Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


F 


SERMONS  PREACHED  AND  REVISED 


G.    H.    SPURGEON, 


DURING  THE  YEAR  1877. 


VOL.  XXI  ir. 


London : 

PASSMORE  &  ALAB.\STER,  4,  P.tTERNOSTEK  BUILDINGS. 


ENTERED   AT   STATIONERS 


THF  NEW  YORK 

PUB^i.IC  MERARY 

^1^ 


AS?  OR 

, LENOX 

AND 

TiLDtN 

hOLINDA 

.  IONS 

R 

1916 

L 

LONDON  : 

I'JISSMORB  &  XUXUXSTER,   STEAM  I'RINTERBt 

31,  LITTLE   mUTAlX,    E.G. 


TnE  0\"E  GOD  OF  E[EAVEN  AND  K\RTH 

IS 

THE  TniSITT  OF  inS  SACEED  PERSOXS^ 

BE  ALL  HOXOUR  ASp  GLORY 

WORLD  WITHOUT  EXD, 

ASIBN. 

TO  THE  fiI,nRIOUS  FATHER,  AS  THE  COVENANT  GOD 

OF  ISRAEL; 

TO  THE  liRACIOUS  SOX,  THE  REDEEMER  OV   HIS  rEOPIJ-:; 
TO  THE  HOLY  llIlOfiT  THE  AUTHOR  OV 

SANCTiFiCATiox  i       :•.:;■-:  •  .  .  . 

BE  EVERLASTING  PRAISE  FOR  TILiT  GOSPli3n.-OF;  IHR 

FREE  GRACE  OF  (iOD,        :     ,;.,  ,'.','  ''' 

HEREIX  PROCL-MJIED  UNTO  IIEN^ '     '  •'  '"  •"". 


.•:.  -  '• 


•  •  • 

•  •• 

•  • 


« 


• « 


••:•■'- 


• 


•  *  •  •  • 


•  • 


•  •  • 

4 


>       • 


•  •  •    • 

a 


•  • 


CONTENTS. 


Ko.  Pago 

lySBl  Thetwo  "Gomel)" 1 

**  And  the  Spirit  and  the  bride  say,  Come.  And  let  liim  that  hcaroth  say. 
Come.  And  let  him  that  is  athirst  come.  And  whosoever  will,  let  Irim 
take  the  water  of  life  freely.*'— Bevelation  xzii.  17. 

1,332  Oar  Urgenfe  Need  of  the  Holy  Spirit       13 

"  Through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghoef'—Eom.  xv.  13. 
"  By  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God."— Rom.  xv.  19. 

« 

1,833  *' Best  in  the  Lord"  25 

"Best  in  the  Lord.'*— Psalm  xxxvii.  7. 

1.334  Coming — Always  Coming 37 

"  To  whom  coming.*' — 1  Peter  ii.  4. 

I 

1.335  A  Cheery  Word  in  Troublous  Times       49 

** Wherefore,  sirs,  be  of  good  cheer:  for  I  believe  God,  that  it  shall  bo 
even  as  it  was  told  me." — Acts  xxvii.  25. 

1.336  A  Family  Sermon Gl 

"  And  the  Lord  said  unto  Noah,  Come  thou  and  all  thy  house  into  the 
ark.  .  .  .  And  Noah  went  in,  and  his  sons,  and  his  wife,  and  his  sons' 
wives  with  him,  into  the  ark,  because  of  the  waters  of  the  flood.''— Genesis 
viL  1  and  7. 

1.337  LoTe's  Medicines  and  Miracles      73 

"  Behold,  for  peace  I  had  great  bitterness :  but  thou  hast  in  love  to  my 
soul  delivered  it  from  the  pit  of  corruption :  for  thou  hast  cast  all  my  sins 
behind  thy  back."— Isaiah  xxxviiL  17. 

1.338  Work  for  Jesus       85 

"  Son,  go  work  to-day  in  my  vineyard."— Matthew  xxi.  28. 

1.339  Idols  Abolished       97 

"  Epbniim  shall  say,  "What  have  I  to  do  any  more  with  idols  ?"— Hosca 
xiv.  8. 


vV 


j\  CONTENTS. 


Ko. 


Page 

1,:540  Manoah's  Wife  and  her  Excellent  Argument      loCV 

**  And  Manoah  said  unto  his  wife.  We  shall  surely  die,  because  we  have 
seen  CJod.  But  his  wife  said  unto  him,  If  the  Lord  were  pleased  to  kill  us, 
he  would  not  have  received  a  burnt  offering  and  a  meat  offering  at  our 
hands,  neither  would  ho  have  shewed  us  all  those  things,  nor  would  as  at 
this  time  have  told  us  such  things  its  these.*^— Judges  xiiL  22,  2X 

1  341  Retreat  Impossible 121 

**  I  have  openetl  my  mouth  unto  the  Lord,  and  I  cannot  go  buck." — 
Judges  li.  Bo. 

1  342  Dagon's  Ups  and  Downs ...       135 

"AVhcn  the  Philistines  took  the  ark  of  God,  they  brought  it  into  the 
house  of  Dagon,  and  set  it  by  Dagon.  And  when  they  of  Ashdod  arose 
early  on  the  morrow,  behold,  Dagon  was  fallen  upon  bis  face  to  the  earth 
before  the  ark  of  the  Lord.  And  they  took  Dagon  and  set  him  in  his  place 
Again.  And  when  they  arose  early  on  the  morrow  morning,  behold,  Dagon 
Tras  fallen  upon  his  face  to  the  ground  before  the  ark  of  the  Lord ;  and  the 
bead  of  Dagon  and  both  the  palms  of  his  hands  were  cut  off  u|x>n  the 
threshold:  only  the  stump  of  Dagon  was  left  to  liim."— 1  Samuel  v.  .»—  I. 

1 343  The  Jewel  of  Peace  ...        ...        ...        ...        ...       145 

**  Now  the  Lord  of  peace  himself  give  you  peace  always  by  all  means. 
The  Lord  be  with  you  all."— 2  Thessalonians  iii.  l(». 

j^44  The  Student's  Prayer         I57 

*^Makc  me  to  understand  the  way  of  thy  precepts :  so  shall  I  talk  of  thy 
wondrous  works." — Psalm  cxix.  27. 

J  •45  For  Whom  is  the  Gospel  Meant  ? ICi^ 

•'They  that  are  whole  have  no  need  of  the  physician,  but  they  that  are 
sick:  I  came  not  to  call  the  righteous,  but  sinners  to  rei^entance.'' — Mark 

a.  17. 

»*  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly." — Romans  v.  (». 

*»God  commondeth  his  love  toward  us,  in  that,  while  wo  were  yet 
sinners  Chiist  died  for  us." — Romans  v.  h. 

•  «•  This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Chribt 
Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners.*'— I  Timothy  i.  la. 

1^46  Guile  Forsaken  when  Gnilt  is  Forgiven 18! 

"  Blessed  is  the  man  unto  whom  the  Lord  imputeth  not  iuitiuity,  and  iu 
whose  spirit  there  is  no  guile."— Psalm  xxxii.  2. 


\M7  How  is  Salvation  Received  ?         19 

•* Therefore  it  is  of  faitli,  that  it  might  bo  by  grace;  to  the  end  the 
^  ISO  might  be  sure  to  all  the  seed ;  not  to  that  only  which  is  of  the  law. 
that  also  which  is  of  the  faith  of  Abraham  ;  who  is  the  father  of  us 
omaus  iv.  1(>. 


o 


CONTENTS.  Vir 

Kob  Pogi- 

1,848  The  Great  House  and  the  Vessels  in  it 205' 

"  Bat  in  a  great  lionse  there  are  not  only  vessels  of  gold  and  of  silver, 
bat  also  of  wood  and  of  earth ;  and  some  to  honour  and  some  to  dishonour. 
If  a  man  therefore  pui^g^  himself  from  these,  he  shall  be  a  vessel  unto 
hononr,  sanctified,  and  meet  for  the  master's  use,  and  prepared  nnto  every 
good  work"— 2  Timothy  ii.  20,  21. 

1,340  Faith  Pnrifjing  the  Heart 217 

"Porifying  their  hearts  by  faith."— Acts  xv.  0. 

1.350  Enlivening  and  Invigorating         22> 

**  Quicken  thou  me  according  to  thy  word.** — Psalm  cxix.  2*'). 

1.351  The  Divine  Call  for  Missionaries 24 1 

"  Also  I  heard  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  saying,  Whom  shall  I  send,  and 
who  win  go  for  ns?    Then  said  I,  Here  am  I ;  send  me.** — Isaiah  vi.  8. 

1.352  Strong  Consolation  for.  the  Lord's  Beftigees        253 

*^  That  by  two  immutable  things,  in  which  it  was  impossible  for  Gtod  to 
He,  we  might  have  a  strong  consolation,  who  have  fled  for  refuge  to  lay  hold 
upon  the  hope  set  before  us.** — Hebrews  vi.  18. 

x.ooo  JifCce  Jtcex     ...        •••        •••        •••        •••        •••        ...      ^o«v 

*'''  He  saith  unto  the  Jews,  Behold  your  King !"— John  xix.  1  (. 

1.354  All  Things  are  Beady.    Come      277 

"  Come,  for  all  things  arc  now  ready.** — Luke  xiv.  17. 

1.355  Oar  Lord's  Question  to  the  Blind  Men 2d> 

**  And  when  Jesus  departed  thence,  two  blind  men  followed  him,  cryiug, 
and  saying,  Thou  son  of  David,  have  mercy  on  us.  And  when  he  wns 
come  into  the  house,  the  bllod  men  came  to  him :  and  Jesus  soith  unto 
them,  Believe  ye  that  I  am  able  to  do  this?  They  said  unto  him,  Yea, 
Lord.  Then  touched  he  their  eyes,  saying,  Acconliug  to  your  faith  be  it 
nnto  you.    And  their  eyes  were  opened.'* — Matthew  ix.  27 — 30. 

1.356  The  Heavenly  Wind  301 

**  The  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth,  and  thou  hearost  the  sound  thereof, 
but  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh  and  whither  it  goeth :  so  is  every  one 
that  is  bom  of  the  Spirit.**— John  iii.  8. 

1.357  A  Bnsiness-like  Account 3K^ 

^*  Bnt  what  things  were  gain  to  me,  those  I  counted  loss  for  Christ.  Yea 
doubtless,  and  I  count  all  things  but  loss  for  the  oxcclleucy  of  the  knowledge 
of  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord :  for  whom  I  have  suffered  the  loss  of  all  things, 
and  do  count  them  but  dung,  that  I  may  win  Christ,  aud  be  found  in  him, 
not  having  mine  own  righteousness,  which  is  of  the  law,  but  that  which  is 
through  the  faith  of  Christ,  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  faith.** — 
PMIippians  liL  7—0. 


riii  CONTENTS. 

Na  P««« 

1,358  All  the  People  at  Work  for  Jesus 321 

**Lot  not  all  the  people  go  up;  but  let  about  two  or  three  thousand  men 
go  up  and  smite  AL" — Joshua  viL  3. 

**  The  Lord  said  unto  Joshua,  Fear  not,  neither  be  thou  dismayed :  take 
ail  the  i)eople  of  wai  with  thee,  and  arise,  go  up  to  Ai :  see,  I  have  given 
into  thy  hand  the  king  of  Ai,  and  his  people,  and  his  city,  and  his  land.** — 
Joshua  yiii.  1. 

1,859  Happiness:  the  Privilege  and  Datyof  Christians  ...       337 

"  Happy  art  thou,  0  Israel,  who  is  like  unto  thee,  0  people  mYcd  by  the 
Lord,  the  shield  of  thy  help,  and  who  is  the  sword  of  thy  excellency!  and 
thine  enemies  shall  be  found  liars  unto  thee :  and  thou  shalt  tread  upon 
their  high  places.'* — Deuteronomy  xxxiiL  29. 

1,3G0  The  Qood  Samaritan  349 

"And,  behold,  a  certain  lawyer  stood  up,  and  tempted  him,  saying, 
Master,  what  shall  I  do  to  inherit  eternal  life  ?    He  said  unto  him,  What  is 
written  in  the  law  ?     How  readest  thou  ?    And  he  answeriog  said,  Thou 
shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and 
with  all  thy  strength,  and  with  all  thy  mind';  and  thy  neighbour  as  thyself. 
And  he  said  unto  him.  Thou  hast  answered  right :  this  do,  and  thou  shalt 
live.    But  he,  willing  to  justify  himself,  said  unto  Jesns,  And  who  is  my 
neighbour  ?    And  Jesus  answering  said,  A  certain  man  went  down  from 
Jerusalem  to  Jericho,  and  fell  among  thieves,  which  stripped  him  of  bis 
raiment,  and  wounded  him,  and  departed,  leaving  him  half  dead..  And  by 
chance  there  came  down  a  certain  priest  that  way :  and  when  he  saw  him, 
he  passed  by  on  the  other  side.    And  likewise  a  Levite,  when  he  was  i^i 
that  place,  came  and  looked  on  him,  and  passed  by  on  the  other  side.    Bat 
a  certain  Samaritan,  as  he  journeyed,  came  where  he  was:  and  when  ho- 
saw  him  ho  had  compassion  on  him,  and  went  to  him,  and  bound  up  his 
wounds,  pouring  in  oil  and  wine,  and  set  him  on  his  own  beast,  and  brought 
him  to  an  inn,  and  took  care  of  him.    And  on  the  morrow,  when  he  de- 
parted, ho  took  out  two  pence,  and  gave  them  to  the  host,  and  said  unto  him, 
Take  care  of  him ;  and  whatsoever  thou  spendest  more,  when  I  come 
again  I  will  repay  thee.    Which  now  of  these  three,  thinkest  thou,  was 
neighbour  unto  him  that  fell  among  the  thieves?    And  he  said.  He  that 
showed  mercy  on  him.    Then  said  Jesus  unto  him,  Qo,  and  do  thou  like- 
wise."— Luke  X.  25—37. 

1.361  The  Final  Perseverance  of  the  Saints       36t 

"  The  righteous  also  shall  hold  on  his  way." — Job  xvii.  9. 

1.362  Mourning  for  Christ  373- 

^'  I  will  pour  n\x)n  the  house  of  David,  and  upon  the  inhabitants  of  Je- 
nisaleni,  the  spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplications :  and  they  shall  look  upon 
me  whom  thoy  havo  pierced,  and  they  shall  mourn  for  him,  as  one 
raoumeth  for  his  only  son,  and  shall  be  in  bitt<?mess  for  hiui,  as  one  that 
is  in  bitterness  for  his  firstborn.'*— Zechariah  xii.  10. 

1.363  Sadden  Sorrovr       385^ 

'*  Suddenly  are  my  tents  spoiled,  and  my  curtains  in  a  moment." — 
Jeremiah  iv.  20. 
*'  And  when  thou  art  spoiled,  what  wilt  thou  do  ?*'  -Jeremiah  iv.  30. 


coKTEirrs.  IX 

No.  Page 

],S64  NcTertheleflfl.    Hereafter 897 

**  Jem  niih  unto  him,  Thoa  hast  said  (or  said  so),  Dcreriheless,  I  eny 
unto  yoQ,  Hereafter  shall  ye  soo  the  Son  of  man  sitting  on  the  right  hand 
of  power,  and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven." — Matthew  xxvi.  G4. 

1.365  The  Trees  in  God's  Courts  409 

**  Those  that  be  planted  in  the  honso  of  the  Lord  shall  flonrish  in  the 
courts  of  our  Qod.  They  sliall  still  bring  forth  frait  in  old  age ;  they  shall 
be  fat  and  flourishing;  to  shew  tliat  the  Lord  is  upright:  he  is  my  rock, 
and  there  is  no  unrighteousness  in  him.*'— Psalm  xdi  13—15. 

1.366  The  Danger  of  TTnconfessed  Sin 421 

"  When  I  kept  sflence,  my  bones  waxed  old  through  my  roaring  all  the 
day  long.**— FBalm  xxziL  8. 

1.367  Strong  Faith  433 

**Bnt  was  strong  in  faith,  giving  glory  to  God.**->Bomans  iv.  20. 

1.368  The  God  of  Peace  and  oar  Sanctification 415 

^  Kow  the  God  of  peace,  that  brought  again  from  the  dead  our  Lord 
Jesua,  that  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep,  through  the  blood  of  the  ever- 
lasting covenant,  nmko  you  perfect  in  every  good  work  to  do  his  will, 
working  in  you  that  which  is  well  pleasing  in  his  sight,  through  Jesus 
Christ;  to  whom  be  glory  for  over  and  ever.  Amen.** — Hebrews  xiiL 
20,21. 

1.369  Proclamation  of  Acceptance  and  Vengeance       457 

"  To  proclaim  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord,  and  the  day  of  vcngcunco 
of  our  God :  to  comfort  all  that  mourn.** — Isaiah  Ixi.  2. 

1.370  Sheep  Among  Wolves       469 

"Behold,  I  send  you  forth  as  sheep  in  the  midst  of  wolves :  bo  yo  thei'e- 
fore  wise  as  serpents,  and  harmless  as  doves/' — Matthew  x.  16. 

1.371  Brave  Waiting       481 

"  Wait  on  the  Lord :  be  of  good  courage,  and  ho  shall  strengthen  thine 
heart:  wait,  I  say,  on  the  Lord.'*— Psalm  xxvii.  14. 

1.372  God  onr  Portion  and  his  Word  our  Treasure      493 

**  Thou  art  my  portion,  0  Lord :  I  have  said  that  I  would  keep  thy 
words.** — Psalm  cxiz.  67. 

1.373  Our  Last  Jouruey 505 

"  When  a  few  years  are  come,  then  I  shall  go  the  way  whence  I  shall 
not  return." — Job  xvL  22. 

1.374  '*  For  Ever  with  the  Lord "  517 

"  So  shall  wo  ever  be  with  the  Lord." — 1  Thessalonians  iv.  17. 


INDEX    OF    SCRIPTURE   TEXTS. 


VOI-UME   xxin. 


DEUTEnONOMY. 


JUDGES. 


i.  3S 


xiii.  22,23    

I.  &\.MUEIi. 

V.  2.4     

IT.  SAML'KU 


3t»xii.  8 
xxxii.  3... 
Mivii.  7 
xcii.  la  Ifi 
«tlx.  27... 

III 

t'xix.  23.. 
cxix.  S7 

■■■     •   :;; 

ISAIAH. 

vi.  8       ... 

liii.  12   ... 
It.  8,  fl  -,. 
Ixi.  2     ... 
Iii».7  ... 

JEREMIAH. 

iv.  20    J 
iv.  :io    t 

ZECHABIAH 

Chip,  ft  VctH. 
ix.  27-30 

X.  16     

xxL  28 


i. .  IS 

II.  CORINTHIANS. 

vi.  9 

GAI,ATIANS. 

ii.  20 

EPIIESIANS. 

iii.  7-9 

PHILIPPUNS. 

r 

TllESSALONIANS. 

II 

iii.  16 

THESSALONIANa 

L  15  ... 

r.  TIMOTHY. 

U.  TIMOTHY. 

ii.20, 21        

HEBREWS. 

vi.  18     

xiii.  20,21     

ii.  4,  .'.    . 

I.  PETER. 

ii.  4 

xxii.  17. 

REVELATION. 

^fUitfsf0m  i^alrenmile  inliit 


t/    THE  TWO  -COMES." 


%  ^tm0t( 


Dbuysbd  (m  IiOia>*0-DAT  MoBNora,  Dsoeicbsb  SIst,  1876,  r 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AS  THB  MXIBOPOLITAH  TABEBN AGLV,   HEWDTOTOV, 


^  And  fhe  Spirit  and  th«  Mde  afty»  Come.  And  lei  him  that  hetnCh  aftj^Oooie. 
And  let  him  that  la  athirit  oome.  And  whoaoerer  wilL  let  him  take  the  water  of 
HfilMltir."— Beiektion  zdL  17. 

OuE  text  standB  at  the  end  of  the  Book  even  as  this  day  stands  at  the 
end  of  Hie  Tear :  and  it  is  fall  of  gospel  even  as  we  wonld  make  onr 
ckmng  Sabbath  discourse.  It  would  seem  as  if  the  Holy  Spirit  were 
loatih  to  pat  down  the  pen  while  so  manv  remained  nnbeUeving,  not- 
irithstancung  the  testimony  of  the  inspired  worc[y  and  therefore  ere  he 
doses  the  canon  of  Holy  Scripture  and  guards  it  against  all  addition 
<xr  mntilation  with  most  solemn  words,  ne  gives  one  more  full,  i^c, 
earnest,  gracious  invitation  to  thirsty  souls  to  come  to  Christ  and  drink. 
So  on  (liis  last  page  of  the  year  I  would  &in  write  another  gospel  invita- 
tion that  those  wuo  have  not  hithei*to  believed  our  report  may,  even  on 
this  last  day  of  the  feast,  incline  their  ear  and  accept  the  message  of  sal- 
tation. Ere  yet  the  midnight  bell  proclaims  the  birth  of  a  new  year,  may 
joube  bom  to  God :  at  any  rate  once  more  shall  the  truth  by  which  men 
are  regenerated  be  bvingly  brought  under  your  attention.  I  ask  those 
of  yon  who  have  the  Ma^r's  ear  to  put  up  this  request  to  him  just  now, 
that  if  the  arrows  have  missed  the  mark  on  the  previous  fifty-two  Sab- 
hiths  thejr  may  strike  the  target  this  time,  being  directed  by  the  divine 
Spirit.  Fray  also  that  if  some  have  kept  the  door  of  their  hearts  fast 
dosed  against  the  Lord  Jesus  till  now,  he  may  himself  come  in  the 
preaching  of  the  Word  this  morning,  and  put  in  his  hand  by  the  hole  of 
the  door,  that  their  hearts  may  be  moved  for  him.  In  answer  to  that 
prayer  we  shall  be  sure  to  get  a  blessing.  Let  us  expect  it  and  act  upon 
the  expectation,  and  we  shall  see  men  Sying  to  Jesus  as  a  dou^  ana  as 
dcves  to  their  windows. 

Are  not  ttie  words  of  our  text  the  words  of  the  Lord  Jesus  ?  Can  they 

be  regarded  as  the  words  or  John?    I  think  not,  for  they  follow  so 

dosely  upon  the  undoubted  language  of  Jesus  in  the  former  verse. 

Thns  runs  the  passage : — **  I  Jesus  have  sent  mine  angel  to  testify  unto 

Na  1,881. 


2  HBTBOPOLITAK  TABBBHAOLV  PULPIT. 

yon  these  things  in  the  chnrches.  I  am  the  root  and  fhe  offisprmg  of 
David,  and  the  bright  and  morning  star.  And  the  Spirit  and  tine  bri^ 
say,  Come."  We  can  hardly,  I  think,  divide  the  paTagrajdi,  and  we 
mnst,  it  seems  to  me,  regard  our  text  as  the  words  of  the  risen  Jesofl^ 
that  morning  star  whose  cheering  beama  foretd  the  glorions  day.  The 
lover  of  men's  souls  had  not  quite  done  spewing  to  sinners ;  there  waa  a 
little  more  to  say,  and  here  he  says  it.  The  divine  Redeemer,  leaning 
from  his  throne  whereon  he  sits  as  the  reward  of  his  accompliahed  wo^ 
and  bending  over  sinners  with  the  same  love  which  led  mm  to  die  for 
them  says,  ^'Let  him  that  heareth  say,  dome.  And  let  him  that  is 
athirst  come.  And  whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  li& 
freely." 

Looking  at  the  words,  therefore,  in  that  golden  light  aa  coming  ftomf 
the  dear  lips  of  the  Well-beloved,  let  ns  notice  first,  the  heavenward  cry 
cf  prayer — *^  The  Spirit  and  the  bride  say.  Gome.  And  let  him  that 
neareth  say,  Gome."  These  voices  go  upward  to  Ghrist.  Then,  secondly, 
let  us  hear  the  earthward  cry  of  invitation — '^  Let  him  that  is  athiist 
come.  And  whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely";  that 
ciT  goes  outward  and  downward  towards  needy  and  sorrowing  spirits. 
Then,  thirdly,  we  shall  pause  awhile  to  notice  the  relation  bekaeen  iheee 
two  cries;  for  the  coming  of  Ghrist  is  connected  with  the  coming  of 
sinners:  and  then,  as  best  we  can,  we  shall  observe  and  expect  the 
response  to  the  two  cries;  both  from  him  who  sitteth  in  the  heavens  and 
from  souls  thirsting  here  below.    0  divine  Spirit,  bless  thou  the  Word. 

I.  First,  then,  our  text  begins  with  the  heayenwaed  cby  of 
PRAYER,  *'  The  Spirit  and  the  hide  say,  Come,  And  let  him  that  heareth 
say,  Come"  I  think  it  will  be  evident,  if  you  read  carefnlty,  that  this 
cannot  be  interpreted  as  being  only  the  voice  of  the  Spirit  and  the 
bride  to  the  sinner.  Surely  the  sense  requires  us  to  regam  this  carj  of 
"  come  "  as  addressed  to  our  Lord  Jesus,  wno  in  a  previous  verse  had  becni 
saying,  "  Behold  I  come  quickly,  and  my  reward  is  with  me."  We 
may  see  the  second  included  in  it,  but  it  will  never  do  to  exclude  the 
first.  We  shall  not  have  dealt  honestly  with  the  words  before  us  nnkss 
we  regard  them  first  as  spoken  upwards  towards  our  Lord,  whose  coming 
is  our  great  hope. 

The  matter  of  this  cry  is  first  to  be  noticed — it  is  the  coming  of 
Ghrist.  *'  The  Spirit  and  the  bride  say.  Gome."  This  is  and  always  has 
been  the  universal  cry  of  the  church  of  Jesus  Ghrist.  There  is  no  one 
common  theory  about  the  exact  meaning  of  that  coming,  but  there  is 
one  common  desire  for  it,  in  some  form  or  other.  Some  of  us  are  ex- 
pecting the  bodily  coming,  because  the  angel  said  when  the  cloud  con- 
cealed the  rising  Ghrist,  "  This  same  Jesus  who  is  taken  up  from  jou 
into  heaven  shall  so  come  in  like  manner  as  ye  have  seen  him  go  into 
heaven."  We  therefore  look  for  his  descent  upon  the  earth  in  person, 
to  be  here  literally  among  us.  Some  expect  that  when  he  comes  it  will 
be  to  reign  upon  the  earth,  making  all  tilings  new  and  bringing  to  hia 
people  a  glorious  period  of  a  thousand  vears,  in  which  there  shall  be 
perpetual  Sabbath  rest.  Others  think  that  when  he  cometh  he  will 
come  to  judge  the  world,  and  that  the  day  of  his  appearing  is  rather  to 
be  regaraed  as  the  end  of  all  things  and  the  conclusion  of  tnis  dispensa- 
tion than  as  the  commencement  of  the  age  of  gold.    There  are  some 


«f 


1HBTW0  ''O0ICI& 

^vlio  fUnk  flie  mfflmminm  all  a  dzeam,  and  Uie  coming  •f  Christ  ui 
ftsaoA  to  be  a  mere  fiyv7»  bat  they  beUeve  that  he  will  oome  qpiritoallyy 
and  tiM^iie  kokinff  m  a  time  when  the  gospel  shall  spread  very 
'insfOfSiMaMty,  and  theve  will  be  an  eztraorainary  power  abont  the 
ministntions  «f  the  word,  so  that  nations  shall  run  onto  him  and  be 
KxmYeited  to  his  troth.  Now  it  wonld  be  very  interesting  to  take  np 
tiheae  'varions  statements  and  specnlations,  bnt  we  do  not  want  to  do  so, 
beoanae  after  all,  in  whaterer  way  men  look  at  it,  all  the  true  people  of 
4tod  atill  deaife  the  coming  of  Christ,  and  so  long  as  he  draws  near  they 
mre  content.  Ibey  may  £iTe  more  or  less  light  about  the  manner  of 
it,  but  stQl  the  coming;  of  Christ  has  be^  ever  since  the  time  when  he 
ideipaited  the  gnat  wish  and  desire,  yea  and  the  agonizinj;  prayer  of 
the  draidi  of  God,  "  Even  so,  come  qoickly.  Lord  Jesus,"  is  the  cry  of 
ihe  wbde  host  of  the  Lord's  elect  It  is  true  that  some  haye  not  always. 
deairsd  this  oeming  from  motives  of  the  most  commendable  kind,  and 
many  become  more  than  ever  earnest  in  this  prayer  when  they  have 
been  in  a  state  of  disappointment  and  sorrow,  bnt  still  that  which 
ihej  deairB  is  a  right  thing,  and  a  promised  blessing  to  be  given  in  its 
time.  I  sappoae  the  file  of  sorrow  will  always  give  a  keener  edge  to 
the  desire  of  Christ's  coming.  Luther  on  one  occasion,  when  much 
diaooomged,  said,  ^May  the  Lord  come  at  once  I  Let  him  cut  the 
lAok  natter  short  witn  the  day  of  judgment ;  for  there  is^  no  amend- 
ment to  be  expected."  When  we  g^  into  this  state  of  mind  the  de- 
aive,  though  right  in  ai^iearance,  may  not  be  auite  as  pure  as  we 
think.  Desires  and  prayers  which  grow  out  of  unbelief  and  petulance 
em  hardly  be  of  the  very  best  order.  Perhaps  when  we  more  {mtiently 
wait  and  quiet^  hope,  we  may  not  be  quite  so  feverishly  anxious  for 
the  qpeedy  oommg,  and  yet  our  state  of  mind  may  be  more  sober  and 
moie  truly  watehral  and  acceptable  than  when  we  showed  more  ap- 
parent eagerness.  Waiting  must  sit  side  bv  side  with  desiring :  patience 
mnst  blend  with  hope.  The  Lord's  *'  quicldy  "  mav  not  be  my  **  quickly  " ; 
and  if  so,  let  him  do  what  seemeth  him  good.  It  may  be  a  better 
thing  after  all  for  our  Lord  to  tarry  a  little  longer,  that  so  by  a  more 
lengthened  conflict  he  may  the  bettor  manifest  the  patience  of  the 
saints  and  the  power  of  the  eternal  Spirit  It  may  be  the  Lord  may 
linger  vet  a  while,  and  if  so,  while  the  caurch  desires  his  speedy  advent, 
the  win  not  quarrel  with  her  Master,  nor  dictete  to  him,  nor  even  wish 
to  know  the  tunes  and  the  seasons.  "  Come,  Lord  Jesus,  come  quickly," 
is  her  heart's  inmost  wish,  but  as  for  the  details  of  his  coming  she 
leaves  them  in  his  hands. 

Havin^oted  the  matter  of  the  cry,  let  us  next  observe  ihepersaru 
trying.  The  Sprit  is  first  mentioned—''  The  Spirit  and  the  bride  say, 
Come."  And  why  does  tfa^  Holy  Ghost  desire  the  coming  of  the  Lord 
Jeans?  At  present  the  Spirit  is,  so  to  speak,  the  vicegerent  of  this 
dUqwnsation  upon  earth.  Our  Lord  Jesus  is  gone  into  the  heavens,  for 
Jt  waa  expedient  for  him  to  go,  but  the  Comforter  whom  the  Father 
iutii  afmt  in  his  name  hath  ttScen  his  place  as  our  teacher,  and  abides 
<A  earth  continually  as  the  witness  to  the  truth,  and  the  worker  for  it 
in  tile  minds  of  men.  But  the  Spirit  of  Qod  is  daily  ^eved  during 
tiiis  aeascm  of  longsnffering  and  confiict.  How  much  he  is  provoked  all 
the  world  over  it  is  not  possible  for  us  to  know !    The  forty  years  in 


4  XETBOPOLrFAir  TABBBaAddB  PULPIT. 

the  wilderness  mnst  have  become  as  nothing  compared  with  nineteen 
centuries  of  rebellions  generations.  The  ungodly  vex  him,  they  reject 
his  testimony,  and  resist  his  operations.  And,  alas,  the  saints  grieve 
him  too.  You  and  I  have,  I  fear,  grieved  him  often  during  the  past 
year ;  and  so  he  desireth  the  end  of  this  «Yil  estate,  and  saith  to  our 
Lord  Jesus,  **  Come."  Beside,  the  Spirit's  great  object  and  desire  is  to 
glorify  Christ,  even  as  our  Lord  saith,  "  He  shall  glorify  me,  for  he  shall 
take  of  mine  and  shew  them  unto  you."  Now,  as  the  coming  of  Christ  will 
be  the  full  manifestation  of  the  Redeemer's  glory,  the  Spirit  therefore 
desireth  that  he  may  come  and  take  to  himself  his  great  power,  and 
reign.  The  Holy  Spirit  seals  us  ''  unto  the  day  of  redemption,"  having 
ever  an  eye  to  that  great  event ;  his  work  tendeth  towards  its  comple- 
tion in  the  day  of  the  appearing  of  the  sons  of  Gk>d.  He  ^'  is  the  earnest 
of  our  inheritance  till  the  redemption  of  the  purchased  possession." 
Therefore  doth  the  Spirit  have  sympathy  in  the  groanings  of  his  saints 
for  the  glorious  appearing,  and  it  is  in  this  connection  especially  that  he 
is  described  as  helping  our  infirmities,  and  making  intercession  for  us 
with  groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered.  In  this  sense  the  Spirit  saith 
^^Come";  indeed,  all  such  cries  of  ''Come"  in  this  world  are  of  his 
prompting. 

Our  text  next  teUs  us  that, ''  the  bride  saith,  Come."  We  all  know 
that  the  bride  is  the  church,  but  perhaps  we  have  not  noticed  the  pecu- 
liarity of  her  name.  It  is  not ''  The  Spirit  and  (he  church  say.  Come," 
but  "  the  Spirit  and  the  bride,"  for  she  saith  "  Come  "  always  more  fer- 
vently when  she  realizes  her  near  and  dear  relationship  to  her  Lord, 
and  all  that  it  involves.  Now,  a  bride  is  one  whose  marriage  is  near, 
either  as  having  just  happened  or  as  close  at  hand.  She  is  far  more  than 
merelv  espoused — either  she  is  married  or  about  Jo  be,  although  the 
actual  marriage  feast  may  not  have  been  eaten.  So  is  the  church  very 
nearly  arrived  at  the  grand  hour,  when  it  shall  be  said  ''  the  marriage  of 
the  Lamb  is  come  and  his  bride  hath  made  herself  ready  ";  and  because 
of  that  she  is  full  of  joy  at  the  prospect  of  hearing  the  cry,  "  Behold, 
the  Bridegroom  cometh."  Who  marvelleth  that  it  is  so  ?  It  would  be 
unnatural  if  there  were  no  desire  on  the  part  of  the  church  to  see  her 
beloved  Lord  and  Head.  Is  it  not  as  it  snould  be  when  the  bride  saith 
"  Come  "  ? 

I  wish  to  call  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  while  I  have  made  two 
of  the  persons  mentioned  in  the  text  for  the  purpose  of  discoursing  upon 
them  in  due  order,  yet  they  are  not  divided  in  the  passage  before  us.  It 
does  not  say  the  Spirit  saith  "come"  and  the  bride  saith  "come,"  buS 
*Hhe  Spirit  and  the  bride  say.  Come."  That  is  to  say,  the  Spirit  of  God 
speaketh  by  the  church  when  he  crieth  "  Come,"  and  the  church  crietb 
unto  Christ  for  his  coming  because  she  is  moved  thereto  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  True  prayer  is  always  a  joint  work ;  the  Holy  Spirit  within  us 
writes  acceptaole  desires  upon  our  hearts  and  then  we  present  them^ 
The  Holy  Ghost  does  not  plead  apart  from  our  desiring  and  believing : 
we  must  ourselves  desire  and  will  and  plead  and  agonize  because  the 
Spirit  of  God  worketh  in  us  so  to  will  and  to  do.  We  plead  with  God 
because  we  are  prompted  and  guided  by  his  Holy  Spirit.  Our  pleadings, 
which  go  up  to  heaven  for  the  Sivent  of  Jesus,  are  the  Holy  Ghost  crying 
in  the  hearts  of  the  blood-bought.    The  church  herself  prays  in  the 


if 


THB  TWO  '^001118. 

Holj  Ghost,  inttanfly  crying  day  and  night  for  the  folfihoent  of  the 
grei^est  of  all  the  covenant  pronuses. 

^  Gome,  Lord,  and  tarrr  not ; 

Bring  the  long-look*c(-fbr  day ; 
Oh,  why  these  years  of  waiting  here. 

These  ages  cf  delay  f 

<<Come,  for  thy  saints  stiU  wait ; 

Daily  ascenos'  their  sigh ; 
The  Spirit  and  the  bride  say,  Come ; 

Dost  thou  not  hear  the  ciyP*' 

rhe  next  danse  of  the  text  indicates  that  each  separate  believer  should 
breathe  the  same  desire,  **  Let  him  that  heareth  say.  Come."  Brethren, 
this  will  be  the  index  of  yonr  belonging  to  the  brick,  the  token  of  your 
sharing  in  the  one  Spirit,  and  being  joined  nnto  tiie  one  body,  if  yon  unite 
with  the  Spirit  and  the  bride  in  saying, ''Come."  For  no  ungodly  man  truly 
desireth  Cnrist's  coming ;  but  on  uie  contnuy  he  desired  to  ^t  away 
from  him,  and  forget  lus  very  existence.  To  ddight  in  drawing  near 
unto  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  an  evidence  of  our  election  and  calling ; 
to  wish  more  and  more  fully  to  know  him  and  to  dwell  more  near  to 
him  is  the  token  of  our  naving  been  reconciled  unto  Ood  by  his 
death,  and  of  our  having  a  new  nature  implanted  in  us :  to  long  to 
see  him  manifested  in  fdmess  of  glory  is  the  ensign  of  a  true  soldier 
of  the  cross.  Do  you  feel  this  ?  Do  you  dedre  to  be  better  acquainted 
with  the  Lord  Jesus  ?  You  have  heard  the  gospel,  do  you  sav  as  the 
church  doth, ''  Come,  Lord  Jesus  "  ?  Alas,  to  many  the  day  of  the  Lord 
wiU  be  darkness  and  not  h'ght,  and  they  cannot  desire  it,  for  it  will  be  a 
day  of  terror  and  confusion  unto  them ;  but  unto  such  as  have  heard  and 
believed  in  the  precious  name  of  the  Son  of  God  it  will  be  joy  and  peace, 
and  therefore  the  cry  of  their  heart  is,  ''Even  so,  come.  Lord  Jesus." 

This  utterance  of  "  Come"  by  him  that  heareth  it  is  the  mark  of  his 
joyful  consent  to  the  &ct  that  Christ  shall  come.  It  is  well,  my  friend,  if 
when  thou  hearest  that  Christ  will  come  thou  sayest,  "  Let  hmi  come." 
If  he  come  to  reign,  let  him,  for  blessed  be  his  name,  who  should  reign 
but  he  ?  If  he  Ascend  to  judge  the  earth,  let  him  come,  for  we  shall 
be  justified  at  his  bar.  His  ends  and  objects  in  coming  cannot  but  be 
fraught  with  infinite  benefit  to  us  and  glory  to  our  God,  and  therefore 
we  would  not  delay  his  chariot  wheels  by  so  much  as  an  hour. 

'* Hasten,  Lord!  the  promised  hour; 
Come  in  glory  and  m  power ; 
Still  thy  loes  are  nnsaodued ; 
Nature  sighs  to  be  renewed. 
Time  has  nearly  reached  its  sum. 
All  thines  with  thy  bride  say  *Come  ;* 
Jesus,  ^om  all  worlds  adore, 
Come  and  reign  for  evermore ! " 

The  saving  of  ^come"  by  each  true  hearer  is  the  sign  that  his  heart 
rentonoiEi  to  the  doctrine  which  he  has  been  taught.    We  have  received 
it  by  revelation  that  Christ  is  to  come,  and  our  soul  saith,  "  Even  so. 
Gome  Lord  Jesua ;  it  is  our  happiness  that  it  should  be  so." 
Thus  have  we  menticmed  the  persons  by  whom  this  cry  ia  uU^t^, 


6  METROPOLITAN  TABRKNACLB  PULPIT. 

and  now  lefc  ns  add  a  word  upon  the  fmse  m  which  the  cry  is  put     It  in 
in  the  pi^esent  tense.  **  The  Spirit  and  the  bride  say,  Come.    And  let  him 
that  hcareth  say.  Come."    The  Spirit  and  the  bride  are  anxions  tj^at 
Christ  should  come  at  once,  and  he  that  knoweth  Christ  and  loveth  him 
desireth  also  that  he  shoidd  not  tarry.    Look,  my  brethren,  is  it  not 
time  as  far  as  our  poor  judgments  go  that  Jesns  should  come  ?    See 
how  iniquity  abounds !    Behold  our  very  streets,  how  foul  they  are 
with  sin !    See  how  errors  are  multiplied :   do  they  not  swarm  even 
in  the  church  of   Qod  itself?      Have  not  heresies  come  down  like 
birds  oi  prey  upon  the  sacrifice,  to  pollute  even  the  altars  of  the  Most 
High  ?    See  at  this  present  time  how  sceptics  defy  the  living  God,  how 
they  hiss  out  from  between  their  teeth  the  nuestion, "  Where  is  the 
promise  of  his  coming,  for  since  the  lathers  fell  asleep  all  things  con- 
tinue as  they  were  ?  **    Behold  how  Antichrist  also  stalks  boldly  through 
the  land.    Superstitions  which  your  lathers  could  not  bear  arc  set  up 
among  you  yet  again,  and  the  graven  images,  crosses,  crucifixes  and 
sacraments,  gods  many  and  lords  many,  ot  old  Rome  have  come  back 
to  England  again,  and  they  are  worshipped  in  her  national  church.   In 
England,  stained  with  the  blood  of  martyrs,  once  again  the  mark  of  the 
beast  is  to  be  seen  on  the  foreheads  of  those  whom  she  feeds  to  t<each 
her  people !     Is  it  not  time  that  the  Lord  should  come  ?     0  hoary 
systems  of  superstition,  what  else  can  shake  ye  from  your  thrones ! 
O  gods  that  have  long  ruled  over  superstitious  minds,  who  else  can 
hurl  you  to  the  moles  and  to  the  bats  ?    Ye  know  him  who  made  you 
quiver  on  your  thrones  on  that  night  when  he  was  born  in  Bethle- 
hem's manger,  and  ye  may  well  tremble,  for  when  he  cometh  it  will 
be  with  an  iron  rod  to  dash  you  into  shivers.    "Even  so,"  we  cry, 
*'  come,  Lord  Jesus :  come  quicMy.    Amen." 

II.  Now,  secondly,  let  us  listen  to  the  earthward  cry  of  invi- 
tation TO  MEN.  I  must  confess  I  cannot  quite  tell  you  how  it  is  that 
the  sense  in  my  text  glides  away  firom  the  coming  of  Christ  to  the  earth 
into  the  coming  of  sinners  to  Christ,  but  it  does.  Like  colours  which 
blend,  or  strains  of  music  which  melt  into  each  other,  so  the  first  sense 
slides  into  the  second.  This  almost  insensible  transition  seems  to  me 
to  have  been  occasioned  by  the  memory  of  the  fact  that  the  coming  of 
Christ  is  not  desirable  to  all  mankind.  There  are  the  unbelievers  who 
have  not  obeyed  him,  and  when  they  hear  the  Spirit  and  the  bride  say 
come,  straightway  they  begin  to  tremble,  and  they  say  within  them- 
selves^ "What  if  he  should  come!  Alas,  we  rejected  him,  and  his 
coming  will  be  our  destruction."  •  I  think  I  hear  some  such  sinners 
weeping  and  wailing  at  the  very  thought  of  the  Lord's  coming,  for  they 
know  that  they  also  who  have  pierced  him  must  behold  him  and  weep 
because  of  him.  It  seems  almost  cruel  on  the  part  of  the  bride  and  the 
Spirit  to  be  saying  come,  when  that  coming  must  be  for  the  overthrow 
of  all  the  adversaries  of  the  Lord  :  and  so  Jesus  himself  seems  gently  to 
turn  aside  the  prayer  of  his  people  while  he  pleads  with  the  needy  ones. 
He  lets  the  prayer  flow  tow^s  himself,  but  yet  directs  its  flow  towards 
poor  sinners  also.  He  himself  seems  to  say,  "  Ye  bid  me  come,  but  I, 
as  the  Saviour  of  men,  look  at  your  brothers  and  your  sisters  who  are  yet 
I'n  the  far  country,  the  other  sheep  which  are  not  yet  of  the  fold,  whom 
bo  I  must  bring  in,  and  in  answer  to  your  cry  to  me  to  come  I  speak 


THl  TWO  "00MB8."  7 

to  ihofle  wandering  ones,  and  say, '  Lefe  him  that  is  athint  oomey  and 
whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely.' "    Is  not  that  the 
way  in  which  the  sense  glides  from  its  first  direction  ? 
NoWy  yVom  whom  do$s  this  cry  arise  f 

It  first  comeBjrom  Jesus.  It  is  he  who  says,  ^'Let  him  that  is 
athirsi  oome."  'fhe  passage  so  stands,  as  I  have  ahready  said,  that  we 
eannot  bat  believe  tiiis  verse  to  have  been  the  utterance  of  Him  who  is 
the  root  and  offipring  of  David,  and  the  bright  and  morning  star.  He 
oat  of  heaven  cries  to  the  unconverted,  *'  Let  him  that  is  athirst  oome." 
WiU  they  refrise  him  that  speaketh  ?  Shall  Jesus  himself  invite  them, 
and  will  they  torn  a  deaf  ear  ? 

Batnext^  it  is  the  OEdl  of  the  Spirit  of  Ood.  The  Spirit  says,  ^^Oome." 
This  Book  which  he  has  written,  on  every  page  says  to  men,  **  Gome ! 
Come  to  Jesus."  This  is  the  cry  of  the  Spirit  in  the  preaching  of  the 
word.  What  mean  sermons  and  discourses  but ''  Come  sinner,  come  ?  " 
And  those  secret  motions  of  power  upon  the  conscience,  those  times 
^en  the  heart  grows  cahn  even  amid  dissipation,  and  thought  is  forced 
upon  the  mind,  those  are  the  movements  of  the  Spirit  of  God  by  which 
he  is  showing  man  his  danger  and  revealing  to  him  his  reftige,  and  so  is 
sayinff,  ^Come.''  All  over  the  world  wherever  there  is  a  Bible  and  a 
proaoher  the  Spirit  is  saying  ''Come." 

And  this  is  the  speech  of  (he  church  too  in  conjunction  with  the  Spirit, 
for  the  ^irit  speaks  with  the  bride  and  the  bride  speaks  by  the  Spirit. 
The  cbnrch  is  always  saying  ''  Come."  This  is  indeed  the  meaning  of 
her  Sabbath  gatherings,  of  her  testimony  in  the  pulpit,  of  her  teaching 
in  the  schools,  of  her  prayers  and  her  exhortations.  Everywhere,  poor 
wandering  hearts,  the  church  of  God  is  saying  to  you,  **  Come" ;  or  if 
she  does  not  do  so  she  is  not  acting  in  her  true  character  as  the  bride 
of  Christ.  For  this  purpose  is  there  a  church  in  the  world  at  all ; 
if  it  were  not  for  this  our  Lord  might  take  his  people  home  as  soon  as 
they  have  believed,  but  they  are  kept  here  to  be  a  seed  to  keep  the  truth 
alive  in  the  world,  and  their  daily  earnest  cry  to  you  is  "  Come,  come 
to  Jesus."    **  The  Spirit  and  the  bride  say.  Come." 

The  next  giver  of  the  invitation  is  spoken  of  as  "  htm  that  heareth^ 
If  you  have  had  an  ear  to  hear,  and  have  heard  the  gospel  to  your  own 
Salvation,  the  very  next  thing  you  have  to  do  is  to  say  to  those  around 
^n,  **  Come."  Go  and  speak  to  anybody  that  you  meet,  to  everybody 
t;hat  you  meet,  accor^ng  as  opportunity  and  occasion  shall  be  given 
3^oa,  and  say  what  all  the  church  saith  and  what  the  Spirit  is  saying — 
Xiamely,  **  Gome."  Give  your  Master's*  invitation,  distribute  the  testi- 
mony of  his  loving  will,  and  bid  poor  sinners  come  to  Jesus.  Your 
children  and  your  servants, — ^bid  them  come;  your  neighbours  and 

Jour  friends,— bid  them  come ;  the  strangers  and  the  far-off  ones, — 
id  them  come ;  the  harlot  and  the  thief, — ^bid  such  come ;  those  that 
are  in  the  highways  and  the  hedges,  those  who  are  far-off  from  God 
by  abominable  works— say  also  unto  all  these  ''  Come."  Because  you 
have  heard  the  message  and  proved  its  truth,  go  you  and  call  in  others 
to  the  feast  of  love.  Oh,  if  there  were  more  of  these  individual  pro- 
claimers  what  blessings  would  descend  upon  London  !  I  do  not  know 
how  many  believers  in  Christ  there  are  present  in  this  house,  but  I  do 
know  that  there  are  five  tiiousand  of  us  associated  in  church  fellowship 


8  XETBOFOLITAN  TABEBKAOLE  PULPIT. 

at  this  Tabernacle ;  and  if  the  whole  of  these  five  thousand  would  bat* 
beg^n  to  bear  witness  for  Ohrist  with  all  their  might,  there  would  be 
salt  enough  even  within  this  one  house  to  season  all  London,  with  God'» 
blessing  upon  our  efforts.  My  brothers  and  sisters,  let  us  not  be  dow 
to  address  ourselves  to  those  to  whom  the  Spirit  of  Ood  within  us,  and 
the  voice  of  Jesus  from  above,  and  the  cry  of  the  whole  chuich  is^ 
addressed.  Let  each  individual  member  "take  up  the  note  of  invitation 
till  all  around  the  trembling  sinner  hears  the  encouraging  cry  of  *^  Gome." 

Now,  notice  the  remarkably  encouraging  character  of  this  *^  Come,^* 
which  is  given  by  the  Spirit  and  tibe  bride.  One  part  of  it  is  directed 
to  the  thirsty :  **  Let  him  that  is  athirst  come."  By  thirst  is  meant 
necessity,  and  an  appetite  for  its  supply.  Dost  thou  feel  thyself  guil^, 
and  dost  thou  desure  pardon  ? — thou  art  a  thirsty  one.  Art  thou  dia- 
quieted  and  filled  with  unrest,  and  dost  thou  long  to  be  pacified  in* 
heart  ? — thou  art  a  thirsty  one.  Is  there  a  something,  thou  knowest  not 
perhaps  what  it  is,  for  which  thou  art  sighing,  and  crying,  and  pining  ? — 
thou  art  a  thirsty  one,  and  to  thee  is  the  invitation  most  positively  and 
distinctly  given,  "  Let  him  that  is  athirst  come." 

But  how  much  I  rejoice  that  the  second  half  of  the  invitation  doea 
not  contain  even  an  apparent  limit,  as  this  first  sentence  has  been 
thought  to  do!  I  regard  the  thirst  here  mentioned  as  by  no  means 
requiring  of  any  man  that  he  should  have  gone  through  a  process  of* 
horror  on  account  of  guilt,  or  should  have  been  overwhelmed  with 
conviction,  and  driven  to  despair  of  salvation.  I  believe  that  any 
desire  and  any  longing  will  come  under  the  description,  of  ^*  thirst";  but 
since  some  have  stumbled  at  it,  and  have  said  again  and  again,  **  I  feel 
I  do  not  thirst  enough,"  see  how  sweetly  the  second  clause  of  our  text 
puts  it — "Whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely." 
Whether  thou  be  thirsty  or  not,  yet  hast  thou  a  will  to  drink  ?  hast  thoa 
a  will  to  be  saved  ?  a  will  to  be  cleansed  from  sin  ?  a  will  to  be  made  a 
new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus?  Dost  thou  will  to  have  eternal  life? 
Then  thus  saith  the  Spirit  to  thee,  '^  Whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the 
water  of  life  freely." 

Now,  notice  tm*ee  vast  doors  through  which  the  hugest  and  most 
dephantine  sinner  that  ever  made  the  earth  shake  beneath  the  weip:ht 
of  nis  guilt  may  go.  Here  are  the  three  doors.  "  Whosoever  "— •'  ic^i//" 
—''freely:'  "Whosoever,"  there  is  the  first  door.  ** Wliosocvcr " — 
then  Whatman  dare  have  the  impudence  to  say  that  he  is  shut  out?' 
If  you  say  that  you  cannot  come  m  under  "  whosoever^**  I  ask  you  how 
you  dare  narrow  a  word  which  is  in  itself  so  broad,  so  infinite.  "  Who- 
soever"— that  must  mean  every  man  that  ever  lived,  or  ever  shall  lire*, 
while  yet  he  is  here  and  wills  to  come.  Well,  then,  the  wonl  "  wilL** 
There  is  nothing  about  past  character,  nor  present  character;  nothing 
about  knowledge,  or  feeling,  nor  anything  else  but  the  will :  **  Whoso- 
ever will."  Speak  of  tilie  gate  standing  ajar!  This  looks  to  me  like 
taking  the  door  right  off  3ie  hinges  and  caiTying  it  away.  "  AVhoso- 
ever  wiU."  There  is  no  hindrance  whatever  in  your  way.  And  thca 
** freely"  God's  gifts  are  given  without  any  expectation  or  recompense, 
or  any  reonirements  and  conditions — "  Let  him  take  the  water  of  lifo 
'^    ij"    Thou  hast  not  to  bring  thy  good  feelings,  or  good  dcsii-es, 

good  works,  but  oome  and  take  freely  what  God  gives  you  for 


THB  TWO  ''COMBS."  9 

fiotUng.  Yon  are  not  even  to  bring  repentance  and  fkith  in  order  to  ob- 
tain grace,  bnt  yon  are  to  come  and  accept  repentance  and  faith  aa  the 
gifts  of  Ctod,  and  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  What  broad  gates  of 
mercy  these  are!  How  wide  the  entrance  which  love  has  prepared  for 
wming  sonls  I    **  Whosoever ! "    *•  Will !  "    "  Freely  !  " 

Obflerre  how  the  invitation  snms  np  the  work  the  sinner  is  called 
upon  to  do.  First,  he  is  bidden  to  come.  *'  Whosoever  will,  let  him 
come.*'  Now,  to  come  to  Christ  means  simply  for  the  sonl  to  draw  near 
to  him  by  tmsting  him.  You  arc  not  asked  to  bring  a  load  with  yon^ 
nor  to  work  for  Christ  in  order  to  salvation,  but  just  to  come  to  him. 
Nothing  is  said  about  the  st^le  of  coming,  come  running  or  creeping, 
come  boldly  or  timidly,  for  if  you  do  but  come  to  Jesus,  he  will  in  no 
wise  cast  yon  out.  A  simple  reliance  upon  the  Lord  Jesus  is  the  one 
enential  tor  eternal  life. 

Then  the  next  direction  is  "  talce"  "  Whosoever  will,  let  him  take." 
That  is  all.  That  word  ^'  take  "  is  a  grand  word  to  express  the  gospel. 
The  world's  gospel  is  "bring":  Christ's  gospel  is  "take."  Nature's 
gospel  is  ^mf&e  :  just  change  the  Icttter  and  yon  have  the  gospel  of 
grace  which  is  "take."  There  i&  the  water,  dear  friends,  you  have  not 
to  dig  a  well  to  find  it,  yon  have  only  to  take  it.  There  is  the  bread 
of  heKieBy  yon  have  not  to  grind  the  flour  or  bake  the  loaf,  you  have 
imiw  to  take  it.  Tbefe  is  a  garment  woven  from  the  top  throughout, 
ana  without  seam ;  you  have  not  to  add  a  fringe  to  it,  you  have  only  to 
take  it.  The  way  of  salvation  may  be  summed  np  in  the  four  letters 
of  the  word  "  take."  Do  you  desire  Christ  ?  take  him.  Do  you  want 
pardon  ?  take  it  Do  you  need  a  new  heart  ?  take  it.  Do  yon  want 
peace  on  earth  ?  take  it.  Do  you  want  heaven  hereafter  ?  take  it — that 
18  all.    "  Whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely." 

And  there  is  one  other  word  which  I  love  to  dwell  on,  and  it  comes 
twice  over  "  let  him  that  is  athirst  come,  and  whosoever  will  let  him 
take."  It  is  graciously  said,  let  him.  It  seems  to  me  as  if  the  Tvord 
Jesus  Christ  saw  a  poor  soul  standing  thirsty  at  the  flowing  crystal 
fountain  of  his  love,  and  the  devil  standing  there  whispered  to  him, 
**  Yon  see  the  sacred  stream,  but  it  flows  for  others.  It  is  what  yon 
need,  bnt  you  must  not  have  it,  it  is  not  for  you.''  Listen,  there  is  a 
voice  from  beyond  the  clouds  which  cries  aloud,  "  Let  him  take  it !" 
Stand  back  devil,  let  the  willing  one  come !  He  is  putting  down  his  lip 
to  drink — ^he  understands  it  now — but  there  comes  rushing  upon  him 
a  host  of  his  old  sins  like  so  many  winged  harpies,  and  they  scream 
out  to  hrim,  ^Qo  back,  von  must  not  draw  nigh,  this  fountain  is  not 
for  yon :  this  pure  ci^tai  stream  must  not  be  defiled  by  such  leprous 
lips  as  yours."  A^in  there  comes  from  the  throne  of  love  this  blessed 
|)assword,  "  Let  him  come  and  let  him  take."  It  is  as  when  a  man  is 
in  court  and  is  called  for,  to  go  into  the  witness-box.  He  is  standing  in 
die  crowd,  and  his  name  is  called  :  what  happens  ?  As  soon  as  he 
hears  his  name  he  begins  to  push  through  the  throng  to  reach  his  place. 
^What  are  you  at?"  says  one.  "1  am  called,"  says  he.  "Stand 
back ;  why  do  you  push  so  ?  "  says  another.  "  I  am  called  by  the 
judge,"  saj^s  he.  A  big  policeman  demands,  "  Why  are  you  making 
soch  confusion  in  court  ? '  "  But,"  says  the  man,  "  I  am  called.  My 
name  was  called  out,  and  I  must  come."    If  he  cannot  come,  if  it  is 


10  METROPOLITAN  TABERVAOLK  PULPIT. 

not  poflsible  for  him  to  get  through  the  throng,  one  of  the  authorities 
calls  out,  '^  Make  way  for  that  man — ^he  is  summoned  by  the  court. 
Officers,  clear  a  passage  and  let  him  come."  Now  the  Lord  Jesus  calls 
the  thirsty-one  and  he  says,  "Whosoever  will,  let  him  come ! "  Make  vrav 
doubts,  make  way  sins,  make  way  fears,  make  way  devils,  make  way  au 
of  you  for  Jesus  Christ  the  great  king  and  judge  of  all  has  said,  "  Let 
him  come!"  Who  shall  hinder  when  Jesus  permits?  He  who  is 
divinely  called  shall  surely  come  to  Jesus.  Come  he  shall,  whoever  may 
stand  in  his  way.  This  morning  I  feel  as  if  I  could  come  to  Jesus 
over  again,  and  I  will  do  so.  Do  you  not  feel  the  same,  my  beloved 
brethren  ?  Well  then,  dear  brother  or  sister,  after  you  have  so  done 
turn  round  and  proclaim  this  precious  gospel  invitation  to  all  around 
you,  and  say  to  them  "  Come  and  take  the  water  of  life  freely." 

III. — ^The  third  point  is  the  connection  between  these  two 
COKINGS.  Is  there  any  relation  between  the  coming  of  Christ  from 
heaven  to  earth,  and  the  coming  ot  poor  sinful  creatures  to  Christ  and 
trusting  him  ? 

There  is  this  relation,  first,  they  are  both  suggested  in  this  passage, 
by  the  closing  of  the  scriptural  canon.  John  is  about  to  write  by  uie 
voice  of  the  Lord  that  none  are  to  add  to  or  take  from  the  completed 
Book  of  God.  The  church  says,  *'  If  there  are  no  more  prophets  to 
proclaim  the  mind  of  God,  no  more  apostles  to  write  with  in&Uible 
authority,  and  no  more  instructors  to  give  forth  new  revelations,  or 
bring  new  promises,  then  it  only  remaineth  that  the  Lord  should  come. 
**Then,"  says  she,  "Come,  Lord  Jesus."  And  here  are  the  sinners 
standing  round,  and  they  hear  that  no  other  gospel  is  to  be  expected^ 
no  more  revelations  are  to  be  added  to  those  which  are  in  this  book, 
there  will  be  no  other  atonement,  no  other  way  of  salvation,  therefore 
it  is  their  wisdom  to  come  at  once  to  Jesus.  It  is  because  the  Book 
was  about  to  receive  ita  finis  that  the  Spirit  and  the  bride  unitedly  cried 
to  the  sinners  to  come  at  once.  No  fresh  gospel  is  to  be  expected, 
therefore  let  them  come  at  onee.  Why  should  they  tarry  any  longer? 
The  oxen  and  fatlings  are  killed,  come  to  the  supper !  All  things  are 
ready,  there  is  nothing  more  to  be  done,  or  to  be  revealed ;  upon  us  the 
ends  of  the  earth  have  come.  ''It  is  finished"  hath  rung  through 
earth  and  heaven,  therefore — 


"  Come  and  welcome^  sinner  come ! 


99 


I  think  I  perceive  another  connection,  namely,  that  those  people  who 
in  very  truth  love  Christ  enough  to  cry  to  him  continually  to  come  are 
sure  to  love  sinners  also,  and  to  say  to  them  also,  "  Come."  Not  bat 
what  there  are  some  who  talk  a  great  deal  about  Christ's  coming,  and 
yet  manifest  but  small  care  for  other  men's  souls.  Well,  it  is  talk ;  the 
profession  of  looking  for  the  second  advent  is  nothing  but  talk  when  it 
does  not  lead  people  to  cry  to  perishing  men,  **  Come  to  Christ."  He 
who  loves  Christ  as  he  should  loves  sinners  also ;  and  that  man  who 
loves  Christ  so  very  much  that  he  is  quite  wrapped  up  in  himself,  and 
forgets  the  dying  millions  around  him,  and  stands  star-gazing  into 
heaven,  expecting  to  see  a  sudden  glory,  to  take  himself  away,  does  not 
imderstand  what  he  saith :  for  if  he  loved  his  Lord  he  would  set  to 


HBM  TWO  "<X)MB8 ."  11 

irork  for  him,  and  would  show  that  he  expected  the  King  to  come  by 
^ndeaToaring  to  extend  his  kingdom. 

Then  is  this  connection  a£o,  that  before  Christ  comes  a  certain 
«nimber  of  his  elect  mnst  be  ingathered.  He  shall  not  come  nntil  an 
aiqDointed  compaay  shall  have  oeen  brought  to  eternal  life  by  the 
pr^ichinff  of  the  Word.  Oh  then,  brethren,  it  is  onrs  to  labour  that 
the  wa^terers  may  come  home,  for  so  we  are,  as  far  as  lieth  in  ns,  has- 
taung  the  time  when  onr  Beloved  lumself  shall  come. 

Oi^  more,  there  is  a  sort  of  coming  of  Christ  which,  though  it  be 
not  the  first  meaning  here,  may  be  included  in  it,  for  it  touches  the 
•oentie  of  the  sinner's  coming  to  Christ.  Because,  brethren,  when  we 
<!rjf  **  Come,  Lord  Jesus,"  if  he  shall  answer  us  by  giving  us  of  his 
^irit  more  fully,  so  that  he  comes  to  us  spiritually,  then  penitent  souls 
will  asBUxedly  be  brought  to  his  feet.  We  know  this,  that  wherever  the 
Lord  himself  is  in  a  meeting,  hearts  are  sure  to  be  broken  and  repent- 
40108 18  certain  to  be  manifested.  Wherever  Jesus  Christ  is  in  power 
there  mnst  be  a  revival,  for  dead  souls  must  come  to  life  in  him.  The 
great  thing  we  want  above  all  others  is  a  grip  of  that  glorious  promise, 
^  Lo,  I  am  widi  you  alway,  even  to  the  end  of  the  world,"  and  as  we  in 
this  sense  obtain  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  we  shall  see  sinners  come  and 
take  of  the  water  of  life. 

IV.  Well  then,  lastly,  what  are  the  responses  ?  We  sent  up  a 
cry  to  heaven,  uid  sai<C  *^  Come."  The  response  is,  '^  Behold,  I  come 
quiddy.'*  That  is  eminently  satisfactory.  You  may  have  to  wait 
awhile,  but  the  cry  is  heuxl,  and  if  the  Lord  should  not  come  in  your 
L'fetime,  the  same  preparation  of  heart  which  made  you  look  for  his 
coming  will  be  blessedly  useful  to  you  if  he  sends  his  messenger  to  take 
you  home  by  death.  The  same  waiting  and  watching  will  answer  in 
either  case,  so  you  need  not  be  under  any  distress  about  which  of  the 
two  shall  happen.  Christ  will  descend  to  earth  as  surely  as  he  ascended 
to  heaven,  and  when  he  cometh  there  will  be  victory  to  the  right  and 
to  the  true,  and  his  saints  shall  reign  with  him. 

And  now  concerning  this  other  cry  of  "  Come."  We  ask  sinners  to  come. 
We  have  asked  them  in  a  fourfold  voice :  Jesus,  the  Spirit,  the  bride, 
and  him  that  heareth,  they  have  all  said,  "  Come."  Will  they  come  ? 
Brethren  and  sisters,  it  is  a  question  which  I  cannot  answer.  You 
must  not  ask  mc,  for  I  do  not  know ;  but  you  had  better  ask  the  per- 
sons themselves :  they  are  of  age,  ask  them.  Take  care  that  you  do  ask 
them  before  they  get  out  of  the  Tabernacle  this  morning.  They  know, 
and^  therefore  they  can  tell  you  whether  they  mean  to  come  or  not.  This 
I  will  say  to  them, — my  dear  friends,  I  do  trust  that  this  last  day  of 
the  year  maybe  to  you  a  day  of  mercy.  The  Jews  had  a  feast  of  in- 
gatherings at  the  end  of  the  year,  and  I  earnestly  pray  that  we  may 
have  an  ingathering  of  precious  souls  to  Christ  ere  the  year  quite  runs 
ont :  that  would  be  a  grand  finish  to  this  year  of  grace,  and  a  sweet 
encouragement  fbr  the  future. 

But  suppose  you  do  not  come.  Well,  you  have  been  invited.  If  a 
Christmas  feast  is  provided  for  the  poor,  and  a  number  of  beggars  are 
standing  shivering  outside  in  the  sleet  and  snow,  and  will  not  come  in 
though  earnestly  bidden,  we  say  "  Well,  you  have  been  invited :  what 
more  do  you  want  ?"  Remember,  also,  that  you  have  been  invited  very 


12  METBOFOUTAH  TABERKICLX  PULPIT. 

earneiify.  The  Spirit,  the  bridey  and  him  that  heareth,  and  Jeec 
himael^— they  have  all  said  to  yoa  **  Gome."  I  am  as  the  man  thi 
heareth,  and  I  have  said,  ^  Gome."  I  do  not  know  how  to  say  it  moi 
earnestly  than  I  have  said  it.  Oh,  how  would  my  sonl  ddight  if  eveat 
one  here  did  come  to  Ghrist  at  this  moment !  I  would  ask  no  greate 
joy  out  of  heaven  to  crown  this  year  with.  Yon  are  invited,  and  yo 
are  earnestly  inrited,  what  more  do  yon  want  ?  It  yon  never  conu 
yon  will  have  this  thonght  to  hannt  yon  for  ever — **  I  was  invited  an 
pressed  again  and  again,  but  I  wonld  not  come." 

I  want  yon  to  remember,  too,  that  yon  are  called  to  come  now,  a 
once.  Yon  may  not  be  bidden  to  come  to-morrow  for  several  reasons 
^n  may  not  be  alive,  or  there  may  be  no  earnest  person  near  yon  t 
invite  yon.  Gan  there  be  a  better  day  than  to-day  ?  Yon  have  alvray 
said  "  To-moiTOW,"  yet  where  are  yon  now  ?  Not  a  bit  forwarder  som 
of  yon  than  yon  were  ten  years  ago.  Do  yon  recollect  that  sermon  whei 
yon  were  made  to  tremble  so,  and  yon  said,  **  Please  God,  I  get  ont  o 
thisy  I  will  seek  his  foce,"  bnt  yon  postponed  it,  and  are  yon  any  for 
warder  now  ?  Yon  remember  the  story  of  the  countryman  who  wonli 
not  cross  the  river  just  yet,  but  sat  down  and  said  he  would  wait  nntj 
all  the  water  had  gone  by.  He  waited  long  in  vain,  and  he  might  hav 
waited  for  e\'er,  for  rivers  are  always  flowing.  You  too  are  waiting  til 
a  more  convenient  season  shall  come,  and  all  the  difficulties  shall  nav 


tion.    Oh  that  you  wonld  believe  in  Jesus  Ghrist  I    May  his  Spiri 
kad  yon  to  do  so  now. 

«« Only  tmst  him !  only  trust  hnn  ? 
(jnlr  trust  him  mow! 
He  will  save  you!  he  will  sare  you! 
He  will  save  you  mno/** 

Chttt  yonrsdves  upon  the  blood  and  merits  of  the  Tx)rd  Jesus,  and  th( 
8*^<M^  work  is  done.    The  Lord  help  you  to  do  so.    Amen. 


IVUTION  OP  SoRirruRB  Read  beforb  Sermon— Revelation  xxii. 


IIVMNH  KttOM  "Our  Own  Uymx  Book"— 017,  345,  509. 


|n«t^A^«Ittan  SFalrenmcte  itttpt 


OUB  URGENT  NEED  OP  THE  HOLT  SPIRIT. 


4.  ?l>m\if\i 


BXLIVEBED   OH   L0M)'S-DaY    MoRNING,    JANUARY    7TH,    1877,    BY 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  UETROPOLITAK  TABERNAOLB,  NEWINGTOH.       , 


"  Through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost"— Rom.  xr.  13. 
"  By  the  power  of  tho  Spirit  of  God."— Rom.  xr.  19. 

I  DSBISE  to  draw  your  attention  at  this  time  to  the  great  necessity 
which  ezistB  for  the  continual  manifestation  of  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  in  the  chnrch  of  God  if  by  her  means  the  multitudes  are  to  bie 

Sathered  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  I  &d  not  know  how  I  coidd  much  better 
0  so  than  by  first  showing  that  the  Spirit  of  God  is  necessary  to  the 
church  of  God  for  its  own  internal  growth  in  grace.  Hence  my  text  in 
the  thirteenth  verse,  "Now  the  God  of  hope  fill  you  with  all  joy  and 
peace  in  belieying,  that  ye  may  abound  in  hope,  through  the  power  of 
the  Holy  Ghost," — where  it  is  evident  that  the  apostle  attributes  the 
power  to  be  filled  with  joy  and  peace  in  believing,  and  the  power  to 
abound  in  hope,  to  the  Holv  Ghost.  But,  then,  I  wanted  also  to  show 
you  that  the  power  of  the  church  outside,  that  with  which  she  is  to  be 
aggressive  and  work  upon  the  world  for  the  gathering  out  of  God*s  elect 
from  among  men,  is  also  this  same  energy  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Hence 
I  have  taken  the  nineteenth  verse,  for  the  apostle  there  says  that  God 
had  through  him  made  "the  Gentiles  obedient  by  word  and  deed, 
through  mighty  signs  and  wonders,  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God." 
So  you  see,  dear  friends,  that  first  of  aU  to  keep  the  church  happy  and 
holy  within  herself  there  must  be  a  manifestation  of  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  and  secondly,  that  the  church  may  invade  the  territories  of 
the  enemy  and  may  conauer  the  world  for  Christ  she  must  be  clothed 
with  the  self-same  sacred  energy.  We  may  then  go  further  and  say  that 
the  power  of  the  church  for  external  work  will  be  proportionate  to  the 

Sower  which  dwells   within  herself.    Gauge  the  energy  of  the  Holy 
piiit  in  the  hearts  of  believers  and  you  may  fairly  calculate  their  in* 
fluence  upon  unbelievers.    Only  let  the  church  be  illuminated  by  the 
Holy  Spirit  and  she  will  reflect  the  li^ht  and  become  to  onlookers  "  fair  as 
the  moon,  clear  as  the  sun,  and  temble  as  an  army  width  banners." 
No.  1,832. 


14  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Let  US  by  two  or  three  illustrations  show  that  the  work  outward  mnst 
always  depend  upon  the  force  inward.  On  a  cold  winter's  day  when  the 
snow  has  fallen  and  lies  deep  upon  the  ground  you  go  through  a  Tillage. 
There  is  a  row  of  cottages,  and  you  will  notice  that  from  one  of  theroofii 
the  snow  has  nearly  (Usappeared,  while  another  cottage  still  bears  a 
coating  of  snow.  You  do  not  stay  to  make  enquiries  as  to  the  reason 
of  the  diiference,  for  you  know  very  well  what  is  the  cause.  There  is  a 
fire  burning  inside  the  one  cottage  and  the  warmth  glows  through  its 
roof,  and  so  the  snow  speedily  melts :  in  the  other  there  is  no  tenant ;  it 
is  a  house  to  let,  no  fire  bums  on  its  hearth  and  no  warm  smoke  ascends 
the  chimney,  and  therefore  there  lies  the  snow.  Just  as  the  warmth  is 
within  so  the  melting  will  be  without.  I  look  at  a  number  of  churches, 
and  where  I  see  worldlincss  and  formalism  lying  thick  upon  them,  I  am 
absolutely  certain  that  there  is  not  the  warmth  of  Christian  life  within ; 
but  where  the  hearts  of  believers  are  warm  with  divine  love  through  the 
Spirit  of  God,  we  are  sure  to  see  evils  vanish,  and  beneficial  conse- 
quences following  therefi*om.  We  need  not  look  within ;  in  such  a  case 
the  exterior  is  index  sufficient. 

Talie  an  illustration  from  political  life.  Here  is  a  trouble  arising 
between  different  nations  ;  there  are  angry  spirits  stirring,  and  it  seems 
very  likely  that  the  Gordian  knot  of  difficulty  will  never  be  untied  by 
diplomacy,  but  will  need  to  be  cut  >vith  the  sword.  Everybody  knows 
that  one  of  the  hopes  of  peace  lies  in  the  bankrupt  condition  of  the  nation 
which  is  likely  to  go  to  war  ;  for  if  it  be  short  of  supplies,  if  it  cannot 
pay  its  debts,  if  it  cannot  furnish  the  material  for  war,  then  it  will  not 
be  likely  to  court  a  conflict.  A  country  must  be  strong  in  internal  re* 
sources  before  it  can  wisely  venture  upon  foreign  wars.  Thus  is  it  in 
the  great  battle  of  truth  :  a  poor  starveling  church  cannot  combat  the 
devil  and  his  armies.  Unless  the  church  is  herself  rich  in  the  things 
of  God,  and  strong  with  divine  energy,  she  will  generally  cease  to  be 
aggressive,  and  will  content  herself  with  going  on  with  the  regular 
routine  of  Christian  work,  crying,  "  Peace  I  peace  ! "  where  peace 
should  not  be.  She  will  not  dare  to  defy  the  world,  or  to  send  forth 
;  her  legions  to  conquer  its  provinces  for  Christ,  when  her  own  condition 
;  is  pitiably  weak.  The  strength  or  weakness  of  a  nation's  exchequer 
]  affects  its  army  in  its  every  march,  and  in  like  manner  its  measure  of 
grace  influences  the  church  of  God  in  all  its  action. 

Suffer  yet  another  illustration.  If  you  lived  in  Egypt,  you  would 
notice,  once  in  the  year,  the  Nile  rising  ;  and  you  wotSd  watch  its  in- 
crease with  anxiety,  because  the  extent  of  the  overflow  of  the  Nile  is 
very  much  the  measure  of  the  fertili|^  of  Egypt.  Now  the  rising  of  the 
Nile  must  depend  upon  those  far-off  lakes  in  the  centre  of  Africa — 
whether  they  shall  be  well  filled  with  the  melting  of  the  snows  or  no. 
If  there  be  a  scanty  supply  in  the  higher  reservoirs,  there  cannot  be 
much  overflow  in  the  Nile  in  its  after-course  through  Egypt.  Let  us 
translate  the  figure,  and  say  that,  if  the  upper  lakes  of  fellowship  with 
God  in  the  Christian  Church  are  not  well  filled — if  the  soul's  spiritual 
strength  be  not  sustained  by  private  prayer  and  communion  with  God— 
the  Nile  of  practical  Christian  service  will  never  rise  to  the  fiood. 

The  one  thing  I  want  to  say  is  this  :  you  cannot  get  out  of  the 
Church  what  is  not  in  it.    The  reservoir  itself  must  be  filled  before  it 


OTIB  VSG-EirT  m&ED  OF  THB  HOLY  flPIItlT.  15 

ponr  forOi  a  stream.  We  mnsb  oarselyes  drink  of  the  living  water 
tin  we  axe  ftill»  and  then  oat  of  the  midst  of  ns  shall  flow  rivers  of 
liTing  water ;  bnt  not  till  then.  Oat  of  an  empty  basket  yon  cannot 
difltmmte  loaves  and  fishes,  however  hangry  the  crowd  may  be.  Oat  of 
an  empty  heart  yoa  cannot  speak  full  things,  nor  from  a  lean  sonl  bring 
fiirth  nfc  things  ftill  of  marrow,  which  shall  feed  the  people  of  Ood^ 
Ont  of  the  folness  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh,  when  it  speaks  to 
-edification  at  all.  So  that  the  first  thing  is  to  look  well  to  home  affairs, 
and  pray  that  Ood  woold  bless  us  and  cause  his  face  to  shine  upon  us^ 
that  his  way  maybe  known  upon  earth,  and  his  saving  health  among  all 
people. 

^  To  bless  thy  chosen  race, 
In  mercy,  Lord,  incline, 
And  cause  the  brightness  of  thy  face 
On  all  thy  saints  to  shine. 

^That  so  thy  wondrous  way 

May  through  the  world  be  known  ; 
Whilst  distant  lands  their  tribute  pay. 
And  thy  salvation  own.** 

This  momingy  in  trying  to  epesk  of  the  great  necessity  of  the  Chnrch, 
namely,  her  being  moved  vigorously  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
I  earnestly  pray  that  we  may  enter  ]^pon  this  subject  with  the  deepest 
conoeivable  reverence.  Let  us  adore  while  we  are  meditating  ;  let  ns 
ibd  the  condescension  of  this  blessed  Person  of  the  Godhead  in  deigning 
to  dwell  in  his  people  and  to  work  in  the  human  heart.  Let  us  remem- 
ber that  this  divine  person  is  very  sensitive.  He  is  a  jealous  God.  We 
read  of  his  being  grieved  and  vexed,  and  therefore  let  us  ask  his  for- 

fiTeness  of  the  many  provocations  which  he  must  have  received  from  our 
ands.  With  lowliest  awe  let  us  bow  before  him,  remembering  that,  if 
there  be  a  sin  which  is  unpardonable,  it  has  a  reference  to  himself — 
the  mn  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  shall  never  be  forgiven,  neither 
in  this  world  nor  in  that  which  is  to  come.  In  reference  to  the  Holy 
Ghost  we  stand  on  very  tender  ground  indeed ;  and  if  ever  we  should 
veil  our  faces  and  rejoice  with  trembling,  it  is  while  we  speak  of  the 
Spirit^  and  of  those  mysterious  works  with  which  he  blesses  us.  In 
that  lowly  spirit,  and  under  the  divine  overshadowing  follow  me  while  I 
set  before  you  seven  works  of  the  Holy  Spirit  which  are  most  necessary 
to  the  Church  for  its  own  good,  and  equally  needful  to  her  in  her  olfice 
of  missionary  from  Christ  to  the  outside  world. 

I.     To  begm,  then,  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  manifested  in 

the  QUiCKENiNa  of  souls  to  spiritual  life.    All  the  spiritual  life  which 

exists  in  this  world  is  the  creation  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  whom  the 

liord  Jesus  quickeneth  whomsoever  he  wiU.    You  and  I  had  not  life 

enough  to  know  our  death  till  he  visited  us,  we  had  not  light  enough 

to^  perceive  that  we  were  in  darkness,  nor  sense  enough  to  feel  our 

misery :  we  were  so  utterly  abandoned  to  our  own  folly  that,  though  we 

were_  naked,  and  poor,  and  miserable,  we  dreamed  that  we  were  rich, 

and  increased  in  goods.    We  were  under  sentence  of  death  as  condemned 

criminals,  and  yet  we  talked  about  merit  and  reward ;  yea,  we  were  dead, 

and  yet  we  boasted  that  we  were  alive — counting  our  very  death  to  be 

our  life.    The  Spirit  of  God  in  infinite  mercy  came  to  us  with  his 


16  MBTBOPOLITAN  TABEBVAOLl  FULPXT, 

inTsterious  power,  and  made  us  live.  The  first  token  of  life  was  s  oon- 
scionsncss  of  our  being  in  the  realm  of  death,  and  an  agony  to  esc^ 
from  it ;  we  began  to  perceive  oar  insensibilitv,  and,  if  I  may  be  imf> 
doned  Bnch  an  expression,  we  saw  onr  blinoness.  Every  grtnrm  o? 
spiritual  life,  irom  the  first  tender  shoot  until  now,  has  also  heea  the 
work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  As  the  green  blade  was  his  production,  so  is 
the  ripening  com.  The  increase  of  life,  as  much  as  life  at  the  beginning, 
must  still  come  by  the  operation  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  who  raised  up 
Christ  ft-om  the  dead,  lou  will  never  have  more  life,  brother,  except 
as  the  Holy  Ghost  bestows  it  upon  you ;  yea,  you  will  not  even  know 
that  you  want  more,  nor  groan  after  more,  except  as  he  worketh  in  yon 
to  desire  and  to  agonise,  according  to  his  own  good  pleasure.  See,  then, 
our  absolute  dependence  upon  the  Holy  Spirit ;  for  if  he  were  gone  we 
should  relapse  into  spiritual  death,  and  tne  Church  would  b^me  a 
charnel-house. 

The  Holy  Spirit  is  absolutely  needful  to  make  everything  that  we  do 
to  be  alive.  AVe  are  sowers,  brethren,  but  if  we  take  dead  seed  in  our 
seed-basket  there  will  never  be  a  harvest.  The  preacher  must  preach  liv- 
ing truth  in  a  living  manner  if  he  expects  to  obtam  a  hundred-fold  harvest 
How  much  there  is  of  church  work  which  is  nothing  better  than  the 
movement  of  a  galvanized  corpse.  How  much  of  religion  is  done  as  if 
it  were  performed  by  an  automaton,  or  ground  off  bv  machinery.  Now- 
a-days  men  care  little  about  heart  and  soul,  they  only  look  at  outward 
performances.  Why,  I  hear  they  have  now  invented  a  machine  wUch 
talks,  though  surely  there  was  taJk  enough  without  this  Parisian  addi- 
tion to  the  band  of  prattlers.  We  can  preach  as  machines,  we  can 
pray  as  machines,  and  we  can  teach  Sunday*  school  as  machines.  Men 
can  give  mechanically,  and  come  to  the  communion-table  mechanically : 

{es,  and  we  ourselves  shall  do  so  unless  the  Spirit  of  God  be  wiUi  us. 
lost  henrers  know  what  it  is  to  hear  a  live  sermon  which  quivers  all 
over  with  fulness  of  energy  ;  you  also  know  what  it  is  to  sing  a  hymn 
in  a  lively  manner,  and  you  know  what  it  is  to  unite  in  a  live  pray^- 
meeting ;  but,  ah,  if  the  Spirit  of  God  be  absent,  all  that  the  church 
does  will  be  lifeless,  the  nistle  of  leaves  above  a  tomb,  the  gliding  of 
spectres,  the  congregation  of  the  dead  turning  over  in  their  graves. 

As  the  Spirit  of  God  is  a  quickener  to  make  us  alive  and  our  work 
alive,  so  must  he  specially  be  with  us  to  make  those  alive  with  whom 
we  have  to  deal  for  tlesus.  Imagine  a  dead  preacher  preaching  a  dead 
sermon  to  dead  sinners :  what  can  possibly  come  of  it  ?  Here  is  a  b^n- 
tiful  essav  which  has  been  admirably  elaborated,  and  it  is  coldly  read  to 
the  cold-hearted  sinner.  It  smells  of  the  midm'ght  oil,  but  it  has  no 
heavenly  unction,  no  divine  power  resting  upon  it,  nor,  perhaps,  is  that 
power  even  looked  for.  What  good  can  come  of  such  a  production  ? 
As  well  may  you  try  to  calm  the  tempest  with  poetry  or  stay  the  hurri- 
cane with  rhetoric  as  to  bless  a  soul  by  mere  learning  and  eloquence. 
It  is  only  as  the  Spirit  of  God  shall  come  upon  God*s  servant  and  shall 
make  the  word  which  he  preaches  to  drop  as  a  living  seed  into  the  heart 
that  any  result  can  follow  his  ministry  ;  and  it  is  only  as  the  Spirit  of 
God  shall  then  follow  that  seed  and  keep  it  alive  in  the  soul  of  the  lis- 
tener that  we  can  expect  those  who  profess  to  be  converted  to  take  root 
and  grow  to  maturity  of  grace,  and  become  our  sheaves  at  the  last. 


017&  UBiQXHT  KBED  OV  THB  HOLY  8PIBIT,  17 

We  m  utterly  dependent  here,  and  for  my  part  I  rejoice  in  this 
•hKdiito  dependence.  If  I  could  have  a  stock  of  power  to  saye  sonls 
iridch  noufd  be  aD  my  own  apart  from  the  ^irit  of  God,  I  cannot  sun- 
me  a  greater  temptation  to  pride  and  to  liymg  at  a  distance  from  0<kL 
II  if  well  to  be  weak  in  self,  and  better  still  to  be  nothing  :  to  be  sim- 

&  the  .pen  in  the  hand  of  the  Spirit  of  Ood,  nnable  to  write  a  single 
ir  npon  the  tablets  of  the  human  heart  except  as  the  hand  of  the 
Hdy  Etpirit  shaD  nse  ns  for  that  purpose.  That  is  really  onr  position, 
■nd  we  ought  practically  to  take  it  up ;  and  doing  so  we  shall  continually 
eiy  to  the  Spirit  of  God  to  quicken  us  in  all  things,  and  quicken  all 
mut  we  do,  and  quicken  the  word  as  it  drops  into  the  sinner's  ear.  I 
am  quite  certain  that  a  church  which  is  devoid  of  life  cannot  be  the 
means  of  life-giving  to  the  dead  sinners  around  it.  No.  Everything 
acts  after  its  kind,  and  we  must  have  a  living  church  for  living  work. 

0  that  God  would  quicken  every  member  of  this  church  !  MVhat," 
say  yon,  ^*  do  you  think  some  of  us  are  not  aUve  unto  God  ?'*  Brethren, 
there  are  some  of  yon  concerning  whom  I  am  certain,  as  to  as  one  can 
judge  of  another,  that  you  have  life,  for  we  can  see  it  in  all 
that  you  do ;  but  there  are  some  others  of  you  concerning  whose 
spuntual  life  one  has  to  exercise  a  good  deal  of  faith  and  a  great  deal 
more  charity,  for  we  do  not  perceive  in  you  much  activity  in  God's  cause, 
nor  care  for  the  souls  of  others,  nor  zeal  for  the  divine  glory.  If  we  do 
not  see  any  fruits,  what  can  we  do  but  earnestly  pray  that  you  may  not 
tnm  out  to  be  barren  trees  ? 

That  is  the  first  point,  and  we  think  it  is  as  clear  as  possible  that  we 
must  have  the  quickening  power  of  the  Spirit  for  ourselves  if  we  are 
to  be  the  means  in  the  hand  of  God  of  awakening  dead  souls. 

II.  Next  it  is  one  of  the  peculiar  offices  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  en- 
lighten his  people.  He  has  done  so  by  giving  us  his  Word,  wliich  he 
has  inspired ;  but  the  Book,  inspired  though  it  be,  is  never  spiritually 
understood  by  any  man  apart  from  the  personal  teaching  of  its  great 
Author.  Tou  may  read  it  as  much  as  you  will,  and  never  discover  the 
inner  and  vital  sense  unless  your  soul  shall  bo  led  into  it  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  himself.  "  What,"  saith  one,  "  I  have  learned  the  shorter  cate- 
chism and  I  have  got  the  creed  by  heart,  and  yet  do  I  know  nothing  ?  '* 

1  answer,  you  have  done  well  to  learn  the  letter  of  truth,  but  you  still  need 
the  Spirit  of  God  to  make  it  the  light  and  power  of  God  to  your  soul. 
The  letter  you  may  know,  and  know  it  better  than  some  who  know  also 
the  spirit,  and  I  do  not  for  a  moment  depreciate  a  knowledge  of  the 
letter,  unless  you  suprx^e  that  there  is  something  saving  in  mere  head 
knowledge  ;  but  the  Spirit  of  God  must  come,  and  makes  the  letter  alive 
to  yon,  transfer  it  to  your  heart,  set  it  on  fire  and  make  it  burn  within 
you,  or  else  its  divine  force  and  majesty  will  be  hid  from  your  eyes.  No 
man  knows  the  things  of  God  save  ne  to  whom  the  Spirit  of  God  has 
revealed  them.  No  carnal  mind  can  understand  spiritual  things.  We 
may  use  language  as  plain  as  a  pikestafi^,  but  the  man  who  has  no 
q[>iritual  understanding  is  a  blind  man,  and  the  clearest  light  will  not 
enable  him  to  see.  Ye  must  be  taught  of  the  Lord,  or  you  will  die  in 
ignorance.  Now,  my  brethren,  suppose  that  in  a  church  there  should 
be  many  who  have  never  been  thus  instructed,  can  you  not  see  that  evil 
nmst  and  will  come  of  it  ?    Error  is  sure  to  arise  where  truth  is  not 


18  MSTBOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

experimentally  known.  If  professors  be  not  tanght  of  the  Spirit  their 
ignorance  will  breed  conceit,  pride,  unbelief,  and  a  thousand  other  erita. 
Oh,  hadst  thou  known  more  of  truth,  my  brother,  thon  hadst  not 
boasted  so  !  Oh,  hadst  thou  seen  that  truth  which  as  yet  has  not  been 
revealed  to  thee  because  of  thy  prejudice,  thou  hadst  not  so  fierce^ 
condemned  those  who  are  better  than  thyself !    With  much  zeal  to  do 

5ood,  men  have  done  a  world  of  mischief  through  want  of  instruction  in 
ivine  tilings.  Sorrow  too  comes  of  ignorance.  0,  my  brother,  hadst 
thou  known  the  doctrines  of  grace  thou  hadst  not  been  so  long  a  time 
in  l)ondage  !  Half  of  the  heresy  in  the  church  of  God  is  not  wilful 
error,  but  error  which  springs  of  not  knowing  the  truth,  not  searching 
tlie  Scriptures  with  a  teachable  heart,  not  submitting  the  mind  to  the* 
light  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  We  should,  as  a  rule,  treat  heresy  rather  as 
ignorance  to  be  enlightened  than  as  crime  to  be  condemned ;  save,  alas, 
that  wjiiiotinicB  it  becomes  wilful  perversity,  when  the  mind  is  greedy" 
after  nov(;Ity,  or  puffed  up  with  self-confidence  :  then  other  treatment 
may  becoiue  painlnlly  necessary.  Beloved,  if  the  Spirit  of  God  will  but 
cnhghtcu  the  church  thorouglily  there  will  be  an  end  of  divisions. 
HcluHijJH  are  gcnerully  occasioned  by  ignorance,  and  the  proud  spirit 
which  will  not  brook  correction.  On  the  other  hand,  real,  lasting,  prac- 
tic4il  inn'ty  will  exist  in  proportion  to  the  unity  of  men's  minds  in  the 
truth  of  (jod.  Ifence  the  necessity  for  the  Spirit  of  (xod  to  conduct  us 
into  the  wliole  truth.  My  dear  brother,  if  you  think  you  know  a  doc- 
trines ask  tlie  Lord  to  make  you  sure  that  you  know  it,  for  much  that  we 
think  wo  know  turns  out  to  be  unknown  when  times  of  trial  put  us  to 
the  tcHt.  Nothing  do  we  really  know  unless  it  be  burnt  into  our  souls 
as  with  a  hot  iron  by  an  experience  which  only  the  Spirit  of  God  can 
give. 

I  think  you  will  now  see  that,  the  Spirit  of  God  being  thus  necessary 
for  our  instruction,  we  pre-eminently  find  in  this  gracious  operation  our* 
strength  for  the  instruction  of  others  ;  for  how  shall  those  teach  who* 
have  never  been  taught  ?  How  shall  men  declare  a  message  which  they 
have  never  learned  ?  "  Son  of  man,  eat  this  roll ";  for  until  thou  hast 
eaten  it  thyself  thy  lips  can  never  tell  it  out  to  others.  "The  husband- 
man that  laboureth  must  first  be  a  partaker  of  the  fruits."  It  is  the  law 
of  Christ's  vineyard  that  none  shall  work  therein  till  first  of  all  they 
know  the  flavour  of  the  fruits  which  grow  in  the  sacred  enclosure. 
Thou  must  know  Christ,  and  grace,  and  love,  and  truth  thyself  before 
thou  canst  even  be  an  instructor  of  babes  for  Christ. 

When  we  come  to  deal  with  others,  earnestly  longing  to  instruct  them 
for  Jesus,  we  perceive  even  more  clearly  our  need  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 
Ah,  my  brother,  you  think  you  will  put  the  gos2)el  so  clearly  that  they 
must  see  it ;  but  their  blind  eyes  overcome  you.  Ah  !  you  think  you  will 
put  it  so  zealously  that  they  must  feel  it ;  but  their  clay-cold  hearts  defeat 
jou.  Old  Adam  is  too  strong  for  young  Melancthon,  depend  upon  that, 
Xou  may  think  you  are  going  to  win  souls  by  your  pleadings,  but  you 
might  as  weQ  stand  on  wlq  top  of  a  mountain  and  whistle  to  the  wind, 
Untess  the  Holy  Spirit  be  with  you.  After  all  your  talking,  your  hearers 
^riU,  perhaps,  have  caught  your  idea,  but  the  mind  of  the  Spirit,  the  real 

«il  of  the  gospel,  you  cannot  impart  to  them  ;  this  remains,  like  creation 
'  a  work  which  only  God  can  accomplish.     Daily,  then,  let  us  pray 


OUR   UUGBNT  KEBD  OP  THB  HOLT   BPIRIT.  1* 

Her  of  the  Spirit  as  the  Illnminator.  Come,  0  blesaed  light  of 
Q  alone  canst  lireak  our  personal  darkness,  and  only  when  thou 
jittened  ns  can  we  lead  others  in  thy  liglit.     An  ignorant 

ie  diBqnalifiod  for  (jreat  uaeliilnesB  ;  bat  he  who  is  taught  of 
»ach  transgressors  God's  vrays,  and  sinners  shall  bo  converted 
Bt.  Both  to  bum  within  and  sluuc  without  you  must  have 
B&tlng  Spirit. 

hie  wort  of  the  Spirit  of  God  is  to  create  in  believera  the 
UJOPTION.  "Because  ye  arc  sons,  God  hath  eent  forth  the 
UB  Son  into  youi*  hearts,  whereby  ye  cry.  Abba,  Father ! "  "  For 
lot  received  the  spirit  of  bon^ge  agnin  to  foar,  but  ye  have 
lihe  Spirit  of  adoption,  whereby  we  cry,  Abba,  Father !  "  We 
sated  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  so  receive  the  nature  of  children ; 

nature,  which  is  giren  by  him,  he  continually  prompts,  and 
vi  developes,  and  matures  j  so  that  we  reccii-c  day  by  day  more 
i  of  the  child-like  spirit.  Now,  beloved,  this  may  not  seem 
ibe  of  very  great  importance  at  first  sight ;  but  it  is  so  ;  for 
ih  is  never  happy  except  as  all  her  members  walk  as  dear 
ctwards  God.  Sometimes  the  spirit  of  slaves  creeps  over  us :  we 
islk  of  the  service  of  God  as  uiongh  it  were  heavy  and  burden- 
I  are  discontented  if  we  do  not  receive  present  wages  and  visiblo 
bat  as  servants  do  whco  they  are  not  suited  ;  but  the  spirit  of 
Voiks  for  love,  without  any  hope  of  reward,  and  it  is  satisfied 

eweet  fact  of  being  in  the  Father's  house,  and  doing  the 
will.  This  spirit  gives  peace,  rest,  joy,  boldness,  and  holy 
T  with  God.  A  man  who  never  received  the  spirit  of  a  child 
lOd  does  not  know  the  bliss  of  the  Oliristian  life ;  iio  misses  its 
1  savonr,  its  excellence,  and  I  sbonld  not  wonder  if  the  service 

ahoitld  be  a  weariness  to  him  because  he  has  never  yet  got  to 
:  things,  and  does  not  enjoy  the  green  pastares,  wherein  the 
ilpherd  makes  his  sheep  to  feed  and  to  lie  down.  But  when 
t  of  God  makes  ns  feel  that  we  are  sons,  and  we  live  in  the 
God  to  go  no  more  oat  for  ever,  then  the  service  of  Ood  is 
I  easy,  and  we  accept  the  delay  of  apparent  success  as  a  part  of 
we  are  called  to  bear. 

oark  yoD,  this  will  have  a  great  effect  npon  the  ontside  world. 
professors  performing  religion  aaa  task,  groaning  along  the  ways 
eaa  with  faces  fuU  of  misery,  like  slaves  who  dread  the  lash,  caa 
email  effect  upon  the  sinners  around  them.  They  say,  "  These 
rve,  no  doabt,  a  hard  master,  and  they  are  denying  themselves 
that ;  why  should  we  be  like  them?"  Bat  bring  me  a  church 
of  children  of  God,  a  company  of  men  and  women  whose  facea 
h  their  heavenly  Father's  sroile,  who  arc  accuatomed  to  take 
■8  and  cast  them  on  their  Father  as  children  should,  who  know 
tccepted  and  beloved,  and  are  perfectly  content  with  the  great 
will ;  put  them  down  in  the  midst  of  a  company  of  ungodly 

I  will  warrant  yoo  they  will  begin  to  envy  them  their  peace 
Thns  happy  sainta  become  most  efficient  operators  npon  the 
'  t^e  nnsaved.  0  blessed  Spirit  of  God !  let  ns  all  now  feel 
re  the  children  of  the  great  Father,  and  let  our  childlike  love 
this  morning ;  so  shall  we  be  tit  to  go  forth  and  proclaim  the 


20  METROPOLITAir  TABEBKACLE  PULPIT. 

Lord's  love  to  the  prodigals  who  are  in  the  fiar-off  land  among  tb» 
swine. 

These  three  points  are  self-evident,  I  think.    Now  pass  to  a  fonrth. 

lY.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  especially  called  the  Spirit  of  HoLDTEsa. 
He  never  suggested  sin  nor  approved  of  it,  nor  has  he  ever  done  other- 
wise than  grieve  over  it:  but  holiness  is  the  Spirit's  delight.  Th& 
church  of  God  wears  upon  her  brow  the  words,  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord." 
Only  in  proportion  as  she  is  holy  may  she  claim  to  be  the  church  of  God 
at  all.  An  unholy  church !  Surely  this  cannot  hi  her  of  whom  we  read^ 
"  Christ  also  loved  the  church,  and  gave  himself  for  it;  that  he  might 
sanctify  and  cleanse  it  with  the  washing  of  water  by  the  word,  t£at 
he  might  present  it  to  himself  a  glonous  church,  not  having  spot,  or 
wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing."  Holiness  is  not  mere  morality,  not  the 
outward  keeping  of  divine  precepts  out  of  a  hard  sense  of  duty,  while 
those  commandments  in  themselves  are  not  delightful  to  ns.  Holiness, 
is  the  entirety  of  our  manhood  fully  consecrated  to  the  Jjord  and 
moulded  to  his  will.  This  is  the  Ihing  which  the  church  of  God 
must  liave,  but  it  can  never  have  it  apart  from  the  Sanctificr,  for  there 
is  not  a  grain  of  holiness  beneath  the  sky  but  what  is  of  the  operation 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  And,  brethren,  if  a  church  be  destitute  of  nolines^ 
what  elTcct  can  it  have  upon  the  world?  Scoffers  utterly  contemn  and 
despise  professors  whose  inconsistent  lives  contradict  their  verbal  testi- 
monies. An  unholy  church  may  pant  and  struggle  after  dominion,  and 
make  what  noise  she  can  in  pretence  of  work  for  Christ,  but  the 
kingdom  comes  not  to  the  unholy,  neither  have  they  themselves  entered 
it.  The  testimony  of  unholy  men  is  no  more  acceptable  to  Christ  than 
was  the  homage  which  the  evil  spirit  gave  to  him  in  the  days  of  hiB 
flesh,  to  which  he  answered,  "  Hold  thy  peace."  "  Unto  the  wicked 
God  saith,  AVhat  hast  thou  to  do  to  declare  my  statutes?"  The  dew  is 
withholden,  and  the  rain  cometh  not  in  its  season  to  the  tillage  of 
those  who  profess  to  be  the  servants  of  God  and  yet  sow  iniquity.  After 
all,  the  acts  of  the  church  preach  more  to  the  world  than,  tne  words  of 
the  church.  Put  an  anointed  man  to  preach  the  gospel  in  the  midst 
of  a  really  godly  people  and  his  testimony  will  be  marvellously  sup- 
ported by  the  chui:ch  with  which  he  labours ;  but  place  the  most  faithml 
minister  over  an  ungodly  church,  and  he  has  such  a  weight  upon  him 
that  he  must  first  clear  himself  of  it,  or  he  cannot  succeed.  He  may 
preach  his  heart  out,  he  may  pray  till  his  knees  are  weary,  but  conver- 
sions will  be  sorely  hindered,  if  indeed  they  occur  at  all.  There  is  na 
likelihood  of  victory  to  Israel  while  Achan*s  curse'is  on  the  camp.  An 
unholy  church  makes  Christ  to  say  that  he  cannot  do  many  mighty 
works  there  because  of  its  iniquity. 

Bretlircn,  do  you  not  see  in  this  point  our  need  of  the  Spirit  of  God  ? 
And  when  you  get  to  grappling  terms  with  sinners,  and  have  to  talk  to 
them  about  the  necessity  of  holiness,  and  a  renewed  heart,  and  a  godly 
life  coming  out  of  that  renewed  heart,  do  you  expect  ungodly  men  to- 
be  charmed  mth  what  you  say  ?  What  cares  the  unregenerate  mind 
for  righteousness?  Avas  a  carnal  man  ever  eager  after  holiness? 
Such  a  thing  was  never  seen.  As  well  expect  the  devil  to  be  in  love 
with  God  as  an  unredeemed  heart  to  be  in  love  with  holiness.  But  yet 
the  sinner  must  love  that  which  is  pure  and  right,  or  he  cannot  enter 


on  VBOira  HIED  OF  THX  BOLT  SPIRIT.  91 

hmwrnL  You  oumot  make  him  do  so.  Who  can  do  it  but  that  Holj 
Ohott  irbo  has  made  you  to  loTe  what  once  you  abo  despised  ?  Qo  not 
ooi^  therefSoTOy  to  battle  with  sin  nntil  yon  have  taken  weapons  out  of 
die  annoniy  of  the  Eternal  Spirit.  Mountains  of  sin  will  not  turn  to 
phins  at  your  bidding  unless  the  Holy  Ghost  is  pleased  to  make  the 
woid  cfhc^DaL  So  th^  we  see  that  as  the  Spirit  of  noliness  we  need  the 
BUf  Srarii. 

v.  Fifthly,  the  ehmoh  needs  much  prayeb,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  is 
die  f^irit  of  graoe  and  of  supplications.  The  strength  of  a  church  may 
mttj  aoonratehr  be  gauged  by  her  prayerfalness.  We  cannot  expect 
€kid  to  pot  fbrth  his  power  unless  we  entreat  him  so  to  do.  But  idl 
lOoeptaUe  supplication  is  wrought  in  the  soul  by  the  Holy  Ghost*  The 
fint  dfltiie  which  Ckxl  accepts  must  have  been  excited  in  the  heart  by  the 
eeerefc  c^ioations  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel^  and  eveiy  subsequent  plead- 
ing of  every  sort  which  containeth  in  it  a  grain  of  living  &ith,  and 
dierefbre  cornea  up  as  a  memorial  before  the  Lord,  must  have  been 
eflSBctoally  wrought  in  the  soul  by  him  who  maketh  intercession  in  the 
■aintB  according  to  the  will  of  Qod.  Our  great  High  Priest  will  put  into 
his  censer  no  incense  but  that  which  the  Spirit  has  compounded. 
Ftayer  is  the  creation  of  the  Holy  Ohost.  We  cannot  do  without 
mjer,  and  we  cannot  pray  without  the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  hence  our 
aependenoe  on  him. 

FurtibermorCt  when  we  come  to  deal  with  sinners,  we  know  that  they 
must  pray*  ^  Behold  he  prayeth  "  is  one  of  the  earliest  signs  of  the 
new  birth.  But  can  tffe  make  the  sinner  pray  ?  Can  any  persu«asion  of 
onrs  lead  him  to  his  knees  to  breathe  the  penitential  sign  and  look  to 
Ohrist  ftr  mercy?  ^If  you  have  attempted  the  conversion  of  a  soul  in 
jour  own  strength  you  know  you  have  failed ;  and  so  you  would  have 
fiuled  if  you  had  attempted  the  creation  of  one  single  acceptable  prayer 
in  die- heart  of  even  a  little  child.  Oh  then,  dear  brethren,  let  us  cry 
to  our  heavenly  Father  to  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  us ;  let  us  ask  him  to 
be  in  us  more  and  more  mightily  as  the  spirit  of  prayer,  making 
intercession  in  us  with  groanings  that  cannot  be  uttered,  that  the 
diurch  may  not  miss  the  divine  blessing  for  lack  of  asking  for  it.  I 
do  verily  lielieve  this  to  be  her  present  weakness,  and  one  great  cause 
why  the  kmgdom  of  Christ  does  not  more  mightily  spread :  prayer  is 
too  much  retrained,  and  hence  the  blessing  is  kept  back ;  and  it  will 
alwajTB  be  restrained  unless  the  Holy  Qhost  shall  stimulate  the  desires 
of  his  people.  0  blessed  Spirit,  we  pray  thee  make  us  pray,  for  Jesus' 
eaka 

VI.  Sixthly,  the  Spirit  of  God  is  in  a  very  remarkable  manner  the 
giver  of  fellowship.  So  often  as  we  pronounce  the  apostolic  benedic- 
tion we  pray  that  we  may  receive  the  communion  of  the  Holy  Qhost. 
THie  Hoqr  uhost  enables  us  to  have  communion  with  spiritual  things. 
He  alone  can  take  the  key  and  open  up  tlic  secret  mystery,  that  we  may 
know  the  things  which  be  of  God.  He  gives  us  fellowship  with  God 
himself:  tiirough  Jesus  Christ  by  the  Spirit  we  have  access  to  the 
lUher.  Our  feUowship  is  with  the  Father  and  with  his  Son  Jesus 
CSniBt,  but  it  is  the  Spirit  of  God  who  brings  us  into  communion  with 
the  Host  High.  So,  too,  my  dear  brethren,  our  fellowship  with  one 
eaother,  so  &r  as  it  is  Christian  fellowship,  is  always  produced  by  the 


22  HETBOPOLITAN  TABERNAOLB  PULPIT. 

Spirit  of  God.  If  we  have  continued  together  in  peace  and  love  these 
many  years,  I  cannot  attribute  it  to  our  constitutional  good  tempers,  nor 
to  wise  management,  nor  to  any  natural  causes,  but  to  the  love  into 
which  the  Spirit  has  baptized  us,  so  that  rebellious  nature  has  been  still. 
If  a  dozen  Christian  people  live  together  for  twelve  months  in  true 
spiritual  union  and  unbroken  affection,  trace  it  to  the  love  of  the 
Spirit ;  and  if  a  dozen  hundred,  or  four  times  that  number  shall  be  able 
to  persevere  in  united  service,  and  find  themselves  loving  each  other  better 
after  many  years  than  they  did  at  the  first,  let  it  be  regarded  as  a 
blessing  from  the  Comforter,  for  which  he  is  to  be  devoutly  adored. 
Fellowship  can  only  come  to  us  by  the  Spirit,  but  a  church  without 
fellowship  would  be  a  disorderly  mob,  a  kingdom  divided  against  itself, 
and  consequently  it  could  not  prosper.  You  need  fellowship  for  mutual 
strength,  guidance,  help,  and  encouragement,  and  without  it  your  church 
is  a  mere  human  society. 

If  you  are  to  tell  upon  the  world  you  must  be  united  as  one  living 
body.  A  divided  church  has  long  been  the  scorn  of  Antichrist.  No 
sneer  which  comes  from  the  Vatican  has  a  greater  sting  in  it  thaa 
that  which  taunts  Protestants  with  their  divisions ;  and  as  it  is  with 
the  great  outward  church  so  it  is  with  any  one  particular  church  of 
Christ.  Divisions  are  our  disgrace,  our  weakness,  our  hindrance,  and 
as  the  gentle  Spirit  alone  can  prevent  or  heal  these  divisions  by 
giving  us  real  loving  fellowship  with  God  and  with  one  another,  how 
dependent  we  are  upon  him  for  it.  Let  us  daily  cry  to  him  to  work  in 
us  brotherly  love,  and  all  the  sweet  graces  which  make  us  one  with 
Christ,  that  we  all  may  be  one  even  as  the  Father  is  one  with  the  Son, 
that  the  world  may  know  that  God  hath  indeed  sent  Jesus,  and  that  we 
are  his  people. 

VII.  Seventhly,  we  need  the  Holy  Spirit  in  that  renowned  office 
which  is  described  by  our  Lord  as  the  Pabaolete,  or  Comforter. 
The  word  bears  another  rendering,  which  our  translators  have  given  to 
it  in  that  paasage  where  we  read, ''  If  any  man  sin  we  have  an  Advocate 
(or  Paraclete)  with  the  Father."  The  Holy  Spirit  is  both  Comforter 
and  Advocate. 

The  Holy  Spirit  at  this  present  moment  is  our  friend  and  Comforter^ 
sustaining  the  sinking  spirits  of  believers,  applying  the  precious  promises, 
revealing  the  love  of  Jesus  Christ  to  the  heart.  Many  a  heart  would 
break  if  the  Spirit  of  God  had  not  comforted  it.  Many  of  God's  dear 
children  would  have  utterly  died  by  the  way  if  he  had  not  bestowed  upon 
them  his  divine  consolations  to  cheer  their  pilgrimage.  That  is  his 
work,  and  a  very  necessary  work,  for  if  believers  become  unhappy  they 
become  weak  for  many  points  of  service.  I  am  certain  that  the  joy  of 
the  Lord  is  our  strength,  for  I  have  proved  it  so,  and  proved  also  the 
opposite  truth.  There  are  on  earth  certain  Christians  who  mculcate  gloom 
as  a  Christian's  proper  state,  I  will  not  judge  them,  but  this  I  wiU  say, 
that  in  evangelistic  work  they  do  nothing,  and  I  do  not  wonder.  Till 
snow  in  harvest  ripens  wheat,  till  darkness  makes  flowers  blossom,  till 
the  salt  sea  yields  clusters  bursting  with  new  wine,  you  will  never  find 
tm  unhappy  reUgion  promotive  of  the  growth  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ. 
You  must  have  joy  in  the  Lord,  brethren,  if  you  are  to  be  strong  in  the 
Lord,  and  strong  for  the  Lord.    Now,  as  the  Comforter  alone  can  bear 


0X7B  UBOENT  KEED  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT.  23 

yon  np  amid  the  floods  of  tribnlation  which  you  arc  butc  to  meet  with, 
jon  see  your  great  need  of  his  consoling  presence. 

We  haye  said  that  the  Spirit  of  God  is  the  Advocate  of  the  church, — 
not  with  (Jod,  for  there  Christ  is  our  sole  Adyocate, — ^but  with  man. 
What  is  the  grandest  plea  that  the  church  has  against  the  world  ?    I 
answer,  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  standing  miracle  of  the 
churdi.    External  ^evidences  are  yery  excellent.    You  young  men  who 
are  worried  by  sceptics  will  do  well  to  study  those  valuable  works 
which  learned  and  devout  men  have  with  much  labour  produced  for  us, 
bat,  mark  you,  all  the  evidences  of  the  truth  of  Christianity  which  can 
be  gathered  from  analogy,  from  history,  and  from  external  facts,  are 
notmng  whatever  compared  >¥ith  the  operations  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 
Hiese  are  the  arguments  which  convince.    A  man  says  to  me,  ''  I  do 
not  believe  in  sin,  in  righteousness,  or  in  judgment."    Well,  brethren, 
the  Holy  Ghost  can  soon  convince  him.    If  he  asks  me  for  signs  and 
evidenoes  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel,  I  reply,  "  Seest  thou  this  woman  ; 
«he  was  a  great  sinner  in  the  very  worst  sense,  and  led  others  into  sin, 
but  now  you  cannot  find  more  sweetness  and  light  anywhere  than  in 
her.    Hearest  thou  this  profane  swearer,  persecutor,  and  blasphemer  ? 
He  is  speaking  with  purity,  truth,  and  humbleness  of  mind.    Obser\'e 
yon  man,  who  was  aforetime  a  miser,  and  see  how  he  consecrates  his  sub- 
stance.   Notice  that  envious,  malicious  spirit,  and  see  how  it  becomes 
gentle,   forgiving,   and  amiable    through   conversion.     How  do  vou 
account  for  these  great  changefi  ?    They  are  happening  here  every  aay, 
how  come  they  to  pass  ?    Is  that  a  lie  which  produces  truth,  honesty, 
and  love  ?    Does  not  every  tree  bear  fruit  after  its  kind  ?    What  then 
must  that  grace  be  which  produces  such  blessed  transformations  ?    The 
wonderful  phenomena  of  ravens  turned  to  doves,  and  lions  into  lambs, 
the  marvellous  transformations  of  moral  character  which  the  minister  of 
Christ  rejoices  to  see  wrought  by  the  Gospel,  these  are  our  witnesses, 
and  they  are  unanswerable,     reter  and  John  have  gone  up  to  the 
temple,  and  they  have  healed  a  lame  man,  they  are  soon  seized  and 
brought  before  the  Sanhedrim.    This  is  the  charge  against  them — 
^' YoQ  have  been  preaching  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  and  this  Jesus  is  an 
impostor."    What  do  Peter  and  John  say  ?    They  need  say  nothing, 
for  tliere  stands  the  man  that  was  healed ;  he  has  brought  nis  crutch 
with  him,  and  he  waves  it  in  triumph,  and  he  runs  and  leaps.     He  was 
their  voliune  of  evidences,  their  apology,  and  proof.    "  When  they  saw 
the  man  that  was  healed  standing  with  Peter  and  John,  they  could  say 
nothing  against  them." 

If  we  have  the  Spirit  of  God  amongst  us,  and  conversions  are  con- 
stantly  being  wrought,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  thus  fulfilling  his  advocacy, 
and  refuting  all  accusers.  If  the  Spirit  works  in  your  own  mind, 
it  will  always  be  to  you  the  best  evidence  of  the  gospel.  I  meet 
sometimes  one  piece  of  infidehty,  and  then  another ;  for  there  are 
new  doubts  and  fresh  infidelities  spawned  every  hour,  and  unstable 
men  expect  us  to  read  all  the  books  they  choose  to  produce.  But  the 
effect  produced  on  our  mind  is  less  and  less.  This  is  our  answer.  It 
is  of  no  use  your  trying  to  stagger  us,  for  we  are  already  familiar  with 
eveiTthing  yon  suggest ;  our  own  native  unbelief  has  outstripped  you. 
We  have  had  doubte  of  a  kind  which  even  you  would  not  dare  to  utter 


24  MKTROPOLITAXr  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

if  you  knew  them ;  for  there  is  enough  infidelity  and  devilry  in  onr 
own  nature  to  make  us  no  strangers  to  Satan's  devices.  We  have 
fought  most  of  your  suggested  battles  over  and  over  again  in  the  secret 
chamber  of  our  meditation,  and  have  conquered.  For  we  have  bem  m 
persmal  contact  with  God.  You  sneer,  but  there  is  no  argument  in 
sneering.  We  are  as  honest  as  you  are,  and  our  witness  is  aa  good 
as  yours  in  any  court  of  law ;  and  we  solemnly  declare  that  we 
have  felt  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  over  our  soul  as  much 
as  ever  old  ocean  li:.s  felt  the  force  of  the  north  wind  :  we  have 
been  stirred  to  agony  under  a  sense  of  sin,  and  we  have  been  liJft;ed  to 
ccstacy  of  delight  by  faith  in  the  righteousness  of  Christ  We  find  that 
in  the  little  world  within  our  soul  the  liOrd  Jesus  manifests  himself  so 
that  we  know  him.  There  is  a  potency  about  the  doctrines  we  have 
learned  which  could  not  belong  to  lies,  for  the  truths  which  we  believe 
we  have  tested  in  actual  experience.  Tell  us  there  is  no  meat  ?  Why, 
we  have  just  boon  feasting.  Tell  us  there  is  no  water  in  the  fountain  ? 
We  have  been  quenching  our  thirst.  Tell  us  there  is  no  such  thing 
as  light  ?  We  do  not  know  how  we  can  prove  its  existence  to  you, 
for  you  are  probably  blind,  but  we  can  sec.  That  is  enough  argument 
for  us,  and  our  witness  is  true.  Tell  us  there  is  no  spiritual  life !  We 
feel  it  in  our  inmost  souls.  These  are  the  answers  with  which  the 
Spirit  of  God  funiishcs  us,  and  they  are  a  part  of  his  advocacy. 

See,  again,  how  entirely  dependent  we  are  on  the  Spirit  of  God  for 
meeting  all  the  various  forms  of  unbelief  which  arise  around  ns ;  yon 
may  have  your  societies  for  collecting  evidence,  and  you  may  enlist 
all  your  bishops  and  doctors  of  divinity  and  professors  of  apologetics, 
and*^  they  may  write  rolls  of  evidence  long  enough  to  girdle  the  globe, 
but  the  only  person  who  can  savingly  convince  the  world  is  the  Advo- 
cate whom  the  Father  has  sent  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  When  he 
reveals  a  man's  sin,  and  the  siu*e  result  of  it,  the  unbeliever  takes  to 
his  knees.  When  he  takes  away  the  scales  and  sets  forth  the  cruci- 
fied Redeemer,  and  the  merit  of  the  precious  blood,  all  canial  reasonings 
are  nailed  to  the  cross.  One  blow  of  real  conviction  of  sin  will  stagger 
the  most  obstinate  unbeliever,  and  afterwards,  if  his  imbelief  return, 
the  Holy  Ghost's  consolations  will  soon  comfort  it  out  of  him.  There- 
fore, as  at  the  first  so  say  I  at  the  last,  all  this  dependeth  upon  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  upon  him  let  us  wait  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  beseeching 
"him  to  manifest  his  power  among  us.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scuiptuue  Read  before  Seumox — Romans  xv. 


Hyiins  from  "Our  Own  Htmn  Book"— 912,  440,  445. 


JRetit0plitM  i^afremsde  inlpt. 


i^^B 


"BEST  IN  THE  LOED." 


%      * 


DsLnmiBD  OH  Lord's-Day   Morning,  Janttary  14th,  1877,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT   THX    MBTROPOLITAN   TABBRNAOLB,   NEWINGTON. 


•*  Bart  in  the  Lord."— Psalm  zxxriL  7. 

Thb  oocnrrence  of  our  text  in  the  psalm  before  as  is  an  instance  of  the 
great  mle  that  the  Lord  does  nothing  by  halves.  In  this  priceless  psahn 
tiie  Lord  foand  his  servant  in  the  first  verse  liable  to  fretfiilness  and 
envy,  and  he  exhorted  him  to  cease  from  fretting ;  then,  in  verse  three, 
he  tanght  him  to  trust,  in  verse  four  he  led  him  on  to  delight,  in  verses 
five  and  six  he  conducted  him  into  a  peaceful  committing  of  bis  way 
unto  God,  and  he  did  not  stay  the  operation  of  his  grace  till  he  had  per- 
fected that  which  concerned  him  and  brought  him  up  to  the  elevated 
Soint  of  our  text,  "  Rest  in  the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently  for  him."  God 
oth  not  merely  cure  the  evil  in  us,  but  he  confers  unspeakable  good. 
He  takes  away  the  disfiguring  wound,  but  he  imparts  also  comeliness  and 
beauty.  If  any  of  you  this  morning  are  in  a  low  state  of  grace,  so  that 
yon  TOve  even  fallen  into  fretfulness  at  the  prosperity  of  the  ungodly, 
do  not  cast  away  all  hope,  for  the  grace  of  God  aboundeth  toward  us  in 
all  wisdom  and  prudence,  and  he  will  restore  your  soul.  Remember  how 
David  said,  in  the  seventy-third  Psalm  :  "  I  was  envious  at  the  foolish, 
whttn  I  saw  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked."  "  So  foolish  was  I,  and 
ignorant :  I  was  as  a  beast  before  thee.  Nevertlieless  I  am  continually 
with  thee :  thou  hast  holden  me  by  my  right  hand."  The  Lord  knoweth 
how  to  bring  his  people  again  from  Bashan,  yea,  and  to  uplift  them  like 
Jonah  from  the  depths  of  the  sea  ;  and  he  can  bring  you  by  the  opera- 
tion of  his  grace  thn  day  upward  from  doubt  to  assurance,  from  fretful- 
ness to  rest. 

Best  is  a  blessing  which  properly  belongs  to  the  people  of  God, 
althoneh  they  do  not  enjoy  it  one  tithe  as  much  as  they  might.  Under 
the  Old  Testament  dispensation  there  was  considerable  provision  made 
for  rest.  Typically  the  chosen  nation  was  shown  that  one  great  end  of 
the  visitation  of  the  Lord  was  to  give  his  people  rest,  for  on  the  seventh 
day  they  rested  and  did  no  manner  of  work.  Yea  more,  in  the  seventh 
Nos.  1,883-4. 


26  METROPOLITAN  TABEBNAOLB  PULPIT. 

year  they  rested  according  to  the  divino  precept.  *Biz  yean  fhmi  dhatt 
80W  thy  field,  and  six  years  thou  shalt  prune  thy  vineyard,' and  gather 
in  the  fruit  thereof;  but  iu  the  seventh  year  shall  be  a  sabbath  of  rest 
unto  the  land,  a  sabbuth  for  the  Ijord :  thou  shalt  neither  sow  thy  field, 
nor  prune  thy  vineyard.**  When  they  were  obedient  to  the  Lord's 
command  they  thus  enjoyed  a  whole  year  of  rest,  and  were  no  losers  by 
it,  for  no  doubt  the  seventh  f^low.  year  so  benefited  the  land  tliat  it 
brought  forth  all  the  more  fruit  during  the  other  six,  so  that  there 
was  none  the  less  store  in  their  bams.  Over  and  above  this,  once  iu  fifW 
years  when  the  seventh  seventh  year  came  found,  they  carried  out  still 
further  the  Sabbatic  idea,  and  the  Jubilee  year  was  a  time  of  peculiar 
and  emphatic  rest  and  festival.  For  thus  had  the  Lord  commanded. 
"A  jubilee  shall  that  fiftieth  year  be  unto  you  :  ye  shall  not  sow,  neither 
reap  that  which  groweth  of  itself  in  it,  nor  gather  the  grapes  in  it  of  thy 
vine  undressed.  For  it  is  the  jubilee ;  it  shall  be  holy  unto  you :  ye 
shall  eat  the  increase  thereof  out  of  the  field."  So  that  very  pro- 
minently even  in  that  somewhat  servile  and  yoke-bearing  dispensation 
there  was  brought  before  the  mind  of  the  Israelite  the  pmil^  of 
rest,  and  those  who  possessed  the  inner  sight,  as  Moses  did,  realivxl  the 

fromise,  "My  Spirit  shall  go  with  thee  and  I  will  give  thee  rest.** 
ndeed,  Canaan  itself  was  intended  to  be  the  type  of  rest :  the  land 
that  fioweth  with  milk  and  honey,  the  land  of  brooks  and  valleys,  the 
land  that  the  Lord  thy  God  thinketh  on,  the  land  upon  which  the  eyes 
of  the  Jiord  rest  from  the  beginning  of  the  year  even  to  the  end  of  the 
year  was  meant  to  be  a  place  where  every  man  should  rest  nnder  his  own 
vine  and  fig  tree,  and  look  for  a  yet  deeper  rest  in  God.  Had  they  known 
it,  in  giving  them  Canaan  Joshua  had  given  them  a  fieiir  picture  of 
rest ;  they  did  not  sec  through  the  type  so  as  ftill^  to  understand  its 
significance,  yet  nevertheless  there  it  was.  0  Christian  men  and  women, 
ye  also  miss  much  of  your  rest,  ye  have  too  much  of  fretfulness,  too  much 
of  care,  too  much  that  is  servile.  The  land  doth  not  keep  her  Si^baths 
as  she  should,  neither  doth  your  soul  rest  as  it  might ;  and  as  for  jnbilees, 
how  very  scarce  they  are,  whereas,  if  Christian  believers  lived  near  to 
God,  and  enjoyed  the  pcniice  which  Jesus  gives,  they  might  keep  jubilee 
every  year,  and  Sabbath  every  day.  The  Lord  grant  that  we  may  have 
power  to  enjoy  his  rest,  and  that  it  may  never  be  said  of  UB, "  They  oonld 
not  enter  in  because  of  unbelief.'* 

Brethren,  the  Lord,  as  if  to  show  us  that  he  would  have  ns  rest,  has 
been  pleased  to  speak  of  resting  himself.  It  is  inconceivable  that  he 
should  be  fatigued,  it  were  profanity  to  suppose  that  he  who  i^inteth  not 
neither  is  weary,  and  of  whose  understanding  there  is  no  searching,  can 
over  be  in  a  condition  to  need  rest,  and  yet  he  did  rest,  for  when  he  had 
finished  all  the  works  of  )»is  hands  in  the  six  days  of  creation  the  Lord 
"  rested  on  the  seventh  day,  and  sanctified  it.**  When  afterwards  that 
rest  was  broken  because  his  works  were  marred,  we  find  him  fbrther  on 
smelling  a  "  sweet  savour  of  rest  **  in  the  sacrifice  which  was  offered  unto 
him  by  Noah,  whoso  very  name  was  rest.  These  two  facts  are  highly 
instructive,  and  teach  us  that  God  resteth  in  a  perfect  work,  and  that 
when  that  work  is  marred  the  Lord  resteth  in  a  perfect  sacrifice,  even  in 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He  hath  a  rest  there  and  he  sp^s  of  our 
**  entering  A?>  rest  *'  as  it  is  written  '^  they  shall  not  enter  into  my  reab" 


''UBST  m  THB  LOBD."  27 

■ft  viife  tt  Qoi  tiiBOt  and  there  lemaineth  a  vert  nnto  the  people 
oC  ttioii  ftod  of  that  reat^  not  in  its  highest  development  in  heaten^  bat 
hi  Uft  pnaent  emjoyment  on  eartbi  we  aie  about  to  speak. 
,  "^Biit in  tba  Lord."  First, dear  brethren,  let  oonsider  at  ths  sfepa  to 
Ma  royal  ehmnher  of  repose :  secondly,  let  us  meditate  upon  (he  rett 
wkitk  is  eitgoufid  in  that  qvisi  cimmber :  and  then,  thirdly,  let  us  look 
afc  (hat  summMM  ehamber  itself.  As  the  result  and  issue  of  it  all  maj 
the  Holy  l^irit  sweetly  \&eA  us  into  quietness  and  peace,  even  as  of  old 
it  was  written, ''  Th6  Spirit  of  the  Lord  caused  him  to  rest." 

I.  First  then  let  us  oonsider  certain  steps  to  this  botal  chamber 
or  RSBT.  How  are  we  to  veach  this  place  of  sacred  repose  ?  The  steps 
are  in  the  psalm  hrfbva  ns«  The  first  is  '^Fret  not  thyself*  You  are 
out  in  the  fields  amon^  the  wild  beasts,  cease  to  hunt  them  :  you  are 
among  those  who  toil  m  bondage,  suffering  all  the  brunt  of  ill  weathers 
ind  Iwid  ■sasdiiij  come  away  from  them.  Obmo  within  doors,  into  your 
Ikthdr^ft  bonne.  By  the  help  of  the  Divine  Spirit  leave  the  green  bay 
Inea  whidl  have  eaet  their  snadow  upon  you  and  enter  into  the  sane- 
idary.  Ho  longer  be  aa  Ae  carnal  who  envy  one  another.  So  long  as 
yon  are  ool  thm  among  those  who  lust  after  evil  things  and  fret  against 
the  Locd's  profidenoe  yon  cannot  rest.  While  ^ou  are  agitating  your- 
■df  to  gain  what  other  men  lust  afi^er  and  to  enjoy  what  other  men  take 
pkftinre  in  jNm  are  missing  the  peculiar  privileges  of  the  children  of 
Sod. '  Wbih  yomr  spirit  is  mnmng  with  worldungs  in  the  race  and 
wieaUiiig  with  them  in  the  battle  yon  cannot  enjqv  the  peace  which 
Jetfos  Im  aft  ft  legacy  to  his  disdplea.  Oome  awav  then;  for  the  first 
atep  to  vert  ia  '^fret  not  thyself."  The  griefli  which  make  the  ungodly 
pns  an  not  far  yon,  for  the  objects  which  they  seek  are  not  your  oh* 
jeots  %  the  kasee  which  make  them  despond  mnrt  not  make  you  discon- 
flidate^  Ibr  their  traasnre  is  not  your  treasure.  Oome  away  then  from 
admixing  their  transient  felicity,  and  lamenting  your  present  distress. 
Hftte  yon  been  envying  traniigressors  ?  Count  yourself  to  have  been 
faoUsb  and  ignorant  in  so  doing,  for  they  shall  soon  be  out  down  Hke 
ibB  gfaas^  and  wither  as  the  green  herb.  Bise  above  the  thinp  which 
ara  seen,  for  they  are  temporal,  and  spurn  the  things  which  make  the 
flesh  to  smart,  for  this  light  affliction  is  but  for  a  moment  Let  not  the 
weorU  weigh  yon  down,  for  you  are  bound,  as  an  heir  of  heaven,  to 
teead  it  breath  your  feet :  the  world  and  ail  its  honours  you  are  esJled 
opon  to  despise,  and  in  order  that  your  soul  should  not  lurt  after  its 
damlies,  come  awsy  nnto  your  God,  and  no  tonger  fret  yourself. 

When  yon  have  thus  come  out  of  the  field,  and  have  arrived  at  the 
prisee  of  love,  the  first  staircase  is  described  as  trust  and  do*  Bead  the 
third  verse,  *^  Tmrt  in  the  Lord  and  da  good."  You  believe  in  the 
Lord's  km,  prove  yonr  confidence  by  committing  yourself  to  the 
ke^ftg  of  lum  who  loves  yoa  Yon  beueve  in  the  atonement  of  Jesus, 
lly  flv  iwnsing  to  the  Uood  which  was  shed  for  you.  You  believe  in 
the  glory  of  vour  risen  Lord,  commii)  all  your  future  to  him  with  whom 
yoa  are  one  day  to  sit  vpon  the  dirone.  As  for  all  your  trials,  come 
ftow  and  believe  in  God  concerning  them.  Do  not  let  anything  make 
yoft  mistrort  or  distrust  your  Gcd.  £j)OW  ye  that  he  is  God  and 
**hi8  mercy  endureth  for  ever,"  and  trurt  ye  in  him  for  ever.  But 
Irt  ak  fiftth  be  pvartica]^'<  Tmrt  in  the  Lord  and  do  good."    A  dead 


2S  MLTKOrOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

faith  will  bring  you  but  poor  comfort ;  yours  must  be  a  fSuth  which  ctn 
do  as  well  as  receive.  It  is  through  the  exercise  of  fitith  that  oomfbit 
comos  to  the  heart,  even  as  the  exercise  of  our  limbs  warms  our  bodify 
frame.  Do  good  if  you  suffer  for  it,  and  you  shall  partake  in  Uie  joj 
•f  your  Lord. 

^  Commit  thy  way  to  €rod, 

The  weight  which  makes  thee  fiuni ; 
World's  are  to  hhn  no  load ; — 
To  him  breathe  thy  complaint. 

He  who  for  winds  and  clonds 

Maketh  a  pathway  firee, 
Through  wastes,  or  hostile  crowds 

Will  make  a  way  for  thee.** 

When  thou  hast  learned  to  trust  and  to  do  thou  wilt  have  aaoendei 
a  noble  staircase  of  the  royal  palace,  and  where  does  it  land  thee  ?  It 
lands  thee  in  the  king's  dining-room,  where  it  is  written — **  Verity  thon 
shalt  be  fed."  Obserre  the  promise,  If  thou  hast  a  living;  active  fluth 
thou  shalt  be  provided  for :  thy  bodily  wants  as  they  come  shall  be  le- 
Heved,  thy  mental  wants  also  shall  be  satisfied,  and  as  fer  the  vast 
demands  of  thy  spirit,  Ood  all-sufiicient  shall  supply  them  all — *^  So  shalt 
thou  dwell  in  the  land  and  verily  thou  shalt  be  fed."  It  will  be  a  hmy 
circumstance,  dear  brethren,  if  you  can  come  up  the  first  stairoaae  wis 
morning,  lea^dng  the  fields,  leaving  the  elder  brethren  ont  there  who 
complain  concerning  the  many  years  of  service  in  which  their  Father 
has  never  given  them  a  kid,  that  they  might  make  meny  with  thrir 
friends,  and  rejoicing  to  do  the  will  of  the  Lord  out  of  motives  of  love. 
Let  the  sinner  and  the  grumbler  alone  and  go  up  those  stain  of  active 
faith,  and  sit  down  where  a  feast  is  spread,  even  a  feast  of  fiit  things  (kill 
of  marrow  and  of  wines  on  the  lees  well  refined. 

We  must  ascend  somewhat  higher,  and  climb  thenext  staircase,  which 
is  marked  Delight  and  deme.  "  Delight  thyself  also  in  the  Lord ;  sod 
he  shall  give  thee  the  desires  of  thine  neart."  Think  what  a  good  God 
thou  hast,  yea,  what  a  blessed  God  he  is.  Remember  how  m(A  he  hia 
been  to  thee  in  the  past.  Think  of  the  richness  of  his  worn,  the  soie- 
ness  of  his  promise,  the  tenderness  of  his  love,  and  the  power  of  hia 
arm  till  thy  soul  shall  say,  ''  Whatever  I  have  not,  I  have  my  Ood ; 
whatever  is  unsatisfactory,  he  satisfies  me ;  and  whatever  grieves  me  to 
think  it  is  so  unfit  for  me,  nothing  grieves  me  in  my  God.  I  would 
not  have  him  changed,  nor  have  him  change  in  any  respect.  He  is  a 
sea  of  blessedness  m  which  my  soul  doth  swim."  When  yon  have  de- 
lighted^  begin  to  desire.  Open  your  mouth  wide  and  the  Lord  will  fill  it. 
Eakrge  your  petitions  and  he  will  grant  them  to  you.  Desire  m<ne 
grace,  more  holiness,  more  love,  more  knowledge  of  Ohrist,  more  heaven 
below ;  and  all  these  shall  come  at  your  call  Ask  what  you  will  and  it 
shall  be  done  unto  you. 

See,  now,  we  have  aseended  beyond  the  dining-room,  and  mounted 
to  the  royal  treasury,  we  have  entered  the  king's  almonry,  yea  we  have 
come  into  the  king's  withdrawing  room  where  he  listens  to  the  desires 
of  his  suitors,  and  enters  into  fellowship  with  them,  and  bids  them 
delight  in  him.    Here  he  bids  you  open  all  your  heart,  and  pour  fbrth 


^BXBT  nr  THB  LOBD."  89 

jonr  ieeni  loiigi]in»  fiir  he  will  layish  upon  you  ihe  gifts  of  hii  loTe» 
mod  ffll  joa  wim  m  hit  fldnefls.  It  will  be  a  great  joj  to  you  to-day  if 
you  harre  now  dimbed  from  the  low  marshy  lauds  of  fretting  into  the 
vjmr  chambor  of  delighting  in  the  Lord* 

But  you  are  not  up  to  the  royal  rest-chamber  yet.  You  must  now 
dfaoib  another  stair,  marked,  Cbmmi  thy  way  and  trusL  ^'  Commit  thy 
way  unto  the  Lor^  trust  also  in  him.  CJonceming  that  part  of  thy 
way  which  thou  understandest  and  hast  under  thy  control,  labour  to  walk 
therein  aooording  to  the  Lord's  mind,  and  all  that  portion  of  thy  way 
which  thou  understandest  not  and  hast  no  power  oyer,  leaye  entirely  to 
the  absolute  will  of  God.  What  hast  thou  to  do  in  ordering  thine  own 
way  ?  ^  AU  the  ifcepa  ot  a  good  man  are  ordered  of  the  Lora."  If  thou 
must  needs  haye  the  arrangement  of  thine  own  march  through  the  wil- 
derness, if  thou  wilt  adyanoe  without  the  guidance  of  the  pilmr  of  cloud 
and  fire,  who  is  to  proyide  for  thee,  and  whither  wilt  thou  go  ?  Thy 
fUliUe  judgment  and  feeble  strength  will  soon  fail  thee.  Leaye  to  thy 
Lord's  win  to  ordain  eyerr  step  which  thou  shalt  take,  and  ask  only  to 
know  so  much  of  his  mind  as  to  be  able  to  follow  his  guidance.  Do  not 
wish  to  Tsnr  into  the  secrets  of  the  ftitnre,  but  **  commit  thy  way  unto 
ihe  LorcL  Do  not  wonr  about  the  troubles  oi  die  present,  but  leaye 
tliy  way  where  thou  hast  left  thy  soul.  Say  unto  ihe  Lord,  **  Hy  Father, 
sdnoe  this  road  is  all  too  rough  for  my  infant  fbet,  be  pleased  to  carry  me, 
eyen  as  thou  didst  thy  people  all  the  days  of  old":  and  his  strong  hands 
shall  lift  thee  u^  and  in  his  bosom  shalt  thou  ride  oyer  the  miry  places 
of  the  earth,  rejoicing  in  almighty  loye.    Commit  and  trust 

Now  this  brings  us  into  the  undressing  room  which  stands  side  by 
aide  with  the  royal  bed-chamber.  Take  off  Uie  dusir  garments  of  thy 
cares  and  0(miimt  them  to  the  Lord.  Strip  thyself  of  one  anxiety  after 
another,  unrobe  thyself  of  all  that  reminds  thee  of  this  miry,  weary  pil- 
grimage, and  leaye  thy  worn  and  trayel-stained  raiment  Then  aost 
thou  need  a  candle  to  light  thee  to  thy  bed ;  here  it  is  for  thee  in 
-^-erse  six,  '*  He  shall  bring  forth  thy  righteousness  as  the  light,  and  thy 
judgment  as  the  noonday."  You  feel  conyinced  that  what  is  left  with 
God  is  safe,  you  haye  an  assured  confidence  that  if  you  commit  a  matter 
to  him  you  haye  left  it  in  the  hands  of  a  faithfril  Creator :  these 
gracious  confidences  will  light  you  to  your  couch  of  rest  Like  Paul, 
you  will  be  at  peace  as  to  the  future  whether  it  bring  you  life  or  death, 
for  you  will  say  ^  I  know  in  whom  I  have  belieyed,  and  am  persuaded 
that  he  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  haye  committed  unto  him  until  that 
day."  There  is  your  candle,  enter  the  quiet  chamber  and  take  your 
rest    '' Best  in  the  Lord." 

These  are  the  steps  which  I  haye  tried  briefly  to  describe.  There  is 
a  coming  out  from  the  fretftdness  generated  by  the  world  and  its  cares 
and  troubles— a  pulling  off  the  shoes,  as  it  were,  before  you  enter  the 
palace,  saymg  to  your  soul,  ^*  Fret  not  because  of  eyil-doers."  Then 
there  is  a  sitting  down  to  a  feast  of  loye  by  a  simple  but  actiye  £uth. 
Next  there  is,  after  the  feast^  the  sweet  dessert  of  communion  with 
Christ — a  leaning  of  the  hc^d  upon  the  bosom  of  the  Lord,  as  John 
did  at  the  supper,  delighting  oneself  in  the  Lord,  and  getting  the 
desires  of  thine  inmost  soul.  Afber  this  comes  a  disrobing  of  eyery- 
thing  Uke  care,  and  the  laying  aside  of  all  that  is  earth-bom  and  gross. 


80  METROPOLITAK  TABSRNACLE  PULPIT. 

which  tends  to  distract  us  ;  and,  last  of  all,  there  is  the  resigning  of 
the  soul  to  the  peace  which  the  Holy  Spirit  brings,  which  is  oompanibk 
to  reclining  upon  a  soft  couch,  provided  by  him  who  says  to  ns,  "  Hy 

child,  thou  art  very  weary ;  rest  in  the  Lord." 

*'  Long  did  I  toil,  and  knew  no  earthly  rest ; 
Fur  did  I  rove,  and  found  no  certain  home ; 


And  I  since  then  am  his,  and  he  is  mine.** 


II.    Now  let  us  try  and  form  some  idea  of  the  rest  itself  wmcu 

IS  BESTOWED  UPON  US  IN  THIS  ROYAL  CHAMBER. 

First,  it  is  a  rest  of  mind,  of  which  the  prominent  ingredient  is  a 
seme  of  aecuriiy  and  fix/idness:  a  fixed  belief  in  the  teachings  of  the 
divine  Spirit  and  in  the  gospel  which  we  have  received ;  a  sense  of 
haying  grasped  the  blessings  which  that  gospel  holds  out  to  us,  and 
therefore  a  sense  of  the  certainty  of  our  acceptance  with  God  and  of 
our  eternal  security  in  Christ  Jesus.  Beloved,  if  you  are  of  the  school 
which  shifts  its  creed  every  week ;  if  you  belong  to  the  modem-cnlture 
gentlemen,  who  cannot  tell  us  what  they  believe,  because  they  do  not 
know  themselves — who  are  so  eminently  receptive  that  it  appears  to  me 
that  they  are  mainly  occupied  in  turning  out  what  lumber  they  have 
warehoused  in  order  to  be  able  to  stow  away  more, — ^then  yon  will  never 
know  any  rest.  This  hallowed  state  of  mind  cannot  come  to  the  unsettled 
doubter.  The  sacred,  dove-like  Spirit  quits  the' regions  of  uncertainty 
and  dwells  with  those  who  know  whom  they  have  believed.  Where  he 
dwells  there  is  rest,  but  nowhere  else.  Look  at  John — the  blessed, 
loving  John — how,  all  through  his  three  epistles,  he  continually  uses 
that  word  "  know."  He  is  a  terrible  Positivist ;  he  is  sure  of  every- 
thing ;  he  dogmatises  gloriously,  and  he  rests.  There  is  no  rest  till  yon 
are  sure.  A  little  'Mf  "  is  like  a  stone  in  your  shoe  ;  you  cannot  travel 
comfortably,  it  blisters  the  toot  and  prevents  restftil  progress.  **  Ah, 
but,''  says  one,  **  I  do  not  know  how  to  interpret  such  and  such  a  text." 
Well,  then,  brother,  cease  from  interpreting  it,  and  believe  it  as  it 
stands.  It  is  infinitely  better  to  believe  God's  word  than  to  interpret 
it ;  indeed,  much  that  passes  for  interpretation  nowadays  is  simply  the 
drying  of  all  sap  and  soul  out  of  the  inspired  words,  ana  making  them 
retain  only  a  very  dry  and  husky  sense.  Be  you  more  earnest  to  believe 
than  to  interpret.  Ask.  what  docs  the  text  say  ?  Believe  that,  and  it  you 
do  not  comprehend  all  its  meaning  do  not  be  any  the  less  l)elieving.  How 
shall  God  be  comprehensible  by  ftnitc  creatures,  or  his  glorious  trath  be 
seen  in  all  points  by  such  poor  mortals  as  we  are  ?  Believe,  so  sha^t 
thou  be  estabhshcd ;  and  then,  being  established  in  the  truth,  grasp  the 
blessings  which  that  truth  brings  to  von,  and  rejoice  therein.  You  believe 
in  justification  by  &ith  ;  be  sure  that  you  are  justified.  You  believe 
in  the  election  of  God ;  make  your  calling  and  election  surci  Yon 
believe  in  the  final  perseverance  of  the  saints ;  persevere  even  to  the 
end.  Grip  the  blessings,  and  then  feel  that,  having  believed  that  Jesus 
is  the  Christ,  you  are  born  of  God  ;  having  put  your  trust  in  him,  there 
IB  therefore  now  no  oondemnation  to  you,  for  you  are  in  Ohrist  Jesus. 


**Kmf  nr  tita  lmp."  31 


Am  700  teiUse  flMte  dooMnes,  and  the  positive  security— the  indil- 
nitebk  MMrit^-^^hioh  oomes  to  ererj  believe  who  is  relying  upon 
Jena»  yon  mtO,  feel  tliAt  perfect  rest  which  is  indescribable  in  sweet- 
nan,  the  ntt  **  wfeich  dikly  he  that  feels  it  knows.*'  Our  rM  is  a  sense 
of  aeciiri^. 

Nezt^  (his  rest  iSi  in  another  aspect,  eontmtmmt-^TpetrfKi  satisfaction 
with  onr  earthly  M;»  Ambition  spoils  rest ;  the  constant  greed  of 
anffioe  tnUt  ml  out  ef  the  question.  The  worry,  the  fret,  the  ftame  of 
accnmnfating,  of  desiring  more,  of  impatiently  coyeting  more  than 
God  is  pleased  to  give — all  this  mins  rest.  Oh,  to  say,  **  The  Lord's 
will  be  done  I  Haying  food  and  raiment^  I  am  therewith  content."  **  I 
haye  leam^  in  wbafaKMyer  state  I  am,  therewith  to  be  content,"  and 
to  let  ambition,  and  loftjr  desires,  and  ftetfhlness,  and  complaining  at 
yonr  lot,  all  go,  and  jnst  say,  "  Ood  hath  appointed  my  portion  and 
ordained  all  my  waj^ ;  and  so  let  it  be."  This  is  rest.  Pnt  this  to- 
gether with  security  as  tf  the  eternal  fatoze,  and  yon  have  gained  two 
rery  sweet  ingredienti  with  which  to  compose  a  rest  worthy  of  the  sons 
of  Qod. 

**  Beat,  weary  hearty 
AoSi  aU  lliy  silent  grietb,  and  seeret  pain. 
Thy  pgeftilaw  iegietg,  aad  lonffinct  Tain ; 
WucCnn  aad  loyehave  orderea  aU  the  pairti 
All  jhall  be  blesBedaeBS  and  light  at  last ; 
Cast  off  the  cares  tjiat  hare  so  long  oppreat ; 

Kest  sweetly,  rsBt  r^ 

K«xl  fh(M  is  in  this  t^t  the  idea  of  immoyable  efmfidene$^]^^t 
mdhlaAoe  in  QM,  !k>  th^t  when  seyere  trial  comes  the  sonl  says,  ''It  is 
righlK-I  adi  sure  it  Is  right ;  I  cannot  see  the  reason,  but  I  know  that 
the  trial  ib  sent  in  love  ;  t  am  certain  of  that.**  When  another  trial 
belUb  ehild'^like  obnfidetice  in  God  still  says.  "  It  could  not  be  better  ; 
if  Ood  send  two  troubles,  they  are  better  than  one  ;  and  if  he  send 
six,  tiiey  Are  six  tiinte  better  than  one,  though  they  seem  six  times 
worse.**  That  confidence  says  also,  "  He  will  bring  me  out  of  it ;  he 
neyer  sent  me  out  yet  upon  toe  sea  of  tribulation  but  what  he  brought 
DM  bomQ  again;  never  sent  me  to  a  battle  at  my  own  charges  yet; 
neyer'  bade  me  do  a  work  but  what  he  gave  me  strength  for  it ;  neyer 
called  me  to  snffisr  but  whi^t  he  sustained  me  under  the  pain."  Oh, 
but  Vkii  is  a  blen^  thing,  to  be  quite  confident  that  God  cannot  err, 
cannot  forsake,  cannot  change,  cannot  cease  to  loye,  and  that  therefore 
eyerjrtbing'.that  Cometh  firom  him  cometh  in  the  ri^ht  way,  at  the  right 
timo,  in  iM  right,  measure,  and  that  all  is  well  and  will  end  well  Ay, 
though  all  the  tempests  come  forth  from  their  caverns  to  howl  at  once 
iuMSS  the  tremendous  seas,  though  every  cyclone  and  hurricane  that 
ever  blew  shonld  come  back  again,  and  my  poor  barque  should  be  almost 
a  wteck  by  reason  6t  thebr  ftiry, — it  is  well,  it  is  well.  If  only  on  a  bosffd 
or  a  broken  piece  of  the  ship,  I  shall  come  safe  to  land,  for  so  hath  God 
lecreed.  Glory  be  to  his  name  !  I  will  leave  all  to  him.  This  is  rest — 
thorough  rest,  security,  contentment,  confidence. 

Then,  perhaps,  mainly,  according  to  the  Hebrew,  this  rest  consists  in 
mbmimm,  for  the  Hebrew  is,  "  Be  silent  to  God."  That  is  the  word. 
Oaa  of  the  dd  yetsions  reads  it,  **  Hold  thou  still  before  God."  This  holy 


32  METROPOLITIH  TJLBBRNAOLB  PULPIT. 

lilenco  is  illustrated  by  what  we  read  of  Aaron ;  when  his  sons  died, 
before  the  Lord—*'  Aaron  held  his  peace."  Let  your  tongue  be  quiet^ 
do  not  murmur^  do  not  ar^iie :  leave  all,  and  bow  in  silence.  **  My  soul 
is  even  as  a  weaned  child/*  said  David ;  he  would  no  longer  cry  after 
the  warm  breasts  of  comfort,  he  was  weaned  at  last.  Now,  0  Lord,  tiiy 
will  is  my  will.  It  has  been  a  sharp  lesson,  but  thou  hast  taught  it  to 
nio  at  las't.  Afoi-ctimc  I  struggled,  but  now  I  acquiesce:  once  I  quar- 
relled, but  now  sweetly  yield.  Let  it  be  as  thou  pleaaest^  thy  will  is 
luiue.    This  also  is  rest. 

*''  This  is  a  holier,  sweeter  rest, 
Than  the  lulling  rest  fW>m  pain, 
And  a  deeper  calm  than  that  which  sleep 
Sheds  over  heart  and  brain. 

^  It  is  the  soiil*s  surrendered  choice^ 
The  settling  of  the  will, 
L}'ing  down  gently  at  the  crofls, 
God's  purpose  to  fulfil.** 

Tlici-e  comes,  next,  the  rest  of  paiieiit  waiitfig,  for  that  is  in  the  text. 
What  docs  it  sav  ?  *'  Rest  in  the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently  for  him." 
This  is  to  have  aesii*es,  but  to  feel  that  yon  can  waive  them,  and  tarry 
the  Lonrs  leisure ;  to  have  wishes,  bnt  always  to  keep  them  tethered 
so  that  they  go  not  too  far ;  to  have  a  will  only  in  subserviency  to  the 
the  wiser  and  kinder  will  which  rules  above ;  saying  ever,  "  Lcra,  that 
is  what  I  think  I  should  wish  for,  but  I  do  not  certaimy  know  whether  it 
would  be  good  for  me  or  not,  and  therefore  I  ask  thee  to  denv  me  if  my 
wishes  are  wrong.  £Iy  most  earnest  prarers,  my  Father,  if  they  shoala 
not  please  thee,  do  not  hear  them ;  for  I  would  ask  thee  rather  not  to 
hoar  mo  than  to  hear  me  if  I  ask  amiss.  I  have  wishes  and  a  will, 
and  thou  hast  nermittcd  me  to  have  them,  for  thou  hast  said  t^oa  wilt 

Snint  mo  the  aesii*es  of  my  heart ;  but  Lord,  if  my  heart  should  not  be 
flighting  herself  in  thee  when  she  feels  her  desires  they  shall  not  be 
my  doMires,  I  will  diso\vn  them.  Ify  supremeet  will  shall  be  not  to 
will  anything  except  thjr  will,  and  if  I  do  will  it  I  repent  of  so  willing, 
and  diiHMird  the  evil  will  and  the  undesirable  desire.  I  will  torn  m 
wilAtlnoss  out  of  doors  by  thy  ^race  that  thou  mayest  have  thy  wilL" 
This  is  a  blesscil  spirit,  dear  friends,  and  he  that  has  attainea  it  has 
ontored  the  r^>yal  b<Hlohamber,  where  he  shall  rest  in  peace,  for  ^  so  he 
Kivoth  liis  Moveil  sleeix" 

Tills  rest  moans  also  ffeace^  peace  of  soul  with  yourself,  with  your 
Mlow  moUi  with  (lO^l  It  takes  two  to  make  an  enemy,  and  if  yon  will 
not  ho  ono  of  tho  two,  yon  will  not  have  an  enemv  seriously  to  distress 
you.  Mt'U  may  dislikovou,  but  they  shall  be  held  in  check,  for  **  wbm 
a  uinirs  WAYS  uknuH)  the  liOrd,  ho  maketh  even  his  enemies  to  be  at 

IMtiioo  with  Inuu  *  **  IIo  maketh  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  him,  and 
ho  riMuaiiulor  thon\>f  doth  ho  restrain.**  At  any  rate,  the  assnred 
Miovor  |H»wos!H'H  that  ]x\)oo  which  Chnst  had,  who  when  his  foear 
tfMthorod  round  alnnit  him.  and  sknight  to  catch  him  in  his  woida, 
U\\\M  thoui  all  bv  his  calm  solf-^x^ssosiiion. 

'hiis  hiil  moana^uiot  fk9jwiju\<s,  inward  calm.  The  soul  has  mountec  1 
whire  it  ^Aiit4i  tolv,  and  Jik^s  not  intend  to  move  from  its  position.. 


^B18T  Hf  THB  LOBD."  88 

• 

Kboh*!  dore  bas  been  round  the  earth  and  seen  nothing  but  a  waste  of 
but  she  baa  flown  home  at  last,  she  is  in  Noah^s  hand,  and  she 
(0  stop  in  the  ark  nntfl  the  better  times  shall  come,  and  the 
are  assoaffed.  Oh,  if  anj  of  yon  have  wandered  and  lost  the 
Moe  whftsh  Ohnst  gives,  even  that  which  he  ffives  not  to  the  world, 
if  joa  are  troubled  and  fretftil,  and  envious,  and  weary,  ostmnune  with 
fm own  heart  this  mominff  and  sav,  ^Setum  unto  thy  rest,  0  my 
tool,  foe  the  Lord  hath  dealt  bountifiilly  with  thee."  Say  to  your  heart 
as  I  have  said  to  mine,  ^  Why  art  thou  cast  down,  0  my  soul  ?  and  why 
art  tfaoQ  disquieted  within  me  ?  hope  thou  in  <!od :  Ibr  I  shall  yet  praise 
him,  who  is  the  health  of  my  countenance,  and  my  Ood."  ''  Best  in 
iheLoid.'' 

To  ekm  our  description  of  rest»  I  tiiink  we  must  add  one  other  term 
to  it»  it  is  the  rest  of  is^eUatum,  especially  in  regard  to  the  kingdom  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Ohrist.  The  greatest  fret  that  some  of  us  ever  have  is 
about  the  cause  of  ChDd.  Personal  troubles  and  domestic  troubles  sit 
rery  lightly  on  some  c^  us,  but  church  trouble  perjjlezee  us.  Not  in  my 
case,  because  none  of  you  who  love  the  Lord  ever  mtentionaDy  cause  me 
distreas  of  mmd,  but  there  are  some  who  walk  of  whom  we  would  tell 
yoQ  even  weeping,  that  th^  are  the  enemies  of  the  cross  ot  CShrist,  and 
yet  they  have  entered  into  tiie  churdi,  to  her  dishonour  and  injury. 
And  outside  this  diurch,  outside  in  the  ereat  church  of  Christ,  you  ean 
•ae  everywhOTe  looming  heavily  over  us  tbe  black  clouds  of  Bomanism, 
and  amidst  the  gloom  the  spectres  of  scepticism  are  fitting  to  and  fro. 
Bveiythine  in  these  times  seems  to  be  loose  and  out  of  joint.  The  men 
of  **  thougnt*'  have  pull^  up  the  old  landmarks,  they  have  broken  down 
the  hedges,  and  laia  die  Lord's  enclosures  common  to  all  that  pass  by 
the  iray.  Behold  they  go  about  to  break  down  the  carved  work  of  the 
nnctuary  with  their  axes,  they  defile  the  temple  of  the  Lord.  Nothing 
is  sacred  tor  these  wise  men  of  modem  times,  no  truth  that  was  taught 
by  their  sires  can  be  taught  by  them.  The  doctrines  of  grace  to  these 
men  are  platitudes,  and  Uie  doctrine  of  the  cross  itself  is  denied ;  or, 
when  not  denied,  so  obscured  that  we  know  not  what  it  is.  Scarcely  do 
th^  themselves  know  what  it  is  they  afSrm  ;  thev  are  great  at  questions 
ana  negations.  Novelties  of  doctrine  are  poured  out  upon  the  earAi, 
oomtless  in  number  as  the  frogs  which  came  up  in  the  apocalyptic  vision, 
and  what  shall  the  end  be  ?  "Go  thy  way,"  says  Goa  to  his  beloved, 
'*foft  thou  shalt  rest  and  stand  in  thy  lot  in  the  end  of  the  days." 
Ohrist  will  take  care  of  his  own  church,  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  pre- 
vail against  her.  Leave  thou  all  this  to  him  who  seeth  the  end  as  well 
as  the  bq^inning,  and  to  whom  the  victory  shall  surely  come.  Your 
strength  is  to  sit  stilL  Best  iirthe  Lord  with  expectation  that  he  will 
overmte  tiie  evil,  and  will  himself  surely  come  to  end  it  all  and  reigm 
amongBt  his  aiocients  gloriously. 

III.  Lastly,  and  here  I  needed  time,  but  with  my  usual  impro- 
vidence I  have  squandered  it,  our  third  point  is,  let  us  enter  and  examine 
THB  BOTAL  CHAMBEE  IT8BLF.  ''Bcst  iu  the  Lord."  Now  the  text 
does  not  sav  rest  in  anything  about  the  Lord,  but  rest  m  the  Lard  him* 
m^.  ^  Oh  that  the  Spirit  might  bring  us  into  such  union  and  com. 
munion  with  God  that  we  must  to  the  full  know  the  meaning  of  thig 
text.    **  Best  in  the  Jx>rd  *' !    The  Lord  has  revealed  himself  te  us  in 


^ffi! 


94  MBTBOPOLITiir  TABEBJffACLE  PULPIT. 

these  days  in  Che  person  of  his  onlv-begotten  Son  :  Jeans,  aldn  to  us  by 
nature,  Jesus,  our  sul^stitute  and  surety,  Jesus,  our  all  in  alL  Now, 
beloved,  come  near  to  Jesus  bj  a  living  faith,  hide  jonraelTes  in  Jesus, 
enter  into  his  wounds,  feel  your  safety  in  him,  your  union  to  him.  Liye 
to  him,  live  with  him,  live  for  him,  live  in  him,  and  as  yon  do  ao  yon 
must  rest.  Only  in  the  Lord  is  there  asij  rest  for  yon ;  but  as  yon  are 
a  man  in  Christ  Jesus  and  lose  yourself  in  him,  your  life  beinff  hidden 
witli  Christ  in  God,  in  that  way,  m  tliat  way  only,  shall  you  find  perfect 
rest.  What  a  rcstinfi:  pluci;  do  sainU  find  in  the  finished  work  of  Jeans  1 
Lot  hut  the  Holy  Ghost  lead  them  to  see  the  glory  of  his  atoning  blood 
and  tlicy  are  sure  to  rest.  Let  me  tenderly  entreat  the  tempted  believer 
to  tell  tfcsuB  all  his  cose,  and  look  to  him  for  that  rest  which  he  himself 
promised  when  ho  said, ''  Take  mv  yoke  upon  you  and  learn  of  me,  and 
je  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls. 

••  Keat,  weary  bouI  ! 
The  |)enalty  is  borne,  the  ransom  paid, 
For  all  thy  sins  full  satisfactioii  made ; 
Strive  not  to  do  thyself  what  Christ  has  dome, 
Claim  the  free  gift,  and  make  the  joy  thine  own ; 
No  more  by  pangs  of  guilt  and  fear  disttest, 

Rest,  sweetly  rest !  ** 

Althoufich  this  is  obviously  the  main  meaning,  we  may  add  that,  **  Best 
ki  tha  lionl  '*  iiiouns,  rest  in  him  as  your  covmant  Ood,  Ton  have  not  to 
d«al  with  Hii  abstract  deity  who  stands  afar  off  as  your  offended  Creator. 
Buluild,  iNtltfved,  if  thou  believoRt  in  Jesus,  the  Lord  has  entered  into 
an  uvcrlastinK  o<>v<>nant  with  thee,  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure.  He 
bath  fuiid  (Minc^rnin^^  thee  '*  I  will  not  turn  away  fh)m  thee  to  do  thee 
g(Nj(l."  Ha  Iiivh  proniisod  to  keep  you  and  presene  you,  and  bring 
yoii  inUi  his  ctfriml  ^lory  by  a  covenant  signed  and  sealed  with  the 
^^\\i\\\H  IiNhhI  of  Christ.  '*  Rest  in  the  Lord.''  He  will  keep  his  covenant 
(ivtMi  Ui  iU  jotH  uikI  littlm,  therefore  be  not  disquieted.  The  eternal  shalls 
and  wilU  hIihII  n()v<>r  fail.  '*This  is  as  the  waters  of  Nos^  unto  me :  for 
hm  I  hiivi*  Hworn  that  the  waters  of  Noah  should  no  more  go  over  the  earth ; 
m  liAvi*  I  Mworn  that  I  would  not  1)0  wroth  with  thee,  nor  rebuke  thee.  In  a 
Ihilo  wruMi  I  hid  my  fm'o  from  thee  for  a  moment;  but  with  everlasting 
klinhtrHH  will  I  huv(^  iiicrcy  on  thee,  saitli  the  Lord  thy  Redeemer.  The 
iniiiiiilniiiH  Mhull  depart,  and  tho  hills  be  removed;  but  my  kindness  shall 
nut  ili'piirt  IVotn  tlitM'.'*  (ilory  be  unto  our  covenant  God  !  Come  and 
X\\%1  III  liiiiii  lirlnvtMJ. 

'riitii  iTHt  in  nil  ///i'  rvltillonnhipH  into  ivhkh  the  Lord  has  been  pleased  to 
(ittnf^  /iiniHttf\  Kiinw  tliou  that  this  God  of  thine  is  thy  shield  and 
^liliiit  i«xri'i'iliii|:  f-rcnt  n^wiinl ;  thy  rock,  thy  dwelling-place,  thy 
MIu'IiIhtiI.  Mini  lli,v  I'h'siTviT.  Host  of  all,  ho  is  thy  Father,  Oh, 
brnlliteii.  oiin  niiitiiit  hilk  iilH)ut  this,  one  wants  to  drink  it  in  by 
ijiiinl  riii'ililuilnii  I  it  JH  II  bliHn  tin)  ^irat  lor  words  to  be  indeed  a  child 
iit  Mm  liiMM'iil.v  l'*n(liiM'l  .Ichovnli  is  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth, 
Miikir  Mini  hrMlnivrr.  niid  yet  I  am  Ivis  eliiUl,  and  as  "surely  as  a  child 

ti;   (iiml    iIh  imniil    Mihl   ivst   in  its  mother^  bosom,  so  Burely  and 

il'iily  iiuiv  I  liii'tt  inv  Kiuiier.  and  rest  in  liim. 

^ii«(  tiiiiii  hwl  kuiiw.too.  that  to  set  forth  i\w  nearness  and  tenderness 


f  ^aec  or  TH>  .LOKD."  85 

(>r  h»  relationflMp  to  ns,  tbe  Li)Td  is  pleaaod  to  deKribe  himself  as  the 
Umb&nd  of  our  BonU  't  For  "  Thy  mskei  is  thv  hnsbalid,  the  Lord  at 
HoaU  ia  hie  name."  "  I  will  CTen  belxoth  taee  onto  me  in  ftithj- 
fnlneas,  and  ihou  shalt  know  the  Lord."  Bhall  not  the  spouse  tnut 
h«r  husband  ?  I  houe  wu  will  e^h  of  as  wj  to  him  this  mortdn;; 
"  Lonl,  I  do  trust  thcu,  for  I  lore  thee,  since  thoo  hast  made  me 
«iia  witli  tboe  in  blcAsod  conjugal  anion;  uid  I  eaj  unto  thee  to-dav  aji 
the  church  did  of  old, '  Tell  me,  0  thou  whom  my  sool  loveth,  vaefi 
tiiou  feedest,  whore  thou  makcat  thy  flock  to  rest  at  noon :  for  why  shonM 
1  be  ABoue  that  tornuthaBidu  brthe  floclESof  th^compam'ons?'  Bert 
in  thy  fritnd,  thy  Saviour,  thy  uUinaU.  I  leaye  the  fQlfUst  of  diyine  teta* 


Hmsliipfi  for  you  to  think  ot  ut  yonr  leianre  ;  they  are  all  fnll  of  regt. 

Best,  next,  in  each  one  of  the  atkibutea  ^  Ood,  Are  you  conscidtiB  ot 
■D.r  '  Oame  and  Rat  in  the  meicy  which  biota  it  oat.  Poor  rinner,  I 
woqld  tm  iwite  thee  with  tbe  borden  of  thy  e;ailt  upon  thee  t6  re- 
nraibar  Out  he  deligbteth  in  meicy,  that  it  is  Qod's  joy  to  pasB  by 
tnui^iMBioii.  ThoB  wilt  nsTW  eKope  &om  the  bondage  of  thy  Bin; 
VSOBft  H  tbon  oomett  to  the  mercy  <n  God  in  JesnB  Christ  his  Son. 
Bert  in  boondlen  men^.  Beloved  child  of  God,  are  yon  troubled  about 
inward  ma.  77-^1101  nat  in  his  power  to  bre^  the  neck  of  corruption. 
Pcthapa  yoor  affiiction  conoems  yonr  worldly  atbirs,  then  rest  in  the 
power  of  Qod  to  help  Ton :  he  is  j^reat  at  a  dead  lift,  and  when  none 
«aii  be^  OB  bat  Qod,  tnen  ii  God  moat  ready  to  come  to  the  rescue. 
Baitt  beloved  brother,  in  Qod'B  wisdom.  Ton  cannot  see  yonr  way,  bat 
Iw  can  see  it,  leave  it  to  him,  for  there  is  no  possibilily  of  error  in  his 
ooaniels.  Beat  alao  in  his  inunntobility,  that  sure  anchorage  amid  the 
tnmbled  aea  of  life.  Thou  hast  changes  every  day ;  he  never  changes. 
Come  hack  to  him  whose  constancy  of  love  is  a  mountain  of  strength. 
He  has  set  his  mind  npon  saving  thee,  and  he  is  of  one  mind,  and  who 
■hall  turn  him  ?  This  is  his  mind — that  he  that  belicvcth  and  is  bap- 
tized shall  be  saved,  and  he  will  perform  that  salvation :  nor  death, 
nor  hell  shall  thwart  the  sacred  pnrpose  of  an  unchanging  (tod.  He 
will  carry  out  his  CTacious  work  and  glorify  himself  therein.  Rest 
tbon  alao  in  his  iaitnftilnesB.  What  he  has  promised  he  will  perform. 
He  is  not  a  man  that  he  should  lie,  nor  the  son  of  man  that  he  should 
repent.  Hath  he  said  and  shall  he  not  do  it  ?  Take  thou  his  promise 
mad  believe  it  to  be  as  good  as  the  fullilment,  for  so  it  is. 

Best  thou  also  in  his  word,  which  he  has  written  for  thy  consolation. 
The  Holy  Ghost  has  in  a  thousand  ways  declared  the  divine  goodwill 
towards  thee :  meditate  upon  what  he  has  dictated.  As  full  as  the  skies 
are  of  stars  so  fnll  are  the  Scriptures  with  promises.  Take  these  precions 
pramiwB,  one  by  one,  believe  them,  and  pray  unto  the  Ix>rd,  saying, 
"  Fnlil  this  word  unto  thy  servant  whereon  thou  bast  caused  me  to 
hope.  O  Lord,  do  as  thou  hast  said."  Then  sweetly  rest  in  the  eternal 
trnthfalneee,  for  the  Lord  will  keep  every  one  of  his  promises  to  yon. 

What  a  subject  I  have  before  me !  I  seem  to  he  like  those  bold  ex- 
{doren  in  the  northern  seas,  before  whom  a  passage  Opens  up  to  the  Ictt, 
and  anon  another  channel  on  the  right.    They  sail  into  the  centre  of  a 

Cbav,  and  then  further  on  enter  upon  another  sea,  and  know  not 
wiae  the  ocean  may  yet  become  sti^l  further  on.    My  text  is  an 
ocean  to  which  I  see  no  bound,  it  is  fnll  of  wondrous  grace,  bnt  I  have 


30  METUOPOLrriN  TABERVAOLB  PULPIT. 

neither  time  nor  ability  to  sail  over  its  shoreless  surface.  I  mntt  leave 
you  to  spread  the  sails  of  meditation,  and  &Toured  by  (lie  gales  of  the 
Spirit's  inflaences,  I  trast  yon  will  be  borne  along,  not  to  an  ocean  of 
primeval  ice,  but  to  the  condition  of  unbroken  rest  in  the  Lord. 

Next,  let  us  rest  in  ths  mil  of  Ood.  It  is  a  hi^h  point  to  arrive 
at  to  feel  that  my  Father's  will  is  such  that  I  can  entuely  rest  in  it^  let 
it  be  whatever  it  may ;  yet  it  would  not  be  so  difficult  if  we  were  not 
BO  depraved.  0  for  conquering  grace  to  crush  down  sel£  I  would  be 
as  a  grain  of  dust  blown  m  the  summer's  gale  without  power  to  change 
my  course,  carried  on  by  the  irresistible  breath  of  the  Lord :  for  ever 
made  willingly  unwilling  to  will  anything  but  the  will  of  my  Lord.  I 
would  be  as  a  tiny  straw  borne  along  by  the  Oulf  Stream,  carried  where- 
ever  the  warm  love  of  QtoA,  shaU  bear  me,  self  delighting  to  lie  low  and  see 
the  Lord  idone  exalted.  The  Buddhists  talk  about  being  absorbed  into 
Buddha  and  ceasing  to  be,  and  they  make  it  their  heaven  to  be  at  last  swal- 
lowed up  in  God.  I  know  the  falsehood  of  this  teaching,  but  I  know 
that  there  is  a  truth  which  is  verv  like  it  in  outward  aspect.  Oh,  to  be 
nothing !  To  be  less  than  nothing  I  To  have  no  will  and  no  daiire 
i^ut  life  or  death,  about  sickness  or  health,  about  poverty  or  wealth, 
no  will  about  anything ;  and  vet  to  have  a  strong  resolved  will  to  deny 
sc^  and  say,  "  Not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt."  This  is  to  rest  in  the 
Lord. 

Beloved,  may  the  Lord,  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  grant  you  abundantly 
from  this  day  forward  to  enter  into  this,  which  is  man's  first,  man's  last, 
man's  sweetest,  truest  rest,  the  rest  of  the  sinner  coming  to  Christ,  the 
rest  of  the  saint  abiding  in  heaven — the  only  real  rest  that  can  be  found, 
in  earth  or  heaven — rest  in  the  Lord.  Ooa  grant  it  to  us  by  faith,  for 
Jesus'  sake.    Amen. 


Portion  op  Scriptueb  Rrad  bbpoee  Sbrmok— Psalm  xxxvii. 


Hymns  prom  "  Our  Own  Hymn  Book  "—708,  699,  729 ; 

Verses  1,  2^  5,  6. 


Metit«i}«Iiten  iialremiule 


r     1 


OOMING— ALWAYS  OOMINO. 


%  ^ttmn 


VELmaasD  bt 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

A>  THE  WKBmOhnJkM  TIBBBHAOU^   WKWlXmOaU 


*Ta  wlumi  oomiag."— 1  P«ft«U.  4 

TtfB  motUe  is  qmJdiig  of  the  Lord  JeaiiB,  of  whom  he  had  Brerioiidy 
flttid,  ^ If  10  be  ye  have  tailed  that  the  Lord  ii  gradona,''  and  ae  Mows 
thai  aemtaioe  np  with  tim,  ^To  whom  ocmiiiig  as  mito  a  liying  atone." 
Now,  I  want  to  call  yenr  special  attention  to  this  present  participle--- 
itdm  act  of  coming — for  there  is  mnch  to  counsel  and  to  ccnnfort  ns  in 
the  &ct  and  the  xiflections  it  suggests. 

The  Christian  life  is  bc^nn,  continued,  and  perfected  altogether  in 
connection  with  the  Lord  Jesns  Christ  This  is  a  very  great  blessing  for 
UB.  Sometimes  when  yon  go  a  joamey,  you  travel  so  &r  under  the  pro- 
tection  of  a  certain  Company,  but  then  you  haye  to  change,  and  the  rest 
of  your  journey  may  be  performed  under  very  different  circumstances, 
npon  quite  another  kind  of  line.  Now  we  have  not  so  far  to  go  to 
hearen  in  the  guardian  care  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  then  at  a  certain  point 
to  change,  so  as  to  have  somebody  else  to  be  our  leader,  or  some  other 
method  of  salTation.  No,  he  is  the  author  and  he  is  the  finisher 
of  ear  &ith.    If  we  begin  aright  we  b^n  with  ''  Christ  is  all  '*;  if  we 

So  on  aright  wego  on  with  **  Christ  is  all ";  and  if  we  finish  aright  we 
niah   with  **  Christ  is  all."     It  was  a  great  delusion  of  some  in 
Paara  day  that  after  they  had  begun  in  the  spirit,  they  hoped  to  be  made 
perfect  in  the  flesh ;  and  iiiere  are  some  now  a  days  who  begin  as  sinners 
resting^  npon  Christ,  but  they  want  to  go  on  as  independent  saints, 
restinfiT  on  themsehres.   That  will  never  do,  brethren.    It  is  not  "  Christ 
and  Company"  anyhow.    The  sinner  knows  that  it  must  be  Christ 
only;  because  he  has  nothing  of  his  own ;  and  the  saint  ought  to  know 
that  it  mnst  be  Christ  only,  because  he  has  less  than  nothing  apart  firom 
Chriat.     I  beUeve  that  if  we  grow  out  of  Christ  we  grow  in  an  unhealthy 
mnahioom  fuhion :  what  we  need  is  to  grow  up  into  Christ  in  all  things, 
knowing  him  more  and  more,  and  being  more  and  more  satisfied  that  he 
ia  what  we  need.    This  is  really  a  h^lfchy  growth,  and  may  God  send 


38  METROPOLITAH  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

\fiijrt  and  more  of  it  to  as  as  long  as  ever  we  livw.  BksKd  be  luhojv 
nuine,  with  qb  it  is  (Christ  in  the  morning,  when  we  are  jonng  and  &il 
of  Htrcn;^h  ;  it  is  Christ  at  noon,  when  we  are  bearing  the  burden  and 
heat  of  tlic  day  ;  and  it  is  Christ  at  eventide,  when  we  lean  on  the  staff 
f(f»r  very  a;?e,  and  the  shadows  lengthen,  and  the  light  is  dim.  Yea,  and 
it  shall  be  Christ  only  when  the  night  settles  down  and  death-shade 
curtains  our  last  lied.  In  all  circumstances  and  conditions  we  look  to 
J(JHUH  only.  Are  we  in  wealth  ^  Christ  crowns  it.  Are  we  in  poverty  ? 
Christ  checra  it.  Are  we  in  honour?  Christ  calms  us.  Are  we  in 
shame  ?  Christ  consoles  us.  Are  we  in '  health  ?  He  sanctifies  it. 
An;  we  in  sickness?  HctcUeTca  it.  .  As  be  is  at  all  times  the  same  in 
hiiuHcir  HO  he  is  the  siime  to  us.  To  the  some  Christ  we  must  come  and 
clin;i;  under  every  new  circiunstoncc.  Ouc  heart  must  abide  fiEUthftd  to 
h(!r  one  only  Lonl  and  lovingly  sin.c:,  — 

4 I'D  luni  to  t)u'e  in  d«j-8  of  l^ht   1 

Ab  well  as  nigbt«  of  care, 
.  'I^lrau  brkrhtest  %md  i41  thaVt  brighii    .     .  «. 

^rh«m  fiiirost  of  tho  fnir  !" 

Wo  have  not  to  seek  a  JVesh  physician',  to  find  a  new  friend,  or  to  dis- 
cover a  novel  iiope,  but  we  are  to  look  for  everything  to  Jesus  Christ,  "  the 
sanie  yestenlay,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever.'*  "Ye  are  complete  in  him,** 
Bland  to  this,  my  brethren.  Never  think  that  you  need  aught  beyond 
th«^  |m)vlBion  which  is  stored  up  in  him,  for  sanctification,  for  satigfec- 
lion,  or  for  wifoty.  Cast  not  your  eyes  around  you  to  find  a  supplement 
to  the  fiord  .IosnB,or  you  will  deceive  yourselves  and  dishonour  him.  It 
Is  not  with  our  Lord  as  it  was  with  Moses.  Moses  led  the  people  throngh 
the  wildeniesfl,  but  he  could  not  bring  them  into  the  promised  land :  that 
was  Hjserved  for  Joshua.  Brother,  the  Lord  Jesus  has  led  you  so  far 
tiirough  the  wilderness,  and  he  will  lead  you  over  the  Jordan,  and  secure 

Eiur  iK^ritage  to  you,  and  see  you  safely  landed  in  it :  look  not,  therefore, 
r  any  other  leader  or  lawgiver.  It  is  not  with  Christ  as  it  was  with 
Dftvid :  David  collected  the  materials  for  the  temple,  but  though  he 
oould  gather  together  vast  stores  of  great  value,  he  could  not  buOd  them 
np,  for  the  Ix)rd  said  that  this  honour  should  be  reserved  for  his  son 
that  should  l)e  after  him ;  and  therefore  the  construction  of  the  temple 
was  loft  for  Solomon.  But  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  blessed  be  his  name, 
has  not  only  gathered  together  his  jx^oplc  and  the  precious  treasures 
with  which  he  is  to  build  a  liMug  temple  unto  God ;  but  he  will  also  build 
it  stone  upon  stone,  and  brin^  foJ'fch  the  top  stone  with  shouting.  He 
shall  build  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  and  he  shall  IxBar  the  gloiy.  Christ 
in  the  Christian's  alphabet  is  A,  B,  C  right  down  toZ,  and  all  the  words 
of  the  i^nre  language  of  Canaan  are  only  compounds  of  himself.  Has 
ho  not  said  it,  "  I  am  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  beginning  and  the  end"? 
Our  text  Ri)oaks  about  coming  to  him,  and  I  shall  endeavour  to  expound 
it  to  you  thus.  This  is  a /kill  picture  of  Christian  life,  I  consider  it  to 
bo  a  complete  picture  of  a  saint  drawn  with  one  stroke.  It  is  not  easy 
to  make  a  i)ortmit  with  ene  line,  yet  I  remember  seeing  a  somewhat 
ftmous  ])ortrait  of  our  Lord  in  which  the  artist  never  lifted  his  pencil  iiom 
the  jMipcr  fh)m  beginning  to  end,  but  drew  the  whole  of  it  with  one 
contmnouH  scriw  of  Hreles.     Ro  here  I  may  say  the  whole  Christian  life 


|idflMmilioiieIitt»-*-KX)nii]igimtoCS^^  ^Towbomcoimiiig/*'  When 
ve  liave.  ipolDtti iqxmihafty  I  ghall  answer  two  questions ;  tbeone — what 
i$  tk$t$ii  wa/g  if  emmg  io  hmat  jksif  the  oUtM^wluU  is  tk$lmt 
waif  4f^mw|7  to  imn  ajkrwards  f  May  the  Holy  Spirit  Mess  the  whok 
diaconrae  to  onr  sonla. 

Ir  Fkati  than,  Hiu  is  ▲  ooxPLvra  DxaoupnoK  or  isi  OHnis- 
7XAV  liin.    It  is  ft  oantmnoiiB  'dooming''  to  Jasns. 

If  jonliAyayoiir  BiUflSopenat  the  text  I  want  yon  to  notiee  that  tbis 
aijiiniiinn  onrinri  fa  oonneotion  with  two  fif^ores.  '  There  is  ene  wfaioh 
|meedflattintiiaaacondvene,namelT>thefl|pireoftf  KUhehUdfeAxxpnt 
milkr  ^Am  n0#-boni  habes,  desire  tne  sinceie  milk  of  the  word,  that  ye 
may  grow  thordby :  if  so  be  ye  ha;?e  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gi«oiotis» 
To  wnmn ooming*"  dhUdim  oome  to  their  parenta,and  they  nequentlf 
iKHne.  nther  kn^er  than  their  parents  like  i  it  is  the  snidral  habit  it 
children  to  coma  to  th^  parents  for  what  they  need.  Thev  benn  with 
eoming  to  the  motbanwmi  they  am  new-bora  babea.  Loolt  at  the  little 
chilis  it  cannot  proirideftriiBeU:  If  it  were  kft  to  shift  for  itself  it  most 
die;  bat hftTing  tasted  the  unadulterated  milk,  it  thirsts  for  move  of  ik 
When  the  time  oomea  roond  for  it  to  be  fed,  and  it  oomea  very  often,  it 
ffiTes  TmmistakeablB  signs  even  before  it  can  speak  that  it  wants  its 
ftod{  it  knows  where  to  oome,  and  it  will  not  rest  till  it  reaches  its 

eioe  and  nestles  down.  As  the  child  grows  up  it  knows  the  breokfost 
or,  and  ihe  diimer  boor,  and  knows  where  to  eome  for  the  grateftd  mfial 
and  the  hearly  wilodlme.  Ton  do  not  want  in  most  of  yonr  honseSfl 
ioqieot,  to  ringa  bell  to  call  your  children  together  to  the  ftmily  tablet 
thi^  aU  carry  little  interior  bells  which  let  them  know  iH^tty  aoon- 
nfcely  when  meal-times  will  be,  and  they  come  freely,  without  per* 
■nadiug  or  fordng.  Some  of  them  are  now  getting  to  be  fifteen  or 
sixteen  years  of  age,  and  they  keep  on  coming  stifi.  They  come  to 
your  table  just  as  they  used  to  come.  When  first  you  had  to  lift 
them  into  their  little  chairs  then  they  were  coming;  and  now  they 
take  their  big  chairs  as  if  they  quite  belonged  to  them;  but  they 
still  keep  on  coming.  Tes,  and  they  come  to  yon  not  only  for  bread 
sad  for  meat,  but  t&y  come  for  a  great  many  things  besides.  In  fact, 
the  older  they  grow,  we  more  they  come  for.  They  used  to  come  for 
little  shoea  uid  little  garments,  uid  now  they  need  them  cut  of  a 
larger  sue,  and  of  more  expensive  material,  and  they  come  accordingly^ 
Though  thev  cost  yon  more  they  come  mtii  greater  freedom,  for  habit 
Jias  made  them  very  bold  in  tlieir  coming.  They  do  not  require  any 
eatreatV  or  encouragement  to  come  for  what  they  want :  they  look  for 
many  uiings  as  a  matter  of  course,  and  for  the  rest  they  come  with  all 
Ae  readiness  imaginable.  Perhaps  they  let  you  know  their  desiree  a 
little  sooner  than  you  want  them  to  do,  and  when  you  think  that  thcrf 
mi^ht  manage  a  little  longer  wiUi  wlutt  they  have,  they  press  their 
daima  with  earnestness,  ana  vote  tiiem  urgent.  They  very  soon  find 
out  their  requirements,  you  never  have  to  call  tUem  together  and  say, 
^Xow  gurls,  I  want  you  earnestly  to  oonsider  whether  you  do  not  want 
more  dresses.  Now  boys,  I  want  you  to  lay  it  to  heart  whether  you  do 
not  require  new  ck>thes."  Oh,notDingof  thesort.  Your  chil(h^n  do  not 
need  to  be  called  in  such  a  way  ;  they  come  without  calling.  They  are 
always  coming  for  something,  as  you  very  well  know.    Sometimes  they 


40  METBOPOLITIV  TABSBVAOLI  PULPIT. 

oonstntin  jou  to  pat  your  hands  into  yonr  pockets  so  freqnenUy  and  ibr 
sach  a  Tariety  of  expenses  that  you  wonder  how  long  the  pnrae  will  hold 
out,  and  when  yonr  resonrces  will  be  exhausted.  Of  one  thing  yoa 
feel  quite  sure  that  it  will  be  easier  to  drain  your  purse  than  to  stop 
your  children  from  coining  for  one  thing  or  another. 

They  come  to  yon  now  for  a  great  many  things  they  did  not  oome  for 
at  first.  It  seems  that  there  is  no  end  to  the  thines  they  oome  for, 
and  I  belicTe  there  is  no  end  at  alL  Some  of  them,  Ilnowy  oontinae  to 
oome  after  they  have  got  beyond  their  boyish  years.  Though  yon  have  a 
notion,  I  suppose,  that  they  might  sluft  for  themselves,  they  are  still 
coming  for  sovereigns  where  shilBngs  used  to  suffice.  When  you  could 
put  them  to  bed  at  night  with  the  r^ection  that  you  had  found  them  in 
food  and  raiment,  and  house  and  home,  vou  knew  your  expenses ;  but 
now  the  big  fellows  come  to  you  with  such  heavy  demands  that  yon  can 
hardly  see  the  end  of  it.    So  it  is ;  they  are  always  coming. 

Now,  in  all  this  long  talk  I  have  been  showing  you  how  to  understand 
the  figure  of  coming  to  Christ.  Just  what  your  children  began  to 
do  firom  the  first  moment  you  fixed  your  eyes  on  them,  and  what 
they  have  continued  to  do  ever  since,  that  is  just  what  you  are  to 
do  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Yon  are  to  be  always  coming  to  him — 
coming  to  him  for  spiritual  food,  coming  to  him  for  spiritual  garments, 
coming  to  him  for  washing,  guiding,  help,  and  health :  coming  in  fact  for 
everything.  Yon  will  be  wise  if,  the  older  vou  grow,  the  more  you  come, 
and  he  will  be  all  the  better  pleased  with  you.  If  you  find  out  other 
wants  and  make  clearer  discoveries  of  your  needs,  come  for  more  than 
you  used  to  come  for,  and  prove  thereby  that  you  better  understand  and 
appreciate  what  manner  of  love  it  is — that  ye  should  be  called  the  sons 
of  God.  "  He  that  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for 
us  all,  how  shall  he  not  with  him  also  freely  give  us  all  things  ?"  Haa 
he  not  said  to  you,  **  Open  your  mouth  wide  and  I  will  fill  it "  ?  It  is  rather 
strange  that  you  never  have  to  tell  your  children  to  do  that.  They  do 
it  without  any  telling  ;  but  you  have  been  told  to  do  it,  and  yet  yon  do 
not  do  it.  He  complains, ''  thou  hast  not  called  upon  me,  0  Jacob." 
The  infinite  liberality  of  your  heavenly  Father  has  urged  you,  to  make 
great  requests  of  him,  and  yet  you  have  stuttered  and  stammered  and 
been  afraid  to  ask,  until  he  now  tells  you  that  "  you  have  not  because 
you  ask  not."  Beloved,  let  us  learn  from  our  children,  and  let  it  be 
the  habit  of  our  lives  to  be  incessantly  coming  to  the  heavenly  Fatl^er — 
coming  oftener,  coming  for  more  reasons,  coming  for  larger  blesdingg, 
coming  with  greater  expectations,  coming  in  one  life-long  perpetual 
coming,  and  all  because  he  bids  us  come. 

If  you  will  look  again  at  your  Bibles,  you  will  get  a  second  iUustration 
from  the  fourth  verse,  "  To  whom  coming  as  unto  a  living  stone,  dis- 
allowed indeed  of  men,  but  chosen  of  God,  and  precious,  ye  also,;  as 
lively  stones,  are  built  up  a  spiritual  house,  an  holy  priesthood,  to  offer 
up  spiritual  sacrifices,  acceptahle  to  God  by  Jesus  Christ."  Here  we 
have  the  figure  of  a  building.  A  building  comprises  first  a  foundation, 
and  then  the  stones  which  are  brought  to  the  foundation  and  are  built 
upon  it.  This  furnishes  a  very  beautitul  picture  of  Christian  life.  1  have 
r^  that  there  has  been  discovered  beneath  Jerusalem  an  immense  ca\-m 
or  quarry  near  the  Damascus  gate.    Travellers  who  have  been  into  this 


OOXINCI — ALWATS  OOMOrG.  41 

qoany  say  that  there  are  niches  in  the  live  rock  ontof  which  the  magni- 
fioent  stoofiB  were  cnt  with  which  Solomon's  temple  was  bnilt.  The  tem- 
ple is  up  there  on  the  top  of  the  rock,  and  then  £eu:  down  in  the  qnarrj 
you  can  distinctly  discover  where  the  huge  stones  used  t^  be.  Now 
there  was  a  process  of  coming  by  which  each  stone  came  to  the  foun- 
dation. Some  stones  that  were  expected  to  form  part  of  the  building 
neyer  reached  it :  there  is  one  hu^c  stone  of  that  sort  in  the  Bezetha 
caTem  noiw.  It  is  still  there,  for  this  reason — that,  though  it  is  squared 
and  chiselled  on  the  front  and  two  sides,  and  also  on  the  top  and  the 
bottom,  yet  it  has  neyer  been  cnt  away  at  the  back,  and  so  it  cleayes 
to  the  rock  of  which  it  is  naturally  a  nart,  and  remains  in  its  original 
daribnesB.  Now,  the  paasa^  that  I  would  like  you  to  think  of  is  that  in 
the  fifty-first  chapter  of  Isaiah — "  Look  unto  the  rock  whence  ye  are 
hewn,  and  to  the  hole  of  the  pit  whence  ye  are  digged.'*  There  are  many 
here  present  who  haye  been  cut  off  from  the  ro(£,  and  lifted  up  out  of 
the  horrible  pit ;  since  which  early  operation  of  diyine  grace  they  haye 
been  comine  and  coming  till  they  haye  reached  the  foundation,  and  are 
built  up  as  Uyely  stones  in  the  temple  which  is  established  upon  Christ. 
But  there  are  others  of  you  who  neea  further  excavating.  Goa  has  begun 
his  work  upon  you,  he  has  used  sharp  tools,  and  begun  to  separate  you 
from  the  world :  it  has  taken  a  long  time  to  get  you  cut  away  from  the 
rock,  even  in  part  Ton  used  to  l^  altogether  sinful  and  eaiih-bound, 
and  yon  lived  m  worldlineas,  just  as  the  stone  formed  a  part  of  the  rock ; 
Qci  has  been  using  his  great  chisel  upon  von,  and  cut  yon  away,  and 
separated  you  to  a  ^eat  extent  from  your  fellow  men ;  but  still  at  the 
back,  in  secret,  your  heart  cleaves  to  sin.  You  have  not  given  up  the 
darling  lust  of  your  heart  and  therefore.you  are  not  quarried  yet,  and  you 
cannot  come  to  Christ,  for  that  is  impossible  till  you  are  separated  from 
the  rock  of  which  you  naturally  form  a  part.  Oh,  how  I  wish  that 
almighty  grace  would  take  the  saw  of  the  word  to-night,  and  make  clear 
cuts  right  across  your  stony  heart  until  yen  are  sawn  right  adrift  from 
the  hard  rock  of  sm,  that  you  may  afterwards  be  made  to  come  to  Christ 
to  be  built  upon  him  as  your  K)undation.  That  is  how  the  work  of 
grace  b^ns, — ^by  cutting  loose  the  soul  from  the  evil  world  of  which 
it  has  been  a  component  j^.  This  is  part  of  the  process  b^  which  the 
living  stones  are  brought  to  rest  on  the  foundation,  for  it  is  clear  that 
they  cannot  come  to  the  foundation  till  first  they  are  removed  from 
their  native  bed  in  the  pit  of  sin.  Oh,  may  Ood's  CTace  continue  to 
take  out  many  of  this  congregation  like  stones  divided  from  the  quarry, 
that  so.  by  grace  they  may  come  to  Jesus. 

Well,  after  they  had  cut  out  those  stones  in  the  quarry,  which,  with  a 
little  imagination,  yon  can  see  lying  there,  detached  and  distinct,  the 
next  operation  was  to  pull  them  up  to  the  top  of  Mount  Zion.  It  was  a 
long  arag  up  to  the  summit  of  the  hiU.  How  Solomon  managed  to 
remove  such  enormous  masses  we  do  not  know.  If  he  had  no  machinery 
or  motive  force  that  could  supersede  manual  labour,  and  the  force  on 
which  he  relied  was  in  the  sinews  of  men,  the  matter  is  all  the  more 
wonderful.  They  must  have  pnUed  away  perhaps  many  thousands  of 
them  at  one  single  stone,  haubng  it  out  of  the  pit,  dragging  it  up  the 
zigzag  roads  till  at  last  the  gigantic  mass  reached  its  place.  Now,  there 
is  a  hftmg,  a  drawing  of  the  soul  to  Christ  after  this  fashion,  and  I  see 


42  ^IKTR©POLITAN  TABEBNACLE  PULPIT. 

among  you  some  who  have  recently  been  drawn.  You  have  not  been 
dragged  b^  men.  All  the  men  in  the  world  could  not  draw  a  sinner  to 
Christ.  !No  machinery  is  known  or  will  ever  be  invented  that  can  ever 
draw  a  proud,  stubborn  will  to  Christ.  We  may  tug  and  pnll  till  we 
break  the  ropes,  but  we  shall  ncyer  make  a  soul  stir  one  inch  C'hrist- 
ward.  But  there  is  another  power  which  can  accomplish  the  work  imix)a- 
sible  to  us.  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up,"  says  Christ,  "  will  dmw  all  men  unto 
me."  He  has  such  attractive  power  that  he  draws  the  stones  out  of 
the  quariy  of  nature,  right  up  to  the  foundation  which  liis  free  grace  has 
laid  in  Zion,  and  they  are  built  upon  him.  This  is  the  second  part 
of  the  work  of  grace  in  the  soul ;  first  it  separates  us  fix)m  the  rock,  and 
theii  it  draws  us  up  to  the  foundation,  and  m  both  it  is  working  out  our 
coming  to  Christ, 

Well,  we  have  watched  the  stone  as  it  has  been  carried  up.  What 
is  the  next  process  ?  Why,  the  next  work  is  to  let  it  down,  so  that  it 
lies  in  due  order  upon  the  foundation.  The  foundation  of  the  temple 
very  likely  was  far  below  the  adjacent  soil ;  and  so  this  mass  of  stone  had 
to  be  let  down  to  the  foundation  steadily  and  wisely  that  it  might  rest  in 
its  proper  bed.  What  a  task  it  is  sometimes — to  let  a  huge  stone  down 
upon  the  foundation,  and  to  get  it  to  lie  square  and  true,  so  that  every 
bit  of  it  is  in  proper  position  with  the  rest  of  the  structure.  Picture 
the  process  to  your  mmd's  eye.  We  have  got  the  stone  upon  the 
base,  but  half  of  it  projects  beyond  the  foundation,  and  so  far  it  has 
nothing  to  lean  upon.  That  will  never  do.  It  must  be  moved  till  it 
lies  plumb  with  tne  foundation,  exactly  square  with  the  other  stones, 
and  till  every  portion  of  it  rests  firmly  on  its  proper  bed.  Oh,  dear 
hearts,  this  is  one  work  which  the  grace  of  God  has  to  do  with  you — to 
bring  you  to  lie  upon  Christ,  to  recline  upon  Christ,  and  that  wholly, 
rightly,  and  squarely.  It  takes  a  long  time  to  bring  some  sinners  to 
this ;  they  want  to  be  propped  up  with  a  little  bit  of  sclf-righteousiiess, 
they  cannot  be  induced  to  lie  right  scfuare  upon  Christ ;  they  want  to 
tilt  a  little,  have  a  little  shoring  up  with  their  own  doings,  and  a  little 
dependence  on  themselves :  but  this  will  never  do.  "  To  whom  coming," 
says  ihe  text,  **  coming  as  to  a  livii^  stone."  Oh,  that  alniighty  grace 
would  constrain  you  all  to  be  coming  till  you  lie  flat  and  square  on 
Christ,  till  you  have  Christ  at  one  comer,  and  Christ  at  the  other  comer, 
and  Christ  at  all  the  four  comers  whereon  your  soul  lies ;  till  you  are 
resting  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Chrbt  at  all  times,  in  all  i-espects,  niider  all 
circumstances,  for  everything.  Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  ;  be 
ye  sure  that  ye  rest  wholly  upon  it. 

"  Bless  the  Lord,"  mts  one,  "  I  know  I  have  come  as  far  as  that.  Can 
I  get  any  fiurther  ?"  Well,  look  brother,  as  long  as  ever  that  huge  stone 
lies  on  the  foundation  it  is  always  coming  to  3ie  foundation.  Its  own 
weight  is  always  pressing  it  down  upon  the  foundation,  and  the  heavier  ijb 
is  tne  more  closely  and  compactly  it  lies.  I  do  feel  myself,  now,  to 
be  more  close  to  Christ  than  ever  I  was.  My  weight  of  sin  helps  to 
press  me  down  on  him.  My  weight  of  trouble,  my  weight  of  care,  my 
weight  of  anxiety  about  the  souls  of  my  hearers,  and  even  my  weight  of 
*oy,  all  help  me  to  press  more  on  my  Lord.    The  way  to  becoininir  to 

~~t,  bretliren,  as  long  as  ever  you  live,  is  to  lean  more  on  Christ, 
more  heavfly  on  Christ,  and  depend  more  upon  Christ  than  ever 


ioy,al 
Christ 

•  ■ 


OOHOrah- 1LWAT8  cxncoNk       •  ii 


foa  aiL'  ft  Qafwijijou  knbw,  some  bUxdm  seem,  by  long  abiding 
snd  iMMtBgy  to  cltiftTe  to  one  modiery  and  nnice  together  till  they  apntar 
•to  be  no  loDgef  diBtinct^  bnt  one  masv.  Have  ^ou  net  often  notioea  in 
an  old  Scman  wall  that  yon  cannot  diatingniih  tjie  mortar  from  th^ 
lAone?  Ton  isatmot  tdl  where  the  Btonee  wisre  joined;  they  haVa 
grown  to  be  one  pfeoe.  And  bleseed  is  that  Ofanatian  who,  lilro  a  living 
atone,  1^  tbtitinned  ao  to  oome  to  the  foandation  till  Ohrist  and  ha 
bate'bed^ilie  ^me,  aa  it  weio :  yea,  one  in  coneciona  fitct,  00  that  noUiing 
VMn  ditUfe-t^eiii.  Thna  we  continue  stfll  to  come  to  JesiiBi  and. draw 
Heai^'to  him;  nearer  and  yet  nearer  etill,  bnilt  np  into.him,  peb* 
-fectty  joteed  in  otio  qririt.  Then,  only  then,  ehall  Ohriitian  life  be 
))erfettcft'  •■■■" 

ThcHe  two  llgtBV  of  the  babe  and  the  atone  have  shown  yon,  I  teas^ 
what  the  text  means.  I  have  not  gone  far  afield  to  fibd  them««-the^lie^ 
aa  yitaha^  aMtty  in  the  inimediato  conteit; '  **  To  whan  oaming";ia  an 
aptdeaortolktt  of  the whda  of  Ohiistiu  lift  1  auHd  Hiatyon  makeft 
i^endewydnra.  *  - 

11.  Bat  now,  leoondly,  I  halve  to  nmnsn  thb  Qtasraov,  whtU  ft 

Thxe  iM  soma  poor  haarts  amodgyoa  longing  to  be  savei  '^  Afa^'' 
yon  aay,  ^'I  hear  that  tf  rconuIto'OhHat  I  ahali  be  saved ;  but  how 
can  I  come  toMm  f  What  do  jm  mean  brooming  to  Jeana?"  WaU^ 
oar  itfpty  ia  plaia  and  oleai^^it  ia  to  ti^iist  tSirU;  to  depend  nptti  fain^ 
to  beheye  hitti,  to  Mly  tipon  him.  Then  they  enqniie,  ^  Bnt  1^  can  I 
oome  to  Christ  ?  tn  what  Way  would  yon  resBommead  me  to.  ix)me  ?-? 
The  answer  ia,  the  ttny  beet  way  to  coma  to  Ohrist  ia  to  coinr.tmM  «# 
ymtr  nseth  dbatU  f/m*  If  you  could  get  rid'  of  half  yoor.needa  apart 
from  Ohrist/you\^ould  not  c6me  to  Jesus  kalf  so  well  as  yon' can  witii 
the  whole  dT  them  pressing  upon  you,  for  your  need  iumiahes  yon  witb 
motives  for  qoming,  iemd  gives  you  pleas  to  urge.  Suppose  a  phjaidiem 
should  come  into  a  'town  with  motives  of  pure  benevolence  to  exercise 
the  heaUng  art.  What  he  wants  is  not  to  make  mon^;  but  to  .bless  the 
townsmen :  he  does  hot  intend  to  make  any  cHarge  or  take  -any  f(9e% 
but  he  lets  it  be  known  that  he  has  come  into  the  town  to  display  hiB 
skin.  He  has  a  love  to  his  fellow  men,  and  he  wants  to  cure  them,  and 
therefore  he  gives  notice  that  aa  he  only  wishes  for  opportunities  of  dis» 
playing  his  kindness  and  skill,  the  poorest  will  be  welcome^  and  the 
inoat  £sea86d  will  be  best  received.  Now,  then,  who  is  the  man  that 
can  come  to  the  doctor's  door  with  confidence,  and  give  a  good  rat^tet*tat, 
and  feel  that  he  will  be  welcome  ?  Well,  there  is  a  person  who  has  cut 
hia  fiioger :  will  the  doctor  rush  into  the  surgery  to  attend  to  him  ?  No 
doabt  ne  Will  look  at  the  cut;  but  he  will  not  grow  very  enthusiastic  over 
it»  for  doctors  do  not  ^  much  credit  out  of  curing  cot  fingers.  Here 
is  another  gratis  patient  who  has  a  wart  on  his  hand.  Well,  there  is 
nothing  very  ftunous  about  curing  warts,  and  the  physician  is  by  no 
means  excited  over  his  work.  But  here  is  a  poor  forlbm  body  who  has 
been  given  up  by  all  the  other  doctons,  a  patient  who  is  so  bad  that  ha 
liea  at  death^  door :  he  has  such  a  complication  of  diseases,  that  ha 
could  hardly  tell  what  diseases  he  has  not  suffered  from,  but  ccrtoinly 
his  condition  is  terribto  enough  to  make  it  a{^)ear  hopeless.  He 
aeema  to  be  »  living  wottdev  of  dkease.    That  ia  .tha^maii  irbo  nfaj 


44  METROPOLITAir  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

come  boldly  to  the  physician,  and  expect  his  immediate  attention, 
and  his  best  consideration.  Now,  doctor,  if  yon  can  cnre  this  man  he 
will  be  a  credit  to  yon.  This  man  exactly  answers  to  yonr  advertisement. 
You  say  that  yon  onl^  wish  for  jxiticnts  who  will  give  you  an  opportunity 
of  displa3ring  your  skill.  Here  is  a  fine  object  for  yonr  pity,  he  is  badtt 
the  lungs,  bad  at  the  heart,  bad  in  the  feet,  bad  in  the  eyes,  bad  in  the 
ears,  bad  in  the  head,  bad  all  over.  If  you  want  an  o^rtuni  tj  of  showing 
your  skill,  here  is  the  man.  Jesus,  my  Lord  and  Master,  is  Uie  Great 
rhysician  of  souls,  and  he  heals  them  on  just  such  terms  as  I  have  men- 
tioned.  Is  there  a  fargone  sinner  here  to-night  ?  Is  there  a  deeply  sin- 
sick  soul  anywhere  within  the  range  of  my  voice  ?  Is  there  man  or 
woman  who  is  bad  altogether  ?  Come  along,  my  friend,  yon  are  just  m 
a  right  condition  to  come  to  Jesus  Christ.  Camefust  0%  you  mt^  that 
is  the  best  stvle  of  coming." 

Another  illustration  may  be  furnished  by  the  ocHumon  acriptural 
figure  of  a  feMt  A  king  determines  to  act  with  generosity ;  and,  to 
show  how  liberal  his  disposition  is,  he  desires  to  make  a  banquet  for 
those  who  need  it  most.  He  says,  ''If  I  make  a  great  feast  to  my 
lords  and  dukes,  they  will  think  little  of  my  hospitality,  for  the^  fare 
sumptuously  every  day;  therefore  I  will  seek  out  guests  who  will  be 
more  likely  to  be  grateful  Where  shall  I  find  gnests  who  will  most 
enjoy  my  aainties,  men  who  will  eat  with  the  greatest  gusto,  and  drink 
with  the  greatest  delight  ?"  Having  considered  the  matter,  he  cries  to 
his  heralds, ''  Go  ye  into  the  highways  and  hedges  and  compel  them  to 
come  in."  From  among  the  tramps  by  the  roadside  the  heralds  soon 
gather  starving  wretches  who  exactly  meet  the  king's  wishes.  Here  is 
a  poor  man  who  has  had  nothing  to  eat  for  the  last  forty-eight  hoius. 
Look  at  his  eager  delight  at  the  sight  of  the  food !  If  you  want  some- 
body to  eat  lai^ly  and  joyftdly,  is  not  he  the  man  ?  See  how  he  takes  it 
in !  It  is  wonderml  how  the  provisions  disappear  before  him !  Here  again 
is  a  poor  woman  who  has  been  picked  up  by  the  wayside,  faint  for  want 
of  bread.  She  has  scarcely  any  life  in  ner,  but  see  how  she  begins  to 
open  her  eyes  at  the  first  morsel  that  is  placed  before  her,  and  what 
delight  there  is  in  her  every  expression  as  she  finds  herself  placed  at 
a  table  so  richly  loaded,  xes,  the  poorer,  the  more  hun^,  the  more 
destitute  the  guests,  the  more  honour  is  accorded  to  the  kmg  who  feeds 
such  mendicants,  and  receives  such  vagrants  to  his  tabic.  Hear  how 
they  shout  the  king*s  praises  when  they  are  filled  with  his  meat !  They 
will  never  ha?e  done  thanking  him.  Now,  if  I  address  a  sonl  to-night 
that  is  very  needy,  very  faint,  very  desponding,  you  are  a  fit  guest  for 
my  Master,  because  you  have  such  a  fine  appetite  for  his  generous  repast 
of  love.  The  greatness  of  your  need  is  your  fitness  for  coming  to  Christ, 
and  if  you  want  to  know  how  to  come,  come  just  as  you  arc.  Tarry  not 
to  improve  yourself  one  single  atom ;  come  as  you  are,  with  all  your 
sin  and  filthiness  and  need  about  you,  for  that  is  the  best  way  to  come. 

If  yon  want  to  know  how  to  come  arifi^ht  the  first  time,  I  should  answer, 
come  to  find  everything  you  want  in  Christ.  Do  not  come  with  a  load 
of  your  own  wealth.  Ilemember  what  Pharaoh  said  to  Joseph;  "Also 
rogEod  not  your  stuff ;  for  the  good  of  all  the  land  of  Egypt  is  yours." 
Do  not  bring  your  old  rubbish  with  you.  "  I  thought  I  was  to  bring 
repentance.      Do  not  attempt  to  do  so,  but  look  to  Jesus  for  it.    Jesus 


ocmnra — ^always  cohikg.  45 

• 

Clirisfc  is  eiilted  <m  high  to  ffive  repentance  and  remism  Oome 

and  neeine  a  heart  of  leshy  for  Ton  cannot  make  one  for  yonreelfl  "Oh, 
boi  I  ihoiiffht  I  was  to  bring  nuth."  Faith  also  is  the  gift  of  Christ. 
it  ooinetihDT  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  word  of  Gk)d ;  dnw  near  then 
to  tbsfe  wora  to  find  fiuth.  Gome  for  eYerything.  **  Oh,  bnt  I  want  to 
ftd."    And  ihon,  I  Bappoae,  after  jou  hare  foimd  a  nice  lot  of  feelings 

ffwi^  oome  to  Ohrist^  and  saTy  ^  Lord,  thou  art  now  able  to  aaye  ma, 
nqr  ftelings  are  right"    miat  self-conceit  I    Oome  to  Ohrist  for 
fceUngi  I  oome  to  Ohiist  for  everything. 

"  whaft^"  saith  onet^  ^can  yon  mean  it^  that  I,  an  nnfeelinffj,  im- 
penitent wieteh.  am  bUden  to  come  atcmceand  believe  in  Jesos  Christ 
wot  everiasting  mb  ?^  I  mean  jnst  that  I  do  not  mean  to  send  joa 
voand  to  that  diop  Ifar  repentance,  and  to  the  other  Aop  fbr  feehng, 
and  to  a  third  store  Ifar  a  tender  heart,  and  then  direct  yon  to  call  on 
Ghriit  at  last  for  a  few  odds  and  ends.  No,  no,  bnt  oome  to  Ohrist  for 
oteijlhiiilg; 

*Oome^  re  needy,  oome  and  welcome^ 

God  s  free  bmmty  l^orify ; 
!biie  belief  and  tme  repentance, 
Srery  nace  thai  hnngjn  you  nigh, 
WiUioat  money 
Ocsae  to  Jeans  Christ  and  bay.** 

I  hsaid  of  a  Aop  some  time  ago  in  a  conntry  town  where  they  sdU 
eteiything,  and  tfo  man  said  that  he  did  not  beheve  that  there  was  any- 
thing a  hnman  being  wanted  bnt  what  he  conld  rig  him  out  from  top  to 
toe.  Well,  I  do  not  Jmow  whether  that  pomiae  w^d  have  been  carried 
oat  to  the  letter  if  it  had  been  tried,  out  I  know  it  is  so  with  Jesns 
Ohrist ;  he  can  snpply  von  with  all  yon  need,  for  '*  Christ  is  all."  There 
is  not  a  need  yonr  sonl  can  possibly  have  bat  the  Lord  Jesns  Christ  can 
siimlyit,andtheTerybe8t  TOf  tooome  is  tocometohimfor  eyerything. 
The  best  way  to  come  to  Christ  is  to  eam$  meaning  to  ^si  evtrythinff, 
and  to  obtain  all  the  plenitude  of  grace,  which  he  has  laid  up  in  store, 
and  promised  freely  to  rive.  Some  poor  sonls  who  come  to  Jesns  Christ 
seem  as  if  they  wanted  a  little  rebef  from  fear,  a  hope  that  they  may 
jnst  get  saved,  and  a  feir  chance  of  going  to  heaven  when  they  die. 
nay^  do  not  come  in  that  way,  my  dear  friend.  Come  intending  to 
obtaoi  the  ftdness  of  love,  the  uttermost  of  grace.  Sometime  ago,wnen 
there  was  adinner  given  to  poor  people,  tiiey  were  told  to  come  and  they 
ahonld  have  all  they  conld  eat  jDo  yon  Imow  what  they  did,  some  ot 
them  ?  There  was  not  to  be  any  mnner  till  six  o'dock.  Well,  that 
they  mifl^t  have  a  noble  iqypetite,  they  did  not  eat  anv  breakfest— not 
tkm.  They  meant  to  get  all  they  coald  now  they  had  an  opportnnit;|r, 
ana  so  they  came  aa  hnngrr  as  possible.  Many  jrears  ago,  I  am  told,  it 
nsed  to  be  the  cnstom  of  the  lord  of  the  manor,  in  certain  Tillages,  on 
Ohristmas-day  to  give  the  poor  people  a  basin  of  food,  and  the  rme  was 
that  whatever  basm  was  raonght  his  lordship  always  filled  it  It  was 
perfectly  marvellons  how  the  basins  grew,  till  at  last,  when  some  of  the 
women  came  with  Aeir  basins  the  Icm  of  the  manor  looked  at  the  base 
bowls  and  wondered  how  they  coold  dare  to  bring  such  capacioas  vessels. 
Bnt  if  he  was  aman  of  a  generous  heart,  all  he  would  sav  to  his  steward 
would  be, ''  These  peqde  believe  in  my  generosity.    Oo  and  fill  their 


46  MRTROPOLITAH  TABEBHAGLB  PULPIT. 

bowlEL  Fill,  and  fill  on  till  you  have  filled  them  alL  As  long  as  they 
bring  their  bowls  none  shall  say  that  I  denied  them."  And  now,  when 
you  go  to  Christ,  take  a  capacious  yessel  of  large  prayer  and  great  ex- 
pectation. Enlarge  your  desire,  and  make  up  jo«r  mind  to  this — *'  I 
^m  not  going  in  to  be  a  miserable  Christian,  with  barely  enough  grace 
to  keep  me  from  open  profanity,  to  whitewash  me  with  a  respectable 

fofession^  and  ensure  me  a^inst  the  peril  of  everlasting  perdition : 
mean  to  take  a  higher  ami,  and  to  seek  a  better  portion.  Fain 
would  I  Tie  with  saints  and  angels  and  be  the  moat  happy,  the  most 
useful,  the  most  joyous,  the  most  holy  believer  that  ever  liined,  if  God 
will  help  me  so  to  be."  I  wish  we  had  some  of  the  old  Methodist  fire 
back  amongst  us  again.  Some  of  those  dear  old  people,  if  they  did 
not  know  much,  used  to  enjoy  much,  and  when  they  went  to  hear  a  sermon 
they  listened  wiUi  a  zest,  for  they  received  the  word  of  Ood  as  a  ireslhr 
inspiration  ;  it  was  a  lively  orade  to  them.  The  gospel  as  it  was  preached 
to  them  awoke  an  echo  in  their  hearts,  they  were  all  alive  to  its  good  (^eer, 
and  they  shouted,  **  Amen,  hallelujah,  bless  the  Lord,"  as  they  heard 
it,  lor  it  went  home  to  their  souls.  Now  a  days  we  are  very  proper  and 
decorous  in  our  behaviour  all  of  us,  and  we  are  not  a  little  critical  in 
our  taste.  As  we  pick  up  a  crumb  of  the  gCHspel  we  like  to  know 
whether  it  is  the  real  aerated  bread  baked  in  a  tin,  or  whether  it  is  the 
common  household  bread  of  the  shops.  The  preacher  is  a  "  little  odd," 
and  bo  does  not  cut  the  br^  exactly  into  dice  pieces,  and  so  we  do 
not  like  the  manner  of  service,  for  we  are  rather  fastidious,  and  we  air 
our  own  conceits  by  fault-finding.  Because  the  Lord's  servant  does  not 
very  daintily  bring  us  our  portion  on  a  silver  salver,  and  hold  it  out 
to  us,  we  curl  our  lip  and  say,  **  No,  thank  you."  Oh,  may  God  deliver 
us  from  the  fashionable  stifiness  and  artificial  nonsense.  May  he  revive 
in  us  the  reality  both  of  nature  and  grace,  so  that  we  may  come  to  his 
table  of  love  with  a  good  appetite.  Modem  Christians  remind  me  of  our 
boyish  days,  when  we  went  to  bathe  in  the  sea,  and  used  to  dip  our  toes 
in  the  waves^  instead  of  taking  a  plunge  head  first.  I  am  sure  that  to 
plun^  right  in  is  the  best  way  with  religion.  Throw  your  whole  soul 
into  it,  and  allow  the  glorious  waves  of  everlasting  love  to  go  right  over 
your  head,  and  then  dive  and  swim  in  that  sea  which  is  bottomless,  and 
rejoice  in  the  Lord  with  all  your  heart.  But  this  mere  dabbling  about 
with  goody-aoody  goodlimasy  instead  of  the  grand  old  godliness,  makes 
professors  all  of  a  shiver,  and  they  stand  in  doubt,  as  though  they  hardly 
iiked  it,  and  would  rather  get  back  to  the  world  and  put  on  their  old 
clothes  again,  only  they  are  half  afiraid  to  do  so.  Oh,  may  the  Lord  give 
us  to  come  with  all  our  needs  to  him — to  come  to  him  for  everything, 
and  to  come  determined  to  have  everything  that  is  to  be  had,  and  to  go 
in  for  it  thoroughly  by  God's  grace.  That  is  the  way  to  come  to  Christ. 
in.  There  remains  one  other  question — what  is  thb  best  way 
TO  OOUE  AFTSHWARDa  ?  The  answer  is, — Come  just  as  you  used  to 
Qome.  Brethren  and  sisters,  the  text  does  not  say  that  you  hnve  cotne  to 
Christ,  though  that  is  true,  but  that  you  are  coming;  and  you  are  to  be 
always  coming.  The  way  to  continue  coming  is  to  come  just  in  tho  siuue 
way  as  you  came  at  first.  I  have  many  things  to  say  about  this,  but  my 
time  has  ^one,  and  therefore  I  will  not  enlarge,  but  I  will  only  put  tlu^m 
thnain  brief..  .1-  am  persuaded  Uiat  the  only  happy,  the  only  sjite  way  for 


OQimrCh- ^iliWATB  ODMIVa.  47 

a  CBnitliaa  to  Vm  ib  to  liye  in  daily  dependenco  upon  tibe  merer 
of  God  in  Jeflos  Christ,  jnst  as  he  did  when  be  was  a  babe  in  grace  ana 
a  atone  newly  drawn  fiom  the  quarry  of  nature.  I  know  what  it  is  to 
boQd  up  8  niee  structure  of  my  own  ozperience  on  the  foundation  of 
Ohriit^  and  to  dimb  i:q)on  it,  instead  of  standing  on  the  foundation.  If 
yon  were  eyer  on  the  top  of  Snowdon,  or  some  other  hi^h  mountain,  you 
will  have  noticed  that  to  make  the  standing  a  little  higher  they  put  up 
some  wooden  sqaffold  or  other,  some  ten  or  twelve  feet  of  platform,  ta 
increase  the  elevation,  and  then  everybody  wants  to  get  up  on  that  plat- 
form. Well,  now,  I  have  built  my  little  platform  on  Christ.  My  own 
experience  has  made  a  very  handsome  erection,  I  can  tell  you.  I  have 
felt,  '^  Wdl,  I  know  this  and  that  and  the  other  by  experience,"  and  I 
hav#.  jbeeoi  anitf  lexalted*  Sometime^  too,  I  have  built  a  plat&niL 
of  gooa  ivorks— "  I  have  done  something  for  Christ  after  all.**  The 
proud  flesh  says,  "  Oh  yes,  you  reallv  have  performed  something  you 
might  talk  about  if  you  liked."  Sel>confidence  has  piled  my  platform 
up  and  it  has  been  a  very  respectable  looking  concern,  and  I  have  asked 
a  few  friends  up.  But,  do  you  know  what  has  occurred  ?  Why,  I  have 
felt  my  pmtfbrm  shake.  It  began  to  tremble.  Stress  of  weather  hhA 
rotted  the  beams,  and  Die  supped  have  b^un  to  give  way,  and  I  have 
seen  all  my  building  tumble  aown,  and  I  have  gone  down  with  it ;  and 
as  I  have  gone  down  with  it  I  have  thought,''  It  is  all  over  with  me  now. 
I  am  going  crash  down,  I  do  not  know  how  £ar,  but  perhaps  I  shall  fall 
to  the  bottom  of  the  mountain"  Instead  of  that  I  alighted  on  the  top 
of  the  mountain.  I  did  not  fall  very  far,  but  came  right  down  where  it 
had  been  most  sensible  of  me  if  I  had  always  kept,  namely,  on  terra 
firtna,  down  on  the  solid  earth.  I  have  noticed  that  a  great  many  of  my 
brethren  have  been  lately  building  some  vcrv  pretty  little  wooden 
structures  on  the  top  of  Jesus  Christ.  I  think  they  caH  them  *'  the 
higher  life,"  if  I  rightly  recollect  the  name.  I  do  not  know  of  any  life 
that  is  hiffher  than  that  of  simple  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  As  far  aa  I  am 
concemcd,  the  highest  life  for  me  out  of  heaven  is  the  life  of  a  poor 
publican  saying,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  My  very  good 
friends  are  not  content  with  this  position,  though  he  who  keeps  it  goes 
to  his  house  justified  more  than  boasters.  Some  friends  built  very  high 
a  little  while  ago,  I  thought  they  would  soon  reach  the  moon,  but  certain 
of  them  went  down  in  a  very  ugly  way,  I  have  heard,  and  I  am  afraid 
gome  more  will  go  down  if  thejr  do  not  mind  what  they  are  at.  Give  up 
building  these  artificial  elevations :  give  up  resting  on  them ;  and  just 
stand  on  the  level  of  Christ^s  finished  work,  the  blood  of  Christ  for 
sinners  shed ;  the  righteousness  of  Christ  to  sinners  imputed.  Be  youiv 
the  humble  plea—        «  ^  ^y^^  ^^-^  ^^  ^^^^^^^  ^^ 

But  Jesus  died  for  me." 

He  that  is  down  there  will  never  fall,  and  he  who  keeps  there  is  reaUy 
as  high  up  as  the  man  who  thinks  he  is  all  aloft ;  for  all  above  living 
by  feith  m  Christ  is  mere  dream  and  moonshine.  There  is  nothing 
higher,  after  all,  than  just  being  nobody,  and  Christ  being  everybody, 
and  singing  with  poor  Jack,  the  huckster, 

"  I'm  a  poor  sinner,  and  nothing  at  all, 
But  Jesus  Christ  is  my  all  in  all/* 


48 


MRB0F0LITA9  TABBRVAOLB  FUIiPrr. 


If  yon  grow  tOl  70a  are  less  than  nothing,  Ton  are  fidl  grown,  biri;  tiw 
have  reached  that  Btage ;  and  if  jon  grow  till  Christ  is  eyerything  to  jon, 

S a  are  in  jonr  prime  ;  bnt,  alas,  how  f&T  short  of  this  do  moat  m&a  Ml 
le  Lord  bring  yon  to  that  highest  of  all  e^wtim^to  be  didly  coming 
to  Christ ;  always  empty  in  yonrself,  bnt  roll  in  him ;  always  weak  in 
yonrselfy  bnt  strongin  hmi ;  always  nothing  in  self, bnt  Christ  your  per- 
petnal  all  in  all !  The  Lord  keep  yon  there,  brothers  and  sisten^  ana  he 
will  hare  praise  and  glory  of  yon,  both  now  and  for  ever.    Ameo. 


POBTIOH  OF  SOBIFTnBB   BBAD  BSFOBB   8IBXQV— I  Peter  IL  1— 1(L 


Hthvs  fbom  ''Oub  Own  Htmn  Book"— 795,  606 ;  and  ''0  Ohiist, 
what  bnrdens  bowed  thy  head  "—44t  Sankey. 


TKB  rOLLOWXRO 


SERMONS    BY    C.    H.    SPURGEON 

ArepMi$hed  in  small  hook /arm,  in  neat  %orapper.  One  Penmy  mgI. 


A  SPUR  FOB  A  FBEB  HORSE. 

BBLLS  FOB  THE  HORSBS. 

THE.  WAR  HORSE. 

OOD*S  JEWELS. 

BAFnsaf  AL  REOEITERATIOir. 

CONFESSION  OF  SIN. 

APOSTOLIC  EXHORTATION. 

THE  WAY  OF  SALVATION. 

INFANT  SALVATION. 

HOW  TO  RAISE  THE  DEAD. 

NONE  BUT  JESUS. 

THE  ESSENCE  OF  SIMPLICITY. 

THE  SILVER  TRUMPET. 

JESUS  AND  THE  LAMBS. 

A  WORD  FOR  THE  PERSECUTED. 

THE  PRIEST  DISPENSED  WITH. 

THE  UTTLK  DOOS. 


THE  BEST  BURDEN  FOB  YOUaa 

SHOULDERS. 
LOVINO    ADVIOB    FOB    ANZIOUB 

SEEKERS. 
THE  UPPER  HAND. 
A  GOOD  SOLDIER  OF  JESUS  0HBI8T. 
LANDLORD  AND  TENANT. 
TOKEN  FOR  THE  BEREAVED. 
LET  US  PRAY. 

CALL  TO  THE  UNCONVERTED. 
SERMON  FOR  EVERYBODY. 
HOW  TO  OBTAIN  FAITH. 
IS  CONVERSION  NECESSARY! 
THE  TURNING  POINT. 
A  DOUBLE  KNOCK  AT  THE  DOOlB  OF 

THE  YOUNO. 
THERE  QO  THE  SHIPS. 


JReti(opIttan  iistmmde  f  up. 


A  CHEERY  WORD  IN  TROUBLOUS  TIMES. 


%  ^tm^ 


DELITBBED  BT 

C.  H.   SPURGEON, 

AT   TnS   HETBOPOLITAN   TABEBNAOLEy    NEWINGTON. 


''Wlkerofore,  ■iii,  be  of  good  cheer:  tor  I  beliere  Qod,  Chat  it  shall  be  even  as  it 
told  me."—- Acts  zxriL  S5. 


The  presence  of  a  braye  man  in  the  hour  of  danger  is  a  very  great 
comfort  to  his  companions.  It  is  a  grand  thing  to  obserre  Pan]  so  bold, 
BO  cahn^  in  the  midst  of  all  the  hnrly-bnrly  of  the  storm,  and  talking 
go  cheerfnlljy  and  so  enconragingly,  to  the  crew  and  to  the  soldiery 
and  to  the  prisoners.  Ton  must  have  seen  in  many  events  in  history 
that  it  is  the  one  man,  after  all,  that  wins  the  battle  :  all  the  rest  play 
their  parts  well  when  the  one  heroic  spirit  lifts  the  standard.  Every  now 
and  then  we  hear  some  simpleton  or  other  talking  against  a  "  one-man 
ministry,"  when  it  has  been  a  one-man  ministry  from  the  commencement 
of  the  world  to  the  present  day ;  and  whenever  yon  try  to  have  any 
other  form  of  ministry,  except  that  of  each  individual  saint  discharging 
his  own  ministry,  and  doing  it  thoroughly  and  heartily  and  independ- 
ently and  bravely  in  the  sight  of  God,  you  very  soon  run  upon  Quick- 
sands. Recollect,  Christian  man,  that  wherever  you  are  placea  you 
are  to  be  ^  one  man,  and  you  are  to  have  courage  and  independence 
of  roirit  and  strength  of  mind  received  from  God,  that  with  it  you  may 
comfort  those  around  you  who  are  of  the  weaker  sort.  So  act  that 
yonr  confidence  in  God  shall  strengthen  the  weak  hands  and  confirm  the 
feeble  knees,  and  your  ci»Im  quiet  look  shall  say  to  them  that  are  of 
a  ftint  heart,  **  Be  strong ;  fear  not." 

If  you  are  to  do  this,  and  I  trust  yon  will  do  it,  in  the  sick 
diamber,  in  the  midst  of  the  troubles  of  life,  in  the  church,  and  every- 
where else,  you  must  be  strong  yatirsBlf.  Take  it  as  a  good  rule  that 
nothing  can  come  out  of  you  uiat  is  not  in  you.  You  cannot  render  real 
enoooragement  to  others  unless  yon  ^ye  courage  within  yourself.  Now, 
the  reason  why  Paul  was  able  to  embolden  his  companions  was  that 
he  had  encouraged  himself  in  his  Ood ;  he  was  calm,  or  else  he  could  not 
have  calmed  those  around  him.  Imagine  him  excited  and  all  in  a  tremble, 
and  yet  saying,  "  Sirs,  be  of  good  cheer."  Why  they  would  have  thought 
Na  1,8«5. 


50  HETBOFOLITAN  TA^SIOrACLE  PULPIT. 

that  he  mocked  them,  and  they  would  have  replied,  "  Be  of  good  cheer 
yourself,  su*,  before  you  encourage  us."  So  my  dear  brothers  and  sisters, 
you  must  trust  God  and  be  calm  and  strong,  or  else  you  will  not  be  of  such 
service  in  the  world  and  in  the  church  as  you  ought  to  be.  Get  ftdl, 
and  then  you  will  run  over,  but  you  can  never  fill  others  till  you  become 
full  yourselves.  Be  yourselves  "  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of 
his  might,"  and  then  you  will  be  as  a  standard  lifted  up  to  which  the 
timid  will  rally. 

At  this  time  wc  are  going  to  speak  very  little  about  Paul,  but  a 
great  deal  to  ourselves.  Slay  God  speak  to  us !  ]!ilay  the  Holy  Spirit 
cheer  our  hearts,  and  lead  us  into  the  way  of  peace  and  power.  If  Paul 
was  Strang  it  was  because  he  believed  God:  let  us  speak  about  that 
faith.  Paul,  being  strong,  spake  words  of  good  cheer  to  others  :  let 
us,  in  the  second  place,  see  whether  we  cannot  speak  words  of  encourage- 
ment to  our  comrades  in  distress.  We  will  finish  up  with  such  words 
as  God  may  give  us. 

I.  First,  then,  Paul  was  strong  because  he  believed.  Faith 
makes  men  strong — not  in  the  head,  but  in  the  heart.  Doubting  people 
are  generally  headstrong — the  Thomas-sort  of  people  who  obstinately 
declare  that  they  will  not  believe  unless  they  can  nave  proofe  of  their 
own  choosing.  If  you  read  certain  newspapers,  journals,  quarterly  re- 
views, and  so  on,  you  will  see  that  the  doubting  people  who  are  always 
extolling  scepticism  and  making  out  that  there  is  more  faith  in  their 
doubt  than  in  half  the  creeds,  and  so  on,  are  particularly  strong  in  the 
upper  region,  namely,  in  the  head,  only  it  is  th&t  sort  of  head-strength 
which  implies  real  weakness,  for  obstinacy  seldom  goes  with  wisdom. 
They  are  always  sneering  at  believers  as  a  feeble  folk,  which  is  a  clear 
sign  that  they  are  not  very  strong  themselves  ;  for  evermore  is  this  a 
rule  without  exception,  that  when  a  man  despises  his  opponent  he  is 
himself  the  party  who  ought  to  be  despised.  When  certain  writers  rave 
about  **  evangelical  platitudes,"  as  they  commonly  do,  they  only  see  in 
others  a  fault  with  which  they  are  largely  chargeable  themselves. 
Anybody  who  glances  at  the  sceptical  literature  of  the  present  day  will 
bear  me  out  that  the  platitudes  have  gone  over  to  the  doubting  side  of 
the  house.  No  people  can  write  such  fluent  nonsense,  and  talk  such 
absurdity,  as  the  school  of  modem  doubt  and  '' culture:''  they  think 
themselves  the  wisest  of  the  wise,  bat,  professing  to  be  wise,  they  have 
become  fools,  and  I  know  what  I  say.  It  is  true  that  the  evangelical 
party  had  b^me  fiat  and  stale,  but  the  other  party  have  beaten  us  at 
that.  They  are  more  dull,  more  stale,  and  more  unprofitable  by  &r. 
When  a  man  leaves  faith  he  leaves  strength ;  when  lie  takes  up  with 
**  liberal  **  views  in  religion,  and  does  not  believe  anything  in  particular, 
he  has  lost  the  bone  and  sinew  of  his  souL  It  is  true  a£i  round,  in  all 
things,  that  he  who  firmly  believes  has  an  element  of  power  which  the 
doubter  knows  nothing  o£  Even  if  a  man  be  somewhat  mistaken  in 
what  he  believes,  there  is  a  power  in  his  faith  though  it  may  in  part  bp 
power  for  misdiidf:  there  is,  however,  in  a  believer  a  world  of  power 
for  good  if  the  right  thing  be  believed.  Paul  was  a  believer  in  Ood, 
and  so  became  strong  in  heart,  and  was  on  board  die  foundering  vessel  tiie 
centre  of  hope,  the  mainstay  of  courage. 

But  notice  that  PauTs  faith  was  faith  in  Ood.    *^  I  beUeve  God/'  said 


A  aBODBBT  WORD  IN  TROUBLOUB  TIK^.  5] 

he.  Nobodv  else  in  the  ship  could  see  any  hope  in  Ood  With  the 
•exception  or  one  or  two  like-minded  with  Panl  they  thought  that  God 
hftd  forsaken  them;  if  indeed  thev  thought  of  Ood  at  all.  But  there 
had  that  night  stood  by  Paul's  side  an  angel  fresh  from  heaven,  bright 
with  the  divine  nresence,  and,  strengthens  by  his  message,  Panl  said, 
'**  I  bdieve  God.  That  was  sometmng  more  than  saying  '*  I  believe  in 
m  GcmI":  this  many  do  and  derive  but  slender  comfort  from  the  belief. 
Bat  ''I  believe  Ood,  believe  him,  believe  his  tmthftilness,  believe  the 
word  that  he  has  spoken,  believe  his  mercy  and  his  power.  I  believe 
God."  This  made  Paul  calm,  pe-acefnl,  strong.  Would  to  Ood  that  all 
pcofeflBiny  Christians  did  really  believe  God. 

Believmg  God,  ?i0  beUeved  ihe  message  (hat  Ood  had  sent  him,  drank 
in  every  word  and  was  revived  by  it.  God  had  said  ''  Fear  not  Paul, 
I  have  given  thee  all  them  that  sail  with  thee."  He  believed  it. 
He  felt  certain  that  God,  having  promised  it»  was  able  to  perform  it ; 
and  amidst  the  howling  of  the  winds  Paul  dung  to  that  promise.  He 
was  sure  that  no  hair  of  any  man's  head  would  be  harmed.  The  Lord 
had  said  the  preserving  word  and  it  was  enough  for  his  servant.  Has 
he  said  it,  and  shall  he  not  do  it  ?  Has  he  spoken  it^  and  shall  it 
not  came  to  pass  ?  He  believed  Gk>d  that  it  should  be  even  as  it  was 
told  him. 

And  he  did  that — ^mark  yon,  dear  friends — when  there  was  nothing  elee 
to  hetkve  m.  ''I  believe  God,"  said  he.  He  might  have  said  to  the 
centurion,  if  he  had  pleased,  "  I  do  not  believe  in  the  sailors  :  they  are 
evidenthr  nonplussed,  and  do  not  know  what  to  do.  We  are  driven 
befcoe  the  wind,  and  their  sails  and  tackle  are  useless.  I  do  not  believe 
in  the  men  themselves,  for  they  are  plotting  to  got  into  the  boat,  and 
leave  the  ship  and  all  in  it  to  go  to  tne  bottom.  We  must  have  them 
•on  board,  but  still  I  have  no  trust  in  them,  their  help  is  of  small  account 
compared  with  the  divine  aid."  He  did  not  say  ''  I  believe  in  you,  the 
centurion,  that  you  can  maintain  military  discipline,  and  so  we  shall 
have  a  better  opportunity  of  escaping."  No,  the  ship  was  breaking  up. 
They  had  put  ropes  all  round  her,  undergirding  her ;  but  he  could  clearly 
perceive  that  aU  this  would  not  avail.  The  fierce  Euroclydon  was 
sweeping  the  vessel  hither  and  thither,  and  driving  her  towards  the 
ahore :  but  he  calmly  said, ''  I  believe  God."  Ah,  that  is  a  grand  thing — 
to  bdieve  God  when  the  winds  are  out, — to  believe  God  when  the  waves 
howl  Ifte  so  manv  wild  beasts,  and  follow  one  upon  another  like  a  pack 
•of  wolves  all  seeking  to  devour  you.  ''  I  believe  God."  This  is  the 
genuine  breed  of  faiui-^-this  which  can  brave  a  tempest.  The  comuion 
vnn  of  men's  fidth  is  &ir-weather  faith,  faith  which  loves  to  bco  its 
beautiihl  image  mirrored  in  the  glassy  wave,  but  is  far  away  when  the 
storm  clouds  are  marshalling  the  battle.  The  &ith  of  God's  elect  is  the 
tfhith  that  can  see  in  the  dark,  the  &ith  that  is  calm  in  the  tumult,  the 
Heuth  that  can  sing  in  the  midst  of  sorrow,  the  faith  that  is  brightest  when 
everything  around  her  is  black  as  midnight.  ^  I  believe  Gcd,"  said  he, 
when  he  had  nothing  else  to  believe  in.  **  My  soul,  wait  thou  onlv  upon 
Ood^  for  mr  expectation  is  from  him."  Say  thou,  0  my  soul,  *^  Though 
the  earth  be  removed,  and  though  the  mountains  be  carried  into  the 
midst  <}i  the  sea,  yet  will  we  not  fear,  for  God  is  our  rcfnge  and  strength, 
a  veiy  present  help  in  trouble." 


r>2  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLB  FULPIT. 

"  God  liveth  still ! 
Trust,  my  soul,  and  fear  no  ill ; 
IIeaven*s  huge  vault  may  cleave  utmderi 

Earth's  round  globe  in  ruius  burst ; 
De^nl^s  fellest  ra^e  may  thunder, 

Death  and  hell  may  spend  their  worst ; 
Then  will  God  keep  safe  and  surely 
Tliose  who  trust  in  him  securely  : 

Wherefore  then,  my  soul,  despair? 

Mid  tlie  shipwreck,  God  is  there.** 

Since  the  apostle  Paul  believed  God  thus  traly  and  really^  he  was  fwt 
ashnnml  fo  smj  so.  He  said  openly  to  all  those  around  him,  "There 
nhall  not  a  hair  of  your  heads  perish,  for  I  believe  God."  Now,  it  is 
not  so  easy  to  thrust  out  your  faith  and  expose  it  to  rough  weathers, 
and  to  the  hearing  of  rough  men.  Many  a  man  has  believed  the  promise 
but  has  not  quite  liked  to  say  so^  for  there  has  been  the  whisper  in  his 
Houl,  **  Suppose  it  should  not  come  true,  then  how  the  enemy  will 
rejoice  !  How  those  that  listened  to  me  will  be  saddened  when  the^find 
that  I  was  mistaken."  Thus  does  the  devil  cause  &ith  to  be  dnmb, 
and  (iod  is  robl)ed  of  his  honour.  Under  the  name  of  pmdenoe  there 
Jurks  an  unbelieving  selfishness.  Brother,  lend  me  your  ear  that  I  may 
whiK]MT  in  it — *'  You  do  not  believe  at  all."  That  is  not  the  legitimate 
Hort  ol*  believing.  Genuine  faith  in  God  speaks  out  and  says,  "  God  is 
true,  and  1  will  stake  everything  on  his  word."  It  does  not  swallow  its 
own  words  and  keep  its  thoughts  to  itself;  but  when  the  time  comies,  and 
others  are  in  difficulty  and  doubt,  it  cheers  them  1^  crying  ont^  *'  I 
))elieve  God."  It  is  not  ashamed  to  say,  *'  The  Lord  Jesus,  wnoae  I  am 
and  whom  I  serve,  stood  by  me  this  night,  and  spoke  with  me,  and  I 
avow  it."  I  would  to  God  all  Christians  were  prepared  to  throw  down  the 
gauntlet,  and  to  come  out  straight ;  for  if  God  be  not  true  let  u  not 
pretend  to  trust  him,  and  if  the  gospel  be  a  he  let  us  be  honest  enough 
to  confess  it.  But  if  it  be  true,  wherefore  should  we  doubt  it  and  speak 
with  bated  breath  ?  If  God's  promise  be  true  why  ahonld  we  dis- 
trust it?  What  excuse  is  there  for  this  hesitancy?  *'0h,"  says  one, 
''  but  that  might  be  running  great  risks."  Risks  with  God,  sur  ?  Riabi 
about  God's  keeping  his  word  ?  It  cannot  be.  **  Let  God  be  true  and 
every  man  a  har."  Let  heaven  and  earth  return  to  chaos  and  old 
m'ght,  but  the  Most  High  cannot  break  his  word  or  run  back  fix)m  bis 

Somise.    Therefore,  0  ye  Pauls,  if  ye  receive  a  message  from  the  Most 
igh,  publish  it  abroad  and  let  your  faith  be  known. 
I  should  like  that  little  word  to  drop  into  the  ears  of  some  of  yon  who 
think  you  love  Christ,  but  have  never  told  your  love — ^you  that  are  hid- 
ing in  the  background  there.    Come  out  and  show  yourselves ! 

As  for  you  who  have  long  avowed  your  Saviour,  do  it  more  and 
more,  and 

**  Speak  his  word,  though  kings  should  hear. 
Nor  yield  to  sinfiil  shame." 

II.  Now,  if  we  have  any  measure  of  the  faith  of  Paul,  let  ns  try 
whether  we  cannot  cheer  others  as  paul  did.  Let  the  language  of 
the  text  be  on  our  tongues,  "  Wherefore,  sirs,  be  of  good  cheer  :  for  I 
believe  God,  that  it  shall  be  even  as  it  was  told  me." 


A  amaBT  wobd  in  troublous  thexs.  53 

70a  will  meet  with  seeking  souls.    They  have  nob  fonnd  Chrigt 

jek^  bnt  thejr  are  hungering  and  thiisting  after  nim.  They  are  saying, 
**  Oh  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  him  I"  Yon  that  b^eve  Ood  are 
bound  to  speak  comfortably  to  them,  and  say, ''  Sirs,  be  of  good  cheer : 
fbr  I  beliere  God,  that  it  Bhall  be  even  as  it  was  told  me."  There  is  one 
that  is  sorrowing  for  sin.  Go  and  tell  him  that  sorrow  for  sin  is  sweet 
aorroWy  and  that  no  man  should  ever  regret  that  he  mourns  his  faults, 
bnt  should  be  glad  that  God  has  enabled  him  to  feel  a  holy  grief,  a 
penitential  pain.  Gotthold  tells  us  that  he  was  called  one  day  to  see 
a  man  who,  when  he  entered  his  chamber,  burst  into  many  tears ; 
and  it  was  a  long  time  before  the  good  divine  could  discover  what 
made  him  so  unhappy.  At  last  the  man  broke  out,  saying,  ''Oh, 
my  sin,  how  I  hate  it !  My  sin,  how  I  sorrow  over  it  I"  vf  hereupon 
Gotthold,  who  had  been  sad  at  the  sight  of  his  sadness,  smiled  and  said, 
^  Friend,  thy  sadness  is  mj  gladness.  I  never  behold  a  happier  sight  than 
when  I  see  a  man  sorrowing  for  his  sin."  *'  Oh,"  said  the  other,  ''say 
yon  BO?"  ''Tes,  indeed,"  said  he;  "there  are  many  mourners  who 
mourn  for  others,  but  blessed  are  they  that  mourn  for  themselves. 
There  are  mainr  who  are  sorry  because  they  cannot  have  their  own  will ; 
bnl^"  said  he,  ''there  are  few  enough  that  sorrow  because  they  have  had 
tiheir  own  wiU,  and  have  disregarded  the  will  of  the  Lord.  1  rejoice," 
said  he,  "for  such  as  you  are  those  for  whom  Jesus  died.  Come  and 
trust  him,  for  when  there  is  sorrow  for  sin  there  will  soon  be  joy  for 
pardon."  Now,  whisper  in  the  ears  of  those  who  are  penitent.  Tell  the 
mourner  that  God  has  promised  to  turn  his  night  into  day,  and  his 
sackcloth  into  beauty. 

Perhaps  you  will  meet  with  another  whose  condition  is  that  he  is 
pleading  datlg  far  mercy.  "  Oh,"  saith  he,  "  I  have  been  praying,  and 
praying:,  and  praying.    I  cannot  let  a  day  pass  without  asking  for  for- 

g'veness ;  but  somehow  my  prayers  seem  to  come  back  to  me.  I  get  no 
vourable  replies."  Brotner,  to  a  man  in  this  plight  you  should  speak 
up,  and  say,  "  Be  of  good  cheer,  friend,  for  I  believe  God,  that  it  shall 
be  even  as  he  told  me,  and  he  told  me  this — '  Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given 
you :  seek,  and  ye  shcdl  find :  knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened.'  "  Tell 
the  praying  soul  that  praying  breath  was  never  spent  in  vain,  and  that 
in  due  time  "he  that  asketh  receiveth."  To  witnhold  your  testimony 
win  be  cruelty  to  the  seeking  one,  and  a  robbery  of  God,  to  whose  honour 
jou  are  bound  to  speak. 

Possibly  you  will  meet  with  another  who  is  saying, "  I  am  beginning 
now  to  vmture  myself  upon  Christ.  I  am  desiring  to  believe ;  but  oh ! 
mine  is  such  a  feeble  confidence.  I  think  I  trust  him,  but  I  am  afiraid 
I  do  not.  I  know  there  is  no  other  Saviour,  and  I  do  give  myself  to 
him ;  but  still  I  am  jealous  of  mv  heart,  lest  mine  be  not  true  faith." 
Tell  that  soul  that  Jesus  has  plainly  said,  "  Him  that  cometh  to 
me  I  will  in  nowise  cast  out,"  and  then  say,  "  Be  of  good  cheer :  for  I 
believe  God,  ttmt  it  shall  be  even  as  he  hath  told  me."  Tell  the  trembling 
heart  that  Jesus  never  did  yet  eject  one  believer,  however  trembling 
might  be  his  trust.  Whosoever  beiieveth  in  him  is  not  condemned.  Let 
the  comfort  you  feel  in  coming  to  Christ  yourself  thus  be  handed  on  to 
other  sedcers,  even  as  the  disciples  passed  the  loaves  and  fishes  among 
the  hungry  multitudes. 


54  METBOPOLITAN  TABSBKAOLB  FULPTT. 

Perhaps  yoa  will  find  one  who  sajs,  **  I  (htir$  tk$  renewal  cf  my 
9Uilure.  I  am  80  sinfnL  I  can  belieTC  in  Chriat  for  paidon,  bat  my 
heart  is  terribly  deceitful,  and  I  feel  snch  strong  passions  and  evil 
habits  binding  me  that  I  am  sore  afraid."  Oo  and  say  to  that  soul, 
*'  His  name  is  called  Jesus,  for  he  shall  save  his  people  fh>m  their  sins.*' 
Tell  that  anxious  one  that  the  Lord  can  take  away  a  heart  of  stone  aid 
give  a  heart  of  flesh.  Say  that  Christ  has  come  to  bring  liberty  to  the 
captives,  and  to  set  men  n*ee  from  the  bonds  of  sin ;  and  tell  them  that 
you  believe  God,  that  it  will  be  even  as  he  has  told  yon ;  and  he  has 
told  you,  and  you  know  it  is  true,  that  he  will  puige  yon  from  sin  and 
sanctify  you  wholly.  Any  soul  and  every  soul  that  comes  trustingly  to 
Jesus  and  rests  in  him  shall  And  sanctification  in  him,  so  that  sin  shall 
be  hated,  avoided,  and  conquered. 

I  do  not  know  how  I  shall  manage  it,  but  I  wish  that  I  could  in  two 
or  three  words  say  something  that  would  make  every  Christian  here 
look  out  after  poor  seeking  souls  with  tenfold  eagerness.  I  do  not 
know  what  to  say,  except  this.  There  is  a  brother  the  less  in  this 
house  to-night.  There  was  one  here  two  Sabbaths  ago  who  never 
needed  me  to  tell  him  to  sympathize  with  anxious  souls.  lie  vaa 
always  up  here  in  the  great  congregation  looking  out,  and  then  down 
in  the  prayer-meeting  Mow  on  the  same  errand.  Many  persons  have 
l)een  invited  from  this  upper  ser\'ice  to  go  down  below,  ana  have  there 
l)cen  8])oken  with  by  him  concerning  the  Lord  Jesus.  It  was  onr  dear 
brother  Verdun,  who  was  a  mighty  soul-hunter  before  the  Lord,  and 
he  lived  to  seek  after  souls.  He  is  gone,  and  my  heart  mourns  him. 
Alas,  my  brother,  when  shall  I  ever  again  see  snch  an  one  as  thoa  waat  ? 
Now,  I  want  each  one  of  you  to  try  to  fill  up  his  place.  Keep  your  eye 
on  any  who  seem  to  feel  the  power  of  the  word,  and  then  step  np  with 
an  encouraging  word,  somewhat  like  that  of  the  apostle,  ^8ii8»  I 
believe  God,  that  it  shall  be  even  as  it  was  told  me." 

Now,  there  is  another  set  of  people  who  are  saved,  bat  they  are 
Liftle'/aiths,  and  I  want  you  strong-faith  people  to  encourage  theni» 
by  telling  them  that  you  believe  God  that  it  shall  be  even  as  it  was 
told  you.  Borne  of  these  Little-foiths  are  conscious  of  very  great  inward 
sin.  They  thought  when  they  believed  in  Christ  that  they  would  never 
feel  any  more  conflicts :  their  notion  was  that  they  should  ba  saved  from 
the  assaults  of  sin  the  moment  they  were  bom  unto  God.  But  now  they 
discover  that  the  old  viper  within  is  not  dead.  He  has  had  a  blow  on 
tlie  head,  but  he  is  not  dead ;  they  see  lusts  and  corruptions  moving 
within  their  hearts,  and  they  cannot  make  it  out.  Go  and  tell  them  that 
you  feel  the  same,  but  that,  thanks  be  to  God,  he  giveth  you  the  victory 
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  poor  young  soul  that  is  just 
struggling  out  of  darkness  into  light,  and  beginning  to  contend  with 
inward  corruption,  will  be  greatly  comforted  if  you  thus  state  yonr 
experience,  and  declare  your  faith  in  the  ultimate  issue. 

In  the  case  of  some  others  of  these  Feeble-faiths,  the  trouble  is  that 
they  are  vexeil  with  ouiward  ienipfaium.  Many  a  young  man  says,  "  It 
is  hard  to  be  a  Christian  where  I  work."  Many  a  young  woman  has  to 
say,  "  Father  and  mother  are  against  me."  Others  have  to  complain 
that  all  their  associations  in  business  tempt  them  to  that  which  is  eviU 
and  that  they  have  few  to  help  them.    Go  and  tell  them  of  the  Lord 


A  COEXBY  WORD  IS  TROUBLOUS  TDCKS.  55 

an-soflScienft.  Bemind  them  that  '*  He  kcc]^)cth  the  feet  of  hiB  saints." 
Tell  them  to  pray  day  by  day,  **  Lead  ns  not  into  temptation,  bnt  deliTer 
TI8  from  evil.  Tell  them  that  there  is  strength  enough  in  Christ  to 
proserve  his  own.  Bid  them  hide  under  the  shadow  of  his  wings.  Yon 
naTC  done  so,  and  found  a  happy  shelter,  and  therefore  you  may  con- 
fidently say  to  them,  "  Sirs,  be  of  good  cheer :  for  I  bebeve  God,  that 
it  shall  be  eyen  as  it  was  told  me." 

Yon  will  find  others  whose  lamentation  is, ''  I  am  so  weak.  If  I  am 
a  Christian  yet  I  am  good  for  nothing.  I  have  little  liberty  in  prayer, 
or  power  to  edi^  anybody.  I  think  I  am  the  most  useless  of  all  the 
family."  Tell  them  that  *'He  giveth  power  to  the  weak,  and  to 
him  that  hadi  no  strength  he  increaseth  might."  Tell  them  that  the 
Lord  does  not  cast  away  the  little  ones,  but  he  '*  carricth  the  lambs  in 
his  bosom,  and  doth  gently  lead  those  that  are  with  young."  Tell  them 
of  the  fikithfhlness  and  tenderness  of  the  Good  Shepherd,  and  say,  '*  Sirs, 
be  of  good  cheer :  weak  as  you  are,  the  Lord's  strength  will  sustain 
jon ;  and  as  he  has  promised  to  preserve  his  own,  and  has  evermore  pre- 
served me,  do  not  doubt,  for  it  shall  be  to  you  even  as  the  Lord  has  told 
me/'  Perhaps  they  will  say,  "  Ah,  but  /  am  beset  by  Satan.  Blas- 
phemous thoughts  are  injected  into  my  soul.  I  am  driven  to  my  wits' 
end."  Then  tell  them  that  the  Lord  enables  his  people  to  cry,  *'  Bejoice 
not  over  me,  0  mine  enemy,  for  though  I  fall  yet  shall  I  rise  again." 
Tell  them  that  when  the  enemy  cometh  in  like  a  fiood,  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  will  lift  up  a  standaixl  against  him.  As  they  feel  their  danger,  point 
them  to  their  great  protector,  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  has  come  to  destroy 
the  works  of  the  devil,  and  say,  ^'  You  will  conquer  him,  you  will  conquer 
him  yet.  The  Lord  will  bruise  Satan  under  our  feet  shortly.  Sirs,  be  of 
good  cheer :  for  I  believe  God,  that  it  shall  be  even  as  he  has  told  me." 

There  is  much  work  for  happy  believers  amongst  the  Feeble-minds, 
and  the  Miss  Much-afraids,  and  the  Mr.  Despondencies,  and  the  like ;  I 
earnestly  hope  that  they  will  set  about  it. 

Now,  if  you  have  pei^rmed  these  tasks,  I  commend  to  your  attention 
a  third  class  of 'persons,  namely,  those  who  are  gi'eathj  tried.  God  has  a 
Tery  tried  people  abroad  in  the  world.  I  learned  a  lesson  the  other 
day  which,  I  think,  I  never  can  forget.  I  was  asked  after  preaching  a 
sermon  to  go  and  see  a  lady  who  suffered  from  rheumatism.  Now,  I 
know  by  bitter  experience  what  rheumatism  is,  but  when  I  saw  one 
whose  fingers  and  hands  had  all  lost  their  form  through  pain,  so  that  she 
was  incapable  of  any  motion  beyond  the  mere  lifting  up  of  her  hand, 
and  the  letting  it  fall  again, — ^when  I  saw  the  pain  marked  on  her 
countenance,  and  knew  that  for  two-and-twenty  years  she  had  suffered 
an  agony,  then  I  said,  '^  You  have  preached  me  a  sermon  upon  patience, 
and  I  hope  I  shall  profit  by  it.  How  dare  I  be  impatient  if  you  have  to 
suffer  so  ?"  Now,  if  you  go  and  see  sick  folk — and  I  suppose  you  do, 
and  if  not  sickness  comes  to  your  own  house — say  to  them,  ''Sirs,  be  of 
good  cheer,  for  it  shiJl  be  even  as  God  has  told  me  ;"  and  what  has  he  told 
me  ?  Why,  that  he  will  support  his  people  in  the  severest  afflictions.  ''  In 
six  troubles  I  wUl  be  with  thee,  and  in  seven  there  shall  no  evil  touch 
thee ! "  Tell  them  that  the  Lonl  will  bless  his  people's  troubles,  for  ''  all 
things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God."  Tell  them  that  God 
win  bring  his  people  out  of  the  trouble  some  way  or  other,  for  he  has 


5G  METROPOLITAN  TABEIUrAOLE  PULPIT. 

said,  "  Many  are  the  afflictions  of  the  righteous^  but  the  Loi4  deUyeretb 
him  out  of  them  all/'  And  if  yon  will  tell  them  these  precious  things, 
believing  them  vourself— for  that  is  the  main  point — havmg  experienced 
the  truth  of  them  yourself,  your  testimony  will  comfort  them.  Yoa 
will  meet  with  some  that  have  been  bereaved,  who  have  lost  the  light 
of  their  house,  and  have  seen  the  desire  of  their  eyes  taken  away  with 
a  stroke.  Cheer  them,  and  tell  them  of  the  sweet  things  that  God  has 
said  conceminji;  the  bereaved.  He  is  "  the  Judge  of  the  widow,  and 
the  Father  of  the  fatherless,"  and  do  you  make  a  point  of  declaring  your 
belief  that  he  is  so.  You  will  meet  with  godly  folks  who  are  under 
testing  trials.  Many  young  people  have  to  go  through  severe  tests.  I 
mean  trials  like  this  :— "  AVill  you  take  this  situation,  young  man  ? 
The  wages  are  sufficient,  are  they  not  ?  "  "  Yes,  sir,  I  should  be  well 
content,  I  do  not  think  I  shall  get  a  better  situation  as  far  as  money 
goes."  "  You  understand  that  you  will  not  have  the  Sabbath  day  to 
yourself  and  that  we  want  no  religion  here,"  Now,  young  man,  what 
do  you  say  to  that  ?  Do  not  think  twice  about  it,  my  friend,  but  say, 
*'  No ; '  what  shall  it  profit  a  man  if  he  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  his 
own  soul  ?' "  Speak  right  straight  out,  and  do  not  be  a&aid  to  throw 
up  the  tempting  offer.  Many  Christians  can  tell  you,  "to  be  of  good 
cheer,"  for  if  you  do  this  God  will  bless  you.  You  shall  have  even  in 
this  life  your  recompense,  as  well  as  in  the  life  to  come,  if  you  can  be 
decided  and  steadfast  to  stand  for  Gx)d  and  keep  his  way.  I  could 
mention  many  Christians  who  would  tell  you  that  when  they  wep& 
tested  the  Lord  helped  them  to  stand  fast,  and  that  they  have  to  bless 
him  for  it  every  day  of  their  lives  ;  whereas  certain  others  have  tem- 
porized and  given  way  a  little,  and  they  have  got  out  of  God's  ways, 
and  have  had  to  run  fix)m  pillar  to  post  all  their  lives  long,  and  though 
they  are  still  Christians  yet  they  never  enter  into  the  joy  of  their  Lom. 

0  sirs,  be  of  good  cheer  when  you  have  to  suffer  for  Christ's  sake,  for 
he  is  able  to  give  you  much  more  than  you  will  ever  lose  by  him,  and 
above  all  he  will  give  you  oeace  of  conscience,  which  is  worth  all  the 
mines  of  California.    Shoula  you  come  under  persecution,  any  of  you, 

1  hope  you  will  be  met  by  your  fellow  Christians  who  will  tell  you  not 
to  be  a&aid,  for  the  Lord  can  make  you  increasingly  to  rejoice  the  more 
you  are  despised  and  calunmiated.  believe  you  that,  and  you  shall  find 
It  true. 

And,  0  ye  tried  people  of  God,  ye  that  have  lost  the  light  of  hia 
countenance,  those  of  us  who  rejoice  in  God  would  come  to  you  and  bear 
witness  that  he  has  only  forsaken  you  for  a  small  moment,  but  he  will 
return  to  yon  in  the  fulness  of  his  mercy.  AVe  believe  God  tliat, 
whether  the  season  be  dark  or  light,  and  whether  the  road  be  rough  or 
smooth,  his  heart  is  still  the  same,  and  he  will  not  turn  aside  from  the 
salvation  of  one  of  his  chosen  people. 

Thus,  dear  friends,  yon  have  good  scope  for  your  faith  to  exercise  itself 
in  comforting  others.    Lay  yourselves  out  in  this  delightftd  service. 

I  have  yet  another  set  of  good  folks  to  speak  to.  AVe  have  some 
'Christian  people  about  who  tremble  greatly  for  the  ark  of  the  Lord. 
I  occasionally  meet  with  good  brethren,  very  good  brethren,  who  arc 
tempted  to  commit  the  sin  of  Uzzah — to  put  forth  their  hand  to  steady 
the  ark  because  the  oxen  shake  it ;  as  if  God  conld  not  protect  his  own 


A  CODEBT  WOSB  IN  TROUBLOTTB  TIMES.  57 

«ai]86.  Bome  isy  tihat  the  good  men  are  all  dying :  I  have  eyen  beard 
that  Hot  aze  all  dead,  but  I  am  not  quite  sure  of  it ;  and  thej  ask 
«8  ihe  nthen  fall  asleep,  and  one  after  another  of  the  pillars  of  the 
honae  of  God  are  taken  away,  what  will  become  of  the  church  ?  What 
will  become  of  the  church  ?  ''My  Father !  My  Father !  The  chariot  of 
Israel  and  the  horsemen  thereof!  '  What  will  become  of  the  truth,  the 
•cause,  and  the  church  ?  Ton  know  the  good  Methodist  woman's  outcry 
at  the  ihneral  sermon  when  the  minister  said, "  Now  that  this  eminent 
^errant  of  the  Lord  is  departed  we  know  of  no  one  to  fill  his  place. 
The  standard-bearers  are  removed  and  we  hare  none  left  at  all  to  be 
compared  with  them.  It  seems  as  if  the  glory  were  de|mrting  and  the 
faitbflil  fUIing  ftom  among  men."  The  worthy  mother  in  Israel  called 
out  from  tbe  aide.  ''Glory  be  to  God,  that's  a  lief"  Well,  I  have  often 
teitt  iacUned  to  say  ttie  same  when  I  have  heard  a  wailing  over  the 
absanoe  of  good  and  great  men,  and  melancholy  prophecies  of  the  awful 
tinws  to  come,  **  GhOT  be  to  God,  he  will  never  let  his  church  die  out 
tor  want  of  leaders ;  he  has  a  grand  reserve  somewhere."  If  all  the  men 
idio  pradi  the  gospel  to-day  were  struck  down  in  the  pulpit  with 
apoplectic  fits  to-mortow,  the  Holy  Spirit  would  still  qualify  men  to 
preach  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  We  are  none  of  us  necessary  to  him, 
nor  is  uaaj  mere  man  necessary  to  God.  Do  not  get  into  that  state  of 
mind  which  makes  yon  attach  undue  value  to  men  or  means.  The 
salvation  of  souls  is  God's  work,  and  if  it  be  God's  work  it  will  go  on. 
Be  quite  sue  of  that.  There  is  no  fear  of  anv  work  fiJling  to  the 
ground  wliidi  has  Jdbovah  for  its  builder.  In  this  church  of  ours  at 
ue  Tabemade  we  gradually  lose  our  leaders,  and  I  have  heard  it  said, 
and  I  must  confess  Siat  I  have  ahnost  thought,  '^  If  So-and-so  were  gone 
iiobody  would  ever  fill  her  place  or  his  place."  Such  earnest  and  noly 
individuals  seem  to  be  essential,  and  we  feel  that  their  removal  would 
be  fktaL  Yet  it  is  not  so,  dear  friends ;  it  is  not  so.  Others  arise,  and 
€k)d'B  woik  Btin  goes  on.  Christians  ought  to  be  as  confident  as  the 
heroic  Spartans.  The  old  men  advanced  in  procession,  and  they  said, 
"We  have  hem  brave,"  and  they  showed  tneir  scars:  and  then  the 
strong  men  in  the  prime  of  their  days  followed  and  said,  '*  Wc  are  brave," 
and  msj  bared  their  arms  for  war.  Then  if  anyone  wondered  what 
would  happen  when  the  old  men  were  gone,  and  when  the  strong  men 
were  dain  in  battle,  there  came  the  boys  and  the  striplings  behind,  and 
they  said,  "We  will  he  brave,  for  we  are  Spartans !"  I  see  my  grey- 
headed brethren  going  ofl^  the  dtage,  and  I  oless  God  that,  though  they 
do  not  say  itj  I  can  say  it  of  them — "  They  have  been  brave."  Blessed 
be  Ood,  we  have  also  a  good  staff  of  active  workers  of  whom  I  may 
say,  though  they  must  not  say  it,  "  They  are  brave."  And  yonder  are 
ihe  young  soldiers  coming  on — the  young  men  and  the  young  women. 
I  see  in  weir  veary  feces  ui^t  the^  are  smiling  at  the  thought  of  being 
numbered  with  the  hosts  of  Chnst,  and  I  am  persuaded  they  mean  to 
be  brave^  and  to  stand  up  for  the  good  old  cause,  and  for  the  blood- 
stained banner  of  Christ,  even  as  their  fathers  have  done.  Instead  of 
ihe  &tbers  diaU  be  the  children :  God  make  them  fer  better  soldiers  than 
we.  have  b^an.  Brethren,  do  not  let  us  be  discouraged,  for  I  bcliere 
^od«  .ib%t  it  shall  be  even  as  it  was  told  me  ;  **  the  Lord  hath  been 
'inindAirof  us,  he  will  bless  us." 


58  XETROPOLITAK  TABERNICLB  PULPIT. 

Many  mindfl  are  in  a  state  of  great  distress  about  the  spread  of  error. 
I  do  not  know  what  is  going  to  happen  to  England  according  to  the 
weeping  prophets.  The  signs  of  tne  times  are  very  bad,  and  the 
would-be  prophets  say  that  a  dreadful  storm  is  coming  on.  Hy 
barometer  does  not  indicate  anything  of  the  kind,  but  theirs  stands  at 
**  nnich  rain,"  or  ''  stormy."  Not  long  ago  I  walked  with  a  Teiy 
excellent  man,  whose  name  I  will  not  mention,  because  I  think  he  mnst 
have  been  ill  that  morning.  He  told  me  that  he  believed  that  he 
should  live  to  see  the  streets  of  I^ondon  run  with  blood,  on  account  of 
the  unbridled  democracy,  the  atheism,  and  the  radicalism  of  the  times. 
In  fact,  he  thought  that  everything  was  out  of  joint,  and  we  were 
^oing — I  do  not  know  where.  It  is  not  long  ago,  and  I  remember  that  I 
l)ulled  him  by  the  sleeve,  and  said,  "  But,  my  dear  friend,  God  is  not 
<iead."  Now,  that  is  my  comfort.  God  is  not  dead,  and  he  will  beat  the 
devil  yet.  As  surely  as  Jesus  Christ  won  the  victory  on  the  cross,  he 
will  win  the  victory  over  the  world's  sin.  It  is  true  it  is  a  hard  time 
for  (.'hristianity.  and  infidels  arc  fighting  us  with  new  ar^ments; 
l)ut  when  1  think  of  them  I  feel  inclined  to  say  what  the  Duke  of 
Wellington  said  at  Waterloo  to  the  generals  "  Hard  pounding,  gentle- 
men I  hard  pounding !  but  we  will  see  which  will  pound  the  longest." 
And  so  we  say.  It  may  be  "hard  pounding"  for  the  Christian 
church,  but  we  shall  see  who  can  pound  the  longest.  Hitherto— 
tlu»se  eighteen  hundred  years  or  more — the  gospel  gun  has  gone  on  pound- 
ing, and  has  neither  l>cen  spiked  nor  worn  out.  As  for  our  opponents, 
thvy  have  changed  their  guns  a  good  many  times.  Our  gospel  cannon 
lias' blown  their  guns  and  gun  carriages  and  gunners  all  to  pieces  ;  and 
they  have  had  to  set  up  new  batteries  every  year  or  two.  They 
change  their  modes,  their  arguments,  their  tactics,  but  we  glory  in  the 
Simic  cross  as  Paul  did,  and  preach  the  same  gospel  as  Augastine,  and 
(^ilvin,  and  Whitefield,  and  the  like.  All  along  the  testimony  of  Jesus 
Clirist  \\i\s  still  been  the  same.  The  precious  blood  has  been  exalted, 
and  niLii  have  been  bidden  to  believe  in  Jesus.  Pound  away,  gen- 
tlonion  !  We  shall  pound  the  longest,  and  we  shall  win  the  day. 
It  wo  believe  God  in  that  fashion,  let  us  turn  round  to  our  discom- 
liteil  brethren,  and  say  to  them,  "  Sirs,  be  of  good  cheer :  for  I  believe 
(ukI,  that  it  shall  be  even  as  it  was  told  me." 

The  last  cliiss  that  I  shall  notice  will  be  our  brethren  and  sisters  who 
ai-e  labouring  for  Christ.  Sometimes  workers  for  the  Lord  get  cast 
down.  *'  I  have  taught  a  class  for  years,"  says  one, "  and  seen  no  fVuit." 
*•  I  have  l>een  preaching  at  the  comer  of  the  street  for  months  bnt  have 
never  heard  of  a  conversion,"  says  another.  "  I  have  been  visiting  the 
lodi^inir-houses,  but  I  have  never  met  with  a  convert."  Wcrll,  dear 
l)ro?iu  r.  do  you  think  that  you  have  preached  Jesus  Christ,  and  li^thing 
h;is  eonie  of  it  ?  If  you  do,  you  must  be  a  veiT  unbelieving  brother. 
I  do  not  believe  it  for  a  moment.  I  believe  God,  that  it  shall  be  i^yen 
as  he  has  told  me,  and  he  has  said, "  My  word  shall  not  return  unto  me 
void,  hut  it  shall  prosper  in  the  thing  whereto  I  sent  it."  Perhaps  yX)a 
i)reaeh  unbelievingly.  Now,  an  unbelieving  word  is  not  God*8  woiid. 
If  you  preach  eontidently,  and  teach  trustfully,  believing  in  the  power 
of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  so  exhibiting  Jesus  Christ  to  your  children  and 
to  your  hearers,  there  are  sure  to  be  i-esults.     The  raindrops  return  not 


A'  GHBSBT  WORD  IN  TROUBLOUS  TIHES.  59 

to  heaTeiiy  and  the  snow  flakes  climb  not  back  to  the  treasnre-honse^  but 
water  the  earthy  and  make  it  bring  forth  and  bnd :  and  even  so  shall 
€tod*8  word  be.  It  mnst  prosper  in  the  thing  whereto  he  has  sent  it. 
BeloTed  brother,  do  not  give  np.  Dear  sister,  do  not  be  disconragcd.  Go 
on!  Gk)  on!  If  yon  do  not  see  results  to-day  you  mnst  wait  and  work 
<m,  for  the  harvest  will  come.  *'  He  that  goeth  fortli  and  weepetb,  bear- 
ing predons  seed,  shall  doubtless  come  again  rejoicing,  bringing  his 
•sheavefl  wi&  him."  Be  not  so  cowardly  as  to  say,  "  I  will  leave  the 
work."  Ton  are  not  to  win  a  battle  in  a  moment,  or  reap  a  harvest  as 
soon  as  you  sow  the  seed.  Keep  on!  ''Be  stcdfast,  unmovable, 
always  ablonnding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord,  forasmuch  as  ye  know  that 
jour  labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord."  We  say  this  to  you  because 
we  are  confident  ourselves,  and  would  have  you  confident  also.  Sirs, 
be  of  good  cheer.  Ood  has  been  true  to  us,  and  given  us  success ; 
4ind  we  believe  that  it  shall  be  to  you  even  as  he  has  told  us. 

III.  Now,  I  have  done  the  sermon,  but  I  had  intended,  if  time  had 
held  out,  to  give  one  or  two  words  op  personal  testimony  to 
THE  FAITHFULNESS  OF  Ooo  by  declaring  that  the  Lord  has  always 
4u;ted  to  me  as  he  has  promised  me.    I  will  give  one  or  two. 

When  I  was  converted  to  Ood,  as  I  read  the  Scriptures  I  found  that 
believers  ought  to  be  baptized.  Now,  nobody  around  me  saw  things 
in  that  light :  but  it  dia  not  matter  to  me  what  they  thought,  for  I 
looked  at  it  carefully  for  myself.  Parents,  Mends,  all  di&red,  but 
believers'  baptism  seemed  to  mc  to  be  scriptural,  and,  though  I  was 
a  lad,  God  gave  me  grace  to  be  honest  to  my  conscience,  and  to  follow 
the  Lord  in  that  respect  as  fully  as  I  could.  Have  I  had  any  cause  to 
regret  it?  It  seemea  then  that  I  might  soon  have  grave  cause  for 
•doing  so,  but  I  have  had  none:  it  has,  on  the  other  liand,  often 
been  a  great  comfort  to  my  soul  to  feel  that  I  did  not  trifle  with  my 
•convictions.  And  I  should  like  to  urge  you,  young  people,  whether  on 
that  matter  or  any  other,  if  you  have  received  hght  from  God,  never 
to  trifle  with  it.  Follow  the  Lord  fully,  and  I  can  say,  as  the  result 
of  actual  experience,  "  Sirs,  be  of  good  cheer.  No  harm  ^vill  come  to 
jon  if  you  are  faithfol  to  God  and  to  your  consciences." 

Agam,  when  I  came  to  London  as  a  young  minister,  I  knew  very  well 
that  the  doctrines  which  I  preached  were  by  no  means  popular,  but  I  for 
that  rery  reason  brought  them  out  with  all  the  more  emphasis.  What  a 
fitorm  was  raised !  I  was  reading  the  other  day  a  tirade  of  abuse  which 
was  poured  upon  me  about  twenty  years  ago.  I  must  have  been  a 
horridly  bad  fellow,  according  to  that  description,  but  I  was  pleased 
to  observe  that  it  was  not  /  that  was  bad,  but  the  docrines  which  I 
preached.  I  teach  the  same  truths  now;  and  after  having  preached 
them  these  four-and-twenty  years  or  so,  what  can  I  say  of  the 
residts  ?  Why,  that  no  man  loses  an^hing  by  bringing  the  truth  right 
rfltrai^ht  out.  If  he  believes  a  doctrme,  let  mm  speak  it  boldly.  Mr. 
Slapdash,  as  Bowland  Hill  called  the  bold  preacher,  will  after  all  succeed. 
Let  no  minister  say,  **  That  is  too  Galvinistic,  and  Calvinism  is  at  a  dis- 
count ;  that  is  too  nonconforming,  and  if  you  dare  to  speak  against  the 
Church  of  England  somebody  will  be  very  vexed.  Now,  trim  your  sails. 
Preach  smootmy^  Whenever  you  have  anytlung  to  say,  polish  it,"  and  put 
it  in  such  a  neat  way  that  nobody  can  object.  j&  the  grc»t  goddess  Diana 


60  METROPOLITAK  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

now  a  days  is  unsectarianism,  try  and  be  nnsectarian,  and  all  that  is 
sweet  and  soothing  and  velvety  and  treacly,  and  yon  will  snooeed." 
Now,  how  has  it  turned  out  with  me  ?  I  wish  to  bear  this  witness^  not 
about  myself,  mark,  but  about  the  truth  which  I  have  preached. 
Nothing  has  succeeded  better  than  preaching  out  boldly  what  I  have 
believed,  and  standing  to  it  in  defiance  of  all  opposition,  and  never 
caring  a  snap  of  the  fingers  whether  it  ofPended  or  whether  it  pleased. 
Young  man,  if  you  are  beginning  life  now,  I  charge  yon  b^n  so  tnat  yon 
can  keep  on,  with  a  straightforward,  honest  reliance  in  G^  for  be  snre 
of  this,  the  truth  will  reward  those  who  love  it,  and  all  who  lose  for  its 
sake  are  great  gainers.  Be  steadfast  in  following  your  convictions.  I 
cannot  help  saying  it,  because  some  of  yon,  perhaps,  are  beginning  to 
temporize  a  little.  I  would  say  to  you,  ''Stand  np  straight,  and  tell  out 
out  the  truth,  and  then  be  of  good  cheer,  for  I  believe  Ood,  that  it  shall 
be  even  as  he  has  told  me." 

May  God  grant  that  this  little  personal  testimony  may  tend  to  put 
backbone  into  certain  Christians,  for  we  have  a  molluscous  company  of 
professors  about,  who  do  not  believe  anything,  but  shape  their 
creed  according  to  the  mind  of  the  last  person  they  meet.  Go,  dear 
brethren,  and  pray  God  to  cleanse  your  hearts  of  that  evil  if  yon  have 
ever  indulged  it.  Believe  God.  Take  every  letter  of  his  Book  and 
hang  to  it  as  for  dear  life,  and  in  little  as  well  as  in  great  things  keep 
to  the  statutes  and  precepts  and  ordinances  and  doctrines  of  the  Lordu 
as  they  are  committed  to  you.  As  surely  as  you  do  this  the  Lord  of 
Hosts  will  bless  you.  First  rest  in  Jesus  by  a  simple  faith  in  him,  and 
then  treasure  up  his  every  word,  and  keep  his  every  command.  So 
shall  the  blessing  of  God  be  with  you  henceforth  and  for  ever.  May  his 
Holy  Spirit  work  this  in  you  I    Amen. 


Portion  op  Scripture  Read  before  Sermon— Acts  xxvii.  11—44. 


Hymns  prom  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 678,  682;  and 

49  and  7,  Sankey. 


A  NOBLE  PRESENT  FOR  A  NEWLY  MARRIED   COUPLE. 


L 


Cloth,  25s.;  Bat  Morocco,  £2  2*. 

THE  INTERPRETER;  or,  Scripture  for  Family  Worship. 

Being  Selected  PoHsoges  of  the  Word  of  God  for  every  Morning  and  Evening 

throughont  the  Year,  accompanied  by  a  Running  Comment  and  Suitable 

Hymns.      Annotated  and  arranged  by  C.  IL  SPURGEON. 

Pasbmobb  and  Alabastbb,  4,  Paternoster  Bnildings ;  and  aU  BookseUen, 


^^(kla^aWm  Mtrtmk  ittlpt 


iMl 


▲  FAMILY  SEBMON. 


%      I 


< .       •   . .   .      ■ 


DKLiyiBED  B7 

€.   H.   SPURGEON, 

Ja  THB  MlTBOFOLITiJr  TIBXBHAGLB^  HIWIHOTOIT. 


~  And  llislioid  Mid  vote  NofthyConletitouiadftlltliybmiM  into  the  ark.  •  •  « 
Aai  Hoah  wmt  is,  and  hb  foof,  aod  hia  wile,  and  hia  aoma'  wiTea  with  him»  into 
tb«  aikf  lieoaiiie  of  tha  watan  of  the  flood.**— Gteneaia  yiL  1  and  7. 

Q6b  in  i]ifimt6  grace  had  entered  into  coyenant  with  Noah  that  he 
would  preeerre  him  and  Mb  fiunily  alive.  The  tenor  of  that  covenant 
yon  wi&  find  in  the  18th  verse  of  the  6th  chapter.  '^  With  thee  will  I 
eatabliflh  n^  covenant ;  and  thon  shalt  come  mto  the  ark,  thon,  and  thy 
flons,  and  tnv  wife,  and  thy  sons' wives  with  thee."  There  was  a  positive 
foretelling  of  ISToah's  coming  into  the  ark  and  finding  safety.  The  thing 
was  fixed,  and  ordained  so  to  be,  and  yet,  when  the  time  came,  Noah  was 
not  caniML  into  the  ark  by  force,  nor  lifted  into  it  against  his  will  by 
a  benevoMt  violence.  He  was  bidden  to  come  into  the  ark  in  the  most 
natural  manner  nossible  ;  and  he  entered  it  voluntarily  and  cheerfdlly. 
He  and  his  HEuniiylefb  their  houses  to  find  a  home  in  the  ark,  and  so 
they  were  saved.  The  coTenant  promise  and  purpose  were  fulfilled,  but 
Noah  acted  in  perfect  freedom,  as  much  choosing  to  go  into  the  ark  as 
others  chose  to  keep  out.  Now,  beloved,  there  is  a  decree  in  heaven 
ordaining  the  salvation  of  the  Lord's  chosen  people.  It  is  useless  to  deny 
that  deeree^  for  even  if  it  were  not  so,  yet  no  difiiculty  would  be  with- 
drawn, it  would  only  be  shifted  to  another  place.  Some  of  us,  instead  of 
denying  predestmation,  like  to  think  upon  it,  and  find  rivers  of  conso- 
lation springing  from  the  everlasting  purpose  of  the  living  God.  But, 
albeit  that  God  hath  purposed  and  decreed  the  salvation  of  his  elect,  yet 
this  by  no  means  prevents  our  speaking  in  the  Lord's  name  to  all  men  ; 
nor  dfoea  it  set  aside  the  necessity  that  those  men  should  cheerfully 
accept  the  gospel  of  Ood,  and  arouse  themselves  to  obey  its  command, 
by  tne  power  of  grace.  My  hearer,  I  cannot  tell  whether  thy  name  is 
writtea  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life  from  before  the  foundation  of  the 
irtaAd,  but  I  can  assure  thee  that  to  thee  is  the  word  of  this  salvation 
sent,  and  that  it  bids  thee  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  witli  this 
asiarance— that  if  thou  doest  so  thou  shalt  be  saved,  for  so  hath  the 
No.  1,886. 


1 

Vv 


62  METROPOLITAN  TABERKACIjE  PULPIT. 

Lord  most  solemnly  declared.  The  method  of  the  diyine  anangement 
inTolves  an  active  consent  on  onr  part  and  a  willing  obedience  to  the 
gospel  command.  The  purpose  is  snre,  but  it  is  unknown  and  nnie- 
vealed  till  the  gospel  is  made  known  and  brought  home  with  effectoal 
power  so  that  the  heart  accepts  it,  the  spirit  obeys  it,  and  the  man  is 
saved— sayed  as  a  free  agent,  saved  as  a  voluntary  being,  yet  not  saved 
apart  from  the  secret,  almighty  purpose  of  the  Most  High,  nor  without 
the  effectual  working  of  his  grace.  And  so  we  come  here,  at  this  time, 
believing  that  there  are  some  in  this  house  concerning  whom  the  Lord 
hath  purposed  that  they  shall  be  Christ's  in  the  day  of  his  appearing. 
We  address  you  all  hoping  that  the  Spirit  of  Ck>d  wiU  apply  the  word 
with  special  power  to  the  chosen,  that  thev  may  see  that  they  themselves 
must  bclieye  in  Jesus, — that  they  must  oe  actively  awakened  to  repen- 
tance, to  prayer,  to  a  change  of  life,  to  confidence  in  Christ,  'mien 
this  shall  nappen,  then  shall  the  covenant  purpose  be  known  to  them,  and 
fulfilled  in  them,  for  they  shall  be  saved  from  the  wrath  to  oome.  Not 
knowing,  therefore,  who  is  to  come  into  this  net,  we  cast  it  into  the  sea, 
believing  that  Christ  kno^rs  every  fish  in  the  sea  and  what  fish  will  come 
to  the  net.  We  do  not  wish  to  know  this  ourselves,  for  it  is  quite  enough 
for  us  to  know  how  to  cast  in  the  net  and  to  be  fishers  of  men.  The 
practical  work  belongs  to  us,  and  the  result  we  leave  wiiJi  the  Lord. 

There  are  two  things  in  the  two  texts.  The  first  is  the  catt, — ^^The 
Lord  said  unto  Noah,  Come  thou  and  all  thy  house  into  the  ark."  The 
second  is  the  ohediencs  to  the  call, — *'  And  Noah  went  in,  and  his  sons, 
and  his  wife,  and  his  sons'  wives  with  him,  into  the  ark.'* 

I.    First,  then,  the  call. 

We  remark,  at  the  outset,  that  it  was  a  call  from  tfis  Lord,  ^  The 
Lord  said  unto  Noah."  You  see  Noah  was  familiar  with  other  forms  of 
calls,  for  he  had  been  the  instrument  of  many.  For  many  yean  he  was 
a  preacher  of  righteousness,  and  the  principal  office  of  a  preacher  is  to 
herald  his  Master,  to  make  proclamations,  and  to  call  upon  men  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord  to  obey  the  Lord's  word.  '^  To  yon,  0  men,  do  I  caD^ 
and  my  voice  is  to  the  sons  of  men."  But  it  was  not  by  such  calls  aa 
Noah  could  give  that  men  were  to  be  brought  into  the  ark.  Fur 
albeit  we  cannot  doubt  that  he  was  a  faithful  minister,  and  an  eameat 
preacher,  and  pleaded  with  the  people  day  and  night,  yet,  sad  to  tell,  not 
one  beside  his  own  family  entered  into  the  ark  through  Noah's  labours. 
Perhaps  his  preaching  may  have  been  useful  to  hu  wife  and  to  hia 
sons'  wives.  If  so,  he  had  no  mean  reward  for  his  pains ;  but  to  all 
outside  of  his  family  his  word  seems  to  have  been  powerless,  as  to 
deliTcring  them  ^m  death  by  the  devouring  fiood.  But  now  he  waa  to 
know  something  of  another  call,  differing  in  many  respects,  a  call  fh)m 
iJie  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth  whose  word  is  with  power.  The  preacher 
can  only  give  the  general  call,  and  it  is  his  duty  to  give  it  to  all  around  him. 
He  is  to  stand  in  the  streets  and  lanes  of  the  city,  and  bid  men  come  to 
the  feast  of  grace ;  yea,  he  is  to  go  into  the  highways  and  hedges,  and, 
as  far  as  he  can,  to  compel  them  to  come  in.  But  men  do  not  come 
upon  onr  compulsion,  or  upon  our  call,  unless  a  secret  something  goes 
with  our  pleadings — a  mysterious  jwwer,  quiet,  silent,  omnipotent, 
making  the  voice  of  man  to  be  the  voice  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  niding 
within  the  shell  of  the  outward  call  the  kernel  of  the  inner  calL 


A  VAXILT  8E&M0V*  68 

'  Whfan'iiie  'Ikyrd  trid  to  IToah,  ''t!ome  thoa»"  he  did  come.  He  did 
BOfc  pot  it  ol^aod  lay  that  sorely  it  was  meant  for  otherB;  he  felt  it  to  be 
H  mNenal  eilL  It  was  **  Come  ihatk**  He  knew  that  it  was  for  him* 
nK  Clod  t&e  Holy  ^^t  speaks  home  to  the  inmost  sool  when  he 
speala  to  sare:  there  is  no  patting  off  his  voice  as  though  directed 
to  another.  Koah  did  not  feel  inclined  to  controvert^  or  plead  ibr 
dtiKt,  or  object,  or  make  excases,  or  say  he  could  not,  for  when  the 
Loia  add  to  Nodi  ^  Come  thon/'  Noah  did  come.  The  caU  toa$  effectuate 
and  reriataiice  was  out  of  the  question.  It  is  true  the  Lord  had,  in 
m  meaning  spoken  to  the  rest  of  mankind  by  Noah's  ministiy,  but  that 
Ann  of  the  Lord's  speakmg  in  common  pleadings  and  invitations  can 
bo  leriated  to  men's  dlsstraction.  They  could  dose  their  ears  against 
tba  oommoB  oall,  and  they  did,  for  it  was  trae  then  as  it  is  now, ''  many 
«B  called,  but  few  are  chosen."  Myriads  go  to  destruction  with  the 
lioiMSt  eall  of  God  ringing  in  their  ears  which  they  wilftally  reject. 

'^^e  woddlings  wilfuUy  went  on 
BebeOious,  till  their  daj  was  past ; 
They  ferc*d  &e  lingering  deluge  down 
And  periflh*d  in  uieir  sins  at  last.*' 

Wlien  Chat  silait  call  comes,  which  we  are  accustomed  to  speak  of 
aa^^eflfectaal  oalling,"  then,  if  there  be  resistance,  it  is  sweetly  over- 
oome.  The  will  firos  itself  no  longer  headstrong  and  obstinate ;  the 
indgment^  dttriceoed  before,  becomes  hght ;  and  the  soul,  aforetime  motion* 
len,  cries  ^Draw  me,  I  will  run  f&er  thee."  Happy  are  the  men 
to  whom  such  a  oaU  comes  from  Ood  himself.  I  ask  you,  my  dear 
hearers  now  presmtj^  whether  yon  have  ever  had  Ood  dealing  with  yon 
itt  this  pewerfiil,  this  inward,  this  spiritual  manner  ;  for,  if  not,  I  am 
sore  yon  have  never  come  to  Christ.  If  yon  have  received  no  call  but 
snch  as  I  can  give  you,  such  as  my  brethren  who  aid  me  can  give  you,  such 
as  the  most  earnest  evangelist  can  give  you,  you  have  been  called  in  vain, 
and  are  yet  in  your  sins.  If  you  are,  indeed,  the  people  of  God  you  must 
know  that  a  voice  in  your  souls,  mysteriously  persuasive  and  over- 
powering, has  spoken  to  you,  and  said,  '^  Come  to  Jesus,''  and  you  have 
yielded  to  to  it.  Happy  are  you  to-night  if  you  have  been  so  called,  for  it 
18  written,  ''Whom  he  called,  them  he  also  justified :  and  whom  he  justi- 
fied, them  he  also  glorified." 

Now,  note  that  mis  call  from  God  was  of  such  a  tenor,  that  Noah  was 
bound  penonally  to  come ;  it  was  a  eall  to  personal  action.  Noah  must 
come.  **  Cenm  thou."  It  was  not  a  call  of  this  kind—''  Now,  Noah, 
sit  where  yon  are,  and  you  will  be  right.  Wait,  Noah;  patiently, 
qnietly  waity  and  see  wlmt  God  will  do."  But,  no ;  it  said  to  Noah, 
^  Come  thou."  Noah  must  come,  and  he  must  come  io  the  ark  too. 
For  him  there  was  only  one  way  of  salvation,  any  more  than  for  any- 
body else.  He  must  come  to  the  ark  which  God  had  bidden  him 
fmpare  as  the  instrument  of  safety :  and  he  must  come  into  it*  It  was 
•f  no  use  his  coming  near  it,  but  he  must  come  into  it.  Within  its 
wooden  wails  he  must  hide  himself;  within  its  vast  chambers  he  must 
find  a  dwelling.  And  so,  dear  soul,  when  God  calls  thee  he  will  make 
tihee  fed  that  thou  must  come  to  Jesus — ^not  wait  and  delay,  but 
come  by  a  distinct  act  of  the  soul  to  be  immediately  performed ;  and  you 


($4  MRTROFOLrriN  TABEBHAOLl  PULPIT. 


must  come  to  Christ  too ;  for  believing  in  anything  dse  will  desizoy 
rather  than  save  yon.  Tottr  faith  mnst  come  and  jdaoe  her  whole  re- 
liance upon  the  ^-eat  sacrifice  of  Christ.  Ton  mnat  come  inh  Christ 
too — so  near  to  him  as  to  be  in  him,  to  make  him  yonr  hiding  idaoe  anui 
your  refuge  from  the  storm.  Yon  mnst  have  an  inward  fidth  whidi  takes 
you  into  the  very  inwards  of  Christ,  hides  yon  in  his  wonnds,  oonoeab 
you  Avithin  himself.  When  God  calls  Noah  it  is,  **  Come  into  the  ark ;" 
and  when  God  calls  any  sinner  to  himself  it  is,  **  Come  to  Chriat ;  le 
hidden  in  Christ  that  you  may  be  preserved  as  flie  Lord's  choice  trea- 
sure." Come,  make  the  Lord  Jesus  your  refuge,  yonr  ddiveranoe,  and 
your  habitation. 

Now,  it  would  have  been  of  no  use  for  Noah  to  have  gone  on  makin<; 
reparations  for  his  dwelling  in  the  ark :  that  he  had  done  long  enough. 
He  had  gathered  all  sorts  of  food  for  all  the  creatnrea  that  were  to 
be  lodged  in  that  marvellous  menagerie ;  and  now  tiiat  he  ia  bidden  to 
enter  the  ark  he  does  not  say, ''  I  must  gather  more  hay,  and  store  up 
more  cdhi  and  fruits."  No,  **  Come  thou  into  the  ark  "  finidied  all  his 
labours,  he  must  have  done  with  preparing,  and  actually  enter  the  refbge. 
I  know  some  of  you  have  been  thinking  about  yonr  souls,  and  praying, 
and  readingjfood  books,  and  attending  meetings,  and  trying  to  get  in- 
struction, well,  so  far,  so  good ;  but  that  is  not  the  way  by  which  yon 
will  find  salvation,  the  call  of  God  to  your  soul,  is  "  Come  into  the  ark,*' 
or,  in  other  words,  come  now  to  Jesus*  and  distinctly  and  finally  commit 
yourself  to  him,  just  as  Noah  put  himself  in  the  ark,  to  sink  in  the  aik 
or  swim  in  the  ark ;  to  live  in  the  ark  or  die  in  the  ark  Heoranmitted 
his  whole  ftiture  to  the  ark,  and  that  is  what  yon  have  to  do :  commit 
yourself,  and  all  that  is  about  you,  entirely  to  the  Lord  Jeans  Christ. 
Considerations,  resolutions,  and  preparations  must  coaie  to  an  end  aad 
yon  must  in  very  deed  ''  come  mio  the  ark." 

^  O  Jesus,  Saviour  of  the  lost, 
Our  ark  and  hiding  place, 
Bj  stonnB  of  sin  ana  sorrow  to8B*d 
We  seek  thy  8hclt*ring  grace. 

**  Fornvc  our  wandering  and  our  sio, 
We  wish  no  more  to  roun  ; 
Open  the  ark  and  take  us  in. 
Our  sours  eternal  home.** 

Neither  would  it  have  done  for  Noah  to  go  round  the  ark  to  anrvey  it 
again.  No  doubt  lie  had  examined  before  that  ark  of  gophir  wood,  and 
been  pleased  to  think  its  timbers  wci'c  so  sound.  No  insect  could  eat  that 
bitter  wood.  It  was  a  tree  that  would  not  rot.  No  doubt  he  was 
pleased  with  the  architecture  of  the  vessel,  for  he  had  built  it  with  no 
surveyor  there  but  his  God,  and  it  was  therefore  well  built.  God  was 
the  great  Master  of  Noah's  navy-yai*d,  and  had  given  him  plans  and 
specifications.  It  was  quite  right  that  Noah  should  go  and  look  the 
huge  vessel  up  and  down,  and  see  to  the  caulking,  and  make  sure 
that  it  was  well  pitched  within  and  without  with  pitch,  and  so  on: 
but  now  he  must  give  up  surveying  and  come  to  inhabiting :  he  must 
come  into  the  ark  to  remain  in  it.  And  so  I  like  you,  my  dear  hearcifi, 
to  take  an  interest  in  the  person  of  Christ,  and  in  the  way  of  salvation. 


A  FAXfLT  SEBMOK.  65 

It  iB  a  reef  hopefiil  sign  when  yon  snrvey  the  Ark  of  salvation  and 
wy,  ^'How  stontlj  bnilt,  and  how  thoroughly  well  canUced  it  is; 
neTer  were  timbers  better  pnt  together,  there  is  no  fear  of  a  leakage 
here ;  she  will  live  out  every  storm  that  will  ever  beat  npon  her ;  she  is 
a  ime  life-boat  npon  a  stnpendons  scale."  I  like  to  hear  a  sinner  say 
**  Cbxwt  is  a  cnreat  Savionr :  I  perceive  that  he  is  able  to  save  to  the 
nttennoBt^  and  I  wonder  at  the  wisdom  and  the  goodness  of  Ood  that  he 
has  devised  soch  a  way  of  salvation."  So  feLV,  so  Rood,  dear  friend,  but 
aU  year  admiration  of  Jesns  will  not  save  yon.  i  on  must  come  inside 
his  aik.  By  a  simple  faith  yon  must  at  once  give  yourselves  up  to 
Jesoa  to  be  saved  m  him.  No  longer  look  at  Christ  externally,  nor 
marej  bim  even  with  a  grateful  eye  for  what  he  has  done  for  others,  but 
come  now  and  commit  yourself  to  him.  There  stands  the  door,  and  you 
have  to  go  through  it,  and  enter  into  the  inner  chambers,  or  you  will 
find  Ao  Mfety. 

Neither  wonld  it  have  been  of  any  use  for  Noah  to  go  up  to  the  ark 
and  stand  against  the  door  and  say,  **  I  do  not  say  that  I  am  not  going 
in,  and  I  do  not  even  say  that  I  am  not  in  already ;  I  have  got  one  foot 
in,  bnt  I  am  a  moderate  man,  and  like  to  be  friendly  with  both  sides. 
I  am  in  and  yet  not  in.  If  the  door  was  shut  I  do  not  know  but  that 
it  would  cnt  me  in  halves ;  bnt,  anyhow,  I  do  not  want  to  be  altogether 
oofc^  and  I  do  not  want  to  be  quite  in.  I  should  like  to  stand  where  I 
cooid  hniiy  in  as  soon  as  I  saw  the  water  coming  up ;  but,  still,  while 
there  is  another  oi^xnrtnnity  of  taking  a  walk  on  the  cbry  land  I  may  as 
wcU  avail  myself  of  it.  There  is  no  hurry  about  it,  is  there  ?  Yon  see, 
if  a  man  keeps  his  finder  on  the  latch  of  the  door  he  can  pop  in  as 
soon  as  ever  he  sees  the  first  drop  of  rain  descending,  or  the  water 
coming  up  anywhere  near  him ;  but  is  there  any  reason  for  being  so 
decided  all  at  once  ?  Everybody  likes  his  liberty,  you  know,  and  does 
not  want  to  be  shut  in  before  he  needs  to  be,  at  any  rate."  No,  that 
would  not  do  for  Noah.  God  said  to  him,  **  Come  into  the  ark,"  and 
he  went  in  at  onoe.  Noah  must  not  hesitate,  or  linger,  or  halt,  but  iu 
he  must  go :  right  in.  And,  0  dear  souls,  you  that  linger,  you  that 
are  of  two  opinions,  if  you  were  wise,  and  did  but  know  the  danfijer 
of  being  outside,  and  the  bliss  of  being  inside,  instead  of  hesitating  you 
would  want  to  penetrate  into  the  ark's  inmost  recesses,  and  to  take  your 
place  in  the  very  centre,  just  as  I  desire  to  go  right  to  the  heart  of 
Christ,  into  the  very  centre  of  his  inmost  love,  for  there  only  shall  I  be 
perfectly  at  rest.  Do  not  hesitate !  Decide !  Decide  at  once !  May 
the  Spirit  of  God  lead  yon  so  to  do.  I  know  you  will  not  delay  if  the 
effectoal  call  is  now  being  given ;  you  will  be  obedient  to  the  heavenly 
vision  at  once. 

Now,  go  a  littie  further.  It  is  God  that  calls,  and  Nocih  mmt  in 
very  deed,  personally  and  actually  came.  It  is  said,  "  Come  into  the 
ark."  Now,  notice  that  word,  for  it  teaches  us  that  in  entering  the  ark 
Noah  would  be  coming  close  to  his  God,  "  Come  thou" — Why  did  it 
not  say,  "  Oo  thou  ?"  Why,  because  God  was  inside  and  meant  to  be 
inside,  in  the  ark,  along  with  Noah,  and  therefore  he  said,  ^'Come 
thon."  Oh  that  blessed  ''come"!  We  had  it  the  other  night,  you 
know  when  we  preached  from, ''  Come  unto  me  all  ye  that  labour  and 
are  heavy  laden.      ^  Come  ".-  that  is  the  grace  word ;  but,  oh,  it  is  the 


|#  XETBOFOIiITjdr  VASMKUmM  FULFIT. 

iloiT  woid  too^  fiir  Ohrist  will  lay  at  the  lait^  '^OonM,  j&  blwai  of  mj 
^atner,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  ibr  jon  ftom  be&ie  thelbandatioB 
of  the  world."  ''  Come."  **  God  is  in  Ohrist  Jema,  rwwnniKng  Am 
world  nnto  himself,  not  imputing  their  tiespasses  imto  tiiem ;"  sad  ha 
that  comes  to  Christ  oomes  to  QoL  If  yon  find  rest  in  Obtnt  jm  iriA 
only  do  what  the  great  God  has  d<me  before  yon,  for  he  rests  in  Christ 
Jesns.  He  smells  a  sweet  saTonr  of  rest  in  the  Bedeemer's  swrifiosL  ^ 
you  delight  in  Christ  you  will  only  do  what  God  has  alwavs  been  daHnm, 
for  he  deUghts  in  his  Son :  "  This  is  my  beloved  Soo,'^  nid  hs^  ^m 
whom  I  am  well  pleased."  There  is  no  coming  to  the  FUher  biit  bj 
Christ,  but  he  that  comes  to  Christ  hath  come  to  the  Bitiier,  aad  ha 
hath  seen  and  known  the  Father.  Coming  to  Ohrist  is  CQmin|[  to  God. 
Now  obserre  that  what  is  meant  here  is  this— that  dMbn  m  OUnd 
are  dwMere  with  Ood.  To  live  in  the  ark  was  to  live  witti  CM. 
Dwellers  in  Christ  are  under  the  protection  of  God,  for  to  direU  in  die 
ark  was  to  have  God  for  a  euardian.  Noah  did  as  much  as  aivf.  wbsn 
he  passed  into  the  ark,  ^'  Gk)a  is  here,  and  I  have  come  to  live  wito  faim. 
God  is  master  and  protector  here,  and  I  am  oome  to  be  ptoteoted  bj 
him."  0  [soul,  when  thou  canst  say,  **  I  trust  in  Ohrist^"  tiien  ihou 
mayest  go  on  to  say,  ^  Lord,  thou  hast  been  our  dwelling  place  in  all 
generations."  You  may  ''joy  in  God  through  Jesus  Olffist^  bj  idiom 
also  we  have  received  the  atonement"  Ah,  how  near  to  God  that  man 
is  who  dwells  in  Christ !  When  Christ  is  all  in  all  to  thee,  the  Father 
himsdf  loveth  thee,  and  thou  mayest  rejoice  in  a  oonsoionsneas  of  oom- 
munion  and  fellowship  with  him. 

Now,  notice  that  whm  Noah  came  to  the  art  he  must  wms  fimn  U 
find  hie  all  mil.  All  the  food  he  wants  he  must  find  in  the  aik.  Ifistraa 
Noah  cannot  go  out  to  market  any  more,  her  daughters  can  no  knotter  ge 
to  the  shops  and  the  stores.  Noah's  sons  cannot  form  or  trader  or 
hunt  or  dig  for  gold.  Houses,  lands,  ireaeuree,  wiU  soon  lie  deep  at  die 
bottom  of  the  flood.  All  Noah  has  is  in  tiie  ark,  it  is  his  sole  pnanonrioa, 
his  all,  for  which  he  has  suffered  the  loss  of  all  thii^  and  rejoioQa  to 
have  so  done.  From  the  time  of  his  entrance  he  is  to  find  all  his 
pleasure  in  the  ark.  Thsr^  are  no  outdoor  amusemenbi  for  Umnlf  or 
nis  family;  he  cannot  even  find  pleasure  in  the  soenenr,  Ibrtfaat  is 
blotted  out  by  the  deluges  of  rain ;  the  valleys  have  vanidied  aad  even 
the  hills  have  disappeared  as  the  deluge  has  increased*  If  he  is  to  find 
any  pleasure,  he  must  find  it  inside  the  ark.  It  was  a  melaiibholy 
prospBct,  indeed,  if  he  could  look  out  from  the  window,  bat  hia  jot 
aad  delight  lav  within  the  chambers  of  the  ark,  for  there  was  he  saveo, 
and  there  he  dwelt  with  God.  All  \i\afood  also  to  supply  his  neooasitiieB 
he  must  find  inside  the  ark.  He  had  no  bam  nor  warehouse  to  lode 
to,  and  there  was  no  port  at  which  he  could  touch  to  take  in  oaim. 
Whatever  need  might  arise  it  must  be  met  by  the  stores  witfiin  the  an^ 
for  there  was  nothing  outside  but  death.  All  his  work  was  inside  flie 
ark  too.  He  had  nothing  to  do  now  except  within  that  vessel,  no  fieids 
to  plough,  no  shops  to  keep,  nothing  to  do  but  what  was  inside  the  arlL 
Now,  when  a  soul  comes  to  Christ,  it  commits  itself  to  him  for  eveiy- 
thing :  Christ  must  feed  it ;  you  must  eat  no  longer  for  your  soul  any- 
thing but  the  bread  of  heaven,  Jesus  must  become  meat  and  drink  to 
yon,  for  ''his  flesh  is  meat  indeed,  and  his  blood  is  drink  indeed." 


A  FAMILT  SERMON.  67 

How  70a  OB  to  find  ^omr  pleasure  in  him — ^your  choicest  debghts^ 
jour  sweetest  joys,  all  in  Ohrist  Jesns,  who  is  our  hoi>e,  onr  crown, 
onr-ddighty  our  heaTen.  And  now,  henceforth,  your  service  must  be  to 
him  only.  ^  Yon  are  not  yonr  own,  yon  are  bought  with  a  price/'  and 
bB.  that  yon  have  to  do  in  uiis  world  now  lies  within  the  drcnmferenoe 
of  .Ohrirt'a  wQL  The  commonest  duties  of  life  are  now  to  be  brought 
witliin  Ibe  ncred  oiiole.  You  have  nothing  to  do  outside  in  the  waters 
of  sin  and  self  and  Satan.  You  need  neither  fish  in  the  waters  of  sin, 
nor  go  boating  i^on  the  waves  of  worldliness ;  you  are  in  danger  if  yon 
do.  Ton  are  Inside  the  ark,  shut  in  with  Ood,  dead  to  the  world,  and 
only  aUve  in  Cbiist  Jesns,  that  you  mav  be  floated  in  him  out  of  the 
old  irofld  into  ^  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth  wherein  dwdlefli 

^Thns^  jon  see,  Noah  in  coming  into  the  ark  left  everything  and 
fbmid  everything,  even  as  by  us  the  world  is  forsaken  and  Jesus 
alL 

^  JesoB,  I  my  cross  have  taken, 

AH  to  leave,  and  follow  thee ; 
Destitate,  despised,  forsaken ; 

Thon,  firom  hence,  my  all  shalt  be  : 
Let  the  world  despise  and  leave  me ; 

They  have  left  my  Savionr  too : 
But  mv  Lord  will  not  deceive  me; 

Ana  in  him  my  all  I  view.** 


Noah  must  come  into  the  ark  never  to  go  out  again.  ''  Come 
thon,'*  saith  God,  'Mnto  the  ark."  He  is  not  to  make  a  visit,  but 
he  is  to  be  shut  in.  As  Seut  as  that  world  was  concerned,  Noah  was  to 
be  in  the  ark  as  long  as  it  lasted.  When  the  new  world  came,  then  he 
walked  out  in  joyful  liberty.  But  yon  and  I,  dear  brethren,  are  in 
Christ,  not  to  w  there  for  a  time,  but  to  abide  in  him  for  ever  and 
ever.  If  any  man  thinketh  to  get  any  good  by  a  transient  profession  of 
Christ,  that  man  is  grossly  mistaken.  If  you  imagine  that  you  can  take 
np  re^gion  and  put  it  down  again — that  you  can  be  believers  to-day  and 
unbelievers  to-morrow,  you  know  nothing  of  the  grace  of  God  ;  for  the 
grace  of  God  begets  a  life,  and  that  life  is  incorruptible  and  abideth  for 
ever:  nothing  can  destroy  it  or  remove  it.  He  that  is  really  in  Christ  is 
like  Noah  in  the  ark,  he  is  shut  in  by  6od*s  own  hand.  '^  None  shall 
pinck  them  out  of  my  hand,"  says  Christ,  and,  truly,  none  shall  ever  take 
a  soul  out  of  the  grip  of  Jesus  Christ  who  is  once  within  it.  Ye  come  to 
Christ  to  be  marriea  to  him.  Yc  take  him,  to  have  him  and  hold  him 
from  this  day  forward,  for  better  for  worse,  for  richer  for  poorer,  in  sick- 
ness and  in  nealth,  and  death  itself  shall  not  prt  you.  *'  Who  shall 
separate  us  from  the  love  of  God  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord  ?*' 
^oah,  according  to  the  Lord's  command,  must  come  in  at  once. 
**  And  the  Lord  said  unto  Noah,  Come  thou  into  the  ark  " — come  at 
once,  **  for  yet  seven  days,  and  I  will  cause  it  to  rain  upon  the  earth 
forty  days  and  forty  nights ;  and  every  living  substance  that  I  have 
made  will  I  destroy  from  off  the  face  of  the  earth."  There  was  a  door 
to  the  ark,  and  that  door  was  open,  indeed  we  are  not  told  that  it  had 
ever  been  shnt  since  it  had  been  made.  There  it  stood,  wide  open. 
We  never  hear  of  anybody  that  ever  went  in  and  was  driven  out,  never 


68  METROPOLITAN  TABERVAOLB  PULPIT. 

hear  of  a  single  beast  or  bird,  or  even  creeping  tbing,  that  ever  went  in 
there  and  was  cast  ont.  So  long  as  the  door  was  open  whofloever  came 
was  wclcouie,  but  longsuffering  was  drawing  to  an  end.  The  time  wag 
now  come  for  Noah  to  go  in,  and  the  time  was  also  near  when  the  door 
mnst  he  shnt.  And  so,  when  the  Spirit  of  God  comes  to  penuade  men 
sweetly  in  efTectual  calling,  it  is  always  in  the  present  tense.  The  Lord 
never  chilled  any  man  by  efifcctual  grace  to  believe  in  Christ  next  wed:. 
He  emails  them  to  believe  in  Christ  directly,  and  one  of  the  wa^  bj  which 
the  eHcctual  call  may  be  judged  is  its  prcsentness  and  its  presBing 
character.  It  is  "now,  note,  now."  Oh,  may  the  divine  ^iiit  be 
pleading  in  some  heart  at  this  hour,  and  saying,  "  Come  to  Jcflos  now,  ere 
the  next  word  has  left  the  speaker's  mouth.  Put  thou  thy  tmat  in  JeaoB 
ere  this  service  ends,  and  thou  shalt  go  thy  way  to  thy  chamber  and  to 
thy  bed  justified  and  saved."  The  Spirit  of  God  sweetly  puts  it,  ^  Now 
is  the  accepted  time,  now  is  the  day  of  salvation  ;"  even  as  he  did  with 
Noah,  who  never  dreamed  of  delays,  but,  when  bidden  to  come,  came 
there  and  then. 

'*  Come  to  the  ark  :  the  waters  rise, 

The  seas  their  billows  rear ; 
While  darkness  gathers  o*er  the  skic9» 

Behold  a  refuge  near. 

**  Come  to  the  ark,  all,  all  that  weep 
Beneath  the  sense  of  sin  : 
Without,  deep  calleth  unto  deep ; 
But  all  is  peace  within. 

**  Come  to  the  ark,  ere  yet  the  flood 
Your  lingering  steps  oppose ; 
Come,  for  the  door  wnich  open  stood 
Is  now  about  to  close.** 

And  now  notice,  once  more — and  that  is  a  sweet  part  of  it — that  Uie 
Lord  said,  "  Come  thou  and  all  thy  house  into  the  ark."  How  good 
it  is  of  the  Lord  to  think  of  our  children !  That  he  should  save  us, 
oh,  we  must  always  bless  liim  for  that  I  But  that  he  should  have  a 
word  for  our  wife,  a  word  for  our  son,  and  a  word  for  our  daughter — 
this  is  overflowing  mercy !  I  have  heard  of  a  man  who  was  nnldnd 
enough  to  say  that  he  married  his  wife,  but  he  did  not  intend  to  many 
all  her  family  ;  and  it  sometimes  happens  that  your  love  to  a  person  is  a 
good  deal  tried  by  that  person's  i-elativcs  and  friends :  but  when  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  takes  to  his  heart  the  master  or  the  mistress  of 
a  house,  he  is  willing  to  take  all  the  household.  He  came  to  the  jailor's 
house  at  Philippi,  and  he  looked  on  him  with  love,  but  he  did  not  stay 
with  him  only,  he  blest  all  his  household — so  blest  them  that  they  were 
all  brought  to  believe  in  the  Lord,  and  they  were  all  baptized  there  and 
then.    There  have  been  other  households  mx^n  which  the  Lord  has 


to  Noah,  come  thou  and  all  thy  house  into  the  lu^k."  **  All."  Oh,  that 
blessed  comprehensive  word, "  all."  Then  Ham  was  not  left  out.  Japhet 
the  elder,  as  he  is  called  in  Genesis  x.  21 — I  know  not  muc4i  for  him  or 
against  him,  but  he  had  faith  enough  to  enter  the  ark,  and  he  was  saved 


A  FAlOTiT  SBBMOV. 


69 


fike  tlie  rest.  Shem,  the  second  of  the  honsehold,  if  I  may  judge  fh>m 
Mt  deaoendantey  was  always  a  religions  yonng  man,  devont,  and  attached 
to  Uie  worahip  of  the  true  Ood :  he  also  entered  the  ark,  and  was  saved. 
Ab  for  Ham,  the  scap^race  of  the  femily,  it  might  have  be^  feared 
tiiat  he  wouM  not  come  in;  but  notwithstanding  all  that  the  Scripture 
tdb  U8  against  hun,  he  was  assuredly  saved  m  the  ark.  And  hero 
mm  the  men^ — that  to  Japhet,  the  elder,  and  to  Shem  and  to  Ham, 
Ae  promiae  extended.  **  Gome  thou  and  all  thy  house  into  the  ark." 
My  dear  brother,  when  you  are  converted  yourself  it  is  a  blessing 
that  yon  ha;ve  so  fSeir  a  hold  of  the  gospel,  but  go  on  to  grasp  more  of 
ii.  ''What must  I  do  to  be  saved?"  said  the  jailor;  and  Paul  re- 
plied« "  Believe  on  flie  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved,  and 
thy  house.**  Many  cannot  get  to  the  second  part  of  the  promise.  They 
seem  satisfied  if  they  themselves  are  saved ;  but  oh  for  that  fsiith  which 
takes  all  that  the  gospel  is  prepared  to  give,  and  pleads  with  God  that 
not  only  I  may  be  saved,  but  my  house,  ay,  and  aUl  my  house,  without 

II.  Here  is  the  call,  then ;  the  Lord  called  effectually  Shem,  Ham, 
and  Japhet,  and  their  wives,  so  that  they  all  came  into  the  ark.  Of 
that  we  are  going  to  sneak  for  a  few  minutes  on  the  second  head,  which 
18  THE  OBEDIENOS.  ifoah  Came  into  the  ark  and  his  wife,  and  his 
wna  and  their  wives.  Their  obedience  wm  unqtteeHoning,  We  do  not 
find  them  asking  anything  at  all  about  the  reason  for  the  command  ;  but 
they  came  as  they  were  bidden.  They  passed  through  the  doorway,  and 
they  were  all  in  the  ark.  Fathers  and  mothers,  brothers  and  sisters, 
sons  and  their  wives,  daughters  and  their  husbands,  and  all  of  you,  oh 
that  the  blessed  Spirit  would  put  you  now  into  such  a  frame  of  mind  that 
you  should  at  once  yield  to  the  divine  precept  which  says,  *'  Believe  in 
the  Ix)rd  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  Have  you  not  asked 
questions  enough  ?  Ton  have  had  some  of  them  answered,  but  every 
answer- has  only  helped  you  to  invent  another  dozen  questions.  Oh, 
those  questions !  these  quibbles !  those  debates !  those  doubts  I  those 
cavillings !  They  are  ruming  thousands.  Have  you  ever  heard  of  the 
man  who  sat  at  the  table  and  could  not  cat  till  he  knew  the  pedigroe 
of  the  bullock  from  which  the  joint  was  cut ;  and  then  he  must  necdc 
know  how  it  was  cooked,  and  comprehend  the  influence  which  fire  has 
over  flesh  to  make  it  eatable.  Next  he  must  understand  anatomy,  and 
know  how  the  stomach  acts  upon  the  food,  and  what  the  gastric  juice  is 
made  of,  and  how  food  is  assimilated  ;  unless  he  could  get  plain  answers 
to  every  enquiry  he  would  not  eat.  He  said,  "Plain  answers,  mind, 
plain  answers  to  all  my  questions,  or  I  will  never  put  a  mouthful  between 
these  lips  a^in."  Now,  there  was  a  poor  countryman  who  came  out  of 
the  fielo,  and  saw  the  meat  and  potatoes,  and  he  ate  them  all  up  while 
the  man  was  asking  the  questions ;  and  very  wise  he  was  too.  I  suppose 
it  was  his  hunger  uiat  made  him  so  sensible.  May  the  Lord  give  you  a 
hunger  after  the  gospel,  and  if  you  have  it,  you  will  fall  to  feeding  upon 
it,  and  receive  it  into  your  soul.  You  will  just  take  what  is  set  before 
von  by  infinite  love,  and  leave  quibblers  to  their  own  folly.  I  myself 
have  a  lot  of  questions,  for  the  questions  I  have  been  asked  by  sceptics  I 
have  put  away  along  with  a  lot  more  of  my  own  which  are  far  more  difficult 
than  theirs.    I  mean  to  bring  them  out  one  day,  but  not  until  I  get  to 


70  METROFOLITiJr  TABBRVACLI  PULPIT. 

heaven  mTself,  and  carry  all  I  can  with  me.  We  shall  hatvelirihfe 
enoDgh  there  to  see  bj ;  it  is  like  reading  in  the  dark  down  here.  We 
will  leave  these  questions  till  wc  get  into  the  blase  of  gloir,  and  perhapi 
they  will  then  answer  themselves.  Noah  and  his  wife  and  hia  Bona  and 
their  wives  did  not  worry  themselves  aboat  myaterieSy  bofc  obeyed  tha 
plain  command  and  went  into  the  ark  and  were  saved. 

They  went  in  directly ^  bnt  I  will  not  dwell  npon  that.  The  whob 
eight  of  them  passed  in  at  once  I  To  get  eight  people  of  a  mind  to  go 
anywhere  is  a  difficult  thing ;  bnt  here  they  were,  all  of  a  mind,  and  dl 
ready  to  start,  and  they  all  went  into  the  ark  there  and  then.  It  is 
wondrous  that  Mistress  Shcm  did  not  say  that  she  conld  not  leave  all  her 
acquaintances,  and  forsake  her  Mber  and  all  her  lelationa  afc  onoe. 
How  could  she  tear  herself  away  ?  Good  Mistress  Japhet  might  have 
felt  bonds  which  hold  her  to  her  bosom  friends.  Bnt  so  it  was :  the 
effcictnd  call  went  through  all  the  fomily,  men  and  women,  and  thqf 
took  up  their  separated  position,  coming  out  of  the  world  at  onoe  whsn 
the  command  came.  0,  blessed  Spirit,  give  such  a  call  aa  tibai  to 
whole  fiunih'es  I 

All  these  eight  people  came  away  once  far  alL   THhssj  oonld  each  say,* 

'<  Farewell,  Tain  world,  I  must  he  gone^ 
Thou  art  no  home,  no  rest  for  mo  ; 
Henceforth  my  heart  mnat  dwell  alone. 
And  have  no  fellowahip  with  thee. 

Farewell,  poor  world,  fbr  thou  must  die^ 

E*en  now  the  floods  begin  to  rise. 
I  die  to  thee  without  a  sigh. 

Save  that  I  mourn  thy  blinded  eyes.*' 

There  was  a  closed  door  between  the  family  of  Noah  and  all  the  rest  of 
the  world.  They  went  in  to  be  the  minority,  and  turned  ent^  befine 
long,  to  be  the  majority.  Oh,  that  men  would  be  willing  to  be  the 
minority  in  a  wicked  world,  and  to  be  counted  fools.  People  say,  ^  If 
yon  join  that  church,  you  just  shut  yourself  out  from  all  society :  nobody 
will  ever  know  you  any  more.  You  might  as  well  be  dead  and  buried/^ 
But,  truly,  when  a  soul  ^ives  itself  to  Christ  it  feels  itself  to  be  dead  and 
buried  to  the  world,  and  says  to  it  **  Adieu,  we  axe  henceforth  stran- 
gers." The  regenerate  pass  straight  away  from  communicm  with  this 
world,  to  hold  all  their  communion  inside  the  ark — to  have  idl  their 
fellowship  in  connection  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Now  to  Noah  and  to  his  wife  and  to  all  the  family  this  was  ih$  most 
important  event  that  ever  happened  to  them.  When  all  of  them  passed 
out  of  the  world  together  to  find  their  refuge  where  God  had  j^vided 
it — ^it  was  the  great  day  with  Noah's  household.  What  a  glonoos  day 
it  is  with  men  and  women  when  they  come  to  Christ !  Their  birth- 
day is  noteworthy,  but  this  is  better.  They  were  only  bom  to  sonow 
and  death  at  first :  now  are  they  bom  to  heaven  and  eternal  life.  Their 
marriage-dav  I  This  is  better.  They  were  but  joined  to  a  mortal  in 
bonds  that  death  will  sever,  but  now  arc  they  married  unto  Christ  in 
everlasting  wedlock. 

Moreover,  simple  as  the  act  of  going  into  the  ark  may  seem,  ii  was 


A  FIMILT   SERMON.  71 

^  Ike  mog I  remarkable  events  in  human  hhlorjf.  "VVliea  Ifoah  and 
^Qiilj  entered  into  the  ark  it  waa  a  more  important  day  than  vhea 
ires  rise  or  fall,  for  there  would  have  been  an  otter  end  of  the 
ion  race  if  it  hod  not  been  for  their  decided  action  on  that  memorable 
So,  when  men  give  themsclrca  to  Cht-ist,  they  do  not  know  what 
hty  thin^  they  are  doing  for  their  posterity  and  foe  those  imme- 
ftlj  around  them.  Time  and  eternity  qniver  with  the  force  of  their 
I,  These  convert*  will  be  a  blessing  to  the  town  in  which  they  live, 
Euiug  to  the  society  in  which  they  move.  The  sniration  of  tjutt 
tan  will  be  the  salvation  of  her  grandchildren,  and  of  their  children 
right  on.  Who  knows,  when  a  man  Ib  bom  to  God,  but  that  then 
X  spring  from  him  in  future  years  a  godly  seed  that  shall  become 
liters  of  Christ  and  missicnaries  of  the  cross?  It  is  a  grand  event 
n  a  family  is  saved.  I  heard  some  music  in  the  street  jost  now, 
it  seemed  to  me  to  be  playing  in  good  time  to  keep  tune  with  the 
Ve  ought  to  feel  when  father,  mother,  sons,  and  danghtera  enter  the 
of  Christ  and  fiod  salvation  there.  Oil,  if  hoascholds  enter  into 
iat,  the  very  beUs  of  heaven  may  ring  again  and  again  and  again  with 
r  that  hath  many  joys  within  it. 

low  let  us  go  into  det&ils.  The  first  fact  is  that  ^VooA  tMnt  in. 
I  was  right !  Noah  was  the  leader.  The  husband  is  the  head  of  the 
lebold,  or  ought  to  he,  and  he  should  go  to  Christ  first.  WhethCT 
wife  comes  in,  or  Shem,  or  Ham  comes  in,  whoever  will  come  in,  or 
'  out,  Noah  goes  in  first,  for  he  would  obey  the  Lord.  Head  of 
house,  arc  yoa  in  the  ark  ?  Are  you  in  Christ  'f  Yon  are  S 
er,  yon  have  sons  grown  np  aroand  yon,  are  you  decided  ?  Yon 
1  your  &mi1y  to  grow  np  in  the  fear  of  <3od ;  I  hope  you  do.  Bat 
'  can  yon  expect  it  if  you  are  not  saved  yonrself  ?  If  Noah  bad  not 
e  into  the  ark,  I  should  not  expect  to  read  that  Shcm  and  Ham 
Japbet  went  in.  0  you  that  are  heads  of  households,  your  position 
eiy  re^ionsihle.  Yon  will  have  to  bear  mnch  blame  if  yonr  children 
isbsy.  Unless  your  example  is  decided  for  the  Lord,  they  will  be 
:  to  say  at  the  last  great  day,  "  Our  father  was  h^-heatted,  and  how 
d  we  be  expected  to  give  onr  hearts  to  God  ? " 
Text  kis  torn  are  mentioned.  "  Noah  went  in  and  his  sons  " — three 
fbllowB.  A  happy  father  is  he  who  has  sons  that  will  go  with  him  in 
things  of  Goo.  Sons  are  called  in  Hebrew  "  builders,"  because 
r  bnila  np  a  man's  house  -,  may  the  Holy  Spirit  build  them  into 
church.  I  would  to  God  there  were  more  young  men  joining  the 
rch — that  more  aona  were  decided  !  You  cannot  expect,  can  you, 
lee  the  sons'  wives  brought  unless  the  sons  are  on  the  Lord's  side  ? 
,  X  am  sorry  to  say,  they  ore  ol^n  opposers ;  and,  when  the  >Tomen 
brought  to  Christ,  there  are  the  hustiands  standin?  back,  and  even 
ng  as  a  hindrance  to  the  religion  of  their  wives.  God  grant  it  may 
be  CO  in  any  case  here  I  0  son  of  Noah,  go  into  the  nrk  with  yonr 
er.  0  child  of  a  godly  parent,  follow  your  fatlier  to  Christ,  that 
may  follow  him  to  heaven.  Let  Abraliam's  son  be  an  Isaac,  and 
JO'S  son  be  a  Jacob,  and  Jacob's  son  l)o  a  Joseph  ;  and  so  may  it  go 
him  generation  to  generation. 

lie  next  person  who  is  mentioned  is  Hie  old  lady — namely,  Noah's 
',    I  give  her  that  name  because  she  was,  no  doubt,  somewhere  about 


72  HBTEOPOLITiJr  TABEBVAOLE  PULPIT. 

six  hundred  ^ears  old,  and  she  was  assuredly  an  eminent  wonum.  We 
usually  describe  persons  who  have  grown  up  sons  by  that  name  in  ear 
fionily  circles.  The  wife  of  the  father  of  three  sons  comeB  into  the  9A 
I  think  of  her  as  of  a  queenly  dame  with  her  sons  and  tiieir  wirei^ 
coming  boldly  forward  with  a  quiet  grace  and  firmness  to  go  with  her 
beloYcd  husband  to  sink  or  swim  with  him,  casting  in  Im  lot  wiA 
him,  not  only  because  he  was  her  husband,  but  becaoise  he  had  cast  in 
his  lot  with  God.  Oh,  beloved  woman,  advancing  into  years,  with  a 
grown-up  £Eunily  about  you,  if  you  have  not  come  to  Christ  I  trost  yon 
may,  that  in  your  fiEonily  the  saved  ones  may  be  as  Noah  and  his  sons 
ana  his  wife. 

Last  came  the  eons*  tvives,  and  what  a  happy  circumstance  fbr  them ! 
I  was  thinking,  as  I  turned  over  the  subject,  how  painftd  it  would 
have  been  if  one  of  the  boys  had  not  come  in,  and  then  how  giievons  it 
would  have  been  if  one  of  the  wives  had  not  come.  If  N<nJi  had  becm 
obliged  to  know  that  one  of  them  should  be  left  out,  and  he  had  to  have 
the  dreadful  selection,  whom  do  you  suppose  he  would  have  left  out? 
I  cannot  imagine.  I  have  heard  of  the  Irishman  with  his  seveif  or 
eight  children,  and  someone  was  willing  to  adopt  one ;  but  flie  ques- 
tion was — ^which  was  it  to  be?  One  is  to  be  taken  out  of  the  ftmily  and 
they  are  not  to  see  it  again,  it  is  to  be  brought  up  and  taken  care  of 
by  a  stranger :  the  {Either  and  mother  could  never  agree  which  it  ahouUL 
be.  I  hope,  dear  fathers  and  mothers,  ^ou  will  never  agree  to  have  one  of 
your  children  lost  Make  it  your  daily  and  nightly  prayer,  your  inces- 
sant effort,  your  hourly  desire,  that  not  only  Shem  and  Ham  and  Ja^h^ 
may  be  brought,  but  their  wives  too,  till  not  one  shall  be  left  bdbmd, 
but  the  whole  family  shall  be  saved  in  Christ  Jesus. 

Now,  all  this  was  done  hj  the  sweet,  effectual  calling  of  the  Divine 
Spirit ;  and  let  us  pray  to-night,  each  one,  that  the  same  caJl  may  be 
given  to  all  our  friends,  and  kinsfolk,  and  all  assembled  here,  that  wc 
may  be  all  in  Christ,  both  now  and  in  the  last  great  day.   Amen. 


PoBTioir  or  SoBiPTUBB  Bead  befobe  Sebmoh— Genesis  viL 


Htmns  fbom  "  OuB  Own  Htmxc  Book  "—429,  501,  iSS. 


i 


|^£(i{j)pte  W^trrmk  itttpit 


LOVE'S  MEDICINES  AND  MIRACLES. 


%.  ^^mtfti 


DkLITSBKD  ok  LOBD'S-DAY  MOBNINa,  JaNITIBT  2l8T,  1877,  BT 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

▲T   THB    METROPOLITAN    TABERNAOLB,   NEWINaTON. 


'' Behold,  fyt  peace  I  had  great  bittemeis:  but  tbou  hast  in  lore  to  my  loul 
delirered  it  tnm  the  pit  of  corraption :  for  thou  hast  cast  all  my  sins  behind  Uiy 
back."— Isaiah  xzzyiiil  17. 

Hezekiah's  recovery  is  a  notable  encouragement  to  prayer.  If  ever 
there  was  a  case  in  the  world  wherein  it  seemed  impossible  that  prayer 
coald  be  of  any  avail,  it  was  that  of  Hezekiah.  It  was  perceivable  by 
everybody  around  him  that  he  was  sick  unto  death.  Why  then  think 
of  prayer?  The  case  was  fatal.  Would  it  not  expose  prayer  to  derision 
if  sucn  a  matter  were  taken  before  the  mercy  seat?  Moreover,  God's 
own  word  spoken  by  his  servant  the  prophet  had  been  given :  "  Set 
thine  house  in  order :  for  thou  shalt  die,  and  not  live."  What  could  be 
the  use  of  prayer  after  that?  Might  it  not  be  regarded  as  an  imperti- 
nent interference  with  the  known  will  of  the  Lord  ?  Yet,  brethren,  the 
proverb  saith  that  hunger  breaks  through  stone  walls ;  and  so  the 
desire  to  live  on  the  king's  part  drove  him  to  pray :  through  all  argu- 
ments and  reasoning  did  Uezekiah's  prayer  break  its  way  to  the  throne 
of  God.  He  turned  his  face  to  the  wall  in  more  than  one  sense  on  that 
occasion,  for  it  seemed  as  if  a  wall  stood  in  the  front  of  him,  and  shut 
oat  all  hope  of  life :  yet  he  turned  his  face  to  it,  and  prayed  his  way 
throngh  it. 

Mark  well  his  success.  Fifteen  years  longer  did  he  live  in  answer  to 
his  entreaties.  Brother,  pray  if  you  are  between  the  jaws  of  death  and 
hell.  Pray,  brother,  if  all  hope  seem  to  be  utterly  slain ;  ay,  and  if 
thoa  canst  put  thy  finger  on  passages  of  God's  own  word  which  ap- 
parently condemn  thee,  still  pray.  Whether  thy  fears  have  contorted 
those  threatening  passages  or  not,  though  many  of  them  frown  upon 
thee,  still  pray.  Perish  with  thy  hand  on  the  horn  of  the  altar  if  perish 
thou  must.  Never  believe  thy  case  to  be  utterly  hopeless  so  long  as 
thou  canst  plead  with  God.  There  can  be  no  hurt  come  of  thy  suppli- 
cation, bat  good  must  come  of  it  in  some  form  or  other.  If  God  do 
Nos.  1,837-8. 


74  MITBOPOLITiJr  TABBHAOUI  PITLnT. 

not  prolong  life  in  answer  to  prftjer,  as  often  as  he  may  not,  or  nobody 

would  ever  die,  yet  still  he  may  give  a  greater  blessing  than  continnea 
(earthly  existence ;  and  if  it  be  a  greater  blessing  in  GM's  jndgmoit,  it 
is  better  for  us  to  receive  it  than  to  have  the  precise  thing  we  hare 
cravod.  In  all  cases  *' pray  without  ceasing."  The  mercy  seat  once 
Htood  within  tlie  veil  where  none  could  approach  it  except  at  one  set 
m^iHon  in  the  year ;  but  now  the  veil  is  rent  from  top  to  bottom,  and 
ydu  inuy  roine  to  it  when  you  will.  Therefore  I  charge  yon  come  boldly 
iitito  the  throne  of  tlie  heavenly  grace  in  every  time  of  need;  yea, 
draw  near  in  tlic  darkest  night,  and  in  the  most  wintry  season,  when 
(io(i  K(M*niH  to  have  forgotten  to  be  gracions,  and  when  thoa  thinkest 
hi*  will  Ik!  favourable  no  more.  ''Men  ought  always  to  pray  and  not 
to  faint."  I^y  in  the  teeth  of  difficulty,  pray  though  impossibility 
Hnin  to  Ktand  in  the  way,  pray  against  death  and  the  devil;  pray  like 
ManaKHfh  in  the  low  dungeon,  and  like  Jonah  out  of  the  beUy  of  helL 
Vvtiy  a^niiiiMi  conHcicnce  and. -oamal  reason;  I  was  going  to  say  even 
pniv  MjraiiiHt  thy  torrifyinp;  interpretation  of  God's  word  itself,  for  thon 
niiiHt.  Hiirrly  have  niisriMid  it  if  thou  hast  thought  that  it  forbids  thee 
lo  pray  :  it  (Miiinot  be  so,  since  Jehovah's  glorious  memorial  is  that  he 
JM  thr  (lod  (hat  hoarcth  prayer.  He  has  never  said  to  the  seed  of 
.Iju ob,  Kii'k  ye  my  face  in  vain.  He  may  say,  and  he  knows  his  own 
iiicnninK  whon  he  nays  it,  ''Thou  shalt  die,  and  not  live,"  and  yet  he 
iiiiiv  jiflrrwanlH  dirlare,  *'I  have  heard  thy  prayer,  I  have  seen  thy 
Iciiim:  bi'hold,  I  will  add  unto  thy  days  fifteen  years."  He  will  be 
ravoiirabh'  unto  the  voice  of  thy  supplication. 

'riial.  li'HHon  having  been  learned,  we  shall  now  proceed  to  consider 
n«/.(?kiah'M  prayer  in  detail.  God  grant  that  ftom  his  experience  we 
may  derive  iuKtruction,  and  if  in  its  bitterness  we  have  already  hsd 
fcllowHlii])  with  the  royal  supplicant,  may  the  Lord  grant  unto  us  to 
Imve  (^)nini union  with  him  in  the  sweeter  part  of  it,  so  that  we  also 
may  fe<!l  our  souls  brought  up  from  the  pit  of  corruption  to  celebrate 
the  praiHCH  of  our  pardoning  Uod. 

f  WW.  in  the  text  three  things  to  think  about  at  this  time :  the  first  is 
a  fuiillhful  hil(rniP8H — "  Behold,  for  peace  I  had  great  bitterness,"  the 
w^'A}\u\  JH  tlelivering  love — *'  But  thou  hast  in  love  to  my  soul  delivered  it 
from  Uie  pit  of  corruption,"  and  the  third  is  ahsoJuUpardofk-^^^TboVi 
hiiMtf;iuit  III)  niy  sins  l>ehind  thy  back." 

fffiforo,  however,  I  divided  my  text,  I  ought  to  have  given  yon 
another  tninKlution  of  it.  Not  that  I  would  readily  find  ftiult  with  onr 
ir<;rK ion  ut  any  tini<%  for  it  is,  as  a  rule,  marvellously  correct  and  singn- 
liiriy  lorrible,  and  I  am  afraid  when  the  new  translation  of  the  Bible 
unui^,  out  it  will  l>e  better  to  light  our  fires  with  it  than  to  give  np  the 
old  v  i>.ion,  which  is  m  df^ir  to  us  and  so  interwoven  into  all  onr  reli* 
^i//i/H  life.  I  friiHt  onr  ^mmdfather's  Bible  will  maintain  its  hold  on  the 
i/fi/i/l  of  the  KngliKli  public  against  all  comers,  for  it  is  so  simple  and  vet 
Wf  tuSfWtw.^  n/i  lioniely  and  yet  so  heavenly  in  style.  The  translation 
yilii'}i  I  (•hall  now  Hubniit  to  you  is,  however,  more  exactly  literal 
tt^fot'lih'/  to  i.lw  M' liH'W :  **  Behold,  to  peace  my  bittor  bitterness"; 
or,  "  M  i/.ib,  Miinih,"  "and  thou  hast  loved  my  soul  from  the  pit  of 
/k*tr</,f.i//ri,  l/tf /aijK':  rhon  hast  cast  all  my  sins  behind  thy  back." 
I,   Our  Uni  hiM\  in  hkalthful  BrrTERNESs,  and  you  have  it  in  the 


UmfB  HEDICIKSS  AHD  HIRJLCLEg.  75 

• 

list  wmbBDce,  wbich  rcmft  in  Hebrew  yery  nearly  as  follows— ''  Behold^ 
0  peace  (or  to  health)  my  bitter  bittemQSS."  Onr  translators  have 
riven  n%  as  it  were,  an  interpretation  of  it  rather  than  a  translation ; 
.  do  not  dispnto  their  interpretation,  bnt  yet  it  does  not  embrace  all  the 
aeaning  which  the  words  convey  to  the  instructed  reader.  The  Hebrew 
a  abn^  sentontions,  and  fml  of  teaching — ^''Behold,  to  peace  my 
)itter  bittomess." 

ThiM  means,  first,  that  he  underwml  a  greats  sad,  and  unexpected 
'hang:  His  peace,  according  to  our  rcrsion,  was  taken  away,  and  for  it 
le  had  mat  bittemess.  The  city  of  Jerusalem  had  been  surrounded  by 
BAbdiakeh*S  armies ;  Sennacherib  had  sent  his  lieutenant  to  demand 
immediate  siirrender,  and  that  commander  had  written  a  letter  full  of 
blaqphemy  and  contempt.  Hezekiah,  haying  but  little  faith,  was  terri- 
bly cast  clown ;  but  though  he  had  not  grace  sufficient  to  be  at  ease  in 
bis  mind  he  had  wlsdoin  enough  to  go  to  his  God  in  prayer.  He 
nxread  the  letter  of  Rabshakeh  before  the  Lord,  and  in  due  season  he 
DDtained  an  answer  which  more  than  satisfied  him.  ''The  king  of 
AsffTTiA  shall  not  come  into  this  city,  nor  shoot  an  arrow  there,  nor  come 
before  it  with  shields,  nor  cast  a  bank  against  it."  The  angel  of  tho 
[xnd  smote  the  armed  men  of  the  king  of  Assyria  in  their  thousands, 
md  the  tyrant  hearing  a  rumour,  fled  to  his  own  capitel,  where  his  sons 
imote  him  with  ihe  sword.  There  was  an  end  of  »Bnnacherib,  and  one 
ironld  haye  said,  and  doubtless  Hezekiah  did  say,  "  Now  I  shall  haye 
A  lon^  season  of  quiet ;  I  shall  reign  in  power  over  my  country,  wateh 
over  ite  interests,  promote  the  happiness  of  my  people,  discharge  justice, 
bnild  up  an  ^pire,  and  then  by-and-by  when  I  grow  grey  in  years  in 
the  fulness  of  time  I  shall  be  gathered  to  my  fathers  in  peace,  as  a 
shock  of  com  cometh  in  its  season."  Instead  of  this,  while  he  was 
in  the  meridian  of  his  age,  and  had  as  yet  no  heir  to  his  crown,  he  finds 
himself  smitten  with  a  painful,  debilitating,  and  depressing  disease,  and 
he  knows  that  he  must  die.  Hear  him  as,  to  the  music  of  sighs  and 
groans,  he  sings  a  mournful  ditty—"  I  shall  go  to  the  gates  of  the 
grave,  I  am  deprived  of  the  residue  of  my  years."  Ah,  brethren,  let 
QB  never  boast  ourselves  of  to-morrow,  for  we  know  not  what  a  day 
may  bring  forth.  The  promises  of  the  opening  morning  are  not  often 
fidnlled,  clouds  gather  and  the  sun  which  rose  in  splendour  sets  in 
showers.  We  reckon  that  now  we  have  made  our  nest  as  downy  as  it 
can  be,  and  we  who  ought  to  know  better  yet  say, ''  Soul,  take  thine 
eaae :  my  mountein  standeth  firm,  I  shall  never  be  moved."  But  ah, 
how  soon  the  mountain  shakes,  the  nest  is  filled  with  thorns,  and  the 
joy  vanishes.  The  sreat  Master  of  the  feast  comes  in,  clears  the  tables, 
tales  away  the  fbt  dungs  full  of  marrow  and  the  wines  on  the  lees  well 
refined,  and  instead  thereof  bids  his  servitors  bring  forth  the  wine  of 
astonishment  and  the  bread  of  sorrow.  Ah,  what  changes  ma^  come ! 
What  changes  have  come  to  some  herd  present.  You  have  gained  the 
object  of  your  life,  and  then  have  been  disappointed  in  it;  you  have 
after  many  a  struggle  reached  the  position  you  sought  for  so  eagerly, 
and  now  you  find  it  a  hard,  uncomfortable  ledge  of  rock  overhung 
with  thorns  and  briars.  You  thought  ihat  when  a  certain  trial  was 
snnnonnted,  which  had  so  long  been  the  *'hill  difficulty"  of  your 
way,  yon  wotdd  come  to  a  level  plain  whereon  your  willing  feet  should 


76  METIIOPOLITAN  TABERNACLB  PULPIT. 

joyfully  trip  towards  heaven ;  bnt  now  fresh  moontains  rise  before  yon, 
unexpected  Alps  lift  up  their  frowning  battlements,  and  yonr  spirit  is 
filled  with  heaviness  at  the  dreary  prospect :  for  peace  you  have  great 
bitterness.  Now,  if  this  be  so  with  you,  count  it  no  strange  thing,  and 
do  not  imagine  that  an  uncommon  experience  has  happened  unto  you. 
It  was  so  with  Hezekiah,  and  has  been  so  with  tens  of  thousands  of 
others  whom  the  Lord  has  loved. 

Notice,  further,  that  Hezekiah* s  condition  was  one  of  en^haUc  sorrow^ 
for  he  says,  "  Behold  to  peace,  Marah  Marah, — ^bitter  bitter/'  or  "bitter 
bitterness."  We  read  that  when  the  children  of  Israel  came  to  Marah 
they  could  not  drink  of  the  waters,  for  they  were  bitter.  Nobody 
knows,  unless  they  have  experienced  it,  what  parching  thirst  is,  and 
how  cruel  is  the  disappointment  when,  seeing  water  before  yon,  you 
discover  it  to  be  so  brackish  that  you  cannot  cu*ink  it.  It  tantalizes  a 
man  when  he  is  least  able  to  exhibit  patience,  and  so  it  intensifies  the 
previous  pain  of  the  thirst.  Marah  was  a  notable  spot  in  the  joameys 
of  the  children  of  Israel,  and  Hezekiah  had  come  spiritually  to  a  double 
Marah,  a  Marah  Marah.  Have  you,  dear  friends,  ever  passed  that  way 
and  drank  of  double  bitterness — the  wormwood  and  the  galU  Beloved!^ 
some  of  us  know  what  it  means,  for  we  have  had  at  the  same  time  a 
body  racked  with  pain,  and  a  soul  full  of  heaviness.  "The  spirit  of  a 
man  will  sustain  his  infirmity,  but  a  wounded  spirit  who  can  bear?" 
Perhaps  the  double  Marah  has  come  in  another  form :  it  is  a  time  of 
severe  trouble,  and  just  then  the  friend  in  whom  you  trusted  has  for- 
saken you ;  this  is  sorrow  upon  sorrow.  Or  peradventure  you  are  in 
temporal  difficulties,  and  at  the  same  time  in  great  spiritual  straits : 
here  also  is  Marah  Marah.  The  flying  fish  is  pursued  by  a  fierce  enemy 
in  the  sea,  and  when  it  fles  into  the  air  birds  of  prey  are  eager  after  it ; 
in  like  manner  both  in  temporal  and  spiritual  tilings  we  are  assailed! 
Paul  notes  in  his  famous  voyage  that  he  c^me  to  a  place  where  two 
seas  met :  have  you  ever  sailed  through  such  a  dangerous  part  of  the 
sea  ?  I  doubt  not  that  you  have,  and  have  at  the  same  time  found  both 
trouble  and  sorrow.  Well,  then,  again  I  say  unto  you,  count  it  not 
strange  concerning  the  fiery  trial,  as  though  some  strange  thing  had 
happened  unto  you ;  for  the  like  aflaiction  has  happened  unto  many  of 
your  brethren  ;  yea,  it  has  so  often  happened  as  to  become  a  proverb 
that  "  ill  things  seldom  come  alone."  Lo,  on  the  heels  of  the  first  of 
Job's  messengers  there  hastens  another.  If  the  Sabeans  have  taken 
away  the  oxen  and  the  asses,  we  may  be  sure  that  the  fire  of  God  will 
be  upon  the  sheep,  and  the  Chaldeans  arc  already  after  the  camels : 
nay,  do  not  wonder  if  the  wind  from  the  wilderness  has  smitten  the 
four  corners  of  the  house  and  buried  the  children  in  the  ruins,  for 
adversities  usually  hunt  in  packs.  Deep  calleth  unto  deep.  Like 
countless  birds  which  fly  over  our  heads,  migrating  to  distant  lands,  so 
do  trials  pass  over  us  in  clouds,  and  we  are  startled  as  we  hear  strange 
and  mysterious  voices  threatening  grievous  ills. 

Now,  notice,  that  the  meaning  of  our  verse  is  not  at  all  exhausted 

by  this  explanation ;  we  find  in  it  a  better  meaning  by  far.     "  Behold 

to  peace  bitter  bitterness,"  tliut  is  to  say,  the  Icing's  double  hitiernest 

urowjhi  his  peace  and  healtU.    Take  the  word  in  the  sense  of  health 

|firs(:.     Tlie  illustration  of  the  text  is  well  known.     Many  a  time  when 


LOVK'B  HBDI0IK£8  AND  MIRACLES.  77 

a  man  has  been  exceedingly  ill^  the  medicine  which  has  met  his  case 
has  been  intensely  disagreeable  to  the  taste ;  it  has  bc^n  as  gall  to  his 
palate,  bnt  it  has  operated  as  a  strengthening  tonic,  it  has  chased  out. 
the  fever,  and  purged  away  the  cause  of  the  malady,  and  the  man  has 
recoTered.  Hezekiah  bore  witness  that  God  had  sanctified  his  bodily 
sickness  and  his  mental  sorrow  to  his  spiritual  health.  Is  it  not  often 
so  with  US  ?  **  Before  I  was  aflSicted  I  went  astray,  but  now  have  I  kept 
thy  word."  Hezekiah  had  time  during  his  sickness  to  consider  his  dis- 
orderly house.  While  he  lay  with  his  face  to  the  wdl,  he  read  a  great 
deal  upon  that  wall  which  he  had  seen  nowhere  else :  a  handwriting 
flamed  forth  in  burning  letters  before  bis  conscience,  and  this  was  the 
interpretation  thereof—"  Set  ihine  hmise  in  order''  This  writing  would 
remain  before  his  eves  even  after  he  was  respited.  The  death-warrant 
was  cancelled,  but  the  mandate  was  not  retracted — "  Set  thine  house  in 
order."  It  needed  setting  in  order,  and  his  first  occupation  was  to  look 
into  home  affairs,  uncover  family  abuses,  and  search  into  personal  errors. 
In  his  quiet  chamber  the  king  would  look  over  the  administration  of  his 
kingdom,  and  note  the  many  mistakes  he  had  made,  the  wrong  acts 
which  he  had  permitted  in  his  subordinates,  and  all  the  abuses  of  die 
times.  Among  the  rest,  his  own  personal  unbelief  would  rise  before  him, 
he  would  remember  his  fear  and  distrust,  and  mourn  over  them.  He  had 
evidently  been  far  more  daunted  bv  Rabshakeh  at  the  first  than  he  ought 
to  have  been,  for  Isaiah  to  comfort  him  said,  '^  Be  not  afraid  of  the 
words  which  thou  hast  heard.''  He  would  think  his  whole  life  over, 
and  banning  with  himself  would  search  out  all  errors  of  the  state  and 
of  the  church.  Self-examination  is  a  great  benefit  to  us,  brethren,  and 
anything  which  brings  us  to  it  does  us  real  service.  Brother,  go  over 
the  whole  of  your  spiritual  farm,  be  diligent  to  know  the  state  of  your 
flocks,  and  look  weU  to  your  herds.  Break  up  the  fallow  ground  and 
clear  out  the  thorns.  Take  the  little  foxes  which  spoil  the  vines,  and 
chase  away  the  birds  which  devour  the  seed.  Let  all  things  be  in  the 
best  condition — thus  will  your  sickness  work  your  health  by  discovering 
the  secret  source  of  your  malady. 

The  king*s  bitterness  of  soul  then  led  him  to  repent  of  his  wrong, 
doing,  as  he  saw  wherein  he  had  sinned.  He  mourned  his  folly  before 
God,  and  humbled  himself  because  of  the  inward  sinfulness  of  nature 
out  of  which  the  outward  transgression  had  come.  I  am  sure  that  very 
often  sickness  reveals  a  man  to  himself.  We  seldom  see  ourselves  till 
sorrow  holds  up  the  glass  before  our  eyes.  Self  is  an  unpleasant  subject 
for  study,  anatomy  is  nothing  to  it :  to  dissect  a  corpse  is  not  half  so 
disagreeable  as  to  examine  your  own  character.  Have  you  ever  laid 
yourself  upon  the  table,  cut  deep  with  the  dissecting  knife,  laid  bare 
the  inward  parts,  and  opened  up  the  hidden  things  of  the  heart  ?  Have 
you  taken  yourself  to  pieces  bone  by  bone  ?  When  you  have  got  as  far 
as  your  heart,  have  you  not  earnestly  wished  that  you  could  avoid  making 
any  pre-mortcm  examination  of  that  desperately  diseased  organ  ?  Ah, 
me  I  what  a  humiliating  piece  of  business  is  the  anatomizing  of  the 
natural  heart,  that  heart  which  is  deceitful  above  all  things,  that  heart 
out  of  which  come  envyings  and  murders.  We  flinch  from  this  till 
sickness  and  despondency  strap  us  down  and  work  away  with  the  sur- 
gical knife  ;  and  yet  this  is  one  of  the  most  beneficial  of  operations,  for 


78  HBTROPOLITAK  TABEBMAOLE  PULPIT. 

^^bj  these  things  men  live,  and  in  all  these  things  is  the  life  of  onr 
q)irit."  Ah,  tins  bitter  bitterness,  which  makes  ns  look  within  and  see 
.  onrselyes  in  onr  tme  colonrs,  is  of  far  more  nse  to  ns  than  those  dainty 
repasts  which  make  ns  like  the  Israelites  with  the  quails,  fiill  of  meat, 
but  also  nigh  nnto  cursing. 

I  can  well  imagine  that  this  hitter  hittemesa  made  ffeuhiah  see  the 
need  of  his  Gad  more  than  ever  he  had  seen  it  before.  He  knew  in  whose 
lumd  his  breath  was,  and  felt  his  entire  dependence  upon  the  divine 
will.  He  saw  himself  to  be  absolutely  in  Gbd's  power,  as  much  as  the 
thread  is  under  the  hand  of  the  weaver,  who  snaps  it  whenever  he 
pleases,  or  as  the  prey  is  under  the  power  of  the  lion  who  can  break  all 
its  bones.  Now  he  learned  to  cling  to  the  Lord  his  Gtod,  and  to  cry, 
'*  0  Lord,  I  am  oppressed,  undertake  for  me."  Now  he  knew  that  the 
Lord  was  ready  to  save  him,  and  while  his  heart  was  filled  with  joy 
because  of  the  promise  of  prolonged  life,  he  was  also  fiill  of  shame  tnat 
he  had  ever  doubted  the  power  and  grace  of  God  in  the  hour  of  trouble. 
He  would  henceforth  feel  that  the  Almighty  Lord  who  could  bring  back 
the  shadow  upon  the  sun-dial  ten  degrees  could  as  readily  chedc  the  wrath 
and  power  of  the  most  terrible  invader  :  he  who  could  deliver  him  from 
the  gates  of  the  grave,  could  assuredly  save  him  firom  the  rage  of  mortal 
man ;  and  he  who  used  a  poor  lump  of  figs  to  disappoint  death  of  its 
prey,  could  aJso  employ  the  weakest  means  to  overthrow  the  most  potent 
foe  of  Israel.  Henceforth  he  would  lean  upon  the  Eternal,  and  bid  the 
virgin  daughter  of  Zion  despise  her  adversary  and  laugh  him  to  scorn. 
After  that  schooling  Hezekiah  would  exhibit  greater  spiritual  strength, 
more  confidence  in  the  promise,  more  power  with  God,  more  zeal  in  the 
divine  service,  and  his  peace  would  come  back  to  lum  and  would  be 
even  deeper  than  at  the  first.  That  joy  which  had  fied  because  of  sin 
and  God's  visitation  on  account  thereof,  returned  to  him  once  more ;  he 
felt  himself  happier  because  he  was  holier  ;  he  felt  himself  strengthened 
because  the  blessed  pur^tive,  though  bitter,  had  removed  a  constant 
source  of  weakness ;  and  he  rose  from  his  bed,  not  merely  a  new  man 
in  bodily  health,  but,  a  renewed  man  as  to  his  entire  spiritual  nature. 
How  sweet  are  the  uses  of  adversity  when  (he  Holy  Spirit  uses  his  sacred 
art  upon  the  soul  and  turns  the  brine  of  tears  into  a  sacred  salt  where- 
with to  season  the  spirit. 

Before  I  leave  this  point  I  would  express  my  prayerful  desire  that  this 
may  be  the  result  of  every  drop  of  bitter  which  any  of  you  may  ever  taste 
throughout  your  future  lives.  If  you  are  not  the  Lord's  people,  your 
bitterness  has  no  blessing  in  it,  on  the  contrary,  you  may  look  upon  it 
as  a  foretaste  of  that  enmess  Marah  by  whose  brackish  fountain  the  im- 

Eenitent  must  sit  and  weep  for  ever  ;  but  if  you  are  the  Lord's  child, 
elieving  in  Christ  Jesus,  all  is  well, ''  for  we  know  that  ^1  things  work 
together  for  sood  to  them  that  love  God,  to  them  that  are  the  called 
according  to  his  purpose." 

11.  Now  we  come  to  the  second  part  of  our  text,  which  is  peculiarly 
sweet  to  our  souls,  for  it  sets  forth  LOViKa  delivbrakob.  The 
original  runs  thus :  "  And  thou  hast  loved  my  soul  firom  the  pit  of 
destruction."  Taken  in  its  first  sense,  the  king  ascribes  to  the  love  of 
God  his  deliverance  fix>m  death  and  the  grave ;  and  praises  God  for  his 
restoration  to  the  land  of  the  living.    Snt  the  words  of  inspired  men 


LOTX^B  XKDIOIKBS  AND  MIRACLSS.  79 

fteqimUy  bare  a  deeper  rignificanoe  than  appears  upon  the  rarfltce,  and 
indeed  thej  often  conceal  an  inner  sense  which  perhaps  they  themselvei 
did  not  peroeiye,  and  hence  the  king^s  words  are  as  durk  sayings  upon  a 
haip  ftilf  of  meaning  within  meaning.  At  an^  rate,  taking  the  language 
oQt  of  the  month  of  Hesekiah,  we  will  nse  it  for  expressing  our  own 
emotions,  and  giye  to  it  a  wider  sense  if  such  be  not  the  original  range 
of  its  meaning;. 

Let  ns  notice  three  things,  the  deed  offfraee,  "  Then  hast  brought  my 
sonl  from  the  pit  of  cormption  ;"  secondly,  the  power  by  which  it  was 
petformed,  **  Thon  hast  Ioyc^  my  sonl  out  of  the  pit  of  cormption ;"  and 
tlurdly,  the  modus  operandi,  which  is  indicated  oy  another  and  equally 
good  translation,  ^'Thou  hast  embraced  my  soul  from  the  pit  of 
oorraption." 

First,  then,  the  deed  of  grace  of  which  ;^ou  and  I  can  sing.  ''The 
Lord  ddivered  us  from  the  pit  of  corruption."  First,  .from  the  pit  of 
hell.  Ah,  there  I  should  have  gone  long,  long  ago  if  mercy  had  not 
interposed.  **  A  platitude,'*  says  one.  Ah,  brother,  God  save  you  from 
thinking  the  acknowledgment  of  Ood*s  choicest  mercies  to  be  a  platitude. 
I  reckon  that  those  in  hell  would  think  it  no  platitude  for  us  to  bless 
Ood  that  we  are  not  in  their  torments.  Our  sins,  like  millstones  about 
our  neck,  might  haye  sunk  us  in  the  sea  of  diyine  wrath  twenty  years 
aeo ;  and  is  it  not  a  thing  to  be  spoken  of  again  and  again,  a  mercy  to 
blesB  God  for,  that  we  are  not  in  the  abode  of  condemned  souls  ?  Is  it 
not  eyen  more  a  reason  for  latitude  that  we  neyer  shall  be  there  ? 
Belieying  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  resting  in  the  atoning  blood, ''  there  is 
therefore  now  no  danmation,''  as  the  older  yersion  used  to  run,  ''  to 
them  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  ''  Who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?  It  is 
Christ  that  died,  yea  rather,  that  hath  risen  again."  The  dreadful 
gates  of  hell  sh%ll  neyer  be  passed  by  a  soul  that  belieyeth  in  Christ 
Jesus  ;  for  us  there  is  no  undying  worm,  for  us  no  unquenchable  fire, 
for  us  no  wrath  to  come.    Glory  be  to  God  for  this  amazin?  grace. 

But  next,  he  has  also  delivered  us  from  the  pit  of  sinfulness,  to  m; 
mind  as  horrible  a  pit  as  hell  itself,  indeed  under  some  aspects  it  is  the 
same  thing,  for  sinfulness  is  hell,  and  to  live  under  the  power  of  sin  is  to 
be  condemned.  Well,  brethren,  years  ago  sinfulness  was  our  master,  and 
we  loved  it ;  we  hated  the  ways  of  God  and  loved  the  wages  of  un- 
righteousness ;  but  at  this  present  moment,  although  we  mourn  because 
we  are  not  perfectly  rid  of  sin,  yet  sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  us. 
We  see  sin  in  our  nature,  but  we  loathe  it ;  it  is  no  more  a  home-bom 
citizen  of  our  soul,  but  an  alien  to  be  expelled,  an  outlaw  to  be  hnnted 
down.  No  more  do  we  consent  to  sin  ;  '*  it  is  no  more  I  that  do  it,  but 
sin  that  dwelleth  in  me."  Blessed  be  God,  although  we  are  sometimes 
brought  into  captivity  to  the  body  of  this  death,  yet  he  giveth  us  the 
yictory  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  We  are  driving  out  the 
Canaanites  of  sin,  little  by  little  by  force  of  arms  and  by  the  might  of 
grace,  and  soon  shall  every  Jericho  fall  flat  to  the  ground,  and  every 
Amorite  be  slain.  Let  us  rejoice  in  being  delivered  from  this  pit  of 
corruption. 

Equally  hath  the  Lord  delivered  us  at  this  time  from  the  awful  con- 
scionsnesa  of  wrath  under  which  we  once  groaned.  Brethren,  you  have 
not  Ibigotten  the  time  when  you  felt  the  hand  of  God  heavy  upon  yoa 


iQ*f(£r  cEUTikifucci  •:'  <iz.  I  co  occ  koov  whtt  the  pangs  of  damned 
fccLtf  ziaj  'ce,  loz  I  il'z.i:  I  harr^  ce=a  ^IzKJCt  able  lo  guess  their  honor, 
tz.  zij  V'^n  :f  ierc  lisrsss^  ▼L-cii  Eij  aoiil  cboie  etiangling  rather 
:"';iz  liff  l«rA2ie  ■::  iij  ziistrj-  att  I  was  drunken  with  wormwood 
1Z.I  il'zc  wiii  s:r^  i^-rxfsc-  Ttls  I  £dow.  ihai  if  my  horror  could 
Li-r  ctitz.  rr^AZcT  ziT  Lfi  zL^s  L*T^e  expired.  Ii  is  not  always  that 
iTikizei  »:cjj  *;i^-;r  sc  ZLZrib,  c:i:  inj  i^aa  who  hath  felt  his  owu 
<:i/i"z.-:S6  'm:>  3*itLZ.  iii*i^  'w'zi^ic,  ni;'-:  xiie  eTgrr  individoal  hair  upon 
>  >  ii:iil  icjz:!  XTrzii  ▼iii  icrr:r.  aizr:^  :o  be  a  sinner  is  the  mo5t 
IriAif*"-  :iiiz^  ^vQ;g:Ti;:i>.  To  i-fc"=  G<>i'5  wrath  revealed  in  the  spirit 
i5  :c  i-k^i  i  sefciiix  i-il  T::i±i  ccai's  cc^isekzice.  Bat,  blessed  be  liis 
zuin^j^  I'f  lii  JcT-fd  Hi  :■«:  :5  ica:  j::  of  dti^Air.  Xo  longer  are  wc 
?:rr:':c^:'I  Tn:ii  i  siLzst:  :f  slz,  ':r  ▼*  arr  rari'DQed;  onr  oooscienec  is 
:  -^r-jrivi  fr:»ii  0£.fci  wcrii ;  ihe  ^inEclciis  I jood  has  made  ns  ham>y  in 
t->i ;  irf  iTi  r^iccii':/-  v:  :•:  iizi  cj  ::2ie  d^i-^zh  oi  his  Son,  and  all  our 
r^^catisst*  iTiT  xr;'>i~  ::r  rTfr.  Ti-rre^jre  onr  heart  is  glad  in  the 
LccX  AZji  :^  ri-n  ^ill  w^  s-zx  :cr  sccjrs  uron  oar  soringed  instnunents 
all  iCtf  di^s  :*  OCT  lif-:  in  :ii  Icsse  o:  Li-e  Lord. 

"^  Lt  A  CTiJisr^-'c.  oeep  i<  K^zai  me. 

He  r«c»i8«il 
TteBC«  sj  jcal  wish.  pn.-«  a&BOiie. 

*  Ami  iir  02$  jM  sBiBi  Aad  Ascebik 
llv  K^dMOwr  vithccs'^Qtl'* 

SuK^  Um  fin(  dark  hoor  of  convicwa  I  dare  saj  yon  have  passed 
Ihroiurh  v>4her  f^NurfU  de^I>^s$kHLS  of  ^jihu  rerj  similar  to  this  wfaichis 
necMwd  of  Heaekiah.    \oq  hare  noc  desorod^  quiie  so  deep  into  the 

C'l  as  YOU  did  at  the  first,  but  yvt  yon  hare  known  bitter  sorrows  and 
^w  wn  dcHivvrvd  fK»ai  ihcni.  Are  yoa  :his  morning  happy  in  the 
^AV^i  ?  Aiv  you  a^iu  rvjoivini:?  Thta  say  with  the  king,— "Thou 
hast  iu  io^"^  to  my  soul  diliTervd  it  from  the  pit  of  ctHTuption.  The 
I«or\l  >^a»  (VHidy  to  save  uio :  chei>^£»e  we  will  dng  my  songs  to  the 
StrtU|^^l  iiU!^cruiuouts»  iu  che  house  i>t  the  LonL*' 

Then^  ciHueth  $pei\lily  a  time  when  we  shall  sing  this  song  more 
sweetly  iu  a  Wtlcr  land  'than  this^  where  :here  shall  be  none  of  these 
misU  to  hai\^  alvut  u:^  buc  chano^less,  ervrlasifng  noonday  without  a 
cKMid«  Iu  heaven  how  swvvtly  sha^l  we  sini:  :his  song  upon  our  stringed 
iu^tnuueutK^  when  thon>  $h;Ui  Iv  uo  v\^rrup::oQ  left  iu  us,  but  we  shall 
Ik»  pui\^  w*  the  soul  of  IuhI  himself,  j<rt\\rt  as  Christ  our  Redeemer. 
What  bvmusof  ^rrucitudo  shrill  we  oh;mt  kiore  the  throue,  when  standing 
tm  tho  heights  of  heaxen  wo  i:aso  into  the  decj>i  of  hoil ;  when  from  our 
|H»rlWtiou  >Yo  iviuoiuKt  the  taW  and  ail  the  ruin  of  it  from  which 
nUuighty  )jrA\Y  uphlVxl  us!  ii!v>ry  l-e  ua;o  the  ix)rd  for  ever,  for  **In 
lovo  to  mjk*  soul  tliou  has;  delivered  i:  m»ui  the  pit  of  coiTuption," 

ilujah !    This  is  the  deed  whieh  i^race  has  done. 


love's  MEDICISEH  ASD   MtRACLRB.  81 

Now,  we  hare  to  notice  Ifw  power  which  per/orntsd  it  To  my  mind  the 
■  truth  herein  set  forth  is  tho  delicious  food  for  meditation,  but  it  is  not 
readily  to  be  broaght  forth  in  preaching.  Hear  ye  the  words— "Thou 
}iast  loved  my  soul  out  of  the  pit  of  coircption."  Love  wrought  tho 
rcscne.  Love  did  it  all ;  let  love  wear  the  cronii.  I  was  asleep  iu  my 
sin,  bat  thou,  0  love,  didst  arouse  me  with  a  Iubb.  Only  when  I  began 
to  hear  that  Jesus  loved  poor  souls  unto  the  death,  and  therefore  came 
to  seek  and  aave  ainnera,  did  I  begin  to  wake  from  my  deadly  lethargy. 
Do  you,  my  brethren,  recollect  when  the  first  thought  entered  ioto  your 
minds  that  after  all  there  was  hope,  for  God  was  full  of  love  ?  Did  not 
that  thoaght  bestir  you  ?  Did  not  the  Lord  love  you  out  of  the  Bleep 
of  Bin?  Sloreover,  you  loved  sin,  and  the  wages  of  it,  and  the  world 
looked  very  pleasantly  upou  j-ou  while  it  enthralled  yon  :  at  last  you 
came  to  know  that  the  love  of  God  was  sweeter  far  than  the  love  of  sio, 
you  had  a  glimpse  of  Jeaus'  dear  marred  visage,  all  bedewed  with 
spittle  and  with  blood,  and  he  appeared  bo  much  more  fair  and  lovely 
than  your  sin  that  you  began  to  fee!  that  ain  and  you  oiuat  part. 
Thus  the  Lord  loved  jon  out  of  your  love  of  ain.  Hia  aweet  love 
made  sin  nauseous  to  you,  yon  were  weary  of  it,  and  would  have  no  more 
of  it.  Do  you  recollect  that  when  you  fell  into  despair  and  said, "  I  have 
been  such  a  sinner  that  I  must  die  in  my  sin,"  you  were  uplifted  from 
the  pit  of  nnlwlief  ?  I  know  that  I  was  borne  ont  of  it  npon  the  eagle 
winga  of  love.  The  Lord  loved  me  out  of  it ;  he  shed  abroad  such  lovo 
in  my  soul  that  I  could  not  be  an  nnbelievcr  any  longer.  Just  as  an 
iceberg  must  surely  melt  when  once  it  is  borne  along  by  the  Gulf 
Stream,  so  my  unbelief  was  compelled  to  dissolve  in  the  warm  stream 
of  his  dear  love.  Belicvu  him?  How  could  I  disbelieve  him  when  I 
saw  his  love  to  sinners,  and  heard  of  hia  death  for  the  very  chief  of 
them,  even  for  anch  as  I  was.  He  loved  me  ont  of  my  unbelief.  But 
then  I  felt  so  we&k  I  conld  do  nothing ;  I  was  afraid  to  unite  with  hia 

Cple,  and  afraid  to  make  confession  of  my  faith  for  fear  I  should  dis- 
lonr  him.  Then  he  came  and  loved  me  oat  of  my  timoronaneaa, 
shed  his  love  abroad  in  my  heart  so  powerfully  that  I  became  strong  with  , 
Btrength  of  his  giving,  and  knew  myself  to  be  safe  beeause  I  was  in  his 
keeping.  Then  did  I  come  forward  and  confess  hia  name  and  unite 
with  hiB  saints,  for  I  felt  that  I  conld  truat  my  Lord  to  keep  me  even 
oata  the  end,  for  his  love  had  loved  me  out  of  my  weakness.  I  am 
telling  the  stcvy  as  though  it  were  about  myself,  but,  brother,  I  mean  it 
about  yon  as  well,  you  have  wandered  sometimes  since  then,  yon  have 
gone  away  firom  your  Lord  into  worldliness  and  much  that  yon  un- 
feigcedly  deplore  ;  and  who  is  it  that  has  led  yon  back  to  peace  and 
holiness  P  Who  has  been  the  Good  Shepherd  and  restored  your  sonl  ? 
Hy  loving  Lord  has  driven  me  back  sometimes  with  sharp  worda  of 
rebnke,  but  oftener  he  has  loved  me  back  with  attractive  tenderness. 
What  a  wonderful  magnet  love  ia  1  It  draws  our  iron  hearte  to  itself. 
Its  sway  ia  kindly  but  irresistible.  We  wander  hither  and  thither,  in 
the  instability  of  our  minds,  til!  a  memory  of  the  days  of  love  comes 
over  our  spirit,  and  straightway  we  can  rest  no  longer  in  the  things  of 
earth  after  which  we  have  so  wickedly  gone  astray,  but  we  aay,  "  I  will 
retam  unto  my  first  husband,  for  it  was  better  with  me  then  than 
now  "    A  moment's  memory  of  t)ie  days  of  our  espousals  makes  the 


88  XfTROPOLITAV  TABKRVlOIiS  FULPIT. 

heart  sick  with  longings  to  retom  to  her  home  in  the  boaom  of  Jeiiu. 
He  loyes  as  oat  of  oar  backslidings.  Perhaps  you  have  fUlen  into 
lakewarmneas,  and  are  chilly  and  lifeless,  and  what  is  the  way  to  raise 
yon  oat  of  that  horrible  state  ?  Is  it  not  a  way  of  love  ?  When  the 
Laodicean  charch  was  neither  cold  nor  hot,  ana  even  her  Beloved  wbb 
ready  to  spne  her  oat  of  his  moath,  how  was  she  bidden  to  rise  ont  of 
her  condition  ?  Did  not  the  Lord  say,  **  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door 
and  knock."  Christ's  coming  to  commune  with  the  charch  was  the 
care  of  her  indifTcrcnce.  When  the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  the 
soul  you  feel  no  longer  sleepy  and  indifferent,  bat  your  spirit  girds  he^ 
self  with  zeal  as  with  a  cloak,  and  yoar  heart  glows  with  vehement 
flames  of  affection.    How  truly  does  our  poet  sing — 

**0  Jesu,  King  most  wonderful. 
Thou  Conqueror  renown*d. 
Thou  sweetness  most  ineffable, 
Li  whom  all  joys  are  found  I 

When  once  thou  visitest  the  heart» 

Then  truth  be^ns  to  shine, 
Then  earthly  vanities  depart. 

Then  kindles  love  divine.*' 

The  ever-gracious  Lord  means  to  perfect  that  which  concemeth  yon  by 
the  action  of  this  self-same  love.  His  gentleness  has  made  yon  great, 
and  his  love  will  make  you  glorious.  Divine  love  is  the  most  sanctify- 
ing agency  in  the  world  ;  it  is  that  which  checked  us  before  we  knew 
the  Lord  when  we  ran  so  greedily  after  sin,  and  it  is  that  whioh  con- 
strains us  now  that  we  live  unto  his  name,  for  "  the  love  of  Christ 
constraincth  us."  Behold  then  the  love  of  the  Spirit !  Is  not  this 
most  blessed  medicine  ?  We  spoke  of  bitter  draughts  under  our  first 
head,  and  truly  these  have  their  mtue,  but  here  the  Lord's  love  uses 
medicine  like  itself;  jea,  it  becomes  itself  the  medicine,  and  the  Lord 
seems  to  say,  "Here  is  my  dear  child  sick,  and  I  will  restore  him  bjr 
giving  him  more  love."  bivine  love  is  a  cafholicon,  a  onivenal  medi- 
cine. No  spiritual  disease  can  resist  its  healing  power.  The  love  and 
blood  of  Jesus,  applied  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  will  raise  up  the  saints  from 

Eining  sickness  and  restore  them  from  the  gates  of  the  grave.  No 
cart,  however  like  to  granite  it  becomes,  can  long  resist  almighty 
love.  The  rebel  may  stand  up  in  bold  defiance,  and  stand  out  in 
daring  obstinacy,  but  when  ne  begins  to  feel  God  loves  him  he 
cries, 

**  Lord,  thou  hast  won,  at  length  I  yield ; 
My  heart,  by  mighty  grace  compellM, 

Surrenders  all  to  thee  ; 
Against  thy  terrors  lon^  I  strove, 
But  who  can  stand  against  thy  love  F 

Love  conquers  even  me. 

If  thou  hadst  bid  thy  thunders  roll, 
And  lightnings  flash,  to  blast  my  soul, 

I  stifi  had  stubborn  been  ; 
But  mercy  has  my  heart  subdued, 
A  bleeding  Saviour  I  have  vicw^d^ 

And  now  I  hate  my  sin.*' 


LOTS'a  HKDIGIMES  AMD  UIRACLXS.  88 

We  mnst  briefly  notice  /A«  modus  operaniii  of  IhU  hve.  "  Thoa  hut 
Bmbmced  my  soul  out  of  the  pit  of  corruption."  Yonder  ifl  the  child  in 
the  pit,  and  the  father  wiahiog  to  save  it,  goea  down  into  the  pit  and 
embracea  his  beloved  one,  and  bo  brings  him  up  to  Jife  imd  safety  again. 
&llcr  this  manner  did  Jesne  save  us.  He  embraced  us  by  takina  oar 
aature,  and  bo  becoming  one  nith  ns.  It  is  by  embraces  that  he  te- 
Kenerates  conTerts  and  sanctifies  us,  for  he  cornea  into  nnion  with  ns 
fay  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  All  our  lives  he  uommnnes  with 
ns  and  embraces  ns  with  onus  of  mighty  love,  and  so  aplifU  ns  fWwn 
the  pit  of  coiTuption.  In  this  way  aleo  he  will  luring  us  right  np  out  of 
oar  fallen  estate  into  perfection  of  hohness,  by  continuing  the  divine 
embiacA,  pressing  us  nearer,  and  nearer,  and  nearer  still  to  his  deu-, 
loving  heart,  till  all  sin  shall  be  pressed  ont  of  us.  He  will  by  one 
eternal  embrace  of  unchanging  love  lift  ns  ont  of  the  pit  of  cormption 
into  a  state  of  absolute  perfection  wherein  we  shall  dwell  with  him 
for  ever.  Glory  be  onto  God  for  all  this.  He  who  has  tuted  of  this 
cannot  but  sing  as  Hezekiah  did  upon  his  stringed  in^^trnmenta  all  the 
days  of  his  life  in  the  honse  of  the  Lord. 

III.  We  have  now  with  mnch  delight  to  consider  the  promise  of 
AB60LUTB  PAiUK)N.  "  For  thou  hast  cost  all  my  sins  behind  thj  back." 
This  king  Hezekiah  mentions  as  the  cause  of  his  restored  peace  and 
health.  He  could  not  be  healed  and  cheered  till  the  cause  of  disease 
was  gone,  and  that  was  sin.  Sin  woe  the  foreign  element  in  his  spiritual 
constitation,  and  as  long  as  it  was  there  it  caused  fret  and  worry  ■ 
and  spiritual  disease ;  bnt  when  the  sin  was  gone  tben  health  and  peace 
oameliack.  Now  let  me  take  the  words  before  ub  and  set  them  forth 
in  a  few  brief  sentences,  and  bid  yon  notice,  first,  th«  bierdtn — sin.  A 
heavy  load,  a  weighty  corse.  Observe  the-  owner  of  this  burden:  Heze- 
kiali  says,  not  sin  only,  but  my  sin.  If  any  sins  in  the  world  are  heavier 
thiin  otlitrs  tlity  ar<;  mine.  Urotlier,  you  feel  yours  to  be  so,  do  you 
not ";'  Then  hike  the  next  word,  which  is  a  word  of  multitnde  and  note 
Ou  compreiimmveneis  of  that  bniden.  AH  my  sins.  "  Thou  hast  cast 
all  my  sins."  Let  ns  spell  that  word,  all  my  eiru.  What  a  row  of 
figures  it  would  take  to  number  them  all ;  as  to  the  record  of  them, 
•orely  it  would  teach  round  the  sky, — all  my  sins.  In  what  balance 
■hall  they  be  weighed  ?  What  must  the  wiath  be  which  is  dne  to  me 
on  account  of  them  ?  Think  long  and  hnmbly  of  the  words — all  my  tins. 

Now,  see  the  Lord  comes  to  deal  with  thsm!  He  takes  them  all, 
and  what  does  be  do  7  He  casts  them.  "  Thou  hast  cast  all  my  sins," 
What  a  deed  of  omnipotence  1  What  s  divine  cast !  None  bnt  Jehovah 
Jeens  himself  could  even  have  lifted  alt  my  sins,  but  he  did  lift  them, 
and,  like  another  Aflas,  he  bore  them  upon  his  shoulders ;  and  having 
done  that  even  till  he  sweat  great  drops  of  blood  and  bled  to  death, 
he  then  took  the  whole  mass  of  my  sins  and  cast  them  as  &r  as  the 
east  is  &om  the  west ;  nay  more,  he  cast  them  behind  Jehovah's  back. 
Where  is  that  P  Behind  Qod's  back  ;  where  can  that  be  ?  Uen  throw 
things  behind  their  back  when  they  cannot  bear  the  sight  of  them. 
Our  sin  is  loathsome  and  abominable  to  God,  he  will  not  look  upon  it, 
and  BO  he  casts  it  behind  his  back.  Bnt  then  he  is  a  just  God,  and  he 
must  punish  iniqnity  ;  it  mnst  come  before  the  eye  of  his  holiness  to 
be  arenged.    We  have  not,  therefore,  seen  as  yet  the  full  meaning  of 


84  METROPOLITAN  TABEHNACTiE  PULPIT. 

the  passage.  No,  it  means  that  the  Lord  becomes  obh'vions  of  his 
people's  sins.  Somebody  said  the  other  day  concerning  a  certain  piece 
of  business,  *'  I  shall  never  think  of  it  again ;  it  is  gone  as  though  it 
had  never  been."  The  Lord  means  all  that  concerning  his  people's 
sins :  *'  I  shall  never  think  of  them  again,  they  are  quite  gbne  as  far  as 
I  am  concerned,  I  have  thrown  them  where  1  shall  never  see  them  any 
more,  their  sins  and  iniquities  will  I  remember  no  more."  AVhat  a 
gracious  mode  of  pardoning  sin !  God  himself  passes  an  act  of  oblivion 
and  declares,  **  I  will  not  remember  their  sins."  He  looks  upon  his 
people  who  have  been  so  provoking,  and  are  still  so  prone  to  sin,  and 
yet  he  beholds  no  iniquity  in  Jacob,  nor  perverseness  in  Israel.  He 
sees  his  people  washed  m  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  robed  in  the  righteous- 
ness which  IS  in  God  by  faith,  and  he  beholds  in  them  neither  spot 
nor  wrinkle,  nor  any  such  thing,  for  he  has  cast  their  sins  so  far  away 
that  they  are  out  of  sight  of  omniscience  and  out  of  mind  of  omni- 
presence. Again,  I  would  remind  you  of  the  words, "  behind  thy  back." 
Where  is  that  ?  All  things  are  before  God's  face :  he  looketh  on  all 
the  works  of  his  hands,  and  he  seeth  all  things  that  exist  Behind  his 
back !  It  must  mean  annihilation,  non-existence,  and  non-entity.  0 
my  soul,  thy  God  has  flung  thy  sin  into  non-entity,  and  effectually 
made  an  end  of  it :  he  treats  thee  as  though  it  never  had  been,  and  far 
as  his  justice  is  concerned  through  the  vicarious  sacrifice  of  Christ,  it 
is  to  the  Lord  as  though  we  had  never  transgressed  at  all.  "  Thon 
hast  cast  all  my  sins  behind  thy  back." 

I  do  not  think  I  need  preach  any  longer  upon  this  subject.  Go  home 
and  turn  it  over  in  quiet  meditation  under  the  overshadowing  of  the 
divine  Spirit.  Dear  child  of  God,  endeavour  to  get  a  grip  of  this  great 
privilege  of  perfect  pardon,  and  never  let  it  go.  May  the  Holy  Ghost 
seal  it  home  to  you.  You  are  right  in  bringing  your  sins  before  your 
own  face  and  mourning  over  them  ;  that  is  where  they  should  be,  bat 
do  not  at  the  same  time  forget  that  they  are  forgiven.  AVhen  a  man 
casts  his  sins  behind  his  back  God  will  put  them  before  his  face :  bat 
when  in  penitence  a  believer  sets  his  sins  before  his  own  face  to  mourn 
over  them  then  the  Lord  in  mercy  declares  that  he  will  cast  them  be- 
hind his  back.  Oh  believer  in  Jesus,  thy  sin  is  gone  for  ever.  Be 
thou  restful,  happy,  secure,  for  thou  art  accepted  in  the  Beloved.  Thy 
sin  has  ceased  to  be.  The  longest  lines  can  never  reach  the  bottom  of 
that  sea  into  whose  depths  Jehovah  has  cast  them  ;  the  utmost  industry 
of  the  devil  can  never  travel  into  that  land  which  does  not  exist,  even 
the  land  which  lies  behind  Jehovah's  back,  into  which  he  has  cast  thy 
sill.  AVho  would  not  be  a  believer  in  Jesus?  Even  if  he  were  sore 
sick,  and  had  to  lie  like  Hezekiah,  on  the  bed  of  death,  who  would  not 
be  a  believer  ?  Even  though  he  had  to  cry  out  Marah,  Marah,  bitter- 
ness twice  over,  who  would  not  be  a  believer,  and  be  embraced  out  of 
his  misery  by  that  mighty  love  which  abolishes  the  sin  of  the  penitent  ? 
Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  0  sinner,  and  this  shall  be  thy  por- 
tion also  by  God's  abundant  mercy.    Amen. 

Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Isaiah  xxxviii. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book "—103,  243,  288. 


1 
\ 


J|!l£t)[Apirllimt  W^mx&t  ittipit. 


WOEK  FOR  JESUa 


%  ^tm0t{ 


DSLIYSBED  BT 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

▲T  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE^  NEWINGTON. 


«  fikm,  go  work  to-day  in  my  Tineyard."— Matthew  zxL  28.  2fi^^/  0/  8^7, 

I  AM  not  going  to  confine  myself  to  the  connection  of  these  words,  nor 
to  use  them  strictly  after  the  manner  in  which  tiiey  were  first  spoken. 
I  may,  perhaps,  explain  the  parable  very  briefly  at  the  close  ;  bnt  I  ts^e 
leave  to  withdraw  these  words  from  their  immediate  context,  and  use 
them  as  a  Toice  which,  I  believe,  sounds  often  in  the  ears  of  God's  people, 
and  sometimes  somids  in  vain. — *'  Son,  go  work  to-day  in  my  vine- 
yard."   It  is  certain  that  God  still  speaks  to  us.    He  has  spoken  to  ns 
in  his  word.    There  are  his  precepts  and  promises ;  his  statutes  and 
testimonies.   He  that  hath  ears  to  hear  let  him  hear  these  sacred  oracles. 
But  beside  this  open  revelation  there  are  counsels  and  rebukes  more 
closely  and  personally  addressed  to  the  conscience ;  voices — soft  some- 
times as  whispers,  at  other  times  loud  as  the  timnders  that  pealed  from 
Sinai.    The  Lord  has  a  way  of  speaking  to  men  when  ^'he  openeth  the 
ears  of  men  and  sealeth  their  instruction,"  as  Elihu  said.    Thus  he 
speaks  when  he  calls  them  effectually  by  his  grace  in  conversion.     So  he 
once  called  "  Samuel,  Samuel,"  till  the  child  answered.    So  he  said, 
"Matthew,  follow  me."    So  he  called  out,  '^Zaccheus,  come  down." 
So  he  cried  out,  "  Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou  me  ?"    So  he  bid 
some  of  us  till  the  divine  accents  were  clear  and  irresistible.    In  like 
manner  we  have,  many  of  us,  heard  him  say,  ^^Son,  give  me  thy 
heart ;"  and  we  have  given  him  our  hearts :  we  could  do  no  otherwise. 
That  voice  exerted  such  a  charming  spell  and  swayed  us  with  such  a 
divine  power  that  we  were  subdued  by  it,  and  we  yielded  our  hearts  to 
the  Goa  of  love.    Since  then  you  who  Imow  the  Lord  must  oft;en  have 
heard  a  voice  speaking  to  you  and  bidding  you  seek  his  fiace  in  prayen 
Perhaps  you  have  been  busy  with  the  world,  but  you  found  an  impulse 
of  a  mysterious  kind  coming  over  you,  and  you  have  been  Mn  to  with- 
draw yourself  for  a  few  minutes  to  the  closet  that  you  might  spe^  with 
God.    You  know  how  it  has  been  when  you  have  b^n  meditating 
alone,  and  yet  not  alone.    One  whose  presence  you  knew,  whose  face 
Tou  could  not  see,  was  with  you.    You  felt  as  if  you  must  pray.    It 
has  not  been  any  effort  on  your  part.    The  exercise  has  been  as  easy  as 


86  MBTROPOLITAN  TABEBKAOUB  PULPIT. 

to  breathe  and  as  pleasant  as  to  partake  of  your  daily  bread.    Ton  fbit 

the  Lord  drawing  yon  to  the  mercy-seat  and  saying  in  your  soul,  "  My 
son,  ask  what  thou  wilt  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  thee."  Yon  muat 
have  been  conscious  of  such  a  voice  as  that. 

And  have  you  not  at  times,  in  the  silence  of  your  mind,  heard  the 
Lord  call  you  to  a  closer  communion  with  himself?  Has  not  the  sense,  if 
not  the  words,  of  the  spouse  in  the  canticle  been  heard  in  your  soul, — 
"Come,  my" beloved,  let  us  see  if  the  vines  flourish.  Come  with  me 
from  Lebanon  my  spouse,  with  me  from  Lebanon  '*?  You  have  been 
up  and  away.  You  have  gone  into  the  secret  places  where  Christ  has 
shown  you  his  love,  till  you  sat  under  his  shadow  with  great  delight, 
and  his  fruit  has  been  sweet  to  your  taste.  Our  experience  makes  us 
know  that  there  are  heavenly  voices  that  invite  prayer  and  call  to 
communion.  And  probably  some  of  yon  have  also  been  conscious  of 
another  voice  which  I  earnestly  desire  we  may  all  hear  to-night,  namely, 
the  more  martial  and  stirring  call  to  service  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Some  of  you  have  been  obedient  to  the  call  these  many  years,  and  it 
calls  louder  and  louder  and  louder  still.  You  have  been  reaping,  and 
bearing  the  heat  and  burden  of  the  day,  but  you  cannot  throw  down 
your  sickle,  vonr  hand  cleaves  to  it.  i  ea,  rather  do  you  take  more 
gigantic  striaes  and  sweep  down  more  of  the  precious  com  at  every 
stroke  you  take.    Yon  feel  that  yon  can  never  cease  from  it  tiU  yon  do 

"  Your  body  with  your  charge  lay  down, 
And  cease  at  once  to  work  and  live.** 

A  voice  divine  seems  caUing  thee  and  saying,  "  Follow  me,  and  I  will 
make  thee  a  fisher  of  men.  Behold  I  have  made  thee  a  chosen  vessel  to 
bear  my  name  unto  the  Gentiles."  Yon  have  heard  that  voice,  and  yoi^ 
are  striving  to  obey  it  more  and  more. 

Others  either  have  never  heard  it,  or  hearing  it  have  forgotten  it. 
There  are  none  so  deaf  as  those  who  will  not  hear,  and  there  are  some 
who  have  a  very  deaf  ear  to  any  admonitions  of  this  kind.  They  are 
like  Issachar — a  strong  ass  crouching  down  between  two  burdens,  bnt 

Jet  lifting  neither.  I  fear  lest  upon  them  should  come  the  curse  of 
leroz,  because  they  come  not  "  to  the  help  of  the  Lord — to  the  help  of 
the  Lord  against  the  mighty."  Now,  mayhap  this  evening  there  are 
some  Christian  men  or  women  here  that  shall  feel  as  if  the  hand  of  the 
Crucified  were  laid  upon  them,  and  they  hear  him  say  to  them, ''  Ye  are 
not  your  own.  Ye  are  bought  with  a  price;  wherefore  glorify  God 
in  your  bodies  and  in  your  spirits,  which  are  his.  Awake  thou  that 
sleepest  and  arise  from  the  dead,  and  Christ  shall  give  thee  light." 

The  text,  I  hope,  may  be  blest  of  God  to  be  such  a  voice  as  that. 
Listening  to  it,  we  notice  four  things.  First,  the  character  under  which 
it  calls  U8f  "  Son";  secondly,  the  service  to  which  U  calls  us,  "go  work"; 
thirdly,  the  time  for  which  it  calls  us,  "go  work  to-day";  and  fourthly, 
the  place  to  which  it  directs  us,  "  go  work  to«day  in  my  vineyard." 

I.  First,  then,  thb  ohabaotbb  ukdeb  which  it  oillb  us. 

It  appears  to  me  to  be  a  very  powerful  selection  of  terms.  "  Son,  go 
work  to-day  in  my  vineyard."  It  puts  work  on  a  very  gracious  footii^, 
when  we  are  bidden  to  work  for  the  Lord,  not  as  slaves,  nor  as  mere 
servants,  but  as  sons.    Moses  speaks  to  us,  and  he  says,  "  Servant,  go 


WOBK  VOB  JISUB.  87 

and  work  for  thy  wages."  But  the  Father  in  Ohrist  qpetks  to  vm^  and 
hesays^  *'  Son,  20  work  to-day  in  my  vineyard."  No  more  as  a  seryant, 
bnt  as  a  son,  snalt  thon  serve  the  Lord  The  returning  prodigal  said, 
^  Make  me  as  one  of  thy  hired  servants."    That  was  not  an  erangelical 

Syer,  and  was  not  answered.  The  father  said,  '*  This  my  son  was 
dy  and  is  alive  again/'  and  so  he  received  him,  not  as  a  hii^  servant 
at  an,  bnt  as  a  son.  Oh,  dear  people  of  Qod,  I  trust  yon  always  draw 
the  distinction  very  clearly  between  the  covenant  of  works  and  the 
covenant  of  grace.  When  yon  work  for  God  ^un  do  not  work  far 
life  but  from  me.  Yon  do  not  try  to  serve  Christ  in  order  that  yon 
may  be  saved,  but  because  you  are  saved.  You  do  not  obey  his 
commands  that  you  may  b^me  his  children,  but  because  you  are 
his  children,  and  therefore  are  imitators  of  God  as  dear  children.  Yon 
Bay  "  Abba,  Father,"  because  you  feel  the  spirit  of  adoption  within  you, 
and  you  endeavour  to  obey  the  commands  of  your  Father  for  the  self- 
aame  reason.  I  do  not,  therefore,  say  to  anyone  here, ''  Qo  and  work 
for  God  that  yon  may  be  saved."  I  would  not  venture  to  put  it  on 
that  footing.  '*  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be 
saved."  But  turning  to  those  who  are  saved,  the  gospel  exhortation 
is  put  after  a  gospel  sort — **  Son,  go  work  to^y  in  my  vineyard." 

And  it  has  all  the  more  strength  on  this  account,  because,  in  address* 
ing  us  as  sons,  it  reminds  us  of  the  great  love  which  has  made  us 
what  we  are.  We  were  by  nature  heirs  of  wrath  even  as  others,  but, 
beloved,  "  Behold,  what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon 
ns,  that  we  should  be  called  the  sons  of  God."  Think  of  the  love  whtoh 
chose  us  when  we  were  still  aliens  and  enemies ;  the  love  which  adopted 
ns,  and  put  us  into  the  fanulv,  itself  wondering  while  it  did  it,  for  the  liord 
is  represented  as  saying,  *^  How  shall  I  put  thee  among  the  children  ?"— 
as  if  it  were  a  strange  thing  that  such  as  we  are  should  ever  be  num* 
bered  among  the  children  of  God.  The  love  which  adopted  us  did  not 
stay  there,  but  having  given  us  the  rights  of  children,  it  gave  us  the 
nature  of  children,  wherefore  we  were  regenerated — "  Begotten  again 
unto  a  lively  hope  by  the  resurrection  of  Jeans  Christ  from  the  dead ; 
bom,  not  01  corruptible  seed,  but  of  incorruptible,  by  the  word  of  God 
which  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever."  Now,  just  think  of  election,  adop- 
tion, regeneration,  and  when  the  Lord  addresses  you  by  that  term  of 
^  son,"  think  of  all  that  and  say,  *'  I  owe  to  God  an  immeasurable  debt 
of  sratitude  for  having  enabled  me  to  become  his  son :  giving  me  power 
ana  privilege  to  become  a  child  of  God.  Therefore  do  I  feel  the  claims 
of  obligation,  and  I  would  endeavour  to  work  in  the  vinevard  because  I 
am  his  child,  his  son,  his  daughter,  made  so  by  his  grace. 

This  you  see,  dear  friends,  engages  us  to  work  in  the  vineyard  all  the 
more  cogently,  because  we  may  reflect  not  only  on  the  grace  which  has  made 
us  sons,  but  on  the  privileges  which  that  same  grace  bestowed  upon  us 
in  making  us  sons ;  for,  if  children  of  God,  the  Lord  will  provide  for 
us,  will  ctothe  us,  will  heal  us,  will  protect  us,  will  guide  us,  will  educate 
ns,  will  make  ns  meet  £0  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in 
light.  Remember,  too,  that  precious  passage, ''  If  children,  then  heirs ; 
heirs  of  God,  and  joint-heirs  with  Christ ;  if  so  be  that  we  suffer  with  him, 
that  we  may  be  also  glorified  together."  If  heirs  of  God,  how  large  is 
our  inWitance,  and  if  joint  heirs  with  Christ  how  sure  that  inheritance 


88  UBTBOPOLITAK  TABERVACfLE  PULPIT. 

18 ;  and  we  hare  been  bronght  now,  beloved,  to  snch  an  estate  as  ihis 
that  the  angels  themselycs  might  envy  ns,  for  I  ventarc  to  apply  a 
passage  of  Scriptnre  to  this  case — I  hope  without  wresting  it — ''  Unto 
which  of  the  angels  said  he  at  any  time,  ThoH  art  my  Son  ?"  But  he 
speaks  thus  to  ns  poor  worms  of  the  dust,  and  when  ne  is  bidding  ns 
serve  him  he  comes  to  us  under  this  character,  and  addresses  us  in  this 
relationship,  and  he  sa]^,  **  Son,  daughter,  go  work  to-day  in  my  vineTaid. 
I  have  given  thee  privileges  boundless  in  making  thee  my  chiM.  I 
have  given  thee  this  world  and  worlds  to  come.  Earth  is  thy  lodge,  and 
heaven  thy  home.  And  therefore,  because  I  have  done  all  this  for  thee 
— and  what  could  I  have  done  more  for  thee  than  have  made  thee  my 
child  ? — therefore  I  say.  Go,  work  to-day  in  my  vineyard." 

In  appealing  thus  to  us  under  the  name  of  son,  it  is  supposed  that  we 
have  some  feelings  within  us  correspondent  to  the  condition  to  which 
our  heavenly  Father  has  called  us.  He  savs,  ^'son.**  If  any  of 
you,  being  a  son,  hath  a  father,  and  if  that  faUier  wished  yon  to  do 
something  for  him,  and  he  addressed  you  as  ^'  my  son,**  yon  would  f&fi 
at  once  that  whatever  yon  could  do  you  were  bound  to  do  because  yoa 
were  a  son.  It  would  awaken  in  yon  the  filial  feeling  which  is  swill  at 
once  to  vield  obedience  and  love.  And  when  the  Lora  looks  upon  thee, 
my  brother,  and  says  to  thee  **  Son,"  it  is  supposed  that  there  is  in  ^y 
heart  a  child's  nature  given  by  his  grace,  and  that  this  filial  instinct 
prompts  the  quick  response,  **  My  Father,  what  dost  thou  say  to  me  ? 
Speak,  Lford,  speak.  Father,  for  thy  son  heareth  thee.  I  long  to  do  thy 
will.  I  delight  in  it,  for  to  me  it  is  the  greatest  joy  I  know  that  thoa 
art  my  Father  and  my  God.  Therefore,  Lord,  my  heart  stands  ready 
now  to  listen  to  whatever  thou  hast  to  say,  and  my  hand  is  ready  to  do 
it,  as  thy  grace  shall  enable  mc,  only  strengthen  me  in  thy  ways." 
Son,  daughter,  go  work  to-day  in  my  vmeyard. 

By  the  use  of  that  term  "  sou,"  also,  it  is  supposed  that  yon  have 
something  of  the  qualification  that  will  fit  you  to  do  what  he  bids  you. 
A  man  who  has  a  vineyard  naturally  supposes  that  his  son  knows  some- 
tliing  about  vineyards.  The  boy  will  have  learned  something  through 
his  sire,  and  you  that  know  the  Lord  are  the  only  people  that  can  serve  him 
in  his  vineyard — that  is  to  say,  in  winning  souls  for  Christ  none  can  do 
this  but  those  who  are  won  themselves.  If  there  be  a  lost  child  to  be 
reclaimed,  he  shall  be  brought  in  by  one  of  the  children  who  has  him- 
self been  found.  Unto  the  wicked  God  saith,  "  What  hast  thou  to  do 
to  declare  my  statutes  ?  "  but  to  you  who  are  his  sons  and  daughters  he 
entrusts  the  gospel,  putting  you  in  trust  with  it  that  you  may  bear  it  to 
others  and  bring  others  to  know  and  love  his  name.  Oh,  dear  friends, 
it  must  be  a  dreadful  thing  to  be  trying  to  save  the  souls  of  others 
while  you  yourselves  are  lost ;  and  what  an  unhappy  mortal  must  he  be 
who  has  to  preach  the  gospel  that  he  never  knew — to  tell  of  promises 
that  he  has  never  believed,  and  to  preach  a  Christ  in  whom  his  soul  has 
never  trusted !  But  when  the  Lord  speaks  to  you  as  his  son  and  his 
daughter,  the  very  fact  that  jou  stand  in  that  relationship  to  him  proves 
that  you  have  some  qualification  for  the  service ;  and,  therefore,  dear 
brother  or  sister,  you  must  not  back  oat  of  it.  You  must  not  wrap  your 
talent  in  a  napkin,  for  yon  have  got  some  talent  in  the  very  fact  or  being 

child  of  God — a  son  or  dauj;:hter  of  the  Most  High. 


WOBK  FOB  JB8US.  89 

Thus  haT6 1  tried  to  open  ap  the  character  to  whom  the  Liord  speaks, 
hot  I  cannot  do  it  so  as  to  interest  those  who  are  not  his  people.  But  I 
do  saf  this  to  those  of  yon  who  arc  a  people  near  nnto  him,  to  whom  he 
stancb  as  a  Father,  that  this  fact  has  strong  claims  npon  jou.  If  I  be  a 
Father,  where  is  my  honour  ?  If  ye  be  my  children,  where  is  your  fear  ? 
If  indeed  the  Lord  has  put  you  into  his  family,  do  you  not  owe  to  him 
the  obedience  and  the  love  of  children,  and  wnat  can  be  more  natural 
that  if  there  be  a  household  work  to  do — ^vineyard  work  to  do — ^your 
Father  should  look  to  you  to  do  it,  and  turn  to  you  whom  he  has  loved 
so  long  and  loved  so  well,  and  say,  *'  Son,  daughter,  go  work  to-day  in  my 
vineyard"? 

II.    Well,  now,  secondly,  let  us  turn  to  the  next  point,  and  that  is, 

THB  SERVICE  TO  WHICH  THE  liORD  CALLS  US — "  Qo  WOrk." 

I  know  some  Christians  who  do  not  like  the  name  of  work,  and  they 
look  very  black  in  the  face  if  vou  say  anything  about  duty.    As  for  the 
matter  of  tbat>  I  do  not  mind  how  black  they  look,  because  there  are 
some  people  who  very  much  expose  their  own  disposition  by  black  looks 
and  soUen  moods ;  and  when  tney  turn  sour  they  only  manifest  what  is 
in  their  own  nature.    He  that  quarrels  with  the  precept  quarrels  with 
Grod.    Let  him  mind  that.    Andhe  that  does  not  like  tne  practical  part 
of  Christianity  may  do  what  he  likes  with  the  doctrinal  part  of  it,  for  he 
has  neither  part  nor  lot  in  this  matter.    The  langua^  of  the  true  child 
of  God  is,  "I  delight  myself  in  thy  precepts";  ana,  as  David  put  it, 
*^  Thy  precepts  have  be^  my  song  m  the  house  of  mv  pilgrimage." 
He  would  even  sing  about  the  precepts  of  the  gospel.    And  now  the  text 
says,  "  Oo  work."    That  is  something  practical,  something  real.    Gro 
work.    He  does  not  say,  "  My  son,  ^o  and  think  and  q)eculate,  and 
make  curious  experiments,  and  fetoh  out  some  new  doctrines  and 
astonish  all  thy  fellow  creatures  with  whims  and  oddities  of  thine  own." 
'*  My  son,  go  work."  And  he  does  not  here  say,  "  Mv  son,  go  and  attend 
conferences  one  after  another  all  the  year  round  and  live  in  a  perpetual 
maze  of  hearing  different  opinions  and  goin^  from  one  public  meeting 
and  one  religious  engagement  to  another,  ana  so  feed  thyself  on  the  fat 
things  full  of  marrow."    All  this  is  to  be  attended  to  in  its  proper  pro- 
portion, but  here  it  is  "  Go  work :  go  work."   How  many  Christians  there 
are  that  seem  to  read,  "  Qo  plan ; "  and  they  always  figure  in  a  way  with 
some  wonderful  plan  for  the  conversion  of  all  the  world,  but  they  are 
never  found  labouring  to  convert  a  baby — never  ha^^ng  a  good  word  to 
say  to  the  tiniest  child  in  the  Sunday-school.   They  are  always  scheming, 
and  yet  never  effecting  anything.  But  the  text  says,  "  My  son,  go  work." 
Oh,  yes,  but  those  who  do  not  like  to  work  themselves  display  the  great- 
ness of  their  talents  in  finding  fault  with  those  who  do  work,  and  a 
rery  clear  perception  they  have  of  the  mistakes  and  the  crotehets  of  the 
rery  best  of  workers,  whose  zeal  and  industry  are  alike  unflagging. 
Howbcit  the  text  does  not  say,  **  My  son,  go  and  criticize ;"  what  it  dis- 
tinctly says,  is,  "  Qo  and  work."    I  remember  that  when  Andrew  Fuller 
lad  a  very  severe  lecture  from  some  Scoteh  Baptist  brethren  about  the 
liseipline  of  the  church,  he  made  the  reply, "  You  say  that  your  discipline 
s  so  much  better  than  ours.    Very  well,  but  discipline  is  meant  to  make 
rood  soldiers.    Now,  my  soldiers  fight  better  than  yours,  and  I  think 
aerefore  that  you  ought  not  to  say  much  about  my  discipline."    So  the 


90  KETBOPOLnULH  TABKRKIOLB  PULPIT. 

real  thing  is  not  to  be  for  ever  calcnlating  about  modes  of  chnrch 
govemmenty  and  methods  of  management  and  plans  to  be  adopted 
and  rules  to  be  laid  down,  which  it  shall  be  accounted  a  serious 
breach  to  violate.  All  well  in  their  place,  for  order  is  good  in  its 
way.  But  come,  now,  let  us  go  to  work.  Let  us  have  something 
done.  I  believe  the  very  best  working  for  Qod  is  often  done  in  a 
very  irregular  manner.  I  get  more  and  more  to  feel  like  the  old 
soldier  of  Waterloo  when  he  was  examined  about  the  best  garment 
that  could  be  worn  by  a  soldier.  The  Duke  of  Wellington  said  to  him, 
"  If  you  had  to  fight  Waterloo  over  again  how  would  you  like  to  be 
dressed  ?"  The  answer  was,  "  Please,  sir,  I  should  like  to  be  in  my  shirt- 
sleeves." I  think  that  is  about  the  best.  Get  rid  of  everything  super- 
fluous, and  get  at  it  and  hack  away.  I  would  to  God  that  some 
Christians  could  do  that,  just  strip  to  it,  get  rid  of  the  superfluities  of 
orderliness  and  propriety,  and  everything  else  which  hampers  them  in 
trying  to  get  back  poor  souls.  There  they  are,  going  down  to  hell,  and 
we  are  stickling  about  this  mode  and  that,  and  considering  the  best 
way  not  to  do  it,  and  appointing  committees  to  consider  and  debate, 
to  adjourn  and  to  postpone,  and  to  leave  the  work  in  abeyance.  The 
best  way  is  to  arise  and  do  it,  and  let  the  committee  sit  afterwards. 
God  grant  we  may.  My  son,  go  work  to-day.  Let  it  be  something 
practical,  something  real,  something  actually  done. 

And  by  good  Work  is  meant  something  that  will  involve  effort,  toil, 
earnestness,  self-denial,  perhaps  something  that  will  want  perseverance. 
In  right  earnest  you  will  need  to  stick  to  it.    You  will  have  heartily  to 
yield  yourself  np  to  it,  and  give  up  a  good  deal  else  that  might  hinder 
you  in  doing  it.    Oh,  Christian  men  and  women,  you  will  not  gloriftr 
God  much  unless  you  really  put  your  strength  into  the  ways  of  the  Lord, 
and  throw  your  body,  soul,  and  spirit — your  entire  manhood  and  woman- 
hood— ^into  the  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     To  do  this  you  need 
not  leave  your  families,  or  your  shoDS,  or  your  secular  engagements. 
You  can  serve  God  in  these  things.    They  wiU  often  be  vantage  grounds 
of  opportunity  for  you,  but  you  must  throw  yourself  into  it.    A  man 
does  not  win  souls  to  Christ  while  he  is  himself  half  asleep.    The  battle 
that  is  to  be  fought  for  the  Lord  Jesus  must  be  fought  by  men  who  are 
wide  awake  and  quickened  by  the  Spirit  of  God.     "  My  son,  go  work 
to-day."    Do  not  go  and  play  at  teacning  in  Sunday-schools.    Do  not 
go  and  play  the  preacher.    Do  not  go  and  play  at  exhorting  people  at  the 
comers  of  streets,  or  even  play  at  giving  away  tracts.    "  My  son,  go 
work."    Tlirow  thy  soul  into  it.    If  it  is  worth  doing  it  is  worth  doing 
well ;  and  if  it  is  worth  doing  well,  it  is  worth  doing  better  than  you 
have  ever  done  it  yet ;  and  even  then  it  will  be  worth  doing  better  still, 
for  when  you  have  done  your  best  you  have  still  to  reach  forward  to  a 
something  far  beyond  ;  for  the  best  of  the  best  is  all  too  little  for  such 
a  God  and  for  such  a  service.    "  My  son,  go  work." 

Well,  now,  such  a  claim  as  this  may,  perhaps,  you  think,  sound  rather 
hard ;  but  I  could  tell  you  of  many  who  would  be  very  glad  indeed  if 
the  Lord  would  say  that  to  them.  I  might  tell  you  of  some  who  seldom 
leave  their  couches,  some  who  can  seldom  sit  upright  through  their 
weakneM,  to  whom  the  nights  are  often  ftill  of  pain,  and  die  days  are  spent 
weariness.    They  hftve  learned,  by  God's  teaching,  to  be  oonteat  to 


woBK  FOB  nsm.  91 

Boflbr ;  bat  loinetimet  they  cannot  stifle  an  aident  widi ;  they  wish  the 
Loid  woqU  let  them  serve  him.  They  do  not  envy,  bnt  yet  there 
■ometimet  croeseB  orer  their  mind  the  uiadow  of  something  like  enyy 
when  they  recollect  what  opportonities  some  of  you  haye,  who  are  fhU 
rf  health  and  strength.  I  have  seen  my  brother  minister  laid  aside,  the 
Toioe  peihaps  gone,  the  Inngs  feeble,  the  heart  prone  to  palpitate, 
wadf  Wf  how  he  has  wished  that  he  conld  preach.  With  what  fervour 
has  he  said,  ''Oh,  if  I  had  bnt  those  opportunities  over  again,  how  I 
would  trf  to  use  them  better  than  when  I  was  favoured  with  them  I  I 
tell  yon  there  are  thousands  of  Gk)d*s  servants  who  would  Idss  the 
duet  of  his  feet  if  he  would  only  say  to  them, ''  Go  work."  I  remember 
reading  of  a  minister  who  had  been  labouring  in  America  till  he  had 
fidrly  broken  down.  He  had  to  take  a  tour  for  his  health.  He  had 
not  Deen  away  many  days  before  he  wrote  in  his  diary,  ''  There  may 
be  mme  ministers  who  count  it  a  pleasure  to  be  relieved  from  the 
doty  of  preaching,  but  I  count  it  a  misery.  I  would  sooner  preach  as  I 
have  done  in  my  own  pulpit  continually  than  I  would  see  all  the  king- 
dom! of  ttie  world."  And,  indeed,  there  is  no  pleasure  in  the  world  like 
that  of  serving  Ood.  You  will  soon  get  tired  if  you  have  a  vacation, 
Imt  yon  will  never  get  tired  of  a  divine  vocation,  though  you  may  some- 
time! grow  tired  in  it  Now,  think  that  the  Lord  might  have  said  to  you, 
^  Now,  go  and  lie  on  that  bed  for  ten  years.  Oo  and  pine  away  in  con- 
somption.  I  have  nothing  much  for  you  to  do.  Ton  have  got  to  bear 
my  wilL"  Are  you  not  very  glad  that  you  are  full  of  strength,  or  that 
yon  have  some  shaze  of  ity  and  that  now  your  heavenly  Father  says, 
''Son,  flo  work.  I  have  given  you  strength:  go  work"?  Lordi  we 
thank  t£ee  for  so  Idnd  and  gentle  a  command. 

Besides,  there  is  a  great  deal  of  honour  in  this  work.  You  know  how 
much  your  little  boy  wants  to  be  a  man.  All  boys  do.  When  he  first 
wears  stick-up  collars  he  congratulates  himself  upon  the  sign  of  any- 
thing like  being  a  man.  How  proud  he  is  of  it !  And  if  you,  being  a 
fiither,  were  to  say  to  your  boy,  "  My  son,  you  are  now  of  such  an 
age  that  I  can  trust  you  to  do  some  work  for  me";  see  how  the  little 
man  would  begin  to  lift  himself  up  :  he  is  glad  of  it.  And  I  am  sure 
that  if  we  look  at  it  rightly,  we  who  are  the  children  of  God  ought 
to  feel  honoured  by  our  heavenly  Father  saying  to  us,  "  You  may  do 
something  for  me.  We  must  be  very  humble,  for,  after  all,  we  cannot 
do  anythmg  except  as  he  worketh  in  us  to  wiU  and  to  do.  But  it  is 
really  very  gratifying  and  ennobling  to  a  poor  mortal  spirit  to  be 
allowed  to  do  anything  for  God,  av,  and  to  do  what  perfect  saints  above 
and  holv  angels  cumot  do ;  for  oh,  dear  brother,  tnere  is  no  glorified 
Ryirit  tnat  can  go  down  that  back  street  and  up  that  blind  alley,  and  up 
tooee  staircases  that  seem  as  if  they  would  tumble  down  under  your  feet. 
Go  Bod  ttSk  to  that  dying  woman  about  Christ.  You  have  a  privilege 
wfaidi  honoured  Gabriel  has  not  got :  be  thankful  that  you  have  it. 
There  is  no  angel  that  can  take  that  little  child  in  the  Sunday-school 
chss  and  tell  it  of  ''Gentle  Jesus,  meek  and  mild,"  and  carry  the  little 
Iamb  for  the'Good  Shepherd.  The  Lord  sends  you  to  do  it.  And  it 
ihonld  be  a  point  of  tnankfulness  with  us  all  that  he  has  counted  us 
wordiy,  and  put  ns  into  the  ministry — into  any  part  or  parcel  of  that 
wiDitltxy'^^tib  do  something  for  his  name's  sake.    Well^  we  are  always 


K 


02  METROPOLITAV  TABEBVAOU  FULPR. 

receiving — ^alwa;^8  receiving,  and  it  is  Terr  bleiBed ;  bat  aCQl  in  thii,  as 
in  other  things,  it  is  more  blessed  to  give  Uum  to  receive;  and  when  le 
(•4111  give  y>ack  to  God  some  little  trifle  of  aervioe,  rtained  with  our  tean 
liecrauiic  it  is  no  better  than  it  is,  oh,  it  is  a  happj  and  a  Uesaed  thng, 
lluw  gratcftil  you  ought  to  be  that  the  Lord  ooes  say  to  joUy  ''Son,  go 
work  to-day." 

And  remember,  once  more,  on  this  point,  Uiat  the  wotk  to  niddi  tbe 
Lord  (Mills  us  is  very  variecl^  therefore  there  is  a  great  deal  of  dunlin 
it ;  and,  Inwidcs  that,  it  suits  the  different  temperamenta,  ooDBtitiitioiii) 
(liHiumitioiiH,  and  abilities  of  his  people.  He  says,  **  My  son,  go  iroik  feo- 
(Ifiy  in  my  viucy(u*d."  But  he  aoes  not  give  you  to  do  my  work,  and  he 
(locH  not  give  me  to  do  your  work.  Dear  sister,  you  would  like  to  do 
thu  work  of  such  and  such  an  excellent  Christian  woman,  wonld  ndt 
(111  ?  Y(^H,  but  that  is  naughty  of  you.  Be  satisfied  to  do  yonr  cmtL 
u|)p(»No  your  housemaid  cufways  wanted  to  do  the  oook'a  work,  the 
liotiHc  would  soon  bo  in  bad  order.  Better  keep  to  your  own  place,  dear 
mU\r,  Ah,  there  is  a  brother  here  who  says,  ^  I  thmk  I  could  preach  if 
I  only  hud  such  and  such  a  congregation.''  Very  likely,  brotlier,  bat 
vou  hud  better  preach  to  your  own  and  do  wimt  good  you  can  there. 
Vt*ry  likely  I  should  do  better  with  mr  own  congregation,  and  you  will 
do  ImiIUt  with  yours  than  I  should.  Every  man  nad  better  keep  to  his 
own  work  in  his  own  pkicc.  And  how  thankful  we  ought  to  be  that  if 
ontt  can  pn^'h  a  senuon,  yet  another  can  offer  a  prayer, — that  if  one 
can  go  and  H|)eak  to  thousands,  yet  another  can  speak  to  ones  and  twos. 
'V\m\\  is  work  in  Uio  school ;  there  is  work  in  the  fiunily ;  there  is 
work  in  thu  street ;  thero  is  work  in  the  workshop ;  there  is  weak  every- 
where for  Jesus  if  thou  wilt  but  stretch  out  thy  hand  to  find  it  and 
follow  Holomon's  good  advice,  *'  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do 
it  with  thy  might.^' 

1 1 1.  Now,  THB  TIMB  IS  the  next  thing.  "  My  son,  go  work  Uhiagr 
That  moans  directly — ^now. 

Brother,  sister,  I  will  not  say  a  word  about  what  it  is  .your  duty  to 
do  to-morrow.  Let  the  morrow  take  care  of  itself.  I  will  have  nothing 
to  say  about  what  it  will  l>c  right  for  you  to  do  in  ten  years'  time.  If 
you  are  alive,  grace  will  bo  given  to  you  for  that.  But  what  I  have  to 
say  to  you  in  (iod's  name  is,  "  Oo  work  to-day,"  and  as  the  sun  baa  gone 
down,  let  it  be,  **  Qo  work  to-night  in  my  vmeyard,"  if  there  be  oj^Kyr- 
tunity,  even  to-night,  ere  anotlier  day's  sun  has  dawned  upon  the  world* 
**  Ana  why  to-day  ?'*  Because,  brother,  thy  Father  wants  thee  to  be 
at  it  at  once.  "  why  stand  ye  here  all  the  day  idle  V*  If  thou  hast 
done  nothing  for  Christ  thou  hast  wasted  enough  time.  Do  not  rest 
to-day,  but  be  at  it  now.  He  wants  thee  to  do  it  now,  because  the  vines 
are  in  a  certain  condition  that  just  now  require  work.  There  is  some- 
body in  the  world  who  is  in  a  tender  state  of  mind,  to  whom  thou  mayest 
speak  successfully.  There  is  a  mourner  here  who  wants  comfort  to- 
night. There  is  one  struggling  against  his  conscience,  who  wants  urging 
on  to-night  in  the  right  way.  It  the  case  be  neglected  to-night  it  wifi 
be  like  neglecting  to  trim  the  vines  just  at  the  proper  time  for  taking 
away  the  superfluous  wood.  Now  canst  thou  do  it.  Thou  canst  not  do 
it  on  any  other  day.    Therefore,  "  go  work  to-day." 

*'  To-day/'  because  there  are  certain  dangers  to  which  those  whom 


k 


WORK  FOB  JESUS.  93 

thon  art  aboat  to  bless  are  just  now  exposed.  The  devil  is  tempting 
them :  it  is  needful  that  thon  go  and  help  them  against  that  tempta- 
tion. Tbey  are  jnst  now  in  despair ;  it  is  needftd  that  thon  step  in  with 
the  word  of  comfort  from  thy  Master's  month.  They  are,  perhaps,  this 
yeiy  night,  before  they  go  to  their  rest,  abont  to  commit  a  great  sin. 
Mayhap  the  Lord  means  thee  to  interpose  jnst  now,  ere  that  sin  be 
done.  Son,  go  work  to-day ;  thou  art  wanted.  There  are  very  few 
labonrers  jnst  now  :  many  of  them  have  gone.  Son,  do  thon  go  to-day, 
while  Uie  others  have  gone  ont  for  their  recreation — while  the  others  are 
adeep  and  grown  idle.  There  is  a  ^p  jnst  now :  it  is  at  this  moment. 
Muiy  a  brare  deed  of  valour  owed  its  success  to  being  done  at  once.  If 
Horatius  had  not  kept  the  bridge  just  in  that  same  moment  when  the 
enemy  endeavoured  to  pass  over,  we  should  never  have  heard  of  him, 
nor  of  the  brave  deeds  of  old.  There  is  a  time  of  dearth — of  want : 
thexB  is  an  urgency.  Son,  God  saith  to  thee, '"  Haste  thee  now,  even 
now,  and  go  work  to-day  in  my  vineyard."    "  To-day :"  mark  that. 

It  means  work  all  the  day :  work  as  long  as  ever  you  live.  Son,  if 
once  thou  get  into  that  vineyard  do  not  come  home  again  until  the  day 
is  done.  I  am  alwavs  sorry  when  I  hear  of  Christian  people  beginning 
to  give  up  some  of  tneir  work  before  the  infirmities  of  old  age  come  on ; 
idtnough  I  think  that  many  a  minister,  when  he  gets  old,  had  better 
give  xip  a  charge  for  which  he  is  not  equal  and  take  one  smaller  for 
^hich  nis  strength  would  avail.  But  I  know  that  some  give  up  this 
work  and  that,  and  they  say,  ^'Let  the  young  people  come  and  take 
their  turn."  Yes,  yes,  but  suppose  the  sun  were  to  stop  shining  and  say, 
**  There  is  a  star  over  there ;  let  him  have  a  turn  and  shine  instead  of 
mc"  Suppose  the  moon  were  for  ever  to  give  up  shining  in  the  night 
watches,  and  say  that  she  has  had  enough  of  being  out  at  night ;  and 
suppose  the  earth  were  to  say  it  has  had  enough  of  yielding  harvests. 
"  Why  should  I  yield  any  more  ?  Let  the  sea  take  its  turn  and  grow 
com."  And  so,  dear  Christian  Ariends,  keep  on  as  long  as  you  can. 
Who  can  blame  dear  old  John  Newton  ?  When  he  got  too  feeble  to  get 
np  the  pulpit  stairs  of  St.  Mary  Woolnoth,  he  was  helped  up,  and  then, 
leam'ng  on  his  pulpit  Bible  be  poured  out  his  soul.  A  friena  of  his  said 
to  him, "Dear  Mr.  Newton,  don't  you  think  you  ought  to  give  up 
preaching  ?"  "  What  I"  said  he,  "  shall  the  old  African  blasphemer  ever 
rive  up  praising  the  grace  of  God  as  long  as  there  is  breath  m  his  body  ? 
Never.  And  so  he  went  to  his  work  again.  Oh,  for  more  of  that 
spirit  to  persevere  in  the  Master's  service. 

Only  mere  is  this  thought :  it  is  only  a  day.  "  Son,  go  work  to-day."  j 
It  will  only  be  a  day.  The  longest  life  is  no  more,  and  then  the  shadows 
of  death  will  gather :  but  there  will  be  no  night,  for  instead  thereof  the 
day  shall  bre&  and  the  shadows  shall  flee  away,  and  then  life's  service 
here  below  will  all  be  over.  There  will  be  no  troublesome  children 
to  teach,  no  hard-hearted  sinners  to  rebuke,  no  backsliding,  lukewarm 
Christians  to  reprove,  no  deceivers  to  encounter,  no  sceptics  to  answer 
with  the  testimony  that  cannot  be  shaken,  no  scoffers  to  put  up  with, 
patiently  bearing  their  contumely.  It  will  be  all  over  then ;  and  then 
shall  those  who  ^ve  served  their  Master  behold  him  gird  himself  and  sit 
down  and  serve  them,  and  they  shall  feast  at  his  table  and  enter  into  bis 
joy.    "  My  son,  go  work  to-day,"  for  thou  shalt  rest  to-morrow.    Work 


94  METBOPOLITIH  TABBBVICLB  PULPIT. 

on,  for  there  is  reft  enonf h  in  heaven :  woilc  on,  for  eiemit j  shall  vdl 
repsT  thee  for  the  toils  of  time. 

rC'.  Then ;  as  to  the  place  whebk  the  Loud  galls  ub  to  thi 
WORK.    **  Mj  son,  go  work  to-day  in  my  vin^ard" 

I  h'ke  to  think  of  this  special  sphere  of  labonry  becanae  it  must  bet 
pleasure  to  work  in  onr  Father's  vineyard,  for  there  everything  that  we 
do  will  be  done  for  him.  I  trim  this  vine  ;  it  is  my  Father  s  vine.  I 
dig  this  trench ;  but  it  is  my  Father  s  ground  I  tnm.  I  gather  oat 
these  stones ;  it  is  my  Father's  nneyard  that  I  am  engaerd  in  clearing. 
I  repair  this  fence ;  it  is  my  Father's  soil  that  I  am  thus  ncdging  abonL 
It  is  all  done  for  him.  mio  would  not  do  all  that  he  could  for  the  dear 
Redeemer,  dying  Lamb,  and  for  the  blessed  Father  of  onr  spirits  ?  "  Go 
work  to-day  in  my  vineyard." 

Then  what  interesting  work  it  is,  for  it  is  our  own  vineyard  became 
it  is  our  Father's  vineyard.  All  that  belongs  to  him  belongs  to  us. 
We  are  sons  working  in  our  Father's  vineyard ;  so  we  can  aav,  "  This 
vine ;  why,  I  have  an  interest  in  it,  for  I  am  the  heir  of  my  Father's  pro- 
perty. This  ground  that  I  endeavour  to  df^  abont  and  manure; 
it  is  my  ground,  it  is  my  Father's.  And  this  wall  that  I  tir  to 
mend  ;  it  is  mini*,  it  is  my  Father's.'*  It  is  always  pleasant  to  work  fcx 
ourselves,  you  know  ;  and,  in  a  blessed  sense,  when  we  are  working  for 
God  we  are  working  for  ourselves.  Ye  are  lalxiurers,  ye  are  God  s  hus- 
bandry, ye  are  (iod's  people ;  and  when  ye  are  working  for  the  Lord  ye 
really  are  taking  shares  with  him. 

And  what  a  work  it  Ls,  too !  "  Go  work  to-day  in  my  vineyard." 
One  likes  working  in  a  vineyard,  because  it  pays.  Working  in  a 
desert  may  be  thankless  toil ;  but  working  in  a  vineyard  where  there  will 
be  clusters  is  very  different.  One  can  think  already  of  those  juicr 
grapes  that  will  be  ready  for  the  winepress,  and  for  the  festiral, 
when  the  ruddy  juice  comes  freely  forth — when  they  make  merry  and 
joy  in  the  vint^e.  And  you  will  have  the  new  wine,  and  the  wine  on 
the  lees  well  refined.  All  sorts  of  pleasures  await  the  man  who  servei 
the  Lord. 

"  Go  work  in  my  vineyard."  Does  it  not  mean  that  the  work  is 
plentiful  ?  There  is  always  something  to  be  done  in  a  vineyard.  If 
vou  ask  those  who  keep  vines  they  will  tell  you  that  there  is  much 
labour  required.  From  one  part  of  the  year  right  on  there  is  something 
still  to  \)(i  done,  many  dangers  to  be  averted,  and  many  enemies  to  be 
kept  off  from  the  vine ;  so  there  is  plenty  to  do,  brother.  Go  work  in 
the  vineyard,  where  there  will  be  need  of"  ail  thy  hands.  It  is  close  at 
hand  ;  hard  by  you ;  for  the  heavenly  Fatlier  did  not  say,  "  Son,  take 
a  ship  and  go  to  Tarshish,  or  to  Ophir."  He  said,  *'  My  son,  go  work  in 
my  vineyard";  and  the  nneyard  was  ^'ust  out  of  the  back  door  there. 
Now,  your  heavenly  Father's  vineyard  is  close  to  you.  Those  streets  where 
jrou  live — the  very  house  in  which  you  dwell — perhaps  the  very  chamber 
in  which  you  sleep — is  God's  vineyard,  where  you  are  to  work  for  him.  It 
is  your  heavenly  Father's  own  work,  to  Ixj  done  l»y  you  in  your  heavenly 
Father's  own  strength.  Oh,  if  I  might  to-night  set  one  young  man 
on  lire  with  love  to  Christ  I  should  l>e  glad.  If  I  could  but  be  the 
humble  means  of  inspiring  some  Christian  woman  with  the  high  mission 
of  being  useful  in  her  day  and  generation,  how  much  would  my  soul 


vou  fOB  nsm.  sa 

rejoice !  There  came  into  thia  Tabernacle  one  evening  a  jonng  gentlenutn 
who  was  well  known  ae  being  a  great  hand  with  hie  cricket  bat.  Ha 
was  a  Christian  and  fall  of  eamcstiiess  in  laying  hold  upon  the  great 
tontha  of  revelation  ;  but  he  had  never  seryed  hia  God.  He  thought  it 
right  to  spend  hia  leisure  time  in  manly  cxereieea,  and  in  Buch  purenita 
he  sought  recreation.  But  while  I  spoke  a  fire  kindled  within  him, 
ind  he  went  home  to  begin  to  preacn  the  gospel  in  the  street  of  the 
city  where  he  lived,  and  now  he  is  the  pastor  of  a  large  and  influential 
church  which  he  has  gathered  together.  Since  then  he  haa  preached 
more  than  once  in  thia  place  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  Oh,  that  aomo 
other  believer  who  may  happen  to  be  in  that  condition — aomeyonng 
man  of  ability  who  is  spending  all  his  strength  on  the  world  without 
goin^  into  anything  grossly  wrong,  but  simply  wasting  his  talents— 
might  hear  a  voice  saying  to  him  to-night,  as  he  goes  down  that  aisle, 
"  My  son,  go  work  to-day  in  my  vineyard." 

After  dwelling  so  long  upon  the  practical  admonition,  I  have  but 
little  time  lefl  for  that  brief  explanation  of  the  parable,  or  more  pro- 
perly the  parables  of  the  vineyard  with  which  on  the  outset  I  promised 
to  close.  The  occaaion  on  which  they  were  spoken  is  memorable. 
Aaaailcd  "while  he  u-at  leaehing," — rudely  interrapted  by  the  legal  san- 
hedrimof  the  Jews  with  the  high  priest  in  the  forefront,  they  confronted 
onr  Lord  as  it  were  with  a  warrant  and  prowjunded  to  hira  two  (jues- 
tions  ; — one  as  to  the  authority  or  title  by  which  he  acted— the  other  as 
to  the  source  from  which  his  authority  was  derived.  You  all  know  how 
skilfully  he  evaded  his  nnscrnpnlons  antagoniBts.  "  I  also  mill  ask  you 
ene  thing"  he  said.  Therewith  ho  put  to  them  aqncstion  that  proved  a 
poeer,  and  left  them  to  a  ridicnioua  parley,  for  "  Ihty  rfaaorted  among 
tkemtelvea,"  went  aside  to  whisper,  and  then  drew  back  in  sheer  timidity 
declining  an  answer,  for  "  ihe>j  feared  ihe  people"  or  aa  yon  may  read  it, 
they  were  afraid  of  the  mob.  The  advantage  our  Lord  thas  gained  he 
qnickly  followed  up  with  a  parable — in  fact,  with  the  parable  we  have 
been  talking  about.  He  opened  it  thus, — "  What  think  yef" — putting 
a  query  about  two  aons,  toe  one  forward  in  profession,  yet  utterly  dis- 
obedient, the  other  sullen  in  appearance  though  aflerwards  penitent  in 
Spirit  and  diligent  in  labour.  The  thing  was  bo  obvioua  that  they 
answer  without  hesitation  with  a  reply  that  nailed  the  censure  to  their 
own  breasts.  "Whether  of  these  twain  did  the  will  of  hia  father  ?" 
They  say  unto  him,  "  the  first."  Read  it,  read  the  parable  for  your- 
selves. Realize  the  force  of  it  if  you  can.  The  penitent  harlot  and  the 
obdnrat«  high  priest  are  put  in  the  scales.  "In  Ihf  way  of  righteoue- 
fiesg  " — according  to  the  truthful  caricature — the  chief  priests  and 
^ers  themselves  admit  that  "  Ihe  first "  of  these  twain  did  the  will 
of  our  heavenly  Father.  Digest  this  parable,  I  pray  you.  Almost 
without  s  break  the  vmn/ard  supplied  liim  yet  again  with  another 
parable  which  he  insisted  on  their  hearing — a  parable  that  brought 
oat  the  character  of  the  dispensation  and  "  the  signs  of  the  times  " 
■0  distinctly,  that  they  coald  not  fail  to  read  it  in  the  light  of  their 
own  prophets,  and  at  the  same  time  it  so  exposed  the  treachery  of 
their  counsel  and  conspiracy  that  they  recognized  their  own  portrait  at 
once  and  perceived  that  he  spake  of  them.  "  The  vineyard,"  you  are  all 
awan,  wu  the  conitaot  ^rin^)  ^  ^  Jewish  nation  as  a  theocracy. 


1)6  MKTBOPOLITAN  TABBRHICLK  PULPIT. 

The  men  that  sat  in  Moees's  seat  were  the  stewards  in  charge  of  thai 
vinojard  which  was  Jehoyah's  special  property.    They,  like  the  penene 
ralcrs  of  every  age,  sought  to  shelter  their  evil  designs  under  cover  of 
syndicates  and  conferences.    But  the  words  and  warnings  of  Jesus,  hii 
proverbs  and  parables,  were  keen  enough  to  probe  all  their  subtleties,  and 
leave  them  to  stand  abashed  without  an  excuse  for  the  guile  of  their 
hearts  or  the  guilt  of  their  conduct.    Now  remember  that  the  kinedom 
of  Qod  was  taken  from  them  and  ^ven  to  a  nation  bringing  fcri^  the 
fruits  thereof.    To  whai  nation  is  it  given  ?    Is  it  not  to  the  church 
which  is  (»dled  '*  a  chosen  generation,  a  royal  priesthood,  an  holy  nation, 
a  pecuh'ar  people ;  that  ye  should  shew  forui  the  praises  of  him  who  hath 
called  yon  out  of  darkness  into  his  marvellous  light"  ?    The  vine  is  the 
express  symbol  of  our  Christian  life,  as  all  believers  are  incorporated  with 
Christ.    Well  then,  there  is  a  vineyard  of  Qod*s  own  planting ;  you 
believe  that.    He  has  let  it  out  to  husbandmen  ;  you  believe  that.    He 
will  come  seeking  fruit  of  this  vineyard  ;  you  believe  that    Yon  are, 
dear  brethren,  the  children  of  the  husbandmen ;  you  believe  that,  or  else 
you  would  not  presume  to  sit  at  his  table  and  drink  of  his  cup.    He 
says  therefore  to  you,  "  Son^o  work  in  my  vineyard."  What  answer  do 
you  give  with  your  lips  ?     What  answer  do  you  give  with  your  life  ? 

Thus  far  I  have  not  been  speaking  to  unconverted  jpeople.  I  have 
not  said  a  word  to  them.  To  them,  however,  I  have  this  word  to  say, 
and  I  have  done.  I  shall  not  ask  you  to  work  for  Christ.  I  cannot  ex- 
hort you  to  do  anything  for  him.  Yon  are  not  in  a  state  of  mind  to 
do  it.  You  must  first  ^licve  in  him.  Oh,  let  it  be  a  sorrow  to  you  to- 
night that  you  are  incapable  of  serving  Christ.  Till  you  get  a  new 
heart  and  a  right  spirit  you  have  no  capacity  to  serve  him.  Yon 
have  first  to  trust  Christ,  and  to  prove  in  your  own  souls  that  this 
gospel  is  the  power  of  Gk)d  to  your  salvation.  Your  eyes  must  be 
opened ;  you  must  be  turned  from  darkness  to  li^ht,  and  fh>m  the 
power  of  Satan  to  God,  that  you  may  receive  forgiveness  of  sins  and 
mhcritaucc  among  them  which  are  sanctified  by  faith  in  Jesus,  before 
vou  can  do  anything  for  him.  Then,  not  till  then,  will  ye  be  meet  to 
be  made  witnesses  both  of  those  thines  which  ye  shall  have  seen  and  of 
those  tlunp^s  in  the  which  he  will  hereafter  appear  unto  you.  You 
must  be  born  again  yourselves  before  ye  can  travail  in  birth  for  othera^ 
till  Christ  be  formed  in  them.  You  cannot  testify,  those  of  you  by  whom 
the  testimonv  of  Christ  has  not  been  received  and  in  whom  it  is  not 
confirmed.  iTonr  unskilled  labour  would  be  mischievous.  Hands  off 
such  holy  work  bill  those  hands  have  been  washed  clean  by  Jesus  Christ. 
Come  ye  unto  him,  and  trust  him,  and  believe  in  him,  and  when  he 
has  saved  you,  then  he  will  say  to  you,  "  Son,  go  work  to-day  in  my 
vineyard." 


Portion  op  Sobipturb  Read  bbforb  Sermon— Matthew  xxi.  12—32. 


Htmns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 23  (Vers.  IT.),  Cyr.o. 


\ 


|ll£tt[jpllto  i^alrmmde  fnlpt 


IDOLS  ABOLISHED. 


DSLITBBBD  BT 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  TBM  KSTROFOLITABr  TABEBVAOLB,  NBWIKOTOV. 


^'Bf/bxt^  thill  Mff,  "Wliai  have  I  to  d6  anymore  with  idols  ?"— Homa  zit.  a 

iDOikAXBT  was  the  ^pceat  un  of  the  ten  tribes  represented  by  Epbraim: 
indeed^  it  is  tbe  sin  of  the  entire  human  race.  When  we  speak  of 
idolatry  we  need  not  think  of  blocks  of  wood  and  stone,  and  blad^ 
men  bowing  down  before  them ;  for  onr  native  land  swarms  with  idola- 
tenk  Neiuier  need  you  go  into  the  streets  to  find  them :  stav  where 
yoa  aie,  and  look  into  your  own  hearts,  and  yon  shall  find  idols  tiiera 
This  is  the  one  easily  besetting  sin  of  oar  natnre — to  turn  aside  &om 
the  living  God  and  to  make  nnto  ourselves  idols  in  some  fashion  or 
another ;  for  the  essence  of  idolatry  is  this — to  love  anything  better 
than  God,  to  trust  anything  more  tlum.  God,  to  wish  to  have  a  God  oUier 
than  we  have,  or  to  have  some  signs  and  wonders  by  which  we  may 
flee  him,  some  outward  symbol  or  manifestation  that  can  be  seen  with 
the  eye  or  heard  with  the  ear  rather  than  to  rest  in  an  invisible  God 
and  oelieve  the  faithful  promise  of  Him  whom  eye  hath  not  seen  nor  ear 
heard.  In  some  form  or  other  this  great  sin  is  the  main  mischief  in 
the  heart  of  man ;  and  even  in  saved  men  this  is  one  of  the  developments 
of  remaining  corruption.  We  may  very  easily  make  an  idol  of  anything, 
and  in  different  ways.  No  doubt  many  mothers  and  fathers  make  idols 
ef  their  children,  and  so  many  husbands  and  wives  idolize  each  other, 
and  we  may  even  make  idols  of  ministers,  even  as  there  were  idol 
shepherds  of  old.  Equally  is  it  certain  that  many  a  thoughtful  man 
makes  an  idol  of  his  intellect,  and  many  another  makes  an  idol  of  his 

5 old,  or  even  of  that  little  home  wherein  he  enjoys  so  much  content. 
^he  Ignorant  papist  holds  up  his  crucifix  and  worships  that,  and  that  is 
his  idol ;  but  men  who  are  better  instructed  often  take  the  Bible  and 
read  that,  and  flailing  to  get  through  the  letter  into  the  spirit,  they  trust 
in  the  mere  act  of  ^ripture  reading  and  make  even  the  word  itself  to 
faeocHne  an  idol  to  them  through  their  resting  in  a  mere  creed,  or  in 
bare  Bible  reading,  and  not  pressing  through  it  to  spiritual  hearty 
No.  1,889. 


98  HETBOFOLITAN  TABSBVAOLK  PUUPIT. 

worsbip  of  God  himself.  Anything,  however  hoij,  wbidi  oonMibetieai 
us  and  the  personal  dealing  of  onr  sonl  with  God^  as  he  iff  rereried  in 
Christ  Jesus,  by  faith  and  ToTe  and  hope,  beocHnes  an  idol  to  m. 

There  are  idols  of  all  sorts,  more  or  less  intrinsicaUT  Yaloabie.  Jut 
as  in  material  substances  one  idol  is  made  of  wood  and  anottier  <tf  sUne, 
and  another  of  silver,  and  another  of  gdd,  so  Aafc  these  idota  diflhrin 
vahe,  and  yet  they  are  all  idols,  so  may  men,  aoeording  to  their  diffaRBt 
grades  of  mind,  make  an  idol  of  this  or  of  that  or  of  the  other,  ereijinn 
according  to  his  own  fancy.  Many  of  these  idols  may  in  themselfesbe 
consider^  good  enough,  but  when  they  are  made  into  idob  thej  ue 
none  the  better  for  that.  A  golden  idol  is  just  as  olmoxioos  to  God  as  a 
wooden  one;  and  so  the  dearest  and  best  thing  on  earth,  if  it  be  alknnd 
to  come  between  us  and  God,  as  an  idol,  it  becomes  an  abomination  in 
the  sight  of  the  Most  High.  0  brother,  when  yon  cannot  femst  the 
providence  of  God,  but  feel  as  if  yon  must  have  ■omething  of  visOde 
substance  to  lean  upon,  you  idolize  your  savings,  or  the  money  yon  covet 
When  von  cannot  take  the  bare  promise,  and  daze  not  ride  everything 
for  Goo,  bnt  want  something  over  and  above  the  word  of  God  to  rest  in, 
yon  idolize  your  own  selfishness.  When  yon  must  have  marks  and  signs 
and  evidences  of  the  things  which  God  has  plainly  dedaied,  and  will  not 
bdieve  God  unless  you  have  corroborative  proof,  yon  are  pbying  the 
idolater's  part.  Yet  human  nature  continually  craves  fw  more  than  God 
Allsufficient,  because  it  is  so  carnal  that  it  will  not  tmet  the  Invisarie 
One.  It  is,  therefore,  a  supreme  woik  of  grace  when  God  toings  mj 
man  to  say,  ''What  have  I  to  do  any  more  with  idols?  ** 

I  ask  your  attention  to  four  points. 

I.  And  the  first  is  this :  I  want  yon  to  notice  THl  BOraauBwn 
OF  THIS  FBEDicrioK.  ''  Ephraim  shall  say.  What  have  I  to  do  mf 
more  with  idols  ?' 

God  speaks  of  Ephraim  as  if  Ephraim  would  do  and  most  do  what 
he  decla^  he  should  do.  "  Ephraim  shall  say.  What  have  I  lo  do 
any  more  with  idols  ?'*  But  who  was  this  Ephraim  ?  If  we  ]aA  at 
him  as  an  individual  he  represents  the  ten  tribes  of  Israel  at  tin  ton 
when  they  were  wedded  to  strange  gods,  Ephraim  is  a  man,  and  then- 
fore  he  has  a  will  of  his  own  ;  he  is  a  depraved  man,  and  tiierofare  he 
has  an  obstinate  will :  and  yet  God  speaks  about  Ephndm  as  positively 
as  if  he  had  no  will,  and  states  that  ne  shall  say,  '*  What  have  I  to  do 
any  more  with  idols  ?"  It  would  be  very  hard  to  say  what  the  wind 
shall  do— very  hard  to  say  what  the  waves  shall  do ;  but  man's  will  is 
more  changeable  and  uncontrollable  than  the  winds  and  the  waves.  Tet 
God  Bjmsaketh  as  if  Ephraim  were  absolutely  in  his  hand,  and  he  tells  ns 
what  Ephraim  shall  say,  and,  in  fact,  what  Ephraim  shall  feeL  It  is 
wondernil — is  it  not  ? — ^that  God  who  knows  humtm  inconstancy  and 
wilfhlness,  thus  speaketh  about  the  mind  of  man  and  declareth  what 
he  shall  say  and  what  he  shall  feel. 

Now,  in  all  this  it  is  to  be  observed  that  there  is  no  violation  of  the 
hnman  will.  Men  are  not  blocks  of  ^vood :  nor  lumps  of  unconsoions 
clay.  God  has  made  man  a  creature  that  wills  and  determines  and  judges 
for  himself;  and  he  deals  with  him  as  such.  There  are  persons  who 
seem  to  fancy  that,  whenever  we  speak  of  God  as  being  omnipotent  in 
the  r^dm  of  mind,  and  speak  of  his  declaring  what  men  shaU  do  and 


-    '  ■  ■■     BUA IBOUBBIB.  99 

feeU  that  we  therefore  deny  frea  ageiiuy.  By  no  maimer  of  means.  We 
an  never  prepared  for  the  Bake  of  one  truth  to  deny  another,  and  w« 
do  as  heartily  belteve  in  free  agency  as  wo  do  in  predestination.  It  haa 
nerer  been  our  CQBtom  to  morder  one  truth  in  order  to  make  room  for 
another.  There  is  room  enough  for  two  truths  in  the  mind  of  the  man 
who  ia  willing  to  become  as  a  little  child.  Yea,  there  is  room  in  a 
teachable  heart  for  fifty  truths  to  live  without  contention. 

God  treats  men  as  men.  and  as  inteliigout  croatnrea.  Haring 
granted  them  power  of  jndgment  and  will,  he  treats  them  aa  such, 
and  be  does  not  nse  that  force  upon  the  soul  which  it  woold  be  legiti- 
mate to  use  upon  a  piece  of  metal,  if  it  had  to  be  bored  or  to  be  melted, 
Bor  even  such  tone  ob  it  is  Legitimate  to  tEse  upon  "  an  ox  and  an  ass 
which  hare  no  undeistanding,  whose  month  must  be  held  in  with  bit 
and  bridle,  lest  thaycome  near  onto  thee."  No,  no.  Under  heaven 
there  is  no  man  whose  will  Qod  has  ever  vioLited.  He  has  made  the 
saved  man's  will  all  the  freer  by  the  constraiittfi  which  grace  has  pnt 
npon  iu  Grace  docs  not  enchain  the  will,  but  frees  the  will ;  and  when 
ft  man  sincerely  says, "  What  have  1  to  do  anymore  with  idols  ?"  thonvh 
tint  speech  be  clean  contrary  to  uU  the  intent  of  his  former  life,  yet  Le 
Bkith  it  with  the  foil  consent  of  his  heart ;  nay,  he  never  suid  anything 
more  willin^iy  than  he  says  this,  when  (Jod  by  divine  power  has  "  made 
him  willing  in  the  day  of  his  power." 

I  wonder  whether  you  are  able  to  grasp,  dear  brethren,  and  lay  hold 
of  these  two  great  truths — first,  that  man  is  made  a  creature  responsible 
for  all  bis  actions,  and  it  free  agent,  so  constituted  that  God  hin^lf  will 
not  violate  that  free  agency,  and  yet  this  other  truth  which  we  will 
maintain  with  all  boldnesa — that  God  is  as  omnipotent  in  the  region  of 
mind  and  free  agency  as  he  is  in  the  realm  of  mere  matter.  He  looketh 
maa  the  hills  and  uiey  smoke,  he  toncheth  the  earth  and  it  trembles, 
tne  aea  obeys  him,  and  pansei  where  he  bids  it  stay  ;  yea,  earthcjuake 
aad  tempest  are  entirely  nnder  bis  control.  Nobody  who  believes  m  an 
omnipotent  God  donbts  these  things ;  but  it  is  equally  tme  that  the 
daA  nodwBtanding  God  enlightens  with  a  flash  of  his  Spirit,  the  iron 
BMW  of  the  obetinata  will  God  removes  ;  as  to  the  affections — vhen 
the  heart  ia  like  stone,  cold,  dead,  heavy,  immovable,  he  has  a  way  of 
Mnin>  the  ibme  to  flesh.  Ho  can  do  what  he  wills  with  men; 
wad  imm  hie  Spirit  pnttoth  £>rth  all  his  power,  though  men  maj 
tmitt^  yet  there  i»  a  point  beyond  which  resistance  absolutely  ceases, 
sad  tin  Biml  is  led  in  joyful  captirity  to  the  conqneriDg  Spirit  of  the 
hkmeAGoi. 

Mow,  somebody  will  again  say,  "  But  how  do  you  make  this  conais- 
tanb  ?  Ton  talk  now  contiary  to  the  statements  yon  mode  before." 
No,  my  dear  brother,  I  do  not  so.  They  are  both  true  ;  man  is  free, 
JVC  Ood  is  a  sovereign  in  the  world  of  f^  mind,,  working  his  own  way, 
md  ^leaking  thos  positively,  without  if  or  but  or  an.  Enow  ye  not 
Aa£  be  will  have  his  will,  and  man's  will  shall  willingly  bow  to  his  will 
Iv  he  is  Lord  alone  7  Let  me  read  you  God's  wills,  God's  wonderful  wills, 
m  they  stand  in  this  chi^ter,  "I  loiU  heal  their  backsliding,  I  will  lore 
tham  ft«ely  :  for  mine  anger  is  turned  away  frvm  him.  I  wiil  be  aa 
the  dew  unto,  Israel :  he  thttU  grow  aa  the  lily,  and  cast  forth  his  roots 
M  LebanoD.    Eii  bnnohet.  tiall  ^)read,  and  ma  beauty  gAalt  b«  at  the 


I:il02j8 


100  METBOFOUTAK  TASKBXAOIM  PULFR. 

oiire  tree,  and  his  Bmell  as  Lebanon.  Enhmim  «MI  say,  Whafc  have  I 
to  do  any  more  with  idols  ?"  God  spefln  aboiit  men  aa  if  thegr  wen 
absolotely  pnppets  in  his  hand,  and  yet  at  the  aaine  time  in  other  jdaoa 
he  puts  them  npon  their  personal  responsibility  s  both  the  doctrines  in 
true.  Be  it  not  yonrs  or  mine  to  ask  hoir  thej  aze  to  be  reooneikd, 
much  less  to  cast  either  of  the  troths  away,  bat  let  ns  hdd  them  both 
fast,  for  these  two  shall  be  a  cine  throngh  many  a  mystery  of  intricite 
doctrine,  and  lead  ns  into  the  light  d  Qcd  on  many  a  duk  aayiag. 
I  reioice  to  hear  the  almighty  Lord  gpeak  tfans  dmnely  of  what  mts 
shall  do,  and  I  adore  the  amazing  wisdom  and  power  which  cao:  rok 
over  free  agents. 

II.  Bnt  now,  secondly,  in  onr  text  we  see  ▲  xabyilloub  ohaios. 
"  Ephraim  shall  say.  What  have  I  to  do  any  move  with  iddb  ?'* 

Who  is  this  Ephraim?  Why,  if  yon  read  the  book  of  Hdsea 
through  Yon  will  find  him  taming  np  continnally.  Ephraim— Who  was 
he?  Who  is  this  that  says  ^' What  haTO  I  to  do  any  mora  with  idols  ?" 
I  will  tell  yon.  It  is  that  same  Ephraim  of  whom  the  Lord  had  said 
**  Let  him  alone  :  he  is  given  nnto  iools." 

This  is  different  talk,  is  it  not  ?  At  one  time  he  is  ^slaed  "  to  his 
idols,  for  that  is  the  word  need  in  the  original — glned  to  th^n  as  if  be 
stock  to  them  and  yoo  coold  not  get  him  away  at  alL  Now  here  he  is 
saying  *'  What  have  I  (o  do  any  more  with  them  ?"  What  a  change  it 
is  I  Is  that  the  same  man  ?  Yes,  the  same  man.  Bat  mark  what 
the  grace  of  Gtod  has  done  for  him.  See  also  how  xesolate  he  ia.  He 
speaks  plainlv  and  positively,  "What  have  /  to  do  any  more  with 
iaols  ?"  Is  tois  the  same  man  that  we  read  of  in  a  tmm&t  ohntar, 
"  Ephraim  is  a  silly  dove  withoot  heart "  ?  Tea,  he  was  ^  a  siUr  dove 
withoilt  heart,"  and  now  this  same  Ephraim  is  saying,  ^  Whathave  I 
to  do  any  more  with  idols  ?**  speaking  as  if  he  had  received  a  new, 
enlightened,  bold,  and  decided  heart.  Hub  is  a  change,  is  it  not  ? 
The  man  who  was  gloed  to  his  idols  and  fall  of  vadUatioa 
whenever  better  things  came  before  him,  is  now  clean  separated 
fitmi  his  former  tmsts,  and  made  to  hate  them,  and  no  longer 
vacillates  and  hesitates,  hot  takes  his  stand  and  asks  with  glorioos 
promptitude,  ''  What  have  I  to  do  any  more  with  idols  ?"  It  is  a 
great  change ;  but  it  is  soch  a  great  change  as  many  of  na  have 
ondergone,  and  soch  a  change  as  everybody  here  most  ondeqpg,  ot 
else  they  shall  never  see  the  face  of  God  with  acoeptanoe.  Oonver*' 
sion,  wmch  is  the  first  froit  of  regeneration,  makes  soch  a  difliBreDoe  in 
a  man  that  it  is  as  though  he  had  been  dead  and  buried  and  were  now 
raised  from  the  dead  into  newness  of  life.  It  is  as  moch  a  change  as  if 
the  man  were  destroyed  and  then  were  made  again  a  new  creatoie  in 
Christ  Jesus. 

I  wonder  whether  yoo  have  all  felt  soch  a  diange  as  this.  I  some- 
times meet  with  persons  who  claim  to  be  Christians  and  believers  and  all 
that,  but  they  have  never  experienced  any  change  that  they  can  remember 
ftom  their  babyhood.  Well,  dear  friend,  there  must  have  been  sudi 
a  chanp  if  you  are  a  Christian.  I  will  not  say  that  yoo  ought  to 
know  the  day  and  the  hour,  but,  depend  upon  it,  if  yoo  are  now  what 
yon  were  when  you  were  bom,  you  are  in  the  gall  of  bitterness 
and  in  the  bonds  of  miquity.    If  there  has  not  been  a  tmning  yon  are 


HMILB  AB0IJ8BBD.  101 

going  the  wrong  way ;  every  man  must  be  turned  from  the  way  in 
which  father  Ad»iu  Bet  hia  face,  for  our  (kce  is  towards  sin  and  de&tmc- 
tron,  and  we  must  be  turned  rieht  roDiid  bo  as  to  have  onr  focee  towards 
holiness  and  everlasting  liie.  where  there  is  not  such  a  tuning  there 
is  the  most  si^lemn  canse  for  heart- seurehing  and  hnmiltation  and  for  the 
Keeking  of  Balvation.  Have  you  undergone  a  great  tranaibnnation  ?  The 
net-essity  for  it  is  no  make-up  of  mine,  remember.  It  is  that  most 
Bok-inn  word  of  the  New  TcHtamcnt^"  Ye  must  be  bom  again."  Then 
iiinst  be  n  complete  and  total  change  in  yon.  bo  that  the  things  yon 
finti.'  loved  you  come  to  liate,  and  the  things  you  hated  yon  are  made 
to  love, — as  great  a  change  as  there  was  in  Ephraim,who  was  fomerly 
i;lned  to  his  idols  and  then  came  to  abhor  them.  I  pcnj  yon  all  to 
warch  nnd  see  whether  snch  a  difference  has  been  made  in  yonr  hearts 
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  for  a  iDistakc  here  will  be  fatal. 

If  you  have  never  undergone  such  a  renewuig,  let  the  prayer  be 
breathed  that  the  Holy  Spirit  may  now  renew  yon  m  the  q>int  of  yonr 
mind :  and  if  yon  hope  that  such  a  change  has  taken  place  upon 
yon,  then  may  tiod  grant  it  may  be  «  real  abiding  conversion,  that  so 
yon  may  remain  in  grace,  and  go  from  strenfjth  to  strength,  till  the 
idols  shall  he  utterly  aboliBhcd,  and  your  whole  natnre  shall  beoome 
the  temple  of  the  living  God. 

Thus,  then,  we  have  two  remarks— a  sovereign  prediction  and  a  mar- 
Tel  Ions  change, 

III.  Thirdly,  there  is  in  our  text  as  implibd  ooOTKSBiOir. 
"Ephraim  shall  sBy,  What  have  I  to  do  any  more  with  idols?" 
"  Any  more  with  idols  !"  Then,  Ephi-aim,  you  have  had  a  good  deal 
to  da  with  idols  np  till  now!'  "Ay."  snith  he,  with  the  tears 
ia  his  eyes,  "  that  I  have."  Hypocrites  mean  less  than  their  lanEruage 
•ej^msaes,  bat  true  penitents  mean  mnch  more  than  their  bare  worda 
can  convey.  The  confession  of  the  text  ib  all  the  more  hearty  because 
it  is  tacit,  and  as  it  were,  slips  out  nnintentionally. 

Attend  earnestly  dear  hearers,  for,  perhaps,  some  of  yon  may  be  wor- 
diii^Dg  idols  now.  We  will  go  into  the  temple  of  yonr  heart  and  see 
whether  we  can  find  a  false  ^od  thei-e.  I  go  into  one  heart,  and,  as  I 
look  np,  I  see  a  gigantic  idol ;  it  is  gilded  all  over  and  clothed  in 
ahming  robes  :  its  eyes  seem  to  be  jewels,  and  its  forehead  is  "  as  bright 
iroiy  overlaid  with  sapphires ";  it  is  a  very  lovely  idol  to  look  npon. 
Come  not  too  close,  do  not  examine  too  severely,  nor  so  much  as  dream 
of  looking  inside  the  hollow  sham.  Within  it  you  will  find  all  manner 
of  rottenness  and  filthiness,  but  the  ontside  of  the  idol  is  adorned  with 
the  greatest  art  and  skill,  and  yon  ma^  even  become  enamoured  of  it 
as  Ton  stand  and  gaze  npon  iL  What  is  its  name  ?  Its  name  is  sel/- 
rtffhfeoumeM.  Well  do  I  remember  when  I  used  to  worship  this  image 
which  my  own  hands  had  made,  till  one  morning  my  god  had  his  h^ 
broken  off,  and  by-and-bj  I  found  his  hands  were  gone,  and  soon  I 
found  that  the  worm  was  devouring  it,  end  my  god  that  I  worshipped 
and  trusted  in  turned  out  to  be  a  heap  of  dross  and  dung,  whereas  I 
had  thought  it  to  be  a  mass  of  solid  gold,  with  eyes  of  diamonds. 
Alas,  there  are  many  men  to  whom  no  such  revelation  has  been  given. 
Their  idol  ib  still  in  first-rate  condition.  True,  perhaps,  at  Cbrist- 
mas-tJme  it  gets  a  little  cmt  of  order,  and  they  feel  that  they  did  not 


102  XKTR0P0LITA5  TABKRHAGLK  PULPIT. 

qnite  behaye  as  they  oa^ht  when  the  bottle  went  lonnd  ao  fireely,  bnfc 
they  have  called  in  the  goldsmith  to  overlay  the  idol  with  new  gold  ud 
gild  the  chipped  places  afresh.  Have  they  not  been  to  chnrch  son 
then  ?  Did  they  not  go  on  Christmas  morning  to  a  place  of  wonhqi^ 
and  make  it  all  right  ?  Have  they  not  repSsted  extra  pnyeri^  and 
given  a  little  more  away  in  charity?  So  they  hare  farbiBhed  their 
god  up  again,  and  he  looks  very  respectable.  Ah,  it  is  eaay  to  tinkor 
him  up,  my  brethren,  until  the  ark  of  the  Lofd  cornea  in,  and  thes 
all  the  smiths  in  the  world  cannot  keep  this  god  erect.  If  the  gospel 
of  Jesus  Christ  once  enters  into  the  sonC  then,  straiglitway,  this 
wonderful  god  l>egins  to  bow  himself,  and,  like  Dagon,  who  vai 
brokcfi  liefore  the  ark  of  the  Lord,  self-righteonsness  is  dashed  to 
pieces.  But  there  are  thousands  all  over  this  world  who  worship  tfaii 
god,  and  i  will  tell  yon  how  they  pray  to  it.  They  say,  **  God,  I  thank 
thee  that  I  am  not  as  other  men  are/'  and  so  on,  not  ezacUj  in  tbe 
PhariHcc's  language,  but  after  the  same  style.  ^  Loid,  I  thuik  tfaee 
that  I  ]tay  cvcryljody  twenty  shillings  in  the  pound,  and  have  bxooght 
up  my  children  respectably.  God,  I  thank  thee  that  I  have  beent 
regular  cliurchgoing  or  chapclgoing  man  all  my  life.  God,  I  thank 
thee  that  i  am  not  a  swearer,  nor  yet  a  drunkard,  nor  anything  ef  that 
kind.  I  am  far  better  than  most  people ;  and  if  I  do  not  get  to 
heaven  it  will  be  very  bad  for  my  neighbours,  for  they  are  not  half  ai 
g<M)d  OH  I  am/*  In  this  manner  is  this  monstrous  deity  adored.  I  am 
not  HiK*aking  of  what  is  done  in  Hindustan,  but  of  an  idohitry  very 
fiiMhionahle  in  England.  The  god  of  self-righteousness  is  lord  pan- 
mount  in  millions  of  hearts.  Oh,  that  every  worshipper  of  that  gpd 
may  Im  \vd  to  say, ''  What  have  I  to  do  any  more  with  this  abominm 
idol  ?  " 

Another  sort  of  god  I  have  seen  in  the  hnman  heart,  is  the  idol  ot 
darling  nin,  A  person  not  long  ago  said — ^*  WdU,  I  suppose  Hiexe  is  a 
gcKid  d(ml  in  religion;  but,  you  see,  I  am  on  the  tuiri^  and  I  oonld 
not  leave  it.  Mow  could  I  ?  I  could  not,  of  course,  become  a  Chris- 
tian man,  and  yet  bo  known  to  be  a  betting  man."  Yes,  the  betting* 
ring  was  his  god.  The  running  horse  is  as  favourite  a  deity  as  wen 
the  calves  of  MctheL 

Another  man  says,  ''Yes,  yes.  I  sliould  be  glad  to  be  a  Ohristian, 
but  you  see  I  l(ive  the  bottle,  I  must  occasionally  enjoy  a  drop  too 
mucih  ;  not  often,  you  know,  but  now  and  then  at  convivial  meetings, 
holiduyH  and  bonfire  nights.  A  man  must  be  drunk  sometimes,  must 
ho  not  ?  And  where's  the  harm  ?  I  oonld  not  give  it  up."  They  do 
not  Mfii/  m  in  luttnal  words,  but  that  is  what  they  mean,  thonsands  of 
thiMii.  Tli(!y  must  still  keep  Bacchus  for  their  god,  and  offer  him  their 
sa^TififM'K.  And,  ah  !  what  sacrifiGcs  they  make.  How  they  ruin  health 
and  di'Ktroy  life  ilscslf,  beggar  their  children,  make  their  wives  wretched, 
aad  all  Ui  worship  this  dunghill  god  of  drink. 

Others  have  some  other  darling  sin.  I  need  not  mention  all ;  in  fact 
I  win  Id  not,  for  the  cheek  of  modesty  would  tingle  if  we  were  to  mention 
(sertajn  of  the  vices  which  men  and  women  feci  that  they  could  not 
«!iwj  from.  They  would  fain  be  siived  in  their  sins,  not  from  their  sins. 
Th4ry  would  worshii)  ^^  »fter  a  fashion,  but  the  first  place  must  be 
•i  ven  tci  tin's  darling  lust  of  theirs.   0  sir,  I  care  not  what  idol  it  is,  but  if 


tiere  ie  anything  in  this  world  that  tboa  lovcat  better  tb&n  Ohrist,  thou 
anal  never  aee  the  face  of  God  with  joy.  If  there  is  any  ein  that  than 
ronldat  persevere  in,  I  beseech  thee  change  thy  mind  about  it,  and  cat 
t  off,  though  it  be  a  right  band,  and  pluck  it  out  though  it  be  a  right 
ye  It  were  better  for  thee  to  enter  into  life  maimed  find  with  one 
ye  ibaxi  having  both  hands  and  both  eyee  to  bo  caet  into  bell  fire. 
Jaiiing  Bins  must  be  abjured  if  CbriBt  is  to  be  enjoyed. 

Behold  how  idolatera  disagree ;  one  adores  rigbteons  self,  and  another 
rorsbipe  Binfnl  self;  but  both  idols  must  be  utterly  abolished. 

In  Bome  men's  hearta  I  sec  IM  lovt  of  pleasure.  That  god  is 
eated  on  the  throne  of  many  hearts.  They  are  overcome  not  so 
Quch  by  the  grosaer  sins  as  by  their  natural  levity  and  trifling. 
rhey  cannot  think,  they  do  not  want  to  think.  They  say  tbev  are 
•  di^  "  it  tbey  have  to  be  quiet  for  awhile.  They  like  to  be  alway« 
taneed,  eratified,  excited.  Now,  there  is  a  measure  of  recreation  whidi 
g  as  good  as  medicine  both  to  body  and  soul,  and  there  are  proper  recre- 
itions  to  be  had.  Ood  has  provided  innocent  pleasures,  and  we  shall  do 
reD  to  accept  them  vrith  gratitude  from  onr  heavenly  Father  ;  but  to 
)€  a  lover  of  pleasure  rather  than  a  lover  of  God  is  to  be  dead 
vhile  you  Live.  To  make  your  belly  your  god,  to  live  t«  eat  and  drink, 
o  be  jnst  meat-digesters  and  wine- strainers,  to  be  living  here  merely  to 
rajoj  yonreelf — butterflies  flitting  from  flower  to  flower,  gathering  no 
loney,  but  merely  seeking  pleasure— this  is  evil.  Sirs,  this  is  a  god 
ihat  will  not  be  worshipped  by  one  who  knows  the  love  of  God,  for  biB 
jUjd  ifl  his  pleasure,  and  pleasure  is  not  his  god.  He  casts  aside  full 
>ften  things  that  he  migut  otherwise  have  allowed  himself  to  enjoy, 
:hat  he  may  honour  and  glorify  iiis  Saviour  the  more. 

Many  worship  the:  golden  calf.  They  indulge  no  vice,  and  pursue  no 
pleascre,  except  their  one  vice  and  their  one  pleasure,  which  is  l/ieir  greed  ■ 
•yf  ffold.  If  yon  want  to  arouse  al!  their  energies,  jingle  a  guinea  near 
ihem.  This  they  pnrsue  as  the  honnds  pnrsnc  the  fox,  hot  foot,  and  never 
resting.  For  fear  tbey  should  be  poor  when  they  are  old,  they  make 
Jaemselves  poor  when  they  are  young  ;  and,  lest  they  should  be  starved 
it  la«t,  they  starve  tliemselvee  to  the  last.  We  have  known  some  to 
whom  honour,  love,  uprightness,  integrity,  religion,  have  all  been  nothing 
whatever,  bo  long  as  gain  could  be  had  by  sacrificing  them.  The  great 
fabric  of  their  fortune  has  rolled  along,  like  the  car  of  Juggernaut, 
[■niBhing  everything  that  has  been  in  its  way.  Widows  might  weep,  and 
orphans  might  lament,  the  groans  of  those  whom  they  oppressed  might 
^oap  to  heaven,  and  the  iniquities  which  they  have  perpetrated  might  go 
before  them  unto  judgment  ;  but  it  was  nothing  to  them.  They  were 
adding  field  to  field  and  bouse  to  house,  and  getting  richer  and  richer : 
for  that  they  lived,  and  for  that  they  seemed  content  to  die.  0  God, 
MBTcrt  the  man  who  worships  gold !  Milton,  yon  know,  describes  the 
demon  of  greed  as 


BOB  die  leaat  erected  spirit  that  fell 
From  heaven  ;  for  even  in  heaven  hU  looks  mid  thoughts 
Were  mhrsji  downward  bent,  admirin;;  more 
The  riches  of  heaven's  pavement,  trodden  gold, 
Thau  cnght  divine  or  holy  eUe  enjoyed 
In  vinon  beatific," 


108  MKTBOPOLirAV  TASmVlOLB  PULPIT. 

aie  wone  a  gieafc  deal  than  I  thought  joa  wete.    BappoM  ft  im 
reported  oommonly  that  Mr.  Hill  fbd  on  carrion  and  wia  Teiy  fiDodot 


it  once  or  twice  a  Tear  for  a  treat !'  llien  everybody  would  Bay,  'Toa 
are  fonder  of  it  than  we  thought.  For  if  poor  cmiinrea  have  to  eit 
it  erery  day  becanae  they  cannot  set  anything  better,  their  taitaia  not  n 
Titiated  as  yonrs  ^o  torn  away  mm  whofemne  Ibod,  and  find  totte- 
ness  to  be  a  dainty  dish.'  ^  If  ^n  can  find  your  pleaanra  and  dal^U 
where  sin  of  the  wont  kind  is  always  'nrj  near  at  hmd,  whoR 
religion  woold  be  ont  of  place,  and  where  C9unfe  yrar  Manber  could  not 
be  expected  to  come,  yon  have  not  learned  to  aajwilli  Ephnrim,  ^Whit 
have  I  to  do  any  more  with  idota  V*  Bnn  away  fiEom  anytU^g  which 
has  the  least  taint  of  sin,  and  may  God  hab  yon  ao  to  do  even  ta  Ihe 
end.  Is  this  in  order  that  yon  may  be  nved r  Godftnbidl  lamoal^ 
speaking  to  von  who  are  saved  already.  If  j^n  are  not  avred,  the  flat 
thing  is  to  have  a  renewed  heart  by  fiuth  in  Jeans  Olunst^  and  ate 
that  we  lay  no  bondage  on  yon,  and  exact  no  tax  finm  jaa  by  way  of 
dnty,  bat  it  will  be  your  joy,  yonr  delight,  yonr  privilege^  to  mp 
near  to  yonr  Master  and  to  say,  **  What  have  I  to  do  fooij  more  wiui 
idols  ?"    God  bless  yon  for  Christ's  sake. 


PO&TIOK  OF  SOBIPTURB    BEAD  BBPOBB    SKBHOV-^Hoaea  XIlL  Xlf. 


Hymvs  fbok  ''O0R  Own  Htms  Book"— 606^  645» 


JUST     PUBLISHBD. 


No.    1   OF 

SPURGEON'S     SHILLING     SERIESr 

Boyal  d2mo.,  224  pages,  Oloth  GQt, 


BHTITLXD 


CHRISrS  GLORIOUS  ACHIEVEMENTS. 

Pammobb  &  Alabaster,  4,  Paternotter  Bafldiafi; 

And  all  Booksellers. 


^^ttj^aBm  ^n&mmk  Mii. 


MANOAH'S  WIFE  AND  HER  EXCELLENT  ARGUMENT. 


BELIVEBED  BY 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

▲T   THB   MBTBOPOUTAN   TABBBNAOLE,    BTEWIHGTOK. 


tf  And  IffOToali  Mid  unio  hit  wife,  We  ihall  surelv  die,  "becatiBe  we  haye  seen 
Qodm  But  liiB  wile  aaid  unto  him,  If  the  Lord  were  pleaBed  to  kill  us,  he  woidd  not 
here  veoeiTed  a  hunt  offering  and  a  meat  offsring  at  oxtr  hands,  neither  would  ha 
httre  ahewed  us  all  theM  things,  nor  would  as  at  this  time  haye  told  us  sodh 
Chinca  as  fliefe.*— Jndgsa  ziii.  22,  8S. 


Thb  fint  Temark  arisfaig  out  of  the  story  of  Manoah  and  hie  wife  is 
— tbafc  ofimtm$8  we  praijfor  blessings  which  will  make  us  tremble  tdbm 
ioe  receive  them.  Hanoah  had  asked  that  he  might  see  the  angel,  and 
he  saw  him :  in  answer  to  his  request  the  wonderful  One  condescended 
to  reveal  himself  a  second  time,  bnt  the  consequence  was  that  the  good 
man  was  filled  with  astonishment  and  dismay,  and  taming  to  his  wife, 
he  exclaimed,  **We  shall  snrely  die,  because  we  have  seen  God." 
Brethren,  do  we  always  know  what  we  are  asking  for  when  we  pray  ? 
We  are  imploring  an  nndonbted  blessing,  and  yet  if  we  knew  the  way  in 
which  snch  bles^og  must  necessarily  come,  we  should,  perhaps,  hesitate 
before  we  pr«»ed  our  suit.  You  have  been  entreating  very  much  for 
powth  in  holiness.  Do  you  know,  brother,  that  in  aunost  every  case 
that  means  increased  affliction  ?  for  we  do  not  make  much  progress  in 
the  divine  life  except  when  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  try  us  in  the  fomace 
and  purge  us  with  many  fires.  Do  you  desire  the  merc^  on  that  con- 
dition ?  Are  vou  willing  to  take  it  as  God  pleases  to  send  it,  and  to 
say,  **  Ix)rd,  ir  spiritual  growth  implies  trial,  if  it  signifies  a  long  sick- 
ness of  body,  if  it  means  deep  depression  of  soul,  if  it  entails  the  loss 
of  properfcy,  if  it  involves  the  taking  away  of  my  dearest  friends,  yet  I 
make  no  reserve,  but  include  in  the  prayer  all  that  is  needfdl  to  the 

Eyd  end.  When  I  say,  sanctify  me  wholly,  spirit,  soul,  and  body,  I 
ve  the  process  to  thy  discretion."  Suppose  you  really  knew  all  that  it 
would  bring  upon  you,  would  you  not  pray,  at  any  rate,  with  more  solemn 
tones  ?  I  nope  you  would  not  hesitate,  but,  counting  all  the  cost,  would 
ttill  desire  to  oe  delivered  from  sin  ;  but,  at  any  rate,  vou  would  put  up 
your  petition  with  deliberation,  weighing  every  syllable,  and  then  when 
No.  1,340. 


110  METBOFOLITAV  TABBBHIOLX  PHinT. 

the  answer  came  yon  woidd  not  be  ao  aatoniahed  at  ita  pacoBar  ftoL 
Often  and  often  the  blessing  which  we  used  ao  eagerlj  to  Mqilore  ip 
the  occasion  of  the  suffering  which  we  ifeplore.  We  do  not  know  God's 
methods.  We  set  him  ^vays  which  he  does  not  chooae  to  follow,  even  as 
John  Newton  confessed  to  have  done  when  he  aakad  that  he  mi^ 
grow  in  grace.    He  says 

**  I  hoped  that  in  iome  fiiYOiired  hour. 
At  once  he*d  answer  mj  ntpnoB^ 
And,  by  his  love's  constraining  po' 
Subdae  my  sins  and  give  me  rest 

Instead  of  this,  he  made  me  feel 
The  hidden  evils  of  my  heart; 
And  let  the  anery  powers  of  hell 
Assault  my  som  m  every  part 

Tea,  more,  with  his  own  hand  he 
Intent  to  aggravate  my  woe  ; 
Crossed  alllme  fair  desiffns  I  schemed. 
Blasted  my  goards,  and  laid  me  low." 

This  is  the  Lord's  way  of  answering  prayer  finr  fiuth  and  giaoe. 
He  comes  with  rods  of  chastisement,  ana  makes  na  smart  tx  omr 
follies,  for  thns  alone  can  he  deliyer  onr  childish  Bpirita  ttout  tikau 
He  comes  with  sharp  plonghshares  and  tears  np  the  aonl,  Ifar  this 
only  ean  we  be  made  to  yield  him  a  hanresti*  He  craiea  wiEh 
hot  irons  and  bnms  ns  to  the  heart ;  and  when  we  enqninv  **  WI9  aD 
this?"  the  answer  comee  to  ns, '^  This  is  what  yon  aaked  Ibr,  thia  ia  the 
way  in  which  the  Lord  answers  your  requests,^  Peifaapa^  at  this  mo- 
ment, the  fainting  feeling  that  some  of  yon  are  now  experiencing^  wfakh 
makes  yon  fear  that  yon  will  surely  die,  may  be  accounted  term  jour 
own  prayers.  I  should  like  you  to  look  at  your  poreaent  aanowi  in  that 
light,  anid  say,  **  After  all,  I  can  see  that  now  my  God  haa  giTen  to  ma 
exactly  what  I  sought  at  his  hands.  I  asked  to  see  the  m^,  and  I 
have  seen  him,  and  now  it  is  that  my  spirit  is  cast  down  within  ma." 

A  second  remark  is  this — Very  frequenUy  dew  froeiraUon  ^  egMLm 
the  forerurmer  of  etms  re$narkable  btesemg^  It  was  to  Manoah  and  to 
his  wife  the  highest  conceivable  joy  of  life,  the  climax  of  timr  "pMtifflH| 
that  they  should  be  the  parents  of  ason  by  whom  the  Loid  ahonld  bqgbi 
to  deliTer  IsraeL  Joy  filled  them — inexpressible  joy— at  the  thooj^ht  of 
it  I  but,  at  the  time  when  the  good  news  was  first  ^MHnmnniiiateil, 
Ifanoah,  at  least,  was  made  so  heavy  in  spirit  that  he  said, "  We  ahall 
surely  die,  for  we  have  seen  an  angel  of  the  Lord."  Take  it  aa  ageoand 
rule  that  duU  skies  foretell  a  shower  of  mercy.  Expect  sweet  IkTOor 
when  you  exprience  sharp  affliction.  When  God's  great  wagona  loaded 
down  with  blessings  are  coming  to  your  door,  you  wiQ  tall  often  hear 
beforehand  the  wheels  rolling  and  mmblinp;  horridly.  You  will  think 
that  it  is  the  death-cart,  majaiap,  although  it  is  your  Father'a  treaaoie- 
wain  that  is  coming  to  your  door.  Do  you  not  remember,  conceniing 
the  apostles,  that  they  feared  as  they  entered  into  the  doud  on  Mount 
Tabor?  and  yet  it  was  in  that  cloud  that  they  saw  their  Master  trans- 
figured ;  and  yon  and  I  have  had  many  a  fear  about  the  doud  we  were 
entering,  although  we  were  therein  to  see  more  of  Christ  and  his  gloiy 


]IAVOA«'«  Win  HID  HBE  WXCBffiLMIT  ABaUXENT.  Ill 

than  we  had  eves  beheld  before.  The  cloud  which  you  fear  makes  the 
estanal  wall  ef  that  aeoret  chamber  wherein  the  Lord  reveals  himself 
It  is  the  thick  veil  whi(di  seems  to  shut  out  the  light  of  day,  but  as 
we  pass  behind  it  auto  what  seems  the  thick  darkness  we  behold  the 
bii^t  light  of  the  shekinah  of  God's  presence  shining  aboye  the  merc^ 
seat.  Trials  come  before  comforts,  like  John  the  Baptist  with  his  rongh 
gunneot  befi>re  Jesus  the  consolation  of  Isiael :  be  therefore  of  good 


Blessed  be  Qod  tor  rongh  winds.  They  haye  blown  home  many  a 
barqne  which  die  had  sailed  to  destruction.  Blessed  be  Ood  for  trial ;  it 
has  been  Ohcist's  black  dc|^  to  fetch  in  many  a  sheep  which  else  had 
wandned  into  the  wolfs  jaws.  Blessed  be  our  Master  for  the  fire : 
it  has  burnt  away  the  dioss.  Blessed  be  our  Master  for  the  file.:  it  has 
taken  -oil  the  rust.  Not  in  themaelyes  considered  are  these  things 
Uessings,  but  they  are  often  oyerruled  to  be  so  Iw  the  mighty-  hand  of 
God,  1^  thsy  are  ifeqnently  the  harbingers  «f  great  favours  yet  to 
oome.  Before  thou  cant  carry  Samson  in  thyarms,  Manoah,  thou  must 
be  made  to  say,  ''We  shall  surely  die.'*  Before  the  minister  shall 
pnaoh  the  worn  to  thonsands,  he  must  be  emptied  and  made  to  tremble 
under  a  sense  of  iuibili<^.  Before  the  fiundajr-sdbool  teacher  shall 
bring  her  girls  to  Christy  she  shall  be  led  to  see  liow  weak  and  insuffi- 
emit  she  is.  I  do  believe  that  whenever  tiie  Lord  is  about  to  use  us  in 
kia  household,  he  takti  us  Idee  a  dish  and  wipes  us  right  out  and  sets 
w  on  the  shd^andthen  afterwards  he  tokes  us  down  and  puts  th«:eon 
Ua  own  heavenlymieatyWitii  which  to  fill  the  soaks  of  others.  There  must 
as  a  rule  be  an  emptTing,  a  turning  upside  dawn,  and  a  putting  on 
one  side,  before  tiae  very  greatest  blessing  comes.  Manoah  felt  that  he 
must  die,  and  jet  die  he  could  not,  for  he  was  to  be  the  father  of 
Samson,  the  dehvero*  of  Israel  and  the  terror  of  Philistia. 

Let  me  offer  a  third  remark,  which  is  this— ^rso/  failh  is  in  many 
mstanees  suljeat  to  fits.  What  great  faith  Manoah  had !  His  wife  was 
barren,  yet  when  she  was  told  by  the  angel  that  she  i^ould  bear  a  child, 
he  belieyed  it,  although  no  heavenly  messenger  had  come  to  himself 
personally — so  believed  it  that  he  did  not  want  to  see  the  man  of  God 
a  second  time  to  be  told  that  it  would  be  so,  but  only  to  be  informed 
how  to  bring  up  the  child :  that  was  all.  ''  Well,''  says  old  Bishop 
Hall,  ^  might  he  be  the  father  of  strong  Samson,  tliat  had  such  a  strong 
futh."  He  had  a  %tKin^  faith  inde^  and  yet  here  he  is  saying  in 
alarm,  "  We  shall  surely  die,  because  we  haveaeen  God."  Do  not  judge 
a  man  h^  any  solitary  word  or  act,  for  if  you  do  you  will  surely  mistake 
ium.  Cowards  are  occasionally  brave,  and  the  bravest  men  are  some- 
times cowards ;  and  there  are  men  who  would  be  worse  cowards  prao- 
tacdly  if  they  were  a  little  leas  cowardly  than  they  are.  A  man  may 
be  too  much  a  coward  to  confess  that  he  is  timid.  Trembling  Manoah 
was  so  outq)oken,  honest,  and  sincere  that  he  expressed  his  feelings, 
which  a  more  pditic  person  might  have  concealed.  Though  fullj 
believing  what  had  been  spoken  &om  God,  yet  at  the  same  time  this 
doubt  was  on  him,  as  the  result  of  his  belief  in  tradition :  **  We  shall 
nrely  die,  because  we  have  seen  God." 

Ton  know  how  many  parallel  cases  there  are  in  Scripture  to  this. 
Look  at  majeatic  Abraham,  the  very  father  of  the  faithful — a  prince,  I 


lis  mnntOPOLrrAir  tibbbhaou  PuiMb 

might  call  him,  amongst  believerg ;  and  yet  be  deDiet  Mi  wift^  al 
earn  ''She  is  my  sister."  These  things  do  not  proye  that  he  hid  lo 
fiuth  :  they  only  show  that  the  strongest  fkitfa  is  miiad  with  mdwlid^ 
and  that  the  best  of  men  are  men  at  the  best  80,  to(^  with  migfa^ 
Bliiah.  When  von  see  him  on  tho  toip  of  Oarmel  {dsading  there  win 
Oody  and  bringing  down  the  fire,  and  when  ron  hear  him  car,  '^  lUs 
tibe  prophets  of  Baal :  let  not  one  escape, '  and  observe  trat  ma 
of  iron,  slaying  them  all  at  the  foot  of  the  hill,  why  yoa  esBBOt 
believe  it  possible  that  he  is  the  sune  trembler  who  flees  thmi  the  flm 
of  Jesebel,  and  sits  down  nnder  one  of  the  desert  jnnipen^  and  oAm, 
**  Let  me  die :  I  am  no  better  than  my  fSftthers."  But  it  is  eo.  It  is 
ever  so.  Ood's  saints  generally  show  their  weakness  in  the  TSty  gnfie 
wherein  their  strength  heth,  and  this  great  believer,  Hsnoah^ii  tniSbM 
witii  a  miserable  attack  of  donbt,  whidi  so  masters  him  that  ha  aqpeels 
sadden  death. 

Now,  have  any  of  ^on  lately  had  sneh  a  fit  as  that  upon  yen?  WeB» 
dear  friend,  do  not  mdnlge  it.  Let  it  be  a  fit,  and  m  it  come  to  aa 
end,  as  no  doubt  it  did  wita  Manoah.  He  did  not  oontinne  kng  ia  bis 
fainting  condition,  bnt  it  was  bad  while  it  lasted.  It  is  Teiy  bid 
when  persons  have  fits  every  day,  and  worse  still  if  they  an  Mngft 
in  fits.  It  will  not  do  for  ns  to  begin  to  make  excuses  Ibr  our  iinlbcKi( 
or  to  allow  ourselves  to  remain  in  depression  of  qiirit  Oor  soul  oiaak 
not  be  suffered  to  lie  deavine  to  the  dust  We  mast  catwnhiae  otf 
hearts,  and  sav,  ''Why  art  thou  cast  down,  O  my  son!?  Ifhf  sit 
thou  disquieted  within  me?  Hope  thou  in  God,  fiv  I  diall  yel  prsiss 
him  who  is  the  health  of  my  count^ianoe  and  my  GML"  Tet  do  nol  be 
surprised,  or  write  your  own  condemnation,  as  thowh  some  atruMe 
thing  had  befallen  you,ibr  so  hath  it  happened  unto  o£afs,fliat  tboapi 
th^  nave  been  strong  in  ftith  they  have  nad  strong  misgivingB  at  times; 

Once  again,  another  remark  is  that  U  U  a  grmt  lasnoy  i»  ham  a 
ChrisUan  campamm  to  ao  to  for  counsel  and  eon^i  whonev^  pour  aral 
%9  dipresaed.  Manoah  had  married  a  capital  wife.  Gbe  was  the  better 
one  of  the  two  in  sound  judgment.  She  was  the  weak^  vessel  hj 
nature,  but  she  was  the  stronger  believer,  and  probably  that  was  wbj 
the  angel  was  sent  to  her,  ibr  the  angels  are  best  nieased  to  iqieak  wita 
those  who  have  faith,  and  if  thev  have  the  pick  of  their  company,  and 
the  wife  has  more  &ith  than  the  husband,  they  will  visit  the  wife  sooner 
than  her  spouse,  for  thev  love  to  take  God's  messap;es  to  those  who  will 
receive  them  with  confiaenoe.  She  was  full  of  &lth,  evidently,  and  so 
when  her  husband  tremblingly  said,  **  We  shaU  surely  die,*'  she  did  not 
believe  in  such  a  mistrustful  inference.  Moreover,  though  they  say  Aat 
women  cannot  reason,  yet  here  was  a  woman  whose  arguments  were 
logical  and  overwhelming.  Certain  it  is  that  women's  peroq>tions  are 
generally  far  clearer  than  men's  reasonings :  they  look  at  once  into  a 
tnth,  while  we  are  hunting  for  our  spectacles.  Their  instincts  are 
genenJly  as  safe  as  our  reasonings,  and  therefore  when  they  have  ia 
addition  a  clear  logical  mind  they  make  the  wisest  of  counsellers. 

Well,  Manoah's  wife  not  only  had  clear  perceptions,  but  die  bid 
Cf^ital  reasoning  faculties.  She  argued,  according  to  the  language  of 
the  text,  that  it  was  not  possible  that  God  should  kill  them  after  what 
4iflj  had  seen  and  heard.    Oh  that  every  man  had  such  a  prudent^ 


XAHOIH'B  WIFK  and  her  BXOKLLSNT  ABGUIOSNT.  IIS 

mckm  wilb  as  Hanoah  had !  Oh  that  whenever  a  man  is  oast  down  a 
Christian  toother  or  sister  stood  ready  to  cheer  him  with  some  reminder 
of  the  Lord's  past  goodness,  or  with  some  gracions  promise  trom  tbe 
divine  word.  It  majr  happen  to  be  the  hnslmnd  who  cheers  the  wife, 
and  in  such  a  case  it  is  equally  beantiftiL  We  have  known  a  Christian 
aiater  to  be  vexy  nervons  ana  rery  often  depressed  and  troubled :  what 
a  mercy  to  her  to  have  a  Christian  husband  whose  strength  of  &ith 
can  encourage  her  to  smile  away  her  meh,  by  resting  in  the  eyerlasting 
fidtfiflilness  and  goodness  of  the  Lord.  How  carefblouglit  young  peo- 
ple to  be  in  the  dioosing  of  their  partners  in  life !  When  two  horses 
pnD  together  how  smoothly  the  chariot  runs ;  but  if  one  horse  draws 
one  way  and  the  other  pulls  in  the  opposite  direction^  whot  trouble  there 
iifore  to  be.  Suppose  Manoah  had  hapnened  to  have  an  unbelieving 
wife.  Ah^Manoatif  how  your  spirit  woula  have  gone  down,  down,  down 
into  decnair,  till  yon  wonM  have  Ailfllled  your  own  sad  prophecy.  If 
he  had  been  troubled  with  a  wife  like  Mistress  Job,  and  she  had  uttered 
some  bitter  saymg  just  at  the  time  when  he  was  in  anguish,  how  much 
mote  severe  would  his  grie&  have  become.  But  Mistress  Manoah  was  a 
bdievinjg  woman,  she  argued  out  the  question  most  discreetly,  and 
her  hu«b!uid  found  peace  again. 

To-night,  as  God  ilie  nolj  Spirit  shall  help  us»  we  will  take  up  the 
aigmnent  of  Manoah's  iritd,  and  see  whether  it  will  not  also  comfort  our 
bearts.  She  had  three  strings  to  her  bow,  good  woman.  One  was — 
The  Lord  does  not  mean  to  kill  us,  because  he  has  accepted  our  sacrifices. 
The  aeeond  was — ^He  does  not  mean  to  kill  us,  or  else  he  would  not  have 
shown  us  all  these  things.  And  the  third  was — He  will  not  kill  us, 
or  else  he  wonld  not,  as  at  this  time,  have  told  us  such  things  as  these. 
So  the  three  strings  to  her  bow  were  accepted  mcrifices,  gracious  revela- 
Hans,  uid.nrmou8  promises.    Let  us  dwell  upon  each  of  them.  • 

L  Ana,  firsL  aoceptbd  sacrifices.  I  will  suppose  that  I  am  ad- 
dressing a  brotKr  who  is  sadly  tried,  and  terribly  cast  down,  and  who 
(herefore  has  b^un  to  lament— 

**  The  Lord  has  forsaken  me  quite : 
My  God  will  be  gracious  no  more.** 

Brother,  is  that  possible?  Has  not  God  of  old  accepted  on  your 
behalf  the  offering  of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ  ?  You  have  believed  in  Jesus, 
dear  friend.  You  do  believe  in  him  now.  Lay  your  hand  on  your 
heart,  and  put  the  question  solemnly  to  yourself,  **  Dost  thou  believe  on 
the  Son  of  God?*'  You  are  able  to  say,  **  Yes,  Lord,  notwithstanding 
an  my  unhappiness,  I  do  believe  in  thee,  and  rest  the  stress  and  weight 
of  my  souFs  interests  on  thy  power  to  save."  Well,  then,  you  have 
God's  own  word,  recorded  in  his  own  infallible  Book,  assuring  you 
that  Jesus  Christ  was  accepted  of  God  on  your  behalf,  for  he  laid  down 
his  life  for  as  many  as  believe  in  him,  that  they  might  never  perish.  He 
stood  as  their  surety,  and  suffered  as  their  substitute,  is  it  possible  that 
this  should  be  unavailing,  and  that  after  all  they  may  be  cast  awav  ? 
The  argument  of  Manoah's  wife  was  just  this — *'  Did  we  not  put  the 
Idd  on  me  rock,  and  as  we  put  it  there  was  it  not  consumed  ?  It  was 
consomed  instead  of  us ;  we  shall  not  die,  for  the  victim  has  been  con- 
sumed.  The  fire  will  not  bum  us :  it  has  spent  itself  upon  the  sacrifice. 


114  xffTBQPOUTijr  TAsauwoM  vuua»        r 

Did  yoa  not  ne  it  go  op  ia  moka^  and  8M  tbe  aagri  annd  vifkiU 
The  file  is  gone ;  it  cannot  &!!  on  na  to  darizoy  nip"  Tbii  bflnyih 
teipretedinto  the  gospel  is  jost  this — ^Have  we  not  saenthe  hoaiJmm 
Christ  fiEMtened  to  the  oross?  Have  we  not  beheld  h^  in  agonifliSB* 
treme?  Has  not  the  fire  of  God  coBaaniad  him ?  TTnTn  nn  nnt  sm 
him  rising,  as  it  were,  from  that  aacrad  fire  in  the.SBiaiieotkm  and  Ha 
asoensiony  to  go  into  the  ^017  ?  Becaosa  the  fiio  of  Jehovnli'ft  vnA 
had  spent  itself  on  him  we  dull  not  die.  Ho  has  died  inattad  of  mit 
It  cannot  be  that  the  Lord  has  made  him  sniEai;  the  juat  finr  the  inSpM^ 
and  now  will  make  the  believer  suffer  too.  It  eannofc  fas  that  Qkziit 
loved  his  church,  and  gave  himself  £ar  it^  and  thai  now  the  ohmdi  nwsfi 
perish  also.  It  cannot  be  that  the  Lord  has  laid  on  him  Aa  iniqiiilj.  of 
ns  all,  and  now  will  lav  onr  iniqoitf  on  na  too*  It  wem  notoonaiafaBnfc 
with  justice.  It  would  make  the  vicarioos  sacrifioa  <tf  Gbriat.  to  be  a 
nullity,  a  superflni^  of  cruelty  which  achieved  nothiii|[.  Zhe  afeona- 
ment  cannot  be  made  of  none  efbct^  the  very  snjpnsB  tiffin  wodd  ta 
blasphemy.  0,  look,  my  soul,  look  to  Uie  Redeemer's  coamg,  and  aa  OtaoL 
seest  how  God  accepts  Christ,  be  thou  filled  with  oootfluL  Hiaar  how 
the  '^  It  is  finished  "  of  Jesus  on  earth  is  echoed ihom  the  tfanmaof  Gq2 
himself,  as  he  raises  up  his  Son  fix)m  the  dead,  and  beatowa  glory  vigaa 
him ;  hear  this,  I  sav,  and  as  thou  heaiest^  attend  to  the  power  of 
this  argument, — ^If  the  Lord  had  bem  plaaMd  to  kUl  na^  ha  woold 
not  have  aocefrfied  his  Son  for  us.  If  he  meant  us  to  dSe,  would  he  hna 
put  him  to  death  too?  How  can  it  be?  Tbesacdfioaof  JasDamnat 
^ectually  prevent  the  destruction  of  thoiae  Ibr  whom,  be  oflfared  of 
himself  as  a  sacrifice.  Jesus  dying  for  sinnera,  and  jeti  the  siiuien  dsr 
nied  mercy  I  Inconoeivabla  uid  imposaihle !  Uy  son!,  whatoro  t^ 
inward  fedings  and  the  tumult  of  thy  thonghts».  tha  aonsptad  aaoafiot 
shows  that  God  is  not  pleased  to  kill  theot 

But,  if  you  notice,  in  the  case  of  ManoaR,  they&iff  ottrdEabamft- 
saorifice  anda  meat-offeriiu^  tbo.    Well,  now,  in  addiAa  to  the  peat^ 

Sand  sacrifice  of  Christ,  which  is  our  trusty  we,  dear  hrothera  and  flMrtan^ 
ve  oflTered  other  sacrifices  to  God,  and  in  conse<]^nence  of  his  aooept- 
ance  of  such  sacrifices  we  cannot  imagine  that  he  intends  to  dertroj  na. 
First,  let  me  oonduet  your  thoughts  bade  to-  the  ofEBiing  rfjwiinr 
which  you  have  presented.  I  will  speak,  for  myselfl  Ireewnow»nD^ 
ning  over  my  diary  mentally,  flill  many  an  mstance  in  lA&sh.  I  Kaem 
sought  the  Lord  in  prayer  and  he  has  most  sracioudy  heard  me.  I 
am  as  sure  that  my  requests  have  been  heard  as  ever  Hanoah  eonU 
have  been  sure  that  liis  sacrifice  was  consumed  upon  &e  rock.  Mbj  I 
not  infer  from  this  that  the  Lord  does  not  mean  to  destxoy  me?  Ton 
know  that  it  has  been  so  with  you,  dear  brother.  You  are  down  in  tibe 
dumps  to-day,  you  are  beginning  to  raise  many  questions  about  divina 
bve;  but  there  have  been  times— you  know  there  have — ^when  yon 
have  sought  the  Lord  and  he  has  heard  you.  You  can  say,  *^Thia  poor 
man  cried,  and  the  Lord  heard  him,  and  delivered  him  from  w  Ml 
fears."  Perhaps  you  have  not  jotted  down  the  &ct  in  a  bool^  bat  your 
memory  holds  the  indelible  record.  Your  soul  has  made  her  personal 
boast  in  the  Lord  concerning  his  fidelity  to  his  promise  in  helping  hk 
people  in  the  hour  of  need,  ror  you  have  happily  proved  it  in  your  own 
oaae.    Now,  brother,  if  the  Lord  had  been  pleased  to  kill  you,  would 


XAHOAH'S  Wm  ASP  HEB  EXOSLLENT  ABGUICBNT.  115 

he  luKV6  hfiaxd  your  mayarB  ?    If  he  had  meant  to  cast  von  oat  after 
aD,  wonldi  he  ome  aetad  yon  so  many  times  ?    If  he  had  songht  a 


qoansl  agamat  jou  he  might  haye  had  cause  for  that  quarrel  many 
yean  agpo^  and  hare  said  to  you,  ^' When  you  make  many  prayers  I  will 
■ot  hearJ'  But  since  he  has  listened  to  your  cries  and  tears,  and  many 
atimaamweiedyoar  petitions,  he  cannot  intend  to  kill  you. 

Agfin^jlOBBL  brxHifliht  to  him,  years  ago,  not  only  your  prayers  but  your" 
mffi    BjunMnhar  tnat  glad  hour  when  you  said^ 

^JVow,  O God,  thine  own  I  am ; 
Now  I  §iT«  thee  baek  thine  own  ; 
£E«idom,.finfiDd0,  aiui  heslfeh,  and  fiunfl^ 
Ckmaeciate  to  thee  alone.; 
Thine  I  liye,  thrice  hapgjr  1 1 
Hi^ppier  still  if  thine  Ime.** 

ToKnPB  jnodf  ovar  tor  Ofartet,  body,  soul,  spirit,  aU  your  goods,  all 
yo«r  Jiaiix%  all  ypor  taknta,  every  fiKulty,  and  every  posnble  acqnii»- 
DMBft^  aaiyiNr aaid,  ''Lord»  I  am  not  my  own>  but  I  am  boofffat  widi  • 
price.'*  Now,  at  that  time  did  not  the  Lord  accept  you  ?  You  have 
aft  this  very  moment  a  lively  recollection  of  the  sweet  sense  of  acceptance 
foa  had  at  that  time.    Even  now  your  heart  sings, 

<'Loid  la  the  strength  of  grace 

With  a  glad  heart  and  free, 
Myself,  my  residue  of  days, 
I  consecrate  to  thee.** 

Thongh  yon  are  at  this  time  sorely  troubled,  yet  you  would  not  wish  to 
with£aw  ftom  the  consecration  which  you  then  made,  but  on  the  con- 
bmy  joiL  ckdaie,. 

**  Hqrh  heaven,  that  heard  the  solemn  vow, 
Tut  TOW  renewed  ahi^  daily  hear. 
Till,  in  life's  latest  hour,  I  bow, 
And  bless  in  death  a  bond  so  dear.** 

'Saw,  wmdd  the  Lord  have  accepted  the  offering  of  yourself  to  him  if 
hemeaitt  to  destroy  you  ?  Would  he  have  let  you  say,  **  1  am  thy  servant 
ind  the  son  of  thy  handmaid :  thou  hast  loosed  my  bonds  "  ?  W  ould  he 
hanre  pennitted  you  to  declare  as  you  can  boldly  assert  to-night,  ^*  I  bear 
in  my  bedty  ibid  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus,"  delighting  to  remember  the 
tinie  of  your  baptism  into  him,  whereby  your  body,  washed  with  his  pure 
bo^,  was  declared  to  be  the  Lord's  for  ever.  Would  he  enable  you  to 
ieel  a  joj  in  the  very  mark  of  your  consecration,  as  well  as  in  the  conse- 
cration itself  if  he  meant  to  slay  you  ?  Oh,  surely  not !  He  does  not 
let  a  man  give  himself  up  to  him,  and  then  cast  him  away.  That  can- 
not be. 

Some  of  us,  dear  friends,  can  recollect  how,  growing  out  of  this  last 
ncrifioe,  there  have  been  others.  The  Lord  has  accepted  our  oflTerings 
at  other  times  too,  for  our  works,  faith,  and  labours  of  love  have  been 
owned  of  his  Spirit.  There  are  some  of  you,  I  am  pleased  to  remember, 
whom  God  has  blest  to  the  conversion  or  little  chiloren  whom  you  have 
faciied  to  teach  for  Jesus.  You  have  some  in  heaven  whom  you  brought 
to  the  Saviour,  and  there  are  others  on  earth  whom  you  can  look  upon 


116  MSTROPOLTTAir  TABBBHAOLX  FULPK 

with  great  joy  because  Ood  was  pleased  to  make  joa  flw  instnnimfcaf 
their  conviction  and  their  after  conveTBion.  Some  of  joo,  Ipenseif^ 
are  ministers  of  the  gospel,  others  of  joa  preach  at  the  oomen  of  fin 
streets,  and  there  have  been  times  in  ^or  lires— I  am  mxte  thafc  job  wUh 
they  were  ten  times  as  many — ^in  which  God  has  been  j^aued  to  anooeift 

Jonr  efforts,  so  that  hearts  hare  yielded  to  the  sway  of  Jeain.  Hair.  ]W 
0  not  put  any  trost  in  those  things,  nor  do  joa  daim  mxj  BMRiilir 
haying  served  your  Master,  but  still  I  think  m&f  may  be  tmowti  in  tl 
a  matter  of  consolation,  and  yon  may  say,  If  the  Lend  had  meaat  to 
destroy  me,  would  he  have  enabled  me  to  pieaoh  his  mpel  ?  Wovid 
he  have  helped  me  to  weep  oyer  men's  souls  F  Would  lie  hay«  endM 
me  to  gather  those  dear  children  like  lambs  to  his  bosom  ?  Wodd  hs 
have  granted  me  my  longing  desire  to  bear  firuit  in  his  vbimidy  If  hs 
did  not  mean  to  bless  me  ?  Surely  he  will  not  let  me  be  like  JndM^  wliD 
preached  the  gospel  and  betrayed  his  Master.  Birty  hayins 
me  and  given  me  joy  in  my  work,  and  success  in  it,  he  will 
with  me  and  help  me  even  to  the  end.    As  Mr.  Wedey  mUl  pafca 

**  Me,  if  purposed  to  destroy 
For  past  nnfiythfalneHy 
Would  God  Touchsafe  to  employ 
And  still  so  strangely  bless  t 

Those  are  comparatively  small  things,  but  sometimes  small  tfainp  hdp 
our  small  minds.  Little  fishes  are  sweet,  and  little  diamonda  •nns^ 
ciouB,  and  so  little  evidences  may  let  in  a  great  deal  of  peace,  liiq! 
may  at  least  help  us  while  we  are  looking  out  fbr  someiihiiig  bettei^  so 
that  we  may  rise  out  of  our  troubles  and  grasp  the  higher  j|m. 

So  much  upon  the  first  point.  Mistr^  Man(^  azgoea  mt,  if 'Ood 
had  accepted  their  offerings,  he  did  not  mean  to  kill  them;  aadtliere 
is  our  argument  to-night,  for  he  has  accei)ted  the  ftetA  aaorifloa  of 
Christ,  and  then  he  has  accepted  the  sacrifioes  which  his  gnoe  hss 
enabled  us  to  offer,  and  therefore  he  does  not  mean  to  kill  ua. 

"  Who  said  he  did  ?"  says  somebody.  Well,  the  devil  haa  aaidtiiat 
numbers  of  times.  He  is  a  liar  from  the  b^finning^  and  ho  doea  not 
improve  a  bit.  He  will  have  the  impudence  to  say  this  to  jm  whoa 
you  Have  just  been  in  tiie  presence  of  Christ.  As  von  dome  ftedi  llmi 
the  closet  he  will  meet  you  outside  the  door,  and  ne  will  tell  roa  tihat 
the  Lord  has  utterly  forsaken  you,  for  there  are  no  bounds  to  nia  liilBe- 
hood.  Reply  to  him,  if  he  is  worth  replying  to  at  all,  in  the  Tangnage 
of  our  text. 

II.  But  now,  secondly,  the  second  argument  was  that  thcj  had 
received  oraoious  BBVBLATioifS.  ''  If  the  Lord  were  pleased  to  kill 
us,  he  would  not  have  shewed  us  all  these  things." 

Now,  what  has  the  Lord  shown  you,  my  dear  brother  ?  I  wfll  mentkm 
one  or  two  things. 

First,  the  Lord  has  shown  you,  perhaps  years  ago,  orpossiblj  afc  this 
moment  he  is  showing  jon  for  the  first  time — yottr  sin.  What  a  sight  Qiat 
was  when  we  first  had  it  Some  of  you  never  saw  your  sins,  but  your  sioi 
are  there  all  the  same.  In  an  old  house,  perhaps,  there  is  a  cellar  into 
which  nobody  goes,  and  the  windows  are  always  kept  shut.  There  is  a 
wooden  shutter :  no  light  ever  comes  in.  You  live  in  the  house  comfortably 


HASOAH'S  wife  and   her   excellent   kUaVHEUT,  U7 

QOQgh,  not  knowing  what  is  there ;  but  one  day  yon  take  a  candle,  nnd 
«  down  the  steps,  and  open  that  mouldy  door,  and  when  it  ii;  opened, 
iear  mel  What  a  damp,  pestilential  smell!  Uow  foul  the  floor 
■  I  All  Borts  of  living  creatures  hop  away  from  under  your  feet.  There 
in  growths  on  the  very  walla — a  heap  of  roots  in  the  comer,  sending  out 
liose  long  yellow  growths  which  look  like  the  fingers  of  death.  And 
iiere  iaaspider,  and  there  are  a  hundred  like  him,  of  such  a  size  as  cannot 
IB  grown,  except  in  eoch  horrible  places.  You  get  out  as  quickly  as 
imr  yon  can.  You  do  not  like  the  look  of  it.  Now,  the  caudle  did  not 
Hake  that  celkr  bad ;  the  candle  did  not  make  it  filthy.  No,  the  caudle 
loly  showed  what  there  was.  And  when  you  get  in  the  carpenter  to 
»ke  down  that  shutter  which  you  could  not  open  anyhow,  for  it  had  not 
ieen  opened  for  yeai^,  and  when  the  daylight  comes  in,  it  seems  more 
lionible  than  it  did  b^  candle-light,  and  you  wonder,  indeed,  howerer 
ftm  did  go  across  it  with  all  those  dreadful  tilings  alt  around  you,  and 
foa  cannot  be  satisfied  C^  live  upstairs  now  till  that  cellar  downstairs 
das  been  perfectly  cleansed.  That  is  just  like  our  heart ;  it  is  full  of 
dn,  but  we  do  not  know  it.  It  is  a  den  of  nnclean  birds,  a  meui^rie 
if  every  thing  that  is  fearful,  and  fierce,  and  farioas— a  little  hell  stocked 
with  devils.  Snch  is  our  nature  j  such  is  our  heart.  Now,  the  Lord 
showed  me  mine  years  ago,  as  he  did  some  of  yon,  and  the  result  of  h 
light  of  one's  heart  is  horrible.  Well  does  Dr.  Young  say,  "  God  spares 
M  eyes  but  his  own,  that  fearful  sight,  a,  naked  human  heart."  Nobody 
ever  did  sec  all  his  heart  as  it  really  is.  Yon  have  only  seen  a  part, 
hnt,  when  seen,  it  is  so  horrible  that  it  is  enough  to  drive  a  man  out  of 
his  senses  to  see  the  evil  of  his  nature. 

Now,  let  us  gather  some  honey  out  of  this  dead  lion.  Brother,  if  the 
Lord  had  meant  to  destroy  na,  he  would  not  have  abonn  us  oar  sin,  be- 
cause we  were  happy  enough  previously,  were  we  not?  In  our  own  poor 
way  we  were  content  enough,  and  if  he  did  not  mean  to  pardon  us,  it 
was  not  like  the  Lord  to  show  us  our  aiu,  and  so  to  torment  us  before 
our  time,  unless  he  meant  to  tflke  it  away.  We  were  swine,  but  wo 
were  satisfied  enough  with  the  husks  we  ate ;  and  why  not  let  ns  remain 
Bwinc?  What  was  the  good  of  letting  us  see  our  filthinesa  if  ho  did 
not  purpose  to  take  it  away?  It  never  can  be  possible  that  God  sets 
himself  studiously  to  torture  the  human  mind  by  making  it  conscious  of 
its  evil,  if  be  never  intends  to  supply  a  remedy.  Oh  no!  A  deep 
sense  of  sin  will  not  save  you,  but  it  is  a  pledge  that  there  is  something 
began  in  your  soul  which  may  lead  to  salvation ;  for  that  deep  sense  of 
sin  does  as  good  as  say,  "The  Lord  is  laying  bare  the  disease  tluit  be 
may  cure  it.  He  is  letting  you  sec  the  foulness  of  ttiat  underground 
cellar  of  your  corruption,  becansc  he  meana  to  cleanse  it  for  you."  So, 
dear  brethren,  if  the  Lord  had  meant  to  kill  us  be  would  not  have 
shown  ns  such  things  as  the  infamy  of  our  nature  and  the  horror  of  oni- 
tall  J  but  since  he  has  revealed  to  us  our  nakednesa  and  poverty  he 
desires  to  clothe  and  enrich  us. 

But  he  has  shown  us  more  than  this,  for  he  has  made  us  see  the 
hollotmiets  tutd  emptiness  of  Ois  world.  There  arc  some  hero  present 
who,  at  one  time,  were  very  gratified  with  the  pleasures  and  amusementa 
of  the  world.  The  theatre  was  a  great  delight  to  them.  The  hull-room 
afforded  them  supreme  satisfaction.     To  be  able  to  dress  just  after  their 


118  lUETROFOLITAV  •TAHnuriAUl  FULRT. 

own  fancy,  and  to  spend  money  on  their  own  iriiim%  wvri  Ihd'VWf 
of  delight ;  bnt  there  came  a  time  when  aoroaa  iH  dma  the  wmLfm 
oeived  a  myBteriooB  handwriting,  which  being  intetpntoA  can  4bM>-i 
^  Vanity  of  Tonlties;  all  is  vanii^."  These  imj  people  ipent  te  ii 
same  amnsements,  bat  they  seemed  so  dnll  snd  fftiqiii  thnfe  Asjr 
away  saying,  '*  We  do  not  care  a  bit  for  ttiem.  The  joft  nra^ 
What  seenrad  gold  tarns  oat  to  be  gilt ;  and  what  m  Vbum^ULm 
was  only  white  p^t  The  yamish  is  cracked,  the  tfaiari  is  trimilh 
colooring  has  yanished.  Mirth  hmghs  like  an  JdieL  «id  pIsMe^ 
like  mamess."  I  haTe  known  persons  in  that-eonaitiaaiC  aMl 
after  still  more  stirring  pleasnres.  They  bstre  Ihuiighl  tha^  # 
went  a  stop  farther,  tiU  what  was  mere  amnsemeufc  oane  te  ^^*^ 
perhaps  they  might  find  something  these.  Th^  hmm  tried  il^ 
haye  draineil  aU  the  caps  of  the  deyiTe  hanyot^  an' 
sickening  as  lokowarm  water,  jnamd,  and  «fen  naMoen 
come  apon  them,  and  they  haye  oeen  weaonr  t)f  Hlb.  "Shm, 
the  Lord  has  tanght  many  of  as  this  in  diroeni  ira>y^  erveai 
OB  who  haye  neyer  gone  yery  far  into  worl^  mnwwanei 
haye  learned  that  there  is  nothing  round  the  spaokmB  ffkbe  tktt 
satisfy  a  hongry  sool.  We,  too,  lia?e  heard  the  wem,  ^Ywttf^ 
yanities :  all  is  yanity,"  soaading  in  oar  hearts ;  and  nowAo  yoK  Wtak 
that,  if  the  Lord  had  meant  to  kill  as,  he  would  haye  taught  tm  flbf 
Wliy,  no  ;  he  wonkl  haye  eaid,  ^Let  than  akne,  (fae^ en  thiM  eifc) 
idols,  l^eyare  only  going  to  haye  oneiroild  mwhiflh  ttayeni'ie- 
joice ;  let  them  enjoy  it."  He  wonld  have  let  the  swine  |[e  ea  wM 
their  husks  if  he  bad  not  meant  to  tarn  them  into  Ub  dfaddns^  itf 
bring  them  to  his  own  bosom.  I  tbiid:  I  told  yon  enee  ttf «  Utaiy 
whicn  illostrates  this,  of  a  good  wife — a  ^ood  Ohristia&iraiBe 
had  been  conyerted.  Her  hasbond  remained  a  godkn  and  li 
man.    Neyertheless,  her  gentleness  and  patnnee  were  eupaa 

one  night,  while  oat  in  a  drinking  parhr,  her  hmbsoul  maSes  lia 

there  was  not  one  of  them  that  h^  sach  a  wife  es  he  had.    Be  wtSi  ihs 
was  far  too  religions,  bat  for  all  that  there  was  neyermuh  >  wuuiStt; 


'^and  if  I  were  to  take  yon  now,"  said  he,  ''ten  otjaa,  home  to  etnnr 
to*night,  thoi^h  it  is  past  twelve,  she  wonld  proyide^jmjttesm 
yon  with  a  smife,  and  neyer  say  a  syllable  by  way  ofcuuykiBAr  ' 

They  did  not  belieye  it,  and  so  they  went  down  to  we  honl; '  8h 
was  sitting  np^  past  midnight,  weary,  and  the  widted  hnriMiiS  inil  In 
had  brought  in  his  friencb  and  he  wished  tiiem  to  haye  wmiuwifftt 
She  had  to  forage  very  carcfally,  nnd  make  the  bc^  (rf  what  flnte  w« 
in  the  honse,  and  she  begged  the  gentlemen  to  haye  a  litUe  peftioBDe 
and  wait ;  the  meal  might  not  be  quite seryed  as  die  Aoidolfte to 
haye  it,  since  the  servants  were  in  bed,  bat  still  she  would  do  her  beit 
She  managed  well,  the  company  sat  down  at  the  table,  the  hi^  tnAsd 
Aem  most  gracionsly,  and  the  husband  had  won  his  bet.  Then  tt^f 
asked  her  how  it  was  that  she  could  bear  with  snch  treatment^  end  adt 
so  nobly.  Borsting  into  tears,  when  they  pressed  her  egain  and  Sjpon, 
she  answered,  **  I  have  long  prayed  for  my  dear  hasban(C  and  mzioorif 
desired  his  salvation,  but  I  am  afraid  he  never  will  be  saved,  and  sol 
have  made  np  my  mind  to  make  him  as  happy  as  possible  white  he  is 
her^  ftaring  be  will  have  no  happiness  hereafter."    Now  do  yon  not 


V&iro&B'fi  TTTB  ATID  HER  IICELLETT  ARGmrairT.  113 

tiilnk  timt  God  would  act  on  that  principle  with  you  nnd  with  me  if  lie 
meant  to  leave  as  to  perish  ?  Would  he  not  allow  tis  to  have  the  en- 
joyment of  this  world  at  any  rate  ?  Bat  l.ecau8e  he  has  taught  us  that 
this  world  is  a  moffcery  and  ft  cheat,  1  gather  thut  he  will  not  destroy 
115, 

Bat  he  has  taught  ua  something  bttter  than  this — nnuiely,  tlw  pre- 
aoHgneis  of  Christ.  Ualesfl  we  are  uwfully  deceived — self-doccivwl,  I 
vavxa — wc  have  known  what  it  is  to  lose  the  bunien  of  onr  sin  at  tho 
foot  of  the  cross.  We  have  known  what  it  is  to  sec  the  suitability  and 
all-«ifliciency  of  the  merit  of  our  dear  Redeemer,  and  wc  have  rejoiced 
ID  him  with  joy  nnspcakable  and  fall  of  glory.  If  he  had  meant  to 
destroy  as  he  woald  not  have  shown  as  Christ, 

8(HnetimeH  also  we  have  strong  desires  after  God!  WhatpiningsafUr 
commanion  with  him  have  we  felt !  What  longings  to  be  delivered  from 
sin!  What  yearnings  to  be  perfect !  What  aspirations  to  be  with  him  in 
beaven,  and  what  desires  to  be  like  him  while  we  ore  here!  Now  tliesc  long- 
ings, cravings,  desirings,  yearnings,  do  you  think  the  Lord  would  have  put 
tliem  into  oar  hearts  if  he  had  meant  to  destroy  us  ?  What  would  be  the 
^od  of  it  ?  Would  it  not  be  tormenting  us  as  Tantalus  was  tormented  ? 
Would  it  not,  iadecd,  be  a  superfluity  of  cruelty  thus  to  make  us  wish 
for  what  wc  could  aevcr  have,  and  pine  after  what  we  should  never 
gain ''  0  l)eloTed,  let  us  be  comforted  about  these  things.  If  he  had 
meant  to  kilt  ns,  he  would  not  have  shown  us  such  things  as  these. 

III.  I  shall  have  no  time  to  dwell  upon  the  last  sooree  of  comfort, 
which  is  what  the  Lord  has  Spoken  to  as— many  paEcious  promises. 
"Nor  would  he  have  told  us  suuh  things  as  these."  At  utmost  any  time 
when  a  child  of  God  is  depressed,  if  he  goes  to  the  word  of  Ood  and  to 
prayer,  and  looks  up,  he  will  generally  get  a  hold  of  some  promise  or 
other.  I  know  I  generally  do.  I  could  not  tell  you,  dear  brother,  to- 
night, what  promise  woald  salt  your  case,  but  the  Lord  always  knows 
how  to  apply  the  right  word  at  the  right  time  ;  and  when  a  promise  is 
applied  with  great  power  to  the  soul,  and  yon  nre  enabled  to  plead  it  at 
the  mercy-aeat,  yoa  may  say,  "  If  the  Lord  had  meant  to  kill  us  ho 
woald  not  have  made  us  such  n  promise  as  this."  I  have  a  promise 
that  bangs  up  before  my  eyes  whenever  I  wake  every  moniing,  and  it 
has  continued  in  its  plac«  for  yeara.  It  is  a  stay  to  my  soul.  It  is  this 
— "  [  will  not  fail  thee  nor  forsake  thee."  Dimcnlties  arise,  fuiida  rnn 
short,  sickness  comes ;  but  somehow  or  other  my  text  always  seems  to 
flow  like  a  fountain — "  I  will  not  fail  thee  nor  forsake  thee,"  If  the 
Lord  had  meant  to  kill  us,  he  would  not  have  said  that  to  as. 

What  is  your  promise  to-night,  brother  ?  What  have  you  got  a  hold 
of  ?  If  you  have  not  laid  hold  of  any,  and  feel  as  if  none  belonged  to 
jOD,  yet  there  are  such  words  as  these,  "  This  is  a  faithful  saying  and 
worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesas  came  into  the  world  to  save 
sinners,"  and  j-ou  are  one.  Ah,  if  ho  had  meant  to  destroy  you,  he 
would  not  have  spoken  a  text  of  such  a  wide  character  on  purpose  to 
inclnde  yoar  case.  A  thousand  promises  go  down  to  tho  lowest  deep 
into  which  a  heart  can  ever  descend,  aad  if  the  I^ord  had  meant  to 
destroy  a  soul  in  the  deeps,  he  would  not  have  sent  a  gospel  promise 
down  even  to  that  extreme. 

I  must  ha?Q  done,  and  thwefore  I  should  like  to  say  tliese  two  or 


12(»  METUOPOLITAX  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

thrto  words  to-night  to  v.ya  whu  are  nnoonrertcd,  but  who  are  tnmbkd 
in  y.'UT  fr^nls.  You  think  that  Goi  means  to  destroj  you.  Now,  dur 
frier.  1.  I  take  it  that  if  the  L<  Td  had  meant  to  kill  you,  he  would  not 
have  S'.-nt  the  jrospel  to  vou.  If  there  had  been  a  purpose  and  a  decree 
to  destroy  yon.  he  would  not  have  broujrht  you  here.  I  am  glad  to  see 
unconverted  [K-ople  here  on  Thursklay  nights.  When  souls  begin  to 
love  week-iii;:ht  .««.Tvices  I  always  think  that  there  is  a  something  good 
in  them  t-.twanU  the  L^n.!  God  of  Israel.  Now  tou  are  sitting  to  hear 
that  Jesu-i  has  died  to  save  such  as  you  arc.  "^ou  are  sittug  where 
vuii  are  hidden  to  trust  him  and  be  saved.  If  the  Lord  had  mesntto 
.slay  you  I  do  not  think  he  would  hare  sent  me  on  such  a  finitlesB 
errand  as  to  tell  you  '.'f  a  Christ  who  could  not  save  you.  I  think,  on 
Thursilay  nights  especially,  I  may  hope  that  I  have  a  picked  congrega- 
tion wliom  God  intends  to  bless.  Besides,  some  or  you  hare  had 
vour  lives  sj^ared  very  remarkably.  Tou  have  been  in  acddents  on 
land  or  on  sea — perhaps  in  battle  and  shipwreck.  You  have  been 
laised  from  a  sick  bed.  If  the  Lord  had  meant  to  destroy  you,  sovelj 
he  would  have  let  you  die  then;  but  he  has  spared  you,  and  pa 
are  ^retting  on  in  years;  sorely  it  is  time  that  you  yielded  to  hii 
mercy  and  gave  yourself  up  into  the  hands  of  grace.  If  the  Loid  had 
meant  to  destroy  yon,  sorely,  he  would  not  have  brought  you  here  to- 
night, for,  ix)ssibly,  I  am  addressing  one  who  has  come  here,  wondering 
wliy.  All  the  time  that  he  has  been  sitting  here  he  has  been  saying  to 
himself,  **  I  do  not  know  how  I  got  into  this  place^  but  here  I  sm.*^ 


God  means  to  bless  you  to-night,  I  trust,  and  he  will,  dear  friend,  if  you 
bretithe  this  prayer  to  heaven, — *•  Father,  forgive  me !    T  have  smned 


'pted.  1  ou  shall  one  of  these  days  rejoice 
in  the  revelations  of  his  love,  juid  in  the  ])roniises  which  he  gives  yon, 
and  say  as  we  say  to-night,  *'  If  the  Lord  were  pleased  to  kill  us  he 
would  not  have  showed  os  all  these  things."  The  Lord  bless  you  fcr 
Christ's  sake.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Judges  ziiL 


Uymns  from  "  Our  Own  Hymn  Book  "—784,  788. 


^isbmMt  §ttlpt 


"  ■     ' 

BBTBEAT  IMPOSSIBLE. 


%.  ^^m^ 


DBLIYBBBD  BT 

a  H.  SPURGEON, 

i  ■ 

AT-  TBI   lOnrBOPOLITAH   TABUHAOU,   UWINOTCUI. 


""I  liATt  0p«MdsQgr  month  iinko  the  Lord, and  I  ovmot  go  back.**— Judgea  zL  80. 

Ik  J«(litliah*8  caae  there  weze  good  reuoiiB  for  going  back.  He  had 
made  a  raah  vow,  and  tmch  thii^  are  mndi  better  broken  thsm  kept 
If  a  man  makes  a  tow  to  conmiit  a  crime  hig  vow  to  do  so  ib  in  itself 
a  ain,  and  the  carrying  out  of  his  tow  will  be  doubly  sinAiL  If  a  man's 
TOwing  to  do  a  thmg  made  it  necessary  and  right  for  him  to  do  it,  then 
the  whole  mMl  law  might  be  suspended  by  the  mere  act  of  vowing, 
fiir  a  Eum  might  yow  to  steal,  to  commit  adultery^  or  to  murder,  and 
then  say,  '^  I  was  right  in  all  those  acts,  because  I  yowed  to  do  them."/ 
This  is  self-'eyidentfy  absurd,  and  to  admit  such  a  principle  would  be  to 
destroy  all  morality.  You  have,  first  of  all,  no  right  to  promise  to  do 
what  is  wrong ;  and  then,  secondly,  your  promise,  whicn  is  in  itself 
wronff,  caniQot  niake  a  criminal  act  to  be  right.  If  you  haye  come  under 
a  rash  tow,  you  must  not  dare  to  keep  it.  You  ought  to  go  before  God 
and  repent  that  you  haye  made  a  tow  which  involyes  sm ;  but  as  to 
keeping  tiie  sinfol  vow,  that  were  to  add  sin  to  sin.  "  But,"  saith  one, 
^  woula  it  not  be  sin  to  break  my  yow?"  I  reply,  there  was  great  sin 
in  making  it ;  and  there  will  probably  be  somemeaanre  of  sin  connected 
with  your  breaking  it,  for  few  human  actions  are  perfect ;  but  to  keep 
your  evil  yow  would  certainly  be  sin,  and  you  must  not  commit  the 
greater  sin  to  ayoid  the  less  sin  which  perhaps  may  be  inyolyed  in  the 
breach  of  your  foolish  promise.  I  think  it  would  haye  been  well  if 
Jephthah,  though  he  had  opened  his  mouth  before  God,  had  gone  back 
when  it  inyoIy6d,'a8  I  think  it  did,  so  dreadful  a  necessity  as  that  of 
sacrificing  his  own  innocent,  only  child.  His  haying  sworn  to  do  it 
did  not  make  it  right :  it  was  just  as.  wrong.  If  he  really  did  slay  her^ 
it  was  a  horrible  action^  dramatize  or  disguise  it  as  you  may.  He  had  no 
right  to  make  the  dangerous  promise ;  he  had  ^till  less  right  to  carry  it 
out  after  he  hbd  made  it,  if  it  led  to  such  terrible  consequences. 

But  now  I  am  going  to  qpeak  about  other  openings  of  the  mouth 
to  Ood,  in  which  were  is  no  ill ;  openings  of  the  mouth  wluch  need 
No.  M41. 


122  3J  RTR0P0LITA9  TABBBVAOLB  PULPIT. 

never  be  rcercHcd,  which  certainly  never  can  be  recalled,  and  of  which 
we  may  rightly  gay,  before  the  living  Ood,  in  the  strength  which  he 
gives  us,  "  I  have  opened  my  mouth  nnto  the  Lord,  tsSi  I  cannot  go 
back." 

My  seimon  will  not  have  mnch  to  do  with  some  of  yoo.  Ton  have 
not  opened  yoar  mouth  to  God,  or  made  any  sort  of  promise  ;  but  yon 
remain  as  you  were,  far  off  from  him,  and  n^ligent  of  his  claims.  I 
do  not  envy  you.  Your  being  under  no  obligation  from  any  resolntion 
of  your  own  does  not  prevent  your  being  under  just  as  much  natinal 
obligation  to  God  on  account  of  your  being  his  creatures  and  therefore 
Bubjects  under  his  law.  I  sometimes  hear  of  people  who  say,  ''Yon 
know  I  do  not  profess  anything/'  and  after  that  assertion  they  appear 
to  feel  at  liberty  to  say  and  do  whatever  they  like.  Now,  if  we  neard 
of  certain  persons  entrusted  with  our  business  that  they  had  not  acted 
honestly,  what  should  we  think  of  it  if  one  man  among  them  should 
rise  up  and  say,  "  Don't  blame  me.  You  ^ow  I  never  profeBsed  to  be 
honest."  What  would  that  mean  ?  It  would  mean  that  he  is  a  con- 
fessed and  acknowledged  thief.  Suppose  a  man  were  to  say,  ^  Well,  I 
never  profess  to  be  truthful,"  what  is  he  ?  He  is  an  acknowled|;ed  liar. 
And  he  who  says, ''  Ah,  I  never  made  any  vows  or  promises,  neither  do 
I  pretend  to  serve  the  Lord,"  acknowledges  himself  to  be  a  godless  man. 
He  is  living  in  the  daily  robbery  of  God,  defrauding  him  of  his  rights: 
he  is  living  in  direct  and  avowed  rebelHon  against  the  King  of  kings. 
He  is  living  without  a  hope  for  the  hereafter — ^without  Rnoe  in  his 
soul  for  the  present,  and  without  glory  in  prospect  for  the  mtore*  All, 
friend,  although  the  things  I  may  have  to  say  at  this  time  may  not 
directly  bear  upon  you,  yet  the  very  fact  that  they  do  not  bear  upon 
you  should  make  you  think,  and  weigh,  and  consider,  and  ponder  your 
ways  as  to  the  place  which  you  now  occupy.  You  are,  hj  yonr  uoor 
profession  and  non-avowal  of  Christ,  making  a  confession  of  beine  on 
the  opposite  side ;  for  he  that  is  not  with  hun  is  against  him,  ud  he 
that  gathereth  not  with  him  scattereth  abroad. 

But  now  I  speak  to  my  own  brethren  and  sisters  in  Ohrist  Jesus. 
Dear  friends,  there  are  three  things  which  I  would  bring  to  yonr  pnc* 
tical  remembrance;  first,  what  we  have  done:  we  have  openea  our 
mouth  unto  the  Lord.  Secondly,  what  we  cannot  do:  ''I  cannot  go 
back";  and,  thirdly,  wliat  we  must  do:  there  are  some  ihin^  that  we 
must  seek  after  if  we  are  to  be  able  to  hold  on  and  to  act  fluthfliny  to 
our  profession. 

L  First,  then,  what  we  havb  done.  **  I  have  opened  my  mouth 
unto  the  Lord." 

We  have  opened  our  mouths  before  the  Lord,  first,  by  confeesing  our 
faiih  in  Jeett^  ChrUU  I  have  said,  and  most  of  you  upon  whom  I 
am  looking  have  also  solemnly  said,  before  others,  '^  I  believe  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  ChriA  with  all  my  heart.  Let  others  believe  what  they 
will  and  trust  in  what  they  please : 

*■  'hliy  hope  is  fixed  on  nothing  less 
Than  Jesus*  blood  and  righteousness.*  ** 

We  are  troubled  by  no  question  of  our  Lord's  power  to  save,  or  of  oiff 
nterest  in  his  salvation,  but  we  have  testified  outright,  as  a  matter-of* 


\ 


BXTBEAT  DIPOSBIBLE.  128 

fact  which  we  feel  in  onr  own  sonls,  that  we  bdieTe  that  Jesus  died  for 
Dfly  and  that  he  is  all  onr  salyation  and  all  our  deeiie.  We  have  opened 
our  month  to  that  in  the  most  decided  manner,  and  we  are  continually 
doing  80  in  yariouB  wajs. 

Tf^  have  also  avoufed  and  declared  before  ihs  Iwing  God  tiiai  we  <p^ 
Christ's  disciples  and  followers.  If  any  one  should  ask  us,  "  Art  thoo 
one  of  them  ?    Dost  thou  consort  with  Jesus  of  Nazareth  ?  "    We  woold 

Sladly  answer,  "  Tea.''  Howeyer  short  we  come  of  perfect  obedience  to 
lis  commands,  yet  his  will  is  our  rule.  We  call  nim  ^^ Master"  and 
^Lord/'  and  when  we  read  about  the  disciples  of  Christ  we  think  of 
onrselyes  as  belmajpng  to  them.  Blessed  Master,  how  glad  we  are  to 
own  that  we  are  indeed  thy  disciples.  We  are  not  acJiAmed  to  acknow- 
ledge  that  we  haye  opened  our  mouth  unto  thee,  to  belieye  all  thy 
teachings^  and  to  obey  all  thy  commands. 

We  naye  opened  our  mouth  to  the  Lord,  next,  because  as  we  believe 
in  Jeans  Chnst,  and  take  him  to  be  our  Master,  so  we  have  admiUed  the 
Ride$mer*s  claims  to  our  persons  and  services,  and  have  resolved  to  live 
far  Mm  alone  all  our  days^  We  haye  made  a  dedication  of  onrselyes  to 
his  seryice,  declaring  tnat  we  are  not  our  own»  but  bought  with  a  price. 
Some  of  ns  did  this  years  ago ;  and— 

^'High  hoayen  that  heard  the  solenm  yow, 
Tlut  yew,  renewed,  has  often  heard,** 

and  shall  hear  it  again.  We  do  profess  that  nothing  that  we  haye  is 
onrs,  but  onr  goods,  onr  hours,  our  talents,  and  onrselyes  are  all  marked 
with  the  broad  arrow  of  the  Eling.  We  are  the  perpetual  heritage  of 
the  Lordj  to  be  his  for  eyer,  and  neyer  to  serve  self  again,  or  the  world, 
or  the  flesh,  or  any,  save  Jesus. 

We  have  also  cast  in  owr  lot  with  his  people.  We  belong  to  their 
fraternity  heart  and  soul.  We  are  not  ashamed  of  them  either.  It  is 
some  years  ago  with  some  of  us  since  we  came  forward  and  asked  to 
haye  our  names  enrolled  with  the  despised  people  of  Qod,  and  we  opened 
onr  mouth  to  the  Lord  that  we  would  take  part  and  lot  with  his  people- 
that  if  they  were  abused  we  would  take  a  share  of  the  abuse,  that  if 
they  had  sorrows  we  would  help  to  bear  their  burdens,  and  if  they  had 
joys  we  only  hoped  that  we  might  be  worthy  to  enjoy  the  crumbs  of 
their  table.  We  craved  to  be  numbered  with  the  citizens  of  that  noble 
city,  the  New  Jerusalem,  and  we  reouested  to  share  the  portion  of 
Zion's  blessed  but  tried  inhabitants,  whether  they  held  fast  or  festiv^ 
suffered  siege  or  enjoyed  triumph.  We  asked  to  have  it  said  of  us 
that  we  were  bom  there,  and  when  we  were  asked  if  we  would  forego 
the  world  and  all  its  allurements  to  become  heirs  of  the  better  country 
we  stood  up  before  the  Lord  and  declared  that  it  was  even  so. 

In  all  these  things  we  have,  as  Clnristian  people,  opened  our  mouths 
unto  the  Lord,  have  we  not  ?  Now,  if  you  ask  me  when  you  did  so,  I 
shall  have  to  mention  several  occasions. 

Some  of  us  opened  our  mouths  in  this  respect  to  the  Lord  in  a  very 
solemn  way  in  private.  We  made  our  dedication  to  God  a  solemn 
deed  performed  in  a  distinct  and  formal  manner.  We  took  time  about 
it,  thought  it  over,  and  then  did  it  deliberately  and  definitely.  Sonae 
haye  even  written  out  an  act  of  solemn  dedication,  and  signed  it. 


124  XKTROPOUTIH  TIBSBSJUU  PUCnXi 

• 

Others,  perhaps,  more  wisely,  haTe  rdkBinBd  fkom  writing  tt^  Isik  ft 
dioald  become  a  bondage  to  their  spirits^  but  thej  iasfB,  neferthda^ 
made  a  formal  act  of  transfer  of  thmnselTei^  and  all  Ihai  thoj  had^lo 
the  Lord.    At  any  rate,  whether  we  did  it  fonnaOj crao^  WB €n si^y 

«<*Tis  donel    The  great  trsiMScliott*s  doM^ 
I  am  my  Lord's,  and  he  is  mine,** 

There  was  a  time  when  once  for  all  we  cave  op  tlia  kqfi  of  tiis  d^ 
of  Mansonl,  and  sorrendered  to  the  Lord  abaohitdlyy  that  bo  in%;hi  be 
onrs,  and  that  we  might  be  his  for  ever  and  erer. 

Then  many  of  yon,  beloved  firiends,  opened  your  inovtii  to  did  Lori 
m  baptism.  Searching  his  word,  von  saw  there  deaify  tbit  m  flun  ss 
believed  were  baptizedu  Yon  read  of  tfie  ennndi  to  irtMHB  Che  qprJinp 
was  pnt,  '<  Dost  thon  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Ohriife?  te  ff  Am* 
believest  with  all  thy  heart  thou  mayest;"  aad  thM  on  nmnflMim  of 
his  faith  he  was  bi^tised.  .  I  have  opened  mjr  moath  imto  ttia  Loid  m 
that  manner.  I  remember  the  solemn  oocasion  irbm  I  went  iilto  fts 
river,  with  multitudes  of  people  as  witnesses  <m  either  bank;  to  miik  mj 
bnrial  with  the  Lord  in  the  water:  and, though  I  have  not  the  nnoiflst 
confidence  in  ontwaid  form  or  ceronony,  vet  often  has  mj  aoatMsllBd 
that  day  when  I  did  before  men  and  angels  aad  devib  deoHn  aiykdf  to 
be  the  servant  of  the  living  Gk)d,  and  was  theEeftm  boried  in  watv  &i 
token  of  my  death  to  all  the  world,  aad  then  raised  ftom  it  as  fla 
emblffln  of  my  newness  of  li&.  Oh,  to  be  always  fitt&fld  to  lAit  we 
then  did,  when,  coming  forward  of  onr  own  aoooid,  we  dachntd  Chat  «e 
were  dead  with  Christ,  that  we  might  also  live  with  hinu 

We  have  opened  our  mouth  unto  the  Lord  ahioe  then^  fUl  eftsa 
when  we  have  come  to  the  communion  iabb.  The  solemn  nttiBg  fbmt 
at  the  table  of  communion,  when  others  have  to  go  awajL  or  oan  on]|j 
look  on— the  separation  which  is  madfe  in  that  act— is  a  dtiekntkn  en 

Jour  part,  beloved,  that  you  belong^  to  the  Lord  Jeana  Ghrial^  thst 
e  is  become  your  meat  and  your  drink,  tiiat  yon  foed  at  hia  tahby 
and  are  his  servants.  There  is  something  very  soknin  aboot  the  csn- 
munion  service,  it  ought  never  to  be  lightfy  entmd  iq^on,  and  lAea 
you  have  been  attending  to  that  ordinance  in  remembrance  6t  him  jon 
ahould  feel,  '*  I  have  opened  my  mouth  unto  the  Lord  in  a  jtirj  specaisi 
manner  by  sitting  at  tne  table  with  his  peopte.** 

Besides  that,  how  often  have  we  openea  oar  numth  beflm  God  in 
hymn-smging.  I  am  aft^id  that  we  do  not  always  think  enoQi^  about 
what  we  say  when  we  sing.  But  ii^bat  solemn  things  you  have  sag. 
Did  you  not  sing  the  other  day — 

*'  And  if  I  might  make  some  reserre, 
And  duty  did  not  call, 
I  lore  my  God  with  zeal  so  jgreat 
That  I  would  gire  him  alPf 

And  did  you  not  sing  — 

**  Had  I  ten  thousand  hearts,  dear  Lord, 
I*dgiTe  them  all  to  thee  : 
Had  I  ten  thousand  tongues,  they  all 
Should  join  the  harmony.** 

|lh,  yon  have  opened  your  mouth  very  widely  unto  the  Lord  in  song. 


BKTHIIAT   IUF0»RIB1,E.  1S6 

And  60,  too,  in  }»-at/»r,  both  in  the  closet  aud  in  public.  We  uj 
great  thinga  to  God  in  snpplii^tiou :  do  we  alwftja  come  up  to  vhat  we 
lay?  Are  we  alwaj-a  of  the  mind  of  Jephthah,  who  said.  "I  haT« 
opened  mj  month  unto  the  Lord,  and  1  cannot  go  back."  Do  we  re- 
member those  TOWS  which  our  bouI  in  unguish  made  when  wc  drew  near 
to  (iod  in  the  bitterness  of  our  Spiiit,  and  poured  ont  our  comjdaJDt 
before  him  ? 

But  ah,  beloved,  very  smcially  I  may  speak  of  some  liere  prewnt 
who  arc  my  partners  in  tnc  work  and  ministry  of  the  church  ttx  ber 
Lord.  Wc  who  bear  public  teslimojii/,  "  we  havo  opened  onr  months 
unto  the  Lord,  and  cannot  go  back."  You  who  teach  classes  in  the 
Bchool,  you  who  try  to  tell  the  gosptl  to  other  men  in  the  workshi^, 
yon  TV'bo  talk  of  Jeans  Christ  even  to  your  children — remember  that  yon 
have  committed  yourselves.  While  you  are  trj-ing  to  speak  to  others 
you  make  arowale  for  yourselves  which  bind  you  to  present  troth  uid 
future  fidelity.  As  for  me,  whither  could  I  flee  from  ray  Master's 
presence  ?  Whither  conld  I  go  from  his  service  ?  Should  I  desert  his 
ministry,  onto  what  part  of  the  enrth  could  I  go  to  hide  myself? 
Somebody  would  remember  this  face  which  has  been  seen  by  so 
many  thousands ;  the  very  tones  of  my  voice  would  betray  me,  and  men 
would  point  me  ont  asan  npostate  from  my  Lord.  Jonah  might  flee  to 
Tarsiiish,  but  if  I  went  to  Tarshish  Bome  one  or  other  would  know  me 
and  pronounce  my  name  as  soon  as  I  set  foot  upon  the  aoil.  I  must 
fight  this  battle  through  now,  rctroac  is  out  of  the  question.  "  I  liare 
opened  my  mouth  unto  the  Lord  "  so  often,  and  before  so  man^,  that 
I  am  bound  by  a  myriad  ties,  nor  would  I  wish  to  be  bound  with  one 
the  less,  but  daily  with  more  and  more.  But,  beloved  ffiends,  do 
remember  that  in  proportion  as  your  religion  gains  publicity,  and  in 
proportion  as,  by  ttoehing  others,  yoti  tacitly  or  avowedly  declare  yonr 
faith  in  the  gospel,  in  that  proportion  yon  have  opened  your  month 
nnto  the  Lord,  and  it  is  not  possible  that  you  should  go  back  withont 
deep  di^race  and  dire  destruction. 

Now,  it  is  worth  our  remembering  offer  whal  fathion  we  have  done 
this.  I  have  shown  you  that  we  have  opened  our  mouth  unto  the  Lord, 
and  I  have  shown  yon  the  occnfiions  when  we  have  done  so,  bnt  in  the 
very  manner  of  the  deed  there  has  been  practical  force.  We  have  done 
this  i-oluntarihj.  Wc  have  opened  our  mouth  to  the  Lord  without  any 
compulsion.  The  little  child,  you  know,  who  according  to  the  Prayer- 
book  is  made  a  member  of  Christ  nud  a  child  of  God,  and  so  on,  has 
nothing  to  do  with  the  business,  and  is  in  no  way  respfnsible  for  what 
others  choose  to  promise  without  lU  li^avc  ;  but  von  and  i  (iiii  willingly 
what  we  did.  We  came  forwM^  and  said, "  Let  me  be  baptized,  for  I  am 
a  believer  in  Jesna.  Let  me  be  united  with  the  church,  for  I  am  one  of 
the  Lord's  redeemed."  We  said  to  the  Lord  Jesns  Christ,  "  I  am 
cfaeerftilly  and  willingly  thy  servant."  We  took  upon  onrselves  the 
bonds  of  a  Chriatian  profesaion  because  we  loved  to  do  so.  Well,  then, 
if  we  hare  done  this  Totnntarily,  there  is  the  strongest  reason  why  we 
sbonld  not  go  back  irom  our  own  chosen  position  as  the  Iiord's  own 
disciples. 

And  we  did  this  twry  lohmnly.  Oh,  to  some  of  yon  it  was  indeed 
ft  derout  actioo  when  joa  avowed  yonrselres  on  tfie'Ijord's  side.    Many 


126  ICETROPOLITIH  TABBBHAOLR  PULPIT. 

were  the  prayers  and  praises  which  preceded  and  fiillowed  it.  Shall  such 
solemnity  be  made  into  a  falsehood  ?  Shall  the  weeping  and  the  Bap- 
plication  be  proven  to  have  been  base  hypocri^  ? 

I  hope  also  that  we  did  it  very  deUberaiely,  ooonting  the  ooat^  hokag 
lonnd  about,  and  seeing  what  it  meant,  and  nndentandiiig  what  we 
were  doing.  We  did  not  reckon  npon  a  nnooth  path ;  we  did  not  oon- 
sidcr  that  we  should  gain  crowns  without  crosses^  or  win  viotorni 
without  fightings ;  and  we  have  found  it  much  as  we  eapecML  We 
passed  through  the  wicket-gate,  and  entered  on  the  zoad  to  the  odestial 
city,  knowing  that  there  were  dragons  to  encounter,  jriants  to  fi|^ 
hills  to  climb,  rivers  to  swim,  and  swamps  to  ford.  We  aet  ont  with 
considerable  knowledge  of  what  we  were  doin^  and  what  it  involved* 
and  we  were  not  thereby  prevented  firom  decidedly  and  deliberately 
declaring  ourselves  to  be  on  the  Lord's  side.  Are  ve  now  going  to 
confess  ourselves  to  have  been  fools  and  dupes?  WiU  we  now  touoBr 
Lord  that  his  service  is  hard  and  worthless  ? 

Most  of  us  made  our  profession  pubUdu.  We  had  many  onkioken. 
We  cannot  forget  that  when  we  began  the  race  a  ok>ud  of  witnesses 
surrounded  us,  and  have  ever  since  kept  us  in  full  survey.  If  there  ii 
a  little  speck  in  our  character  they  are  sure  to  point  it  out  Never  cat 
watched  a  mouse  as  the  lynx-eyed  world  watches  the  Ohriatian.  How 
it  magnifies  and  multiplies  the  faults  of  believens  and  ories,  "Aha! 
aha  I  so  would  we  have  iW*  ^^^  moment  it  finds  the  sliditest  trip  or 
mistake.  Well,  we  have  opened  our  mouth  to  the  Lord  oefoie  mnlti- 
tudcs,  and  shall  we  recant  and  deny  the  faith  ?  Men  and  angels  and 
devils'  know  that  wo  belong  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Ohrist.  We  have  de> 
Glared  it  before  all  wiiii  whom  we  have  come  into  contact^  not  always 
in  so  many  words,  but  I  hope  in  our  actions,  by  the  decided  stand 
that  we  have  taken  up  for  God  and  for  Ohrist,  mi  for  truths  and  for 
holiness,  and  for  the  fear  of  God  in  the  land. 

But  the  weight  of  it  all  lies  in  this, — ''  We  have  opened  onr  month 
unto  the  Lojd.**  It  is  not  what  wc  promised  the  church,  though  in  be- 
coming members  of  it  we  have  promised  to  fulfil  the  mutual  duties  of 
Christians.  It  was  not  what  we  promised  to  the  minister,  though,  in 
the  very  fact  of  becoming  members  of  a  church  of  whioh  he  is  the  pM- 
tor,  we  have  a  Ohristian  duty  towards  him.  It  was  not  what  we  mo- 
mised  one  another,  though  we  all  owe  something  to  each  other.  But 
we  have  opened  our  mouth  to  the  Lord.  If  a  man  must  trifle,  let  him 
trifio  with  men,  but  not  with  God  If  promises  to  men  may  be  lightly 
broken^and  they  should  not  be,  yet  let  us  not  trifle  with  prcxniaes 
made  to  God.  And  if  solemn  declarations  ever  can  be  forgotten— which 
they  should  not  be — ^yet  not  solemn  declarations  made  to  God.  Beware, 
oh !  beware  of  anythmg  like  levity  in  entering  into  covenant  with  the 
Most  High.  If  a  man  should  measure  his  footsteps  and  vreigh  his 
words  when  he  i^pears  before  an  earthly  monarch,  how  much  more  when 
he  stands  before  the  King  of  kings,  who  is  also  Judge  of  qnick  and 
dead.  There  let  thy  woras  be  few  and  guarded,  but  when  thou  hast 
once  spoken  them,  and  lifted  thy  hand  to  heaven,  let  thy  promise  stand, 
and  do  thou  keep  it  faithfully,  saying,  ^'  I  have  opened  my  mouth  unto 
the  Lord,  and  i  cannot  go  back." 

II.  But  enough  upon  what  we  have  done,  for  we  want  our  full  strength 


BBTBBAT  niFOSSIBLE.  127 

of  thought  to  dwell  upon  what  wb  cai^not  do.  '*  I  have  opened  my 
mouth  unto  the  Lord,  and  /  cannot  go  hack."  That  is  to  say,  having 
once  become  Ghristiaiis  Vfe  catmoi  apostatize  from  the  faith.  We  feel 
that  we  cannot,  and  God's  servants  in  all  ages  have  proved  that  they 
cannot.  Men  have  threatened  them,  '^  You  shall  go  to  prison  if  you  do 
not  go  back,"  but  they  have  said  **  We  cannot."  And  they  have  gone  to 
prison,  and  they  have  said,  like  John  Banyan,  *^  I  will  lie  there  till  the 
nuMB  giowB  on  my  eyelids,  but  I  cannot — I  cannot  do  other  than  God 
bids  me.'*  Hie  enemy  has  said,  **  If  yon  do  not  leave  Ohrist  yon  shall 
be  stretched  en  the  rack,"  and  that  means  the  pulling  of  every  bone 
from  its  Mbw :  but  in  defiance  of  torture  they  have  replied  '^  We  cannot 

Kback :  we  can  rather  bear  the  rack."  Poor  women,  like  Anne  Askew, 
^  been  nMdced  most  onielly,  bat  they  coald  not  go  back.  Then  the 
enemies  ot  ibe  Lord  have  sworn,  **  We  will  bam  vou  quick  to  the  death." 
Tbe  saints  hsve  accepted  that  challenge  also,  ana  they  have  burned,  and 
triumphed  in  the  bnming,  clapping  their  blazing  hands ;  for  they  conld 
not  go  badL  The  yonng  people  in  the  old  citv  of  London,  over  the 
water  there,  went  down  to  Smithfield  in  the  early  morning  to  see  their 
pastor  burned;  and  when  they  came  home  and  their  mother  said, 
**  What  went  you  ft>r?"  the  boys  replied,  "We  went  to  learn  the  way." 
They  wanted  to  know  how  to  bum  when  their  turn  should  come  I  Brave 
sons  of  toave  sires  I  God's  servants  always  have  known  how  to  bum,  but 
they  have  not  known  how  to  turn.  They  have  lifted  their  hand  to  the 
Lord,  and  if  it  involved  bsses,  and  crosses,  and  torture,  and  torment, 
and  death,  thev  conld  not  go  back.  No,  sir,  if  you  can  go  back,  you 
never  knew  Gnrist  I  If  yon  can  go  back,  he  never  marked  tlie  cross- 
mark  onyoor  heart,  he  never  baptized  you  into  his  death  ;  for,  if  he  had 
so  done  a  sacred  impulse  would  be  upon  you,  and  you  must  go  forward. 
As  though  you  were  a  thunderbolt  launched  from  the  omnipotent  hand 
you  must  go  on,  and  burst  through  every  'opposition  till  you  reach  the 
end  towaros  which  God's  etemal  might  is  speeding  you.  You  cannot 
go  back. 

Moreover,  if  we  are  right  at  heart  we  feel  that  wx  have  lifted  our 
hand  to  the  Lord,  and  we  cannot  go  lack,  even  by  temporary  turnings 
OMtde,  I  do  not  mean  that  we  do  not  do  so,  sadly  too  often ;  the  Lord 
have  mercy  upon  us  for  it.  But  it  ought  to  be  our  solemn  declaration 
that  we  cannot  go  back.  Somebody  says  to  you  when  you  euter  the 
woikshop,  "Ah,  yon  are  one  of  those  fools  of  Christians."  The  devil 
tempts  you  to  say  that  yon  are  not,  or  at  any  rate  to  be  very  quiet  about 
it*  Do  not  M  into  cowardly  silence,  but  say  at  once,  *'  I  have  opened 
my  mouth  unto  the  Lord,  and  I  cannot  go  back.  I  am  in  for  it  now. 
miatever  it  means,  I  am  enlisted  and  will  never  desert."  Sometimes 
the  temptation  is,  **  Come  with  me,  young  man,  come  with  me,  young 
woman — to  such  and  such  questionable  place  of  amusement."  ''  ShaU 
I  go?  Perhaps  I  shall  not  get  much  hurt."  Stand  still  and  say,  "  No, 
I  have  openedl  my  month  to  the  Lord  and  I  cannot  go  back,  even  if  I 
had  the  desire  to  do  so.  I  have  committed  myself  to  the  pursuit  of 
holiness,  and  I  cannot  go  back  to  the  foolish  pleasures  of  sin."  I  like 
YOU  young  people  to  make  a  very  straightforward  profession  of  your 
mith,  because  it  may  be  the  means  of  keeping  you  in  the  hour  of  tempta- 
tion; you  win  say  to  yourself,  *'The  vows  of  the  Lord  are  upon  me ; 


128  KJ£TROPOLITAir  TABSUIAOLX  PULPIT. 

how  can  I  do  this  great  wickedness  and  sin  against  God  ?"  I  heard  one 
say  once,  *'  I  conld  not  join  the  church  because  I  should  feel  it  such  a 
tie."  "  Ay,  but/'  I  replied, ''  Brother,  it  is  the  sort  of  tie  you  need  to 
feel."  A  profession  of  our  faith  in  Jesus  ought  to  be  a  rerj  stnng 
cord  of  loTC  to  hold  us  to  that  which  is  good,  we  ought  to  feel  that  tke 
sacrifice  is  bound  to  the  boms  of  the  altar,  but  this  bonda^  is  tne 
liberty  to  us,  and  pleasant  to  us,  and  it  dM>uId  be  our  desire  to  be 
bound  faster  and  faster  as  lon^  as  we  lire.  ''I  cannot  go  back  "  is  an 
inability  of  the  most  desirable  kind. 

The  enemies  of  your  soul  will  attempt  to  persnade  yon  to  fiofaaike  the 
Lord,  they  will  tiy  ridicule  and  thrrats  and  bribes,  but  be  jim  as  a 
deaf  man  and  hear  them  not.  If  you  hare  lealiy  opcoed  your  mouth 
to  God  with  all  your  heart,  you  cannot  go  back ;  the  diTine  lift  wiihh 
yon  will  laugh  to  scorn  all  efforts  of  the  foe.  Baffled  and  jiseoon^ 
they  will  soon  give  up  their  wicked  endeayours :  they  will  see  tliat  it  ■ 
of  no  use  to  tempt  sach  an  one  as  you  are,  your  steadftitneas  mi 
patient  endurance  will  drive  them  from  the  field. 

But  there  are  some  of  you  that  make  a  profession,  who  attempt  com- 
promises, and  go  a  little  way  with  the  world.  If  yon  go  a  fturlong  with 
the  world  yon  will  soon  ro  a  mile  I  will  giye  yon  a  sentonoe  to 
recollect : — **  That  man  who  is  oi^y  half  Christ's  ia  alto^ther  the 
devirs."  Do  remember  that.  He  who  is  only  half  a  Christian  is  abo- 
gether  an  unbeliever.  As  half  clean  is  unclean,  so  half  conyerted  is 
unconverted,  and  half  a  saint  is  wholly  a  sinner.  You  cannot  say  to 
the  world, ''  Hitherto  thou  shalt  go,  but  no  ftirther,*'  it  is  greedy,  and 
Keeks  to  win  the  whole  man.  To  its  imperious  demands  giye  a  stem 
deniiil,  saying,  **  I  have  opened  my  mouth  unto  the  Lord,  and  I  cannot 
go  biick." 

Now,  what  are  our  reasons  why  we  cannot  go  back  ? 

The  first  reason  is  that  if  tee  did  go  back  we  ihauU  Mhow  ikai  w$ 
have  been  altogether  false  until  now.  Ton  profess  to  be  belieyers  in  Jesos 
Christ,  you  say  that  you  have  been  bom  a^in,  that  you  haye  received 
that  inward  principle  which  liveth  and  abi&th  for  ever;  if  you  go  biick 
to  the  worla  and  to  sin,  you  say  to  all  mai^ind,  **  I  made  a  hypocri- 
tical  profession.  I  was  a  mere  formalist.  The  root  of  the  matter  wis 
not  in  me."  You  cannot  sav  that ;  for  you  know  you  love  the  Lord. 
Even  when  you  are  in  a  doubting  mood,  you  know  yon  love  Jeaos. 
Though  you  question  yourselves  over  and  over  affain,  you  know  that 
you  love  your  Master.  If  you  hear  anybody  finding  feuh  with  him, 
are  you  not  sorely  grieved  ?  Oh,  yes,  it  brings  the  blood  into  your 
cheeks,  and  you  say,  "  I  cannot  bear  to  hear  him  spoken  lu^ainst" 
You  thought  that  you  did  not  love  him,  but  the  enemy  provokes  you 
to  feel  that  you  do  love  him.  You  do  love  him ;  you  cannot  say  that 
you  do  not.  Can  you  ?  And  yet  if  you  went  back  it  would  be  tanta- 
mount  to  a  declaration  that  all  your  former  life  had  been  a  falsehood. 

You  cannot  go  back,  dear  friend,  because  thai  were  to  act  moat  Uuelg, 
Have  you  been  bought  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  and  will  you 

fo  away  from  him  ?  Did  he  die  upon  the  cross  for  you,  and  will  a  little 
uffeting  cause  you  to  desert  him  ?  What  I  Did  he  fetch  you  up  out 
of  the  horrible  pit  and  out  of  the  miry  clay  by  his  own  death,  and 
will  you  forsake  him,  and  choose  sinful  ease  and  the  praises  of  a  wicked 


SETBEAT  IMPOSSIBLE.  129 

irofld?  Oh^  it  were  baseness,  abominable  baseness,  for  a  soul  who  once 
has  tasted  of  his  wondrous  love,  and  seen  him  in  his  glory  and  death 
throes  to  desert  Christ  No,  no,  no  ;  we  cannot  be  so  base  as  this,  God 
helping  ns. 

To  go  back  fh>m  that  for  which  we  have  opened  our  mouth  to  the 
Lord  were  lo  ineur  frightful  penalties :  for  there  is  no  judgment  so 
great  as  that  which  is  pronounced  upon  the  apostate.  If  they  have 
tasted  of  the  heavenly  gift  and  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come — *'  if 
these  shall  fall  away,  it  is  impossible  to  renew  them  again  unto  repent- 
ance.** '^  Salt  is  good,  but  if  the  salt  has  lost  its  savour  wherewith  shall 
it  be  seasoned  ?  It  is  henceforth  good  for  nothing  but  to  be  trodden 
aiider  foot  of  men."  You  know  how  many  passages  there  are  in 
which  it  is  positively  asserted  that  if  a  child  of  God  did  deliberately  and 
totallT  apostatize,  his  restoration  would  be  utterly  impossible — not  diffi- 
cnlt^  but  wwoseible.  This  is  one  of  the  greatest  proofs  of  the  doctrine 
of  (lie  final  perseverance  of  the  saints,  since  there  is  no  man  in  a 
condition  in  which  it  is  impossible  to  save  him,  and  yet  any  man  would 
be  in  inch  a  state  if  he  ajpoistatizcd.  Therefore  true  believers  shall  not 
apostatise,  but  shall  stand  feist,  and  shall  be  kept  even  to  the  end.  Yet, 
conld  they  totally  apostatize,  they  could  never  be  restored  again :  the 
ereatest  remedy  having  ahready  fkiled,  there  would  remain  no  other. 
On  the  snpjposition  that  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  the  cleansing 
infioenoe  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  could  not  preserve  the  man  from  Ming 
back  into  his  um^enerate  state,  what  else  could  be  done  for  such  ?  If 
regeneration  fails— what  then  ?  If  the  incorruptible  seed  which  liveth 
and  abideth  for  ever  can  die — what  then  ?  On,  we  cannot  go  back ! 
To  go  back  is  death,  shame,  eternal  ruin. 

And  togo  back  would  be  so  unreasonable.  Why  should  I  leave  my 
Lord  ?  Why  should  I  let  my  Saviour  go  ?  In  my  heart  of  hearts  I 
cannot  think  of  a  reason  why  I  should  forsake  my  Master.    Do  I  seek 

fleasnre  ?  What  pleasure  is  equal  to  that  which  he  can  give  me  ?  Do 
seek  gain  ?  What  gain  could  there  be  if  I  lost  him  ?  Do  I  seek  ease  ? 
Ah,  to  leave  him  were  to  forfeit  eternal  rest.  To  whom  should  we  go  ? 
That  was  a  forcible  question  of  the  disciples  when  the  Master  enquired, 
^  Will  ye  also  go  away  ?"  They  replied,  "  To  whom  can  we  go  ?'*  Ah, 
to  whom  can  we  go  ?  If  you  give  up  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ,  what 
other  religion  would  you  have  ?  Ii  you  were  to  give  up  the  pleasures 
of  godliness,  what  other  pleasures  would  you  have  ?  **  Oh,"  says  one, 
"  we  could  go  into  the  world."  Could  you  ?  Could  you  ?  If  you  are 
a  child  of  God  you  are  spoiled  for  the  world.  Before  you  became  a 
Christian  you  could  have  done  very  well  in  the  world,  but  now  you 
know  too  much  to  be  happy  there.  While  the  sow  is  a  sow,  the  mud  is 
good  enough  for  her.  Turn  that  sow  into  an  angel,  and  if  the  angel 
has  no  place  in  heaven,  where  shall  it  go  ?  It  cannot  go  back  to  the  sty. 
What  could  it  do  there  ?  The  wash  of  the  trough  was  good  enough  for 
the  sow,  but  the  angel  has  eaten  heavenly  food.  It  cannot  roll  in  the 
mire,  nor  consort  with  swine,  it  must  have  heaven  or  nothing.  If  you 
can  go  back  to  the  world  you  will  go  back  to  the  world  ;  but  if  you  are 
a  child  of  God  you  cannot  go  back,  because  grace  has  so  changed  your 
nature  that  you  would  not  1^  in  an  element  in  which  you  could  exist. 
There  is  no  reason  for  apostasy ;  all  the  reasons  lie  the  other  way.   "  I 


150  UETROPOLRIH  TABBaXAOLM  PULPIT. 

hare  o[iened  my  month  mito  the  Loid,  md  I  camioe  so  bade,**  for  Om 
reason — that  I  have  no  inclinatioii  that  way.  Breuien^  some  of  oi 
have  }>een  Christians  these  fiTe-and-lwenty  yean,  and  we  axe  elad  of  iL 
You  know  that  in  the  army  they  have  short-time  Boldiers  and  lon^4ma 
foldierg.  When  I  enlisted  m  Christ's  anny,  I  did  not  00  in  to  enhst  fir 
a  quarter  of  a  year,  and  then  haTe  a  new  ticket ;  but  1  enHsted  Ibr  fifi^ 
But  suppose  my  Master  were  to  say  to  me,  **  Now,  jam.  haye  had  some 
iiTe-and-twenty  years  of  it :  you  may  now  go  home  and  oease  flfom  befac 
one  of  my  soldiers."  ^*  Ah,  my  Master,  where  BhoaM  I  go?  Do  not 
discharge  me."  If  he  were  still  to  say,  ^  Ton  are  out  of  yoor  time,  aid 
may  go  home/'  I  would  tell  him  that  I  would  not  kaTe  him  in  life  cr 
death.  If  I  were  put  out  at  the  front  door  I  wonld  oome  in  at  die 
back.  Ah,  my  Lord,  what  angnish  has  thatcrneatioin stiixed,  whetlMi 
I  would  also  go  as  others  have  done.  Go  ?  Tnoa  haat  fcetwMd  me  to 
thy  cross  and  driven  in  the  nails.  I  cannot  go.  Go  ?  I  am  deid, 
and  buried  with  thee ;  and  thy  rich  grace  has  made  me  part  and  pand 
of  thyself  by  indissoluble  union.  "  Who  shaD  separate  ns  from  the  kfe 
of  God  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord  ?"  No^  if  I  were  dieoluBged 
to-day,  I  would  enlist  again  directly.  The  man  who  is  manied  to  a 
good  wife  thinks  to  himself,  **  If  I  had  to  many  again  to-monow  mon- 
ing,  she  diould  be  the  bride,  and  hai^y  woiud  we  be."  And  ao^  if 
we  had  our  choice  to  make  again,  we  would  ohoose  our  dear  Lend 
over  again,  only  witli  much  more  eagerness  and  esmestneas  than  «e 
did  at  first. 

Dear  friends,  wo  have  opened  oar  month  to  the  Lord,  and  we  cannot 
go  back  because  we  are  so  happy  as  we  now  an.  A  man  does  not 
turn  his  back  upon  that  which  nas  become  his  life  and  hia  joj,  Iw  ii 
bound  to  it  by  the  bliss  which  ho  derives  from  IL  Can  the  Ghrns  ilRgeC 
his  country  when  he  listens  to  the  home  mmic  whioh  he  heard  as  a 
child  amidst  his  native  hills  ?  Does  not  the  hone-aidaMaB  oooie  Ofsr 
him  so  that  he  longs  to  be  among  the  Alps  anin?  Does  not  the 
Englishman,  wherever  he  wanders,  whether  by  h^  or  sea^  fM  hia  haait 
instinctively  turn  to  the  white  clifb  of  Albion,  and  doea  h%  not  aaj  that 
with  all  her  &ults  he  loves  his  country  still?  Who  woodd  eeaae  to  be 
that  which  he  loves  to  be  ?  And  so,  now,  our  joy  in  Olmat  ia  gi'oai,  and 
we  cannot  wish  to  be  divided  from  him.  Why  should  we  ?  ShaQ  tihs 
star  desert  the  sphere  in  which  it  shines,  or  the  fish  the  sea  in  wfaieh  it 
lives  ?  Shall  the  eagle  abhor  the  crag^  rock  on  whidh  he  boilda  Us 
nest,  or  the  angel  shun  the  heaven  in  which  he  dwdls  ?  No^  beloved,  we 
cannot  go  back.    Our  joy  holds  us  fast  to  our  Lord. 

And  then,  besides  that,  we  cannot  go  back  from  what  we  have  said, 
for  divine  grace  impele  us  onward.  There  is  a  secret  power  more 
mighty  theui  all  other  forces  called  the  force  of  grace,  and  this  has 
captured  us.  When  the  temptation  comes  to  go  baok  to  Egypt^  and  we 
recollect  the  garlic, — that  strong-smelling  garlic,  and  the  eucnmben^— 
those  spongy,  watery  cucumbers,  and  we  recollect  the  onions,— thorn 
pungent  onions,  the  thought  of  going  back  to  the  fleshpota  again  comes 
upon  us  like  a  man  of  war ;  but  mighty  grace  soon  puts  it  down, 
drowns  the  desire  in  tears  of  repentance,  and  makes  ns  loathe  ourselves 
to  think  that  we  should  be  such  fools  as  to  think  more  of  fleshpota 
^than  of  manna,  and  more  of  cucumbers  than  of  Canaan.    Again  we 


RBTREAT  IMPOSSIBLE.  IS  I 

molntely  presB  forward  towards  Canaan,  blushing  to  think  that  we 
•hoald  have  in  heart  turned  back  into  Egypt.  Grace  will  not  lot  us 
TCiDm  to  our  old  bondage. 

And  there  is  another  that  holds  us.  It  is  he  with  the  hands  nailed  to 
the  tree.  Whenever  he  is  revealed  in  us  we  feel  that  we  cannot  go  back. 
A  sight  of  him  with  his  face  to  the  world's  opposition,  his  face  to  the 
devily  his  face  to  death,  his  face  to  hell,  his  face  towards  the  wrath  of 
Ood,  and  going  through  it  all  with  boundless  courage,  makes  us  feel 
that  we  must  go  forwara  too,  even  till  we  enter  into  his  rest.  Brethren, 
hj  all  these  aiguments  we  are  moved  to  testify  each  one  for  himself,  "  I 
have  opened  my  mouth  unto  the  Lord,  and  I  cannot  go  back." 

III.  Now,  the  last  thing  of  all  is  that,  if  this  is  the  case,  there  is 
somedking  which  we  must  do.  What  we  must  do  is  this — if  there 
is  a  pceaent  sacrifice  demanded  of  us  we  must  make  it  directly,  '^  I  have 
opened  mj  mouth  to  the  Lord  :  I  cannot  go  back."  Now,  if  there  is 
anything  in  your  business,  and  you  cannot  be  a  Christian  if  vou  do  it, 
abjnre  it  at  once  and  for  ever.  Do  not  question  about  it,  and  do  not  ask 
a  frigid  what  vou  shall  do,  but  follow  conscience.  If  vou  know  the 
ttking  is  ri^ht,  oo  it.  Do  not  ask  mother,  or  brother,  or  the  wisest  man 
that  ever  hved  ;  consult  not  with  flesh  and  blood,  but  follow  Jesus  at 
dl  hawds.  Do  not  take  time  for  second  thoughts,  but  do  it,  and  have 
done  with  it.  Oh,  I  have  known  Christians  palter  as  to  what  they 
onght  to  do :  their  dutj  has  been  plain  enough,  but  they  have  not  likod 
it>  and  so  they  have  wished  for  somebody  to  tell  them  that  they  might 
be  Christians,  and  yet  do  wrong :  to  get  some  sort  of  excuse  from  the 
jud^ent  of  others  they  have  gone  fishing  about  to  this  and  that 
minister,  misrepresenting  the  circumstances  to  some  extent,  to  gain  the 
judgment  they  desired,  till  at  last  they  have  forged  a  sort  of  dispensa- 
tion for  sin  from  some  good  man's  opinion,  and  then  they  have  cheated 
their  conscience  by  saying,  *'  I  feel  much  relieved.  I  can  do  it  now, 
for  I  have  consulted  a  gracious  man,  and  he  thinks  I  may.*'  No  con- 
sultation can  be  requiiid  where  duty  is  plain. 

*'  Oh,  sir,  but  the  sacrifice  is  great."    If  it  were  a  thousand  times 

greater,  that  does  not  enter  into  tne  question.  Duty  is  imperative,  and 
t  it  be  done.  If  your  doing  right  will  make  yourself  and  your 
children  poor,  so  must  it  be.  It  were  Ijetter  that  you  wei*e  poor  and  yet 
maintained  your  integrity  and  continued  in  the  service  of  God  tbau 
that  you  should  roll  in  riches  by  violating  your  conscience.  Say,  **  I 
canaot  go  back*':  make  the  sacrifice,  and  go  on. 

If  vou  are  to  do  this,  however,  you  must  ask  for  more  grace;  and, 
dear  brethren,  wherever  there  is  an  ugly  piece  in  the  road,  since  you 
cannot  go  back,  all  you  have  to  do  is  to  ask  the  Lord  to  assist  ^ou  over  it, 
for  you  must  go  through  it,  and  this  can  only  be  done  by  his  strength. 
Recollect  that  your  abiding  faithful  to  the  end  does  not  depend  upon 
yourself.  >  Ton  have  to  do  it ;  but  the  Holy  Spirit  is  to  find  you 
strength  to  do  it.  The  negro  said,  "  Massa,  if  the  Lord  say  to  Sambo, 
'Sambo,  jump  through  the  brick  wall,*  I  will  jump.  It  is  the  Lord 
that  will  make  me  go  through  ;  but  Sambo  must  jump.*'  So  it  is  with 
persevering  in  the  mce  of  difficulty  and  trouble.  If  you  are  bidden  to 
a  hard  duty,  and  it  involves  sacrifice  and  hardship,  do  not  hesitate,  but 
advance  unflinchingly ;  it  is  the  Lord  who  bids  you  do  it,  and  if  the 


182  UETROPOLTTAV  TABIBSACUi  POLPIT. 

liord  bids  yon  go  thTongh  the  brick  wall  he  will  ntln  ft  hole  in  ftlr 
yon,  or  make  it  soft  for  you,  or  in  aome  waj  or  otktt  mike  roa  eqpri 
to  the  occasion.  Yonrs  it  is  to  .^  through ;  do  not  tte&d  baok  beni 
of  yonr  OAvn  weakness,  bnt  let  faith  lay  hold  on  (he  diTine  itnngtli. 

One  Other  admonition  to  Christian  people  ia  ihlH-faam  tMiMMili 
behind  yon.  When  the  Roman  commander  meanl  yictoty  he  landed  Ui 
troops  on  the  coast  where  he  knew  there  were  thomanda  of  eneoiieii  ni 
he  burned  the  boats,  so  as  to  cnt  off  all  dianoe  of  letreai.  ^  BdAImw 
are  we  to  get  away  if  we  are  beaten?**  ^That  ia  Jvetit^*'  laM  hei^'va 
will  not  be  beaten  ;  we  will  not  dream  of  inch  a  ttung ."  ^BnaAe 
I  boats"— that  is  what  you  Christian  ]^eopie  mart  da  ''ICake  nooe^ 
vision  for  the  flesh."  Let  the  sepan^tion  betwpeii  jaa  and  the  worn  lie 
final  and  irreyersible.  Say,  ^  Here  I  go  Ibr  Ohnet  and  his  etomt,  ftr  tti 
truth  of  the  Bible,  for  the  laws  of  God,  for  hoHnea^  Cir  Imt  ia  JeM; 
and  never  will  I  go  back,  come  what  may.^ 

This  is  the  right  spirit.  The  Lordsendftunongiiamoie  animil 
It  is  the  spirit  (rf  martyrs.  You  want  it^  ven  eonvertedworidB^mai— 
yon  want  the  spirit  of  martyrs.  I  know  now  your  werionalea  yai,  mi 
leer,  and  torment  jou.  Well,  do  not  think  joonwlf  haidlr  ooBa  by, 
but  play  the  man,  and  bear  it  all,  and  fuy  to  yooiaelf^  **  I  did  notfwi 
reckon  on  t^is,  but  it  does  not  matter;  1  have  opened  m  moatk  vito 
the  Lord,  and  I  cannot  so  back  if  it  coeto  me  efWfiUsig. 

I  will  not  talk  to  you  longer ;  for  what,  after  al^  lMllmn,4SM  iei||ip 
cost  us  compared  with  what  our  salvation  cost  our  Loid  P  WhaA  iiSli 
go  forward  if  we  compare  it  with  the  glory  that  ia  beyond?  A  |ilBlajpiiA| 
that  is  all ;  and  then  yon  will  be  in  neaven.  Oh,  to  Itaad  auMififejflB 
glorified  !— to  hear  the  Master  say, ''  Well  done  !**    Om  nMlt  4k  a 

thousand  deaths  to  get  those  two  syllables,  if  tfaeve  wen  aott * 

"  Well  done !"  To  enjoy  his  smile,  to  share  Us  orown,  to  afeaa 

his  palm-bearing  hosts,  and  participate  in  his  gknj— ihia  ia  woflh  aB: 

difiiculty  and  sacnfice  involved  m  going  fonmd,  and  tai  i* 

times  more.    Therefore  accept  this  closing  word.    Itarwaid,  mj 

— forward !    Whatever  lies  before  you — Ae  Red  Bea  or  the  nge  of 

earth  and  hell  combined^if  God  calls  yon,forwud  to  it  I    He  «fl 

bear  you  through  to  the  glorious  end.    The  Lord  be  With  ycM^:  fa 

Christ's  sake  !    Amen ! 


Portion  of  Sobiptube  Read  bbforb  Sbbmov— Judgiee  A  l^^^it- 


HvHirs  FBOM  ""  OUB  OwK  Htieh  Book  "—661,  «7d»  668i 


^j^a^Bm  i^alrmmde  fttlpt 


DAOON'S  UPS  AND  DOWNS. 


%  ^tmif^^ 


DSLIYEBED  BT 

C.  H.  SPURGE  ON, 

AT   THl   UTBOFOUTAV   TABSEVAOLS,    VIWINOTOV. 


»*Whm  tb»  PlulictuMi  took  the  ark  of  God,  th^  bEoaght  U  into  tko  hovM  of 
DagoOf  and  itt  it  bjDagon.  And  when  they  oi  ABhood  arose  early  on  the  morxow, 
baliold.  Dagon  was  &nen  npon  his  fiioe  to  the  earth  before  the  aik  of  the  Loid. 
And  my  mk  Bagon,  and  set  him  in  his  phice  aoain.  And  when  they  arose  early 
ta  fha  moiTOW  morning,  behold,  Dagon  was  fftUen  upon  his  fiuse  to  the  ground 
tsJDffa  tiba  ark  of  the  Lora ;  and  tiie  head  of  Dagon  and  both  the  pahns  of  his  hands 
ma  cot  off  npon  the  threshold ;  only  the  stump  of  Dagon  was  left  to  him.*' — 
1  Samxiol  T.  2—4. 

The  ark  of  the  Lord  wag  captnred  by  the  PhiliBtines  though  it  was 
ffoarded  by  all  the  men  of  arms  that  Israel  could  muster  for  the  battle. 
it  came  to  no  hnrt  when  it  was  gorroonded  by  unarmed  priests: 
aMioagfa  the  times  were  exceedingly  disturbed  and  perilous  all  through 
the  dreary  period  of  the  Judges,  yet  neyer  was  the  ark  a  captive  till  it 
was  protected  by  the  carnal  weapon.  When  those  whom  God  had 
otdained  to  take  care  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant  had  it  in  charge  it  was 
Btife  enoneh ;  but  when  the  proud  banners  of  the  State  and  the  warlike 
array  of  uie  nation  formed  tne  body-guard  of  the  sacred  shrine  the  ark 
of  God  was  t^en.  When  the  civil  power  was  joined  with  the  spiritual, 
and  the  arm  of  flesh  came  in  to  patronise  and  to  take  into  connection 
with  itself  the  arm  of  Qod's  strength^  then  it  was  that  the  ark  was 
borne  away  in  triumph  b^  its  foes.  All  through  human  history  you  will 
find  die  ezirianation  of  thjj^  instructive  fact :  let  God's  truth  alone,  and 
it  will  take  care  of  itsellwithont  the  aid  of  kings  and  princes,  laws  or 
establishments,  endowments  or  privileges.  Only  stato  the  pure  truth 
of  revelation  and  it  will  force  its  own  way,  but  garnish  and  adorn  it  by 
joor  eloquent  language,  or  protect  and  guard  it  by  your  carnal  wisdom 
and  prudenoe,  aiS  we  truth  goes  into  captivity.  Leave  the  church 
ikme,  0  ye  kings  and  princes,  or  persecute  it  if  ye  will,  for  it  will  laugh 
four  opposition  to  scorn;  but  pretend  not  to  propagate  its  doctrines  by 
the  civil  power,  for  this  is  the  worst  curse  that  can  befall  it.  Take  it 
under  your  patronage,  and  the  mere  touch  of  your  royal  hands  will  create 
Mo.  1,342. 


]34  METROPOLITAN  TABERHACLB  PULPIT. 

disease  within  it.  Almost  to  the  death  has  the  ao-oalfed  "chnnA'* 
come  down  when  her  ministersy  like  Hophni  and  Pbineoay  haTe  allied 
thenLselTes  with  the  temporal  power ;  for  God  will  do  his  work  by  hii 
own  instraments,  and  in  his  own  way ;  he  will  not  be  indebted  to  the 
might  of  the  flesh,  but  will  defend  his  own  glory  by  his  own  myrtoioai 
power.  He  uses  for  his  instraments  his  oonsecrated  ones  who  wear  th 
white  linen,  which  is  the  righteousness  of  saints,  and  not  the  bkwd- 
stained  men  of  war  arrayed  in  coat  of  mail  and  glittering  bieasl^ilate  of 
steel. 

Another  lesson  may  be  learned  from  the  incident  before  na.  Wheo 
the  Philistines  had  beaten  the  Israelites  in  battle,  and  o^taied  the 
sacred  chest  called  the  ark,  they  boasted  and  gloried  as  though  tbsf 
had  defeated  God  himself!  They  evidently  reguded  the  golden  oaiket 
as  the  very  choicest  part  of  the  spoil,  and  tli^Y  placed  it  as  a  trophy  ii 
the  chief  temple  of  their  god  Dagon,  to  show  that  he  waa  mightier  hmb 
the  God  Jehovah,  who  was  unable,  as  they  thought,  to  protect  iiia  (Wpph. 
This  touched  at  once  the  honour  of  Jehovah,  and  because  he  is  a  leami 
God  this  boded  good  for  Israel.  The  fact  that  God  is  a  jealous  God  hm 
often  a  terrible  side  to  us,  for  it  leads  to  our  chastisement  when  we 
grieve  him :  this,  indeed,  led  to  the  defeat  of  Israel  Bat  it  has  alio 
a  bright  side  towards  us,  for  his  jealousy  flames  against  his  foes  even 
more  terribly  than  against  his  friends ;  and  when  his  name  is  blaqihemed, 
and  honours  that  are  due  to  him  are  ascribed  to  a  mere  idol|  or  be  ii 
declared  to  have  been  defeated  by  a  fiedse  god,  then  his  jealoaay  boms  lib 
coals  of  juniper,  and  he  makes  bare  his  ri^ht  arm  to  smite  his  advw- 
saries,  as  he  did  on  this  occasion.  He  thmks  it  meet  to  pnnish  hie 
offending  people,  but  when  Philistia  saith,  "  ^^^  ^^^  defcatod 
Jehovah/'  then  the  Lord  will  no  longer  suffer  Philistia  to  trinmiA. 
Jehovah's  answer  to  his  foes  was  Dagon  broken  to  shivers  befbn  nie 
ark,  and  the  Philistines  plagued  with  emerodstill,  in  their  despoatenaia 
and  dire  disgrace,  they  set  free  the  ark,  being  no  longer  i^le  to  cnaoit 
its  presence  in  any  of  their  towns ;  so  that  the  Jews  ever  afterwaide 
used  to  exasperate  the  Philistines  by  reminding  them  of  the  disease 
which  so  sorely  tried  them ;  and  there  is  a  dash  of  this  in  the  pseJm 
which  saith  of  the  Lord, ''  He  smote  his  enemies  in  the  hinder  pait;  he 
put  them  to  a  perpetual  reproach."  Never  did  a  boastftd  nation  mdage 
a  deeper  dishonour  in  the  eyes  of  their  neighbours,  to  whom  they  M> 
came  a  laughing-stock,  and  never  did  an  image  suffer  a  worse  di^giace 
than  that  which  befell  their  god  Dagon. 

Now,  then,  whenever  at  any  time  infidelity  or  superstition  shall  m 
prevail  as  to  discourage  your  minds,  t^e  you  comfort  out  of  Uiis— that 
in  all  these  God*s  honour  is  compromised.  Have  they  blaaphemed  Ue 
name  ?  Then  he  will  protect  that  name.  Have  they  gone  rartlier  thaa 
they  used  to  do  in  foul  utterances  against  him  ?  Then  they  will  provoke 
him,  and  he  will  make  bare  his  holy  arm.  I  pray  that  they  may  so 
provoke  him!  All  his  church  will  say  <' Amen!"  to  that,  so  that  he 
may  arise  and  perform  the  glorious  works  of  his  strength  and  of  his  love 
among  the  sons  of  men,  and  put  the  adversary  to  confusion  hj  pioviiig 
that  he  is  still  with  his  people,  and  still  the  same  mighty  Goa  as  he 
was  in  the  days  of  yore.  Say  you  to  yourselves,  then,  *'  Our  Lord  will 
not  always  endure  this  idolatrous  popery^  which  is  multiplying  its  priests 


•^  jukmmfu'jnm  akd  Domvg.  185 

jIfaiR  (Dfar  mfcioDaiidhafdu  His  people  ounot  faear  it  i  mnoh  less  will 
k  Sbi  wfll  Boi  •Hraya  totoiato  these  biwpiiemeue  tiieoriee,  by  which 
klf^soiteeileiy  kanwdflien  and  vaiorloriooB  toeptics  seek  to  get  rid  of 
tf  iiat  of  tiie  world.  Thej  wtllprovwse  him.  He  will  bestir  himself;  he 
in  show  himnlf 'steoDg  on  the  Ibehelf  of  his  truth,  he  will  roll  back  the 
WBWBB  of  Bin,  and  k*  tiM  agee  know  that  he  ib  still  the  great  I  AM,  the 
bfeorioin  Ood  oyer  all,  bfesaed  for  ever."  Those  two  truths  seem  to 
m  to  Hi^npon  the  surfiiee  of  tfads  paoage. 

AiDd  aow,  though  it  wonU  be  verj  wrong  to  make  ont  the  word  of  God 
I  te  m^mere  set  rf  allegories,  and  so  to  deny  that  it  records  fscts — and 
!nsy  I  Innb,  we«iHdl  nerer  do— yet^  as  the  apostle  Paal  has  shown  os 

Ok 


liAfeindiy  of  the  events  in  the  Old  Testament  are  an  allGgory,  and  as, 
■ftMi^  then  things  are  evidently  types,  aad  most  be  regarded  as 
■BhbBds  md  pattcnn  of  things  that  still  ooca^--we  shaU  use  this  pas- 
sfctrfai'^^iiritMl'wmy,  and  make  it  the  channel  of  experimental  teach* 
■r.  miere  thelTiag  Ood  €omes  into  the  sonl,  Dagon,  or  the  idol  god 
foi  and  worUUiness,  mnst  go  down.  This  is  the  one  thonght  wludi 
rrriuA  hammer  oat  at  this  nme. 
'  L    To  begin,  then :  thb  ooMDva   or  the   ask   nrro  Daoon's 

HankW  VAB  AM  AFT    BOOUt   OF  THB    OOKIirG  OV  CHBIBT  IXTO  THl 


Hagypn^  Bfioeirding  to  the  best  infbrmation,  was  the  fish-god  of  Phi- 
"^1  perhaps  bonowed  ttom  the  Bidonians  and  men  of  IVre,  whose 
ImrfncBS  was  upon  the  sea,  and  who  therefore  invented  a  marine 
Wty.*  T&e  upper  part  «f  Dagon  was  a  man  er  woman,  and  the  lower 
Mrt  of  the  idm  was  carved  like  a  fish.  We  get  a  very  good  idea  of  it 
faMoi  the  'OOmBoion  notion  of  the  ftstitious,  Mmlons  creatnre  called  a 
iisnuiid.  Dagon  was  inst  a  merman  or  mermaid ;  only,  of  coarse, 
ihere  was  iio  pntenoe  of  his  being  alive.  He  was  a  carved  image,  like 
111*  #h]eh  the  purists  worship  and  call  the  Blessed  Virgin,  or  Saint 
Peter,  or  Saint  Bemy.  The  teorple  at  Ashdod  was,  perhaps,  the 
sithednl  of  Dagon,  the  chief  shrine  of  his  worship ;  and  there  he  sat 
met  upon  the  rn^h  altar  wi<^  pompous  sarroandings.  The  ark  of  the 
covenant  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  was  a  small  wooden  box  overlaid  with 
{cUy  tr  no  ineaiDB  a  venr  camberBome  or  bulky  matter,  bnt  nevertheless 
Miy  SBRredy'beoaose  it  had  a  representattve  character,  and  symbolized 
te  oovensnt'of  Ood :  its  oaptnre  was  grievoos  indeed  to  picas  Israel- 
iiS^  for  they  felt  that  tiie  glory  was  depanted  when  the  ark  was  taken. 
Vkt  sacred  etot  was  carried  in  triumph  by  the  Philistines,  and 
imight  into  the  temple  where  Dagon  stood.  In  your  mind's  eye  yon 
Ml  aee  the  fidb^god  high  npon  his  tlmne,  and  the  incense  baming  before 
Un  «  iife  priests  gather  aroand,  and  the  princes  of  Philistia  with 
IriinDphaift  baJbnen  bow  before  his  shrine.  We  hear  the  sfaoats  of  the 
PUliatine  lords  as  they  brhig  fn  the  gMea  coffer  with  the  golden 
toretf,  and  set  it  down  at  the  foot  of  Dagon,  and  sin^  their  exnltant 
mnigiL  'Hear  them  as  they  sound  their  trampets  and  chant  their  bias- 
AMionB  hymns :  **  Glory  be  onto  thee,  O  Dagon  I  then  hast  triomphed 
Im  day,  0  mighty  god  of  the  land  and  the  sea !  Gforious  fish-god, 
htm  hsist  vanquished  those  who  vanquished  the  Oanaanites ;  and  though 
heir  Ood  slew  the  Egyptians  of  old,  thou  hast  smitten  them  by  their 
hoosaiids.    Olory  be  unto  thee,  thou  mighty  god  I "    Thus  would  they 


186  MKTROPOLITAN  TABBBHAOU  TUthT. 

extol  their  deity  and  pour  oontempt  upon  the  otfitiived  bA,  wUA  Om 
placed  at  the  foot  of  the  image.  Then,  wlieii  the  Mrrioe  was  over,  ih 
they  had  worshipped  Dagon  to  their  heart*!  oontent,  Uiej  dmfr  op  tk 
temple,  and  there  was  darkness  in  the  holy  place,  or  nnholj  plaee* 
which  shall  I  call  it  ?  Not  long  did  the  ark  remain  where  it  wai^  with 
Dagon  still  supreme,  but  the  mere  incoming  of  the  ark  Mo  tk$  idai  Hmfk 
was  a  fair  picture  of  the  nUrodueiion  of  the  graes  of  Ood  mh  iko  Aami 
heart.  The  Philistines  broneht  in  the  ark  6f  the  iaxA,  bnt  onlf  an  act 
of  divine  power  can  bring  the  grace  of  God  into  the  aoaL  By  diien 
instmmentalities  the  tmth  as  it  is  in  Jeans  is  read,  ia  heard,  ia  nm^t 
to  the  recollection,  is  seen  printed  in  the  lives  of  men,  and  aoentofBiilo 
the  temple  of  the  inner  manhood.  When  it  first  oomea  into  the  hevt 
it  finds  sin  enthroned  there;  and  the  Prince  of  Datknen  ninSaf 
supreme.  The  first  grace  that  enters  into  the  eonl  finds  it  in  flailiiwi 
and  in  death,  under  3ie  dominion  of  sin.  Brethren,  we  have  not  to  d^ 
liver  ourselves  from  sin  and  death  and  darkneas,  uid  then  obtain  giaoe; 
but^  while  we  are  yet  dead,  eraoe  visits  us ;  while  we  are  yet  akvet  the 
liberator  comes ;  on  our  blackest  midnight  the  sun  of  rigfateonaneii  arian. 
While  the  Da^n  of  sin  sits  firmly  on  his  throne,  as  if  lie  never  ooold  he 
stirred,  and  his  horrid  form  is  alone  to  be  seen  lording  it  over  all  die 
thoughts  and  imaginations  of  the  heart,  even  Uien  it  is  tmit  **  God,  who  is 
rich  m  mercy,  for  his  great  love  wherewith  he  loved  n8,even  when  we  wen 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,"  sends  his  almightj^  grace  to  dwell  wittiin  ns. 
When  that  grace  enters  the  soul  it  comes  not  with  obaervation,  and  nn  it 
the  first  does  not  know  any  more  about  the  incoming  of  grace  than  D^pn 
knew  about  the  ark.  The  grace,  the  light,  the  tmUi,  tiie  love  of  Cm 
come  into  the  soul,  and  the  man  does  not  know  aa  yet  what  tiie  Lord  hia 
done  for  him.  He  is  only  conscious  of  some  impression,  of  a  thoQg^tlU- 
nesH  he  had  never  known  before,  of  a  calm  frame  of  mind,  of  a  dene  lo 
consider  eternal  things ;  and  that  is  all  that  he  peieeivea  of  the  Loid^k 
work  within  him.  Ris  Dagon  seems  to  be  ttiere  in  aa  aopreme  a 
majesty  as  ever,  only  something  strange  is  also  within  the  mnd,  the 
man  knows  not  what  it  is.  It  is  the  beginning  of  theend— of  a  Ueaad 
and  glorious  end. 

We  have  now  Dagon  and  the  ark  in  the  same  temple,  sin  and  gnee 
in  the  same  heart,  Imt  this  state  of  tkmgs  cannot  hmg  oMfe.  No  man 
can  serve  two  masters,  and  even  if  he  could  then  two  maaiero  wodd 
not  agree  to  be  so  sen^.  The  two  great  principlea  of  sin  aid  graes 
will  not  abide  in  peace  with  each  other,  they  are  as  oppoaite  aa  fiie  oni 
water.  There  will  be  a  conflict  and  a  victory,  and  we  know  which  will 
eoncjner,  for  as  surel;jr  as  ever  the  grace  of  God  comes  into  the  oool  ain 
reoeives  notice  to  quit  That  night,  when  the  Philistines  had  finisM 
their  exulting  ceremonies,  they  thought  they  had  left  Dagon  robed  in 
gfery,  reiening  and  triumphing  over  the  ark  of  the  Lord.  They  had 
scaicelv  shut  the  doors  and  gone  before  Dagon  fell  on  his  fhoe  to  the 
ground  before  the  ark.  Down  he  went  He  did  not  lean  over,  bat  to 
feUf  nor  did  he  drop  upon  his  side,  but  he  was  made  to  do  obeisance 
before  the  ark,  for  he  fell  on  his  face;  and  he  did  not  fall  part  of  the 
way  merely,  but  fell  on  his  face  to  the  around  before  the  ark  :  a  change 
of  positions  very  significant  to  his  worshippers !  The  ark  was  set  at  the 
ibot  of  Dagon,  and  now  Dagon  lies  before  the  ark  aa  if  he  were 


BAOOH'S  UP8  AND  DOWNS.  137 

prostiating  hiingelf  in  worship  before  the  great  and  mighty  God.  Eren 
Ham  grace  in  the  Bonl  is  not  long  before  it  oyerthrows  sin.  What  a 
toming  of  things  npside  down  grace  always  makes  I  The  watchword 
is,  **  Orertomy  overtam,  overtnm."  The  Breaker  is  come  np,  and  the 
images  of  man's  indention  mnst  be  dashed  to  shiyers. 

Very  likely  yonr  Da^n  is  in  the  shape  of  wl/^-fghfeousneds.  I 
•hall  call  it  Dagon,  for  it  is  nothing  better :  one  of  the  worst  idols 
IB  the  wbde  w<md  is  the  idol  of  self.  The  self-righteous  man  boasts 
that  he  is  as  geod  as  other  people,  if  not  rather  better,  although 
he  it  not  a  Christian.  He  does  not  know  that  he  has  ever  done 
anTtbing  very  wrong,  and  he  feels  that  in  him  there  is  a  great  deal 
that  ia  Terr  good  and  excellent,  and  therefore  he  expects  that  tilings 
win  go  weU  with  him  at  last.  He  has  a  Terr  fine  figure-head  for  his 
mk  and  thoogfa  there  may  be  a  rather  **  fishy  ^'  tail  to  nis  character,  he 
fcsspa  that  as  much  out  of  sight  as  possible,  and  conceals  it  with 
eicqasSb  The  god  of  his  self-confidence  is  a  yery  pretty  thing,  take  it 
tor  an  in  an ;  it  is  beatttiftd  as  a  mermaid,  and  he  is  fascinated  with 
ila  beauty.  He  bows  before  his  idol  and  sings  before  it  that  ancient 
eanticle  of  the  Philistines — I  mean  the  Pharisees— which  begins,  '*  Ood, 
I  thank  tiiee  that  I  am  not  as  other  men  are !"  When  grace  enters  the 
sool  the  dominion  of  self-confidence  comes  to  an  end,  down  goes  the  fish- 
lod  on  its  Uob  to  the  ground  before  the  ark  of  the  Lcord,  and  the  man 
diaoofm  that  he  has  no  such  righteousness  as  that  wherein  he  trusted. 
Ke  begins  Ito  bemoan  his  sins  and  to  lament  his  shortcomings.  A 
perftct  diaoge  of  foding  has  come  oyer  him.  He  loathes  himself  as 
much  as  he  once  admrnd  himself;  and  now,  instead  of  taking  the 
higheatteat  in  Oie  synagogue,  he  is  willing  to  be  a  door-keeper  in  the 
hooae  of  the  Lord.  ''Ah,  me !"  says  he,  **  what  a  sinner  I  am !  how 
yile  in  the  sight  of  Ood !"  See  you  not  how  this  brave  Dagon  has 
gone  down  on  nis  fiM^e  to  the  ground  before  the  ark. 

Perhaps  the  man  neyer  had  much  of  this  yainglorious  self-rightcous- 
acH,  but  he  seryed the  Daemon  of  (eM//ffi^ 0/1^ MoTM^m.  Themanwas 
a  dnmkaid,  Bacchus  ruled  him :  but  as  soon  as  the  grace  of  God  is 
brought  into  his  soul  he  has  done  with  the  drink-god.  The  horrible 
Dagon  of  drunkenness  is  hurled  from  its  throne  by  erace.  The  man  can- 
not bear  to  think  that  he  should  haye  so  disgraced  himself  as  to  be  fond 
of  wantonness,  and  chambering,  and  surfeiting,  and  drunkenness,  and 
aadi-hlce  abominable  sins,  whidi  bring  manhood  below  the  level  of  the 
beaat.  He  who  is  truly  penitent  hates  the  very  name  of  these  filthy  sins. 
If  a  man  has  heeai  gnil^  of  nsine  bad  language  and  profane  swearing, 
die  grace  of  God  generally  cures  him  of  that  at  once.  I  have  heard  men 
who  had  Uved  in  the  practice  of  swearing  for  many  years  say  that,  from 
the  time  they  were  converted,  they  never  had  a  temptation  to  it ;  that 
bhek  sin  went  off  bag  and  baggage  at  once.  Some  sins  are  slow  in 
dying,  but  profonity  generally  gives  up  the  ghost  without  a  struggle. 
John  Bunyan  sa^  uiat  a  stone  from  the  battering-ram  slew  Mr. 
Pxofkne  by  crackmg  his  dkull,  so  that  he  died  early  in  the  siege  of 
Hansoul ;  it  were  well  if  more  deceptive  sins  did  the  like.  The  grosser 
oatwud  ofi^ences,  like  Dagon,  are  soon  down  before  the  ark. 

Sin  of  every  sort  is  bowed  low  before  triumphant  grace.  Yea,  and  the 
man  who  receives  the  grace  of  God  feels  that  the  love  of  nny  and  every 


1 


138  XBTKOFOLCUS  TiB^MTtniJI  flfLPa. 

•in  ii  cast  oot  «f  ita  place  in  his  heart.    'Saw  bt  deeiroa  to  be 

•11,  and  Boxioiulj  cries, "  Lord,  what  wouldat  tboa  h&re  me  to 

will  no  more  go  and  live  in  sin,  an  he  did  tMioR,  than  Paul  will 

to  be  a  persecntOT  after  the  Lwd,  ctsb  Jmm>  bu  uipeared  to  bim  bj 

the  way.    What  a  DagOB-Ul  there  wh  in  the  i^osUe's  piide  just  gnt- 

Bide  tlw  Damaactn  gate  I     Sach  a  fiJl  take».pltce  in  the  oeart  of  enrj 

man  to  whom  the  graoe  of  Qod  axueg  intii  power. 

Now  the  paral)u  may  be  nn  a  little  further.  Tfus  fall  ^  Do^m 
vtry  aooK  bigan  to  bt  ptremved,  for  "  Wiica  they  of  Aahdod  arose  cuHj 
on  the  morrow,  behiw,  Dagon  wm  tkllea  on  his  face  to  the  eailh." 
Very  bood  after  the  entrance  of  grace  this  iiga  follows,  and  ere  loiu  it 
is  aeen  and  known.  Let  no  man  conceive  that  there  is  grace  in  bb 
ionl  if  Dagon  liti  on  the  throne  BtilL  lliis  is  one  of  the  earliest  Utkeu 
of  the  entrance  of  the  Ufb  o/  God  into  the  aoul — that  sin  falls  dam 
from  its  high  pla«v  ud  is  i|0  more  had  in  honour. 

At  the  aame  tim^  ohawre  that  Dt-gou  waa  not  brokeii.  He  bod  falkn 
•n  bia  &ae,  but  tiiab  wai  all ;  ao  tiiat  the  next  day  bis  foolish  worehii^ias 
coold  set  him  np  i^d.  Sometima  ut  the  firat  entrance  of  grace  then 
it  a  dowB&U  of  ain,  bat  nothing  like  such  a  breaking  and  dcfitroTitie  gf 
■in  in  the  wnl  as  there  irill  be  atttitFardfi.  When  tbe  divine  ufe  nu 
entered  aia  is  dethnmed,  it  no  longer  Bit«  up  there  in  the  plaee  of 
Ood  i  bat  jet,  for  all  that,  then  ia  an  awful  power  reniainiog  in  the 
owrnpt  natoie, «  dead^  tondenof  to  sin,  a  powerful  la^v  in  tbe  memben 
bringme  tbe  loal  into  ct^vitT.  Sbill,  down  tbe  idol  goes,  even  if  it  be 
not  broKen:  it  cannot  reigo,  tiiOB^h  it  may  remain  to  trouble  as. 

Now,  what  hi^ipeaed  on  the  night  mentiooed  in  tbe  text  ?  Dagm 
fili  bt/on  Uu  ark  tcAm  U  vai  all  gtmt  and  sUU  in  Iht  tea^k 
While  the  worahii^jers  wwe  there,  during  the  day,  there  was  noise,  and 
■hooting,  the  fa^  god  sat  aloft  aud  you  coold  not  tell  that  there  m 
any  mysterious  power  aboat  the  aA.  It  wae  in  the  quiet  of  the  night 
that  this  deed  was  done,  and  Uina  o^n  in  the  hearing  of  the  word 
graoe  ia  introduced  into  the  heart*  bnt  yoa  would  oot  know  that  an)' 
ehasffe  was  wrought,  for  it  ie  onlr  when  the  man  gets  away  from  tJie 
world's  bnsineas — gets  alone  and  ocgius  to  consider — that  a  divindj- 
mjBteriouB  might  is  displayed  by  the  inward  grace,  ao  as  to  sink  gin, 
and  lay  the  power  of  enl  low.  Would  to  God  oar  bearers  took  men 
opportnnitiea  for  quietly  oonaideriiig  the  word  of  God !  How  mudi 
more  blessing  might  often  be  gotten  out  of  sermons  and  books  if  there 
were  more  nieditation !  Ton  get  the  grapes,  but  you  do  not  tread  them 
in  the  wine-rat.  There  is  more  trouble  taken  to  collect  the  ^beaTC*  of 
the  sermon  than  is  afterwards  expended  in  thte«lung  ttiem  oaU  Ths 
power  which  smote  Dagon  was  displayed  in  the  quiet  of  the  uigbt;  and 
when  the  grace  of  Qod  has  enteredTinto  your  soois  it  \&  probiible  that  tbe 
downcoming  of  sin  will  be  better  e&cted  in  timce  of  quiet  thoagbt  and  - 
searching  of  heart  than  at  any  other  r>criod.  Thought  is  the  channel  li 
immense  benefit  to  the  SOuL  Shot  the  tcmpii:  doors  iind  let  all  be  fitiU, 
and  then  will  tbe  Holy  Ghogt  work  wonden  in  tbe  sooJ. 

II.    Now,  secondly,  the  eExrao  up  or  Daoob  thb  seoobd  nn 

AND  HIS  SECOMU  FALL,  TEAK  W£LL  BSP&ESKUT  THB  BAXTLE  OODTS  OX 
Ut  THB  BOUL  BETWEEN  SIN  AHD  QEACB. 

What  fools  these  Philistines  were  to  continue  woishii^iingf  a  ga4 

; 


I»40(»r'B  UPS  AND  DOWNS.  180 

ffliidi  when  it  tmnbled  down  could  not  get  up  agshL  To  wonhip  a 
[od  nbkh  fell  on  its  feoe  was  bad  enongh,  bat  to  woiship  one  that  oonld 
lot  rise  wbm  be  feU^  bat  needed  to  be  set  m  his  place  by  hnman  hands, 
fM  oertainly  Tik  ijifintnation :  bat  they  took  ap  their  precbas  deity, 
and  ftliey  pot  him  in  his  place  agaii^  and  no  doabt  sang  a  special ''  high 
DSflS ''  to  him,  and  then  want  their  way  qnietly  to  uieir  homes^  littie 
Irwiniing  thafc  their  pietfyfidi-god  woold  want  their  help  again  so  soon. 
Sma  tfins  AUom  aid  me  flesh  came  Mo  eur  souls  aid  trytosstom 
laUm  Dagsn  ty  agamy  wiih  some  fmasuro  sf  success.  It  often  happens 
JmA  in  yonng  axmvmta  these  comes  a  penod  when  it  looks  as  if  they 
MdaltogelilMr  ttKMtatiad  and  gone  back  to  their  fonn^  It  seems 

MxCdMwin^  of  Ood  were  not  real  in  their  booIs,  andfrace  was  not 
aeinariiBit  Do  yon  wonder  at  it  ?  I  haye  ceased  to  wonder.  The 
mmi  IS  pvHK^ed,  and  the  man  accepts  it,  and  there  is  a  marrdhms 
iyfcaiea  in  him ;  bnt  when  he  goes  among  his  old  conoipanionsi,  al- 
JMiighhfi  it  leaolTed  not  to  &U  into  his  fionner  sins^  they  try  him  yccy 
Mfevriy*  He  is  assailed  in  a  thoasmd  waysl  Some  of  oar  yoong 
people,  tfikey  were  to  tell  tiieir  story,  wooldfaiairow  up  yoar  feeling  I7 
MSilhliiinR  Hie  way  in  which  all  sorts  of  jests,  sad  insinnations,  and 
hHiiti»aMi  itturlad  atthem,  and  that  bTinflnential  perscms — their  parents, 
Mr  eUsr  fasotiierB.aBd  sistem,  and  those  who  oversee  their  work ;  they 
m  bsiBfc  bahiqil  and  before,  so  that  if  the^  do  not  transgress  in  one 
wuf,  il  is  iwy  likdy  that  tba  dsrlL  craftily  trips  them  np  in  another.  I 
hvviB  known  aman  when  he  has  been  tempted  to  go  into  evil  company 
nitaae  mtsm,  and  agau^  and  again.  His  tempters  haye  langlied  at  nim, 
lad  he  has  bene  it  all,  bat  at  last  he  has  lost  his  temper;  and  as  soon 
m  the  ttedDiies  haiye  seen  his  pfusion  boiling  op  thc^  have  cried  oat^ 
*  Ah,  there  yon  are  1  We  have 'got  jou.**  At  sach  a  time  as  that  tfie 
foot  aura  is  apt  to  cry,  ^  Alas,  I  cannot  be  a  believer,  or  else  I  shoald 
aoi  have  done  this."  Now,  all  this  is  a  violent  attempt  of  Satan  and  the 
leah  to  set  Dagon  np  again.  They  know  that  the  Lord  has  thrown  him 
lown  and  they  cannot  bear  it,  bat  woald  fain  set  the  fish-god  again  on 
Ilia  Chiona.  Bometimea  they  do  for  a  time  set  Bagon  ap  again  and 
aanae  great  sorrow  in  the  sool.  I  have  known  a  poor  lost  lamb  to  be 
bond  and  faroog^  into  the  fold ;  bat  it  has  miserably  wandered  for  a 
fcinie^  and  the  dbvil  has  thoaght  that,  sorely,  he  had  got  that  lamb,  and 
■Oidd  toar  bun  into  pieces,  and  yet  he  has  been  decdved  after  alL 
[kigon  was  only  set  np  for  a  time,  and  be  had  to  come  down  again  ;  and 
10  &  bupperm  wnerever  grace  enters  the  heart.  The  wanderers  have  come 
^$ak,  weeping  and  sighing,  to  own  that  they  have  diahonoared  their 
piofaMion :  md  what  has  been  the  resnlt  in  the  long  ran?  Why,  they 
lave  had  more  hamilitrr,  more  tenderness  of  heart,  more  bve  to  Ohrist, 
noxe  ffiatitiide,  than  they  had  before ;  and  I  have  been  glad  (not  glad 
dhat  mey  wandered,  bat  glad)  that  the  grace  of  Qod,  when  he  has 
xoo^t  them  back  again  more  fnlly,  has  given  them  a  deeper  conversion 
md  tt  more  lasting  and  sabstantial  work  of  sraoe,  so  that  afterwards  they 
biKve  contittaed  by  the  grace  of  God  honoanu)le,  asefdl  Christians  even  to 
he  end.  Often  and  often  is  that  the  case,  and  I  speak  at  this  time  to 
my  young  convert  who  can  say  in  his  heart,  '^  0  sir,  I  do  love  the 
jora,  bnt  I  have  been  wch  a  backslider.  I  do  trnst  Jesas.  I  wish  to 
M  a  Obriitian,  but  I  have  been  overthrown  by  enemies^  I  fear  I  mast 


i 


140  XETROPOUTAH  TABIBVAOLS  FITLPIT. 

not  join  a  Christian  charch»  because  if  I  oonld  not  resist  temptatiQii  fr 
six  weeks  how  conld  I  expect  to  stand  tut  all  m^ life?  I  am  soda 
poor,  weak  creature,  so  apt  to  be  led  astraj,  what  is  to  become  of  nef 
Dear  fHond,  CTiere  to  think  yon  were  so  foolish^  bat  do  not  doobt  the 
power  of  Qod's  Holy  ^irit  to  help  yon,  and  to  break  in  pieces  tk 
enemy,  who  seems  to  have  resumed  nis  power  over  yoa. 

Now,  notice  that  aHhoygh  fkey  agam  s$i  Dagon  m,  h$  had  to  g$  imn 
opam  ti^h  a  tcors^/alL  I  have  no  doabt  it  took  tnem  a  kntf  pnll  ui 
a  frroat  heave  to  haul  the  nncomely  lamp  of  marble  into  its  race  agiin. 
Many  strong  limbs  were  tired,  and  muscks  stnined,  to  lift  up  Un 
huge  god,  and  set  him  on  his  pedestal;  bat  it  was  no  tnnibk  to  flie 
Ix>rd  to  apaef  the  usly  stone.    No  rope  was  wanted, and  no  stniningor 

G tiling,  **  Bel  boweth*  down  and  Nebo  stoopeth''  when  Jehovah  q£fti 
mself.  Only  shnt  the  tem^  gates,  and  leave  the  aik  and  Dagon  to 
have  it  ont  between  them,  ana  Ibgon  gets  the  worst  of  it  Only,  nsik 
Uiis,  Dagon  has  not  gained  much  by  being  reinstated,  for  thia  time^  whn 
he  comes  down,  bdiold  he  was  fallen  on  his  &oe  to  the  gronxMl  befcn 
the  ark  of  Jehovah,  **  and  the  head  of  Dagon  and  bodi  the  pafana  of  hit 
hanils  were  cat  oiF  upon  the  threshold."  The  idol's  head  was  gone,  and 
even  so  the  retting  power  of  sin  is  utterly  broken  and  destagnsd,  ito 
beauty,  its  cunnmg,  its  glory  are  all  dashed  to  atoms.  This  is  the  nsolt 
of  the  grace  of  Ooa,  and  the  sure  result  of  it^  if  it  onoe  oomea  into  the 
soul,  however  long  the  conflict  may  continue,  and  however  desperate  the 
cffbrta  of  8aUn  to  regain  his  empire.  0  beUever,  sin  may  trooUe  thee^ 
hut  it  diall  not  tvranniae  over  thee.  *'Sin  shiJl  not  have  dominion 
over  yi>u,**  saith  ihe  Holy  Spirit,  **  for  ye  are  not  under  the  law,  bst 
under  grace.**  If  the  power  of  evil  be  set  up  for  awhile  it  rittD  <n^ 
come  down  with  the  gnnter  force,  and  its  head  shall  be  cut  oIL 

Then,  too,  the  h4Mds  of  Dagon  were  broken  oll^  and  even  thus  the 
acti\*e  ^wer,  the  working  power  of  sin  is  takm  away.  Both  the  pabos 
of  the  idol's  hands  were  cut  off  upon  the  threshold^  so  that  he  bad  not 
a  hand  left.  Neither  right-hanoed  sin  nor  kit-handed  sin  shall  n* 
main  in  the  believer  when  Ood*8  sanctifying  grace  fetches  Dagon  dovBi 
The  secret  reignii^  power  is  broken,  and  so  is  the  manifeat  werimig 

fi>wer•  The  Christian  is  kept  from  patting  forth  his  hand  into  iniqoily. 
e  is  crucified  with  Christ,  and  so  both  hands  ave  nailed  to  the  cnoi 
and  fastened  up  horn  performing  those  deeds  of  01  towards  whidi  Ai 
lustinga  of  the  flesh  would  nrge  nim. 

Thi*  hapfi^HHi^  too,  if  you  notice,  rm-i^  Mjmdilif;  for  we  are  tdd  s 
Bcccmd  time  that,  when  thev  arose  eariy  on  the  morrow,  behold.  Dagos 
was  fallen  upon  his  face.  It  does  not  take  grace  long,  when  it  is  <»eo 
in  the  soul,  to  overturn  the  reigiring  power  and  the  arave  enerayof  sin, 
when  those  for  a  while  apfK^ar  to  get  the  umier  hand.  BroSen  and 
sisters,  I  hope  you  know  t^is.  I  hope  that  the  Spirit  of  Ood  whidi  is 
in  you,  and  the  lo^^o  of  Christ  whtcn  reigns  in  you,  have  destroyed  the 
power  which  sin  once  had  in  your  souls.  If  it  be  not  so,  then  qaesfion 
yourselves  whether  the  Spirit  of  Ood  be  in  you  at  all.  It  is  not  possible 
that  tlio  ark  should  be  in  the  temple  and  tl&at  Dagon  should  be  standing 
there  unbroken.  Not  till  the  morrow  morning  shall  evil  remain  un- 
ohallen^  and  unmoved  upon  the  throne.  It  is  not  possible  that  yon, 
dear  fViend,  could  live  ana  delight  in  sin,  and  vet  be  a  child  of  Goi 


lUCKXV'B  UPB  ilTD  BOWHS.  141 

Tf  your  lieiui  is  aet  iipon  iniquity,  where  yoar  heart  k  there  your 
trasiue  %  and  if  ain  be  your  tieaanre  you  inre  no  heir  of  heaven.  That 
which  govema  your  heart  ia  ^onr  lord  and  yoar  god ;  what  your  heart 
knreSy  by  that  you  ahaU  be  judged,  and  if  you  love  evil  you  shall  be 
oondemned.  We  may  sin — ah,  would  God  we  did  not !— but  to  love 
ain  ia  not  in  the  believer.  There  is  a  deadly  antagonism  between  grace 
and  8in;  and  where  Oxd  gracious  life  cornea  the  evil  life  must  fell 
l%ere  caimot  be  an  alliance  between  Dagon  and  the  ark,  between  Qtoi 
and  the  world,  or  between  Ohrist  and  sin. 

III.  And  now,  thirdly,  the  parallel  still  holds  good  in  one  more 
point,  namely,  that  though  the  fish-god  wab  thus  madcsd  abd 

BBdKKV,  TXT  THB  STUMP  OF  DAGOK  WAB  LEFT  TO  HDC. 

Hie  original  Hebrew  ia,  ^' Only  Dagon  was  left  to  him,"  or ''only 
the  flah":  only  the  fishy  part  remained.  The  head  and  the  upper 
portknia  were  brol^en  away,  there  remained  only  the  fishy  tail  of 
thgpa,  and  that  waa  all ;  but  that  was  not  broken.  Now,  this  is  the 
iwmeu  wkkh  hrmgn  us  so  much  sorrow — that  the  stump  of  Dagon  is 
left  to  him.  I  wish  it  were  not.  I  have  heard  some  say  that  they  have 
no  ain  remaining  in  them.  Well,  dear  brother,  the  Lord  convert  you ! 
I  shall  aay  no  more  than  that,  fbr  if  there  were  in  you  enough  light  for 

Sm  to  nerceive  your  darkness,  it  were  better  than  to  taUc  as  you  do. 
very  diild  of  God  who  knows  anything  about  himself  and  the  expe- 
rience of  a  real  believer,  knows  that  there  is  indwelling  sin  in  him,  and 
that  to  a  moat  fearftd  extent,  so  as  to  make  his  very  soul  cry  out  in 
agony,  ^0  wretched  man  that  I  am,  who  shall  deliver  me  from  we  bodv 
Of  tma  death?"  I  could  not  go  the  len^h  of  singing,  with  Balph 
EMdne,  as  a  deacription  of  myself,  the  lines  written  by  him  in  bis 
^  Belierer^a  Sonneta"— 

**  To  good  and  evil  equal  bent, — 
And  both  a  devil  and  a  saint.** 

But  jtt,  taken  with  a  large  lump  of  salt,  there  is  a  eood  deal  of  truth 
even  in  that  unguarded  expression.  There  is  the  old  corruption  within 
na,  and  there  ia  no  use  denying  it,  because  denying  it  will  put  us  olF 
onr  guard,  will  make  many  of  the  puzzles  of  life  to  be  quite  un- 
answerable, and  often  bring  upon  us  great  confusion  of  souL  The  other 
law  is  within  ua  as  well  as  the  law  of  grace.  Canst  thou  draw  near  to 
God,  my  brother,  and  not  see  that  he  can  iustly  charge  thee  with  folly? 
"Oanat  thou  atand  in  his  presence,  as  Job  did,  and  behold  his  glory, 
and  not  aaj,  ^  I  abhor  myself  in  dust  and  ashes"?  Canst  thou  have 
dttlings  with  perfection,  and  not  perceive  thy  faultiness  ?  Canst  thou 
come  near  unto  the  innermost  court  of  the  temple,  and  stand  in  that 
excessive  light  of  fellowship  which  is  the  portion  of  the  Lord's  chosen, 
and  not  see  within  thyself  spots  and  wrinkles,  vea,  thousands  of  them,  so 
as  to  make  thee  cover  thy  face  for  shame,  and  adore  the  amazing  grace 
which  loves  thee  atiU  ?  Canst  thou  not  see  in  thy  daily  life  enough  to 
condemn  thee,  and  cast  thee  into  hell,  were  it  not  that  God  still  sees 
thee  in  Ohrist,  and  imputes  not  thy  iniquitv  to  thee,  but  accepts  thee  in 
the  Beloved  ?  Oh,  it  is  so— it  is  so,  indeed !  The  stump  of  Dagon  is 
still  left ;  uid  beomse  it  is  left,  dear  friends,  ilts  a  thing  to  Ife  watchsd 
^igemst^  for  though  that  stony  stump  of  Dngon  would  not  grow  in  the 


us  Mgnwwwmiar  ii  mwi  tf  tf  m^tHLFrf » 

FUUflthM  tiupW;  yttt  thej  would  ttute  aiNir  Imml  'wt  MA  1' 
ggstn,  and  bow  befim  it  aaveftxe.    AIm»  His  itn^  of  in  irilMillMK 
not  a  dab  Df  stone,  but  ftill  of  TitaUty,  like  the  tme  Ml  doim,  of  lAttl 
Job  said, '« At  the  Msent  of  water  it  win  bal'*    LisvBfilieflfeatlMtiili 
yon  to  itself, and  let  temptation  oome  inthe  waj^ud  ton  shaBlMflil 
which  will  Uind  yonr  eyes  with  we^Hng.    It  is  a  gooa  thiof  to  hdkM 
your  fiEu>e  in  <^  glass»  but  yonr  ftce  is  not  yonnrif ;  no  munror  cata  diMr 
yon  yonrselt  lliere  is  a  certain  temptation  which  has  an  allnitj  t6  jdi 
eyil  within  you ;  and  should  Satan  brii^diat  templatioii  mar  jm  ifl 
see  yourself  to  your  horror  and  shame.  There  ahalf  then  kxykwt  itf  &ie 
window  of  ?our  countenance  a  man  whom  yon  did  not  aae  wlran  yM 
looked  in  the  glass,  for  you  only  saw  the  house  he'  Bred  m.    Bojm 
is  he  that  he  makes  ttie  very  house  he  Uves  in  look  hoRildk    wm 
the  angry  man  comes  up,  and  is  visible  to  tiie  naked  eye,  hdw  lis 
deforms  the   countenance!     When   obstinate  old  Adam   oohms  W 
the  window,  what  a  dark  forbidding  face  he  wears!     Whm  Ast     I 
envious  spirit  comes  up,  what  an  evil  glance  there  is  in  the  eget     j 
When  the  unbelieving  spirit  peers  through  the  ktticey  what  a  niiv-    j 
able  countenance  he  shows  compared  with  the  &oe  of  ftith  ml    . 
diildlike  confidence  in  God !    There  is  nobody  in  this  worid,  dsair    I 
biotiier,  that  you  have  so  much  cause  to  be  aflwid  of  as  jooaMji 
Augustine  used  to  pray,  **  Lord,  deliver  me  fhxm  tiiat  evil  mm,  tfj^ 
self."    A  very  appropnate  prayer  !br  a  woman,  too*-^  Lord,  save  as 
flx>m  mjself.''    if  you  ore  saved  ftom  yourself  you  will  be  tovel  tiak 
the  devil ;  ibr  what  can  the  devil  do  unless  self  joins  hands  "with.  1dm 
in  unholy  league?    But,  oh,  what  watchfulness  it  will  need  I    Kttell 
room  for  fai^  indeed !     Faith  does  not  de<diiie  the  eonflioty  ner  ptiK 
us  up  with  the  notion  that  the  fight  is  over;  on  the  oontnriy,  ft  fdna'tb 
itself  the  whole  armour  of  God,  because  it  sees  Uie  battle  to  be  stOI 
raging.    Faith  is  wanted  to  be  the  shield  to  keq>  off  the  fiery  darts,  and  . 
the  sword  with  which  to  smite  the  foe.    Here  is  the  sphere  in  whidi 
&ith  is  to  work ;  it  does  not  talk  of  ended  war&re^  DOi  ettfries  A 
the  life-tong  campaign  to  ultimate  victory.    Faith  does  liet  iiiv,  ""I 
have  ceased  the  conmct*';  she  knows  better :  Mth  says,  ^  I  tai  in  As 
midst  of  it,  warri^^  with  a  thousand  foes,  and  looking  fer  the  victiMj 
through  Jesus  Ohnst  my  Lord."    0  brothers  and  sisten»  be  fUxmif  m 
faith  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  for  you  have  need  to  be  so,  Btase 
the  stump  of  Dagon  still  remaineth.     The  lusting  of  the  Aesh  abidett 
still  in  the  re^fenerate.  \ 

Look  at  this  matter  again.  That  stump  of  Dagon  which  i^^noaiMd 
was  a  vile  thing :  it  was  a  piece  of  an  idol,  a  fragment  of  a  moi^Btvoos 
image  which  had  been  worshipped  mstead  of  God.  Now,  the  sin  which 
dwelleth  in  vou  is  never  to  be  regarded  by  you  as  anyUiing  else 'then 
a  horrible,  loathsome,  and  detestable  thin|;.  That  after  such  lov#  ^ 
you  and  I  have  known  there  should  be  in  us  even  the  power  to'  be 
nngratefhl  ou^it  to  shock  us ;  that  after  such  proof  of  his  trs^ 
as  God  has  shown  to  us,  after  such  faithfulness  and  such  abnn<jittt 
evidences  of  fidthfulness,  we  should  still  be  cap^le  of  unbelief  oitvht 
to  bo  a  sorrow  to  us.  Oh,  I  wish  I  could  never  sin  again  througJ^MNit 
time  or  eternity.  Oh,  that  everv  particle  of  the  tinder  of  depravity  jittto 
which  the  devil  could  let  a  spark  fall  was  gone  fh>m  my  nature.    It^  is  a 


daoos'b  dps  jInd  Dowsn.  14S 

Hrcy  to  hare  the  sparks  put  out,  but  it  is  u  pity  to  have  even  the  tinder 
lift  ;  aod  there  is  plenty  of  this  tindiT  about  iis  all.  TJDder?  At, 
RUipawder,  ho  quick  is  it  to  take  the  light  which  Satan  is  ever  readj 
p  brin^.  We  carry  a  bomb-shell  hcRrt  about  with  u<i,  and  we  had  better 
ftep  clear  of  all  the  devil's  candles  lest  there  should  be  an  explosion  of 
iCtual  sin.  These  candies  are  common  enough  in  the  form  of  some 
iJRnoible  but  sceptical  friend,  or  in  the  form  of  aciinaements  which  are 
[Uestionable.  Keep  you  clear  of  Ijiicifer's  luatchea.  Ton  hare  got 
nough  mischief  in  vonr  heart  without  going  wliert  yon  will  get  more. 
•t  anybody  here  feels  that  he  is  m  very  gracious  and  good  that  be  caD 
■fely  enter  into  temptation,  1  am  snre  that  he  ie  laboonng  under  a  very 
[reat  mistake.  I  would  say  to  him,  Brother,  there  is  devil  eoongfa  ia  yon 
rithout  yonr  sending  out  inWtation  cards  to  sevfrt  more.  Go  yon  to 
)im  that  casteth  ont  devils,  (io  you  into  company  where  the  powers  of 
iTiI  will  be  held  in  chains  and  bound  ;  but  do  uot  ^'O  where  other  devils 
IB  wicked  as  hiuiself  will  call  to  the  demon  who  now  beaeta  yon,  snd  stir 
dm  up  to  work  uiischief.  The  stump  of  Dagou  is  left.  Be  carefnl, 
mtolifol,  prayerful,  and  loathe  sin  with  all  your  souL 
IV.     But  now,  lastly,  here  is  mercy,  that  THOUGH  THE  sruiiP  OV 

DaOOK  WAH  not  TAKEK  out  of  the  PlIII-lflTINE  TSMFLE,  WB  UT 
iO   BKYOKD  THE     UIBTOKY    AND     REJOICE    THAT    IT    WILL    BK  TAEKX 

tBOH  OUR  HEARTS.  The  day  ia  ooming.  hruthcr,  sister,  in  which  thwe 
nrill  Tfe  no  more  inclination  in  yon  to  sin  thiiu  there  is  in  an  angeL  The 
lay  is  coming  in  which  your  nature  shall  be  so  established  in  tmth 
lad  righteousness  and  holiuess  that  all  the  deviis  in  hell  will  not  be 
tble  to  make  yon  think  a  wrong  tiiought.  "  Oh,"  says  one,  "  I  wish 
that  time  would  come  soon."  It  will  come,  brother.  The  Lord  will 
keep  yon  Rghting  yet  and  warring  yet ;  hut  there  will  come  a  day  when  a 
lucesengerwillwait  at  your  door,  and  he  will  say,  "The  pitcher  ia  broken 
*t  the  fountain,  and  the  wheel  broken  at  the  cietei-n.  Thy  flesh  mnst 
return  to  the  dust,  and  thy  spirit  to  God  that  mode  it,"  and  then  yonr 
Ipirit  shall  open  its  eyes  with  glad  surprise  and  find  itself  delivered  mim 
tbe  body,  and  at  the  same  time  dehvercd  fium  all  sin.  There  sh^l  also 
L-onie  by-and-by  the  Eonnd  of  the  trumpet  of  resnri-ectioo,  and  the  body 
thatl  riae  ;  and  one  of  tbe  chief  characteristics  of  the  risen  body  will  be 
Lliat  as  it  i-ises  it  will  be  free  from  the  boudage  of  cormption,  and  it  will 
hare  no  tendency  to  lead  us  into  sin.  When  our  perfected  spirit 
ihali  enter  into  our  perfect  i>ody,  then  our  complete  manhood,  body, 
•on],  and  spirit  shall  have  no  stain,  or  spot,  or  flaw.  All  ita  past  sin  will 
be  washed  away — nay,  in  washed  away— in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and 
itil  ita  propensities,  tendencies  and  inclinations  to  sin  shall  all  be  gone 
For  eyer,  and  the  very  posaibilitiDS  of  sinning  shall  be  ctem^ly  taken 

"No  clond  those  blissful  re<^oiis  know, 
For  ever  bright  ftud  fair ; 
For  rin,  the  source  of  morlnl  woe. 
Can  never  enter  tliere." 

lobn  Bnnyan  repreacnts  Jlercy  ns  lau^'hing  in  her  sleep.  She  had  a 
Ircsm,  she  said  ;  and  she  laughed  bccintsc  of  the  great  fsTonrs  wliich 
Ken  jet  to  be  bestowed  upon  her.    Well,  if  some  of  you  were  to  dream 


144  lIBTBOF<»JIiJr  TABBXACU  miflT. 


to-night  that  the  gfreat  thing  which  I  hnve  ipohea  «f  had  i0ttt% 
happened  to  yon,  bo  that  you  were  eomplefeeiy  Dm  tma  iB  teodeBBf  1i 
gin,  would  not  yon  also  be  aa  them  that  dwiaiw  and  laqgh  fbr  wjm 
Think  of  it — ^no  more  caose  fx  watdifiifaieai,  no  uoie  need  of  WMm 
over  the  day'aain before  yon  fall  asleep  atnif^ ;  no  mm  rinto  eoui^ 
no  devil  to  tempt  yon,  no  worldly  care,  no  hMmg,  no  ewytPodepwMoa 
of  spirit,  no  unbelief  nothingof  the  kind — wilTnot  thia  bea  wylop 
part  of  tiie  joy  of  heaven  ?  thiy,  lamreadTtocaiyftr  JOTti^fldwthik 
this  will  happen  to  me,  unworthy  though  I  be.  ^  Bern  tha  Lori, 
0  my  sonl^  and  all  that  is  wilhin  me  Uees  Ua  hofy  nameu*  It  wilbe 
so,  brother,  both  to  yon  and  to  me.  AaanrelyaawBhsvv  tnaladakiik 
he  will  perfect  that  which  concemeth  na. 

<*  The  feeblest  saint  shall  win  the  day. 
Though  death  and  hdl  obttnict  tibe  way.** 

The  Lord  has  undertaken  our  perfect  sanctilloaiioii,  and  he  wiD  aeeon- 
plish  it.  He  haa  brought  old  Dagon  down,  and  broken  Ua  head  aai  Ui 
hands,  and  he  will  brcAk  him  to  shivere  ere  hmg.  Tea,  he  will  take  the 
azk  of  the  Lord  away  where  Dagon  shall  never  come  into  oonteot  wittit 
any  more.  He  will  take  you — the  gracious  part  of  yon,  your  femeifr  nl 
best  self— away  into  the  glory,  to  abide  with  him  ionr  eiv«r.  ^Batk  of 
this  and  sing.  Yea,  brother,  sing  with  aU  yonr  mighty  ftr  all  tUs  an 
happen  within  a  week.  A  week  ?  It  may  hmpen  iritfafai  a  diy.  It 
may  happen  before  you  reach  home  to-night  We  are  ao  near  to  haana 
that  if  we  were  not  very  dull,  and  our  ean  veryhewy,  w«  Bi^M  st^oMi 
hear  the  angels  chantuig  their  ceaseless  hallelajahBL  Soaae  «f  ChA 
saints — some  here,  perhaps — have  almost  got  their  Ibet  mpm  t0 
threshold  of  Uie  eternal  city,  and  do  not  know  it  Thejwn^iomi  flas 
they  think  to  the  hari>  and  the  x)alm  famoh.  Thej  woold  wH  M 
about  what  they  will  do  next  year,  they  would  not  be  wwaih^  skoii 
next  quarter-day  if  thev  knew  that  they  would  be  amongat  m  nyttlto 
of  heaven  by  then.  They  Would  not  even  think  about  to-monaw  Ji 
they  know  how  soon  it  will  all  be  over,  and  how  soon  tlla^atsBSBl  jqr 
will  begin. 

God  bless  you,  dear  friends.  May  the  Lord's  ^pnsoe  nsigii  ofsr  dl  is 
Uie  power  of  the  Holy  Ohost ;  and  even  to  smners  in  whoBi  sia  ii 
triumphant  may  Jesus  Christ  come,  and  his  f[race  enter,  and  QttA  fUt 
beloved  sins  must  fall.  To  the  one  only  livmg  and  tnie  €k>d  be  ^d^ 
for  ever  and  ever.    Amen. 


POBTIOir  OF  SOBIPTURE    READ    BEFORE    SSRMOIT — RomanS  V$.     ii 

18 — 25  ;  and  Romans  viii.  1 — 14. 


Hyurs  froh  "Our  Owk  Htmk  Book"— 877,  648,  6tl. 


|llftt[0|(tntan  iFahfrnack  |ttl|it. 


THE  JEWEL  OF  PEACE. 


f 


DBinrKSBD  OK  Jjonn's-DAT  Morniwo,  Mahch  18th,  1877,  i 

C.   H.  SPURGEON, 

IT    THB    METROPOLITAH    TABERMACLE,    HEWDTOTOK. 


J  cimfii.    Tbs 

When  the  heart  is  full  of  Iotc  it  findB  the  hand  too  feeble  for  its  desires. 
Hence  it  seekB  relief  in  intercesBion  and  licncdiction ;  wishing,  praying 
and  blessing  where  it  cannot  actnally  ell'ect  its  loving  porpose.  The 
apostle  would  have  done  for  the  Thcssnloninna  all  the  good  that  was 
conceivable  had  it  been  in  his  power,  but  his  wiebcs  far  outstripped  his 
abilities,  and  therefore  he  betook  himself  to  interceding  for  them,  nnd  to 
invoking  upon  them  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  and  Master  whom  he 
served.  Here  is  a  lesson  for  ns  in  the  art  of  doing  good ;  as  we  lengthen 
the  ejeaight  with  the  telescope,  as  wo  send  our  words  afar  by  the 
telegraph,  so  let  ns  extend  our  ability  to  do  good  by  the  constant  use  of 
intercessory  prayer.  Parents,  when  you  have  done  all  you  can  for  your 
children  yourselves,  be  tbankfnl  that  yon  may  introduce  them  to  a  fur- 
ther and  greater  blessing,  by  commending  them  to  the  care  of  the  great 
Father  in  heaven.  Friends,  do  your  friends  the  best  possible  deed  of 
friendship  by  asking  for  them  the  friendship  of  God.  Yon  who  love  the 
sonis  of  men,  when  you  have  poured  out  all  yonr  strength  on  their  behalf, 
bless  Uod  that  there  is  still  something  more  which  yon  c«n  do,  for  by 
earnest  entreaties  and  sunplicationR  yon  may  bring  down  from  on  high 
the  effectual  energy  of  tne  Holy  Spirit,  who  can  vork  in  their  bearta 
Hat  which  it  ia  sob  in  your  power  to  accomplish.  The  apostle  saw  that 
the  ThesBatoniana  were  mncb  troubled,  and  he  wrote  the  most  enconr- 
aging  words  to  cheer  them,  but  he  knew  that  ho  conld  not  tak»  the 
boiden  fiom  off  their  hearts,  and  therefore  he  turned  to  the  God  of  all 
amwUtion,  Mtd  pmyed  him  to  give  them  peace  always  by  all  means. 
The  slenderneM  of  onr  power  to  bless  otbets  will  be  no  detriment  to 
Uiem  if  it  lead  na  to  lay  hold  npon  the  eternal  strength,  for  that  will 
tning  into  the  field  a  snperior  power  to  bless,  and  onr  infinnity  wiU  aatf 
nnka  space  foe  iha  dispuy  of  aivioe  grace. 


•  .  t  » 


Let  nsloolt  first  at  the  mamf'-eidedbhismff  which  tiit  vfioMbinrtilBmf^ 
peace ;  and  then  let  us  note  the  special  denrablmiB$$  qf  iL  ThftHj^U 
us  observe  from  wham  alone  it  eomes;  and  Ibnrthlyy  i\ote  lib  wide  ewtif 
of  the  apostolic  prayer, 

I.  First,  then,  M  tls  fo6k  At  TBS  XAHT-ttbsD  BLBsanro,— "The 
Lord  of  peace  himself  giro  yon  peace."  Some  haTe  thonslit  to  mbaik 
the  expression  to  peace  within  the  chnrch,  since  disor&rly  membm 
were  evidently  increasing  among  the  Thessaloniana ;  bnt  that  is  a  Wf 
straitened  and  niggardly  interpretation,  and"  it  is  never  wiae  to  nuimr 
the  meaning  of  Ood's  woML  InAeed,  sntt  a  contracted  ezplanatioa 
cannot  be  borne,  for  it  does  not  appear  that  the  disorderly  penons  nMn- 


^ 


tioned  in  the  ch^ter  had  as  vet  created  any  neciat  distqrbMlce ;.  fhr 
had  been  quietly  rattening  at  ttie  expense  of  their  ge&erons  Me^Al  in 
would  not  be  very  eager  to  qnairel  with  the  rack  firom  which  they  fei 
Although  no  doubt  ohtih)h  quiet  is  Indnded  as  one  variety  of  peaee^ 
yet  it  would  be  a  sad  dwarfing  of  the  meaning  of  the  Spirit  to  oonsidff 
one  phase  of  the  blessing  to  th^  n^leol  of  the  rest  No»  Cb^^eace  hen 
meant  is  **  the  deep  tranquillity  of  a  soul  resting  on  Qod,"  the  gaiefc 
restfulncss  of  spirit  which  is  the  pecnhar  gift  of  €k)d,  and  tibe  ooote 
privilege  of  the  believer.  *'  Great  peace  have  all  they  that  love  thy  ]sk% 
and  nothing  shall  offend  them.'* 

The  peace  of  the  text  is  a  gem  with  many  facets,  but  in  cooaidflriiis 
its  many-sidedness  we  must  remember  that  its  main  befffin^  la  inmrd  OeL 
The  deepest,  best,  and  most  worthy  peace  of  the  soul  is  its  rest  ftowaidi 
the  Lord  Gtod  himself.  I  trust  we  know  this,  and  aie  enjoyiw  it  it 
this  moment.  We  are  no  longer  afraid  of  Ood :  the  sin  whion  cutidBd 
ns  fh>m  him  is  blotted  ont,  and  the  distance  wfaidi  it  created  hit 
to  be.  .The  atonement  has  wrongfat  perfect  reoondliidaoQ  and 
lished  everlasting  peace.  The  terrors  of  God's  law  an  eflboteiKf 
removed  iVom  ns,  and  instead  thereof  we  fed  the  drawings  of  hia  lom 
We  are  brought  nigh  by  the  atoning  sacrifice,  and  have  peace  with  God 
through  Jesus  Ohrist  onr  Lord.  We  know  that  all  hia  thoog^  to  m 
are  thoughts  of  love,  and  we  bless  his  name  that  our  tiiovighti  towud 
him  are  no  longer  those  of  the  slave  towards  a  tadmuMfeer,  or  of  a 
criminal  towards  a  jndge,  bnt  thoeeofabdovedohildtowaidBakfaidnd 
tender  father.  Fervent  love  reigns  in  our  hearts,  casting  out  aU  fetf 
and  causing  us  to  joy  in  God  by  onr  Lord  Jesos  Ohriat  TUa  is  s 
great  blessing.  It  is  sorely  a  choice  ddight  fixr  a  man  to  know  thik 
whether  he  prospers  or  is  afflicted,  whether  he  lives  or  diee,  ibeve  s 
nothing  between  God  and  him  bnt  perfect  amity ;  fbr  all  ttiat  oAndi 
has  been  effectnallv  put  away. 

Beloved,  when  the  apostle  wishes  ns  peace  in  the  words  of  onr  text,  In 
no  doubt  means  that  onr  hearts  should  be  at  perfect  peace,  by  farinff 
placed  folly  in  accord  with  the  will  of  God ;  fi>r,  alas,  we  have  knoini 
some,  who  we  hope  are  forgiven  and  are  God's  children,  who  nevortfae- 
lesd  qoarrel  with  God  very  sadly.  They  are  not  pleased  with  what  he 
does,  bnt  even  complain  that  he  deals  hardly  with  them :  tiiey  an 
naoght^  children,  and  carry  on  a  sort  of  soUen  contention  with  (fair 
iM^^fy  Father,  beeanse  he  does  not  indulge  them  in  all  their  winme 
and  fimcies.  Now  may  the  Lord  of  peace  pot  an  end  to  all  iMii 
grievous  warfstre  of  heart  in  his  peoi^e.    May  yon  love  the  LMd  ee  weD 


-I    <  vm  Jwwm  or  FiAO«.  147 

ind  trnst  him  bo  fully  tbat  you  could  not  pick  a  qnnrrel  with  him,  even 
if  he  Btuote  yon  and  brniBed  yon  and  broke  yonr  bones.  Whatever 
be  doee  is  not  only  to  be  accepted  with  snbraission,  but  to  bo  rejoiced  in. 
That  which  pleases  him  should  please  us.  Then  have  we  perfect  pence 
when  we  can  mt^ify  and  praise  the  Lord  even  for  the  sharp  ants  of  his 
rod,  and  the  fierce  fires  of  liis  furnace.  May  the  Lord  bring  us  into 
this  f^tat*,  for  there  is  no  joy  like  it ;  perfect  peace  with  God  is  heaTCa 
below. 

Yea,  brethren,  we  rep.eh  a  little  farther  than  reconciliation  and  sab* 
mission,  for  wo  come  into  t!ie  anjoyraent  of  conscionB  complacency. 
There  are  men  who  arc  at  peace  with  God  as  to  the  for^iveneas  of  iin, 
and  in  a  measure  are  in  nocotd  with  his  will,  but  they  ore  not  walking 
oareftiWy  in  the  path  of  obedience,  and  so  they  are  missing  the  sense  of 
divine  love.  God  is  their  Father,  and  he  loves  them,  hut  he  hides  his 
fece  from  them ;  they  walk  contrary  to  him,  and  so  he  walks  contrary 
to  them.  We  cannot  consider  such  a  condition  to  be  one  of  the  fallest 
peac«-  The  truly  restful  state  of  mind  is  enjoyed  when  the  henrt  and 
life  are  daily  cleansed  by  grace,  so  that  there  is  nothing  to  grieve  the 
%)irit  of  God,  and  therefore  the  Lord  feels  it  right  to  favour  his  child 
with  the  h'ght  of  his  connteniince  in  fall  meridian  splendoLir.  0  bow 
blessed  to  bask  in  the  sanlight  of  Jehovah's  lore,  free  fVom  all  doubt, 
and  having  no  more  conscience  of  siu  !  In  that  sense  of  conscious  favour 
liee  the  rest  of  heaven.  May  the  Lord  of  peace  himself  give  as  thin 
peace. 

Peace  becanso  sin  Is  forgifem,  is  the  sweet  Suit  of  justification — 
"therefore  being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God."  Peace 
because  the  heart  is  renened  and  made  to  agree  with  the  will  of  God  is 
the  blessed  resalt  of  sanetificntion,  for  "to  be  spiritually  minded  is  life 
and  peELce."  Peace,  because  the  sonl  is  conacioas  of  being  the  object 
of  divine  love,  is  a  precious  attendant  npon  the  spirit  of  adoption,  which 
is  the  very  essence  of  peace.  Brethren  in  Christ,  may  this  threefold 
peace  with  God  be  with  you  always. 

Now  we  look  farther  an<l  note  that  this  peace  spreads  itself  abroad 
uid  covers  ofj  Ikituff  with  its  soft  liRbt.  God  is  great,  and  filluth  all 
Ihings,  and  he  who  becomes  at  {wace  with  him  is  at  peace  with  all  things 
else.  Being  reconciled  to  God,  the  believer  says, — All  things  are  mine, 
whether  things  present  or  things  to  come;  all  are  mine,  for  I  am 
Christ's  and  Chi-ist  is  God's.  Behold  the  Lord  has  ma<Ie  us  to  lie  iu 
league  with  the  stones  of  the  field,  and  the  beasts  of  the  field  are  at  peace 
with  us.  Providence  Is  oor  pavilion,  and  angels  arc  our  attendants.  AU 
things  work  together  for  oUr  good,  now  that  we  love  God  and  are  the 
called  according  to  hia  purpose.  No  longer  are  we  afraid  for  the  terror 
by  night,  nor  for  the  arrow  that  flieth  by  day,  nor  for  the  pestilence 
^at  walkoth  in  darkness,  nor  for  the  destruction  which  waateth  at 
noonday.  Behold  the  Lord  God  covereth  us  with  hia  feathers,  and 
tmder  his  wings  do  we  trust ;  his  truth  is  our  shield  and  buckler :  be- 
cause we  have  set  oar  love  npon  him  he  doth  deliver  ns,  and  he  doth  set 
tti  on  high  beoanse  we  have  known  hia  name.  At  peace  with  the  Lord 
ef  hosts  we  are  at  peace  with  all  the  armies  of  the  nniverse,  in  alliunee 
with  all  the  forces  whii:h  muster  at  Jehovah's  biddin^^  Though  we 
Siost  be  at  war  with  Batan,  jH  even  ha  is  nhained  and  iaada  u  a  ilave 


148  URTROPOLITIV  TABDViOUi  rOUff. 

to  accompKih  pnipoaei  of  good  caoMrj  to  hk  own  wilL  Tlmii 
neither  in  heaTon  nor  earth  nor  hdl  anything  that  wo  need  fear  wfamie 
aie  onoe  right  with  Ood.  Settb  the  oenftre^  and  the  oiicnmftraieeii 
secnre  :  peace  with  God  is  nnivonal  peaoe. 

This  practically  shows  itself  in  the  Ohriattaa*a  inwaid  peace  wi& 
regard  to  Aw  prmni  eircmukme$$,  be  they  what  they  may,  Bemgit 
peace  with  Ood  he  sees  the  Loid's  hand  in  everythinff  anmnd  faini,  nd 
»  content.  Is  he  poor?  The  Lord  makea  him  ricK  in  fiuOi,  and  hi 
asks  not  for  gold,  ishesick?  The  Lotd  endows  him  with  pitiflBce,aBi 
he  glories  in  his  afflictions.  Is  he  bid  aside  ftom  the  ho^aerfioeiriubk 
he  so  mnch  loves  ?  He  feds  that  the  Loid  knows  beak  If  he  might  be 
actively  engaged  in  doing  Ood's  will  he  would  be  ray  tfaenkfkd,  and  nn 
with  diligence  the  race  set  befim  him ;  bntif  hemnatlieinihaliospyi 
and  Buffer  rather  than  serve,  he  does  not  wish  to  pnt  his  own  widMabefen 
the  will  of  his  Master,  bnt  he  leaves  himself  in  the  Lord's  haads^  asyiagi 
''  Lord,  do  as  thoa  wilt  witti  me.  I  am  so  at  peace  with  thee  that  if  Ihoa 
nse  me  I  will  bless  thee,  and  if  thou  hy  me  aside  I  will  bless  thee:  if  thoa 
spare  my  life  I  will  bless  thee,  and  if  thon  bring  me  down  to  the  gaavel 
will  bless  thee ;  if  thon  honour  me  amonff  men  I  will  bless  thee^  aadif 
thou  make  me  to  be  trodden  und^  foot  uke  straw  for  the  ^w^a  I 
will  Btill  bless  thee :  for  ttion  art  everything,  and  I  am  nothings  thoa  artiD 
goodness  and  I  am  sin  and  emptiness."  Ulie  sonl  which  thna  haa  peiftet 
peace  as  to  all  its  personal  surroundings  is  indeed  hafqiy)  it  ia  lying  doffi 
in  green  pastures  beside  the  still  watm. 

Blessed  be  God  this  peace  is  mainly  tobe  fonnd  wiAasiifldMlfasto 
its  own  thoughts,  believmffs,  h(q[>ings,  expectations,  and  desivBS.  We  hife 
not  only  peace  towards  the  outer  world,  hot  peace  within.  After  sl^ 
happiness  and  peace  lie  more  within  the  man  than  in  anything  aboot 
him.  Heaven  lies  more  in  the  heart  than  in  pdden  streets^  and  hell's 
flamo  consists  rattier  in  man's  tortured  conscienoe  than  in  the  Trahit 
fire  which  the  breath  of  Qoi  has  kindled.  So  the  peace  wUoh  Jesos 
gives  is  within  us ;  'Hhe  good  man  is  satisfied  ftom  himself."  Some  mink 
are  strangers  to  peace.  How  can  they  have  peace,  for  thev  havo  no 
faith  ?  They  are  as  a  rolling  thing  before  the  whirlwind^  lumng  no 
fixed  basis,  no  abiding  foundation  of  belief.  These  are  the  darinoi  of 
the  school  of  modem  thought,  whose  disciples  set  themaelvea  aa  mtos- 
trioosl J  to  breed  doubt  as  tf  salvation  came  hj  it.  Doubt  and  be  saved 
is  their  gospel,  and  who  does  not  see  that  this  is  not  the  gospel  cf  neacs? 
Forsooth  they  are  recssptive,  and  are  peering  about  for  frMhuf^tooii^ 
long  ago  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  has  arisen.  Such  nnoeicteinfy  snits 
me  not.  I  must  know  something  or  I  cannot  live :  I  must  be  anre  id 
something  or  I  have  no  motive  from  which  to  act.  God  never  meant  us 
to  live  in  perpetual  questioning.  His  revelation  is  not  and  cannot  be 
that  shapeless  cloud  which  philosophical  divines  make  it  ont  to  bk 
There  must  be  something  true,  and  Ohrist  must  have  come  into  tiie 
world  to  teach  us  something  saving  and  reliable ;  he  cannot  mean  thst 
we  should  be  always  rushing  through  hoes  and  into  morasses  after  the 
wUl-of-the-win>  of  intellectual  religion.  There  is  assuredly  some  aaeer- 
tainable,  infallible,  revealed  truth  for  common  people ;  there  mnat  be 
aomething  sure  to  rest  upon.  I  know  that  it  is  so,  and  declare  nnto  yon 
what  I  have  heard  and  seen.    There  are  great  truths  which  the  IjOid 


THS  JKWKL  or  PBAOB.  149 

has  oigraTen  npon  my  very  soul, toiicoming  v.''<ch  all  the  men  on  earth 
and  all  ttie  devils  in  Itell  cnnnoC  sbiike  me.  A.a  to  these  vital  doctrines, 
an  immovable  and  nnconqncmble  dogmatiam  has  laid  hold  upon  my 
soul,  and  thurefurc  my  mind  haa  pence.  A  man's  mind  must  come  to  a 
Bettlement  upon  eternal  tmtha  by  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  GhoBt,  or 
elGc  he  cannot  know  what  peace  is. 

I  would  ask  for  every  one  of  my  brethren  that  they  may  find  an 
KDcborage  of  mind  and  heart  and  never  lea^-e  it.  We  have  been  often 
spoken  of  as  an  old-fashioned  chui-eh,  and  your  minister  ia  said  to  be 
Vltimut  Fuiilwiorvm,  the  last  of  the  Puritans,  a  man  incapable  of  any 
thousLt  beyond  the  limit  of  the  old-fashioned  theology.  I  bless  the 
Lord  that  it  is  even  so.  I  am  indeed  incapable  of  forsaking  the  gospel 
for  these  new-fangled  theories.  Down  went  my  anchor  years  ago :  it 
wad  a  great  relief  to  me  when  I  first  felt  it  grip,  and  it  ia  a  growing  joy 
to  me  that  I  know  whom  I  have  believed,  and  am  persuaded  that  he  is 
able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  to  him.  Pretensions  to 
original  thought  I  have  never  made.  I  invent  nothing,  I  only  tell  the 
old,  old  story  as  God  enables  mc.  "Ah,"  said  a  certain  divine  to 
me  one  day,  "  it  must  be  very  easjr  to  you  to  preach  becaase  you  know 
irhat  yon  are  ^oing  to  say ;  your  views  arc  fixed  and  stereotyped.  As 
ftr  mc,"  he  said,  "  I  am  always  seeking  after  truth,  and  I  do  not  know 
one  week  what  I  may  preach  the  next."  Thus  spak  the  teachers — do 
jou  wonder  if  the  disciples  wander  into  scepticism  ?  Has  the  Lord 
taught  the  man  nothing  of  sure  truth  ?  Then  let  him  wait  tillhe  has 
received  his  message.  Till  he  knows  the  gospel  in  his  own  heart  experi- 
mentally as  the  power  of  Ood  unto  salvation  let  him  sit  on  the  penitent 
form  and  aek  to  be  prayed  for,  but  never  enter  a  pulpit.  What  are  the 
chnrchcs  at  to  tolerate  these  sowers  of  infidelity  ?  Time  was  when  the 
i&tbers  in  our  Israel  would  have  clinacd  from  their  pulpits  those  who 
glory  in  the  nnl.ielief  which  is  their  shame.  May  the  Lord  of  peace 
Dimsflf  give  you  peaee  as  to  your  pi'rsonal  beliefs  and  convictions, 
and  then  when  you  get  into  deep  waters  of  trial  and  sorrow  you  will 
u^,  "Ah,  I  did  believe  the  right  doctrine  after  bIL    I  can  feel  the 

Eip  of  my  anchor  on  the  things  unseen,  I  have  not  been  deceived,  I 
re  not  followed  cunningly  devised  fables,  for  the  promise  is  true  and  I 
feel  the  power  of  it,  it  sustains  and  cheers  and  comforts  mc  under  all  my 
iTiolB,  and  I  know  that  it  will  do  so  even  to  my  dying  hour,"  May 
er^  ti'oubled  thinker  find  the  peace  of  faith  and  never  lose  it. 

Many  mioda  arc  for  ever  rcstleaa  as  to  their  fears.  It  is  a  great  thing 
to  tntjw  what  you  tremble  at,  for  when  you  know  what  you  fear  your 
Uar  ia  lialf  gone.  The  indefinable  shape,  the  mysterious  hand  which 
has  no  arm,  but  writes  upon  the  wall  in  strange  characters, — the  clondi- 
oeas  of  all  things  dreaded  makes  the  mind  more  restless.  But  blessed  is 
the  man  to  whom  the  Ijord  has  taught  his  fear,  so  that  he  knows  what 
he  fears,  and  does  not  permit  his  hopes  to  he  in  perpetual  eclipse. 

Of  this  many-sided  peace  we  must  say  sometbmg  more.  The  Tbessa- 
lunian  church  had  been  troubled  three  ways.  They  had  been  persteuted 
from  loilhoul.  That  is  not  a  pleasant  thing,  but  the  apostle  says,  "  Ton 
Uiat  are  troubled  rest  with  ns."  Now,  when  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
■ays  to  a  jjcrsecuted  saiut,  "  I  am  with  yon :  all  the  evil  which  is  done 
wto.yoH  la  done  nnto  me,  and  yon  an  bearing  it  for  my  name's  sake," 


150  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

then,  beloved,  no  persecution  can  break  the  peace  of  the  boqI,  bnt  rather 
the  sufferer  rejoices  and  Is  exceeding  glad  that  he  is  counted  worthy, 
not  only  to  belieye  in  Christ,  but  to  suffer  for  his  sake. 

Kext,  the  Thessalonian  church  was  annoyed  by  certain  fal^  teachers. 
They  did  not  absolutely  teach  novel  doctrine,  but  upon  a  basis  of  truth 
they  erected  an  edifice  of  error.  They  exaggerated  one  special  truth,  and 
carried  its  teaching  to  extravagance.  They  said,  Christ  is  coming, 
therefore  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  immediately  at  hand.  They  belonged 
to  that  order  of  fanatics  who  are  always  raving  about  "  the  signs  of  the 
times,''  and  pretending  to  know  what  will  happen  within  the  next  twenty 
years.  There  were  impostors  of  that  sort  m  Paul's  day,  and  there  aro 
such  impostors  now.  Believe  them  not,  they  can  see  no  more  of  the 
future  than  blind  horses.  I  put  them  all  together  as  impostors,  whether 
they  are  preachers  or  literary  hacks,  for  no  man  knoweth  the  future, 
and  no  man  can  tell  his  fellow  about  it.  I  care  no  more  for  their 
explanations  of  prophecy  than  for  the  pretended  winking  of  the  eyes  of 
the  Madonna ;  yet  will  they  continue  tne  cheat,  and  will  be  saying,  one 
this  thing,  and  another  that,  that  this  and  that  wonder  shall  happen, 
and  that  terrible  judgments  shall  overwhelm  our  nation.  The  apostle 
would  not  have  tne  Thessalonians  disturbed  in  their  minds  by  fears 
about  the  future.  Brethren  in  Christ,  the  most  terrible  fact  of  the 
future  can  be  no  just  cause  of  alarm  to  a  true  believer.  The  Lord 
comforts  his  people,  and  there  is  nothing  in  his  plans  or  purposes 
which  is  intended  to  disquiet  them.  Ton  may  rest  assured  that  if 
any  doctrine  in  the  Bible  prevents  a  godly  man  from  enjoying  peace 
it  must  be  because  he  has  not  yet  understood  it  fhlly,  or  else  has 
mistaken  its  bearing  towards  himself.  Truth  must  minister  peace  to 
true  men.  All  truth,  whether  doctrinal  or  prophetic,  is  on  the  side  of 
the  children  of  God  ;  how  can  it  be  otherwise  ?  The  apostle  tells  the 
Thessalonians  not  to  be  disturbed  about  the  coming  of  Christ.  **  The 
Lord  be  with  you  all,"  saith  he,  and  if  the  Lord  be  with  us,  what 
matters  it  to  us  whether  he  personally  comes  at  once  or  chooses  to 
delay  ?  We  should  be  looking  for  his  coming,  but  not  with  alarm, 
for  the  fact  that  he  has  come  already  is  a  well-spring  of  delight. 
We  glory  in  his  first  advent,  and  do  not  dread  tlie  second :  since 
we  are  abready  raised  up  into  the  heavenly  places  to  sit  with  him 
by  faith,  what  matters  it  to  us  whether  be  is  up  there  or  down  here,  or 
whether  we  are  in  heaven  or  on  earth,  so  long  as  we  abide  in  him.  There 
may  arise,  possibly  there  will  arise,  wild  fanatics  who  will  c^in  spread 
alarming  news  about  wars  and  rumours  of  wars,  and  select  some'fatal 
year  as  the  end  of  all  things.  Well,  if  such  things  should  be,  if  crowds 
should  go  into  the  wilderness  or  into  the  city  to  look  for  the  coming  of 
Christ,  believe  them  not,  but  sit  ye  still  in  peace  and  tranquillity  of  spirit 
and  say,  ''My  soul  loves  him  and  he  loves  me.  He  cannot  mean  ill  to 
me  whether  he  destroys  the  earth  or  spares  it.  Though  the  heavens 
pass  away  and  the  earth  itself  melt  with  lervent  heat,  my  heart  is  resting 
in  her  Lord  and  knows  herself  to  be  secpre."  Thus  the  Lord  saves  his 
people  fit)m  the  disturbance  caused  by  &lse  teaching. 

There  were  also  in  the  church  disorderly  character,  people  that  wont 
about  spreadine  idle  tales  and  gossiping.  They  would  no^  do- anything 
for  a  living,  and  so  they  set  people  oy  the  ears.    But  when  the  Lorn 


THE   JBWKL  OP   PXACB.  HI 

gives  a  Christian  man  deep  epiritual  peace  within,  he  soon  puts  aside 
the  Bmall  nuisancea  of  idle  tongnes  and  disorderlj  dceda.  H«  refuses 
to  be  worried.  Mosqnitoea  bnzz  an)und  every  Cliristian  chureti,  and 
blessed  is  the  man  who  does  not  feel  their  bite  or  heed  their  buzzing ; 
his  sonl  shflll  dwell  at  ease.  Peaee  from  chnrch  troublers  is  a  great 
blessing,  and  we  ought  to  praise  God  for  it  when  we  are  in  the  enjoy- 
ment of  it,  for  strife  within  the  church,  lite  civil  war,  la  the  worst  of 
wnrfare.  0  to  live  in  holy  love  and  unbroken  concord  in  referenca  to 
all  onr  fellow  Ohristians,     Ma^  the  Lord  of  peace  grant  us  this. 

Thus,  you  see,  the  peace  whicli  is  here  spoken  of  has  many  sides  to  it. 
Slay  you  possess  it  in  all  its  forms,  modes,  and  phases,  and  may  yonr 
spirit  enter  into  the  peace  of  God  which  paaseth  all  nnderatanding. 

n.  Kow,  secondly,  let  as  note  the  speoiaIi  debihablenehs  o» 
PEiCE.  It  is  a  very  great  thing  for  a  sonl  to  realize  perfect  peace,  for 
if  it  does  not  do  bo,  it  must  miss  the  joy,  and  comfort,  and  blessedness  of 
the  Christian  life,  God  never  meant  hia  children  to  be  hke  thistle- 
down, wafted  about  with  every  breath,  nor  as  a  football,  hurled  to  and 
Iro  by  every  foot.  He  meant  ua  to  be  a  happy,  restful,  established 
people.  The  cattle  crop  the  grass,  but  they  are  not  fattened  till  tbey  lie 
down  and  rnminate  in  peace :  the  Lord  makes  his  people  to  feed  and  to 
lie  down  in  quietness.  Yon  do  not  know  the  gospel,  dear  friends,  if  you 
have  not  obtained  peace  through  it ;  peace  is  the  jaice,  the  essence,  the 
sonl  of  the  gospel.  Doctrines  are  clusters,  but  you  have  nevei'  trodden 
them  in  the  wine  vat,  yen  ha\e  never  quaffed  the  flowing  jnice  of  their 
gmpes  if  yon  have  not  pe.icefuHy  considered  divine  truth  in*  the  quiet 
of  yonr  heart. 

Wrtliout  peace  yon  cannot  grow.  A  she])lierd  may  find  goodpnsturo 
for  his  flock,  bnt  if  his  sheep  are  hanted  about  by  wild  dogs,  so  that 
they  cannot  rest,  they  will  become  mere  skin  and  bone.  The  Lord's 
lambs  cannot  grow  if  they  are  worried  and  harried  ;  they  must  enjoy 
the  rest  wherewith  the  Lord  makoth  the  weary  to  rest.  If  your  soul  ia 
always  sighing,  and  moaning,  and  questioning  its  interest  in  Chriat,  if 
you  ore  always  in  suspense  us  to  what  doctrine  is  true  and  what  is 
false,  if  there  ia  nothing  established  and  settled  about  j'oii,  you  will 
never  come  to  the  fulness  of  the  stature  of  a  man  in  Christ  Jesus. 

Neither  without  peace  can  you  bear  much  fniit,  if  any.  If  a  tree  is 
frequently  transplanted  yon  cannot  reasonably  look  for  many  golden 
apples  upon  its  boughs.  The  man  wlio  has  no  root-hold,  who  ik'itlier 
believes,  nor  gnisps,  nor  enjoye  the  gospel,  can  never  know  what  it  ia 
to  be  st^fldftal,  unmovable,  neither  will  he  be  always  abounding  in  the 
work  of  the  Lord. 

We  know,  too,  some  who,  because  they  have  no  conscious  [leace  with 
God,  lack  all  stability,  and  are  the  prey  of  error.  That  doctrine  can 
soon  be  driven  ont  of  a  man's  head  which  affords  no  light  and  comfort 
to  his  heart.  If  yon  derive  no  sweetness  from  what  yon  belieie,  I 
abonld  not  marvel  if  you  soon  begin  to  doniit  it.  The  power  of  the 
gospel  is  its  best  evidence  to  the  soul ;  a  man  always  believes  in  that 
which  he  enjoys.  Only  make  a  truth  to  be  a  man's  spiritual  fooil,  !&t  it 
be  marrow  and  fatness  to  him,  and  I  warrait  yon  he  will  believe  it. 
When  truth  becomes  to  a  proud  carnal  roind  what  the  manna  became 
to  mnrmuring  Israel,  namely,  light  bread  that  his  son!  abhoVeth,  then 


152  XETaaPOLITAV  rABMBXACUi  PUU'IT. 

the  puffed  np  intellect  cries  after  ■omething  more  plewii^  to  ibe  fledi; 
but  to  the  mind  which  hungers  and  thirsts  after  righteonsiMa  As 
gospel  is  so  soul-satisfying  that  it  never  wearies  of  it 

Brethren,  jon  mnsttiaYe  peaoe  for  your  soal*s  wealtiL  What  a  dif* 
ference  there  is  between  a  soul  at  peaoe  and  a  sool  oontJimaBv  tossed 
about!  I  have  seen  one  num's  heart  like  a  oonntiy  whose  hedgjBS  are 
broken  down,  whose  walls  are  laid  lerel  with  the  ground,  where  injga- 
tion  is  neglected,  where  tilling  has  ceased,  when  the  rinea  an  on- 
trimmed,  where  the  fields  are  nnplonghed,  and  all  becann  then  is  a 
perpetual  sound  of  war  in  the  soul,  and  the  sonff  of  peace  is  never  heivl. 
Sudi  a  soul  may  be  likened  to  the  Holy  Land  beneath  Toxkidi  ndsb 
where  no  man  has  rest,  and  consequently  the  highways  lie  waate,  and  the 
gardens  are  a  desert.  But  I  hare  seen  anot£er  man's  life  which  hss 
grown  up  under  the  influence  of  holy  peace,  ftom  whom  Ood  haa  ke|i 
back  the  wandering  Arabs  of  doubt  ana  fear,  and  to  whom  he  haa  given 
a  settled  government  of  grace  and  an  establishment  in  steadbatness  snd 
quiet  assurance,  and,  lo,  that  man  has  been  as  the  land  which  floweUi  with 
milk  and  honey.  As  war  spends  and  peace  gathers  the  riches  of  satbni^ 
so  does  inward  strife  devour  us,  while  Q>iritial  peaoe  makes  the  sool  fet 
Even  as  Paleetine  when  it  abounded  in  com  and  wine  and  oil  ooaU 
nourish  Tyre  and  Sidon,  which  border  thereon,  even  so  does  the  msa 
who  is  rich  towards  God  through  internal  peace  become  a  feeder  of  other 
souls,  till  even  they  who  are  but  borderers  upon  Immannel's  land  obtain 
a  blessing.  Beloved,  I  would  that  every  Christian  knew  ihia  soul- 
enriching  peace  to  the  full.  I  am  sorry  to  meet  with  so  many  who 
'^  hope  **  they  are  believers,  and  "  trust  '*  they  are  saved,  bnt  they  aie 
not  sure.  Ah,  brethren,  in  these  matters  we  must  get  beyond  msn 
hopes,  wc  must  reach  to  certainties.  **  Ifs  "  and  ''bnts"  an  terrible  in 
the  things  which  concern  the  soul  and  eternity.  We  mnat  have  (Wn 
and  unquestionable  securitv  here,  divine  security  applied  to  the  sool 
itself  by  the  Holy  Ohost.  Friend,  you  are  either  sav^  this  morning  or 
you  are  not  saved ;  either  you  are  in  the  love  of  God,  or  yon  an  not ; 
either  you  are  secure  of  heaven,  or  you  are  not — one  of  the  two.  I 
beseech  you,  do  not  let  these  thin|;s  be  in  jeopardy ;  chance  anything 
rather  than  your  soul.  Cry  mightily  to  God  tliat  you  may  have  these 
things  fixed,  certain,  positive,  beyond  all  dispute,  for  then  shall  your 
soul  enjoy  peace  with  God,  and  so  shall  you  become  strong,  naefbl,  «id 


■"ffi 


Now,  thirdly,  we  shall  get  into  the  very  heart  of  our  text  while 
we  consider  for  a  minute  or  two  the  sole  person  feok  whom  this 
PEACE  MUST  COME, — "  Now  the  Lord  of  peace  himself  give  you  peace." 
Who  is  this  **  Lord  of  peace"  but  die  Lord  Jesus,  the  Prince  of  peace, 
born  into  the  world  when  there  was  peace  all  over  the  world  ?  ft  was 
but  a  little  interval  in  which  the  gates  of  the  temple  of  war  were  dosed, 
iind  lo,  Jesus  came  to  Bethlehem,  and  angels  sang, ''  Peace  on  earth." 
He  came  to  establish  an  empire  of  peace  which  shall  be  universal,  and 
under  whose  influence  they  shall  hang  the  useless  helmet  high  and 
study  war  no  more.  **  The  IMnce  of  peace !"  How  blessed  is  the  title! 
So  was  it  written  of  old  by  Esaias,  and  Paul,  the  true  successor  of  Isaiah, 
changing  but  a  word,  now  speaks  of  '*  the  Lord  of  peace."  This  is  he 
whe,  l)eing  in  himself  essential  peace,  undertook  to  be  the  Father*s 


rax  nwiL  or  puo*.  Xi8 

great  Ambassador,  and  having  made  peace  by  the  blood  of  his  cross, 
ended  the  strife  between  man  and  his  offended  Maker.  Tbis  is  he  who 
is  our  pence,  who  hafli  made  Jew  and  Gentile  one,  and  broken  down 
the  middle  wall  of  partition  which  stood  between  us.  This  ia  the  Lord 
who,  when  he  atooa  in  the  midst  of  his  disciples,  gave  them  peace  by 
saying,  "  Peace  be  onto  yon";  and  this  ia  he  who  in  his  departure 
made  bis  last  wit!  and  testament,  and  wrote  thorein  this  grand  legacy — 
"  Peace  I  leave  with  yon,  my  peace  I  give  unto  you ;  not  as  the  world 
giveth  give  I  nnto  you,"  This  is  that  Lord  of  peaoe  to  whom  it  is 
part  of  his  nature  and  office  to  give  peace. 

I  want  to  call  particular  attention  to  the  apostle's  words  in  this  place. 
He  does  not  say  "  May  the  Lord  of  peace  send  his  angel  to  give  yon 

Jjace,"  It  were  a  great  mercy  if  he  did,  and  we  might  be  as  giad  aa 
Bcob  was  at  Mahanaim,  when  the  angels  of  God  met  him.  He  docs 
not  even  say.  "  May  the  Lord  of  peace  send  his  minist-er  to  give  yon 
peace."  If  he  did  we  might  bo  as  happy  as  Abraham  when  Melchize- 
dec  refreshed  him  with  bread  and  wine.  He  does  not  even  say,  "  ilay 
the  Lord  of  peace  at  the  communion  table,  or  in  reading  the  word,  or 
in  prayer,  or  in  some  other  sacred  exercise  give  you  peace."  In  all 
these  we  might  well  be  as  refreshed  as  Israel  was  at  Elim  where  wells 
and  palm  trees  gladdened  the  tribes ;  bat  he  says  "  the  Lord  of  pence 
hrmxel/  give  yon  peace,"  as  if  he  alone  in  his  own  person  could  give 
peace,  and  as  if  his  presence  were,  the  sole  means  of  such  a  divine 
peace  as  he  desires. 

"  The  Lord  of  peaoe  himself  give  you  peace."  The  words  are  inex- 
pressibly sweet  te  me.  If  you  H-ill  think  for  a  minute  you  will  see  that  we 
never  do  obtain  peace  except  from  the  Lord  himself.  What  after  all  in 
your  worst  times  will  bring  you  peace  ?  I  will  tell  you.  "  This  man 
shall  be  the  peace."  To  me  it  has  often  afforded  great  peace  to  think 
of  his  mysterious  person.  He  is  a  man  tempted  in  all  points  like  as  I 
am,  a  man  who  knows  every  grief  of  the  soul  and  every  pain  of  the 
body,  hence  his  tender  sympathy  and  power  to  succom-.  Have  you  not 
often  derived  peace  from  that  sweet  reflection  ?  Yon  know  you  have. 
Bis  person  then  is  a  source  of  peace.  And  have  yon  not  been  rented  in 
your  soul  by  meditating  upon  his  death  ?  You  have  viewed  him 
wounded,  bleeding,  dying  on  the  tree;  and,  insensibly  to  yourself,  a 
wondrous  calm  has  stolen  over  your  heart,  and  you  have  felt  pacilied 
concerning  all  things.  Yes,  Jesus  is  himself  that  bundle  of  myrrh  and 
spice  from  which  peace  flows  like  a  sweet  perfume.  When  he  comes 
very  near  your  heart  and  lays  bare  his  wounds,  and  spoaka  hia  iove 
home  to  yon,  making  you  feet  its  divine  fervency,  when  he  assures  you 
that  vou  are  one  with  him,  united  to  him  in  an  everlasting  wcdloi;k, 
which  knows  of  no  divorce— then  it  is  that  your  soul  is  steeped  in  peace. 
This  ia  an  experimental  business  and  no  mere  words  can  express  it. 
"The  Lord  of  peace  himself  give  you  peace," — this,  I  say,  he  does 
mainly  hj  manifesting  himself  to  the  heart  of  hia  servants. 

Then  notiee  that  the  text  says,  "give  you  peace,"  not  merely  offer  it 
to  yon,  or  argua  with  you  that  yon  onght  to  have  peace,  or  show  you 
the  STonnds  of  peace,  bnt  "  give  you  peace."  He  has  the  power  to 
breathe  prace  into  the  heart,  to  create  peace  in  the  soul,  and  lull 
the  Bpint  into  that  sweet  sleep  of  the  beloved  which  is  the  peculiar 


IM  XlBTBOPOIilTAir  TABWIMWSUI  rUliPlT. 

Sift  of  hearen.    ''I  will  gire  you  tci^"  laid  hi^  imd  he  cmhi  Mid  tKl 
0  it.  • 

''  The  Lord  t$  iviih  you  mU**:  m  much  u  to  laj,  "That  is  whiti 
mean."  I  pray  that  Jesna  may  be  with  jon*  fie  if  be  le  prewat  jot 
must  enjoy  peaoe.  Let  the  aea  rage  and  )et  e^ery  titobeic  of :t(ie  abip  te 
strained ;  yea,  let  her  leak  till  befcweep  eaeh  timbor  fcbaiei  yawm  i 
hungry  mouth  to  swallow  yon  up  qoickj  j^  wbmienm aijiee be  wfli 
rebuke  the  winds  and  the  wavei»  aiil  tbire  will  be  •  mafe  oyupu  ^h 
is  I,  be  not  afiraid/'  is  euoogh  to  oieate  peaqe  at  W9tt..^h^jjWfLiba^ 
know  this  peace  which  Jesus  akme  can  gife.    . 

lY.  Now  I  must  conclude  with  t&  Iborth  heai^ vtiicb  is  aiojrii- 
sideration  of  the  sweep  of  tsji  ifti9B«r--^^Tba  Ixivd  of  pmoa]iuih 
self  give  you  peaoe  always" 

What !  always  at  peace?  Yei^  thai  is  whal  Ihii  MMftla.  dapjixea  tat 
Tou.  May  you  have  peace  given  you  aluHtyi.  f*  WeH»  nv  I IM  mj 
happy  on  Sabbath-days.  I  have  such  peaoe  Uiat  I  wuh  I  ooold  kava  a 
week  of  Sundays."  May  the  Lord  himself  give  jjon  peaoe  sibmifi,  ca 
all  the  week  days  as  well  as  on  the  L^'s  days.  *'  Ini^f  J  1^^  baea 
very  happy  of  late,"  says  one, ''  Ood  has  prqnperecl  QS  aal  everyoBa  hu 
been  very  loving  in  the  family ;  but  I  do  not  know  bow  1  diovld  be  if  I 
had  an  awkward  husband  and  unruly  obildren."  Sistert  i  wiU  tell  you 
what  I  wantyou  to  be, — ^I  would  have  you  restful  upder  all  dzooiA* 
stances, — '^  The  Lord  of  peace  give  you  peace  alwaya."  ^I  eqjoj  audi 
peace  in  the  prayer-meeting,"  says  one.  I  want  you  to  have  poaoe  ia 
the  workshop  also.  **  I  do  have  peaoe  when  I  get  alone  vitti  ii|y  BiU%" 
cries  another.  We  pray  that  vou  may  have  eqpal  peMse  whan  you  an 
troubled  with  the  ledger,  and  fared  with  those  uiipaid  bil]%  aad  didl 
trade,  and  cross  currents  of  business.  You  need  peaoe  always*  Qar 
friends  who  are  commonly  called  Quakers  have,  as  a  roloi  set  na  a  fin 
example  of  cahn,  dignified  quietness  and  peace.  How  nndisbixbed  fluf 
generally  appear.  Whatever  they  &jl  in  they  oerfeainly  exod  in  a 
certain  peacemlness  of  manner  which  I  hope  is  the  index  of  calm  enjoyed 
within.  Numbers  of  professors  are  venr  firetfii(,  ezoitable^  agitafesd, 
hasty,  and  fickle.  It  snould  not  be  so,  brethren;  you  ought  to  ban 
more  weight  about  yon,  more  grace,  more  solidity,  xour  soul'a  albiis 
are  all  right,  are  they  not?  AH  is  right  for  ever,  everything  ia  aigptfd. 
sealed,  and  delivered ;  the  covenant  is  ordered  in  all  things  ipdfqre,  ana 
everything  is  in  divine  hands  for  our  good.  Well,  then,  why  not  kt  us 
be  as  happy  as  the  angels  are  ?  Whv  are  we  troubled  ?  Is  thme  any- 
thing worth  shedding  a  tear  for  now  that  all  is  wdl  for  eUmitji  Our 
want  of  peace  arises  from  the  fact  that  we  have  not  r^^dized  the  fulncM 
of  om*  text.  **  The  Lord  of  peace  himself  give  you  peace  always."  He 
can  always  give  you  peace,  for  he  never  changes ;  there  is  always  the 
some  reason  for  peace ;  you  may  ^ways  go  to  him  for  peace,  ana  he  is 
always  ready  to  bestow  it.    Oh  that  we  might  always  possess  it ! 

Notice,  again,  it  is  writton — "  May  the  Lord  of  peace  give  you  peace 
always  by  all  means"  Can  he  give  us  peace  by  all  means?  I  know  he 
can  give  us  peace  by  some  means,  but  can  all  means  be  made  subser- 
vient to  this  end  ?  Some  agencies  evidently  work  towards  peace,  but 
can  ho  give  us  peace  by  opposing  forces  ?  Yes,  certainly :  he  can  give 
peace  by  the  brtter  as  well  as  by  the  sweet,  peace  by  the  storm  as  well 


THB  JEWEL  or  PKAQE.  165 

as  by  the  calm,  peace  by  Iobs  aa  weU  as  by  gain,  peace  by_  death  aa  well 
as  by  lifp.  For,  notice  there  are  two  granS  ways  of  giving  ua  peace ; 
&od  uDc  is  by  taking  away  all  that  disqitietfi  us.  Here  is  a  man  who  frets 
becanse  he  doea  not  make  monoy,  or  becanse  he  has  lost  much  of  hia 
wealth.  Suppose  the  Lord  takes  away  from  him  all  covetousneaa,  ail 
greed  of  gain,  all  love  of  the  world — is  he  not  at  onco  filled  with  peace  ? 
He  ia  at  peace  not  because  he  has  more  money,  but  because  lie  has  lesa 
of  grasping  desire.  Another  man  is  very  ambitions,  he  wants  to  Im 
Bomeboay,  he  must  be  great,  and  yet  he  never  will  be,  and  therefore  he 
is  restless.  Suppose  the  grace  of  God  should  hmnbie  him  and  take 
away  his  lofty  aspirations,  so  that  be  only  wishes  to  be  and  to  do  what 
the  Lord  wilia.  Do  you  not  see  how  readily  he  rests  ?  Another  man  has 
an  angry  temper,  and  is  soon  put  out :  the  Lord  does  not  alter  the 
people  that  are  round  about  him,  bat  he  changes  the  man  himself, 
makes  him  quiet,  ready  to  forgive,  and  of  a  gentle  spirit.  What  pence 
the  man  now  feels !  Anotlier  person  has  had  an  envious  eye — he  did 
not  like  to  see  others  prosper,  and  if  others  were  better  off  than  himself 
he  always  thought  hardly  of  them.  The  Lord  wrings  that  bitter  drop 
of  envy  ont  of  his  heart,  and  now  see  how  peaceful  he  is— he  is  glad  to 
BCG  otiiers  advanced,  and  if  he  is  tried  himself  It  helps  to  make  him  happy 
to  think  that  others  are  more  favoured.  It  is  a  great  blessing  when 
the  Lord  removes  the  disturbing  elements  &om  the  heart.  Even  curiosity 
may  be  a  soorce  of  unrest.  Many  are  a  great  deal  worried  by  cnrioeity. 
I  have  sometimes  wanted  to  know  why  the  Lord  does  this  and  that  with 
me.  Blessed  be  his  name,  I  am  resolved  not  to  question  him  any  more 
in  that  fashion.  Somebody  prayed  the  other  day  that  I  might  see  the 
reason  why  the  Lord  has  lately  afflicted  me.  I  hope  the  brother  will  not 
pray  that  any  more,  for  I  do  not  want  to  know  the  Lord's  reasons — why 
should  I  ?  I  know  he  has  done  right,  and  I  wOl  not  dishonour  him  by 
cateehisinw  him  and  wanting  him  to  explain  himself  to  a  poor  ivorm. 
This  is  ^^ere  the  mischief  has  been  with  most  of  us,  that  we  have 
wanted  to  see  how  this  and  that  can  be  right  Why  shonld  we  ?  If  God 
conceals  a  thing  let  us  be  anxious  to  keep  it  concealed.  A  Ber\ant  was 
passing  through  a  street  with  a  dish  that  was  curiously  covered.  There 
met  him  a  follow  who  said.  "  I  am  most  anxious  to  know  what  thy 
lord  has  put  in  that  dish,  for  he  has  so  carefully  covered  it."  But  the 
the  sonant  said,  "  Therefore  shouldst  thou  not  desire  to  know,  for  seeing 
my  lord  has  so  carefully  covered  it,  it  is  clear  tliat  it  is  no  business  of 
thine."  So  whenever  a  providence  puzzles  yon  take  it  as  a  sign  that  the 
Lord  does  not  mean  you  to  understand  it,  and  bo  content  to  take  it  upon 
faith.  Wbon  cnriosity  and  other  restless  things  are  gone  peace  is 
enjoyed. 

Then  the  Lord  liaa  ways  of  giving  us  peace  by  making  discoveries  of 
himself.  Some  of  you  do  not  know  as  yet  the  things  which  would  give 
fon  peace.  For  instance,  if  yon  did  but  know  that  he  loved  yon  from 
lefore  the  fbtmdation  of  the  world,  and  that  whom  once  be  loves  he 
never  leaves,  you  who  are  now  afraid  that  you  have  fallen  from  grace 
woold  obt&in  strong  consolation.  Ay,  and  if  yon  understood  the  grand 
dodrine  of  the  divme  decree,  and  saw  that  the  Lord  will  not  fail  nor  be 
diaconraged,  nor  turn  aside  from  one  jot  or  tittle  of  his  purpose,  then 
f  OQ  womd  see  how  you,  poor  insignificant  believeis  though  you  be,  are 


bef 


156  HETROPOUTAK  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

one  Btitcli  in  the  great  fabric  that  must  not  be  snflfered  to  dn>p,  or  ell8 
the  whole  fabric  will  be  marred.  You  would  understand  now  the 
eternal  purpose  ordered  in  wisdom,  and  backed  up  with  soyereign  power, 
guarantees  your  salvation  as  much  as  it  does  the  glory  of  G^,  and  so 
you  would  have  peace. 

Many  a  soul  has  not  the  peace  it  might  hare^  because  it  does  not 
fully  understand  the  atoning  blood.  The  great  doctrine  of  substitution 
is  not  seen  in  all  its  length  and  breadth  by  some  minds.  But  when 
they  come  to  see  Christ  standing  in  the  place  of  his  chosen,  made  sin 
for  them,  and  the  chosen  standing  in  Christ's  place,  "  the  righteousness 
of  God  in  him,"  then  will  their  peace  be  like  a  riyer.  The  grand  tmth 
of  the  union  of  the  saints  with  Christ,  if  it  be  once  understood,  what  a 
means  of  peace  it  is !  He  that  belieyeth  in  Christ  is  one  with  him,  a 
member  of  his  body,  of  his  flesh,  and  of  his  bones,  one  with  Christ 
by  eternal  and  indissoluble  union,  eyen  as  the  Father  is  one  with  the 
Son.  If  this  be  known,  together  with  the  doctrine  of  the  covenant,  the 
attribute  of  immutability,  the  eternal  purpose,  and  the  marriage  union 
between  Christ  and  his  elect,  deep  peace  must  be  enjoyed,  like  the  cahn. 
of  heaven,  like  the  bliss  of  immortality. 

But  there  are  some  to  whom  this  peace  cannot  come,  some  concerning 
whom  the  Lord  saith  **  What  hast  thou  to  do  with  peace  ?  "  **  There  is 
no  peace,  saith  my  God,  unto  the  wicked."  Your  works,  your  prayers, 
your  repentances,  none  of  these  can  bring  you  peace.  As  for  the 
world  and  the  pleasures  thereof,  they  are  destructive  to  all  hope  of 
ueace.  Come  ye  this  day  and  believe  in  the  great  sacrifice  which  God 
nimself  has  prepared  in  the  person  of  his  crucified  Son.  Come  look 
into  Emanuel's  face  and  read  where  peace  is  to  be  found.  Come  to 
the  great  gash  in  Jesus'  side  and  see  tne  cleft  of  the  rock  where  God's 
elect  abide  in  peace.  Trust  in  Jesus  and  you  shall  begin  a  peace  which 
shall  widen  and  deepen  into  the  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  uud^* 
standing,  which  shall  keep  your  hearts  and  minds  by  Christ  Jesus. 
Amen. 


Portion  op  Scripture  read  before  Sermon— 2  Thess.  ii.  iii. 


Hthns  from  "  Our  Own  Hymn  Book  " — 855 ;  417  ;  720. 


Just  Published,    Price  One  Shilling. 

CHRIST'S    glorious"  ACHIEVEMENTS. 

5ct  fort!)  in  isebm  Sermons, 

B-2-     O.    EC.     QF-CJI?,Q-E03Sr. 

"SeUiom,  we  venture  to  think,  has  such  a  **  glorious''  theme  beon  h<indlcd  after 
•neb  a  **  gluri«U8  "  fasliion.  Kvcry  page  drops  fatness :  it  is  a  rare  spiritual  feast. 
All  our  readers  who  ))rocure  Uiis  delightful  pocket  companion  will  thank  us  for 
Mmoonciiig  its  publication." — Thr  CkrUtian. 


k 


Pammoeb  &  Alaoasteb,  4,  Paternoster  Buildincni ;  and  all  BooLidieni. 


THE  STUDENT'S  PEAYER. 

DELIVERED  BT 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THB  MBTBOPOUTAN  TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON, 


0  ih&ll  I  Ulk  or  thy  itOD- 

Whbn  we  seek  any  good  thing  from  God,  we  ought  also  to  consider  how 
we  EOfty  use  it  for  his  glory.  It  is  meet  that  dfairea  for  good  things 
slionld  flow  from  good  motiTca.  Wlicn  the  hoiirt  ia  not  only  pracionH 
but  gratoful,  it  will  laru  to  God  with  double  purpose,  desiring  the 
mercy  and  desiring  to  use  it  to  his  praise.  Tlic  grnce  of  God,  which 
bnnj^eth  eahatiou,  dgth  marrclloualy  whet  the  appetite  for  good  things  ; 
it  doth  more,  it  provokes  an  intense  anxiety  to  glorify  God's  nnme  in 
the  world,  even  before  it  has  imparted  the  ability  to  do  any  good  tliiug. 
Vehement  passion  and  abject  helplessness  meeting  together,  and 
straggling  in  the  breast,  often  lend  to  despondency,  hut  they  ought  far 
rather  to  Btimalate  prayer. 

Directly  we  are  saiea  by  fprace  we  are  eager  after  snpplies  for  onr 
Boiil's  wnnis.  "Ax  iiricl'oni  babes,  deaira  ike  sincere  milk  of  Ike  word, 
that  ye  may  grow  thereby."  This  is  the  fint  stage  of  spiritual  child- 
hood; like  the  infant  who  cries  for  the  bottle,  and  takes  its  little  fill 
and  feoata,  all  to  iUelf,  and  all  for  itself.  There  follows  on  this  another 
yearning,  a  desire  for  fellowship  with  the  saints,  although  we  feci  too 
weak  and  too  foolish  to  enter  into  snch  good  company  as  we  take  the 
older  disciples  to  be,  or  even  to  talk  to  them.  But  I  will  tell  you  what 
we  can  do.  We  may  all  venture  Ut  ask  the  Lord  to  instruct  us  and 
make  us  undersiand  nis  ways,  that  so  onr  conversation  may  be  welcome 
to  his  people  :  and  so  he  will.  "  Wherefore  comfort  yourselves  toyefker, 
and  edify  om  another,  even  as  also  i/e  do."  This  is  the  second  stage  of 
development.  Then  comes  a  third  ^ade;  and  come  it  surety  will,  if  ye 
follow  on  to  know  the  Lord.  "  Tlien  will  I  teach  transyi-essors  thy  ways: 
and  einturs  shafl  be  converted  unto  ihee."  Speakest  thou  not,  my 
brother,  on  this  wise — "Tiiou  hagt  told  me,  0  my  God,  to  covet 
eunoBtly  the  best  gifts.    I  do  covet  them.  Lord,  thon  knowest,  not  to 


158  METROPOLITAN  TABESVIOLB  PULPIT. 

consame  them  upon  idy  lusts,  bafc  to  nte  them  for  thy  sflrrioe.  I  gladly 
wf.I  aLxvpt  ihy  raUnts'as  a  trust,  not  to  trifle  with  them,  not  to  vaunt 
ti.e:u  as  t:.c  coys  n:*  my  vanity,  but  by  thy  grace  as  a  wise  and  faithful 
suwArJ  :o  brir.::  ::;:x*  all  the  profit  and  all  the  interest,  for  I  am  grcedj 
to  cc:  <:.\iii  out  of  all  those  endowments  thou  dost  entrust  to  my  care." 
••  .!/.:.V:  :  ;■"  ::•  '..•*  UrsLvid  the  way  of  ihy  precepts:  so  shall  I  talk  of  thy 

I  w.uli  l.:»Tt-  you  further  obsuTTC,  on  the  threshold  of  our  meditation, 

t:;;»:  ::.vri;-  is  n:-:  rt-a'.iy  any  jmive  duty  a  man  can  be  called  on  to  dis- 

c:...r^..  :i.'  rvsiviisille  orlice  he  may  be  elected  to  fill,  nor  even  any  plan 

or  :  -^r:  •.  s*:  :;j  lays  i:  t  u  his  heart  to  accomplish,  which  does  not  reqaire 

r.. !;«.:.:  '.  r.j  ;;ra::..:i  on  iiis  own  part  to  fit  himself,  to  train  his  facultie.s 

:■::  i  :■.  Jisoiiline  his  ir.in.i.     What  you  call  unskilled  labour  may  pos- 

s:  "y  lo  u:!'.Lv;dl'y  ct^iciv:::  ofllieers,  but  unskilful  labour  is  a  sheer  waste 

o: '.\'.v;;r.     Ik'W  much  more  imperative  the  demand  that  we  should  be 

ti:.:.  -v^U  \v::':i  the  requisite  faculties  and  qualified  by  suitable  instruction 

::'  wl-  i.ivo  ii::y  work  to  do  for  OoJi,  or  any  ofiice,  however  humble,  in 

t:..  s.rvi^o  of  the  grtwt  King!    Zeal  without  knowledge  would  only 

Uin-y  us  :n:o  reokloss  prtsimiption.    When  called  to  t^Ik  of  God'a 

\Vv*::.:rous  works,  wo  oui;ht  noc  to  rush  upon  that  exercise  at  once  on- 

!:::td  and  unproj  anxl.  but  we  should  wait  upon  the  Lord,  that  the  eyes 

of  o::r  understanding  may  bo  enlightened,  that  our  stammering  tongues 

ni;.y  l»o  un^vsod.  and  that  our  lips  maybe  attuned  to  tell  the  noble  tale 

in  graceful  strains.   We  must  first  obtain  for  oniselyes  an  onderstanding 

of  the  way  of  the  Lord's  precepts  before  we  can  make  it  plain  to  others. 

He  who  tries  to  teach,  but  has  never  been  taught  himself,  will  make  a 

sorry  moss  of  it.     He  who  has  no  understanding,  and  yet  wants  to  make 

others  understand,  must  assuredly  fail.    Some  there  are  who  cannot 

teach  and  will  not  learn,  and  it  is  because  they  will  not  learn  that  they 

cannot  teach.    1  believe  aptness  for  being  taught  is  at  the  bottom  of 

aptness  to  teach.     The  psiilmist  had  both.    He  says,  ''Make  mc  to 

understand  the  way  of  thy  statutes."    There  he  would  be  taught 

'•  Then,"  saith  he,  *'  I  shall  talk  of  thy  wondrous  works."    There  he 

would  be  teaching 

In  ^KMidering  the  text,  it  has  appeared  to  me  to  set  forth  three  things, 
first,  the  prayer  of  a  student;  secondly,  the  occupation  of  a  sclwlar; 
and  tiiirdly,  the  intimate  relation  there  is  between  them. 

1.  1  sec  \\\  it  A  student's  pr.vyer.  I  hope,  my  beloved  breUiren 
and  sisters  in  Christ,  that  we  are  all  students  in  the  school  of  Christ^ 
ull  disciples  or  scholars — and  I  trust  we  shall  adopt  the  student's 
prayer  as  our  own :  **  Make  me  to  understand  the  way  of  thy  precepts." 
Vou  know  that  prayer  is  to  study  what  fure  is  to  the  sacrifice ;  I  beseech 
you.  tlurcfore,  join  heartily  in  the  petition  of  the  text. 

The  6tuiitnt\^  prayer  deala  with  the  main  subject  of  tlie  conversation  which 
is  to  be  that  afuiimt^s  occupation,  namely,  the  way  of  God* s precepts.  You 
and  1.  lircthron,  have  to  teach  those  things  which  relate  to  the  counsels 
and  coiiiinandincnts  of  the  Lord.  It  is  not  our  province  to  gnide  men 
in  |:olitics  or  to  tutor  Iheiii  in  science.  Those  things  are  better  taught 
liy  men  of  mark,  whose  time  and  attention  are  absorbed  in  those  proibuuJ 
aud  laborious  i-cscarches.  As  for  us  who  ai'e  Christians,  and  servants 
ist,  our  businorts  is  to  teach  men  the  things  of  God.    To  that  one 


THi  ffriTDxirr's  futib.  159 

Ktic  we  do  well  to  keep,  both  for  our  own  good  and  for  the  good  at 
^ra.  If  wo  have  many  studies  to  engage  us,  onr  thooghts  will  soon 
ipscsttci'cd  ;  and  if  we  multiply  our  pursoits,  we  shall  be  incapable  of 
Dnccntratiii^  all  our  energies  upon  the  grand  topic  which  divine  wisdom 
1^  selected  for  us — "  the  way  of  thy  precepts." 

In  the  way  of  God's  legal  precepts  we  have  great  need  of  sound 
mdersbindiiig,  that  we  may  be  competent  to  instruct  othen.  It  is  well 
D  be  initiated  in  the  law,  to  discern  its  wonderful  comprehenBivencsa, 
piritualUy,  and  severity  ;  to  know  the  way  of  the  law — a  way  too  hard 
D  be  trodden  by  any  mortal  man  so  as  to  win  salvation  thereby.  It  is 
cell  to  survey  tlie  way  of  the  Lord'a  precepts,  to  see  how  esceeding^ly 
iroad  Hiid  yet  at  the  same  time  how  remiirkably  narrow  it  ia ;  for  "  thy 
onamandment  is  exceeding  broad,"  and  yet  "strait  is  the  gate  and 
uuTuw  is  the  way  which  leadeth  unto  life,  and  few  there  be  that  go  in 
beieat."  It  is  well  for  ui  to  know  exactly  what  the  law  teaches,  and 
^t  the  law  designs ;  why  we  were  made  subject  to  its  prescript,  and 
WW  we  may  be  delivered  now  its  penalties. 

Great  need  too  have  we  to  understand  the  way  of  God's  gospel 
wceptfi — what  these  precepts  are  :  "  repent,"  "  believe,"  "  be  con- 
certed," and  the  like ;  to  be  able  to  see  their  relation,  where  they 
(and,  not  as  means  to  an  end,  but  as  results  of  divine  grace — commands 
ml  yet  promises,  the  duty  of  man  but  yet  the  gift  of  God.  Happy  is 
ihat  preacher  and  teacher  who  understands  the  way  of  the  gospel  pre- 
vpLs,  and  never  lets  them  clash  with  the  precepts  of  the  law,  so  as  to 
each  a  mingle-mangle,  half  law  and  half  gospel,  but  who  knows  the 
vay  of  Gods  legal  precepts,  and  sees  them  all  ablaze  with  divine  wrath 
in  account  of  sin,  and  discerns  the  way  of  the  gospel  precepts,  and  sees 
.hem  all  bright  and  yet  all  crimson  with  the  precious  blood  of  him  that 
ipened  ap  for  us  the  way  of  acccj^ance. 

The  way  of  God's  precepts !  Does  not  that  mean  that  we  ought  to 
)e  acquainted  with  the  relative  position  which  the  precepts  occupy, 
'or  it  IS  very  easy,  brethren,  unless  God  gives  us  understanding,  to 
jreach  np  one  precept  to  the  neglect  of  another.  It  is  possible  for  a 
ninistf)-  and  a  teaching  to  be  lop-sided,  and  those  who  follow  it  may 
lecome  rather  the  caricatnres  of  Christianity  than  Christians  bar- 
nonionsly  proportioned.  0  Lord,  what  foolish  creatures  we  are  1  When 
iioQ  dost  exhort  ns  one  way,  we  run  to  such  an  extreme  therein  that 
we  forget  that  thoa  hast  given  us  auv  other  counsel  than  that  which 
s  just  now  ringing  in  our  ears.  A7e  have  known  some  commanded  to 
le  hnmhle,  who  have  bowed  down  till  they  have  become  timorous  and 
lesponding.  We  have  known  others  exhorted  to  be  confident,  who  have 
tone  far  beyond  a  modest  courage,  and  grown  so  preaumptaoua  that 
liej  have  presently  fallen  into  gross  transgressions.  Is  fidelity  to  the 
mth  thy  cardinal  virtne  ?  Take  lieed  of  being  uncharitable.  Is  love  to 
Jod  and  man  tby  highest  aspiration  ?  Beware  lest  thou  become  the 
lupe  of  false  apostles  and  foul  hypocrites.  East  thou  clad  thyself  with 
»»l  as  with  a  garment  ?  Have  a  care  now,  lest  by  one  act  of  indiecrctioii 
hy  gaiTuent  should  be  rolled  in  blood.  Oh,  how  easy  it  is  to  exaggerate 
I  virtne  until  it  becomes  a  vice.  A  man  may  look  to  himself,  examine 
Limaelf,  and  Kcrutinize  all  his  actions  and  motives  til!  he  becomes  de- 
dorobly  sel&sh  j  or  on  the  other  hand  a  man  may  look  to  others,  coon- 


160  HETROPOLITAH  TABKRVACOJI  PULPIT. 

Belling  them  and  caatiouing  thein^  preaching  to  tbem  and  pn&ying  br 
them,  till  he  grows  oblivioiu  of  his  own  eatatey  dqaienraatea  into  hyipo- 
crisY,  and  discorers  to  his  soiprise  that  his  own  heart  is  not  right  with 
Goo.  There  is  a  ''way*'  aboat  the  precepts  :  there  is  a  chime  shoot 
them  in  which  every  bell  giyes  oat  its  note  and  makes  up  a  tme. 
There  is  a  mixture,  as  of  old,  of  the  anointing  oil, — so  mnch  <h  this  and 
that  and  the  other ;  and,  if  any  ingredient  were  left  oat,  tihe  oil  wooU 
have  lost  its  perfect  aroma.  So  is  there  an  anointing  of  the  holf  life  in 
which  there  is  precept  upon  precept  ddlflilly  mingled,  delicately  inftued, 
gratefully  blended  and  grace  given  to  keep  each  of  these  precepts,  ind 
so  the  life  becomes  sweet  like  an  ointment  most  nrecioas  nnto  the  Ijoid. 
God  grant  us  each,  if  we  are  to  teach  others — ana  Ibope  we  shall  all  ii; 
to  do  that— to  understand  the  way  of  his  precepts. 

As  a  prayer,  too,  this  must  certainly  mean, "  Hake  me  nndentsod 
the  way  to  keep  thy  precepts."  It  is  not  in  human  strength,  for  he  tint 
keeps  tne  precepts  of  God  must  be  kept  by  the  God  of  the  pieeepts.  Tb 
keep  the  precepts  we  must  keep  him  in  the  heart  who  nve  the  preoepti^ 
and  whose  life  is  the  best  exemplification  of  diem.  O  Lord,  teadi  ni 
the  way  to  observe  and  to  do  thy  commands.  Give  ns  anch  hnmble» 
dependent  hearts,  so  receptive  of  the  sweet  influences  of  thy  ftririt, 
that  we  may  understand  the  way  in  which  those  precepts  are  to  be  kept 
Does  it  not  signify, — "  Lord,  make  me  to  understand  the  Christian  m, 
for  that  is  the  way  of  thy  precepts  "  ?  Dear  friends,  if  von  are  teadieA 
of  others  you  must  be  experimentally  acquainted  witn  the  Ohristitt 
life :  you  must  know  Uie  sreat  doctrines  which  suf^port  it  and  flurmih 
motives  for  it, — the  great  doctrines  which  are  the  pavement  of  the  md 
along  which  the  Christian  travels.  You  must  know  the  practiod  pre- 
cepts themselves — what  they  are  and  how  the  Lord  has  worded  them 
for  each  circumstance  and  each  a^e  of  the  Ohristian  Ufe.  Ton  suit 
know  the  doctrinal  and  the  practical ;  but  you  must  know  the  experi- 
mental, and  he  is  no  preacher  of  anv  value  who  cannot  tell  ibe  way  of 
God*s  precepts  by  having  experienced  that  way— haviujg^  felt  the  joy  of 
running  in  it — having  tfuiLen  the  precepts  and  been  guided  by  them,  ■> 
as  to  have  proved  that  *'  in  keeping  of  them  there  is  great  rewaid." 
Ay,  and  he  will  be  none  the  worse  t^icher  if  he  has  a  lively  memory  of 
the  bitterness  that  comes  of  having:  wandered  from  those  command- 
ments, for  he  can  tell  the  sinner,  with  the  tear  starting  to  his  own  cjei, 
that  he  who  wanders  from  the  way  of  obedience  will  miss  the  patlis  of 
peace,  for  the  way  of  God*s  commandments  is  exceedingly  pleasant,  M 
tho^  that  break  the  hedge  and  follow  their  own  will  shall  find  that 
their  wilfulness  entails  upon  them  grievous  sorrow  and  sore  pain.  This 
is  what  we  want — to  understand  the  way  of  God's  precepts.     Let  the 

Erayer  go  up  to  heaven,  especially  from  every  youn^  brother  who  is 
oping  to  preach  the  word  ere  long,  "  Make  me  to  understand  the  imj 
of  thy  precepts." 

Very  obviously  here  a  confession  is  implied.  **  Make  me  to  understand 
the  way  of  thy  precepts."  It  means  just  this,  "  Lord,  I  do  not  und<»- 
stand  it  of  myself.    I  am  ignorant  and  foolish,  and  if  I  follow  my  oirn 

4'udgment, — if  I  take  to  my  own  thinkings,  I  shall  be  sure  to  go  wrong. 
jord,  make  me  to  understand."    It  is  a  confession  of  a  good  man  who 
did  uudei-Rtand  a  great  deal,  but  felt  that  he  did  not  understand  all.   In 


THE  BTUDEirr'S  PBAYER.  IGl 

t\m  learning,  he  who  underBtanda  most  is  the  man  who  thinks  he 
nndcrstands  leaat.  He  who  has  the  clearest  knowledge  of  divine  things 
in  the  very  one  to  feel  that  thtre  is  a  bociidless  ocean  far  beyond  his 
observation,  and  he  cries  "  Mrike  mc  to  understand  the  way  of  thy  pre- 
cepts." It  is  a  confession  which  should  be  made  becanse  it  is  intensely 
felt — the  consciousness  of  folly  and  ignorance  forcing  the  confession  to 
the  lip. 

Our  fitndent's  prayer  asks  a  great  boon  when  he  says,  "  Sfake  me  to 
un(Jersfanii."  This  is  souiethiiig  more  than  "  Make  me  to  know." 
He  had  said  juat  before — ■'  Teach  me  thv  atatntes."  Every  Christian 
needs  this  teaching  for  his  own  sake,  but  he  that  is  to  be  an  instructor 
of  others  mnst  especially  enquire  for  a  thorongh  nnderstanding.  Yon 
Sunday-school  teachers  who  take  the  oversight  of  the  children,  and  you 
elders  of  tjie  church  who  look  after  enquirers  and  help  them  to  the 
Siivionr,  yon  must  not  be  satisfied  with  knowing,  yon  mnst  vndrr- 
rlaiid.  A  supeificial  acqnaintanco  with  the  Scriptures  will  not  sufR™ 
for  yonr  important  office.  Your  mind  must  penetrate  into  the  deeper 
meaning,  the  hidden  treasures  of  wisdom.  "  Make  mo  to  iiudtrsfand." 
A  cat«cniam  may  Bn]>ply  right  answers ;  but  we  want  the  living  teacher 
to  give  us  tme  perceptions.  Intelligence  is  not  a  faeulty  of  babes :  in 
nnaerstanding  be  ye  men.  Young  pupils  soon  lose  confidence  in  their 
preceptor  if  he  does  not  seem  up  to  the  mark,  I  heard  two  schoolboya 
talking  of  their  usher  the  other  day.  Says  one,  "I  don't  think  he 
knows  much  more  than  we  do."  "  Well,  he  always  has  to  look  at  the 
book  before  he  can  tell  us  anything ;  has  not  he  ?"  saicl  the  other  little 
chap.  Just  now  as  I  came  along  I  watched  two  babies  trying  to  carry 
another  baby  a  little  smaller  than  themselves,  and  they  all  three  rolled 
down  together.  It  is  pretty  to  see  little  children  anxious  to  help 
their  littie  brother ;  but  when  the  father  comes  up  he  liftB  all  three 
and  carries  them  with  ease.  We  have  not  many  fathers,  bnt  every 
Christian  man  ehoald  aspire  to  that  honourable  and  valuable  estate  in 
the  church.  The  wisdom  that  comca  of  experience  leads  up  to  it. 
"  Make  me  to  nnderataud."  Oh  Ixird  the  children  are  pleased  with  the 
flowers,  help  me  to  spy  out  the  roots :  take  me  into  the  secrets,  let 
mc  know  the  deep  things  of  God.  Help  me  to  discriminate  :  enable  ma 
to  judge  and  weigh  and  ponder,  and  so  to  understand,  Such  reasons 
as  thou  givest  enable  me  to  comprehend.  Where  thou  givcst  no  reason 
teach  my  reason  to  feel  that  there  must  be  the  best  of  reasons  for  no 
reasons  having  been  given.  So  make  me  to  understand  what  can  be 
undei'stood,  and  to  understand  that  what  I  eannot  underetRnd  is  just 
ns  reliable  as  what  I  do  understand.  In  nnderstanding  I  can  never 
find  thee  ont,  0  God,  to  perfection.  In  thy  sight  I  must  still  \x  a  babe, 
though  towards  my  fellow  Christians  1  may  be  a  man.  "  Make  uie 
to  understand." 

I  love  to  meet  with  those  of  the  Lord's  people  who  have  had  their 
senses  cxereised  in  divine  things,  and  their  intelligence  matured. 
For  the  most  part  we  find  disciples  like  babes,  unskilful  in  the  word 
of  righteousness,  using  milk  because  unable  to  digest  Strong  meat. 
Thank  God  for  the  babes,  pray  God  they  may  soon  grow  and  develop 
into  men.  He  who  knows  that  he  is  a  sinner  and  that  Christ 
-Icsns  is  his  Saviour,  knows  enough  to  save  him.     But  we  have  no  wish 


162  METROPOLITAIT  TABBRKACLK  FULPIT. 

to  perpetuate  childishness.  The  spellinjr-hook  is  essential  as  a  primer, 
bnt  not  the  spelling  book  for  ever !  ABC  must  not  be  B\m^  for  ever 
in  wearisome  monotone ;  nor  must  **  Only  beh'eve  "  become  the  erer- 
lastinj^  song !  Are  there  not  other  truths  deeper  and  higher.  There  is 
the  grand  analogy  of  the  faith  :  there  is  the  doctrine  of  the  coTenant, 
there  is  the  doctrine  of  election,  there  is  the  doctrine  of  the  nnion  of  the 
saints  with  Jesus  Christ.  These  are  the  deep  things  of  God,  and  I  think 
we  should  pray,  **  Make  me,  Lord,  to  understand  them."  Yet  the  best 
understanding  is  that  which  aims  at  personal  holiness.  ^*  Make  me  to 
understand  the  tcay  of  thy  precepts"  liord,  if  I  cannot  grapple  with 
doctrine,  do  let  me  know  which  is  the  right  way  for  me  to  take  in  my 
daily  life.  If  sometimes  thy  truth  staggers  me,  and  I  cannot  see  where 
this  truth  squares  with  that,  yet  Lord,  grant  that  integrity  and  bright- 
ness may  preserve  me.  So  make  me  to  know  and  underetana  Lne  way 
of  thy  statutes  that,  if  I  l>e  tempted,  and  the  Tempter  come  as  an 
angel  of  light,  I  may  so  understand  the  difference  between  a  true  anirel 
of  light  and  the  mock  angel  of  light  that  I  may  not  be  taken  in  the 
snaixi,  "Make  me  to  understand  the  way  of  thy  statutes."  May  my 
eye  be  keen  to  know  the  right  in  all  its  tangles.  May  I  follow  the 
silken  clue  of  uprightness  where  it  seems  to  wind  and  twist.  Give  thy 
servant  such  a  clear  understanding  of  what  Israel  ought  to  do,  and  of 
what  he  himself  ought  to  do  as  a  part  of  Israel,  that  he  may  never  miss 
his  way.    This  is  the  best  kind  of  understanding  in  all  the  world. 

The  psalmist  appeals  to  the  Fountain  of  all  wisdom,  the  source  from 
whence  all  knowlcage  springs.  "Who  can  put  wisdom  in  the  inward  parti 
but  the  Lord  ?  Or  who  can  give  understanding  to  the  heart  but  God 
Most  High  ?  Our  parents  and  our  Sunday-school  teachers  taught  us  the 
rudiments  while  we  were  supple  and  pliant  with  tender  age.  We  thank 
them  much,  and  we  esteem  them  highly.  Yet  they  could  only  teach 
the  law  and.  imprint,  if  possible,  the  letter  of  it  on  our  memory,  aftlioujEfh 
even  that  we  oft  repeated  and  as  oft  forgot.  It 'is  the  Lord  that 
teacheth  us  to  profit  by  the  divine  Spirit.  How  very  wonderfully  the 
Lord  does  teach  us.  Some  lessons  have  to  be  whipped  into  ns. 
Well,  he  docs  not  spare  the  rod  for  our  crying.  Other  lessons  can 
only  be  burnt  into  us  as  with  a  hot  iron.  Some  of  us  can  bless 
the  Lord  that  we  bear  in  our  lx)dy  the  prints  of  the  Ijord  Jesus,  that 
he  branded  his  truth  into  our  very  flesh  ana  bones,  so  that  we  cannot  now 
miss  it,  but  must  understand  it.  Into  what  strange  places  God  ^vill  pat 
his  children !  You  have  heard  of  colleges  callea  by  odd  names— 
Brasennose,  and  the  like ;  but  the  most  singular  college  I  ever  heard  of 
was  the  whale's  belly.  Jonah  would  never  have  bowed  his  self-will 
to  sovereign  grace  had  he  not  been  cast  into  the  deep,  compassed  abont 
with  floods,  and  overwhelmed  with  billows  and  waves.  But  the  sound- 
ness of  his  doctrine  was  very  palpable  in  the  voice  of  his  thanksgiyinjr, 
for  as  soon  as  ever  he  came  out  of  the  whale's  belly,  he  said,  '•  Siilra- 
tion  is  of  the  Lord."  A  singular  college  for  a  prophet ;  but  we  may 
be  content  to  leave  the  college  to  God,  and  if  we  be  like  Joseph  sobl 
into  Egypt,  or  like  the  Hebrew  children  carried  captive  into  Babylon,  or 
wherever  it  may  be — so  long  as  he  makes  us  to  understand  the  way  of 
^lia  precepts  we  may  be  well  content.  Christ  taught  only  three  of  his 
^welve  apostles  upon  Tabor,  but  eleven  of  them  in  Gethsemane.     Some 


THE   aXUDEST'S   PEAYEU.  163 

tlioogh  faTonrwl  much  with  high  joys,  learn  more  bj^dccp  boitowb.  Ha 
take^  bat  three  of  them  into  the  chamber  whcro  he  raises  the  dead  girl,  for 
hII  hiB  wonders  ore  not  to  be  seen  by  all  his  followers ;  but  they  may  all 
beliold  him  on  the  cross,  and  lesra  the  sweet  wonders  of  hia  dyin"  love. 
I  would  not  be  Batisfied,  dear  brethren  and  sisters,  without  trying  to 
understand  all  that  can  be  understood  of  the  love  of  Jesns  Christ,  and 
of  all  those  precious  trntha  that  make  up  the  way  of  God's  precepts.  Ho 
is  a  poor  scholar  who  does  not  wish  toleam  more  than  lies  within  the  bare 
compass  of  hIa  task :  a  good  pupil  will  try  to  get  as  much  as  ever  he  can 
ont  of  liis  teacher.  Be  it  your  resoite  and  mine  always  to  be  Icarnin!" ! 
Let  OH  never  be  content  lightly  to  skim  the  wave  or  gently  sip  tne 
river's  brim.  Rather  let  ns  delight  oursolvea  with  diving  into  the  clear 
strenm  of  knowledge.  Revelation  iiwitos  research,  and  it  unfolds  its  choice 
stores  only  to  those  who  eearch  for  (hem  as  for  hidden  treasures.  Oh,  iny 
God  *  I  long  to  giean,  to  gather,  to  gain  knowledge,  I  would  fain  yield 
up  every  hour  I  nave  to  sit  at  thy  feet.  To  thee  I  would  surrender  every 
faculty  I  have  that  I  may  be  learning.  By  the  ear,  by  the  eye,  by  the 
laste  would  I  imbibe  instrnction ;  yea,  and  in  every  season  of  recreation 
I  would  inhale  the  fragrance  of 'thy  wondrous  worJts ;  and  when  I  seek 
repose  I  would  kan  my  head  upon  thy  bosom,  that  I  may  learn  thy  love 
by  the  touch  as  well  as  by  every  other  sense.  May  each  gate  of  Munsonl 
he  filled  with  the  traffick  of  the  precions  merchandise  of  neavenly  know- 
ledge. And,  Lord.  I  would  open  the  inmost  depth  of  my  soul  that  thy 
light  may  sUioe  into  the  most  secret  part!  of  my  nature.  Oh,  hear  my 
cry  !     ifake  me  to  understand  the  way  of  thy  precepts  ! 

IL  Now,  dear  friends,  let  ns  pass  on  to  notice,  in  the  next  place, 
THE  occtrpATios  Of  THE  INSTBUCTED  siAJj.  "When  the  Lord  has 
taught  a  man  the  way  of  his  precepts,  it  behoves  him  rightly  to  use  his 
Eacred  pririlegcs :  "  So  shall  I  talk  of  thy  wondrous  works.' 

As  a  faithful  teacher  let  him  testify  of  OoiTs  works — hia  wondrona 
works.  It  is  a  sorry  sermon  that  ia  all  about  man's  works,  especially  if 
the  preacher  makes  out  our  good  works  to  be  something  very  remark- 
able. Wo  are  to  preach,  not  man's  works,  but  God's  works — not  onr 
own  workB,bnt  the  works  of  our  great  Sabstitutc.  There  aw  two  works, 
eK>C(;ially,  that  you  Christian  people  must  talk  about  to  others — the  work 
of  Christ /ffr  us  and  the  work  of  the  Holy  Qhoet  in  ns.  These  are 
themes  tliat  will  never  bo  exhausted.  The  work  of  (lod  the  Son  for  us  in 
his  life  and  death,  resurrection,  and  ascension,  his  intercession  at  the 
right  band  of  God,  and  his  second  advent — what  a  theme  is  before  yon 
here!  How  great  are  the  works  of  Christ  on  our  behalf!  Preach  his 
substitution  emphatiually.  Let  there  be  no  mistake  about  that,  Letithe 
told  that  Christ  stood  in  the  place  and  stead  of  hispcople,  and  lived  and 
died  for  them.  Moreover,  thcreia  the  workofthe  Holy  Spirit  in  us — the 
vital  interest  and  importance  of  which  it  would  not  be  possible  to  exag- 
gerate.  I  should  not  like  any  man  to  try  and  talk  about  this  divine 
ministry  nnless  he  has  been  brought  under  its  power,  and  been  led  by 
tjpcrience  to  nndcratand  it — the  work  of  conviction,  the  work  of  re- 
generation, the  work  of  emptying,  humbling  and  bringing  down,  the 
work  of  lending  to  repentance  and  to  faith,  the  workof  Banctifirntion,  the 
work  of  doily  sustenance  of  the  divine  life,  the  work  of  perfecting  the 
soul  for  heavsn.    There  is  plenty  of  room  for  blundering  here  if  God 


16i  METROrOLITAV  TABKUVAOLB  PQLm. 

•  ^^ 

does  not  make  you  to  nnderstand  the  wiqr  of  his  preoejpts !  But  if  to 
have  a  good  clear  knowledge  of  what  Christian  lilb  ii,  then,  my  im 
brothers  and  sisters,  always  be  dweUing  on  these  two  things — wlnfcfltt 
Tiord  has  done  for  ns,  and  what  the  Lord  is  doing  lit  ns  when  te 
brings  ns  ont  of  darkness  nnto  his  marvellons  light 

The  wonderful  character  of  these  icorke  of  6M  opens  vsjf  a  study  on 
which  the  devont  mind  can  descant  with  ever  awakening  emotiouof 
awe  and  delight.  There  arc  a  few  things  in  the  world  that  men  mn 
wonder  at.  They  used  to  speak  of  the  seyen  wonders  of  the  wodl 
I  belieTC  that  there  is  not  one  of  those  seven  wonders  whidi  some 
have  not  ceased  to  wonder  at  If  yon  see  them  a  soiBdent  nnadier 
of  times  yon  get  accnstomed  to  them,  and  the  wonder  evaponteSi  Boi 
the  works  of  the  Lord,  and  these  two  works  especiaUy,  joa  mar  tluik 
on  them,  meditate  npon  them,  inspect  them,  enjoy  them,  every  oay  of  s 
long  life;  and  the  result  will  be,  not  a  diminntion,  bnt  an  inereoe 
of  your  wonder.  '*  Thy  wondrous  works  !**  Ood  incarnate  in  tiltt  Boa 
of  Mary  I  Wondrous  work,  this  I  God  in  the  carpenter*s  shop !  Hie 
Son  of  God  driving  nails  and  handling  a  hammer !  Wondroos  woifc, 
this !  Jesus  at  the  loom,  weaving  a  righteousness  fbr  his  people^  cut- 
ing  his  soul  into  every  throw  of  the  shuttle,  and  prodncing  sodi  s 
matchless  fabric  for  the  wedding-dress  of  his  own  diosen  bride  disk 
all  ^e  angels  in  heaven  stand  still  and  gase  at  it,  and  mwvd  hmr 
such  a  fabric  was  wrought  I  Behold  him — God  himself  in  hmsn 
flesh— Hiying,  bearing  human  sin  with  a  condescension  that  is  wooderiU 
beyond  all  wonder!  Behold  him  casting  all  that  sm  into  the  dqiChof 
the  sea,  with  wondrous  might  of  merit,  which  drowned  it  in  the  bot- 
tomless abyss  for  aye  I  Wondrous  work,  that  I  Then  see  him  goiiv 
forth  again,  discharged  from  all  his  suretyship  engagements,  having 
paid  the  debt ;  and  behold  him  nailing  the  handwriting  of  the  ordinances 
that  were  against  us  to  his  cross.  Oh,  wondrons  work  I  One  mi|^t 
talk  tliercof  by  night  and  day,  and  never  weary.  View  him  rising  ts 
our  representative,  guaranteeing  life  to  us  :  see  him  climbing  the  SKiei 
and  casting  a  largesse  of  mercies  amongst  rebellious  men.  Consider  the 
influence  of  his  mediatorial  authority,  the  power  committed  to  himbj 
his  Father,  for  he  hath  power  given  him  over  all  flesh,  that  he  may  give 
eternal  life  to  as  many  as  the  Father  gave  him.  List,  list  ye  to  hii 
pleading  as  the  Priest  npon  the  throne.  What  wondrous  work  is  that! 
Still  through  the  apocalyptic  vista  gaze ;  gaze  on  all  the  glories  of  the 
future,  when  he  shall  come  to  reign  upon  tlie  earth !  There  yon  have 
new  fielcis  of  light  breaking  on  your  ravished  view — fresh  incentives  to 
wonder,  admire,  and  worship. 

And  what  shall  I  say  of  these  wondrous  works  whicli  seem  so  near 
and  so  familiar  to  our  observation,  and  yet  baffle  our  investigation,  till 
the  more  we  scrutinize  them  the  more  amazement  we  feel  ?  The  cbnrdi 
in  the  world  kept  alive  from  genoration  to  generation  by  One  whoee 
presence  was  promised,  was  bestowed,  and  is  now  felt  and  proved  by  the 
saints,  the  blessed  Paraclete,  the  Comforter  whom  Jesus  sent  from  the 
Fatlicr.  By  his  agency  long  seasons  of  drought  and  despondency  hare 
been  ever  and  anon  succeeded  by  times  of  refreshing  from  the  presence 
of  the  Lord,  by  revivals  and  renewals  of  signs  and  wonders  snch  as 
began  but  did  not  end  in  the  day  of  Pentecost    I  never  know  which 


f 


THE  BTUDENT'B  PRAYEB^ -r|j^  IML 

to  wonder  at  moat, — Qod  in  hnman  flesfa,  the  incamnte  Son,  nr  the 
Holj'  Spirit  dwelling  in  man.  The  indwelling  is  as  wonderful  as  the  in- 
carnation. Let  every  gospel  teacher  yield  np  his  onn  sonl  to  the 
wonder  and  gratitnde  which  these  "Kirks  of  God  are  fitted  to  inspire. 
I  like  (o  see  the  preacher,  when  he  is  talking  aboot  these  things,  look 
like  a  man  wondcrstruck,  gazing  forth  on  a  vast  expanse,  lost  in  im- 
mensity, a,s  if  he  were  far  out  at  sea,  trembling  with  adoration,  as  if  the 
I'hords  of  bis  nature  vibrated  to  the  mystery  aud  awe  that  encircle  him. 
There  are  loyely  traces  of  God's  tranBcendent  skill  in  things  minute 
when  peered  at  through  a  microscope ;  but  these  wondroaa  works  of 
God  are  of  another  order.  They  display  his  grander  jiowcr.  Tell  not 
the  old,  old  Htory  as  if  it  had  grown  trite  aJid  trifling  in  yoar  ears, 
:ind  tripped  from  off  your  toague.  List  to  Uie  slow  deep  mellow  voice 
of  the  mighty  ocean  of  grace  until  thy  soul  faints  within  thee.  Then 
Bpcak  in  tones  of  strong  emotion  like  those  of  Paal — "  0  the  depth  of 
the  riches  both  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God  1  how  unsearchable 
are  his  judgments  and  his  ways  past  finding  out !" 

Yet  it  becomes  yon  to  speak  very  plainly.  See  how  it  is  pnt.  "I 
will  talk  of  thy  wondrous  works."  Talk  is  the  simplest  mode  of  speech. 
You  cannot  all  preach,  but  you  can  all  talk ;  and,  if  some  preachefs 
would  refrain  from  rhetoric  and  teJl  their  plain  unvarnished  tale,  they 
would  succeed  better  than  they  do  now.  Do  yon  think  that  Uod  meant 
hiR  ministeiB  to  kill  themselves  in  order  come  ont  on  Sundays  with  one 
or  two  splendid  displays  of  "  intellect "  and  eloquence  ?  Surely  this  is 
not  God's  way  of  doing  thii^.  I  do  not  believe  that  Paul  ever  preached 
a  line  sermon,  or  that  Peter  ever  dreamed  of  any  display  of  intellect. 
I  asked  the  other  day  of  one  who  had  heard  a  sermon  if  it  was  likely 
tfaat  sinners  would  be  converted  by  it.  He  said,  "  Oh  no ;  by  no 
means;  but  it  was  an  intellectual  treat."  Is  there  anywhere  in  the 
Bible  a  word  about  intellectual  treats,  or  anything  approximating  to 
such  an  idea?  1b  there  not  a  country  on  the  other  side  of  the  sea, 
where  tbey  are  attempting  fine  flashy  oratory — sermons  that  remind 
you  of  the  way  in  which  they  finish  up  the  fireworks ;  discourses  made 
made  up  of  blue  lights  and  blazes?  They  call  it  a  "peroration,"  I  be- 
lieve. But  the  way  for  the  Christian— the  real  Christian — is  to  talk  of 
God's  wondrous  works.  Tell  me  the  old,  old  story.  Tell  it  not  stalely, 
hut  do  lell  it  simply,  as  to  a  little  child.  More  glory  will  come  to 
God  from  that,  mora  comfort  to  yonr  soul  in  reflection,  and  more 
benefit  to  the  souls  of  those  yoti  teach,  than  from  all  the  Sights  of 
poetry  or  the  flourishes  of  rounded  periods.  They  that  would  win  sonia 
must  take  David's  words  here,  and  say,  "  Make  me  to  understand  the 
way  of  thy  precepts,"  so  shall  I  give  up  all  the  "  spread  eagle,"  and 
*■  I  shall  talk  of  thy  wondrons  works."  "  Blessed  be  God,"  said  a 
farmer  at  a  prayer-meeting,  "that  we  were  fed  last  Sunday  out  «f  a 
low  crib,  for  we  have  mostly  had  the  fodder  so  high  that  we  poor 
things  could  not  reach  it."  When  i  read  that  farmer's  thanksgiving, 
I  thought  it  very  wise. 

When  a  man  is  instructed  in  the  faith  he  will  often  speak  abont 
these  things.  Such  convers-ition  may  be  frequent  without  being  irk- 
•ome :  be  asys,  "  I  will  iaik."  Preacnipg  it  an  exercise  to  be  under- 
taken now  and  then,  bnt  talking,  I  believe,  ia  capable  of  being  carried 


166  XETROPOLITAK  TABSMAOLS  PVLPIT. 

on  by  some  people  very  nearty  etery  miotite  of  the  day.  Certainly 
few  persons  account  it  a  haroship  to  talk  every  day ;  and  when  God 
makes  ns  to  understand  the  way  of  his  precepts  we  shall  have  the 
gospel  at  our  fingers'  ends^  so  that  whoever  we  meet  with,  we  shall  be 
able  to  talk  to  them  in  an  earnest  and  simple  style  about  God's  salra- 
tion.  I  would,  dear  friends,  that  onr  talk  were  always  seasoned  with 
salt,— that  our  commonest  conrersation  were  bedewed  with  heavenly 
unction,  ministering  grace  nnto  the  hearers. 

But  though  very  plain  and  very  frequent,  the  good  psalmist's  talk 
was  very  much  to  the  point,  and  it  did  not  lack  propriety ;  for  he  says, 
**  So  shall  I  talk  of  thy  wondrous  works."  How  does  he  mean  ?  Why, 
according  to  understanding.  **  Make  me  to  understand,  and  then  I 
shall  talk  like  an  intelligent  man."  May  you,  dear  brethren  and 
sisters,  who  do  talk  about  Jesus  Christ  be  enabled  to  talk  about  him  in 
a  wise  way.  Very  serious  mischief  has  often  come  from  harping  upon 
some  one  string.  Some  men  are  far  more  interested  in  stating  their 
own  crotchets  than  in  unfolding  Gk>d's  counsels.  If  we  understand  the 
way  of  God's  precepts,  acquire  the  language  of  it,  get  into  the  groove 
of  it,  then  we  shall  talk  with  understanding;  and  there  will  be  a 
harmony  and  a  wisdom  about  our  utterances  which  will  be  blest  to  the 
edification  of  the  hearers. 

III.    We  will  close  by  noticing  the  intimate  relation  bbtwesv 

tHE  PBATE&  OF  THE  STUDENT  AND  THE  PURSUIT  THAT  HE  SUBSE- 
QUENTLY followed.  '*  Make  me  to  understand  the  way  of  thy  pre- 
cepts :  so  shall  I  talk  of  thy  wondrous  works." 

The  connection  lies  partly  in  the  enchantment  of  this  knowledge 
and  the  passion  to  communicate  it.  A  man  who  understands  Chnst 
and  his  mediatorial  work,  and  the  Spirit  and  his  sanctifying  work 
cannot  be  silent.  The  fire  once  kindled  the  flames  will  spread.  He 
will  be  so  transported  with  wonder,  admiration,  and  adoring  gratitude 
at  the  great  mercy  and  love  of  God,  that  it  will  cause  a  fermentation 
within  his  breast.  He  will  be  like  a  ftill  vessel  wanting  vent,  and  he 
must  have  it.  As  with  a  fire  in  his  bones,  he  will  exclaim, ''  Woe  is 
me  if  I  preach  not  the  gospel."  I  would  to  God  there  were  a  deeper 
understanding  of  the  ways  of  Gh)d,  fi)r  then  many  silent  tongues  mnst 
speak.  The  theme  iteeif  without  any  remarkable  gifts  on  the  part  of 
the  man  would  suffice  to  secure  the  attention  it  strongly  claims.  As 
the  heart  swells  with  thankfulness,  the  lips  burst  forth  spontaneously 
into  song.  Doubtless  Hannah  would  tell  you  that  it  was  easier  for  a 
barren  wife  to  restrain  her  tears  than  for  a  joyfril  mother  to  stifle  her 
hymn  of  praise.  Did  Jesus  love  yon  when  you  were  all  forlorn  ?  Did 
he  find  you  when  a  stranger,  and  prove  himself  your  friend?  Did  he 
shelter  you  when  a  sinner,  and  shield  yon  from  all  harm  ?  Did  he  die 
that  you  might  live  ?  Dost  thou  know  that  Jesus  is  thy  near  kinsman, 
and  that  he  takes  great  delight  in  redeeming  thee  for  himself?  Let  the 
truth  of  this  but  dawn  on  thy  heart,  and  though  thy  tongue  were  dumb 
before  it  must  now  begin  to  talk, 

*'  Kow  will  I  tell  to  sinners  round, 
What  a  dear  SaTiour  I  have  found, 
m  point  to  thy  cedceming  blood 
And  say,  *  Behold  the  wa^o  Ood.*  ** 


THB  htuubnt's  prater,  167 

TSkj  this  stir  np  aomo  of  yon  who  love  the  Tjord,  and  yst  neror  talk 
tlboat  bim ;  tnitT  it  lead  jon  to  a  holy  searchiDg  of  heart.  Snrelj  you  hare 
not  Buch  an  Dnderstanding  of  him  as  von  ought  to  hare,  or  else  some' 
times  yoar  silence  would  be  thawed,  and  your  words  would  betray  your 
Itroiig  emotions. 

If  I  nnderatand  tlie  way  of  God's  precepts,  then  I  shall  be  fully 
Bimiahed  with  matlar  to  talk  of  his  wondrous  works.  What  a  dreadful 
thing  it  must  he  for  a  man  to  set  up  to  be  a  teacher  of  others  if  he 
fiocB  not  know  the  things  of  God  experimentally  himself.  It  can  bo 
done,  yon  know,  and  done  very  cheaply.  Yon  can  buy  sermons  ready 
liUiogntpbed  and  guaranteed  not  to  have  been  preached  within  so 
many  miles :  price  nine|wncc  eacb.  Yon  can  be  furnished  with  tbem  for 
ten  fihilliags  nnd  sixpence  a  quarter.  But  there  will  be  a  heavy  account 
at  the  last  for  the  man  who  does  that  sort  of  thin^.  It  is  easy  for  yon 
to  teach  in  yotir  class  by  reading  the  Sunday  School  Union  notes, 
getting  np  the  lesson,  and  haTinti;  it  all  in  the  head.  Ah,  bnt,  my  dear 
mend,  how  will  yoa  answer  for  having  taught  children  in  the  Sunday- 
ichool  when  you  have  never  been  God's  child  and  never  have  been  taught 
of  God  yourself?  "Unto  the  wicked  God  saitb.  What  hast  thou  to 
3o  to  declare  my  Btatutci,  or  to  take  my  name  into  thy  mouth?" 
Do  not  try  to  teach  others  what  you  do  not  nnderstand  yourself. 
Go  down  on  your  knees  and  cry,  "  Make  me  to  nnderstand  the  way  of 
Hiy  precepts,  so  shall  I  talk  of^thy  wondrons  works."  Dear  bretliren, 
Hpecially  you  who  are  to  be  ministers  of  the  gospel  and  have  begun 
b>  preauh.  seek  a  deeper  nnderstonding  of  divine  things,  or  else  your 
loinistiT  will  be  lean  and  poverty-stricken.  Unless  you  are  taken  into 
tte  confidence  of  God  and  initiated  into  his  counsels  yon  cannot  possibly 
jiechai;ge  the  solemn  duties  which  lie  upon  the  ambassador  for  Christ. 
O17  mightily  to  be  well  Slled  with  an  understanding  of  the  gospel :  m 
ritall  you  overflow  to  others  and  talk  of  God's  wondrous  wcirks. 

8nch  sound  education  will  clothe  yon  with  authority.  A  man  who, 
fai  his  own  heart,  knows  what  be  is  talking  about,  and  preaches  what  he 
has  tasted  and  handled  of  the  good  word  of  grace,  will  put  weight 
into  every  utterance.  It  matters  bnt  little  what  language  he  uses,  the 
power  lies  not  in  the  garnishing,  but  in  the  truth  itself  which  he  pro- 
claims. It  is  not  the  (xilish  of  his  speech  but  the  ferrour  of  his  soul 
iritich  gives  forc«  fo  his  persnasiona.  Oh,  how  often  my  heart  has  been 
refreshed  by  a  humble  testimony  from  a  poor  man  who  has  talked  only 
■bout  what  the  Lord  has  done  for  him.  What  a  power  there  is  about 
BTperimental  talk.  Dry  doctrine  and  pious  platitudes  borrowed  from 
txioks,  faU  flat  on  the  ear  and  pall  on  the  taste,  but  ho  who  talks  of 
the  things  which  he  has  made  touching  the  King,  has  a  tongue  like  the 
pen  of  a  ready  writer.  I  know  aged  Christians  who  seem,  every  time 
they  speak,  to  drop  diamonds  and  emeralds  from  their  lips ;  one  could 
Irish  to  treasure  np  every  syllabic  they  utter,  not  because  there  is  any- 
hiag  very  ingenious  or  original  in  any  sentence,  but  becauae  there  is 
I  aonnd  of  abundance  of  rain  in  every  word ;  a  divine  depth,  a  sacred 
iweetDMB,  a  leaping  of  life,  even  in  each  broken  ntterance  which  is 
x>m  on  their  lips.  Ton  say,  "  That  man  knows  more  than  be  tells.  He 
loes  not  expose  all  his  wares  in  the  window.  He  has  been  in  the  secret 
daoe  of  oommnnion.    His  face  shines  though  his  voice  falters."     Such 


168  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PUIiPIT. 

tet'whers  may  you  and  I  proTC  in  our  riper  years,  having  light  in  out- 
selycs  and  illuminating  all  who  are  within  the  range  of  our  influence. 
What  God  has  led  us  to  understand,  may  we  be  the  means  of  communi- 
cating by  our  ordinary  conversation,  by  speech  easy,  simple,  unosten- 
tatious, yet  earnest,  faithful,  and  heavenly  minded. 

Brethren,  be  up  and  doing,  teaching  others  what  you  know.  Do  not 
try  to  teach  them  what  you  do  not  know.  As  far  as  you  know  Christ, 
speak  about  him  to  your  kinsfolk  and  acquaintance,  your  friends  and 
neighbours.  Our  dear  brother  and  elder,  tne  late  Mr.  Verdon,  on  such 
a  night  as  this  would  have  been  anxiously  looking  after  anv  person  who 
seemed  to  have  heard  with  thankfulness,  and  he  would  not  have  suflfered 
them  to  leave  the  place  without  accosting  them  in  his  own  gentle 
manner,  and  beginning  to  talk  to  them  about  Christ.  I  want  some  more 
like  him.  He  has  gone  home.  I  pray  the  Lord  that  some  may  be  bap- 
tized for  the  dead,  to  stand  in  his  place  and  fill  up  the  gap  which  his 
removal  has  made  in  our  ranks.  We  want  a  host  or  wise  and  prudent 
Christian  talkers.  I  do  not  know  that  we  have  at  present  any  more 
urgent  need :  people  who  can  talk  in  the  train,  can  talk  by  the  roadside, 
can  talk  in  the  kitchen,  can  talk  in  the  workshop,  can  talk  across  a 
counter,  can,  in  fact,  make  opportunities  to  talk  of  Jesus.  I  want  you, 
dear  friends,  to  ask  the  Lord  to  qualify  you  for  this  service  and  leadyoa 
into  it.  Some  of  you  appear  to  be  marching  backward,  for  you  are  even 
more  reticent  than  you  used  to  be.  I  would  have  you  like  Archuuedes 
when  he  found  out  his  secret  and  could  not  keep  it  for  very  joy,  but 
ran  down  the  street  crying  out, "  I  have  found  it !  I  have  found  it !" 
Come,  break  your  guilty  silence  and  cry  aloud,  "  I  have  found  him  of 
whom  Moses  in  the  Law  and  the  Prophets  did  write,  and  I  cannot  help 
talking  about  him." 

As  for  others  of  you  who  are  not  believers,  I  pray  the  Lord  that 
you  may  give  a  listening  ear  to  the  message  which  I  ask  others  to  tdl 
out.  Here  it  is  :  ''  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners. 
Whosoever  believeth  in  him  hath  everlasting  life."  "  He  that  believeth 
and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved."  The  Lord  bring  you  to  accept  these 
tidings,  to  believe  in  Jesus,  and  to  find  eternal  Ufe.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripturb  Rbad  before  Sermon— Psalm  cxix.  17 — 82, 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Htmn  Book"— 88,  119. 


^eti[0pdtten  i^akmm:!^ 


FOR  WHOM  IS  THE  GOSPEL  MEANT? 


DsLiYEBED  ON  Lord's-Day  Morning  March  25th,  1877,  BT 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

▲T    THK    MBTROPOLITAN    TABERNACIiE,    NEWINGTON. 


Thflj  tiiAi  are  whole  lutre  no  need  of  the  physician,  but  they  that  are  sick :  I 
m  not  to  oall  the  righteooa,  bat  sinnert  to  repentance.** — Mark  iL  17. 
**  Chnst  died  for  the  ungodly." — Romana  t.  6. 
"  God  commendeth  hia  loTe  toward  ub,  ia  that,  while  we  were  yet  einnere,  Christ 
died  far  na.*'— Bomans  t.  8. 

"Thia  ia  a  fiuthlol  aapng,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came 
into  the  world  to  tare  sinners." — 1  Timothy  i.  15. 

Last  Thnreday  eyening,  with  considerable  difficulty,  I  stood  here  to 
preach  the  gospel  of  Jesas  Christ,  and  I  handled  one  of  .the  simplest 
imaginable  texts,  fall  of  nothing  but  the  very  plainest  elements  of  the 

KfpeL  Within  a  very  few  minutes  I  had  a  narrest  for  the  sermon. 
e  oongr^^tion  was  slender,  for  you  know  how  ill  a  night  it  was,  and 
how  little  you  ei^)ected  that  your  pastor  would  be  able  to  preach,  but 
three  souls  came  forward  uninvited  to  acknowledge  that  they  had  found 
peace  with  God.  How  many  more  there  were  I  do  not  know,  but  these 
three  sought  out  the  brethren,  and  bore  a  good  and  hearty  confession  to 
the  bless^  fact  that  for  the  first  time  in  their  lives  they  had  understood 
the  plan  of  salvation.  Now,  it  seemed  to  me  that  if  a  plain  gospel  theme 
was  so  promptly  profitable,  I  had  better  keep  to  the  like  subjects.  If  a 
farmer  finds  that  a  certain  seed  has  paid  him  so  well  that  he  never  had 
a  better  crop  before,  then  he  will  keep  to  that  seed,  and  sow  more  of  it. 
Those  processes  of  husbandry  which  have  been  successful  should  be 
persevered  inland  even  used  upon  a  larger  scale.  So  this  morning  I 
shall  just  preach  the  A  B  G  of  thegospe^  the  first  rudiments  of  the  art 
of  salvation,  and  I  thank  God  this  will  be  no  new  thing  to  me.  Iklay 
God  the  Holy  Bpurit,  in  answer  to  your  prayers,  grant  us  a  reward 
this  morning  after  the  same  proportion  as  last  Thursoay,  and,  if  so,  our 
heart  will  be  exceeding  glad* 

Out  of  a  very  great  number  I  have  selected  the  fi)ur  texts  which  I  have 

read  just  to  set  K)rth  the  truth  that  the  mission  of  our  Lord  related  to 

nnners.    What  did  Christ  come  into  the  world  for  ?    For  whom  did  he 

come  ?    These  are  questions  of  the  greatest  importance,  and  they  are 

No.  1,845. 


;:»  ;;.TROPOLITAX  TABHBKACLE  PL'hPIT. 

dear IV  aii>wiTL'vl  in  Script uro.  When  the  children  of  Israel  first  fonnd 
manna  .>u:side  the  camp  they  said  to  one  another,  "  ^fanua  ?  "  or,  what  is 
it  ?  Wy  thi.y  wist  not  what  it  was.  There  it  lay,  a  small  round  thinir,  as 
pniaii  :■>  t'lo  hoar  frost  upon  the  ground.  No  doubt  they  looked  at  it 
and  rnl'livd  it  in  their  hands,  and  smelt  it,  but  how  glad  they  were  when 
^Io>'  s  said,  "  This  is  the  bread  which  the  Lord  has  given  you  to  eat." 
Tht  y  W..1V  not  lonir  lx>k»ro  they  put  the  good  news  to  the  test,  for  each 
man  irat Ik-red  his  omer  full  and  took  it  home,  and  prepared  it  according 
to  ]\\<  likin^r.  Now,  concerning  the  gospel,  there  are  many  who  might 
cail  lUt  "  Manna  r  '*  for  they  know  not  what  it  is.  Very  frequently,  too 
tlk y  make  a  mistake  as  to  its  l»earing3  and  its  olijects,  dreaming  that  it 
is  ;i  kind  vt'  improved  law,  or  an  easier  system  of  salvation  by  works ;  and 
lull -o  rhoy  err  also  in  their  idea  of  the  persons  for  whom  it  is  designed. 
Tiirv  i:n:iLriiio  that  surelv  the  blessiiisrs  of  salvation  must  be  meant  for 
dosor\  iiiLT  persons,  and  Christ  must  be  the  Redeemer  of  the  meritorious. 
On  ;:i-.^  ji\:icinle  of  "^"ood  for  the  good"  they  infer  that  grace  is  for  the 
oxi\  l!eni  aiut  Christ  for  the  virtuous.  Hence  it  is  a  most  useftil  thing 
for  r.s  eoiuinually  to  be  reminding  men  what  the  gospel  is,  and  for  whom 
it  issiui  into  the' world  :  for.  though  the  great  mass  of  you  know  full  well, 
and  do  not  need  to  ho  told,  yet  there  are  multitudes  around  us  who  pei-sist 
in  gra\e  mistakes,  and  need  to  be  instructed  over  and  over  agfiin  in  the 
verv  si:v.;'le>t  of  the  doctrines  of  grace.  Tliere  is  less  nocd  for  laborious 
oxphsuauons  of  profound  mysteries  than  for  simple  explanations  of  plain 
trmli<.  Many  men  need  only  a  simple  latchkey  to  lift  the  latch  and 
open  [he  iliH)r  of  faith,  and  such  a  key  I  hope  God's  infinite  mercy  may 
i.ut  inio  ihtir  hands  this  morning.  Our  business  is  to  show  that  the 
gospel  is  intended  for  sinners,  that  it  has  an  eye  to  guilty  persons ;  that 
ft  is  not  sent  into  the  world  as  a  reward  for  the  good  and  for  the  excel- 
lent, ov  for  tliose  who  think  they  have  any  measure  of  fitness  or  pre- 
paration  for  the  divine  fiwour ;  but  that  it  is  intended  for  law  breakers, 
for  the  undeserving,  for  the  ungodly,  for  those  who  liave  gone  astray 
like  lost  shceii,or  left  their  father's  house  like  the  prodigal.  Christ  died 
to  save  sinnei-s,  and  he  justifieth  the  ungodly.  The  truth  is  plain 
enough  in  the  Word,  but  since  the  human  heart  kicks  against  it  we  will 
the  more  earnestly  insist  upon  it. 

First,  kvi:n  a  surKUFiciAL  glance  at  our  Lord's  mission  auFFiCRS 
TO  SHOW  THAT  ins  WORK  WAS  Fou  THE  sixFiFL.  Por,  dear  brethren, 
the  (/fsrrnf  of  the  i^ti  of  God  info  this  irorhl  as  a  Saviour  implied  that 
men  needed  to  be  delivered  from  a  gi-eat  evil  by  a  divine  hand.  The 
coming  of  a  Saviour  who  should  by  his  death  provide  pardon  for  human 
sin  sni>pn.sed  men  to  be  greatly  guilty,  and  to  be  incapable  of  procuring 
pardon  by  any  doings  of  tlicir  own.  You  would  never  have  seen  a 
Saviour  if  tlierc  had  not  been  a  fall.  Eden's  withering  was  a  necessary 
preface?  to  Oethsemane's  groaning.  You  would  never  have  heard  of  a 
cross  and  a  bleeding  Saviour  on  it  if  you  had  not  first  heard  of  the  tree 
of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  and  of  a  disobedient  hand  which 
piurked  I  he  forbidden  iruit.  If  the  mission  of  our  Lord  did  not  refer 
<o  the  guilty  it  was  an  unnecessary  errand  altogether,  so  far  as  wec^m 
fioe.  AVhat  justifies  the  incarnation  excei)t  man's  ruin  ?  What  exi^lains 
pr  Lord's  suffering  life  but  man's  guilt?     Alx)ve  all,  what  explains  his 

th  and  the  cloud  under  which  he  died  Imt  human  sin  ?    '*  All  wo  like 


7DR  WHOM  IS  1I1B  OOSPBL  HKAHT  ?  171 

she«p  have  gone  astray,  and  the  Lord  hntti  laid  on  him  the  iaiqtiity  of 
ns  all " — that  ia  the  answer  tu  iiu  otliei-wiet  unanaworable  riddle. 

If  we  giTc  a  g-lance  at  the  covemml  wider  which  our  Lord  canie  we  soon 
perceive  that  its  bearing  is  towards  gniltj  men.  The  bleasin^  of  the 
coTenant  of  works  has  lo  do  with  men  who  arc  innocent,  and  to  them 
it  prom ise 8  great  blessinga.  If  there  had  been  salvation  by  works  it  would 
have  been  by  the  law,  for  the  law  is  upright  and  just  and  good ;  but 
the  new  covenant  evidently  deals  with  sinners,  for  it  does  not  speak  of 
the  reward  of  merit,  but  it  freely  piomises,  *'  I  will  be  merciful  U>  their 
nnrighteonaness,  and  their  sins  ana  their  iniquities  will  I  remember  oo 
more."  -  If  there  had  been  no  Bine  and  iniquities,  and  no  no  righteousness, 
then  there  had  been  no  need  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  of  which  Christ  is 
the  messenger  and  the  ambassador.  The  slightest  glimpee  at  our  Lord's 
official  character  as  the  Adam  of  a  new  covenant  ahoald  suffice  to  ooa- 
TiDce  ns  that  his  errand  is  to  guilty  men.  Uoses  comes  to  show  how 
the  holy  should  behave,  but  Jesus  comes  to  reveal  how  the  unholy  may 
be  cleansed. 

Whenever  we  hear  the  mission  of  Ghriat  spoken  of  it  is  described  as 
one  0/  mtrcij  and  of  grace.  In  the  i-edemption  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus 
it  is  always  the  nicrcy  of  God  that  is  extolled — according  to  his  mercy 
he  saved  us.  He  for  Christ's  sake,  according  to  his  abundant  mercy, 
forgiveth  na  oar  trespasses.  "  The  law  was  given  by  Moees,  but  grace 
and  truth  by  Jesos  Christ."  "  The  grace  of  God,  and  the  gift  by 
grace,  which  is  by  one  man  Jesns  Christ,  hath  sbonnded  unto  many.'' 
The  apostle  Paul,  who  most  fully  c:(roandeth  the  gospel,  makes  grace  to 
be  the  one  word  upon  which  he  rings  the  changes ;  "  where  sin  abounded 
grace  did  mnch  more  abound."  "  Bv  grace  are  ye  saved,  through  faith, 
and  that  not  of  yourselves,  it  is  the  gift  of  God."  "  Grace  reigns 
through  rightconsuesB  unto  eternal  life,  by  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord," 
But,  brethren,  mercy  implies  sinfulness:  there  can  be  no  mercy  ex- 
tended to  the  juBt,  fur  justice  itself  secures  every  good  thing  to  them. 
Grace,  too,  can  only  be  for  offenders.  What  grace  is  wanted  by  those 
who  have  kept  the  law,  and  deserved  well  at  Jehovah's  hands  ?  To 
them  eternal  hfe  would  be  a  matter  of  debt,  a  fairly  earned  reward ; 
but  when  you  talk  of  grace  you  at  once  shut  ont  merit  and  introdnce 
another  principle.  Mercy  can  only  !«  exercised  where  there  is  sin,  and 
grace  cannot  be  manifested  except  £0  the  undeserving.  This  is  plain 
enough,  and  yet  the  whole  tcitor  of  some  men's  religion  is  based  on 
another  theory. 

The  fact  is,  when  we  begin  to  study  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God 
we  see  that  t^  turns  its  face  alirai/B  lowardt ain,  even  as  aphygician 
looks  towards  disease,  or  as  charity  looks  toworde  distress.  Tne  gospel 
issues  its  invitations ;  but  what  are  the  invitations  ?  Are  they  not  ad- 
dressed to  those  who  are  burdened  y<iib  a  load  of  sin,  and  labouring  to 
escape  from  its  consequences  ?  It  iuvit«e  every  creature  because  every 
creature  has  its  needs,  but  it  specially  says  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his 
way  and  the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts."  It  invites  the  man  who 
has  no  money,  or,  in  other  words,  no  merit.  It  calls  to  those  who  arc 
needy,  and  thirsty,  and  poor,  and  naked,  and  all  these  are  but  used  as 
figures  of-fitates  produced  by  sin.  The  very  gifts  of  the  gospel  imply  sin ; 
Ii&  is  for  the  dead,  sight  is  for  the  bliHa,  liberty  is  for  the  captives, 


f 


172  XnROPOLITiJr  TABIRTACLI  FUUPtT. 

cleatiaing  is  for  the  filthy,  abflolotion  is  fbr  tiw  riofkiL  No  gopel 
blessine  is  proposed  as  a  reward^  and  no  invitatkm  ia  unied  to  those  no 
claim  the  blessings  of  grace  as  a  matter  of  right ;  men  are  invited  to 
come  and  receive  them  freely  according  to  the  grace  of  Gtod.  And  what 
are  the  commands  of  the  gospel  ?  Recent,  ftit  who  lepenteth  nve  a 
sinner  ?  Believe.  But  l:^lieving  is  not  according  to  the  law ;  the  kw 
speaks  only  of  doing.  Believing  has  to  do  with  Binners^  and  wifli  the 
method  of  salvation  by  grace. 

The  gospel  representatione  of  Uee^  vsmOy  look  tinnortamtL  The 
great  king  who  makes  a  feast  finds  not  a  goest  to  sit  at  the  taUe  amooff 
those  who  were  naturally  expected  to  come,  bat  from  the  highwaji  aod 
hedges  men  arc  compelled  to  come  in.  If  the  gosml  deooribeo  itnlf 
as  a  feast  it  is  a  great  feast  for  the  blind,  the  halt^  and  iho  Imms 
if  it  describes  itself  as  a  fountain  it  is  a  foontain  opened  Jhr  rin 
and  for  nncleanness.  Everywhere,  in  ail  that  it  does  and  wja  nd 
provides  to  men,  the  gospel  proves  itself  to  be  the  flinner^B  ftfenl 
The  motto  of  its  Foonder  and  Ijord  still  is  ''this  man  notmA 
sinners."  The  gospel  is  an  hospital  for  the  sick,  none  bat  the  gifltf 
will  ever  accept  its  benefits  ;  it  is  medicine  for  tiie  dis^Med^  the  wIkmi 
and  the  self-righteous  will  never  relish  its  savins^  dzai^htB.  Thoie  who 
imagine  that  they  have  some  excellence  before  God  will  never  core  to  be 
saved  by  sovereign  grace.  The  gosjpel,  I  say,  looks  ainnerward.  Ihat 
way  and  that  way  only  doth  it  cast  its  blessing 

And  brethren,  ye  know  that  the  gospel  has  always  found  its  grsaM 
trophies  amongst  (he  most  sinful:  it  enlists  its  best  soldieni  not  ool^ 
from  amongst  the  guilty  but  m>m  amongst  the  moet  goOty,  **9laaM} 
said  our  l^rd,  **  I  have  somewhat  to  say  nnto  theiH— A  oertam  Mia 
had  two  debtors,  the  one  owed  him  five  hundred  pence,  and  the  <^6bm 
fifty,  and  when  they  had  nothing  to  pay  he  frankly  fov^ve  iihen&  belL 
Tell  me  therefore,  which  of  them  will  love  him  most?'*  The  .go9sl 
goes  upon  the  principle  that  he  who  has  had  much  feigivea  thi  IMM 
loveth  much,  and  so  its  gracious  Lord  delights  to  aede  oat'tto  mSKt 
guilty  and  to  manifest  himself  to  them  with  abundant  and  ovorflbwiag 
love,  saying  **  I  have  blotted  out  thy  sins  like  a  dond,  and  like  a 
thick  cloud  thy  transgressions."  Among  great  transgresaaira  it  finds 
its  warmest  lovers  when  once  it  has  saved  ^em,  from  tbeee  it  MooivM 
the  heartiest  welcome  and  in  them  it  obtains  the  moat  nnflmiilartn 
adherents.  Great  sinners  when  saved  crown  free  giaoe  with  ibi  oioat 
illustrious  diadems.  Well  may  we  be  sure  that  it  has  its  eye  towatda  shi- 
ners, since  it  is  amongst  the  chief  of  sinners  that  it  finds  ita  highest  gkny. 

There  is  one  other  reflection  which  also  lies  very  near  the  aimce^ 
namely,  that  if  the  gospel  do  not  look  towards  stnners,  io  wksm  sbs 
could  it  look  f  There  seems  to  have  been  a  revival  lately  of  the  oid 
cavilling  spirit,  so  that  proud  Pharisees  constantly  toll  us  that  the  preach- 
ing of  justification  by  faith  is  overdone,  and  that  we  are  leadingpeople 
to  think  less  of  morality  by  preaching  up  the  grace  of  God.  Thia  oft 
refuted  objection  is  coming  ibrth  again,  becanse  Proteatantism  ia  losing 
its  sap  and  soul.  The  very  force  and  backbone  of  the  Reformers*  teadiing 
was  that  great  doctrine  of  grace,  that  salvation  is  not  of  works  bat  of  the 
grace  of  God  alone ;  and  because  men  are  getting  away  from  the'Beforma- 
tion,  and  drifting  into  Romanism,  they  are  casting  into  the  backgroond 


X»  WXW-JB  THE  QOBPEI.  HBAFT?  173 

'»  mod  taaUi  ef  jOBtification  by  faith  alone,  and  preteoiing  to  be 
aiaof  it.  Soto,  ^laTu  and.  fot^  that  tnoat  men  are  upon  thie  matter  1 1^ 
iMto  all  BRCii  this  one  qneation— To  whom,  sin,  wonid  the  goBpelr" 
ik  if  not  (owardft  siimeiB,  for  what  are  toq  bnt  sinneTg  ?  Ton  wlio 
k  about  morality  being  injured,  about  holiness  being  ignored,  what 
vc  ym  to  Jo  with  uitlier?  The  people  who  uauaily  urge  these  ob- 
itions,  as  a  rule,  had  better  be  quiet  oil  such  topics.  In  general  these 
pce  defenders  of  monility  and  hghoBBS  are  exceedingly  lax,  while 
lievers  in  the  grace  of  God  are  frequently  charged  wifli  Puritanism 
d  rigidity.  He  who  stands  out  most  to  speak  against  the  doctrines  of 
»ce  IS  frequently  the  man  who  needs  grace  moat,  while  the  very  man 
10  cries  down  good  works  as  a  ground  of  trust  is  just  the  pewon  wiiose 
J  is  carefully  directed  by  the  statutes  of  the  Lord.  Know  ye,  0  men, 
at  there  lives  not  on  the  face  of  the  earth  a  man  upon  whom  God  can 
•k  with  pleasure  if  he  consider  that  man  on  the  gromid  of  his  law, 
rhcy  are  all  goue  out  of  the  way,  they  are  altogether  become  unprofit- 
le ;  there  is  none  that  doeth  good,  no  not  one," — not  one  heart  is 
ind  and  right  before  God  by  nature,  not  one  life  is  pure  and  clean 
len  the  Lord  comes  to  examine  it  with  his  all-aearching  eye.  We 
I  Bhut  i^  in  the  same  prison  as  all  guilty :  if  uct  alike  guilty,  yet 
iltjr  according  to  the  proportion  of  our  light  and  knowledge,  and  each 
»  justly  condemned,  for  we  have  erred  in  heart  and  have  not  loved 
!  Lord.  To  whom,  then,  could  the  gospel  look  if  it  did  not  cast  its  i 
!B  sinnerward  ?  For  whom  else  could  the  Saviour  have  died?  Who  is  ' 
Te  in  the  world  for  whom  the  benefits  of  grace  could  be  designed  ?  ^ 
H.  Secondly,  the  more  cixjsbly  wk  look  the  mobe  oleau  this 
TT  BECOMEa,  for,  brethren,  f/«  work  of  salvation  teas  certainly  noiptr- 
medfor  any  one  of  ]is  who  are  saved  on  account  of  rmy  goodness  in  %is. 
there  be  any  goodness  in  us,  it  was  put  there  by  the  grace  of  God,  and 
KTtainly  was  not  there  when  first  the  bowels  of  Jehovah's  love  began 
move  towards  us.  If  you  take  the  first  ensign  of  salvation  that  was 
nally  \iaible  on  earth,  namely,  the  coming  of  Christ,  we  ai-c  told  con- 
ning it  that "  when  we  were  yet  without  strength,  in  due  time  Christ 
d  for  the  ungodly.  For  scarcely  for  a  righteous  man  will  one  die  : 
■  persdventure  for  a  good  man  some  would  even  dare  to  die.  But 
d  conunendeth  his  love  toward  us,  in  that,  while  wo  were  yet  sinners, 
riat  died  for  us,"  So  that  our  redemption,  my  brother,  was  effected 
ore  we  were  bom.  This  was  the  fruit  of  the  Father's  great  love 
'herewith  he  loved  us,  even  when  we  were  dead  in  sins."  There  was 
ihing  in  us  going  before  which  could  have  merited  that  redemption, 
[eed  the  very  idea  of  meriting  the  death  of  Jesus  is  absurd  and  bhis- 
>mous.  Tes.  and  when  we  were  living  in  sin  and  loving  it,  there 
re  preparatioiiB  made  for  oOr  salvation ;  divine  love  wae  busy  on  our 
lalf  when  we  were  busy  in  rebellion.  The  gospel  was  brought  near 
ne,  earnest  hearts  were  set  a-praying  for  us,  the  text  was  written 
ich  would  convert  us ;  and  as  I  have  already  said,  the  blood  was 
It  which  cleanses  us,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  was  given,  who  should 
ew  UB.  All  this  was  done  while  as  yet  we  had  no  breathings  of  sonl 
ir  God.  Is  not  that  a  wonderful  passage  in  Ezekiel,  where  the  Lord 
sed  by  and  saw  the  helpless  infant  cast  out  in  the  open  field  while  it 
1  yet  nnswaddled  saA  unwashed,  but  was  foul  and  polluted  in  its  own 


171  insTBOPOLrrijr  tabibvaou  fuuit. 

blood  ?  He  sajs  thafc  it  was  a  time  of  bTe,  and  yet  it  wai  a  timi  of 
pollution  and  loathing.  He  did  not  loYe  the  chosen  babe  beoMM  itm 
well  washed  and  fitly  clad,  bnt  he  loved  it  when  it  was  fi>nl  and  mdni 
Let  every  believing  heart  admire  the  freeness  and  ocMnpaaakm  iit^nm 
love. 

**  He  saw  me  rainM  in  the  fidl. 
Yet  lored  me,  notwithstanding  all ; 
He  flSTed  me  from  my  lost  estate^ 
His  loTing^kindneifl,  oh,  how  greatl** 

When  thy  heart  was  hard,  when  thy  neck  was  obstinate,  when  thoa 
wouldst  not  repent  nor  ^ield  to  him  bnt  rebelled  yet  more  and  moRLJb 
loved  thee,  even  thee,  with  supreme  alKction.  Why  soch  grace  ?  W^ 
indeed,  but  because  his  nature  is  fnll  of  goodness  and  be  delightefli  n 
mercy.  Is  not  mercy  seen  to  be  evidently  extended  towaida  uie  amftd 
and  not  exerted  because  of  some  goodness  moving  thereto  ? 

Look  a  little  closer  still.     Whai  did  our  Lard  cam$  Mo  fils  wmU  U 
do  f    Here  is  the  answer.  *'  He  was  wonnded  for  our  tranagroiBioM^  he 
was  bmised  for  our  iniquities :  the  chastisement  of  onr  peaoe  waa  imon 
him ;  and  with  his  stripes  we  are  healed."    He  came  that  he  mighft  be 
a  sin-bearer :  and  do  yon  think  he  came  to  bear  only  the  litUe^  triflfa^ 
sins  of  the  best  sort  of  men,  if  such  sins  there  be  ?    Do  yoa  nqppose 
that  he  is  a  little  Saviour,  who  came  to  save  ns  from  little  offionoes? 
Beloved,  it  is  Jehovah's  darling  Son  that  comes  to  earth  and  bears  the 
load  of  sin,  a  load  which,  when  he  bears  it,  he  finds  to  be  no  fictitiovi 
burden,  for  it  forces  from  him  the  bloody  sweat.    So  heayr  is  that  load 
that  he  bows  his  head  to  the  grave,  and  even  nnto  death,  beneath  it 
That  stupendous  load  which  lay  on  Christ  was  the  heap  of  onr  sins; 
and  hence  as  we  look  into  the  subject  we  perceive  that  tm  gond  most 
have  to  do  with  sinners.    No  sin !    Then  is  the  cross  a  mistua    Ho 
sin !    Then  the  lama  sahachthani  was  a  just  complaint  against  nnneoes- 
sary  cruelty.  No  sin !  Then,  0  Redeemer,  what  are  those  gloriea  which 
wo  have  so  eagerly  ascribed  to  thee  ?    How  canst  thou  pot  awaj  sm 
which  does  not  exist  ?    The  existence  of  great  sin  is  implied  in  the 
coming  of  Christ,  and  that  coming  was  occasioned  and  rendered  nece^ 
sary  by  sin,  against  which  Jesus  comes  as  our  Deliverer.    He  dechxcs 
that  he  has  opened  a  fountain,  filled  with  the  blood  of  his  own  Teios. 
But   what  for?     A  cleansing  fountain  implies  filth.     It  ninat  b^ 
sinner,  that  somewhere  or  other  there  are  mthv  people,  or  else  then 
hod  not  been  such  an  amazing  fountain  as  this,  fill^  m>m  the  heart  of 
Christ.    If  thou  be  guilty  thou  art  one  who  needs  the  fountain,  and  it 
is  opened  for  thee.    Come  thou  with  all  thy  sin  and  fonlnefls  about 
thcc  and  Avash  this  morning,  and  be  clean. 

"  *Twas  for  sinners  that  he  suflTer  d 
Agonies  unspeakable ; 
Canst  thou  doubt  thou  art  a  sinner? 
If  thou  canst — then  hope  farewell. 

"  But,  believing  what  is  written — 
*  All  are  guilty  * — *  dead  in  sin,' 
Looking  to  the  Crucified  One 
Hope  shall  rise  thy  soul  within." 


FOR  WHOM  IB  THB  OOBPEL  HEANT  ?  175 

Bretliren,  all  the  gifh  which  Jtsva  Chrial  came  to  ghe,  or  at  leut 
aost  or  tbcm,  imply  thnt  there  is  sin.  Wbat  is  his  first  ^ft  b&t  par- 
loD  ?  How  can  he  pRidon  a  man  who  has  not  transgresaed  ?  With  all 
(everence  do  I  speak,  there  can  be  no  snch  thing  as  pardon  where 
there  is  no  olfence  committed.  Propitiation  fbr  ain  and  blotting  out  of 
iniqnity  both  require  that  there  iniist  be  sin  to  be  blotted  ont,  or  what 
ia  there  real  about  them  ?  Christ  comee  to  bring  JQstification,  and  this 
ihowa  that  there  muRt  lie  a  lack  of  natural  holiness  in  men,  for  if  not 
they  woDld  be  justified  by  themselves  and  by  their  own  works.  And 
irhT  all  this  outcry  about  juetification  by  the  righteonsnesa  of  the  Son 
i>f  God  if  men  are  already  jnatined  by  a  righteousness  of  their  own  ? 
Those  two  blessings,  and  othera  of  the  same  kind,  are  clearly  applicable 
Duly  to  sinful  men.    To  no  other  men  can  they  be  of  any  uae. 

Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  came  girded  also  wUh  divine  power.  He  says, 
"The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  me."  To  what  end  was  he  girded 
with  divine  power  unless  it  be  because  sin  had  taken  all  power  and 
strength  trom  man,  and  man  wns  ta  a  condition  ont  of  which  he 
Docftd  not  be  lifted  except  by  the  energy  of  the  eternal  Spirit  ?  And 
irhat  does  this  imply  but  that  Christ's  errand  bears  npon  those  who 
through  sin  are  without  strength  an<l  witbont  merit  before  God  ?  The 
Holy  Spirit  is  given  because  man's  spirit  has  failed :  becanso  sin  has 
taken  the  life  out  of  man,  and  made  aim  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins, 
therefore  comes  the  Iloly  Spirit  to  quicken  him  into  newnen  of  life,  and 
that  Spirit  comes  by  JcBus  Christ.  Therefore  tbe  enand  of  Jeans 
Christ  IS  manifestly  to  the  guilty, 

I  will  not  omit  to  say  that  the  yrral  deedt  0/  our  Lord,  if  yon  look  at 
them  carefully,  all  bear  upon  sinners.  Jeeng  livea;  it  is  that  he  may 
seek  and  gave  that  which  is  lost.  JesuB  dies ;  it  is  that  he  may  make  a 
propitiation  for  the  sins  of  guilty  men.  Jesus  rises ;  he  rises  again  for 
our  just  ideation,  and  as  I  have  shown,  we  should  not  want  justifiCBtion 
unless  we  had  been  naturally  guilty.  Jesus  ascends  on  high,  and  he 
receives  gifts  for  men  ;  but  noli;  that  special  word,  "Tea,  for  the  rebel- 
lious also,  that  the  Lord  God  may  dwell  among  them."  Jeans  hves  in 
heaven,  but  he  lives  there  to  interuetle.  "  Wherefore  he  is  able  also  to  save 
Uiem  to  the  uttermost  that  come  unto  God  by  him,  seeing  he  everliveth 
to  make  intercession  for  them."  So  tiike  whatever  part  of  his  gloriona 
•chievcmcnts  you  please  you  will  lind  that  there  is  a  distinct  bearing 
towards  those  who  are  immersed  in  guilt. 

And.  beloved,  all  tie  gifts  and  bleseingt  thai  Jems  Christ  has  brought 
to  v»  itfrivf  mitrh  of  their  radiancn  from  their  iearing  iipon  eivnms.  It  is 
in  Christ  Jesus  that  we  are  elect,  and  to  my  mind  the  glory  of  electing 
lore  lies  in  this,  that  it  pitched  upon  such  undeserving  objects.  How 
had  (Jiere  been  any  election  had  it  been  according  to  merit  ?  Then 
men  would  have  taken  rank  by  right  according  to  their  own  deeds,  but 
election's  glories  are  brilliant  with  grace,  and  grace  always  lias  for  its 
foil  and  background  Uie  unworthiness  of  the  objects  towards  whom  it  is 
manifested.  The  election  of  God  is  not  according  to  our  works,  but  it 
IB  a  gracious  election  of  sinners.    Adore  and  wonder. 

Tnm  jou  to  effectual  calling,  and  see  how  delightful  it  ia  to  view  that 
railing  as  a  calling  ^m  among  the  dead,  as  a  calling  of  the  things  that 
lae  not  aa  thongh  Uiej  were,  as  a  calling  of   condemned  ones  into 


176  MBTBOPOl.lTAS   TAn£R«ACLK   PDI.PIT. 

foigiveneas  md  favour.  Turn  ye  nest  to  adoption.  What  is  tbe  §\aTj 
of  adoption,  bat  that  Ckxl  haa  adopted  those  who  were  stnui^ra  aaa 
rebels  to  make  them  his  cbiidreo  ?  What  i»  tbe  peculiar  beauty  t/C 
ref^neration,  bnt  that  ha  ha.'!  been  able  of  these  stonea  to  nuw  i^ 
chUdien  unto  Alffaham  i  Wiiat  is  the  beiauty  of  sonctific^ion,  hot. 
that  he  hu  taken  snich  unholy  crcmtiiTes  as  we  &n  to  make  qb  kio^ 
and  priests  onto  Ood,  and  to  sanctifj  ns  nholly — spirit,  bouI,  aad  bod;  ? 
To  mj  mind  if  is  the  glorj  of  iieuven  to  think  tbiit  youder  white-robed 
chonsters  were  (HUM  foolly  defiled  i  those  happy  wor^ppers  were  oora 
rebels  against  God.  It  is  a  happy  sight  to  see  the  nii&llen  imrrelB  who 
hare  kegt  their  first  estate,  perfectly  pure  and  for  over  praising  God ; 
bat  tbe  visitui  of  fidloo,  nten  divinely  restored  is  more  fail  of  the  gUo; 
of  God.  Lift  as  tiiey  may  their  joyAil  voices  in  pcrpetoal  chorales  the 
angels  can  never  reaoh  tbe  special  sweetnees  of  tliat  song — "  We  hare 
washed  oar  robes  and  miuic  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Ltuab." 
They  cannot  eziterimmiaUy  enter  into  that  truth  which  is  uf  Jehovah's 
name  ita  CKOwning  f^arj — "  Thou  wuet  slain  and  hast  redeen^  us  to 
God  by  thy  Uood.^ 

Thus  I  have  abundaaljy  shown  that  the  farther  we  look  the  mora 
clear  it  is  thai,  the  gospel  is  aimed  at  sinners  and  especialiy  intended 
for  their  benefit. 

HI.  Now,  thirdly,  it  ia  evident  that  it  I8  oira  wisdom  to  aockpt 
THE  BrnJATiOH.  I  know  that  to  many  this  is  very  unpalatable  doc- 
trine. Well,  fTriend,.yon  had  better  have  your  palate  altered,  for  yon 
will  never  be  able  to  alter  the  doctrine.  It  is  tbe  truth  of  the  eve^ 
lasting  God]  and  (wnnot  be  cliangcd.  Tbe  very  best  thing  you  cui  do, 
sinoe  the  go^ielloi^  towards  sinners,  is  to  get  where  the  gospel  looks; 
and  I  cim  recommend  tiiia  to  you,  not  merely  on  the  ground  of  policy, 
bat  on  the  ground  of  honesty,  because  you  will  be  only  in  your  ri^ 
place  when  ^oa  get  liiere.  1  think  I  hear  you  raising  objections.  "  I 
do  not  admm  thia  system.  Am  I  to  be  saved  in  the  same  way  as  the 
dying  thief  2"  Freciaaly  bo,  sir,  unless  tliere  should  happen  to  be  eveo 
more  grace  shown  towards  you  than  to  him.  "  Bat  you  oo  not  mean  to 
aaseit  that  in  tbe  matter  of  salvation  I  am  to  be  put  on  a  level  with  the 
woman  that  was  a  itnoer  ?  I  liave  been  pure  and  chaste,  and  am  I  to 
owe  my  aalvadon  jost  as  much  to  the  absolute  mercy  of  Ood  as  she 
did?"  Tee,  sir,  I  do  say  that,  exactly  as  it  stands.  There  is  but  one 
principle  npon  which  the  Lord  saves  men,  and  it  is  that  of  pare  grace. 
I  want  yon  to  nnderatand  this.  Even  if  it  grinds  like  grit  between  yonr 
teeth,  aad  makes  you  angry ;  I  shall  not  regret  it  so  long  as  you  know  what 
I  mean;  for  the  troth  may  vel  tiiiiJintiYinue  into  your  soul,  iiini  you  mav 
yet  bow  before  its  power.  Oh,  you  children  of  godly  parents,  ycMi  jOBBf 
people  of  excellent  mcffals  and  delicate  ctmsciences,  to  yon  I  speak,  nw 
to  yon.  Rejoice  in  your  privileges,  bat  do  not  boast  in  them,  m  yuL 
too  have  sinned,  you  have  sinned  against  light  and  knowledge,  yon  koof 
yon  have.  If  yon  have  not  plunged  into  the  grosser  sios  in  act  aai 
deed,  yet  in  desire  and  in  imagination  you  have  gone  far  enough  aatnff, 
and  in  many  things  yon  have  offended  grievonsly  against  God.  I^  witb 
Uiesa  considerations  before  yon,  yon  take  your  plaoe  as  a  sinner  yoa  wiH 
not  be  disgraoed,  bat  be  merely  standing  where  yon  certainly  are. ' 

And  then  remonb^,  if  yon  get  the  blessing  Uiia  way,  yoa  will  ban 


I  FOR    WHOM    IS   THE   GOKPKL  MEAST '•'  177 

olitiiineil  it  ill  Ike  sa/tei  po»axbk  ivay.  SuppoBo  cbcrc  tiiv  ivnadber  of 
guest  cliamU-ra,  and  I  have  my  seat  in  ono  ol'  the  beat  of  Lhan,  I  may 
ahva  no  right  to  be  there.  I  am  eating  and  drinking  ol*  wb»t  ia  pro- 
Tid«d  for  sumrior  guceU,  but  my  ticket  dwa  not  mark  mc  out  M  one 
of  tl)«ae,  ana  therefore  I  am  ill  at  ease.  Evcrj*  monthful  that  I  est  I 
thitilc  to  myself,  "  I  do  not  kuon-  whether  I  shall  lie  allonod  to  remain 
hew.  perhaps  ihe  Lord  of  the  feoat  will  come  in  and  saj  to  me, '  Friend 
bow  earnest  thon  in  hither  ?'  and  I  most  begin  with  shnme  to  take  the 
Igwcst  room."  Brethren,  when  we  begin  at  the  fiottoni.  and  sit  In  the 
toveat  room  we  fee!  safe,  we  are  sntiafied  that  what  we  do  get  is  meant 
for  ns,  and  will  not  be  taken  away  from  us.  Perliaps,  aleo,  when  the 
kinn  cornea  he  may  take  us  up  to  a  higher  room.  TIjui'b  is  nothing  likft 
he^iiming  in  the  lowliest  plaee.  When  I  lay  hold  of  the  promise  u  a 
aoini  1  bare  my  doubts  aboDt  it,  but  when  I  grutip  it  as  u  gjnner  I  can 
hare  no  question.  If  tiie  Lord  bid  me  feed  on  liis  mercy  as  his  ^Id  I ' 
do  it,  but  the  devil  whispers  that  I  am  preaummg,  for  I  ne\  er  was  really 
adopted  by  grace  i  but  when  I  come  to  Jesns  as  a  guilty,  andeserring  \ 
gionor,  and  take  what  the  Lord  freely  presents  to  me  npon  )>elieving,  tba  I 
derii  himself  cannot  tell  me  that  I  am  not  a  sinner,  or  if  he  does  the  ' 
lie  ia  too  transparent,  and  causes  me  no  distress.  There  \*.  nothii^  like  ) 
having  an  indefeasiblo  title,  and  if  the  description  {;iTen  to  yon  in  the 
titfc  is  that  you  arc  a  sinner,  it  ia  an  indi^ntable  one,  for  depend  upon 
it  a  sinner  yon  are.  So  the  sinner'a  place  ia  your  true  plitce  and  your 
safeet  place. 

Another  blessing  is,  it  is  a  plac»  into  which  t/w*  can  gel  iftrtclly,  eyen 
at  this  rery  moment.  If  the  gospel  looks  towards  men  in  a  certain 
slate  of  heart  in  which  there  ai-e  eommendable  virtues,  then  how  long 
will  it  take  me  to  raise  my  heart  to  that  state  ?  If  Jesus  Ohrist  comes 
into  the  world  to  save  men  who  have  a  certain  tnuasnrc  of  excellence, 
dieu  how  long  will  it  take  me  to  obtain  that  excellence  ?  I  may  be 
taken  Hick  and  die  within  half-an-honr,  and  hear  the  aentence  of  eternal 
judgment,  and  it  would  he  poor  gospel  to  tell  me  that  1  might  pos- 
sibly obtain  salvation  if  I  nttjuncd  a  state  which  would  take  me  several 
months  to  reach.  At  this  hour  I,  a  dying  man,  do  know  that  I  may 
be  gone  out  of  this  world  and  Iwyond  the  reaeh  of  mercy  within  an 
hour :  what  a  comfort  it  is  that  the  goapel  comce  to  me  and  gives 
itself  to  me  just  now,  even  as  it  finds  me  !  I  am  already  in  that 
position  in  whidi  grst«  begins  with  men,  for  I  am  a  sinner,  and  I  have 
only  to  own  that  i  am  bo.  Now  then,  jtoor  sonl,  just  sit  thee  down  be- 
fore the  liord  and  any,  "  Ixird,  does  thy  Son  come  to  save  the  guilty  ? 
I  am  snch,  and  I  trust  him  to  save  mo.  Did  he  die  for  the  ungodly? 
I  am  such.  Lord,  I  trust  in  his  blood  to  cleanse  me.  Was  hie  death  for 
sinners  ?  Lord,  I  take  up  the  jwaition.  I  plead  guiity.  I  accept  the 
■nteoM  of  thy  law  as  being  jnst,  but  save  me.  Lord,  for  Jesus  died." 
It  ii  dime ;  yoo  are  saved.  Go  in  peace,  my  son ;  thy  sins,  which  are 
vaamj,  an  firoiveo  tfiee.  Go,  my  daughter,  go  thy  way,  and  rejoice : 
the  jLovd  htta  pot  away  thy  sin  ;  thou  shalt  not  die,  for  he  that  bc- 
ttcmtli  is  jnstified  from  all  sin.  Blessed  is  the  man  to  whom  the  Lord 
tepatethnot  iniquity,  and  in  whose  spirit  there  is  no  guile.  Get,  then, 
into  JOOT  true  position,  accept  the  situation  in  which  grace  considers 
you  to  be.     Do  not  talk  of  jnstice  and  merit;  but  appeal  to  pity  and 


178  mntopoLiTAV  TABuariioui  Tvunt. 

love.  A  oertein  man  had  seTerdtmiet  plotted  anhiifc  the  fii^ 
and  eventnally,  being  entirely  in  the  emperar^a  liaiid%  aeptenee  m  deA 
was  pronounced  upon  him.  Hit  dsogfater  eaniestl|j  pleaded  Ibr  hia  HIb^ 
and  at  last,  baring  obtained  an  aodienoe  with  the  empemv  die  feD  iqm 
her  knees  before  him.  **  My  girl,"  said  the  eaxptm,  **  it  ia  of  no  use  to 
plead  for  yonr  &ther,  for  I  hare  the  deamt  evidence  of  hit  repeated 
crimes,  and  it  is  bnt  justice  that  he  shoold  die."  The  girl  replied,  ^  Bin, 
I  do  not  ask  for  justice,  I  be^  for  mercy.  It  is  mNm  ttte  mernftalnesBtf 
Tonr  heart  and  not  upon  the  justice  of  the  case  that  I  rely."  She  wm 
heard  patiently,  and  her  £EiUier*s  life  was  spared  at  her  reqneat.  Imitate 
this  app<^,  and  cry,  ^  Have  merqr  npon  me,  O  God,  aooordiitf  to  thy 
lovingkindness."  Justice  owes  yon  nothinff  but  death,  mercy  ameoBB 
spare  you.  Have  done  with  every  idea  of  making  ont  a  good  cue :  admit 
it  to  be  a  bad  one  and  plead  guilty.  Cast  yonisdf  npon  the  merpy  rf 
the  court  and  ask  for  mercy,  free  mercy,  undeeerved  merogL  gnipUiUM 
favour  :  this  is  what  you  must  ask  for,  and  as  in  kw  thej  have  m  bm 
of  suing  called  m  farmd  patg^eris,  that  is,  in  the  ibnn  of  m  paimer,  da 
you  adopt  tiie  method,  and  as  a  man  flill  of  necessities  do  yoa  b^lr 
favour  at  the  hands  of  Ood,  m  formi  patgrnis,  and  it  shall  be  beatoiwd 

upon  you. 
IV.  Now  I  ctose  this  discourse  with  the  neit  pointy  whicdi  ia^  tb^ 

DOCTRINE  HAS  A  GRBAT  SANOnFTING  DfFLXJBNOB.     **  Tbdn,**  aqfl  Om, 

**  I  do  not  believe  that.  Surely  you  have  been  holding  oat  a  prania 
to  sin  by  saying  that  Christ  came  to  save  nobody  bnt  aumen^  aad  does 
not  call  anybo^  to  repentance  but  the  sinfid.  My  dear  airs,  I  have 
licard  all  that  sort  of  talk  so  many  times  that  I  know  it  l^  heait;  the 
same  objections  were  raised  against  this  doctrine  in  Lnthera  day  tajthe 
Papists,  and  since  then  by  workmongers  of  aU  cbsaea.  Aen  ii 
nothing  substantial  in  their  notion  that  free  grace  is  opposed  to  mocalitT: 
it  is  only  their  fiwcy.  They  dream  that  the  doctrine  of  jnatifioatioii  if 
ilEuth  will  lead  to  sin,  but  it  can  be  proved  by  history  that  wheoMBver  tbs 
doctrine  has  been  best  preachedmen  have  become  moat  ho^,  and  when- 
ever this  truth  has  been  darkened,  all  manner  ofcorrnptkwwMabomided 
Gracious  doctrine  and  gracious  living  fitly  go  together,  and  l^gal  tnarhinf 
and  unlawful  living  are  generally  found  associiSed- 

Let  us  show  you  the  sanctifying  power  of  this  gospeL  Its  fint 
operation  in  that  direction  is  this :  when  the  Holy  Spirit  bnnga  the  traA 
of  free  pardon  home  to  a  man  it  compleUly  ehange$  mU  tkmit^U$ 


wff  Ood,     '^What,"  says  he,  ^'has  God  Areely  forgiven  me  all  ny 


oftences  for  Ghrist^s  sake  ?  And  does  he  love  me  not 
my  sin  ?  I  did  not  know  he  was  such  an  one  as  this,  so  sracioiurand 
kind !  I  thought  he  was  hard ;  I  called  him  a  tyrant,  gathering  where 
he  had  not  strewed ;  but  does  he  feel  towards  me  like  this  ?  "  **  Then," 
saith  the  soul,  *'  I  love  him  in  return.**  There  is  a  complete  revnUkm 
of  feeling  ;  the  man  is  turned  right  round  as  soon  as  ever  he  understands 
redeeming  grace  and  dying  love.  Conversion  follows  on  a  sight  of  grace. 
Moreover,  this  grand  truth  does  more  than  turn  a  man,  it  mmm, 
melUf  enlh*ens,  and  inflames  him.  This  is  a  truth  which  stirs  the  de^ 
of  the  heart,  and  fills  the  man  with  lively  emotions.  You  talked  to  hua 
about  doinff  good,  and  about  right,  and  justice,  and  reward,  and  punirii- 
ment^  and  nc  heard  it  all,  and  it  may  have  it  had  a  measure  of  influence 


fOa   WHOM   IS  TITF.   G03PBr.  MRANT  ?  17» 

OTer  liim,  but  he  did  not  doeplj  fee!  it.  Siioh  tefwhing  is  too  cold  to 
vrerm  the  heart.  The  trnth  which  comes  home  lo  the  man  appears  to 
him  to  Ijc  new  and  exciting.  It  rnns  like  this, — Go<l  ont  of  his  free 
mercy  foi^i\'es  the  guilty,  and  he  has  foi^ven  yon.  Why,  this  awakens 
him.  etira  htrn  up,  toaches  the  fountain  of  his  tears,  and  moves  his 
whole  being.  Perhaps  at  the  first  hearing  of  the  gospel  he  does  not 
care  for  it,  and  even  hates  it,  but  when  it  comes  wiA  power  it  obtains 
a  wonderful  mastery  over  him.  When  he  really  jeceives  ita  message  as 
his  own,  then  hia  cold  heart  of  stone  is  turned  to  flesh  ;  warm  emotion, 
tender  love,  humble  desire,  and  a  sacred  longing  after  the  Lord  are  all 
excited  in  his  bosom.  The  r]nickening  power  of  this  divine  truth,  as 
well  aa  the  converting  power  of  it,  can  never  be  too  miiuh  admired. 

Besides,  this  truth  when  it  enters  the  heart  deals  a  deadly  blme  at 
the  Tram's  self-conmt.  Many  a  man  would  have  liecome  wise  only  he 
thonght  he  was  so  already  ;  and  many  a  man  would  have  been  virtuous 
only  ne  concluded  that  he  had  already  attained  thereto.  Behold,  this 
doctrine  smites  upon  the  skull  all  confidence  in  your  own  goodness,  and 
makes  yon  feel  yonr  guilt ;  and  in  so  doing  it  removes  the  great  cTil  of 
pride.  A  sense  of  sin  is  the  very  threshold  of  mercy,  A  consciousness 
of  shortcoming,  a  grief  because  of  past  offences,  is  a  necessary  prepara- 
tion for  a  higher  and  a  nobler  life.  The  gospel  digs  out  tho  tbundation, 
makes  a  great  vacnum,  and  so  mokes  room  to  lay  in  their  placet  the 
glorious  stones  of  a  noble  spiritnal  chamcter. 

Moreover,  where  this  trnth  is  received  there  is  sure  to  spring  up  in 
the  floul  a  smse  of  gratitndf.  The  man  who  ha&  had  much  forgiven  will 
be  sure  to  lovo  much  in  return.  Gratitude  to  God  is  a  grand  maiB- 
spring  for  holy  action.  Those  who  do  right  in  order  to  be  rewarded 
for  it  are  acting  selfishly.  Selfishness  is  at  tho  bottom  of  their  charac- 
ter, they  abstain  ftom  sin  only  lest  self  should  suffer,  and  they  obey 
only  that  self  may  be  safe  and  happy.  The  man  who  does  right,  not 
becanse  of  heaven  or  hell,  but  because  God  has  saved  him,  and  he  loves 
the  God  who  saved  him,  is  the  tmly  rig^t-loving  man.  He  who  loves 
right  because  God  loves  it  has  risen  ont  of  the  bog  of  selfishness  and 
is  capable  of  the  loftiest  virtue,  yea,  he  has  in  him  a  living  spring,  which 
wilt  well  up  and  flow  forth  in  holy  living  so  long  as  he  exists. 

And,  dear  brethren,  I  think  you  will  all  sec  that  free  forgiveness  to 
sinners  is  very  conducive  towards  one  part  of  a  tme  character,  namely, 
readiness  to  forgive  olfiera,  for  he  who  has  been  forgiven  much  himself 
ia  the  very  man  who  finds  it  easy  to  pass  by  the  transgressions  of  others. 
If  he  do  not  BO  he  may  well  doubt  whether  ho  has  been  himself  for- 
given ;  bnt  if  the  Lord  has  blotted  out  his  debt  of  a  thousand  talents 
be  will  readily  enough  forgive  tlie  hundred  pence  which  hia  brother 
owes  him. 

Last  of  all,  some  of  ns  know,  and  we  wish  that  all  knew  by  personal 
experience,  that  a  sense  of  undeserved  favour  and  free  forgiveness  is  the 
very  soul  of  enlhtisvism,  and  enthusiasm  is  to  Christianity  what  the  life- 
blood  is  to  the  body.  Were  you  ever  made  enthusiastic  by  a  cold  discourse 
upon  the  excellence  of  morality?  Did  you  ever  feel  your  soul  stirred 
within  you  by  listening  to  a  sermon  upon  the  rewards  of  virtue  ?  Were 
you  ever  made  enthusiastic  by  being  told  of  the  punishments  of  the  law  ? 
No,  sirs ;  bnt  preach  up  Ibe  doctrines  of  grace,  let  the  free  favour  of 


160  MRTROPOLITAK  TARBRVAOLK  PUIiPIT. 

■        ■  ■         ■ 

Ood  be  extolled,  and  mark  the  conseqnenoQti.:  .ThQrc;are  people  who 
will  walk  for  many  miles  and  stand  without  weariMcn^^'  ^c.  hour 
together  to  hear  this.    I  ha?e  knonn  them  lfd)om-  man j  a  weary  mile 
to  listen  to  this  doctrine.    What  for  ?    Beeanse  the  man  was  eloquent, 
or  l>ccause  he  put  it  well?     Not  so:  it  has  sometimes  been  uadlj 
spx)kcn,  and  in  uncouth  lan^age,  and  yet  this  doctrine  has  alwaTs 
aroused  the  people.    There  is  something  in  the  soul  of  man  that  is 
looking  out  for  the  gospel  of  grace,  and  when  it  comes  there  is  a  hun- 
gering to  hear  about  it.    Look  at  the  Reforming  times,  when  death  was 
the  i)enalty  of  listening  to  a  sermon :  how  the  people  crowded  at  nnd- 
night ;  how  they  journeyed  into  the  deserts  and  the  caves  to  listen  to 
the  teaching  of  these  grand  old  truths.    There  is  sweetness  nboofc 
mercy,  di\ine  mercy,  freely  given,  which  holds  the  ear  of  man  and  stin 
his  heart.   When  this  truth  enters  the  soul  it  breeds  zealots,  martyn, 
confessors,  missionaries,  saints.    If  any  Christians  are  in  earnest,  and 
full  of  love  to  God  and  man,  they  are  those  who  know  what  grace  hts 
done  for  tliem.    If  any  remain  under  reproaches  faithful,  under  losses 
and  crosses  joyful,  they  are  those  who  are  consdous  of  their  indebted- 
ness to  divine  love.    If  any  delight  in  God  while  they  live,  and  rest 
in  him  as  they  die,  they  are  the  men  who  know  that  they  are  justified  hy 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ  who  justifieth  the  ungodly.    All  glory  be  to  the  Jiord 
who  lifbeth  the  beggar  fix)m  the  dunghill  and  setteth  him  among  priiicei, 
even  tlic  princes  of  his  people.    He  takes  the  very  cast-oflb  of  the  worM 
and  adopts  them  into  his  family,  and  makes  them  heirs  of  Gk>d  by  Jesns 
Christ.    The  Lord  give  us  all  to  know  the  power  of  the  gomel  npoD 
our  sinful  selves.    The  Lord  endear  to  us  the  name,  work,  and  persoa 
of  the  Sinner's  Friend.   May  we  never  forget  the  hole  of  the  pit  whence 
we  were  drawn,  nor  the  hand  which  rescued  us,  nor  the  undeserred 
kindness  which  moved  that  hand.    Henceforth  let  us  have  more  and 
more  to  say  of  infinite  grace.    "Free  grace  and  dying  love.'*    WcH 
docs  the  negro  song  say,  "  Ring  those  charming  bells."    Free  gnicc 
and  dying  love — the  sinner's  windows  of  hope !    Our  hearts  exult  in 
tlie  very  words.    Glory  be  unto  thee,  0  Lord  Jesus,  ever  full  of  com- 
passion.   Amen. 


Portion  op  Schipture  head  before  Sermon— Galatiana  iiL 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 152,  545,  289, 


h 


Peti[fpte  W^xbrnrnk 


T   I   III!        S5S 


aJJlLB  IK>BSAKEN  WHBN  QUILT  18  ¥OB.QtlJM. 


I  I 


DsrjwuD   QV   LpR»'d-DAY    ETBNINat   Mabgh   25TE[,  1877,  BY 

C.  fl.  SPURGEON, 

IS   SHI   XSXfiQFOLITAK   TABBBKIOLV,   KEWTKOTOK. 


^BlHMd&ihe  man  tmto ivihom  tik*  Lord  impwiath  not  iniqiiity,  and  iMmkam 
firil-tlMre  k  BO  gaile."--Failm  xsdL  2l 

la  onlybleiainff  Uie  law  cangive  it  bestows  on  those  who  do  no  irnqnity, 
od  walk  pecfect^  in  6od*B  ways :  the  gospel  alone  has  a  blessing  for  the 
niUj.  On  them  xcpon  their  believing  in  Jesns  it  pronounces  the  bene- 
btion,  '^  Blessed  is  he  whose  transgression  is  forgiven,  and  whose  sin 
i  ooveied.  Blessed  is  the  man  unto  whom  the  Lord  impntcth  not 
liqnity."  To  be  '^  blessed  "  is  to  be  in  the  most  desirable  state,  at 
Bace  with  God,  happy  in  yourself  and  full  of  divine  favour.  A  man 
umot  be  more  than  blessed,  or,  what  if  I  say,  doubly  blessed  ?  since 
le  bemediction  is  i»ronouneed  twice.  Nor  is  it  a  stinted  blessing,  for 
D  limiting  word  is  put  before  it  or  after  it  to  mark  an  inferior  bene- 
iction.  When  our  Lord  opened  his  mouth  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount 
e  poured  &rth  a  stream  of  blessings,  and  even  so  doth  the  gospel  - 
hen  it  speaks  to  the  soul,  rivers  of  blessing  flow  ih)m  its  every  word. 
"he  language  of  the  text  is  veiy  emphatic  in  the  original,  and  implies  a 
inlkiplieation  of  blessings.  There  cannot  be  a  more  true,  real,  and 
isnred  bleisadness  than  uiat  which  belongs  to  the  forgiven  sbner.  All 
le  bksaednesB  which  oould  have  come  to  a  i>Qttect  man  does  come  to 
le  man  whose  transgression  is  forgiven.  0  th(;n  who  hast  sinned  against 
od,  and  art  conscious  of  it,  rejoice  that  thou  art  nevertheless  not  shut  out 
om  blessedness ;  for  if  by  faith  thou  canst  believe  in  the  sin-forgiving 
ody  and  aocept  the  matchless  atonement  which  covers  all  thy  guilt,  and 
ihou  wilt  exercise  faith  upon  that  blessed  system  by  which  sin  is  no 
Dger  imputed,  then  art  thou  even  now  among  the  blessed.  God  him- 
>li  has  blessed  thee,  and  neither  men  nor  devils  can  reverse  the 
inediction. 

Now,  mark  that  at  the  very  same  time  that  the  guilt  of  sin  is  taken 
ray  and  blessedness  is  bestowed  it  happeneth  unto  the  forgiven  man 
lat  he  undergoes  a  change  of  nature.    The  work  of  the  Spirit  is  linked 
Ko.  1,846. 


182  METBOPOLITAN  TABERKAOLE  PULPIT. 

with  the  work  of  the  Son:  when  the  Son  removes  gnilt  the  Spirit 
removes  gnile.  He  who  takes  away  our  offences  also  cares  onr  deceit. 
When  we  begin  to  be  beh'evers  we  cease  to  be  liars.  He  who  was  afore- 
time crafty  as  Jacob  no  sooner  receives  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  in  answer 
to  prater  than  he  becomes  "  an  Israelite  indeed,  in  whom  is  no  gnile." 

It  IS  to  this  fact  that  I  am  going  to  draw  yonr  attention  at  this 
time,  and  as  I  desire  to  nse  it  as  a  means  for  self-examination  and  arous- 
ing, I  pray  the  Holy  Ghost  to  apply  it  with  power  to  many  sonls. 

1  on  must  all  have  noticed  in  David's  case  that  after*  he  had  fallen 
into  his  fonl  sin  with  Bathsheba  he  ceased  to  exhibit  that  transparent 
trath-speaking  character  which  had  charmed  ns  so  much  before.  Until 
he  had  obtained  a  sense  of  pardon  for  his  great  crime,  David  was  as 
crooked  and  perverse  as  well  conld  bo.  Gnile  was  as  abundant  in 
him  as  guilt ;  for  he  made  no  confession  of  his  sin,  and  would  not 
allow  himself  to  see  the  heinoosness  of  it ;  but  he  must  have  put  a 
fearful  strain  upon  his  conscience  to  have  hushed  its  protests  against 
his  grievous  offence  Perhaps  even  months  passed  without  any  honest 
acknowledgment  to  his  own  conscience  and  to  God  that  he  had  so  foully 
sinned.  His  entire  endeavours  were  concentrated  upon  the  concealment 
of  his  crime,  and  to  that  end  all  his  wits  were  set  to  work  with  horrible 
cunning.  What  crafty  devices  he  practised  in  seeking  to  hide  his  sin, 
such  as  bringing  Uriah  back  and  making  him  drunk.  Could  tins  be 
I  >avid — the  honest  and  conscientious  David  of  former  days  ?  Could  he 
have  Itccome  so  mean,  so  full  of  low  scheming  ?  Could  he  be  the 
pHiilmiHt  who  sung  so  sweetly  ?  Could  he  deliberately  plan  the  death  of 
tlu'  iniiu  whom  lie  had  so  rearfully  wronged  ?  Yes,  and  worse,  when 
Uriah,  being  wilfully  exposed  to  danger,  fell  in  battle,  David  mani- 
fi'Htwl  110  compunction,  nor  uttered  a  word  by  way  of  confession,  but 
he  put  it  oft'  with  apparent  indifference,  saying,  "  the  sword  devoureUi 
one  as  well  as  aiiotlier."  He  knew  right  well  how  Uriah  came  to 
die,  and  Joab  knew  also,  and  yet  he  trumped  up  a  message,  as  if 
nothing  had  been  arranged  between  them  beforehand.  Ah,  David, 
what  a  deceitful  heart  thou  hadst,  and  how  didst  thou  practice  gnik 
upon  guile !  Yea,  bo  blind  had  his  mental-  vision  become  as  to  his 
own  sinfulness  that,  when  Nathan  outlined  a^cture  which  was  the 
very  photograph  of  his  own  case,  he  did  not  seerfc^'it  pronounced  a 
fierce  sentence  against  the  supposed  culprit.  It  neeStfj^®  prophet  to 
come  forward  and  to  say,  "Thou  art  the  man"  befonlLf'^^f'  g**^®^*^ 
heart  of  Da\id  was  able  to  perceive  that  Nathan  spake  ^L^™-  ^^* 
sin  gives  a  twist  to  our  entire  manhood,  and  makes  us  plart^  thonaand 
tricks  both  with  our  conscience  and  with  God.  Bat  notice, 
ever  Nathan  said,  '*  The  Lord  hath  put  away  thy  sin  :  tlio'u^fc^V*?* 
die,"  David  became  another  man;  he  wrote  the  51st  Psalm   iv     "''  *" 


in  It  you  do  not  so  much  hear  the  sound  of  vibrating  harp-strings  1 
throbbin*-,  breaking  heart-strings.  All  through  it  the  man's  soi' 
running  over  at  his  lips  and  at  his  eyes  ;  concealment  and  trickery 
quite  out  of  tlic  field.  Pardoned  sin  makes  an  honest  heart,  but  w 
sin  is  miconfesscd  and  unforgivcn  the  serjient  niles  within,  and  ujm 
twist,  and  wriggle,  and  wind,  and  torn  in  a  thousand  deceitful  \\'ays  4: 

I 


avwA  mmkxm  mBss  wwn  j8  ^gesmvEs.  IBS 

kiWij  fint  head  to-night  is  this — rnan^  mm  p2a^  hricks  wiih  God  and 
||l«*6OM«0li0n0M;^a]ld^Bee(md^  ttiefar^/wm  mem  gives  mdmce  of  having 
WtmifmniUs  mnl  habil—^^  m  hi&  spirit  there  is  no  guile." 

X.  While  I  Bpeftk  apon  mj  first  head*--*tfaat  auNY  men  play  tricks 
IfSEH  6€D  AKD  TBBiB  eosrscxxarcss,  I  shall  be  very  glad  if  you  will 
Midi  Ctftfully  notioB  how.iutioh  of  what  is  said  b^ngs  to  you  per- 
MBall^..  I  want  to  be  very  hoaait  with  joa,  biit  I  should  be  sorry  to 
Im9' unjust  Do  not  take  boiue  what  does  not  apply  to  you,  but  anything 
lAdeh  is  really  youxs  I  pray  you  to  lay  to  heart.  Court  the  entrance 
It^iratb^  eyen  though  it  should  cut  you  to  the  quick.  ^^  Faithful  are 
Hbtiiroiuids  of  a  friend,  but  the  kisses  of  an  enemy^ure  jdeoeit«fti1."  Avail 
imiialnMJ  of  the  opportunity  which  the  Lord  is  now  affording  you  to 
Marrti  onr  hearts,  as  in  the  presence  of  the  .lioord  who  rwei^beth  the 
yiiita.  May  the  Holy  Spirit  aid  us  in  this  biuiiness. 
jJjPhe  guHe  of  the  hunum  heart  shows  itself  in  a  rs/usal  to  came  io 
mmm^emaideratiarL  Men  ^cannot  be  induced  to  examine  Ihemselves 
Mr^iook  to  the  state  of  affairs  between  God  and  their  souls;  we 

Kab&m  to  it,  and  plead  with  them  even  to  tears  but  they  refuse  to 
temselves  ^lis  necessary  service.  They  ase  more  or  less  conscious 
hnt  aonething  is  T«ry  iwcong,  but  they  have  no  mind  to  enquire.  Is 
idfr  taitbfiil  ?  Is  it  reaBonid)le  ?  If  their  house  weiie  Jejported  to  be 
Hi.ftie^  would  they  not  see  to  it  ?  But  no,  they  could  not  enjoy  the  fool's 
I— iiiliiio  of  false  peace  if  they  were  seriously  to  think  and  enquire, 
md  therefoce  they  prefier  to  taketsnatters  «8si^  and  ignore  as  mam  as 

Kible  .allithat  is  imsatis&ctory  about  their  condition  and  prospects. 
n  week  to  week  there  is  no  calling  of  oonseience  to  account ;  Sab- 
[>aths  follow  one  another,  and  though  there  may  be  a  little  occasional 
Hiakening  th^e  is  no  resolute  determination  to  cast  up  accounts  and 
bid  ost  ^e  sonl's  actual  condition.  They  prefer  to  shut  their  eyes  and 
^tap  their  ears  rather  than  see  signs  and  hear  tidings  which  would  dis- 
SKBS  them.  What  cfaildislmess  is  this  I  It  is  worse.;  it  is  dishooesty 
M>  their  souls  and  God.  When  a  steward  de(dines  to  render  an  account 
fmi  may  easily  guess  the  reason.  When  a  shipmaster  refuses  to  have 
us  vessel  surveyed  yon  shrewdly  6u»ect  the  sea-worthiness  of  the  ship. 
HThen  a  merchant  does  not  care  to  look  into  his  books  yon  judge  on 
lAieh  side  the  foalaaee  has  turned.  Honest  men  are  prepared  to  go 
sto  BiatterB,  and  aie  willing  to  see  the  naked  truth,  but  men  who  are 
lot  bcave  enough  to  face  uncomfortable  facts  play  the  foolish  game  of 
Mndaging  their  eyes.  Putting  the  telescope  to  the  blind  eye  and  de- 
claring that  you  see  nothing  is  an  old  trick,  and  conmionly  practised 
jf«n  now.  May  we  never  be  suffered  to  persevere  in  the  self-deception 
ri&ich  is  supported  by  a  heedless  disregard  of  warnings.  Most  men  will 
Io  anything  sooner  than  think  about  etemsA  things.  The  most  frivo- 
ons  amusements,  the  most  stupid  songs,  the  most  carking  cares,  and 
^n  the  most  weary  ceremonials  of  fashions,  are  adopted  as  a  happy 
elease  from  the  labour  of  reflection.  Death,  judgment,  eternity,  heaven, 
nd  hell — they  dare  not  think  of  these :  and  why  ?  Because  they  know 
hat  all  is  wnnaig  with  them,  and  so  they  practise  a  crafty  carelessness 
nd  a  cunning  indiffer»ice. 

Others  who  do  think  a  little  are  partial  in  their  judammts  of  them^ 
Blves.     They  present  accounts,  but  these  are  cookea  and  made  to 


184  METKOPOLITAir  TABBBHAOLS  PULPfT. 

a]>l>oar  other  than  they  should  be  bjr  a  sort  of  ^iritual  finaaciiig.  Un« 
godly  men  colonr  all  that  they  do  with  a  rosy  tmt^  and  endmnmr  to  be 
Laatificd  with  the  appearanoe  of  their  lives.  Is  it  not  mtj  osoal  te 
biisincss  men,  when  their  financial  pjosition  is  beeoming  more  aad  moio 
inisoimd,  to  make  a  show  of  prosperity  in  order  to  keep  no  their  credit? 
Doubtful  investments  are  reckoned  as  availaUe  assets,  ana  heavyliahli- 
ties  arc  toned  down  by  cleTcr  adjustments.  Pablic  companies  often  shew 
us  fine  specimens  of  the  art  of  colouring.  Alas,  that  leasonalile  beings 
sliould  practise  this  art  upon  themselves  in  relati<»i  to  their  most  viul 
interests :  yet  they  do  so  year  after  year.  They  pat  darkness  Ibr  lq;ht 
and  light  tor  darbiess,  and  reckon  themselves  to  be  lioh  and  increased 
with  goods,  while  they  are  naked  and  poor  and  miserable.  Well  dnlkd 
are  many  in  the  method  of  '^  making  the  worse  appear  the  better 
reason";  they  exaggerate  any  little  excellence  which  thej  ttiink  thej 
possess,  and  greatly  under-estimate  their  &ults.  lliey  denj,  or  ex- 
tenuate, or  altogether  excuse  their  sin ;  they  blame  their  natnre^  or  tibeir 
circomstanoes,  or  the  tempter,  but  they  themselves  must  be  encased. 
How  could  they  help  sinnmg  ?  Others  would  have  done  the  same  had 
they  been  in  their  position,  whv  then  should  they  beUamed  ?  Moieom, 
what  they  did  was  not  so  very  bad  afler  all,  and  there  are  all  their  ^pood 
deeds  as  a  set  off  against  the  bad.  Men  use  false  weights  and  deoeitfid 
balances  when  they  are  dealing  with  their  souls,  and  msj  will  not  endoro 
honest  handling.  They  cry  "peace,  peace "  where  there  is  no  peaoe^  and 
prophesy  smooui  things  for  themselves.  Like  the  onjost  stewaid,  they 
permit  false  statements  to  be  made  of  what  is  due  to  their  Lord,  and 
when  they  come  up  to  their  false  standard  they  congratalate  thmnadvcs 
as  if  they  were  the  pink  of  honesty. 

Again,  many  are  evidently  tricking  themselves  wiUblly  because  Msy 
rest  on  such  frivolous  grounds  of  confideiue.  Ooald  any  man  6epm 
on  his  own  good  works  unless  he  had  juggle  with  his  judgment? 
What  think  you?  Do  you  believe  that  any  man  woula  baild  bis 
hope  for  eternity  upon  his  being  christened  when  he  was  a  baby,  sod 
his  having  taken  the  conununion  at  certain  seasons  since,  if  he  were 
not  anxious  to  be  deceived?  Do  you  think  that  anjr  man,  ookss 
willingly  duped,  could  believe  that  he  was  made  a  child  of  Qod  bj 
an  outward  ceremonv?  Do  you  think  any  man  would  rehr  upon 
sacraments  unless  he  desired  to  be  misled  ?  If  any  mortal  man  odieves 
in  absolution  given  to  him  by  a  fellow  sinner  who  calls  himaelf  a 
priest,  is  he  not  willingly  deceived  ?  If  any  man  relies  upon  outward 
performances  as  a  means  for  the  putting  away  of  sin,  do  yon  think 
he  Ims  not  sense  enough  in  him,  if  he  chose  to  use  it,  to  know 
that  this  is  utter  absurdity  ?  True,  many  are  duped  by  the  teachhtts 
of  others,  but,  if  they  possess  even  so  much  as  a  trace  of  brain,  might 
they  not  see  through  such  &lse  teaching  if  they  chose  ?  If  a  man  would 
sit  down  and  only  think,  would  he  not  see  that  confidences  bused  upon 
such  frail  foundations  are  as  sure  to  Ml  as  houses  built  upon  the  sand? 
But»  alas,  multitudes  of  men  play  such  tricks  with  themselves  that 
they  are  led  by  the  nose  by  the  servants  of  Antichrist  They  see 
ttiat  others  yield  their  assent  to  the  pretensions  of  priests,  and  they 
dude  that  they  will  go  with  the  many;  it  is  inconvenient  to  be  too 
'  ular,  and  so  they  leap  with  the  majority.    But  what  a  wretched 


^     that  c 

^^mtic 


QVnJt  SOBfiAKBK  WHKET  OUIVI  TS  FOGOITBIT.  185 

f  doing  bnsioeBs,  and  bow  hollow  the  peace  which  comesof  it.  If  en 
raet  their  souls  upon  statements  so  flimsy  that  they  wonid  not  risk 
T-crown  upon  them.  There  is  >ruilc  at  the  bottom  of  this,  and  thone 
>rofeES  to  be  easy  in  these  conMences  are  not  bo.  Sirs,  there  is  no 
[lonest  in  his  peace  but  the  man  who  gained  it  throngh  the  blood  of 
;  Christ.  If  yon  come  to  testing  and  trying,  all  other  confidences 
©n  save  confidence  in  the  Christ  of  (Jod  ;  bnt  the  sinner  is  fiill  of 
,  and  does  not  want  to  test  and  try ;  like  the  simple,  he  belicreth 
woi'd  because  it  would  be  tedious  to  diBenininat«,  and  tronblesome 
iibt  a  good  report, 

se  practise  guile  in  another  way.  Tfiftf  aivid  alt  home  kulht,  a»d 
rfair  of  searching  doetriivs.  If  they  hejir  a  faithfta]  sermon,  and  it 
I  home  to  them,  do  yon  know  what  they  say  ?    "  The  preacher 

0  Teij  harsh.  I  could  not  hear  a  man  like  that  I  want  more 
'    Of  coarse  they  cannot  abide  a  ministry  which  reveals  their  true 

for  "  he  that  doeth  eril  hatcth  the  light,  neither  cometh  to  the 
lest  his  deeds  should  be  reproved."  Onlr  hcaiest  beuts  uk  to 
Qiat  searching  word  which  lays  bare  the  tlionghts  and  intents  of 
le&rt,  bnt  gracious  men  know  that  to  be  turned  inside  ont  by  a 
ring  discoarse  is  the  very  thing  they  need,  and  they  ate  ^tcful 
i  honest  man  of  God  who  will  not  spare  them. 
OBC  persons  mnst  be  very  foolish  wno  prefer  a  doctor  who,  when 
are  dreadfully  diseased  and  near  to  death,  neverthelesB  fiatt«ringly 
"  Oh,  this  is  but  a  small  matter ;  I  shall  soon  setyou  right.     Here 

wonderful  pill ;  take  a  certain  quantity  of  boxes  and  yon  will  be 
ily  restored.  I  have  seen  many  cases  worse  than  yoois  completely 
."  The  poor  wretch  is  almost  in  his  grave,  and  yet  he  promises 
ong  life.  Sensible  men  hate  such  a  deceiver.  Rational  men  choose' 
ttworthy  physician  who  will,  so  far  as  he  knows,  tell  them  what 
iem,  and  not  bolster  them  up  in  falsehood.  So,  if  men  would  but 
leir  senses  exercise  themsehes  on  the  best  things,  they  wouki 
■an  honest  teacher  and  prize  hia  faithful  warnings,  and  be  glad 
hings  should  be  put  plainly,  even  if  harshly,  lest  haply  they  shonld 

1  in  self-deception.  Very  commonly  we  meet  with  people  foolish 
■h  to  endeavour  to  turn  the  edge  of  an  unpalatable  home  truth 
iding  fault  with  the  preacher.  He  is  too  censorious,  and  that  is 
excuse  for  remaining  in  spiritual  apathy:  he  blundered  in  pro- 
ation,  or  grammar,  or  style,  and  that  is  tacitly  placed  as  an  excuse 
lOr  rejecting  the  gospel  which  he  preached.  Even  books  come  in 
re  censures.  The  plain-speakinjr  volume  is  not  "  conceived  in  a 
t  spirit,"  or  is  too  narrow,  bigoted,  and  one-aided.  The  witness  is 
because  be  prophecies  only  evil.  If  the  sinner  cannot  escape  the 
re  of  his  conscience,  he  will  raise  a  deal  of  dust  and  throw  hand- 
f  it  npon  those  who  seek  his  good,  so  that  in  the  smother  ho  may 
a  retreat.    Ah,  foolish  trickery  I 

fond  this,  many  ar^  clever  at  parrying  fume  Ihnuls  by  mln3ditcing 
themts.  Many  imitate  the  Bamaritau  woman  at  the  well  When 
(wd  b^an  to  unveil  her  character  and  touch  her  conscience  about 
five  hnsbands  of  hers,  she  songht  to  change  the  subject  by  the 
k,  "  Out  fathers  worshipped  in  this  mountain,  and  ye  say  that  in 
ilcm  men  ought  to  worship."    Thus  with  (juestions  about  rites 


186  METROPOLITAN  TABE&NAOLE  FUIiPIT. 

or  ceremonieSy  or  doctrines^  or  types,  or  prophecieSy  men  shield  th«n- 
selyes  from  the  blows  of  the  Spirit's  sword.  A  brother  minister  told  me 
some  time  ^o  that  he  visited  a  woman  whose  husband  had  died  Tery 
suddenly,  and  he  found  that  she  had  at  one  time  been  an  attendant  upon 
his  ministry.  She  was  sitting  in  the  room,  with  her  brother,  who  was 
an  elder  of  the  Scotch  church,  who  began  at  once  somewhat  harshly 
to  remind  her  of  her  negligence  of  Chnstian  ordinances :  the  woman 
evidently  feared  that  the  minister  would  follow  in  the  same  strain,  and 
so  she  cleverly  warded  off  the  expected  attack  by  stating  that  she  had  a 
^at  difficulty  which  she  could  by  no  means  get  over.  The  nainister 
had  no  idea  of  rebuking  her  while  just  newly  made  a  widow,  bnt  her 
conscience  was  evidently  putting  her  into  a  state  of  alamiy  and  ao 
she  again  interrupted  the  minister's  kindly  earnest  mmarkg  bj  sajing, 
**  Bat  BtiU,  ye  see,  sir,  I  cannot  get  my  mind  easjr-aboit  this  one  thiDg. 
In  the  Shoarter  Catechism  it  Bays,  that  God  is  without  begmning,  aiid 
I  cannot  understand  how  that  can  be.  That  he  should  be  without  end 
I  can  ondBistandy  but  that  he  should  be  without  beeinning  is  ouite 
beyond  me^"  "  Well,"  said  the  pastor,  '^my  good  sou^  I  do  not  udnk 
that  this  is  quite  the  time  to  talk  about  such  a  mysterious  matter 
You  see  the  Lord  has  removed  your  husband  from  you,  and  it  is 
well  for  us  to  hear  the  voice  of  the  rod."  It  was  of  no  user  for  the 
woman  held  to  her  shield,  and  repeated  that  still  she  conid  not 
understand  how  God  could  be  without  a  beginning*  At  If»t  her 
brother,  the  elder,  silenced  her  objection^  by  saying,  '*  Woman,  what  are 
you  at  ?  To  make  such  a  fuss  about  a  plain  siu)joct.  Of  course  the 
Lord  never  had  a  banning,  and  he  never  needed  any,fi)r  he  was  atwaya 
there."  This  for  awhile  silenced  that  particular  form  of  cavilliBg,  hot 
before  long  the  woman  was  at  the  same  mode  of  defence.  You  mow 
how  the  lapwing  pretends  to  have  a  broken  wing,  and  flies  as  if  it  muat 
be  taken  and  all  with  the  view  of  leading  the  passenger  frcmi  her  nfist,K> 
do  our  hearecB  try  to  lead  us  away  from  the  main  matter,  Wbm  coi»- 
paring  notes  about  the  way  in  which  the  unconverted  meet  ns  when  we 
try  to  deal  personally  with  them,  ministers  can  all  bear  witness  to  the 
devemeas  of  many  in  the  art  of  turning  the  switch  and  diunting  the 
conversation..  Yon  know  how  it  has  been  with  some  of  yon  when  jo^ 
have  been  hardly  [aressed,  you  have  crept  under  the  docb*in!e  of  eleotioi^ 
von  hanre  hidden  in  the  dark  comer  of  predestination,  or  dodged  the  goqial 
behind  some  theory  of  free  agency.  This  is  sheer  trickery,  a  dis^y.  of 
evil  subtlety,  exceedingly  mischievous.  What  would  it  help  yon  if  voa 
could  understand  all  mysteries?  As  long  as  you  are  unreconciled  to 
God,  what  does  it  matter  about  what  you  understand  or  do  not  under- 
staud  ?  Is  it  not  your  business  to  confess  your  sin,  and  go  and  seek 
mercy  at  the  hands  of  the  Most  High,  and  what  degree  of  knowledge 
will  excuse  you  if  you  neglect  this  chief  duty  ?  Those  points  whidi 
are  worth  your  knowing  God  will  teach  you  in  due  time  by  his  Spirit^  I 
beseech  you  attend  to  the  main  business,  which  is  that  you  should  be 
saved  from  sin  by  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus. 
Another  very  cunning  trick  which  is  often  practised  by  sinners  who 
I  full  of  guile  is  this,  they  pctss  on  to  other  people  anythiiyf  which 
wiCQmfin'tably  applicable  to  ihem^lves.  It  seemed  as  if  the  preacher 
"  made  a  cap  specially  to  fit  that  head,  but  the  result  was  that  the 


^ad 


OUtliH  PORBAKEli   WH£N  QITILT   IS  ^IIQ^VEN.  1&7 

pcraon  who  waU-hed  the  niakiug  eidafmed,  "  Dear  me  !  How  well  h« 
has  token  uiy  neigliboor'a  im-nsiirc."  The  letter  is  meant  for  him,  but 
he  puta  it  la  itnother  eaTclopc,  drops  it  into  his  friend's  letter-boi  and 
run*  uwiiy.  If  there  be  a  »jlemn  warning  for  imregcuerate  lucn  he  does 
not  see  its  bearing  on  himaelf,  but  he  perceivea  Bomebody  in  tlie  crowd 
who  needs  just  ench  a  serious  word,  and.  he  hopes  that,  it  will  be  useful 
to  him.  You  will  l>ear  him  somiitimea  say  after  a  sermon  in  whicb 
almost  ejery  point  has  I>een  put  persouitUy  to  himself,  "  I  cannot  tbiuk 
how  uur  friend  Smith  could  keep  bis  eeat  while  the  pastor  was  dealing 
w  faitbfbily  with  him."  "Thou  art  the  mau"  is  an  application  as 
much  needed  bow  as  ever,  for  it  is  cue  of  the  common  tricl^  of  sinners 
til  get  another  to  wear  their  robes  that  tiiey  themsdvea  may  piiaa  un- 
woosded  thniagh  tbe  battle.    Alas  for  such  wretched  guile. 

One  sorry  {lieoe  oi  ci'aTt  wbich  Satiui  tetkchea  to  many  is  to  malce 
them  doubi,  or  pretend  to  tbithl,  anj/lhitui  m  Seripture  whkh  frowns  upon 
thtm.  It  they  find  tluti;  dying  ihs  they  are  they  will  be  driven  from  the 
presence  of  God  for  ever,  tuey  comfort  themseltes  by  recollectuig  that  a 
wise  man  has  discoreri^d  that  everlasting  docs  not  mean  for  cvei',  and 
tbey  hear  ibat  a  clever  divine  has  fonad  out  Umt  there  is  to  be  a  gencval 
jail  delivery  inbell,  and  everybody  la  to  be  itdmitted  into  heaven  in  due 
•Mae.  They  bear  this  and  they  bear  that,  and  iis  di'owaing  men  catch 
4tt  stniwa  so  do  tiiey  ding  to  any  new  inventions  which  promiee  them 
ease  la  Lttcii  sine.  They  lay  the  flattering  unction  of  false  doctrine  to 
tbc-ir  budIs  as  if  it  wei'e  the  ]>alm  of  Gilead,  "Perhaps  it  may  be  so," 
they  aay,  and  thus  they  risk  their  future  happiness  upon  so  poor  a 
chance  as  tlie  hope  tliat,  perhaps,  tlicoe  mmlern  thinkers  may  turn  out 
to  be  right,  and  the  plain  teaching  of  Scripture  prove  to  be  a  mistake. 
It  IS  a  wonderfnlly  easy  thing  to  make  yourself  out  to  be  an  honest 
sceptic,  and  from  this  ettithwork  to  asuul  your  assailants,  and  yet  all 
the  while  yon  may  hare  no  doubt  at  all,  but  in  the  core  ol'  your  heart 
may,  like  tbe  devil,  believe  and  tremble.  Ab,  ye  pretended  doubteis, 
if  yon  were  stretched  on  a  dying  bed  you  would  believe  the  old  revelsr 
tion  fast  enough,  and  begin  to  cry  ont  for  meivy  in  the  scare  wbich  the 
^prooch  of  death  would  bring  upon  yon.  Half  the  men  who  talk  so 
mocb  obont  their  not  believing,  oeliere  a  great  deal  raore  than  they 
wonld  like  to  admit,  and  they  daix;  not  teat  their  own  imaginary  infi- 
debty  by  spending  tm  hour  ulone  in  their  chamber  at  eventide  and 
looking  into  their  own  hearts.  There  are  many  hypocritical  believers, 
bnt  are  there  not  quite  as  many  pretended  unbehevers  to  whom  doubt- 
ing is  a  mere  sop  to  qniet  tlie  Cerberus  of  their  conscience  ?  Guile  plays 
its  part  with  the  human  intellect,  and  conjures  up  on  army  of  ghosta  m 
the  form  of  doobta,  but  when  the  sun  of  truth  arises  they  immediately 
disappear. 

Let  US  examine  another  product  of  the  guile  of  the  natural  heart. 
While  yet  they  are  far  fram  God  many  calm  and  quiet  titemselves  wtih 
oulu-iaii  religion.  They  never  pray  in  sincerity,  neither  doea  their 
heart  speak  at  any  time  with  God,  and  yet  they  dare  not  go  to  bed  at 
night  without  kneeling  down  at  their  bedside  and  repeating  a  form  of 
prayer.  They  never  vet  i-epcnted  of  sin,  and  yet  they  will  repeat  words 
of  confession  the  most  hnmble.  They  do  not  praise  the  Lord  in  sin- 
cerity, and  yet  ibeir  voices  may  be  heard  in  psalm  and  bjmn.  ,  Qn.Uu 


188  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Sabbath-dav  they  go  up  to  the  house  of  Qoi^  and  ait  there,  and  do  u 
Ood*8  people  do,  and  they  would  not  foe  ea97  if  they  did  not  do  so; 
and  yi.'t  their  heart  is  in  none  of  the  worship.  Far  be  it  from  me  to 
discourage  even  outward  reverence,  but  it  is  a  strange  cheat  tbatt 
man  puts  upon  himself  when  he  supposes  that  mere  formal,  heaTtkn 
worKhip  can  be  a  reason  for  peace  of  mind.  To  haTe  mocked  God  with 
solemn  sounds  upon  a  thoughtless  tongue  ought  not  to  be  a  gronnd  of 
comfort.  Re|)catmg  words  of  prayer  without  life  and  feeling  ahooU 
rather  moYO  us  to  self-condemnation  than  to  self-congratulation.  How 
can  men  feel  content  with  rending  their  garments  when  the  Lord  bids 
them  rend  their  hearts  ?  0  sirs,  if  yon  do  not  pray  with  yonr  hearts 
what  are  all  yonr  forms  worth?  What  are  bended  kneea  withont 
broken  hearts  ?  If  you  do  not  indeed  repent  oi  sin  and  lay  bold  oa 
Christ,  what  are  all  your  church  goings,  or  yonr  chapel  goingSy  howe^ier 
constant  they  may  be  ?  Of  what  good  can  external  religionanesa  be  to 
you  while  you  denv  to  Qod  the  homage  of  yonr  minds?  And  yet  too 
many  wrap  themsclTcs  up  in  this  ^rment  of  guile. 

There  are  others  who  conceal  m  the  secret  of  their  hearta  a  biai- 
phemous  notion  which  they  hardly  dare  to  put  into  worda,  but  it 
amounts  to  this  that  ihe  reason  why  they  are  not  eaved  is  not  by  antf 
means  due  to  themselves.  They  reject  the  Saviour  and  reftise  to  leave 
their  sins,  but  they  are  not  to  blame  for  it ;  in  fact— <ml7  they  due 
not  actually  say  so — they  insinuate  that  the  blame  of  their  condition  liee 
with  God  himself.  They  have  been  waiting,  but  grace  has  not  come: 
t/iey  are  quite  ready,  but  God  is  not.  They  are  poor  victims  of  advene 
fate,  nnd  rather  to  be  pitied  than  condemned :  so  they  endeavonr  to 
make  out  for  themselves.  Distorteil  truth  is  used  to  support  their 
egregious  falsehood,  and  conscience  is  drugged  into  a  daneerons  alnm- 
ber.  Thus  do  men  cozen  themselves  out  of  their  souls  with  aophistieal 
arguments  forged  by  him  who  from  the  b^inning  is  a  mnrderer  and 
a  liar.  Be  not  hoodwinked  by  this  slanderous  fi&lsehood,  bat  read 
God*s  word  where  he  declares,  **  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord,  I  have  no 

fdeasurc  in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth,  but  that  he  turn  unto  me  and 
ive."  He  testifies  that  he  waiteth  to  be  gracious,  and  all  the  day  kmg 
stretches  out  his  hands  to  a  disobedient  and  gainsaying  ^eneratioii. 
What  a  strong  delusion  is  this  when  men  dare  to  lay  tneir  blood  at 
God's  door,  ana  make  him  to  be  the  author  of  their  sin !  In  their  con* 
sciences  they  know  better,  but  their  inward  crookedness  delights  in  iiei. 
Perhaps  the  most  numerous  victims  of  this  guile  are  those  ifho  flattfr 
theffiselvps  that  they  will  come  right  some  day.  They  have  been  hearers 
of  the  gospel  for  twenty  years  and  are  not  saved,  but  they  have  a  thll 
persuasion  that  they  shall  not  die  as  they  now  are.  They  nurse  the 
fond  idea  that  one  of  these  days  it  will  be  convenient  for  them  to  seek 
the  Lord.  The  convenient  day  has  never  come  yet,  but  still  they  think 
it  will.  There  will  be  a  favoured  hour  and  a  peculiar  time,  and  they  half 
promise  that  it  shall  not  be  very  much  longer  delayed.  0  ye  who  play 
at  procrastination,  ye  are  knaves  to  your  own  souls.  Look  ye  to  it.  If 
yon  resolve  that  you  will  i-epent  in  a  year's  time,  what  is  that  l>nt  a 
daring  defiance  of  God  by  declaring  that  you  will  continue  in  sin  for 
twelve  months  at  least  ?  Have  you  ever  looked  at  it  in  that  light  ?  Even 
if  a  man  knew  that  he  could  live  a  year,  nnd  that  on  this  day  twelve 


avUX  TOKgAKSir  THEK  OVU/l  la  FORGTVEK.  189 

onChehe  conld  carry  out  his  rcaohitiou  to  become  a  Christian,  vet  if  he 
lonld  make  anch  a.  reBoIntion,  ivhat  would  it  amonot  to  bot  tnia — "  I 
can  for  twelve  months  to  refuse  the  Saviour's  claims,  and  remain  ao 
lemy  to  God"?  Do  yon  think  that  Le  who  thiiB  resolves  is  in  ft 
(peful  condition  ?  If  he  be  determined  for  twelve  months  to  rebel 
rninst  his  Lord,  do  yon  not  prognosticate  that  at  the  end  of  the  year 
;  will  be  a  worse  man,  and  be  even  less  hkely  to  yield  himself  to  God  ? 

Thtis  have  I  exposed  a  few  of  the  many  "  knavish  tricks"  by  which 
ir  nnrenewed  hearts  ninnifest  their  gnile.  May  God  the  eternal 
pirit  bless  the  searching  word  to  all  who  are  deceiving  themselves. 

n.  But  now,  secondly,  the  pardoned  man  gives  BvroEKCB  or 
E.tsi.yo  FROM  THTB  Guii.E,  for,  in  the  first  place,  fi«  makes  an  open 
mfessioit  of  bis  sin  lo  Ood.  Here  he  stands  before  the  Moat  High,  and 
ries, "  God  be  mercifiil  to  me,  a  sinner,"  for  ho  feeie  his  gniltinesB. 
[e  takes  his  fimit  and  criminality  to  himself,  and  does  not  cloak  his 
liqnity.  He  owns  that  he  has  sinned  against  heaven  and  in  the 
resence  of  the  Most  High.  This  he  does  ,ill  the  more  freely  becanse 
e  has  no  motive  to  do  otherwise.  Why  shonld  he  hide  his  sin? 
'here  is  fall  forgiveness  for  him.  Why  shonld  he  deny  it  when  the 
rccicns  blood  of  Christ  is  ready  to  put  it  all  away  ?  I  think  the  ' 
lost  honest  confession  is  that  which  falls  from  the  believer's  lip  when 
e  gazes  upon  the 

"  fuutitaiii  filled  with  blood. 
Drawn  from  Inmianiiers  veins." 

There,"  says  a  creditor  to  his  debtor,  "  yon  owe  me  a  great  deal  of 
loney,  but  if  yon  will  bring  me  the  acconnt  I  will  receipt  it  alL"  My 
iend,  would  you  not  willingly  put  down  all  you  owed  in  snch  a  case  ? 
h,  I  think  you  would  rather  put  down  too  much  than  too  little  when 
ich  a  promise  was  before  you.  Yon  would  Ire  afraid  lest  you  should 
rerlook  anything,  and  would  he  eager  to  make  a  clean  breast  of  all 
}ur  liabilities.  And  so  when  the  Lord  Jesus  gives  a  full  pardon  to 
ic  son!  that  believes  in  him  it  is  sure  to  be  met  with  a  full  con- 
asion.     How  could  it  be  otherwise  ? 

The  pardoned  man  has  also  done  u-ilh  all  sorts  of  excuses  and  pallia- 
ons.  He  does  not  try  to  set  his  virtues  in  a  brighter  light  tlian  that 
'  truth,  or  to  make  his  sins  appear  less  heinous  than  they  are ;  but  he 
>nfcsscs  all  their  guilt,  and  heartily  humbles  himself  in  the  Bight  of 
od.  The  lowliest  words  in  the  language  he  loves  best;  the  lowest 
lace  in  the  synagogue  is  his  choice:  once  he  boaB[«d  that  he  was 
most  a  saint,  but  now  he  owns  that  he  is  altogetbtr  a  sinner.  Yon 
tall  hear  no  extennations,  excuses,  or  denials  now.  The  man  be- 
ilds  thepardon  of  God,  and  it  makes  him  honest.  Now  he  desrret  lo 
WK  Ihe  worst  of  his  casf,  and  longs  to  be  searched  and  probed.  He 
ho  has  found  peace  through  Jesus  Christ  surrunderB  the  keys  of  the 
lost  secret  chambers  of  his  soul,  and  asks  for  inspection,  "  0  Lord," 
lith  he,  "I  pray  thee  make  sure  work  with  my  case.  I  beseech  thee 
it  from  my  heart  this  dreadful  cancer  of  sin,  even  though  the  painful 
nife  must  follow  every  rootlet  of  the  hideous  evil,  for  I  desire  truth  in 
le  inward  parts  and  the  complete  erndimtion  of  the  love  of  sin.     He 

not  content  to  miiko  clean  the  outside  of  the  cup  and  the  platter. 


I 


190  KKTBOPOLITAV  TABUViOU  VVTUII. 

and  leave  the  inward  part  filthy,  bat  be  oriee  fiur  iamcd  deMMg  aid 
for  renewal  in  the  hidden  fonntaiaB  of  tboii{^  iuid  aofcioA.  Nov  ht 
courts  divine  investigation^  and  be^  his  Redaemer  k>  lefe  the  trimunriig 
&n  discover  and  remove  his  chaffl  Now  wonld  ho  pofc  himMlf  ia  fte 
full  blaze  of  Jehovah's  light,  and  desire  the  oonsiming  line  to  b«m  ^ 
his  dross.  He  cultivates  heart«eurchisg,  and  sraotiBBS  idailf  Jtfuir 
ance ;  a  lowlv  estimate  of  himself  he  oontinaulj  danrao,  boeonw  he 
feels  that  self-abhorrenoe  endears  Ohnst  to  hu  heart  aa  the  greit 
Saviour  of  unworthy  ones.  He  would  rather  have  a  Itttlo  ftraa  gnee 
than  abound  in  great  pretensions,  and  he  oomaden  the  lowaat  plioe 
among  the  children  of  God  to  be  bettw  than  be  deiervaa. 

Sincerity  has  also  miersd  Mo  tM  mmr^a  teU^m  iksimriib  A«fi 
of  OocTs  word.  He  now  sees  their  certainty  and  their  juatfoay  and  don 
not  pretend  to  question  them ;  he  is  one  who  Iffembka  at  the  mcd  of  As 
Lord,  and  he  leaves  the  cavillers  to  do  tbeir  daring  work  akaia.  Eb 
knows  in  his  own  conscience  that  there  is  a  hell,  be  oanftaieB  alao  flat 
it  is  just  that  there  should  be  such  a  place  of  punutameat^  and  ha  aalf 
wonders  that  he  has  not  been  driven  there  himself. 

Such  a  man  now  toishes  to  be  deaU  with  perBmallj/  Mnd  wiy  n  iiiHf 
whenever  he  reads  a  book  or  heais  a  sermon.  He  does  sat  wsaat  As 
preacher  to  speak  to  others  and  leave  him  out ;  nay,  bat  be  haa  eaas 
hungering  and  thirsting  after  the  Word  and  he  opens  hia  maatii  aad 
pants  for  his  portion ;  aad  if  instead  ol  getting  conm)rt  he  ia  to  leceivB 
rebuke,  he  is  reverently  ready  to  reoerve  it  so  long  as  it  shall  be  fer  Us 
real  good.  He  is  ready  to  take  bitter  medicine,  mr  he  is  anxious  to  be 
healed.  He  lays  bare  his  breast,  &r  he  dasicas  .the'haaiBaW«m||ai.to 
inflict  any  wound  sooner  than  leave  the  heart  af  atona  ariuunlua  iariL 
He  deb'ghts  in  the  searehing  Word,  and  the  aon  oloadjf  it  triaannl 
tests  him  the  more  thankful  he  jm  for  it. 

The  pardoned  man  also  deekee  in  everffHimg  iM  h§  i$m  to  ftt  km. 
He  is  often  afraid  to  pray  in  public  lest  ha  dionld  aay  more  think 
feels.  When  he  rises  from  his  knees  in  private  ha  mqnanUj  ^pMh 
tions  himself—''  Has  it  been  real  devotion  ?  Did  I  laally  ansan  all  thit 
I  said  ?"  He  catechises  himself  lest  he  should  be  a  famoerifee.  ikndl 
have  known  a  man,  whose  sins  have  been  pardoned,  when  bn:ina  dfaiad 
to  preach  a  sermon,  sit  down  afterwards  and  take  all  htaaentanoea  to 
pieces  lest  he  should  have  said  more  tban  he  altogakhtf  knaw  and 
actually  felt,  for  he  was  exoeedinglv  a&aid  of  going  begrond  iha  lina  of 
bis  actual  knowledge.  The  saved  soul  bates  paste  i^enu  and  miMio 
jewels;  he  desires  to  have  true  precious  stones  or  none  at  aUL  Ha  is 
afraid  of  shams.  He  wants  to  be  real  in  all  things,  and  henoa  ha  noaah 
times  doubts  his  own  safety,  because  he  is  in  the  habit  af  polling 
himself  to  ^eoeSy  to  dissect  his  heart  and  to  see  whether  it  aa  aoondid 
tfazougL  This  habit  may  bo  carried  to  excess,  bat  in  itself  it  ia  aa 
ezoecdingly  good  one.  It  is  infinitely  l)ettar  than  the  diihonaaty  of 
safeting  down  all  our  gilt  as  gold. 

The  really  pardoned  man  also  do$ir0$  io  be  rid  of  §tU  sin.  I  knaw 
some  who  can  never  hope  to  obtain  forgiveness,  for  they  oontinne  ia 
their  iniquity.  Can  a  woman  expect  to  find  peace  with  God  vriiile  she 
goes  on  taking  her  sly  drop  and  becoming  intoxicated  in  private  ?  Oana 
man  find  joy  m  God  who  still  clings  to  the  drunkard's  vice  ?    Will  God 


OrTLl  TOSfUKES  WHEN  r.UII.T  IS  POSaiVBS.  191 

receive  into  hie  f&voor  those  wliu  coiilinue  to  practice  dishoncsLjr  ia 
trade?  SheJl  sin  be  fondled  and  jet  pard'Hied?  No  one  dates  to 
expect  it,  and  yet  deccitfal  hearts  attempt  to  think  so.  They  will  con- 
d«Din  other  people's  pet  sins,  nnd  yet  exi:usc  their  own.  They  pretend 
to  much  sorrow  for  sin  in  general,  and  yet  hoM  to  one  fkvonrite  sin  in 
porticulor.  Their  delicate  Agag  ninst  li\e.  Kill  all  the  rest,  but  surely 
Hs  to  this  one  the  bittei-iiesB  of  death  has  passed  1  0  sirs,  be  not  de- 
ccived ;  you  must  be  willin;^  for  all  uin  to  go.  If  yon  desire  one  sin  to 
Utc  yon  will  not  live  yourself.  The  boneat-hearted  sinner — he  whom 
the  Lord  abeolves  of  iniquity — desires  to  sec  all  bis  sins  bronght  forth 
and  hnng  up  like  the  kings  whom  Joshua  found  in  the  cave  at  Mak- 
kedah — bung  up  in  the  face  of  the  sun  that  ths^  might  die  the  death. 

"  The  (Icaivat  idol  1  have  known, 
Whatc'er  that  idol  be, 
Help  me  to  War  it  from  thv  thit)ne. 
And  worsbip  oiilj  thee.' 

We  are  not  perfect,  bnt  evei^  really  pardoned  man  wishes  that  he  were 
eo.  Thecal  tlicre  are  sins  into  which  we  fall  there  are  no  sins  which 
we  love.  Though  we  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God,  yet  we  do  not 
rest  happy  in  falling  short,  and  we  can  never  be  wholly  content  till  it  is 
no  longer  so  with  ns.  Beloved,  the  pardoned  man  ia  cleansed  from  the 
gnile  which  would  ask  for  quarter  for  darling  sins. 

He  seeks  after  perfect  parity  of  life,  and  he  has  heartily  ceased  from 
guile,  for  now  as  an  heir  of  lieaven  he  lives  in  Ike  presence  of  Ood,  and 
delighU  to  remember  the  all-sccing  eye.  Now,  he  does  not  say.  to  God, 
'■  Depart  from  me ;  I  desire  not  the  knowledge  of  thy  ways,"  bnt  he 
looks  upon  every  action  of  every  day  as  done  before  Iub  Father's  face, 
lie  wants  nothing  but  truth,  and  that  wliich  will  bear  the  test  of  the 
judgment  day.  Beloved,  I  can  well  understand  why  a  pardoned  man 
l)©comes  a  man  without  guile — because  his  pardon  is  a  real  pardon; 
there  is  no  fiction  in  it.  Uod  jiistiHes  him,  but  he  does  not  justify  him 
by  a  Gnbterfuge,  as  sonic  have  blasphemously  ventured  to  say.  No,  bat 
there  is  my  sin,  Christ  took  it  and  was  puniEhed  for  it,  and  therefore 
my  sin  was  honestly  put  away  without  any  violation  of  justice,  for 
Christ  has  made  a  l\ili  atonement  for  it,  and  so  my  sin  has  justly  ceased 
to  be.  Why,  with  eoch  an  honest  foundation  as  that,  an  honest  pardon 
may  well  make  an  honest  man.  God  makes  the  believer  righteous — 
righteous  beyond  dispute.  His  faith  is  counted  to  him  for  righteous- 
ness, seeing  he  hatb  believed  iu  Jesus  Chi'ist,  and  that  is  a  righteousness 
which,  at  the  last  great  day,  will  stand  the  test  of  the  most  searching 
enquiry.  The  man  is  saved  on  honest  principles,  and  therefore,  hence- 
forth, there  are  no  tricks  for  him.  He  stands  erect  and  fears  no  accuser, 
white  he  cries,  "  Who  shull  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect? 
It  is  God  that  justifieth,  .  Who  is  he  that  condemncth  ?  It  is  Christ 
that  died,  yea  rather,  that  is  risen  again,  who  is  even  at  the  right  hand 
of  God,  who  also  maketh  iutercessiou  for  us." 

The  lesson  from  the  whole  ia  this :  tie  honest.  Sinner,  may  God 
make  yon  honest.  Do  not  decci^■e  yourself.  Make  a  clean  breast 
of  it  before  God.     Have  an  honest  religion,  ot  have  none  at  all.    Have 


192  WBTROPOLITAV  TAVKOrAGUI  PVmr. 

a  religion  of  fche  hearty  or  else  ha^e  none.    Pat  aside  die  men  witaMik 
and  garment  of  piety,  and  let  yonr  soul  be  ngbt  irifthfaL    Be  boneik 

And  jon  that  are  Ohristian  men  reooUect  thai  jaar  Ueeaediies  will 
never  be  enjoyed  by  yonrselres  unless  yon  oootinne  to  be  without  girik 
Some  Christian  men  live  rathw  by  policy  tluui  by  hommbw;  I  hop^  fksf 
are  Christians,  bnt  I  am  not  anre,  for  their  Inb  is  ftm  of  eAemiiig. 
They  never  go  straight ;  they  would  not  care  to  go  etnright ;  theynthar 
like  going  a  little  round  alxmt  just  to  show  that  they  eaii  de4ge  in  and 
out.  There  are  men  of  this  B(»t  in  busineny  and  yon  seed  not  go  oat 
of  your  road  to  meet  them.  Even  their  thinking  neema  to  Tovdvo  m  • 
wheel — all  round  about  and  round  about.  Now,  frienda,  yon  wifl  never 
be  happy  while  you  act  craftily.  The  only  life  in  wUn.  %  num  eai 
enjoy  the  blessedness  of  pardoned  sin  is  a  downright  atnughtforwani 
Ufe.  Be  like  clear  glass,  so  that  all  who  cbooae  to  do  so  may  aee  right 
through  you.  There  is  a  way  of  Hving  guardedly,  in  which  you  never 
speak  your  mind,  but  are  diplomatic  and  reserved ;  you  take  yoor 
words  out  of  your  mouth  ana  look  at  them,  and  judge  what  other 
people  will  think  of  them,  and  then  you  put  the  best  of  them  bock 
agam.  There  is  a  system  of  living,  as  it  were,  in  annonr,  budded  op, 
with  your  vizor  down ;  you  never  dare  show  jonr  real  sel^  bntnuia- 
tain  great  prudence  and  reserve.  What  is  this  but  to  livo  in  Atten? 
I  would  sooner  die  at  once.  ^  I  would  as  lief  not  bc^  as  live  to  be  ia 
awe  of  such  a  thing  as  I  myself."  To  speak  his  heart,  end -to  set 
honestly  is  to  a  true  believer  the  path  of  peace  and  happinesa.  If  a^ 
man  choose  another  path,  and  try  diplomacy  and  |x>liey,  ao  he  may,  bat 
as  sure  as  he  lives  he  will  come  to  a  sorrowml  ending,  and  find  ihat  aaeh 
a  course  is  not  a  way  wliich  God  approves,  nor  will  he  let  his  eernuto 
have  peace  in  it.  God  of  his  infinite  mercy  brii^  us  all  to  Mbv 
Jesus,  trusting  in  his  blood,  and  treading  in  his  footsteps ;  and  to  Ud 
be  glory  for  ever  and  ever.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Sobipture  read  before  Serkov— Pealm  UL 


Hyhns  fbok  ''Our  Own  Hykn  Book"--«51  (Ver8.LX  Ml,  M6. 


Jusi  Published.    Price  One  Shitting. 

CHRIST'S    glorious"  ACHIEVEMENTS, 

SbiX  fortf)  in  SWam  Sbtxmam, 


"Seldom,  we  renttire  to  think,  hi&s  Buch  a  'glorious*  theme  been  iMmSled 
inch  a  'glorious'  fashion.    Every  page  dro|M  hiinais:  it  ii  a  race  apirituiil  \ 
All  our  readers  who  procure  this  delightful  pocket  oompanioio  will  thank  xm  for 
announcing  its  publication.'*— 7%<9  Chrhtian, 

.        Passmobb  &  Alabaster,  4,  Paternoster  Buildings ;  and  all  Bookselleri. 


Jfl«ti(ii}jalttmi  gabfniirde  |ttl}!tt 


HOW   IS   SALTATION   EECBIVKD? 


4   ^^<imt[ 

Dkuterkd  oh  Losd'b-Day  Morkino,  Aprii.  Ist,  1877, 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

IT  THE  METROPOHTAN   TABERNACLE,   NEWIHOTON. 


"  Therefore  it  ia  of  faith,  that  it  [nig:ht  b«  by  grace  ;  to  the  end  the  nromise  misht 
fi«  anra  to  all  the  ieed  ;  not  to  that  iinij  vhtch  is  of  the  Uv,  bat  to  that  alio  wtuch 
(•of  thefidtb  of  Abraham;  who  ia  the  fntber  of  lu  all.'— Romans  iv.  16. 

We  shall  tnrn  during  jet  auoLlier  Sabbath  morning  to  one  of  the  great 
vital  traths  of  the  gospel,  I  feel  it  to  be  iniportiiiit  more  and  more  to 
brinp  forward  the  fiindamentnl  doctrines,  aintic  they  are  in  certain 
quarters  placed  so  much  in  the  background.  I  met  with  a  remark  the 
other  dfij  thftt  even  the  evangelical  pulpit  needs  to  be  eraiigelined:  I 
am  afraid  it  is  too  true,  and  therefore  we  will  give  such  prominence  to 
the  gospel,  and  to  its  central  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith,  that  no 
such  remark  shall  be  applicable  to  us.  We  have  heard  it  said  that  if 
an  iustroment  could  be  invented  which  would  serve  the  same  purpose 
totrards  sermons  as  the  lactometer  does  towards  milk,  jou  would  with 
gretit  difficulty  be  able  to  discover  any  trace  of  the  unadulterated  milk 
of  the  Word  in  large  numbers  of  modem  disc-oarscs.  I  shall  not  sai>- 
tcribe  to  any  sweeping  cens'ire,  but  I  am  a&aid  there  is  too  much 
gronnd  for  the  accusation.  1..i  abundance  of  sermons  the  polish  of  the 
rhetoric  ia  greatly  in  excew  of  tlie  weight  of  the  doctrine,  and  "  the 
wisdom  of  words  "  is  far  more  conspicuous  than  the  cross  of  Christ, 

Besidee,  the  gospel  is  always  wanted.  There  are  always  sonic  persons 
who  urgently  need  it,  and  will  i^crish  unlees  they  receive  it.  It  is  a 
matter  of  hourly  necessity.  There  may  be  gner  and  more  artistic  things 
to  apeak  about  than  the  eimphcitics  of  Christ,  but  there  are  certainly 
no  more  useful  and  requisite  things.  The  sign-posts  at  the  cross  roads 
bear  very  simple  words,  generally  consisting  of  the  names  of  t}ie  towns 
and  villages  to  which  the  roads  lead ;  but  if  these  were  painted  out  and 
thciir  places  supplied  with  stanzas  from  Byron,  or  stately  lines  from 
Milioii,  or  deep  thoughts  from  Cowper  or  Young,  I  am  afraid  there 
wonld  bo  grievous  complaints  from  persons  losing  their  way.  They 
would  declare  that  however  excellent  tike  poetry  might  be  they  thoaght 
Ko.  1,347. 


194  KETBOPOLITAai  TABKUACLB  PULFIT. 

it  an  impertineiice  to  mod^  them  with  a  vcne  iriien  tiiej  needed  phis 
directions  as  to  the  king's  higfawmj.  So  let  dioae  who  will  indntoB  is 
poetical  thooghts  and  expreas  them  in  high-flofwii  Imigiuige,  it  mH  be 
cars  to  set  up  the  hand-posts  marking  oat  the  war  of  salTation,  and  to 
keep  them  painted  in  letters  lazge  aivi  plain,  so  that  he  who  rans  may 

There  is  another  reason  for  giving  the  gospel  over  and  over,  arain  and 
again.  It  is  the  reason  which  makes  the  mother  tell  her  child  twenty 
times,  namely,  becanac  nineteen  times  are  not  enough.  Men  aie  so  fiv- 
getfal  abont  the  things  of  Christ,  and  thdr  minds  are  so  apt  to  start 
aside  from  the  troth,  that  when  they  have  learned  the  goapd  they  are 
very  easily  bewitched  by  falsehood,  and  are  readily  draeived  by  that 
^  other  gospel "  which  is  not  another:  tberelKe  we  need  to  give  them 
''  line  upon  line  and  precept  apon  precept,"  I  scarcely  remember  the 
old  rustic  rhyme,  bot  I  recollect  hearing  it  song  in  m^  boyish  days  when 
the  ooontiy  people  were  dibbUng  beans,  and  aoooidmg  to  the  old  plan 
were  pntting  three  into  each  hole, — I  think  it  ran  dins — 

**  One  for  the  wonn  and  one  for  the  crow. 
And  let  us  hopa  the  other  will  grow.** 

We  most  be  content  to  plant  many  seeds  in  the  hope  that  one  will  take 
root  and  bear  frait  The  worm  and  crow  are  dwavs  at  w<Nic,  and 
will  be  sore  to  get  their  full  share  of  our  sowing,  and  therefore  let  ss 
sow  the  more. 

Come  we,  then,  to  oar  text  and  to  the  gospel  of  ftith.  Last  Sabbadi 
the  theme  was,  For  whom  is  the  gospel  meant?  and  the  reply  was^  tar 
sinners.  The  question  to-day  is,  Hoia  is  the  jfo$pel  retewedt  T\» 
answer  is,  by  faith. 

Oar  first  head  shall  be,  the  fact,—''  it  is  of  fidtfa  ":  seocmdly,  the  JM 
r$ammfor  this, — ^"'that  it  might  be  by  grace**:  and  thirdly,  ikBfurOm 
TBOson^ — **  to  the  end  that  the  promise  might  be  sore  to  dl  tlie  seed." 

I.  First,  then,  here  is  the  fact,  it  is  affailh.  What  does  the  "^  it  ** 
refer  to  ?  //  is  of  faith.  If  you  will  read  the  context^  I  think  yon  iriD 
consider  that  it  refers  to  the  promise,  althongh  some  have  said  that  the 
antecedent  word  or  thought  is  ^*  the  inheritance."  This  mattere  vei; 
little  if  at  all:  it  may  mean  the  inheritance,  the  covenant^  or  the 
promise,  for  ^ese  are  one.  To  give  a  wide  murd  whfeh  vrill  take  in 
all, — the  blcffiedness  which  comes  to  a  man  in  Christy  the  blessedneiB 
promised  by  the  covenant  of  grace  is  of  faith :  in  one  word,  salvation  ii 
of  faith. 

And  what  is  faith  ?  It  is  believing  the  promise  of  God,  taking  God 
at  his  word,  and  acting  upon  that  belief  by  tmsting  in  him.  Some 
of  tlic  Puritans  used  to  divide  faith,  improp^ly  but  still  instmctively, 
into  three  parts.  The  first  was  self  renunciation,  which  is^  perhaps, 
rather  a  preparation  for  faith  than  &ith  it«elf,  in  which  a  man  confesses 
tliat  he  cannot  trust  in  himself,  and  so  goes  out  of  sdf  and  all  confidence 
in  his  own  good  works.  The  second  part  of  faith  thev  said  was  relianee 
in  irtiich  a  man  believing  the  promise  of  God  trusts  him,  depends  ofion 
him,  and  leaves  his  soul  in  the  Saviour's  hands :  and  then  the  third 
]mrt  of  faith  they  said  was  appropriation  by  which  a  man  takes  to  him- 
self that  which  God  presents  in  the  promise  to  the  believer,  appropriates 


<'''<dOV  IS  SALTATION  RBOEITBD?    '  196 

k  B8  hiB  (Twn,  kcAe  upoa  it,  and  enjoya  it.  Certainly  there  is  no  trne 
Uth  -without  self-renunciation,  reliance,  and  at  least  a  measnre  of 
jmropriation ;  where  these  three  fire  found  there  is  faith  Id  the  aoul. 
We  ahull,  however,  tetter  understand  what  faith  is  as  we  proceed  with 
Jut  snhject,  if  God  the  Holy  Ghost  will  be  pleased  to  enliphten  m. 
Dear  friends,  yon  can  easily  see  that  the  blessiDg  was  of  faith  in 
Abraham's  case,  and  it  is  precisely  the  same  with  all  those  who  by  faith 
lie  the  children  of  believing  Abraham. 

First,  it  was  so  in  Ike  ease  of  Abraham,  Abraham  obtained  the  pro- 
miae  by  faith  and  not  by  works  nor  by  the  energy  of  the  fleah.  He  relied 
llone  upon  the  diTlne  jmimise.  We  read  in  the  seventeenth  verse  ("Ab 
ft  is  written,  I  have  made  thee  a  father  of  many  nations,)  before  him 
Miom  he  believed,  even  God,  who  quickcneth  the  dead,  and  calleth  those 
tliinga  which  be  not  as  though  they  were."  Abraham's  faith  consisted 
it  believing  (he  prmiist  of  God,  and  this  he  did  fimily  and  practically. 
He  was  fer  away  in  Chaldea  when  the  Lord  called  him  out  and  pro- 
Inised  to  give  him  a  land  and  a  seed,  and  straightway  he  went  forth,  not 
knowing  whither  he  went.  When  he  came  into  Canaan  he  had  no 
tettled  resting  place,  but  wandered  about  in  tents,  stilt  believing  most 
fiilly  that  the  land  wherein  he  sojourned  as  a  stranger  was  his  own, 
8i>d  promised  to  give  him  a  seed,  and  yet  he  had  no  children.  Year 
followed  year,  and  in  the  course  of  nature  he  grew  old  and  hia  wife  was 
fong  past  the  age  of  childbearing,  and  yet  there  was  no  son  bom  to 
Aem.  When  at  last  Ishmael  was  bom  hia  hope  in  that  direction  waa 
dashed  to  the  gronnd,  for  he  was  informed  that  the  covenant  was  not 
with   Ishmael.     Beh'eving  Abraham  had  stepped  aside  to  caraa!  ei- 

Kdiency,  and  had  hoped  in  that  way  to  realise  the  lingering  promise, 
t  he  had  fourteen  years  more  to  wait,  tiH  lie  waa  a  hundred  years  old, 
imd  till  Sarah  had  reached  her  ninetieth  year.  Yet  he  believed  the 
word  of  the  Lord  and  fell  npon  his  face  and  langhed  with  holy  joy  and 
nid  in  his  heart,  "  Shall  a  child  be  bom  onto  him  that  is  an  hundred 
years  old  ?"  So,  too,  when  Isaac  waa  bora  and  grown  up  he  believed 
that  in  Isaac  shonld  the  covenant  be  established,  nor  did  he  doubt  this 
'frhen  the  Ivord  bade  him  take  Isaac  and  offer  him  up  as  a  sacrifice.  He 
obeyed  without  questioning,  believing  that  God  was  able  to  raise  Isaac 
from  the  dead,  or  in  aome  other  way  to  keep  his  word  of  promise.  Now 
consider  that  we  have  multiplied  promisee,  and  those  written  down  in 
black  and  white  in  the  inspired  Word,  which  we  may  consult  at  any 
time  we  please,  while  Abraham  had  only  now  and  then  a  verbal  pro- 
mise, and  yet  he  clnng  to  it  and  relied  upon  it.  Though  there  was 
nothing  else  to  rely  npon,  and  neither  sign  nor  evidence  of  any  oH^pring 
to  fiilfil  the  promise  that  he  should  be  heir  of  the  world  and  father  of 
jbany  nations,  yet  he  needed  no  other  ground  of  confidence  bnt  that  God 
Itad  said  it,  and  that  he  wonld  make  his  word  good. 
['  There  was  in  Abraham,  also,  an  eye  to  (he  eenlral point  0/  the promn, 
ttie  Messiah,  Jesus,  our  Lord.  I  do  not  know  that  Abraham  under- 
htood  all  the  spiritual  meaning  of  the  covenant  made  with  him,  probably 
in  did  not ;  bnt  he  did  understand  that  the  Christ  was  to  he  born  of 
Idm,  in  whom  all  nations  shonld  be  blessed.  When  the  Lord  said  that 
he  would  make  him  a  blessing,  and  in  him  should  all  nations  of  the 
Buth  be  blessed,  I  do  dot  suppose  Abraham  saw  all  the  fulness  of  that 


^ 


196  HieTaoi*ouTAir  TABRavAOLB  puurar. 

marvellonB  word ;  but  he  did  aee  that  he  wm  to  be  tbe  pnqieiiitor  of 
the  MessiAh.  Oar  Lord  himielf  is  my  anihority  Ibr  tfau  UMrtioa: 
**  Abraham  saw  my  day,  he  saw  it  and  was  glnl  Tiunigh  tiuam  9^ 
peared  to  this  man,  old  and  wiUiered,  wiUi  a  wih  ninet?  yean  of  an 
no  likelihood  that  he  should  erer  become  a  fitther,  yet  cud  he  fUly  te- 
lieve  that  he  woald  be  the  fSither  of  many  nations,  amd  that  ima  na 

Sound  whatever  but  that  the  living  Qoa  had  so  promised  wn,  and 
erefore  so  it  must  be. 

This  faith  of  Abraham  we  find  cmMmd  m  MkmUi$9  wMmr. 
^  Who  against  hope  believed  in  hope,  that  he  mig^  Moome  the  fidiar 
of  many  nations,  according  to  that  whioh  waa  wpsUnn^  80  ahall  tto 
seed  be.  And  being  not  weak  in  fiiith,  he  ooosidered  not  hia  cnm  wj 
now  dead,  when  he  was  abont  an  hundred  yean  old,  neitlisr  jet  tti 
deadness  of  Sarah's  womb:  he  staggered  not  at  the  piomisa  of  flii. 
through  unbelief"  Brethren,  these  were  in  themselvea  IsnrQde  d^leat 
ties,  enough  to  make  a  man  fear  ttiat  the  promise  did  but  moek  hiiB^ 
but  Abra£an  did  not  consider  anything  beyond  the  promiae  and  the 
Ood  who  rave  it.  The  difficulties  were  ibr  Qod  to  oomdder«  and  ast 
for  him.  He  knew  that  Qod  had  made  the  wcnrld  oat  of  nothing,  aid 
that  he  supported  all  things  bv  the  word  of  his  power,  and  therafDie  k 
ftlt  that  nothing  was  too  hara  for  him.  His  own  advanced  yean  aad 
the  afire  of  his  me  were  of  no  consecj^uence,  he  did  not  even  tidos  Umb 
into  toe  reckoning,  but  saw  only  a  fiuthfnl  Almighty  Qod,  and  fUt  eoa- 
tent  OnoblefoithI  Faith  such  as  Qod  deserveal  lUth  audi  aa  bom 
render  to  him  but  those  whom  he  calls  by  eflhctQal  giaoe !  This  it  mm 
which  justified  Abraham,  and  made  him  the  fother  of  belkven. 

Abraham's  fiuth  9iao govs  f lory  io  Ood.  I  stopped  in  tbe  middkef 
the  twentieth  verse  just  now,  but  we  must  now  complete  the  reading  of 
it  '^  But  was  strong  in  fidth,  giving  elory  to  Qod."  Qod  had  |»omi«Bl, 
and  he  treated  the  Lord's  promise  with  becoming  reveraioe ;  ne  didaot 
impiously  suspect  the  Ixm  of  falsehood,  or  of  mockii^  hia  servant,  or 
of  uttenng  to-day  what  he  might  take  baedc  to-morrow.  He  knew  Uat 
Jehovah  is  not  a  man  that  he  should  lie,  nor  the  son  of  man  that  he 
should  repent.  Abraham  gkrified  the  truth  of  Ood,  aad  at  tbe  same 
time  he  glorified  his  power.  He  was  quite  certain  that  the  LoAl  had 
not  spoken  bevond  his  line,  but  ttiat  what  he  had  piomised  he  was  able 
to  perform.  It  bdongs  to  puny  man  to  speak  more  than  heoan  do  ( fhB 
often  his  tongue  is  longer  than  his  arm ;  but  with  the  Ijord  it  ia  never 
so.  Hath  he  said,  and  shall  he  not  do  it?  Is  anything  too  hard  Ibr 
the  Lord?  Abraham  adoringly  believed  in  the  mimutability,  troth, 
and  power  of  the  living  Qod,  and  looked  for  the  fulfilment  of  hia  wofd. 

AU  this  strong,  unstaggeriuff  foith  which  glorified  Qod  r9$iml  wm 
As  Lard  atoM.  xon  wiUsee  that  it  was  so  by  reading  the  tweniy-niifc 
verse.  *'  Being  fully  persuaded  that,  what  he  had  promiaed,  lie  was 
able  also  to  pmorm."  There  was  nothing  whatever  in  hia  honae^  hii 
wUb,  himself,  or  anywhere  else,  which  could  guarantee  the  ftilfilment  ef 
ihe  promise.  He  had  only  Qod  to  look  to :  only,  did  I  say--wfaat  conU 
a  man  have  more  ?  Yet  so  it  was,  there  were  no  signs,  marks^  UdceMi 
or  indicatiiNQS  to  substantiate  the  confidence  of  Abraham :  he  fealed 
aolely  upon  the  unlimited  power  of  Qod.  And  tim,  dear  brethren,  ii 
the  kind  of  Inirh  which  Uod  loves  and  honours,  which  wants  no  si^M^ 


BOW  18  8ALVATIOH  E«OBIT>D?  197 

larkfl,  evidenceB,  be)ps,  or  otlier  buttrasaes  to  Bapport  the  plain  and 
ire  word  of  the  Lord ;  but  simply  knows  that  Jehovah  hu  said  it,  and 
lat  he  will  maVe  it  good.  Though  all  things  should  give  the  promise 
ie  He,  tve  bdiere  in  it  because  wc  beliere  in  God  Tme  foith  ndicnies 
n possibility,  and  pours  contempt  upon  impTohability,  knowing  that  om- 
ipotence  and  immutability  cannot  be  thwarted  or  hindered.  Has  Ood 
iid  it  ?  Then  so  it  ia.  Dictum !  Factum !  Spoken  I  Done !  These 
ivain  are  one  with  the  Most  High. 

Well,  now,  (A*  /at/A  of  eve}-y  man  who  is  tavtd  mutt  J>»  tf  thia  eha- 
Mler.  Every  man  who  receives  salvation  receives  'A\/ja  faith  like  that 
f  Abraham,  for,  my  brethren,  when  we  are  saved  a*  too  lakt  On  pro- 
liu  of  Gal  and  depend  vpon  it.  To  one  believer  one  word  of  God  is 
pplied,  to  another  nuolher,  but  some  sweet  word,  moat  sore  and  gteadisst, 
I  discovered  upon  which  we  fix  our  hope,  and  find  anchwage  tbr  our 
pirit.  Yea,  nnd  as  We  search  the  word  by  hith  we  take  eaoh  promise 
B  we  lind  it,  and  we  say  "  this  is  true  "  and  "  this  ia  tme,"  ana  so  we 
est  n[>Dn  all  of  them.  Is  it  not  so  widi  all  of  von  who  have  peace  with 
lod  ?  Did  yon  not  gain  it  by  resting  nnon  the  promise  of  God  as  jpa 
mnd  it  in  the  word  and  as  it  was  opened  up  to  yon  by  the  Holy^irit? 
lave  yon  any  other  ground  of  confidence  but  God's  promise?  I  tcnow 
on  have  not,  my  brethren,  nor  do  yon  desire  any. 

And  ice  also  believe  m  God  over  the  hmd  of  gnat  diffiaUHti.  If  it  «-flJ 
lard  for  .\lraham  to  believe  that  a  son  should  be  bom  unto  him, 
letlimks  it  is  Jiarder  for  a  poor  burdened  sinner,  oonsdons  of  his  neat 
-iiilt.conscions  that  God  must  punish  him  also  for  that  guilt,  to  believe 
levertheless  in  the  hopefnl  things  which  the  gospel  prophecies  unto 
lim.  Can  I  believe  that  the  righteous  God  is  looking  npon  me,  a  sinner, 
rith  eyes  of  love  ?  Can  I  believe  thab  though  I  have  o&ended  him  and 
irciiiL-u  iiii  his  laws  he  nererthcless  waits  to  be  gracioaa  to  me  ?  While 
17  heart  is  heavy  and  the  prospect  is  black  around  me  and  I  see  nothing 
mt  a  terrible  hell  to  be  my  eternal  portion,  can  1  at  such  a  time  believe 
hat  God  haa  planned  my  redemption  and  given  Iiiri  Sou  to  die  for  me, 
■d  Uiat  sow  be  invites  me  to  come  and  receive  a  full,  perfect,  and  im* 
nediate  pwdon  at  his  hands  ?     Can  the  gospel  mcsBitge  be  trae  to  such 

wotdilesi  rebel  aslam?  It  seems  as  if  the  law  and  justice  of  God 
et  themaelres  against  the  truth  of  such  wonderful  deeds  of  merc^  as 
he  gotpd  announces,  and  it  is  hard  for  a  stricken  heart  to  believe  the 
opoct  i  bat  (he  faith  which  saves  the  sonl  believes  the  gospel  promise  in 
be  teeth  of  all  its  alarms,  and  notwithstanding  all  the  thunders  of 
h*  (aw.  Despite  the  trepidation  of  the  awakened  spirit,  the  Holy 
Ipfait  enables  it  to  accept  the  great  Father's  word,  to  rest  upon  the 
ropitiation  which  he  has  set  forth,  and  to  quiet  itself  with  the  firm  per- 
MWion  Uiat  God  for  Christ's  sake  doth  put  away  its  sin. 

At  the  same  time  another  grand  miracle  is  also  believed  in,  namely, 
aKeBention.  This  seems  to  me  to  be  quite  as  great  an  act  of  faith  as 
IT  Abraham  to  believe  in  the  birth  of  a  child  by  two  parents  who  were 
•til  advanced  in  years.  The  case  stands  thus:  here  am  I,  dead  by 
•tore,  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  The  deadness  of  Abraham  and 
larah  according  to  nature  was  not  greater  than  the  deadness  of  my  soul 
»  every  good  tning.  Is  it  possible,  then,  that  I  should  live  unto  God, 
hat  within  this  stony  heart  there  should  yet  throb  eternal  life  and 


196  XETROPOUTAX  TABSa^ACLS  PCLFIT. 

divine  love,  and  iba:  I  sLcold  oome  to  delight  in  God ?  Can  it  be  thai 
viib  sr.-:h  j  dvpravei  and  deceiiniA  bean  a5  mine  I  should  jet  riae  to 
fclio'tril.iy.  w.±  ;:.e  lv:lv  God  and  should  call  him  my  Father  and  fed 
the  spin:  of  i^iopci.o.  viibin  mv  hean?  Can  I  who  now  diead  the 
Lord  vc:  ^.viLr  'x*  rt; ojct  in  him  ?  "  Oh,"  ftavs  the  poor  troubled  sinner, 
"  can  l  tb:.:  b^ve  ;•.  j.::::  i^iiia»£  the  ihrone  of  Goo,  I  that  CTen  tried 
:o  do::: :  bia  ex:s:r2>.^.  rrer  '>:z^e  :o  l^e  at  perfect  peace  with  him,  ao  that 
bo  sb./.l  :^'.l  '^r  bis  :':.-::.:  iz.L  reveal  his  secret  to  me  and  listen  to  my 
voic^  m  rraj.r  f  h  .:  L*:se::  Ic?"  The  faith  which  saTea  the  soul  be- 
'.:cT-:i  :n  ibe  >.•»»:  L-:l.:y  o:'  rL-jenrrotion  and  sanctification,  nay,  more, 
i:  IvlicT^s  iL  Jes.is  and  o:  Ukins  for  us  pow^  to  become  children  of 
Vsod  ui  s:re:ii::b  ;o  ^vsqiL-^  sin.    Tbis  is  belierinff  God  indeed. 

Lcsrk  ib.s  ^jiv  ye:  ^^l.  :or  here  is  another  difficulty.  We  know 
ihii  we  nius:  r^rscvere  :o  ibe  end.  for  only  he  that  endureth  to  the  end 
»^a11  b«o  SoVcd.  IXxis  ::  nc*:  scr^:  inj'iiedibie  that  such  fe^e,  fickle, 
icvlisb  L:>:^:v.rc«  ^  7e  ;i:>r  sb^:ili  cvi:Lnae  in  iaiih  and  the  fear  of  God 
&11  our  .Itcs  :  Ye:  :b'^  we  xl.us:  do  :  and  :be  faith  which  aavea  enablra  ua 
to  l'el>:Te  :bs;  we  sbali  lez^vezv,  for  it  is  persuaded  that  the  Bedeemer 
is  il.t-  :•:  ketr*  :b*i  "i\::h  we  have  comoiiited  unto  him,  that  he  will 
ptr:\v:  :b.i:  >^b..b  i^vcwxriirib  us.  tha:  be  will  suffer  none  to  pluck  in 
ou:  ::  bis  b..::.:.  a'^.I  :bj:  bsrinj:  Ur.in  the  good  woric  in  ua  be  will 
vTLrry  ::  o".    Tb.s  :s  :i::b  •.v:r:bT  ::  :be  f&uier  of  the  fkithfnL 

On:^  iiT-u-.  le:  us  "virbold  iLo:b-:T  dificiilty  for  fiuth.  We  beliere 
according  to  ucos  pr:::iise  :b.i:  we  sba.l  one  day  be  '*  without  spot  or 
wrinkle,  or  any  sr.ob  :b:nj. '  I  do  Wlieve  ihat  this  head  ahaU  wear  a 
cn}wn  of  gAvry.  and  u.at  :r.is  hand  sbaLi  wave  a  pafan  branch.  I  am 
fiiliy  assure  iL^i  be  u  ill  one  day  sweeily  sliv  lo  mr 

"C:  -.  -.lino  eves  -diAt  ibou  znAvs't  see 
AVL-:  I  have  in  *:cre  fcr  :bee* 
Lav  :h:r.e  arms  cf  warfir«  d.  wn. 
Fail  lb  at  then  mayn't  win  a  crown.- 

We,  all,  who  are  believers  in  Jesus,  sbaii  one  day  be  without  fSralt  befcic 
the  throne  of  God ;  but  how  i>  this  to  be  ?  Surely  our  confidence  it 
that  he  who  has  promised  i:  is  aJ.ie  to  perform  it"  This  is  the  faith 
which  finds  its  way  to  ffii-ry — loe  i':;:r[i  which  expects  to  enter  into 
the  Bedeemer  s  joy,  Ltvtiuse  oV  : he  Redeemer 's  love  and  life.  Brethren, 
in  this  matter  we  see  the  didicuities^  but  we  do  not  consider  them: 
we  count  th-rm  as  less  than  noibinir  sinoe  omniporence  has  come  into 
the  field.  ••  Thanks  Ih?  unto  ^.fO-.l  whiih  eiveth  us  the  victory  through 
our  Lord  Jesus  Cbrist,"  We  kco'.v  ihn:\:ir  Kedvviner  liveth",  and  that 
because  he  lives  vr-j  s'.Kiii  also  "iro.  ani  l-e  with  him  wiiore  he  is. 

At  the  tnd  ui'  ihc  ci..u»tor  we  are  lo'A  cuu:  //*«  sariwj  faith  resis  in 
ihfi  power  of  Oo.i  u^  >;.«?.. '/V>;f«i  in  Jr^us, — "If  we  l^Iieve  in  him 
who  w«^  dt'iircred  lor  our  uL*eiKts,  and  w;is  raised  again  for  our  justifi- 
cation.'* Beloved,  wo  believe  that  Jesus  died,  as  certainly  died  as  ever 
man  died. and  yet  on  the  ni^rniuir  o:*  thv  :hinl  day  he  rose asrain  from  the 
dead  by  divine  |X)wer.  It  is  no:  to  ;js  a  thins:  inckniible  that  God  should 
nr.se  the  dt-aii;  we  ihor.iore  ivlieve  tha:  i-e^ause  liod  has  raised  the 
di^ad  he  hath  raise\l  us  also  lK>:ii  our  death  in  sin.  and  that  he  will 
our  bodies  Irom  the  tomb  atUr  they  shaii  have  sivpt  awhile  in  the 


mm  n  uirjrnoir  wKmriD?  IM 

1.  Wo  believe  aUo  that  our  Lord  Jeeiie  died  lor  oar  offeaoes,  and 
them  sway.  Our  faith  builds  upon  the  Aib«titstiaii  of  the  Loud 
B  on  onr  behalf,  and  it  reata  there  with  firm  confidence.    We  be- 

a)BO  that  he  roBc  again  because  his  BubBtiUiti<»  iraH  aooept«d,  and 
nae  our  offenoes  were  for  ever  pat  away, — roae  again  to  pwre  that 
re  jastiHed  in  him.  Tliis  is  where  wc  slaad  thea.  I  expect  to  be 
1,  not  at  all  because  of  what  I  am,  nor  of  what  I  can  do,  nor  beoaoM 
lything  I  ever  shall  l*e  al)ie  to  bo  or  to  do ;  but  only  beoanw  God  has 
lised  to  Bave  those  who  beiicve  in  Jesue  Ohriat  thnagh  what  the 
[  JeeuB  has  suffered  in  their  stead.  Becawa  Jem  hw  riaai  ts 
B  that  his  snttering  w;ie  incepted  on  the  behalf  of  beliflvan,  then 
e  rest  and  trnst,  and  that  is  the  way  in  which  every  believer  ia 
i, — that  way  and  no  how  else.    Even  as  Ahrahaai  beliared  lo  do 

Here  ia  the  &ct,  it  is  of  faith. 
.    Now  we  conte  to  the  second  point ;  and  here  we  are  to  oonaider 

riBST  KKASON  why  God  has  chosen  to  make  salvation  by  faith, 
t  it  might  he  of  grace." 

iw,  dear  Mends,  the  Lord  might  have  willed  to  make  the  condition 
ilratton  a  mitigated  form  of  works.  If  he  had  done  so  it  wonU 
tave  been  of  grace,  for  it  is  a  principle  which  i  n«d  notexplain  now, 
t  fixed  principle,  that  if  thu  blcssiBg  be  of  grace  it  is  no  more  of 
R,  otherwise  grace  ia  no  more  grace ;  and  if  it  be-  cf  wwka  it  ii 
lore  of  grace,  otherwise  work  is  no  more  work.  As  water  and  oil 
not  mix,  and  as  lire  and  water  will  not  lie  down  tide  \ij  nde  in  qniet, 
lither  will  the  principle  of  merit  and  the  prinoiple  of  free  favaar. 
cannot  make  a  legal  work  to  be  a  condition  of  a  gracions  hleaaing 
ant  at  once  introducing  an  alien  element  and  really  bringing  the 
nnder  the  covenant  of  works,  and  so  spoiling  the  whole  plan  of 
y.  Grace  and  faith  are  corijjniinis,  :ind  will  Sixw  together  in  the 
:  (dnriot,  bat  gr«ce  and  merit  are  ccmtrary  the  one  bo  the  othoi  and 
Of^KHitB  ways,  and  therefore  6od  has  not  cboaan  to  yoke  them 
iier.  He  will  not  bnild  with  incongruous  materials,  or  daub  with 
asfiOnA  mortar.  He  will  not  m^e  an  miage  partly  of  gold  and 
J  of  day,  nor  weave  a  linsey-woolsey  garment :  ois  work  is  all  of  a 
••od  all  of  grace. 

[ate,  m  Abrahmi'a  cats,  isaamnch  a  he  received  by  faith  the 
B^  wlscli  Ood  promised  him,  it  is  vary  evidvnl  that  it  mas  ^  gract, 
never  heard  any  one  ascribe  Abraham's  salvation  to  his  meribe,  and 
Lbrahan  was  as  eminently  holy  man.  There  are  specks  in  his  life 
d  in  whose  life  will  there  not  be  fbond  infirmities  F—bnt  yet  he 
}ne  iA-  the  gnm^rt  charactera  of  history.  Still,  no  man  thinks  of 
hs2D  ai  a  self-jOBtiiying  person,  or  as  at  all  related  to  ^e  Pharisee 
said,  "  Ood,  I  thank  thee  that  I  am  not  as  other  men."  I  never 
I  soybody  hint  that  the  great  patriarch  had  whereof  to  glory  before 
His  DaoM  is  not "  the  tather  of  the  innocent,"  bnt  "  the  father  of 
sfthftd."  When  we  read  Abraham's  life  we  see  that  God  called  him 
1  aet  4riF  nvereign  grace,  that  God  made  a  corenant  with  him  as 
t  of  grace,  and  that  the  promised  child  was  bom,  not  «f  the  power 
e  fleui,  bat  entirety  according  to  promise.  Grace  leigns  throagh 
eoosnesa  onto  eternal  life  in  the  life  of  the  patriorcn,  and  it  is 
ntad  1b  a  tboosand  ways  whenever  we  see  his  &ith  receiving  the 


SOO  HsnoFOLRijr  TAntvACUB  rmjm. 

promisei.  The  holiness  of  Ahrahun,  liiioe  it  ame  oai  of  his  Mh, 
never  leads  ns  to  ascribe  his  MtMcdnsss  to  ai^fUu^g  but  ttia  gnas  or 
God. 

Now,  inasmnch  as  we  aie  saved  by  ikitli,  MMry  UUtmr  %$  tmkk  t^m 
far  hmmlf  that,  in  his  own  in$iam$,  iii$  ijf  mie$^  Believiog  ia aoAs 
self-rennnciafeing  act  that  no  man  who  loobRiretonial  life  ihevdij  evv 
talked  about  his  own  merits,  except  to  count  them  bat  dnxsi  and  dnif^ 
No,  brethren,  the  child  of  the  promise  cannot  Hts  in  the  aaoifi  hfim 
with  the  son  of  the  bondwoman*  when  Isaac  growa  op  T«iiwf^  ^Mt 
depart :  the  nrinoiple  of  believing  nnto  evnriasSng  life  will  nofe  eqdne 
a  hint  abont  numan  deservings.  Those  who  believe  in  jwaKflcaKon  If 
&ith  are  the  only  persons  who  can  believe  in  sahatUNi  by  gaosu  TJi 
believer  may  grow  in  grace  till  he  beoomea  ftill|y  aasured  ok  bia  own  si^ 
vation ;  yes,  and  he  may  become  holiness  mto  the  Loei  ia  o  na 
remarkable  manner,  being  wholly  oonseorated  to  God  in  bocb»  mLiH 
spirit,  but  yon  will  never  hear  the  believing  man  qieak  of  bis.eaqp^ 
nence,  or  attainments,  or  achievements  aa  a  reaacm  Ibr  f^oajinc  ia 
himself,  or  as  an  argument  for  becoming  moce  cimfideni  aa  to  hia  mkh. 
He  dares  not  trost  his  works,  or  statea  of  fteling,  far  he  fcela  that  1^ 
fiiith  he  stands.  He  cannot  get  away  from  sin^de  Ihith,  forthomoniBBl 
he  attempts  to  do  so  he  feels  the  nonnd  goin^  from  nndar  hinii  andhs 
begins  to  sink  into  horrible  connision  of  qnrit;  ther^lbre  ha  rstani 
unto  his  rest,  and  resolves  to  abide  in  futh  in  his  nam  Savioin;  fa 
there  he  abides  in  the  grace  of  God. 

Through  the  prominence  given  to  fiuth,  the  troth  of  aalviftton  if 
grace  is  so  conspicuously  revealed  that  mmi  tk§  out$id$  world  mo  omh 
pellediosse  it^  though  the  only  result  maybe  to  make  them  oavil  thenst 
They  charge  us  with  preaching  too  mooh  conoeminff  gmos^  beoapll 
thev  hear  us  magnifying  and  extolling  the  {rian  of  atdvafcton  by  MSk, 
and  they  readily  perceive  that  a  gift  promised  to  (hith  must  bo  a  boon 
of  grace,  and  not  a  reward  for  service  done.  Only  begin  to  pmok 
sal^ion  by  works  or  ceremonies,  and  nobody  will  aooose  yon  of 
saying  too  much  of  grace,  but  keep  to  iUth  ana  you  are  aom  to  keep 
to  the  preaching  of  grace. 

Moreover,  faith  never  did  clash  unth  grace  yet  When  tbo  aiaMr 
comes  and  trusts  to  Christ,  and  Qhrist  saith  to  him,  '*  I  flnglvo4fae 
freely  by  my  ^[race,*'  faith  says,  **  0  Lord,  that  is  what  I  want^  sai 
what  Ibelieve  m ;  I  ask  thee  to  deal  with  me  even  so."  ^  Bat  if  Igiiv 
thee  everlasting  life  it  will  not  be  because  thou  deservest  it,  but  fa 
mine  own  name's  sake."  Faith  replies,  '^0  Lord,  that  also  ispceoiselv 
aa  I  desire ;  it  is  the  sum  and  substonoe  of  my  prayer."  Wnoo  faiu 
grows  strong  and  takes  to  pleading  in  prayer  (and  oh  how  mighty  ahe  is 
with  God  in  supplication,  moving  nis  omnipotence  to  her  mind),  yet  sD 
her  pleadings  are  based  on  grace,  and  none  of  them  upon  the  merit  of 
the  creature.  Never  yet  did  faith  borrow  weapons  from  Mount  Sinsi, 
never  once  did  she  ask  as  though  the  favour  were  a  debt,  but  ahe  ahni|i 
hdds  to  the  promise  of  the  gracious  God,  and  expects  oil  thinga  ftooDi 
the  fhithfnlness  of  her  God. 

A^,  and  when  fsuth  grows  strongest  and  attains  to  her  highest  statnn^ 

fd  is  ftiUest  of  delight,  so  that  she  danceth  for  very  joy,  yet  die  nenr 
all  her  exultation  boasts  or  exalts  herself.    Where  is  boasting,  then? 


■OW   18   HALTATIOn   BECEITED  ?  201 

It  is  ext-ladwl.  By  the  law  of  woifca?  nay,  bnt  by  the  law  of  fiiitb. 
hith  and  carnal  IxMtBM'ng  Dcver  yet  walked  together.  If  a  man  shooM 
bodflt  of  the  strength  of  bis  ttiith,  it  woald  be  clear  eridence  that  he 
had  none  at  all,  or  at  legist  (hat  he  had  for  the  time  fallen  into  Tainglorions 
preBuiu})tion.  Boasting  ?  No,  faith  lovea  to  lie  low,  and  beharc  henelf 
■A  a  little  child,  and  when  she  lifts  hendf  np  it  is  to  exalt  her  Lord, 
Mid  her  Lord  alone. 

Faith,  too,  is  well  caicnlatcd  to  show  forth  the  grace  of  God,  because, 
fnlh  it  the  thild  of  grate,  "  Ah,"  sajv  foith,  "  I  have  grasped  the 
eoTenant,  I  have  laid  hold  on  the  promises,  I  hare  seen  Ohrist,  I  hare 
Mzed  into  heaven,  I  have  enjoyed  loretastefl  of  eternal  jojs.  But  (mjs 
me)  I  am  of  the  operation  of  God;  Ishonld  never  hare  existed  if  the  Spirit 
of  God  had  not  created  me."  The  believer  knows  that  his  &ith  is  not  a 
weed  indigenous  to  the  soil  of  his  heart,  bnt  arare  plant,  ait  exotic  which 
has  been  planted  there  by  divine  wisdom,  and  he  knows  teo  that  if  the 
Lord  does  not  nonrish  it  his  faith  will  die  tike  a  withered  flower.  He 
knows  that  his  folih  is  a  perpetual  miracle ;  for  it  is  begotten,  eostained, 
•ud  preBGncd  by  a  power  not  less  might;  than  that  which  raised  our 
Lord  Jeans  Christ  from  the  dead.  If  I  met  with  an  ange)  in  a  hovel  I 
riionld  know  that  he  was  not  born  there,  bnt  that  he  came  from  above ; 
and  BO  is  it  with  faith,  its  heayenly  descent  is  manifest  to  all.  Faith, 
then,  tracing  her  very  existence  to  grace,  never  can  be  anything  bat  the 
friend,  the  vindicator,  the  advocate,  and  theglorifier  of  the  giMe  of  Qod : 
therefore  it  is  of  faith  that  it  might  be  by  graoe. 

III.  Now,  thirdly,  there  is  A  fdrthbr  bbasos  for  ihtth  and  grace 
being  the  Lord's  chosen  method  of  salvation, — "  To  iht  «ni  tMat  the 
promi*e  might  be  sun  lo  all  the  teed."  Look  at  this,  dear  friends,  very 
carcfnlly.  Salvation  was  made  to  be  of  bith,  and  not  of  works,  that 
the  promise  might  be  sure  to  all  the  seed,  for  first,  it  could  not  have 
been  *ttre  to  ut  Oenliles  bg  tfw  law,  because  in  a  certain  sense  we  were 
not  under  the  law  of  Mosca  at  alL  Turn  to  the  text  and  you  find  that 
it  runs  thus  :  "  Sure  to  all  the  seed,  not  to  that  only  which  is  of  the 
law,  but  to  that  also  which  ia  of  the  &ith  of  Abraham,  who  is  the  futher 
of  ns  alL"  That  is  to  aay,  the  Jew  receiving  the  seal  of  circnmcision 
and  coming  under  the  ceremonial  law,  eating  its  passover,  and  presenting 
its  Siifrifites,  might  possibly  have  been  reached  by  a  legal  method,  but 
«e  who  are  Gentiles  woold  have  been  altogether  shut  out.  Aa  to  the 
covenant  according  to  the  flesh,  we  are  aliens  and  have  never  come 
tader  ita  Iwuds,  oi'  participated  in  its  privileges,  therefore  gnce  chooses 
to  bless  as  by  faith  in  order  that  the  Qentile  may  partake  of  the  blessing 
9f  the  covenant  as  well  as  the  Jew. 

Bat  there  is  a  still  wider  reason  :  it  is  of  fiuth,  because  the  other 
UteltMit  kas/ailM  already  in  every  earn.  We  hare  all  broken  the  law 
aln^dy,  and  so  have  put  oui-aclves  beyond  the  power  of  ever  receiving 
blessing  as  a  reward  of  merir.  Failure  at  the  outset  has rnined  our  future 
proJ4>e<.-Ca,  and  henceforth  liy  the  deeds  of  the  taw  shall  no  flesh  t>e  justi- 
fied. Wiiat  rematnetli,  then,  IT  wu  are  to  be  saved  at  all,  but  that  it 
should  be  of  faith  ?  This  door  alone  is  open,  let  us  bless  Qod  that  no 
man  can  shut  it. 

Again,  it  is  of  failli  that  it  miyhl  be  sure.  Now,  under  the  system  of 
works  nothing  is  sure.     Suj^ose,  my  dear  bi-cthren,  you  were  imder  a 


202  MSTSOPOLITAV  VIUBMACU  FOUIX. 

covenant  of  salTation  by  works,  and  -yon  had  fldfilled  tlMMn  voriai  m 
till  now,  yet  yon  would  not  be  sue.  An  yoa  wemntf  jeaa  of  agi^  m 
have  yon  kept  yonr  Btandin?  till  now  P  W^  yon  Iwva  donetagBniiid 
more  than  father  Adam  did,  for  though  he  waa  a  pttftcfe  mavillMk 
any  natural  corruption,  I  do  not  anppoae  that  ha  kapi  hta  finft-catrti  ti 
a  day.  But  after  all  yon  have  done  far  tfaeaa  loag  fean  ftfawM^hm 
ererything  before  you  have  finighed  your  next  meaL  ■  If  jomt  ^tmiUm 
depends  upon  your  own  works  yoa  sfenot  nft^aBBd  ma  mmtth^wdim 
you  are  out  of  this  present  life,  for  yoa  might  ni,  and  Uiat  «iia< 
against  the  conditions  would  deatny  the  oofotaBBft.  ^  Whan  the  nig 
tumeth  from  his  righteousness,  and  oommittnth  itaiqnilj^  he-  ahilfHi 
dio  therebv."  But  see  the  ezoeUenoeof  «Bhalaoaoj0eaos^'fer!1riilB 
yon  reach  the  ground  of  faith  in  the  promiBeii_yoa  an  upon  iiiVtf>  JMll 


^^havt 


and  your  soul  is  no  longer  in  jeopardr*     Han  ia  m , 

for  the  divine  promise  cannot  fiuL  If  nvf  adifatioii  dspwula  meftiit 
Lord,  and  is  received  by  me  on  the  ground  that  the  hant  katk  dstaMll 
it,  promised  it  in  covenant,  and  enmnred  it  to  me  Iqf  the  Uood:<if  JsM 
Ohrist,  then  it  is  so  mine  that  neither  life  nor  dealih  nor  Satva  Mr  Us 
world  shall  ever  rob  me  of  it.  If  I  Hve  to  the  afte  of  Methnaelah  mjJUk 
will  have  the  same  promises  to  rest  npon,  and  dinging:  there  ahe  fAittf 
the  lapse  of  years  to  change  her  unmntable  seeonty.  The  jnmm 
would  not  be  sure  to  one  of  the  seed  by  anv  other  means  thia  Ibat  af 
grace  through  faith,  but  now  it  is  sure  to  slL 

Moreover,  if  the  promise  had.  been  made  to  itMat  tfaeiti  jwa  mm 
of  the  seed  to  whom  most  evidently  it  never  could  oome»  Xhie  of  Hie 
seed  of  Abraham  hung  dying  upon  a  oroaa,  and  within  an-honr  or  t«B 
his  bones  were  broken  uiat  he  might  the  more  qnibUj  die  and  k 
buried.  Now,  if  salvation  to  that  poor  dying  tUefnniateoaieta^Vod% 
how  can  he  be  saved?  His  hands  and  ibet  aie  fhatiinwl  i^f  and'haii 
in  the  very  article  of  death,  what  can  he  do?  The  praniaa  umld Mt 
have  been  sure  to  him,  my  brethren,  if  there  had  beea  anj  aottva  ad- 
dition ;  but  he  beheved,  cast  a  saving  e;^e  upon  die  Lord  Jeana  and.iridl 
^  Lord,  remember  me,"  and  the  promiae  was  moot  aore  to-him^ibr  Om 
answer  was — ^''To-day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  Paxadtae.'*  lii^a 
chosen  one  of  Ood  is  brought  into  such  a  condition  that  aothlQg  is  pos- 
sible to  him  except  faith,  but  grace  has  made  the  act  of  beBemg 
divinely  possible.  Well  was  it  for  those  bitten  bf  serpents  that  dDl  iliit 
was  asked  of  them  was  a  look,  for  this  was  possiUe  eveoi  whn  thehqt 
venom  made  the  blood  to  boil  and  scalded  all  the  frame  wUii  ismtt. 
Faith  is  possible  to  the  blind,  the  lame,  the  deaf,  the  dumb;  fhithia pos- 
sible to  the  almost  idiot,  the  desponding  and  the  gailty ;  fidth  can  hs 
possessed  by  babes  and  by  the  extremely  aged,  by  tte  illiterate  m  wefl  si 
by  the  instructed ;  it  is  well  chosen  as  tne  cup  to  convey  the  livav 
water,  for  it  is  not  too  heavy  for  the  weak,  nor  too  hnge  for  the  I^tiK 
anr  too  small  for  the  full-grown. 

Now,  Inrothers  and  sisters,  I  have  done  when  I  have  aaid  jnat  thifi 
I  will  ask  ^u  who  have  believed  in  Christ  one  quesfciojEiy — jon.lAo 
are  resting  m  the  promise  of  God,  you  who  are  depending  nnon  Ae 
finished  work  of  him  who  was  delivered  for  your  ofTeoces— -now  do 
feel?    Axe  you  rejoicing  in  your  unquestionable  safety?    As  I 

;ve  tnmed  this  matter  over,  and  thought  upon  it^  my  sonl  haa  dwett 


HOW  IB  au.TATioir  BaonvED?  201 

1  perfect  peace.  I  cannot  cotie«ive  anjtliing  that  God  himnlf  could 
ive  to  the  believer  which  would  make  him  more  Bofe  than  the  work  of 
IfariRl  has  made  him.  Ood  cunnot  lie,  are  yon  not  gnre  of  this?  He 
lofit  keep  his  promise,  are  you  not  certain  of  this  ?  "Wliat  more  do  ^a 
ant  ?  As  a  little  child  believes  its  father's  word  without  any  qneation, 
ken  m  would  iie  rest  on  the  bare,  naked  promise  of  Jehovah,  wad  in 
t  doing  we  i:iecoLne  coneciouB  of  a  peace  that  ptuseth  all  under- 
amding,  which  keeps  yonr  ijearts  and  minds  by  Christ  Jeans.  I  dare 
ot  say  otherwise,  nor  be  nilent,  for  I  am  conscious  of  lieinf;  able  to  aay, 
Therefore  being  justified  by  faith,  I  have  peace  with  God."     la  that 

ace  of  the  soul  much  love  springs  np,  and  inward  nnity  to  God 
nd  conformity  to  Christ.  Faith  believes  her  Ood  and  tmsts  him  for 
UDG  and  eternity,  for  little  things  and  great  things,  for  body  and  for 
oul,  &od  this  leads  on  to  still  higher  results.  U  bleated  God,  what  a 
iiiion  of  desire,  and  heart,  and  aim  exists  between  thee  and  the  sotil 
hat  tmsts  thee!  How  arc  we  brought  into  harmony  with  thy  mind 
ud  pnrpoeeal  How  is  our  heart  made  to  delight  in  thee  I  How 
ompletely  is  our  soul  "bound  np  in  the  bundle  of  life  with  the  soul  of 
he  Lord  our  Qod"!  We  grow  up  into  faim  in  ali  things  who  is 
nr  Head,  onr  life,  our  all. 

I  charge  yon,  dear  children  of  God,  "as  ye  have  received  Christ 
estiE  the  Lord  so  walk  ye  in  hini."  Live  in  his  |M?iice,  and  abound  in 
i  more  and  more ;  do  not  be  afraid  of  being  too  peaceful,  "lejotoe  in  the 
iord  always,  and  again  I  Bay  rejoice."  When  you  liare  U>  condemn 
oareclf  for  ghort^^omings,  yet  do  not  qnestion  the  promise  of  the  Lord. 
Vhcn  Bin  overcomes  you,  confess  the  fault,  bnt  do  not  donbt  the  pardon 
,-hich  Jeans  still  gives  you.  When  sharp  tempUitions  and  severe  trials 
rise  from  dirers  qnartcrB  do  not  suifer  them  to  otrry  yon  by  storm ;  let 
,ot  the  stronghold  and  castle  of  your  spirit  be  captured — "  let  not  yoor 
cart  be  troubled."  Stagger  not  at  the  promise  through  nnbelief,  but 
lold  to  it  whether  you  walk  in  the  sunshine  or  in  Egyptian  darkness, 
'hat  which  the  Lord  haa  promised  he  is  able  also  to  {lerform,  do  not 
nnbt  it.  Ijean  hard  on  the  faithful  promise,  and  wIk/u  you  feel  sad  at 
leart  lean  harder  and  harder  still,  for  ''faithful  is  bL' that  hath  promised, 
fho  also  will  do  it." 

Laat  of  all,  you  sinners  here  this  morning,  who  ha\o  heard  all  abont 
his  salvation  by  trusting ;  I  charge  yon  do  not  rest  till  you  have' 
rusted  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  rested  in  the  great  promises  of  God. 
{ere  is  one:  "I  will  be  merciful  to  their  nnrightconsness,  and  their 
ins  and  thch'  iniquities  wilt  I  remember  no  moit'  for  ever."  Here  is 
nother  which  is  Tery  cheering  :  "  Whosoever  callech  upon  the  name  of 
he  Lord  shall  be  saved."  Cal!  upon  him  in  prayer,  and  then  say, 
'  Lord,  I  have  called,  and  thou  bast  aiu'd  I  shall  be  saved."  Here  is 
nother  gracious  word:  "  He  that  believeth  and  is  liaptized  shall  be 
aved."  Attend  thou  to  these  two  commands,  and  then  say,  "  Lord,  I 
lave  thy  word  for  it  that  1  shall  be  saved,  and  I  bold  thee  to  it." 
klieve  Ood,  sinner.  Oh  that  he  wonld  give  Cliee  grace  this  morning 
ly  his  Holy  Spirit  to  say,  "  How  can  I  do  otherwise  than  believe  him  ? 

dale  not  doubt  him."  0  poor  tried  soul,  I>e1ieve  in  Jesus  so  as  to 
rust  Iby  guilty  soul  with  him.  The  more  guilty  thou  feelcst  thyself 
D  be  the  more  is  it  in  thy  power  to  glorify  Ood,  by  believing  that  he 


304  KWeUOfOUTAK  TiMBUIACU  FOmT. 

can  forgive  and  renew  aoch  a  guilty  one  at  Iboa  art.  If 
buried  Uke  a  feesil  in  the  loweet  ttratom of  tiOp  fe^ka on  ^pnny Ar 
ihee  and  fetch  thee  np  out  of  the  horribla  pit,  and  maksb  thy  to, 
petrified  heart  to  liye.  Beliefeat  thra  Oua?  "" If  Ams  wnafc  bdMi^ 
all  things  are  poaaiUe  to  him  that  bdiavelh.'^  !biiafe  tin  nonuia  tint 
be  makea  to  ewery  beUerer  that  he  will  aave  skimp  and  hoU  ikon  tail^ 
i>r  it  is  not  a  Tarn  thing,  it  ia  tihy  life.  ""BnfcwlMii  if  I  obMn  aojcj 
or  peace?"  Believe  the  piamiae  atill,  and  jojapd  paaoa  wffl  ooml 
^Bntwhatiflaeeno  aigna?"  Aak  f(ff  no  ai0u^ be  wiilipr  to  tnat 
God'a  word  without  any  other  foanfatee  bnthttftrathAilaiianalH^aBd 
thon  wilt  thus  ffire  him  glonr.  ''Blaned  an  tibif  thai  hate  not  am, 
and  yet  have  believed."  BeUeve  that  Jehomkottmat  Bap  and  aa  k 
has  promised  to  forgive  all  who  believa  in  Jaaai,  kteg  on  to  fliatwaid 
and  thoQ  shalt  be  saved.  Knners,  I  hawa  aet  befeaa  jaa  llia.vay«f 
salvation  as  simplv  as  I  can,  will  yon  have  it  or  not?  Ma|f  ika  BgaH 
of  Qod  sweetly  leaa  yon  to  aay,  **  Have  it^  ay^  that  I  wilL"  Hub  go  ia 
peace,  and  rejoice  henceforth  and  for  even    Ckxl  Ueas  yovL    Amen. 


Portion  of  Sobiptttre  Read  bbforb  8iBXQiH-43bloaBian8  iL 


HTiom  FROM  ''OuB  OwH  Htmb  Book"— 280»  249;  Sfti 


•«  « 


Ju$t  PubUOud.    Ptitt  On»  ShOMiif. 


CHRISrS   GLORIOUS   ACHlEVEMEfe 

■ 


<<To  the  legion  loTdrt  of  Mr.  Sporgeon*!  proUfio  mindaad  pea  tlrfs fsoi #IU kt 
verv  acceptable.  It  ie  one  of  the  ahilUng  series,  and  oogtoini  soaa  o|  Iba  fsllil^i 
beet  and  choicest  spiritual  utteranoes.**— !&a/itu^  Meamiger, 


FAMMoaa  Sl  AsJkBAATMMf  4|  Palemostar  Bnildiny ;  aad  all  IWlnhinlkn 

.1  •  ■  .•.!.■ 


r 


THE  GREAT   HOUSE   AND  THE  VE88EUS  IN  IT. 
Dblitkred  OS  Loiii»'3-Dat   Morning,  April  8th,  1877,  bt 

C.  H.  SPURGEON.      '" 

IT   THE   USTROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    KEWIHOTOK. 


"But  in  sgTeit  booie  there  are  not  only  vessels  af^cU  md  of  liltcr,  but  tltoet 
wood  and  of  mrth  :  and  aome  to  honour  aoi  some  to  dithonour.  If  a  man  tberefora 
purge  himulf  from  theacr,  ho  shull  bo  a  reiiel  unto  honour,  SBDctiGed,  and  meet  for 
the  muter'e  uie,  and  prepared  unto  orery  good  Tvork." — 2  Timothy,  ii,  20,  31. 

Oke  of  the  most  serious  calamities  which  CEto  befall  achnrch  is  to  baTO 
her  own  miniBterB  teaching  heresy  :  vet  this  is  no  new  thing,  it  has  hflj)- 
pened  from  the  beginning.  Paul  and  Pet-erandJames  and  John  in  their 
epistles  had  to  speak  of  seduceraiii  the  churches, even  in  those  primitive 
days,  and  ever  since  then  there  have  arisen  in  the  very  midst  of  the 
^boiise  of  God  those  who  have  suhvertcd  the  faith  of  many,  and  led 
them  away  O'om  the  fundamental  tniths  into  errors  of  their  own 
inventing.  The  apostle  compares  this  to  a  gangrene,  which  is  one  of  the 
most  dangerous  and  deadly  miEchiefs  which  can  occnr  to  the  body.  Tl 
is  within  the  body,  it  eats  into  the  flesh  deeper  and  deeper,  festering  and 
putrefying,  and  if  it  be  not  stopped  it  will  continue  its  ravages  till  life  is 
cxtingnished  by  "  black  mortificntion."  False  doctrine  and  an  unchristian 
spirit 'in  the  midst  of  the  charch  itself  must  be  regarded  as  such  a 
gnngrene,  a  silent  wolf  ravenously  gnawing  at  the  heart,  the  vulture  of 
Promethens  devouring  the  vitals:  no  external  oppcraition  is  one-half  so 
much  to  be  dreaded.  Yet  here  is  our  comfort  when  distressed  at  the  evils 
of  the  pivsent  age,  among  which  this  is  one  of  the  chief,  that  the  truth 
abides  for  ever  the  same,  "The  foundation  of  God  standethsnre."  There 
is  no  moving  that.  Whether  ten  thousand  oppose  it  or  promulgate  it, 
the  tmth  is  still  the  same  in  every  jot  and  tittle ;  even  as  tne  snn  shineth 
evermore,  as  well  when  clouds  conceal  its  brightness  as  when  from  a 
clear  sky  it  poors  abroad  a  flood  of  gUry.  The  lovers  of  profane  and 
Tain  babblings  have  not  taken  away  from  lis,  nor  can  they  take  from  us, 
the  eternal  verities :  the  Lord  liveth,, though  they  have  said,  "There  is 
no  God."  The  precious  blood  of  Jesns  has  not  lost  its  efficacy,  though 
divines  have  beclouded  the  atonement;  the  Spirit 'af  God  is  not  less 
No.  Ij848, 


206  KETBOPOLITAV  TABERIffAOfil  FDLPIT. 

migbbT  to  qmckea  and  to  oonple  dwogh  bmbImb  dBoABd  iili  ■»- 
BonaHty;  Om  resanectioii  is  as  9m  as  if  HymfiiiBiu  nd  TUkftag 'W 
never  aaid  that  it  is  passed  already ;  and  the  eternal  ooTenant  of  nm 
abides  for  ever  unbroken  ihondi  Fharuaes  and  SaddoioeeB  nnn  ti 
reyile  it  The  foundation  of  God  standeth  isan,  and  wanomt  db 
foundation  of  the  dinrch  remaanfl  01m  aha,  ft^  Uaand  be  €k4 *dte 
Lord  knoweih  them  that  are  his."  All  that  Cfod  baa  Inult  iq^  Oe 
foundation  which  he  himself  has  laid  keeps  its  plafle»  not  tam  lirtag 
stone  that  he  ever  laid  upon  the  foundation  baa  been  lifted  tcom  Mi 
resting  place.  Earthquakes  of  ervor  maj  test  the  atabilftj  ct  tte 
building  and  cause  groift  aeavehing  of  lieart^  bat  aoomer  ahdl  tts 
mountains  which  are  round  about  Jerusalem  start  Oram  their  aeatB  Hum 
the  work  or  word  of  the  Lord  be  frustrated.  Tbe  things  wbidioaaaot 
be  shaken  remain  unaltered  in  the  Teiy  wont  tbaea. 

*'  After  all,"  says  the  apostle  in  eOecty  though  in  fewer  woEds,  *^itii 
not  such  a  very  great  wonder  that  there  diould  be  persona  in  tb 
church  who  are  not  of  the  sterling  metal  of  sincerity,  mx  of  the  gold 
and  silver  of  truth,  which  endures  the  fiie.  You  must  not  kok  at 
Hymeneus  and  Philetus  as  if  they  were  prodigies,  there  hare  beenmanj 
like  them  and  there  will  be  many  more ;  these  ill  weeda  siow  apaiH^^ 
all  ages  they  multiply  and  increase."  Where,  dear  brmiren,  bensafli 
the  skies  shall  we  mid  absolute  parity  in  any  community?  The  my 
first  fJEunilyhada  Gain  in  it,  and  there  was  a  wicked  Ham  eraa  in  the 
select  few  within  tbe  ark.  In  the  household  of  the  flither  of  Oe  ikMrfU 
there  was  an  Ishmael;  Isaac,  with  all  his  quiet  walk  with  God,  most  be 
troubled  with  an  Esau,  and  ye  know  how  in  the  hooeaef  Jwob  iim 
were  many  soiis  that  walked  not  as  they  shoidd.  Whai  Um  oliiBDb 
of  God  was  in  the  wilderness  and  had  a  barrier  of  deaart  between  itead 
the  outer  world,  yet  ye  know  how  Eorah,  Dathan,  and  AUran  wm 
there,  beside  many  other  troublers  in  larad;  yei^  even  anidat  fle 
most  select  part  of  the  risible  church  ot  God,  in  the  pEieBtheed»llMR 
were  found  those  that  dishonoured  it.  Nadab  and  Abflin  we  dam 
with  fire  before  the  Lord ;  and  Honhni  and  Phineas  died  in  battle, 
because  they  had  made  themaelTcs  Tile,  though  God'a  •nointfld  priesfai. 
Bren  when  our  dirine  Master  had  formed  for  himself 

'*  A  little  garden,  walled  sroand, 
Chosen,  and  miide  peculiar  ground,** 

in  which  there  were  but  twelre  choice  trees,  yet  one  of  them  beie  eiil 
fruit.  '*  I  have  chosen  you  twelve,  and  one  of  von  ia  a  deviL"  Ik  the 
great  field  which  Ohrist  has  sown,  tares  will  spring  «p  ameiv  the 
wheat,  for  the  ^emy  takes  pains  to  sowthem;  nirither  is  it  pooaub  fv 
us  to  root  them  up.  In  the  king's  garden  briars  will  grow,  thonaaiso 
and  thistles  will  the  most  sacred  soil  yield  to  us.  Even  dtt  Uliea  of 
Ohrist  grow  among  thorns.  You  cannot  keep  the  beat  of  chnielsi 
altogetMr  pure,  for  though  the  Lord  himself  has  prepared  a  WMfwdt 
and  mate  a  winqyrees,  and  built  a  wall  about  it,  yet  tAefoxeaoomaand 
apoii  the  vines ;  and  thimigh  our  great  Lord  has  an  oiolttrd  which  yieUMfa 
rare  fruit,  yetwh^ihecometh  tovisit  it  hefindsabanenfigtiee^dimd 
about  and  donged  it  is  true,  but  barren  stilL  Look  to  Ohrist'j  mdoD 
earth,  and  bdioid  Ihere  are  wolves  in  stop's  cbthhig  tbeie ;  looktotbe 


THB  CraUT  HOUBB  ANp  THS  THHILS  lit  IT.  207 

net  which  hie  servants  ditkv  to  shore,  and  then  are  both  good  and  bad 
ligli  therein.  Yea,  lift  your  eyes  even  to  iho  skies,  and  thongh  there  be 
inyriailB  of  stare,  yet  je  shall  mark  wandering  stara  among  them,  and 
meteors  which  are  and  are  not,  nnd  are  quenched  in  the  bhicknesB  of 
darkness  for  ever,  Until  we  shall  come  to  the  hearen.  of  the  Most 
High  we  must  expect  to  find  chaff  mixed  with  the  wheat,  droae  with  the 
^Id,  goats  with  the  slicep,  and  dead  flies  withtbe  omtment ;  only  let  ua 
Bee  to  it  that  we  be  not  of  that  ill  character,  bnt  be  precions  in  the  eight 
of  the  Ijord. 

Coming  to  the  text,  the  npostlo  snggeats  the  encouragement  I  hare 
iiJi-cady  gi^'en,  under  a  certain  metaphor.  He  saja  that  in  a  gieat  honac 
there  will  naturally  be  varieties  of  famitnre,  and  there  will  be  vessels 
tind  nt^nsUs  ■.'(  many  kinds;  some  of  them  will  be  of  wood,  and  of 
(arthenivare,  for  meaner  purposes ;  and  others  of  gold  and  Bilver,  for 
state  occasions,  when  the  honour  and  glory  of  the  great  proprietor  are  to 
be  displayed.  There  are  vesiscls  of  precions  metal  in  a  great  house,  and 
these  are  its  honour,  decking  tho  tablee  on  high  festivala  when  the 
Master  is  at  home  ;  but  there  are  ot'^era  of  baser  stuff,  kept  in  the  back- 
erooiid.  never  displayed  at  times  of  rejoicing,  bnt  meant  for  common 
dmdgery.  There  are  cups  and  flagooB  of  Bolid  silver  priced  as  perpetoa! 
heirlooms  of  the  family,  which  are  carefully  preserved,  aad  trenchers 
and  ixita  which  are  soon  worn  oat  and  are  only  of  temporaiTUBe,  many 
sets  of  them  being  broken  up  in  the  lifetime  of  a  family.  The  like  is 
true  in  the  cbuntr  of  God,  which  being  in  the  worid  has  ita  common 
liide  and  its  common  vcsaelfi,  bnt  being  also  a  heavenly  boose  has  also 
its  nobler  furniture,  far  more  precious  than  gold  which  perisheth  though 
it  be  tried  with  fire. 


For  our  instruction,  may  the  Holy  Spirit  help  ns  while  we  look  first 
treat  haate;  secondly,  at  lltt  meaner  iwffMb,  peeping  into  the 
;  thirdly,  at  tbe  nobler  resale,  going  into  the  plate  chamber 


lo  liKik  at  the  silver  and  gold  ;  and  then,  fonrthly,  before  we  leave  tbe 
hnuso,  let  ns  ask  for  an  interview  with  Mo  Jfaater  huntelf. 

I.     Finit,  let  UA  consider  THE  gkbat  houbil 

The  apostle  compares  tbe  cimrcli  to  a  great  house.  Wo  feel  sure  be 
is  not  speaking  of  the  world  -,  it  did  not  oocnr  to  him  to  speak  nbunt 
the  world,  and  it  wonld  have  been  altogether  mperflnous  to  tell  ns 
that  in  the  world  there  are  all  sorts  of  people, — everybody  knows  that. 
The  church  is  a  great  house  belonging  to  a  great  peonage,  for  tbe 
church  is  the  house  of  God,  according  to  the  promise — "  I  will  dwell 
in  them,  and  walk  in  them."  The  chorch  is  the  temple  in  which  the 
Ijord  js  worshipped,  the  palace  in  which  he  rules  (  it  is  his  castle,  and 
place  of  defence  for  bis  truth,  the  armouir  cut  of  which  he  supplies  his 
people  with  weapons.  The  church  is  God  s  mansion  house  in  miich  he 
Abides — "  This  is  my  rest  for  ever,  hero  will  I  dwell  for  I  have  desired 
it."  There  it  is  that  he  rests  in  his  love,  and  in  infinite  condescension 
manifests  himself  as  he  doth  not  unto  toe  world.  King  Solomon  bnilt 
toe  himself  a  house  in  the  forest  of  Ijebanon,  and  beboli^  the  Lord  bath 
'>f  living  stones  buildcd  for  himself  a  br  more  glorioas  house  whejein 
be  may  abide,  ft  is  a  great  house  because  it  is  the  boote  of  the  great 
Bod     Who  can  be  so  great  as  he  ? 

It  is  a  great  house  because  planned  and  deiigtud  igwn  a  great  ecale. 


208  icxTROFouTijr  TAtmictt  Minr:  '■ 

I  fear  that  some  who  live  in  the  hooie  hsv^  aft  Mm  botrftmlftli  |i 
They  lutve  a  Tory  &ittt  notioft  of  ita  laqgth  attl  fakMCHL    Tk  m 


grcar  thoughts  of  God  are  fiur  beyond  iliehr  motb  tUm^d  tamoBfltm,  ■; 
80  that  he  might  Bay  to  them  as  m  bat  said  to  oflieniy  *"]!▼  ilMi^Ui  |i 
are.  not  your  flionghts,  neither  are  niy  ways  jo«r'waji^-«aitii  the  LnL"  li 
Tiie  palace  of  the  King  of  kings  is  ''•eioeedH^  ]iMig[Bifloal,**  sMilr 
spacioosness  fiur  excelleth  all  the  abodes  of  esraDfy  pmeoi.  We  iMd 
of  the  goMen  palace  of  Nero,  that  it  teaohed  from  uH  to  UDp  ittl» 
closed  lakes  and  stream  and  gardens  beneath  its  wondroot  nof ;  ht 
behold,  the  Lord  has  stretdied  the  line  of  hisehoting  giMeoMrv^bm 
and  kindreds  even  to  the  ends  of  the  earth:  his  tufom  taUhil  • 
mighty  sweep  of  hnmanity.  Many  are  Obe  looms  in  ite  IioaB^aiid  And 
arc  dweUera  m  one  room  wlio  hare  nerrer  vet  seen  any  part  «f  Ae  nt 
hoase  bnt  the  little  chamber  in  winch  mbj  wwe  bon^  mnmt  wuDBi 
through  the  marreUoas  oorridon^  or  mored  m  Ae  Tirt  farib  WUAM 
hath  bailded  with  cedar  pillars  and  cedar  beams,  and  carrad  wiritef 
heavenly  workmanship.  Some  ^ood  men  hardly  earo  to  aea  Ite  iasi 
rows  of  polished  oolnmns,  qnamed  by  gniee  from  the  ro^gh  msa  v 
nature,  which  now  shine  resplendait  as  monmnents  of  diriiie  km  mi 
wisdom.  '  Golossal  is  the  plan  of  the  Eternal,  the  cbnich  of  flod  ii 
worthy  of  the  infinite  mind.  Angels  and  princsipalitiea  doMglit  to  ataBi|^ 
the  stapendoBS  plan,  and  well  they  may :  as  the  gnat  Aiofaitoot  vmDihi 
drawings  piece  by  piece  to  let  them  see  Ae  yarioassectmiB  of  tiie  uii|iafa 
design,  tMy  sfre  strnck  with  admiration,  and  ezclamn,  "iNi  the  dolHiflf 
the  wisdom  and  the  knowledge  of  CM.'*  The  tdnndi  is  no 
oottage  wherehi  a  few  may  Inxnriate  in  bigotrr,  bnt  it  ta  m  graM 
worthy  of  the  infinite  heart  of  Jehorah,  worthy  of  the  Uood  of 
the  incarnate  Ood,  and  wordiy  of  the  power  of  Ae  nirir  liTtiifcifl  Mrit 
It  is  a  great  honse  becanse  &  has  mwi  srmiBi  at  grmi  emi,  Mriidl 
ffreal  labour.  The  cost  of  this  mansion  who  can  toHF  It  U  «  frioe 
beyond  pice,  fer  God  lias  given  his  only-begotten  Son— ho '  lad  W 
one,  and  heaven  conld  not  match  him-^jist  he  might  ndsptt  tnlo 
himself  a  people  who  should  be  his  dweHing^ptaoe  fer  eff«r.  "Wtamali 
temple,  now  that  they  have  laid  bare  a  part  of  the  Ibmidstfoail  %vsb 
though  it  be  in  utter  ruin,  astonishes  all  behohlnnB,  as  tfaej  mmr  tb 
'enormous  size  and  accurate  adjustment  of  file  stones  rirfait  anil  ii 
have  been  in  its  gbry  ?  What  cost  was  lavished  on  ttat  gtuihnis'hwiBL 
But  think  of  the  labour  hxA  the  skill,  the  divine  art  n^  ei^girieMilg 
with  whidh  Jehovah  has  hewn  out  of  the  rock  of  sinfkd  naUntfflK 
stones  with  wliieh  he  builds  ^np  his  spiritual  house.  Wlnilt  emgjhsi 
the  Holjr  Spirit  dieplayedl  What  resurrection  power!  Haidir  IfaBi 
any  granite  we  were  by  nature,  yet  has  he  cut  nsttway  firom  tlie  lo^vf 
which  we  formed  a  part,  and  fhshioned  and  souartd  m^  stnd  Bade 
ns  to  be  bnilded  together  for  an  habitation  of  Goo,  through  the  flpfrtt. 
Tell  it  to  the  praise  of  the  glonr  of  his  grace,  that  the  Lord*s  6mnipo- 
tent  power  and  boundless  wealth  of  love  are  revealed  in  his  duneh. 
When  oar  eyes  shall  see  the  church  of  God'  at  last  in  all  her  beanlj 
descending  out  of  heaven  from  God,  having  the  glory  of  God,  and  her 
lieht  like  unto  a  stone  most  precious,  even  like  unto  a  jaiper  sbme; 
when  we  shall  see  that  the  length  and  the  breadth  and  th^  hc^ht  tof  it 
are  equal ;  when  we  shall  see  its  deep  foundations  laid  in  tiie  etenal 


THB  «UT  HOUBB  AHD  THE  VXSaKLS  IN  IT.  209 

THii]poBe,  and  ita  walls  uphatit  with  lofty  piniiadea  of  glor^,  high  ob  the 
divine  person  of  her  Lord ;  aiid  when  wc  ahall  mark  its  wondrous  com- 
.pasA,  brood  enough  to  hold  tlie  glory  and  honoar  of  the  nations, — then 
.1^11  we  shout  for  joy  as  we  behold  the  riches  and  the  power  and  the 
qilendoar  of  the  great  King  of  kings,  who  has  bnilded  for  himself  this 
gKnt  hotiEC. 

It  is  a  great  house,  again,  becanse  ils  household  arrmtqements  are 
'tondudtd  on  a  great  scale.  You  know  the  country  people,  when  there  is 
'flome  rich  lord  living  in  the  village,  speak  always  of  his  mansion  as  "  the 
>xre&t  house."  It  is  the  great  house  for  whidi  those  bnllocks  are  being 
nttened,  and  those  aheep  and  lambs  will  be  consumed  at  the  great  house, 
ifirtherearemany  in  the  family,  and  none  ore  allowed  to  want.  Solomon 
kept  a  great  house.  Wiien  you  read  the  account  of  the  daily  provision 
fot  his  table  yon  see  that  it  was  a  great  house  indeed,  a  vast  and  truly 
royal  establishment.  Ay,  but  neither  for  quality  nor  quantity  conld 
Stdomon'a  palace  ntatt'h  with  the  great  house  of  God  in  its  plenty.  Speak 
cf  fine  flour — behold,  he  hasgiveu  us  angels' food:  speak  of  royal  dainties 
— behold,  the  Lord  hath  given  us  lat  things  full  of  marrow,  wines  on  the 
lees  well  refined.  What  a  peipetual  feast  doth  the  Lord  Jeaus  keep  up 
(or  all  bis  followers.  If  any  of  them  hunger  it  is  not  because  their  rations 
■re  stinted ;  if  there  be  any  complaining  it  is  not  becanse  the  Master's 
oxen  and  fatlinga  are  not  freely  provided.  Ah,  no ;  to  every  man  there 
is  a  good  piece  of  flesh  and  a  flagon  of  wine  dealt  out,  even  as  David 
dealt  it  out  in  the  day  when  he  removed  the  ark  unto  the  hill  of  Zion. 
Glery  be  to  God,  he  hath  said,  "  Eat,  0  friends ;  drink,  yeo,  drink 
abundantly,  0  beloved."  In  this  mountain  shall  the  hand  of  the  I^rd 
rest,  and  he  will  make  nnfo  nil  nations  a  feast  of  fat  thingfl.  Behold,  his 
oxeu  and  fatlings  are  killed,  all  things  arc  ready.  It  is  a  great  house, 
where  great  sinners  are  fed  on  great  dainties,  and  fllled  with  the  great 
goodness  of  the  Lord. 

It  IB  a  great  house  Joy  the  number  of  iU  mhabiiaiils.  How  many 
have  lived  beneath  that  roof-tree  for  ages.  "  Lord,"  say  they  like  a  great 
host,  "  thoa  hast  been  our  dwelling  place  throughont  all  generations." 
God  is  the  homo  of  his  people,  and  his  church  ia  the  home  of  Ood ;  and 
what  multitudes  are  dwelling  there  now.  Not  enly  the  couipaniea  that 
we  know  of,  with  whom  it  is  our  delight  to  meet  for  solemn  worship,  but 
idlovcr  the  world  the  Lord  hath  a  people  who  dwell  in  the  mid.'it  of  hie 
ctrarch ;  and,  thoagh  men  have  disngured  their  Uaster's  house  b; 
chalking  up  odd  signs  over  ?ome  of  the  rooms,  and  calling  them  by 
other  names  than  those  of  the  owner,  yet  the  Lord's  people  are  all  one 
diareii,  and  to  whatever  part  or  party  they  may  seem  to  beJong,  if  Christ 
is  in  them  they  belong  to  liim  of  whom  the  whole  family  in  heaven  and 
earth  ia  named,  and  they  make  up  but  one  spiritual  house.  AVhat  a 
nrami  there  is  of  the  Ixird's  cliiidrcn,  and  yet  not  one  of  the  family 
reniHinB  unfed.  The  chnrch  is  a  great  house  wherein  thousands  dwell, 
jea,  a  number  that  no  man  can  number. 

Once  more,  it  is  a  gi-eat  house,  because  of  ils  importance.  People 
speak  of  "  the  great  house "  in  our  remoter  counties  because  to  the 
whole  neighbourhood  it  bears  a  special  relationship,  being  connected 
with  some  of  its  most  vital  interests :  county  politics  and  police,  dignity 
ad  wealtb  find  their  centre  at  "the  great  dodsc."    The  church  is  a 


210  METBOPOLITAK  TABEBNAOLK  PULPIT. 

great  house  beeanse  it  is  Qod*s  hospice,  where  he  distributes  bread  and 
wine  to  refresh  the  weary,  and  entertains  wayfarers  that  else  had  been 
lost  in  the  storm.  It  is  God's  hospital,  into  which  he  takes  the  sick, 
and  there  he  nourishes  them  till  they  renew  their  youth  like  tiie  eagle's. 
It  is  God's  ^reat  pharos  with  its  lantern  flashing  forth  a  directing  ray 
so  that  wanaerers  far  away  may  be  directed  to  the  haven  of  peace. 
*^  Out  of  Zion,  the  perfection  of  beauty,  God  hath  shined."  It  is  the 
seat  of  God's  magistracy,  for  there  are  set  thrones  of  judgment,  the 
thrones  of  the  house  of  David.  Behold,  the  Lord  hath  set  his  King 
upon  his  holy  hill  of  Zion,  and  thence  shall  the  power  of  his  sceptre  go 
forth  to  the  ends  of  the  earth.  The  great  house  of  the  church  is  the 
university  for  teaching  all  nations,  the  library  wherein  the  sacred 
oracles  are  preserved,  the  treasury  wherein  the  truth  is  deposited,  and 
the  registry  of  new-bom  heirs  of  heaven.  It  is  important  to  heaven  as 
well  as  to  earth,  for  its  topmost  towers  reach  into  glory,  and  tbcffe  is 
in  it  a  ladder  the  foot  whereof  doth  rest  on  earth,  but  the  top  thereof 
doth  reach  to  heaven,  up  and  down  which  the  angels  come  and  go 
continually.  Said  I  not  well  that  the  apostle  had  wisely  diosen  l£e 
figure  when  he  called  the  church  a  great  house? 

II.  We  will  now  Ro  inside  the  great  house,  and  we  at  once  observe  that 
it  is  well  furnished.  Our  text,  however,  invites  us  to  note  that  it  con- 
tains a  number  of  keaker  vessels,  articles  of  the  coarser  kind  for 
ordinary  and  common  uses.  Here  are  trenchers  and  buckets  of  wood, 
and  pitchers  and  pots  and  divers  vessels  of  coarse  potteiy.  Some  have 
thought  that  this  figure  of  vessels  to  dishonour  remtes  to  Christians  of 
a  lower  ^rade,  persons  of  small  grace  and  of  less  sanctified  oonversation. 
Now,  although  believers  may  from  some  points  of  view  be  comparable  to 
earthen  vessels,  yet  I  dare  not  look  upcm  any  child  of  Ood,  however 
low  in  grace,  as  a  vessel  to  dishonour.  Moreover,  the  word ''  ^k$m  '* 
refers  to  the  earthen  and  wooden  vessels,  and  surely  they  cannot  rq>re* 
sent  saints,  or  we  should  never  be  told  to  purge  ourselves  fh>m  them. 
If  a  man  be  God's  child,  into  whatever  state  and  condition  he  may 
fall,  it  is  our  business  to  look  after  him  and  endeavour  to  restore  him^ 
remembering  ourselves  also,  lest  we  also  be  tempted;  but  it  cannot 
be  right  to  purge  ourselves  from  even  the  least  of  our  believing 
brethren.  Besides,  that  is  not  the  run  of  the  chapter  at  aM.  The 
real  meaning  is  that  in  the  church  of  God  there  are  nnworthy 
persons  serving  inferior  and  temporary  purposes,  who  are  veMMit  to 
dishonour.  They  are  in  the  church,  but  they  are  like  vessels  erf  wood 
and  vessels  of  earth,  they  are  not  the  treasure  of  the  mansion,  Uiey 
arc  not  brought  out  on  state  occasions,  and  are  not  set  much  store 
by,  for  they  are  not  '^  precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord."  The  apostle 
does  not  tell  us  how  they  came  there,  for  it  was  not  his  intent  to 
do  so,  and  no  parable  or  metaphor  could  teach  everything;  neither  will  I 
stay  to  describe  how  some  professors  have  come  into  the  church  of  God, 
some  by  distinct  falsehood  and  by  making  professions  which  they  knew 
were  untrue,  others  through  ignorance,  and  others  again  by  being  self- 
deceived,  and  carried  away  with  excitement.  The  parable  does  not  say 
Ilow  they  got  there,  but  there  they  are,  and  yet  they  are  only  vesseteof  wood 
(iiid  vessels  of  earth.  It  is  no  credit  to  them  that  they  are  where  they  are, 
for  tlicy  arc  not  vessels  to  honour  though  in  an  honourable  place.    It  is 


THI  CmXAT  HOtmX  ABD  THE  TK8XLB  UT  IT.  211 

QO  honour  to  any  man  to  be  it  nic^mber  of  a  Christian  ohnrch  if  he  be  in 
himBfilf  intrinsically  worthless  :  though  they  make  a  minister  of  him,  or 
elect  him  deacon,  it  is  no  honour  to  hiin  to  be  in  office  if  the  metal  he  J8 
made  of  docs  not  fit  him  for  so  honourable  a  purpose.  He  is  &n  intruder 
in  an  hononrable  position,  and  it  is  a  dishonour  to  him  to  be  whei«  he 
is.  It  iB  no  honour  to  a  weed  to  grow  in  the  best  part  ol  the  mtden,  no 
honoor  to  a  barren  figtree  to  cumber  the  finest  gronnd  in  the 
Tineyard.  Ah,  dear  friend,  if  yon  are  in  the  church  of  God,  bat  not 
truly  one  of  the  Lord's  people,  it  is  a  diahononrable  thing  of  yon  to 
hare  come  there,  and  it  is  equally  disbononrable  for  yon  to  remain  there 
withont  fulfilling  that  great  requisite  which  is  demanded  of  every  one 
who  names  the  name  of  Jesos,  that  he  depart  Irom  all  iniquity. 

The  vessels  in  the  great  house  arc,  however,  of  some  um,  even  though 
they  are  made  of  wood  and  earth ;  and  ao  there  are  persona  in  the 
church  of  God  whom  the  Lord  Jesua  vill  not  own  as  his  treaniTe,  bnt 
he  nevertheless  turns  them  to  some  temporary  purpose.  Some  ore  nsei^I 
as  the  scaffold  to  a  bouse,  or  the  dogshores  to  a  ship,  or  the  hedges  to  n 
field.  I  believe  that  some  unworthy  members  of  tnc  dinrch  are  nseftil 
iu  the  way  of  watch  dogs  to  keep  others  awake,  Or  lanoeta  to  let  blood, 
or  bnrdens  to  try  strength.  8ome  qnarrolsomc  mcmben  of  the  ohnrch 
help  to  scour  the  other  vessels,  lest  they  should  rust  diroagh  being 
peacelbl.  The  church  is  made  up  of  men  who  are  yet  in  the  body,  and 
it  has  to  deal  with  the  outside  world,  and  sometimes  the  woridlv  men 
who  are  in  her  serve  some  purpose  in  connection  with  this  her  lowest 
need.  Judas  mnde  a  good  treasurer,  for  his  economy  saved  more  than 
be  Btole.  Joab  was  a  good  warrior  for  David,  though  he  was  by  no 
means  a  saint.  False  professors  do  not  make  the  goepel  nntme,  and 
sometimes  when  they  have  spoken  it  God  has  blessed  it.  Yoa  may  se^  il 
yon  go  down  the  Kennington-park-road  to-day,  a  row  ot  young  trees 
planted  by  the  road :  hoiv  are  they  kept  up  while  yet  they  are  slender  ? 
Why,  small  posts  of  dead  timber  hold  them  op ;  and  even  so  a  dead 
Sunday-school  teacher  may  yet  be  useful  to  a  really  Christian  child, 
aud  a  dead  deacon  may  be  the  financial  support  of  a  living  church. 
Ay,  and  there  are  dead  preachers,  too,  who  nevertheless  serve  to  fill  up 
a  qmce,  bnt  what  vessels  to  dishonour  they  are.  It  js  a  dreadful  thing, 
however,  for  those  who  are  like  the  posts  1  just  now  mentioned,  because 
the  quicker  the  yonng  tree  grows  the  sooner  will  the  post  bo  taken 
away,  being  no  participant  in  the  life  which  it  helped  to  support.  You 
see,  then,  that  the  base  professors  who  get  into  the  chnrch  are  turned  to 
some  accoont  by  oar  great  31  aster ;  the  servants  of  the  great  bouse 
can  use  the  wooden  ware  and  the  earthenware  for  awhile  for  rough 
cvcry-day  purposes,  even  as  mere  formalisLs  can  be  employed  in  some 
scullery  work  or  another. 

There  is  one  thing  noticeable,  viz.,  that  the  wooden  and  earthen 
vessels  are  not  for  the  Mailer's  use.  When  he  holds  high  festival  his 
CDpfl  are  all  of  precious  metal.  "All  King  Bolomoii's  drinking  vessels 
irere  of  gold."  Would  yon  have  the  King  of  kings  set  an  earthen  pot 
upon  his  royal  table  i  tihall  the  guests  at  his  table  eat  from  wooden 
bowls?  So  false  pro&asora  arc  only  useful  to  the  serranls,  not  to  the 
MfiBter ;  they  serie  base  purposes,  and  are  not  to  be  seen  on  tliose  great 
daya  when  he  manifests  his  glory.    The  Great  Master  overrules  all 


1 


212  METBOPOUTAV  TABEBVIOU  PVUnT. 

things,  being  the  master  of  the  servanti^  and  lo  te  thai  lAaA  answea 
the  purpose  of  his  servants  is  semoeaUe  to  him,liiifc  panonallj  batmsa 
the  King  at  his  table  and  the  wooden  Teasel  ihflce  la  no  Gongniity:  It 
wonld  be  an  insnit  to  hand  him  wine  in  any  bofc  a  somptnona  cop  of 
precious  metal,  or  to  brin^  him  fantter  in  m  bat  a  lordly  diaL  asm 
sad  it  is  that  many  Christians  are  nsefiil  to  toe  chnxoh  in  various  ynj% 
but  as  for  personal  serrico  rendered  to  the  Lord  JeaoaChiist  himieB^  in 
that  they  have  no  share  whatever  and  nsver  oaa  have  tOI  gcaoe  ebai^ 
them  fiom  wood  to  silv^,  or  finun  eartih  to  gold. 

Note  that  in  th^e  vessels  of  which  the  apottle  speaks  As  suUmm 
is  hose.  They  are  wood,  or  they  are  earthy  ndthiiig  num.  Gtoaiawed 
by  nature  of  base  material,  and  grace  mnst  maka  na  into  silver  or.inls 
golden  vessels,  or  the  Master  cannot  himself  nae  na,  nor  ca&  oar  vm  m, 
the  chnrch  ever  be  to  honour.  The  wooden  vends  i&  tha  dmnh  in 
very  easily  hacked  and  carved  and  spoiled;  if  a  na&  be  mriina^ti 
mischief  he  can  put  his  knife  to  them  and  oan  cot  great  iiolQliaa  la 
them,  rain  their  character,  and  render  them  worthlMSL  Coming 
teachers  can  soon  take  away  flx»n  merely  nominal  Cfhriatiani  what  (iHf 
professed  to  believe,  for  thiey  axe  very  readily  oat  and  hadsad  faff  Unss 
who  play  at  audi  games.  As  £»r  the  eaithen  vessels^  ftow  aaoa  ihif 
are  broken.  Outsideof  any  great  hoose  there  are  the  remaina  of  aMpf 
broken  pots,  which  fell  to  the  ground  and  went  to  pisoea;  an^lm 
sorry  to  say,  we  also  can  find  enough  of  aaoh  rdica  to.  aaddm  naalL 
There  were  some  in  this  house  once  who  were  comely  to  look  apos^  bit 
there  came  a  temptation  and  brushed  them  iSrom  tha  tahle^  md  ttif 
were  shivered  in  a  momenta  Others  of  precioas  metal  hafis  andnad  tm 
more  shocks  and  tests  of  a  severer  kind,  bat  these  hevig  .€«4^  of  aspA 
were  broken  at  onoe.  Heaps  of  coockeiy  aiwnmnlato  ottsjds  fswmfgmk 
house,  and  certainly  outside  the  great  house  of  Obriiit. 

These  vessels  unto  dishonour,  though  tuned  to  so 
quire  a  great  deal  efoare  <m  ihe  part  ^  Om  emvaiiUs*  When 
fathers  used  to  eat  from  wooden  trenohersi  the  time  tba-g 
used  to  spend  in  scalding  and  cleaning  to  keep  them  at  all  sHMt  te  irt 
upon  was  something  terriUe,  and  there  are  membara  of  the  dbvdi  i^ 
take  a  world  of  time  from  pastors  and  elders  to  keqp  themat  aUdaoaat: 
we  are  continually  trying  to  set  them  right,  <x  keqp  them  ri^t^  m.  flie 
common  relationships  of  life.  There  are  quarrels  in  their  flmiKeawiaA 
must  be  settled  lest  they  bcK»me  scandals,  and  these  aoeopy  tha  aanM 
thought  of  their  fellow  Christians  who  have  to  watoh  lor  tiieir  good; 
or  they  get  lax  in  their  doctrines,  or  foolish  in  their  habiti^  or  hmn  in 
their  business  transactions,  and  we  have  to  be  scouring  and  ^^i^— *"g 
them  times  without  number.  Certain  sorts  of  earthen  vessels  yon  have 
to  be  veiT  particular  in  handling.  Like  egg-shell  china^  vou  may  hardly 
look  at  them.  Thank  Gh)d  I  have  not  many  in  this  chnrch,  periuqps 
none  of  that  sort,  as  far  as  my  handling  is  concerned,  but  other  peo- 
ple's touches,  though  quite  as  wise,  are  not  so  welcome.  Oertaia 
earthen  vessels  get  dreadfully  chipped  unless  they  have  dainty 
handling.  If  a  brother  does  not  take  his  hat  oJQT  to  them  in  Toy 
lowly  style,  and  behave  very  reverently,  they  are  ready  to  take  oiEsnoe. 
They  feel  themselves  hurt  and  slighted  when  no  such  thing  was  in- 
tenacd ;  they  stand  upon  their  dignity  and  expect  the  fullest  reoc^ition 


THB'eauritiDfla  abs  vxm  tmbeu  in  it.  213 

of  it.  These  are  real  earthen  pots,  very  apt  to  be  chipped,  perhaps  a  little 
cncked  already,  and  needing  a  deal  of  care  and  trouble  on  the  part  of 
the  Lord's  servants,  leet  they  should  go  to  pieces  and  ^ill  everything 
that  is  pnt  into  them. 

There  arc  anch  in  all  great  Louses,  and  in  the  Master's  great  house 
there  btc  I  fear  not  a  few.  They  are  cseful  up  to  a  certain  point,  but 
they  bring  no  honour  to  the  hoose,  because  there  are  plenty  as  good 
as  they  in  other  houses,  every  cottage  can  have  common  earthen  pitohers 
in  it.  Thej  are  vessels  in  which  is  no  pleasure,  they  are  not  peculiar, 
or  precious;  nobody  ever  Bonnda  abroad  t!ie  Master's  fame  beennse 
he  has  so  many  tbouaands  of  wooden  bowls  or  earlhem  pots.  No, 
the  king's  honour  comes  from  the  plate,  the  gold  and  silver  vessels,  the 
peculiar  treasure  of  kings.  People  speak  al>ont  these  rich  goods  and 
Bay,  "  Yon  should  see  the  sidehoai-da  loaded  down  with  the  massive  ser- 
fices  of  gold  and  silver  j  yon  should  see  how  the  t-ables  groan  beneath 
the  splendour  of  the  royal  feaat  when  the  king  brings  tbrth  his 
treasures."  True  Ciiristians  are  the  glory  of  Christ,  but  false  profeaeora 
at  their  very  best  are  unto  dishonoar.  Better  the  smallest  silver  vessel 
than  the  tat^est  earthen  one ;  better  the  least  of  all  the  saints  than  the 
greatest  of  vain  professors.  So  much  upon  the  vessels  to  dishonour. 
III.     We  arc  now  going  into  the  treasury,  or  plate  room,  and  will 

tbink  of  THE  NOBLER  TESSELS. 

These  are,  first  of  all,  of  solid  melal,  vessola  of  silver  and  vessels  of 
gold.  Tiiey  are  not  all  ei]ually  valuable,  but  they  arc  all  precious. 
Hero  is  weight  for  yoa;  here  is  something  that  ia  worth  treasuring, 
•omething  which  will  last  for  ages,  and  at  any  time  will  endnre  the 
fire.  Now,  in  real  Christians,  those  who  really  love  the  Lord,  there 
is  something  snbstantial  and  weighty,  and  when  yon  get  hold  of  them 
you  know  the  difference  between  them  and  the  wooden  professor.  Even 
those  who  do  not  like  them — strange  taste  that  which  does  not  appre- 
ciate silver  and  gold — aro  nevertheless  compelled  to  say,  "  That  is  a 
genuine  article,  worth  a  great  deal,  weighty  and  substantial."  Now,  we 
shall  none  of  us  ever  be  vessels  of  silver  and  gold  unless  the  Lord  make 
as  BO  by  divine  grace.  Vessels  of  earth  are  things  of  nature,  any 
potter  can  make  them;  vessels  of  wood  are  common  enough,  the  cooper 
soon  produces  a  pai! ;  bnt  a  vessel  of  silver  or  of  gold  ia  a  rarer  thing ; 
it  costs  mining  and  searching,  furnace  work  and  fashioning,  toil  and 
skill.  On  eacii  vessel  unto  honour  Jesus  himself  has  put  his  band  to 
mould  and  fashion  it,  and  to  cause  it  to  be  "prepared  unto  glory." 
Did  yon  ever  hear  how  vessels  come  to  be  golden  ?  Listen  to  this,  and 
yon  shall  know.  One  very  dear  to  me  has  pnt  the  story  into  rhythm. 
"Ob  tlraC  I  were  «  cup,  >  goldeii  cup 

HeM  fer  the  Masters  Tue ! 
^  Brimming  uid  tremblit^  with  Uiat  draught  of  joy 

(The  love  of  hu  b«lov*d  and  pnrchaa'd  onei) 

Which  filli  hit  heart  with  KUdneu." 

•  •  •    °      •  •  ■ 

So  apake  a  poor,  vile,  broken,  earthy  thing, 

A  worthleiB  cutaway. 

The  Muter  heard,  and  when  he  puaed  that  way 

He  itoop'd  and  tonch'd  it  with  hia  tcounded  hand — 

When  lol  its  baaenoa  vaniih'd,  and  uutead 


214  XETBOPOLITAH  TJIBBBSAOLB  FULR& 

There  flood  mgMm  cImiIiwi  woadgom  fidr» 
And  overflowinff  with  dwp  lore  lor  hSm» 
He  nused  it  to  nis  ffraciooi  lipBy  and  qmffMl 
*'  The  wine  that  mdceth  fjM  the  heart  of  God^T 
Then  took  the  cnp  to  heaven. 

Oa  the  yesseb  to  honour  yea  can  aee  tk$  katt  wiaHL  What  ii  Ik 
hall  mark  which  denotes  the  poritr  of  the  Lord*8  goidea  Tcneb  ?  Wdi 
he  baa  only  one  stamp  for  eTerythiiig.  When  &  laid  the  tomaiaSm 
what  was  the  seal  he  pat  upon  it?  *^The  Lend  knoweth  them  thii«e 
his,  and  let  eveiy  one  that  nameth  the  name  of  Chrisi  d^wt  fteps  d 
iniquity."  That  was  Ood's  seal,  the  impresa  of  the  great  King  vjm 
the  foundationHErtone.  Do  we  find  it  here?  Yei^  we  do.  "  If  ami* 
therefore,  puree  himself  from  these  he  shall  be  a  Tossel  onto  bonoK" 
Yon  see  ttmt  &e  nian  who  is  the  golden  or  silTer  Teasel  dewrtoftMid 
iniquity,  and  that  is  the  token  of  hia  sennine  ohanotsr.-  The  mm  «h» 
is  trnly  the  Lord's  seeks  to  be  cleaused  not  only  ftom  the  open  sin  of  lie 
world,  but  from  the  common  sin  of  professing  Ohristians;ne.IalMMn.to 
be  purged  from  that  which  the  wooden  yoaiel  and  the  ettiben  vend 
would  delight  in ;  he  wants  to  be  pure  within  and  withoot^  he  desfaei 
perfection,  he  labours  daily  to  conquer  etery  sin,  and  stmea  with  all  t^ 
might  to  serve  his  Lord.  He  is  not  content  to  have  a  fiur  nppeenneiE^ 
as  wood  and  earth  may  haye— he  wishes  to  be  aolidt  enhiitantial  imWi 
purged  and  purified  to  the  utmost  possible  degree,  and  fit  Ibr  the  ^^^ 
purposes.  Now,  this  seeking  after  purity  is  the  hall  mark  of  the  M^l^s 
vessels  of  gold  and  silver. 

Notice,  however,  that  ihsy  are  purged^  fi>r  the  Lord  will  not  «e 
filthy  vessels  be  they  what  they  may.  He  will  an^  nse  thoae  ^etaie 
clean,  and  he  would  have  his  true  people  purged,  aa  I  have  iaid  bete^ 
not  only  from  gross  sin,  but  IVom  dootrinal  emxr,  and  from  aiiocialkn 
with  the  perverse  minded.  We  are  to  be  pvged  from  Hymfloewitfil 
Philetus,  and  from  the  vain  babblings  of  .mi£  the  epoatle  has  .biHi 
speaking  in  the  previous  part  of  the  chapter.  I  fear  that  OluiBtivB 
men  do  a  great  deal  of  mischief  by  their  oomplicitjf  with  thoae  wbp^ais 
teaching  what  is  downright  fiilsehood.  If  we  .are  to  serre  tiM  Lonl  in 
the  matter  of  advancing  his  truth  we  must  be  true  to  ttnth  onrsdiee; 
but  if  we  join  hand  in  hand  with  others,  and  so  fbrm  a  eonfeden^ 
when  the  veiy  pilkuis  of  the  tempte  are  being  pulled  down  by  rode  handle 
it  may  be  we  shall  be  partakers  of  other  men's  sin.  We  moat  bo  del 
handed  in  this  matter. 

And  then  notice  that  ihsmi  ffold  and  iUver  vessels  are  resmvei  aa  wril 
as  purged.  They  are  made  meet  for  th«  Master*s  use.  Nobody  it  to 
drink  out  of  them  but  the  king  himself.  This  is  the  blessedness  of  the 
child  of  God  when  he  comes  to  be  what  he  should  be,  that  he  can  siog 
as  we  did  just  now, 

''  I  am  thine,  and  thine  alone, 
This  I  gladly,  fully  own ; 
Andy  in  all  mj  works  and  ways, 
Only  now  would  seek  thy  praise.** 

As  Joseph  had  a  cup  out  of  which  he  alone  drank,  so  the  Lord  takes 
his  people  to  be  lus  peculiar  treasure,  vessels  for  his  personal  use. 
Brethren,  I  count  it  an  honour  to  be  useful  to  the  meanest  child  of  God, 


IT.  215 

bat  I  confess  thnt  the  bonoor  lies  mainl;  in  the  fact  that  1  am  thereby' 
ierring  the  Master  himself.  Oh,  to  be  nstd  by  God  I  This  is  to  aoswer 
Iteena  of  our  being,  Ifyoncimfeel  that  fforf  has  used  you  then  may  yon 
Rjoice  indeed.  There  are  wme  Christians  whom  the  Lord  cannot  modi 
nse  becanse,  first  of  all,  they  arc  not  cleansed  from  selfishiiesn,  they  have 
an  eye  to  their  own  honour  or  aggrandisement.  The  Lord  will  not  be 
in  complicity  with  selfish  aims.  Some  men  are  self-confident :  there  is 
too  mnch  of  the  "  I "  abont  them,  and  the  Master  will  not  use  them.  He 
irill  have  our  weakness,  bnt  not  our  8trens:th,  and  if  we  are  great  siHBe- 
bodies  he  will  paas  as  by  and  take  some  little  nobody  and  make  nae  of 
faim.  The  Lord  cannot  nse  acme  men  becanse  they  arc  too  apt  to  be 
prond ;  if  he  were  to  give  them  a  little  snccess  it  wonid  be  dangerooB  to 
their  Christian  existence ;  their  poor  brain  would  liegin  to  swim,  and 
they  would  think  the  Lord  could  hardly  do  witliont  them  ;  indeed,  when 
tiiey  meet  with  a  little  encouragement  they  swell  into  such  wonderfol 
people  that  they  espect  everybody  to  fell  down  and  worship  them.  Qod 
will  not  use  them,  neither  vrill  he  set  upon  his  table  Tessela  which  are 
in  any  way  defiled.  There  must  be  purity,  and  a  man  may  wwk  his 
beart  ont  in  the  ministry  or  the  Sunday-school,  bnt  if  be  is  |vactising 
eome  secret  sin  he  cannot  prosper ;  it  is  not  possible  that  God  shonld 
hoBonr  him.  There  may  be  a  mtasure  of  apparent  succesa  for  n  time,  and 
divine  sovereignty  may  use  the  truth  itself  despite  the  man,  but  the  maa 
himself  will  not  be  useful  to  the  Master.  Littleness  of  grace  and  con- 
tentednesB  with  that  spiritual  poverty  also  puts  many  a  man  a^de.  Wo 
mnst  be  foil  if  Qod  is  to  ponr  out  of  us  to  the  thirsty,  wc  mnst  be 
foil  of  hifl  light  if  we  are  to  illuminate  the  darkness  of  others:  we 
cannot  reveal  to  the  world  what  the  Lord  has  not  revealed  lo  its. 

Oh,  fur  a  holy  character  and  holy  communion  mth  God  {  then  we  shall 
be  golden  TeBscIs  fit  for  the  Master's  use,  and  so,  according  to  the  text,  vc 
shall  l>e  rtadij/or  every  ijotd  teork,  ready  for  the  work  when  it  comes, 
and  ready  at  the  work  when  it  has  come,  because  completely  eonae- 
<sat«d  to  God  and  subject  to  his  hand.  In  this  readiness  for  whatever 
comes  we  shall  be  honoured.  Hen  may  despise  us,  as  they  will,  bnt  what 
matters  it  if  God  honours  ns?  This  height  of  grace  may  cost  us  a 
aharp  experience,  bnt  must  not  gold  be  tried  with  lire  ?  As  thieves  are 
moat  anxious  to  steal,  not  the  pots  and  wooden  veasels,  bnt  the  ^Id  and 
tbe  silver,  so  we  may  expect  to  be  osposed  to  greater  temptations  waA 
greater  persecutions  than  others.  More  grace  involves  more  trials,  hut 
then  we  shall  have  the  dehght  of  glorifying  God  more.  Oh,  to  be 
vessels  nnto  honour  f  Beloved  members  of  this  church,  do  aspire  to 
this.  Yon  have  given  ia  your  names  as  Christians,  yon  have  been 
fautized  into  tbe  sacred  name  of  the  divine  Trinity,  you  have  borne 
fainerto  a  ooosistait  moa«l  eharacter,  bnt  oh,  see  to  it  that  the  inner 
substance  is  the  real  metal,  the  gold  and  silver.  Do  sec  to  it  that  you 
arerescrred  for  tbe  Lord's  own  special  use.  Be  as  consecrated  to  him 
as  were  the  bowls  before  the  altar.  Never  let  the  world  drink  ont  of 
Ton,  as  Belshazzar  did  out  of  the  vessels  taken  at  Jerusalem.  May  the 
Lord  grant  that  yon  may  never  be  defiled,  but  may  be  kept  by  his  grace 
pore  atift  cmuearated  to  him. 

IV.     Fourthly,  for  a  moment  we  must  speak  about  the  Master. 

He  ia  introduced  here,  yon  see,  as  having  certain  vessels  meet  for  his 


216  HRTROPOLITAH  TABBBSIOU  PUmT. 

'  lue,  and  thig  shows  that  he  is  in  the  home.  There  would  be  BO.mi 
to  reserve  yessels  for  his  use  if  he  were  not  there,  hot  he  ii  in  ^hnirihf 
of  his  church  by  his  indwelling  Spirit  How  this  ought  to  make  m 
wish  to  be  purged,  sanctified,  and  ready  tor  him.  Yonr  Maater  isnoi 
far  away.  His  presence  in  the  chnich  is  promised :  **  Lo,  I  am  vitt 
you  al way,  even  to  the  end  of  the  worUL"  What  manner  ot  penou, 
therefore,  onght  yon  to  be  ? 

Secondly,  the  Master  knows  all  about  the  hooaey  and  knows  Oe 
quality  of  all  the  vessels.  There  is  no  deceiving  him  with  the  woodei 
trencher,  he  knows  it  is  not  gold:  and  as  toft  tbit  earthen  onp,  tboqgh 
it  may  be  gilt  all  over,  he  knows  it  is  not  goUL  He  reads  tb  hevtof 
everyone  here  present ;  wood  or  earth,  silver  or  gold,  the  Haafcer  undv- 
stands  us. 

And  then  reflect  that  the  Master  will  oaensaD  aaikraBwearefltto 
be  used.  We  are  in  Gk>d's  house,  and  if  we  are  wood,  he  will  pot  ns  to 
wooden  use.  There  are  many  wooden  preachers.  If  we  are  earth  aad 
earthly  minded  he  may  put  us  to  eartnly  uses,  as  he  did  Jndas,  who 
carried  the  bog,  but  had  no  grace.  If  you  are  silver  he  will  ^ive  jm 
silver  use,  and  if  you  are  gold  he  will  give  you  golden  service,  m  wmch 
you  shall  be  happy,  and  honoured,  and  blessed. 

What  comes  of  this,  then,  lastly  ?  Why,  brethren,  let  us  bestir  our- 
selves that  we  be  purged,  for  the  text  says,  **  If  a  man  therefore  pmge 
himself."  It  throws  this  business  upon  each  one  of  ns  personal^,— « 
man  must  pura^  himself  from  ill  company ;  but  wh^  we  nave  oonmed 
the  responsibility  let  us  turn  to  God  in  prayer^  and  feel  that  thoroigh 
purging  is  a  work  which  wc  cannot  achieve,  and  therefore  we  07. 
**  Cleanse  me,  0  God,  sanctiiV  me ;  make  me  meet  for  thy  aernoe^  and 
prepared  to  every  good  work. 

Beloved,  finish  with  earnest  prayer.  Pray  Qod  that  ye  bm^  not  be 
hypocrites :  beseech  the  Lord  to  search  you  and  try  you,  that  yoi  be 
not  found  deceivers,  and  when  you  are  sure  that  you  are  his^  thea 
ask  him  to  make  you  not  merely  silver,  for  it  is  very  apt  to  tainiflli»  bit 
even  the  precious  gold,  which  when  exposed  to  we  worst  infliMMes 
scarcely  shows  a  trace  of  dulness.  Pure  unalloyed  gold  may  we  be^ 
and  then  may  the  Master  both  in  secret  and  public  use  ua  to  his  ova 
joy.  May  he  refi'esh  himself  with  our  love  and  foith,  yea,  may  his 
joy  be  fulfilled  in  us,  that  our  joy  may  be  full  Ood  gnint  it  may  be 
so,  for  Christ's  sake. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon— 2  Timothy  ii 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 910,  €58,  66«. 


Iftditopolilan  i^akrnack  p«IpiJ. 


FAITH    PURIFYING    THE    IIEAKT. 


4.  ^S'lno'l 

D^LIVEKBD  OH  LoBD'B-DAT  UOBNUtO,  ApBtL  IfiTB,  1877, 

C.    H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  Tin  mraoFOLiTAir  tabirhaole,  kiwjsqtoh. 


"  Paiilying  their  heart*  bjr  fuHi." — Aeti  xv.  9. 

Thb  Jewish  or  PliariBaic  pnrtj  violently  opposed  the  gospel  fhim 
without.  Wherever  the  apostles  went,  the  Jews  who  believed  not,  being 
moved  with  envy,  siirred  up  the  people  against  them.  They  could  not 
piidnre  to  hear  of  the  salvation  of  the  Gentiles  by  grace  through  faith : 
it  grated  on  tbeir  triT,  for  they  thought  that  this  doctrine  was  contrary 
to  the  law  of  KIosoE  in  which  they  boasted.  They  were  children  of  the 
bondwoman,  under  the  old  covenant  of  works,  and  they  could  not 
endure  that  the  children  of  the  promise  should  come  to  the  inheritance. 
They  struggled  and  rebelled  against  the  gospel  of  salvation  by  grace, 
fur  it  ntnt  a;;airisc  Iheir  natural  pride  and  their  national  exclusive uess. 
Tee,  and  even  when  any  of  them,  as  blessed  be  the  grace  of  God  was 
the  case,  became  converted,  the  old  man  was  still  witmn  them,  and  the 
qiirit  of  bondaee  was  stiU  apt  to  assert  itself.  Those  who  had  been  of  the 
MCt  of  the  Pharisees  brought  a  good  share  of  Pharisaic  tendencies 
with  them  into  the  chorch,  and  these  were  dangerous  to  the  yoong 
kingdom  of  Christ.  I  scarcely  know  whether  legal  principles  were  not 
Me  to  do  more  mischief  inside  the  church  by  perverting  pure  doctrine 
than  tiier  could  do  outside  the  church  by  exciting  persecution.  One 
can  hardly  imagine  how  the  gospel  could  have  escaped  being  overlaid 
and  smotnered  by  Judaism,  like  a  babe  by  its  mother,  had  it  not  been 
for  the  preserving  grace  of  God,  and  the  indwelling  Spirit  within  the 
chnrch  of  God.  Ye  know,  brethren,  how  we  mourn  at  this  day  that 
certain  who  claim  to  be  Christians  are  laiwuring  moat  zealously  to  put 
a  yoke  upon  tlic  neck  of  the  diaciples  which  neither  our  fathers  nor  we 
were  able  to  bear.  They  invent  pompous  ceremonies,  obsene  days  and 
months,  and  are  bound  by  rubrics  and  rcgnlations,  all  of  ivhich  are  an 
idle  and  needless  servitude  to  outward  forms.  Certain  othei's  would 
bind  ns  with  creeds  and  ordinances  not  plainly  taught  in  the  word  of 
>'o6.  l,349-M', 


218  nTROPOLTTAV  TABXBVACLV  FULPIT. 

Ood,  nor  agreeable  thereto,  of  ^iliich  Peter  aui  John  TntfW  l¥rfUi| 
whatever,  having  no  force  but  that  which  cornea  of  human  anUiorify. 
The  old  Phariaaic  ^irit  is  a  great  finger  of  bonda  and  builder  of 

Srisons,  it  wonld  sabject  na  to  ordinancea  of  ^^  Touch  not^  taste  vU, 
andle  not/'  and  fetter  na  with  rules  of  many  sorts:  for  it  csnnot 
understand  the  liberty  wherewith  Ohrist  hath  made  us  ftve.  It  teacliedi 
Uiis  and  it  teacheth  that,  whereof  the  apostles  would  have  said, "  We 
gave  no  such  commandment."  We  must  contend  against  this  qiirit 
as  much  now  as  ever.  Still  must  we  refiue  to  be  entangled  again 
with  the  yoke  of  bondage.  Christ  is  alL  We  are  complete  in  him,  and 
we  will  not  permit  a  single  letter  to  be  added  to  hia  perlbot  lawef 
liberty. 

Peter  at  the  great  Jerusalem  ooundl  was  enabled  through  his  eips- 
rience  to  answer  those  who  said  that  unless  a  man  was  citcmacmnie 
could  not  be  saved.    Depend  upon  it,  brothers  and  sisters,  there  ii 
nothing  like  practical  work  finr  Christ  to  teach  tts  Christ's  truth. 
For  the  most  part  the  heretics  of  the  present  day  are  a  diqne  of 
literary  man,  aaepts  at  the  pen,  but  quite  unable  to  qpeak.    It  may 
be  that  their  failure  in  this  direction  sours  them,  and  seta  them  upon 
opposing  the  gospel  ministry.    At  any  rate  they  are  a  set  of  theoriiefs 
who  know  nothing  of  practical  service  for  the  Lord,  and  so  tlwy 
make  up  all  manner  of  nonsense  according  to  their  own  fimdes. 
They  sit  in  their  studies  and  do  nothing,  ana  then  criticise  those  who 
are  doing  hard  service  and  are  successful  in  it    They  are  ao  busy  wiili 
nibbing  their  quills  and  polishing  their  periods,  that  th^  oare  nothing 
about  saving  souls ;  ana  they  are  so  intent  upon  making  discoYeriss 
which  shall  manifest  their  own  gigantic  intellects  that  they  cannot  soil 
their  hands  with  practical  work  among  the  poor  and  ignorant.    HiTiv 
nothing  upon  their  hearts  their  whole  nature  runs  to  head,  and  thobMB 
being  unbalanced  by  a  busy  heart  takes  to  spinning  odbinb  theoriss 
and  novelties  of  heresy.    Fiercely  liberal,  the  spirit  which  thqr  tn«»w^ 
against  the  orUiodoz  is  grandly  bigoted :  in  this  the^are  eameat^  but  in 
little  else  except  in  engendering  grievous  errors,  which  are  xaTieing  the 
churches  and  mining  souls.    Among  the  do-nothings  all  miaohief  beghia. 
Give  a  man  practical  work  for  Jesus,  and  keep  mm  at  it^  and  he  wiO, 
like  Peter,  learn  as  he  goes  on,  and,  like  a  river,  filter  as  he  flows. 
Peter  could  not  continue  to  believe  in  restricting  the  gospel  to  the  Jews 
after  the  Lord  had  bidden  Cornelius  send  t<x  him  from  Joppa,  thai  he 
might  teach  him  the  gospel:  his  actual  service  refined  nia  theoiy. 
If  those  who  ruled  botanical  science  never  saw  a  flower,  wonld  jou 
wonder  if  they  ran  into  ^ross  heterodoxies  of  belief?    A  natunuist 
who  never  saw  a  living  animal  would  not  be  likely  to  be  veir  sound  in 
his  zoology ;  and  even  so,  those  who  never  deal  with  the  soula  of  men, 
who  never  see   penitents  under  conviction,  nor  hear  the  songs  of 
new-bom  believers  in  Christ,  nor  see  men  rejoice  in  affliction  and 
triumph  in  death,  are  sure  to  blunder  when  they  set  up  for  teachers. 
They  lean  back  in  their  study  chairs  and  blow  bubbles,  and  vent 
doubts,  to  the  subverting  of  the  faith  of  many  godly  but  fbeUe  souls^ 
and  all  for  the  want  of  something  better  to  do.  I  prescribe  as  medicine 
them,  and  I  heartilv  wish  they  would  take  it,  to  do  something  fx 
and  the  good  of  rollen  men.    Peter  got  out  of  what  would  other- 


r&ITH  PUKIETHIQ  THS  HBABT,  319 

wise  have  been  his  natural  condition  of  bigotry  by  bein;;  exercised  ia 
the  service  of  bis  Master. 

Peter  tells  as  how  he  came  to  see  tliat  circumcision  was  not  nsedfaL 
At  the  dirine  bidding  he  went  in  and  preached  to  ComeliiiB  and  hig 
household,  and  while  he  was  preaching  they  believed.  He  had  not 
finiEhcd  his  sermon  before  they  had  all  beoome  belieTeis,  and  be  adds, 
■'  God  the  heart-knower  bare  them  witness,  giving  them  the  Holy 
Ghost,  even  as  he  gave  unto  us."  They  believed,  and  he  knew  that 
their  faith  had  purged  thoir  hearte  ;  for  the  Lord  sent  the  Holy  G-host 
tipon  them  there  and  then.  The  Holy  Ghost  dwells  not  in  nnclean 
hoarts,  bnt  when  the  temple  of  the  heart  has  been  purified,  there  he 
comes.  Though  these  men  had  never  been  circumcised,  yet  they  were 
purified  in  heart,  for  the  Spirit  of  God  rested  upon  them :  it  was 
evidently  the  same  Spirit  which  had  descended  upon  the  circnmoBed 
ones  at  Jerusalem,  ainoe  it  produced  the  same  results,  "for  thej 
heard  thenj  speak  with  tongues  and  magnify  God."  Now,  if  the  Spirit 
put  no  difference  between  the  circumcised  and  the  nncircumcised,  why 
shonld  the  church  do  so  ?  Peter  therefore  siiid,  "  Can  any  man  forbid 
water,  that  these  should  not  be  baptized,  which  have  received  the  Holy 
Ghost  as  well  as  we  ?"  He  therefore  commanded  them  to  be  baptized 
in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  thus  affirmed  his  belief  that  faith  had 
purified  them. ,  He  saw  that  the  Lord  had  given  the  choicest  of  gospel 
blcfisings  to  nncircumcised  believers,  even  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  therefore  he  felt  that  they  were  to  be  received  into  the  church  with- 
out circumcision.  Peter's  argument  is  eminently  clear  and  convincine. 
Ton  aad  I  cannot  be  impartial  because  we,  being  Gentiles,  are  natural^ 
pleased  with  an  argument  which  includes  us  in  the  blessing,  hut  if  we  were 
sitting  as  judges  to  listen  to  the  pleading  of  the  apostle,  I  feel  sure  we 
should  say, — Whether  it  bless  us  or  cnrse  ns,  the  reasoning  is  nnanswer- 
nble:  if  God  would  not  give  the  Spirit  except  the  heart  had  been 
purified,  then  these  men's  hearts  were  pnrificd,  and  it  is  evident  that 
they  were  purified  by  faith  alone,  seeing  that  they  were  nncircumcised 
and  altogether  outside  the  Jewish  law.  Seeing,  then,  that  they  are 
pure  in  heart,  what  need  can  there  be  of  further  purification  ?  What 
need  to  lay  upou  them  the  outward  and  visible  sign,  the  putting  away 
of  the  tilth  of  the  Heah,  when  it  is  proved  by  divine  witness  that  they 
are  pure  in  heart  already  ?  It  is  well  argued,  Peter,  and  we  rejoice  in 
the  conclusion. 

Now  let  us  consider  the  point  npon  which  the  argument  depends, 
the  statement  which  made  to  a  great  extent  the  hinge  of  Peter's 
i-casoning — namely,  that  by  faith  the  hearts  of  the  Gentile  believers 
bad  been  purified. 

First,  consider  t/w  agmt  of  this  jiuriOfinff,  "  by  faith  ;"  secondly,  t/te 
secret  of  ila  poioer,  it  was  God  that  purified  them  by  faith  ;  thirfly, 
the  SNit  of  its  action, — "purifying  their  hearts";  and,  fourthly  (what  is 
not  in  the  text,  but  which  we  gather  from  our  own  experienced,  the  mode 
of  its  operalion,  or  how  faith  purifies  our  hearts. 

\.  First,  then,  dear  friends,  let  us  speak  of  thb  AQEnt  of  chart 
PITRUIOATIOK — faith.  There  was  nothing  but  faith  in  the  case  of 
Cornelius,  nothing  hut  ordinary  faith  such  as  you  and  I  possess, 
Ekith  born  of  hearing,  and  resting  alone  on  Jesns.    Fffifh  alone  did  it. 


220  MRTBOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Bead  Petcr'8  sermon  to  Cornelius,  and  yon  will  perceive  that  bis  fiudi 
was  not  created  by  Peter's  eloquence,  and  did  not  stand  in  the  wisdom 
of  man.  Peter  told  a  very  simple  story  abont  the  life,  death,  md 
resurrection  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  just  such  a  stoty  as  a  oonvorted  Isd 
fh>m  our  Sunday  schools  might  relate,  in  &ct,  **  the  old,  old  story ;"  sod 
while  he  was  telling  it,  1  hope  not  so  hoarsely  as  I  am  compelled  to  do 
this  morning,  the  power  of  God  was  preset,  and  the  oentnrion  and  hii 
family  believed  the  testimony.  The  innate  power  of  the  atory  itself  by 
God*s  blessing,  wrought  faith  in  the  hearts  of  his  hearers,  and  they  woe 
straightway  purified  by  that  faith.  If  I  were  to  talk  of  Jeans  Chriit 
and  his  matchless  death  this  morning,  and  some  of  yoa  hearing  die 
story  were  to  trust  him,  you  would  be  purified  just  as  these  GBBsaraa 
believers  were.  Their  faith  came  by  hearing,  just  as  yoora  would, 
and  they  heard  the  very  same  gospel  of  the  grace  of  Ood  which  I  would 
preadi  to  you.    By  such  faith  hearts  are  punfied. 

2'heir  faith  punfied  them  directly.  They  were  not  purified  by 
month  after  month  of  contemplation.  Faith  purified  their  hesris 
immediately,  for,  to  the  astonishment  of  the  circumcised  believexB  irtio 
were  looking  on,  the  Holy  Ghost  fell  upon  them  there  and  then,  the 
evidence  from  heaven  that  their  faith  had  made  them  meet  for  the  in- 
dwelling of  the  Holy  Spirit.  What  matchless  energy  is  this  which  pnrifiei 
hearts  stained  with  original  sin,  and  defiled  by  actual  transgressions^  and 
cleanses  them  at  once  j  The  sacred  power  which  requires  not  e?^  a 
single  day  for  its  marvellous  operations,  but  achieves  its  purpose  in  a 
moment,  is  worthy  of  our  highest  admiration.  How  speeay  is  die 
work !  The  hearing  ear,  the  believing  heart,  the  purified  httsrt,  theee 
three  follow  each  other  in  rapid  succession,  without  long  pansesof  diMd 
conviction  or  dreary  doubt.  Delavs  do  occur  in  some  cases,  but  th^ 
are  not  necessary  to  the  work,  neither  are  they  of  the  Lord*  Here  the 
operations  of  mercy  followed  upon  the  heels  of  one  another :  hearing, 
believing,  purification,  the  gift  of  the  Spirit,  the  public  avowal  of  the 
same  by  baptism  into  the  sacred  name,  came  in  rapid  succession,  and 
herein  you  see  the  wondrous  power  of  faith,  whereby  the  aoul  is  puri- 
fied at  once. 

The  agent  of  the  purification  was  &ith  alone,  and  it  is  dear  ftom 
the  narrative  that  water  baptism  did  not  aid  therein.  It  is  sapposed 
by  those  who  deal  with  suppositions  only,  for  they  certainly  can  have 
no  facts  to  support  their  theory,  that  there  is  somethii^  purging  in 
baptism.  Do  tney  not  say  that  by  it  they  are  made  memrors  of  Christ, 
children  of  God  and  inheritors  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven?  Now,  no 
babe  has  ever  yet  ^iven  any  evidence  that  such  a  thing  took  place ;  how 
could  it  ?  The  httle  creature  is  unconscious  at  the  time,  and  as  he 
grows  up  he  does  not  show  any  superiority  to  others  who  have  not 
undergone  the  aqueous  regeneration.  We  find  our  nnbaptized  sons  and 
daughters  converted  by  grace  in  quite  as  large  a  proportion  as  those 
little  members  of  Christ  and  inheritors  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  These 
"children  of  God  by  sprinkling"  show  evidently  that  they  need  con- 
verting, for  they  grow  up  to  be  heirs  of  wrath,  even  as  others.  The 
regeneration  seems  to  be  only  skin  deep  if  we  may  judge  by  the  charac- 
ter of  ninety-nine  out  of  every  hundred  of  those  who  are  thus  regene- 
rated.  But  in  this  case  thei*e  was  no  mistaking  the  meaning  of  baptism, 


FAITH  PUKIFYING  THE   HEART.  221 

for  Corneliiis  and  his  hoasehold  were  not  baptized  till  after  they  had  re- 
GeiYed  the  Holy  Ohost,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  was  the  sign  that  their  hearts 
were  already  purified.  Now,  my  brethren,  the  Lord  will  not  permit 
Its  to  mix  up  even  his  own  ordinances  with  the  work  of  his  blessed 
Spirit  in  purifying  the  heart  by  faith  alone,  and  God  forbid  we  ever 
should  fall  into  such  an  error.  No ;  soul-purification  is  of  faith,  it  is 
not  of  baptism :  it  is  not  by  any  outward  rite  even  of  God's  own 
ordaining,  nor  by  the  will  of  man,  nor  by  blood,  nor  by  birth,  but  by 
the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  through  the  agency  of  faith  and  that 
alone. 

If  it  should,  however,  occur  to  some  brother  that  peradventure  the 
case  of  Cornelius  may  have  been  somewhat  special  because  he  had  been 
a  devout  man  and  an  alms-giver  even  before  he  knew  the  gospel,  I 
reply  that  Peter  in  his  narrative  and  argument  said  not  a  word  upon 
that  point,  but  he  held  forth  the  centurion's  case  simply  as  that  of  an 
nncircumcized  person  who  had  believed,  and  had  been  purified  in  heart. 
It  seems  to  me  clear  enough  that  if  Cornelius,  instead  of  having  been  a 
devout  man,  had  been  ciuled  by  God  out  of  the  utmost  profligacy  he 
woidd  have  been  purified  in  heart  in  precisely  the  same  manner.  If 
not,  Peter  was  unfair  in  quoting  as  a  typical  instance  what  would  have 
been  a  palpable  exception  to  the  rule  :  but  he  speaks  of  the  centurion 
and  his  familv  as  being  specimens  of  what  God  was  doing  for  Gentile 
betievers,  so  that  he  saw  nothing  at  all  exceptional  about  them ;  saw, 
indeed,  nothing  but  that  they  were  believers  and  were  purified  in 
heart  by  their  faith.  The  fact  is  that  the  instrument  by  wnich'hearts 
aie  truly  purified  is  faith  which  cometh  by  the  hearing  of  the  gospel, 
and  this  is  all ;  and  so  I  say  to  you  upon  this  point,  even  to  you  who 
know  not  the  Lord  as  yet,  do  not  he  looking  for  pure  hearts  tvithin  your- 
selves  before  you  come  to  Christ  by  faith.  Do  not  look  for  the  fruits 
before  you  have  the  roots,  but  look  by  faith  to  the  great  purifier,  how- 
ever impure  you  feel  your  heart  to  be.  There  is  a  blessing  for  the  pure 
in  heart,  but  you  cannot  claim  it  at  present,  and  therefore  be  it  yours 
to  believe  as  sinners  in  whom  is  no  good  thing  whatever.  Though  you 
mourn  the  deep  depravity  of  your  nature  do  not  vainly  endeavour  to 
alter  it  before  you  believe,  but,  sinner  as  you  are,  condemned  by  the 
verdict  of  your  conscience,  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  that  you 
may  be  completely  renewed.  I  beseech  you  seek  purity  of  heart  by  faith 
alone,  for  you  will  be  disappointed  if  you  search  ror  it  in  any  other  way. 
Do  not  thmk  that  anything  else  can  touch  the  matter,  for  it  cannot ;  no 
washing  and  cleansing  can  make  the  Ethiopian  white,  only  the  Re- 
deemer's divine  power  can  do  it.  Head  your  Bibles  by  all  means  and 
pray  by  all  means,  and  hear  sermons  by  all  means,  but  none  of  these 
things  can  avail  to  change  the  radical  impurity  of  your  inward  nature. 
Faith  must  behold  the  bleeding  Lamb  and  know  the  virtue  of  the' 
water  and  the  blood  which  flowed  from  his  pierced  side,  and  until  then 
the  soul  must  remain  in  the  impurity  of  the  fall.  All  the  efforts  of  un- 
believing nature  do  but  plunge  us  deeper  in  the  mire  and  increase  our 
defilement.  Faith  is  that  branch  of  hyssop  which,  being  dipped  in  the 
blood  of  Jesus,  makes  the  heart  clean  from  sin,  and  nothing  else  will  do 
this.  Look  thou,  then,  poor  soul,  away  from  thyself  that  thou  mayest 
have  thyself  renewed.    Ix>ok  to  thy  black,  disordered,  and  loathsome 


382  METROPOLITAN  TABSBHACLB  PUUfTF^ 

self  and  moam>  but  look  not  there  for  cue ;  that  were  to  eeek  for  lidMi 
amid  bankruptcy,  and  death  amid  lifo,  to  search  ftir  hell  in  heaven  aid 
for  God  among  demons ;  look  thou  to  Jesns^  whom  Qod  hath  set  fbrtli 
to  save  his  people  from  their  sins,  and  aa  thou  lookeat  to  him  faith  liU 
purify  thy  souL 

II.  How  is  faith  strong  enough  to  do  this  ?  What  ia  THK  SICBB 
OF  ITS  POWER  ?  Believing  other  thin^  does  not  purij^  the  aonl ;  niiy 
does  believing  the  gospel  ?  Trusting  is  a  very  aunple  act ;  how  doei 
it  come  to  pass  that  trusting  Ohrist  becomes  the  meani  of  ftlgftMing 
to  the  heart  ?  I  answer,  because  God  works  hy  it  Let  us  read  oar 
text  with  the  preceding  verse.  ^^Ood,  which  knoweth  the  hearts, 
bare  them  witness,  giving  them  the  Hdy  Ghost,  even  aa  he  did 
unto  us  ;  and  put  no  difference  between  us  and  them,  purifying  their 
hearts  by  faith.  Who  was  it  that  was  jpuri^png  their  hearts  ?  His 
answer  is  clear.  It  was  the  omniscient  dod.  Ah,  brethren,  yon  most 
not  look  alone  to  the  instrument  which  the  Lord  usefl,  but  yon  most 
have  re^u^l  to  his  own  power  which  he  puts  forth  in  connection  there- 
with. f*aith  alone  would  be  nothing,  but  when  Ood  work^  l^  foith 
wonders  are  accomplished.  You  know  the  old  stor^  of  the  sword  of 
Scanderbeg  with  which  he  used  to  cleave  men  in  twam  fix»n  the  crown 
of  the  hei^  downwards.  As  one  looked  at  it  he  declared  that  he  saw 
nothing  about  the  sword  to  make  it  so  fatal  a  weapon ;  but  the  other 
replied,  *^  You  should  have  seen  the  arm  whic^  waa  wont  to  wield  it" 
Now  faith  looked  at  of  itself  appeareth  to  be  contom^ble,  but  oh,  the 
arm  that  wieldeth  it  I  Who  shall  resist  that  everla8tm|^  arm?  Jaixd> 
may  be  but  a  worm,  but  God  can  thresh  the  monntaina  with  him.  Euth 
may  be  but  a  poor  besom ;  but  when  Jesus  comes  to  purine  the  temple  of 
the  heart  he  sweeps  out  all  the  accumulated  filth  bv  this  &cA>le  means. 
This  greater  than  Hercules  careth  little  for  the  weakness  of  the  instru- 
ment, but  behold  he  cleanseth  the  Augean  stable  of  our  natniB  with  no 
other  agency  than  childlike  faith.  God  worlm  through  foithj  and  so 
faith  doeth  marvels. 

Ah,  beloved,  if  thou  believest  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  thine  inbrsd 
sins  have  another  champion  to  meet  them  beside  thyself.  God  himself 
is  with  thee  for  thy  captain,  and  he  will  use  thy  faith  to  be  the 
ram*s  horn  to  lay  low  the  walls  of  Jericho,  or  to  be  as  the  pitchera  and 
the  trumpets,  by  whose  means  the  Midianitish  myriads  were  over- 
thrown. Thine  iniquities  shall  bow  before  his  grace.  Only  do  thou 
trust,  and  thy  poor  childlike  trust  shall  be  in  God's  hand  the  aacied 
scourge  of  small  cords  which  shall  free  thy  soul  from  aU  the  thieves  who 
now  make  it  their  den. 

Besides,  the  text  suggests  that  Ood  is  at  work  m  ihs  heart  by  kit 
Holy  Spirit.  Now,  where  the  Holy  Spirit  comes,  he  bumeth  as  a 
heavenly  fire,  and  consumeth  sin.  He  comes  also  aa  a  flowing  stream 
and  cleanseth  away  evil,  and  as  a  rushing  mighty  wind  to  chase  away 
all  that  is  foul  and  polluted  which  has  fathered  in  the  stagnant  air  of 
the  soul.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  spirit  of  holiness,  and  as  he  always  dwells 
with  faith,  being  its  author,  its  strengthener  and  guardian,  you  may  be 
sure  that  where  faith  comes  the  heart  will  speedily  bo  purified. 

The  fact  is,  brethren,  faith  sees  sin,  loathes  it,  and  flings  itself  into  the 
eternal  arms  to  be  delivered  from  it.    Faith  feels  sin  like  a  huge 


FAITH  PURIFTIKa  THE  HBART.  223 

flMNUitaiii  pveBsiiig  on  its  boaom  and  crashing  down  its  hearty  and  faith 
crielh,  *f  Etmial  Ood,  thou  hast  promised  to  delivw  thj  people  from 
ihcrir  lins.  Lo^  I  invoke  thy  power,  and  ohalleng  \  thy  promise  ;  I  cast 
myself  npon  thy  might  to  lin  thisload  from  off  my  bosom,  and  to  let  me 
breathe  freely  as  being  deliyered  from  its  terrible  weight."  All  is  well 
when  sndi  an  appeal  is  belieringly  made.  When  you  bring  God  into  your 
onarrel  it  is  ended.  When  you  lay  hold  on  the  divme  strength  Goliath 
uUls  though  yoor  weapon  be  bnt  a  sling  and  a  stone.  Here  is  the  power 
of  fkith,  wat  she  wears  the  promise  of  her  God  as  her  girdle  of  strength. 
She  hatii  laid  hdd  npon  the  omnipotence  of  him  that  maketh  heaven 
and  eartii  to  stand.  Well  may  she  perform  miracles,  for  God  is  at  her 
beok  and  c4IL  See,  then,  where  the  power  oi  faith  lieth  whereby  she 
works  the  pnrifioation  of  the  sonl : — it  is  God  that  worketh  by  her. 

Bnt  yon  say>  ^  How  does  God  pnrify  the  heart  ?  He  cannot  do  it  by 
jAysical  Ibice.*'  No.  Who  thought  he  could?  But  he  does  it  by  his 
wisdom  which  was  never  baffled  yet,  bringing  before  the  human  mind 
airgoiB«nts  whioh  suit  the  case,  revealing  trat^  which  convince  the 
understanding,  and  plying  the  conscience  with  fEM)ta  which  gain  its 
vesdiot  If  human  wndom  wins  men's  minds,  what  shall  infaUible 
wisdom  do  ?  Tc^ther  with  omnipotent  wisdom  there  is  the  most  im- 
portant dement  oi  irresistible  love.  Do  you  think  there  is  no  power 
aiiywh«fe  but  that  which  can  be  measm^  by  pounds,  and  gauged  as 
we  compute  the  force  of  steam  in  the  locomotive  engine  ?  Ah,  sirs^ 
in  the  impulse  of  persuasion,  in  the  force  of  conviction,  in  the  plea 
01  love,  there  are  powers  which  never  violate  the  human  will,  but  yet 
rule  it  with  sacred  supremacy.  What  is  stronger  than  the  power  of 
]ov€^**^]ove  which  makes  the  most  obdurate  at  length  to  yield,  love 
which  compels  the  most  malicious  to  love  in  spite  of  themselves,  love 
which  surprises  men  into  repentance  and  gratitude  or  ever  they  are 
aware  of  it  ?  Godloveth  men  until  they  must  love  him.  God  loveth 
them  with  such  omnipotence  that  at  last  they  hurl  their  weapons  of 
rebellion  down,  and  submit  with  eagerness.  Nothing  conquers  like 
love.  Now  it  is  because  faith  trusteth  in  this  wisdom  and  this  love, 
and  these  come  to  aid  h^  in  her  war  with  sin,  that  the  raging  lusts 
and  wayward  passions  of  the  heart  are  subdued,  and  grace  reigns 
through  righteousness  unto  eternal  life. 

So,  then,  I  say,  as  I  leave  this  point,  brethren  and  sisters,  remember 
humbly  and  hopefrilly  that  the  battle  is  not  yours  after  all :  the  Lord 
has  tmdertaken  the  conflict,  and  he  will  gain  the  victory.  The  conquest 
of  sin  is  to  be  achieved  by  the  Almigh^ :  you  are  to  wrestle  and  con- 
tend, but  God  in  you  is  the  winner  of  the  contest.  Since  then  God 
18  with  yon,  nothing  is  impossible ;  there  is  no  constitutional  fault  which 
yon  cannot  remedy,  there  is  no  strong  passion  which  you  cannot  check, 
there  is  no  inward  desire  however  fierce  which  you  cannot  at  last  destroy. 
Have  courage.  High  degrees  of  sanctity  are  possible  to  you  now  that 
God  is  with  yon.  Despair  of  nothing ;  doubt  not,  for  in  all  things  you 
shall  be  more  than  conquerors,  through  him  that  loved  you.  Only  let 
your  faith  continually  fling  herself  upon  the  omnipotence  of  God,  and 
you  shall  see  that  he  will  purify  your  nearts. 

III.  l^irdly,  let  us  consider  that  the  sbat  of  faith's  aotion  is 
primarily  the  heart, — **  purifying  fhefr  hmris,''    I  will  not  speak  upon 


2S4  M  rrBOFOI.ITAN   TABSItNACI'K   Ptn^PIT. 

this  topic  mure  than  to  oiitlioe  nhat  1  would  liare  wtid  liad  I  been  aiit 
to  utter  my  words  with  greater  rapidity.  Infirmities  of  voice  are  a  sad 
hindrariL-e  to  minist«'  s  :  pray  tliat  they  toay  be  removed,  for  in  my  cbh 
at  least  the  brain  is  >.low  when  the  speech  is  hampered. 

Faith  L'haDges  the  current  of  our  love,  and  altera  the  motive  whidi 
swafB  Qg :  this  is  what  is  meant  by  purifying  the  heart.  It  makes  lu 
loTe  that  which  is  gxid  and  right,  and  moves  ub  with  motives  free  from 
■elf  and  sin — this  is  a  great  work  indeed.  Hence  the  change  whitli 
&ith  produces  is  very  radical  and  deep.  It  is  a  small  matter  to  wtuli 
the  ontetde  of  the  cup  and  of  the  platter,  the  inside  of  the  cup  must 
be  first  and  chiefly  attended  to.  If  the  heart  be  chanE;ed  the  conversion 
ie  ihorovgk  and  eomplek — not  a  mere  superficial  affair,  but  a  through 
and  through  renewal.  "  Rend  your  hearts  and  not  yonr  garments,"  wns 
God's  command  to  his  people,  and  taith  acta  in  this  spirit ;  it  does  niA 
b^n  with  the  garmcuta,  nor  frame  regnlations  for  the  external  action!, 
bnt  it  begins  with  the  inner  man.  Faith  lays  the  axe  at  the  root,  it 
heals  the  stream  at  the  fountain  head,  and  what  is  done  is  therefore 
thoronghly.  effectually,  and  honestly  done. 

But  the  heart  being  purified,  the  purification  becomes  operalwe  throngh- 
ont  the  whole  iife,  A  diseased  heart  means  a  sickly  man  all  oven 
you  cannot  get  your  heart  wrong  but  what  every  organ  is  in  its  meaanre 
wrong,  the  whole  life  is  disarranged.  Neither  can  yon  have  the  heart 
right  without  its  telling  upon  the  entire  nature  and  affecting  for  thu 
better  all  that  is  within  you,  and  ail  that  comes  forth  of  you,  of  thought, 
and  word,  and  deed.  There  is  nothing  like  beginning  at  the  heart  oal 
of  whicli  are  the  isauea  of  life.  All  else  ia  poor  patchwork,  but  to  have 
the  heart  made  new  ia  to  be  renewed  indeed.  Hence  such  a  change  it, 
permanent.  Restrain  appetites  which  still  remain,  and  the  dog  returns 
to  his  Vomit ;  purify  externals  and  leave  the  nature  untouched,  and  the 
BOW  that  was  washed  goes  back  to  her  wallowing  in  the  mire.  Transform 
the  dog  to  a  slieep,  change  the  swine  to  a  child,  and  you  shall  not  sec 
the  old  habits  retnm,  bnt  without  this  all  human  goodness  ix  as  a  fading; 
flower.  Such  a  purification  is  acuptable  mlh  Qod,  who  aearcheth  the 
heart.  Man  judgeth  acoording  to  the  outward  appearance,  but  Qod 
looketh  at  the  heart ;  and  ao  faith  in  purifying  the  heart  produces  a 
purification  which  is  well  pleasing  before  God. 

The  sum  of  this  ia,  brothers  and  staterB,  do  not  begin  seeking  after 
the  purification  of  your  hearts  and  then  seek  after  faith  in  Christ  as  t 
second  thing.  No ;  let  all  things  be  done  in  order.  Emotions  are  good 
if  they  be  good,  but  they  arc  not  the  sonrce  of  purity  nor  antecedent  to 
faith.  Faith  ia  the  parent  of  right  emotions;  never  confound  the 
mother  ^vith  the  children.  If  you  would  have  men  purified,  aim  by  the 
blessing  uf  God  to  prodnce  faith  in  them.  The  preaching  which  only 
stirs  the  passions  ia  of  small  value.  We  have  heard  a  good  deal  abD:it 
vrowda  weeping,  but  we  had  rather  see  one  individual  believing.  We 
count  it  far  better  to  lead  a  man  to  believe  with  his  hoai-t  than  to  of 
with  hia  eyes ;  and,  therefore,  I  aim  rather  at  preaching  Christ  crucified, 
so  as  to  beget  faith,  than  to  paint  pathetic  pictures  of  death-beds  and  dying 
mothers,  which  things  worV  on  the  emotions  but  have  small  tondeoo; 
to  lead  to  faith.  If  first  of  all  we  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Ohriet  and 
come  to  r«Bt  in  him  the  emotions  will  be  brought  right  enough  va  doe 


FAITH   PURIKVINO  THB  HEART.  2i.*> 

tiniG  ;  tlie  heart  will  lie  rhaii^fil  vvlicre  once  faith  aesumea  the  stvay. 
But  if  you  hnre  a  faith  nliicli  never  tuiiclies  joor  heart,  n  faith  which 
never  cansca  you  to  rejoice  or  luouru,  a  faith  which  uoitlicr  maltca  you 
Imtc  Bin  nor  loie  the  Lord  Jcsua,  I  chnry;e  yon  shake  off  yonr  faith  oa 
Paul  shook  the  viper  troai  hia  hand,  for  it  in  a  deadly  faith ;  and  if  in- 
stead (hereof  you  ahouid  feel  an  aching  heart,  and  a  deep  sense  of 
alienation  from  Ood,  the  cimnge  will  appear  terrible  to  yon,  but  it 
will  be  conducive  to  your  highest  good.  Only  the  living  faitti  which 
works  npon  the  heart  and  influences  the  deaires  and  the  affections  can 
te  the  faith  of  God's  elect.  A  moonlight  t^ith,  which  has  light  but  no 
varmth,  is  a  thing  of  the  night,  and  id  not  the  faith  of  the  uiildren  of 
the  day.  Faith  which  lives  in  the  cold  garret  ot  the  brain,  and  never 
descends  into  the  parlour  and  ban(|ucting  room  of  the  heart,  wiU  starve 
with  cold,  and  it  is  not  the  life  which  the  Holy  Spirit  works  m  man. 
Judge  yon  what  I  say,  but  if  you  forget  all,  stul  remember  that  faith 
stands  ^rst,  and  then  the  heart's  purification  follows  as  a  consequence. 
Never  put  the  cart  liefore  the  horse,  nor  the  effect  before  the  cause  ; 
do  not  expect  the  fniit  of  holiness  without  the  root  of  faith,  nor  try  to 
increase  purity,  which  is  a  result,  without  first  strengthening  the  faith 
which  is  ita  original. 

IV.  Lastly,  let  us  consider  TUB  MODK  or  FAlTH'a  opebatiob, — how 
does  faith  go  to  work  to  pnrify  the  heart  ? 

Observe,  dear  friends,  fir^t,  that  faith  believea  in  ain  aa  sin,  and  sees 
the  horror  of  it  as  an  offence  E^iuiit  a  holy  and  gracious  Ood,  in  whom 
faith  devoutly  believea.  Faith  believes  in  hell,  and  sees  the  "smoke 
of  its  tormcuta  goinf;  up  for  ever  and  ever."  Faith  believes  in  the 
"worm  that  dieth  not,  and  the  Rre  that  never  can  be  quenched." 
Faith, "  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen,"  places  before  the  soul  in 
dread  array  the  pomp  of  that  Iremondons  day  when  Christ  with  clouds 
shall  come,  so  that  the  sodI  sees  sin  to  be  an  exceedingly  dreadful  and 
damnable  thing,  and  turns  to  Qod  for  deliverance  from  it :  this  is  one 
element  in  the  purification  of  the  soul. 

Next,  faith  delights  to  set  Christ  before  the  heart  and  to  make  itgaze 
npon  his  bleeding  wounds  and  pierced  side  and  marred  face.  Faith 
makes  him  no  di-eam,  but  a  reality  ;  she  causes  the  aoul's  ears  to  hear 
his  groans  and  listen  to  his  "  Lama  Sabauhthani."  The  aoul  perceives 
that  when  sin  wua  laid  on  Clu'ist  it  bruised  him  sore  and  crushed  him 
down,  and  therefore  the  heart  hatea  the  sin  which  alew  its  beat  friend, 
and  here  ia  another  element  whieh  worketh  towards  its  pnrilication. 

Faith  delighteth  much  in  the  person  of  Christ,  and  therefore  she  sets 
before  the  soal  hia  incomparable  loveliness,  aa  the  well-beloved  of  saints. 
To  faith  Christ  is  not  au  historic  personage  that  flitted  over  the  page 
of  history  even  as  a  passer-by  mo\'es  before  a  camera  when  an  artist  is 
taking  a  street  phot<^>tph,  and  lea\'eB  a  dim  trace  of  his  having  passed 
across  the  scene  while  the  picture  was  being  fashioned.  Faith  has 
learned  to  see  Christ  stand  out  as  the  most  real  man  that  ever  lived,  the 
&ct  of  the  ages,  the  focus  of  truth.  Faith  touches,  handles,  embraces, 
and  feeds  upon  Christ.  She  has  been  eo 'familiar  with  liim  as  to  have 
been  kissed  with  the  kisses  of  hia  lips,  and  she  has  been  filled  with  his 
love,  which  is  better  than  wine,  snd  tliercfoi'c  she  feels  his  constraining 
power  and  follows  him.     Faith   in  Christ's  fauiili:ir  friend;  tnith  is  us 


2Si;  Mt;THOPOLITAH  TABEHHACLB    PUljPlT. 

Jolin,  that  lieth  ereii  ia  his  bosom,  and  there  eiijo}^  hh  love  and  ponn 
forth  hfr  own.  Faith  by  revealing  the  love  and  loTcHness  of  Christ  to 
the  Bonl  kindlea  in  the  heart  a  vehement  flame  of  love  to  him,  and  this 
fire  of  love  becomes  a  powerful  element  of  pnrificatioD,  for  you  cannot 
love  Chriat  and  love  ain,  yon  cannot  feel  gratitude  for  delivemnce  from 
evil  tind  then  go  and  plnngo  into  it  again. 

Fnrther,  faith  has  awonderftil  art  of  realizing  her  gracious  privile«M, 
Faith  Bays  to  the  man,  "  Dost  thou  not  know  that  thou  art  God's  elect  ? 
The  eternal  Father  wrote  thy  name  in  hie  book  of  life  before  he  lit  np 
the  lampa  of  heaven.  How  onghteat  thou  to  live  ?  Thou  art  redeomeo, 
the  blood  mark  is  on  theo,  th(ia  art  not  thine  own,  bnt  bouEcbt  with  a 
price,  what  a  holy  life  thine  ought  to  be !  Thou  art  precious  to  the 
heart  of  God,  Ihoti  art  his  Hephzibali,  he  delighteth  in  thee.  Thon  art 
his  child,  no  more  a  aervant,  but  a  eon.  Thou  art  ChriBt's  bride  j  yea, 
thou  art  a  part  of  hia  mystical  body,  thon  art  fiUe  with  him, — how  onght- 
est  thon  to  behave  thyself?"  Brothers,  sisters,  did  yon  ever  realize  any 
one  of  these  bleasings  without  feeling  that  such  privil^es  purge  the 
Honl  ?  Did  they  not  each  one  of  them  aeem  to  say  to  joti,  "What 
manner  of  persona  ought  yon  to  be  in  all  holy  conversation  and  godli- 
ness, since  yon  are  partakers  of  mercies  like  these  ?" 

Faith  has  yet  farther  a  wondroua  power  of  acting  upon  the  teleecopic 
principle,  by  bringing  near  to  ns  the  things  to  come.  Hath  ahe  not  even 
opened  to  us  the  gat^  of  pearl,  and  set  the  golden  streets  a-glitteriue 
before  our  eyes  ?  How  near  to  faith's  far-seeing  eye,  oh  thou  blessed 
Jerusalem,  thy  celestial  splendours  have  appeared !  At  auch  seasons,  bo 
iar  from  thinking  that  we  would  indulge  in  sin  because  we  felt  our 
heaven  secure,  we  hare  groaned  after  more  purity  and  began  to  put 
our  shoea  from  off  our  feet,  for  we  have  felt  that  even  the  suborbs 
of  heaven,  where  we  then  stood,  were  holygronnd.  Transported  by  faith's 
vision  we  have  commenced  to  pnt  on  the  snow-white  robes  of  the  im- 
maculate. Having  this  hope  in  119,  we  hove  purified  ourselvea,  "even  as  he 
is  pare."  0  yowho  are  brothera  to  perfect  spirits,  coheirs  with  the 
glorified  of  the  crown  of  life  that  fadeth  not  away,  with  angels  for  yont 
wrvitoi-s  and  Christ  hiniBelf  for  your  elder  brother,  what  ahonld  he  the 
maniiT  of  our  walk  and  conversation !  We  feel  that  we  shall  never  l>o 
perfectly  contented  till  we  are  perfectly  holy,  and  nublamealile,  and 
unreprcivable  in  his  sight.  What  could  more  effectually  purify  the  heart 
than  tlie  vision  of  heaven,  which  faith  presents  to  ua  ? 

Suffer  me  now  to  crowd  a  number  of  matters  together,  to  show  yon 
that  faith  does  not  merely  give  us  motives,  but  that  it  really  finds  na 
power.  I  will  tell  you  how  faith  does  this,  for  I  have  tried  it  in 
fighting  against  ain.  Power  is  gained  by  faith  through  pleading  tlie 
promiaes  or  God.  Did  you  ever  feel  that  yon  conld  not  master  a  sin, 
and  have  you  then  gone  and  knelt  down  and  cried  :  "  Ix>rd,  thon  haat 
said, '  sin  shall  not  nave  dominion  over  you,  for  ye  are  not  under  the 
law,  but  under  grace,'  Lord  save  me  from  the  tyranny  of  sin,  which  it 
now  seeks  to  exercise  upon  me."  Did  yon  ever'  plead  that  other 
promise,  "  I  will  turn  my  liand  upon  bhee,  and  purely  purge  away  thy 
arosa,  and  take  away  all  thy  tin?"  Did  you  ever  cry,  "Ivord,  I  wiU 
rot  let  thee  go  til!  thon  hast  taken  away  my  bonds,  and  delivered  me 
from  the  iniquities  which  prevail  against  me?"    Then  I  am  surcjou 


FAI9U  PURIPYIKO  THE  HEART.  %27 

bste  obtained  help  of  OocL  Thus  does  faith,  by  pleading  God's  own 
word)  gtiUi  power  to  master  sin.  Trj  her  sacred  art  Belieye  without 
a  doiift>t  tbe-fidthflil  PromiSer,  and  hold  him  to  his  word,  a  word  from 
which  he  never  did  draw  back,  and  never  will,  for  he  is  not  a  man  that 
hft  should  lie,  nor  the  son  of  man  that  he  shonld  repent. 

Fttiih  daringly  layeth  hold  npon  the  power  of  Ohi  himself.  On  the 
strength  of  the  promise  she  grasps  the  mvine  hand  ;  she  has  the  sacred 
impiidence,  the  consecrated  impertinence,  to  thrui»t  herself  near  the 
mont,  and  Uf  hold  npon  God,  for  she  has  heard  him  say, ''  Let  him 
hff  hold  npon  my  strength.''  And  oh,  beloved,  how  she  smites  the 
raffistines  then  I  How  she  lays,  iniquity  low  when  once  God,  the  irre- 
tistible  tiater  of  siii,  has  come  to  her  help.  She  constrains  him  to  come 
bj  laying  noUjqwn  him,  and  then  she  routs  all  her  adversaries. 

Faith  brings  us  real  power  to  conquer  sin  by  applying  the  blood  of 
Ohriit  flhedoes  not  merely  talk  of  the  atonement,  but  she  delights  in 
i^  M  her  own  and  makes  a  medicine  of  it  for  the  curing  of  sinful 
hririts.  Hie  blood  of  Jesus  is  the  life  of  faith  and  the  death  of  sin.  All 
the  saints  overcome  through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  ;  we  sprinkle  it 
before  us,  and  kings  of  armies  flee  apace.  The  atonement  by  blood,  the 
hteral  substitution  of  our  Lord,  the  smarting  suretiship,  the  triumphant 
righteousness,  and  the  representative  glorification  of  the  Lord  Jesus  are 
all  great  purifiers  of  the  soul, — sharp  swords  vdth  which  to  smite 
mi*  Best  hazily  in  him  who  died  for  you  and  rose  again,  and  you 
will  be  strong  for  virtue,  sin  shall  lose  all  power  over  you.  The  blood 
of  Jesim  is  the  chief,  and,  indeed,  the  only  fountain  for  cleansing  ;  it  is 
the  supreme  source  of  holiness,  the  preparation  for  heaven.  Faith 
getteth  us  power,  for  she  plunges  us  in  the  atoning  blood  which  is  our 
life^  I 

Faith  herself  also  gives  us  power  against  sin  by  mixing  herself  with 
all  gospel  ordinances.  We  read  of  some,  "  that  the  word  preached 
did  not  profit  them,  not  being  mixed  with  faith  in  them  that  heard  it.*' 
Faith  is  a  necessary  ingredient  to  be  mixed  with  means  and  ordinances 
to  give  them  savour  and  efiicacy.  With  hearing  sermons,  attending 
oommunions,  private  prayer,  Bible  8tudy,-^mix  faith.  "  Without  pre- 
scribing how  much/'  mix  faith,  and  the  more  the  better.  Faith  will 
enable  you  to  draw  the  nourishment  and  essence  out  of  gospel  ordi- 
nances, and  so  it  will  make  you  vigorous  in  agonizing  against  sin. 

Last  of  all,  faith  rouses  the  new  man  to  intense  resistance  ot  sin. 
Faith  like  a  trumpet  wakes  up  the  unsinning  new  nature  to  battle,  and 
leads  it  into  the  thick  of  the  fight.  Did  I  startle  you  when  I  said  the 
**  unsinning  new  nature  "  ?  I  said  it  advisedly,  for  it  cannot  sin  because 
it  is  bom  of  God  ;  there  is  within  the  regenerate  man  a  principle  of 
divine  birth,  a  seed  which  is  incorruptible  which  will  remain  and  abide 
in  the  renewed  soul  for  ever  and  ever ;  this  seed  or  principle  faith 
excites  into  growth  and  energy.  Faith  arouses  love,  stirs  up  courage, 
girds  patience  with  her  girdle  and  perseverance  with  her  shoes, 
excites  zeal  and  stirs  up  jealousy,  bestirs  desires  after  holiness,  and 
quickens  the  diligence  of  devotion,  and  so  it  keeps  the  powers  of  evil 
in  che'^k  and  purifies  the  heart.  This  is  a  brief  sketch  of  how  faith 
purifies  from  day  to  day  the  soul  of  man. 

I  have  done  when  I  have  said — see,  then,  to  the  simplicity  and 


228  i[F.TKOPOI.[TJlN  TABERKICLE  POUT?. 

eneiKy  of  your  faith.  Beloved, -'as  ye  have  receivwl  Olirifit  Jestistk 
Jjord  BO  walk  ye  in  him."  As  you  belfeve  in  him  unto  justification  Re- 
lieve in  Liiii  lo  Bftnctification.  If  anyVioily  tells  you  that  yon  arc  to  get 
jnetification  in  one  way  and  KAnctificntion  in  another  way  believe  him 
not,  Jesits  (.'hrifit  is  made  of  God  nnto  us  aanctification  as  well  na  n- 
demptioti.  Pharisees  vJrtnally  tench  us  that  we  are  to  be  aanctilied  Iit 
the  law  thi^ufjh  jnstified  by  faith ;  hut  we  know  Iwtter.  These  are  twin 
covenant  blessings,  and  are  not  to  be  had  apart.  Believe  in  Christ  to 
conquer  sin  as  well  as  to  pardon  sin.  Believe  that  the  only  power  which 
can  subdue  a  base  passion  in  thee  is  the  power  which  washed  thee  from 
thine  iniqnity  of  old.  Tniat  Gfarist  with  the  power  of  sin  as  well  as 
the  guilt  of  sin.  Thon  needst  not  go  throuKh  a  ronnd  of  performance 
in  order  to  bo  purified  in  heart,  thou  needst  not  look  for  a  higher  lifo 
than  Jesus  gave  thee  when  ^lon  didst  took  and  live:  there  ifl  no 
higher  life,  for  he  gave  thee  his  own.  What  more  dost  thou  want  than 
the  Holy  Ghost  which  quickens  thee — what  is  higher  than  that  ?  What 
more  canst  thou  have  than  faith  has  brought  thee,  and  will  bring  thee? 
Jeans  has  given  thee  himself.  Didst  thou  believe  in  half  a  Christ  at 
the  banning?  Didst  thou  receive  from  him  a  lower  and  interior  life? 
Ob,  Bhame  on  thee  to  think  so.  Thou  didst  trast  thy  soul  wholly  with 
him,  didst  thou  not,  and  did  be  not  give  his  whole  self  to  thee  ?  Dart 
thon  mean  to  say  that  thou  didst  trust  him  to  save  theo  from  bell,  and 
not  from  sin  ?  Didst  thou  trust  Aim  to  blot  out  the  past,  and  wcrt  thon 
fool  enongh  to  trust  to  Ih^self  for  keeping  in  the  future?  If  so,  thon 
didat  not  believe-  in  him  at  ail,  thy  faith  was  faulty  at  the  very  core,  for 
Christ  must  be  everything  or  nothing ;  and  if  hitherto  thou  hast  been 
so  foolisli  lis  to  have  half  a  Saviour,  and  if  even  now  thou  art  lookiDg 
for  something  which  is  not  contained  in  liim,  be  foolish  no  longer.  Go 
back  to  the  very  beginning,  and  say,  "  Blewcd  Saviour,  just  as  I  am  I 
come  to  thee.  Behold,  I  take  thee  to  be  all  in  all  to  me,  fer  wisdom, 
righteousness,  sane tificat ion,  and  redemption."  Doing  this' thon  shall 
find  all  in  .lesns,  and  by  faith  thy  heart  shall  Ik  purified. 

I  had  intended  to  appeal  to  sinners,  hat  my  voice  refuses  to  !»c  loiigof 
tried,  and  so  I  leave  it  with  the  prayerful  dcBire  that  the  niiole  subject 
may  appeal  to  seekers  and  encoarage  them,     God  save  you.     Amen. 


OF  Scripture  read  bufobk  Srrmos— Acts  i 
XV.  1—81. 


Hymns  from  "Ohb  Owk  Hymn  Book"— 166,  639. 


^cbiBjirlitair  ^^mmk  fulpi. 


ENLIVENING  AND  INTIOOKATINa. 


%  ^tm»n 


DBLITBBKD  BT 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

Ht   THK   MBTROPOLITAH   TABKRKAOT.R,   MRWIHOTOIT. 


Ihon  nM  Mflording  b>  thy  woid." — PmIoi  ox!x.  25. 

You  will  frequently  fine!  David  nttcring  this  petition ;  it  is  a  favonrite 
pmyer  of  liis :  "  Quiclcon  thou  me,  0  Lord !"  And,  as  David  was  like 
the  rest  of  na— indeed,  hia  experience  is  the  mirror  of  the  experience  of 
all  Ijclievers — jou  may  depend  upon  it  we  have  all  great  need  to  pray  aa 
ho  did  :  *'  Quicken  tboa  me,  O  Lord !"  If  he  felt  a  coldness  and  dead- 
ntf^  frequently  BteHlinf;  over  him,  so  do  we.  Did  he  find  it  hard  to 
•.'ndnre  Hiich  a  wretched  state,  so  ought  we  also  to  loathe  and  abhor  it. 
And  as  he  cried  to  the  strong  for  strength,  and  knew  that  quickening 
iDuat  come  from  God,  w«  oi^ht  to  know — I  trust  we  do  know — the 
tame  resonrce  under  the  same  necessity.  Therefore  let  it  be  our  prayer 
now,  and  let  the  like  prayer  be  repeated  often : — "  Quicken  thon  me, 
O  Lord,  according  to  tny  word." 

How  ore  we  to  understand  this  quickening;?  It  means,  of  course, 
makinp:  alive,  keeping  alive,  nnd  giving  more  life, — in  a  word,  enlivening. 
He  was  alJTO  :  he  was  a  spiritunl  man,  or  else  he  would  not  have  asked 
for  life  ;  for  dead  men  never  pray,  "  Quicken  me."  It  is  a  Bign  that 
tlicre  is  life  already  when  a  man  is  able  to  say,  "Give  me  life,  0  Lord!" 
This  is  not  the  prayer  of  the  unconvcrt«d  ;  it  ia  the  prayer  of  a  man 
who  is  already  regenerate,  and  has  the  love  of  Ood  in  his  soul: 
"  Qaickcn  thou  me,  0  liord,  according  to  thy  word,"  Quickening,  of 
coarse,  comes  to  us  at  first  by  regeneration.  It  is  then  that  we  receive 
^iritnal  life ;  and  as  there  is  no  natural  life  In  the  world  except  that  of 
which  God  is  the  author,  ho  assuredly  in  the  new  world  there  is  no 
itpiritnal  life  except  that  which  God  has  created.  The  first  quickening 
it  that  which  comes  upon  us  when  we  begin  to  feel  our  need  of  a 
8nvionr,  when  we  begin  to  perceiie  the  preciousnesB  of  that  Saviour, 
nnd  when  with  a  feeble  finger  we  touch  the  hem  of  the  Saviour's  gar- 
ment :  then  are  we  quickened  into  newness  of  life.  Hut  that  spiritual 
life  needs  every  day  to  be  kept  alive.     It  is  like  the  life  of  a  fire,  which 


290  MKTROPOUTAN  TAB£RNACLE  PULPIT. 

must  be  fed  with  fael  and  supported  witk  air.  It  is  like  our  nattual 
life,  which  needs  food  to  sustain  it,  and  needs  to  breathe  the  atmosphere 
in  order  to  its  continuance.  We  are  as  much  creatures  of  God's  power 
in  our  continuing  to  live  as  in  our  commencing  to  live ;  and,  spirituallj, 
we  owe  as  much  to  divine  grace  that  we  remain  belieTers  as  that  we 
became  believers.  As  soon  as  we  get  spiritual  life,  this  prayer  is  most 
proper  as  a  sacred  instinct,  '^  Lord,  continue  this  life  in  my  soul,  con- 
tinue to  quieken  me ;  for,  if  thou  dost  not,  I  have  no  life  in  myself 
apart  from  thee,  and  I  should  die  were  I  oevered  from  thee,  as  doth 
a  branch  when  severed  fi-om  the  vine.  Continue  therefore,  good  Lord, 
to  quicken  me." 

Obviously,  too,  some  special  invigoration  and  excitement  of  life  must 
here  be  implied.  The  trees  all  through  the  winter  arc  alive.  Their 
substance  is  in  them  when  they  cast  their  leaves.  The  vitality  is  not 
extinct,  though  our  poet  of  **  The  Seasons  "  does  sing — 

*'  How  dead  the  vegetable  kingdom  lies : 
How  damb  the  tuneftd  choir  I" 

A  divine  act  of  power  secretly  maintains  the  life,  hidden  awav  till  the 
spring-time  comes.  Then  the  chains  of  frost  are  broken,  the  genial 
warmth  begins  to  light  upon  the  sealed  buds,  the  sap  flows,  and  the  ti«et 
in  their  reviving  tints  and  bursting  buds  give  such  promise  of  retnming 
foliage  and  flower  that  in  a  very  special  sense  they  may  be  said  to  be 
quickened.  As  soon  as  the  sap  begins  to  rise,  the  buds  swell,  the 
leaves  unwrap  themselves,  and  the  concealed  flowers  gradually  open: 
a  quickening  comes  over  what  was  alive,  and  what  had  b^n  kept 
alive  all  through  its  dreary,  wintry  time.  So,  beloved,  you  see,  first 
of  all,  God  gives  ns  life,  then  he  maintains  life,  and  then  at  times  and 
seasons  (would  to  God  they  were  more  frequent,  and  even  without 
intermission  I)  he  gives  vigour  to  that  life,  so  that  it  becomes  more 
manifest  and  mighty ;  and  then  it  is  that  in  a  conspicuous  manner  the 
(]|^uickening  is  seen.  I  would  to  God  that  he  would  lead  some  poor 
smner  to  pray  in  the  very  first  sense  of  the  word :  *'  Lord,  quicken  me ; 
give  me  life  :"  it  would  be  a  sign  that  life  was  coming.  I  would  that 
every  Christian  would  incessant^  pray  the  prayer  in  the  second  sense : 
"  Quicken  me.  Lord" — that  is,  "  Continually  keep  me  faithful  and  true 
to  thy  word."  And  then,  thirdly,  I  would  that  we  would  all  go  on  to 
the  third  sense,  and  say,  ''  Lord,  inspirit  me,  revive  me,  lift  me  up 
unto  a  higher  life,  fill  me  with  more  of  thy  Holy  Spirit,  and  so  make 
me  more  truthful  and  more  like  thine  ever  living  Son  Jesus,  who  hath 
life  in  himself." 

Having  thus  introduced  to  yon  the  prayer,  I  would  use  the  psalm  to 
explain  it — to  explain,  rather,  the  experience  which  commends  the 
prayer  to  our  constant  use. 

First,  brethren,  I  would  assign  some  reasons  why  you  need  quidkmv- 
ing ;  secondly,  I  would  point  out  some  motives  to  seek  it;  thirdly,  we 
shall  mention  some  ways  in  which  it  is  wrought;  and  fourthly,  we  will 
suggest  pleas^  such  as  the  psalmist  used,  for  ohtainhig  it 

1.    There  are  many  rearoxs  why  we  should  seek  QmcKENiNa. 

You  cannot  overlook  that  confessed  in  the  text — because  of  the  deaden-- 
ing  influence  of  this  world:  "  lily  soul  cleaveth  unto  the  dust :  quicken 


ENIilVSMIKO  AND  tNVIQOBATINe.  281 

thou  me  accordinff  to  thy  word."  We  are  surrounded  with  dust.  We 
are  associated  with  dust.  The  best  and  brightest  things  that  are  in  this 
world  are  made  of  dust ;  and  as  for  ourselves,  although  we  have  within 
us  a  new  and  higher  life  that  has  no  fraternity  with  the  dust,  there  is 
sn  old  life  belonging  to  us  which  is  brother  to  the  dust — ^which  saith 
to  the  worm,  "  Thou  art  my  sister."  '^  Dust  thou  art,  and  unto  dust 
thou  shalt  return,"  is  true  of  every  one  of  us.  Yet,  beloved,  we  cannot 
feed  on  the  dust ;  that  shall  be  the  serpent's  meat,  it  may  not  be  ours. 
The  new  life  in  us  craves  for  something  higher,  but  the  old  nature  tries 
lo  be  contented  with  dust.  It  clings  to  it ;  the  dust  cleaves  to  it,  and 
it  cleaves  to  the  dust.  You  know  how  the  care  and  cross,  the  work  and 
worry  of  a  busy  day  will  often  damp  your  ardour  in  prayer  and  disaualify 
your  thoughts  for  devout  meditation.  You  cannot  think  much  or  trea- 
sure laid  up  in  heaven  if  you  think  a  great  deal  of  this  world's  goods. 
Riches  are  often  a  dangerous  incumbrance  to  those  who  seek  after 
righteousness  ;  they  steal  the  heart  away  fix)m  Qod.  Matthew  Henrjr, 
in  his  own  racy  style,  warns  us  that  the  care  in  getting,  the  fear  m 
keeping,  the  temptation  in  usinf ,  the  guilt  in  abusing,  the  sorrow  in 
losing,  and  the  responsibility  of  giving  account  for  gold  and  silver, 
houses,  and  lands,  accumulate  a  heavy  burden  for  him  to  bear  who  would 
have  a  conscience  void  of  oflTence  toward  God  and  toward  man.  And  yet 
if  you  have  but  little  of  this  world's  wealth  you  will  find  poverty  a  trymg 
ordeaL  The  cares  of  poverty,  like  those  of  property,  oft^  break  the  calm 
repose  which  our  faith  ought  to  enjoy.  If  things  go  smoothly  with  you  in 
bmnness,  then  those  smooth,  deceitM  streams  bear  you  away  fix)m  Ood ; 
and,  if  they  go  roughly  vdth  you,  then  in  the  deep  and  in  the  storm 

Sn  are  too  apt  to  foiget  the  Lord  or  to  murmur  against  his  providence. 
lere  is  nothing  in  this  world  to  help  a  Ohristian ;  it  is  all  against  him. 
The  world  holds  us  to  itself  as  tightly  as  it  can  :  it  acts  like  bird-lime 
to  us.  When  we  would  mount  on  the  wings  of  eagles  we  are  often 
like  the  eaffle  that  you  see  in  the  gardens  where  they  keep  such 
creatures :  tnere  is  a  chain  to  our  foot,  and  we  cannot  rise.  Our  soul 
deaveth  to  the  dust.  Now,  as  this  is  the  case,  and  as  you  cannot  get 
out  of  the  world,  do  pray  that  you  may  rise  superior  to  its  influence. 
You  men  of  business,  you  heads  of  families,  you  who  guide  and  you  who 
follow,  you  who  are  sociable  and  you  who  are  solitary,  all  of  you  must 
still  be  in  the  world  and  mix  witn  men  of  the  world,  therefore  cry  to 
Qod,  yea,  cry  mightily,  "  Lord,  deliver  us  from  the  deadening  influence 
of  the  world  in  which  we  live  I  Qnicken  us,  we  beseech  thee,  ftom  day 
to  day !" 

A  second  reason  for  our  need  of  quickening  lies  in  the  influence  of 
vanity — of  that  which  is  actually  sinfol.  Refer  to  the  thirty-seventh 
verse : — "  Turn  away  mine  eyes  from  beholding  vanity ;  and  quicken  thou 
me  in  thy  way."  As  we  go  about  in  the  world  we  see  a  g^t  deal  of  that 
which  is  injurious  to  us.  The  sins  of  others  leave  some  kind  of  stain  upon 
the  conscience.  I  question  whether  you  can  read  a  newspaper  and  scan 
the  story  of  a  murder  or  a  robbery,  or  survey  with  more  distant  glance  in 
any  book  of  history  the  sin  of  your  fellow  men,  without  being  in  a  degree 
injured  therewith.  Much  of  vanity  and  sin  we  are  compelled  to  see  in 
our  daily  callings  ;  we  do  not  merely  read  of  profanity  but  we  hear  the 
oath,     xou  enter  into  a  railway  carriage,  and  you  cannot  always  avoid 


2.^2  MKTROPOTJTAlf  TABIHllfACr.F  P0I.PIT. 

hearing  conTersation  which  is  the  reverse  of  pare:  yon  go  into  joor 
houfie^  and,  anlcss  yon  are  happil?  sitnated  so  that  all  axe  Chriitiaa^ 
there  \\ill  be  a  great  deal  of  which  yon  cannot  approve,  and  which  ca 
be  of  no  lienefit  to  yoir  soul.  Besides,  the  whole  world  nuuieth  afler 
its  own  idols :  men  seek  each  man  his  own,  and  not  the  things  cC 
Christ,  and  all  these  things  are  vanity.  ''  Vanity  of  vanitieSy  saith  ths 
Preacher,  all  is  vanity."  Oar  eves  are  often  fiEMcinated  by  the  glitter 
and  the  glare  of  these  vanities.  The  world  pats  on  a  very  beanteons  oqbh 
plexion ;  she  attires  her  head  and  paints  her  face  like  Jeiebelt  and  iiii 
not  always  easy,  like  Jehn,  to  detest  her^  and  to  say^  **  Flin^  her  dowi^ 
and  let  the  dogs  consume  her."  We  have  noaght  to  do  with  this  vaia 
world.  We  are  not  citizens  of  this  land.  Bn^  tndy^  Madam  BoUiK 
as  Bimyan  calls  her,  with  her  purse  and  her  person^  oontinnallj  prant- 
ing  herself,  is  enough  to  make  even  Standfast  himself  to  atagger,  andhs 
need  to  fall  on  his  knees,  and  cry,  '*  Quicken  me,  0  hard,  and  tm 
away  mine  eyes  from  beholding  vanity."  There  is  thos  a  second  good 
reason  why  we  should  seek  for  quickening. 

Sometimes  we  shall  have  need  to  cfy  for  quickening  becaose  tew  an 
muroundsd  by  deceivers.  Turn  to  the  eighty-seventh  and  eigblf- 
eighth  verses : — ^'  They  had  almost  consumed  me  upon  earth ;  hot 
I  forsook  not  thy  pi'ecepts.  Quicken  me  after  thy  tovingkindneai; 
so  shall  1  keep  the  testimony  of  thy  mouth."  If  yon  are  of^n  assailed 
by  foes,  and  if  those  foes  happen  to  be  the  men  of  jour  own  hoaw- 
nold,  if  they  jeer  at  your  raith,  if  they  make  a  jest  of  boUnM 
on  purpose  to  pain  you,  you  \vill  need  a  great  deal  of  aiaoe  not  to 
be  ruffled.  To  be  a  dove  always,  to  be  a  dove  in  the  midst  of 
ravens :  to  be  a  lamb  always,  to  be  a  lamb  in  the  midst  of  wolva^ 
is  not  80  easy.  He  must  have  much  spiritual  life  who  shall  be  ahh^ 
wisely  and  discreetlv,  to  behave  himself  in  the  midst  of  thoee  who  Kb 
in  wait  to  entrap  him  in  every  word  that  he  says.  Bemember  how 
David  acted  in  the  court  of  Saul,  when  Saul  eved  hinu  UnaoBied 
purity  is  the  safest  policy.  Though  Saul  eyed  David  he  coold  not  see  any 
fault  or  rake  up  any  charge  that  he  could  bring  against  him.  Oh  that  vi 
of  you  young  people,  especially  those  of  you  who  are  sabjected  to  soon 
and  contempt  because  of  your  fidelity  to  Christ,  may  be  doablvg[iri  wilk 
grace, — may  you  be,  indeed,  quickened  to  the  full  spiritual  life,  that  joa 
may  stand  the  test  of  persecution  and  reproach,  of  suspicion  and  d» 
paragement,  of  misrepresentation  and  slander,  which  is  sore  to  como 
upon  you.  Do  not  pray  to  be  rid  of  the  grievance :  rather  reioice  that 
you  are  counted  worthy  to  suffer  shame  for  your  Sa\iour*s  sake.  Tea 
may  pray  if  you  like  that  the  distress  may  be  lightened,  because  your 
strength  is  small ;  you  may  pray  that  your  flight  be  not  in  the  winter; 
but  do  not  make  that  the  s]X)cial  object  of  your  petition.  Rather  pray 
for  gnice  to  endure  it.  Pray  for  life,  spiritual  life,  that  you  may  throw 
it  ott*.  I  suppose  that,  in  order  to  prevent  disease,  it  is  a  good  thing  to 
remove  the  cause  of  the  disease,  ana  take  away  everything  that  prodncei 
ill  savours  in  the  air;  but  the  sure  thing  is  for  the  man  himself  to  be 
vigorous  as  to  his  own  life.  I  have  no  doubt  many  die  in  moderately 
healthy  localities  because  they  have  no  stamina,  tiiey  are  constitutionally 
weak,  while  the  young  man  who  is  in  robust  health,  may  even  paai 
through  a  pestiferous  district,  and  l>e  for  hours  in  the  midst  ot  miasmi» 


ntLlTCKEKO  AKD  INTIQOBATIHa.  288 

vithont  ftk1liii<,'  »  prey  to  its  deadly  influence,  simplf  becanae  the  life 
tb&t  is  in  him  resistB  the  malaria.  Yonr  bnsinew,  dear  friend,  if  70a 
IiTO  in  the  midst  of  tho«e  that  are  set  on  fire  bf  hell,  who  pour  out 
Tenom  against  yon,  is  to  pray, — "Ijord,  quicken  me  that  I  may  have 
m  mnch  epiritnal  life  that  these  deleterioiiB  inflnencea  may  not  be 
ninouB  to  me.  Deliver  me  from  them  when  it  is  thy  will ;  but  mean- 
while let  me  have  such  a  full  tide  of  life  that  I  may  be  able  to  endure 
what  I  muBt  encounter  without  being  injured  thereby." 

Another  reason  for  seeking  quickening  will  be  fonnd  in  the  hundred 
and  seventh  rcrsc  :  "  I  am  amicted  very  much :  quicken  me,  0  Lord, 
according  unto  thy  word,"  In  teatotu  of  affliction  we  are  very  apt  to 
IWIl  into  a  dark,  cold,  dead  stat«  of  mind.  We  bare  known  persona  in 
poverty — I  have  often  been  sorely  pained  by  it,  when  members  of  this 
chore)]  who  have  become  very  poor,  have  given  over  attendance  at 
the  house  of  God.  I  could  understand  their  reasons  far  better  than  I 
could  appreciate  them.  Their  pride  was  doubtless  womided,  because 
they  could  not  dress  aa  they  used  to  do,  though  I  am  sure  nobody  here 
thinks  any  better  of  you  for  dressing  yonrselvea  in  fine  clothes.  I  do  not 
think  BO  much  of  yon  myself.  As  they  could  not  dress  qnit«  so  well 
they  felt  they  could  not  mix  as  they  did  with  some  with  whom  they  were 
once  equal  in  circumEtances.  So  they  have  gone  out  of  the  way.  It  is 
a  sad  thing  when  they  do  so.  I  ani  mnch  saddened  by  it.  I  hope  none 
of  you  ever  will.  You  ought  to  think  that  you  wiU  be  more  welcome 
at  the  house  of  God  when  you  are  in  tronble  than  you  ever  were 
before :  and  if  yon  lose  your  earthly  possessiona,  it  is  ^  the  more 
retison  why  you  should  sei-k  to  hold  the  faster  to  the  richea  which  are 
above.  If  you  are  in  pitiu,  too,  that  kiud  of  affliction  has  a  great 
tendency  to  distract  tiie  mind.  Who  can  think  when  the  brow  is 
throbbing  >  Who  can  lie  calm  when  every  vein  becomes  a  road  for  the 
hot  feet  of  pain  to  tnno!  on ?  It  is  not  easy.  Well  now,  we  have 
reason,  when  we  feel  weuk,  when  we  feel  that  the  mind  is  soffering  in 
sympathy  with  the  body,  to  cry,  "  Lord,  let  grace  triumph  over  nature. 
Let  thy  Spirit  have  power— thy  blessed  comforting  Spirit — to  lift  me 
np  above  the  weight  which  now  is  laid  upon  me,  that  I  may  glory  in 
tribulation  also,  l-ecanse  tlie  power  of  God  doth  rest  upon  me."  You 
kxik  upon  a  weight  as  a  heavy  matter  which  keeps  you  down,  bat 
mwhanics  know  how  to  make  a  weight  raise  you.  A  little  adjustment 
of  ropes  and  pulleys  and  such  hke  contrivances,  and  the  weight  shall  litt 
you  up.  And  the  Lord  knows  how  to  make  our  afflictions  mmister  toour 
quickeutng,  hs  we  ehidl  llu^e  to  show  yon  directly  ;  but  in  themselves 
they  deaden  us.  They  do  not  assist,  but  rather  hinder  ;  and  so,  when- 
ever the;  ctone,  then  is  the  time  for  us  to  pray  with  especial  emphasis, 
"Quicken  thoa  me,  0  Lord,  according  to  tny  word.  Thus  nave  I 
^ideavonnd  to  show  yon  from  the  paahn  itself  soma  of  the  reasons  why 
we  need  quickening. 

IL    Now,  let  us  pass  on  to  describe  sous  OF  the  uorincs  voa. 


Sttk  it  btcawM  of  what  you  are.  Yon  arc  a  Christian,  and  there- 
ton  already  alive  nnto  God.  Life  seeks  more  life;  it  is  its  natnral 
tandmoy.  If  there  is  life  in  a  tree  it  seeks  to  put  forth  its  branches  ; 
and  when  it  has  had  its  spring  shoot,  you  will  notice  that  it  then  begins 


234  KETBOFOLRIV  TABUUIIOUI  rULFIT. 


to  seek  for  its  midsommer  dioofc;  and  when  the  midsaiiuntf  ahoofek 
over,  the  tree  always  has  an  eye  to  ihe  shooting  of  the  next  Wing ;  sod 
before  the  old  leaves  go  there  is  every  preparation  made  for  rae  ntv 
leaves.  Life  is  always  aiming  at  more  life.  It  a  law  of  natore.  Thfn 
is  a  propagation  continually  pn^irearing  in  which  life  devekipB  and  mul- 
tiplies itself.  Now,  if  thoa  hast  the  life  implanted  I7  the  Hidy  Ofaoit 
thou  wilt  long  for  more.  If  thou  dost  not  long  to  have  mora  lifiv  it 
surely  must  be  because  thou  hast  no  life.  The  living  man  will  be  wn 
to  cry  to  God  that  he  may  have  lifo  more  sbnndantly. 

The  next  motive  is  not  only  beoause  of  what  you  ar^  but  hmmrn  tf 
what  you  ought  to  he.  Here  is  a  question  for  you :  I  will  leave  yon  to 
answer  it :  ''  What  manner  ofpersons  ought  we  to  be  in  all  hofy  con- 
versation and  godliness  ?  "  We  like  sometimes  to  wwk  out  a  pcobkn. 
There  is  one  to  solve.  Draw  a  picture,  if  yon  can,  of  what  yon  eq;fat 
to  be.  I  will  toll  you,  if  you  draw  that  picture  exactly,  what  it  will  bs 
like.  It  will  be  like  Jesus  Ohrist.  That  is  the  answer  to  this  qneetion^ 
*'  What  manner  of  persons  ought  we  to  be  ?  "  Now  Ohrist  was  ilnll  of  lib 
Although  he  did  not  strive  or  cry,  or  lift  up  his  voioe,  or  canse  it  to  bs 
heard  in  the  streets  by  way  of  seeking  after  popular  notoriety,  yet  irtist 
life  was  in  him.  He  was  brimfol  of  life.  There  was  nothing  Btegnsotk 
indifferent,  or  purposeless  in  any  of  his  actions  or  in  allhis  oanon 
Why,  the  life  of  Christ  was  so  full  that  it  seemed  to  flow  out,  even  on  to 
his  garments,  so  that  when  they  touched  his  garments  virtue  went  oet 
of  him.  How  full  must  he  have  been  of  the  living  force— -the  invsd 
power !  0  bclovod,  we  ought  so  to  be.  As  we  are  rsdeemed,  aa  we  ai 
quickened  by  Ohrist,  as  we  are  members  of  his  body,  an  we  bekog  to 
him,  we  ought  to  reckon  ourselves  dead  unto  sin,  rat  alive  nntouod 
by  Jesus  Ohrist.  Above  all  men  that  live,  the  Ohiiitian  ought  to  liis 
at  the  most  vigorous  rato.  We  have  a  race  to  run ;  we  must  not  crap 
and  crawl,  or  we  shall  not  win  the  prise.  We  have  a  battle  to  &;ht; 
should  we  sheath  our  sword,  put  off  our  aarmour,  and  go  to  uaa^ 
how  can  we  overcome  our  enemies?  We  have  an  agony  to  tndaiOb 
according  to  his  power  that  worketh  in  us  mightily,  and  then  can- 
not be  this  resisting  unto  blood,  striving  against  sin,  unlew  all  ov 
passions  be  aroused  and  all  our  powers  be  stirred  for  the  wondinos  in* 
ward  strife.  We  ought  to  ask  for  quickening  because  of  what  we  onght 
to  be. 

Then,  we  ought  to  ask  for  quickening  heoauu  9f  what  wo  aJkoD  la 
**  It  doth  not  yet  apuear  what  we  shall  be,  but  we  know  that  when  he  ohldl 
appear  we  shall  be  like  him,  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is."  Brother,  you  an 
to  be  a  pure  spirit  in  heaven  :  be  spiritual  now.  Brother,  you  axe  to  sing 
among  the  angels ;  rehearse  the  music  now.  Brother,  you  are  to  aoo 
his  face  that  is  as  the  sun  that  shineth  in  its  strength  :  let  not  your 
eyes  be  sealed  with  dust  now.  Let  them  be  dear,  as  clear  as  they  con 
be  in  this  misty  atmosphere  of  earth.  Brother,  you  are  to  sit  upon  tbe 
throne  with  Ohrist,  for  he  saith,  "As  I  have  overcome,  and  have  sat 
down  with  my  Father  upon  his  throne,  so  also  shall  you  sit  with  me 
upon  my  throne'*:  see  where  you  arc  to  be,  and  behave  youndf 
accordingly.  You  cannot  maintain  the  dignity  of  your  high  oaUing,  or 
your  heavenly  destiny,  unless  yon  have  an  abundance  of  spiritual  UK 
wherefore  pray,  "  Quicken  thou  me,  0  Lord." 


BUOiITBlIINa  AHD   ISVlOOlMIIRa.  285 


Nov,  to  come  back  to  the  psalmist's  9\va  coofessioiiB  uid  r 
he  gives  us  another  motiro  for  Ecekin^  this  in  th«  eighth-eighth  vtna : 
"  Quicken  me  after  thy  loving  kindness ;  so  shall  I  keep  the  testimonj 
of  thy  mouth."  We  want  quickming  in  order  to  oMiena.  If  our  life 
decays,  then  the  power  of  sin  will  get  the  luaatar;  over  na.  We  cannot  go 
ID  the  way  of  obedience  and  punctuality  and  Bontpuloos  care  and  inward 
heartiness,  rniless  we  are  daily  quickened.  I  am  Bureroo  want  to  be 
holy,  brothers  and  siatera.  I  am  aaro  yon  do.  Well,  then,  pray, 
"Quicken  me."  There  is  no  soch  thing  aa  dead  holineBS^  it  must  be 
living  holinees,  iind  you  must  be  made  alive  in  oider  to  be  obedient,  for 
there  ie  no  such  thing  as  dead  obedience.  Up  to  the  altar  ol  God  they 
■ruught  birds,  and  they  brought  beasts,  but  they  never  brought  fish  j 
and  why  ?  Becaaec  they  could  not  bring  fiah  alive  there,  and  there 
must  be  no  sacrifii^o  presented  to  God  but  that  which  hath  life.  Ask 
for  life,  that  thomuayest  have  obedience. 

liook  at  the  one  hundred  and  seventh  vene  and  you  have  another  reason 
for  seeking  quickening,  because  tl  will  be  your  comfort.  "I  am  afflicted 
very  much :  quicken  thou  mo,  0  Lord,  according  to  thy  word ; "  or,  . 
better  still,  at  the  firtieth  verse,  "  This  k  my  cou^rt  in  my  affliction : 
for  thy  word  hath  quickened  me."  Ho  you  want  comforting  ? .  Get 
qtiickening :  do  not  so  much  aak  the  Lord  to  give  yon  sweet  promiaee, 
aa  to  give  yon  inward  life,  for  in  life  there  ia  always  light.  "  In  him 
WM  life,  and  the  life  was  the  light  of  men."  Aa  the  light  is  the  life, 
tha  life  is  the  light;  and  when  you  get  the  life  oi  God  within  ^onr 
Boni,  yon  will  get  the  comlbrt  of  God,  I  urge  yon  to  seek  quickening, 
then,  if  you  are  cnder  any  distress,  bcsause  it  will  be  the  readiest  - 
means  of  yonr  finding  consolition  in  it. 

Look  also  at  the  eighty-seventh  and  ^e  eighty-eighth  verses,  to 
which  we  have  already  referred,  and  you  will  see  that  we  onght  to  seek 
quickening  as  l/ie  best  securily  eu/ainst  altaeka  of  etwmiea.  We  Deed 
not  examine  how  we  can  meet  the  foe,  or  with  what  argument  ws  can 
rufale  his  sophistries,  or  with  what  wewone  we  can  overthrow  him. 
"Quicken  then  uie,  0  Ijord,"  is  still  ine  prayer,  even  though  they 
IhKalen  to  consume  ub  from  off  the  I-m9  of  the  earth.  We  have  but 
to  keep  close  to  the:  precepts  of  God  tuid  pray  for  quickening,  and  we 
shall  be  "  more  than  conquerors  through  him  that  lo-'cd  us." 

The  use  of  the  word  "  quicken  "  will  be  seen  in  tha  ninety-third  verse. 
"  I  will  never  forget  thy  precepts :  for  with  them  thou  hast  quickened 
me."  We  are  always  in  danger  of  foi^getting  God's  precepts  j  but  lo  m- 
PK6rat«  our  mmtories,  and  to  fortify  our  liearte,  we  most  get  quickening. 
Kotbing  can  make  a  man  bo  secure  of  walking  rightly,  and  defying  all 
the  attacks  of  his  enemies,  as  the  reception  of  spiritual  life.  The  young 
man  can  only  cleanse  his  way  by  taking  heed  to  it  according  to  God's 
word ;  but  he  cannot  take  heed  to  his  way  if  he  is  not  alive  in  the 
way.  Life  is  the  great  thing.  Lwk  at  n  pool  of  water  when  it  stands 
still — how  it  becomes  mantled  over  with  weed,  how  stagnant  and 
defiled  it  is :  but  give  it  vent,  and  let  it  run  down  yonder  brook  among 
the  stones ;  let  it  leap  in  little  cascadus  on  its  way  down  to  the  river. 
It  is  alive  now,  and  see  how  pure  it  guLs,  refining  aa  it  goes,  dropping 
all  the  tilthiness  it  hod  aceumtiluted  btlbre,  becoming  itself  sweeter  ana 
clwrer,  because  of  life.     So  it  must  !«  with  ne.     We  must  b«v«  life ; 


8W  VmtoroUTAB  TABUtSACLB   POLPIT. 

we  shsll  toTf^et  God's  precept  eUe,  aud  lose  the  parity  of  life,  nnlea 
qoickeniDg  be  giTeo  to  ns  abondantlj. 

If  I  wanted  Btnic  one  ihriUiog  mo4ire  to  ronw  the  relnctant,  I  would 
reiOTt  to  this — thf  iernbie  renv^weneta  <^  hmng  spiriiiuil  life:  I  ija 
not  mean  the  effect  of  losing  it  alU^Uier,  but  of  locking  it  in  iti 
nuaifest  dinplajr.  Alae  that  it  ^oald  be  m  easy  to  give  obvloos  illnt- 
tntioiu!  Bat  1  con  Id  iil!  yoa  of  many  ci^n^regatioas  and  chnrchet 
where  there  is  no  iHore  evidcnco  of  TJtality,  growth.  Increase,  than  If ' 
th^  were  all  dead.  I  do  not  say  that  there  is  no  spiritual  lifs,  bat  thai 
is  none  in  tite  seDf:  in  irhich  1  am  naiDg  the  term.  They  have  falln 
into  a  dead  Bleep,  nnd  the  members  of  toe  church  are  cold,  apotfaetii^ 
EoiritleGS.  Life  amoni:  tiuui  is  at  the  lowest  ebb.  Yoa  cannot  be  snra 
they  breathe ;  breiithe — 1  mean — a  breath  of  prayer.  Some  of  them  han 
r>ot  been  to  a  prat<  r  mo'iino  ihey  conld  Dot  tell  when,  do  not  know  whea 
they  cTcr  did  go  ;  ..ud  when  cbev  attend  Subliath  serrices  not  a  few 
of  them  litorallyt.ie|i,  imi  the  rest  of  them  sleep  with  their  eyes  open. 
The  miaistcf  doiiric.  dreaming,  snoring,  talking  in  his  sleeph — thatig 
what  his  preachiii<:  is  like.  There  is  plenty  of  preaching  Uke  that— 
an  iitaTticnIatfi  snoriu?  of  Che  erertasling  gospel.  The  preacher,  per- 
btpe,  i«ada,  or  else  he  repeats  what  he  has  Iatx>riously  committed  bi 
memory,  and  says  ic  as  a  school-boy  does  his  lesson,  and  he  is  gUd 
whea  it  is  orw:  for  he  oousiders  that  preaching  twice  on  a  Sandsf 
wears  him  ont,  dear  man  !  And  well  it  may,  as  he  does  it.  It  neatt 
hia  people  oat  as  well.  They  have  no  enterprise,  the  sarronnding  neigh- 
booniood  is  not  erangelized  b?  them,  they  do  not  increase,  they  do  not 
think  of  inGreuing.  in  fact,  they  get  fewer  m  the  good  people  go  homt 
to  heaven.  Any  attempt  to  do  anything  there  would  be  uwked  DpoB 
as  "an  innovation":  ytt  they  do  something,  they  have  a  disturbuica 
•Twy  now  and  then.  They  hold  what  they  call  a  "  church  loeetin^" 
which  mcaoB  in  their  case  a  sptritual  bear-garden,  in  which  they  sbo* 
their  life,  and  one  minister  is  driven  away  and  another  and  aaotfaer— 
not  that  it  la  a  tic  plai-e  for  anybiidy  to  desire  to  go  to,  you  know, 
fin*  there  is  very  liiile  to  be  had  except  abuse  j  bat  still  that  is  Che 
style  of  the  thin^-.  ind  there  are  hundreds  ol  churches  in  England 
in  that  condition.  <>  (hut  tlic  I^rd  would  quicken  them!  May  this 
place  be  reduced  C'>  a$hes,  and  may  the  congregation  be  scattered  lo 
the  fonr  winds  of  heaven,  sooner  then  it  shoald  become  a  hnge  maoso- 
lenm,  a  catacomb,  of  which  it  may  be  said  "  the  dead  are  there."  Ah, 
it  ii  ill  to  hare  "the  means  of  grace"  without  the  grace  of  the 
means,  to  have  a  name  to  live  and  to  be  dead.  God  save  us  front  it. 
Take  heed  to  yourselt  es ;  some  of  the  members  of  this  churuh,  1 
fear,  are  getting  into  that  condition ;  yet  not,  1  trow,  yoa  that  are 
present  this  evening.  Von  would  not,  most  likely,  have  been  hen  w 
Mich  a  wet  night  as  this  if  yon  had  not  some  care  for  the  thuigsof  (ledi 
bat  I  refer  to  tlio^  that  are  not  here.  When  yoa  get  home  lelt  Iheuso; 
tell  them  what  I  h.ive  said  about  it,  and  then  perhap  they  will  say, 
"  Well,  if  the  pastor  always  epcaks  suvercly  of  those  who  are  not  there 
m  had  better  go,  so  as  to  escape  his  strictures." 

III.    Kow  let  us  mi'utiou  brictiy  some  of  tub  ways  by  which 
XBtli  QUKIOailNe  UAY   BE  WKOLGUT  IS  V&. 

or  course  the  Lord  himself  most  do  it.    In  prayer  it  must  be  son^!^ 


BNIiIYBWIKQ    AKD   IHViafHUTUIO.  287 

liwnnse  by  liis  power  it  ainat  be  wronght.  The  prayer  iB,  "  Quicken 
tliou  me,  O  Lord,  accordii^  to  thy  word."  He  does  not  expect  the 
qviickeiiiEig  rram  any  bat  a  divine  source.  Whence  can  life  come  bnt 
Iroui  the  ever  HvingGoii?  How  can  we  expect  that  we  should  get 
life  if  while  we  seek  tlie  gratuity  we  totally  forget  the  divine  energy  of 
him  who  alone  can  bestow  jt  ?  In  the  thirty-seventh  verse  we  are 
told  how  the  Lord  oflea  qnickens  his  people,  namely,  by  tnmiag 
ofl'  their  eyes  from  beholding  vanity.  "  Tarn  away  mine  eyes  from 
beholding  vanity  ;  and  qvicken  thon  me  in  thy  way."  The  Lord  some- 
times takes  the  canity  away  of  which  we  made  onr  idol;  or  else  he 
takes  uB  away  from  the  idol,  and  does  not  permit  as  to  find  any  con- 
tentment in  it.  Ob,  it  is  half  the  battle  to  be  weaned  fh>m  the 
creature.  It  is  half  the  battle,  I  say,  to  get  the  eyes  off  the  vanity, 
for  then  yon  are  likely  to  get  yonr  eyes  turned  upon  yom-  God.  May 
he  be  graciously  pleased  ta  quicken  some  of  you  in  that  way. 

In  tbe  nUteth  vensc  we  find  that  God  quickens  his  people  by  hit 
u-ord.  "  Thy  word  hath  qDickened  me."  And  the  part  of  the  word 
which  he  often  blesses  to  this  end  is  remarkable,  for,  in  tbe  ninety-thinj 
verse,  it  is  written,  "  I  will  never  forget  thy  ^ecepU ;  for  with  them 
thou  hast  qnickened  me,"  Promises  are  quickening,  doctrines  are 
quickening,  but  David  says,  "Thy  precepts — with  them  thou  hast 
quickened  me."  If  we  preach  ftequently  and  earneBtly  the  precepts  of 
our  Lord  there  are  hearers  who  will  complain  and  say,  "  The  minister 
is  getting  legal."  Nay,  brethren,  it  is  you  that  are  getting  dead,  for 
when  you  are  alive  yon  will  love  God's  precepts,  and  those  precepts  will 
quicken  yoa.  "  But  theypain  me,"  says  one.  That  is  often  how  people 
are  quickened.  While  a  person  is  drowning,  we  have  heard  that  hie 
sensations  ore  often  really  delightful;  but  when  he  is  fished  out  of  the 
water,  as  Goon  as  ever  he  aegins  to  recover  life,  the  blood  begins  to  tingle 
in  the  veins,  and  the  puin  is  intense.  The  pain  of  returning  hfe  is 
something  terrible.  Well,  80  it  is  with  God's  precepts  when  he  quickens 
Ds  with  them.  These  precepts  pain  us  because  they  show  us  our  short- 
coming, expose  to  us  our  laultiness  and  humble  us.  Brother,  that  ia 
the  way  to  be  quickened.  When  you  are  numbed,  you  know  that  is 
next  door  to  being  dead  ;  but  when  that  numbed  flesh  of  yours  begins  to 
come  to  life  again, — you  have  felt  it,  you  must  have  felt  it — when  the 
blood  begins  to  cireulate  by  the  rubbing,  a  sharp  pain  is  excited  in  the 
part  that  was  numbed  nud  painless  before.  Be  thankful  for  the  pain 
that  is  an  itidcx  of  life.  "  I  love  thy  precepts,  for  with  them  thou  hast 
quickened  me."  May  the  Lord  apply  a  text  of  Scripture  to  your  soul 
with  power,  or  let  iiim  send  a  woM  from  the  minister  as  he  speaks  in 
Jehovah's  name  with  a  divine  force,  and  you  will  soon  feel  the  effect. 
Though  you  apj.icared  to  be  dead,  you  will  start  up  and  begin  to  live 
^;ain.  Have  not  you  found  it  so  full  often?  Have  yon  not  often 
found  great  rcrivings  come  to  yonr  sinking  spirit  ?  Pray  the  Lord  to 
make  his  word  always  tlics  vivifying  and  inspiriting  to  you. 

Ia  the  hundred  aad  seventh  verse  we  have  another  means  of  quick- 
ening which  God  frequently  uses,  namely,  affliction.  "  I  am  afflicted 
Yery  mach :  quicken  me,  0  Lord,  according  to  thy  word."  God  fre- 
quently employs  adversity  us  a  black  poker  to  stir  ns  up  that  the  flame 
of  devotion  may  be  brighter.     When  you  obaerve  tiie  fire  in  your 


SaS  lOBTROPOLITAH  TABIBHIOUI  FUWIT. 

•itfcing  room  getting  dnll  and  going  oat,  joa  do  not  alwaji  put  mon 
coals  on,  bnt  yon  stir  it ;  and  aometimeB  affliotfon  does  ihafe  Ibr  oi.  ft 
stirs  us  and  makes  the  lift  whioh  was  laiyiiahing  to  bnrat  tonA  brid^. 
Be  thankfiil  if  God  stirs  Your  fire. 

Then,  again,  diis  quickening  is  sometiiBaawioiipflit  in  Of  bj  maanssf 
divine  comfort,  as  in  the  fiftieth  Terae :— **  This  is  mj  oomfat,  fa 
thy  word  hath  quickened  me."  The  gre^  floflh  of  oomibr^  the  sodte 
inflow  of  supreme  joy,  when  yon  were  much  depresMd — ftlui  hm 
greatly  cheered  and  invigorated  yon;  at  least  X  know  it  haa  Qfteabea 
so  with  me.  When  very  despondent  and  aad  at  hearty  I  taaTS  ftlt  aiBft 
stream,  as  though  it  were  the  Oulfnitream  willi  itt  warm,  gmid  tanMa- 
ture,  flowing  into  my  soul,  malting  idl  the  icebergs  that  bad  gatwnl 
round  my  heart,  and  I  have  w^mderod  what  it  was.  Qofw  hai  wf 
gratitude  turned  to  my  gracious  Ood  and  found  iweet  frgynMimi  in  flat 
nymn — 

<'  Thy  mercy  is  more  than  a  match  ftr  my  hearty 
Which  wonders  to  feel  its  own  hardness  depart» 
Dissolved  hy  thy  goodness,  I  ML  to  i&t%  gronadt 
And  weep  to  the  praise  of  the  mercy  Fye  fiRmd.** 

You  will  often  have  proved,  I  doubt  not,  how  God  naea  tbe  oomlioiEtar 
his  Spirit  to  quicken  nis  children. 

lY.  Our  last  point  is  to  squire  whbbi  abm  ottb  puus  what  vi 
ooMfi  BEFORE  OoD  TO  ASK  FOB  QUiOKHirnro?  Whataignmentaahattws 
use?  Well,  brethren,  use  first  the  argument  of  ymiTfMomiilv.  Whatsfsr 
that  necessity  is,  padiiculariae  it^  as  David  ooes  in  the  hnndied  sii 
seventh  verse : — "  I  am  afflicted  very  much  i  aniokan  me."  Or  tribi 
our  text,  "  My  soul  deaveth  to  the  dust,  quicken  me.''  Head  thai 
your  necessities.  Your  wants  shall  be  the  argument  finr  tlie  oil  sii 
wine.  Your  emaciation  and  your  hunger  shiril  be  ttie  axgnment  fa  a 
festival.  Show  the  Lord  what  you  are  and  where  yon  are,  ftonfan  ft 
before  him,  and  this  shall  begood  pleading.  Also  plead,  if  it  be  m  vmr 
newer  to  do  so,  ilA^  mvyim/ diMwv  that  God  haa  kindle  tn  yo^  Baaatihs 
fortieth  verse : — *'  Behold  I  have  longed  Ibr  thy  precepts ;  qidclnn  me  ii 
thy  righteousness."  This  is  as  mucn  as  to  say,  **  Lord,  thon  haii  gi?«i 
me  great  bngings  after  thee.  Thou  gaveat  me  these  cravings :  wilt  tboi 
not  satisfy  them  ?  Dost  thou  torture  me  with  the  miseriee  of  TantalH  ? 
Dost  thou  grieve  me  with  a  thirst  which  thou  wilt  not  gratifr  ?  Haik 
thou  given  me  a  hunger  for  the  bread  of  heaven  only  tat  m  asks  of 
torturing  me  ?"  Beloved,  if  you  have  got  a  desire,  you  may  depend  upon 
it  the  desire  of  the  righteous  shall  be  granted*  Ood  does  not  eicite  the 
appetite  without  providing  the  aliment.  If  he  miJces  yon  hunger  and 
thirst  after  riehteousnees,  recollect  the  promise,  "  Blessed  are  they  ttat 
do  hunger  ana  thirst  after  righteousness,  for  they  shall  be  filkd."  They 
shall  not  have  merely  a  little,  a  crumb  or  two  to  stay  their  atomachf,  hot 
they  shall  be  filled.  Go  and  plead  that  before  God.  **  I  have  kiiged 
after  thy  precepts ;  quicken  thou  me  in  thy  righteousness."  There  is 
the  second  plea. 

And  then  you  may  find  a  third  in  the  very  righteousness  of  God,  as  we 
have  seen  in  the  fortieth  verse.  Appeal  to  hds  righteousness.  Do  I  see 
joo  start  back  abashed  ?  Do  I  hear  you  say,  '*  Oh  no ;  I  conld  not 
Uppeal  to  that»  for  the  righteousness  of  Ood  must  condemn  me."    Stop 


HTLITBNISa  AMD  nTTICKHUTINa.  SSS 

«  miiint«.  "  If  we  confess  our  sins,  he  ia  &ithfal  and  juti  to  forcive  ns 
onr  aina."  Why,  the  justice  of  God  is  on  tho  aide  of  the  man  who  has 
received  God's  promifle,  because  it  were  nnjust  of  God  to  break  it.  He 
Kiil  not  alt«r  the  thing  that  has  gons  out  of  his  mouth.  Tho  Lord 
has  given  his  word  for  it,  that  he  will  give  his  people  Ufe.  The  vaij 
&ict  of  his  liaring  mada  them  hve  at  all  is  the  proof  that  he  meana  to 
continne  to  make  them  live.  Go  and  plead  it,  tiien.  Saj — "in  thy 
righteousness,  oh  Lord,  quicken  me."  David  is  twt  often  harping 
open  that  string.  As  I  showed  you  in  the  reading,  h»  twice  appeal! 
lo  God's  judgment,  or  his  justice,  that  be  would  quicken  him. 

Another,  and  a  very  sweet  plea  is  thittot  GotP*  Urvingkvuinees.  Read 
ihe  eighty-eighth  Terse: — "Quicken  me  after  thy  lovingkindneaa." 
Look  at  the  hundred  and  lorty-nintli : — "Hear  my  voice  according 
unto  thy  lovingkindaess  :  0  Lord,  ouioken  me  aocording  to  thy  judg- 
ment." And  so  again  in  tho  hnndrea  and  fifty-sixth  : — "  Great  are  thy 
tender  mercies,  0  Lord :  quicken  me  according  to  thy  judgments.^' 
"  Thou  pitying  God,  give  me  more  lifo.  0  thou  who  wiliest  not  the 
death  of  any,  give  mo  more  life.  0  thon  that  lovest  as  a  father  lorea, 
give  me  more  life.  0  thou  who  hast  graven  me  npon  the  palms  of  thy 
hands,  quicken  me;  quicken  mc,  I  bciieech  thee."  Are  they  not  blessed 
pledges  to  lay  hold  on — his  lovingkiadnees  and  his  tender  mercies? 
With  such  promises  you  will  be  uure  to  prevail. 

And  then  what  a  comprehensive  plea,  is  that  of  our  text:  — 
"  Quicken  thon  me  according  to  thy  word."  Yon  have  it  in  the  twenty- 
fifth  verse,  and  yon  have  it  in  the  hundred  and  seventh.  He  pleads  l/u 
irord  of  God.  What  that  word  was  that  David  had  to  appeal  to,  it  would 
rather  puszle  me  to  tell  you.  His  Bible  was  not  so  lu^  nor  near  so 
full  :is  ours.  I  do  not  find  any  promise  of  quickening  before  David's 
lime.  Perhaps,  n  special  promiac  had  been  given  to  him,  or,  at  any  rate, 
the  promise  is  virtually  in  the  Pentateuch :  but  certainly  to  ua  there 
ia  abundant  testimony  to  be  found  in  tte  word  of  God,  for  onr  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  htmaelf  has  told  na — "  Wbosoever  drinketh  of  the  water 
that  I  shall  give  him  shall  never  thirst,  but  it  shall  be  in  him  awell  of 
water  Bpringin<;  up  into  everlasting  life."  "I  give  unte  my  sheep 
eternal  life."  The  Son  of  man  hath  come  not  only  that  we  might  have 
life,  but  that  we  might  have  it  more  abundantly.  Plead  the  promieeH, 
brother ;  plead  the  promises  ;  and,  ns  you  plead  them  before  the  Lord, 
you  may  rest  quite  certnin  that  God  will  be  as  good  as  his  word ;  and, 
if  you  can  plead  the  promise  the  promiae  will  be  surely  fulfilled  to 
yon. 

Beloved  in  Christ,  do  tenderly  watch  over  your  epirittial  li^  or 
otherwise  yon  are  hypocrites  when  you  pray  "quicken  me."  Take 
heed  lest  you  neglect  the  food  of  your  sonb.  Do  not  go  where 
your  life  would  lie  in  danger.  Do  not  seek  worldly  company,  do  not 
indulge  in  worldly  aumsementB.  Keep  out  of  all  the  deadening  in- 
fluences of  the  world  as  mach  as  ever  you  can.  Have  you  ever  seen 
the  Grotto  del  Cane  near  Naples  't  It  has  a  deadly  gas  at  the  bottom  of 
it,  and  they  take  a  dog  and  throw  him  in,  and  when  they  drag  him  up 
igain  the  dog  looks  as  if  he  were  duad ;  but  by  aid  of  a  fresh  water 
bath  he  comes  round  again.  An  they  thus  kill  the  poor  di^  half  a 
dozen  times  a  day,  I  do  not  envy  him  hw  ejcperience.    Indeed,  I  rath«r 


340  MKTROPOIJTAir  TABKEKAGLB  PULPIT. 

thiuk  if  I  were  tbat  dog  I  would  loee  no  time  in  fleekiii^  anote 
master.  Yet  there  are  some  professing  Christians  that  will  so  into  had 
company — get  into  the  bad  gas  of  temptation — and  then  they  go  ni 
hear  a  sermon  and  get  back  Uieir  q>iritnal  life  again.  I  wonkl  adfiie 
yon  not  to  be  like  that  poor  dog,  but  to  keq)  ont  of  hann*8  way.  If 
yon  have  life  do  yonr  best  to  maintain  it,  and  do  not  ron  the  risk  of 
suspended  animation. 

Knowing  the  worth  and  joy  of  life  yourself,  pray  yeirjf  eameatly  thtt 
God  would  give  it  to  others.  Look  on  the  doid  in  am,  but  not  witk 
stony  eyes.  Look  on  them  with  tears.  Bren  if  I  knew  that  my 
hearers  muse  be  lost,  I  would  pray  Ood  to  help  me  to  weep  OTcr  them, 
because  our  Saviour*8  tears  over  Jerusalem,  you  remember,  were  aeoom- 
panied  with  a  distinct  indication  that  Jerusalem  would  be  Aet^ttopL 
**  Oh,  that  thou  hadst  known,  even  thou,  in  this  thy  day,  the  thn» 
which  make  for  thy  peace  !  But  now  are  they  hid  from  thine  ejes?* 
Still  he  wept.  AYe  have  no  such  terrible  knowledge  about  the  destiny 
of  any  man.  We  look  hopefhlly  upon  you  noconyerted  people^  and  «e 
exhort  you  because  we  expect  you  to  believe  in  Jesua.  •  We  sincerdy 
trust  that  yet  you  will  be  saved,  and  therefore  we  pray  for  yon  in  hope^ 
May  the  Lord  in  infinite  mercy  lead  yon  to  feel  for  yonrBehes^  and 
pray  for  yourselves. — **  Quicken  thou  me."  Do  you  feel  that  pnjBr 
welling  up  from  your  soul  ?  Does  it  rise  fit)m  your  heart  ?  iImd, 
already,  there  is  something  of  spiritual  life  there.  Believe  in  the  Lnd 
Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  have  life,  for  he  who  said,  **  He  that  Imtii 
and  belicveth  in  me  shall  never  die,'*  said  also,  '*he  that  believeiih  ia 
me,  though  he  were  dead,  yet  shall  he  live."  God  give  yon  that  hnig 
faith  which  is  the  token  of  the  life  divine.  To  him  be  glory  for  ever 
and  ever!    Amen. 


Portion  of  Soriptubb  Read  bsfobb  Sebmoh-— Flsalm  oziz.  145— 161 


Hymns  from  ''  Our  Own  Hymn  Book  "—119  (Third  Fart),  4M. 


Just  Published.     Price  One  ShaUng. 

CHRisrs  glorious"  achievements, 

Sitt  {ortfi  in  Seben  Sermons, 

B-sr     O.     T£.    SFURO-BOIT. 


"Seldom^  we  venture  to  think,  has  such  a  'glorious'  theme  bean  i»«*s<n^  aftv 
snoh  a '  glorious  *  fashion.  Ever^'  page  drops  fatness :  it  is  a  rare  spuritoal  ftsft 
AU  oar  readers  who  procure  this  delightful  pocket  oompanion  wiU  thank  as  &> 
announcing  its  publication." — The  CkrittUin. 

PiMMOKi  k  Ai*ABAtT£a,  4,  Patemofltev  BoUdingt ;  and  aU  BooknUan. 


Ifttttujpltott  i^abfi'ttark  flip. 


THE   DIVINE   CALL   FOE  MISSIONARIES. 


%  l^tnioil 


DeLITEBED  on  LOHD'S-DaY  JklOBMlMO  ArEIL  23llO,   1877,  B7 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    TIIK    UETnOFOLITAB    TABEBMACLE,    NEWrNGTON, 


BaETHREN,  the  heathen  are  perishing,  and  there  ia  but  one  way  of 
Balration  for  them,  for  there  is  but  one  name  given  nnder  hea\'en  among 
men  whereby  they  must  besaTod.  God  in  thcglorions  unity  of  his  divine 
natare  ia  calling  for  mesHengerB  who  shall  proelaim  to  men  the  way  of 
life.  Out  of  the  thick  darknees  my  ear  can  hear  that  sound  mTsterioos 
and  divine,  "  Whom  shall  I  send  ?"  If  ye  will  but  listen  with  the  ear  of 
faith  ye  may  hear  it  in  this  honae  to-day — "Whom  shall  I  send?" 
While  the  world  lieth  under  the  curse  of  sin  the  living  God,  who  willeth 
BOl  that  any  should  pcrisii  but  that  tJicy  ^h&uld  come  to  repentance,  is 
K^ii^  for  beraldB  to  proclaim  his  mercy ;  he  is  asking  even  in  plead- 
ing tenoB  fbr  some  who  will  go  forth  to  the  dying  milUons  and  tell  the 
wondniDi  Bttoy  of  hia  lore — "  Whom  shall  I  send  ?"  As  if  to  make 
Ot^  TOtce  more  powerful  by  a  threefold  utterance  we  hear  the  sacred 
TtMtf  enquire,  '*  Who  will  go  for  us  ?"  The  Father  asks,  "  Who  will 
go  fiv  me  and  invite  my  far-off  children  to  return  ?"  The  Son  . 
cnqmies,  "  Who  will  seek  for  me  my  redeemed  but  wandering  sheep  ?" 
The  Holy  Bpiiit  demands,  "  In  whom  shall  I  dwell,  and  through  whom 
shall  I  ^eu  that  I  may  convey  life  to  the  perishing  multitudes  ?"  God 
in  th«  nnity  of  bis  nature  crieth,  "  Whom  shall  I  send?"  and  in  the 
trinity  of  ma  persons  he  askcth,  "  Who  will  go  for  ns  ?"  Happy  shall 
we  be  to-day  if  earnest  responses  shall  be  heard  in  this  honse — "  Here 
am  T,  send  me."  It  is  ours,  at  any  rate,  very  solemnly  to  pat  the 
Blatter  before  you,  brethren  in  Ohrist,  and  while  we  shall  try  to  plead 
Jehovah's  cause  we  trust  the  Holy  Spirit  may  be  here,  saying  of  one  and 
'•DoUier,  quite  unknown  to  ns,  "  Separate  me  Sanl  and  Barnabas  for  the 
veiknfceramto  I  have  called  them."  Yea,  may  the  constraining  voice 
of  tbe  qiecJal  call  of  grace  come  to  the  ear  of  some  here  present  who 
ihall  renKmcl  like  yonng  Samnel  and  say,  "  Here  am  I,  for  thon  didst 
cdlise.''^ 

No.  M51. 


242  METIiOPOLITAN  TABKRKACLR  I 

First,  we  sliall  tliia  morning;  consider  Ike  vition  of  glonj  in  fprcraiM 
to  the  offer  of  »r\  ice  mnde  Iiy  the  prophet :  the  vision  whiufa  he  raif ; 
and  secondly,  Ihe  rixion  uf  orainalion  which  he  did  more  than  see,  lor 
his  lipB  were  focthtd.  Thirdly,  wr  will  apcuk  upon  the  ilirmt  vmi 
and  conclude  by  dwoUing  npon  the  earnest  reeponsf. 

I.     Reverently,  nnd  with  all  our  hearts  attent,  let  cb  frnze  npon  Tire 
VIRION  OF  OLOBY  wliich  iRaifihfiaw.    It  was  neceasiiryfor  him  tyseeitin 
order  that  he  roi(;iit  Ije  brought  into  the  condition  of  heart  out  of  which 
should  come  the  full  consecration  expressed  in — "  Here  am  I,  send  mt." 
Observe  what  he  smv.     He  saw,  first,  the  supreait  glory  of  God,   "Is&ir 
Adoiiai,"  aaith  he,  "  sitting  npon  a  throne,  high  and  lifted  np,  and  hia 
train  filled  the  temjjlc."    Was  it  Jesus  that  he  saw  ?     Was  this  one  of    i 
the  anticipations  of  his  future  incarnation?    Probably  so,  for  Jclm    I 
writes  in  his  twdfth  chapter,  at  the  forty-first  verse,  "These  things 
said  Esaias,  when  he  saw  his  glory,  and  spake  of^  him," — referring  to  the    , 
Lord  Jesns  Chriet.     AVe  will  not,  however,  insist  npon  that  interprtti- 
tion,  for  the  wonl  Adonni,  doubtless,  inclnded  at  times  the  whole  God- 
head, and  therefcire  the  vision  may  have  represented  the  Lord  biniKlf 
revealed  in  visible  form.     As  to  his  absolute  essence,  eye  cannot  behold    ( 
the  Ijord,  but  he  rhooHeth  to  make  an  apparition  of  himself;  appeuing    ' 
among  men  in  such  a  form  as  may  come  under  the  ken  of  their  senas. 
Now,  brethren,  wo  knoir  of  nothing  that  will  supply  a  better  motive  for 
missionary  work,  or  for  Christian  effort  of  any  sort,  than  a  sight  of  the 
divine  gloiy.    Tliis  is  one  of  the  strongest  impulses  a  soal  can  fivl. 
Behold,  0  believers  ia  the  divine  word,  at  this  day  the  Lord  God,  eroi 
Jehovah,  is  not  dt-tlironed,  bnt  sitteth  on  the  throne  of  his  glory.  Some 
know  him  not,  and  others  deny  hijn  and  blaspheme  him,  but  he  is  still    ] 
God  over  all  blesstd  for  ever.  \ 

See  the  patience  of  hia  iulinite  majesty, — he  sUs  in  calm  glory  nijon 
his  eternal  throni;,  'i'lie  nations  fnrionsly  rage  and  imagine  a  vain  thinj; : 
"  he  that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  doth  langh  ;  the  Lord  doth  have  them  ia 
derision."  Still  are  his  purposes  fnlfiUed,  and  his  soul  abides  in  iu 
serenity  ;  he  is  the  same  and  of  his  years  there  is  no  end.  He  sitteth  osa 
King,  observe,  Hjfo/i  a  throne;  he  never  renounces  his  sovereignty  aad 
dominion.  All  things  still  feel  the  omnipotence  of  the  reif^  of  God. 
"  The  Lord  hath  fircparcd  his  throne  in  tne  heavens,  and  his  klngiUmi 
rnleth  over  bIL"  The  rebellions  of  men,  can  they  ever  shake  his  finii 
dominion?  \o,  bnt  out  of  their  wildest  nproar  he  faehionetli  ordet. 
and  by  their  most  viok-nt  resislAnce  he  worketh  bis  own  pncposcs.  After 
all  the  Lord  reigtielh  ;  let  the  earth  rejoice,  let  the  multitudes  of  tht 
isles  be  glad  theniiif.  Still,  despite  all  the  hurly-burly  of  war,  and  all 
ihe  wickedness  of  men  in  the  dark  places  of  the  earth,  and  the  detest- 
able blasphemies  of  the  heathen  against  the  Most  High,  the  Lord  sitteth 
on  a  throne  which  never  can  Ije  shaken. 

Nor  is  it  a  meim  throne  either,  nor  one  of  little  dignity ;  it  is  "  hifjlt 
and  lifted  up."  It  is  not  merely  above  all  other  thrones  by  way  of 
greater  power,  bnt  over  them  all  by  way  of  supreme  dominion  over  them, 
for  he  is  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords.  I  wish,  dear  brethren,  we  could 
get  a  glimpse  of  the  glory  and  power  and  dominion  which  belong  to  the 
Most  Iligb,  for  if  we  did,  though  it  would  certainly  humble  us  in  the 
very  dust,  yet  it  would  fire  na  with  a  consecrated  indignation  against 


THE  DIYINE  CALL  FOR  IQSSIONABIES.  243 

ili06e  who  set  up  other  gods ;  it  would  fill  us  with  a  sacred  courage  to 
do  and  dare  anything  against  these  blind,  and  deaf,  and  dumb  deities  to 
whom  it  is  almost  too  great  an  honour  to  pour  contempt  upon  them ; 
and  it  would  make  us  feel  confidence  in  the  ultimate  success  of  the 
cause  and  kingdom  of  the  liying  God.  Since  even  now,  while  he  re- 
strains his  hand  he  sitteth  upon  a  throne  high  and  h'fted  up,  and  is  even 
now  the  Ooyemor  among  the  nations ;  surely  the  day  shall  come  when 
all  nations  shaJl  behold  ms  throne  and  bow  before  it,  and  God  shall  be 
seen  to  be  Lord  oyer  all.  The  God  whom  we  serve  is  able  to  give 
victoiy  to  his  own  cause.  Here  is  an  impulse  for  us  in  all  warring  for 
his  cause  and  crown. 

If  jon  choose  to  take  the  text  as  referring  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
what  a  ddight  it  is  for  us  to  think  that  there  is  no  more  for  him  the 
thOTny  crown  and  the  cruel  lance  and  the  contemptuous  spittle,  but 
he  woo  bowed  his  head  to  death  has  left  the  dead,  no  more  to  die,  and 
asooided  to  the  right  hand  of  God,  even  the  Father ;  God  having  highly 
exalted  him,  so  that  he  now  sitteth  upon  a  throne  high  and  lifted  up. 
ThiSy  in  fact,  is  the  origin  of  our  commission — "  Go  ve,  therefore,  and 
teach  all  nations,  baptizing  them  into  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of 
the  8on^  and  of  the  Holy  Gnost"  Because  all  power  is  given  unto  him 
in  heaven  and  in  earth,  therefore  we  are  to  go  forth  and  subdue  the 
people  under  his  feet.  0  when  will  his  church  fully  believe  in  the 
glei^  of  her  Lord,  and  rejoice  therein,  so  that  his  power  shall  fill  her, 
as  bn  train  aforetime  fiUed  the  temple.  If  we  cannot  behold  his  greatest 
^orieBy  yet  we  pray  that  his  presence  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  like  the  per- 
nimed  smoke  and  the  resplendent  skirts  of  his  robes,  may  be  known 
among  us  and  fin  us  with  adoration.  Did  the  posts  of  the  door  move 
at  that  august  pres^ce  ?  Let  our  hearts  be  moved  also  as  in  lowliest 
adoration  we  bow  before  him  who  is  Lord  and  Christ. 

Bat  then  Isaiah  saw  also  the  court  of  the  great  King ;  he  beheld  the 
riorioos  attendants  who  perpetually  perform  homage,  nearest  to  his 
uuone.  He  says,  "  Above  it  (or  rather  above  him)  stood  the  seraphims," 
noi  imi^lying  that  their  feet  rested  upon  the  earth,  or  noon  any  other 
solid  sabstance,  but  that  they  were  stationary  around  and  above  the  great 
King;  poised  in  mid  air  in  a  circle,  l&e  a  rainbow  round  about  the  throne, 
'or  as  a  body  guard  surrounding  the  throne  of  majesty.  There  were  they, 
waiting  to  know  his  pleasure,  on  the  wing  ready  for  any  errand,  and 
adoring  while  they  waited.  These  seraphim  may  furnish  us  with  a 
pattern  fx  Christian  service :  as  the  throne  of  God  becomes  the  impulse 
to  that  service,  so  let  these  serve  us  as  the  model.  They  dwell  near  the 
Lord,  and  even  so  should  we ;  he  is  their  centre  and  their  bliss,  even 
so  8lK>uld  he  be  ours.  But  I  specially  note  that  they  were  burning  ones, 
tot  sach  is  the  meaning  of  the  word  seraphims,  a  term  applied  in  the 
Hebrew  to  the  fiery  fiying  serpents  of  the  wilderness.  These  courtiers 
of  Ac  great  King  were  creatures  of  fire,  ablaze  with  ardour ;  all  glowing 
and  shining  they  worship  him,  "who  maketh  his  angels  spirits,  his 
ministers  a  flame  of  fire.  Jehovah,  who  is  a  consuming  fire,  can  only 
fitly  be  served  by  those  who  are  on  fire,  whether  they  be  angels  or  men. 
Hence  that  solenm  question,  "Who  among  us  shall  dwell  with  the 
deronring  fire  ?  Who  among  us  shall  dwell  with  everlasting  burnings  ?" 
(Is.  xxxiii.  14).    None  can  do  this  but  the  man  on  fire  with  love  divine. 


244  METBOPOUTAH  TABKBVACLB  PUIiFir^ 

In  the  presence  of  that  consuming  fire,  it  is  not  poasible  for  Inkewmi- 
ness  or  indifference  to  exist,  they  would  be  uttmy  burned  np.  'Co  id 
as  courtier  before  the  burning  throne  of  God  reonires  a  mn^kk  or 
burning  spirit,  and  if  we  become  lethargic  and  aonllefls  we  shall  soibe 
counted  worthy  to  be  employed  on  diyine  errands.  Far  henoBy  tlMSD,  fat 
all  coolness  of  love  and  slumbering  of  spirit  be  remoYed.  Hay  tb 
Lord  make  us,  like  John  the  Baptirt^  burning  and  shining  ligfata. 

These  courtiers  of  God  were  burning  ones^  and  they  are  alao  pktaed 
to  us— for  remember  these  are  only  representationa  of  thii^  aotodjf 
invisible,  and  seen  only  in  vision — as  having  six  wings*  Sodi  arelm 
servants,  full  of  motion,  full  of  life.  Some  mat  I  know  of  who  prafai 
to  sen^e  the  Lord  seem  to  have  no  wing  at  all,  but  are  stolid  andinietim^ 
more  like  the  sloth  than  the  seraph,  having  more  wdght  than  wii^ 
Those  who  come  near  him  should  be  iJl  in  motion,  qaiok,  actiYe,  willing^ 
awake,  enei^etic,  ready  to  fly  upon  the  Lord's  bouneaa  with  a  mighty 
swiftness  ;  in  a  word,  sixfold  should  be  their  wings,  that  they  mvf  not 
tarry  nor  tire,  nor  linger  nor  loiter  in  the  way.  Have  we  soch  reamnees 
of  mind  as  this  ? 

Having  life  and  motion,  these  glorious  spirits  use  their  powers  witk 
prudence  and  discretion.  They  use  not  all  their  wings  for  flighti  but 
with  twain  each  one  covered  his  face,  for  even  they  cannot  gaie  upon  Om 
dazzling  brightness  of  Jehovah's  throne,  and  tiierefore  in  hnmUeihioi^ 
facedness  of  awe  they  adore  with  veiled  countenance !  ''With  twain  h 
covered  his  feet,"  or  his  body,  or  his  lower  parts,  for  the  sernh 
bers  that  even  though  sinless  he  is  yet  a  creature,  and  therefore  be 
ceals  himself  in  token  of  his  nothingness  and  unworChineflB  in  the 
presence  of  the  thrice  Holy  One.  The  middle  pair  of  wingg  wai  VBbI 
for  flight,  for  mere  bashfulness  and  humility  cannot  oflbr  ii'PiHf'^^ 
adoration,  there  must  be  active  obedience  and  readinen  of  hnrc  ftr 
service.  Thus  they  have  four  wings  for  adoration  and  two  ftr  aetiiv 
energy ;  four  to  conceal  themselves,  and  two  with  which  to  oocQpjydNOh 
selves  in  service ;  and  we  may  learn  from  them  that  we  shall  serve  God 
best  when  we  are  most  deeply  reverend  and  humbled  in  his  jpnsenea 
Veneration  must  be  in  larger  proportion  than  vigour,  adontioki  BSit 
exceed  activity.  As  Mary  at  Jesus'  feet  was  preferred  to  Martha  and 
her  much  serving,  so  must  sacred  reverence  take  die  first  phoe^  and 
energetic  service  follow  in  due  course.  The  angels  do  his  coausiBd- 
ments,  hearkening  unto  the  voice  of  his  word,  and  thus  they  exoAt  our 
excellence  must  lie  in  the  same  direction — the  union  of  worriiip  witk 
work  in  due  pro^rtions.  The  covering  of  the  face  is  as  needftd  as  tfie 
flight ;  the  burning  one  is  as  seraphic  in  the  veiling  of  his  feet  as  in  die 
stretching  of  his  wings.  Let  us  pray  the  Lord  to  fill  us  with  the  divine 
enthusiasm  which  is  toe  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  so  ma^e  as  burning 
ones ;  and  then  when  he  has  winged  us  with  sacred  energy  may  he  make 
us  humble  in  mind,  removing  from  us  all  vain  curiosity,  so  that  we  shall 
not  attempt  to  gaze  with  uncovered  eye  on  the  great  Incomprebeosible^ 
and  taking  away  all  unhallowed  presumption,  so  that  we  use  no  proud 
bravado,  but  cover  our  feet  in  the  solemn  presence  of  the  Holy  One. 
Let  us  ask  God  to  make  us  ready  to  every  good  word  and  work,  swift  to 
go  anywhere  and  everywhere,  as  he  may  Sdl  us,  being  as  it  were  six- 
winged  in  the  service  of  our  God. 


THE  DirOTE  CALL  FOE  HISiUONABI  U).  '  245 

Agaiu,  another  part  of  the  vision  of  Isaiah  in  the  temple  was  Uieper- 
oettuil  soiiij,  for  these  altered  beings  continnally  cried,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy 
n  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  whole  earth  is  foil  of  his  gtory."  Brothers 
iad  Bisters,  let  as  tukc  this  cry  to  be  the  life  song  of  each  one  of  as. 
Adore  ye  the  holy  God,  perfection's  self.  Whatever  he  shall  do  with 
)ou,  bicfls  him,  and  call  him  holy  still.  Find  no  fault  nith  bis  dis- 
pciisations ;  never  dare  to  quarrel  with  any  of  his  ways.  Holy,  hol^, 
Aoty,  ia  he  in  all  things.  In  creation,  providence,  and  redemption  be  is 
Wy,  holy,  holy.  Praise  him  with  ardour  ;  be  not  content  to  call  him 
boly  once,  hnt  dwell  upon  the  theme.  Extol  the  Lord  with  all  your 
might;  raise  again,  ana  again,  and  again  the  eacred  song.  Adore  not 
■lone  the  Father,  but  the  Bon,  and  the  ever-bleased  Spirit :  let  the 
l^inity  in  Unity  be  the  object  of  your  perpetual  adoration. 

"  Holy,  ht-lj-,  holy.  Lord  God  Almighty ! 
Early  ia  tiie  mornii^  our  song  shall  rise  to  diee  ; 
IIolv,  holy,  holy  [    Merciful  and  mij;btT  1 
God  in  Three  Persona,  blessed  Trinity ! " 

While  yoa  praise  his  holiness  do  not  forget  his  power,  bnt  adore  him 
m  "  Jdiovah  of  hosts."  He  is  as  great  as  he  is  good,  as  high  as  be  is 
hoh,  M  potent  as  he  is  pure.  He  created  the  heavens,  and  the  earth, 
■■a  an  ute  host  of  them.  Legions  of  angels  do  his  bidding ;  boats  of 
mldligenoes  wait  bis  call ;  all  forces  of  nature,  animate  and  inanimate, 
nanh  at  his  command ;  from  the  crash  of  thunder  to  the  flight  of  an 
iBKOt  all  things  are  at  bis  beck.  Hosts  of  birds  migrate  at  his  direc- 
tiao,  boats  of  fisheB  swarm  the  sea  at  his  call,  hosts  of  locusts  and  cater- 
piDuv  devour  the  fields  at  his  order.  His  armies  are  innumerable,  and 
aB  living  things  are  in  their  regiments  a  part  of  his  camp,  which  is  veiy 
freat.  Hen  also,  whether  they  will  or  not,  shall  be  suoservient  to  hia 
tapreme  dominion ;  their  armies  and  tlieir  navies  fullil  his  decrees  even 
WDen  they  think  not  of  him.  He  is  Lord  of  all.  £xQlt  in  this,  and 
let  roar  heartfl  be  brave  because  of  it. 

And  then  dwell,  that  yon  may  feel  a  missionary  spirit,  on  that  last  part 
<rf  the  song,  "The  whole  earth  is  filled  with  his  glory,"  for  so  it  really 
is  in  one  sense.  "  Jehovah  of  hosts  is  the  fulness  of  the  whole  earth." 
God  ia  glorious  all  over  the  world ;  heaven  and  earth  arc  full  of  the 
Bajea^  of  his  glory,  evcirthing  adores  him  except  that  wandering. 
wayward  creature,  man.  IMm  this  ascription,  for  it  may  be  so  read, 
into  a  wish  -.  "  Let  the  whole  earth  be  filled  with  his  glory."  Read  it, 
if  yon  please,  as  a  prophecy :  "  The  whole  earth  shall  be  filled  witli  his 
gloiy,"  and  then  go  yon  forward,  0  ye  servants  of  the  Most  High,  with 
Uiia  reeolve,  that  in  his  bands  yon  will  be  the  means  of  fulfilling  the 
prophet^  by  spreading  abroad  the  knowledge  of  bis  name  ameiig  the 
torn  of  men.  The  earth  is  the  Lord's  and  the  fulness  thereof,  and  he 
mniflt  reign  over  it.  Are  yon  going  to  succumb  to  the  modern  theory 
that  the  world  is  never  to  be  converted  to  God  ?  Is  human  history  to 
«d  with  the  triumph  of  the  devil  over  the  cburcb  of  God?  Is  tlie 
Lord  about  to  give  up  the  present  battle  of  good  with  evil  with  feeble 
men  as  the  instruments,  and  are  ihe  conditions  of  the  conflict  to  be 
^nged  alti^ther  ?  Is  the  Holy  Spirit  to  fail  until  an  earthly  kingdom 
m  act  np  for  the  Lord  Jesns  ?    Is  the  gospel  never  to  spread  among  the 


246  METROPOLITAN  TIBERVACLI  PULPIT. 

heathen  ?  Is  Christ  to  come  upon  an  unenlightened  heathen  mdi, 
with  Mahomet  the  false  prophet  still  nnconauered,  and  the  haxUof 
Rome  still  upon  her  seven  hills,  and  all  the  iaob  in  their  plaoea?  h 
the  battle  which  now  glorifies  Ood  by  the  wedmeas  of  man  to  be  fcqght 
out  in  another  manner  ?  You  may  belieye  it  if  you  will^  and  |^  to  tbe 
beds  of  your  inglorious  sloth ;  but  methinks  there  is  aomethuiff  bur 
worthy  of  faith  than  that,  namely,  that  God  will  be  Yictorioofl  w  aki^ 
the  line  in  the  present  battle  and  in  tiie  present  style  of  confiictb  By 
his  church,  his  word,  and  his  Spirit  he  means  to  irin  tlie  rictoiy;  tf 
the  testimony  of  weak,  feeble  men  to  the  gospel  of  his  grace  he  mnni 
to  conq^uer  the  powers  of  darkness.  Foot  to  foot  with  Saten  has  he 
stood  smce  our  Lord  went  up  to  heaven,  near  these  two  thoiUHaid  7111% 
and  he  will  not  end  this  wrestling  match  till  he  has  given  his  fee  s 
deadly  fall,  and  the  shout  shall  go  up  from  a  ransomed  world,  **  Hab- 
Injah!  hallelujah!  for  the  Lord  God  omnipotent  rejeneuL"  Oor 
prayers  will  never  be  ended  till  we  see  the  desire  of  pious  Darid  flilfilkd 
when  he  said, ''  Let  the  whole  earth  be  filled  with  hia  glory ;  amen,  ind 
amen.  The  prayers  of  David  the  son  of  Jesse  are  ended.*'  We  m 
looking  and  labouring  for  that  consummation,  and  we  believe  tbitve 
shall  realize  it,  thougn  it  looks  most  improbable,  espeoiallY  joit  not 
when  the  heathen  are  converting  our  missionaries  instead  of  theBumia* 
aries  converting  the  heathen,  when  we  have  had  bidK^  tmned  into 
Zulus  instead  of  Zulus  into  Christians,  and  several  other  inntfairtii  k« 
known  to  evil  fame.  We  believe  in  the  conqnest  of  the  world  boowr 
we  believe  in  the  omnipotence  of  God.  Nothing  short  d  *'  liimiiiiff' 
from  sea  to  sea  "  dare  we  ask  in  prayer  or  seek  in  servioe  tar  our  Lori 
Jesus.  The  idols  must  be  utterly  abolished,  error  and  ain  nunt  tj 
before  the  light  of  truth  and  holiness,  the  enda  of  the  earth  niiiat  jet  100 
the  salvation  of  our  God,  and  the  whole  earth  must  be  filled  withhii 
gloiT. 

II.  Let  us  now  turn  our  thoughts  to  the  yibion  of  ouinrATlQl. 
This  man  Isaiah  was  to  go  forth  in  Jehovah's  name,  but  inoidtf  to 
preparation  for  so  high  an  embassage  he  must  undergo  a  motm  peeo- 
liar  but  necessary.  He  was  brougnt  into  a  state,  whicn  to  hmiin 
judgment  would  seem  to  disqualify  nim  for  all  future  nseftilnen^  cnnhr 
ing  the  courage  out  of  him,  and  leaving  him  like  a  bruised  reoL  B7 
reason  of  the  glorious  vision  which  he  saw  there  was  no  strength  leftia 
him ;  he  was  cast  down  as  low  as  he  could  well  go  with  a  aenae  cf  hit 
own  uttor  unworthiness,  and  felt  himself  to  be  less  than  nothhig.  In 
the  presence  of  God  he  cried,  "Woe  is  me !  for  I  am  undone ;  becme  I 
am  a  man  of  unclean  lips."  "Alas,  alas,  alas,"  saith  he, ''  woe  has  tiken 
possession  of  my  soul ;  I  am  destroyed  by  it."  Yes,  dear  brother,  and 
this  is  our  way  to  success  :  God  will  never  do  anything  with  na  till  he 
has  fii*st  of  all  undone  us.  We  must  be  taken  to  pieces  and  made  to 
undergo  a  process  very  like  destruction,  and  then  we  ahall  be  new- 
fashioned  according  to  a  nobler  mould,  more  fit  to  be  used  by  our  great 
liord.  I  shall  not  regret  if  every  brother  here  called  to  the  work  w  the 
Lord  shall  feel  as  if  he  could  not  go  on  with  it,  and  shall  mourn  daily  his 
incapacity,  his  unworthiness,  and  failure ;  for  it  is  good  for  us  to  be  laid 
in  the  dust.  Downward  in  breakage,  in  crushing,  in  grinding,  in  makii^ 
into  dust  we  must  go,  for  this  is  the  way  to  be  made  strong  in  the  Lordf 


THE  DIYUrS  GALL  FOR  MISSIONARIES.  247 

in  the  power  of  his  might.  The  death  of  self  is  the  life  of  grace. 
SQ  we  are  weak  then  are  we  strong.  We  can  only  rise  to  ability  for 
noblest  errands  by  being  emptied  of  all  self-snfficiency,  and  filled  with 
aU-snfScient  Spirit. 

^bseare,  next,  that  h»  made  a  confession  of  sin  while  thus  prostrate, 
said,  '^  I  am  a  man  of  unclean  lips."  Why  does  he  lament  tne  uncir- 
idsion  of  his  lips  rather  than  the  evil  of  his  heart  ?  It  was  partly 
lose  he  longed  to  loin  the  seraphim  in  their  song  bat  felt  his  lips 
t;  and  yet  more  becanse  he  was  a  prophet,  and  therefore  his  lips 
I  the  instraments  of  his  office,  and  he  was  most  conscious  of  sin 
le  he  felt  most  the  need  of  grace.  I  know  not  that  Isaiah  had  ever 
i  back  any  part  of  the  tmth,  or  that  he  had  spoken  in  uncomely 
My  or  that  in  his  work  of  prophecy  he  had  in  anything  been  un- 
Uhl,  but  yet  he  felt  his  shortcomings.    There  was  nothing  about 

that  yon  and  I  could  haye  seen  to  find  fault  with,  but  he  saw  it; 

felt  ft,  and  what  minister  is  there  that  God  has  ever  sent  who 

I  not  when  he  surreys  his  ministry  feel  that  he  is  a  man  of  unclean 
?  Often  and  often  does  our  soul  say,  '^  Oh  that  these  lijps  had  km- 
ge ;  they  are  poor,  dumb  things  that  will  not  speak  aright.  0  that 
Md  of  flesh  they  were  flame,  that  we  might  let  &fl  a  burning 
ent  of  persuasions,  entreaties,  and  solicitations  which  should  run 
i  multitudes  of  men  like  fire  in  dry  stubble."    But  it  is  not  so  with 

we  aie  often  chill  and  lifeless,  and  so  we  are  made  to  mourn  that 
haTB  nndean  lips.  Who  that  ever  saw  the  glory  of  Ood,  or  the 
>  of  Christ,  would  refuse  to  join  in  this  confession  ? 
ndy  then,  this  man  of  God  felt  also  a  deep  sense  of  the  sin  of  the 
>Jb  among  whom  he  dwelt.  He  cried, ''  I  dwell  among  a  people  of 
lean  lips."  I  do  not  think  a  man  can  be  a  good  missionary  if  he 
ks  at  the  sin  that  surrounds  him.  Unless  it  stinks  in  his  nostrils, 
«s  it  makes  his  soul  boil  with  holy  indignation,  unless  like  Paul  his 
rt  is  stirred  in  him,  how  can  he  speak  as  he  should  speak  the  message 
is  God  ?  Familiarity  with  evil  too  often  takes  off  the  edge  of  tender 
ng ;  men  readily  cease  to  weep  oyer  the  sin  which  is  always  before 
r  eyes.  You  may  look  upon  the  superstitions  of  Rome  till  you 
Mt  admire  the  gallant  show,  and  I  suppose  you  may  regard  heathen 
pies  till  the  majesty  of  their  architecture  may  make  you  forget  the 
my  of  their  purpose ;  but  it  must  not  be  so :  we  must  feel  that  we 

II  among  a  people  of  unclean  lips,  and  we  must  bear  their  sin  upon 
hearts,  repenting  for  them  if  they  will  not  repent,  and  breaking 
bearts  oyer  them  because  their  hearts  are  as  adamant  against  their 
.  Only  in  such  a  frame  of  mind  shall  we  be  fit  to  go  forth  in  God's 
e. 

nd  do  you  notice  that  he  had  a  saci'ed  awe  upon  him  because  of  tJie 
IS  presence  ?  You  see  how  bowed  down  he  was  because  his  eyes  had 
the  King,  the  Lord  of  hosts.  0  favoured  servant  of  God  !  Esaias, 
I  art  honoured  above  thy  fellows  to  behold  God*s  throne  and  glory  ! 
kt  would  not  you  and  I  give  if  we  might  but  have  stood  in  the 
de  and  peered  within  the  doorway,  and  gazed  into  the  smoke,  and  have 
some  glimpse  of  the  brightness  ;  but  he  never  exulted  in  it,  on  the 
rary  he  cried,  "  Woe  is  me ! "  There  is  no  thought  of  the  dignity 
hich  the  marvellous  sight  has  lifted  him,  but  deep  in  the  dust  he 


248  UETROPOLITAN  TABEBVACLI  PULPIX. 

cries,  *^  I  am  undone,  for  I  have  seen  the  Em^,  ttie  l4ord  ct  hmkC* 
Now  this  awe-full  sense  of  the  divine  preeenoe  u  neoenaiy  to  make  t 
man  serve  the  Lord  fitly  and  acceptably.  Forg^  that  God  u  kD  aimmd 
jon,  forget  that  yon  live  in  his  presence  and  are  his  aenrant^  get  awij 
from  him,  and  you  can  be  careless,  yon  can  zestrain  your  icad  tad  mr 
conscience  may  be  at  ease  ;  but  let  a  man  only  feel  that  God  seei  him, 
and  know  that  he  is  nnder  his  immediate  gnidanee,  and  he  will  ht 
aroused  at  once  to  do  the  will  of  the  Lord  on  earth  after  the  fethion  in 
which  it  is  done  in  heaTcn.  He  will  pat  forth  all  his  energies  faeoaim 
Qod  shonld  be  served  with  onr  best ;  but  oonscioDfl  that  whea  he  hat 
done  his  best  he  has  fallen  short  of  tiie  gloiy  of  God,  he  wHI  be  tbij 
humble,  as  those  should  be  who  are  in  snch  a  presence.  O  Lord  Jeau^ 
by  thy  Holy  Spirit  give  ns  an  overpowering  sense  of  tiiy  praenoe  nov. 
If  thon  wilt  but  do  this  we  shall  be  a  ttubemacie  ftiU  of  wturshqipea 
first,  and  of  workers  afterwards,  and  shall  cheerfully  adore  thee  and 
labour  for  thee. 

In  this  second  part  of  the  prophet's  vision  the  most  notable  tfaiiut  is 
the  way  in  which  Ood  met  and  removed  his  servants  n^rmiisBs.    Hii 
unclean  lips  were  his  great  impediment ;  where  he  most  needed  power 
he  most  felt  his  infirmity,  and  so  there  came  a  seraph  wiUi  the  gddoi 
tongs  or  snuffers,  and  took  a  burning  coal  from  off  the  altar,  and  touched 
his  lips  with  it    What  does  this  mean?    We  have  the  ezfdanatioa: 
*'  Thine  iniquity  is  taken  away,  and  thy  sin  purged.**    Fdlowahip  with 
the  great  sacrifice,  the  application  of  one  of  the  coab  which  oonainnad 
the  ever  blessed  Jesus  is  the  way  to  make  our  lips  ready  finr  preaduag. 
I  believe  that  most  of  my  dear  hearers  have  the  application  of  the  fire 
coal  to  their  hearts  so  as  to  have  been  purged  werewith,  &r  we  do 
l>elieve  in  him  who  died  for  us ;  so  that  we  are  resting  in  his  great 
sacrifice.    But  in  order  to  be  prepared  for  service  we  want  to  have  that 
word  yet  again  touching  us  till  wo  feel  the  fire.    We  need  fellowahb 
with  the  pangs  and  woes  of  Christ ;  we  need  to  feel  as  if  we  too  wi^^ 
to  be  consumed  for  others,  as  he  was  consumed  for  ns.    The  disinter- 
ested love  which  made  him  die  must  come  and  influence  ns»  that  we 
may  be  willing  to  die  for  others  too.    We  want  just  that    Did  it  not 
make  you  feel  joy  in  your  fellow  men  the  other  day  when  yon  read  of 
the  poor  men  in  the  pit,  and  of  their  gallant  deliverers  ?    Oot  rejoiced 
that  manhood  could  exhibit  such  heroism.    "  We  can  do  no  more/'  said 
some,  '*  it  is  death  to  go  into  the  pit  again :  we  cannot  rescue  the  poor 
fellows,  and  it  is  idle  to  throw  away  life  for  no  purpose."    The  brave 
men  who  had  been  toiling  there  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  finding 
themselves  in  the  presence  of  almost  certain  death,  might  well  have 
stood  back ;  but  not  so  the  bold  Welshmen.     One  said,  "  If  it  is  death 
to  go  and  save  them,  I  will  go,  death  or  no  death,"  and  then  others 
came  forward  and  said  they  would  go  also.     Had  I  been  there  I  shonld 
ha^•c  been  ready  to  weep,  because,  being  unskilled  in  the  miner's  craft,  I 
should  have  been  helpless  to  assist,  but  they  should  not  have  lacked  my 
lieartiest  cheers  and  most  ardent  prayers,  nor  aught  else  that  I  could 
have  done.    Assuredly  since  Jesus  Christ  has  died  for  us,  we  need  to  be 
touched  with  something  of  that  same  zeal  for  the  rescue  of  others  from 
eternal  ruin.    A  coal  from  off  the  altar  where  he  was  consumed  must  be 
'aid  on  us  that  we  may  feel  willing  to  make  any  sacrifice  for  his  dear 


\ 


TUB  BmSS  CALL  FOR  lUSalONABIEa.  2i9 

sake  and  for  the  aonis  of  men.  That  tonching  of  the  lip  was  tbe  Lord's 
way  of  setting  the  prophet  on  fire  where  the  fire  was  needed.  He  wanted 
lipa  blistered  with  the  griefs  of  Christ,  and  bnniine  with  love  to  men's 
souIb,  and  he  had  snch  lips  bestowed  npon  him  by  ni's  God,  and  so  was 
lie  fit  to  go  and  preach  in  the  yame  of  tne  Lord. 

Here,  then,  ia  the  true  ordination  for  a  Christian  worker.  Yonrself 
nothing,  lying  in  the  dust  wich  confession  of  sin ;  but  yourself  pnrged 
liy  the  great  sacrifice  of  Culvair,  and  your  tongue  compelled  to  tell  the 
tale  because  yon  have  felt  aiich  royal  mercy,  such  free  mercy,  sacli  un- 
speakable mercy,  that  if  you  did  not  speak  of  it  the  very  stones  in  tbe 
street  wonld  cry  out  against  yon.  Ton  want  this  tor  yonr  preparation, 
and  if  yon  hare  it,  my  brother,  yon  have  obtained  yoor  ordination  from 
the  great  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  your  sonls,  and  yon  need  no  other. 

in.  When  a  man  is  prepared  for  sacred  work  he  ig  not  long  before 
he  receives  a  commission.  We  come  then  to  think  of  the  divdjb  call. 
I  feel  in  my  son),  though  I  cannot  apeak  it  ont,  an  inward  grieving 
sympathy  with  God,  that  God  himself  sbqnld  have  to  cry  fiom  hia 
throne,  "  Whom  shall  I  send  ?"  Alas,  my  God,  are  there  no  volunteers 
for  thy  ser\-ice !  What,  all  these  priest*  and  sons  of  Aaron,  will  none 
of  theee  run  npon  thine  errand  ?  And  all  these  Levites,  will  not  one 
of  them  offer  Iiiuiself  ?  No,  not  one.  Ah,  it  is  ^cvooa,  grieTonn 
beyond  ail  Ibonght,  that  thci-e  should  be  such  multitudes  of  men  and 
women  in  the  t^iirch  of  God  who  nevertheless  seem  unfit  to  be  sent 
upon  Ibc  Master's  work,  or  nt  least  never  offer  to  go,  and  he  has  to  cry, 
"  Whom  shall  I  send  ?"  What,  out  of  all  these  saved  ones,  no  willing 
messengers  to  the  heathen  !  Where  are  his  ministers  ?  Will  none  of 
these  cross  the  seas  to  heathen  lands?  Here  ore  thousands  of  ns 
working  at  home.  Are  none  of  ns  called  to  go  abroad  ?  Will  none  of 
us  carry  the  gospel  to  regions  beyond  ?  Are  none  of  us  bound  to  go  ? 
Does  the  divine  voice  apj>eal  lo  onr  thousands  of  preachers  and  find  no 
response,  so  that  again  it  cries,  "Whom  shall  I  send?"  Here  arc 
multitudes  of  professing  Christians  making  money,  getting  rich,  eating 
the  fat  and  drinking  the  awect,  is  there  not  one  to  go  for  Chriat  ?  Men 
travel  abroad  for  trade,  will  they  not  go  for  Jesus  ?  They  even  risk 
life  amid  eternal  snoiva,  arc  there  no  heroes  for  the  croaa  7  Here  and 
there  a  yonng  man  perhaps  with  little  qualification,  and  no  experience, 
offers  himselfj  and  he  may  or  may  not  be  welcomed,  but  can  it  be  true 
that  the  majority  of  educated,  intelligent  Christian  young  men  arc 
more  willing  to  let  the  heathen  be  damned  than  to  let  the  treasures  of 
the  world  go  into  other  hands.  Alas,  for  some  reason  or  other,  I  am 
not  going  to  question  the  reasons,  God  himself  may  look  over  all  his 
(.-hurcli,  and,  finding  no  volunteers,  may  utter  the  pathetic  cry,  "Whom 
shall  I  aend,  and  who  will  go  for  us  ?" 

But  there  were  the  aiz-winged  aeraphim.  Why  did  not  the  Iiord  send 
them?  Ah,  brethren,  that  he  might  hare  done,  hut  it  is  not  according 
to  the  order  of  the  gospel  dispensation,  for  he  is  pleased  by  the  foolish- 
new  of  preaching  to  save  them  that  believe,  and  the  preachers  must  be 
men  like  the  rest  of  mankind.  It  is  great  condescension  on  bis  part 
th^  he  has  chosen  men,  and  unto  the  angels  bath  he  not  put  in  subjec- 
tion the  world  to  come  whereof  we  speak,  but  he  has  given  this  honour 
to  a^  patting  his  treasure  in  earthen  vessels  that  the  excellency  of  the 


250  MRBOFOLITAV  TlBBOEiOLl  TVUtB. 

|)ower  may  be  all  his  own.  We  ought  tx>  iqoioe  f&  ^bk,  bobit faflri^ 
sarpaasinglj  sad,  that  from  amongst  tnjnads  of  wilUog  aeniihtaii  CbA 
cry  should  come  to  nnwilling  men,  ^  Whom  shall  I  sandy  and  whavl 
go  for  HB  ?" 

I  call  to  yoar  attention  agam  the  ftcWliafc  this  is  tht  Toioeof  fhaosi 
God,  and  it  is  also  the  question  of  the  sacred  IMnitj:  '^WhondHDI 
send,  and  who  will  go  for  ns?**  The  Falihsr,  Son'  and  Bpiril  te 
question  us,  shall  not  the  threefold  Toice  be  legardedf 

Notice  the  particular  kind  of  man  for  whom  fliis  Toiea  is  sediiug^  B 
is  a  man  who  must  be  sent,  a  man  under  impolsSy  »  maa  niv 
authority—''  Whom  shall  I  send  ?"  But  it  is  »  man  wlio  Is  quite  wS- 
ing  to  go,  a  volunteer,  one  who  in  his  inmost  heart  njoioes  to  dhy 
''  Who  will  go  for  us?"  What  a  strange  min^liDg  tlitt  1st  ^Wosii 
me  if  I  preach  not  the  gospel,"  and  ySt  ^takmg  the  of«n|gliiof  Ob 
flock  of  God  not  by  constraint  but  willingly."  IiresistiUb  impj^sri 
cheerfol  choice,  omnipotent  compulsion  and  joyfhl  eagemeM  moot  mi* 
teriously  combine !  We  must  have  a  mingling  of  thne  two.  I  da  BDt 
know  that  I  could  put  into  so  many  watdB  tihat  wondesflil  fbeKogsf 
freeness  and  overpowering  impulse,  of  necessity  and  freedom,  boloarsi- 
perience  understands  what  our  language  cannot  expiess.  Wo  m  wflBsg; 
and  yet  a  power  is  over  us ;  we  are  willing  in  the  dar  of  Oodls 
coming  forth  as  freely  as  the  dew-drops  from  the  womib  of  tho  m 
and  yet  as  truly  the  product  of  divine  power  as  th^  aio.  Sodh 
God's  servant  be.  I  wonder  if  I  echo  and  re-echothe  yoioe  of  God  fUi 
morning  whether  it  will  find  out  amidst  the  thousands  in  tUi  hanm, 
and  the  thousands  that  may  read  this  word,  some  loving  responasi  in  at 
least  a  few  chosen  hearts?  ''Whom  shall  I  send?^---tt  n  JoiMifak% 
voice.  ''And  who  will  go  for  us  ?*' — ^it  is  the  voice  of  the  bleediig 
Lamb,  it  is  the  voice  of  the  loving  Father,  it  is  the  Toioe  of  tkeoisr 
blessed  Spirit.  Does  no  one  leap  up  at  this  moment  and  ftoeljoAr 
himself?  Must  I  speak  in  vain  ?  Ah,  that  were  a  light  thing'  —it 
the  voice  from  heaven  be  in  vain  ?  Did  die  diild  Samnel  nplj  ^Hsn 
am  I,  for  thou  didst  call  me,"  and  will  no  fdll-grown  man  answer  to  te 
voice  of  the  Eternal  ?    With  your  hearts  and  oonaoienoes  I  leave  ik 

lY.  Now  comes  the  lastpoint,  and  that  is  ths  BABxrasr  BBWUiSB. 
The  reply  of  Isaiah  was  "  Here  am  I ;  send  me."  I  think  I  see  intisit 
response  a  consciousness  of  his  being  in  a  certain  position  which  no  ooe 
else  occupied,  which  rendered  it  incumbent  upon  nim  to  say,  ^  Here  sm 
I."  There  was  no  one  else  in  the  temple,  no  one  else  saw  that  visian, 
and  therefore  to  him  the  voice  of  the  Lord  came  as  direcihr  taai  per- 
sonally as  if  there  were  not  another  man  in  all  the  world.  '^  ECere  am  L*' 
Now,  brethren,  if  at  anv  time  the  mission  field  lacks  workers  (it  is  a 
sad  thing  that  it  should  be  so,  but  yet  so  it  is),  should  not  that  fiiot  make 
each  man  look  to  himself  and  say,  "  Where  am  I  ?  What  jposition  do  I 
occupy  towards  this  work  of  God  ?  May  I  not  be  placed  jnst  where  I 
am  because  I  can  do  what  othere  could  not  ?"  Some  of  yon  young  men 
especially,  without  the  tics  of  family  to  hold  you  in  this  country,  wiUi- 
out  a  large  chureh  around  you,  or  not  having  yet  plunged  into  the  sea 
of  business,  you,  I  say,  are  standing  where  in  the  ardour  of  your  first 
love  yon  might  fitljr  say,  "  Here  am  1."  And  if  God  has  endowed  yon 
rith  any  wealth,  given  you  any  talent,  and  placed  yon  in  a  fJuvomaUe 


THE   DrriHE  CALL  FOB.  HISSIOSABIES  251 

position,  yon  are  the  man  who  should  eaj,  "  Perhaps  I  havn  coxae  to 
the  kingdom  for  snch  »  tune  as  this ;  I  may  be  placed  where  I  am  on 
purpose  IhBt  I  mny  render  eaaential  help  to  the  cause  of  God.  Here 
at  any  i-ate  I  am ;  1  fed  the  presence  of  the  gloriouB  God ;  I  see  the 
skirts  of  hia  pirmenta  as  he  reveals  himself  to  me,  I  almost  hear  the 
roah  of  seraphic  wings  ai  I  perceive  how  near  heaven  is  to  earth,  and 
I  feel  in  my  soul  I  mm^t  give  myself  np  to  God.  I  feel  in  my  own 
heart  my  indebt«dneEs  to  the  Christ  of  Ood;  I  see  the  need  of  the 
heathen,  I  love  them  for  Jesus'  sake ;  the  fiery  coal  is  touching  my  lip 
even  now :  Aere  am  I.'  Then  hast  put  me  where  I  am ;  Lord,  take  mc 
as  I  nm,  and  nee  me  as  thou  wilt''  May  the  divine  Spirit  influence 
some  uf  you  who  greatly  love  my  Lord  tilt  yon  feel  all  this. 

Then  you  observe  that  he  makes  a  full  surrender  of  himself.  "  Here 
am  I."  Lord,  t  am  what  I  am  by  thy  grace,  but  here  I  am ;  if  I  am  a 
man  of  one  talent,  yet  here  I  am ;  if  I  am  a  man  of  ten,  yet  here  I  am ; 
"  if  in  youthful  vigour,  here  I  am ;  if  of  maturer  years,  here  I  am.  Have 
I  snlnBtance?  here  I  am.  Do  I  lack  abilities?  Yet  still  I  made  not 
my  own  mouth,  nor  did  I  create  my  infirmities;  here  I  am.  Just  as 
I  am,  as  I  gave  myself  up  to  thy  dear  Son  to  be  redeemed,  so  give  I 
myself  up  again  to  lie  used  for  thy  glory,  because  I  am  redeemed,  and 
am  not  my  own,  but  bought  with  a  price.     "  Here  I  am." 

Isaiah  gave  himself  up  to  the  Lonl  none  the  less  completely  because 
bis  errand  was  bo  full  of  sadness.  He  was  not  to  win  men,  but  to  seal 
their  doom  by  putting  Ixfore  them  truth  which  they  would  be  sure  to 
rcjecL  We  read,  *'  And  be  said,  Qo,  and  tell  this  people,  Hear  ye  indeed, 
but  understand  not ;  and  see  ye  indeed,  but  perceive  not.  Make  the 
heart  of  this  people  fat,  and  make  their  ears  heavy,  and  shut  their  eyes; 
lest  they  see  with  their  eyes,  and  hear  with  their  ears,  and  understand 
with  their  heart,  and  convert,  and  be  healed,"  Thank  God  ours  is  not 
so  hard  a  task  ;  the  Spirit  of  God  is  with  ns,  and  men  are  turned  from 
darkness  to  light.  Oiit;ht  we  not  to  be  all  the  more  eager  to  go  ?  It  is 
a  point  of  great  weight,  an  argument  most  telling.  Do  not  refuse  to  feci 
its  power,  but  yield  yourselves  up  to  God,  seeing  that  he  calls  you  to  the 
most  happy  and  blessed  work  which  even  he  himself  could  commit  to 
yon. 

Then  comes  Isaiah's  prayer  for  authority  and  anointing.  If  we  read 
this  passage  rightly  we  shall  not  always  throw  the  emphasis  upon 
the  last  w<nd,  "  me,  but  read  it  also  thus,  "  Here  am  I,  sendme."  He  is 
willing  to  go,  but  he  does  not  want  (o  go  without  being  sent,  and  so  the 
prayer  is,  "  Lord,  tend  me.  I  beseech  thee  of  thine  infinite  grace 
qu^i^  me,  open  the  door  for  me,  and  direct  my  way.  I  do  not  need  to 
oe  foiced,  but  I  would  be  commissioned.  I  do  not  ask  for  compulsion, 
bnt  I  do  ask  for  guidance.  I  would  not  run  of  my  own  head  under  the 
notion  that  I  am  doing  God  sen'ice.  Send  me  then,  0  Lord,  if  I  may 
go;  guide  me,  inatmct  me,  prepare  me,  and  strengthen  me."  There  is 
a  combination  of  willingness  and  holy  prudence — "  Here  I  am  [  send 
me."  I  feel  certain  that  some  of  you  are  eager  to  go  Ibr  my  Lord  and 
Master  wherever  he  appint^  Keep  not  back  I  pray  you.  Brother, 
make  no  terms  with  God.  Put  it, "  Here  am  I ;  send  me — where  thou 
wilt,  to  the  wildest  region,  or  even  to  the  jaws  of  death.  I  am  thy 
■oldicr ;  pnt  me  in  the  front  of  the  battle  if  thou  wilt,  or  bid  me  lie  in 


252  M  ETROrOl.ITAK  TABKBHiOLK   PULPTr. 

the  trcnchea ;  ^ha  me  gullantiy  to  chargi;  at  the  head  of  my  regiment, 
or  give  me  silently  to  sap  and  mine  the  foundations  of  the  entmj's 
fortrftsses.  Use  me  as  thou  wilt;  smd  mt,  and  I  will  ^.  I  leave  all  dsf 
to  theej  only  here  I  am,  thy  willing  servant,  wholly  consecrattd  w 
thee."  That  is  tlie  right  miBsionary  spirit,  and  may  God  be  pleiu^ 
to  potir  it  out  npon  yon  all,  and  npon  his  people  throughont  tlic 
world.  To  mc  it  seemB  that  if  a  hundred  were  to  leap  up  and  each  oni 
exclaim,  "  Hes'o  am  I ;  send  me,"  it  wonld  be  no  wonder.  By  the  kwc 
and  wonnds  and  death  of  Christ,  by  yoiir  own  salvation,  by  yonr  in- 
debtedneaa  to  Jesna,  by  the  terrible  condition  of  the  heathen,  and  bylbi 
awfbl  hell  whose  yawning  mouth  is  before  them,  onght  yoQ  not  to  sit, 
"  Here  am  I ;  send  me  "?  The  vessel  ia  wrecked,  the  sailors  are  perish- 
ing ;  they  are  olinj^ing  to  the  ri^ng  as  best  they  can ;  tiiey  are  beiu; 
washed  off  one  by  one  I  Good  God,  they  die  before  onr  eyes,  and  jet 
there  is  the  lifeboat  stanch  and  trim.  We  want  men !  Men  to  man  the 
boat  I  Here  nre  the  oars,  but  never  an  arm  to  use  them !  AVhat  is  to' 
be  done  ?  Htro  is  the  gallant  boat,  able  to  leap  from  billow  to  billow, 
only  men  are  wanted !  Are  there  none  ?  Are  we  all  cravens  ?  A  mui 
is  more  precious  than  the  gold  of  Ophir.  Now,  my  brave  brethren,  who 
will  leap  in  and  take  an  oar  for  the  love  of  Jeans,  and  yon  dying  men? 
And  ye  brave  women,  ye  who  have  hearts  like  that  of  Grace  Darling, 
wiU  not  ye  shame  the  laggards,  and  dare  the  tempest  for  the  love  of  aoola 
in  danger  of  death  and  hell  ?  Weigh  my  appeal  in  earnest  and  at  ouce, 
for  it  is  the  appeal  of  God.  8it  down  and  listen  to  that  sorrowM  yei 
majestic  demhnd,  "  Whom  shall  I  send,  and  who  will  go  for  us?"  «ai 
then  respond,  "  Ready,  aye  ready ;  ready  for  anything  to  which  oar 
Redeemer  calls  na."  Let  those  who  love  him,  as  they  perceive  ill 
around  them  tlio  terrible  token  of  the  world's  dire  need,  cry  in  an  agonj 
of  Christian  love, "  Here  mq  I  j  send  me." 


PoBTKWS  or  ScBlPTrnB  bead   befouk  Sebiioh — Exodus  iv.  i— ii 
10 — 18  ;  Jeremiah  i.  6 — II ;  Isaiah  vi. 


Hymns  from  "Oua  O^vk  Hymn  Book"— 148  (Song  !.),  189,  W. 


"  THE  8W0HD  AXD   THE  THOWEL."    Edited  by   C.   H.  SPUHQEOK. 

Comisi'  fon  M.r,  ISJJ. 


Spnrf»n. 
Bloniia«Fort.  Bj  Hit.  J.  n.  VinHin,  I 


rt  SpuT^ — ,  ,.  ,, 

SsTcrelgii  Onics. 


91  j^utiir  U.   KI>I,  t 


PHce  U.    P(Nt  free,  4  atamiN. 


JRcfinipIton  i^atjntarle  puljit. 


STEONG  CONSOLATION  FOE  THE  LOED'8  KEFHaEES. 


4   ^ttiitoit 

DBLrvBBBD  ON  Lord's-Dat  Mohbisg,  April  29th,  1877,  bt 

'  C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT   TBE    USTBOFOLITAK    TABERKACLS,    HEWINOTOH, 


"Tbstbjtwo  im mutable  things,  in  which  it  was  impoidblo  for  God  to  tie,  we 
might  hsTc  ■  strong  consstation,  vho  hme  fled  for  refugo  to  taf  hold  upon  tho  hopo 
Bet  before  us."— Hebrews  vi.  IB. 

Whe^t  we  read  sucli  a  clioice  verse  as  this  we  are  apt  at  once  to  con- 
clnde  that  it  "  belongcth  to  them  that  are  of  fall  age,  even  to  those  who 
hy  reason  of  use,  have  had  their  sctiaca  escrcised  to  disceru  both  good 
and  evil."  We  set  tliia  aside  as  a  choice  morsel  reserved  for  those  who 
haie  ffom  nell  and  borne  the  burden  and  heat  of  the  day,  who  have 
Kttained  to  fall  asBorance  of  faith,  and  therefore  are  able  to  la;  hold  Dpoa 
rich  covenant  provisionB.  Let  us  at  once  correct  this  miatAke,  for  the 
pweage  belongs  to  a  very  early  form  of  Christian  experience :  it  relates, 
mdeed,  to  the  lowest  d^ree  of  Christian  grace.  I^t  me  read  it  again. 
"That  by  two  immutable  things,  in  which  it  was  impossible  for  Ood  to 
lie,  tea  might  hare  a  strong  consolation."  To  whom  does  the  "we" 
reftr?  We  "  who  have  fled  for  refuge  to  lay  holdnpon  the  hope  set  be- 
fan  US."  The  strong  consolation  mentioned  in  the  text  hebngs  to  those 
who  Inve  fled  to  Christ  for  refoge,  and  surely  this  is  the  very  beginning 
of  the  divine  life ;  it  belongs  also  to  those  wno  lay  hold  upn  the  hops 
of  the  goapel,  and  this  also  is  a  very  elementary  part  of  Christian  eipe- 
rienpe.  If  jou  have  only  newly  fled  to  Christ  for  refuge,  and  if  by  a 
chiidiike  faith  yon  have  freshly  laid  hold  upon  the  hope  that  is  set 
before  yon,  then  the  riches  of  grace  are  yoors,  and  Qod's  oath  and 
promise  an  intended  to  aflbrd  yon  strong  consolation.  As  far  as  this 
text  is  concerned,  yon  need  not  examine  yourselves  to  search  for  strong 
futb,  or  deep  experience,  or  great  growth  in  grace,  or  advanced  holiness, 
for  if  yoQ  arc  "but  Christ's  refngee  and  a  grasper  of  the  Lord's  promise 
yon  may  rejoice  in  the  two  immntable  things  and  rest  in  peace. 

I  gather  from  Qod's  beginning  thos  early  to  enconrage  his  people,  and 
from  his  laying  down  so  much  of  comfori:  for  them  at  the  oaUet,  that  he 
would  have'  them  haippj  all  theii  lives.    It  is  not  the  lord's  mind  that 
No.  1,362. 


I 


254  ICBTROPOLITAV  TABXBVA0LE  PfTLpiT. 

the  Ktng-s  children  should  ^  BKHiming  all  tfiur  dqfi.    If  Jftkm 

jonr  harps  upon  the  willows,  it  is  not  by  di^ne  jjtnoept  thil  ye  itm, 
for  his  wmd  to  theproj^t  is,  '^  Oonribft  jBpV&mtaKtm  iny  pcopk^utt 
your  God.  Speak  ye  comfortably  nnto  JemsalenL  m  would  km 
yon  clothed  in  raiment  of  rejoicing,  yea*  ho  desiretti  that  JiNpr  j^nqr 
be  full.  If  yonr  heavenly  Father  wocda  not  hsvB  yon  BswowiU,  "vnu  jte 
not  consent  to  his  loving  wish  concerning  yon,  and  drink  deejfifbAotb^ 
comfort  which  he  provides?  The  Lord  knew  of  old  that  nil  peo|li 
would  want  comforting,  for  he  foresaw  onr  Infirmities  and  our  afflMstioM 
from  our  birth.  He  knew  what  croatorea  of  the  dnst  we  are,  liov  Ib3 
and  feeble,  and  therefore  he  hath  ordained  abqndant  ooniiolatioat  thitliii 
poor,  weak,  tried,  and  tempted  people  may  be  strengthened  and  ohfliiwii 

Garefhlly  notice  that  the  Lm  has  laia  most  ike»  ^pon  iba  |jiU 
which  is  most  vital  to  the  believer's  comfort  He  knew  r^^  id 
that  we  should  often  doubt  his  flrreat  grace,  aad  think  the  ooTonaoft  mif 
of  salvation  to  be  too  good  to  be  troe,  and  therefore  that  we  mi|^ 
have  no  excuse  for  mistrust  or  suspicion,  he  has  first  pledged  his  wnd- 
and  then  has  condescendingly  uttered  a  solemn  oaSi»  sitauing  I7 
kimself,  that  henceforth  we  might  never  raise  a  gneaticAi  about  die 
foundations  upon  which  the  eternal  settlements  of  bve  axe  laid.  Tp 
belieyers  he  has  put  salvation  and  all  other  oovenaiit  blaaiingi  bi- 
yond  dispute,  in  order  that  all  who  are  interested  in  them  nu^njbin 
the  firmest  assurance  concerning  them.  The  wont  poasiUe  kaal  ioi  I 
believer  is  to  have  it  sug^ted  to  him  that  the  goq>el  is  not  ime,  flit 
pardon  through  the  precious  blood  is  a  fiction,  and  that  Qod  a  nit 
reconciled  through  the  atoning  sacrifice.  If  we  air^  abaokLta^oAliii 
a&  to  the  truth  of  God's  gospel  and  our  own  salvation  therdij  AA  ii 
other  things  are  of  small  concern  to  us ;  and  therefofe  hath  Ihelill 
fixed  on  a  sure  basis  of  promise  and  oath  this  comerHsUme  of  oorMir 
fort,  and  set  his  promise  in  such  a  light  that  it  beoomes  lilaajilMij  In 
doubt  it. 

Our  loving  Father  knew  that  we  should  often  be  aaniiled  Ij  tte 
spirit  of  distrust,  and  this  has  led  him  so  abundantiy  to  oertm  the 
truth  of  the  things  which  he  has  promised.  For  yon  tmn/tp  hAmif 
guilt  is  very  suspicious ;  when  you  nave  done  wrong  to  a  mm  jon  OM- 
not  believe  him.  Nothing  renders  yon  so  flail  of  d(mbt  towaria.aaaAff 
as  your  own  consciousness  of  having  acted  unjustly  towards  liiin.  llflfw; 
when  a  sense  of  guilt  comes  over  the  sotu,  natnre  beg^  le  wft 
*'  Can  the  Lord  be  a  sin-pardoning  Lord  ?  Oan  he  lore  me  m  hs  laji 
he  does  ?  Such  a  base,  ungrateful  rebel  as  I,  can  I  reaillv  have  part  n 
se  great  a  salvation  as  that  which  God  has  provided  and  set  btA  ? " 
Knowing  the  suspicious  nature  of  a  guiltv  heart,  Gk>d  has  made  Ida  oatli 
and  promise  to  be  two  sheet-anchors  to  the  soul,  that  onr  fldth  may  lifc 
out  every  storm  of  doubt. 

The  greatness  of  the  mercies  themselves  often  staegen  na.  Uta 
we  consider  God's  electmg  love,  when  we  reckon  toe  amiiiiny  eoit 
of  redemption,  and  when  we  see  the  high  honour  of  adoption,  muon  to 
Christ,  and  heirship  Avith  him,  we  naturally  exclaim — ^^'WlieildB  9 
this  to  me  ?  "  and,  alas,  we  are  apt  to  go  a  step  farth^  and  mj,  ^Can 
Itbd  true  ?  Is  it  not  all  a  pleasant  dream  ?  Hath  the  Lora  les^ 
made  me  one  with  Christ  and  called  me  his  beloved,  andwSI  he  pnptto 


naOltS  fKHTBOUTIOK  IDB  THE  LORD'S  ItlFVOEKfl.  25o 

'fttr  me  also  a  plsco  among  Uie  glorified  ?  "  Now,  kat  the  gnatneM  of 
Aie  bleseing  should  st»ggcr  our  confidence,  the  Lord  has  ensared  erery 
tdessing  to  ne  by  a  cOTenant  rendered  Tftlid  by  biB  own  act  and  deed ;  & 
ODTenant  Bi'gncd,  sealed,  and  delivered,  so  as  to  be  beyond  alt  qnestion. 

Moreover  the  Lord  knev  that  we  ehonld  donbt  his  faithfabiess, 
becaoBe  wc  ourselrcfl  are  so  &lse.  We  remember  many  a  broken  pro- 
mine,  broken  though  made  before  the  Lord ;  and  persons  who  are 
imtnithfnl  themselves  are  very  apt  to  think  others  bo.  Therefore  onr 
God,  knowing  the  deceitful  nature  of  oar  hearts,  foresaw  that  we  shonld 
be  an  unbelieving  race,  and  has  set  two  swords  at  the  heart  of  our 
nspicionB  and  qnestioningB ;  slaying  anbelief  by  his  oath  and  promise. 

Besides,  onr  nature  mns  Bo  cross  to  the  whole  system  of  divine  grace 
that  we  need  much  assuring  before  we  can  believe  it.  We  are  always  for 
working,  deserving,  and  camii^.  Pbariseeism  is  the  religion  of  nature. 
We  boast  ofour  merit  and  yet  we  are  as  meritlesa  as  Satan  himself.  The 
idea  of  working  and  deserving  appears  to  be  ingrained  in  onr  nature  ; 
and  as  certain  as  the  blood  is  red,  so  snre  is  the  heart  Belf-righteons.  We 
cannot  divest  onrsclvcs  of  the  idea  of  salvation  as  payment  for  work 
done:  that  it  is  a  gift,  a  free  gift  of  grace,  it  is  hard  to  make  ns  believe. 
Even  after  conversion  the  old  tendency  betrays  itself;  we  steal  away 
ftom  Jesus  to  Moses  as  often  as  we  get  opportoitity,  and  then  Ix^n  to 
donbt  free  grace.  Ttierefore  the  Lord  has  fettered  and  bonnd  ns  down 
to  believing  with  golden  chains  of  promise  and  oath.  "  It  mnst  be  so," 
taith  he,  "  the  grace  that  I  have  revealed  ib  indeed  tme,  for  I  have 
MTom  by  myself."  Beloved,  we  ought  earnestly  to  abhor  that  wicked 
legality  of  ours  which  so  often  does  despite  to  the  grace  of  Qod,  casts 
knroicion  upon  his  mcroy,  and  brings  onr  eonU  into  bondage. 

Another  door  for  doubt  is  found  in  the  feai  of  preenming.  It  is  right 
that  we  should  be  fearful  of  being  comforted  in  a  wrong  manner,  for 
nothing  is  more  dondly  th.ia  false  peace.  The  Lord  approves  of  that 
holy  jealonsy  which  leads  ns  to  examine  ourselves  whether  we  be  in  the 
Ikith.  1  am  always  soirowfiil  when  hallowed  fear  departs  from  a 
man,  so  that  he  no  loi^r  dreads  self-deception ;  bnt  yet  the  fear  of 
premmmg  may  be  perverted  by  the  evil  one,  and  then  it  becomes 
a  mare  to  onr  feet  Beloved,  be  sure  of  this,  that  it  is  no  presumption 
to  bdiere  God ;  the  presumption  lies  in  doubting  him.  Faith  is  sister 
to  htnnility,  and  mistrost  is  neighbour  to  pride.  But  lest  any  of  yon, 
tiembleTB,  dionid  be  afraid  to  take  the  promise  of  God  as  being  verity 
and  tmth  to  you,  behold  Jehovah  swears  it,  and  now  vou  dare  not  donbt 
it.  Ton  dare  not  qnestion  the  veracity  of  God  who  tnus  with  "  ameni "' 
and  "  Teriiys "  pledges  his  own  eternal  power  and  Godhead  that  the 
oorensntofhisgrace  shallstand  fast  for  ever.  Thus  doth  God  lay  the 
Btreai  of  assurance  where  we  are  apt  to  put  the  force  of  onr  donbt,  and 
try  making  his  own  promise  sure  he  affords  to  ns  consolation  of  the 


At  this  time,  hoping  that  some  of  God's  people  may  be  comforted 
thereby,  we  shall  descrihe  the  conditions  of  mind  to  which  the  text  is 
addreeaed  and  the  blessing  which  it  brings.  The  toxt  speaks  of  three 
■tates:  first,  we  have  "JUdfor  rt/uge  ";  secondly,  we  have  "  laid  hold 
t^on  the  hope  set  hefore  vt ",-  and  thirdly,  we  have  "  a  stnmg  ameolaUon." 

I.     First,  V2  HATB  "fled  n)R  RSFVQB."    Altbongh  the  original 


260  MSTROPOLITAV  TABXBHICUB  PUXflT. 

of  Melchisedec."  By  the  oath  of  Gk>d  the  Son  ui  ocmiecrmiad  fiir  emw 
more,  and,  having  offered  one  sacrifioe  &r  ana  Ibr  ever,  he  aita  at  tte 
right  hand  of  Qod,  ahle  to  save  them  to  the  nttermoafc  that  oome  mto 
God  by  him.  Wdl  then,  I,  a  poor  conyinced  ainner^  withoat  anj  otfaor 
hope,  do  flee  away  from  myaelf  to  the  eternal  prieithood  of  Ohnit^  aai 
to  the  sacrifice  that  he  has  offered  once  Ibr  all,  and  I  know,  becaoKGol 
has  sworn  it,  that  his  sacrifice  avails  for  me  and  finr  all  believera.  la 
thus  fleeing  for  refuge  to  our  great  Losd  and  prieet^  we  find  a  atsgm 
consolation  in  the  oath  and  promise  of  Ood. 

The  one  solemn  qnestion  is — Beloved  hearersy  have  yoa  fled  ftr 
refuge  ?  Are  yon  the  Lord's  refugees  to  day  ?  Are  700  fogitimB 
daily  from  self  and  sm  ?  Are  yon  m  Christ  aa  in  a  city  of  lefagc^aii 
is  this  &e  sole  ground  of  your  seoority  ?  If  so,  the  stronger  oannli* 
tions  are  your  portion. 

II.  But,  secondly,  wi  havi  oom  to  ^  lit  bold.''  Hero  we  faaie  a 
change  of  figure,  unless  we  recall  the  case  of  Joab,  who  fled  for  fdagi 
to  the  temple  and  laid  hold  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar.  We  wiU  lut 
insist  npon  that  rare  incident,  for  probably  it  did  not  oooor  ta  tka 

r  tie's  mind.  Beloved,  we  feel  that  we  need  a  refuge,  and  we  Itai 
God  has  been  pleased  to  set  one  forth :  he  aays,  ^  vflioioem  b»> 
lieveth  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  shall  not  periah,  rat  have  frmirtistiiir 
life."  He  bids  ns  cease  firom  all  hopes  of  merit^  and  sinnly  oome'sal 
believe  hhn  and  trust  in  the  great  work  which  his  well-beloved  Son  Im 
finished  for  ns.  He  bids  ns  accept  the  great  plan  of  Cbriat'a  huadshm  cft 
our  behalf,  and  his  sacrificial  suffering  in  onr  zoom  and  atead. .  Jnsfr 
fication  by  faith  in  Jesus  is  set  before  ua.  What  are  we  to  do  aooixdr 
ing  to  the  text  ?  We  have  to  **  lay  hold  "  npon  it.  We  are  not  oqbt 
manded  to  prepare  ourselves  for  it,  or  to  get  what  the  "R^mw"^^  writan 
call  **  the  CTace  of  congmit^,"  by  which  we  ahonld  be  fit'&r  it^  bat  it  ii 
to  be  laid  hold  npon  by  ns  just  as  we  are.  Ever]^body  here  knowa  lAit 
it  is  to  lay  hold  upon  a  support  or  a  treasure:  sinner,  that  iajnat  whit 
you  have  to  do  with  Christ  I  You  have  te  lay  hold  iqx>n  him  by  lUdi, 
You  are  drowning ;  there  is  a  rope  thrown  to  yon;  what  have  you  tede? 
*'  Lay  hold.'*  You  are  not  to  look  at  yonr  handa  to  see  whether  thej  art 
clean  enough*  No,  lay  hold,  dirty  hand  or  clean  hand.  **  But  mv  luuid  ii 
weak."  Lay  hold,  brother,  as  best  yon  can,  weak  hand  or  not^  for  while 
yon  are  laying  hold  of  Christ  God  is  laying  hold  of  you  ;  yon  may  rest 
assured  of  that.  If  you  have  the  faintest  grip  of  Christy  Ohriat  has  a 
firm  grip  of  you  snch  as  never  shall  be  relaxed.  Your  hnsntesa  ia  at  this 
moment  to  lay  hold  and  keep  hold.  God  has  riven  ns  this  bleaaed  hope^ 
that  those  who  are  in  Christ  are  for  Christ^  sake  forgiven  all  their 
iniquities,  are  accepted  and  are  secure  of  everlasting  life,  and  of  this  we 
have  only  to  lay  bold.  What  does  it  mean  ?  What  is  to  be  done  in 
order  to  lay  hold  ? 

Well,  first,  we  must  believe  the  gospel  to  he  true.  Do  you,  all  of  yoo, 
believe  it  to  be  true  that  God  was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  nnto 
himself,  not  imputing  their  trespasses  unto  them  ?  les,  I  know  yon 
believe  that  God  has  sent  his  Son  to  be  a  propitiation  for  ain.  So 
far,  so  ^ood  :  the  next  thing  is  to  apprehend  for  yourselves  ihis  inUk 
Christ  justifies  believers  ;  he  is  worthy  of  trust :  trust  him,  and  he  has 
justified  you.    "  I  do  not  feel  it,"  says  one.     You  do  not  need  to  feel  ik 


ItisEimattcr  of  beiicvia^;;.  Bcliere  in  Jema,  and  because  yon  are  a 
ielie»er  be  asrared  that  you  are  saved.  "  Bat  I  thonght  I  should  fc-el," 
nya  another.  Yes,  you  shall  fee!  enough  by-and-by,  bnt  now  there  is  a 
qaestion  between  you  and  God.  Is  the  Lord  a  liar  or  not  ?  "  He  that 
"believcth  not  hath  made  God  a  liar,"  and  on  the  other  h&nd,  "  He  that 
faelieTcth  on  him  hath  set  to  hia  seal  that  God  ia  true,"  Which  of  the 
t-ffo  is  it  to  be  ?  fiod  with  a  solemn  oath  declares  that  belieTera  are 
bkased,  bein^  the  seed  of  Abraham,  bleased  according  to  hia  covenant ; 
with  an  oath  he  declares  that  beiicrcrs  shall  enter  into  hia  rest  ;  with  an 
oath  he  deckircs  that  bis  Son,  the  everlasting  Meichiaedec,  is  able  to  save 
to  the  uttermost  them  that  come  iinto  God  by  liim.  yfha,t  then  ?  Dost 
then  beheve  him  or  not  ?  "  Oh,"  suith  one,  "  I  believe  God's  word,  but" 
I  doubt  ifB  application  to  myself?"  Ton  do  not  believe  it  anlesa  you 
believe  it  for  yourself,  fur  tiierc  are  no  exceptions  made  in  the  caae.  If 
thon  believest,  thou  art  blessed ;  if  thou  believest,  thou  shalt  have  rest ; 
if  thon  believest,  the  great  Melcbisedec  lives  for  thee  and  pleada  for 
thee,  and  thou  art  saved.  If  then  believest — there  is  the  point — if 
ttioQ  hoQonrest  God  by  accepting  hia  word  aa  true,  and  by  rdying  npon 
Christ  for  thyself, — then  is  it  well  with  thee.  If  thou  aayeat,  "  Yes,  the 
rope  is  a  strong  one,  and  I  believe  it  will  sn^iport  a  ainking  man,"  why 
not  lay  hold  upon  it  ?  There  is  tha  vital  porat  of  faith :  practiadly  to 
beheve  God  by  resting  one's  own  eternal  deatiny  npon  the  tmth  which 
we  say  we  believe.    "  Lay  hold  on  the  hope." 

White  a.  man  lays  hold  upon  a  Chii^  ne  goes  no  further,  bnt  con- 
fmue.t  to  cimg  lo  it.  Wc  have  fled  for  remge,  but  we  flee  no  fur- 
ther tnan  the  hope  which  we  now  lay  hold  npon,  namely,  eternal  lifb 
in  Christ  Jesna.  We  never  wish  to  get  beyond  God's  promise  in 
Christ  JesQs  to  believers,  ths  promise  of  salvation  to  &ith.  We  are 
BattsSed  with  that,  and  there  wc  rest.  "  Laying  hold"  in  the  forcible 
language  of  the  Greek  would  imply  firm  retention  of  that  which 
we  haie  seized.  I  remember  well  when  first  I  laid  hold  on  the  hope 
that  God  had  set  before  me.  I  was  terribly  afraid  to  graap  it,  for  I 
thonght  it  was  too  good  to  be  true :  bnt  I  saw  that  there  was  no 
other  chance  for  me,  and  tlierefore  I  was  driven  right  ont  of  myaelf 
to  be  bold,  and  ventare  all.  I  knew  that  I  mnst  fiee  somewhere,  and  it 
Beemed  to  be  that  or  nothing ;  I  was  forced  to  believe  in  the  wondrous 
plan  of  salvation  by  another  and  in  another,  even  in  salvation  by  Jesna 
Christ.  I  made  a  dash  at  it,  and  believed  it,  and  joy  and  peace  filled 
my  spirit.  That  is  twenty-seven  yeara  ago  now,  and  I  am  laying  hold 
npon  it  atill.  Brethren  and  sisters,  I  have  not  gone  an  inch  beyond 
the  old  hope.  Jesus  Christ  was  all  in  all  to  me  then,  and  he  is  the 
same  now,  only  1  am  more  resolved  than  ever  to  lean  my  soul  on  him 
and  upon  him  alonC.  I  do  profess  to  yon  this  day  I  dare  not  place  a 
shadow  of  reliance  on  any  sermons  I  have  preached,  or  any  alms  I  have 
given,  or  any  prayers  I  have  offered,  or  any  communions  with  Christ  I 
have  enjoyed,  or  on  anything  that  I  have  done,  or  said,  or  thonght : 
bnt  I  rely  wholly  on  what  Jesus  did,  and  is  doing,  as  my  covenant 
Head  and  Surety,  I  know  ho  bore  my  sin  in  his  own  body  on  the 
tree,  I  know  he  bmied  my  sin  where  it  never  shall  have  a  resurrection, 
and  I  know  he  stands  as  my  representative  at  the  eternal  throne,  and  I 
tiao  know  that  I  shall  soon  be  where  he  is ;  becaase  I  am  one  with  him. 


262  xKTiopouriv  tibuxacu  mm. 


since  I  have  belierediQ  him.  SbVyinjftiaid,  if  joabdieve  inUiiitn^ 
if  it  be  bat  five  minutes  ago  thifc  joa  iceeifri  tuOk,  joa  are  joil  • 
safe  in  the  hand  of  Jesos  as  fthoae  of  va  who  hafo  been  in  him  ftr 
jears^  If  bj  an  act  of  tnist  joa  do  bat  aeoept  what  God  has  aot  M^ 
fleeing  to  it  and  laying  hoj^  Ufoa  ft,  the  ^ationg  conaohtiott*  cf 
whidi  the  text  speaks  beloog:s  to  70a.  I  jnj  Cml  of  his  m^^hl^ 
mercy  to  lead  many  to  belieTe  in  him  now. 

Did  yoa  notice  that  the  qioBtle  qpeaks  of  htjfmf  JMd  ^^fm  ahaf$f 
This  does  not  mean  that  we  are  to  kj  hold  bj  imaginatioii  ufoa  wamh 
thing  which  we  hope  to  obtain  in  the  dim  ftatore^  ftr  the  nozt  mn 
goes  on  to  say  '^  which  hope  we  hare^**  We  hars  oar  liope  now,  ith 
not  a  shadowy  idea  that  possibly  when  we  oome  to  die  wo  may  bi 
sared.  We  know  that  we  at  this  momeat  are  nib  in  our  refiiga^  aii 
we  lay  hold  on  onr  confidence  as  a  present  jcj.  Yet  Chat  whidi  wo  Iif 
hold  upon  is  fall  of  hope,  there  is  more  in  it  than  we  can  now  ne  er 
enjoy.  What  is  the  hope  ?  The  hope  of  final  peraeferanoe,  the  hm 
of  ultimate  perfecti<m,  the  hope  of  eternal  gkvy,  the  hope  of  being  wA 
onr  Lord  where  he  is  that  we  may  behold  his  glory  m  ever — a  hqe 
parifying,  elerating,  and  foil  of  glory ;  a  h<^  whidi  cheen  and  delll^ 
us  as  often  as  we  think  of  it  This  we  have  laid  hdd  of  bj  a  sim|b 
act  of  faith,  believing  Ood  to  be  tme.  This  laying  hold  upon  tihe  hofi 
which  God  sets  before  ns  is  a  very  simple  matter,  and  yet  thcvam 
some  who  do  not  understand  it»  for  th^  ask  us  again  and  «gdm 
*'  What  is  faith  ?  "  Well,  it  is  kying  hold,  but  if  yon  want  to  know 
more  about  it  lay  hold  at  onoe,  and  see  what  it  ia  by  practioe.  Lm 
hold  at'  once,  sinner,  it  is  all  thoa  hast  to  do,  and  the  £^pirit  of  CM 
enables  thee  to  do  iL  As  I  said  before,  Uack-ha&ded  anme^  do  not 
stop  to  wash  thy  hands,  but  lay  hold.  That  which  you  Ivf  hoU  on  wfll 
wash  you  and  cleanse  you.  And  thou,  poor,  feebte,  tremhJmfc  panbead 
soul,  Jesus  bids  thee  stretch  out  thine  hand,  and  as  thoa  layeatiibld 
thou  shalt  find  peace  and  consolation. 

III.  For  this  is  our  last  pointy  WB  en  jot  **  STBOHa  odEraouLnQB.** 
I  have  not  time  to  speak  upon  thu  as  I  should  like,  and  tfaoefom  wlB 
just  throw  out  a  few  hints.  Many  of  our  feUow-moi  haTe  no  oraaola- 
tion  ;  when  trouble  comes  woe  is  unto  them.  There  are  many  otheni 
who  have  a  weak  consolation  ;  they  dei>end  upon  the  **db9oh0  li**  of  a 
priest.  That  must  be  a  yerr  poor  thing,  I  should  think,  fbr  anybodly 
to  get  consolation  out  of ^to  know  that  you  have  been  to  mass,  have  eon* 
fesMd,  and  have  been  assured  of  forgiveness  bya  poor,  mortal  man  who  ii 
no  better  than  yourself,  except  that  he  has  had  his  head  shaved.  What 
ground  for  consolation  poor  beings  can  see  in  this  I  cannot  teU :  it  most 
be  a  yery  poor  support  when  sin  and  Satan  assail  the  souL  Ifanj 
have  a  very  insufficient  consolation,  for  as  soon  as  laial  or  trouble  arise 
they  fidnt,  and  when  they  have  the  prospect  of  death  before  them  their 
consolation  vanishes  like  the  dew  m  the  sun.  But  w$  have  a  9kmm 
caruolaUan.  We  call  that  liquor  strong  of  which  a  very  few  drops  will 
fiavour  all  into  which  it  falls :  how  wonderfully  the  consolation  of  Ohrisk 
has  alTected  our  entire  lives !  There  is  such  potency  in  it  that  it 
sweetens  everything  about  us.  It  is  so  strong  that  it  mastera  all  oar 
fears,  and  shtys  all  our  scepticisms.  Though  there  are  many  teachen 
Jwdly  engaged  in  suggesting  unbelief,  yet  our  strong  consolation  flings  a 


UTBOXQ   COKSOLATtOlT   FOK  THB  LOBD'S  BBFDQEBS.  S68 

thousand  doabts  aside,  as  Sameon  slew  a  thomand  PhiliBtines.  It  ooo- 
qucr?  all  our  trouble  too,  for  it  makes  us  feel  that,  being  called  acoordii^ 
to  the  ctcnml  purpose,  ali  tbin^  work  tof^tJier  for  our  good :  yea,  this 
consolation  ia  so  strung  that  it  vanquishes  death  itself  and  makes  us 
descend  into  the  chill  precincts  of  the  sepulchre  withont  a  sbiyer,  joy- 
fnliy  triumphant  because  Christ  bos  promised  hb  life,  God  has  awom  it, 
and  the  promise  and  the  oattk  must  be  trae. 

What  I  want  yon  to  note  is  that  tke  ixmsola(ioR  of  the  Ghrittkm  lies 
wholly  m  his  God,  because  the  ground  of  it  is  that  God  has  swom,  and 
that  God  baa  promised.  N^ever  look,  bberefora,  to  yoniselTes  for  any 
consolation ;  it  would  bo  a  rain  search.  Flee  horn  yDnrselres,  and  lay 
bold  upon  the  hope  set  before  you.  Oh  Ohristian,  yoa  lose  consolation 
when  yoQ  look  away  from  yoni  God.  Paaten  the  eye  of  faith  on  him 
and  never  let  it  glance  elsewhere.  Eig  promise,  his  oatlt,  himself,  a 
trae  xai  faithfal  God,  this  consideration  aume  can  sustain  yon. 

Remember,  too,  that  your  consolation  must  oome  _from  what  Sod  has 

Allien  and  not  from  his  prOTidence.  Mind  that  you  da  not  lo<^  to  the 
ord's  proridential  dealings  for  your  springs  of  joy,  for  he  may  ohasten 
you  with  the  rod  ofmen,  and  beat  you  with  many  stripes,  but  his  pronuse 
smiles  when  his  providence  frowns.  See  how  the  apostle  dwells  upon  the 
promise  and  the  oath  as  the  two  immutable  things,  and  not  npon  tem- 
poral blessings.  Outward  providences  change,  bnt  the  oath  never 
changes,  hold  you  on  to  that.  Your  comfort  mnat  not  even  depend  upon 
sensible  realizations  of  God's  favour,  nor  on  sweet  commnnioBS  and 
delights.  No,  but  npon — he  iias  said  it  and  he  has  swom  it — those 
are  the  two  strong  pillars  npon  which  your  comfort  must  rest.  Not 
upon  what  you  think  he  says  to  your  heart,  nor  upon  what  yoa  may 
believe  yoa  have  felt  to  be  applied  to  your  own  soul,  but  upon  the  bare 
word,  promise,  and  oath  of  God  without  feeling  or  evidence  to  bock  it. 
God  bath  said  it  and  sworn  it,  there  is  your  strong  consolation. 

Remember,  however,  that  Ihf  power  "f  the  strong  conaolalion  derived 
from  the  oath  of  God  micsi  in  your  personal  enjoyment  depend  very 
mtteh  upon  pour  faith.  What  is  the  consolation  of  a  promise  if  yon  cb 
not  believe  it,  and  what  is  the  comfort  of  an  oath  if  yon  doubt  it  ?  It 
is  not  the  end  of  ali  strife  to  those  who  believe  not.  0  brother,  I  charge 
thee  by  the  veracity  of  God,  labour  after  an  increased  faith.  If  thou 
never  donbtest  God  till  thou  bast  cause  to  do  so,  thou  wilt  never  doubt 
M^in.  It  is  impossible  for  him  to  ho  in  anything,  and  above  all  in 
the  great  things  that  thy  soul  rests  npon,  therefore  do  not  treat  him  as 
if  he  could  lie,  nor  dare  to  suspect  his  faithfulness,  but  hold  on  to  the 
inmintable  veracity  of  God. 

Bemember  that  this  consolation  which  is  intended  to  come  to  you  ^y 
biChf  if  yon  do  not  get  it  will  prove  that  yoa  ate  insulting  God.  It 
may  appear  to  be  a  suaU  and  an  easy  thing  to  believe  God,  bnt  it  ia  a 
horrible  and  a  detestable  thing  to  disbelieve  him.  Picture  some  generous 
frjend  in  this  assembly  coming  before  ns  and  saying  "  I  promise  sach 
aiidvadi  a  thing,"  He  would  be  grieved  at  heart  if  some  one  should 
rise  and  say,  "  I  am  .willing  enongh  to  believe  it,  but  I  cannot."  I  can 
hardly  think  of  anything  which  would  be  more  ihsulting  to  an  honest 
man  than  to  -have  doubt  cast  upon  him  by  one  wlio  pretends  to  be 
onxigw  to  bdieve  kim.    But  stq^ose  in  great  gentleness  of  spirit  the 


21)  t  METnOPOLITAS  TABERHACLB  tVt^Tt.  " 

]>oi-Bon  so  mistnisted  were  to  soy,  "  To  put  an  end  to  all  qneetionuif;. 
engross  a  deed  and  I  will  set  my  hand  and  seal  to  it,  and  I  will  at  tbc 
wune  time  take  a  solemn  oath,  calling  God  to  witness  that  what  1 
promise  is  true."  Now  if  any  person  shonld  say, "  I  still  do  not  belieTe 
it,"  can  yon  conceire  the  pain  of  heart,  yea,  and  the  indignation  which 
M'onld  naturally  take  possession  of  our  friend's  mind  1  Now  God  cannM 
swear  by  anything  greater  than  himself,  far  there  is  no  greater,  and  so 
he  has  sworn  by  himself.  By  his  own  existence,  by  his  holiness  from 
which  he  can  never  part,  by  the  majesty  of  his  deiW,  he  has  Goiemnl; 
sworn  that  the  believing  seed  shall  be  blessed ;  and  blessed  they  mmt 
l>e.  There  shall  be  foi^vcnoss  and  eternal  life  to  every  one  that  Iteiieves 
in  Ids  Son  Jesus  Christ.  This  is  no  fiction.  God  cannot  deceive  m  on 
SHch  a  point  as  this,  nor  indeed,  opon  any  other.  This  is  no  dream,  no 
charming  myth  as  some  would  seem  to  fancy ;  it  is  reality,  divine  reality. 
Now  then,  soals,  will  yon  cast  yoarselvcs  npon  this  divine  reality  ?  May 
the  devil  Iw  kept  back  from  yon  that  yon  may  cease  blaspheming  God 
by  doubting  himl  May  the  eternal  Spirit  now  convince  you  bow 
natural,  how  proper,  liow  necessary  it  is  that  you  shonld  at  onoe  bcliere 
the  promise  and  the  oath  of  God,  and  trast  yourselves  with  Jesus  Christ, 
whom  be  sets  forth  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Savionr  to  give  repentance  nnto 
Israel  and  remission  of  sins  this  day !  I  wish  I  knew  how  to  plead 
with  yon;  but  the  time  has  gone.  There  was  a  time  with  me  when 
to  have  heard  this  message  would  hare  made  my  heart  leap  within  me, 
for  I  wanted  Christ ;  and  when  I  heard  that  I  mnst  lay  hold  upon  him. 
and  flee  to  him,  and  so  be  saved,  I  was  delighted  so  to  do.  Those  of 
yon  who  are  as  sinfol  as  I  was,  and  as  eonsciona  of  it,  will  I  tmst  at 
this  very  moment  look  unto  him,  and  bo  saved :  and  if  you  do,  by  the 
promise  and  the  oath  of  God,  you  are  eternally  secure.  May  God  tlie 
Holy  Ghost  lead  you  to  Jesus.     Amen. 


Portions  of  Scbipthbe  Ue&d  before  Sebuon — Hebrews  iii.  7—19, 
iv.  6—9 ;  V,  I— 11 ;  vi,  13—20. 

JlYMtis  FEOM  "Odr  Ows  Htms  Book " — 381,  611,  548. 

Jiitt  Piiblishfd.     Price   One  Praay. 

"THE    crj.A.iM:s    OF    a-oD." 

AN   ADDRESS  TO  MEN   OF   BUSINESS 

THE  FRIENDS'  MEETING  HOUSE,  BISHOPSQATE  STREET, 
til   Wtditdidni/,  May  2jiJ,   1877, 

B-2-     C     H.     SFXJ^g-EOIT. 
Pa«mObs  k  ALABABm,  4.  PittCTHMter  BaiMinga ;  and  «U  Book*dl«n> 


r 

IHelttopliian  iJakruMk  iul|it. 


ECCE     KEX. 


4.    cP4l*1««lt 

Dbutsrsd  OS  Loed's-Day  MoitKiNa,  May  6th,  187T,  by 

C.   H.   SPORGEON, 

'■*  IT   THB    HETROPOLrriK    T4BEEHACLK,   NEWIKQTON. 


"He  ftoith  unW  ihe  Jews,  Bi;bold  your  King  1" — John  lii,  II. 
Pilate  snid  much  mora  than  ho  meant,  and,  therefore,  we  shall  not 
restrict  our  considoratiun  of  hia  words  to  what  he  iut«ndod.  John  tell.s 
□a  considering  CaiaphaB,  "  and  thie  spake  he  not  of  himgclf,"  and  we  may 
eay  the  same  of  I'llate.  Everything  said  or  done  in  connection  with 
the  Savionr  during  the  day  of  his  crucifixion  waa  full  of  meaning,  far 
fnllerof  meaning  uian  the  speaiere  or  o^^tora  were  aware.  Transformed 
by  the  cross,  even  the  commonplace  becomes  solemn  and  weighty. 
Wfaeo  CaiaphaB  Bald  that  it  was  expedient  that  one  man  should  die  for 
the  people,  that  the  whole  nation  perish  not,  he  little  thought  that  he 
was  €anmciating  the  great  goapcl  principle  of  aubstitution.  When  the 
Jenrish  pe<^le  cried  out  before  Pilate  "  His  blood  be  on  ub  and  on  our 
childreQ,"  they  little  knew  the  judgment  which  they  were  bringing 
npon  themselves,  which  would  commence  to  be  fulfilled  at  the  ai^e  ot 
jWusalem,  and  follow  them,  hanging  like  a  heavy  cloud  over  their  race, 
for  centnries.  When  the  soldier  with  a  spear  pierced  his  aide  he  had  no 
idea  that  he  was  bringing  forth  before  all  eyes  that  blood  and  water 
which  are  to  the  whole  church  the  emblems  of  the  double  cleansing 
wbicfa  we  find  in  Jeaua,  cleaufiing  by  atoning  blood  and  sanctifying 
grace.  The  folnesB  of  time  had  come,  and  all  things  were  fall.  Each 
movemoit  on  that  awfal  day  was  brimming  with  mystery,  neither  could 
die  Master  or  th(»e  around  him  stir  or  apeak  without  teaching  some 
gospel,  or  fioforoing  some  leasou.  Whereas  on  certain  days  Involity 
eeeou  to  rule  the  hour,  and  little  is  to  be  gathered  from  much  that  is 
Bpoken:  on  the  day  of  the  passion  even  the  most  careless  spake  as  men 
inqpiiM.  Pilate,  the  undecided  spirit,  with  no  mind  of  his  own, 
littered  langni^e  as  weighty  as  if  he  too  had  been  among  the  prophets. 
His  acquittal  of  our  Lord,  hia  mention  of  Borabbas,  his  writmg  of 
Hw  inscription  b>  be  fixed  over  the  head  of  Jesus,  and  many  otbsi 
BMttei^  mre  all  fronght  with  instroction, 
Ko.  1,353. 


2Gt)  METROPOLITAN  TABBRNACLK  PULl'lT. 

It  was  to  the  Jews  that  Pilate  broaght  forth  Jesos  arrayed  in  gaiments 
of  derision,  and  to  them  he  said, "  Ecce  rex  " — "  Behold  your  King ! "  It 
was  by  the  seed  of  Abraham  that  he  was  rejected  as  their  King ;  bat 
we  shall  not  think  cf  them  in  order  to  blame  that  unliappy  nation,  bat 
to  remind  ourselves  that  we  also  may  &11  into  the  same  sin.  As  a  nation 
t'avoared  with  the  gospel  we  stand  in  many  respects  in  the  same  privileged 
condition  as  the  Jews  did.  To  as  is  the  word  of  God  made  known,  to 
our  keeping  the  oracles  of  God  are  committed  in  these  last  days,  and  we, 
thoagh  by  nature  shoots  of  the  wild  oliye,  are  engrafted  into  that 
favoured  stock  from  which  Israel  have  for  a  while  been  cat  o£  Shall 
we  prove  equally  unworthy  ?  Shall  any  of  us  be  found  ^ilty  of  the 
blood  of  Jesus  ?  We  hear  of  Jesus  this  day ;  are  we  rejecting  him  ? 
The  suffering  Messiah  will  be  brought  forth  again  this  morning,  not 
by  Pilate,  but  by  one  who  longs  to  do  him  honour,  imd  when  he  stands 
l)eforeyou,  and  is  proclaimed  again  in  the  words, ''  Behold  yoar  King!" 
will  you  also  cry, ''  Away  with  him,  away  with  him  "  ?  Let  us  hope  tnat 
tliere  will  not  be  found  here  hearts  so  evil  as  to  imitate  the  lel^iooa 
nation  and  cry,  ''We  will  not  have  this  man  to  reign  over  us."  Oh  that 
each  one  of  us  may  acknowledge  the  Lord  Jesus  to  be  his  King,  for 
beneath  his  sceptre  there  is  rest  and  joy.  He  is  worthy  to  be  crowned  by 
every  heart,  let  us  all  unite  in  beholding  him  with  reverence  and  receiving 
him  with  delight.  Give  mc  your  ears  and  hearts  while  Jesus  is  evidently 
set  forth  as  standing  among  you,  and  for  the  next  few  minutes  let  it  w 
your  only  business  to  "  Behold  your  King." 

I.  Come  with  mc,  then,  to  the  place  which  is  called  the  Pavement, 
but  in  the  Hebrew  Gabbatha,  and  there  "  behold  your  King."  I  shall 
first  ask  you  to  behold  your  Kinq  PREjPARiNa  his  throhs,  yea» 
and  making  himself  ready  to  sit  thereon.  When  you  look  in  answer  to 
the  summons, ''  Behold  your  King,"  what  do  you  see  ?  You  see  the 
*'  Man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief, "  wearing  a  crown  of  thorns 
and  covered  with  an  old  purple  cloak,  which  had  been  thrown  about 
him  in  mockery ;  you  can  see,  if  you  look  narrowly,  the  traces  of  his 
streaming  blooa,  for  he  has  just  been  scourged,  and  you  may  also  dis- 
cover that  his  face  is  blackened  with  bruises  and  stained  with  shamefal 
spittle  from  the  soldiers'  mouths. 

*  Thus  tiimmed  forth  they  bring  him  to  the  rout, 
Who  'Crucify  him*  cry  with  one  strong  shont, 
God  holds  his  peace  at  man,  and  man  cries  oat.** 

1 1  is  a  terrible  spectacle,  but  I  ask  yon  to  gaze  upon  it  steadily  and  see 
the  establishment  of  the  Redeemer's  throne.  See  how  he  becomes  your 
mediatorial  King.  He  was  setting  up  a  new  throne  on  Oabbatha^  where- 
on he  would  reign  as  the  King  of  pardoned  sinners  and  the  Prinoe  of 
}*eace.  He  was  King  before  all  worlds  as  Lord  of  all  by  right  of  his 
ctei-nal  power  and  Godhead  ;  he  had  a  throne  when  worlds  were  made» 
as  King  of  all  kings  by  creation  ;  he  had  also  always  filled  the  throne  of 
])rovidencc,  upholding  all  things  by  the  word  of  his  power.  On  hiahead 
were  many  crowns,  and  to  Pilate's  Question,  "Art  thou  a  king  then  ?"  he 
(lid  fitly  answer, "  Thou  saycst  that  I  am  a  king."  But  here  tefore  Pilate 
and  the  Jews,  in  his  condition  of  shame  and  misery,  he  waa  atont  to 
ascend,  and  first  of  all  to  prepare  the  throne  of  the  heavenly  gracet  whidi 


ECOB  BBX, 


HlBW  is  set  np  among  tbe  boos  of  men,  tiiat  thev  may  flee  to  it  and  find 
Paternal  salvation.  Mark  how  be  is  proparin^  tnig  tmvne  of  ^race,  it  la 
iff  pain  atui  shame  auiured  in  our  room  tmdaiead.  Sin  was  in  tbe  way 
of  Eaan'§  huppineea,  and  a  brnken  law,  mid  joatice  requiring  a  penalty : 
ond  all  tbi3  must  be  arranged  before  a  llirone  of  grace  conld  be  erected 
among  men.  If  you  look  at  oor  Bullefing  Lord  yon  see  at  once  the 
cosigHBof  bispain,  for  he  wears  a  erowuofthomawhioh  pierce  bis  brow. 
Pain  was  n  great  part  of  tbe  penalty  ddU  for  sin,  and  tbe  great  Substi- 
tnte  was  therefore  sorely  pained.  When  Pilate  brought  forth  our  marfjrr 
Prince  he  was  tbe  very  mirror  of  agony,  ho  was  majesty  in  miaery, 
mieery  wrought  up  to  its  fall  height  and  stature.  The  crnel  furrows  of 
the  sconrge,  and  the  trickling  rivulets  of  bis.  blood  adown  his  iace  were 
bnt  the  tokens  that  he  was  about  to  die  in  cruel  [ningd  i\\«n\  U]<;  cross, 
and  these  together  were  incumbent  upon  him  because  iliere  could  be  no 
throne  of  grace  till  first  there  had  been  a  Bubstitutionary  sacrifice.  It 
behoved  him  to  suffer  that  he  might  be  a  prince  and  a  Saviour. 
Behold  your  King'  in  his  pains,  he  is  laying  the  deep  foundations  of  his 
kingdom  of  mercy.  Many  a.  crown  has  been  secured  by  blood,  and  so 
is  this,  bnt  it  is  bis  own  blood ;  many  a  throne  has  been  established  by 
suffering,  and  so  is  this,  bnt  be  himself  bears  the  pain.  By  bis  great 
sacriliciai  griefs  our  Lord  has  prepared  a  tlirone  whereon  lie  shall  sit 
till  all  the  chosen  race  have  been  made  kings  and  priests  to  reign  with 
him.  It  is  by  his  t^ony  that  he  obtains  the  royal  power  to  pardon :  by 
his  stripes  and  bruises  he  wins  the  right  to  alaolve  poor  sinners.  We 
sh&U  tuTe  no  cause  to  wonder  at  the  gieatnesa  of  his  mediatorial  power 
if  wo  consider  the  depth  of  his  saorificial  Bufferings:  aa  his  misery 
is  the  source  of  his  majesty,  so  t)ie  greatness  of  his  pains  has 
secured  to  him  the  fulness  of  power  to  save.  Had  he  not  gone  to  the 
end  of  the  law,  and  honoured  justice  to  Ihe  highest  de^e,  he  had  not 
now  been  so  gloriously  able  to  dispense  mercy  from  his  glorious  high 
throne  of  mediatorial  grace.  Behoid  your  King,  then,  as  he  lays  deep 
in  his  own  pain  and  death  the  basis  of  his  throne  of  grace. 

Hor  is  it  only  pain,  for  he  wears  also  the  tokens  of  scorn.  That  crown 
of  thorns  meant  mainly  mockery :  the  soldiers  made  him  a  mimic 
iDOQarch,  a  carnival  king,  and  that  SL-arlut  robe,  too,  was  cast  npon  his 
sbonlders  in  bitter  scorn:  thns  did  this  world  deride  its  God.  The 
CTangelistB  give  joa  the  description  in  brief  Bentences,  as  if  they  stopped 
between  each  line  to  cover  their  faces  with  their  hands  and  weep.  So 
there  he  stands  before  the  crowd,  helpless,  friendless,  with  none  to  declare 
his  generation  or  give  him  a  good  worJ,  He  is  deserted  by  all  who 
formerly  called  him  Master,  and  he  has  become  the  centre  of  a  scene  of 
rioting  and  ridicule.  The  soldiers  have  done  their  worst,  and  now  the 
chief  men  of  the  nation  look  at  him  with  contempt,  and  are  only  kept 
back  from  the  moat  ribald  scorn  by  a  hMe  too  fiirionsly  eager  for 
death  to  afford  them  leisure  for  their  sooffo.  Hie  enemies  had  done 
overything  in  their  power  to  clothe  him  with  scorn,  and  they  were  ask- 
ing for  permission  to  do  more,  for  they  cried,  "  Let  him  be  crucified." 
Behold  ye,  how  he  has  left  all  tbe  honour  of  his  Father's  honse,  and 
his  own  glory  among  the  angels,  and  iiera  he  stands  with  a  mock  robe, 
a  mimic  sceptre,  and  a  thorny  crown,  the  bntt  of  ridicule,  scoffed  at  by 
all  1    X«t  this  most  be,  because  sin  is  a  Bhaneftd  thing,  and  a  part  of 


268  METROPOLITAN  TABBBKAOLE  PULPIT. 

the  penalty  of  sin  is  shames  as  they  will  know  who  shall  wake  np  in  the 
day  of  judgment  to  eyerlasting  contempt.  Shame  fell  on  Adun  when 
he  sinned,  and  then  and  there  he  knew  that  he  was  naked ;  and  now 
shame  has  come  down  in  a  tremendous  hail  upon  the  head  of  the  Second 
Adam,  the  substitute  for  shamefid  man,  and  he  is  coYered  with  con- 
tempt. ''  All  they  that  see  me  laugh  me  to  scorn."  It  is  hard  to  say 
M'iiether  cruelty  or  mockery  had  most  to  do  with  the  person  of  our 
Ij0j;d  at  Gabbatha ;  but  by  enduring  these  two  things  tc^ther  he  laid 
on  an  immoyable  foundation  the  comer  stone  of  his  .dominion  of  love 
<and  grace.  How  could  he  have  been  the  king  of  a  redeemed  people  if 
he  had  not  thus  redeemed  them  ?  He  miglit  have  been  lord  oTer  a  people 
doomed  to  die,  the  stem  mler  of  a  people  who  continued  in  sin,  and 
would  so  continue  till  they  perished  for  ever  from  his  presence ;  but  no 
such  a  kii^om  did  he  seek ;  he  sought  a  kingdom  over  hearts  that 
should  etemally  be  under  obligation  to  him,  hearts  that,  being  redeemed 
from  the  lowest  hell  by  his  atoning  death,  would  for  eyer  loye  him  with 
the  utmost  feryency.  His  sorrow  secured  his  power  to  saye,  his  shame 
endowed  him  with  the  right  to  bless. 

'*  Behold  your  King."  Look  at  him  with  steady  eye  and  see  what  a 
King  he  now  is  hy  right  of  benefit  conferred.  Behold^  he  hath  pat  away 
sin  for  eyer  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself,  and  therefore  all  the  ransomed 
ones  agree  that  he  should  be  king  who  smote  the  great  dragon  which 
dcYoured  the  nations.  Behold  by  his  stooping  to  shame  he  hath  de- 
throned Satan,  who  was  the  prince  of  this  world;  and  who  shonU 
occupy  the  throne  but  he  who  has  won  it,  and  cast  out  the  strong  one 
who  mled  aforetime.  Christ  has  done  more  for  men  than  the  prince 
of  darkness  could  or  would,  for  he  has  died  for  them,  and  so  be  has 
eamed  a  just  supremacy  oyer  all  grateful  hearts.  As  for  death,  Jesos, 
by  yielding  to  death,  has  conquerod  it.  Let  him  be  crowned  with  the 
victor's  wreath  who  has  destroyed  the  world's  destroyer.  In  his  shame 
you  also  see  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ftilfilling  the  law  and  making  it 
honourable.  He  who  could  honour  that  law,  which  else  would  miye 
cursed  us,  deseryeth  to  have  all  honour  and  homage  paid  to  him  by  the 
sons  of  men,  whom  he  has  rescued  from  the  curse,  xon  see,  then,  our 
Jjord,  when  he  put  on  the  old  red  cloak,  and  submitted  his  brows  to  be 
environed  with  thorns,  was  really  establishing  for  himself  an  empire  the 
foundations  of  which  shall  never  be  shaken :  he  was  performing  that 
saving  work  which  has  made  him  king  among  sinners  whom  he  saves, 
and  Lord  of  the  kingdom  of  grace,  which  through  his  death  is  bestowed 
upon  men. 

Note  this,  too,  that  men  are  kings  among  their  fellows  when  they  can 
show  deep  sympathy ^  and  give  substantial  succour.  He  who  can  sym- 
])iithise  wins  power  of  the  best  sort,  not  coarse  force,  but  refined  apiritaal 
influence.  For  this  cause  our  Loi-d  was  afflicted,  as  yon  see  him 
afflicted,  that  he  might  have  sympathy  with  you  in  your  direst  grief, 
and  in  your  most  grievous  dishonour.  'As  the  children  were  partaken 
of  flesh  and  blood,  he  himself  also  took  part  of  the  same,  and  as  Umj 
inust  suffer,  so  the  Captain  of  their  salvation  was  made  perfect  by  saflfor- 
iug.  This  gives  him  his  glorious  power  over  u&  He  is  a  faithful  high 
priest,  for  he  can  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities,  mi 
this  ability  to  enter  into  our  infirmities  and  sorrows  makes  him  sapremo 


ECOB  SEX.  2GU 

i:\  our  hearts.  Look  at  your  King  in  pain  and  luockcry,  and  see  how 
royal  he  is  to  your  htart !  Sow  eoTercignly  he  coramandB  your 
heart  to  rejoice,  AVith  what  regal  power  he  commands  your  fean 
to  lie  stiii,  and  bow  obediently  yonr  despondency  yields  to  hia  word. 
Now,  as  it  is  with  yon,  ao  is  it  on  a  larger  scale  in  the  world, 
Tlic  Bufferim;  nntions  will  yet  see  their  trae  aetiverer  in  their  suffer- 
ing Lord.  That  scoptrc  of  u  rued  will  secure  him  power  far  greater 
tliaii  n  rod  of  iron.  His  lo\c  to  man  is  proved  b;  bis  Buffering  to 
the  defttli  on  their  behnlf,  and  this,  when  toe  Holy  Ghost  hath  made 
men  wise,  shall  Iw  to  the  myTiads  of  our  race  the  reasou  (br  proclaiming: 
bim  Ijord  of  all.  The  kings  and  princes  who  rale  mankind  by  reasou 
of  their  descent  or  by  the  force  of  arms  have  bnt  the  names  of  kings, 
the  trae  kings  are  the  great  Iteoefaotors.  The  heroea  are  onr  kings 
ofter  all.  We  look  upon  tiioac  as  royal  who  csan  risk  their  lives  for 
their  fellow  men,  to  win  them  liberty,  or  to  teach  them  truth.  The 
nee  forgets  its  masters,  but  it  lemembeTS  its  Mends.  Earth,  but  for 
Jesus,  bad  been  a  vast  prison,  and  men  a  race  of  condemned  criminals, 
but  he  who  stands  before  us  in  Oabbatha,  in  all  his  shame  and  grief, 
hath  delivered  us  from  our  lost  estate,  and  therefore  he  most  be  Kiog. 
Who  shall  say  him  nay  ?  If  Iotc  must  ultimately  triumph  ;  if  disinter- 
ested self-Eocrilict'  must  obtain  homage,  then  Jesns  is  and  shall  be  King. 
If  eventually  when  the  morning  breaketh  and  man's  heart  is  purged 
trota  the  prejudice  and  injustice  occasioned  by  sin,  the  might  shall  be 
vith  the  right,  and  truth  must  prevail ;  then  Jesus  must  reign.  The 
eternal  fitness  of  things  demands  that  the  best  should  be  highest,  that 
be  who  does  men  moat  service  ehonld  be  most  honoured  amcHig  them ;  in 
a  word,  that  ho  who  was  made  nothing  of  for  man's  sake  should  become 
everything  to  him.  Sue  you,  then,  bow  the  crown  of  thorns  is  mother 
to  the  crown  whidi  Jesus  wears  in  his  church  I  The  scarlet  robe  is  the 
purchase  price  of  the  vesture  of  universal  sovereignty,  and  the  mock 
Bceptrc  of  reed  is  the  precursor  of  the  rod  of  nations  wherewith  the 
whole  earth  will  yet  be  ruled,  "  Behold  your  King,"  and  see  the 
sources  of  his  mediatorial  power, 

II.  0  you  who  see  in  your  bleeding  and  rejected  Lord  "  the  King 
in  his  beauty,"  come  ye  hither  yet  again  and  bbhold  hiu  claiming 
TOUK  HOUAOE.  See  in  whnt  way  he  comes  to  win  your  hearts.  What 
is  his  right  to  be  King  over  you  ?  There  are  many  rights,  for  on  his 
head  are  many  crowns,  hut  the  most  commanding  right  which  Jesus 
has  over  any  of  us  is  signified  by  that  crown  of  thorns:  it  is  t^e  right 
^  suprtiHB  love  :  he  lored  us  as  none  other  could  have  loved.  If  we 
put  ail  the  loves  of  parents  and  of  wives  and  children  all  together,  we 
can  never  rival  even  for  a  moment  the  love  of  Christ  to  us,  and  when- 
ever that  love  touches  uh,  so  that  we  feel  its  power,  we  crown  him  King 
directly.  Who  can  resist  his  cliaims  ?  One  look  of  his  eyes  overpowers 
OS.  See  with  your  heart  those  eyes  when  they  are  full  of  tears  for 
perishing  sinnere,  and  you  arc  a  willing  subject.  One  look  at  his 
bleesod  person  subjected  to  scourging  and  spitting  for  our  sakes  will 

E'vc  ns  more  idea  of  his  crown  rights  than  anything  besides.  Look  into 
B  pierced  heart  as  it  pours  out  its  life-flood  for  us,  and  all  disputes 
about  his  sovereignty  are  endt-d  in  onr  hearts.  We  owu  him  Lord  be- 
cause we  Bee  how  he  loved.     How  conld  we  do  otherwise  ?    Love  in 


270  METROPOLITAN  TABBRNACLE  PULPIT. 

p.ctioD,  or  ratlier  love  sufEering^  carries  an  omnipotence  abont  it.  Behold 
what  his  love  endured,  and  so  ^'  Behold  your  Eng." 

JcBus  in  the  garb  of  mockery,  marred  with  traces  of  his  pain,  also 
reminds  us  of  his  complete  purchase  of  us  by  his  deeds  and  death. 
**  Yc  are  not  your  own,  ye  are  bought  with  a  price."  Behold  your 
Iving,  and  see  the  price.  It  is  the  price  of  suffering  immense,  of  ghame 
most  cruel.  It  is  an  incalculable  price,  for  the  Lord  of  all  is  aet  at 
nought.  It  is  an  awful  price,  for  he  who  only  hath  immortality  yields 
himself  to  die.  It  is  the  price  of  blood.  It  is  the  scourging  and  bleed- 
ing and  woe  of  Jesus ;  nay,  it  is  himself.  If  you  wouM  see  the  price 
of  your  redemption, ''  Behold  your  King."  'Tis  he  that  hath  redeem^ 
us  unto  Ood  oy  his  blood,  he  that  ''  made  himself  of  no  repntatioHy 
and  took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant ;  and  being  found  in  ftahkm 
as  a  man,  humbled  himself,  and  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the 
death  of  the  cross."  You  own  that  claim,  the  love  of  Ohrist  coa- 
straineth  you ;  you  feel  that  henceforth  ^u  live  for  him  idone,  lud 
count  it  joy  that  in  all  respects  he  should  reign  over  you  with  unlimited 
sway. 

Jesus,  because  he  suffered,  hath  acquired  a  power  over  ns  whidh  is 
far  superior  to  any  which  could  be  urged  in  courts  of  law,  or  enfocced 
by  mere  power,  for  our  hearts  have  voluntarilv  surrendered  to  him  and 
ji^iven  him  the  right  of  our  free  submtsnon,  charmed  to  own  alfegiance 
to  such  imperial  love.  Is  it  possible  for  a  believer  to  look  at  the  Lcxd 
Jesus  Christ  without  feeling  that  he  longs  to  be  more  and  more  hia 
servant  and  disciple?  Do  vou  not  thirst  to  serve  him?  Can  yoa 
liehold  him  in  the  depth  oi  shame  without  pining  to  lift  him  op  to  the 
heights  of  gloiT?  Can  you  see  him  stooping  thus  for  yon  witboat 
pleading  with  God  that  a  glorious  high  throne  may  be  his,  and  thafc  he 
may  sit  upon  it  and  rule  all  the  hearts  of  men  ?  There  is  no  need  to 
argue  out  the  right  of  King  Jesus,  for  you  feel  it ;  his  love  has  canied 
you  by  storm,  and  it  holds  fast  its  capture.  You  cannot  have  a  Savionr 
without  his  being  your  King,  and  seeing  such  a  Saviour  in  soch  a  con- 
dition, you  cannot  even  thmk  of  him  without  delighting  to  aaoribe  to 
him  all  power  and  dominion.  Could  we  escape  hu  sway  it  would  be 
bondage  to  us,  and  when  we  at  any  time  fail  to  own  it,  it  is  our  wont 
affliction. 

'' Behold  your  King,"  then,  for  he  himself  is  his  own  claim  to  yonr 
obedience.  Sec  what  he  suffered  for  you,  my  brethren,  and  hencefivth 
never  draw  back  from  any  labour,  shame,  or  suffering  for  his  dear  sake. 
*'  Behold  your  King,"  and  reckon  to  be  treated  like  him.  Do  you 
( xpcct  to  be  crowned  with  gold  where  he  was  crowned  witii  thorns? 
Shall  lilies  grow  for  you  and  briars  for  him  ?  Never  again  be  aahamed 
to  own  his  glorious  name,  unless  indeed  you  can  be  so  vile  as  to  prove  a 
(raitor  to  such  a  Lord.  See  to  what  shame  he  was  put,  ana  leam 
irom  him  to  despise  all  shame  for  his  truth's  sake.  Shall  the  disciple 
be  above  his  master,  or  the  servant  above  his  lord  ?  If  they  have  thos 
maltreated  the  master  of  the  house,  what  shall  they  do  to  the  boiue- 
hold  ?  Let  us  reckon  upon  our  share  of  this  treatment,  and  by  aooepting 
it  prove  to  all  men  ihat  the  despised  and  rejected  of  men  is  reaJlj  the 
King  over  us,  and  that  the  subjects  blush  not  to  be  like  their  monarqh. 
Even  though  the  cost  be  all  the  shame  the  world  can  possibly  pdv 


k 


EOOE  BEX.  271 

1 118,  or  all  the  sufferiiig  that  flesh  and  blood  can  in  any  condition 
ire,  letna  be  fiuthfiil  in  onr  loyalty^  and  cry,  ''Who  shall  separate 
Bball  persecntion,  or  distress,  or  tribulation  divide  ns  from  onr 
g  ?  Nay,  in  all  these  things  we  are  more  than  conquerors.  Sling 
;rie&y  thon  art  Eang  of  my  soul  I  0  Eling  of  shame,  thou  art 
>lute  monarch  of  my  heart.  Thou  art  King  bv  right  ^vine,  and 
g  by  mine  own  roluntary  choice.  Other  lords  have  had  dominion 
r  VB,  but  nowy  since  thou  hast  revealed  thyself  after  this  &shion,  thy 
16  onlv  shall  govern  our  spirit."  Do  you  not  see,  then,  that  Jesus 
ie  Pilate  levealB  his  claim  in  the  appearance  which  he  wears.  '*  Be- 
l  jour  King.'' 

iL    'rBehold  your  King,"  for  a  third  time,  that  you  may  see  him 
BUING  HIS  DOiOKiOKa.    Dressed  in  robes  of  scorn,  and  with  a  visage 
"ried  with  pain,  he  comes  forth  conquering  and  to  conquer.    This  is 
teiy  apparent  at  a  superficial  elance,  for  he  is  not  anraved  like  a  man 
far.    You  eee  no  sword  upon  nis  thigh,  nor  bow  in  his  hand.    No 
f  tfareatenings  fell  from  his  lips,  nor  does  he  speak  with  eloquent 
mmxoL    He  is  unarmed,  yet  victorious  ;  is  silent,  but  yet  conquer- 
.    in  this  garb  he  goeth  forth  to  war.    His  shame  is  his  armour,  and 
BofoingB  are  his  battle  aza     How  say  you?    How  can  it  be  so  ? 
leak  no  fiction,  but  sober  fact,  and  it  shall  be  proved, 
fiarianaries  have  gone  forth  to  win  t?ie  heathen  for  Christ,  and  they 
^aonmenced  with  the  uncivilized  sons  of  sin  by  telling  them  that  there 
'Qod,  and  that  he  is  great  and  just :  the  people  have  listened  unmoved, 
Mveonly  answered,  *'  Dost  thou  think  we  know  not  this?"    Then 
r  haverooken  of  sin  and  its  punishment,  and  have  foretold  the  coming 
lie  Lora  to  judgment,  but  still  the  people  stirred  not,  but  coolly  said, 
Ka  true,"  and  then  went  on  their  way  to  live  in  sin  as  before.   At  last 
Be  earnest  men  have  let  ML  the  blessed  secret,  and  spoken  of  the  love 
shod  in  giving  his  only  begotten  Son,  and  th^  have  begun  to  tell  the 
ry  of  the  matchless  griefs  of  Immanuel.    Then  have  the  dry  bones 
red,  then  have  the  deaf  begun  to  hear.    They  tell  us  that  they  had 
long  told  the  story  before  they  noticed  that  eyes  were  fastened  on 
m,  and  that  countenances  were  beaming  with  interest  which  had 
n  listless  before,  and  they  have  said  to  themselves,  "  Why  did  we  not 
in  with  this?"    Ay,  why  indeed?  for  this  it  is  that  touches  men's 
rta.    Olurist  crucified  is  the  conqueror.    Not  in  his  robes  of  glory 
B  hesubdue  the  heart,  but  in  his  vestments  of  shame.    Not  as  sitting 
m  the  throne  does  he  at  first  gain  the  faith  and  the  affections  of  sinners, 
as  bleeding,  suffering,  and  dying  in  their  stead.    "  God  forbid  that 
lonld  glorv,"  said  the  apostle,  "  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
•ist";  ana  though  every  theme  that  is  connected  with  the  Saviour 
lit  to  play  its  part  in  our  ministry,  yet  this  is  the  master  theme. 
>  atoning  work  of  Jesus  is  the  great  gun  of  our  battery.    The  cross 
ihe  mighty  battering-ram  wherewith  to  break  in  pieces  the  brazen 
M  of  human  prejudices  and  the  iron  bars  of  obstinacy.    Christ 
ling  to  be  our  jucfge  darms,  but  Christ  the  man  of  sorrows  subdues. 
^  crown  of  thorns  has  a  royal  power  in  it  to  compel  a  willing  allegiance, 
aoeptre  of  reed  breaks  hearts  better  than  a  rod  of  iron,  and  the  robe 
mockery  commands  more  love  than  Caesar's  imperial  purple.  There  is 
hing  like  it  under  heaven.    Victories  t^n  thousand  times  ten  thousand 


272  MKTl:OPOI.ITUI  TABtlUrUTI.K  PCLITT. 


have  been  achieTod  by  him  whom  Pilate  Ird  forth  to  the  multitnde,- 
Tidoriefl  diatinctly  lo  b«  ascribed  to  the  thorny  crown  and  TCBtuiv  of 
mockerj,  are  they  Dot,  written  in  the  book  of  the  wan  of  the  LotJ  ? 
There  will  be  more  sach  as  he  u  more  fKqnemlj  set  forth  in  hts  onii 
&ahioii,  and  men  are  bidden  in  the  Man  of  son-ows  to  behold  their 
King. 

Has  it  not  been  so  al  hooi*  as  well  as  among  tha  fur-off  heatlieD? 
What  winneth  meu'a  heurta  to  Christ  f>-da;  ?  What  bat  Christ  in 
shame  and  Christ  in  suffering  ?  1  appeal  to  jrou  who  have  been  newly 
conrertcd ;  what  has  bound  ;on  as  captives  to  Jesus'  chariot  ?  Whnt 
has  made  yon  henceforth  rov:  to  be  his  followei^,  ivjoicrug  in  his  nacit^  ? 
What  hnt  this,  that  he  bowed  his  head  to  the  death  for  yoor  sake  aad 
hath  redeemed  you  unto  God  by  his  blood  ?     Yon  know  it  ia  so. 

And  oh,  dear  thitJifn  of  Ood,  if  ever  yon  feel  the  power  of  Christ 
npon  yon  to  tbu  full,  till  it  utterly  overcomes  yon,  ia  it  not  tlie 
memory  of  redecmiug  j^riuf  which  doeth  it?  When  you  become  like 
haipg,  and  Jeanfi  is  (he  minstrel  and  laycth  his  finger  nmon^  yoiii 
heart-strings  and  bringeth  oot  nothing  but  praise  for  bis  dear  name, 
what  is  it  that  cliarms  jod  into  the  music  of  grateful  love  but  the 
fact  of  his  condescension  on  yonr  behall'  ?  Is  not  this  your  song,  that 
he  was  slain  and  hath  redeemed  you  unto  God  by  his  blood  ?  I  confea 
I  oonid  sit  me  down  at  his  cross'  foot  and  do  nothing  else  bnt  weei> 
nntil  I  wept  myself  away,  for  his  sufferings  make  my  soul  to  melt  within 
me.  Then  if  the  call  of  duty  ia  heard  I  feci  intensely  eager  to  plead  with 
others,  ready  to  make  nny  sacrifice  to  bring  others  under  my  Lord's 
dominion,  and  fnll  of  a  holy  passiou  that  even  death  could  not  qaencfa — 
all  this,  I  eay,  if  I  have  but  just  come  trom  gnzing  on  the  Redeemer's 
Mssion,  and  drinking  of  his  cup  and  being  baptized  with  bis  lM^ti«is. 
The  sceptre  of  reed  rules  as  nothing  else  ever  did,  for  it  rouses  eothnsiasD. 
The  thom<crown  commands  homage  aa  no  other  diadem  ever  did,  for  il 
braces  men  into  heroea  and  martyra.  No  royalty  is  so  all -commanding 
as  that  which  has  for  its  inal^'uia  tho  chaplct  of  thorn,  the  reed,  the  rmt 
cloak,  and  the  fire  wouuds.  Other  sovereignties  are  forced,  and  feigned, 
and  hollow  compared  with  tlic  sovereignty  of  "the  despised  of  men": 
fear,  or  cnstom,  or  self-inlerest  make  men  courtiers  elsewhere,  but  fer- 
vent love  crowds  the  courts  of  King  Jesus.  Wc  do  not  merely  say 
that  the  marred  countenance  is  the  moat  majestic  ever  seen,  but  we  have 
(bit  it  to  be  BO  on  many  an  occasion,  yea,  and  feel  it  to  be  so  now.  Do 
yoo  want  to  make  our  liard  hearts  soft  ?  Tell  us  of  Jeaua'  grief.  Would 
yon  make  ns,  strong  mi'U,  into  children  ?  Set  the  Man  of  sorrows  in  our 
midst ;  there  is  no  resiDtitig  him. 

Look  ye  also  at  backslidera  if  ye  would  see  the  power  of  the  demised 
Nazarene,  If  they  have  gone  away  ti-om  Christ,  if  they  have  become 
lokewarm,  if  their  hearts  have  become  obdurate  to  him  who  once  could 
charm  them,  what  can  bring  thorn  bock?  I  know  but  one  magnet 
whichin  the  hands  of  the  Holy  .Spirit  will  attract  these  sadly  fallen  ones : 
it  is  Jesus  in  his  shame  and  pains.  >Ve  tell  them  that  they  cruciRed  the 
Son  of  Ood  afresh,  and  put  him  to  an  open  shame,  and  tbey  look  on  him 
whom  they  have  pierced,  and  mourn  for  hiin.  0  ye  that  after  having 
Biffed  of  the  oommuuiou  cup  liaie  gono  to  drink  at  the  table  of 
Biwchiu,  ye  who  after  haiing  talked  of  love  to  Christ  have  foUowoi 


] 


'  BOOB  BEX.  273 

after  ihe  Inste  of  the  flesh,  ye  who  after  eingine  his  praises  have  blas- 
phemed the  sacred  name  witn  which  ye  are  iuuae(V— may  his  omnipotence 
of  bve  be  proved  in  yon  also.  What  can  ever  bring  you  back  but  this 
sad  reflection^  that  ye  also  have  twisted  for  him  a  crown  of  thorns  and 
caused  him -to  be  blasphemed  among  his  enemies?  StiU  the  merit  of 
his  death  is  available  for  yon :  the  power  and  efficacy  of  his  precious 
blood  have  not  ceased  even  for  yon,  and  if  you  come  bock  to  him — and 
oh,  may  a  sight  of  him  draw  you — he  will  receive  you  graciously  as  ( t 
ihe  fin^.  I  say  to  yon,  "  Behold  your  King,"  and  may  the  sovereignly 
of  bis  hnmiliaaon  and  suffering  be  proved  this  morning  in  some  of  you 
as  Toa  shall  come  bending  at  his  feet,  conquered  by  his  great  love 
ana  restored  to  repentance  and  &ith  by  his  marvellous  compassion. 
A  su?ht  of  his  wounds  and  bruises  heals  us,  so  that  we  grieve  at  our 
rebellions  and  long  to  be  brought  home  to  God,  never  to  wander  more. 

Ah,  dear  brethren,  we  shall  always  find,  as  long  as  the  world  standeth, 
that  among  saints,  sinners,  backsliders,  and  all  classes  of  men  Jesus 
Christ's  power  is  most  surely  felt  when  his  humiliation  is  most  &ith- 
ftiOy  declared  and  most  believingly  known.  It  is  by  this  that  he  will 
sabdne  all  things  to  himself.  If  we  will  but  preach  Jesus  Christ  to  the 
Hifldoo  it  will  not  be  necessary  to  answer  all  his  metaphysical  subtleties 
—the  sorrows  of  Jesus  are  as  a  sharp  sword  to  cut  the  Oordian  knot. 
If  we  will  go  down  amongst  the  degraded  inhabitants  of  Africa  we 
shall  not  new  first  to  civilize  them ;  uie  cross  is  the  great  lever  which 
lifts  np  fallen  men :  it  conquers  evil  and  establishes  truth  and  righteous- 
ness. The  most  depraved  and  hardened  learn  his  great  love,  and  hearts 
oi  stone  begin  to  beat ;  they  see  Jesus  suffering  to  the  death  out  of 
nothing  else  but  love  to  them,  and  they  are  touched  b^  it,  and  eagerly 
enquire  what  they  must  do  to  be  saved  by  such  a  Saviour.  The  Holy 
l^irit  worketh  in  the  minds  of  many  by  setting  forth  the  great  love 
and  grief  of  Jesus.  May  we  who  are  his  ministers  have  great  faith  in 
his  cross,  and  henceforth  say,  as  we  preach  the  suffering  Jesus,  *'  Be- 
holdyonr  King." 

IV.  In  the  fourth  place  I  beg  you  to  "  Behold  your  King  "  setting 
FORTH  THB  PATTERN  OP  HIS  KINGDOM.  When  you  look  at  him  you 
are  strack  at  once  with  the  thought  that  if  ho  be  a  king  he  is  like  no 
other  monarch,  for  other  kings  arc  covered  with  rich  apparel  and 
snrnmnded  with  pomp,  but  he  has  none  of  these.  Their  glories  usually 
ccmsist  in  wars  by  which  they  have  made  others  suffer,  but  his  glorv  is 
his  own  suffering ;  no  blood  but  his  own  has  flowed  to  make  him 
illnsbrions.  He  is  a  king,  but  he  cannot  be  put  in  the  list  of 
sovereigns  such  as  the  nations  of  the  earth  are  compelled  to  serve. 
When  Antoninus  Pius  set  up  the  statue  of  Jesus  in  the  Pantheon  as 
one  of  a  circle  of  gods  and  heroes,  it  must  have  seemed  strangely  out 
of  {riaoe  to  those  who  gazed  upon  its  visage  if  the  sculptor  was  at  all 
trde  to  life.  It  must  have  stood  apart  as  one  that  could  not  be  num- 
bered with  the  rest  Neither  can  you  set  -him  among  the  masters  of  the 
hmnan  race  who  have  crushed  mankind  beneath  their  iron  heel.  He 
was  no  Caesar ;  you  cannot  make  him  appear  like  one  :  call  him  not 
autocrat^  emperor,  or  czar, — he  has  an  autnority  greater  than  all  these, 
yet  not  after  their  kind.  His  purple  is  different  from  theirs,  and  his 
erown  also,  but  his  face  differs  more,  and  his  heart  most  of  all.    ^'  My 


274  METROPOLITAN  TABBRKAOLB  PULPIT. 

kingdom,"  saith  he,  "  is  not  of  this  world."  For  troops  he  has  a  host  of 
sorrows,  for  pomp  a  surronnding  of  scorn,  for  lofty  bearing  hnmilily, 
for  adalation  mockery,  for  homage  spitting,  for  dory  s&me,  for  a 
throne  a  cross.  Yet  was  there  never  truer  lung,  indeed  all  kin^  are 
bat  a  name,  save  this  King,  who  is  a  real  ruler  in  himself  and  of  himself, 
and  not  by  extraneous  force.  Right  royal  indeed  is  the  Nazarene,  but 
he  cannot  be  likened  unto  the  princes  of  earth,  nor  can  his  kingdom  be 
reckoned  with  theirs.  I  pray  that  the  day  may  soon  come  when  none 
may  dream  of  looking  upon  the  church  as  a  worldly  organisation  oapeibh 
of  alliance  with  temporal  soTereignties  so  as  to  be  patronized,  directed, 
or  reformed  by  them.  Christ^s  kingdom  shines  as  a  lone  star  with  a 
brightness  all  its  own.  It  standcth  apart  like  a  hill  of  light,  sacred  and 
suUimc  :  the  high  hills  may  leap  with  envy  because  of  it,  but  ifc  is 
not  of  them  nor  like  unto  them.  Is  not  this  manifest  eren  in  the 
appearance  of  our  Lord  as  Pilate  brings  him  forth  and  cries^  **  Behold 
your  King  I"  ? 

Now  as  he  sets  beforo  us  in  his  own  person  the  pattern  of  his  king- 
dom, we  may  expect  that  we  shall  see  some  likeness  to  him  in  ms 
subjects  ;  and  if  you  will  ^aze  upon  the  church,  which  is  his  kiu^om 
^m  the  first  day  of  her  history  until  now,  you  will  see  that  it  too  is 
wearing  its  Purple  robe.  The  martyrs'  blooa  is  the  purple  yesture  of 
the  church  of  Gorist ;  the  trials  and  persecutions  of  oelieyen  are  her 
crown  of  thorns.  Think  of  the  rage  of  persecution  under  Pagan 
Rome,  and  the  equally  inhuman  proceedings  of  Papal  Rome,  and  you 
wQl  see  how  the  ensign  of  Christ  s  kingdom  is  a  crown  of  thorns ;  a 
crown  and  yet  thorns,  thorns  but  still  a  crown.  The  bush  is  burning, 
but  it  is  not  consumed.  If  you,  beloyed,  aro  truly  followers  of  Jesus, 
you  must  expect  to  take  your  measure  of  shame  and  dishonour,  and  you 
may  reckon  upon  your  allotment  of  griefis  and  sorrows.  The  **  Man  of 
sorrows  "  attracts  a  sorrowful  following.  The  lamb  of  Gk>d's  passoyer 
is  still  eaten  with  bitter  herbs.  The  child  of  Ood  cannot  escape  tibe 
rod,  for  the  elder  brother  did  not,  and  to  him  we  are  to  be  conformed. 
We  must  "  fill  up  that  which  is  behind  of  the  afflictions  of  Christ  for 
his  body's  sake,  which  is  the  churoh  "  (Coloesians  i.  24). 

Recollect,  howeyer,  that  Christ's  sufferings  as  a  pattern  were  not  for 
his  own  sins,  nor  brought  upon  him  as  a  chastisement  for  his  own 
faults,  so  that  the  sufferings  which  belong  to  his  kingdom  are  those 
which  ar^  endured  for  his  name  and  for  his  glory's  sake,  and  for  l^e 
good  of  others.  If  men  he  in  prison  for  their  own  crimes,  that  has 
nothing  to  do  with  his  kingdom  ;  if  we  suffer  for  our  sins,  that  is  no 
part  of  his  kingdom  ;  but  when  a  man  loseth  of  his  substance  for 
Christ's  cause,  layeth  out  himself  to  toil  eyen  unto  death,  beaiBth  con- 
tempt and  suffers  hardness  as  a  Christian — this  is  after  the  type  of 
Christ's  kingdom.  When  the  missionary  goeth  forth  with  his  life  in 
his  hand  among  the  heathen,  or  when  a  belieyer  in  any  way  diyesteth 
himself  of  comfort  for  the  good  of  others,  it  is  then  that  he  truly 
copies  the  pattern  set  him  in  Pilate's  hall  by  our  great  King.  I  say 
to  you  Christians  who  court  ease,  to  you  who  aro  hoarding  up  your 
gold,  to  yon  who  will  do  nothing  that  would  bring  you  unast  the 
criticism  of  your  fellow  men,  to  you  who  liye  unto  yonrselyes, — ^woaM 
it  not  be  irony  of  the  seyerest  kind  if  I  were  to  point  to  Jesus  befixo 


ECCE  REX.  275 

Pilate  and  say,  "  Behold  your  King."    Living  in  undue  luxury,  amass- 
ing wealth,  rolling  in  ease,  living  to  enjoy  yourselves !    Is  that  your 
King  ?     Poor  subjects  you,  and  very  unlike  your  Lord ;  but  if  there 
be  among  ua  those  who  for  his  sake  can  make  sacrifices,  we  may  look 
upon  our  King  without  fear.    You  who  are  undaunted  by  contempt, 
and  who  wouW  give  all  that  yon  have,  yea,  and  give  yourselves  to 
know  Jesus,  and  arc  doing  so,  to  such  I  say,  "  Behold  your  King," 
for  yon  are  of  his  kingdom  and  you  shall  reign  with  him.    In  your 
your  conquest  of  yourselves  you  have  already  Income  kings.    In  reim- 
ing  over  your  own  desires  and  carnal  inclinations,  for  the  sake  of  his 
dear  love,  you  are  already  kings  and  priests  unto  God,  and  you  shall 
reign  for  ever  and  ever.    He  who  is  ruled  by  his  passions  in  any  degree 
is  still  a  slave,  but  he  who  lives  for  God  and  his  fellow  men  hath  a  royal 
soul.    The  insignia  of  a  prince  unto  God  are  still  shame  and  sufH^ring : 
which  adornments  are  readily  worn  when  the  Lord  calls  him  so  to  do. 
In  Christ's  kingdom  those  are  peers  of  the  highest  rank  who  are  most  like 
their  Lord  and  are  the  lowest  and  humblest  in  mind,  and  most  truly  the 
servants  of  all.    The  secondary  princes  of  his  kingdom  approximate  less 
closely  to  him,  and  the  lowcryou  descend  in  the  scale  the  less  you  are 
like  him  in  those  respects.    Tiie  Christian  surrounded  with  every  com- 
fort, who  never  endured  hardness  for  Christ,  who  never  knew  what  it 
was  to  be  sneered  at  for  Jesus'  sake,  who  never  made  a  sacrifice  which 
went  so  far  as  to  pinch  him  in  the  least,  he,  if  indeed  he  be  a  Christian, 
is  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.    Proud,  rich  men  who  give  but  trifles 
to  Christ's  cause  arc  pariahs  in  his  kingdom,  but  they  are  the  chief  who 
are  willing  to  be  least  of  all,  they  arc  princes  who  make  themselves  the 
oflTscouring  of  all  things  for  his  name's  sake,  such  as  werc  the  apostles 
and  first  martyrs,  and  others  whom  his  love  has  greatly  constrained. 
V.  Our  concluding  remark  sliall  be,  "  Behold  your  Kin^  " — proving 
THE  cnsaiTAiNTY  OF  HIS    EMPIRE, — for  if,  bclovcd,   Christ  was  King 
when  he  was  in  Pilate*s  hands,  after  being  scourged  and  spit  upon,  and 
while  he  was  wearing  the  robe  and  crown  of  mockery,  when  will  he  not 
be  King?    If  he  was  King  at  his  woret,  when  is  it  that  his  throne  can 
ever  be  shaken  ?    They  have  brought  him  very  low,  they  have  brought 
him  lower  than  the  sons  of  men,  for  they  have  made  him  a  worm  and 
no  man,  despised  of  the  people,  and  yet  he  is  King!    Marks  of  royalty 
were  present  on  the  day  of  his  death.     He  dispensed  crowns  when  he 
was  on  the  cross, — he  gave  the  dying  thief  a  promise  of  an  enti-ance  into 
Paradise.     In  his  death  he  shook  the  earth,  he  opened  the  graves,  he 
rent  the  rocks,  he  darkened  the  sun,  and  he  made  men  smite  on  their 
breasts  in  dismay.    One  voice  after  another,  even  fh)m  the  ranks  of  his 
foes,  proclaimed  liim  to  be  King,  even  when  dying  like  a  malefactor. 
Was  he   a   King  then  ?    When  will  he  not  be  ICing  ?  and  who  is 
there  that  can  by  any  means  shake  his  throne  ?    In  the  days  of  his 
flesh  "  the  Kings  of  the  earth  stood  up,  and  the  rulers  took  counsel 
together;,  s&yingy  Let  us  break  his  bonds  asunder,  and  cast  his  cords 
from  us";  but  he  that  sat  in  the  heavens  did  laugh,  the  Lord  did  have 
them  in  derision,  and  Christ  on  the  cross  was  acknowledged,  in  Hebrew, 
and  Greek,  and  Latin,  to  be  still  the  King  of  the  Jews.    When  will  he 
not;  be  King  ?    If  he  was  King  before  he  died  and  was  laid  in  the 
gntVc,  what  is  he  now  that  he  has  risen  from  the  dead,  now  that  ho  has 


I 


276  MtTKOPOJ-lTAK  TABEBSAOLE   PUI^IT. 

vanquished  the  dcfltrojer  of  onr  race,  and  Uvea  no  more  to  die  ?  What 
is  he  now  ?  Ye  angels,  tell  whnt  glories  surround  him  now !  If  he  was 
King  when  he  stood  at  Pilate's  l>ar,  what  wiU  he  be  when  Pilate  Bbll 
stand  at  hie  bar,  when  he  ehaU  come  on  the  great  white  throne  and 
snniDion  all  mankind  before  him  to  jndgment  ?  What  will  be  hia  ac- 
knowledged sovereignty  and  his  dreaded  majesty  in  the  day  of  the 
Lord  ?  Come,  let  na  adore  him ;  let  ns  pay  our  humble  hom^  in  the 
courts  of  the  Lord's  house  this  day  j  and  then  let  us  go  forth  to  our 
daily  service  in  his  name,  and  make  this  our  strong  reaolve,  his  Spirit 
helping  us,  that  we  will  live  to  crown  him  in  our  hearts  and  in  oar 
lives,  in  every  place  where  our  lot  may  be  cast,  till  the  day  break  anJ 
the  shadows  flee  away,  and  wo  behold  the  King  in  his  beaaty  and  tlic 
land  that  is  very  far  off.  None  can  overturn  a  kingdom  which  is  founded 
on  the  death  of  its  King ;  none  can  abolish  a  dominion  whose  dew 
foundations  are  laid  in  the  t^ars  and  blood. of  the  Prince  himselC 
Napoleon  said  that  he  founded  his  empire  by  force,  and  therefore  it  tud 
passed  away ;  but,  said  he,  "  Jesus  lomided  his  kingdom  upon  love, 
and  it  will  last  for  ever."  So  it  most  be,  for  whatever  may  or  may  not 
be,  it  ia  wTitten — "  ffe  mini  rei^n." 

Aa  for  ufl,  if  we  wish  to  extend  the  Redeemer's  kingdom  we  must  be 
jirepared  to  deny  ourselves  for  Christ,  we  must  be  prepared  for  weari- 
ness, slander,  and  self-denial.  In  this  sign  we  conqnor.  The  croa 
will  have  to  be  borne  by  us  as  well  as  by  him  if  we  are  to  rei"o 
with  Jesus.  We  must  both  teach  the  cross  and  bear  the  cross.  He 
must  participate  in  the  shame  if  we  would  participate  in  the  gloir.  Ho 
thorn  no  throne.  When  again  shall  be  heard  the  voice,  "  Behold  your 
King,"  and  Jew  and  Gentile  shall  eee  him  enthroned,  and  surrounded 
with  all  his  Father's  angels,  witli  the  whole  earth  subdued  to  liii 
power,  happy  sliall  he  be  who  shall  then  in  the  exalted  Saviour  behold 
his  King.  The  Lord  grant  ns  this  day  to  bo  loyal  subjects  of  the 
Crucified  that  we  may  be  favoured  to  share  hia  gloij. 


POBTION  Oi'   SCHIPTURB    READ    BEFORE   SsttllON — John   xil.    1—30. 


Hymns  from  "Ouh  Owk  Htbin  Book" — 373,  293,  2S2. 


ft 


k 


Ju!t  Piihlishcd.     Price   One  Penny. 

":r  .A- 1  T  K     I  :!sr     o  H  h,  i  s  T:" 

AN  ADDRESS  TO  MEN   OF   BUSINESS 

Tire  FRrENDS'   MEETING  HOUSE,  BISIIOPSGATE  ErTRElF, 

Oh   Tuesday,  May  m,  1877, 

By     O-     131.    SFXJiRGI-EOlSr. 

k  AusABTm,  i,  Patoraoiter  Buildinga ;  and  kU  BookMUen. 


JKrfitoj«Iilmr  i^at^niaclf  f  tdpit 


ALL  THINGS  ABB  READY.  COME. 


t  h 


Deuvered  oh  Lord'b-Day  Mobkiko,  May  13Tir,  1877,  BT. 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THR    HETBOPOI.ITAH    TABERNACI.R,    HRWINQTON. 


"  ComP,  for  ■]]  thirgB  aro  now  leadj."— Luke  xiv.  IT. 

This  invitation  whs  first  of  all  made  to  the  Jews,  bnt  it  seems  to  me  to 
have  a  peculiar  appropriatcnesB  to  ourselves.  It  is  later  in  the  day  than 
tvhen  first  the  Loro  ivas  here,  and  therefore  the  snpper  time  is  evidently 
closer  at  hand.  The  shadows  lengthen,  the  snn  of  the  present  dispen- 
sation is  Bearing  its  setting;  hy  nearly  nineteen  hundred  years  has  its 
day  been  Ehorttncd  since  firat  the  Lord  sent  forth  his  servants  at  supper 
time.  The  fulnoaa  of  time  for  the  marriage  snpper  of  the  Lamb  must 
speedily  arrive,  and  therefore  it  behoves  us  to  be  more  than  ever  earnest 
in  delivering  the  message  to  the  invited  guests. 

And  if  all  things  could  be  Siiid  to  be  ready  even  in  our  Saviour's  day, 
we  may  say  it  witB  still  greater  emphasis  now ;  for  when  he  delivered 
this  parabie  the  Holy  Spirit  was  not  yet  given,  but  Pent«eost  has  now 
passed,  and  the  Spirit  of  Ood  abideth  with  ua  to  accompany  the  word, 
to  fill  it  with  power  and  to  bless  our  soula  as  we  feed  upon  the  tmtb. 
Very  emphatically  then  at  this  time  all  things  are  now  ready,  and  the 
snpper  awaits  the  guests.  I  pray  you  do  not  begin  to  make  cxcnscs, 
bnt  be  prepared  to  follow  na  when  we  bid  yon  come,  to  go  with  ns  when 
we  6eek  to  bring  yon  in,  or  at  least  to  yield  to  our  entreaties  when  with 
all  the  sacred  violence  »f  love  we  wonld  compel  yon  to  come  in.  We 
will  not  grudge  tlie  use  of  all  the  three  increasing  modes  of  peranasion 
so  hiii^'  iisvuu  uii.bnt  led  to  "Come,  for  all  things  are  now  ready." 

There  are  two  things  clearly  in  the  text,  and  these  have  a  close  re- 
lation to  one  another.  A  plain  invitation — "Come,"  and  then  a  forcible 
Vgament — "  for  all  things  are  ready."  The  argument  is  fetched  from 
the  divine  prerarations,  gathered  from  among  the  dainty  viands  of  the 
toni  feast  "My  oxen  and  my  fatiings  are  killed,  come  to  the  supper," 
'The  readiness  of  everything  on  God's  part  is  the  argument  why  men 
•bonld  come  and  partake  of  bis  grace :  and  that  is  the  point  upon  which 
No.  1,354. 


278  MRTROrOLITAir  TABCRKACLK  PULPIT. 

we  will  dwell  at  this  time — the  teadiness  of  Hnd  ftufe  of  mBtfsj  is  tte 
leasoa  why  men  should  come  to  it  at  once. 

I.  We  will  begin  our  meditation  by  laying  down  iihe  fint  atatemeoft 
which  shall  make  our  first  division  of  ai8a>nT8e»  namdy,  that  it  D 
God's  habit  to  have  all  things  rbadt,  wfaethor  finr  his  gnests  or 
his  creatures.  Tou  never  discover  him  to  be  behindhand  in  anything. 
When  the  guests  come  there  is  not  a  scramble  to  get  the  table  ananged 
and  the  fo(^  prepared,  but  the  Lord  has  great  mrethonght,  and  eveij 
little  point  of  detail  is  well  arranged.    *^  AU  things  are  r^y." 

It  was  80  in  creation.  He  did  not  create  a  single  blade  of  grass  upon 
the  face  of  the  earth  until  the  soil  and  the  atmosphere  had  been  pn- 
pared  for  it,  and  until  the  kindly  sun  had  leanied  to  look  down  npoa 
the  earth.  Imagine  vegetation  without  a  sun,  or  without  the  altcna- 
tion  of  day  and  night  But  the  air  was  full  of  light,  the  firnHioifiot 
upheld  the  plouds,  and  the  dry  land  had  appeared  from  out  of  the  seii 
and  then  all  things  were  ready  for  herb,  and  pknt,  and  tree.  Nor  did 
God  prepare  one  single  creature  that  hath  lire,  nor  fowl  that  fly  in  the 
midst  of  heaven,  nor  fish  that  swim  the  seas,  nor  beast  that  moveth  on 
the  dry  land,  until  he  had  prepared  its  habitat,  and  made  ready  its  i^ 
pointed  food  There  were  no  cattle  before  there  were  meadows  for  tinar 
grazing ;  no  birds  till  there  were  trees  for  their  nests^  no,  nor  even  a 
creeping  insect  till  its  portion  of  meat  had  been  provided.  No  opeatare 
had  to  wait  in  hungry  mood  while  its  food  was  growing ;  all  things  wers 
ready :  ready  first  for  vegetation,  and  then  afterwards  for  animal  lift. 
As  for  Adam,  when  God  came  to  make  him  as  his  last  and  noblat 
work  of  creation,  all  things  were  ready.  The  garden  was  laid  ont  upon 
the  banks  of  flowing  streams,  and  planted  with  all  kinds  of  trees,  ths 
fruits  were  ripe  for  his  diet,  and  the  flowers  in  bloom  for  his  deli^ 
He  did  not  come  to  an  unfurnished  house,  but  he  entered  upon  a  heme 
which  his  Father  had  made  pleasant  and  agreeable  for  his  dwelliiig. 
The  world  was  first  fitted  up,  and  then  the  man  who  was  to  govern 
that  world  was  placed  in  it.  '^  All  things  are  ready,"  the  Lord  seems 
to  say,  "  Spring  up,  0  herb  yielding  seed";  and  then  ''AD  thiqgs arB 
ready,  come  forth  ye  roes  and  hinds  of  the  field!"  and  then  "AD 
things  arc  ready,  stsmd  forth,  0  man,  made  in  mine  own  imaee ! " 

In  after  times  we  may  gather  illustrations  of  the  same  truth  ftom  the 
ways  of  God  with  men.  ThQ  ark  was  first  of  all  buQded,  and  the  varion 
creatures  were  gathered  into  it,  with  all  their  necessary  provender,  Ibr 
that  strange  voyage  which  they  were  about  to  take  :  and  then  the  Loid 
said  to  Noah,  "  Come  thou  and  all  thy  house  into  the  ark,"  "All  dungs 
are  ready,  come,"  was  his  voice  to  the  chosen  eight  as  they  entered  into 
the  ark.  There  was  no  need  to  tarry  any  longer,  every  preparation  wis 
made,  and  therefore  Ood  shut  them  in.  EveMhing  is  done  with 
punctuality  and  exactness  by  the  only  wise  Gtod.  The  selfisame  day  that 
a  thing  is  needed  it  is  prepared. 

Take  another  event  in  providence,  such  as  the  going  down  of  Israel 
into  Eg^t.  Ood  had  determined  that  Jacob  and  his  seed  should  sojourn 
awhile  in  the  land  of  Ham,  but  how  wisely  he  prepared  the  whole  matter* 
He  sent  a  man  before  them,  even  Joseph,  and  Joseph  was  thero  upon 

^ibe  throne  clothed  with  power  to  nourish  them  through  the  famine. 

^H|.had  been  there  years  before,  all  in  good  time  to  storo  the  wheat 


XBL  TBORia  JUtB  BBftin.    onCE.  279 

while  the  seven  years  of  plenty  lasted,  that  the;  night  be  well  fed 
during  the  seven  years  of  famine.  Goshea  also  wea  at  the  dispoaal  of 
Joseph,  so  that  the  flocks  and  hei'ds  of  Israel  might  dwell  in  that  ftt 
land.  Not  into  Egypt  shall  God's  Israel  go  till  all  things  are  ready ; 
and  when  all  things  aia  noAy  tliey  will  como  out  again  with  a  high 
hand  and  an  outstretched  arm. 

So  was  it  when  the  tribes  migrated  into  Oanniin  itself.  God  took 
them  not  to  the  promised  land  nntil  all  things  were  ready.  They  were 
made  to  wait  for  the  fitting  time,  for  the  Lord  &iid  "  The  iniquity  of 
the  Amorites  is  not  yet  full."  Not  till  the  inhabitjinte  of  the  Inndnad 
passed  the  bounds  of  mercy,  and  were  condemned  to'  die,  were  the 
Israelites  brought  npon  the  scene  to  be  at  once  their  esecutioners  and 
snccessors ;  and  when  the  tribes  came  to  the  river  Jordan,  God  had 
prepared  everything  for  them,  for  he  had  sent  the  hornet  before  them 
to  drive  out  the  people,  and  a  pestilence  also,  for  the  spies  said,  "  It  is  a 
land  that  eateth  np  the  inhabitants  thereof."  Tiic  Lord  God  had  gone 
before  them  to  fight  their  battles  before  tlioy  came,  and  to  prepare  a 
place  for  them,  so  that  when  they  entered  they  dwelt  in  bousea  which 
they  had  not  built,  and  they  gathered  the  fruit  of  olives  which  they 
had  not  planted.  They  came  to  a  land  that  flowed  with  milk  and 
honey,  a  land  in  a  fine  cultivated  condition,  and  not  a  wilderness  which 
with  hard  labour  must  be  reclaimed.  Israel  came  to  a  coantry  which 
was  as  the  garden  of  the  Lord,  whose  fruit  might  at  (mce  be  enjoyed, 
tor  they  ate  of  the  old  com  of  the  land  almost  as  soon  as  they  passed 
the  Jordan,  So  you  see  "  All  things  are  ready  "  is  a  proclamstion 
which  the  Loi-d  has  often  in  spirit  made  to  those  whom  Be  chooses  to 
bless. 

Now  the  fact  that  in  the  great  gospel  supper  all  things  ai'c  ready 
teaches  us  first,  that  Go^s  Umvghh  /jo  before  men's  comings.  "  Come, 
for  all  things  are  ready."  Not  "  If  you  come,  all  tilings  will  be  ready," 
bnt  "they  are  ready,  and  therefore  come."  Grace  is  first,  and  man  at 
his  best  follows  its  footstepa.  Long  before  we  ever  thought  of  God  he 
thought  of  ns  ;  yea,  befoi-e  we  had  a  lieing  and  ere  time  itself  began,  in 
the  I»Bom  of  the  Eternal  there  were  thoughts  of  love  toivards  those  for 
wtiom  the  table  of  his  mercy  is  now  spread.  He  had  planned  and 
arranged  ercrything  in  hia  august  mind  from  of  old,  he  had  indeed 
foreknown  and  predestinated  all  the  pro\T8ion8  and  all  the  gnesta  of 
his  snpper ;  all  tnings  were  settled  in  bis  eternal  covenant  and  purpose 
or  ever  the  earth  was.  Never  think,  oh  sinner,  that  thou  canst  out- 
strip the  love  of  God,  it  is  at  the  end  of  the  race  before  thou  art  at  the 
banning.  God  hath  completed  before  thon  bast  begun.  His  thoughts 
ue  before  ours,  and  so  are  his  nds,  for  he  doth  not  say,  "  Ail  things 
ire  planned  and  arranged,"  but  "All  things  oi'e  ready,"  Jesus,  the 
fTcat  sacrifice,  is  slain,  the  fountain  for  our  cleansing  is  filled  with 
blood  :  the  Holy  Spirit  has  been  given,  the  word  by  which  we  are  to  be 
instructed  is  in  our  hands,  and  the  light  which  will  illuminnta  that 
ucred  page  is  promised  ua  through  the  Holy  Ghost,  Things  promised 
Hight  to  encourage  us  to  come  to  Christ,  but  things  already  given  ought 
lo  DC  irresistible  attractions.  All  things  are  already  completed  by  the 
ncred  Trinity  before  we  come  to  cry  tor  mercy ;  tliis  should  make  ns 
rery  hopeful  and  eager  in  our  approaches  to  the  Lord.     Come,  sinn^ ; 


S80  HSTBOFOLITAM  TABSBKAOiB  POIJIT. 

come  at  once :  this  ought  to  enconr^e  thee,  eince  all  that  God  hns 
do  in  th;  BalTfttioi)  U  done  before  thou  hast  a  thought  of  him  or  tumnt 
one  foot  towards  hia  abode.    All  thinge  are  ready.    Come  I 

This  also  prmm  how  welamu  those  are  who  come.  If  yon  are  in- 
vited to  see  a  friend,  and  when  you  reach  the  place  yon  find  the  doer 
fast,  and  after  knocking  mnny  times  no  one  anawera,  for  there  in  no  one 
at  home,  yon  reckon  that  there  ia  eome  mistake,  or  that  the  iDTitation 
was  not  a  eiucere  one.  Even  if  yonr  host  ehontd  come  to  the  door  ui<i 
admit  yon,  bnt  Bhonld  evidently  bo  embarraased,  for  there  is  no  mea!  pro- 
Tided,  and  he  has  made  no  arrangements  for  your  rest  at  night,  yoa  boot 
detect  it,  and  like  a  wise  man  yon  quickly  move  off  Bomewhere  else,  for 
if  yon  had  been  welcome,  chings  wonid  have  been  prepared  for  jon. 
Bnt  oh,  poor  soul,  if  thon  comeEt  to  Ood  all  things  are  read;  fat  tliiiu 
entertainment. 

"  Spread  for  thee  the  festal  hoard. 
With  his  richest  daintjea  ctoretL" 

The  conch  of  rest  and  quietneas  is  prepared  for  thee.  All  thin^  an 
ready.  How  freely  doth  Jehovah  welcome  thee,  how  genuine  Is  the 
invitation,  how  sincere  the  desire  that  thon  sliouldst  come  to  feast  with 
him. 

So  much  upon  onr  first  remark,  it  is  tJie  habit  of  the  Lord  to  have  all 
things  ready  for  his  guests. 

II.  Onr  second  statement  is  that  this  readiness  bhould  bs 
AN  ARGUMENT  THAT  HIS  SADtTS  BHOCLD  OOMB  Continually  to  him  aad 
find  grace  to  help  in  every  time  of  need.  0  children  of  God,  I  wiU 
lift  the  parable  away  irom  the  immediate  use  which  the  Saviour  made 
of  it  to  employ  it  for  your  good.  Yon  know,  beloved,  that  whenewr 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  invites  his  people  to  come  to  him,  and  to  tuU 
of  his  bounty,  all  things  are  ready.  It  was  a  beautiful  scene  by 
the  sea  of  Tiberias  when  the  Lord  epake  to  those  who  had  been  toiling 
on  the  lake  at  fishing,  and  said  to  them,  "  Come  and  dine."  Thej 
were  willing  enough  to  dine,  bnt  they  were  busy  dragging  to  the  aiion 
those  great  fishes.  Remember,  when  they  did  land,  they  found  tlu 
invitation  to  be  no  vain  one,  for  it  is  wTitton,  "  They  saw  a  fire  ofcosli 
there  and  fish  laid  thereon,  and  bread."  How  the  coals  came  there,  and 
the  fish,  and  the  bread,  the  evangelist. does  not  tell  us,  bnt  oar  Lord 
would  not  have  asked  them  to  dinner  if  he  had  not  been  able  to  give 
them  a  warm  reception ;  there  was  the  fire  of  coals,  and  the  fish  laid 
thereon  and  bread.  Whenever  therefore  your  Lord  and  Master,  by  hia 
blessed  Spirit,  calls  yon  to  come  near  to  him,  yon  may  be  quite  son 
that  all  things  are  ready  for  your  immediate  enjoyment :  you  need 
never  pause  or  hesitato,  bnt  approach  him  without  delay.  I  want  to 
caution  you  against  replying,  '*  But,  Lord,  I  do  not  feel  ready,"  Th»t 
ia  most  tme,  but  that  is  not  an  argument  which  thon  sbouldst  use  to 
excuse  thyself  in  holding  back.  It  is  his  readiness  that  is  the  main 
thing,  not  thine,  and  as  all  things  are  ready,  do  thon  come  whether  thon 
feetest  ready  or  not.  I  have  heard  of  some  Christians  who  have  said, 
"  I  do  not  feel  in  a  proper  frame  of  mind  to  pray."  My  brother,  pray 
till  you  do.  Some  have  said,  "  I  do  not  thmk  I  shall  go  up  to  the 
^hoQie  of  God  to-day,  I  feel  so  unhappy,  so  cast  down."    When  sbonldat 


to    I 


ALL  T1IISG8  AltK  BEADT.     COHE.  281 

tboD  go  GO  mnch  as  then,  in  order  that  thou  mayest  find  ccmfort  ? 
"  Still,"  saith  one,  "  yon  would  not  have  me  aing  a  hjmn  wlien  of  hesry 
heart  ?"  Ay,  would  I  not,  I  wonldindeed,  I  would  naTe  thee  aing  thy- 
self np  from  the  depths  of  the  sea  where  all  Qod's  billows  hare  gone 
orcr  thee.  David  full  oflen  did  ho,  when  he  began  apBalm,  in  the  deepa, 
and  then  gradoitllj  rose,  and  rme,  and  rose,  till  he  was  in  a  perfect  rapture 
of  delight  before  the  psalm  was  over.  AU  things  are  ready  with  yonr 
Lord,  therefore  do  yon  como  whether  you  happen  to  be  ready  or  not. 

Nott;  the  times  when  this  truth  ought  to  naye  power  with  you.  All 
things  are  ready,  therefore  come  to  ttfi  storthouss  of  divine  premise. 
Are  you  in  spiritual  poverty  ?  Come  and  take  what  God  has  provided  for 
Toa,  for  all  things  arc  yours,  and  all  the  blessings  of  the  everlasting  hilla 
belong  to  all  the  people  of  God.  Are  you  needing  strength  ?  There  is 
a  promise,  "  As  thy  days  so  shall  thy  strength  be."  It  is  ready,  come 
and  take  it.  Art  thon  wanting  consolation  ?  Dost  thou  not  know  that 
all  things  are  ready  for  thy  comfort,  that  two  immutable  things,  wherein 
it  is  iitipossiblo  for  God  to  lis,  are  already  set  before  thee  ?  Come  thon, 
and  take  thy  eolace.  Ay,  remember  that  all  that  God  has  promised  be- 
longs to  all  those  who  believe  the  promise,  and  that  you  may  therefore 
come  at  all  times,  however  deep  your  need,  and  if  yon  have  but  faith  you 
fihall  find  the  special  sapply  for  the  special  want.  AU  things  are  ready, 
therefore  come  with  holy  confidence,  and  take  what  is  ripe  enough  to 
gather,  ripe  for  you. 

Come  next  to  the  imraj  seat  in  prayer,  all  things  are  ready  there.  The 
mercy  scat  is  sprinkled  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ.  The  veil  also 
is  rent  in  twain,  and  from  between  the  cherubim  Jehovah's  gloiy  now 
shines  forth  with  mildest  radiance.  Let  ns  therefore  come  with  bold- 
ness unto  the  throne  of  the  heaven^  grace,  because  eveirthing  there  ia 
ready  for  the  pleading  suppliant.  Thon  bast  no  need  to  bring  anything 
with  thoe  there.  Thou  haat  no  need  of  making  preparations  other  than 
the  Holy  Spirit  waits  to  give  thee  in  the  form  of  groaainga  which  cannot 
be  uttered.  Come,  child  of  God,  notwithstanding  thy  carelessness  and 
indifierence,  or  whatever  it  may  be  thou  haat  to  complain  of,  for  though 
thou  be  unready,  the  throne  cf  grace  ia  ready,  and  therefore  do  thou  draw 
near  to  it  and  find  the  grace  thon  ncedest. 

If  at  this  time  we  ieel  strong  promptings  towards  communion  with 
Christ  what  a  blessing  it  is  that  Christ  ia  always  ready  to  commnue 
with  his  people.  "Behold,"  saith  he,  "I  stand  at  the  door  and 
knock."  We  think  that  wt  stand  at  the  door  and  knock,  but  it  is 
scarcely  so,  the  ^ater  truth  with  regard  to  his  people  is  that  Jesns 
asks  for  fellowship  with  us,  and  tells  us  that  if  we  open  the  door,  and 
that  is  all  he  bids  his  people  do,  he  will  enter  in  and  sup  with  them, 
and  they  with  him.  Suppose  there  is  no  supper,  he  will  provide  it — 
he  hath  nil  things  ready.  The  Master  saith,  "Where  ia  the  guest- 
chamber?"  He  doth  not  say  "Where  is  the  feast?"  If  thy  heart 
will  he  the  gnest-chamber,  he  will  provide  the  sapper,  and  thou  shalt  sap 
with  him  and  he  with  thee.  At  whose  door  did  Christ  knock  according 
to  the  Scriptarcs  ?  It  was  ai  the  door  of  the  Laodicean  chureh,  at  the 
door  of  the  very  church  concerning  which  he  had  said,  "  Because  thou 
art  neither  cold  nor  hot,  I  will  spue  thee  out  of  my  mouth."  Therefore 
thoa  poor  Laodicean  behcver  that  art  here  this  morning,  if  thoa  haat 


)8S  SIETROPOLITAN  TADEKXiCLE  I'ln-PIT. 

any  promptings  toiviinis  Christ,  arJac,  for  all  thin^  are  ready,  aud  or 
erer  thou  art  iiwarc  thy  soul  shall  be  as  the  chariots  of  Amminadih. 
He  is  ready  to  rei'civc  ns  to  his  heart  of  hearts.  How  snwrtly  thu 
onght  to  constotiii  us  to  fly  into  the  arras  of  Jesus. 

I  think  the  enme  thoug'ht  ought  to  cross  onr  mtiids  with  roganJ  to 
every  daila  duly.  IVe  wake  up  in  the  morning,  but  wc  do  not  know 
exactly  what  lies  before  ua,  for  God's  proridence  has  constnctly  new 
revelations:  but  I  like  to  think  in  the  morning  that  all  thingti  an 
ready  for  my  patlnviiy  through  the  day,  that  if  1  will  go  ont  to  serve 
God  in  my  ministry  he  has  prepared  some  car  into  which  I  am  to  drop 
a  graciooB  word,  and  some  neart  in  the  fUrroivB  of  which  I  shall  mtf 
some  blessed  seed  cS'ectnally.  Behold  all  providence  with  its  mighty 
wheels  is  co-working  nith  the  seniint  of  the  living  God ;  only  go  for- 
ward in  zeal  aod  confidence,  my  brother,  and  thou  shalt  find  that  ercn 
step  of  thy  way  id  i-eady  for  thee.  Thy  Master  has  trodden  the  road 
and  marked  out  for  thee  the  houEes  of  refreshment  where  thon  pirt  tu 
tarry  till  thou  ahnit  come  to  the  celestial  city  itself,  and  the  hallowed 
spota  where  thou  fihalt  bring  glory  to  his  blessed  name.  For  a  useful 
hfe  all  things  ni-e  ready  Ibr  us. 

YeSjand  if  beyond  the  dailyservice  of  life  we  should  feel  a  promptiog' 
to  aspire  to  a  /lit/licr  dnjirt  of /loh'ncKs,  if  we  want  to  grow  in  grace  uai 
reach  the  fulness  of  the  stature  of  a  man  in  Christ  Jesus,  all  tilings  un 
ready  for  ua.  Ko  Christian  can  have  a  sacred  ambition  after  boliaca 
whicli  the  Lord  is  not  prepared  to  fulfil.  Thou  that  wiliest  to  be  lilu 
thy  Master,  thtm  that  aesirest  to  make  a  self-sacrifice  that  will  show  the 
power  of  his  grace  in  tliee,  the  Holy  Spirit  waits  to  help  thee,  all  thin|[S 
shall  work  for  tlicc,  for  all  things  iire  ready.  Come  therefore  withont 
fear.  , 

One  of  these  daj^s  it  may  be  that  you  and  I  ahull  ei  thcr  \>c  grown  Terr 
old,  or  else  dist}aac  will  lay  hold  upon  ua,  aTid  we  shall  lie  npon  the  aicK 
bed  watching  and  waiting  for  our  Master's  coming.  Then  then  shall 
suddenly  appear  a  messenger  from  him,  who  wiU  l.iring  us  this  word, 
"All  things  are  ready,  come  unto  the  supper,"  and  cloBlng  our  eyc» 
on  earth  we  shall  open  them  in  heaven  and  see  what  he  has  done 
who  so  sweetly  said,  "  I  go  to  prepare  n  place  for  you,  and  if  I  go  to 
prepare  a  place  Ibr  you  I  will  come  again  and  receive  yon  nnto  myself, 
that  where  I  am  tliere  ye  may  be  also."  Oh,  it  will  be  a  joyous 
moment  when  we  shall  hear  the  summons,  "AH  things  are  ready, 
(^nit  thy  house  of  clay,  thy  farm,  thy  merchandise,  and  even  her  who 
lies  in  thy  bosom,  for  the  mniTiagc  of  the  Lacnb  has  come,  and  thon  must 
be  there  ;  therefore,  rise  up,  my  love,  my  fair  one,  and  come  away.  The 
winter  is  over  and  post,  the  time  of  the  singing  of  birds  is  come  for 
thee,  all  thiogB  arc  ready,  come !"  I  feel  tempted  to  linger  here,  hat  I 
most  toai'  myself  away  from  that  point  to  pass  on  to  the  nest. 

III.  The  l-ERFECT  I1EA1IINE3,S  OF  THE  FEAST  OK  SIVtKK  HBBCT 
18  EVIDBXTLY     1.NTE2.UED  TO  BE  A  STROXO   ABOUUEKT  WITH  SIKSKBa 

WHY  THEY  8U01LD  COME  AT  OKCE.  To  the  sinner,  then,  do  I  address 
myself. 

Soul,  dost  tlion  desire  etenial  life?  Is  there  within  thy  spirit  a 
hnngeriiig  and  a  thirsting  after  such  things  as  may  satisty  thy  spirit  and 
make  thee  live  for  ever  E  Then  hearken  while  the  Master's  servant  give* 


ALL  THIN68  ABB  BEADY.  00M£«  28^ 

Jiee  the  inYitoti(»L  ^'Comey  for  all  things  are  ready/* — all,  not  somc^ 
imft  alL  There  is  nothing  that  thou  canst  need  between  here  and  heaven 
sat  what  is  proTided  in  Jesna  Ohrist,  in  his  person  and  in  his  work.  All 
things  are  ready,  life  for  thy  death,  for^Teness  for  thy  sin,  cloansincr 
br  uiy  filth,  clothing  for  thy  nakedness,  joy  for  thy  sorrow,  strength  for 
iiy  weakness,  yea,  more  than  all  that  ever  thon  canst  want  is  stored  up 
n  the  bonndlettB  nature  and  work  of  Christ.  Thon  must  not  say,  '^  I 
»Diiot  oome  becanse  I  have  not  this,  or  have  not  that."  Art  thou  to 
vepare  the  feast  ?  Art  thou  to  provide  anything  ?  Art  thou  the  pur- 
reyor  of  even  so  much  as  the  salt  or  the  water  ?  Thou  knowest  not 
t!f  troe  condition,  or  thon  wouldst  not  dream  of  such  a  thing.  The 
rieat  Householder  himself  has  provided  the  whole  of  the  feast,  thou 
mat  nothing  to  do  with  the  provision  but  to  partake  of  it.  If  thou 
aokest  oome  and  take  what  thou  lackest;  the  greater  thy  need  the 
^tester  reason  why  thou  shouldst  come  where  all  things  that  thy  need 
san  possibly  want  will  be  at  once  supplied.  If  thou  be  so  needfy  that 
iboa  hast  nothing  good  at  all  about  thee,  all  things  are  ready.  What 
fimldst  thon  provide  more  when  God  has  provided  idl  things?  Super- 
Inity  of  nau^tiness  would  it  be  if  thou  wert  to  think  of  adding  to  his 
*«tt  things  ";  it  would  be  but  a  presumptuous  competiii^  with  the  pro- 
ritkms  of  the  great  King,  and  this  he  will  not  endure.  All  that  tnou 
fanteat — I  can  but  repeat  the  words — ^between  the  gates  of  hell,  where 
boa  now  liest,  and  the  gates  of  heaven,  to  which  grace  will  bring 
kee  if  thou  believest, — ^all  is  provided  and  prepared  in  Jesus  Christ  the 
kvionr. 

And  all  things  are  ready,  dwell  on  that  word.  The  oxen  and  the  fat- 
ings  were  kill^ ;  what  is  more,  they  were  prepared  to  be  eaten,  they 
were  ready  to  be  feasted  on,  they  smoked  on  the  board.  It  is  something 
rhen  the  king  gives  orders  for  the  slaughter  of  so  many  bullocks  for  the 
^eaat,  but  the  ^ast  is  not  ready  then  ;  and  when  beneath  the  poleaxe 
;lie  victims  fall,  and  they  are  stripped  and  hung  up  ready  for  the  Gre, 
here  is  something  done,  but  they  are  not  ready.  It  is  when  the  joints 
ite  served  hot  and  steaming  upon  the  table,  and  all  that  is  wanted  is 
noQght  forth  and  laid  in  proper  order  for  the  banquet,  it  is  then  that 
ill  things  are  ready,  and  this  is  the  case  now ;  at  this  very  moment 
hoa  wilt  find  the  feast  to  be  in  the  best  possible  condition ;  it  was 
lever  better  and  never  can  be  better  than  it  is  now.  All  things  are 
"eady,  just  in  the  exact  condition  that  thou  ncedest  them  to  be,  just  in 
mch  condition  as  shall  be  best  for  thy  souVs  comfort  and  enjoyment. 
Wl  things  are  ready ;  nothing  needs  to  be  further  mellowed  or  sweetened, 
everything  is  at  the  best  that  eternal  love  can  make  it. 

But  notice  the  word,  **  now,*'  *^  All  tMngs  are  7ioiv  ready  " — ^just  now, 
\t  this  moment.  At  feasts,  you  know,  the  good  housewife  is  often 
Tonbled  if  the  guests  come  late.  She  would  be  sorry  if  they  came  half- 
m-honr  too  soon,  but  half-an-hour  too  late  spoils  everything,  and  in 
rhat  a  state  of  fret  and  worry  she  is  if  when  all  things  arc  now  ready, 
ler  friends*  still  delay.  Leave  food  at  the  fire  awhile,  and  it  does  not  seem 
10  be  **  now  ready,"  but  something  more  than  ready,  and  even  spoiled.  So 
loth  the  great  householder  lay  stress  upon  this,  all  things  are  nowTOfxdj, 
herefbre  come  at  once.  He  saith  not  that  if  thou  wilt  tarry  for  another 
icren  years  all  things  will  then  be  ready :  God  grant  that  long  before 


S81  METIIOPOLITAH  T.t^EBHAOI.B  PULPIT. 

that  space  of  titan  thon  mayest  hare  got  beyond  the  needs  of  pcraa&HOft 
by  haring  become  a  taater  of  the  feast,  bat  he  doth  say  that  they  axe  d 
ready  now,  jnat  now.  Just  now  that  your  hewt  is  so  heavy  and  yow 
mind  is  bo  careluse,  that  yoiir  spirit  is  so  wanderinc; — ali  chinga  an 
ready  now.  JobI  now,  though  you  have  never  thought  of  these  thinp 
before,  but  drop[>eJ  in  this  morning  to  see  this  large  assembly  voh 
BO  motive  whtUcvcr  aa  to  your  own  salvatioii,  yet  all  things  arc 
ready  runo.  Thoui;i]  your  Bins  are  as  the  stars  of  heaven,  and  yonr 
soul  trembles  undi.T  an  awful  foreboding  of  coming  judgment,  yet  "all 
things  are  now  luady."  After  all  yonr  rejections  of  Christ,  uf^r  the 
many  invitations  tliat  have  been  thrown  aw»y  upon  you,  como  ye  to  the 
supper. 

And  if  they  are  ready  noiv,  the  argument  ia  come  tiow,  while  still  all 
things  are  ready.  While  the  Spirit  Ungera  and  still  doth  strive  with 
men,  while  mercy's  gates  still  stand  wide  open,  that  *'  whosoever  will 
may  come,"  while  life  and  health  and  reason  still  are  spared  to  you  end 
the  miutstering  voice  that  bids  thcc  come  can  atill  be  beard,  come  nov, 
come  at  once— all  things  arc  ready — come !  Delay  is  as  unreason&ble 
as  it  is  wicked  now  that  ail  things  are  ready. 

Notice  that  all  things  were  ready  for  those  who  were  bidden.  They 
did  not  come,  bnt  they  were  not  mocked  when  they  were  bidden  to 
come.  The  fact  of  all  things  being  ready  proved  that  the  inritittioa 
was  a  sincere  one,  although  it  wa«  a  rejected  one.  There  are  some  who 
will  not  have  us  give  au  invitation  to  any  but  to  those  whom  we  beUevv 
are  sure  to  come,  nny,  in  a  measure  have  come ;  that  is  to  say,  they 
make  a  minister  to  be  a  mere  superfluity.  Why  need  he  come  anil 
invite  those  who  iiiivc  already  begun  to  come  ?  But  we  believe  it  to  be 
our  duty  and  our  givivilege  to  invito  the  whole  mass  of  mankind ;  sod 
even  those  who  will  Tiot  cumu  :  if  we  knew  they  would  not  come  »*c 
should  not  therefore  exempt  them  from  the  bidding,  for  the  seri'ant  was 
sent  to  bid  them  to  the  wedding  who  nevertheieae  all  with  one  consent 
began  to  make  e.Teiise.  They  were  invited,  and  earnestly  invited,  and 
all  things  were  ready,  though  they  came  not.  0  my  dear  hearers,  if 
yon  do  not  come  to  Clirist  you  will  perish,  bnt  you  will  never  be  aHe 
to  say  yon  were  not  bidden,  and  that  thcro  was  nothing  ready  fat 
you.  No,  there  stands  the  feast  all  spread,  and  you  are  sincerely  and 
honestly  bidden  to  come.  God  grant  thut  you  may  come,  and  come  U 
once. 

IV.  Now  I  am  going  to  pass  on  to  my  fourth  and  last  point,  which. 
may  God  bless  to  the  comfort  of  some  socking  soul.    This  tkxt  dis- 

TOSSS  OF  A  GREAT   DEAL  OF  TALE  ABOUT  TUB  BINNEH'b  BHADIKESS  OK 

UNREADINESS  1  bcgatiso,  if  the  raason  why  a  sinner  ia  to  come  is  he- 
caose  all  things  arc  ready,  then  it  ia  idle  for  him  to  say  "  But  I  am  not 
ready."  It  is  clear  that  all  the  readiness  required  on  man's  part  is  a 
willingness  to  come  and  receive  the  blessing  which  God  had  pro- 
vided. There  is  nothing  else  necessary;  if  men  are  willing  to  come, 
they  may  come,  tlity  will  come.  Where  the  Lord  has  been  pleased  to 
touch  the  will  so  that  man  has  a  desire  ton'arda  Christ,  where  the  heart 
really  hungers  and  tliirsts  aller  rightuuuaness,  that  is  all  the  readiness 
which  is  wanted.  All  the  fitness  he  requireth  is  that  first  you  feel 
your  need  of  him  (and  that  ho  gives  you),  and  that  secondly  iu  Ibeliug 


r 


AUi  THXHGS  ABE  ^VP;<;;i    C9?ffi,  9&^ 

mat  noed  of  liim  yoa  are  willitig  to  come  to  him,  Willingiiees  to  come 
18  everything.  A  readiness  to  believe  ia  Jesns,  a  willingneBB  to  caat  the 
8onl  on  him,  a  preparedness  to  accept  him  just  as  he  is,  beCanse  yon  feel 
that  he  is  jnat  the  Savionr  that  yon  need — that  ia  aU:  there  was  no 
other  readiness,  there  conld  have  been  none,  in  the  case  of  those  who 
irere  poor  and  blind,  and  halt,  and  maimeid,  yet  came  to  the  feast. 
The  text  does  not  say,  "  You  are  ready,  tiherefore  come,"  that  is  a  legal 
way  of  potting  the  gospel ;  but  it  says,  "  All  things  are  ready,  the 
gospel  is  ready,  therefore  you  arc  to  CMne."  As  for  your  readiness,  all 
die  readiness  that  is  possibly  wanted  is  a  readiness  vi^iich  the  Spirit 
gives  us,  namely,  willingness  to  come  to  Jesus. 

Kow  notice  that  the  nnreadiness  of  those  who  were  hidden  arose  ont 
of  their  possessions  and  out  of  their  abilities.  One  wonld  not  come  be- 
canse  he  had  bought  a  piece  of  land.  What  a  ^leat  heap  Satan  casts 
up  between  the  soul  and  the  Saf-iunrl  What  with  worldly  posseesions 
and  good  deeds  he  builds  an  earthwork  of  hnge  dimensions  between 
the  sinner  and  his  Lord.  Some  gentlemen  hare  too  many  acres  ever  to 
come  to  Christ :  they  think  too  much  of  the  world  to  think  mnch  of 
him.  Many  have  too  many  fields  of  good  works  in  which  there  ate 
growing  crops  in  which  they  pride  themselves,  and  these  canse  them  to 
feel  that  they  are  persons  of  great  importance.  Many  a  man  cannot 
come  to  Christ  for  all  things  because  he  has  so  much  already.  Others 
of  them  could  not  come  because  they  had  so  much  to  do,  and  coiUd 
do  it  well — one  had  bought  five  joke  of  oxen,  he  was  going  to  prove 
than  ;  a  strong  man  quite  able  t>M  ploughing ;  the  reason  why  he  did 
not  come  was  because  he  had  so  mnch  ability.  Thousands  are  kept 
away  ftom  grace  by  what  they  have  imd  by  what  they  can  do.  Empti- 
ness is  more  preparatory  to  a  feast  than  fnlness.  How  often  does  it 
happen  that  povei-ty  and  inability  even  help  to  lead  the  soul  to  Christ. 
Wtten  a  man  thinketh  himself  to  be  rich  he  will  not  come  to  the 
Savionr.  When  a  man  dreameth  that  he  is  able  at  any  time  to  repent 
anci  believe,  and  to  do  everything  for  himself  that  is  wanted,  he  is  not 
likely  to  come  and  by  a  simple  faith  repose  in  Christ.  It  is  not  what 
yon  nave  not  bnt  what  you  have  that  keeps  many  of  you  from  Christ. 
Sinftil  self  is  a  devil,  but  righteous  self  is  seven  devils.  The  man  who 
feels  himself  gnilty  may  for  awhile  be  kept  away  by  his  guilt,  bnt  the 
maa  who  ia  self-righteous  will  never  come :  until  the  Lord  has  taken 
his  pride  away  &om  him  he  will  still  refuse  the  feast  of  free  grace. 
The  possession  of  abilities  and  honours  and  riches  keep  meu  from 
coming  to  the  Redeemer, 

But  on  the  other  hand  personal  condition  does  not  constitute  an  un- 
fitness for  coming  to  Christ,  for  the  sad  condition  of  those  who  became 
siDGflts  did  not  debar  them  from  the  supper.  Some  were  poor,  and 
doabtJess  wretched  and  ragged;  they  had  nob  a  penny  to  bless  them- 
aelves  with,  as  wc  say ;  their  garments  were  tattered,  perhaps  worse, 
thej  were  filthy,  they  were  not  fit  to  be  near  respectable  people,  they 
Tonld  certainly  be  no  credit  to  my  lord's  toble ;  bat  those  who  went  to 
bring  them  in  did  not  search  their  pockets,  nor  look  at  their  coats,  bnt 
&ej  fetehed  them  in.  They  were  poor,  but  the  messengers  were  told  to 
bring  in  the  poor,  and  ther^ore  brought  them.  Their  poverty  did  not 
{Ottvent  their  being  ready  ;  and  oh,  poor  son),  if  thou  be  poor  literally,  or 


286  HICTEOPOLITjLN  TABBIUFAISdl  FDbFII. 

.poor  flpiritmdly,  neither  sort  of  povei'tj can  constitnto  aii  iiEiStoeafar 
divine  mercy. 

"  The  poorer  the  wreti-L  the  weloMnet  hcrt" 

If  thon  art  brought  to  thy  last  ponay,  yea,  if  that  is  spent,  »nd  if  tim 
hast  pawned  all,  and  thoa  art  left  in  debt  over  head  and  ears,  and 

tliiukeat  that  there  is  nothing  for  thee  bat  to  be  laid  by  the  heeluin 
prison  for  ever,  neverthclcaa  thon  niayest  come,  poverty  and  alL 

Another  claas  of  theui  were  maimed,  and  so  were  not  very  comely  io 
nppearance  :  an  iirm  had  been  lopped  off,  or  an  eye  hod  been  goo^ 
out.  One  had  lost  a  nose,  and  aaotber  a  leg'.  They  were  in  all  staga 
and  shapes  of  dismemberment.  Sometimes  we  turn  our  heads  away,  aai 
feel  that  wc  would  rather  give  anything  than  look  npou  beggars  who 
show  their  wounds,  and  describe  how  they  were  maimed.  But  it  did 
not  matter  how  badly  they  vfere  tliafigared ;  they  were  brought  in, 
and  not  one  of  them  was  rupulacd  Wzause  of  the  ugly  cuts  be  Lad  re- 
«cived.  •  So,  poor  soul,  however  Satan  may  have  torn  and  lopped  thie, 
iind  into  whatsoever  condition  he  may  have  brought  thoe,  so  that  thoo 
leelcst  ashamed  to  live,  nevertheless  this  is  no  unfitness  for  mming; 
jnst  as  thou  art  thou  mayest  come  to  his  table  of  grace.  Aloral  ds- 
Jigiiremeuta  are  soon  rectified  when  Jesus  takes  the  character  io  hani 
Come  thon  to  him,  however  sadly  thou  ni't  injured  by  sin. 

There  were  others  who  were  iuill,  that  is  to  say,  they  had  loet  a  1^, 
or  it  was  of  no  use  to  them,  and  they  could  not  come  except  they  hadi 
cniteh  and  crawled  or  hop]>ed  upon  it ;  but  nevertheless  that  was  oo 
reason  why  they  were  not  welcome.  Ah,  if  you  find  it  difficnlt  Io  ix- 
lieve,  it  is  no  reason  why  you  should  not  como  and  receive  the  grand 
-iibsolutiou  which  Jesus  Christ  is  ready  to  bestow  upou  you,  Laax 
with  donbtiug  and  distrusting,  nevertheless  come  to  the  supper  and  say, 
""  Lord,  I  beheve ;  help  thou  mine  unbelief." 

Others  were  blind  people,  and  when  they  were  told  to  come  thef 
could  not  see  the  way,  but  in  that  case  the  messenger  was  not  toM  to 
t^ll  them  to  come,  he  was  commanded  to  bring  them,  and  a  blind  man 
«/in  como  if  he  is  brought.  All  that  was  wanted  was  willingness  to  be 
led  by  the  hand  in  the  right  dirci'tion.  Now  you  that  cannot  fallj 
undei'stand  the  gospel  as  you  desire  to  do,  that  are  puzzled  and 
muddled,  give  your  hand  into  the  hand  of  Jesus,  and  be  willing  to  l« 
led,  be  willing  to  believe  what  yon  cannot  comiirehond,  and  to  grasp  ia 
<»nfidenee  that  which  you  are  not  able  yet  to  measure  with  yoor 
understanding.  The  blind,  howci  er  iguoi-ont  or  uninatnictcd  they  are, 
shall  not  be  kept  away  because  of  that. 

Then  there  were  the  men  in  the  highways,  I  suppose  they  were  bcggan ; 
and  the  men  in  the  hedges,  I  sappose  tbey  were  hiding,  and  were  pro- 
bably thieyes ;  but  nCTertbelcss  they  were  told  to  come,  and  tiwi^ 


ALL  THINGS  ABB  BEADT.     COME.  287 

lej  were  highwaymen  and  hedge-birdfl  even  that  did  not  pretent 
leir  coming  and  finding  welcome.  Though  outcasts,  o^casts,  spiritual 
ipsies,  people  that  nobody  cared  for,  yet,  whatever  they  might  be,  that 
rafi  not  the  question,  they  were  to  come  because  all  things  were  ready : 
ome  in  rags,  come  in  filth,  come  maimed,  come  covered  with  sores, 
(Mne  in  all  sorts  of  filthiness  and  abomination,  yet  because  all  things 
re  ready  they  were  to  be  brought  or  to  be  compelled  to  come  in. 

Now,  lastly,  I  think  it  was  the  very  thing,  which  in  any  one  of  these 
leople  looked  like  unfitness,  which  was  a  help  to  them.  It  is  a  great 
nMi  that  what  we  regard  as  unfitness  is  often  our  truest  fitness.  I 
rant  yon  to  notice  these  poor,  blind,  and  halt  people.  Some  of  those 
rho  were  invited  would  not  come  because  they  had  bought  some  land, 
rr  five  yoke  of  oxen,  but  when  the  messenger  went  up  to  the  poor  man 
in  mgs  and  said,  "  Come  to  the  supper,"  it  is  quite  clear  he  would  not 
wy  he  had  bought  a  field,  or  oxen,  for  he  could  not  do  it,  he  had  not 
i  penny  to  do  the  thing  with,  so  that  he  was  clean  delivered  from  that 
iomptotion.  And  when  a  man  is  invited  to  come  to  Christ  and  he  says, 
'I  do  not  want  him,  I  have  a  righteousness  of  my  own,*'  he  will  stay 
iwaj ;  but  when  the  Lord  Jesus  came  along  to  me  I  never  was  tempted 
n  that  way,  because  I  had  no  righteousness  of  my  own,  and  could  not 
lave  made  one  if  I  had  tried.  I  know  some  here  who  could  not  patch 
ip  a  garment  of  righteousness  if  they  were  to  put  all  their  rags  together, 
md  tins  is  a  great  help  to  their  receiving  the  Lord  Jesus.  What  a 
it  is  to  have  such  a  sense  of  soul  poverty  that  you  will  never 


}tay  away  from  Christ  because  of  what  you  possess. 

Then,  next,  some  could  not  come  because  they  had  married  a  wife. 
Wow,  I  think  it  is  very  likely  that  these  people  who  were  maimed  and 
cnt  about  were  so  injured  that  they  had  no  wife,  and  perhaps  could  not 
a^t  anybody  to  have  them.  Well  then,  they  had  not  that  temptation,  to 
stay  away.  They  were  too  maimed  to  attract  the  eye  of  anybody  who 
was  looking  for  beauty,  and  therefore  they  were  not  tempted  that  way. 
Bot  they  found  at  the  ever-blessed  supper  of  the  Lamb  an  everlasting 
wedlock,  which  was  infinitely  better.  Thus  do  souls  lose  earthly  joys 
and  comforts,  and  by  the  loss  they  gain  supremely :  they  are  thus  made 
willing  to  close  in  with  Christ  and  find  a  higher  comfort  and  a  higher 
joy.  That  maiming  which  looked  like  unfitness  turned  out  to  be 
Stness. 

One  excuse  made  was,  "  I  have  bought  five  yoke  of  oxen,  and  I  go  to 
prove  them."  The  halt  could  not  do  that.  When  the  messenger 
touched  the  lame  man  on  the  shoulder  and  said  '*  Come,*'  he  could  not 
say,  "  I  am  going  out  to-night  to  plough  with  my  new  teams.**  He  had 
lever  been  over  the  clods  ever  since  he  had  lost  his  leg,  poor  soul,  so 
;hat  he  could  not  make  such  an  excuse.  The  blind  man  could  not  say, 
'  I  have  bought  a  piece  of  land  and  I  must  go  to  see  it  ;*'  he  was  free 


'288  MKTROPOLITAN  TABBRHACLB  PTJLFIT. 

from  all  the  lusts  of  the  eye,  and  bo  far  was  all  the  moTQ  xeadj  tobe 
led  to  tiie  supper.  AVhen  a  soul  feels  its  own  sinftilneaB,  and  wietdied- 
ness,  and  lost  estate,  it  thinks  itself  unfit  to  oome  to  Christy  bnt  this  ii 
an  assistance  to  it,  since  it  prevents  its  looking  to  anything  else  but 
Christ,  kills  its  excuses,  and  makes  it  firee  to  scKXpt  «dvation  liy  gnocL 

Bnt  how  about  the  men  that  were  in  the  highway  ?  Well,  it  seems  to 
me  that  they  were  already  on  the  road,  and  at  least  oat  of  tl^  homo^ 
if  they  had  any.  If  they  were  out  there  b^gfaig;  they  were  the  more 
ready  to  accept  an  inyitation  to  a  meal  of  yictual%  for  it  was  that  tbej 
were  singing  for.  A  man  who  is  out  of  the  house  of  his  own  seii- 
righteousness,  though  he  be  a  great  sinner,  is  in  a  more  fsTounlde 
position  and  more  likely  to  come  to  Christ  than  he  who  prides  hinuelf 
in  his  supposed  self-righteousness. 

As  for  those  who  were  under  the  hedges,  well,  they  had  no  bonse  of 
their  own,  and  so  they  were  all  the  more  likely  to  come  and  fill  God'i 
house.  Men  do  not  take  to  hedges  to  sleep  under  them  as  long  as  tber 
have  CTcn  a  hovel  where  thcv  may  rest  their  head,  but  oh,  poor  soot 
when  thou  art  driven  to  such  aistrcss  that  thou  wouldst  fain  hide  under 
any  hedge,  when  thou  hast  nothing  left  thee  but  a  fearful  looking  fiirrf 
judgment,  when  thou  thinkest  thyself  to  be  an  outlaw  and  an  ootCMi 
before  6(m1,  left  to  wander  like  Cain,  a  wait  and  stray,  lost  to  all  sood, 
thou  art  the  very  man  to  come  to  Christ.  Come  out  of  your  heqgei^ 
then.  I  am  looking  for  you.  Though  you  hide  yourselves  away  jrt 
God's  own  Spirit  will  discover  you,  and  bring  ^n,  I  trust  this  THy 
morning,  to  feed  on  love  divine.  Trust  Jesus  Christ,  that  is  all,  just  as 
you  are,  with  all  your  unfitness  and  unreadiness.  Take  what  God  im 
made  ready  for  you,  the  precious  blood  to  cleanse  yon,  a  robe  of 
righteousness  to  cover  you,  eternal  joy  to  be  your  portion,  fieoem  tte 
gi-ace  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  oh  receive  it  now.  Qod  grsnfe  yon  mij. 
for  Jesus  Chnst's  sake.   Amen. 


Portion  op  iScuiptuiie  Read  before  Serkon — Luke  xiv,  1»— 85. 


I 

/ 


Hymns  from  "  Oun  Own  Hymn  Book  "—909,  504, 488  (t.  9—8). 


Just  Published.    Price  One  Penny. 

"F  -A.  I  T  H      I  IT      O  H  R.  I  S  T:" 
AN  ADDRESS  TO  3IEN  OP  BUSINESS 

DELIVKRKI)  AT 

THE  FRIENDS'  MEETING  HOUSE,  BISHOPSGATE  STREET, 

On  Tuesday,  May  Sih,  1877, 

Bit     O.     H.    SFXJRg-ESOlsr, 

■jh         Passmorb  k  Alabastbb,  4,  Paternoster  Buildings ;  and  all  DookBellen. 


^Sl^^ttfM  i^ob^nrnde  f  ttlpt. 


OUR  LOKD'8  QUESTION  TO  THE  BLIND  MEN. 


%     $* 


r  Loed's-Dat  Etenino,  May  13th,  1877,  ht 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THB   UETROPOLITAH   TABERKACLS,   HBWIHQTOH, 


n  lie  Memhert  of  the  regular   Coiigregaiia, 


'  Anil  nlien  Jeidi  d«p«rted  tlienco,  two  bUml  men  folloved  bim,  (xjitifr,  and  nying, 
Thoa  kh  of  DavM,  luTe  msrcy  on  na.  And  wbsii  hs  wu  come  into  uia  hoate,  the 
blind  msn  came  to  bim :  and  Jesiu  saith  onto  them,  Belisve  j/e  l^t  I  am  able  to  do 
Utu  y  They  said  unto  him.  Yea,  Lord.  Then  touched  he  their  eyes,Ba7iDg,  Accord- 
ing to  your  faith  be  it  onto  yon.    And  their  eye*  were  opened."— Matthew  ix.  27— M. 

In  OUR  own  streets  we  meet  here  and  there  with  a  blind  begg&r,  bnt 
they  swarm  in  Eastern  cities.  Ophthalmia  is  the  scourge  of  Egypt 
and  Syria,  aiul  Volney  declares  that  iii  Cairo,  oat  of  a  hundred  persons 
whom  hi!  met,  twenty  were  qnite  blind,  tea  wanted  one  eye,  and  twenty 
others  were  more  or  leas  afflicted  in  that  organ.  At  the  present  day 
every  one  is  struck  with  the  immense  number  of  the  blind  in  oriental 
lands,  and  things  were  probably  worse  in  our  Saviour's  times.  We 
ought  to  be  very  gT-atefiil  that  leprosy,  ophthalmia,  and  certain  other 
forms  of  disease  have  been  wonderfully  lield  in  check  amouf;  qs  in 
modem  times,  so  that  the  plugue  which  devastated  our  city  two 
hondred  years  ago  is  now  unknown,  and  our  Lock  hospitals  are  no 
longer  crowded  with  lepers.  Blindness  is  now  often  prevented,  and 
frequently  cured ;  and  it  is  not  by  any  means  an  evil  of  such  frequent 
occtirreoce  as  to  constitute  a  leading  sooi-ce  of  the  poverty  of  the 
country.  Because  there  were  so  many  blind  folk  in  our  Saviour's  day, 
and  so  many  gathered  around  him,  we  very  commonly  read  of  his  healing 
the  blind.  Mercy  met  misery  on  its  own  ground.  Where  human  sor- 
row was  most  conspicuous  divine  power  was  most  compassionate. 
Now,  in  these  days  it  is  a  very  usual  uiing  for  men  to  be  blind  spiritu- 
ally, and  therefore  I  have  great  hope  that  our  Lord  Jesus  will  act  after 
bis  former  manner,  and  display  his  power  amid  the  abounding  evil. 
I  troBt  l^ere  are  some  here  at  this  hour  who  are  longii^  to  obtain 
spiritual  sight,  longing  especially,  like  the  two  blind  men  in  our  text, 
to  see  Jesufi,  whom  to  see  is  everlasting  life.  We  have  come  to-night 
to  nieak  to  those  who  feel  their  spiritual  blindness  and  axe  pining  for 
the  light  of  God — the  Ught  of  pardon,  the  light  of  love  and  peace,  the 
No.  1,355. 


290  METBOPOLTTJIH  TABEIIKACLE  PITLPIT. 

fight  of  tib^esa  and  puritj.  Oar  eager  desre  ia  that  the  pat!  of  did:- 
nesBma;  bt  lifted,  that  the  divine  ray  may  fiad  a  pas;uge  into  liie 
soul's  inner  gloom,  and  c&UBe  the  night  of  nature  to  poaa  away  for  GTur, 
0  that  the  moment  of  dar-dawn  may  be  just  at  hand  to  rannj  of  jou 
who  are  "inl;  blind."  Immediate  illumination  is  the  bleesing  I  im- 
plore upon  yon.  I  know  that  truth  may  abide  in  tlie  memory  for  yewfi, 
and  at  last  product;  fruit ;  but  at  this  time  oor  prayer  is  for  immedi^ 
results,  for  sncb  only  will  be  in  accordance  with  the  natnre  of  the  ligh 
whereof  we  niectk.  At  the  first,  Jehovah  did  but  say,  "  Let  there  be 
light,"  and  there  wa«  tight ;  and  when  Jehovah  Jcfius  sojourned  hero 
below  he  did  but  touih  the  eyes  of  the  blind  and  straightway  tfaey  n^ 
eeived  sight.  O  for  the  like  speedy  work  at  this  hour  !  ilen  who  were 
led  by  the  hand  to  Jesua,  or  groped  their  way  along  the  wall  to  the  place 
where  his  voice  proclaimed  his  presence,  were  touched  by  his  finger  and 
went  home  withont  a  guide,  rejoicing  that  Jesus  Christ  had  opened  their 
eyes.  Such  marvels  Jesus  is  stiil  able  to  perform ;  and,  depending  upon 
the  Holy  Spirit,  we  will  preach  his  woni  and  watch  for  the  signs  fol- 
lowing, expecting  to  see  tlieni  at  once.  Why  should  not  hundreds  of 
yon  who  came  into  this  Tabernacle  in  nature's  blackness  go  forth  Iraii 
it  blessed  with  the  light  of  heaven?  This,  atanynite,  is  onr  heait's 
inmoBt  uid  uppermost  desire,  and  at  this  we  aim  with  concentrated 
foculties.  Oome  with  us,  then,  to  the  text,  and  be  at  once  friendlj 
enough  to  yourselves  to  be  willing  to  be  affected  by  the  truths  which 
it  wiD  bring  before  you. 

I.  First,  in  explaining  the  passage  before  us,  we  uinst  cjiII  your  atteii- 
tion  to  THB  MKKERS  themselves — the  two  blind  men.  There  is  some- 
thi^  about  them  worthy  of  imitation  by  all  who  would  be  saved. 

ne  notice  at  once  that  the  two  blind  men  were  in  dotonrighi  tanul 
The  word  which  describes  their  appeal  to  Christ  is.  "crying,"  and  l)j 
thia  is  Dot  meant  mere  speaking,  for  they  are  represented  as  ''crying 
and  eaying."  Now,  crying  implies  earnest,  energetic,  pathetic  im- 
ploring, pleading,  and  beseeching.  Their  tones  and  gestures  indicattil 
that  theirs  was  no  holiday  fancy,  but  a  deep,  passionate  craving.  Imagim: 

Sjnrselves  in  sach  a  case.  How  eaq^r  you  would  be  for  the  hwaiA 
ght  if  for  years  you  had  been  oompelled  to  abide  in  what  Milton  called 
"  the  evei^uring  dark."  They  were  hungering  and  thirsting  ofltf 
sight.  Now,  we  cannot  hope  for  salvation  till  we  seek  it  with  eqiul 
vigour,  and  yet  bow  tew  are  in  earnest  about  beingsaved.  How  earnest 
some  men  are  about  their  money,  their  health,  or  tbeir  children  !  Hov 
warm  they  are  upon  politics  and  parish  business ;  but  the  moment  yon 
touch  them  npon  matters  of  true  godliness  they  are  as  cool  as  the  Arctic 
mows.  0  BirB,  how  is  this  ?  Do  you  expect  to  be  saved  while  you  are 
half  asleep  ?  Do  you  expect  to  find  pardon  and  grace  while  you  con- 
tinue in  hstless  indifference  ?  If  so,  you  are  wofully  mistaken,  for  "  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  enffereth  violence,  and  the  violent  take  it  by  force." 
Dof^  and  eternity,  judgment  and  hell  are  not  things  to  play  witii ;  Uk 
■ouI'b  eternal  destiuy  is  no  small  matter,  and  salvation  by  the  precioos 
blood  of  Chrigt  ia  no  trifle.  Men  are  not  saved  from  going  down  into 
ttie  pit  by  a  careless  nod  or  a  wink.  A  mnmbled  "  Our  Father,"  or  n 
"*"  ■  "Lord,  hare  mercy  npon  me,"  will  not  suffice.  These  blind  men 
have  remained  blind  had  they  not  been  in  earnest  to  have  theic 


toe  pit 


OUB  uiBOS  <^xrsgam  to  the  blind  mbk.  291 

«S  opened ;  and  so,  many  oontinne  in  their  aina  becanee  the;  are  not 
eameet  to  escape  fVom  them.    These  men  were  full;  awake.    Dear 
«rer,  are  you  ?     Can  70a  join  with  me  in  these  two  verses  ? 
"  Josus,  who  now  «rt  paMiiiR  by. 
Our  Prophet,  Priest^  oiid  King  thon  art : 
Hear  a  poor  uabeliever'B  cry, 
And  heal  the  bliudneaa  of  my  hc«rt : 
"  Ui^wg  my  pasnooate  request, 
Thy  pordoninfr  mercy  I  implore, 
AVaoe'er  rcbi^c  I  will  not  rest. 
Till  thou  my  spirit's  sight  restore.'' 

The  bliiid  men  were  Ihorotighli/ iierseveftng  in  conseqnence  of  beinj; 

leamest,  for  they  "followed"  Christ,  and  BO  continued  to  urtri)  their  Bnit. 
aw  did  they  msnage  to  follow  the  moTemeots  of  tiiu  Lord  ?  We  do 
rt  know  :  it  most  hare  been  Yerydifficnlt,  for  they  were  blind,  but  they 
>donbt  asked  others  the  way  which  the  Master  had  takvu,  nnd  they 
fpt  their  ears  open  to  every  soniid.  Doubtless  tbey  snid,  "  Where  is 
e?  Where  is  Jesus  ?  Lead  us,  guide  us-  We  musltind  liira."  We 
3  not  know  how  far  onr  Loi'd  had  gone,  but  we  know  this,  that  as  far 
1  be  had  gone  they  followed.  They  were  so  bravely  persevering  that 
anng  reached  the  house  where  he  was,  they  did  not  stay  ontside  wait* 
K  till  he  came  oat  again,  but  they  pressed  into  the  room  where  he  sat. 
^ej  were  insatiable  for  sight.  Their  earnest  cries  took  him  off  from  his 
reaching,  he  paused  and  listened  while  they  said,  "  Thon  Son  of  David. 
ave  mercy  on  us."  Thus  does  perseverance  prevaU:  no  man  shall  be  lost 
ho  knows  the  art  of  importunate  prayer.  If  thou  wilt  resolve  never 
)  leave  the  gate  of  mercy  till  the  porter  opens  to  thee,  he  will  assuredly 
nbar  the  door.  If  thou  dost  grasp  the  covenant  angel  with  this  re- 
live, "  I  will  not  let  thee  go  except  thou  bless  me,"  thou  sholt  come 
nth  trom  the  place  of  wrestling  more  than  a  conqueror.  A  mouth 
pen  in  never-ceasing  prayer  shall  bring  about  eyes  0{«n  in  full  vision 
f  fiiitb.  Pray,  therefore,  in  the  darkness,  even  if  there  be  no  hope  of 
ght ;  for  when  God,  who  is  light  itself,  moves  a  poor  sinner  to  plead 
od  cry  out  before  him  with  the  solemn  intent  to  contiiiiic  so  to  do  till 
he  blessing  comes,  he  has  no  thought  of  mocking  that  poor  cryiug 
eart.  Perseverance  in  prayer  is  a  sure  sign  that  the  day  of  the  oi>ening 
r  the  eyes  is  near. 
The  blind  men  IukI  a  tiefinile  objed  in  their  prayers.  They  knew 
hat  they  wanted,  they  were  not  like  children  crying  lor  nothing,  or 
reedy  misers  crying  for  everything ;  they  wanted  their  sight  and  they 
new  it.  Too  many  blind  souls  are  unaware  of  their  blindness,  and 
lerefore  when  they  pray  they  ask  for  anything  except  the  one  thing 
eedfbl.  Many  so-called  prayers  cousist  in  sjiying  very  nice  words, 
ery  pretty,  pious  sentences,  bat  tliey  are  not  prayer.  Prayer  "  to 
ived  ones  "  is  communion  with  God,  and  to  persons  seeking  salvation 
i  is  asking  for  what  yon  want  and  expecting  to  receive  it  through  the 
ame  of  Jesus,  whose  name  you  plead  with  God.  But  what  sort  of 
myer  is  that  in  which  there  is  no  sense  of  need,  no  direct  asking, 
o  intelligent  pleading  ?  Dear  hearer,  have  you  in  distinct  terms 
iked  the  Lord  to  save  you  ?  Have  you  expressed  your  need  of  a  iiew 
ewt,  your  need  of  being  washed  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  your  need  of 


232  MKTROPOLITAJT  TABHaSJCLB   PCLPIT. 

boiiig  made  God'e  child,  and  adopted  into  hie  family  ?  There  i» : 
praying  till  »  man  knows  what  he  is  praying  for,  and  sets  himself  M 
pray  for  it,  as  if  he  cared  for  nothing  else.  If  being  tdrcady  earnest 
and  importunate,  he  is  also  instructed  and  fnll  of  definite  dcsirce,  be  it 
8ure  to  Bucceed  in  hia  pleading.  With  a  strong  arm  he  draws  the  bow  of 
defiire,  and  fits  upon  the  string  the  sharp  arrow  of  paesionate  longb^, 
and  then  with  the  instnict«l  eye  of  prception  he  takes  deliberate  aini, 
and  therefore  we  may  expect  that  he  will  hit  the  very  centre  of  tfcc 
target.  Pray  for  light,  hte,  forgiveneBS,  salvation,  and  pray  tor  these 
with  all  jour  sonl,  and  oe  surely  as  Chriet  is  in  lieaven  he  will  give  thea 
good  gifts  to  you.    Whom  did  he  ever  refuse  ? 

These  blind  men  in  their  prayers  hon<nire^  Clm'st,  for  they  sad, 
"  Thon  Son  of  David  have  mercy  on  ns."  The  great  ones  of  the  Inirf 
were  loath  to  recognize  our  Lord  as  being  of  the  seed  royal,  bnt  these 
blind  men  proclaimed  the  Son  of  Darid  right  lustily.  They  were  blisd, 
but  they  conld  see  a  great  deal  more  than  some  with  sharp  eyes  j  for 
they  could  see  that  the  Nnzarene  was  the  Messiah,  sent  of  God  to  restore 
tha  kingdom  unto  Israel.  They  gathered  from  this  belief  that,  as  t!« 
Messiah  was  to  open  blind  eyes,  Jesus,  being  the  Messiah,  could  open  ttw'r 
blind  eyes ;  and  so  they  appealed  to  him  to  perrorm  tbe  tokens  of  hii 
office,  thus  honouring  bim  by  a  real,  practical  faith.  This  is  die  maniuir 
of  prayer  which  will  always  speed  with  heaven,  the  prayer  which  ctowm 
the  Son  of  David.  Pray,  gloritying  Christ  Jesus  in  your  prayers,  making 
much  of  him,  pleading  much  the  merit  of  his  life  and  death,  giving  him 
glorious  titles  ue cause  your  soul  has  a  high  reverence  and  a  vast  esteem 
of  him.  Jesua- adoring  prayers  have  in  them  the  force  and  swiftncssof 
eoglea'  wings,  they  must  ascend  to  God,  for  the  elements  of  heavenly 
power  are  abundant  in  them.  Prayer  which  makes  little  of  Christ  ii 
prayer  which  God  will  make  little  of;  but  the  prayer  in  which  the  sool 
glorifies  the  Redeemer  rises  like  a  perfumed  piliar  of  iocense  from  the 
Most  Holy  place,  and  the  Lord  himself  smells  a  sweet  savour 

Obsei-ve,  also,  that  these  two  blind  men  in  their  prayer  rcnfesitil  Ihet 
HMOorihriifss.  "  Thon  Son  of  David,  have  mercy  on  us."  Their  sole 
appeal  waa  to  mercy.  There  was  no  talk  about  merit,  no  pleading  of 
their  past  sufferings,  or  their  persevering  endeavonrs,  or  their  reaolvM 
for  the  future  ;  but,  "  Have  mercy  on  us,"  He  will  never  win  a  bleswng 
from  God  who  demands  it  as  if  he  had  a  right  to  it.  We  must  jrieaa 
with  God  as  a  condemned  criminal  appeals  to  hia  sovereign,  asking  for 
the  exercise  of  the  royal  prerogative  of  free  pardon.  As  a  beggar  bsIk 
for  alms  in  the  street,  by  pleading  his  need  of  it  and  requesting  a  gill 
for  charity's  sake,  so  must  wc  apply  to  the  Most  High,  ap)>caling  d 
miser kordiam,  and  directing  onr  Riipplication  to  the  lovingkmdness  and 
tender  merey  of  the  Lord.  Wl'  lunst  plead  after  this  fashion — ^"0 
God,  if  thou  destroy  me  I  deserve  it.  If  never  a  comfortable  hxA 
should  come  from  thy  face  to  me  I  cannot  complain.  But  save  &  sinncf, 
Lord,  for  mercy's  sake.  I  have  no  claim  upon  thee  whatsoever,  bnt  oh. 
because  thon  art  fnll  of  gi-ace,  look  on  a  poor  blind  soul  that  fain 
would  look  on  thee." 

^  My  brethren,  I  cannot  put  fine  words  together.     I  have  never  occu- 
pied myself  in  the  school  of  oratory.     In  fact,  my  heart  abhors  the  very 
»     idea  of  seeking  to  speak  finely  when  sonlg  are  in  peril.    No,  I  labour  W 


0U&  £obd'8  qnenoK  to  itbs  blind  men.  299 

peak  Btraight  hpnie  to  year  hearts  and  coiucieiioesy  and  if  theio  be  in 
bis  listening  throng  any  who  are  listening  in  the  right  manner,  Qod 
rill  bless  the  word  to  them.  ^' And  what  kind  of  listening  is  that  ?*' 
Ely  yon.  Why,  that  in  which  the  man  says,  '^  As  &r  as  I  peroeive  that 
he  preacher  delivers  God's  word  I  will  follow  him,  and  I  will  do  what 
e  describes  the  seeking  sinner  as  doing.  I  will  pray  and  plead  to-night 
nd  I  win  persevere  in  my  entreaties,  labooring  to  elorify  the  name  of 
eras,  and  at  the  same  time  confessing  my  own  nn wor&ness.  Thns,  even 
hns,  wiU  I  crave  mercy  at  the  hands  of  the  Son  of  David."  Happy  is 
be  preacher  if  he  knows  that  such  will  be  the  case. 

II.  Now,  we  will  pause  a  minute  and  note,  secondly,  the  qubstioh 
rsiCH  WAS  PUT  TO  THEM.  ThcY  sought  to  havo  their  eyes  opened. 
Siey  both  stood  before  the  Lord  whom  they  could  not  see,  but  who 
onld  see  them  and  could  reveal  himself  to  them  by  their  hearing.  He 
ic^gan  to  question  them,  not  that  he  might  know  them,  but  that  they 
i^ht  know  themselves.  He  asked  only  one  question:  ^'Believe  ye 
lu^  I  am  able  to  do  this?"  That  question  touched  the  only  thing 
rhich  stood  between  them  and  sight.  On  their  answer  depended 
rbether  they  should  go  out  of  that  room  seeing  men  or  blind.  **  Believe 
!e  that  I  am  able  to  do  this?"  Now,  I  l^ieve  that  between  every 
eeUng  sinner  and  Christ  there  is  only  this  one  question — **  BeUevest 
boa  that  I  am  able  to  do  this  ?"  and  if  any  man  can  truly  answer  as 
he  men  in  the  narrative  did,  '^  Yea  Lord,"  he  will  assuredly  receive  the 
^ly,  '^  According  to  your  faith  be  it  unto  you.'* 

Let  us  look,  &en,  at  this  very  weighty  question  with  very  serious 
ttesntioBu  It  concerned  their  faith.  *^  Beueve  ye  that  I  am  able  to  do 
his  ?"  He  did  not  ask  them  what  kind  of  characters  they  had  been  in 
he  past,  because  when  men  come  to  Christ  the  past  is  forgiven  them.  He 
lid  not  ask  them  whether  they  had  tried  various  means  of  getting  their 
yes  opened,  because  whether  they  had  or  had  not  they  were  still 
ilind.  He  did  not  ask  them  even  whether  they  thought  there  might 
»e  a  mysterious  physician  who  would  effect  a  cure  in  a  future  state.  No. 
Tnrious  questions  and  idle  speculations  are  never  suggested  by  the  Lord 
Fesns.  His  enquiries  were  all  resolved  into  a  trial  upon  one  point,  and 
hat  one  point,  faith.  Did  they  believe  that  he,  the  Son  of  David,  could 
\esA  them  ?  Why  does  our  Lord  everywhere,  not  only  in  his  ministry  but 
n  the  teaching  of  the  apostles,  always  lay  such  stress  upon  faith  ?  Why 
s  faAih  so  essential  ?  It  is  because  of  its  receptive  power.  A  purse 
rill  not  make  a  man  rich,  and  yet  without  some  place  for  his  money 
low  could  a  man  acquire  wealth  ?  Faith  of  itself  could  not  contribute 
i  penny  to  salvation,  but  it  is  the  purse  which  holds  a  precious  Christ 
rithin  itself,  yea,  it  holds  all  the  treasures  of  divine  love.  If  a  man  is 
liirsty  a  rope  and  a  bucket  are  not  in  themselves  of  much  use  to  him, 
mt  yet,  sirs,  if  there  is  a  well  near  at  hand  the  very  thing  that  is 
vantied  is  a  bucket  and  a  rope,  by  means  of  which  the  water  can  be 
ifled.  Faith  is  the  bucket  by  means  of  which  a  man  may  draw  water 
^ut  of  the  wells  of  salvation,  and  drink  to  his  heart's  content.  Ton 
nay  sometimes  have  stopped  a  moment  at  a  street  fountain,  and  have 
lesired  to  drink,  but  you  found  you  could  not,  for  the  drinking-cup  was 
;giie.  The  water  flowed,  but  vou  could  not  get  at  it.  It  was  tantalizing 
o  be  at  the  fountain-head  and  yet  to  be  thirsty  still  for  want  of  a  little 


Horn  haOt  it  tint  little  oq^  vbidi  m  hridi^to  UMflaviag 
1  of  Clinit*8  grace :  wefiH  lUflBithca  vedriidcaraAieiefknhML 
Hence  the  imporomce  of  fkith.    It  wvMild  InTe  leenied  to  our  fine* 
iitiMtn  uk  idk  thine  to  lay  down  a  cMb  vnte  the  eea  fiom  En|^aoi 
to  Americft,  tnd  it^vonld'be  idle  now  if  it  were  not  that  acieDoe  hii 
taiqifat  ns  how  to  qxak  bj  lightaii^ :  ftt  Ihe  eabfe  itadf  is  now  of  the 
nlmoet  importance,  for  the  bnt  inTentions  of  telegraphy  woaM  be  dt 
no  nae  for  porpoees  of  tranaatlantie  oommnnioatioa  u  there  were  mt 
tiie  oonnectii^  wire  between  the  two  eontinente.    Faith  ia  joat  tfaat^ 
it  is  the  connecting  link  between  onr  aoola  and  God,  and  the  Utumt 
inuawgii  flashes akmg  it  to  onr  soak.    Futfi  is  aometimes  waakaad 
oomptfaUe  onh- to  a  ^-eiT  slender  thread ;  bntitisarenrpreciooadriBg 
far  all  that,  for  it  is  the  b^inninf^  of  great  thinga.    xean  ago  ttap 
were  wanting  to  throw  a  sospensicHi  hrid^  across  a  mightf  ehssB,. 
threogh  which  flowed,  far  down,  a  naTigaUeiirer.   From  cng  tocng  it 
was  pn^MMed  to  hang  an  iron  bridge  sibft  in  the  air,  hot  how  was  it  to 
be  commenced?   TI^t  shoe  an  arrow  from  one  side  to  the  other»  and  it 
carried  across  the  cmlf  a  tiny  thread.    That  inrisible  thread  was  enoogh 
to  b^in  with.    The  omnection  was  established ;  by-and-by  the  tiuEesd' 
drew  a  piece  of  twine,  the  twine  carried  after  it  a  small  rope,  the  repfr 
soon  carried  a  cable  across,  and  all  in  good  time  came  the  iron  diaiai 
and  dl  else  that  was  needed  for  die  permanent  war.    Now^laith  ia  ollm 
Tery  weak,  bnt  even  in  that  case  it  is  still  of  the  ntmost  Tafaie^  fir  it 
fixms  a  communication  between  the  sonland  the  Lord  Jesoa  Qoist.    If 
tfaoabelieToet  in  him  thsxe  is  a  link  betweoi  him  and  thee;  thy  shilU- 
nessrestsonhisgrace,  thy  weakness  hangs  on  his  strength,  thynothiag* 
aess  hides  itself  in  his  all-snfBciency ;  bnt  if  thou  beUevest  nolt,  thonatt 
spart  tnm  Jesns,  and  no  blessing  can  flow  to  thee.    So  the  qnsrtioa 
nat  I  have  to  address  in  my  Master's  name  to-night  to  erery  aeolua|[ 
unner  has  to  do  with  his  faith  and  nothing  else.     It  does  not  matter 
to  me  whether  yon  are  a  hundred  thousand  pounds  man  or  whethv 
yon  earn  a  few  shillings  a  week,  whether  yon  are  a  peer  or  a  paopc^ 
iriieiher  yon  are  royal  or  rustic,  learned  or  ignorant    We  haTe  At 
aame  gospel  to  deli?er  to  every  man,  woman,  and  child,  and  we  hare  io 
kj  the  stress  upon  the  same  point — **  Belieyest  thou  ?"  If  them  bdievHt 
fihou  shalt  be  saved,  but  if  thou  beUevest  not  thou  canst  not  partake  of 
the  blessings  of  grace. 

Notice,  next,  that  the  question  concerned  iheir  faHh  m  Jmm. 
^  Believe  ye  that  /  am  able  to  do  this  ?"  If  we  were  to  a^  the  awakened 
sinner,  *'  Dost  thou  believe  that  thou  canst  save  thyself  ?*'  his  answer 
would  be,  ''No,  that  I  do  not :  I  know  better.  My  self-sufBcienqr ib 
dead."  If  we  were  then  to  put  the  questicm  to  him,  **  Believest  thoa 
that  ordinances  and  means  of  grace  and  sacraments  can  save  thee  ?"  if 
he  is  an  intelligent,  awakened  penitent,  he  wiU  reply,  '*  I  know  better. 
I  have  tried  them,  but  in  and  of  themselves  th^  are  utter  vanity." 
Truly  it  is  so,  tlicrc  remains  in  us  and  around  us  nothing  upon  which  hop 
can  build,  even  for  an  hour.  But  the  enquiry  passes  beyond  self  and  carts 
ns  upon  Jesus  only,  by  bidding  us  hear  the  Lord  himself  say,  «  BeUeve 
^I  am  able  to  do  this  Y'  Now,  betoved,  we  are  not  talking  coo- 
merely  historical  person  when  we  speak  about  the  Lord  Jesoi 
q)eak  of  one  who  is  above  all  others.    He  is  the  Son  of  the 


OUB  LOBD'S  QVBflTIDK  TO  THR  BUKD  MBK.  29S 

ighesty  find  yet  he  came  to  this  earth  and  was  bom  a  babe  at  Beth- 
bem.  He  slept  upon  a  woman's  bosom,  and  grew  np  as  other  children 
K  He  became  a  man  in  fhhiess  of  statmre  and  wisdom,  liying  here  for 
iirty  years  or  more,  doing  good.  At  the  last  this  glorious  God  in 
iman  flesh  'Mied  the  jnst  for  the  nnjost,  that  he  might  bring  ns  to 
od,**  standing  in  the  room  and  place  and  stead  of  guilty  man,  that  he 
ight  bear  man's  punishment— that  God  might  he  just,  and  yet  the 
istifier  of  him  that  believeth.  He  died  and  was  buried,  but  only  for 
sh<»t  time  could  the  grave  contain  him ;  early  in  the  morning  of  the 
jrd  day  he  rose  and  lefb  the  dead,  no  more  to  die.  He  tarried  here 
Aeiently  long  for  many  to  see  him  ^ive  and  really  in  the  body. 

0  orient  in  history  is  so  well  authenticated  as  the  resurrection  of 
iirisi,  he  was  seen  by  individuals  alone,  and  by  twos  and  twenties,  and 
r  aboYe  five  hundred  brethren  at  once.  After  having  lived  here 
UMe  while  he  ascended  up  into  heaven  in  the  presence  of  his  dis- 
^ks^  a  cloud  receiving  him  out  of  their  sight.  At  this  moment  he  is 
bifiig  at  the  right  hand  of  God  in  human  flesh  :  that  selfisame  man 
to  died  upon  the  tree  is  now  enthroned  in  the  highest  heavens  Lord 
ttil,  and  every  angel  delights  to  do  hun  homage.  The  one  question 
Udi  kB  asks  of  you  to-night,  through  these  poor  lips  is  this,  ^'  Belie?est 
<MI  that  I  am  able  to  save  thee — that  I,  the  Christ  of  God  now  dwelling 

iieaven,  am  able  to  save  thee  ?"  Everything  depends  upon  your 
mwer  to  that  question.  I  know  what  your  answer  ought  to  be.  Surely, 
he  be  God,  nothing  is  impossible  or  even  difficult  to  him.  If  he  has 
id  down  Ids  life  to  make  atonement,  and  God  has  accepted  that  atone- 
ent,  b^  permitting  him  to  rise  from  the  dead,  then  there  must  be 
Bciicy  in  his  blood  to  cleanse  me,  even  me.  The  answer  ought  to  be, 
Tea,  Lord  Jesus,  I  believe  that  thou  art  able  to  do  this." 

But  now  I  want  to  lay  stress  on  another  word  of  my  text,  and  I  want 
w  to  lay  stress  on  it  too.  '*'  Believe  ye  that  I  am  able  to  do  this?" 
ow,  it  would  have  been  of  no  use  for  these  blind  men  to  say,  "  TVe 
jKeve  that  thou  canst  raise  the  dead."  "  No,"  says  Christ,  "  the 
fttter  in  hand  is  the  opening  of  your  eyes.  Believe  ye  that  I  am  able 
►  do  this?'*  They  might  have  replied,  "  Good  Master,  we  believe  that 
Mm  didst  staunch  the  woman's  issue  when  she  touched  thy  garment." 
No,"  says  he,  "that  is  not  the  question.  Your  eyes  have  now  to  be 
tended  to.  You  want  sight,  and  the  question  about  your  faith  is» 
dieve  ye  that  I  am  able  to  do  this  f"  Ah,  some  of  you  can  believe  for 
lier  people,  but  we  must  bring  the  question  more  fully  home  to  you 
id  sav,  **  Believest  thou  that  Christ  is  able  to  save  thefi—e\Gn  thee  ? 

1  he  able  to  do  thisV  Possibly  I  address  some  one  who  has  gone  very 
r  in  sin.  It  may  be,  my  friend,  you  have  crowded  a  great  deal  of 
liquity  into  a  short  space.  You  went  in  for  a  short  life  and  a  merr}* 
ie>  aim  according  to  your  present  prospects  you  are  likely  enough  to 
ive  a  short  life,  but  the  merriment  is  pretty  nearly  over  with  you 
ready,  and  as  you  look  back  upon  your  life,  you  reflect  that  never  did 
yoong  man  or  a  young  woman  throw  life  away  more  foolishly  than 
m  have  done.  Now  then,  do  you  desire  to  be  saved  ?  Can  you  say 
ran  your  heart  that  you  do  ?    Answer  me,  then,  this  further  question, 

0  yon  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  is  able  to  do  /Af>,  namely,  to  blot  out 

1  your  sins,  to  renew  your  heart,  and  to  save  you  to«night  ?    "  Oh,, 


SM  lIKTROFOLrTAH  TABESHACL>  PDlf  IT. 

air,  I  do  beUnre  he  is  nbia  to  forgive  sin."  Bat  belierest  thou  Hitt  ht 
is  able  to  forgive  i/our  ein  ?  You  ;oDrscif  uro  the  ease  ia  hand ;  W 
holda  your  futh  on  that  point  i  Let  the  cuses  of  others  iilonc  just  do*, 
aud  oonsider  yourself.  Beitcvest  thoa  tliat  he  is  able  to  do  t/ust  Thit 
— this  OD  of  thine,  this  misspent  lite,  is  Jesus  ubie  to  cope  with  Ihtit 
On  Tonraiuwer  to  that  queHtioa  cverythiog  depends.  It  is  aa  idle  faitli 
which  dreams  of  believinf!  in  the  Lord's  power  over  others,  but  thai 
declana  that  it  has  no  confidence  in  him  for  itself.  You  uinst  belira 
that  he  is  able  to  do  Oii» — this  which  concerns  yon,  or  you  aru  for  ill 
practical  porpown  :tn  imbcliever. 

i  know  I  am  sjKaking  to  a  great  many  persons  who  never  did  go    ' 
into  the  vices  of  the  world.     I  thank  God  ou  your  behalf  that  you  hnvc 
been  kept  in  the  wnys  of  uiorahtr  and  sobriety  and  honesty  ;  yet  1 
have  known  some  of  you  aliuost  wish,  or  at  least  it  has  occurred  to  joa   ' 
that  yon  might  almost  wish — that  you  had  been  great,  opea  sinnen. 
that  yon  m^t  be  prcfiched  to  as  open  siimers  are,  and  that  you  migbc 
see  a  change  in  yoursulf  equul  to  what:  you  have  seen  in  some  of  tivaa, 
about  whose  conversion  you  can  never  doubt.    Do  not  indul^  so  qd- 
wise  a  wish, but  liKt^n  while  I  put  this  ouestion  to  you  also.     Yourcufr 
is  that  of  a  moralist  who  has  obeyeu  every  outward  duty,  but  hu    i 
neglected  his  God — the  case  of  a  moralist  who  feels  as  if  repentance 
were  to  him  impossible,  because  he  has  been  so  long  catea  up  with  sell-    ' 
righteousness  that  he  knows  not  how  to  cut  out  the  gangrene.    The 
Lord  Jesas  Christ  can  as  easily  save  yon  from  your  aclf-righteoasDeasu    | 
he  can  save  another  from  his  guilty  habits.     Do  you  believe  that  he  U 
able  to  do  this  ?     Come  uow,  do  you  believe  that  he  is  able  to  meet  iAu, 
your  own  peculiar  eaao  ?     Give  me  "  yes  "  or  "  no  "  to  this  quGStioo. 

"  Aias,'  cries  one  of  you,  "  my  heart  is  go  hard."  Dost  tliou  believe 
that  he  can  softeii  it  ?  Suppose  it  to  be  as  hard  aa  grauite  :  d'jst  ^loa 
now  believe  that  the  Christ  of  Ood  can  tnrn  it  into  wax  in  a  moment 'r 
Suppose  thy  heart  to  be  us  fickle  as  the  wiud  and  waves  of  the  su: 
canst  thou  believe  that  he  can  make  thee  stable-minded  and  settle  thm 
upon  the  Rock  of  Ages  for  ever  ?  If  thou  believest  in  him  he  wiU'Io 
this  for  tbee,  for  according  to  thy  feith  shall  it  be  unto  thee,  iiul  I 
know  the  pinch  lies  here.  Everybody  tries  to  run  away  to  the  thoii^'hi  | 
that  he  does  believe  in  Christ's  power  for  others,  but  he  trembles  for 
himself;  but  I  must  hold  each  man  to  the  point  which  concerus  hiia- 
self,  I  must  buttonhole  yon  and  bring  you  to  the  real  test.  Jesua  uks 
each  one  of  you — "Dost  thou  believe  that  I  am  able  to  do  UusV 

"  Why,"  says  one,  "  it  would  bo  the  most  surprising  thing  that  even 
the  Lord  Jesus  ever  did  if  he  wore  to  save  me  to-night."  Dost  tlioii 
believe  that  he  can  do  it?  Wilt  thou  trust  him  to  do  it  now? 
"But  it  will  be  such  a  strange  thing,  such  a  miracle!"  The  Lord 
Jesus  works  stmiige  things :  it  is  the  way  of  him.  He  was  ever  a 
miracle- worker.  Canst  thou  believe  him  able  to  do  this  for  thee,  evan 
this,  which  ia  now  needed  to  save  thee  ? 

It  is  wonderful  the  power  which  faith  has — power  over  the  Lord  Je«i» 
himself.  I  have  often  experienced  in  my  little  way  how  confidence  will 
master  yon,  Hhvl-  yon  not  freiiuontly  been  conquered  by  the  tmstfoltuu 
of  ft  tiny  child  ?  The  simple  reqnest  was  too  full  of  trust  to  be  refused. 
Have  yon  ever  been  grasped  by  a  blind  man  at  aaCreet  crosaing^wtiolili 


OUR  10BT>'5  QTTBfinOir  TO  THK  BLIim  MSB.  291 

^  to  yoa,  "  Sir,  would  you  take  me.  acroea  the  road  ?"  And  then, 
frhaps,  lie  haa  said  somewhat  cunningly,  "I  know  by  the  tone  of  your 
)ice  that  you  are  kind.  I  feel  I  could  trost  myself  with  yon."  At 
ich  a  time  you  have  felt  that  yon  were  in  for  it ;  you  could  not  let  him 
0.  And  whcL  a  boqI  says  to  Jesus,  "  I  know  thon  canflt  aave  me,  mj 
lOrd  :  1  know  thou  canet,  therefore  in  tliee  do  I  tmst,"  why  he  cannot 
lake  you  off,  he  cannot  wish  to  do  so,  for  he  has  said, "  Htm  (hat 
ameth  (o  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  I  sometimes  t«ll  a  stoty  to 
Instrate  this ;  it  is  a  simple  tale  enoujjh,  bnt  it  shows  how  taith  wins 
rerywherc.  Many  years  ago  my  pardcn  happened  to  be  anrronnded  by 
ibedire,  which  looked  green,  but  was  a  jioor  protection.  A  neighbour^ 
pg  was  very  fond  of  visiting  my  garden,  and  oa  he  never  improved  my 
owers  I  never  gave  him  a  cordial  welcome.  Walking  along  ^ietly 
□e  evening  I  saw  him  doing  mischief.  I  threw  a  atick  at  him  and 
dvised  him  to  go  liomc ;  but  how  did  the  good  creatnre  reply  (o  me  V 
le  Cnmed  round  and  wagged  his  tail,  and  in  the  merriest  mnnner 
licked  up  my  stick,  and  brought  it  to  ine,  and  laid  it  at  my  feet.  Did 
,  strike  him  ?  Xo,  1  am  not  a  monster.  I  should  have  been  ashamed 
t  myself  if  I  hod  not  ^tted  him  on  the  Imck  and  told  bim  to  come  there 
rltenever  he  liked.  He  and  I  were  friends  directly,  because  you  see 
le  trusted  me  and  conquered  me.  Now,  simple  as  the  story  is,  that  is 
DBt  the  philosophy  of  a  sinner's  faith  in  Christ.     Aa  the  dog  mastered 


;  man  hy  confiding  in  him,  so  a  poor  ^ilty  sinner  does,  in  effect, 
nastcr  the  Lord  liimself  by  trusting  him,  when  he  says,  "  Lord,  I  am  a 
)oor  dog  of  a  sinner,  and  thou  raightest  drive  me  away,  but  I  believe 
hee  to  be  too  good  for  that.  I  believe  thou  canst  save  me,  and  lo  !  I 
mat  myself  with  thee.  Whether  I  am  loat  or  saved,  I  trust  myself 
tith  thee."  Ah,  dear  heart,  you  will  never  be  lost  if  you  thnB  tmst. 
le  who  trusts  himself  with  Jeans  has  given  the  answer  to  the  question, 
'  Doet  thou  believe  that  I  am  able  to  do  this  ?"  and  there  is  nothing 
low  left  but  for  him  to  go  his  way  and  rejoice,  for  the  Lord  haa  opened 
lis  eyes  and  saved  him. 

III.  Now,  thirdly,  THAT  qcestios  wab  a  very  kkasonabi.k  one. 
'  Behcve  ye  that  I  am  able  to  do  this  ?"  Just  a  minute,  let  me  show 
hat  it  was  a  very  reasonable  question  for  Christ  to  put,  and  equally 
reasonable  for  me  to  urge  home  upon  many  here  present,  Onr  Lord 
leens  might  have  said,  "  If  you  do  not  believe  that  I  am  able  to  do  this, 
vhy  did  you  follow  me  f  Why  did  you  follow  me  more  than  anybody 
slse  ?  You  have  l>een  after  mc  down  the  sti-eets,  and  yon  have  come 
nto  this  house  after  me.  Why  have  you  done  this  if  you  do  not 
relieve  that  I  am  able  to  open  your  eyes  ?"  So  a  large  proportion  of  you 
»ho  are  here  to-night  attend  a  place  of  worship  :  you  like  to  be  there  ; 
rat  why,  if  you  do  not  believe  Jesus  ?  ^Vhat  do  yon  go  there  for  ?  Do 
foa  go  to  seek  a  Saviour  who  c".nnot  save  you  ?  Do  yon  foolishly  seek 
ifter  one  in  whom  yon  cannot  trust  ?  I  have  never  heard  of  snch  mad- 
less  aa  for  a  sick  man  to  nm  alter  a  doctor  in  whom  he  has  no 
onfidence  And  do  you  come  here  to-night  and  attend  your  places 
>f  worship  at  other  times  without  having  any  faith  in  Jesns  ?  Then 
Fby  do  you  come  ?    What  inconsistent  people  you  must  be  ? 

Again :  these  blind  men  had  been  praying  to  Jesns  to  open  their 
yea,  but  why  did  tkey  ^oy?     If  they  did  not  believe  that  Jeans 


298  METROPOLITAN  TABSBNACLE  PULPIT. 

coald  heal  them  their  prayers  were  a  mockery.  Would  yoa  ask  a  maa 
to  do  a  thing  which  you  knew  he  could  not  do?  Must  not  prayer 
always  be  measured  by  the  quantity  of  faith  that  we  pat  into  it? 
Now,  I  know  that  some  of  you  have  been  in  the  habit  of  prayer  ever 
since  you  were  little  children ;  you  scarcely  ever  go  to  bed  at  nights 
without  repeating  the  form  of  piuyer  your  mother  taught  you.  What 
do  you  do  that  for  if  you  do  not  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  can  save  yon  ? 
Why  ask  him  to  do  what  you  do  not  believe  he  can  do  ?  What  strange 
inconsistency — ^to  pray  without  faith ! 

Moreover,  these  two  blind  men  had  called  Jesus  Christ  the  **  Son  of 
David."  Why  had  they  thus  confessed  his  Messiahship  f  The  most  of 
you  do  the  same.  I  suppose  that  out  of  this  congregation  there  are  veiy 
lew  who  doubt  the  deity  of  Christ.  You  believe  in  the  Word  of  God: 
you  do  not  doubt  that  it  is  inspired ;  you  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  has 
lived  and  died  and  gone  into  his  glory.  Well,  then,  if  you  do  not 
believe  that  he  is  able  to  save  you,  what  do  you  mean  by  saying  that 
he  is  God  ?  God,  and  yet  not  able  ?  A  dying,  bleeding,  atoning,  sac- 
rifice, and  yet  not  able  to  save  ?  Oh,  man,  your  nominal  creed  is  not 
your  true  one.  If  you  were  to  write  your  true  creed  out  it  would 
run  something  like  this — '^  I  do  not  believe  in  Jesus  Clu*ist  as  the  Son 
of  God,  or  that  he  hiis  made  a  full  atonemeut  for  sin,  for  I  do  not 
l)elieve  that  he  is  able  to  save  me."  Would  not  that  be  correct  and 
all  of  a  piece  ? 

Well,  then,  I  charge  you  by  yom*  frequent  hearings  of  the  Word, 
by  your  habitual  prayers,  and  by  your  profession  of  being  believers 
in  that  grand  old  Bible,  answer  me: — How  is  it  that  you  do  not 
believe  in  Jesus  ?  Sirs,  he  must  be  able  to  save  you.  Do  you  know 
it  is  some  seven-and-twenty  yeais  or  more  since  I  put  my  trust  in  him, 
and  1  must  speak  of  him  as  I  find.  In  every  hour  of  darkness,  in 
every  season  of  despondency,  in  every  time  of  trial  I  have  found  him 
iaithful  and  true ;  and,  as  to  trusting  him  with  my  soul,  if  I  had  a 
thousand  souls  I  would  trust  them  with  him ;  and  if  I  had  as  many 
souls  as  there  aix*  Siiuds  upon  the  sea-shore  I  would  not  ask  for  a 
Hccond  Saviour,  but  would  just  put  them  all  into  that  dear  hand 
which  was  pierced  with  the  nail,  that  he  might  grasp  us  and  hold  us 
fast  for  ever.  He  is  worthy  of  your  trust,  and  your  trast  is  all  he 
asks  of  you :  knowing  that  he  is  able — and  you  cannot  doubt  that  be  is 
willing,  seeing  that  he  has  died — he  asks  you  to  act  upon  your  belief 
that  he  is  able  to  save  you,  and  trust  yourself  to  him. 

IV.  Now,  I  must  not  detain  you  much  longer,  and  therefore  I 
want  to  notice  the  answer  which  these  blind  men  gave  to  his  ques- 
tion. They  said  to  him,  **  Yea,  Lord.''  Well,  now,  I  have  been  pressing 
that  question  upon  you,  and  I  again  repeat  it.  Do  you  believe  that 
Christ  is  able  to  save  you,  that  he  is  able  to  do  this,  to  touch  your  case 
in  all  its  speciality  ?  Xow  for  your  answer.  How  many  will  say 
^*  Yea,  Lord."  I  am  half  inclined  to  ask  you  to  say  it  aloud ;  but  I 
will  rather  beg  you  to  say  it  in  your  secret  souls — '*  Yea,  Lord."  And 
now  may  God  the  Holy  Spirit  help  you  to  say  it  very  dislttully^  with- 
out any  holding  back  and  mental  reservation, ''  Yea,  Ix)rd.  Blind  eye, 
dumb  tongue,  cold  heart — I  beheve  that  thou  art  able  to  change  them  all, 
and  I  rest  myself  on  thee,  to  be  renewed  by  thy  divine  grace,"    Say  it 


OUR  LOBD'B  QUKSnOV  TO  THK  BLIKII  HKN.  299 

snd  mean  it  Say  it  deoidedly.and  distinctlj^  with  your  whole  hearfc, 
^'Yea,  Lord." 

Notice  that  the  two  men  replied  tmrnedtaMy.  The  question  was  no 
fiooner  out  of  Christ's  mouth  than  they  gave  the  answer, ''  Yea,  Lord." 
There  is  nothing  like  being  prompt  in  your  answers ;  for,  when  you 
ask  a  man  a  question  and  you  say,  ^'  Belie  vest  thou  that  I  am  able 
to  do  tliis  ?"  and  he  stops,  rubs  his  forehead,  strokes  his  head,  and  at 
hot  says, — ^'Y — ^yes,"  does  not  such  a  ''yes"  sound  uncommonly 
like  "no "?  The  best  "  yes"  in  the  world  is  the  "  yes "  which  leaps 
tnrth  directly.  "  Yes,  Lord ;  bad  as  I  am,  I  believe  thou  canst  save 
me,  for  I  toow  thy  precious  blood  can  take  away  every  stain.  Though 
I  am  an  old  sinner,  though  I  am  an  aggravated  sinner,  though  I  am 
<me  who  has  gone  back  from  a  profession  of  religion,  and  have  played 
the  backslider^s  part,  though  I  seem  to  be  an  outcast  from  society, 
thoogh  I  do  not  at  this  time  feel  as  I  could  wish  to  feel,  and  am  the 
very  reYerse  of  what  I  ought  to  be,  yet  I  do  believe  that  if  Christ  has 
died  for  sinners,  that  if  the  eternal  ^n  of  Ood  has  gone  into  heaven 
to  plead  for  sinners,  then  he  must  be  '  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost 
them  that  come  unto  God  by  him,'  and  I  come  to  God  to«night  by 
him,  and  I  do  believe  that  he  is  able  to  save  even  mt."  That  is  the 
land  of  answer  which  I  long  to  get  frojii  you  all.  May  the  Spirit  of 
€tod  produce  it ! 

V.  Then  see  our  Lord's  response  to  their  answer.  He  said, 
*'  According  to  your  faith  be  it  unto  you."  As  much  as  if  he  had  said, — 
If  yon  believe  in  me  there  is  light  for  your  blind  eyes.  So  true  the  faith, 
flo  true  the  sight.  If  you  believe  decidedly  and  fully  you  shall  not 
have  one  eye  opened,  or  both  eyes  half  opened,  but  all  your  sight  shall 
be  given  to  you.  Decided  faith  shall  clear  away  every  speck,  and 
make  your  vision  strong  and  clear.    If  your  answer  is  quick,  so  shall 

S  answer  be.  You  shall  see  in  a  moment,  for  you  at  once  believed, 
e  Lord's  power  just  kept  touch  with  their  faith c  If  their  faith 
was  true  his  euro  was  true.  If  their  faith  was  complete  his  euro  was 
complete;  and  if  their  faith  said '' yes "  directly,  he  give  them  sight 
directly.  If  you  are  a  long  while  in  saying  "  yes  "  you  will  be  a  long 
while  in  getting  peace ;  but  if  you  say  to-night,  '*  I  will  venture  it,  for  I 
see  it  is  so ;  Jesus  must  be  able  to  save  me ;  I  will  give  myself  up  to 
him ;"  if  you  do  that  at  once  you  shall  have  instantaneous  peace — 
yes,  in  that  very  seat,  young  man,  you  who  are  burdened  to-night  shall 
find  rest.  You  shall  wonder  where  the  burden  has  gone,  and  look  round 
and  find  that  it  has  vanished,  because  you  have  looked  to  the  Cracified 
One,  and  trusted  all  your  sins  with  him.  Your  bad  habits,  which  you 
have  been  trying  in  vain  to  conquer,  which  have  forged  ^sh  chains  to 
hold  you  fast,  you  shall  find  them  fall  from  off  you,  like  spiders'  webs. 
If  you  can  but  trust  Jesus  to  break  them,  and  give  yourself  up  to  him 
to  be  renewed  by  him,  it  shall  be  done  and  done  to-night ;  and  heaven's 
eternal  arohes  shall  ring  with  shouts  of  sovereign  grace. 

Thus  I  have  put  the  whole  matter  before  you.  My  only  hope  is 
that  God  the  blessed  Spirit  will  lead  you  to  seek  as  the  blind  men 
sought,  and  especially  to  trust  as  they  trusted. 

This  last  word.  There  are  some  persons  who  are  specially  diligent  in 
finding  out  reasons  why  they  should  not  be  saved.    I  have  battl^  with 


800  MfiTROPOUTAV  TABEBNACLE  PULPIT. 

some  such  by  the  half-hour  together,  and  they  always  finish  up  with, 
"  Yes,  that  is  true,  sir,  but — "  And  then  we  try  and  chop  that  "  but " 
to  pieces  ;  bnt  after  a  while  they  find  another,  and  say,  **  Yes,  I  now 
see  that  point,  but — "  So  they  buttress  their  unbelief  with  **  buts."  If 
anybody  here  should  be  wishful  to  give  you  a  thousand  pounds,  can  you 
tell  me  any  reason  why  he  should  not  ?  Well,  I  fancy  if  he  were  to 
come  to  yon  and  present  you  with  a  bank  note  for  that  amount  yon 
would  not  worry  yourself  to  discover  objections.  You  would  not  keep 
on  saying,  "  I  should  like  the  money,  but — "  No,  if  there  were  any 
reason  wny  you  should  not  have  it,  you  would  let  other  people  find  it 
out.  Yon  would  not  labour  and  cudgel  your  brains  to  try  and  find  out 
arguments  against  yourself ;  you  are  not  so  much  your  own  enemy. 
And  yet  with  regard  to  eternal  life,  which  is  infinitely  more  precious 
than  all  the  treasures  of  this  world,  men  act  most  absurdly  and  say,  **  I 
earnestly  desire  it,  and  Christ  is  able  to  do  it,  but — "  What  folly  is  this 
to  argue  against  yourself.  If  a  man  were  in  Newgate  condemned  to 
die,  and  had  to  stand  upon  the  drop  to-morrow  morning,  and  the 
sheriff  came  and  said,  '^  There  is  a  free  pardon  for  you,"  do  you  think 
that  man  would  begin  to  object  ?  Would  he  cry,  **  I  should  like 
another  half-hour  to  consider  my  ease,  and  find  out  reasons  why  I 
should  not  be  pardoned  "  ?  No,  he  would  jump  at  it.  Oh  that  yon  may 
also  jump  at  the  pardon  to-night.  The  Lord  grant  that  yon  may  fed 
auch  a  sense  of  danger  and  guilt,  that  you  may  promptly  cry,  "  I  do 
believe ;  I  will  believe  in  Jesus." 

Sinners  are  not  half  as  sensible  as  span*ows.  David  said  in  one  of 
the  Psalms,  **  I  watch,  and  am  as  a  sparrow  alone  upon  the  housetop." 
Well,  have  you  noticed  the  sparrow  ?  He  keeps  his  eyes  open,  and 
the  moment  he  sees  a  grain  of  wheat  or  anything  to  eat  down  in  the 
road,  he  flics  to  get  it.  I  never  knew  him  wait  tor  someone  to  invite 
him,  much  less  to  beg  and  beseech  him  to  come  and  feed.  He  sees 
the  food  and  he  says  to  himself, ''  Here  is  a  hungry  sparrow,  and  there 
is  a  piece  of  bread.  Those  two  things  go  well  together,  they  shall 
not  be  long  apart."  Down  he  flies,  and  eats  up  all  he  can  find  as  fast 
as  he  fincU  it.  Oh,  if  you  had  half  the  sense  of  the  sparrow  yon 
would  say,  **  Here  is  a  guilty  sinner,  and  there  is  a  precious  Saviour. 
These  two  things  go  well  together,  they  shall  not  be  long  apart.  I 
believe  in  Jesus  and  Jesus  is  mine." 

The  Lord  grant  that  you  may  find  Jesus  to-night  before  yon  leave  this 
house.  I  pray  you  may.  In  these  very  pews  and  aisles  may  you  look 
to  Jesus  Christ  and  believe.  Faith  is  only  a  look,  a  look  of  simple 
trust.  It  is  reliance,  a  believing  that  he  is  able  to  do  this^  ana  a 
trusting  in  him  to  do  it  and  to  do  it  now.  God  bless  every  one  of  you, 
and  may  we  meet  in  heaven,  for  Christ's  sake.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Matthew  ix.  18 — 88, 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book" — 100,  539,  555. 


^«tj[tfpKtan  iJaternade  fap. 


THB   HEAVENLY  WIXD. 


%.    |««H(lt 


DEMYBaED    OS     LoUDVDaY    IIOIIXING,    MaY    27TJI,    1877,    BY 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METKOrOLITAN    TABEHSJACNE,    HEWISGTOS. 


"Thawind  blowcth  vliGte  it  liateth,  and  thou  lunueiit  the  sound  tboTikol',  liot 
canit  not  tail  whence  it  cometb,  and  vluther  it  goeth :  so  U  STory  one  thut  in  bom 
of  the  SpiriL" — John  ili.  B, 

TuE  Holy  Spirit  is  to  be  udiuii-ed,  not  only  for  tlie  great  tmtlis  whi(!ii 
he  teaches  as  in  Holy  Sci'iptni'c,  but  also  tor  the  wonderAil  nuuincr  in 
which  those  tmtbs  lue  balaiiced.  The  ^vord  of  God  never  (nves  ne  too 
mucb  of  oiie  thing  or  too  little  of  another ;  it  ncvei"  cam^^yleetiine 
to  an  eitreme,  but  tempera  it  with  its  correspon '1  ■  "tit'*f''T^di^  Truth 
aecmB  to  run  at  least  in  two  jiarallcl  linoH-JiSJfcJ*"^  ^  when  the 
Holy  Spirit  sets  before  ub  ouc  linu  holT,ft*triiot  in  three.  -  ^^^  ^^.^^^ 
The  tmth  of  divine  sovereigntv  ^^w^Bcly  iwints  "^'^  ,,,„,,oDflibility, 
and  the  teaching  of  ahoundi-  th*<^qn»lificd  by  'V^,  rpmcuibi-ance  of 
mflinching  jnatice.  Sj^efc^^f^ace  is  seasoned  by  a  «^^;,^  ^^^  the 
alluli ;  the  rock  and  '< 

■"^'ks  l»to  ;AicJ^gg'P;»-,,a  to»  from  .tj^™^^^^^^ 
™.d  two  m  doli.  foiJF}?."'  A,  om-  Lord  »»lj,^™  "1,1  woTtW  «^ 


as  if  they  ^ 
one  ia  tht  ^ 

WhOBOBTi-- 


,\B  ouu  "■;--         ,,       f.jn  alia  l"Oi  '■"      — . 

bjudc.    The 


•.for  the  btams  «' "■»  \oth.  .Uo*t »  pl.mlJ 


c  ia  il  l"™;  '  '  "V  ib«t  men  maj  te    =".  "!".  „„  piih  and 
/No.  1.356. 


302  METROPOLITAS  TABEItNACLE   PDIiPIT. 

new  birth  or  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  he  states  it  quite 
plainly  aa  the  other  grand  traih.  See  how  they  blend — "  Yc  mnst '_ 
bom  again ;"  bnt  "  whosoever  bolievcth  in  liim  shall  not  peiith,  hi 
have  everlasting  life ;"  "  Except  a  man  be  bora  of  water  and  c^  th 
^irit,  he  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God ;"  but "  be  that  beUeredi 
on  him  is  not  condemned."  Two  great  tmtbs  are  written  in  letuis  a 
light  over  the  gate  of  heaven,  as  the  reqaisites  of  all  who  enC«r  t) 
ReameUiation  &/  ihe  blood  nf  Jesus  Chriet;  and  lUgetteration  by  Hk  vm 
of  fhe  Holy  Ghost  We  mnst  not  pnt  one  of  these  truths  before  Hi 
other,  nor  allow  one  to  obliterate  or  hide  ttte  other :  they  are  of  eqH 
importance,  for  they  are  revealed  by  the  same  divine  Spirit,  and  ■ 
alike  needfnl  to  eternal  salvation.  He  who  cares  to  preach  eitheK 
these  ought  also  diligently  to  teach  the  other,  lest  he  be  foand  gnil^t 
violating  that  salutary  precept,  "  What  God  hath  joined  together  It*  i 
man  pnt  asnnder."  Avoid  all  neglect  of  faith,  and  equally  gfann  i 
undervalning  of  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  so  shall  you  find  Hi 
narrow  channel  in  which  the  way  of  troth  doth  lie.  Yon  must  i^ 
Christ  that  you  may  be  accepted  before  God,  but  the  work  of  the  F 
Spirit  within  ^on  is  absolutely  needfid  that  you  may  be  able  to  1 
communion  with  the  pure  and  holy  God.  Faith  gives  us  the  righli 
the  children  of  God,  but  the  new  birth  mnst  be  expcrienoed  thati 
may  have  the  nature  of  children :  of  what  use  woula  rights  be  if} 
had  not  the  capacity  to  exercise  them  ? 

Now  it  is  of  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  of  the  man  in  n 
the  Spirit  of  God  has  worked,  that  I  shall  speak  this  morning,  ao 
ing  to  the  tenor  of  the  t«st.  The  text  may  be  read  two  ways, 
it  may  evidently  ]-efer  lo  ihe  Holy  Spirit  himself.  Do  yon  not  exM 
the  text  to  rnn  thus — "  The  wind  bloweth  where  it  list^th.  and  uM 
hearest  the  sound  thereof,  but  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh, 
whither  it  goeth:  so  also  is  the  Spirit  of  God"?  Is  not  that  the 
in  which  yon  natnrally  expect  the  sentence  to  end  ?  Yes,  and  I  d( 
not  that  snch  was  really  the  Saviour's  meaniag ;  but  frequently  accw 
ing  to  the  New  Testament  idiom  the  truth  is  not  stated  as  onr  En{' 
modes  of  speech  would  lead  us  to  expect :  for  instance,  "The  king 
of  heaven  is  like  unto  a  man  that  sowed  good  seed  in  his  gronnV 
Now  the  kingdom  is  not  like  the  man,  but  like  the  whole  transactiiM 
of  the  parable  in  which  the  man  is  the  principal  actor.  "  The  kingdob  1 
of  heaven  is  like  nnto  a.  merchantman  seetdag  goodly  pearls,"  bnt  the 
kingdom  is  not  like  the  man,  bnt  the  comparison  rnus  into  .all  that  the 
man  does.  So  here  the  Lord  Jesus  lays  hold  of  one  grand',  sphere  of 
the  Spirit's  operations  and  puts  it  down,  intending,  howevei'^a  wider 
sense.  There  are  certain  readings  of  our  text  which  wonld  n^ake  this 
more  clear  if  we  conid  think  them  allowable,  as  for  instance  thirf  which 
does  not  render  the  Greek  word  by  "wind"  at  all,  bnt  traiddates  it 
"  spirit,"  and  makes  it  run,  "  The  Spirit  bloweth  where  he  listc^h,  and 
thou  hearest  the  sonnd  thereof."  I  do  not  adopt  that  reading,  bii^  there 
arc  several  great  anthorities  in  its  favonr,  and  this  tends  to  sho^  that 
our  first  head  is  correct.  When  we  have  spoken  njMU  that  we  wiJ(l  take 
the  language  in  its  second  sense,  in  reference  lo  the  rff/etifratf  viaft,  and 
then  we  read,  "  The  \viud  bloweth  where  it  liateth,  and  thou  hearqst  the 
sound  thereof,  but  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh,  and  whither  it  gWth ; 


J^ 


THE  HEAVBSLT   WINS.  303 

_l  every  man  that  is  bom  of  the  Spirit":  be  himself,  like  the  Spirit 
irliicfa  lie  13  bom,  is  &ec,  and  is  myBteriotu  in  his  ways,  bat  diacerned 
|Uic  soDod  of  his  works  and  life. 

Take  the  text  in  reference  to  the  Holy  SPiair  hixbelf.    The 

_^  s  the  wind,  and,  aa  moat  of  joa  know,  the  Hebrew  word  for 

"^  wind  "  and  for  "spirit"  ia  the  same;  and  it  is  interesting  to  note 

-3i&t  the  same  is  true  with  the  Greek  word  "jmmima,"  which  signifieth 

t30th  '*  breath  "  and  ■'  spirit,"  so  that  the  fignre  which  the  Sayiour  used 

caught  very  natnraliy  srrow  ont  of  the  word  which  he  employed.    The 

'^■rind  is  air  in  motion,  and  is,  of  courBe,  material ;  bnt  air  is  apparentlr 

MDore  spiritual  than  any  of  the  other  elements,  except  fire,  since  it  is  not  to 

Vic  grasped  by  the  hand  nor  seen  with  the  eye.    It  is  certain  that  wind 

Tcaily   csisU,  lor  we  liear  the  sonnd  thereof  and  obBerro  ita  varions 

«fit:cts,  but  it  ia  not  to  be  touched,  handled,  or  gazed  npon ;  men  cannot 

traffic   in  it,  or  meaEDi'S  it  in  scales,  or  weigh  it  in  balances.    We  may 

watch  ibr  Imnrs  as  wc  will  the  clouds  as  they  hasten  along  like  winged 

fowl,  l)i)t  lUl'  wind  which  driveth  them  is  oat  of  oar  sight ;  we  obscrre 

ihe  waves  roused  to  I'uiy  in  the  tempest,  bnt  the  breath  which  so  excites 

(hem  we  L'aiinot  aeu.    Hence  the  word  becomes  all  the  more  excellent 

•>  figure  of  thnt  mighty  power,  the  Holv  Ghost,  of  whose  existence  no 

inan  ever  doubts  wliu  has  come  under  Iiis  influence,  bnt  who,  never* 

Lhelese,  in  not  to  be  tracked  in  his  movements,  nor  to  be  seen  as  to  his 

•livine  persuu  ;  for  he  is  mysterious,  incomprehensible,  and  divine. 

The  metaphor  of  the  wind  cannot  fully  set  forth  the  Holy  Spirit,  aa 
joD  know  :  and,  consequently,  many  other  natural  figures  are  employed, 
such  aa  lire,  dew,  water,  light,  oil,  and  so  on,  in  order  to  exhibit  all  the 
phases  of  his  infiuonco ;  but  still  the  wind  is  a  moat  instructiTe  meta- 
phor as  far  as  it  ^ocb,  and  as-we  cannot  draw  forth  all  its  teaching  in 
one  sermon  let  us  l>i:  content  to  keep  as  closely  as  we  can  to  the  text 

First,  the  wind  ia  a  Sgore  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  iU  freeness — "The 
wind  bloweth  where  in  liateth."  We  speak  of  the  wind  aa  the  very 
image  of  Irecdom ;  ne  say  to  those  who  would  enthral  us,  "  go  bind 
the  winds,"  as  for  ourseWes,  we  claim  to  be  "free  as  the  win£  which 
rttom  at  their  own  will."  No  one  can  fetter  the  wind.  Xerxes  threw 
(-■hoins  into  tbc  ik^Oespont  to  bind  the  sea,  bnt  even  he  was  not  fool 
•mongh  to  talk  of  t'orgisg  fetters  for  the  winds.  The  breezes  arc  not  to 
be  dicteted  Co.  Ciusai'  may  decree  what  he  pleases,  but  the  wind  will 
blow  ic  bis  face  if  he  looks  that  way.  The  Pope  may  command  the 
gale  to  chaiigi;  its  cotirtie,  but  it  will  blow  around  the  Vatican  neither 
less  nor  more  lor  the  holy  father  and  the  cardinals.  A  conference  of 
plenipoteutiarits  (foin  all  the  powers  of  Europe  may  sit  for  a  week 
4nd  resolve  unauituously  that  the  east  wind  shall  not  blow  for  the  next 
six  months,  but  it  will  take  no  heed  of  the  arrangement,  and  will  cast 
dnat  into  the  eouusellors'  eyes,  and  whistle  at  their  wisdom.  No  pro- 
damstion  nor  purpose  under  heaven  will  be  able  to  affect  the  wind  by  so 
moch  as  half  a  point  of  the  compass.  It  will  blow  according  to  its  own 
i^wcct  will,  where  it  pleases,  when  it  pleases,  how  it  pleases,  and  aa  it 
pleases,  for  "  the  wind  lilowcth  where  it  listeUi."  So  ia  it,  only  in  a  far 
higher  and  moi'e  cmplittic  sense,  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  for  he  ia  most 
free  and  absolute,  le  know  that  the  wind  is  in  the  bond  of  God,  and 
(hat  he  ordaineth  every  eephjr  and  each  toraado :  winds  arise  and 


304  METUOPOr.lTAM  TAHEKNACLB  PULPIT. 

tempests  blow  br  order  from  the  throne  supreme  i  bat  as  fur  the  Q 
Spirit,  he  is  God  himself,  and  absolatelj  tree,  and  worketh  according  ^ 
bia  own  will  and  pleivsuru  amongst  the  eone  of  men.     One  nation  )a 
been  visited  b^  the  Holy  Spirit  and  not  aaotlicr — who  shall  ttS  a 
why?    Why  lie  yon  heathen  lands  in  the  dense  darkneas  while  a 
Britain  the  light  is  concentrated  ?    Why  has  tlie  Rcforusatiou  taken  n 
in  Ei^land  and  among  the  northern  nations  of  Europe,  while  in  Su 
and  Italy  it  has  left  scarce  a  trace  ?     Why  blows  the  Holy  Spirit  In 
and  not  there?     1b  it  not  that  he  doeth  as  he  wills?     "I  wilt  hi 
mercy  on  whom  I  will  have  mercy,  and  1  will  hare  compassion  on  wlwal 
I  will  have  compassion  "  is  the  declaration  of  the  diriDc  sorenigcty,  f 
and  the  Spirit  of  God  in  his  movemeuts  oonfinnetli  it.     Among  tbc 
nations  where  the  Spirit  of  God  is  at  work  how  is  it  that  he  bieassi 
one  man  and  not  another?     How  is  it  that  of  two  men  hearing  the 
same  sermon,  and  Enbject  to  the  same  influences  at  home,  one  is  tsfaa 
and  the  other  left?    Two  children  nursed  at  the  same  br^sat,  mi 
trained  by  the  same  parents,  grow  np  to  different  ends.     He  who  periibcs 
in  sin  has  no  one  to  blame  but  himself,  but  lie  who  is  saved  ascribu  ii 
all  to  grace — why  came  that  grace  to  him  ?     We  never  dare  to  laytbt 
fenlt  of  man's  not  repenting  and  belie\ing  npcrn  God — that  n^stetlii^ 
the  evil  will  which  refused  to  obey  the  gospel ;  bnt  we  dare  not  aewibt 
the  saying  difference  in  the  case  of  the  one  who  bclieTes  to  any  natnni 
goodness  in  himself,  but  we  attribute  it  all  to  the  grace  of  God,  and 
believe  that  the  Holy  Spirit  worketh  in  such  to  will  and  to  do  aoccvdiiii; 
to  his  own  good  pleasure.     But  why  works  he  in  us  ?     Why  in  any  cf 
thechosen?    Ah,  why?     "The  wind  blowetli  where  it  listcth." 

So,  too,  is  it  with  the  blessing  which  rests  upon  ministries.  Ou 
man  winneth  eonlg  to  God,  and  as  a  joyons  reaper  returnetfa  with  foil 
sheaves,  bnt  another  who  goeth  forth  with  strong  desires,  and  aeeniBal 
least  to  be  as  earnest  as  his  fellow,  comes  home  with  a.  scanty  bandfol 
of  ears,  which  he  has  painfully  gleaned.  Why  is  one  man's  net  fail 
of  fish  and  another's  utterly  empty  ?  One  servant  of  the  Lord  secou. 
whenever  he  stands  up  to  preach  the  gospel,  to  attract  men  to  Josiu  u 
though  he  had  golden  chains  in  his  mouth  which  he  did  cast  about 
men's  hearts  to  draw  them  in  joyful  captivity  to  his  Lord,  while  anotlier 
cries  in  bitterness  of  soul,  "  Who  hath  twlieved  our  report  ?"  Trolj, 
"  the  wind  blowetli  where  it  listeth."  Ay,  and  these  changes  happen  tt 
each  man  severally  :  one  day  the  preacher  shall  be  ail  alive,  his  sunt 
shall  be  stirred  within  him,  and  he  shall  speak  evidently  with  the  Holr 
Ghost  sent  down  frotn  heaven  ;  and  to-morrow  he  shall  nnd  himself  dml 
and  heavy,  even  to  his  own  consciousucBS,  and  even  more  so  b)  hi) 
people's  experience,  for  the  power  rests  not  upon  him.  One  day  he 
speaketh  hke  the  \'oice  of  God,  and  another  day  he  is  but  as  a  leed 
shaken  of  the  wind.  His  fiit  kine  of  years  gone  by  are  devoured  by  the 
lean  cattle  of  the  present.  He  has  his  famine  as  well  as  his  nleolj. 
Ton  shall  see  him  come  forth  to-day  with  the  unction  of  Ibe  Lord  upw 
him,  and  his  face  shining  with  the  glory  of  fellowship  with  the  Most 
High, and  to-morrow  he  shall  say, "Look  not  ujton  mc, for  I  am  black," 
for  the  glory  shall  have  departed.  We  know  what  it  is  to  come  forth 
Uke  Samson  when  his  locks  were  uhorn  ;  and  to  shake  ourselves  as  st 
Other  times  and  discovei  that  the  lx>rd  is  not  with  ns.    Why  all  this? 


TH£  HS&WILT  WIKD.  305 

la  it  not  becauBe  "the  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth"?  The  Holy 
Spirit,  for  bis  own  wise  reasons,  puts  not  forth  an  eqnal  power  upon  any 
man  at  all  times.  Wc  cannot  control  nor  command  the  Spirit  of  the 
liYing  God  :  he  is  in  the  highest  sense  a  ftee  agent  "Thy  free  Spirit " 
is  a  name  nhkh  David  gave  him,  and  a  most  appropriate  name  it  is. 

Yet,  beloved,  do  not  fell  into  a  misapprehension.  The  Holy  Qhost 
is  absolutely  live  in  his  operations,  bnt  he  is  not  arbitrarr  ;  he  dneth  as 
he  wills,  but  bis  will  is  imaUible  wisdom.  The  wind,  though  we  hate 
no  control  over  it.  hatli  a  law  of  its  own,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  is  a  law 
anto  hiniRelf ;  he  doeth  as  he  wills,  bnt  he  willeth  to  do  evermore  that 
which  is  for  the  best.  Moreover,  we  know  with  regard  to  the  wind 
that  there  are  I'ei'tain  places  where  you  will  almost  always  find  a  breese : 
not  here,  in  the  tceiniDg  city,  nor  down  in  the  valley  shut  in  by  the 
monntains,  nor  on  yonder  steaming  marsh ;  bnt  lift  up  your  eyes  to  the 
hills,  and  mavk  how  tli3  breeze  courses  along  the  downs,  and  sweeps  the 
summits  of  the  mountain  ranges.  In  the  morning  and  the  evening, 
when  the  inland  air  is  tiot  as  an  oven,  gentle  winds  come  to  and  from 
the  aea  and  fun  the  liHher's  cheek :  yoa  may  find  places  where  the  air 
seems  always  stagnant  and  men's  hearts  grow  heavy  amid  the  feverish 
calm,  but  there  are  elavated  hillsides  where  life  is  easy,  for  the  air 
exhilai'ate.'i  by  its  per^ictnal  freshness.  Brethren,  among  lively  sainta,  in 
the  use  of  the  mean.s  of  grace,  in  private  prayer,  in  communion  with 
the  Lord,  you  will  find  the. wind  that  bloweth  where  it  listeth  always  in 
motion. 

The  wind  too  hath  at  least  in  some  lands  its  times  and  seasons.  We 
know  that  at  certain  times  of  the  year  we  may  expect  winds,  and  if  they 
come  not  to  a  day  or  t\m,  yet,  as  a  mle,  the  month  is  stormy ;  and  there 
are  also  trade  winds,  monsoons  which  blow  with  remarkable  regularity  and 
are  counted  upon  by  marinera.  And  so  with  the  Spirit  of  God.  We  know 
that  at  certain  times  he  visits  the  chnrchea,  and  onder  certain  condi- 
tions puts  forth  his  power.  If,  for  instance,  there  is  mighty  prayer,  you 
may  be  sure  the  Spirit  of  God  is  at  work  ;  if  the  people  of  Qod  meet 
together  and  besiege  the  throne  of  grace  with  cries  and  tears,  the  spiritnal 
buumetur  iudieatea  that  the  blessed  wind  is  rising.  Besides,  the  Holy 
Spirit  has  graciously  connected  himself  with  two  things,  truth  and 
prayer.  Preach  the  truth,  publish  the  gospel  of  Jeans  Christ,  and  it  ia 
the  habit  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  make  the  word  qnick  and  powerful  to 
the  hearts  of  tuoii.  If  we  falsify  his  word,  if  we  keep  back  part  of  the 
tmlh,  if  we  become  unfaithful,  we  cannot  eniect  the  Holy  Spirit  to 
bless  us ;  Ijut  if  our  leaching  be  Christ  crucified,  lovingly  set  forth,  and 
if  the  grace  of  God  ia  its  fnhiees  be  really  dechtred,  the  Holy  Spirit 
will  attend  the  truth  aud  make  it  the  great  power  of  God.  I  will  not 
mj  that  it  is  always,  and  without  exception  so,  bnt  I  think  exceptions 
muBt  be  rare ;  almost  invariably  the  Spirit  beareth  witness  witn  the 
tmfch  in  the  conversion  of  men.  So  too  with  prayer,  the  Holy  Spirit  is 
pleased  to  connect  himself  with  that  also,  it  it  be  believing  pr^r. 
Here  the  connection  is  exceedingly  intimate,  because  it  is  the  Spint  of 
Ood  who  himself  gives  the  believing  prayer,  and  it  is  not  only  true  that 
tibe  ^irit  will  be  given  in  answer  to  prayer,  but  the  Spirit  is  already 
^van  or  the  believing  prayer  would  never  have  been  offered.  The 
afiA  ot  prayerfulnesB,  the  spirit  of  anxiety  for  the  conversion  of  men 


306  UETUOPOLITAH  TiBEiisiiSM  tvijU. 

is  one  of  the  snresc  indimtions  thiit  the  Holy  Spirit  is  alreodv  at  wwk 
in  the  miadR  of  l)is  pniplc. 

Coming  back,  liowever,  to  the  grfttt  fact  that  we  caniioc  command  the 
Holy  Spirit,  Jihat  inflnenct;  ouRht  that  tmth  to  have  upon  as  ?  Should 
it  not  bejiiBt  thlB-  Ifc  should  lead  tis  to  Ijc  very  tender  and  jeaknw 
in  onr  conduct  towtirds  the  Holy  Ghost,  so  that  ive  do  not  griet^e  liim  and 
uaniie  him  to  depart  from  us.  Tex  not  the  Spirit.  When  yoa  enjoy  hi," 
graciouB  operations  be  devoiitly  pTat«fal,  and  walk  hambly  before  God. 
that  yon  may  retoiii  them  ;  and  when  he  is  at  ivorkletnotnejr'i^enceon 
Tonr  part  cause  yoa  to  receive  the  grace  of  God  in  rain.  The  wind 
blew,  bnt  the  Bailor  iv»a  asleep ;  it  was  a  favourable  breeze,  bat  he  hvf 
cast  anchor  and  Ms  barqae  moved  not.  If  he  had  hut  known  it  all 
through  the  night  he  would  have  sprend  his  aail  and  have  made  o;ood 
headway  towards  his  port ;  bnt  he  slumbered,  and  the  blessed  wind 
whistled  throngh  the  cordage  and  the  ship  lay  idle  at  its  mooring  Let 
it  not  be  so  with  us.  Never  Buffer  the  Spirit  of  God  to  be  with  ua  anti 
find  uB  regardlesB  of  his  presence.  In  the  olden  times,  when  conntrj- 
people  depended  more  than  they  do  now  on  the  nse  of  the  windmill  tn 
grind  their  com,  porac  parishes  would  he  half-starved,  when  week  afltr 
week  there  had  lieen  no  wind.  The  miUcr  would  look  up  anxioaslj. 
and  eveirbodv  is  the  parish  would  become  a  wat^^hman  for  hia  ssilk, 
hoping  that  tuey  would  soon  be  set  in  motion.  If  the  breeze  stirred  u 
the  dead  of  night,  and  the  miller  was  sound  asleep,  somebody  or  other 
would  ran  and  kiiotk  him  up.  "  The  wind  is  blowing,  the  wind  u 
blowing,  grind  oiir  corn."  So  it  onght  to  be  whenever  the  ^iritof 
God  ia  vigorously  working  in  his  church,  we  should  eagerly  avail  om^ 
selves  of  his  powir.  We  should  he  so  anxions  for  his  divine  operatioiK 
that  all  shonld  be  on  the  watch,  so  that  if  some  did  not  discover  it  other? 
woold,  and(rf)aervfint  ones  would  crj-,  "The  Holy  Ghost  is  working witji 
ns  s  let  arise  and  labour  more  abundantly,"  Hoist  sail  when  the  irind 
fovonra  j  you  cannot  command  it,  therefore  careftilly  value  it. 

But  we  must  paaa  on,  Tlie  Holy  Spirit  is  described  as  being  like  the 
wind  as  to  Am  nKiiiifuflalioni.  "  Thou  heareat,"  aaya  Jesns,  "  the  sotmd 
thereof."  It  has  been  suggested,  and  some  have  enlarged  upon  it,  tbal 
there  are  many  otlior  manifestations  of  the  presence  of  wind :  yon  can 
feel  it,  yon  can  see  its  results  upon  the  trees  and  the  waves,  and  «ksk- 
timeH  yon  can  be  auro  that  the  wind  has  been  at  work  by  the  devastBtian 
which  it  haa  caused :  but  in  this  place  our  Savioar  was  not  so  lauHi 
tUuding  to  a  great  wind  ai>  to  the  gentler  'breezes.  The  Greek  word 
"pneuma"  ia  translated  "  breath,"  and  can  hardly  he  made  to  mean  a 
tranpeet.  It  was  a  gentle  wind  like  a  zephyr  of  which  the  Iiord  Mat 
here  speaking.  The  great  winds,  as  1  have  already  said,  can  Itc  H>me* 
what  calculated  upon,  but  if  yon  sit  in  the  garden  in  the  cool  of  thn 
evening  it  is  utterly  impossible  for  yon  to  tell  whence  the  zephyrs  oomi- 
and  where  they  go ;  they  are  Eo  viilatile  in  their  movements  and  un- 
tnckable  in  their  course;  here,  there,  everywhere  the  soft  btveses  of 
evening  steal  among  the  lowers.  Our  Tioni  tells  us  that  snch  gentk 
zephyrs  arc  heard :  Nicodcmus  in  the  stillnew  of  the  night  could  bear 
tlwrn.  "Thou  liearest  the  Bound  thereof."  The  leaves  rustle,  and  that 
is  all  i  you  hear  a  gentle  movement  of  branch  and  stem,  and  ns  it  wen 
tbt  tfokli^  of  fiowcr-bells.  and  so  yon  discover  that  thp  wind  ts  fKttiag 


THB  mUTBRLV  WIRD.  3d7 

among  the  bede  anl  boilers.  Nov,  beloved,  tliiii  shows  us  that  thft 
hvnring  ear  is  intended  b;  Ood  to  be  the  diacemer  of  the  ^jnt  to  men, 
to  the  most  of  men  the  only  diBcerner  that  thej  have.  "Thon  hearest 
the  sound  thereof."  What  a  wonderful  dignity  the  Lord  bu  been 
pleased  to  put  npon  this  little  organ,  the  ear.  The  Romish  chnrch 
I'iTcs  the  preferenfc  always  to  the  eye ;  her  priests  are  always  for  astonnh- 
u^  men  into  ^acc  vith  their  wonderAil  perfbrmances ;  bnt  God't  way 
s  "  Faith  Cometh  by  hearing,"  and  the  first  detector  of  the  Holy  Ohoet- 
Is  the  ear.  To  sorae  men  this  is  the  only  revealer  of  his  mysterions 
presence,  as  I  have  already  said ;  they  hear  the  sound  thereof,  that  is  to 
say.  they  hear  the  ^fospel  preached,  they  hear  the  word  of  God  read. 
Truth  when  it  is  couched  in  words  is  the  rtutling  of  the  holy  wind,  it 
is  the  footstep  of  the  Eternal  Spirit  as  mysterionsly  he  passes  along  a 
congTegation.  Oh.  vhat  grief  it  is  that  some  never  get  any  taruxr 
than  this,  bnt  &bide  where  Nicodemus  nas  at  the  first :  they  hesr  tho 
sonnd  thereof  and  nothing  more.  Some  of  yon  are  now  daily  hearisg 
tmth  which  hoE  Ba\'ed  thoasands,  but  it  does  not  save  yon ;  yon  are 
hearing  the  very  truth  which  peoples  heaven,  bnt  yet  it  leaves  yon  wil^- 
oat  a  hope  of  eternal  life ;  yet  be  ye  sure  of  this,  the  kingdom  of  God 
has  come  nigh  unto  yon.  "  Thon  nearest  the  sound  thereof,"  and  that 
wind  whose  whiapOT  yon  hear  is  not  far  off  thine  own  cheek. 
When  thon  henrest  the  mstling  amongst  the  boiu;hs  of  the  frees  the 
breozes  are  not  fur  to  seek,  nor  is  the  Spirit  of  God  far  away  when  his 
sonnd  is  heard. 

Some  hearci?,  honever,  go  ftirther,  for  they  hear  the  sonnd  (^  the 
Spirit  in  their  consciences  and  it  disturbs  than ;  they  wotdd  sfem  as  do 
others,  but  as  the  irind  sometimes  comes  whistling  through  the  kery- 
holc  or  honls  down  the  chimney  and  wakes  the  slaggard,  or  if  the  man 
be  ly&ig  in  a  garden  asleep  the  breezes  play  around  his  ears  and  &cc 
md  startle  him,  so  is  it  with  many  unconverted  people;  they  cannot 
be  qniet,  for  they  hear  the  sound  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  their  consciences, 
and  are  troubled  and  perplexed.  There  is  a  revival  and  they  are  not 
•aved,  but  they  are  startled  and  alarmed  by  it ;  their  sister  is  converted, 
they  are  not,  but  still  it  comes  very  near  them,  and  they  feel  as  if  an 
airow  had  gone  whJEzing  by  their  own  car.  It  is  hard  living  in  a  care- 
ksstate  inthe  midst  of  revival.  "Thon  heareet  the  sonnd  thereof." 
Bat  BOfne  of  yon  in  yonr  conscience  are  hearing  the  sonnd  now  in  your 
fiunilv  cirele,  from  the  fact  that  one  after  another  of  your  relatives 
b«ve  been  brought  to  know  the  Lord ;  yon  cannot  avoid  feeling  that 
Aeie  is  something  powerful  abroad,  thongh  it  has  not  yet  exerted  its 
rcfenerating  power  npon  yon. 

As  for  the  man  who  is  saved,  he  hears  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  most 
emphatic  sense,  and  with  what  variety  that  sound  comes  to  him.  At 
fint  he  heard  it  as  a  threatening  wind,  which  bowed  him  in  sadness  and 
seemed  to  sweep  all  his  hopes  to  the  ground,  as  Uie  sera  leaves  of  the 
finest  are  earned  in  the  antnmn's  wind.  When  the  Spirit's  voice 
flonnded  in  mine  ears  at  the  first  it  was  as  a  wail  of  woe,  as  a  vrind 
among  the  tombs,  as  a  sigh  among  faded  lilies.  It  seemed  as  if  all 
vof  hopes  were  pnf&d  away  like  smoke,  or  as  the  night  mists  in 
tlie  mtmring  breeze ;  nothing  was  left  me  bnt  to  montn  my  nothing- 
ness,    ?%en  I  heard  a  sound  as  of  the  hot  sirocco  of  the  East, 


808  tUTBOPOLtTAK  TABEBKAOLB    PULPIT. 

as  if  it  isBoed  from  a  burning  oven.  Yon  know  the  text,  "  Tbe  gTBS 
withewth  and  the  flower  thereof  fadeth  away,  becanse  the  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  bloweth  apon  it :  anrely  the  people  is  ^raes."  In  ni,v  wnl 
there  had  bloomed  a  fcir  meadow  of  golden  kin^nps  and  fair  flowers  of 
many  dainty  colonre,  but  the  Spirit  of  God  blew  tuereon  and  withered 
it  all,  uid  left  it  as  a  dry.  brown,  rnsty  plain,  whereon  was  neither  life 
nor  comelineas.  So  far  the  sacred  wind  dt>atroya  that  which  is  evil,  hnt 
it  ends  not  there,  foi'  wo  thank  God  we  have  heard  the  sound  of  tht 
Spirit  as  a  quickening  wind.  The  prophet  cried,  "  Come  from  the  four 
winds,  0  breath,  and  breathe  npon  these  elain  that  they  may  liw '; 
the  wind  came  and  the  dead  arose  an  exceeding  great  army.  The  like 
miracle  has  been  wrongiit  on  ua.  The  sere  hones  of  oar  own  dealli 
hare  crept  tt^ether,  bono  unto  his  bone,  and  flcah  has  come  npon  them, 
and  now  because  of  the  dirine  breath  we  have  begun  to  live,  Now.  aleo, 
when  the  Holy  Spirit  visits  ns  he  renews  our  life  and  ener^.  nnd  wt 
have  lifb  more  abundantly.  The  Holy  Spirit  has  bidcc  thenlWn  to  os 
full  often  a  melting  wind,  "  He  cauaeth  his  wind  to  blow  and  the  waters 
flow."  IxKked  op  in  the  chains  of  ice  all  through  the  winter  the  waleis 
are  still  as  a  stone,  but  the  spring-winds  come,  tbe  brooklets  Snd  liberty 
and  leap  away  to  the  rivers,  and  the  rivers  flow  in  all  their  free  force  to 
add  their  volume  to  the  sea.  So  hath  the  Spirit  of  Qod  oft«ntiniM  | 
broken  up  our  frost,  and  given  our  spirits  Joyous  liberty.  He  melB  i 
the  rocky  heart  and  di>^solvcs  tbe  iron  spirit,  at  the  sound  of  his  f^in^'s 
men  are  moved  to  feeluip;,  We  know  the  sound  of  this  wind  at^  as  » 
diffusive  breath,  drawitig  forth  and  diffusing  our  slumbering  graces. 
"  Awake,  0  north  vrind :  and  come,  thou  south  ?  blow  upon  my  garden.  , 
that  the  spices  thereof  may  flow  ont."  Oh,  whut  a  sweet  unloosing  of  holj 
gratitude,  and  love,  and  hope,  and  joy  has  there  been  in  our  heart  whea  I 
the  Spirit  of  God  has  i  isited  us.  As  sweet  essences  lie  hidden  in  the 
flowers,  and  come  not  forth  until  the  loving  wind  doth  entice  theoi 
to  fly  abroad,  bo  do  sweet  graces  lie  within  renewed  spirits  until  the  i 
Holy  Ghost  cometh  and  s|»aketh  to  them,  and  they  know  his  voice  and 
come  forth  to  meet  him,  nnd  so  sweet  fragrances  are  shed  abroad. 

Yes,  my  brethren,  all  this  wc  know,  and  we  have  heard  the  sound  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  in  another  sense,  namely,  as  going  forth  with  us  to  tht 
battle  of  the  Lord.  We  have  heard  that  sound  of  a  going  lu  the 
toi«  of  the  mulberry  trees  which  David  heard,  and  we  have  bestirred 
onrsolves,  and  victory  has  Ijeen  onrs.  If  we  have  not  heard  that  rush- 
ing mighty  wind  which  came  at  Pentecost,  yet  have  we  felt  its  divine 
effect,  which  ceaseth  not,  but  still  bringeth  life,  power,  energy,  and  all 
that  is  wanted  for  th<.'  c<iiiversion  of  the  sons  of  men  to  us  who  an; 
bidden  to  go  forth  and  preach  the  gospel  amongst  the  nations.  In  all 
these  respects  the  Holy  Ghost  has  luanifestcd  himself^  as  wind  does,  hj 
his  sound.  "  Thou  hcarest  the  sound  thereof."  "  Their  sound  went 
into  all  tbe  earth,  and  their  woi-ds  unto  tbe  ends  of  the  world." 

A  third  likeness  of  the  ISpirit  to  tbe  wind  is  set  Ijetbre  us  in  the  point 
of  myetn-y.  "  Thou  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh  nor  whither  it 
goeth."  Of  the  wind  we  nmy  tell  that  it  comes  from  such  and  such  a 
quarter  or  point,  but  you  cannot  put  your  linger  on  the  map  and  «ay, 
"  The  north  wind  begim  in  this  region,"  or  "  here  the  west  wind  was 
bom."    Indeed,  we  know  ^■ety  little  about  the  winds,  theit  origin,  or 


THE  HEAYENLT  WIND.  809 

tlieir  laws.  One  of  the  best  and  most  accurate  observers  of  the  wind 
during  thirty  years  recorded  every  wind  in  his  region,  until  at  the  end 
of  the  term  ne  abandoned  the  few  rules  which  he  had  laid  down  during 
the  first  two  or  three  years,  for  he  found  that  no  rule  held  good.  No  man 
can  say  whence  the  wind  leapeth  forth.  The  heathen  dreamed  of  a  certain 
cave  wherein  the  winds  were  enclosed  as  in  a  prison,  and  suffered  to  go 
abroad  one  by  one  :  it  was  but  a  fable  ;  we  know  not  where  the  winds 
first  spread  their  wings,  or  where  they  sleep  when  all  is  still.  So  is  it 
with  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  mind  of  man,  his  first  movements  are  hidden 
in  mystery.  You  know  that  you  are  converted,  my  dear  Mend,  and  you 
know  somewhere  about  the  time,  and  probably  you  remember  somewhat 
as  to  the  means  which  the  Lord  used  for  your  salvation.  Those  outward 
circumstances  you  do  know,  but  how  the  Holy  Spirit  operated  upon  you 
you  do  not  and  cannot  tell  any  more  than  you  can  tell  how  swells  the  life 
vdthin  the  seed  until  it  springs  up  and  becomes  the  full  com  in  the  ear, 
or  how  the  sap  in  the  trees  first  descendeth  in  the  winter  and  after- 
wards climbeth  again  in  the  spring.  There  are  secrets  which  nature 
doth  not  reveal,  and  the  work  of  the  Spirit  is  even  more  a  secret,  and 
assuredly  no  man  can  explain  it  to  his  tellow  or  to  himself.  Why  is  it, 
my  friend,  that  you  obtained  a  blessing  under  one  sermon  but  not  under 
another,  and  yet  when  you  spoke  to  your  sister  she  had  been  more 
bless^  under  the  second  than  the  first  ?  The  power  does  not  come 
from  the  preacher,  then,  it  is  clear,  and  **  thou  canst  not  tell  whence  it 
cometh."  There  are  times  in  which  you  feel  not  only  that  you  can  pray 
Imt  that  you  must  pray  ;  how  come  you  to  be  in  that  state  ?  I  ^ow 
what  it  is  to  feel  in  a  very  ecstacy  of  deb'ght  in  the  Lord,  for  which  I 
can  scarcely  account,  for  at  another  time  when  I  have  been  engaged  in 
the  same  work,  and  I  think  with  the  same  earnestness,  I  have  not  been 
conscious  of  any  such  exceeding  delight  in  God.  At  one  time  the 
heart  will  be  full  of  penitence  as  if  it  would  break  for  sin,  and  at 
another  season  it  will  overflow  with  such  delight  in  Christ  that  the  sin 
seems  almost  forgotten  in  the  pardoning  sacrifice.  Why  these  diverse 
operations  ?  We  know  what  it  is  at  times  to  feel  such  a  sense  of  death 
upon  us  as  to  be  earnestly  preparing  for  our  last  hours ;  and  at  another 
time  to  be  altogether  forgetful  of  death,  and  to  be  living,  as  it  were, 
the  immortal  life  already,  raised  up  together  and  made  to  sit  together 
with  Christ.  But  how  these  various  modes  and  forms  and  workings 
of  the  Spirit  come  who  among  us  shall  tell  ?  Go  trace  the  dewdrops, 
if  ye  can,  to  the  womb  of  the  morning,  and  discover  which  way  went 
the  lightning's  flash,  or  how  the  thunder  rolled  along  the  mountain 
tops,  but  ye  cannot  tell  nor  can  you  guess  whence  cometh  the  Spuit  of 
Ood  into  your  souls. 

Nor  can  we  tell  whither  it  goeth.  Here,  again,  is  another  mystery. 
Oh,  it  charms  me  to  think  that  when  we  let  loose  the  truth  in  the  power 
of  the  Spirit  we  never  know  where  it  will  fly.  A  child  takes  a  seed, 
one  of  those  little  downy  seeds  which  has  its  own  parachute  to  bear  it 
through  the  air  ;  the  little  one  blows  it  into  the  air,  but  who  knows  where 
that  downy  seed  sd^all  settle,  and  in  whose  garden  it  shall  grow  ?  Such 
18  tmthy  even  from  the  mouths  of  babes  and  sucklings.  Whole  conti- 
jients  have  been  covered  with  strange  flowers  simply  by  the  wind  wafting 
#av6ign  seeds  thither,  and  mariners  have  discovered  sunny  islets  out  there 


1 


tl9  METROfOlJT*}!  TABKKSACL£   PULPIT. 

in  tbe  Southern  Hea,  where  foot  of  uma  liua  neyer  trodden,  cuTerod  with 
abnndanee  of  vegetaiion  which  the  wind  has  by  degrees  wtilted  thither. 
Scatter  the  trath  ou  all  sides,  for  you  oinnot  tell  where  the  Spirit  will 
carry  it.  Fling  it  to  the  winds,  and  yoa  ahull  find  iC  afW  many  days. 
Scatter  the  living  seed  with  lioth  htind^  send  it  noiib,  south,  east, 
andweat,  and  God  will  give  it  wings. 

-■  Wuft,  wntt  ye  winds  die  ^Uiry. 
And  you,  ye  waters  roll. 
Till  like  a  sea  of  glorj 

It  sprrawlfl  from  pole  to  pole." 

I  fa&d  a  letter  but  the  other  day  when  I  was  sore  sick :  it  was  written 

by  a  sister  in  Christ  in  the  very  heart  of  the  empire  of  Brazil.  She  suid 
that  she  had  met  with  a  copy  of  iny  '■'  Morning  Headings,"  and  had  Iband 
thereby  the  way  of  peace,  and,  therefore,  she  wrote  nie  such  a  loving, 
toaching  letter,  that,  as  I  read  it,  it  brought  tears  to  my  eyes.  There 
was  something  more  affecting  yet,  for  at  the  end  was  written  in  anoUier 
hand,  some  words  to  the  effect  that  his  dear  wife  who  had  written  the 
above  letter  had  died  soon  after  finishing  it,  and  with  a  bleeding  heart 
the  lone  huslmnd  sent  it  on  to  me,  rojoiciug  that  ever  the  word  came  to 
his  wife's  sonl  in  the  far-off  land.  Brethren,  you  do  not  know  where 
the  word  will  go  and  the  Spirit  with  iL  In  Bohemia  the  papists 
thought  they  had  stamped  out  the  gospel,  and  with  cruel  edicts  they  kept 
down  all  thought  of  Pi\)testaniBm,  but  just  lately,  since  the  toleration, 
the  goBpel  fiaa  been  preached  in  that  country,  and  to  the  siirpiTsc  o( 
everybody  there  have  come  forward  men  and  women  from  looe  cottages 
in  the  woods  and  from  different  comers  of  the  great  ciiles  uf  Bohemia, 
bringing  with  tbem  ancient  copies  of  the  word  of  God,  themselves  being 
eager  to  know  the  precious  truth  for  which  they  remember  that  their 
fathers  died.    A  truth  will  go  adown  the  centuries :  hke  the  river,  it  sijiga 


■■  Thou  canst  not  tell  whither  it  Koeth,"  it  will  travel  on  till  the 
millenuiiun.  Send  that  saying  abroad  that  the  truth  cannot  die. 
The  persecutor  cannot  kill  it,  it  is  immortal,  tike  the  God  who  sent 
it  forth ;  the  persecutor  cannot  even  stay  ila  course,  it  is  divine. 
Popery  will  always  be  in  danger  so  long  as  tnere  is  one  leaf  of  the  Bible 
upon  earth,  or  one  man  living  who  knows  the  Saviour.  Aoticimst 
cannot  triumph ;  the  Holy  Spirit  wars  against  it  with  the  sword  of  the 
word,  and  thou  canst  not  tell  how  far  into  the  heart  of  error  any  truth 
may  be  driven.  To  the  overthrow  of  falsehood  and  the  death  of  siu 
the  Spirit  speeds  on,  but  thou  kuowest  not  how. 

"  Thou  canst  not  t«ll  whither  it  goeth  "  either  in  any  one  heart.  If 
you  have  received  the  Holy  Spirit  into  your  heart,  you  cannot  teB 
whither  ho  will  carry  you.  I  am  sure  that  William  Carey,  when  he 
gave  his  young  heai't  to  Ciirist  never  thought  the  Spirit  of  God  tvould 
carry  him  to  Serampore  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  Hindoos ;  and  wlieo 
Ueorge  Whitefield  first  drank  of  the  life-giving  spirit  it  never  occurred 
to  him  that  the  pot-boy  at  the  Bell  Inn  at  Gloneestor  would  thuniter 
the  gospel  over   two  continents  and  turn  thousands  to  Christ.    Nq! 


THB  HKAVBHLY  WDIB.  311 

Too  know  not  to  what  blesaed  ead  this  wind  will  waft  ;ou.  Commit  yonr- 
selTes  to  it :  be  nob  disobedient  to  the  heavenly  Tieion  ;  be  ready  to  be 
borne  along  as  the  Spirit  of  Ood  shall  help  you,  even  as  the  dust  in  the 
sommer'B  breeze.  And  0  child  of  God,  yon  do  not  yonrself  know  to 
what  heights  of  holiness  and  d^reea  of  knowledge  and  ecstaciea  of  en- 
joyment the  Spirit  of  Ood  will  bear  yon,  "  Eye  hath  not  seen  nor  ear 
lieiutl  the  things  which  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  lore  him,"  and 
though  he  hath  revealed  them  by  his  Spirit  (for  the  Spirit  searcheth  all 
tbii^s,  even  the  deep  things  of  Qod),  yet  even  to  the  best  tanght  child 
of  God  it  is  not  yet  known  to  the  full  whither  the  Spirit  of  GM  goeth. 
"  Tmst  yc  in  the  Lord  for  ever,  for  in  the  Lord  Jehovah  there  is 
everlasting  strength,*  said  he  will  bear  you  onward  and  upward,  even 
to  jiE^fectiou  it^,  and  yoQ  shall  be  with  Jesus,  where  he  is,  and 
behold  his  gioiy. 

11.  I  hiivtibnt  a  few  minntes  left  for  my  second  head,  bnt  I  do 
not  need  muny,  since  I  do  not  wish  to  say  mnch  npon  it.  The  text 
relates  to  those  who  are  born  of  the  Spirit.  "The  windbhiw^ 
where  it  listctli,  and  thon  hearest  the  sonnd  thereof,  bnt  canst  not  tell 
wbenct!  it  cunieth,  and  whither  it  goeth :  so  is  every  one  that  is  bom 
of  the  Sfiiril. "  The  birth  partakes  of  the  nature  of  the  parent.  That 
which  is  bom  of  the  Spirit  is  like  onto  the  Spirit  of  which  it  is  bom, 
even  as  that  nbich  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh,  and  is  similar  to  the 
flesh  by  whicl)  it  is  begotten.  The  twice-bom  man  is  like  the  Holy  Ghost 
who  produced  him,  and  he  ia  like  him  in  each  of  the  points  which  we 
have  ali-oady  dwelt  npon.  As  to  freedom,  yon  may  say  of  him,  "  He 
bloweth  where  he  listeth."  The  Spiritof  Qod  makea  the  believer  a  liree 
man,  bestows  on  him  the  freedom  of  his  will  which  he  never  had  before, 
and  gives  him  a  delighthil  consciousness  of  liberty.  "  If  the  Son  make 
jou  li-eu  ju  shiJl  he  free  indeed."  I  do  not  afBim  that  every  spiritual 
man  does  as  he  list£,  because,  alas,  I  see  another  law  in  our  members 
warring  against  the  law  of  our  mind,  and  bringing  us  into  captivity  to 
the  law  of  sin  and  death :  but  still,  "  where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is, 
dieie  is  liberty."  Now  you  can  pray,  which  you  could  not  do  before ; 
now  yon  can  praise,  though  yon  could  not  extract  a  note  of  praise  from 
jonr  ungratetul  heart  before  ;  now  yon  can  cry,  "Abba,  Father;" 
now  you  can  draw  near  to  God.  You  are  no  longer  under  man's 
conbtil,  you  blow  where  you  list  j  you  are  not  now  ruled  by  priest- 
craft, nor  domineered  over  by  the  opinion  of  your  fellow-man.  The 
Lord  has  set  yon  free,  and  yon  list  to  go  where  God's  word  bids  you 

f,  and  you  find  the  utmost  liberty  in  going  that  wsy.  Oh,  brethren, 
cannot  tell  you  the  change  which  is  felt  by  a  regenerate  man  in  the 
matter  of  spiritual  liberty.  When  you  were  under  the  bondage  of  the 
law,  of  custom  and  of  sin,  and  of  fear  of  death  and  dread  of  hell, 
von  were  like  a  man  shut  up  in  one  of  those  cells  in  Venice  which  lie 
below  the  level  of  the  water  mark,  where  the  air  is  foul,  and  the  poor 
prieoner  can  only  stir  half-a-dozen  feet  and  then  walk  back  again  in  the 
dartniesB ;  but  when  the  Spirit  of  God  comes  he  brings  the  soul  &om 
daikness  into  light,  from  clammy  damp  into  the  open  air ;  he  sets 
before  you  an  open  door,  he  helps  you  to  mn  in  the  ways  of  Qod'a  com- 
mands, and  as  if  that  were  not  enough,  he  even  lends  you  wings,  and 
iHds  Ton  mount  as  the  eagl^  for  he  has  set  yon  free. 


S13  MKTHOPOI.n'AX   TAHLXMACIiK   I'Ll.t'IT. 

A^n,  the  man  who  in  bom  of  thit  Spirit  is  somcwbAt  ouuffMkd; 
ani  18  Imom  by  bis  soand.  ■'  Thon  hearest  the  sonnd  thereof.  Tk 
most  nngodl;  mnn  if  ho  lives  near  a  GfaristiaQ  will  hear  the  wiiDd  OS 
him.    Tm  lecret  life  within  will  speak ;  woTda  there  will  be,  fat  Ckrii- 


e  not  dnmb,  but  actions  will  speak  mope  loudly  still :  and 
apart  irom  actions  the  very  a[Hrit  ana  tone  of  the  man  who  is  nsiin 
r^enentod  will  speuk,  and  the  ungodly  man  will  be  compelled  to  hear 


"Thou  hparest  the  sonnd  thereof." 
And  now  notice  l/w  mygtory  there  \%  tibont  si  Ohristian.  Tlioo 
Jmoweat  nothing,  if  thon  art  nnregencmtc,  al>ODt  the  life  the  bdienr 
lewis,  for  be  ta  dead,  and  his  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God.  Tlwa 
knowest  not  wheQ<^«  ho  cometh  forth  Jn  the  morning ;  those  bedn  of 
nices  which  iiave  niude  his  gannent«  fi-agrant  thon  host  not  wee: 
that  weeping  in  pruyer  or  that  rejoicing  in  fellowship  wi^  wbidi 
be  opened  the  morning  thon  knowest  nothing  of,  nnd  thon  eanst  not 
know  nntil  thou  art  thyself  iKirn  of  the  Spirit.  Neither  canst  thon 
tell  whither  the  spiritnal  man  goeth.  In  the  midst  of  his  Iroabk 
Uion  teest  him  »ilm ;  dost  thon  know  where  he  went  to  win  tbu 
rare  qnietinde  't  In  the  hoar  of  death  thon  seest  him  triamnlumt ;  doi 
thou  know  where  lie  has  been  to  leani  to  die  so  joyously  ?  No.  the  no- 
r^i;enerate  man  knows  not  whither  the  believer  goes.  Ti-ere  is  a  secwl 
}daoe  of  the  Most  High,  and  they  shall  abide  under  the  shadow  of  At 
Alnugh^  who  have  onre  learned  to  enter  there,  but  carnal  men  oont 
not  into  this  secret  chamber.  The  Christian  life  is  a  niysteiy  il 
through,  from  it.s  beginning  to  its  end:  to  t)ie  worldling  all  a  tajiaj, 
and  to  the  Christian  hiatself  a  pnzsle.  He  cannot  read  his  own  riddk, 
nor  understand  biniself.  This  one  thing  he  knoweth,  "  Wheroas  I  m 
once  blind,  now  I  see";  this  also  he  knoweth,  "0  Lord,  I  am  thi 
servant,  I  am  thy  servant,  and  the  son  of  thine  handmaid :  thon  Yum 
loosed  my  bonds";  this  also  he  knoweth,  that  when  his  Lord  shiill  br 
revealed  then  will  he  also  shine  forth  as  the  sun.  The  life  witbin  tiin 
in  its  coming  and  going  is  all  a  mystery  to  him,  but  he  blesses  God  tbn 
he  has  fellowship  therein.  He  goes  on  his  way  feeling  tliat  thon^ 
men  know  not  whence  he  is,  nor  whither  he  is  going,  yet  the  LonI 
knows  him,  and  he  himself  is  snre  that  he  ia  going  to  his  Father  ami 
his  God.  0  that  every  one  of  yon  had  so  delightful  a  hope.  The  liori 
grant  it  to  yon,  for  -Tcbub'  sake. 


POIITIONS  OF    tirRIITUUE   RRAD  DBroitK   SKH 


Hymnb  from  "Oun  Owx  IIvks  Itoox' 


Jllptttaplitan  iJakrnade  §ul|!it 


A  BCSINESS-I/IKE  ACCOUNT. 


Delitkeed  oh  Lokd'b-Dat  M0HHIS8,  JuHB  3rd,  1877,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THS    MBTROPOLITAir    TABEBKAOLB,   NZWmOTOlf. 


"Butwliat  thini^a  WGre^ntome,  UiMe  t  counted  loss  for  Christ  Ym  donbllets, 
and  I  count  all  things  but  loss  for  tho  excellencj  of  the  knowledgiQ  of  Christ  Jeau* 
toy  Lord  :  for  «bom  I  hare  suffered  the  lose  of  all  thiuge,  and  do  count  them  but 
dnagi  that  I  may  n-in  Chriet,  and  be  fotind  in  him,  not  having;  mine  own  tighteoiU' 
ness,  which  11  of  the  law,  but  that  which  is  throneh  the  fiiith  of  Christ,  thn 
righteonat^ess  which  ia  of  God  by  faith." — Philippisns  lii.  7 — 9. 

OoR  Saviour's  advice  to  those  who  wished  to  be  hia  disciples  was 
'■'  Count  the  cost."  He  did  not  wish  to  entice  any  man  to  eahat  in  his 
atm^  b^  keeping  him  in  ignorance  as  to  the  reqairements  of  his  service. 
Again  and  again  he  tested  professed  converts  himself,  and  be  frequently 
exhorted  men  to  try  themselves,  lest  they  should  begin  a  profession  and 
be  unable  to  maintain  it.  True  religion  I'a  a  matter  of  enthasiasm,  bnt 
at  the  Boine  time  its  truths  and  preccpUi  can  endure  the  severest  exami- 
nation. The  exercise  of  our  judgmenta  npon  the  gospel  is  invited,  yea 
ngaired.  It  is  true  that  many  persons  are  brought  to  Clirist  in  earnest 
aaaembliefl,  where  they  are  addressed  in  fervent  language ;  but  yet  a  man 
may  sit  down  in  his  study  or  bis  counting  house  with  his  pen  in  his 
hand,  and  in  the  coolest  possible  manner  he  may  calculate,  and,  if  under 
the  Holy  Spirit's  guidance  he  shall  be  led  to  calculate  trathfuUy,  he  will 
conie  to  the  concfasion  that  the  cause  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  worthiest 
and  best.  Do  not  imagine,  as  some  do,  that  rehgion  consists  in  a  wild 
Canaticism  which  never  considers,  calculates,  judges,  estimates,  or 
ponders ;  for  such  an  imagination  will  be  the  reverse  of  truth.  Ardonr, 
fervODT,  enthusiasm,  these  are  desirable,  and  we  cannot  well  hare  too 
mm:h  of  them ;  but  at  the  same  time,  as  I  have  already  said,  we  can 
jnatify  our  attachment  to  Christ  by  the  calmest  Ic^ic,  by  the  most 
patient  consideration.  We  may  make  a  lengthy  and  deliberate  esti- 
mate, taking  both  things  temporal  and  things  eternal  into  review, 
and  yet  we  mar  challenge  all  gainsayers  while  we  declare  that  it  tR 
&a  wisest  and  the  best  thing  in  all  the  world  to  be  a  disciple  of  Jesns 
Ohriit 

N08.  1,867-8. 


81i  METROPOLITIH  TABERNACLB  PULPIT. 

In  our  text  the  apostle  gives  or  the  vord  •'  oDant  "  three  fcimee  vnr. 
He  waa  skilled  in  F^piritnal  arithmetic,  and  very  carets  in  his  reckoniajf. 
He  cast  up  his  acconnta  with  caution,  and  observed  with  a  diligeot 
eye  his  leascB  and  iiis  ^ins.  In  his  reckoning  he  doen  not  ignore  ai^ 
losses  that  may  be  supposed  to  be  sustained,  or  really  may  be  Bn»- 
tained ;  and  he  does  not,  on  the  othet  hand,  far  a  rngfacat  forget  that 
blessed  gain  for  which  he  couute  it  worth  while  to  goffer  surprising  Ins. 
Paul  here  seems  to  be  in  n  meroBntile  firame  of  mind,  adding  and  snV 
tracting,  counting  and  balancing,  with  much  quiet  and  decision  of 
mind  I  commend  the  te\t  to  busineSB  nies ;  I  inrite  them  to  folknr 
the  apostle's  esaiuple.  to  use  their  best  jadgments  upon  eternal  things, 
to  sit  down,  take  out  their  pen  and  figure  as  he  did,  and  make  ont 
estimates  and  calculations  as  to  themMlveB  and  Christ,  their-own  worb 
and  the  righteonanesa  of  faith. 

The  subject  this  morning  ^^ll  be,  first,  IM  apoitU's  calaitalums ;  kA 
secondly,  our  oxmi ;  the  object  being  in  the  second  part  to  put  qnestioat 
to  ourselves  as  to  whether  we  estimate  things  after  the  apostolic  feshioa, 

I.  First,  then,IetusconsiderTHB  AFoaTi.E'B  0AUJULATIOS8.  liOokin^ 
at  the  text,  yon  will  notice  tliat  ho  n]ade  three  distinct  countings  ;  they 
all  came  to  much  the  same  thin<r,  with  this  diiference,  that  each  one  as  it 
succeeded  its  fellow  was  more  emphatic  in  its  result:  the  result  was 
the  same,  bat  it  was  more  and  more  forcibly  expressed. 

And,  first,  we  have  his  eounlituf  at  Ihs  outset  of  hi*  ChritiioH  ^ 
When  he  became  a  believer,  he  says  of  himself,  "  what  things  wen 
gain  to  me,  those  I  counted  loss  for  Christ."  That  is  to  say,  at  the  fint 
and  earliest  period  when,  from  being  8anl,  the  Rabbi,  the  intena 
Pharisee,  he  tecame  Paul,  the  convert,  and  the  preacher  of  the  faith 
which  onoe  he  destroyed,  those  things  which  to  himself  had  seemed  vetj 
splendid  gains  all  dissolved  into  one  great  loss.  At  that  time  he  sari 
he  made  a  calcolHtioii  and  formed  a  deliberate  opinion  that  what  bad 
appeared  to  him  to  be  most  advantageous  was  really,  so  far  as  Christ 
wae  concerned,  a  positive  disadvantage  and  hindrance  to  him — the  gaina 
were  a  lose. 

Now,  yon  will  notice  that  in  this  first  calcnlation  he  dwelt  upon  tbe 
separate  items,  noting  each  with  great  distinctness.  The  list  of  the 
thmga  whereof  he  might  glory  in  the  flesh  reads  like  a  catalogue.  "  Cir- 
cumcised the  eighth  day,  of  the  stock  of  Israel,  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin, 
an  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews  ;  as  touching  the  law,  a  Pharisee  ;  eoncerainy 
zeal,  persecuting  the  church  ;  touching  the  righteousness  which  is  in  tha 
law,  hlamelesB."  These  are  the  things  which  were  gains  to  him,  and  tht 
list  is  very  comprehensive,  beginning  at  his  birth  and  circnmcision  and 
mnning  righton  to  the  date  of  his  conversion.  He  dwells  with  a  high 
degree  of  interest  upon  the  items  of  his  Jewish  advantf^es :  they  had 
bean  aa precions pearls  to  him  once,  and  while  he  freely  renounces  them, 
he  yetremambem  that  they  were  once  dear  as  the  apple  of  his  eye.  Thej 
had  been  his  pride,  his  patent  of  nohiittj,  and  his  daily  boast.  He  felt  him- 
self t«  be  in  these  respects  far  in  advance  of  the  most  of  mankind,  anJ 
second  to  none,  even  of  his  favoured  race,  for  even  now,  he  says,  "  If  any 
other  man  tbinkrth  that  he  hath  whereof  he  might  trust  in  the  flesh,  I- 
mBM."  "  Oircwncised  the  eighth  day  "  s— the  rite  which  introduced  him  » 
th«  Mtward  covenant  of  Abrfthwa  had  been  performed  exactly  wfcen 


A  BUBPFB8»-I(IKa  iBDOnSW.  31S 

rdsinedbj  the  ]nw.  Haww  notoaevhc  hiul  been  eircnmeiHad  w  prp- 
aHytos  nere,  late  in  liTe,  nor  at  ui  iirf^nlar  Mfiaon  on  aoconot  of  ill 
lealth,  tmrellin^,  or  parental  nagleet ;  bol  to  the  moment  as  the  Mooaia 
Itual  required  he  had  as  a  babe  been  rcceired  into  the  congregation  of 
[srael.  aext,  he  was  of  "the  etook  of  larael,"  he  waa  not  one  who 
iftd  been  couvert^d  to  the  Israelitish  faith,  nor  a  descendant  of 
Sibeonites  or  of  proselyted  parents,  but  he  wae  of  the  pure  stock  of 
Israel,  descended  by  a  clear  line,  which  probably  he  was  able  genealc^i- 
ttUy  to  trace,  from  that  Israel  who  was  a  prevailing  prince  with  Gad. 
Be  nna  proud  of  thin  deecen^  and  well  he  might  be,  for  everr  Jew  is  of 
rioble  lineage.  Spenk  of  ancient  families  who  can  match  the  seed  of 
Israel !  Theirs  is  the  belt  blood  in  the  nniverse,  if  one  blood  be  better 
tb&n  another. 

Paul  also  boasted  that  be  wai "  of  die  tribe  of  Benjamin  " :  the  tribe 
which  Moses  called  the  belored  of  the  Lord,  the  tribe  within  whose 
canton  the  temple  stood :  the  tribe  which  was  descended  from  the  beloved 
wife  of  Jacob,  eren  Baobel,  and  not  &om  the  sons  of  either  of  the 
bondwomen.  The  tribe  of  Benjamin  wag  that  firom  which  the  first 
king  of  Israel  was  chosen,  and  he  bore  the  same  name  ae  tliat  by  which 
PbqI  hod  beL>n  known  among  his  Jewish  brethren.  Paul  was,  there- 
fore, of  the  Terj  choicest  branoh  of  that  vine  which  the  liOrd  himself 
brought  out  of  Egypt. 

He  next  adds  that  he  was  a  "Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews";  he  waa 
the  eream  of  the  cream,  the  very  pick  and  choice  out  of  the  choice 
nation  and  the  elect  people.  If  there  waa  any  benefit  to  be  had  by  being 
Qf  the  seed  of  Abraham,  the  Hebrew,  he  had  all  that  benefit  in  the 
highest  possible  degree.  Then  he  had  !^pended  to  all  the  adranteges 
of  birthright  and  of  nationality  that  of  entering  into  a  peculiar  sect,  the 
most  orthodox,  the  most  devout — for  "  as  touching  the  law  he  was  a 
Pharisee,"  and  belonged  to  the  sect  which  attached  importance  to  the 
miaateat  details  of  the  law,  and  tithed  its  mint  and  ita  anise,  and  its 
cummin.  What  more  could  he  be?  He  was  a  Jesalt  among  the 
Catholics,  one  who  went  to  the  extreme  among  extremists,  one  of  those 
initiated  into  the  innermost  secrets  of  the  faith.  Then,  aa  to  personal 
character,  he  felt  that  tiere  in  his  natural  state  he  had  something 
which  was  gain,  for  he  waa  so  full  of  zeal  that  those  who  appeared  to 
i^eak  against  the  law  of  Moses  bv  declaring  the  gospel  were  couuted 
•a  his  enemies,  whom  he  hunted  down  with  all  his  might—"  concern- 
ing seal,  persecuting  the  church."  This  he  had  done  in  all  honesty  of 
pnipose  as  the  result  of  bia  thorough  self-righteousness.  He  finishes  by 
saying  that  he  himself  waa  as  to  every  detail  of  the  law,  every  little 
point  of  ritual,  and  every  particular  rubric,  altogether  blameless.  This 
was  no  imall  thing  to  say,  but  he  apoke  no  more  than  the  truth.  These 
things  all  put  together  are  what  he  counted  gains  (for  the  Greek  word 
is  in  the  plural),  and  I  think  he  dwells  ^mewhat  lingeringly  upon  each 
Beparat«  point,  as  verj  well  he  might,  for  they  had  been  very  dear  to 
him  in  former  days,  and  these  privileges  were  in  themselves  things  of 
no  meau  worth. 

But  now,  what  woe  to  be  set  on  the  other  side  7  Here  is  a  long  list 
OD  one  side,  what  is  to  be  placed  per  emira  J  He  says,  "  What  things 
were  gain  to  me,  those  I  counted  lo»  /«■  GhrUi."    What!    What  I 


816  MBTSOPOLITAF  TIBSMTAOLB  PULPIT. 

Nothing  on  the  other  side  but  one  item  1  One  ?  One  onlj  ?  anA  jri 
there  were  bo  many  privilcKM  on  the  other  aide  !  There  was  bnt  one 
name,  one  person  in  thut  scale,  while  in  the  other  there  were  «t 
manj  advantngeB  I  Why,  one  bcpina  to  think  thnt  tlie  calcolalicn 
will  floon  come  to  an  end  in  faronr  of  Ranl'B  iBraelttish  descent,  and 
the  rert  of  it:  bat  not  so,  the  one  ontweished  the  many.  Here  I 
wantTon  to  notice  that  Pani  does  not  say  that  those  be  eonnted  Iob 
for  Chriatianity,  or  for  the  church,  or  for  the  orthodox  faith.  Then 
would  have  been  truth  in  euch  a  atat^ment,  bnt  the  centre  of  (Ix 
tmth  lies  here — be  counted  these  things  loss  for  Christ,  that  is. 
for  the  liord  Jcbub  Clirist  himself.  He  thought  of  that  divrne  one, 
blessed  be  his  name,  that  brother  of  our  Bonla  who  was  bom  at 
Bethlehem,  the  Kiusmnn,  Redeemer  of  hia  people  :  Christ,  the  liiiinj, 
loTing,  bleeding,  dying,  buried,  riSen,  ascended,  glorified  Ohriat  j  thi» 
wastheglorions  person  whom  he  placed  on  the  other  side  of  the  balance- 
sheet.  And  now  Eoe  the  result.  He  aays,  "What  things  were  pin 
to  me,  those  I  counted  loss,"  A  singular  resnlt.  Not  only  that  afltt 
putting  the  one  under  the  other,  and  making  a  snbtraction,  he 
found  that  all  his  carnal  advantages  were  less  than  Christ:  bnt,br 
more  than  this,  he  fonud  those  gains  actually  transformed  into  a  Ina. 
They  were  not  a  pljts  on  that  side  to  stand  in  proportion  to  the  plui  m 
this  side ;  but  they  were  turned  into  a  miniM  of  actual  deficit,  fie  felt 
that  his  fleshly  advantages,  when  be  came  to  look  at  them  in  p^ard  to 
Christ  were  disadvantages,  and  what  ho  had  rochoned  to  be  gaina  operated 
rather  against  him  than  for  him  when  he  began  to  know  Christ.  Mj 
brethren,  be  does  nnt  mean  that  to  be  a  "  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews  "  wa* 
in  itself  a  loss ;  nor  that  to  be  of  the  stock  of  Israel  was  a  loss,  fur  tiim 
was  a  natural  advantage  abont  nil  this.  "  What  advantage  then  hath  tht 
Jew  ?"  saith  he  in  another  place,  and  he  replies,  "iliitb  everyway:" 
but  he  meant  that  with  respect  to  Christ  those  things  which  were  Data- 
rally  an  ndrantsgc  became  a  disadvantage,  becense  their  tendency  hut 
been  to  keep  him  from  trusting  Christ,  and  their  tendency  still  was  to  tempt 
him  away  from  simple  faith  in  Jesus.  "Alas!"  beseemed  to  say  to 
himself,  "  it  was  becAUse  I  gloried  that  I  was  of  the  stock  of  Israel  thit 
I  rejected  the  Christ  of  God ;  it  was  because  I  boasted  that  as  toacbinj 
the  law  I  was  blameless  that  therefore  I  refused  to  accept  the  glorioni 
rightcousaess  of  Jesus  Christ  by  faith.  These  advantages  were  scale* 
upon  my  eyes  to  keep  me  from  seeing  the  beauty  of  my  Lord  ;  thecc 
privileges  were  stumbling-blocks  in  my  way  to  prevent  my  coming  as  a 
poor,  humble,  needy  sinner  and  laying  hold  on  the  atoning  sacrifice  rf 
JcsuH."  My  brethren,  it  is  a  grand  thing  to  have  led  a  virtuous  life:  it 
is  a  matter  for  which  to  praise  God  to  have  been  kept  in  the  very  centn 
of  the  paths  of  morality :  but  this  blessing  may  by  our  own  folly  become  ■ 
a  curse  to  iis  if  wc  place  our  moral  eccellences  in  opposition  to  the 
righteousness  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  and  begin  to  dream  that  we  hare  no 
need  of  a  Saviour.  If  oar  character  is  in  our  own  est<«m  so  good  that 
it  makes  a  passable  garment  for  us,  and  thcrufore  we  rejc(t  ihv-  nAn:  of 
Chrisfs  righteonsncsa,  it  n'ould  have  been  better  for  us  if  our  character 
had  been  by  our  own  confession  a  mass  of  raga,  for  then  we  sboald  b«Te 
been  willin"  to  be  clothed  with  the  r^ture  which  divine  chuifrf  has 
prepared.    Tea,  better,  so  fu*  as  this  matter  is  oonceroed,  to  bo  Ift6 


A   BUSIXESS-LIKK  ACCOUNT.  T)!/ 

the  open  sinner,  who  will  not  readily  be  tempted  that  way,  because 
he  is  too  fool,  too  bankrupt  to  pretend  to  be  righteous  before  God.  I 
say  again,  he  does  not  say  that  these  things  are  not  advantages,  but 
that /(TT  Christ;  and  when  he  comes  to  look  at  them  in  the  light  of 
Christ,  he  regards  them  as  being  a  loss  rather  than  a  gain.  If  I  had 
this  day  a  righteousness  of  my  own,  yet  would  I  fling  it  to  the  winds  to 
lay  hold  of  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  fearing  all  the  while  lest  so 
much  as  the  smell  of  it  should  cling  to  my  hand.  Had  I  never  sinned 
in  one  solitary  open  sin,  and  if  but  one  secret  transgression  of  my 
heart  had  ever  been  committed,  yet  would  I  loathe  my  righteousness 
as  filthy  rags,  and  only  tremble  lest  my  proud  spirit  should  be  so  foolish 
as  to  clin^  to  such  a  useless  thing.  Adam  fell  through  one  sin,  and 
lofit  Paradise,  and  lost  us  all ;  so  that  one  sin  suffices  to  curdle  the 
purest  righteousness  into  utter  sourness.  Away,  then,  with  the  very 
shadow  of  self  and  legal  righteousness. 

But  let  us  now  proceed  to  notice  that  Paul  gives  us  his  second  calculO' 
tian,  which  is  his  estimate  for  the  time  then  present,  "  Yea  doubtless," 
saith  he,  "and  I  count " — ^not  '*  I  counted,"  as  he  said  before,  but  "I 
count  all  things  but  loss  for  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ 
Jesus  my  Lord."  We  are  always  anxious  to  hear  what  a  man  has  to 
say  about  a  thing  after  he  has  tried  it.  It  is  all  very  well  to  begin  with 
eagerness,  but  how  does  the  venture  answer  after  a  trial  ?  After  twenty 
years  or  more  of  experience  Paul  had  an  opportunity  of  revising  hia 
balance-sheet,  and  looking  again  at  his  estimates,  and  seeing  whether  or 
not  his  counting  was  correct.  What  was  the  issue  of  his  latest  search  ? 
How  do  matters  stand  at  his  last  stock-taking  ?  He  exclaims  with  very 
special  emphasis,  "Yea  doubtless,  and  I  count  all  things  but  loss 
for  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord."  The 
two  words,  "yea  doubtless,"  are  a  very  strong  affirmation.  He  is 
speaking  very  positively  as  to  his  present  confirmed  assurance  and 
established  judgment.  Look  at  him  then,  again,  making  his  estimate 
to-day,  after  he  has  been  for  some  time  in  the  divine  life,  and  has  been 
made  to  suffer  as  the  result  of  his  earnest  service.  You  perceive  that 
he  has  not  forgotten  the  things  that  were  gains,  for,  as  we  have  already 
seen,  he  has  given  us  a  detailed  list  of  them.  On  this  second  occasion 
he  does  not  repeat  the  catalogue,  partly  because  there  was  no  need  for 
it,  and  partly  oecause  he  cares  less  for  each  item,  and  mainly  because 
for.  fear  anything  should  have  been  omitted  he  succinctly  sums  up 
the  whole  by  saying,  "  all  things."  He  as  good  as  says — yea  doubtless, 
and  I  count  as  loss  all  the  advantages  of  birth,  nationality,  and  self- 
righteousness,  which  once  I  reckoned  to  be  gains.  If  I  have  left  out 
anything  whereof  as  an  Israelite  I  might  have  gloried,  I  beg  you  to 
insert  it  in  the  list,  for  I  mean  that  all  should  be  included  when  I  say 
that  I  count  all  things  but  loss  for  Christ's  sake. 
'  So  you  see  he  has  not  altered  the  original  summary,  he  has  even 
made  it  more  comprehensive,  but  he  stands  to  the  same  estimate  as 
ever:  the  gain  is  still  "but  loss  ";  only  we  perceive  that  now  he  dwells 
longer  and  evidently  with  greater  delight  of  expression  upon  the  other 
side,  for  now  he  uses  not  barely  the  word  "  Christ,"  but  the  fuller  ex- 
pression, "  for  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  my 
liOid."    Now  be  has  come  Ui'know  the  Christ  in  whom  before  he 


318  y>7TROP0LIT*ir  TABBftBAOLR  MTE^IT.' 

tTDsted.  He  spoke  of  him  before  m  one  for  whom  be  counted  pm  u 
loss,  bnt  now  ha  (icrccives  so  great  an  excellency  in  him  thateTrau 
know  him  he  reckons  to  be  a  super-eminent  blesaing.  Our  dirine  Lord 
is  better  lored  as  he  is  better  Known.  The  closer  otir  inspectioa  tht 
greater  is  the  ipanifcst  eseellency  of  his  character. 

The  w<H^  nied  by  the  apostle  show  us  the  points   npon  wtifi 
he  bad  the  fttlleat  knowlodgo.     Ho  knew  the  Lord  lu  Citri-^l,  or  at 
the  Messiah,  sent  and  anointed  of  tho  Father.     He  understood  men 
fully  than  at  the  first  the  fahieas,  power,  nnd  exceeding. efficacy  ^ 
the  anointing  of  our  Lord  which  he  had  received  aboTe  liis  ffikiwm 
He  saw  him  to  be  t!ie  woman'a  promised  seed,  tho  coming  one,  the  pro-    '| 
miaed  light  of  Israel,  the  ordained  Prince  and  Saviour  of  the  sons  of    i 
men,  and  he  saw  all  his  qualiiiciitions  for  this  wonderful  character.    Ua     ! 
perceived  his  anointing  as  prophet,  priest,  and  King,     He  delighted  to  4 
see  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  resting  upon  him,  and  descendii^  from  him  to  A 
bia  people,  as  the  sacred  oil  Irom  the  head  of  Aaron  distilled  to  the 
skirts  of  his  garments.     He  saw  great  excellency  in  the  knowledge  of  th«  " 
T^ord's  anointed,  whose  garments  smell  of  myrrb,  and  aloes,  and  cnffiis)  4| 
batthiBwaBnotall,forheproceedstocallhim./c««,Christ Jesus.  "Thott  41 
shalt  call  hiB  name  Jesus  :  for  he  shall  save  his  people  from  their  sins."  «| 
Paul  knew  him  as  the  anointed  Saviour,  yea,  as  the  uctnal  Sa\'ioar  who  J 
bad  saved  him :  aaicd  him  from  the  madness  of  his  blasphemy  and  perm-  J 
cution,  saved  him  from  all  his  past  (niilt,  saved  him  and  made  him  to  be  ^| 
an  instrument  of  the  salvation  of  others.     He  delights  in  the  title  rf  t, 
Saviour,  as  we  all  do  who  know   the   eavonr  of  it.     How   swcctij  fi 
musical  is  the  name  of  Jcsns  ;  bow  fragrant   ia  it  even  as   ointment   ■ 
poared  forth.    Excellent  indeed  is  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  in  this 
character.  | 

How  delicious  is  the  apoatle's  next  word,  "my  iorrf;  "  not  merely     I 
the  Lord,  but  "roy  Lori"      Hia  knowledge  was  an  appropriating     i 
knowledge.    He  knew  the  Redeemer  as  anoinfed  for  him,  as  saving     | 
him,  as  Lord  over  all  for  him,  and  now  as  Lord  to  him.     The  honey     l 
of  the  sentence  lies  in  that  word  "my."    I  do  not  know  how  it  seenu 
to  your  hearts,  but  to  me  it  is  one  of  the  sweetest  words  that  can  pot-  ■ 
flibly  be  used  by  mortal  lip,  "  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jeaus  nty  Lord." 
Whether  he  is  your  Lord  or  not,  yet  is  he  surely  mine,  whether  he  be     I 
accepted  as  Lord  by  the  sons  of  men  or  not,  yet  is  he  joyfully  owned     ' 
as  Lord  to  me  and  master  of  my  spirit,  sole  monarch  of  my  wbots 
nature, — "Christ  Jesns  my  I-oi-d."    You  see,  then,  how  truly,  folly,     ' 
practically,  and  personally  he  knew  the  Lord  Jesus. 

The  text  imphes  that  he  knew  him  by  faith.  He  had  seen  him  after 
the  fleah,  but  in  that  he  did  not  gbry,  for  he  had  now  come  to  value  only 
the  things  of  faith,  desiring  mainly  that  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God 
by  feith  might  be  fmputea  unto  him.  He  believed,  and  hence  he  knew. 
There  is  no  knowledge  so  gracious  as  the  knowledge  of  faith,  for  a  man 
may  know  a  great  deal  in  a  natural  way  and  yet  perish,  but  that  which 
cornea  of  faith  ig  saving.  If  a  man  only  knows  Christ  in  the  head,  but 
does  not  trust  him  with  the  heart,  what  is  the  good  of  hia  knowledge  ? 
It  will  rather  min  than  save  him.  So  to  know  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
as  to  lean  yonr  soul's  full  weight  upon  him,  so  to  know  him  as  to  ex- 
perience peace  because  yon  trust  in  him,  so  to  know  him  as  to  feel  that 


onirr.  819 

yon  am  rest  in  him  more  Bnd  more,  from  day  to  daj,  benOH  he  ii  all 

?>ur  Balvfition  and  all  yonr  desire, — this  ii  to  know  nim  indeed  I  Bnb 
anl  also  knen  the  Lord  by  ta^nriena,  for  he  ipeaki  of  knowing  hitn 
and  "  the  power  of  hie  reBurreotfon."  Thia  ie  excellent  knowledge  in- 
dtpd,  whfn  the  power  of  a  fiict  ii  realiied  within  and  shown  in  the  life. 
When  we  are  raised  fh)m  the  death  of  onr  ain,  and  feel  that  we  ore  bo, 
then  IB  onr  kitotrledge  of  the  risen  OhriBt  excellent  indeed.  When  we 
feel  a  new  life  within  na,  qnicken;ng  ns  unto  spiritnal  things,  and  know 
that  tliia  springs  from  the  reBnrrection  of  onr  Lord,  and  is  wrought  in 
us  according  to  the  mighty  power  which  raised  Jesus  Christ  from  the 
dead,  then  indeed  can  we  rejoioe  in  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of 
Ohrist  Jesus  onr  Lord. 

Mere  than  that,  Paul  knew  something  of  Christ,  and  was  aiming  to 
know  more,  by  a  groiving  likmsii  to  km:  "that  I  may  know  him,  aad 
the  fellowship  of  iiia  snfferingB,  being  made  conformable  unto  his  duth.'* 
He  bad  entered,  in  some  measure,  into  his  Itlaater's  Bufferings,  he  bad 
been  persecuted  and  deHpised  of  men,  and  for  mnch  the  same  reason 
aa  his  Master.  He  had,  in  a  degree,  fblt  Christ's  motives,  Christ'i 
lore  for  man,  Christ's  seal  for  Ood,  Christ's  self-sacriQce,  Christ's  readi^ 
ness  to  die  on  behalf  of  the  tmth.  This  is  an  excellent  knowledge  in- 
deed, and  Paul  might  well  esteem  it  as  ^  more  precious  than  all  legal 
priTilegcN.  He  f^poke  of  it  as  saper-eminent  knowledge,  for  such  is  his 
meaning,  and  he  reckoned  it  to  be  beyond  all  price.  Beloved,  there  is 
no  knowledge  in  the  world  which  can  be  compared  with  such  a  know* 
ledge  of  Christ  Jesus  as  I  hare  tried  to  describe  just  now,  for  it  is  a 
knowledge  which  soncems  the  highest  conceirabla  object — erea  the  Sob 
of  God.  To  know  the  science  of  nature,  to  be  familiar  with  rocks, 
to  read  the  stnvs,  to  comprehend  all  things  else,  is  a  comparative  trifle 
when  we  consider  what  it  is  to  know  God  in  the  person  of  the  Lord 
Jesus.  He  in  whom  dwellcth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily  is  most 
worthy  to  he  known,  and  angels  and  principalities  nnite  with  all  tha 
saiDts  in  thinking  so.  One  truth  about  Christ  is  more  precious  than  the 
total  of  all  other  knowledge  !  This  is  a  knowledge  wliich  no  man  hath 
except  it  be  given  him  by  the  Holy  Spirit — and  hence  its  excellence. 
We  may  say  to  all,  who  know  Christ,  "  Flesh  and  blood  hath  not  ra> 
rested  this  nnto  thee."  Divinely  tanght  must  he  be  who  has  learned 
Christ.  This  science  cannot  be  acquired  in  the  schools,  nor  imparted 
by  learned  professoTS,  nor  even  gathered  by  years  of  diligent  re* 
March  ;  to  the  heflrt,  renewed  by  the  Holy  Ohost,  the  -  Lord  Jesua 
mnat  be  revealed  by  the  Spirit  himself,  for  no  man  can  say  that  Jesus 
Christ  la  Lord  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  That  must  needs  be  a  super- 
Ifttive  knowledge  which  requires  in  each  case  to  be  communicated  by 
Ood  himself. 

If  yon  would  see  the  excellency  of  thia  knowledge  look  at  its  efTeots. 
Some  knowledge  puff's  up,  but  thia  knowledge  makes  us  bumble,  and 
the  more  we  have  of  it  the  less  are  we  in  our  own  esteem.  Thia  know- 
ledge sanctifies,  pui^es,  and  delivers  from  the  lore  of  sin.  It  saves  the 
HinT, — sarcB  it  from  present  sin  and  (torn  eternal  woe.  This  knowledge 
elevates  the  motires,  sweetens  the  feelings,  and  gires  nobility  to  the 
entire  life:  for  the  man  who  knows  Christ  lives  after  a  loftier  order 
of  life  than  those  who  are  ignorant  of  him.     This  knowledge  indeed, 


S20  METROFOblTAH   rABEBSACLB  PfLPIT. 

bolOTed,  is  excellent,  became  it  never  can  be  lost ;  itiaa  knowledge  v1 
will  continne  to  progress,  even  in  eternity.  The  most  of  Hie  aubj 
which  mortals  etndT  here  will  be  forgotten  ia  the  world  to  coi 
the  profonndest  of  them  will  be  too  triBing  to  be  pursued  amid  an| 
thronee.  The  honours  of  clasflioal  and  mathematical  attainments 
shine  bnt  dimlv  amidst  the  glories  of  heaven,  bat  the  knowledge 
Christ  Jeanswill still  beprioeles3,and  it  will  cause  those  who  posB« 
to  shine  as  the  snn.  He  that  knowcth  Christ  shall  go  on  to  sit  at 
feet  and  still  to  leam,  and  as  he  Icaros  he  will  tell  to  principalities 
powers  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God  in  the  person  of  Jesns  Chi 
See  ye,  then,  beloved,  that  the  apoGtie  for  the  sake  of  the  knowie 
of  Christ  Jesus  his  I^rd  sLill  counted  all  the  things  that  he  had  o 
gloried  in  to  be  but  loss.  This  was  his  calculation  when  he  ' 
writing.  It  was  not  merely  the  estimate  of  his  younger  days, 
it  was  his  present  renewed  and  confirmed  judgment.  My  £riends 
it  oars  ? 

The  great  apostle  gives  ns  a  third  counting,  which  may  be  regart 
u  hit  life  etimate ;  not  of  the  past  only,  nor  of  the  present  mere^,  I 
of  the  past  and  present  inclusively.  Here  it  ia  "For  whom  I  h 
suffered  the  lose  of  all  things,  and  do  count  them  but  dnng,  that  I  n 
win  Christ,  and  be  found  in  him."  Here,  beloved,  you  see  that  hia  o 
mate  sets  out  with  actual  test  and  practical  proof.  He  is  sitting  don 
I  suppose,  in  the  guard  room  of  the  Proetormm  at  Rome,  where  he  n 
a  prisoner ;  the  chains  an  on  his  nTist,  and  if  he  likes  he  needs 
blotting  paper,  bnt  may  powder  his  writing  with  the  rust  of  his  fette 
He  has  nothing  in  all  tne  world ;  he  has  lost  all  his  old  friends :  1 
relations  disown  him,  his  countrymen  abhor  him,  and  even  bis  Chr 
tian  brethren  often  distress  him.  No  name  made  the  Jew  gna 
bis  teeth  more  maliciously  than  did  the  name  of  Saul  of  TarEiis,  v 
was  adjudged  to  be  the  vilest  of  renegades.  He  has  lost  caste,  and  t( 
all  ground  of  glorying,  he  has  no  longer  a  righteousness  of  bis  01 
whereia  to  gloiy,  but  he  ia  stripped  of  every  rag  of  legal  hop 
Christ  is  his  all,  and  he  has  nothing  else.  He  has  no  worldly  propetl 
he  has  no  provision  for  his  Lommonest  needs,  and  moat  true  a 
his  words  as  he  writes — "For  whom  I  hare  sufTcrcd  the  loss  of  1 
things."  Let  us  enter  the  prison  and  put  a  pergonal  question  to  t 
good  man.  Paul,  your  faith  has  brought  you  to  ateolute  pena 
and  friendlessness :  what  is  yom'  estimate  of  it  now  ?  Theory  is  0 
thing,  but  does  practice  bear  it  out  ?  The  sea  looks  smooth  as  gU: 
but  seafaring  is  pleasauter  to  talk  of  than  to  practiiie.  The  embarki) 
was  a  fine  spectacle;  but  what  think  you  of  a  sea  voyage  when  t 
Htorm  rages?  How  now,  Paul  ?  "  Well,"  saith  he,  "  I  confess  I  ha 
suffered  the  loss  of  all  things."  And  do  yon  deeply  regret  it.  Pan 
"Ee^t  it,"  saith  he,  "regret  the  loss  of  my  Phariseeism,  my  c; 
cumcision,  my  Israelitish  dignity?  Regret  it  1  No,"  he  says,  "Is 
glad  that  all  these  are  gone,  for  I  count  it  to  be  a  deliverance  to  be  i 
M  them." 

In  hig  first  and  second  countings  he  called  hia  former  gains  Iosa,b 
now  he  sets  them  down  aa  "  dung."  He  could  not  use  a  stronger  wor 
he  calls  all  hie  boastings  in  the  fiesh  mere  offal — something  to  get  rid  < 
and  no  loas  when  it  is  gone,  bat  rather  a  subject  for  congratnla^oD  tl 


A  BUSnrESS-LIKX  ▲(XX>UNT.  821 

ijt  k  lemoTed  from  him.  The  word  signifies  that  which  is  worthless,  and 
u  used  to  express  the  lees  and  dregs  of  wine,  the  settlement  which  a 
man  finds  in  his  cnp,  and  drains  out  npon  the  ground  when  he  has 
drank  his  liquor,  the  refuse  of  fruit,  the  dross  of  metals,  and  the  chaff 
and  stobble  of  wheat.  In  fact,  the  root  of  the  word  signifies  things  cast 
fo  dogs, — dog's  meat,  bones  from  the  plates,  crumbs  and  stale  pieces 
bnuhed  from  the  table,  and  such  things  as  one  is  anxious  to  be  rid  of. 
The  apostle  puts  down  the  whole  of  the  fine  things  which  he  had 
enumerated  as  no  better  than  dung.  '*  Of  the  stock  of  Israel,  of  the 
tribe  of  Benjamin,  an  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews,"  he  shakes  out  the 
irfaole  lot  for  the  dogs,  and  is  glad  to  be  rid  of  it  all  for  Christ's  sake. 
It  reminds  me  of  a  ship  in  a  storm.  When  the  captain  leaves  the 
barbour  he  has  a  cargo  on  board  of  which  he  takes  great  care,  but 
irhen  a  tremendous  wind  is  blowing  and  the  ship  labours,  being  too 
heayily  laden,  and  there  is  great  fear  that  she  will  not  outride  the  storm, 
■ee  how  eagerly  the  sailors  lighten  the  ship.  They  bring  up  from  the 
hdd  with  all  diligence  the  very  things  which  before  they  prized,  and 
tbej  seem  rejoiced  to  heave  them  into  the  sea.  Never  men  more  eager 
to  get  than  these  are  to  throw  away.  There  go  the  casks  of  fiour,  the 
bars  of  iron,  the  manufactured  goods:  overboard  go  valuable  bales 
4rf  merchandise ;  nothing  seems  to  be  worth  keeping.  How  is  this  ? 
Are  not  these  things  good  ?  Yes,  but  not  good  to  a  sinking  ship.  Any- 
thing must  go  to  save  life,  anything  to  outride  the  storm.  And  so  the 
ritle  says  that  in  order  to  win  Christ  and  to  be  found  in  him  he  fiung 
whole  cargo  of  his  beloved  confidences  over,  and  was  as  glad  to  get 
rid  of  ihem  as  if  they  were  only  so  much  dung.  This  he  did  to  win 
Christ,  and  that  fact  suggests  another  picture  :  an  English  war  ship  of 
Uie  olden  times  is  cruising  the  ocean,  and  she  spies  a  Spanish  galleon  in 
the  distance  laden  with  gold  from  the  Indies.  Captain  and  men  are 
'determined  to  overtake  and  capture  her,  for  they  have  a  relish  for 
prize-money  ;  but  their  vessel  sails  heavily.  What  then  ?  If  she  will 
not  move  because  of  her  load  they  fling  into  the  sea  everything  they  can 
lay  their  hands  on,  knowing  that  if  they  can  capture  the  Spanish  vessel 
the  booty  will  make  amends  for  all  they  lose  and  vastly  more.  Do  you 
wonder  at  their  eagerness  to  lose  the  little  to  gain  the  great  ?  .Sailor, 
why  cast  overboard  those  useful  things  ?  "  Oh,"  says  he,  "  they  are 
nothing  compared  with  that  prize  over  yonder.  If  we  can  but  get  side 
by  side  and  board  her  we  will  soon  make  up  for  all  that  we  now  throw 
into  the  sea."  And  so  it  is  with  the  man  who  is  in  earnest  to  win 
Christ  and  to  be  found  in  him.  Overboard  go  circumcision  and  Pha- 
riaeeism,  and  the  blamelessness  touching  the  law,  and  all  that,  for  he 
knows  that  he  will  find  a  better  righteousness  in  Christ  than  any  which 
he  foregoes,  vea,  find  everything  in  Christ  which  he  now  for  his  Lord's 
lake  counts  but  as  the  slag  of  the  furnace. 

Now,  beloved,  notice  how  much  nearer  Paul  had  got  to  Christ  than 
he  was  before,  for  in  his  second  estimate  he  spoke  of  knowing  him,  but 
now  he  speaks  of  winning  him  for  his  own.  The  word  meant  and 
should  have  been  translated  "  gain,"  *'  that  I  may  gain  Christ,"  for  the 
apostle  keeps  to  the  mercantile  figure  all  the  way  through,  and  means 
that  I  mav  gain  Christ,  and  know  him  as  my  own,  that  I  may  have 
hiin  and  hold  him,  and  sing  with  the  spouse  '^  My  beloved  is  mine." 


872  UETROPOLITAN  TASBKNAOLB  PCLPIT. 

For  this  cstaa  we  may  wisely  connt  all  thinga  bnt  dnag,  that  ve  maj 
have  the  Lord  Jesiis  in  Rrerlnsting  posGession. 

Then  Paul  adi'i  "  and  be  found  in  liim."  He  lon^  to  be  hidden  in 
Jeans,  Hnd  to  abide  in  him  as  a  bird  in  the  air,  or  a  hah  in  the  seft;  he 
pants  to  b«  one  with  Christ,  and  bo  to  be  in  him  as  a  member  is  Id  th« 
txidy.  He  dcflireg  to  ^et  into  Christ  as  a  fugitive  Bheltera  himself  in  !ii< 
hiding  place ;  he  napires  to  be  so  in  Christ  as  never  to  come  out  of  him ; 
BO  that  wheaever  any  one  looks  for  him  he  may  find  him  in  Jesus,  and 
that  when  the  O^at  Judge  of  all  calls  for  htm  at  the  la^t  great  day 
he  mav  find  him  in  Christ.  It  would  be  ill  to  be  found  where  Adam 
was,  shivering  under  the  trees  of  the  garden  with  hia  fig-leaves  on;  bnc 
to  be  found  beneath  the  tree  of  hfe,  wearing  the  robe  of  God's  righteous- 
ness, this  will  be  blisa  indeed.  We  are  lost  out  of  Christ,  but  wasre 
found  in  him.  Once  met  with  by  the  Great  Shepherd,  we  are  found 
hj/  him,  hut  when  safely  folded  in  his  love,  we  are  found  in  him. 

Do  notice  how  Paul  sticks  to  what  he  began  with,  namely,  the  nn- 
robing  himself  of  his  boastings  in  the  flesh  and  bis  arraying  himself 
with  Christ.  He  desires  to  be  found  in  Christ,  hot  he  adds,  "  not 
having  mine  own  rigliteousness,  which  is  of  the  law."  No,  he  will  haT* 
nothing  to  do  with  that ;  he  has  already  despised  it  aa  loss,  and  throini 
it  orerboard  bb  dross,  and  now  he  will  not  have  it  or  call  it  his  own  U 
all.  It  is  strange  for  a  man  to  say  "  not  having  my  own,"  but  he  daa 
ftay  BO  :  he  disowns  his  own  righteousness  as  eagerly  as  other  men  dis- 
own their  sins,  and  he  highly  esteems  the  righteousness  which  Christ  hai 
WEonght  out  for  us,  which  liecomes  ours  by  faith.  He  calls  it  "the 
righteonaness  which  is  of  God  by  faith,"  and  he  sets  great  store  by  il ; 
Tea,  it  is  all  he  desires.  My  brethren,  this  is  the  thing  we  ought  to 
be  seeking  after,  to  be  more  and  more  conscious  that  we  have  Christ, 
to  abide  in  him  mora  continually,  to  be  more  like  him,  even  in  his 
snflerings  and  in  his  dcatli.and  to  feel  the  full  power  of  his  resuiTeutioo- 
life  within  onrselves.  May  God  grant  na  grace  to  do  tliis,  and  the  more 
we  do  it  the  more  we  shall  coincide  with  the  apostle  in  his  slight  esteem 
for  all  things  else.  This  matter  is  tike  a  balance,  if  one  scale  goes 
down,  the  other  must  go  up.  The  weightier  Chriat's  infiuenoe,  tlic 
lighter  will  be  the  world  and  self-righteousness  :  and  when  Christ  is  all 
in  all,  then  the  world  and  aalf  will  be  nothing  at  all. 

II.  I  shall  not  weary  you,  I  hope,  hy  taking  a  few  miautes  for  tbt 
last  head,  which  is  our  own  oai.culatiomb. 

First,  do  we  Join  in  Paul's  earUest  e»limale  f  At  the  outset  of  his 
spiritual  life  he  saw  all  his  own  natural  advantages  and  excallenvH, 
and  he  counted  them  loss  for  Christ,  Every  true  Christian  here  rt- 
members  the  time  whc;n  he  also  count-ed  all  wherein  he  had  formerly 
trusted  to  be  of  no  value  whatever,  and  betook  himself  to  Jesus,  But 
perhaps  I  speak  to  some  who  have  never  done  so.  Yon  are  at  this  time, 
my  friend,  still  confident  that  you  never  did  anybody  anj  harm ;  tiiut 
your  life  has  been  amiable  and  upright;  t^at  you  havo  been  just, 
charitable,  and  kind;  and  that  all  this  certainly  qualifiea  you  for  heaveo. 
You  count  your  natural  virtues  to  be  great  gains.  Z  spoke  but  three 
days  ago  to  an  old  man,  more  than  eighty,  and  when  ho  told  mo  of  bis 
great  age  I  said,  '*  I  hope  that  when  you  die  you  will  go  to  hcnreo." 
"  Ah  master,"  says  he,  "  I  never  did  auythiug  why  1  should  go  in;- 


'^irhere  eltfd."  There  are  multitudes  who  beliere  that  Creed,  they  do  not 
speak  it  out  quite  so  plainly  as  tte  aged  peasant  did,  but  thej  mean  it 
au  the  same.  Ah,  dear  friends,  you  must  be  brought  out  of  that  delu- 
sion, and  all  these  moral  excellence^  and  yirtues  must  be  loss  to  you 
that  Christ's  righteousness  may  be  your  only  gain.  May  the  Holy 
Spirit  teach  you  this  distasteful  truth.    I  wish  your  heart  would  sing— 

'*  No  more,  my  God,  I  boast  no  more 
Of  all  the  duties  I  hare  dope ; 
X  quit  the  hopes  I  held  before, 
To  trust  the  merits  of  thy  Son. 

<<  Yes,  and  I  must  and  will  esteem 
AU  things  but  loss  foot  Jesus'  sake : 
O  may  mpr  soul  be  ^und  in  him, 
And  of  his  righteousness  partake/* 

• 

Ton  will  nerer  be  saved  till  you  lose  all  your  legal  hopes. 

Now,  secondly,  after  years  of  profession  which  many  of  you  hare 
made,  do  yim  still  amtinue  in  ifis  same  mind  and  mak$  ihs  sams  sstmais  f 
I  have  known,  I  am  sornr  to  say,  some  professors  who  have  by  degrees 
seitied  down  upon  something  other  than  Christ*  Beloved,  are  you  rest- 
ing now  upon  your  years  of  manifest  improVSement  since  conversion  ? 
Are  yon  beginning  to  depend  upon  the  regularity  of  your  attendance  at 
tiie  means  of  grace,  upon  your  private  prayer,  upon  what  vou  have 
nyen,  or  upon  your  preachmg,  or  anything  else  ?  Ah,  it  will  not  do. 
We  must  continue  to  stand  where  we  stood  at  first,  saying,  ''Yea 
doubtless,  and  I  count  all  things  but  loss  for  the  excellency  of  the 
knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord."  Come  now.  Christian,  if  you 
oould  go  back,  would  you  begin  at  the  cross  ?  If  you  could  retrace  your 
sleps,  would  you  begin  again  by  resting  upon  Christ  and  by  taking  him 
to  oe  your  all  in  all  ?  1  will  tell  you  my  answer, — I  have  no  other 
foundation  upon  which  I  could  begin,  I  must  rest  on  my  Lord. 

**  To  whom  or  whither  should  I  ^o 
If  I  should  turn  from  thee  ? 

Lone  refageof  my  spirit,  sole  port  of  my  poor  labouring  barque,  to  thee 
I  fly  to-day,  if  never  I  did  so  before ;  or  if  before,  to  thee  I  fly  anew. 
Sav  you  so,  brothers  and  sisters  ?    I  am  sure  you  do. 

Now,  again,  you  cannot  join  Paul  in  the  third  calculation  and  say, 
* "  For  whom  I  have  suffered  the  loss  of  all  things";  but  still  I  must  put 
it  to  you — do  you  think  you  could  have  suffered  the  loss  of  all  things  if 
it  had  been  required  of  you  for  Christ's  sake  ?  If  it  had  come  to  this, 
that  you  must  oe  banished  or  renounce  your  Saviour,  would  you  go  into 
banisnment  ?  If  the  alternative  were  the  spoiling  of  your  goods,  would 
you  let'  all  go  rather  than  renounce  your  Lord  ?  You^  forefathers  did 
BO,  and  what  the  Spirit  wrought  in  them  I  doubt  not  he  would  have 
wrought  in  you,  haa  the  times  been  of  a  severer  character.  But  I  will 
put  you  a  more  practical  question.  Since  you  have  not  had  to  suff*er  the 
k>ss  of  all  things,  do  you  hold  all  things  at  Ood's  disposal  ?  Are  you 
ready  to  part  with  comfort  and  honour  for  him  ?  Can  you  take  up  the 
social  cross  and  join  with  the  most  despised  sect  for  the  truth's  sake  ? 
Can  you  lose  the  respectability  which  attaches  to  popular  creeds,  and 


894  inrrBOFCOJMB  tabebhaci.e  pvlfit. 

can  jon  coat  in  yoar  lot  with  the  despised  I{«deemcr,  when  religion  no 
more  walks  in  her  silver  tHii^rs,  Imt  travels  barefooted  through  the 
mire?  Can  you  becOQtent  to  share  with  the  "despised  and  rejcitvil 
of  men"?  If  yon  can,  then  ^on  conld  also  suffer  the  lose  of  nil 
things ;  but  see  to  it  that  it  be  indeed  so. 

Let  me  ask  another  practical  question.  Yon  have  not  suffered  the 
loss  of  all  things,  but  seeing  God  has  left  your  woiidlj  comforts  to  jon, 
h/ive  you  wed  all  thinga  for  hit  sake  f  Have  yon  given  to  his  canse  ill 
that  cause  might  fairly  ask  ?  I  hope  yon  can  say, "  Tes,  I  hope  I  hare, 
and,  as  the  world  jndges,  vastly  more,  for  I  have  said  in  my  aonl — 
■  And  if  I  miut  make  MHiie  reterre, 

And  dntr  did  not  call, 
I  loTe  mj  God  with  xeal  so  ereat 
That  I  would  give  him  alL' " 

Well,  then,  yoa  also  may  make  your  estimate  as  the  apostle  did :  though 
yon  have  not  had  practically  to  endure  the  loss  of  all  things,  yet  yon  do 
count  them  bnt  dung  for  Christ's  sake. 

Bnt  one  thing  more.  Beloved,  if  Christ  he  so  to  you  that  all  thinn 
else  in  comparison  to  him  are  dross  and  dang,  do  you  ml  tmnt  Mm  for 
ymtT  children  f  Do  yon  not  desire  him  for  yonr  friends  7  Do  yon  not 
wish  all  yonr  kinsfolk*  to  have  him  ?  Whatever  a  man  valaes  fin 
himself  he  values  for  others.  Yon  want  your  boy  to  follow  your  tnSa 
if  yon  believe  it  to  be  a  very  good  one.  You  desire  to  see  yonr  childnm 
well  placed  in  life,  but  what  position  in  life  can  be  equal  to  being 
found  in  Christ  ?  and  what  winnings  under  heaven  can  be  compared 
with  winning  Christ.  You  may  judge  yonr  own  sincerity  by  the 
measure  of  yonr  desire  for  the  salvation  of  others,  and  I  earneetJj 
entreat  yon  he  not  backward  to  tell  to  others  the  excellency  of  the  know- 
ledge of  Christ  JesHS  your  Lord,  and  be  not  slow  to  impress  npon  them 
the  absolute  necessity  of  being  found  in  him.  Loathe  the  idea  of  having 
a  righteousness  of  jour  own,  but  grasp  with  all  your  faith  the  righteow- 
ncss  of  Jesus  Christ.  I  commend  to  you  Christians  that  you  give  yonr 
whole  selves  to  Christ,  that  from  this  day  forward  ye  serve  him,  spirit, 
soul  and  body,  for  after  all  there  is  nothing  worth  living  for,  noUiing 
worth  even  giving  a  single  tear  for  if  yon  lose  it,  nor  worth  a  smile  if 
yon  gain  it,  save  only  that  which  comes  from  Christ,  and  can  be  used 
for  Christ,  and  is  found  in  Christ.  Christ  is  all.  Uay  he  be  so  to  yon. 
Amen.  , 


Portion  of  Scbiptdbe  bead  befobb  Seeuon — Philippians  iii. 


Hymnb  paoi!"ODR  Own  Htmk  Book"— 136  (Song  L),  564,  661."'' 


JtxE  19th  hcing  Mr.  Spuboeon's  43rd  birthday,  a  fdla  will  be  held  in  the  nfteniooii 
Hi  Ihp  Slockwtll  Orphanage,  with  a  public  meeting  in  thoovening.  Goode  for  warded 
nt  (inco  for  Iho  Bale-room  will  bo  much  valued.  If  ipndt-rs  of  the  Sermons  will  each 
«end  a  donation  for  the  orphana  (S40  boya)  it  will  grenlly  aheet  Mr.  Spuhqeon** 


^^ji^jrlitM  ^Tsibtnmk  fttlpt 


ALL  THE  PEOPLE  AT  WOBK  FOR  JESUS. 


%      ? 


DSLIYBBBD  OK  WSDKESDAT  MORNING,  MaT  9TH,  1877,  BT 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    OHRIST    OHUBCH,     WESTMINSTEB    BBIDGE    BOAD, 
On  Behalf  of  the  London  Mueionary  Society. 


I  HAYB  taken  two  texts  from  two  successive  chapters  of  the  book  of 
Joshua :  the  first  is  from  Joshua  the  seventh,  at  the  third  verse.  The 
spies  who  were  sent  to  Ai  returned  to  Joshua  and  said  to  him, ''  Let  not 
all  the  people  go  up  ;  hut  let  about  two  or  three  thousand  men  go  up  and 
emite  At*'  This  policy  led  to  a  disastrous  defeat;  and  our  other  text 
gives  us  the  Lord's  command  concerning  the  new  attack.  You  will  find 
it  in  the  eighth  of  Joshua  and  the  first  verse :  "  I'he  Lord  said  unto 
Joshua^  Fear  not,  neither  be  thou  dismayed :  take  all  the  people  of  war 
with  thee,  and  arise,  go  up  to  Ai:  see,  J  have  given  into  thy  hand  the 
king  of  Ai,  and  his  people,  and  his  city,  and  his  land" 

The  two  texts  may  be  condensed  into — first,  tlie  advice  of  the  spies, 
to  employ  only  a  part  of  the  people  in  the  assault  upon  Ai, — **  Let  not 
all  the  people  go  up  " ;  and,  secondly,  the  command  of  Ood,  to  let  every 
fighting  man  go  forth  to  the  war, — "  Take  all  the  people  of  war  with 
thee." 

Brethren,  like  Israel,  we  are  called  to  war,  and  we  have  a  greater 
than  Joshua  at  our  head,  in  whose  name  we  conquer.  There  is  an  in- 
heritance which  as  yet  has  been  held  bv  the  adversary,  and  in  the  name 
of  God  we  have  to  drive  him  out.  We  are  likely  to  experience  diffi- 
culties very  similar  to  those  which  were  met  with  by  the  tribes ;  and  I 
donbt  not  that  their  history  (is  it  not  written  for  our  learning  ?)  will 
TOove  exceedingly  interesting  to  us,  if  we  have  a  mind  to  consider  it. 
We  shall  meet  with  the  same  defeats  as  they  did  if  we  fall  into  the  same 
sins,  and  we  shall  win  like  victories  if  we  are.  obedient  to  the  commands 
which  God  has  given  us,  which  are  very  similar  to  those  addressed  to 
Israel  of  old.  As  in  a  glass  we  see  ourselves  in  the  twelve  tribes,  from 
the  first  day  even  until  now,  and  in  the  texts  before  us  there  is  a  lesson 
for  ns,  which  may  God,  by  his  grace,  enable  us  to  learn.  I  pray  the 
Holy  Spirit  to  illuminate  our  minds  while  we  read  in  the  book  of  the 


826  llETROPOIilTlN   TABNBNAOLK  ruU-tl. 

Win  of  tbe  Lord,  and  as  soldiers  of  Christ  Team  from  varriora  of  old 
time. 

I.  Let  m  consider  the  adticb  of  thh  bpiks  which  led  to  sncb  s 
shameful  defeat. 

And  here  we  shall  have  to  deal  with  tha  error  of  suppoiing  Viai  a  part 
rnly  of  the  church  wiH  be  suffirkjil  toperfonn  /he  work  of  the  ichoU ;— that 
a  large  proportion  may  be  idle,  and  that  the  rest  will  be  quite  enonsh 
to  fight  the  Lord's  battles.  I  feel  it  to  be  an  eiTor  which,  though  not 
perhaps  theoretically  held  by  any  of  us,  is  practiealiy  to  be  Been  nbresd 
in  our  churches,  and  needs  to  be  met  and  put  to  an  end. 

In  Joshua's  day  this  error  sprang  up  among  the  IsraeKles  becanti,  vn 
account  of  their  t^is,  God  was  disjikased  ivitlt  tJiem,  The  commencemeDt 
of  the  chapter  tells  na  that  the  Lord  God  was  wroth  because  the  chil- 
dren of  Israel  ha(.l  committed  a  tniapaaa  in  the  accursed  thJDE; :  for  the 
sin  of  Achan  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  ktadlcd  gainst  the  peopk 
That  was  the  real  reason  of  their  defeat  before  Ai ;  but  out  of  tW 
secret  cause  grew  the  more  manifeat  source  of  defeat — which  was,  that  ■ 
because  God  was  displeased  with  them  they  were  left  to  themselyes,  snd 
hence  they  adopted  a  ihtal  poliCT.  When  God  is  in  the  midst  of  & 
chnrch  he  guidea  its  coonaels,  and  directs  the  hearts  of  men  to  go  abont 
his  work  in  the  wisest  manner.  Is  it  not  an  old  saying  that  "  Whom  the 
jfO(!B  wish  to  destroy  they  firet  make  mad  "?  And  is  not  the  heathen 
proverb  the  shadow  of  the  fact  that  men  become  foolish  when  they  hg\t 
broken  the  commands  of  God,  and  thus  they  are  chastened  for  one 
fcult  by  being  ptrmittcd  to  fall  into  another  ?  Even  upon  tjie  I/ird'j 
own  people  a  mensure  of  judicial  blindness  may  come.  You  may  depead 
npon  it  that  when  it  becomes  a  doctrino  that  only  special  classes  of  meii 
are  to  be  expected  to  work  in  the  church,  there  is  soma  great  wrong  in 
the  background.  In  that  church  which  most  of  all  has  fallen  into  this 
fallacT,  and  has  driiwn  the  sharpest  line  between  those  called  the  clerg/ 
(ind  tne  poor  nnforttmate  laymen  outside,  who  perchance  may  do  hw- 
Ihing  for  God,  bet  who  cannot  be  expected,  or  indeed  allowed  to  do  acT- 
tbing  in  particular  :  in  that  church,  I  say,  the  deadliest  errors  have  found 
a  home.  We,  too,  may  take  ic  for  granted  that  when  we  begin  to  leaic 
Christian  work  to  be  performed  by  a  minister,  or  the  visitation  of  the 
poor  to  be  solely  done  by  a  paid  missionary,  we  have  some  Achan  in 
the  camp,  with  a  goodly  Babylonish  garment  hidden  in  his  tent.  There 
most  be  an  acoirscd  thing  somewhere  or  other  which  has  caused  u£ 
to  be  left  to  BO  gross  a  folly:  either  worldliness,  or  lukewarmneB, 
or  love  of  ease,  or  deep  declension  of  heart  must  He  at  the  root  of  this 
■lovenly  and  sluggish  policy.  It  is  not  God's  mind  that  it  should  tc 
BO  ;  and  he  has  endently  left  us  to  ourselves  when  this  fatal  method 
1b  adopted.  When  the  Holy  Ghost  rests  upon  the  chnrch  this  folly  ii 
practically  avoided,  nay,  it  is  not  even  thought  of,  God  grant  to  the 
churches  represented  here  to-day  that  they  may  walk  in  such  soondneEi 
of  doctrine  and  have  such  spirituality  of  life  that  they  may  be  full  of  the 
divine  presence,  and  never  dream  for  a  moment  of  sending  a  portion 
only  of  their  members  out  to  war,  and  leave  tlie  rest  to  sit  still !  Wc 
cannot  leave  the  battles  of  our  Lord  to  he  fought  by  mercenary  troops ; 
the  whole  army  of  men  made  willing  in  the  day  of  the  Lord's  power 
mnst  go  out  nnder  the  command  of  our  divine  Joshua  to  meet  the  foe. 


iliL  THB  PBOPLB  AT  WOBK  FOB  JBBUS.  827 

Fortheonarey  Ms  evil  ffoltcy  arose  out  of  preeumption  engendered  by 
Sfuecess,  But  a  little  while  ftgo  all  Israel  had  marched  around  Jericho  for 
seren  days,  and  on  the  seyenth  day,  when  they  shouted,  the  city  walls 
fell  flat  to  the  ground.  Perhaps  they  began  to  say, ''  Did  those  massire 
walls  fall  when  we  compassed  them  about  ?  0  Israel,  thou  art  a  great 
nation  1  And  did  they  fall  with  nothing  but  a  shout  ?  Then  the  Hit- 
tite  and  the  Hiyite,  and  every  other  enemy,  shall  flee  before  us  like  chaff 
before  the  wind  I  What  need  can  there  be  to  carry  all  our  baggage  up 
the  hill  to  Ai  ?  What  need  to  march  so  many  men  ?  Two  or  three 
thousand  will  be  quite  sufficient  to  carry  that  small  city  by  storm.  We 
ean  do  wonders,  and  therefore  we  need  not  put  forth  all  our 
atiength!" 

Brethren,  many  dangers  surround  success ;  it  is  not  much  of  it  that  any 
of  V8  can  bear.  The  full  sail  needs  much  ballast  lest  the  boat  be  oversei. 
When  in  this  or  any  other  part  of  the  world  the  church  sees  many  con- 
Ttits  as  the  fruit  of  her  labours,  when  there  are  great  gatherings,  and  a 
good  deal  of  shouting,  great  interest  excited,  and  multitudinous  conver- 
aiffios,  it  is  yery  natural  to  calculate  that  the  work  has  been  easily  done, 
ai^  needs  no  yery  severe  or  general  effort.  The  idea  is  fostered  that 
there  is  no  need  now  for  continued  house-to-house  visitation,  no 
need  for  more  missionaries,  no  need  for  regular  plodding  seryice  in 
■ehool  and  cottage-meeting,  no  need  to  set  our  young  men  and  women 
to  work  for  Christ !  The  drill  and  organization  of  the  regular  army  is 
in  danger  of  being  lightly  esteemed.  •  Blow  the  trumpet,  and  the  walls 
will  come  down  easily  enough.  Jericho  has  fallen  with  shouting  and 
maiGhing,  let  us  gather  ourselves  together  and  show  that  we  are  a 
mighty  people,  who  no  longer  need  to  go  up  unanimously  and  labori- 
lonaly  in  rank  and  order  to  the  flght,  as  our  fathers  did. 

Ah,  brethren,  this  evil  spirit  must  be  exorcised,  for  it  cometh  from 
the  devil.  God  will  not  ble3s  us  if  we  tolerate  this  spirit.  Why,  some 
of  us  are  too  great  altogether  for  our  Lord  Jesus  to  use  in  his  work. 
Like  Saul's  armour,  we  are  unfit  for  our  David  to  put  on  if  Goliath  is  to 
be  slain.  We  must  be  more  sensible  of  weakness,  more  mindful  that  the 
conversion  of  souls  is  the  work  of  omnipotence,  or  we  shall  see  but  little 
done.  We  must  ourselves  believe  more  fully  in  the  need  of  earnest  work 
for  God,  and  put  forth  all  our  strength,  and  strain  every  sinew  for  him, 
knowing  that  it  is  his  power  that  worketh  in  us  mightily  when  we  strive 
with  all  our  hearts.  We  must  learn  that  our  great  Leader  means  us 
not  only  to  shout  and  blow  rams'  horns,  but  to  employ  all  the  strength 
of  every  man  in  our  ranks  in  his  glorious  cause.  May  we  be  delivered 
from  the  presumption  which  leads  to  the  foolish  course  which  Israel 
pursued. 

Let  us  not  forget  that  these  children  of  Israel  were  forgetting  their 
c&mmiesion  and  violating  the  command  of  Ood.  It  is  a  terrible  truth 
tiiat  the  tribes  had  been  brought  out  of  Egypt  that  they  might  be  the 
executioners  of  divine  vengeance  upon  races  which  had  committed 
capital  crimes,  for  which  the  Lord  had  condemned  them  to  be  rooted 
out.  The  reward  of  the  ministers  of  justice  was  to  be  the  land  which 
the  infamous  ones  had  polluted.  They  were  charged  to  make  no 
alliances  with  them,  nor  to  intermarry  with  them,  but  to  execute  them 
tor  their  crimes ;  and  the  commission  was  not  given  to  some  of  the 


SS8  mnopoLiTAB  tabebxaclb  pulpit.  ] 

Inelites,  bnt  to  all  of  iaetn,  for  all  were  to  be  rewarded  by  s  portion 
of  the  land.  The  chane  wu  not  (pTeii  to  Joshna  and  to  the  dden 
onl/,  bat  to  all  the  tribes.  As  thej  all  expected  to  hare  a  dweltiog- 
place  in  Canaan,  ao  they  wer«  all  expected  to  conquer  the  territotr  ij 
their  own  exertions.  Thejwere  all  an  enlisted  host  for  God,  and  m 
nerer  ordained  that  a  part  only  should  go  forth  in  his  great  con- 
troreray  with  the  condemned  Caaa&nit«4. 

If  we  ever  n^lect  to  render  universal  service  aa  a  chnrch  in  the 
canse  of  Christ  we  shall  deport  from  our  trust  and  call,  for  the  Lord  - 
has  sent  all  his  disciples  to  testifv  of  him  and  contend  against  sin.  H« 
has  scut  us  all  to  make  known  everywhere,  according  to  our  ability,  the 
glad  tidings  of  his  salvation  ;  aud  he  has  not  given  this  command  to 
this  or  that  man,  m  to  this  or  that  body  of  men,  but  to  all  his  chosen. 
Every  member  of  the  body  has  iw  own  office,  and  no  part  of  it 
can  be  allowed  to  lie  dormant.  To  none  has  he  said,  "  Oo  yoor 
vaj,  eat  the  &t  and  drink  the  sweet,  and  find  fault  with  those  who 
do  the  woAi"  hut  to  sll  bia  saints  our  Lord  Jesus  says — "  As  my 
Father  hath  sent  me,  eren  so  send  I  you."  Every  Christian  man 
is  described  in  Scripture  as  being  a  light,  a  light  not  to  be  hidden, 
but  seen  of  men.  Every  child  of  Uod  is  described  as  forming  a  part  of 
that  "  city  set  on  a  hill  which  cannot  be  hid."  It  is  not  only  tlie  mlnit- 
ters  who  are  the  salt  of  the  earth  and  the  light  of  the  world ;  but  "yi 
are  the  salt  of  the  earth";  "  ye  are  the  light  of  the  world";  all  of  yon 
without  exception.  Each  one  in  his  own  proportion  and  in  his  own 
place  must  be  used  as  a  vesB?]  in  the  great  house  of  the  Lord :  and  vf 
■hall  get  away  from  our  true  position  and  onr  high  calling  if  we  excDse 
oniBclves  or  onr  brethren  from  personal  service,  and  then  go  and  take 

§art  in  pnblic  meetings  and  thank  God  for  what  other  people  haro 
one  on  our  behalf. 
These  Israelites,  in  the  new  fashion  which  they  were  tryinir  to  setup, 
were  departing  from  their  mvn  modtl.  That  mode!  was,  doubtless,  the 
siege  of  Jericha  In  that  siege  there  was  much  dependence  upon  God, 
but  there  was  no  neglect  of  instrumentality ;  and,  though  all  they  d^ 
was  to  go  round  the  city  and  shout,  yet  in  so  doing  they  were  lit«rallf 
fulfilling  orders,  and  doing  nil  that  was  commanded.  Yes,  if  tlui 
would  bring  down  the  walls  tlioy  did  it  thoroughly — they  marched  as 
bidden  and  shouted  as  desired.  They  all  went  round  Jericho ;  they  did 
not  some  of  them  sit  in  their  tents  and  look  on  while  the  others  paraded, 
but  they  all  filed  ont  in  order.     It  might  seem  to  be  a  perfectly  u^leO 

f recession,  but  it  was  commanded  by  God,  and  they  all  united  in  it. 
n  martial  array  they  all  compassed  the  city,  and  all  gave  the  shoat, 
and  down  came  the  walls,  and  there  and  then  every  man  went  up  to  Um 
prey,  leaping  over  the  ruined  walls  to  strike  his  foe  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord  I  That  was  their  precedent  and  pattern,  and  they  were  departing 
ftom  it  very  sadly  when  tliey  said,  "  Let  not  all  the  people  labour 
thither." 

"What,  then,  is  our  model  as  a  church  ?    Is  it  not  Pentecost?     la  it 

not  those  earliest  days,  that  dawn  of  Christianity,  that  goldeu  era  to 

which  we  always  look  back  as  the  heroic  age  of  our  holy  faith  ?    In 

that  day  did  they  not  break  bread  from  honsc  to  house,  all  of  themf 

^Did  they  not  sell  their  lands  and  lay  the  price  of  them  at  the  apottla' 


Ah'L  THE  PEOPLE  AT   WORK   FOa  JESCi-  829 

fedt  ?  Was  there  not  a  bnrning  enthnatBam  thronghont  the  entire  com- 
pony  of  dificiplea  ?  We  know  it  was  so ;  and  if  we  are  to  iee  a;rain  the 
mamphflof  tboae  primitive  times  ^e  mnatgohack  to  primi  tire  prac- 
tice, aod  trery  man  and  nomaa  and  child  in  &e  chnrch  muBt  te con- 
■ecrated  to  the  divine  service.  "Child,"  did  I  say?  Yes,  verily,  for 
"  out  of  the  mouths  of  babes  and  ancklinga  thon  hoBt  perfected  praise." 
I  soppose  there  ie'notone  person  present  who  heard  that  fainona  sermoo 
by  Vattfaew  Wilka  upon  tne  universal  service  rendered  by  idolaters  to 
their  Mst  gods,  from  the  text,  "  The  children  gathered  wood,  and  the 
fathers  kindled  the  fire,  and  the  women  kneaded  their  dough  to  make 
cakes  to  the  queen  of  heaven."  The  preacher's  argument  on  that  occa- 
Bion  was  that  which  I  wonld  now  press  upon  ^on,  that  all  should  take 
part  in  the  work  of  the  Lord.  Distinct  offices  but  united  aims ;  di- 
verse operations  but  the  same  spirit ;  many  and  yet  one — so  let  it  be. 
Would  to  God  that  the  church  wonld  recognise  this  more  fnlly,  and  w> 
come  buck  to  the  great  precedents  of  her  war&re. 

Again,  this  emir  whicn  we  are  carefully  to  avoid  was  no  doubt  the 
dictate  of  carnal  leisdom.  Spies  were  never  of  much  use  to  Israel — two 
only  of  the  first  twelve  were  faithful— what  did  Israel  want  with  spies  ? 
Better  far  hnd  it  been  to  walk  by  faith.  To  Ai  they  must  need  send 
spies  instead  of  going  up  at  once  in  the  confidence  of  faith  :  evil  came 
of  it,  for  these  spies  counselled  that  only  part  of  the  people  need  labour 
np  the  hill.  And,  brethren,  the  best  ministers  of  Christ,  worthy  of  all 
bononr,  wonld  be  the  cause  of  great  mischief  if  once  their  carnal  wisdom 
should  make  them  think  that  they  can  supereede  primitive  plana  with 
wiser  inventions.  I  dare  say  the  men-at-arms  would  have  said  that 
Israel's  numbers  were  a  hindrance  to  efficient  fighting,  and  that  the 
common  sort  were  in  the  way  of  trained  warriors  and  encumbered  the 
battle.  I  know  that  some  able  brethren  are  of  this  mind.  Have  they 
not  said  in  acts  if  not  in  words,  "  That  youog  man  is  preaching; — wo 
wish  he  would  be  quiet ;  he  makes  such  blnnders  in  the  Queen's 
English  !  He  has  a  great  deal  of  zeal,  but  there  is  no  little  danger  in 
it-  And  those  good  siatcra — we  know  they  do  a  good  deal  of  work 
irhich  waa  never  done  before,  but — ":  and  they  shake  their  heads  at 
-ttem.  That  is  often  the  main  contribution  of  the  more  prudent  sort  to 
tlie  eervice  of  God  !  They  generously  lavish  npon  the  younger  folks 
their  grave  looks  and  their  shakes  of  tiie  head  at  innovation  and  zeal. 
There  is  the  Sunday-school ;  well,  that  is  a  proper  thiufr,  because  it 
is  a  recognised  agcney,  but  if  it  were  started  to-day  for  the  first 
time  many  wonld  shake  their  heads  at  that  also.  City  mission  work, 
•gain,  is  a  tried  and  proved  mode  of  operation;  bnt  in  days  gode 
l^  there  was  thought  to  be  peril  in  lay  agency,  especially  as  the 
men  were  not  college  trained.  Well,  my  brethren,  there  are  many 
more  holy  sgcucies  yet  to  be  invented,  and  though  thoy  will  none  of  thent 
be  perfect,  our  wet  blankets  will  not  improve  them.  Better  far  will  it 
be  to  help  the  ^od,  and  as  for  the  little  mischief  which  may  come  of 
imperfect  agencies,  let  the  wise  men  supply  the  antidote  and  rectify  the 
blunders.  Anything  is  better  than  lethai'gy  and  death.  Thank  God 
that  our  people  have  a  mind  to  do  good,  and  if  their  zeal  be  inclined 
to  wildfire,  let  us  not  quench  it,  but  try  to  use  it  for  holy  purposes ;  for, 
•ftertOl,  fire,  wild  or  otherwise,  is  what  we  want.  If  we  have  the  fire  (torn 


986  KBTROPOUTAV  TIBBRKAOLE  PVhPTT. 

hearen  in  the  form  of  seal  for  God's  glory,  it  can  eofiily  be  regalatocl, 
bnt  the  most  terrible  calamity  is  lo  have  no  fire  at  all. 

"  But,"  Bays  one,  "  may  not  tlie  ignorant  and  indiscreet  ftdvocacy  of 
tarath  by  unqoalified  persona  do  a  great  deal  of  barm  to  the  cause  we 
love  ?"  It  mny ;  but  is  tht  tnith  yon  beliefe  so  weak  as  lo  bo  iu  any 
BeriouB  daoger  from  such  an  accident?  Is  not  truth  invincible  and 
fully  able  to  take  care  of  herself?  Ail  she  has  to  fear  is  the  cramping 
and  imprisoning  agency  of  escesaive  prudence.  With  weaknesB  for  her 
gnardian,  and  foUy  for  her  defender,  she  is  yet  safe  !     The  God  who 

?rotecta  her  from  her  foes  can  assuredly  save  her  from  her  friends. 
'he  danger  lies  in  our  carnal  wisdom,  which  would  cover  the  light  tvitfa 
a  bushel  to  prevent  its  being  blown  oat,  and  wrap  the  talent  in  a  napkia 
because  it  is  only  one. 

We  Tery  IreqaeDtly  hear  it  said  that  there  is  do  need  for  bo  much 
excitement  and  exertion :  and  this,  too,  has  come  from  our  prudent 
men : — we  ought  to  take  it  coolly,  the  thing  went  rightly  enough  ia 
onr  grandfather'a  days,  the  great  men  of  the  pnst  did  very  well  with- 
ont  all  this  stir  !  Well,  we  liiiic  observed  that  wet  blankets  arc  etJU  on 
eale,  and  may  be  had  at  whi.ilcs;ile  prices  1  Now,  brethren,  I  do  not 
know  what  yon  think  about  ii,  but  I  for  one  feel  that  there  iamoch  work 
to  be  done,  and  very  little  time  to  do  it  in.  If  I  plunge  into  the  work 
with  all  my  might,  I  shall  do  none  too  much ;  but,  at  any  rate,  all  mj 
tittle  might  is  demanded  by  Buch  a  cause.  1'here  is  a  blessed  leisure  of 
the  heart  which  sits  at  Jesus's  I'oet ;  but  I  amsurc  that  it  is  not  inconsis- 
tent with  that  violence  which  the  kingdom  of  heaven  suffera-^"  and  the 
violent  take  it  by  force."  There  were  people  who  complained,  in  the 
days  of  Wesley  and  Whitefield,  because  tneir  zeal  caused  a  great  deal  of 
fanaticism ;  but,  thank  God,  the  blessed  fanaticism  spread  throughout  ' 
the  land  ;  and  it  is  not  extinct  even  now,  nor  shall  it  be  by  God's  grac^ 
bnt  it  shall  go  on  increasing  till  Christ  shall  come  1  Let  us  bring  up 
onr  men,  the  whole  of  the  Irihcs,  weak  though  they  be,  and  though 
their  weapons  be  no  better  than  the  axes  and  coulters  with  which  Israel 
fongbt  the  Philistines  I  Let  us  spring  upon  our  foe  as  one  man,  even 
as  in  the  days  of  old.  Let  us  all  go  up  to  Ai ;  and  as  surely  aa  God 
was  with  his  jieople  then,  so  surely  will  he  be  with  our  oompactad 
hosts  to-day,  and  the  world  shall  learn  again  that  there  is  a  God  in 
larael! 

Only  once  more  upon  this  point :  these  children  of  Israel,  in  scndinf[ 
to  the  war  only  part  of  the  men,  were  breaking  in  upon  the  divine  detign. 
The  Lord  never  intended  to  have  two  peoples,  but  one  ;  and  so  we  read 
that  the  Reubenites  and  the  Gaditea  came  over  Jordan  to  the  wai, 
although  their  portion  was  already  conquered.  It  was  the  divine  intent 
that  they  should  be  one  army  of  the  living  God,  ea(.^h  separate  son  of  tba 
seed  of  Abraham  belonging  -to  that  army  and  fighting  in  it ;  he  measb 
that  not  some  only,  but  all  should  sec  the  mighty  works  of  his  hand, 
working  with  them  to  overthrow  their  adversaries.  When  Jericho  leU. 
all  saw  it ;  and  if  Ai  should  t\iU  before  the  divine  power,  they  must  aH 
be  there  to  see  with  their  own  eyes  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  I  am  sure  it 
is  so  with  the  church  of  Gml  to-day.  Our  Lord  means  to  keep  all  bis 
chosen  ones  as  one  army,  and  to  instruct  them  all  as  one  baud.  And 
when  are  we  moat  manifestly  one  ?    When  we  get  to  weik.     If  T«0 


ILL  THE  PEOPLB  AT  WOBK  FOR  JESUS.  381 

ome  to  declamation  npon  your  own  peculiar  points,  I  shall  wish  you 
pod  morning ;  but  if  you  are  going  to  work  for  Jesus,  suffer  me  to  go 
ritli  yoo.  I  have  marked  the  history  of  organizations  formed  for  no 
iractical  purpose,  and  they  have  inyariably  come  to  an  end,  and  I  do 
lot  know  that  we  need  weep  over  the  &ct ;  but  work  to  be  done  for 
^esns  is  a  mighty  bond  of  union.  Our  Ood  does  not  mean  that  his 
liniatcni  should  alone  see  all  the  death-beds,  and  be  the  sole  spec- 
ators  of  the  dying  triumphs  of  his  peopla  No,  our  brothcra  and 
istera  must  visit  too,  and  have  their  faith  strengthened  and  their 
troapects  brightened.  He  does  not  wish  that  preachers  alone  should 
ee  all  the  coip'crts  and  encourage  all  the  desponding  ones.  No,  his 
risdom  perceives  that  it  is  good  for  all  his  servants  to  behold  the 
rophiea  of  his  grace,  and  know  how  to  use  the  encouragements  of 
lis  promises.  The  Lord  does  not  ordain  that  one  or  two  should  mourn 
>ver  the  evil  of  the  hearts  of  men  and  do  battle  with  sinners  alone.  No ; 
16  means  all  his  servants  in  their  measure  to  learn  the  lessons  which 
loly  warfare  would  teach  them.  Not  to  deal  practically  with  souls  is 
)eiiloas  to  ourselves.  Men  who  spend  their  time  providing  us  with 
narrellons  essays  and  papers  in  the  reviews  are  most  of  them  unsound 
n  the  faith ;  but  if  they  went  out  into  the  world  of  real  life,  to 
save  men,  if  they  had  to  battle  personally  with  hard  hearts  and  evil 
passions  in  actual  conversion  work,  they  would  find  that  their  fine* 
q;mn  theories  are  of  no  use ;  they  would  learn  that  the  Puritan  faith 
N  our  fore&thers  is  the  sturdiest  of  all  weapons  and  the  best  adapted 
for  the  world  as  it  is,  and  that  the  old  truth  is  the  sword  with  wnich 
ilone  Tou  can  pierce  the  hefu'ts  of  men.  Work  for  Jesus  is  an  education 
for  a  Uhristian.  What  an  education  it  would  be  for  the  philanthropist 
to  see  what  the  agricultural  labourer  eats,  or  rather  aoes  not  eat ! 
What  a  lesson  for  the  sanitary  reformer  to  see  with  his  own  eyes  where 
the  people  lodge  I  What  an  education  for  a  man  of  wealth  to  spend  a 
oight  or  two  in  the  crowded  chambers  where  our  London  workmen 
iwcll !  And  in  the  same  way,  holy  service  is  a  training  for  us.  In 
Drder  really  to  know  man's  fall  and  the  way  of  redemption  we  must  go 
imong  the  people  and  labour  for  their  conversion.  Hence  our  Lord 
irill  not  excuse  any  of  us  from  service  in  this  war,  because  it  would  be 
lo  onr  great  damage  to  be  away'from  it ;  and  it  is  for  our  encourage* 
sent  and  growth  that  we  should  t^e  our  share  in  it. 

I  wOl  fmish  this  part  of  my  subject  with  a  parable.  In  the  days  of 
ihivalry  a  certain  band  of  knights  had  never  known  defeat.  In  all 
latdes  their  name  was  terrible  to  the  foe.  On  their  banners  was  em- 
)]aaoned  a  long  list  of  victories;  but  in  an  evil  hour  the  leader  of 
he  knights  summoned  them  in  chapter,  and  he  said :  '^  My  brethren, 
re  caoae  ourselves  too  much  toil.  We  have  a  band  of  skilled  warriors 
rorsed  in  all  the  arts  of  battle,  these  are  quite  sufficient  for  ordinary 
sonflictfl^  and  it  will  be  wise  for  the  many  if  they  tarry  in  the  camp  and 
'eat,  or  furbish  their  weapons  for  extraordinary  occasions.  Let  the 
ihampions  go  alone.  Yonder  knight  with  his  sword  can  cleave  a  man  in 
wain  at  a  single  stroke,  and  his  comrade  can  break  a  bar  of  iron  with 
lis  axe ;  others  among  us  are  equally  powerful,  each  one  being  a  host 
n  himself.  With  the  terror  of  our  name  behind  them,  the  chosen 
hampionB  can  carry  on  the  war  while  the  rest  divide  the  spoil."    The 


332  MKTBOFOLrrAM  TABSBSAOLX   PULPIT. 

saying  pleased  the  warriors  well,  bnt  from  that  hoor  the  knell  of 
fame  wa«  rung,  and  defeat  defiled  tlieir  standard.  When  they  cai 
pcthcrlhey  complained  of  the  champions  because  they  had  not  sasi 
the  honour  of  the  order,  and  tlicy  hade  them  exert  themselrea 
heroically.     They  did  go,  bat  with  small  succeas.     Loader  and  lent 

were  the  notes  of  dtscontant  and  the  demands  for  new  champioi 

Then  one  of  the  oldest  of  the  knighl^  said :  "  Brethren,  why  do  jm 
blame  as  ?  The  mistake  lies  here.  In  the  old  time,  when  the  enemy 
assailed  OB,  a  thousand  men  were  up  in  arms,  and  we  who  led  the  vm 
knew  that  a  gallant  army  followed  at  our  hcela.  But  now  you  have 
made  ns  solitary  champioDS,  aud  the  adversary  takes  heart  to  defy  m, 
finding  us  nnenstained.  Come  you  all  with  ns  to  the  fray  as  aforetime 
and  none  shall  stand  against  us."  Brethren,  ye  need  not  that  a  mao 
interpret  this  unto  yon. 

II.  In  the  second  place,  uiy  text  contains  thr  oosmAm)  that  au 
Ibraei,  8B0CU)  GO  KiBTH  TO  THE  FiOHT.  "  Take  all  the  men  of  war 
with  thee." 

I  will  mainly  address  myself  to  my  brethren  in  Christ ;  and  what  I 
have  to  say  to  them  I  say  hnmijly,  speaking  mainly  to  myself.  Brethren, 
wo  mnst  have  all  onr  chnrch  members  go  to  the  war.  I  know  this  ii 
onr  theory;  hnt  in  practice  we  do  not  accomplish  it.  The  baggage 
of  onr  army  is  too  heavy  ;  the  sutlers  and  camp-followers  are  too  manj. 
We  want  to  turn  ont  the  drones,  and  we  need  an  increase  of  true  woti- 
ing  bees.  How  is  it  to  be  done  ?  We  must  be  ourselves  deeplij  im- 
jnetted  with  the  evil  brought  upon  idle  Okrisltant  by  their  idleiieiu,  and 
the  evil  which  they  bring  upon  the  rest  of  the  church.  Only  BU^qxne  i 
Christian — I  will  treat  it  as  a  mere  supposition — living  an  idle  life ;  gin 
him  nothing  to  do  and  he  will  become  morbid  with  introspection  j  or 
he  will  grow  quarrelsome,  contending  with  all  who  hold  opinions  contruy 
to  his  own ;  or  he  will  dishonour  the  name  of  Christ  by  sin.  Youknow 
when  it  was  that  David  feU  with  regard  to  Bathsheba  ;  it  wag  at  the  | 
time  when  kings  go  forth  to  battle  and  he  tarried  still  at  JcruBatem.  Be 
had  not  fallen  into  that  sin  if  he  bad  not  played  the  slu^ard  at  homC' 
Where  was  bis  duty  as  commander-in-chief  ?  Was  it  not  in  the  camp? 
Indolence  is  temptation.  Cci'tain  of  our  churches  arc  suQcring  from 
unsound  teaching,  but  they  are  suffering  as  much  from  want  of  work. 
The  moss  is  growing  npo^n  them,  the  rust  ia  eating  them  np  ;  the  gold 
becomes  dim,  the  silver  is  losing  its  brightness,  and  all  for  want  of  use. 
Oh,  brethren,  if  we  stand  at  the  foot  of  a  barren  tree  in  the  vineywd  of 
Christ  we  know  what  mnst  happen.  As  we  look  upon  it  and  see  no  fniit 
onr  emotions  onght  to  be  those  of  bitterest  sorrow  j  for  the  axe  is  pre- 
pared for  those  that  bear  no  fiuit.  Alas,  that  we'  should  hare  chorch 
members,  not  inconsistent  in  moral  character,  bat  excellent  in  many 
ways,  and  yet  cnmbcrers  of  the  ground  '.  There  is  a  great  deal  of 
charity  about  of  an  evil  srart,  because  it  docsnot  face  the  truth  in  honest 
desire  for  men's  good.  Let  ns  be  too  truly  charitable  to  indulge  in  such 
iatal  charity.  Let  us  sigh  and  cry  when  we  think  of  onr  useless  church 
members  as  branches  of  the  vine  that  bear  no  fruit,  of  whom  the  Master 
has  said  that  they  shall  be  taken  away — "  For  every  branch  in  me  that 
beareth  not  fruit  he  takcth  away  ";  and  "men  gather  them  and  cast 
them  into  the  fire,  and  thej  are  bomed."    What  sorfow  will  fill  our 


JILL  THE  PEOPLB  AT  WORK  FOB  JBBVB.  333 

hcnrtB  if  we  reflect  npon  thia !  If  we  regard  irnitleBB  professors  in  this 
light,  it  will  ^  farther  than  anything  else  to  make  ns  Enccesafal  in 
exciting  all  our  brethren  to  active  service. 

We  veed  to  le  mpressed  with  the  mischief  which  idlers  cause  lo 
olhrrs.  Ono  ackly  sheep  infects  tho  flock;  one  member  who  does 
nothing  lowers  the  tone  of  the  whole  body.  The  indolence  of  prominent 
professors  is  not  merely  the  waste  of  their  own  labour,  bnt  of  that  of 
HM)i«5  of  others.  Leading  persons  are  looked  npon  as  a  sort  of  model 
for  the  rest ;  and  if  So-and-so  is  content  merely  to  liU  his  place  in  the 
pev  and  sabscribe  bo  much  (or,  rather,  so  Utile)  per  annum,  then  others 
will  say,  "  We  shall  he  up  to  the  standard  if  we  do  the  Bamc."  Erery 
man  in  an  army  who  is  not  efficient  and  really  serviceable  is  on  the 
enemy's  Bide.  "What  can  the  enemy  more  desire  than  that  the  opposite 
army  may  he  encumbered  with  the  sick?  What  can  be  better  news  for 
them  than  to  hear  that  the  hoBpitals  are  crowded,  for  then  they  know 
that  a  large  nnmberof  men  are  occupied  with  the  sick  and  detained  from 
the  fight.  The  enemy  claps  his  hands  and  cries,  "These  sick  men  are 
worth  many  a  gon  to  ns."  Oh,  useless  professor,  you  cannot  serre  the 
devil  better  than  by  joining  a  church  and  doing  nothing. 

I  want  my  brethren  to  feel  all  this  ilioBt  keenly.  I  doubt  not  they  do 
feel  it,  but  I  want  to  feel  it  more  vividly  myself;  for  when  we  get  into 
a  tmly  sensitive  condition — when  we  who  are  ministers  are  ahve  npon 
this  point — we  shall  stir  up  the  people  of  God,  all  of  than,  and  we  shall 
see  greater  things  than  these. 

Moreover,  brethren,  ws  must  hunt  out  the  sin  which  leads  to  Ha 
evil  against  which  we  contend,  and  I  believe  it  is  want  of  vital  godli- 
ness in  many  cases.  I  do  not  know  how  my  friend  Mr.  Newman  Hall 
finds  it — I  suppose  he  docs  not  suffer  much  from  it;  but  I  know 
pastors  who  say  they  have  very  respectable  members,  but  nothing 
can  be  done  with  them.  In  some  cases  pritjer- meetings  arc  given  up 
because  the  rich  members  come  home  from  the  City  and  dine  at  the 
hour  which  ja  usually  selected  for  the  prayer-meeting,  and  bo  they 
cannot  attend.  Dining  is  a  most  important  business  :  it  wonld  seem 
to  be  more  important  than  praying.  BuBiness  men  are  so  fntigoed.  It 
is  true  that  we  find  carpenters  and  bricklayers  and  other  workmen 
delighting  in  our  prayer-meetings.  Is  this  because  they  do  not  work  so 
hard  as  your  City  men  ?  In  some  quarters  it  is  found  impossible  to 
canyon  chnrchwork  eSfectively  because  the  very  persons  who  Bhould 
be  workers  and  officers  are  resolved  that  their  liberal  subscriptions  and 
Sabbath  worship  shall  be  the  whole  of  their  assistance  to  the  canse 
of  Christ.  As  to  laying  themselves  out  for  holy  work,  they  look  in  your 
fbce  with  wonder,  as  if  they  thought  you  had  lost  your  scuEes  when  you 
propose  any  very  ardnous  service  to  them.      Now,  this  shirking  of 

frayer  and  service  is  to  be  exposed  and  denounced  in  all  faithfulness, 
t  is  often  the  sin  wtuch  grows  out  of  too  much  case,  self-indulgence, 
and  lojnrions  living.  It  seems  as  if  the  more  God  gives  a  man  the  leas 
return  he  is  inclined  to  oft'er. 

Whatever  the  secret  sin  of  the  charch  may  be,  let  ns  try  to  discover 
it,  and  then  by  the  aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit  endeavour  to  educate  all  our 
members  to  wprk  for  the  Lord.  There  must  be  a  continttal  insisting  u^n 
the  personal  obligations  of  Christians.    We  who  are  known  as  Baptists 


3S1  mraoroLiTAv  tibkbvacu  rvan. 

sre  of  opinion  thst  baptiim,  U  the  personal  act  of  a  believer,  is  a  good 
lesson  to  our  people  as  to  their  personal  responsibilities  ;  but  I  will  not 
for  »  moment  Bnppose  that  my  PiEtiobaptiBt  brethren  are  leas  earnest 
in  enforcing  the  same  trath.  You  also  believe  firmly  in  tho  person.iliSy 
of  true  religion,  you  teach  the  need  of  personal  faith  and  consecration. 
Then  we  are  agreed  upon  the  ^reat  benefit  of  urging  upon  each  niao  tlw 
dnty  of  personal  work  for  Christ.  "What  art  thou  doing  for  Christ?" 
is  a  question  to  be  asked  of  all.  We  must  make  every  believer  feol  that 
he  is  not  his  own,  but  bought  with  a  price  ;  that  no  amount  of  firing 
can  compensate  for  personal  labour  fur  his  Lord  ;  that  even  he  who  by 
sickness  and  infirmity  cannot  at  hmllv  work  should  render  his  contrihn- 
tion  to  the  general  effort  by  continiml  prayer.  No  one  must  uppnr 
before  the  Lord  empty,  but  eithi;i'  by  active  or  paosive  scrTice  uinst 
prove  his  gratitude  to  God. 

And  then,  while  each  is  responsible,  neglect  by  one  is  injurious  to 
the  common  service  of  the  whole.  I  saw  a  cart  standing  this  morning 
on  the  roadside  with  one  wheel  chained  ;  there  was  no  fear  of  its  moving 
with  that  one  wheel  fast.  Sometimes  one  ohnined  wheel  in  a  church 
will  hinder  all.  We  are  all  parts  of  a  great  machine,  and  the  stoppingof 
one  part  does  not  simply  mean  the  one  stoppage,  lint  the  hindering  of 
the  whole  organization.  If  a  pit'ce  .^C  bone  in  the  Imdy  becomes  dead,  It 
is  not  simply  useleas,  but  it  bewnuf*  ihe  nidns  of  mischief,  and  the  cflnse 
of  pain.  It  begins  to  decay,  disi;i,i.'  forms,  and  serious  evil  comes  of  It 
to  the  entire  irame.  A  dead  jmilc'-sor  who  is  content  to  enjoy  the 
doctrines  without  fulfilling  the  pn^ceplii  of  the  gospel  bcuouicB  a  aonrce 
of  serious  danger  in  the  church  of  Jcsas  Christ,  and  wc  know  it  to  be 
indeed  so. 

My  brethren,  durell  v^on  the  importance  of  fhe  mlerprm  in  ti'/iieh  un 
are  engaged;  and  so  act  aa  to  make  others  feel  it^s  importance.  Why 
take  all  that  trouble  about  furbishing  up  a  doubtful  point  of  divinity, 
which  is  of  no  earthly  use  when  it  is  furbished  up  ?  Why  all  that  Sunday 
morning  spent  in  discussing  far-fetched  points  o!'  belief  ?  What  is  this  but 
sheer  trifling  ?  Some  are  greatly  given  to  what  they  call  "  thinking  " — 
"dreaming'  is  the  truer  word,  Better  by  half  plunge  the  old  gospel 
Bword  at  once  into  men's  hearts  and  slay  their  sins  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord  than  stand  quibbling  about  certain  characters  upon  the  hilt  of 
the  weapon.  One  sermon  about  nothini;  will  do  more  harm  than  all 
yonr  specnlationa  will  do  goodi.  Men  come  to  forget  that  the  gospel 
is  meant  to  save  souls,  and  look  upon  it  as  a  mass  of  interesting  sub- 
jeeta.  Certain  sermons  are  said  to  be  "  intellectual  treats," — 1  think 
that  is  what  I  have  heard  them  called.  Our  religion  docs  not  mean  that, 
it  means  fighting  with  sin  ;  it  is,  if  anything  at  nil,  one  of  real  down- 
right practical  work  for  Jesos  Christ ;  and  we  must  show  that  it  is 
so.  Our  teaching  nothing  indiiborate  lancruiitre  will  nmke  our  people 
think  that  practical  godliness  U  a  sni.ill  nuittcr,  and  that  intellect  is 
better  than  piety.  We  mnst  make  men  feel  that  to  save  a  sonl  is  bettsr 
^an  to  possess  all  knowledge,  or  even  to  gain  the  whole  world  !  While 
l^em  are  making  a  new  gospel  let  us  labour  to  save  souls  by  the  old 
Wp^  ^'■l  ^od  enable  as  to  preach  in  awful  earnest,  and  by  this  meanSi 
HUytie  Holy  Spirit  quickening  us,  we  shall  get  all  our  people  to  maioh 
^pr^tD  the  battle  of  their  God  I 


AU,  THI  PlOPtS  AT  TOBK  FOU  JtSUB.  SS5 

bove  all,  let  u>  ^ay  /«•  nwre  grace.  We  most  neyer  read  the 
f  of  old  timev.and  say,  "What  a  splendid  denomination  onra  htui 
\,  can  we  not  rest  on  our  lanrela  ?"  Impossible.  You  must  vin 
1  ones.     Napoleon  used  to  sa;,  "  Contjaest  has  mnde  me  what  I  am, 

coQ(jDest  must  mnintain  me  "j  and  it  is  so  with  ChriBtians.  Yon 
t  advance ;  yon  must  ontdo  the  eiploits  of  the  past,  and  eclipae 
deeds  of  your  sires,  or  you  will  show  yourselves  nnworthy  of  them. 

battle  thiekenB,  and  how  shall  wc  meet  the  growing  demands  upon 
iccpt  by  aeeliing  for  aeTenfold  grace  ?  Our  spiritual  stamina  needs 
e  increased.    If  we  were  to  collect  a  number  of  men  all  wheezing 

cong-hiug,  and  only  fit  for  the  Consnmption  Hospital,  and  set  them 
fork  npon  a  railway,  we  might  commend  them  for  their  diligence, 

tbey  would  never  accompIiBh  much-  On  the  other  hand,  gather 
:ther  a  company  of  burly,  brawny  men,  and  they  will  say,  "  Who 

then,  0  strong  moontain  ?"  and,  before  it  can  answer,  it  will  be 
led  to  a  plain !  See  how  they  nae  the  pick  and  the  shovel !  Tital 
Qgth  is  their  motive  force.  0  God,  strengthen  oal  We  are  willing, 
e  of  na,  but  our  strokes  are  feeble !    Grant  ua,  we  beseech  thee, 

e  of  thy  Holy  Spirit,  and  we  shall  accomplish  j^reat  things.  Strength 
ghta  in  work,  feebleness  is  afraid  of  it.  Spiritual  strength  will  pro- 
s  universal  spiritnal  service  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

have  done  when  I  have  looked  into  the  future  for  a  moment.  If  it 
jld  ever  come  to  pass  that  the  minister  and  all  bis  people  went  forth 
he  war  for  King  Jesus,  what  would  happen  ?    I  seem  to  be  in  para- 

when  I  think  of  it !  If  all,  without  exception,  who  name  the  name 
'ems,  went  earnestly  into  his  vineyard,  what  life  there  would  be,  and 
tt  nnity  in  all  the  chorches .'  There  would  be  no  longer  a  name  to 
,  but  real  living  I  There  would  be  no  divisions  if  all  were  alike 
pus  for  the  glory  of  the  common  Master.  Yon  would  not  hear  of 
rch  meetings  which  are  scenes  of  disturbance,  and  chnrchee  where 
jon  are  unhappy  ;  such  things  would  be  regarded  as  extinct  animals 
he  ages  gone  by. 

rhen  we  should  hear  no  complaints  of  our  not  being  strong  enough  to 
the  work  of  oni  great  cities  and  scattered  hamlets.  The  very 
)kst  church,  if  every  one  did  his  share,  would  be  strong  enough  for 
position.  Moreover,  there  would  be  no  lack  of  funds  for  any  holy 
ETprise.  Ah,  if  ^od's  treasure  received  from  all  as  it  receives  from 
le,  we  should  almost  have  to  tell  the  people  tn  stay  their  hands,  be- 
se  we  should  scarcely  know  how  to  use  all  their  gifts.  But  the 
kith  which  belongs  to  Christ  and  the  service  kept  back  from  him 
ker  in  men's  coft'ers,  and  the  amount  of  which  the  Lord  is  robbed  is 
lOSt  beyond  computation.  The  missionary  societies,  very  well  aus- 
led  on  the  whole,  do  not  receive  more  tlian  a  tenth  or  a  hundredth 
t  of  what  God's  people  ought  to  give  to  so  divine  a  work.  If  the 
reliant  prince  who  contributes  what  is  thought  to  be  a  handsome 
a  to  Christ,  only  gave  in  the  aame  proportion  as  many  a  pious  girl 
3  has  to  eom  her  living  at  so  many  stitchee  for  a  penny,  and  if  all 
e  as  tiie  few  are  giving,  we  should  soon  supply  all  nations  with 


Vnd  if  this  were  the  case,  what  enterprises  would  be  undertaken  ? 
■at  overflowings  of  Christian  seal  should  we  perceive  ?    We  shonld 


M6  MBTEOPOLITAN  TABEBKAOLB  PULPIT. 

l>e  sending  out  meaaen^rs  to  discover  every  region  which  remained  nn- 
Enbdued,  and  we  should  at  once  be  np  ana  doing.  'Then  the  mi^ioD 
field  would  be  atrong  with  men  of  nobleat  fitncBS.     I  do  not  know  hoir 

Jon  think  about  it,  but  it  does  eeem  etraagc  to  oic  that  wc  here  in  this 
ittle  island  are  ao  close  packed  together,  and  yet  a  few  scores  or 
hundreds  only  go  into  the  mission  field.  '■  Some  of  us  hnre  lu^ 
Bpherea  here,  aud  we  cannot  be  exjiected  to  go,  can  we  ?"  I  nnswr, 
the  ablest  preacher  that  ever  lived  is  not  t«o  good  for  misGionarj 
work !  the  most  useful  man  at  home  ia  probably  the  fittest  for  the 
foreign  field. '  Let  us  each  question  his  own  heart  as  to  the  claims  of 
the  heathen:  for  my  owp  part,  I  dare  not  sleep  till  I  have  honeatly 
considered  whether  /  ought  to  go  or  not.  "We  tell  our  young  men 
in  the  College  that  they  must  pi-ove  that  they  have  no/  to  go,  or 
else  their  duty  ia  clear.  If  some  of  the  men  of  Israel  had  said  to 
Joshua,  "We  cannot  go  to  Ai,"  Joshua  wonid  have  replied,  "Ton 
must  prove  that  yon  cannot  go  or  you  may  not  be  excused."  All 
other  things  being  egual,  ministers  should  take  it  for  granted  that 
it  ia  their  duty  to  invade  new  territory  unless  they  can  prove  to 
the  contrary.  When  I  think  of  the  number  of  young  men  who  ars 
well  educated,  aud  can  read  a  capital  paper  at  the  Metihanica'  Insti- 
tution, and  profess  to  be  regenerated  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  grieves 
me  to  see  their  talents  dedicated  so  largely  to  meaner  ends.  Oh,  bleed- 
ing Lamb,  it  does  seem  strange  that  we  have  a  greater  passion  foe 
literature  than  for  thee  1  more  care  for  fleeting  than  for  enduring 
things! 

France  is  wanting  the  gospel.  See  what  one  beloved  brother  in  Paris 
has  been  able  to  do, — a>e  there  rone  who  can  do  the  like  for  other  cities 
in  that  neighbour  country  ?  Here  and  there  a  good  man  can  say,  "  I 
have  made  a  competency  " — why  not  lii^e  and  employ  it  where  you  can 
lay  it  out  personally  for  the  spread  of  the  Redeemer's  kingdorti  ?  Sot'ii 
a  thing  is  being  done  by  a  few,  it  is  not  therefore  impossible,  and 
you  wno  follow  the  graid  e;tample  shall  have  your  reward.  See 
what  Pastor  Harms  did  in  the  village  of  Hermansburg,  h"w  he  stirred 
up  all  the  people  until  they  gave  themselves  and  their  property  to  the 
lrf)rd,  and  built  a  ship  for  tlie  mission  and  went  forth  in  it  to  Africa, 
company  after  company,  to  evangelize.  Should  it  not  be  the  ambition 
of  a  minister  to  feel  that  if  he  stays  at  home  be  will  at  least,  by  the  Holy 
Spirit's  heIp,produce  missionaries  byscores  in  the  village  where  hclaboiir?. 
I  wot  the  day  toraeth  that  he  will  be  thought  most  happy  who  suffered 
and  laboured  moat  for  Christ.  When  this  great  fi"ht  is  o\er  he  who  is 
most  soiirred  will  be  most  honoured,  and  he  who  dwelt  at  home  at  ease 
will  think  himself  but  sparacly  blest  becanee  he  put  not  in  for  his  share 
of  the  wnr.  Let  us  be  all  at  work  for  Christ  and  his  redeemed  church  I 
All  at  work,  at  all  times,  and  in  all  ways  for  Christ !  1 1  is  for  that  I 
plead  ;  and  then  we  will  take  another  motto  and  say — the  world  for 
Christ,  and  Christ  for  every  niition  under  beaven  !  This  will  be  atcoui- 
pliahed  when  the  Spirit  has  Hroused  us  all.  0  blessed  Spirit,  con\Tr[ 
the  church  and  it  will  convert  the  world  1 


JRdvapGton  ^nibtmitk 


HAPPINESS:  THE  PRIVILEGE  AND  DUTY  OP 

CHRISTIANS. 


%  ^m^ 


Dkjtemd  on  Lord'8-Dat  Morning,  Juns  10th,  1877,  bt 

C.    H.   SPURGEON, 

JIT  THE  MBTROFOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON* 


**Bmj  art  thou*  0  Imel :  who  it  like  unto  thee,  O  people  sayed  by  the  Lord, 
.tli0  thialaof  thv  helivand  who  is  the  sword  of  thy  excellency !  and  thine  enemier 
^iHtll  be  found  nan  nnto  thee ;  and  thou  shalt  tread  upon  their  high  plaoea.'' — 
P— teionomy  tttjij.  29. 

These  are  the  last  recorded  words  of  Moses,  and  they  are  significant, 
for  they  show  us  that  he  found  comfort  in  his  dying  momento  in  con- 
sidering the  happiness  of  the  people  for  whom  he  had  laboured  all  his 
life.  Erom  the  dajr  when,  by  God's  power,  he  led  them  up  out  of  Egypt 
and  brought  them  into  the  wilderness  they  had  never  ceased  to  lie  near 
his  heart.  They  had  been  «  very  heavy  burden  to  him  at  times,  but 
with  marvellous  meekness  and  patience  he  had  borne  with  their  many 
rebellious  provocations,  and  only  once  spoken  bitterly  of  them.  Often- 
times had  ne  stood  in  the  gap  and  made  intercession  for  them,  when 
otherwise  they  would  have  been  destroyed.  He  had  for  their  sakes 
given  up  the  most  glorious  prospect  that  was  ever  proposed  to  the  mind 
of  man,  for  the  Lord  had  said  to  him  in  secret,  ^' Xict  me  alone,  that  I 
may  destroy  them ;  and  I  will  make  of  thee  a  greater  nation."  But  no, 
even  such  a  proposal  could  not  divert  him  fix>m  his  patriotic  zeal  for  his 

Ex>ple :  he  bved  Israel,  erring  Israel,  ungrateitd  Israel,  as  a  mother 
ves  her  child,  and  family  aggrandizement  was  relinquished  for  love  of 
the  nation.  Still  he  continued  to  instruct,  and  lead,  and  guide  the 
fltiflhecked  race,  having  no  thought  but  God's  glory  in  the  midst  of 
Israel  and  no  ambition  but  to  see  the  tribes  brought  at  length  into  the 
promised  land.  When  about  to  die  the  ruling  passion  is  strong  upon 
nim,  and  from  it  he  draws  his  consolation.  He  seems  to  say  to  him- 
self, **  I  Can  no  more  go  out  and  come  in :  also  the  Lord  hath  said  unto 
me.  Thou  shalt  not  go  over  this  Jordan,  but  though  I  must  leave  the 
beloved  nation,  yet  they  are  a  happy  people,  and  are  safe  in  Jehovah's 
hajids."  He  looks  with  sparkling  eye  at  the  privileges  with  which  GodL 
No.  1,869. 


MS  KSTSOPOI.n'in  TiBSBBjLOtK  P?iJ». 

hftd  etitf (And  tbem,  and  be  feeh  that  he  mayqnietlygoap  to  thenaA- 
tain  and  &II  asleep,  for  tliey  would  be  blessed  when  be  was  gone,  and 
■ared  of  Uie  Lord. 

Ah,  my  dear  young  friends,  you  who  are  children  of  godly  famiHe^ 
yon  cannot  tell  what  joy  yon  will  give  to  yonr  parents  if  you  are  con- 
Terted  to  God;  for  when  they  come  to  die  they  will  find  it  cue  of  their 
sweetest  consolations  to  see  their  children  walking  in  the  truth.  Thej 
haTe  loTed  yon  dearly,  and  they  will  feel  a  pang  in  leaving  yon ;  but 
if  they  can  feel  that  Ood  has  blessed  yon,  and  saved  you,  they  will  din 
in  peace.  I  have  heard  saints  when  dying  say,  "  There  is  but  one  thiag 
that  I  want,  and  for  which  I  could  wisb  to  be  spared  a  little  longer.^! 
conld  wisb  to  live  to  see  all  my  family  believing  in  the  Lord.  0  that 
allmyofibpri&gwere  lovers  of  Jesos."  I  have  heard  dying  saints  eipreai 
thenoBelres  in  language  somewhat  similar  to  that  of  David ;  "  The  Lord 
hath  made  with  me  an  everlasting  covenant,  ordered  in  all  things,  and 
Bnre,  although  my  house  be  notlso  with  Ood  as  I  cocdd  desire,"  That 
"  although  my  house  be  not  so  with  God"ha3  been  a  thorn  in  their 
pillow,  and  they  have  felt  it  painful  to  quit  their  household  while  yrt 
their  children  were  bo  unhappy  as  to  be  out  of  Ghr^t  and  unreconciled 
to  God.  Think  of  this,  dear  young  people,  I  pray  you,  and  perh^ 
natural  afitetion  may  be  blessed  in  tbo  hand  of  God  to  lead  you  to  se£ 
after  eternal  salvation. 

Thna  you  see  how  Moses  consoled  himself;  but  why  was  not  this  ex- 
pressioa  of  the  great  lawgiver  left  as  a  soliloquy  unrecorded  P  Mosei 
had  cheered  himself  with  this  reflection,  "  Happy  art  thou,  0  lerad," 
what  need  to  write  it  domi,  or  to  utter  it  before  the  people?  It  is 
frequently  an  unwise  thing  to  tell  a  nian  of  his  propitious  surroundings, 
for  ne  may  become  vain  of  them.  You  may  commend  a  man's  estate 
until  he  lOoliBhly  dreams  that  you  are  commending  him.  When  yon 
praise  a  man's  position,  it  is  the  next  thing  to  flattering  the  man  him- 
self, for  the  most  of  men  do  not  divide  between  tbemselves  and  their 
condition,  but  read  a  commendation  of  their  condition  as  a  commenda- 
tion  of  themeelves,  though  it  be  not  so.  Kcnce  one  has  sometimes  to 
be  very  chary  of  calling  men  happy  i  and  all  the  more  so  because  we 
cannot  generally  be  sure  that  they  arc  happy ;  extenial  circumstances 
being  but  a  poor  means  of  judgment.  The  fairest  apple  may  be  rotten 
at  the  core,  the  finest  linen  may  be  a  coverlet  for  a  corpse.  Moreovar, 
according  to  the  truthful  rule  of  the  ancients,  no  man  ia  to  be  counted 
happy  till  he  is  dead,  seeing  that  you  do  not  know  the  whole  of  his  life^ 
and  it  may  happen  that  the  circumstances  which  now  appear  to  be  the 
foundation  of  a  happy  hfe  may  tnrn  out  to  be  a  preparation  for  increased 
bitterness  in  the  after  part  of  existence.  Yet  Moses  speaks  thus  openly 
to  Israel  without  a  word  of  quaUficntion  or  caution :  "  Happy  art  thou, 
0  Israel :  who  ia  hke  unto  thee  1"  Now,  we  are  quite  certain  that 
Moses  did  not  err  in  this ;  it  would  be  great  self-conceit  to  imagine 
Buch  a  thing.  We  may  confide  in  the  clearness  of  his  judgment,  in  the 
maturity  of  his  experience,  and  in  the  fidelity  of  his  spirit.  We  are 
snre  that  he  did  not  speak  with  rashness,  for  he  was  of  a  meek  and 
gentle  disposition,  and  somewhat  slow  in  speech,  and  not  likely,  there- 
fore, to  worm  into  unreasonable  enthusiasm  and  go  beyond  the  Bobtf 
truth,    Abore  all,  the  Holy  Ghost  has  adopted  Uie  lawgiver's  mtda, 


HAFPIHE9B1  TfiS  FRZYILBGB  ASD  DUTY  OF  CHBI8TIAN8.        83^ 

for  he  had  himBelf  inspired  them^  and  we  haye  ihem  here  in  the  in£Ej- 
lible  Word  of  God,  so  that  it  is  quite  certain  that  Israel  was  happy^ 
eren  as  onr  text  declares.  The  ^ople  were  favoured,  and  it  was  right 
lor  ihem  to  be  told  so,  a  wise  design  led  to  their  being  reminded  of  the 
Ueased  faot.  I  think  that  Moses  thus  eulogized  the  nation  by  way  of 
xxmaolii^  them  for  his  departure.  He  did  as  much  as  say,  *'  I  climb 
the  mount  to  go  away  to  God,  but  happy  art  thou,  0  Israel :  whether 
Hoses  be  with  thee  or  not,  God  is  with  thee."  No  doubt  many  would 
say  as  the  great  lawgiver  departed,  **  My  father,  my  father,  the  chariot 
of  lerael  and  the  horsemen  tnereof";  but  Moses  reminds  them  that  the 
'43hield  of  their  help  and  the  sword  of  their  excellency  would  still  be 
with  them,  and  they  would  still  be  a  people  saved  of  the  Lord.  What 
better  comfort  can  be  offered  to  bereaved  hearts  ? 

I  think  also  that  he  had  in  his  mind's  eye  the  fact  that  they  were 
BOW  about  to  face  new  difficulties.  Under  Joshua  they  were  to  cross 
the  Jordan  and  fi^ht  the  Canaanites.  They  had  known  occasional 
:brnsh^  in  the  wilderness  with  Amalek  and  Bashan,  but  for  the  most 
part  they  had  led  peaceable  lives ;  now,  however,  each  man  was  to  be  a 
floldier.  From  the  day  in  which  his  foot  pressed  the  promised  land 
each  man  was  to  contend  for  the  mastery,  and  therefore  Moses  sustains 
them  with  rich  and  nourishing  meat  to  strengthen  them  for  the  new 
service.  **  Happy  art  thou,  0  Israel ;  thou  art  about  to  throw  thyself 
anto  the  midst  of  ferocious  tribes,  who  will  all  conspire  to  cut  thee  off; 
bat  thou  art  a  people  saved  of  the  Lord ;  thine  enemies  shall  be  found 
Jiafs  unto  thee^  and  thou  dialt  tread  upon  their  high  places,'' 

**  My  never-ceasinff  songs  shall  show 
The  mercies  of  the  Lord, 
And  make  succeeding  ages  know 
How  faithful  is  his  word. 

"  The  sacred  truths  his  lips  pconounce 
Shall  firm  &s  heaven  endure  ; 
And  if  he  speak  a  promise  once, 
The  eternal  grace  is  sure. 

**  How  long  the  grace  of  David  held 
The  promised  Jewish  throne ! 
But  there's  a  nobler  covenant  sealed 
To  David's  greater  Son. 

'*  llis  seed  for  ever  shall  possess 
A  throne  above  the  akies  ; 
The  meanest  subject  of  his  grace 
Shall  to  that  glory  rise." 

So  then  I  gather  fix)m  the  example  of  Moses  that  to  commend  a  man's 
condition,  if  you  have  a  wise  motive  for  it,  and  can  either  console  him 
4mder  trouble  or  inspire  him  for  future  service,  is  a  right  thing  to  do. 
Hiis  morning  we  are  going  to  repeat  the  experiment.  Whatever  was 
said  about  the  happy  condition  of  the  natural  Israel  is  emphatically 
true  of  the  spiritual  Israel.  The  tribes  were  our  types,  and  what  was 
true  of  them  is  true  of  us.  Without  any  sort  of  wresting  of  the  text, 
we  shall  this  morning  apnly  to  all  believers,  to  all  who  rest  in  Christ 
Jesns  and  have  no  confidence  in  the  flesh,  the  words  of  Moses  to  the 


tiia  HBTBOFOUTIV  TABIBVIOLB  FDLPIt. 

tribes,  "Happy  art  thou,  0  Israel:  who  is  like  unto  thee,  O  people 
eaved  by  the  Lord."  We  are  the  trne  Israel,  the  apiritua!  seed  of  (ha 
father  of  the  faithful,  and  to  as  unbounded  happineas  belongs. 

This  shall  be  onr  point  this  morning.  First,  lel  us  consider  the  happu 
tondition  of  Goctt  people ;  and  then,  secondly,  let  ws  consider  the  rMtOt 
of  our  fully  realizing  Ihix  happiness.  May  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Com- 
forter, fill  as  with  all  joy  nod  peace  while  wc  commune  upon  this 
aabject.    May  the  blessed  God  now  bless  all  his  children. 

L  Let  hb  dwell  upon  the  happy  condition  of  God's  peoplr. 
The  IsraelitcB  were  bo  favoared  that  Moses  himself  was  aftonished  at 
the  eminently  desiralile  condition  in  which  they  were  placed.  We 
may  readily  imagine  that  wc  sec  him  liftiog  up  bis  hands  with  surprise 
and  Baying,  "  Happy  art  thou,  0  Israel :  who  is  like  unto  thee ! "  Ha 
considered  the  nation  to  be  incomparably  favoured,  and  therefore  ai- 
qnired  in  astonishment,  "Who  is  like  unto  thee?"  He  had  seen 
Egypt  with  all  its  wisdom  and  its  wealth,  and  the  desert  tribes  in  all 
their  rustic  simplicity,  and  doubtless  he  knew  the  condition  of  most 
of  the  nations  under  heaven,  but  haTiog  his  eye  upon  them  all  he 
aerertheleBB  looks  upuu  the  chosen  race  which  God  hod  brought  up  out 
of  Egypt,  and  he  says,  "  Who  is  like  nnto  thee?"  Beloved,  you  who 
are  in  Christ  are  favoared  by  God  beyond  all  others.  None  in  the 
whole  universe  are  bo  happily  placed  as  yon  are :  "ye  are  a  chosen  gene- 
ration, a  pecnliar  people.'  If  you  have  been  bom  again  and  saved,  yoa 
are  the  pick  and  choice  of  all  God's  creatures,  and  ho  has  indulged  yon 
with  a  measure  of  love  and  kindness  such  as  he  has  shown  to  none  else. 
I  address  believers  as  a  body,  and  I  ask  you,  would  you  change  your 
estate  with  the  rich  of  this  world  ?  Would  you  barter  grace  for  gain? 
Surely  not.  There  is  much  that  is  comfortable  connected  wi^  the 
possession  of  wealth ;  but  if  you  look  at  the  opulent,  as  such,  there  is 
no  reason  to  believe  that  they  are  the  posscssorB  of  any  great  amount  of 
happiness.  Gold  cannot  lighten  the  heavy  heart  or  cool  the  burning 
brow :  fiir  oftener  it  cankers  the  soul,  and  lies  like  a  weight  upon  the 
spirit.  It  is  a  heary  metal  and  has  weighed  many  down  to  hell.  Yon, 
even  though  you  be  the  poor  of  the  flock,  the  despised  and  rejected  of 
men,  are  a  people  infinitely  favoured  beyond  those  who  possess  the 
treasures  of  this  fleeting  world.  Select  even  a  company  of  princes,  and 
let  them  stand  before  you  in  all  their  pomp,  half  worshipped  by  their 
subjects;  but  they  will  not  excite  your  en\'y,  for  "  uneasy  nes  the  bead 
that  wears  a  crown,"  and  those  who  climb  to  the  high  places  of  the 
earth  commonly  confess  that  there  is  little  peace  of  mind  to  be  found 
there.  Yon  who  believe  in  Jesus  are  kings  of  a  nobler  sort  already, 
and  enjoy  honours  and  blessings  which  emperors  might  covet :  you 
reign  in  Christ  after  a  far  higher  manner  than  princes  and  emperor^ 
fhr  yon  rule  in  a  superior  realm,  since  the  spiritual  far  exceeds  the 
material.  Who  is  like  unto  thee,  0  believer,  amongst  the  mighty  onM 
of  the  earth  ?  for  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  thy  strength  and  thy  song,  thy 
portion  and  thy  praise,  thy  comfort  and  thy  croivi;.  Turn  yon,  if  yoa 
will,  to  those  who  are  f^imous  for  knowledge,  men  of  skill,  and  wit,  and 
teeearch,  yet  amoufj  these  there  are  none  to  lie  found  comparable  in 
happiness  to  Christians.  To  know  yourself  forgiven,  to  know  yourself 
eternally  saved,  to  know  yourself  ordained  nnto  eternal  Ufi^  to  be 


HAPTISXBfi.;  THE  PEITILEQB  AND  DUTY  07  OHBISTUITS.        S41 

snared  ih&t  yon  will  enjoy  bliw  niupe&kable  when  jondet  san  tunu  to 
8  coal,  and  the  moon  ia  black  as  sacKcIoUi  of  hair :  to  know  all  tbia  ia 
to  be  un^eakably  Tavonred  ;  the  ntmoaC  learning  cannot  oompaie  with 
it.  Nor  if  you  take  the  soni.  of  pleasoie,  with  theii  wine  and  theit 
mttaic,  and  tbeir  s&bsiiliI  jo^,  can  yon  find  any  rivaU  foi  onx  hi^^iocaa. 
Solomon  tells  ua  co..oem!ng  lan^ter  that  it  ia  mad»  uid  Bntoa  np  all 
earthly  joy  with — "  Vanity  of  vanitiei^  aU  ig  vanity."  Onr  conaect^ted 
pleoEJircs  arc  not  such ;  our  hidy  joy  haai  no  delngion  in  it ;.  it  ia  solid 
and  real,  and  can  never  be  takea  froia  ns,  and  thertfote  thoM  whoi 
possesK  it  are  a  people  nnp:aalleled  fto  bleasedneaa.  Wealth*  lai^ 
learning,  fame,  pleasure,  nnd  all  else  that  man  holda  deai^  we  would 
gladly  renounce  for  Lho  joy  of  oar  Lord.  He  haa  satisfied  tjb  with 
favour,  and  tilled  us  to  Ihe  brim  with  content,  now  that  hahaagivHi  ns 
himself  for  our  portion.  BleiiBed  are  our  very  dwellings,  and  the  beds 
we  lie  upon,  and  the  tables  at  which  we  sit.  "  How  goodly  are  thj 
tents,  0  Jacob,  ard  thy  tabernacles,  0  Israel  I " 

Am  I  speaking  Co  some  believers  who  are  not  enjoying  this  happiness? 
Is  it  not  strange  that  men  should  be  iu  a  position  which  angels  might 
enTy,  and  yet  they  fail  to  realize  their  bleat  estate  ?  Just  as  some 
mea  with  thooBaads  a  year  will  live  like  paupers,  so  are  there  othen 
vho^  with  a  boondless  income  of  eternal  love  at  their  disposal  never- 
thelna  starre  their  souls  with  small  dehghta.  Just  think  for  a 
nuBote,  0  downcast  believers,  of  this  singnlar  tact,  and  chide  your- 
■elres  into  a  more  joyful  frame  of  mind.  There  was  a  time  when  yon 
wonld  have  given  your  eyes  to  be  what  yon  now  are.  Do  you  re- 
mesbw  when  sin  fay  heavy  on  your  conscience,  and  a  dread  of  death 
and  hall  brooded  over  yon  ?  What  would  you  Imve  given  then  to  have 
bees  able  to  say,  "By  grace  I  am  forgiven"?  Yon  know  yon  used  to 
envy  the  very  least  and  poorest  and  mostafflictedofGod'ssaiatAinthoso 
daja,  and  you  were  wont  to  think  that  if  you  could  lie  in  a  dungeon  and 
be  fad  on  bread  and  water  all  vour  life,  yet  if  yon  could  but  once  get  rid 
^  tho  burden  of  sin  you  would  never  murmur  again.  Yet  here  you  are, 
aec^>ted  in  the  Beloved,  and  conacious  of  being  adopted  into  the  family 
of  hMKn,  and  for  all. that  your  joy  ia  at  a  low  ebb.     Should  it  be  so  ? 

Bemember  also  the  time  of  your  espouaala,  the  season  of  vour  first  love. 
WKy,  in  those  days  you  wondered  how  a  Christian  could  be  unhappy. 
Aa  for  yourself,  you  were  ao  full  of  intense  delight  that  when  yon  heard 
some  oider  Christian  lamenting  over  anxiety,  ^nbt,  fear,  and  the  like, 
jtM  looked  at  him  as  a  prodigy,  you  conld  notcomprehend  his  speaking 
afl»r  that  feshion.  You  felt  that  to  say,  "My  Beloved  ia  nune  ana 
I  am  h^"  waa  the  very  essence  of  heaven  to  yon,  aod  you  could  not 
ntake  out  how  a  man  could  be  an  heir  of  glory  and  not  be  as  overflow- 
ing with  delight  as  yon  were.  Therefore,  I  say,  chide  yonrself  to  thinfa 
tb»t  yon  should  have  fallen  from  yonr  eminency  aad  come  away  from 
tbaie  sweet  delights. 

Beloved,  if  we  are  not  as  happy  as  the  days  are  long  in  these  aammer 
ntaaths,  it  is  entirely  our  own  fault,  for  there  is  plenty  of  reason  for 
being  ao.  Come,  Christians,  why  are  you  cast  down  ?  Why  ore  yon  so 
dnqoieted  ?  Have  you  not  forgotten  your  redemption,  forgotten  yonr 
action,  forgotten  your  justification,  and  forgotten  your  safety  in  Christ  ? 
Hava  yoB  not  also  somewhat  neglected  to  anrvey  your  hopes  ?    What  if 


i 


S42  ■  USTBOFOIiITAM  TADERNACLE    PUUTT. 

Jou  have  little  of  t^is  world :  see  what  U  laij  np  in  store  for  you  hcre- 
■fter.  Within  a  few  jma  at  the  onteidc  yoa  are  to  be  with  the  angek. 
where  no  dnet  of  toil  flhall  ever  etain  your  garments  ^ain,  where  no  ' 
sweat  of  labonr  ahall  stand  upon  your  brow,  where  no  care  shall  bcouf^  | 
the  heart,  and  no  Borrow  dim  the  eye.  Grief,  loss,  bereaTement,  or  want  i 
ahall  never  approach  yoK  there.  You  are  of  the  blood  imperial,  and  i 
yoa  are  aoon  to  be  acknowledged  as  a  peer  of  heaven's  own  reahn;^  « 
the  day  of  your  accession  to  sacred  honours  hastens  on.  It  may  be  btU'  { 
a  week  or  two  that  the  bliss  will  tarry ;  even  a  few  hours  may  be  0»  4 
only  interna),  and  we  shatl  stand  beatified  amongst  the  perfected  one»'  ' 
who  see  God's  face  without  a  leil  between.  We  have  every  reason  t(^  . 
be  happy,  «nd  if  we  are  not  so,  it  must  bo  bscause  we  fail  to  remeo-  ^ 
ber  tlie  priTileges  which  our  Lord  has  bestowed  upon  us.  Let  me  stir  c 
joa  up,  my  brothers  and  listers,  to  happiness  this  momiiig.  J 

"Why  sLould  the  children  of  b  King  3 

Go  moiiruing  all  tlieir  i\ajn  ?  ^1 

Come,  cease  to  groan,  and  louilly  sing  T 

A  psalm  or  gladsome  pnii:^c."  * 

What  a  blessed  task  is  mine, — to  urge  my  brethren  to  be  happyT  |! 
How  highly  favoured  are  you  to  bo  exhorted  to  so  delicious  a  privilege  « 
When  happiness  becomes  »  duty  who  will  not  be  glad  ?  What  a  blesMtf '  ■* 
people  are  they  to  whwn  to  be  delighted  is  but  to  obey  the  divine  com-  f[ 
mand ;  to  whom  rejoicing  in  the  Lord  is  an  obligation  as  well  as  »  * 
pririlege.  4 

My  brethren,  I  would  urge  you  to  rejoice  this  morning,  bccatiBe  if  1 
yoQ  are  indeed  believers  in  Christ,  you  tire  "  a  ptople  savtd  by  tt^  i 
Lord."    If  yoa  only  read  as  fiix  as  the  word  "saved"  and  there  pane^   ^ 
what  mnsic  there  is  in  tJic  words — "a  people  sared"!    Xot  a  pe^P^ 
who  may  be  saved,  who  arc  in  process  of  being  saved,  but  a  pottle'  *. 
sared;  for  he  that  believes  in  Jesus  is  saved.     The  work  is  dwft.-  * 
"There  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation  to  them  that  are  in  Chnst*  ' 
Jeans."    "  Unto  ns  who  aro  saved,"  says  the  apostle,  not  speaking  ol^  4 
salvation  as  a  future  boon,  but  as  a  deed  accomplished.     It  is  ours  at*  ^ 
this  veiy  moment,  for  in  Christ  Jesus  we  arc  "  a  people  saved."    The    ( 
Israelites  were  saved  from  Pharaoh's  domination.    With  a  high  hsn# 
and  an  ontstretched  arm  did  >Iehovab  bring  them  forth,  even  as  at 
^lis  day  yon  and  I  are  saved  from  the  reigning  power  of  ein.    We  an* 
no  longer  held  spell-botind  by  Satan  so  that  we  cannot  bestir  oursetres 
and  seek  after  holiness,      we  aro  saved  from  the  bondage  of  evil, 
even  from  the  iron  fom&Cc  of  our  ruling  passions.     The  Israelites  weK 
saved  also  from  the  destroying  angel.    On  that  night  when  the  avenger 
flew  through  the  land  and  smote  all  the  firstborn  of  Egypt,  the  blood 
mark  on  the  lintel  saved  the  families  of  Israel,  and  even  so  are  we  saved 
by  the  precious  blood  of  Christ.    No  angel  of  vengeance  can  smite  the 
man  who  is  sheltered  beneath  the  atoning  blood  ;  he  shall  feast  secnrely 
when  Egypt  sends  np  her  mighty  cry.    The  chosen  tribes  were  saved 
When  Pharaoh  pursued  them  and  his  hosts  overtook  them  at  ihe  iM, 
even  at  the  Eed  Sea.      Then  came  the  fiery  cloudy  pillar  betwosn 
Israel  and  Egypt,  brightness  to  Israel  but  darkness  to  their  foes.    They 
oonld  not  come  near  them  idl  that  night,  and  in  the  morning  Israu 


HAPPIKEBS :  THE  FBIVILKM  AHD  DDTV  OF  OHRISTIAKS.        S4J- 

vaa  safe,  for  the  Lord's  redeemed  marched  on  foot  through  the  Red  Sea, 
and  Baw  their  enemies  do  more  ;  nhey  were  drowned  in  the  midst  of  the^ 
sea,  for  Ood  had  saved  his  people.  Even  so  has  he  §aTed  us  from 
being  overtaken  and  oi'erthrown  oj  temptation,  he  has  rescoed  as  from 
the  renewed  attacks  of  tlie  old,  cormpt  natnre  combined  with  the 
canning  of  Satan, — he  Iiha  savud  oB  np  to  this  hour  from  besetting  sin 
and  itsfierce  pnrsnit.  When  tlio  people  came  into  the  wiMemeas  th^ 
were  like  to  have  perished  of  thirst,  bat  he  saved  them  by  bidding  the 
crystal  stream  leap  from  the  rixk.  They  were  ready  to  die  of  hnng^, 
bnt  he  saved  them,  for  the  loiiTiiia  fell  IrtHn  heaven  roond  aboat  their 
camp.  They  were  attacked  by  Amaiek  when  they  were  weary,  but  he 
saved  tbem,  for  Joshua's  aword  nad  Moaes'  outetretched  hands  brought 
victory  for  them  till  their  foes  were  utterly  defeated.  Israel  knew  what 
it  was  to  be  saved  in  many  ways,  and  so  do  we.  We  have  been  blessed 
with  all  spiritual  blessinfts  in  Christ  Jesna,  fed  with  the  bread  ot 
heaven,  and  made  to  drink  of  water  from  the  Rock  of  Ages ;  and  as 
for  onr  adversaries,  they  have  nat  been  able  to  harm  us,  for  tlie  Lord 
has  saved  ns  an  to  this  day. 

Mark  the  emphasis  which  Mcses  puts  here, "  A  people  saved  by  lAe 
Lord."  You  and  I  know  that  if  ^e  are  saved  at  all  it  is  of  the  Lord.  We 
eannot  talk  of  merit ;  we  abhoi  the  veiy  word.  Nor  dare  we  attribute  oar 
salvation  to  oar  own  freewill:  free  grace  must  wear  the  crown  if  ever  we 
are  saved.  Bethink  ^'ou,  brethren,  what  a  blessing  it  is  to  have  a  salva- 
tiim  which  is  altogether  divine.  If  yon  had  saved  yonrself^  that  poor  work 
of  yooTB  wonld,  like  aU  man's  work,  one  day  pass  away ;  but  salvation 
is  A  tbe  Lord,  and  therefore  it  will  stand  for  ever.  It  is  God  that  ap- 
pointed and  arranged  it,  even  the  Father  vrbo  is  the  God  of  onr  election ; 
it  is  Jesna  who  vrrought  it  out,  even  the  Son  who  is  the  God  of  onr  re- 
deo^tion ;  and  it  ia  the  Holy  Spirit  who  applies  it,  even  the  Holy  Ghost, 
who  is  tiie  God  of  onr  regeneration  and  onr  sancti  Scat  ion.  The  Tritme- 
God  has  wrought  all  onr  works  in  us  and  for  as,  glory  be  to  his  name. 
"Who  is  like  unto  thee,  0  people  saved  by  the  Lord  !"  I  wish  I  could 
sptak  u  I  feel  this  morning,  I  would  fire  year  hearts  with  enthusiasm 
towwds  him  who  loved  you  before  the  earth  was,  who,  having  chosen  yon, 
parchased  yon  with  a  price  immense,  brought  yon  ont  from  among  the 
KSt  <rf  mankind  by  his  power,  separated  you  unto  himself  to  be  hia  people 
for  ever,  and  who  now  loves  you  with  a  love  that  will  never  weary  nor 
grow  cold,  bat  will  bring  you  unto  himself  and  seat  yoa  at  his  right 
hand  fin  ever  and  ever.  Yon  are  saved.  Remember  that,  0  believer. 
Not  half  saved,  but  completely  saved :  saved  in  the  Lord  with  an  ever- 
lutting  salvation;  yon  shall  not  be  ashamed  nor  confounded,  world 
withoat  end.  Why,  that  one  word  "saved"  is  enough  to  make  the 
heut  dance  as  long  as  life  remains.  "  Saved !  "  Let  us  hang  out  oar 
banoen  and  set  the  bells  a-ringing.  Saved !  What  a  sweet  soand  it  ia 
to  the  man  who  is  wrecked  and  sees  the  vessel  going  down,  but  at  that 
moment  discovers  that  the  life-boat  ia  near  and  will  rescue  him  from 
the  sinking  ship.  To  be  snatched  from  the  devouring  fire,  or  saved 
from  fierce  disease,  jnst  when  the  turjiing  point  has  come,  and  death 
appears  imminent,  these  also  are  occasions  for  crying,  "  Saved."  But 
tobe  renned  from  sin  and  hell  is  a  gceater  salvation  still,  anddemanda- 
a  looderjoj.    We  will  sing  it  in  life  and  whisper  it  in  death,  and  chant 


HAPFINSSS ;  THE  PRITTLB0B  AXV  Sim  OF  OHRISTUVS.        MS 

Will  yon  not  be  happy  after  that  ?  As  yon  cower  down  beneath  tJiOM 
mijlhty  wings.  eTcn  aa  the  little  thickenB  sneltar  under  the  hen,  are  yon 
not  happy?  As  yon  hide  biL'hiiid  that  mighty  shield,  do  you  not  reel 
rcstfal  and  contented  ?  If  not,  jiriy  that  yoa  may  be,  for  bo  you  ongliit 
to  be. 

Besides  defensive  armonr  wo  need  oflfenBiTe  weapons,  and  we  oi^ht  to 
he  happy,  in  the  next  pliiec,  bcc^nse  we  are  dmneij/  armed; — "  Who  is 
the  flword  of  thy  excellency."  This  wondrons  word  of  God,  when 
bippsed  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  is  our  aword  with  which  to  fight  the  battle 
of  life.  Does  ein  invade  us  ?  The  precept  smites  it,  and  the  story  of 
Calvary  alaya  it-  Does  the  flesh  rebel  ?  The  word  of  Qod  Bmitea  the 
flesh  and  helps  as  to  mortify  it.  Does  Satan  come  against  us?  With 
"  It  ie  WTitt«n  "  we  meet  him  qs  our  Master  met  him  in  the  wildemesB 
of  old.  There  is  no  weapon  like  the  word  of  God,  This  is  the  true 
Jerusalem  blade  that  will  ent  through  bone  and  marrow,  which  waa 
never  known  to  bend  or  break  yet  in  the  hour  of  conflict.  Take  thee 
good  heed  that  thon  have  it  by  thee,  gird  it  on  thy  thigh,  aid  wield  it 
well,  for  victory  ever  goeth  with  it. 

We  are  armed  with  the  word  of  God,  not  only  that  we  may  smite  onr 
own  spiritnal  foes,  but  that  we  may  win  men  for  Christ,  As  the  Israel- 
ites had  to  conquer  Canaan,  so  have  we  to  conquer  the  world  for  JesQS. 
Goyenp  against  the  ramparts  of  error,  go  ye  np  against  the  hosts  of  evil. 
Trim  no  weapon  in  your  hand  but  the  story  of  the  cross,  the  revehitiott 
of  the  Most  High,  the  declaration  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus,  for  by  this 
tiga  m  conqner  :  it  ia  impossible  that  we  should  fell  with  Uie  gospel  in 
not  huaSE.  How  happy  God's  people  ought  to  be  when  they  think  of 
tUB.  Aimed  with  an  invincible  weapon,  ought  we  not  to  rejoice  in 
anticipation  of  victory  ?  A  man  who  has  a  Bible  of  his  own — I  mean 
itot  the  paper  and  the  letterpress,  bat  all  that  is  in  the  inspired  volume,-^ 
Is  there  anything  more  that  he  can  desire  ?  He  finds  from  Genesis  to 
Bevelation  every  promise  his,  every  dear  assnrance  of  ahnighty  power 
and  love  all  his  own,  what  more  doth  he  need  ?  He  who  can  nse  this 
two-edged  sword  may  defy  doubt,  fear,  anxiety,  care,  temptation, 
-Woildliness,  yea,  and  death  and  the  devil.  At  the  very  sight  of  this 
sword  OUT  adversaries  tremble,  for  it  cuts  through  joints  and  marrow, 
and  leaves  a  deadly  wound  wherever  it  cnta.  Be  happy.  Christian : 
the  Lord  help  thee  to  be  happy  as  thou  seeat  this  sword  of  the  Spirit  to 
lie  liiioe. 

The  fturth  thing  which  is  mentioned  aa  a  great  privilege  is  that  we 
have  ueurity  of  victory :  "Thine  enemies  shall  be  found  liars  unto  thee." 
Kow  I  ask  any  Christian  man  of  ezpenence  here  whether  he  has  not 
ftnmd  this  true?  What  a  shameless  liar  the  devil  is!  What  a  many 
times  he  has  been  found  a  liar  to  ns.  "  Ah,"  saith  he,  "  in  this  trouble 
the  hand  of  the  Lord  has  gone  out  against  you ;  he  has  forsaken  you, 
and  ho  will  be  gracious  no  more.  He  lias  deserted  you  as  he  did  Saul 
llie  ting,  and  henceforth  dark  and  brooding  thoughts  will  overshadow 
JDU  which  no  musician's  hand  shall  be  able  to  charm  away.  The  Lord 
WiU  no  more  answer  you  from  his  holy  oracle,  for  behold  he  has  cast  yon 
away."  But,  brethren,  we  are  not  deserted  after  all,  for  here  we  are 
this  morning  to  sing  of  divine  lovingkindnesa,  and  to  tell  of  alt  our  past 
tnmbles  aa  trials  and  proofs  of  et«mal  taithfolness.    We  are  not  in  the 


MA  MBTBOPOLITAS  TABBBSAOLE  PULPIT. 

MSjium,  nor  the  prison,  thoDs;h  the  arch-enemy  ha«  threatened  na  with 
the  ODfl  or  the  other.  God  has  caabled  as  to  trlampb  over  all  dtS- 
-cnldes,  though  the  enemy  has  predicted  onr  utter  defeat.  Tin 
dsiil  came  to  as  once,  and  he  §aid,  "  Now  yon  will  assuredly  fall ;  «!• 
reads  your  heart  is  beginning  to  go  back  to  sin  :  you  are  uot  faitbfiii, 
yon  nave  heen  treacherous  in  your  inmost  thaughte,  and  you  will  apot- 
tatise  altogether,  and  bring  great  disgrace  upon  your  profession.  Yoa 
are  a  fool  ever  to  hitve  joined  the  church :  there  is  no  stability  about 
yon.  You  are  a  mere  flash  in  the  pan.  You  blazed  tike  a  firebraol 
but  you  will  die  out  into  black  aahes."  Bnt,  beloved,  we  have  not  diel 
«nt  yet,  bleseed  be  Jehovah's  name.  Year  after  year  has  passed  aai 
the  faint  are  still  pursuing,  the  feeble  still  hold  on  their  way,  uttei 
weakness  still  triumphs  over  strong  temptations.  Satan  has  bceu  aHir 
to  UB,  and  so  has  that  wicked  unbelief  of  ours,  which  is  rather  worse  thu 
die  devil,  for  at  any  rate  it  has  less  excuse  for  its  existence.  Unhelij 
has  whispered  a  thousand  accnrsed  falsehoods  in  our  ears :  this  laboor 
iras  to  be  too  difficult,  that  trial  was  to  consume  us.  that  adveisuf 
would  swaUow  us  up  quick.  Nothing  of  the  kind  lias  happened,  hut  w 
onr  enemies  said,  aud  they  have  ail  been  liari^.  What  fools  we  were  tf 
have  believed  them,  and  wliat  greater  fools  we  shall  be  if  in  days  tv 
come  we  shall  lend  an  ear  to  them.  Let  as  not  listen  to  anything 
which  opposes  itself  to  the  sure  truth  of  God.  He  cannot  forsake  ol 
Leave  his  chosen  to  perish  ?  Cast  away  the  people  whom  he  did  fan- 
know?  Renounce  the  purchase  of  his  blood,  the  darlings  of  his  heart? 
Impossible !  Ue  may  sooner  cease  to  be  thaii  cease  to  be  the  Father  of 
hie  own-begotten ;  he  may  sooner  quench  the  suu  aud  moon,  and  bid 
the  whole  nniTerse  paaa  away  aa  the  sere  leaves  fall  from  the  fcostt 
tieee,  than  he  can  ever  say  unto  his  cliildrcn,  *■  I  have  loved  yon,  bat 
not  now ;  I  have  chosen  you,  but  have  cast  you  away ;  I  have  brought 
you  thus  far  to  put  you  to  shame."  No,  beloved,  his  mercy  endureti 
for  ever,  and  never  does  he  turn  from  his  covenant.  What  a  God  yoK 
have  to  deal  with !  There  is  none  like  unto  the  God  of  Jeshumn!  Id 
the  chapter  fh>m  which  our  text  is  taken  we  see  a  singular  God  and  a 
angular  people:  there  is  none  like  Jehovah,  and  none  like  his  peo^ 
He  is  blessea  for  ever,  and  they  are  blessed  for  ever  in  him  and  by  hun. 
Therefore  let  ns  be  happy  this  morning,  0  ye  mourners,  take  down 
your  harps  &om  the  willows  aud  tune  them  afresh ;  put  away  the  sackbot 
and  take  the  dulcimer,  and  upon  an  instrument  of  ten  strings  praiac 
J^he  Lord.  Let  your  heart  now  be  glad  in  his  uumc,  and  rejoice,  yoa 
exceedingly  rejoice. 

IL  Swondljand  briefly,  let  us  consider  the  result  of  bealiziko 
OUB  BLESSED  ESTATE.  Upon  this  subject  there  ought  to  be  no  need  to 
dilate,  for  each  heir  of  heaven  should  Uve  in  the  hourly  enjoyment  of 
his  divine  inheritance,  but,  alas,  few  are  doing  so.  Surely  Gpiritnal 
blessings  are  the  only  ones  which  men  decline  to  enjoy.  Bring  a 
-thirsty  man  near  to  a  brimming  cup  and  sec  how  long  he  will  linger. 
See  how  he  hastens  to  enjoy  the  draught.  Bring  a  poor  man  near  an 
'«itat6  and  tell  him  that  he  ba^  but  to  sue  the  court  to  gain  it,  and  to- 
morrow morning  he  wilt  l)e  asking  where  he  haa  to  go.  Alas,  Christian 
people  seem  to  be  stupid  about  their  privileges ;  they  are  not  so  wise  as 
Jhe  ass  which  knoweih  its  master's  crib.    They  have  great 


HiFFnrBnTtn  TBiviLiSB  AmmnrvF  OHBrariAHs.     '947 

it  they  do  not  always  enjoy  them  j  the  good  which  the  Lord  pmrtdes 
get  before  them,  but  they  do  not  graap  it  as  they  dioidd.  May  tbe 
o]y  Spirit  teach  ua  ■wisdom. 

Now,  there  are  many  reBBons  why^on  ■ShonHwijoy  yonr'pnTileges 
id  be  happy,  and  the  first  is  because  it  tends  to  fceep  oar  sUeginice  to 
od  tufflhami.  Israel  would  never  seek  after  another  god  while  ahe 
new  that  none  could  blcsa  her  as  J^honh  had  'done.  Those  who 
ere  happy  with  Jehovah  would  not  be  Hkely  to  ■Wander  off  to  Baal: 
od's  people  will  not  go  astray  from  him  -wbeii  their  hetota  ate 
noronghly  happy  with  him.  It  is  becstne  yon  lose  llie  iweet  flaTonr 
r  the  waters  of  the  flowing  fountain  that  70a  dabble  m  those  mnddy, 
agnant  gatherings  which  linger  in  'tho  biofeen  dstems.  If  tbon 
onldst  delight  thyself  in  the  Lord  all  the -world  conld  not  tempt  thee 
■om  him.  A  man  will  never  be  drizzled  with  gold  -who  has  hia  heart 
itjatcd  with  God.  Unhappy  Christimii, -when  tempted,  are  Tery^fc 
>  seek  pjeostire  away  from  the  Lord,  but  those  who  rejoice  in 'the  Lord 
hr^  shall  find  the  joy  of  the  Lord  to  be  their  strength ;  for  it  shall  be 
orda  of  iove  and  bands  of  a  man  to  hold  them  itoit  to  their  King.  "When 
onr  joj  begins  to  sliickcn  say  to  yourself,  "  There  hi  something  wrong 
ore ;  I  mast  get  back  to  where  I  was  in  my  earlier  day^ ;  I  -mnBt 
Btnm  to  my  God  and  to  the  sunlight,  for  now  that  I  am  in  tbccdd 
hade  my  love  may  soon  cool." 

Beloved,  if  yon  will  be  bappy  it  will  create  'Warm  ent^nsiasm  and  8 
ratefal  love  within  your  bosom.  Have  von  begun  to  be  lukewarm  ? 
las  yoor  heart  declined  in  afTection?  Nothing  can  n^  your  soni 
Btnm  to  ita  first  lore  like  the  Lord's  return  and  the  testorstion 
f  the  old  happiness.  Yea,  I  am  saved  ;  yes,  I  am  shielded  ;  yes,  I  bear 
lis  Bword  with  which  to  smite  my  foes  ;  yes,  I  shall  triumph  through 
he  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  there  is  a  portion  for  me  at  his  right  hand. 
Fell,  then,  the  next  thought  ia,  therefore  blessed  be  hia  dear  name,  I  do 
3ve  him,  I  thought  I  did  not,  bet  when  I  b^in  to  see  -what  he  has 
one  for  me,  and  what  he  has  given  me  and  provided  for  me,  I  find  my 
|n|^h  heart  beating  at  a  quicker  rale. 

"  Yes,  I  love  bim  and  adore. 
Oh  for  grace  to  love  him  more." 

llaC  is  a  good  resnlt  to  come  of  being  happy.  "  Therefore  comfort  ye, 
omfoTt  ye  my  people,  saith  the  Lord ;  speak  ye  comfortably  nnto 
emsalem." 

Joy  also  will  have  another  effect :  it  will  give  you  confidence  to  cx- 
ect  other  blessings.  Because  God  has  dealt  so  well  with  ns  in  the 
■Bt^  we  are  persuaded  that  goodness  and  mercy  will  follow  us  all  onr 
1^  If  now  to-day,  beloved,  you  will  survey  the  goodness  of  God  to 
on  in  the  past,  you  will  feel  confidence  that  when  new  troubles  arise 
oa  will  be  helped  in  them,  and  when  new  mercies  are  wanted  they 
IwH  be  supplied  you,  "  new  every  morning."    Gratitude  for  the  past 

T"  es  ns  with  courage  for  the  future. 
d  so  too  yon  wiU  gain  strength  for  bearing  all  your  burdens  and 
omage  for  facing  all  yonr  enemies.     Has  the  Lord  done  bo  much  to 
lake  us  happy?    Then  he  will  not  deny  us  anything.     He  who  has 
iren  ns  so  much  idready  will  be  sure  to  sustam  ua  and  supply  our 


^i8  KETBOPOLITIN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT, 

needs  out  of  his  all-sufBciency  until  we  have  trampled  down  ereiy  fiie 
And  shall  rest  for  ever  at  his  right  hand. 

Lastly,  for  Ciiristians  to  be  happy  is  one  of  the  surest  ways  to  set 
them  seeking  the  salvation  of  ouiers.  If  we  found  religion  to  be  a 
bondage  and  a  deception  we  should  be  inhuman  if  we  wished  to  intro- 
duce others  to  it  He  who  enters  upon  a  tyrant's  service,  with  little 
food  and  no  pay,  and  much  misery,  ought  not  to  stand  at  the  door  aiui 
invite  others  to  come  in ;  he  should  rather  warn  them  to  seek  some  hap- 
pier service.  Now,  we  have  found  religion  to  be  true  happiness.  I  am 
sure  I  speak  the  sentiments  of  all  here  who  know  the  Lord  when  I  say 
that  if  we  have  not  been  perfectly  happy  it  has  not  been  the  &nlt  cf 
Ood's  grace,  but  entirely  our  own ;  for  nad  we  lived  up  to  our  calling 
«nd  our  privileges  we  should  have  been  as  happy  as  the  birds  of  Uie  air, 
«nd  our  lives  would  have  been  one  perpetual  song.  Despite  our  shori- 
comings,  blessed  be  God,  we  have  been  supremely  hwpy.  If  we  could 
begin  life  again  we  would  only  ask  to  begin  it  with  Jlesus,  by  the  power 
of  his  Spirit.  If  we  had  our  choice  of  all  the  various  positions  and 
conditions  of  our  fellow-men  we  do  not  know  one  that  we  prefer  to  our 
own,  80  long  as  we  can  say,  ^  Christ  is  mine." 

Because  we  have  found  this  honey  we  desire  our  friends  and  kinsfolk 
io  partake  of  it.  Oh,  my  hearers,  I  would  you  were  all  ha^^y ;  I  would 
you  were  every  one  of  you  supremely  hiqipy,  and  especially  some  of  you 
into  whose  faces  I  have  looked  these  many  years,  and  see  that  yon  are 
not  clear  of  your  anxieties  vet,  not  sure  about  your  souls  yet,  bat  yoa 
still  hesitate  and  linger  in  the  border-land.  0  come  ye  and  rest  where 
God  has  provided  rest  for  sinners'  souls.  Beloved,  trust  in  Jeios 
Christ  this  morning;  make  no  more  delay.  May  his  divine  Spixit 
enable  you  so  to  do ;  then  shall  your  peace  be  like  a  river,  and  yoa  uudl 
confess  that  we  did  not  deceive  you.  You  will  cry,  **  The  half  has  not 
been  told  me,"  when  you  perceive  the  deep  peace,  the  holy  calm,  the 
blessed  restfulness,  and  sometimes  the  ecstatic,  overflowing  delwht 
which  is  the  portion  of  the  child  of  Qod.  If  I  bad  to  die  like  a  £g, 
nnd  there  were  no  hereafter,  I  would  still  choose  to  be  a  Christian,  for 
of  all  lives  that  can  be  lived  there  is  none  that  can  compare  with  this. 
We  drink  the  wine  on  the  lees  well  refined,  and  are  satisfied  with 
marrow  and  with  fatness ;  but  as  for  worldlings,  they  do  but  champ 
the  husks  that  swine  do  eat,  with  which  their  bellies  cannot  be  fiUea 
The  Lord  grant  his  people  grace  to  be  happy  in  him,  and  may  he  also 
bring  in  the  wanderers,  for  Jesus'  sake. 


Portion  of  Scripture  Bead  before  Sermon— Deuteronomy  xzxiiL 


Hymns  from  "  Our  Own  Hymn  Book  "—89  (Ver.  II.),  768, 787* 


picipplitjiit  3FaljfnratIe  fulpt. 


THE   GOOD    SAMARITAN. 


4   ^«llt(rit 

DsLiTEitEn   ON   LoRD'a-DAY   Morning,   June   17tu,   1877,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWUffiTOH. 
Oit  behalf  of  the   Ho/pilab  of  London. 


"  And,  behold,  n  cOTtain  Inwj-er  stood  up,  and  tomptcd  him,  sapng',  MastBr.  what 
iluai  I  do  ta  inherit  etetTTBl  life  ?  He  said  unto  him,  What  is  written  in  the  law  ? 
how  tcadest  thouf  And  he  answering  a^^id,  Thon  fhalt  lore  thaLord  thy  God  with  all 
tty  heart,  and  with  all  Ihy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  atrongth,  nnd  with  nil  thy  mind ; 
■nd  thy  neighbour  as  thyself.  And  be  said  unto  him,  Thou  hast  answered  right ; 
this  do,  and  tbou  shall  IWa.  But  he,  nilling  to  juatify  himseir,  Mid  unto  Jeta*, 
And  who  is  my  neighbour  ?  And  Josus  answering  said,  A  certain  man  went  down 
(nnn  Jerusalem  to  Jericho,  and  full  amon^  tbieres,  which  etripped  him  of  his  raiment, 
knd  wonnded  him,  and  departed,  leanng  him  Imlf  dead.  And  by  chance  there 
came  down  k  certain  prieat  that  way  :  and  when  he  saw  him,  ho  pasaed  by  on  the 
other  aide.  And  likewise  a  Levitc,  when  he  waa  at  the  place,  came  and  looked  on 
him,  and  pasaed  by  on  the  other  ride.  But  a  certain  Samaritan,  as  he  jourueyed, 
came  where  bo  was  ;  and  when  ho  auw  him  he  had  compassion  on  him,  and  went 
to  him,  and  bound  op  bia  wounda,  pouring  in  oil  and  wine,  and  set  him  on  his  own 
beast,  and  brought  turn  to  an  inn,  and  took  care  of  him.  And  on  the  morrow  when 
be  departed,  be  took  out  two  pence,  and  gave  them  to  the  host,  and  said  onto  bim. 
Take  care  of  him ;  and  whataoever  thou  apendest  more,  when  I  coma  again,  I  will 
repay  thee.  Which  now  of  these  three,  thinkest  (hou,  waa  neighbour  unto  him  that 
fell  among  the  tbievea?  And  he  said,  lie  thnt  showed  morcy  on  bim.  Then  suid 
Jetni  unto  bim.  Go,  and  do  tbou  likewiae.'' — Luke  i.  25 — 37. 

OuB  text  is  the  whole  story  of  the  Samaritan  ;  but  as  that  is  Tcry  long, 
snppose,  for  our  memories'  sake,  we  consider  the  exhortation  in  the 
thirty-seventh  verse  to  be  our  text,    "  Oo,  and  do  ihou  liketvtse." 

There  are  certain  persons  in  the  world  who  will  not  allow  the  preacher 
to  speab  upon  anything  but  those  doctrinal  statements  concerning  the 
way  of  Balyation  which  are  known  as  "the  gospel."  If  the  preacher 
shul  insist  upon  some  virtne  or  practical  grace  they  straightway  say 
that  he  was  not  preaching  the  gospel,  that  he  became  legal,  nnd  was  a 
mero  moral  teacher.  TVe  do  not  stand  in  any  awe  of  such  criticism, 
for  we  clearly  perceive  that  our  Lord  Jeans  Christ  himself  would  very 
fteqnsnbly  have  come  nnder  it.  Read  the  SermoB  on  the  Uount  and 
Ko.  1,8B0. 


350  VGTROPOLITAIf  TABEHKACI.E  PULPIT. 

judge  whether  certain  people  would  be  content  to  hear  the  like  of  it 
preached  to  them  on  the  Sabbath.  T!iej  would  condemn  it  as  containin); 
very  Kttle  goepel  and  too  much  about  good  works.  Our  Lord  was  a  gmt 
practical  preacher.  He  frequently  delivered  addresses  in  which  he 
made  answer  to  qaestioners,  or  gave  direction  to  seekers,  or  upbraided 
ofienders,  and  he  gave  a  prominence  to  practical  truth  such  as  some  of 
his  ministers  dare  not  imitate.  Jesua  tells  us  over  and  over  again  the 
manner  in  which  we  are  to  live  towards  oar  fellow-men,  and  he  lays 
great  stress  upon  the  love  which  should  fihine  throughout  the  Christian 
character.  The  story  of  the  good  Saraaiitan,  which  is  now  before  us,  is 
a  case  in  point,  for  our  Lord  is  there  explaining  a  point  which  arose  ofit 
of  the  qnestion,  "  AVhat  shall  I  do  to  inherit  eternal  life  ? "  The  queatioi 
is  legal,  and  the  answer  is  to  the  jioint.  But  let  it  never  be  forgotten 
that  what  the  law  demands  of  ns  the  gospel  really  produce*  in  us.  The 
law  tells  us  what  we  ought  to  be,  and  it  is  one  object  of  the  gospel  W 
raise  us  to  that  condition.  Hence  our  Saviour's  teaching,  though  it  be 
eminently  practical,  is  always  tviingelical :  even  in  expounding  the  law 
he  has  always  a  gospel  desi^.  Two  ends  arc  served  by  his  setting  up  a 
high  standard  of  duty :  on  the  one  he  slays  the  eelf-righteouEncss  which 
claims  to  have  kept  the  law  by  making  men  feel  the  impossibility  of 
solvation  by  their  own  works ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  he  calls 
believers  away  from  all  content  with  the  mere  decencies  of  life  and  the 
routine  of  outward  religion,  and  stimulates  them  to  seek  after  the 
highest  degree  of  holiness— indeed,  afler  that  excellence  of  character 
which  only  his  grace  can  give.  This  morning  I  trust  that  thongh  I 
keep  very  much  to  practic^  points  I  shall  be  guided  by  the  Spirit  of 
hohncss,  and  shall  not  really  be  guilty  of  legality,  nor  will  any  of  yon  be 
ledintoit.  I  shall  not  hold  up  the  love  of  our  neighbour  aa  a  condition 
of  salvation,  but  as  a  fruit  of  it.  1  shall  not  spenk  of  obedience  to  the 
law  as  the  road  to  heaven,  but  I  shall  sbow  yon  the  pathway  vhicb  is 
to  be  followed  by  the  faith  which  works  by  love. 

Let  us  proceed  to  the  parable  at  once. 

L  Our  first  ot^servation  will  be  that  the  world  IS  VERY  fULL  or 
ATFLICTION,  This  story  ig  but  one  aniong  a  thousand  based  upon  an 
unhappy  occurrence.  "A  certain  man  went  down  from  JerusiJem  to 
Jericno,  and  fell  among  thieves."  He  went  upon  a  short  journey,  and 
almost  lost  his  life  on  the  road.  We  are  never  secure  from  trouble ;  it 
meets  us  around  the  family  hearth,  and  causes  ns  bo  suff  r  in  onr  own 
persons  or  in  those  of  die  dearest  relatives  ;  t  alks  nto  onr  shops  and 
counting-houses,  and  tries  us  ;  and  when  we  1  av  home  t  becomes  oar 
fellow-trai'eller,  and  communes  witii  us  on  tl  e  ro  d  \lthough  afflic- 
tion conieth  not  forth  of  the  dust,  neither  doth  troul  le  sp  ng  out  of  the 
ground  ;  yet  man  is  bom  unto  trouble,  as  the  sparks  fly  upward." 

Frequently  the  greater  afflictions  are  notoKosimud  by  Iht  faulU^  Hit 
mffmer.  Nobody  could  blame  the  poor  Jew  that  when  he  was  goinx 
down  to  Jencho  about  his  business  the  thieves  beset  him,  and  demwiclea 
his  money,  and  that  when  he  made  some  little  resistance  they  woimded 
him.  stripped  him,  and  left  him  half  dead.  How  could  he  be  Uamed? 
It  was  to  him  a  pure  misfortune.  Believe  me,  there  is  a  great  deal  of 
sorrow  in  the  world  which  does  not  arise  out  of  the  vice  or  foDy  of  the 
persons  enduring  it:  it  comes  from  the  hand  of  God  upon  the  a  ~  '~ 


ZHK  OOOO  fUXl&ITllf.  351 

not  because  he  is  a  sioner  above  others,  but  for  wise  ends  unknown  to 
oa.  Now,  this  is  the  kind  of  distress  which  aboTe  all  others  demands 
Christian  sympatbj,  and  the  very  kind  which  abounds  in  our  hospitals. 
The  man  is  not  to  blame  for  lying  there  beaten  and  bruised:  those  gaping 
vounds  from  which  his  life  is  oozing  are  not  of  his  own  inflicting,  nor 
received  in  a  drunken  brawl  or  through  attempting  a  foolhardj^  feat ;  he 
suffers  from  no  fault  of  his  own,  and  therefore  he  has  a  pressing  claim 
npon  the  benevolence  of  his  fellow  men. 

Still,  very  much  distress  is  caused  by  Hu  toickedmss  of  oSura.  The 
poor  Jew  on  the  road  to  Jericho  was  the  victim  of  the  thieyes  who 
wounded  him  and  leil  him  half  dead.  Man  is  man's  worst  enemy.  If 
man  were  but  tamed  to  peace  the  wildest  beast  is  the  world  would  be 
subdued ;  and  if  evil  were  purged  from  men's  hearts,  the  major  part  of 
the  ills  of  life  would  cease  at  once.  The  drunkard's  wastefulness  and 
brutality,  the  proud  man's  acom,  the  oppressor's  cruelty,  the  slanderer's 
lie,  the  trickster's  cheat,  the  heartless  man's  grinding  of  the  faces  of 
^e  poor, — these  put  together  sib  the  root«  of  almost  aU  the  poisononB 
weeds  which  multiply  upon  the  &C8  of  the  earth  to  onr  shame  and 
sorrow.  If  dominant  sins  could  be  taken  away,  as  blessed  be  Glod  tliey 
shall  when  Christ  has  triumphed  through  the  world,  much  of  hunuui 
sorrow  would  be  assuaged.  When  we  see  innocent  persona  suffering  as 
the  result  of  the  sin  of  others  our  pity  should  be  excited.  How  many 
there  are  of  little  children  star^w,  and  pining  into  chronic  disease 
through  a  father's  drunkenness,  wnoch  keeps  the  table  bare  I  Wiree, 
too,  who  work  hard  themselves  are  brought  down  to  pining  sickness 
and  painful  disease  by  the  laziness  and  cruelty  of  those  who  shonld 
have  cherished  them.  Work-people,  too,  aie  often  sorely  (^pressed  in 
their  w^s,  and  have  to  work  Uiemselves  to  death's  door  to  earn  a 
pittance.  Those  are  the  people  who  ought  to  have  onr  sympathy  when 
accident  or  disease  bring  them  to  the  hospital  gates  "wounded  and  half 
dead." 

T/if  man  in  the  parable  was  quite  Mplesa,  he  coald  do  nothing  for 
himself;  there  he  must  lie  and  die,  those  hoge  wounds  must  bleed  his 
Tcry  soul  away  unless  a  generous  hand  shall  interfere.  It  is  as  much  as 
he  «aa  do  to  groan ;  he  cannot  even  dress  his  wounds,  moch  lees  arise 
and  aeek  a  shelter.  He  is  bleeding  to  death  among  the  pitiless  rocks  of 
the  dssoent  to  Jericho,  and  he  must  leave  his  body  to  be  fed  upon  by 
kites  and  crows  unless  some  Mend  shall  come  to  his  help.  Now,  when 
a  man  can  help  himself,  and  does  not,  ho  deserves  to  'safTer ;  when  a 
man  fliqgs  away  opportunities  h^  his  idleness  or  self-indulgence  a  measure 
0%  anffering  ought  to  be  permitted  to  him  as  a  cure  for  his  vices;  but 
when  p^wns  are  sick  or  injured,  and  are  unable  to  pay  for  the  aid  of 
the  nurse  and  the  physician,  then  is  the  time  when  trne-hcarted  phi- 
luithropy  should  promptly  step  in  and  do  its  best.  So  our  Saviour 
teaches  ns  here. 

Ctrtain  paths  of  life  are  peeuliarly  subject  to  a^icHon.  The  way 
wUch  led  nom  Jerusalem  to  Jericho  was  always  infested  by  robbers. 
Jerome  tells  ns  that  it  was  called  the  "  bloody  way,"  on  account  of  the 
freqaent  highway  robberies  and  murders  which  were  there  committed ; 
ana  it  ii  not  so  long  ago  as  to  be  beyond  the  memory  of  man  that  an 
E|^;Iuh  traveller  met  his  death  on  that  road,  while  even  very  recent 


852  uEXBOrouTAS  tabbbsaclb  PtTLFrr. 

traTellen  tell  hb  that  tiiej  have  been  cither  threatened  or  actnally  at- 
tacked in  that  particularly  gloomy  region,  the  desert  which  goes  doitn 
to  the  city  of  palm  dees.  So  also  in  the  world  around  ua  there  are 
paths  of  life  which  are  highly  daagerous  and  fearfully  haunted  by 
disease  and  accident.  Years  ago  there  were  many  trades  in  which  from 
want  of  precaution  death  slew  its  thousands.  I  thank  God  thatganitsTy 
and  precantionary  laws  are  better  r^arded,  and  men's  lives  are  thought 
to  be  somewhat  more  precious.  Yet  still  there  are  ways  of  life  which 
may  each  be  called  "  the  bloody  way";  pursuits  which  are  necessary  to 
the  community,  but  highly  dangcroas  to  those  who  follow  them.  Onr 
mines,  our  railways,  ana  our  seas  show  a  t«rrib!e  roll  of  soffering  and 
death.  Long  hours  in  ill-ventilatcd  work-rooms  are  accountable  for 
thonsands  of  lives,  and  so  are  stinted  wages,  which  prevent  a  sufiteienar 
of  food  from  being  procured.  Many  a  needlewoman's  way  of  life  is 
traly  a  path  of  blood.  When  I  think  of  the  multitudes  of  our  workloe 
people  in  this  city  who  have  to  live  in  close,  unhealthy  rooms,  crowdea 
together  in  lanes  and  courts  where  the  air  is  stagnant,  I  do  not  hesitate 
to  say  that  much  of  the  road  which  has  to  be  trodden  by  the  poor  of 
Jjondon  is  as  much  desening  of  the  name  of  the  way  of  blood  as  the 
road  from  Jerusalem  to  Jerieho.  If  they  do  not  lose  their  money  it  is 
because  they  never  have  it ;  if  they  do  not  fall  among  thieves,  they  f^l 
among  diseases  which  praeticully  wound  them,  and  leave  them  half  dead. 
Now,  if  you  have  not  to  engage  in  sueh  avocations,  if  your  pathway  does 
not  lead  yoa  from  Jernsdem  to  Jericho,  but  takes  you,  perhaps,  fhll 
often  from  Jerusalem  to  Bethany,  where  yon  can  enjoy  the  sweetnesses 
of  domestic  love  and  the  delights  of  Christian  fellowship,  you  onght  to 
be  very  thankful,  and  be  all  tlie  more  ready  to  assist  those  who  for  yonr 
Bakes,  or  for  the  benefit  of  society  at  large,  have  to  follow  the  more 
dangerous  roads  of  life.  Do  you  not  agree  with  me  that  snch  persons 
onght  to  be  among  the  first  to  receive  of  our  Christian  kindness?  Such 
abound  in  oar  hospitals  and  elsewhere. 

Let  that  stand  :  it  is  dear  that  there  is  a  great  deal  of  affliction  in 
the  world,  and  mnch  of  it  is  of  the  sort  which  decerres  to  be  succonred 
at  once. 

II.  Secondly,  tbbrb  a.be  uant  who  never  beltbve  XFfLicnov. 
Out  Saviour  tells  us  of  two  at  least  who  "passed  by  on  the  other  side," 
and  I  suppose  he  might  have  prolongea  the  parable  bo  aa  to  hare 
mentionea  two  dozen  if  ho  had  chosen  to  do  so,  and  even  then  he  might 
have  been  content  to  mention  but  onegood  Saniaritan,  for  I  hardly  think 
that  there  is  one  good  Samaritan  to  two  heartless  persons.  I  wish 
there  were,  but  I  fear  the  good  Siuuaritans  ure  very  few  in  proportion 
to  the  nnmber  who  act  the  port  of  the  priest  and  the  Lrcrite. 

Now,  notice  who  the  persons  were  that  refosed  to  render  aid  to  tfae 


First,  they  were  brought  to  Ihe  spot  ly  GoSxproviiknce  onparpomh 
do  so.  What  better  thing  conld  toe  Lord  himself  do  for  the  poor  mail 
half  dead  than  to  bring  some  man  to  help  him  ?  An  angel  could  not 
well  have  met  the  case.  How  shonld  an  angel,  never  wounded,  nodcr- 
Btand  binding  up  wonnds  and  pouring  in  wine  and  oil.  No,  a  man  Was 
wanted  who  wonld  know  what  was  necessary,  who  would  with  brother^ 
sympathy  cheer  the  mind  while  doctoring  the  body.    In  our  Engltn 


THB  GOOD  SAMARITAN.  353 

Yemen  we  read,  ''  By  chance  there  came  down  a  certain  priest  that 
way  ;*'  but  learned  Greek  scholars  read  it,  '^ By  a  coincidence"  It  was 
in  the  order  of  divine  providence  that  a  priest  shonld  come  first  to  this 
afflicted  person,  that  so  he  might  go  and  examine  the  case  as  a  man  of 
education  and  skill,  and  then  when  the  Levite  came  afterwards  he 
would  be  able  to  carnr  on  what  the  priest  began ;  and  if  one  conld  not 
t»imr  the  poor  man,  the  two  might  between  them  be  able  to  bear  him  to 
the  uui,  or  one  might  remain  iA  guard  him  while  the  other  ran  for  help. 
God  brought  them  to  this  position,  but  they  wilfully  refused  the  sacred 
duty  which  providence  and  humanity  demanded  of  them.  Now,  you 
that  are  wealthy  are  sent  into  our  city  on  purpose  that  you  may  have 
compassion  upon  the  sick,  the  wounded,  the  poor,  and  the  needy. 
€kid  8  intent  in  endowing  any  person  with  more  substance  than  he 
needs  is  that  &e  mav  have  the  pleasurable  office,  or  rather  let  me  8ay» 
tbe  delightfiil  privilege,  of  relieving  want  and  woe.  Alas,  how  many 
tbeie  are  who  consider  that  store  wnich  God  has  put  into  their  handb 
^m,  ffoxfoee  for  the  poor  and  needy  to  be  only  so  much  provision  for 
tlieir  excessive  luxury,  a  luxuir  which  pampers  them  but  yields  them 
neither  benefit  nor  pleasure.  Others  dream  that  wealtli  is  given  them 
thai  they  may  keep  it  under  lock  and  key,  cankering  and  corrodmg, 
txeeding  covetousness  and  care.  Who  dares  roll  a  stone  over  the  well's 
mouth  when  thirst  is  raging  all  around  ?  Who  dares  keep  the  bread 
ftom  the  women  and  the  children  who  are  ready  to  gnaw  their  own  arms 
far  hunger  ?  Above  all,  who  dares  allow  the  sufferer  to  writhe  in  agony 
imcared  for,  and  the  sick  to  pine  into  their  graves  unnursed  ?  This  is 
no  small  sin :  it  is  a  crime  to  be  answered  for  to  the  Judge  when  he 
ahall  come  to  judge  the  quidc  and  dead.  Those  people  who  neglected 
the  poor  man  were  brought  there  on  purpose  to  relieve  him,  even  as  you 
are,  and  yet  they  passed  by  on  the  other  side. 

They  were  both  of  them  persons,  too,  who  ought  to  have  relieved 
him,  because  they  were  very  familiar  with  things  which  should  have 
€ofUmd  their  hea»  is.  If  I  understand  the  passage,  the  priest  was  coming 
down  from  Jerusalem.  I  have  often  wondered  which  way  he  was  going, 
whether  he  was  going  up  to  the  temple,  and  was  in  a  hurry  to  be  in 
time  for  fear  of  keeping  the  congregation  waiting,  or  whether  he  had 
fulfilled  his  duty,  and  had  finished  his  month's  course  at  the  temple  and 
was  going  home.  I  conclude  that  he  was  going  from  Jerusalem  to 
JerichOf  because  it  says, ''  By  chance  there  came  down  a  certain  priest 
that  way."  Now  to  the  metropolis  it  is  always  '^  going  up":  going  mj^ 
to  London,  or  up  to  Jerusalem ;  and  as  this  priest  was  coming  dowuy  he 
was  going  to  Jericho.  It  was  quite  literally  going  down,  for  Jericho 
lies  very  low.  I  conclude  that  he  was  going  home  to  Jericho,  after 
having  fulfilled  his  month's  engagements  in  the  temple,  where  he  had 
been  familiar  with  the  worship  of  the  Most  High,  as  near  to  God  as 
man  could  be,  serving  amidst  sacrifices  and  holy  psalms  and  solemn 
mayers,  and  yet  he  had  not  learned  how  to  make  a  sacrifice  himself. 
He  had  heard  those  prophetic  words  which  say,  ''I  will  have  mercy,  and 
not  sacrifice,"  but  he  was  entirely  forgetful  of  such  teaching :  he  had 
often  read  that  law,  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself,"  but  he 
regarded  it  not.  The  Levite  had  not  been  quite  so  closely  engaged  in 
the  sanctuary  as  the  priest,  but  he  had  taken  his  share  in  holy  work, 


864  TUETROPOIJTAK  TABEBSACIf  PCLPTT, 

■nd  yet  he  came  away  from  it  with  a  hard  heart.  This  is  a  sad  UiA. 
They  had  been  ncnr  to  God,  but  were  not  like  him.  Dear  people, 
yoQ  may  spend  8(,l il.iutli  after  Sabbath  in  the  worship  of  God,  or  wW 
you  think  to  bo  su,  and  you  may  behold  Christ  Jesus  set  forth  visiblj 
cmdfied  among  yon,  imd  themes  which  ought  to  turn  a  heart  of  stow 
to  flesh  may  pass  ln'tbre  your  minds,  and  nevertheless  yon  may  retani 
into  the  world  to  Ije  as  miserly  as  ever,  and  to  hare  as  little  feclii^ 
towards  your  fellow  men  as  before.  It  ought  not  to  be  so.  I  beeeech 
,    yon  suffer  it  not  to  be  so  in  any  case  ftf^ain. 

These  two  persons,  moreover,  were  bowid  by  llicir  profesKion  io  kaee 
Mped  this  man,  fin-  tlioug^h  it  wag  originally  said  of  the  high  priest  yet 
I  tnink  it  could  be  said  of  any  priest  that  he  was  taken  from  amoDg 
men,  that  he  might  have  compassion.  If  anywhere  there  should  « 
Gompaflsion  towards  men,  it  should  be  in  the  heart  of  the  priest  who  it 
chosen  to  spe^  for  Ood  to  men  and  for  men  to  God.  No  stone  shoolii 
erer  be  found  in  his  bosom;  he  should  be  gentle,  geoerons-hearted 
kindly,  fall  of  sympathy  and  tcndemeas ;  bat  thia  priest  was  not  so,  nor 
mB  the  LevHe  vho  ought  to  have  followed  in  iits  wake.  And  oh. 
yon  CSiriBtian  ministers,  and  all  of  yon  who  teach  in  sehoois,  or  who  mi- 
'  aertake  'any  serrice  of  Christian  ministry — and  yon  ought  all  to  do  so, 
forthe  Lofd  hath  made  ail  his  people  to  be  prieste  nnto  bim — there 
onght  to  be  in  yon  from  your  very  profession  a  readineas  of  heart 
towards  the  kindlicEt  actions  for  those  who  need  them. 

And  there  is  one  tiling  to  l>e  mentioned  also  against  this  priest  and 
Lcvite,  that  they  were  very  well  atvare  of  tfte  vutn's  condition.  Thej 
came  close  to  him  and  saw  his  state.  It  is  a  narrow  trackway  down  to 
Jericho,  and  they  were  obliged  to  go  almost  over  his  wounded  body : 
the  first  comer  looked  at  him,  but  he  hurried  on ;  the  second  appears  to 
have  made  a  liirthcr  investigation,  to  have  had  sufficient  cunoaity,  at 
an^  rate,  to  begin  to  csamioo  the  state  of  the  case ;  but  his  enimitj 
bemg  satisfied  his  compassion  was  not  aroused,  and  he  hurried  away. 
Half  the  neglect  of  the  sick  poor  arises  from  not  knowing  tiiat  there  an.' 
auch  cases,  but  many  remain  wilfully  in  ignorance,  and  such  ignorance 
is  no  available  excu^se.  In  the  case  of  tlie  hoepltala  for  which  we  plead 
to-day,  yon  do  imow  that  there  are  persons  in  them  at  this  moment 
snffering,  persons  littering  grieviously,  for  no  fault  of  their  own,  and  you 
know  that  these  med  your  aid.  As  I  rode  the  other  evening  by  Uiat 
noble  building  on  our  side  of  the  water,  St.  Thomas's  Hospital,  I  conld 
not  help  meditatJD!.'  ui>on  what  a  mass  of  pain  and  sutiering  was  gathen^d 
within  those  walls  ;  but  then  I  thanked  God  tliat  it  was  witlim  those 
walls  where  succour  would  be  most  surely  rendered  to  it  to  the  best  of 
human  ability.  So  you  do  know  that  there  is  poverty  and  sickness 
around  you,  and  if  juu  pass  by  on  the  other  side  you  will  have  looked 
at  it,  you  will  have  kitoivn  about  it,  and  on  your  heads  will  be  the 
criminality  of  having  left  the  wounded  man  unhelped. 

Yft  the  pair  had  capital  excuses :  both  the  priest  and  the  Levite  had 
excellent  reasons  Ibr  neglecting  the  bleeding  man.  I  never  knew  a 
man  refuse  to  help  the  poor  who  failed  to  give  at  least  one  adminble 
excuse.  I  believe  that  there  is  no  man  on  earth  who  wickedly  rejects 
the  plea  of  need  who  is  not  furnished  with  arguments  that  he  is  right: 
arguments  eminently  satisfactory  to  himself,  and  such  a«  he  tlunka 


THS  GOOD  SAMABTBAK.  855 

■hmM  gilenoe  those  who  press  the  case.  For  instance,  tix»  priest  and 
Jdffrite  were  botii  in  a  hurry.  The  priest  had  been  a  month  away  at 
J^omtalem  from  his  wife  and  dear  children,  and  he  naturallj  wanted  to 
get  home;  if  he  lingered  the  sun  might  be  down;  it  was  an  awkward 
plaoe  to  be  in  after  sundown,  and  you  could  not  expect  him  to  be  so 
impradent  as  to  stay  in  a  lone  place  with  darkness  coming  on.  He  had 
qpent  a  very  labcnrioiis  month  in  the  temple,  yon  do  Bot  know  how 
ezhAOsting  he  had  found  it  to  act  as  a  priest  for  a  whole  month,  and 
if  yon  did  yon  would  not  blame  him  for  wanting  to  get  home  to  enjoy 
m  Utde  rest.  Besides,  he  had  promised  to  be  home  at  a  certain  hour,  and 
lie  was  a  man  of  punctuality,  and  would  by  no  means  cause  anxiety  to 
liis  wife  and  riiildren,  who  would  be  looking  from  the  housetop  for  him. 
▲  -very  excellent  excuse  was  this  :  but  he  also  felt  thi^  he  really  could 
not  do  much  good.  Be  did  not  understand  surgery,  and  could  not  bind 
^  a  wound  to  save  his  life  ;  he  shrank  from  it ;  the  very  sight  of  Uood 
tamed  fais  stomach,  he  oould  not  hrii^  himself  to  go  near  a  person  who 
-  was  to  frightfully  mangled.  If  he  did  try  to  bind  up  a  wound  he  felt  he 
'tfioiild  be  sure  to  make  a  muddle  of  it.  If  his  wife  nad  been  with  him, 
"Ae  oouU  have  done  it ;  or  if  he  had  brought  some  plaister,  liniment,  or 
•tlrBming,  he  would  have  tried  his  best,  but  as  it  was  he  oould  do 
^sotinng.  The  poor  man,  moreover,  was  evidently  haff  dend,  and  would 
fee  quito  dead  in  an  hour  or  two,  and  therefore  it  was  a  pity  to  waste 
time  on  a  hopeless  case.  Then  the  priest  was  only  one  person,  and 
i«oidd  not  be  expected  to  carry  a  bleeding  man,  and  yet  it  would  be 
idle  to  begin  witn  the  case  and  leave  him  tha?e  all  night.  True,  he 
eoidd  almost  hear  the  sound  of  the  Levite's  feet,  indeed  he  hoped  he 
w«s  eoming  up  behind,  for  he  felt  very  nervous  at  being  alone  witn  such 
s^ease;  but  then  that  was  all  the  more  reason  for  leaving  the  matter, 
«iee  the  Levite  would  be  sure  to  attend  to  it«  Better  still  was  the  follow- 
ing line  of  excuse-— you  would  not  have  a  person  stop  in  a  place  where 
BDother  man  had  been  half  killed  by  thieves.  The  thieves  might  be 
^back  again,  they  were  scarcely  yet  out  of  hearing  even  then,  and  a  priest 
after  a  month's  service  ougnt  to  have  some  fees  in  his  purse,  and  it 
was  important  not  to  run  the  risk  of  losing  the  support  of  his  family 

§r  stopping  in  a  place  which  was  evidently  swarming  with  highwaymen. 
e  might  be  wounded  loo,  and  then  there  would  be  two  people  half  dead, 
and  one  of  them  a  valuable  clergyman.  Eeally,  philanthropy  would 
suggest  that  you  take  care  of  yourself,  as  you  could  not  possibly  do  any 
0ood  to  the  poor  man.  And  then  the  man  might  die,  and  the  person 
round  near  tne  body  might  be  charged  with  the  murder.  It  is  always 
awkward  to  be  found  alone  in  a  dark  spot  with  the  corpse  of  one  who 
has  evidently  suffered  from  foul  pla^.  The  priest  might  be  taken  up  upon 
sugpicion,  and  did  not  all  the  prmciples  of  pradence  suggest  that  the 
Tery  best  thing  that  he  could  do  was  to  get  out  of  the  way  as  quickly 
as  possible  ?  Moreover,  he  could  pray  for  the  man,  you  know,  and  he 
was  glad  to  find  that  he  had  a  tract  with  him  which  he  would  leave 
near  him,  and  what  with  the  tract  and  the  prayer  what  more  could  a 
sood  man  be  expected  to  do  ?  With  this  pious  reflection  he  hastened  on 
his  way.  It  is  just  possible  also  that  he  did  not  wish  to  be  defiled.  A 
jHriest  was  too  holy  a  person  to  meddle  with  wounds  and  bruises.  Who 
would  propose  such  a  thing  ?    He  had  come  from  Jerusalem  in  all  the 


856  METBOPOLITAH  TABKRVACLS  PULPIT. 

odour  of  sanctity ;  he  felt  himself  to  be  as  holy  as  he  coald  oonveniently 
be,  and  therefore  he  wonld  not  expose  such  rare  excellence  to  worldly 
inflnences  by  touching  a  sinner.  All  these  powerful  reasons  pot 
together  made  him  content  to  save  trouble,  and  leave  the  doing  of 
kindness  to  others. 

Now,  this  morning,  I  shall  leave  you  to  make  all  the  excuses  you 
like  about  not  helping  the  poor  and  aiding  the  hospitals,  and  when  you 
hare  made  them  they  will  be  as  good  as  those  which  I  have  set  before 
you.  You  have  smiled  over  what  the  priest  might  have  said,  but  if  yon 
make  any  excuses  for  yourselves  whenever  real  need  comes  before  you, 
and  you  are  able  to  relieve  it,  you  need  not  smile  over  your  excuses^  the 
devil  will  do  that;  you  had  better  cry  over  them,  for  there  is  the 
gravest  reason  for  lamenting  that  your  heart  is  hard  toward  your  fellow* 
creatures  when  they  are  sick,  and  perhaps  sick  unto  death. 

III.  In  the  thurd  place  the  Saxaritak  is  a  model  for  thobe 
WHO  DO  HELP  THE  AFFLicfiED.  He  is  a  model,  first,  if  we  notice  who 
the  person  was  that  he  helped.  The  parable  does  not  say  so,  bat  it  im* 
plies  that  the  wounded  man  was  a  Jew,  and,  therefore,  the  Samaritan 
was  not  of  the  same  futh  and  order.  The  apostle  says,  ^'  As  we  have 
opportunity,  let  us  do  good  unto  all  men,  especially  unto  them  who  are 
of  the  household  of  faith."  This  man  was  not  of  the  household  of 
faith,  as  far  as  the  Samaritan's  judgment  went,  but  he  was  one  of  the 
''all  men."  The  Jew  and  he  were  as  much  apart  in  religious  sympathy  as 
they  well  could  be.  Ay,  but  he  was  a  man :  whether  he  was  a  Jew  or 
not,  he  was  a  man,  a  wounded,  bleeding,  dying  man,  and  the  Samaritan 
was  another  man,  and  so  one  man  felt  for  another  man  and  came  to  hb 
aid.  Do  not  ask  whether  a  sick  man  believes  in  the  thirtv-nine  articks, 
or  the  Westminster  Assembly's  catechism.  Let  us  hope  that  he  is  sound 
in  the  faith,  but  if  he  is  not  his  wounds  need  staunching  just  as  much 
as  if  he  held  a  perfect  creed.  You  need  not  enquire  whether  he  is  a 
sound  Calvinist,  for  an  Arminian  smarts  when  he  is  wounded;  a 
Churchman  feels  as  much  pain  as  a  Dissenter  when  his  leg  is  broken, 
and  an  infidel  needs  nursing  when  he  is  crushed  in  an  accident.  It  is 
as  bad  for  a  man  to  die  with  a  heterodox  creed  as  with  the  orthodox 
faith ;  indeed,  in  some  respects  it  is  far  worse,  and  therefore  we  should 
be  doubly  anxious  for  his  cure.  We  are  to  relieve  real  distress  ine* 
spective  of  creed,  as  the  Samaritan  did. 

Moreover,  the  Jews  were  great  haters  of  the  Samaritans,  and  no 
doubt  this  Samaritan  might  have  thought,  ''If  I  were  in  that  man's  case 
he  would  not  help  me.  He  would  pass  me  by  and  say, '  It  is  a  Samaritan 
dog,  let  him  be  accursed.' "  The  Jews  were  accustomed  to  curse  the 
Simiaritans,  but  it  did  not  occur  to  the  good  man  to  remember  what  Uie 
Jew  would  have  said :  he  saw  him  bleeding  and  he  bound  up  his  wounds. 
Our  Saviour  has  not  given  us  for  a  golden  rule,  "  Do  ye  to  others  as 
others  would  do  to  you,"  but  "  as  ye  would  they  should  do  to  yon."  The 
Samaritan  went  by  that  rule,  and  though  he  knew  of  the  enmity  in  the 
Jewish  mind  he  fek  that  he  must  heap  coals  of  fire  upon  the  wounded 
man  by  loving  help ;  therefore  he  went  straight  away  to  his  relief 
Perhaps  at  another  time  the  Jew  would  have  put  off  the  Samaritan  and 
refused  even  to  be  touched  by  him ;  but  the  tender-hearted  sympathuser 
does  not  think  of  that :  the  poor  man  is  too  sick  to  hold  any  crotchets 


THE  GOOD  SAMABITAy.  057 

or  prejadices,  and  when  the  Samaritan  bends  over  him  and  pours  in  the 
oil  and  wine  he  wins  a  gratefnl  glance  from  the  son  of  Abraham. 

That  poor,  wonnded  man  was  one  who  could  not  repay  km.  He  had  been 
strii^)ed  of  ^1  that  he  had,  even  his  garments  were  taken  from  him ;  but 
chanty  does  not  look  for  payment,  else  were  it  no  charity  at  all  The 
man  was  a  total  stranger  too.  The  Samaritan  had  not  even  seen  him 
before.  What  did  Ihat  matter  ?  He  was  a  man,  and  all  men  are  akin. 
'*  God  hath  made  of  one  blood  all  nations  that  dwell  upon  the  face  of 
the  earth  "  :  the  Samaritan  felt  that  touch  of  nature  wnich  makes  aJl 
men  kin,  and  he  bent  over  the  stranger  and  relieved  his  pains. 

He  might  have  said,  "  Why  should  /  help  ?  He  has  been  rejected  hj 
hk  own  people ;  the  priest  ana  the  Levite  have  left  him ;  his  first  claim 
is  upon  his  own  countrymen."  So  have  I  known  some  say,  ^'  These 
persons  have  no  claim  ;  they  ought  to  go  to  their  own  people."  Well, 
sujqpose  they  have  gone  and  failed,  now  comes  your  turn ;  and  what 
the  Jew  would  not  do  for  the  Jew  let  the  Samaritan  do,  and  he  shall 
be  blessed  in  the  deed.  He  had  been  neglected  bv  the  oflScials  and 
ni^Iected  by  the  saints ;  the  best,  or  those  who  ought  to  be  the  best, 
the  priest  and  the  Levite,  had  deserted  him,  and  left  him  to  die.  The 
Samaritan  is  neither  saint  nor  official,  but  yet  he  steps  in  to  do  the 
deed.  Oh,  Christian  brethren,  take  care  that  ye  are  not  put  to  shame 
by  this  Samaritan. 

He  is  a  model  to  us  next  in  the  spirit  in  which  he  did  his  work.  He 
did  it  without  asking  questions.  The  man  was  in  need,  he  was  sure  of 
that,  and  he  helped  him  at  once ;  doing  so  without  hesitation,  and 
making  no  compact  nor  agreement  with  him,  but  at  once  proceeding 
to  poor  in  the  ou  and  wine.  He  did  it  without  attempting  to  shift  the 
lalKrar  from  himself  to  others.  Charity  nowadays  means  that  A  asks 
B  to  help  him,  and  B,  in  his  wonderful  charity,  does  him  the  great  favour 
of  sending  him  on  to  C.  That  is  to  say,  tne  common  run  of  benevo- 
lent persons  nowadays  put  their  hands  but  seldom  into  their  own  purses, 
bnt  send  people  on  to  a  few  individuals  who  find  cash  for  all.  It  seems 
to  me  to  DO  a  very  mean  way  of  getting  rid  of  a  case  by  saving  your 
own  pocket  and  passing  the  applicant  on  to  another  who  is  no  better  off 
than  yourself,  but  far  more  generous.  The  Samaritan  was  personally 
beneA'olent,  and  therein  he  is  a  mirror  and  model  to  us  all. 

He  did  it  without  any  selfish  fear :  the  thieves  might  have  been 

3K)n  him,  bnt  he  cured  nothing  for  thieves  when  a  life  was  in  danger, 
ere  is  a  man  in  want,  and  the  man  must  be  relieved,  thieves  or  no 
thieves,  and  he  does  it.  He  does  it  with  self-denial,  for  he  finds  oil  and 
Wine,  and  money  at  the  inn,  and  everything,  though  he  was  by  no  means 
a  rich  man,  for  he  gave  two  pence,  a  larger  sum  than  it  looks,  but  still 
a  small  sum.  He  did  not  fling  his  alms  about  because  he  was  rich : 
he  is  not  said  to  have  given  a  handfid  of  pence,  but  two,  for  he  had  to 
count  his  pence  as  he  expended  them.  It  was  a  poor  Samaritan  who 
did  this  rich  and  noble  act :  the  poorest  can  help  the  poor  ;  even  those 
who  feel  distress  themselves  may  manifest  a  generous  Christian  spirit, 
and  give  their  services.    Let  them  do  so  as  they  have  opportunity. 

This  man  helped  his  poor  neighbour  with  great  tenderness  and  care. 
He  was  like  a  mother  to  him.  Everything  was  done  with  loving  thought 
and  with  whatever  of  skill  he  possessed.    He  did  the  best  he  co^d. 


S5S  METBOPOUTAN  TABEEKACLE  FOLPn'. 

Uretbreii,  let  wliut  we  do  for  others  always  be  done  in  the  noblest  at;fle. 
Let  ns  not  treat  the  poor  like  doga  to  whom  we  fling  a  bone,  norvtait 
the  sick  like  superior  beinga  who  feel  that  they  are  stoopin"  down  to 
inferiors  when  they  eater  their  rooms ;  but  in  the  sweet  tenderness  of 
real  love,  learned  at  Jesu's  feet,  let  us  imitate  this  good  Samaritan. 

Bnt  ivhal  dvibedo?  Well,  first  lie  came  to  where  the  sufferer  was, 
and  put  himself  into  his  position.  Then  he  pat  forth  all  his  skill  for 
him,  and  bound  up  his  wounds,  no  doubt  rending  his  own  garment  to 
get  the  bands  with  which  to  binil  up  the  wound-  He  poured  in  oil  and 
wine,  the  best  healing  mixture  that  he  knew  of,  and  one  which  ha 
happened  to  have  by  him.  He  then  set  the  sick  man  on  his  male,  cmd 
of  course  he  had  to  walk  himself,  but  this  he  did  right  cheerfully,  sup- 
porting his  poor  patient  as  the  mule  proceeded.  He  took  him  to  an  \m, 
but  he  did  not  leave  him  at  the  carayanaerai  and  say,  "  Anybody  will 
take  care  of  him  now,"  but  he  went  to  the  manager  of  the  estaolish* 
ment  and  gave  him  money,  and  he  said,  "  Take  eare  of  him."  I  admire 
that  little  sentence,  because  it  is  first  written, '-  he  took  care  of  him,"  and 
next  he  said,  "Take  care  of  him."  What  you  do  yourself  you  may  ex- 
hort other  people  to  do.  He  said,  "  I  leave  this  poor  man  with  yon, 
pray  do  not  neglect  him.  There  are  a  great  many  people  in  the  inn, 
bnt  take  care  of  him."  "  Is  he  a  brother  of  yours  ?"  "  No,  I  never 
saw  him  before."  "  Well,  are  you  at  all  under  obligation  to  him  T' 
"  No ! — yes,  yes,  I  feel  under  obligation  to  everybody  that  is  a  man. 
If  he  wants  help  I  am  obhgcd  to  help  him,"  "  Is  that  all  ?"  "  Yes, 
but  do  take  care  of  him.    I  feel  a  great  interest  in  him." 

The  Samaritan  did  not  cease  till  he  had  gone  through  with  his  kind- 
ness. He  said,  "  This  money  may  not  be  sufficient,  for  it  may  be  a 
long  time  before  he  is  able  to  move.  That  leg  may  not  soon  heal,  that 
broken  rib  may  need  long  rest.  Do  not  hurry  him  away,  let  him  stcqi 
here,  and  if  he  incurs  additional  expense,  I  will  be  sure  to  pay  it  when 
I  come  back  from  Jerusalem  again."  There  is  nothing  hke  the  chartlr 
which  endures  even  to  the  end,  I  wish  1  had  time  to  enlai^  on  all 
these  things,  bnt  I  cannot  do  so ;  exhibit  them  in  your  lives,  and  yon 
wQl  best  know  what  they  moan.  Go  and  do  likewise,  each  one  of  yon, 
and  thus  reproduce  the  good  Samaritan. 

lY.  But  now,  tburthiy.  we  have  a  hiqhbr  uodel  than  even  the 
Samaritan — our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  I  do  not  think  that  our  divine 
Lord  intended  to  teach  anything  about  himself  in  this  parable,  except 
so  far  as  he  is  himself  the  great  exemplar  of  all  goodness.  He  was 
answering  the  question,  "  Who  is  my  neighbour  ?"  and  he  was  not 
preaching  about  himself  at  all.  Tiierc  has  been  a  great  deal  of  strain- 
ing of  this  parable  to  bring  the  Lord  Jesus  and  everything  abont  him 
into  it,  bnt  this  I  dare  not  imitate.  Yet  by  analt^  we  may  illustrate 
our  Lord's  goodness  by  it.  This  is  a  picture  of  a  eeneroua  hearted 
mac  who  cares  for  the  needy  :  iKit  the  most  generous  hearted  man  that 
ever  lived  was  the  Man  of  Nazareth,  and  none  ever  cared  for  sick  and 
suffering  souls  as  he  has  done.  Therefore,  if  wo  praise  the  good 
Samaritan,  we  should  much  more  extol  the  bleaaod  Saviour  whom  his 
enemieB  called  a  Samaritan,  and  who  never  denied  the  charge,  for  what 
cared  he  if  all  the  prejudice  and  scorn  of  men  should  vent  itself  on  him  ? 
^^Squ,  brethren,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  hae  done  better  than  thegood 


THE  GOOD  BAXARITAK.  859 

Soxnaritatt,  because  our  case  was  worse.  As  I  have  already  said,  the 
iponnded  man  could  not  blame  himself  for  his  sad  estate ;  it  was  his 
misfortane,  not  his  fieinlt ;  bnt  yon  and  I  are  not  only  half  dead,  but 
altogeUier  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  and  we  have  brought  many  of  our 
ilb  njwn  onrselyes.  The  thieves  that  have  stripped  us  are  our  own 
iniqnitiesy  the  wounds  which  we  bear  have  been  inflicted  by  our  own 
suicidal  hand.  We  are  not  in  opposition  to  Jesus  Christ  as  the  poor 
Jew  was  to  the  Samaritan  fh>m  the  mere  force  of  prejudice,  but  we  have 
be^i  oppoo&i  to  the  blessed  Redeemer  by  nature ;  we  have  from  the 
fint  turned  away  from  him.  Alas,  we  have  resisted  and  rejected  him. 
Hie  poor  man  £d  not  put  his  Samaritan  friend  away,  but  we  have  done 
80  to  our  Tx>rd.  How  many  times  have  we  refused  Almighty  love ! 
How  often  by  unbelief  have  we  pulled  open  the  wounds  which  Christ 
has  bound  up !  We  have  rejected  the  oil  and  wine  which  in  the  gospel 
hie  nresents  to  us.  We  have  spoken  evil  of  him  to  his  face,  and  have 
Kved  even  for  years  in  utter  rejection  of  him,  and  yet  in  his  infinite 
love  he  has  not  given  us  up,  but  he  has  brought  some  of  us  into  his 
dmrch,  where  we  rest  as  m  an  inn,  feeding  on  what  his  bounty  has 
provided.  It  was  wondrous  love  which  moved  the  Saviour's  heart 
when  he  found  us  in  all  our  misery,  and  bent  over  us  to  lifb  us  out  of 
it|  though  he  knew  that  we  were  his  enemies. 

The  Samaritan  was  akin  to  the  Jew  because  he  was  a  man,  but  our 
Lord  Jesus  was  not  originally  akin  to  us  by  nature :  he  is  Ood,  infi- 
nitely above  us,  and  if  he  was  ''found  in  fashion  as  a  man"  it  was 
because  he  chose  to  be  so.  If  he  journeyed  this  wa^,  via  Bethlehem's 
manger,  down  to  the  place  of  our  sin  and  misery,  it  was  because  his 
infinite  compassion  brought  him  there.  The  S^naritan  came  to  the 
wounded  one  because  in  me  course  of  business  he  was  led  there,  and, 
being  there,  he  helped  the  man  ;  but  Jesus  came  to  earth  on  no  business 
bnt  that  of  saving  us,  and  he  was  found  in  our  flesh  that  he  might  have 
fl^pathy  with  us.  In  the  very  existence  of  the  man  Christ  Jesus  you 
see  the  noblest  form  of  pity  manifested. 

And  being  here,  where  we  bad  fallen  among  robbers,  he  did  not 
merely  run  risks  of  being  attacked  by  thieves  himself,  but  he  was  attacked 
by  them :  he  was  wounded,  he  was  stripped,  and  not  half  dead  was  he, 
bnt  altogether  dead,  for  he  was  laid  in  the  grave.  He  was  slain  for 
our  sakes,  for  it  was  not  possible  for  him  to  deliver  us  from  the  mis- 
diief  which  the  thieves  of  sin  had  wrought  upon  us  excepting  by 
safferin^  that  mischief  in  his  own  person ;  and  he  did  suffer  it  that  he 
might  Oliver  us. 

What  the  Samaritan  gave  to  the  poor  man  was  generous,  but  it  is 
not  comnarable  to  what  the  Lord  Jesus  has  given  to  us.  He  gave  him 
wine  and  oil,  but  Jesus  has  given  his  heart's  blood  to  heal  our  wounds : 
"  he  loved  us  and  gave  himself  for  us."  The  Samaritan  kfit  himself 
with  all  his  care  and  thoughtfulness,  but  Christ  gave  himself  even  to  the 
death  for  us.  The  Samaritan  gave  two  pence,  a  large  amount  out  of 
his  slender  store,  and  I  do  not  depreciate  the  gift,  but  "  he  that  was 
rich  for  our  sakes  became  poor  that  we  through  his  poverty  might  be 
rich."  Oh,  the  marvellous  gifts  which  Christ  has  bestowed  upon  us ! 
Who  is  he  that  can  reckon  them !  Heaven  is  among  those  blessings, 
but  his  own  self  is  the  chief  boon. 


860  METROPOLITAN  TABEBNAOLB  PULPIT. 

The  Samaritan's  compassion  did  bnt  show  itself  for  a  short  time.  If 
he  had  to  walk  by  the  side  of  his  mule  it  would  not  be  for  many  mile^ 
but  Christ  walked  by  the  side  of  us,  dismounted  from  his  glory^  all 
through  his  life.  The  Samaritan  did  not  stop  long  at  the  inn,  for  he 
had  his  business  to  attend  to,  and  he  very  rightly  went  about  it ;  but 
our  Lord  remained  with  us  for  a  lifetime,  even  till  he  rose  to  heaven: 
yea,  he  is  with  us  even  now,  always  blessing  the  sons  of  men. 

When  the  Samaritan  went  away  he  said,  **  Whatsoever  thou  spendest 
more  I  will  repay  thee."  Jesus  has  gone  up  to  heaven,  and  he  nas  left 
behind  him  blessed  promises  of  something  to  be  done  when  he  shdl 
come  again.  He  never  forgets  us.  The  good  Samaritan,  I  dare  say, 
thought  very  little  of  the  Jew  in  after  years ;  indeed,  it  is  the  mark  of 
a  generous  spirit  not  to  think  much  of  what  it  has  done.  He  went 
back  to  Samaria  and  minded  his  business,  and  never  told  anybody  ^*  I 
helped  a  poor  Jew  on  the  road."  Not  he.  But  of  neoessity  our  Lord 
Jesus  acts  differentlv,  for  because  we  have  a  constant  need  he  oontinues 
to  care  for  us,  and  nis  deed  of  love  is  being  done,  and  done,  and  done 
again  upon  multitudes  of  cases,  and  will  always  be  repeated  ao  long  as 
there  are  men  to  be  saved,  a  hell  from  which  to  escape,  and  a  heaven 
to  win. 

I  have  thus  set  before  you  the  highest  example,  and  I  shall  conclude 
when  I  have  said  two  things.  Judge  yourselves,  all  ye  my  hearers,  if 
ye  are  hoping  for  salvation  by  your  own  works.  Look  to  what  yon  must  be 
throughout  an  entire  lite  if  your  works  are  to  save  you.  You  must 
love  God  with  all  your  heart  and  soul  and  strength,  and  vour  ndghbour 
in  this  Samaritan's  fashion,  even  as  yourself,  and  both  of  these  without 
a  single  failure.  Have  you  done  this  ?  Can  vbu  hope  to  do  it  pa^- 
fectly  ?  If  not,  why  do  you  risk  your  souls  in  this  frail  skiff,  this  leaky, 
sinking  craft  of  your  poor  works,  for  you  will  never  get  to  heaven 
therein  ? 

Lastly,  you  who  are  Christ's  people  are  saved,  and  you  are  not  going 
to  do  these  things  in  order  to  save  yourselves :  the  greater  Samaritan  has 
saved  you,  Jesus  has  redeemed  you,  brought  you  into  his  church,  put 
you  under  the  care  of  his  ministers,  bidden  us  take  care  of  you,  and 
promised  to  reward  us  if  we  do  so  in  the  day  when  he  comes.  &ek, 
then,  to  be  true  followers  of  your  Lord  by  practical  deeds  of  kindness^ 
and  if  you  have  been  backward  in  your  gifts  to  help  either  the  temporal 
or  the  spiritual  needs  of  men,  begin  from  this  morning  with  generous 
hearts,  and  God  will  bless  you.  0  divine  Spirit,  help  us  all  to  be  like 
Jesus.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Soriptube  bead  bbpoeb  Sermon — Luke  x.  17—42. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 92  (Vers.  I.),  15,  428. 


PttoirlttM  ^n&trmtk 


B 


THE  PINAL  PEE8EVBRANCE  OP  THE  SAINTS. 


t^ 


ttmt( 

DxiiiyiBEtKD  OH  Lord's-Dat  Morning,  June  24th9  1877,  bt 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

▲T   THE   MBTBOPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 


"The  righteoufl  alio  shall  hold  on  his  way.*' — Job  xviL  9. 

I  man  who  is  righteous  before  Qoi  has  a  way  of  his  own.  Ifc  is  not 
firsy  of  the  flesh,  nor  the  way  of  the  world ;  it  is  a  way  marked  out 
dim  bj  the  divine  command,  in  which  he  walks  by  faith.  It  is  the 
g's  highway  of  holiness,  the  unclean  shall  not  pass  over  it :  only  the 
omed  of  the  Lord  shall  walk  there,  and  these  shall  find  it  a  path  of 
mtion  from  the  worM.  Once  entered  upon  the  way  of  life,  the  pil- 
i  must  persevere  in  it  or  perish,  for  thus  saith  the  Lord,  "  If  any 
draw  back,  my  soul  shall  have  no  pleasure  in  him."  Perseverance 
le  path  of  faith  and  holiness  is  a  necessity  of  the  Christian,  for 
**  he  that  endureth  to  the  end,  the  same  shall  be  saved."  It  is  in 
to  spring  up  quickly  like  the  seed  that  was  sown  upon  the  rock,  and 
by-and-by  to  wither  when  the  sun  is  up  ;  that  would  but  prove 
STich  a  plant  has  no  roj;^  in  itself,  but  "the  trees  of  the  Lord  are 
of  sap,"  aJid  they  abide  and  continue  and  bring  forth  fruit,  even  in 
ige,  to  show  that  the  Lord  is  upright.  There  is  a  great  difference 
reen  nominal  Christianity  and  real  Christianity,  and  this  is  generally 
in  the  failure  of  the  one  and  the  continuance  of  the  other.  Now, 
declaration  of  the  text  is  that  the  truly  righteous  man  shall  hold  on 
NBj ;  he  shall  not  go  back,  he  shall  not  leap  the  hedges  and  wander 
hie  right  hand  or  the  left,  he  shall  not  lie  down  in  idleness,  neither 
1  he  faint  and  cease  to  go  upon  his  journey ;  but  he  "  shall  hold  on 
way."  It  will  frequently  be  very  difficult  for  him  to  do  so,  but 
irill  haye  such  resolution,  such  power  of  inward  grace  given  him, 
b  he  will  "  hold  on  his  way,"  with  stern  determination,  as  though  he 
1  on  by  his  teeth,  resolving  never  to  let  go.  Perhaps  he  may  not 
ays  travel  with  equal  speed  ;  it  is  not  said  that  he  shall  hold  on  his 
8,  but  he  shall  hold  on  his  uwj.  There  are  times  when  we  run  and 
not  weary,  and  anon  when  we  walk  are  thankful  that  we  do  not 
it .  ay,  and  there  are  periods  when  we  are  glad  to  go  on  all  fours 
No.  1,861. 


3C3  JOTROPOLITAS  TABEBKACi.E   PUI.riT. 

(Uid  creep  npvurd  «ith  P>>»:  lint  elill  we  prove  that  "  the  righteooi 
shall  hold  ou  hia  way."  Under  all  diffiralties  tht  face  of  the  man  wlietn 
(lod  has  justified  is  steadfastly  set  towards  Jcnisalem  ;  nor  will  he  tnru 
:iside  till  his  eyes  shall  see  t\.i:  King  in  Lis  Iioauty. 

This  is  a  great  wonder,  h  ii*  a  marvel  that  any  man  should  be  a 
Christian  at  all,  and  a  great*  r  uondtr  that  he  should  continue  so.  Con- 
sider the  weakness  of  the  fl'.=li,  the  strength  of  inward  corruption,  the 
fury  oF  Satanic  temptation,  th-.'  .'^duHions  of  wealth  and  the  pride  of 
life,  the  world  and  the  fashion  ihereuf :  all  these  things  are  against  ns, 
:uid  yet  behold,  "  greater  is  b.'  tliat  is  for  na  than  all  they  that  Iw  agaiuil 
US,"  and  defying  sin,  and  Satan,  and  death,  and  hell,  the  righteous  holds 
Wi  his  way. 

I  take  our  text  as  accurab.-ly  setting  fortli  the  doctrine  of  the  Hael 

?'rseTcrance  of  the  saints.  "  The  righteous  shall  hold  on  his  way," 
ears  ago  when  there  w«8  nti  earnest,  and  even  a  bitter  contiwein 
between  Calvinists  and  Anniniaua  it  was  the  habit  of  each  side  to  csn- 
cature  the  other.  Very  much  of  the  argument  is  not  directed  against 
the  rval  aentiinent  of  the  ti|.[nisite  party,  but  against  what  had  beta 
impated  to  them.  They  maAv  a  mim  of  straw,  and  then  they  bnroed 
him,  which  is  a  pretty  easy  (liiiit;  to  do,  but  I  trust  we  have  left  the« 
things  behind.  The  gloHoos  rnith  of  the  final  perseverance  of  the  saints 
has  survived  controversy,  an  1  in  some  form  or  other  is  the  cheriahrd 
belief  of  the  children  of  God  Tike  care,  however,  to  be  clear  aslowbit 
it  is.  The  Scripture  docs  n(<  k  ink  tliat  a  man  will  reach  bis  jouniej't 
end  without  contiiining  to  U,r-<:\  ulong  the  road;  it  is  not  true  tlialDOo 
act  of  faith  is  all,  and  that  coiliiu^'  ia  needed  of  daily  faith,  prayer,  and 
watchfulness.  Our  doctrine  \n  tlie  very  opposite,  namely,  that  the 
vJ^htcoUB  shall  hold  on  his  iviiv;  ur.  in  other  words,  shall  coQtiaus  in 
faith,  in  repentance,  in  prayir,  iiiid  umKr  the  iafiaence  of  the  grace  of 
God.  We  do  not  believe  in  salvntion  bya  physical  forccwhich  treatsa 
uiau  as  a  dead  log,  and  carries  him  whether  he  will  it  or  not  towsids 
heaven.  Ko,  "  he  holds  on,"  iie  ia  persoually  active  about  the  niaitcr, 
and  plods  on  up  hill  and  down  dale  till  he  reaches  his  journey's  end.  W'e 
never  thought,  nor  even  dreamed,  that  merely  because  a  man  supposa 
that  he  once  entered  on  this  way  he  may  therefore  conclude  that  be  is 
certain  of  salvation,  even  if  he  leaves  the  way  immediately.  No,  but  its 
say  that  he  who  truly  receives  the  Holy  Ghost,  so  that  he  believes  in 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  shall  not  go  back,  but  persevere  in  the  way  of 
faith.  It  is  written,  "  He  thut  believeth  imd  is  baptized  shall  bs  saved," 
and  this  he  cannot  be  if  he  were  left  to  go  back  and  delight  in  sin  at 
he  did  bcfoiu ;  and,  therefore,  he  shall  be  kept  by  the  power  of  God 
thron^h  faith  nnto  salvation.  Though  the  believer  to  his  gi-ief  will 
commit  many  a  sin,  yet  still  the  tenor  of  his  life  will  be  holiness  to  tha 
Lord,  and  he  will  hold  on  in  the  way  of  obedience.  iVe  detest  the 
doctrine  that  a  man  who  haa  once  believed  in  Jesus  will  Iv  .-^iVL-d  ^■^■_■ll  if 
he  altogetlier  forsook  the  path  of  obedience.  We  deny  that  sa^  a 
taming  aside  is  jjossible  to  the  true  believer,  and  therefore  the  idea 
imputed  to  us  is  clearly  an  invention  of  the  adversary.  No,  beloved,  a 
man,  if  he  be  indeed  a  believer  in  Christ,  will  not  live  after  the  will  of 
the  flesh.  When  lie  does  fall  into  sin  it  will  be  liis  grief  and  misery, 
id  be  will  never  rest,  till  lie  is  cWi\s&4  ftom  guilt ;  but  I  will  say  this 


THB  ITKAL  PBRSBTEBANCE  07  THE  SAINTS.  363 

f  the  believer,  tliat  if  he  conld  lire  as  he  would  like  to  live  he  would 
ive  a  perfect  life.  If  you  ask  him  if,  after  believing,  he  may  live  as  he 
ists,  he  will  reply,  **  Would  Qod  I  could  live  as  I  list,  for  I  desire  to  live 
Ifcogether  without  sin.  I  would  be  perfect,  even  as  my  Father  in 
leaven  is  perfect."  The  doctrine  is  not  the  licentious  idea  that  a  be- 
[ever  may  live  in  sin,  but  that  he  cannot  and  will  not  do  so.  This  is 
he  doctrine,  and  we  will  first  prove  it;  and,  secondly,  in  the  Puritanic 
ense  of  the  word,  we  will  briefly  improve  it,  by  drawing  two  spiritual 
esBons  therefrom. 

I.  Let  tjs  prove  the  DOOTRiirB.  Please  to  follow  me  with  your 
Mbles  open.  You,  dear  friends,  have  most  of  you  received  as  a  matter 
>f  &ith  the  doctrines  of  grace,  and  therefore  to  you  the  doctrine  of  final 
perseverance  cannot  require  any  proving,  because  it  follows  from  all  the 
^er  doctrines.  We  believe  that  God  has  an  elect  people  whom  he  has 
hosenunto  eternal  life,  and  that  truth  necessarily  involves  the  persever- 
noe  in  grace.  We  beheve  in  special  redemption,  and  this  secures  the  sal- 
iition  and  consequent  perseverance  of  the  redeemed.  We  believe  in 
ffectnal  calling,  which  is  bound  up  with  justification,  a  justification 
rhioh  ensures  glorification.  The  doctrines  of  grace  are  like  a  chain — if 
ou  believe  in  one  of  them  you  must  believe  the  next,  for  each  one  involves 
he  rest ;  therefore  I  say  that  yon  who  accept  any  of  the  doctrines  of 
[iBoe  must  receive  this  also,  as  involved  in  thenu  But  I  am  about  to 
ly  to  prove  this  to  those  who  do  not  receive  the  doctrines  of  grace  ;  I 
ronld  not  argue  in  a  circle,  and  prove  one  thing  which  you  doubt  by 
nother  thing  which  you  doubt,  but  *'  to  the  law  and  to  the  testimony, 
o  the  actual  words  of  Scripture  we  shall  refer  the  matter. 

Before  we  advance  to  the  argument  it  will  be  well  to  remark  that 
hose  who  reject  the  doctrine  frequently  tell  us  that  there  are  many 
laations  in  the  word  of  Ood  against  apostatizing,  and  that  those 
antions  can  have  no  meaning  if  it  be  true  that  the  righteous  shall  hold 
►n  his  way.  But  what  if  those  cautions  are  the  means  in  the  hand  of 
lod  of  keeping  his  people  from  wandering  ?  What  if  they  are  used  to 
xcite  a  holy  fear  in  the  minds  of  his  children,  and  so  become  the 
neans  of  preventing  the  evil  which  they  denounce.  I  would  alse 
emind  you  that  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  which  contains  the 
nost  solenm  warnings  against  apostasy,  the  apostle  always  takes  care  to 
dd  words  which  show  that  he  did  not  believe  tnat  those  whom  he  warned 
ronM  actually  apostatize.  Turn  to  Hebrews  vi.  9.  He  has  been  telling 
liese  Hebrews  that  if  those  who  had  been  once  enlightened  should  fall 
iway,  it  would  be  impossible  to  renew  them  again  into  repentance,  and 
16  adds,  **  But,  beloved,  we  are  persuaded  better  things  of  you,  and 
hings  that  accompany  salvation,  though  we  thus  speak."  In  the  10th 
lia^r  he  gives  an  equally  earnest  warning,  declaring  that  those  who 
hould  do  despite  to  the  spirit  of  grace  are  worthy  of  sorer  punishment 
ban  those  who  depised  Moses'  law,  but  he  closes  the  chapter  with  these 
rords,  '*  Now  the  just  shall  live  by  faith :  but  if  any  man  draw  back, 
oy  Boul  shall  have  no  pleasure  in  him.  But  we  are  not  of  them  who 
Iraw  back  unto  perdition ;  but  of  them  that  believe  to  the  saving  of 
hesouL"  Thus  he  shows  what  the  consequences  of  apostasy  would  be, 
>ut  he  is  convinced  that  they  will  not  choose  to  incur  such  a  feax^^vk 
bonL 


361  HETROFOLITAS  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

Again,  objectora  aometimes  meDtJon  iosUtnces  of  apostaa;  vhicb 
an  mentioned  in  the  word  of  God,  but  on  JooUing  into  them  it  will 
be  discovered  tbat  these  are  cases  of  persons  who  did  bat  profess  Ui 
know  Christ,  but  were  not  rtuWj  possessors  of  the  divine  life.  John,  in 
his  first  Epistle,  ii.  19,  folly  desLTibes  these  apostates  :  "  They  weiiL 
oat  from  as,  bat  they  were  not  of  as ;  for  if  they  had  b«en  of  us,  tlicy 
woold  no  doubt  have  continued  with  us  :  but  the;  went  out,  tbat  tlii.r 
might  be  made  manifest  that  they  were  not  all  of  as."  Thelik<.-is 
trae  of  that  memorable  passage  in  John,  whore  our  Saviour  Bpeaka  u.' 
branches  of  the  vine  which  arc  cut  off  and  cast  iato  the  fire :  these  are 
described  as  l»ranchcs  in  Christ  that  bear  no  &ait.  Are  those  real 
ChriatiaiiH  ?  How  can  they  bo  so  if  they  bear  no  , fruit  ?  ■*  By  tJieir 
firaits  ye  shall  know  them.'  The  branch  which  bears  fruit  is  pni^ed, 
bat  it  is  never  cut  off.  Those  which  bear  no  froit  are  not  fignres  of  tnie 
Christiana,  bat  they  fitly  re;>resent  mere  professors.  Oar  liord,  la 
MatL  vii.  22,  tells  ng  concerning  many  who  will  say  in  that  day  "  Lord, 
Lord,"  that  he  will  reply,  "  I  never  knew  you,"  Not  "  I  have  for^rotUa 
yoa,"  bnt  "  I  never  knew  yoa  ":  they  were  never  really  his  disciples. 

Bat  DOW  to  the  argnment  Itself.  First  we  argue  the  peraeTerance  of 
the  saints,  most  distinctly  from  the  ttaiure  of  the  Ufe  which  is  itnparltd 
al  ngetwraiion.  What  saith  Peter  concerning  this  life  ?  (1  Peter  i.  23.) 
lie  speakB  of  the  people  of  God  as  "  being  bora  again,  not  of  cor- 
rnptible  seed,  bnt  of  incorruptible,  by  the  wl^  of  God,  which  livethand 
abideth  for  ever."  The  new  life  which  is  planted  in  ns  when  wc  are 
bom  again  is  not  like  the  fruit  of  onr  first  birth,  for  that  is  aabjeet  Ut 
mortality,  but  it  is  a  divine  principle,  which  cannot  die  nor  be  corrupt; 
and,  if  it  be  so,  then  he  who  possesses  it  must  live  for  ever,  mi:ut, 
indeed,  be  evermore  what  tbc  Spirit  of  God  in  regeneration  has  niivle 
him.  So  ia  1  John  iii.  9  we  have  the  same  thooght  in  another  form. 
"Whosoever  is  bom  of  Ood  doth  not  commit  sin;  forhisseedremaineth 
in  him ;  and  be  cannot  sin,  because  he  is  born  of  God."  Tiiat  is  to  say, 
the  bent  of  the  Christian's  life  is  not  towards  sin.  It  would  not  be  a 
&ir  description  of  his  life  that  he  lives  In  sin  ;  on  Lbe  contrary,  he  fi^lits 
and  contends  against  sin,  because  he  hna  an  inner  principle  whicJi 
canDut  sin.  Tlic  new  life  sinneth  not ;  it  is  born  of  God,  and  cannot 
transgi'esii ;  and  though  the  old  nature  warreth  against  it,  yet  doth  the 
new  life  so  prevail  in  the  Christian  that  he  is  kept  from  living  in  siu. 
Our  Saviour,  in  Ms  simple  teaching  of  the  gospel  to  the  Samaritan 
woman,  said  to  her  (Johaiv.  13),  ■'  Whosoever  drinketh  of  this  water 
shall  thirst  again:  bnt  whosoever  driuketh  of  the  water  that  I  shall  give 
him  ahui!  never  tbirst ;  bnt  the  water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall  t«  in 
him  a  well  of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life."  Now,  if  our 
Saviour  taught  this  to  a  sinful  and  ignorant  woman,  at  his  first  inter- 
view with  her,  I  lake  it  that  this  doctrine  is  not  to  be  reserved  for  the 
inner  circle  of  full-grown  saints,  but  to  be  preached  ordinarily  among 
the  common  people,  and  to  be  held  np  as  a  most  blessed  privily.  If 
you  receive  the  grace  which  Jesus  imparts  to  your  souls,  it  sh^U  be  like 
the  good  part  tvliich  Mary  chose,  it  shall  not  be  taken  away  Irom  you; 
it  shall  abide  in  you,  not  as  the  water  in  a  cistern,  but  as  a,  living  luun- 
iaia  spriagiug  uji  onto  eveilaaUng  life. 
^  We  nil  kuuw  ihat  the  Ufc  given  m  V-Va  TO."a  \iM'Ott.  \a  latiouUely 


THE  FDTAL  PERSEVERANCE  OP  THE  SAIXTS.  305 

!t>iinected  with  faith.  Now,  faith  is  in  itself  a  conqnering  principle.  In 
.he  First  Epistle  of  John,  which  is  a  great  treasury  of  argument  ( I 
John  V.  4)  we  are  told,  "  Whatsoever  is  bom  of  God  overcometh  the 
jforld :  and  this  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith. 
W^ho  is  he  that  overcometh  the  world,  but  he  that  belie veth  that  Jesus 
is  the  Son  of  Ood?''  See,  then,  that  which  is  bom  of  God  in  us,  namely, 
the  new  life,  is  a  conquering  principle  ;  there  is  no  hint  given  that  it 
can  ever  be  defeated:  and  faith,  which  is  its  outward  sign,  is  also  in 
itself  triumphant  evermore.  Therefore  of  necessity,  because  God  has 
implanted  such  a  wondrous  life  in  us  in  bringmg  us  out  of  darkness 
into  his  marvellous  light,  because  he  has  begotten  us  again  unto  a  lively 
hope  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead,  because  the 
eternal  and  ever  blessed  Spirit  hath  come  to  dwell  in  us,  we  conclude 
that  the  divine  life  within  us  shall  never  die.  ''  The  righteous  shall 
hold  on  his  way." 

The  second  amiment  to  which  I  shall  call  your  attention  shall  be 
drawn  from  our  Lords  own  express  declarations.  Here  we  shall  look  to 
the  gospel  of  John  again,  and  in  that  blessed  third  of  John,  where  our 
Lord  was  explaining  the  gospel  in  the  simplest  possible  style  to  Nico- 
demns,  we  find  him  mying  great  stress  upon  the  fact  that  the  life  received 
by  faith  in  himself  is  eternal.  Look  at  that  precious  verse,  the  four- 
teenth : — '^  As  Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  in  the  wildemess,  even  so 
must  the  Son  of  man  be  lifted  up :  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him 
shoold  not  perish,  but  have  eternal  life,'*  Do  men  therefore  believe  in 
him  and  yet  perish  ?  Do  they  believe  in  him  and  receive  a  spiritual  life 
which  comes  to  an  end  ?  It  cannot  be,  for  "  God  gave  his  only  begotten 
Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not  perish":  but  he  would 
perish  if  he  did  not  persevere  to  the  end ;  and  therefore  he  must  perse- 
vere to  the  end.  The  believer  has  eternal  life,  how  then  can  he  die,  so  as 
to  cease  to  be  a  believer  ?  If  he  does  not  abide  in  Christ,  he  evidently 
has  not  etemal  life,  therefore  he  shall  abide  in  Christ,  even  to  the  end. 
**  For  God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that 
whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life." 
To  this  some  reply  that  a  man  may  have  everlasting  life  and  lose  it. 
To  which  we  answer,  the  words  cannot  so  mean.  Such  a  statement  is 
a  self-evident  contradiction.  If  the  life  be  lost  the  man  is  dead  ; 
how,  then,  did  he  have  everlasting  life  ?  It  is  clear  that  he  had  a  life 
which  lasted  only  for  a  while  :  he  certainly  had  not  everlasting  life,  for 
if  he  had  it  he  must  live  everlastingly.  "  He  that  believeth  on  the  Sou 
hath  everlasting  life"  (John  iii.  36).  The  saints  in  heaven  have 
etemal  life,  and  no  one  expects  them  to  perish.  Their  life  is  etemal ; 
but  eternal  life  is  etemal  life,  whether  the  person  possessing  it  dwells  on 
earth  or  in  heaven. 

I  need  not  read  all  the  passages  in  which  the  same  truth  is  tauglit ; 
but  fui-ther  on,  in  John  vi.  47,  our  Lord  told  the  Jews,  "  Verily,  verily, 
I  say  unto  you,  he  that  believeth  on  me  hath  everlasting  life :  "  not 
temporary  life,  but  "  everlasting  life."  And  in  the  51st  verse  he  said, 
*'I  am  the  living  bread  which  came  do^vn  from  heaven  :  if  any  man  eat 
of  this  bread,  he  shall  live  for  ever."  Then  comes  that  famous  declara- 
tion of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which,  if  there  were  no  other  at  alU 
would  he  quite  sufficient  to  prove  our  point.    John  x.'2^  •.  "  k\A\  ^v^*^ 


366  MBTBOPOLITAN  TABBBHAOLB  PULPIT. 

nnto  my  sheep  eternal  life,  and  they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall 
any  "  (the  word  "  man  "  is  not  in  the  original)  **  plnck  them  oat  of 
my  hand.  My  Father,  which  gave  them  me,  is  greater  tiian  all ;  and 
no  man  is  able  to  plnck  them  ont  of  my  Father's  hand."  What  cui  he 
mean  bnt  this,  that  he  has  grasped  his  people,  and  that  he  means  to 
hold  them  securely  in  his  mighty  hand? 

^  Where  is  the  power  can  reach  m  there» 
Or  what  con  pluck  us  thence  f  ** 

Oyer  and  above  the  hand  of  Jesns  which  was  pierced  comes  the  hand 
of  the  omnipotent  Father  as  a  sort  of  second  grasp.  **  My  Father,  which 
gave  them  me,  is  greater  than  all ;  and  no  man  is  able  to  plnck  them  oat  of 
my  Father's  hand."  Sorely  this  must  show  that  the  saints  are  seooro 
from  anything  and  everything  which  would  destroy  them,  and  oonie- 
qnently  safe  from  total  apostasy. 

Another  passage  speaks  to  the  same  effect — it  is  to  be  fonnd  in 
Matthew  zxiv.  24,  where  the  Lord  Jesns  has  been  speaking  of  the  fiilse 
prophets  that  shonld  deceive  many.  **  There  shall  arise  fidse  Christy 
and  false  prophets,  and  shall  shew  great  signs  and  wonders ;  inaomnch 
that,  if  it  were  possible,  they  shall  deceive  the  very  elect ; "  whidi 
shows  that  it  is  impossible  for  the  elect  to  be  deceived  by  them.  Of 
Christ's  sheep  it  is  said,  '^  A  stranger  will  they  not  follow,  for  they  know 
not  the  voice  of  strangers,"  but  by  divine  instinct  they  know  the  voice 
of  the  Good  Shepherd,  and  they  follow  him. 

Thus  has  our  Saviour  declared,  as  plainly  as  words  possibly  can  ex- 
press it,  that  those  who  are  his  people  possess  eternal  life  witmn  them- 
selves, and  shall  not  perish,  but  shall  enter  into  everlasting  felicil^. 
**  The  righteous  shall  hold  on  his  way." 

A  very  blessed  argument  for  the  saifety  of  the  believer  is  found  in  our 
Lord's  intercession.  You  need  not  turn  to  the  passage,  for  you  know 
it  well,  which  shows  the  connection  between  the  living  intercession  of 
Christ  and  the  perseverance  of  his  people— ^' Wherefore  iJso  he  is 
able  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost  that  come  unto  (jk>d  by  him,  seeing 
he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them"  (Hebrews  viL  25^ 
Our  Lord  Jesus  is  not  dead ;  he  has  risen,  he  has  gone  np  into  the 
glory,  and  now  before  the  eternal  throne  he  pleads  the  merit  of  his  per- 
fect work,  and  as  he  pleads  there  for  all  his  people  whose  names  are 
written  on  his  heart,  as  the  names  of  Israel  were  written  on  the  jewelled 
breastplate  of  the  high  priest,  his  intercession  saves  his  people  even  to 
the  uttermost.  If  you  would  like  an  illustration  of  it  yon  must  torn 
to  the  case  of  Peter  which  is  recorded  in  Luke  xxii.  31,  where  our 
Lord  said, "  Simon,  Simon,  behold,  Satan  hath  desired  to  have  yon,  that 
he  may  sift  you  as  wheat :  but  I  have  prayed  for  thee  that  thy  faith  fail 
not :  and  when  thou  art  converted,  strengthen  thy  brethren."  The  in- 
tercession of  Christ  does  not  save  his  people  from  being  tried,  and 
tempted,  and  tossed  up  and  down  like  wheat  in  a  sieve,  it  does  not  save 
them  even  from  a  measure  of  sin  and  sorrow,  but  it  does  save  them 
from  total  apostasy.  Peter  was  kept,  and  though  he  denied  his  Master, 
vet  it  was  an  exception  to  the  great  rule  of  his  life.  By  grace  he  did 
hold  on  his  way,  because  not  only  then,  bnt  many  a  time  b^de,  though 


THE  FINAL  PEBSEYSBANCE  OF  THE  SAINTS.  867 

he  nimed,  he  had  an  advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesas  Ohrist  the 
ligfafteoiiB. 

If  yoa  desire  to  know  how  Jesus  pleads,  read  at  your  leisure  at  home 
tbat  wonderfiil  17th  of  John — ^the  Lord's  prayer.  What  a  prayer  it 
18  I  ''  While  I  was  with  them  in  the  world,  I  kept  them  in  thy  name : 
those  that  thou  gavest  me  I  have  kept,  and  none  of  them  is  lost,  but  the 
son  of  perdition ;  that  the  scripture  might  be  fulfilled."  Judas  was  lost, 
bat  he  was  only  given  to  Christ  as  an  apostle  and  not  as  one  of  his  sheep. 
He  had  a  temporary  faith,  and  maintained  a  temporary  profession,  but 
he  never  had  eternal  life  or  he  would  have  lived  on.  Those  groans  and 
crfas  of  tike  Saviour  which  accompanied  his  pleadings  in  Gethsemane 
were  heard  in  heaven,  and  answered.  ^'  Holy  Father,  keep  through  thine 
cmn  name  those  whom  thou  hast  given  me  " ;  the  Lord  does  keep  them  by 
his  word  and  Spirit,  and  will  keep  them.  If  the  prayer  of  Christ  in 
€teiliseniane  was  answered,  how  much  more  that  which  now  goeth  up 
fcam  the  etenial  throne  itself  1 

**  With  cries  and  tears  he  offered  up 
His  humble  suit  below  ; 
But  with  authority  he  asks, 
Enthroned  in  glory  now. 

**  For  all  that  come  to  God  by  him. 
Salvation  he  demands ; 
Points  to  their  names  upon  his  breast, 
And  spreads  his  wounded  hands.** 

Ah,  if  my  Lord  Jesus  pleads  for  me  I  cannot  be  afraid  of  earth  or  hell : 
tiiat  living,  intercessory  voice  hath  power  to  keep  the  saints,  and  so  hath 
the  Hving  Lord  himself,  for  he  hath  said — ^^  Because  I  live  ye  shall  Uve 
also."    (John  xiv.  19.) 

Now  for  a  fourth  argument.    We  gather  sure  confidence  of  the  per- 
severance of  the  saints  frain  the  character  arid  work  of  Christ.   I  will  say 
little  about  that,  for  I  trust  my  Lord  is  so  well  known  to  you  that  he 
needeth  no  word  of  commendation  from  me  to  you ;  but  if  you  know 
him  you  will  say  what  the  apostle  does  in  2  Tim.  i.  12, — "  I  know 
whom  I  have  believed,  and  am  persuaded  that  he  is  able  to  keep  that 
which  I  have  committed  unto  him  against  that  day."    He  did  not  say 
**  I  know  in  whom  I  have  believed,"  as  most  people  quote  it,  but,  "  I 
know  whom  I  have  believed."     He  knew  Jesus,  he  knew  his  heart 
and  his  faithfulness,  he  knew  his  atonement  and  its  power,  he  knew 
his  intercession  and  its  might ;  and  he  committed  his  soul  to  Jesus  by 
an^  act  of  faith,  and  he  felt  secure.    My  Lord  is  so  excellent  in  all 
things  that  I  need  give  you  but  one  glimpse  of  his  character  and  you 
will  Bee  what  he  was  when  he  dwelt  here  among  men.    At  the  commence- 
menfc  of  John  xiii.  we  read,  "  Having  loved  his  own  which  were  in 
the  world,  he  loved  them  unto  the  end."     If  he  had  not  loved  his 
disciples  to  the  end  when  here  we  might  conclude  that  he  was  change- 
aUe  now  as  then ;  but  if  he  loved  his  chosen  to  the  end  while  yet  in 
his  humihation  below,  it  bringeth  us  the  sweet  and  blessed  confidence 
tliat  now  he  is  in  heaven  he  will  love  to  the  end  all  those  who  confide 
in  him. 

Fifthly,  we  infer  the  perseverance  of  the  saints  from  the  tenor  of  the 


368  versopoLiTAK  tabbbhaou  fdlkt. 

rotviutHl  of  ijrnef.  Wonld  yon  like  to  read  it  for  jourselres?  If  ro, 
turn  to  the  Old  Testament.  Jeremiah  ixxii.,  and  there  yon  will  (indtli<; 
covenant  of  grace  set  forth  at  some  Length.  We  shall  only  be  ahle  to 
read  the  fortieth  Teree  :  "  And  I  will  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with 
them,  that  I  will  not  tarn  avay  from  thom,  to  do  them  good  ;  but  1 
pnt  my  fear  in  their  hearts,  that  they  shall  not  depart  from  me."  Hr 
will  not  depart  from  them,  and  they  shall  not  depart  from  him,— 
what  can  be  a  grander  itssarance  of  tbeir  perseverance  even  to  the  end  ■ 
Now,  that  this  is  the  covenant  of  grace  under  which  nelive  is  ckar  froai 
the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  for  the  apo«lc  in  the  8th  chapter  quotes  that 
passage  to  this  very  end.  The  question  nins  thus — "  Behold,  the  dnjii 
come,  saith  the  JiotA,  when  I  will  make  a  now  covenant  with  the  house  of 
Israel  and  with  the  house  of  Jndah  :  not  according  to  the  covenant  that  I 
made  with  their  fathers  in  the  day  when  I  took  tbem  by  the  hand  to 
lend  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt ;  fe?cau8c  they  continued  not  in  mj 
covenant,  and  I  regarded  them  not,  siuth  the  liOrd.  For  this  is  Ihe 
covenant  that  I  will  make  with  the  house  of  Israel  after  those  dnvR, 
saith  the  Lord ;  I  will  pnt  my  laws  iu[^  their  mind,  and  write  them  ia 
tbeir  hearts :  and  I  will  be  to  tbem  a  God,  and  they  shall  be  to  me  u 
people."  The  old  covenant  had  an  "if"  in  it,  and  bo  it  suffered  Bbip- 
wreck  ;  it  was — "  If  you  will  be  obedient  then  vou  shall  bo  blessed  ": 
and  hence  there  came  a  failure  on  man's  jtart,  and  the  whole  covenant 
ended  in  disaster.  It  was  the  covenant  of  works,  and  under  it  we  were 
in  bondage,  until  we  were  delivered  from  it  and  introdnccd  to  the 
covenant  of  grace,  which  has  no  "  if  "  in  it,  but  runs  upou  the  strain  of 
promise ;  it  is  "  I  will "  and  "You  BhalJ "  all  the  way  through.  "  I  will 
be  yonr  God,  and  ye  shall  be  my  people."  Giory  beto  God,  this  coTenant 
will  never  pass  away,  for  see  how  the  Ijord  declares  its  enduring  character 
in  the  book  of  Isaiah  (liv,  10) ;  "  For  th.-  □loimtiiina  shall  depart,  and  lh« 
hills  be  removed  ;  but  my  kindness  shall  not  depart  from  thee,  neither 
shall  the  covenant  of  my  peace  be  removed,  saith  the  Lord  that  hath 
mercy  on  thee,"  And  again  in  Isaiah  Iv.  3  :  "  I  will  make  an  ever- 
lasting covenant  with  you,  even  tbe  sure  mercies  of  David."  The  idea 
of  falling  utterly  away  from  grace  is  a  relic  of  the  old  legal  spirit,  it  is 
a  going  away  from  grace  to  come  under  law  again,  and  I  cbni^e  yoii 
who  have  once  been  manumitted  slaves,  and  have  had  tbe  fetters  of 
legal  bonda^B  stmck  from  off  your  hamls,  never  consent  to  wear  thow 
bonds  again.  Christ  has  saved  yon,  if  indeed  you  are  believers  in  hiui, 
and  he  has  not  saved  you  for  a  week,  or  a  month,  or  ft  quarter,  or  » 
year,  or  twenty  years,  but  he  has  given  to  you  eternal  life,  and  yon  shall 
never  perish,  neither  shall  any  pluck  yoii  out  of  his  hands.  Rejoice  ye 
in  this  bleswcd  covenant  of  grace. 

The  sixth  most  forcible  argument  is  drawn  from  the  fail^ubuat  t^ 
God.  Look  at  Romans  xi.  29 :  what  eaitfa  the  apostle  there,  H>eaking 
by  the  Holy  Qhost  ?  "  For  tbe  gifts  and  calling  of  Qod  are  witnont  re- 
pentance," which  means  that  he  does  not  give  life  and  pardon  to  a  man 
and  call  bim  by  grace  and  afterwards  repent  of  what  be  has  done,  and 
withdraw  tho  good  things  which  he  has  bestowed.  "  God  is  not  a  man, 
that  he  sfaocld  lie;  neither  the  son  of  man,  that  he  should  repent" 
When  he  putteth  forth  his  hand  to  save  he  doth  not  withdraw  it  till 
Mfae  work  is  aGcomplisbed.    His  word  is,  "I  am  the  I^ord,  I  change 


THE  riVAl.  FBBBEVE&A^CE  OF  THE  SADITS.  oG9 

not ;  therefore  yc  sons  of  Jacob  are  not  consamed  "  (Mai,  iii.  6).  "  The 
Slrength  of  Israel  will  not  lie  nor  repent "  (1  Sam,  sv.  29).  The  apostle 
wonld  haTeus  ground  our  confidence  of  perseverance  upon  the  confirma- 
tion which  dirlne  faithfulneSB  is  sure  to  bentow  npon  ns.  He  Ba;a  in  1 
Cor.  i.  8,  "  Who  shall  also  confirm  you  nnto  the  end,  that  ye  may  be 
blameless  in  the  day  of  our  Lord  Jeans  Christ.  God  is  faithful,  by 
whom  ye  were  called  onto  the  feUowship  of  his  Son  Jeans  Christ  our 
Lord."  And  i^ain  he  speaks  to  the  same  effect  in  1  Thesa.  v.  2-1, 
'■  Faithful  is  he  that  calleth  yon,  who  also  will  do  it."  It  was  of  old  thu 
will  of  Qod  to  Hare  the  people  whom  he  gave  to  Jesos,  and  from  this  he 
has  never  turned,  for  our  Lord  said  (John  vi.  39),  "And  thia  is  the 
Father's  will  which  hath  seut  me,  that  of  all  which  he  hath  given  me  I 
ghonldloee  nothing,  but  should  raise  it  np  again  at  the  last  day."  Thus 
yon  see  from  these  pafl8ages,and  there  are  numbers  of  others,  that  God's 
^tbfolness  secures  the  preservation  of  his  people,  and  "  the  righteous 
sball  bold  on  liis  way." 

The  seventh  and  last  argument  shall  be  drawn /»wn  te/ial  has  alremiij 
bten  done  in  us.  I  shall  do  Uttle  more  than  quote  the  Scriptures,  and 
leave  them  to  sink  into  your  minds.  A  blessed  passage  is  that  in  Jere- 
miah xxxi.  3  :  "  The  Lord  hath  appeared  of  old  unto  me,  saying,  yea, 
I  have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love :  therefore  with  lovingkindneaa 
have  I  drawn  thee."  If  he  did  not  mean  that  his  love  should  be  ever- 
lasting he  would  never  have  drawn  us  at  all,  but  because  that  love  is 
everlasting  therefore  with  lovingkindness  has  he  drawn  ns.  The 
apostle  argues  this  in  a  very  elaborate  manner  in  Romans  v.  9,  10: 
"  Much  more  then,  being  now  justified  by  his  blood,  we  shall  be 
saved  from  wrath  throngh  him.  For  if.  when  we  were  enemies,  we 
wete  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  his  Son,  much  more,  being 
reocmciled,  we  shall  be  saved  by  his  life."  I  cannot  stop  to  show  how 
every  word  of  this  passage  is  emphatic,  but  so  it  is :  if  God  reconciled 
ns  mien  we  were  enemies,  he  certainly  will  save  na  now  we  are  his  friends, 
and  if  our  Lord  Jesus  has  reconciled  us  by  his  death,  much  more  will  ha 
Bave  B8  by  his  life  -,  to  that  we  may  be  certain  he  will  not  leave  nor  for- 
sake those  whom  he  has  called.  Do  yon  need  me  to  bring  to  your  minds 
that  golden  chapter,  the  8th  of  Romans,  the  noblest  of  all  language 
that  was  ever  written  by  human  pen  ?  "  Whom  ye  did  foreknow, 
he  alBO  did  predeatinato  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  his  Son. 
Moreover,  whom  he  did  predeatinate,  them  he  also  called ;  and 
whom  he  called,  them  he  alao  justified  ;  and  whom  he  justified,  them 
he  alBo  glorified."  There  is  no  break  in  the  chain  between  justifica- 
tion and  glory  :  and  no  supposable  breakage  can  occur,  for  the  apostle 
pnta  that  out  of  all  hazard,  by  saying,  "  Who  shall  lay  anything  to 
the  chai^  of  God's  elect  ?  It  is  God  that  juatifieth.  ^vho  is  he  that 
condemneth  ?  It  is  Christ  that  died,  yea  rather,  that  ia  risen  again, 
who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  who  also  maketh  intorcession  for 
US.  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ?"  Then  he 
he^iB  on  all  the  things  that  might  be  supposed  to  separate,  and  says, 
"For  I  am   persuaded,  that  neither  death,  nor  life,  nor  angels,  nor 

Erincipahtiee,  nor  powers,  nor  things  present,  nor  things  to  come,  nor 
eight,  nor  depth,  nor  anv  other  creature,  ahall  be  able  to  separate  us 
from  the  love  of  God,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Xiord."     In  the 


870  KBTBOFOLITAN  TABERIUCLE   PITLFIT. 

same  maiiDer  the  apostle  writtjs  in  Philippians  i.  6.  "  Beit^  confident 
of  thia  very  thing,  that  he  wlio  hath  bej^n  a  good  work  in  jon  wili 
perfoim  it  until  the  day  of  Jeans  Christ."  I  cannot  stay  to  mention 
the  many  other  Scriptorea  in  which  what  has  been  done  ib  made  an 
aignment  that  the  work  shall  T>e  completed,  hot  it  is  after  the  msa- 
ner  of  the  Lord  to  go  throngh  with  whatever  he  undertJikes.  "  He  will 
give  grace  and  glory,"  and  perfi^ct  that  which  concerneth  ns. 

One  marvellons  privil^e  wnJch  has  been  bestowed  npon  ns  is  of  pecuhar 
Bignificance  :  we  are  one  with  Christ  by  cIobc,  vital,  spiritual  union.  We 
are  tanght  of  the  Spirit  thatwe  cnjoya  marriage  nnion  with  Christ  Jedos 
our  Lord — shall  that  union  be  dissolved  ?  We  are  married  to  him.  Hit 
he  ever  given  a  bill  of  divorce  ?  There  never  has  been  such  a  ctN 
as  the  heavenly  bridegroom  diiorcini;  from  his  heart  a  chosen  ml 
to  whom  he  has  been  united  in  the  bonds  of  grace.  Listen  to  theK 
words  from  the  prophecy  of  Iloaca  ii,  19,  20.  "And  I  will  betroth 
thee  onto  ine  for  ever ;  yea,  I  will  betroth  thee  nnto  me  in  righteons- 
nege,  and  in  judgment,  and  in  loving  kindness,  and  in  mercies.  I  wil' 
even  betroth  thee  nnto  me  in  faiChfuInesB :  and  thon  ahalt  know  the 
Lord." 

This  marvelloQS  nnion  IB  fiet  forth  by  the  fignrc  of  the  head  and 
the  body :  we  are  members  of  the  body  of  Christ.  Do  the  memlters 
of  his  body  rot  away  ?  Is  Clirist  amputated  ?  Is  lie  fitted  with  new 
limbs  aa  old  ones  are  lost?  Nay,  being  members  of  thia  body,  we 
shall  not  be  divided  from  him.  "  He  that  is  joined  unto  the  liord," 
says  the  apostle,  "is  one  spirit."  and  if  we  are  mude  one  spirit  with 
Christ,  that  mysterious  nnion  docs  not  allow  of  the  supposition  of  a 
separation. 

The  Lord  has  wrought  another  pjeat  work  upon  ns,  for  he  haa  sealed 
us  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  possession  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  divine 
aeal  which  sooner  or  later  is  set  upon  all  the  chosen.  There  are  many 
paes^es  in  which  that  seal  is  spoken  of,  and  is  described  as  being  an 
earnest,  an  earnest  of  the  inheritance.  But  how  an  earnest  if  after 
receiving  it  we  do  not  attain  the  pnrchnsed  poBsesston  ?  Think  over 
the  words  of  the  apostle  in  1  Cor.  i.  21,22:  "For  after  that  in  the  wisdom 
of  God  the  world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God,  it  pleased  God  by  the 
foolishness  of  preaching  to  save  them  that  believe.  For  the  Jews 
require  a  aign,  and  the  Greeks  seek  after  wisdom."  To  the  same  effect 
the  Holy  Spirit  speaks  in  Epii.  i.  13,  14;  "  In  whom  ye  also  truste-d, 
after  that  ye  heard  the  word  of  truth,  the  gospel  of  yonr  saivation : 
in  whom  also  after  that  ye  believed,  ye  were  sealed  with  that  Holy 
Spirit  of  promise,  which  is  the  earnest  of  onr  inheritance  until  the 
redemption  of  the  purchased  po.'jsession,  nnto  the  praise  of  his  glory." 
Beloved,  we  feel  certain  that  if  tlie  Spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in  ns,  he  that 
raised  up  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead  will  keep  onr  souls  and  win  abo 
quicken  onr  mortal  bodies  and  present  us  complete  before  the  ^ory  of 
his  face  at  the  last. 

Therefore  we  sum  up  the  argument  with  the  confident  ezpresaion  of 
the  apostle  when  he  said  (2  Tim,  iv.  18),  "  The  Lord  shall  deliver  me 
ftom  every  evi!  work,  and  will  preserve  me  unto  his  heavenly  king^m; 
to  whom  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever.    Amen." 

II.    Now,  how  shall  we  iufkote  tee   dootsine   fbaotkullt  ? 


THE  FDTAL  PEKBETERANCK  OK  THE  BAIKTS,  371 

The  firat  improvement  i&fur  eticottragemfni  lo  the  manw/wis  mi  the  road 
to  heaven.  "  The  righicons  sball  hold  on  his  way,"  If  I  had  to  take  a 
very  long  jounicy,  say  from  London  t«  John  o'  GroaU,  with  my  poor 
[ottering  limbs  U>  ciirry  inc,  and  Bucb  a  weight  to  enrry  too,  I  might 
Ijegin  to  dcepair,  and,  indeciJ,  the  very  first  day's  walkJDg  woald  knock 
me  up  :  but  if  I  had  a  divine  aasnrance  unmistakenbly  saying,  "  You 
will  hold  on  your  way,  aiid  you  will  got  to  your  journey's  end,"  I  feci 
that  1  would  brace  myself  up  to  achieve  the  taak.  One  might  hardly 
undertaKc  a  difficult  journey  if  he  did  not  believe  that  he  woold 
finish  it,  bnt  the  sweet  assurance  that  we  shall  reach  our  home  makes 
ufi  pluck  np  courage.  The  weather  is  wet,  rainy,  blostcroas,  but  we 
must  keep  on,  for  the  end  is  snre.  The  road  is  very  rough,  and  runs 
np  hill  and  don  n  dale ;  wu  pant  for  breath,  and  oar  limbs  are  aching ; 
but  aa  we  aUal!  get  to  our  journey's  end  we  pnsh  on.  We  are  ready  to 
creep  into  some  cottage  an'l  lie  down  to  die  of  weariness,  saying,  "  I 
shall  never  accomplish  my  task ;"  bnt  the  confidence  which  we  have 
received  seta  us  on  our  feet,  and  off  we  go  again.  To  the  right-hearted 
man  the  asaaranco  of  succeM  is  the  best  stimulus  for  labour.  If  it  be 
so,  that  I  shall  overcome  the  world,  that  I  shall  conquer  sin,  that  I 
shall  not  be  an  apostate,  that  I  ahnll  not  give  np  my  faith,  that  I  shall 
not  fling  away  uiy  shield,  tiiat  I  shall  come  home  a  conqueror — then 
win  I  play  the  man,  and  light  like  a  hero.  This  is  one  of  the  reasons 
why  British  troops  have  so  often  won  the  fight,  because  the  drnmmer- 
boys  did  not  know  how  to  l^eat  a  retreat,  and  the  rank  and  file  did  not 
believe  in  the  jwssibility  of  defeat.  They  were  beaten  oftentimes  by 
the  French,  so  the  French  tell  us,  bnfc  they  would  not  believe  it,  and 
therefore  woald  not  run  away.  They  felt  like  winning,  and  so  they 
stood  like  ^olid  rocks  amidst  the  dread  artillery  of  the  foe  till  victory 
declared  on  their  siilo.  Brethren,  we  shall  do  the  same  if  we  realizt^ 
that  we  are  jircscrvuil  in  Christ  Jesus,  kept  by  the  power  of  God 
'  throngh  faith  onto  salvation.  Every  true  believer  shall  be  a  conqueror, 
and  hence  the  reason  for  warring  a  good  warfare.  There  is  laid  up  for 
na  in  heaven  a  crown  of  life  that  fadeth  not  away.  The  crown  is  laid 
np  for  vs,  and  not  for  chance  comers.  The  crown  resei-ved  for  me  is 
such  that  no  one  else  can  wear  it;  and  if  it  be  so,  then  will  I  battle 
and  strive  to  the  end,  till  the  last  enemy  is  overcome,  and  death  itself 
IB  dead. 

Another  improvement  ia  this;  what  aw  eticourayemfnl  Ihk  is  lo  sinners 
who  desire  salvation.  It  should  lead  them  to  come  and  receive  it  with 
grateful  delight.  Those  who  deny  this  doctrine  offer  sinners  a  poor 
twopenny-halfpenny  salvation,  not  worth  having,  and  it  ia  no  marvel 
that  they  turn  away  from  it.  As  the  Pope  gave  England  to  the 
Spanish  king — if  he  could  ^ct  it — so  do  they  proffer  Christ's  salvation 
if  a  man  wiUdeaen^e  it  by  his  own  faithfulness.  Accoi-ding  to  some. 
eternal  life  is  given  to  you,  but  then  it  may  not  be  eternal ;  you  may 
fall  from  it,  it  may  last  only  for  a  time.  When  I  was  but  a  child  I 
used  to  trouble  myself  because  I  saw  eomo  of  my  young  companions, 
who  were  a  little  older  than  myself,  when  they  became  apprentices 
and  came  to  London,  become  viuions ;  I  have  heard  their  mother's 
laments,  and  seen  their  tears  about  them ;  1  have  hcaiil  their  fHthers 
expressing  bitterest  sorrow  over  the  boys  whom  I  knew  in  my  dai« 


372 


UBTROPOLITAK  TABEBSAOLB  PULPIT. 


to  be  quite  as  good  as  ever  I  had  been,  and  it  used  to  strike  me  with 
horror  that  I  perhaps  might  sin  as  they  had  done.     They  became 
Sabbath-breakers ;  in  one  case  there  was  a  theft  from  the  till  to  go 
into  Sunday  pleasuring.     I  dreaded  the  Tery  thought;   I  desired  to 
maintain  an  unsullied  character,  and  when  I  heard  that  if  I  ^ve  my 
heart  to  Ohrist  he  would  keep  me,  that  was  the  very  thing  which  won 
me ;  it  seemed  to  be  a  celestial  Ufe  assurance  for  my  character,  that  if 
I  would  really  trust  Ohrist  with  myself  he  would  save  me  from  the 
errors  of  youth,  preserre  me  amid  the  temptations  of  manhood,  and  keep 
me  to  the  end.    I  was  charmed  with  the  thought  that  if  I  was  madie 
righteous  by  believing  in  Christ  Jesus  I  shomd  hold  on  my  way  by 
the  power  of  tiiQ  Holy  Spirit.    That  which  charmed  me  in  my  boy- 
hood is  eren  more  attractive  to  me  in  middle  life :  I  am  hu»y  to 
preach  to  you  a  sure  and  ererlastin^  salvation.    I  feel  that  I  naye 
something  to  bring    before   you   this   morning  which  is  worthy  of 
every  sinner's  eager  acceptance.    I  have  neither  "if"  nor  '*bnt"  with 
which  to  dilute  the  pure  gospel  of  my  message.    Here  it  is :  "  He 
that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved.*'    I  dropped  a  piece  of  ice 
upon  the  floor  yesterday,  and  I  said  to  one  who  was  m  the  room,  ''Is 
not  that  a  diamond ? "    "  Ah,"  he  said,  ''you  would  not  leave  it  on  tiie 
floor,  I  warrant  you,  if  it  were  a  diamond  of  that  size."  Now  I  have  a 
diamond  here — eternal  life,  everlasting  life  I    Methinks  ^u  will  be  in 
haste  to  take  it  up  at  once,  to  be  saved  now,  to  be  saved  m  living,  to  be 
saved  in  dying,  to  be  saved  in  rising  a^ain,  for  ever  and  ever,  by  the 
eternal  power  and  infinite  love  of  Qoa.    Is  not  this  worth  having? 
Grasp  at  it,  poor  soul ;  thou  mayest  have  it  if  thou  dost  but  believe  in 
Jesus  Christ,  or,  in  other  words,  trust  thy  soul  with  him.  Deposit  ttiine 
eternal  destiny  in  this  divine  bajik,  then  thou  canst  say,  ''I  k^ow whom 
I  have  believed,  and  I  am  persuaded  that  he  is  able  to  keep  that  which 
I  have  committed  to  him  against  that  day."    The  Lord  Dlesa  yon,  ftr 
Christ's  sake.    Amen. 


Portion  op  Soriptueb  bead  before  Sermon — John  x.  1 — 80. 


Hymns  from  "  Our  Own  Hymn  Book  "—245,  668,  788. 


it 


THE  SWORD  AND  THE  TROWEL."    Edited  by  C.  H.  SFUBaBOK. 

CoivTzim  pos  JvLT,  1877. 


Feed  my  Sheep.  The  closing  sermon  delivered 
to  the  Conference  of  the  Pastors'  Oollegei 
Ajsril  13th,  1B77.    By  0.  H.  Sporgeon. 

Social  Converse. 

Three  Ha'pence  a  Week  in  the  **  Book  of  Re- 
membrance."   By  James  L.  Stanley. 

The  Sluggard's  Purpose. 

Marriage. 

Charles  Kingsley 

Servants  in  Latimer* .■«  day. 

At  a  Party  of  Night  School  Graduates.  ByG. 
Holdcn  Pike. 

Doctrine  neocs.«arv. 


Bible  Flower  Mission  for  the  sick  poor  of  BoaXk 

London.    By  a  Visitor. 
Robert  Hall's  opinion  of  Novel  Reading. 
Encouragement  to  pray.    An  incident  in 

nection  with  the  Jrastors*  College. 
The  Legend  of  St.  Marguerite. 
Letter  from  C.  and  T.  Spurgeon. 
Loan  Offices. 
Notices  of  Books. 
Notes. 

Pastors'  College. 
Stockwell  Orphonnpo. 
Colportage  Association. 
Stockwell  Orphanage  Report. 


Price  3d.    Post  free,  4  stamps. 


P^tTiiipliten  i^at^made  ittljtt. 


MOURNING  FOR  CHRIST. 


^1 


Deuviired  on  Lord's-Day  Morning,  July  1st,  1877,  by 

C.   H.  SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"  I  wQl  pour  upon  the  house  of  David,  and  upon  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  tTin 
spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplications  :  and  they  wall  look  upon  me  whom  they  have 
pierced,  and  they  shall  mourn  for  thim,  as  one  monmeth  hr  Iub  only  son,  and  shall 
be  in  bitterness  for  him;  as  one  that  is  in  bitterness  for  his  firstborn." — ^Zeohaiiah 
ziLlO. 

8eb,  beloTcd,  whence  every  good  thing  flows — **  I  will  pour  upon  the 
house  of  David  the  spirit  of  grace."  The  starting  point  is  the  Lord's 
.sovereign  act  in  giving  the  Spirit.  Eveij  work  of  |race  b^ins  witli 
<lod ;  no  gradons  thought  or  act  ever  originates  in  the  free  will  of  un- 
i^nerate  man.  The  Lord  is  first  in  all  things  which  are  acceptable  in 
his  sight  It  is  God  that  ^  worketh  in  us  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  own 
good  pleasure."    **  Thou  hast  wrought  all  our  works  in  us." 

Then  notice  how  exceedingly  effectual  the  work  of  the  Lord  is.  Men  may 
(lersnade,  and  even  inspired  prophets  may  warn,  without  efifect,  but  when 
the  Lord  putteth  his  hand  to  the  work  he  never  fails ;  as  soon  as  ever 
lie  says  "  I  will  pour,"  the  next  sentence  is,  "  and  they  sliall  look." 
Wlien  he  works,  who  shall  hinder  ?  His  people  shall  be  willing  in  the 
tlay  of  his  power.  *^  Thev  shall  look  upon  me  whom  they  have  pierced, 
and  they  «^i7if/ mourn."  This  is  eil^tual  calling  indeed,  in  such  results 
we  see  what  is  the  exceeding  greatness  of  his  power  to  usward  who 
believe  according  to  the  working  of  his  mighty  power,  which  he  wTought 
in  Christ  when  he  raised  him  from  the  dead. 

Observe,  thirdly,  the  dignity  and  the  prominent  position  which  is 
occupied  bv  faith,  *•  I  will  pour  upon  them  the  spint  of  supplication, 
and  they  shall  look."  Faith  is  evidently  intended  here,  for  faith  is  e^  er 
that  glance  of  the  eye  which  brings  to  us  the  blessing  which  Christ  has  to 
l)e8tow.  **  As  Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  in  the  wilderness,  even  so  must 
the  Son  of  man  be  lifted  up :  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should 
not  perish."  A  look  at  the  brazen  serpent  healed  Israel,  and,  according 
to  tne  figure,  believing  in  Jesus  Christ  is  a  saving  look.  Now,  this 
faith-look  is  mentioned  as  the  first  fruit  of  the  Spirit:  before  they 
No.  1,862. 


1  h  gf*a    I 


374  ■MKTnOI-OI.ITAN  TABEKNACIJE   PULPIT. 

ifKnrli'Bra  took;  \fhen  the  tpr'A  of  ^cc'  nfad  ka^plic«li<m  i 
its  principal  tesaLt  is  looking  onto  Jcsna. 

Bnt  now  see  frhiit  a  choioe  fhiit  foUowg  upon  (ailh :  a  soft,  smut, 
mellow  frait  of  the  Sjiirit — "  They  ahull  raoiim  for  him  as  one  lh»l 
monmeth  for  hia  only  son."  This  sorrow  ib  r  sweet  bitter,  a  delicious 
grie^  ftill  of  all  manner  of  rare  excellencies.  It  ia  a  peculiar  order  of 
mourning,  and  difllrs  greatly  from  the  sorrow  of  the  world,  which 
worketh  death.  Those  who  monm  in  this  ftishion  are  made  sorry  afifr 
a  podly  manner,  for  goilly  sorrow  worketh  repentance  to  Balvation  not 
to  be  re^nted  of,  Mark,  it  \igoiljf  ■orrow  or  repentance  toicardi  Gvd. 
Its  speciality  is  that  it  looks  Uodward,  and  weeps  because  of  grieTins! 
Aim.  The  lamentation  described  in  the  text  is  a  mourning  for  Chrisi. 
"And  I  will  pour  upon  the  house  of  DH\nd,  and  upon  the  infaabitanU 
of  Jerusalem,  the  spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplications  :  and  they  shall 
look  upon  tiu  whom  they  have  pfeiteil,  and  tniEj'  shaH  mourn /or  hm  m 
one  monmeth  for  his  only  sOn.  and  shall  be  in  bitterness  for  !/im,  !is 
one  that  is  in  bitterness  for  his  lirstlxim."  This  is  a  very  remarkal'l* 
peculiarity  of  tnu.'  sjiirit- wrought  rejjcntance :  it  fixes  its  eye  mainly  npon 
the  wrong  done  U<  tbt'  Lord  by  its  sin.  So  other  repentance  but  that 
which  is  evangcli  Oil  I  looks  in  that  direction.  The  repentance  of  ungodly 
men  is  a  horror  at  their  pnoishment,  an  alarm  at  the  dire  result  of  their 
transgreesions.  They  repent  like  Esau,  not  of  eating  the  pottage,  but  of 
losing  the  birthright :  they  sec  Bin  only  in  reference  to  tnemBelTCR  ami 
their  fellow  men,  bnt  it.s  higher  bearings  in  rcfbronce  to  the  Lord  tbey 
quite  ignore.  The  ungodly  at  times,  and  especially  in  the  hour  of 
death,  feel  remorae,  bnt  it  baa  nothing  to  do  with  God,  unless  it  be  thnt 
tba^  tremble  at  his  justice,  and  fear  the  punishment  which  he  executes: 
it  IB,  after  all,  pure  selfishness;  they  are  sorry  because  Uiey  aw 
about  to  suffer  the  eonseqncnces  of  their  rebellion.  Evangelical  repeot- 
ance  sympathiEos  with  trie  Great  Father,  and  grieves  that  be  should 
hare  been  bo  sadly  provoked.  See  it  in  David:  "Against  thee  only 
have  I  sinned,  and  done  this  evil  in  thy  sight."  See  it  in  the  prodigal : 
"Father,  I  hare  Binned  against  heaven  and  before  I/tee,  and  am  uo  more 
worthy  to  bs  called  thy  son."  See  how  it  was  wrought  in  Saul  of 
Tarsus,  fw  the  voice  from  heaven  said,  *'  Saul,  San!,  why  ^rsecatcat 
thouffu.'"  It  was  sin  as  against  the  exalted  Saviour  which  struck 
home  to  Paul's  heart  and  laid  him  low  at  the  feet  of  his  Lord.  All  troe 
r^ntance  has  this  for  its  special  mark,  that  it  is  attended  with  evident 
reconciliation  to  God,  since  it  now  regrets  the  wrongs  done  to  him. 
One  SDresealof  its  genuine  spirituahly  is  that  it  is  a  lamentation  on  ac- 
count of  the  di^ouoiir  which  siu  has  done  to  Go<l  and  to  bis  Christ. 
We  are  going  to  view  the  special  case  before  us  from  that  point  of  vi«ir, 
and  work  it  ont  in  three  or  four  ways, 

I.  Rrat>  according  to  our  text,  when  the  spirit  of  grace  is  given, 

TH8RK  WILL  BB  .1  srEriAl,    StOl'ttMSLi    FlUl    CH]tI.-;T    OS    THE    P.MIT  OF 

Ibbasl.  You  must  take  the  text  in  its  primary  significance  for  w« 
must  treat  the  word  of  God  fiiirly.  There  will  come  a  day  whm  tka 
ancient  people  of  God,  who  have  so  long  rejected  Jesus  of  Nauietli, 
will  discover  him  to  be  the  Messiah,  and  then  one  of  their  ftrst  fetlings 
will  be  that  of  deep  humiliation  and  bitter  regret  before  God.  Thej 
will  mourn  as  at  the  mourning  of  Hadadrimmon,  when  the  bdored 


MOBBIHMO  FOB  OHRIfiT.  375 

JoBiah  fell  in  battle,  and  all  good  men  knew  that  the  light  of  the  nation 
was  quenched.  "  The  brenth  of  our  nostrils,  the  anointed  of  the  Lord, 
was  taken  in  their  pita,  of  wlioiii  vc  Raid,  Under  his  shadow  we  shall 
liTe  among  the  heathen,"  T\vf  jnstty  monmed  for  jriona  Josieh,  for 
he  was  the  last  of  their  godly  kings,  and  the  full  shower  of  wrath  began 
to  fall  upon  Judah  when  he  wns  taken  from  the  evil  to  come.  Right 
well  alao  will  it  ho  for  them  to  mourn  bitterly  as  a  nation,  when  they 
discern  the  Lord  whom  they  !inre  pierced,  for  is  there  not  a  cause  ? 
T/ifi/  had  a  jiernlini-  inlere.'il  in  l/ie  Mesm'ah,  for  it  whs  to  them,  and 
ahuost  to  them  only,  that  liis  coming  was  clearly  revealed.  God 
'<poko  of  him  to  Ahrahnm,  iind  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  and  the  fathers. 
It  ivas  from  their  race  that  th(!  Messiah  was  to  come.  It  is  no  small 
honour  to  Abraham's  seed  that  the  man  Christ  Jesus  is  one  of  them. 
It  was  a  Jndean  virtrin  of  whnm  he  was  bom,  and  to  Israel  he  is 
indeed  bone  of  their  bone  and  Qesh  of  their  flesh.  When  he  came 
on  earth,  he  confined  his  miniiitry  to  them  :  of  them  he  said,  "I  am 
not  sent  sare  to  the  lost  ahtep  of  the  house  of  Israel."  He  healed 
their  sick,  he  opened  the  eyes  of  their  blind  ones,  and  raised  their 
dead-  It  was  in  their  streels  that  he  delivered  his  ^raciona  meEsages 
of  love ;  and  when  he  was  gone  it  was  in  their  chief  city  tliat  the 
preaching  of  tho  gospel  began,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  wae  ponred  out. 
"  Go  ye  and  teach  all  nations,"  said  he,  "  beginning  at  JeniBalem." 
It  was  from  among  the  Jews  that  the  first  van^ard  of  the  church's 
boat  waa  chosen.  Tiie  tiret  to  preach  the  gospel  were  of  the  house  of 
Israel,  and  they  might  have  been  to  this  day  in  the  very  front  of  the 
ancv,  peculiarly  adapted  as  they  are  in  many  respect*  to  lead  the  way 
in  the  teatjiing  of  a  [>ure  faith,  bnt  they  jndged  themselves  nnworthy, 
and  therefore  the  ministers  of  Oiriat,  tnongh  chosen  IVom  themselves, 
were  obliged  to  say,  "  We  turn  unto  the  Gentiles."  Then  came  their 
casting  away  for  a  time,  dnring  which  season  their  own  Messiah  is 
despised  and  blasphemed  by  the  nation  which  ought  to  have  received 
him  with  exultation.  *'  He  ctinie  unto  his  own,  and  his  own  received 
him  not." 

TAw  ration  of  thr  Lord  ./fsitH  was  most  determined,  and  carried  to  the 
H(most  Ifiifft/t.  It  was  not  suHiiient  for  that  generation  in  which  Jesna 
lived  to  tuni  a  deaf  eiir  to  liis  iijmonitions,  they  mist  needs  seek  his 
life.  Once  they  would  have  cast  him  headlong  from  the  brow  of  a  bill^ 
At  another  time  they  took  up  stones  again  to  stone  him,  and  at  last  they 
did  take  him  and  bear  false  witness  against  him,  fiercely  seeking  his 
blood.  By  their  malice  he  waa  given  over  to  the  Horaans  and  put  to 
death,  not  becanse  the  Romans  desired  to  slay  him,  bnt  because  the 
tHammsT  of  the  mnltitude  was, "  Crucify  him,  crucify  him ; "  and  their 
voices  pFSvailed  with  Pilate,  They  imprecated  on  their  heads  his  blood, 
flagrinr,  "His  blood  be  on  us  and  on  our  children."  They  pushed  the 
rejection  of  the  King  of  the  Jews  to  the  ntmost  possible  extreme,  for 
mej  rested  not  tilt  he  hnng  upon  the  shamefhl  tree,  and  life  remained 
no  more  m  him.  Peter  saw,  "  And  now,  brethren,  I  wot  that  through 
isiKKaiice  ye  did  it,  as  did  also  yonr  mlcrs."  How  bitterly  then  will 
tbey  lament  when  that  ignorance  is  removed !  They  will  mourn  as  one 
who  has  lost  his  firBtbom  and  only  child,  as  for  a  loss  never  to  be 
«^rcd. 


878  MKTUOPObnAN  TABEUNACt-U  1 


.1 


men  of  (rrent  uttuinnmiits  aiid  abiJitiea  who  will  extol  our  Lord' 
lH>od,  mid  even  profess  to  be  in  love  with  his  character,  but  tbej  ivillnw 
yield  him  di\ine  hoiioure.  Oh,  thou  Son  of  God,  to  wliooi  tiie  Father 
laro  witness  by  au  audible  voice  out  of  heaven,  Buying,  "  This  is  mj 
l>(:Io\'ed  Son,  hear  ye  Iiim," — they  reject  the  witness  of  God  and  so  did- 
luinoar  thee.  Thou  didst  notcount  it  robbery  to  be  ei[nal  with  God, but 
thuy  tain  would  pierce  thee  in  thy  divbity,  and  make  thee  nothing  bnt 
11  man.  Men  also  reject  onr  Lord's  atonemcnL  By  many  that  truUi  if 
olisc'urod  or  ntt«rfy  denied!  I  hear  still  the  cry  in  many  quarters, 
"  Lot  him  come  down  from  the  crosa  and  we  wUl  btlie^e  on  hiui." 
Modern  philosophers  will  accept  auythiii^  except  the  bleeding  Sabstitnle 
for  guilty  mun.  When  I  think  of  the  false  doctrine  wlkich  is  preachet) 
about  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  how  his  gloiy  is  tarnished  by  the  lips  of  hie 
professed  ministers,  who  think  his  gospel  a  worn-out  tale,  I  see  tto 
thei'e  is,  indeed,  occasion  for  US  to  get  us  to  our  chambers,  and  then 
pour  out  our  hearts  iii  lamentation,  Alas,  my  Lord,  why  art  thon  thus 
blasphemed  by  blie  worldly  wise  ?  Vt'by  is  thy  truth  despised  among 
the  learned  and  ridicrded  by  the  surihes  ? 

i  do  not  know  wtten  my  grief  has  been  more  stirred  for  my  Loi'd  and 
Mustor  than  when  brought  actually  to  see  J^4«  mpereHlion  by  which  oar 
bdy  taith  is  travestied  and  his  blessed  name  hlaspiiemed.  Turning  from 
scepticism,  where  he  is  wounded  in  the  house  of  his  enemies,  jou  come 
to  superstition,  where  he  is  wounded  in  the  house  of  his  professed 
tVieudk.  and  what  wounds  they  are  !  1  have  felt  sometimes  as  if  I  could 
tciir  down  the  baby  image  held  in  the  Virgin's  hands,  when  I  havt 
Been  men  and  women  prostrate  before  it.  What,  0  ye  sons  of  Anti- 
christ, could  ye  not  make  an  idol,  like  tlie  Egyptians,  out  of  your  cats 
uiid  dogs,  or  find  j-our  gods  in  your  gardens  t^  Gould  yo  not  make  a 
golden  calf,  as  Israel  did  in  the  wilderness,  or  liorrow  the  fantastic^ 
shapes  of  India's  deities  V  Could  nothing  content  yon  tUl  the  imagu 
of  the  holy  child  Jesus  should  be  made  into  an  idol,  and  Christ 
QiJOR  the  cross  uplifted  slionid  be  set  up  as  an  image  for  men  to  bov 
before  it  ?  Tlie  idolatry  which  worships  the  image  of  the  devil  is  leat 
blasphemons  than  that  which  worships  the  image  of  Christ.  It  is  an 
awfiil  sacrilege  to  make  the  holy  Jeans  appear  to  be  an  accomplice  in  the 
violation  of  the  divine  command ;  yea,  and  to  tnm  tliat  bleased  memorial 
of  death  into  an  idolatrous  rite  in  which  divine  honours  arc  given  to  a 
piece  of  bread.  Was  there  ever  sin  like  mitothis  sin?  Thou,  innocent 
8i)rionr,  it  is  grief  indeed  to  think  that  thou  shouldst  be  set  up  in  the  idol 
temple,  lunon^  saints  and  suinteesea,  and  that  men  should  think  that  they 
are  honouring  God  by  breaking  his  first  and  second  commands.  ThL'^ 
mast  be  to  onr  lionl  the  most  loathsome  of  all  things  under  heaven. 
Hotv  doth  he  in  pittience  bear  it  ?  Let  not  his  people  heliold  it  without 
a  mourning  like  tlie  monmiug  of  llfidadriuunon  lu  tlic  valley  of  Uc- 
giddou,  bccauiie  our  blessed  Christ  is  so  blasphemed  by  Antichrist  that 
the  image  of  the  incurnutc  ISou  of  <.iod  is  set  up  us  an  object  el' 
idolatrons  worship. 

There  should  1^  great  sorrow  and  mourning  when  we  read  the  histore 

of  the  past,  and  look  even  at  the  present,  at  Uit  ftarful  Krpaga  Khih 

Atm  bUH  done  in  the  nanie  of  Jesve.    Jeaus  is  all  lore  and  teademevL 

I  and  jet  they  place  hia  cross  upon  the  blood-stained  baoneES  of  MeutBcd. 


VOUUf  INO  FOB  CHBI^r,  S7^ 

imr.  '  JiBsas^  ^riio  saidy^^Pnt  up  thy  sword  into  ite  sheatli,  f6r  they 
that  toke  the  sirefd  shall  perish  with  the  sword,"  is  neverUicledB  adjured 
to^g^  fovlh  With  armed  hosts  to  blow  men  to  pieces  with  gons,  or  pierce 
tb^  withr  bavonets.  When  the  Spanish  nation  capttved  Pern  and 
ll«sie0^  it  makes  one's  blood  boil  to  read  that,  while  they  nrardered 
|}io  defenceless  peofde  for  their  gold,  they  set  up  in  every  town  the  holy 
croaa.  What  had  the  cross  to  do  with  their  mnrders  and  robberies ! 
They  tortmed  thdr  rictims  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  and  when  they  put 
ttent  to  death  they  held  up  before  them  the  image  of  the  crucined 
JeaoB.  'What  horrors  have  been  wrought  in  thy  name,  0  Christ  of  Godf 
Men  hay^  indeed,  pierced  thee,  and  they  who  take  thy  name  and  call 
tiiettisell^  of  *^  the  Society  of  Jesus  "  have  been  chief  enactors  of  these 
abomiiiations.  Thy  crucifixion  at  Calvary  is  a  small  part  of  the  matter; 
IM*  the  wm  of  men  have  gone  on  piercing  thee  by  maligning  thee  thu» 
tkhtDOtiAjf  ihoa  Lord  of  boundless  love. 

And  now  to^ay,  what  is  done  in  our  land  ?  I  can  scarcely  stay  to 
eHlM|*e;  but  there  are  multitudes  of  things  done  in  the  name  of  the 
religion  of  Christ  which  are  a  dishonour  to  it.  Under  the  pretence 
of  iparding  the  interests  of  his  church,  a  certain  communitv  of  pro- 
ftafenng  Christians  beg  that  their  fellow  Christians  may  not  be  buried 
within  the  same  enclosure  as  themselves ;  forsooth,  Christ's  name  must 
miction  mdi  un-Cbristly  bigotry !  One  section  of  the  church  must 
also  be  patronized  and  made  dominant  in  the  land,  and  this  wrong  i& 
dxmt  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  It  is  to  honour  him  that  this  crying  in- 
jnalice  is  perpetrated !  Hear  it,  ye  heavens  I  There  are  multitudes 
of  things  besides,  which  I  shall  not  mention,  for  which  the  Christian 
obnrch  ought  perpetually  to  sorrow.  That  she  does  wrong  is  enough 
to  make  her  be  humble ;  but  that  she  has  dared  often  to  do  wrongs 
even  in  the  very  name  of  Jesus,  is  worst  of  all. 

8ttU,  brethren,  the  worst  sorrow  probably  for  us  all  is  that  there 
dioukl  be  so  many  professing/  Ghrutians  loho  act  m  a  ^manner  the  very 
opposito  to  what  Christ  would  Mve  them  do.  The  heathen  everywhere 
point  to  our  countrymen,  who  are  supposed  to  be  Christians,  and  they 
say  of  us  that  we  are  the  most  drunken  race  of  men  upon  the  face  of  the 
eoffth ;  and  I  suppose  we  are.  Charges  are  brought  against  us  which  are 
sttppOFted  hj  the  conduct  of  our  sailors  and  soldiers,  and  others  who  go 
amoad,  which  make  the  followers  of  Mahommed  and  tho  disciples  of 
Rrahminism  to  think  their  i*eligion  superior  to  our  own.  These 
Bn^ishmen  are  supposed  to  be  Christians,  though  they  are  not.  This 
is  a  great  scandal  and  a  grievous  sorrow  under  the  sun. 

And  then  in  the  very  heart  of  it  all  lies  this,  that  true  Christians, 
those  who  are  truly  Christ's  blood-bought,  regenerated  people,  never- 
theless do  not  sufficiently  btiny  glory  to  kis  name,  where  is  the 
aeal  of  the  Church — the  all-consuming  zeal  of  other  days  ?  Where  is 
the. consecration  which  ought  to  rest  upon  all  meml>ers  of  Christ's 
bkod-booght  bodv  ?  Where,  I  say,  is  that  mightiness  in  prayer  and 
anp^lioation  which  at  the  first  so  gloriouslv  prevailed  ?  Where  is  that 
apint  of  hearty  love  and  unity ;  of  brotherly  kindness  and  compassion, 
which  ought  to  be  seen  in  all  Christians  ?  The  first  church  brought 
great  honour  to  the  name  of  Christ :  does  the  church  of  to-day  do  the 
l&e  ?    Do  even  the  most  spiritual  portions  of  the  church  bring  to  the 


980  MKTROPOIJTAS  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

I<ord  Jesus  sach  honour  und  glory  ae  he  onglit  to  have  ?  Judge  je 
what  I  snj.  Arc  wc  not  all  unprofiublc  servanbi  ?  la  there  not  csoh) 
&>r  mourniug,  and  for  great  mourning  too,  to  think  that  Jestie  ehonld 
tims  have  been  ill-treatfid  br  Mends  and  Ibee  ?  For  him,  our  best  be- 
loved, perpetaatly  pierced,  the  Church  may  well  prodoim  a  fast,  sod 
mourn  before  the  Lord,  as  in  the  day  of  Hadadrimmoii  ia  tJie  yalle; 
of  Megtddon. 

in.  Suffer  now  a  word  or  two  upon  the  third  point,  for  the 
TEXT  rti'KAKri  OF  A  FAMILY  MOURNiKB.  It  will  be  u  very  blcsscd  da; 
indeed  when  we  see  this,  when  the  spirt  of  grace  and  supplication  ahill 
be  largely  poured  out,  and  the  land  sliall  mourn,  every  family  apait. 
Have  you  ever  ncen  thia  in  yom'  households  ?  Where  the  Spirit  of  God 
really  rests  upon  a  family  there  will  be  mnch  of  it,  and  surely  there  b 
cause  enough  for  it  in  some  families  where  there  is  none  at  bU.  We 
ou^ht  to  gricrc  to  think  that  there  has  been  such  formality  and  cold- 
ness in  family  devotion,  so  little  love  to  Jesus  manifested  in  the 
morning  and  CTcnin^  worship.  I  fear  that  there  are  professing  families 
where  daily  prayer  is  altogether  nt^lected.  The  individuals,  1  trust, 
pruy  in  their  ehombera,  but  they  uave  givea  up  the  assembling  (rf 
themselves  as  families  to  worship  in  the  name  of  Jesus :  as  fanuliet 
they  are  prayerlcss  aud  dishonour  the  Lord.  Herein  is  serious  caow 
for  sorrow,  because  our  Lord  lo&es  by  this  neglect  that  wliieli  he  de- 
lights in,  namely,  family  praises. 

Families  should  also  mourn  bccanso  the  Lord  is  not  eo  regarded 
as  he  should  be  in  fttmily  man^cmont.  Christ  is  not  made  ficat 
and  ehief  in  family  matters.  Fiithers  look  rather  to  the  woridly 
prosperity  of  their  boys  in  placing  them  oat,  than  to  their  moral  and 
spiritual  advantage.  Many  a  time  maiTiages  for  the  ditughters  are 
wught,  not  in  the  Lord,  but  solely  in  relcrence  to  pecuniary  con- 
siderations. How  much  of  the  arrangement  of  the  household  ignoPEs 
the  existence  of  the  Saviour :  as  for  instance — mnch  work  done  on  tis 
fiabbath  which  might  be  spared  by  a  little  ou'o  and  thought,  and  oon* 
sequent  inability  to  go  out  to  worship  the  Saviour  with  the  rest  of  God's 
people.  There  is  a  way  of  setting  the  Lord  always  before  us  in  the 
luanagciQcnt  of  household  matters,  and,  on  the  other  band,  there  ia  a 
way  of  so  acting  as  to  prove  that  God  ia  not  in  tlie  least  considervd. 
For  family  quarrels,  family  pride,  family  covetousness,  aud  family  sins 
ijf  all  kinds,  whi<.'Ii  bring  shame  upon  our  profession,  and  dishoooar 
npon  the  name  with  which  we  are  named,  there  ought  to  be  great 
sorrow. 

If  tfafire  be  any  members  of  a  family  nncon^^rted,  this  abotdd  onue 
to  the  whole  household  deep  regret.  If  there  be  but  me  child  nwnTtJ, 
the  whole  should  plead  for  nim  with  tears.  Ha[^y  are  yon  wbo  hue  all 
your  imn^LliolJ  n^Jkiii;;  in  the  faith)  bi^  if  there  be  one  loft  Diit,in» 
not  for  thi:  dead,  neither  bewail  him,  bat  weep  for  the  livuig  who  U  dew 
nuto  bis  Lord.  Wile,  be  grieved  in  yonr  heatt  if  yoa  have  a.irwU)]C 
husband.  0  husband,  nuiuni  for  thine  unconverted  wife  1  If  yoitbAW 
brothers  or  SLstersf  not  yet  brought  to  Jesoa,  fail  not  to  lameab.nm' 
cerning  them.  I  nouU  to  Qoa  that  familica  did  BomeCiueB  caut 
together  to  pay  their  vow8  with  special  care,  and  tiiat  the  bther 
would   eonfetis  hnxiiy  fasits  and  family  una  i(t  th«  ,oame  4f  ^ifin 


Moaasnia  fob  ohbibt.  281 

&11,  and  BO  acknowledge  each  wound  given  to  tbe  ZiOnt  id  that  house. 
I  am  not  alluding  to  those  private  nbnkeB  which  erety  wise  potent 
most  give,  but  I  would  have  a.  common  oonfeBsion  ftom  sJl,  ntt^ed  bj 
the  Toice  of  the  head  of  the  household.  Oh,  Lord  Jeans  Christ,  how 
blessed  it  is  to  think  that  thon  lut  the  Qod  of  all  the  fiunilies  of  Israel, 
and  that  thou  lovcst  the  tents  of  Jacob  welL  Grant  that  onr  households, 
as  households,  inasmuch  as  they  sin  and  tranagress,  may  also  wait  be- 
fore thee  in  all  humbleness.  Let  all  families  monm  :  let  the  house  of 
David  monm,  for  there  is  sin  in  royal  and  noble  femilies.  Let  the 
honee  of  Levi  repent,  for,  alas,  there  are  Bins  in  ministers'  families 
which  frri'iitly  provoke  tlic  Lord  our  God.  The  honse  of  Shimel,  of 
wiMNn  we  know  aothii^  may  rmresent  the  private  families  which  nro 
ankaewn,  and  of  the  humbler  order ;  let  these  also  draw  near  to  God  in 
penitentjal  grief.  The  house  of  Nathan  may  be  regarded  as  the  pro- 
nhetio, «  pertupa  as  the  princely  bouse  ;  bat  be  they  what  they  may, 
let  iketa  all  oome  before  the  Uost  High,  each  with  the  language  of  con- 
temioa.  .  It  will  be  a  grand  thing  for  England  when  we  snail  see  more 
fiunily  piet^  and  &aiily  moaming  for  sin.  They  tell  as  that  in  Crom- 
veU'fl  day  if  yon  went  down  Cheapside  at  a  certain  boor  is  the  morning 
«mrj  Uind  of  every  honas  was  down,  becanse  the  inmates  were  at  family 
]nmr.  It  was  then  a  standing  ordinance  of  all  profeasora  ot  religion, 
WDa  it  was  the  groat  buttress  against  Fopeij.  Blodem  Ritualists  want 
OB  to  go  to  church  every  morning  and  night  to  pray ;  the  church  is 
openea  all  day  long,  so  I  see  by  a  notice  on  one  of  oar  chnrcbes,  for 
prwait  prayar :  it  strikes  me  aa  being  rather  a  place  for  public  prayer, 
and  well  adapted  for  the  display  of  devotion.  The  idea  that  prayer  ia 
mate  acceptable  in  the  pariah  chnrch  than  in  your  own  houses  is  a 
•npetatition,  and  ought  to  be  treated  with  no  respect.  If  wc  will  pray 
in  onr  fiunilies,  and  make  every  house  into  a  cnurch,  and  consecrate 
«v«r;  room  by  private  supplication,  wo  shall  not  be  fascinated  by  the 
foolidi  idea  of  the  holiness  of  places  or  priests,  and  we  shall  so  be 
ggarded  against  the  seductions  of  Popery,  The  Lord  pour  out  the 
qririt  of  grace  upon  all  the  families  of  his  peo[de ! 

IT.  But  now,  lastly,  and  more  personally :  according  to  the  test, 
-when  the  Spirit  of  God  is  given,  there  will  be  FEBsoHAt.,  BsrAUTE, 
AMD  ULUTABr  UODBNINQ  ON  THE  PAET  OF  BACH  0MB,  "  Every  family 
v^Ki,  and  their  wives  apart,"  these  words,  often  repeated,  bring  out 
Tividly  the  individuahty  of  this  holy  sorrow  before  the  Lord.  Let  us 
now  endeavour  to  enter  into  it. 

First,  dear  brethren  and  sisters,  let  us  mourn  that  our  sins  occa- 
sioned our  Lord's  death ;  and  when  we  have  done  this,  which  wonld 
natnrally  bo  the  first  thought  from  tbe  text,  and  therefore  will  naturally 
oocdr  to  you  without  my  needing  to  ai^  it,  let  us  go  on  to  monrn  our 
SOS  define  our  regtwraiwn.  To  me  it  will  ever  cause  r^ret  that  I  was 
nnbelieving  tov^^  One  who  oould  not  lie.  Now,  as  I  knotv  my  Lord, 
and  have  proved  his  faithfulness  so  well,  it  looks  so  strangely  cruel  that 
I  abonld  luve  doubted  him,  that  I  should  have  thought  he  conjd  not 
olrann  me,  or  that  he  would  not  receive  me.  He  is  the  tendcreet  of  all 
bterts,  the  most  loving  of  all  beings,  and  yet  there  was  a  day  when  I 
thmurht  him  a  severe  tyrant  who  expected  a  preparation  of  me  wliich  I 
conld  not  produce  in  myself.     I  did  not  know  tliat  he  would  take  mc 


:382  METROPOLFTAH  TABERHAOLB  PULPIT. 

jnst  as  I  was  and  blot  oat  my  sin ;  I  know  it  now,  bnt  I  mourn  that  I 
so  grievously  belied  him.  Onght  we  not  to  grieve  over  our  long  care- 
lessness ?  Tou  used  to  hear  the  gospel,  dear  friend,  and  yon  under- 
stood its  plan  and  scope,  but  you  did  not  wish  to  feel  its  power:  the 
Son  of  God  in  pity  came  to  die  for  you,  and  yet  you  thought  it  an  eveiy- 
day  matter  to  ue  attended  to  at  your  convenience,  and  you  went  your 
way  to  mind  earthly  things.  0  Lord,  how  cotdd  I  shut  the  door  of  my 
heart  against  thee  so  long,  when  thy  head  was  wet  with  dew  and  thy 
locks  with  the  drops  of  the  night  ?  Thou  didst  gently  knock,  and 
knock  again,  my  God,  and  yet  I  would  not  let  thee  in  for  many  a  year ! 
Sorrowfully  would  I  I'epent  for  this. 

Think  then,  dear  friends,  of  the  contempt  which  we  cast  upon  Christ 
while  we  were  living  in  that  state  of  carelessness  ;  for  did  we  not  as 
irood  as  sa  v  in  our  heart,  *^  Pleasure  is  to  be  found  in  the  world  and  not  in 
Ohrist ;  rest  is  to  be  had  in  wealth,  not  in  Jesus"  ?  Did  we  notdeKber- 
ately  choose  when  were  young  to  follow  the  devices  of  our  own  hearts 
instead  of  the  will  of  Jesus  ?  Kow  that  we  know  him  we  think  outmIvos 
ten  thousand  fools  that  we  should  have  seen  any  charms  in  the  painted 
face  of  that  Jezebel  world,  when  Jesus  stood  by  with  all  his  matchless 
1)eauties.  Forgive  us,  dear  Redeemer,  that  we  ever  thought  of  these 
trifles,  these  transitory  tovs,  these  mockeries,  and  let  thee  go  though  it 
were  but  for  an  hour.  Alas,  this  base  contempt  of  thee  was  no  error  of 
an  hour,  but  a  crime  which  lasted  many  years.    Pardon  us,  O  Lord. 

Let  us  reflect,  again,  with  great  regret  upon  the  resistance  which  we 
offered  to  Christ.  In  some  of  us  the  Spirit  strove  mightily.  I  do  con- 
fess that  under  sermons  I  was  oftentimes  brought  to  my  knees  and 
driven  to  my  chamber  with  tears,  but  the  next  morning  saw  those 
tears  evaporate,  and  I  was  as  obdurate  as  before.  Did  Jesus  persQadc 
us  to  come  to  his  wedding  feast  ?  Did  he  put  his  arms  abont  our 
neck  and  say,  **  Come  and  receive  my  love  ?  "  By  his  tenderness  did 
he  persuade  us,  and  by  his  terrors  did  he  threaten  ns,  and  yet  did  we 
resist  him  ?  What  a  crime  is  this !  Look  at  him  now !  Oh,  look  at  him 
with  his  dear  ^younds  and  his  fiace  marred  more  than  any  man  I  Did 
we  push  ?iim  aside  ?  Did  we  contend  with  him  who  only  meant  our 
jTooQ  ?  Did  we  not  by  this  conduct  pierce  our  Lord  ?  It  was  even  so. 
Alas,  for  those  dark  days !  Let  the  whole  of  our  life  before  conversion 
be  counted  but  as  a  breathing  death.  Write  down  its  days  as  nights 
and  let  the  nights  perish  and  be  forgotten  for  ever. 

But  we  have  more  than  this  to  reflect   upon,  namely,  our  *//« 
.since  cofiversion.     Do  I  address  any  this  morning  who  have  grievously 
backslidden  since^  they  professed  faith  in  Christ  ?    Have  you  committed 
great  and  open  sins?    Has  it  even  been  found  necessary  to  removeyou 
from  the  church  of  God  as  the  leper  is  put  out  from  the  camp  ?    Tnen 
do  not  think  of  it  without  feeling  your  eyes  swim  in  tears.    Whafc  is 
justly  bound  by  the  church  on  earth  is  bound  in  heaven,  and  theratee 
do  not  despise  the  censure  of  the  church  of  God.    And  if  others  of  ss 
have  been  kept — as  I  trust  we  have — from  the  great  tstmsgresaion,  jci,    ^ 
l^eloved,  what  shall  we  say  ?      Are  there  not  with  us,  even  with  m,  ^^ 
many  sins  against  the  Lord  ?    We  too  have  often  been  gnilty  of  wi^  t} 
trust.    We  have  doubted  the  Lord,  who  is  truth  itself.    What  a  glib'-  t^ 
ut  his  heart  is  this  !    What  a  re-opening  of  his  veins !     We  have  bee« 


vouBirnfa  for  otbist.  d6S 

^loom^  BDmetimeB,  and  full  of  marmnring,  until  men  harb  said  that 
Clirirtiaiis  are  miserable,  and  they  have  taken  up  a  proTerb  against 
oar  hcAj  faith  becsnae  we  haxe  l)een  despondent,  ana  have  not  felt 
tbe  joy  of  the  Lord.  This  is  wounding  him  in  the  house  of  his 
friendSy  and  for  this  evil  let  us  mourn. 

Migfatnot  our  Bekved  charge  lukewarmness  upon  very  many  who  would 
be  mable  to  deny  tftie  aobnsation?  Lukewarm  towards  the  bleeding 
LMdb— Cowards  the  di»r  lover  of  our  souls !  Have  we  not  been  disobe- 
dien^  too,  leating  undone  certain  duties  because  they  were  unpleasant 
to  the  iesliyand  doing  other  things  which  we  know  we  ought  not  to 
have  done,  because  we  cfaoso  to  please  ourselves?  This  is  a  sad  state 
of  things  to  exiist  between  our  hearts  and  our  best  Beloved. 

'Bum  there  not  been  in  us  &  very  great  want  of  self-denial  ?  What  a 
SfMe' we  hiive^ver  given  to  him  !  Did  we  ever  pinch  otirselves  fcflc 
hsal?'  Might  te  not  say  to  us,  **  Thou  hast  bought  me  ho  sweet  cane 
iriih  money,  neither  hast  thou  filled  me  with  the  fat  of  thy  saorifioes :  but 
thou  hast  nade  me  to  serve  with  thy  sins,  thou  hast  wearied  me  with  thiiie 
iasmiities.^'  And  how  little  seal  we  have  shown  for  him.  Zeal  has 
jm  lingered  on,  like  a  spark  in  the  flax  unquenched;  but  how  little 
flime  has  theite  been,  how  little  love  for  God,  now  little  love  for  perish- 
iag  smners,  how  little  love  even  for  Christ's  own  people.  How  scant 
haebeen  our  fidlowship  with  Jesus.  I  know  some  who,  I  hope,  love 
hSt^  who  go  fipom^y  to  day  without  hearing  his  voice,  and  some  will 
eteii  live  a  week  in  that  condition.  Shame !  shame!  to  live  a  month 
in  the  tene  house  witii  our  heart's  husband,  and  not  to  have  a  word  with 
IdnkI  It  is  sad  indeed,  that  he,  who  should  be  all  in  all  to  us/shonld 
oftoi'  be  treated  as  if  he  were  second  best,  or  nowhere  in  the  race. 
Aliliy  alas,  Ohrist  is  all  excellence,  and  we  are  all  deficiency.  In  him 
we  may  rejoice,  but  as  to  ourselves,  we  ought  to  mourn  like  doves  because 
of  the  griefs  we  must  have  caused  to  his  Holy  Spirit  through  the  ill 
estate  of  our  souls. 

We  have  asked  you,  and  I  pray  the  Spirit  of  God  to  enable  you,  to 
motm  over  the  past,  but  what  shaft  we  say  as  to  f?ie  present  f  Take  stock 
now  of  last  week.  I  invite  myself  and  you,  for  we  are  one  in  Christ  if 
we  are  believers,  to  look  through  last  week.  Did  you  make  any  survey 
of  the 'days  aar  they  passed?  If  so  I  think  you  might  have  said  with 
Dr.  Watts— 

*'  What  have  I  done  for  him  that  died 
To  save  my  ^[iiilty  soul  ? 
How  arc  my  follies  multiplie<l, 
Fast  as  my  minutes  roll." 

Has  it  been  a  week  of  real  service  for  Christ  ?  You  have  done  some- 
thing, did  you  do  your  best?  Did  you  throw  your  heart  into  it? 
Did  you  feel  that  tenderness,  when  you  were  trying  to  bring  others  to 
Christ,  which  a  Christian  ought  to  feel?  You  had  some  little  conten- 
tion with  another,  did  yon  act  in  a  Christian  spirit  ?  Did  you  show 
the  mildness  and  gentleness  of  Jesus  ?  You  were  offended,  did  you 
forgive  freely  ?  for  nis  dear  sake  did  you  cast  it  all  behind  your  back  ? 
You  have  been  somewhat  in  trouble,  did  you  take  your  burden  to  him 
naturally  ns  a  little  child  runs  to  its  mother  with  a  cut  finger?     Did 


SW  METEOPOLms  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

50a  teD  him  all,  and  lenvc  it  nil  to  liim  ?  Yoa  bad  n  loss,  did  tou 
Tolantarily  resigit  all  to  his  will  ?  Hoh  there  been  no  pride  tliia  veek  ? 
Pride  grieTes  him  very  much,  for  he  is  not  a  proud  Master,  and  is  not 
pleased  witt  a  fonnd  disciple.  Has  there  not  Ijeen  much  lo  mourn 
OTer? 

And  now  at  this  vitij  moment  wiiat  is  the  state  of  our  feoliug 
ioward  him  ?  Moat  we  not  confess  that  thoa^h  there  is  a,  work  of 
grace  in  onr  souls,  yet  thci-c  is  much  about  us  at  this  moment  whicli 
should  mate  m  bow  down  in  grief  before  tlie  Lord,  Dear  Sinioor, 
4l)0Q  knovest  there  is  not  one  in  this  house  who  has  more  cnuse  t<i 
monm  fbr  Uiee  than  lie  does  who  speaks  for  thee  now ;  for  he  feelj 
that  these  poor  lips  are  not  able  to  tell  what  his  heart  feels,  aud 
his  heart  does  not  feci  wluit  it  ought.  A  preacher  should  be  like  n 
senq>h.  One  who  spotiks  for  Christ,  and  triea  to  praise  him,  shoald 
be  a  very  Niobe  when  he  sees  the  sin  of  men  ana  hia  own,  AVhcre 
are  my  tears?  The  spirit  tmly  ia  willing,  but  the  flesh  is  weal;, 
Methinks  what  I  have  now  said  of  myself  will  snit  most  of  too 
who  are  engaged  in  uiy  JIaster's  service.  Do  yon  not  feel  that  joa 
blander  at  i^  that  when  you  n-ould  paint  him  you  make  a  daub  of  hia 
likeness  ?  When  you  would  set  him  forth  visibly  crucified  among  the 
people,  do  yoa  not  obscure  him  with  the  very  words  with  which  yoa 
wish  to  reTCol  him  ?  Yon  must  have  such  feelings,  and  if  yon  hare 
them  let  me  close  by  niading  these  words  to  yon ;  they  an?  assuredly 
true  when  there  is  a  time  of  hearty,  sincere  mourning  for  Jt-sns :  *■  In 
that  day  there  shall  be  a  fountain  opened  to  the  honse  of  David  and  to 
the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  for  sin  and  for  unclennnesB."  So  let  m 
plange  into  the  sacred  bath.  Believing  in  the  precious  blood,  let  m 
wash  and  be  clean.  Glory  be  to  his  name,  those  whom  he  has  washed 
are  clean  every  whit.    .\iQen. 


POETHBI  OP  SOElPTtniE  Rbad  BEFoaE  Sehmos — Zechnriah  liL 


Hyuhs  FfiOM  "Our  Own  Hysdj  Book"^-^29,  278,  :;67. 


ERROB.— To  onr  inten^o  regret  we  pcroei.e  ilmt  upon  page  170  nf,  the  l«al 
Straion  the  Printer  has  inserted  a  verse  from  the  First  Epistle  to  the  ,C«tia- 
ihiiuis  instead  of  from  the  Seuond.  This  entirely  spoiU  oar  argument:  n-JU  tb« 
reaJer  kindly  correct  hii  copy  ?  put  2  Corinthians  for  I  Corinthiani.  and  «•* 
out  the  misquoted  words.    The  error  was  occasioned  by  a  slip  of  our  pea. 


^ela^xi&m  ^^sismmk  f  nl|it. 


SUDDEN    SORROW. 


%  ^i^m$\{ 


DXLIYEBED    OK    LOIID*S-DaY    MoENING,    JuLY    8TH,    1877,    BY 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THS    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINQTON 


*^Sadd6nly  are  my  tents  spoiled,  and  my  curtains  in  a  moment." — Jeremiah 
!▼.  20. 

''And  when  thou  art  spoiled,  what  wilt  then  do  P' — Jeremiah  iv.  30. 

JsBBKiAH  was  describing  the  havoc  of  war,  a  war  which  was  devastating 
liis  country  and  bringing  untold  miseries  upon  the  people.  He  says  of 
it,  "  My  bowels,  my  bowels !  I  am  pained  at  my  very  heart ;  my  heart 
maketh  a  noise  in  me ;  I  cannot  hold  my  peace,  because  thou  hast  heard, 
O  my  soul,  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  the  alarm  of  war.  Destruc- 
tion upon  destruction  is  cried ;  for  the  whole  land  is  spoiled : 
suddenly  are  my  tents  spoiled,  and  my  curtains  in  a  moment.  How 
long  shall  I  see  the  standard,  and  hear  the  sound  of  the  trumpet  ?  "  How 
grateful  we  ought  to  be  that  war  is  not  raging  in  our  own  land.  We 
iriiould  read  those  terrible  stories  which  come  to  us  concerning  the 
destruction  of  human  life  by  the  two  armies  in  the  East  with  the  utmost 
legret.  On  whichever  side  the  victory  may  turn  it  is  still  to  be  daily 
lamented  that  men  should  slaughter  men,  and  glory  in  wholesale  murder. 
How  true  it  is  neither  the  elements  in  their  fury,  nor  wild  beasts  in 
their  rage,  have  ever  been  such  terrible  enemies  to  man  as  men.  We 
should  thank  God  that  we  dwell  apart,  and  see  our  harvests  ripening 
without  the  dread  of  their  being  reaped  by  invaders ;  we  walk  our 
streets  without  the  fear  of  bursting  shells,  and  seek  our  chambers  without 
the  apprehension  of  being  awakened  in  the  dead  of  night  by  the  shouts 
of  advancing  adversaries.  Blessed  be  the  Lord  who  has  given  centuries 
of  peace  to  the  fertile  hills  and  valleys  of  his  chosen  isle. 

**  O  Britain,  praise  thy  mighty  God, 
And  make.nis  honours  known  abroad ; 
He  bade  the  ocean  round  thee  Aow  ; 
Not  bars  of  brass  could  guard  thee  so.** 
No.  1,368. 


386  KETBOPOLITAN  TABEEHAOLB  PULPIT. 

Let  the  name  of  Jehoyah  onr  Qoi  be  praised  this  monung,  for  giving 
peace  in  onr  borders,  and  filling  ns  with  the  finest  of  the  wheat. 

There  are,  however,  in  this  land,  and  in  all  lands,  whether  at  war  or 
peace,  many  calamities  which  come  suddenly  upon  the  sons  of  men,  con- 
cerning which  they  may  bitterly  lament,  "  How  suddenly  are  my  tents 
spoiled,  and  my  curtains  in  a  moment."  This  world 'at  its  best  is  not 
our  rest.  There  is  nothing  settled  below  the  moon.  We  csall  this  terra 
firma,  but  there  is  nothing  firm  upon  it ;  it  is  tossed  to  and  fro  like  a 
troubled  sea  evermore.  We  are  never  for  any  long  time  in  one  stay ; 
change  is  perpetually  operating.  Nothing  is  sure  but  that  which  is 
divine  ;  nothing  is  abiding  except  that  which  cometh  down  from  heaven. 
All  things  change  as  they  pass  before  ns,  and  perish  in  the  using.  At 
this  moment  your  ship  lies  becalmed :  be  not  too  secure,  for  witlun  the 
next  few  minutes  you  may  be  driving  before  a  hurricane  with  bare  poles. 
To-day  your  garden  is'planted  with  blooming  flowers,  which  are  loading 
the  air  with  t^eir  perfume  ;  rejoice  not  too  much  in  their  sweetness,  for 
within  a  short  time  nothing  may  remain,  the  spoiler  may  tear  them  up 
by  the  roots,  and  your  garden  may  become  a  desolation.  There  is 
nothing  bright,  beautiful,  mir,  lovely,  or  desirable  beneath  Uie  sun  which 
may  not  be  speedily  withered.  Even  as  a  vision  are  all  these  things ; 
they  are,  and  lo,  they  are  not.  They  flash  upon  us  as  the  meteor  wmch 
blazes  in  the  midnight  sky,  and  then  leaves  the  darkness  to  be  blacker 
than  before.  "  Boast  not  thyself  of  to-morrow,"  yea,  boast  not  thyself 
of  to-day,  lest  haply  on  that  morrow,  or  even  in  this  very  day,  thou 
mavest  have  to  cry  with  Jeremiah,  "  How  suddenly  are  my  tents  spoiled, 
and  my  curtains  in  a  moment." 

This  expression  may  be,  without  any  straining,  very  readily  applied  to 
many  matters,  and  to  three  especially.  First,  to  th$  sudekn  spming  ^ 
all  human  righteousness  ;  secondly,  to  the  sudden  spoiling  of  all  earthly 
comfort;  and,  thirdly,  and  this  is  by  no  means  an  unusual  thi^,  to  the 
sudden  spoiling  of  human  life  Oself.  May  the  Holy  Spirit  bteas  our 
meditations  upon  the  instability  of  all  earth-bom  things,  mat  so  we  may 
despise  the  things  which  are  seen  and  temporal,  and  follow  after  the 
things  unseen  and  eternal. 

I.     A    BUDBEir    SPOILINa    HAPPENS    TO    HITtfAK    BIGHTB0U8NS88. 

Beloved,  when  I  put  those  two  words  together, ^^kimtan righteousness*^  I 
inwardly  smile ;  it  sounds  like  a  com^y,  or  a  satire,  I  scarce  know 
which.  '^  What  is  man  that  he  should  be  dean  ?  and  he  that  is  bom  of 
a  woman  that  he  should  be  righteous?"  Mere  human  nature  and 
righteousness  are  two  things  not  easily  joined  together,  and  when  they 
are  united  for  a  time  they  soon  separate,  for  they  agree  no  better  than 
oil  and  water.  There  is  a  divine  righteousness,  wrought  out  by  our  dear 
Bedeemer  and  imputed  to  all  his  beUeving  people,  wMch  will  remain : 

^  That  glorious  robe  the  same  appears 
When  mined  nature  sinks  in  yean ; 
No  age  can  chan^  its  glorious  hue, 
The  robe  of  Chnst  is  ever  new.** 

But  the  righteousness  which  comes  of  man  is  a  dream — ^how  suddeoly 
doth  it  vanish  from  our  view.    Lighter  than  the  gossamer'a  web,  move 


SUDDEN  SORROW.  887 

subtle  than  the  mist,  more  fleeting  than  the  wind,  the  very  name  of  it 
as  vanity. 

Let  ns  look  at  the  history  of  human  righteousness,  and  begin  in  the 
garden  of  Eden,  and  lament  the  fall.  Human  righteousness  existed  in 
tiie  bowers  of  Paradise,  and  man  was  happy  with  his  Grod.  Maxn  was 
created  sinless,  his  mind  was  upon  an  equal  balance,  and  without  ten- 
dency to  evil.  He  was  placed  in  a  garden  of  delights,  with  but  one 
conmiandment  to  test  him,  and  that  a  very  simple  one,  costing  but  slight 
self-denial  to  obey.  We  do  not  know  how  long  Adam  was  in  the  garden, 
but  we  know  that  man  being  in  honour  continueth  not,  and  in  a  \qtj 
short  time  he  and  our  mother  Eve  were  spoiled  of  all  that  they  had. 
The  serpent  crept  in  and  beguiled  them ;  he  who  was  a  murderer  fix)m 
the  begmning  plundered  them.  How  suddenly  were  their  tents  spoiled, 
4md  their  curtams  in  a  moment,  for  their  eyes  were  opened,  and  they  per- 
ceived that  they  had  lost  all.  The  righteousness  which  covered  them 
much  better  than  a  vesture  had  been  taken  from  them,  so  that  they 
were  utterly  naked  before  the  eyes  of  the  living  God.  He  is  a  cruel 
spoiler  indeed  who  strips  a  man  of  every  garment,  but  thus  completely 
were  our  first  parents  robbed  and  despoiled :  they  found  that  they  had 
lost  the  garden  wherein  they  had  lived  in  such  content,  lost  peace,  lost 
happiness,  lost  themselves,  lost  their  posterity,  lost  all.  Everything 
was  taken  from  them  except  that  whidi  infinite  mercy  stepped  in  to 
^ve  them  in  the  form  of  a  gracious  promise  concerning  the  restoring 
seed  of  the  woman.  Whenever  we  think  of  the  Fall  we  ought  to  be 
humbled,  and  to  be  restrained  from  all  idea  of  self-righteousness,  for  if 
Adam  in  his  perfection  could  not  maintain  his  righteousness,  how  can 
you  and  I,  who  are  imperfect  from  the  very  birth,  hope  to  do  so  ?  If 
the  thieves  broke  in  and  stole  our  ancestor's  righteousness,  when  his  tent 
was  pitched  amid  the  sunny  glades  of  Eden,  how  much  more  will  our 
curtains  be  despoiled  in  this  land  of  the  Ishmaelite  and  the  Amalekite  ? 
If  the  old,  wily  serpent  found  a  way  into  the  unfellen  hearts  of  our  first 
parents,  when  they  had  no  surroundings  to  mislead  them,  how  vain  is  it 
lor  us  to  hope  to  overcome  the  evil  one  so  as  to  attain  to  everlasting 
life  by  tiie  works  of  the  law. 

A  second  instance  of  this  very  commonly  occurs  in  the  failure  of  the 
wcraUsVs  resolutions.  See  yonder  young  people,  tutored  from  their 
childhood  in  everything  that  is  good :  their  character  is  excellent  and 
4idmirable,  but  will  it  so  abide  ?  Will  not  the  enemy  despoil  their  tents? 
Often  is  it  so.  The  young  man  starts  in  hfe  with  the  conviction  that 
he  is  not  of  the  common  herd  of  sinners,  and  wiU  never  descend  to  their 
level.  He  has  heard  of  other  youths  who  have  fallen  into  temptation, 
^ind  destroyed  themselves  by  dissipation,  but  he  feels  certain  that  he 
shall  do  nothing  of  the  kind.  Like  Hazael,  he  cries,  "  Is  thy  servant  a 
dog  that  he  should  do  this  thing  ?  "  He  fancies  that  his  barque  can 
weather  all  storms,  and  he  plumes  himself  upon  the  idea  that  the  record 
cf  his  Ufe  will  be  very  different  from  that  of  other  men.  How  truly 
lovely  at  first  sight  he  seems  !  How  honest,  generous,  and  true  I  Even 
looking  upon  him  with  the  eyes  of  Jesus,  we  might  love  him,  and  only 
mourn  that  he  lacks  one  thing.  The  righteousness  which  he  wears  is 
A  merely  human  one,  and  it  is  altogether  in  his  own  keeping,  but  he 
believes  that  he  ahall  hold  it  ta&t,  and  never  let  it  go.    His  tfcTv\*S&  ^  n?^ 


388  HETKOPOIITAH  TABEBKACLB  PULriT. 

pitched  that  no  wind  from  the  wildemeaa  will  ever  overtnm  it.  Have  ' 
not  these  delnsions  been  sadly  diepc lied  in  hundreds  ui'  instances?  A 
fierce  temptation  ariaes,  and  the  man's  resolutions  are  carried  along 
thereby  like  thiatle-down  in  the  wind.  Tho  young  wim  did  not  tiiink 
that  sach  a  temptation  could  ever  happen  ti}  him.  Rb  had  been  kept  hj 
his  parents  and  friends  like  a  flow^^r  in  a  conservatory,  and  he  could  not 
believe  that  the  nights  could  be  bo  bitterly  frosty  in  the  cold  vorld 
outdde ;  but  now  he  has  to  feel  the  nipping  influence  of  sin,  and  he 
withers  speedily.  Satan,  discoTeritig  his  ncakncss,  takes  him  at  a  tender 
point,  brings  before  him  that  lust  to  which  he  has  the  greatest  tendency, 
seta  before  him  that  dainty  delicacy  of  sin  to  which  he  has  the  sweeteS 
tooth,  and  by-and-by  the  hopefril  youth  can  no  longer  talk  of  hia  viitaea 
nor  boast  of  his  purity,  for  he  baa  fallen  low.  The  ship  Boasd'ul  has 
Btruck  on  a  rock,  and  is  going  down.  The  self-confident  young  man 
now  finds  himself  to  be  human  ;  being  human,  to  be  liable  to  temptation ; 
being  tempted,  to  be  ready  to  yield  to  eiu.  "  I  saw  tlie  tents  of  Cushan 
in  affliction,  and  the  cortains  of  the  land  of  Midian  did  tremble,"  for 
the  cords  of  reselation  are  broken  and  the  stakes  of  principle  are  looeed. 
Alas,  poor  hnman  righteooaneeB,  thou  art  soon  smitten  on  the  forehead. 
and  speedily  rolled  in  the  dnst.  How  soon  does  the  comeliness  of  human 
nature  pass  away  in  the  honr  of  trial ! 

Many  a  yonng  man  and  young  woman,  opening  their  eyes  on  a  snddcn 
after  tranptation,  have  had  to  cry,  "  IIow  suddenly  are  my  tents  ^wiled, 
and  my  curtains  in  a  moment."  Ah,  ye  that  think  yourselves  heyoiid 
all  danger  of  falling  into  sin  ye  know  not  yourselves ;  ye  understand  not 
the  plagne  of  your  own  hearts,  for  if  ye  did  ye  would  sec  that  ye  wrrj 
within  your  sonls  all  manner  of  iniiL|iiity,  which  only  waits  for  an  oppor- 
tunity to  develop  itoelf,  and  when  it  tinds  a  fit  occasion  it  will  display  its 
deadly  nature,  and  thenyou  will mipum  that  you  did  not  seek  a  new  heart 
and  a  right  spirit  at  the  hand  of  Clirist. 

My  second  text  BayB,"And  when  thou  art  epoiled,  what  wilt  thou  do?" 
And  I  would  earnestly  answer  it  for  any  of  you  who  have  gone  through 
this  experience.  Bo  not  try  to  re-establish  that  righteousness  of  youn 
which  haa  been  so  thoronghly  apoiled,  but  look  for  something  better. 
Quit  the  tent  for  a  mansion,  flee  bom  the  curtains  of  self  to  the  walls  of 
mlvation.  Tour  own  resolntions  have  failed  yon,  theretbre  leave  such  a 
sandy  foundation  and  build  upon  the  rook  of  divine  strength  I  Go  and 
confess  your  ain  with  deep  contrition ;  ask  the  Lord  Jesus  to  wash  you  in 
his  precious  blood,  and  then  desire  truth  in  the  inward  parts,  and  ask 
tiiat  in  the  hidden  part  the  Holy  Spirit  may  make  yon  to  know  wisdom. 
So  shall  it  come  to  pass  that  you  shall  no  longer  build  upon  the  aand,  mx 
yet  with  wood  and  bay  and  stubble,  but  on  the  rock  with  gold  and  Bilver 
and  precious  stones. 

Another  liabihty  of  human  righteoosness  is  one  which  I  must  not  calla 
calamity,  seeing  it  is  the  commencement  of  the  greatest  blessing :  I  mean 
when  the  Spirit  of  Oixl  comes  to  deal  with  human  righteousness,  by  way 
of  iUuminalion  and  amviction.  Here  wo  can  speak  of  what  we  know 
szperimentally.  How  beautiful  our  righteousness  is,  and  how  it  flouriHhes 
like  s  comely  flower  till  the  Spirit  of  God  blows  upon  it,  and  then  it 
wWieis  quite  away,  like  the  grass  in  the  hot  sirocco.  The  firsts  lesson 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  the  heart  is  to  lay  bare  its  deceiTablenesa,  and  to  / 


SXn)DEN  SOBBOW.  889 

incoyer  before  us  its  loathsomeness,  where  we  thought  that  everything  was 
roe  and  acceptable.  What  a  different  character  yon  gave  joorself,  dear 
riend,  before  the  Spirit  of  €k)d  dealt  with  you,  to  what  you  were  oom- 
)ened  to  give  afterwards.  Truly,  your  beauty  consumed  away  like  a 
noth.  You  began  to  mourn  over  your  holiest  things,  for  you  saw  the  sin 
rhich  polluted  them ;  and  as  for  your  transgressions,  Tdiich  you  thought 
10  little  of,  when  the  Spirit  of  God  set  them  in  a  true  light  you  found 
bBfh.  to  be  hideous  and  horrible  offences  against  the  God  of  love, 
^retime  you  emblazoned  your  name  in  letters  of  sold,  but  when  yon 
jeamed  t^e  truth  you  chose  a  black  inscription,  and  with  a  heavy  hand 
roa  wrote  out  your  own  condemnation,  feeling  that  you  were  bound  to 
10  so.  Now,  it  is  a  great  mercy  when  the  Spirit  of  Gk)d  brings  home  the 
bmth  to  the  heart  and  makes  a  man  see  the  deceptiveness  of  outward 
ippearances.  I  pray  that  it  may  happen  to  you  aU  if  it  never  has  done 
io.  May  your  tents  be  spoiled  until  vou  see  yourselves  to  be  utterly 
undone ;  for  you  are  so  by  nature  whether  you  see  it  or  not. 

I  would  ask  all  who  are  under  conviction  of  sin  to  answer  this  question, 
^*  When  thou  art.spoiled,  what  wilt  thou  do  ?  "  May  you  reply,  *'  We  toiow 
irliafc  we  will  do.  We  will  flee  away  from  self  to  Jesus.  Our  precious 
things  are  removed,  and  our  choice  treasure  is  taken  from  us ;  therefore 
lo  we  take  the  Lord  Jesus  to  be  our  all  in  all."  If  such  be  your  resolve, 
^oa  are  frilfilling  the  end  and  design  of  the  ever  blessed  Spirit,  who 
rorketh  in  order  to  wean  man  frx)m  self  and  to  hide  pride  from  him.  For 
diis  cause  doth  he  plunge  man  into  the  ditch  till  his  own  clothes  abhor 
liini,  for  then  he  turns  to  Jesus  and  seeks  for  that  clothing  which  the 
aaatchless  righteousness  of  Christ  Jesus  alone  can  afford. 

But  tjiere  will  come  to  aU  human  righteousness  one  other  time  of 
spoiling  if  neither  of  those  should  happen  which  I  have  mentioned  be- 
fope.  Hemorse  will  come,  and  that  very  probably  in  the  hour  of  death,  if 
not  before.  Apart  from  the  Holy  Spirit,  conscience  often  does  its  work 
in  a  very  terrific  fashion,  and  tears  to  pieces  before  a  man's  eyes  the 
curtains  of  righteousness  which  he  had  so  laboriously  woven.  Have  you 
never  seen  a  sinner  happy  and  contented,  because  self-deluded  ?  But  on 
\  sudden  he  has  found  out  that  his  falsehood  and  hypocrisy  were  known 
bo  God,  and  would  be  all  exposed  and  punished.  At  such  a  time  instead 
Df  turning  to  God,  he  has  despaired  and  said,  '^  I  am  lost,  there  is  no 
bope  for  me,"  and  therefore  he  has  plunged  into  deeper  sin  and  become  a 
nrorse  man,  while  all  the  while,  like  the  -nilture  at  Prometheus'  liver,  con- 
idence  has  continued  tearing  away  at  his  heart,  eating  into  his  very  soul, 
ind  drinking  the  blood  of  joy  out  of  his  Ufe,  till  he  has  been  dried  up  by 
in  anguish  from  which  he  could  not  escape.  I  have  seen  men  die  so ;  the 
x)nsolations  of  the  gospel  have  been  sounded  into  a  deaf  ear,  they  have 
ifted  up  their  hands  as  though  they  would  thrust  the  minister  away, 
¥hen  he  talked  of  mercy  they  replied  that  there  was  none  for  them, 
md  when  he  spoke  of  cleansing  they  declared  that  their  sin  was  of  more 
ium  scarlet  hue,  and  never  could  be  washed  away.  Oh,  how  suddenly 
u^  their  tents  spoiled,  and  their  curtains  in  a  moment,  and  when 
rooiled  thus,  what  does  a  man  do  ?  What  but  give  himself  up  to 
nat  everlasting  despair,  which  has  at  last  overmen  him.  While 
kny  man  is  yet  alive  I  would  exhort  him  still  to  apply  to  Christ :  though 
t  were  the  last  breath  he  breathed  I  would  still  hold  up  the  Bedeemer 


890  KBTEOPOLITAX  TABSIUfACLB  PULPIT. 

hefoK  his  expiring  gaze,  but  K-hen  remorse  has  Mly  set  in  this  is  Be^dom 
of  any  avail.  They  cry,  « Too  late,  too  late!"  they  continue  to  refhje 
their  Saviour,  and  pass  away  naked,  and  poor,  and  miserable,  to  stuid 
before  God's  righteous  bar  to  liear  the  sentence  of  their  conscience 
confirmed  for  ever  by  the  mouth  of  the  Eternal  Jndge.  In  that 
dreadful  day  their  overtbrow  will  be  terrible  indeed.  God  save  as  from 
Ibis. 

I  hope,  dear  friends,  that  all  of  us  know  what  it  is  to  have  seen  allonr 
tents  spoiled  of  all  the  precious  things  wherein  our  pride  boasted  itself, 
and  that  we  have  now  oecome  rich  in  the  riches  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  eiti 
Aecnre  in  the  cleft  of  the  rock  which  was  opened  in  hia  side.  If  we  have 
so  done  we  shall  not  regret,  but  greatly  rejoice,  that  our  tents  were  sud- 
denly spoiled,  and  onr  curtains  in  a  moment. 

II.  The  words  of  our  text  are  exceedingly  applicable  to  the  BPOiLina 
OF  ALL  EABTHLT  COHFOBTS.  Suddm  deitnuHon  to  all  our  earthly  com' 
/oris  u  eomrwn  to  all  sorts  of  men.  It  may  happen  to  the  beet  as  well  as  to 
the  worst.  Did  it  not  bo  occur  to  Job,  who  on  a  certain  morning  was  amazed 
by  messenger  after  meaeenger  hastening  to  tell  him  that  all  his  property 
was  swept  away?  Last  of  all  came  one  who  told  him  that  his  entire 
fiunily  aoA  been  destroyed  by  tempest.  Sudden  sorrow  happened  also  to 
lebeliionB  Pharaoh  as  well  as  Ui  pious  Job,  for  at  the  dead  of  night 
he  was  aroused  to  bewaU  the  firstboni  of  him  that  sat  upon  the  throne, 
and  heard  throughout  all  the  laud  of  Egypt  a  chorus  of  lamentations  on 
aoconnt  of  a  similar  calamity  ivhicli  had  happened  to  every  household. 
Neither  the  just  not  the  nnjust  can  tell  when  tribulation  will  befall  tbem. 
David  returns  &om  among  the  Philistines  and  he  finds  Ztklag  burned 
with  fire,  and  his  wives  and  liis  children  carried  away  captive ;  yet  nut 
to  the  righteous  only  are  such  trials,  for  Belshazzar  feasts  in  his  p^ace 
in  Babylon,  bat  that  same  niglit  was  Beishazzar  slain.  An  arrow  pierces 
the  heart  of  wicked  Ahab,  but  gracious  Josiah  fell  in  the  same  manner ; 
with  impartial  foot  doth  cahunity  come  te  the  door  of  all  kinds  of  men. 
As  darte  the  hawk  npon  its  prey,  so  docs  afBiction  fall  upon  the  unsus- 
pecting sons  of  Adam.  As  the  earthquake  on  a  sudden  overthrows  a  city, 
so  does  adversity  shake  the  estate  of  mortals. 

Suddsn  trial  comes  m  van'oun  forms.  Sometimes  it  is  the  loss  of 
property,  as  in  the  mstance  of  Lot  when  the  Idnf^  came  and  took  him 
caj)tive  and  all  that  he  had :  then  was  he  ntterly  spoiled.  The  same 
thmg  has  happened  m  ordinary  commerce,  as  in  the  case  of  Jehoahapbat 
when  he  made  ships  te  go  to  Tiirehiah  and  they  were  broken  at  Ezion- 

Sber.  Bis  letters  were  opened  one  mnmiiig  and  the  merchant,  who 
snght  Mmself  rich  as  a  prince,  found  that  he  had  become  a  bankmpL 
These  u-e  but  common  thmgs  in  days  of  panic  and  convulsion.  Fre- 
quently tlic  calamity  oomes  in  the  tbrin  of  the  loss  of  one  dear  to  us. 
So  came  it  to  the  Shunammite,  whose  child  had  been  such  a  comfort  to  her, 
but  it  fell  on  a  day  that  he  went  into  the  field  nnto  the  reapers,  and  he 
uid,  "  Ihly  head,  my  head,"  and  very  soon  the  hctle  gift  trom  beavw 
had  left  a  childlcu  mother  to  weep  over  his  Httle  lifeless  tbrm.  So  happened 
it  to  Jacob,  who  sent  his  darling  son  away  with  a  kiss,  but  ere  many  noun 
lud  passed  he  saw  his  garment  coverod  with  blood,  and  exclaimed^ 
"  An  evil  beast  luith  devoured  him ;  Joseph  is  without  donht  rent  in 
You  cqnoot  foe  sure  of  child,  or  vih,  or  husband.    The  fbndesk 


BUDDEN  SORROW.  891 

er  may  be  torn  from  yonr  side,  and  the  dearest  babe  may  be  rent  from 
ir  bosom.  Here  below  nothing  is  certain  but  nniversal  uncertainty. 
e  way  or  another  Ood  knoweth  how  to  bring  the  rod  home  to  us,  and 
make  us  smart  till  we  cry  out,  '^  How  suddenly  are  my  tents  spoiled, 
1  my  curtains  in  a  moment." 

Now^  this  might  well  he  expected.  Do  we  wonder  when  we  are  sud- 
ily  deprived  of  our  earthly  comforts?  Are  they  not  fleeting  things? 
[len  they  came  to  us  did  we  receiye  a  lease  of  them,  or  were  we  promued 
it  they  should  last  for  ever?  Jonah  sat  imder  his  withered  gourd 
inging  his  hands  and  combining  of  Gkxl,  but  if  you  and  I  had  been 
iie  we  might  haye  said  **  What  a^eth  thee,  man  ?  Art  thou  surprised 
it  gourds  wither?"  '^I  murmur/'  said  he,  ^'because  I  have  lost  the 
ide  which  screened  me  from  the  sun."  '^  But,  man,  is  it  not  the  nature 
a  gourd  to  die  ?  It  came  up  in  a  night,  dost  thou  marvel  that  it 
riahed  in  a  night  ?  A  worm  at  the  root  of  a  gourd  surely  is  no  novelty, 
prophet,  be  not  angiy  with  thy  Gkxl,  this  is  what  thou  shouldst  look 
'  from  such  a  growth.  If  our  tents  are  spoiled,  we  should  remember 
it  they  are  tents,  and  not  fortresses ;  curtains,  and  not  bulwarks.  The 
ief  can  readily  enough  enter  and  spoil  the  habitation  which  is  made  of 
ii  frafl  material.  Do  you  wonder  that  your  oflfepring  die  ?  Why  so  ? 
!roB8  your  children's  brows  there  is  written  the  word  "mortal,"  if  you 
id  aright.  Did  you  expect  a  mortal  mother  to  bring  forth  an  immortal 
I  ?  Did  you,  a  dying  &ther,  expect  to  be  the  parent  of  a  daughter  who 
nld  never  see  death  ?  Your  love  is  astonishea,  but  your  reason  is  not ; 
cur  affection  counts  it  strange,  but  your  understanding  judges  it  to  be 
xirding  to  the  frequent  course  of  nature.  Your  children  came  to  you, 
i  you  received  them  into  your  home  and  heart,  with  the  knowledge  that 
jy  were  mortal,  and  therefore  you  are  not  deceived.  Bow,  therefore, 
the  divine  wiU  and  say,  "  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken 
OT,  and  blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord." 
iou  lament  that  you  have  lost  your  riches.   Are  you  surprised  at  that? 

>  you  keep  birds  ?  Do  you  wonder  when  they  fly  away  ?  What  are 
hes  but  birds  of  golden  leather  ?  They  take  to  themselves  wings,  we  are 
d,  and  fly  away.  It  is  not  the  most  marvellous  thing  in  the  world  if 
nr  boy  has  a  tame  bird  if  ho  comes  to  you  and  says,  "  Father,  my  bird 
B  taken  wings  and  fled  away."  "Dear  child,"  say  you,  "I  always 
»ndered  that  it. did  not  do  so  before."  So  may  you  say  to  the  mer- 
EUit  who  has  lost  his  property  in  trading — the  marvel  is  not  that  wealth 
parts  but  that  it  stays  by  any  man,  seeing  it  is  the  nature  of  winged 
ings  to  fly  away.  Clouds  dissolve,  bubbles  burst,  snow-flakes  melt, 
d  even  so  do  this  world's  treasures  waste  away. 

Moreover,  our  earthly  comforts  were  never  given  to  us  to  be  held  for 
sr  by  a  covenant  of  salt.  They  are  always  loans,  and  never  gifts.  All 
it  we  possess  here  below  is  God's  property ;  he  has  only  loaned  it  out  to 
,  and  what  he  lends  he  has  a  right  to  take  back  again.  We  hold  our 
saessions  and  our  friends,  not  upon  freehold,  but  upon  lease  terminable 
the  Supreme  Owner's  option ;  do  you  wonder  when  the  holding  ceases  ? 

>  you  know  the  parable  of  the  wise  Jewish  woman  ?  When  her  husband, 
)  Kabbi,  had  gone  out  to  teach  his  disciples,  certain  neighbours  in  great 
TOW  brought  home  to  her  the  corpses  of  her  only  children,  two  sweet 
fs,  who  had  been  drowned.    She  took  them  upstairs,  and  laid  them 


392  liEiROPO[.rrAS  tasersaclb  pulpit. 

Xa  the  bed,  and  coTered  them  with  a  sheet,  aod  waited  in  her  dwft 
ctioa  till  her  hosband  came  home,  grieving  iu<^t  of  all  for  the  sorroir 
which  would  OTerwhelm  M>i.  ii>hc  Rtood  at  the  door  and  mournfully  said, 
"My  husbaad,  doet  thoa  know  that  a  great  tribulation  has  haMened 
onto  me  1  A  friend  had  lent  me  a  treasure,  and,  while  I  have  hod  it, 
it  has  been  a  great  joy  to  nie,  but  this  daj  he  has  taken  it  back  ttgain. 
and  I  know  not  what  to  do."  "  My  beloved,"  said  the  Rabbi,  "  Spest 
not  so.  Can  it  be  a  sorrow  to  thee  to  return  that  which  thoa  niat 
borrowed?  O  daughter  of  Abraham,  thou  canst  not  harbour  dishonesty 
in  thy  bouL  If  the  treasure  hath  been  lent,  be  gratefol  to  him  who  per- 
mitted thee  the  loan,  and  send  it  back  with  cheerfulness."  "  Sayest  uioa 
80  ?"  said  she ;  "  Gome  hither."  Then  she  turned  back  the  coverlet,  sod 
be  gaiied  upon  the  cold  faces  of  his  two  children,  and  he  said  "Thoa 
haat  spoken  wisely,  0  wonuin,  for  I  understand  that  God  hath  lent  thien- 
children  unto  me,  and  that  I  must  not  complain  because  he  hath  taken 
back  his  own."  See  ye  not  how  natural  it  is  that  loans  should  be  re- 
turned to  their  lender  in  doc  Boason.  Say  not,  "  I  am  the  man  that  hath 
seen  affliction  by  the  rod  of  his  wrath,"  as  though  thou  wert  the  chief  or 
the  only  safierer,  for  ia  this  thin^  there  hath  no  trial  happened  unto  yoa 
but  Bucn  aa  ia  common  to  men."  Cry  not  in  diamoy,  "  How  auddealj 
are  my  tenta  spoiled,  and  my  curtains  in  a  moment ! '  for  when  war  is 
raging  it  is  little  sniprisin^  that  tents  should  be  spoiled.  It  is  ac- 
ceding to  the  nature  of  things  that  in  a  world  whidi  bringeth  foith 
thorns  and  brian  in  all  its  i'urrows  some  of  tho  sharp  points  should 
pierce  thy  flessh. 

Once  more,  we  live  in  a  world  that  ia  fiill  of  thieves,  and  it  is  no 
wonder  if  onr  joys  are  stolea.  Our  Master  has  warned  us  that  oiir 
habitations  here  below  are  not  thief-proof;  he  forbids  us,  therefore,  to  la; 
up  our  treasure  where  thieves  break  through  and  steal.  The  mud-houses- 
or  the  East  are  very  soon  entered  by  bm-glara ;  they  break  a  hole  wher- 
ever they  please,  and  steal  a  man's  wealth  while  he  sleeps,  and  tliis  present 
life  ia  of  the  same  &shion.  This  world  swarms  with  thieves  such  a 
fitlee  friends  and  deceiven,  slanderers  and  cavillers,  losses  in  business  and 
cranes  in  our  expectations,  unkindncss  of  enemies  and  fickleness  of 
tuquaintances,  and  especially  sickness  and  death.  We  must  not  marvd. 
tiiimkin,  if  some  thief  or  other  should  take  away  the  dear  delight  which 
makes  our  tent  so  happy. 

Beloved,  since  these  calamities  may  be  expected,  let  tis  fie  pepared  fvr 
them.  "How?"  say  you.  Why,  by  holding  all  earthly  tilings  looselyj 
by  having  them  as  though  you  had  them  not ;  by  looking  at  them  as 
fleeting,  and  never  expecting  them  to  abide  with  you.  Love  tiio  citature 
in  the  measure  in  which  the  creature  may  be  loved,  and  no  mi.ire.  Mor- 
tal things  may  only  be  lored  in  their  proportion;  never  make  them  tout 
gods,  nor  suiTcr  your  heart  to  live  upon  them  or  stay  itself  upon  tnem, 
for  if  you  do  you  are  preparing  sorrow  for  yourself,  and  "  When  thou  art 
spoiled,  what  wilt  thun  do?"  Thou  wilt  cry  with  Micah,  "They  have 
taken  away  my  gods."  If  yon  suffer  your  heart  to  be  filled  with  earthly 
Uiinga  while  yoti  have  them,  yoa  will  have  your  heart  broken  when  tiiey 
KK  taken  a^ay. 

Let  vs  talce  care  lo  miika  good  ust  of  our  comforts  vikiU  we  poattt* 
lAmh.    Since  they  hastily  fly  by  ns,  let  ns  catch  them  on  (he  wiog,  and 


BUDDSR  80BR0W.  393 

itiligeiitl;  etaploy  them  for  God's  gloiy.  Let  us  be  careflil  to  plaoe  our 
o^ef  treasure  in  beaveii,  for,  aa  old  Swinnock  aays, "  A  worldling  b  wealth 
Hetli  in  the  earth,  therefore,  lite  wares  laid  in  low  damp  cellars,  it  cor- 
ToptB  Bad  moulders ;  but  the  godly  man's  treaam«  is  in  heaven,  and,  like 
oommoditiee  laid  np  in  high  rooms,  it  continues  sonnd  and  safe."  Trea- 
eare  in  the  skies  is  treasare  indeed.  Where  moth  and  rust  and  thief  can 
«uter  is  no  fit  place  for  us  to  store  our  treasoies  in.  Let  oa  commit  onr 
all  to  the  custody  of  God,  who  is  our  aU  in  aU.  Snch  a  blessed  thing  a 
faith  in  God  that  if  the  believer  should  lose  everything  he  possesses  here 
below  he  would  hare  small  cause  for  sorrow  so  long  as  he  kept  his  faith. 
If  a  great  landed  proprietor  in  walking  down  the  street  were  robbed  of 
his  handkerchief,  he  would  not  lie  down  in  despair,  nor  even  moke  a 
great  noise  over  his  loss.  "  Ah,"  says  he,  "  they  could  only  st«al  a  mere 
trifle,  they  could  not  rob  me  of  my  parks  and  farms,  and  yearly  in- 
comings." Believers  invest  their  true  wealth  in  a  bank  which  never 
breaks,  and  as  for  their  earthly  substance  it  is  not  theirs  at  all,  but  their 
Lord's,  and  they  desire  only  to  employ  it  for  his  cause ;  so  that  if  he 
taken  it  away  they  are  bonnd  to  look  upon  themselves  as  no  losers,  bnt 
OS  in  some  measure  released  from  responsibitity,  and  they  may  thank 
their  Lord  for  such  relief.  Be  sure  thou  use  this  world  as  not  abusing 
it,  and  fix  all  thy  jay  and  love  and  hope  and  trust  in  the  eternal  God, 
and  then,  happen  what  may,  thou  wilt  he  safe.  "Thou  wilt  keep  him 
in  perfect  pcuce  wtiose  mind  is  stayed  on  thee,  because  he  trustoth  in 
thee." 

Bnt  let  me  solemnly  remind  you  that  tn  ftniM  whm  vm  meet  tcith 
midden  axtamity  God  is  putting  ua  to  ike  lest,  and  trying  the  love  and 
iaith  ot  those  who  profess  to  be  his  people.  "  When  thou  art  spoiled, 
That  wilt  thou  do  ? "  You  thought  you  loved  God  :  do  yon  love  him 
now  7  You  said  he  was  your  Father,  but  that  was  when  he  kissed  yon  ; 
is  he  yoor  Father  now  that  he  chastens  you  ?  The  ungodly  kick  against 
flod  i  they  can  only  rejoice  in  him  while  he  gives  them  sweet  things,  but 
hifl  tme  children  learn  to  kiss  the  rod.  Can  you  believe  in  Jesus  when 
■distresB  is  upon  you,  and  wheu  want  assails  you  as  an  armed  man  ?  Yon 
talked  of  your  fmth  in  snmmer  weather :  have  you  &ith  now  in  the  long, 
irintry  nights  ?  Can  you  trust  the  Lord  when  the  fierce  winds  from  the 
TrildemesB  tiireaten  to  overturn  your  tent?  Has  the  Holy  Ghost 
given  you  the  faith  of  God's  elect,  which  can  bear  a  strain  ?  "Oiat  faith 
which  cannot  endure  trial  is  no  iaith  at  all,  and  if  the  death  of  a  child,  or 
the  lo8s  of  wealth,  or  being  smitten  down  hv  disappointment  or  sickness 
.shall  moke  thee  doubt  thv  God,  what  wilt  thou  do  when  thou  comest  to 
die  ?  If  in  running  with  footmen  thou  art  weaiied,  what  wilt  thou  do 
when  thou  oontendest  with  horses  ?  If  these  minor  trials  overwhelm  thee, 
what  wilt  thou  do  in  the  last  dread  day,  when  all  things  pass  away  from 
thy  sight  ?  This  is  a  trying  time  for  your  heart,  a  testing  time  for  your 
staces.  If  all  things  be  right  within  us,  when  our  tents  are  spoiled  we 
shall  live  closer  to  God  than  ever,  and  thus  we  shall  be  gainers  by  our 
loss,  because  it  has  increased  onr  spirituality  and  our  peace.  It  wonld 
be  a  blessed  thing  to  be  like  the  planet  Venus,  of  which  it  is  certain  that 
the  earth  can  never  come  between  her  and  the  sun.  The  world  often 
hides  our  God  fWtm  us,  and  when  our  comforts  are  swept  away  there  is 
all  the  leas  likeUhood  of  its  doing  so.     If  our  bereavements  bring  ua  into 


394  UXTBOFOLITAir  TABBRHACLB  PULFtT. 

the  dear  and  ever-abiding  Bonli^iit  of  the  Lord's  own  tace,  we  nftf  lie 
thankful  to  ioee  that  whi^  aforetime  uaiu«d  the  eclipse. 

"  Nearer,  mj  God,  to  thee ! 
Neu-er  to  thee ! 
What  though  il  be  a.  crost 
Tbat  ninnh  me, 

ThiaBtilltaTerjFhallbe, 


nven 
tJiec, 


Nearer  to  diee,  Nearer  to  thcc!" 

Blessed  IB  he  who  is  resolved  wttii  Job,  and  by  pnico  is  enabled  to  abiilc 
by  it,  "  Though  he  slay  me,  yet  vn]\  I  trnst  in  him."  We  should  leani  W 
give  up  everything  that  is  df.ir  to  ns  in  this  present  life,  and  find  om 
comfort  in  the  hopes  of  the  iiL-jct  world ;  ao  that,  like  David  when  hii 
darling  child  had  Iwen  taken  anay,  we  may  say,  "I  aball  gg  to  him:  ht 
ehall  not  return  to  me."  Happy  and  blessed  is  the  man  who  octoth  thnt. 
He  Bhall  not  be  cast  down  in  tlie  cloudy  and  dark  day ;  "  he  shall  not  U 
afraid  of  evil  tidings,  his  heart  is  fixed,  trusting  in  the  Lord."  i 

Oh,  yon  worldlings,  what  wiU  yoii  do  in  the  time  of  tremble  ?    Hoir    | 
wiU  von  comfort  your  hearts  in  tiie  day  of  visitation  ?     Most  of  you  yotrng 
people  are  full  of  fun  and  mirth,  and  I  am  gliul  you  have  h^tpy  tiina; 
but  the    hoUdays   Oi   youth  lust   not  for  ever,  your    tents    will  be 

Soiled  one  of  these  days,  aa  surely  as  yon  live,  and  what  will  yon 
en  do?  All  the  joy  which  you  can  draw  froni  this  world's  well* 
will  torn  to  bracki^  water  ere  long,  and  yon  n-ill  loathe  it:  what 
will  you  then  do?  Nothing  will  remain  of  all  this  momentary  mirtli 
when  the  heyday  of  your  yoiith  is  over  and  tie  evil  days  come,  and 
the  dajB  draw  nigh  when  you  aliall  say,  1  have  no  pleasnre  in  them. 
Why,  then,  are  yon  so  taken  up  with  fickle,  fleeting  joys  ?  I  beseech 
you  seek  substantial  happiness.  Ask  for  eternal  blessings.  Draw  nigh 
to  Qod  by  Jeeus  Christ  and  seek  unfading  bliss  in  hie  abiding  love. 

III.  In  the  third  place  there  may  come  a  eUDDEN  bpoiliko  or 
IJFB  iTSXLF.  In  a  moment  prostrated  by  disease  and  brought  to  dcaUi's 
door,  frail  man  may  well  cry  out,  "  How  suddenly  are  my  tents  spoiled, 
and  my  curtaans  m  a  moment ! "  It  is  by  no  means  wnuttal  for  m*» 
to  die  on  a  sudden.  One  does  not  wish  to  suggest  an  unhappy  thought, 
but  this  is  so  salntaiy  a  consideration  that  it  ought  never  to  be  ttlMcut 
from  ns, — we  are  but  dust,  and  may  be  dissolved  in  an  instant  hy 
death.  We  are  contumaDy  surprised  that  one  and  another  have  suddenly 
b^ea  called  away  ;  yet  it  is  more  strange  that  so  many  remain. 

"  Our  life  contains  u  tlioiisniid  "jui'iigs, 
And  faili  if  one  be  Kone, 
Strange  that  a  harp  of  thousand  strings 
Should  keep  in  tune  bo  long." 

In  this  lai^  congregation  death's  work  is  very  manifest  to  one  irto 
stands  npon  this  central  tower  of  observation.  During  the  last  few 
days  we,  as  a  church  and  congregation,  have  lost  several  from  oax 
midst.  I  will  not  ^int  out  the  seats  which  are  to-day  oocnpied  bf 
otben,  where  old  fnenda  have  sat  for  many  years,  but  so  it  is,  tlitt 
come  have  gone  quite  suddenly  from  ns,  and  meir  graves  are  scucely 
Slkd  in.  mio  will  be  the  next.^   It  fi«(^>£D.'a^  bwg^oB  that  thoas  wu> 


SUDDEN  60RB0W.  895 

ire  apparently  very  hale  and  strong  men  are  among  the  first  to  &11. 
>nr  friends  who  are  continaal  inyalids  remain  with  ns,  some  of  them  many 
nonths,  and  even  many  years  after  we  have  sorrowfdlly  given  them  up.  Con- 
mmption  keeps  many  for  long  months  lingering  dowly  into  everlasting 
ife,  while  strong,  hearty  persons  are  in  an  instant  taken  away.  It  is 
^erefore  no  new  thing  for  men  to  die  suddenly. 

Not  one  man  or  woman  here  has  a  guaranies  that  hs  or  shs  shall 
\iv€  till  fv-morrow.  It  is  almost  a  misuse  of  language  to  talk  about 
life  insurance,  for  we  cannot  insure  our  lives ;  they  must  for  ever  remain 
uninsured  as  to  their  continuance  here.  If  I  could  be  a  prophet  this 
morning,  and  point  out  one  and  another  and  say,  ^'  That  man  will  be 
dead  before  next  Sunday,"  or  "  That  woman  will  not  live  a  week,"  I 
ihould  feel  I  had  a  veiy  painful  duty  to  discharge ;  but  is  it  not  wise  for 
DS  to  reflect  that  it  may  happen  to  any  one  of  us  ?  There  are  no  reasons 
bj  which  we  can  prove  that  we  shall  escape  the  mighty  hunter  for  another 
day.  We  are  ready  enough  to  think  of  this  for  others,  for  all  men  think 
all  men  mortal  but  themselves ;  but  practical  wisdom  would  lead  us  to 
niggest  to  ourselves  that  we  are  mortal,  and  that  perhaps  the  death-bolt 
which  has  just  left  the  bow  of  God  may  be  aimed  at  our  hearts.  The 
question  is,  "  When  thou  art  spoiled,  what  wilt  thou  do  ?"  When  on  a 
Hidden  the  curtains  of  our  tent  shall  rend  in  twain,  and  the  tent  pole 
shall  be  sniped,  and  the  body  shall  lie  a  desolate  ruin,  what  shall  we 
then  do?  I  will  tell  you  what  some  of  us  know  that  we  shall  do.  We 
know  that  when  the  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  is  dissolved  we  have 
a  building  of  God,  a  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens. 
As  poor,  guilty  sinners  we  have  fled  to  Christ  for  refuge,  and  he  is  ours, 
ana  we  Iniow  that  he  will  surely  keep  what  we  have  committed  to  him 
nntQ  that  day :  therefore  are  we  not  airaid  of  all  that  the  spoilers  can  do. 
We  are  not  afraid  of  thee,  0  Death,  for  thou  art  the  porter  that  shall 
open  the  gates  of  immortality.  And  you,  ye  worms,  we  are  not  afraid 
01  you;  for  though  ye  devour  this  body,  yet  ye  shall  not  destroy  it,  tor  in 
our  flesh  shall  we  see  God.  0  Grave,  we  are  not  dismayed  at  thy  gloom, 
for  what  art  thou  but  a  refming  pot,  out  of  which  this  poor  earthy  body 
shall  arise  set  free  from  all  corruption.  Time,  we  fear  not  thy  trials  ! 
Eternity,  we  dread  not  thy  terrors.  Our  soul  shall  dwell  at  ease,  come 
what  may.  Glory  be  to  the  blessed  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  we  shall  rise 
because  ne  has  risen,  we  shall  live  because  he  lives,  and  reign  because  he 
reigns. 

We  are  not  afraid  of  the  spoiler ;  but  0,  Tjrorldling,  when  thou  art 
spoiled,  what  wilt  t?iou  do  ?  Rich  man,  your  acres  will  be  yours  no 
longer ;  no  park  for  you  to  roam  over,  no  fine  trees  to  boast  of,  nor 
ancestral  halls  in  which  to  gloriiy  yourselves.  You  will  have  nothing 
left  you;  no  bams,  no  ripening  harvests,  no  noble  horses  or  fettened 
sheep :  you  must  leave  them  all,  and  if  these  are  your  treasures,  what 
will  you  do  when  God  requires  your  soul  of  you  ?  Then  the  large- 
ness of  the  amount  invested  will  only  make  it  all  the  harder  to  die, 
and  palaces  and  gardens  will  make  the  pang  of  separation  yet  more  keen. 
You  will  find  it  a  dreadful  wrench  to  be  torn  away  from  that  in 
which  your  heart  so  much  delighted.  "When  thou  art  spoiled,  what 
wilt  thou  do  ?  "  Thy  money  bags  will  not  ease  thy  conscience :  all  the 
leases^  and  title  deeds,  and  mortgages  that  thou  canst  heap  upon  the^  ^aU. 


896  HETROPOLITAn  TABBBVAOLS  PULPIT. 

not  warm  thy  dying  heart  into  the  life  of  hope.    What  wilt  tboa  do? 
AlaBf  what  wut  thou  do? 

And  yon,  ye  worldlings,  who  have  no  wealth,  but  live  for  present 
pleasore, — ^wnere  then  wm  be  yonr  wine  caps  and  yonr  danoes?  Where 
your  Oughts  of  mighty  ale,  TOur  oaths  and  blasphemies  ?  Where  now 
Yonr  micbight  revelry  ana  wantonness?  Wnen  ye  shall  appear 
before  the  Judgeof  all  me  earth,  what  will  be  left  to  yon?  When  all  tiieee 
nnhallowed  pleasures  are  swept  away,  what  remains  ?  Tes,  thon  lover  (tf 
pleasure,  mdce  meiry  and  rejoice  to-day,  but  '^  when  thou  art  spoiled,  what 
wilt  thou  do  ?"  Witii  thy  cmldren  about  thee,  rejoioe  in  thy  home  and  live 
at  ease  witiiout  Gk)d,  but  ^^when  thou  art  rooiled,  what  wilt  thou  do?" 
Despise  religion  if  thou  wilt,  and  count  it  all  a  dream  invented  to  make 
men  sour  and  wretched,  but  when  thou  art  dying,  and  thy  pulse  is  &int 
and  fdling,  what  wilt  tiiou  do  ?  What  canst  thou  do  ?  Opportunities 
over,  and  space  for  repentance  nearly  run  out, — ^what  wilt  thou  do  ?  The 
thought  mayhap  will  seize  you  then,  **  Too  late,  too  late !  you  cannot  enter 
now/'  Tlie  voice  which  saith, "  Behold  the  bridegroom  cometh,"  will  startle 
you  in  the  midnight  of  your  ignorance  just  as  you  are  about  to  die,  aod 
then  you  will  wnng  your  hands  in  everlasting  despair,  because  you  did 
not  in  due  time  seek  him  who  can  save  you  from  the  wrath  to  oome. 
Awaken,  I  beseech  you,  your  duggish  hearts,  and  look  forward  to  yonr 
latter  end.  I  pray  that  I  may  leave  one  or  two  solemn  thoughts  upon 
the  minds  of  the  careless ;  better  still,  I  pray  Ood  the  Holy  Spirit  to 
lead  them  now  to  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  to  the  saving  of  their  souls. 


POBTIOK  OF  SOBIPTURE    BEAD  BEFORE    SeBUOK — ^Psalm  IxxL 


Hymns  prom  "  Our  Own  Hymn  Book  "—78  (Part  III.),  74, 196. 


coTvnvTEisrT'iisrca-  j^istid  co:M::M:E3:Ta?jLK»iB3S: 

Two  Lectures  addressed  to  the  Students  of  the  Pastors'  Coll^^  Metropolitan 
•  Tabernacle.    Together  with  a  Catalogue  of  Biblical  Gommentaries 

and  Expositions.    By  C.  H.  SPURGEON.    Price  28.  6d. 

"  This  is  another  of  the  scries  of  lectures  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  has  delivered  to  his  stndents,  and 
here  offers  to  h  wider  audience,  by  whom  it  will  no  doubt  be  cordially  welcomed.  It  has  aU  tta 
excellence  which  characterises  tne  work  of  Mr.  Spurgeon.  The  terse  idiomatio  English,  the  ahreW 
mother-wit,  and  the  practical  sagacity  of  Spurgeon  are  all  here  in  force.  For  students  tbs  bosk 
will  have  great  Talue.  It  will  be  to  them  a  valuable  guide  to  the  literature  of  a  great  subMot  B«l 
a  true  student  will  soon  pass  beyond  the  narrow  bounds  of  the  list  of  books  given  here,  we  dioiitd 
have  said  that  the  voluiue  consists  of  a  couple  of  lectures,  one  on  commenting  ^"4  nnirthsr  oa 
commentaries.  The  hinu  on  commenting  are  very  suggestive.  But  the  cream  of  the  book  is  Oh 
list  of  commentaries,  and  the  short,  pithy  criticisms  given  on  each  at  the  end  of  tiie  vohtOM.  Ws 
cordially  recommend  the  book  to  our  readers,  assuring  tham  that  they  will  find  it  ftiU  of 
and  amusement.*'— ^<lin6«r^A  Dail^  Beview. 


PifiSMOAE  k  ALABA8TEl^  4^  Patemofter  Baildingi;  and  all  BookMlkn. 


r^,  " 


|PEl^titii|riitHn  iJab^macb 


NEVERTHELESS.    HEREAFTER. 


%   I 


DELIVBBED  BY 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  UETBOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINC^TON. 


**  Jemm  aaiih  aaith  onto  him,  Thou  hast  said  (or  said  so],  nevertheless,  I  say  unto 
yoQy  Hereafter  shall  ye  see  the  Son  of  man  sitting  on  the  right  hand  of  power,  and 
oondng  in  the  donds  of  heaven."— Matthew  xxvi.  64. 

OuB  Lord,  before  his  enemies,  was  silent  in  his  own  defence,  bat  he 
faitbfiillj  warned  and  boldly  avowed  the  truth.     His  was  the  silence  of 
patience,  not  of  indifference ;  of  courage,  not  of  cowardice.    It  is  written 
that  "before  Pontius  Pilate  he  witnessed  a  good  confession,"  and  that 
statement  may  also  be  well  applied  to  his  utterances  before  Caiaphas, 
for  there  he  was  not  silent  when  it  came  to  confession  of  necessary  truth. 
If  you  will  read  the  chapter  now  open  before  us,  you  will  notice  that 
the  high  priest  adjured  him,  saying,  "  Art  thou  the  Christ,  the  Son  of 
God  ?'*  to  which  he  replied  at  once,  "  Thou  hast  said  it."    He  did  not 
disown  his  Messiahship ;  he  claimed  to  be  the  promised  one,  the  mes- 
senger firom  heaven,  Christ  the  anointed  of  the  Most  High.  Neither  did  he 
for  a  moment  disavow  his  personal  deity :  he  acknowledged  and  con- 
fessed that  he  was  the  Son  of  God.     How  could  he  be  silent  when  such 
a  yital  point  as  to  his  person  was  in  question  ?     He  did  not  hold  them 
in  suspense^  but  openly  declared  his  Glodhead  by  saying,  **  I  am  ;"  for 
so  are  his  words  reported  by  one  of  the  evangelists.     He  then  proceeded  to 
reveal  the  solemn  fact  that  he  would  soon  sit  at  the  right  hand  of  God, 
even  the  Father.    In  the  words  of  our  text  he  declared  that  those  who 
were  condemning  him  would  see  him  glorified,  and  in  due  time  would 
stand  at  his  bar  when  he  would  come  upon  the  clouds  of  heaven  to  judge 
the  qaick  and  dead  according  to  our  gospeL     See,  then,  dear  brethren, 
in  a  few  words,  the  great  truths  of  our  holy  religion  clearly  set  forth 
by  OUT  Lord  Jesus  :  ne  claimed  to  be  the  Christ  of  God,  and  the  Son  of 
God,   and   bis  brief  statement  by  implication  speaks  of  Jesus  dead, 
buried^  and  risen,  and  now  enthroned  at  the  right  hand  of  God  in  the 
power  of  the  Father^  and  Jesus  soon  to  come  in  his  glorious  second 
advent  to  judge  the  world  in  righteousness.    Our  Lord's  confession  was 
very  full,  and  happy  is  he  who  heartily  embraces  it. 
No8.  1,364-5. 


89ll '  MrrBOPOIiITAH  TABHRVAOLB  FVLPIT. 

I  intend  to  dwell  npon  three  cateh-words  around  which  there  galliers 
ft  world  of  encouraging  and  wlemn  thonght.  Th«  first  is  "  lu-verliulesi," 
and  the  Bocoud  is  "  Iterea/ter ;  ''  what  the  third  is  you  shall  know  here- 
after, hnt  not  just  now. 

I.  "Nevertheless,"  said  Christ,  "hereafter  shall  ye  aee  the  Son 
of  man  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  power,  and  coming  in  the  clouds  of 
hcaTcn."  This,  then,  is  the  atriug  from  which  we  must  draw  forth 
music.  " Neverthfksii"  which  being  interpreted  by  being  pulled  ill 
pieces,  signifiea  that  truth  ie  nevcr-the-ks8  sure  bocnuae  of  oppositioD. 
"  NererthelcBs,"  not  one  atom  the  less  is  the  troth  certain  to  prevail,  for  all 
that  you  say  or  do  against  it.  Jesus  will  sorely  sit  at  the  right  hand  of 
power,  ii"  i  t-ome  in  due  season  upon  the  clonds  of  heaven.  Let  us  dwell 
for  a  Hide  time  upon  this  important  fitct,  that  truth  is  none  the  lea 
certain  because  of  the  opposition  of  men  and  devils. 

Observe,  first,  that  Ihe  Saviour's  condilion  when  h  made  wm  of  that 
"  nn-erlheUsa  "  teas  no  proof  Ihnf  he  iivutd  not  rise  to  potitr.  There  be 
stood,  a  poor,  defeueeless,  emac^iated  man,  newly  led  from  the  night- 
watch  in  the  garden  and  its  bloody  sweat,  lie  teas  a  spectacle  of  rm«i 
and  lowly  suffering,  led  by  his  captors  like  a  lamb  to  the  slaoghter,  with 
none  to  speak  &  word  on  his  behalf.  He  was  surrounded  by  those  who 
hated  bini,  and  he  was  forsaken  by  his  frienda.  Scribes,  Pharisees,  prieita, 
were  all  thirsting  for  his  heart's  blood.  A  lamb  in  the  midst  of  wolrei 
iebnt  aiUint  piclureof  Christ  standing  there  before  the  Sanhedrim  inps- 
tient  silence.  And  yet,  though  hia  present  condition  seemed  to  contradiet 
it,  he  who  was  the  faithfnl  and  trae  witness  spake  truly  when  he  testified, 
"Nevertheless,  hereafter  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  man  coming  in  ths 
clouds  of  heaven.  Despite  my  present  shame  and  suffering,  so  it 
shall  be," 

He  gives  himself  that  lowly,  hnmhlc  title  of  Son  of  man,  as  best  indi- 
cating himself  in  his  condition  at  that  time.  "Hereafter  ye  shall  see  tb« 
Son  of  man  sitting  at  the  right  hnndofwDwcr,  and  coming  in  the  clondi 
of  heaveii."  The  humiliution of  Christ  did  not  in  the  least  endanger  hii 
afterglory.  His  sufferings,  his  shame,  his  death,  did  not  render  it  any 
the  less  certain  that  he  would  olimb  to  his  throne.  Nor  did  the  cavil- 
lings of  his  opposers  keep  him  for  one  instant  from  his  place  of  honour. 
I  wish  yon  to  remember  this,  for  there  is  a  great  principle  in  it.  Then 
are  many  poor  wcakminded  people  who  cannot  take  sides  with  a  perse- 
cnted  tnith.  nor  accept  anything  but  the  most  popular  and  fashionable 
form  of  religion.  They  dare  not  be  with  troth  when  men  spit  in  its 
face,  and  buffet  it,  and  pour  contempt  upon  it ;  bnt  it  will  be  victorioof 
none  the  less,  although  cowards  desert  it  and  falsehearted  men  oppos* 
it.  If  it  stand  alone  at  the  bar  of  the  world,  a  culprit  to  be  con- 
dcnmcd, — if  it  receive  nothing  but  a  universal  hiss  of  human  execr*- 
tion, — yet,  if  it  be  the  trnth,  it  may  be  condemned,  but  it  will  b« 
jcstified ;  it  may  be  buried,  but  it  will  rise ;  it  may  be  rejected,  but  it 
will  be  glorified,  even  as  it  has  happened  to  the  Christ  of  God.  Who 
would  be  ashamed  of  truth  at  any  time  when  he  knows  the  precioos- 
llMs  of  it  ?  Who  will  tremble  because  of  present  opposition  when  he 
^^  foresees  what  will  yet  come  of  it  ?  What  a  sublime  S(*ctacle — the  man 
^^of  sorrows  standing  b^rc  his  eraol  judgM  in  all  mtmner  of  weakness 
^^und  poverty  and  ronlpnipt.  at  th"   sam**  time  heir  (^  all  thinps,  atA      j 


ItltYSBTffBLtflfl.     KWKKkTTBtL  899 

apipoilited,  ndtertheless,  to  sit  at  the  right  hand  of  power  and  to  oome 
in  the  clonds  of  heaven. 

Nor  maj  we  think  onlj  of  bis  condition  as  a  despised  and  rejected 
man ;  for  he  was,  on  his  trial,  charged  with  grievous  wrong,  and  about 
to  be  condemned  by  the  ecclestasHedl  authoritiee.  The  scribes  learned  in 
the  laW  declared  that  he  blasphemed  •  and  the  priests,  familiar  with  the 
ordinances  of  Ood,  exclaimea,  **  Awhj  with  him ;  it  is  not  meet  that  he 
should  live."  The  high  priest  himself  gate  judgment  that  it  was  ex- 
pedient for  him  to  be  put  to  death.  It  is  a  very  serious  thing,  is  it 
noty  when  all  the  ecclesiastical  authorities  are  against  jou, — when  they 
are  unanimous  in  jour  condemnation  ?  Yes,  verilj,  and  it  may  cause 
gre^t  searching  of  heart ;  for  no  peaceable  man  desires  to  be  opposed 
to  constituted  authority,  but  would  sooner  have  the  good  word  of  those 
who  sit  in  Moses*  seat.  But  this  was  not  the  last  time  in  which  the 
established  ecclesiastical  authorities  were  wrong,  grievously  wrong.  Thoy 
were  condemning  the  innocent,  and  blaspheming  the  Lord  from  heaven. 
Ndr,  I  say,  was  this  the  last  time  in  which  the  mitre  and  the  gown 
have  been  upon  the  side  of  cruel  wrong:  yet  this  did  not  un-Christ 
Otllr  Saviour  or  rob  him  of  his  deity  or  his  throne.  On  the  same 
prflldple  human  history  brings  before  us  abundance  of  instances  in 
wbteb,  nevertheless,  though  scribes,  priests,  bishops,  pontiffs,  and  popes 
cotidemned  the  truth,  it  was  just  as  sure,  and  became  as  triumphant,  as 
it  had  a  right  to  do.  There  stands  the  one  lone  man,  ahd  there  arc 
all  the  great  ones  around  him— men  of  authority  and  reputation,  sanctity 
and  tomp — and  they  unartiinou^Iydeny  that  he  can  ever  sit  at  the  right 
hiina  of  God :  "  But,  nevertheless,"  saith  he, "  hereafter  ye  shall  see  the 
Son  of  man  at  the  right  hand  of  power."  He  spoke  the  truth :  his 
declaration  has  been  most  gloriously  fulfilled  hitherto.  Even  thus  over 
the  neck  of  clergy,  priests,  pontiffs,  popes,  his  triumphant  chariot  of 
salvation  shall  still  roll,  and  the  truth — the  simple  truth  of  his  glorious 
gospel — shall,  despite  them  all,  win  the  day,  and  reign  over  the  sons  of 
men. 

Nor  is  this  all.  Our  Lord  at  that  time  was  surrounded  by  those  toho 
U>ete  in  possession  of  earthly  power.  The  priests  had  the  ear  of  Pilate, 
and  Pilate  had  the  Roman  legions  at  his  back.  Who  could  resist  such 
k  combination  of  force  ?  Craft  and  authority  form  a  dreadful  league. 
One  disciple  drew  a  sword,  but  just  at  the  time  when  our  Lord  stood 
before  the  Sanhedrim  that  one  chivalrous  warrior  had  denied  him ;  so 
that  all  the  physical  force  was  otl  the  other  side.  As  a  man  be  was 
helpless  when  he  stood  bound  before  the  council.  I  am  not  speaking  now 
of  that  almighty  power  which  faith  knows  to  have  dwelt  in  him  ;  but 
as  to  human  power,  he  was  weakness  at  its  weakest.  His  cause  seemed 
at  the  lowest  ebb.  He  had  none  to  stand  up  in  his  defence — nay, 
none  t6  speak  a  word  on  his  behalf;  for, ''  Who  shall  declare  his  genera- 
tion?" And  yet,  for  all  that,  and  even  because  of  it,  he  did  rise  to  sit 
at  the  right  hand  of  power,  and  he  shall  come  in  the  clouds  of  heaven« 
So  if  it  ever  comes  to  pass,  my  brother,  that  thou  shouldst  be  the  lone 
advo<3ite  of  a  fors^otten  truth, — if  thy  Master  should  ever  put  thee  in  all 
thy  weakness  and  infirmity  in  the  midst  of  the  mighty  and  the  strong, 
d6  not  thou  fear  6r  tremble ;  for  the  possession  of  power  is  but  a  trifle 
colbpated  with  the  possession  ef  truth,  and  be  thai  has  the  right  may 


4M  HSTSOPOUUM  TASBSAOLS  FDIinf. 

ufelj  defy  the  might  of  the  woiid.  He  shall  viia  and  conquer,  let  the 
princes  and  powers  that  be  take  to  themselves  what  force  and  craft 
they  choose.  Jesus,  nevertheteBS,  wins,  though  the  poirer  is  all  against 
him,  and  so  shall  the  tmth  which  be  represents,  for  it  wears  abont  it  s 
hidden  power  which  baffles  all  opponents. 

Nor  was  it  merely  all  the  power,  tbtre  was  a  grttU  deal  of  furioui  ragi 
against  kirn.  That  Caiaphaa,  how  he  spoke  to  him  !  "  I  adjore  thee, " 
saith  he,  "by  God."  And  after  he  has  spoken  he  rends  his  garment* 
in  indignation,  his  anger  bomfl  Uke  fin? ;  but  the  Christ  is  very  qniet, 
the  Lamb  of  God  is  still,  and  looking  his  adversary  in  the  facf;,  he  sajg, 
"  NerertheleBH,  hereafter  thoa  shalt  tee  the  Soa  of  mui  sitting  at  the 
right  hand  of  power,  and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  hectTeii.''  He  wu 
Rtrong,  and  therefore  calm ;  confident,  and  therefore  peaceful ;  Irdly  u-  I 
enred,  and  therefore  patient.  He  could  wait,  for  he  believed;  and  his  pro-  | 
phecy  was  tme,  notwithstanding  the  high  priest's  rage.  So  if  we  meet 
with  any  man  at  any  time  who  gnashes  his  teeth  npon  us,  who  fouuB 
in  passion,  who  dips  hie  pen  into  the  bitterest  gall  to  writ«  down  oar 
holy  faith,  who  is  indefatigable  in  his  violent  efforts  against  the  Christ 
of  God, — what  mattereth  it  ?  "  NeverlhelesB,  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  man 
sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  power."  "  Yet  have  I  set  my  king  upon 
my  holy  hill  of  Zion,"  said  Jehovah ;  and  he  declared  the  decree  though 
the  heathen  raged  and  the  people  imagined  a  vain  thing.  Weil  may  he 
smile  at  rage  who  is  ao  sure  of  rictory. 

YcB,  but  it  was  not  one  pereon  that  raged  merely.  The  people  of 
Jerusalem,  and  the  mnltitodes  that  bad  come  up  to  the  passorer, 
bribed  and  ^ged  on  by  the  priests  and  the  Pharisees,  were  all  hot 
after  onr  SaTionr'a  death,  clamonring,  "  Crucify  him,  cnieify  him  "  and 
yet  there  he  stood,  and  as  he  beard  their  tumult,  and  anticipated  itc 
growing  demand  for  his  blood,  he  lost  not  his  confidence,  but  he  calmlj 
said,  "Nevertheless,  hereafter,  shall  ye  see  the  Son  of  man  sitting  at  tht 
right  hand  of  power."  Behold  his  porfect  inward  peace,  and  see  how 
be  manifests  it  by  a  bold  confession  in  the  rery  teeth  of  nil  his  adversaries. 
"  Ye  may  be  as  many  as  the  waves  of  the  sea :  and  ye  may  foam  and 
r^ge  like  the  ocean  in  a  storm,  bat  the  purpose  and  Lhe  decree  of  Ood 
will,  nevertheless,  be  fulfilled;  ye  cannot  let  or  hinder  it  one  whiL 
fe,  to  vonr  everlasting  confusion,  shall  see  the  Son  of  man  sitting  at 
the  tight  hand  of  power," 

Beloved,  yon  know  that  after  he  had  said  this  our  Lord  was  taken 
before  Herod  and  Pilate,  and  at  last  was  pat  to  death :  and  he  knew  all 
this,  foreseeing  it  moat  clearly,  and  yet  it  did  not  make  him  hesitate. 
He  knew  that  ne  would  be  crucified,  and  that  bis  enemies  would  boast 
that  there  wus  on  end  of  him  and  of  his  kingdom.  He  knew  that  his 
disciples  would  hide  themselves  in  holes  and  comers,  ami  that  nobody 
would  dare  to  say  a  word  concerning  the  man  of  Nazareth :  he  foreknew 
that  the  name  of  the  Nazarene  would  be  bandied  about  amid  general 
opprobrium,  and  Jerusalem  would  say,  "  That  cause  is  crushed  out :  that 

Sjgofmischiefhas  been  broken;"  but  he,  foreseeing  all  that,  and  mon^. 
eclared,  "  Nevertheless,  hereafter  ye  shall  see  the  ^n  of  man  sitting  at 
tbe  right  hand  of  power,  and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven."    I  can- 
,  not  help  harping  npon  the  text — I  nope  I  shall  not  weary  you  with  it, 
ur  to  me  it  18  music.  I  do  not  like  running  over  the  word  "  tuvertMet "     i 


NEVBaTHELESS.      HEREAITEK.  401 

too  quickly,  I  like  to  draw  it  out  and  repeat  it  as  "  never — the — hegs," 
K09  not  one  jot  the  less  wiU  his  victory  come.  Not  in  the  least  de^ee 
was  his  royal  power  endangered  or  his  sure  triumph  imperilled.  Not 
eren  by  his  death  and  the  conseauent  scattering  of  his  disciples  was  the 
least  hazard  occasioned  ;  but,  inaeed,  all  these  tilings  wrought  together 
for  the  accomplishment  of  the  divine  purpose  concerning  him,  and  the 
lower  he  stooped  the  more  sure  he  was  to  rise  ultimately  to  his  glory. 

And  now,  beloved,  it  is  even  so.  The  man  Christ  Jesus  was  despised 
and  rejected  of  men,  but  at  this  moment  he  sits  at  the  right  hand  of 
power:  all  power  is  given  to  him  in  heaven  and  in  earth,  and  therefore 
does  he  hid  us  proclaim  his  gospel.  There  is  not  an  angel  but  does  his 
bidding ;  providence  is  arranged  by  his  will,  for  "  the  government  shall 
be  upon  his  shoulder,  and  his  name  shall  be  called  Wonderful,  Coun- 
sellor, the  mighty  God,  the  everlasting  Father,  the  Prince  of  Peace." 
Atoning  work  is  done,  and,  therefore,  he  sits.  His  work  is  well  done, 
and,  therefore,  he  sits  on  the  right  hand  of  God,  in  the  place  of  honour 
and  dignity.  Before  long  he  will  come.  We  cannot  tell  when :  he  may 
come  to-night,  or  he  may  tarry  many  a  weary  year :  but  he  will  surely 
come  in  person,  for  did  not  the  angels  say  to  the  men  of  Galilee,  as 
they  stood  gazing  into  heaven,  *^  This  same  Jesus  shall  so  come  in  like 
manner  as  ye  have  seen  him  go  into  heaven"?  He  shall  come  with 
blast  of  trumpet  and  with  thousands  of  angelic  beings,  all  doing  him 
honour.  He  shall  come  with  flaming  fire  to  visit  the  trembling  earth. 
He  shidl  come  with  all  his  Father's  glories  on,  and  kings  and  princes 
shall  stand  before  him,  and  he  shall  reign  amongst  his  ancients  gloriously. 
The  tumults  of  the  people,  and  the  plotting  of  their  rulers,  shall  be 
remembered  in  that  day,  but  it  shall  be  to  their  own  eternal  shame :  kis 
throne  shall  be  none  the  less  resplendent. 

I  beg  you  to  learn  the  spiritual  lesson  which  comes  out  of  this.  I 
have  already  indicated  it,  and  it  is  this — never  be  afraid  to  stand  by  a 
losing  cause.  Never  hesitate  to  stand  alone  when  the  truth  is  to  be  con- 
fessed. Never  be  overawed  by  sacerdotalism,  or  daunted  by  rage,  or 
swayed  by  multitudes.  Unpopular  truth  is,  nevertheless,  eternal,  and  that 
doctrine  which  is  scouted  and  cast  out  as  evil  to-day  shall  bring  immortal 
honour  to  the  man  who  dares  to  stand  by  its  side  and  share  its  humiliation. 
Oh,  for  the  love  of  the  Christ  who  thus  threw  a  '*  never IMess '*  at  the 
feet  of  his  foes,  follow  him  whithersoever  he  goeth.  Throngli  flood  or 
flame,  in  loneliness,  in  shame,  in  obloquy,  in  reproach,  follow  him !  If 
it  be  without  the  camp,  follow  him !  If  every  step  shall  cost  you  abuse 
and  scorn,  follow  still ;  yea,  to  prison  and  to  death  still  follow  him,  for 
as  surely  as  he  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  power  so  shall  those  who 
love  him  and  have  been  faithful  to  his  truth  sit  down  upon  his  throne 
with  him.  His  overcoming  and  enthronement  are  the  pledges  of  the 
Tictory  both  of  the  truth  and  of  those  who  courageously  espouse  it. 

Thus  have  we  sounded  our  first  great  bell—"  nevertheless."  Let 
its  music  ring  through  the  place  and  charm  each  opened  ear. 

II.  The  second  bell  is  "hereafter."  "Nevertheless,  hereafter." 
I  like  the  sound  of  those  two  bells  together  :  let  us  ring  them  again. 
**  Nevertheless,  herea/ier.**  The  hereafter  seems  in  brief  to  say  to  me 
that  the  main  glory  of  Christ  lies  in  the  future.  Not  to-day,  perhaps, 
nor  to-morrow  will  the  issue  be  seen !     Have  patience !     Wait  a  while. 


402  METROrOMTAN   TAflRnNAPLK    PDI.PIT.  ' 

"  Your  stivngth  is  to  sit  still."  God  has  great  leisure,  for  ho  is  tla 
Eternal.  Let  us  partake  in  his  restfniness  while  we  sing.  "  Kn'trlhelm, 
kfreaf/pr."  O  for  the  Holy  Spirit's  power  at  this  motu&iit ;  for  it  ti 
written,  "he  will  show  you  tilings  to  come." 

It  is  one  great  reason  whj  the  unrecrenerate  sons  of  men  cannot  sm 
any  glory  in  the  kingdom  of  Clirist  liecause  to  tliem  it  is  soch  a  fuiun 
thing.  Its  hopes  look  into  eternity :  its  great  rewards  are  beyond  thli 
present  time  and  state,  and  the  most  of  mortal  eyes  cannot  see  so  fai. 
Unregenerate  men  are  like  Fission  in  John  Bunyaa'a  parable :  they  wiB 
bare  all  their  good  things  now,  and  so  they  haye  their  toys  and  break 
them,  and  they  are  gone,  and  then  their  hereafter  ia  a  dreary  outlook  rf 
r^^t  and  woe.  Men  of  faith  know  better  ;  and  like  Patience  in  tbi 
same  ptirable,  they  choose  to  b-ive  their  best  things  last,  for  that  whiti 
comes  last,  lasts  on  for  ever.  He  whose  tnm  comes  last  has  none  ts 
follow  him,  and  his  good  things  shall  never  bo  taken  away  from  him. 
The  poor,  pnrblind  world  cannot  see  beyond  its  own  nose,  and  so  it 
mnst  have  its  joys  and  riches  at  once.  To  them  speedy  \  ictory  is  the 
main  thing,  and  the  tmlhis  nothing.  Is  the  ciiuse  triumphant  to-day? 
Off  with  your  caps,  and  throw  them  up.  and  cry  "  Hurrah  I  "  no  matur 
that  k  is  the  cause  of  a  lie.  Do  the  multitudes  incline  that  way! 
Then,  sir,  if  yon  be  worldly-wise,  nm  with  them.  Pull  off  tlie  pum 
branches,  strew  the  roads,  nnd  shout  "  Hosunna  to  the  hero  of  iht 
honr !  "  though  be  be  a  despot  or  a  deceiver.  But  not  so — not  bo  wilb 
those  who  are  taught  of  Qod.  They  take  eternity  into  their  estimaUi 
and  they  ai'e  contented  to  go  with  the  despised  and  rejected  of  men  fot 
the  present,  because  they  recollect  the  hereafter.  They  can  swim  again* 
the  flood,  for  they  know  whither  the  course  of  this  world  is  tending. 
0  blind  world,  if  thou  wert  wise,  thou  wonldat  amend  thy  line  rf 
action,  and  begin  to  think  of  the  hereafter  too  j  for,  brethren,  tha 
hereafter  wtH  soon  be  ktr».  What  a  short  tims  it  is  since  Adan 
walkad  in  the  garden  of  Bden  :  compared  with  the  ages  of  tha  lockit 
compared  with  the  history  of  the  slurs,  compnred  with  the  life  o( 
God,  it  is  SB  the  winking  of  nn  eye.  or  as  a  flash  of  lightning.  One 
has  but  to  grow  a  little  older,  nnd  years  become  shorter,  and  time 
appears  to  travel  at  a  much  f^i^tcr  rate  than  before,  so  that  a  year 
niahea  by  you  like  a  meteor  auri)sa  tiie  midnight  heavens.  When  ws 
are  older  still,  and  look  down  fi'om  the  serene  al>odes  above,  I  Bumxica 
that  centuries  and  ages  will  he  as  momenta  to  ua ;  for  to  the  Lord 
they  are  as  nothing.  Suppose  tlie  coining  of  the  Lord  should  be  put 
off  for  ten  thousand  years — it  is  but  supposition — but  if  it  were,  tea 
thousand  years  will  soon  be  gone,  and  when  the  angust  apectacle  of 
Christ  coming  on  the  obudt  of  heaveu  shall  really  be  seen,  the  del»y 
will  be  as  though  but  an  hour  had  intervened.  The  space  betweoi 
now  and  then,  orrather  the  space  between  what  is  "now"  at  this  tim^ 
and  what  will  be  "  now  "  at  the  last— how  short  a  span  it  is  !  Men  wiU 
look  back  from  the  eternal  world  and  say,  "  How  could  we  !iave  thought 
ao  much  of  the  fleeting  life  we  have  lived  on  earth,  when  it  was  to  be 
fbllowed  hy  eternity  ?  ^Vhat  fools  we  were  to  make  saoh  count  of 
momentary,  transient  pleasures,  when  now  the  things  which  are  not 
Been,  &nd  fere  eternal,  hars  come  upon  ns,  and  we  are  unprepared  for 
tfaetd  I "    Christ  will  soon  come,  and  at  the  longest,  when  ha  cometh. 


KEyiBTHELESB.      HBRBAFTER.  408 

he  interral  between  fco-day  and  then  will  seem  to  be  jnsfc  nothing  at 
kU  ;  so  that  "  hereafter  *'  is  not  as  the  sound  of  far-off  cannon,  nor  as 
he  boom  of  distant  thunder,  but  it  is  the  rolling  of  rushing  wheels 
lastening  to  overtake  us. 

**  Hereafter  !  "  "  Hereafter  I  "  Oh,  when  that  hereafter  comes,  how 
»Terwhelming  it  will  be  to  Jesns*  foes !  Now  where  is  Caiaphas  ? 
Will  he  now  adjure  the  Lord  to  speak?  Now,  ye  priests,  lift  up 
ronr  haughty  heads  !  'Utter  a  sentence  against  him  now  !  There 
iHs,  your  victim  upon  the  clonds  of  heaven.  Say  now  that  he  blas- 
)heines,  and  hold  up  your  rent  rags,  and  condemn  him  again.  But 
irhero  is  Caiaphas  ?  He  hides  his  guilty  head  :  he  is  utterly  con- 
fonnded,  and  begs  the  mountains  to  fall  upon  him.  And,  oh,  ye  men  of 
jhe  Sanhedrim,  who  sat  at  midnight  and  glared  on  your  innocent  victim, 
pfith  your  cold,  cruel  eyes,  and  afterwards  gloated  over  the  death  of 
four  martyred  Prince,  whore  are  ye  now — now  that  he  has  come  with 
ill  his  Father's  power  to  judge  you  ?  They  are  asking  the  hills  to  open 
their  caverns  and  conceal  them :  the  rocks  deny  them  shelter.  And 
where,  on  that  day,  will  you  be  ;  you  who  deny  his  deity,  who  profane 
bis  &ibbath,  who  slander  his  people,  and  denounce  his  gospel — oh, 
where  will  you  be  in  that  tremendous  day,  which  as  surely  comes  as 
Domes  to-raorrow*s  rising  sun  ?  Oh,  sirs,  consider  this  word — "  Here- 
after I  "  I  would  fain  whisper  it  in  the  ear  of  the  sinner,  fasainated 
by  his  pleasures.  Come  near  and  let  me  do  M-^hereaffo*  /  I  would 
make  it  the  alarum  of  the  bed-head  of  the  sleeping  transgressor,  who 
is  dreaming  of  peace  and  safety,  while  he  is  slumbering  himself  into 
helL  Hereafter  I  Hereafter  !  Oh,  yes,  ye  may  suck  the  sweet,  and 
eat  the  fat,  and  drink  as  ye*  will ;  but  hereafter  !  hereafter  I  What  will 
jre  do  hereafter  when  that  which  is  sweet  in  the  mouth  shall  be  as  gall 
m  the  belly,  and  when  the  pleasures  of  to-day  shall  be  a  mixture  of 
miseiy  for  eternity  ?  Hereafter  I  Oh,  hereafter  !  Now,  0  Spirit  divine, 
be  pleased  to  open  careless  ears,  that  they  may  hsten  to  this  prophetic 
sound. 

To  the  Lord's  own  people  there  is  no  sound  more  sweet  than  that 
of  "hereafter."  "  Hereafter  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  man  coming  in  the 
clonds  of  heaven."  Welcome,  welcome,  welcome,  welcome,  liedeeraer, 
fovi^ur !  Welcome  in  every  character  in  which  thou  comest.  What 
acclamations  and  congratulations  will  go  up  from  the  countless 
myriads  of  his  redeemed,  when  first  the  ensigns  of  the  Son  of  man 
shall  be  seen  in  the  heavens  I  On  some  one  of  earth's  mornings, 
when  the  children  of  men  shall  be  **  marrying  and  giving  in  mar- 
riage" while  saints  dhall  be  looking  for  his  appearing,  they  shall 
first  of  all  perceive  that  he  is  actually  coming.  Long  desired,  and 
come  at  last.  Then  the  trumpet  shall  be  heard,  waxing  exceeding 
loud  and  long,  I'ii^gii^g  out  a  sweeter  note  to  the  true  Israel  than 
STer  trumpet  heard  on  the  mom  of  Jubilee.  What  delight !  What 
lifting  up  of  gladsome  eyes  I  What  floods  of  bliss  !  Oppression  is 
overi  the  idols  are  broken,  the  reign  of  sin  is  ended,  darkness  shall 
no  more  cover  the  nations.  He  oometh,  he  cometh  :  glory  be  to  his 
name ! 

**  Bring  forth  the  royal  diadem. 
And  crown  him  Lord  of  all. 


404  UETUOPOUTAa  TABBBVIOLI  PUIflT. 

0  lU««»xl  daj  of  Trbmatinnii !  huw  sitall  heaven's  TanU  bo  rent  mOi 
tltt'iu  wIh'U  his  BiiaU  shall  Ke  t^r  ihemselvea  what  iras  reecrvcd  for 
iiiiu  luiil  for  them  in  the  "  heraJler."  "  Ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  man  at 
iho  right  hand  of  power,  and  oonsing  in  the  clonda  of  heaven," 

Thai  ^xird  "  bei««fta'."  mj  fan>>bers  and  sisters,  is,  at  this  moment, 
\iuT  jn^nd^^  sobM,  and  I  wiA  lo  bring  it  before  jon  in  that  ti^bt. 
lUv«  Tva  b««n  misanikistoad,  aiisrcpreacnted,  slandered  bccaasc  of 
di-U-tti/  to  Uk  tight  and  to  tt«  erne?  Do  not  troablc  youi-seir. 
Yt»itv'ttt«  not  TUDT  own  noK:.  Refer  it  to  the  King's  Bcitch  ai>o\-e, 
aud  ^r.  ~  Hereafter,  bereaftcr."  Ra\t  von  been  accosed  of  being 
tuad.  Euutk'al,  and.  I  know  not  -what  besides,  becaaee  to  you  party  is 
tt>.<4tUib:.  and  ecclesiastical  pride  noching,  and  the  stamp  of  popular 
vf^uiiiv'^  nothing ;  becanae  voa  are  determined  to  follow  the  stej^s  of 
WOT  faster,  and  believe  the  tnie  and  do  the  right  ?  Then  be  in  do 
htuTT ;  the  sore  hereaft«r  will  ^-nl^  the  debate.  Or  are  you  veiy 
(kkt'  and  very  sick,  and  very  sad  ■  Bat  are  yon  Christ's  own  ?  Do 
you  tmat  him  ?  Do  you  live  in  feUowship  with  him  ?  Then  the  hope 
of  the  hereafter  may  well  take  the  stinc;  out  of  the  present.  It  is  not  for 
long  that  yoQ  shall  saSer ;  the  glory  vill  kiod  be  revealed  iu  yon  and 
around  yon.  There  are  streets  of  gold  symbolic  of  your  fntore  wealtb, 
and  there  are  harps  celestial  emblematioai  of  yonr  eternal  joy.  You 
shall  have  a  white  robe  soon,  and  the  dnsty  garments  of  toil'shall  be 
laid  aside  for  ever.  You  shall  hare  a  far  more  e.tceeding  and  an  eternal 
weight  of  gloiy  ;  and  therefore  the  light  affliction  which  is  bat  for  a 
moment  may  well  be  endured  nith  patience.  Have  yon  lal>oured  in 
vain  ?  Have  yon  tried  to  bring  souls  to  Christ,  and  had  no  recom- 
pense ?  Free  not,  but  remember  the  hereafter.  Many  a  labourer,  mi- 
snccesafnl  to  the  eye  of  man,  will  receive  a  "  Well  done,  good  and 
faithful  servant"  f^m  his  Master  in  that  day.  Set  little  store  bj 
anything  you  have,  and  wish  bat  lightly  for  anything  that  yon  han 
not.  Let  the  j)resent  be  to  you,  as  it  really  is,  a  dream,  an  emptr 
show,  and  project  yonr  sonl  into  the  hereafter,  which  is  solid  ana 
enduring  ;  for,  oh !  what  music  there?  ia  in  it ! — what  delight  to  a  troo 
child  of  Ood !     "  Nevertheless,  hereafter." 

I  feel  half  inclined  to  have  done,  and  to  send  yon  out  of  the  plao^ 
singing  all  the  way, "  Nevertheless,  hereafter."  The  people  ontaide 
might  not  onderstand  you,  but  it  would  be  a  perfectly  justifiabla 
enthusiasm  of  delight. 

III.  Now,  thirdly.  Where  am  I  to  look  for  my  third  bell  7  When  is 
the  third  word  I  spoke  of?  In  truth,  I  cannot  find  it  in  the  venioa 
which  we  commonly  use,  and  there  is  no  third  word  in  the  original, 
and  yet  the  word  I  am  thinking  of  is  there.  The  truth  ia  that  tiu 
Kcond  word,  which  has  been  rendered  by  "  hereafter,"  bean  another 
meaning  ;  I  will  give  yon  what  the  Greek  critiea  say,  aa  noariy  as  can 
)»,  the  meaning  of  the  word  is,  "  Hxncsfobwaed."  "  Henceforward 
ju  shall  see  the  Son  of  man  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  power,  and 
coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven."  "  Henct/orward."  That  is  anothti 
word,  and  the  teaching  gathered  out  of  it  is  this :  nvn  in  tha  prtMiU 
Bun  are  tokens  of  tht  vklot-y  of  Christ.  "  Hut,"  says  one,  "did  Christ 
JKJ  to  those  prieats  that  henceforward  they  should  see  him  sitting  at  the 
■jpit  hand  of  power  ?"    Tea.  yea,  that  is  what  be  meant.    He  meant, 


KBVERTHELE8S.      HBRKAFTKR.  405 

fon  look  at  me  and  scorn  me  ;  bnt,  sirs,  you  shall  not  be  able  to  do 
is  any  longer,  for  henceforward  you  shall  see  for  yourselves  that  I  am 
»t  what  I  appear  to  be,  but  that  I  sit  at  the  right  hand  of  power, 
enceforward,  and  as  long  as  you  liye,  you  shall  know  that  galling 
nth."  And  did  that  come  true  ?  Yes,  it  came  true  that  night ;  for 
ben  the  Saviour  died  there  came  a  messenger  unto  the  membci-s  of 
e  Sanhedrim  and  others,  and  told  them  that  the  veil  of  the  temple 
18  rent  in  twain.  In  that  moment,  when  the  man  of  Nazareth  died, 
at  splendid  piece  of  tapestry  seemed  to  tear  itself  asimder  from  end  to 
id  as  if  in  horror  at  the  death  of  its  Lord.  The  members  of  that 
>ancil,  when  they  met  each  other  in  the  street  and  spoke  of  the  news, 
ust  have  been  dumb  in  sheer  astonishment ;  but  while  they  looked 
x>n  each  other  the  earth  they  stood  upon  reeled  and  reeled  again, 
id  they  could  scarcely  keep  their  feet  This  was  not  the  first  wonder 
hich  had  that  day  startled  them,  for  the  sun  had  been  beclouded  in 
matural  darkness.  At  midday  the  sun  had  ceased  to  shine,  and  now 
le  earth  ceases  to  be  stable.  Lo,  also,  in  the  darkness  of  the  evening, 
rtain  members  of  this  council  saw  the  sheeted  dead,  newly  arisen 
om  their  sepulchres,  walking  through  the  streets ;  for  the  rocks  rent, 
le  earth  shook,  and  the  graves  opened,  and  the  dead  came  forth  and 
)peared  unto  many.  Thus  early  they  began  to  know  that  the  man  of 
azareth  was  at  the  right  hand  of  power. 

Early  on  the  third  morning,  when  they  were  met  together,  there 
ine  a  messenger  in  hot  haste,  who  said,  "  The  stone  is  rolled  away 
om  the  door  of  the  sepulchre.  Remember  that  ye  placed  a  watch,  ana 
lat  ye  set  your  seal  upon  the  stone.    But  early  this  morning  the  soldiers 

7  that  he  came  forth.  He  rose,  that  dreaded  One  whom  we  put  to 
iath,  and  at  the  sight  of  him  the  keepers  did  quake  and  became  as 
5ad  men."  Now,  these  men — these  members  of  the  Sanhedrim — 
jlieved  that  fact ;  and  we  have  clear  evidence  that  they  did  so,  for  they 
ibed  the  soldiers,  and  said, "  Say  ye,  his  disciples  came  and  stole  away 

8  body  while  we  slept."  Then  did  the  word  also  continue  to  be  ful- 
led, and  they  plainly  saw  that  Jesus  whom  they  had  condemned  was 

the  right  hand  of  power.  A  few  weeks  passed  over  their  heads, 
id,  lo,  there  was  a  noise  in  the  city,  and  an  extraordinary  excitement, 
ster  had  been  preaching  and  three  thousand  persons  in  one  day  had 
ien  baptized  into  the  name  which  they  dreaded  so  much  ;  and  they 
are  told,  and  they  heard  it  on  the  best  of  evidence,  that  there  had 
>en  a  wonderful  manifestation  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  such  as  was  spoken 
*  in  the  book  of  the  prophet  Joel.  Then  they  must  have  looked  one 
lother  in  the  face,  and  stroked  their  beards,  and  bitten  their  lips,  and 
id  one  to  another,  '^  Did  he  not  say  that  we  should  sec  him  at  the 
^ht  hand  of  power?"  They  had  often  to  remember  thai  word,  and 
;ain  and  again  to  see  its  truth,  for  when  Peter  and  John  were  brought 
»fore  them,  it  was  proven  that  they  had  restored  a  lame  man,  and 
ese  two  unlearned  and  ignorant  men  told  them  that  it  was  through 
e  name  of  Jesus  that  the  lame  were  made  to  leap  and  walk.  Day 
ter  day  they  were  continuously  obliged,  against  their  will,  to  see,  in 
e  spread  of  the  religion  of  the  man  whom  they  had  put  to  death, 
at  his  name  had  power  about  it  such  as  they  could  not  possibly  gainsay 
resist.     Lo,  one  of  their  nimiber,  Paul,  had  been  converted,  and  was 


406  HETBOPOLITAlt  TAASKKACLB  FOU'IT. 


104    I 
ocd    I 


preaching  the  feith  which  he  had  endeavoured  Ui  destrojf.  Thoy  maA 
have  Iwen  mnch  amazed  and  cliagrined,  as  in  this  also  they  disuci'ocd 
that  the  Son  of  man  was  nt  the  rijiiht  band  of  power. 

Tea,  say  yon,  but  did  they  see  him  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven ; 
I  answer,  ye*.  Hencefoi-th  they  saw  that  also,  for  they  began  to  W.m 
npoii  their  minds  forebodings,  and  dark  thoughts.  The  Jewish  natiou 
was  in  an  ill  state,  the  [ieoj)ie  were  getting  disquieted,  imuostcrs 
were  rising,  and  the  leadinj;  men  of  the  nation  trembled  as  to  whi;t  liie 
Romans  would  do.  At  liisc  tiiere  came  an  outbreak,  and  the  imperiiii 
power  was  defied,  and  then  bucIi  of  them  as  still  survived  began  to 
realize  the  wurda  of  Christ.  Wheu  they  saw  the  comet  in  the  sty,  lui^I 
the  drawn  Bword  hanging  over  Jerusulem,  when  they  saw  the  citj-  com- 
passed about  with  armies,  when  they  marked  the  legions  dig  the 
trenches,  and  throw  np  the  enrtliworkfl  and  sarroiuid  the  devoted  citj, 
while  all  around  waa  ure  and  famine  ;  when  ^m  every  tower  upon  w 
walls  thoy  oonld  see  one  of  tiieir  own  countrymen  nailed  to  a  crosi) 
for  the  Romans  pat  the  Jews  to  death  by  crucifuion  by  hundreds,  aM 
even  by  thonEand8,-~then  must  they  have  begun  to  see  the  coming^ 
the  8oQ  of  man.  And  when,  at  lest,  the  city  was  destroyed  and  a  fiffr 
brand  was  hnrled  even  into  the  holy  place,  and  the  Jews  were  banished 
and  sold  for  slaves  till  they  would  not  fetch  the  price  of  a  pair  of 
shoes,  EO  many  were  they  and  so  grently  despised, — then  they  saw  tbe 
8on  of  man  coming  in  tba  clouds  of  heaven  to  take  vengeance  on  hi) 
adversaries. 

Read  the  text  as  meaning,  "Henceforward,  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of 
man  at  the  riglit  hand  of  power,  and  coming  in  the  clondB  of  heaven." 
It  is  not  the  full  meaning  of  the  passage,  bnt  it  ia  a  part  of  that  meaniag, 
beyond  all  question. 

Beloved,  even  at  the  present  time  we  may  see  the  tokens  of  Che 

powiT  of  Christ  among  us.     Only  tokens,  mark  you ;  I  do  not  vant 

to  take  you  off  from  the  hereafter,  bnt  beQceforward  and  even  notr 

there  nre  tokens  of  the  power  of  our  Lord  Jesus.     Look  at  ruvivali. 

When  they  break  out  in  the  church  how  they  atasger  all  the  advetvarieK 

of  Oliriet.    They  said — ^yes,  they  dared  to  say — that  the  gospel  hod  lost 

all  its  power — that,  since  the  days  of  VVhiteficId  and  Wesley,  therowasno 

hope  of  the  masses  being  stirred,  yet  wheu  they  see,  even  in  this  house, 

frum  B&hlinth  to  Sabbaw,  vast  crowds  listening  to  the  word,  and  nhsa 

Buniu  few  months  ago  no  house  could  be  built  that  was  large  enough 

to  Accommodate  the  thmnging  masses  who  sought  to  hear  our  Ame- 

riv-an  lirutliren,  then  were  they  smitten  in  the  mouth,  so  that  they  cuuli 

ipcitk  110  more,  for  it  was  manifested  that  the  Lord  Christ  stilt  lives, 

and  that,  if  liis  gospel  be  fully  uud  simply  preiiL'hed,  it  will  still  drair 

all  men  to  him,  and  souls  will  be  saved,  an<J  that  not  a  few. 

And  look  ye,  in  the  brave  world  onteide,  apart  fntoi  religion,  what 

I  influences  there  are  abroad  which  are  doe  to  the  power  of  the  Chriat  of 

I         God.     Would  you  have  believed  it  twenty  years  ago  that  in  America 

I         tiiero  should  be  no  more  a  slave  ;  that  onitcd  Italy  should  be  free  of 

I         her  dM|K)ts  ?    Could  you  have  believad  that  the  Pope  would  be  paling 

I  about  his  beiig  a  prisoner  in  the  Vatican,  and  that  the  power  oi  anti- 

L         Christ  would  )^  shorn  away  ?    No,  the  wonders  of  history,  even  within 

^^  the  hist  few  ysara,  are  enough  to  ahov  oa  that  Chiist  ie  at  ths  right 


KSVEBTUBUI86.      UBHEAFTER.  407 

iami  ot  i>ower.  Gome  what  will  ia  the  future,  mark  je  this,  idj 
h^tbren,  it  will  neyer  be  possible  to  uphold  tyranny  and  oppression 
l<«g,  for  the  Lord  Christ  is  to  the  front  for  the  poor  and  needy  of  the 
earth.  0  despots,  yon  may  do  what  yon  will,  and  use  your  cratt  and 
|>Dlicir,  if  yon  please,  but  e}.\  over  this  world  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has 
ufted  up  a  plummet  and  set  up  a  righteous  standard,  and  he  will  draw 
a  straight  line,  and  it  will  pass  through  everything  that  offends,  that  it 
may  be  cnt  off ;  and  it  will  also  pass  over  all  that  is  good  and  lovely, 
and  right,  and  just,  and  true,  and  these  shall  be  established  in  his  reign 
among  men.  1  believe  in  the  reign  of  Christ.  Kings,  sultans,  czars— 
Uiese  are  puppets  all  of  them,  and  your  parliaments  and  congresses  are 
but  vanity  of  vanity.  God  is  great,  and  none  but  he.  Jesus  is  the 
King  in  all  the  earth.  He  is  the  man,  the  King  of  men,  the  Lord  of 
all.  Glory  be  to  his  name.  As  the  years  progress  we  shall  see  it  more 
and  more,  for  he  has  had  long  patience,  but  he  is  bep:inning  now  to  cnt 
the  work  short  in  righteousness.  He  is  baring  his  right  arm  for  war  and 
that  which  denies  manhood's  just  claims,  that  which  treads  upon  the 
neck  of  the  humanity  which  Christ  has  taken,  that  which  stands  against 
his  throne  and  dominion,  must  be  broken  in  pieces  like  a  potter's  vessel, 
for  the  sceptre  in  his  hand  is  a  rod  of  iron,  and  he  will  use  it  mightily. 
The  Christ,  then,  gives  tokens  still  of  his  power.  They  are  only  tokens, 
but  they  are  sure  ones,  even  as  the  dawn  does  not  deceive  us,  though 
it  be  not  the  noontide. 

And  oh,  let  me  say,  there  be  some  of  yon  present  who  are  enemies  of 
Christ,  but  you  also  must  have  perceivea  some  tokens  of  his  power.  I 
have  seen  him  shake  the  infidel  by  the  gospel  till  he  has  said,  **  Almost 
thou  persuadest  me  to  be  a  Christian."  He  has  taken  him  in  the 
silence  of  the  night  and  probed  his  conscience  :  in  his  gentleness  and 
love,  and  pity  he  has  led  the  man  to  think,  and  though  he  has  not 
altogether  yielded,  yet  he  has  felt  that  there  is  a  solemn  power  al^out  the 
Christ  of  God.  Some  of  the  worst  of  men  have  been  forced  to  own  that 
Christ  has  conquered  them.  Remember  how  Julian,  as  he  died,  said, 
**  The  Nazarene  has  overcome  me :  the  Nazarene  has  overcome  me." 
May  you  not  have  to  say  that  in  the  article  of  death,  but  oh  that  you  may 
say  it  now.  May  his  love  overpower  you,  may  his  compassion  win 
you,  and  you  will  see  in  your  own  salvation  tokens  of  his  power. 

But  I  must  have  done,  for  my  time  has  fled,  but  I  desire  to  add  that 
it  will  be  a  blessed  thing  if  everyone  here,  becoming  a  believer  in  Jesus, 
shall  henceforw&rd  see  him  at  the  right  hand  of  power  and  coming  in 
the  clouds  of  heaven.  Would  to  God  we  could  live  with  that  vision 
fall  in  view,  believing  Jesus  to  be  at  the  right  hand  of  power,  trusting 
him  and  resting  in  him.  Because  we  know  him  to  be  the  Lord,  strong 
and  mighty,  the  Lord  mighty  in  battle,  we  ought  never  to  have  a  doubt 
when  we  are  doing  what  is  right.  We  ought  never  to  have  a  doubt 
when  we  are  following  Jesus,  for  ke  is  more  than  a  conqueror,  and  so 
shall  his  followers  be.  Let  us  go  on  courageously,  trusting  in  him  as 
a  child  trusts  in  his  father,  for  he  is  mighty  upon  whom  we  repose  our 
confidence. 

Let  us  also  keep  before  our  mind's  eye  the  fact  that  he  is  coming. 
Be  ye  not  as  the  virgins  that  fell  asleep.  Even  now  my  ear  seems  to 
hear  the  midnight  cry,  "  Behold,  the  bridegroom  cometh  I"    Arise,  ye 


4(W  ■iifrtr.f'rt'lJTMl  TA*naACi.Ji  pdlht. 

1,  riwn  no  kMj  .".  if  i'k  i*i<fcgT«)m  ia  nwr.     Aa  for  70a, y< 

I  TiiviiK,  Gfld    .TTinf  thM  there  may  yiet  be    time  enoi^  left 

.J  avak«  etm  too.  ::.i:  5r<D  maT  jct  faa^v  oil  for  your  lamre  befon 
be  comes.  He  corner  ve  know  not  vben,  bat  be  comes  quickly.  Bo 
TC  n«dr.  for  in  Escfa  1:1  h"ar  «  re  ihink  not  the  8on  of  man  cometh. 
^  n  af  m«i  that  t  .:<:^  .''or  (heir  I»ni.  and  aa  lerranta  that  are  readf 
toen»  in  tb«r  xrot/.  t-ewirae  the  master  of  the  honse  is  near. 

in  ibat  spirit  let  n  ^is  to  the  I/^*s  table,  M  often  as  we  gather 
there,  frr  he  has  B»i'  ■->  it*.  "  I*o  this  nuti!  I  cofne."  Outward  ordi- 
BaBMs  win  f*aw  wbe  ;  I  ■  ■v^.m*:-*.  f-jT  we  ehal!  need  no  memorial  when 
ttse  I^KiJ  faimKlf  will  he  amon|;  ns.  Letna  here  pledge  faim  in  thecnn. 
n^  be  i*  eoairag  we  do  rerilj  believe ;  that  he  is  coming  we  do 
mfaQj  ivoclaiiD.     Is  it  a  snbject  of  joy  to  yon  ?    If  not — 

"  Ye  linnen  seek  hia  bee. 

Whose  wrath  yc  cannot  bear ; 
Bow  to  the  sceptre  of  his  grace, 
And  find  salrmtioQ  thoe." 

God  hkm  yon  for  Christ's  sake. 


fOBUOM    or  SCKIPTUSB  SKAD  BETORE  SbBXOV— Matt.   XXTL  47—75. 


Hmm  FBOH  "  Odb  Owb  Htioi  Book  "—414,  746. 


Ibt  SnnaBOX  b^  to  ra^nd  hia  iMdera  that  the  TUioua  religiooi  and  oharitablt 
Inititationi  which  h«  conduct*  require  nsarlj  X300  per  week  to  luitaia  tkam,  and 
thongh  there  i«  so  tUt  of  regnlar  sabscriben,  and  no  collector  haa  erer  been  paid, 
jet  the  need  baa  been  met  for  many  yean  by  the  freewill  offering  of  the  Lonl'i 
people.  During  the  anmmer  montha  the  donatioDi  arc  luually  very  few  ',  ptrfaapt 
readen  of  the  »ennoiu  will  think  of  this.  Full  inrurmaiioii  as  b>  each  work  will 
be  found  in  a  ihillin);  Tnlume,  entitled,  "  Thp  Metropoliun  TabsrnaEle  :  iu  Ilistor/ 
and  Work,"  published  bj  Passmore  and  A1sbnit«r,  4,  Paternoster  Building*.  Itia 
a  proruaeiy  illustrated  book,  aad  full  of  interest. 


p^£ti[jrpir)xtmt  ^afrtimcte  fulpt. 


THE  TREES  IN  GOD'S  COURTS. 


DELIYfiRED  BT 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTOH. 


'*  Those  that  he  planted  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  shall  flonriah  in  the  courts  of 
oar  God.  They  shall  still  hring  forth  fruit  in  old  age ;  they  shall  he  fist  and 
flourishing ;  to  show  that  the  Lord  is  upright :  he  is  my  rocK,  and  there  is  no 
unrighteousness  in  him." — Psalm  zcii.  18 — 15. 

These  verses  occur  at  the  close  of  a  psalm  for  the  Sabbath  oyer  which 
there  rests  a  sabbatic  glory  of  perfect  calm,  of  hallowed  peace.  Amidst 
the  business  and  bustle  of  daily  life  the  great  trouble  of  the  psalmist 
was  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked,  but  it  does  not  trouble  him  at  all 
when  he  enters  the  sanctuary,  there  to  keep  the  holy  day.  He  then 
looks  upon  the  ungodly  who  prosper  in  the  world  as  so  much  flowering 
grass  in  their  beauty,  and  he  beholds  them  cut  down  and  utterly  des- 
troyed. And  it  is  meet  that  a  psalm  for  the  Sabbath  should  be  calm 
and  peaceful,  cloudless  and  far-seeing.  If  on  any  day  we  see  things  in 
their  right  light,  and  our  yiews  extend  farther  than  at  other  times, 
surely  it  should  be  on  the  day  of  sacred  rest.  I  know  a  friend  who 
wislied  to  take  a  house  in  Newcastle.  It  stood  on  an  eleyated  position, 
and  the  landlord,  who  wished  to  have  him  for  a  tenant,  took  him  to  the 
attic  of  the  house,  and  said,  "  What  a  view  there  is  from  this  window  ! 
Do  you  know,*'  said  he,  "  that  on  Sundays  you  can  see  Durham  Cathe- 
dral ?  "  **  On  Sundays !  **  said  my  friend,  with  a  look  of  surprise,  **  and 
why  not  on  other  days  ?'*  **  Well,"  said  the  landlord,  "  on  Sundays 
there  is  less  smoke,  and  so  you  can  see  farther."  And,  as  it  is  in  the 
natural  world,  so  it  should  always  be  in  the  spiritual — less  of  the  smoke 
of  this  world — less  of  the  dust  and  the  care  of  life,  and  therefore  a 
clearer  vision  of  the  things  which  are  beyond,  which  God  reveals  to 
spiritual  eyes.  Kead  and  sing  this  psalm  often,  and  may  your  heart 
constantly  be  in  that  sweet  restful  state. 

David  having  here  put  aside  this  trouble  which  he  so  often  brings 
up  in  the  psalms — the  frequent  prosperity  of  the  wicked,  as  they  exult 


410  UKTRUPOLITA!!   TABEttNACLE  PULPIT. 

is  power  imd  spread  themaeWea  like  a  groan  liay  tree,  whilst  tic 
ri^htcoiu  are  placed  nil  the  day  loiig  and  uluisteDed  every  moraing— 

after  putting  timt  aside,  )]0  dwelJa  upon  tUc  deligbtful  coadition  of  thv 
man  of  God,  and  lie  db6CTil)es  Litn  as  a  troe  that  is  planted  in  the  cggid 
of  God's  house,  growing,  flourishing;,  and  bearing  fruit  even  in  old  age. 
It  is  of  such  we  are  now  going  to  speak,  and  we  $hall  ii^li  your  aU«D- 
tion  to  /As  planting  ef  l/ie  trees,  Ihepromisf  that  Iheg  ahall  fiourith,  l/it 
amimued  ferlilili/ Ihey  exhibit,  aad  Ike  conclvsiee  proof  they  sfiow  of  GoSt 
faithfulness.  "Those  that  be  planted  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  skll 
flourish  in  the  eoarls  of  our  God." 

I.  The  planting.  It  sounds  oddly  to  yon  to  hear  of  planting 
a  tree  in  a  liouse,  and  of  its  flonriahing  in  courts ;  bot  you  will  plesw 
to  remember  that  an  oriental  house  is  a  sort  of  quadrangle,  it'vti 
four-square  burldin",  with  the  middle  open  to  the  sky,  and  genersllj 
there  is  a  small  garden,  in  which  a  palm  tree,  or  an  olire,  or  gome  olbkT 
evergreen  tree  (for  thL-y  generally  prefer  that  sort)  will  be  found 
planted :  so  that  what  teems  itrangG  to  ns — a  tree  planted  in  a  houft 
— was  not  at  all  strange  to  David  or  to  anybody  else  who  lived  in  (iie 
city  of  Jerusalem.  And  it  is  a  I'ery  beautiful  figure — this  being 
planted  within  the  four  courts  of  God's  house,  that  we  might  grow 
right  in  the  middle  of  the  place  where  God  with  his  family  deigm  O 
dwell. 

What,  then,  is  it  to  be  planted?  Well,  we  are  planted  in  God's 
hpnse  in  two  respects.  First,  in  regeneralion,  when  we  are  bom  into 
the  house  ;  and  secondly,  at  our  profession  0/  faith,  which  ahonld  be 

S  baptism,  when  we  are  publicly  bronght  into  the  house  and  planted  in 
I  likeness  of  Christ's  death  by  being  buried,  after  his  commandment, 
in  the  water. 

We  are  really  planted  in  the  courts  of  the  Lord's  honse  bi/  tla  ntw 
birth.  Then  we  become  the  children  of  God,  for  "  as  many  as  iBccired 
him  (that  is  to  say,  him  who  is  the  Divina  Word,  the  tme  Light,  the 
Sariour),  to  them  gave  he  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God,  cren  to 
them  that  believe  on  his  name  :  which  were  born,  not  of  blood,  nor  of 
the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God."  Every  man, 
the  world  over,  that  has  beeu  born  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  is  really  planted 
in  the  Lord's  house.  But  we  become  manifestly  and  \isibly  so  on  coD- 
fcssing  to  the  world  this  inward  and  spiritual  grace,  for  the  Lord 
has  thus  pnt  it,  you  know,  "He  that  with  his  heart  believeth,  and 
with  his  mouth  niaketh  confession,  shall  be  saved,"  so  that  when  I 
come  to  join  God's  people,  and  ask  to  be  admitted  to  their  fellowship, 
— when  I  come  to  tlie  Lord's  table  with  them,  and  publicly  own  luj-seif 
to  bo  one  of  the  Master's  servants — then  I  am  in  a  public  manner 
planted  in  the  house  of  the  Lord. 

Well,  this  being  the  tact,  let  ns  follow  the  figure  a  little  more 
closely. 

Planting  implies,  first,  that  IMre  has  been  something  dont  for  us  thai 
that  we  could  ftot  do  for  ourselves.  A  tree  cannot  plant  itself.  There 
are  self-sown  trees,  but  such  arc  not  spoken  of  in  the  text.  It  is  "  those 
that  be  planted  in  the  house  of  the  Lord."  And  you  know,  there  is  s 
necessity  that  there  should  be  a  work  of  grace  npou  oar  sonls, 
which    shall   come,   not    from   ourselves,    but   distinctly  bom  Ood, 


TM£  TB£KS  IN  GOP'S  COUBTS.  411 

for  *^  CTcry  plant  which  my  heavenly  Father  hath  not  planted  shall  be 
rooted  up."  It  cannot  plant  itself,  and,  if  it  could,  it  must  be  rooted 
up,  because  it  would  not  be  planted  by  the  heavenly  Father.  There 
must  be  wrought  upon  us,  in  order  to  our  being  truly  in  the  courts  of 
the  Lord*s  house,  a  work  of  grace  infinitely  beyond  the  power  of  the  will, 
or  all  the  power  that  dwells  in  human  nature.  We  must,  in  fact,  be 
new -created.  We  must  be  born  again,  AVe  must  have  as  great  a  work 
wrought  upon  us  as  was  wrought  upon  the  body  of  Christ  when  he  was 
raised  from  the  dead.  The  eternal  power  and  godhead  of  the  divine 
Spirit  must  put  forth  the  fulness  of  its  strength  to  raise  you  up  fi-om 
jrour  death  in  sin,  or  otherwise  you  will  be  like  scar  brancnes  and  cast 
off  pieces  of  wood,  but  never  will  you  be  trees  planted,  made  to  live 
and  to  grow  in  the  courts  of  the  Lord's  house.  There  must  be  some- 
thing done  for  us,  if  we  are  planted. 

That  implies,  too,  that  there  must  be  a  great  change  in  our  position, 
for  a  tree  that  is  planted  has  been  growing  somewhere  else.  It  has  to 
reach  a  certain  height  in  the  nurseryman  8  garden,  if  we  are  speaking 
af  England,  and  then  it  is  planted  where  it  is  meant  to  be  permanently 
fixed.  So  must  it  have  been  in  the  East.  The  tree  grew  somewhere 
else.  Ailer  a  time  it  was  dug  up,  its  roots  were  loosened,  it  was  taken 
away  from  the  place  where  it  had  been  accustomed  to  stand.  Many  a 
tender  rootlet  was  made  to  bleed,  and  it  was  then  carried  and  put  in 
another  place  altogether,  and  so,  from  being  outside  the  court  it  came 
to  be  inside  the  court  of  the  house  of  the  Lord.  So,  brethren  and 
sigtors,  if  we  are  to  answer  the  condition  described  in  the  text  we 
must  have  been  dug  up  and  transplanted.  This  is  to  have  undergone  a 
great  and  wonderful  change.  Ai*e  we  conscious  of  it  ?  Do  we  know 
oui'&elves  to  be  new  creatures  in  Christ  Jesus?  If  you  are  what  you 
always  were,  you  are  wliat  I  pray  you  may  not  always  be ;  but  if  you 
are  new,  changed,  transformed,  or,  to  come  back  to  the  text,  trans- 
planted, then  I  trust  you  may  continue  to  thrive  according  to  the 
promise,  "  They  that  be  planted  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  shall  flomish 
in  the  courts  of  our  God.'* 

Ah  me !  that  transplanting  business  is  often  very  painful,  and  while 
it  is  being  undergone  we  almost  think  that  we  are  going  to  be  destroyed. 
What  anxiety  it  causes ;  for  how  is  the  plant  to  know  what  it  is  being 
taken  up  by  the  roots  for  ?  Perhaps  it  fancies — or  rather  if  it  had  any 
intellect  it  would  fancy — that  it  was  taken  up  to  be  destroyed ;  just  as 
when  the  law  put  a  big  spade  down  to  our  roots,  and  began  to  loosen 
all  our  soil  about  us,  wc  thought,  "  Now  we  are  going  to  be  cut  down." 
But  wc  were  not ;  we  were  going  to  be  transplanted  from  the  field  of 
nature  into  the  garden  of  grace.  Blessed  be  God,  we  know  what  this 
means. 

Planting  means  not  only  that  something  has  been  done  for  us  that 
wc  could  not  do  for  ourselves,  and  that  a  great  change  has  taken  place 
in  our  position,  but  it  implies  that  ihei'e  is  life  in  us,  I  suppose  that  if 
we  speak  of  planting  a  post  or  planting  a  pillar  we  hai'dly  use  correct 
language.  We  plant  a  thing  that  has  life  in  it,  and  we  do  not  consider 
that  a  thing  has  been  planted  unless  it  be  a  living  thing.  Most  cer- 
tainly the  promise  of  the  text  could  not  be  fulfilled  to  any  but  a  living 
tree,  for  it  is  said — '*  They  that  be  planted  shall  flourish  and  they  shall 


UBTROPOLlTAir  TABKI 


"Thdt  little  garden  irdled  nround. 
Chosen  and  made  [)ceul{Ar  (^und, 
That  little  ipot  em^lo^ed  by  grace 
Outofthe  world's  wild  wildurneas," 

is  not  intended  to  be  occupied  by  dead  trees.  If  there  be  Bnch  in  it  Iw 
will  come  and  say,  " Cot  it  down!  AVhy  cuml)oreth  it  the  ground?" 
It  is  a  living  tree  that  he  desirea  to  have  there.  Bolored,  are  yoQ  ooi- 
scions  of  an  inner  life?  Does  there  lieiit  within  yon  another  pntae 
besides  that  which  1>ctokens  natursl  life,  the  poise  of  Btrong  desire  and 
love  to  God?  Is  there  within  you  the  heaving  of  anolhor  brents  tbn 
that  which  keeps  body  and  aool  together  ?  Is  there  the  breath  of  pnyu 
that  keeps  the  soul  and  God  together,  and  so  Veep'  the  man  in  spiritsil 
life  ?  Are  you  quickened  ?  Have  you  had  breathed  into  your  noetrili 
the  breath  of  the  life  of  God  ?  Is  there  within  you  the  incorrupt^ 
seed  which  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever? — God's  people  are  a  Uvii^ 
people,  and  if  we  do  not  know  the  life  of  God  we  know  not  God  at  »U. 
There  must  be  a  life  in  us. 

And  then,  to  complete  the  figure,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  fa<!t  of  out 
being  planted  implies  that  we  outxIvk  have  takfn  hoUl  of  the  soil  whrrm 
we  have  been  placed,  A  tree  that  is  rightly  planted,  so  as  to  flouheli, 
begins  to  send  out  its  roots — 'to  drink  in  moisture,  to  select  Irom  tbe 
earth  around  it  those  portions  which  are  fit  food  for  vegetable  life. 

Now,  beloved,  are  you  so  incorporated  with  the  t'hurch  of  God  thatjM 
have  got  a  grip  of  the  fellowship  of  the  saints,  that  you  have  efFectn^y  u^ 
hold  of  the  citizenship  of  our  Lord's  feithful  disciples  ?  Are  you  scekiu; 
for  rital  truth  to  sustain  your  soul's  vitality  ?  Do  yon  in  the  ordi- 
nances send  out  the  rootlets  of  your  desire,  to  seek  after  what  God  bu 
prepared  for  you  ?  Is  there  in  yon  a  living  sap  flowing,  which  sap  Ji 
being  fed  by  what  you  draw  in  from  the  soil  in  which  God  haa  plaoed 
you  ?  Sorely  you  know  what  this  means.  Sabbath  days  are  often 
feeding  times  to  you  ;  and  your  visits  to  the  Lord  in  prayer  are  build- 
ing np  times  to  your  spirit;  and  when  you  seareh  the  word  in  private 
andwnen  the  Holy  Ghost  communes  with  you  in  your  quiet  retirement — 
ay,  and  when,  even  in  the  midst  of  business,  your  soul  breathes  her  swifl 
ejaculations  np  to  heaven,  then  are  the  roots  of  your  soul  taking  hold 
of  Christ,  and  drawing  out  of  him  the  vital  clement  which  you  need. 
You  are  of  the  right  kind  if  this  be  the  case,  and  yoii  shall  flourish  in 
the  courts  of  our  God. 

You  see,  then,  the  figure,  and  what  is  meant  by  this  planting  in 
the  house  of  the  Lord. 

II.      Now,    secondty,    LET    UB    ENDEAVOUR   TO  GRASP  THE   PROUISI. 

"  Those  that  be  planted  shall  flonrish,"  "  Flovriah  "  they  well  may. 
Let  ns  be  sni-e  of  their  welfare. 

They  shall  flourish  because  God  has  said  that  thetj  shall.  His 
promises  arc  sure  to  be  fulfilled.  If  he  plants  a  tree  he  will  caose  it  to 
floiiriah.  There  seems  to  be  very  much  against  the  Christian,  many 
porils  to  which  he  is  exposed,  when  he  is  first  planted.  Indeed,  in  the 
early  childhood  of  Christian  life  we  undergo  a  world  of  trial.  Such  was 
k  our  weakness,  snd  such  oar  esposure  to  the  bleak  atmosphere  of  this 


THB  TREES  IN  GOD*S  COURTS.  413 

resent  evil  world,  the  chances  were  all  against  as.  But  there  is  no 
lance  with  Ood.  What  he  plants  is  sure  to  take  root.  If  he  says  it 
tail  flourish,  flourish  it  will.  Satan  may  seek  to  tear  it  up  ;  the  foxes 
Ay  try  to  spoil  the  vines  ;  there  may  be  chilling  winds ;  there  may  be 
ns  droughts ;  the  sun  may  seek  to  smite  it  by  day,  and  the  moon  by 
ignt;  but  God  hath  promised  that  it  shall  flourish,  and  flourish  it 
lUst;  therefore  I  invite  you,  young  Christians,  to  be  very  hopeful. 
ee  to  it  that  you  are  rightly  planted,  and  then  you  may  depend  upon 
.  that  you  will  really  flourish.  God  who  hath  been  pleased  to  give  you 
race  will  bestow  on  you  more  grace,  and  then  more  grace — grace  upon 
race — grace  for  every  exigence  and  every  emergency.  As  your  needs  arise 
hose  needs  shall  be  supplied.  Just  B!^  you  require  spiritual  health, 
piritual  health  shall  be  vouchsafed  to  you  if  you  seek  it  at  his  hands, 
nowing  that  it  is  at  his  disposal.  You  shall  not  be  a  half-starved 
christian — a  sort  of  living  skeleton  of  a  believer,  but  you  shall  flourish  ; 
ou  shall  be  peaceful,  happy,  strong,  useful.  Set  your  heart  upon  this, 
,nd  ask  the  Lord  to  make  you  thrive,  and  bloom,  and  fructify.  Your 
eaf  shall  not  wither,  and  he  will  cause  you  to  prosper  if  you  are  planted 
n  the  courts  of  the  Lord. 

Some  of  you,  perhaps,  are  Christian  men  who  have  received  the  Word 
vith  gladness  and  believed  to  the  saving  of  your  souls,  and  so  far  you 
ippear  to  be  in  the  courts  of  God's  house,  but  you  have  never  joined  the 
church,  or  made  a  profession  of  your  fkith,  which,  though  it  may  be 
rery  sincere,  is  not  very  apparent.  As,  however,  you  have  not  gone  in 
or  the  whole  of  the  planting,  you  cannot  reasonably  expect  to  realize  the 
vholc  of  the  flourishing.  I  like  to  know  that  I  have  given  myself 
irholly  up  to  the  Lord  according  to  his  command ;  not  having  merely 
embraced  one  part  of  the  gospel,  but  the  whole  of  it.  When  one  has 
x>ught  to  obey  it  in  its  entirety,  then  he  may  come  and  expect  to  have 
;he  promise  in  its  entireness  too.  If  you  are  altogether  Christians, 
slanted  in  his  house — not  merely  in  his  garden,  but  in  his  house — then 
fou  shall  flourish,  for  you  have  the  promise  that  you  shall.  And  flourish 
^ou  well  may,  because  of  the  goodness  of  the  soil.  They  are  quite  sure 
to  have  good  soil  in  the  little  garden  enclosed  by  the  house.  It 
may  be  rocky  outside,  but  when  a  man  has  built  the  four  walls  of  his 
house  in  the  East,  he  generally  takes  all  the  soil  that  is  in  the  middle 
iiway.  It  may  be  very  bad  and  poor,  but  then  he  has  brought  in 
baskets  the  richest  soil  that  he  can  possibly  get,  for  he  must  have  a 
good  tree  in  the  middle  of  his  house.  It  would  not  do  every  moment 
t)f  the  day  to  look  out,  or  rather  to  look  in,  and  to  see  a  little  scrubby 
tree,  half  alive.  No,  he  procures  the  best  soil  he  can  get,  and  those  that 
are  planted  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  are  planted  in  the  best  soil  possible. 
They  arc  planted  where  the  means  of  grace  abound.  They  are  planted 
where  Christians  help  one  another  with  mutual  fellowship.     They  are 

Slanted  where  the  ordinances  of  the  gospel  are  Ireely  enjoyed  by  all  who 
well  there.  They  are  planted  where  the  Holy  Spirit  has  promised  to 
abide.  They  are  planted  wherc  the  word  of  God  does  not  return  void. 
They  arc  planted  where  the  eye  and  the  heai't  of  Christ  perpetually  rest. 
They  are  i)huued  in  his  church — the  church  that  he  hath  redeemed  with 
his  most  precious  blood.  The  soil  is  good,  and  they  ought  to  flourish, 
and  they  shall. 


411  METROPOLTTAH  TJBERMAOI.K  PUIiPIT. 

And  then  they  are  planted  in  a  shelltred  pntHion.  Yon  know  'StA 
trees,  ei'en  if  they  have  good  Boil,  are  FoniotiiUM  a  great  d«l  kipt 
back  by  having  a  cold  northerly  aspect.  Tliey  mnj  bo  tery  much  liittm 
by  the  frost,  bnt  a  tree  that  is  planted  ri^lit  in  the  inidille  of  the  tbr» 
conrt,  surronnded  by  the  walla,  is  ghcliETcd.  There  is  tli«  natuil 
warmtliof  the  houiie  round  nboat  it. uitd  it  is  alielLered  IVom  that  vhich 
other  trees  out  in  the  \ineyard,  or  out  in  the  garden,  may  hnvc  to  endors. 
Oh,  how  sheltered  some  of  ns  have  boen  from  our  first  profeasion  of  faith. 
I  know  that  I  can  speak  to  soma  hare  who  bQg:nn  Christian  life  in  » 
class  in  the  Son  day- school,  where  a  loving  teacher  looked  afler  their 
spiritual  interests.  There  are  others  of  you  that  betran  your  Christiaa 
life  in  the  midst  of  a  warm-hearted,  camciit  chuii'li.  You  were  no 
Booner  seen  aa  a  member  than  two  or  thrwj  friends  took  hold  of  yon.  and 
they  did  all  they  could  to  cnconrsige  you,  gnido  yoo,  and  Rynipalhi« 
with  you.  Whenever  they  may  have  observed  a  little  lukewornineBS  or 
backsliding  in  your  manner,  they  have  looked  tiftcr  yon  as  a  mother 
aniious  for  her  child,  so  tenderly  have  yon  boon  niiFKcd  by  those  who 
watched  for  your  souls.  And  you  cannot  sorely  forget  how.  on  Sahballi 
days,  the  word  of  God  has  been  a  woudcrfnl  shelter  to  you.  "When  jour 
feet  had  almost  gone  there  has  been  the  very  word  to  hold  yon  np. 
When  you  felt  dispirited  there  hiis  been  a  promise  to  enconrage  yoo. 
When  you  have  been  ready  to  tni-n  hack  there  has  licen  an  exhortalioii 
that  has  stimulated  yon  once  more  to  go  forward;  and  so  yon  bars 
lived  inside  four  walls.  The  cold  could  not  get  at  you.  Ton  scarcely 
had  enough  of  the  cold  of  the  world  to  do  you  any  injury.  The  warm 
Bun  of  righteousness  was  refiectcil  upon  you,  not  only  did  it  come 
directly  upon  you  by  divine  favour,  but  it  was  reflected  upon  von  with 
grateful  sympathy  by  the  walls  of  the  hoiiso  of  the  Lord  in  which  ym 
Bad  been  planted.  Youknow  it  has  been  so.  Is  it  any  wonder  then  that 
you  flourish  ?  There  isalittle  wonder  sometimes  that  you  donotflonriah 
more,  and  that  you  do  not  bring  forth  more  fruit ;  for  what  nrore  could 
Qod  do  than  he  has  done  for  some  of  you  who  have  been  planted  in  ths 
house  of  the  Lord  ?  Are  you  not  like  a  vineyard  on  a  very  fruitful  hiO, 
which  he  has  hedged  about  and  walled,  and  in  which  Le  has  put  a  win»- 

Eress,  and  which  lie  has  watered  every  morning,  and,  lest  any  should 
nrt  it,  has  kept  night  and  day  ?  How  sour  tiie  grapes,  and  how  ffe» 
the  clusters  fit  for  the  Great  Vinfr-drcsser  to  gather  uo  one  knows  better 
than  yourselves:  Yet  they  ought  to  flourish,  because  they  are  planted 
in  good  soil,  and  because  they  are  placed  in  a  sheltered  pi'sitiun. 

Stili  wo  might  assign  a  better  reaiwn  why  they  should  flourish.  It  ii 
btcavM  they  are  so  near  tlu  husbamlman.  "  My  Father  is  the  husband- 
man," says  Christ.  They  that  be  planted  in  tlic  house  of  the  Lord  an 
planted  in  the  husbandman's  housr. 

Methinks  I  hear  some  one  say  "  I  do  not  wonder  that  snch  a  tjm 
flourishes,  because,  you  see,  the  Urcat  Yine-dresaer,  who  understasda  all 
abont  it,  has  it  on  the  wall  of  his  own  house.  He  sees  it  every  mominr, 
and  of  course  he  pays  very  special  attention  to  it."  Little  do  yon  andl 
know,  beloved,  what  special  attention  God  has  paid  to  ua  peisonallj 
and  individually.  Oh,  thei-e  be  some  of  us  upon  whom  tha  Lord  bu 
been  long  wont  to  look  with  a  tender  bnt  jealous  eye.  If  he  has  seen 
«  little  wrong  abont  ua  he  has  grieved  at  it,  and  felt,  "  I  must  put  it 


THE  TREES  IN  O0D*S  COUBTS.  415 

my."    When  he  has  seen  us  getting  a  little  cold  he  has  begun  at  onoe 

rouse  us  up,  for  he  has  loved  us  too  well  to  leave  us  exposed  to  even 
little  spintual  sickness.  He  has  said  sometimes,  "There  is  my 
nrant,  and  ho  will  get  proud  of  his  service,  or  of  his  success,  I  must 
ing  him  down/'  High  looks  and  haughty  thoughts  are  an  abomina- 
dh  in  his  sight.  Another  time  he  has  said,  "  Such-and-such  a  man  is 
tcreasing  in  wealth  ;  he  will  get  worldly-minded.  I  must  take  away 
ime  of  his  worldly  goods  that  he  may  take  more  account  of  his  treasures 
id  up  in  heaven,  and  set  his  heart  more  on  me.''  The  Lord  thy  God  is 
jealous  God.  Where  there  is  love  there  is  oftentimes  a  sensitiveness 
nich  stirs  up  jealousy.  The  greatness  of  God's  love  makes  him  very 
ialotis  for  us  and  verj  jealous  of  us.  If  he  sees  those  whom  he  very 
Luch  loves,  with  the  slightest  evil  thing  about  them,  he  is  quick  to 
bflerve  it  and  prompt  to  purge  it  away.  You  know  that  you  do  not  like 
)  see  a  spot  on  your  dear  child's  face.  You  will  have  it  washed  off  as 
xm  as  possible.  So  will  the  Lord  cleanse  his  people,  both  without  and 
Ithin.  The  care  and  the  trouble  he  has  had  with  us,  as  I  have  already 
lid,  none  of  us  can  tell.  We  ought  to  bring  forth  fruit,  to  the  profit  of 
lie  husbandman,  to  the  glory  of  God.  Branches  that  bring  forth  fruit 
e  purges.  Those  that  bring  forth  very  little  fruit  he  lets  very  much 
lone.  If  there  be  a  man  that  brings  forth  much  fruit,  that  man  will 
lave  much  trial,  because  it  will  pay  the  vine-dresser  to  prune  him. 
lome  branches  will  not  pay  for  it.  They  will  never  do  more  than  they  are 
oing,  and  so  there  they  are,  and  thus  they  are  left  to  prove  their 
aebleness ;  but  those  that  will  pay  for  pruning  will  be  pruned  again 
ni.  again.  And,  truly,  when  the  man  of  God  is  in  his  right  mind,  he 
rill  bless  the  Lord  for  the  honour  he  puts  upon  him  when  he  afflicts 
dm  with  the  view  of  making  him  still  more  useful.  This  is  evermore 
►nr  Lord's  design.  Does  he  not  say  that  they  shall  never  perish  whom 
le  protects  and  provides  for,  holding  them  in  his  hands  ?  But,  as  they 
annot  flourish  if  they  run  to  wood,  he  will  be  quite  sure  to  use  his  knife 
o  take  off  this  new  shoot  and  that  new  shoot,  because  it  is  not  fruit- 
)earing  ^ood,  and  he  takes  it  away,  and  he  leaves  the  vine  in  such  a 
ondition  that  it  will  bring  forth  good  fruit  in  due  time.  They  shall 
lonrish,  and  well  they  may,  when  they  are  so  near  to  the  Great  Hus- 
Muidman's  hand. 

Now,  if  any  of  you  are  not  flourishing,  though  you  are  planted  in  the 
LOUSe  of  the  Lord,  I  am  sure  it  is  not  through  any  faultiness  on  God's 
Murt.  Let  such  a^  him,  and  ask  themselves,  the  reason  why,  and  go 
o  him  in  prayer,  and  say — "  Good  Lord,  I  am  planted  in  thy  house : 
oake  me  to  flourish  according  to  thy  word." 

III.  Well,  now,  as  to  the  continuaitcb  op  thib  flourishino, 
»ur  third  head  is  full  of  consolation.  "  They  shall  bring  forth  fruit  in 
ild  age,  they  shall  be  fat  and  flourishing." 

There  are  some  that  begin  with  a  spurt,  and  it  is  soon  over ;  and 
here  are  some  trees  that  promise  exceedingly  well  for  fruit,  but  the 
)lo8^m8  did  not  knit,  hence  they  fail  to  yield  fruit  in  due  season. 
3ut  those  whom  God  plants,  and  whom  he  makes  to  flourish,  bring 
orth  fruit,  and  continue  to  bring  it  forth  till  old  age.  During  all  their 
oath  and  all  their  manhood  they  keep  fruitful,  and  then  they  bring 
orth   fruit  when  their  years  decline  and  their  days  are  numbered 


416  IfBTROPOLITAN  TABERNACLB  PULPIT. 

When  others  are  in  the  sear  and  yellow  leaf,  then  are  their  fimits  ripe 
and  mellow.  When  others  are  decaying  they  are  ripening.  They  are 
growing  sweeter,  better,  holier,  when  others  are  not  growing  at  all. 
They  shall  bring  forth  fruit  in  old  age — that  time  when  one  docs  not 
expect  much  fruit  beariug — when  the  strength  faileth,  when  the 
capacity  for  projecting  seems  to  have  gone,  and  the  power  for  carmng 
out  what  is  projected  has  become  very  little.  "  They  shall  bring  fortn 
fruit  in  old  age."  This  is  not  merely  a  cheering  promise,  but  it  is  a  very 
gratifying  fact  that  God's  people  do  bring  forth  fruit  in  old  age.  Very 
luscious  fruit  some  of  them  produce.  Yea,  we  look  for  the  best  fruit  in 
the  oldest  saints.    What  fruit,  then,  you  will  ask,  do  they  bring  forth? 

Well,  there  is  the  fruit  of  testimony,  I  distinctlv  recollect  hearing  a 
blind  old  minister  talk  of  the  lovingkindness  of  the  Lord  when  I  was 
sixteen  or  seventeen,  and  the  encouragement  that  he  gave  me  has  never 
departed  from  me.  A  young  man  could  not  have  done  that,  because  he 
had  not  attained  so  much  experience ;  but  the  weight  of  years,  and  even 
of  infirmities,  made  that  venerable  blind  man's  testimony  very,  very 
weighty  to  my  soul.  **  They  shall  bring  forth  fruit  in  old  age."  JSlessed 
be  his  name,  I  can  tell  of  the  goodness  of  the  Lord  to  me  these  five- 
and-twenty  years  or  more,  since  I  have  known  him ;  but  think  of  a 
man  who  can  speak  of  fifty  years,  and  there  are  some  children  of  God 
who  can  do  so.  There  is  a  member  of  this  church  who  has  been  a 
member  of  it  for  seventy  years,  and  she  can  tell  yon  how  good  the  Lord 
has  been  to  her.  And  the  fruit  is  riper,  you  know.  There  is  a  comu- 
lative  force  of  evidence,  because  if  a  thing  has  been  true  fiffcy  years, 
and  a  person  has  tried  it  in  all  sorts  and  shapes  and  ways  and  modes 
and  conditions  and  circumstances  fifty  years — well,  who  is  to  contradict 
that  ?  It  must  be  so,  and  you  feel  the  testimony  is  a  blessed  froit  of 
old  age. 

Saints  bring  forth  fruit  in  the  way  of  savour  when  they  grow  dd. 
Many  young  ministers  can  rattle  out  some  of  the  truths  of  the  gospel 
very  readily  ;  but  if  you  want  to  taste  the  sweetness,  to  feel  the  nnction, 
to  enjoy  the  savour,  you  must  hear  one  that  has  had  long  and  deep 
experience.  It  must  be  so.  There  is  an  inimitable  mellowness  about 
the  Christian  who  has  grown  old  in  his  Master's  service.  If  you  want 
to  hear  about  the  sea,  talk  to  an  "  old  salt."  If  you  want  to  hear  about 
war,  talk  to  an  old  soldier  that  has  been  in  the  battle  and  smelt  gun- 
powder, and  knows  what  it  is  to  have  lost  a  leg.  He  is  the  man  to  tell 
you.  And  so,  if  you  want  to  know  about  the  real  deeps,  the  truth,  the 
vitality,  the  power  of  religion,  you  must  not  go  to  boys  :  you  must  go 
to  those  who  bring  forth  fruit  in  old  age,  because  they  can  speak  ont  of 
the  fulness  of  their  soul.  Have  not  we  had  some  in  this  church — there 
are  such  now,  and  there  are  some  in  heaven — who,  every  time  we  used 
to  hear  them  speak,  let  drop  pearls  and  diamonds  while  they  talked 
about  what  the  Lord  had  done  for  them.  Dear  old  Mr.  DransfidU — 
how  many  a  time  he  has  electrified  us  when  he  used  to  stand  on  that 
platform,  and  talk  about  the  blessedness  of  God  and  the  sweetness  of 
religion  to  his  own  soul.  You  used  to  think  a  great  deal  more  of  it 
because  he  was  so  old.  I  am  sure  you  did.  It  was  good  in  itself,  but 
still  there  was  the  age  of  the  man  at  the  back  of  it ;  so  in  that  case  the 
age  gave  a  power  to  the  experience  which  he  told  out  to  you. 


THE  TREES  IN  00D*8  COURTS.  417 

The  aged  Christian  ought  to  have,  and  I  hope  he  often  has,  the  fruit 
tit  patience.  After  having  suffered  so  long  and  enjoyed  the  mercies  of 
G^  80  long,  he  ought  to  learn  to  be  patient.  I  once  heard  a  good 
Christian  man  say  that  he  was  confessing  a  fault.  He  said, '^  I  am 
afraid  that  the  fruit  of  my  old  age  is  peevishness."  "No,''  I  said, 
•*  that  is  not  a  fruit  of  your  old  age  ;  it  is  a  fruit  of  your  old  nature." 
But  the  fruit  of  old  age,  where  there  is  grace  in  old  age,  should  be 
patience.  And  oh  I  what  fruit  some  of  God's  servants  do  show  by  way 
of  patience,  in  poverty,  in  sickness,  in  infirmities.  There  used  to  sit 
here  an  aged  woman  who  could  not  hear  anything  I  said,  but  she  always 
came  because  she  thought  it  was  setting  a  good  example  to  the  young 
people  at  home  to  attend  the  house  of  God.  Whenever  I  used  to  speak 
with  her  there  was  such  a  charm  about  her  conversation,  because,  though 
she  was  much  tried,  she  never  uttered  a  complaint.  She  could  only 
bless  the  name  of  the  Lord  for  everything.  You  remember  Dr.  Hamil- 
ton's story  of  poor  old  Betty,  who  could  not  do  anything  but  lie  in  bed 
and  cough,  but  she  said,  *'  Well,  bless  the  Lord,  whatever  the  Lord  has 
told  me  to  do  I  have  tried  to  do  it ;  and  when  he  said,  *  Betty,  bring 
np  your  family,'  I  tried  to  bring  them  up  in  the  fear  of  God.  When 
he  said,  *  Betty,  go  to  the  house  of  God  and  sing  my  praises,'  I  was 
delighted  to  do  iL  And  when  he  said,  '  Betty,  go  up  stairs  and 
lie  in  bed  and  cough ;'  well  I  vviU  do  it,"  she  said, "  and  bless  the  name 
of  the  Lord  for  letting  me  do  it,  so  long  as  there  is  anything  to  be  done 
for  him." 

Now,  the  promise  is  that  if  we  be  thus  planted,  as  I  have  described, 
"we  shall  be  enabled  to  bring  forth  fruit  in  old  age.  Anything  that  we 
do  with  a  sincere  desire  to  glorify  God  in  it,  and  anything  that  we  bear 
with  patience  and  quietness  accordiug  to  the  divine  will,  is  sweet  and 
gracious  fruit.     We  can  bring  forth  that  fruit  in  our  old  age. 

One  of  the  most  delicious  fruits  that  Christians  produce  in  their  old 
age  is  calm,  quiet  confidence  in  God,  John  Bunyan  has  described  this 
in  his  "  Pilgrim's  Progress,"  in  the  beautiful  picture  of  the  land  Beulah. 
I  shall  not  at  all  object  to  have  a  grey  head,  and  eyes  like  lamps  whose 
wasting  oil  is  spent,  weak  shoulders  and  tottering  knees,  if  I  may  get 
to  Beulah.  You  know  that  he  describes  it  as  a  land  that  was  just 
on  the  verge  of  the  river,  and  so  near  to  the  celestial  countiy  that  the 
shining  ones  did  often  cross  the  river,  and  there  was  a  pervading  smell 
of  sweet  spices  all  over  the  land,  because  it  lay  so  near  to  the  city  of 
the  blessed  that  when  the  wind  blew  that  way  it  wafted  the  spices 
across,  and  they  could,  in  quiet  places  of  the  land,  often  hear  the 
songs  of  the  shining  ones  who  wandered  there.  The  inhabitants  were 
at  perfect  rest.  The  land  was  called  Beulah,  for  God's  delight  was  in 
her.  They  that  dwelt  in  her  were  called  Heph-zibah,  for  they  were 
married  unto  the  Lord ;  and  they  were  sitting  there,  many  of  them, 
close  by  the  brink  of  the  river,  waiting  till  a  message  should  come  from 
the  king,  for  the  king's  messengers  every  now  and  then  came  into  the 
country,  and  they  said,  "  The  pitcher  is  broken  at  the  cistern.  Rise  up, 
my  love,  and  come  away."  And  so,  one  by  one,  the  Beulahites  crossed 
that  river.  On  bright  sunshiny  mornings  they  were  known  to  cross 
it  singing,  **  0  gi*ave,  where  is  thy  victory  ?"  Well,  it  is  that  patient 
abiding,  that  quiet  waiting,  that  noly  confidence,  that  divine  anticipa- 


41ft  MBTROKILITAB  TASBBRAOLB  PDI.rtT. 

tion,  that  sweet  expectsdon  of  the  coming  glory,  that  is  one  of  tlw 
fruita  which  belieTera  bring  fonh  in  old  age,  ami  whencTer  we  ee«  it  n 
prise  those  golden  apples,  and  long  for  the  time  when  we  may  bar 
them  too. 

But  now  notice  that  the  text  doea  not  speak  of  old  age  merely  bring- 
ing forth  fmit,  bnt  it  says — "They  shall  be  fat  andflonrishing/'whicfc   | 
means  that  Christiana,  in  their  advanced  years,  aliail  have  a  fiilnsssot 
Bavour  and  life  in  them.    I  have  known  some  Christiana,  both  old  and 
young,  that  have  been  rery  dry  aticka,  not  fat  and  flourishing,  ce^ 
tainly ;  they  had  very  little  savmr,  very  little  unction,  though  they  hid 
Tery  aharp  teeth  to  bite  the  yonnf;  people  with  ;  they  were  very  critical,, 
very  ready  to  look  harshly  at  thcjii,  and  ask  them  hard  qncstionB ;  aai,  : 
if  they  could  not  spell  the  biggest  word  in  the  whole  confraaion  of  failji,.« 
they  have  said,  "Ah,  the  young  people  nowaday  are  not  like  what  tlHj"| 
used  to  be  in  my  time."     We  hnve  known  some  of  that  sort.     Bnt  when 
they  are  planted  in  the  honse  of  God,  and  God  makes  them  to  flouriBb, 
they  are  full  of  the  juice  of  love ;  they  are  i^:ill  of  Christian  kindnos 
and  gentleness  ;  they  are  full  of  life  ;  they  are  fall  of  real  vigour— not 
the  vigour  of  the  flpBh,  but  the  vigour  of  the  Spirit ;  and  they  love  the 
Lord  and  delight  in  him,  and  delight  to  help  the  young  people,  and  Co 
encourage  them  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord.     Oh,  I  like  to  see  an  old  mu 
thus  fat  and  flourishing. 

And  it  ia  added,  in  addition  to  their  being  fat,  that  they  shall  bg 
flourishing.  It  means  that  the  aged  believer  ehall  have  a  special  v^nn. 
This  flourishino;  means  his  profession ;  and  how  delightful  is  the  pro- 
fession of  Christianity  in  advanced  age.  I  do  not  mean  that  som« 
people  get  exceedingly  attached  to  the  pastor  whom  they  have  h  wd  fot 
many,  many  years.  One  old  woman  nscd  to  say  that  she  liked  to  heW 
the  old  minister  better  than  anybody  else.  "  Well,  but,"  they  said,  "  he 
is  getting  very  feeble."  "  Oh,"  said  she.  "  bnt  then  1  recollect  what  he 
used  to  be,  and  I  would  sooner  see  him  shake  his  head  than  I  woidd 
hear  anybody  else  preach."  And  I  have  no  doubt  that,  thongh  tlut 
grows  to  be  an  infirmity  and  folly,  there  ia  something  praiseworthy  in 
it,  because  you  recollect  the  times  and  aeasona  when  tlie  Lord  refi^hed 
your  soul  by  him :  and  there  is  a  moral  glory  about  a  man  as  yon  look 
at  him  who  has  been,  say  for  fifty  years,  living  and  labouring  as  a  ^blic 
professing  Christian,  without  a  stain  upon  his  reputation — not  a  spot 
on  his  character.  Why,  the  young  people  say,  "  BIcsa  God  !  if  he  hai 
kept  him,  why  should  he  not  kocp  me ;  and  if  the  Lord  has  sustained 
him  under  many  trials,  why  should  ho  not  sustain  me  ?"  It  is  not 
what  the  man  says ;  it  is  the  man  that  aays  it  that  gives  force  to  all  he 
says.  It  is  what  you  know  is  behind  the  voice  ;  it  is  the  experience 
of^the  Lord's  goodness;  it  is  thi^  long-continued  honourable  conduct 
which  God  has  enabled  hire  to  evince,  and  to  show  to  others,  by  the 
abounding  grace  that  waa  within  him,  which  ]>reache5  in  aceente  louder 
than  the  finest  voice  can  articulate. 

Kow,  I  do  pray  that  even  young  man  here— and  I  am  glad  to  see  so 
many  young  men — will  aeok  to  be  one  day  amongst  the  old  men  wtoiB 
profession  shall  be  the  very  strength  of  the  church,  because  of  this  CM- 
ustency.  I  will  not  say  to  my  elder  brethren — because  the  Lord  will  saj 
it  to  tliett — that  they  engbfc  td  rMBettber  what  manner  of  people  thef 


THE  TREKS  DT  OOD'S  OOURTS.  4W 

Qglit  to  be^  seeing  that  Ood  has  been  so  gracious  to  them  these  many 


IV.    I  close  with  my  fourth  point,  which  is  the  manifestation 

KAT  AFPOUDS  CONCLUSIVE  PROOP  OF  THE  DIVINE  FAITHFULNESS.     "To 

haw  that  the  Lord  is  upright/'  These  good  folks  are  to  bring  forth 
hiit,  and  to  be  fat  and  flourishing,  on  purpose  to  manifest  before  the 
yes  of  all  men  "  That  the  Lord  is  upright :  he  is  my  rock,  &ad  there  is 
i6  unrighteousness  in  him." 

"  That  the  Lord  is  upright."  Well,  how  does  the  fruit-bearing  of  an 
ged  Christian  show  that  ?  Why,  it  shows  that  God  has  kept  his  promise. 
le  has  promised  that  he  will  never  leave  them  nor  forsake  them.  There 
'on  see  it.  He  has  promised  that  when  they  are  weak  they  shall  be 
irong.  There  you  see  it.  He  has  promised  that  if  they  seek  him 
hey  shall  not  lack  any  good  thing.  There  you  see  it.  He  has  promised 
lieniy  "Thy  bread  shall  be  given  thee ;  thy  water  shall  be  sure."  Hear 
irhat  they  have  to  say,  and  you  will  see  it.  He  has  said,  "  Even  to  hoar 
[laixn  I  am  he.  I  have  made  and  I  will  bear,  and  I  will  carry  you  as 
in  the  days  of  old."  There  you  have  it.  Ask  them.  There  you  see 
it.  We  put  "  Q.  E.  D."  at  the  end  of  a  proposition  when  it  is  proved. 
Bo  you  may  put  that  down  at  the  end  of  the  problem  of  lite.  God  is 
good  to  his  people.  The  old  man  stands  up,  and  says,  "  Truly  God  is 
good  to  Israel.  If  you  could  hear  my  story,  young  man,  you  would 
see  it  before  your  eyes,  and  it  would  show  that  the  Lord  is  upright." 

Nor  is  it  only  that  he  keeps  his  promises,  but  the  Lord  is  kind  and 
generous  towards  his  servants.  I  always  think  it  a  shameful,  heartless 
thing  to  turn  adrift,  when  he  gets  old,  a  man  who  has  been  in  your  service 
from  his  youth.  It  is  one  of  the  things  that  have  become  more  common 
in  present  than  in  former  times,  to  turn  out  old  servants.  Since  you 
have  had  the  pith  of  their  life — the  marrow  out  of  their  bones,  do  keep 
a  roof  over  their  heads ;  grant  them  a  pension,  or  at  least  a  pittance ; 
supply  them  with  a  bit  of  bread  and  cheese  till  they  die.  I  think  it  is  only 
right  that  an  old  servant,  a  faithful  servant,  should  be  so  treated.  You 
know  how  David  puts  it.  "  0  God,  thou  hast  taught  me  from  my  youth, 
and  hitherto  have  I  declared  thy  wondrous  works.  Now  also  when  I 
am  old  and  grey-headed,  0  God,  forsake  me  not."  It  is  not  likely  that 
he  would,  is  it?  Such  a  God  as  he  turn  his  old  servants  off!  You 
remember  the  Amalekite  who  had  a  master  that  was  an  Egyptian,  and 
the  master  left  him  to  perish,  and  David  found  him.  Ah,  well,  that 
is  how  the  Egyptian  masters  do,  but  that  is  not  how  our  Master  does. 
Thoa  wilt  not  leave  or  desert  me  when  my  age  and  my  infirmities 
multiply  upon  me.  When  these  eyes  grow  dim  thou  wilt  look  upon  me ; 
when  another  shall  guard  me,  and  lead  me  whither  I  would  not,  thou 
still  wilt  be  my  friend  and  helper,  and  lay  thy  finger  on  ray  eyelids 
as  I  close  them  in  the  hour  of  death.  It  is  a  faithful  God  we  serve, 
and  he  keeps  his  people  alive  in  their  old  age  that  they  may  show  that 
he  is  a  faithful  and  upright  God. 

Now,  David  added  at  the  end,  "  He  is  my  rock,  and  there  is  no  un- 
righteousness in  him."  I  want  every  one  of  my  elderly  friends  to  add 
his  Amen  to  this  sentence,  and  to  set  his  seal  that  God  is  true.  Come 
forward  as  witnesses,  attest  the  deed  while  it  is  being  executed,  and  put 
your  nafiaefe  t6  the  record  ktA  ftay,  "  I  bear  t^itness  to  that.*'     At  least 


4M  SKTSOFOUTAM  TJLBEBKACLS   PUIflT. 

I  waat  70a  in  the  sil?nc«  of  toot  hearts  to  oome  and  say,  "  Yes,  I  an 
hew  witness."  I>»T:d  sars,  "He  is  my  rock."  Mj  aged  brethren,  can 
vv>tt  saT,  "  God  e  ibe  rack  on  which  my  hope  ig  foaiided — mr  foanda- 
live,  utd  be  bu  mm  bikd  ne.  The  root  will  never  shake,  ut^cr 
tui>\-«.  aenr  give  wxj.    He  K  the  rock  of  my  defeoce— the  'rock  d[ 

rcdfft  fvr  me.'  I  haie  hidden  mywlf  in  him,  and  I  have  been  saL 
b  ctt»  cwk  <i(  say  ^tdng.  I  hxve  dwelt  in  him  and  lived  in  him, 
aai  I  tMT«  {uoni  hhn  my  catffe  Uid  my  high  tower.  He  is  a  rock  for 
ttnAtiUitbihcT.''  C^ib  jkm  saj  that,  bRtfaicn  ?  Ue  has  nt-vcr  cfaangud— 
iKxw.  He'has  bun' "  viUnat  TamUenreES  or  shadow  of  tuniing.'' 
Gvery  «v»l  utd  per&d  gift  ham  I  nodTcd  from  him.  Bear  wiuttM 
gv>  tc'  ^liiis  is  vfaal  is  w«aied  in  tUs^e — that  you  should  benr  witnn 
itkM  tnAl  tsantck,  finu,  ttron^  fcithfiil.  immnlablc— the  defeut'e  ofliit 

And  then  "  there  is  no  onngbtoiaBeii  in  liim."     I  woold  have  yoa 
t«ar  vitneas  to  that.    Von  httve  had  wme  sbarp  troubles.     Hare-  job 
eter  had  more  than  yon  oaght  to  hare ':    You  have  had  many  lofists. 
ilate  yon  really  lout  anything  in  l>eing  a  ChriatiiLD  ?     You  ha^e  hecn 
brought  very  low.     Have  you  ever  been  left  and  descrttid  altogether? 
Ton  hare  gone  through  lire  and  throogh  mtei,  but  ha^  the  Sie  coa- 
snmedyou?     Has  the  tvater  drowned  tod?     If  yon  hare  anything  tu 
say  against  God,  you  old  a-.rvants  of  hie,  let  us  hear  it.    No,  but  the 
older  God's  people  get  the  more  they  praise  him  ;  and  one  reason  whj    ' 
I  am  sore  that  God  moat  be  a  good  God  is  that,  I  always  find  that  ul     I 
hia  servants  want  to  get  their  childrea  into  the  smic  bouse,  tntii  ibe 
same  family.    A  man  is  not  badly  treated  by  his  master  when  ho  eaji,    I 
"  My  ambition  is  to  have  my  boy  follow  me."     Oh,  I  can  speak  well  « 
my  Lord  and  MasKr  iu  all  that  ho  has  ever  given  me  to  do,  but  it  ii    | 
the  joy  of  my  soul  to  Ihiuk  that  my  sous  should  follow  me  in  the  lore    , 
of  Christ,  and  the  preaching  of  the  gospel     "We  who  are  yonnger  men,    1 
but  yet  who  have  had  a  g»>od  deal  of  tossing  lo  and  iro,  can  say,  "  H« 
is  my  Lord,  and  there  is  uo  un righteousness  in  him.     No,  not  a  Aiv 
in  him — not  one  uukindness,  not  one  uuiitiUifuhiesf,  not  one  foigettiil> 
nesa,  not  one  aagry  word,  not  one  thing  but  what  has  been  fhll  oilov&" 
He  has  said,  "  I  have  awom  that  I  would  not  !;e  vrrotli  with  thee, « 
rebnke  thee,"  md  he  has  kept  bis  promise ;  and  np  to  this  hoar  m 
cannot  discover  speck,  spot,  or  flaw  iu  all  the  transactions  of  his  pron- 
denee.      Though   Bometimes   they  have  been   mysterious,  they   havi 
always  been  right :  blessed  be  his  name  for  ever  and  ever. 

Ob,  who  would  not  be  planted  in  the  courts  of  such  a  God  as  this,  to 
be  kept  even  to  old  age,  and  lo  bo  blessed  with  snch  uuspc^ikable  bleES- 
ings  world  without  end?  God  grant  you  all  to  be  called  trees  of 
righteousness,  the  planting  of  the  Lord  that  he  might  be  glorified. 


PoBTioN  OP  ScKiPTURB  Rkad  BEFORE  Skemon — Psahn  xoii. 


Hymns  nioii  "Ode  Own  Hthw  Book"— 2.3,  178,  732. 


JRdppIttmt  iiatr^rnaxle 


THE  DANGER  OP  UNCONFESSED  SIN. 


%      I 


D£LIYEBED  BT 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

i^  ITHS  MSTJROPOLITAK  TABSBNACLE,  NEWINQTOIT. 


*^  'When  I  kept  Jilence,  my  bones  waxed  old  through  my  roaring  all  the  day  long.  ** 
— ^RnOm  xxxii.  3. 

Ht  is  well  known  that  in  ordinary  cases  grief  which  is  kept  within  the 

dbosom  grows  more  and  more  intense.    It  is  a  Tery  great  relief  to  shed 

i^teare^;  it  gives  a  yent  to  the  heart.   We  sometimes  pity  those  who  weep, 

Int  there  is  a  grief  too  deep  for  tears,  which  is  far  more  worthy  of 

iximpassion ;  we  ought  most  to  pty  those  who  cannot  weep.  A  dry  sorrow 

is  a  terrible  one,  but  clear  shining  often  follows  the  rain  of  tears.    Tears 

-are  hopefol  things ;  they  are  the  dewdrops  of  the  morning  foretelling 

ihe  coming  day.    So  is  it  also  a  very  great  consolation  to  teU  yonr  story 

to  a  friend :  I  do  not  know  whether  it  would  not  be  a  comfort  to  speak 

it  to  a  little  child,  even  if  the  child  could  not  understand  you.    There  is 

something  in  telling  your  sorrow  and  letting  it  out ;  otherwise  it  is  like 

a  mountam  tarn  which  has  no  outlet,  into  which  the  rains  descend  and 

ihe  torrents  rush,  and  at  last  the  banks  are  broken  and  a  flood  is 

caosed.    Let  thy  soul  flow  forth  in  words  as  to  thy  common  griefs,  it 

is  well  for  thee.  A  festering  wound  is  dangerous.  Many  have  lost  their 

reason  because  they  had  good  reason  to  ten  their  sorrows,  but  had  not 

reason  enough  to  do  so.    Much  talk  hath  in  it  much  of  sin,  but  a  heart 

.fiall  of  agony  must  speak  or  burst ;  therefore  let  it  talk  on  and  even 

jspeat  it^lf,  for  in  so  doing  it  will  spend  itself. 

"  Sorrow  weeps  I 
And  spends  its  bitterness  in  tears  ; 
M^  cmld  of  sorrow, 

W  eep  out  the  fulness  of  thy  passionate  grief, 
And  drown  m  tears 
The  bitterness  of  lonely  years." 

We  shall  now,  however,  think  of  spiritual  sorrows,  and  to  these  the 
same  rule  applies.    "  When  I  kept  silence,"  and  did  not  pour  out  my 
sorrow  where  I  ought  to  have  confessed  it,  "my  bones  waxed  old 
through  my  roaring  all  the  day  loug." 
]N0.  1,366. 


k 


428  HSTKOPOUTAH  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Ib  it  not  a  great  mercj  for  ue  that  we  have  tbe  Book  of  PssJot, 
and  the  life  of  anch  a  man  as  Darid  ?  Biographies  of  most  peopk 
iiowada;ra  are  like  the  portraits  of  a  past  generation,  when  the  art  of 
flatter;  in  oils  was  at  ita  height.  There  in  no  greater  cheat  thnn  i 
modem  biography  :  it  is  not  the  man  at  all,  hnt  what  he  might  hate 
been  if  he  nad  not  been  something  else.  They  give  yon  a  lock  of  hii 
hair,  or  his  wig,  or  his  old  cont,  hnt  seldom  the  man :  thev  makt 
hnge  Yolnmes  oat  of  a  heap  of  hia  letters  which  ought  to  have  haen 
bnmed,  and  copy  little  scraps  of  pictures  which  he  nsed  to  draw  foe 
friends,  and  neither  tbe  letters  nor  the  sketches  onght  ever  to  hare  been 

fiablished.  Like  burglars,  they  break  into  a  man's  chamber  and  pi?- 
oin  his  hidden  things  ;  they  hold  np  to  the  pnbltc  eye  what  was  mew^ 
for  privacy  only,  and  expose  the  seeret^  of  the  man's  heart  and 
hearth.  Things  which  the  man  would  never  have  drawn  or  writiai 
if  he  had  thought  that  they  would  meet  the  public  eye  are  dragged 
forth  and  brought  ont  as  prei'ioiis  things,  and  so  they  are,  but 
preciona  nonaense.  We  hiivc  uo  biographers  nowadays.  When 
BoBwell  died  the  greatest  of  all  biographers  died,  and  he  was  not  &r 
removed  from  a  fooh  If  a  man  lives  a  noble  life  he  may  well  ahrink 
from  dying,  becanae  he  knows  what  will  become  of  him  nowadays  when 
writers  of  hia  memoirs  nnearth  him  and  tear  him  to  pieces,  David's 
psalms  are  his  best  memorial  There  you  have  not  the  man's  exterior, 
bnt  hia  inward  sonl ;  they  do  not  reveal  the  outward  manifestations  of 
the  man,  bnt  you  see  the  man's  heart — the  inner  David,  the  David 
that  grcnned  and  the  David  that  wept,  the  David  that  sighed  and 
the  David  that  sinned,  the  David  that  ycnmed  after  God,  and  the 
David  that  was  eateo  np  with  the  zeal  of  God's  honse — the  man  who 
was  bom  in  sin  and  groaned  over  sin,  and  was  yet  the  man  ajler  Cod'i 
own  heart.  What  a  wonderftil  autobiography  of  a  wonderful  life  thil 
Book  of  Psalms  is !  David  was  a  many-sided  man,  and  bis  lift 
was  Uke  the  lite  of  onr  Lord  in  this  respect — that  it  seemed  to 
comprehend  the  lives  of  all  other  men  within  itself.  There  is  no 
man,  I  suppose,  who  has  knonti  the  Lord  in  any  age  since  David  wrote 

.  but  has  seen  himself  in  David's  psalms  as  in  a  looking-glass,  and  has 

I  said  to  himself,  "  This  man  knows  aU  about  mo.  He  has  been  into 
every  room  of  my  sonl — into  ils  lowest  cellar  and  into  its  loftiest  toweri 

I  he  has  been  with  me  in  the  dens  of  my  inbred  sin  iind  in  the  palaces  of 
my  fellowship  with  Christ,  from  whiih  I  have  looked  upon  the  gloiy 

I  of  God,"  Here  is  a  man  who  "  seems  to  be,  not  one,  but  ull  man- 
kind's epitome."  Though  we  monra  over  David's  sin,  yet  we 
thank  God  that  it  was  permitted,  for  if  h''  lind  not  so  fnHcn  he 
had  not  been  able  to  help  as  when  we  are  conscious  of  tran^^nAioa. 
He  could  not  have  so  minutely  described  our  grieis  if  be  had  not 
felt  the  same.  David  lived,  in  this  respect,  for  others  as  welt  as  te 
himself. 

I  am  thankful  that  David  was  permitted  to  try  the  experiment 
of  silence  after  his  great  sin,  for  he  will  now  tell  us  what  came  of  it— 
"  When  I  kept  eiience,  my  bones  waxed  old  through  my  roaring  alt  tho 
daylong." 

We  shall  apply  this  first,  as  it  should  he,  to  the  erring  child  of  Oti 
amvinadof  htx  «m;  and  then,  secondly,  we  shall  lemiad  yon  tJut  the 


V 


THftr]»ASSBB'«rfUirOOHn88Bro  BBT.  4^ 

same  rale  holds  good  with  4A«  awakemd  mnn&r  in  whom  th$  Spirii  of 
Ood  has  bmfun  to  wmk  a  sense  of  gmlt 

I.  Pirgt,  LET  us  THIKK  ©F  THE  OHHiD  OP  GoD.  Children  of  God 
sin  I  Some  of  them  have  daimed  to  be  well-nigh  Aree  from  it;  bnt — 
I  will  say  no  more ;  I  think  they  sinned  when  thej  talked  in  snch  a 
kyftj  fltrain.  God's  children  sin,  for  they  are  still  in  the  body.  If  they 
aie  in  a  right  state  of  heart  they  will  monm  oyer  this,  and  it  will  be 
&»  bmrden  of  their  liyes.  Oh  that  they  conld  live  withont  sin !  it  is 
tills  that  they  sigh  after,  and  <^ey  can  never  be  folly  content  nntR 
they  obtain  it.  They  do  not  excnse  themselves  by  saying,  '*  I  cannot 
be  perfect,"  bat  they  feel  that  their  inability  is  their  sin.  They  regard 
errevy  transgression  and  tendency  to  sin  as  a  grievons  fault,  and  they 
monm  over  it  ftom  day  to  day.  They  wonld  be  holy  as  Christ  is  holy. 
To  will  is  present  with  them,  bat  how  to  perform  that  which  they 
mwjAA  they  find  not. 

Now,  when  the  child  of  €k>d  sins,  the  proper  thing  for  him  to  do  is  at 

to  go  and  tell  his  heavenly  Father.    As  soon  as  ever  we  are  con- 
of  sin,  the  right  thing  is  not  to  begin  to  reason  with  the  sin,  or  to 

until  we  have  brought  ourselves  into  a  proper  state  of  heart  about 
it>  Imt  to  go  at  once  and  confess  the  transgression  unto  the  Lord,  there 
«nd  then.  Bin  will  not  come  to  eny  very  great  head  in  any  man's  heart  who 
dMB  this  continually.  God  will  never  have  great  chastisements  in  store 
teifaoee  who  are  quick  confessors  of  sin.  You  know  how  it  is  with 
Tfuas  child.  There  has  been  something  broken,  periiaps,  by  carelessness: 
there  has  been  some  violation  of  a  rule  of  the  house,  but  if  he  comes 
floid catches  you  by  the  sleeve,  and  says,  ^'  Father,-'  or  "Mother,  I  am 

sorry  that  I  have  been  doing  wrong  " — ^why,  you  know,  while  you 
sorry  that  he  should  trani^ress  you  are  glad  to  think  that  his  heart 
IB  so  right  that  without  being  questioned  he  comes  of  his  own  accord 
sad  tells  you  so  irankly  that  he  was  wrong.  Whatever  grief  you  may 
ieel  about  his  fault,  you  feel  a  greater  joy  in  the  frankness  of  his  con- 
lassion  and  the  tenderness  of  his  conscience,  and  you  have  forgiven 
him,  I  am  sure,  before  he  has  got  half  wav  through  his  openhearted 
acknowledgment.  You  feel  that  you  cannot  be  angry  with  so  frank  and 
penitent  a  child.  Though  sometimes  you  may  have  to  put  on  a  sour 
look,  and  shake  your  head,  and  reprimand,  and  scold  a  little,  yet  if  the 
little  eyes  fill  with  tears,  and  the  confession  becomes  still  more  open,  and 
tiie  sorrow  still  more  evident,  it  is  not  hard  to  move  you  to  give  the 
child  a  kiss  and  send  him  away  with, ''  Go  and  sin  no  more :  I  have 
forgiven  thee."  Our  heavenly  Father  is  a  much  more  tender  Father 
tlum  any  of  us,  and  therefore,  if  we,  being  evil,  know  how  to  give  good 
g^fbs  unto  our  children,  how  much  more  shall  our  heavenly  Father 
forgive  us  our  trespasses.  "Like  as  a  father  pitieth  his  children, 
so  the  Lord  pitieth  them  that  fear  him,"  and  therefore  he  has  com- 
passion upon  the  children  of  men  when  they  acknowledge  their  ofTences. 
We  are  not  more  ready  to  forgive  our  children  than  our  heavenly 
Father  is  ready  to  forgive  us.  We  may  be  quite  sure  of  that.  And  so,  if  it 
be  our  habit — and  I  do  trust  it  is — never  to  suffer  guilt  to  lie  upon  our 
consciences,  but  to  go  as  soon  as  ever  we  are  sensible  of  a  fault 
and  own  it  before  the  Lord,  asking  pardon  from  him  for  Jesus* 
sake,  there  will  be  no  great  amount  of  damage  done  to  ourselves. 


1 


4M  nrnoccuTAS  tibksiuolb  pulpit. 

mA  Um  Lord's  aager  will  ncc  vu  hot  against  ng,  neither  nill  germ 
ohastiaemeBia  Iwppen  to  bs.  We  may  cndarc  sharp  nillictioiu,  be- 
aiUM  thej  an  0^01  sent  for  another  parpoae,  bat  ve  ehall  sot  ban 
visitetions  of  pafeeroal  wnth.  Many  trials  are  not  sent  for  chastiK- 
lU^nU  «t&U,bat  w  pRfMnttoos  for  higher  tiBefnlnees ;  for  every  bnodi 
that  bc«R4h  trnt  be  pai|;eth  ii.  evideDtly  not  because  of  any  oSeux 
in  the  bnadi.  bot  ena  becu--.  ihe  branch  is  good  and  does  bear  fniii. 
And.  tiKKefiire.  it  is  aUowod  :  ^pocial  privilege  of  the  pnming  knif>: 
tlMt  it  HUT  bring  forth  nxire  ':.n:.  Speedy  and  fail  confeeaion  will  dm 
imTCBl  tribdlatioDa  which  ar  meant  merely  for  instmctton.  bnt  it  will 
»wn  tnah  which  are  in(end<.>i  us  severe  eltaatiseniGnt^ ;  and  thia  will 
)<«  wt  snail  benefit.  Did  no;  Ditrid  pray,  "  0  Lord,  rebuke  me  not  in 
ihr  wnOh.  neither  chasten  m<j  m  thy  hot  displeagnrc"  ? 

Xow,  it  sometimes  happeo^  iha:  Uod's  children,  when  they  have  done 
wntn^ — e^jecially  if  they  h<^-.  done  very,  very  wrong— do  not  go  and 
WMifwsit.  When  there  is  t";;.  miMC  necessity  for  confession,  there  if 
uften  the  greatest  tardiness  i:i  m.-kking  it.  It  was  so  in  Oavld's  cbk. 
Alas!  bow  foully  had  be  fklk  Q  :  It  is  never  to  any  purpose  to  tiyand 
excuse  David's  sin.  There  ar<  >^:nain  palliating  circnmeUuices,  bathe 
never  mentioned  than,  an  i.  thenlbre,  we  need  not.  indeed,  if 
David  were  here  to-night,  av.d  we  were  to  begin  escusing  bis  wn,hf 
would  rise  with  tears  in  his  ey  ?  and  say,  "  For  Goda  aiAe  do  not  attenql 
iL  Let  it  stand  in  all  its  a.;..Tmtty,  that  the  power  of  God's  menj 
may  be  the  more  clearly  seen  in  washing  me  and  making  me  wUla- 
Uian  Euow."  Bat  David's  liejirt  was  very  nangbty.  It  was  soDnd 
toward?  God  as  a  rale  ;  there  was  deep  love  to  God  always  there,  faal 
it  had  become  overlaid  and  cmstod  with  what  was  always  David's  neat 
beeetment — the  strong  paasioiisof  his  impulsive  nature.  He  hadM- 
lowed  in  some  measnre  the  iil  example  of  neighbouring  kings,  in 
taking  a  number  of  wivea  to  himself,  and  this  had  fed  rather  ihaa 
checked  his  natuial  tendencies  :  and  at  length  in  an  evil  hour,  he  fell 
into  a  crime  of  deepest  dve.  Uo  knew  that  be  was  doing  wrong.  He 
sinned  against  light  and  knowledge,  bat,  alas,  he  did  not;  hasten  to  bn 
God  and  confess  the  grierons  crime. 

I  think  I  can  see  why  he  could  not  have  gone  straight  away  ttaa 
the  sin  to  confession,  for  the  tin  prntnted  Ike  eonfessum — C>ie  sis 
blinded  the  eye,  stoltified  the  con^iencc,  and  stapelicd  the  entire  spiritaal 
nature  of  David.  Hence  he  did  not  confess  at  once ;  but  sorely  he  felt 
as  if  he  maet  own  the  ftult  when  the  time  came  for  pmycr.  I  hare 
no  doubt  that  David  prayed  al'lcr  a  sort,  bnt  he  mitst  hare  presented 
rery  formal  and  mutilated  prayers  so  long  as  be  refused  to  acknowledge 
his  transgression.  When  the  time  came  for  David  to  linger  his  ham 
perhaps  be  did  so,  and  went  throngh  a  song  or  a  psalm  ;  but  he  couW 
never  reach  to  the  essence  of  trae  praise  by  pouring  out  his  heart  bej^ 
God  while  the  foul  sin  was  hidden  in  his  bosom.  How  oonld  he?  His 
psalms  and  hia  prayers  were  silence  before  God,  whatever  sound  he 
made,  for  bis  heart  did  not  speak,  and  God  would  not  hear  him.  How- 
srer  sweet  the  tone  or  the  tune,  his  songs  were  nothing  to  the  Host 
Bigfa,  for  his  heart  was  silent,    And  why  wis  he  silent  when  he  knew 

1  be  was  wrong  ?    Why  did  he  not  go  to  God  at  once  ?     Well  it 
'  ~~"7  because  he  was  slupehed  by  his  sin.    He  was  fascinated, 


THK  DANGER  OF  UNCX)KF£SSED  SIN.  425 

captivated,  and  held  in  bondage  by  it.  Oh,  brethren  and  sisters,  beware 
of  the  basilisk  eye  of  sin.  It  is  dangerous  even  to  look  at  sin,  for  look- 
ing leads  to  longing.  A  look  at  sin  often  leads  to  a  lusting  after  sin, 
and  that  soon  ripens  into  the  actual  indulgence.  No  man  even  thinks 
of  ain  without  damage.  I  saw  a  magnificent  photograph  in  Rome,  one 
of  the  finest  I  had  ever  seen,  and  right  across  the  middle  there  was 
the  spectre  mark  of  a  cart  and  two  oxen«  repeated  many  times.  The  artist 
had  tried  to  get  it  out,  but  the  trace  remained.  While  his  plate  was 
exposed  to  take  the  view,  the  cart  and  the  oxen  had  gone  across  the 
scene,  and  they  were  indelible.  Often  in  the  photograph  of  a  fine 
building  you  will  see  the  shade  of  a  man  who  passed  by,  who  is  there 
repiesented  by  a  sort  of  ghostly  figure.  Upon  our  soul  every  sinful  thought 
leaves  a  mark  and  a  stain  that  calls  for  us  to  weep  it  out — nay,  needs 
Ohrist's  blood  to  wash  it  away.  We  begin  with  thinking  of  sin,  and  then 
we  somewhat  desire  the  sin :  next  we  enter  into  communion  with  the  sin, 
and  then  we  get  into  the  sin,  and  the  sin  gets  into  us,  and  we  lie  asoak 
is  it.  So  David  diiL  He  did  not  feel  it  at  first,  but  there  he  was, 
pfamged  into  the  evil  deeps.  In  such  a  state  sin  does  not  appear  burden- 
some. A  man  with  a  pail  of  water  on  liis  head  feels  it  to  be  heavy,  but 
if  he  dives  he  does  not  feel  the  weight  of  the  water  above  him  because  he 
is  actually  in  it  and  surrounded  by  it.  When  a  man  plunges  into  sin 
]ie>  does  not  feel  the  weight  of  the  sin  as  he  does  when  he  is  out  of 
that  dreadful  element ;  then  he  is  burdened  by  it.  So  David  did  not 
ftelhis  gnilt  at  first ;  he  knew  that  he  had  done  wrong,  but  he  did  not 
peioeive  the  exceeding  heinousness  of  his  evil  deed,  and  therefore  he  did 
mot  confess  it. 

Next,  there  was  mach  pride  in  David's  heart  Have  you  a  child  who, 
when  he  has  offended,  knows  he  is  wrong,  but  will  not  own  it  ?  If 
so,  von  talk  to  him,  but  he  will  not  speak :  he  is  quite  silent,  or,  if 
he  does  speak,  it  is  not  in  the  right  way ;  he  makes  some  naughty, 
obstinate,  strongheaded  speech.  You  cannot  bring  him  to  say,  '*  Father, 
I  have  done  wrong ;"  but  he  tries  to  excuse  himself  in  this  way  and 
that  Perhaps  he  partlv  denies  the  fault,  and  only  mentions  certain 
things  that  other  people  did,  by  way  of  excuse  for  himself.  Now, 
what  our  children  do  to  us  we  have  often  done  to  God.  We  have 
snllenly  stood  it  out  before  him.  I  remember  well  a  story  of  a  reputable 
Ohiistian  man  who  on  a  certain  occasion  was  betrayed  into  drinking. 
He  was  a  long  time  in  distress  of  mind  about  his  sin.  He  had  been 
dnmk,  but  when  he  was  spoken  to  about  it,  as  he  was,  by  some  of  the 
officers  of  the  church,  he  said  that  he  was  **  overtaken, 'i  and  added  that 
**a  very  little  affected  him.'*  I  think  that  is  what  he  said;  and  he 
jdeaded  that  some  others  had  been  overtaken  too,  and  he  did  not  see  why 
soch  notice  should  be  tsJ^en  of  a  little  slip.  Ail  this  he  said  to  leave  a 
k>ophole  for  himself.  When  he  had  done  saying  that,  he  would  add — 
Well,  he  did  not  know,  he  did  not  believe  that  he  was  drunk ;  he  was 
sure  that  nobody  could  prove  that  he  was,  though  he  might  have  taken 
a  httle  more  than  was  good  for  him.  His  tongue  talked  in  that  way, 
bat  his  heart  knew  better.  He  was  a  child  of  God,  and  he  knew  he  was 
wrong,  and  he  never  got  peace  by  making  these  shocking  self-defences. 
He  was,  indeed,  terribly  tortured  in  his  soul,  till  at  last  he  went  down  on 
his  knees,  and  said, ''  Lord,  I  have  been  drunk.   There  is  no  use  in  denying 


488  USTROPOLITAir  TABEHSACLB   PIII.FTT 

it:  I,  who  am  thy  servant,  have  be^n  drunk.  Forgive  me  far  tlij 
mercy's  sake,  and  keep  me  henocforth  froo]  even  tastiog  of  the  tntoii- 
catiog  cnp,"  He  honestly  confessed  his  transgreaaion,  and  a  sweM 
sense  of  pardon  followed  ac  once.  It,  takes  aome  professors  a  long  time 
to  get  np  to  that  point.  We  call  oar  sin  by  some  other  name,  and  fancy 
that  itienot  quite  so  bad  in  us  as  it  vouid  be  in  o^thers.  Oh,  tlie  wayt 
we  have  got  of  trying  to  extenuikte ;  and,  oh,  the  eoJlenacM  which  hu 
sometimes  been  put  on  and  miried  ont  for  daya  and  days  together 
before  the  living  God  by  God's  naughty  children  when  they  have  UIhl 
into  an  ill-temper. 

I  have  no  donbt  that  some  have  been  silent  before  Ood  for  a  time  n 
to  the  confeaBioB  of  their  wrong,  because  of  fewr.  They  conld  not  belien 
that,  after  all,  their  Fathet  IotlhI  them.  They  thonght  that  if  they  did 
confess  thoy  wonld  receive  u  heavy  sentence  and  be  ovenvfaehned  wilb 
wrath.  David  had  often  looked  up  into  the  face  of  Ood  and  known  hit 
love ;  bnt  now  t^iat  he  had  thrown  dust  into  his  own  eyes  he  could  not 
Bee  God's  face,  and  he  only  felt  tiod's  chastening  band,  for  he  saya, "  Daf 
and  night  thy  hand  was  heavy  upon  me ;  my  moisture  is  turned  into  the 
dronght  of  snimner."  The  sun  bnraed  him  op,  but  ailbrded  bim  araw 
of  the  BOnshins  of  the  fitce  of  Gud.  Unbelief  ia  snre  to  follow  sin  of  the 
kind  ccmmitted  by  David.  When  it  has  broogbt  on  sullenness  of  tetaper, 
then  we  begin  to  think  that  God  deals  hardly  with  as,  whereas  it  is  ne 
that  are  dealing  hardly  with  him.  If  we  would  confess,  all  woold  be 
wdl ;  bnt  there  is  the  hard  point.  It  is  not,  if  he  wonld  tbrgive,  for  Iw 
is  ready  to  blot  ont  the  transgressions  of  his  people,  but  the  difficolty  lies 
in  if  we  would  beheve  in  his  love.  There  is  a  great  deal  of  the  Phansw 
in  many  Cbhstians.  Ton  may  question  the  statement,  bnt  I  ^onld 
not  wonder  if  there  is  «  good  deal  of  the  Pharisee  m  yoit,  or  else  yen 
mnld  not  have  donbted  tbe  assertion.  Yon  ore  bo  much  of  a  Pharisee 
that  yon  do  not  think  yonrsclf  a  Pharisee.  Bat  n-e  are  prone  to  begin 
thinking,  "  Surely,  snroly,  I  at  eqcIi  a  time  was  a  worthy  abject  of  God's 
love,  hut  now  I  am  not. '  Oh,  then,  you  were  once  a  wonder  of  good- 
nesa,  and  marvelloualy  worthy  and  excellent?  Do  not  believe  it.  Ut 
dear  brother,  perhaps  yon  were  as  bad  when  yon  bad  not  openly  trso&- 
greased  as  you  are  now*  for  then  your  disease  may  have  taken  the  form 
of  ptide,  and  though  it  has  now  taken  another  shape,  it  may  be  no 
worse,  for  pride  is  as  damnfitile  as  any  other  form  of  sin.  Kc  who  says 
to  himself,  "  I  am  righteous  :  1  can  stand  before  God  and  deserve  lua 
love,"  is  as  surely  lost  as  tliough  he  had  fallen  into  gross  sin.  Taks 
heed  of  the  Pharisee  that  lurks  within  yon. 

As^^ti.  whatever  was  the  reason,  David  was  silent  about  his  sin  Us 
soQLc  ions:  tima.  The  result  of  it  was  that  his  sorrow  became  worse  and 
woi-se.  He  conld  not  pray  :  he  tried  to  pray,  but  aa  he  would  not  am- 
fcBS  his  sin.  it  stack  in  his  throat,  and  till  that  was  out  he  conld  not 
pay.  liut  still  he  naui  pray  ;  so  he  took  to  roaring.  That  is  to  say. 
It  was  sueh  iaarticnlat«,  indistinct  prayer,  and  there  was  so  much  « 
his  soul  in  it,  diat  he  calls  it  the  roaring  of  a  beast  instead  of  the  [s^- 
ing  of  a  mou.  His  inward  grief  over  his  unconfessed  sin  was  buoi 
that  his  bones  b^^  to  wax  old.  They  are  the  pillars  of  the  bonsa,  tha 
^strongufct  p»rt  of  the  entire  system,  hut  even  they  seemed  as  if  they 
^■pBld  (iecay.    He  was  brought  into  ill  health  of  body  through  tha 


THB  DANGBB  OF  imCONFESSED  SIN  427 

torment  of  his  mind.  He  conid  find  no  peace,  and  yet  he  would  not 
go  and  confesa  the  sin.  He  was  still  snllenlj  looking  up  to  God,  not 
BM  a  sinner,  but  as  a  saved  one,  and  talking  to  God  as  if  he  were 
righteous,  while  at  the  same  time  his  sin  was  crushing  him.  All  this 
while,  I  say,  his  grief  gathered,  and  there  was  only  one  cure  for  it :  he 
ought  to  have  confessed  it  to  the  Lord.  As  soon  as  it  was  confessed  he 
was  forgiven.  How  quick  was  that  act  of  amnesty  and  oblivion ! 
David  said, ''  I  have  sinned,"  and  Nathan  said,  ^'  The  Lord  hath  pot 
awaT  thy  sin ;  thou  shalt  not  die."  If  pardon  be  so  near  at  hand,  who 
wonid  linger  a  moment  ?  Who  among  us  would  not  at  once  repair  to 
our  heavenly  Father,  and  with  our  he^  in  his  bosom  sob  out  the  con- 
ftaaioa  of  our  sin  ?  Because  he  is  so  ready  to  forgive  we  ought  to  be 
nmij  to  confess* 

I  may  be  addressing  a  child  of  God,  or  one  who  thought  that  he  was  a 
duld  of  God,  who  has  grievously  fallen.  Mjr  brother,  go  thou  with 
hasted  thy  Lord,  and  aoknowiedge  thine  iniquity.  He  bids  thee  come* 
Oga^oonfSsss  tiiine  iniquity  in  which  thou  hast  transgressed  against  tha 
Loid,.aDd  he  will  have  mercy  upon  thee  now.  And  oh,  what  a  rdief  it 
i»wiienyon  have  discharged  the  bad,  and  when  the  voice  of  mercy  has 
''Ijiou  art  forgiven  :  go  in  peace."  What  would  I  give  for  that» 
0m.  Well,  thou  needest  not  give  anything.  Do  but  confess,  and 
if  Ikfaoa  confess  into  the  ear  of  God,  with  faith  in  his  dear  Son,  for  Jesus* 
sake  be'will  accept  thee,  and  seal  thy  pardon  home  to  thy  souL  Come  aad 
mAorden  thy  apuit  at  the  bleeding  feec  of  the  Bedeemer,  and  leap  for  joy. 
have  1  tried  to  encourage  the  Lord's  own  children  to  own  their 
I  do  not  know  for  whom  these  words  are  particularly  meant^ 
bat  I  am  driven  to  say  them,  for  I  labour  under  the  strong  impression 
thai  there  is  some  child  of  God  here  who  is  almost  despairing  of  the 
Ixnd^S' mercy  and  who  is  well  nigh  ready  to  renounce  his  profession  of 
religion  because  he  foars  that  the  Lord's  mercv  is  clean  gone  for  ever. 
My  dear*  friend,  judge  not  so  harshly  of  him  wno  loves  thee  still.  Did 
he  Doi  love  us  when  we  were  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  and  will  he 
not  love  us  if  now  our  sin  has  wounded  us  again  ?  He  never  loved 
na  beeanse  we  were  good,  and  therefore  as  he  Imew  all  that  we  should 
bs^  he  will  not  change  in  his  ailection.  He  *^  commendeth  his  love  to 
na  in  that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly  "— 
died  for  us  as  sinners.  If  you  never  did  come  to  him — ^if  all  your 
religion  has  been  a  mistake — ^o  not  begin  to  argue  upon  that  matter, 
bat  come  to  Jesus  now,  for  the  first  time.  Many  and  many  a  score 
times  have  I  done  that.  When  the  devil  has  said,  '^  Your  faith  has 
been  mere  delusion,  and  your  experience  has  been  all  a  fiction,"  and  I 
have  replied,  "  I  will  not  dispute  with  you.  Sir  Devil,  but  I  will  just 
go  to  Christ  as  a  sinner,  for  I  know  he  came  to  seek  and  to  save 
sinners,  even  lost  ones,  such  as  I  am ;  and  I  will  humbly  ask  him  anew 
to  be  my  Saviour."  That  is  a  short  cut  to  comfort,  may  the  Spirit 
lead  you  into  it.  Be  not  baffled  by  Satanic  suggestions,  but  come  to 
Jesus  over  again,  and  over  again,  and  over  again,  ^^  to  whom  coming  as 
onto  a  living  stone  " — ^looking  unto  Jesus — ^not  having  looked  once,  but 
continually  looking  and  trusting  in  him. 

II.  But  now  I  must  have  a  few  minutes,  while  we  use  this  same 
subject  in  reference  to  the  awakened  sinner. 


428  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Some  in  this  place,  perhaps,  haye  lately  been  aronaed  to  a  conacions- 
ness  of  gailt  before  God  ;  bat  one  thing  they  have  not  done,  they  have 
never  made  confession  of  their  sin.  They  feel  the  burden  of  it  in  a 
measnre,  and  they  will  feel  it  more,  bat  as  yet  they  have  kept  thdff 
grief  to  themselves :  neither  to  Ood  nor  man  have  they  poared  oat  their 
soals.  To  speak  to  oar  fellow-men  about  our  heart  troubles  ia  compara- 
tively of  little  use,  and  yet  I  would  not  recommend  persons  under 
conviction  of  sin  always  to  hide  their  souls*  sorrows  from  their  Chris- 
tian friends.  They  might  often  be  much  helped  if  they  would  oomma- 
nicate  their  thoughts  to  those  who  have  gone  further  on  the  road  to 
heaven,  and  know  more  about  Christ  and  the  way  of  salvation.  Yet,  ton: 
the  most  part,  a  wounded  conscience,  like  a  wounded  stag,  delights  to 
be  alone  tnat  it  may  bleed  in  secret.  It  is  very  hurd  to  get  at  a  man 
under  conviction  of  sin ;  he  retires  so  far  into  himself  that  it  is  im- 
possible to  follow  him.  Ah,  you  poor  mourners^  I  know  how  you  trj  to 
conceal  your  pains.  I  will  tell  you  one  reason  why  you  do  not  Ukd  to 
tell  your  mother,  your  sister,  your  brother.  It  is  because  you  think  your 
feelings  are  so  strange :  you  suppose  that  nobody  ever  felt  like  you ;  you 
have  the  notion  that  you  must  be  the  worst  person  that  ever  lived* 
and  therefore  you  are  ashamed  to  tell  what  you  feel  for  fear  your 
friends  should  scout  you  out  of  their  society.  Ah,  poor  soul ;  you  do 
not  know  ;  you  do  not  know.  We  have  all  been  on  your  road.  When 
you  tell  of  your  sin,  you  put  us  in  memory  of  the  way  in  whi(^  we 
talked,  perhaps  five-and-twenty  years  ago,  or  more,  when  we^  too,  felt  sin 
a  burden  as  you  feel  it  now.  When  you  tell  us  of  the  greaibneas  of 
your  sin,  and  think  that  we  shall  surely  despise  you,  and  nev«r  sprak  to 
you  again,  tears  of  joy  are  in  our  eyes  to  think  that  you  feel  as  we  did. 
We  are  glad  to  discover  your  tender  and  contrite  spirit ;  we  oi^y  wish  that 
thousands  felt  as  you  do.  Do  you  not  remember  what  George  White- 
field  said  when  his  brother  at  the  dinner-table  said  that  he  was  a  lost 
soul  ?  Mr.  Whitefield  said,  *'  Thank  God,"  and  his  brother  wondered. 
*^  Why,"  said  Whitefield, "  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  seek  and  to 
save  that  which  was  lost.'*  The  more  black  you  think  yourself  to  be,  the 
brighter  is  our  hope  of  you ;  when  you  poor  tremblers  give  younelvea 
an  awful  character  we  know  it  is  correct,  and  we  do  not  wiSi  to  contradict 
vou,  but  we  are  glad  to  hear  you  say  it,  and  to  know  that  you  fed  it^ 
because  now  we  see  in  you  that  which  will  prepare  you  to  value  a  pre- 
cious Christ.  A  man  who  says,  ''  I  am  well  clothed,"  is  not  likely  to 
accept  Christ's  righteousness.  But  when  he  cries,  "  How  naked  I  am, 
how  useless  aretnese  fig-leaves,"  he  is  the  man  for  Christ's  robes. 
When  you  meet  with  a  man  who  says  ^'  I  am  full ;  I  feast  on  my  own 
righteousness,"  what  is  the  good  of  inviting  him  to  the  gospel  bai^net? 
You  must  invite  him,  for  you  are  command^  to  do  so ;  but  he  will  refuae 
to  come.  But  when  you  meet  with  another  who  is  hungry,  and  feint, 
and  ready  to  die — ^ah !  thete  is  the  man  for  yoiu:  money.  Bid  him 
come  where  the  oxen  and  the  fetlings  are  killed,  and  all  things  are  roady. 
His  mouth  is  watering  while  you  speak  to  him,  and  he  wm  come  wita 
you,  and  sit  down  at  the  banquet  of  the  Ein^.  We  are  glad,  poor  sinneTy 
to  hear  your  tale  ;  and  therefore  the  next  time  you  meet  with  a  Ohria- 
tian,  I  would  advise  you  to  tell  him  a  little  of  it.  But  atill  that  ia  not 
what  you  most  want.    You  need  to  lay  bare  your  deep  sorrow  befoie 


THE  DAXGEE  OF  UNOOKFESOED  8IV.  429 

jour  God ;  and,  oh,  if  yon  do  it,  there  stands  the  promise,  ^^  He  that 
confesseth  and  fbrsaketh  his  sins  shall  find  mercy."  Confession  before 
God  was  never  sincerely  offered  but  absolution  from  the  Most  High  was 
sore  to  follow. 

Remember  that,  even  though  you  do  not  go  and  tell  the  Lord,  he 
knows  already,  and  therefore  concealment  is  in  vain.  He  needs  not  your 
confession  for  his  information,  but  for  your  own  benefit.  But  if  you  do 
not  confess  to  him,  you  certainly  wiU  never  obtain  pardon,  for  there  is 
not  between  the  covers  of  the  holy  Bible  a  single  intimation  that  God 
will  ever  pardon  unconfessed  sin.  If  you  cover  and  cloak  it,  and  feel  no 
rep^tanoe  about  it,  and  do  not  bring  it  to  Christ,  you  cannot  expect  to 
receive  mercy  from  the  offended  Lord. 

Now,  it  happens  with  some  that,  though  they  are  conscious  of  sin, 
they  do  not  confess  it ;  and  what  is  the  result  ?  Why,  it  increases 
their  mis^.  It  is  impossible  that  you  should  find  peaoe  while  sin 
contiimeB  to  gather  in  your  soul.  It  is  a  festering  wound :  the  lancet 
must  be  let  in,  there  cannot  be  rest  until  it  is  so.  I  have  known 
a  sinner  before  confession  of  sin  feel  as  if  he  could  lay  violent  hands  upon 
hinisdf,  so  intense  was  his  anguish.  Well  do  I  remember  repeating  to 
myself  tlie  words  of  the  prophet,  ""Uj  soul  chooseth  stranding  ra^er 
than  life,"  for  of  all  the  tortures  in  this  world  an  awakened  conscience, 
pressed  down  with  a  sense  of  guilt,  is  tlie  worst..  The  Spanish  Inq[uisi- 
iion  invented  cruel  racks  and  thumbscrews,  but  there  is  no  inquisitor 
like  a  man's  own  conscience,  for  it  can  put  the  screw  upon  the  soul  to 
the  uttermost  degree.  Let  a  man's  conscience  loose  upon  hdm,  and  at 
onco  the  worm  commences  to  gnaw,  and  the  fire  b^ns  to  bum.  They 
used  in  olden  times  to  ascribe  the  torment  of  hell  to  the  devil :  but  we 
do  not  want  any  devil  for  that ;  conscience  can  measure  out  an  infinite 
misery.  Let  but  remorse  lay  its  thongs  of  wire  upon  a  man,  and  it  will 
scarify  him,  and  gash  him  to  the  verv  soul.  So  long  as  a  man  continues 
silent  before  God,  and  does  not  own  his  sin,  if  the  Lord  really  has  begun 
to  deal  with  him,  he  will  have  to  suffer  more  and  more  from  the  pangs 
of  conscience. 

But,  then,  increase  of  sorrow  accompanied  by  this  silence  is  a  very'' 
dangerous  piece  of  business.    I  spoke  cheeringly  just  now  of  those  of 
yon  who  are  under  a  sense  of  sin,  but  it  was  only  in  the  hope  that  you 
would  go  to  God,  through  Jesus  Christ,  and  confess  your  sin  ;  for  if  i 
you  rerase  to  do  so,  your  position  is  one  of  very  great  danger.    "  What 
danger  ?  "  say  you.    Why,  if  sin  remain  festering  within  you,  and  your 
sorrow  increases,  you  will  come  to  despair  altogether,  and  that  is  an  awful ' 
prospect  indeed.    You  remember  Jonn  Bunyan's  picture  of  the  man  in 
the  iron  cage  ?    There  is  not  in  the  "  Pilgrim's  Progress  "  an  incident 
moro  terrible.    Now,  you  are  forging  the  bars  of  a  cage  for  yourself 
as  long  as  you  refuse  to  acknowledge  vour  guilt  beforo  God.    Those  who 
aro  in  the  iron  cage  of  despair  will  tell  you  that  they  delayed  to  acknow- , 
ledge  sin,  that  they  refused  to  accept  Christ,  that  they  suppressed  their 
feeungs,  and  so  brought  themselves  into  bondage.     They  were  pleased 
to  hear  ministers  preach  about  conviction  of  sin,  and  speak  of  deep 
sorrow,  and  the  like  ;  but  they  did  not  care  to  be  told  that  it  was  their  , 
duty,  there  and  then,  to  believe  in  Jesus  :  they  could  not  endure  that  j 
doctrine.    They  hked  to  be  comforted  in  the  notion  that  there  wan 


480  KTCBOFOLITAH  TASSBNAOLB  PtlUTT. 

'  somethmg flood  in  feeling  a  hcjisb  of  Hin,  npnrt  frooi  b«lieving;  whemi, 
if  a  Boul  will  not  believe  in  Ohi-isC,  its  Bense  of  sin  may  be  ut  eiil 
infltead  of  a  benefit  t«  it.    Nothing  cau  be  ^od  that  is  ansalted  with 

,  feith.  "  With  all  thy  sacriHccs  thou  shalt  offer  salt ;"  and  if  the  S^ 
of  faith  be  absent,  the  eaciitice  is  anacceptAhle. 

'  Wo  have  known  some  who,  through  getting  into  despair,  have  after- 
wards fallen  into  utter  harilncss  of  heart.  They  used  to  be  malleable; 
they  used  to  feel  the  strokes  of  the  divine  hammer;  now  they  iVel 

'  nothing,  bnt  are  as  hard  us  the  blacksmith's  anvil.  They  have  fot 
into  Buch  a  condition  that  they  wickedly  say,  if  God  will  save  them  the; 
will  be  ea-ved,  but  they  have  nothing  to  do  with  it.    They  once  were 

'  tender ;  now  they  arc  presuuiptuons.  They  say  "  there  ia  no  hope,"  and 
therefore,  on  ti»e  theory  of  the  old  proverb  that  they  may  as  well  be 
hanged  for  a  eheep  as  for  a  lamb,  in  all  probability  they  will  eo  oatt 
oommit  woree  aina  than  ever.  Some  of  the  biggest  sinners  that  han 
ever  di^raced  the  name  of  Imaianity  have  been  persons  who  were  aus 
lender  of  conscience  and  wei-e  on  the  point  of  conveKion,  bnt  tbey  did 
Tiolence  to  conviction,  camo  to  despair  of  ever  entering  heaven,  tmd  ii 
Hie  end  determined  that  ns  tlicy  must  go  to  hell  they  wonld  go  thers 

'  with  a  high  hand  uid  an  outetretched  arm.  He  who  has  seen  heaven's 
gate  open  before  him,  but  has  not  stepped  in,  is  the  man  who  above  all 

,  otheisislikely  to  find  the  hottest  place  in  hell,     Tonnuiy  think  it  strai^ 

,  for  me  to  say  bo,  but  I  know  it  is  so.  for  snch  persons  go  by  the  waj 
of  despair  into  hardness  of  heart,  and  then  into  the  grossest  tmnegns- 
sion.  Yes,  and  this  is  the  back  lioor  to  atheism,  for  when  a  man  teeln 
that  God  and  he  never  can  be  at  peace, — when  he  has  made  np  his 
mind  that  he  never  wiU  confess  his  sin, — what  ia  the  firet  thing  that  he 
does  to  comfort  himself?  He  says — "  There  is  no  God."  And  what 
does  the  declaration,  "  There  isnoQod,"  mean?  It  means  (his.  that 
the  man  feels  that  he  wonld  be  much  more  happy  if  there  were  no  6od. 
That  is  what  it  means,  and  nothing  more.  It  is  the  man's  wish  rather 
tliati  his  creed,  and  he  wishes  it  because  he  despairs  and  his  heart  has 
grown  hard.  Oh,  when  God  makes  your  heart  soft  as  wax,  mind  who 
puts  the  seal  npon  it.  If  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God  sei  not  the  seal 
of  deep  repentance  and  holy  faith  upon  the  softened  soul,  there  is 
another  that  will  pnt  the  ecal  of  despair,  and  perhaps  of  atheism  and  of 
defiant  sin  upon  it ;  and  then  woe  worth  the  day  to  yon  that  ever  yon 
were  born.  Refusal  to  confess  is  a  perilous  thing  for  your  aonl.  I  am 
sure  that  when  a  man  bef^ins  to  be  awakened  to  a  sense  of  sin,  if  ho 
tarries  long  in  that  condition  he  is  being  entangled  moment  by  moment 
in  the  Satanic  web.  The  devil  carea  little  about  careless  sinners.  "  Let 
them  alone,"  says  he,  "  they  will  come  to  me  by-and-hy,"  And  as  for 
very  religious  people  who  possess  no  true  godliness,  the  devil  does  not 
bother  them  ;  he  says,  "No,  let  the  hypocrites  be  in  peace ;  tbey  an 
going  ray  way  as  nicely  as  possible.  Why  shonld  I  arooae  tiieta  I7 
cnuBiug  them  mistrust  as  to  tneir  state  ?"  Bnt  the  moment  that  bobIb 
ara  startled  into  a  sense  of  sin  the  devil  says  to  himself,  "  I  shall  km 
them,"  and  so  he  plies  all  his  arts,  and  uses  all  his  craft,  if  by  any  meau 
he  may  prevent  their  escape.  Man,  now  is  your  time  to  See  away  to  An 
city  of  refuge  without  tarrying  even  for  an  hoar,  for  even  now  all  tiw 
devils  in  hell  are  after  yon.    Th^  did  not  tronblo  sbont  yon  boliN^ 


THB  DANGER  OP  UNC0NFE88BD  SIN.  -431 

bnfc  they  are  after  you  now  with  sevenfold  energy.  Close  in  with  Christ, 
theTky  and  ab  once  escape  them  all.  Oh,  may  the  Spirit  of  God  enable 
you  now  to  find  eternal  mercy  through  the  confession  of  your  sin  to  God 
and  looking  to  Christ  for  mercy — the  mercy  which  he  is  so  willing  to 
give. 

This  is  the  last  point.  There  is  no  hope,  then,  of  any  comfort  to  a 
bruised  heart  except  by  its  confessing  its  euilt.  I  would  earnestly  urge 
upon  every  one  conscious  of  sin  to  go  witn  troubled  heart  and  heaving 
bosom  and  confess  his  transgression  to  the  Lord  at  once.  I  would  do  it 
in  detail,  if  I  were  you.  I  find  it  sometimes  profitable  to  myself  to  read 
the  ten  commandments,  and  to  think  over  my  sins  against  each  one  of 
them.  What  a  list  it  is,  and  how  it  humbles  you  in  the  dust  to  read 
it  over !  When  you  come  to  that  command — **  Thou  shalt  not  commit 
adultery/'  "Ah,"  say  you,  "I  have  never  been  guilty  there."  But 
when  you  are  told  by  the  Saviour  that  a  lustful  glance  breaks  that  com- 
mand, how  it  alters  all  I  Then  you  perceive  that  fleshly  desires  and 
imaginations  are  all  sins,  and  you  humble  yourself  in  the  dust.  You 
read  also,  "  Thou  shalt  not  kill,"—"  Well,"  say  you,  "  I  never  killed 
anyone";  but  you  change  your  note  when  you  hear  that  "  he  that  is 
angry  with  his  brother  without  a  cause  is  a  murderer."  When  you  see 
the  spirituality  of  the  law,  and  the  way  in  which  you  have  broken  all 
the  commandments  ten  thousand  times  over,  be  sure  to  confess  it  all, 
right  sorroWfullv.  I  find  it  good  to  look  all  round  sometimes,  and 
think,  "  I  am  a  father ;  there  are  my  sins  against  my  children.  Have  I 
trained  them  up  for  God  as  I  should  ?  I  am  a  husband  ;  there  are  sins 
in  that  relationship.  I  am  a  master ;  there  are  sins  in  that  position : 
how  have  I  acted  towards  my  servants  ?  I  am  a  pastor  ;  how  many  sins 
occur  in  that  relationship  ?"  Why,  you  will  not  look  around  you,  if 
God  opens  your  eyes,  without  being  helped  to  see  what  you  ought  to 
confess.  Take  the  very  limbs  of  your  body,  and  they  will  accuse  you  : 
sins  of  the  brain  in  evil  thoughts,  sins  of  the  eye  in  idle  glances,  sins  of 
this  little  naughty  member,  the  tongue,  which  does  more  mischief  than 
all  the  rest.  There  is  no  member  without  its  own  special  sins.  There  are 
sins  of  the  ear — how  often  have  we  heard  the  gospel,  but  heard  it  in  vain. 
On  the  other  hand,  have  we  not  too  often  lent  a  wilhng  ear  to  unholy  words. 
and  to  wicked  stories  against  our  neighboui*s  ?  I  need  not  read  over 
the  calendar  of  our  offences  &om  this  pulpit ;  go  and  write  it  out  in 
the  closet,  and  pour  out  a  flood  of  tears  over  it.  If  you  are  willing 
to  confess,  everything  will  help  you  to  confession,  and  there  is  good 
reason  for  doing  it  at  once.  May  the  Holy  Spirit  work  with  its  tenderest 
influences  to  melt  your  heart  into  contrition. 

Bemember  while  you  are  confessing,  that  each  one  of  your  sins  has  a 
world  of  evil  in  it.  There  is  a  mine  of  sin  in  every  little  sin.  You  have 
taken  up  a  spider's  nest  sometimes  —one  of  those  little  money-spinner's 
nests — and  you  have  opened  it.  What  thousands  of  spiders  you  find 
hanging  down  and  hastening  away  in  divers  dii'ections.  What  a  myriad 
of  them.  So  in  every  sin  there  is  a  host  of  sins.  There  is  a  conglomera- 
tion of  many  kinds  of  evil  in  every  transgression,  therefore  be  humbled 
on  account  of  each  one.  Confess  your  iniquities  before  God,  and  accept 
the  punishment  as  being  your  righteous  due.  There  stands  the  block, 
and  there  is  the  place  lor  your  neck ;  put  it  down,  and  say,  "  Lord,  I 


432  KBTHOPOLITAH  TABERKAOLB  PCLPTT. 

submit  to  my  sentence,  and  if  chon  biddeat  the  headsman  strike  I 
cannot  complain."  Oo  before  Cod  us  the  citizens  of  Calais  came  behn 
the  Bngliah  king,  with  ropes  about  their  nocks,  Snbmit  yonrselnw  to 
the  pnntBhment  dne  to  yonr  offence,  and  then  make  an  appeal  ai 
mUericordiam,  to  the  mercy  of  God  alone,  and  say,  "  For  Christ's  stb 
— for  hifl  blood's  sake — have  mwfy  npon  me."  There  is  no  man, 
woman,  or  child  in  this  Tabemaclo  who  shail  do  that  to-night  vhs 
shall  be  rejected;  for  "him  that  cometh  to  me,"  saith  Christ,  "1 
will  in  nowise  cast  ont."  And  this  ia  the  right  way  of  coming— 
the  way  of  confessing  your  sin  and  acknowledging  the  evil  of  it 
and  taming  to  the  great  Sabstitote  for  deliTcrance.  Say  that  jot 
deserve  to  be  sent  to  hell,  and  cast  yourself  upon  the  mercy  of  God 
in  Christ  Jesns,  trusting  in  the  great  Surety  and  Sacrifice,  and  job 
shall  be  accepted  in  and  through  him.  This  ia  the  way  of  life,  val 
he  who  runs  tnerein  shall  find  salvation. 

May  the  Lord,  by  his  Holy  Spirit,  lead  every  one  of  you  withoD! 
exception  to  monm  your  sin,  and  rest  in  Jesns.    Amen. 


FQBTION  of  BcmiPIDBB  BRAD  BSFOB£  SEauou — Psalms  tj.,  SJXa. 


Hyilns  feom  "Our  Own  Hybin  Book" — 622,  51  (Part  IIL). 


Jusl  Puhliahed.    No.  2  of  the  ShiUing  Series. 

SEVEN    WONDERS    OF    GRACE. 

B:2-     G.     SI.     Si^TJ-ROEOJSr, 


Now  Ready,  Pria  One  Shilitag. 

READING   COVERS   FOR  THE   SERMONS. 

f  Muiaa*  It  Ai><LBUTu,  4  Patwnwtar  Buildings;  Mid  all  Bfxiatllmt, 


«tttjplttmi  ^iilbtnmk  itdpt 


STRONG  FAITH. 


i^ 


Dkliyebbd  oir  Lord's-Day  Morning,  July  15th,  1877,  dt 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THB    MBTROPOLITAN    TABERNACfiE,    NKWINQTON. 


"  Bat  was  strong  in  fkith,  giving  glory  to  Ood.*'  —Romans  iv.  20. 

Abraham  is  the  father  of  the  feithfiil.  When  children  have  a  noble 
&ther  it  is  a  good  thing  for  them  to  be  fully  conversant  with  his  character ; 
and  therefore  we  shall  do  well  to  consider  the  life  of  the  great  patriarch, 
eapecially  marking  that  grand  excellence  which  makes  hmi  the  father  of 
believers,  namely,  his  feith.  Nor  should  we  fell  to  observe  the  stren^ih 
of  his  faith,  for  in  him  it  reached  a  veiy  high  degree  :  he  was  not  only 
a  believer,  but  he  was  an  nnstaggering  believer.  He  did  not  only  trnst 
Ood,  but  he  trusted  Gtod  most  firmly,  in  the  teeth  of  all  contrac&ction, 
not  so  much  as  considering  the  difficulties,  but  belieiing  in  God  without 
questioning.  Oftentimes  1  have  exhorted  unbelievers  to  faith,  but  now 
my  word  is  directed  to  those  who  have  faith  already,  bidding  them 
manifest  more  faith.  Where  there  is  the  root  of  faith  we  plead  for  the 
growth  of  feith  ;  where,  there  is  life  our  desire  is  that  it  may  be  found 
more  abundantly.  If  you  have  not  beUeved  at  all,  then  the  gospel  cries 
to  you,  "Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved ;"  but 
if  you  have  believed,  its  voice  is,  "  Grow  in  grace  and  in  the  knowledge 
of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  We  cannot  talk  to  unbelievers 
upon  the  subject  of  strong  faith,  because  they  have  none  to  begin  with ; 
if  they  had  even  the  weakest  feith,  it  would  save  them,  and  become  the 
germ  of  the  highest  assurance,  but  without  a  beginning  how  can  they  be 
oxhorted  to  increase  ?  There  must  first  of  all  be  the  seed  of  faith  in  the 
heart,  and  then  it  will  be  wise  to  water  it,  but  to  water  barren  ground  is 
lost  labour.  Have  you  given  glory  to  God  by  believing  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  ?  Then  may  you  glorify  him  more  by  a  stronger  confidence,  but 
mot  till  then.  Those  who  have  faith  in  God  are  constantly  to  be  ex- 
horted to  grow  in  all  graces,  and  especially  in  the  most  important  and 
fdndamental  grace  of  feith.  They  are  permitted  to  pray,  "  Lord,  increase 
our  feith,"  with  the  assurance  that  "  he  giveth  more  grace."  My  present 
address  will  have  strong  feith  for  its  subject^  let  those  who  have  l:^lieved 
atrive  after  it. 
No.  1,867. 


434  methofolitab  tabebkaclk  pui-itt. 

la  it  needful  for  me  to  remind  you  that  os  faith  at  firel  is  the  wort  o{ 
'the  Holy  Spirit,  so  must  any  real  growth  in  it  I>e  of  di\ine  operation? 
Any  Eidaitioii  to  faith  which  could  come  to  yoa  by  or  from  the  flesh,  if 
Bncli  a  thing  were  supposable,  would  be  an  artnltemtion  of  faith,  and  not 
an  increase  of  it ;  for  eTcrmore  that  which  ia  bom  of  the  flesh  is  flesh, 
and  only  that  which  is  bora  of  the  Spirit  ia  spirit.  Even  if  an  incRHe 
of  faith  could  come  to  us  by  the  will  of  man,  and  not  by  divine  working, 
it  would  not  be  worth  the  liaTing,  for  it  would  be  a  coimtcrfeit.  Only  Ihs 
Bap  of  the  trunk  can  make  tlie  nranch  grow :  he  who  gave  thee  feith  it 
the  first  mnst  give  thee  more  faith  if  thou  art  to  become  stn>ng  in  it 
Yet  there  ia  the  parallel  truth  never  to  be  foi^tten,  that  while  laith  n 
the  gift  of  God  it  is  also  our  own  act.  The  Holy  Spirit  works  faith  in 
UH,  but  we  ourselves  personally  bebeve  ;  the  Holy  Ghost  does  nflt  belietc 
for  UB— what  has  he  to  believe  ?  It  would  be  altogether  absurd  to  con- 
ceive of  the  Holy  Q  Imst  as  ijelieving  or  repenting  1  Nor  if  such  a  thing 
were  possible  could  il  )w  of  any  tenefit  to  us,  for  the  faith  which  saves 
thesoul  must  be  porsimal  and  cannot  bo  performed  by  pretty.  FaiHt 
is  both  God's  gift  arid  man's  act.  The  Lord  Is  the  author  of  oor  feith, 
but  we  ourselvea  bebeve.  In  the  same  manner,  though  the  strengthenii^ 
of  our  faith  will  come  through  the  Spirit  of  God,  yet  must  it  be  oor  owa 
act  and  deed :  we  must  ourselves  behere  more  firmly,  and  our  own  heatt 
must  be  exercised  to  attain  to  the  liighest  privilege.  As  unbelief  ii  a 
sin  for  which  tlie  nubcliever  must  be  held  responsible,  even  bo  is  the 
feebleness  of  &ith  a  fault  for  which  we  are  hlamewortliy.  We  are  in 
duty  bound  to  believe  in  God  without  wavering,  and  if  we  neglect  the 
matter  we  shall  be  hold  guilty  concerning  it.  It  is  our  duty  to  belicTe, 
and  to  believe  in  the  highest  degree ;  and  though  some  professors  eut 
never  see  the  consiet^jncy  of  the  two  statement*  that  fiiith  is  the  gilt  of 
God  and  yet  the  duty  of  man,  we  are  sure  that  the  one  ia  as  true  aa  the 
other;  and  so  while  I  shall  earnestly  refer  you  to  the  Spirit  of  God  for 
Btrength  in  order  to  obtain  more  faith,  yet  I  shall  not  apologise  for  un- 
belief, or  treat  strong  faith  as  a  work  of  supererogation,  for  which  God 
has  no  claim  upon  us.  I  most  earnestly  declare  the  responsibility  of 
each  behever,  and  claim  fi-om  him,  oa  the  righteous  due  of  a  bithAiI 
God,  that  he  do  henceforth  beUeve  in  liira  more  fully  than  he  hath  hew- 
tofore  done.  May  the  rcmarka  I  shall  ofler  be  used  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
to  tlie  increase  and  csiablishraent  of  your  confidence  in  God. 

I.  Our  first  point  is  tliis:  BTnONQ  faith,  wherever  is  BXISts,  W 
acPPORTBD  BY  ABUNDANT  HKABOSB.  It  is  uever  chargeable  with  being 
nnreasonable  fenatidimi  or  blind  credence  :  it  ia  a  sound,  prudent,  justi- 
fiable thing. 

For,  first,  all  the  rmsont  which  jutiify  our  iehtvmg  m  6od  at  «0 
JusU/y  our  beUgving  tn  him  most  firmly  and  continuaSy.  You  do  not  need 
that  I  dwell  upon  this,  because  it  is  self-evident :  it  can  never  be  lii^  to 
believe  unless  the  statements  are  true,  and  if  true  they  deserve  undividsd 
&ith.  If  you  have  trusted  your  soul  with  your  Kedeeraer  becMiae  of 
tile  efScacy  of  his  atoning  blood,  thi^  argument  plesda  with  you  to  txaat 
him  yet  more  stead&atiy  and  confidently.  If  anything  be  strong  cmoogfa 
flw  you  to  trust  your  eternal  destiny  to  it,  your  trust  ought  not  to 
^e  bncinred  with  Buflpicion,  or  soured  with  raistnist ;  it  ought  to  be 
^■all(7ed  aa  pure  gold,  and  immovable  as  a  granite  roctc    MiOta  ■no 


STRONG  FAITH.  435 

sonfidenoe  or  great  confidence  can  be  logically  defended,  but  a  divided  heart 
cannot  be  justified  ^by  reason.  Dear  brother,  little  fiiith  will  save  thee 
if  it  be  true  faith,  but  there  are  many  reasons  why  thou  shouldst  seek  an 
increase  of  it,  and  among  the  rest  this  forcible  one, — thy  conscienco 
cannot  justify  the  weakness  of  thy  faith,  nor  answer  the  question,  "  AVherc- 
fore  dost  thou  doubt  ?  "  If  thou  believest  at  all,  why  dost  thou  doubt 
at  all  ?  If  God  be  worthy  of  trust,  he  is  worthy  of  abundant  trust ;  if 
it  be  well  to  lean  on  him  at  all  it  must  be  well  to  lean  hard.  Is  the 
Lord  feithfiil  ?  then  do  not  both  trust  and  mistrust,  beheve  and  disbe- 
lieve. Is  the  promise  sure  ?  then  do  not  believe  it  a  little  and  doubt  it 
a  little.  Elias  spake  concerning  Jehovah  and  Baal,  "  If  Jehovah  be  God 
serve  him,  and  if  Baal  be  God  serve  him  "  ;  so  also  would  I  demand  in 
this  matter :  if  the  gospel  be  a  lie,  denv  it,  but  if  it  be  a  truth,  believe  it. 
Be  no  longer  content  to  mingle  unbelief  with  faith,  as  if  this  were 
the  utmost  credence  that  Grod's  children  could  give  to  their  own  Father. 
It  is  time  that  this  mental  twilight  came  to  an  end,  and  that  the  day  was 
known  to  be  day,  and  the  night  to  be  night.  Hesitating  and  questiom'ng, 
hoping  and  fearing,  make  but  a  lame  walk  for  a  Christian  pilgrim,  and 
are  nnieasonable  and  indefensible.  As  the  legs  of  the  lame  are  not 
eqnal,  so  such  a  state  of  mind  has  not  the  baJance  which  a  wise  man 
should  seek  after.  If  thou  goest  up  to  the  ancles  in  the  river  of  faith,  go 
farther,  even  up  to  the  loins,  or  to  full  swimming  depth,  for,  if  it  be 
ri^t  to  enter  into  fiEuth's  stream  at  all,  every  possible  argument  proves 
that  the  deeper  you  go  the  better. 

Reasons  for  strong  faith  may  he  found  in  abundance  in  the  character 
9f  God,  He  is  not  hke  ourselves,  for  in  him  is  no  mixture  of  truth  and 
fiedsehood,  wisdom  and  folly,  power  and  weakness.  Our  reliance  upon 
man  must  be  cautiously  given  and  measured  out  with  great  prudence,  for 
man  is  only  man  ;  but  ^'  the  Lord  is  not  a  man  that  he  should  lie,  nor 
the  son  of  man  that  he  should  repent."  His  character  absolutely  demands 
tniplicit  &ith,  insomuch  that,  while  meditating  upon  this  subject,  I  felt 
ashamed  of  myself  that  I  should  need  to  pray  for  &ith  in  God.  It  is  a 
dear  evidence  of  our  dire  depravity  that  we  should  need  to  be  helped 
to  believe  in  one  who  cannot  lie.  It  seems  inevitable  that  a  dreature 
should  trust  its  Creator,  and  especially  such  a  Creator ;  and  it  wauld  be 
inevitable  if  that  creature  were  not  exceeding  depraved.  For  a  child  to  trust 
its&ther  is  natural,  so  natural  that  no  one  counts  it  a  virtue.  How  mar- 
vellous is  our  moral  perversity  that  we  should  be  so  for  gone  out  of  our 
right  condition  of  heart  that  we  have  to  argue  ourselves  into  believing 
our  God,  and  even  then  succeed  not  till  the  Holy  Spirit  gives  us  faith. 
It  ought  to  be  a  very  hard  thing  for  a  Christian  to  doubt  his  heavenly 
Father ;  in  feet,  it  ought  to  be  impossible,  seeing  that  the  divine  character 
is  incapable  of  felsehood.  Beloved,  should  we  not  have  strong  feith  who 
believe  in  a  God  whose  very  essence  is  pure  truth  ?  Where  deception  i» 
inconceivable  doubt  should  be  impossible.  Thou  believest  that  never 
shadow  of  untruth  ever  stained  the  character  of  thy  God,  why  then  dost 
thon  not  render  to  him  strong  faith  ?  Thou  believest  also  that  God  is  infi- 
oiteh^  wise,  and  therefore  he  has  never  spoken  rashly  nor  promised  what 
it  might  be  wiser  to  withhold.  The  promise  was  not  delivered  in  haste, 
>r  so  unguardedly  that  it  might  be  necessary  to  retract  it ;  and  therefore 
no  alteration  can  be  snppos^.    The  covenant  of  promise  stands  secure 


436  METROPOLITAN  TABERKAOLS  PULPIT. 

even  as  to  its  jots  and  tittles.  If  it  had  been  foolish  it  might  pas 
away,  but  since  it  is  ordered  by  eternal  wisdom  it  will  outlast  the  ever- 
lasting hills.  Gome,  then,  beloved,  should  not  the  utmost  confidence  be 
rendered  to  him  whose  every  word  is  steeped  in  infallibility  ?  Shouldst 
thon  not  believe  with  all  thy  heart  and  soul  and  strength  in  him  whott 
tnith  stands  fast  like  the  great  mountains? 

Moreover,  0  man  of  God,  thou  believest  in  One  who  is  omnipotent^ 
and  therefore  thy  believing  should  be  strong.  Thou  knowest  how  to 
answer  that  question,  "  Is  anything  too  hard  for  the  Lord  ?  "  for  thou 
believest  that  with  God  all  things  are  possible.  If  it  be  so,  then  his  true 
word  spoken  in  wisdom  can  readily  enough  be  carried  out :  he  has  but 
to  will  it,  and  it  is  done.  God's  word  is  fact :  for  him  to  purpose  is  to 
perform :  can  there  then  arise  any  condition  or  circumstance  which  he 
cannot  meet  ?  Wherefore  these  doubts  ?  In  the  presence  of  an  Almighly 
Promiser  unbelief  is  as  ridiculous  as  it  is  sinful.  *'  The  strength  of  Israel 
will  not  lie,"  neither  may  we  treat  him  with  mistrust. 

Thou  Imowest  also  that  thy  God  is  inunutable.  All  things  else 
change,  but  thy  God  knoweth  no  shadow  of  a  turning ;  he  is  *'  the  same 
yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever."  Is  he  the  same  ?  He  doth  not  take 
back  the  word  that  gooth  out  of  his  mouth,  nor  reverse  his  divine  decree; 
why  then  question  and  suspect  him  ?  Better  far  to  believe  immutably 
in  an  inmiutable  God.  Canst  thou  not  rest  in  him  who  saith  ^'  I  am 
Jehovah ;  I  change  not "  ? 

Thou  believest  also  that  he  is  the  God  of  love,  full  of  goodness,  mercy, 
and  lovingkindness.  What  a  wanton  insult  it  is  to  mistrust  one  who 
cannot  be  unkind,  whose  very  nature  it  is  to  bless  his  creatures,  sod 
whose  innermost  soul  is  set  upon  loving  and  blessing  his  own  elect. 
Hast  thou  confided  in  him  ?  then  doth  he  not  assure  thee  that  he  has 
graven  thy  name  upon  the  palms  of  his  hands,  that  he  has  loved  thee  with 
an  everlasting  love,  and  therefore  with  lovingkindness  he  has  drawn  thee. 
Wilt  thou  fiy  in  the  face  of  changeless  love,  and  coldly  question  it? 
Can  it  be  possible  to  trust  it  too  confidingly  ?  Surely  all  tnese  things, 
and  much  more,  in  the  glorious  character  of  the  ever-beloved  God»  demand 
of  us  the  strongest  imaginable  faitL 

Then,  again,  when  I  turn  mine  eyes  from  pure  deify  to  him  who  is 
bono  of  our  bone  and  flesh  of  our  flesh,  even  <n(r  Lard  Jems  Christy 
in  whom  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily,  it  appears  in- 
congruous that  the  blessed  Son  of  God  should  be  received  with  meagre 
confidence.  God  dwelt  among  men  in  human  flesh,  you  know  it  to  be 
true  that  so  it  was :  Jesus;  the  Son  of  God,  abode  upon  the  earth  through- 
out a  lowly  life  amidst  poverty  and  shame,  and,  (wonder  of  wonders),  at 
last  he  poured  out  his  heart's  blood  for  our  redemption ;  and  can  we 
entertain  a  doubt  of  his  abihty  to  save  ?  Do  we  see  those  blood  drops 
from  his  hand  and  heart,  sealing  the  everlasting  covenant,  and  can  we 
doubt  ?  Abraham  had  strong  confidence  when  he  saw  the  smoking  fur- 
nace and  the  burning  lamp  passing  between  the  pieces  of  the  slain  vic- 
tims, and  what  ought  our  confidence  to  be  when  we  behold  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  himseU^  ratifying  the  eternal  covenant  by  his  own  death? 
Surely  if  the  patriarch  could  find  rest  in  the  sight  of  the  Upe  only,  we 
ought  to  rest  without  tiiought  of  fear.  When  faith  beholds  the  cuvine 
antitype,  no  thought  of  disquietude  should  ever  arise  again.    My  soul, 


fiTBONG  FAITH.  487 

what  more  dost  thon  want  ?  Is  there  not  here  more  than  enough  of 
solemn  pledge  and  surety  ?  Are  not  founts  of  assurance  opened  in  the 
Ueeding  Saviour  which  are  deeper  than  all  fear  and  higher  than  all 
hope  ?  That  wondrous  sacrifice  is  as  high  above  thy  thoughts  at  their 
best  as  the  heavens  are  above  the  earth,  and  wilt  thou  return  doubts 
and  fears  as  a  fit  recompense  for  such  a  divine  confirmation  of  eternal 
love  ?    0  Lord,  help  thy  servants  to  be  strong  in  iBaith  I 

One  other  reason  is  perhaps  of  less  weight  than  those  which  have  gone 
before,  but  I  cannot  withhold  it.  It  is  this  :  we  ought  to  give  to  God 
strong  faith,  because  there  is  no  evidence  to  the  contrary,  nor  any  suppos- 
able  evidence  which  could  justify  mistrust.  All  adown  the  ages  those 
who  have  trusted  in  him  have  never  been  confounded.  Our  fathers 
trusted  in  him,  and  he  helped  them  to  suffer  and  to  bear,  to  attempt  and 
to  accomplish,  to  live  and  to  die.  We  read  just  now,  in  the  eleventh  of 
the  Hebrews,  the  record  of  what  the  Lord  wrought  in  those  who  belieVed 
in  him.  Now,  on  the  other  side,  per  contra,  there  standeth  nothing. 
Has  one  child  of  God  come  forward  wringing  his  hands  and  saying, "  God 
faaUi  not  fulfilled  his  word,  and  his  promises  are  false  "  ?  We  have  stood, 
many  of  us,  at  the  bedside  of  dying  saints,  and  the  truth  generally 
comes  out  there,  yet  there  is  not  one  among  us,  most  familiar  with  such 
scenes,  who  ever  heard  a  soUtary  believer  declare  that  it  is  a  mistake  to 
confide  in  the  blood  of  Jesus,  or  an  error  to  rest  in  the  faithfulness  of 
God.  Somewhere  or  other  this  thing  would  have  come  out  if  it  had 
been  so :  if  the  Lord  had  been  false  to  one  of  his  people  we  should  have 
had  sure  record  of  it,  and  I  think  we  might  have  trusted  the  devil  and 
his  myrmidons,  who  delight  in  infidelity,  to  have  circulated  such  a  report, 

SBtty  largely,  all  over  the  world,  if  they  had  known  one  such  an  instance; 
t  they  have  not  one  to  report,  "  He  forsaketh  not  his  saints." 
Furthermore,  I  will  appeal  to  your  own  experience, — have  you  expe- 
rienced anything  which  casts  suspicion  upon  the  character  of  God  ?  Has 
the  Lord  been  a  wilderness  unto  you  ?  When  you  have  trusted  him  has 
he  failed  you  ?  Will  you  put  your  finger  upon  a  promise  which  he  has 
broken  ?  Search  the  book  through  and  through,  and  find  if  you  can  one 
sin^e  word  of  his  against  which  you  must  write  "  false."  Oh,  no ;  the 
promise  tarries  sometimes,  but  it  never  lies.  There  is  a  waiting  time  foj 
the  testing  of  your  faith,  but  in  the  end  it  will  be  seen  that  he  has  with- 
held no  good  thing  from  them  that  walk  uprightly,  and  you  >vill  have 
to  say  at  last,  like  hoary  headed  Joshua,  "  There  failed  not  ought  of  any 
good  thing  which  the  Lord  had  spoken  unto  the  house  of  Israel ;  all  came 
to  pass."  Brethren,  ought  we  to  doubt  our  God  when  we  have  no  cause 
bo  show  for  it  ?  Is  there  any  apology  for  httle  faith  since  we  cannot  re- 
[nember  any  instances  of  prayers  unheard,  deliverances  denied,  or 
nercies  refused  ?  We  have  nothing  of  the  kind  to  quote,  and  therefore 
vhen  we  doubt  the  Lord  we  are  guilty  of  wanton  distrust, — may  the  Lord 
breive  us  and  deliver  us  from  it. 

So  much  upon  that  first  point,  the  strongest  faith  is  supported  by 
bundant  reasons. 

II.  And  new,  secondly,  according  to  the  text,  strong  faith  pro- 
•UOfiS  THE  MOST  DESIRABLE  RESULTS.  We  have  uot  time  to  go  into 
lany  of  these,  but  we  will  dwell  upon  one,  the  one  mentioned  in  the 
5Xt,  "  Strong  in  faith,  giving  f/bry  to  God:'    Why,  this  is  what  we  live 


48$  HETBOPOLITAK  TA^BERKACLE  PULPIT.  ' 

for — to  glorify  Ood,  Evcrv  man  w]in  is  tndy  a  child  of  God  feeb  tbat 
ho  has  no  object  which  hI  nil  approachea  to  this  in  imporfaince ;  his  chirf 
end  is  "to  glorify  God  and  onjoy  him  forever."  Well,  then, niiw  stiong' 
faith  answers  to  that  end  we  uiight  earnestly  to  desire  it ;  but  ho»f  dots 
itatn>ear? 

well,  strong  faith  glorifies  God  becaase  t/  Irtaft  htm  likf  God.  Vrt- 
belief  is  practical  atheism ;  because,  denying  the  tmthfulnesa  of  God,  it 
takes  away  what  is  a  part  of  the  essential  character  of  God,  and  so  &r 
mars  his  very  existence.  I  would  not  say  a  word  to  grieve  those  who 
have  but  little  faith,  for  the  least  fiiith  is  saving  and  is  most  precioot; 
but  still  faith  wherein  it  is  weak  does  nol  treat  Uod  like  God,  it  bonitdl 
and  limits  the  Holy  One  <  ■(  Israel !  It  believes  hira  np  to  such  a  point  i 
or  under  such  and  such  circunislanccs,  and  this  is  not  to  act  towarth 
him  aa  omnipresent  and  omnipotent.  Strong  faith  treats  God  according'  ' 
to  his  infinite  character;  it  doeit  not  suspect  him,  bccanae  it  faKnA 
him  to  be  the  God  of  truth ;  it  does  not  doubt  the  possibility  of  hie 
accomplishing  his  promise,  beeaiisc  it  knows  him  to  be  God  aU-Buffident; 
it  does  not  question  his  Jaitlifulucfs,  because  it  knows  him  to  be  abw- 
lutely  immutable.  Alaa,  we  oftcu  deal  with  Ood  as  if  he  were  liltt- 
ouFsclvee,  or  like  oar  fellow-nion.  We  are  fickle,  and  we  suppose  thst 
he  is  80 ;  our  fellow-men  promise  and  feil  us,  and  we  act  as  if  our  Ood 
were  like  to  the  son  of  man,  who  is  but  a  worm.  0  beloved,  it  rote 
God  of  glory  when  we  act  t^iwards  him  otherwise  than  as  he  is,  but  it 
glorifies  him  when  we  gain  a  sc'riptural  conception  of  what  he  is,  anrf 
act  towards  him  rnider  tliat  aspect,  and  what  ia  that  but  to  trust  hini 
mthout  staggering?  To  me,  when  I  look  at  it  wdmly,  the  strongeiri 
faith  does  not  appear  to  be  a  wonder,  it  is  only  wliat  *the  Lord  has  « 
right  to  receive.  Considering  the  folly  and  depravity  of  man,  feith  is  a 
marveUous  production  of  piice ;  yet  Ifiokcd  at  from  tlie  Godward  ade  of 
it,  the  strongest  possible  fiiith  in  God  is  only  what  God  may  justly  daim. 
Say  you  not  so,  O  believers  ?  Dots  not  your  Lord  deser\-e  to  be  tmstcd 
at  all  times  ? 

Further,  strong  feith  briuga  glory  to  God,  because  it  htats  him  at  a 
Fal/ier,  and  acta  towards  him  in  the  childlike  spirit.  It  is  very  beau^I 
to  see  the  confidence  which  our  children  repose  in  ns.  Why  even 
when  the  man  is  utterly  nnworthy  of  respect  yon  will  see  the  Htfe 
child  still  believing  in  his  father.  And  as  for  those  who  are  favonred 
with  parents  who  are  wise  and  gracious,  there  is,  there  shonld  always  be, 
an  implicit  reliance  upon  father's  judgment.  I  have  known  boys  quote 
their  fcther  with  as  implicit  a  reliance  as  Christians  quote  Scripture,  or 
as  confidently  as  a  Catnolic  quotes  a  bull  of  the  Pope.  Indeed,  what 
ia  a  &ther  after  all  but  the  papa,  the  pope,  of  his  child  to  a  rtn 
great  degree ;  and  though  that  confidence  may  be  mistaken,  yet  it  » 
natnial  to  the  child  to  t'ocl  it.  nud  it  is  a  sad  pity  that  it  should 
too  often  be  rudely  repressed  by  the  lather's  folly.  Now,  eveiy 
child  of  God  ought  to  have  unlimited  confidence  in  God.  Is  be  not 
my  Father?  Can  my  Father  do  an  unkind  thing  to  me?  Cbji  n^' 
Father  be  untrue?  Cfan  my  heavenly  Father  be  false  or  changeable? 
Impossible !  The  child  of  God  does  not  boast  of  his  &ith,  for  it  is 
only  a  simple  childlike  trust,  yet  it  glorifieth  God  more  than  aO  the 
Hfwta  of  proad  reason,  for  it  calleth  Um  by  tbs  name  which  he  lovc^ '. 


STRONG  FAITH.  489 

nd  it  patteth  him  into  the  place  which  he  delights  in,  namelj,  that  of 
father  to  his  own  chosen. 

Again,  strong  faith  honours  God  because  ii  strengthens  all  the  other 
raceSf  and  these  all  bring  glory  to  Ood.  Without  the  graces  of  the 
Ipirit  in  him  a  man  cannot  glorify  God.  That  therefore  which  will 
produce  in  our  character  all  those  yarious  lights  which  are  the  reflec- 
ions  of  the  di\ine  excellence  as  it  shone  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  is  the  chief 
aeans  of  our  glorifying  God,  and  is  therefore  to  be  prized.  Faith  is  the 
cot  of  whatsoever  things  are  lovely  and  pure  and  of  good  repute,  and 
n  proportion  as  it  is  strong  all  these  precious  things  flourish,  therefore 
t  greatly  tends  to  magnify  the  Lord. 

Strong  faith  peculiarly  glorifies  God  because  it  gives  a  striking  testis 
wmy  to  tJie  world.  I  do  not  think  the  world  notices  much  the  common 
iedth  of  ordinaiy  Christians ;  the  faith  which  relies  upon  God  ordinarily 
n  good  times  the  outside  world  does  not  think  much  of;  but  even  camaL 
ninds  are  compelled  to  view  with  astonishment  the  faith  which  glories  in 
}od  when  all  temporal  things  are  swept  away.  The  &ith  which  can 
)iBctise  eminent  self-denial,  or  which  can  achieve,  through  the  power 
»f  God,  enterprises  which  appear  foolhardy  to  mere  reason,  that  is  the 
biih  which  attracts  the  eyes  of  men ;  they  see  your  strong  faith,  and 
hey  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven.  I  pray  God  that  we  may 
ilways  have  such  a  faith  that  it  may  be  worth  while  for  men  to  study  it. 
[  have  known  some  faith  which  would  have  required  a  man  to  put  a 
oicroscope  to  his  eye  to  be  able  to  perceive  it  at  all,  and  when  we  have 
leclured  that  little  faith  saves  the  soul,  the  worldling  has  replied,  ^' Well, 
t  is  a  very  small  concern,  at  any  rate."  Brethren,  ask  that  your  faith 
nay  grow  ;  let  it  embrace  God  heartily,  let  it  rest  in  him  without  a  fear, 
ma  even  the  ungodly  will  be  obliged  to  confess  that  this  is  the  finger  of  God. 

Strong  &ith  glorifies  God  again  because  it  enables  him  to  woik  great 
corks  in  us  and  through  us.  As  our  Saviour  could  not  do  many  mighty 
forks  in  a  certain  place  because  of  their  unbelief,  so  is  God  hampered 
rith  regard  to  some  of  us,  because  we  have  such  little  confidence  in  him. 
Se  has  given  to  some  men  all  the  abilities  necessary  for  the  conversion 
>f  many  souls,  all  the  knowledge,  all  the  utterance  and  a  large  part  of  the 
esl ;  but  they  do  not  believe  in  him,  and  therefore  they  are  not  esta- 
blished. Some  men's  words  actually  create  distrust  in  the  minds  of 
others,  for  they  themselves  are  so  oiflidcnt  in  spirit  that  they  rather 
Muilk  the  children  of  God  in  their  progress  than  help  them  to  advance  in 
he  divine  life.  Search,  0  my  brethren  and  sisters,  whether  it  be  not  so. 
3e  who  has  little  faith  will  be  made  useful  according  to  the  littleness  of 
lis  faith,  but,  if  he  had  more,  the  Master  might  use  him  more.  If  we 
rusted  more,  our  life  would  be  holier,  happier,  serener,  more  close  with 
Jod,  and  more  useful ;  and  why  should  we  not  ?  Give  me  a  reason  why 
ee  should  not.  Oh,  Spirit  of  the  living  (Jod,  why  should  we  not  ?  Help 
hou  us  now  to  be  strong  in  faith,  giving  glory  to  God  ! 

III.  Now  I  advance  to  a  third  observation,  which  I  trust  may  give 
ome  comfort    to    those  who    are  little    in   Israel.     Strong  FArrn 

rHICH    GIVES    GLORY    TO    GOD  MAY    BE  EXERCISED  BY  PERSONS  WHO 

JIB  OTHERWISE  EXCEEDINGLY  WEAK.  What  a  joy  this  is  to  you  who 
re  sufferers  in  body.  You  do  not  often  creep  out  of  your  bed  which  is 
LOW  growing  so  hai-d  through  your  having  laid  upon  it  these  months. 


4*0  HETROPOLITAM  TABERSACLB   PUI-PIT. 

It  is  qnit«  a  holiday  to  jou  to  be  found  in  tlis  house  of  God  now  anl 
then.  Well,  dear  brother,  dear  sister,  you  cannot  do  apostolic  work  ud 
range  a  continent,  fervently  l)lazin<r  out  the  IrotU,  but  yon  can  haw 
Rtrong  faith  in  God :  you  may  exhibit  a  placid  patience,  a  Bwoet  resigiUfi 
tion,  a  sactcd  hopefidnesa  as  lo  the  futnre,  a  divine  disdain  as  to  the  &tf 
of  death ;  and  if  these  abound  in  you  the  circle  of  friends  who  know  jw 
and  tenderly  watch  you  are  receiving  from  your  eiaraplo  the  otmuG 
benefit,  and  perhaps,  though  you  may  not  be  able  to  enter  inl«  aclim 
flervice,  you  may  be  tutoring  otliere  by  the  strength  of  your  feith,  aii^ 
they  will  accomphflh  great  thinrra  as  the  reeult  of  your  example.  At  u^ ' 
rate,  the  weakness  of  your  body  ni-cd  not  prevent  your  exercising  tim 
strong  faith  which  glonfiea  G  od. 

So,  too,  dear  frienda,  you  may  have  but  few  talents,  you  may  be  con?;, 
Bcious  that  you  have  no  briliiancy  of  intellect,  tbaC  you  arc  not  pemuili 
of  remarkable  parts  or  attainmenla,  and  yet  you  may  glorily  God  bf 
strong  faith.  Xou  need  not  be  a  genius  in  order  to  give  glory  to  Qaa, 
for  the  strength  of  your  faith  will  do  it.  Many  a  man  who  is  of  slcndo- 
intellect  glorifies  God  far  more  tbau  your  great  thinker,  because  the  great 
thinker  is  too  often  filled  with  a  high  conceit  of  his  own  thoughts,  and 
will  not  follow  (iod's  word,  whereaa  the  poor  uninteliectual  belierer  a>» 
superior  to  him  by  taking  the  intellect  of  God  to  be  his  guiding  a£ar. 
Ton  can  glorify  God,  dear  brethren,  by  holding  firmly  to  the  troth  of 
which  j-oa  nnderstand  80  httle,  but  which  you  love  90  heartily.  Thou^ 
you  do  not  know  the  whole  of  its  meaning  you  are  in  much  the  same 
condition  as  your  more  advanced  brethren,  for  who  knows  the  whok 
meaning  of  God's  mind?  T-Vhat  you  do  know  you  are  resolved  to  hold 
Avith  iron  grip,  and  by  so  doing  you  greatly  honour  your  Lord. 

Some  saints  are  conscious  of  weakness  of  every  sort,  but  they  miut- 
not,  therefore,  think  that  they  cannot  honour  God  by  strong  feith,  fcr 
Abraham,  of  whom  the  text  is  f:|iokeu,  was  a  special  instance  of  this.  'B» 
was  BO  old  that  his  body  was  now  dead,  and  yet  ho  believed  that  he 
would  be  the  progenitor  of  the  thosen  seed.  He  knew  that  death  waft- 
written  upon  him  as  to  all  th;it  matter,  and  yet  he  was  qmte  certain  that 
God  who  had  promised  would  rcrtaiiily  perform.  Do  you  feel  this  morn- 
ing almost  d^  spiritually?  Deur  lover  of  Jesus,  have  you  wandered 
from  him,  so  that  your  conBciousuess  of  life  in  him  is  dimmed  and  yon 
hardly  know  whether  you  are  in  him  or  not,  for  you  are  so  lethargiiv 
your  soul  cleaveth  to  the  dust ?  Now  is  the  time  to  trust  him:  when 
sin  abounds,  when  fears  are  tJiickcat,  when  temptations  are  most  furiou^ 
when  want  comes  upon  Ihee  like  an  armed  man,  now  is  the  time  to 
trust  in  God.  Summer  weatlier  faith  is  poor  stdf,  but  a  faith  whicb 
bums  on  through  the  long,  dark,  dreary  winter,  a  faith  which  is  not: 
damped  by  the  rain  nor  buried  by  the  snow-Btonn, — this  is  faith  indee^ 
aod  glorifieth  God.  The  depth  of  your  weakness  is  just  the  height  of 
yonr  possibilities  of  honouring  t)ie  I-ord.  If  yon  are  nothing,  eo  much 
tJiemore  room  for  God  to  be  i;\tTj  thing;  if  you  are  unworthy,  the  more 
room  for  confidence  in  the  righteousness  of  Christ ;  and  if  you  are  dea^ 
yon  are  the  better  able  to  prove  the  truth  of  your  Lord's  words  ooncem> 
ing  thebehever,  "  though  he  were  dead,  yet  sliall  he  live."  God  grantis 
grace  that  whatever  our  circumstances  or  conditions,  wc  may  haye  the 
^une  conqneriog  faith  towards  God. 


BTRONG  FAITH.  4il 

XV.  Now,  fonrthly,  rmB  btronq  faith  varies  as  to  rra  hanker 
OP  WORKIHH,  very  much  according  to  the  person  and  hia  circumHtnnces. 
Ttere  ia  one  thing  that  strong  faith  does  not  do  which  some  think  it 
voald  bo  sure  to  do— it  never  olusters,  and  it  never  talks  big  and  boasts 
of  what  it  will  accomplish.  "Though  all  men  should  forsake  thee,  yet 
win  not  I,"  ia  not  the  language  of  strong  iaith,  that  is  the  prattle  of 
Master  Peter  with  his  pride  uppermost.  Some  men  are  in  their  own 
opinion  in  sach  a  fine  condition  that  they  could  push  the  whole  world 
l^forc  them,  and  drag  the  church  after  them :  I  do  not  know  what  they 
could  not  do.  Yea,  but  there  is  a  groat  deal  of  difference  between  con- 
fidence in  yourself  and  confidence  in  God.  I  have  noticed  that  the 
f^th  which  guea  forth  against  the  world  with  the  dauntlesfl  courage  of  a 
lion  is  the  very  fiiith  which  lies  down  like  a  lamb  at  Jesus'  feet.  The 
next  thing  to  "1  can  do  all  things"  is  "Without  Christ  I  can  do 
nothing."  ConscionaneBB  of  personal  weakness  attends  a  brave  reliance 
npOQ  God,  and  shows  itself  in  modesty  and  quietude  of  manner.  Bark- 
ing doga  do  not  often  bite,  and  those  men  who  promise  much  very  seldom 
perform.  Strong  faith  has  a  quiet  tongue,  and  does  the  daring  deed 
fritihont  preliminary  boasting.  It  docs  not  advertise  its  coming  victories, 
bat  foOs  upon  the  Midianitcs  at  dead  of  night,  and  n-ith  its  lamps  and 
pitchers  puto  them  to  the  rout.  Point  me  to  one  boastful  word  that 
ever  fell  from  Abraham.  All  the  Scriptural  heroes  of  feith  were  doers, 
and  not  bloaterera.  David  sdd  little  to  his  envious  brothers,  but  he 
brought  home  the  giant's  bleeding  head,  and  bade  its  dumb  moutii  tell  of 
what  he  bad  done. 

Failk  exercises  ilself  as  iti  tite  ease  of  Abraham,  hy  heUeviiu}  God's 
teord.  God  had  said  many  things  to  Abraham,  and  Abraham  believed 
them  all.  That  is  a  rare  thing  nowadays.  The  school  of  modem 
thought,  which  considers  itself  to  be  the  most  infallible  thing  now 
extant,  always  cats  and  shapes  divinity  according  to  its  own  views  of 
what  it  ought  to  be  j  in  fact,  it  has  a  God  of  its  oivn,  cut  out  of  the 
brown  paper  of  ita  philoaophiea— a  God  of  soft  effeminacy,  who  is  no 
more  hke  the  Jehovah  of  Abraham  than  the  Yenus  of  Paphos.  These 
men  believe,  not  what  the  Bible  says,  but  what  they  imagine  it  ought  to 
■ay.  Their  doctrinal  views  are  like  the  camel  which  n'as  evolved  by 
a  German  philosopher  out  of  hia  own  consciousness :  he  had  never 
seen  one,  bnt  he  produced  it  according  to  his  own  notion  of  what 
it  ought  to  be,  and  he  was  very  strong  against  humps  ;  he  would  never 
believe  that  a  real  camel  had  a  hump,  because  hia  consciousness  did 
.not  suggest  such  a  thing.  Much  of  intellectual  religion  nowadays  is 
jost  t^t;  we  have  certain  gentry  about  who  evolve  a  gospel  out  of 
their  own  brain,  and  of  course  tliey  utterly  despise  the  gospel  which 
.actually  exists  because  it  is  not  like  their  model.  We  are  asked  to 
bow  down  and  worship  the  calf  which  comes  out  of  their  furnace,  but 
that  wc  shall  not  do  wiule  our  faith  is  strong.  We  believe  God's  eveiy 
word  as  far  as  we  know  it.  If  I  know  a  doctrine  to  be  in  God's  word, 
it  is  infallible  to  me.  If  I  have  ever  in  thought  gone  beyond  that 
which  is  revealed,  I  do  heartily  repent  of  such  presumption ;  brethren, 
aayyou  not  so?  If  I  see  in  God's  Book  two  truths  which  I  cannot 
square  with  one  another,  I  believe  them  both.  There  is  a  middle  term 
somewhere,  though  I  know  not  where  to  find  it;  and  for  the  present  I 


441  XFTBOPOLrrAK  TABEH5ACT.E  PCLPIT. 

beliere  without  that  explanatory  brutii.  Tlicre  are  the  tvo  things,  Gul 
has  said  them,  and  thej  muBt  be  true,  and  it  is  mtDC  to  beheve  Utao. 
Let  God  be  tme  and  every  maji  a  liar.  TbJa  is  where  strong  kiik  a 
wanted  in  these  days ;  we  need  a  settled  creed,  and  a  clear,  compreheasn 
view  of  revealed  truth,  even  if  ne  should  in  conseqnenee  be  called  old- 
fashioned  or  imbecile.  We  need  to  be  more  old-fashioned  than  ever.  lami 
Kadicai  in  many  things,  but  in  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  I  wonld  hnc 
you  to  be  Conservative  to  the  backbone,  not  for  an  hour  yielding  a^ 
point  of  truth  to  the  moat  brilli.'mt  thinker  that  the  world  can  prodow 
rhinkers  are  not  ^pointed  to  tinker  up  a  gospd  for  ns;  thank  God,  m 
have  a  perfect  gospel  already.  Thc-ir  Bliifting  gospel  changes  aboatemj 
ten  yean,  and  comes  out  spick  and  ki^aa  as  a  new  theology,  but  we  han 
graqjed  the  old  infallible  truth,  iuid  we  mean  to  hang  to  it  for  dear  li^ 
being  strong  in  fcith,  giving  glorj'  ti.  God. 

But  Abraham's  was  not  alone?  reccpfive  fiiiih  :  his  was  a  &'th  whiii 
obeyed  Ihe  precept.  The  test  of  his  ubfJienct  was  the  strange  command  ta 
take  his  only  son  and  offer  him  up  fur  a  sacrifice,  but  he  went  to  do  i^ 
and  in  God's  account  he  did  do  it.  fL<r  he  had  the  will  to  do  it  at  God*! 
bidding.  Yon  and  I  most  be  willing  to  do  what  God  tella  us.  as  God 
telle  ns,  when  God  tells  ns,  btcaiuie  God  telk  us,  but  only  strung  MA 
will  be  equal  to  such  complete  r-bcdience. 

Then  Abraham's  faith  awakened  in  him  grmt  erpcelaHons.  He  vnt 
looking  for  an  heir,  an  heir  JVom  whom  siiould  B)>ring  a  seed  aa  the  slan 
of  heaven  for  roullitude;  he  expcvted  that  quite  aa  confidently  as  yon 
and  I  expect  to-morrow.  We  sliiill  be  full  of  expectation  if  we  have 
strong  faith:  looking  for  blcssiugy,  expecting  prayeni  to  be  answered, and 
promises  to  be  folfilled.  We  Bhall  not  cry  ■'  How  wonderful !  "  evety 
time  a  prayer  is  answered,  but  ne  iihitll  reckon  it  a  matter  of  nccesi^ 
(hat  God  uionid  stand  to  every  word  that  comcth  out  of  his  mootii. 
May  the  Lord  give  you  sach  strung  fiiilh  as  this,  and  may  it  work  in  ttna 
fiwhion. 

Bnt  time  chides  me,  as  it  did  the  apostle  when  he  entered  upon  this 
subject.  You  may  well  pardon  me  if  I  am  prolix,  for  even  so  was  bt. 
imtil  he  said,  "  Time  would  &il  us  to  spcuk  of  Gideon  and  Jephtha,"  toA 
80  on. 

v.  Our  last  point  is,  PAmi  la  espkctallt  to  be  expected  jx 
^JBBTAIN  QUAKTE&s.  Here  I  wish  to  Bpcak  vet?  pointedly  and  penen- 
aU;  to  all  my  brethren  and  sisters  in  Christ. 

Dear  friends,  there  ought  to  be  strong  faith  in  ui  vho  know  Ood. 
""They  that  know  thy  name  will  put  their  trust  in  thee,  for  thou.  Lord, 
lust  not  forsaken  them  that  seek  tbcc  "  ;  and  if  he  does  not  forsake  tba 
seekers,  mnch  less  will  he  forsake  those  who  have  found  him  and  trusted  in 
him.  Brethren,  there  are  some  mou  you  cdu  trust  till  you  know  them, 
bnt  if  it  be  tme  that  when  you  do  know  them  you  can  no  longer  trust 
them,  it  proves  that  they  nave  a  had  character.  Now,  yon  who  know 
the  IJord  ought  never  to  throw  your  God  under  such  a  suspicion.  If 
you  know  him,  tmst  him.     I  know  you  will. 

Wc  expect  strong  fiuth  next  from  those  who  have  had  a  long  txperimtt 
of  him.  we  can  ahnost  forgive  yon  young  people  who  have  just  sUltsd 
'"  the  Christiaii  life  if  you  are  vexed  with  doubta  and  fears,  t'\ourii  trnly 

''  does  not  deserve  than  even  of  youj  but  when  your  sires  Begin  to 


BTROHO  TATTB.  443 

<linibt,  what  shall  we  say  of  them  ?  What,  have  you  known  him  fifty 
years  and  (januut  yon  trust  him  yet  ?  "What,  my  dear  brother,  has  the  Lord 
kept  you  till  yoii  are  seventy!  How  long  do  yon  expect  to  live?  To 
eigiity?  Well,  lie  has  been  good  to  you  for  Bevon  tens,  cannot  you  trust 
him  for  the  last  ton  ?  AVhat,  tested  him  over  and  over  again,  and  never 
found  a  flaw  in  his  fidelity — been  in  deep  waters  aiid  kept  from  sink- 
ing, aud  yet  arc  you  niiBtrustful  ?  What  are  those  things  upon  your 
feet?  Shoes  of  iron  and  brass.  He  said  they  should  be.  Are  you 
Afraid  that  after  all  you  will  be  footsore  and  shoeleffi  ?  He  promised, 
"  BS  thy  days  so  shall  thy  strength  be."  How  has  it  been  ?  Why,  you 
say,  "It  has  been  so  up  to  this  moment ;"  then  why  not  to  the  end? 
8pcak  well  of  the  bridge  which  has  carried  you  over  so  many  times. 
J^  I  have  already  said,  yoU  cannot  put  your  finger  upon  a  single  instance 
in  wliifih  the  good  Lord  has  deceived  you,  and  if  yon  never  doubt  your 
Lord  till  you  have  reason  for  it  you  will  never  doubt  him  at  all.  Come, 
come,  let  those  of  us  who  have  been  twenty-five  years  in  the  ways  of  God 
put  aside  our  childish  doubts.  Yet  I  warrant  you  this  is  easier  said  tbui 
done;  and,  though  we  taik  thus,  and  we  know  it  ia  true  and  right,  alas, 
our  nature  gocth  readily  astray  into  a  wicked  and  provoking  distrust  of 
God. 

Further,  dear  friends,  those  ought  to  trust  him  taho  have  lived  «i 
fellowship  loilli  him.  II'  you  have  been  on  the  top  of  Tabor;  if  you 
have  known  the  kisses  of  hia  moutb  and  tasted  of  his  love,  which  is 
better  than  wine;  if  yon  have  been  emparadiscd  in  his  arms,  in  the  full 
asBoronce  of  faith  and  the  enjoyment  of  perfect  love  %  why  should  you 
«oiM  down  from  the  mountain  and  distrust  him  ?  God  forbid  that  we 
4Kmld  do  this.  May  the  recollection  of  the  hill  Mizar  and  the  Hermon- 
ites  come  freshly  over  our  minds  this  morning,  and  may  we  rest  in  our 
'God. 

Those  ioho  are  gelling  near  to  heaven  ought  not  to  distrust  him.  I  sec 
upon  some  of  you  the  marks  of  the  coming  end.  The  snow  flakes  of 
inany  winters  he  on  your  brows,  nay,  the  wind  has  blown  even  those 
ftwmy  from  some  of  you  and  left  the  summit  bare.  You  will  soon 
behold  your  Lord,  your  eyes  will  soon  see  the  King  in  his  beauty  in  the 
land  tMt  is  very  far  off.  Do  not  let  it  be  among  the  lust  memories  of 
earth  tbat  you  doubted  your  Beloved.  Oh,  you  who  have  known  him 
from  your  youth,  and  have  proved  his  fuithfulness  till  you  have  come  to 
pained  age,  do  not  now  begin  to  suspect  your  gracious  Qod.  You  do  not 
oonbt  the  partner  of  your  bosom,  who  has  shared  your  sorrows  for  half  a 
«enttiry  and  has  been  the  comfort  of  your  life, — you  do  well  to  trust  in 
her,  for  it  is  said  of  such,  "  The  heart  of  her  hushand  doth  safety  trust 
her";  but  surely  she  is  not  to  be  relied  upon  eo  implicitly  as  your  God ! 
Oh,  dear  aged  brother,  permit  one  who  is  but  a  httle  child  compared  with 
you  to  entreat  you.  Console  and  cheer  the  younger  people  by  the  exhi- 
bition of  confidence  and  serenity  wrought  in  you  by  strong  faith. 

Lastly,  we  who  are  ieachera  of  olhera  oughl  to  have  strong  faith  vi 
God,  I  think  we  may  at  times  profitably  mention  our  own  doubts  and 
&an  for  the  ancooragemcnt  of  Oiose  who  are  terribly  downcast,  but  it 
ought  always  to  be  done  with  very  great  prudence  and  much  regret.  I 
recollect  once  speaking  of  my  own  tremblings,  when  preaching,  and  a 
venerable  brother  said  to  me  afterwards,  "  I  do  not  think,  dear  pastor, 


444  KETROFOLITAM  TABKOKACLB  PULPIT. 

thatjoa  vera  right  in  speaking  of  yoiir  own  transgreGBionsso  freelj.  Tso 
encoDraged  the  people  oert&iniy  by  what  jou  said  about  yourself  but  I 
hardly  think  they  ought  to  be  encouraged.  Now,  Buppose  yoa  were  to  go 
into  the  polpit  and  say  'th>  re  are  some  of  you  who  are  thiei-es;  it  is 
very  wrong  of  yoc,  but  still  do  not  despair,  for  I  thieve  a  little  myBelt' 
Why,  you  know,"  he  said,  "  jou  would  not  be  doing  good,  bnt  ham; 
and  yet  thieving  is  not  more  truly  a  sin  than  doubting  God,  in  fact  then 
is  the  utmost  sin  in  nnbelief."  I  replied  to  my  good  brother  that  he  vu 
right,  and  I  thanked  him  lur  the  correction.  Whenever,  dear  hearere, 
you  cateh  any  of  na  who  arc  tcitchera  doubting  and  fearing,  do  not  pitr 
UB,  bat  scold  us.  We  have  no  right  to  be  in  Doubting  Castle.  Pmj 
do  not  visit  us  there.  Follow  us  as  far  as  we  follow  Christ,  but  if  we  get 
into  the  horrible  Slough  of  Despond,  come  and  pull  ua  out  by  the  bair  of 
our  heads  if  neceaaary,  but  do  not  fall  into  it  youreelves.  Never  aay,  "Uj 
beloved  paator  went  there,  and  tJiereforc  I  may  go  there."  No,  but  wf, 
"  Even  our  minister  fell  into  that  error,  and  tlicrefore  I  will  keep  as  fa 
from  it  as  ever  I  can,  for  if  tlie  teacher  ehps  the  disciple  may  easily  do 
80,  and  therefore  I  must  very  carefully  watch  against  unbelief. 

Brethren,  we  sh^  never  succeed  in  winning  sinners  to  faith  if  m 
preach  what  we  do  not  intensely  believe.  I  do  verily  believe  that  the 
sinner  is  lost,  and  that  unless  grace  saves  him,  he  is  lost  for  ever.  I 
believe  that  eternal  punishnient  wM  full  upon  him  uuless  he  repents  sod 
believes  in  Jesus  Christ.  I  do  believe  that  Jcsua  shed  his  ftedtn 
fclood,  and  that  whosoever  J«jtieveth  in  bim  is  saved  beyond  all  tev  rf 
destruction,  saved  by  the  bL-od  of  the  Lamb.  We  muat  preach  in  a 
beheving  manner,  knowing  our  message  to  be  true,  or  else  men  will  die 
in  unbelief.  And,  what  is  Eiiorc,  I  do  not  think  we  shall  have  many  con- 
versions unless  we  expect  God  to  bless  the  word,  tuid  feel  certain  that  be 
will  do  so.  We  must  not  wonder  and  be  astonished  if  we  hear  of  a 
dozen  or  two  conversions,  but  let  the  aatonishraeut  be  that  tbouaandi  ar? 
not  converted,  when  they  hear  such  divine  trutli,  and  when  we  ask  the 
Holy  Spirit  to  attend  it  wicli  divine  energy.  God  will  bless  us  in  pnv 
por^on  to  our  faith.  It  JB  the  rule  of  his  kingdom. — "According  li' 
your  &ith  so  be  it  nnto  yvu."  O  God,  give  thy  ministcra  more  faith! 
Let  US  believe  thee  firmly  I  Oii,  tiiat  we  could  beUeve  thee  up  to  thf 
fiilleat  poesible  measure  of  feith,  and  never  doubt  thee  again.  If  the 
enemy  number  thousands,  give  us  the  faith  of  Samson  to  throw  ourselva 
upon  them,  and  in  the  name  of  God  to  amite  them,  and  though  tre 
ourselves  as  to  all  power  to  convert  others  are  as  dead  men,  and  uou^ 
the  sinner  be  dead,  yet  hel]>  us  to  believe  that  souls  can  be  begott«i 
again  by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  and  let  us  preach  with  confidence 
in  the  divine  power.    O  liOrd,  grant  this  to  us,  for  Jesus'  sake.     Amen. 


FoaTiON  OF  ScRiPTUBE  RsAD  BEFOKB  SsBitOH — Hebrews  xi. 


Hthns  feok  "Ooe  Own  HxuM  Book  "—125  (Song  II.),  229,  2 


^di[0pl}tan  i^ahmafk  ftilpit. 


THE  GOD  OP  PEACE  AND  OUR  SANCTI  PI  CATION. 


%  ^m\ift{ 


Dbmvbrbd  on   Lord*8-Day  Moening,  August  5th,  1877,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THB    MBTBOPOLITAN    TABBRNACLE,    NEWINQTON, 


''Now  the  Qod  of  peace,  that  brought  again  from  the  dead  our  Lerd  Jesus,  that 
great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep,  through  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant,  make 
jon  perfect  in  every  good  work  to  ao  his  will,  working  in  you  that  which  is  well 
pleasing  in  his  sight,  through  Jesus  Christ;  to  whom  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever. 
Amen." — Hebrews  xiii  20,  21. 

Thb  apostle,  in  the  eighteenth  verse,  had  been  earnestly  asking  for  the 
prayeTB  of  the  Lord's  people.  On  the  behalf  of  all  his  brethren  he 
saidy  "  Pray  for  us ; "  and  for  himself  he  added,  *'  I  beseech  you  the 
rather  to  do  this,  that  I  may  be  restored  to  you  the  sooner."  If  the 
apostle  needed  the  prayers  of  his  brethren,  how  much  more  do  we  who 
are  so  greatly  inferior  to  him  in  all  respects.  We  may,  indeed,  even 
with  tears  appeal  to  you  who  are  our  brethren  in  Christ,  and  entreat 
you  to  be  earnest  in  your  supplications  to  God  on  our  behalf..  What 
can  we  do  without  your  prayers  ?  They  link  us  with  the  omnipotence 
of  God.  Like  the  lightning-rod,  they  pierce  the  clouds  and  bring  down 
the  mighty  and  mysU^iious  power  from  on  high.  But  what  the  apostle 
was  anxious  to  receive  he  was  careful  to  bestow,  and  therefore  he  pro- 
ceeded in  the  words  of  our  text  to  plead  for  his  brethren ;  from  which 
we  learn  that  if  wo  desire  others  to  pray  for  us  we  must  set  the 
example  of  praying  for  them.  We  cannot  expect  to  be  benefited  by 
other  men's  prayers  unless  the  spirit  of  supplication  dwells  in  us  also. 
In  this  matter  the  Lord  will  give  to  us  good  measure  pressed  down 
and  running  over  according  as  we  give  unto  others.  Other  hearts  shall 
be  stirred  up  to  intercede  for  us  if  we  are  ourselves  diligent  in  inter- 
cession.   Pray,  if  you  would  be  prayed  for. 

The  prayer  before  us  was  an  exceedingly  wide  one,  for  Paul  had 
learned  to  ask  great  things  of  the  Lord.  The  Holy  Spirit  had  filled 
him  with  much  love  to  flie  Hebrews,  and  with  strong  desire  for  their 
welfare ;  and,  therefore,  he  asks  for  that  which  is  the  greatest  of  all 
blessings  to  the  people  of  God,  that  they  may  be  fit  for  every  good 
work,  and  that  God  may  work  in  them  to  do  that  which  is  well-pleasing 
Xo.  1,368. 


4d6  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

ill  his  sight.  When  we  plead  for  €k>d's  own  bebved  people  we  are  safe 
in  asking  for  the  best  of  blessings :  if  wc  feel  straitened  in  pleadh^ 
for  ourselves  there  can  be  no  reason  in  being  so  in  reference  to  them, 
since  we  know  that  the  Lord  loves  them  and  abounds  towards  them  in 
grace  through  Christ  Josus. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  this  prayer  or  benediction  comes  at  the  close 
of  the  epistle,  even  as  in  Christian  assemblies  the  benediction  is  pro- 
nounced at  the  end  of  the  worship.  Let  the  end  of  all  our  acts  be  a 
blessing  to  men  and  a  doxology  to  God.  As  long  as  yon  live,  dear 
brethren,  endeavour  to  bless  others,  and  when  you  die  conclude  life  with 
a  blessing,  even  as  your  Lord  and  Master  did,  who  as  he  ascended  to 
heaven  was  seen  with  outstretched  hands  blessing  his  people.  As  Jacob 
would  not  let  the  angel  go  until  he  blessed  him,  so  we  should  not  ceaae 
from  preaching  or  writing  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  until  we  have  a 
comfortable  persuasion  that  a  blessing  has  come  upon  our  brethren. 

This  prayerful  benediction  is  an  exceedingly  instructive  one.  It  has 
within  itself  the  whole  compass  of  the  gospel,  as  one  might  show  if  this 
were  our  object  at  this  season.  It  is  condensed  spiritual  meat ;  much 
in  little ;  all  things  in  one  blessing.  Every  word  is  as  a  pearl  for  value, 
and  as  the  sea  for  depth.  It  is  not  the  object  of  prayer  to  instmct  our 
fellow  men :  a  decided  distinction  ought  always  to  be  drawn  betweoi 
praying  and  preaching,  and  those  err  greatly  who  undw  thenaBDoeof 
prayer  not  only  instruct,  but  argue  and  exhort;  yet  it  is  a  remarkiAie 
fact  that  there  is  no  inspired  prayer  in  Scripture  but  what  is  full  of 
teaching  to  those  who  are  willing  to  study  it.  Take  an^  one  of  the 
psalms,  —  though  they  be  addressed  to  God;  yet  within  them  ^e 
preacher  finds  a  thousand  texts  tvom  which  to  inculcate  the  dociaranea 
and  the  precepts  of  the  Lord.  As  for  the  prayers  of  our  Lord  Jesus, 
they  drop  fatness ;  that  which  is  commonly  called  "  the  Lord's  prayer  *• 
contains  a  world  of  doctrine,  and  that  glorious  prayer  in  t^  aev^- 
teenth  of  John  is  as  honey  from  the  honeycomb.  Now,  since  the  same 
Spirit  that  wrought  of  old  worketh  also  in  us,  I  conclude  that  he  will 
lead  us  «lso  to  ^ray  to  the  edification  of  those  who  hear  us.  Though 
the  foremost  object  of  prayer  be  not  the  instruction  of  our  Mow 
men,  yet  prayer  ought  to  oe  Ml  of  good  matter  and  worthy  of  the  con- 
sideration of  those  whom  we  invite  to  join  in  it!  Public  prayer 
would  be  a  far  better  means  of  grace  to  the  people  if  those  who  utter 
petitions  in  public  would  seek  preparation  of  heart  from  the  Lord  and 
enter  upon  the  exercise  with  careful  thought.  Surely  it  is  not  sufficient 
to  repeat  a  round  of  godly  expressions  which  have  become  current  in 
the  church,  but  we  ought  to  speak  with  the  Spirit  and  with  the  nnder- 
standing  in  our  approaches  to  God,  so  that  the  thoughts  of  our  fellow 
Christians  may  be  excited,  and  their  hearts  united  with  us  in  our  public 
devotions.  He  who  prays  in  public  a  dull  prayer,  devoid  of  all  thought 
and  meditation,  damps  the  flame  of  devotion,  whereas  it  was  his 
duty  to  have  added  fuel  thereto.  I  imdte  those  who  take  part  in  our 
prayer-meetings  to  lay  this  matter  to  heart. 

We  must,  however,  further  note  that  though  the  prayer  of  Paul  for 
the  Hebrew  believers  is  full  of  doctrine,  yet  the  whole  of  it  toids  to 
the  end  which  he  had  in  view.  He  did  not  garnish  his  prayer  with 
extraneous  ornament,  nor  drag  in  needless  doctrinal  statements ;  but 


THE  GOD  OF  PEACE  AND  OUR  aiNCTIFICATION.  447 

eTery  word  was  meant  to  support  his  plea  for  personal,  practical  holi- 
ness, which  was  the  one  object  of  his  prayer.  While  he  shows  us 
whence  holiness  must  come,  and  how  it  must  come,  and  how  it  is 
wrought  in  us,  and  what  it  is  like  when  it  is  wrought  in  us,  he  is  aJI 
iilong  bringing  forth  his  strong  arguments  with  the  Lord  that  in  the 
Hebrew  believers  this  holiness  might  be  wrought  abundantly.  I  am 
sure  I  shall  hare  your  earnest  attention  while  I  endeayour  to  weigh 
the  Tery  words  of  the  text,  since  each  one  is  full  of  meaning  :  I  cannot 
hope  in  the  short  space  of  one  sermon  to  bring  out  the  whole  fulness  of 
its  meaning,  for  who  can  hold  the  sea  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand,  or 
compass  the  fulness  of  such  a  text  in  one  brief  address  ?  Yet  I  would 
labour  to  give  you  sufficient  insight  into  it  to  let  you  see  that  its 
lengths  and  breadths  and  depths  and  heights  are  not  easily  to  be 
measured  by  mortal  mind. 

I.  I  call  your  attention  to  the  peculiab  title  under  which 
God  18  ADDRESSED  IN  THIS  PRAYER  :  "  Now,  the  Qod  of  peocc''  The 
names  of  God  employed  in  prayer  in  holy  Scripture  are  always  signiff- 
cant.  Holy  men  of  old  were  not  so  poverty-stricken  in  language  as 
always  to  address  God  under  one  name,  nor  were  they  so  careless  as  to 
speak  with  him  under  such  a  title  as  might  first  come  to  hand  ; 
but  in  their  approaches  to  the  Most  High  they  carefully  regarded 
that  attribute  of  the  divine  nature  from  whicn  they  expected  the 
blessing  which  they  desired.  If  they  needed  that  their  enemies  should 
be  overthrown  they  pleaded  with  the  arm  of  his  strength  ;  if  they  were 
wrongfully  entreatea,  they  prayed  to  the  God  of  righteousness  ;  if  they 
need^  pardon  for  their  sins,  they  pleaded  with  the  God  of  merey ; 
and  such  names  as  Jehovah,  Elohim,  Shaddai,  are  not  used  indiscrimi- 
nately in  the  prayers  of  the  saints  of  old,  but  always  with  selection  and 
judgment.  Why,  then,  did  the  apostle  here  call  God  "the  God  of 
peace  "?    He  had  a  reason ;  what  was  it  ? 

It  is  ft  Pauline  expression.  You  find  that  title  only  in  the  writings 
of  Paul.  It  is  a  name  of  Paul's  own  coinage  by  the  teaching  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  There  were  reasons  in  PauFs  experience  which  led  him 
to  dwell  upon  this  peculiar  trait  of  the  divine  character.  Each  man, 
seeing  with  his  own  eyes,  sees  something  peculiar  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord ;  and  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  when  writing  to  Hebrew  be- 
lieyers  saw  with  special  clearness  **  the  God  of  peace,"  who  had  made 
both  Jew  and  Gentile  to  be  one  in  Christ,  so  makmg  peace.  If  you  look 
in  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  fifteenth  chapter  and  33rd  verse,  you  find 
him  praying,  *'  Now,  the  God  of  peace  be  with  you  all."  In  the  same 
epistle,  chapter  xvi.  verse  20,  he  says,  "  The  God  of  peace  shall  bruise 
Satan  under  your  feet  shortly."  Again,  in  the  second  Epistle  to  the 
Corinthians,  xiii.  1 1,  he  says,  "  Be  perfect,  be  of  good  comfort,  be  of 
one  mind,  live  in  peace ;  and  the  God  of  love  and  peace  shall 
be  with  you."  In  Philippians  iv.  9,  he  thus  concludes  his  exhor- 
tation: "Those  things,  which  ye  have  both  learned,  and  received, 
and  heard,  and  seen  in  me,  do :  and  the  God  of  peace  shall  be  with 
you;"  but  especially  in  1  Thessalonians  v.  23,  there  is  a  passage 
strikingly  parallel  to  our  text.  He  there  prays,  **  And  the  very  God  of 
peace  sanctify  you  wholly."  Sanctification  is  the  subject  of  the  present 
prayer.    Just  as  in  our  text  he  prays,  **  Perfect  you  in  every  good  work 


"I 


i48  METaOPOLITiK  T4BKKSACLK  PUUH. 

todoliiswiU,"ioiiiThessaloQiiins  he  Bays,  "  And  I  pray  God  yonr  whole 
spirit  and  soal  and  body  be  pro'-f'rved  blameless  nnto  tne  coming  of  cur 
Lord  Jesna  Christ."  It  ia  cudent,  not  only  that  the  apoatJe  delighttd 
in  the  eipresaion  pecnliar  to  liimseif,  but  (hat  he  aaw  a  close  coDnecCioc 
between  the  peace  of  God  ajij  the  saocLifying  of  beiicTera,  and  for  this 
reaaon,  both  in  the  ThcBsakniimis  and  in  the  Hebrews,  his  prayer  far 
their  aanctification  is  addree ^'j^d  to  the  God  of  peace. 

The  title  ia  a  gospel  one.  God  is  nut  spoken  of  as  the  God  of  peaoe  < 
in  the  Old  Testument ;  bat  (bore  he  is  "  a  man  of  war,  the  Lord  it 
his  name  ;"  "  he  ahoU  cut  off  the  spirit  of  princes ;  he  ia  terrible  to  the 
kingaof  the  earth."  He  is  fri'4ui>ntlj  spoken  of  in  the  Paalms  and  the 
prophets  as  "  the  Lord  strong'  mid  mighty,  the  Lord  migbty  in  battle," 
and  it  is  a  part  of  Israel's  pmn-j  of  !iim  that  he  slew  mighty  kings,  "  fut 
big  mercy  endnreth  for  ever."  Constantly,  in  the  older  Tolomc  of  instHn- 
tion,  do  we  read  of  "  the  Lord  of  hosts,"  and  of  this  title  an  qM  dirine 
saitb,  "  It  hath  the  sonnd  of  lioatility  in  it  ";  but  now  no  longer  spe^ 
we  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  bnt  of  the  God  of  peace  :  for,  since  Jesus  is 
onr  peace,  the  enmity  is  slain.  Messiah's  reign  began  with  songs  in 
heaven  of  "  peace  on  earth,  goodwill  towarifi  men,"  his  errand  wm 
peace,  his  spirit  was  peace,  his  teaching  was  peace,  his  last  tcstami^nt 
was  peace,  and,  through  his  atonement,  from  the  opened  beaTens  ihe 
God  of  peace  and  consolation  looks  down  npon  the  eons  of  men. 

The  appropriateness  of  the  title  to  the  particolar  prayer  will  readilj 
strike  you,  for  hoUnesi  is  pean^.  "  May  the  God  of  peace  make  yoa 
hdy,"  for  he  himaelf  is  peace  and  holiness,  ^hen  noliness  reigned 
orer  the  whole  unlTerBe  peace  reigned  also.  There  was  do  war  in 
heaven  till  one  who  had  been  an  angel  became  a  devil,  and  fomented 
a  rebellion  against  the  thrice  holy  God.  Sin  brings  forth  strife,  bnl 
holiness  is  the  mother  of  peace.  In  perfection  there  is  peace,  and 
therefore  Paul  prays  the  God  of  peace  to  make  his  children  perfect: 
holiness  is  well  pleasing  to  him,  and  when  he  is  pleased  all  is  peaces 
therefore  he  prays  him  to  work  in  them  that  which  ia  well-pleasing  in 
his  sight. 

The  God  of  peace  has  also  graciously  restored  peace  and  recondbd 
U»  to  himself  by  Jesus  Chris/,  but  il  has  been  by  Ihe  putting  awaj(  ^ 
sin,  for  while  sin  remained  peace  was  impossible.  "  The  blood  of  the 
everlasting  covenant,"  of  which  the  text  speaks,  was  the  sealing  of  a 
covenant  of  peace  which  God  madi?-  between  himself  and  man  ;  for  of 
old  were  there  thonghts  of  peace  in  the  mind  of  God  towards  his  chosen. 
In  the  fulness  of  time  the  gift  of  Clirist  and  hia  atoning  death  wai 
the  actual  establishment  of  peace,  for  he  hath  made  peace  by  the 
blood  of  his  cross.  He  is  the  ambassador  of  God  to  ns,  and  by  his 
substitutionary  sacrifice  peace  was  effectually  made,  "f^r  he  is  oar 
peace";  by  the  blood  of  the  everlasting;  covenant  wn-i  lh'?ri?  a 
treaty  made  between  God  and  his  elect,  which  shall  stand  l^t  for 
ever  and  ever.  As  for  our  Lord's  resurrection  and  ascension,  of  which 
the  text  speaks—"  The  God  of  peace,  that  brought  again  from  the 
dead  our  Lord  Jeaus," — that  was  the  open  proclamation  of  peace.  So 
kmg  u  Jesua  was  in  the  grave  peace  was  not  openly  declared  ;  it  was 
aworedly  established,  bnt  not  pnblicly  announced ;  bnt  when  the 
r  rose,  and  especially  when  he  ascended  on  high  and  received 


THB  GOD  GP  PSACE  AND  OUR  SANCTIFICATION.  449 

gifts  for  men,  and  sat  down  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  even  the  Father, 
then  before  the  whole  universe  was  it  declared  that  Grod  was  at  peace 
with  the  sons  of  men.  For  Jesus  is  in  all  things  the  Adam,  the 
model  man,  the  representative  of  his  people,  and  peace  with  him 
means  pjeace  with  all  who  are  in  him.  He  died  for  our  sins,  but  he 
rose  again  for  our  justification,  which  is  none  other  than  the  replacing 
of  us  in  a  condition  of  reconcihation  with  God.  He  went  into 
heaven  to  take  possession  of  our  inheritance  ;  and  what  better  evi- 
dence could  there  be  that  we  are  reconciled  to  God?  It  our  repre- 
sentative sits  at  his  right  hand  we  may  be  confident  that  the  Lord  is 
reconciled  unto  us. 

Beloved,  if  you  pursue  the  subject  you  will  see  more  and  more  clearly 
the  significance  of  the  title,  "the  God  oi  peace";  for,  to  make  us 
ferfect  m  every  good  work  to  do  his  mil  is  to  give  tis  peace.  Although 
every  Ohristian  by  faith  in  Christ  is  justified,  and  so  has  a  judicial 
peace  with  God^  yet  we  never  can  enjoy  perfect  peace  with  our  own 
consciences  so  long  as  any  sin  is  committed  by  us,  or  dwells  in  us.  *  So 
long  as  there  shall  remain  a  solitary  tendency  to  sin  within  these  mem- 
bers we  shall  be  disturbed,  sin  will  contend  with  grace,  and  newborn 
grace  will  war  vrith  inbred  sin.  Sin  and  grace  can  no  more  agree  than 
nre  and  water.  Even  the  God  of  peace  never  tries  to  establish  a  peace 
between  good  and  evil,  for  it  would  be  monstrous  even  if  it  were 
possible.  The  way  to  peace  is  the  way  of  holiness.  Cast  out  sin, 
and  you  cast  out  contention.  Subdue  iniquity,  and  peace  wins  the 
Tiotoiy.  Beloved,  it  is  of  no  use  for  us  to  seek  happiness  ot  life 
except  by  the  way  of  holiness  of  conversation.  I  have  already  declared 
that  we  have  peace  with  God  through  the  atoning  work  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ ;  but  for  deep  calm  of  heart  and  quiet  of  conscience  there 
most  be  a  work  of  sanctification  within  us  wrought  by  the  power  which 
raised  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead.  Sin  is  our  enemy,  and  the  new  life 
within  us  is  heartily  at  enmity  with  evil,  and  therefore  peace  can  never 
be  proclaimed  in  the  triple  kingdom  of  our  nature  until  we  always  do 
that  which  is  well  pleasing  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  through  Jesus 
Christ. 

Nor  is  this  all.  When  the  apostle,  praying  for  our  sanctification, 
prays  to  the  God  of  peace,  it  is  as  much  as  to  say  to  us  that  ive  must 
view  God  as  the  God  of  peace  if  we  are  to  he  led  to  do  his  will,  0 
man,  is  God  your  enemy  ?  Then  you  will  never  serve  him,  nor  do  that 
which  is  well  pleasing  in  his  sight.  Do  you  at  this  moment  feel  a 
horror  of  God,  a  dread  at  the  mention  of  his  name  ?  Then  you  can 
never  do  that  which  will  please  him,  for  without  faith  it  is  impossible 
to  please  God,  and  faith  is  the  reverse  of  horror.  You  must  first  of  all 
know  that  there  is  peace  between  you  and  your  God,  and  then  you  can 
please  him.  This  knowledge  can  only  come  to  you  through  Christ 
Jesus,  for  peace  is  made  only  by  **  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant:" 
When  once  you  know  that  the  Lord  hath  made  with  you  an  everlasting 
covenant,  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure,  then  you  have  leverage  to. 
work  with,  then  are  you  founded  upon  a  rock  whereon  you  may  be 
built  up  in  every  form  of  obedience,  but  not  till  then.  Peace  with  God 
is  the  root  of  virtue :  reconciKation  by  the  death  of  his  Son  is  the  door 
to  conformity  to.  the  life  of  his  Son.    May  we  know  our  great  Shepherd 


450  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

both  jn  his  dying  atonement  and  living  example  as  the  liord  and  giver 
of  peace. 

I  think  also  that  the  apostle  in  thus  praying  to  *^  the  God  of  peace  " 
had  in  his  mind's  eye  the  entire  church  of  the  Hebrews,  or,  if  yon  will, 
any  one  Christian  church.  Brethren,  it  is  essential  that  we  have  peace 
in  the  church.  Whatever  be  the  enmity  without,  u^a  most  love  one 
another.  If  we  do  not  walk  in  love  we  certainly  cannot  have  pros- 
perity. God  alone  can  give  peace  to  a  church,  and  he  only  gives  it  by 
sanctifying  its  members,  stirring  them  up  to  good  works,  keeping  them 
in  sacred  activity,  making  them  fit  to  labour  for  him,  and  working  in 
them  to  do  that  which  is  well-pleasing  in  his  sight.  When  yon  hear  of 
disturbances  in  churches  you  need  not  so  much  seek  to  compose  the 
difTerences  among  the  members  as  to  amend  the  men  themselves.  We 
should  not  gather  so  many  thorns  if  the  plants  were  fig-trees ;  wan  and 
fightings  would  never  spring  up  among  us  if  we  were  not  carnal  ud 
unsanctified.  If  we  were  more  spiritually  minded  we  should  be  more 
ready  to  forgive  and  less  likely  to  offend  or  to  be  offended.  **  Are 
ye  not  carnal  ?"  saith  the  apostle, ''  because  one  saith,  I  am  of  Paul, 
and  another,  I  am  of  Cephas,"  and  the  like  ;  but  once  let  the  God  of 
peace  sanctify  each  believer,  and  then  will  every  man  seek  his  brother's 
good,  and  the  things  which  make  for  peace.  When  yon  pray  for  the 
peace  of  Jerusalem  remember  that  you  can  promote  it  by  labouring  after 
noliness. 

Before  leaving  this  first  head,  I  would  call  to  your  notice  the  £em^ 
that  the  title,  *'  Uie  Ood  of  peace,''  sheds  a  light  over  the  whole  passage, 
and  is  beautifully  in  harmony  with  every  word  of  the  prayer.  Let  ns 
read  it  line  by  line.  **  Now  the  God  of  peace,  that  bronght  again  from 
the  dead  our  Lord  Jesus."  War  drives  men  down  to  the  d^d,  and  is 
the  great  jackal  of  the  grave.  Ah,  how  sadly  the  nations  see  this 
exemplified  in  the  East  at  this  moment.  War  brings  down  to  death ; 
but  the  God  of  peace  brings  back  from  the  dead.  The  restoration  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  from  the  grave  was  a  peaceful,  act,  and  was  meant  to  be 
the  guarantee  of  peace  accomplished  for  ever.  "  That  great  Shepherd  of 
the  sheep" — sheep  are  peaceful  creatures,  and  a  shepherd's  occupation 
hath  not  to  do  with  Uood-red  fields  of  strife.  We  always  couple  with  the 
idea  of  peace  the  quietness  and  repose  of  the  sheepfold,  and  the  simple 
restfulness  of  flocKS  in  green  pastures.  Peace  is  the  very  atmosphere  of 
pastoral  scenes.  ^'Through  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant." 
The  very  word  '*  covenant "  is  also  full  of  peace  :  and  especially  is  it 
so  when  we  remember  that  it  is  a  covenant  of  peace  wnich  eternal 
Love  has  established  between  God  and  man.  Where  no  covenant 
or  league  exists  war  may  break  out  at  any  time,  but  where  a  cove- 
nant is  once  established  there  is  peace  and  rest.  The  apostle  goes  on 
to  pray,  "  Make  you  perfect  in  every  good  work  to  do  his  will."  If 
Goa's  will  is  done  by  us,  then  there  must  be  p^e,  for  no  ground  of 
difference  can  exist.  **  Working  in  you  that  which  is  well  pleasing  in 
his  sight." — Oh,  the  soft  music  of  these  words.  When  all  in  ns  is  well 
pleasing  to  God  then  indeed  is  he  the  God  of  peace  to  ns.  The  final 
doxology  is  also  very  significant,  for  in  effect  it  proclaims  the  universal 
and  eternal  reign  of  peace  :  **To  whom  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever. 
Amen."    What  can  there  be  to  disturb  the  universe  when  the  Lord 


laE  OOD  OF  PEACE  AKD  OUR  BAITOTIFIOATIOK.  451 

God  omnigiotcnt  shall  reign,  and  all  nations  shall  glorify  and  extol  the 
Evof  Blessed,  world  withont  end  ?  Not  without  reason,  therefore,  did 
our  apostlu  select  the  title,  "  The  God  of  peace," 

II.  We  have  aow  briefly  to  consider  the  special  act  dwelt  upos 
IN  Tnia  PRATER.  "  That  brought  again  from  the  dead  our  Lord  Jesus, 
Ihat  great  Shfphefd  of  the  sheep,  through  the  blood  of  the  &ferlasting  cove- 
nant." Here  I  wonid  have  each  one  of  you,  for  himself,  read  the  passage 
of  Scripture  which  I  think  the  apostle  had  in  his  mind  when  he  \vrote 
these,  words.  Turn  to  Isaiah  uiii.  11:  "Then  he  remembered  the 
days  of  old,  Mosca,  and  his  people,  saying.  Where  is  he  that  brought 
them  up  out  of  the  sea  with  the  shepherd  of  his  flock  ?  where  is  he  that 
pnt  his  Holy  Spirit  within  him  ?  That  led  them  by  the  right  hand  of 
MosGB  with  hi3  glorious  arm,  dividing  the  water  before  them,  to  make 
himself  an  everlasting  name  ?"  See  how  this  making  to  himself  an  ever- 
lasting name  tallies  with  the  laat  clause, — "  To  whom  be  glory  for  ever 
and  ever."  But  let  us  proceed — "  that  led  them  through  tne  deep  as  an 
horae  in  the  wildemese,  that  thev  should  not  stumble."  Truly,  those 
do  not  stumble  in  whom  the  Lord  worketh  "  that  which  ia  well  pleasing 
in  his  sight."  "  As  a  beast  goeth  down  into  the  valley,  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  e«u3ed  Iiim  to  rest," — there  is  the  God  of  peace — "  bo  didat  thou 
lead  thy  people,  to  make  thyself  a  gloriona  name" — there  again  is  the 
doxology,  "  To  «hom  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever."  The  historical  event 
to  which  he  alludeB  is  the  deliverance  from  Egypt  and  the  coming  up 
from  the  Red  Ses.  Having  saved  his  people  by  the  blood  of  the  cove- 
nant, which  was  smeared  upon  their  doorposts,  he  led  them  to  the  Bed 
Sea,  their  foes  pnrsning  them.  Into  the  Red  Sea  they  descended ;  not  to 
its  banks  alone  did  they  go,  but  into  its  very  depths  they  passed,  and 
there  were  tbey  buried ;  the  sea  was  as  the  place  of  deatn  to  them. 
Between  its  liquid  walls,  and  beneath  the  cloudy  pillar,  which  hung  over 
the  passage,  they  were  baptized  unto  Moaes  and  buried  in  baptisih 
as  in  a  liquid  tomb ;  but  lo,  they  come  up  ont  of  it  again,  led  safely  up 
up  from  what  b<«ame  the  grave  of  Pharaoh,  with  songs  and  shoutings 
and  rejoicings.  The  parallel  is  this :  "  That  great  Shepherd,"  who  ia 
far  greater  than  Moses  and  Aaron,  must  needs  go  down  into  the  place 
of  death  on  the  liehalf  of  his  people ;  he  must,  as  the  representative  of 
his  flock,  descend  into  the  place  of  sepnichrc.  This  he  did,  for  he  bowed 
his  head  and  di«i ;  bnt  lo,  the  Lord  led  him  np  again  from  the  deeps, 
and  he  arose  to  life  and  glory,  and  all  his  people  with  him.  On  that 
day  the  song  might  have  been  jubilant  as  that  of  Miriam  when  she 
chanted,  "  Sing  unto  the  Lord,  for  he  hath  triumphed  gloriously. 
Thy  right  hand,  0  Lord,  is  become  glorious  in  power."  But  now  in 
this  greater  deliverance  by  "  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant " 
the  psalm  ia  not  to  the  Lord  who  is  a  man  of  war,  but  to  "  the  God 
of  peace,"  The  honour  is  ascribed  to  the  same  Lord,  but  under  a 
Kei^er  name,  and  to  him  be  ^lory  for  ever  and  ever.  I  have  no  doubt 
uiat  Paul  in  part  borrowed  his  imagery  from  the  Eed  Sea,  which  ia  of 
«U  deliverances  the  most  instructively  typical.  Is  it  not  even  in  heaven 
the  chosen  type,  for  there  they  aii^  the  song  of  Mosea  the  servant  of 
God  and  of  the  Lamb  ? 

With  that  illustration  to  help  us  we  shall  notice  that  the  bringing 
back  of  the  Iiord  Jesus  from  the  dead  waa  the  seal  of  his  peifueted 


452  METROPOLITAK  TABSRNACLK  FULPIX. 

« 

work,  and  consequently  of  our  peace  and  ultimate  perfection  in  holiness. 
The  Lord  Jesus  could  no  more  be  holden  by  the  bands  of  death,  but 
might  justly  return  to  his  throne.  Because  he  had  finished  all  his  mxk, 
therefore  the  word  of  authority  declared  his  freedom,  and  he  was 
brought  back  to  his  former  glory.  Because  he  had  wrought  all  rigfateona- 
ness  therefore  did  he  stand  amongst  living  men ;  and  because  he  had 
merited  a  crown  of  glory  therefore  did  he  rise  eyen  to  the  throne  of 
Jehovah,  to  ait  there  till  his  enemies  are  made  his  footstool.  His  woA 
is  finished,  and  therefore  God  acknowledges  the  fact  by  bringing  hnn 
again  from  the  dead.  Most  wisely  does  the  apostle  pray  that  be  lAo 
thus  owned  Christ's  finished  work  would  finish  his  Spirit's  work  in  ns. 
Christ  is  perfected ;  therefore,  0  Lord,  perfect  thy  saints.  Jesns  has 
done  thy  will :  help  us  to  do  it.  May  he  that  brought  Jesus  fixun  Hie 
dead  in  token  of  his  completed  righteousness  bring  i^>  also  his  peopk 
from  all  relics  of  their  death  of  sin,  and  make  them  complete  in  holi- 
ness to  the  glory  of  his  name. 

Beloved,  we  go  further  yet.  The  bringing  again  of  Ohriat  from  tbe 
dead  was  in  effect  the  leadmg  back  of  all  his  people.  Not  without  tlie 
sheep  did  the  Shepherd  come,  for  that  were  to  retom  defeated.  He 
went  down  into  the  grave  to  seek  the  lost  sheep,  and,  findii^^  it,  he  flmj^ 
it  on  his  shoulder,  and  as  he  come  up  from  the  grave  he  tore  upon  his 
mighty  shoulders  the  sheep  for  whom  he  died.  The  text  speaki  of 
^Wwhovi,  Jesus.''  Did  you  notice  that?  Ours  in  his  offices  of  Shsp- 
herd  and  Saviour,  altogether  ours  as  brought  again  from  the  desd. 
What  he  did  was  for  us.  He  is  the  Great  Sh^herd  of  tii§  ihrnf^ 
and  therefore  what  he  did  was  for  the  sheep.  We  can  give  nuu^ 
reasons  why  the  Lord  Jesus  is  the  Great  Shepherd,  becanse  he  is 
the  Shepherd,  not  of  one  congregation,  but  of  all  the  saints  in  dl  ages, 
and  because  the  sheep  are  his  own,  and  he  who  owns  the  she^  is  &r 
greater  than  he  who  only  feeds  the  flock  for  another.  But  the  leaaon 
which  just  now  attracts  my  attention  is  this  : — ^if  there  be  a  great 
shepherd  there  must  be  a  great  flock.  You  cannot  truly  call  airf  man 
a  shepherd  if  he  has  no  sheep,  nor  call  him  a  great  shejAeza  if  he 
has  not  a  great  flock.  So  he  **  that  brought  again  from  the  dead  that 
great  Shepnerd  of  the  sheep,"  did  by  that  act  and  deed  bring  op  the 
great  flock  from  the  dead  too,  for  so  long  as  our  Lord  Jesus  can  tmly 
be  called  a  shepherd,  he  must  have  a  living  flock  ;  they  are  inseparsUe 
from  him  and  essential  to  him.  The  church  is  the  fulness  of  Christ. 
A  king  is  no  king  without  subjects,  a  head  is  no  head  withont  a  body, 
and  a  shepherd  is  no  shepherd  without  sheep.  The  idea  of  the  Great 
Shepherd  involves  the  chosen  flock:  his  bringing  again  from  the  deid 
as  a  Shepherd  involves  their  upbringing  in  him.  The  resurrection 
and  the  glory  of  Christ  are  thus  the  resurrection  and  the  glory  of 
all  his  flock,  for  whom  he  laid  down  his  life.  Glory  be  to  his  name 
for  this.  Now  you  see  tbe  force  of  the  petition,  which  may  be  inte^ 
preted  thus  : — Lord,  thou  hast  brought  diy  people  up  from  the  dead 
in  Christ,  therefore  bring  them  up  from  all  the  death  of  sin ;  quicken 
them  to  fulness'  of  life ;  perfect  them  in  every  good  work  to  do  thy  will; 
work  in  them  that  which  is  well-pleasing  in  thy  sight :  becanse  this 
is  their  spiritual  resurrection,  this  is  the  giving  to  them  what  thou 
didst  give  to  Christ  on  their  behdf,  tiierefore  folfil  it  nnto  thenu 


THE  QOD  OF  PEACE  Am>  OUB  SANCTIFICATION.  453 

Bdoved,  it  needs  the  same  power  to  make  us  holy  that  it  needed  to 
boring  onr  Sayioar  from  the  dead.  That  same  power  which  raised  the 
fead  body  of  Christ  most  raise  us  from  om*  death  in  sin  ;  and  the  same 
power  which  enabled  the  living  Christ  to  climb  from  earth  to  heaven^ 
and  take  his  throne,  must  be  exercised  in  living  saints  to  make  them 
rifle  from  one  degree  of  holiness  to  another,  till  they  shall  be  presented 
without  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing,  before  the  Father's  pre 
Bence.  Yes,  and  that  power  comes  to  us  because  Christ  has  risen. 
^Because  I  live/'  saith  he,  "ye  shall  live  also";  and  because  he 
It^es  to  intercede,  therefore  his  people  are  preserved  from  evil.  Satan 
deaiieB  to  have  us,  that  he  may  siib  us  as  wheat ;  but  the  great  Shep- 
faeid,  who  was  brought  again  from  the  dead,  is  daily  watchmg  over  us, 
and  pleading  for  us,  and  the  power  of  his  life,  and  of  his  kingdom, 
and  of  his  plea,  are  manifested  in  us,  so  that  we  conquer  temntation, 
and  advance  from  strength  to  strength  in  our  pilgrimage  to  heaven. 
The  text  is  all  of  a  piece,  and  each  word  is  necessary  and  important. 
We  have  not  here  pious  expressions  strung  together  without  reason, 
but  erery  single  syllable  adds  to  the  weight  of  the  whole. 

The  work  described  in  this  text  must  be  wrought  in  us  by  the  Spirit 
of  €k>d.  Jesus  is  the  model  to  which  we  are  to  be  conformed.  Beloved, 
foainuflt  go  do?fn  to  death  as  J^sus  did,  and  be  buried  with  him, 
ftai  you  may  rise  with  him.  There  must  be  in  you  the  death  of  all 
canuJ  power  and  strength,  or  the  power  of  Ood  cannot  be  revealed  in 
poo.  xou  must  know  the  depths  as  Moses  did,  even  the  depths 
irlMzein  proud  self-sufficiency  is  drowned ;  you  must  be  baptized  in 
^  doad  and  in  the  sea ;  you  must  have  over  you  the  sentence  of 
xndenmation ;  you  must  own  in  your  own  soul  that  in  your  flesh 
dbeiedweUeth  no  good  thing,  and  that  you  are  condemned  under  the 
ianr  ;  and  then  there  must  be  wrought  in  you  a  quickening,  a  coming 
x>  life,  a  coming  up  out  of  the  place  of  condemnation  and  death. 
Stappj  is  he  who  has  come  forth  from  the  tomb  of  his  former  vain 
mnreraation,  leaving  the  grave-clothes  of  worldliness  and  sin  behind, 
XNDiiig  up  to  be  clothed  with  a  heavenly  mind,  and  to  lead  a  new 
i%  secret  and  divine  as  that  of  the  risen  Saviour ;  yea,  like  that 
>f  the  ascended  Lord,  "  for  he  hath  raised  us  up  together,  and  made  us 
lititogether  in  the  heavenlies  in  Christ  Jesus."  "  Ye  are  dead,  and 
fonr  fife  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God."  Have  you  realised  this  ?  You 
liwe^  been  buried  in  baptism,  many  of  you,  but  were  you  at  that 
#]me  partakers  of  your  Lord's  death?  You  had  no  right  to  be 
Miried  if  you  were  not  dead.  Did  you  really  know  that  death  had 
Mosed  upon  you  ere  you  were  buried  with  your  Saviour  ?  And  now 
lo  you  feel  the  life  of  God  within  you,  quickening  you  to  newness  of 
ife  ?  If  so,  it  will  daily  lift  you  to  something  nobler  and  better,  till 
^<m  diall  be  ultimately  raised  to  dwell  where  you  shall  never  again  be 
lefiled  by  sin,  where  Satan  shall  be  bruised  under  your  feet,  and  the  God 
rf  peace  shall  reign.  When  you  shall  dwell  in  perfect  holiness  then  shall 
fou  reign  in  perfect  peace.  May  he  who  brought  our  Lord  Jesas  from 
ihe  grave  to  glory,  bring  you  also  along  the  upward  way,  till  you  are 
nritfa  him  and  like  him  for  ever. 

III.     Thirdly,  let  us  notice  the  vert  remarkable  manner  in 

PVHIOH  THE  HOLINESS  PRAYED  FOR  IS  DESCRIBED  in  the  text  :  '*  Make 


451  KETHOPOLrrAB  TABBRKACLE  PDLPIT. 

wmperfeet  m  every  good  work  to  do  his  wilL"  That  is  the  first  dame,  I 
bnt  the  tnmBlatiOQ  is  not  atrictl;  ticcurate.  1"he  passage  would  be  better 
rendered,  "  make  you  fit  in  e?ery  good  work  to  do  his  will."  aud  the  , 
original  Greek  worn  (though  I  have  not  noticed  that  eipoaitore  obaen* 
it,  yet  anyone  turning  to  the  lexicon  will  see  it,)  properly  means  to  re- 
set a  bone  that  is  dislocated.  The  moaning  of  the  teit  is  this :  by  tiia 
fall  nil  our  bouea  are  out  of  ioiat  for  the  doing  of  the  Lord's  will,  and 
the  desire  of  the  apoatle  ia  that  the  Lord  will  set  the  bones  in  their 
places,  and  thoa  make  us  able  with  every  fiiculty  and  in  every  good 
work  to  do  hie  will.  If  we  take  the  arm-joint  for  our  tllnstration,  he 
would  have  it  so  well  set  that  it  may  be  capable  of  erery  movement  far 
which  an  arm  was  at  first  constracted  by  infinite  wisdom.  A  dislocated 
bone  may  be  so  badly  set  as  only  to  be  capable  of  a  part  of  the  motiom 
natural  to  it ;  there  may  be  a  Haw  in  the  surgery,  so  that  certain  morc- 
menta  cannot  be  performed ;  there  may  be  a  stiffiiesa  and  an  awkwaiJ- 
ncaa,  and  even  a  positive  inability  for  certain  moTenQcnte ;  this  may  be 
seen  insome  men's  mindSf  but  it  is  byno  means  desirable.  The  apostle 
would  have  every  bone  in  us  to  be  well  set,  and  our  whole  manhiwd 
fitted  for  performing  every  form  of  good  work  to  do  the  will  of  the  Ijord 
thoroughly.  What  a  blessed  prayer  !  0  Lord,  thou  hast  raised  thy 
Son. up  in  perfection,  not  a  bone  of  him  was  broken  ;  and  qow  we,  who 
are  hia  body,  need  to  be  set  togetlier  and  fixed,  every  joint  in  its  own 
place,  and  the  whole  church  conipactjy  knitted  together  by  its  band) 
and  sinews,  so  that  it  may  be  in  perfect  order  for  performing  the  dirine 
will.  I  apprehend  that  onr  text  refers  not  so  much  to  any  one  believer 
as  to  the  entire  church,  for  the  apoatle  apeaks  of  the  Great  Shepherd  of 
Ihe  shetp,  by  which  he  must  mean  the  whole  church :  the  apostle  praji 
that  the  Lord  would  perfectly  joint  his  church,  put  it  into  harmoiiii«a 
union,  and  so  make  it  fit  to  do  all  that  Ood  meant  the  church  to  do 
here  below.    When  shall  we  sen  our  churches  in  such  a  case  ? 

Alas,  the  disjointed  membcrG  of  our  churches  cause  great  pain  and 
weakness  to  the  body,  and  only  holincaa  caa  put  them  into  their  proper 
position.  If  I  must  take  the  text  as  applying  to  each  individual, 
the  prayer  is  that  you  and  I  may  be  fitted  to  do  the  divine  will  every- 
where,— fitted  to  sufier,  fitted  to  labour,  fitted  for  the  meanest  office 
"in  the  church  (which  requires  a  great  deal  of  fitness,  by  the  way),  and 
fitted  for  the  highest  work  in  the  church,  and  fitted  for  anything  that 
God  wishes  ua  to  do ;  so  that  we  may  not  be  competent  for  one  set  of 
duties  only,  but  may  be  ready  for  all  things.  We  shall  greatly  glorify 
God  if  we  have  a  complete  character,  in  which  every  grace  shall  be 
manifeated,  and  in  which  no  Binglc  stn  is  seen  to  mar  its  consist^icy. 
Such  is  the  prayer.  Who  ctui  work  this,  good  Lord  ?  Who  can  work 
this  in  ufl?  Thou  canst,  0  Qod  of  peace,  for  thou  didst  bring  np  ihy 
Son  from  the  grave  to  the  throne,  and  thou  canst  bring  up  our  mangled 
nature,  and  perfect  it  till  it  shall  bo  meet  to  partake  of  the  inherit- 
ance of  the  saints  in  light,  world  without  end.  The  first  j>art  of  ths 
prayer,  then,  is  for  fitness  for  holiness. 

The  next  is  for  actual  service :  "  Working  in  us  that  which  it  weil 

pleating  in  hit  tight."    And  here  I  ask  you  to  notice  how  all  thin^ 

^re  of  God.    We  mizht  have  thought  that  the  apostle  would  have  said, 

■^Zioid,  when  thou  nast  made  us  fit  to  work  for  the^  then  help  ns  i 


THE  GOD  OP  PEACK  iLND  OUB  SANCTIFICATION.  455^ 

^  to^  serve  thee :"  but  he  does  not  saj  so :  he  pubs  his  prayer  into  a 
I  kfunbler  ibnn^  and  asks  the  Lord  to  work  ii^;  us.  What  a  heavy  blow 
I  aH  all  self-glory !  How  instructive  to  us !  Dear  brother^  when  the 
f  Lord  makes  thee  fit  for  every  good  work,  yet  thou  wilt  do  no  good  work 
['  ttiiless  he  worketh  it  in  thee.  Even  he  who  is  best  adapted  for  the 
I  performance  of  virtue  and  holiness,  yet  does  not  perform  these  things 
I  tiR  the  Lord  worketh  in  him  to  will  and  to  ao  of  his.  own  good 
i    pleasure. 

j  Over  and  above  this  mode  of  securing  all  the  glory  to  God  notice 
[  the  next  clause — "  through  Jesus  ChrisL"  That  which  we  do  even 
[  when  the  Lord  works,  in  us  we  only  do  through  Jesus  Christ.  We  are 
j  notbing  without  our  Lofd,  and  though  we  do  what  is  acceptable  in  the 
i  Lord's  sight,  yet  it  is  only  acceptable  through  Jesus  Christ.  What 
notiiings  and  nobodies  we  are !  Even  when  the  Lord  does  the  most  for  us 
that  can  be  done,  so  that  we  dwell  in  his  sight  and  our  actions  become 
veil  pleasing  to  him,  and  he  looks  upon  us  with  delight,  yet  even  then  we 
ass  nothing.  It  is  the  Lord  that  hath  wrought  all  in  us,  even  the  God 
of  peace,  who  is  all  in  all.  To  each  fruitful  bough  he  saith,  '^  From  me 
m.mj  firuit  found."  When  your  garments  sparkle  like  the  sun,  it  is 
hft  tnat  transfigures  you ;  when  your  face  shines  like  Moses*  through 
secret  communion  upon  ther  mount,  it  is  God's  brightness  which  illlumi- 
oate  your  brow.  Our  goodness  is  none  of  ours, ''  for  we  are  his  work- 
numahip,  created  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works,  which  God  hath 
before  ordained  that  we  should  walk  in  them." 

IV.  Our  fourth  point  drops  into  its  place  very  naturally,  for  we  have 
already  seen  that  the  whole  of  it  gomes  to  a  most  appbopriatb 
CD»CLXTSio»r  of  praise  :  "  To  whom  he  glory  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen  J' 
To  glorify  God  is  the  object  of  it  all.  We  too  much  forget  this.  Praise 
is  the  flower  for  which  the  stalk  of  prayer  exists.  Praise  to  God  is  the 
essence  of  all  the  flowers  of  holiness,  the  otto  of  all  the  roses  in  the 
garden  of  the  church.  God's  glory  is  the  harvest  for  which  all  the 
ploughing  and  sowing  of  ministry,  and  evangelizing,  must  be  done. 
Ulory  to  God  in  the  highest,  and  glory  to  his  only  begotten  Son  for 
ever  and  ever — this  is  the  pure  gold  for  which  we  dig  the  mines  of 
godly  service.  It  would  be  a  very  difflcult  question  to  decide  to  whom 
the  last  clause  alludes,  whether  to  "  the  God  of  peace,"  or  to  "•  Our 
Lord  Jesus,"  and,  therefore,  I  think,  the  safer  way  is  to  take  them 
both  together,  for  they  are  one.  "To  whom,"  that  is  to  God  ;  "  To 
whom,"  that  is  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  "be  glory  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen." 
Let  it  be  so ;  it  ought  to  be  so,  it  must  be  so,  it  shall  be  so.  Amen. 
Amen. 

Tarry  just  a  minute  while  we  give  glory  unto  the  Three-One-God. 
O  ye  hearts  that  love  him,  glorify  him  first  as  the  God  of  peace,  who  had 
thoughts  of  peace,  and  designs  of  peace,  and  executed  a  covenant  of 
peace  on  your  behalf.  Glorify  him  who  is  at  peace  with  all  his  believing 
ones  to-day.  He  lays  his  thunder  by,  he  hangs  his  bow  in  the  cloud  as 
the  token  of  his  love,  he  puts  aside  his  javelin  and  his  buckler ;  ho 
loves,  he  smiles,  he  speaks  in  tenderness.  He  is  the  God  of  peace  ;  ap- 
proach him  with  hojy  delight ;  adore  him  ;  glorify  his  name  evermore. 
Then  magnify  him,  next,  because  he  found  for  us  a  Shepherd.  Wc 
were  as  sheep  going  astray,  and  he  sent  his  Son  to  shepherd  us ;  he  look 


456  XZTBOPOLTUX  TABERSACLB  PtHJH. 

from  his  own  dear  bosom  his  equal  and  eternal  Son,  and  sent  him  here 
to  gather  w  &om  the  wilds,  and  save  ns  from  the  wolves.  GI017  be  to 
thee,  thon  Shepherd  ol  Israel,  and  to  thy  Father  who  sent  thee  to  thia 
end. 

Glorify  hun  next  for  the  coTenant.  What  mercy  is  this,  that  God 
should  enter  into  covenant  with  man  1  Adore  him  for  the  blood  of  the 
covenant,  that  he  gave  his  only-begotten  to  die  to  make  that  covenant 
anre,  that  the  purchased,  blood-hegotten  possession  might  never  be 
alienated  from  one  of  those  for  whom  he  laid  down  his  glorious  life. 
Glory  be  to  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost.  Praise  him,  praise  him, 
praise  him,  ye  blood-bonght  sons  of  men !  Lift  np  your  hearts  witt 
gratitude,  and  joy,  and  blees  the  Lord,  who  brought  back  the  dying 
Shepherd  to  live  and  reign  for  yoii. 

-ijid  then  adore  him  l:«cauBe  the  power  which  he  exerted  npon  Chris 
he  is  now  exerting  npon  yon.  Yon  are  not  perfect  yet,  but  still  inyonr 
measure  yon  are  fitted  for  every  good  work.  In  many  ways  the  Lord 
is  qnahfying  you  for  service.  In  some  of  you  he  is  working  to  do,  aod 
in  others  to  suffer,  the  good  pleaeiii-e  of  his  will.  Bless  him  for  ererj 
grace  received,  for  faith  however  little,  for  love  even  thongh  it  bum 
not  as  you  would  desire ;  bless  him  for  every  conquered  sin,  bless  him 
for  every  implanted  grace,  bless  him  evermofe. 

Bless  him  that  he  deals  with  you  through  Jesus  Christ.  Throosh 
the  Mediator  all  good  has  come  to  us,  and  through  the  Mediator  it  wiD 
still  come,  nntil  that  day  when  he  shall  deliver  up  the  throne  to  God, 
even  the  Father,  and  God  shall  be  all  in  ail.  Meanwhile  we  will  gloriff 
the  mediatorial  Lord,  and  extol  tlic  Father  and  the  consoling  Spirit. 
Even  now  we  join  with  chemhim  and  seraphim,  and  adore  him  to  whom 
only  all  worahip  belongs. 


Portion  of  Scriptdee  read  before  Sbbmon — Hebrews  > 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Rtmk  Book" — 308,  1054,  401. 


Jusl  Ptiblished.    No.  2  0/  Ihe  ShiUmg  Series. 

SEVEN    WONDERS    OF   GRACE. 

IB-z-     O.     H.     SPXJR.C3-EOIT. 

"  To  «et  forth  lome  of  the  '  Wondera  of  Grace'  this  little  book  was  prepsred. 
Come,  reader,  and  see  the  various  characters  upoa  which  grace  operate*,  tod  it 
may  be,  if  yon  are  nnaBved,  you  will  End  here  a  something  to  aroiue  or  to  m- 
courage  you." 

Piantou  k  Alamrss,  «,  Ftttnntlet  Building*;  and  all  Bookidle*^ 


Jl[ljii[i):pflKlan  i^afrenrnde  puljtt. 


PEOCLAMATION  OF  ACCEPTANCE  AND  VENGEANCE. 


II 


Dbliterbd  ok  Loed's-Day  Morning,  Augurt  12th,  1877,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METBOFOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


**  To  proclaim  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord,  and  the  day  of  yengeance  of  our 
Gh>d;  to  comfort  all  that  mourn." — leaiah  bd.  2. 

Wb  know  that  this  Scripture  speaks  concerning  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
We  say  not  this  as  if  we  relied  upon  our  own  opinion,  we  know  it  of 
a  surety  from  the  Lord's  own  lips,  for,  reading  this  passage  in  the  syna- 
gogue at  Nazareth,  he  said,  "  This  day  is  this  Scripture  fulfilled  in  your 
ears."  It  is  Jesus  of  Nazareth  whom  the  Lord  hath  anointed  to  preacli 
deliverance  to  the  captives  and  recovering  of  sight  to  the  blind,  and 
our  text  te%  us  that  he  was  also  sent  to  make  a  proclamation  which 
should  usher  in  the  year  of  acceptance  and  the  day  of  vengeance. 

Notice  well  the  expression,  to  proclaim,  because  a  proclamation  is  the 
message  of  a  king,  and  where  the  word  of  a  king  is  there  is  power.  The 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  announce  the  will  of  the  King 
of  kings.  He  saith,  "  I  am  come  in  my  Father's  name,"  and  again, 
"  My  doctrine  is  not  mine,  but  his  that  sent  me."  Every  word  of  the 
gospel  is  backed  by  the  authority  of  "  the  King  eternal,  immortal,  in- 
visible," and  he  who  rejects  it  is  guilty  of  treason  against  Jehovah,  God 
of  all.  The  gospel  is  not  of  the  nature  of  a  commonplace  invitation  or 
human  exhortation,  which  may  be  accepted  or  refused  at  wiU  without  in- 
volving guilt;  but  it  is  a  divine  proclamation,  issued  from  the  throne  of 
the  Eternal,  which  none  can  reject  without  becoming  thereby  rebels 
against  the  Infinite  Majesty.  Now  if  it  be  so,  let  us  give  the  diviin' 
edict  our  most  earnest  attention,  and  take  heed  what  we  hear.  When  n 
proclamation  is  issued  by  the  head  of  a  state,  all  good  citizens  gatlier 
around  to  read  what  has  been  said  to  them,  and  to  know  what  the  su- 

Ereme  law  may  be:  and  so,  when  God  proclaims  his  will,  all  right- 
earted  men  desire  to  know  what  it  is,  and  what  bearing  it  has  upon 
them,  what  the  Lord  demandeth  or  what  the  Lord  promiseth,  and  what 
is  their  share  therein.     Beloved  hearers,  listening  to  the  gospel  should 
dways  be  very  solemn  work,  since  it  is  listening  to  the  word  of  God. 
No.  1,369. 


k 


458  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Though  the  voice  is  that  of  man  yet  the  tnith  is  of  Chxl ;  I  pnay  yon  do 
not  trifle  with  it. 

Nor  let  it  be  forgotten  that  a  proclamation  must  be  treated  with  pro> 
found  respect,  not  merely  by  receiving  attention  to  its  contents,  but  by 
'gaining  obedience  to  its  demands.    6od  does  not  speak  to  ns  by  his 
Son  that  we  may  be  gi-atified  by  hearing  the  sound  of  nis  voice,  but  that 
we  may  yield  to  his  vnW.    We  are  not  to  be  hearers  only,  but  doers  of 
the  word.    We  should  be  quick  in  obedience  to  the  command  of  the 
proclamation,  swift  in  acceptance  of  its  promise,  and  cheerfiil  in  sub- 
mission to  its  demand.     Who  shall  resist  the  proclamations  of  Jehovah? 
Is  he  not  our  Creator  and  King  ?     Who  is  stubborn  enough  to  refuse 
obedience?     Or  who  hath  brazen  face  enough  to  dispute  his  swav? 
Shall  not  he  who  made  heaven  and  earth,  and  shaketh  them  when  he 
pleaseth,  and  will  destroy  them  at  his  pleasure,  be  regarded  with  vert* 
rential  awe  by  the  creatures  of  his  hand  ?     0  Son  of  God,  since  it  is  a 
divine  proclamation  wliich  thou  dost  publish,  send  forth  thy  Holy  Spirit 
that  we  may  receive  it  with  deepest  reverence  and  lowliest  obedienoe, 
lest,  through  our  neglect,  we  do  despite  to  thee  as  well  as  to  thy  Father. 
When  a  proclamation  is  not  made  by  an  ordinary  herald,  but  whoi  die 
Prince  himself  comes  forth  to  declare  his  Father's  will,  then  should  all 
hearts  be  moved  to  sevenfold  attention.    It  is  the  Son  of  God,  anointed 
by  the  Spirit  of  God,  who  acts  as  herald  unto  us,  and  so  by  each  Penou 
of  the  divine  Trinity  we  are  called  upon  to  bow  a  listening  ear  and  tn 
obedient  heart  to  what  the  Lord  proclaims.     Attention,  then!    Hie 
Messenger  of  the  Covenant  makes  proclamation!     Attention  fox  the 
King  of  kings  I 

With  this  as  a  preface,  let  me  notice,  that  there  are  three  points  in  Ae 
proclamation  worthy  of  our  best  attention :  the  first  is  the  aecqftabk 
year;  the  next,  the  vengeame  day;  and  the  third,  the  comfort  derwed 
from  both, — "  to  comfort  all  that  mourn." 

I.  Jesus,  in  the  first  place,  proclaims  the  acceptable  tear  op  thb 
Lord.  Take  the  expression  to  pieces  and  it  comes  to  this, — the  year  of 
the  Lord,  and  the  year  of  acceptance. 

Now,  what  was  the  year  of  tJie  Lord?  There  can  be,  I  think,  veiy 
little  question  that  this  relates  to  the  jubilee  year.  Every  seventh  year 
was  the  Lord's  year,  and  it  was  to  be  a  sabbath  of  rest  to  the  land ;  bat 
the  seventh  seventh  year,  the  fiftieth  year,  which  the  Lord  reserved  unto 
himself,  was  in  a  very  marked  and  especial  sense  the  year  of  the  Lord. 
Now,  our  Lord  Jesus  has  come  to  proclaim  a  period  of  jubilee  to  the 
true  seed  of  Israel.  The  seed  of  Abraham  now  are  not  the  seed  accord- 
ing to  the  law,  but  those  who  are  bom  after  the  promise.  There  are 
privileges  reserved  for  Israel  after  the  flesh,  which  they  will  yet  receive 
in  the  day  when  they  shall  acknowledge  Chiist  to  be  the  Messiah ;  bat 
every  great  blessing  which  was  promised  to  Abraliam's  seed  after  the 
flesh  is  now  virtually  promised  to  Israel  after  the  Spirit,  to  those  who  by 
Jaith  are  the  children  of  beKe\i  ng  Abraham. 

Now,  beloved,  to  all  who  believe,  our  Lord  Jesus  proclaims  a  year  of 
jubilee.  Let  us  dwell  upon  the  four  privileges  of  the  jubilee,  and  accept 
with  delight  the  proclamation  which  our  Lord  has  made. 

In  the  year  of  jubilee,  as  we  read  in  the  twenty-fifth  chapter  of  Levi- 
ticus, there  was  a  release  of  all  persons  who  had  sold  themselves  for 


FBOOIi&lUTlOB  or  AOOEFTAHOI  ABD  TBHaBAMOE.  459 

serT&nts,  Pinchsd  by  great  porerty,  and  nnable  to  meet  their  debte,  it 
aometimcs  hanpeoed  that  men  were  compelled  to  aay  to  their  creditor, 
"  Take  iis  ana  oar  wives  and  children,  and  accept  onr  services  instead 
of  money.  We  ,iave  no  goods  or  chattels,  and  our  land  has  been  mort- 
ga^d  long  ago,  bat  here  we  are ;  we  cannot  pay  in  any  other  way, — 
give  us  food  anJ  raiment  and  lodging,  and  we  wiU  put  ourselves  under 
apprenticeship  to  yon.""  Tlie  law  of  Mofles  ordained  that  such  persona 
were  not  to  be  created  harshly,  nor  regarded  as  slaves,  but  as  hired 
setrant^,  but  stiK  it  nrast  have  been  an  unpleasant  condition  of  servitude 
for  a  freebom  Israelite.  How  happy  then  was  the  morning  when  the 
jnbilee  trumpet  Bounded,  and  the  generous  law  came  into  operation  which 
said,  "  He  shall  serve  thee  unto  the  year  of  jubilee,  but  then  shall  ho 
depart  from  the?,  both  he  and  his  children  with  him.''  From  that 
moment  he  owed  no  more  service,  however  great  his  debt  might  have 
been ;  he  looked  upon  his  wife  and  children  and  rejoiced  that  they  were 
all  his  o\vn  and  all  free  from  ttic  yoke,  so  that  they  could  at  once  return 
to  the  posscsmon  of  their  fathers,  all  live  in  the  cottage  in  which  they 
ibrmeriy  dwelt,  and  enjoy  the  piece  of  land  which  they  had  formerly 
called  their  own.  Liberty,  that  gladsome  sound,  liberty  had  come  to 
them;  no  mtittcr  that  they  had  long  been  under  obligations  to  the 
creditisr,  those  ojligations  ceased  on  the  sound  of  the  sacred  trumpet. 
Beloved  souls  now  present,  proclamation  is  made  to  yon  in  the  Lord's 
name  that  if  you  are  under  bondage  to  sin  and  to  sinful  habits,  there  is 
Uberty  for  yon ;  faith  in  Jesus  will  set  yon  free.  If  you  are  in  bondage 
under  justice  and  the  broken  law  there  is  deliverance.  If  you  are  nnder 
IxHidage  through  fear  of  death,  or  from  the  rage  of  Satan,  our  divine 
Lord  and  Masttir  has  come  into  the  world  on  purpose  to  break  these 
bmids  in  sunder,  and  to  proclaim  liberty  to  the  captives.  Ye  need  be 
bemud  no  longer;  .if  ye  believe  in  Jesus  ye  are  bound  no  longer,  but  ye 
are  set  free  from  all  the  bondage  of  the  law,  from  the  slavery  of  Satan 
add  frvtm  the  dread  of  death.  Take  the  liberty  which  the  great  Lord 
freely  presents  to  you,  and  be  no  longer  slaves.  Jesua  has  brought  in 
redemption  and  finished  atonement,  and  believers  are  free  ;  come  and 
rejoice  therein. 

The  next  jubilee  blessing  was  Ifie  redemption  of  alienakd  possesions. 
Every  man  had  his  own  plot  of  ground  in  t!ie  Holy  Land,  but  through 
the  pressure  of  the  times  it  BoinetimeB  happened  that  a  man  aUenated  his 
jwoperty  :  he  was  in  need  of  ready  money,  his  children  wanted  bread  to 
ea£,  and  ho,  therefore,  parted  with  his  land.  It  was  gone  :  the  vines  and 
ttn  figtrces,  the  com  and  the  oil,  passed  over  to  another ;  but  it  was  not 
g>i»e  for  ever,  he  had  no  power  to  sell  beyond  the  year  of  jubilee.  When 
tfie  joyful  morning  dawned  he  went  back  to  his  lamily  estate ;  it  was  all 
his  own  again,  clear  of  all  encumbrances ;  the  little  homestead,  and  the 
fiinnyard,  and  the  fields,  and  the  garden,  dl  had'  come  back  to  him, 
and  none  could  dispute  his  right.  Just  so  my  Lord  and  Master  declares 
to  all  who  believe  in  him  that  the  estate  which  Adam  forfeited  is  restored 
to  all  for  whom  the  Second  Adam  died.  The  ahenated  heritage  is  our 
own  again.  The  great  Father's  love,  and  favour,  and  care,  yea,  all 
things,  whether  things  present  or  things  to  come,  or  life  or  death,  all  are 
onrs,  and  we  are  Christ's  and  Christ  is  God's.  If  we  are  believers,  and 
lire  of  the  true  seed  of  Israel,  this  day  the  Lord  Jestis  proclaims  to  us  a 


4C0  MKTROPOLITAK  TABBBHAOLS  PULPIT. 

restoration  of  all  the  lost  privil^eB  and  blefldngs  which  originally  belongdl 
to  manhood.  Behold,  believers,  all  coyenant  blessingB  are  joniSy  rejoice 
in  them  1  Partake  of  hearenlj  blessings  freely.  Let  your  soul  rejoioe 
in  its  portion,  and  delight  itself  in  fatness. 

It  followed,  also,  as  a  third  blessing  of  the  yeiur  of  the  Lord  that  aU 
debts  were  discJiarged,  The  man  who  had  sold  himself  had,  as  it  were, 
made  a  composition  of  his  debts  by  the  sale  of  himself  and  this  implied 
a  full  and  find  discharge  at  the  jubilee.  The  person  also  who  had  mort- 
^^agcd  his  land  up  to  <^e  jubilee  year  had  discharged  his  debts  thereby, 
and  when  the  man  received  back  himself  and  his  property,  no  further 
liability  rested  upon  him,  he  was  cleared  of  all  charges.  The  jubilee  did 
not  give  the  man  back  himself  and  his  land  under  a  reserve,  but  unre- 
servedly. If  debt  had  still  been  due  the  release  would  have  been  a  mere 
i'arcc,  since  he  would  have  had  to  mortgage  his  land  and  sell  himself  again 
(iii*octly  to  meet  the  demand.  No,  there  was  a  fiill  discharge,  a  canoeUing 
of  all  debts,  a  removal  of  all  incumbrances  upon  the  man  and  upon  hK 
estate,  and  he  was  free.  What  a  joy  this  must  have  been  I  He  who  is 
in  debt  is  in  danger ;  a  honest  man  sleeps  on  a  hard  bed  till  he  has  paid 
what  he  owes.  He  who  is  inmiersed  in  debt  is  plunged  in  misery,  dnven 
to  his  wits'  end,  not  knowing  what  to  do.  Happy  is  he  that  is  delivered 
from  debt  once  for  aU.  Now  behold,  0  believers  in  Jesus,  your  debts 
before  the  Lord  are  all  discharged,  the  handwriting  that  was  against 
you  is  nailed  to  the  cross,  receipted  in  the  crimson  lines  of  Jesos* 
precious  blood.  Being  justified  by  faith  ye  are  clear  before  the  sight 
of  the  Eternal ;  none  can  lay  anything  to  your  charge.  What  joyfiil 
notes  are  tlicse  I  Jesus  makes  the  proclamation,  who  will  not  believe  it 
and  be  glad. 

A  fourth  blessing  of  the  jubilee  trumpet  was  rest  They  had  their 
lands,  but  they  were  not  to  till  them  for  a  year.  J^o  more  the  spade 
and  the  plough,  the  sickle  and  the  flail, — they  were  to  put  away  ini^ra* 
ments  of  labour,  and  rest  for  twelve  months.  Think  of  a  whole  year  %i 
perfect  repose,  wherein  they  might  worship  and  adore  God  all  the  week 
round,  make  every  day  a  holy  festival,  and  the  whole  year  a  Sabbath  ot 
Sabbaths  unto  the  Most  High.  Brethren,  the  Israelites  had  no  small 
privileges  under  the  ceremonial  covenant,  if  they  had  lived  up  to  it,  but 
tliey  failed  to  do  so,  for  it  has  sometimes  been  questioned  whether  they 
ever  kept  a  jubilee  at  all,  and  whether  the  Sabbatic  year  was  ever  once 
observed.  If  they  had  obeyed  the  Lord  they  would  nave  been  fiftvooied 
indeed :  for  in  the  matter  of  holidays  and  quiet  resting  times  thev  were 
favoured  above  all  people.  Think  of  one  year  in  seven  of  absolute 
cessation  from  toil.  What  repose  for  them !  And  then  they  had  also  the 
year  after  the  seventh  seven,  so  that  every  man  who  reached  the  fiftieth 
ye^u"  enjoyed  two  consecutive  years  of  absolute  rest  from  all  labour,  and 
yet  knew  no  want,  for  the  ground  brought  forth  plentifiiUy,  and  every 
man  helped  himself.  Those  who  had  land  had  a  good  store  to  last  them 
through  three  years,  and  those  who  had  none  were  fed  by  the  spontane(Ais 
])roduce  of  the  soil.  We  live  not  under  such  laws,  and  if  we  did  I  am 
afraid  we  should  not  have  the  faith  to  trust  in  the  Lord  and  avaQ  our- 
selves of  the  divinely  appointed  hoHday.  But,  beloved,  we  rest  spiritually. 
He  that  believes  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  entered  into  r^.  Now 
no  more  does  he  strive  to  work  out  a  righteousness  of  his  own,  fiw 


PROCLAMATIOX  OF  ACCEPT-LNCE  AND   VENUEANCE.  461 

he  has  already  a  divine  one,  and  needs  no  other.  It  is  his  pleasure  to 
worship  Qody  but  he  no  longer  trembles  beneath  his  Avrath ;  it  is  his 
delight  to  do  his  commandments,  but  he  toils  and  firets  no  longer  as  a 
slave  under  the  law  ;  he  has  become  a  free  man,  and  a  beloved  child,  and 
the  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  understanding  keeps  his  heart  and 
mind.  Being  justified  by  faith  he  has  peace  with  God,  and  enjoys  the 
Miflnencesof  the  divine  Comforter  whose  indwelling  gives  rest  to  the  soul. 

The  jubilee  year,  according  to  our  text,  was  called  "  the  year  of  the 
Lord ;  *'  and  the  reason  for  all  the  four  jubilee  blessings  was  found  in  the 
Liord.  First,  the  servants  were  set  free  because  God  said  "  they  are  my 
servants,  which  I  brought  forth  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt."  (Lev.  xrv.  42). 
Ah,  poor  burdened  soul,  if  thou  believest  in  Christ  thou  shalt  go  free,  for 
thou  art  the  Lord's  own — his  chosen,  his  redeemed,  and  therefore  he 
claims  thee,  and  will  suffer  no  other  lord  to  have  dominion  over  thee. 
The  devil  seeks  to  lay  an  embargo  upon  thee,  and  hold  thee  a  slave, 
but  Jesus  saith,  "  Let  go  my  captives,  for  I  have  redeemed  them  with  my 
blood/'  Jesus  claims  you',  0  penitent  souls ;  he  cries  to  sin  as  once  the 
Lord  said  to  Pharaoh,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  let  my  people  go."  Jesus 
says  of  each  repenting  soul,  '^  Loose  him  and  let  him  go,  for  he  is  mine. 
My  Father  gave  him  to  me — he  is  my  chosen,  my  beloved.  Neither  sin 
nor  Satan,  nor  death  nor  hell,  shall  hold  him,  for  he  is  mine." 

The  land  also  was  set  fr'ee  for  this  same  reason,  for  concerning  it  the 
'  Lord  said,  "  The  land  is  mine "  (Lev.  xxv.  28).  The  freehold  of  the 
land  was  vested  in  Jehovah  himself,  consequently  he  ordained  that  no 
man  should  hold  any  portion  of  it  by  right  of  purchase  beyond  the 
fiftieth  year,  for  the  land  was  entailed  and  must  go  back  to  those  for 
whom  he  had  appointed  it  at  the  jubilee  year.  So  the  blessings  of  the 
everlasting  covenant  are  God's,  and  therefore  he  appoints  them  unto  you 
poor  believing  sinners,  and  you  shall  have  them,  for  the  di\ine  decree 
shall  not  be  frustrated.  As  surely  as  he  appointed  Christ  to  reign, 
and  placed  him  on  the  throne,  so  does  he  appoint  you  to  reign  with  him, 
and  you  shall  sit  upon  his  throne  though  all  the  devils  in  hell  should 
say  you  nay. 

So,  too,  the  debts  were  all  discharged,  because  on  the  day  before  the 
jubilee  the  great  atonement  had  swept  away  all  transgression  and  iu- 
debtedness  towards  God,  and  he  would  have  his  people  forgive  all  the? 
debts  of  their  fellow  men.  All  things  are  the  Lord's,  and  he  exercised 
his  crown  rights  on  the  day  of  jubilee  so  far  as  to  declare  all  debts  dis- 
charged. "The  earth  is  the  Lord's  and  the  fulness  thereof"  was  the 
'  motto  of  the  jubilee,  and  sufficient  reason  for  the  cancelling  of  obliga- 
tions between  man  and  man. 

As  for  rest,  that  came  also,  because  it  was  God's  year,  and  was  hallowed 
unto  the  Lord.  "A  jubilee  shall  the  fiftieth  year  be  unto  you:  ye 
shall  not  sow,  neither  reap  that  which  growethr  of  itself  in  it,  nor  gatlier 
the  grapes  in  it  of  thy  vine  undressed.  For  it  is  the  jubilee ;  it  shall  be 
holy  unto  you  :  ye  shall  eat  the  increase  thereof  out  of  the  field."  Durin<;- 
man's  years  the  earth  brings  forth  thorns  and  thistles,  and  man  must 
earn  his  bread  with  the  sweat  of  his  face ;  but  when  God's  year  come : 
then  the  wilderness  and  the  solitary  place  are  glad,  and  the  desert  re- 
joices and  blossoms  as  the  rose.  When  the  Lord's  own  kingdom  conictli 
then  shall  the  earth  yield  her  increase  as  she  has  never  done  before.    My 


4M  HITBOFOLITAX  TUnSACLK  rUUtE. 

Imlnvwl,  1  tnwt  you  know  the  Hrwrilw  a£  fime  in  God**  jmi,  fir 
yini  llvn  by  hitli  npon  hia  providcDee,  rwring  aO  foar  me  mioii  Un. 
ftir  ti«  mrrlh  for  you,  Thie  is  the  SabbMh  of  Uk  moI,  the 
nf  lipnVKli.  Yon  behold  the  work  of  UoneiDeDt  Eiilly  aceunii 
viitir  ItcttHlf,  And  know  yourselves  to  be  delivered  &uii  ^  jroor  lafaihtMi 
t><  (he  1»W.  Mid  thcrofora  y^ur  heart  leaps  irithin  toil  Yoa  bib  dm 
(Wivi>n<d.  X't  fh>t>.  washed  ill  th^UiXjdof  the  Luiib.  uid  therefore  do  j« 
WMHP  t(V  ISwin  with  songB  ao.l  !■;  iTlaating  joy  upon  your  beads. 

it(U  Mw  hxt  wteaks  also  ■  i  iL  ■  ■■  acctplabte  year  of  tAf  Lerd"     "Saw, 
i>Mr  W^t  J<«iM  Christ  has  c  :  :    :  '  proclaim  to  sinnera  the  Lord's  aoo^  < 
MW>'- t^^S'U)ly  tuen  throagfa  t\-  j7<.nt  sacrifice.     Apart  &om  1^  wtsk  <C 
.■wv  (.1^  J««us,  men  as  8ini,:rs  un?  uimcceptable  to  God.     Some  djOL 
Vw.'-w  t)w>  luisoiy  of  bein?  in  w-^i  cmdition ;  it  is  hr^rriUe  to  feel  Uiat  tht 
^y^  #  w\'»ii7  of  yon  aiM  yar  vi*in  oblations.    Since  yon  have  conein    I 
\'ss«^'>^wunaiiiaandnght£0[U'',ii:s.s,  Gud  haenot  accepted  yon,  neither  has  ht 
^!^t  ytuir  prayers  nor  Ustt'^it.-d  to  joor  cries,  nor  had  respect  unto  jonr 
n4^iiw  observances,  for  he  f:M\,  "  Yea,  when  ye  mctke  maaj  prayeis,  I 
«4I  tii'l  hoar."    If  the  Spirit  of  God  has  convinced  yon  of  yonr  oatar^ 
WWrtviUnblonesB  with  Qod,  yua  mnst  have  been  bronght  into  a  very  ad 
flDfK  liiduud ;  for  not  to  be  au.-cpted  of  God,  and  to  be  aware  of  i^ii 
>'t«»i'  for  iiitonso  aorrow.    But  now  be  sure,  ttiou  that  believest  in  Jean, 
|]Kn(  tJiim  art  acccDtcd  of  God  :  notwithstanding  thine  infiimitics  and  a» 
Mti'ii  art  "  acoept«a  in  the  Beloved,"  by  him  who  hath  said,  "  I  will  aoesfk ' 
yikii  will)  your  sweet  saTonr."    And  now,  being  thus  accepted  as  toyoarpv" 
WHIN,  yiiiir  [wtitions  sliall  come  up  with  acceptance  before  the  Loid.    it  ■ 
Sff  your  priivurs,  God  heareth  tiium  ;  as  for  your  tcara,  he  putteth  tha  ■ 
tutu  hJN  bottle  I  as  for  your  works,  he  countcth  them  to  be  fi-uit&  of  lu  • 
H|ilHC  luid  oooepta  them.     Yea,  now  that  thou  art  accepted  in  Chji(t,dl  • 
IhnlUv^'.M  Mt  iMi>l  all  that  iliuu  hast,  and  all  thou  dost,— the  whole rf *' 
thiH-  In  ii(Hw|iliil>'-  I)  God  thv  M/li  .fesas  Christ  oar  Lord.  j 

Thritv  lin]i)<N  liiltoha^  i"  tidknpon  such  asuhjectaa  this.  Oow 
yp  whu  am  willri  now  to  !■■  in.vi.' iu  Jesus,  this  ia  the  acceptable  yw • 
iifliht'  IjiHil  i  \t'"\  ■sreconcil-.d.  mim  ia  favoured,  blessings  abound.  Nor 
la  tho  Hcouptixl  liiiie,  now  is  tlio  day  of  salvation.  Let  sin  be  confiaed 
tuid  thi>  (>uiill>mii>ii  shall  bo  anx'nted,  and  yon  shall  find  for^venesa.  Lst 
(mniunwiiiit  K'  i>'ponttid  of.  itie  repentance  shall  be  accepted,  andywi 
itttall Tkvar  n\-<>i<''  ■.lytne. "G  '-vui  ainnomorc;  thy ains, which  aremaaf, 
«v  Dirf[iMm  tli' '  HaiU  I''  .  liiut  ai't  gi'acioualy  accepted,  bleased  art 
tlhn)  MuonK»"i.>  I  Ai)d  I  i  i'>o,  my  brother.reinember  the  wordsof 
(MiHllirti, 'Mi"  111  ivay,  eat  .  i'nad  with  j\py,  itiid  drink  thy  wine  nith 
H  iHcn^' liiwi  ,    I      (iwi  now  i.;.-::!:ii   iMifl.-.""  I'E.-i  1.  i\.  7.)     C.^viic 

hi  JmU*  by   "tti'i      |ir  thwipl      \.    .    .  :■..!:■■_■>■.,!!.,    :,;i."i    \  ■;!; 

(hllh  (*  ftwbli  ,    '  nlnUI  vou  Iw  accepted.     Cume  yc  who  have  brokeo 

Itvwrta  ttitil  O'Mi'  11^  ii]iirits,  coiueye  that  are  downcast  and  dare  not 

llHth  y\\\,  thin  (•  <<  >  lumiiaii  time,  the  Lord  Jeaus  has  made  It  a  red  letter 

twtr  A>('  y\')i .  <' '  'w  )u\x)laims  ■  year  of  grace  and  acceptance.     Behdd 

lU  tllfa  I4MIMI  (>•■  i  or  yvM*  of  our  Lord,  we  have  a  choice  year  of  grace 

"  '  *\»aS  Ittr  w  ^VUo  will  uol  c^>me  to  oar  gracioaa  Prince,  accept  lua 

Vnuii  pw,  am  wr  |r#t  a  d«Hit)le  ntfuuiug  fium  the  text — the  year  of 
Ihw  nl(h  <ti\  tti  MvuiuultUiKl  privikgva  dT  free  grace,  and  the  year  of 


PBOOLAMATIQN  OP  AOOBPTANCE  AND  YEKGEAKCS.  463 

ooepiance  in  which  whosoever  will  may  come,  and  God  will  accept  him 
r  lie  Cometh  in  the  name  of  Jesiis,  trasting  alone  in  the  atoning  blood. 
II.     May  the  Lord  help  us  while  we  speak  upon  the  second  part  of  the 

BXt  :   the  "  DAY  OF  VENGEANCE   OF  OUR  GOD."      DoCS  UOt  the  SOUud  of 

engeanoe  grate  upon  your  ear  ?  Does  it  not  seem  discordant  to  the 
weet  tenonr  of  the  passage  ?  Vengeance  !  Shall  that  happen  side  by 
ide  with  aoceptanoe  ?  Yes,  beloved,  this  is  the  mystery  of  the  gospel ; 
he  ^stem  of  redemption  marries  justice  and  mercy ;  the  method  of 
izretifihip  unites  severity  and  grace ;  the  economy  of  substitution  blends 
iooep4aace  and  vengeance.  This  gospel  mystery  is  to  be  published 
iOr  every  creature  mider  heaven,  for  it  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation 
A}  eveiy  one  that  believeth.    We  sweetly  sang  just  now  : 

**  Here  I  behold  his  inmost  heart, 
Where  grace  and  vengeance  strangely  join, 
Piercing  bis  Son  with  sharpest  smart, 
To  make  the  purchased  pleasure  mine.** 

Now  behold  in  this  text  you  have  the  heart  of  Qod  laid  bare,  for  you 
htswe  the  vear  of  acceptance  coupled  with  the  day  of  vengeance.  Let  us 
explain  this  strange  commingling,  and  at  the  same  time  expound  tiie 
text. 

In  the  first  place,  whenever  there  is  a  day  of  mercy  to  those  who  be- 
liesve,  it  is  always  a  day  of  responsibility  to  those  who  reject  it,  and  if 
they  continue  in  that  state  it  is  a  day  of  increased  tm^ath  to  unbelievers. 
It »  not  possible  for  the  gospel  to  be  without  some  effect.  If  it  be  a 
flsvour  of  life  unto  life  to  those  who  receive  it,  it  must  of  necessity  from 
ite  own  intrinsic  vigour  be  a  savour  of  death  unto  death  to  those  who 
rejeet  it.  To  this  sword  there  are  two  edges — one  will  Idll  our  fears,  or 
tii^  other  will  surely  kill  our  pride  and  destroy  our  vain  hopes  if  we  yield 
not  to  Christ.  You  may,  perhaps,  have  noticed  that  when  our  Lord  read 
this  pass^e  at  Nazareth,  he  stopped  short,  he  did  not  read  it  all ;  he  read 
as  fer  down  as,  "to  proclaim  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord,'*  and  then 
he  dosed  the  book  and  gave  it  to  the  minister  and  sat  down.  I  suppose 
that  at  the  commencement  of  his  ministry,  before  he  had  been  rejected 
by  the  nation,  and  before  he  had  suffered  for  sin,  he  wisely  chose  to  allude 
to  the  gentler  topics  rather  than  to  those  more  stem  and  terrible  ones  ; 
bat  he  did  not  conclude  his  ministry  without  referring  to  the  stem 
words  which  followed  those  which  he  had  read.  If  you  will  turn  to 
Luke's  twenty-first  chapter  you  will  find  him  saying  in  the  twenty-first 
and  twenty-second  verses,  "  Then  let  them  which  are  in  Judea  flee  to  the 
naoiintains  ;  and  let  them  which  are  in  the  midst  of  it  depart  out ;  and 
let  not  them  that  are  in  the  countries  enter  thereinto.  For  these  be  the 
days  of  vengeance,  that  all  things  which  are  written  may  be  fulfilled." 
You  know  the  story  of  the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  the  most  harrowing  of 
all  narratives,  for  the  anger  of  God  was  concentrated  upon  that  wicked 
city  beyond  all  precedent.  It  was  because  they  rejected  Christ  that 
vengeance  came  upon  them.  They  filled  up  the  measure  of  their  iniquity 
when  at  last  they  disowned  their  king  and  cried  out,  "  Away  with  liim, 
away  with  him,  let  him  be  crucified."  Mark  you  then,  dear  hearer,  that 
if  you  have  heard  the  gospel  and  rejected  it,  you  have  incurred  great 
gufit,  and  you  can  never  sin  so  cheaply  as  you  did  before  ;  for  you  there 


464  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

will  be  a  day  of  vengeance  above  the  men  of  Sodom  and  Gom<»Tfaiiy 
becaoBe  jon  have  perpetrated  a  crime  which  they  were  not  capable  of 
committing — ^you  have  rejected  the  Christ  of  Gk)d.  The  year  of  accept- 
ance to  beUevers  will  be  a  day  of  vengeance  to  those  who  obey  not  nis 
gospel. 

Another  meaning  of  the  tett  comes  out  in  the  fact  that  there  is  ap- 
pointed a  day  of  vengeance  for  all  the  enemies  of  Christy  and  Uiis  will 
happen  in  that  bright  future  day  for  which  we  are  looking.  Not  merely 
for  rejecters  of  his  gospel  will  there  be  vengeance,  but  for  all  men  and 
fallen  spirits  who  dare  to  oppose  his  sway.  Behold  he  comes  a  second 
time  ;  every  winged  hour  hastens  his  advent,  and  when  he  comes  it  will 
be  a  great  and  a  dreadful  day  to  his  foes.  It  will  be  to  his  saints  theday 
of  their  revelation,  manifestation,  and  acceptance,  but  to  the  ungodly 
^Hhe  day  of  vengeance  of  our  Gk)d/'  ''Enoch,  Uie  seventh  fiom 
Adam,  nrophesied  of  these,  saying.  Behold,  the  Lord  cometh  with  tea 
thousanos  of  his  saints,  to  execute  judgment  upon  aU,  and  to  convince 
all  that  are  ungodly  among  them  of  aU  their  ungodly  deeds  which  th^ 
have  ungodly  committed,  and  of  all  their  hard  speeches  which  unffodly 
sinners  have  spoken  against  him."  Paul  also  bears  witness  the  Lnd 
Jesus  shall  be  revealed  from  heaven  with  his  mighty  angels,  **  In  iaming 
fire  taking  vengeance  on  them  that  know  not  God,  and  that  obey  nottl^ 
gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  who  shall  be  punished  with  everiasting 
destruction  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  from  the  glory  of  his 
power;  when  he  shall  come  to  be  glorified  in  his  saints,  and  to  be 
admired  in  all  them  that  believe."  Note  the  vengeance  and  the  grace 
combined.  The  prophet  Isaiah  saw  our  great  champion  returning  from 
his  last  fight,  and  thus  spake  concerning  lum  :  **  Who  is  this  that  cometh 
from  Edom,  with  dyed  garments  from  Bozrah?  this  that  is  glmous 
in  his  apparel,  travelling  in  the  greatness  of  his  strength?  I  that 
speak  in  righteousness,  mighty  to  save.  Wherefore  art  thou  red  in 
thine  apparel,  and  thy  garments  like  him  that  treadeth  in  the  winefiit  ? 
I  have  trodden  the  winepress  alone ;  and  of  the  people  there  was 
none  with  me  :  for  I  will  tread  them  in  mine  anger,  and  trample  them 
in  my  fiiry ;  and  their  blood  shall  be  sprinkled  upon  my  garments, 
and  I  ydW  stain  all  my  raiment.  For  the  day  of  vengeance  is  in  mine 
heart,  and  the  year  of  my  redeemed  is  come."  Observe,  again,  the 
connection  between  the  day  of  vengeance  and  the  year  of  the  rede^ned. 
At  the  second  advent  Christ  will  come  to  be  glorified  in  his  saints^ 
and  they  shall  be  manifested  in  the  fulness  of  their  acceptance,  bat 
it  \Wll  be  an  overwhelming  day  of  vengeance  for  all  those  wko  have 
hardened  their  hearts  and  continued  in  their  sins.  ^*  Behold,  the  daj 
comctli,  that  shall  bui'u  as  an  oven  ;  and  all  the  proud,  yea,  and  all  that 
do  wickedly,  shall  be  stubble  :  and  the  day  that  cometh  shall  bum  them 
lip,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  that  it  shall  leave  them  neither  root  nor 
branch." 

However,  I  consider  that  the  chief  meaning  of  the  text  lies  in  this — 
that  "  the  day  ofvengennce  of  our  God''  was  that  day  whm  he  made  all 
the  tramgiessions  of  his  people  to  meet  upon  the  head  of  our  great  Surety. 
8in  with  many  streams  hsd  been  flowing  down  the  hills  of  time  and 
forming  by  their  dread  accumulation  one  vast  and  fathomless  lake.  Into 
this  the  sinner's  substitute  must  be  plunged.     He  had  a  baptism  to  be 


PROCLAMATION  OF  ACOBPTANCE  AKD  VENGEANCE.  465 

baptized  with  and  he  must  endure  it,  or  all  his  chosen  must  perish  for 
ever.  That  .was  a  day  of  vengeance  when  all  the  .waves  and  billows  of 
divine  wrath  went  over  his  innocent  head. 

"  Came  at  lenorth  the  dreadful  niVht ; 
Vengeance  with  its  iron  rod 
Stood,  and  with  collected  might 

Bruised  the  hannless  Lamb  of  God. 
See,  my  soul,  thy  Saviour  see, 
Prostrate  in  Gethscmane  !'* 

From  his  blessed  person  there  distilled  a  bloody  sweat,  for  his  soul  was 
exceedingly  sorrowful  even  unto  death.  All  through  the  night  with 
soourgings  and  buffetings  and  spittings  of  cruel  men,  he  was  tortured 
and  abused ;  he  was  rejected,  despised,  maltreated,  and  pierced  in  his  in- 
most soul  by  man's  scorn  and  cruelty.  Then  in  the  morning  he  was 
taken  out  to  be  crucified,  for  nothing  could  suffice  short  of  his  death. 
The  outward  sorrows  of  crucifixion  ye  know,  but  the  inward  griefe  ye  do 
not  know,  for  what  our  Lord  endured  was  beyond  what  any  mortal 
man  could  have  borne.  The  infinity  of  the  Godhead  aided  the  manhood, 
and  I  doubt  not  Hart  was  right  in  saying  that  he 

*'  Bore  all  Incarnate  God  could  bear 
With  strength  enough  but  none  to  spare.** 

It  WBB  an  awful  "  day  of  vengeance  of  our  God,"  for  the  voice  cried  aloud, 
**  Awake,  0  sword,  against  my  shepherd,  against  the  man  that  is  my 
fellow,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  The  doctrine  that  justice  was  executed 
upon  our  great  Substitute  is  the  most  important  that  w^  ever  propounded 
in  the  hearing  of  men ;  it  is  the  sum  and  substance  of  the  whole  gospel, 
and  I  fear  that  the  church  which  rejects  it  is  no  longer  a  church  of  Christ. 
Sabstitution  is  as  much  a  standing  or  falling  article  in  the  church  as  the 
doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  itself.  My  brethren  and  sisters,  there 
wonld  never  have  been  an  acceptable  year  if  there  had  not  been  a  day  of 
vengeance.     Be  ye  sure  of  this. 

And  now  let  us  look  at  the  instructive  type  by  which  this  truth  was 
taaght  to  Israel  of  old.  The  year  of  jubilee  began  with  the  day  of 
atonement.  "  Then  shalt  thou  cause  the  trumpet  of  the  jubile  to  sound 
on  the  tenth  day  of  the  seventh  month,  in  the  day  of  atonement  shall 

Je  make  the  trumpet  sound  throughout  all  your  land.''  What  did  the 
igh  priest  do  on  that  day  ?  Read  for  yourselves  the  seventeenth  chapter 
of  Leviticus.  On  that  day  he  washed  himself  and  came  forth  before  the 
people,  not  wearing  his  breast-plate,  nor  his  garments  of  glory  and  beauty, 
of  blue  and  scarlet  and  fine  linen ;  but  the  high  priest  wore  the  ordinary 
Knen  garments  of  a  common  priest.  Even  thus  the  Lord,  who  counted 
it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God,  laid  aside  all  his  glory,  and  was 
found  in  fashion  as  a  man.  Then  the  priest  took  a  bullock  and,  having 
offered  it,  went  within  the  veil  with  the  censer  full  of  burning  coals  of 
fire,  and  sweet  incense  beaten  small,  with  which  he  filled  the  inner  court 
with  perfumed  smoke.  After  this  he  took  the  blood  of  the  bullock  and 
sprinkled  it  before  the  mercy-seat*  seven  times.  Thus  our  Lord  entered 
within  the  veil  with  his  own  blood  and  with  the  sweet  incense  of  his  o>vn 
merits,  to  make  atonement  for  us.  Of  the  two  goats,  one  was  killed  as  a 
sin-offering,  and  his  blood  was  sprinkled  within  the  veil,  and  the  other 
wad  used  for  a  scapegoat.     Upon  the  head  of  the  scapegoat  Aaron  laid 


466  KETBOPOLITAN  TABBBNACLE  PULPIT. 

both  his  hands,  and  confessed  all  the  iniquities  of  the  childien  of  Israel, 
*^  putting  them  upon  the  head  of  the  goat,"  which  was  then  taken  into 
the  wilderness  as  the  type  of  the  carrying  away  of  sin  into  obliTion. 
Do  you  not  see  your  Lord  and  Master  bearing  your  sin  away?  "As 
far  as  the  cast  is  from  the  west,  so  far  hath  he  removed  our  transCTCssions 
from  us."  Is  there  any  wonder  that  a  jubilee  of  peace  should  foUow  sodi 
a  taking  away  of  iniquity  as  our  great  High-priest  has  accomplished? 
Jesus  is  entered  into  the  heavens  for  us^  can  we  doubt  of  our  acceptance 
with  God? 

The  bodies  of  the  beasts  whose  blood  was  brought  into  the  sanctoaij 
for  sin  on  the  day  of  atonement  were  not  suffered  to  remain  in  the  h<*r 
place,  but  were  carried  forth  without  the  camp  to  be  utterly  oonsomed 
with  fire,  in  token  that  sin  is  loathsome  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  moit 
be  put  away  from  his  presence.  Even  thus  did  our  Lord  suffer  without  the 
gate  and  cry,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?"  "  Christ 
also  hath  once  suffered  for  sins,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  that  he  might 
bring  us  to  God."  All  this  was  absolutely  needful  to  a  jubilee.  Witibont 
atonement,  no  rejoicing.  Before  there  can  be  acceptance  for  a  single 
sinner,  sin  must  be  laid  on  Jesus  and  carried  away.  The  blood  of  Jesns 
must  be  shed,  and  must  be  presented  within  the  veil,  for  '^  without  shed- 
ding of  blood  there  is  no  remission  of  sin  ;'*  for  no  man  living  under 
heaven  can  there  be  pardon  or  acceptance  with  Gk)d  in  any  way  bat  by 
the  bloody  sacrifice  which  our  Eedcemer  offered  when  he  bowed  m& 
head  and  gave  up  the  ghost  on  Calvary.  This  great  truth  we  must  never 
becloud,  nor  ever  cease  to  publish  so  long  as  we  have  a  tongue  to  move. 

The  day  of  vengeance  then  is  intimately  connected  with  the  year  of 
acceptance ;  and  mark,  beloved,  they  must  be  so  connected  experimmtally 
in  the  heart  of  all  God's  people  hy  the  teacking  of  the  Holy  Ohatty  for 
whenever  Christ  comes  to  make  us  live,  the  law  comes  first  to  kill  us. 
There  is  no  healing  without  previous  wounding.  Depend  upon  it^  there 
never  will  be  a  sense  of  acceptance  in  any  man  until  first  he  has  had  a 
sense  of  the  just  and  righteous  vengeance  of  God  against  his  sin.  Have 
you  noticed  that  remarkable  parallel  to  our  text  in  the  thirty-fifth 
chapter  of  Isaiah,  where  salvation  and  vengeance  are  so  closdj  joined. 
There  we  read  in  the  third  verse  and  onward,  "Strengthen  ye  the 
weak  hands,  and  confirm  the  feeble  knees.  Say  to  them  that  aie  of  a 
fearful  heart,  be  strong,  fear  not :  behold,  your  God  will  oome  witii 
vengeance,  even  God  with  a'recompence ;  he  will  come  and  save  yoa. 
Then  the  eyes  of  the  blind  shall  be  opened,  and  the  ears  of  the  deaf 
shall  be  unstopped.  Then  shall  the  lame  man  leap  as  an  hart^  and  the 
tongue  of  j;he  dumb  sing  :  for  in  the  wilderness  shall  waters  break  out^ 
and  streams  in  the  desert."  0  poor  trembling  convinced  sinner,  God 
has  come  with  vengeance  to  you,  but  his  intent  is  to  save  you.  Every 
soul  that  is  saved  must  feel  that  wrath  is  deserved  and  that  the 
death  punishment  is  duo  on  account  of  sin,  and  when  iim  is  known 
and  felt  acceptance  b?  faith  will  follow.  There  must  be  a  death  blow 
struck  at  all  self-sumcicncy  and  self-tighteousness,  and  the  nmn  most 
be  laid  as  dead  at  the  feet  of  Christ  before  ever  he  will  look  up  and  find 
life  and  healing  in  the  great  atoning  sacrifice.  When  our  Lord  puts  on 
the  hebnet  of  salvation,  he  also  girds  about  him  the  garments  of  veneeance, 
and  we  must  see  him  in  all  his  array.    (See  Isai&  lix.  17.)     The  day 


PROCLAMATION   OF  ACCEPTANCE   AND   VENGEANCE.  467 

of  vengeance  is  a  needful  corapanion  to  the  year  of  acceptance ;  have 
thev  gone  together  in  your  experience  ? 

III.  I  wish  time  would  occasionally  stay  his  rapid  flight,  or  at  least 
liUow  us  to  .pluck  a  feather  Irom  his  wing  while  we  contemplate  such  a 
sabject  as  this.     But  I  must  close  with  the  third  head,  namely,  the 

COMFOET    FOR    MOURNERS    DERIVABLE    FROM     BOTH     THESE      THINGS. 

**  To  comfort  all  Ihat  maurn.'' 

Now,  I  have  no  hope  of  interesting,  much  less  of  doing  any  good  to,  any 
in  this  house  of  prayer  who  do  not  come  under  the  description  of  mourners. 
The  Bower*8  duty  is  to  sow  the  seed  everywhere,  but  he  knows  within 
himself  that  it  will  take  no  root  anywhere  except  where  the  plough  has 
been  first  at  work.  If  the  Lord  has  made  thee  a  mouraer  then  the 
blessed  subject  of  this  morning  will  comfort  thee ;  but  the  Lord  never 
comforts  those  who  do  not  want  comfort.  If  you  can  save  yourself,  go 
and  do  it :  if  you  are  righteous,  "  he  that  is  righteous  let  him  be  righteous 
still."  I  say  it  in  sarcasm,  as  you  perceive,  for  you  cannot  save  yourself, 
nor  are  you  righteous ;  but  if  you  think  so,  go  your  way  and  try  it — vainly 
try  it,  fbr  surely  when  you  have  fanned  your  best  works  into  a  flame,  and 
have  walked  by  the  light  of  the  sjmrks  of  the  fire  which  you  have  kindled, 
you  shall  have  this  at  the  Lord's  hands — you  shall  lie  down  in  sorrow 
and  be  astonished  that  you  were  ever  so  mad  as  to  dream  of  self-salvation 
or  of  justification  by  your  own  works. 

But  oh,  ye  moumere,  what  joy  is  here,  joy  because  this  is  the  year  of 
acceptance,  and  in  the  year  of  acceptance,  or  jubilee,  men  were  set  free  and 
their  lands  were  restored  without  money.  No  man  ever  paid  a  penny  of 
redemption  money  on  the  jubilee  morning :  every  man  was  free  simphj 
because  jubilee  was  proclaimed:  no  merit  was  demanded,  no  demur  was 
oflfered,  no  delay  allowed,  no  dispute  permitted.  Jubilee  came,  and  the 
bondman  was  free.  And  now,  to-day,  whosoever  believeth  in  Jesus  is 
saved,  pardoned,  freed,  without  money,  Avithout  merit,  without  prepara- 
tion, simply  because  he  believeth,  and  God  declareth  that  he  that  be- 
lieveth is  justified  from  all  things  from  which  he  could  not  be  justified 
by  the  law  of  Moses.  Dost  thou  believe  ?  Then  art  thou  of  the  house 
of  Israel,  and  thou  hast  God's  warrant  for  it,  thou  art  free.  Rejoice  in 
thy  liberty !  Surely  this  is  sweet  comfort  for  all  that  mourn.  Look 
not  for  any  marks  and  evidences,  signs  and  tokens,  look  not  fur  any 
merits  or  attainments,  look  not  for  any  progress  in  grace  or  advance- 
ment in  piety  as  a  ground  of  salvation ;  listen  only  to  the  proclamation 
v)f  the  gospel,  and  accept  the  divine  decree  which  ordains  a  jubilee.  Art 
thou  but  of  the  chosen  seed,  dost  thou  beheve  in  Jesus,  then  for  thee  it 
is  an  accepted  year.  Come,  bring  hither  thy  gvieU  and  sorrows,  and 
leave  them  at  the  cross,  for  the  Lord  accepts  thee,  and  who  shall  say 
thee  nay  ? 

An  equal  joy-note  however  rings  out  from  the  other  sentence  concern- 
ing the  day  of  vengeance.  If  the  day  of  vengeance  took  place  when  our 
Lord  died,  then  it  is  over.  The  day  of  vengeance  was  past  and  gone 
eighteen  hundred  years  ago  and  more. 

"  Now  no  more  His  wrath  we  dread, 
Vengeance  smote  our  Surety's  head  ; 
Legal  claims  are  fully  met, 
Jesus  paid  the  dreadful  debt." 


468  METROPOLITAN  TABSRHACLB  PUIiFIT. 

M J  heart,  dost  thon  bleed  for  sin  and  monm  beoanse  of  it  ?  Be  it  so ; 
but  it  has  ceased  to  be,  for  Christ  made  an  end  of  it  wh^i  he  took  it 
up  to  his  cross  and  bore  it  there  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree.  O  belie^r, 
art  thou  bowed  down  and  troubled  on  account  of  past  sin  ?.  It  is  right 
thou  shouldst  repent,  but  still  remember  thy  past  sin  exists  no  more,  the 
pen  is  drawn  through  it  and  it  is  cancelled,  for  the  day  of  Tengeeoice 
IS  over.  God  will  not  twice  take  vengeance  for  the  same  sin.  Either 
the  atonement  which  Jesus  offered  was  enough,  or  it  was  not ;  if  it  was 
not,  then  woe  be  to  us,  for  we  shall  die  ;  but  if  it  was  sufficient— if  "  It 
ia  finished''  was  not  a  lie  but  a  truth,  then  he  hath  '^ finished  transgres- 
sion and  made  an  end  of  sin."  The  sin  of  the  behever  is  annihilated 
and  abolished,  and  can  never  be  laid  to  his  charge.  Let  us  rejoice  that 
the  day  of  vengeance  is  over,  and  the  year  of  acceptance  has  b^un. 

In  another  sense,  however,  it  may  be  that  some  are  mourning  because 
of  the  temptations  of  Satan.  Here,  too,  they  may  be  comforted,  ftr 
Jesus  has  come  to  take  vengeance  on  the  evil  one,  and  the  God  of  peace 
shall  bruise  Satan  under  your  feet  shortly.  Are  you  afraid  of  deaik? 
Behold  Christ  has  taken  revenge  on  death,  for  he  bids  you  cry,  became 
of  his  resurrection,  "  0  death,  where  is  thy  sting  ?  0  grave,  where  is  thy 
victory  ?" 

Are  we  mourning  to-day  because  our  dear  ones  are  not  converted?  It 
is  a  good  thing  to  mourn  on  that  account,  but  let  us  take  comfort,  for 
this  is  an  acceptable  year ;  let  us  pray  for  them,  and  the  Lord  will  save 
them.  Are  we  mourning  because  sin  is  rampant  in  the  wide  worid  ?  Let 
us  rejoice,  for  our  Lord  has  broken  the  dragon's  head,  and  the  day  of  vra- 
geance  must  come  when  the  Lord  will  overthrow  the  powers  of  darknesB. 
Have  we  been  looking  with  mournful  spirit  upon  old  Kome,  and  tfie  Mo- 
hammedan imposture,  and  the  power  of  Buddhism  and  BrohminiBmand 
other  the  sway  gf  ancient  idolatries  ?  Let  us  be  glad.  Behold  the  Avenger 
cometh !  He  comes  a  second  time,  and  comes  conquering  and  to  conquer. 
Then  shall  the  day  of  his  vengeance  be  in  his  heart,  and  the  year  ot  his 
redeemed  shall  come.  FroiH  the  seven  hills  the  deceiver  shaU  be  torn,  no 
more  to  curse  the  sons  of  men  with  his  pretensions  to  be  the  vicar  of  God. 
In  blackest  night  shall  set  for  ever  the  crescent  of  Mohamm^  whidi 
already  Avanes ;  its  baleful  light  shall  no  more  afflict  unhappy  nations.  Then 
shall  fell  the  gods  of  the  Hindoos  and  the  Chinese,  broken  like  potters' 
vessels  by  the  rod  of  iron  which  Jesus  wields.  At  his  appeaimg  the 
whole  earth  shall  acknowledge  that  he  who  was  "despised  and  rejected  of 
men  "  is  "  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords."  Behold,  the  day  comedi 
on  apace,  let  all  that  mourn  be  comforted.  The  day  of  vengeance,  the 
full  year  of  the  millennial  glory,  the  day  of  the  overthrow  of  error,  the 
year  of  the  acceptance  of  creation  in  all  her  former  beauty,  the  age  when 
(lod  shall  be  all  in  all,  is  near  at  hand.    Hasten  it,  0  Lord.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  Read  before  Sermon— Leviticus  xvi  29—84, 

and  Leviticus  xxv.  1 — 24 :  89 — 43. 


Hymns  from  "  Our  Own  Hymn  Book  "—289,  271,  299. 


^^tt[«pton  itab^maffe  §up. 


SHEEP  AMONG  WOLVES. 


t 


tmtt( 

Delivered  on   Lord's-Day  Morning,  August  19th,  1877,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON, 


*•  Behold,  I  send  you  forth  as  sheep  in  the  midst  of  wolves :  be  ye  therefore 
^iae  as  serpents,  and  harmless  as  doves." — Matthew  x.  16. 

"Well  may  the  text  begin  with  a  "  Behold,"  for  it  contains  some  special 
wonders,  such  as  can  be  seen  nowhere  else.  First,  here  is  a  tender  and 
loving  Shepherd  sending  his  sheep  into  the  most  dangerous  position — "  I 
'Send  you  forth  as  sheep  in  the  midst  of  wolves."  It  is  the  part  of  a  shep- 
lierd  to  protect  his  sheep  from  the  wolves,  not  to  send  them  into  the  very 
midst  of  those  ravenous  beasts ;  and  yet  here  is  the  Gk)od  Shepherd,  "  that 
Great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep,"  actually  undertaking  and  carrying  out  this 
extraordinary  experiment  of  conducting  his  sheep  into  the  very  midst  of 
wolves.  How  strange  it  seems  to  poor  carnal  sense.  Be  astonished,  but 
"be  not  unbelieving — stand  still  awhile  and  study  the  reason. 

The  next  remarkable  thing  is  "  sheep  in  the  midst  of  wolves,"  because 
according  to  the  order  of  nature  such  a  thing  is  never  seen,  but,  on  the 
other  hand,  it  has  been  reckoned  a  great  calamity  that  in  some  lands 
wolves  are  too  often  seen  in  the  midst  of  sheep.  The  wolf  leaps  into  the 
midst  of  a  flock  and  rends  and  tears  on  every  side ;  it  matters  not  how 
many  the  sheep  may  be,  for  one  wolf  is  more  than  a  match  for  a  thousand 
sheep.  But  lo !  here  you  see  sheep  sent  forth  among  the  wolves,  as  if 
they  were  the  attacking  party,  and  were  bent  upon  putting  down  their 
terrible  enemies.  It  is  a  novel  sight,  such  as  nature  can  never  show, 
bnt  grace  is  full  of  marvels. 

Equally  extraordinary  is  the  singular  mixtm'c,  never  yet  seen  by  human 
eye  amongst  beasts  and  birds — a  mixture  of  the  serpent  with  the  dove  in 
one  person.  AVliat  a  strange  blending.  Creatures  which  are  capable  of 
cross-breeding  must  have  some  sort  of  kinship ;  but  here  is  a  reptile  of 
the  dust  united  ^nth  a  bird  of  the  air — "  Be  ye  therefore  wise  as  serpents, 
and  harmless  as  doves."  Grace  knows  how  to  pick  the  good  out  of  the 
evil,  the  jewel  out  of  the  oyster  shell,  the  diamond  from  the  dunghill,  the 
sagacity  from  the  serpent ;  and  by  a  divine  chemistry  it  leaves  the  good 
No.  1,370. 


470  METROPOLITAN  TABERHAOLE  PULPIT. 

which  it  takes  out  of  the  foul  place  as  good  as  tiioti^  it  had  never  beoi 
there.  Grace  knows  how  to  blend  the  most  gentle  with  tibe  most  aabUe; 
to  take  away  from  prudence  the  base  element  which  makes  it  into  coimiiig, 
and,  by  mingling  innocence  with  it,  produce  a  sacared  prudence  most 
valuable  for  Si  walks  of  life. 

With  these  three  wonders  outside  the  text,  lying,  as  it  were,  upon  the 
very  surface,  we  shall  enter  into  a  fuller  consideration  of  it  with  great 
expectations ;  but  if  we  do  so  we  shall  be  disappointed  if  we  expect  to 
learn  anything  very  extraordinary  unless  we  are  prepared  to  practise  what 
we  learn.  I  may  truly  say  of  this  text,  he  that  doeth  its  bidding  shall 
understand  its  doctrine :  he  who  foUoweth  its  precept  shall  best  know  its 
meaning.  May  the  Spirit  of  all  grace  work  in  us  according  to  his  divine 
power,  and  perfect  in  us  the  will  of  the  Lord. 

Though  primarily  addressed  to  the  apostles,  it  seems  to  me  that  our 
text  relates  in  its  measure  to  aU  who  have  any  talent  or  ability  fiir 
spreading  the  gospel,  and  indeed  to  all  the  saints  so  far  as  they  are  tme 
to  their  calling  as  the  children  of  Grod.  They  are  all  of  them  more  or 
less  as  sheep  in  the  midst  of  wolves,  and  to  them  all  is  the  advice  giv^i, 
"  Be  ye  therefore  wise  as  serpents,  and  harmless  as  doves."  Let  us  hear 
for  ourselves  as  though  the  Lord  Jesus  spoke  to  us  each  individually. 

We  may  see  in  the  text  four  things  concerning  the  people  of  God. 
First,  their  prominent  vocation — "Behold,  I  send  you  forth;  secondly, 
their  imminent  peril — "as  sheep  in  the  midst  of  wolves";  thirdfy,  Uimr 
eminent  authoriti^ — "Behold,  i  send  you  forth";  and,  lastly^  their  per^ 
nument  instructions — "  Be  ye  wise  as  serpents,  and  harmless  as  doves. 

I.  First,  let  us  consider  their  promikent  vocation.  They  had 
other  callings,  for  some  of  them  were  fishermen ;  but  their  great  callmg 
was  this—"  Behold,  I  send  you  forth."  The  call  of  the  Lora  over-rides 
all  other  vocations.  Every  child  of  Grod,  according  to  the  capacity  of 
grace  which  God  has  given  to  him,  should  hear  tms  voice  of  the  Loid 
calling  him  and  sending  him  forth  to  labour — "  Behold,  I  send  yoa 
forth." 

These  disciples  had  been  with  ldnif2aiihad  been  taught  hy  him,  that  (hey 
might  teach  in  his  name.  Thevhad  for  some  little  time  been  his  disciptes 
or  learners,  and  now  he  calls  them  apart  from  the  rest,  and  says,  "I  send 
you  forth  to  teach  and  to  make  disciples."  The  mode  of  operation  in 
the  kingdom  of  God  is,  first  make  disciples,  baptize  them,  teach  Aem 
whatsoever  the  Lord  has  commanded,  and  then  let  them  go  forth  and  do 
the  same  with  others.  When  one  light  is  kindled  other  candles  are  lit 
therefrom.  Drops  of  heavenly  water  are  flashed  aloft  and  scattered  aH 
around  Uke  dew  upon  the  £Etoe  of  the  earth,  and  behold  each  one  begetteth 
a  fountain,  where  it  Ms,  and  thus  the  desert  is  made  to  rejoice  and  blos- 
som as  the  rose.  Do  not  try  to  teach  till  the  Lord  Jesus  lias  first  taught 
you  :  do  not  pretend  to  instruct  till  you  have  been  instructed.  Sit  at 
Christ's  feet  before  you  speak  in  Christ's  name,  but  when  once  yon  are 
instructed  do  not  &il  to  become  teachers.  The  lessons  of  your  Lord  will 
be  impressed  upon  your  own  minds  the  more  forcibly  and  mddibly  when 
you  have  earnestly  communicated  them  toyour  fellow  men.  rirst  be 
taught,  but  afterwards  fail  not  to  teach.  Hoard  not  up  the  treasure  of 
divine  knowledge,  for  there  is  no  stint  therein :  eat  not  alone  the  honej 
of  redeeming  love^  for  there  is  enough  and  to  spare.    Feed  not  upon  the 


SHBEP  AMONG  WOLVES.  471 

bread  of  heaven  with  selfish  greed,  as  though  there  were  a  famine  in  the 
Umd  and  you  had  need  to  save  each  crumb  for  yourself,  but  break  your 
bread  among  the  hungry  crowd  about  you,  and  it  shall  multiply  in  your 
hand.  Christ  has  called  you  that  you  may  afterwards  go  forth  and  call 
others  to  his  sacred  feast  of  grace. 

Our  Lord  called  them  not  only  to  teach  those  that  came  in  their  way, 
but  to  go  after  the  lost  sheep.  "  Behold,"  he  says,  "  I  send  vou  forth." 
Some  persons  will  hardly  teach  those  who  come  immediately  to  their 
doors.  Living  under  your  own  roof,  with  some  of  you,  there  are  neglected 
flouls.  Even  in  some  professedly  Christian  families  there  are  sons  and 
daughters  who  are  not  being  trained  for  holiness  nor  taught  in  the  way  of 
everiasting  life.  This  is  sad  to  the  last  degree.  Friend,  do  you  fail 
there  ?  Let  conscience  be  awake  to  judge.  Your  Master  supposes  that 
you  have  fulfilled  home  duties,  and  then  he  calls  you  forth  to  attempt 
something  further.  "  Go  your  ways,"  saith  he,  for  "  I  send  you  forth." 
You  have  been  sitting  and  hearing  the  gospel,  leave  your  seats  at  times 
and  go  forth  to  bring  others  to  the  faith.  You  have  the  power  of  tho 
word  upon  your  hearts,  now  go  and  show  its  power  upon  your  lips  by 
speaking  to  others,  however  few  or  many.  Go  out  yourselves  as  sowers, 
and  scatter  the  seed  your  Lord  has  given  to  you  for  that  end.  Go 
where  providence* guides  you,  to  the  Sunday-school  class  to  teach,  to  the 
street  comer  to  preach,  to  the  remote  village  or  hamlet  to  bear  witness 
fer  Christ,  or  to  the  densely  crowded  city  slums  to  uplift  the  banner  of 
Christ ;  but  go  your  way  somewhere.  Sit  not  down  in  idleness  and  fold 
your  arms  in  indifference  to  the  world's  woes.  Behold,  your  compas- 
sionate Lord  sends  you,  therefore  go  gladly  anywhere,  everywnere, — where 
his  wisdom  appointe  the  way — where  your  business  gives  you  opportunity, 
or  your  travelling  gives  you  occasion.    "  I  send  you  forth,"  saith  he. 

He  sent  them  forth,  we  are  told,  to  tvork  miracles  as  well  as  to  preach. 
Kow,  he  hath  not  given  us  this  power,  neither  do  we  desire  it:  it 
is  more  to  God's  glory  that  the  world  should  be  conquered  by  the  force 
of  truth  than  by  the  blaze  of  miracles.  The  miracles  were  the  great 
bell  of  the  universe  which  was  rung  in  order  to  call  the  attention  of  all 
men  all  over  the  world  to  the  fact  that  the  gospel  feast  was  spread :  we 
do  not  need  the  bell  now,  for  the  thousands  who  have  feasted  to  the 
foil  are  the  best  announcers  of  the  banquet.  Those  of  us  who  have  fed 
upon  Christ  and  his  salvation  will  make  the  matter  known  wherever 
we  go,  and  no  further  announcement  by  miracle  will  be  required,  save 
only  the  standing,  miracle  of  the  indwelling  Spirit. 

We  have  now  the  great  advantages  of  rapid  travelling  and  of  the 
printing  press,  so  that  we  need  not  now  the  gift  of  tongues,  since  men 
can  so  much  more  readily  learn  a  foreign  language  than  they  could 
before,  and  so  much  more  quickly  travel  to  the  spot.  For  the  moral  and 
spiritual  forces  of  truth  to  work  by  themselves,  apart  from  any  physical 
manifestation,  is  more  to  the  glory  of  the  truth,  and  the  Christ  of  the 
truth,  than  if  we  were  all  miracle  workers,  and  could  destroy  gainsayers. 
Yet  still,  though  we  work  no  miracles  in  the  physical  world,  we  work 
them  in  the  moral  and  spiritual  world,  ay,  and  the  same  miracles  too ; 
for,  behold,  he  has  sent  us  forth  to  heal  the  sick,  as  the  evangelist  has 
it  in  the  eighth  verse  of  the  chapter  before  us.  Those  who  are  depressed 
ia  spirit,  faint  and  feeble,  broken-hearted  and  desponding,  bruised  and 


472  UETKOPOLITAB  TlBBBViOUl  PUIflT. 

mangled  by  the  aeaanlto  of  the  great  cnGray, — we  are  to  go  forth  and  poor 
in  the  oil  and  wine  of  the  gogpel,  apply  the  heavenly  plaster  of  the  promise, 
and  bind  np  with  sacred  liniraeot  of  consoling  doctrine,  and  everywhere 
bring  before  ein-sick  ainnora  the  matchless  medicine  of  the  preciona  blood 
of  Christ.  For  every  spiritual  dieease  the  goqwl  is  the  sure  remedy,  and 
we  are  to  cairy  it  to  e^ery  land,  "  Heal  the  sick."  This  als)  we  do. 
Such  sickneBseB  as  langh  at  the  physician,  and  cannot  be  touched  bf 
mortal  skill,  are  heated  Dy  the  servants  of  lum  who  came  himself  to  bear 
human  sicknesses  that  he  might  bear  them  away.  Go  forth,  ye  scmnli 
of  God,  with  a  better  b&lin  than  that  of  Gilead ;  ait  not  still  in  idlenos 
while  bleeding  hearts  and  sickening  sonls  arc  all  around  yon.  Men  an 
perishing;  go  forth  to  heal  them. 

You  are  also  to  "cleanse  the  iepcrs."  There  is  a  leprosy  abroad  in 
the  world  which  takes  diU'creut  shapes  in  different  ages,  but  is  the  aam 
both  in  its  cause  and  effect.  In  our  land  we  sec  on  all  hande  the  fool 
leprosy  of  drunkenness,  Uiat  brutish  diaease  which  degrades  and  destron 
men's  souls ;  there  is  the  leprosy  of  superstition,  which  cats  into  w 
trnderstanding  and  makes  n  man  a  fool ;  nnd,  alas,  there  is  the  white 
leprosy  of  scepticism,  which  like  an  inward  fire  consumes  the  very  heart. 
Bin  is  this  leprosy,  and  our  business  is,  as  God  sliall  help  us,  by  tbe 
preaching  of  tne  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  to  make  tliese  lepers  clean.  It 
18  to  be  done.  It  ia  done  by  us  now  in  our  Lord's  name.  He  that 
worketh  in  us  mightily  will  cause  the  Word  to  be  mighty  to  this  ead 
also,  that  the  leprosy  may  depart  from  men  and  that  they  may  come  into 
the  con^gation  of  the  Lord. 

He  bids  us  also  raise  the  dead,  which  seems  the  sternest  work  of  aQt  . 
but  as  the  others  are  impossible  to  us  apiart  froui  him,  this  is  not  man 
difScult  than  the  rest  We  arc  to  "raise  the  dead,"  Our  gospel  begtua 
with  men  where  they  are  by  nature,  and  doea  not  wait  till  tney  ctMS 
part  of  the  way.  We  go  forth  to  preach  to.  those  who  are  careleaa  and 
insensible,  to  those  who  have  no  feeling  whatsoever,  and  arc  furthomt 
gone  from  any  tenderness  of  heart  with  regard  to  tlidr  own  sin  op  thi 
loTe  of  God.  Go  ye  with  the  gosxl  to  the  sepulcln^  of  rice  and  preacfa 
to  the  dead  in  sin.  The  gospel  has  a  quickening  power,  beloved,  and 
Jesns  who  is  the  resurrection  and  the  Ufe  sends  you  forth,  tliat  by  hit 
word  in  your  mouths  dead  soiils  may  be  raised.  None  are  too  stolid  U> 
be  aroused,  too  hardened  to  be  renewed. 

_And  then  he  adds,  "Cast  out  devils."  Tiiis  commiaaion  ho  gave  to 
his  aj)OBtles,  and  in  a  spiritual  sense  to  us  too.  The  devil  and  hit 
myrmidons  reign  over  the  hearts  of  men,  subjecting  them  to  sin  and 
unheliuf  liekold  they  claim  this  world  as  their  dominion,  but  it  is  not 
80,  they  are  usurpers,  for  the  earth  is  the  Lord's  aud  the  fulneaa  thereot 
Go  ye  with  the  truth  and  coat  out  the  demon  of  error;  go  ye  with  tin 
glad  tidings  of  joy  and  cast  out  the  demon  of  despair ;  go  ye  wilii  tha 
meeaagc  of  peace  and  cast  out  the  demon  of  war ;  go  ye  with  the  word  of 
holiness  and  east  out  the  demons  of  iniquity  j  go  with  the  gomfsl  ol 
liberty  and  cajt  out  the  demons  of  tyranny.  These  blessed  aeeos  caa 
be  done  and  sliall  be  done,  God  being  with  you,  and  to  this  end  he  ^A^M 
you  go  in  his  name,  for  he  will  gird  you  with  his  strength. 
Now,  when  I  eay  that  every  Christian  according  to  his  ability  is  called 
^D  do  this,  I  mean  precisely  what  I  say.    I  mean  that  Christian  meD 


SHEEP  AMONG  WOLVES.  473 

nowadays  while  they  should  be  attached  to  the  church  to  which  they 
belong,  and  the  more  intense  that  attachment  the  better  for  a  thousand 
reasons,  yet  they  should  not  regard  the  church  as  being  a  peacefbl 
dormitory  where  they  are  all  to  sleep,  but  a  common  barracks  where 
they  are  all  to  be  trained,  and  out  of  which  they  are  to  issue  and  carry 
on  the  sacred  crusade  for  Christ.  We  are  not  to  be  frozen  together  with 
the  compactness  of  a  mass  of  ice,  through  mere  agreement  of  creed,  but 
welded  together  like  bars  of  iron  by  the  fire  of  a  common  purpose  and  a 
common  zeal.  If  we  are  what  we  should  be,  we  shall  be  continually 
breaking  forth  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left :  each  man,  eacn 
woman,  according  to  the  calling  that  God  has  given  to  us,  we  shall  be 
seeking  to  extend  the  Redeemer's  kingdom  in  Si  directions.  My  dear 
brethren,  ye  are  arrows  in  the  quiver,  how  gladly  would  I  see  you  shot 
forth  upon  the  enemy  from  the  bow  of  the  Lord.  Many  of  you  are  as 
bettleaxes  and  weapons  of  war  hanging  on  the  wall.  0  that  you  may 
be  taken  down  and  used  of  the  Lord  in  his  glorious  fight.  Lo,  on  the 
walls  of  Zion  hang  a  thousand  bucklers,  all  shields  of  mighty  men  ;  but 
the  great  need  of  the  age  is  that  these  weapons  be  removea  from  their 
restmg  and  rusting,  and  carried  intx)  the  thick  of  the  fitiy.  May  the 
Lord  send  you  forth,  0  ye  who  have  been  saved  under  my  ministry ! 
May  he  hurl  you  forth  with  power  divine,  like  a  mighty  hail  against  his 
adversaries.  May  each  man  among  you  be  eager  to  contend  earnestly  for 
the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints  and  to  save  souls  from  going  down 
mto  the  pit.     Here,  then,  is  your  permanent  vocation,  try  to  realize  it. 

II.  Secondly,  we  shall  consider  their  imminent  peril.  "/  send 
you  forth  as  sheep  in  the  midst  oftvolves ;"  that  is  to  say,  the  task  is  one 
of  great  danger  and  difficulty.  Our  divine  enterprise  is  no  child's  play. 
The  work  has  its  charms ;  it  looks  very  pretty  upon  paper  and  sounds 
well  when  eloquently  described.  At  missionary  meetings  and  revival 
flerrices  it  stirs  your  blood  to  hear  of  what  is  to  be  done,  and  you  resolve 
to  rush  upon  it  at  once ;  but  while  we  would  not  check  the  ardom*  of  one 
eager  aspirant,  we  would  have  him  coimt  the  cost  and  know  what  the 
warfiare  is.  Enlist  by  all  means,  but  stop  a  bit,  and  know  what  you  are 
doing,  lest  you  quit  the  field  as  hurriedly  as  you  entered  it,  and  bring 
disgrace  both  on  yourselves  and  the  cause.  Old  soldiers  who  know  the 
smeU  of  gunpowder,  talk  not  so  lightly  of  a  battle  as  the  raw  recruits 
may  do ;  they  remember  the  blood  and  fire  and  vapour  of  smoke,  and, 
though  they  are  not  timid,  they  are  very  serious.  Come  ye  who  have 
never  thought  about  it,  and  look  upon  that  which  will  dishearten  every 
man  who  is  a  coward,  and  test  the  brave  as  to  whether  their  courage  is 
that  of  nature  or  of  grace. 

You  are  to  go  forth  as  sheep  among  wolves,  that  is  to  say,  you  have  to 
go  among  those  who  will  not  in  any  way  sympathize  ivith  your  efforts. 
Sometimes  we  go  among  amiable,  quiet,  almost  persuaded  people,  and  it 
IB  somewhat  pleasant  work,  though  even  there  it  is  very  discouraging,  for 
those  who  are  not  far  from  the  kingdom  are  often  the  hardest  to  be  won. 
Borderers  are  a  difficult  sort  of  people  to  deal  with,  and  for  real  success 
one  may  as  well  go  among  the  decidedly  ungodly  at  once.  If  you  dis- 
charge your  souls  and  behave  zealously  before  God,  you  will  have  to  deal 
with  people  who  cannot  enter  into  your  feelings  or  agree  with  your  aims. 
The  bleating  sheep  finds  no  harmony  in  the  bark  or  howl  of  the  wolf : 


474  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

the  two  are  very  different  animals^  and  by  no  means  agree.  You  do  not 
suppose  that  you  are  going  to  be  received  with  open  arms  by  everybody, 
do  you  ?  And  if  you  become  a  preacher  of  the  gospel  you  do  not  imaginfe 
that  you  arc  going  to  please  people,  do  you  ?  The  time  may  come  wnem 
perhaps  the  wolves  wiU  find  it  most  for  their  own  comfort  not  to  howl 
quite  so  loudly,  but  my  own  experience  goes  to  show  that  they  howl 

Eretty  loudly  when  you  first  come  among  them,  and  they  keep  up  the 
ideous  concert  year  after  year,  until  at  last  they  somewhat  weaiy  of 
their  useless  noise.  The  world  doth  raven  as  a  wolf  if  any  man  be  in 
double  eamcst  for  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  Well,  you  must  bear  with  it. 
Wliat  sort  of  sympathy  can  a  lamb  expect  from  wolves  ?  If  he  expected 
any  would  he  be  not  disappointed  ?  Be  not  you  disappointed,  for  ^ou  know 
your  surroundings,  and  you  know  your  mission,  when  our  Saviour  used 
similar  words  to  the  seventy,  he  did  not  call  them  sheep,  but  lambs,  (see 
Luke  x.  8),  for  they  were  not  so  far  advanced  as  the  twelve,  yet  did  he 
send  them  into  the  same  trying  circumstances,  and  they  returned  in 
peace.  Even  the  weak  ones  among  us  should  therefore  be  of  good 
courage  and  be  ready  to  face  opposition  and  ridicule. 

Sheep  in  the  midst  of  wolves  are  among  t1u>8e  who  would  rend  ihem, 
tear  them,  devour  them.  Luther  used  to  say,  Cain  will  go  on  killing 
Abel  to  the  world's  end,  if  he  can,  and  so  he  will  till  that  millennial  day 
when  the  wolf  shall  lie  down  with  the  Iamb.  The  disposition  and 
nature  of  the  wolves  cause  them  to  be  opposed  to  the  sheep,  and  it  is 
the  nature  of  the  world  to  hate  the  children  of  God.  All  alon^  through 
history  you  see  the  two  seeds  in  contention  ;  if  there  is  Abel  there  is 
Cain  who  slays  him  ;  if  there  is  Noah,  you  see  an  ungodly  world  all 
round  him ;  if  there  be  an  Isaac,  so  also  is  there  an  Ishmael  who  will 
mock  him  ;  and  if  there  be  a  Jacob  there  is 'an  Esau  who  seeks  to  kiU 
him.  There  cannot  be  an  Israel  without  Pharaoh,  or  Amalek,  or  Edom> 
or  Babylon  to  oppose.  David  must  be  hunted  by  Saul,  and  the  Son 
of  David  by  Herod.  There  is  an  enmity  between  the  seed  of  the 
serpent  and  the  seed  of  the  woman,  and  that  enmity  will  always  remain. 
The  ungodly  roar  upon  the  righteous,  and  seek  to  bnng  cruel  accusa- 
tions against  them,  even  as  against  their  Lord.  No  matter  how  mat 
the  lives  of  the  godly,  the  wicked  will  slander  them ;  no  matter  now 
kind  their  actions,  they  will  render  evil  in  return ;  no  matter  how  plain 
and  honest  their  behaviour,  they  will  suspect  them ;  and  no  matter  how 
disinterested  in  their  motives,  they  will  be  sure  to  attribute  to  them 
the  very  meanest  designs,  for  the  wolf  cometh  to  kill  and  to  devour^ 
and  he  will  do  it  to  the  best  of  his  ability.  Ah,  how  red  are  his  fanga 
in  times  of  persecution.  How  the  wolf  raged  and  raved  over  this  our 
country  in  the  days  of  Mary  and  Charles  the  Second,  and  afterwards 
when,  first  as  a  Protestant,  and  next  as  a  Puritan,  the  godly  were  de* 
voured,  and  he  that  followed  his  conscience  was  made  bitterly  to  suffer* 
Scotland  can  tell  how  the  wolfs  fangs  were  wet  with  the  blood  of  her 
covenanting  sons  ;  and  were  it  not  for  God's  own  strong  hand  put 
upon  them  the  wolves  would  be  tearing  the  sheep  to  this  day  in  oar 
own  land. 

Again,  they  were  to  go  like  sheep  among  wolves,  among  a  people 
ioho  would  hinder  tlieir  endeavours ;  for  their  business  was  to  sedc  the 
lost  sheep,  and  the  wolves  would  not  help  them  in  that,  on  the  contracj^ 


SHEEP  AMONG  WOLVES.  475 

he  wolyes  themselyes  desire  to  seize  upon  the  lost  sheep  as  their 
)rey.  Yon  must  expect,  if  you  are  faithful  to  Christ  and  put  forth 
»aions  efforts,  that  there  will  be  others  who  will  put  forth  their 
strength  and  cunning  to  oppose  you.  It  is  often  an  awful  game  that 
^e  have  to  play  for  a  man's  soul.  Each  move  we  make  is  met  by 
;be  devil,  and  unless  God  directs  us  we  shall  lose  the  man.  If  we  draw 
tiim  to  the  prayer-meeting,  another  takes  him  to  the  theatre ;  if  we  set 
before  him  the  truth,  another  puzzles  him  with  scepticism ;  if  we  per- 
snade  him,  others  entice  him  in  the  wrong  direction:  the  cunning 
yf  our  foe  is  something  terrible.  We  go  forth  to  hunt  for  precious 
sonls,  but  there  are  others  who  in  another  sense  hunt  for  the  precious 
life.  The  streets  at  night  tell  of  those  whom  Satan  hires  that  he  may 
use  them  as  his  decoys,  and  the  vicious  literature  scattered  abroad  so 
plentifully,  are  other  forms  of  the  nets  of  Satan,  the  great  fowler,  who 
matches  the  sons  of  men  in  his  snares.  If  we  are  not  earnest  the  devil 
is :  he  never  sleeps  ;  he  lost  his  eyelids  long  ago.  We  may  slumber  if 
we  dare,  but  the  powers  of  evil  will  never  suspend  their  activities :  day 
uid  night  the  deadly  work  goes  on,  and  the  wolves  howl  over  their  prey. 
Therefore  go  we  forth  like  sheep,  not  among  the  images  of  wolves,  but 
in  the  midst  of  real  active  wolves,  that  are  doing  all  they  possibly  can 
t;o  destroy  those  sheep  who  are  as  yet  lost,  but  whom  Christ  has- 
aevertheless  purchased  with  his  precious  blood. 

We  are  to  go  forth  like  sheep  among  wolves  in  this  sense,  that  we 
ire  quite  powerless  against  them.  What  can  a  sheep  do  if  a  wolf  sets* 
upon  it  ?  It  has  no  strength  to  resist ;  and  so  those  seventy  disciples 
of  Christ,  if  the  Jews  had  hunted  them  down,  must  have  gone  to  prison 
uid  to  death,  for  they  could  not  fight.  "  My  kingdom,"  said  our  Lord, 
'*  is  not  of  this  world,  else  would  my  servants  fight,  that  I  should  not 
be  delivered  to  the  Jews."  All  through  the  history  of  the  church  when 
bhe  wolves  actually  set  upon  the  sheep  they  make  no  active  resist- 
ance, but  as  the  flock  of  slaughter  they  suffer  and  die.  I  know 
there  was  a  time  in  history  when  the  sheep  began  fighting,  but  it 
was  not  their  Master's  mind  that  they  should  :  he  bids  us  put  up  our 
sword  into  its  scabbard.  Our  place  is  to  bear  and  bear  and  bear  con- 
tinually, as  he  did.  He  saith,  '*  If  a  man  smite  thee  on  the  right  cheek, 
turn  to  him  the  other  also."  Fighting  sheep  are  strange  animals,  and 
fighting  Christians  are  self-evident  contradictions.  They  have  forsaken 
the  Master's  way  :  they  have  gone  off  from  the  platform  whereon  he 
standeth  whenever  it  comes  to  the  carnal  weapon.  It  is  ours  still  to- 
sabmit,  and  to  be  the  anvil  which  bears  the  blows,  but  outlasts  all  the 
hammers.  After  all,  the  wolves  have  had  by  far  the  worst  of  it ;  the 
Bheep  are  multiplied  and  the  wolves  grow  fewer  and  fewer.  As  a  matter 
of  fact  the  sheep  have  lived  in  this  country  to  see  the  last  of  the  wolves, 
and  they  will  in  other  lands.  The  wild  dogs  of  Australia  are  very  fierce 
against  the  sh^,  but  the  sheep  will  surely  in  the  end  live,  and  the  wild 
log  will  die.  Everywhere  it  is  so.  They  are  weak  in  themselves,  and 
yet  they  conquer  the  strong.  "  Ah,"  you  say,  "  it  is  the  shepherd  who 
^ves  them  this  victory."  Precisely  so,  and  that  is  where  our  strength 
also  lieth,  even  in  "  that  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep."  Though  called  to- 
bow  down  as  the  street  that  men  may  go  over  us,  by  this  endurance  we 
donquer :  in  suffering  we  are  invincible,  and  ever  still  in  this  sigp.  wa 


476  METItOPOLITAK  TABERNACLE  FULPIT. 

oonqaer — the  cross  of  self-denial  and  self-sacrifice  leads  the  way.  "  I  tad 
yon  forth  aa  sheep  in  the  midst  of  wolres,"  not  rendering  railing  for  lad- 
ing, but  contrariwise  blessing;  being  provoked,  ye  return  gentleneas;  ud 
being  persecuted,  ye  pray  for  your  eneraioa.  "  Ah,"  saith  one,  "  I  do  not 
like  the  look  of  such  a  mode  of  warfare."  I  thought  yoo  would  fioli 
and  you  may  go  your  way.  As  notice  was  given  of  old  in  the  can^  of 
Israel  that  he  who  had  lately  mnnied  a  wife,  or  builded  a  honse,  or  na 
feinthearted,  might  go  home,  so  do  we  say, — To  your  beds,  ye  cowards! 
if  yo  cannot  undertake  this  for  your  Master,  he  docs  not  need  that  hii 
host  should  be  encumbered  by  jour  presence.  Our  Master  calls  out  men 
to  whom  he  giveth  grace,  that  thoy  may  be  strong  to  endure  even  aow 
the  end.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  giveth  patience  and  forbearance  to 
those  who  in  true  faith  seek  to  be  like  their  Buffering  Lord. 

Brethren,  it  is  Iryiiu;  work  for  the  sheep  to  go  forth  among  iroh^ 
but  it  has  to  be  done.  Picture  it  in  your  mind's  eye.  The  timid  eheoi 
trembles  at  it.  The  wolves  sire  rough,  nnmannerly,  coarse-minilci 
irritatii^,  annoying:  the  poor  sheep  does  not  fi,«l  at  home  in  saA 
company.  He  sees  every  now  and  then  the  white  teeth  glittering  wi^ 
the  wolf  a  month,  and  he  is  ill  at  ease.  The  sheep  wishes  he  were  bad: 
again  in  the  qnaet  fold  among  his  happy  bretliien ;  but  the  ^ej^iod 
knows  what  he  is  at,  and  it  is  the  duty  of  the  sheep  to  obey,  and  to  go 
into  the  midst  of  the  wolves  if  Jiis  Shepherd  bids  him. 

It  is  very  testing,  too,  because  if  a  man  bo  not  truly  one  of  God's 
own  he  will  not  obey  so  trying  a  command,  but  will  neglect  duty  and 
seek  comfort.     It  will  try  even  you  who  are  most  sincere.     Ton  think 

Sa  have  mnch  patience ;  get  among  the  wolves  and  see  how  much  a 
t.  Yon  fancy  you  conld  put  up  with  a  great  deal  of  annoyance ;  Ic* 
it  come  npon  you  and  you  will  see  how  it  torments  yon.  When  it  comes 
to  the  loss  of  your  good  name,  to  doivuright  lying  and  slander  agaiatt 
the  tenderest  part  of  your  character,  when  it  comes  to  bitter  anecs 
and  sarcasms,  and  words  which  eat  like  acid  into  the  deah  and  bom  }ikt 
coats  of  fire  flnng  into  the  bosom,  it  is  not  easy  then  to  maintain  tin 
love  which  hopeth  all  things,  endureth  all  things,  Grace  alone  make 
believers  press  forward  in  their  work  of  love,  seeking  with  gentleness 
to  win  sonls.  Oh  to  say, — though  the  wicked  man  curse  me,  and  foam 
at  the  mouth  with  r^e,  I  will  still  seek  his  good.  This  is  the  victorf 
of  faith,  bnt  the  battle  will  test  all  your  graces,  and  make  you  see  thit 
all  is  not  gold  which  glitters.  You  will  soon  see  whether  the  Spirit  of 
Ood  be  in  yon  or  not,  for  patient  love  is  not  natural,  but  supernatural, 
and  only  he  who  is  filled  with  the  supernatural  indwelling  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  will  be  able  to  live  as  a  sheep  among  wolves. 

If  you  can  accomplish  this  work  it  will  be  very  leaching  to  yoa.  Toa 
will  never  know  why  Christ  wept  over  Jerusalem  till  you  get  among  the 
Jerusalem  i tea,  and  painfiiliy  feol  the  cruel  wrouM  which  make  men 
weep  because  they  love.  You  cannot  understand  the  Savioor's  dnath 
throe,  the  bloody  sweat,  the  heaviness  even  unto  death,  and  the 
broken  heart,  unless  you  go  like  a  sheep  into  the  midst  of  Tolra; 
then  you  will  be  where  Jcaua  was,  and  yon  will  have  fellowahip  with 
him.  Practical  learning  is  beat — books  cannot  teach  us  fellowship  with 
onr  Lord,  bnt  when  we  get  to  do  Ohristly  work  then  we  come  to  moom 
tite  evil  which  he  lamented  and  prize  the  remedy  whidt  ke  SQpplied. 


SHEEP  AMONG  WOLVES.  477 

Thns  we  gather  knowledge,  and  are  ourselves  the  better  for  our  labour 
tor  others. 

III.  Let  us  new  look  at  God's  servants  sent  forth,  and  note  theib 
EMINENT  AUTHORITY,  "Behold  I  Send  youfon'thr  What  a  grand  ex- 
pression !  It  could  be  used  by  no  mere  man.  He  who  spake  thus  is 
divine.  Brothers  and  sisters,  our  commission  justifies  us  in  what  we 
do.  For  a  sheep  to  go  into  the  midst  of  wolves  of  its  own  accord  would 
be  a  foolish  courting  of  peril,  but  when  the  great  Shepherd  says,  "I  send 
you,"  it  would  be  a  grievous  fault  to  linger.  Who  is  this  who  says  "  I 
send  you "  ?  First,  it  is  "  The  Lord  of  the  harvest''  Did  you  notice 
while  we  were  reading  in  the  tenth  of  Luke,  how  the  two  verses  ran  on, 
**  Ptay  ye  therefore  the  Lord  of  the  harvest,  that  he  would  send  forth 
labourers  into  his  harvest.  Go  your  ways :  behold,  I  send  you."  The 
same  connection  is  here,  only  there  is  a  httle  parenthesis  ;  read  the  last 
verse  of  the  ninth  chapter  of  Matthew,  and  you  will  see  that  it  is  the 
same.  It  is  the  Lord  of  the  harvest  to  whom  we  pray,  who  actually  • 
3ends  us  forth  in  answer  to  our  own  prayers.  He  is  the  Master  of  aU 
warldsy  and  owner  of  the  souls  of  men.  He  puts  his  sickle  into  your 
liand  and  bids  you  go  forth  and  reap  the  golden  grain  which  is  the 
jeward  of  the  travail  of  his  soul.  "  I  send  you," — the  Lord  of  the  har- 
vest. Armed  with  this  authority,  who  shall  daunt  you  ?  Go  even  to  the 
gates  of  hell  if  Jesus  commands. 

Next,  "  I  send  you" — I  who  p'ize  you,  for  you  are  my  sheep,  I  who  love 
you,  for  I  bought  you  with  my  blood  ;  I,  who  would  not  expose  you  to 
a  needless  danger,  I  who  know  by  my  infinite  \sisdom  that  I  am  doing  a 
wise  and  a  kind  thing,  I  send  you,  you  my  sheep,  my  dear  sheep,  for 
whom  I  laid  down  my  life, — I  send  you  into  the  midst  of  wolves,  tnere- 
fiire  you  may  safely  go,  for  I  who  love  you  send  you  there.  Lord,  we  ask 
no  questions,  but  we  go  at  once. 

"1  send  you,"  that  is,  /  ivho  have  gone  on  the  same  eirand  myself. 
Did  he  not  come  into  the  world  like  a  sheep  in  the  midst  of  wolves  ? 
Bemember  with  what  patience  he  endurea,  and  with  what  glory  he 
iariumphed  ;  recollect  his  poverty  and  shame  and  death :  remember  how 
like  a  sheep  before  her  shearers  he  was  dumb,  like  a  lamb  that  is  taken 
to  the  slaughter  he  opened  not  his  mouth.  He  does  not  bid  you  go 
where  he  1ms  not  gone  himself.  It  is  dangerous,  but  then  he  has  passed 
through  the  danger,  endured  it,  and  triumphed  in  it. 

**  I  send  you  " — mark  that, — I  who  o-vercame  in  the  very  character  m 
ichich  I  send  you.  Have  you  not  read  in  the  book  of  the  Revelation, 
**  The  Lamb  shall  overcome  them ;"  and  again,  "  They  overcame  by  the 
blood  of  the  Lamb  :"  and  know  ye  not  that  heaven's  high  songs  go  u 
to  him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne  and  unto  the  Lamb  for  ever  an 
«ver  ?  The  Lamb  in  the  midst  of  wolves  has  conquered  the  wolves,  and 
is  Lord  of  all ;  and  so  he  in  effect  says,  "You  are  my  lambs  ;  therefore 
go  forth,  as  I  did ;  endure,  as  I  did ;  conquer,  as  I  did ;  and  you  shall  sit 
on  my  tiirone,  and  the  Lamb  shall  lead  you  to  the  living  fountains  of 
water." 

.rV.  We  close  by  noticing  their  permanent  instructions.  You 
liave  a  tough  task  before  you,  to  act  as  sheep  among  wolves.  Your 
Lord  leaves  you  not  without  guidance  in  the  form  of  plain  precept.  What 
are  you  to  do,  then  ?    Be  bold  as  lions  ?   Yes,  but  that  is  not  the  principal 


478  METROPOLITAN  TABEBNAOLB  PULPIT. 

thing.  Be  swift  as  eagles?  Tes,  by  all  meaiiB,  bnt  that  is  not  tiie 
main  requirement.  For  everyday  life,  for  the  wear  and  tear  of  tfaiB  great 
battle,  there  arc  two  grand  requisites ;  the  first  is  pmdence, — ^be  wise  as 
ficrpents;  and  the  next  thing  is  innocence, — ^be  harmless  as  doves. 

First,  hepnidsnt  and  wise  as  a  serpent.  Do  not  imitate  a  serpent  in 
any  other  respect  but  in  this  only.  Never  let  the  devil  enter  into  yoa 
as  he  did  into  the  serpent,  nor  become  grovelling  and  cunning.  Biit» 
still,  the  serpent  is  an  exceeding  wise  creature,  and  it  had  need  to  be, 
for  it  lives  in  a  world  where  it  is  hated  by  a  deadly  foe.  It  is  natural 
to  man  to  hate  the  whole  serpent  tribe.  The  very  first  thing  yon  do  if 
you  see  a  viper  is  to  look  for  a  stick  to  kill  it.  Everybody  is  tne  enemy 
of  serpents,  and  if  they  are  to  exist  at  all  they  must  be  very  wary :  in 
this  you  are  to  copy  them.  What  does  a  serpent  do  to  preserve  itself? 
What  is  it  which  proves  its  wisdom  ?  First,  it  gets  oxU  of  the  way  if 
man  as  much  as  it  can.  Our  Lord  meant  this,  for  immediately  after  our 
text  he  says,  "  But  beware  of  men."  It  is  well  to  get  out  of  the  aocieij 
of  ungodly  men,  and  let  them  see  that  their  habits  and  modes  of  con- 
versation are  not  ours.  Seek  to  benefit  them,  but  do  not  seek  their 
society.  Their  wolfish  pro[>ensities  are  most  seen  in  their  leisure  time, 
in  their  drinking  and  revelling,  therefore  keep  far  from  these.  Yon 
have  no  business  in  their  gay  parties,  their  frivolous  assemblies,  their 
drinking  bouts  and  places  of  lascivious  song.  Do  not  accept  their 
invitations  when  you  know  that  they  will  be  under  no  restraint ;  do  not 
linger  near  them  when  they  are  talking  lewdly  or  profimely ;  your 
moving  off  will  be  your  most  telling  protest.  Tou  must  be  with  them 
in  your  business — indeed,  you  are  sent  to  them,  but  while  you  are  wSk 
them  you  must  not  be  of  them  ;  and  you  should  discreetly  avoid  them 
when  you  know  that  you  can  do  no  good.  You  younger  ones  should 
get  out  of  the  way  of  old  blasphemers  and  scoffers  as  mnch  as  yon 
ever  can,  for  they  delight  to  wony  the  lambs.  Do  not  attempt  to  answer 
them,  but  keep  out  of  their  way. 

Do  not  court  quarrelling  and  controversy,  but  avoid  all  disputing 
upon  the  gospel.  Your  workmates  will  chaff  you,  and  no  doubt  you  wifi 
receive  many  opprobrious  epithets,  but  neither  provoke  this  treatmoit 
nor  resent  it  in  any  way.  Do  not  cast  pearls  before  swine,  and  do  not 
introduce  religion  at  unseasonable  times ;  hold  your  principles  very 
firmly,  but  when  you  know  a  man  will  only  blaspheme  if  he  hears  you 
name  the  name  of  Jesus,  do  not  give  him  the  occasion.  Stand  up  for 
Jesus  when  the  time  is  fit,  but  do  not  exercise  zeal  without  knowledge. 
AMien  a  man  is  half  drunk,  or  in  a  passion,  leave  him  to  himself^  imd 
thus  escape  many  a  brawl.  At  another  opportunity,  when  the  occasion 
is  more  favourable,  then  endeavour  to  instruct  and  persuade,  bnt  not 
when  failure  is  certain.  Be  very  prudent,  and  hold  your  peace  when 
silence  is  better  than  speech. 

How  else  docs  the  serpent  act  ?  //  glides  along  very  quietly.  It  can 
hiss,  but  it  does  not  very  oflen  do  so.  As  it  glides  along  it  neither 
sings,  nor  roars,  nor  barks  ;  it  does  not  court  observation ;  it  sl^ 
off  quietly,  gracefully,  swiftly,  and  without  noise.  Now,  do  nat  seek 
after  great  publicity.  There  may  be  times  when  it  may  be  wdl 
to  ring  the  great  bell.  If  you  can  get  multitudes  of  people  together 
to  hear  the  gospel  by  all  means  ring  the  bell  as  loudly  as  yon  can  i 


SHBBE  AMONG  WOLVES.  479 

^nt  as  far  as  yon  are  personally  concerned  do  not  make  a  fnss^  do  not 
blazon  abroad  what  yon  are  going  to  do  ;  do  not  call  upon  ererybody, 
sayingy  "  Come,  see  my  zeal  for  the  Lord  of  hosts."  Glide  along 
through  a  useM  life  as  quietly  as  the  serpent  which  does  what  he 
Bnds  to  do  and  says  nothing,  dreading  rather  than  courting  the  eye  of 
man.  UnobtrusiTe  earnestness,  quiet,  simple-minded  resolution  to 
ac^ieye  your  purpose,  whether  men  will  bear  or  whether  they  will 
fini)ear,  whether  tney  will  praise,  or  whether  they  will  gainsay, — this  is 
jovr  wisdom. 

^nien,  again,  the  serpent  is  famous  ior  finding  his  way  where  no  othei' 
cnature  could  entei* :  vm  Uttle  interstice,  any  tiny  opening,  will  be  suffi- 
cient for  his  purpose.  His  form  is  adapted  to  progress  amon^  obstacles. 
Tou  may  block  the  way  to  other  creatures,  but  he  will  wriggle  in  some- 
liow.  So  should  it  be  with  us.  If  we  cannot  get  at  men's  hearts  one 
iray  we  must  try  another.  If  you  cannot  induce  tibem  to  read  the  gospel, 
j^et  them  to  hear  it ;  if  you  cannot  induce  them  to  hear  a  sermon,  drop  a 
-vene  into  their  ears ;  if  a  tract  is  refused,  put  a  word  in  edgeways  for 

Car  Lord  and  Master.  There  is  a  way  into  everyone's  heart  if  you  know 
w  to  find  it :  be  wise  as  serpents  and  discover  it.    Though  it  seems 
TWcy  difficult  to  reach  some  minds,  yet  with  holy  perseverance  and  ser- 


^aoe  where  the  spear's  point  may  come  at  him ;  and  so  the  most  ungodly, 
widbed,  blaspheming,  profane  infidel  has  some  point  where  you  may  reach 
Mi  better  feelings  if  you  do  but  search  it  out.  Be  wise  as  serpents  in 
this  respect. 

Bat  tnen  you  are  to  add  to  this,  which  might  otherwise  degenerate  into 
canmng^  the  innocence  of  the  dove.  The  Greek  for  harmless  is  "  without 
horn."  The  dove  is  without  horn,  hoof,  fang,  or  other  means  of  defence. 
Xoa  are  to  have  positively  no  weapon:  like  the  dove,  you  are  to  be 
defenceless.  It  seems  a  singular  thing  to  set  doves  flying  at  eagles,  and 
lambs  at  war  with  wolves,  but  this  is  what  the  Loid  has  done.  This 
defenoekssness,  however,  which  looks  like  our  weakness,  is  our  real 
strengdL  Our  being  harmless  appears  to  predict  sure  destruction,  but 
it  18  to  be  the  means  of  certain  victory.  You  are  to  be  gentle,  and 
easOy  aitreated ;  you  are  not  to  fly  into  a  passion  because  you  are  con- 
tradicted, nor  to  be  angry  because  you  are  reviled.  You  are  to  endure 
contradiction  and  slander  with  tenderness  and  gentleness,  as  a  dove 
b^ffs  all  things.  You  are  not  to  be  driven  into  any  sin  by  opposi- 
tion. The  dove  is  pure ;  it  loveth  to  be  by  the  rivers  of  waters,  in  the 
ooiet  and  clean  places.  So  do  you  never  be  driven  to  sinful  word  or 
weAf  but  do  good  to  all  men,  and  glorify  God  in  all  things,  by  being  both 
gentle  and  pure  as  a  dove.  And  as  the  dove  is  very  simple  and  is  alto- 
gether artless  and  unworldly,  so  let  your  strength  and  your  wisdom  he 
m  your  artless  truthfulness  and  childlike  dependence  upon  God.  See  how 
Christ  explains  his  own  utterance  a  little  further  down.  "  Harmless  as 
doves,"  men  he  adds,  "  But  when  they  dehver  you  up,  take  no  thought 
how  or  what  ye  shaU  speak."  Be  like  a  dove,  confident  because  fear- 
Ins,  gentle,  artless,  simple,  and  restful.  Do  no  ill,  and  fear  none. 
Ton  Christian  people,  if  you  are  going  to  defend  the  gospel,  need  not 


480  TUKTROPOLITAN  TABERNAOLB  PULPTP. 

study  oratory,  or  become  expert  in  pleadings  such  as  are  used  at 
law.  Tell  the  truth  and  bafQe  the  devil  Truth  is  the  most  powerfhl 
weapon  and  the  most  subtle  policy.  I  belieye  that  even  in  affiurs  of 
state  truth  is  wisdom.  No  diplomatic  agent  would  so  confound  intrigoen 
as  a  man  who  should  tell  the  truth.  They  would  conclude  that  wluut  he 
said  was  a  lie,  because  they  are  accustomed  to  regard  everything  as 
having  another  meaning.  An  ambassador  was  formerly  said  to  be  a 
gentleman  who  is  sent  abroad  to  lie  for  the  good  of  his  countty; 
but  I  hope  it  is  not  so  now.  If  straightforward  truth  should  ever 
become  the  policy  of  any  country  it  would  be  invincible  in  coundl : 
if  in  politics  a  man  were  to  throw  away  all  arts  and  tricks,  and  adhero 
only  to  principle,  he  must  gain  respect.  The  gr^test  art  in  all  theworid 
is  to  fling  all  art  away,  and  the  grandest  policy  is  to  have  no  poliqr,  hot 
honest  dealing.  The  bravest  thing  that  can  ever  be  done,  ana  the  most 
noble,  is  to  be  artless  and  harmless  as  a  dove.  There,  then,  is  the  policy 
of  your  warfare, — ^be  prudent,  but  be  innocent  and  simple-minded.  Oh, 
the  power  of  truthfulness !  Do  not  believe  that  men  are  strong  in  pro- 
portion as  they  are  artful.  By  no  manner  of  means.  Do  not  believe 
that  they  are  strong  in  proportion  as  they  can  bend  a  fist.  No,  the 
power  of  a  Christian  must  lie  in  his  holy  heart,  and  in  his  earnest  Urngjand, 
and  in  his  look  of  love.  By  this  he  shall  vanquish,  but  by  nothing  cte. 
The  conclusion  of  my  sermon  is  this.  Does  it  come  home  to  yon, 
brothers  and  sisters  ?  Do  you  hear  the  Lord  sending  you  out  to  work? 
Then,  I  entreat  you,  go  forth.  Suppose  I  make  that  one  sentence  my 
last  word, — go  forth.  You  may  have  heard  of  the  Scotch  o£Boer  who 
had  his  men  drawn  up  for  the  battle,  and  felt  bound  to  make  them  a 
speech,  and  so  he  pointed  to  the  enemy,  and  said,  "  There  they  are,  lads ; 
if  you  don't  kill  them,  they  will  kill  you."  My  word  is  the  same: 
there  are  the  enemies  of  all  righteousness,  the  enemies  of  Ghrist,  the 
enemies  of  the  good  of  men^  the  enemies  of  progress  :  if  you  do  not 
overthrow  them  by  publishing  iiie  gospel  to  all  according  to  your  ability, 
they  will  overthrow  you.  Which  is  it  to  be  ?  By  the  grace  of  the 
Eternal  and  the  ommpotence  of  him  who  bled  for  us,  we  will  conquer 
even  by  his  cross  after  his  own  fashion.  Only  let  his  Holy  Spirit  rest 
upon  us.    Amen. 


Portion  op  Scripture  Read  before  Sermon — Luke  x.  1 — 2^ 


Hymns  from  "  Our  Own  Hymn  Book  "— 44D,  679,  671. 


^«ti[0plttan  ^^ttmtk  fttlpit. 


BRAVE  WAITING. 


t  h 


Delivered  on  Lord's-Day  Morning,  August  26tii,  1877.  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NBWINGTON. 


*^  Wait  on  tho  Lord  :  be  of  good  courage,  and  he  shall  strengthen  thine  heart : 
wait^  I  say,  on  the  Lord." — Psalm  xxvii.  14. 

The  Christian's  life  is  no  chilcVs  play.  All  who  have  gone  on  pilgrimage 
to  the  celestial  city  have  found  a  rough  road,  sloughs  of  despond  and  hills 
of  difficulty,  giants  to  fight  and  tempters  to  shun.  Hence  there  are  two 
perils  to  which  Christians  ai-e  exposed;  the  one  is  that  under  heavy 
pressure  they  should  start  away  from  the  path  which  they  ought  to 
pursue, — the  other  is  lest  they  should  grow  tearful  of  failure,  and  so  be- 
come faint-hearted  in  their  holy  coui-se.  Both  these  dangers  had 
evidently  occurred  to  David,  and  in  the  text  he  is  led  by  the  Holy  Spirit 
to  speak  about  them.  "Do  not,"  he  seems  to  say,  "do  not  think  that 
you  are  mistaken  in  keeping  to  the  way  of  faith  ;  do  not  turn  aside  to 
crooked  policy,  do  not  begin  to  trust  in  an  arm  of  flesh,  but  wait  upon 
the  Lord ;'  and,  as  if  this  were  a  duty  in  which  we  are  doubly  apt  to  tail, 
he  repeats  the  exhortation,  and  makes  it  more  emphatic  the  second  time, 
**  Wait,  I  say,  on  the  Lord.'*  Hold  on  with  your  faith  in  God,  persevere 
in  walking  according  to  his  will ;  let  nothing  seduce  you  from  your  in- 
tegrity,— let  it  never  be  said  of  yon,  "  Ye  did  run  well,  what  did  hinder 
you  that  you  did  not  obey  the  truth  ?"  And  lest  we  should  be  faint  in 
our  minds,  which  was  the  second  danger,  the  psalmist  says,  "  Be  of  good 
courage,  and  he  shall  strengthen  thine  heart."  There  is  really  nothing  to 
be  depressed  about,  there  is  no  real  danger,  you  are  safe  while  God  lives,  and 
while  Christ  pleads,  and  while  the  Spirit  of  God  dwells  in  you ;  therefore  be 
not  dismayed,  nor  even  dream  of  fear.  Be  not  timorous  and  unbeheving, 
but  play  the  man ;  "  Wait  on  the  Lord :  be  of  good  courage,  and  he  shtul 
strengthen'  thine  heart."  The  object  of  our  discourse  this  morning  will 
be  the  encouragement  of  those  who  feel  in  any  degree  whatever  dispirited 
and  depressed  on  account  of  the  hard  places  of  the  way,  or  the  opposition 
of  the  world.  May  the  Divine  Spirit,  whose  pecuhar  office  it  is  to  be  the 
Conrforter  of  his  people,  now  give  the  oil  of  joy  to  all  who  mourn,  and 
courage  to  all  who  tremble. 
No.  1,371. 


464  KETROPOUTAK  TABBRHACLB  PULPIT. 

work  if  with  your  whole  heart  you  wait  upon  the  Lord.  Wcdo  ill  if 
■ffc  stand  iJly  S''^'"?  "P  '"^  heaven  expecting  his  comiiiir,  and  makiit:; 
it  a  pretence  for  doing  little  or  nothing  to  win  souls :  our  ivisest  course 
is,  ns  men  that  expect  their  Lord,  to  stand  with  oor  loini  f^irt,  and  oor 
lamps  trimmed.  You  know  what  the  Orientals  meant  by  having  their 
loins  girt,  they  gathered  up  their  loose  flowing  gnriui.nts  when  ticj 
meant  work,  even  03  a  hardworking  man  among  us  fcil.cs  off  his  coat 
and  works  in  his  shirt-sleeves.  Stand  like  workmen  si ili  your  gleem 
up — tliat  is  the  English  of  it,  ready  for  any  work  whiiJi  yiiur  Maettf 
niiiy  appoint.  You  put  on  the  hveiy  of  the  Lord  Jesu-i  jTare  ago  whoi 
you  were  baptized  into  his  name ;  take  care  to  keep  it  .'■p  .itloss,  for  it  ie 
known  to  bu  connected  with  a  sinless  prince.  Never  liy  disobedtenet 
make  tlie  livery  to  be  a  lie,  for  if  you  be  not  his  Eer\un(9  wherdoB 
should  yon  wear  tiie  Sfarb  of  hia  household  ?  Beloved,  '■  be  that  waitetb 
npou  his  master  slidl  he  honoured."  Let  us  not  f^  in  waiting  upon 
ours. 

Sometimes  the  servant  will  have  to  wait  in  absolute  inactL::in,  and  tliii 
is  not  always  to  the  taste  of  energetic  minds,  I  supfL-'  .■  that  walkini; 
round  JericJio  bis  days  and  douig  nothing  must  havo  iiecn  very  dis- 
tasteful to  the  men  of  war  who  wanted  to  be  coming  l.i  blows.  TIict 
might  have  said,  "  Why  should  we  and  all  the  multit.nJe  march  ronna 
the  wails  and  do  nothing  ?  The  men  of  war  chafed  in  their  harness,  anJ 
longed  to  be  at  the  foe.  It  is  said  that  WeIIingto;i  kept  back  tht 
Guards  at  Waterloo  till  &T  into  the  fight,  and  it  must,  I  should  think, 
have  needed  much  courage  on  their  part  to  remain  cahr  .^!^d  quiet  wliilu 
cannon  were  roaring,  and  the  battle  ra^ng,  and  the  Eh.itg  flying  about 
them.  They  must  not  atir  tiU  the  conmiaader-in-ohief  t;ives  tlie  order, 
"  Up,  Guards,  and  at  them ! "  then  will  they  clear  the  fi'-Ad  and  uticrh 
annihilate  the  foe.  They  were  ns  much  Ecr^-ing  their  country  by  lyinj: 
still  till  the  time  came  as  they  were  by  dashing  forward  \\hcn  at  last  the 
word  was  given.  Wait  then  upon  your  Lord  in  all  aorta  of  service  oorf 
patience,  tor  this  is  what  he  would  have  yon  to  do. 

Another  form  of  tiiia  waiting  may  be  compared  to  a  travcUcr  trailing 
the  directiona  of  hit  guide,  or  a  mariner  waiting  npon  the  pilot  who 
takes  chai^  of  his  ship.  We  are  to  w'ait  upon  God  for  direction  in  thv 
entire  voyage  of  life ;  ne  ia  at  the  helm,  and  his  hand  is  to  stoer  our 
course,  1  am  fearful  that  some  Christians  very  greaty  fail  in  w^Hue 
upon  the  Lord  for  guidance,  yet  the  types  and  examples  of  the  Old 
TSjstament  very  strongly  enforce  this  duty.  I  will  give  you  one  type  aad 
one  exaiiiplc.  Tlie  tjpe  shall  be  larael  in  the  wilderness.  'Diere  was  a 
Btniight  way  to  Canaan,  and  I  suppose  it  would  not  ocCTpy  many  daja  Uj 
go  fi'om  Goshen  to  Jerusalem.  Tney  must  not,  however,  take  that  way. 
Dot  follow  their  leader.  When  they  Lad  wandered  even  for  a  year  in  tin: 
nildcrncKS,  they  might  soon  have  reached  the  land,  for  ia  fact  they  werf 
near  IIa  borders;  but  no,  tliey  must  go  where  the  famous  pillar,  whiuli 
indicated  the  presence  of  God,  should  conduct  them.  If  it  remained 
■^"oBnry  for  a  year  the  tents  must  not  remove ;  if  it  was  np  early  in 
murnirig,  nsrain,  and  a^iiin,  and  again,  for  a  whole  SucceEsim  of 
7  mai'cliini;  days,  Israel  must  not  dare  to  rest.  Under  the  shade  of 
pillar  III'  cloMil  iijuft.  ilny  abide  by  day,  and  its  light  must  be  thek 
"by  night.     E\cryuliuic  they  Mere  to  wait  for  the  hearenlj mgai. 


BRAVE  WAITING.  485 

nd  never  choose  their  own  path.  Do  you  watch  the  cloud,  my  brethren? 
)o  you  wait  upon  the  Lord  for  guidance  ?  Do  you  continually  say,  "  I 
ray  thee  show  me  thy  way  ?  "  Do  you  conmiit  your  own  way  unto  the 
iord  ?  If  not,  how  little  you  liave  learned  the  true  position  and  pri- 
ilege  of  the  people  of  God.  The  example  I  take  from  David's  own  life. 
f  you  have  noticed  the  fourteenth  chapter  of  the  First  Book  of  Chroni- 
les,  you  will  read  that  David,  being  threatened  by  the  Philistines,  enquired 
if  the  Lord,  saying,  "  Shall  I  go  up  against  them  ?  "  and  he  had  for  an 
nswcr,  "  Go  up,  for  I  will  deliver  them  into  thine  hands."  Encouraged 
)j  the  oracle  he  went  forth  to  the  attack,  and  carried  all  before  him  like 
he  breaking  forth  of  a  flood.  The  Philistines  rallied  again  and  spread 
hemselves  abroad  in  the  valley,  and  surely  Da\id  might  have  felt  quite 
afe  in  again  falling  upon  them,  Wliat  further  directions  could  he  need  ? 
Vould  not  the  former  oracle  avail  now  that  the  same  circumstances 
rere  occurring  ?  But  no,  the  man  of  God  did  not  feel  safe  until  he 
lad  laid  the  new  case  before  the  Lord,  and  it  is  recorded  **  therefore 
)avid  enquired  again  of  God."  This  time  the  response  was  very 
lifferent ;  possibly  to  his  own  surprise  David  received  orders  not  to  go  up 
Iter  the  I^iilistines,  but  to  turn  away  from  them,  and  come  upon  them 
rver  against  the  mulberry  trees.  When  he  should  hear  a  sound  of 
he  going  in  the  tops  of  the  mulberry  trees  he  was  to  bestir  himself, 
rat  not  just  tlien.  He  followed  the  new '  directions  and  again  smote 
he  host  of  the  Philistines.  Brother,  wait  on  the  Lord  often.  Though 
rou  were  wise  in  the  last  intricate  business,  you  may  be  a  fool  over 
he  next  simple  matter ;  in  fact,  it  is  over  the  simple  matters  that  we 
nake  our  great  blunders  in  Ufe,  even  as  Israel  did  with  the  Gibeonites ; 
¥hen  they  came  with  old  shoes  and  clouted,  and  bread  that  was  mouldy, 
lalf  an  eye  might  have  suflBiced  to  see  through  their  trick,  but  Israel 
icted  hastily,  ate  bread  with  them,  made  a  treaty  with  them,  and  inquired 
lot  at  the  hand  of  the  Lord.  Not  so  David,  he  was  never  slow  to  seek 
livine  guidance.  I  admire  that  which  comes  out  incidentally  about  him 
n  the  saying  of  Ahimelech,  the  priest  at  Nob.  When  Saul  accused  him 
)f  having  enquired  of  the  Lord  for  David,  Aliimelech  replied,  "  Did  I  then 
begin  to  enquire  of  God  for  him  ?  "  as  much  b&  to  say,  "  He  is  an  old 
BrM^uenter  of  the  Lord's  courts,  he  has  enquii*ed  of  God  many  and  many 
i  tune  ere  this.  To  accuse  me  of  inquiring  of  the  Lord  for  him,  as 
tJiongh  I  was  abetting  rebellion,  is  unjust,  for  I  only  did  for  David  what 
[  had  often  done  before."  Hence  it  was  that  David  behaved  himself 
jrisely  in  a  perfect  way,  because  he  followed  not  his  own  judgment  buA 
rated  on  tne  Lord.  There  was  an  occasion  when  he  marched  against 
ITabal  in  the  heat  of  his  WTath,  when  he  went  in  his  own  spirit,  and  not 
mder  heavenly  influences,  and  had  it  not  been  that  the  Lord  sent  a  wise 
iroman  to  cross  his  path,  he  had  shed  blood  that  day  and  it  would  have 
yeen  a  grief  of  mind  to  him  all  his  hfe.  Oh  that  we  did  more  sincerely 
wait  upon  the  Lord  in  the  sense  of  seeking  instruction  as  to  our  path  in 
ife,  then  would  he  fulfil  his  promise  unto  us,  "  Thine  ears  shall  hear 
k  voice  behind  thee,  saying,  Tnis  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it." 

I  have  not  yet  exhausted  the  word  "  wait " ;  for  we  ought  to  wait  upon 
3od  as  a  child  waits  upon  its  parent.  Our  children  can  seldom  be  ac- 
nised  of  having  small  expectations  with  reference  to  us.  They  have 
ieskes  and  wants  almost  countless,  and  they  always  expect  their  parents 


486  MBTHOPOLITAM  TAEEIIKACLE  rULPlT. 

readily  to  supply  them,  in  which  reckoning  I  have  no  doubt  they  have 
bcea  strongly  confirmed  by  their  piiat  experience.  No  little  duld 
thinks  of  pro\iding  for  himself,  nor  di«s  he  dream  of  directing  lua  own 
(louree  in  life.  You  cannot  get  that  li  tile  head  to  be  thoughtful  about  to- 
morrow's  fix)d;  you  cannot  force  that  little  heart  to  be  annious  aboDt 
the  next  anit  of  clothes.  To  all  snggestud  doubt  the  little  Ups  rejily,  "  Mj 
father  knows  what  I  have  need  o^  ami  I  am  eure  he  will  give  it  to 
me,"  Such  is  the  happy,  restful  life  of  a  losing  child,  and  this  is  as  it 
stiould  be  witli  us.  It  is  my  Father's  business  to  provido  for  me:  hi) 
iiauie  is  Jehovah-Jirch.  It  is  my  Father's  busineas  to  preserve  me  [  he 
has  given  his  angels  chai^  to  kctp  mc  in  all  my  ways.  It  id  mj 
Father's  biisiufss  to  mark  out  the  future  for  me ;  I  cannot  see  even  into 
to-iuorrow,  my  eyes  are  dim,  bnt  my  Father  knows  all  abont  what  sbaD 
be,  nud  he  will  be  ready  for  whatever  shall  happen,  therefore  would  I 
wait  npon  him,  raise  no  questions,  and  expect  great  meru'ies.  Blessed  aie 
they  w-ho  are  thus  found  waiting. 

And  then,  perhaps,  I  may  add  one  tiling  more,  ivc  should  wait  upon  the 
Lord  as  a  courlier  u-ails  vpon  hia  prince.  He  that  is  at  court,  and  seeks 
to  rise  to  favour,  waits  upon  his  prince  with  the  desire  to  be  employed  in 
the  royal  service,  that  he  may  prove  his  loyal  zeal.  He  counts  auj 
sort  of  employment  at  court  to  be  a  great  honour;  he  tells  bis  Mends. 
and  they  accept  it  as  a  subject  of  cxnigratulation,  that  he  hus  obtained 
such-and-such  work  to  do  for  the  kinj.  He  delighta  to  increase  the 
honour  and  dignity  of  his  prince's  court,  for  he  shares  in  it  himaJf. 
Brethren,  how  carefully  should  you  and  I  endeavour  to  show  forth  tiie 
honour  of  our  Lord  Jesus  among  the  sons  of  men,  for  has  he  not  made 
ufl  kings  and  priests,  and  should  we  not  exalt  his  glorious  name  for  ever? 
We  should  seek  to  make  our  Lord  Jesus  famous  to  the  world's  cud:  our 
daily  conversation,  and  our  current  character,  our  private  and  public 
behai'iour  should  all  tend  to  increase  our  Master's  honour  among  the  bom 
of  men.  "VTe  must  be  ready  for  anything  fur  Jesus,  and  everything  for 
Jeeus,  cfluntini^  thnt  we  ourselves  are  honoimid  by  disg^iicc  if  wa  bring 
honour  to  him.  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  was  wise  in  his  gcnenitioli  whco  bu 
took  off  hia  richly  embroidered  cloak  to  spread  it  over  a  miry  place,  that 
Queen  EUzabcth's  feet  might  not  be  damped  ;  the  courtier  knew  how  ui 
Bmooth  hia  own  road  by  caring  for  his  queen;  and  thus,  with  uuaclM 
motives,  out  of  pure  reverence  ibr  our  Lord,  let  us  be  willing  to  be  made 
as  the  street  t«  be  walked  over  if  Jesus  can  thereby  bo  honoured.  Ijet 
ns  lay  ont  for  our  Lord  the  best  that  we  have,  even  to  the  character  which 
is  dear  to  us  as  life  itaelf,  if  by  ao  dtiing  we  may  bring  glory  to  the  holy 
and  blessed  name  of  our  Redeemer.  Henceforth  it  is  ours  to  live  mitu 
the  Lord  and  die  unto  the  Lord,  We  will  wait  on  the  Lord  and  keep 
his  way,  and  may  hia  grace  enable  ub  daily  to  say,  "  I  ivait  fur  the  LorJ, 

Lmy  soul  doth  wait,  and  in  his  word  do  I  hope." 
U,  Hccundly,  coobage  la  to  be  maintained.  "  Be  of  good 
conrage."  Our  good  Ijjrd  and  Master  ought  not  to  be  followed  bj 
ixiwards.  Be  of  good  courage,  you  that  wait  on  the  Lord.  Have  tht 
fwrags  of  hojm  coucetiiin^  the  faith  which  you  are  exercising  upon 
Olirist,  You  are  just  beginning,  some  of  you,  to  believe  in  Jesus,  and 
you  arc  afraid  that  he  will  cast  you  away,  or  fearful  that  you  will  not  ob- 
tain full  salvation  from  sin.    I  have  already  told  you  to  continue  to 


BRAVE  WAITING,  487 

knock  at  mercy's  door ;  do  so,  but  be  of  good  courage,  for  that  door  will 
certainly  open  to  you.  He  that  asketh  receiveth,  *he  that  seeketh  findeth, 
and  to  him  that  laiocketh  it  shall  be  opened.  Take  heart,  poor  fainting 
one,  the  Lord  hath  a  tender  eye  towaros  mourning  souls ;  he  is  very  good 
to  those  who  seek  him.  Though  thou  be  Uke  poor  trembling  Mercy 
who  fainted  outside  the  door  of  the  interpreter's  house,  yet  thy  Lord 
thinketh  upon  thee,  and  he  says,  "  Come  in  thou  blessed  of  the  Lord, 
wherefore  standest  thou  without  ?"  He  will  not  suflPer  those  to  perish  who 
humbly  wait  on  him ;  the  light  of  his  countenance  shall  yet  be  thine. 
Be  of  good  courage,  0  seeker  ! 

Be,  also,  of  good  courage  you  who  have  newly  found  him.  Be  bold  io 
avow  your  faith.  Remember  that  the  trust  which  you  repose  in  Jesus 
18  a  justifiable  one,  and  can  be  vindicated  against  all  comers,  therefore 
do  not  hide  it.  I  hate  to  see  a  Christian  act  hke  a  rat  behind  a 
wainscot,  who  comes  peeping  out  when  everything  is  still  to  see  if  any- 
body is  about,  so  that  he  may  get  his  crumbs,  but  if  there  is  half  a 
sound  of  a  foot  anywhere  away  he  shps  and  hides  himself  in  his  hole. 
Nay,  if  you  belong  to  Christ,  avow  it.  What  is  there  to  be  ashamed  of? 
To  believe  the  truth — shall  a  man  blush  at  that?  To  follow  infinite 
purity  and  holiness  incarnate  in  Christ  Jesus,  is  there  anything  to  be 
ashamed  of  in  that  ?  Nay,  rather  let  us  wear  our  colours  before  the 
fece  of  all  men,  and  lift  high  our  banner  in  all  companies,  for  it  is 
rather  a  cause  for  glorying  than  for  blushing  that  we  are  on  the  Lord's 
side.  It  is  the  best  thing  about  us,  it  is  the  greatest  mercy  we  have 
ever  received,  whv  should  we  conceal  it  ?  Wait  on  the  Lord,  be  of  good 
courage,  and  confess  your  faith  before  men,  you  that  have  newly  been 
brou^t  to  Jesus. 

Then  go  further.  Be  of  good  courage  in  endeavouring  to  spread  the 
faith  which  you  have  receivSl.  Wlien  you  go  to  speak  to  others  about 
the  great  salvation,  be  not  afraid.  If  it  be  new  work  to  you,  I  dare  say 
you  wiU  tremble,  but  still  do  it,  and  ask  the  Lord  to  give  you  greater 
confidence  in  proclaiming  the  tidings  of  his  grace.  If  you  speak  with 
infidels,  be  of  good  courage,  though  for  a  w^hile  you  cannot  lead  them  to 
believe.  If  you  speak  to  those  who  are  incensed  against  the  truth,  be 
of  good  courage :  what  harm  can  they  do  to  you  that  shall  be  equal  to 
the  harm  you  will  suffer  by  beooming  a  coward  ?  Be  of  good  courage, 
and  undertake  great  things  for  Christ ;  do  not  expect  a  defeat,  but  dare 
and  venture  all  for  hira.  Do  something  more  than  you  are  able  to 
do,  expecting  strength  beyond  your  own  to  be  afforded  you,  and  it  will 
certainly  come.  "  Wait  on  the  Lord :  be  of  good  courage,  and  he  shall 
strengthen  thine  heart."  Be  of  good  courage,  then,  in  the  way  of  prac- 
tical energy  for  the  advancement  of  your  Redeemer's  cause. 

Be  of  good  courage  talien  y  on  pray  for  others.  Wait  on  the  Lord  about 
your  children,  and  be  of  good  courage  and  expect  to  sec  them  saved. 
Wait  on  the  Lord  about  your  servants,  about  your  brothers  and  sisters, 
about  your  neighbours ;  be  of  good  courage  about  them,  believe  that 
Ck)d  hears  prayer  and  that  your  intercessions  will  bless  those  for  whom 
you  pray.  Intercession  has  great  influence  with  God ;  it  is  no  vain 
thing  to  wait  upon  the  Lord  for  the  souls  of  others.  Thousands  now 
in  heaven  owe  their  conversion  to  the  prayers  of  the  saints,  and  there- 
fore ple&d  with  great  courage.    Never  cease  to  pray,  and  when  you  pray. 


■188  METBOPOLnAa  TABEKSAOLE  PCLFTT. 

pray  not  as  thongh  you  spoke  to  a  tyrant  rdnct&nt  to  hear,  or  to  a  for- 
jiotM  God,  who  would  mil  to  answer,  but  wait  on  him  with  qoiet  coa- 
liilouco  and  you  ahall  not  come  empty  away. 

Ito  of  good  courage,  too,  also  m  making  self-iecrifices  for  the  can^  ot 
Chiist.  If  yoD  lose  a  Bituation  because  yoa  ure  honest,  be  of  good 
iwumgc,  j-ou  will  be  no  loser  in  the  long  ran.  Are  there  some  who 
despise  toh  because  von  are  a  Christian?  Be  uf  good  courage,  their 
opinion  is  of  very  Uttle  worth,  and  in  the  judgment  of  angela  aud  good 
uion  you  stand  very  high.  Are  you  like  Moses  when  he  refused  the 
tmisu'res  of  Kgjpt,  with  all  the  honours  of  tte  court  ?  Be  of  ji<)od 
c^^u^»^^^  the  Lorn  will  give  yon,  even  in  this  lifc,  a  recompense,  aiiii  in 
tho  Wk'rid  to  come  hfc  everlasting.  If  it  should  come  to  losing  all 
Villi  \\xn  for  Josub'  Boke,  be  of  good  conrage,  for  he  that  losetb  his  lift 
Vv-r  Christ's  sake  shall  hnd  it,  and  he  that  hecomecJi  poor  for  the  caose  trf 
Christ  shall  be  rich  eternally.    Be  of  good  courage ! 

Once  again,  if  you  are  called  to  endure  great  afflirlion,  sharp  pain, 
fii-qiient  sickness;  if  business  goes  amiss,  U  riches  take  to  themselya 

Eand  fly  away,  if  friends  forsake  yoa  and  foes  surround  yon,  be  of 
courage,  for  the  God  lipon  whom  yon  wait  will  not  forsake  yoa. 
'  let  it  be  said  that  a  soldier  of  the  croBS  iliuched  in  tbcd^c^ 
battle.  Bear  your  Father's  will,  glad  to  have  Kiich  a  Father's  will  to 
bear.  If  grace  cannot  enable  us  to  endure  all  that  nature  can  heap 
upon  us,  what  is  grace  worth  ?  Now  is  the  time,  my  dear  brother,  in 
the  floods  of  adversity,  to  see  whether  yonr  &ith  is  real  faith  or  not. 
Mere  sunshine  fiiith  is  not  worth  the  having;  wc  waut  that  which  will 
outlive  the  most  terrible  stonn  that  ever  beclouded  the  heavens.  Wait 
on  the  Lord,  be  of  good  courage,  though  heart  and  flesh  shonld  fail  you. 
Though  eyes  grow  dim  and  the  light  of  day  should  be  quite  shut  oni, 
thongn  hiring  should  fail  and  the  daughters  of  music  be  silent,  thoosb 
all  ttK  doors  of  the  senses  should  be  closed,  though  the  bearera  of  vxe 
body  should'  totter  and  the  kecpcra  of  the  house  should  tremble,  y<«. 
though  death  itself  should  remove  this  feeble  body,  yet  there  is  no  cause 
for  fear,  but  we  may  exclaim  with  dying  Jacob,  "  I  have  waibed  for  thj 
salvation,  0  Lord."  Let  not  your  hearts  be  troubled,  wait  on  the  Lon^ 
and  courage  siiall  revive. 

III.  Our  third  point  is,  that  waiting  upos  God  sdstaiks  cotTBACR. 
Beloved,  if  cvor  yon  begin  to  grow  weary  in  the  go'id  ways  of  God,  wait 
upon  him  with  double  earnestness.  You  have  heai-d  of  the  famous  gianl 
wnom  Hercules  could  not  kill,  because  the  earUi  was  his  mother,  and 
erery  time  Ht-rcules  dashed  him  down  he  obtainedfi-csh  strength  by  touch- 
ing his  parent,  and  rose  again  to  the  fight.  We  arc  of  like  nature,  and 
every  time  we  are  driven  to  onr  God,  though  we  be  dashed  upon  him  by 
defeat,  we  grow  strong  again,  and  our  adversary's  att^^mpt  is  foiled.  Otu 
foe  will  never  destroy  us  unless  he  can  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God 
which  is  in  Christ  Jeeus  our  Lord,  and  that  is  imjioEaible.  Waiting 
upon  God  K  the  way  to  renew  our  strength  until  we  moont  up  with 
eagle's  winga  and  leave  the  world  below. 

In  the  first  place,  our  heart  is  strengthened  by  waiting  npon  Go4 
because  wa  IJmt  receivt  a  myaterions  strength  throagh  the  incoming  of  ^ 
"itemal  Spirit  into  onr  souk.  No  man  can  explain  this,  but  many  of  ni 
~  iw  what  it  L&    Wo  do  not  know  how  the  Holy  Ghost  op(xat«^  hot 


BKAVE  WAITING.  489 

we  are  conscious  that  after  a  season  of  prayer  we  are  often  much  re- 
freshed, and  feel  as  if  we  had  been  ground  young  again.  We  have  gone 
in  before  the  Lord  haggard  and  worn,  desponding,  and  (shame  upon  us, 
we  must  add)  ready  to  give  up,  turn  tail,  and  run  away.  We  have  not 
long  drawn  near  to  God  ^fore  we  have  felt  our  spirit  revive.  Though  our 
approach  was  mostly  a  groan,  yet  we  did  wait  upon  the  Lord,  and  the 
Eternal  strength  came  into  us.  How  wonderfully  do  the  secret  springs 
of  omnipotence  break  into  the  feeble  soul  and  fill  it  with  might  in  the 
inner  man.  Through  the  sacred  anointing  of  the  Holy  Ghost  we  have 
been  made  to  shout  for  joy,  we  have  been  so  glad  in  the  Lord  that  we 
oould  not  contain  our  joy.  He  that  made  us  has  put  his  hand  a  second 
time  to  the  work,  and  restored  unto  us  the  joy  of  his  salvation,  filled 
our  emptiness,  removed  our  weakness,  and  triumphed  in  us  gloriously. 
The  poor  harp  which  had  been  long  played  upon  could  not  at  length 
yield  music  to  its  owner's  hand;  in  vain  the  bardic  fingers  roamed 
over  the  strings,  the  more  heavily  they  were  struck  the  more  dis- 
cordant were  the  sounds.  The  harp  was  taken  from  the  hall  and 
laid  aside  in  a  quiet  chamber,  and  there  its  Maker  came  to  deal  with 
it.  He  knew  its  frame,  and  understood  the  art  of  tuning  it.  He  put 
new  strings  in  here  and  there,  and  set  the  rest  aright,  and  the  next 
time  the  harper  laid  his  fingers  among  the  strings  pure  music  floated 
forth,  and  flooded  the  palace  with  melody.  Where  discord  had  peopled 
the  air  with  evil  sprites  all  was  changed,  and  it  seemed  as  though  angels 
leaped  forth  with  silver  wings  from  every  chord.  Ay,  go  thou  to  thy 
God,  poor  soul,  when  thou  art  out  of  order ;  wait  on  the  Lord,  and  he 
will  strengthen  thine  heart  by  his  mysterious  power. 

Besides  this,  waiting  upon  the  Lord  has  an  effect  upon  the  mind, 
which  in  the  natural  course  of  tilings  tends  to  strengthen  our  courage ; 
for  waiting  upon  God  makes  irwi  grow  small,  and  dwarfe  the  world  and 
all  its  affairs,  till  we  see  their  real  httleness.  Poor  Da\1d  sat  fretting 
about  the  ungodly,  as  he  saw  them  prospering  in  their  way,  while  as  for 
himself  he  was  plagued  all  the  day  and  chastened  every  morning.  Fool- 
ishly and  ignorantly  he  complained  of  the  Lord,  and  questioned  his 
justice,  "  until,"  saith  he,  "  I  went  into  the  sanctuary  of  God,  then 
understood  I  their  end."  Set  your  great  troubles  before  the  infinite  God, 
and  they  will  dwarf  into  such  little  things  that  you  will  never  notice 
them  again.  He  taketh  up  the  isles  as  a  very  little  thing,  and  the 
nations  are  as  a  drop  in  a  bucket ;  and  this  great  God  will  teach  you  to 
look  at  earthly  things  in  the  same  hght  as  he  does,  till,  though  the  whole 
world  should  be  against  you,  you  would  smile  at  its  rage,  and  though  all 
the  devils  in  hell  should  rise  against  you  you  would  defy  their  fury.  Our 
worst  ills  are  utterly  despised  when  we  learn  to  measure  them  by  the  line 
of  the  Eternal :  thus  you  see  that  waiting  upon  God  strengthens  the  heart 
by  lessening  the  causes  of  fear. 

And  then  it  mflames  the  heart  with  love.  Nothing  can  give  us  greater 
courage  than  a  sincere  affection  for  our  Lord  and  his  work.  Courage  is 
sure  to  abound  where  love  is  fervent.  Look  among  the  mild  and  gentle 
creatures  of  the  brute  creation  and  see  how  bold  they  are  when  once 
they  become  mothers  and  have  to  defend  their  offspring.  A  hen  will 
fight  for  her  chicks,  though  at  another  time  she  is  one  of  the  most 
timid  of  birds.    Mr.  White,  in  his  book  on  Selbome,  tells  of  a  raven  that 


490  .METROPOLITjUr  TABEItHAOLE  PDWTE. 

was  hatching  her  young  in  a  tree.  The  woodman  b^an  to  M  it,  bat 
there  she  Bat ;'  the  blows  of  the  axe  shook  the  tree,  but  she  nevw 
moved,  and  when  it  fell  sho  was  atill  upon  her  neat.  Love  wiU  make  Ui( 
most  timid  creature  atroDR;  and,  oh,  beloved,  if  yon  love  Christ  you  wilt 
dety  all  fear,  and  count  all  hazards  undergone  for  him  to  be  your  joy. 
In  this  seuBe,  also,  perfect  love  caateth  out  fear,  it  hopeth  all  thingt, 
ondureth  all  things,  and  continnca  still  to  wait  npon  the  Lord.  T<i  ban 
more  love  we  must  more  continually  wait  upon  the  Lord,  and  this  wil! 
mifflitily  renew  the  strength  of  our  heart. 

Again,  waiting  upon  the  Lord  Srewft  ptace  within  the  -eonl,  and  when 
a  man  is  perfectly  at  rest  within  he  cares  httle  for  trials  or  foea.  It  ii 
conscience  that  doth  make  cowards  of  us  all,  but  let  conscience  be 
pacified  through  the  atoning  blood  of  Jesus,  and  yon  can  smile  wba 
others  spit  their  venora  at  you,  and  hke  your  blessed  Master  you  can  best 
their  taunta  without  reply,  for  there  is  a  heavenly  cahn  within:  A  heart 
unsettled  towards  God  is  sure  to  be  alraid  of  men,  but  when  the  sold 
waits  on  the  Lord  in  glad  serenity  it  stoops  not  to  fear. 

And,  beloved,  this  waiting  upon  the  Lord  produces  the  effect  of  in- 
creasing  onr  coorage,  because  it  givss  tis  often  a  itgkt  <^  ifu  eitrMl 
reward,  and  if  a  man  getteth  a  glimpse  of  the  crown  of  glory,  lie  cnnm 
of  thorns  will  no  more  prick  his  temples.  He  that  seeth  what  he  sbiB 
be  in  tiie  day  when  Christ  shall  be  revealed,  moumcth  not  bocsuae  of 
what  he  now  is  while  ho  beareth  the  reproach  of  Christ,  In  feet,  wait- 
ing upon  God  mokes  us  see  that  we  are  in  fellowship  with  Christ  ind 
causes  us  to  know  that  the  load  wo  carry  is  a  cross  of  whicli  be  almjt 
bears  the  heaviest  end  :  it  lets  us  se«  that  his  heart  is  full  of  eeaa&'n 
sympathy  towards  us,  and  so  it  makes  us  suSer  without  complaining.  U 
it  not  sweet  to  Bing —  — ' 

"  If  on  my  face  for  tLy  dear  name. 
Shame  and  reproach  BliaJl  be, 
I'll  hail  reproach  and  welcome  shame 
For  Uiou'lt  remember  me  "? 

Thna  waiting  upon  the  Lord  pours  power  into  the  central  reservoir  tf 
our  strength, 

IV,  Now  I  finish  with  the  fourth  point,  which  is,  ESFEniEiCE 
PKOVES  THiB.  I  want  you  to  keep  your  Bibles  open  at  the  twenty- 
seventh  Psalm,  and  sec  now  my  text  is  a  summary  of  tha  entire  psalm. 
All  the  rest  of  the  verse  may  be  compared  Ui  the  ligurea  of  an  account, 
an<I  tiiis  closing  verse  is  the  cnstitig  up  of  the  whole — waiting  on  the 
Lord  is  the  path  of  wisdom. 

For,  first,  in  the  opening  verses  David  had  been  surroonded  by . 
enemies:  he  waited  upon  the  Lord  and  the  Lord  made  them  stomw 
and  tall.  Afterwards,  when  they  fought  against  him  he  told  his  sorroir 
to  his  God,  and  God  lifted  his  hc^  high  above  his  encmiea  roand 
about  him,  till  he  could  sing  in  the  sanctuary  songs  of  exultant  joy 
unto  the  Lord,  My  brethren,  do  the  same  when  yon  are  assailed.  Too 
are  not  in  a  country  subject  to  actual  war,  but  yon  have  many  adveim- 
riea,  spiritual  and  otherwise.  You  have  the  prinoe  of  darknem  armed 
against  you,  and  a  host  of  spiritual  wickednesses  in  high^acea.  Wait 
^       on  the  Lord  in  this  conflict,  and  he  will  give  you  victory.    Tour  strength 


BRAVE  WAITING.  491 

is  lo  sit  still.  Fret  not  yourself.  Quietly  refer  all  the  contest  to  him 
who  returns  from  Edom  with  dyed  garments  from  Bozrah,  travelling  in 
the  greatness  of  his  strength,  because  his  foes  and  yours  are  trodden 
beneath  his  feet.  Wait  on  the  Lord.  Get  you  away  to  the  shadow  of 
his  payilion,  hide  in  the  secret  of  his  tabernacle.  Climb  you  up  upon 
the  rock,  and  keep  you  there,  and  all  the  adversaries  of  your  soul  shall  be 
broken  in  pieces. 

Next,  read  the  seventh  and  eighth  verses,  and  you  will  see  David 
occupied  in  prayer,  and  there,  too,  he  succeeded  and  prospered  abund- 
antij,  because  in  prayer  he  waited  on  the  Lord.  The  very  essence  of 
prayer  is  to  get  the  ear  of  God.  You  might  as  well  whistle  as  pray 
unless  you  pray  in  spirit  and  in  truth ;  and  the  very  spirit  and  truth 
of  prayer  mu^  lie  in  communion  with  God  himself.  If  you  have  been 
praying  after  a  feshion,  and  you  have  not  gained  that  which  you  prayed 
for,  surely  you  have  not  yet  reached  the  ear  of  God.  Get  into  the  secret 
place,  go  close  to  your  Lord,  and  wait  upon  him  in  very  deed ;  then 
shall  you  have  great  courage  in  prayer,  renew  your  strength,  and  come 
back  victorious. 

Next,  David  had  been  enveloped  in  darkness.  He  was  afraid  that  God 
was  about  to  forsake  him.  He  had  lost  the  light  of  Jehovah's  countenance. 
I  think  I  hear  one  say,  "  What  am  I  to  do  in  such  a  case  ?  "  Wait  on 
tikd  Lord.  If  he  does  not  smile,  wait  on  him  still.  The  smile  of  his  face 
is  dehghtftd,  but  if  you  lose  it,  hide  under  the  shadow  of  his  \%ing. 
When  he  does  not  smile  he  still  loves.  "  Though  he  slay  me,"  said  Job, 
**  yet  will  I  trust  in  him."  Even  when  he  seems  an  angry  God  yet  throw 
yourself  at  his  feet.  Let  nothing  drive  you  away  from  him.  If  he  hfts 
his  sword  to  smite,  the  further  off,  the  heavier  the  blow  will  fall.  Eun 
close  in,  dear  child,  if  your  Father  is  going  to  whip  you ;  run  close  in,  he 
cannot  strike  hard  then.  Draw  very  near  to  your  Father's  heart ;  lay 
hold  on  his  strength,  and  put  him  against  himself  as  it  were,  pleading  his 
love  against  his  wrath  and  saying,  "  Thou  hast  sworn  that  thou  wilt  not 
be  wroth  with  me,  nor  rebuke  me  :  therefore  deal  tenderly  with  thy 
child."  If  any  walk  in  darkness  and  see  no  light,  let  liim  still  trust  and 
wait  on  the  Lord. 

In  the  next  sense  we  find  David  forsaken  by  everybody.  Father  and 
mother  had  left  him,  still  he  waits  upon  the  Lord  and  the  Lord  takes 
him  up.  Now  that  you  are  quite  alone,  dear  widow,  and  the  husband  of 
your  love  is  gone,  wait  on  the  Lord.  Now  that  the  children  one  by  one 
have  been  carried  to  the  silent  tomb,  wait  on  the  Lord,  and  he  will  be 
better- to  you  than  ten  sons.  Now,  young  man,  you  are  drifting  about 
London  without  a  helper,  wait  on  the  Lord,  and  he  will  direct  your  way. 
Yea,  all  of  you  who,  either  from  persecution  or  bereavement,  have  come 
to  be  solitary,  remember  the  Lord  setteth  the  sohtary  in  families,  and 
maketh  them  families  like  a  flock.     Wait  upon  him  and  all  will  be  well. 

Next  we  find  David  in  a  difficult  road,  so  that  he  prays,  "  Teach  me 
thy  way,  O  Lord,  and  lead  me  in  a  plain  path,  because  of  mine  enemies ; " 
but  waiting  on  the  Lord  exactly  met  the  case.  Whenever  you  cannot 
tell  what  to  do,  wait  upon  the  Lord.  When  the  road  turns  this  way 
and  that,  and  you  know  not  which  is  right,  kneel  down  and  pray  ;  you 
will  know  which  way  to  go  when  you  rise  from  your  knees,  or  if  you  do 
not,  kneel  down  again.    The  directing  post  is  oest  seen  when  we  are  in 


493  UETROPOLITAN  TABXBNAOLB  PTIIfir. 

prayer.  Tlie  oracle  ahaU  answer  to  you  out  of  the  excellent  majesty 
when  you  have  resigned  yoor  will  and  believingly  eocght  direction  h•^m 
the  Moat  High. 

To  conclude,  we  find  next  that  David  had  been  slandered  by  his 
enemies — "  Fulse  witnesses  are  risen  up  agMnat  me,  aiid  such  as  breatljc 
out  cruelty."  What  tlicn  ?  Wait  upon  the  Lord  still.  "  Oh.  bat  1 
must  answer  thorn."  Yes,  and  then  you  wiU  make  had  worse ;  yi'iit 
slanderers  will  for^e  another  lie  when  you  have  anaweruil  the  liret.  "  Oii. 
but,"  says  one,  "  f  could  Iwar  such  a  charge  if  it  were  true."  All.  hui 
then  you  ought  not  to  bear  it,  the  truth  of  an  iH  report  ougjit  to  grii/- 
you,  but  if  it  is  not  tnie,  never  mind,  let  it  alone.     '■  Oh,  Lut  i!  . 

sny ,"   SVhatdo  they  say? — Let  them  say  it.   No  hurt  will  com-; 

it.  Wait  you  upon  the  "Lorf.  They  rail  at  yon,  taJie  care  not  l>  1 1. 
iignin.  Make  no  reply  to  howling  wolves.  ■\Vhen  d'.i^'S  baik  hi,  lii-u 
Iwirk,  for  it  is  their  nature;  they  will  leave  off  when  iliey  liav..-  il.-m: 
and  so  with  all  our  adversaries,  they  wilt  confiite  thcjuSi/hLS  if  w-  wii 
hut  let  them  alone.  Our  strength  is  to  wait  npon-lln.'  Lnni,  tdl  luw 
about  it  and  leave  it  with  him.  (io  t«  law?  Yes,  anil  |^,t  a  salt  whidi  1 
will  not  wear  out  in  a  hurry.  Go  to  law,  and  bring  iiju.m  yourself  no 
end  of  troubles.  In  all  other  things  except  sland.n-  it'  yon  waul  ■  | 
thing  done  do  it  yourseltj  bnt  there,  if  you  want  to  bt  i\u]l  defended.  1« 
others  defend  you.  Dirt  will  rub  off  when  it  ia  dry;  be  bravely  patwir 
Wait  you  upon  the  Lord,  commit  everything  to  him,  and  he  wiU  bcc  }■■. 
through,  even  to  the  triumphant  end.  All  that  you  on  do  in  your  uf^ 
iustifieation  will  only  make  more  mischief.  Hands  oB",  tliero,  and  l&nt: 
it  with  the  Most  High.  i 

So  we  close  by  repenting  our  blessed  text :  "  Walt  on  Ihe  Lord  :  bs  of   . 
good  courage,  and  he  shall  strengthen  thine  heart :  wait,  I  say,  on  ' 
Loid."    May  he  keep  yon  waiting  courageously  for  Christ's  sake. 


Portion  of  Scriiture  read  before  Seruon — Psalm  iniL 


HvMKS  FROM  "Our  Own  B.yus  Book" — 27,  C7G,  086. 


A   NOBLE  PRESENT  FOR  A   NEWLY  MARRIED    COUPLt 

Clolli,  251.;  Best  Morocco,  £2  2*. 

THE  INTERPRETER;  or.  Scripture  for  FamUy  Worship. 

Being  Selected  Passnges  of  die  Word  of  Ood  for  every  M.^niing  and  Eveoinj 

throughout  the  Year,  accompanied  by  a  Kunning  Comnii'Tit  and  ^iitable 

Hymns.      Annolatc<l  and  arranged  by  C.  II.  SFLItGEON. 

P^mtOHE  tt  Al^basteii,  4,  Pal«Tnott«r  BuildingB;  and  lU  DookscJIcnk 


^fii[0poltott  i^afremadf  fttljit 


GOD  OUE  PORTIOK  AND  HIS  WORD  OUR  TREASURE. 


t 


tmtf\{ 

Delivered  on   Lord's-Day  MoRNma,   Sept.  2nd,  1877,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON,    • 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 


"Thou  art  my  portion,  0  Lord:  I  have  said  that  I  would  keep  thy  words.*' — 
Pflalm  cxix.  57. 

Observe  the  close  connection  between  privilege  and  duty.  "  Thou  art 
my  portion,  0  Lord  ;'*  this  is  an  unspeakable  happiness.  "  I  have  said 
that  I  would  keep  thy  words" — this  is  the  fitting  return  for  such  a 
blessing.  Every  mercy  given  us  of  the  Lord  brings  with  it  a  claim  which 
we  ought  in  gratitude  to  recognise. 

Notice  very  carefully  the  order  in  which  the  privilege  and  the  duty 
are  arranged.  The  blessing  of  grace  is  first  and  the  fruit  of  gratitude 
next.  The  grace  given  is  the  root  and  the  resolve  is  the  fruit  growing  out 
of  it.  It  is  not,  "I  have  said  that  I  would  keep  thy  words,  that 
thou  mayest  be  my  portion,  0  Lord."  No ;  first  the  portion  is 
enjoyed  by  faith,  and  then  tlie  resolution  is  formed.     "  Thou  art  my 

fortion,  0  Lord,  I  have  thee  already  in  present  possession  ;  therefore  wiU 
,  as  thou  shalt  help  me,  keep  thy  words."  Duty  in  order  to  privilege  is 
the  law  :  God  be  thanked  that  we  are  not  under  it,  for  we  should  never 
obtain  a  single  blessing  thereby  :  but  privilege  in  order  to  obedience  is 
the  gospel :  God  grant  that  we  may  know  the  fulness  of  its  power  to 
sanctify  our  souls.  The  Lord  must  first"  be  your  portion  l)eforc  you  will 
be  able  to  keep  his  words.  How  can  a  man  keep  what  he  has  not  .re- 
ceived ?  Without  God  to  be  our  portion,  where  will  the  strength  come 
from  to  aocompUsh  so  difficult  a  duty  as  the  keeping  of  God's  words  ? 
See  to  it,  all  of  you,  that  you  do  not  reverse  the  order.  Do  not,  as  the 
old  proverb  says,  put  the  cart  before  the  horse.  Let  all  things  como  in 
their  due  course  and  keep  due  rank,  for  mischief  comes  of  the  wrong 
placing  of  things.  First  receive  from  di\4ne  grace  until  tliou  canst 
say,  "Thou  art  my  portion,  0  Lord,"  and  then  give  forth  by  daily 
service  what  God  has  worked  within,  aud  say,  "  I  will  keep  thy  words." 

Each  possession  not  only  involves  service,  but  appropriate  service,  even 
as  each  plant  bears  it  own  flower.     The  general  principle  which  calls  for 
service  bears  a  particular  application,  for  each  particular  gospel  benefit  is 
No.  1,372. 


494  METROPOLITAN  TABEBNACLB  PULPIT. 

linked  with  some  special  gospel  service.  The  iinspeaknbk  IxionoFliftrint! 
God  for  our  portion  has  here  faBtenod  to  it  the  peculiar  excellence ')( 
keeping  God's  words ;  and  one  object  of  the  present  Bcmion  vnH  be  tu 
show  that  this  is  by  no  means  an  accidentii!  arrangement,  but  that  a  true 
connection  really  exists,  and  ou^ht  to  be  earnestly  acknowledged  byeTerv 
child  of  God.  Because  yon  can  say  "Thou  art  my  portion,  0  Lord,'' 
you  ought  also  to  add,  "  I  will  keep  tliy  words." 

First,  this  morning,  let  us  consider  /Ac  inflntU  po»»tif«ion — "Thou  an 
my  portion,  0  Lord  ;"  and  secondly,  the  appropriate  revoltttion — "I  hiivt 
said  tiiat  I  would  keep  thy  words." 

L  Begin,  then,  where  tlie  text  begins,  with  the  rayisiTK  POhsrbsiok. 
"  Thoa  art  my  portion,  0  Lord."  Here  firat  notice  a  dear  distUitlim. 
The  psalmist  declares  the  Lord  to  be  his  portion  in  distinction  to  tit 
prtion  of  the  ungodly.  "  These  ott«u  have  their  portion  in  this  life ;  thej 
increafle  in  riehes."  The  seventy-third  psabu  gi^-es  a  fuU  and  particulK 
description  of  the  ungodly  in  tiieir  prime  and  glory,  when  "  their  ej9 
stand  out  with  fatness,"  and  '■  they  hara  more  thai  heiut  can  niM." 
But  David  did  not  desire  to  share  their  ahort-lived  joys,  he  sought  hij 
happiness  elsewhere,  looking  to  tlie  Creator  rather  than  the  creatiiTM, 
and  to  eternity  rather  than  time, — 

"  WLnt  siniici's  value  1  resign  ; 
Ixjrd,  'tis  enough  if  thuu  art  mine." 

"  Thou  art  my  portion,  0  Lord."  It  is  better  to  have  our  good  God  thaa 
all  the  goods  in  tlie  world :  it  is  better  to  have  God  for  onr  all  than  to 
have  all  and  be  without  him.  He  who  possesses  God  lives  at  the  well- 
head and  drinks  from  the  cvcr-tiowing  fountain  ;  he  who  oirns  the 
choicest  worldly  good,  apart  from  him,  only  drinks  of  the  foul  leavings 
which  remain  in  the  comers  of  earth's  broken  cisterns.  Wlmt  is  the 
whole  universe  compared  with  him  who  made  it?  What  are  the  base 
pleasures  of  sin  compared  with  the  fulness  of  joy  whicli  ever  dwells  at 
God's  right  hand  ? 

David  says  "Thon  art  my  portion,"  evidently  in  opposition  to  the 
future  portion  of  the  wicked.  "  Ujion  the  wicked  God  shall  rain  snares, 
fire  and  brimstone,  and  an  hoi'ribJe  tempest :  this  sliall  be  the  portion  of 
their  cup."  There  is  to  come  to  the  ungodly  a  dreadful  awakening  IronL 
their  dream  of  security  ;  they  phatl  start  up  in  another  world  to  find  that 
their  wealth  has  vanished,  that  their  joya  have  for  ever  fled,  and  that  tlicjr 
must  for  ever  suffer  the  loss  of  all  things,  and  remain  utterly  undone. 
For  them  a  woe  unutterable  is  prepared,  and  WTath  like  a  fierce  hiuricaiK 
shall  beat  upon  their  guilty  houIs  without  end :  but  "  Thou  art  my  por- 
tion, 0  Lord  ";  for  me  there  shall  be  no  deadly  snares  in  life,  nor  hombie 
tempest  in  death.  So  long  as  I  abide  in  this  body.  I  shall  be  fed  npcrn 
thy  goodness,  and  when  I  shall  fall  asleep,  and  shall  afterwards  a^vakentn 
the  likeness  of  my  Redeemer,  I  shall  find  myself  in  eternal  poaseaaion  of 
my  God,  who  is  mine  all  in  all. 

Nor  does  the  distinction  end  here.  The  [psalmist  David  here  makess 
distinction  between  his  true  position  and  the  earthly  comlbrta  with  whidi 
the  Lord  had  endowed  him.  He  was  a  king,  and  had  many  possesaioDa, 
but  none  of  these  were  his  portion.  Some  of  the  Lord's  people  are  not 
the  Bubjecta  of  distressing  poverty  ;  on  the  contraiy,  they  are  blest  Hilh 


GOD  OUB  PORTION  AiJD  HIS  WOED  OUR  TREASURE.  495 

many  comforts  for  which  they  ought  to  praise  God  day  and  night,  but 
none  of  these  things  are  their  peculiar  heritage  as  joint  heirs  with  Jesus. 
BeloTed,  whatever  we  have  in  tliis  world  we  are  bound  to  turn  oiu*  eye  to 
God  and  say,  "  This  is  not  my  portion ;  thou  art  ray  portion,  0  Lord." 
The  comforts  of  this  life  are  like  the  youth's  spending  allowance,  they  are 
not  the  estate  to  which  he  is  the  heir,  upon  which  he  \nll  enter  when 
the  fidness  of  time  shall  come.  Present  mercies  are  a  sip  by  the 
way,  a  morsel  eaten  to  stay  the  stomach ;  our  full  meal  will  be  eaten  at 
the  great  supper  of  the  Lamb.  We  are  like  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob, 
in  Canaan,  dwelling  in  tents,  as  strangers  and  foreigners.  The  flocks 
and  herds  which  graze  around  our  camp  are  greatly  valued,  but  still  we 
look  not  on  those  things  as  our  portion  :  Canaan  itself  is  the  lot  of  our 
covenanted  inheritance,  and  nothing  else  wiQ  content  us.  We  look  for  a 
city  which  hath  foundations  whose  bmlder  and  maker  is  Grod.  Oh, 
beloved,  take  care  of  ever  making  common  things  your  portion.  If 
riches  increase^  set  not  your  heart  upon  them ;  if  God  indulges  you  with 
a  healthful  and  happy  family,  if  you  yourself  are  in  a  good  state 
of  bodily  health,  if  your  business  prospers,  and  if  the  Lord  pours  you  out 
temporal  mercies  from  a  full  horn,  yet  never  make  these  things  your 
idols :  live  above  them,  and  say,  "  I  cannot  be  put  off  with  these :  thou 
art  my  portion,  0  God." 

I  think  David  carried  this  distinction  right  away  into  eternity.  Some 
think  of  heaven  as  this  and  some  as  that.  Fellowship  with  beliovers  of 
all  ages  is  the  great  desire  of  some ;  others  long  for  paradise  as  a  place 
of  increased  knowledge,  to  know  even  as  they  are  known ;  and  a  third 
rejoice  in  it  chiefly  as  a  haven  of  rest.  There  are  are  grounds  for 
each  of  these  forms  of  desire,  but  concerning  heaven  this  is  the  believer's 
chief  thought,  that  he  ^\Tll  be  with  God,  and  that  God  will  be  for  ever 
his  joy  and  bhss.  No  sins  will  hide  the  brightness  of  Jehovah's  glory 
from  our  eyes,  no  doubts  disturb  the  deep  calm  of  our  enjoyment  of 
Jehovah's  love  when  once  we  fully  enter  upon  our  portion.  Wc  si  mil  be 
for  ever  with  the  Lord,  and  nothing  more  or  better  can  be  imagined. 
God  is  our  heaven.  Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but  thee  ?  Draw,  then, 
ever  a  clear  distinction  between  the  things  that  are  seen,  which  are  not 
your  portion,  and  the  things  which  are  not  seen,  which  are  your  true 
heritage;  between  the  temporal  and  fleeting  joys  which  amuse  us  by 
the  w^ay,  and  the  abiding  and  eternal  felicity  which  will  satisfy  us  at  the 
end.  Allow  nothing  to  rival  the  chief  good  in  your  judgment  or  your 
affections,  but  cry  evermore, "  0  God,  thou  art  my  God ;  early  ^sill  I  seek 
thee." 

Notice  next  tlie  positive  claim — "  Thou  art  my  portion,  0  Lord."  He 
deliberately  declares  this  in  the  silence  of  his  soul.  As  for  the  ungodly, 
they  are  boasting  of  their  prosperity,  they  arc  girding  themselves  with  pride 
as  with  a  golden  chain ;  but  I  dare  not  seek  my  joy  in  such  matters,  "Thou 
art  my  portion,  0  Lord."  To  get  into  a  comer  quietly,  to  commune  with 
your  heart  and  be  still,  and  then  to  find  your  soul  revelUng  in  the  wealth 
which  she  finds  in  her  God — this  is  true  happiness.  Let  worldlings 
babble  on  as  they  may,  and  let  the  trumpet  of  fame  sound  out  its 
loudest  blasts  for  her  darlings,  we  will  not  envy  her  rich  men  or  her 
great  men  so  long  as  in  the  deep  of  our  spirit  we  can  feel  that  the 
Eternal  himself  has  declared,  "  I  will  be  their  God."     Ours  is  the  best 


496  HBTROPOUTAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

portion  by  &r.  Whether  here  we  have  little  or  much,  our  hereafter  is  our 
true  treasure,  for  then  shall  we  to  the  full  enjoy  our  6ocL  These  store- 
rooms and  bams,  buiks  and  iron  safes,  cannot  hold  our  portion ;  bdiold 
our  treasure  is  secured  where  neither  moth  nor  rust  doth  corrupt,  ncithct 
do  thieves  break  through  and  steal. 

It  is  worthy  of  observation  that  this  clear  claim  which  David  sets  np 
is  not  merely  felt  in  his  own  heart,  but  it  is  uttered  in  the  most  solemn 
place,  even  in  the  j^resence  of  God.  He  addresses  himself  to  the  all- 
seeing,  htait-searchmg  God,  and  cries,  **  Thou  art  my  portion,  0  Lord.** 
Though  I  stand  before  thee,  ^eat  God,  even  before  thee,  who  can  read 
me  through  and  through,  yet  dare  I  make  my  claim.  Thou  knowest  all 
things,  and  thou  knowest  that  I  do  choose  thee  to  be  mine  all  in  alL 
Though  I  ^asse  upon  thy  splendour,  which  bids  angels  veil  their  ftces 
because  of  its  excess  of  glory,  vet  I  call  that  splendour  mine.  However 
great  thou  art,  I  adore  with  trembling,  but  yet  my  faith  calls  &▼ 
greatness  mine.  Thou  art  my  portion ;  nothing  less  than  thino  own  seti^ 
0  infinitely  glorious,  omnipotent,  thrice-holy  Jehovah.  My  aonl  doth 
not  bound  her  humble  claim,  nor  rest  content  with  a  part  of  thee;  bat 
thoD^  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  thou  one  (}od,  thou  thyself  art  my 
portion.  Do  you  see  how  fully  assured  of  his  interest  in  divine  love 
a  man  must  be  if  he  dares  to  speak  thus  in  the  presence  of  the  infinite 
Majesty,  and  to  challenge  the  divine  judgment  upon  lus  claim  ? 

xon  see  he  speaks  in  the  present  tense.  There  are  a  great  mairr 
whose  religion  lies  in  ^^  shall:  be's,"  hopes  and  trusts,  but  I^yid's  fidth 
lay  in  the  present  tense.  ''  Thou  art  my  portion,  0  Lord.*'  Thcare  arc 
some  things  which  I  have  not  received  as  vet,  but  I  have  already  laid  hold 
upon  my  God.  Man v  things  I  press  forward  to  obtain,  for  I  have  wspiradonB 
wnich  as  yet  are  unmlfilled,  and  spiritual  ambitions  not  vet  satisfied,  bat 
thou  art  even  now  my  God,  despite  my  infirmities  ana  shortcomings. 
Yes,  even  to-day,  my  (Jod,  thou  art  mine.  At  this  hour  "  My  Beloired 
is  mine,  and  I  am  his."  I  know  whom  I  have  believed,  I  know  that  he 
has  given  himself  to  me  as  I  have  given  myself  to  him.  Beyond  a 
doubt,  thou  art  at  this  very  moment  my  portion,  0  Lord.  Tte  Lord 
teach  you,  brothers  and  sisters,  to  speak  in  the  same  confident  manner. 
If  true  believers,  you  have  a  right  so  to  speak,  because  yon  simplj 
declare  a  fact.  Do  not  be  satisfi^  to  leave  such  a  matter  in  question; 
aim  at  positive  certainty.  Pray  the  Lord  to  give  you  the  full  assurance 
of  faith  that  you  may  always  unwaveringly  say,  "  Thou  art  my  portion, 
0  Lord." 

Now  let  us  linger  for  a  few  moments  while  we  muse  upon  the  portim 
itself,  a  subject  which  it  might  require  many  an  hour  fiuly  to  consider* 
The  text  contains  an  intelligent  description  of  this  portion — "  Then  art 
my  portion,  0  Lord."  The  psalmist  at  once  mentions  the  very  heart 
and  centre  of  his  spiritual  wealth — "  Thou  art  my  portion,  0  LonL** 
What  a  boufidleas  portion.  Parochial  authorities  beat  the  bounds  of  the 
parish,  and  great  men  make  surveys  of  their  estates,  but  none  can  beat 
the  bounds  or  make  a  fiill  sun^ey  of  this  inheritance  of  tiie  saints.  A 
man  takes  stock  in  trade,  or  sits  down  to  balance  his  accounts ;  there  is 
no  taking  stock  here :  towards  the  infinite  God  there  are  no  adcnlations^ 
figures  are  lost,  and  even  imagination  swallowed  up.  Our  inheritanoe 
suq)asscs  that  of  all  the  men  of  the  world  put  together ;  yea»  and,  apart 


GOD  OUR  PORTION  AND  HIS  WORD   OUR  TREASURE.  497 

• 

from  "having  something  of  the  hke,  even  angels  could  not  vie  with  iis. 
Heaven  itself  is  not  so  vast  a  treasure  as  the  (Jod  of  heaven.  How- 
ought  we  to  prize  an  inheritance  which  knows  no  boundary.  Indeed, 
brethren,  we  require  something  boundless,  our  soul  pmes  for  the  infinite. 
I  appeal  to  those  of  you  who  have  been  favoured  in  divine  providence 
with  prosperity  beyond  what  you  expected.  Do  you  feel  that  it  fills  your 
aoul  ?  You  are  content  that  God  should  give  you  what  he  wills,  but  do 
you  find  satisfaction  in  earthly  property  ?  What  if  your  children  are  a 
comfort  to  you,  and  your  house  is  filled  with  all  manner  of  store,  and 
friendly  neighbours  speak  well  of  you,  yet  can  you  find  perfect  rest  in 
these  things?  Do  they  yield  you  inward  heart-filling  joy?  I  know 
they  cannot.  If  you  were  to  be  as  highly  favoured  as  Solomon  himself, 
who  beyond  all  men  enjoyed  this  present  world,  yet  would  you  have  to 
come  to  Solomon's  own  conclusion,  "Vanity  of  vanities,  all  is  vanity." 
For  a  regenerate  man  this  life  is  like  a  bird  within  a  shell  just  wakened 
into  life.  However  comfortable  the  shell  may  be  for  him  in  its  way  and 
after  its  fashion,  yet  as  life  becomes  vigorous  he  wants  more  space ;  he 
needs  wing  room,  he  wants  to  get  out  of  his  prison  and  roam  at  large. 
The  things  which  are  seen  are  a  prison  to  the  soul,  our  spirit  needs  more 
air,  more  space  in  which  to  breathe.  AVhen  a  man  can  truly  say,  "  My 
God,  thou  art  mine,"  he  has  touched  the  confines  of  the  infinite,  and  he 
has  reached  the  tiliima  thuls  of  his  spirit,  where  he  may  cast  anchor,  and 
no  more  tempt  the  troubled  sea  of  desire.  When  we  reach  God  our  soul 
is  at  peace,  but  not  till  then ;  for  then  the  immortal  soul  has  gained  the 
immortal  God,  and  eternal  destiny  is  sealed  with  happiness  by  eternal  love. 

And  while  this  inheritance  is  boundless,  how  abiding  it  is !  A  man 
who  has  the  Lord  for  his  portion  has  a  freehold  for  eternity.  His  lease 
will  never  run  out,  and  there  will  need  no  renewal  of  lives,  for  there  is 
one  life  on  which  our  tenure  hangs,  and  that  is  everlasting.  "  Because  I 
live,  ye  shall  live  also."  He  that  getteth  God  hath  an  entailed  estate. 
He  hath  in  him  a  friend  who  cannot  change,  who  cannot  fail,  who  cannot 
cease  to  be,  nor  cease  to  be  the  source  of  blessedness  to  those  who  possess 
him.  Of  this  portion  time  cannot  deprive  us,  nor  death  rob  us,  nor 
judgment  deprive  us,  nor  eternity  bereave  us.  "  This  God  is  our  God 
for  ever  and  ever."  Ah,  ye  worldlings,  all  your  goods  shall  wither  like 
Jonah's  gourd,  but  our  God  shall  be  our  shield  and  our  exceeding  great 
reward  world  without  end. 

As  the  Lord  is  an  abiding  portion,  so  is  he  an  appropriate  portion,  in 
every  way  suitable  to  content  the  soul.  Man  was  made  in  the  image  of 
God,  and  nothing  will  satisfy  man  but  God,  in  whose  image  he  was  made. 
Manna  was  fit  food  for  man,  and  God  himself  is  fit  sustenance  for  the 
man  of  God.  Only  in  the  Lord  can  the  mind  and  heart  find  that  which 
all  their  faculties  require  for  their  development  and  perfection.  When 
renewed  by  grace,  our  powers  are  adapted  to  receive  God,  and  to  rejoice 
in  him ;  and  hence  a  full  possession  of  God  is  the  craving  of  the  heart. 
In  God  there  is  food  for  memory,  which  looks  upon  the  past,  and  for 
hope,  which  gazes  into  the  future  :  for  judgment,  which  weighs,  and  for 
will,  which  decides ;  for  the  affections,  which  clasp,  and  for  the  imagination, 
which  creates.  There  is  no  power  of  humanity  which  is  properly  a  part 
of  God-made  man  which  does  not  find  its  due  sphere  and  place  in  God. 
How  well  my  portion  suits  me  I     Adam  was  not  more  at  home  in 


498  METROPOLITiH  TABEtUTACLB   PULMT. 

parndisG  than  I  am  in  my  God.     My  soul  by  grace  is  brought  fitto  a  ' 
place  of  Bweet  content,  and  delights  herself  in  the  abundance  of  peace. 

This  portion  is  to  the  fullest  degree  mtisfying.    Nothiog  else  will  ever 
end  the  awftil  hunger  of  the  soul  of  man,  which,  like  the  grave,  for  e»a 
yawns  for  more ;  but  the  infinite  God  fills  the  heart,  and  he  who  hu 
gotten  the  Lord  for  his  portion  hath  all  that  he  can  desire. 
"  All  my  capncioua  powers  can  wish 
In  thee  doih  richly  meet." 
Yon  may  sit  down  and  imagine  all  that  you  could  have  wished,  and  then 
if  yon  rightly  view  your  God,  you  will  see  that  he  snrpaffies  aD  ywn 
desires.    Never,  even  in  eternity,  will  you  be  able  to  coneeive  of  a  jcy 
beyond  your  God,  a  bliss  surpassing  himself. 

Next,  dear  brethren,  the  I-ord  is  an  elevalkig  portion.  A  HUB  il 
gradually  changed  into  the  image  of  that  which  he  loves.  He  who  hsft 
his  portion  in  this  world  gro^vs  worldly.  When  a  man  gives  himsdf  te 
any  pursuit  he  first  of  all  moulds  il,  and  then  it  moulds  him.  We  taj  i 
man  rides  a  hobby,  but  after  a  while  the  hobby  ridea  the  man.  ToniriD 
lind  it  so.  Now,  if  a  man  secketh  his  wcaltn  in  the  things  of  this  lil^ 
and  coveteth  gold,  he  mil  become  metallic,  hard,  and  unfeeling.  He  iilw 
lives  to  increase  his  land  soon  heojmes  of  the  earth  earthy.  To  punoe 
carnal  things  will  degrade  a  man,  cramp  his  mind,  and  hold  him  va  cap- 
tivity to  base  materialism.  He  that  loveth  to  hoard  that  he  may  graiift 
h is  CO vctousu ess  by  counting  over  his  stores,  what  a  wretched  creatnK 
he  becomes.  Better  by  fiir  to  be  a  poor  squirrel  who  in  due  time  enjojB  lie 
little  store  of  nuts  and  aconis  he  has  gathered  than  hoard  for  oar  heirs  "K- 
uill  laitgli  at  us  for  onr  pains.  The  worldhngts  little  better  than  the  ni- 
who  barrows  through  the  earth,  and  never  looks  npon  the  sun.  Eurr  . 
earth,  earth,  nothing  bat  earth  does  the  carnal  heart  care  for ;  ita  facnllJL; 
arc  all  pressed  downward,  and  fjrccd  to  become  adapted  for  its  grovelling 
sphere.  Nothing  is  more  dcbttsing  than  to  live  for  self;  and  the  more  ■ 
scliish  man  has  tiie  more  base-hearted  does  he  become :  bnt  if  our  por 
tion  Ijc  the  Lord  our  delight  in  him  raises  our  thonghta  and  pnrifies  our 
emotions.  Covetousness,  selfishness,  worldliness  all  i^anish  "a^cii  God  is 
all  in  all  to  us.  If  God  be  ours  we  seek  to  be  like  him;  we  bcoome 
followers  of  God  as  dear  children.  "He  that  hath  this  hope  in  himpnri- 
fietli  himself."  He  who  is  possessed  of  the  hght  is  filled  with  hght ;  lie 
who  has  God  is  filled  witli  God,  Tlic  Holy  Spirit  transforms  as  until  at 
last  he  makes  us  to  be  meet  to  dwell  m"th  him  for  ever. 

Only  one  more  thought  on  this  portion,  although  many  are  crowding 
upon  my  mind.  If  God  be  my  portion  then  my  portion  is  all  o/groc. 
for  H'l  one  can  merit  God.  The  idea  is  utterly  ridiciilons,  if  not  profiuiLv 
No  human  eseellence  could  merit  deity.  If,  then,  the  Lord  be  m" 
portion  let  my  song  be  always  of  that  rich,  free,  sovereign,  bonnd]i's^ 
grace  which  is  given  to  me  who  deserves  hell,  bnt  obtain  heaven. 

I  ^ant  to  call  your  attention  once  more  to  this  infinite  poe^eseion,  or 
rather  to  the  seasonable  vlleranre  of  David  concerning  it,  for  it  is  very 
noteworthy  that  this  holy  claim  has  generally  been  made  by  godly  men  at 
peculiar  times.  Did  yon  ever  notice  the  purallcl  passages  ?  "Tnily  Ihe 
Lord  is  his  people's  God  at  all  tiiui.-,^.  but  his  people  rejoice  most  in  ilia 
possession  of  him  when  they  have  most  trouble.  In  the  pnrtienlar 
instance  before  us  I  find  in  the  filly-first  verse,  "  The  proud  have  had  me 


GOD  OUR  PORTION  AND  HIS  WORD  OUR  TREASURE.  499 

greatly  in  derision :  yet  have  I  not  declined  from  thy  law,"  and  in  the 
sixty-first  verse — "  The  bands  of  the  wicked  have  robbed  me :  but  I  have 
not  forgotten  thy  law."  David  appears  to  have  been  between  two  fires — 
derided  by  the  proud  and  robbed  by  the  oppressor,  and  it  is  in  the  middle  of 
this  double  trouble  that  he  puts  in  his  claim,  "  Thou  art  my  portion,  0 
Lord."  Perhaps  the  robbers  helped  him  to  think  the  more  of  that  trea- 
sure which  no  thief  can  steal ;  perhaps  the  derision  of  the  proud  made 
him  remember  the  kindly  condescension  of  the  high  and  lofty  One  that 
inhabiteth  eternity,  who  deigned  to  be  his  portion.  Look  at  another 
instance,  where  the  same  language  is  used,  namely,  in  Psalm  xvi.  5, 
and  you  will  find  the  psalmist  declares,  "  The  Lord  is  the  portion  of  mine 
inheritance  and  of  my  cup :  thou  maintainest  my  lot.  Therefore  my 
heart  is  glad,  and  my  glory  rejoiceth :  my  flesh  also  shaU  rest  in  hope. 
For  thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul  in  hell ;  neither  wilt  thou  suffer  thine 
Holy  One  to  see  corruption."  So  far  as  this  language  is  that  of  David 
at  all,  you  see  that  he  claims  God  for  his  portion  in  the  prospect  of 
death  and  the  grave.  How  good  it  is  to  have  a  hving  hope  in  dying 
moments,  to  be  full  of  hght  when  peering  into  the  darkness  of  the 
grave.  When  death  is  taking  away  everything  else,  then  doth  the 
Christian  cHng  to  the  portion  which  can  never  be  touched  by  death's 
bony  finger.  Read  again  in  the  seventy-third  Psalm,  at  the  twenty- 
sixth  verse.  There  Asaph  claims  God  as  his  portion.  But  you  know  t^ 
psalm  is  all  about  the  trouble  of  mind  which  he  felt  whilst  he  fretted 
over  his  own  affliction  and  contrasted  it  with  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked. 
One  more  instance.  In  Lamentations  iii.  24,  Jeremiah  says  "  The  Lord 
is  my  portion,  saith  my  soul ;  therefore  will  I  hope  in  him.".  But  that  is 
said  in  connection  with  a  long  roll  of  sorrow's  concerning  w^hich  the 
prophet  had  said,  **0  that  my  head  were  waters,  and  mine  eyes  a 
fountain  of  tears."  Beloved,  learn  this  lesson — if  in  Scripture  you  find 
God  claimed  as  the  portion  of  his  saints  when  under  different  forms  of 
trial,  then  when  you  are  in  deep  affliction,  and  when  you  come  near  to 
die,  you  also  may  find  the  strength  of  your  heart,  and  the  sustenance  of 
your  courage  in  this  same  blessed  fact  that  the  Lord  is  your  portion. 

II.  Secondly,  let  us  consider  the  appropriate  resolution — "I 
have  said  that  I  would  keep  thy  words."  Here  notice  tlw  p-eface,  "  I  have 
said."  Why  did  he  not  put  it,  "  Thou  art  my  portion,  0  Lord  ;  I  w^ill 
keep  thy  words  "  ?  No,  he  wTites  "  I  have  said  it,"  w^hich  means  delibe- 
ration. He  had  thought  over  liis  happiness  in  having  such  a  portion. 
What  then  ?  His  thoughts  began  to  stir  within  him  and  to  de\isc  a  fit 
expression  for  his  gratitude,  and  he  at  last  said  "  I  will  keep  thy  words." 
It  was  no  hasty  thought  but  a  determined  resolve.  I  suppose  he  also 
means  that  he  had  given  a  distinct  pledge.  He  had  opened  his  mouth 
to  the  Lord,  and  could  not  go  back.  "  I  have  said  " — to  my  God,  to 
myself,  to  my  fellows-men — I  have  said  I  will  keep  thy  words.  It  signi- 
fies, also,  an  adherence  to  what  had  been  said: — I  have  said  it,  and 
there  is  an  end  of  all  question  about  it.  Do  not  distress  me  any  more, 
the  die  is  cast.    I  have  said  it,  and 

"  High  heaven,  that  heard  the  solemn  vow, 
That  vow  rencw'd  shall  daily  hear  : 
Till  in  life's  latest  hour  I  bow, 
And  bless  in  death  a  bond  so  dear.'* 


500  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLK  PULPIT. 

I  have  said  it,  my  God,  and  I  will  not  unsay  it.  What  I  have  written  I 
have  written.  Others  have  heard  me  say  it :  I  have  said  it  in  the 
presence  of  a  cloud  of  witnesses,  men  and  angels  looking  on.  I  have 
said  it,  and  so  let  it  stand  in  time  and  in  eternity. 

It  is  time  that  we  now  investigated  the  link  between  the  portion  pos- 
sessed and  the  resolution  made :  it  is  not  very  difficult  to  discover.  God 
is  best  known  to  us  by  his  words.  His  works  reveal  him  by  a  reflected 
light  as  the  moon,  but  his  words  display  him  by  a  direct  light  as  a  very 
sun  of  light  to  us.  How  do  I  know  God  except  by  his  words  ?  The 
God  of  revelation  is  the  Cliristian's  God.  Philosophers  nowadays  wor- 
ship a  God  of  their  own  imagination :  they  construct  a  (Jod  out  of  their 
own  consciousness,  and  a  very  pretty  God  he  is  indeed :  bat  the  God  of 
the  Christian  is  the  God  who  has  spoken,  and  whose  words  are  preserve 
here,  in  the  Book.  The  God  of  the  inspired  word  is  our  Grod,  and 
because  this  God.  is  our  portion,  and  we  know  him  by  his  words,  there- 
fore  have  we  said  we  will  keep  his  words. 

I  want  you  to  notice  that  always  there  seems  to  have  been  a  connec- 
tion between  the  possession  of  the  portion  and  the  keeping  of  the  words. 
When  God  said  to  Abraham,  "  Fear  not,  Abram :  I  am  thy  shield,  and 
thy  exceeding  great  reward,"  a  little  further  down,  in  the  sixth  verse,  we 
read, ''  And  he  beheved  in  the  Lord ;  and  he  counted  it  to  him  for 
righteousness."  First  he  receives  God  to  be  his  own — "  I  am  thy  shield": 
and  then  he  keeps  God's  word,  for  he  believes  it.  How  did  he  know  that 
God  was  his  shield  except  through  the  word  which  God  had  spoken  to 
him  ?  Notice  in  the  first  verse,  "  After  these  things  the  worn  of  the 
Lord  came  unto  Abram,"  and  again  in  the  fourth  verse,  "  And,  bdiold, 
the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  him."  He  believed :  this  was  Abraham's 
way  of  keeping  the  words  of  the  Lord,  and  it  is  worthy  of  our  imitation. 
Oh  for  grace  to  believe  every  word  that  God  speaks,  and  never  to  start 
aside  unto  unbelief  on  any  pretence  whatever,  for  every  word  of  the  Lord 
is  sure,  and  abideth  true  for  ever. 

By  keeping  God's  words  we  fiilfil  the  type  of  Israel  in  the  wildemesB. 
Do  you  not  remember  the  story  of  the  manna,  which  is  contained  in  the 
sixteenth  of  Exodus?  Now,  the  manna  is  so  named,  according  to 
Kabbi  Kimchi,  because  the  people  saw  in  it  their  "portion."  Our 
version  reads,  "  They  said.  It  is  manna :  for  they  wist  not  what  it  was  ;'* 
but  according  to  the  rabbi  they  said,  "  It  is  a  portion :  for  they  wist  not 
what  it*  was."  Men  did  eat  angels'  food  in  the  wilderness :  they 
realised  there  that  "man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  word 
that  procecdeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  Grod."  Their  feeding  on  manna 
was  the  type  of  the  Lord  being  our  portion ;  but  what  then  ?  They  ate 
the  manna,  but  did  they  keep  any  part  of  it  ?  Assuredly  they  did ;  see  the 
thirty-second  verse,  "  This  is  tne  thing  which  the  Lord  commandeUi, 
Fill  an  omcr  of  it  to  be  kept  for  your  generations ;  that  they  may  see'  the 
bread  wherewith  I  have  feci  you  in  the  wilderness,  when  I  brought  you  forth 
from  the  land  of  Egypt.  And  Moses  said  unto  Aaron,  Take  a  pot,  and 
put  an  omer  full  of  manna  therein,  and  lay  it  up  before  the  Lord,  to  be 
kept  for  your  generations."  God  himself  is  my  manna  or  portion,  and 
therefore  I  will  treasure  up  himself  as  he  is  revealed  in  his  word,  which 
is  the  golden  pot  in  which  the  heavenly  food  is  preserved.  Brethren,  let 
us  keep  the  dinne  word  in  the  very  secrets  of  our  heart  as  in  a  golden 


GOD  OUR   PORTION  AND   HIS  WORD  OUR  TREASURE.  501 

pot,  saying  with  the  psalmist,  "  Thy  word  have  I  hid  in  mine  heart,  that 
1  might  not  sin  against  thee." 

Another  bcauti&l  type  of  the  exaltation  which  the  beHever  gets  when 
lie  can  practically  realize  our  text,  will  be  foimd  in  Numbers  x\iii.  20, 
"  And  the  Lord  spake  unto  Aaron,  Thou  shalt  have  no  inheritance  in  the 
land,  'neither  shalt  thou  have  any  part  among  them  :  I  am  thy  part  and 
thine  inheritance  among  the  children  of  Israel."  See,  beloved,  we  take 
our  share  with  the  high  priest,  for  he  had  God  to  be  his  sole  and  only 
portion.  Was  it  not  a  better  portion  than  all  the  rest  put  together  ? 
Happy  are  the  people  whom  the  Lord  Jesus  has  made  to  be  priests,  and 
to  whom  he  has  given  the  priest's  portion,  namely,  himself.  But  what 
is  our  duty  if  this  is  the  case  ?  We  must  note  how  the  priests  of  the  tribe 
of  Le\i  behaved,  and  imitate  them.  We  read  in  Deut.  xxxiii.  9,  "AVho 
said  unto  his  father  and  to  his  mother,  I  have  not  seen  him ;  neither  did 
he  acknowledge  his  brethren,  nor  knew  his  own  children :  for  ihey  have 
ohsei'ved  thy  loord,  and  kept  thy  covenants  Their  heritage  was  the  Lord 
and  they  kept  his  words,  for  the  priest's  lips  should  keep  knowledge. 
They  lived  upon  the  meat  of  the  Lord's  house,  and  they  were  bound  care- 
fully to  keep  his  ordinances.  If  you  are  priests  unto  God  it  falleth 
unto  you  likewise  that  as  God  is  the  lot  of  your  inheritance  and  your 
portion,  your  daily  business  is,  like  the  tribe  of  Levi,  to  observe  the  word 
of  God  and  keep  his  covenant. 

Moreover,  the  words  of  G  od  are  our  title-deeds  to  our  portion.  Men 
despise  them,  and  so  might  a  stranger  pour  contempt  upon  old  deeds 
relating  to  pro^xirty  in  which  he  has  no  concern.  "  What  is  the  good  of 
those  old  parchments  ?"  says  the  ignorant  man  when  he  sees  legal 
documents.  **^AMiat  is  the  good  of  the  old  Book?"  cry  others  even 
more  ignorant.  Ah,  we  know  their  value ;  those  to  whom  those  titlp- 
deeds  secure  an  inheritance  prize  them  exceedingly.  Whenever  you  hear 
people  talking  about  Bibliolatry,  and  finding  fault  with  us  for  believing 
in  verbal  inspiration,  you  will  find  that  they  set  small  store  by  covenant 
treasures ;  and,  what  is  more,  you  will  soon  discover  that  they  tamper 
with  our  divine  charter  in  order  to  rob  us  of  the  choice  truths  of  the 
gospel,  and  that  the  top  and  bottom  of  their  meddling  with  the  divine 
words  of  inspiration  is  a  design  to  take  away  their  portion  from  the 
people  of  God.  Let  them  alone,  and  you  will  soon  see  them  tearing 
away  one  privilege  after  another,  and  making  great  havoc  with  our  com- 
forts. Therefore,  warned  by  what  we  have  seen  them  do,  we  have  said, 
**  I  will  keep  thy  words,"  for  we  shall  not  else  be  able  to  keep  God  for 
our  portion.  If  we  let  even  the  jots  and  tittles  go  we  may  soon  discover 
a  flaw  in  our  title,  and  we  cannot  afford  to  do  that.  Our  possession  is 
too  precious  for  us  to  tamper  with  the  securities  by  which  we  hold  it. 
*'  Thou  art  my  portion,  0  Lord ;  I  have  said  that  I  would  keep  tliy  words." 

Now,  very  l>riefly,  what  is  this  work  of  kerpiny  God's  words  ?  I  do 
pray  God  the  Holy  Spirit  to  help  us  to  know  it  by  practically  carrying 
it  out  every  day  of  our  lives. 

First,  then,  there  is  a  avord  which  above  all  is  to  be  kept,  enshrined 
in  the  hciirt  and  obeyed  in  the  life.  **  In  the  beginning  was  the  Word." 
That  very  name,  "  the  Word,"  given  to  Christ  puts  the  highest  honour 
njx)n  every  other  word  of  revelation.  Beware  of  trifling  or  being  neg- 
ligent towards  any  word  of  the  Lord,  since  Jesus  Christ  is  the  chief  and 


502  METEOPOLITAN  TABEENACLB  PULPIT. 

sum  of  the  words  of  God.    Keep  him,  hold  him,  abide  in  him^  continue 
in  him,  never  let  him  go. 

"  I  have  said  that  I  would  keep  thy  word  " — ^thifl  means  the  word  of 
the  gospel.  This  we  will  accept  by  sincere  and  simple  fedth.  The  gospel 
offi*ce  grace,  of  substitution,  of  atonement  by  blood,  of  justification  by 
faith,  tins  we  wiU  hold  by  faith  right  steadfastly  so  long  as  we  breathe. 
All  our  hope  hangs  tiiere,  and  therefore  there  we  will  abide,  neither  shall 
any  seduce  us  from  it. 

"I  have  said  that  I  would  keep  thy  words," — that  is,  "I  will  believe 
thy  doctrines.  When  I  cannot  comprehend  the  great  mysteries  I  will 
still  believe  them.  Though  others  dispute,  I  will  believe !  Despite 
the  insinuations  of  crafty  men  I  will  hold  to  the  doctrines  of  grace 
intensely ;  believing  them  as  long  as  reason  holds  her  throne.  What  I 
see  to  be  in  God's  word  I  will  not  dare  to  doubt  or  neglect  The 
doctrines  of  grace  are  the  backbone  of  the  Christian  life.  Keep  to 
them  for  your  comfort,  and  you  shall  never  be  ashamed  of  them.  If 
you  willingly  tamper  with  any  one  of  the  doctrines,  there  is  no  knowing 
where  you  will  drift.    Cast  out  more  anchors ;  never  let  the  vessel  drive. 

''  I  have  said  that  I  would  keep  thy  \rord  ;**  that  is.  Thy  word  of 
precept.  What  thou  biddost  me  do,  I  will  delight  to  do.  I  will  not 
merely  rejoice  in  the  doctrines,  but  in  the  commands  also,  and  I  wiU 
ask  for  grace  to  obey  them  all.  I  will  keep  thine  ordmatices  too,  for 
they  are  a  part  of  thy  word,  and  are  to  be  kept  as  they  were  delivered, 
without  addition  or  diminution.  I  will  not  say,  **  This  is  non-essentid, 
and  this  is  unimportant,"  but  **  I  have  said  that  I  would  keep  thy  words, 
and  keep  them  I  will,  through  thy  grace,  in  every  particular.  I  will  do 
what  thou  biddest  me,  as  thou  biddest  me,  when  thou  biddest  me." 
So  much  evil  has  grown  out  of  slight  departures  from  Scripture  that 
Christian  men  ought  to  be  very  scrupulous,  and  careftdly  observe  every 
ordinance  as  it  is  set  forth  in  the  word. 

"  I  have  said  that  I  would  keep  thy  words,"  that  is,  I  will  keep  thy 
promises  in  my  heart  to  comfort  me.  I  will  keep  them  in  my  Saith, 
expecting  their  fulfilment ;  in  my  mind,  folr  daily  use  and  solace,  and  on 
my  tongue,  that  I  may  encourage  others.  Since  the  Lord  keeps  his 
promises  by  ftil filling  them,  we  ought  to  keep  them  by  remembering 
them. 

''  I  have  said  that  I  will  keep  thy  words,"  and  this  especially  includes 
the  word  which  the  Lord  has  pledged  in  his  covenant.  I  will  rejoice 
to  think  that  thou  hast  by  deed  of  gift  made  thyself  over  to  me  !  How 
will  I  keep  in  mind  thy  word  and  oath  pledged  to  the  Lord  Jesus  on 
my  behalf:  how  will  I  rejoice  in  the  blood  which  ratified  the  covenant 
and  in  the  covenant  word  itself.  See  what  sea  room  I  have  in  my 
topic,  and  yet  I  have  merely  coasted  and  skirted  the  shore :  what  bound- 
less sailing  room  there  would  be  if  we  were  to  launch  out  into  the  de^p. 

My  brethren,  pray  for  grace  to  keep  every  word  of  God  with  all  your 
hearts.  Do  not  believe,  as  some  do,  that  it  does  not  matter  what  is 
truth  or  what  is  falsehood.  It  makes  all  the  diflPerence  conceivable. 
God's  word  against  man*s  word  any  day  in  the  week.  I  fear  that  the 
ancient  power  of  Protestantism  has  evaporated  through  the  influence 
of  those  who  hold  loose  views  upon  inspiration,  and  who  are  busy 
manufacturing  new  gospels  instead  of  preaching  the  old  one  whidi  18 


GOD   OUR  PORTION  AND   HIS  WORD  OUR  TREASURE.  503 

already  in  the  word.  The  great  thinkers  may  propound  wl\at  they 
choose,  and  the  learned  men  of  this  age  may  invent  what  doctrines  they 
like,  but  one  thing  I  know,  they  will  not  cause  those  who  have  God  for 
their  portion  to  give  up  his  words.  For  these  twenty-four  years  you  have 
found  me  here  preaching  the  words  of  God,  and  you  will  find  me  here  still 
if  I  live  another  twenty-four  years.  By  his  grace  1  am  incapable  of  moving 
one  inch  away  from  the  old  faith.  One  thing  I  know,  namely,  the  gospel 
of  substitution,  and  one  thing  I  do,  namely,  prefffch  it.  I  have  deter- 
mined to  laiow  nothing  among  you  save  Jesus  Christ  and  him  crucified. 
When  we  get  thfough  all  the  words  of  God  we  will  begin  them  again  ; 
but  we  shall  still  keep  to  the  old  Book  and  its  old,  old  story.  The  children 
shall  go  on  eating  their  daily  bread,  and  not  even  for  novelty's  sake  will 
we  give  them  the  stones  of  modern  thought. 

Now,  to  conclude.  This  blessed  subject  very  painfully  suggests  to  me 
a  solemn  contrast.  Will  you  at  your  leisure  read  concerning  another 
portion  which  the  Lord  reserves  for  certain  persons.  God  grant  we  may 
never  inherit  it.  It  is  the  portion  of  the  hypocrites.  In  Matthew  xxiv. 
50,  our  Lord  speaks  very  strongly  of  some,  and  I  will  tell  you  the  reason 
why  he  deals  so  terribly  with  them.  He  says  of  some  that  "  the  Lord  of 
that  servant  shall  come  in  a  day  when  he  looketh  not  for  him,  and  in  an 
hour  that  he  is  not  aware  of,  and  shall  cut  him  asunder,  and  appoint 
him  his  portion  with  the  hypocrites  :  there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing 
of  teeth.  *  Do  you  know  what  this  man  had  done  ?  He  had  not  kept 
Christ's  word.  His  Master  had  said  that  he  would  come,  and  he  did 
not  keep  the  word  about  his  second  coming,  nor  believe  in  it  at  all,  but, 
according  to  the  forty-eighth  verse,  he  said,  **My  Lord  delayeth  his 
coming,"  and  then  he  began  to  act  upon  it,  to  smite  his  fellow  servants, 
and  to  eat  and  drink  and  to  be  drunken;  so  that,  not  keeping  what 
some  think  a  very  small  matter,  the  word  concerning  the  future  coming 
of  Christ,  he  was  found  to  be  a  hypocrite  and  had  his  portion  appointed 
with  falsehearted  pretenders.  The  same  passage,  with  a  httle  variation, 
comes  in  Luke  xii.  46,  where  the  unfaithful  servant  is  said  to  have 
his  "  portion  with  unbelievers,"  which  is  equally  to.  be  dreaded.  The 
threat  seems  most  to  apply  to  ministers  and  teachers  of  the  word  who  are 
unfeithful  to  the  truth.  The  condemned  one  was  not  a  faithful  and  wise 
steward,  and  did  not  bring  forth  things  new  and  old  with  which  to 
feed  his  Master's  servants,  and  he  also  doubted  whether  his  Master  would 
ever  come  to  caU  him  to  account,  and  so  he  had  his  portion  among  unbe- 
lievers. It  will  be  an  awful  thing  for  me  and  for  any  minister  here, 
or  any  other  teacher  of  the  people,  if  we  do!  not  bring  forth  things  new 
and  old  out  of  the  gospel  to  give  the  saints  their  portion  of  meat  in 
due  season.  If  we  keep  the  Lord's  servants  without  their  portion  we 
shall  be  kept  without  our  portion,  or  rather  we  shall  have  it,  but  it  will 
be  a  portion  of  the  most  awful  kind.  This  makes  it  solemn  work  for  any 
of  you  who  attempt  to  teach  others.  God  grant  tliat  you  may  give  forth 
a  good  portion — give  out  the  things  that  are  new — that  is  the  gospel, 
which  is  always  new  ;  and  give  out  the  old  things,  the  antiquities  of  evci*- 
lasting  love  and  electing  grace,  bring  them  all  forth  in  proportion  lest  ye 
be  found  at  last  to  have  been  unbelievers. 

We  will  finish  when  we  duly  note  one  more  point,  namely  this,  that  if 
you  do  diligently  keep  God's  words,  and  if  it  is  tlie  joy  of  your  heart  to 


506  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

no  common  sorrow.  Beyond  all  this,  almost  every  daj  we  have  npoit 
of  this  one  and  that  one  in  the  membership  and  in  the  oongregaoai 
going  home.  These  dying  ones  are  God's  voices  to  us,  and  I  should  ba 
unworthy  of  addressing  you  if  I  did  not  first  hear  them  in  the  silence  of  mj 
own  soul,  and  then  endeavour  to  interpret  them  to  you.  All  these  things 
bring  to  my  mind  the  language  of  our  text,  "When  a  few  years  aie 
come,  then  I  shall  go  the  way  whence  I  shall  not  return;"  will  they  not 
have  the  same  effect  upon  you  ?     He  that  hath  ears  to  hear  let  him  hear. 

My  subject  is  one  upon  which  it  woidd  be  quite  impossible  to  say 
anything  new,  since  death  is  neither  novel  nor  uncommon,  for  from  the 
days  of  Abel  until  now  it  has  honeycombed  the  earth  with  graves.  Nor 
need  I  seek  out  elegancies  of  speech,  for  these  would  be  incon^moiis 
with  such  a  theme.  When  we  speak  of  eternal  things  the  less  aaenqit 
we  make  at  fine  language  the  Ixitter;  such  solemn  topics  are  mok 
powerful  when  suffered  to  have  their  own  natural  voice  and  speak  for 
themselves.  Begone  all  trifling  thoughts  !  Let  the  mind  put  off  all  gay 
apparel,  and  wear  awhile  the  shroud.  Instead  of  rising  with  gaiety,  let 
the  imagination  bow  with  solemnity,  for  now  we  have  to  do  with  the  aying 
chamber,  and  the  grave,  and  the  judgment  throne.  The  blast  of  the  surdi- 
angel's  trumpet  is  ringing  in  our  ears,  and  we  are  to  anticipate  the  day  in 
which  we  shall  receive  our  final  sentence  from  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth. 
Solemnity,  therefore,  should  possess  our  minds.  Let  us  shut  out  the  pre- 
sent world  and  become  famihar  with  the  world  to  come.  Very  simple  and 
self-evident  will  be  the  considerations  which  I  shall  set  before  you,  but  if 
already  moved  to  a  solemn  frame  of  mind,  you  will  be  prepared  to  derive 
profit  from  them.  May  G^od  the  Holy  Spirit  bless  the  word,  and  by 
its  means  prepare  us  for  our  last  remove,  of  which  the  text  speaks  so 
plainly. 

First,  then,  let  us  realize  mir  tnetuiable  journey — "  I  shall  go  the  way 
whence  I  shdl  not  return."  Secondly,  let  us  contemplate  its  nearness — 
"  When  a  few  years  are  come."  Thirdly,  let  us  consider  our  non-retwm 
from  the  journey — "  Whence  I  shall  not  return ;  *'  and  then  we  shall 
close  in  the  fourth  place  by  enquiring  irhtfher  we  are  going.  We  are 
going  whence  we  shall  not  return,  but  to  what  place  are  we  bound  ? 
Is  it  endless  bhss  or  ceaseless  woe  ? 

I.  First  then  let  us  realize  our  inevitable  joubnby.  J  desire 
that  these  words  maybe  earnestly  taken  up  in  a  personal  ma^er  by 
each  of  us.  The  language  is  in  the  singular  number.  "  /  shall  go  the 
way  whence  I  shall  not  return.  Let  us  apply  it  each  one  to  hf<^8elf. 
The  fact  that  all  men  are  mortal  has  little  power  over  our  minds,  fOf  we 
always  make  a  tacit  exception  and  put  off  the  evil  day  for  ourselves.  »Ve 
own  ourselves  mortal,  but  do  not  expect  to  die  just  now.  Even  the  h^kA 
look  forward  to  a  continuance  of  life,  and  the  consumptive  dream  of  ms- 
sibie  recovery.  I  will  not,  therefore,  remind  you  so  much  oi  the  general 
truth,  but  place  before  you  the  individual,  pointed,  personal  declaration 
of  the  text.  **  I,"  the  preacher ;  you,  each  one  of  you  looking  upon  the 
preacher  now, — '*/  shall  go  the  way  whence  /shall  not  return.''  As 
surely  as  you  live  you  will  die.  It  may  help  you  to  realise  this  fact  if  I 
ask  you  to  accompany  me  first  of  all  into  the  chamber  ot  a  dying  man, 
und  as  you  look  upon  him  I  entreat  you  to  remember  that  you  youi-self 
^vill  lie  there  in  a  like  case  ere  long.     It  is  sometimes  my  duty,  and  a 


^ctjtfliolttmi  i^alrcrnaxlc  fttlpit. 


OUR    LAST    JOURNEY. 


%    IftttUtt 


Dbliyered  on  Lorb's-Day  Morning,  September  9th,  1877,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOIilTAN    TABERNACLE,    NBWINGTON. 


"  When  a  few  years  are  come,  then  I  shall  go  the  way  whence  I  shall  not  return.*' 
Job  xvi.  22. 

The  season  of  the  year  may  well  remind  us  of  our  mortality.  The 
com,  which  a  few  weeks  ago  was  green  and  yigorous,  has  now  for  the 
most  part  yielded  to  the  sickle ;  many  flowers  which  adorned  our  gardens 
have  exchanged  their  bloom  for  ripening  seed ;  the  year  has  commenced 
to  die,  its  glory  and  prime  have  gone.  The  dews  of  evening  are  hea\7, 
and  the  mists  linger  in  the  morning,  for  the  simimer  heat  is  declining. 
The  leaves  are  just  upon  the  turn,  and  the  fall  of  the  yeiu:  is  close  at 
hand.  These  are  creation's  warnings,  reminding  us  that  the  Lord  hath 
set  a  harvest  for  us,  and  that  we  all  do  fade  as  a  leaf.  Nature  hath  her 
prophets  as  well  as  revelation,  and  autumn  in  his  mgged  garb  is  one  of 
them.  He  has  now  come  to  us  with  this  solemn  message,  "  The  harvest 
is  passed  and  the  summer  is  ended ;  prepare  to  meet  your  God ! " 

In  addition  to  the  warnings  of  nature,  we  have  lately  been  saluted  by 
voices  from  divine  providence.  Loud  calls  have  come  to  us  of  late  from 
almost  every  part  of  our  church  work.  Death  is  come  up  into  our  win- 
dows, and  is  entered  into  our  palaces.  Death,  who  seldom  comes  into 
the  Orphanage,  has  forced  his  cruel  hand  into  our  nest  of  young  ones, 
and  has  taken  thence  the  widow's  child.  A  funeral  has  left  our  gates, 
and  little  boys  have  gathered  around  a  grave  to  see  one  like  themselves 
laid  in  the  silent  earth.  Death  has  set  his  axe  also  against  the  College, 
and  has  cut  down  one  of  our  growing  trees,  upon  which  there  were 
abundant  tokens  of  future  fruitfulness.  Our  brother  Winter  had  sharp- 
ened his  sword  for  the  conflict,  and  was  just  about  to  leave  us  for  actual 
service,  when  in  a  few  days  his  strength  departed,  and  he  was  not. 
Death  has  come  also  among  the  ministers  who  were  once  our  students, 
and  were  our  crown  of  rejoicing  as  labourers  for  the  Lord.  One  of  the 
ablest  and  best  of  them  has  put  a  whole  town  in  mourning  for  he  has 
been  taken  home  at  an  early  age,  when  he  had  already  become  fore- 
most for  usefalness.  Middlesborough  mourns  our  brother  Pritcr  with 
Nos.  1,373-4. 


•^mm 


^ 


f^  mfiTROPOLITAK  TABEBKACLB  PUI-Pir. 

groat  things  of  eternity,  and  cannot  leave  them  to  anodier.  He  wed  to 
hear  about  eternity  as  one  of  the  mass,  but  now  he  has  to  eipaksKe  it 
alone,  and  by  hinlsclf.  Into  the  cold  river  his  own  lisei  most  deacend, 
t)\o  cool  waves  must  chill  his  blood,  death  mnsc  dose  his  eye,  and  into  tbfi 
nnknown  futun.^  he  must  plunge  alone.  No  brother's  hand  can  gruplui 
hand  when  he  \n\&  quitteil  the  body,  no  fellow-mortal  can  fly  side  Ijj 
side  with  Inni  throus^li  the  tracks  unknown.  How  vividly  the  individu- 
ality ol  the  man  cH)ines  out,  and  the  need  of  a  personal  interest  hi  the 
givut  salvation.  How  much  it  is  to  be  desired  that  it  conld  be  made 
(iuit4}  aa  plain  under  happier  circumstances.  And  yet  how  dear  it  ii 
mat  each  one  of  us  must  believe  in  the  Saviour  for  himadiy  each  serro 
(3od  i)cm)nally,  and  each  have  a  good  hope  through  grace  wrought  in 
hia  own  soul. "  Will  men  never  think  of  this  till  they  come  to  die? 

And  now  that  candle  burning  in  the  sick  man's  diamber  sheds  a 
struuffe  light  upon  his  past  life.  Some  said  he  was  fortanate,  bat  if  he 
was  sniful  where  is  his  good  fortune  ?  Men  said  he  was  a  poor  unsuc- 
cessful muddler,  but  he  \\ill  be  worth  as  much  in  a  short  time  as  if  he 
had  been  the  most  pnident,  and  had  prospered  in  the  world,  for  here  men 
come  to  a  level.  "  Naked  came  I  out  of  my  mother's  womb,  and  naked 
must  I  return  thither."  So  must  it  be.  In  death  the  financial  dement 
looks  contemptible,  and  t?ie  moral  and  the  spiritual  come  to  be  mod 
esteemed.  How  did  he  hve  ?  What  were  his  thoughts  ?  What  ma 
his  heart  towards  God  ?  Did  he  repent  of  sin?  Does  he  still  repent? 
Does  he  believe  in  Jesus  ?  Is  he  resting  upon  the  finished  work  of 
Christ  or  is  he  not  ?  He,  perhaps,  failed  to  ask  himself  some  of  thoee 
questions  a  little  while  ago,  but  now,  if  he  be  in  his  sober  senses,  he  is 
compelled  to  put  his  soul  through  its  paces.  How  does  his  heart  answer 
when  cross-examined  ?  Now  he  must  reach  down  the  accounts,  the 
memoranda,  and  the  day-book  of  his  hfe,  and  he  must  look  to  what  he 
did  and  what  he  was,  and  what  he  is.  Ah  me !  how  will  the  reckoning 
end  ?  What  will  be  the  simi  total  ?  It  matters  little  what  he  wai 
before  his  fellow  men,  whose  judgments  are  fallible,  but  the  question  ia^ 
what  was  he  before  the  all-searching  eye  of  the  Most  High  God  ?  Sodi 
an  account  you  will  have  to  render. 

The  individuality  of  the  man  is  clear,  and  the  man's  character  before 
God,  and  now  it  is  also  evident  that  dmih  tests  all  things.  If  you  lode 
upon  this  poor  dying  man  you  see  that  he  is  past  the  time  for  pretences 
and  shams.  You  yourself,  if  you  knew  but  little  of  him  before,  feel  very 
concerned  to  know  whether  the  religion  he  professed  was  truthful  or 
not,  whether  he  was  really  regenerate  or  merely  dreamed  that  he  was  so. 
If  you  wish  to  answer  that  question,  how  much  more  does  that  poor 
dying  man  want  to  know  for  himself?  Here  let  me  tell  you  that  very 
much  of  the  comfort  with  Avhich  we  WTap  ourselves  up  in  days  of  health 
proves  to  be  very  sorry  stuff  when  we  come  to  die.  While  you  are  in 
good  health  and  strength  you  often  derive  a  measure  of  peace  of  mind 
from  things  which  will  not  stand  the  fiery  ordeal  of  an  approaching 
eternity.  Some  of  the  best  men  that  ever  lived  have  founa  this  out 
You  may  know  the  name  of  Mr.  Durham,  the  author  of  a  famous  book 
on  Solomon's  Song,  one  of  the  most  earnest  of  Scotland's  ancient 
preachers.  Some  days  before  he  died  he  seemed  to  be  in  some  perplexity 
about  his  future  well-being,  and  said  to  his  Mend  Mr.  Carstairs,  '<  Dear 


OUR  LAST  JOURNEY.  609 

brother,  for  all  that  I  have  written  or  preached,  there  is  but  one  Scrip- 
ture which  I  can  now  remember  or  dare  grip  unto  now  that  I  am 
hastening  to  the  grave.  It  is  tliis — 'Whosoever  cometh  unto  me,  I 
will  in  no  wise  cast  out.*  Pray  tell  me  if  I  dare  lay  the  weight  of  my 
salvation  upon  it."  Mr.  Carstairs  justly  replied,  "Brother,  you  may 
dei)end  upon  it,  though  you  had  a  thousand  salvations  at  hazard."  You 
see  it  w*as  a  plain,  sinner's  text  that  he  rested  on.  Just  as  Dr.  Guthrie 
wanted  them  to  sing  a  bairn^s  hymn,  so  do  dying  saints  need  the  plain 
elementary  doctrines  of  the  gospel  to  rest  upon.  Those  fine  ideas  and 
dainty  notions  oi  our  nearing  perfection  and  becoming  completely  sanc- 
tified dissolve  like  the  hoar  frost  in  the  sun,  when  we  come  face  to  face 
with  eternity.  Those  grand  excitements,  those  high  enjoyments,  and 
those  deep  experiences,  Avhich  lead  us  to  think  ourselves  to  be  somebodies 
in  the  church  ot  God  are  of  small  account  in  dying  moments.  Men 
cannot  die  on  stilts.  Death  finds  out  the  truth  of  our  condition  and 
blows  away  with  his  cold  breath  a  heap  of  chaff  Avhich  we  thought  to  be 
good  wheat.  Then  a  man  has  to  look  to  the  mercy  of  God,  to  the  blood 
of  the  covenant  and  to  the  promises  of  the  gospel,  and  to  cling  os  a  poor 
needy,  guilty  sinner  to  free,  rich,  sovereign  grace,  or  else  his  spirit  will 
utterly  sink.  "When  life  is  ebbing  nothing  will  do  but  the  taithiul 
saying, "  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners."  I  have  heard 
children  of  God  speak  in  their  last  moments  just  as  seeking  souls  speak. 
They  come  to  God  again  just  as  they  came  at  first,  and  they  find  in 
Jesus  all  their  hope.  Dying  men  want  realities,  they  want  a  sinner's 
Saviour,  they  want  atonement  for  guilt,  for  so  only  can  they  pass  out 
of  the  worla  with  hope.  Oh,  brethren,  follow  after  that  which  is  solid 
and  real,  for  nothing  else  will  serve  your  turn  when  you  come  to  die. 

Still  keep  your  eye  on  thnt  dying  man  whom  I  have  tried  to  picture — 
he  is  vividly  before  me  now.  He  must  go :  there  is  no  alternative,  lie 
cannot  resist  the  power  ^Thich  now  summons  him  t')  depart.  Willing  or 
unwilling,  it  matters  not,  he  jniisf  go.  The  sheriff's  oilicer  has  him  in 
his  grip,  and  he  must  go.  Is  he  prepared?  Pray  God  he  may  be;  but 
whether  he  be  so  or  not  it  makes  no  difference,  he  must  leave  all  and 
take  his  journey.  Has  he  children  dependent  upon  him,  and  a  wife  who 
needs  his  support  ?  Their  necessities  cannot  aetain  him,  he  must  go. 
Has  he  made  his  will,  or  has  he  left  all  his  business  affairs  in  a  tangle  ? 
Whichever  it  is,  he  must  go.  The  tide  which  bears  all  before  it  has 
seized  his  barque,  and  even  now  it  drifts  adown  the  stream. 

That  man  who  must  go  is  yourself y  projected  only  a  little  way  further 
into  time.  Can  you  not  realize  what  will  certainly  be  the  fact?  Can 
you  not  already  hear  the  ticking  of  the  watch  at  your  bed-head  in  the 
silence  of  your  last  night  ?  Can  you  not  anticipate  that  mysterious  con- 
sultation of  physicians,  when  each  one  owns  to  his  fellows  his  in- 
competence to  suggest  a  remedy.  It  is  clear  that  the  hour  is  come: 
you  must  go.  This  must  happen  to  every  mortal  man  and  woman 
sitting  or  standing  in  this  house  this  morning.  AVill  you  not  lay  it  to 
heart  ? 

Now  survey  another  scene  to  help  you  to  realize  your  departure. 
Look  no  longer  on  the  dying,  but  bend  over  the  dead.  It  is  all 
over  now.  He  has  breathed  his  last,  and  he  now  lies  upstairs  alone 
in  the  darkened  chamber.    A  loving  one  has  stolen  in  and  tremblingly 


510  METROPOLITAlf  TABBRKACLE  PULPIT. 

lifted  the  coffin  lid  to  gaze  once  more  npon  the  dear  faoe,  and  mg 
another  adien ;  bnt  there  can  be  no  more  of  this.  The  friands  hate 
gathered,  and  the  monmers  must  go  through  the  streeta  and  bear  him  to 
the  tomb.     That  funeral  is  yours. 

The  corpse  is  borne  to  the  grave,  and  on  the  road  it  silentlj  preacbee 
to  all  passers  by.  Archbii^op  Leighton  one  morning  was  adced  hj 
a  friend,  ''Have  you  heard  a  sermon?"  He  said,  '^No,  bat  I  met  a 
sermon,  for  I  met  a  dead  man  carried  ont  to  be  buried."  Let  eveiy 
funeral  be  a  discourse  to  you.  Within  a  short  time  to  each  one  of  w 
it  will  happen  that  within  the  narrow  limits  of  the  coffin  we  muat  lie, 
and  then  mil  come  for  us  the  opened  grave,  the  lowering  of  the  ooipae, 
and  the  gathering  of  mourners  around  it.  Upon  your  coffin  lid  and 
mine  the  mould  shall  fall — "  Earth  to  earth,  dust  to  dust,  and  ashes  to 
ashes."  A  green  mound,  a  daisy  or  two  amid  the  grass,  a  friend  to  bring 
a  few  feding  flowers  to  scatter  on  our  graves  ever  and  anon ;  perhaps  a 
head-stone,  prhaps  not, — to  this  we  must  all  come.  "  Here  he  lies  ii 
the  universal  epitaph.  On  the  lap  of  earth  you  will  lie ;  there  shall  I 
also  lie.  Do  realize  it ;  it  is  so  near,  so  sure — ^when  a  few  years  shsll 
come  we  shall  be  with  the  unnumbered  throng. 

Now  let  your  realization  go  a  little  further.  Canyon  picture  the  sunlit 
of  a  man  as  it  leaves  the  body  ?  I  confess  my  imagination  does  not 
enable  me  to  picture  it  to  myself,  and  certainly  my  words  are  not  com- 
petent to  convey  to  you  what  little  I  can  realize  to  m^  mind.  The  soul 
finds  itself  rid  of  materialism ;  how  will  it  feel  when  it  has  shakai  itsdf 
loose  of  its  shell  of  day  ?  I  cannot  teU.  We  all  love  this  earUily  hooie 
of  our  tabernacle,  and  leave  it  with  reluctance. 

'*  For  who,  to  dumb  forgctfulness  a  prey, 
This  pleasing  anxious  being  e*er  resiffn*d. 
Left  the  warm  precincts  of  the  cheerfiu  day, 
Nor  cast  one  longing,  lingering  look  behind  ?" 

But  it  does  not  matter  what  lingering  looks  we  cast,  our  soul  will  have 
done  with  the  body  in  its  present  foshion,  and  it  must  for  a  while  dwell 
apart  from  aU  materialism.  At  once  it  must  come  before  God.  Its  stsie 
will  immediatelv  after  death  be  known  to  it  beyond  a  question.  In  a 
moment  it  will  know  beyond  all  doubt  whether  it  is  accepted  before  €k)d, 
and  beyond  all  hope  it  will  know  whether  it  is  reprobate  and  condemned. 
That  luiowledge  will  at  once  commence  its  happmess,  a  happiness  whidi 
will  be  increased  as  ages  roll  on ;  or  that  knowlc^  will  at  once  com- 
mence its  misery,  which  will  deepen  evermore.  The  soul  will  abide  in 
the  disembodied  state  for  a  while,  and  then  will  come  the  clarion  note  of 
the  resurrection  trumpet,  and  the  body  shall  rise  again  to  be  again  in- 
habited by  the  soul.  What  will  the  meeting  be  ?  What  will  be  the 
sensation  of  the  remarriage  of  mind  with  matter,  of  soul  with  body  ?  We 
know  not.  The  resurrection  is  the  blessed  hope  of  the  Ohristian,  but  it 
is  a  terrible  dread  to  the  ungodly.  The  soul  shall  never  more  retoro  to 
the  world's  cares,  nor  to  the  world  at  all  as  the  world  now  is,  but  it  shall 
again  inhabit  the  body,  and  stand  before  the  judgment  seat  of  Gbrut  to 
receive  the  verdict  from  the  lips  of  him  who  is  appointed  Judge  of  dl 
mankind. 

The  divine  verdict  is  given,  and  the  soul  must  continue  its  jonnMy. 


OUR  LAST  JOXJRNBT.  611 

Still  onward  must  it  go :  whether  accepted  or  condemned,  onward  it  must 
go.  Onward,  exulting  in  a  bliss  unspeakable  like  to  the  divine,  if  Christ 
pronounce  it  blessed ;  onward,  in  a  misery  unutterable  if  Christ  pronounce 
it  "  cui'sed."  /  do  npt  know  whether  you  are  able  in  imagination  to  place 
yourself  in  such  a  condition,  but  in  such  a  condition  you  will  certainly  be 
found  ere  long.  You  will  be  stripped  of  this  house  of  clay,  and  so  you 
will  die,  but  you  will  live  again,  ay,  live  for  ever.  You  will  live  to  be 
judged,  to  be  justified  or  to  be  condemned,  and  then  you  will  live  for 
ever,  in  happiness  or  torment,  and  all  this  you  will  know  in  a  shwt  time 
to  come. 

Thus  I  have  helped  you  as  best  I  could,  and  I  fear  but  poorly,  to 
realize  the  inevitable  journey. 

II.  Now,  let  us  very  briefly  contemplate  itr  meaning.  Very  soon 
we  shall  have  to  start  upon  our  solemn  and  mysterious  pilgrimage.  If 
we  should  fulfil  the  entire  tale  of  our  years  the  allotted  period  of  human 
life  is  but  short.  The  text  in  the  Hebrew  speaks  of  "  years  of  number  ": 
they  are  so  few  that  a  child  may  count  them.  At  the  commencement  of 
life  the  view  before  us  looks  like  an  endless  avenue,  but  as  we  advance 
along  the  path  the  end  seems  very  near,  and  we  perceive  how  short  our 
time  is.  Middle  life  has  but  a  short  view,  either  backwards  or  forwards. 
As  for  some  of  you,  upon  whom  age  is  descending,  you  should  be  well 
enough  aware  how  short  for  certain  your  time  for  lingering  here  must  be. 
Your  lease  has  almost  run  out ;  can  you  doubt  it  ? 

What  are  seventy  or  eighty  years,  if  we  live  so  long  ?  But  then  we  are 
further  warned  by  the  consideration  that  we  cannot  safely  reckon  upon  the 
whole  of  that  brief  period,  for  children  are  carried  away  and  young  men 
are  cut  do^vn  by  the  scythe  ;  and  we  see  frequently  the  maiden  before 
she  reaches  the  full  bloom  of  her  years  carried  off,  with  death  as  her 
bridegroom.  Does  not  the  text  say,  "  a  few  yeai*s  '*  Read  it  months, 
read  it  days,  read  it  hours,  read  it  minutes,  for  we  cannot  tell  how  soon 
we  must  set  sail  for  the  far-off  land.  In  a  short  time  we  must  join  the 
great  caravan,  and  cross  the  desert  to  a  land  whence  avc  shall  not  return. 
Life  is  so  short,  that  we  have  scarce  begun  to  live  ere  we  are  called 
to  die. 

Hence,  dear  brethren,  if  there  is  anything  grievous  to  be  borne,  we  may 
well  bear  it  cheeifuUy,  for  it  cannot  last  long.  When  a  few  years  are 
come  we  shall  be  gone  from  the  thorn  and  the  briar  which  now  prick  and 
wound.  Hence,  too,  if  there  is  any  work  to  be  done  for  Jesus  let  us  do 
it  at  once,  or  el^e  we  shall  never  do  it,  for  when  a  few  years  are  come  we 
shall  have  gone  whence  we  shall  not  retuni.  Hence,  too,  if  there  be  sal- 
vation to  be  sought  let  us  seek  it,  for  soon  we  shall  be  where  salvation 
is  no  more  proclaimed.  Hence,  again,  if  worldly  goods  are  possessed 
by  us  let  us  hold  them  ver}^  loosely,  for  in  a  short  time  we  must 
leave  them.  Let  us  lay  them  out  for  God's  glory,  for  our  stewardship 
will  not  last  for  long,  and  we  shall  soon  have  to  give  an  account. 
Hence,  above  all  things,  the  need  of  being  always  prepared  to  die.  Oh, 
brothers,  he  who  is  to  die  next  had  need  be  ready.  Who  is  he  ?  An  old 
man  who  used  to  sell  goods  from  house  to  house  had  an  eccentric  cry  of 
his  o\Mi,  which  he  was  wont  to  utter  whenever  he  sold  goods  at  the 
door.  He  would  cry  out  aloud,  "  Who'll  be  the  next  ?  Who'll  be  the 
next?"     One  day  a  funeral  passed  just  as  he  had  given  out  his  usual 


512  METROPOLITAN  TABEENAOLB  PULPIT. 

C17,  and  strange  enough  sounded  the  question — "WhoU  be  the  next?' 
I  may  ask  with  solemn  emphasis  whenever  the  cemetery'B  gates  are 
opened,  and  the  funeral  passes  through,  "Who  will  be  the  next?  Who 
will  be  the  next  r"  Your  hymn  says,  "  Who  will  be  the  next  to  foUow 
Jesus  ? "  but  I  must  ask  this  morning,  "  Who  will  be  the  next  among  oi 
to  be  carried  to  the  silent  tomb  ?  "  To  be  ready  to  depart  is  wisdom.  It 
is  the  mark  of  the  beast  that  it  looks  not  beyond  the  present  moathlhl 
of  grass  which  it  crops  from  the  sward ;  it  never  thinks  of  the  butdia*8 
knife  and  the  shambles.  Be  not  as  the  brutes  which  perish,  but,  being 
gifted  with  minds,  use  them  to  look  before  you.  It  is  the  mark  of  the 
fool  that  he  never  looks  before  he  leaps,  but  is  content  with  present  en- 
joyments though  they  leave  him  penniless.  Be  not  as  the  tool,  hot  be 
prudent  and  look  before  you,  and  consider  your  latter  end.  It  is  the 
mark  of  the  worldling  that  he  confines  his  thoughts  within  tlie  narrov 
range  of  time :  the  Christian  looks  into  the  everlasting  future  as  an  im- 
mortal being  should  do.     Be  not  worldlings,  lest  ye  perish  with  them. 

May  God  make  you  Avise  unto  salvation  !  To  be  prepared  to  die  is  aa 
immediate  duty,  will  you  neglect  it  ?  Some  imagine  that  to  be  prepared 
to  die  would  involve  a  Ufe  of  perpetual  gloom.  If  it  did  so  it  were 
well  to  face  it.  When  a  man  comes  to  die  and  finds  hiniseL  prepared, 
even  if  he  had  endured  fifty  years  of  perpetual  anguish  of  heait^  and 
had  denied  himself  eveiy  worldly  comfort,  ne  would  think  himself  well 
repaid  to  have  the  prospect  of  a  blessed  future.  Heaven  at  any  price 
is  well  secured.  A  good  hope  through  grace  is  worth  a  thousand  worlds. 
But  it  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  melancholy  attends  upon  fitness  to 
die.  Why  should  it  ?  To  be  unprepared  for  death,  and  to  know  that  it 
may  come  at  any  moment,  is  a  fair  reason  for  sadness,  but  to  have  that 
great  matter  secure  nmst  surely  be  a  source  of  joy.  To  be  prepared  to 
die  is  to  be  prepared  to  live ;  to  be  ready  for  eternity  is  in  the  best  aeos^ 
to  be  ready  for  time.  Who  so  fit  to  live  on  earth  as  the  man  who  is  fit 
to  live  in  heaven  ?  Who  hath  brightness  of  the  eye  ?  Is  it  not  the 
man  who  h^  looked  within  the  gate  of  pearl,  and  seen  his  place  pre- 
pared among  the  blessed?  Who  hath  lightness  of  heart?  Is  it  not 
the  man  who  is  unloaded  of  his  sin,  and  has  found  mercy  through  the 
blood  of  Christ  ?  Who  can  go  to  his  bed  and  sleep  in  peace  and  wake 
with  joy — who  but  the  man  that  is  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  his 
Son?  Who  hath  the  best  of  this  world  as  Avell  as  the  world  to  come? 
Is  it  not  he  to  whom  death  has  now  become  a  changed  thing,  a  chemb 
that  has  lost  its  way — no  longer  destruction,  but  rather  development,  and 
admission  into  a  higher  and  nobler  hfe  ?  Since  readiness  tor  death  is 
peace  and  happiness,  and  is  above  measure  needful  in  prospect  of  the 
eternal  state,  let  us  see  to  it  at  once.  We  are  to  be  gone  so  soon  let  us 
gird  up  our  loins  for  our  solemn  journey.  There  is  no  time  to  spare. 
The  end  is  drawing  near.  Every  fljing  moment  is  hastening  on  our 
last  hour.  It  is  high  time  to  awake  out  of  sleep,  and  in  earnest  make 
ready  to  meet  the  Bridegroom,  who  is  already  on  his  way. 

III.  Now,  thirdly,  I  want  you  to  consider  the  fact  that  wb 
BHALL  not  return — "  When  a  few  years  are  come,  then  I  shall  go  the 
way  whence  I  shall  not  return."  To  the  occupations  of  life — to  sow 
and  reap,  and  mow ;  to  the  abodes  of  life — to  the  store  and  to  the 
country  house;   to  the  pleasures  of  Ufe, — the  festival  and  the  family, 


OtJft  LAST  JOURNEY.  518 

we  shall  not  return.  To  tlie  engagements  of  the  sanctuary,  the  com- 
munion table,  the  pulpit,  or  the  pew,  we  shall  not  return.  To  the 
chamber  of  love,  to  the  hearth  of  aftection,  to  the  walk  of  friendship,  we 
shall  not  return.  To  hopes  and  fears,  and  joys,  and  pains,  we  shall  not 
return.  To  summer's  flowers  and  winter's  snows  we  shall  not  return. 
To  our  brothers,  children,  husband,  or  wife,  we  shall  not  return.  To 
nothing  that  is  done  under  the  sun  shall  we  return.  Soul,  unsaved  soul, 
to  the  land  of  the  gospel  and  the  mercy  seat  thou  shalt  not  return.  If 
you  die  unsaved  you  will  not  be  able  to  come  back  to  the  house  of 
God  to  hear  again  the  ministry  of  reconcihation  ;  you  mil  hear  no  more 
invitations  and  expostulations,  neither  will  Jesus  be  set  before  you  as 
your  hope.  You  will  not  be  able  to  come  back  to  the  prayer  meeting 
and  to  the  earnest  entreaties  of  a  godly  mother  and  other  loving  friends, 
nor  even  back  to  your  Bible  and  to  the  opportunity  of  searching  it  that 
you  may  find  eternal  Hfe.  You  will  not  return  to  find  space  for  repent- 
ance, nor  a  second  opportunity  for  prayer,  nor  another  season  for  believing 
in  Jesus.  It  shall  be  said  concerning  you,  "  He  which  is  filthy,  let  him 
be  filthy  still."  Where  the  tree  falleth  there  must  it  lie.  Once  pass  the 
ban-iers  of  life  unsaved,  and  ye  cannot  return  to  a  new  probation.  The 
die  is  cast. 

Beloved  Christian  friends,  we  need  not  wish  to  return.  What  is  there 
here  that  should  either  tempt  us  to  stay  in  this  world  or  induce  us  to 
return  to  it  if  we  could  ?  Still,  I  could  suppose  in  a  future  state  some 
reasons  for  wishing  to  return.  I  can  suppose  we  might  have  it  in  our 
hearts,  for  instance,  to  A\ish  to  undo  the  mischief  which  we  did  in  life. 
If  a  dying  man  should  receive  mercy  in  his  last  moments,  one  might 
imagine  him  as  desiring  to  return  to  earth  to  tell  the  glad  tidings  and 
beseech  his  family  and  friends  to  seek  salvation.  Who  would  not  wish  for 
once  to  plead  with  his  children  if  he  felt  that  he  had  neglected  his  duty  to 
them.  A  man  might  wish,  even  if  he  were  in  the  unquenchable  flame,  to 
come  back  to  earth  or  to  send  a  messenger,  as  the  rich  man  did,  to  tell  his 
brethren,  lest  they  should  come  into  the  place  of  torment.  Selfishness 
might  wish  to  be  spared  the  reproaches  of  those  we  helped  to  ruin.  But 
yon  cannot  come  back  or  send  back  to  undo  your  ill  deeds.  Therefore 
seek  to  mend  matters  now.  Avoid  the  doing  of  evil,  and  as  for  that 
which  is  already  done,  confess  it  before  God,  and  seek  to  administer  the 
antidote  by  an  earnest  and  godly  hfe. 

You  cannot  come  back  to  carry  out  those  good  resolutions,  which  as 
yet  are  as  unripe  fruit.  Young  man,  you  mean  to  do  good  some  day,  do  you 
not  ?  You  have  it  in  your  heart  to  lead  a  grand  life.  Well,  you  must 
do  it  now,  for  you  cannot  come  back  to  revise  your  conduct ;  it  Avill  not 
be  possible  to  correct  and  amend  it,  for  death  stereotypes  all.  After  death 
you  cannot  return  to  developc  your  promises  into  performances.  There- 
fore bestir  yourself  betimes.  AV^e  shall  not  be  able  to  come  back  to  finish 
the  work  we  have  begun ;  the  half-built  house  will  never  be  completed  by 
our  labour.  We  have  many  projects  which  are  but  half  developed,  we 
had  better  proceed  Avith  them  or  they  will  never  be  completed.  If  we 
leave  our  ships  on  the  stocks  we  shall  not  be  able  to  return  to  launch 
them.  When  our  lives  below  are  at  an  end  we  have  reached  the  finis  of 
our  earthly  career. 

Neither  can  we  come  back  to  rectify  any  mistake  we  have  made 


614  MBTSOPOUUa  TABUaiCLK  PDLPrt. 

in  our  life-work,  nor  even  return  to  look  after  it,  in  order  to  preserve 
thut  whidi  was  eood  io  it.  I  sometimes  think  if  I  wore  in  lieaven  I 
iiliirultl  almost  wish  to  visit  my  work  at  the  Tabertiniilc,  t<)  see  whether  it 
will  iibidi:  the  test  of  time  and  prucper  when  I  am  gone.  Will  you 
kcfp  t-j  the  truth?  Will  you  hoU  to  the  grsLil  old  ductriueaof  the 
|(I)N[h;1  ?  Or  will  this  olmrcli,  like  so  many  otheit:,  go  astray  frum  the 
■iuililicity  of  its  faith,  mid  set  np  gaudy  aervicus  utid  false  doctme? 
Muthiiiks  I  should  turn  ovtr  in  my  grave  if  such  u  thiug  cjuld  be.  God 
furiid  it !  But  there  will  be  no  comii^  back,  mid  thercfuni  we  must 
build  well,  rejecting  all  wood,  bay  aud  stubble,  luiiig  nothing  but  gold, 
siher,  imd  precious  stoues.  We  must  build  qiiii.'tly  to  get  the  work 
done,  but  fast  as  wc  labour  we  must  do  it  sui-cly  and  honestly  aud 
tlwruughly,  for  the  fire  will  try  it  when  we  are  goue.  It  will  be  a  pit; 
tliat  our  work  ahoQld  suffer  loss,  even  though  ne  uui:sel\-ea  should  w 
lavud.  We  oauikot  return  to  save  the  burning  im^ss,  uor  to  rebuild 
the  ruiu,  but  we  ehaU,  doubtless,  see  aud  know  what  ramus  of  it.  "Esta- 
blish Uiou  tlic  work  of  our  bauds  upou  us;  yea,  the  work  of  our  haDd:^ 
estttblish  thou  it." 

Therefore,  dear  brother,  if  your  hand  findeth  anything  to  do,  do  it  tt 
once  with  aJl  your  might.  If  your  heart  suggests  anything  that  should 
be  done,  let  it  be  done  at  once :  see  to  the  bringiug  up  of  your  childitii, 
Uie  conversion  of  your  neighbours,  the  laying  out  of  your  taknlE 
for  Christ,  the  consecration  of  your  substance,  the  propagation  of  the 
precious  truth  which  has  been  revealed  to  you,  If  a  good  work  is  to 
be  done,  do  it  I  Do  it,  do  it  once.  Tlie  curfew  of  time  is  sounding.  Yoor 
own  vesper  bell  is  ringing  out,  and  these  are  the  words  which  I  set  to  ib 
music — "  What  thou  doest  do  quickly,  for  when  a  few  yean  are  ooae, 
thou  must  go  whither  thou  wUt  not  return."  Again  I  aay,  "  He  tint 
hath  ears  to  hear,  let  hjin  hear." 

lY.  And  now,  lastly,  let  us  enquibe  wuituer  we  shau,  go  ?  Io 
some  respects  it  happeneth  alike  t«  all,  for  all  go  upon  the  long  jonmej. 
Ail  go  to  the  grave,  which  is  the  place  of  all  living.  It  matten  very 
little  where  our  grave  shall  be,  whether  beneath  a  weeping  vrillow  or  in 
the  solemn  deeps :  the  best  of  ail,  I  think,  that  can  happen  to  any  of  oi 
is  to  be  laid  where  we  shall  quickly  moulder  into  the  common  earth,  that 
none  may  afterwards  profane  our  bones;  but  if  they  do,  what  matters  it i 
wc  shall  kuow  oothing  of  it,  and  precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  will 
our  dust  be,  though  it  be  trodden  under  foot  or  blown  of  the  winds.  We 
shall  all  die,  and  then  wc  shall  uU  pa^  into  the  disembodied  state.  Bat 
of  what  cliaractcr  sliaU  my  death  be  aud  where  shall  I  speud  the  time  of 
waiting?  May  I  urge  upon  you  to  ask  yoursclvca  this  question?  May 
I  press  a  second  enquiry  upon  you  ?  If  at  this  very  instaut  you  were  to 
leave  your  body  where  would  your  soul  be  ?  You  may  know  veir  readily. 
Where  docs  it  delight  to  be  now  7  I  once  visited  au  aged  Chri^jan 
woman  who  said  to  me  when  she  was  near  death,  "  Sir,  I  do  not  think 
that  God  will  appoint  me  my  portion  with  the  ungodly,  for  I  could  never 
bear  their  company ;  ajid  I  do  hupe  I  shall  be  among  his  people,  though 
I  am  very  unworthy,  for  I  never  was  so  happy  as  when  I  was  with  them." 
Tea,  you  will  keep  the  same  company  for  c\ur.  The  sheep  shall  be  with 
the  steep,  and  the  goats  with  the  goats.  Your  delight  prophesies  your 
^deatiny,    What  you  have  chosen  hci-u  shall  be  your  portion  hercoflcr. 


OUR  LAST  JOURNBY.  515 

*. 

The  scoffer,  the  drunkard,  the  liar,  the  unchaste  shall  be  your  comrades 
in  hell  if  they  were  so  here.  If  you  love  sin  you  shall  be  steeped  up  to 
the  throat  in  it,  and  it  shall  bum  around  you  like  hquid  fire.  If  you 
have  loved  the  wages  of  uiu-ighteousness,  you  shall  receive  them  in  full 
tale,  for  the  wages  of  sin  is  death,  and  death  shall  rage  about  you  and 
gnaw  you  with  lus  undying  worm.  But  if  your  dehghts  have  b^n  with 
your  God,  you  shall  dweU  with  him.  If  you  have  rejoiced  in  Christ 
Jesus,  you  shall  reign  with  him,  and  if  you  have  loved  his  people,  you 
shall  abide  with  them  for  ever.  Your  disembodied  state  shall  be  spent 
either  with  Christ  and  his  people  or  with  sin  and  sinners.  If  not  in 
paradise  with  Jesus,  you  know  where  you  must  he.  Did  not  our  Lord 
himself  tell  us  of  the  great  gulf  which  cannot  be  passed,  and  of  the 
torment  of  those  upon  the  other  side.  You  may  know  it  all  before  yon 
clock  strikes  again.     Do  think  of  it  and  tremble. 

Then,  as  I  have  already  stated,  we  shall  all  go  forward  in  our  journey 
towards  resurrection.  We  shall,  every  one  of  us,  stand  in  the  latter  day 
upon  the  earth.  To  the  righteous  this  is  the  greatest  joy.  "  I  know 
that  my  next  of  kin  still  liveth,  and  though  after  my  skin  worms  devour 
this  body,  yet  in  my  flesh  shall  I  see  God."  Oh,  blessed  hope,  it  were 
worth  while  to  die  with  this  in  prospect.  A  child  of  God  who  died  not 
long  ago  said  to  one  who  stood  by,  "  I  have  enjoyed  more  in  the  two 
hours  1  have  been  d)ing  than  in  the  fifty  years  that  I  was  living.  It  is 
so  blessed  a  thing  to  die,  for  I  have  a  clear  prospect  of  the  resurrection. 
But,  oh,  to  have  no  blessed  resurrection  before  you,  but  instead  thereof 
the  certainty  of  rising  to  shame  and  to  everlasting  contempt ;  rising  so 
that  both  body  and  soul  may  be  cast  into  hell,  till  the  tongue  that  now 
dares  to  curse  will  ask  in  vain  for  a  drop  of  water  to  cool  its  burnings, 
and  every  limb  shall  be  made  to  sufier  because  it  yielded  itself  up  to  be 
an  instrument  of  unrighteousness  and  of  rebeUion  against  God.  which 
shall  your  resmTection  be — a  blessing  or  a  horror  ?  God  help  you  to 
decide.  Yea,  may  the  Holy  Ghost  so  work  upon  your  heart  and  will  that 
you  may  lay  hold  on  Jesus  at  once  and  find  eternal  life  in  him. 

Speedily  shall  come  the  great  and  terrible  scene  of  the  judgment,  when 
all  that  are  in  the  earth  and  in  the  sea  shall  stand  before  the  gi*eat  white 
throne.  What  an  assemblage  !  These  miglity  gatherings  in  the  Taber- 
nacle, and  the  crowds  we  hear  of  on  great  festival  days,  are  but  as  a  drop 
in  a  bucket  compared  Avith  the  innumerable  hordes  of  men  that  shall 
spring  up  from  their  gi*aves  Avhen  the  last  trumpet  soundeth.  If  you  can 
think  of  anything,  then,  besides  your  Judge,  you  will  cast  your  eye  as  far 
as  you  can  see,  and  over  hill  and  dale  you  will  see  myriads  of  our  race. 
Men  have  been  so  numerous  a  host  that  they  will  cover  every  speck  of 
earth ;  vea,  and  the  sea  itself  shall  yield  for  once  a  solid  basis  for  them 
to  stand  upon,  and  all  shall  teem  like  a  hive  when  the  bees  swarm 
around  it,  the  world  shall  appear  black  with  the  multitude  of  men. 
And  what  a  sight  when  the  Assessor  shall  sit  upon  his  throne,  and  he 
shall  begin  to  divide  them  as  the  shepherd  divideth  the  sheep  from  the 
goats.  To  the  righl !  To  the  left !  Blessed !  Cursed !  Come !  Depart ! 
Oh,  the  terror  of  that  voice  which  shall  pronounce  a  separate  sentence 
upon  each  of  the  two  great  classes  into  which  the  population  of  earth 
shall  then  be  divided.  On  which  side  would  you  be  if  now,  instead 
of  this  poor  voice  saluting  yoiu*  ears,  there  should  suddenly  be  a  trans- 


51G 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLR  PULPIT. 


formation  scene,  and  Christ  should  sit  upon  his  throne,  and  you  be  tboe 
and  I  be  there  to  be  judged  before  him  ? 

And  then,  after  the  judgment  cometh  the  end,  but  what  then?  Do 
not  flatter  yourselves  with  the  idea,  ye  ungodly,  that  ye  shall  be  anni- 
hiiated.  You  have  chosen  sin,  you  have  deliberately  rejected  Christ,  and 
if  you  continue  to  do  so  you  have  settled  your  own  destiny,  and  settled 
it  for  ever.  Look  the  danger  in  the  face  like  honest  men,  and  then  escape 
from  the  wrath  to  come. 

But  if  you  beheve  in  Jesus  now,  look  your  future  in  the  fece  and 
rejoice,  for  your  redemption  draweth  nigh.  See  body  and  soul  together, 
and  both  perfect,  and  Christ  the  Judge  acquitting  you,  and  saying, 
"  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you 
from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world."  Can  you  conceive  your  over- 
flowing joy,  your  ecstatic  delight  ?  The  presence  of  angels,  the  fellowship 
of  perfect  saints,  the  sight  of  your  Saviour,  near  communion  with  your 
God,  and  all  this  for  ever  and  for  ever !  Why,  methinks  it  makes  me 
wilUng  to  use  my  solemn  text  no  longer  as  a  dirge,  but  as  a  sonnet,  and 
say  right  joyously,  "  When  a  few  years  are  come,  I  shall  go  whence  I  shall 
not  return,  nor  ever  wish  to  return,  but  shall  be  for  ever  wath  the  Lord.'* 
Amen,  so  let  it  be. 


PoKTioN  OF  Scripture  read  before  SERMON^Psalm  xc. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 90,  821,  841. 


One  Penny  Each.    In  neat  Wrapper. 

SERMONS   BY  C.   H.    SPURGEON. 

Specially  adapted  for  gratuitous  distribution. 


TOKEN  FOR  TIIE  BEREAVED. 

LEI'  US  PRAY. 

CALL  TO  THE  UNCONVERTED. 

SEUMON  I'OK  EVERYBODY. 

now  TO  OBTAIX  FAITH. 

IS  CONVERSION  NECESSARY? 

TIIE  TUHNINO  POINT. 

A  SPLU  EOR  A   FREE  IIOItSE. 

BELLS  FOR  THE  HORSES. 

Tin:  WAR  HORSE. 

OOirS  JEWELS. 

RAl'l  Ls.M.AL   REGENERATION. 

CONFESSION  OF  SIN. 

AP(.)sroLlC  K.XJIORTATION. 

•J  Hi:  WAY  OF  SALVATION. 

IN F.VNT  SA L\ATION. 

HOW  TO  RAISE  THE  DE.\D. 


NONE  BUT  JESUS. 

THE  ESSENCE  OF  SIMPLICITY. 

THE  SILVER  TRU.MPET. 

JESUS  AND  THE  LAMBS. 

A  WORD  FOR  THE  PERSECUTED. 

THE    PRIEST  DISPENSED  WITH. 

BEST  BURDEN  FOR  YOUNG  SHOULDERS 

LOVING    ADVICE    FOR    ANXIOUS 

SEEKERS. 
TIIE  UPPEK  HAND. 

A  GOOD  SOLDIER  OF  JESUS  CHRIST. 
LANDLORD  AND  TENANT. 
A    DOUBLE   KNOCK    AT    THE    DOOR   OF 

THE  YOUNG. 
THERE  GO  THE  SHIPS. 
LllTLE  DOGS. 
THE  SILLY  DOVE. 


Ildil0palton  i^akmatk  fuljit 


"FOR  EVER  WITH  THE  LORD. 


>» 


t 


Dei.ivbred  on  Lord's-Day  Morning,  Sept.  16th,   1877,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 


**  So  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord." — 1  Thessalonians  iv,  17 

We  know  that  these  words  are  full  of  consolation,  for  the  apostle  says  in 
the  next  verse,  "  Wherefore  comfort  one  another  with  these  words."  The 
very  words  it  appears  were  dictated  by  the  Holy  Spirit  the  Comforter,  to 
be  repeated  by  the  saints  to  each  other  with  the  view  of  removing  sorrow 
from  the  minds  of  the  distressed.  The  comfort  is  intended  to  give  us 
hope  in  reference  to  those  who  have  fallen  asleep.  Look  over  the  list  of 
those,  beloved  in  the  Lord,  who  have  departed  from  you,  to  your  utmost 
grief,  and  let  the  words  of  our  text  be  a  handkerchief  for  your  tears, 
borrow  not  as  those  that  are  without  hope,  for  they  are  with  the  Lord 
though  they  are  not  with  you,  and  by-and-by  you  shall  surely  meet  them 
where  your  Lord  is  the  centre  of  fellowsliip  for  ever  and  ever.  The 
separation  will  be  very  transient ;  the  reunion  will  be  everlasting. 
These  words  are  also  intended  to  comfort  the  saints  with  regard  to 
themselves,  and  I  pray  that  they  may  be  a  cordial  to  any  who  are  sick 
with  fear,  a  matchless  medicine  to  charm  away  the  heartache  from  all 
believers.  The  fact  that  you  bear  about  a  dying  body  is  very  evident  to 
some  of  you  by  your  frequent  and  increasing  infirmities  and  pains,  and 
this,  it  may  be,  is  a  source  of  depression  of  spirits.  You  know  that  when 
a  few  yeai*s  are  gone  you  nmst  go  the  way  whence  you  shall  not  return  ; 
but  be  not  dismayed,  for  you  shall  not  go  into  a  strange  country  alone 
and  miattxindcd.  There  is  a  friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother, 
who  will  not  fail  you  nor  forsiUvc  you ;  and,  moreover,  you  are  going 
Lome ;  your  Lord  will  be  with  you  while  you  are  departing,  and  then  you 
"will  be  ever  with  liim.  Therefore,  though  sickness  warn  thee  of  the 
near  approach  of  death,  be  not  in  the  least  dismayed  ;  though  pain  and 
weariness  should  make  thy  heart  and  flesh  fail,  yet  doubt  not  of  thy 
triumph  through  the  Redeemer's  blood ;  though  it  should  sometimes 
make  thy  flesh  to  tremble  when  thou  rememberest  thy  many  sins  and  the 
weakness  of  thy  faith,  yet  be  of  good  cheer,  for  thy  sins  and  weakness  of 
feith   will  soon  be  removed  far  from  thee,  and  thou  shalt  be  in  his 


518  METBOFOLITAN  TABBBNAOLB  PULPIT. 

preeenoe  where  there  is  fdlnees  of  joy,  and  at  his  richt  hand,  where  there 
are  pleaflures  for  evcnnore.  Comfort  yonrselveSy  then,  both  with  r^gud 
to  those  who  have  gone  before  and  in  reference  to  the  thought  of  jonr 
own  departure. 

Observe  that  the  comfort  which  the  apostle  here  presents  to  ns  may 
be  partly  derived  fi*om  the  &ct  of  the  resurrection,  out  not  chiefly;  for 
he  does  not  so  much  refer  to  the  words  ''  The  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise," 
as  to  these  last — ''so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord."  It  is  a  great 
truth  that  you  will  rise  again ;  it  is  a  sweeter  truth  that  you  wul  be 
''  ever  with  the  Lord."  There  is  some  consolation  also  in  the  &ct  that 
we  shall  meet  our  departed  brethren  when  we  all  shall  be  caoght  np  to- 
gether in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air.  Blisafdl  wSl  be  tiie 
general  assembling  of  the  redeemed,  never  again  to  be  broken  up ;  the  joy 
of  meeting  never  to  part  again  is  a  sweet  remedy  for  the  bitterness  oi 
separation.  There  is  great  comfort  in  it,  but  the  main  stress  of  conso- 
lation does  not  lie  even  there.  It  is  pleasant  to  think  of  the  eternal 
fellowships  of  the  godly  above,  but  the  best  of  all  is  the  promised  Mow- 
ship  with  our  Loni, — "  So  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord."  What- 
ever else  you  draw  comfort  from,  neglect  not  this  deep,  dear,  and , 
overflowing  well  of  delight.  There  are  other  sources  of  good  cheer  ' 
in  connection  with  the  glory  to  be  revealed,  for  heaven  is  a  many-sided 
joy ;  but  still  none  can  excel  the  glory  of  communion  with  Jesus  Christ, 
wherefore  comfort  one  another  in  the  flrst  place,  and  most  constantly, 
with  these  words,  "  So  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord." 

I  shall  view  our  text,  in  order  to  our  comfort  at  this  time,  in  three 
lights.  I  look  upon  it,  first,  as  a  continuance — ^we  are  with  the  Lord 
even  now,  and  we  ever  shall  be :  secondly,  as  an  advancement — ^we  shall 
ere  long  be  more  fully  with  the  Lord  than  we  are  now :  and  thirdly, 
as  a  coherence — for  we  both  are  and  shall  be  with  him  in  a  dose  and 
remarkable  manner. 

I.  I  regard  the  text  as  A  oontikuanob  of  our  present  spiritual 
state — "  So  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord."  To  my  mind,  and  I  think 
I  am  not  incorrect  in  so  expounding,  the  apostle  means  that  nothing 
shall  prevent  our  continuing  to  be  ever  with  the  Lord;  death  shall 
not  separate  us,  nor  the  terrors  of  that  tremendous  day  when  the  voice 
of  the  archangel  and  the  trump  of  (rod  shall  be  heard ;  by  divine  plan 
and  arrangement  all  shall  be  so  ordained  that  "  So  shall  we  ever  be  with 
the  Lord.  By  being  caught  up  into  the  clouds,  or  in  one  way  or  anotho', 
our  abiding  in  Chnst  shall  remain  unbroken.  As  we  have  received 
Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,  so  shall  we  walk  in  him,  whether  in  life  or  in 
death. 

I  understand  him  to  mean  that  we  are  with  the  Lord  now,  and  that 
nothing  shall  separate  us  from  him.  Even  now  like  Enoch  we  walk  with 
Grod,  and  we  shall  not  be  deprived  of  divine  communion.  Our  fear  mi^t 
be  that  in  the  future  state  something  might  happen  which  would  beccmy 
a  dividing  gulf  between  us  and  Christ,  but  the  apostle  assures  us  that 
it  will  not  be  so,  there  shall  be  such  plans  and  methods  used  that  **to 
shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord."  At  any  rate,  I  know  that,  if  VtoM  1« 
not  the  truth  here  intended,  it  is  a  truth  worUiy  to  be  expounded^  and 
therefore  I  do  not  hesitate  to  enlarge  upon  it. 

We  are  with  the  Lord  in  this  life  in  a  high  spiritual  sense.    Bead  yon 


FOB  BYSR  WITH  THB  LORD.  519 

not^  in  the  ^istle  to  the  Goloasiaiifl,  **  for  ye  are  dead,  and  joar  life  is 
hid  with  GhriBt  in  Qoi "  ?  Were  yon  not  "  bnried  witii  him  in 
baptism,  wherein  also  ye  are  risen  with  him  through  the  Mih  of  the 
operation  of  God,  who  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead  "  ?  Do  yon  not 
know  what  it  is  to  be  dead  to  the  world  in  him,  and  to  be  Hying  a  secret 
life  with  him  ?  Are  you  not  risen  widi  Christ ;  ay,  and  do  you  not 
understand  in  some  measure  what  it  is  to  be  raised  up  together,  and 
made  to  sit  together  in  the  heayenlies  in  Christ  Jesus  ?  if  you  are 
not  with  him,  brethren,  you  ^re  not  Christians  at  all,  for  this  is  just  the 
mark  of  the  Christian,  that  he  follows  mth  Christ.  It  is  essential  to 
salyation  to  be  a  sheep  of  Christ's  fold,  nay  more,  a  partaker  of  Christ's 
life,  a  member  of  his  mystical  body,  a  branch  of  the  spiritual  xine. 
Separated  from  him  we  are  spiritually  dead :  he  himself  hc^  said,  '^  If  a 
man  abide  not  in  me,  he  is  cast  forth  as  a  branch,  and  is  withered ;  and 
men  gather  them,  and  cast  them  into  the  fire,  and  they  are  burned." 
Jesus  is  not  &i  from  any  one  of  his  people  ;  nay,  it  is  our  priyilege  to 
follow  him  whithersoeyer  he  goeth,  and  his  loying  word  to  us  is,  <'  Abide 
in  me,  and  I  in  you.''  May  he  enable  us  sweetiy  to  realize  tins.  We 
are,  dear  brethren,  constancy  with  Christ  in  die  sense  of  abiding  union 
with  him,  for  we  are  joined  unto  the  Lord,  and  are  one  roirit.  Some- 
times this  union  is  yery  sweetly  apparent  to  ourselyes ;  "  We  know  that 
We  are  in  him  that  is  true,"  and  in  consequence  we  fisel  an  intense  joy, 
eyen  Christ's  own  joy  fulfilled  in  us.  For  the  same  reason  we  are  at 
times  bowed  down  with  intense  sorrow ;  for  being  in  and  with  Christ 
we  haye  fellowship  with  him  in  his  sufferings,  being  made  conformable 
with  his  death  :  this  is  such  sweet  sorrow  that  the  more  we  experience  it 
the  better. 

« live  or  die,  or  work  or  suffer, 
Let  my  weary  soul  abide, 
In  all  changes  whatsoever, 
Siure  and  stedfast  by  thy  side. 

"  Nothing  can  delay  my  progress, 
Nothmg  can  diliturb  my  rest, 
If  I  shall,  where'er  I  wander, 
Lean  my  spirit  on  thy  breast.*' 

This  companionship  is,  we  trust,  made  manifest  to  others  by  its 
finits.  It  ought  always  so  to  be  :  the  life  of  the  Christian  should  be 
mwiifestly  a  life  with  Christ.  Men  should  take  knowledge  of  us  that  we 
haye  been  with  Jesus,  and  have  learned  of  him ;  they  should  see  that 
Uiere  is  something  in  us  which  could  not  have  been  there  if  it  were  not 
for  the  Son  of  God :  a  temper,  a  spirit,  a  course  of  life,  which  could  not 
have  come  by  nature  but  must  have  been  wrought  in  us  through  grace 
which  has  been  received  fix)m  him  in  whom  dwells  a  fulness  of  grace, 
even  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Brethren,  if  we  are  what  we  ought  to 
be,  our  life  is  spent  in  conscious  communion,  growing  out  of  continued 
uiion  witii  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  if  it  be  so  we  have  that  rich 
assurance  whidi  is  written  by  the  beloved  John,  "  If  that  which  ye  haye 
heard  from  the  beginning  shall  remain  in  you,  ye  also  shall  continue  in 
the  Son,  and  in  the  Father." 

We  are  with  him,  dear  friends,  in  this  sense  too,  that  his  imchanging 
love  is  always  set  upon  us,  and  our  love,  feeble  though  it  sometimes  may 


520  MKTBOFOUMK  TJlBlBVlCLK  PULPIT. 

Ijc,  DCTer  qaite  dies  out.  In  Irxh  xnaet  that  (.-tulkage  of  tbe  iqiadleu 
true,  "  Who  ehall  separate  v.^  frjin  the  love  of  God  wfaidi  ia  in  Chiist 
Jfcsws  our  Lord  ?  "  We  can  ■  ,  ■  I  .  mv  betored'a,  and  his  denn;  is 
towards  iik;"  and,  on  the  al»  testify,  "  Mr  bdond  is 

injnp,  and  1  am  his."     He  c  claim  him  :  he  lores  uc  vid 

we  love  him.    There  is  a  am  -  :vetn  ns.    Wc  sre  with  him, 

not  ai^inst  him;  ne  arc  in  i    _  .:.  tslisted  beneath  his  baoner, 

obedient  to  hiB  Spirit.     For  ■  -  ■  ;.ri=t :  we  b^re  no  otl'ier  aim. 

He  is  with  ua  by  the  conti  .■  i:  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  wiwis 

with  us  aud  shall  be  in  as  f  -  '  - :  IIi-  ^D^Muting  abideth  ob  oa,  and 
becaoac  of  it  we  abide  in  Chi-^i  J>2sai.  He  has  teal  as  the  Oomft«ter 
to  reprceeot  himself,  and  thro'jgh  that  divine  Paradete  he 
to  be  with  as,  and  so  even  n.iw  ne  are  ever  with  the  Lord. 

Oor  Lord  has  also  promised  !■  \ye  with  os  whenerer  we  are 
his  work.    That  is  a  grand  •r<  r.i  nf  enconrngement,  "  Lo,  I  am  wit 
alway,  even  unto  the  end  ol'  i'.,v  w-jrld."     Think  not,  therefore,  th^  it 
will  be  the  firet  time  of  our  :  -  : :. ::  with  Christ  when  wc  shall  see  him  in    1 
glory,  for  even  nuw  he  manil"'  -■-  ;.;::. --If  "t.^'  "?  ?..'  hi?  d--?=  mt  nut.)  the 

world.      Has  he  not  often    flliriiieo  ma  plulmec,  '■  W  ireit  (.»1<J  yit  (Jinn  its 

gathered  together  in  my  name,  there  am  1  in  the  midst  of  them"?  We 
have  heard  the  sonnd  of  our  Master's  feet  behind  as  when  we  have  heoi 
going  on  his  errands ;  wc  liave  felt  the  tondi  of  hia  hand  when  we  have 
come  to  the  forefront  of  the  liuttlc  fcr  hia  sake,  and  we  have  known  that 
he  dwelleth  in  ub  by  his  Spirit,  and  is  with  us  l^  the  power  wherewith  he 
has  attended  our  work,  and  the  deeds  wljicb  he  baa  wion|^t  by  the  good 
which  we  have  proclaimed.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  with  Sis  chnnA  in  ha 
tribulation  fur  his  name's  suke,  and  lie  will  ever  be  so,  for  he  fomkelh 
not  his  saints.  "  Fear  not,  I  am  with  thee,"  is  as  mnch  a  wend  of  the 
Lord  under  the  gospel  as  in  Old  Testament  times.  Bv  the  powo-  of 
his  blessed  Spirit  Jesus  abides  with  us,  and  through  this  present  dis- 
pensation  he  enables  ns  to  be  "  ever  with  the  I*rd. 

But,  my  brethren,  the  time  is  comin?  when  we  tkall  die,  nnless  the 
Lord  shall  descend  from  heaven  with  a  snout  meanwhile.  Assoredly  in 
the  article  of  death  we  shall  still  be  with  the  Lord. 

"  Deolb  may  niy  soul  divide 

From  tbia  abode  of  clay  ; 
But  love  shall  keep  mo  near  thy  aide 

Through  all  the  gloomy  way." 

"  Yea,  though  I  walk  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  I  will 
fear  no  evil :  for  thou  art  with  me  ;  thy  rod  oud  thy  staff  they  (X>mf<nt 
me."  Tliis  makes  dying  such  delicious  work  to  the  people  of  God,  for 
then  especially  is  Jesus  seen  to  be  near.  By  death  tiicy  escape  from 
death,  and  henceforth  it  is  no  more  death  for  them  to  die.  Whes 
JosuB  meets  his  saints  there  seems  no  iron  gate  to  pass  through,  but  in 
a  moment  they  close  their  eyes  on  earth  and  open  them  in  glory.  Be- 
loved, there  should  be  no  more  bondage  through  fear  of  death,  since 
Christ  attends  his  people  even  in  their  descent  inte  the  tomb,  and 
strengthens  them  upon  the  bed  of  langiiisliing.  This  has  been  a  great 
rto  many  departing  saints.  A  dying  Ijeliever,  who  was  attended  by 
"^       y  ig]^}  was  also  a  child  of  God,  was  observed  to  be  whiapering  ( 


FOB  EVER  WITH  THE  LORD.  521 

to  himself  while  dying,  and  his  good  attendant,  wishing  to  know  what 
were  his  last  words,  placed  his  ear  against  the  dying  man*s  lips,  and 
heard  him  repeating  to  himself  again  and  again  the  words,  "  For  ever 
with  the  Lord,  For  ever  with  the  Lord."  When  heart  and  flesh  were 
failing,  the  departing  one  knew  that  God  was  the  strength  of  his  life  and 
his  portion  for  ever,  and  so  he  chose  for  his  soil,  low-whispered,  dying 
song, — "  For  ever  with  the  Lord." 

After  death,  we  shall  abide  awhile  in  the  separate,  disembodied  state, 
and  we  shall  know  as  to  our  soul  what  it  is  to  be  still  with  the  Lord  ;  fur 
what  saith  the  apostle  ?  "  Knowing  that  when  we  are  absent  from  the  body 
we  are  present  with  the  Lord."  The  dying  thief  was  to  be  that  day  with 
Christ  in  paradise,  and  such  shall  be  our  lot  as  soon  as  our  souls  shall 
have  passed  out  of  this  tenement  of  clay  into  that  wondrous  state  of 
v/hich  we  know  so  little.  Our  pure  spirits  shall  "  come  unto  Blount  Sion, 
and  unto  the  city  of  the  living  God,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  and  to  an 
innumerable  company  of  angels,  to  the  general  assembly  and  church  of 
the  firstborn,  which  are  ^vTitteu  in  heaven,  and  to  God  the  Judge  of  all, 
and  to  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect,  and  to  Jesus  the  mediator  of 
the  new  covenant,  ajid  to  the  blood  of  sprinkling,  that  speaketh  better 
things  than  that  of  Abel."  Who  is  dismayed  when  such  a  prospect 
opens  up  before  him  ? 

Ay,  and  this  body  which  shall  fall  asleep,  though  apparently  it  shall 
be  destroyed,  yet  shall  it  not  be  so,  but  it  shall  only  slumber  awhile,  and 
then  awake  again  and  say,  "When  I  awake  I  am  still  with  thee." 
Constantly  death  is  described  as  sleeping  in  Jesus  :  that  is  the  state  of 
the  saint's  mortal  frame  through  the  interregnum  between  death  and 
resurrection.  The  angels  shall  guard  our  bodies ;  all  that  is  essential  to 
complete  the  identity  of  our  body  shall  be  securely  preserved,  so  that  the 
very  seed  which  was  put  into  the  earth  shall  rise  again  in  the  beauty  of 
efflorescence  which  becomes  it :  all,  I  say,  that  is  essential  shall  be  pre- 
served intact,  l>ecause  it  is  still  with  Christ.  It  is  a  glorious  doctrine 
Avhich  is  stated  by  the  apostle  in  the  first  e])istle  to  the  Thessalonians, 
the  fifth  chapter,  at  the  ninth  and  tenth  verses,  "  For  God  hath  not 
appointed  us  to  WTath,  but  to  obtain  salvation  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
who  died  for  us,  that,  whether  we  wake  or  sleep,  we  should  live  to- 
gether with  him." 

In  due  time  the  last  tnimp  shall  sound  and  Christ  shall  come,  but  the 
saints  shall  be  with  him.  The  infinite  providence  has  so  amiuged  that 
Christ  shall  not  come  without  his  j^eople,  for  "  Them  also  that  sleep  in 
Jesus  shall  God  bring  with  him."  The  saints  shall  be  with  him  in  the 
advent  as  they  are  now.  Our  souls  shall  hear  the  shout  of  vict(:»ry  and 
join  in  it ;  the  voice  of  the  archangel  shall  be  actually  heard  by  all  his 
redeemed,  and  the  trump  of  God  shall  be  sounded  in  the  hearing  of 
every  one  of  his  beloved,  for  we  shall  be  with  Jesus  all  through  that 
glorious  transaction.  Whatever  the  glory  and  splendour  of  the  second 
advent,  we  shall  be  with  Jesus  in  it.  I  am  not  going  to  give  you 
glimpses  of  the  revealed  future,  or  ofter  any  suggestion  as  to  the  sublime 
history  which  is  yet  to  be  written,  but  most  certiunly  there  is  to  be  a  last 
general  judgment,  and  then  we  shall  be  with  Christ,  assessors  with  him 
at  that  day.  Being  ourselves  first  acquitted,  we  shall  take  our  seat  upon 
the  judgment  bench  with  him.    What  saith  the  Holy  Ghost  by  the 


982  NETROPOLTTAB  TiBSBNlOLl  PULPIT. 

■  apoBtle — "Do  ye  net  know  that  the  sainte  shall  judge  the  world  ?  Knoit 
ye  not  that  we  shaU  judge  angels?"  Tht  fnilen  angels,  to  their  shame, 
shall  in  part  receive  the  verdict  of  their  ('nndfinnatiun  from  the  lips  of 
men,  ana  thus  Tcn^^nuce  shall  be  taken  npuu  them  for  all  the  mischief 
they  have  done  to  tlie  Bona  of  men.  Oh,  tiiink  of  it :  amidst  the  tcimr 
of  the  tremendous  day  jou  shall  be  at  case,  rcs'tiiig  in  the  love  of  Godj 
and  l)eholding  tlie  glory  of  Christ,  and  "so  shall  you  ever  be  with  the 
Lord." 

There  is,  moreover,  to  be  a  reign  of  Chriet.  I  cannot  read  the  Scrip- 
tures without  perceiving  that  there  is  to  be  a  millennial  ragii,  as  I  beliere, 
upon  the  earth,  and  that  there  shall  be  new  heavens  mid  new  earth, 
wherein  dwelleth  righteousness.  AVel!,  whatever  that  reign  j.-  to  be,  we  shall 
reign  also,  "  And  he  that  overcometh,  and  keepeth  my  works  unto  tie 
end,  to  him  will  I  give  power  over  tlie  nations :  and  he  ^ball  rule  tiiem 
with  a  rod  of  iron ;  as  the  vessels  of  a  potter  shall  thej-  he  broken  to 
shivers ;  even  as  I  received  of  my  Father."  "  And  \\atl  made  na  uitto 
our  God  kings  and  priests :  and  we  shall  reign  on  the  earth."  He  sliall 
reign,  but  it  will  be  "  before  his  ancients  glorioualy."  We  shall  bepir- 
takers  in  the  splendours  of  the  latter  days,  whatever  they  may  be,  and 
"So  shall  wc  ever  he  with  the  Lord." 

The  particular  incident  of  the  t*xt  docs  not  cxhanst  the  words,  bnt  yon 
may  apply  them  to  the  whole  story  of  God's  own  children.  From  the 
first  day  of  the  spiritual  birth  of  the  Lord's  iraraortals,  until  they  an 
received  up  into  the  seventh  heaven  to  dwell  with  God,  their  h^torr 
may  be  summed  up  in  these  words,  "  So  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord. 
Whether  caught  up  into  the  clouds  or  here  below  on  this  poor  afflicted 
earth,  in  paradise  or  in  the  renovated  earth,  in  the  grave  or  in  the 
glory,  we  shall  ever  be  with  the  Lord.  And  when  cometh  the  end,  and 
God  alone  shull  reign,  and  the  mediatorial  kiugdom  shall  ceaae,  agea, 
ages,  and  ages  shall  revolve,  but  "  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  LokL" 
The  saints  immortal  shall  be  with  their  covenant  Head,  and  like  him 
free  fi-om  sorrow.  All  tendency  to  sin  shall  be  gone,  and  all  fear  ot 
change  or  death ;  their  intimate  communion  will  last  on  for  ever : — 

"Blessed  stntc  !  beyond  conception  I 
Wlio  Its  vast  ddifthU  can  tell  P 


May 
Wi 


it  be  my  bli-sfiil  portiui 
ith  my  Saviour  there  to 


I  think  the  text  looks  like  a  continuation  of  what  is  already  begun, 
only  rising  to  something  higher  and  better.  To  be  with  Christ  is  life 
eternal :  tliis  wc  have  already,  and  shall  continue  to  have,  and  "  so  shall 
we  ever  be  with  the  Lord." 

II,  Secondly,  most  assuredly,  brethren,  the  text  is  A  Qrb&t  ADTARCft- 
KBNT — "  So  shall  we  ever  be  w'ith  the  Lord." 

It  is  an  advancement  upon  this  present  state,  for  however  spiritual 
minded  we  may  be,  and  however  in  consequence  thereof  we  may  be  very 
near  unto  our  Ijord  Jesua,  yet  still  we  know  that  while  we  are  present  in 
tiiebody  we  are  absent  from  the  Lord,  This  life,  at  its  very  best,  is  still 
comparatively  an  alienee  from  the  Lord,  but  in  the  world  to  come  we 
Bhall  be  more  perfectly  at  home.  Now  we  cannot  in  the  Iiighcstsense  be 
Christ,  for  we  must,  according  to  the  apostle's  phraseology, "  depvt, 


I^Mth 


FOR  EVER  WITH  THE  LORD.  623 

and  be  with  Christ ;  which  is  far  better  ";  but  there  we  shall  be  for  ever 
beholding  his  face  unveiled.  Earth  is  not  heaven,  though  the  believer 
begins  the  heavenly  life  while  he  is  upon  it.  We  are  not  with  Christ  as 
to  place,  nor  as  to  actual  sight,  but  in  the  glory-land  we  shall  be. 

And  it  is  an  advancement,  in  the  next  place,  upon  the  present  state  of 
the  departed,  for  though  their  souls  are  with  the  liord  yet  their  bodies 
are  subject  to  corruption.  Still  does  the  sepulchre  contain  the  blessed 
dust  of  the  fathers  of  our  Israel,  or  scattered  to  the  four  winds  of  heaven 
the  martyr's  ashes  are  with  us  still.  The  glorified  saints  are  not  as  yet 
consciously  "  \\ith  the  Lord  "  as  to  their  complete  manhood,  but  when 
the  grand  event  shall  occur  of  which  Paul  speaks,  the  body  shall  be 
reanimated.  This  is  our  glorious  hope.  We  can  say  with  the  patriarch 
Job — "  For  I  know  that  my  redeemer  livcth,  and  that  he  shall  stand  at 
the  latter  day  upon  the  earth :  and  though  after  my  skin  worms  destroy 
this  body,  yet  in  my  flesh  shall  I  see  God :  whom  I  shall  see  for  myself, 
and  mine  eyes  shall  behold,  and  not  another ;  though  my  reins  be  con- 
sumed within  me."  Know  ye  not,  brethren,  that  flesh  and  blood  cannot 
inherit  the  kingdom  of  God  ?  That  is,  as  they  are ;  but  this  corruptible 
must  put  on  incorruption,  and  this  mortal  must  put  on  immortality,  and 
then  shall  the  entire  manhood,  the  perfected  manhood,  the  fully  developed 
manhood,  of  which  this  manhood  is  as  it  were  but  a  shrivelled  seed,  be 
in  the  fullest  and  di^inest  sense  for  ever  with  the  Lord.  This  is  an  ad- 
vancement even  upon  the  present  paradisiacal  state  of  departed  saints. 

And  now  let  us  consider  what  this  glorious  condition  is  to  which  we 
shall  be  advanced.  We  shall  be  with  the  Lord  in  the  strongest  possible 
meaning  of  that  language.  So  with  him  that  we  shall  never  mind 
earthly  things  again,  shall  have  no  more  to  go  into  city  business,  or  into 
the  workshop,  or  into  the  field ;  we  shall  have  nought  to  do  but  to  be 
engaged  for  ever  with  him  in  such  occupations  as  shall  have  no  tendency 
to  take  us  off  from  communion  with  him.  We  shall  be  so  with  him  as 
to  have  no  sin  to  becloud  our  view  of  him  :  the  understanding  vnll  be 
delivered  from  all  the  injury  which  sin  has  wrought  in  it,  and  we  shall 
know  him  even  as  we  are  known.  We  shall  see  him  as  a  familiar  friend, 
and  sit  with  him  at  his  marriage  feast.  We  shall  be  with  him  so  as  to 
have  no  fear  of  his  ever  being  grieved  and  hiding  his  face  from  us  again. 
We  shall  never  again  be  made  to  cry  out  in  bitterness  of  spirit,  "  Oh, 
that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  him."  We  shall  always  know  his  love, 
always  return  it,  and  always  swim  in  the  full  stream  of  it,  enjoying  it  to 
the  full.  There  will  be  no  lukewarmness  to  mar  our  fellowship.  He 
shall  never  have  to  say  to  us,  "  I  would  thou  wert  either  cold  or  hot." 
There  shall  be  no  weariness  to  suspend  our  ceaseless  bliss  :  we  shall  never 
have  to  cease  from  fellowship  with  him,  because  our  physical  frame  is 
exhausted  through  the  excessive  joy  of  our  heart ;  the  vessel  will  be 
strengthened  to  hold  the  new  wine.  No  doubts  shall  intrude  into  our 
rest,  neither  doctrinal  doubts  nor  doubts  about  our  interest  in  him,  for 
we  shall  be  so  consciously  with  him  as  to  have  risen  ten  thousand 
leagues  above  that  gloomy  state.  We  shall  know  that  he  is  ours,  for 
his  left  hand  shall  be  under  our  head  and  his  right  hand  shall  embrace 
ns,  and  we  shall  be  with  him  beyond  all  hazard  of  any  remove  from 
him.  The  chief  blessedness  seems  to  me  to  lie  in  this,  that  we  shall  be 
with  him  and  with  him  always.    Now  we  are  with  the  Lord  in  conscious 


•J-IL.-  " 


521  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

enjoyment  sometimes,  and  then  we  are  away  from  him,  but  tiiere  it  will 
be  constant,  unwavering  fellowship.  No  break  shall  ever  occur  in  flie 
intimate  communion  of  the  saints  with  Christ.  Here  we  know  thafc  our 
high  days  and  bright  Sabbaths,  with  their  sweetest  joys,  most  hs?e 
their  eventides,  and  then  come  the  work-days  with  the  burden  of  ike 
week  upon  them ;  l3ut  there  the  Sabbath  is  eternal,  the  worship  endko^ 
the  praise  unceasing,  the  bliss  unbounded.  "  For  ever  with  the  Loid."- 
Speak  ye  of  a  thousand  years  of  reigning  ?  What  is  that  compared  with 
"for  ever  with  the  Lord"?  The  millennium  is  httle  compared  wift 
"for  ever" — a  millennium  of  millenniums  would  be  nothing  to  it 
There  can  come  no  end  to  us  and  no  end  to  our  bliss^  since  there  can 
be  no  end  to  him — "  because  I  live,  ye  shall  Kve  also." 

"For  ever  with  the  Lord" — What  will  it  mean?  I  remembw  a 
sermon  upon  this  text  by  a  notable  preacher,  of  which  the  heads  were  as 
follows — "  For  ever  life,  for  ever  light,  for  ever  love,  for  ever  peace,  for 
ever  rest,  for  ever  joy."  AYhat  a  chain  of  dehghts !  What  more  can 
heart  imagine  or  hope  desire  ?  Carry  those  things  in  your  mind  and  you 
will  get,  if  you  can  drink  into  them,  some  idea  of  the  blessedness  whidi 
is  contained  in  being  for  ever  with  the  Lord ;  but  still  recollect  these  are 
only  the  fruits,  and  not  the  root  of  the  joy.  Jesus  is  better  than  all  these. 
His  company  is  more  than  the  joy  which  comes  out  of  it.  I  do  not  care 
so  much  for  "  life  for  ever,"  nor  for  "  light  for  ever,"  as  I  do  for  ^^forevw 
with  the  Lord."  Oh,  to  be  vnth  him !  I  ask  no  other  bliss,  and  camiot 
imagine  aught  more  heavenly.  Why,  the  touch  of  the  hem  of  his  gar- 
ment healed  the  sick  woman ;  the  sight  of  him  was  enough  to  give  life  to 
us  when  we  were  dead !  What,  then,  must  it  be  to  be  with  him  actaallj, 
consciously,  and  always  ?  to  be  with  him  no  more  by  foith,  bnt  in  veiT 
deed  with  him  for  ever  ?  My  soul  is  ready  to  swoon  away  with  too  mn^ 
joy  as  she  drinks  even  in  her  shallow  measure  into  the  meaning  of  this 
thought,  and!  dare  not  venture  further.  I  must  leave  you  to  muse  your 
souls  into  it,  for  it  needs  quiet  thought  and  room  for  free  indulgence 
of  holy  imagination  till  you  make  your  soul  to  dream  of  this  excess  of 
joy.  "  Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  have  entered  into  the 
heart  of  man,  the  things  which  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  lore 
him.     But  God  hath  revealed  them  unto  us  by  his  Spirit." 

"  O  glorious  Lour !  O  blest  abode ! 
I  shall  be  near  and  like  my  God  ; 
And  flesh  and  sin  no  more  control 
The  sacred  pleasures  of  my  soul.*' 

We  love  to  think  of  being  with  Jesus  under  the  aspect  which  the  text 
specially  suggests  to  us.  We  are  to  be  for  ever  ^^^th  the  Redeemer, 
not  as  Jesus  the  Saviour  only,  but  as  the  Lard.  Here  we  have  seen 
him  on  the  cross  and  lived  thereby  ;  we  are  with  him  now  in  his  cross- 
bearing  and  shame,  and  it  is  well ;  but  our  eternal  companionship 
with  him  will  enable  us  to  rejoice  in  him  a^  the  Lord,  What  ssid 
our  Master  in  his  blessed  prayer  ?  "I  will  that  they  also,  whom  thw 
hast  gi^'cn  me,  be  with  me  where  I  am ;  that  they  may  behold  my  glory'* 
It  will  be  heaven  to  us  to  be  fur  ever  with  him  as  the  Lord.  Oh,  ho^ 
we  shall  delight  to  obey  him  as  our  Lord !  How  we  shall  triumph  as  we 
see  what  a  lord  he  is  over  all  the  universe  !  and  what  a  conqueror  he  is 


FOB  EVER  WITH  THE  LORD.  525 

over  all  his  eneinies !  He  will  be  more  and  more  the  Lord  to  us  as  we 
Bee  all  things  put  under  him.  We  shall  for  ever  hail  him  as  King  of 
kings,  and  Lord  of  lords.  How  we  will  adore  him  there  when  we  see 
him  in  his  glory.  We  do  worship  him  now,  and  are  not  ashamed  to 
believe  that  the  Man  of  Nazareth  is  "  very  God  of  very  God  : "  but  oh, 
how  his  deity  will  shine  upon  us  with  infinite  effulgence  when  we  come 
to  be  near  him.  Thanks  be  to  his  name,  we  shall  be  strengthened  to 
endure  the  sight,  and  we  shall  rejoice  to  see  ourselves  in  the  full  blaze  of 
his  glory.  Then  shall  we  see  what  our  poet  endeavoured  to  describe 
when  he  said — 

"  Adoring  saints  around  bim  stand, 
And  thrones  and  powers  before  him  fall ; 
The  God  shines  gracious  through  the  Man, 
And  sheds  sweet  glories  on  them  all." 

We  shall  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord,  and  his  Lordship  shall  be  most 
npon  our  minds.  He  has  been  raised  into  glory  and  honour,  and  is  no 
more  able  to  suffer  shame. 

"  No  more  the  bloody  spear, 

The  cross  and  nails  no  more  ; 
For  hell  itself  shakes  at  his  word, 
And  all  the  heavens  adore.'* 

III.  Now  we  come  to  our  third  point,  and  shall  consider  what,  for 
want  of  a  better  word,  I  entitle  A  coherence.  Those  who  are  acquainted 
with  the  Greek  language  know  that  the  "  tvith  "  here  is  not  meta,  which 
signifies  being  in  the  same  place  with  a  person,  but  sutiy  which  goes  very 
much  fiirther,  and  implies  a  coherence,  the  two  who  are  with  each  other 
are  intimately  connected.  Let  me  show  you  what  I  mean.  .We  are  to 
be  for  ever  with  the  Lord  :  now,  the  Christian's  life  is  all  along  like  the 
life  of  his  Lord,  and  so  it  is  a  life  with  Christ.  He  was  in  all  things 
with  his  brethren,  and  grace  makes  us  to  be  with  him.  Just  hurriedly 
look  at  your  spiritual  experience  and  your  Lord's  life,  and  see  the 
parallel.  When  you  were  new  bom  as  a  Christian  you  were  bom  as 
Jesus  Christ  was,  for  you  were  bom  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  What  happened 
after  that  ?  The  devil  tried  to  destroy  the  new  life  in  you,  just  as 
Herod  tried  to  kill  your  Lord :  you  were  with  Christ  in  danger,  early 
and  imminent.  You  grew  in  stature  and  in  grace,  and  while  yet 
grace  was  young,  you  staggered  those  who  were  about  you  with  the 
things  you  said,  and  did,  and  felt,  for  they  could  not  understand  you ; 
even  thus  when  he  went  up  to  the  temple  our  Lord  amazed  the  doctors 
who  gathered  around  him.  The  Spirit  of  God  rested  upon  you,  not  in 
the  same  measure,  but  still  as  a  matter  of  fact  it  did  descend  upon  you  as 
it  did  upon  your  Lord.  You  have  'been  with  him  in  Jordan's  stream, 
and  have  received  the  divine  acknowledgment  that  you  are  indeed  the 
son  of  God.  Your  Lord  was  led  into  the  wilderness  to  be  tempted  ;  and 
you  too  have  been  tempted  of  the  devil.  You  have  been  with  the  Lord 
aU  along,  from  the  first  day  until  now.  If  you  have  been  by  grace 
enabled  to  Hve  as  you  should,  you  have  trodden  the  separated  path  with 
Jesus ;  you  have  been  in  the  world,  but  not  of  it,  holy,  harmless, 
undefilea,  and  separate  from  sinners.  Therefore  you  have  been 
despised;  you  have  had  to  take  your  share  of  being  unknown  and 


5»«  METBOPOLITJjr  TiBWWAOW  TOIFIT. 

miBreprescTited,  becaase  yon  are  even  as  he  was  in  tbo  worM.  "T>ierc- 
fore  the  world  knoiioth  us  not,  becauae  it  knew  him  nut."  As  he  wnj 
here  to  serve,  you  have  been  with  him  as  a  serrant,  vi>ii  have  mrried 
his  yoke  and  counted  it  an  easy  load.  Ton  have  heon"  crucified  t;  tiie 
world  with  him:  yon  know  the  meaning  of  his  ctcifls.  and  delight  lo 
bear  it  after  him.  Yon  arc  dead  to  the  world  with  hini.  aiid  wish  to  U 
as  one  buried  to  it.  Yon  have  already  in  your  meastii-o  partaken  of  hit 
resurrection,  and  are  living  in  newness  of  life.  Your  liic-gtory  is  still  to 
be  like  the  life-story  of  your  Lord,  only  painted  in  miniatttro.  The  more  yon 
watch  the  life  of  Christ  the  more  clearly  you  will  see  the  life  of  a  spirilu^ 
mnii  depicted  in  it,  and  the  more  clearly  will  you  »e  what  the  saint»' 
future  will  be.  You  have  been  with  Christ  in  life,  and  you  will  t» 
with  him  when  you  come  to  die.  You  will  not  die  the  ex]>mtory  death 
which  fell  to  his  lot,  but  you  will  die  feehng  that  "it  is  finished,"  and 
you  will  breathe  out  your  soul.  Baying,  "  Father,  into  tly  baud  I  commead 
my  spirit." 

Then  our  Lord  went  to  paradise,  and  you  will  go  thtrc  too.  You  shill 
enjoy  a  sojourn  where  he  spent  his  interval  in  the  fiiscmbodii-d  state- 
You  shall  be  with  him,  and  like  him,  and  then  hke  liiiu  y<m  Bhall  rise 
when  your  third  morning  Cometh.  "After  two  days  will  he  revive  ns:  in 
the  third  day  he  will  raise  us  up,  and  we  shall  live  in  his  sight,"  "Hy 
dead  men  shall  live,  together  with  my  dead  body  shall  they  arise."  Yon  shall 
also  ascend  as  Christ  did.  Do  yoti  catch  the  thought?  Howdidheaacead? 
In  clouds.  "  A  cloud  received  him  out  of  their  sight,"  and  a  clcnd  sfad 
receive  you.  You  shall  be  caught  up  info  the  clouds  to  meet  the  LiM<l 
in  the  air,  and  so  shall  ^ou  be  ever  mtb  the  Lord,  in  the  sense  of  beiiig 
like  to  him,  walking  with  him  in  experience,  and  passing  through  tfaa 
like  events.  That  likeness  shall  continue  for  ever  and  for  ever.  Oni 
lives  shall  run  parallel  with  that  of  our  Lord. 

Think  then,  beloved,  we  are  to  be  like  Christ  as  to  onr  character :  we 
are  to  be  with  the  Lord  by  sharing  bis  moral  and  spiritual  likenca. 
Conformed  to  his  image,  we  shall  be  adorned  with  his  beauty.  When 
the  mother  of  Darius  saw  two  persons  entering  her  pavilion,  she  being 
a  prisoner  bowed  to  the  one  whom  she  supposed  to  oe  Alexander.  It 
turned  out  to  be  Hyphestion,  the  King's  favourite.  Upon  discoTeriDg 
that  it  was  Hyphestion  the  lady  humbly  begged  Alexander's  pardon  for 

Eaying  obeisance  to  the  wrong  person,  but  Alexander  answered,  "  Yon 
ave  not  mistaken.  Madam,  for  he  also  is  Alexander,"  meaning  that  he 
loved  him  so  much  that  he  regarded  him  as  his  other  self.  Our  Lord 
looks  on  his  beloved  as  one  with  himself,  and  makes  them  like  himself. 
You  remember,  brethren,  bow  John  bowed  down  before  one  of  his  fellow 
servants,  the  prophets  in  heaven.  It  was  a  great  blunder  to  make,  but  I 
dare  say  yon  and  I  will  be  likely  to  make  the  same,  for  the  saints  are  so 
like  their  Lord.  Know  ye  not  that  "we  shall  be  like  him  when  we 
ahall  Bee  him  as  he  is"?  Christ  will  rejoice  to  see  them  all  covered  with 
the  glory  which  his  Father  has  given  him.  He  will  not  be  ashamed  to 
call  them  brethren.  Those  poor  people  of  his,  who  were  so  full  of 
infirmity,  and  mourned  over  it  so  much,  they  shall  be  so  like  hicn  that 
tbey  sh^  be  at  once  seen  to  be  his  brethren.  Where  shall  siich  fa^-oured 
""     be  found  ? 

e  shall  be  with  him  in  the  sense  that-  we  shall  be  partakers  of  all 


FOB  EVER  WITH  THE  LORD.  627 

the  bleflsedness  and  glory  which  onr  adorable  Lord  now  enjoys.  We 
shall  be  accepted  together  with  him.  Is  he  the  beloved  of  the  Lord  ? 
Does  his  Fatner's  heart  delight  in  him,  as  well  it  may  ?  Behold  ye  also 
shall  be  called  Hephzibah,  for  his  delight  shall  be  in  you.  You  shall 
be  beloved  of  the  Father's  soul.  Is  he  enriched  with  all  manner  of  bless- 
ings beyond  conception  ?  So  shall  you  be,  for  he  has  blessed  us  with 
all  spiritual  blessings  in  Christ  Jesus,  according  as  he  has  chosen  us 
in  him.  Is  Christ  exalted  ?  Oh,  how  loftily  is  he  lifted  up  to  sit  upon 
a  glorious  high  throne  for  ever  !  But  you  shall  sit  upon  his  throne  with 
him  and  share  his  exaltation  as  you  have  shared  his  humiliation.  Oh, 
the  delight  of  thus  being  joint  heirs  with  Christ,  and  with  him  in  the 
possession  of  all  that  he  possesses.  What  is  heaven  ?  It  is  the  place 
which  his  love  suggested,  which  his  genius  invented,  which  his  bounty 
provided,  which  his  royalty  has  adorned,  which  his  wisdom  has  pre- 
pared, which  he  himself  glorifies ;  in  that  heaven  you  are  to  be  with 
him  for  ever.  You  shall  dwell  in  the  King's  own  palace.  Its  gates  of 
pearl  and  streets  of  gold  shall  not  be  too  good  for  you.  You  who  love 
him  are  to  abide  for  ever  with  him,  not  near  him  in  a  secondary  place, 
as  a  servant  lives  at  the  lodge  gate  of  his  master's  mansion,  but  with 
him  in  the  self-same  palace  in  the  metropolis  of  the  universe. 

In  a  word,  believers  are  to  be  identified  with  Christ  for  ever.  That 
seems  to  me  to  be  the  very  life  and  essence  of  the  text :  with  him  for 
ever,  that  is,  identified  with  him  for  ever.  Do  they  ask  for  the  Shepherd? 
They  cannot  behold  him  to  perfection  except  as  surrounded  by  his 
sheep.  Will  the  King  be  illustrious?  How  can  that  be  if  his 
subjects  are  lost  ?  Do  they  ask  for  the  bridegroom  ?  They  cannot 
imagine  him  in  the  fulness  of  joy  without  his  bride.  Will  the  Head 
be  blessed  ?  It  could  not  be  if  it  were  separated  from  the  members. 
Will  Christ  be  for  ever  glorified?  How  can  he  be  if  he  shall  lose 
his  jewels  ?  He  is  a  foundation,  and  what  would  he  be  if  all  his  people 
were  not  built  upon  him  into  the  similitude  of  a  palace  ?  0  brethren, 
there  shall  be  no  Christ  without  Christians  ;  there  shall  be  no  Saviour 
without  the  saved  ones ;  there  shall  be  no  Elder  Brother  without 
the  younger  brethren ;  there  shall  be  no  Redeemer  without  his 
redeemed.  We  are  his  fulness,  and  he  must  have  us  with  him.  We 
are  identified  with  him  for  ever.  Nothing  can  ever  divide  ns  from 
him.     Oh,  joy,  joy  for  ever.     Hallelujah  ! 

"  Since  Christ  and  we  are  one, 

Why  should  we  doubt  or  fear  ? 
If  he  in  heaven  hath  fix'd  his  throne, 
He'll  fix  his  members  there." 

Two  or  three  practical  sentences.  One  word  is  this — This  '*  with  ihe 
Lord''  must  begin  noiv.  Do  you  wish  to  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord  ? 
You  must  be  with  him  by  becoming  his  disciple  in  this  life.  None 
come  to  be  with  the  Lord  hereafter  who  are  not  with  the  Lord  here  in 
time.  See  to  it,  dear  hearers,  see  to  it,  lest  this  unspeakable  privilege 
should  never  be  yours. 

Next,  every  Christian  should  seek  to  be  more  and  more  with  Christ, 
for  the  growth  and  glory  of  your  life  lies  tfiere.  Do  you  want  to  have 
heaven  below  ?  Be  with  Christ  below.  Do  you  want  to  know  at  once 
what  eternal  bliss  is  ?    Know  it  by  living  now  with  the  Lord. 


628  MT5TR0P0LITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT, 

The  next  word  is,  how  plainly  then  the  way  of  life  is  to  h$  wSk.Sn 
Lord,  If  you  want  to  be  saved,  sinner,  you  must  be  "  with  the  Lori" 
There  is  no  other  way  for  you.  Come  near  to  him,  and  lay  hold  upon 
him  by  faith.  Life  lies  there.  Come  to  him  by  a  humbley  tearfal  faith. 
Come  at  once. 

And,  lastly,  u'?iat  must  it  he  to  he  mthout  the  Lord?  What  must  it  be 
to  be  against  the  Lord  ?  For  it  comes  to  that,  "  He  that  is  not  with 
me,"  saith  he,  '*  is  against  me."  To  be  for  ever  without  the  Lord, 
banished  from  liis  love,  and  light,  and  life,  and  peace,  and  rest,  and  joyl 
What  a  loss  will  this  be  I  What  must  it  be  to  be  for  ever  against  the 
Lord  !  Think  of  it :  for  ever  hating  Jesus,  for  ever  plotting  against 
him,  for  ever  gnashing  your  teeth  against  him;  this  is  hell,  this  is  the 
infinite  of  misery,  to  be  against  the  Lord  of  love  and  life  and  hght 
Turn  ye  from  this  fatal  course.  Believe  on  him  :  '*  Kiss  the  Son,  lest  be 
be  angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way,  when  his  wrath  is  kindled  bnta 
little.     Blessed  are  all  they  that  put  their  trust  in  him."    Amen, 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — 1  Thess.  iv. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book" — 855,  846,  853. 


Jtist  Published,    No,  2  of  the  Shilling  Series. 

SEVEN    WONDERS    OF    GRACE. 

B-z-    O.    H.    S  FXJ  rt  C3- E  o  3sr. 


**  A  neat  little  pocket  volume,  the  second  of  the  *  Shilling  Series**  oontaining 
seven  of  the  matchless  sermons  which  have  made  the  Tabernacle  Pulpit  vocal  to 
the  ends  of  the  earth.  It  would  be  presumption  to  say  more  than  that  they  are  one 
in  conception,  in  simple  power,  and  in  spiritual  wealth  with  all  that  Mr.  Spoigecm 
has  written." — TJie  Christmn, 


Passmorb  k  Alabaster,  4,  Paternoster  Buildings ;  and  all  BooksoUexB. 


^^tpplton  i^akmark 


"NOW  THEN  DO  IT. 


ft 


t 


Delivered  on  Lord's-Day  Morning,   September  2nuD,  1877,  by 

C.    H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"  Ye  sought  for  David  in  times  past  to  be  king  over  you :  now  then  do  it :  for  tho 
Lord  hath  spoken  of  David,  saying,  By  the  hand  of  my  servant  David  I  will  save 
my  people  Israel  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Philistines,  and  out  of  the  hand  of  all  their 
enemies.*' — 2  Samuel  iii.  17,  18. 

You  know  the  circumstances  under  which  these  words  were  spoken. 
<jod  had  cast  off  Saul  because  he  had  not  been  faithful,  and  he  had 
appointed  Da\id  to  be  his  successor,  anointing  him  by  the  hand  of 
Samuel.  Yet  when  Saul  was  slain  in  battle  Israel  seemed  determined  to 
choose  her  own  king,  by  selecting  one  of  Saul's  family,  and  under  the 
leadership  of  Abner  the  majority  of  the  tribes  set  up  Ishbosheth,  son  of 
Jonathan,  to  be  king.  Then  commenced  a  civil  war  between  the  two 
parties,  and  we  read  that  the  house  of  David  waxed  stronger  and 
stronger,  and  the  house  of  Saul  grew  weaker  and  weaker.  In  process  of 
time  Abner,  the  commander-in-chief  and  prime  minister,  who  was  at  the 
head  of  Saul's  party,  because  it  served  his  own  purpose,  changed  his 
mind,  and  resolved  that  David  should  Ixjcome  king  over  the  whole  land. 
Having  so  resolved  he  began  to  persuade  the  tribes  and  argue  with  them 
on  David's  behalf ;  and  the  words  of  my  text  are  a  part  of  a  very 
powerful  argument  which  he  used  in  order  to  induce  them  to  give  up  the 
ting  of  their  own  choosing,  and  offer  the  crown  to  the  king  whom 
God  had  appointed,  even  David.  I  need  say  but  very  little,  however, 
about  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  for  I  am  alx)ut  to  accommodate  the 
words  to  quite  another  peojile  and  another  king.  I  desire,  in  all  sin- 
cerity of  heart,  to  approach  those  of  you  whose  minds  are  ruled  by  evil 
desires  and  motives,  all  of  which  are  alien  sovereigns,  hostile  to  the  true 
king,  whom  God  has  anointed, — and  to  remind  you  this  moniing  that  you 
have  in  times  past  sought  to  have  Jesus  to  be  King  over  you.  Perhaps 
you  have  some  desires  towards  him  Hngering  in  your  heart  even  yet,  and 
therefore  I  have  hope  of  you  that  you  will  go  further,  and  in  all  sin- 
cerity submit  yourselves  to  his  dominion.  It  is  time  that  yon  should 
go  beyond  mere  desires,  e^nd  attain  to  something  practical.  In  tho 
No.  1,375. 


630  METROPOLrUir  TABEONACLK  POr.FIT. 

words  of  Abncr  I  would  say  to  you,  "Now  thea  do  it."     If  vortfc  4ft- 

siring  it  is  worth  performing.  "Now  then  do  it."  There  are  the  bat 
of  reasons  nhy  you  should  do  it,  for  Jeaos  ia  God's  ^pointed  Kio^ 
anointed  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  whom  alone  he  will  Bare  joa  from  jour 
Bpiritual  enemies.  Sray  God  grant  that  his  word  be  snccessful,  thn>^ 
his  di\-inc  Spirit,  in  eetablishing  the  kingdom  of  Christ  in  many  mi£- 
cidcd  hearts  this  morning,  and  he  shall  have  the  praise. 

The  text  gives  me  the  following  rnn  of  thought.  Firrt,  I  would  f»- 
mindijoa  of  former  impulses — "  Ye  sought  for  Da^id  in  times  past  to  be 
king  over  you";  secondly,  I  would  recommend  decided  action — ^"Nor 
then  do  it " ;  and  thirdly,  I  would  reiuon  tcitA  a  forcible  arffumetii,  br, 
only  changing  names,  I  may  read  my  text  on  in  this  &Bhion,  "  The  hiai 
hath  spoken  of  Jesus,  saying,  by  the  hand  of  my  only  beeotten  Son  Ii^ 
save  my  people  Israel  out  of  the  hand  of  the  powers  of  darlaiesB,  and  oot 
ef  the  band  of  all  their  enemiea." 

I,  First,  then,  my  business  this  morning  is  to  Bevcid  xjsdecidkd 
FEBSONS  OF  FORHEB  IUPUL8ES.  I  would  personally  address  eadi 
hesitating  hearer,  and  call  up  the  memories  of  his  life.  Tou  are  not  i 
Christian,  but  many  times  yon  have  been  npon  the  vei^  of  it,  fi:v  ym 
have  even  gone  the  length  of  seeking,  after  a  fashion,  to  have  Jesaa  for 
yonr  King. 

Of  course  Ihe  character  and  frrqurtuy  of  ihote  impuhte  ham  vaHei 
ffreallij  in  different  ittdividvals.  Each  man  has  had  his  own  amoont  of 
drawings  and  inchninga  towards  God.  I  cannot  so  speak  as  to  describe  aD 
at  once,  and  therefore  I  must  go  into  particuliffs.  Many  of  you  have  been 
tutored  in  the  ways  and  manners  of  the  godly  from  yout  youth  xxf.  The 
verjJirst  aongyou  heard  your  mother  sing  as  she  hushed  you  to  deep 
was  sweetened  nith  the  name  of  Jesus.  Probably  you  cannot  reooUeet  a 
time  when  there  were  not  some  holy  agencies  at  work  upon  your  heart ; 
and  yon  recoHect  the  effect  they  had  upon  you,  even  at  the  very  begiih 
ning,  when  even  aa  a  child  your  little  prayer  at  night  grew  fervent,  aid 
you  sobbed  yourself  to  sleep  with  grief  for  having  done  wrong.  O&CB 
did  your  cliildi^h  heart  sign  after  "gentle  Jesns"  and  long  for  his  Vm. 
I  think  I  sec  tliose  t«ars  upon  your  little  cheek  even  now,  when  yon  had 
lately  heard  the  Ktory  of  Jesus,  or  had  been  earnestly  addressed  oonoeni- 
ing  death  and  judgment  to  come.  '^Vhcn  the  sweetness  and  beauty  d 
Ghjifit  and  the  liivppiuuss  of  believers  were  set  before  you  ia  your  yonth 
you  often  felt  drawn  to  the  ci'OBs.  Nor  was  it  in  childhood  alone,  foi  as 
you  grew  older  there  were  agencies  adapted  for  your  growth  prepared  by 
infinite  love.  Some  of  you  fell  into  the  hands  of  sincere  Christian  men 
and  women,  wlio  did  not  c«ase  to  instnict  yon  and  to  warn  you;  and 
sometimes,  aa  yon  must  remember  if  yon  nill  but  try  to  do  bo,  yon 
were,  like  Agripfa  of  old,  "  almost  persuaded  to  be  a  Christian."  Yon 
promised,  yon  resolved,  you  began  even  to  pray,  bat,  alas !  your  good- 
ness was  as  the  niomiiig  cloud,  as  the  early  dew,  and  soon  passed  away ; 
but  yet  you  do  remember,  do  yon  not,  that  it  was  there  ?  Since  ibea, 
though  you  have  been  immersed  in  business  csres,  you  have  not  been 
altogctlicr  without  some  thoughts  towards  Jesus  the  Saviour.  An  eamert 
Betuion  has  Jrivtn  you  home  to  yonr  knees:  affiiction  has  frequently 
compelled  you  sticmnly  to  consider ;  tlie  death  of  others  has  made  yoa 
^'     h*nd  forced  yoa  to  hopeful  resolves.     Can  you  count  up  \h»  uuaj 


NOW  THEN  DO  IT.  531 

times  in  which  you  have  come  to  a  dead  halt,  and  have  raised  the  question, 
^*  Shall  I  go  further  or  shall  I  turn?'*  Your  soul  has  been  half  con- 
strained to  say  within  herself,  "  Things  shall  be  altered :  I  will  be  no  longer 
an  ungrateful  child  to  my  good  God,  but  I  will  aiise  and  go  unto  my 
Father/*  Why,  there  are  some  of  you  to  whom  continuance  in  rebellion 
must  have  been  very  difficult,  for  you  have  had  to  stifle  and  almost  to 
strangle  conscience.  If  you  do  not  see,  it  is  because  you  have  laid  your 
lingers  heavily  upon  your  eyelids  to  keep  out  the  light :  if  you  luive  not 
heard,  it  has  been  because  you  have  stopped  your  ears  till  they  have  U'comc 
dull  of  hearing.  The  knock  at  your  door  by  your  Lord's  pierced  hand 
has  been  kept  up  year  after  year,  almost  incessantly,  and  eveu  in  the 
night  watches  you  have  been  startled  with  it.  He  whose  head  is  wet 
with  dew,  and  his  locks  with  the  drops  of  the  night,  has  stood  there 
these  many  weary  montlis  knocking,  knocking,  knocking !  In  boundless 
patience  of  love  he  lingei*s  still,  and  again  hfts  that  scarred  hand  to 
knock  again  in  tender  earnestness.  You  have  been  almost  persuaded  to 
rise  from  the  couch  of  your  sloth  to  admit  him  to  your  heart,  but  as 
jet  you  have  not  done  so.  Ye  sought  for  Da^id  to  be  king  over  you  in 
times  past,  some  of  you,  but,  alas !  ye  have  not  crowned  him  yet. 

There  are  others  among  you  who  have  not  been  so  highly  favoured 
Avith  reUgious  advanUiges.  Some  of  you,  perhaps,  come  of  an  ungodly 
household,  and  your  bringing  up  has  been  apart  from  the  tilings  ot 
(jod.  I  grieve  to  say  that  this  is  getting  daily  more  frequent,  especially 
in  our  great  cities.  Children  nowadays  are  not  trained  to  the  obser^'ance 
of  the  Sabbath  as  they  were,  and  multitudes  in  this  great  city  seldom 
tread  the  floor  of  God's  house  at  all.  Still  I  can  scarcely  imagine  that 
there  is  one  present  but  what  has  at  times  enjoyed  holy  impulses,  right 
<X)nvictions,  and  pure  desires.  Conscience,  though  not  enlightened  as 
we  could  have  wished,  has  not  been  quite  quiet  with  you :  you  have  felt 
uneasy  in  your  unconverted  state,  and  you  arc  uneasy  now.  You  have 
been  forced  sometimes  to  think,  and  when  a  man  who  is  without  God 
and  without  Christ  begins  to  think  his  thoughts  must  trouble  him,  and, 
being  troubled,  he  is  likely  to  desire  the  way  of  ixiacc.  I  cannot  but 
believe  that  you  who  are  thoughtful  have  sometimes  had  intense  desires 
to  be  Christians ;  you  have  longed  to  be  pard<jned,  renewed,  and  sancti- 
fied. Would  you  not  give  all  that  you  have  for  a  sure  hope  of  heaven  ? 
You  know  that  occasionally  at  least  pure  aspirations  have  come  oAer  you, 
and  I  wish  that  I  could  by  any  means  so  revive  your  recollections  that 
jou  would  all  cMjufess  that  ye  sought  for  Jesus  in  times  past  to  be  King- 
over  you.  If  you  do  remember  these  things,  I  beg  you  also  to  consider 
that  your  responsibilities  have  been  increased  in  proportion  to  those 
impulses,  for  every  time  you  have  checked  conscience,  or  have  held 
yourself  back  when  you  were  moved  towards  right,  you  have  not  only 
incurred  a  present  sin,  but  you  have  rendered  all  your  future  Ufe  the 
more  censm-able.  The  more  difficult  it  is  to  perseverc  in  an  evil  course, 
the  more  intensely  sinful  that  i:>erseverance  becomes.  So  that  I  must 
•charge  upon  some  here  present  that  every  day  in  which  they  live  ^nthout 
repentance  and  without  faith  is  a  day  of  aggravated  iniquity,  seeing 
that  they  resist  the  Holy  Ghost  as  did  also  their  fathei*s^  and  they  love 
darkness  mther  than  light  because  their  deeds  are  evil.  None  are  so 
blameable  for  ignorance  as  those  who  refuse  to  learn,  and  none  so  guilty 


582  KETBOPOLITAH  TABEBKAOLB  PULPIT. 

in  their  sins  as  those  who  resist  better  impnlseSy  and  doTiolenoe  to  tlmii- 
selves  in  order  to  indulge  tiiehr  iniquities.  Tte  case  Taries,  however,  u 
vre  have  already  seen. 

These  impulses  have  hem  usual  in  you  at  c$rlain  imes,  and  these  find 
a  parallel  in  the  case  of  Israel.  The  tribes  desired  DaTid  for  king  cm 
certain  occasions.  For  instance,  whenever  Sanl  was  more  tiian  ordiniurihr 
om>re8sive,  they  sighed  for  the  son  of  Jesse,  who  was  of  a  gentler  moulo. 
Wnenever  sin  begms  to  be  oppressive  to  a  man,  he  has  for  the  present 
some  wish  to  escape  from  its  tyranny.  Sin  is  a  very  hard  taskmaster, 
especially  some  forms  of  it.  Let  a  man  pursne  the  sin  of  dmnkennci, 
and  "who  hath  woe  ?  who  hath  redness  of  eyes"  like  to  him?  Lets 
man  follow  the  lasts  of  the  flesh,  and  his  very  body  soon  b^ins  to  smart 
beneath  the  lash  of  his  despotic  vices.  Even  now  the  earnest  of  sin's  waga 
is  something  dreadfol  for  a  man  to  receive.  Have  ye  never  seen  a  flpem- 
thrift  brought  to  beggary  and  rags  ?  Do  you  wonder  that  whoi  Mj 
hungry  belly  accuses  him  he  promises  better  things,  and  in  a  measure  k 
sincere  in  ms  good  resolves  ?  Selfishness  itself  cdls  upon  men  to  quit 
their  evil  ways  which  are  ruining  them  body  and  soul,  and  it  is  not  at  d 
wonderful  that  so  loud  and  near  a  voice  should  for  a  time  be  heaid. 
Some  of  you  know  well  when  it  has  been  so,  when  your  sin  has  kst  its 
pleasurableness,  when  the  beaded  babbles  of  frothy  joy  have  disajqpearod 
from  the  cup  of  sin,  and  it  has  become  stale  and  flat,  then  you  have  seen 
the  hollowness  of  the  world  and  cried,  "  I  would  iain  be  a  Christian." 

These  Israelites,  perhaps,  in  their  hearts  sought  for  David  to  be  king 
when  they  saw  the  joy  upon  the  face  of  David*s  men.  His  troopers  dten 
had  spoil  to  share,  and  they  always  spake  well  of  their  captain,  and  when- 
ever a  David's  man  was  seen  anywhere  about  Judah  or  Israel,  the  peoide 
said, "  Those  warriors  have  a  goodly  heritage  in  being  under  sudi  a  noUe 
leader,"  and  they  wished  they  had  such  a  king  themselves.  I  do  not 
doubt  but  sometimes  when  you  hear  Christ  preached  in  all  his  sweetness, 
your  mouths  begin  to  water  after  him.  "  Is  he  so  good,  is  he  so  jJet- 
sant  ?  Oh,  that  we  knew  him  !"  And  when  you  see  Christians  so  happy, 
and  cq)ecially  when  you  see  them  in  times  of  trouble  so  cheerfal  anl 
joyous  under  all  their  trials,  I  know  you  have  had  an  inwiffd  wish  that 
you  knew  their  secret  and  could  share  their  peace.  Has  not  it  been  so  ? 
AVhen  you  saw  your  mother  die  did  you  not  wish  you  had  her  Savioor  to 
soften  your  pillow  as  he  sofl^ned  hers.  When  that  dear  little  child  rf 
yours  who  loved  the  Saviour  sang  of  Jesus  ns  she  departed,  yon  almost 
wished  that  you  could  die  with  her  if  you  might  as  cheerfally  meet  the 
Lord.  Well,  those  were  times  when  you  sought  David  to  be  king  over 
you  iu  days  past.  I  want,  if  I  can,  to  bring  them  all  up  afresh.  Pttv 
naps  if  they  would  all  revive  at  once,  and  come  over  again,  God  mif^ 
bless  them  and  make  the  united  impulse  strong  enough,  by  his  good 
Spirit,  to  carry  you  over  the  frontier  into  the  kingdom  of  Chnst. 

The  Israelites,  no  doubt,  oft;en  wished  that  David  had  been  ^ng  when 
they  saw  their  enemies  gradually  encroaching  upon  their  territory  and 
threatening  to  subdue  them.  They  sighed  and  said,  "  Oh,  for  an  hoor  of 
David  with  his  sling  and  his  stone.  In  the  name  of  the  Lord  he  broof^ 
down  the  haughty  Phih'stine.  0  that  he  were  to  the  front  agun !  Baal 
has  fallen  on  tne  mountains,  and  Jonathan  is  slain  nponhis  hig^  plaoe^ 
and  we,  the  people  of  the  Lord,  are  trodden  down  by  the  undicomoand. 


NOW   THEN   DO   IT.  50:3 


Oh  for  the  son  of  Jesse  once  again  to  lead  our  annics  forth  to  success- 
ful war !"  Have  not  you  also,  when  you  have  seen  the  strength  of  your 
erowing  sins  and  contemplated  the  rum  which  they  will  bring  upon  you, 
K>nged  for  a  deliverer  ?  When  you  have  perceived  what  sin  will  surlily 
bring  upon  you  by-and-by,  in  another  world,  and  how  even  now  it  holds 
yon  in  oondage,  have  you  not  wished  for  a  Saviour,  ay,  wished  for  the 
Christ  of  God  to  come  and  smite  your  sins  and  overthrow  Satan  and  set 
jon  free  ?  I  am  sure  you  must  have  had  such  wishes  when  sickness  has 
made  death  appear  to  be  approaching,  when  judgment  has  begun  to  be 
realized,  and  the  terrors  of  wrath  to  come.  Ye  thought  of  Jesus  in  times 
past  to  be  King  over  you. 

And  have  you  not  also,  hkc  Israel,  often  longed  for  your  tnie  King 
that  you  might  at  length  find  rest  ?  The  civil  war  must  have  inflicted 
much  misery  upon  the  nation,  and  therefore  the  people  wished  the  strife 
to  be  ended,  tmrough  David's  being  made  king.    So,  too,  you  wish  that 

C>ur  heart  were  peaceful  and  quiet,  for  now  you  are  ill  at  ease.  You 
ve  your  pleasurable  sins,  but  you  are  not  easy  in  them ;  the  bed  is 
shorter  than  a  man  can  stretch  himself  upon  it,  and  you  know  this !  You 
wish  that  you  enjoyed  the  solid  peace,  the  confidence,  and  satis&ction 
which  beUevers  possess ;  but  you  know  that  you  cannot  have  it  apart 
from  Christ,  and  this  reflection  has  sometimes  made  you  seek  to  Christ, 
afteryour  fiashion,  though,  alas,  it  has  not  lasted  long  enough  to  produce  real 
allegiance  to  him.  I  think  it  right  to  remind  you  of  these  past  feelings. 
How  I  wish  they  would  come  back  and  rise  to  practical  results.  May 
the  Holy  Ghost  renew  them  in  a  deeper  form  than  in  the  past,  that  you 
may  at  (mce  with  eagerness  go  forth  and  salute  your  King — the  King 
who  wore  a  crown  of  thorns  tor  your  sake. 

These  seekings  after  David  were  sometimes  with  the  Israelites  vivid  and 
strong ;  and  so,  too,  impulses  with  widecided  people  are  occasumally  very 
powerful.  Though  they  do  not  actually  lay  hold  on  eternal  life,  they 
yet  have  strong  desires  to  do  so.  They  go  beyond  empty  wishes,  and 
aerionsly  sigh  for  an  interest  in  Jesus,  and  yet  they  pause  there  and  go 
no  further.  The  bud  becomes  a  tiny  fruit,  and  then  withers  from  the 
tiee.  I  have  known  unconverted  people  to  feel  great  terror  at  the 
thought  of  remaining  unsaved,  and  under  this  influence  they  have  gone 
to  their  knees  and  begun  to  pray,  they  have  gone  to  their  Bibles  and  begun 
to  read,  they  have  attended  the  house  of  God  with  great  regularity,  and 
listened  with  very  solemn  attention,  and  they  have  even  gone  the 
length  of  mending  their  ways  in  many  points.  They  have  begun  to  fre- 
oaent  prayer-meetings,  and  for  awhile  it  did  seem  as  if  Jesus  would  be 
king  over  them ;  indeed,  we  hoped  that  they  were  already  the  servants  of 
ihe  Lord,  but,  alas,  our  hopes  were  disappointed,  tliey  turned  back,  and 
walked  no  more  with  us.  Oftentimes  the  impulses  which  are  put  aside 
and  stamped  out  by  half-awakened  men  are  exceedingly  diificnlt  to 
orercome.  Some  of  you  liave  had  to  exert  yourselves  fearfully  to  remain 
as  you  are;  you  have  needed  help  of  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the 
devil  to  overpower  the  force  which  held  you  for  awhile  in  its  grasp. 
Some  men  battle  for  damnation  with  a  greater  force  than  others  strive 
after  eternal  lite.  The  way  of  transgressors  is  sometimes  hard,  in  this 
sense,  that  they  find  it  difllcult  to  continue  as  thoy  are ;  they  are  so  per* 
aeoated  by  the  persuasions,  warnings,  and  entreaties  of  good  men,  and 


S^  XETROPOUTAS  TABBRHACL£  PULPIT. 

tttvir  o'd^-itiKV  ^  SO  alarmed  as  to  girc  them  little  of  no  nat.  A]|% 
their  a«i.-fe  k  a«  ^  irv«  ^new,  tad  Hwt  ue  set  on  mischief,  and  dcqite 
ih«  uiv^-'l  L-a^  whikh  bid  ihem  seek  Jesos  for  their  King  &ej  tnni  a 
Jbif  «ur  [x>  cIm  »atk'rcst  wooings,  and  continne  as  thej  were ;  bnt  not 
wicboiK  in  awftil  inrrwise  of  gnilt. 

Lisaa  w  ttw.  je  who  nre  described  in  tlie  langnagc  I  have  used ;  li§ten 
ami  !iftira  vrriii'>m.  Xoihii)ghasfomtofaUlh»irektnga  ofyovryouikmd 
tmir  i/ffr  J^tt/f.  Tc  soiigbt  for  Barid  in  times  past  to  be  king  oT«r  jon, 
buc  3'.<<Mni; has  come  of  it.'  N'othinghnscomcof  iteren  to  this  day.  Too 
siw  i^  rvligion  was  riglit,  jou  did  not  aigue  to  the  contrary,  yon  ad- 
tiuCt'd  all  its  reasons,  you  so  for  yiLldcd  your  nndentanding  that  yon 
«i.Hiid  OTvn  defend  the  truth  against  opponents ;  bnt  what  of  all  that? 
Tv>  aihnit  a  thing  to  be  right  is  but  a  small  part  of  the  matter,  if  jvo 
|imti(-iilty  deny  it  by  your  indifference.  Yon  have  wished  that  you  wet 
a  Ohrisliim ;  you  liaie  wished  it  liundi-eds  of  times,  bnt  this  ako  ii 
Taniiv,  if  earned  no  further.  "If  wialius  were  horses  be^ais  wonU 
ride,"  and  bo,  if  wishes  were  graces  the  careless  would  be  saved.  Yew 
bK>w,  too,  that  j-on  went  beyond  wishing  :  yon  i-egrctted  that  yon  nm 
Kot  already  decided,  you  felt  \cij  much  ashamed  of  yourself  for  hmog 
resisted  so  long.  If  anybody  )iad  told  yon  that  you  would  be  hesitatiK 
now,  yon  wonld  not  hare  believed  it.  'I'cn  years  ago,  if  any  one  had  aia, 
"In  tfin  years'  time  von  will  be  sitting  in  the  Tabernacle  jnst  as  uade- 
dded  as  you  used  to  oe,"  you  would  have  replied  with  indignation,  "Is 
thy  SL'r\*ant  a  dog  ?  I  shall  never  be  so  foolish,"  Bat  it  is  even  vom,  fa 
now  yon  do  not  feel  half  so  much  as  you  once  did.  Yon  vete  men 
impressible  years  ago  than  you  are  now,  and,  speaking  after  the  maniter 
of  men.  yim  ;ire  imiv  far  less  likely  to  be  saved.  Yon  know  ifc  is  Bo,  and 
yet  you  did  (it.  tlint;  time,  after  a  fashion,  pray,  and,  after  a  sort,  jot 
were  in  eanicst :  hut  what  of  all  that  ?  Nothing  has  come  of  itw  mB 
anytliing  ever  come  of  it?  The  Israelites  might  talk  about  makiDg 
David  king,  hut  th»t  wonld  not  crown  him.  They  might  meet  boget&er 
and  eny  tJiey  wished  it  were  so,  but  that  would  not  do  it.  It  might  be 
generally  admitted  that  he  ought  to  be  monarch,  and  it  might  even  be 
eemogtly  hoped  that  one  day  he  would  be  so,  bnt  that  wonld  not  d»it: 
something  moK  decided  must  be  done.  And  oil,  am  I  not  indeed  hitlii^ 
the  ^ery  centre  of  the  target  ivhen  I  say  of  some  of  yon  that  yon  haffi 
scores  of  times  given  up  the  whole  question  as  a  matter  of  argument? 
Yes,  and  yoiur  hears  has  submitted  that  it  was  WTong  of  you  to  continue 
as  you  are,  and  you  have  been  moved  with  strong  resolutions  towards 
rcpeutance  and  fiiitli,  and  yet  you  are  the  same  as  ever,  and  not  one  inch 
the  forwarder.  Still  yon  are  in  darkness,  still  under  the  dominion  of 
Satan,  still  the  Hlu\'e  of  sin,  and  so  yon  will  be  in  ten  years'  more  time, 
I  fear;  and  so  yon  will  be  to  the  end  of  life,  and  so  for  ever  and  for 
ever!  May  God  grant  that  my  words  may  not  be  prophetic  concerning 
any  one  of  yon,  but  that  yon  may  this  very  day  !«  moved  by  the  Eternal 
Spirit  to  take  decided  action  through  his  grace,    "  iWic  then  do  it." 

11.     I  tlici-efure  pass  on  to  the  second  part,  to   RGCOUUEifD   DBCIDKD 

ACTio.v.     "  Ye  sf)Uj;ht  for  David  in  times  past  to  be  king  over  yon,  *wir 

thfii  doit"    Xd  Ion  jerstand  thinking,  questioning,  hesitating,  hating,  but 

^■Ktlien  do  it.  Do  one  thing  or  another;  if  God  be  God,  serve  him  j  ifBaal 

^^^fed  or  the  devil  be  God,  serve  him.     Do  not  sit  down  for  ever  in  Uiis 


NOW  THEN  DO   IT.  58^ 

absurd  condition  of  believing  a  thing  to  be  right  and  yet  neglecting  it,  of 
feeling  yourself  to  be  in  danger  and  not  seeking  to  escape  by  the  way 
which  you  admit  to  be  safe  and  fitting.  Oome  now  to  something  like 
honest  dealing  with  yourself  and  Tvith  your  Lord. 

Note  the  business  on  hand — it  is  that  Jesus  should  be  king  over  you. 
It  was  needful  that  David  should  become  king,  or  else  he  could  not  rescue 
Israel  from  the  Philistines,  and  in  your  case  Jesus  must  be  king  or  he 
cannot  be  your  Saviour.  Thousands  of  people  are  quite  willing  to  be 
saved  by  Christ,  but  when  it  comes  to  the  very  first  step,  namely,  that 
Jesus  must  be  accepted  as  ruler,  lawgiver,  master,  king,  and  Lord,  then 
they  start  back  and  reject  eternal  life. 

"  Yet  know  (nor  of  the  terms  complain), 
Where  Jesus  comes,  he  comes  to  reign ; 
To  reign,  and  with  no  partial  sway  ; 
Thoughts  must  be  slain  that  disobey.' 

The  whole  question  of  your  being  saved  or  lost  will  tuni  on  this  :  if 
Jesus  be  not  your  king,  then  the  devil  will  remain  enthroned  in  your 
hearty  and  you  wiU  remain  a  lost  soul :  but  if  your  heart  will  yield  itself 
up  to  the  supremo  authority  of  King  Jesus,  then  the  work  of  salvation 
has  already  commenced,  and  Jesus  will  take  care  to  purge  your  nature  of 
all  his  enemies,  until  you  shall  be  an  empire  in  which  he  alone  shall  reign 
in  holiness  and  peace.  Jesus  must  be  king  !  What  say  you,  sir,  shall  it 
be  so  r  Do  you  hesitate  alx)ut  it  ?  He  must  be  your  Lord  and  Master, 
his  will  must  be  your  will,  his  commands  must  be  law  to  you,  and  hi& 
example  must  henceforth  be  the  model  of  your  life.  Do  you  demur,  or 
will  you  yield  at  once  ? 

Next  notice  that  if  Christ  is  to  be  your  king,  it  must  be  by  your  own 
act  and  deed.  So  saith  the  text  concerning  king  David — "  Now  then 
do  it."  David  would  not  be  king  over  Israel  unless  Israel  was  willing 
that  he  should  be  king ;  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  no  forced  monarch 
over  one  single  human  heart ;  the  promise  is,  "  Thy  people  shall  be  'willing 
in  the  day  of  thy  power."  The  kingdom  of  Clunst  over  men's  hearts  is 
a  kingdom  of  love,  not  a  kingdom  of  force,  so  that  there  must  be  the 
full  assent  and  consent  of  the  will  to  the  reigning  power  of  Christ  in  the 
soul,  or  else  he  does  not  reign  at  all.  What  sayest  thou,  yes  or  no  ? 
Art  thou  willing  that  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of  God  should  henc^eforth  rule 
and  reign  over  thine  entire  nature  as  thy  heart's  supreme  Lord  ?  There 
is  the  question.  Let  it  be  settled  once  for  all.  You  have  sometimes 
sought  to  have  it  so,  "  naw  then  do  it  J' 

Audi  here  is  the  point,  if  Jesus  is  to  reign  the  old  king  nnist  go  down. 
It  is  of  no  use  trying  to  have  Ishbosheth  and  David  on  the  throne  at  the 
same  time.  It  is  impossible  to  serve  sin  and  to  sene  Christ.  Favourite 
and  constitutional  sins  must  be  relinquished.  I  know  many  pcreons  who 
say  that  they  are  under  concern  of  soul  whose  sincerity  I  more  than 
question,  because  they  continue  in  knowni  sin,  and  yet  they  complain  that 
they  cannot  find  peace.  How  can  they  ?  If  you  meet  with  a  person 
who  drinks  upon  the  sly  and  is  frequently  half  intoxicated,  if  you  hear 
him  say  that  he  cannot  find  rest  in  Christ,  do  you  wonder?  Do  you 
not  feel  that  he  is  a  hypocrite  ?  How  can  men  and  women  continually 
fuddle  themselves  with  drink  and  yet  hope  to  be  children  of  God  ?  Give 
up  your  abominable  tippling.     Do  you  think  Christ  is  going  to  save  sots^ 


^38  METROPOLITAN  TABERKAOLB  PULPIT. 

impulses  which  urge  it  to  wards  the  right,  and  yet  remaining  »  captiro  to 

that  accursed  freewill  which  enalaves  it  to  the  last  degree.  iJas,  how  maay 

put  bitter  for  sweet  and  sweet  for  bitter,  and  therefore  will  not  come 

unto  Christ  that  they  might  have  life.    Such  is  the  state  of  man  :  sodiii 

the  state  of  some  of  you.    May  God  have  mercy  upon  yon  for  Ghrist's  Bike! 

It  is  mine,  however,  to  return  distinctly  to  the  charge  of  my  text  and 

sav,  **  Now  ihcn  do  it."    Oh,  sirs,  I  w  ish  you  would  do  as  one  did  a  little 

while  a<ri\     I  was  preaching,  and  I  siiid  that  if  any  man  sincerely  went  to 

(lod  wntoj^ing  his  siu  and  just  tnisted  Chiist  to  save  him,  if  he  did  not 

save  him  1  wi&Iicd  he  would  write  mc  a  note  to  let  me  knowit^  for  I  had 

Iki'u  so  acx^ustomed  to  declare  that  he  w\)uld  not  cast  out  any  that  came 

to  him  that  I  should  like  to  know  if  I  was  labouring  under  an  error. 

Thoa^  was  one  in  my  audience  who  went  deliberately  home,  and  knedio^ 

at  his  bedside,  he  said,  with  all  liis  heart,  "  I  do  confess  my  guilftnmi 

before  thee,  0  God,  and  I  do  now  trust  myself  with  Ghnst  that  he 

niav  save  me.     Lord,  cast  me  not  away,  for  I  believe  in  thy  Son."    He 

fbujid  peace  immediately,  and  continued  to  feel  the  love  of  God  abed 

abroad  in  his  soul ;  and  he  therefore  thought  it  right  to  tell  me  the  good 

news.     It  greatly  cheered  me.     Instead  of  being  rejected  he  was  wd- 

<x)med  by  the  God  of  mercy,  and  found  immediate  acceptance  in  Christ 

Jesus.     I  remember  to  have  said  tliat  if  one  believing  soul  was  cast 

out  by  Christ  and  sent  to  hell,  I  woidd  engage  to  lie  side  by  side  witk 

Jiim  in  the  quenchless  fire  for  ever  and  ever.     I  repeat  the  pledge.    If 

any  of  you  perish  repenting  of  your  sin,  and  tnistiug  alone  in  Jesos,  I 

will  perish  with  you.     I  will  be  bondsman  for  God  this  morning  that, 

if  any  one  of  you  will  humble  himself  before  the  Lord  and  simply  troflt 

bis  Son  whom  you  accept  to  be  your  King  and  your  Saviour,  he  can  no 

more  reject  you  than  he  can  cease  to  be,  for  so  it  is  written,  "  Him  that 

cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."     "  Now  then  do  it.*'    Tliere 

is  Ufe  in  a  look  at  the  Crucified  One :  the  Lord  help  you  to  look  to 

the  Crucified  One  at  once !     ^^Now  tlie^n  do  it"    Dream  not  of  beUeriog 

to-morrow  or  next  year,  nor  even  in  half-an-hour's  time ;  but  cast  yonr 

^Ity  soiU  on  Christ  at  once.    Now  then  do  it.    While  now  Uk  ^irit 

of  God  pervades  this  assembly  yield  yom-sclf  to  the  silver  sceptre  waidi 

is  held  in  the  pierced  hand  of  the  once  crucified  King  and  you  shall  live. 

Now  then  do  it. 

III. — Lastly,  I  have  to  reason  witu  strong  ARGUHEirrs.  I  will 
utter  them  rapidly,  for  time  fails  me.  Here  they  are  in  a  condensed 
form.  You,  dear  friend,  need  salvation.  Sin  has  got  the  mastery  over 
^our  nature,  and  you  need  a  powerful  arm  to  set  you  free  from  it.  Nor 
IS  it  sin  alone,  but  punishment  also  which  threatens  you.  Be  you  who 
you  may,  vou  are  in  danger  of  eternal  wrath  and  you  need  to  be  saved 
from  it.  Xow,  it  is  evident  that  none  can  save  you  from  eternal  wrath 
but  King  Jesus.  Will  you  have  him  for  King  ?  Whether  you  will 
have  him  or  not,  you  must  have  a  king.  Every  man  in  the  world  has  a 
master  of  some  kind ;  some  principle  or  another  has  dominion  over  him, 
.and  the  worst  tyrant  a  man  can  serve  is  himself.  Self  is  the  hardest  and 
meanest  of  all  despots.  Seeing  then  that  you  must  have  a  king,  can  you 
have  a  better  king  than  King  Jesus,  who  is  incarnate  love  ?  Think  of 
Jbis  character  and  of  the  love  he  has  shown  to  men,  and  tell  me  could 
lye  a  better  King  ? 


NOW  THEN  DO  IT.  537 

The  sooner  it  is  done  the  better.  Until  the  deed  is  done,  remember 
you  are  undone :  till  Christ  is  accepted  by  you  as  king,  till  sin  is  hated 
and  Jesus  is  trusted,  you  are  under  another  king.  Whatever  you  may 
think  of  it,  the  devil  is  your  master.  You  say  you  do  not  like  him,  but 
he  is  your  master  and  lord  for  all  that,  since  he  leads  you  captive  at  his 
will.  Till  Jesus  reigns  in  your  heart  you  are  also  in  the  utmost 
danger, — in  danger  of  death  and  eternal  punishment.  Let  your  breath 
go  the  wrong  way,  or  let  your  heart  cease  beating  just  for  a  little,  and 
you  will  be  in  hell.  My  friends,  you  will  be  in  hell.  You  who  sought  for 
Jesus  in  times  past,  you  who  felt  those  good  desires,  youj  the  beloved 
child  of  Cliristian  parents,  you  the  earnest  hearer  at  the  house  of 
Ood,  you  who  are  fond  of  sermons,  but  are,  I  fear,  sermon-hardened.; 
youy  even  you,  will  sink  do^m  to  hell,  with  all  those  privileges  like 
millstones  about  your  neck.  "Well,  sir,  I  will  think  of  it."  Under 
cover  of  that  promise  there  lurks  delay,  and  that  is  exactly  what  I  am 
afraid  of.  Do  not  so  much  think  as  act.  "Now  then  do  it."  I 
beseech  you  to  make  serious  and  immediate  business  of  it.  Perhaps  if  it 
is  not  done  at  this  moment  it  never  will  be  done.  For  all  these  long 
yeai*s  nothing  has  been  actually  done,  though  so  mucli  has  been  proposed, 
and  this  mainly  because  of  your  perpetual  delays.  AVhat  has  come  of  all 
jour  fine  resolutions  ?  What  is  the  good  of  a  mere  resolve  ?  A  man 
resolves  that  he  will  be  industrious,  but  if  he  continues  to  lie  on  the  bed 
of  the  sluggard  is  he  any  the  more  thrifty  ?  A  man  is  sick  and  resolves 
to  take  medicine,  but  leaves  it  untasted — is  he  benefited  bv  his  intcn- 
tion?  A  man  resolves  to  go  on  a  journey,  but  does  not  take  the 
trouble  to  get  into  the  public  conveyance,  or  to  use  his  limbs — what 
progress  does  he  make  ?  Does  he  not  abide  just  where  he  was  ?  All 
this  bears  upon  your  case ;  you  know  it  does. 

All  this  while  Jesus  is  being  rejected.  We  do  not  sufficiently  think 
of  the  dishonour  done  to  Jesus  by  base  delays.  All  the  while  that  Israel 
did  not  accept  David  as  king,  Da^id  was  being  badly  treated.  He  who 
fought  the  Philistines  for  them,  he  whose  valour  was  Israel's  right  arm, 
whose  band  of  men  was  the  sword  and  shield  of  the  nation  against  the 
Philistines,  was  being  kept  away  from  his  rightful  throne ;  his  mciits 
forgotten,  his  claims  ignored.  Soul,  by  refusing  him  his  throne  you  are 
treating  Jesus  ill.  You  halters  between  two  opinions  are  setting  him  in 
rivalry  with  foul  sin  and  a  base  world,  and  upon  you  daily  guilt  is  coming, 
a  guilt  which  grows  thicker  and  blacker  as  time  rolls  on.  Think  of 
jour  previous  impulses,  and  as  you  consider  them  answer  me  this 
question — were  they  wrong  ones?  When  in  your  childhood  you  felt 
finch  strong  desires  after  Christ,  were  they  not  commendable  desires  ? 
Why,  then,  do  you  not  carry  them  out?  If  you  were  wrong  in  checking 
tliem,  then  why  should  you  continue  to  act  so  unwisely  ?  If  they  are  re- 
tuniing  now,  why  not  entertain  them  heartily  ?  Remember,  moreover, 
that  though  you  had  these  holy  impulses  they  passed  away :  have  you  any 
reason  to  hope  that  they  will  continue  with  you  now  ?  Will  tliey  not 
agfdn  melt  into  thin  air?  Unless  God,  the  almighty  Spirit,  at  this  time 
fihall  lead  you  to  take  decided  steps  you  will  resolve  again  to-day,  and 
re-rcsolve,  but  continue  still  the  same.  Of  all  things  the  most  pitiable 
fiight  to  my  mind  is  a  man  who  has  light  enough  to  know  he  is  >NTong  but 
not  grace  enough  to  forsake  the  evil.    It  is  terrible  to  see  a  soul  under 


Jt40 


UETBOFOLITAX  TABBBHAOU  PULPIT. 


aoni,  and  bodr,  to  be  thine  for  ever  and  eyer.  We  i 
our  own,  for  tnoQ  hast  booght  as  with  a  price."  All  this  hw  long'  iuo 
beea  done  by  mai^  of  lu,  we  are  only  repeating  the  declaration  wfaS 
we  have  made  hnndreda  of  time  before.  Oh  that  some  of  jon  poor 
soals  wonld  hear  the  voice  which  aaya — "  Now  t/un  do  il."  To  gin 
joo  words  wherewith  to  do  it  we  will  ell  sing  the  t — 


"  'Til  done,  the  great  traiuaction'a  done  j 
I  am  m;  Lord's,  uid  he  is  mine. 
He  dron  me,  and  I  followed  on, 
Cbarmed  to  coufesd  the  veice  dinner'* 


May  the  Lord  bless  yon.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scriptitbk  bead  bepobb  Sibmon— Psalm  t.,  ii. :  2  Sm. 
iii.  17—21. 


Hyuns  pbou  "Oub  Own  Hyidi  Booe" — il8,  2,  509,  C58. 


Just  Published.    No.  2  <f  Ou  Skaiktg  Sariss. 

SEVEN    WONDERS    OF   GRACE. 

B-H-     O.     TI..    SFXTRO-EOIT. 

"The  addreaaMofwhichthisToInnieooDsisttarecltaigned  toiUiutntp  thevwiBM 
wB3-i  in  vhich  God  deals  with  unnen  in  calling  Iham  to  Mm— if,  uid  an  ImmI  w 
tho  hisloTiM  of  UanuBeh,  the  woman  that  wu  a  sinner,  the  dyjiig  Uiifl^  Bad  U 
Tamu,  the  Fhilippian  jailer,  Oneumua,  and  "  the  gieateat  wonder  of  alL"  Ea  mA 
«f  these  cases  Mr.  Spurgeon's  vigorous  and  forcible  st7le  ii  shown  to  great  adia^ 
tage,  and  the  tiuUii  he  handles  are  admirably  illwtiated,  and  brought  to  bau  W/m 
the  everyday  lifu  ot  the  reader." — ITie  Saci. 

Pabsmore  tc  Alabaster,  i.  Paternoster  Buildings;  and  «U  BookadUeML 


\ 


Ittett[0plton  iJahmatfe  pdptt. 


THE   TRUE    PRIESTHOOD,  TEMPLE  AND  SACRIFICE. 


1 1 


Delivered  on  Lord's-Day  Morning,   September  80th,  1877,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEVVTNGTON. 


"  To  whom  coming,  as  unto  a  living  stone,  disallowed  indeed  of  men,  but  chosen 
of  God,  and  precious,  ye  also,  as  lively  stones,  are  built  up  a  spiritual  house,  an 
holy  priesthood,  to  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices,  acceptable  to  God  by  Jesus  Christ.''- 
1  Peter  ii.  4,  5. 

At  the  outset  I  call  your  special  attention  to  the  connection  of  the  two 
verses.  "  To  whom  coming,  as  unto  a  living  stone,  ye  also,  as  living  stones, 
are  built  up":  or,  "To  whom  coming,  .  .  ye  become  an  holy  priest- 
hood." Everywhere  throughout  Scripture  the  connection  between  the 
saints  and  their  Head  is  perpetually  mentioned.  "  In  Christ "  is  the  very 
symbol  of  New  Testament  writers.  Whatsoever  things  are  mentioned 
choice  and  good  concerning  the  saints,  their  privileges  and  honours,  wc 
are  always  reminded  that  they  are  only  enjoyed  in  connection  ^^^th  the 
Lord  Jesus,  according  as  the  Father  hath  blessed  us  in  him  and  made  us 
to  be  accepted. in  the  Beloved.  Coming  unto  him  as  a  foundation  wc 
become  a  temple ;  coming  to  him  as  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  we  become  a 
holy  priesthood,  and  resting  in  his  sacrifice  we  also  offer  spiritual  sacrifices. 
Coming  close  to  him — for  such  is  the  force  of  the  word — coming  closer 
and  closer,  we  grow  up  in  all  things  into  him,  and  become  perfect  in 
Christ  Jesus.  Realising  and  consciously  enjoying  our  vital  union  with 
him  we  obtain  promises,  receive  blessings,  possess  privileges,  and  exercise 
offices  which  can  only  be  ours  in  union  with  our  Lord.  It  is  only  by 
coming  to  our  great  covenant  foundation,  and  only  in  proportion  as  we 
daily  come  to  him  and  rest  upon  him  that  God  dwells  in  us  as  in  a 
temple.  It  is  only  as  we  are  seen  in  union  with  the  apostle  and  high 
priest  of  our  profession,  that  the  Father  allows  us  to  serve  him  as  priests, 
and  accepts  the  sacrifices  which  we  present. 

Let  this  tnith  be  always  in  your  view,  because  there  are  many  who 
judge  us  otherwise.  The  true  judgment  of  any  man  is  how  he  standeth 
towards  Christ,  whether  he  be  in  him  and  beheveth  in  him  or  not.  If 
he  beheveth  on  the  Lord  Jesus  he  is  in  him,  and  he  is  by  coming  to  him 
built  up  as  a  part  of  the  spiritual  house;  but  if  he  be  not  in  Christ  he 
No.  1,376. 


512  UETROPOLITAH  TABEBKAOLB  PULPTT. 

may  c&ll  himself  bj  what  name  he  pleases,  and  may  aesnme  this  or  that 
lofty  pretension,  but  he  boasteth  himself  beyond  his  line  and  beyond  the 
truth.  Union  to  Christ  is  Ihe  teit  of  union  with  the  true  church.  If  we 
are  members  of  the  most  orthodox  church  in  ChriBleiidcim  it  wil!  avail  m 
nothing  unless  we  are  spiritually  joined  unto  Clirist  himself.  WiUiont 
Christ  we  can  do  nothing,  and  we  are  nothing.  There  are  some  who 
judge'  us  because  we  follow  not  with  them.  They  txy,  ■■  The  temple  of 
the  Lord,  the  temple  of  the  Lord  are  we."  Xhej  ulaim  to  he  "  tie 
church  "  beyond  whose  pale  there  can  be  no  salvation.  Brethren,  r^jud 
them  not,  tor  if  ye  be  in  Christ  ye  are  built  np  as  a  spiritual  hoose,  and 
so  are  a  portion  of  the  true  church.  If  ye  nave  come  to  Jesne  by  t 
living  faith,  and  if  it  be  your  daily  practice  to  come  to  your  Lordandhve 
upon  him  and  unto  him,  you  are  priests  unto  God  and  need  not  miodttie 
censure  of  those  who  arc  ordained  of  men. 

There  are  others  who  condemn  us  because  we  reject  the  pomp  of  theii 
ceremonial,  the  prestige  of  their  state  connection,  and  the  -venerablenea 
of  their  antiquity.  Those  have  weight  with  the  unlearned  and  nn- 
spiritual,  but  those  who  are  taught  of  God  discern  the  vanity  of  thdr 
boastings.  Be  not  moved  by  their  judgment,  no,  not  for  an  hour,  f« 
if  you  indeed  come  to  the  Lord  Jesus  you  arc  built  up  by  himself  into 
a  spiritual  house,  and  that  which  he  doeth  does  not  hick  for  honour  or 
reverence.  It  is  enough  of  prestige,  and  of  antiquity,  for  ua  to  be  ac- 
cepted by  OUT  Lord  Jesus.  "Unto  you  that  believe  he  ig  honour," 
AVhcther  your  critics  are  so  or  not,  you  are  beyond  question  living  stouce 
built  up,  a  spiritual  house,  if,  indeed,  you  are  evermore  ooming  to  yom 
Lord. 

Some  there  be  who  in  the  serenity  of  their  infallibility,  becanae  we 
cannot  endorse  their  creed  or  pronounce  their  shibboletl^  straighiiny 
cut  us  off  and  count  us  to  be  mere  pretenders.  But  if  we  aie  in  oor 
very  heart  coming  unto  Christ,  if  he  be  the  end  of  our  convemtion,  if 
we  make  him  Alpha  and  Omega,  and  if  he  is  to  uB  the  beginaing  and 
the  end  of  all  things,  we  may  make  small  account  of  the  condenmatiaa 
or  the  approval  of  the  best  of  our  brethren,  since  we  are  in  Christ,  and 
ao  we  arc  a  spiritual  house  built  up  for  the  inhabiting  of  God.  I  re- 
member an  anecdote  of  the  Jesuit  Fathers  of  the  Sooth  Seaa  whici 
illustrates  this.  When  they  iutruded  themselves  upon  a  native  popula- 
tion who  had  been  converted  to  Christ  they  began  to  instruct  them  in 
their  Popish  idolatries  by  means  of  pictures,  and  among  the  rest  showed 
them  a  famous  tree.  The  natives  asked,  "What  is  this?"  "It  seta 
forth  the  church."  "And  what  is  this  root?"  "0  that  is  Jesus  ChriBt," 
"  And  this  trunk,  what  is  that  ?"  "  That  is  the  succession  of  the  Popes, 
T\'ho  are  the  vicars  of  Clirist."  "And  these  great  boughs,  what  are 
theiic?"  "They  are  the  cardinals."  "And  these  branches,  what  are 
they  ?"  "  They  are  the  bishops  of  the  church."  "  And  what  arc  these 
small  branches  and  little  twiga  ?"  "  They  are  the  priests  and  the  feiiJi- 
ful."  "And  what  arc  these  poor  twiga  which  ore  cut  off  and  are  falling 
into  the  fire?"  "They are  the  heretics, — such  as  Martin  Luther,  Calvin, 
and  the  like."  The  natives  looked  at  the  picture  for  awhile,  rubbed 
their  eyes,  declared  that  they  did  not  understand  much  about  it,  but  with 
great  glee  exclaimed — "It  is  all  right  with  us,  for  we  have  the  root 
:   We  have  the  root,"    So  we  can  say  if  we  have  come  to  Jesus  Christ  ou 


THE  TRUE  PRIESTHOOD,  TEMPLE  AND  SACRIFICE.  548 

Lord,  we  are  growing  out  of  the  root,  aud  we  need  have  no  doubt  as  to 
our  being  in  the  right  place.  The  branch  which  grows  out  of  him  must 
be  a  true  branch  of  the  vine :  the  stone  which  rests  upon  him  as  a 
foundation  must  be  a  true  part  of  the  spiritual  temple.  Our  only  hope 
lies  in  our  being  of  him  and  in  him :  we  know  no  other.  Whatever  the 
dignity  which  men  ascribe  unto  themselves  apart  from  him,  verily  I  say 
unto  you  we  know  them  not,  neither  do  we  give  place  for  subjection 
unto  them.  They  may  tell  us  of  what  they  are,  but  we  only  know  what 
Jesus  is.  It  is  written,  "  The  sheep  hear  his  voice,  and  a  stranger  will 
they  not  follow,  for  they  know  not  the  voice  of  strangers."  We  know 
not  the  many  strange  voices  which  are  in  the  world,  of  those  who  would 
have  us  follow  them,  and  yield  to  their  authority;  but  we  know  the 
Toice  of  the  great  King  in  Zion,  and  we  rejoice  to  feel  that  if  we  are 
found  in  him  we  are  accepted  in  him,  and  in  nim  to-day,  as  hving  stones, 
we  are  built  up  a  spiritual  house. 

I  purpose,  tnis  morning,  to  show  that  we  who  are  in  Christ  have  the 
reality  of  all  that  which  Eitualism  pretends  to  possess :  the  votaries  of 
that  faith  delight  in  the  shadow,  but  we  have  the  substance.  For,  first, 
we  are  a  temple^ — "built  up  a  spiritual  house";  secondly,  we  are  a 
priesthoody — "  a  holy  priesthood";  and  thirdly,  we  have  our  own  peculiar 
sacrificeSy — "  to  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices  acceptable  to  God  by  Jesus 
Christ." 

I.  First  then,  all  those  who  are  coming  to  Christ,  daily  coming  nearer 
and  nearer  to  him,  are,  as  living  stones  built  up  into  A  temple.  The 
saints  in  their  corporate  capacity  are  a  holy  temple  unto  the  Lord.  They 
are  called  a  spiritual  house  in  opposition  to  the  old  material  house  in 
which  the  emblem  of  the  divine  presence  shone  forth  in  the  midst  of 
Israel,  that  temple  in  which  the  Jew  dehghted,  counting  it  to  be  beautiful 
for  situation  and  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth.  We  have  nothing  to  do 
with  material  temples  now ;  we  are  quite  clear  of  that,  for  the  typical  has 
given  way  to  the  real  and  spiritual.  Solomon's  temple  itself,  is  ever  to  be 
spoken  of  with  honour,  seeing  that  God  did  for  a  time  make  it  the  centre 
of  his  worship,  yet  it  must  not  be  too  highly  honoured,  for  God  never  had 
any  very  great  delight  in  its  magnificence,  and  wrought  but  few  miglity 
deeds  amid  its  splendours.  You  remember  that  when  David  proposed  to 
build  it  the  Lord  seemed  rather  to  yield  to  the  weakness  of  his  servant 
than  to  rejoice  in  the  proposal,  for  he  said,  "  For  I  have  not  dwelt  in  an  /  C^/r 
house  since  the  day  that  I  brought  up  Israel  unto  this  day ;  but  have 
gone  from  tent  to  tent,  and  from  one  tabernacle  to  another.  Wheresoever 
I  have  walked  with  all  Israel,  spake  I  a  word  to  any  of  the  judges  of  Israel, 
whom  I  conmianded  to  feed  my  people,  saying.  Why  have  ye  not  built 
me  an  house  of  cedars?"  The  Lord  sought  not  for  such  a  palace,  nor 
when  it  was  built  did  he  much  regard  it,  for  he  says  by  his  servant 
Isaiah,  "Thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  heaven  is  my  throne,  and  the  earth  is 
my  footstool :  where  is  the  house  that  ye  build  unto  me  ?  and  where  is 
the  place  of  my  rest  ?  For  all  those  things  hath  mine  hand  made,  and 
all  those  things  have  been,  saith  the  Lord :  but  to  this  man  will  I  look, 
even  to  him  that  is  poor  and  of  contrite  spirit,  and  trembleth  at  my  word." 
Stephen  in  the  latter  day,  when  he  was  rehearsing  the  history  of  Israel, 
alludes  to  the  temple,  but  he  carefully  guards  himself  from  being  sup- 
posed to  attach  any  great  importance  to  it.     He  says,  "  But  Solomon 


5li  METROPOLITAN  TABERNAOLB  PULPIT. 

built  him  a  house.  Howbeit  the  most  High  dwdleth  not  in  tei 
made  with  hands ; "  and  goes  on  to  quote  the  passage  from  the 
which  I  have  just  mentioned.  When  the  apostles  sat  down  opposite 
the  temple  which  Herod  had  renovated,  and  were  filled  with  wonder 
at  the  great  stones  whereof  it  was  made,  our  Lord  did  not  seem  at 
all  to  sympathise  in  their  admiration  of  its  glories,  but  he  said,  "Thea 
shall  not  be  left  one  stone  upon  another  that  shall  not  be  thrown 
down."  Had  God  cared  for  the  temple  he  oould  have  preserved  it 
to  this  day,  but  lo,  hke  a  dream  of  night  it  has  passed  away ;  and  no 
order  has  since  been  given  to  the  servants  of  the  Lord  to  buili 
temples.  We  have  nobler  work  to  do  in  building  up  the  spiritual  house, 
and  need  not  be  occupied  with  gorgeous  architecture  of  buikliDgi 
made  with  hands.  I  fear  me  that  the  pretentious  aichitectare  whidi  is 
now  so  much  in  vogue  for  professedly  Christian  places  of  worship  is  only 
one  of  those  ill  signs  of  the  times  which  inmcate  a  d^artuie  from 
inward  and  spiritual  worship.  The  prophet  Hosea  said  of  old,  "  Israel 
hath  forgotten  his  Maker,  and  buildeth  temples."  There  is,  I  fear, 
everywhere  too  much  going  back  to  the  beggarly  elements  of  outward 
and  materialistic  worship  and  a  receding  from  pure  spiritual  adoration : 
even  the  purer  sort  are  hankering  after  visible  show,  and  the  dehghtB  of 
music  and  the  fine  arts  as  accessories  to  worship.  God,  the  Everlastiag 
One,  hath  beneath  yon  blue  canopy,  studded  with  a  thousand  stars,  a  fiir 
more  glorious  temple  than  all  that  architect  shall  plan,  or  wealth  of 
builders  and  skill  of  masons  shall  ever  be  able  to  rear.  All  man's  archi- 
tecture is  but  child's  play  compared  with  the  great  universe  of  God, 
which  is  the  temple  of  the  infinite ;  and  what  seems  to  us  the  most 
enchanting  music  must  surely  be  but  discord  in  his  ears.  It  is  significant 
that  of  heaven,  where  God  is  best  worshipped,  John  says,  "I  saw  no 
temple  therein."  Where  every  place  is  holy  what  needs  a  temple?  And 
Avhere  every  being  shall  be  perfect  and  for  ever  full  of  adoring  love,  there 
shall  be  no  need  of  any  select  shrine  or  settled  hour  of  assenH)l7.  When 
we  become  holy,  as  we  should  be,  we  shall  count  all  places  and  all  hours 
to  be  the  Lord's,  and  we  shall  always  dwell  in  his  temple  because  God  is 
everywhere.  For  one  spot  to  be  holy  and  not  another  is  but  to  show 
how  much  of  the  earth  we  resign  to  the  devil :  lix)m  this  dreary  super- 
stition I  pray  you  shake  yourselves  loose.  We  have  not  so  learned 
Christ  as  to  count  one  edifice  more  sacred  than  another,  for  we  know 
him  as  cleansing  all  places  and  things  and  henceforth  nothing  to  us  is 
common  or  unclean  ;  save  only  as  sin  defileth  and  spreadeth  pollution. 
We  arc,  then,  a  spiritual  temple  in  opposition  to  all  material  temples, 
even  that  of  Solomon,  included  amongst  the  rest. 

We  are  a  spiritual  temple,  hut  not  the  less  real  That  which  is 
s})iritaal  is  sometimes  supposed  to  be  mythical  and  imaginary,  but  indeed 
it  is  not  so.  The  things  which  are  seen  are  the  shadowy  and  the  dreamy; 
the  things  which  are  not  seen  are  the  substantial  and  the  eternal.  Our 
Lord  Jesus  called  his  body  the  temple  of  God  :  he  said,  "Destroy  this 
temple,  and  I  will  build  it  in  three  days."  As  a  temple  of  God,  the 
body  of  Christ  was  most  real.  There  was  no  fiction  about  his  himianity. 
The  AVord  was  made  flesh  and  tabernacled  tmiong  us,  so  that  the  apostle 
John  saith,  '-'  We  beheld  his  glory,  the  glory  as  of  the  only  begotten  of 
the  Father,  full  of  grace  and  truth."  "His  perfect   body  was  a  true 


THE  TRUE   PRIESTHOOD,   TEMPLE   AND   SACRIFICE.  545 

temple  which  God  had  pitched  and  not  men,  and  just  as  true  and  real  is 
the  spiritual  temple  of  which  the  text  speaketh.  With  equal  truth 
the  apostle  Paul  tells  us  that  our  bodies  are  "the  temple  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  which  is  in  us":  and  that  not  by  imagination  but  in  reahty, 
as  the  context  of  that  expression  proves,  since  he  therefore  bids  us 
avoid  all  fornication.  (1  Cor.  vi.  18,  19).  He  would  not  use  a  mere 
fancy  as  a  practical  reason  for  guarding  the  purity  of  our  bodies.  The 
force  of  the  argument  must  lie  in  its  truthfulness,  and  so  the  bodies  of 
the  saints  are  really  and  indeed  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Moreover, 
the  whole  church  together,  the  whole  body  of  the  elect,  the  whole  com- 
pany of  the  redeemed,  regenerate,  and  called,  are  "builded  together  for  an 
hal}itation  of  God  through  the  Spirit,"  and  this  also  is  most  real.  Read 
the  two  vei*ses  in  the  first  of  Corinthians  and  the  third  chapter.  "  Know 
ye  not  that  ye  are  the  temple  of  God,  and  that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelleth 
in  you?  If  any  man  defile  the  temple  of  God,  him  shall  God  destroy; 
for  the  temple  of  God  is  holy,  which  temple  ye  are."  Surely  this  cannot 
relate  to  a  fiction  or  a  dream,  or  the  punishment  for  defiling  a  mere 
notion  would  hardly  be  so  terrib'e. 

Yet  while  real  the  temple  of  God  in  the  saints  is  spiritual  :  a 
church  is  made  up  of  spiritual  men,  and  her  temple  form  is  spiritual. 
Your  eye  cannot  as  yet  see  the  church  in  which  God  dwells.  Words 
have  come  to  be  so  misused  nowadays  that  they  call  a  steeple  and  a 
building  made  of  stone  or  brick  and  mortar  a  chiu'ch,  which  cannot 
possibly  be  correct ;  for  a  church  is  a  company  of  faithful  men.  Alas, 
they  have  yet  further  perverted  language,  and  they  make  a  company  of 
ecclesiastics,  whether  regenerated  or  not,  to  be  "  the  church."  "  Going 
into  the  church"  is  a  current  phrase  which  shows  the  ignorance  of 
those  who  use  it.  Nor  is  this  all,  there  is  no  one  visible  church  which 
can  claim  to  be  the  church.  I  tell  you  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ 
dificrs  greatly  from  these  associations  which  are  called  churches. 
The  \'isible  church  contains  a  large  part  of  the  true  church  of  Christ,  but 
it  is  not  identical  with  it.  Like  its  liOrd,  the  church  is  as  yet  hidden, 
and  the  creation  itself  waiteth  for  the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God. 
The  Lord  has  a  people  scattered  abroad  everywhere,  whose  lives  are  hid 
with  him  in  God,  and  these  make  up  the  real  temple  of  God  in  which 
the  Lord  dwelleth.  Men  of  every  name  and  chme  and  age  are  quickened 
into  life,  made  living  stones,  and  then  laid  upon  Christ, — and  these  con- 
stitute the  true  temple,  which  God  hath  built  and  not  man,  for  he 
d\\elleth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands;  that  is  to  say,  of  man's 
building,  but  he  dwelleth  in  a  temple  which  he  himself  hath  builded  for 
his  habitation  for  ever,  saying — "  Tliis  is  my  rest  for  ever ;  here  will  I 
dwell,  for  I  have  desired  it." 

This  temple  is  spiritual,  and  therefore  it  is  living.  A  material  temple 
is  dead,  a  spiritual  temple  must  be  alive;  and  so  the  text  tells  us,  "Ye 
also  us  living  stones."  I  cannot  understand  why  the  translators  put  the 
word  "  lively,"  since  it  is  precisely  the  same  word  in  the  original  as; 
above,  where  they  have  translated  it  "a  living  stone."  Those  good  men 
wished  to  infuse  a  little  variety  into  their  version,  but  this  was  hardly 
justifiable  in  intei-pretcrs,  who  ought  to  have  given  us  the  exact  meaning, 
and  have  left  the  sacred  style  to  take  care  of  itself:  even  its  monotony  is 
more  reft-eshing  than  the  variety  of  any  other  book.     True  believers  are 


510  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Btoiics  full  of  life,  so  joined  to  Christ  as  to  be  part  of  the  liye  rods, 
instinct  with  spiritual  vitality.  God  hath  quickened  them  from  tbe 
dead :  the  Holy  Spirit  has  come  to  take  possession  of  them,  and  whereai 
once  they  were  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  they  now  live  by  the 
livins^  seed  which  God  has  put  into  them,  and  the  life  that  they  live 
in  the  flesh  is  the  life  of  Christ  within  them.  "  I  live,  yet  not  I/*  said 
th J  apostle,  "  but  Christ  liveth  in  me."  Can  your  eye  of  faith  see  that 
temple  of  God  made  np  of  Uving  men  and  women,  not  alive  tiirongh 
the  life  of  the  Fii*st  Adam,  but  ahve  through  that  Second  Adam,  of 
whom  it  is  said,  **  The  Second  Adam  is  made  a  quickening  Spirit."  Pot 
those  live  people  together  in  an  organisation  which  allows  free  action  to 
the  life  within,  and  you  have  befoi*e  you  the  divine  cathedral  in  whkh 
Jehovah  dwells  for  ever  and  ever. 

We  are  a  spiritual  house,  my  brethren,  and  therefore  spvrUuaUy  huSH 
vp.  Peter  says,  "  Ye  are  built  up," — built  up  by  spiritual  means.  Ton 
cannot  force  men  and  women  under  rule  and  call  them  a  church ;  mx 
even  if  they  come  together  willingly  wiU  they  be  a  temple  for  the  Lord 
unless  the  dinne  Spirit  shall  fitly  frame  them  together.  God's  temple 
does  not  build  itself,  neither  does  man  build  it,  but  it  is  the  sole  work 
of  God.  The  Spirit  of  God  quarries  out  of  the  pit  of  nature  the  stones 
which  are  as  yet  dead,  separating  them  from  the  mass  to  which  tiicy 
adhered ;  he  gives  them  life,  and  then  he  fashions,  squares,  polishes  th^n, 
and  they,  without  sound  of  axe  or  hammer,  are  brought  each  one  to  iia 
appointed  place,  and  built  up  into  Christ  Jesus.  The  old  heathen  &bled 
of  the  music  of  Orpheus  that  it  was  so  sweet  that  as  he  poured  forth  the 
mellifluous  sounds  the  rocks  began  to  dance  around  him,  and  as  he  con- 
tinued still  to  play  they  piled  themselves  up  into  a  temple  at  his  bidding. 
This  is  true  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  the  music  of  whose  divine  word  by  th& 
Spirit  brings  us  stones  from  different  parts  of  the  fields  in  which  we  lay, 
and  fits  us  together,  stone  to  his  stone,  till  a  holy  temple  in  the  Lord 
arises  to  his  praise.  May  the  Holy  Ghost  work  among  us  in  this  manner, 
and  may  we  all  become  indwelt  by  the  ever-blessed  Spirit.  As  you  and 
I,  who  have  long  been  brought  into  the  church,  think  of  how  we  became 
built  upon  the  foundation,  let  us  praise  the  hand  which  laid  ns  in  our 
l)lace ;  and  as  we  cUng  closer  and  closer  to  the  great  comer  stone  to 
whom  we  are  always  coming,  let  us  bless  him  that  the  same  love  which 
in  the  l)eginning  cemented  us  to  the  comer  stone  still  holds  us  in  our  * 
place  so  firmly  that  none  shall  separate  us. 

We  are  a  spiritual  house,  dear  friends,  and  therefore  tJic  more  fit  for 
Ihe  indwelling  of  God  wfw  is  a  Spirit.  It  is  impossible,  if  you  consider 
ft)r  a  moment,  to  conceive  of  God  dwelUng  within  walls.  The  roof  may 
be  of  cedar  and  the  walls  of  polished  marble  overlaid  with  fine  gold,  but 
(^an  Omnipresence  be  enclosed  by  a  wall  or  surmounted  by  a  roof?  The 
infinite,  who  filleth  all  things,  and  who  maketh  all  things,  who  stretcheth 
out  the  heavens  like  a  tent  to  dwell  in,  who  rideth  on  the  wings  of  the 
wind,  doth  he  dwell  within  walls  of  man*s  building  ?  It  can  only  be  in 
some  typical  sense  that  he  can  be  said  to  abide  in  a  temple  :  but  that  he 
should  dwell  within  spiritual  beings  whom  he  has  created  in  his  own 
image,  should  dwell  in  intellect,  and  thought,  and  love,  and  hope,  and  all 
those  high  and  spiritual  powers  which  adorn  the  minds  of  his  people  is 
most  fitting.     A  spirit  dwelling  in  a  spiritual  house,  a  spirit  innabiting    \ 


THE   TRUE   PRIESTHOOD,   TEMPLE   AND   SACRIFICE.  547 

other  spirits  and  making  them  all  to  be  resplendent  with  his  excellence, — 
this  is  a  beautiful  conception,  and  by  no  means  impossible  to  realize. 
Within  the  assemblies  of  the  saints  God  is  known,  loved,  remembered, 
and  consulted.  In  the  church  he  is  heartily  worshipped,  tor  all  true 
worship  is  in  the  hearts  of  his  people,  and  aU  else  is  mockery.  Not  at 
your  altars,  0  ye  that  pile  up  your  hewn  stones ;  not  under  your  groined 
arches,  0  ye  who  seek  to  show  the  skill  of  the  stonemason ;  but  in  your 
hearts,  believers,  where  God's  skill  and  power  are  seen, — there  is  God 
worshipped,  whether  ye  are  in  cathedrals  or  by  the  way  side.  Jesus  said 
to  the  Samaritan  woman,  "the  hour  cometh,  when  ye  shall  neither  in  this 
mountain  of  Gerizim,  nor  yet  at  Jerusalem  worship  the  Father,  but  the 
true  worshippers  shall  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  for  the 
Father  seeketh  such  to  worship  him."  Material  temples  are  abolished  for 
a  spiritual  temple  is  instituted.  It  is  in  the  church  that  God  reveals 
himself.  If  you  would  know  the  Lord's  love  and  power  and  grace  you 
must  get  among  his  people,  hear  their  experiences,  learn  from  them  how 
God  dealeth  with  them,  and  let  them  tell  you,  if  ye  have  grace  to 
understand  them,  the  height,  and  depth,  and  length,  and  breadth  of  the 
love  of  Christ,  which  passeth  knowledge,  for  he  manifesteth  himself  to 
them  as  he  doth  not  to  the  world.  Hath  he  not  said,  "  I  will  dwell  in 
them  and  walk  in  them"?  And  it  is  out  of  the  church,  the  spiritual 
palace  of  God,  that  his  glory  shines  forth  among  men.  The  promise 
of  the  hundred  and  tenth  psalm  is,  "The  Lord  sh^l  send  the  rod  of  thy 
strength  out  of  Zion ;  rule  thou  in  the  midst  of  thine  enemies."  If  you 
desire  to  see  God's  spiritual  power  you  will  discern  it  best  by  seeing  how 
it  is  exerted  in  and  through  spiritual  men  and  spiritual  women,  built 
up  together  as  a  spiritual  house.  The  church  of  Christ  is  the  camp  from 
w-hich  the  armies  of  the  Lord  go  forth  to  conquer  the  nations ;  it  is  the 
pavilion  in  which  the  Prince  of  Peace  has  fixed  his  head-quarters  during 
this  last  crusade.  If  you  ask  for  the  centre  of  the  nations,  if  you  would 
discover  the  eye  and  soul  of  this  poor  world,  if  you  would  fain  see  the 
glory  and  excellence  of  the  sons  of  men,  find  out  the  quickened  stones 
that  God  hath  builded  together,  and  you  will  see  the  habitation  of  the 
great  King. 

But  I  must  now  bring  you  back  to  the  point  from  which  I  started,  that 
all  this  is  in  subordination  to  Christ,  "  To  whom  coming,  as  unto  a  living 
stone,  disallowed  indeed  of  men,  but  chosen  of  God  and  precious,  ye  also, 
as  living  stones,  are  built  up  a  spiritual  house."  You  Uve  because  he 
lives,  you  are  a  building  because  he  is  the  comer  stone,  you  are  honoured 
because  "  to  you  that  believe  he  is  honour."  Of  him  and  through  him  are 
all  things.  You  are  no  member  of  the  church  unless  you  are  a  member 
of  Christ ;  you  are  not  a  living  stone  unless  you  hve  by  the  life  of  Christ ; 
you  are  not  built  up  unless  you  are  built  up  on  him.  "  What  think  ye  of 
Christ?"  That  is  the  test  of  your  whole  state.  Is  he  your  Saviour, 
your  all  in  all  ?  If  he  be,  then  by  this  sign  do  you  know  that  God  hath 
built  you  up  into  his  temple ;  but  if  not  you  are  cast  forth  as  a  rejected 
stone.  God  grant  us  grace  to  reahse  as  a  church  that  we  are  a  temple 
of  God,  and  realise  it  best  by  coming  daily  to  Christ  more  and  more 
closely,  that  we  may  be  vitally  one  with  him. 

II.  In  addition  to  being  a  temple,  God's  people  are  said  to  be  A 
PRIESTHOOD.     Observe  that  they  are  spoken  of  together,  and  not  merely 


548  HETROPOLITAH  TABEOKACLB  PULPIT. 

as  individuals :  they  make  up  one  indinsible  prieethood:  each  one  iii 

Ericst,  but  all  BtaDoing  together  they  aro  a  priesthood,  by  virtue  of  their 
eing  one  with  Christ,  "  For  we,  Ring  many,  are  one  body  in  ChrisL" 
Never  let  us  cease  to  walk  in  nnity  and  love,  for  wo  are  ail  one  in  Cliriit 
Jesus,  and  what  God  hath  joined  together  let  no  man  put  aannder. 

We  are  "a  holy  priesthood,"  Tliis  stands  m  opposition  to  l/ie  nominal 
and  worldly  priesthood.  I  think  I  sec  the  world's  priests,  decorated  with 
divers  robes  and  ornaments ;  a  gaUant  show,  indeed,  for  fools  to  etare  iL. 
I  see  theniwith  their  garments  many,  and  their  colours  various,  with  tbeir 
shaven  heads  or  unshaven,  as  the  case  may  be  1  These  be  the  prieftd  uf 
Bajil ;  mere  mimics,  servants  of  a  visible  shrine,  servitors  of  idols ;  thae 
be  not  the  priests  of  the  living  Qod,  who  is  a  Spirit,  and  is  served  I9 
spiritual  priests.  It  is  of  these  outward  priests  that  he  saith,  "  He  tbit 
ufieretb  an  oblation  is  as  if  he  offered  swine's  blood,  and  he  that  bomeliL 
incense  as  if  he  blessed  an  idol."  There  are  no  priests  now  save  onlj 
those  who  are  in  Christ,  and  this  priesthood  belongs  to  aU  believers  alibi. 
"When  a  man  comes  forward  and  claims  that  he  is  a  priest,  beyond  and 
above  the  sense  in  which  all  Christiana  are  so,  we  spit  upon  his  pfr- 
tensions,  we  utterly  loathe  the  idea  of  fellon'ship  with  such  ^sehood.  ai^ 
we  regard  the  poor  mortal  as  going  hack  to  the  elements  of  old  Judaism, 
if  not  turning  aside  altogether  unto  antichrist.  All  men  andwonuowho 
arc  in  Christ,  believing  in  him,  become  sanctified  by  his  Spirit,  and  ao 
they  become,  not  some  of  them  but  all  of  them,  priests  and  kings  unto 
God  through  Christ  Jesus.  This  they  are,  not  in  themselves  in  any  wiy, 
nor  by  any  derivation  of  grace  from  men  by  apostolical  snoceasion  ud 
the  like,  but  by  the  pei^nal  and  direct  union  with  their  neat  H0 
Priest,  in  whom  alone  they  become  a  holy  priesthood  unto  CkxL 
"Blest  inhabitanta  of  Zion, 

Wash'd  in  the  Redcemer'a  blood, 
Je$iis,  whom  their  aouls  rely  on, 

Makes  them  kings  and  priests  to  God. 
'Tis  his  love  his  people  raiaea 
Over  self  to  reign  as  kings  ; 
And  as  priests,  hia  solemn  praises 
Each  for  a  tiank-offering  brings," 

This  prieslhoodis  most  real,  although  it  be  not  of  the  outward  (md  viaiWe 
order ;  for  God's  prieste  become  priests  after  a  tnie  and  notable  fashion. 
The  priests  of  Aaron's  line  were  priesta  by  birth,  and  so  are  we,  bwn 
again  with  a  high  and  spiritual  birth  which  brings  the  priesthood  with  iL 
In  that  day  when  we  were  begotten  again  unto  a  lively  hope  by  the  lesnr- 
rectiou  of  Jcsns  Christ  from  the  dc^  we  assumed  our  spiritual  priest- 
hood. We  are  priests  by  anointing  too,  for  if  the  Spirit  of  God  dwell  not 
in  us,  neither  are  we  priests  of  God,  by  whatsoever  names  we  may  aspire 
to  be  called  :  but  where  the  Spirit  of  God  with  his  divine  anointing  has 
descended,  that  man,  that  woman  has  become  a  priest  unto  the  lirii^ 
God,  for  in  Christ  Jesus  tliere  is  neither  ma!e  nor  female,  but  of  whatem 
ses  we  be,  we  are  alike  qualified  to  exercise  this  priesthood.  If  we  have 
been  anointed  of  the  Holy  Ghost  our  <'rder8  are  received  from  heai'en, 
and  none  can  make  them  void.  And  we  have  also  been  consecrated 
Brethren,  I  shall  leave  it  to  yourselves  as  to  the  reality  of  that  conse- 
cration, but  some  of  iia  can  solemnly  declare  that  if  anything  was  ever 


THE  TRUE  PRIESTHOOD,   TEMPLE  AND  SACRIFICE.  549 

true  in  our  lives  it  was  the  giving  up  of  ourselves  unto  God.  The  priest 
of  old  was  touched  with  the  blood  upon  his  ear,  and  is  not  your  ear  the 
Lord's  to  hear  his  word  ?  The  blood  was  also  smeared  upon  his  thumb, 
and  is  not  your  hand  the  Lord's,  with  all  its  dexterity  and  force  conse- 
crated to  him  ?  He  was  also  bloodmarked  upon  his  great  toe,  to  show 
that  liis  foot  belonged  to  the  Lord ;  and  is  it  not  so  with  you  ?  Do 
you  not  feel  that  you  would  run  on  his  commandments,  that  you  would 
work  in  his  service,  and  that  you  would  listen  to  the  voice  of  his  word  ? 
You  own  that  you  are  his  :  you  confess  that  you  are  not  your  own  but 
bought  with  a  price,  and  therefore  you  present  yourselves  to  him  to  be 
for  ever  his,  in  spirit,  soul,  and  body.  This  consecration  is  a  part  of  the 
actual  process  by  which  you  are  in  very  deed  constituted  priests  unto 
God. 

We  are  priests,  beloved  friends,  in  the  aspect  of  priesthood  towards  God. 
Priesthood  meant  in  Israel  that  these  men  were  set  apart  to  speak  with 
God  on  behalf  of  the  rest  of  the  congregation.  They  had  to  offer  the  daily 
sacrifice,  and  kindle  the  fire  of  the  incense.  Now,  you  who  believe  in 
Christ  are  all  priests — priests  for  mankind,  to  speak  for  them  to  God.  As 
man  is  spokesman  for  a  dumb  world,  so  are  you  intercessor  for  a  sinful 
race.  Whereas  fields  and  lulls  and  rocks  and  cattle  cannot  speak,  nor 
even  the  surging  waves  of  the  sea,  man  is  the  world's  eye  and  heart  and 
tongue,  to  speak  for  them  all ;  but,  alas,  men  themselves  have  become  as 
dumb  as  driven  cattle  towards  God,  and  as  dead  as  the  earth  they  tread 
upon,  and  you,  quickened  into  Ufe,  are  to  be  the  priesthood  of  the  uni- 
verse, the  ordained  intercessors  for  the  sons  of  men.  You  are  to  speak 
with  God  on  man's  behalf,  and  bring  down,  each  of  you,  according  to 
the  measure  of  your  faith,  the  blessing  upon  the  sons  of  men  among 
whom  you  dwell.  You  stand  before  God  to  speak  for  your  fellow-men ; 
take  care  that  you  do  this  with  solemn  earnestness. 

And  7J0U  are  priests  towards  inen  also,  for  the  priest  was  selected  from 
among  men  to  exercise  necessary  offices  for  man's  good.  The  priests' 
lips  should  keep  knowledge,  and  if  ye  be  as  ye  should  be,  ye  hold  fast  the 
faith  once  deUvered  to  the  saints.  The  priests  taught  God's  word,  and 
80  also  must  ye  publish  among  the  people  the  divine  message  of  grace. 
As  Ughts  ye  must  shine  in  the  world,  holding  forth  the  word  of  life. 
It  is  yours  to  be  the  nation's  teachera :  God  has  consecrated  you  to  the 
oflBce ;  do  not  neglect  it,  lest  the  blood  of  men's  souls  should  lie  at  your 
door. 

The  priest,  in  addition  to  being  the  instructor  of  the  people,  was  also 
their  intercessor.  So  must  you  be.  Oh,  cease  not  day  nor  night  to  pray 
for  men  till  Grod  shall  send  forth  his  Ught  into  the  darkest  parts  of  the 
earth.  Ye  that  make  mention  of  the  Lord  keep  not  silence  till  the  time 
to  fevour  Zion  come. 

The  priests  also  were  to  arouse  the  people,  and  therefore  they  had  the 
keeping  of  the  silver  trumpets.  It  was  theirs  to  blow  them  on  the  new 
moon,  and  to  proclaim  tne  Sabbath  and  the  jubilee  :  it  was  theirs  to 
give  the  alarm  of  war ;  it  was  theirs  in  the  AVilderness  to  summon  the 
tribes  together,  to  bid  them  march  or  bid  them  halt  according  as  the 
Lord  commanded.  0,  believing  men  and  women,  you  are  to  arouse  the 
world.  God  has  quickened  you,  not  for  your  own  sakes  alone,  for  no 
man  liveth  unto  himself  in  this  priesthood,  but  that  you  may  have  com- 


550  METROPOLITAN  TABERHACLB  PULPIT. 

passion  on  the  ignorant  and  those  that  are  out  of  the  way,  and  may  nek 

to  awaken  the  careless  and  lead  them  to  God. 

The  priests  were  to  bless  the  people.  It  was  their  prerogative  to  pro- 
nounce  God's  name  upon  them.  Oh,  live  a  bleBsed  lifis,  and  as  jov 
Master,  as  he  rose  to  heaven,  went  there  with  outstretched  hands  blesBiBS 
still  his  people,  let  your  course  on  earth  be  like  that  of  the  Ascended 
One,  a  life  scattering  blessings  among  the  sons  of  men,  and  let  id 
closing  scene  be  full  of  love  to  those  you  leave  below.  Thus  shall  je 
be  practically  the  holy  priesthood  which  God  would  have  yon  to  be. 

This  is  to  be  your  function  and  ministry  always,  and  in  every  pka. 
You  are  a  holy  priesthood  ;  not  alone  on  the  Lord's  day  when  ye  oome 
into  this  house,  but  at  all  times.  What  is  this  house  more  than  any  otter? 
You  are  a  priesthood  everyw^here  at  all  times,  owing  nothing  to  Uie  phoe 
you  stand  in  or  to  the  garb  you  wear.  How  this  invests  the  Chri^aii^ 
life  with  dignity.  You  are  to  eat,  and  drink,  and  sleep,  and  wake,  aid 
all  along  to  abide  in  your  priesthood.  For  you  the  chamber,  and  tiie 
parlour,  and  the  workshop,  and  the  open  field,  and  the  street  are  to  be 
still  a  place  for  the  exercise  of  your  priestly  functions.  Do  you  not  see 
that  it  must  be  so,  for  you  carry  your  temple  with  you  ?  Yon  youraelTtt 
make  the  temple,  for  ye  are  the  temple  of  God.  You  are  always  in  yom 
temple,  for  your  body  is  your  temple.  You  are  always  in  your  temple, 
tor  you  are  built  up  into  it,  and  stones  do  not  move  when  once  built  up, 
so  that  wherever  you  dwell  you  are  in  the  place  ot  service  and  woishq». 
Do  you  live  up  to  this,  my  brethren  ?  Do  you  seek  to  do  so  ?  Do  jcra 
make  your  ordinary  meals  into  sacraments  ?  Do  yon  turn  the  commoB 
garments  oi  your  toil  into  vestments?  Do  you  make  your  speedito 
be  an  offering  of  the  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving?  Do  you  cause  your 
thoughts  to  be  as  a  sAveet  perfume  ot  incense  unto  the  Most  High? 
This  is  whereunto  ye  are  called — to  be  a  holy  priesthood.  Unholines 
in  you  is  a  slight  upon  the  office  with  which  God  has  invested  you: 
un holiness  in  you  is  as  though  the  High  Priest  put  off  his  garments  of 
beauty  and  glory,  and  robed  himself  in  the  motley  or  a  fool. 
'  Now,  brethren,  I  call  you  back  again  to  the  point  from  which  we 
started.  You  are  a  holy  priesthood  only  as  you  are  in  Christ.  Christ  is 
the  elect  of  God,  and  you  are  elect  in  Mm :  he  is  a  King,  and  therefore 
you  are  a  royal  priesthood  in  him :  he  is  a  holy  Prince,  and  you  become 
a  holy  nation  in  him :  he  is  God's  pecuhar  treasure,  and  you  become  a 
peculiar  people  in  him ;  but  aU  this  is  in  oneness  with  him.  If  you  can 
be  severed  from  Christ  you  have  lost  your  priesthood.  Only  as  we  abide 
in  our  Lord  do  we  abide  in  our  condition  of  honour  and  privilege. 

III.  We  must  now  consider  the  sacrifices  which  we  offer — "  spiritual 
sacrifices,  acceptable  to  God  by  Jesus  Christ." 

We  offer  spiritual  sacrifices  as  opposed  to  the  literal.  There 
were  sacrifices  ot  bulls  and  goats  under  the  law,  as  you  know 
right  well,  yet  the  Lord  never  cared  much  for  them,  for  the  Holy 
Spirit  when  he  spake  by  men  of  old  frequently  set  these  things  in  the 
place  of  small  esteem.  In  an  evangelical  frame  of  mind,  de^lj 
penitent  for  sin,  the  patriarch  David  was  able  to  see  the  inefficiency  of 
the  legal  ofterings,  and  he  wrote  thus,  "  Thou  desirest  not  sacrifice, 
else  would  I  give  it ;  thou  delightest  not  in  burnt  offering."  And 
again  he  says  concerning  thanksgiving,  "  This  also  shall  please  the  Lord 


THE  TRUE  PRIESTHOOD,  TEMPLE  AND  SACRIFICE.  551 

better  than  an  ox  or  bullock  that  hath  horns  and  hoofe.*'  To  the 
same  effect  and  even  more  comprehensive,  is  that  expression  in  the 
fortieth  Psalm,  **  Sacrifice  and  offering  thou  didst  not  desire  ;  burnt 
offering  and  sin  offering  hast  thou  not  required."  And  what  follows, 
"  Then  said  I,  lo,  I  come  ;  in  the  volume  of  the  book  it  is  written  of 
me,  I  deh'ght  to  do  thy  will,  0  my  Grod  :  yea,  thy  law  is  within  my 
heart."  Upon  which  remarkably  clear  passage  Paul  remarks,  "he  /  - 
taketh  away  the  first,"  the  sacrifices,  "that  he  may  establish  the /v^-^y^^.*^ 
second,"  or  set  up  the  doing  of  the  divine  will  by  Christ  as  the 
great  sacrifice  for  ever. 

You  and  I  bring  no  lambs  or  bulls,  but  we  present  a  real  sacrifice 
which  is  far  more  pleasing  in  his  sight,  for  it  is  written,  "  The  sacrifices 
of  God  are  a  broken  spirit ;  a  broken  and  a  contrite  heart,  0  God,thou  wilt 
not  despise."  The  text  which  I  have  just  quoted  shows  what  our 
sacrifices  are,  for  we  imitate  our  Lord,  and  say,  "  I  delight  to  do  thy 
will,  0  God."  This  is  the  true  sacrifice.  Had  not  the  Lord  aforetime 
spoken  by  Samuel  and  said,  "To  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice,  and  to 
hearken  than  the  fat  of  rams.''  So  this  day,  beloved,  when  you  do  the 
will  of  God  from  your  heart,  when  you  studiously  strive  to  find  out 
what  God's  will  is,  and  then  conscientiously  endeavour  to  attend  to  it, 
you  are  as  priests  offering  spiritual  sacrifices  acceptable  to  God  by  Jesus  , 
Christ.  This  sacrificing  takes  various  forms.  "I  beseech  you, 
brethren,  that  ye  present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice."  You  are  to 
present  yourselves,  spirit,  soul  and  body  as  a  sacrifice  unto  God.  You 
are  also  to  "do  good  and  to  communicate,  for  with  such  sacrifices 
God  is  well  pleased."  To  him  also  you  are  to  "  offer  the  sacrifice  of 
praise  continually,  the  fruit  of  your  lips  giving  glory  to  God."  To  the 
Lord  also  you  must  present  the  incense  of  holy  prayer ;  but  all  these 
are  comprehended,  I  think,  in  the  expression,  "  I  delight  to  do  thy  will, 
O  God."  That  scribe  spake  discreetly  who  replied  to  our  Lord,  to  love 
God  with  all  the  heart,  and  with  all  the  understanding,  and  with  all 
the  soul,  and  with  all  the  strength,  and  to  love  his  neighbour  as  himself, 
is  more  than  whole  burnt  offerings  and  sacrifices. 

Oh,  ye  saints,  hve  to  do  Jehovah's  will.  Lay  self  aside ;  put  self- 
seeking  far  away ;  live  wholly  to  make  Jesus  great,  to  make  his 
gospel  known,  and  to  prform  the  will  of  God  which  is  your  sanctifi- 
cation.    Live  unto  God  and  so  offer  unceasing  sacrifice. 

We  come  back  to  where  we  began.  The  text  says,  "  acceptable  to 
God  by  Jesus  Christ,"  and  so  reminds  us  of  our  dependance  upon  our 
Lord  Jesus.  You  have  no  sacrifice  to  bring,  apart  from  his  sacrifice, 
and  it  is  only  as  you  hve  in  the  spirit  of  the  self-sacrificing  Jesus 
that  you  can  possibly  offer  unto  God  such  sacrifice  as  he  will  accept. 

I  have  done  when  I  have  said  this  much  to  von.  Beloved  believers, 
you  see  your  honourable  office :  rejoice  therein.  Are  you  poor  ?  Are 
you  obscure  ?  Have  you  to  work  hard  for  a  hving  ?  Nevertheless 
behave  not  yourselves  before  the  sons  of  men  as  though  you  were  of 
mean  degree,  for  you  are  priests  unto  God.  I  delight  to  think  of  God*s 
priests  working  in  our  fields  and  toiling  in  our  shops,  as  well  as  gathered 
here  at  this  time  in  a  holy  convocation  ;  God's  priests  as  much  in  one 
place  as  in  another.  Such  holy  priests  are  all  around  you.  You  know 
them  not  by  their  wearing  a  biretta,  or  by  that  hideous  long  coat  and 


6M  HETROPOLITAIT  TABERFACLE  PULFIT. 

Roman  dog  collar  in  which  the  world's  priests  drape  themaelves,  bnt 
joa  know  the  priests  of  God  bv  their  practical  hoUness.  If  yon  are 
holy  unto  God  yon  have  yonr  [nieatly  garments  on,  and  if  the  world 
disallows  you,  as  it  disallowed  its  Lord,  and  rejects  yon  as  a  stone  not 
to  be  built  into  the  temple,  it  does  not  matter, — "  The  Lord  knoweth 
them  that  are  his."  He  has  builded  yon  into  your  place  in  his  spiritual 
temple,  and  he  will  dwell  with  yoa,  yea,  does  dwell  with  you,  and  will 
abide  with  you  for  ever. 

See  now  your  reHponsibility,  and  walk  circumspectly,  because  what- 
ever you  do  will  be  a  part  of  the  acta  of  "  the  holy  priesthood," 
The  priests  of  God  must  be  pure.  "  Be  ye  clean  that  bear  the  vessels  of 
the  Lord."  The  temple  of  the  Lord  must  not  have  buyers  and  sellers, 
and  thieves  and  robbers  to  defile  it ;  Christ  would  have  it  pnrged.  This 
puts  you  into  such  a  responsible  position,  that  I  would  earnestly  implore 
yon,  "  Be  ye  perfect,  even  as  your  Father  in  heaven  is  perfect."  Set 
apart  to  such  an  ofRce  as  this,  everything  about  yon  shoald  be  marked 
with  "Holiness  unto  the  Lord." 

And  now  see  once  more  what  grace  has  been  bestowed  upon  you,  that 
j/OH  should  become  priests,  who  in  times  past  were  enemies  to  God. 
You  were  not  a  people,  but  are  now  the  people  of  God  ;  who  had  not 
obtnined  mercy,  but^  have  now  obtained  mercy.     Ye  were  sometimes 


I  darkness,  but  now  are  ye  light  in  the  Lord ;  ye  were  once  the 

Tvnnts  of  Satan,  but  now  are  yo  priests  unto  God.     Go,  and  ao 

live,  timt  men  shall  say  of  you,  "  They  are  the  priests  of  the  Lord." 


May  yon  shew  forth  the  virtues  of  your  God  and  declare  his  praises. 
Yon  have  received  the  office  ;  honour  it,  live  up  to  it,  ask  for  grace  to 
fulfil  it.  Think  how  it  dignifies  you,  for  the  text  which  I  quoted  jost 
now  says,  "  Unto  you  that  believe  he  is  honour  " — that  ia  the  Greek 
word.  It  is  yunr  honour  to  have  Obrist  for  your  Saviour ;  your  honour 
to  be  Christ's  servants ;  yonr  honour  to  be  like  Christ ;  yonr  hononr  to 
be  priests  through  his  grace,  and  by  and  by  it  will  be  your  honour  to  be 
with  him  world  without  end.     Amen. 


Portion  of  Scriptuke  read  before  Sermon — 1  Peter  ii. 


Hyuhs  from  "Oub  Own  Hyun  Book" — 410,  645,  419. 


^etopKtan:  M^tnmk 


TAKING  HOLD  UPON  GOD. 


%  |^m<rtt 


Delivered  on  Lord's-Day  Morning,  October  7th,  1877,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNAOLE,  NEWINGTON. 


^' There  is  none  that  calleth  upon  thy  name,  that  Btirreth  up  himself  to  take  hold 
of  thee." — Isaiah  Ixiv.  7. 

Isaiah  in  the  chapter  before  us  describes  a  very  mournful  condition  of 
the  people  of  God.  He  feels  the  case  to  be  so  desperate  that  he  sighs 
Jot  a  divine  interposition — **  Oh  that  thou  wouldest  rend  the  heavens,  t£at 
tbon  wouldest  come  down."  He  perceives  that  the  people  are  so  steeped 
in  slumber,  so  utterly  under  the  power  of  their  sins  that,  unless  God  him- 
.aelf  shall  descend  with  all  the  power  and  terror  of  Sinai,  the  nation  will 
utterly  perish  through  its  iniquity,  even  as  withered  leaves  are  blown 
away  by  the  fierce  winds.  He  longed  for  a  melting  fire  to  dissolve  their 
bard  hearts ;  for  a  swift  flame  such  as  bums  the  brushwood  on  the  moun- 
tain's side  to  make  a  speedy  end  of  their  false  confidences ;  and  for  a 
burning  heat,  suchasmaketh  the  waters  to  boil,  to  remove  the  lukewarm- 
ness  of  those  who  professed  to  worship  the  Lord. 

I  do  not  know  that  the  condition  of  the  church  of  God  at  the  present 
time  is  quite  so  bad  as  that  which  is  here  described.  It  would  be  wrong 
to  boast  of  our  condition,  but  it  would  be  worse  to  despair  of  it.  It  would 
not  be  honest  to  apply  the  words  of  our  text  to  the  church  of  the  present 
day.  Blessed  be  God,  we  could  not  say,  "  There  is  none  that  calleth  upon 
thy  name,  that  stirreth  up  himself  to  take  hold  of  thee,"  for  there  are 
many  who  plead  day  and  night  for  the  prosperity  of  Zion.  Yet  in  a 
measure  we  are  somewhat  in  the  same  plight  as  that  which  is  described 
by  the  prophet,  and  there  is  much  to  mourn  over.  Prayer  languishes  in 
many  churches,  power  in  intercession  is  by  no  means  a  common  attain- 
ment, and  meetings  for  prayer  are,  as  a  rule,  tliinly  attended,  and  not 
much  thought  of.  Sin  abounds,  empty  profession  is  conunon,  hypocrisy 
IB  plentifiil,  and  the  life  of  God  in  the  soul  is  but  little  esteemed. 

Notice  carefully  that  according  to  our  text  the  prophet  traces  much  of 

the  evil  which  he  deplored  to  the  lack  of  prayer.    After  he  has  compared 

their  righteouflneases  to  filthy  rags  he  adds,  "  there  is  none  that  calleth 

upon  thy  name,  that  stirreth  up  himself  to  take  hold  of  thee."    When 

No.  1,377. 


55-1  METROTOLITAN   TABBSNACLE   PtTLPIT. 

there  ie  a  degenera<?y  nf  pubiic  manners,  you  may  be  sure  that  there  ha* 
also  occurrod  a  Berioun  decline  of  secret  devotion.  When  the  oiilnard 
Ben-ice  of  the  church  begins  to  flag  and  her  hoiineas  declines,  yon  inny  be 
sure  that  hcrcommniiioii  ivith  God  has  been  eodl;  suspended.  Devotimi 
to  God  will  be  foond  to  bo  the  basis  of  holiness  and  the  buttress  of 
inteffrity.  If  yon  backslide  in  secret  before  God,  yon  nill  soon  err  at 
pubhc  before  men.  You  mny  jndge  yourselves,  my  dear  hearers,  as  to 
your  spiritual  state  lij  the  condition  of  your  hearts  in  the  matter  rf 
prayer.  How  are  you  nt  the  mercy  seat?  for  that  is  what  yon  rciJly 
are.  Arc  tlie  couBohitions  of  God  small  with  you  ?  That  is  a  minor 
matter ;  look  deeper, — U  there  not  a  restraining  of  prayer  before  the 
living  God  ?  Do  yon  lind  yourself  weak  in  the  presence  of  templation? 
Tliat  is  important ;  but  search  below  the  surface,  and  yon  will  hnd  that 
you  have  grown  lax  in  supplication,  and  have  failed  to  keep  up  continaal 
communion  with  God. 

The  prophet  also  reveuls  the  vcrj-  essence  and  soul  of  prayer  It  is 
a  stirring  up  of  one's  self  to  take  hold  of  God.  If  in  prayer  we  do  not 
take  hold  of  God,  we  have  prajod  but  feebly,  if  at  all.  The  very  soui  of 
devotion  lies  in  realising  the  divine  presence,  in  dealing  with  (.Jod  as  a 
real  pei-son,  in  firm  contidencc  in  his  faitlifulness, — in  a  word,  in  "  taking 
hold  of  him."  Men  do  not  take  hold  of  a  shadow,  they  cannot  graap 
Che  uusubstautial  fabric  of  a  dream.  Taking  hold  implies  somethuig 
real  which  we  grasp ;  and  there  is  wanted  to  make  prayer  truthful  ana 
acceptable  nith  God  the  grip  and  grasp  of  a  tenacious  faith,  which 
believes  the  feet  that  God  is,  and  that  he  is  the  rcwarder  of  them  that 
diligently  seek  him.  Taking  hold  implies  a  reverent  familiarity  with  the 
Lord,  by  which  we  use  a  holy  force  to  win  a  blessing  from  his  hand. 
[t  was  because  there  was  so  little  of  this  in  Israel,  that  the  nation  hsd 
fallen  into  so  forlorn  a  state ;  and  if  yon  trace  up  the  evils  of  the  chiiirb 
at  the  present  day  to  their  source  it  hiU  come  to  this,  that  there  are  p> 
few  who  stir  np  tiiemselves  to  take  hold  upon  the  hving  God,  so  few  who 
grapple  with  spiritual  matters  in  downnght  eamcst,  and  bring  them 
before  the  Lonl  with  resolute  faith.  We  have  few  Ehjahs  now,  and 
Jacobs  are  hard  to  find.  Why,  look  ye,  airs,  there  are  many  whose 
religion  is  nothing  but  a  mere  outward  pcrforraauce,  it  consists  in  attenJ- 
micc  upon  a  place  of  worship  so  many  tunes  on  the  Sabbath,  the  reading  ■ 
of  prayers  in  the  fomily,  the  repetition  of  a  form  of  devotion  night  and 
morning,  and  perhiipa  the  mechanical  rending  of  a  chapter ;  but  there  is 
no  consciousness  that  God  is  near,  no  converse  tvitli  lum,  no  taking  hold 
upon  him.  In  the  aise  of  snch  persons  the  "Thon  God  scest  me"  of 
Hagar  in  the  nildeniew  lias  nevcT  leaped  from  their  hps,  neither  have 
they  cried  like  Daiid.  ■'  Against  thee,  thee  onlv,  have  I  sinned,  and  done 
this  evil  in  thy  sight,"  God  is  fer  off  from  t^em  even  when  they  pray: 
they  never  dream  that  they  are  speaking  into  his  ear.  They  believe 
there  is  a  GihI,  but  they  act  as  if  there  were  none.  He  does  not  inflnenoe 
them,  their  lives  arc  not  inspiivd  by  his  presence,  or  ennobled  lyhii 
smile.  Their  rehgion  is  practically  godless,  and  therefore  worthleaa.  bi 
vain  is  it  that  they  are  regular  at  services  and  attentive  at  sermons  if 
their  hearts  stop  short  of  God  himself.  Their  service  may  be  in  all 
respects  proper  and  orderly,  but  if  there  be  no  taking  hold  of  God  it  is 
lifeless  and  useless:  a  garnished  sepulchre,  and  not  a  temple.     "God 


TAKDra  HOLD  UPON  GOD.  555 

witii  us,"  in  our  flesh,  is  our  Saviour ;  **  God  ;^th  us,"  by  his  Spirit, 
proves  that  we  are  saved. 

Laying  hold  upon  God  is  not  the  act  of  a  dead  maii^  neither  is  it  the 
deed  of  one  who  is  destitute  of  spiritual  perception ;  it  is  the  act  of  one 
who  Ib  quickened  and  kept  alive  by  the  indwelling  power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  Those  who  are  at  enmity  with  God  neither  can  nor  will  take 
hold  of  him,  for  "  they  say  unto  God,  depart  irom  us :  for  we  desire 
not  the  knowledge  of  thy  ways." 

Men  will  do  anything  sooner  than  fitir  up  themsdves  to  take  hold  of 
Grod :  they  will  build  churches,  and  rear,  altars,  and  say  masses  and  per- 
form pilgrimages,  and  a  thousand  other  things,  but  they  do  not  want 
God,  and  will  not  have  him.  To  go  through  a  round  of  performances  is 
very  easy  work  compared  with  thought,  and  consideration,  and  the 
yielding  of  the  heart.  You  may  In  religious  matters  make  yourself  like 
the  brickmaker*s  blind  hoise,  which  goes  round  and  round  at  his  pug- 
mill,  but  knows  nothing  about  what  he  is  doing.  Such  worship  God 
XGga^th  not :  as  well  might  we  set  automatons  to  pray  and  wax  figures 
to  move  in  and  ont  of  church  doors.  God  is  a  Spirit,  and  to  grasp  a 
£^izit  is  not  everyday  work.  Only  a  spiritual  man  can  do  anything  of 
the  kind  or  know  what  it  means.  A  man  must  be  stirred  up  and  have 
All  his  &cultie8  awake,  and  his  entire  mental  and  spiritual  nature  thrown 
into  energetic  action  before  he  will  be  able  to  cope  with  this  mystery,  and 
take  hold  on  him  that  made  the  heavens  and  tne  earth,  who  is  not  seen 
of  the  eye  nor  heard  of  the  ear,  and  is  only  to  be  apprehended  by  the 
inner  i^irit  of  man.  I  pray  God  that  I  may  be  helpful,  as  he  shall 
please,  m  stirring  up  many  of  you  to  take  hold  upon  the  Lord  with  all 
your  heart  and  soul  and  strength.  If  such  shall  be  the  case,  it  will  be 
a  great  blessing  to  the  churches  to  which  you  belong,  a  great  blessing  to 
the  society  in  which  you  move. 

At  this  present  I  shall  not  attempt  more  than  the  task  of  describing 
certain  forms  in  which  taking  hold  upon  God  is  exceedingly  desirable  at 
this  present  time.  The  same  priaciple  in  different  stages  of  spiritual 
life  is  seen  in  varying  forms,  let  me  point  out  four  of  the  most  needful ; 
and  may  the  Holy  Ghost  enable  some  among  us  to  stir  up  themselves  for 
the  holy  effort. 

I.  The  first  form  of  taking  hold,  that  which  is  intended  in  the  text, 
is  that  in  which  the  awakened  sinner  takes  hold  upon  God  ;  and 
here  I  shall  be  addressing  myself,  I  hope,  to  many  now  present  who  are 
sincerely  anxious  to  find  present  salvation.  If  you  really  wish  to  be 
reconciled  to  God,  and  to  be  pardoned  by  the  great  Father  at  once, 
hearken  diligently  unto  me,  and  hear,  that  your  souls  may  live.  Your 
only  hope  lies  in  taking  hold  upon  God.  Startle  not,  but  hearken  and 
ob^.  It  is  great  condescension  on  the  Lord's  part  that  he  should  permit 
it  to  be  so,  but  so  it  is,  that  when  he  bares  his  right  arm  to  smite  you 
your  safety  lies  in  grasping  that  very  hand  which  apparently  is  lifted  for 

Jour  destruction.  He  says  by  the  mouth  of  the  prophet,  "  Let  him  lay 
old  on  my  strength,  and  let  him  make  peace  with  me."  As  a  child 
when  bis  &ther  is  about  to  chaji?ten  him  will  often  seize  his  father's  hand 
and  with  many  tears  entreat  him  to  forbear  the  rod,  so  will  you  do  if  you 
act  wisely.  You  are  to  run  in,  as  it  were,  into  God,  and  shelter  in  the 
very  rock  which  firowns  upon  you*   Though  he  seemeth  to  be  a  destroyer, 


556  METROPOLITAH  TABKRHAOT.S  PCI.Prr. 

if  yon  can  but  tmst  him  yon  vill  find  him  to  be  jotir  gairionT.  Tm 
must  say,  aa  John  Bnnyan  once  did,  "  I  was  so  driven  that  I  woold  hsnv 
run  to  ChriBt,  eTen  if  he  had  stood  with  a  pike  in  hia  hand,  yea,  I  wooid 
have  mn  upon  the  very  point  therouf  so'jiier  than  be  as  I  then  wag."  li 
Ib  bo  wretched  a  thing  to  be  with^nit  God  that  one  may  gladly  dare  sn; 
calamity  in  Tenturing  to  ^prooch  him,  though  in  trnth  there  is  do  catur 
for  fear.  God  has  been  pleased  to  reveal  himself  in  the  peretm  of  hi» 
dear  Son  Jesus  Christ,  wno  lived  and  died  for  the  salvation  of  men; 
and  whosoever  will  trtrnt  God  as  he  is  revealed  in  Christ  Jesos  ahall  find 
forgiveness  for  all  his  sins,  shall  obtain  a  new  nature,  shall  caber  cpon  i 
new  life,  and  shall  be  the  heir  of  a  blessed  immortality.  Thk  is  (lit 
way  of  salvation  which  God  i^)poiats,  namely,  that  yon  now  at  onor 
heartily  tniet  in  his  Son. 

However  strange  this  method  may  appear  to  you,  jadge  not  occoid- 
ing  to  the  sight  of  the  eyes,  bat  accept  what  the  Lorf  sets  before  ymi 
That  mnst  be  best  for  yon  which  God  thinks  be«t :  if  it  satisfies  your 
Maker  it  may  well  satisfy  you.  But  indeed  you  have  no  choice  j  yon 
are  rfmt  up  to  this  one  method  of  deliverance.  Trust  in  Christ  ifll 
save  you;  but  "there  is  none  other  name  nnder  heaven  given  amonf! 
men,  whereby  we  must  be  saved." 

Do  you  understand  me  ?  The  way  of  life  is  to  take  hold  of  God  in 
Christ  Jesns.  You  are  charged  with  Bin :  do  not  deny  it,  for  soch 
a  course  will  be  your  min :  tike  hold  upon  the  occnsation,  and 
confess  it.  Stand  where  the  accusation  places  yon  in  conscious  guilt, 
and  repent  as  you  stand  there:  then  turn  yon  onto  God,  and  say  to 
him,  '■  It  is  written  in  thine  own  word, '  This  is  a  faithful  ssyiiisj,  and 
worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  » 
save  sinners.'  Lord,  Thou  knowcst  I  am  a  sinner,  and  /  also  feei  ii 
I  cast  myself  upon  the  faithful  saying,  and  tmst  in  thee  to  saTemi' 
through  Jesus  Christ  thy  Son."  This  is  taking  lioW  upon  God,  and 
when  you  have  so  done  you  shall  find  salvation ;  yea,  you  are  saved. 

I  think  I  hear  yon  say, "  But  how  slial!  I  take  hold  on  God  ?  i 
who  am  bo  vile,  so  weak,  so  far  off  from  him."  He  has  given  yoo 
many  points  by  which  yon  may  grng])  him.  Yon  may  Udte  hold  Upon 
certain  of  his  attributes,  and  especially  apon  his  mercy.  '•  He  de- 
lightcth  in  mercy."  Can  yon  not  trust  the  God  who  is  ready  to 
ptijdon,  and  eager  to  receive  his  returning  child?  Remember  h:» 
lovingkindness,  and  the  multitode  of  hia  tender  mercies,  and  call  to 
mind  the  fact  that  he  has  declared  that  he  hath  no  pleasure  in  the 
death  of  him  that  dicth,  but  that  he  shonld  tnm  to  him  and  Htc. 
Can  you  not  cast  anchor  in  the  hnrbonr  of  infinite  mercy,  as  seen  in 
the  provision  of  a  divine  Saviour?  Can  you  not  find  foothold  for  ffulh 
on  that  blessed  and  sure  word,  *•  His  mercy  endureth  for  ever"  ?  This 
is  the  star  of  the  sinner's  night,  t}ie  dawn  of  his  day  of  hope.  There  is 
forgiveness  with  God  that  he  may  be  feared ;  with  him  is  plent«ODi 
redemption.  0  poor  sinking  soni,  take  hold  of  this,  believe  that  God 
for  Christ's  sake  can  justly  pardon  the  guilty,  and  plead  with  bim  to  do 
so  in  yonr  case.  Urge  your  suit  upoo  cliis  plea,  and  it  wiU  not  fail  joo. 
Perhaps  your  mind  can  better  settle  upon  a  promise.  Well,  it  will 
uttlo  matter  which  one  of  them  it  is,  for  though  they  are  very  many, 
they  an  all  equally  certain  ;  but  do  try  to  take  hold  of  the  Lorf  by  one 


TAKING  HOLD  UPON  GOD.  657 

or  other  of  those  hand-holds  which  he  has  provided  on  purpose  for  seeking 
sonls.  Hold  him  by  such  a  word  as  this,  **  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his 
way,  and  the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts :  and  let  him  return  unto  the 
Ijord,  and  he  will  have  mercy  upon  him ;  and  to  our  God,  for  he  will 
abundantly  pardon."  Or  take  hold  upon  that  other  gracious  invita- 
tion, ^^  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together^  saith  the  Lord  :  thongh 
jour  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow  ;  though  they  be 
red  like  crimson,  thev  shall  be  as  wool."  There  are  many  such  words 
of  grace,  and,  as  I  have  already  told  you,  they  are  all  equally  sure. 
Like  the  great  roads  which  all  meet  in  London,  so  any  promise  will 
lead  you  to  God.  Fix  your  grasp  of  faith  on  that  which  best  suits 
your  character  and  condition,  ana  you  are  at  once  in  contact  with 
God  :  only  do  take  hold,  and  do  not  trifle  with  the  promise,  or  stagger 
at  it.  0  sinner,  arouse  yourself  to  take  hold  upon  the  loving  word ; 
be  in, earnest,  man,  for  it  is  your  life,  and  when  you  once  get  hold,  let 
your  grip  be  as  an  iron  vice,  grapple  the  promise  to  thee  as  with  hooks 
of  steel.  Plead  after  this  fashion,  *'  Thou  hast  said  it,  0  God,  and  I 
believe  it,  and  I  trustfully  feok  to  thee  to  be  as  good  as  thy  word. 
On  this  thy  promise  I  depend,  and  I  am  persuaded  thou  wilt  keep  thy 
word," 

Perhaps  the  character  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  may  furnish  you  with 
a  boldfast.  Remember  who  and  what  he  was,  and  remember  that  what- 
ever Christ  was  that  Qod  is,  for  he  himself  testified,  *'  He  that  hath  seen 
me  hadi  seen  the  Father."  Recollect  how  Jesus  put  the  message  of  love, 
**  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give 
you  rest.  Take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me ;  for  I  am  meek  and 
lowly  in  heart:  ana  ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls."  Could  you  not 
trust  the  meek  and  lowly  one  ?  Say,  can  vou  not  readily  trust  Jesus  ? 
Do  you  fear  Immanuel  or  dread  the  Lamb  of  God  ?  Bleeding  on  the  tree, 
with  no  thunder  in  his  hand  nor  terror  on  his  brow,  can  you  not  confide 
in  him  ?  His  dying  body  by  every  wound  invites  the  sons  of  men  to 
find  a  shelter  in  the  riven  rock,  lake  at  once  firm  hold  of  God.  The 
body  of  his  incarnate  Son  and  all  his  blessed  doing  and  dying  stand 
before  you  as  so  many  points  of  attraction.  Turn  not  away,  but  let 
the  God  of  love  be  your  God  now  and  for  ever. 

Can  you  not  take  hold  of  him  through  the  gospel :  the  gospel  which 
publishes  salvation  to  the  most  ungodly?  what  say  you  to  this, 
** Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved"?  "He  that 
believedi  on  him  is  not  condemned."  "The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his 
Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  What  a  number  of  persons  have  laid 
hold  of  God  through  that  precious  text.  It  stands  like  an  open  door 
with  width  enough  to  admit  a  giant  in  sin.  Some  who  could  never  find 
comfort  anywhere  else  have  caught  at  that  encouragement,  and  found 
peace  with  God  at  once.  Why  should  you  not  ?  Note  this  one  also. 
•*  Him  that  cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out,"  and  this,  "  Who- 
soever will,  let  him  come  and  take  the  water  of  life  freely."  By  some 
one  or  other  of  those  gospel  declarations  I  do  in  the  name  of  Jesus 
entreat  every  guilty  sinner  to  take  hold  of  God.  Again,  I  say,  do  not 
run  from  him,  or  from  the  facts  of  your  sad  case :  do  not  try  to 
forget  what  you  are  towards  him,  nor  forget  what  he  must  be  towards 
you  if  you  continue  in  your  sin  ;  but  come  now  in  an  honest  manner. 


n 


r  TABERFACL15   PXTLPIT. 


md  meet  the  trnth  fiice  to  face.  Make  this  firm  resohre.  that  yon 
will  be  n  stranger  to  joiir  God  no  longer.  Say  in  yonr  eonl,  "  I  wifl 
take  hold  of  God  this  day,  as  ho  presents  himself  to  me  in  his  trotd." 
Pot  forth  yoor  hand  and  tonch  the  hem  of  Jesus'  garment  if  yon  can  do 
no  more,  and  he  will  not  sjium  you,  bnt  give  yon  immediate  salrstimL 

The  text  speaks  of  a  man'a  stirring  np  himself  to  lay  hold  on  Go4 
and  that  is  the  point  to  which  I  long  to  sec  you  bronght.  I  would  that 
every  unconverted  man  were  at  this  moment  arooeed  out  of  his  deadly 
slumber.  Ton  will  not  take  hold  on  God  while  you  are  asleep  in  nn ; 
downy  bed.  Believe  me,  no  sinner  is  saved  white  hia  mind  is  in  a  dreamy, 
hesitating,  IcthfiT^c  condition.  Yon  need  to  be  stirred  up  to  make  your 
calling  and  election  Ban?.  Snrely  such  a  bnsinc^  shontd  be  eamcatly 
attended  to.  Let  yonr  memory  be  stirred  up  to  recollect  yoiir  sin,  and 
your  eoni  to  repent  of  it.  Let  your  conscience  be  stirred  np  to  remmd 
yon  of  the  guilt  of  that  si[5,  and  your  heart  to  make  a  fnll  confe«skni  of 
it  with  deoT  shame  and  bitter  sorrow.  Let  jour  fears  be  stirred  np  tL' 
apprehend  the  wrath  to  come,  and  your  hopes  to  remind  yon  of  the 
possibilities  of  everlasting  life  and  glory.  Let  yonr  deairea  be  awakened 
this  morning,  and  may  you  bo  set  longing  and  crying  after  mercy ;  and 
with  yonr  desires  may  your  will  awaken,  only  not  as  it  has  been  accn* 
tomed  to  be,  in  vicious  obstinacy,  setting  itself  against  God,  bnt  mads 
willing  to  obey  in  the  dny  of  the  Lord's  pawer.  May  hie  Holy  Spirit 
arouse  reason  and  thocght.  understanding  and  the  affections,  yea,  yonr 
whole  man.  As  when  in  business  yoa  are  about  to  do  something  of 
extreme  importance  yoa  arouse  yonrself  and  endeavonr  to  have  all  ymir 
wita  abont  you,  so  now  come  to  this  great  business  of  your  soul's  salva- 
tion with  all  your  thoughts  aroused  and  ail  yonr  energies  eieited,  ftr 
all  these  are  iieedftil.  Is  it  not  a  concern  of  the  utmost  weight?  Sinw 
the  prize  is  worth  the  winning,  and  the  loss  will  be  intolerabfe,  be  atirml 
np  wtth  strong  resolve  that,  if  grace  and  mercy  arc  to  be  had  by  laying 
hold  on  God,  yon  will  have  them  at  this  very  honr. 

Brethren  beloved,  if  there  are  none  among  us  who  take  hold  on  God 
onr  chnrch  is  in  a  very  sad  state ;  a  church  without  converta  ia  a  clond 
without  rain,  a  river  without  water.  I  thank  God  that  we  arc  not  in 
such  a  plight,  bnt  we  liavc  many  in  thia  place  who  have  lately  taken 
hold  upon  the  Lord,  and  found  grace  in  his  sight.  This  has  been  b 
means  of  grace  to  va  all ;  the  oldest  and  most  established  haTe  been 
cheered  by  these  new  converts.  Their  coming  among  as  haa  been  a 
dew  from  the  Lord ;  we  have  welcomed  them  as  men  do  swallows  in 
the  spring.  Their  addifion  to  our  numbers  hits  lit  tip  new  stars  m  onr 
sky.  Pray,  my  brethren,  thnt  there  may  !«  many  such  in  ail  churches, 
for  it  is  pre-cmincntlr  ilf'^irablo  that  every  awakened  mnner  should  he 
stirred  rm  to  take  hold  upon  God. 

11.  We  will  now  consider  another  character  considerably  in  advuice 
6f  the  former,  who  also  stirs  up  himself  to  take  hold  of  God.  We 
very  greatly  need  to   have  among  us   many  thoeodgh   belibtbu 

WHO    TAKK    nOLD    UPON    GOD    BY    FIDELITY    TO     HIM.      I     haVB    seeO 

applied  to  Calvin  the  motto,  "  He  took  fast  hold."     If  ever  a  man  did 

take   fast    hold    on  invisible    things,  it  was   that    famous  reformer. 

What  he  grasped  he  held  with  force  of  clear  conviction,  intelligent 

k  apprehension,  and  devout  reverence.    I  am  particularly  aimoos  tiiat 


TAKING  HOLD  UPON  GOD.  559 

every  member  of  this  church  should  now  look  upon  himself  or  herself 
separately  and  distinctly,  and  try  to  follow  me  in  my  description 
of  a  believer  who  takes  hold  of  God.  He  is  deeply  sincere  and 
thorough  in  all  that  he  does.  Shams  and  pretences  are  his  abhorrence. 
He  feels  the  solemn  importance  of  dealing  in  spirit  and  in  truth  with 
the  Lord,  and  of  taking  hold  upon  G(S  himself  and  not  on  mere 
names  and  words  and  forms.  He  says  within  himself,  "I  am  a 
Christian,  and  I  will  be  so,  by  God's  grace,  not  in  name  only,  but  in 
deed  and  in  truth.  I  know  that  tha  outward  form  of  religion  is  but  a 
husk,  and  I  resolve  to  feed  upon  the  kernel.  The  substance  of  religion 
I  mean  to  have,  and  not  its  shadows.  I  will  take  hold  of  all  the  out- 
irard  which  God  has  revealed ;  but  I  will  mainly  look  to  the  inward,  and 
my  soul  and  spirit  shall  deal  with  the  living  God  himself.  If  I  live,  I 
mQ  live  unto  him  :  nothing  short  of  this  shall  content  me."  Such  a 
man. opens  his  Bible  and  resolves  to  find  out  what  Grod's  will  is,  and 
lie  judges  for  himself,  for  he  knows  that  he  will  have  to  render 
a  personal  account.  He  means  to  take  hold  for  himself  of  every 
revealed  truth,  for  he  wishes  not  to  be  taught  of  man  alone,  but  to  be 
taught 'of  God.  He  arouses  all  his  wits  to  understand  the  doctrine 
and  precepts  of  God's  word ;  for  he  has  become  a  disciple,  and 
he  therefore  wishes  to  learn.  His  cry  is,  "  I  want  to  be  thorough,  I 
want  to  go  to  the  soul  and  centre  of  things,  and  know  truth  by  the 
teaching  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  my  own  heart.  'Not  content  with 
Bearcbing  the  word  alone,  he  takes  everything  he  finds  there  to  God, 
and  says,  "  Lord,  I  long  to  lay  hold  of  thee  in  this  truth.  I  desire 
not  merely  to  know  concerning  Christ,  but  to  know  Christ.  Not  only  to 
believe  the  doctrine  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  but  to  feel  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  himself  upon  my  soul,  for  I  have  said  in  my  heart, '  My  God,  1 
would  know  thee  and  commune  vrith  thee,  love  thee  and  serve  thee.  My 
soul  foUoweth  hard  after  thee ;  when  shall  I  come  and  appear  before 
thee.' "  Such  a  man,  dear  brethren  and  sisters,  when  he  once  knows 
the  will  of  the  Lord,  has  made  up  his  mind  to  act  promptly  upon 
what  he  knows ;  his  mind  is  expressed  in  the  language  of  one  of  old, 
who  said,  "  As  for  me  and  my  house,  we  will  serve  the  Lord."  It  is 
nothing  to  him  what  others  may  do,  except  that  he  regrets  that  they 
should  do  amiss.  He  puts  his  foot  down  and  will  not  run  with  a  multi- 
tude to  do  evil.  He  has  made  the  word  of  the  Lord  to  be  the  guide  of 
his  life,  and  he  will  not  depart  therefrom.  His  is  no  borrowed  faith  ;  he 
has  embraced  the  truth  of  Jesus  for  himself,  and  he  means  to  follow  him 
at  all  hazards ;  and,  as  far  as  he  can,  he  will  have  his  household  so  ordered 
that  all  who  come  around  him  may  see  that  Jesus  is  his  Lord.  'Come 
Mr  or  come  foul,  his  hold  is  taken,  and  he  will  not  leave  it. 

Such  a  man  sets  himself  to  extend  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  impelled  by 
inward  zeal.  Having  obtained  a  sohd  fulcrum  of  assured  knowledge,  he 
now  begins  to  use  his  lever  and  work  upon  others.  \VTierever  he  is 
settled  in  providence  he  sets  about  founding  a  church  for  his  Lord.  He 
is  glad  to  be  a  member  of  a  numerous  church  for  the  sake  of  Christian 
fellowship,  but  if  he  is  cast  in  a  desert  place  he  can  hold  his  own  alone, 
for  his  hold  is  not  on  man,  but  on  God.  He  can  testify  in  the  midst  of 
others  who  fear  not  God ;  he  would  testify  in  the  midst  of  heathen  if  he 
were  called  to  it,  for  opposition  and  persecution  cannot  shake  him.    He 


5€0  METROPOLITAK  TABEBNACIiB  PULPIT. 

has  taken  hold  of  God ;  not  of  the  church,  nor  of  the  minister^  nor 
of  the  mere  formal  creed;  he  has  passed  beyond  all  thin^  to  the  Lend 
himself  and  his  confidence  is  thus  above  the  heavens.  He  knows  that 
he  cannot  be  placed  where  God  is  not,  and  therefore  he  feels  that  his 
best  friend  is  alwi^s  near.  The  eye  of  man  is  nothing  to  him,  the 
presence  of  God  is  nrst  and  last  with  him. 

He  labours  with  earnest  zeal  to  maintain  and  defend,  and  also  to 
spread  abroad,  the  truths  which  are  verily  beUeved  among  us.  He  is  a 
man  that  calleth  upon  God,  not  merely  in  prayer,  but  by  oonfesdng 
his  name,  and  owmng  his  cause ;  and  he  stirs  up  himself  to  take  hold 
upon  God  in  the  doing  of  all  these  things. .  Bret^n!en,  I  earnestly  wish 
that  every  member  of  this  church  was  a  man  of  this  metal :  weshould 
be  strong  for  God  if  this  were  the  case.  We  have  so  many  profeascm 
who  are  still  babes,  needing  the  feeding-bottle  and  the  perambulator 
though  they  are  forty  years  of  age;  what  can  we  do  wUh  these? 
Others  are  unstable ;  they  know  something  about  truth,  but  not  veiy 
mudi,and  what  they  do  Imow  they  are  not  sure  of,  and  so  they  are  readv 
to  be  bamboozled  out  of  it.  In  the  present  age  if  any  man  can  tall 
well  he  will  get  a  following,  whatever  ne  may  teach.  1  am  astounded 
at  some  professors,  who  can  hear  this  man  to-day  and  that  man  the 
next,  though  the  two  are  diametrically  opposed.  Surely  there  is  some 
difference  Mtween  truth  and  error,  and  mere  devemess  cannot  neutralise 
fidse  doctrine.  Our  fore&thers  discerned  between  things  that  differed, 
and  when  felse  doctrine  came  before  them  they  cast  it  out^  notwithstand- 
ing the  eloquence  of  its  advocate.  I  do  not  want  you  to  be  bigots.  God 
deliver  ii»  from  their  bitter  roirit,  but  I  do  want  you  to  be  sound  b& 
lievers.  There  is  a  great  difference  between  obstinate  bigotcy  and  a 
decided  mainteuance  of  that  which  we  have  believed.  After  all,  what  is 
the  chaff  to  the  wheat  ?  There  is  a  difference  between  the  doctrines  of 
men  and  the  teachines  of  the  Lord.  No  Ue  is  of  the  truth.  Ganush  it 
as  you  may,  it  is  stiu  a  lie.  Oh  to  be  rooted  and  grounded  and  built  up 
in  Christ  I  One  of  the  most  desirable  things  in  this  fickle  age  is  to 
see  around  the  minister  of  Christ  a  people  who  know  the  truth,  and 
feel  that  the  truth  binds  them  fest  to  tneir  God. 

III.  We  take  a  step  further  in  advance  when  we  mention  a  third 
form  of  this  taking  hold  of  God.  We  need  a  development  in  the  Ibrm  of 
THE  WRESTLING  PLEA^EB^  The  expression  is  borrowed,' as  you  know, 
from  Jacob  at  the  brook'  of  Jabbok.  Me  had  begun  to  pray  alone  by  the 
brook  when  an  angel  appeared  to  him,  or  rather  the  prinoe  of  angels 
himself.  When  Jacob  saw  the  angel  he  laid  hold  upon  him,  and  tbisre 
was  a  wTestling  match  between  them  all  through  that  night.  It  was  a 
sight  such  as  never  did  earth  see  before.  After  much  weeping  and 
agony,  Jacob  made  a  desperate  clutch  at  the  angel  and  cried, ''  I  will 
not  let  thee  go  unless  thou  bless  me."  In  the  churoh  of  God  we  need 
man^  wrestling  Jacobs.  What  means  the  text  when  it  speaks  of  a  man 
stimng  himself  up  to  take  hold  of  Gk)d  ?  The  transaction  takes  ttds 
form.  The  good  man  feels  the  case  urgently:  the  blessing  which  is 
wanted  is  laid  on  his  heart,  and  he  feek  that  he  must  have  it.  He 
is  convinced  of  the  necessity  of  it,  and  he  is  also  certain  that  he  cannot 
have  it,  except  from  God.  ^en  he  looks  at  the  propriety  of  it  and 
asks,  "  Is  this  a  case  which  I  can  lawfully  lay  before  God  ?    I  SQck 


TAKING  HOLD  UPON  GOD.  561 

such  a  thing,  bni  may  I  expect  the  thrice  holy  God  to  give  it  mc  ? 
Is  it  for  his  glory  ?  When  you  have  done  that,  dear  friend,  you  have 
commenced  well ;  now  proceed  to  business.  Go  about  it  in  an  energetic 
but  reasonable  way ;  and  next,  turn  to  the  Bible  and  see  if  the  Lord  has 
ever  promised  that  which  you  seek.  Search  out  promises,  get  them  ready 
to  your  hand,  learn  their  very  words :  then  go  before  Goa  and  tell  ont 
your  desire,  and  honestly  declare  your  reasons  for  desiring  it.  Show 
the  Lord  that  you  know  that  he  has  promised  the  blessing,  and  then 
begin  to  plead  with  him  to  fulfil  his  own  word.  Very  much  of  taking 
hold  upon  God  must  lie  in  using  argument  with  him.  The  Lord  knows 
the  thing  is  good,  but  he  wants  you  to  know  it,  and  in  order  that  you 
may  be  well  instructed  in  the  value  of  the  mercy  you  seek  he  wishes  you 
to  produce  your  arguments  and  bring  forth  your  strong  reasons.  Many 
teachers  use  what  we  call  the  Socratic  method,,  in  which  the  boy  is  made 
bo  answer  questions,  not  that  his  teacher  may  be  instructed,  but  that  the 
youth  may  learn.  Set  your  case  in  order,  and  mention  your  pleadings 
before  the  Lord  as  if  you  were  pleading  in  a  court  of  justice ;  state  why 
and  wherefore  this  thing  should  be,  and  what  you  fear  will  happen  if  you 
be  not  answered.  Ketum  to  the  work  again  and  again,  as  Abraham  did 
when  interceding  for  Sodom,  and  each  time  renew  your  strength.  Es- 
pecially bring  forth  the  divine  promises,  and  say  concerning  each  one  of 
them,  "Do  as  thou  hast  said.  Fulfil  this  word  unto  thy  servant,  upon 
which  thou  hast  caused  me  to  hope."  Plead  the  covenant  and  the  feith- 
fnlness  of  God.  That  done,  believe  that  God  will  keep  his  promise,  and 
begin  to  expect  the  blessing.  Act  as  if  you  had  obtained  it,  for  it  is 
written, "  Believe  that  ye  have  it,  and  ye  shall  have  it."  If  the  mercy  be 
not  then  given,  ask  again — go  through  the  same  pleadings  as  before, 
amending  them  and  increasing  their  power.  The  agony  of  prayer  is  some- 
what like  a  great  siege,  in  which  one  earthwork  is  cast  up,  and  after  awhile 
it  is  followed  by  another  yet  nearer  to  the  town  which  is  to  bo  taken. 
One  after  another  the  besiegers  raise  their  works  till  the  place  is  quite 
hemmed  in  ;  then  they  bring  up  their  guns,  and  begin  to  pound  away 
upon  the  walls  which  they  have  resolved  to  capture.  Thus  must  we 
go  about  to  win  the  blessing  which  we  need,  using  divine  promises 
as  our  ramparts,  and  our  strong  reasons  as  our  great  guns.  Remember 
it  is  not  for  God's  sake  that  you  are  called  upon  thus  to  plead,  but 
for  your  own.  The  Lord  desires  to  convince  you  of  the  value  of 
mercy,  and  when  he  has  done  it  he  intends  to  grant  it  to  you. 

A  man  who  can  take  hold  of  God  in  prayer  will  be  of  the  utmost 
value  to  the  church.  Why  should  we  not  learn  this  art  ?  But  oh  how  few 
there  are  who  call  upon  his  name,  who  stir  up  themselves  to  take  hold  of 
God.  Sleepy  prayers  :  God  have  mercy  upon  them  !  Prayers  that  do 
not  mean  anything  !  Prayers  of  men  who  can  be  put  off  with  "  No :" 
these  are  as  common  as  stones  on  the  road,  and  of  less  worth.  We 
need  importunity  ;  the  knocking  at  the  gate  of  mercy  again  and  again 

^  •  ^«r  ^.^  It  1  tc  T  i1 'i.  11. 


ijesty  of  prayer  among  us  agam. 
we  had  hundreds  of  church  members  who  could  take  hold  upon  God, 
religion  would  revive,  and  we  should  no  more  have  to  complain  of 
barrenness.      God  will  rend  the    heavens  and  come  down,  and  the 


562  XXTEOFOUIUI  TABBBHIOLI  POLFIT. 

monntainB  will  Sow -at  bia  |H«Beuoe,  when  once  hii  people  take  him  at 
hia  word  and.icBj  as  if  they  belJeved. 

IV.  The  foorUi  point)  aod  the  last,  ia  to  mentioa  <Ktt  other  form  of 
thisatiiriDgiipofoiuselves  tolajholdof  Qod.  It  ia  one  which  Igod&k 
I  have  but  selaom  seen,  uid  wiah  I  could  see  on  all  aidsB.  I  have  read 
of  it  in  biogra{>hies,  and  paat  ages  have  aeen  it,  and  wondered  at  it.  It 
ought,  however,  to  be  oommoa  in  the  church,  and  to  be  seen  in  every 
Ghiutiaa.  I  meao  hhk  iakjckq  hold  of  Qod  by  tub  siKSKaTHEmo 
BBLISVEB :  the  SUB  who  has  got  boTond  doubta  and  fean,  and  grafted 
the  eternal  vehlaes.  Noqueetionnowastowhether  theie  is  aGodor  no:  . 
b&  Imowa  him,  qiealca  with  him,  wallcs  with  him.  In  sacred  commonifHi 
t.tm  Lord  l""  tyiann  known  his  aecret  to  him,  and  shown  him  his  covenant, 
Gooceming  the  gospel,  and  things  revealed,  he  does  not  care  to  argoe: 
he  is  aa  sure  of  thoee  matteta  as  of  the  fiict  that  there  is  a  Bnn  in  the 
heavens  or  salt  in  the  sea.  Se  has  passed  bejond  argumeiit  aa  to  tJiing^ 
oi  this  sort.  You  might  as  well  try  to  shake  the  earth  out  of  ita  plaoa 
aa  to  remove  him  from  his  convictions :  he  knows  them,  and  what  ia  a 
great  deal  more,  he  intenaely  realizes  them.  Heas  moch  believee  in  G«d 
and  hia  gospel  as  he  believee  inhia  own  eiiateace :  and  liieae  things  have 
aa  maninst  power  over  him  as  the  things  which  are  seen  and  heard  have 
over  the  hninftn  aenaaa.  He  is  famiiinr  now  with  Sod,  he  talks  viUi 
JeeoB  i  iho  Holf  Qhoat  dwells  in  him.  Be  has  passed  into  a  spiritoal 
realm,  and  has  oonaciooalv  to  do  with  spiritual  tuiiigBi  Sudi  a  man  is 
now  quite  sure  about  God  a  being  with  him,  for  he  dwells  in  his  preaaue, 
and  be  never  dares  to  act  except  under  a  sense  of  that  presence.  He  is 
quite  sore  about  Qod'a  keeping  bis  promises,  he  darea  not  doubt  that.  Sir 
he  haa  had  too  many  pnK>&  alreadv  of  the  faithfiilnefis  of  God  for  him  to  di^ 
truat  inm.  ^ow,  see  how  steadily  that  man  mores  about ;  trial  does  BOt 
bow  him  down,  he  expected  it,  am  he  expects  to  be  delivered  oat  of  it. 
If  you  rush  in  upon  him  with  the  moat  terrible  information  it  does  not 
distreaa  him,  for  "  he  is  not  a&aid  of  evil  tidings  j  hia  heart  is  fizedi 
traBtisg  in  the  Lord."  What  a  grand  character  Graham  was,  and  onlj 
beoauBe  he  waa  grandly  believing.  Whenever  iaith  rave  way  in  Abraham, 
as  it  did  now  and  then,  for  the  best  of  men  are  omy  men,  then  he  sank 
to  the  ordinaij  levd,  aa  he  did  when  he  denied  hia  wifo  and  said — 
"She  is  my  sister."  Bat  when  his  &ith  is  atrong  what  a  wonderfdl 
man  be  is.  He  never  disputes  with  Lot  about  which  shall  take  tlie 
&tteat  pastnrage.  Lot  may  have  what  he  likes,  for  Abraham  has  his 
God.  Lot  may  take  the  well-watered  plain  of  the  Jordan  if  he  desires 
it,  Abraham  had  sooner  dwell  alone  with  his  God.  When  Lot  is  carried 
captive,  and  he  feels  it  his  duty  to  deliver  his  reMiv^  be  does  not  ask 
about  how  strong  Chedorlaomer  and  the  other  three  kings  may  be ;  that 
is  nothing  to  him,  God  is  with  him,  and  he  hastens  to  the  conflict.  He 
uses  such  means  as  are  at  hand,  and  asks  hia  neighbours  to  join  him  in 
the  pursuit,  and  then  he  marches  confidently  a&er  Cbedorkomer,  and 
smites  him,  and  God  gives  the  plundering  host  like  driven  stubble  to  his 
bow.  You  never  find  Abraham  fretting,  he  is  alwayspeacefiil  in  mind ; 
he  is  not  afcaid  of  men,  nor  abashed  before  princes.  His  fhith  had  made 
him  heir  of  the  world,  and  he  knew  iL  He  moved  majestically,  becaase 
he  had  learned  to  believe  in  Ood.  When  Isaac  was  to  be  offered  vf, 
bow  the  strong  man  smothered  bis  emotions,  and  went  silently  bit 


TAKING  HOLD  UPON  GOD.  568 

resolutely  his  three  days'  joumey  with  his  son,  to  the  hill  of  which  God 
had  spoken  to  him.  There  the  deed  would  have  been  done,  had  not  the 
angel  interposed,  for  it  never  entered  into  his  mind  to  disobey  the  Lord. 
He  believed  so  firmly  in  his  God  that  whatever  God  had  bidden  him 
he  resolved  to  do.  Oh,  could  you  get  to  the  same  realizing  faith, 
how  calm,  quiet,  serene,  strong,  happy,  blessed  would  you  be,  for 
you  would  then  to  the  fullest  extent  have  taken  hold  of  God.  When 
we  have  such  a  man  in  a  church  he  is  a  man  of  power  in  all  respects. 
When  he  speaks  it  is  almost  as  the  oracles  of  God.  Other  speakers  may 
dazzle  you  with  eloquence,  but  this  man  overpowers  you  with  grace 
and  confounds  the  adversaries  by  his  boldness.  God  gives  to  the  church 
every  now  and  then  such  a  man.  Such  a  one  was  Martin  Luther,  a  man 
by  no  means  free  from  faults,  but  gloriously  free  from  doubt.  Others 
think  the  gospel  is  true :  Erasmus  feels  sure  that  it  is,  but  Erasmus 
wants  to  die  in  a  whole  skin.  Luther  knows  that  justification  by 
faith  is  right,  and  he  will  thunder  it  out,  whether  his  skin  shall  be 
damaged  or  no.  It  will  be  better  not  to  go  to  Worms,  say  timid  ad- 
visers ;  things  have  come  to  such  a  pass  that  there  will  be  danger  to 
life : — ^you  had  better  give  up  the  contest,  Luther,  before  you  die  in  it. 
Future  ages  may  take  it  up,  but  if  you  go  to  Worms  you  will  certainly 
never  come  back  again  !  Well,  saith  he,  I  shall  go  :  yea,  if  there  were 
as  many  devils  there  as  there  are  tiles  on  the  housetops,  I  should  go, 
for  I  have  to  confess  Christ  there,  and  confess  him  I  will.  And 
when  he  is  asked,  "  What  would  you  do  if  the  duke,  your  protector, 
should  no  longer  harbour  you  ? "  "I  shall  take  shelter,"  says  he, 
"  beneath  the  broad  shield  of  the  Almighty  God."  What  are  dukes  and 
princes  to  such  a  man  ?  He  had  taken  hold  of  God,  and  he  feels  stronger 
than  all  men  and  all  devils  combined.  There  is  nothing  like  this  link- 
ing of  one's  self  with  the  Eternal  by  faith.  Such  a  man  was  Calvin. 
I  picture  him  as  he  looked  when  going  into  the  church  of  St.  Peter, 
the  libertines  resolved  that  they  would  partake  of  the  Lord's  Supper, 
though  he  had  declared  they  should  not.  They  are  men  licentious  in 
life  and  godless  in  character,  but  they  mean  to  come  to  the  table  and 
take  the  sacred  elements,  whether  he  will  or  not.  They  care  for  no 
one,  and  mean  riot  and  bloodshed.  If  he  refuses  they  have  sent  him 
word  that  they  will  kill  him  in  the  church.  He  goes  to  the  table 
and  breaks  the  bread,  and  distributes  it  to  the  people  of  God,  and  hands 
not  a  mouthful  to  the  profane,  upon  whom  he  looks  with  such  pitying 
severity  that,  awed  by  the  man's  courage,  they  retire  to  learn  better 
manners.  We  have  in  these  days  a  race  of  time  servers  and  word 
spinners  to  succeed  the  real  men.  There  are  hundreds  who  say  it  is 
undoubtedly  untrue  that  children  are  in  their  baptism  made  members 
of  Christ,  children  of  God,  inheritors  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  but 
atill  we  will  teach  children  to  say  so,  and  afterwards  we  will  tell 
them  that  the  words  mean  something  else.  Is  this  the  way  of  doing 
the  work  of  the  Lord  ?  Is  this  according  to  the  gospel  of  faith,  or 
after  the  manner  of  truth  ?  Numbers  of  others  say,  '*  Yes,  we  see  all 
this,  we  see  popery  coming  back  in  the  form  of  ritualism,  but,  at  the 
same  time,  we  cannot  be  decided,  and  shake  ourselves  clear  of  the  ac- 
cursed thing.  We  cannot  tell  what  will  happen  ;  we  will  wait,  and 
jjerhaps  fate  may  favour  us."     I  know  what  would  happen  if  we  feared 


564  METROPOLITAlfr  TABEBKAOLB  PULPIT. 

God  more:  we  should  sooner  die  than  remain  in  any  fellowship  iritli 
popery.  Every  man  who  saw  any  fear  of  his  beii^  firaad  in  oomplicy^ 
with  Antichrist  would  at  onoe  say,  '^  I  will  not  have  it.  Popery  is  ab- 
horred of  the  Lord,  and  they  who  help  it  wear  the  mark  of  the  beast  I 
hate  Antichrist,  and  therefore  I  denounce  it  and  ci^,  Down  with  it,  raze  it 
eren'to  the  ground."  ETerytlung  that  is  of  the  Pope  and  popeiy  would 
soon  be  put  aside  if  men  were  but  true  to  their  oonacienoes  and  t^eir 
God.  This  generation  is  credulous,  and  yet  unbelieTing.  It  is  deluded 
by  the  most  tram^yarent  frauds.  It  swings  like  a  pendulum  to  this  uid 
that ;  it  believes  in  almost  anything  except  its  God,  but  in  God  and  his 
truth  and  righteousness  it  will  not  be  macte  to  believe.  Oh  for  a  John 
Knox  !  We  need  a  leader,  firm  and  heroic,  a  man  strong  and  stout 
because  he  has  God  with  him.  He  that  believeth  in  God  will  maJce 
men  decide  for  the  right  when  else  they  would  vacillate.  He  is  a  oom- 
mander-in-chief  among  the  sons  of  men.  His  brow  is  like  a  flinti  and 
he  is  not  to  be  abashed.  Let  criticism  rattle  upon  his  annour  like  a 
hail-fitorm,  he  standeth  fast  and  defies  it  alL  May  God  make  some  of 
you  into  such  heroes.  I  would  to  God  he  would  make  all  of  you  valiant 
for  truth,  so  that  in  your  little  circle  you  would  be  firm  for  God  and 
scriptural  doctrine  and  pure  worship,  because  you  have  taken  hcdd  of 
him.  God  save  us  from  the  men  of  willow,  and  gutta  percha,  and 
plaster  of  Paris,  such  as  would  be  dear  if  you  comd  buy  them  at  a. 
shilling  the  doaen.  Take  these  away,  0  &ther  Time,  and  give  us  back 
men  of  granite,  men  of  backbone,  say  rather,  men  of  God.  Oh  that 
each  man  among  us  were  aroused  to  take  hold  of  God,  and  that  all  oat 
£Etcultie8  were  stirred  to  their  utmost  depth,  and  that  then  thej  grasped 
the  Lord.  Ho  comrades,  see  ye  not  the  standard  I  It  wavers !  Shall 
it  fall  ?  The  true  soldier  in  the  cruel  fight,  when  he  sees  the  stan^bud- 
bearer  struck  down,  and  the  fight  thi(S:ening  all  around  tha  banner, 
stirreth  up  all  his  strength  and  rushes  into  the  strife,  as  a  lion  leaps 
on  his  prey.  He  strains  every  sinew,  and  throws  every  mam  into 
action,  daahing  forward  to  grasp  the  standard  and  to  hdd  it  MitjSt, 
touch  it  who  daze.  He  suutes  right  and  left^  and  sooner  than  the 
banner  shall  be  trailed  in  the  mire,  he  will  spill  his  life  in  crimsoa 
streams  upon  the  ground.  Up  ye  soldiers  of  Christ !  Up  ye  lion-like 
men,  and  turn  the  battle  to  the  gate !  May  €k>d  help  you  to  do  it  for 
Ohrist's  sake.    Amen. 


PoBTiON  OF  ScRiPTUBE  BEAD  BBFOBS  Sbbmon — ^Isaiah  Iziv.,  and 

Ixv.  1— 10. 


Hthzts  from  "Ora  Own  Hymn  Book"— 676,  674,  660. 


jn£ti[o:pote  i^drtmade  ptttpt 


THE  RIGHTEOUS  FATHER  KNOWN  AND  LOVED. 


%  ^mm{ 


Dbliyered  on  Lord's-Day  Morning,  October   14th,  1C77,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THK    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLB,    NBWINQTON. 


"OrighteoM  Father,  the  world  hath  not  known  thee,  bat  I  have  known  thee, 
and  tbeaa  have  known  that  thou  hast  sent  me.  And  I  have  declared  unto  them  thy 
name^  and  will  declare  it :  that  the  love  wherewith  thou  hast  loved  me  may  be  in 
them,  and  I  in  them." — John  xvii.  25,  26. 

These  are  the  last  sentences  of  our  Lord's  most  wonderful  prayer.  May 
they  not  be  regarded  as  the  flower  and  crown  of  the  whole  intercession  ? 
Minds  usually  bum  and  glow  aud  reach  their  highest  fervour  as  they  pro- 
ceed, and  it  will  not  be  \^Tong  to  conceive  of  the  Saviour  as  having  here 
reached  the  climax  of  his  pleading,  the  summit  of  his  supplication.  He 
has  kept  the  best  wine  until  now,  and  brings  forth  his  richest  sentences 
last.  How,  then,  shall  our  slender  ability  attain  to  "  the  height  of  this 
great  argument"?  It  is  far  beyond  our  little  skill  to  draw  forth  all  the 
sweets  which  lie  within  these  words  like  ointment  in  a  box  of  alabaster. 
For  their  full  consideration  a  lifetime  would  be  too  brief,  and  the 
mind  of  the  most  grace-taught  believer  too  feeble.  Here  are  great  deeps 
which  neither  reason  nor  thought  can  fathom  nor  experience  fully  know. 
Only  the  scholars  of  the  New  Jerusalem  who  have  tor  ages  studied  the 
manifold  wisdom  of  God  in  the  glorious  work  of  redemption,  and  perhaps 
not  even  they,  would  be  able  to  tell  out  all  that  the  Saviour  meant  by 
these  most  simple  but  yet  most  pregnant  words.  John's  gospel  is  always 
easv  for  the  child  to  read,  but  it  is  always  hard  to  the  man  to  understand ; 
and  these  two  verses,  which  are  almost  entirely  made  up  of  words  of  one 
syllable,  contain  mysteries  which  baffle  the  most  enlightened  understand- 
ing. When  I  consider  what  they  veil,  I  am  constrained  to  cry  out,  "  0 
the  depths  !"  I  can  only  hope  to  present  to  you  a  few  grains  of  gold 
which  have  been  washed  down  by  the  streams  of  meditation,  but  I 
cannot  take  vou  to  the  secret  mines  tom  which  the  treasures  have  been 
borne.  It  shall  need  your  own  experience  and  the  personal  teaching  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  for  you  to  know  the  height  and  depth  of  the  tniths  here 
spoken  o(  and  it  shall  even  with  these  require  death  and  resurrection 
No.  1,878. 


5G6  METROPOLITAN  TADEaSACLB  POl^TT. 

and  a  sigbt  of  the  eternal  glorjr  to  QiiaUf;r  7<ni  vhoUy  to  comprchHiil 
tlicm. 

ThiTC  arc  two  thinfp  in  the  tort  manifest  to  every  careful  render.  Tbm 
is.  first,  a  knou-Mge  tr/n'eh  >>  excttiUnglij  pccuijar  and  vwstimnblif  pn- 
fidus — "0  rifrhteons  Father,  the  world  hath  not  known  thee:  bnt  I  \an 
kno"n  thee,  and  those  have  known  that  thou  hast  sent  me."  In  avir 
mvi  ion  nith  this  knowledjiie  joo  will  observe  that  there  ia  a  grmt  Itodur, 
whu  first  knows  for  liimself  that  which  he  t«arhes — •'  I  have  knont 
ihiv" — .iiid  then  communicates  his  knowledge — "And  I  have  declairi  , 
::;::.>  them  thy  name,  and  will  declare  it."  That  friutful  thciue  shall 
f;:r:ii*ii  ihe  first  tojiic  of  onr  meditatioa.  May  the  Holy  Ghost  lead  m  I 
ir.to  it.  The  bccoihI  part  of  the  text  is  not.  knowledge,  it  is  that  ta  whki  | 
«1:  .Jivinc  knowJeil^' is  intended  to  lead,  namely,  love.  The  tiventy-«xd 
TOiw  spcaka  of  wondoifid  (liscoveries  of  a  love  of  infimU  cznUmtt: 
"That  the  love  wherewith  thou  hast  loved  me  maybe  in  them."  And  yen 
notice  tliot  in  order  to  bring  tliat  love  home  to  us  there  is  a  divine  inJin'Un. 
who  goes  with  it,  nml  without  whom  it  could  not  be.  As  a  teacher  is  n?- 
qoircd  to  bring  us  the  choice  knowledge,  bo  an  indweller  is  needful  to  infijs? 
into  us  the  infinite  love — "And  I  in  them."  Jesus  must  teach  as  or  we 
shall  not  know  the  Father ;  he  miu^t  dwell  in  us  or  we  shall  not  «joi« 
ill  his  love.  Thus  our  first  subject  is  divine  knowledge  and  the  diritir 
instructor,  and  our  second  subject  is  indwelling  love  and  the  iudwellin; 
Lord.  The  two  arc  one ;  the  bleased  person  of  our  Lord  Jesus  is  «>ooo- 
nectcd  with  both,  and  so  unites  both,  that  the  subject  is  one.  To  faw« 
fiod  in  Christ  Jesus  is  to  iovf  him,  and  to  Iw  loved  of  him  is  the  cameof 
our  being  made  to  know  him.  When  Jesus  declares  the  Father's  name 
we  both  know  and  love,  and  when  we  see  the  Father  in  the  Son  we  «t 
filled  both  with  instruction  ami  nlFection. 

L    Our  text  sjieaks  of  A  knowledge  of  ikfisitk  vai,ob  asb  its 
TEACHEB.   What  is  that  knowledge  ?    Jesus  tells  us  in  veree  26 — "  I  h»is 
declared  unto  them  Ihy  name."    (Jiid  has  made  man,  and  natnr&Ily  maa 
onght  to  know  his  Ikfaker.    The  creature  sliould  aciiuaiut  itself  witli  its 
<3reator,  the  subject  should  know  the  name  of  fiis  King ;  but  by  reason  tJ 
the  blindness  of  our  heart,  through  tho  depraritj  eugcnderod  by  tbf 
Fall,  and  also  by  reason  of  lnicIi  man's  personal  sin,  thero  is  none  thtt 
understandeth,  there  is  none  that  seeketli  after  GoA.    Whatever  else  fallen 
man  desireth  to  know  (and  by  nature  he  is  ever  ready  to  eat  of  the  trw 
of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil),  yet  he  desires  not  to  know  hia  God,  b"t 
saith  unto  him,  "  Depart  from  iis;  we  desire  not  the  knowletlge  of  tiij    | 
ways."    Yet  it  is  evident  that  a  man  can  never  be  in  a  proper  stale  till 
he  knows  his  (Jod,  and  is  at  j>eaoe  with  liim,    A  man  who  is  totallj 
ignorant  of  tJod  must  be  in  u  dark  state  of  mind,  and  since  he  loves  tlmt    | 
darkness  it  is  plain  that  his  mind  is  biassed  a^inst  good.     His  wilful 
ignorance  of  God  proves  his  curnity  to  liim.    While  man  is  oppost*]  tc 
God  he  cannot  be  happy,  holy,  or  safe  :  how  can  he  be  when  he  fights    I 
against  one  who  is  peilect  holiueMS  and  love  ?     Our  Ijord  Jesus  Clirist    I 
therefore,  in  coming  to  save  us,  makes  it  u  part  of  his  office  to  reveal    I 
the  Father  to  us.     He  brings  us  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  Gui    ' 
for  it  shines  in  his  own  face.      "  God   was  manifest  in   the  flesh." 
^Iwi    must   know    God    in    order    to    be    saved,   and    therefore  the 
HJArd   Jeans    of    old    promised    in    the    twenty-second    Psalm,    "1 


THB  EIGHTBOUS  FATHER  KNOWN  AND  LOVED.  567 

Trill  declare  thy  name  unto  my  brethren,"  and  here  in  our  text 
he  confesses,  "1  have  declared  unto  them  thy  name,  and  will  de- 
clare it."  By  the  term  "  name  "  he  means  the  existence  of  God,  the 
nature  of  God,  the  character  of  God,  the  work  of  God,  the  revelation  of 
Grod,  for  the  word  "name"  is  a  pcuharly  expressive  word  in  Scripture, 
and  comprehends  all  that  by  which  a  person  is  properly  described.  In  tliis 
case  it  comprehends  the  whole  of  God,  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  haa 
come  to  make  God  known  to  us  to  the  full.  He  says,  "  If  ye  had  known 
me,  ye  should  have  known  my  Father  also."  Tliis  should  suggest  to 
each  of  us  a  searching  question.  Do  I  know  the  Lord  ?  If  you  do  not, 
it  is  quite  certain  that  our  Lord's  words  apply  to  you,  **  ye  must  be  bom 
again."  Without  a  knowledge  of  God  you  bear  evidence  that  you  are 
still  in  nature's  darkness,  and  in  the  natural  alienation  of  your  spirit. 
You  belong  to  that  world  which  lieth  in  the  wicked  one,  of  which  our 
Lord  said,  "  0  righteous  Father,  the .  world  hath  not  known  thee." 
O  that  by  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Ghost  you  may  yet  know  the 
Father. 

In  verse  25  there  is  a  testing  name  given  to  God,  a  name  by 
which  we  may  decide  whether  w^e  know  the  name  of  the  Lord  or  no. 
What  is  that  ?  I  call  your  particular  attention  to  it,  for  my  whole  sub- 
ject turns  upon  it :  it  is  this — "  0  righteous  Father"  1  know  not  that 
in  any  other  portion  of  Scripture  God  is  called  by  that  name.  In  this 
prayer  Jesus  had  not  addressed  his  Father  by  that  title  before.  He  had 
spoken  of  him  as  "  Father,"  and  also  as  "  Holy  Father,"  but  here  alone 
it  is — '*'  0  righteous  Father."  Now,  I  say  that  the  knowledge  of  this 
name  may  serve  as  a  test  as  to  whether  you  do  truly  and  spiritually  know 
God,  or  have  only  a  notional  and  outward  idea  of  him.  If  you  know 
him  aright  you  know  and  understand  what  is  comprehended  under  those 
two  simple  words,  which  are  so  remarkable  when  found  in  combination — 
"righteous  Father."  He  is  "righteous,"  having  the  attributes  of  a 
Judge  and  Ruler :  just,  impartial,  by  no  means  sparing  the  guilty.  He 
is  "  Father," — near  of  kin,  loving,  tender,  fe)rgiving.  In  his  character 
and  in  his  dealings  with  his  people  he  blends  the  two  as  they  were  never 
combined  before.  How  can  the  judge  and  the  father  be  found  in  one  ? 
When  guilty  men  are  concerned  how  can  both  characters  be  carried  out 
to  the  full  ?  How  is  it  possible  ?  There  is  but  one  answer,  and  that  is 
found  in  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus  which  has  joined  the  two  in  one.  In 
the  atonement  of  our  Lord  Jesus  "  mercy  and  truth  are  met  together ; 
righteousness  and  peace  have  kissed  each  other."  In  the  sacred  sub- 
stitution we  see  declared  how  God  is  "  righteous  "  and  yet  "  Father  ":  in 
the  sublime  transactions  of  Calvary  he  manifests  all  the  love  of  a  tender 
Father's  heart,  and  all  the  justice  of  an  impartial  Ruler's  sword. 

This  Ls  the  knowledge  which  our  Lord  has  come  to  declare  among  the 
men  whom  he  has  chosen  out  of  the  world ;  and  he  assures  us,  first,  that 
this  is  peculiar  knowledge.  "  0  righteous  Father,  the  world  hath  not 
known  thee."  The  heathen  world  knew  nothing  of  a  righteous  Father ; 
it  scarcely  knew^  God  as  Father ;  though  here  and  there  a  line  of  a  heathen 
poet  might  speak  of  men  as  the  offspring  of  God,  the  true  idea  of  divine 
Fatherhood  was  unknown  to  sages  and  philosophers.  As  to  the  righteous- 
ness of  God,  they  had  but  clouded  notions ,  a  future  judgment,  and  a 
system  of  rewards  and  punishments  they  saw  by  the  light  of  natural 


^568  XJnrBOPOLITAH  TABERVAOLB  FULPm 

conscience^  but  true  righteousness  in  the  gOTeming  of  the  niuTene  Uiey 
had  not  spelled  out :  they  knew  not  because  they  did  not  wish  to  know. 
Their  go^  were  generally  monsters  of  iniquity.  As  to  righteousness  and 
love  being  combined,  they  imagined  no  sudi  thing;  the  idea  of  a  god 
who  should  be  at  once  sternly  righteous  and  yet  infinitely  tender  had  not 
occurred  to  them.  How  could  it?  Being  themselves  unrighteous,  they 
sought  not  after  a  righteous  €rod;  he  was  not  in  all  their  thoughts. 
Being  themselves  cruel  and  loveless,  they  could  not  discover  a  Deity 
whose  name  is  love.  All  the  wisdom  of  antiquity  went  to  &bricate  gods 
of  quite  another  kind.  The  world  by  wisdom  knew  not  the  God  who  is 
called  "  righteous  Father." 

It  is  more  humbling  to  have  to  add  that  the  Christian  world  does  not 
know  God  as  a  ''  righteous  Father,"  but  persists  in  forsaking  this  grand, 
glorious,  and  scriptural  view  of  him.  Mark  you,  I  draw  a  very  grave 
distinction  between  the  Christian  church  and  the  Christian  world.  The 
Christian  world  is  a  conglomeration  of  good  and  evil ;  the  embodiment 
of  the  unreal  and  unspiiitual,  which  nevertheless  desires  to  bear  the 
Christian  name.  It  is  the  world  pretending  to  be  the  friend  of  Christ, 
and  you  know  how  hoUow  is  the  pret^ice.  The  Ciiristian  church,  made 
np  of  the  men  taught  of  God  and  born  of  the  Spirit,  is  anoth^  matter : 
therein  we  have  something  very  diflferenr,  for  these  know  the  righteous 
Father.  Sceptics  labelled  as  **  thinkers  "  reject  the  evangehcal  idea  of  God, 
and  the  atonement  which  that  idea  involves.  Worldly  wMom  talks  of  **  the 
universal  fatherhood  of  God,"  and  babbles  for  ever  about  that  mere  dream, 
that  fiction  of  folly^  against  which  the  Bible  Is  a  plaui  and  pointed  protest. 
Universal  Fatherhood  indeed,  when  our  Lord  Jesus  said,  ^'  If  God  were 
g>ur  Father  ye  would  love  me,  for  I  proceeded  forth  and  came  from  God. 
Ye  are  of  your  father  the  devil>  and  the  lusts  of  your  &ther  yp  vrill  do." 
Is  it  not  described  as  a  special  wonder  of  love  that  we  should  be  called 
the  sons  of  God?  (I  John  iii.  1.)  Did  not  the  Holy  Ghost  say  by  his 
sei*vant  John,  **  In  this  the  children  of  God  are  manifest,  and  the  chil- 
dren of  the  devil:  whoever  doeth  not  righteousness  is  not  of  God, 
neither  he  tha^  loveth  not  his  brother."  The  philosophic  Christian 
world  knows  an  efifeminate,  indiscriminate  fatherhood,  but  not  **tiie 
righteous  Father."  It  will  not  bow  before  the  majesty  of  his  justice. 
According  to  the  tenor  of  its  teaching  sin  is  a  misfortune,  transgression, 
a  mere  trifle,  and  the  souls  that  simer  for  wilful  guilt  are  objects  to 
be  pitied  rather  than  to  be  blamed.  The  world's  '^  thinkers"  are  con- 
tinually drawing  upon  oar  feelings  to  make  us  pity  those  who  are 
punished,  but  they  havp  little  to  say  in  order  to  make  us  hate  the  evil 
which  deserved  the  doom.  Sin  according  to  tiiem  does  not  of  itself 
demand  punishment,  but  penalties  are  to  ^  exacted  or  remitted  for  the 
general  good,  if  indeed  they  are  to  be  executed  at  all.  All  neoessaiy 
and  inevitable  connection  between  guilt  and  its  punishment  is  denied. 
They  dare  to  call  justice  revenge,  and  sjpeak  of  atonement  as  if  were  a 
solatium  for  private  pique.  The  Christian  wprld  does  not  seem  to  have 
learned  the  truth  that  "  a  God  all  mercy  were  a  God  unjust,"  and  that 
a  God  unjust  would  soon  be  discovered  to  be  a  God  vrithout  love,  in  fiict^ 
no  God  whatever.  "  Eighteous  Father ! "  This  is  the  peculiar  revela- 
tion which  is  received  by  those  who  have  been  taught  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
and  t<*  this  day  Jesus  Christ  may  say,  "  O  righteous  Father,  the  worid 


THE  RIGHTEOUS  FATHEH  KNOWN  AND  LOVED.        569 

hath  not  known  thee."  Men  kick  against  the  doctrine  of  the  atonement, 
they  qnarrcl  with  substitution,  they  are  fierce  in-  their  sarcasms  against 
the  mention  of  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  and  sneer  supercihously  at 
those  who  hold  fast  the  old  truth.  They  stumble  at  this  stumbhng  stone, 
and  strive  evermore  to  overthrow  this  rock  of  truth;  and  yet,  depend 
upon  it,  this  is  the  test  question  by  which  we  shall  know  whether  a  iinui 
knoweth  God  aright  or  knoweth  him  not. 

There  is  much  in  this  knowledge  which  renders  it  very  distinctive,  for 
it  reveals  the  condition  of  the  mind  which  receives  it.  A  man  who 
knows  God  as  "  righteous  Father  "  shows  that  he  has  some  knowledge  of 
himself :  he  has  perceived  the  sin  within  his  nature,  and  it  has  burdened 
him ;  the  righteousness  of  God  has  appeared  to  him  in  its  threatening 
form,  and  he  had  been  bowed  before  it  under  a  sense  of  his  guilt.  You 
can  see,  too,  that  the  man  also  knows  something  of  his  Saviour  :  he  has 
evidently  seen  the  Son,  or  else  he  would  not  know  the  Father,  for  of  old 
Jesus  said,  "  No  man  cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  me,"  He  has  seen 
God's  great  gift  to  man,  and  learned  liis  boundless  love.  His  know- 
ledge of  the  "  righteous  Father "  shows  that  his  heart  has  submitted 
itself  to  the  justice  of  God.  He  has  been  in  the  place  where  David  stood 
when  he  said,  "  Against  thee,  thee  only,  have  I  sinned,  and  done  this 
evil  in  thy  sight ;  that  thou  mightest  be  justified  when  thou  spcakest,  and 
be  clear  when  thou  judgest."  He  has  e\idently  bared  iiis  back  to  the 
lash  of  punishment,  and  felt  that  he  deserved  all  the  blows  which  it  could 
lay  upon  him.  Inasmuch  as  it  knows  the  Lord  as  a  "  righteous  Fattier  " 
you  can  see  that  the  heart  has  learned  to  trust  God,  for  no  man  calleth  him 
Father  in  spirit  and  in  truth  till  first  he  possesses  a  living  faith,  and 
some  kindlings  of  di\'ine  love.  Submission  and  trust  compose  a  con- 
dition of  character  which  is  pecuhar  to  a  renewed  soul,  but  will  surely 
be  found  in  a  man  if  he  be  indeed  saved,  for  it  is  the  mark  of  being 
saved  fi:om  self-justification  and  from  the  hatred  bred  by  despair.  When 
we  see  in  a  man  an  unconditional  submission  to  the  justice  of  God, 
and  yet  a  trustful  hopefulness  in  his  boundless  love,  we  may  be  sure 
that  he  is  a  renewed  man.  He  a*ies,  "  Thou  art  righteous,  0  my  God, 
and  if  thou  destroy  me,  I  can  say  no  less :  but.  Father,  thou  wilt  not 
destroy  me,  for  I  perceive  that  thou  art  love.  Though  I  see  thee  grasp 
thy  sword  of  fire,  yet  do  I  trust  thee,  for  I  believe  thee  to  be  gi-acious 
and  loving  still."  The  knowledge  described  in  the  text  is  not  only  pecu- 
liar to  those  who  are  taught  of  God,  but  it  reveals  peculiarities  in  them 
which  grace  has  implanted  there.  They  believe  because  they  are  Christ's 
sheep  and  know  his  voice.  The  hfe  within  them  receives  the  living 
truth.  They  would  not  have  come  to  know  the  "  righteous  Father " 
unless  there  had  been  a  change  in  their  character  wrougfit  by  the  Spirit 
of  God ;  but  that  once  done  they  know  him  as  of  necessity. 

I  would  next  say  that  this  knowledge  is  etninently  consolatory.  It  is 
but  little  that  I  know,  but  I  feel  that  1  would  cheeriiilly  part  with  it  all 
so  long  as  I  may  be  allowed  to  retain  the  knowkge  contained  in  these 
two  words,  "  righteous  Father."  This  is  my  life,  my  light,  my  love,  my 
delight,  my  heaven.  If  all  the  productions  of  wit  and  wisdom  through- 
out all  past  ages  could  be  as  etiectually  consumed  as  the  Alexandrian 
library  w  hen  it  was  burned  to  ashes,  if  man  did  but  retain  the  knowledge 
of  these  two  words,  "  righteous  Father,"  he  might  be  content  to  sec  the 


570  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLS  PULPIT. 

whole  mass  pass  away  in  smoke.  To  know  the  only  trae  Gt>d  and  Jesos 
Christ  whom  he  has  sent  is  the  ch'max,  the  essence,  the  sum  total  of 
wisdom.  I  said  that  it  was  consolatory,  and  so  it  is  to  the  last  de- 
gree. For  a  man  to  know  that  God  is  his  Father  is  delightful  beyond 
measure,  to  feel  that  God  forgives  him  as  the  father  forgave  the 
prodigal,  that  he  has  received  him  into  his  heart  and  home,  as  the 
father  did  his  once  lost  boy,  is  imspeakably  deh'ghtful;  but  when  irc 
further  learn  that  all  this  is  done  without  the  violation  of  justice,  that  all 
this  deed  of  grace  is  done  righteously,  and  so  done  that  even  justice 
demands  it  should  Ix?  done,  then  are  we  fiill  of  wondering  love.  Beloved, 
God  is  as  just  in  loving  his  sinful  people  as  he  could  have  been  in  mani- 
festing his  displeasure  towards  them ;  as  lust  in  forgiving  as  he  could 
have  been  in  punishing ;  and  this  is  the  glory  of  the  wTiole  matter.  This 
being  known  we  see  our  position  in  Christ  Jesus  to  be  unassailable.  We 
see  that  justice  cannot  punish  us,  for  Jesus  has  borne  our  penalty :  it 
cannot  demand  more  at  our  hand,  for  our  great  Substitute  has  rendered 
to  it  the  full  tale  of  obedience.  In  Christ  Jesus  God  is  just,  and  yet 
our  justifier.  We  are  so  safe  that  we  begin  to  challenge  opposition, 
and  cry,  "Who  shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect?"  We 
take  up  a  triumphant  note  and  sing  with  exceeding  joy,  '*  If  God  be  for 
us  who  can  be  against  us!"  If  God  be  righteous,  and  yet  my  Father, 
then  am  I  saved,  and  saved  in  such  a  way  that  the  attributes  of  God 
are  glorified  by  my  salvation,  and  therefore  I  am  most  securely  and 
certainly  saved.     AVhy  should  I  not  rejoice? 

One  more  fact  about  this  knowledge  of  God  as  a  "righteous  Father:** 
it  is  a  knowledge  which  catises  its  posspssoi'  to  enjoy  much  felUnvship  wUh 
Jesus.  Notice  how  our  Lord  puts  it.  "  0  righteous  Father,  the  world  hath 
not  known  thee  :  but  /  have  knawn  thee,  and  tJwse  have  known  thai  ihtu 
liost  sentinel  "  I  have  known  thee."  Ah,  yes,  of  old  the  Son  of  God 
knew  the  glorious  character  of  the  Godhead ;  being  himself  God  he  knew 
that  justice  was  an  essential  attribute  of  deity,  which  never,  never  could 
be  tarnished  or  made  to  yield  a  hair's  breadth ;  and  he  knew  also  that  God 
is  love,  and  that  his  love  would  never  cease  to  be  his  special  glory  and 
delii^lit  He  knew  of  old  that,  speaking  after  the  manner  of  men,  these 
two  attributes  were  each  resolved  to  suffer  no  eclipse  :  lie  knew  that  each 
of  tlieni  must  keep  its  place.  God  must  be  just,  and  must  be  a  Father : 
cx^nscqucntly,  when  deiilingwith  sinners,  he  must  smite  and  he  must  spare. 
Our  Lord  saw  how  these  two  necessities  stood,  like  the  eternal  hills, 
and  how  our  doom  seemed  to  roll  between,  and  it  was  he  who  cond^ 
clouded  for  our  sakes  to  bring  these  two  together  by  his  own  endurance 
of  justice  and  manifestation  of  love.  He  determined  to  take  upon 
himself  our  nature,  and  bear  our  sin,  which  was  the  cause  of  the  quan'el; 
and  flien,  by  enduring  the  chastisemen*^  of  om*  peace,  he  magnified 
instice,  and  to  an  equal  degree  glorified  love.  He  came,  he  saw,  and 
8(»he(l  the  dilliculty,  and  now  the  judge  is  as  righteous  as  if  he  were  not 
lo^  e,  and  the  Father  is  as  loving  as  if  righteousness  had  never  been 
oHended.  This  grand  charactei  of  God  as  **  righteous  Father  "  was  so 
deai*  to  our  Lord,  and  so  much  admiied  by  him.  that  he  died  to  main- 
tam  and  vindicate  it,  and  w  hen  you  and  I  come  to  know  it,  I  am  sure 
we  so  much  deliglit  in  it  that  we  feel  we  would  sooner  die  than  give  up 
truth.     This  great  revelation  of  God  is  not  a  dogma  that  mayor 


THE  RIGHTEOUS  FATHER  KNOWN  AND  LOVED.  571 

may  not  be  accepted ;  it  must  be  so.  I  do  in  my  soul  believe  this  truth 
to  be  an  article  of  a  standing  or  of  a  falling  Church.  If  you  put  away 
the  doctrine  of  the  substitutionary  sacrifice  of  Christ,  you  have  disem- 
bowelled the  gospel,  and  torn  from  it  its  very  heart.  Nor  lons:er  need 
angels  sing  glory  to  God  in  the  highest  and  on  earth  peace,  if  it  be  not 
true  Ae  union  of  the  divine  glory  and  human  salvation  is  found  in 
Jesus.  The  glad  news  dwindles  down  very  lamentably  if  the  atonement 
is  denied ;  but  it  cannot  be  disproved — God  is  just,  and  yet  the  justifier 
of  him  that  believeth ;  Christ  has  diedjthat  this  truth  may  be  clear,  and 
his  people  live  to  declare  it,  and  feel  that  it  were  worth  a  thousand 
martyrdoms  to  maintain  it.  Herein  we  have  fellowship  with  Christ,  for 
he  knows  the  "  righteous  Father,"  and  rejoices  in  him,  and  w^e  know 
the  "righteous  Father"  too  in  Christ,  and  love  and  bless  him,  and 
wonder  at  him  every  day  more  and  more. 

Thus  I  have  to  the  best  of  my  power  described  the  invaluable  know- 
ledge. May  we  all  be  taught  of  tne  Lord,  and  all  know  him,  from  the 
least  to  the  greatest. 

Now,  this  knowledge  comes  to  us  by  «  teacher.  That  teacher  is  spoken 
of  in  verse  2(}.  "I  have  declared  unto  them  thy  name,  and  will 
declare  it."  Our  beloved  Lord  has  most  fitly  declared  to  us  this  name 
of  "  righteous  Father,"  for  he  himself  knows  it  as  none  other  can  know 
it ;  ana  he  here  confesses  this  intimate  knowledge,  saying,  "  but  I  have 
knowTi  thee."  "  No  man  knoweth  the  Father  save  the  Son,"  and  the 
Son  knows  the  rectitude  of  the  Father's  government,  and  the  love  of 
the  Father's  heart  beyond  all  others.  Is  he  not  himself  "  very  God  of 
very  God"?  and  docs  he  not  perceive  this  w-ondrous  union  of  the  two 
ranges  of  attributes  in  the  person  of  the  Father  with  a  clearness  of  vision 
which  no  one  else  possesses  ?  Fit  is  it,  therefore,  that  he  should  declare 
to  us  what  he  hath  seen  and  known  of  the  Father. 

He  declared  the  "  righteous  Father  "  in  his  life,  for  in  his  hfe  he  incar- 
nated truth  and  grace.  Jesus  Christ  on  earth  was  righteous, — in  thought, 
in  word,  and  in  deed.  Point  me  to  a  sin  he  ever  committed,  inculcated, 
or  excused.  Eighteousness  was  about  him  as  the  atmosphere  which  he 
breathed.  Well  did  the  psalmist  say  of  him,  "  Thou  lovest  righteousness 
and  hatest  wickedness."  And  yet  what  love  there  was  in  him,  and  pity 
for  the  wandering  sheep !  He  mingled  with  sinners,  and  yet  was 
separate  from  sinnei*s  ;  he  touched  their  diseases  and  healed  them,  and 
yet  was  not  defiled  by  their  impurities ;  he  took  their  infinnities  upon 
nimself,  and  yet  in  him  personally  there  was  no  trace  of  sin.  Our  Lord 
was  so  righteous  that  you  perceived  at  once  that  he  was  not  of  this  world, 
and  yet  he  was  so  lovingly  human  that  he  was  altogether  a  man  among 
men,  and  not  at  all  separated  from  them  in  the  way  in  which  John  the 
Baptist  was,  who  "  came  neither  eating  nor  drinking,"  nor  divided  from 
his  fellows,  as  many  a  man  of  genius  has  been,  by  eccentric  modes  of 
thought.  He  was  man's  brother  and  his  physician,  his  friend  and  his 
Saviour.  When  you  want  to  know  the  Father's  righteousness  and  love, 
read  the  history  of  Jesus  Christ  :  nay,  know  the  Lord  Jesus  himself,  and 
you  know  the  Father. 

His  death,  however,  most  gloriously  illustrated  this  beyond  everything 
else.  Behold,  he  dies  that  the  "  righteous  Father "  may  be  seen.  He 
has  taken  upon  himself  man's  sin,  and  he  is  brought  to  the  place  where 


57S  XBTBOPOLITAS  TABBBKACLE  FULPIT. 

man  miut  answer  fbi  Ms  dn ;  be  is  eilent  before  his  accnaer^  he  is 
condenmed  and  numbered  witb  the  transgreason.  Kov  he  must  die  tiie 
Binner's  death.  See,  be  ie  naiJed  to  Uie  cros,  and  now  God  him- 
self f<»'BBke8  him,  for  he  has  laid  the  gnilt  of  man  npoa  him,  aod 
therefore  cannot  be  preeent  to  make  his  spirit  glad.  The  deserted 
Sayiour  criee,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  haat  thoa  foramen  me  ?,"  and. 
well  he  migh^  when  his  own  Father  in  righteouaneBS  turned  his  &ce  from 
him.  Beloved,  when  Jesns  Christ  died  there  was  a  grander  display  of  the 
righteousnesa  and  the  btherhood  of  God  than  could  have  be^  possible 
by  any  other  means  ;  then  the  mystery  was  n^ade  plain  and  the  depth 
opened  up  to  its  Tery  IxriJiom.  0  Lord  our  Qod,  what  an  abyss  of 
adorable  goodness  hast  thou  thus  laid  bare  before  us  I 


"  How  our  hearts  tremble  at  thy  love  im 
In  love  immense,  inviolsbljr  jnatl 
Thou,  rather  than  tb  j  jnataoe  thonld  be  gtained. 
Didst  stain  &e  cron  irilk  blood  (f  thine  own  Son." 

And  now  to-day  it  is  the  business  of  out  Lord  to  continue  to  lereal 
the  righteous  Mherhood  of  God,  and  he  does  so  by  the  work  of  his  Holy 
Spirit.  Bo  yon  not  remember  when  he  revealed  it  to  you  ?  When  yoa 
were  bowed  dcwn  with  grief  on  account  of  sin,  when  you  longed  to  be 
reconciled  to  God  but  G«ild  not  see  how,  then  the  Spurit  of  God  came 
to  yoa  and  pointed  you  to  the  fiiU  atonement  made,  to  the  nbnost 
nmaom  paid,  and  you  eloped  yonr  hands  for  very  joy  as  yoa  per- 
ceived that  God  could  be  your  Father,  and  receive  vou  as  nis  child, 
and  yet  his  righteousness  need  not  soffer  the  shgntest  diminntitHL 
That  Spirit  of  God  working  on  the  behalf  of  Christ  is  still  declaring 
this  among  the  nations,  as  the  years  roll  on,  opening  the  eyes  of  the 
blind,  and  bringing  his  own  chosen,  one  by  one,  to  behold  the  glory  of 
God  in  the  fiue  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  to  say,  "  0  righteous  Father,  I 
know  thee  and  rejoice  in  thee."  To  each  one  of  us  who  are  saved  Jems 
is  declaring  this  "  righteona  Father "  more  and  more.  I  hope  I  know 
more  of  this  than  I  did  twenty  years  ago.  Brother,  do  not  yon? 
Sister,  do  not  you  7  I  trust  that  every  day  we  see  a  ht^e  more  of  Uie 
righteous  fiktherhood  of  God,  and  shall  continue  to  do  so,  world  without 
end.  Wc  shall  as  we  grow  in  grace  look  further  and  further  into  the 
wondrous  mystery  of  the  justice  which  was  satisfied  and  the  love  whidi 
furnished  the  satis&tction.  Beloved,  it  shall  be  a  part  of  our  Lord's  joy 
even  in  etemitv  still  to  declare  unto  us  the  name  of  God  the  "righteons 
Father."  Will  it  not  be  our  joy  to  dt  at  his  feet  and  learn  of  him? 
Is  he  not  a  blessed  teacher  ?  Has  he  not  been  very  patient  with  db  ? 
Blessed  be  his  name  &r  all  his  care  and  travail  towiu^  us.  He  has 
taught  us  much,  and  means  to  teach  us  mare.  Let  us  bead  a.  b'sten- 
ing  ear,  and  bow  a  wiUin^  heart,  while  from  day  to  day  he  shall  continue 
to  declare  unto  us  the  "  nghteous  Father." 

_  Now,  if  at  any  time  I  should  seem  to  preach  the  doctrine  offhe  substitu- 
tion of  Christ  too  often,  aud  if  you  should  say,  "He  is  harping  upon  the  old 
string,"  I  shall  not  hesitate  to  quote  my  Master's  words,  and  say,  "1 
have  declared  unto  them  thy  name,  and  will  dedare  it."  This  truth  jb 
one  that  needs  continue  dedsration.  It  should  be  sounded  often  in  the 
Christian's  ear  to  keep  alive  hia  sense  of  obligation  to  the  wisdom  which 


THE  RIGHTEOUS  FATHEB  KNOWN  AND  LOVED.  573 

devised,  and  the  love  which  carried  out,  the  plan  of  our  salvation,  to  the 
glory  of  the  "righteous  Father." 

II.  But  now,  secondly,  this  heavenly  knowledge  is  not  given  to  us 
for  its  o^vn  sake  alone.  Even  the  high  and  blessed  revelation  of  the 
**  righteous  Father  "  is  not  made  to  us  that  we  may  know  it  and  end  in 
knowing,  but  our  Lord  says,  "  I  have  declared  unto  them  thy  name,  and 
will  declare  it,  that  tJie  love  wherewith  thou  hast  loved  me  may  he  in  them, 
and  I  in  thejn,**  The  object  of  the  knowledge  bestowed  upon  us  is  the 
infusion  of  a  love  unrivalled  in  value,  and  extraordinary  to  the  last 
degree.     Let  us  speak  upon  it. 

First  notice  that  this  discovery  of  love  which  is  spoken  of  in  the 
twentv-sixth  verse  is  an  inward  discovery  of  it :  "  That  the  love 
\vhere\nth  thou  hast  loved  me  may  be  in  them.*'  It  was  always  on 
them,  for  the  Father  has  always  loved  his  people  ;  but  here  it  is 
spoken  of  as  "  in  them,''  What  does  that  mean  ?  I  apprehend  it 
means  that  they  may  know  it,  be  persuaded  of  it,  believe  it  and 
enjoy  it ;  that  they  through  knowing  the  righteous  name  may  come  to 
perceive  the  love  of  God  towards  them.  Do  you  not  see  the  connec- 
tion ?  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  dies  for  us  that  God  may  be  righteous  and 
yet  may  save  us.  Is  it  not  clesr  as  a  pikestaff*  to  you  that  God  loves 
his  people  with  a  very  wonderful  love  when  he  gives  his  own  Son  to  die 
and  satisfy  justice  on  their  behalf?  Nothing  can  prove  that  love  so 
clearly,  nothing  bring  it  home  so  forcibly  as  the  sacrificial  death  of  the 
Only  Begotten.  Therefore  does  Christ  declare  the  blessed  name  of  the 
"  righteous  Father  "  in  order  that  it  may  come  home  to  you  with  an  un- 
conquerable power  that  the  Father  loves  you,  and  loves  you  beyond  con- 
ception, seeing  that  not  even  his  dear  Son  was  so  loved  as  to  be  spared, 
but  he  must  die  that  you  might  live,  and  that  the  justice  of  God 
might  be  satisfied  on  your  account.  There  is  no  way  of  knowing  the 
love  of  God  like  knowing  the  "righteous  Father,"  and  the  atone- 
ment which  that  character  necessitated.  "Hereby  perceive  we  tlie 
love  of  God,  because  he  laid  down  his  Hfe  for  us."  You  may  say,  "  I 
see  his  love  in  every  flower  that  blooms  and  every  breeze  that  blows." 
It  is  true,  but  it  is  the  same  love  after  all  which  he  has  towards  a  horse 
or  a  cow ;  for  do  not  flowers  bloom  and  breezes  blow  for  them  ?  "  We 
see  the  love  of  God,"  say  some,  "in  giving  us  meat  to  eat  and 
raiment  to  put  on."  So  do  I,  but  this  also  is  the  same  love  which 
he  bears  to  ravens  and  to  Ulies,  for  does  he  not  feed  the  one  and  clothe 
the  other?  I  want  something  more  by  way  of  love  than  this.  "  I  see 
God's  love,"  says  one,  "  in  Christ's  coming  to  teach  us  and  make  us 
better."  No  doubt  you  do,  and  so  do  I,  but  I  do  not  feel  it  one  half  so 
forcibly  as  when  I  gaze  upon  Calvary  and  see  the  innocent  Victim 
bleeding  for  my  crimes.  "Herein  is  love!"  When  the  divine  Father 
gives  up  his  best  Beloved  for  guilty  man  we  may  well  say,  "  Behold  how 
he  lovea  him!" 

Come  and  sec  this  spectacle  of  love.  It  is  none  other  than  the  Lord 
of  heaven  who  must  die  to  vindicate  the  jealous  purity  of  the  divine 
government.  Is  he  Ood's  only  begotten  Son,  and  must  he  bear  man's 
guilt  ?  Miracle  of  miracles  !  Must  the  spotless  Son  bear  human  guilt? 
He  must !  He  did !  Tell  it,  and  let  heaven  be  astonished  still,  though  it 
has  heard  the  wonder  near  two  thousand  years.    Upon  him  who  never 


674  KETBOPOUTAN  TABEBNAOLB  PDLPIT. 

sinned  the  Lord  hath  laid  onr  iniquities.  Bearing  that  gnilt,  most  he 
sufier  ?  He  mnet.  If  Ood  loves  his  people  his  Son  mast  snS^  in  their 
stead,  must  goffer  shame,  must  suffer  desertion,  must  Boffer  death.  What, 
die  ?  Incarnate  Deity  be  pot  to  death  ?  A  felon's  death  ?  Can  ^lis  be  ? 
It  has  been  I  It  is  finished.  Suoh  was  the  love  of  God  that  "  he  ^>ared 
not  bia  only  begotten  Son,  bat  freely  delivered  him  np  for  ns  all.  Be 
astonished,  0  heavens,  for  ever  and  ever  that  love  conid  acoomphsh  such 
a  feat  as  this.  Now,  then,  Christ  has  %me  on  purpose  to  declare  the  name 
of  Qod  that  the  love  of  Ood  may  be  perceived  by  us,  ite  power  felt,  its 
glory  recognized,  its  greatness  wonder^  at,  its  infinitude  delighted  in. 

But  now  notice,  and  here  is  the  very  pith  of  our  subject,  that  this  love 
was  of  a  most  extraordinary  kind.  "That  the  love  wherewith  thon 
hast  loved  me  may  be  in  them."  What  is  the  love  wherewith  God  loved 
his  Son  F  Gome,  yon  philosophers  and  divines,  come,  yon  who  hare 
learned  to  blend  imagination  with  cool  judgment,  come  and  think  or^ 
this — the  love  wherewith  the  Father  loved  his  Son.  Believer,  he  loves 
yoQ  as  he  loves  his  best  Beloveid.  He  is  his  only  begotten  Son ;  Son  in 
a  very  mysterious  manner,  for  we  comprehend  not  that  divine  filiation 
in  which  the  Father  is  eternal,  and  the  Son  eternal  also.  He  loves  yon 
as  he  loves  such  a  Son.  There  is  more  than  sonship,  there  is  natural 
unity  of  essence,  for  the  Father  and  Son  are  one  God ;  and  how  the 
one  God  loveti,  how  the  Father  loveth  the  Son,  I  know  not,  save  that 
I  know  there  can  be  no  liniit  to  such  love.  It  must  be  dU^ether 
boundless  and  unspeakable.  Now,  if  jon  fiillT  know  the  righteous 
fetherhood  of  God,  as  Christ  would  have  yon  know  it,  you  will  leara 
that  God  loved  you  as  he  loved  his  Son.  Do  you  not  see  that  it  is  so? 
If  he  had  not  loved  you  as  he  loved  the  Son,  lie  would  have  spared  his 
Son.  Is  not  that  clear  ?  If  he  had  not  loved  yon  as  he  loved  his  Son  he 
would  have  said  to  his  Son,  "  Son,  thou  shalt  never  leave  heaven  fw 
that  polluted  planet,  thon  shalt  never  descend  to  poverty  and  sufTering, 
thou  shalt  never  have  thy  hands  and  feet  pierced,  thou  shalt  never  be 
despi^  and  spit  opon  and  pnt  to  a  cruel  death."  But  because  he  loved 
OS  as  he  loved  his  Son  he  gave  his  Son.  Will  not  that  fact  warm  ^nr 
hearts;  wHl  it  not  bum  bke  coals  of  juniper  within  your  bosoms? 
"T%anks  be  unto  God  for  his  unspeakable  gift  '! 

Nay,  that  is  not  alL  We  leani  m>m  the  verse  which  precedes  onr  text 
that  the  Father  loved  our  Lord  eternally : "  For  thou  lovedst  me  before  the 
foundation  of  the  world."  Perceive,  Uien,  that  God  has  also  loved  thee, 
dear  child  of  his,  from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world.  Or  ever  thou 
hadst  a  being  his  prescient  eye  foresaw  thine  eiistenoe,  and  thou  wast  the 
object  of  his  love.  Why  or  wherefore  I  cannot  tell  thee,  but  he  loved 
thee,  and  he  loves  thee  still  as  he  lores  his  Sou.  Hay  the  power  of  that 
love  be  fell  m  Oij  heart  now. 

It  was  a  love  of  complacency  and  Might.  Eemember  those  words  (J 
the  Lord  which  he  spake  concerning  his  Son  in  the  day  of  his  baptism, 
and  at  two  other  occaaions  when  the  heavens  opened :  "  This  is  my  be- 
loved Son,  in  whom  I  am  well,  pleased."  Always  draw  a  diatindton 
between  the  love  of  benevolence  with  which  God  loves  all  his  creatures 
and  the  love  of  complacency,  which  is  reserved  for  hia  own.  He  calls  his 
church  his  Hephzirah,  "  My  ddight  is  in  her,"  he  saith  not  so  of  the 
world.      God  never  said  concerning  any  wicked  man,  "This  is  my 


THE  RIGHTEOUS  FATHER  KNOWN  AND  LOVED.  575 

beloved  son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased,"  for  he  is  not  pleased  with  him, 
but  angry  with  him  every  day ;  but  concerning  all  those  who  know  the 
"righteous  Father"  it  is  the  prayer  of  Christ  that  the  love  wherewith 
the  Father  loves  him  may  be  in  them,  and  by  that  he  means  that  they 
may  feel  that  the  Lord  has  in  them  a  father's  content.  Do  try  if  you 
can  to  realise  this  high  privilege.  It  is  true,  0  believer,  that  God  the 
infinite  Father  takes  pleasure  in  thee !  It  is  true,  but  it  is  very  sur- 
prising !  Often  have  I  turned  over  that  word  in  the  Song  where  the 
bridegroom  says  to  the  bride,  "  Thou  art  all  fair,  my  love ;  there  is  no 
spot  in  thee."  How  can  this  be  ?  Why,  we  are  all  spots.  Yet  does  the 
Eternal  Father  view  us  in  Christ,  and  in  him  he  takes  dehght  in  us  as  a 
father  does  in  his  children.  '*  My  delights  were  with  the  sons  of  men." 
*'  He  shall  rest  in  his  love,  he  shall  rejoice  over  thee  with  singing." 
When  you  know  God  as  "  righteous,"  and  yet  "  Father,"  then  shall  you 
see  that,  inasmuch  as  the  righteous  way  of  salvation  has  put  away  all 
sin  by  laying  it  upon  Christ,  there  is  no  reason  why  the  Lord  should 
be  angry  with  us ;  and  inasmuch  as  the  righteousness  of  Christ  is 
imputed  to  us,  there  is  a  legal  reason  why  he  should  be  satisfied  with 
his  people ;  and  inasmuch  as  we  have  become  one  with  Christ,  there 
is  good  cause  why  he  should  take  a  delight  in  us,  even  for  his  Son's 
sake. 

God  the  Father  loves  his  Son  infinitely.  How  could  he  do  less? 
Without  beginning  has  he  loved  him,  and  without  an  end  will  he  love 
him,  and  also  without  change,  without  limit,  and  without  degree  :  in 
the  same  way  doth  he  love  his  people,  whose  hope  is  fixed  in  him  as  the 
"  righteous  Father." 

This  love  wherever  it  reigns  in  the  heart  creates  a  return  love  to  God. 
You  cannot  really  know  all  this  and  enjoy  it  without  feeling,  "  My  God, 
I  love  thee  in  return  ;"  and  that  high  and  noble  passion  works  to  the 
cleansing  of  the  soul  and  the  purging  out  of  sin,  and  so  it  becomes  a 
sanctifying  influence  by  which  a  Christian  is  made  to  be  *'  holiness  unto 
the  Lord." 

To  close;  this  love  within  the  soul  comes  through  an  indiveller. 
Observe  the  last  words  of  the  text,  **  That  the  love  wherewith  thou 
hast  loved  me  may  be  in  them,  and  I  in  them"  What  does  this  mean  ? 
I  cannot  tell  you  all  it  means.  Let  us  skim  the  surface  just  for  a 
minute.  It  means  this.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  representative  of 
Christ  now  upon  earth,  and  if  ever  the  love  of  God  the  Father  is  to  be 
known  by  any  one  of  us  the  Lord  Jesus  by  the  Spirit  must  he  in  us. 
Without  the  Spirit  of  God  actually  resident  in  us  we  cannot  know 
the  righteous  Father.  We  are  as .  blind  and  dead  men  until  he 
quickens  and  illuminates  us,  and  all  the  letter- teaching  in  the 
world  will  benefit  us  nothing.  We  must  be  bom  again.  My  dear 
hearers,  there  may  be  some  of  you  to  whom  all  my  talk  this 
morning  must  seem  very  strange  :  you  cannot  see  anything  in  it.  Let 
the  fact  cause  y«i  to  suspect  that  you  must  be  in  the  dark.  When  even 
the  love  of  God  to  his  people  becomes  a  dry  theme  to  you  it  looks 
suspicious.  Surely  you  have  no  part  nor  lot  in  it,  or  else  you  would 
relish  a  discourse  upon  it.  The  reason  why  you  do  not  compre- 
hend it  is  because  you  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  and  if  you  have 
not  the  Spirit  of  Christ  you  are  none  of  his.    May  this  convince  you  of 


576  XETKOPOLITAN  TABEBKACLB  PULPIT. 

Snr  condition,  and  may  joa  be  led  to  seet  Christ  and  find  eTerlatlang 
e. 

Bnt  when  the  test  sats  that  Christ  is  in  his  people,  it  means,  beades 
the  indweUing  of  the  Spirit,  that  Chriet  ia  in  us  bg/a*lA,  for  we  hare 
taken  Christ  Jesoa  ae  t&e  great  atoning  sacrifice  to  be  onr  sole  and 
only  confidence,  and  hence  he  is  in  ns,  tmsted  and  bved,  fed  npon 
and  believed  in.  If  he  be  so,  then  it  is  quite  clear  that  we  know 
the  "  righteooB  Father,"  and  when  we  know  the  "  righteous  Father  " 
then  it  follows  that  we  mnst  have  some  discoTeries  of  nia  great  lo?e  to 
OB.  Are  you  trusting  Christ  ?  Is  Jesos  in  yon  the  hope  of  glory  ? 
Do  yon  trust  in  him  alone  ?  If  so,  go  and  drink  to  the  fall  the  sweet- 
ness of  the  text,  and  let  no  man  say  yon  nay. 

Christ  is  in  yon  moreover  by  a  real  arid  vital  union  with  yon.  Yon 
are  in  him  as  a  branch  is  in  the  vine,  aad  he  is  in  yon  as  the  sap  is  in 
the  branch.  Von  are  in  him  as  a  member  is  in  the  body,  and  he  is  in 
yon  as  the  life  Is  in  all  the  members.  We  know  that  Jesus  quickens 
11B,  and  because  he  livea  we  live  also.  Ileuceforth  we  we  one  with 
Christ.  It  must  be  so,  because  if  (rod  did  not  see  uB  in  Christ  be 
could  not  regard  us  with  comijlacency,  or  in  other  words  love  us  as  he 
loves  bis  Son.  If  he  did  not  in  looking  upon  a  man  see  the  love  and 
the  nature  of  his  Only  Begotten  in  him,  how  could  he  love  him  ?  He 
views  us  as  part  and  parcel  of  his  Awn  dear  Son,  and  bo  his  delight 
is  in  UB. 

Beloved,  the  Lord  sees  in  addition  to  all  this,  tomelking  of  a  Ukt- 
ness  fo  Chi-ist  in  v»,  wrought  by  his  Spirit,  for  if  Jesus  be  indeed  in  ns 
we  shall  grow  to  be  like  him,  and  shall  manifest  somewhat  of  hia  Bpirit 
and  uatnre.  The  more  we  have  of  likeness  to  Jesus  the  more  will  it 
be  evident  that  the  love  of  God  Ie  in  ns,  and  is  working  in  ns,  "to 
will  and  to  do  of  his  own  good  pleasure." 

May  Qod  grant  that  what  I  nave  spoken  so  feebly  may  aevertheless 
be  sweetly  enjoyed  by  you,  for  I  am  persuaded  that  in  the  text  there 
licB  many  a  banquet  for  gainte  that  hunger  and  thirst  afler  righteouft- 
nesB,  and  a  d^th  of  mystical  teaching  wfaitdi  it  shall  be  well  for  you  to 
search  into  with  all  your  powerg.  God  bless  yoo,  my  beloved,  for 
Christ's  Bake.     Amen, 


Portion  of  Scriptttbe  read  betore  Servoh — John  zvii. 


Htmns  iiiOH  "OoB  OwH  Hymji  Book"— 426,  286,  7«8. 


pi«ii[ttpoItta«  i^attrnatlc  piilpt. 


THE  MAGNANIMITY  OF  GOD. 


t 


Deliyebed  on  Lord*s-Day  Morning,  October  21st,  1877,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

▲T    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


'*  Behold,  God  is  mighty,  and  despiseth  not  any  :  he  is  mighty  in  strength  and 
wisdom"  (or,  in  strengSi  of  heart). — Job  xxxvi.  5. 

We  cannot  wonder  that,  in  the  extreme  bitterness  of  his  soul.  Job  was 
driven  to  utter  some  expressions  which  he  would  not  afterwards  have 
attempted  to  justify.  Among  the  rest  Job  had  thouglit  and  ahnost  said 
that  God  had  despised  him.  In  the  tenth  chapter,  at  the  third  verse,  he 
appealed  to  him  thus :  "  Is  it  good  mi  to  thee  that  thou  shouldest  oppress, 
that  thou  shouldest  despise  the  work  of  thine  hands?"  Ehhu,  in  his 
zeal  to  vindicate  the  righteousness  of  his  Maker,  fixes  his  mind,  as  I 
think,  upon  that  expression  of  Job,  and  meets  it  with  a  positive  denial, 
proving  nis  point  from  the  might  and  the  great-heartedness  of  the  Lord. 
He  had  promised  to  fetch  his  argument  from  afar,  and  therefore  he  does 
not  argue  against  God's  despising  any  from  his  mercy  or  goodness,  nor 
give  us  a  commonplace  reason  for  his  assertion,  such  as  would  easily 
have  suggested  itself  even  to  the  thoughtless,  but  he  grounds  his  declara- 
tion that  God  despises  no  one,  and  consequently  not  Job,  upon  the  fact 
of  God's  being  mighty.  "  Behold,  God  is  mighty,  and  despiseth  not 
any ;  he  is  mighty  in  strength  of  heart."  That  form  of  argument  would 
not  have  naturally  occurred  to  you  or  to  me ;  we  might  even  have  been 
inclined  to  argue  the  other  way  and  say — he  is  so  mighty  that  he  cannot 
be  expected  to  consider  such  feeble  things  as  his  creatures,  but  he 
despises  them  all;  and  it  is  therefore  little  wonderful  that  he  should 
despise  Job  among  the  rest.  Elihu,  with  far  better  judgment  than  the 
most  of  us  possess,  draws  quite  the  opposite  inference,  and  declares  that 
because  God  is  mighty  therefore  he  despises  not  any. 

Facts  are  convincing  arguments,  and  if  you  carefully  observe  you  will 
see  that  usually  those  persons  who  despise  others  are  weak,  and  if  weak 
nowhere  else,  are  weak  in  understanding.  Those  little  men  who  are 
dressed  in  brief  authority  are  often  harsh  and  tyrannical,  but  the  truly 
great  are  courteous,  tender,  and  considerate.  The  strong  have  no  reason 
to  be  suspicious  and  jealous,  and  therefore  they  are  free  from  envy  ;  they 
Nos.  1,379-80. 


578  MBTEOPOLTTAH  TABERNACLE  PDLPrP 

I  are  void  of  kax  of  the  power  of  others,  and  therefbre  the;  become  ancioW 
that  their  own  power  wiould  not  be  oppreaaive  to  the  weak  ofiea  arouna 
them.  They  become  considerate  of  otnere  because  thie  famishes  a  fit 
^here  for  the  nse  of  their  strength.  Ton  man,  who  is  only  strong  in 
appearance,  and  ia  really  feeble,  despises  otheis  because. he  dreads  them, 
and  knowing  how  much  he  deserves  to  be  despised  himself,  he  pretends 
to  look  down  upon  his  neighbours.  It  is  yoor  half-edncat«d  man  who 
sneers  ;  it  ia  your  pretender  to  gentility  who  gives  himself  airs.  Wher- 
ever anything  is  mere  pretence,  it  endeavours  to  shield  itself  from  criti- 

'  cism  by  casting  sarcasms  upon  its  rivals.  It  is  said  of  the  Phariseea  that 
they  trusted  in  themBclves,  that  they  were  righteous  and  despised  others  ; 
had  they  been  truly  righteous  they  would  not  have  despised  otheis,  but 
bccanae  they  had  a  mere  veneer  of  religion,  a  superficial  Tarnish  or  gU(t- 
ing  of  righteouencss,  or  something  that  looked  like  righteousnesa,  they 
a&L'cted  to  look  donn  with  supreme  scorn  upon  all  who  did  not  make 
the  same  show  as  thcmsclvea.     God  is  so  great  in  all  things  that  he  des- 

fyises  none :  he  has  no  rivals,  and  has  no  need  to  sustain  himself  br 
[jwering  the  good  name  of  others.  Ho  is  supremely  real,  so  true  and 
thorough,  that  in  him  tbei'c  can  never  be  so  much  as  the  thought  of 
despising  any  in  order  to  guard  himself.  His  power  is  not  soon  aroused 
to  war,  becaaso  it  has  no  opposition  to  fear  ;  his  might  is  associated  with 
gentleness,  and  fury  is  not  in  him,  because  it  is  such  great  might  that 
when  it  is  once  in  action  it  -devours  his  adversaries  as  flame  consomes 
the  stubble.  God  is  too  great  to  be  contemptuous,  too  migtity  to  be 
!  haughty. 

liote,  too,  that  mere  brute  force  may  despise  the  wetdi,  bnt  the  mi^ 
here  ascribed  to  the  Lord  is  of  a  higher  order.  His  might  ia  seen  not 
only  in  that  power  which  rocks  the  solid  world  ivith  earthqnijus  and 
abaJies  the  heavens  with  tempests,  but  in  that  nobler  form  of  might 
which  reveals  itself  in  wisdom  and  nobleness  of  mind.  The  power  ntfiia 
arm  is  quailed  by  the  greatnees  of  his  spirit.  His  might  ties  in  hia 
heart, — in  his  understanding  and  in  his  love ;  he  is  mighty  in  roiritual 
things,  in  sublimity  of  thought,  grandeur  of  ^motive,  nobleness  of^roirit, 
and  loftiness  of  aim.  When  you  perceive  the  exaltation  of  the  divine 
mind  and  the  sublimity  of  the  divine  character,  you  perceive  the  reason  why 
the  Lord  does  not  despise  any.  To  put  my  meaning  into  one  onmbioiu 
but  eipressive  word,  it  is  the  magnanimity  of  God  which  prevents  his 
despising  any.  The  sun  is  so  glorious  that  it  refuses  not  to  ^line  upon  a 
dungliili,  the  rain  ia  bo  plenteuus  that  it  declines  not  to  drop  into  the 
tiny  flower-enp,  the  sea  is  bo  vast  that  it  docs  not  hesitate  to  va& 
a  leather,  ana  God  is  so  mighty  that  he  rejects  not  the  praises  of 
babes  and  sucklings.  If  God  were  little,  he  might  deapiae  the  little; 
if  he  were  weak  lie  would  disdain  the  weak ;  if  he  were  untrue  he  would 
be  supercilious  to  those  about  him ;  but,  seeing  lie  is  none  of  these,  bot 
ia  Cud  over  all  blessed  for  ever,  the  oiUy  wise  God,  we  have  to  deal  with 
one  who,  though  he  be  lu'gli,  hath  respect  unto  tlie  lowly;  who,  though 
he  hiinilileLli  liiiiiscif  even  to  observe  tlie  things  which  are  done  in  heaven, 
yet  despiseth  nut  the  cry  of  tlie  humble.  The  magnanimity  of  God  it 
the  reason  why  lu;  despiseth  not  auy. 

By  the  aid  of  the  Holy  Spuit  we  will  this  morning  first  dwell  npoa 
4#  agetrme,  and  then  consider  ilspracikitl  usm. 


THE  MAGNANIMITY  OP  GOD  579 

I.  First,  I  want  you  reverently  to  consider  the  doctrine  that  God 
is  mighty,  and  therefore  despiseth  not  any. 

Begin  at  the  beginning  :  the  Loid  is  mighty — that  is  to  say,  God  is  so 
strong  that  power  immeasurable  and  inconceivable  belongeth  unto  him. 
"  God  hath  spoken  once ;  twice  have  I  heard  this ;  that  power  belongeth 
unto  God."  All  that  God  has  already  done  proves  his  power,  but  we 
cannot  even  from  his  greatest  works  guess  at  what  he  is  yet  able  to  do. 
"  Lo,  these  are  parts  of  his  ways :  but  how  little  a  portion  is  heard  of 
him?  the  thunder  of  his  power  who  can  understand?"  Since  there 
is  no  bound  to  his  power,  and  it  would  be  sinful  to  attempt  to  limit  the 
Holy  One  of  Israel,  we  are  free  to  believe  that  the  Lord  could  work  on 
even  a  more  stupendous  scale  than  he  has  done  if  so  it  pleased  him. 
Search  as  long  as  you  will,  and  by  his  help  obtain  as  clear  a  discovery  of 
divine  power  as  was  ever  given  to  mortal  mind,  but  recollect  that  he  is 
past  finding  out,  and  that  even  if  you  saw  him  stand  and  measure  the 
earth,  and  drive  asunder  the  nations,  and  cause  the  everlasting  moun- 
tains to  be  scattered,  and  the  perpetual  hills  to  bow,  you  would  yet  have 
to  say  with  Habakkuk,  "  There  was  the  hiding  of  his  power." 

With  the  Lord  nothing  is  impossible.  Learn  somewhat  of  his  power 
from  the  following  facts.  First,  all  the  power  there  is  in  the  universe 
came  from  God  at  first,  comes  from  him  still,  and  at  his  bidding  would 
in  a  single  moment  cease.  Whatever  of  force  there  is  in  inanimate 
nature  it  is  but  God  at  work,  he  set  the  wheel  of  nature  in  motion,  and 
at  his  bidding  it  would  cease  to  turn.  Whatever  mental  faculty  thero 
may  be  in  cherub  or  seraph,  angel  or  mwi,  it  is  but  an  emanation  froiK 
his  creative  energy,  a  ray  from  his  eternal  sun,  which  would  cease  if  he 
restrained  his  might.  If  Jehovah  willed  it,  yonder  enormous  orbs,  which 
now  revolve  in  order  around  the  central  sphere,  would  rush  in  wild  con- 
fusion to  inevitable  destruction.  The  law  of  gravitation,  which  holds 
all  things  in  their  places,  would  be  broken  in  an  instant  if  he  withdrew 
the  force  which  makes  the  law  a  power ;  there  would  be  no  coherence 
among  atoms,  nay,  the  atoms  themselves  would  dissolve  into  non-exist- 
ence and  leave  one  vast  sepulchre,  one  universal  void.  Herein  is  power 
BO  great  that  we  cry  with  Nehemiah,  "  Thou,  even  thou,  art  Lord  alone ; 
thou  hast  made  heaven,  the  heaven  of  heavens,  with  all  their  host,  the 
earth,  and  all  things  that  are  therein,  the  seas,  and  all  that  is  therein,  and 
thou  preservest  them  all ;  and  the  host  of  heaven  worshippeth  thee." 

The  great  God  can  do  all  things  without  help.  He  needs  no  assistance 
from  any  created  thing ;  indeed,  there  could  be  no  such  aid,  since  all 
the  power  of  all  other  beings  is  derived  from  himself  alone.  Creatures 
do  not  contribute  to  his  strength,  they  only  manifest  him,  revealing  the 
power  which  they  have  first  of  all  borrowed  from  him.  To  achieve  any 
purpose  of  his  heart  he  asketh  none  to  be  his  ally,  for  alone  he  doeth  as 
he  wills.  What  is  more,  he  could  with  equal  ease  accomplish  all  his  pur- 
poses if  all  created  intelligences  and  forces  were  against  him.  It  would 
make  no  diflerence  to  his  supremacy  of  might  though  all  the  tremendous 
powers  which  have  now  been  created  should  revolt ;  he  that  sitteth  in  the 
heavens  would  have  them  in  derision.  Even  powers  which  set  up  their 
standard  against  him  are  beneath  his  control :  his  enemies  are  his  foot- 
stool, out  of  their  rage  he  bringeth  forth  his  peaceful  purposes ;  **  he 
maketh  the  wraUi  of  men  to  praise  him^  and  the  remainder  thereof  he  doth 


680  UETBOPOUTAH  TABEEHICLE  PULFIT. 

restrain."  Note  well  that  when  God  hath  done  all  that  he  pleasetli 
he  hath  not  apeiit  his  strength.  "  He  feintfith  not,  neither  is  weaiy ; 
there  is  no  searching  of  hia  understanding."  He  wat<^th  alwajB,  bnt 
he  never  wearies  so  as  to  need  to  slumber :  he  worketb  ever,  but  he  never 

Sauseth  to  take  rest  becanse  of  any  lassitude  or  ezhaaetion ;  when  be  hath 
one  all  that  he  hath  purposed  to  do  he  remains  as  ready  to  work  as  b^ne  j 
when  he  hath,  according  to  onr  notions,  gone  to  the  ntmoet  of  hia 
potency,  he  is  but  at  the  beginning.  These  are  the  akirtA  of  hia  gar- 
ments, but  his  full  glory  is  not  seen.  I  tremble  while  I  speak  npon  that 
of  which  I  know  so  little,  but  assuredly  God  is  mighty  in  the  most 
emphatic  sense  that  can  be  conceived  by  Uie  moat  enlai^^  intellect,  yei^ 
ana  far  beyond  all  that  hath  entered  into  the  heart  of  man. 

The  text  also  tells  iis  that  he  is  "  mighty  in  strength  and  in  wisdom  " 
BO  that  we  have  to  consider  that  Ood  «  power/ill  m  mind.  "  There  ia 
no  searching  of  his  understanding."  He  not  only  poBseasee  phyncal 
might,  by  which  he  creates,  preserves,  or  destroys,  but  the  higher  power  ot 
understittiding,  for  "  he  is  wonderful  in  counsel."  "  Great  ia  onr  Lord 
and  of  great  power  :  his  understanding  is  infinite."  It  ia  difiScnlt  to  find 
•  words  to  express  my  meaning,  for  God  is  a  Spirit,  but  as  far  as  he  may 
reverently  be  spoken  of  as  poBSCssing  a  mind  and  intellect,  he  ia  aa  omm- 
potent  in  that  sphere  as  in  the  phydcal  world.  This  is  the  aecnritj  of 
Ilia  creatures,  that  he  is  a  great-minded  God.  He  who  has  great  power 
of  hand  is  to  be  dreaded,  unless  he  haa  correaponding  greatness  of  aonl. 
It  is  a  calamity  when  the  niler  of  an  empire  cannot  rule  his  own  qiirit. 
The  world  has  shuddered  at  Neros  and  Domitians  and  Cabgnlas,  who 
were  BO  weak  in  character  that  they  broke  every  law  of  mnralitf  and 
humanity,  and  yet  had  the  destinies  of  nations  under  their  ooatn^ 
Look  at  the  oonformation  of  the  heads  of  those  monstdra,  and  thc^  strike 
you  as  resembling  both  prizefighters  and  idiots,  or  a  combination  of  the 
two ;  and  one's  blood  chills  at  hearing  that  snch  beings  were  once 
masters  of  the  Roman  world.  Happy  is  it  for  a  nation  when  the  maater 
of  its  legions  is  of  capacious  mind  and  generons  spirit,  strong  in  self- 
restraint,  and  irresistible  in  the  force  of  virtue.  In  the  highest  degree 
we  have  this  in  "  the  blessed  and  only  Potentate."  God  hath  ^oat 
thonghts,  great  designs,  great  wisdom,  great  goodness. 

He  13  mighty  in  all  respects,  and  especially  in  the  restraint  whidli  he 
puts  upon  his  wrath.  If  you  wish  to  Bee  tins,  look  at  the  forbeamnce 
and  longBiifFcring  which  ne  manifests  towards  the  disobedient.  How 
matchless  ia  his  patience  !  How  enduring  his  mercy  1  The  wickedpro- 
vokc  him,  and  he  feels  the  provocation,  bnt  yet  he  does  not  smite.  Week 
after  week  they  still  insult  him,  thej  even  touch  the  apple  of  hie  eye  by 
persecuting  his  people,  but  still  he  lets  the  lifted  thunder  drop,  and  gives 
space  for  repentance.  He  sends  them  messages  of  mercy,  ne  imjdores 
them  to  turn  from  the  error  of  their  ways ;  but  they  harden  their  hearts, 
they  blaspheme  him,  they  take  his  holy  name  in  vain.  Still,  by  the 
sp&ce  of  many  years  he  bears  with  their  incessant  rebellions,  and  tboi^ 
he  is  grieved  ivith  the  hardness  of  their  hearts,  he  kecpeth  back  bis  in- 
dignation. This  patience  is  shown,  not  here  and  there  to  wie  of  onr 
race,  but  to  myriBOs  of  the  human  femily,  and  not  for  oat  generation 
only,  but  from  generation  after  generation  still  dofli  hia  good  Spirit  strini, 
Btill  doth  he  Btretfih  ont  bis  hands  all  the  day  long  even  to  Uw 


THE  MAGNANBIITY  OF  GOD.  581 

disobedient;  and  to  the  gainsayers.  Not  willing  that  any  should  perish, 
he  waiteth  long  and  patiently,  because  he  delighteth  in  mercy. 

Equally  wonderful,  I  think,  is  the  power  which  God  hath  over  his  own 
mind  in  the  ultimate  pardoning  of  many  of  these  transgressors.  It  is 
marvellous  that  he  should  be  able  to  forgive  any,  and  so  perfectly  to  for- 
give. It  often  happcneth  to  us  that  we  feel  compelled  to  say  when 
greatly  offended,  "  I  can  forgive  you,  but  I  fear  I  shall  never  forget  the 
wrong."  God  goeth  far  beyond  this,  for  he  castcth  all  our  sins  behind 
his  back,  and  he  declares  that  he  will  not  remember  them  against  us  any 
more  for  ever.  What,  never !  Such  deep  oirences  ;  such  heinous 
crimes  !  Such  provoking  transgi'essions  !  Shall  they  never  be  remem- 
bered ?  What,  not  even  remembered  ?  Shall  there  not  be  at  least  a 
frown,  or  a  degree  of  coolness  on  account  of  them  ?  No.  "  I  have 
blotted  out,  as  a  thick  cloud,  thy  trausgrcssiuns,  and,  as  a  cloud,  thy 
sins."  It  shows  the  great-mindedness  of  God  that  he  should  be  able  to 
act  thus,  and  to  act  thus  towards  the  very  chief  of  sinners.  "  Who  is  a 
God  like  unto  thee,  that  pardoncth  iniquity,  and  passeth  by  the  trans- 
gressions of  the  remnant  of  his  heritage  ?  he  retaineth  not  his  anger  for 
ever,  because  he  delighteth  in  mercy." 

Let  me  add  that  when  he  does  not  forgive,  but  when  pei'sisteut  impeni- 
tence demands  the  final  doom,  God  is  great-soulcd  even  in  the  punish- 
ment of  the  wicked.  He  takes  no  pleasure  in  the  sinner's  death  ; 
judgment  is  his  strange  work.  Punishment  is  never  inflicted  as  a  matter 
of  arbitrary  sovereignty,  but  always  because  demanded  by  justice.  The 
Lord  in  vindicating  his  justice  deals  not  with  the  poor  and  the  obscure 
alone,  but  with  the  great  ones  of  the  earth,  plucking  down  from  their  high 
places  emperors  and  kings,  red-handed  with  human  carnage,  and  casting 
them  down  to  hell.  Nor  does  he  on  the  other  hand  exercise  exceptional 
severity  on  the  great  blasphemer,  but  he  deals  with  the  baser  sort  also, 
and  does  not  spare  the  braggart  of  the  streets  who  profanes  his  name. 
Calmly  and  impartially  doth  God  deal  out  justice,  **  for  there  is  no 
iniquity  with  the  Lord  our  God,  nor  respect  of  persons,  nor  taking  of 
gifts."  His  sentence  is  so  just  that  none  shall  be  able  to  gainsay  it. 
Thus  he  proves  the  gi-eatness  of  his  mind,  for  when  he  docs  condemn 
and  punish  it  is  never  in  passion,  never  in  haste,  never  without  exact 
weighing  of  evidence.  Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right  ? 
"  Yea,  surely  God  will  not  do  wickedly,  neither  will  the  Almighty  per- 
vert judgment."     Our  God,  then,  is  mighty  of  heart. 

Now,  the  pith  of  the  doctrine  lies  here,  that  because  of  his  might  God 
despMh  not  any.  The  proof  is  very  manifest.  God  is  so  great  and 
mighty  that  all  things  must  be  little  to  him.  There  can  be  nothing 
great  to  the  infinite  God.  There  are  worlds  so  ponderous  that  human 
reckoning  cannot  estimate  their  size,  there  are  worlds  so  numerous  that  wc 
have  to  leave  them  uncounted,  yet  separately  or  apart,  or  taken  altogether 
in  their  constellations,  all  these  must  be  as  a  drop  of  a  bucket  to  him. 
Since,  then,  all  things  must  be  little,  it  cometh  to  pass  that  nothing  is 
therefore  more  than  little,  and  nothing  falleth  much  more  below  the  level 
of  his  greatness  than  other  things  which  we  are  wont  to  think  nuu-h  of. 
If  the  divine  observation  and  care  is  to  extend  to  creatures  at  all,  then 
it  must  be  exercised  upon  insignificance  and  weakness,  since,  comjiared 
with  himself,  there  is  nothing  else.     If  you  desire  proof  that  tlie  Lord 


582  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

oonsidereth  the  lesser  things^  look  at  creation.  The  great  and  mighty 
God  has  displayed  his  greatness  as  much  in  the  tiny  objects  which  he  has 
made  as  in  the  magnificent  worlds  which  he  has  fashioned.  Myijads  of 
creatures  disport  themselvea  in  a  single  drop  of  stagnant  water,  and  yet 
in  each  one  of  these  omnipotence  is  manifested.  The  bodies  of  those 
minute  beings  display  in  every  part  amazing  skill  and  admirable  design. 
Their  very  minuteness  increases  our  wonder,  and  compels  us  to  feel  the 
mightiness  of  the  divine  Creator.  For  each  of  these  infusorial  creatores, 
so  small  as  only  to  be  observed  beneath  a  strong  microscope,  God  findetii 
fitting  food,  and  puts  life-force  into  each  part  of  its  organization,  so  that 
it  can  exist,  and  grow,  and  mature,  and  enjoy  life,  and  transmit  it  to  its 
successor.  He  seeth  to  everything  that  concemeth  a  gnat  or  a  fly ;  and 
as  surely  as  he  watches  over  seraphim  and  cherubim  he  guardeUi  the 
worm  of  the  earth  and  the  mumow  of  the  brook.  God  has  created  tiny 
things,  not  as  a  freak  or  an  experiment,  nor  as  the  sport  of  his  leisure, 
but  in  sober  earnest  he  has  evidently  put  forth  as  much  of  his  mind  in 
the  formation  of  the  minute  as  in  the  fashioning  of  the  immense ;  and  if 
he  has  done  so,  let  us  not  question  but  that  he  will  deal  tenderly  with 
the  poor  and  needy  among  men,  and  he  will  despise  none  that  s^qk  nnto 
him  in  sincerity  of  heart.  He  who  takes  care  of  gnats  and  flies  will 
hear  the  prayer  of  humble  hearts,  and  will  not  refuse  to  regard  the 
ignorant  and  the  obscure.  Jesus,  bis  Son,  was  meek  and  lowly  m  heart, 
and  suffered  the  little  children  to  come  unto  him^  and  therefore  we  who 
are  least  among  men  shall  not  be  despised. 

The  same  respect  to  the  minor  tnings  is  observable  in  providence. 
The  providence  of  God  doth  not  only  concern  wars  between  mighty 
empires,  and  the  discussions  of  cabinets  and  royal  councils,  but  it  com- 
prehends within  its  rule  everything  that  transpires.  The  blooming  of 
each  one  of  the  millions  of  daisies  in  the  meadows  is  arranged  by  eternal 
purpose,  and  the  croaking  of  a  frog  in  the  marsh,  or  the  fEdung  of  a 
leaf  fr^m  an  oak  in  the  forest  is  part  of  the  plan  of  eternal  wisdom. 
The  migration  of  each  swallow  is  as  much  arranged  as  the  voyage  of 
Columbus,  and  the  breaking  of  a  fowler's  net  is  as  surely  ordained  as  the 
emancipation  of  a  nation.  God  is  in  all  things ;  not  a  sparrow  lig^teth 
to  the  ground  without  your  Father,  and  the  very  hairs  of  your  head  are 
all  numbered.  A  might  which  encompasses  these  httle  thmgs,  and  oon- 
descends  to  make  them  a  part  of  his  eternal  purpose,  most  evidently 
proves  that  the  Lord  cannot  be  suspected  of  despising  any. 

One  telling  argument  to  prove  that  the  magnanimity  of  God 
despiseth  none  is  found  in  the  fact  that  he  hath  reg^ed  man.  David 
thought  thus  when  he  surveyed  "  the  heavens,  the  work  of  God's  fingers, 
the  moon  and  the  stars  which  he  had  ordained,"  for  he  exclaimed, "  What 
is  man,  that  thou  art  mindfril  of  him  ?  and  the  son  of  man,  that  thou 
visitest  him  ?"  Man  is  neither  the  greatest,  the  strongest,  nor  the  swiftest 
amongst  animals.  Lions  outmatch  mm  in  force,  horses  in  swiflaiess,  eagles 
in  power  to  soar,  and  fish  in  ability  to  dive.  Leviathan  &r  surpasses  him 
in  bulk,  and  behemoth  exceeds  him  in  the  strength  of  his  loins.  Man  is 
apparently  a  feeble  creature,  and  more  likely  to  be  the  prey  of  beasts  thm 
their  destroyer.  Look  at  him  in  his  naked  weakness,  and  what  a  deMoe- 
less,  unprotected  creature  he  appears,  and  yet  he  is  maoarch  of  tiie  world. 
As  David  said :  "  Thou  madest  him  to  have  dominion  over  the  works  of 


THE  MAGNANIMITY  OF  GOD.  588 

thy  hands ;  thou  hast  put  all  things  under  his  feet :  all  sheep  and  oxen, 
yea,  and  the  beasts  of  the  field ;  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  the  fish  of  the 
sea,  and  whatsoever  passeth  through  the  paths  of  the  seas."  That  God 
ghould  consider  man  is  an  instance  of  that  great-mindedness  which  does 
not  look  at  bulk  and  strength,  but  abounds  in  condescension. 

This  is  more  clear,  too,  when  you  think  of  what  sort  of  men  God  has 
most  of  all  favoured.  Who  are  his  chosen?  Remember  that  the  most 
intimate  love  of  God  has  seldom  fallen  to  the  lot  of  the  great  ones  of  this 
earth.  "  Not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble,  are  called :  but  God  hath 
full  often  chosen  the  poor  of  this  world.'* 

"  When  the  Eternal  bows  the  skies 
To  visit  earthlv  thinors, 
With  scorn  divine  ho  turns  his  eyes 
From  towers  of  haughty  kings. 

**  He  bids  his  awftil  chariot  roll 
Far  downward  from  the  skies, 
To  visit  every  humble  soul,  . 
With  pleasure  in  his  eyes." 

What  saith  Paul  in  his  epistle  to  the  Corinthians?  "Things  which  are 
despised  hath  God  chosen,  yea,  and  things  which  are  not,  to  bring  to 
nought  things  that  are."  He  despiseth  not  any,  we  are  sure,  for  when  he 
ordained  fathers  in  his  church,  and  set  twelve  leaders  in  the  apostleship, 
he  chose  to  this  office  neither  pliilosophers,  nor  senators,  nor  kings,  but 
lowly  fishermen :  and  from  that  day  to  this  it  hath  been  his  wont  to  do 
his  mightiest  actions  for  his  people  by  those  who  have  been  least 
esteemed  among  the  sons  of  men,  for  he  is  so  mighty  that  he  despiseth 
not  any. 

Brethren,  you  know,  some  of  you,  another  sweet  proof  that  he  doth 
not  despise  any,  for  you  can  say  in  the  language  of  David,  in  the  twenty- 
second  Psalm,  **  He  hath  not  despised  nor  abhorred  the  affliction  of  the 
afflicted ;  neither  hath  he  hid  his  face  from  him ;  but  when  he  cried  unto 
him,  he  heard."  You  have  some  of  you  been  in  very  deep  waters 
through  bodily  pain,  bereavement,  poverty,  or  persecution,  and  you  have 
found  lovers  and  friends  forsake  you,  for  you  have  been  but  poor  com- 

eny  for  their  merry-makings ;  but  God  hath  not  forsaken  you,  he  hath 
en  very  near  unto  you  in  the  time  of  your  distress,  and  thus  hath  he 
proved  that  he  despiseth  not  any.  To  this  man  also  hath  he  looked, 
even  to  him  that  is  poor  and  of  a  contrite  spirit,  and  that  trembleth  at 
his  word. 

I  need  not  stay  to  prove  this  further,  for  all  history  declares  that  God 
hath  no  esteem  for  human  greatness,  tJiat  he  hath  no  flattery  for  human 
excellence ;  but  that,  on  the  contrary,  he  layeth  the  axe  at  the  root  of  the 
tall  and  the  green  trees,  and  bringeth  them  down  even  to  the  ground ; 
but  as  for  those  that  are  lowly  and  despised,  and  appear  to  be  withered, 
he  hath  pity  upon  them  and  blesses  them,  and  so  the  word  of  his  servant 
Esekiel  is  fulfilled,  "  And  all  the  trees  of  the  field  shall  know  that  I 
the  Lord  have  brought  down  the  high  tree,  have  exalted  the  low  tree, 
have  dried  up  the  green  tree,  and  have  made  the  dry  tree  to  flourish :  I 
the  Lord  have  spoken  and  have  done  it." 

Now,  brethren,  the  proof  which  I  have  given  you  that  the  Lord  looketh 
upon  httle  and  lowly  things  shows  the  greatness  of  his  soul.    Our  God  is 


684  UETSOPOUTAN  TABEEHiCLB  FULFTT. 

not  like  the  great  oaee  among  men.  Kings  and  princes  genenllf  eeteem 
tjioee  most  who  can  do  them  or  the  atate  most  service.  God  needeth 
nothing  Trom  anr,  and  therefore  neither  esteems  the  great  nor  deqHKS  the 
littlo.  He  is  delivered  trom  all  consideration  of  self,  seeing  that  he  ta 
all  in  all.  Those  vho  can  do  the  state  no  service  are  usually  looked  npon 
by  their  rulers  as  tho  last  to  be  considered.  Why  should  they  ha\'e  a 
voice  ?  Who  are  they  that  their  interests  should  be  thought  of?  Bnt 
seeing  God  reqnircth  not  to  look  to  any  for  help,  he  is  not  led  to  look 
down  with  despite  and  contempt  npon  any.  If  yon  feel  an  undue  esteem 
for  some,  it  follows  almost  as  a  matter  of  couise  that  yon  shonld  have  a 
want  of  consideration  fur  otheis,  but  because  Ood  hath  no  need  to 
ask  iivvours  of  any  of  his  creatures  or  in  the  slightest  degree  to  ewe  for 
their  strength  or  wisdom,  therelure  he  maketh  not  much  of  the  great,  and 
therefore  on  the  other  hand  he  does  not  make  little  of  those  wdo  are  of 
lowly  rank.  God  hath  power  also  to  protect  all  interests,  and  tida 
human  rulers  say  that  they  cannot  do.  The  great  ones  of  the  earth  will 
often  argue  thus,  "  For  the  good  of  the  general  public  a  portion  of 
the  popumtion  must  suffer.  Great  measures  naturally  involve  dJBbcss 
here  and  there,  and  this  is  unavoidable.  The  law  bears  hard  npon 
a  few,  but  we  cannot  alter  it :  all  regulations  do  so  more  or  less."  But 
God  is  so  mighty  that  he  has  no  need  to  perform  a  deed  which  in- 
volves injustice  to  one  of  the  least  of  his  creatures.  Strict  justice  shall 
be  dealt  out  to  every  individual  as  impartially  ba  if  he  were  the  only 
creature  God  had  ever  made.  The  Lord  knows  how  to  consider  every 
one  separate  individual  of  the  human  family  as  carefully  as  if  there  were 
no  more  than  that  one  ;  for  he  is  so  great  in  might,  and  his  thoughts 
are  so  deeply  wise,  tliat  he  looks  to  the  interests  of  all.  "The  Lord  is 
good  to  all,  and  his  tender  mercies  are  over  all  bis  works."  Let  as 
adore  and  bless  him  tliat  this  doctrine  stands  on  so  sure  a  baus ;  he  is 
mighty  in  heart,  and  despiseth  not  any. 

IL    Kow  I  come  to  the  practical  ubes  of  this  great  tmth. 

And  the  first  use  of  the  truth  is,  it  should  greatly  encourage  those  who 
are  tried.  You  have  not  come,  my  dear  friend,  to  quite  so  low  a  state  as 
that  of  Job  when  he  sat  upon  a  dunghill  and  scraped  his  sorea  with  a 
potsherd ;  but  even  if  you  were,  you  ought  not  to  conclude  that  you  are 
despised  of  the  Lord.  He  never  could  despise  one  of  those  for  whom 
Christ  died.  The  Lord  has  not  thought  contemptuously  of  yon  and 
said,  "  Let  him  suffer !  Ue  is  a  nobody,  it  matters  not  what  becomes  of 
him."  On  che  contrary,  whatever  your  griefe  are  to-day  they  have  been 
allotted  to  you  by  infinite  ivisdom,  and  superlative  love.  You  are  in  tiie 
best  condition  that  you  could  be  in  after  all.  Bad  as  it  appears  to  yon, 
God  knows  that  your  lot  is  rightly  ordained.  If  it  had  been  better  for 
you,  upon  the  whole,  to  have  been  rolling  iu  wealth,  you  would  have 
been ;  if  it  had  been  better  for  you  never  to  know  pang  or  pain,  JOB 
would  not  have  known  them  :  but  God's  great  pnrpases  and  plans,  in- 
volving you  and  the  rest  of  his  people,  ren^r  it  the  best  thing  that  yon 
should  be  tried,  and  therefore  tried  you  are.  If  you  could  have  all  the 
fecta  of  the  case,  and  all  the  divine  purposes  spread  before  you,  and  if 
you  could  have  as  clesr  an  understanding  as  Qod  has,  you  would  pot 
yourself  just  where  you  are  now,  for  your  lather's  dealings  are  right  and 
good.    He  has  not  put  you  in  the  furnace  because  he  demises  yoo,  but 


THE  MAGNANIMITY  OF  GOD.  585 

because  he  values  you.    He  bought  you  with  the  blood  of  Jesus,  and 
therefore  you  may  be  sure  he  prizes  you  much. 

Neither  does  the  Lord  think  so  Httle  of  you  an  to  forget  you  in  your 
pains.  In  all  your  grief  Jesus  has  deep  sympathy  with  you.  In  the 
watches  of  the  night  his  eye  sees  your  faintucss  and  sleeplessness; 
when  nurse  and  friend  must  from  very  weariness  leave  you,  he  is 
still  with  you,  making  your  bed  in  your  sickness.  You  must  not  say, 
"  My  God  is  so  busy  with  heaven's  glories,  and  with  the  management  of 
the  world's  affairs,  that  he  forgets  me."  Far  from  it.  "  Like  as  a  father 
pitieth  his  children,  so  the  Lord  pitieth  them  that  fear  him."  Depend 
upon  it,  the  great  God  is  too  mighty  to  despise  one  of  his  o^vn 
children.  He  does  not  say,  "  It  is  only  a  work-girl  pining  away 
with  consumption,  she  will  not  be  missed."  Nor  does  he  say,  "It 
is  only  a  poor  old  woman,  worn  out,  and  suffering  the  natm*al  pains  of 
old  age,  it  httle  matters  what  happens  to  her."  He  does  not  speak 
contemptuously,  and  say,  "  It  is  only  a  man  of  small  brain,  who  will 
never  do  much,  and  is  not  worth  caring  about;  let  him  sorrow  and 
die,  there  will  be  only  one  grave  more  in  the  cemetery,  and  one  mouth  less 
to  feed,  and  that  is  all."  Oh,  no,  he  "  despiseth  not  any."  "  Precious  in 
the  sight  of  the  Lord  is  the  death  of  his  saints."  He  sees  your  tears 
and  hears  your  groans,  for  he  is  in  fellowship  with  the  very  least  of  his 
people.  "  In  all  their  affliction  he  is  afflicted,  and  the  angel  of  his 
presence  saves  them."  If  any  of  you  have  come  here  this  morning  very 
much  cast  down  because  your  trials  are  httle  known  to  others,  and  nobody 
sympathizes  with  you,  do  get  a  grasp  of  this  grand  fact,  **  He  despiseth 
not  any,"  and  you  will  be  much  cheered.  You  arc  not  made  to  suffer 
because  of  any  indifference  in  God's  heart  towards  you,  but  because  he 
loves  you.  "  As  many  as  I  love,"  saith  he,  "  I  rebuke  and  chasten." 
Take  these  rebukes  and  chastenings  as  tokens  of  his  love,  and  when 
the  rod  falls  more  heavily  than  usual  perceive  it  to  be  the  rod  of  the 
covenant,  which  is  held  in  a  father's  hand,  and  only  comes  upon  his  own 
beloved. 

A  second  use  of  this  great  truth  is  one  which  I  pray  God  to  render 
effectual.  It  should  encourage  every  sinner  who  is  seeking  the  fare  of 
God  to  think  that  God  is  mighty,  and  despiseth  not  any.  You,  dear 
friend,  feel  now  as  if  God  might  very  well  pass  you  by  and  suffer  you  to 
perish.  You  have  begun  to  seek  his  face,  but  you  could  not  blame  him 
if  he  were  to  hide  himself  from  you  and  leave  you  to  perish,  for  you  have 
such  a  keen  sense  of  your  unworthiness  and  insignificance.  Be  comforted 
by  this, — God  is  too  great  to  deny  you  his  favour.  What  profit  would  he 
have  in  your  blood  ?  What  benefit  would  it  be  to  him  that  you  should 
go  down  ahve  into  the  pit?  His  justice  has  been  glorified  sufticiontly  in 
the  death  of  his  Son  Jesus,  and  those  that  believe  in  him  shall  therefore 
live.  Beloved  friend,  it  may  be  you  say,  "  1  am  so  ignorant,  I  know 
but  little  of  the  Lord."  Will  he  despise  you  because  of  that?  If  he 
does  so,  woe  unto  us  all,  for  we  are  all  ignorant,  and  on  that  ground  he 
might  despise  even  the  angels  whom  he  charged  with  folly.  In  compari- 
son with  his  omniscience  all  creatures  are  fools.  Little  as  you  know,  he 
will  teach  you  and  instruct  you,  but  he  will  not  despise  you.  **  Ah,"  say 
you,  "  but  I  have  such  slender  faculties."  Suppose  you  have,  the  gi^eatest 
intellect  that  God  has  created  must  in  comparison  with  him  have  little 


688  METBOPOLITAH  TIBIRKIOLI  PDIfK 

enough  of  capacity,  aiid  therefbre  he  would  detpin  all  that  he  kaa  auda. 
But  it  is  not  BO.  Does  the  Lord  aak  aay  &cultT  from  ui,  eiaagt  Um 
facility  to  receive  his  mercy  and  to  laj  hold  upon  hia  grace  ?  Your  vwy 
emptiness  and  sense  of  need  conatitnte  a  &calty  of  receptivenen  into 
which  he  will  ponr  his  grace.  Be  not  discoara^d,  however  low  in  ths 
scale  of  intelligence  jon  may  place  yoniaelf,  Qoa  is  mighty  is  heart  and 
desplseth  not  any. 

Your  heart  Ib  broken.  Well,  it  is  written,  "A  broken  and  a  contrite' 
heart,  0  Gtod,  thon  wilt  not  despiae."  Yonr  graces  are  very  wBsk,  yon 
cannot  Bee  clear  marks  of  the  divine  Spirit  about  yon.  It  is  wdttsD, 
"  He  hath  not  despised  the  dav  of  small  things."  Gven  spsrka  of  grace 
hs  never  tramples  out,  and  altnough  your  grace  is  but  as  a  smoking  Sax, 
which  may  hare  more  of  ofienoe  about  it  than  of  excellence,  even  tiiat 
he  doth  not  quench.  The  bruised  reed,  the  grace  which  aecaas  to  be 
destroyed,  and  out  of  which  no  music  can  be  brought,  he  doth  not  despise 
or  break,    Othere  may  despise  you,  but  the  heavraly  Father  will  not. 

It  is  just  possible  that  yon  say, "  Oh,  sir,  I  cannot  think  deep  thonp:hts. 
I  try  to  grasp  the  great  doctrines,  but  they  are  beyond  me."  God  is  so 
mighty  that  be  does  not  dcBpise  you  for  that,  for  he  has  Bent  yon  a  gos- 
pel wluch  requires  no  deep  uiought.  The  gospel  of  "  behere  and  hve  " 
IS  on  the  level  of  any  man's  capacity  who  d^ireth  to  understand  and 
believe.  Christ  JesuB  has  pitched  the  gospel  note  so  low  that  our  poor 
cracked  bass  voices  may  join  in  the  tune.  He  hath  made  the  steps  of 
the  Palace  Beantifnl  so  easy  that  httle  children  may  climb  them.  I 
bless  him  for  that  word, "  Suiter  the  httle  children  to  come  unto  me,  and 
forbid  them  not,"  for  then  I,  who  feel  myself  as  a  mere  bahe  amidst  the 
great  mysteries  of  his  kin^om,  may  come  to  him  and  be  sure  that  he 
oespiseth  not  any,  and  despiseth  not  me. 

"  Ah,"  but  you  say,  "  I  fear  that  God  will  casti  me  away  because  I 
sh^l  never  be  eminent  for  any  great  grace  even  if  be  saves  me.  My 
fitith,  I  fear,  will  always  be  weak,  my  love  will  always  be  chill,  my 
character  wiU  be  imperfect."  Well,  beloved  friend,  then  you  will  owe 
more  to  his  love  than  others,  and  more  to  his  patience  and  his  grace, 
but  in  any  case  he  will  not  despise  yon.  Think  you  that  the  great 
God  needs  our  CTeat  graces?  It  is  true  he  is  pleased  with  great  fiiith, 
but  he  would  be  a  great  God  if  we  had  no  laith  ^  all.  It  is  brue 
be  delights  to  Bee  the  heroism  of  his  children,  but  not  because  he 
depends  upon  that  or  needeth  it  in  the  slightest  degree.  He  getteth 
nothing  out  of  us,  onr  goodness  extendeth  not  to  him,  therefore  is  he 
too  mighty  to  demise  us  if  we  csimot  render  anything  to  him.  Yet 
another  replies,  "  I  can  understand  God's  saving  a  man  who  afterwards 
becomes  an  eminent  minister  or  a  gifted  missionBry;  but  if  he  were  to 
save  me  he  could  not  make  much  of  me.  What  ahould  I  be  if  grace 
did  its  best  with  me  ?  I  could  only  be  a  humble  unknown  membei 
of  the  church,  drawing  greatly  upon  hia  resources,  but  giving  him  a 
very  smaU  return."  WeU,  belovM,  the  Lord  is  so  mighty  that  he  is 
wilung  to  receive  multitudes  of  snoh.  Why  should  he  not?  If  hs  did 
not  receive  them  he  would  not  be  enrich^  fay  hia  refusal ;  if  he  does 
receive  them  be  will  not  be  impoverished  by  wlutt  he  bestows  upon  them. 
Believe  firmly  in  the  generosity  of  God.  I  have  known  what  it  is  to  find 
shelter  behind  his  magnanimity,  whea  I  have  cried,  "  0  that  he  would 


THE  MAGNANIMITY  OP  GOD.  587 

look  upon  me  in  love!  I  am  utterly  unworthy  and  insi^ificant — 
will  he  take  the  trouble  to  spurn  me  ?  Will  it  be  worth  his  while  to 
refuse  me  his  grace  ?  Surely  I  am  too  unimportant  for  him  to  break  his 
promise  in  order  to  reject  me,  and  act  contrary  to  his  nature  in  order  to 
cast  me  away,  and  both  of  these  he  would  have  to  do  if  he  rejected  one 
poor,  needy,  penitent  spirit  which  dares  to  trust  in  him  through  Jesus 
Christ."  0  poor,  discouraged  one,  believe  in  God's  great-heartedness. 
Throw  yourself  at  the  cross-foot,  sinner,  and  say  unto  God,  "  By  thy 
very  greatness  I  will  lay  hold  upon  thee.  Surely  thou  art  too  mi.i;iity 
to  crush  a  worm  like  me,  too  mighty  to  refuse  me  now  that  I  trust  the 
blood  and  merit  of  thy  Son.  Display  the  greatness  of  thy  might  by 
saving  me,  even  me,  I  beseech  thee."  Do  you  not  see  how  full  of  con- 
solation is  the  doctrine  of  the  text  ?  May  faith  be  given  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  to  enable  you  to  grasp  it. 

Lastly,  this  doctrine  affords  an  example  to  God's  people.  If  our 
heavenly  Father  is  mighty  and  despiseth  not  any,  then  it  clearly  follows 
that  if  we  are  imitators  of  God  as  dear  children  we  must  not  despise  any. 
I  pray  you  never  despise  any  of  your  brethren  and  sisters  in  Christ.  Are 
they  poorer  than  you  ?  Do  not  despise  them,  but  rather  help  them.  If 
they  are  very,  very  poor,  think  what  they  have  to  bear,  and  do  not  add 
to  their  other  sorrows  the  grief  caused  by  your  contempt.  Deal 
gently  and  tenderly  with  them.  If  they  are  parts  of  your  Lord's  body 
you  should  be  glad  to  serve  them,  for  so  you  wash  his  feet.  You  should 
feel  it  to  be  a  blessing  that  there  are  poor  saints  to  whom  you  can 
minister,  because  in  so  doing  you  arc  ministering  to  Christ.  "  The  poor 
ye  have  always  with  you ;"  and  they  are  needful,  for  if  there  were  no 
poor  saints  we  might  begin  crying  **  Lord  Jesus,  what  can  we  do  for 
thee  ?  We  wish  we  could  show  our  love  to  thee,  but  now,  seeing  there 
are  no  poor  saints,  we  do  not  know  how  to  clothe  thee,  nor  how  to  visit 
thee  in  thy  sickness,  and  we  shall  miss  the  blessing  thereby."  If  poor 
saints  abound  around  you,  esteem  them,  because  it  is  through  them  you  will 
be  able  to  be  commended  by  your  Lord  when  he  will  say  to  you,  "  I  was 
an  hungered  and  ye  gave  me  meat,  I  was  thirsty  and  ye  gave  me  drink." 

Perhaps  your  poorer  brethren  are  more  honourable  in  God's  esteem 
than  you  are,  and  probably  they  love  the  Master  better  than  you  do. 
It  is  very  possible  that  they  show  more  of  the  power  of  c^odlincss  in 
their  lives  than  you  do  in  yours,  and  it  may  be  when  Clirist  will  come 
in  his  glory  he  will  put  tlicm  in  a  higher  seat  than  some  who  have 
houses  and  lands.  Brethren,  do  not  despise  one  another.  If  you  see  a 
brother  with  very  little  talent  doing  his  best,  never  sneer  at  him  ;  God 
may  perhaps  bless  his  one  handful  of  com  more  than  he  will  your  basket- 
ful if  he  sows  in  more  faith  than  you  do.  Do  not  despise  young  beginners. 
What  if  they  do  not  know  as  much  as  you  do  ;  you  do  not  know  too  much, 
and  you  know  but  little  to  the  purpose  if  you  have  no  compassion  upon 
the  lambs  of  the  flock.  Never  despise  a  brother  because  of  the  mistakes 
he  makes  in  doctrine.  If  you  can  set  him  right,  do  so,  but  if  the  love 
of  God  is  in  him,  do  not  cast  him  out  for  his  blunders.  Do  not  say,  **  I 
will  never  associate  with  that  man."  In  the  family  of  grace  there  are 
some  queer  people ;  some  of  the  Lord's  are  such  that,  if  he  did  not 
choose  them  in  sovereignty,  I  am  at  a  loss  to  see  how  else  they  were 
chosen.    But  then,  if  the  Lord  loves  them,  you  should  endeavour  to  do 


CSS  UETROPOLITAH  TABKRHACLE  PULPIT. 

the  Eame.    Never  deepiee  one  of  ChriBt's  little  ones,  or  eTil  will  oome 

of  it. 

'       OncQ  m'jTe,  neivy  despise  any.    There  is  a  text  that  sorae  people  are 

;  Tery  pleased  with — "Honour  the  king."  Yes,  by  all  manner  of 
means :  I  trnst  we  shall  always  be  very  loyal  and  honour  the  soTereign 
of  the  realm  in  which  wc  dwell.     Bnt  did  you  ever  notice  the  precept 

'  which  cornea  before  it,  which  I  rccomnicnd  to  those  people  who  sneer  at 
the  poor?  it  rnns  thus — "Honour  all  men."  This  is  jnst  as  much  a  duty 
as  "  Honour  the  king."  "  Hononr  all  men."  What,  hononr  the  lower 
classes  ?    Yes,  sir,  "  nonour  all  men."    Honour  agricnltnral  labonreis  ? 

'  Yes,  "  all  men."  Hononr  paupers,  negroes,  crossing-sweepers  ?  Yes, 
"  hononr  all  men."  Respect  tne  worker  and  the  aulferer ;  respect  the 
burden  and  the  bnrden-bcarer  ?  Anything  in  the  shape  of  a  man  or  a 
woman  dcsenes  to  be  honoured,  for  man  was  made  in  the  image  of  God. 
You  are  not  to  eny  of  the  fallen  woman,  "Away  with  her !  The  leas  said 
alx>ut  her  the  better."     Perhaps  bo.  Bister,  bnt  the  more  dom  the  better. 

I  Nor  are  yon  to  say  of  any  man,  "  He  is  an  incorrigible  character  ;  we 
cannot  touch  his  case."  No,  that  is  not  the  way  Jesas  deals  with  men 
— ho  despiseth  not  any.  Upon  the  worst  of  characters  we  onght  t« 
spend  sevenfold  love  and  patience,  in  the  hope  that  we  may  rescne  such 
depraved  ones  from  the  Jcptha  of  sin. 

If  it  comes,  yon  know,  to  the  matter  of  despising,  and  yon  and  I  begin 

'  despising  onr  fellow-crcatnres,  God  may  make  short  work  of  na  by 
despising  us  all.  He  may  jiist  shut  the  door  of  mercy  in  our  faces  and 
say,  "Yon  think  little  cnoogh  of  one  another  ;  yon  poor  people  are 
railing  at  the  rich,  and  you  rich  people  are  sneering  at  the  poor.  By 
your  own  judgment  you  shall  all  be  judged."  The  Lord  knows,  if  he 
were  to  leave  a  woman  to  be  judged  by  women,  or  even  if  he  were  to 
leave  a  man  to  be  judged  by  men,  a  whole  host  of  na  would  be  lost 
Bnt  instead  of  that  he  sets  wide  the  door  of  grace,  and  bids  the  despised 
ones  come  and  welcome.  For  Jesas'  sake  he  looks  in  pity  upon  men, 
and  has  a  kindness  towards  them.  He  sets  before  us  an  open  door  of 
mercy,  and  cries,  "  I  have  given  my  Son  to  die,  and  whosoever  among 
yon  will  bnt  believe  in  him  shall  prove  that  I  will  not  despise  you,  but 
will  receive  yon  to  my  heart,  love  you  in  time  and  love  yon  in  eternity, 
and  give  yon  to  bo  sharers  of  the  throne  of  my  only  begotten  Son  for 
ever  and  ever."  Brethren,  shake  off  your  prido  and  love  your  fellow- 
man,  for  if  ye  love  not  yonr  brother  whom  ye  have  seen  how  can  yon 
love  God  whom  yo  have  not  seen  ?  If  he  is  mighty  and  despigeth  not 
any,  then  be  sure  that  if  you  despise  any  it  is  because  you  are  not  the 
mighty  body  that  you  think  you  are  ;  your  contempt  of  others  proves 
that  yon  arc  a  little-souled  creature,  weak,  pitiful,  pretentious.  Yon 
may  measure  yonrsolf  by  this— if  yon  despise  others  you  ought  to  be 
despised,  bnt  if  on  the  contrary  your  tender  heart  of  sympathy  would 
lift  even  the  beggar  from  the  danghill  you  are  magnanimous,  great- 
soulud  and  like  unto  God.  May  the  Holy  Ghost  make  you  more  and 
more  so.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Job  sxxvi. 


Hyuks  from  "Our  Own  Eyus  Look" — 194, 195,  689. 


fldi[0plitmt  ifat^rnark 


VANITIES  AND  VERITIES. 


% 


DELIVERED   BY 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


**  "We  look  not  at  the  things  which  are  seen,  but  at  the  things  which  are  not  seen : 
for  the  things  which  are  seen  are  temporal ;  but  the  things  which  are  not  seen  are 
eternal.*'— 2  Corinthians  iv.  18. 

The  apostle  Paul  was  by  no  means  a  stoic.  He  had  not  conquered  all 
human  feeling,  and  rendered  himself  a  stone  man.  On  the  contrary,  he 
was  exceedingly  sensitive.  You  can  sec  abundant  evidence,  not  only  in 
the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  but  also  in  the  tone  of  all  his  epistles,  that  he 
has  a  very  tender  spirit.  He  feels  acutely  any  unkindness.  If  a  friend 
forsakes  him,  he  mourns  it ;  or  if  friends  oblige  hnn,  there  is  genuine 
emotion  in  his  gratitude.  He  is  sensitive,  too,  to  poverty,  sensitive 
to  shame  ;  sensitive  to  all  those  giiefe  which  he  has  to  bear  for  Christ's 
sake.  He  feels  them :  you  can  see  that  he  does.  He  is  not  an  iuviilnerable 
man  in  armour,  he  is  a  man  of  flesh  and  blood,  whom  the  arrow  pierces 
and  pains.  Yet  how  bravely  he  sticks  to  his  work ;  he  faces  every  danger 
and  never  dreams  of  flinching.  Never  for  a  single  moment  does  he  seem 
to  take  into  consideration  what  he  may  have  personally  to  sufler  for  the 
testimony  of  Christ  and  the  triumph  of  the  gospel.  He  remembers  the 
pangs  when  they  are  past ;  lie  looks  on  the  scare  when  they  are  healed, 
and  he  sometimes  gives  a  long  list  of  the  perils  and  privations  he  has  [ 
had  to  endure,  thus  showing  that  he  was  keenly  sensitive  ;  but  he  never  ' 
tries  to  shelter  himself  from  any  sort  of  sidlering  if  it  is  necessary  ' 
to  accomplish  his  life-work.  Thus  he  pressed  steadily  on  through  evil 
report  and  good  report,  through  lionour  and  through  dishonour,  enjoying 
the  love  of  the  churches  at  one  time,  and  at  another  time  smarting  under 
a  cruel  suspicion  of  his  apostleship  even  among  his  own  converts  ;  now 
the  hero  of  unbounded  popularity  when  the  people  crowd  to  do  him 
honour,  and  anon  the  vietiiu  of  public  hatred  and  frenzied  riot  when  he 
is  dragged  out  of  the  city  to  be  stoned  to  death.  "  But  none  of  these 
things  move  me,  neither  count  I  my  life  dear  unto  me,"  he  could  well 
say.     He  seemed  as  if  God  had  thrown  him  forth  from  his  hand,  even 


690  HBT&OPOLITAH  TABEKKAOLS   FDLPIT. 

Bs  he  hurls  a  thunderbolt,  and  be  Btayed  not  until  he  reached  IhetDd 

towards  which  the  power  of  GttJ  was  urging  him.  He  cried,  "Tbe 
love  of  Christ  constmineth  us."  He  I'eckoned  himself,  therefore,  dnd 
to  nil  but  Christ.  Wisll  may  we  he  curious  to  know  what  supported  n 
noble  a  man  under  his  trials,  and  developed  such  a  hero  onder  sodii 
succession  of  oppositions.  What  kept  him  so  cahn ;  what  mads  him  N 
self-possessed  and  intrepid  ? 

How  was  it  that  wheu  cast  down  he  was  not  destroyed — tliat  when 
troubled  he  was  not  distressed?  What  sustained  him?  Hepvcsus 
the  hey  to  tliis  furtitude  by  telling  us  that  he  connted  his  afllicticmi 
hght  l>ecause  they  were,  in  nis  estimation,  but  for  a  moment ;  end  they 
were  working  out  for  him  a  far  more  exceeding  and  etemai  wei^  et 
glory.  He  was  calm  and  happy  midst  rage  and  tumult:,  violent  prejudiee, 
and  adverse,  and  even  disastrous,  circumstances,  beoause,  in  the  langoagi 
of  tlie  text,  he  looked  not  at  the  things  which  are  seen,  but  at  &e 
things  wliich  are  im.^cen,  reckoning  that  the  things  which  are  seen 
arc  nut  worth  looking  at,  so  transient  arc  thej,  while  the  things  nnsetii 
are  of  priceless  worth,  becaiise  Hicj  nre  eternal.  That  is  our  mhjiy^. 
at  this  time :  Firstly,  things  not  lu  ha  looked  at ;  and,  aeuuudly,  liaiigt 
to  be  looked  at. 

The  test  wears  the  shape  of  a  double  paradox.  Things  that  can  be 
seen  are,  naturally,  the  things  to  be  looked  at.  What  should  a  man 
look  at  hut  what  he  can  sec  ?  And  yet  tlie  apostle  tells  us  not  to  lodt 
at  the  things  which  are  seen,  but  at  ttie  things  which  are  not  seen. 
How  can  things  invisible  be  looked  at  ?  That  again  is  a  paradox.  How 
can  you  look  at  what  you  cannot  see  ?  This  is  only  one  paradox  of  the 
Christian  hfe,  which  is  all  paradox,  and  the  riddle  lies  rather  in  tlte 
words  than  in  the  sense.  We  shall  soon  discover  that  there  is  na 
contradiction  or  incongruity,  no  difficulty  whatever. 

I.  First,  then,  let  us  1.00K  at  what  cam  be  seen,  and  ask,  whit 
are  we  to  understand  by  this  protest :  "  We  look  nut  at  the  things  whicb 
are  seen"?  The  word  for  "/twA"  is  used,  I  think,  sis  times  in  the  New 
Testament,  and  is  translated  in  four  or  five  different  ways.  I  do  not 
intend  to  keep  to  those  translations,  but  to  work  them  into  the  .explana- 
tion of  what  IS  meant  by  not  lookuig  at  the  things  which  are  seen. 

It  means,  first,  Uyhlli/  culeemiiff  both  presetU  joy  andpre*ent  sorrots,  as 
if  they  were  not  worth  looking  at.  The  present  is  so  soon  to  be  over  that 
Paul  does  not  care  to  look  at  it.  There  is  so  little  of  it,  and  it  lasts  such  s 
brief  time,  that  he  does  not  even  deign  to  give  it  a  glance,  he  looks  not  at  it 
Here  he  is  persecuted,  despised,  forsaken.  "  It  will  not  last  long,'  saith 
he.  "  It  is  but  a  pin's  prick ;  it  will  soon  be  over,  and  I  shall  be  witii 
the  goodiy  fellowsliip  above,  and  behold  my  Master's  ftce."  He  win  not 
look  at  it.  Ue  ignores  it.  Thus  it  behoves  us  to  do  if  surrounded  with 
trials,  troubles,  present  soitows  :  we  should  not  think  so  much  of  thenraa 
to  fix  our  attention,  or  rivet  our  gaze  on  them.  Rather  let  us  treat  them 
with  indifference  and  say, "  It  is  really  a  very  smiUI  matter  whether  I  am 
in  wealth  or  in  poverty,  in  health  or  in  sickness  ;  whether  I  am  enjoying 
conifoi-te  or  whether  I  am  robbed  of  them.  The  present  will  be  so  soon 
gone  that  I  do  not  care  to  look  at  it.  I  am  like  a  man  who  stays  at  an 
hostelry  for  a  night  whilst  he  is  on  a  journey.  Is  the  room  uncomfort- 
able ?   When  the  morning  breaks  it  is  of  uo  luto  making  a  complauit,  and 


VANITIES  AND  VBRITIBS.  691 

SO  he  merely  chronicles  the  fact,  and  hastens  on.  He  says  to  himself, 
**  Never  mind,  I  am  up  and  away  directly ;  it  is  of  no  use  fretting  about 
trifles."  If  a  person  is  going  a  long  distance  in  a  railway  carriage, 
he  may  be  a  little  particular  as  to  where  he  shall  sit  to  see  the  country, 
and  as  to  which  w^ay  he  Ukes  to  ride  ;  but  if  it  is  only  a  short  stage — 
^  between,  say,  the  Borough  Road  and  the  Elephant  and  Castle — he  does 
not  think  about  it.  He  does  not  care  in  whose  company  he  may  be,  it  is 
only  for  a  few  minutes ;  he  is  hardly  in  before  he  is  out  again,  it  is  a 
matter  not  worth  thinking  about.  That  is  how  the  apostle  regarded  it. 
He  reckoned  that  his  present  joys  and  present  sorrows  were  so  soon  to  be 
over  that  they  were  to  him  a  matter  of  indifference,  not  even  worth 
listing  his  eye  that  way  to  see  what  they  were.  "  Doth  Jesus  bid  me 
go  to  Kome  ?  "  says  the  apostle.  "  Then  I  do  not  look  to  see  whether  I 
shall  be  housed  in  Nero's  hall  or  ca^ed  in  Nero's  dungeon.  It  is  for  so 
short  a  while  that  if  I  can  serve  my  Master  better  in  the  dungeon  than  I 
can  in  the  palace,  so  let  it  be.  My  casual  lot  shall  be  my  well-con- 
tented choice.  It  shall  be  a  matter,  if  not  of  cool  indifference,  yet  still 
of  calm  serenity,  for  it  will  be  soon  over,  and  gone  into  history.  A 
whole  eternity  lies  beyond,  and  therefore  a  short  temporality  dwindles  into 
an  insignificant  trifle."  What  a  blessed  philosophy  this  is  which  teaches 
lis  not  even  to  look  at  passing,  transient  troubles,  but  to  fix  our  gaze  on 
eternal  triumphs. 

He  meant  more  than  that,  however.  He  meant  that  he  had  learned 
not  to  regard  the  things  of  the  present  as  if  they  were  at  all  real.  He 
did  not  look  upon  them  as  substantial  or  enduring.  Like  as  clouds 
when  they  float  overhead  assume  divers  shapes  but  change  their  form 
while  we  are  gazing  at  them,  so  events  as  they  seemed  to  be  transpiring 
were  to  him  no  more  than  apparitions.  When  a  man  looks  on  a  dis- 
solving view,  knowing  that  it  is  going  to  dissolve,  he  does  not  regard  it 
as  being  other  than  an  illusion.  It  is  a  shadow  cast  upon  a  sheet,  there 
is  nothing  substantial  in  it.  It  may  please  his  eye,  but  he  will  say, 
"  The  subject  upon  the  sheet  is  not  the  real  thing.  The  view  before 
me  is  not  the  scene  itself,  and  if  I  turn  my  eyes  away  from  it,  it  will  have 
melted  away  into  nothingness  in  a  little  while,  so  for  all  its  charms  or  its 
terrors  I  ^ill  not  fret  myself"  You  know  how  Paul  explains  his  own 
words  in  another  passage  when  he  says,  "  Bretlu'en,  the  time  is  short : 
-It  remaineth,  that  both  they  that  have  ^vives  be  as  though  they  had  none ; 
and  they  that  weep,  as  though  they  wept  not ;  and  they  that  rejoice,  as 
though  they  rejoiced  not ;  and  they  that  buy,  as  though  they  possessed  not ; 
and  they  that  use  this  world,  as  not  abusing  it :  for  the  fashion  of  this 
world  passeth  away."  That  is  so  with  the  earthly  joy  of  the  best  of 
men.  He  should  say  to  himself,  "  This  is  a  dying  joy ;  this  will  pass 
aw^ay ;  1  look  at  it  as  a  shadow."  Is  a  child  bom  into  your  house  ? 
Read  across  its  brow  the  word  "  Mortal,"  and  when  it  dies  you  will  not 
be  disappointed  or  be  anything  like  so  sad  as  if  you  dreamed  that  you  were 
parent  of  an  immortal :  such  a  thought  7nust  be  a  dream,  since  your  Uttle 
one  may  be  taken  from  you  as  well  as  the  child  of  another.  "When  you 
have  riches  do  you  say  to  yourself,  "  This  is  a  sohd  treasure ;  this  is  golden 
gain"  ?  All,  then  it  will  be  your  god,  and  if  you  lose  it  the  loss  will  eat 
nke  a  canker  into  your  spirit.  But  if  you  s^, "  These  are  fleeting  things ; 
they  take  to  themselves  wings  and  fly  away ;  I  will  not  consider  money  to  bo 


51(2  UETIIOPOLITAN  TABBliMACLE  PtfLPrT. 

treasure,  hut  only  look  upon  it  as  a  Bli.-idow  and  hold  it  as  anch — u  l 
thing  not  to  be  reckoned  with  Bubstaucoa.  Ijccause  it  is  seen  and  lera- 
pornl " — that  is  the  ivay  to  do  with  evtry  oiig  of  our  joys.  Do  not  I'lot 
upon  them  as  though  they  were  substantial,  for  they  are  not.  They  m 
R  part  of  this  life-dream,  this  empty  show :  they  are  nothing  more  at  thcii 
very  Iwst  Oh,  how  often  do  they  prove  to  oa,  paiiifally.  that  the; 
arc  nnsnbstantial !  Look  in  the  same  way  upon  your  cirtminstances,  Saj. 
I  "  Well,  I  am  in  poverty,  but  this  is  not  real  poverty,  'because  it  is  not 
lasting  poverty.  In  a  ^ort  time  I  shall  be  among  the  angeU  and  nalk 
the  streets  of  gold,  and  be  as  bravely  clad  as  any  prince  among  them; 
therefore  will  I  not  fret  and  worry,  smce  my  poverty  will  soon  be  over." 
Aught  of  loss  or  suffering  that  you  are  called  upon  to  endnre,  always  look 
upon  it  in  the  light  of  time,  and  see  what  a  Qecting  thing  it  i&,  and  bear 
it  bravely  like  a  man — nay,  h"ke  a  ChriBtian  man — because  you  have  in 
heaven  a  better  and  an  enduring  substance.  Those  transient  thin^  are 
not  wortliy  to  be  considered.  Look  nptm  them  as  if  they  were  jait 
nothing  at  all.    So  the  apostle  did. 

Again,  I  find  the  word  sometimes  translated  "wwri."  "Brethren," 
saith  the  apostle,  "mark  them  that  are  unruly."  The  word  is  the  euk 
as  that  which  is  here  rendered  "look."  Dear  friends,  we  are  not  torouk 
the  things  which  are  seen  as  if  they  were  worth  notice.  You  know 
that  little  children,  if  you  give  them  a  new  toy,  or  a  new  frock,  clap  their 
Iiands  and  otherwise  espress  their  delight.  That  is  because  they  are  chil- 
dren. Be  not  children  in  knowledge,  but  quit  yourselves  as  men :  and  as  to 
the  tilings  of  this  life,  look  on  them  as  toys.  Do  not  act  towards  them 
as  children  do,  but  as  men.  "  Oh,"  says  the_  young  man,  "  I  have  taken 
my  degree  at  the  university  to-day."  How  he  exults.  What  high  im- 
portance he  attaches  to  it.  He  wishes  to  get  the  newspaper  to  Ecc  if  it 
IB  recorded  there.  It  is  to  him  an  event  as  great  as  anything  in  hiah^. 
We  perad venture  are  rather  amused  at  his  excitement,  for  we  do  not  con- 
sider anything  of  this  sort  much  worthy  of  marking  down.  Another  nun 
finds  that  he  has  made  some  considerable  gain,  and  he,  too,  reckon* 
as  a  red  letter  day  the  day  in  which  he  seized  these  accessions  to  hii 
fortune.  If  thou  art  doing  bo  thou  art  making  sorrow  for  thyself,  for  as 
surely  na  joy  becomes  too  sweet  sorrow  will  become  too  bitter.  If  I 
care  nothing  whatever  for  man's  approbation,  I  reck  little  of  man's 
disapprobation :  one  ggtteth  to  be  brave  in  that  way.  It  is  not  good  to  be 
much  elated  or  much  depressed  by  the  joys  and  sorrows  of  life.  If  yon 
arc  overjoyed,  if  you  mark  down  certain  matters  ss  the  very  essence  of 
happiness,  and  begin  to  exult  and  revel  in  the  things  which  are  seen,  then, 
mark  you,  when  the  untoward  things  come  to  you  and  blight  your  hopra, 
you  will  find  that  you  have  rendered  yourself  too  sensitive,  and  yon  nill 
fcel  the  smart  far  more  keenly  than  you  would  have  done  if  you  had 
exercised  wisdom  enough  to  forbear  revelling  In  the  sweet*.  Look  at 
the  wasps  and  flies  in  suimner.  They  will  sec  placed  for  them  by  your 
kindness  sweet  liquor  in  which  to  catch  them  :  sugar  or  honey  is  em- 
ployed to  hold  their  wings.  The  wise  fly  sips  a  little  and  away,  but  the 
unirise  insect  enjoys  the  sweet  and  wades  in  farther  and  farther  till  he  cl^ 
his  wings,  and  he  it  is  who  mil  suffer  when  you  come  to  destroy  your  prey. 
It  is  a  blessed  thing  to  be  able  to  sip  of  this  world,  and  no  more, 
for  to  plunge  into  it  is  death.     Avoid  the  sweets  of  this  world  when 


VANITIES  AND  VERITIES.  598 

they  begin  to  tempt  thee.  Say  of  tliem,  as  Solomon  did  of  wine — 
"  Look  not  upon  it  when  it  is  red,  when  it  giveth  its  colour  in  the  cup, 
when  it  moveth  itself  aright,  for  who  hath  woe,  who  hath  sorrow,  who 
hath  contention,  who  hath  babbling,  who  hath  wounds  without  cause,  who 
hath  redness  of  eyes?*'  Surely  tlie  men  who  make  this  world  to  be 
their  highest  joy  find  at  the  la^^t  it  biteth  like  a  serpent  and  stingeth 
as  an  adder.  They  indulge  their  passions  to  the  destruction  of  their 
Bouls.     Do  not,  therefore,  mark  carnal  joy  as  sixicially  to  be  desired. 

But  are  we  never  to  have  anything  special  to  mark  ?  Oh  yes  ;  care- 
fully mark  down  the  eternal  things.  Did  the  Lord  appear  to  you? 
Mark  that  down.  Did  yon  win  a  soul  to  Christ  ?  [Mark  that  down. 
Did  you  have  sweet  answers  to  prayer  ?  Mark  that  down.  Those  are 
things  of  special  note,  as  I  am  quite  sure  Paul  thought.  Though  he  would 
not  say  much  about  the  discomforts  of  the  dungeon  of  the  Pra3torium,  he 
marked  down  its  consolations.  AMien  Onesimus  came  to  hear  him,  he 
made  a  note  of  it.  It  did  not  matter  to  him  whether  he  was  assailed  with 
stones  or  surrounded  with  applause.  Whether  he  lodged  in  a  palace 
or  slept,  in  a  prison  was  to  him  no  more  than  the  incident,  or  say  but 
the  accident,  of  the  hour;  he  made  no  accoimt  of  such  tri\ialities. 
He  never  marked  those  things  down :  the  eternal  was  what  he  marked, 
but  not  the  transient. 

Another  meaning  is,  take  heed.  You  must  put  all  the  translations 
together  to  get  the  meaning.  In  the  gospel  according  to  Luke  this  word 
is  translated,  "  Take  heed."  The  apostle  meant,  no  doubt,  that  he  did 
not  take  heed  of  the  things  which  were  seen.  He  did  not  exercise  care, 
thought,  and  anxiety  about  them ;  but  his  care,  thought,  and  anxiety 
were  about  the  things  which  are  not  seen.  "After  all  these  things,"  says 
Christ,  "  do  the  Gentiles  seek."  So  they  do.  They  are  always  seeking 
after  the  world ;  from  early  moniing  till  late  at  night  it  is  the  world  they 
are  after.  Well,  let  the  Gentiles  follow  their  pursuits ;  but  the  child  of 
God  should  not,  for  our  Lord  says  unto  us,  "  Talvc  no  thought  for  your 
life,  what  ye  shall  eat  or  what  ye  shall  drink,  or  wherewithal  ye  shall  be 
clothed."  He  bids  us  cast  our  care  upon  him,  and  cease  from  all  anxiety. 
"Seek  ye,"  says  he,  "first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  righteousness, 
and  all  these  things  shall  be  added  mi  to  you."  So  the  apostle  Paul  tells 
us  not  to  care,  not  to  wony  or  trouble  ourselves  about  things  which 
are  seen,  whether  good  or  bad,  prosperous  or  adverse — never  suJQTering 
them  to  eat  like  a  corrosive  acid  into  our  spirit.  We  are  to  spend  all  our 
heed  upon  our  walk  with  God,  our  obedience  to  his  conuuand,  our  ful- 
filling his  \rill,  our  spreading  his  kingdom,  our  getting  ready  for  tlie 
coming  of  Christ,  our  being  prepared  for  judgment,  our  being  prepared 
to  dwell  eternally  with  God  at  his  right  hand.  About  tlicse  we 
ought  to  take  heed.  This  is  our  business,  but,  alas,  our  thoughts 
naturally  drift  the  other  way.  These  temporalities  are  wont  to  absorb  us. ' 
There  are  some  who  not  only  apologise  fur  themselves,  but  justify  their 
worldly-mindedness.  Fitly,  therefore,  duth  the  Lord  Jesus  Clirist,  by 
the  moutli  of  his  apostle,  recall  our  thoudits  ii'om  grovelling  tkemes, 
and  bid  us  take  heed  of  the  eternal,  and  let  the  secular  sit  lightly  on 
our  minds. 

Paul  in  the  epistle  to  the  Galatians  uses  the  word  in  the  sense  of  con- 
sidering,  "considering  thyself  lest  thou  also  be  tempted,"    We  shall 


IM  UETKO?OUTAH  TABBUIAOLl  PULFIT. 

'  diTB  still  more  daeplj  into  the  menniBg  if  we  underBtand  bow  is  oertain 
Gonditions,  the  present,  the  transieBt,  the  things  moBt  palpable  to  the 
senBes  are  properly  left  ont  of  &U  coiunderation,  and  not  hucen  into  Ute 
reckoning.  For  inBtance,  if  the  qtoetle  knew  that  be  ebonld  glori^ 
God  hy  preaching  the  goapel,  what  would  it  matter  to  him  if  friend  or 
foe  Bhould  say  to  him,  "Paul,  von  will  risk  your  life  \fj  attempting  to 
doso"?  'Live  or  die,  he  woula  be  bold  to  preach.  He  never  took  Qieir 
caveat  into  his  consideration.  And  if  ther  n&d  said,  "  If  yon  state  anch 
and  such  a  truth,  or  administer  such  and  such  a  reproof  in  a  oertain 
chnrch,  you  will  be  sure  to  lose  their  respect :  you  will  lose  caste  among 
them,"  again  hewoald  have  smiled.  Itwoald  have  had  no  moreinflnenoe 
npon  him  than  it  would  have  upon  a  merchant  should  yon  say  to  him, 
"If  you  go  into  such  a  district  you  will  have  to  enconnter  clouds  of 
dust. '  He  would  reply  "  Why,  if  I  can  nett  a  thousand  pounds 
what  do  I  care  about  dust  or  no  dust."  If  it  be  my  object  to  ascend  a 
mountain,  am  I  to  be  deterred  by  a  few  cobwebs  across  my  path? 
What  are  tiny  obstacles  to  a  strong  man  ?  So  Paul  did  not  consider 
the  things  which  are  seen  to  be  worth  a  thought,  though  there  be  puny 
fblk  who  value  nothing  else.  The  cost  to  him  seemed  so  little,  that  he 
would  let  it  go  into  the  scale  or  not,  as  men  pleased.  "  I  reckon  that 
these  hght  afflictions,  which  are  but  for  a  moment,  an  not  worthy  to  be 
compared  with  the  glory  which  shall  be  revealed  in  ns." 

Are  you  not  sometimes  placed  in  this  position  P  You  know  yon  ought 
to  do  right,  bnt  you  fear  that  if  you  do  so  you  will  lose  your  situation. 
Well,  now,  if  God's  cause  be  uppermost  in  yonr  estimation  yon  will  not 
consider  your  loss  as  the  firat  matter.  You  will  rather  say,  "  I  can  lose 
anything  sooner  than  lose  peace  of  mind,  and  miss  pleasing  God."  Or 
there  is  some  duty  which  yon  know  you  ought  to  perform,  and  you  are 
told,  "Well,  if  you  do  that  you  will  lose  your  old  uncle's  love.  He  will 
strike  you  ont  of  hia  will.  You  must  think  about  it."  What  ie  the  use 
of  thinking  about  it  ?  It  is  only  an  earthly,  transient  t^ing ;  and  what 
are  these  transient  things,  be  they  what  they  may,  compared  with  the 
et«mal  weight  of  glory  ?  0  brothers,  if  men  hved  in  the  light  of  eter- 
nity, and  judged  their  position  accordingly,  bow  differently  woold  they 
act.  Bnt  instead  of  so  doing  we  begin  weighing  those  trifies  which  we 
may  have  to  endure  for  Christ's  sake,  and  making  much  of  them.  This 
is  playing  the  traitor  to  Christ,  and  foraaking  bim  when  we  ought  to  be 
most  firm.  Shame  upon  ns  if  we  thus  requite  our  Lord.  Eternal  con- 
tempt awaits  such  cowards.  From  this  time  forth  may  we  never  look 
npon  the  things  which  are  seen  as  substantial,  but  put  them  down  as 
vanity,  and  let  the  things  which  are  not  seen  rise  before  us  in  all  their 
supremacy  of  value. 

Perhaps  you  roa^  get  a  still  dearer  perception  of  the  meaning  of  tiie 
text  if  1 1^  yon  ita  full  interpretation.  By  "not  looking  at  the  things 
whicb  are  seen  "  we  may  understand  twt  making  them  otir  scope.  That 
is  the  nearest  EngUsh  word  I  can  find  to  interpret  the  Greek,  Let  not 
these  visible  objects  be  the  scope  of  your  life  ;  for,  alas,  there  are  many 
whose  whole  scope  of  life  is  that  they  may  prosper  ia  this  world.  The  next 
world  may  go  as  it  wills;  their  scope  ends  here.  To  win  the  esteem  of 
Oodseemsatrifle  to  them.  That  th^  may  live  at  esse,  enjoy  the  comfbrti, 
and,  if  possible,  the  luxuries  of  this  life,  is  their  sole  aim  and  object 


VANITIES  AND  VERITIES.  896 

As  for  the  eternal  things  of  heaven  they  seem  dim  and  nnsnbstantial. 
Kow,  it  must  not  be  so  with  us.  We  should  say,  "The  things  eternal 
I  pursue.  I  am  no  more  a  citizen  of  this  world,  but  a  pilgrim 
bound  for  tlie  celestial  city.  When  I  passed  through  Vanity  Fair,  they 
asked  me  to  buy  this  and  that,  and  I  said,  '  I  buy  the  truth.'  I  must 
go  through  tlic  Enchanted  Ground,  but  I  will  not  sleep  there,  for  this  is  not 
n\j  rest.  Whatever  I  see  which  is  enchanting  to  others  shall  have  no 
power  over  me,  for  the  scope  of  my  soul's  desire  and  life-work  is  eternity." 
Would  God  we  all  had  invisible  joys  for  our  object. 

To  smn  up  the  whole,  my  dear  brothers  and  sisters  in  Christ,  look  not 
at  the  things  which  are  seen.  Do  not  look  upon  your  comforts  as  if 
they  were  enduring.  Do  not  dote  upon  them.  Do  not  think  of  them  as 
if  you  had  them  otherwise  than  on  loan,  or  as  if  you  had  any  right  to 
them.  Be  thankful  to  God  for  them ;  but,  because  they  will  so  soon 
pass  away,  do  not  set  much  store  by  them.  Build  not  your  nest 
on  any  of  these  trees,  for  they  are  all  marked  for  the  axe,  and  ere  long 
they  "will  all  come  down.  Say  not  of  any  mortal  man,  or  woman,  or 
dear  child,  or  worldly  possession,  or  knowledge,  or  pursuit,  or  honour, 
"  This  is  much  to  me."  Let  it  be  little  to  you.  Put  the  gifts  of  God 
far  down  in  the  scale  compared  with  himself.  Try,  when  you  have  your 
comforts,  to  find  God  in  all  5  and,  when  you  lose  your  comforts,  then 
just  change  the  words,  and  try  to  find  all  in  God  ;  for,  remember,  "  Man 
shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of 
the  mouth  of  God  shall  man  live." 

You  have  not  to  live  on  the  creature  comfort :  you  are  bound  to  live 
on  the  living  word  of  the  hving  God,  and  you  vdU  never  be  fully  happy 
until  you  do  this.  A  man  who  goes  to  a  town  and  chooses  a  house  that 
is  dilapidated — the  foundations  gone  and  the  beams  decayed — may  say, 
"  Tliis  is  a  very  comfortable  house."  But  ymi  would  not  think  so  highly 
of  its  charms.  "  Nay,"  you  would  be  ready  to  say,  "  I  cannot  be  com- 
fortable in  it.  The  lich  hangings  and  costly  furniture  do  not  hide  the 
serious  defects :  it  may  come  do^vn  at  any  time  about  the  heads  of  the 
6lcepci*s.  This  is  not  a  house  for  me."  You  know  this  is  the  case  in 
daily  hfe  and  common  experience.  Well,  it  is  just  similar  with  regard 
to  the  things  eternal.  Say  therefore  to  yourself,  "  I  must  repose  my  soul 
upon  that  which  is  true,  real,  well-founded,  and  imperishable :  earthly 
things  are  too  transient  to  afford  me  any  solace  or  security.  I  dare  not 
set  my  soul  upon  them.  I  cannot  drink  water  out  of  these  broken 
cisterns,  I  must  go  to  the  fountain  whence  all  satisfying,  trustworthy 
supphes  flow." 

You  must  do  the  same  with  regard  to  your  sorrows :  although  it  looks 
rather  hard,  yet  it  is  the  wiser  way  to  take  them  cheerfully,  rather  than  to 
exaggerate  their  weight  by  murmuring  at  them.  If  a  man  has  gi*ace  to 
live  above  his  joys,  that  same  grace  will  enable  him  to  hve  above  his 
sorrows.  As  I  said  just  now,  when  earthly  joys  enchant  you  too  much, 
then  should  earthly  sorrows  overtake  you  they  will  make  you  sorely 
despond.  Your  wisdom  is  to  live  above  them  both,  above  the  glee 
of  prosperity  and  the  gloom  of  adversity.  Dear  brother,  what  ails 
you  ?  have  you  lost  a  child  ?  Lost !  Why,  you  will  be  where  that  dear 
one  is  within  so  incredibly  short  a  time,  that  you  need  not  worry  and 
fret.    Coming  down  from  such  a  domestic  grief  as  that  to  a  commercial 


6d6  uBTiiOFOLrrAS  tabebhaclb  pulpit. 

anziet? :  you  have  had  a  sad  loss  in  the  City,  have  yon  ?  Some  of  your 
comforts  will  be  cnrtailed.  But  if  you  get  nearer  to  the  heart  of  your 
Lord,  and  lore  him  better,  and  walk  in  the  light  of  his  conntcnance 
more  than  yon  did,  you  will  never  know  you  had  a  loss.  Ton  will  be  so 
much  richer  in  the  fine  ^Id  of  his  com&rt,  that  yon  will  scarcely  miss 
tiie  silver  of  this  poor  worn. 

And  so,  too,  if  yon  lose  credit,  or  are  discooutenanced  by  old  friends, 
or  are  deprived  of  aught  which  men  are  wont  to  make  great  account  of 
here  below ;  if  you  do  Dut  remember  that  it  was  only  a  bubble,  and  it  has 
burst,  you  w^  not  be  broken-hearted.  Say,  "It  never  was  more  tiian 
a  bubble,  and  I  ought  to  have  known  that  it  would  soon  be  gone.  The 
comfort  I  had  was  never  anything  but  a  temporary  loan,  and  I  ought  to 
have  remembered  that  it  was  borrowed."  If  you  get  into  that  mind  yon 
will  live  above  the  cares  of  this  life.    May  God  help  you  bo  to  do. 

II.    Now  for  a  few  nunutes  let  us  address  ourselves  to  the  second 

Soint — LOOKINQ  AT  THE  THlfiQS  WBICH  ABE  KOT  BSBS.      HoW  Caa  We 
0  th^? 

Well,  first,  realize  lAan  hy  faith.  We  believe  in  the  'resorrectioa  of 
the  dead,  and  in  the  judgment,  and  in  life  everlasting,  according  to 
the  teaching  of  the  word  of  God.  Try  to  look  at  these  things— to 
look  at  them  as  present  fects.  Some  will  never  do  so.  They  will  toll 
you  that  they  could  not  see  them  if  they  tried ;  but  that  is  jnat  what 
we,  who  have  been  taught  of  God  so  to  look  at  the  things  which  an 
not  seen,  can  palpably  discern.  Oh,  to  look  beyond  death  to  "the  home 
over  there,"  beyond  the  swelling  flood  where  soiils  that  were  loved  of  God 
from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world  are  safe  with  Jesus,  I  invite 
you  to  do  so,  especially  if  yon  have  some  dear  ones  there.  Do  yoa  see 
them  ?  Do  you  hear  their  music  ?  Do  you  behold  their  joys  ?  An 
you  going  to  be  troubled  about  them  any  longer  after  having  realized  thetc 
certain  happiness  P  By-and-by  thero  cometh  the  resurrection,  and  the 
trumpet  shall  sound,  and  the  dead  shall  be  raised.  The  very  body  over  whidi 
you  wept  because  it  was  to  be  given  to  the  worm  ahall  rise  in  matchless 
beauty  in  the  likeness  of  ita  Loni.  Will  you  not  wipe  your  eyes  dry  now 
and  submit  to  the  divine  will,  tor  surely  the  hope  of  the  blessed  resur- 
rection makes  amends  for  the  loss  by  death  ?  Then  there  is  to  come  the 
ju^ment,  and  you  and  I  will  be  thero.  A  soldier,  some  time  ago,  was  in 
the  valley  of  Jehoehnphat,  where,  according  to  tradition,  the  feet  of  the 
Messiah  will  rest  in  the  day  of  judgment,  and  he  sat  on  a  stone  and  said, 
"  And  shall  we  all  be  present  ?  I  will  sit  here  in  that  day."  And  there, 
iibsorbcd  with  the  thought,  he  looked  up  to  the  sky,  and  so  distinctly  did 
he  realize  tlie  majestic  vision  of  the  day  of  judgment,  that  he  &1I  to  the 
groimd  in  amazement,  obUvious  of  everything  that  was  transpiring  around 
him.  Ah,  if  all  of  UB  were  living  in  the  light  of  the  day  of  the  Lord,  wimt 
trifles  these  ebbs  and  flows,  these  ups  and  downs  of  passing  circumstances 
would  £cem !  How  lightly  we  should  bear  sorrow,  and  how  little  we 
should  i-eck  of  earthly  ibrtuucs  and  misfortunes  if  we  conlJ  actually  fore- 
cast the  tremendous  day  when  with  angels  for  witnesses  and  Christ  for  our 
judge  we  shall  have  to  stand  and  be  judged  according  to  the  things  done 
in  the  body.  Beahze  heaven,  brothers  and  sisters — the  heaven  of  Um 
perfected  manhood  afler  the  resurrection — the  heaven  where  we  shall  see 
the  Beloved's  bee,  and  day  and  night  extol  him  for  ever.    Oh,  what  is 


VANITIES  AND   VERITIES.  597 

it  to  be  poor  ?  AYliafc  is  it  to  be  sick  ?  What  would  it  be  to  cfo 
through  a  thousaiid  dcatlis  if  we  may  but  at  last  behold  his  glory,  world 
without  end  ?  And  think  of  hell,  ye  that  forget  God  and  revel  in  Vanities; 
as  yonr  trembling  spirit  best  may,  think  what  it  must  be  to  be  driven  ft-oni 
his  presence — to  hear  him  say,  "Depart,  ye  cursed,  into  everlasting 
fire  in  hell."  Ah !  gilded  world,  how  thou  dost  lose  thy  histre  when 
once  I  see  the  lurid  glare  of  Tophet !  0  painted  harlot,  how  I  see 
thy  haggard  ugliness,  when  I  hear  the  weeping  and  wailing  and 
gnashing  of  teeth  of  those  who  chose  the  broad  road  and  let  the  Lord  the 
Saviour  go !  How  I  despise  thee !  As  the  vision  opens  before  the  eyes  of 
faith  what  zeal  it  kindles  in  my  breast !  Would  to  God  I  could  induce  some 
careless  person  here,  who  nevertheless  does  believe  the  Scriptures,  to  sit 
down,  if  it  were  but  for  one  half-hour  and  try,  believingly,  to  picture  these 
things  to  his  mind's  eye.  This  sacred  volume  is  fiill  of  pictures ;  pictures 
of  tMngs  that  shall  shortly  come  to  pass.  Oh  that  ye  had  the  discernment 
to  see  them,  not  as  weird  fancies,  but  as  veritable  facts ;  the  true  sayings  of 
God.  The  real  thing  is  what  you  do  not  see  to  be  real.  The  fiction  is 
that  which  you  account  a  solid  fact.  We  are  going  down  each  one  of  us  to 
the  grave,  but  God  liveth  for  ever  and  ever.  As  for  that  body  of  yours 
in  which  you  are  sitting  in  this  house,  it  is  not  a  substance  which 
shall  abide,  but  it  is  a  shadow  which  shall  dissolve,  mouldering  into 
dust,  and  exhaling  into  water.  Yet  there  lives  within  you  what  you 
cannot  see — the  real  and  true  self ;  and  that  true  self  of  yours  wiU  pass 
into  another  state,  and  through  it  into  yet  another,  which  shall  be  ever- 
lasting. And,  oh,  may  God  grant  thftt  your  lot  may  not  be  everlasting 
sorrow,  but  endless  joy.  In  either  case  the  things  which  are  not  seen  are 
eternal.  Gird  up  your  loins  and  look  at  them  hke  a  man  who  will 
have  ere  long  to  dispel  the  illusions  of  sense  and  cwifront  the  verities 
of  eternity,  w^hether  he  will  or  no. 

The  Christian  learns  to  look  on  these  ihin/js  with  the  eye  of  delight. 
Is  it  not  to  you,  my  dear  brother  in  Christ,  a  dehght  to  see  God  ?  I 
should  not  hke  to  go  to  any  place  where  I  could  not  see  my  God.  Yet 
he  is  not  seen.  Is  it  not  a  delicious  thing  to  look  forward  to  the  heaven 
that  is  above — to  the  city  of  the  blest?  When  the  Lord  indulges  our 
faith  with  a  view  of  that  eternal  joy — and  some  of  us  have  known 
what  it  is — it  has  been  too  much  for  our  weak  capacity.  We  can 
laugh  in  our  sleep  when  we  dream  of  heaven,  and  we  can  sit  down 
in  the  midst  of  pain  and  sorrow  and  feel  as  if  we  could  not  feel  more 
joy  than  we  possess,  because  our  souls  have  looked  on  the  pinnacles  of 
our  Father's  palace,  and  seen  the  gleaming  radiance  of  the  twelve 
bejewelled  foundations  of  the  eternal  city  where  there  is  a  house  and  a 
crown  and  a  harp  for  every  believer  among  us.  The  poor  girl  who  goes 
home  from  this  joyous  place  of  worship  to  her  own  little  cheerless  room 
would  feel  miserable  indeed  if  she  looked  at  the  shady  side  of  her 
condition ;  but  she  says,  "  My  Lord  is  in  this  room,"  and  the  place  glows 
as  if  it  were  made  of  slabs  of  gold.  She  settles  down  and  begins  to 
think  of  the  heaven  that  is  hers,  and  she  sees  herself  to  be  a  king's 
daughter,  a  true  princess,  for  she  possesses  in  the  glory-land  a  crown 
that  no  head  can  wear  but  hers,  and  there  is  a  mansion  pro\ided  for 
her  which  none  can  tenant  but  herself;  happy,  therefore,  she  well 
may  be.    0  beloved  friends,  learn  to  look  at  these  things  with  intense 


698  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

delight,  because  they  are  onra  in  rererHon  now,  and  are  soon  to  be  onn  in 
possefision. 

On  the  other  hand,  if  yrni  are  not  converted,  I  wonld  nr<re  vnn  t"  Wk 
upon  the  eternal  future — for  it  ia  all  eternal — with  an  idt'ii-r  ilvf:!il.  fir 
without  OhriBt  what  is  there  for  jva  among  the  things  which  are  not 
Been,  and  are  eternal,  but  that  whi^  will  make  jon  wring  yonr  hands  foi 
poignant  grief  and  gnash  yonr  teeth  for  bitter  self-reproach  if  you  are 
lesolved  to  live  and  to  die  as  yon  now  are  ?  You  see  not  yet  the  foture 
state  of  woe,  but  like  all  the  unseen  things  it  is  eternal.  There  can  be 
no  termination  to  the  miseiy  of  an  immortal  soul  when  once  baoished 
from  God.  I  see  no  "larger  hope"  revealed  in  Scripture.  Let  my 
phOoBophical  brethren  conjecture  what  they  will,  where  God  speaks  not  I 
am  dlent :  bat  I  do  see  the  dread  forebodings  of  a  death  that  never  dies 
and  a  fire  that  is  never  quenched.  I  would  have  every  man  who  will  not 
have  Christ,  or  who  dilly-daUies  with  salvation  and  runs  risks  with  his 
soul,  to  look  at  what  he  risks.  Face  your  ftiture,  0  you  who  choose  yonr 
own  destruction  I  That  was  a  solemn  morning's  work  for  Abraham  when 
he  went  to  the  place  where  he  was  wont  to  meet  with  God,  and  he  looked 
towards  Sodom,  and  he  saw  the  smoke  thereof  going  up  as  the  smoln 
of  a  fomaoe.  0  Ghrietians,  yon  do  well  sometimes  to  look  that  way. 
Snoh  a  contemplation  is  not  pleasant  to  flesh  and  blood.  No,  bnt  it  will 
do  you  ^ood  and  make  you  ftel  fervent  emotions  of  gratitude  for  yonr  own 
redemption,  and  intense  desires  for  the  salvation  of  others.  But  come 
thoa  here,  sinner  I  Gome  thon  here !  I  must  have  thee  here.  Look, 
dost  thou  see  it?  Dost  thou  see  it — the  smoke  of  the  Same  which 
bumeth  for  ever  and  ever  ?  That  flame  is  for  thy  burning  if  thou  repent 
not.  Dost  thou  see  it  as  it  reddens  the  heavens?  That  fire  bums  for 
thee  if  thon  believest  not  ia  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Wilt  thon  not  look? 
If  thou  wilt  not,  thou  wOt  have  to  ftel  it.  Thon  canst  not  mitig^ 
those  woes  by  reusing  to  beUeve  in  their  existence.  It  is  the  silly  trick 
of  the  ostrich,  so  they  say,  when  the  hunter  pursues  it,  to  burrow  its  head 
in  Gx  sand  and  fancy  itself  safe;  and  this  is  what  yon  are  doing,  wiUi 
more  than  equid  folly.  I  wonld  faia  recall  yon  to  reason.  Look  at  the 
things  which  are  not  seen,  for  they  are  eternal.  I  met  with  a  remark  the 
other  day  which  stmck  me  forcibly, — If  a  man  had  no  worse  pain  than 
the  toothache,  if  he  knew  that  it  would  last  for  ever,  he  wonld  desire  to 
die  that  he  might  escape  from  it.    When  we  have  to  endure  any  acnte 

r'  a  for  a  little  while  we  begin  to  cry  out  for  rehef,  and  find  it  hard  to 
quiet,  but  were  any  pang  to  last  eternally,  the  horror  of  such  an  ex- 
pectation would  even  now  be  overwhelming!  By  the  dread  thought  of 
eternity  I  implore  you  see  to  it,  that  your  salvation  is  secured  at  once. 
Escape  for  thy  Ufe,  my  friend,  and  look  not  behind  thee,  for  unless  thon 
escape  in  time  thy  fete  will  be  sealed  for  ever  and  ever.  Those  things 
which  are  not  seen  are  eternal,  and  hell  is  one  of  them.  Except  thou 
escape  now  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  thou  never  nilt  escape.  There  is  no 
repneve  nor  rec^ite  in  the  world  to  come ;  pardon  therefoi-e  should  be 
sought  at  once. 

By  looking  into  the  things  which  are  not  seen,  Paul  doubtless  meaid 
that  fu  looked  to  fhsm  teilA  hope.  To  his  view  the  harvest  was  ripe, 
and  he  was  eagst  to  Tcap  it.  I  invito  all  believers  to  be  lookitw;  witb 
ardent  hope  ^  the  things  that  are  eternal.    Long  for  tlu  bright  ap- 


VANITIES  AND  VERITIES.  699 

pearing  of  the  Lord.  Long  for  your  translation  unto  the  city  of  glory. 
jExpect  it :  watch  for  it.  It  is  on  the  way.  You  may  be  much  nearer 
than  you  think.  You  may  be  in  heaven  before  next  year ;  indeed,  you 
may  be  there  before  to-morrow  morning.  Light  is  fading  from  the  earth. 
Dear  friend,  look  towards  heaven.  Look  towards  eternal  things.  Make 
it  a  point  to  look  unto  thy  future  home.  Should  there  be  any  young 
man  here  who  is  not  twenty-one,  and  he  knows  that  when  he  comes 
of  age  he  is  to  be  squire  of  a  village,  own  a  park,  and  enjoy  a  rich 
heritage,  I  will  be  bound  to  say  he  has  often  forestalled  the  time  because 
he  is  sure  of  his  title.  If  any  one  of  you  had  a  legacy  left  him  of  a  large 
estate,  he  would  be  off  this  week  to  have  a  look  at  it.  One  Hkes  to  look 
at  one's  own :  Christian,  be  sure  to  survey  thine  own  possession  in  the 
skies.  Read  much  the  book  of  Grod,  which  tells  thee  of  thy  ftiture  in- 
heritance. Say  to  thyself,  "This  is  all  mine.  Why  should  not  I 
begin  to  enjoy  it  ?  Did  not  the  Israehtes  fetch  bunches  of  the  grapes 
of  Eshcol  before  they  entered  Canaan  ?  And  why  should  not  I  ? "  I 
hope  you  will  full  often  enjoy  foretastes  of  bliss,  till  you  can  sing  with  John 
Berridge, — 

"  Too  long,  alas,  I  vainly  sought 
For  happiness  below, 
But  earthly  comforts,  dearly  bought, 
No  solid  good  bestow. 

"  At  length,  through  Jesu's  grace,  I  found, 
The  good  and  promised  land 
Where  mUk  and  honey  much  abound 

And  grapes  in  clusters  stand. 

* 

**  My  soul  has  tasted  of  the  grapes, 
And  now  it  longs  to  go 
Where  my  dear  Lord  his  vineyard  keepsy 
And  all  the  clusters  grow. 

"  Upon  the  true  and  living  vine 
My  famish'd  soul  would  feast, 
And  banquet  on  the  fruit  divine. 
An  everlasting  guest." 

What  a  sanctifying  influence  such  anticipations  would  have  upon  you  ! 
**  Every  one  that  hath  this  hope  in  him  purifieth  himself."  Pursue  eternal 
things  with  concentrated  mind.  You  must  look  right  on  to  the  end  of  the 
race  for  the  prize.  The  runner  does  not  cast  a  glance  to  the  right  or  to  the 
left,  or  to  the  flowers  which  bespangle  the  pathway,  but  he  keeps  his  eye  on 
the  prize,  and  that  helps  him  to  run.  He  stretches  every  nerve  to  reach 
the  end,  and  win  the  prize.  Brothers  and  sisters,  make  eternal  things 
the  scope  of  your  life  at  all  times.  This  I  have  told  you  is  the  hteral 
sense  of  the  original  Greek.  Make  them  that  for  which  you  plot  and 
plan  ;  that  for  which  you  think  and  consider ;  tliat  for  which  you  live 
and  act :  throw  your  whole  being  into  eternal  things.  Are  we,  therefore, 
to  neglect  business,  you  may  ask  ?  God  forbid !  Serve  God  in  business. 
To  leave  business,  or  to  do  business  as  if  it  were  not  a  part  of  your 
religion,  would  be  a  departure  from  your  Master's  will,  and  not  a  fulfil- 
naent  of  it.  Sanetiiy  your  commonest  action  to  the  glory  of  God. 
"  Whether  ye  eat  or  dnnk,  or  whatsoever  ye  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of 


600  MrrSOFOLITAH  TA.BEBNACLE  PULPIT. 

God."  Have  an  eye  always  to  eternity.  Keep  y our  thongfats  ttptML  that. 
Eat  and  drink  as  for  etemitj,  remembering  that  what  yon  eat  and  drink 
pcriabcth,  and  he  that  eata  will  perish  too.  It  is  "  eariii  to  earth  "  when' 
erer  wo  cut,  therefore  let  tis  not  make  gods  of  onr  bellies.  ^Vhen  thoa 
enjoycst  any  earthly  thing,  do  it  as  in  tlie  light  of  eternity,  and  say,  "  I 
am  plucking  a  flower  tliat  must  fade.  This  is  not  a  diamond  that  will 
remain  with  me,  always  glistening;  it  is  only  a  bright  daisy;  it  looks 
very  pretty  at  the  moment,  but  it  will  soon  &de.  The  children  gather 
it,  but  soon  let  it  fall,  and  so  do  I.  Put  not  thy  eonl  into  that  which  is 
sensual  at  thy  peril.  See  that  thou  pursuest  ^vith  all  thy  might  things 
spiritual.  As  for  things  transient,  commit  them  to  God's  providence. 
Do  thy  best  to  honour  God  in  the  nse  of  this  world's  currency,  bnfc 
make  it  not  thy  wealth.  Look  at  Jonah  sitting  under  his  gourd  which 
screened  him  from  the  scorching  sun  with  its  broad  leaves.  Think  of 
Jonah  as  he  said  to  hinoBeif, "  How  happy  I  am  under  this  arbour.  How 
cool  it  makes  me."  He  was  content  ana  comfortable,  but  God  prepared  a 
worm.  The  worm  destroyed  the  wretched  gonrd.  Though  it  seemed 
so  beantiful  before,  it'  Boon  became  only  fit  to  be  pulled  down  and  cast 
upon  the  dunghill.  It  may  Boon  be  the  same  with  your  eartiily  comforts. 
If  yon  make  your  gonrd  your  God,  it  will  do  yon  no  good.  Gonids  are 
well  enough,  but  they  are  not  good  when  you  put  (hem  in  the  place  of 


I  finish  with  this.  Treat  the  things  present  as  if  they  were  not,  and 
live  thou  Uko  an  heir  of  heaven's  invisible  but  substantia  joys.  Higher 
and  better  things  are  in  store  for  thee.  God  bless  thee  by  his  bleesod 
Spirit  with  blessed  foretastes  of  the  blessed  hereafter.    Amen. 


FOBTiON  or  SoBiPTiTBB  BEAD  BBPOBB  Sebuoit — 2  Gorinthians  iv. 


Hymns  fbom  "Oub  Owh  Htmh  Book" — 785,  656,  667. 


Just  PwUitked.    Ks.  2  of  the  SMUing  Series. 

SEVEN    WONDERS    OF   GRACE. 

B-z-    O.    ■J3L.    SPXJRCa-BOIT. 

"  Tbo  addreasM  of  vhich  this  volame  consUtt  we  designed  to  illusb'ale  the  ruioiu 
ways  in  vhich  God  de&I«  irith  nnoere  in  calling  tbem  to  himeelf,  uid  bi«  baaed  on 
tho  hiatories  of  Manoaash,  the  woman  that  was  a  ainner,  the  d}-ing  thief,  Sainl  of 
Taraoa,  the  Philippian  jailer,  Oneaimua,  and  '  the  greateat  wondoi  of  alL"  Id  sKch 
of  these  caaea  Mr.  Spnrgeon'a  vigoroua  and  forcible  style  ia  ahoim  to  great  advsn- 
tage,  and  the  tratha  he  handlea  are  admirably  illuatrated,  and  brought  to  bear  upon 
the  BTeryday  Ufs  of  the  reader."— ?»«  tioek. 

PjosHOiLE  &  AuBAKTEB,  4,  Fdtemotter  Bnlldmgs;  and  all  BaokBcllc-..-i^ 


Jfl^clitirplito  i^a&fmadc  ittljit. 


A  SABBATH-SOHOOL  SERMON, 


i 


m\tf\\ 


Dei  iTEEED  ON  Lord's-Day  MoRNiNa,   October   28th,  1877,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NBVVINGTON. 


*'  He  shall  gather  the  lambs  with  his  arm,  and  cany  them  in  his  bosom/*— 
Isaiah  xl.  11. 

Ministers  all  over  England  have  been  specially  requested  to  assist  in 
exciting  a  spirit  of  prayer  in  connection  with  Sabbath  Schools  to-day,  and 
I  feel  that  tne  training  of  the  young  is  so  important  a  part  of  Church 
work  that  it  would  be  almost  sinfiil  to  decline  the  seasonable  request  of 
the  Sunday  School  Union.  Therefore  have  I  selected  this  subject  this 
morning  in  the  hope  that  God  the  Holy  Spirit  may  bless  it,  not  only  to 
those  who  are  teachers,  but  to  those  who  ought  to  be,  and  afterwards  to 
those  of  us  who  may  be  otherwise  occupied  in  the  Master's  vineyard, 
that  we  also  may  be  led  more  earnestly  to  pray  for  our  brothers  and 
sisters  who  are  watching  over  the  lambs  of  the  flock. 

The  words  of  our  text  are  spoken  of  One  who  is  in  the  tenth  verse 
called  "  The  Lord  God  with  strong  hand,"  and  of  whom  we  are  asked, 
in  verse  12,  "Who  hath  measured  the  waters  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand, 
and  meted  out  heaven  with  the  span,  and  comprehended  the  dust  of  the 
earth  in  a  measure,  and  weighed  the  mountains  in  scales,  and  the  hills  in 
a  balance  ?  "  It  is  a  wonderful  proof  of  the  tenderness  of  God  that  very 
generally  when  he  is  spoken  of  bv  his  glorious  titles,  and  is  described 
in  the  infinity  of  his  powder,  w^e  are  before  long  assured  of  his  great  gentle- 
ness by  having  some  special  deed  of  kindness  ascribed  to  him.  He  is 
the  Lord  God  with  strong  hand  and  ruling  arm,  but  he  carrieth  the 
lambs  in  his  bosom  :  he  bringeth  out  the  starry  host  by  number,  he 
calleth  them  all  by  names  in  the  greatness  of  his  might,  and  yet  he 
**  doth  gently  lead  those  that  are  with  young."  How  condescending  it  is 
on  the  part  of  the  great  Lord  that  he  should  come  to  shepherdize  men ! 
How  marvellous  that  it  should  \ye  said  of  the  Almighty  God,  "  He  shall 
feed  his  flock  like  a  shepherd  " — shall  act  the  shepherd  towards  his 
chosen  among  the  sons  of  men  :  guiding,  feeding,  protecting,  nourishing, 
and  healing  them.  It  is  Jehovah  Jesus,  who,  though  he  accounted  it 
No.  1,381. 


602  HBTSOPOLITAS   TABEKNACLE   FULPIT. 

not  robbeiy  to  be  equal  with  God)  jet  came  down  to  earth  that  he 
might  be  the  shepherd  of  men.  A  shepherd  bean  among  his  ftwk 
in  wonderful  conjunction  the  offices  of  ruler  and  of  servant.  He  rnkt 
and  guides  and  controls  his  flock,  but  at  the  same  time  he  waits  npon 
them  as  the  servant  of  all.  Behold  in  the  Lord  Jesns  yon  see  one  who 
was  justly  recognized  by  his  disciples  as  their  Master  and  Lord,  and  ye^ 
as  the  servant  of  servaate,  he  washed  the  feet  of  his  disciples.  He  cune 
as  God  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour,  bnt  he  made  himself  of  no  repu- 
tation, and  took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant.  He  bowed  himself  to  . 
save  his  people,  to  help  their  infirmities,  to  sympathize  with  tfadr  ' 
sorrows,  and  even  to  suffer  for  their  sina.  Behold  what  manner  of  love 
the  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep  has  manifested  towards  us. 

It  is  notable  that  to  accomplish  this  work  the  Lord  is  represented  w 
coming  with  strength. — "  Behold  the  Lord  God  will  come  with  strong 
hand,  and  his  arm  shall  mle  for  him."  From  which  I  gather  that  toe 
work  of  saving  men  is  one  which  requires  the  putting  forth  of  strength, 
even  when  he  who  undertakes  it  is  divine.  He  is  mighty  to  save,  for  it 
requires  might  to  save  a  soul.  If  jou  and  I  under  God  are  called  to  al^ 
tempt  the  work  of  soul  saving,  we  must  certainly  borrow  divine  strength 
if  we  are  to  succeed,  for  what  power  to  aavc  can  dwell  in  an  arm  of  fle^  ? 
Nor  must  we  ever  treat  the  work  of  caring  for  the  souls  of  men  with  in- 
difierence,  nor  go  about  it  with  carelessness.  It  is  not  a  secondary  work 
to  be  pursued  at  leisure  as  a  species  of  amusement :  it  filled  the  Savioar'a 
heart  and  hands,  so  that  the  zeal  of  it  ate  him  up;  and  unless  you  have  the 
same  power  resting  upon  you  which  also  dwelt  in  him,  and  sometliing  of 
the  same  fervour,  you  will  never  be  able  to  perform  it  aright.  0  servant 
of  the  living  God,  see  that  your  loins  be  girt  nithoumipotcnce  for  such  a 
task  as  this,  for  to  save  the  soul  of  the  smallest  child  in  the  SabboUi 
school  will  need  the  same  power  that  raised  Christ  fcom  the  dead. 

The  Lord  would  also  have  yon  feel  that  soul-winniug  can  only  be  done 
in  earnest,  it  requires  energy  and  fervency.  We  must  exercise  every 
ftculty,  use  all  our  intellect,  arouse  all  our  aSecticn,  and  continue  labour- 
ing with  unbounded  perseverance,  if  by  any  meauB  we  may  save  some. 
When  I  behold  the  Lord  coming  forth  to  save,  even  tlie  Lonl  who 
made  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  I  know  what  a  work  it  most  be  ;  uid 
when  I  see  even  him  coming  wiUi  a  strong  hand,  making  his  arm  to  rule 
lor  him,  I  compi-ehcnd  that  it  is  no  child's-play  to  be  a  sonl-winner.  If 
God  himself  putteth  ou  strength,  then  you  and  I  must  ask  for  power  be- 
yond onr  own,  that  we  may  be  useful  in  this  heavenly  service. 

Beautifully  does  our  text  set  forth,  not  only  the  great  power  eserted  I^ 
our  Lord  Jesus,  but  also  his  tender  love,  for  not  only  does  he  come  forUi 
to  care  for  men  OB  his  sheep,  but  he  undertakes  work  among  the  lambib 
among  the  feeblest,  the  smallest,  the  youngest.  No  part  of  his  work  ii 
beneath  liim  :  he  docs  all  the  work  of  a  good  shepherd.  It  is  supposed  Ij 
some  that  it  needs  greater  genius  and  ability  to  care  for  the  sheep  than 
tor  tlie  Iambs ;  I  have  even  kuown  preachers  speak  of  bringing  their 
minds  down  tu  the  comprehension  of  children ;  they  know  little  of  the 
matter,  for  to  pi-each  a  child's  sermon  or  write  a  really  good  child's  book 
is  a  very  difficult  task,  and  requires  tiie  highest  ability.  Jesus  evidently  ' 
thinks  not  lightly  of  the  little  ones,  nor  of  the  service  which  they 
require.     His  shoulders .  may  soffice  for  lost  sheep,  but  his  bosom  is 


A  BABBATH-SOHOOL  SEHMOX.  G03 

reserved  for  the  lambs ;  they  need  and  shall  have  our  Lord's  best.  With 
divine  sweetness  and  tenderness  the  Redeemer  carries  the  lambs  in  his 
fond  embrace^  and  lends  both  his  heart  and  his  arm  to  cherish  and  protect 
.them. 

We  have  before  us  in  the  text  a  lavely  ouiline  portrait  of  the  Good 
Shepherd.  Let  us  look  at  the  picture  and  notice  its  main  beauties,  and 
when  we  have  done  so  sufficiently  let  us  see  therein  an  example  for  ths 
church,  and  a  model  for  the  teacher  of  the  young, 

I.  We  have  to  examine  A  portrait  of  the  Good  Shepherd.  Let 
ufl  study  it  with  care.  "He  shall  gather  the  lambs  with  his  arm,  and 
carry  them  in  his  bosom."  What  see  I  in  this  picture?  First  I  see  the 
Lord  of  angels  condescending  to  personal  labour.  Jesus  Christ  himself 
gathers  with  his  own  arm  and  carries  in  his  own  bosom  the  lambs  of  his 
flock.  He  doth  not  commit  this  work  to  an  angel,  nor  does  he  even  leave 
it  to  his  ministers ;  but  he  himself,  by  his  Spirit,  still  undertakes  it.  He 
cared  for  the  lambs  while  he  was  here  below.  He  sufiered  the  little 
children  to  come  unto  him,  and  he  took  them  in  his  arms  and  blessed 
them.  He  spoke  very  plainly,  so  that  the  young  could  understand  his  words, 
for  he  cared  for  their  souls.  We  have  frequent  indications  that  he  was 
often  followed  by  a  great  company  of  young  people ;  and  we  know  that 
they  were  read^  to  give  him  their  hosannas  with  eager  enthusiasm. 
After  he  had  risen  from  the  dead  he  did  not  forget  the  young  of  the 
flock,  for  he  said  to  Peter,  "  Feed  my  lambs."  He  was  the  holy  child 
Jesus  himself  all  his  days,  and  he  was  a  dear  lover  of  the  little  ones, 
the  true  "  children's  friend."  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  was  upon  him,  for 
the  Lord  had  anointed  him  to  preach  glad  tidings  to  the  meek,  and  the 
poor,  who  are  as  lambs  in  the  flock.  He  condescended  to  look  after  the 
feeble  and  weak  of  the  flock  himself,  toiling  many  a  weary  mile  and 

E leading  through  many  a  chilly  night  on  their  behalf.  Now,  though 
e  reigns  in  heaven,  his  divine  Spirit  looks  after  the  young  converts, 
and  causes  them  to  grow  up  in  his  fear.  Many  are  the  Timotliies 
taught  from  their  youth  to  know  the  Scriptures  whom  his  grace  meets 
with  and  saves,  and  when  they  are  saved,  being  still  his  lambs,  he 
watches  over  them,  trains  them,  instructs  them,  confirms  their  faith, 
guides  them  in  his  way,  and  preserves  them  to  the  end.  All  our 
mercies,  as  believers,  we  owe  to  our  Lord's  personal  service,  "who 
his  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree."  Not  by 
proxy  did  he  save  either  his  sheep  or  his  lambs,  he  did  not  stand  and  bid 
others  do  it  and  himself  merely  give  the  command,  but  he  himself  here 
below  spent  thirty  years  of  personal  service  among  the  sons  of  men. 
At  this  moment  he  is  personally  pleading  for  his  own,  and  pereonally 
ruling  providence  on  behalf  of  nis  httle  ones.  He  gathers  and  he 
carries  still.  And  if,  dear  brothers  and  sisters,  we  are  to  be  at  all  like 
Jesus  w^e  must  not  merely  write  tracts  about  how  Sunday  School 
work  is  to  be  done,  nor  stand  on  an  eminence  like  a  commander-in-chief 
and  give  orders,  but  we  must  each  one  personally  bend  our  back  and 
stoop  to  the  lambs,  we  must  put  out  the  strength  of  our  own  arm  to  gather 
them,  and  then  carry  the  blessed  load  of  infirmity  in  our  own  bosom.  We 
must  render  personal  service  if  w^e  are  to  be  like  our  Lord,  who  gave 
himself  for  us.  This  first  line  in  the  portrait  is  well  drawn,  and  adds 
■UIQch  to  its  manly  beauty ;  he  condescended  to  personal  labour. 


£04  XBTItOFOLITAS  TABERlTACLIt  PULPIT. 

The  second  noteworthy  line  in  the  portrait  seeias  to  me  to  be  that 
Jesus  was  earrutl  to  tavt,  And  earnest  to  save  little  ones.  The  text  doth 
not  merely  say  ^at  he  carries  the  lambs  in  his  bosom,  but  that  he  gatixat 
them.  It  were  great  love  that  he  ehoutd  cany  (hose  who  come; 
it  is  greater  lore  that  he  gathcn  those  who  do  not  come.  CooBtntining 
grace  goeth  out  into  the  midst  of  the  world  to  fetch  in  the  wandering 
sheep  and  Iambs ;  and  therein  the  greatest  love  is  revealed,  even 
the  love  which  puts  forth  its  strength  while  yet  we  go  astray. 
The  Good  Sh^herd  sees  (hat  even  children's  hearts  are  &r  off 
from  him,  and  will  remain  bo  nnlcss  his  effectuEd  grace  shall  go 
forth  to  reclaim  them  from  the  error  of  their  natund  estate ;  aM, 
glory  be  to  liis  love,  he  ntill  doth  fetch  this  one,  and  that  one,  in  eariy 
days  to  himself;  not  watting  till  they  come,  but  going  after  them,  even 
as  the  parable  of  the  good  Shepherd  sets  ibrth,  for  there  the  shepherd 
leaves  the  ninety  and  nine  in  the  wilderness  and  goes  after  that  which  is 
^ne  astray  nntil  he  finds  it.  Brothers  and  sisters,  if  we  are  to  be  like 
Christ — and  I  hold  the  picture  up  that  we  may  endeavour  to  copy  it— 
we  must  not  only  rejoice  when  children  are  saved,  and  encourage  tbem 
when  we  see  signs  of  grace,  but  we  must  go  after  the  little  tenants  of 
the  street,  the  httle  disorderly  members  of  our  class,  the  young  rebela  of 
our  family,  and  "  compel  them  to  come  in."  It  must  be  the  dm  of  our 
teaching  that  children,  as  children,  should  become  children  of  the  living 
God.  VoT  this  we  should  pray,  for  this  we  should  seek  to  be  an<»ntea 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  we  may  bring  in  these  Iambs  &om  the  dark 
mountains  to  the  green  pastures.  Whereas  they  are  wayward,  inatten- 
Uve,  difficult  to  rule,  forgetful,  and  inapt  in  spiritud  things,  we  must 
with  great  patience  gather  them,  win  their  hearts,  impress  Uieir  miod^ 
and  introduce  them  by  divine  grace  into  the  fold  of  love.     Ixx^  at  the 

S'cture  before  you,  and  yon  can  see  that  your  Ijord  is  earnest  to  save, 
is  &ce,  his  hands,  his  feet,  his  side  all  prove  what  an  eager  Saviour  he 
is.  He  does  not  tairy  at  home  till  wanderers  of  their  own  IVee  will  se^ 
his  fiioe,  but  he  goeth  forth  to  seek  the  lambs  which  lie  about  neglected 
in  these  great  mldemess  cities ;  he  finds  them  in  the  fields  of  ignorance 
and  under  the  hedgesof  vice,  pining  and  perishing  for  lack  of  knowledge 
and  be  gathers  them  with  his  arm. 

Thirdly,  a  very  superficial  glance  will  show  us  that  onr  Lord  is  wHlmg 
io  receive.  If  he  be  so  eager  to  gather  those  who  do  not  come,  d^ioid 
upon  it  he  is  wiliii^  to  receive  alT  who  do  seek  him.  There  is  never  a 
heart  that  yearns  after  Christ,  though  it  be  the  heart  of  a  little  child, 
but  Jesus  Christ  delightB  to  not*  those  early  desires.  There  is  little 
knowledge  as  yet  in  the  child's  heart  about  uie  Lord,  and  little  know- 
ledge as  yet  of  the  evil  of  sin,  but  Jesus  does  not  expect  mnch  from 
tender  youth.  Only  a  fceble  ray  of  light  has  gleamed  into  the  sonl,  only 
a  gentle  breath  of  the  divine  wind  has  turned  the  little  soul  towudb 
Christ,  but  our  Lord  perceives  it,  and  dehghU  therein.  It  were  wdl  if 
we  could  copy  this  trait  in  our  Ijord's  ch^nctor.  I  am  afm'd  we  Me 
not  veiT  quick  to  notice  the  first  impressions  of  boys  and  giris,  or  dn 
we  hnrrfily  judge  that  such  impressions  are  writ  in  water,  and  havka 
been  frequently  disappointed  n-e  have  grown  ineredulons  of  childreni 
convictions  and  children's  iaith.  But  it  should  not  be  so,  for  if  «« 
Lord  gathers  the  lambs,  it  ia  cleat  ttwt  he  is  willing  enongh  to  receiw 


A  SABBATH-SCHOOL  SERMOX,  605 

tiiose  lambs  when  they  come ;  and  if  jou  are  to  be  hkc  your  Master  I 
would  exhort  each  of  you  to  receive  with  gladness  even  the  least  among 
your  scholars  when  they  come  to  tell  you  of  their  newborn  faith  in  Christ. 
Do  not  quench  the  sparks,  but  fan  thorn  to  a  flame ;  never  crush  the 
bruised  reeds,  nor  throw  them  away  as  useless,  for  with  a  little  care  they 
may  be  so  bound  up  that  your  Lord  may  get  music  out  of  them  to  liis 
eternal  praise.  Despise  not  the  day  of  small  things.  Look  not  for  ripe 
graces  and  mature  judgment  in  the  early  spring  of  youth,  but  rejoice  in 
the  buds  and  blossoms.  Receive  the  lambs  as  lambs,  though  they  are 
the  weakest  and  most  troublesome  of  the  flock.  See  what  your  Lord 
does.  The  loving  tenderness  of  Christ,  and  his  willingness  to  receive 
those  who  seek  him  early,  should  make  our  hearts  willing  to  believe  in 
childish  piety,  quick  to  perceive  it,  and  ready  to  rejoice  in  it.  Wisely 
may  we  receive  those  whom  Jesus  receives  ;  if  they  are  capable  of  coming 
to  him  and  lying  in  his  bosom  they  will  do  no  dishonour  to  the  bosom  of 
the  church. 

In  this  portrait  I  see  a  fourth  beautiful  feature,  namely,  that  he  is 
careful  to  protect  the  feeble  lambs.  Gathering  graciously  and  i*eceiving 
kindly,  he  next  guards  securely.  To  this  end  the  Shepherd  places 
the  sickly  lamb  in  liis  flowing  garment,  close  to  his  bosom,  and  carries 
it  there.  He  will  not  let  it  try  to  walk,  for  it  is  as  yet  too  weak ; 
he  will  not  eren  put  it  in  the  fold  and  leave  it  with  the  old  sheep, 
but  he  must  himself,  while  it  is  in  a  critical  state,  carry  it  where 
it  shall  be  at  its  ease,  and  secure  from  trial  or  toil.  Here  in  his 
bosom  it  will  not  be  pinched  by  the  frost,  his  heai't  will  keep  it 
warm ;  here  it  will  not  die  of  weakness,  his  own  life  will  flow  into  it  and 
fill  its  little  struggling  heart  with  vitality  ;  hero  the  wolf  cannot  touch 
it,  for  unless  the  wolf  could  rend  the  shepherd,  it  certainly  could  not 
destroy  the  beloved  burden  which  he  carried  on  his  heart.  How  care- 
fully doth  Christ  watch  over  the  lambs.  He  is  lovingly  watchful  over 
the  entire  flock,  for  not  one  under  his  care  shall  perish,  but  towards  tliese 
his  tenderness  is  more  manifest,  for  they  need  it  more.  It  is  with  him 
even  as  with  a  mother  who  is  more  anxious  concerning  her  little  babe  or 
her  sick  child  than  concerning  the  strong  of  the  family.  Where  the  need 
is  greatest  the  love  is  most  fervent.  Christ  carrieth  the  lambs  in  his 
bosom  because  the  greatest  need  requires  the  most  luxurious  resting 
place  and  the  most  calm  repose.  Beloved  friends,  we  must  bo  very  care- 
ful to  protect  young  Christians  if  we  would  see  them  become  strong  in 
Christ.  We  should  anxiously  endeavour  to  keep  them  out  of  temptation, 
and  since  they  must  be  tempted  more  or  less,  we  should  endeavour  to 
strengthen  them  to  endure  the  various  forms  in  which  it  assails  the 
young.  Let  us  lead  them  away  from  habits  which  debase  and  amuse- 
ments which  degrade.  Let  us  try  to  keep  from  them  many  of  those 
sinful  doubts  which  have  peq^lexed  om*selves,  and  those  heresies  which 
have  been  a  snare  to  others  :  above  all,  let  us,  by  a  pious  example,  en- 
deavour to  preserve  them  from  the  corruption  that  is  in  the  world  through 
lust,  carrying  them  in  oiu:  bosoms  to  the  throne  of  grace,  to  the  house  of 
God,  and  to  everything  which  is  pure,  and  holy  and  acceptable  to  God. 
As  Mr.  Greatheart  is  described  by  Bunyan  as  convoying  tne  women  and 
children  to  the  celestial  city  and  fighting  the  giants  for  them,  even  so 
should  we.    We  must  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  watch  for  their  souls  as 


608  MBTEOPOLITAN  TABBRHAOLB  PDl-PIT. 

those  thnt  mnst  give  accoant,  keeping  giiard  A-om  ireek  to  week  lest  our 
hope  shoiiid  be  disappointed.  Thus  Hhdl  ire  be  liko  the  Good  Shei^Hit^ 
who  is  ever  careful  to  pi-otect  hia  own. 

"Shepherd  of  Ibe  chosen  numlwr. 

They  arc  ufo  irhom  Ihoii  dost  keep; 

Olhcr  Ebepberda  taint  and  Bluoiber, 

And  forget  to  watch  the  sheep  ; 

WaithfulSiephcrdl 

,  Thou  dost  nake  while  others  sleep." 

But  OUT  Lord's  act  mesTis  more  than  that,  for  he  might  have 
pnt  the  lambe  on  hia  shoulders  if  mere  safety  were  all  that  he 
desigiied.  We  see  by  the  picture  before  ns  that  he  is  Umier  to 
eiiensh  the  little  ones.  It  is  said  that  he  carries  them ;  this 
is  mercy ;  bnt  this  is  not  all,  for  he  csrriee  them  in  his  bosom, 
thia  is  tender  mercy.  To  carry  is  kindness,  but  to  carry  in  the  bosom 
is  loTing-kindness,  The  shoulders  are  fitr  po^'er,  and  the  back  fi)r 
force,  bnt  the  bosom  is  the  seat  of  love.  Jesus  would  warm,  cheer,  com- 
fbrt,  and  make  them  happy.  The  Lord  wishes  all  his  people  to  be  ha,ppjt 
"  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye  mv  people,  saith  your  God."  It  is  a  worthy 
object  to  try  and  make  any  Chnstian  happy,  hut  especially  a  young  be- 
lierer,  whose  weakness  needs  great  gentleness.  To  clothe  rebgion  with 
gloom  is  to  slander  the  name  of  Christ.  We  should  always  be  most  eagv 
to  prevent  young  believers  from  imagining  that  to  follow  Christ  is  to 
walk  in  darkness,  lor,  indeed,  it  is  not  eo.  Hath  he  not  himself  said, 
" He  that  foUoweth  me  shallnot  walk  in  darkness"?  Did  not  tJie  wiso  ' 
man  say  concerning  wisdom,  "  Her  ways  are  ways  of  pleaaantneae,  and 
all  her  paths  are  peace"?  The  good  Shepherd  looks  to  thooomfiR^ 
peace,  and  enjoyment  of  bis  lambs,  and  he  carries  them  where  they  wiU 
be  most  happy.  If  yon  are  to  be  Uke  your  Master  yon  will  try  to  take 
away  from  yonng  beuevers'  hearts  all  temptation  to  despondency  ■  yon 
will  set  before  them  the  richness  and  ireeness  of  the  gospel,  QiB  "  ts.eeei-' 
ing  great  and  precions  promises,"  the  oath  and  covenant,  and  the  star 
bilityof  the  engagements  of  God;  yea,  you  will  try  to  let  them  see  the 
preciousness  of  Christ,  and  tell  them  how  exceeding  faith&l  and  tnieyon 
have  found  him  to  be  in  yonr  own  experience.  All  this  will  Jielp  them 
to  ride  at  ease  on  the  breast  of  Jesus'  Jove,  if  the  Holy  Ghost  graciously 
assists  your  endeavours.  Do  not  sow  mistrust  in  their  hopeful  nature 
nor  instruct  them  to  be  as  unbelieving  as  their  fathers.  Do  not  sternly 
judge  and  condemn  them.  Cruelty  to  children  is  the  worst  of  cruelty, 
and  unkind  and  harsh  judgments  upon  inexperienced  believers  are 
barbarous  and  unworthy  of  the  Ghristian  name.  Endeavour  to  comfint 
and  not  to  distress,  to  cheer  and  not  to  censure,  to  gladden  and  not  to 
discourage  the  babes  in  grace,  for  they  are  dear  to  the  heart  of  Christ. 

Once  more,  dear  friends,  you  see  in  the  text  that  Christ,  the  good 
Shepherd,  is  kn>ing  in  his  esUmate  of  the  lambs.  Men  carry  in  thdr 
bosoms  their  gems,  their  jewels,  and  so  doth  Christ  carry  the  lambs  of 
the  flock,  regmUng  them  as  hie  peculiar  treasure.  He  knowB  that  in 
themselves  they  are  nothing  worth,  bnt  then  he  puts  an  estimate  upon 
them  accordiog  to  his  own  relationship  to  t^m.  He  prizes  them  R- 
canse  bis  Father  gave  them  to  Mm  of  old  to  be  his  portion.    The  little 


A  SABBATH-SCHOOL  SERMON.  607 

child  that  believeth  in  Christ  was  given  to  Christ  before  the  foundations 
of  the  world  :  therefore  doth  he  look  upon  it  as  a  choice  treasure,  and 
it  is  exceeding  dear  in  his  eyes.  "  All  that  the  Father  giveth  me  shall 
come  to  me,"  saith  he.  He  knows,  too,  what  the  child  cost  him,  for  to 
redeem  a  httle  child  from  going  down  into  the  pit  he  must  needs  bear 
the  penalty  due  to  justice,  and  suffer  even  unto  death.  He  sees  the 
purchase  of  his  agonies  in  every  youthful  believer.  For  him  the  precious 
blood  flowed  from  the  Redeemer's  own  heart,  and  bought  the  child  to  be 
his  own  redeemed  for  ever.  He  recollects,  moreover,  what  that  child 
will  come  to  if  he  do  not  save  it  by  carrying  it  in  his  bosom.  It  has 
sinned,  it  has  knowingly  and  wilfully  sinned,  and  therefore  it  lies  under 
the  curse  of  the  law,  and  Jesus  mourns  to  see  a  soul  in  that  condition, 
obnoxious  to  the  wrath  of  Grod.  A  soul  is  a  precious  thing  to  Chiist, 
for  he  believes  in  its  immortaUty.  We  know  he  does,  for  he  speaks  of  a 
place  "where  their  worm  dieth  not,  and  their  fire  is  not  quenched," 
and  he  it  was  that  told  us  that  the  wicked  will  be  driven  away  into 
"  everlasting  punishment."  Hence  he  values  souls  at  a  rate  unknown 
to  those  who  dream  that  men  are  mere  animals,  and  will  one  day  cease  to 
exist.  If  they  are  to  pass  away  and  be  no  more,  like  things  of  the  dust 
and  of  the  mist,  why  should  he  die  for  them  at  all  ?  Why  should  he 
care  to  gather  them  ?  But  because  no  diamond  can  ever  equal  in  value 
the  soul  even  of  a  beggar's  child,  therefore  does  Christ  carry  his  Uttle 
ones  in  his  bosom  as  exceeding  precious  to  him. 

And  he  knows,  too,  what  may  come  of  that  child  if  he  saveth  it,  for 
the  possibihties  of  blessing  within  one  Uttle  saved  child  who  shall 
estimate  but  the  Lord  who  knoweth  all  things  ?  I  read  the  other  day  a 
pleasing  anecdote  of  what  one  lamb  may  come  to.  A  ewe  brought  forth 
three  lambs,  and  the  brutal  shepherd  tlu-ew  the  third  into  the  hedge  that 
there  might  be  the  more  milk  for  the  other  two.  A  poor  woman  passing 
by  begged  for  the  thrown  away  lamb,  employed  her  utmost  care  in  nursing 
it  by  means  of  a  sucking  bottle,  and  reared  it  till  it  could  eat  grass  for 
itself.  She  turned  it  upon  the  conmion,  and  in  due  course  it  produced 
her  twins :  by  care  she  at  length  raised  a  whole  flock  of  sheep  from  the 
single  ewe,  and  in  process  of  time  she  became  a  woman  of  considerable 
estate.  See  what  one  poor  half-dead  lamb  may  yet  produce.  Who 
knows  what  one  poor  trembling  soul  may  yet  bring  forth  ?  Jesus  knows 
that  perhaps  a  boy  may  be  here  who  will  be  the  spiritual  father  of  scores 
and  hundreds  of  thousands  ere  he  dies.  There  may  be  in  the  congre- 
gation of  to-day  a  Chrysostom  or  an  Augustine.  Eight  among  us  may 
sit  a  Httle  Whitefield,  or  a  young  Luther,  or  some  other  of  honourable 
character  who  shall  lead  many  to  Christ.  There  was  a  dreadful  snow- 
storm one  Sabbath  morning  when  Dr.  Tyng,  of  Kew  York,  set  out  to 
preach,  and  when  he  reached  the  church  there  was  only  one  poor  httle 
girl  there.  Most  preachers  would  have  gone  home  when  one  child  made 
up  the  whole  of  the  congregation ;  but  Dr.  Tyng  went  through  the  ser- 
vice as  earnestly  as  if  the  pews  had  been  crowded.  He  preached  to  the 
httle  girl,  and  God  gave  him  that  girl's  soul,  and  never  was  he  better 
repaid.  To  his  knowledge  she  had  been  the  means  of  bringing  some 
twenty-five  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  among  them  was  one  of  his  o\vn  sons. 
The  greatest  orator,  the  most  spiritual  teacher,  the  most  useful  evangehst 
may  not  dare  to  despise  one  of  Christ's  little  ones.    It  were  worth  while 


608  HKTBOPOIJTIK  TABBBHAOLS  PVt^Tt. 

ten  all  toe  miniet«T8  in  En^and  to  journey  round  the  world  to  Bare  Uie 
sonl  of  a  single  shoeblack  or  of  one  girl  in  the  workhouse.  Talne  the  little 
oTies  by  their  poeaibilities,  and  joa  will  reckon  one  lamb  to  be  an  nntold 
treaBnre,  worthy  to  be  preserved  in  the  casket  of  your  loving  care.  Lnther*! 
schoolmaster  always  used  to  take  off  his  hat  to  his  boys  when  he  entered 
the  schoolroom,  bccanse,  he  said,  he  did  not  know  what  they  might  become, 
and  had  he  known  that  Martin  Luther  had  been  there  he  couid  not  have 
done  better  than  he  did.  Jeans  Christ  knows  what  he  can  make  of  little 
children  in  heaven,  and  bo  be  carries  them  in  his  boeom  becanse  they 
sl:^  be  for  ever  near  the  Father's  throne  to  behold  his  &ce.  He  has 
learned  to  estimate  t}iem  at  their  eternal  value ;  a  value  which  his  grace 
has  pnt  npon  them,  and  which  he  never  foi^t^. 

I^w,  if  there  were  time  to  take  my  text  and  handle  it  ia  another  shape 
I  should  divide  my  subject  thus — first,  here  are  two  evih  about  yaung 
believeiB  and  young  children,  and  these  are  wandering  and  wesikneRE. 
They  are  far  away  &om  God  by  nature,  and  when  they  are  brought  ni^ 
tiiey  are  veir  weak  as  to  divine  things.  Secondly,  there  are  two  atbribi^ 
in  the  Lord  Jesas  to  meet  with  and  overcome  the  two  evils :  here  is  etiength 
to  gather  the  wandering  with  his  arm  and  here  is  love  to  cherish  weakoesB 
till  it  forgets  itself  and  bocomcth  strong.  Thirdly,  here  are  two  optroHom 
perform^  by  the  two  attributes  to  meet  the  two  infirmities — here  is 
gathering  and  here  is  carrying.  It  is  vety  delightful  to  note  how  out  bleMed 
Lord,  whose  marred  &ce  I  seem  to  see  at  this  very  moment,  does  the 
gatheringand  the  carrying  with  equal  ease.  Even  now  by  iaith  I  see  his 
pierced  reet  pursuing  the  truant  lambs,  his  wounded  hands  laying  hold  upaa 
them,  and  his  bosom  so  full  of  the  divinest  love  receiving  and  bearing  tb«n. 
Do  yon  not  hear  the  sweet  accents  of  his  voice  saying,"  Satkr  the  little 
children  to  come  unto  me,  and  forbid  them  not,  for  of  such  is  the  king- 
dom of  heaven  "  F  He  is  still  gathering  and  still  carrying  by  his  wwd 
and  Spirit,  and  so  will  he  do  until  he  ^all  come.  Qod  help  ub  in  this 
to  imitate  him  to  the  end. 

II.  Let  us  now  remember  in  our  text  we  have  am  kxahplb  tob.  the 
CHURCH.  There  are  two  great  things  which  a  church  ought  alwsys  to 
have,  namely,  an  ann  to  gather  with  and  a  bosom  to  carry  in.  I  want 
to  speak  to  you  members  of  the  church  now  not  merely  about  the 
Sunday-school,  but  concerning  eveij  other  part  of  onr  soul-seeking 
and  soul-saving  work.  I  want  you  all  to  tir  in  the  name  of  God, 
and  in  the  energy  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  be  the  arm  to  gKtber 
with.  "He  gathcreth  the  lambs  with  his  arm."  They  are  scat- 
tered now,  the  blood-bought,  the  ordained  of  God  nnto  eternal  liiiB, 
are  scattered  hither  and  thither  and  know  not  the  Lord,  Wc  are  boui^ 
to  gather  them  from  all  places  into  which  they  have  wandered.  They 
will  not  come  of  themselves.  The  mass  of  them  despise  even  the  ontwani 
means  of  grace.  We  want  a  strong  arm  to  gather  with,  so  that  they 
may  be  compelled  to  come  in.  The  church's  arm  is  partly  the  ministry 
of  the  word  in  her  midst.  Preaching  should  be  attractive  enough  to 
gather  the  people  together,  for  how  shall  they  believe  on  him  aS  whom 
they  have  not  heard,  and  bow  shall  they  hear  if  they  will  not  ga^er 
around  the  preacher  ?  Though  certain  wise  penons  pretend  to  deeiMn  Uw 
power  to  gather  the  multitudes  to  hear  the  word,  you  and  I  need  not 
mind  their  decrying  it,  sinoe  we  shrewdly  snepect  that  their  dqreciaCxa 


▲  BABBATH-SOHOOL  8EBM0N.  609 

of  the  gift  IS  caused  by  their  not  possessing  it  themselves :  the  grapes 
are  always  sour  if  they  hang  above  our  reach.    But  we  know  who  hath 
■  told  us  that  faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  word  of  God. 
If  it  be  the  gospel  that  is  preached,  we  should  rejoice  that  by  any  means 
the  people  can  be  gathered  to  hear  it ;  and  it  is  plain  as  a  pikestaff  that 
a  part  of  the  preacher's  aim  should  be  so  to  preach  that  men  may  be 
gathered  to  the  hearing  of  it,  for  if  he  preacheth  and  none  gather  to  hear, 
to  what  end  doth  he  preach  ?   He  might  as  well  get  him  away  to  the  woods 
or  to  the  wilderness  and  there  repeat  the  gospel  to  himself  in  solitude,  if  he 
hath  no  desire  that  men  should  listen  to  him.    The  prcachoi*'s  voice  is  to 
gather,  but  then  amid  such  teeming  multitudes  as  those  of  London,  the  few 
preachers  can  never  be  expected  to  be  the  arm  of  the  Lord  to  gather  alone. 
We  must  gather  the  young  by  Sabbath  schools,  and  endeavour  to  retain 
them  when  they  grow  up.     We  must  gather  them  by  the  distribution 
and  sale  of  good  books  and  other  pure  literature :  the  colporteur  has,  in 
this  respect,  his  work  to  do  to  gather  in  the  villages  and  hamlets.    We 
must  gather  them  by  visiting  from   house  to  house ;   your  tract  dis- 
tributors, your  city  missionaries,  your  Bible  women,  these  must  be  the 
arm  of  the  Church  to  gather  many ;   but  still   the  w^ork  will  not  be 
done  unless  we  have  more  help  than  all  these.     Every  Christian  must 
be  a  gatherer,  each  one  gathering  his  one.    In  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  we  must  all  seek  out  the  wanderers.    If  you  cannot  bring  sheaves 
you  must  glean  ear  by  ear ;   if  you  cannot  preach   to  hundreds  you 
must  endeavour  to  gather  individuals  by  your  holy  conversation,  by  your 
pious  lives,  by  the  orderly  ruling  of  your  family,  and  by  using  every 
occasion  that  God  gives  you  to  speak  a  good  w^ord  for  Christ.     Gather. 
I  give  you  this  word,  all  of  you  dear  members  of  the  church,  as  your 
watchword.   Gather  ye,  gather  ye,  gather  ye,  the  people  together.    Bring 
them  in  where  Jesus  is  upHfted,  and  his  gospel  sounded  forth.     Try  and 
find  them  out  in  the  lonely  places  whither  they  are  scattered  in  the 
cloudy  and  dark  day.     There  are  many  of  you,  and  you  can  go  into  all 
sorts  and  nooks  and  corners,   for   you    dwell   in   all  sorts  of  places. 
Let  no  spot  be  unvisited  in  your  mission  of  love.     Go,  ye  rich,  and 
gather  in  from  the  parlour  and  from  the  drawing-room  :   go,  ye  poor, 
and  gather  in  from  the  cottage,  and  even  from  the  workhouse.     Go, 
you  who  labour,  and  gather  amongst  the  sons  of  toil  :  go,  ye  that  toil 
not,  neither  do  ye  spin,  and  spend  your  ample  leisure  in  winning  souls 
from  among  those  with  whom  you  associate.  80  shall  the  blood-redeemed 
ones  be  fetched  out  and  formed  into  a  goodly  flock,  and  Christ  by  you 
shall  gather  both  lambs  and  sheep  with  his  arm. 

But  the  church's  second  work  is  to  carry  in  her  bosom.  Those  who 
are  brought  to  Christ  need  nurture,  instruction,  example,  edification. 
"  Feed  my  sheep,"  saith  he,  and  yet  again,  "  Feed  my  lambs."  The 
preacher  should  try  to  do  this,  suiting  his  discourse  to  the  weakest  and 
feeblest  lamb ;  but  since  he  is  but  one,  and  taketh  not  upon  liimself  the 
responsibility  of  others,  the  whole  church  should  try  to  be  a  nursing 
mother  unto  those  who  are  bom  unto  her.  Beloved,  carry  the  young 
converts ;  take  the  convinced  of  sin  and  pity  them,  cheer  them,  fight 
against  their  despondencies,  battle  with  their  doubts,  enlighten  their 
ignorance,  and  so  bear  them  in  your  bosom.  And  then,  when  they  begin 
to  gi'ow  strong  and  work  for  Christ,  encoun^  them,  carry  them  in  the 


610  METBOFHJTAir^rABSBHAOU  ITfLFIT. 

boaoitt  of  yonr  earaeet  jKam;  askiDg  Ood  to  mabe  tlieni  wotkiDcii'  oat 
to  be  t^iAined,  doing  tne  Master's  work  right-  wuel^  and  weU.  Hhsi 
thej  BiKceed  in  their  aemce,  cony  tJtem  in  the  bosom  of  ;oat  loving 
ttdmiiation ;  and  ^en  yon  see  them  grow  in  grace  till  th^  are  strong 
cany  ttiem  in  the  bosom  of  your  lellowahip,  remembering  that  no  child  of 
God  can  afibrd  to  be  imloTed  and  lonely.  Those  who  do  not  need  yoni 
help  will  need  your  loTe ;  those  who  do  not  require  encooragement  will 
ncTcrthelesa  be  glad  of  yonr  sympathy.  Oany  all  yonr  brothers  and  tdsterg 
in  your  bosom.  Yoa  will  be  Christhke  if  you  do  so.  It  is  tin  church's 
work  in  this  to  imitate  her  great  Lord,  and  let  the  beloved  of  Christ  be 
carried  in  her  bosom  of  affection.  May  your  arm  always  have  strength 
to  labour,  and  your  heart  love  wherewith  to  chcriBh :  may  this  churdi 
never  lack  for  arms  that  shall  encompaaa  the  neighbourinf  popijation, 
and  never  lack  for  a  heart  that  ahall  be  warm  towards  those  who  low 
om-  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Hand  and  heart  must  go  together;  by  these 
two  our  work  must  be  fully  done.  May  they  be  both  evermore  in  fall 
activity,  even  as  they  are  seen  in  ChriBt,  our  blessed  exemplar, 

III.  We  shall  close  with  a  practical  word  or  two  uptm  ths  xoqxl 
TBACHEB.  He  who  gathers  the  lambe  with  his  arm  and  carries  them 
in  his  bosom  is  the  model  of  a  Bundav-school  teacher.  In  what  pointa? 
First,  there  should  be  about  the  teacher  attractivenesa,  in  order  that  be 
may  gather.  You  cannot  gather  hearts  and  spirits  by  feroe.  The  Board 
School  may  gather  iix  childien  by  law,  but  you  must  gather  youra  by 
love.  You  cannot  keep  a  class  of  children  around  you  by  the  fear  of 
punishment.  It  must  be  by  some  attraction  which  will  hold  them  with 
the  cords  of  love  and  the  bands  of  aman.  Our  Lord  Jesus  gathers  with 
his  arm  because  he  is  so  full  of  love,  and  of  that  which  wins  love.  His 
character  is  so  amiable  that  it  draws  men  to  it  as  a  loadstone  draws  the 
needle.  This  is  the  arm  with  which  he  gathers.  Oh  that  all  teachen  had 
more  of  it  I  Alittle  child  one  morning  was  eating  her  breakfast  with  a  spoon, 
and  the  snn  shone  in  upon  her  httle  mess  of  broth,  and  as  she  lilted  a  spoon- 
fol  to  her  month  she  said,  "Mother,  what'do  yon  think?  I  have  eaten  a 
spoonAil  of  sunshine."  I  recommend  thatdict  to  all  Sonday-school  teachers; 
take  a  great  many  spoonfuls  of  snnahine  into  your  nature,  and  let  it  shine 
inyourvery&ceandglitterinyotirtalk.  Your  Master  had  it.  Tbepeople 
loved  to  listen  to  him.  They  felt  when  they  drew  near  to  him  as  if  toey 
were  hke  a  ship  that  had  entered  into  port  and  could  castanchor.  Even 
when  they  did  not  receive  all  that  he  said,  there  was  a  charm  about  hn 
manner,  his  spirit,  and  hia  tone.  Ask,  0  ye  teachers,  a^  for  youiselTes 
tliat  God  would  give  yon  that  holy  charm  which  gathers,  and  pray  tlut 
he  may  deUver  you  from  the  angry  spirit  which  scatters.  Let  your  charm* 
lie  in  this,  "  I,  if  I  be  hftcd  up,  will  draw  all  men  unto  me."  Carry  the 
love  of  Cluist  with  you  and  you  will  not  fail  to  gather  the  lambs  with 
yonr  arm. 

The  next  thing  ia,  after  you  have  attracted,  vplifl.  He  carries  (lie 
lambs  iu  his  bosom,  and  therefore  he  must  lift  them  up.  Tliey  were  on 
the  ground  till  he  raised  them.  Evei-ythiag  about  a  teacher  should  tend 
to  raise  the  children.  Ton  are  to  go  down  tu  the  child  first  and  make  your- 
self understood,  but  yon  are  not  to  keep  down,  and  become  yourself  childish. 
To  tell  children  a  lot  of  tales,  merely  to  amuse  them  is  but  to  roll  iu  the 
duBb  with  the  lambs,  and  not  to  carry  them.    You  may  tell  the  tale,  and 


A   SABBATH-SCHOOL   SERMON.  611 

SO  come  down  to  the  lambs,  but  it  must  have  its  holy  lesson,  with  which 
you  lift  the  lamb  upward  towards  better  things.  Do  think  of  this,  and 
let  your  whole  life  act  in  that  direction.  Your  example,  your  temper,  your 
very  di*ess  must  be  a  hft  up  for  tlie  child.  How  often  in  this  evil  city  do 
home  influences  drag  the  child  downward ;  the  habits,  and  manners,  and 
customs  with  which  it  is  surrounded  tend  to  make  it  grovel  in  the  earth. 
You  have  to  lift  it  up,  dear  teacher,  as  the  great  Shepherd  of  the  slieep 
did,  away  from  its  childishness,  away  from  its  worldUness  (for  it  gets  to 
be  worldly  even  while  a  child),  away  from  its  sin,  away  from  the  cor- 
ruptions of  the  wicked  world.  Ask  for  grace  that  every  time  you  sec 
your  children  you  may  hft  them  up,  God  the  Holy  Spirit  lifting  you  up 
all  the  while.     Lift  up  your  heart,  or  you  cannot  lift  up  your  child. 

The  third  thing  to  be  noticed  is,  that  when  he  lifted  up  the  lamb,  he 
laid  it  an  his  heart  Oh,  Sunday-school  teacher,  this  is  a  very  material 
point  with  you.  If  you  are  to  bless  the  little  ones,  they  must  lie  on  your 
heart.  You  must  make  them  feel  the  life  of  your  religion — there  must 
be  a  heart  and  a  bosom  to  it.  Let  them  know  that  there  is  something 
in  your  religion  which  looks  towards  them ;  that  you  love  their  souls, 
that  you  sorrow  if  they  neglect  the  great  salvation,  and  that  you  will 
rejoice  exceedingly  if  they  be  brought  to  Christ.  Uplift  them,  and 
then  lay  them  on  your  heart,  and  let  that  heart  be  warm  with  holy 
love. 

Next,  hear  (hem  forward.  The  lamb  is  put  into  the  shepherd*s  bosom, 
not  that  he  may  stand  still  with  it  all  the  day  long,  but  because  the 
sheep  are  going  this  way  and  the  lambs  must  go  that  way  too,  and  there- 
fore he  carries  it.  It  is  of  no  use  for  you  to  lay  a  child  upon  a  cold  heart ; 
your  own  heart  must  be  glowing,  or  it  will  not  be  a  fit  candle  for  a 
babe  in  grace  ;  and  then  the  bosom  will  be  of  small  service  unless  the 
teacher  is  active  as  well  as  affectionate.  A  child  in  the  bosom  of  a 
sluggish  teacher  will  make  no  progress.  You  must  be  always  going  for- 
ward yourself  if  the  child  is  to  go  forward  with  yon.  I  do  not  believe 
that  any  preacher  will  have  a  growing  congregation  if  he  does  not  grow 
himself,  nor  will  any  teacher  have  an  advancing  class  if  he  or  she  is  not 
advancing  too.  Advance  in  holiness,  advance  in  communion  with  Christ, 
advance  in  perfect  consecration  to  your  Lord,  and  as  you  do  so  the  dear 
little  children  who  lie  in  your  bosom  will,  by  God's  gi*ace,  be  carried 
with  you. 

The  next  word  is,  gimrd  the  children.  Did  we  not  say  that  Christ 
placed  the  lambs  in  his  bosom  to  protect  them  ?  Good  Sabbath -school 
teachers,  try  to  keep  your  children  out  of  sin  and  out  of  harm's  way  on 
week  days  as  well  as  on  Sundays.  Spiritual  teachers  of  the  noblest  order 
want  to  know  what  the  children  do  on  ordinary  days ;  they  try  if  they 
can  to  be  their  guardian  angels  from  the  Monday  morning  to  the 
Saturday  night ;  they  never  relax  their  endeavours  to  lead  the  children 
away  from  the  terrible  temptations  which  surround  them  in  this  huge 
Babylon. 

The  next  word  is  cheer.  Did  I  not  say  that  the  Good  Shepherd  laid  the 
lamb  in  his  bosom  to  keep  it  warm  and  cherish  it  ?  So  should  the  good 
teacher  always  have  a  smile  for  the  children  and  a  word  of  encourage- 
ment for  them  in  their  little  life- battle,  for  to  them  it  is  a  great  one. 
Beloved,  do  all  that  you  can  to  comfort  the  little  hearts  of  the  young 


612  MTTTROrOUTAS  TABERNACLS   PULPIT. 

ronverts.     Help  them  to  believe  «8  God  helpeth  jron.     By  tJu  finiB 

S|>iri(  trr  to  iend  them  on  in  holy  jt^  as  the  Spirit  leadeth  job.    So 
sh^Ui  y»ii  l>e  inucatcrs  of  "that  gmtt  Shepherd  of  the  sheep,"  vhe 

"  Gcndj-  leads  the  wearied  dam, 
Gentlj  bifkds  tbe  bmiied  limb ; 
And  his  bosom  bean  the  Umb 
Like  an  inbiit  dear  to  him. 


irillH, 
le  aaddeat  bearta." 

Ami.  last  or  nil,  (Iflu/hl  ia  them.  That  tenth  verse,  with  wMdb  I  dhd 
c\in.lniic,  has  n  fcreiit  charm  for  me.  " The  Lord  God  will  come  «iiii 
siron^  hand,  and  his  arm  shall  rale  for  him :  behold,  his  remrd  k 
with  him,  and  his  work  before  him,"    Well,  what  did  he  have  befin 

him  but  the  sheep  that  he  went  foTth  to  find,  and  the  lamli 
which  he  gathered  and  carried  in  his  bosom  ?  They  were  his  wcaA, 
but  they  were  also  his  reward.  Teachers  of  Sabbath  achools,  yonr  wori 
is  before  yon  in  yonr  claas ;  yonr  reward  is  before  yon  too.  These  hoj) 
and  girls  arc  to  coat  yon  service  :  do  not  gmd.L'v  i:,  f-'i  Llii'y  i,;il  ;»:_voar 
reward.  Look  them  in  the  face  and  know  tliiii  tliey  uiv  imiuortid,  and 
that  these  are  they  whom  God  is  able  to  win  for  hia  Sun  through  too. 
to  be  the  jewels  of  his  diadem,  and  to  be  jour  crowns  of  rejoicung. 
The  harder  and  more  stubborn  a  human  heart,  the  more  hononr  it  is  to 
win  it  for  the  Lord  Jcsns.  The  less  attention  yon  get  at  £ret.  th? 
higher  will  be  your  reward  if  winning;  the  attention,  you  shall  by-and-b; 
win  the  soul,  I  reckon  that  yonr  Master  will  count  yon  to  have  sarcd 
him  all  the  more  fuithfiilly  if  yon  bring  frcm  the  ra^ed  school  tht 
moat  degraded,  the  most  ignorant,  the  leaat  taught,  and  the  nuit 
depraved.  To  bring  to  Christ  the  children  of  godly  parents  is  a  Qung 
worthy  of  any  one's  ambition,  but  to  gather  to  Jiim  the  children  of  Uw 
back  alnms,  tlie  children  of  the  debauched  and  the  depraTed,— tbii 
seems  to  me  to  be  a  more  illastrions  ambition  stiU.  Therefore  do  I  WJ 
to  you  as  yon  traverse  these  streets  of  London,  Christianmen  and  women, 
your  work  is  heforo  you,  yonr  reward  is  before  you  ;  the  teeming  masses 
are  at  once  your  spliere  of  labour  and  your  recompense.  There  is  the 
soil  jou  have  to  sow,  and  there  is  the  han-est  which  yon  havp  to  reap. 
The  fields  are  white,  but  they  are  white  for  the  harvest.  God  give  yon 
faith  in  the  gospel  that  you  teach,  faith  in  the  !i[as(or  who  taught  it 
before  you,  faith  iu  the  Mastcrwho  teaches  it  witli  joii,  ami  l;o  ye  furtli 
one  and  all,  each  one  according  to  his  ability  and  calling,  and  gather 
with  your  arm,  and  carry  in  your  hosom,  those  for  whom  Chriat  died 
Amen. 


Portion  op  SoRiPTunE  Read  befori  Serhoh — Isaiah  i.  7. 


Hymns  PRoa  "Our  Own  Hymm  Book"— 23,  402,  400. 


Jll^tt[irplton  i^nkm^tk  §n\pi' 


THE    TOUCH. 


%  ^tm^ 


Delivered  on  Lord*s-Day  Morning,  November   4th,  1877,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  metropolitan  TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


"She  said,  If  I  may  touch  but  his  clothe?,  I  shall  be  whole.**— Mark  t.  28. 

The  miracle  of  the  healing  of  this  woman,  occurred  while  our  Savioiu* 
was  on  the  road  to  the  house  of  Jairus  to  raise  his  daughter,  and  I  have 
not  much  doubt  that  although,  in  itself,  it  was  a  very  remarkable 
miracle,  it  was  not  meant  to  stand  quite  alone,  but  had  a  relation  to  the 
Lord's  deaUngs  with  Jairus.  If  I  read  the  narrative  rightly,  the  ruler 
of  the  synagogue  was  about  to  have  his  faith  severely  tried.  He  had 
come  to  the  Sa^iour  saying  that  his  daughter  was  lying  at  the  point  of 
death,  and  beseeching  him  to  come  and  heal  her ;  but  before  he  had 
reached  the  house  other  messengers  came  to  say,  "  Thy  daughter  is  dead ; 
why  troublest  thou  the  Master  any  further?  Now,  in  order  that  the 
faith  of  Jairus  might  be  prepared  for  that  shock,  our  Lord  had  afforded 
him  the  sight  of  a  special  miracle  TiTought  upon  this  woman.  Our 
Lord  had  said  to  him,  "  Fear  not ;  believe  only,  and  she  shall  be  made 
whole,"  and  as  old  Bishop  Hall  says,  "  to  make  this  good,  by  the  touch  of 
the  verge  of  his  garment  he  revived  a  woman  from  the  verge  of  death." 
It  is  singular  that  the  case  of  his  little  daughter,  of  twelve  years  of  age, 
was  here  placed  within  the  region  of  hope  by  our  Lord's  healing  a 
woman  who  had  been  exactly  the  same  time  subject  to  a  grievous  and 
incurable  malady.  A  woman  who  led  a  living  death  is  healed  that 
Jairus  may  believe  that  his  dead  daughter  may  be  raised  to  Ufe. 
Brethren,  we  never  know  when  God  blesses  us  how  much  blessing  he  is 
incidentally  bestowing  upon  others.  It  may  be  that  even  our  conversion 
had  a  far-reaching  but  very  distinct  connection  with  the  conversion  of 
others.  Grace  smiles  upon  its  personal  subject,  but  its  object  reaches 
beyond  the  private  benefit  of  the  individual.  The  Lord  is  strengthening 
the  faith  of  another  of  his  children,  or  it  may  be  he  is  actually  working 
faith  in  a  convinced  soul,  when  he  is  accepting  and  honouring  our  faith, 
and  saving  us.  We  speak  of  killing  two  birds  with  one  stone ;  but  our 
No.  1,382. 


G\  f  MiirrROPOLITAN  rABKI»rA.CLB  PUI.PIT. 

Saiionr  knows  how  to  bless  two  sonls,  nay,  two  thonsand  Boalfl,  with  ono 

Biiigle  touch  of  hia  hand. 

1  vnitt  not,  howcrer,  detain  yon  in  the  throng  of  thoughts  with  whidi 
I  might  pi-cfnoe  my  discourse  upon  this  interesting  namitive,  for  1 
long  to  bring  yon  near  to  the  glonons  person  of  the  great  Healer  of  men. 
Our  Lord  wrought  this  miracle  while  moving  on  to  work  another; 
like  the  sun,  he  shines  while  he  pursues  his  course,  and  every  beam  it 
full  of  grace.  Not  only  what  he  doea  with  full  purpose  is  glorious,  bat  he  ia 
so  full  of  power  and  grace  that  even  what  he  does  incidentally  by  the  way  is 
marvellous  I  The  raniii  course  and  design  of  his  life  must  ever  engroag 
our  most  earnest  thoughts;  bat  even  the  minor  episodes  of  his  life  pocra 
are  rich  beyond  cxprcaaion,  nor  ia  there  even  a  point  of  detail  which  ii 
without  inatriiction.  We  cannot  exhaust  the  subject,  but  must  he  satis- 
lied  to  leave  out  many  interesting  mattei-s  and  come  at  once  to  the  heart 
of  the  atory. 

First,  I  invite  you  to  look  at  this  womnn  as  a  palitnt,  and  then  to 
observe  the  p'eat  diffUuUies  tailkivhick  her  faith  was  iwrounded ;  thirdly, 
we  will  come  to  lite  vanishing  point,  and  see  how  all  her  difficulties  floi 
like  the  mists  of  the  morning  when  ^e  thought  of  Christ ;  and,  lastly,  vn 
will  AviaWu^an  Iter  grand  siiccf-s.  It  may  be  the  Lord  will  help  us  to  attain 
to  some  greater  blessing  by  enabling  us  to  follow  her  example.  Corac, 
Holy  Spirit,  and  aid  our  fiiith,  that  it  may  bring  us  into  closer  and  yet 
closer  contact  with  our  divine  Lord. 

I,  First,  then,  look  at  the  patient.  She  was  a  woman  who  had  suf- 
fered irom  a  very  grievous  malady,  which  had  drained  away  her  life 
Her  constitution  had  been  sapped  and  undermined,  and  her  veir  existenos 
had  become  one  of  constant  suffering  and  weakness;  aud  yet  tchat 
courage  and  spirit  she  displayed.  She  was  ready  to  go  through  fire  and 
through  water  to  obtain  health.  She  must  have  had  a  wonderful  amonnt 
of  vitahty  in  her,  for  where  others  would  have  been  lying  upon  the  bed  of 
sickness,  and  long  ago  despairing,  she  still  for  tweU-c  years  continued  to 
seek  after  a  care  from  one  physician  or  another.  Nothing  damped  or 
daunted  her ;  she  wonld  not  give  up  so  long  as  breath  remajued.  Wlien 
at  last  she  had  found  the  true  physician  ^e  plunged  into  the  thick  of 
the  crowd  to  touch  him  by  some  means  or  other.    She  asked  nobody  to 


intercede  for  her,  but  witJi  a  dauntless  conroge  worthy  to  l>c  a 
with  her  deep  humiUty,  she  forced  her  way  through  the  press  to  reach 
the  healing  Christ.  She  displayed  intense  energy  and  nnconqneraUa 
spirit  in  pursuit  of  health.  0  that  men  wei-e  a  tenth  as  much  ahve  to 
the  salvation  of  their  souls. 

Note  also  her  itsotule  determinaliotu  She  would  die  hard,  if  die  she  must. 
She  wonld  not  resign  herselfto  the  inevitable  till  she  had  used  every  effort 
to  preserve  hfe  and  to  regain  health.  For  twelve  years  it  appears  she 
had  persevered,  in  different  ways  and  in  the  teeth  of  terrible  agonies.  Wo 
are  told  that  she  had  suffered  many  things  of  many  physicians.  It  is  had 
enough  to  suffer  many  things  of  one  sui^eon,  but  slie  had  anfifcred  iiiiiny 
things  from  many  practitioners.  The  physicians  of  those  days  wore  a 
^,^681  deal  more  to  be  dreaded  than  the  worst  diseases.  If  I  were  now  to 
I'ead  to  you  even  a  brief  account  of  the  siu^ry  practised  in  olden  times, 
you  would  shudder,  and  beg  me  to  close  the  hook.  Any  reasonable  per- 
son might  prefer  to  suffer  ^m  any  fbrm  of  natural  disorder  rather  tlian 


THB  TOUCH.  615 

submit  himself  to  the  hands  of  the  doctors  of  those  days.  As  for  their 
prescriptions,  they  were  horrible.  Even  those  of  a  couple  of  hundred 
years  ago,  to  be  found  in  such  books  as  "  Culpepper's  Herbal,"  are  such 
a  mess  and  mass  of  all  manner  of  abominations  that  it  would  surely  be 
better  to  die  than  to  be  drenched  with  such  detestable  concoctions. 
What  with  cupping,  leeching  and  cutting,  cauterizing,  blistering,  and 
incision,  strapping,  puncturing,  and  putting  in  setons,  patients  were 
made  to  undergo  all  manner  of  unimaginable  tortures.  The  phy- 
sicians of  her  day  were  worthy  to  have  been  familiars  of  the  Inquisition, 
for  they  had  reached  perfection  in  the  artd  of  torment.  Yet  the  heroic 
woman  before  us  endured  every  process  which  was  supposed  to  have 
virtue  in  it.  I  know  not  how  many  operations  she  had  endured,  nor 
how  many  gallons  of  nauseous  drags  she  had  swallowed,  but  they  had 
certainly  caused  her  a  vast  amount  of  suffering  and  bitter  disappoint- 
ment. Meanwhile  her  money  had  been  paid  away  freely  till  she  had 
nothing  left  to  procure  her  comforts  when  she  most  needed  them.  As 
long  as  her  money  lasted  she  never  stinted  a  single  pemiy  of  it.  The 
resolution  of  the  woman  is  well  worthy  of  being  observed.  She  is  deter- 
mined that,  if  beneath  the  slnr  there  is  a  cure,  that  cure  she  will  have, 
and  as  long  as  there  is  life  left  in  her  that  life  shall  be  spent  in  some- 
how or  other  seeking  to  baffle  death  of  his  immediate  prey.  I  am  glad 
when  I  see  such  resolution  in  an  awakened  soul ;  but  how  seldom  is  it  to 
be  seen.  I  am  happy  when  a  man,  however  ignorant  of  the  way  of  sal- 
vation, nevertheless  resolves,  "  I  will  be  saved  if  salvation  be  obtainable. 
Whatever  is  to  be  suffered,  whatever  is  to  be  given  up,  whatever  is  to  be 
done,  if  there  be  any  way  of  salvation  procurable  by  any  means,  I  will 
have  it.  The  whole  world  shall  not  be  reckoned  too  great  an  expense  ; 
self-denial  of  the  most  arduous  kind  shall  be  a  trifle  to  me,  if  I  may  but 
be  saved."  Surely,  brethren,  the  salvation  of  our  immortal  soul  is 
worthy  of  all  the  intensity  of  zeal,  constancy  of  purpose,  and  resolute- 
ness of  determination  of  which  we  are  capable  ?  Who  shall  count  its 
worth  ?  Against  what  shall  we  weigh  the  soul  ?  Fine  gold  of  the  mer- 
chants is  as  dross  compared  with  our  undying  spirit,  the  diamond  and 
the  costly  crystal  are  not  to  be  named  in  comparison  with  it.  Job  said, 
"  Skin  for  skin,  yea,  all  that  a  man  hath  will  he  gixe  for  his  hfe";  and 
truly  the  ransom  of  the  soul  is  precious.  It  is  a  hopeful  sign,  a  gracious 
token,  when  there  is  a  determination  wrought  in  men  that,  if  saved  they 
can  be,  saved  they  will  be. 

I  admire  also  this  woman's  marvellous  hopefulness.  She  still  believes 
that  she  can  be  cured.  She  ought  to  have  given  up  the  idea  long  ago 
according  to  the  ordinary  processes  of  reasoning  ;  for  generally  we  put 
several  instances  together,  and  from  these  several  instances  we  deduce  a 
certain  inference.  Now  she  might  have  put  the  many  physicians  together, 
and  their  many  failures,  and  have  rationally  inferred  that  her  case  was 
past  hope.  She  might  have  said,  "  My  disease  is  incurable.  I  must 
ask  for  patience  to  bear  it  till  I  die,  but  no  longer  dream  of  a  cure." 
But  no,  bright-eyed  woman  as  I  have  no  doubt  she  was,  she  saw  hope 
where  others  would  have  despaired.  Something  within  her  buoyed  her 
up,  and  she  still  had  hopes  of  better  days,  and  so,  when  she  heard  of 
Jesus,  her  heart  leaped  within  her.  Her  hope  said,  "  The  blessing  has 
come  at  last.    I  have  long  waited  for  it,  and  now  God  has  sent  it  to 


616  JIETllOPOLITAH  TABEKUACI.E  PULPIT. 

me.  Here  it  is;  and  I  will  seize  it  at  once.  Now  has  the  san  of 
nj^hteonsness  arisen  npon  me  with  healing  beneath  his  wings,  and  I  will 
bathe  in  his  simlight.  Now  I  have  escaped  from  mete  preteudere,  and  I 
have  found  one  who  haa  real  power  to  heal."  You  see,  then,  the  patient. 
A  woman  of  ^irit,  of  resolution,  and  of  hopefulness.  Such  persons 
make  grand  workers  when  thev  are  converted.  May  Qod  grant  that  I 
may  have  many  snch  men  and  women  before  me,  and  may  the  Master 
come  this  morning  by  his  Spirit  and  do  his  healing  work  upou  them. 

II.  But  now,  secondly,  I  beg  you  to  join  with  me  in  considering 
THE  DiPFicoLTiBB  OF  THI8  WOMAN'S  FAITH.  They  must  be  weighed 
in  order  to  ijiow  its  strength.  The  difScultiea  of  her  iaith  muat  ha« 
been  as  follows. 

First,  she  could  hardly  foi^t  Ifial  fhs  disease  was  wi  ilsetf  w- 
curable,  and  that  the  had  long  suffered  from  it.  Taken  early,  joaaj 
maladies  may  be  greatly  mitigated,  if  not  altogether  removed ;  but  it 
was  now  very  late  in  the  day  with  this  poor  sufferer.  Twelve  years, — 
it  is  a  long,  long  portion  of  human  hfe  during  which  to  have  been 
continually  drained  of  the  very  sustenance  of  that  life.  To  pine  and 
bleed  for  twelve  years  is  enough  to  render  one  hopeless.  Can  a  cute  be 
possible  ?  Can  the  disease  which  has  taken  root  in  the  body  for  tw^ve 
years  be  eradicated  ?  Can  the  incurable  be  healed  after  all  ?  Her  heart 
would  naturally  enquire,  how  can  this  thing  be  ?  Do  you  wonder  that 
after  being  so  long  weakened  by  her  complaint,  and  rendered  more  and 
more  infirm  by  its  long  continuance,  if  it  looked  to  her  to  be  an  utt^ 
impossibihty  that  she  should  be  healed  ?  Yet  observe  her  conduct  and 
admire  it :  she  st^gered  not,  but  believed  in  Jesus. 

And  then  again  ghe  had  endui-ed  frequent  disappointnunts;  and  aH 
these  must  have  supplied  her  nith  terrible  reasons  for  doubting.    "Yes," 
she  might  have  said,  "  I  remember  the  first  physician  I  appliod  to,  tiow 
he  told  me  it  was  a  very  small  matter,  and  that  if  I  would  purchase  a 
bottle  of  the  large  size  of  his  Egyptian  elixir,  which  he  had  imported 
ftom  the  tombfl  of  the  Pharaohs  at  enormous  expense,  I  should  speedily 
be  well.    Alas,  he  only  relieved  me  of  my  gold.    Then  another  famous 
professor  assured  me  that  his  pills  would  do  the  work  if  I  took  them 
some  three  hundred  times,  and  was  cartful  to  purchase  them  only  of 
himself,  as  he  alone  possessed  the  secret,  and  no  one  else  could  prepare 
the  genuine  article.   He  hod  no  doubt  that  I  should  be  greatly  improved 
after  the  three  hundredth  box ;  but,  alas,  after  tedious  delay,  I  was  no 
better."     She  recollected  how,  under  each  new  treatment,  she  interpreted 
every  little  cliauge  in  herself  into  a  hojx'fat  sign,  but  soon  found  hers^   t 
rudely  shaken  out  of  her  dream  by  an  mcrease  of  the  evil.     Her  adven-   " 
turoB  were  many,  bat  all  alike  sad  in  their  end.    She  remembered  the 
grave  old  physician  to  whom  she  went  anuie  years  ago,  who  shook  hifl 
learue<i  head,  and  assured  her  that  he  had  s(.'airely  ever  met  with  a  more  i 
terrible  case ;  it  was  a  great  mercy  for  her  that  she  had  come  to  him,  for  I 
there  was  not  another  man  in  Palestine  "ho  understood  the  disease.    He  & 
believed  that  he  could  certainly  stay  the  issue  by  the  daily  use  of  his  Balm  \ 
of  Lebanon,  prepared  from  the  best  gums  of  the  cedar,  and  the  richest    1 
juices  of  odorif^us  herbs,  mixed  in  on  extraordinary  manner,  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  suggestions  of  the  ancieuj^  and  the  obsenations of     | 
manj  years  of  practice.    It  wea  a.  meiuy  iudecd  that  he  had  a  l'"'*     ■ 


TUE   TOUCH.  G17 

left  of  this  matclilcss  balm,  which  she  could  have  at  a  very  mode- 
rate price  considering  how  much  expense  it  was  to  him.  She  had  taken 
it,  but  it  had  made  her  feel  a  new  pain,  and  had  brought  on  a  fresh 
disease.  She  had  paid  heavily  to  endure  two  maladies  instead  of  one. 
She  had  changed  her  doctor,  and  this  time  engaged  a  Greek  physician, 
who  heartily  condemned  all  his  predecessors  as  fools,  and  taught  a  system 
so  profound  that  the  poor  Avoman  could  not  understand  him  at  all,  but 
beUeved  in  him  none  the  less  for  that,  for  she  set  it  down  to  her  own 
ignorance  and  his  deep  learning.  He  failed,  however,  and  she  then 
tried  a  Roman  doctor,  a  plain,  blunt,  practical  man,  who  talked  no  Greek, 
but  was  greatly  skilled  in  the  rough  and  ready  treatment  of  Avounded 
soldiers.  After  trying  medicines  tor  a  very  considerable  time,  he  in- 
formed her  that  hers  was  a  very  suitable  case  for  a  famous  operation 
which  he  had  himself  firat  practised — a  beautifiil  operation  indeed.  Ho 
had  tried  it  on  many  scores,  and  although  none  had  recovered,  he  be- 
lieved that  his  treatment  was  the  best  known.  She  had  declined  that 
heroic  operation,  but  she  had  endured  another,  and  another,  until  she 
moved  about  painfully,  with  the  scars  in  her  flesh  of  wounds  which  she 
had  received  in  the  house  of  her  medical  friends.  AVhen  we  consider 
the  long  story  of  which  I  have  thus  tried  to  make  a  rough  draft,  it  would 
not  have  been  at  all  extraordinary  if  she  had  said,  "  I  cannot  trust  any- 
body else.  Now  I  give  it  up.  I  would  sooner  die  than  be  tortured  any 
more.  Better  to  let  nature  alone  than  that  I  should  put  myself  into  the 
hands  of  any  more  of  these  infallible  deceivers."  Yet  she  was  not  dis- 
mayed :  her  faith  rose  superior  to  her  bitter  experience,  and  she  believed 
ill  the  Lord.  It  is  more  easy  for  me  to  tell  this  to  you  than  it  is  for  any 
of  us  to  realise  Avhat  her  difficulty  really  must  have  been.  If  you  too 
have  tried  by  good  Avorks,  by  ceremonies,  by  prayers  and  teare,  tu  obtain 
salvation,  and  have  been  defeated  at  all  jwints,  it  is  not  extraordinary 
that  you  should  be  slow  to  believe  that  you  can  ever  be  saved.  May 
your  faith  also,  like  hers,  swim  over  the  crests  of  the  billows  of  dis- 
appointment, and  may  you  hope  in  the  Almighty  Saviour. 

There  was  also  another  difficulty  in  her  way,  and  that  was,  hei'  vivid 
sense  of  her  men  nnwm'thiness.  AVhen  she  thought  of  Jesus,  she  viewed 
him  as  a  person  who  was  holy  as  well  as  powerful :  she  reverenced  as 
well  as  trusted  him.  I  am  sure  she  did,  for  though  she  summoned 
courage  enough  to  touch  him,  her  modesty  led  her  to  go  behind  him, 
as  umvorthy  to  be  seen.  She  was  evidently  afraid  to  face  him,  lest  he, 
laiowing  her  un worthiness,  as  she  knew  it,  should  spurn  her,  and  forbid 
lier  approach.  She  was  an  unclean  woman,  according  to  the  ceremonial 
law,  and  the  shame  of  her  disease  prevented  her  venturing  upon  any  verbal 
request,  or  open  application.  She  had  great  confidence  in  his  power  and 
mercy,  but  she  had  equal  awe  of  his  purity,  and  therefore  feared  that  ho 
would  be  angry  if  she  touched  him.  This  must  have  very  much  ham- 
pered her.  "  How  shall  I  venture  to  draw  near  to  him  ?  The  other  physi- 
cians I  could  approach,  for  I  knew  them  to  be  very  like  myself,  but 
concerning  him  I  find  that  he  is  a  prophet  mighty  in  Avord  and  deed — 
a  man  of  God,  and  something  more.  Hoav  shall  I  dare  to  approach  to 
him  ?  *'  The  thought  that  she  would  go  behind  shoAvs  her  ignorance  of 
the  Lord's  di\inity  or  her  forgetfulness  of  the  attribute  of  omniscience, 
but  still  it  proves  that  she  laboured  under  a  sense  of  unworthiness, 


618  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

and  yet  she  believed.  Ah,  dear  hearers,  when  yoa  are  bowed  do«& 
with  a  sense  of  your  own  sin  and  folly,  may  the  Holy  Spirit  letd  joi 
still  to  belicTC  that  Jesus  Christ  is  able  to  make  you  whcde. 

I  do  not  know  whether  the  other  difficulty  did  oocor  to  her  at  afl,  bii 
it  would  to  me,  namely,  that  she  had  noio  no  mmiey.  She  had  epeat  A 
her  living,  we  are  told, — all  her  living.  The  physiciaEis  whom  she  lad 
previously  consulted  had  all  been  great  in  the  matter  of  &es ;  they  coidi 
diminish  her  wealth  if  they  could  not  establish  her  health.  She  had  am> 
fully  approached  them  with  promises  of  large  reward,  aBsariE^  them  Ait 
anytliing  she  could  give  would  be  freely  rendered  if  she  cooM  hot  le 
cured  :  but  now  she  can  offer  nothing.  Her  disease  remaing^  hot  her 
cst^ate  is  gone.  She  is  reduced  to  poverty  1^  her  efforts  after  health :  how 
shall  she  come  before  the  great  Physician  of  whom  she  has  heaidsi 
much  ?  I  should  not  wonder  but  what  the  thought  of  his  giwi 
heartedness  and  the  many  cures  which  he  had  wrought  gratoitoDriy 
helped  her  to  get  over  that  difficulty,  but  stiU  it  occurs  to  many  to  dream 
of  purchasing  salvation,  and  to  this  day  many  need  to  be  renunded  tint 
Jesus  gives  his  grace  to  those  who  have  no  money  nor  any  other  price  to 
oJQfer  him.  His  terms  are  *' without  money  and  without  price,"  faot 
many  awakened  consciences  forget  this. 

Perhaps  the  worst  difficulty  of  all  was  her  extreme  sickness  at  that  tone. 
We  read  that  she  was  nothing  better,  but  rather  grew  the  worse,  ^le  hid 
been  bad  enough  before,  but  they  had  aggravated  the  disease  with  ^bet 
strong  acrid  medicines,  and  sharp  incisions,  and  fierce  blistas.  Tiny 
had  made  her  worse  than  nature  would  have  left  her  if  it  had  heea  ht 
alone.  She  had  reached  a  frrghtfiil  stage  of  the  disease  and  was  oofr 
fessedly  beyond  all  human  help.  She  was  as  bad  as  she  could  be  to  cwfl 
about  at  all.  Usually  such  a  sickness depresses  the  spirits,  xmnerra  te 
mind,  and  makes  the  sufferer  feel  a  want  of  ^ergy,  so  that»  resolute  wonn 
as  she  was,  we  should  little  have  marvelleoifshe  had  saic^  "  No,  I  obi 
do  no  more,  I  must  yield  ;  there  is  nothing  no^^^ut  to  lay  me  down  sad 
die,  for  I  am  in  such  a  condition  that  all  attem^  to  gain  heaUfa  ne 
futile."  What  a  grand  faith  was  hers  which  mao^her  rise  above  licr 
weakness,  overcome  her  depression  of  spirit,  throw  aside  tiie  kAaigy 
w^hich  was  creeping  over  her,  and  beheve  that  everything^maltered  now, 
for  she  had  no  longer  to  deal  with  a  pretender  wno  woula^^J  h«r,  bat 
with  one  sent  of  God  and  clothed  with  infinite  power,  who  codd  meet 
her  case — even  here. 

III.  So  now  we  come  to  our  third  point,  which  is  the  VAisriSBCiG 
POINT  OF  ALL  HER  DIFFICULTIES.  We  read  of  her  first  that  she  had 
heard  of  Jesus,  It  is  Mark  who  tells  us  that,  "  When  she  had  heard  of 
Jesus."  "Faith  cometh  by  hearing."  WTiat  had  she  heard  of  him? 
Is  it  not  more  than  probable  that  she  had  been  told  of  that  scene  which 
is  pictured  in  Luke's  gospel,  in  the  sixth  chapter  and  the  nineteenth  vei^y 
Avhen  "  The  whole  multitude  sought  to  touch  him :  for  there  went  virtue 
out  of  him,  and  healed  them  all."  On  one  especial  day  great  multitudes 
followed  our  Lord  and  pressed  upon  him  to  touch  him,  for  whosoever 
touched  him  was  healed  of  w^hatsoever  disease  he  had.  What  a  wonderful 
scene  that  must  have  been  when  men  were  so  enthusiastic  to  be  blest 
that  they  thronged  the  great  Physician !  Not  that  our  Lord  was 
more  able  to  save  on  one  day  than  on  another,  but  that  still  there 


THE  TOUCH.  619 

-were  certain  days  in  which  the  power  seemed  to  emanate  from  his 
person  more  mightily  than  at  other  times,  always,  a^  I  judge,  in  pro- 
portion to  the  faith  of  the  people  who  surrounded  him.  On  tliat  occa- 
sion, being  followed  by  a  great  company  who  believed  in  his  healing 
Eower,  they  saw  such  wonders  wrought  tnat  they  made  a  general  rush  at 
is  blessed  person,  and  all  who  touched  obtained  healing.  Some  conceive 
that  even  the  healthy  touched  him  and  gained  greater  vigour  from 
the  touch.  I  should  not  wonder:  at  least,  in  spiritual  things  it  is 
so.  The  woman  had  heard  of  all  the  wondrous  cures  he  had  wrought, 
and  she  said  to  herself,  "  Then  I  will  touch  him,  and  be  healed ; 
for  if  these  reports  are  true,  then  if  I  may  but  touch  him  I  too  shall 
be  made  whole."  She  seems  to  have  believed  Christ  to  be  charged 
with  marvellous  power,  somewhat  like  a  Leyden  jar  charged  with 
electricity,  which  gives  forth  its  power  most  freely.  She  was  not  a 
woman  of  any  very  great  wisdom,  her  chief  quality  was  energy.  She 
made  a  great  blunder  about  our  Lord  and  his  garments,  but  it  did  not 
touch  the  vital  point ;  she  so  thought  of  liim  as  to  glorify  his  power,  and 
it  sufficed.  She  truly  believed  in  him,  and  if  you  behevein  Christ,  though 
you  are  in  the  dark  about  a  thousand  things,  your  faith  will  save  you.  If 
you  do  but  really  believe  in  Jesus  all  your  mistakes  about  him  will  not 
really  destroy  his  power  to  bless  you,  nor  set  his  heart  against  you,  nor 
destroy  the  value  of  your  faith.  "  If  I  touch  but  his  clothes,"  saith  she, 
**  he  is  so  full  of  power  that  he  will  heal  me." 

The  point  to  notice  most  distinctly  is  this.  The  poor  woman  believed 
that  the  faintest  contact  with  Clirist  would  heal  her.  Notice  the  words 
of  my  text :  "  If  I  may  touch  but  his  clothes."  It  is  not,  "  If  I  may 
but  touch  his  clothes," — no,  the  point  does  not  lie  in  the  touch,  it  lies  in 
what  was  touched :  "  If  I  may  touch  hut  his  clothes:  if  I  cannot  get  near 
enough  to  him  to  touch  his  flesh,  if  I  may  touch  but  his  clothes.  Such 
is  the  power  which  dwells  in  him  that  it  overflows  even  into  his  gar- 
ments ;  and  while  he  wears  them  they  are  charged  with  the  virtue  which 
I  need  ;  it  reaches  even  to  the  blue  fringe  which,  as  a  Hebrew,  he  wears 
upon  the  edge  of  his  robe.  I  am  sure  if  I  touch  but  that  fringe,  if  I 
cannot  do  any  more,  there  will  be  a  connection  between  him  and  me,  and 
I  diall  be  healed."  Splendid  faith !  It  was  not  more  than  Christ  de- 
served, but  yet  it  was  remarkable.  It  was  a  kind  of  feith  which  I 
desire  to  possess  abundantly.  The  slenderest  contact  with  Christ  healed 
the  body,  and  will  heal  the  soul ;  ay,  the  faintest  communication.  Do 
but  become  united  to  Jesus,  and  the  blessed  work  is  done.  Efiect  the 
junction,  and  the  virtue  comes  to  you.  "  If  I  touch  but  his  clothes,  I 
shall  be  made  whole." 

I  want  you  carefully  to  observe  that  the  woman  did  not  seem  to  think 
anything  about  herself.  You  could  not  lay  the  stress  upon  the  pronoun, 
"  If  /  touch  but  his  clothes,  /  shall  be  made  whole";  it  would  not  be  in 
accordance  with  the  context.  No,  it  is  "  If  I  touch  but  his  clothes."  It 
does  not  matter  who  I  may  be,  what  my  uncleanness  may  be,  what  my 
character  may  be,  what  my  state  of  mind  may  be,  if  I  touch  but  his 
clothes,  contact  being  estabhshed,  I  shall  be  healed.  Every  person  who 
comes  into  contact  with  Jesus  by  the  touch  of  faith  will  partake  of  his 
healing  power.  She  knew  this,  and  shut  her  eyes  to  all  other  considera- 
tions.    She  lays  no  stress  upon  any  mode  of  touching ;  no — **  If  I  touch 


620  METROPOLITAN  TABBRVAGLE  PULPIT. 

but  his  clothes," — not  embrace  him,  nor  grasp  him,  hold  him,  wralb 
with  him — no,  she  beheves  that  any  sort  of  contact  will  answer  the  por.* 
pose.     Now  it  is  always  a  blessed  thing  when  a  man  is  taa^ht  of  God  to 
forget  himself,  and  even  to  forget  his  faith,  and  only  think  upon  ^ 
Lord  Jesus,  who  is  the  object  of  our  trust.    I  adnure  this  woman*! 
single  eye :  she  sees  nothing  but  Jesus.    Dear  heart,  she  felt  that  the 
virtue  to  heal  was  all  in  him,  and  not  in  her,  nor  in  her  touch.    She 
knew  that,  whatever  she  might  be,  his  power  could  master  every  diffi- 
culty of  her  case,  and  that  the  result  did  not  depend  upon  the  mode  of 
her  touch,  nor  the  length  during  which  it  lasted,  out  on  him  alone.    It 
was  from  him  that  the  virtue  was  to  come,  and  come  it  wonld,  however 
slender  the  contact.    This  faith  is  worth  cultivating.    To  forget  eveiy- 
thing  else,  and  only  to  consider  the  Lord  Jesus  and  his  power  to  bless : 
this  is  wisdom.     Here  am  I,  a  poor  lost  sinner,  but  if  I  can  only  get  to 
Jesus  I  shall  be  forgiven  and  saved.  Here  am  I,  vexed  with  unmly  paasicMis, 
diseased  with  this  sin  and  that,  but  if  I  may  only  touch  him,  he  is  so  fall 
of  healing  power  that,  mass  of  spiritual  disease  though  I  may  be,  the 
moment  I  touch  him,  his  virtue  will  battle  with  my  disease  and  vanquish  it 
for  ever.     Behold  this  woman.    Again  fix  your  eye  upon  her  till  yoa 
have  become  hke  her.    All  her  thoughts  nave  gone  towards  the  liocd 
Jesus.     She  has  forgotten  herself,  forgotten  the  rampant  furv  of  her 
disease,  forgotten  her  being  behind  and  out  of  sight,  and  even  her  own 
touch  of  him  she  has  put  into  a  secondary  place.    Everything  she  looks 
for  must  come  out  of  him.     She  knows  that  connected  with  lum  she  will 
obtain  the  blessing,  but  apart  from  him  she  will  abide  in  her  misery. 
"  If  I  may  touch  but  his  clothes," — not  because  his  garments  are  in 
themselves  poAverfiil,  but  because  they  are  "  his  clothes," — the  garments 
which  he  is  wearing,  and  which  consequently  will  be  a  medium  of  com- 
munication with  himself.    There  is  the  vanishing  point  then,  she  hss 
come  to  think  of  Jesus  and  of  the  certainty  of  cure  through  contact 
with  him.     If  you,  seeking  sinners,  would  but  think  more  of  Christ  all 
would  be  well.    You  who  cannot  believe,  if  you  would  relinquish  yonr 
])eiix}tual  thoughts  about  your  faith  and  even  about  your  sin,  and  b^n 
to  think  of  him, — the  Son  of  God,  exalted  to  be  a  priest  and  a  Saviour, 
the  Christ  whose  finished  work  is  all  for  sinners,  the  Christ  of  the 
resurrection,  Jesus  the  ever  hWng,  Jesus  in  whom  all  power  dwelleth, 
methinks  you  would  soon  obtain  eternal  salvation.     When  your  whole 
heait  sets  itself  upon  him  and  no  more  upon  itself,  you  will  enter  into 
ix^acc,  and  enjoy  rest  for  your  souls. 

IV.  Fourthly,  let  us  speak  of  her  grand  success.  Let  me  remind 
you  again,  however,  of  how  she  gained  her  end.  She  gave  to  the  Lord 
Jesus  an  intentional  and  voluntary  touch.  Upon  the  intentional  cha- 
racter of  it  I  must  insist  for  a  minute.  She  pressed  into  the  crowd,  she 
was  hustled  about  I  do  not  doubt,  and  in  her  weak  state  ready  to  feint, 
or  even  to  die.  In  the  midst  of  those  rough  men  who  pressed  about  the 
Saviour,  she  found  no  sympathy.  But  she  is  desperately  resolute,  and 
bound,  by  hook  or  by  crook,  to  touch  his  clothes.  She  presses  in  behind, 
for  she  cares  not  where  she  touches  him,  but  touch  him  she  must.  In 
the  throng  the  garments  of  Christ  became  entangled,  and  at  some  little 
distance  fnau  him  she  jxjrceives  just  a  bit  of  the  blue  fringe  hanging  out 
behind.     Now  is  her  time,  she  has  only  got  to  touch  that— so  sti"ung  is 


THE  TOUCH.  621 

her  faith,  that  even  the  hem  of  his  gannent  suffices  her,  for  it 
will  make  a  connection  between  her  and  the  Saviour,  and  that  is  all  she 
needs.  Her  finger  is  put  out,  and  the  deed  is  done.  Yet  n(»te  that 
she  was  not  healed  by  a  contact  with  the  Lord  or  with  his  gamient  a^^ainst 
her  will :  she  was  not  pushed  against  him  accidentally,  but  the  touch 
was  active,  and  not  merely  passive.  "  Thou  seest,"  said  one  of  the  apos- 
tles, "the  multitude  thronging  thee  and  pressing  thee."  There  was 
nothing  remarkable  of  efficacious  about  such  unavoidable  and  invohintiuy 
touches.  Her  touch  was  her  own  distinct,  intentional,  voluntary  act, 
and  it  was  done  under  the  persuasion  that  it  would  bring  her  a  cure. 
Such  is  the  faith  which  brings  salvation.  It  is  not  every  contact  with 
Christ  that  saves  men ;  it  is  the  arousing  of  yourself  to  come  near  to  him, 
the  determinate,  the  personal,  resolute,  believing  touch  of  Jesus  Christ 
which  saves.  AVe  must  believe  for  oui-selves.  The  Spirit  helps  us,  but  we 
ourselves  beheve.  Some  of  you  sit  still  and  hope  that  the  Lord  will  visit 
you,  and  you  waic  by  the  pool  till  an  angel  comes  and  stii*s  the  watei*, 
and  all  that  kind  of  thing ;  but  that  is  not  according  to  the  tenor  of  the 
gospel  command.  The  gospel  does  not  come  to  you  and  say,  "  Whosoever 
waits  for  impressions  shall  be  saved ;"  but  it  says,  "  Believe  in  the  Loitl 
Jesus  Christ:  for  he  that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved." 
Exercise  the  personal,  voluntary,  intentional  act  of  faith  and  you  shall  be 
saved.  Oh,  I  would  to  God  that  some  sinner  here,  deeply  conscious 
of  his  guilt,  might  be  aroused  to  perform  that  act  this  morning.  However 
little  your  knowledge,  believe  in  Jesus  as  far  as  you  know  him.  Though 
you  can  only  come  into  contact  with  that  part  of  Christ  which  you  have 
learned  from  the  Scriptures,  that  little  of  (^hrist  is  a  part  of  himself, 
and  you  will  have  touched  him.  You  may  ;iot  be  acquainted  with  the 
deep  things  of  God,  nor  Avith  the  high  (-octrines  which  honour  our 
adorable  Lord,  but  what  you  do  know  will  suffice  for  faith.  If  you  say, 
'*  I  will  trust  the  Lamb  of  God,"  and  really  do  so,  then  yon  have  come 
into  contact  with  him,  and  you  are  saved.  Ay,  though  it  be  but  a  be- 
lieving prayer,  a  believing  sigh,  a  believing  tear,  you  have  really  reached 
him,  and  you  are  made  whole ;  but  the  touch  of  faith  must  be  your 
own  act  and  deed.  Nobody  is  saved  in  his  sleep,  nobody  may  claim  to 
have  been  transformed  into  a  living  soul  unless  he  can  prove  it  by  the 
living  act  of  trust.  There  must  be  this  appropriating  faith,  and  this 
the  woman  had. 

And  now  see  her  grand  success ;  she  no  sooner  touched  than  she  was 
healed ;  in  a  moment,  swift  as  electricity,  the  touch  was  given,  the  con- 
tact was  made,  the  fountain  of  her  blood  was  dried  up,  and  health 
l>eamed  in  her  face  immediately.  Immediate  salvation !  I  heard  a 
person  say  the  other  day  that  he  had  heard  of  immediate  convereion,  but 
he  did  not  know  what  to  make  of  it.  Now,  herein  is  a  marvellous 
thing,  for  such  cases  are  common  enough  among  us.  In  every  case 
spiritual  quickening  must  be  instantaneous.  However  long  the  prepara- 
tory process  may  be,  there  must  be  a  time  in  which  the  dead  soul  begins 
to  live.  There  must  be  a  time  in  which  the  babe  is  not  born,  and  a 
moment  in  which  it  is  hon\.  AVe  are  pardoned,  or  else  condemned:  there 
must  be  a  moment  in  which  the  man  is  not  pardoned,  and  another  in 
which  he  is,  and  that  must  be  an  inappreciable  period  of  time.  I  grant 
you  that  many  workings  of  conscience,  and  so  on,  may  go  before  and  melt 


^2  HET&OPOLITAK  TABEKSAOLE  PULPIT. 

into  the  actual  raception  of  life,  so  as  to  mitke  it  appeta  »  gradnal  work  j 
bnt  the  actual  lirirtn  the  divine  qnickening  b;  wnidi  the  man  is  made 
to  live  in  Christ,  maBt  of  neceadty  be  instantaneooB  inereiy  case.  Aman 
is  brought  by  d^rees  to  a  deep  aenae  of  sin,  to  the  rennnoatieB  of  esV, 
and  so  on ;  but  there  is  ho  peritMl  in  which  a  man  lies  between  death  and 
life ;  he  either  is  alive  unto  God  or  he  is  dead  in  sin  :  if  he  is  dead  be 
ia  dead,  aad  if  he  is  alive  he  is  alive,  but  there  is  no  state  between  the 
two.  A  man  is  either  regenerate  or  unr^nerate ;  there  is  no  border- 
land or  neutral  territorj  between  the  two  conditions.  This  woman  was 
healed  in  a  moment,  and  God  can  save  von,  my  dear  hearers,  in  an 
instant.    May  he  do  it  now !     If  now  you  beheve,  it  is  done. 

There  may  be  cases  in  which  a  blessing  cornea  to  a  man  and  he  is 
scarcely  aw&re  of  it,  bnt  this  woman  knew  that  she  was  saved ;  she  felt 
in  herself  that  she  was  whole  of  her  plague,  I  do  not  say  that  I  would 
like  to  have  nndergone  her  twelve  years'  of  suffering  for  the  sake  of  Uiat 
moment's  joy,  bnt  I  am  sure  she  was  quite  content  to  have  done  so. 
The  joy  of  the  first  hour  in  which  you  know  you  are  saved  I  It  is 
almost  too  much  to  Uve  with.  It  is  well  that  it  does  not  oontinne  in  all 
itB  vehemence  and  ecstacy.  That  Sash  of  hght,  brighter  than  the  sun  ! 
That  flash,  that  flood,  that  torrent  of  nnutterable  blisa,  which  bears  all 
before  it ;  when  at  last  we  can  say,  "  My  sins  are  assuredly  removed 
from  me — I  am  saved :  and  know  it  within  myself"; — that  joy,  I  say, 
is  beyond  all  description.  Blessed  be  God  if  we  have  known  that  bliss ! 
Blessed  be  God,  I  say,  and  I  would  repeat  the  thanks  a  thousand  times. 
Oh,  touch  the  Saviour,  poor  sinner.  The  Lord  dehver  thee  from  any- 
thing of  thine  own,  and  bring  thee  now  to  look  for  all  to  Jesus,  and  thon 
Bbalt  know  in  thyself  that  thoa  art  whole  of  thy  plague. 

She  had  next  the  BHSnrance  from  Christ  himself  that  it  was  so,  bat 
ahe  did  not  obtain  that  assurance  till  she  had  made  an  open  confesuon. 
She  felt  in  herself  that  she  was  whole,  but  there  was  more  comfiirt 
in  reserve  for  her.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  would  have  those  who  follow 
him  come  forward  and  no  longer  hide  in  the  crowd.  Those  who 
believe  ought  to  be  baptized  on  confession  of  their  Mth.  He  who  in 
his  heart  believeth  should  with  his  mouth  make  confession  of  him. 
So  Christ  tnmed  round  and  said,  "Who  touched  my  clothes?"  At 
the  hearii^  of  that  enquiry  the  newly-kindled  flame  of  her  joy 
began  to  damp  under  the  fear  of  losing  what  she  had  stolen.  Down 
went  her  spirits  below  zero.  Then  the  officious  disciples  said, 
"Thon  seeat  the  multitude  thronging  thee,  and  pressing  thee,  and 
sayest  thou,  who  touched  me?"  but  Jesus  said,  as  he  looked  arotmd 
a^in,  "Somebodv  hath  touched  me."  For  not  his  clothes  alone, 
bnt  himself,  had  neen  touched  by  somebody.  That  poor  "  somebody  " 
wanted  to  sink  into  the  earth :  I  know  she  did.  She  trembled  as  Jesus 
looked  for  her.  Those  blessed  eyes  looked  around,  and  by-and-by  they  , 
lighted  upon  her,  and  as  ahe  gazed  upon  them  she  did  not  feel  so  much  I 
alarmed  as  before;  but,  still  afraid  and  trembling,  she  came  and  ] 
fell  down  before  him,  and  told  him  aU  the  truth.  Then  he  gently 
raised  her  up,  and  said,  "Daughter,  thy  faith  hath  made  thee 
whole ;  go  in  peace,  and  be  whole  of  thy  plague."  Now  ahe  knew 
her  cure  from  Christ's  lips  as  well  as  from  her  own  consdonsDees. 
She  had  now  the  divine  witness  bearing  witness  with  her  qiirit  that  ahe 


THE  TOUCH.  623 

"was  indeed  a  healed  one.  Mark  then,  that  those  of  you  who  desire  to 
obtain  the  witness  of  the  Spirit  should  come  foi-ward  and  confess  youi* 
faith  and  tell  what  the  Lord  has  done  for  you  :  then  shall  you  receive 
the  sealing  witness  of  the  Spirit  with  your  spirit  that  you  are  indeed 
bom  of  God.  God  help  you  tremblers  who  have  at  last  touched  my 
Master's  hem  to  acknowledge  it  bravely  before  all  and  sjiecially  before 
himself. 

Brethren,  the  wine  which  coraeth  out  of  these  grapes  is  this  :  the 
slightest  connection  with  Jesus  will  bless  us.  I  desire  to  send  you 
away  with  this  one  ti*uth  upon  your  minds.  Whether  you  are  a  child 
of  God  or  not  a  child  of  God,  hear  this  weighty  doctrine.  This  woman 
believed  the  matchless  truth,  that  the  least  touch  of  Christ  will  cure. 
"  If  I  may  touch  but  his  clothes,  I  shall  be  made  whole.'*  Believe  this, 
I  pray  you,  each  one  for  himself. 

Jf  you,  dear  child  of  God,  feel  very  depressed  this  morning — cold- 
hearted,  dead,  sluggish  :  if  you  touch  but  his  clothes  you  shall  become 
warm-hearted  again.  You  shall  get  all  your  life  and  vigour  and 
enthusiasm  back  again  if  you  only  draw  near  to  your  Lord.  Do  I  hear 
yon  say  **  I  seem  so  full  of  doubts,  so  depressed  in  spirits,  so  unhappy. 
I  trust  I  am  converted,  but  I  cannot  rejoice  ; "  then,  brother,  get  a 
i'resh  hold  of  your  Lord,  for  if  you  touch  but  his  clothes  you  shall  be 
made  whole  of  the  plague  of  doubting.  Only  draw  near  to  Jesus,  your 
risen  Lord,  by  a  prayer,  or  a  believing  thought,  and  it  is  done.  Be 
it  ever  so  slight  a  touch  you  shall  be  made  whole.  Perhaps  you  Fay, 
"  I  feel  80  discouraged  in  my  Christian  work,  and  even  feel  as  if  I 
must  give  it  up.  I  have  seen  no  conversions  lately,  and  therefore  I 
cannot  go  about  my  work  with  the  spirit  I  once  had."  Brother,  you 
are  falling  into  a  spiritual  lethargy,  but  if  you  do  but  touch  your  Lord 
again  you  shall  be  made  whole.  Did  not  the  Lord  Jesus  heal  you  at 
the  firet  ?  He  can  heal  you  still.  He  loses  no  virtue  when  he  gives 
forth  his  power.  If  a  master  takes  a  scholar  and  fills  him  full  of 
wisdom  the  master  is  just  as  wise  afterwards  as  he  was  at  first,  and 
when  our  Lord  grants  us  a  fulness  of  grace  he  remains  as  full  of  grace 
as  he  was  originally.  Come  to  him,  then,  ye  downcast  saints.  Come 
now.  Come  always.  If  any  of  you  have  backslidden  ;  if  you  have 
become  altogether  wrong  and  out  of  sorts  ;  if  your  spintual  digestion 
is  bad  ;  if  your  spiritual  eyes  are  dim,  so  that  you  cannot  see  afar  off ;  if 
your  knees  are  weak  and  if  your  hands  hang  down,  if  your  whole  hea<i 
is  sick  and  your  heart  faint,  yet  still  if  you  touch  but  your  Lord's 
garments  you  shall  be  made  whole.  This  wonderful  medicine  has  bound- 
less power  to  restore  from  relapses  as  well  as  to  heal  the  first  disease.  I 
cannot  help  reminding  you  of  the  church  at  Laodicea,  which  was  in  so 
horrible  a  state  that  our  Lord  himself  said  he  must  spue  it  out  of  his 
mouth,  and  yet  he  added,  "  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door,  and  knock  :  if 
any  man  hear  my  voice,  and  open  the  door,  I  will  come  in  to  him,  and 
will  sup  with  him,  and  he  with  me."  Communion  is  the  cure  for  luke- 
wammess.  AVhen  you  have  fallen  so  low  that  even  Christ  himself  is 
sick  of  you — and  it  must  be  a  veiy  bad  case  when  he  becomes  sick  of 
a  church — yet  even  then  if  you  but  sup  with  him  and  he  with  you 
all  will  be  well.  Only  get  into  communion  Avith  iiim  who  has  life  in 
himself  and  your  own  life  shall  become  full  of  vigour.    Oh,  dear  children 


624  HETROPOLITAH  TABBBKACLE  PULPIT. 

of  God,  if  yon  have  fallen  into  an  nnhappy  state,  pat  in  practice  the 
example  of  tbe  woman,  and  see  whether  Jesns  is  not  still  tl^  same.  A 
toach  is  a  very  simple  matter,  but  do  not,  therefore,  donbt  its  Talne. 

As  for  yon  who  fear  that  you  are  not  his  children,  behold,  I  set  before 
yon  an  open  door  this  morning,  and  I  pray  Ood  that  yon  may  be  enabled 
to  enter  into  it.  If  yon  touch  but  the  Bedeemer^s  clothes  you  shidl  be 
made  whole.  Whatever  the  transgression,  the  iniquity,  the  sm,  of  which 
you  have  been  guilty,  come  into  contact  with  the  bleeding  Lamb  and 
you  shall  be  foi^ven.  You  need  not  eyen  so  much  as  touch,  for  there 
is  life  in  a  look.  A  look  will  set  up  sufficient  contact  to  bring  salvation. 
'^  Look  unto  me  and  be  ye  saved,  all  ye  ends  of  the  earth."  *^  They  looked 
unto  him  and  were  lightened,  and  their  faces  were  not  ashamed."  Do  but 
look,  do  but  get  out  of  yourself  to  him  somehow  or  other,  and  it  is  dcme. 
Though  a  glance  will  not  carry  a  thread  as  thin  as  a  spider's  cobweb, 
yet  it  will  establish  a  connection.  The  ray  of  light  which  comes  from 
Jesus'  wounds  to  your  eye  will  be  link  enough  and  along  it  eternal  sal- 
vation will  come  to  yon.  Get  to  Christ,  sinner,  get  to  Christ  at  once. 
Have  you  come  tc  him  ?  Then  you  are  saved.  Confess  your  faith,  and 
give  Jesus  honour.  Love  him  with  all  your  heart ;  and  while  angels  are 
rejoicing  over  yon,  do  you  be  glad  also.  Christ  hath  saved  you,  praise 
him  for  ever  and  ever.  May  the  Lord  add  his  blessing  for  Jesus'  sake. 
Amen. 


Portion  op  Scripturb  read  before  Sermon— Matthew  ix.  9 — 81. 


Hymns  from  **Ocm  Own  Hymn  Book"— 174,  415,  608. 


**  The  Sunday  School  Teachers*  Manual,'*  hy  W.  H.  Groser,  coniaiiia  the  feUewiDf 

remarks  upon  Mr.  Sru&OEOx's 

COMMENTING  &  COMMENTARIES. 


"Mr.  Spurgeon  has  rendered  invaluable  serrioe  to  teachers  and  praadien 
preparing  a  guide  hook  to  expository  literature,  under  the  title  of  "  GoouBentiog 
and  Commentaries,'*  and  which  may  be  had  for  half-a-crown.  It  is  oonspicuoos  for 
yariety  of  information^  fairness,  and  acumen.  We  heartily  recommend  this  laWloui 
and  useful  work," 


^ftt[tfplitan  ifatemade  iuljfit. 


THE  CAUSE  AND    CURE  OP    WEARIXESS   IN   SABBATH- 
SCHOOL  TEACHERS. 


i  I 


Detjvered  on  Thursday  Evening,  November  8th,  1877,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    Tin?    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 
At  a  Convention  of  the  Sunday-school  Union, 


'*  Let  ns  not  be  weary  in  well  doing :  for  in  due  season  we  shall  reap,  if  we  fiiint 
not.*'— Galatians  yI.  9. 

This  verse  occura  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians,  which  so  plainly  sets 
forth  the  grand  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith,  and  teaches  us,  most. 
plainly,  that  salvation  is  not  of  works,  but  of  grace.  As  if  to  confound 
for  ever  those  who  say  that  the  doctrine  of  free  grace  is  unpractical,  the 
apostle,  before  he  closes  his  epistle,  exhorts  belie\'ers  to  labour,  and  in  the 
Terse  before  us  gives  us  a  sentence  worthy  to  be  printed  in  letters  of 
gold  and  hung  np  for  ever  before  the  eyes  of  all  Christian  workers,  "  Be 
not  weary  in  well  doing."  7t  is  time,  my  brethixn,  that  you  are  not  to 
save  yourselves  by  well  doing.  Your  motive  is  not  selfish,  but  because 
yon  are  saved  already  you  desire  to  manifest  the  power  of  gratitude,  and 
to  prove  to  all  the  world  that  those  who  receive  a  free  salvation  are  the 
very  men  who  most  cheerfully  labour  to  please  God  and  to  bring  glory 
to  his  name.  0  ye  who  arc  debtors  to  infinite  mercy,  "  Be  not  weary  in 
well  doing." 

The  aiK)8tle,  at  the  time  he  wrote  our  text,  had  in  his  mind's  eye  the 
well  doing  which  by  its  alms  does  good  unto  all  men,  and  also  that 
kindness  which  leads  hearers  of  the  gospel  to  communicate  in  all  good 
things  unto  him  that  teacheth.  Truly  it  is  easy  to  bo  weary  in  tliese 
matters.  Almsgiving  certainly  is  disheai-tening  w^ork.  One  is  so  con- 
tinually being  deceiv^  that  giving  to  the  poor  becomes  a  weai'y  business. 
Impostors  abound  on  all  sides :  this  city  of  London  swarms  with  im- 
postors who  would  deceive  Solomon  himself.  I  do  not  wonder  that 
men  are  driven  to  organize  their  charity,  which  frequently  means  bring- 
ing it  to  an  end.  The  tendency  is  to  excuse  themselves  because  at  some 
time  or  other  they  have  been  victimized.  A  cruel  hardness  is  abroad 
No.  1,888. 


626  UETBOPOLITAir  TABSBNACLE   FCLPrT. 

which  talks  philosophy,  and  abjures  almsgiving  for  fear  ^Sjstiima^  ear 
delightful  bocibI  econoiivy.  AunsgiTing,  if  ve  ore  to  beliere  Bomc  men, 
has  become  a  crime,  and  the  truly  good  man  is  be  who  never  interferes 
with  the  work  of  1^  poor  law.  To  these  people  it  seems  odd  that  our 
Lord  Bbonld  have  commended  anything  bo  inconsistent  -mtb  political 
economy  as  giving  to  the  poor.  Aocwoing  to  the  modem  school  no 
may  eipect  those  to  be  blessed  who  see  people  hungry  and  give  thcra 
DO  meat,  thirsty  and  give  them~ao  drink,  sick  and  in  prison  and  never 
visit  them  ;  because  hungry  people  should  go  to  the  parish,  and  thirsty 
people  to  the  pump.  I  trust,  howeyer,  th^t  the  Christian  spirit  wfaidi 
IS  pitiful  to  the  poor  wiJ}  )iever  dis  bnt  among  us,  and  that,  notwith- 
standing  ^1  the  difficulties  under  whidi  we  may  have  to  labour,  we  may 
not  be.  weary  in  well  doing,  for  despite  all  deceits  and  impodtioos,  iu 
due  season  we  shall  reap  if  wc  faint  not. 

I  am  sure  I  shall  not  be  wrong  iu  taking  the  text  from  ita  immBdlittc 
omnection  and  am^yiog  it  to  the  work  of  ^bbafh-schools :  for,  first 
of  ^I,  I  am  sure,  hrethren  and  dBlcni,  that  i/our  wmk  i»  well  deseribetl 
in  the  text — ^it  is  well  doin^,  8eoondIy,  I  am  equally  clear  that  you 
are  liable  to  the  evile  mentioned  here,  which  are  common  to  all  Chris- 
tian servioe — weariness  and  feintness :  and  it  is  equally  clear  that  the 
contolaHon  and  encouragement  of  the  text  may  InUhfully  be  enjoyed  by 
you.    "  Iu  due  season  we  shall  reap,  if  we  fiiint  not." 

I.  First,  then,  I  know  you  will  all  agree  with  me  that  touk  wore 
18  WELL  DESCHIBBD  III  THB  TBTT. 

It  may  be  set  forth  in  so  many  words  as  tcell  doing.  Too  entered 
upon  it  because  you  felt  it  to  be  so,  and  yon  continue  in  it  for  the  some 
reason.  Another  description  of  Christian  work  is  implied  in  the  j^romlsa 
of  reaping  i  yonr  work  h  sowing.  Take  the  two  ideas  of  well  doing  and 
sowing,  and  they  will  both  be  found  to  be  exceedingly  well  embodied  in 
holy  labonr  among  the  young. 

Snnday4chool work  is  leeUdoing.  How  can  it  beothcrwisc,  forifisaii 
act  e/obediencef  I  trust  yon  have  entered  upau  it  because  you  call  Jeaiu 
^our  Master  and  Lord,  and  you  wish  to  fulflL  tlie  great  comtnaud, "  Go]^ 
into  all  the  worid,  and  preach  the  gospel  U.'  every  crenture."  You  find 
children  to  be  creatures,  &llen  creatures,  liut  still  lovable  Uttle  things  full 
of  vigour,  and  liie,  andglee.  You  see  tht:m  to  be  a  compoaentpart  ofthe 
race,  and  yon  conclude  at  once  that  your  Mik.'itcr'E  comumud  applies  to  them. 
Yon  are  not  like  the  disciples  who  would  put  them  baok,  for  you  hare 
learned  from  their  mistake,  and  you  remember  tlio  words  of  their  Master 
and  yours,  "SnSer  the  littk  otdldren  to  cumc  unto  roe,  aud  forbid  them 
not.'  Yon  know,  too,  that  "out  of  the  moutln  of  babes  aud  anckliugit  he 
hath  ordained  strength  because  of  the  adversary  j"  so  that  you  are  sure 
that  he  included  the  little  ones  in  the  general  comuussiuu  w'nen  he  said, 
"  Preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature.  You  are  doubly  aurc  that  yoa 
are  obeying  his  will  because  you  have  oertnin  special  prcccjjts  which  re-  ■ 
late  to  the  little  ones,  such  as  "  Feed  my  lambs,"  and  "  Tram  up  a  chilil 
in  the  way  he  should  go,  and  when  he  is  old  he  shall  not  depart  from  it." 
,  Yoa  know  that  it  Ib  our  duty  to  preserve  aiive  a  testimony  in  the  world, 
and  therefore  von  are  anxious  to  teaoh  tlie  word  to  your  children  that 
they  may  teacn  it  to  their  .children,  that  so,  from  gcncmtiou  to  genera- 
tion, the  word  of  the  Lord  may  be  made  known,     Be  the  task  plcawiit 


THE  CAUSE   AND  CURE   OF  WEARINESS.  C27 

or  irksome  to  you,  it  is  not  yours  to  liesitate  but  to  obey.  The  love 
•which  has  redeemed  you  also  constrains  you.  You  feel  the  touch  of  the 
sacred  hand  upon  your  shoulder,  the  hand  which  once  was  pierced,  and 
jou  hear  your  Redeemer  say,  "  As  my  Father  hath  sent  me,  even  so  send 
I  you  ; "  and  because  of  that  sending,  you  go  forth  to  the  little  ones  in 
obedience  to  his  will.  He  who  obeys  is  doing  well,  and  in  this  sense 
your  semce  among  the  little  ones  is  well  doing. 

AVell  doing  it  is,  again,  because  it  hruujs  ffJori/  to  Ood.  We  must 
always  continue  to  receive  from  God,  who  is  the  great  fountain  of  good- 
ness and  blessing,  but  yet,  in  infinite  condoBcension,  he  permits  us  to 
make  him  some  return.  As  the  dewdrop  reflects  the  beam  with  which 
the  gi*eat  sun  adoi*ns  it,  so  may  wo,  in  our  measure,  make  the  light  of 
our  great  Father  to  sparkle  before  the  eyes  of  men.  Our  lives  may  be  as 
the  rivers  which  run  into  the  sea  from  whence  they  originally  came. 
Whenever  we  attempt  that  which  \\\\\  clearly  promote  the  divine  glory, 
we  are  well  doing.  When  we  make  known  Jehovah's  grace,  when  wo 
work  in  accordance  with  his  purposes  of  love,  when  we  speak  forth  the 
truth  which  honours  his  beloved  Son ;  whenever,  indeed,  the  Holy  Spirit 
through  us  bears  witness  to  the  eternal  verities  of  the  gospel,  there  is 
well  doing  towards  God.  We  cannot  increase  his  intrinsic  glory,  but 
through  his  Spirit  we  can  make  his  glory  to  be  more  widely  seen  :  and 
among  the  choicest  ways  of  doing  this  we  give  a  high  place  to  the 
teaching  of  children  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  in  order  that  they  may  be  a 
seed  to  serve  him,  and  to  rejoice  in  his  salvation. 

And  who  shall  doubt  that  Sabbath-school  work  is  well  dmig  tmvards 
man  ?  The  highest  form  of  charity  is  to  teach  our  fellow-man  the  gospel 
of  Jesus  Christ.  Thou  mayest  give  bread  to  thy  fellow,  but  when  he 
has  eaten  it  is  gone;  if  thou  givest  him  the  bread  of  lite  it  abides  ^nth 
him  for  ever.  Thou  mayest  give  him  bi-ead  in  plenty,  but  in  due  time  ho 
Anil  die  as  his  fathers  have  done  l>efoi'e  him ;  but  if  thou  givest  him  th'3 
bread  of  heaven,  and  he  eat  thereof,  he  shall  live  for  ever.  God  has  en- 
abled thee  to  hand  out  to  him  immortal  food,  even  Jesus,  who  is  **  that 
bread  from  heaven."  What  a  blessing  it  is  to  a  man  if  you  are  the 
instrument  of  changing  his  heart,  and  so  of  emancipating  him  from  vice 
i\nd  making  him  free  unto  holiness?  To  lead  a  soul  to  Christ  is  to  lead 
it  to  heaven.  It  is  assuredly  a  noble  part  of  benevolence  to  deliver  the 
<^pel  to  the  sons  of  men ;  and,  if  possible,  this  benevolence  is  of  a  still 
higher  kind  when  you  deliver  the  truth  of  God  to  children,  for  as  pre- 
vention is  better  than  a  cure,  so  is  it  better  to  prevent  a  Hfe  of  vice  than 
to  rescue  from  it ;  and  as  the  earlier  a  soul  has  light  the  shorter  is  its 
night  of  darkness,  so  the  earlier  in  life  salvation  comes  to  the  heart  the 
better,  and  greater  is  the  benediction.  To  receive  the  dew  of  grace  while 
we  are  yet  in  the  dew  of  youth  is  a  double  boon. 

Bretliren,  your  work  is  one  of  well-doing,  of  the  most  thorough 
and  radical  kind,  for  you  strike  at  the  vciy  root  of  sin  in  the  child 
by  seeking  his  regeneration.  You  desire,  by  the  grace  of  God,  to  win 
the  heart  for  Christ  at  the  beginning  of  life,  and  this  is  the  best  of  bless- 
ings. I  hope  yon  are  not  among  those  who  only  hope  to  see  vour 
children  converted  when  they  are  grown  up,  and  feel  satisfied  to  let  them 
a'eraain  in  thdr  sins  while  they  are  children.  I  hope  that  you  pray  for 
the  con%ersion  of  children  as  childi-en,  and  are  working  to  that  end  by 


C26  UETROPOLITAK  TASERSACLB  PULPIT, 

the  Spirit's  gradous  aid.  If  yon  are  doing  ao  I  know  not  of  any  Eervice 
more  fit  to  engage  the  angels  of  heaven,  if  they  conld  he  permitted  to 
nndertake  it.  Sotely,  if  they  could  t«ach  the  goepel  to  mankind,  and 
had  |their  choice  of  leamera,  they  might  well  pass  thoae  by  who  are 
already  hardened  in  sin,  and  vho  can  only  give  their  tottering  age  to 
Christ ;  and  gather  for  him  the  young  whose  day  is  but  dawning.  Vfe 
may  not  set  one  work  against  another,  bnt  at  any  rate  we  may  ooont 
ODTselvee  happy  if  onr  s]ntere  is  among  tlie  yonng.  Let  ns  g^er  ^e 
rosebads  for  Jesns.  Let  ns  bring  to  him  the  virgin  in  her  earliest 
beauty,  and  the  young  man  in  his  first  vigonr,  before  dn  and  age  have 
qoite  despoiled  them  of  their  charms.  Let  us  find  for  him  those  who 
can  give  nim  a  whole  life,  and  honour  him  &om  dawn  till  its  eve.  Oh, 
it  is  glorious  to  have  such  work  tor  Jesns.  Oo  ye  to  your  yoathfiil 
charges,  lejoicinE  in  your  work,  for  it  ia  well  doing. 

It  is  by  no  means  dillicalt  to  see  that  Suudny-school  work  is  emeing. 
Upon  this  I  will  not  Gpcak  much,  fur  the  cmbleoi  is  easy  to  be  under- 
stood; your  schools  ai-e  the  field,  tho  goepel  it)  the  seed,  and  you  arc  the 
sowers.  Suffer  mc  unly  to  say  that  yours  is  a  work  iu  which  there  are 
great  outgoings  and  apparent  losings ;  even  as  tlie  sower  casU  Iiis  seed 
into  the  earth,  buries  it,  and  it  is  lost  to  him,  so  do  you  spend  your 
strength,  yonr  thought,  your  love,  your  talent,  your  time,  and  at  fiist  eoc 
no  ratnm.  Tou  ai'e  sacrificin;;  yonr  leisure,  and  much  of  the  religious 
privileges  of  your  fellow  Christians.  You  arc,  as  some  say,  burning 
yonraelves  in  Uie  school — surrendering  ease  and  repose  for  unrcmuneratcd 
work.  I  speak  after  the  manner  of  men.  You  engage  in  these  self- 
denials  because  you  beUeve  that  truth,  like  a  seed,  ought  to  be  sown,  and 
tliat  it  is  yonr  duty  to  sow  it.  It  is  frequently  said  that  "  truth  is  mighty, 
and  will  prevail ";  but  this  must  he  ijualiiied  by  the  reflection  that  truth 
does  nothing  by  way  of  conquest  till  it  is  spoken  out  by  earnest  men,  I 
doubt  not  that  there  arc  hundreds  of  great  tniths,  in  the  sliapc  of  social 
nfinrns,  now  lying  on  the  shelf,  and  ha\ing  httle  or  no  power  because 
they  have  not  yet  found  a  brave  and  earnest  tongue  to  proclaim  them. 
Wben  the  man  shall  come  who  is  ordained  to  be  thdr  spokesman  they 
Till  ring  oat  like  a  clarion,  and  hosts  nill  gather  to  their  standard,  but 
meanwhile  tJi^  he  like  sleeping  giants  wlioec  might  sleeps  nith  them. 
There  ia  power  iu  truth,  as  there  is  life  in  seed,  but  it  will  bo  hidden  till 
like  seed  it  is  sown  in  favourable  soU.  It  needs  a  sower,  and  feeling  that 
taith  ought  to  be  sown  yon  conaecrate  yourselves  to  that  work. 

Yon  Inve,  moreover,  looked  at  the  children,  and  you  have  felt  that 
the  sml  of  their  minds  ought  to  be  sown,  Yuu  hope  to  find  good  soil  at 
least  in  some  oases,  and  it  strikes  you  that,  to  delay  to  sow  irill  bo  oul- 
'  pable  neglect.  You  arc  sure  that  if  yoH  do  not  sow  tho  devil  will,  and 
that  weMB  wiU  spring  up  if  wheat  be  not  sown ;  and  you  wish,  if  yon 
can,  to  ^t  the  start  of  some  at  least  of  the  devil's  servants,  and  drop  in 
tiie  seeds  of  divine  truth  before  the  grosser  uoes  have  come  to  dcvelop- 
laeat.  Yon  know  that  abundance  of  the  seed  of  noxious  plants  lies 
hidden  in  that  plot  of  ground  by  nature,  as  the  result  of  the  Fall,  hut 
still  before  they  have  grown  into  rank  luxuriance  you  desire  to  choke  the 
weeds  with  the  rapid  growth  of  heaven's  own  com.  Y'our  present  (mx^u- 
pataon  is  to  sow  the  children's  minds.  You  arc  delighted  when  you  see 
the  seed  spring  up  iminediatcly,  but  ivfici'e  it  trios  your  patience  you 


THE  CAUSE  AND  CURE  OF  WEARINESS.  629 

still  SOW.  When  I  had  a  little  garden  of  my  own,  and  put  in  mnstard 
and  cress,  I  went  the  next  morning  to  see  if  it  was  sprouting,  and  was 
not  satisfied  to  wait  for  the  due  season.  I  turned  over  the  mould,  and 
I  dare  say  I  checked  the  growth  of  the  seed  by  my  over  haste.  It  is 
i\mte  possible  for  teachers  to  commit  the  same  folly  by  an  unbelieving 
hurry,  expecting  to  reap  to-morrow  what  they  have  sown  to-day.  Imme- 
diate fruit  may  come,  for  God  worketh  marvellously,  but  whether  it  does 
or  not,  your  plain  duty  is  to  sow.  Heap  you  shall,  but  meanwhile  you 
must  be  satisfied  to  go  on  sowing,  sowing,'  sowing,  even  to  the  end. 
Reaping  is  your  retvm'dy  but  sowing  is  your  work.  Sowing,  sowing, 
ever  sowing,  till  the  hand  is  palsied  in  death,  and  the  seed  basket  is 
carried  on  another  arm.    Well  doing  by  sowing  the  seed  is  your  work. 

II.  Now,  secondly,  it  appears  from  the  text  that  in  your  service  you 
WILL  MEET  WITH  EVILS,  common  to  Christian  workers  of  all  descrip- 
tions :  especially  will  you  be  liable  to  weariness  and  fiaintness. 

Take  the  first  word  as  it  stands  in  our  version ;  you  will  be  tempted  to 
grow  laeari/.  Hard  work,  this  teaching  children.  Some  good  souls  seem 
bom  to  it,  do  it  splendidly,  and  enjoy  it ;  to  others  it  is  a  stern  labour. 
Some  are  by  constitution  exceedingly  inapt  at  it,  but  I*  do  not  think  that 
they  should  excuse  themselves  by  that  fact,  but  should  educate  themselves 
into  losing  the  work :  many  people  around  us  are  very  inapt  at  anything 
which  would  cause  them  a  perspiration,  but  we  call  them  lazy,  and  goad 
them  on.  It  is  no  new  thing  for  men  to  attempt  to  escape  the  army  by 
pretending  to  be  in  bad  health,  but  we  must  have  none  of  this  cowardly 
malingering  in  Christ's  army ;  we  must  be  ready  for  anything  and  every- 
thing. We  must  compel  ourselves  to  duty  when  it  goes  against  the 
gi*ain.  When  it  is  a  clear  duty,  obedience  must  master  our  aversion.  I 
have  no  donbt  whatever  that  teaching  is,  to  some,  very  toilsome  work, 
but  then  it  has  to  be  done  all  the  same.  I  delight  to  hear  you  speak, 
dear  brethren,  with  holy  enthusiasm  of  the  privilege  of  teaching  children, 
and  I  folly  believe  in  it;  but  I  know  also  that  it  requires  no  small 
degree  of  self-denial  on  your  part,  self-denial  for  which  the  church  does 
not  always  give  you  due  credit.  To  continue  fix)m  Sabbath  to  Sabbath 
drilling  some  little  BibUcal  knowledge  into  those  noisy  boys,  and  trying 
to  sober  do^vn  those  giddy  girls,  is  no  light  amusement  or  pretty  pastime. 
It  must  be  a  toil,  and  therefore  it  is  not  difficult  to  become  weary. 

Teachers  may  the  more  readily  tire  because  the  work  lasts  on  year 
after  year.  If  you  are  all  Sunday-school  teachers  I  am  very  happy  to  per- 
ceive so  many  grey  and  bald  heads  among  you.  It  looks  well.  I  admire 
the  vetei'ans  of  your  army.  There  ought  to  be  an  "  Old  Guard  "  as  well 
as  new  regiments.  Why  leave  this  work  to  young  beginners?  Did  not 
Darid  say,  "  Come,  ye  children,  hearken  unto  me,  and  I  will  teach  you 
the  fear  of  the  Lord,"  when  he  was  in  the  prime  of  Ufe  ?  Why,  then, 
do  so  many  cease  to  teach  when  they  are  best  qualified  to  do  so  ?  Have 
not  many  aged  persons  a  gentleness  and  an  impressiveness  which  pecu- 
liarly qualify  them  to  arrest  the  attention  of  the  young?  As  they  Imow 
more  by  experience  than  most  of  ns,  should  they  not  be  all  the  readier  to 
impart  instruction  ?  It  was  always  my  dehght  to  sit  at  my  grand&ther's 
feet  when  he  told  out  his  experience  of  ike  grace  of  God.  When  he  was 
(^iglity  years  old  or  more  his  witness  to  the  j^ithfohiess  of  God  was  worth 
going  many  miles  to  hear.    There  are  scores  of  aged  men  and  women  whose 


e.10  UETBOPOLITAff  TABKRITAOLE  PUTJTr. 

Ure-story  ought  to  be  ofUii  told  Hnuntg  cliildren ;  with  their  loving 
waje  niid  diccrfut  mMinera  they  would  be  an  aoqiiiaitioii  tu  any  school 
fi.r  tlie  children's  sake,  wliile  to  the  toat-hcre  their  weight  and  wisdom 
would  be  an  inealculable  benefit.  Die  in  haniesa,  my  brethreo,  if 
your  mental  and  physical  vigtmr  will  permit.  Stillj  the  long  round  of 
many  years'  labour  must  tena  to  make  the  norker  weary ;  and  the  man 
so  if  the  work  is  allowed  to  become  mniiotonoiut,  as  iii  some  sciuM-b  it 
certainly  is.  You  go  to  the  same  dingy  room  and  sit  on  the  same  cbair 
before  the  same  claas  of  boys,  Itis  true  the  boys  are  not  the  same  bojB, 
for  though  the  pro^^erb  says  "Boys  will  he  lxi)'s,"  I  find  that  tht-y  will 
not  be  boys,  bnt  that  they  will  be  men ;  but  still  one  buy  is  bo  mucli  lite 
another  boy  that  the  class  is  oTCrmore  the  same.  Tlic  lefiSL>ns  Tsiy 
bnt  the  truth  ia  the  same,  and  the  work  of  toachiiig  is  like  the  tow'mg  A 
seed — very  much  the  same  thingover  ando\'er  again.  Lovers  of  change 
will  hardly  find  in  regular  Bundny-echool  work  r  field  fur  their  fidiicncas. 
The  text  says,  "  Be  not  wearj'. '  Come,  brother,  are  you  tired  out? 
How  long  have  you  been  teacbiii;;?  A  thousand  years  ?  ToRSmS^ 
and  I  smile  too,  and  say— do  not  be  weary  wltJi  any  period  of  serri* 
short  of  that.  Our  Lord  desorvus  a  whole  eternity  to  be  ^leot  in  his 
praise,  and  we  hope  so  to  spend  it ;  and,  therefore,  let  us  not  be  mttj 
with  the  few  years  which  constitute  the  ordinary  life  of  man. 

I  hnd  the  Greek  word  contains  the  idea  of  being  "  diiheattenod :" 
"  T^t  us  not  lose  heart."  This  is  a  soul- weariness  against  whicdi  we  nuA 
resolutely  fight.  It  comes  to  many  good  workers  and  BhowB  itaetf  ia 
diSerent  ways.  Home  think  the  work  less  important  than  they  did  at  Ifae 
first ;  others  fear  that  their  part  of  it  will  prove  an  ntter  &iitue,  Ttit 
is  heart- weariness.  AVhen  a  l^bbath-school  is  going  down,  whea  there  an 
not  so  many  children  as  in  former  years,  or,  what  ia  cqnally  bad,  wheal  thcR 
are  not  enough  teachers,  the  poor  superintendent  &1[b  into  groat  uuietT. 
and  the  teachers  at  the  teachers'  meetings  are  not  in  the  best  (A  s 
By  the  way,  I  am  not  sure  that  you  teachers  ain-ays  edify  one  ant^ 
those  meetings,  or  that  you  always  have  the  Spirit  of  tiod  uoMig  yoo. 
I  have  heard  otlierwiee  sometimes ;  and  yet  I  cannot  blame  yoo,  fcr  I 
haTe  heard  of  church  meetings  too  whieh  have  not  been  *'  like  a  little 
heaven  below,"  nor  would  I  say  of  them,  "  I  have  been  there  and  stilt 
would  go."  When  the  condition  of  the  school  is  disorder  and  decline 
the  best  of  teachers  become  discouraged  and  weary.  At  mch  timea 
good  teachers  hardly  know  how  to  go  to  their  work  at  ^  for  there 
is  not  that  loving  spirit  in  the  school  which  rendtav  it  a  h(^^ 
family,  neither  is  there  that  power  in  prayer  which  secures  the  grMt 
Father's  picsenoe,  and  therefore  many  beoc«ie  distressed  and  tire  of  tiie 
service.  Now  comes  in  my  text,  "  Be  not  weary  in  well  doing."  Pluck 
up  courage.  Do  not  be  a  coward.  Hope  on,  hope  ever.  Woit  on, 
even  though  the  task  beconies  more  and  more  trying  to  yoo.  Do  not 
despise  your  vocation,  nor  stay  your  hand,  be  not  woary  in  nisU  doit^. 

Our  t«.xt  next  speaks  of  onr  /ain/iitg.  The  original  word  has  at  its 
base  the  idea  of  being  loosened.  You  know,  there  is  a  girding  np  of 
the  loms  wliich  means  yrotk,  and  there  is  a  loosening,  not  merely  of 
garments,  but  of  sinews,  which  means  that  the  man  will  do  no  more. 
Home  Snnday-achool  teachers  get,  as  the  saying  ia,  npon  the  loose. 
They  display  an  utt<.i'  want  of  eiiers;y :  they  ore  unstrung.     They  do  not 


THE  CAUSE  AND  CURE  OF  WEARINESS.  681 

teach  their  classes  with  all  their  heart,  and  soul,  and  strength,  but  they 
get  through  in  a  "  slipshod  "  fashion,  like  a  man  trudging  along  with 
loosened  sandals.  They  teach,  but  put  no  honest  work  into  it :  their 
heart  is  no  longer  bound  to  the  altar.  The  school  work  is  performed  in 
i-outine  fasliiou,  and  it  might  almost  as  well  have  been  let  alone.  I  have 
seen  a  man  at  work  in  such  a  sleepy  style  that  I  have  been  ready  to  cry 
out,  "  Dear  me !  dear  rac !  I  cannot  endure  to  see  such  crawling  and 
creeping !  Stand  away  !  Give  me  your  tool,  and  let  me  have  a  turn  at 
it ;"  and  even  so  might  one  feel  the  same  about  certain  teachers.  A 
chapter  is  read,  and  remarks  made  upon  it  which  cost  neither  thought 
nor  reading ;  hymns  sung  \Nithout  the  slightest  siga  of  life,  and  prayer 
offered  without  heart.  A  living  Sunday-school  teacher  standing  by  has 
been  ready  to  weep  to  see  how  the  children  become  indifferent  because 
the  teacher  is  trifling.  There  must  be  life,  force,  fire,  heart,  ener^, 
intensity,  put  into  your  service,  or  it  will  be  valueless.  Dear  fiiehds,  ao 
not  fell  into  a  loose  state.  You  shall  bind  your  sheaves  soon  if  you  do 
oot  become  loose  in  your  own  minds.  You  shall  reap  if  you  do  not 
become  languid  and  lethargic. 

How  is  it  that  we  ever  fall  into  that  state  ?  What  are  the  excuses 
that  we  make  for  ourselves  Avhen  we  faint  ?  At  times  we  are  tempted 
to  give  it  all  up.  We  feel  that  there  is  no  good  being  done,  and 
therefore  we  cannot  hold  on  any  longer.  What  makes  us  talk  so  ? 
Is  it  not  the  old  Adam — our  carnal  nature  ?  Should  we  not  mortify 
him,  and  say,  "  Now,  old  Adam,  you  want  mc  to  give  up  the  Sunday- 
school,  and  I  shall  refuse  to  do  so  for  that  very  reason  "?  My  idle  flesh  is 
saying  to  me,  "  Take  things  a  little  more  leisurely.  Do  not  take  extra 
work  upon  yourself."  Ah,  flesh,  proud  flesh,  if  I  sow  to  you  I  shall  reap 
corruption.  What  a  horrible  thing  it  is,  that  reaping  of  corruption. 
The  very  word  seems  to  swarm  with  linng  and  moving  abominations ; 
its  meaning  is  intensely  abhorrent  to  the  pure  mind.  We  must  at  once 
reply,  "  No,  flesh,  I  cannot  sow  to  thee  and  reap  comiption,  and  there- 
fore you  must  be  denied.  I  shall  mortify  you,  and  continue  with  my 
class  at  the  school.  I  had  thought  of  giving  it  up,  but  I  will  not  in- 
dulge you  so  much,  but  by  God's  grace  1  will  persevere." 

Do  you  not  think  that  at  times  our  getting  lax  in  Christian  work 
arises  from  our  being  very  low  in  grace  ?  As  a  rule,  you  cannot  get  out 
of  a  man  that  which  is  not  in  him.  You  cannot  go  forth  yourself  to 
your  class  and  do  your  work  vigorously  if  you  have  lost  inward  vigour. 
You  cannot  minister  before  the  Lord  with  the  unction  ef  the  Holy  One 
if  that  unction  is  not  upon  you.  If  you  are  not  living  near  to  God  and 
in  the  power  of  God,  then  the  power  of  God  will  not  go  forth  through 
you  to  the  children  of  your  care ;  so  that  I  think  we  should  judge,  when 
we  become  discontented  and  down-hearted,  that  we  are  out  of  sorts 
spiritually.  Let  as  say  to  ourselves,  "  Come !  my  soul !  What  aileth  thee  ? 
This  feint  heart  is  a  sign  that  thou  art  out  of  health.  Go  to  the  gix^at 
Physician,  and  obtain  from  him  a  tonic  which  shall  brace  thee.  Come, 
play  the  mnn.  Have  none  of  these  whims!  Away  with  your  idleness! 
The  reaphig-time  will  come,  therefore  thrust  in  the  plough." 

Is  not  another  reason  why  we  become  down-hearted  to  be  found  in  the 
coldness  and  indifference  of  our  fellow  Christians  ?  We  see  others  doing 
the  Lord's  work  carelessly :  and  when  we  are  all  on  fire  ourselves  we  find 


63i  UETROFOUTAN  TABERHAOLE  FULFIT. 

tliein  to  be  cold  as  ico :  we  get  nmoiig  people  in  the  cliurch  who  do  not 
seem  to  cnrc  whether  the  souls  of  the  chudreii  are  saved  or  not,  and 
thus  we  nrc  apt  to  bo  discouraged.  The  idleness  of  others  shonlfi  he 
ail  ar^uncnt  fur  our  being  more  diligent  onreeliTS.  If  our  Master's 
work  is  fiuSfcring  at  the  hantis  of  our  fellow  senanta,  should  we  not  try 
to  do  twice  as  much  oureelvca  to  make  np  for  their  deficiencies  ?  Ought 
not  the  laggards  to  be  waniings  to  us  leBt  we  also  come  into  the  same 
lukewarm  uoiidition  ?  To  argue  that  I  ought  to  be  a  shiggard  lieoause 
others  luit£r  is  poor  logic. 

Sometimes,  too — I  am  ashamed  to  mention  it — I  have  heard  of  teachers 
becoming  weary  from  want  of  being  appreciated.  Their  work  has  not 
been  snfhciently  noticed  by  the  pastor,  and  praised  by  the  superintendent, 
and  sulficieiit  notice  has  not  been  taken  of  them  an^  their  class  by  ilieir 
Ibllon -tcachei'S.  I  will  not  saj  much  about  this  cause  of  laintness. 
boeausc  it  is  so  small  an  affair  that  it  is  quite  bclon'  a  Cliristtan.  Appre- 
ciation !  Do  we  cxiject  it  in  this  world  ?  The  Jewish  nation  despised  Rud 
rejected  their  King,  and  even  if  we  were  as  holy  as  the  I^ord  Jesus  we 
might  still  fail  to  be  rightly  judged  and  properly  esteemed.  Wliat  matters 
it  ?  If  God  aw.'epts  us  we  need  not  be  dismayed,  though  all  should  ikiss 
us  by. 

Perhaps,  however,  ffie  irork  itself  may  suggest  to  us  a  little  more 
excuse  for  being  weary.  It  is  hard  work  to  suiv  on  the  highway,  and 
amidst  the  tlionis — liard  work  to  be  casting  good  seed  upon  the  rock 
Year  nft«r  year.  IVell,  if  I  had  done  so  for  many  years,  and  was  enabled 
by  the  Holy  Ghost.  I  would  gay  to  myself,  "I  sliall  not  give  up  my  work 
because  I  iiavc  not  yet  received  n  recompense  in  it,  for  I  peroei™  that 
in  the  Lord's  parable  three  sowings  did  not  succeed,  and  yet  tlie  one 
piece  of  good  ground  paid  for  all.  Perhape  I  have  gone  through  my 
tliree  unauccessfiil  sowings,  and  now  is  my  time  to  enjoy  my  ftinrth. 
ill  which  the  seed  will  fiill  upon  good  groond."  It  is  a  pity,  dear 
brothel',  when  you  have  had  some  years  of  rough  work,  to  give  all 
np  noii:  Why,  now  you  are  going  to  enjojr  the  sweets  of  your  former 
labour.  It  would  Imj  a  pity,  my  dear  sister,  just  when  you  have  mastered 
your  class,  and  prepared  the  nay  for  a  blessing,  for  you  to  run  away  from  il. 
There  is  bo  much  less  of  difficulty  for  yon  to  overcome  by  as  much  rs  jxiu 
have  already  ovcri.'ome.  He  who  has  passed  bo  many  miles  of  a  mugli 
voyage  will  not  have  to  go  over  those  miles  again  :  do  not  let  him  think 
of  going  back.  To  go  back,  indeed,  in  this  pilgrimage  were  shameful ; 
and  as  we  have  no  annour  for  our  back,  it  would  be  dwigcnms. 
Putting  our  baud  t*!  this  plough  mid  looking  back  will  prove  that  we- 
were  unwortliy  of  the  kingdom.  If  there  be  a  hundred  reasons  for 
giving  np  your  work  of  fiiith,  there  are  fifty  thousand  for  going  on 
with  it.  Though  there  are  many  arguments  for  fainting,  there  are  far 
more  arguments  for  persevering.  Though  we  might  be  weary,  and 
do  sometimes  feel  so,  let  us  wait  upon  the  I*ord  and  renew  our  atrength. 
and  we  shall  mount  up  with  win^  as  eagles,  forget  our  weariness,  and 
be  strong  in  the  Iiord  and  in  the  power  of  his  might. 

III.  That  observation  brings  me  to  the  last  part  of  my  subject  which 
is  that  WE  HAVK  ABrsDANT  ENCOirBAGHMENT  in  thc  prospect  of  reward 
which  is  afforded  iu  the  text,    "  lu  due  season  we  shall  reap,  if  we  fiiint 


TUB  CAUSE  AND  CURE  OF  WEARINESS.  C3 


o 


The  first  remark  upon  that  promise  shall  be — that  reaping  time  will 
come.  Our  chief  business  is  to  glorify  God  by  teaching  the  truth 
whether  souls  are  saved  or  not ;  but  still  I  demur  to  the  statement  that  we 
may  go  on  preaching  the  gospel  for  years  and  yeai-s  and  even  all  our  life- 
time, and  yet  no  result  may  follow.  They  say,  "  Paul  inay  preach  and 
ApoUos  limy  water,  but  God  giveth  the  increase."  I  should  like  them 
to  find  that  passage  in  the  Bible.  In  my  English  Bible  it  runs  thus — "I 
(Paul)  have  planted,  Apollos  watered ;  but  God  gave  the  increase." 
There  is  not  the  slightest  intent  to  teach  us  that  when  Paul  planted  and 
Apollos  watered  God  would  arbitrarily  refuse  the  increase.  All  the 
glory  is  claimed  for  the  Lord,  but  honest  labour  is  not  despised.  I  do 
not  say  that  there  is  the  same  relation  between  teaching  the  truth  and 
conversion  as  there  is  between  cause  and  effect,  so  that  they  are.  invariably 
connected ;  but  I  will  maintain  that  it  is  the  rule  of  the  kingdom  that 
they  should  be  connected,  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Some  causes  will  not  produce  effects  because  certain  obstacles  inter- 
vene to  prevent.  A  person  may  teach  the  gospel  in  a  bad  spirit: 
that  mtist  spoil  it.  A  person  may  teach  only  part  of  the  gospel,  and  he 
may  put  that  the  \NTong  way  upwards.  God  may  bless  it  somewhat, 
but  yet  the  good  man  may  greatly  retard  the  blessing  by  the  mistaken 
manner  in  which  he  delivers  the  truth.  Take  it  as  a  rule  that  the 
truth  of  God  prayed  over,  spoken  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  dwelling  in  the  man  who  speaks  it,  will  produce  the 
effect  which  is  natural  to  it.  As  the  rain  climbs  not  up  to  the  skies, 
and  the  snow  flakes  never  take  to  themselves  \\ing8  to  rise  to  heaven, 
so  neither  shall  the  word  of  God  return  unto  him  void,  but  it  shall 
accomplish  that  which  he  pleases.  "VVe  have  not  spent  our  strength 
in  vam.  Not  a  verse  taught  to  a  little  girl,  nor  a  text  dropped 
into  the  ear  of  a  careless  boy,  nor  an  earnest  Avaming  given  to  an  obdu- 
rate young  sinner,  nor  a  loving  farewell  to  one  of  the  senior  girls,  shall 
be  without  some  result  or  other  to  the  glory  of  God.  And,  taking  it  all 
together  as  a  mass,  though  this  handful  of  seed  may  be  eaten  of  the  birds, 
and  that  other  seed  may  die  on  the  hard  rock,  yet,  as  a  whole,  the  seed 
shall  spring  up  in  sufficient  abundance  to  plentifully  reward  the  sower  and 
the  giver  of  the  seed.    We  know  that  our  labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord. 

I  do  not  come  into  this  pulpit  myself  with  any  fear  that  I  shall  preach 
in  vain.  It  does  not  occur  to  me  that  such  a  thing  can  happen.  I 
thought  so  once,  when  I  thought  more  of  myself  than  now  ;  but  now  I 
am  assured  that  if  I  speak  out  God's  message  in  the  best  way  I  can,  and 
with  mnch  prayer  leave  it  all  with  God,  he  will  take  care  of  it.  I  expect 
to  see  people  converted,  not  because  there  is  any  good  in  them,  but 
because  the  Lord  works  as  he  pleases,  and  will  call  whom  he  pleases,  and 
will  give  to  his  own  truth  victory  and  honour.  Go  to  your  classes  with 
this  persuasion,  "  I  shall  not  labour  in  vain,  or  spend  my  strength  for 
nought."  "  According  to  your  faith,  so  be  it  unto  yon."  Take  a  little 
measure,  and  you  shall  have  it  filled  with  the  manna  of  success,  but  take 
a  great  omer,  and  in  its  fulness  yon  shall  ha\^  abundance.  Believe  in 
the  power  of  the  truth  you  preach.  Belize  in  the  power  of  Christ 
about  whom  you  speak.  Believe  in  the  omnipotence  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
whose  help  you  have  invoked  in  earnest  prayer.  Go  to  your  sowing, 
and  reckon  upon  reaping. 


C34  METROPOLITAN  TABEHSACLE  rULPIT, 

I  want  to  call  yoiir  paiticular  attention  to  a  word  in  the  text  wliich 
is  vorj  full  of  oucuiinigi'iiieiit.  "  Lot  «»  nut  t>e  weary,  for  tct  sb»l! 
reap."  We  shall  reap.  Dear  brethren  ami  sisters,  we  ^lall  reap.  It 
is  not,  "  We  shall  do  the  work,  and  our  miccessors  shall  reap  after  ire 
iire  gone."  Wo  ought  to  be  very  pleafied  even  with  that,  and  no  doubt 
such  is  often  tlie  tiise,  lint  tee  shall  reap  too.  Yes,  I  shall  have 
my  slioaves,  and  you  will  have  yonra.  Tie  plot  which  T  have  toiled 
and  wept  over  shall  yield  nie  my  sheaves  of  harvest,  and  I  shall  per- 
sonnliy  gather  them.  I  bIioU  reap.  "  I  never  thought  much  of  myself 
as  a  teacher,"  says  one,  "  I  always  fear  that  I  am  hardly  competent,  and 
I  notice  tliat  the  superintendent  has  oiJy  tmstcd  me  with  the  httle  chil- 
dren ;  but  I  am  so  glad  to  hear  tliat  I  shall  ivnp.  I  shall  reap,  I  bImII 
have  a  dear  little  one,  saved  in  the  Lord,  t'j  be  my  portion."  I  pray 
you,  (tear  frienils,  if  you  liave  never  reaped  yet,  Ix^u  to  hope.  Xoa 
teachers  who  arc  always  punctual,  I  mean :  of  coarse,  if  yoa  do  not  come 
in  time,  you  do  not  care  whether  you  reap  or  not ;  bnt  I  speak  t» 
pnncttial  teachers,  I  speak  also  to  ennicst  ccachers — for  if  you  arc  n"t 
earnest  you  will  never  reap :  you  punetiiaj,  earnest,  prayerful  tcachere 
shall  reap.  Some  teachers  do  not  go  in  fur  reaping,  and  tliey  nill  a-A 
enjoy  it.  But  I  am  speaking  now  to  real,  liard-working,  earnest  Sunday- 
school  teachers  who  give  their  hearta  to  it,  and  yet  have  seen  no  reml[& 
Accoixling  to  the  text,  you  sliall  reap.  Come,  my  persevering  comnulos, 
let  us  not  be  dlscour^'d :  "  In  dne  season  ice  sliall  reap,"  even  we.  You 
shall  have  your  sliare  with  others.  Though  you  fi^cl  as  though  yoa 
must  give  it  up,  you  shall  yet  reap.  After  sowing  all  this  while,  do  not 
cease  from  labour  when  reaping  time  is  s:>  near.  If  I  were  a  fitrmer, 
if  I  did  give  up  my  farm,  it  should  be  bcfcrc  I  fiowe<I  my  wheat,  bnt 
if  I  had  d<me  all  the  ploughing  and  tlie  sowing,  I  should  not  say  to 
my  laridloi-d,  "There  aix)  six  weeks  and  then  cometh  harvest,  and  I 
desire  to  let  another  tenant  couie  in."  No,  no,  I  should  want  to  stop 
and  see  the  hanest  gathered  and  the  wheat  taken  to  markcL  I  slionld 
want  to  hare  my  reward.  So,  dear  brothers,  wait  for  your  recompense, 
specially  yon  that  have  bcou  discoui-nged, — ■'  In  due  time  tve  ahalf  reap, 
if  we  feint  not."  We  who  have  thought  least  of  our  service,  and  pcr- 
liaps  have  exercised  lea^t  fiiith,  and  endured  moet  soarchinga  of  heart 
and  most  groaning  and  cning  before  the  Lord,  we  also  "  in  dne  seasun 
shall  reap,  if  we  ^ut  not.' 

This  hardest  will  come  "  in  due  season."  There  is  even  amongmen  a 
dne  season  for  a  reward.  They  say,  "He  is  a  bad  paymaster  who  payi 
beforehand."  So  he  is.  Yon  must  always  keep  a  Uttle  in  hand  for  Sior- 
day  nighty  or  you  may  miss  yonr  man  before  the  week  is  ended.  Some- 
times our  Lord  keeps  hack  his  people's  reward  that  they  msy  have 
something  cheerful  on  before  them,  something  also  to  try  tJieir  mettle, 
and  to  bring  out  all  their  powers.  I  like  to  see  a  brave  man  driven  into 
a  comer,  baffled  and  defeated,  and  yet  resolved  to  overcome  :  then  his 
true  heroism  comes  out.  Hear  him  say,  "  I  have  been  working  Uiat 
ragged  school  for  months,  hi)t  I  make  no  impression  npcHi  the  yonne 
roughs.  There  is  a  disturbanoe  and  disorder  almost  every  lught.  I 
do  not  know  what  to  do,  I  am  at  my  wit's  end;  but  there  is  one  thinz 
I  know — if  it  is  to  be  d(»ie  it  shall  be  done.  In  the  name  of  God  I 
will  continue  at  work  tilt  a  change  is  effected."     There  yon  see  the 


THE  CAUSE  A^^)  CURE  OP  WEARINESS.  C85 

■man  strengthened  by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  labour.  That  is  the  man  who 
will  find  out  how  to  tame  the  arabs.  He  the  man  who  will  draw 
teachers  round  him,  and  build  up  a  noble  school.  Our  true  manhood 
often  lies  deep,  and  needs  to  be  puraued  into  its  den  and  stirred  into 
action.  When  once  it  is  thoroughly  aroused  it  is  grand  to  see  it  leap 
forth  in  passionate  earnestness  to  achieve  its  purpose.  I  love  to  hear  a 
man  say,  "  This  is  impossible  to  men,  but  God  ^vill  enable  me."  This 
is  the  triumph  of  faith,  and  blessed  is  he  that  believeth,  for  the  due 
season  of  reaping  is  near  for  him. 

The  due  season  often  is  when  you  yourself  are  in  a  right  state; 
when  your  feith  has  been  tried,  when  your  resolve  has  become  fixed,  when 
;jou  are  down  on  your  fece  before  God  in  prayer,  when  you  are  emptied 
•out  and  have  no  strength  of  your  own,  when  you  go  to  God  and  cry  to 
liim  alone  for  help,  then  your  due  season  will  come.  The  due  season  for 
haiTest  is  not  the  day  after  the  sced-sowdng,  but  we  must  wait  awhile  and 
not  be  weary.  The  harvest  will  come  as  the  Lord  appoints.  As  all  fruits 
4ire  the  sweeter  for  being  in  season,  so  is  the  reward  of  Christian  service 
^hen  it  comes  in  God's  time. 

Now,  lastly,  when  this  reward  comes,  it  will  abundantly  repay  us. 

What  is  the  reward  of  Sunday-school  teachers  ?  Taking  you,  beloved 
T)rethren,  on  a  broad  scale,  I  would  say  that  your  reward  lies  chiefly  in 
seeing  the  conversion  of  your  children.  There  are  a  great  many  very 
excellent  manuals  upon  the  management  of  Sunday-schools,  and  I  hope 
jou  will  read  them  all,  and  dwell  with  special  attention  upon  the  prize 
essays  ;  until  your  school  is  order  itself  Still  I  have  heard  of  beautifully 
managed  schools  from  which  there  are  very  few  conversions.  Order  may 
be  heaven's  firet  law,  but  it  is  not  heaven's  first  object.  Order  is  very 
desirable  in  a  gai'dcn,  but  fruit  is  the  main  purpose.  I  know  a  school 
which  is  generally  in  a  muddle,  but  yet  chilaren  are  saved  in  it  con- 
tinually. I  wish  it  were  more  orderly,  but  yet  I"  do  not  fret  much  about 
it  BO  long  as  the  grand  result  is  gained.  You  may  form  so  many  niles  and 
orders  that  yon  may  rule  your  hearts  out  of  your  work  :  mind  you  do 
not  fell  into  that  eiror.  Your  great  business  is  to  have  those  children 
saved — systematically  if  you  can,  but  saved  anyhow.  You  must  have 
those  children  convinced  of  sin  by  the  Holy  Spirit  and  led  to  Christ. 
You  must  not  be  satisfied  to  trim  off  your  Sunday-school  in  the  neatest 
istvle,  unless  there  is  real  fruit  unto  the  Lord.  And  what  shall  I  say? 
What  reward  can  equal  the  conversion  of  these  young  immortals  ?  Is 
it  not  the  highest  felicity  that  we  can  enjoy  on  earth,  next  to  commu- 
nion with  our  Lord,  to  see  these  little  ones  saved  ? 

Taking  the  Sunday-school,  however,  on  a  broad  scale,  I  think  yom* 
reward  partly  lies  in  rearing  up  a  generation  of  worship-loving  people. 
We  cannot  get  at  the  great  masses  of  London,  do  what  we  may. 
We  shall  open  this  house  next  Sunday  night  to  all  comers,  but  who  will 
-come?  The  great  mass  of  them  will  be  persons  who  have  always 
gone  to  the  house  of  prayer,  but  only  a  few  of  the  outsiders  will  enter. 
Go  into  what  evangelistic  assembly  you  may,  you  will  soon  detect  from 
the  manner  of  the  singing  that  the  bulk  of  the  people  have  been  ac- 
customed to  sacrcd  song.  We  do  not  know  how  to  get  at  the  great 
tens  of  thousands  ;  but  you  do.  You  reach  them  while  they  are  little, 
xind  you  send  them  home  to  sing  their  hymns  to  their  fathers,  who  will 


686  VETROPOUTAB  TABEBBACI^B  PDLPIT. 

not  come  and  sing  them  here.  They  go  aad  tcU  Uicir  mothers  all  about 
Jeans,  so  that  the  cliildrcii  of  LoDduii  are  the  miBsionaries  of  our  chv. 
They  are  Christ's  li>;nil<k  to  tlie  btuilies  where  ministers  would  be  totally 
shut  out.  You  niv  tniiiiiii^'  them  up,  and  if  you  do  this  ivurk  well  (aud 
I  charge  you  to  look  well  to  the  connecting  link  between  your  seuior 
classes  and  the  cliiircli),  >f  yon  do  this  work  well,  we  Blial!  require 
more  places  of  worship,  and  more  tamest  miuisters,  for  tlie  people  of 
London  will  take  to  coming  to  die  lioiise  of  prayer.  When  that  day 
arrives  there  will  be  a  grand  time  for  the  preachers  of  the  word.  In 
some  Tillages  of  England,  and  eqtei-ially  in  Scotland,  you  will  Ecarcely 
find  a  single  person  absent  when  the  Imnse  of  God  is  open  !  They  all 
go  to  the  kirk,  or  to  the  meeting-house.  Alas,  it  is  not  R)  in  Li>iid<>u. 
We  have  hundreds  of  thousands  who  forfcet  tlic  Sabbiitli.  \\\'  luno,  I 
&ar,  more  than  a  million  of  our  fellow  citizens  who  go  ao  seldom  to  a 

ElacQ  of  worship  that  tliey  may  be  said  to  be  habitually  absent.     It  wiD 
B  a  grand  thing  if  you  can  change  all  this,  and  give  ub  chnrch-going 
miUions. 

And  then,  I  beUeve,  brethren  and  sist^'re,  t.lint  to  yoii  thci-e  will  be 
another  reward,  namely,  that  of  satuniCin^  the  whole  population  with 
TeligiouB  truth.  All  childrea  are  now  to  be  taught  to  read.  Shall 
they  read  so  as  to  grow  np  highwaymen  and  thieves,  or  sliall  they  read 
so  as  to  become  servanta  of  the  living  God?  Veiy  much  of  that 
must  depend  upon  yon.  You  will,  in  due  subordination  to  all  other 
objects,  take  care  to  introduce  your  childrsn  Ui  iutci-eating  but  sound 
litctatnre.  Your  boys  must  read,  and  if  you  are  tiie  teacher  of  a  boy 
who  reads  "  Jack  Sheppard  "  you  will  be  sadly  to  blame  if  he  continues 
to  delight  in  such  an  abomination,  I  trust  that  your  leaven  will  leaven 
the  whole  lump  of  our  country;   that  you  will  be  the  meaua  of  iin- 

f  roving  the  moral  tone  of  society,  and  as  generation  follows  generation 
trust  we  shall  see  a'nation  bright  witli  religious  knowledge,  devout 
with  religious  thought,  and  in  all  things  exalted  by  justice  aud  truth. 
What  an  army  yon  ai-e  here  to-night!  Muy  your  Captain  (Kquc  into 
(he  midst  of  you,  and,  as  he  reviews  you,  may  he  east  a  look  of  love  iuto 
tJie  heart  of  e^'^y  one  of  you,  and  choer  you  and  send  yon  away 
invigorated, 

I  am  delighted  to  have  bad  the  opportunity  of  trpeaidng  this  word  to 
yon,  feeble  Uiough  it  be,  for  God  may  make  it  powerful  by  his  ^riiit. 
Go,  beloved,  and  train  these  children  well.  You  have  undertaken  the 
work,  be  faithful  in  the  dischai^c  of  it.  It  is  worth  doing  well,  for  eo 
mnch  depends  upon  it.  If  yon  do  it  Ijei'IIj,  the  results  will  accuse 
yon  throughout  et^ruity.  Go,  and  teaih  nitli  nil  your  heart,  and  aoul, 
and  might.  Be  not  weary.  Bo  not  slack.  Youi' reaping  time  is  coming. 
The  next  generation  will  even  more  than  the  present  show  what  roa 
have  been  doing,  and  the  next,  and  the  next  will  each  more  fully  dedare 
it,  till  this  ble^ed  island,  first  gem  of  the  sea,  shall  shine  as  a  vetj 
Koh'i-noor  in  the  diadem  of  Christ, 


POBTIOH  OF  SCRIFTXTBB  READ  BEFOBE  SERUOK— Mattfaew  siii.  1 — 23. 


Htxxs  fboh  "Oub  Own  Hns  Book"— 67«,  IH,  674. 


JR^ti[0pIton  i^ahrnark 


A  ROUND   OF   DELIGHTS. 


%  I 


tmtft{ 

Delivered  on  Lord's-Day  Morning,  Xovembeu  11th,  1877,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT   THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


**  Now  the  God  of  hope  fill  you  with  all  joy  and  peace  in  helieving,  that  ye  may 
a1>OQnd  in  hope,  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost" — Homans  xv.  13. 

This  is  one  of  the  richest  passages  in  the  Word  of  God.  It  is  so  full 
of  instruction  that  I  cannot  hope  to  bring  out  even  so  much  as  a  tithe  of 
its  teaching.  The  apostle  desired  for  the  Roman  Christians  that  they 
might  be  in  the  most  dehghtful  state  of  mind,  that  they  should  be  filled 
with  joy  and  peace,  and  that  this  should  lead  on  to  yet  further  expecta- 
tions, and  create  an  abundance  of  hope  in  their  souls.  See,  dear 
friends,  the  value  of  prayer,  for  if  Paul  longs* to  see  his  friends  attain 
the  highest  possible  condition,  he  prays  for  them.  What  m\l  not  prayer 
do  ?  Whatsoever  thou  desirest  for  thyself,  or  for  another,  let  thy  desire 
be  prepared  like  sweet  spices  and  compounded  into  a  supplication,  and 
present  it  unto  God,  and  the  benediction  will  come. 

I  gather,  also,  from  PauFs  making  this  state  of  happiness  a  subject  of 
request  unto  God,  that  it  is  possible  for  it  to  be  attained.  We  may  be 
filled  with  joy  and  peace  in  believing,  and  may  abound  in  hope.  There 
is  no  reason  why  we  should  hang  our  heads  and  live  in  perpetual  doubt. 
We  may  not  only  be  somewhat  comforted,  but  we  may  be  fiill  of  joy  ; 
we  may  not  only  have  occasional  quiet,  but  we  may  dwell  in  peace,  and 
delight  ourselves  in  the  abundance  of  it.  These  great  privileges  arc 
attainable,  or  the  apostle  would  not  have  made  them  the  subjects  of 
prayer.  Ay,  and  they  are  possible  for  us,  as  the  meaning  of  the  Epistle 
to  the  Romans  was  not  exhausted  upon  the  Romans,  so  this  text  Le- 
longeth  to  us  also ;  and  the  words  before  us  still  rise  to  heaven  as  the 
prayer  of  the  apostle  for  us,  upon  whom  the  ends  of  the  earth  are  come, 
that  we  also  may  be  filled  with  joy  and  peace,  and  abound  in  hope 
through  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  sweetest  aehghts  are  still  grown  in 
Zion*s  gardens,  and  are  to  be  enjoyed  by  us  ;  and  shall  they  be  within 
our  reach  and  not  be  grasped  ?  Shall  a  life  of  joy  and  peace  be  attain- 
able, and  shall  we  miss  it  through  unbelief?  God  forbid.  Let  us,  as 
No,  1,384. 


688  irrrEOPOLiTAK  taberkaclb  pulpit. 

believers,  resolve  that  whatBoever  of  priTiloge  is  to  be  enjoyed  we  will 
enjoy  it ;  whataoever  of  lofty  experience  ia  to  be  realized,  we  will,  by 
God  B  grocions  help,  aacend  to  it :  for  we  wish  to  Icnow  to  the  full  the 
things  which  are  freely  given  to  ne  of  God. 

Not,  however,  in  onr  own  Btrength  will  we  thus  resolve,  for  thie  con- 
dition of  faith,  and  joy,  and  peace  must  be  wronght  in  as  by  God  alone. 
This  is  clear  enoagh  in  the  tost,  for  it  is  the  God  of  hope  who  alone  can 
fill  us  with  joy  and  peace  ;  and  yet  again,  oar  hope  which  is  to  abonnd 
will  only  abound  throngh  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  feet  that 
the  happy  condition  deaonbed  is  Bonght  by  prayer  is  a  plain  evidence 
that  the  blessing  comes  flrom  a  divine  Boarce,  and  the  prayer  itself  is 
so  worded  that  Uie  doctrine  is  prominently  presented  to  the  mind.  So, 
brethren,  while  we  resolve  to  obtain  everything  of  privilege  that  is 
obtainable,  let  ns  set  about  our  effort  in  divine  power,  not  depending 
npon  our  resolutions,  bnt  looking  for  the  power  of  the  Qoly  Ghost  and 
the  energy  of  the  God  of  hope. 

I  shall  want  you  to  follow  me  whilst  I  notice  concerning  the  blessed 
state  of  fiilneas  of  joy  and  peace,  first,  whenct  it  comes ,-  Becondly,  v>hiU 
it  M,  taking  its  delights  in  detail ;  and  then,  thirdly,  what  it  laid*  to. 
We  are  to  be  filled  with  joy  and  peace,  that "  we  may  abound  in.  hopg 
throngh  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost." 

I.  If  there  be,  then,  such  a  condition  as  being  divinelyjilled  with 
all  joy  and  peace  in  believing,  whence  does  it  coue  ?  The  answer 
is,  it  comes  from  "  the  God  of  hope."  But  in  order  that  we  may  see 
how  it  comes  let  ns  look  a  little  at  the  chapter  in  which  we  find  oar 
t«xt,  for  the  connection  is  instructive. 

To  know  joy  and  peace  throngh  believing  we  mnst  begin  by  knowing 
what  is  to  bo  believed,  and  this  we  must  learn  from  holy  Scripture,  for 
there  he  ia  revealed  at  the  Ood  of  Hope,  Unless  God  had  revealed 
himself,  we  could  not  have  guessed  at  hope,  bus  the  Scriptures  of 
truth  are  windows  of  hope  to  na.  Will  you  kindly  reiul  the  fourth 
verse  of  the  chapter  and  note  how  strikingly  parallel  it  is  to  our 
text — "For  whatsoever  things  were  written  aforetime  were  written 
for  onr  learning,  that  we  throngh  patience  and  comfort  of  the  Scriptures 
might  have  hope."  See,  then,  the  God  of  hope  is  revealed  in  Scripture 
with  the  design  of  inspiring  ua  with  hope.  If  we  would  be  filled  with 
faith,  joy,  and  peace,  it  must  be  by  believing  the  tnitiis  set  forth  in  the 
Scriptures.  Before  we  have  any  inward  ground  of  hojie,  God  himself, 
aa  revealed  in  the  Bible,  mnst  be  our  hope.  We  must  not  aak  for  joy 
firet  and  then  foundjour  faith  upon  it,  but  onr  joy  rouHt  grow  out  of  onr 
faith,  and  that  must  rest  npon  God  alone.  Our  ppostle  sets  db  nn 
example  of  how  to  use  the  SmptnreB,  for  in  this  chaptLT  he  ^mTL-hcs  mn. 
the  truth  item  Moses,  and  David,  and  Isaiah,  and  then  places  one  text 
with  another  and  gets  a  clear  view  of  the  testimony  of  God.  What  is 
very  much  tu  our  point,  he  socs  iu  Lliose  SeripLurtB  tli[it  to  us  Gentiles 
God  has  of  old  been  set  forth  in  the  Scriptures  as  the  God  of  hope. 
Aforetime  it  seemed  aa  if  salvation  were  of  the  Jews  and  of  the  Jews  alone, 
and  we  were  shut  out ;  bnt  now,  on  turning  to  the  Old  Testament  itself, 
we  discover  t  bat  God  had  spoken  good  things  concerning  na  before  we  knew 
liiin.  There  was  always  hope  for  the  Gentiles,  and  though  Israel  per- 
«eived  it  not,  yet  patriarchs  and  kings  and  prophets  faU  often  epske 


A  ROUKD  OF  DELIGHTS.  6S9 

wonls  which  coBld  not  Otherwise  bo  interpreted.  "In  tliee  aod  in  thy 
seed  shall  all  the  nations  oftlie  earth  be  blessed"  is  a  promiBe  which  over- 
leaped the  bounds  of  Canaan.  As,  then,  by  searching  the  apostle  found 
in  the  word  of  God  hope  for  the  Gentiles,  so  will  the  most  heavy  loden 
and  burdened  spirit  discover  soarccs  of  consolation  if  tlie  Bible  be  dili- 
gently read  and  faithfiilly  believed.  Every  promise  is  meant  to  inspire 
the  believer  with  hope ;  thcfcforo  use  it  to  that  end.  Use  the  written 
word  as  the  source  of  comfort,  and  do  not  look  for  di'cams,  excitements, 
impressions,  or  foelinfrs.  Faith  deals  with  the  Sci-iptures  and  with  the 
God  of  hope  as  therein  revealed,  aud  out  of  these  it  draws  its  fulness  of 
joy  and  peace.  Beloved,  if  yon  desire  to  get  faith  in  Christ,  or  to  in- 
crease it,  be  diligent  in  knowing  aud  underetanding  the  gospel  of  your 
salvation  as  set  forth  in  the  word  of  God.  "Faith  comcth  by  hearing," 
or  by  reading  the  word  of  God.  How  shall  you  believe  tliat  whieh  you 
do  not  know  ?  Do  not  at  once  make  nn  effort  to  believe  before  you  are 
instructed,  bat  fii-st  know  what  God  hath  revealed,  see  bow  he  hath  dis- 
played  to  yon  the  hope  of  everlasting  life,  and  then  believe  with  all  your 
heart  the  testimony  of  God.  Every  promise  and  word  of  God  must  be 
to  yon  a  fuundation  most  sure  and  steadfast  whereon  to  build  your  hope. 
Let  your  anchor  frvasp  and  hold  to  each  reveided  truth,  whatever  your 
feelings  may  be.  We  begin  then  by  saying  that  fiiliirss  of  joy  and  peace 
comes  to  us  from  t!m  God  of  hope  as  he  reveals  himself  in  holy  writ. 
As  it  is  written,  "  Hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live,"  so  do  we  flud  that 
we  must  hear  if  our  soul  is  to  rejoiue. 

Now,  it  so  happens  that  the  Scriptures  were  not  only  written  that  the 
Gentiles  might  have  hoi>c,  but  that  they  might  have  joy.  I  ask  you  to 
notice  the  passages  quoted  by  the  apostle,  for  at  least  the  last  three  of 
them  call  us  to  joy.  Thus  in  verse  10,  Moses  saith, "  Ecjoiee,  ye  Gen- 
tiles, with  his  people."  Tf  there  be  any  joy  for  the  elect  nation,  it  ia  for 
Its  also  who  believe.  If  there  be  any  joy  for  Israel  redeemed  out  of 
Egypt,  led  through  the  Red  Sea,  fed  with  manna,  and  brought  to  the 
borders  of  Ciinaan,  that  joy  is  for  us  also  ;  if  any  joy  over  the  burnt 
offering,  if  nuy  joy  at  the  paachal  supper,  if  any  dehglit  at  the  jubilee, 
all  that  joy  may  be  eliared  by  us,  for  thus  saith  the  Lord,  "Rejoice,  ye 
Gentiles,  with  his  people."  Joy  in  their  joy.  Again,  David  saith  (verse 
11),  "Praise  the  Lord,  all  ye  Gentiles;  and  laud  him,  all  ye  people." 
Now,  where  there  ia  praise  there  is  joy,  for  joy  is  a  component  element 
of  it.  They  that  praise  the  liord  ariplit  rejoice  before  him.  Go,  ye 
Gentiles,  when  David  bids  you  thus  unite  with  Israel  ia  praising  God, 
he  bids  j'on  take  full  possession  of  the  joy  which  moves  tlie  favoured 
nation  to  magnify  the  Lord.  Again,  Isaiah  says,  "There  shall  be 
a  root  of  Jesse,  and  ho  that  shall  rise  to  rcigu  over  the  Gentiles;  in 
him  shall  the  Geiifilos  trust,"  or,  as  it  should  be  translated,  "  hope." 
Now,  hope  is  ever  the  source  of  joy.  So,  then,  iu  the  Scriptures 
we  sec  God  is  the  God  of  Lope,  and  on  further  scarcJi  we  see  that 
the  bo[)e  of  the  Gentiles  permits  them  to  rejoice  with  bis  people  ;  in 
fine,  we  see  that  God  himself  is  the  hope  of  all  those  who  know  him, 
aud  the  consequent  source  of  joy  and  peace. 

Again,  then,  I  am  brought  to  this,  that,  to  begin  with,  the  joy  and 
I«ace  whieh  wc  all  desire  lo  obtain  must  Ix!  sought  throiigb  a  knowledge 
of  the  God  of  hope,  as  he  is  revealed  to  us  by  the  Scriptures.    AV'e 


MO  HETROPOUTIK  TABBBHACU  PITLPIT. 

mnst  begin  with  that  enre  word  of  tcBtimony  wherennto  we  do  well  if 
we  take  heed  as  nnto  a  light  that  stiinelji  in  a  dark  place.  There  most 
be  belief  in  God  as  revealed  in  the  word,  even  though  as  yet  wc  see  no 
change  within  ourselvca,  nor  any  conceivable  internal  ground  tn  oor 
nature  for  hope  or  joy.  Blessed  in  he  who  bath  not  seen  and  yet  hath 
behcTcd.  He  who  can  hang  upon  God  without  the  comfort  of  inward 
experience  is  on  the  high  road  to  being  filled  with  joy  and  peace. 

Bat  the  apostle  in  the  text  leads  na  through  the  Scriptures  to  God 
himself,  who  is  peraonally  to  fill  na  with  joy  and  peace  j  by  which  I 
understand  that  ne  is  tomcome  the  great  of^ect  of  our  joy.  As  Israel  ia 
the  Red  Sea  triumphed  in  the  Lord,  even  so  do  we  joy  in  God  by  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Like  David,  we  say,  "Then  will  I  go  uuto  the 
altar  of  God,  unto  God  iny  exceeding  joy  ";  and  with  Isaiah  we  sin^ 
"I  will  greatly  rejoice  in  the  I^ord;  roysou!  shall  be  joyful  in  my 
God."  when  Grst  the  Lord  looked  upon  us  threugh  the  windows 
of  his  word  we  began  to  hope ;  by-and-by  his  good  Spirit  caused 
our  Jioping  to  grow  into  believing,  and  since  then,  as  our  know- 
ledge of  the  Lord  has  increased,  our  believing  has  risen  to  fulness 
of  joy.  Our  God  ia  a  blessed  God,  bo  that  to  believe  in  him  is  to  find 
rest  unto  the  Boul,  and  to  commune  with  him  ia  to  dwell  in  bliss. 
Beloved,  ivhen  you  think  of  God,  the  just  one,  apart  from  Christ,  yon 
might  well  tremble,  but  when  you  sec  him  in  Jesus,  his  very  justice 
becomes  precious  to  yoaas  "  the  terrible  crystal,"  and  yon  learn  to  bniU 
it  into  the  fonndation  of  your  joy.  The  holiness  of  God  which  aforetiuie 
awed  you  becomes  supremely  attractive  when  you  eee  it  revealed  in  the 
person  of  Jesaa  Christ  your  Lord.  How  charming  is  "  the  glory  of  God 
in  the  face  of  Christ."  As  for  the  love  of  God,  aa  yon  see  it  act  forth  in 
this  book  and  in  his  Son,  it  inspires  you  with  every  sacred  passion.  As 
for  his  eternal  immntabitity,  it  becomes  the  groundwork  of  your  peace, 
for  if  he  changes  not,  then  all  his  promises  will  stand  sure  to  you  and  to 
all  his  people  from  generation  to  generation.  His  power,  which  was 
once  so  terrible  in  the  thunder  and  in  the  storm,  now  becomes  delightful 
to  you  as  you  sec  it  yoked  to  the  promise  that  the  promise  may  be  ful- 
filled, and  behold  it  concentrated  in  the  man  Christ  Jesus  that  his 
purposes  may  be  achieved.  In  fine,  there  is  no  attribnte  of  God,  there  is 
no  purpose  of  God,  there  ia  no  deed  of  God,  there  is  no  aspect  under  which 
God  ie  Been,  but  what  becomes  the  object  of  the  Christian's  joy  when 
he  has  seen  him  and  believed  in  him  as  revealed  in  the  Scriptures.  To 
the  believer  God  is  his  sttn,  his  shield,  his  portion,  liia  delight,  his  all. 
Hia  soul  delights  herself  in  the  Lord.  At  first  he  hoped  in  Giad,  that 
pcradventure  he  would  smile  npon  him  :  he  turned  to  the  Scriptures, 
and  he  found  there  many  s  cheering  declaration,  and  these  be  knew  to 
he  true,  and  therefore  he  believed  God  that  he  would  do  as  he  had  said ; 
aud  now  not  only  liaa  his  hope  become  faith,  but  his  faith  has  budded 
and  blossomed  and  bron^ht  forth  the  almon»ifl  of  joy  and  peace.  Ton 
see,  then,  how  the  Lord  is  the  author  of  all  our  holy  gladness. 

Our  God  is,  however,  called  the  God  of  hope,  not  only  because  he  is 
the  object  of  our  hope,  and  the  ground  of  our  jot  and  peace,  bat 
because  Ite  it  is  thai  tuorktlk  hope  and  joy  in  vs.  No  joy  is  worth  the 
having  unless  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  it,  and  no 
/07  IB  worth  receiving  except  it  springs  fi-om  hope  in  him.     He  mnst 


A  UOUND  OF  DELIGHTS.  641 

breathe  peace  upon  us,  or  else  the  storm-tossed  waters  of  our  spirit  will 
never  rest^  nor  is  it  desirable  that  they  should^  for  peace  without  Ood 
is  stupefaction^  joy  without  God  is  madness,  and  hope  without  God  is 
presumption.  In  true  believers  their  hope,  &ith,  joy,  and  peace  are  all 
alike  of  divine  workmanship.  Our  spiritual  raiment  is  never  home- 
spun ;  we  are  divinely  arrayed  from  head  to  foot. 

This  blessed  name  of  "  God  of  hope  "  belongs  to  the  New  Testament, 
and  is  a  truly  gospel  title.  Livy  tells  us  that  the  Romans  had  a  god 
of  hope,  but  he  says  that^the  temple  was  struck  by  lightning,  and  in  an 
after  Dook  he  adds  that'it  was  burned  to  the  ground.  Exceedingly 
typical  this  of  whatever  of  hope  can  come  to  nations  which  worship 
gods  of  their  own  making.  All  idol  hopes  must  perish  beneath  the 
wrath  of  the  Most  High.  The  God  of  human  nature  unenlightened,  or 
only  sufficiently  enlightened  to  discover  its  sin,  is  the  God  of  terror  ;  in 
fact,  to  many,  the  Lord  is  the  God  of  despair :  but  when  you  turn  to 
the  revelation  of  God  in  Scripture,  you  find  him  to  be  a  God  whose 
gracious  character  inspires  hope,  and  henceforth  you  turn  away  from 
everything  else  to  fix  your  hope  on  God  alone.  "  My  soul,  wait  thou 
only  upon  God,  for  my  expectation  is  ^m  him."  God,  in  Christ  Jesus, 
has  ceased  to  be  the  m^ad  of  men,  and  has  become  their  hope.  Our 
Fi^er  and  our  Friend,  we  look  for  all  to  thee.  And  blessea  be  God, 
the  hope  which  he  excites  is  a  hope  worthy  of  him.  It  is  a  God-like 
hope — ^a  hope  which  helps  us  to  purify  ourselves.  At  first  we  hope 
in  God  for  cleansing  iiom  every  sin,  and  then  for  acceptance  here 
and  hereafter.  We  hope  for  pardon  through  the  atonement  which  is  in 
Christ  Jesus,  and  when  we  have  it,  we  hope  for  sanctification  by  the 
Spirit.  Oar  hope  never  ceases  to  rise  higher  and  higher,  and  to  receive 
fulfilment  after  fulfilment,  and  we  Imow  that  it  shaU  continue  to  do  so 
till  we  rise  to  dwell  at  his  right  hand  for  ever  and  ever.  He  who 
graspeth  this  hope  hath  a  soul-satisfying  portion,  for  which  a  man 
nught  well  be  content  to  suffer  a  thousand  martyrdoms  if  he  might  but 
abide  in  it.  It  is  a  hope  which  only  God  would  have  contrived  for 
man — a  hope  founded  in  himself ;  a  hope  presented  to  the  sons  of  men 
in  Christ  Jesus  because  his  sacrifice  has  been  presented  and  accepted ; 
a  hope  which  God  alone  can  inspire  in  men,  for  even  if  they  hear 
the  gospel  they  do  not  find  hope  till  he  comes  in  power  to  their  souls  : 
a  hope  which  always  adores  God,  and  lies  low  at  his  feet,  never  dream* 
ing  of  being  independent  of  him  ;  a  hope  which  layeth  her  crown  at 
his  feet,  and  taketh  him  to  be  her  Lord  for  ever  and  ever.  This  is  the 
hope  which  is  the  mother  of  our  joy  and  peace,  and  only  as  it  is  wrought 
in  us  by  the  Lord  can  we  be  truly  happy  and  restful. 

II.    Secondly,  let  us  enquire,  what  is  this  blessed  state  of  MDn> 
^f  which  we  have  spoken  a  little?    Let  us  look  into  the  words.    He 

Siys,  '*  That  the  God  of  hope  may  fill  you  with  all  joy  and  peace  in  be- 
eving."    It  is  a  state  of  mind  most  pleasant,  for  to  be  filled  with  joy 
ia  a  rare  del^ht,  reminding  one  of  heaven. 

It  is,  however,  a  state  as  safe  as  it  is  pleasant,  for  the  man  who  has  a 

y  which  God  gives  him  may  be  quite  easy  in  the  enjoyment  of  it.  The 

t  of  the  world's  joy  is  but  for  a  season  ;  whOe  you  are  enjoying  it 

ou  are  in  fear  because  it  will  soon  be  over,  and  what  then  ?    Earth's 

candles  will  soon  bum  out.    The  day  of  this  world's  mirth  will  end 


642  METUOPOUTAK  lABEItffACLE  PULPIT. 

in  a  nigbt  of  miHcry.  This  tliongiit  mars  and  sours  all  fleeting  joys; 
but  the  joy  which  God  gives  baa  no  afterthought  about  it,  it  ia 
wholesome  and  eafe  and  abiding.  We  may  drink  our  full  n-ilhont  being 
sickened,  yea,  revel  in  it  without  surfeit. 

At  the  same  time  it  ia  most pi-o/iffiMfl  joy,  for  the  more  a,  man  has  of 
this  joy  the  better  mrm  he  will  be.  It  wilt  not  soflen  him  and  render 
him  effeminate,  for  it  Jiaa  a  singular  strengthening  poiver  about  it. 
There  is,  doubtlcas,  a  tonic  iiiflaciicc  in  sorrow,  but  nolyjoyis  also 
exceedingly  invigoraiin^,  for  it  ia  written,  '-The  joy  of  the  ijord  is  your 
atrength. '  The  more  liappy  we  can  be  in  our  God  the  more  thoroughly 
will  the  will  of  Christ  be  iiilfilled  in  us,  for  he  desired  that  onr  joy 
might  be  full.  Tlie  more  you  rejoice  in  God  the  more  you  will  recom- 
mend true  religion.  The  more  full  of  delight  you  are,  especially  in 
trying  times,  the  moi'c  you  will  glorify  God.  Few  things  are  at  the 
same  time  bothpleai^nnt  and  pmfitablo,  bnt  holy  joy  and  peace  possess 
that  double  excollcnee.  Fulneaa  of  spiritual  joy  ia  both  the  index  nud  the 
means  of  spiritual  atrcj^tli.  I  rommend  this  state,  therefore,  to  you.  I 
trust  that  we  shall  not  hn  so  uubelicring  as  to  be  afraid  of  heaven's  oivn 
consolations,  nor  so  unreasonable  us  to  decline  to  be  filled  with  joy  and 
peace  when  they  may  he  had  by  believing, 

Kow,  notice,  that  it  is  a  slate  which  has  varieties  iniL  It  is  joy  and 
peace ;  and  it  may  be  either.  Sometimes  the  believer  is  full  of  joy.  Jo^ 
IB  active  and  expressive ;  it  sparkles  and  flashes  Uke  a  diamond ;  it 
sings  and  dances  like  Datid  before  the  ark.  To  be  fiUed  with  holy  joy 
is  a  dehcious  excitement  of  the  sweetest  kind ;  may  yon  often  experience 
it,  mitil  strangers  are  compelled  to  infer  that  the  Lord  hath  done  great 
things  for  you.  Nevertheless,  the  flesh  is  weak,  and  might  hardly  en- 
dure continuous  delight,  and  so  there  comes  a  relirf,  in  the  lovely  fbnn  of 
peace,  in  which  the  heart  is  really  joyous,  but  after  a  calm  and  qniet 
manner.  I  have  seen  the  ringers  make  the  pinnacles  of  a  church  tower 
reel  to  and  &o  while  they  have  made  the  joy  Dells  sound  out  to  tiie  Ml, 
and  then  they  have  played  quietly,  and  let  the  fabric  settle  down  agaio. 
Even  thus  does  joy  strain  the  man,  but  peace  comes  in  to  give  him 
I'est.  In  this  peace  there  is  not  much  to  exhilarate,  not  mach  whicb 
could  fittingly  be  spoken  out  in  song ;  but  silence,  full  of  infinite  meaning, 
becomes  the  floodgate  of  the  soul.  Ton  seek  not  the  exulting  assembly, 
but  the  calm  shade  and  the  quiet  chamber.  Yon  are  as  happy  as  ^n 
were  in  your  joy,  but  not  so  stirred  and  moved.  Peace  is  joy  reatm"', 
and  joy  is  peace  dancing.  Joy  cries  hoaanna  before  the  Well- beloved, 
but  peace  leans  her  head  on  his  bosom.  In  the  midst  of  bereavement* 
and  sickness  we  may  scarcely  be  able  to  rejoice,  but  we  ma^  be  at  peace. 
When  faith  cannot  break  tinxjugh  a  troop  with  her  sacred  joy  she  stand* 
still  and  sees  the  salvation  of  God  in  hallowed  peace.  We  work  with  joj 
and  rest  with  peace.  What  a  blessing  it  is  that  when  we  come  to  di*. 
if  we  cannot  depart  with  the  banners  of  triumphant  joy  all  flying' in  tM 
breeze,  we  can  yet  fall  asleep  safely  iu  the  arms  of  peace.  How  pleasaijl 
a  life  do  they  lead  who  are  not  the  sabjecta  of  any  very  great  exeitA  j 
meut,  but  maintain  cahn  and  quiet  communion  with  God.  Their  hearl  A 
is  fixed,  tmsting  in  the  Lord.  They  neither  soar  nor  sink,  but  keei>  thi  J 
even  tenor  of  their  way.  It  is  a  state  of  mind,  then,  which  adiuiia  ola 
rarfations ;  and  I  really  do  not  know  which  to  choose  out  of  its  twi|| 


A   ROUND  OF  DELIGHTS.  643 

forms.     I  should  not  like  to  be  without  joy,  and  yet  methinks  there  is 
something  so  solid  about  peace  that  I  might  almost  give  it  the  prefer- 
ence.    I  think  I  love  the  quiet  sister  the  better  of  the  two.    That 
famous  text  in  Isaiah — "They  shall  mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles ;  they 
shall  run,  and  not  be  weary ;  and  they  shall  walk  and  not  faint  "  looks 
somewhat  like  an  anti-climax  ;  it  would  appear  to  place  the  greatest 
first,  and  then  the  less,  and  then  the  least ;  but  it  is  not  so.    The 
mounting  up  with  wings  as  eagles  must  always  be  more  or  less  tempo- 
rary :  we  are  not  eagles,  and  cannot  always  be  on  the  wing.    The  Lord 
renews  our  strength  like  the  eagles,  and  this  shows  we  are  not  always  up 
to  the  eagle  mark.   Well,  though  it  is  a  grand  thing  to  be  able  to  fly,  it 
is  a  better  thing  to  be  able  to  run ;  this  is  more  like  a  man,  iuTolves 
less  danger,  and  is  more  practically  useful.    It  is  good  to  run,  but  eren 
that  is  not  the  best  journey  pace :  it  is  best  of  all  to  walk,  for  this  is  a 
steady,  persevering  pace  to  move  at.    "  Enoch  walked  with  God."  This 
is  God's  pace,  who  even  when  he  makes  clouds  his  chariot  is  described 
as  walking  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind.    We  read  of  the  walk  of  faith, 
and  the  walk  of  holiness,  for  ^walking  is  practical,  and  is  meant  for 
every  day.    You  young  people,  I  like  to  see  you  run,  and  I  am  glad  to 
take  a  turn  at  it  myself,  but,  after  all,  steady,  sober,  unwearied  walking 
is  the  best.    To  walk  without  fainting  is  a  high  experimental  attain- 
ment, and  is  none  the  less  valuable  because  at  first  sight  there  seems 
nothing  striking  about  it.     Walking  is  the  emblem  of  peace,  and 
running  and  mounting  up  with  wings  as  eagles  are  the  emblems  of  joy. 
But,  beloved,  this  blessed  state  is  also  a  componrd,  for  we  are  bidden 
at  one  and  the  same  time  to  receive   both  wine  and  milk — wine 
exhilarating  with  joy,  and  milk  satisfying  with  peace.    "  Ye  shall 
go  out  with  joy,  and  be  led  forth  with  peace."    You  shall  lie  down  in 
the  green  pastures  of  delight,  and  be  led  by  the  still  waters  of  quiet- 
ness.    Our  heart  may  be  as  an  ocean,  gloriously  casting  upward  its 
spray  of  joy,  and  lifting  up  its  waves  on  high  in  delight,  as  one  clap- 
peth  his  hands  for  joy  ;  and  yet,  at  the  same  time,  as  down  deep  in  the 
coral  caverns  all  is  still  and  undisturbed,  so  may  the  heart  be  quiet  as 
a  sleeping  babe.    We  see  no  difficulty  in  understanding  both  lines  of 

the  hymn— 

"  My  heart  is  resting,  O  my  God, 
I  will  give  thanks  and  sing.'* 

We  rest  and  praise,  as  trees  hold  to  the  earth  by  their  roots,  and 
perfume  the  air  with  their  bloom ;  as  morning  comes  without  sound 
of  trumpet,  and  yet  awakens  the  music  of  birds  by  its  arising.  Ours 
is  no  froth  of  joy ;  there  is  solid  peace  beneath  our  effervescence  of 
delight.  Happy  ai*e  we  to  have  learned  how  to  combine  two  such 
choice  things. 

"  Joy  is  a  fruit  that  will  not  grow 
In  nature's  barren  soil ; 
All  we  can  boast,  till  Chri:}t  we  know, 
Is  vanity  and  toil. 

•*  But  where  the  Lord  has  planted  grace, 
And  made  his  glories  known, 
These  fruitB  of  heavenly  joy  and  peace 
Are  found,  and  there  alone." 


644  HETKOPOUTAN  TABKRKACLE  PULPIT. 

Now,  I  waut  yon  to  lay  atress  on  the  next  obaerration  I  am  sbont  t^- 
make,  because  I  began  with  it,  and  wish  to  leare  it  opon  yonr  mind» 
as  tlie  chief  tbongbt.  Tht  joij  and  peaee  hart  tpoktn  of  an  ihrmigh 
beliofinff.  Yon  come  to  know  Che  God  of  hope  throo^h  Uie  Scriptar^ 
which  reveal  him ;  by  this  you  are  led  to  believe  in  bim,  and  it  i». 
through  that  believing  that  yon  become  filled  with  joy  and  peace.  It 
is  not  by  working,  nor  by  feeling,  that  we  become  full  of  joy  ;  our  peace- 
does  not  arise  from  the  marks,  and  evidences,  and  experiences  which, 
testify  to  ns  that  we  are  the  sons  of  God,  but  simply  from  believing. 
Our  central  joy  and  peace  most  always  come  to  us,  not  as  an  inference 
from  the  internal  work  of  the  Spirit  in  onr  souls,  but  from  the  finished, 
work  of  the  Lord  Jesns,  and  tne  promises  of  God  contained  in  the 
Scriptarcs.  "We  must  continue  to  look  ont  of  self  to  the  written  word 
wherein  the  Lord  is  set  forth  before  ns,  and  we  must  rest  in  God  in^ 
Christ  Jesaa  as  the  main  basis  of  our  hope  ;  not  depending  n^n  any 
other  arguments  than  those  supplied  by  uie  Bible  itself.  I  will  show 
by-and-by  how  we  shall  afterwa!rds  reach  to  a  hope  which  flows  out 
of  the  work  of  the  Spirit  within  ns ;  but  at  the  first,  and,  I  think,, 
permanently  and  continuously,  the  main  ground  of  the  surest  joy  and 
tmest  peace  mnst  come  to  ns  through  simply  beUeving  in  Jesos 
Christ.  Beloved,  I  know  that  I  have  been  converted,  for  I  am  sniQ 
that  there  is  a  change  of  heart  in  me  ;  nevertheless,  my  hope  of  eternal, 
life  does  not  hang  upon  the  inward  fact.  I  rest  in  the  external  Act. 
that  Ood  hath  revealed  himself  in  Jesns  as  blotting  oat  the  sin  of  all' 
his  believing  people,  and,  as  a  believer,  I  have  the  word  of  God  as 
my  guarantee  of  forgiveness.  This  is  my  rest.  Because  I  am  a  be- 
liever in  Christ  Jesns,  therefore  have  I  hope,  therefore  have  I  joy  uid 
peace,  since  God  hath  declared  that  "  he  that  believeth  in  him  hath, 
everiasting  life."  This  joy  can  only  safely  come  through  believing, 
and  I  pray  you,  brothers  and  sisters,  never  be  driftea  away  &obl 
child-Uke  faith  in  what  God  hath  said.  It  is  very  easy  to  obtain  a. 
temporaij  joy  and  peace  through  your  present  easy  experiencei  bnt 
how  will  yon  do  when  all  things  within  take  a  tronolons  tnm  ? 
Those  who  live  by  feeling  change  with  the  weather.  If  yon  ever 
pnt  aside  yonr  faith  in  the  finished  work  to  drink  from  the  cup  of  yoor 
own  inward  sensations,  yon  will  find  yourself  bitterly  disappoinlUd. 
Yonr  honey  will  turn  to  gall,  yonr  innshine  into  blackness;  fov  all 
things  which  come  of  man  are  fickle  and  deceptive.  The  God  of 
hope  will  fill  you  with  joy  and  peace,  bnt  it  will  only  be  thromrii 
believing.  Yon  will  still  have  to  stand  as  a  poor  sinner  at  ue- 
foot  of  the  cross,  trusting  to  the  complete  atonement.  Yon  wVll 
iiorer  have  joy  and  peace  unless  you  do.  If  you  once  begin  tB 
say,  "  I  am  a  saint ;  there  is  something  good  in  me,"  and  so  onV 
you  will  find  joy  evaporate  and  peace  depart.  Hold  on  to  yourt 
believing.  ^ 

Come  back  to  the  text  again,  and  yon  will  find  that  this  joy  and  '-■ 
peace,  according  lo  Paul,  gre  of  a  ^tq/nkiiivi:  •■haracter,  for,  after  his 
manner,  Paul  makes  language  for  biiiiitutf.     llu  often  mannfactorea  a 
snperlative  by  the  use  of  the  word  "  all,"  as  here,  "  Fill  you  with  all  A 
joy."    He  means  with  the  best  and  highest  degree  of  joy,  with  as|l 
much  joy  as  yon  can  hold,  with  the  very  choicest  and  most  full  of  joysO 


A  ROUKD  OF  DELIGHTS.  645 

in  earth  or  in  heaven.    God  give  yon  the  joy  of  joys,  the  light  of 
delight,  the  heaven  of  heaven. 

Then  notice  ths  compreJimsiveness  of  his  prayer.  **  All  joy  ";  that  is 
joy  in  God  the  Father's  love,  joy  in  God  the  Son's  redeeming  blood,  joy 
in  God  the  Holy  Ghost's  indwelling  ;.  joy  in  the  covenant  of  grace,  joy 
in  the  seal  and  witness  of  it,  joy  in  the  promises,  jov  in  the  decrees,  joy 
in  the  doctrines,  joy  in  the  precepts,  joy  in  everything  which  cometh 
from  God,  "  all  joy."  Paul  also  requests  for  them  all  peace,  peace  with 
God,  peace  of  conscience,  peace  with  one  another,  peace  even  with  the 
outside  world,  as  far  as  peace  may  be.    May  you  all  have  it. 

And  now  observe  the  degree  of  joy  and  peace  which  he  wishes  for 
them — ^**that  ye  may  he  filled,'*  and  that  by  the  God  of  hope  himself. 
God  alone  knows  our  capacity  and  where  the  vacuum  lies  which  most 
needs  filling.  A  man  might  try  to  fill  us  and  fail,  but  God,  who  made 
US,  knows  every  comer  and  cranny  of  our  nature,  and  can  pour  in  joy  and 
peace  till  every  portion  of  our  bei  ng  is  flooded,  saturated,  and  overflowed 
with  delight.  I  like  to  remember  David's  word,  **  The  rain  also  filleth  the 
pools,"  for  even  thus  doth  the  Lord  pour  his  grace  upon  the  thirsty  soil 
of  our  hearts  till  it  stands  in  pools.  As  the  sun  fills  the  world  with 
light,  and  enters  into  all  places,  even  so  the  God  of  hope  by  his  presence 
lights  up  every  part  of  our  nature  with  the  golden  light  of  joyoug  peace, 
till  there  is  not  a  comer  left  for  sadness  or  foreboding.  This  is  rani's 
prayer,  and  he  expects  its  answer  to  come  to  us  through  believing,  and 
in  no  other  way  ;  he  docs  not  ask  for  us  mysterious  revelations,  dr^ms, 
visions,  or  presumptuous  persuasions ;  he  seeks  for  us  no  excitement  of 
fanaticism  nor  the  intoxication  of  great  crowds  and  pleasing  oratory, 
neither  does  he  seek  that  we  may  imagine  ourselves  to  be  perfect,  and 
sll  that  kind  of  lumber,  but  that  we  may  be  happy  through  simply  be* 
lieving  in  the  God  of  hope  as  he  is  set  forth  in  the  Bible.  I  take  this 
book  of  God  into  my  hands  and  say,  '*  Whatsoever  things  are  written 
here  were  written  for  my  leaming,  that  through  patience  and  comfort 
of  the  Scriptures  I  might  have  hope  ";  I  do  have  hope,  for  I  believe  this 
book,  and  now  I  feel  joy  and  peace  welling  up  within  my  soul. 

Brethren,  receive  ye  this  benediction !  O  Lord,  fulfil  it  in  the  heart 
of  every  believer  before  thee. 

III.  Now  thirdly,  what  dobs  this  lead  to?  **Lead  to  ?"  says 
one,  **  Lead  to,  why  surely  it  is  enough  in  itself.  What  more  is  wanted  ?  " 
When  a  man  brings  you  into  a  chamber  vaulted  with  diamonds  and 
amethysts,  and  pearls  and  rubies  ;  with  walls  composed  of  slabs  of  gold, 
and  the  floor  made  of  solid  pavements  of  silver,  we  snould  be  astonished  if 
he  said,  **  This  is  a  passage  to  something  richer  still."  Yet  the  apostle 
directs  us  to  this  fulness  of  joy  and  peace  through  believing  that  we  may 
by  its  means  reach  to  somethmg  else, — "  that  you  may  abound  in  hope 
through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  How  often  do  great  things  in 
the  Bible,  like  tiie  perpetual  cycles  of  nature,  begin  where  they  end  and 
«nd  where  they  begin.  If  we  begin  with  the  God  of  hope,  we  are  wound 
up  into  holy  joy  and  peace,  that  we  may  come  back  to  hope  again  and  to 
Abounding  in  it  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

First,  I  notice  that  the  hope  here  mentioned  arises,  not  out  of  pure 
Ixjlieving,  but  out  of  the  joy  created  in  us  by  our  having  believed. 
Hope  led  to  faith,  faith   to  joy,  and  now  joy  back   again  to  hope. 


64S  UETBOPOUTia  TABBBaKIL>  BVLPIT. 

This  is  tlie  story  as  f »r  as  I  am  concerned  : — I  began  with  bdievinj. 
I  felt  nothing  good  within  me,  bnt  I  believed  in  what  God  reveaicd 
concerning  bimRelf.  I  saw  nothing,  but  I  believed,  on  the  groimd 
that  God  said  bo.  I  soon  bad  joy  and  peace  in  my  sonl  as  the  ttsait 
of  my  faith,  and  now,  because  of  Xliis  joy  and  peace,  I  hope  and  (apeiS 
fnrther  blessings.  Though  still  resting  my  soul  upon  the  finished 
work  of  Jcsns,  yet  hope?  do  arise  Irom  the  woric  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
within  me.  The  God  who  has  f^iven  me  by  belicring  to  rejoic«  that 
the  past  is  all  atoned  for,  and  who  baa  given  me  peace  becaoee  my  sins 
are  forgiven  me  for  his  name's  sake,  will  not  dash  that  jo;  by  revokio? 
my  pardon.  He  who  has  given  me  joy,  becaose  he  lias  qaicktn^ 
me,  and  has,  up  to  this  day,  preserved  me,  will  not,  I  am  peruuded, 
forsake  me,  and  snffer  me  to  perish.  Snrely  he  will  never  leave  me, 
after  having  done  so  mnoh  for  me.  My  present  joy  gives  me  a  hope, 
most  snre  and  steadfast,  that  he  will  never  turn  his  back  upon  me. 
If  he  did  not  intend  to  bless  me  in  the  future,  be  woald  not  have  done 
so  mnch  for  me  in  the  past,  and  he  could  not  and  would  not  be  duiag 
GO  mnch  for  me  now. 

This  hope,  yon  perceive,  drinks  its  life  at  the  fountain  of  penenil 
experience.  Ihe  fii-at  hope  we  ever  know  comes  together  with  «u 
simply  believing  the  word  of  God,  bnt  nowliiere  sriBeam  lu  an  ^xniiii- 
ing  of  hope,  ^^hich  is  the  outgrowth  of  tbe  inward  lilie.  Fear  ii 
banished  now,  foe  we  liave  lodced  to  the  God  of  hope,  «■&  fonnd 
occeptanoo  in  the  Beloved.  Now,  therefore,  in  the  chamber  when 
fear  formerly  dwelt  hope  takes  up  its  habitation ;  amre-winged,  fangU* 
eyed  hope  tuakcs  it«  nest  there,  and  sings  to  ns  all  the  day  k>ng. 

The  test  speaks  of  an  abounding  ihope,  and  if  yoa  ooDsiderftr 
awhile  yon  will  see  that  very  mneh  hope  mnst  arise  to  a  Chriatiaa  oil 
of  his  ^iritual  joy.  If  you  nave  once  been  in  the  boaom  of  Jcsaa,  aid 
known  his  joy,  your  hope  will  overflow.  For  instaiice,  yon  will  argiie—li 
has  pardoned  my  sin,  and  made  me  to  rejoice  as  a  forgiven  n>^ ;  wiH 
be  condemn  me  after  all  ?  What  meaneth  the  pardon  if,  aftor-sH,  tha 
transgressions  are  to  bo  laid  upon  me,  and  I  am  to  sailer  fer  my  lis  ? 
The  believer  hath  great  joy  lMM»aae  God's  love  is  shed  abroad  in  his 
Boul,  and  he  argnes  that  if  the  Lord  loves  him  so  iateDsely  now,  fat 
will  not  nndei^o  a  change,  and  remove  his  love.  He  who  in  bve 
redeemed  me  by  the  blood  of  his  Son  will  love  me  eternally,  fbr  he 
changes  not.  Is  not  this  sound  ai^nmont  ?  Grace  enjoyed  ia  a  pledge 
of  glory.  Redeeming  love  is  the  guarantee  of  [observing  love.  Accept- 
ance with  God  to-day  creates  a  uleased  hope  of  aociq>tance  for  ever. 
Faith  and  joy  within  tbe  soul  sing  to  one  another  somewhat  after 
this  fashion : — 

"  Ilia  nnilci  have  freed  my  heart  fraiii  iiaiii, 
JIj'  (InHijiiiift  Mjiiiits  cfcccrM  ; 
Anil  will  lie  not  epjicnr  a|;aiii 
AVticrc  be  liiu  oiii-c  apjieai'Ltl? 

"  Has  be  not  foriu'd  my  soul  niicw. 

Anil  caused  my  liclit  to  sliiiie  : 

^,  And  >vill  he  now  bis  work  Jin<l<s 

^■i  Or  break  hU  word  dirinc}"' 


A   ROUND  OF  DELIGHTS.  C47 

Perfectly  assured  of  the  Lord's  goodness,  the  man  confronts  the  future 
•without  fear,  and  in  due  time  approaches  death  without  dismay.     Since 
i;he  Lord  has  begun  to  make  us  Uke  his  Son  we  conchide  that  he  will 
perfect  his  work,  and  i-aise  us  from  our  graves  in  the  full  image  of  our 
Kedeemer.    He  has  given  us  already  to  know  something  of  the  joy  of 
-Christ,  who  'prayed  that  his  joy  might  be  fulfilled  in  us  that  our  joy 
might  be  full,  and  therefore  we  are  sure  that  we  shall  bask  in  the  joy  of 
heaven.    We  will,  therefore,  lie  down  in  peace,  and  rest  when  our  last 
day  on  earth  shall  come,  for  we  shall  rise  with  Jesus :  of  this  we  have  no 
-doubt.    We  shall  enter  into  the  joy  of  the  Ijord,  for  we  have  entered 
into  it  already.    Thus  out  of  peace  and  joy  there  grow  the  noblest  of 
-buman  hopes.     Little  enjoyment,  like  a  weak  telescope,  gives  us  but  a 
faint  prospect,  but  great  enjoyment  is  an  optic  glass  of  marvellous 
power,  and  brings  great  things  near  to  us.   Joy  and  peace  are  specimens 
^f  heaven's  felicities,  and  set  the  soul   both  hoping  and  hungering. 
Having  tasted  of  the  grapes  of  Eshcol,  we  believe  in  the  land  which 
floweth  with  milk  and  honey,  and  long  to  rest  under  the  boughs  which 
bear  such  luscious  clusters.     We  have  seen  the  celestial  city  far  away, 
but  the  light  of  it  is  so  surpassing  that  we  have  longed  to  walk  its 
^Iden  streets,  ay,  and  have  felt  sure  of  doing  so  ere  long.     He  who 
has  seen  a  little  of  the  ! light  of  the  morning  expects  the  more  eagerly 
the  noonday.    He  who  has  waded  into  the  river  of  joy  up  to  the  ankles, 
becomes  eager  to  enter  it  still  further,  till  he  finds  it  a  river  to  swim  in, 
'wherein  the  soul  is  borne  along  by  a  sacred  current  of  unutterable  de- 
hght.    Up,  ye  saints,  to  your  Pisgah  of  joy,  for  there  you  shall  have  a 
full  view  of  Canaan  which  stretches  before  you,  and  is  soon  to  be  yours. 
Whatever  your  joy  and  peace  may  be  now  you  ought  to  see  at  once  that 
they  are  meant  to  be  only  a  platform  from  which  you  are  to  look  for 
fiomething  brighter  and  better  still :  ye  are  filled  with  joy  an,d  ix^ace 
that  ye  may  abound  in  hope. 

Our  apostle  rightly  adds,  "  hy  tlie  power  of  iJw  Holy  Ghost,''  for  I  take 
it  that  this  is  partly  mentioned  by  way  oi'  caution,  because  there  are 
hopes  arising  out  of  inward  experience  which  may  turn  out  to  be 
fallacious,  and  therefore  we  must  discriminate  between  the  hope  of 
nature  and  the  hope  of  grace.  I  have  heard  young  people  say,  **  I  know 
I  am  saved,  because  I  am  so  happy."  Be  not  too  sure  of  that.  Many 
people  think  themselves  very  happy,  and  yet  they  are  not  saved. 
The  world  has  a  happiness  which  is  a  fatal  sign,  and  a  peace  which  is 
the  token  of  spiritual  death.  Discernment,  therefore,  is  needed  lest  we 
mistake  the  calm  before  a  storm  for  the  rest  which  the  Lord  giveth  to 
those  who  come  unto  him.  Hope  may  arise  out  of  our  joy,  but  we  must 
inind  that  we  do  not  fix  our  confidence  in  it,  or  wc  shall  have  a  sandy 
foundation.  The  solid  grace  of  hope  which  abides  and  remains  in  the 
soul  is  born  of  faith  through  the  word ;  it  is  only  tJie  ahoundiny  of  hope 
which  comes  out  of  our  joy  and  peace.  Let  me  begin  again  with  you 
lest  there  should  be  any  mistake.  You  hear  of  the  God  of  hope,  and 
are  led  to  believe  in  God  as  he  is  revealed  in  Scripture.  So  far  all  is 
plain  sailing.  If  you  believe  in  the  Christ  of  God,  you  obtain  joy  and 
peace,  but  these  are  resul  ts,  not  causes  :  you  must  not  begin  with  your  own 
]oy  and  peace,  and  say,  "My  hope  of  salvation  is  built  upon  the  happiness 
1  nave  felt  of  late.*'    This  will  never  do.     Begin  first  of  nil  with  the 


650  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Srayer  of  his,  shows  how  quick  he  is  to  see  anything  which  is  in  any 
egrec  favourable  to  the  poor  cheats  whose  cause  lie  has  undertaken. 
He  spied  oat  in  a  moment  the  only  feet  upon  which  compassion  ooiild 
find  foo^iold,  and  he  secretly  breathed  out  his  loving  hewt  in  the  cry, 
"  Father,  forgive  them ;  for  they  know  not  what  they  do."  Onr  gittat 
Advocate  will  be  sure  to  plead  wisely  and  efficiently  on  our  behalf;  he 
will  urge  every  argument  which  can  be  discovei-ed,  for  his  eye,  quickened 
by  love,  will  suffer  nothing  to  pass  which  may  tell  in  our  favour. 

The  prophet,  however,  does  not,  I  suppose,  intend  to  confino  onr 
thoughts  to  the  one  incident  which  is  recoraed  by  the  evangelists,  for  the 
intei-cession  of  Christ  was  an  essential  part  of  his  entire  life-work.  The 
mouutaiii'H  side  often  heard  him,  beneath  the  chilly  night,  pouring  out 
his  heart  i[i  Eupplications.  He  might  as  fitly  be  called  the  man  of 
jirayere  as  "  the  man  of  sorrows."  He  was  always  pra;ring,  even  when 
his  lips  moved  not.  '\Vlnle  he  was  teaching  and  worlang  miracles  by 
day  he  was  silently  communing  with  God,  and  making  supplication  for 
men  ;  and  his  nights,  instead  of  being  spent  in  seeking  restoration  from 
his  exhausting  labonrs,  were  frequently  occupied  with  intercession.  In- 
deed, our  Lord's  whole  life  is  a  prayer.  His  career  on  earth  was  inter- 
cession wrought  out  in  actions.  Since  "he  prayeth  beat  who  lovcth 
t)e6t,"  he  was  a  mass  of  prayer,  for  he  is  altogether  love.  He  is 
not  only  the  channel  and  the  example  of  prayer,  out  he  is  the  life  and 
force  of  prayer.  The  greatest  plea  with  God  is  Christ  himself.  The 
argument  w^hich  always  prevails  with  God  is  Christ  incarnate,  Christ 
fulfilling  the  law,  and  Christ  bearing  the  penalty,  Jesus  himself  is  the 
reasoning  and  logic  of  prayer,  and  he  himself  is  an  ever  living  prayer 
unto  the  Most  High. 

It  was  part  of  our  Lord's  official  work  to  make  intercession  for  the 
transgressors.  He  is  a  Priest,  and  as  such  he  brings  his  offering,  and 
presents  prayer  on  the  behalf  of  the  people.  Our  I<ord  is  the  Great 
High  Pnest  of  our  profession,  and  in  fulfilling  this  office  we  read  that 
he  offered  up  prayera  and  supplications  with  strong  crying  and  tears; 
and  we  know  that  be  is  now  oflfering  up  piuyers  for  the  souls  of  men. 
This,  indeed,  is  the  great  work  which  he  is  can-ying  on  to-day.  "We 
rejoice  in  his  finished  work,  and  rest  in  it,  but  that  relates  to  hia  atoning 
sacrifice  ;  his  intercession  springs  out  of  his  atonement,  and  it  will  never 
cease  while  the  blood  of  his  sacrifice  retains  its  power.  The  blood  of 
sprinkling  continues  to  speak  better  things  than  that  of  Abel.  Jesus  is 
Reading  now,  and  will  be  pleading  till  the  heavens  shall  be  no  more. 
For  all  that  come  to  God  by  him  he  still  presents  hia  merits  to  the 
Father,  and  pleads  the  causes  of  their  souls.  He  urges  the  grand  a^- 
ment  derived  from  his  life  and  death,  and  so  obtains  innumerable  blessings 
for  the  rebellious  sons  of  men. 

I.  I  have  to  direct  your  attention  this  morning  to  our  ever-living 
Lord  making  intercession  for  the  transgressors;  and  as  I  do  bo  I  shall 
pray  God,  in  the  first  place,  that  all  of  us  may  be  roused  to  admiba- 
Tios  FOE  HIS  QRACK.  Ck)me,  brethren,  gather  up  your  scattered  thoughts 
and  meditate  upon  him  who  alone  was  found  fit  to  stand  in  the  gap  and  turn 
away  WTath  by  hia  pleading.  If  yon  will  consider  his  intercession  for 
transgressors  I  think  you  will  be  struck  with  the  love,  and  tenderness,  and 
gracioamees  of  his  heart,  when  yon  recollect  that  he  offered  intercetaim 


JESUS  INTERCEDING  FOR  TRANSaRESSORS.  651 

verbally  while  he  was  standing  in  the  midst  of  tlieir  sin.  Sin  heard 
of  and  sin  seen  are  two  very  different  thinf^.  We  read  of  crimes  in  the 
newspapers,  bnt  we  are  not  at  all  so  homfied  as  if  we  had  seen  tliem  for 
onrselves.  Our  Lord  actually  saw  human  sin,  saw  it  unfettered  and  un- 
restrained, saw  it  at  its  worst.  Transgres^rs  surrounded  his  person,  and 
by  their  sins  darted  t^n  thousand  arrows  into  his  sacred  heart,  and  yet 
while  they  pierced  him  he  prayed  for  them.  The  mob  compassed  him 
round  about,  yeUing,  "  Crucify  him,  crucify  him,'*  and  his  answer  was 
"Father,  forgive  them":  he  knew  their  cruelty  and  ingratitude,  and  felt 
them  most  keenly,  but  answered  them  only  ^\^th  a  prayer.  The  great 
ones  of  the  earth  were  there,  too,  sneering  and  jesting — Pharisee  and 
Sadducee  and  Herodian — he  saw  their  selfishness,  conceit,  falsehood,  and 
bloodthirstiness,  and  yet  he  prayed.  Strong  bulls  of  Bashau  had  beset  him 
ronnd,  and  dogs  had  compassed  him,  yet  he  interceded  for  men.  Man's 
sin  had  stirred  up  all  its  strength  to  slay  God's  love,  and  therefore  sin  had 
arrived  at  its  worst  point,  and  yet  mercy  kept  pace  with  malice,  and  out- 
ran it,  for  he  sought  forgiveness  for  his  tormentors.  After  killing  pro- 
phets and  other  messengers,  the  wicked  murderera  were  now  saying, "  Tliis 
is  the  heir ;  come,  let  us  kill  him,  that  the  inheritance  may  be  ours."  And 
yet  that  heir  of  all  things,  w  ho  might  have  called  fire  from  heaven  upon 
them,  died  ciying, "  Father,  forgive  them."  He  knew  that  what  they 
did  was  sin,  or  he  would  not  have  prayed  "  forgive  them,"  but  yet  he 
set  their  deed  in  the  least  unfavourable  light,  and  said,  "  they  know  not 
what  they  do."  He  set  his  own  sonship  to  work  on  their  behalf,  and 
appealed  to  his  Father's  love  to  pardon  them  for  his  sake.  Never  was 
virtue  set  in  so  fair  a  frame  before,  never  goodness  came  so  adonied 
with  abundant  love  as  in  the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  yet  they 
hated  him  all  the  more  for  his  loveliness,  and  gathered  round  him  with 
the  deeper  spite  because  of  his  infinite  goodness.  He  saw  it  all,  and 
felt  the  sui  as  you  and  I  cannot  feel  it,  for  his  heart  was  purer,  and 
therefore  tenderer  than  ours :  he  saw  that  the  tendency  of  sin  was  to 
put  him  to  death,  and  all  like  him,  yea  and  to  slay  God  himself  if  it 
could  achieve  its  purpose,  for  man  had  become  a  Deicide  and  must  needs 
crucify  his  God — and  yet,  though  his  holy  soul  saw  and  loathed  all  this 
tendency  and  atrocity  of  transgression,  he  still  made  intercession  for  the 
transgressors.  I  do  not  know  whether  I  convey  my  own  idea,  but  to 
me  it  seems  beyond  measure  wonderful  that  he  should  know  sin  so 
thoroughly,  understand  its  heinousness,  and  see  the  drift  of  it,  and  feel 
it  so  wantonly  assailing  himself  when  he  was  doing  nothing  but  deeds  of 
kindness;  and  yet  witli  all  that  vivid  sense  of  the  vilcness  of  sin  upon 
him,  even  there  and  then  he  made  intercession  for  the  transgressors, 
saying,  "Father,  forgive  them  ;  for  they  know  not  what  they  do." 

Another  point  of  his  graciousness  was  also  clear  on  that  occasion, 
namely,  that  he  should  thus  intercede  while  in  agony.  It  is  marvellous 
that  he  should  be  able  to  call  his  mind  away  from  his  own  pains  to  con- 
sider their  transgressions.  You  and  I,  if  we  are  subject  to  gi-eat  pains 
of  body,  do  not  find  it  easy  to  command  our  minds,  and  especially  to 
collect  our  thoughts  and  restrain  them,  so  as  to  forgive  the  person 
inflicting  the  pain,  and  even  to  invoke  blessings  on  his  head.  Reineniber 
that  your  Loixl  was  suffering  w'hile  he  made  intercession,  beginning  to 
suffer    the    pangs  of  death,   suffering  in   soul  as  well   as   in  body. 


6fi2  UETROPOLITAN   TABEBKACT.E  FTJLPIT. 

for  he  had  freshlj  come  from  the  garden,  where  bis  Bonl  waa  exceeding^ 
Borronful,  even  unto  death.  Yet  iq  the  midst  of  that  depression  of 
spirit,  which  might  well  have  made  him  forgetful  of  the  wretched  beings 
who  were  putting  him  to  death,  he  foists  himself,  and  he  only  thinks  of 
them,  and  pleads  for  them.  I  am  sure  that  we  shonld  have  oeen  taken 
up  with  our  pains  even  if  we  had  not  been  moved  to  some  measure  of 
resentment  against  our  tormentors ;  but  we  hear  no  complaints  from  our 
Lord,  no  accusations  lodged  with  God,  no  angry  replies  to  them  such  as 
Paul  once  gave — "God  shall  smite  thee,  thou  whited  wall";  not  even  a 
word  of  mourning  or  of  complaining  concerning  the  indignities  which  he 
endured,  but  his  dear  heart  all  ascended  to  heaven  in  that  one  blessed 

gitition  for  his  enemies,  which  there  and   then   he  presented   to  his 
ather. 

But  I  will  not  confiiie  j'our  thoughts  to  that  incident,  because,  as  I 
have  already  said,  the  prophet's  woras  had  a  wider  range.  To  me  it  is 
marvellous  l/iat  he,  being  pure,  eftotiU  plead  fw  transgrestort  at  all:  for 
you  and  for  me  amongst  them — let  the  wonder  begin  there.     Sinners  by 

(nature,  sinners  by  practice,  wilful  sinners,  sinners  who  cling  to  sin 
with  a  terrible  tenacity,  sinners  who  come  back  to  sin  after  we 
have  Bmaited  for  it ;  and  yet  the  Just  One  has  espoused  our  cause,  and 
has  become  a  suitor  for  our  pardon.  We  are  sinners  who  omit  duties 
when  they  are  pleasures,  and  who  follow  after  sins  which  are  known  to 
involve  sorrow :  sinners,  therefore,  of  the  most  foolish  kind,  wanton, 
wilful  sinners,  and  yet  he  who  hates  all  sin  has  deigned  to  take  our  part^ 
and  plead  the  causes  of  our  sonls.  Our  Lord's  hatred  of  sin  is  as  great  as 
his  love  to  sinners ;  fais  indignation  against  everything  impure  is  as  great  as 
that  of  the  thrice  holy  God  who  revengeth  and  is  furions  when  he  comes 
into  contact  with  evil ;  and  yet  this  divine  Prince,  of  whom  we  sing, 
"Thou  lovest  righteousness  and  hatost  wickedness,"  espouses  the  cause 
of  transgressors,  and  pleads  for  them.  Oh,  matehless  grace  1  Surely 
angels  wonder  at  this  stretoh  of  condescending  love.  Brethren,  words 
&il  me  to  speak  of  it.     I  ask  yon  to  adore ! 

Further,  it  is  to  me  a  very  wonderfVil  fact  that  in  his  ghry  he  efiouid 
sHll  be  pleading  for  sinners.  There  are  some  men  who  when  they  have 
reached  to  high  positions  forget  their  former  associates.  They  knew  the 
poor  and  needy  friend  once,  for,  as  the  proverb  hath  it,  poverty  brings 
us  strange  bedfellows,  bnt  when  they  have  ri^u  out  of  such  conditions  they 
are  ashuned  of  the  people  whom  once  they  knew.  Our  Lord  is  not  thus 
forgetful  of  the  degraded  clients  whose  cause  he  espoused  in  the  days  of 
his  humiliation.  Yet  though  I  know  his  oonstancy  I  marvel  and  admire. 
The  Son  of  man  on  earth  pleading  for  sinners  is  very  graotons,  but  I  am 
overwhelmed  when  I  think  of  his  interceding  for  sinners  now  that  he 
reigns  yonder,  where  harps  unnumbered  tune  hispmiseand  cherubim  and 
seraphim  count  it  their  glory  to  be  less  than  nothing  at  his  feet,  where 
all  the  glory  of  his  Father  is  resplendent  in  liimself,  and  he  sitteth  at  the 
right  hand  of  God  in  divine  favour  and  majesty  unspeakable.  How  can 
we  hear  without  amazement  that  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords 
occupies  himself  with  caring  for  transgressors — caring  indeed  for  you  and 
me.  It  is  condescension  that  he  should  commnne  with  the  blood- 
washed  before  his  throne,  and  allow  the  perfect  ipirita  to  be  his  com- 
panions, but  that  his  heart  should  steal  away  from  all  heaven's  felicities 

I 


JESUS   INTERCEDING   FOR  TRANSGRESSORS.  653 

to  remember  sucli  poor  creatures  as  we  are  and  make  incessant  prayer 
on  our  behalf,  this  is  like  his  own  loving  self — it  is  Christlike,  Godlike. 
Methinks  I  see  at  this  moment  our  great  High  Priest  pleading  before 
the  throne,  wearing  his  jewelled  breastplate  and  his  garments  of  glory 
and  beauty,  wearing  our  names  upon  his  breast  and  his  shoulders  in  the 
most  holy  place.  What  a  vision  of  incomparable  love !  It  is  a  fact,  and 
no  mere  dream.  He  is  within  the  holy  of  holies,  presenting  the  one 
sacrifice.  His  prayers  are  always  heard,  and  heard  for  us,  but  the  maiTel 
is  that  the  Son  of  God  should  condescend  to  exercise  such  an  office  and 
make  intercession  for  transgressors.  This  matchless  grace  well  nigh  seals 
my  lips,  but  it  opens  the  floodgates  of  my  soul,  and  I  would  fain  pause  to 
worship  him  whom  my  words  tail  to  set  forth. 

Again,  it  is  gloriously  gracious  th<tt  our  Lord  sliouJd  continue  to  do  this; 
for  lo,  these  eighteen  hundred  years  and  more  he  has  gone  into  his  glory, 
yet  hath  he  never  ceased  to  make  intercession  for  transgressors.  Never 
on  heaven's  most  joyous  holiday  when  all  his  armies  are  marshalled, 
and  in  their  ghttering  squadi'ons  pass  in  review  before  the  King  of 
kings,  has  he  forgotten  his  redeemed  ones.  The  splendours  of  heaven 
have  not  made  him  indifferent  to  the  sorrows  of  eai'th.  Never, 
though,  for  aught  we  know,  he  may  have  created  myriads  of  worlds, 
and  though  assuredly  he  has  been  ruhng  the  courses  of  the  entire  uni- 
verse, never  once,  I  say,  has  he  suspended  his  incessant  pleading  for  the 
transgressors.  Nor  will  he,  for  the  holy  Scriptiu-es  lead  us  to  believe 
that  as  long  as  he  lives  as  mediator  he  will  intercede  :  "  He  is  able  to 
save  them  to  the  uttermost  that  come  mito  God  by  him,  seeing  he  ever 
liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them."  He  lived  and  lives  to  intercede,  as 
if  this  were  the  express  object  of  liis  living.  Beloved,  as  long  as  the 
great  Redeemer  lives  and  there  is  a  sinner  still  to  come  to  him,  lie  will 
still  continue  to  intercede.  Oh,  my  Master,  how  shall  I  praise  thee ! 
Hadst  thou  undertaken  such  an  office  now  and  then,  and  hadst  thou 
gone  into  the  royal  presence  once  in  a  while  to  intercede  for  some 
special  cases,  it  would  have  been  divinely  gracious  on  thy  part,  but  that 
thou  shouldst  always  be  a  suppliant,  and  never  oea^  to  intercede,  sur- 
passes all  our  praise.  Wonderful  are  his  words  as  written  in  prophecy 
oy  Isaiah, — "  For  Zion's  sake  will  I  not  hold  my  peace,  and  for  Jeru- 
salem's sake  I  will  not  rest  until  the  righteousness  thereof  go  forth  as 
brightness,  and  the  salvation  thereof  as  a  lamp  that  burneth."  As  the 
lamp  in  the  temple  went  not  out,  so  neither  hath  oiu*  Advocate  ceased  to 
plead  day  nor  night.  Unwearied  in  his  labour  of  love,  without  a  pause 
he  has  urged  our  suit  before  the  Father's  face.  Beloved,  I  will  not  en- 
large, I  cannot,  for  adoration  of  such  love  quite  masters  me ;  but  let 
your  hearts  ha  enlarged  with  abounding  love  to  such  an  intercessor  as 
this,  who  made,  who  does  make,  and  who  always  will  make  intercession 
for  the  transgi'cssors.  I  have  said,  "  tvill  iimke^'  and  indeed  this  is  no 
bare  assertion  of  mine,  for  my  text  may  be  read  in  the  future  as  well  as 
in  the  past :  indeed,  as  you  will  perceive  upon  a  little  thought,  it  must 
have  been  meant  to  be  understood  in  the  future,  since  the  prophecy 
was  written  some  seven  hundred  years  before  our  Lord  had  breathed 
his  intercessory  prayer  at  the  cross :  although  the  prophet,  in  order  to 
make  his  language  pictorial  and  vivid,  puts  it  in  the  past  tense,  it  was 
actually  in  the  future  to  him,  and  therefore  we  cannot  err  in  reading  it 


6M  METSOFOLITAS  TABERKJCLB  PTLPIT. 

in  the  futnre,  as  I  hare  done — "  he  tiaJl  make  iatenxaMm  for  the  tnas- 
gresaoTS."  Constant  lore  puts  op  a  ceamlese  plea.  EikDesB  compusimi 
brcflthcH  its  cndlcsB  prajer.  TiA  the  )a<)t  of  the  redeemed  haa  been 
gathered  home  that  interceding  breath  shall  neTCr  Btay,  nor  cease  to 
prevail. 

II.  Thns  hare  I  called  yon  to  feel  admiratioD  forhia  frace ;  and  nov, 
Beeondly,  I  do  earnestly  pray  that  we  may  be  led  of  the  Holy  Ghost  so 
to  Tiew  his  intercession  ror  transgressors  as  to  pnt  our  coswidbscs  ra 
HIMSELF.  There  is  gronnd  for  a  sinner's  confidence  in  Christ,  and 
there  is  abnndant  argument  for  the  belierer's  comp]et«  reliance  in  him, 
from  the  fact  of  his  perpetnal  intercession. 

Let  mc  show  you  this  first,  becanse,  beloved,  his  intercetsion  auceeeSt. 
God  hearcth  him,  of  that  we  do  not  donbt ;  but  what  is  the  basis  of  this 
intercession?  For  whateverthatis,  seeing  it  makes  the  intercession  to  be 
Bucccasfnl,  we  may  safely  rest  on  it.  Read  carefully  the  Terse :  "  Becanse 
he  h.ith  poured  oat  his  sonl  unto  death :  and  hewasnnmbered  with  the 
transgressors  j  and  he  bare  the  sin  of  many."  See,  then,  the  saocess  of 
his  p'tta  arises  out  of  his  substitution.  He  pleads  and  prevails  becanse 
he  has  borne  the  sin  of  those  for  whom  he  mtercedes.  The  main  stay 
and  Etrength  of  his  prevalence  in  his  intercession  lies  in  the  compl^eness 
of  the  sacrifice  whicn  he  offered  when  he  bore  the  sin  of  many.  Come, 
then,  my  soul,  if  Christ's  prayer  prevails  becanse  of  this,  so  will  thy 
faith.  Resting  on  the  same  foundation,  thy  faith  will  be  eqnal^  secnre 
of  acceptance.  Come,  my  heart,  rest  thon  on  that  truth — "  he  bare  the 
sin  of  many."  Throw  thyself  with  all  thy  sin  npon  his  snbstitntioo  and 
feci  that  this  is  a  Bafc  resting-place  for  thy  believing,  becanse  it  is  a 
solid  basis  for  thy  Lord's  intercession.  The  perfect  sacrifice  will  boar 
all  the  strain  which  can  possibly  come  npon  it ;  test  it  by  the  strongest 
faith  and  sec  for  thyself;  plead  it  with  the  boldest  requests  and  leam 
its  bonndlees  prevalence.  Thon  mayest  ut^  the  plea  of  the  precions 
blood  with  the  Father,  seeing  the  Lord  Jeans  has  ui^ed  it,  and  has 
never  failed. 

Now,  again,  there  m  reason/or  trami^etaors  io  torn*  and  trust  in  Jesus 
Christ,  seeing  he  pleads  for  them.  Ton  need  never  be  afraid  that  Ghriat 
will  cast  yon  ont  when  yon  can  hear  him  pleading  for  yon.  If  a  son  had 
been  dtBobedient  and  had  left  his  father's  honse,  and  were  to  come  back 
again,  if  he  had  any  fear  about  his  father's  receiving  him,  it  would  all 
disappar  if  he  stood  listening  at  the  door  and  heard  his  father  praying 
for  him.  "Oh,"  saith  ho,  "my  coming  back  is  an  answer  to  my  father's 
prayer,  he  will  gladly  enough  receive  me."  Whenever  a  sonl  comes  to 
Chrirtt  it  need  have  no  hesitancy,  seeing  Christ  has  already  prayed  for  it 
that  it  might  be  saved.  I  tell  you,  transgressors,  Christ  prays  for  yon 
when  yon  do  twl  pray  for  yourselrcs.    Did  he  not  say  of  his  believing 

Eeoplc,  "Neither  pray  I  for  these  alone,  but  for  them  also  which  shall 
clicvc  on  me  through  their  word  "?  Before  his  elect  become  believers 
they  have  a  place  in  his  supplications.  Before  you  know  yonraelves  to 
be  tranBgi-esaors  and  have  any  desire  for  pardon,  while  as  yet  yon  are 
lying  dead  in  sin,  hia  intercession  has  gone  up  even  for  such  aa  you  are. 
"  Fatlior,  forgive  them  "  was  a  prayer  for  those  who  had  never  songht  ■_, 
forgi\'eiieB3  for  themselves.  And  when  you  dare  mt  pray  for  yourselves 
he  is  Btill  praying  for  you  :  when  under  a  senae  of  sin  yoU  dare  not  lift 


JESUS  INTERCEDING  FOR  TRANSGRESSORS.  655 

BO  much  as  your  eyes  towards  heaven,  when  you  think  "Surely  it 
would  be  in  vain  for  me  to  seek  my  heavenly  Father's  face,"  he  is 
pleading  for  you.  Ay,  and  when  you  cannot  plead,  when  throuo:h  deep 
distress  of  mind  you  feel  choked  in  the  very  attempt  to  pray,  when  the 
language  of  supplication  seems  to  blister  your  lip  because  you  feel  your- 
self to  be  so  unworthy,  when  you  cannot  force  even  a  holy  groan  from 
your  despairing  heart,  he  stills  pleads  for  you.  Oh  what  encouragement 
this  ought  to  give  you.  If  you  cannot  pray  he  can,  and  if  you  feel  as 
if  your  prayers  must  be  shut  out,  yet  his  intercession  cannot  be  denied. 
Come  and  trust  him !  Come  and  trust  him  !  He  who  pleads  for  you  will 
not  reject  you :  do  not  entertain  so  unkind  a  thought,  but  come  and 
cast  youi*self  upon  him.  Hath  he  not  said,  "  Him  that  cometh  to  mo 
I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out  "?  Venture  upon  the  assured  truth  of  that 
word,  and  you  will  be  received  into  the  abode  of  his  love. 

I  am  sure  too  that  if  Jesus  Christ  pleads  for  transgressors  as  trans- 
gressors, while  as  yet  they  have  not  begun  to  pray  for  themselves,  /^  will 
he  sure  to  hear  them  when  they  are  at  last  led  to  pray.  When  the  trans- 
gressor becomes  a  penitent,  when  he  weeps  because  he  has  gone  astray, 
let  us  be  quite  sure  that  the  Lord  of  mercy  who  went  after  him  in  his 
sin  will  come  to  meet  him  now  that  he  returns.  There  can  be  no  doubt 
about  that.  I  have  known  what  it  is  to  catch  at  this  text  when  I  have 
been  heavy  in  heart.  I  have  seen  my  sinfulness,  and  I  have  been  filled 
with  distress,  but  I  have  blessed  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  that  he  makes 
intercession  for  the  transgressors,  for  then  I  may  venture  to  believe 
that  he  intercedes  for  me,  since  I  am  a  transgressor  beyond  all  doubt. 
Then  again,  when  my  spirit  has  revived,  and  I  have  said,  *^  But  yet  I  am 
a  child  of  God,  and  I  know  I  am  born  from  above,"  then  I  have  drawn 
a  further  inference, — if  he  makes  intercession  for  transgressors  then 
depend  upon  it  he  is  even  more  intent  upon  pleading  for  his  own  people. 
If  he  is  heard  for  those  who  are  out  of  the  way,  assuredly  he  will  be 
heard  for  those  who  have  returned  unto  the  shepherd  and  bishop  of  their 
souls.  For  them  above  all  others  he  will  be  sure  to  plead,  for  he  lives 
to  intercede  for  all  who  come  unto  God  by  him. 

In  order  that  our  confidence  may  be  increased,  consider  t/ie  effect  of  our 
Lord's  intercession  for  transyressors.  Remember,  first,  that  many  of  the 
TToret  of  transgressors  have  been  preserved  in  life  in  answer  to  Christ's 
prayer.  Had  it  not  been  for  his  pleading  they  would  have  been  dead 
long  ago.  You  know  the  parable  of  the  fig  tree  that  cumbered  the 
ground,  bearing  no  fruit,  and  impoverishing  the  soil.  The  master  of 
the  vineyard  said,  "  Cut  it  down,"  but  the  vine  dresser  said,  *'  Let 
it  alone  this  year  also,  till  I  shall  dig  about  it,  and  dung  it :  and  if  it  bear 
fruit,  well."  Need  I  say  who  he  is  that  stays  the  axe  which  else  had 
long  ago  been  laid  at  the  root  of  the  baiTen  tree  ?  I  tell  you  ungodly 
men  and  women  that  you  owe  your  very  lives  to  my  Lord's  interference 
on  your  behalf.  You  did  not  hear  the  intercession,  but  the  great  owner 
of  the  vineyard  heard  it,  and  in  answer  to  the  gracious  entreaties  of  his 
Son  he  has  let  you  live  a  little  longer.  Still  are  you  where  the  gospel 
can  come  at  you,  and  where  the  Holy  Spirit  can  renew  you  ?  Is  there 
no  ground  for  faith  in  this  gracious  fact  ?  Can  you  not  trust  in  him 
through  whose  instrumentality  you  are  yet  ahve?  Say  to  your  heavenly 
Father, 


656  UETaOPOUTAN  TABERHACLE  PULPIT. 

"  Lord,  and  am  I  yet  alive. 
Not  in  toniionls.  u<it  in  bell ! 
Slill  doth  thy  gaoA  Spirit  strive— 
WitU  the  cbief  of  siniiei-.  dwell  ?  " 

And  thon  Iwlicve  in  him  to  whose  pleading  you  owe  the  fact  that  yon 
are  within  reach  of  mercy.  Well  doth  it  become  you  to  coafide  in  him 
who  has  already  been  yonr  preserrer  from  death  und  hell.  May  the 
divine  Spirit  teach  yon  the  reason ableaeiss  of  my  ai^nment,  and  lead 
you  at  once  to  humble  faith  in  Jesus, 

Remember  next,  that  Ihe  ffi/t  of  the  Holy  Spirit  which  is  needful  for 
the  quickening  of  transgressors  was  the  reiult  of  Clirist's  intercession. 
Our  poet  was  right  when  he  said : — 


I  do  not  donbt  but  that  between  the  prayer  of  Christ  for  his  mnrdcrerB 
and  the  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Ghost  at  Pentecost  there  was  an  inti- 
mate connection.  Ah  the  prayer  of  Stephen  brought  Saul  into  the  church 
and  made  him  an  npoatle,  ao  the  prayer  of  Christ  brought  in  three 
thousand  at  Pentecost  to  become  his  disciples.  The  Spirit  of  God  n-as 
given  "  to  the  rebellions  also  "  in  answer  to  the  pleadings  of  onr  Lord. 
Now,  it  is  a  great  blessing  thus  to  have  the  Spirit  of  God  given  to  the 
sons  of  men,  and  if  this  comes  through  Jesiia'  prayers  let  us  trust  in 
him,  for  what  will  not  come  if  we  rely  npon  hia  power  ?  Upon  sinneis 
he  will  still  display  his  power  ;  they  will  be  pricked  in  their  hearts,  and 
will  believe  in  liim  whom  they  hare  pierced. 

It  is  throngh  Christ's  intercession  thnt  ovr  poor  praytra  tire  acrepltd 
with  Ood.  John,  in  the  Revelation,  saw  another  angel  standing  at  the 
altar,  having  a  golden  censer,  to  whom  there  was  given  much  incense, 
that  he  should  offer  it  with  the  prayers  of  all  saints  upon  the  golden 
altar  which  was  before  the  throne.  Whence  comes  the  much  iucenae  ? 
What  is  it  but  Jesus'  merits  ?  Our  prayers  are  only  accepted  because 
of  his  prayers.  If,  then,  the  intercession  of  Christ  for  transgressors  has 
made  the  prayers  of  trangressors  to  be  accepted,  let  us  without  wavering 
put  our  trust  in  him,  and  let  iis  show  it  by  offering  our  supplications 
with  a  fiill  assurance  of  faith,  and  an  unstaggering  confidence  in  the 
promise  of  onr  covenant  God.  Are  not  all  the  promises  yea  and  amen 
in  Christ  Jeans  ?  Let  us  remember  him,  and  aak  ia  faith,  nothing 
wavering. 

It  is  through  the  prayers  of  Christ,  too,  that  we  are  Icepl  in  l/ie  how 
of  femplalion.  Remember  what  lie  said  to  Peter,  "  I  have  prayed  for 
thee,  that  thy  faith  fail  not,"  when  Satan  desired  to  have  him  and  sift 
him  as  wheat.  "Father,  keep  them  from  the  evil"  is  a  part  of  our 
Lord's  supplication,  and  his  Father  hears  him  always.  Well,  if  we  are 
kept  in  the  midst  of  temptation  from  being  destroyed  because  Christ 
pleads  for  us,  let  ns  never  fear  to  trust  ourselves  iu  hia  kind,  careful 
hands.  He  can  keep  ns,  for  he  has  kept  us.  If  his  prayera  have  de- 
livered us  ont  of  the  nand  of  Satan,  his  eternal  power  can  bring  ns  safely 
home,  though  death  hes  in  the  way. 

Indeed,  it  is  bccanao  he  pleads  thai  at  are  saved  at  all.  He  is  "able 
also  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost  that  come  nuto  God  by  him,  seeing  he 


JESUS  INTERCEDIKa  FOR  TRANSGRESSORS.  657 

ever  Hveth  to  make  intercession  for  them."  This,  also,  is  one  grand 
reason  why  we  are  able  to  challenge  all  the  accusations  of  the  world 
and  of  the  devil,  for  "  Who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?  It  is  Christ  that 
died,  yea,  rather,  that  is  risen  again,  who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of 
God,  who  also  maketh  intercession  for  ns."  Satan's  charges  are 
all  answered  by  our  Advocate.  He  defends  us  at  the  judgment  seat 
when  we  stand  there  like  Joshua  in  filthy  garments,  accused  of  the  devil ; 
and  therefore  the  verdict  is  always  given  in  our  favour — "  Take  away 
his  filthy  garments  from  him."  Oh  ye  that  would  bring  slanderous 
accusations  against  the  saints  of  God,  they  will  not  damage  us  in  the 
court  of  the  great  King,  for  "if  any  man  sin,  we  have  an  advocate 
with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous."  Think,  my  dear 
brethren  and  sisters,  of  what  the  intercession  of  Jesus  has  done,  and 
you  mil  clearly  perceive  great  inducements  to  place  your  sole  reliance 
in  your  Lord.  You  who  have  never  trusted  him,  will  you  not  this  very 
morning  begin  to  do  so  ?  Come,  weary  heart,  take  the  Lord  Jesus  to  be 
your  confidence, — ^what  more  do  you  want?  Can  you  desire  a  better 
friood  than  he  is,  a  more  prevalent  advocate  before  the  throne  ?  Come, 
leave  all  other  trusts,  and  yield  yourselves  to  him  this  morning.  I  pray 
you  accept  this  advice  of  love.  And  you,  ye  saints,  if  you  are  foolish 
enough  to  have  doubts  and  fears,  come,  see  how  Jesus  pleads  for  you. 
Give  him  your  burden  to  bear,  leave  with  him  your  anxieties  at  this 
moment  that  he  may  care  for  you.  He  will  carry  on  your  suit  before  the 
eternal  throne,  and  carry  it  through  to  success.  He  who  engages  a 
soJicitor  to  manage  his  legal  business  among  men  leaves  his  affairs  in  his 
hands,  and  he  who  has  such  a  pleader  before  God  as  Christ  Jesus,  the 
"Wonderful,  Counsellor,  has  no  need  to  torment  himself  with  anxieties. 
Rather  let  him  rest  in  Jesus,  and  wait  the  result  with  patience. 

"  Give  him,  my  aoul,  thy  cause  to  plead, 
Nor  doubt  the  Father's  grace." 

So  much,  then,  for  the  duty  of  exercising  confidence  in  him.      May  the 
Holy  Ghost  fill  you  with  faith  and  peace. 

III.  And  now,  in  the  third  place,  I  pray  that  our  text  may  inspire  us 
ivith  the  spirit  of  obedience  to  his  example.  I  say  obedience  to  hi« 
example,  for  I  take  the  example  of  Christ  to  be  an  embodied  precept  as 
much  binding  upon  us  as  his  written  commands.  The  life  of  Christ  is 
a  precept  to  those  who  profess  to  be  his  disciples.  Now,  brethren  in 
Christ,  may  I  put  a  few  practical  matters  before  you,  and  \nll  you  endea- 
vour by  the  help  of  God's  Spirit  to  carry  them  out  ? 

First,  then,  your  Lord  makes  intercession  for  the  transgi-cssoi's,  there- 
fom  imitate  him  by  foi^givijuj  all  transgressions  against  yourself.  Have  any 
offended  you  ?  Let  the  very  recollection  of  the  offence  as  far  as  possible 
pass  from  your  minds,  for  none  have  ever  injured  you  as  men  injured 
him ;  let  me  say,  as  you  yourself  have  injured  him.  They  have  not  nailed 
you  to  a  cross,  nor  pierced  your  hands,  and  feet,  and  side ;  yet  if  he  siiid, 
**  Father,  forgive  them,"  well  may  you  say  the  same.  Ten  thousand 
talents  did  you  owe  ?  Yet  he  forgave  you  all  that  debt,  not  without  a 
grievous  outlay  to  himself:  your  brother  owes  you  but  a  hundred  pence, 
will  you  take  him  by  the  throat  ?  Will  you  not  rather  freely  forgive 
hhn  even  to  seventy  times  seven  ?    Can  you  not  forgive  him  ?     If  you 


658  UETKOPOLITAB   TABER]!rA.OLB   PULPIT. 

find  it  to  be  impossible  I  will  not  speak  to  yon  any  longer  aa  a 
Christian,  because  I  must  donbt  if  yon  are  a  believer  at  all.  The  Lord 
oannot  accept  you  while  yon  are  unforgiving,  since  he  himself  Bays, 
"  Therefore  if  thon  bring  thy  gift  to  the  altar,  and  there  reraemberest 
that  thy  brother  bath  ought  against  thee ;  leave  there  thy  gift  before  the 
altar,  and  go  thy  way;  first  be  reconciled  to  tby  brother,  and  then  come 
and  offer  thy  gilt."  If  peace  be  not  made  thon  \nlt  not  be  accepted. 
God  hears  not  those  in  whose  hearts  malice  and  enmity  find  a  lodging. 
Yet  I  would  speak  to  thee  in  tones  of  love  rather  than  with  worffl  of 
threatening :  as  a  follower  of  the  gentle  Christ  I  beseech  thee  imitate  him 
in  this,  and  thou  shalt  find  rest  and  comfort  to  thine  own  sonl.  From 
the  day  in  ^vhich  Christ  foi^vcth  thee  rise  to  that  nobility  of  character 
which  finds  a  pleasure  in  forgiving  all  offences  fully  and  frankly  for 
Christ's  sake.  Surely,  the  atonement  which  he  offered,  if  it  satisfied  God, 
may  well  satisfy  thee,  and  make  amends  for  the  sin  of  thy  brother 
against  thee  as  well  as  against  the  Lord,  Jesus  took  upon  himself  the 
transgressions  of  the  second  table  of  the  law,  as  well  as  of  the  first,  and 
I  ^vilc  tlioii  bring  a  suit  against  thy  brother  for  the  sin  which  Jesua  bore  ? 
I  Bretiutn,  ye  must  forgive,  for  the  blood  has  blotted  the  record !  Let 
these  woraa  of  Scripture  drop  upon  your  hearto  like  gentle  dew  from 
heaven, — "  Be  ye  kind  one  to  another,  tender-hearted,  forgiving  one 
another,  even  as  God  for  Christ's  sake  hath  forgiven  you." 

Kelt,  imitate  Christ,  dear  Iriends,  in  pleading  /or  yourselvas.  Since  ■ 
you  are  transgressors,  and  you  see  that  Jesus  intercedes  for  tranfigreasors, 
make  bold  to  say,  "  If  he  pleads  for  such  as  I  am,  I  will  put  in  my  humble 
petition,  and  hope  to  be  heard  through  him.  Since  I  hear  nim  cry, '  Father, 
forgive  them,'  I  wiU  humbly  weep  at  his  feet,  and  try  to  mingle  my  faint 
and  trembling  plea  with  bis  all-prevalent  supplication."  When  Jesos 
says,  "  Father,  foi^ivc  them,"  it  will  be  your  wisdom  to  ciy,  "  Father, 
I  forgive  WM."  Dear  iearer,  that  is  the  way  to  be  saved.  '  Let  thy  prayers 
hang,  like  the  golden  bells,  upon  the  skirts  of  the  great  High  Priest ; 
he  will  carry  them  within  the  veil,  and  make  them  ring  out  sweetly  there. 
As  music  borne  on  the  breeze  is  heard  afar,  so  ahall  tby  prayers  have  a 
listener  in  heaven  because  Jesus  waits  thein  tliere.  Since  tny  prayers  are 
feeble,  yoke  them  to  the  omnipotence  of  his  intercession :  let  his  merits 
be  as  wings  on  which  they  may  soar,  and  his  power  as  hands  with  which 
they  may  grasp  thepriceless  boons,  IVhat  shall  I  say  to  those  who  refuse  - 
to  pray  when  they  have  such  an  encouragement  as  the  aid  of  Jesus  ? 
Tones  of  tenderness  are  suitable  when  addressing  the  ungodly,  when  we 
would  persuade  them  to  pray ;  but  if  they  refuse  the  intercession  of 
Jesus  Christ  himself,  then  must  we  add  our  solemn  warnings.  If  yoa 
perish,  your  blood  be  on  jour  own  heads ;  we  must  say  Amen  to  your 
condcnmation,  and  bear  witness  that  you  desen'e  to  be  doubly  punished. 
Rejecters  of  great  mercy  must  expect  great  wrath.  The  iutercession  of 
your  Saviour,  when  refused,  will  be  visited  upon  you  most  terribly  in  the 
day  when  he  becomes  your  judge. 

Let  us  imitate  our  Lord  in  a  third  point,  dear  friends :  namely,  if  we 
have  been  forgiven  our  transgressions,  Ul  m  now  intercede  for  traiu- 
gresaors,  since  Jesus  does  so.  He  is  the  great  example  of  all  his  dis- 
ciples, and,  if  he  makes  it  his  constaut  business  to  supplicate  &ir  sinnen, 
should  not  his  people  nnite  with  him  ?    Therefore  would  I  stir  np  yoor 


JESUS  INTERCEDING  FOR  TRANSGRESSORS.  659 

pure  minds  by  way  of  remembrance,  to  come  together  in  your  hundreds, 
and  in  your  thousands,  to  pray.  Never  let  our  prayer-meetings  decline. 
Ijet  us,  as  a  church,  make  intercession  for  transgressors,  and  never  rest 
from  seeking  the  conversion  of  all  around  us.  I  trust  that  every  day,  so 
often  as  you  bow  the  knee  for  yourselves,  you  will  make  intercession  for 
the  transgressors.  Poor  things,  many  of  them  are  sinning  against  their 
own  souls,  but  they  know  not  what  they  do.  They  think  to  find  pleasure 
in  sin  :  in  this  also  they  know  not  what  they  do.  They  break  the 
Sabbath,  they  despise  the  sanctuary,  they  reject  Christ,  they  go  down- 
ward to  hell  with  mirth,  singing  merry  glees  as  if  they  were  going  to  a 
wedding  feast :  they  know  not  what  they  do.  But  you  do  know  what 
they  are  doing.  By  your  humanity — scarcely  shall  I  need  to  urge  a 
stronger  motive, — I  say,  by  mere  humanity,  I  beseech  you,  do  all  you  can 
for  these  poor  souls,  and  especially  pray  for  them.  It  is  not  much  you 
are  asked  to  do ;  you  are  not  ix)inted  to  the  cross  and  bidden  to  bleed 
there  for  sinners,  you  are  but  asked  to  make  intercession.  Intercession 
is  an  honourable  service  ;  it  is  an  ennobling  thing  that  a  sinner  like 
youi'self  should  be  allowed  to  entreat  the  King  for  others.  If  you  could 
have  permission  to  frequent  the  Queen's  courts  you  would  not  think  it  a 
hardship  to  be  asked  to  present  a  petition  for  another ;  it  would  be  to  you 
a  delight  to  be  enjoyed,  a  privilege  to  be  snatched  at  eagerly,  that  you 
should  be  permitted  to  present  requests  for  others.  Oh,  stand  where 
Abraham  stood  and  plead  for  sinners  :  Sodom  could  scarce  be  worse 
than  many  portions  of  the  world  at  this  hour.  Plead,  then,  with  all 
your  hearts.  Plead  again,  and  again,  and  again  with  the  Lord,  though 
ye  be  but  dust  and  ashes,  and  cease  not  till  the  Lord  say,  "  I  have  heard 
the  petition,  I  will  bless  the  city,  I  will  save  the  millions,  and  my  Son 
shall  be  glorified." 

I  have  not  quite  done,  for  I  have  a  further  duty  to  speak  of,  and  it 
is  this ;  let  us  take  care,  dear  friends,  that  if  we  do  plead  for  others 
7ce  mix  with  it  tlie  doitig  of  good  to  tliem,  because  it  is  not  recorded 
that  he  made  intercession  for  transgressors  until  it  is  first  written,  "  he 
bare  the  sin  of  many."  For  us  to  pray  fur  sinners  without  instruct- 
ing them,  without  exerting  ourselves  to  arouse  them,  or  making  any 
sacrifice  for  their  convereion,  without  using  any  likely  means  for  their 
impression  and  conviction,  would  be  a  piece  of  mere  formality  on  our 
part.  According  to  our  ability  we  must  prove  the  sincerity  of  our  t)eti- 
tions  by  our  actions.  Prayer  without  eflbrt  is  falsehood,  and  that  can- 
not be  pleasing  to  God.  Yield  up  yourselves  to  seek  the  good  of 
others,  and  then  may  you  intercede  with  honest  hearts. 

Lastly,  if  Christ  appears  in  heaven  far  us,  let  ks  be  glad  to  ajjpear  an 
earth  for  him.  He  owns  us  before  God  and  the  holy  angels,  let  us  not 
be  ashamed  to  confess  him  before  men  and  devils.  If  Christ  pleads  with 
God  for  men,  let  us  not  be  backward  to  plead  with  men  for  God.  If 
he  by  his  intercession  saves  us  to  the  uttermost,  let  us  hasten  to  serve 
him  to  the  uttermost.  If  he  spends  eternity  in  intercession  for  us,  let 
US  spend  our  time  in  intercession  for  his  cause.  If  he  thinks  of  us,  we 
ought  also  to  think  of  his  people,  and  especially  supplicate  for  his  afflicted. 
If  he  watches  our  cases,  and  adapts  his  prayers  to  our  necessities,  let  us 
obsei-ve  the  needs  of  his  people,  and  plead  for  them  with  understanding. 
Alas,  how  soon  do  men  weary  of  pleading  for  our  Lord.    If  a  whole  day  is  set 


1 


GOO  METROPOLITAN  tABBRKACLB  PULPIT. 

apart  for  prayer  and  the  meeting  is  not  carefolly  managed  it  reaflfltlib- 
coines  a  weariness  of  the  flesh.  Prayer-meetings  very  easily  lose  Umi  hunt 
and  burn  low.  Shame  on  these  laggard  spirits  and  this  heavy  flesh  of  oms, 
wliicli  needs  to  be  pampered  with  Hvelineas  and  brevity,  or  we  go  to  sleep  at 
our  devotions.  "  For  ever  "  is  not  too  long  for  hun  to  idead,  and  y^  an 
hour  tries  us  here.  On,  and  on,  and  on  through  all  the  ages,  still  his 
intercession  rises  to  the  throne,  and  yet  we  flag  and  our  prayers  are  half 
dead  in  a  short  season.  See,  Moses  lets  his  hands  hang  down,  and  Amelek 
is  defeating  Joshua  in  tlie  plain  !  Can  we  endure  to  be  tivjia  losing  yictories 
and  causing  the  enemy  to  triumph  ?  If  your  ministers  are  unsucceasfdl, 
if  your  labourers  for  Christ  in  foreign  lands  make  little  headway,  if  ^ 
work  of  Christ  diags,  is  it  not  because  in  the  secret  place  of  inter- 
cession we  have  but  little  strength  ?  The  restraining  of  prayer  is  tiie 
weakening  of  the  church.  If  we  aroused  ourselves  to  lay  hold  upon 
the  covenant  angel  and  resolutely  cried,  "  I  will  not  let  thee  go,  except 
thou  bless  me,"  we  should  enrich  ourselves  and  our  age.  If  we  us^  more  of 
the  strong  reasons  which  make  up  the  weapon  of  all-prayer,  our  victories 
would  not  be  so  few  and  far  between.  Our  interceding  Lord  is  hindered 
for  lack  of  an  interceding  church ;  the  kingdom  comes  not  because  so 
little  use  is  made  of  the  throne  of  grace.  Get  ye  to  your  knees,  my 
brethren,  for  on  your  knees  ye  conquer.  Go  to  the  mercy-seat  and  re- 
main there.  What  better  argument  can  I  use  with  you  than  this— 
Jesus  is  there,  and  if  you  desire  his  company  you  must  ofttimes  resort 
thither?  If  you  want  to  taste  his  dearest,  sweetest  love,  do  what  he  is 
doing :  union  of  work  will  create  a  new  communion  of  heart.  Let  as 
never  be  absent  when  praying  men  meet  together.  Let  us  make  a  point 
of  frequenting  assemblies  gathered  for  prayer,  even  if  we  give  up  other 
occupations.  Wliilc  we  live  let  us  be  above  all  things  men  of  pray©', 
and  when  we  die,  if  nothing  else  can  be  said  of  us,  may  men  give  ns 
this  epitaph,  which  is  also  our  Lord's  memorial — "He  made  inteicessioii 
tor  the  transgressors."    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Isaiah  liii. 


IlTsi^s  from  "  Our  Own  Hymn  Book  "—327,  412,  329. 


*'  THE  SWORD  AND  THE  TROWEL."    Edited  by  0.  H.  SPURGEON. 

CONTEJtTS   FOR  DeCEMBXB,   1877. 

"  Do  not  Sin  against  tho    Ctild."     By  C.  H.  f  Octavius  Street  Chapel,  DeptfonL 
Spurgcon.  1  The  Palac©  of  the  Bible.    By  Dr.  Somerrille. 

Seven u-cn  Ycar3  in  the  Yoruba  Country.     Bv   A  Message  to  all  Mimsters  who  were  formerly 
raster  C.  A.  Da vi'!,  Manchester.  *        -     -    -       .      •  -  - 

Security  of  God's  Children. 

liliezer ;  or,  Suflfcriug  fur  Christ.  i  : 

Our  Evangeli;>t!$  in  Bristol. 

Mind  the  Application. 

*'  Good  Neva  from  a  Tor  Country." 


Students  of  the  Pastors'  College. 
Notices  of  Books. 
Notes. 

Pastors*  OolIoRC. 
Stockwell  Orphanage. 
Colportage  Association. 


Price  3d.    Post  free,  4  stamps. 


JK«tit«pIttan  iJatemafk  fttljit. 


SINS  OF  IGNORANCE. 


%  ^mn 


Delitered  on  Lord's-Day  Morning,  November   25nT,  1877,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


"  And  if  a  soul  sin,  and  commit  any  of  these  things  which  are  forbidden  to  be 
d#ne  by  the  commandments  of  the  Lord  ;  though  he  wist  it  not,  yet  is  he  guilty,  and 
shall  bear  his  iniquity.  And  he  shall  bring  a  ram  without  blemish  out  ef  the  flock, 
with  thy  estimation,  for  a  trespass  offering,  unto  the  priest :  and  the  priest  shall 
make  an  atonement  for  him  concerning  his  ignorance  wherein  he  erred  and  wist  it 
not,  and  it  shall  be  forgiven  him." — Leviticus  y.  17,  18. 

It  is  supposed  in  our  text  that  men  might  commit  forbidden  things  with- 
out knowing  it ;  nay,  it  is  not  merely  supposed,  but  it  is  taken  for  granted, 
and  provided  for.  The  Le\itical  law  had  special  statutes  for  sins  of 
ignorance,  and  one  of  its  sections  begins  with  these  words,  "  If  a  soul 
shall  sin  through  ignorance  against  any  of  the  commandments  of  the 
Lord."  If  you  will  at  your  leisure  read  the  fourth  and  fifth  chapters  of 
Leviticus  you  will  find  it  first  of  all  supposed  that  a  priest  may  sin.  They 
know  nothing  of  infallible  priests  and  infallible  popes  under  the  ^Mosaic 
law ;  but  it  was  known  ana  recognised  that  priests  might  sin,  and  sin 
through  ignorance,  too.  "The  priest's  lips  should  keep  knowledge," 
but  as  they  were  compassed  with  infirmities,  they  learned  to  have 
compassion  on  the  ignorant  by  being  made  themselves  conscious  that 
they  were  not  perfect  in  understanding.  In  the  fourth  chapter  a  sacri- 
fice is  prescribed  for  "  the  priest  that  is  anointed,  if  he  do  sin  according 
to  the  sin  of  the  people."  The  highest  in  office,  who  ought  to  be  best 
read  in  the  things  of  God,  might  nevertheless  err  through  misunder- 
standing, forgetfulness,  or  ignorance.  Tlie  priests  were  teachers,  but 
they  needed  also  to  be  taught.  As  Trapp  says,  "  The  sins  of  teachers 
are  teachers  of  sins,"  and  therefore  they  were  not  overlooked,  but  had  to 
be  expiated  by  trespass  offerings.  Further  on  in  the  chapter  it  is  sup- 
posed that  a  ruler  may  sin  (see  verse  22).  A  ruler  should  be  thoroughly 
acquainted  with  the  law  which  he  has  to  dispense,  but  yet  he  might  not 
know  every  point,  and  therefore  mi^t  err ;  therefore  it  is  written, 
"  When  a  ruler  hath  sinned,  and  done  somewhat  through  ignorance  against 
any  of  the  commandments  of  the  Lord  his  God  conoerning  things  which 
No.  1,386. 


^ 


C62   •  BIETKOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

sliould  not  be  done,  and  is  guilty ;  or  if  his  sin,  Mrherein  he  hath.ginned, 
come  to  liis  knowledge ;  lie  shall  bring  his  offering."  There  existed  nc 
fiction  among  the  Jews  that  the  king  can  do  no  wrong  :  however  excel- 
lent his  intentions,  he  might  \ye  misinformed  upon  the  divine  law,  and  so 
fall  into  error.  Errors  in  leaders  ai"e  very  fruitful  of  mischief,  and  there- 
fore they  were  to  be  repented  of  and  put  away  by  an  expiatory  sacrifice. 
It  was  also  accoixling  to  the  law  regarded  as  very  like^  that  any  man 
might  fall  into  sins  of  ignorance,  for  in  chapter  iv.,  verse  27,  we  read, 
"  And  if  any  one  of  the  common  people  sin  through  ignorance,  while  he 
doeth  somewhat  against  any  of  the  commandments  of  the  Loni."  Tbe 
sin  e^•en  of  the  commonest  person  was  not  to  be  winked  at  and  passed 
over  as  a  mere  trifle,  even  though  he  could  plead  ignorance  of  the  law. 
It  was  not  to  be  said,  "  Oh,  he  is  quite  an  insignificant  person,  and  he 
did  it  inerrvjr,  and  therefore  there  is  no  need  to  take  any  note  of  it";  but, 
on  the  contrary,  he  was  also  to  bring  his  trespass  offering  that  tbe  priest 
might  make  an  atonement  for  him.  Ignorance  was  common  enough 
am(^ng  the  common  people,  and  yet  it  did  not  constitute  a  Hcense  for 
them,  nor  screen  them  from  guilt. 

But  we  need  not,  dear  friends,  go  to  these  Scripture  references,  for  we 
are  well  assured  by  our  own  obsen'ation  and  the  verdict  of  our  own  ex- 
perience that  sins  of  ignorance  are  possible,  for  we  have  often  oursehes 
sinned  in  this  ftishion,  and  we  have  had  deeply  to  mourn  over  the  fact 
when  we  have  been  convinced  of  it.  Very  much  in  which  we  once 
allowed  ourselves  we  would  not  do  again,  for  we  see  the  evil  of  it,  though 
once  we  judged  it  to  be  right  enough.  An  enlightened  conscience 
mourns  over  sins  of  ignorance,  which  it  would  never  do  if  they  were 
innocent  mistakes. 

The  word  rendered  "  ignorance  ''  may  also  bear  the  translation  of  in- 
advertence. Inadvertence  is  a  kind  of  acted  ignorance :  a  man  fii^uently 
does  wrong  for  want  of  thought,  through  not  considering  the  bearing  of 
his  action,  or  even  thinking  at  all.  He  cai^elessly  and  hastily  blunders 
into  the  coui-sc  which  first  suggests  itself,  and  errs  because  he  did  not 
study  to  be  right.  There  is  very  much  sin  of-this  kind  committed  every 
day.  Thei-e  is  no  intent  to  do  wrong,  and  yet  ^v^ong  is  done.  Culpabte 
neglect  creates  a  thousand  faults.  **  Evil  is  wrought  by  want  of  thought 
as  well  as  want  of  heart."  Sins  of  inadvertence,  therefore,  are  un- 
doubtedly abundant  among  us,  and  in  these  busy,  thoughtless,  rail^'ay 
days  they  arc  apt  to  increase.  We  do  not  take  time  enough  to  examine 
our  actions  :  we  do  not  take  good  heed  to  our  steps.  Life  should  be  a 
careful  work  of  art,  in  which  every  single  line  and  tint  should  be  the 
fruit  of  study  and  thought,  like  the  paintings  of  the  great  master  who 
was  wont  to  say,  "I  paint  for  eternity";  but  alas  life  is  often  slurred 
over  like  those  hasty  productions  of  the  scene  painter  in  which  present 
effect  alone  is  studied,  and  the  canvas  becomes  a  mere  daub  of  colours 
hastily  laid  on.  We  seem  intent  to  do  much  rather  than  to  do  well :  we 
want  to  cover  space  rather  than  to  i-each  perfection.  This  is  not  wise. 
O  that  every  single  thought  were  conformed  to  the  will  of  God. 

Now,  seeing  that  there  are  sins  of  ignorance  and  sins  of  inadvertence,  what 
about  them  ?  Is  there  any  actual  guilt  in  them  ?  In  our  text  we  have 
the  Lord's  mind  and  judgment,  not  that  of  the  church  or  of  some  eminent 
divine,  but  of  the  Lord  God  himself,  and  therefore  let  me  read  it  to  you 


8ma  OF  IGNO&AKOB.  668 

once  again.  "If  a  soul  sin,  and  commit  any  of  these  things  which  are 
•forbidden  to  be  done  by  the  commandments  of  the  Lord ;  though  he  wist 
it  not,  yet  is  he  guilty,  and  shall  bear  his  iniquity."  Sins  of  ignorance, 
Ihen,  are  really  sins,  needing  atonement,  because  they  involve  us  in 
guilt.  Yet  let  us  clearly  understand  that  they  greatly  differ  in  degree  of 
guil<?from  l&iown  and  wilful  sins.  Oar  Lord  teaches  ixs  this  in  the  gospels, 
Bud  our  own  conscience  tells  us  that  it  must  be  so.  The  Sa\'iour  puts 
ity  "  That  servant,  which  Imew  his  lord's  will,  and  prepared  not  himself, 
neither  did  according  to  his  will,  shall  be  beaten  with  many  stripes. 
But  he  that  knew  not,  and  did  commit  things  worthy  of  stripes,  shall  be 
'l)eaten  with  few  stripes."  He  who  knew  not  liis  Lord's  will  was  less 
punished  than  the  intentional  offender,  but  still  he  was  beaten,  and  beaten 
with  stripes,  of  which  a  few  will  be  far  more  than  you  and  I  may  wish 
to  bear.  The  fewest  stripes  that  will  come  from  the  hand  of  justice  will 
be  enough  to  aiilict  us  grievously.  One  stroke  has  made  good  men  lie 
in  the  dust  and  moan  in  sorrow.  Sins  caused  by  ignorance  are  punished, 
for  the  prophet  says  (Is.  v.  13),  "My  people  are  gone  into  captivity, 
because  they  have  no  knowledge,"  and  again  in  Hosea,  "  My  people  are 
destroyed  for  lack  of  knowledge."  Paul  also  tells  us  that  "  the  Lord 
Jesus  shall  be  revealed  from  heaven  with  his  mighty  angeLs,  in  flaming 
fire  talcing  vengeance  on  them  that  know  not  God."  These  are  to  be 
pmiished,  it  seems,  though  their  sinful  ignorance  is  mentioned  in  the 
threatening. 

Yes,  and  according  to  my  text,  there  is  sin  in  ignorance  itself,  for  the 
eighteenth  verse  declares,  "  the  priest  shall  make  an  atonemfent  for  him 
concerning  his  ignorance  wherein  he  erred."  Ignorance  of  the  law 
among  those  who  dwell  in  the  camp  of  Israel  is  essentially  sinful.  The 
Israelite  had  no  business  to  be  ignorant.  The  law  was  plain  and  within 
his  reach.  If  he  neglected  to  study  the  statute,  his  breach  of  the  statute 
could  not  be  excused  by  his  neglect,  seeing  the  neglect  was  in  itself  an 
act  of  omission  of  a  censurable  kind.  Wilful  ignorance  of  the  Lord's 
will  is  in  itself  sin,  and  the  sin  which  cometh  of  it  is  grievous  in  the 
sight  of  the  Lord  our  God. 

Blessed  be  God,  the  solemn  declaration  of  the  text  conceniing  the 
guilt  of  sins  of  ignorance  need  not  drive  us  to  despair,  for  a  sacrifice  was 
permitted  for  it.  The  offender  on  discovering  his  error  might  bring  his 
offering,  and  pay  the  trespass-money  for  any  damage  which  he  had  caused 
by  his  action ;  and  there  was  a  promise  given  in  connection  with  the 
atoning  sacrifice,  which  was  no  doubt  often  reaUzed  by  the  contrite  in 
heart — "  It  shall  be  forgiven  him."  Be  it  ours  this  morning  not  to 
attempt  excuse,  but  to  seek  forgiveness.  May  the  Spirit  of  God  work  in 
us  a  tender-hearted  confession  of  that  sin  which  we  did  not  before  know 
to  be  sin,  and  while  we  are  confessing  it  may  the  divine  Spirit  apply 
the  precious  blood  that  we  may  have  a  sweet  sense  of  pardon.  May  the 
Lord  make  us  to  rejoice  in  the  truth  that  "  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his 
Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin." 

The  teaching  of  my  text  does  three  things,  of  which  I  shall  speak. 

First,  by  it  the  commandrtient  is  honoured ;  secondly,  by  it  the  conscience 

milightened;  thirdly,  by  it  the  sacrifice  is  endeared, 

,   I.    By  the  divine  declaration  that  sins  of  ignorance  are  really  sins 

THE  COMMANDMENT  OF  GoD  IS  HONOURED.    I  need  not  multiply  words 


eei  MBTROPOLITAN  TABERKACL8  PULPIT. 

to  prove  it  so.  The  law  is  by  this  solemn  sentence  lifted  into  a  place  of 
awful  dignity.  If  it  be  really  so,  that  to  break  one  of  its  precepts  in- 
volves us  in  goilt,  even  if  we  aid  not  know  that  we  were  offioidingy  then 
is  the  law  inaeed  enthroned  upon  a  terrible  eminence  and  girt  around 
with  fire. 

Enlarging  upon  this  thought  I  would  observe,  first,  dear  friends,  that 
hereby  the  h,w  is  declared  to  he  the  supreme  authoritu  over  men.  The  law 
is  supreme,  not  conscience.  Conscience  is  diflferently  enlightened  in  dif- 
ferent men,  and  the  ultimate  appeal  as  to  right  and  wrong  cannot  be  to 
your  half-blinded  conscience  or  to  mine.  I  might  condemn  what  you 
allow,  and  you  would  scarcely  tolerate  what  I  approve :  we  are  neither  of 
us  judges,  but  both  alike  culprits  upon  trial  when  we  come  under  the 
law.  The  ultimate  appeal  will  be  to  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord," — to  the 
law  itself,  which  is  the  only  perfect  standard  by  which  the  deeds  and  ac-^ 
tions  of  men  can  be  measurea.  The  law,  from  the  supremacy  into  which 
this  text  lifts  it,  says  to  us,  "  You  will  not  be  excused  because  your  con- 
science was  unenlightened,  nor  because  it  was  so  perverse  as  to  put  bitter 
for  sweet  and  sweet  for  bitter.  My  demands  are  the  same  in  every  jot 
and  tittle,  whatever  your  conscience  may  condemn  or  allow."  Conscience 
has  lost  much  of  its  sensitiveness  through  the  Fall,  and  through  our 
actual  sins,  but  the  law  is  not  lowered  to  suit  our  perverted  understand- 
ing. If  we  break  the  law,  although  our  conscience  may  not  blame  us,  or 
even  inform  us  of  the  wrong,  yet  still  the  deed  is  recorded  against  ufl; 
we  must  bear  our  iniquity. 

The  law  is  also  set  atlove  human  opinion,  for  this  man  says,  '*  Yon 
may  do  that,"  and  a  second  claims  that  he  may  do  the  other,  but  the 
law  changes  not  according  to  man's  judgment,  and  does  not  bend  itself 
to  the  spirit  of  the  a^  or  the  taste  of  the  period.  It  is  the  supreme 
judge,  m)m  whose  inmllible  decision  there  is  no  appeal.  Right  is  right 
though  all  condemn,  and  MTong  is  wrong  though  m  approve.  The  law 
is  the  balance  of  the  sanctuary,  accurate  to  a  hair,  sensitive  even  to  the 
small  dust  of  the  balance.  Opinions  continually  differ,  but  the  law  is 
one  and  invariable.  According  to  the  moral  sensitiveness  of  a  man  will 
be  his  estimate  of  the  act  which  he  performs,  but  would  you  have  a  law 
vary  according  to  man's  fickle  judgment  ?  If  you  would  desire  such  a 
thing,  God's  mfinite  wisdom  forbids.  The  law  is  a  fixed  quantity,  a 
settled  standard,  and  if  we  fall  short  of  it,  though  we  know  it  not,  yet  are 
we  guilty,  and  must  bear  our  iniquity  unless  an  atonement  be  made. 

This  exalts  the  law  above  the  custom  of  nations  and  periods  :  for  men 
are  very  wont  to  say, "  It  is  true  I  did  so  and  so,  which  I  could  not  have 
defended  in  itself;  but  then  it  is  the  way  of  the  trade,  other  houses  do 
so,  general  opinion  and  public  consent  have  endorsi^  the  custom ;  I  do 
not  therefore  see  how  I  can  act  differently  from  others,  for  if  I  did  so  I 
should  be  very  singular,  and  should  probably  be  a  loser  through  mj 
scrupulosity."  Yes,  but  the  customs  of  men  are  not  the  stan£Lrd  of 
right.  ^Vhere  they  have  been  at  first  correct  through  strong  Christian 
influence,  the  tendency  is  for  them  to  deteriorate  and  sink  below  the 
proper  standard.  Habit,  perpetuity,  and  universality  of  wrong,  at  last 
enable  men  to  call  the  false  by  the  same  name  as  the  true,  but  there  is 
no  real  change  ^^TOught  thereby :  the  customary  wrong  is  still  a  wrong, 
the  universal  lie  is  still  a  fiUsehood.    God's  law  is  not  changed :  our 


SINS  OF  IGNORANCE.  665 

Lord  Jcsiis  said,  "  It  is  easier  for  heaven  and  earth  to  pass,  than  one 
tittle  of  the  law  to  fail."  The  divine  law  overrides  custom,  tradition, 
and  opinion :  these  have  no  more  effect  upon  the  eternal  standard  than 
the  fall  of  a  leaf  upon  the  stars  of  heaven.  "  If  a  man  do  any  of  these 
things  which  are  forbidden  to  be  done  by  the  commandments  of  the 
Lord ;  though  he  wist  it  not,  yet  is  he  guilty."  All  the  customs  in  the 
w'orld  cannot  make  wrong  right,  and  if  everybody  that  ever  lived  from 
Adam  down  to  this  hour  had  done  a  wrong  thing  and  declared  it  to  be 
righteous,  yet  would  it  make  no  moral  difference  in  the  evil  deed.  A 
thousand  ages  of  whitewashing  cannot  make  a  vice  a  virtue.  God*B 
command  standeth  fast  for  ever,  and  he  who  breaketh  it  must  bear  his 
punishment.  Thus  you  see  that  by  the  declaration  of  my  text  the  law 
is  enshrined  in  the  place  of  reverence. 

Note  again,  if  a  sin  of  ignorance  rendms  us  guxlfy,  tvhat  must  a  mlful 
sin  do  ?  Do  you  not  perceive  at  once  how  the  law  is  again  set  on  high 
by  this  ?  For  if  an  inadvertent  transgression  covers  the  soul  with  g^ilt 
which  cannot  be  put  away  without  a  sacrifice,  then  what  shall  w^e  say  of 
those  who  knowingly  and  advisedly,  with  malice  aforethought,  break  the 
commands  of  God  ?  What  shall  we  say  of  those  who,  again  and  again 
and  again,  being  often  reproved,  harden  their  necks  and  go  on  in  their 
iniquities  ?  Surely  their  sin  is  exceeding  sinful.  If  I  may  become  a 
transgressor  by  breaking  a  law  which  I  did  not  know,  by  what  name  shall 
I  be  called  if,  when  I  do  know  it,  I  presumptuously  lift  up  my  hand  to 
defy  the  lawgiver  and  violate  his  statutes. 

Thus  again,  dear  friends,  by  the  teaching  of  our  text,  men  were  driven 
io  study  the  Jaw ;  for  if  they  were  at  all  right-hearted  they  said,  '*  Let 
us  know  what  God  would  have  us  do.  We  do  not  wish  to  be  leaving  his 
commands  undone,  or  committing  transgressions  against  his  prohibi- 
tory precepts  through  not  knowing  better."  They  Avould,  therefore,  run 
to  the  prophets  and  other  teachers,  and  ask  them,  "  Tell  us  what  are 
the  statutes  of  the  law.  "WTiat  hath  Jehovah  ordained  ?"  and  right- 
minded  men  would  be  led  by  a  desire  to  obey,  to  become  earnest  students 
of  the  \Nnll  of  God ;  as  I  trust,  beloved  friends,  we  also  shall  be  moved 
to  be.  Lest  we  should  break  the  law  through  not  kno\>*ing  its  com- 
mands let  us  make  it  our  continual  study.  Let  us  search  it  day  and 
night ;  let  it  be  the  man  of  our  counsels,  and  the  guide  of  our  lives. 
Be  this  the  prayer  of  each  one  of  us.  What  I  know  not,  0  my  God, 
teach  thou  me.  Make  me  to  understand  the  way  of  thy  precepts ;  let 
me  not  be  as  the  horse  and  the  mule,  which  have  no  understanding,  but 
enlighten  me  in  my  inmost  heart,  lest  I  ignorantly  transgress  thy  com- 
mandments. 

Thus,  you  see,  the  law  was  glorified  in  the  midst  of  Israel,  and  men 
were  led  to  search  it,  to  know  what  the  Lord  required  of  them.  A  holy 
fear,  lest  they  should  inadvertently  fall  into  sin,  moved  them  to  diligent 
reading  of  the  commands.  Thus  they  were  often  checked  when  about 
to  perform  a  hasty  deed,  and  were  made  to  ask  themselves,  "  What  would 
the  Lord  have  us  to  do  ?"  Without  such  an  ordinance  as  our  text  they 
might  have  acted  hurriedly,  and  so  have  sinned,  and  sinned  again,  in 
the  blundering  haste  of  a  thoughtless  spirit;  but  by  this  they  were 
checked  in  their  heedlessness,  called  to  consideration,  and  made  to  have 
the  fear  of  God  always  before  them.    They  were  thereby  warned  to  look 


666  HETROPOLITAK  TABERKACLB  PULPIT. 

at  their  actions  and  examine  their  ways,  lest  throngh  thoughtlessness 
they  shonld  sin  against  the  law. 

And  you  will  see  at  once,  beloved,  that  this  would  lead  every  earnest 
Israelite  to  teach  his  children  Ood's  law,  lest  his  sons  should  err  through 
ignorance  or  inadvertence.  The  pious  Jew  carefully  taught  his  children 
M  things  concerning  the  passover  and  the  yearly  feasts,  and  the  daUy  sacri- 
fice, and  the  worship  of  the  temple,  and  what  was  due  to  the  service  of 
God :  he  made  him  learn  the  moraJ  law,  and  endeavoured,  as  far  as  he 
could,  to  enlighten  his  conscience,  knoTNing  that  ^'for  the  soul  to  be  with- 
out knowled^  is  not  good."  He  said  to  his  son, ''  Take  fiist  hold  of 
instruction ;  let  her  not  go :  keep  her ;  for  she  is  thy  life."  Without 
knowledge  a  man  will  fall  into  many  pitfalls  and  snares,  which  the  true 
light  would  have  enabled  him  to  avoid ;  good  men,  therefore,  spent  mudi 
of  their  time  in  training  their  famihes.  "  Come,  ye  children,"  they  said, 
"  hearken  unto  me ;  I  will  teach  you  the  fear  of  the  Lord."  They  were 
also  zealous  to  make  known  the  law  as  &r  as  they  could,  saying  each  one 
to  his  fellow,  "  Know  the  Lord."  Fear  of  committing  sins  of  Ignorance 
was  a  spur  to  national  education,  and  tended  greatly  to  make  all  Israel 
honour  the  law  of  the  Lord. 

I  close  these  thoughts  by  noting  that  to  me  the  sin-revealing  power  of 
the  lata  is  loonderfuUy  displayed  as  I  read  my  text.  I  know  the  law  to 
be  exceeding  broiad,  I  know  its  eye  to  be  like  that  of  an  eagle,  and  I 
know  its  hand  to  be  heavy  as  iron,  but  when  I  find  that  it  accuses  me  of 
sins  which  I  wist  not,  that  it  searches  the  secret  parts  of  my  soul,  and 
brings  to  light  what  my  own  eye  of  self-examination  has  never  seen, 
then  am  I  fiBed  with  trembling.  When  I  discover  that  I  may  stand  be- 
fore the  bar  of  God  charged  with  iniquities  which  I  shall  be  quite  unable 
to  deny,  but  of  which  at  this  moment  I  am  not  at  all  conscious,  then  am 
I  bowed  into  the  dust.  What  a  law  must  this  be  !  What  a  light  is  thii 
in  which  our  conduct  is  placed  !  If  you  set  your  character  side  by  side 
with  that  of  your  fellow  man,  you  may  begin  to  compliment  yoursdf ;  if 
you  look  at  it  by  the  dim  candlelight  of  piS)lic  opinion,  you  may  begin  to 
flatter  yourself ;  if  you  even  go  no  further  than  a  diligeiot  search  by  the 
aid  of  your  own  judgment,  you  may  still  be  somewhat  at  ease  :  but  if 
the  light  in  which  we  shall  stand  at  last  will  be  Uie  Hght  of  Jehov^'s 
own  ineflable  purity,  if  his  omniscience  detects  iniquity  where  we  have  not 
perceived  it,  and  if  his  justice  will  visit  sin  even  where  we  were  not  cog- 
nisant of  it,  our  position  is  solemn  indeed.  What  a  law  is  this  by  whidi 
men  are  bound  I  How  severe  and  searching !  How  holy  and  how  pure 
must  God  himself  be  ?  0  thou  thrice  holy  Jehovah,  we  are  filled  with 
awe  of  thee !  The  heavens  are  not  clear  in  thy  sight,  and  thou  chargedst 
thine  angels  with  folly,  how  then  can  we  be  just  with  thee?  After 
reading  this,  thine  own  word,  we  see  how  justly  thou  wilt  charge  us 
with  folly,  and  how  impossible  it  is  for  us  to  hope  to  be  justified  in 
thy  sight  by  any  righteousness  of  our  own.  Thus,  my  brethren,  we  see 
that  the  law  is  honoured. 

II.  Secondly,  by  the  teaching  of  the  text,  thb  conscience  ib 
AROUSBD.  I  feel  when  I  read  these  words  as  if  a  great  gulf  opens  at  my 
feet,  '^  If  a  soul  sin,  and  commit  any  of  these  things  which  are  fcMrbidden 
to  be  done  by  the  oonmiandments  of  the  Lord  ;  though  he  wist  it  not> 
yet  is  he  guilty,  and  shall  bear  his  iniquity."    You  biow,  dear  Wend, 


SINS  OF  IGNORANCE.  667 

that  you  arc  a  wilful  sinner,  and  have  broken  God's  law  consciously,  but 
if  you  may  be  a  sinner,  though  you  wist  it  not,  how  the  solid  earth  rolls 
away  from  under  you  as  in  a  dreadful  earthquake,  and  almost  like  Korah, 
Dathan,  and  Abiram,  you  stand  in  dread  as  the  devouring  fire  pours 
forth  from  the  mysterious  abyss.    Nothing  which  is  human  can  be 
thought  certain  after  this.    Think  of  the  sins  you  may  have  committed  ; 
sins  of  thouglits  which  have  too  rapidly  flitted  through  your  mind  for 
you  to  recollect  them, — thoughts  which  pass  over  your  mind  as  mere 
imaginations,  like  clouds  floating  aloft  in  the  sky,  which  cast  a  flying 
shadow  over  the  landscape  and  are  gone.    Think  of  your  evil  thoughts, 
your  pleasure  in  hearing  of  uncleanness,  your  desires,  wishes,  and  excuses 
of  evil, — these  are  all  iniquities.      Then,  too,  our  words,  our  hurried 
words  of  anger,  of  falsehood,  of  petulance,  and  pride  :  our  idle  words,  our 
murmuring  words,  our  unbelieving  words,  our  irreverent  words  :  words 
scarcely  meant,  which  fell  from  us  AN'ithout  thought :  what  a  multitude  of 
these  may  be  laid  to  our  door,  and  all  these  are  full  of  sin  !    And  actions 
in  which  we  have  excused  oui^selves  very  thoroughly,  because  we  have 
never  looked  at  them  in  God's  light,  but  have  been  content  to  regard 
them  in  the  dim  ray  of  custom :  are  there  not  many  of  these  which  con- 
tain sin  ?    When  I  think  of  all  the  forms  of  evil  I  am  compelled  to  fear 
that  much  of  our  hfe  may  have  been  a  continuous  sin,  and  yet  we  may 
have  never  condemned  ourselves,  or  even  thought  about  it !     Remember 
that  great  command,  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy 
heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  mind,  and  with  all  thy 
strength."     How  far  short  of  that  you  and  I  have  come !     Mentally  we 
have  not  served  God  to  perfection,  neither  have  the  affections  loved  him 
with  all  possible  intensity,  nor  has  the  soul  with  its  desires  gone  after  him  so 
eagerly  as  it  sliould.    Verily,  we  are  guilty,  guilty  much  more  than  we 
have  ever  imagined.    And  as  to  that  second  command,  "  Thou  shalt  love 
thy  neighbour  as  thyself";  who  among  us  has  done  so  ?    Have  we  loved 
our  fellow-man  with  a  love  that  even  approximated  to  our  love  to  our- 
selves ?    0  God,  amid  the  varied  lights  of  thy  ten  commands,  all  compre- 
hended in  the  white  light  of  that  one  word  "  love,"  we  stand  convicted, 
and  we  perceive  that  our  ignorance  affords  no  covering  for  us !     We 
hear  thy  voice  and  tremble  before  it  whilst  thou  sayest,  "  Though  he  wist 
it  not,  yet  is  he  guilty,  and  shall  bear  liis  iniquity." 

Our  i(/noranc£,  dear  friends^  is  evidently  very  great,  I  do  not  sup- 
pose that  the  best  instructed  Christian  here  will  claim  to  possess  much 
wisdom.  The  usual  rule  is  that  the  more  we  really  know  the  more  con- 
scious we  are  of  the  littleness  of  our  knowledge.  Our  ignorance,  there- 
fore, I  may  take  it  for  granted  all  round,  has  been  very  great.  What 
scope,  then,  has  there  been  beneath  the  mantle  of  that  mist  of  ignorance 
for  bin  to  hide  and  multiply.  As  the  conies  swarm  in  the  holes  of  the 
rock,  the  bats  in  the  smiless  caves  of  the  earth,  and  the  fish  in  the  deep 
abysses  of  the  sea,  so  do  our  sins  swarm  in  the  hidden  parts  of  our 
nature.  "Who  can  understand  his  errors?  Cleanse  thou  me  from 
secret  faults ! " 

The  ignorance  of  veiy  many  persons  is  to  a  large  degree  wilful. 
Many  do  not  read  the  Bible  at  all,  or  veiy  seldom,  and  then  without  de- 
siring to  know  its  meaning.  Even  some  professing  Christians  take  their 
religion  from  the  monthly  magazine,  or  from  some  standard  book  written 


S68  HETROrOI-ITAH  TABERrfACI.E   PULPIT. 

by  n  luiinan  niitlmr  and  adopted  by  tlicir  sect,  Imt  few  po  to  tlie  Word 
of  God  itself:  they  nre  content  to  drink  of  the  mnddicd  streana  of 
hnmau  teaching  instead  of  filling  their  caps  at  tlio  crystal  fount  of  revela- 
tion itself.  Now,  brethren,  if  ye  be  ignorant  of  anytliing  conceroing 
God's  mind  and  will,  it  is  not,  in  the  case  of  any  of  you,  for  want  of  the 
Book,  nor  for  want  of  a  willing  guide  to  instruct  you  in  it ;  for,  behold, 
the  Holy  Spirit  waiteth  to  be  grocions  to  you  in  this  resjiect.  "  If  anj 
man  lack  wiBdom,  let  hiin  ask  of  God,  that  giveth  liberally,  and  np- 
broidetii  not."  If  we  do  not  know,  we  may  know  it.  Oar  ignorance  has 
been  wilfnl  if  in  this  privileged  country  we  remain  ignorant  of  Ite 
gospel.  Where  there  is  confessedly  such  a  mass  of  wilful  ignorance,  whu 
among  lis  can  imagine  what  myriads  of  evil  shapes  of  sin  swarm  in  the 
ginm  darkness  ?  The  prince  of  darkness  liolds  hia  court  in  the  blacknc« 
of  that  ignorance  which  we  ourselves  hai*c  wilfully  created  by  revising  f> 
come  to  the  light.  The  enemy  sows  the  seed  of  eril  by  uight,  and  amid 
Egyptian  darkness  the  accnrBed  grain  grows  to  an  awful  ripeness  and 
brings  forth  a  hundredfold.  Breakin.Olightctcmal  I  Break  in  upon  i-iii' 
dimness  of  our  ignorance,  lest  it  thicken  into  the  eternal  midnight  of  hell. 

Now,  if  will  be  vain  for  anij  Man  to  say  in  hit  mind,  as  I  fear  tarn 
will  do,  "  God  is  hard  in  thu»  dealing  mlh  us."  If^thou  sayest  thns,  0 
man,  I  ask  thee  to  remember  God's  answer.  Christ  puta  your  rebellions 
8[)ecch  into  the  mouth  of  the  unfaithful  one  who  hid  hia  talent.  He 
said,  "  I  knew  that  thou  wast  an  austere  man,  gathering  where  tbon 
hadst  not  strawcd."  What  did  his  Master  say  ?  Instead  of  eicnnng 
himself,  which  it  is  far  beneath  the  dignity  of  the  great  Qod  to  do,  he 
took  the  man  at  his  own  confession,  and  he  said,  "  Thou  knewest  that  [ 
was  an  austere  man,  taking  up  that  I  laid  not  down,  and  reaping  that  I 
did  not  sow  ;  wherefore  then  gavest  not  thou  my  money  into  the  bank,  that 
at  my  coming  I  might  have  required  mine  own  with  usury  ?  "  If  yon  knov 
God  to  be  hard,  or  say  yon  think  so,  then  recollect  how  earnest  yon 
ought  to  be  to  come  up  to  his  standard  j  for,  call  that  standard  what  yon 
like,  it  is  tlie  standard :  count  it  to  be  severe  if  you  will,  it  is  bin^ng 
upon  you  for  all  that,  and  by  it  you  will  have  to  be  tried  at  the  last,  so  that 
there  is  no  escape  for  any  one  of  us  by  impeaching  our  Maker.  Wiser 
far  is  it  to  submit  and  crave  for  mercy. 

Let  ns  recollect,  in  order  that  our  doctrine  may  appear  less  strange, 
thci  it  is  according  to  the  analoi/g  of  nature  that  when  God's  laws  are 
broken,  ignorance  of  those  laws  should  not  prevent  the  penalty  Mlinz 
upon  the  offenders.  The  natural  law  is  an  instructive  type  of  the  moral 
and  spiritual  law,  and  from  it  we  may  gather  much  tcadung.  Here  is 
the  law  of  gravitation,  by  which  objects  are  attracted  to  each  other.  It 
is  inevitable  that  heavy  matters  will  fell  to  the  earth.  A  man  thinks 
that  he  can  fly;  he  puts  on  his  wings  and  ascends  a  tower;  he  is  fully 
persuaded  that  he  is  about  to  mount  like  a  bird.  Spectators  are  invittd 
to  behold  the  wonder  and  expectations  are  excited.  The  law  of  gravita- 
tion is  against  the  inventor,  but  he  does  not  think  so.  Poor  man,  he 
firmly  believes  in  his  own  flight,  but  the  moment  he  leaps  from  the  tower 
he  falls  to  the  earth  and  is  gathered  up  a  mangled  corpse.  Why  did  not 
God  suspend  his  law  because  the  man  did  not  intentionally  viohte  it? 
No ;  the  law  is  stern,  and  changes  not,  and  he  who  offends  in  ignorance 
poys  the  penalty.    I  have  read  that  the  Chinese  at  Pekin  oflcu  endure 


SINS  OF  IGNORANCE.  6G9 

• 

severe  winters ;  they  have  coal  jnst  nnder  them,  but  they  I'efuse  to  dig 
the  coal  for  fear  they  should  disturb  the  equilibrium  of  the  eailh,  and 
cause  the  celestial  empire,  which  is  now  at  the  top  of  the  universe,  to 
turn  over  to  the  bottom.  The  celestials  are  thoroughly  conscientious  in 
this  belief,  but  does  the  weather  alter  to  suit  their  philosophy  ?  Does 
God  make  them  warm  in  winter  without  coal  ?  By  no  manner  of  means. 
If  they  refuse  the  means  of  warmth  they  must  be  cold :  their  ignorance 
does  not  raise  the  temperature  so  much  as  half  a  degree.  A  physi- 
cian, with  the  best  possible  motive,  endeavours  to  find  out  a  new  drug, 
that  he  may  alleviate  pain.  In  making  his  experiments  he  inhales  a 
deadly  gas,  which  he  did  not  know  to  be  &tal.  He  dies  as  surely  as  if  he 
had  wilfully  taken  poison.  The  law  is  not  suspended  to  reward  his 
benevolence  and  avert  the  fatal  result  of  his  mistake.  Whatever  his 
motives  may  have  been,  he  has  broken  a  natural  law,  and  the  appointed 
penalty  is  exacted  of  him.  Verily,  as  it  is  in  the  natural  so  will  you 
find  it  to  be  in  the  spiritual  world. 

But  let  us  go  into  the  question  a  little,  by  way  of  argument.  It  is  of 
necessity  that  it  should  he  according  to  this  declaration.  It  is  not  pos- 
sible that  iterance  should  be  a  justification  of  sin :  for,  first,  if  it  did 
so,  it  would  follow  that  the  more  ignorant  a  man  was  the  more  innocent 
he  would  be.  It  would  then  assuredly  be  true  that  ignorance  is  bliss,  for 
perfect  ignorance  would  be  under  no  responsibihties  and  free  from  all  sin. 
All  that  you  and  I  woijld  have  to  do,  in  order  to  be  perfectly  clear  from 
all  charge,  would  be  to'know  nothing.  To  bum  the  Bible,  refuse  to  hear 
the  gospel,  and  rush  away  from  civilization  would  be  the  nearest  way  to 
freedom  from  all  guilt.  Do  you  not  see  that  if  things  were  so,  knowledge 
.^ight  be  regarded  as  a  curse,  and  that  the  light  which  Christ  comes  to 
bring  into  the  world  would  be  a  man's  most  solemn  affiction  if  it  shone 
upon  him  ?  I  protest  that,  in  my  unregenerate  state,  if  I  had  been  sure  that 
ignorance  would  have  rid  me  of  responsibility,  I  would  have  closed  every 
avenue  of  knowledge,  and  would  have  laboured  to  abide  in  darkness.  But 
such  a  supposition  is  not  to  be  borne :  it  is  inconsistent  with  the  first 
principles  of  common  sense. 

If,  again,  the  guilt  of  an  action  depended  entirely  upon  a  man's 
knowledge,  we  should  have  no  fixed  standard  at  all  by  which  to  judge 
right  and  wrong  :  it  would  be  variable  according  to  the  enlightenment 
of  each  man,  and  there  would  be  no  ultimate  and  in&Uible  court  of 
appeal.  Suppose  the  statute  book  of  our  own  country  should  be  con- 
structed on  the  principle  that  in  proportion  only  to  a  man's  knowing  the 
law  should  be  his  guilt  in  breaking  i^  we  should  have  numbers  of  persons 
truthfully  pleading  ignorance,  and  a  great  manv  more  endeavouring  to 
do  so,  and  such  a  simple  and  easy  method  of  obtaining  acquittal  would 
become  popular  at  once.  The  art  of  forgetting  would  be  diligently 
studied,  and  ignorance  would  become  an  enviable  inheritance.  We 
should  have  gentlemen  brought  up  for  being  drunk  and  disorderly 
who  had  paid  forty  shillings  and  costs  a  score  of  times,  who  would  stiU 
say  that  they  did  not  know  that  they  could  be  punished  again  since 
they  had  paid  the  fine  so  often.  Ignorance  would  be  so  continually 
pleaded,  that  there  would  be  practically  an  end  of  all  law,  and  the  very 
foundations  of  the  state  would  be  undermined.  The  thing  cannot  be 
endured  :  it  is  absurd  upon  its  very  face. 


670  UBTROPOUTAM  TABERKAOLB  FULFR. 

Uoreover,  ignorance  of  the  lair  of  God  is  itaelf  a  breach  of  law,  since 
ire  are  bidden  to  know  and  remember  it.    Thus  a^ke  the  Lprd  by  tui 
servant  Uoscs :  "  Ye  shall  lay  up  these  my  words  m  joor  heart  and  in 
your  Bonl,  and  bind  Uiem  for  a  sign  upon  yonr  hand,  that  theyinay  be  n 
fKmtlets  between  your  eyes,    ^d  ye  aliall  teach  them  yotir  mitdrai, 
speaking  of  tJiem  when  thoa  sittest  in  thine  bons^  and  when  tiion 
walkest  by  the  way,  when  tliou  liest  down,  and  when  thoa  risest  np.    ! 
And  thou  shalt  write  them  npon  the  door  posts  of  thine  house,  and  np^     . 
thy  gates."    Knowledge  of  the  law  was  a  duty  and  ignorance  a  crime,    j 
Can  it  be  possible,  then,  that  one  sin  is  to  be  an  exciue  for  another  ? 
It  is  a  sin  on  a  man's  part  to  refuse  to  search  into  the  word  of  God: 
can  it  be  that  because  ne  commits  this  sin  he  is  to  be  excused  for.  the 
faults  into  which  his  wilful  ignorance  leads  him?    It  is  o«ti  ^  the 
question.  . 

If  sina  of  ignorance  are  not  sins,  then  Christ's  iol«i'cession  was  alto- 
gether a  superfluity.  You  remember  that  our  test  lust  Sabbath  morning 
was, "  Ue  made  intfrceasiou  for  the  transgressors,"  and  we  illQKtmt«d  it 
by  the  text, "  Father,  forgive  them  ;  for  they  know  not  what  tiiey  do." 
But  if  there  is  no  sin  when  a  man  does  not  know  what  be  does,  why  did 
our  Lord  pray  for  pardon  for  ignorant  transgressora  ?  ^VTiy  ask  f^rgive- 
nesB,  if  there  be  no  wrong  ?  The  correct  way  of  putting  it  would  hare 
been,  "  Father,  I  do  not  ask  thee  to  forgive,  for  there  isno  offence,  seeing 
that  they  know  not  what  they  do";  but  by  the  bet  of  his  having 
pleaded  for  foi^venees  it  in  clearly  proved  that  there  is  guilt  in  the  sin 
of  ignorance. 

Ihe  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  too,  would  be  an  evil  instead  of  a  good 
work  in  the  hearts  of  men,  if  ignorance  were  an  excuse  for  sin,  for  he  has 
come  to  convince  the  world  of  gin  ;  but  if  unconvinced  of  sin  they  are 
imiocent  of  it,  why  convince  them  of  it  ?  Of  what  use  is  it  to  quicken 
a  conscience  and  to  enlighten  it  and  make  it  bleed  over  a  transgression, 
if  it  would  be  no  transgression,  provided  that  consdence  had  never  been 
made  cognisant  of  it  ?  Who  is  he  that  sliall  so  blaspheme  the  Holy 
Ghost  as  to  say  that  his  work  is  needless  and  even  idle  i  Sins  of  igno- 
rance, therefore,  must  be  sinful. 

Look  at  one  other  consequence  which  would  follow  from  the  contrary 
doctrine.  The  more  wicked  a  man  is,  tlic  more  hardened  he  becomes, 
and  the  more  ignorant  he  grows  as  to  the  beauty  of  holiness.  Everybody 
knows  that.  A  sin  which  troubles  a  child  when  at  home  wiu  his 
godly  father  will  not  trouble  him  at  all  when  he  gets  to  be  fifty  years  of 
age,  provided  he  has  indulged  in  a  course  of  vice.  From  one  sin  to 
another  the  man  descends,  and,  as  he  descends,  his  mental  and  moral  eyes 
grow  dim,  and  he  perceives  less  and  Usa  the  sinfulness  of  ain.  If  a 
man  who  has  arrived  at  the  utmost  pitch  of  iniamy  can  commit  any 
atrocity  without  the  smallest  idea  of  its  being  wrong,  if  he  can  cheat,  and 
lie,  and  swear,  and  I  know  not  what,  and  yet  call  it  all  nothing,  and  wipe 
his  mouth  ;  if  that  man  is  guilty  of  less  sin  because  of  t^e  growing 
dcadness  of  iiis conscience,  and  the  limited  degree  of  hia  spiritual  knowledge, 
then  verily  things  are  turned  upside  down.  Hut  it  is  not  ho.  "The  test  of  the 

fuilt  of  an  action  is  not  a  man's  conscience,  nor  his  perception  of  evil,  nor 
is  knowledge,  but  the  law  itself ;  for  siu  is  a  transgression  of  the  law, 
be  that  law  known  or  unknown.    The  statute  stands  immovable  wid 


SINS  OF  IGNORANCE.  C71 

irnmu table,  and  the  sinner,  blind  though  he  may  be,  if  lie  fall  upon  it' 
shall  bo  broken. 

Once  again,  I  am  sure  that  many  of  us  now  present  must  have  felt 
the  truth  of  this  in  our  own  hearts.  You  who  love  the  Lord  and  hate 
unrighteousness,  must  in  your  lives  have  come  to  a  point  of  greater 
illumination,  where  you  have  said,  "I  see  a  certain  action  to  be 
ivTong ;  I  have  been  doing-  it  for  years,  but  God  knows  I  would  not 
liave  done  it  if  I  had  thought  it  wrong.  Even  now  I  see  that  other 
people  arc  doing  it,  and  thinking  it  right ;  but  I  cannot  do  so  any  more ; 
my  conscience  has  at  last  received  new  light,  and  I  must  make  a  change 
At  once."  In  such  circumstances  did  it  ever  come  to  your  mind  to  say, 
"  What  I  have  done  was  not  wrong,  because  I  did  not  know  it  to  be 
wrong"  ?  Far  from  it.  You  have  justly  said  to  yourself,  "^ly  sin  in 
tliis  matter  is  not  so  great  as  if  I  had  transgressed  wilfully  with  my  eyes 
open,  knowing  it  to  be  sin":  but  yet  you  have  accused  yourself  of  the 
fault,  and  mourned  over  it.  At  least  I  know  /  have.  A  man  like  John 
Newton,  who  in  his  early  yeare  had  been  conpected  with  the  slave  trade, 
and  thought  it  right,  as  most  Christian  men  did  in  those  times,  did  not 
excuse  himself  in  his  after  yeai*s  when  his  conscience  was  aroused  to  the 
iniquity  of  slavery.  Do  you  think  that  the  good  man  would  say,  "  I 
was  quite  right  in  doing  as  I  did,  because  everybody  else  did  it,  and  I 
knew  no  better"?  Ah,  no.  It  was  right  or  wrong  whether  he  knew  it 
or  not,  and  his  conscience,  when  it  became  enlightened,  told  him  so. 
My  conscience,  and  your  conscience,  may  need  to  be  enlightened  about 
several  mattei-s  which  now  we  are  doing  complacently  enough,  Avithout 
any  notion  that  we  are  sinning:  but  the  action  bears  its  own  character 
of  right  or  wrong,  whatever  our  judgment  may  be. 

Does  not  this  show  us  the  utter  impossibiHty  of  salvation  by  works  ? 
If  you  expect  to  be  saved  by  keeping  the  law,  you  must  be  a  bolder  man 
than  I  dare  to  be.  I  know  that  I  cannot  keep  the  law  of  God,  and  the 
doctrine  of  my  text  makes  it  impossible  beyond  all  other  impossibility, 
Ixjcause  the  law  accuses  me  of  doing  wrong  even  when  I  do  not  intend 
it,  and  am  not  conscious  of  it.  0  you  who  hope  to  be  saved  by  works, 
how  can  you  ever  enjoy  a  moment's  peace  ?  If  you  think  your  righteous- 
ness will  save  you  if  it  is  perfect,  how  can  you  ever  be  sure  that  it  is 
perfect  ?  You  may  have  sinned  ignorantly,  and  that  will  spoil  it  all. 
Think  of  this,  and  be  dismayed.  I  do  beseech  you,  believe  our  testi- 
mony when  we  assure  you  that  the  road  to  heaven  by  your  own  righteous- 
ness is  blocked  up.  Ten  great  Krupp  guns  which  fling,  each  one  of 
them,  a  bolt  huge  enough  to  dash  your  soul  to  hell,  stand  pointed  against 
you  if  you  attempt  to  make  your  way  to  heaven  by  that  steep  ascent. 
There  is  another  path  :  yon  cross  directs  you  to  it,  for  it  is  the  sign- 
post of  the  King's  highway.  That  royal  road  to  heaven  is  paved  with 
grace :  God  forgives  the  guilty  freely  because  they  trust  in  Christ. 
That  path  is  so  safe  that  no  lion  shall  be  there,  neither  shall  any  raAcnous 
beast  go  up  thereon  ;  but  as  for  the  road  of  legal  righteousness,  attempt 
it  not,  but  hearken  to  what  we  have  further  to  say  unto  you. 

III.  By  the  grand  and  awful  truth  of  the  text  the  sacrificr  is 
tNDEAUED.  Just  accordiui?  to  our  sense  of  sin  must  Ixi  our  value  of  the 
sacrifice.  God's  way  of  delivering  those  who  sinned  ignorantly  was  not 
by  denying  their  sin  and  passing  it  over,  but  by  accepting  an  atonement 


672  METROPOLITAN  TABERKAOLB  PULPIT. 

for  it.  "  The  priest  shall  make  an  atonement  oonoeminff  his  sia  irbefeoi 
ho  hath  erred,  and  wist  it  not,  and  it  shall  be  forgiven  him.'*  The  fer- 
giveness  was  to  come  through  atonement.  How  greatly  you  and  I  need 
an  atonement  for  our  sins  of  ignorance,  seeing  our  ignorance  is  gieifc! 
0  blood  of  Christ,  how  much  we  need  thee  I  0  divine  Sobstitate,  how 
greatly  do  we  require  thy  cleansing  blood ! 

How  gracious  it  is  on  God*s  part  to  be  willing  to  accept  an  atonement; 
for  if  his  law  had  said  there  shall  be  no  atonement  possible,  it  would 
have  been  just ;  but  infinite  grace  devised  the  plan  by  which^  throng 
the  sacrifice  of  another,  pardon  is  possible  for  the  ignorant  sinner. 
Behold  how  generous  God  is,  for  he  has  himself  provided  this  saciifioe. 
The  man  who  had  erred  under  the  law  had  to  bring  an  offering  him- 
self, but  ours  is  brought  for  ns.  Jesus  the  Son  of  Otod  was  not  spared 
by  the  great  Father,  but  he  gave  him  out  of  his  bosom  that  he  mi^ 
bleed  and  die.  The  incarnate  God  is  the  great  bearer  of  the  sin  of 
ignorance ;  and  to-day  he  can  have  compassion  on  the  ignorant,  and  on 
them  that  are  out  of  the  jvay,  for  he  has  made  an  atonement  for  them. 

Under  the  law  this  atonement  was  to  be  a  ram  without  blemish.  Our 
Lord  had  no  sin,  nor  shade  of  sin.  He  is  the  spotless  victim  which  the 
law  requires.  All  that  justice,  in  its  most  severe  mood,  oonld  require 
from  man  by  way  of  penalty  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  rendered ;  fos  in 
addition  to  his  sacrifice  for  the  sin,  he  has  presented  a  recompense  for  the 
damage,  as  the  person  who  sinned  ignorantly  was  bound  to  do.  He  hss 
recompensed  the  honour  of  God,  and  he  has  recompensed  every  man 
whom  we  have  injured.  My  brother,  has  another  injured  you?  Well, 
since  Christ  has  given  himself  to  you,  there  is  a  full  recompense  made  to 
you,  even  as  there  has  been  made  to  God.  Blessed  be  his  name,  we  may 
rest  in  tliis  sacrifice.  How  supremely  efficacious  it  is.  It  takes  away 
iniquity,  transgression,  and  sin. 

My  dear  hearers,  you  are  bound  to  confess  your  sins  to  God ;  bat  if 
pardon  were  offered  you  upon  the  condition  that  you  should  mention 
every  sin  you  have  committed,  not  one  of  you  would  ever  be  saved.  We 
do  not  know,  and  if  we  ever  did  know,  we  cannot  remember  all  our  sbcut- 
comings,  and  all  our  transgressions ;  but  the  mercy  is,  though  toe  do  not 
know  them,  he  does,  and  he  can  blot  them  out.  Though  we  cannot 
weep  over  them  with  a  distinct  knowledge  of  them,  because  they  are  not 
kno>\'n  to  us,  yet  Jesus  bled  for  them  with  a  distinct  knowledge  of 
them  all,  and  they  are  all  put  away  by  his  unknown  sufferings, — all  cast 
into  the  deeps  where  an  angel's  eye  can  never  trace  them.  By  his 
agonies  immense,  unsearchable,  endured  for  us,  and  by  his  merits,  in- 
finite as  his  divine  nature,  our  Redeemer  has  taken  away  that  thick 
darkness  of  iniquity  which  we  were  not  capable  of  comprehending.  0 
believing  siimer,  the  debt  thou  knowest  not  thy  glorious  Surety  has 
nevertheless  borne  and  discharged  for  thee.  Blessings  on  his  name. 
Rest  in  him,  and  then  go  thy  w^y  and  rejoice.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  Read  before  Sermon — Psalm  li. 


Hyhks  prom  ''Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 189,  51  (Vers.  III.),  564. 


^«it[D|0ton  iJafr^rnaelc  itilpt. 


GOD'S  THOUGHTS  AND  WAYS  FAE  ABOVE  OURS. 


i 


Delivered  on  Lord*s-Day  Morning,  December  2nd,  1877,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINOTON. 


•*  For  my  thoughta  are  not  your  thoughts,  neither  are  your  waya  my  ways,  stith 
the  Lord.  For  as  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth,  bo  are  my  ways  higher 
than  your  ways,  and  my  thoughts  than  your  thoughts.'* — Isaiah  Iv.  8,  9. 

Very  often  must  the  great  trutli  expressed  by  this  Scripture  have  forced 
itself  upon  every  thoughtful  mind.  Thougli  we  tliink  and  are  so  far  like 
to  God  because,  being  intelfigcnt  beings,  we  have  thoughts  of  our  own, 
yet  our  thoughts  must  for  ever  be  weak  and  fragmentary  as  compared 
with  his  thoughts:  and  though  as  free  agents  we  have  ways  of  our  own 
choice,  in  some  of  which  we  move  with  great  show  of  wisdom,  yet  our 
ways  are  upon  the  earth,  and  camiot  attain  to  the  ways  of  the  Lord, 
which  are  far  above  us.  This  is  true  as  to  his  proceeding  in  providence. 
God*s  designs  are  vast  and  far-reaching,  and  his  methods  are  frequently 
strange  and  inscrutable,  though  always  wise.  We  have  little  plans  to 
suit  our  httle  foresight  and  power,  but  his  ways  are  unsearchable.  Often- 
times he  brings  light  of  excessive  brightness  out  of  darkness  more  dense 
than  usual ;  and  produces  superior  joys  out  of  extraordinary  sorrows.  In 
infinite  wisdom  he  causes  the  most  furious  storms  to  cast  up  upon  the  shore 
the  pearl  of  peace.  He  is  wonderful  both  in  counsel  and  in  Avorking  and 
choose th  ever  that  way  in  which  his  glory  is  most  abundantly  displayed. 
Our  way,  which  for  a  time  we  think  to  be  the  best,  when  it  is  scanned 
by  the  enhghtened  eye  soon  turns  out  to  be  as  much  beneath  God's  way 
of  accomplishing  the  desired  purpose  as  the  earth  is  beneath  the  heavens. 
Compared  with  him  our  wisdom  is  folly,  and  our  prudence  maaness. 
Indeed,  we  may  not  compare  ourselves  with  the  Lord,  for  there  is  no 
comparison  :  call  it  a  contrast,  and  you  have  the  word.  So  sublime  is 
Providence  that  we  do  not  comprehend  it ;  so  good  is  it  tl:mt  we  are 
filled  with  wonder  as  we  see  its  designs  unfolded.  We  see  its  bright  side 
at  times  and  sun  ourselves  in  the  w^arm  light  thereof,  and  then  we  adore 
and  magnify  the  Lord.  Yet,  we  never  knew  the  half  of  the  hidden 
benefits  which  he  is  working  out  for  us ;  nor  do  we  suspect  the  Lord  of 
a  tenth  of  the  goodness  which  he  stores  up  for  us.  At  other  times  we 
have  felt  the  night  side  of  providence,  and  have  sorrowed  in  its  chill  shade ; 
Nos.  1,387-8. 


674  METROPOLTTAK  TABSBHAOLB  PULPIT. 

yea^  and  perhaps  we  hare  even  rebelled  against  it ;  and  y^fc  afc  Uiafc  irc^ 
time  the  Loras  purposes  have  been  divinely  rich  toward  tis,  and  the 
night  has  been  the  choicest  season  of  benediction.  We  have  not  the 
wings  of  eagles  on  which  to  soar  to  the  exceeding  height  of  the  dealings 
of  the  Lord ;  we  walk  below  and  look  np  wonderingly,  as  men  gaze 
on  the  stars  :  we  are  sore  that  we  are  safe  beneath  the  sublime  all- 
covering  power,  but  we  are  equally  clear  that  the  longest  experience  and 
the  profoundest  thought  will  never  measure  the  height  of  the  thoughts 
and  ways  of  the  Eternal. 

The  words, "  As  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth,  so  are  my  ways 
higher  than  your  ways,"  are  equally  true  in  reference  to  the  things  of 
grace,  for  there  the  Lord  of  love  has  altogether  left  our  thoughts  behind. 
Could  man  have  dreamed  that  he  was  the  object  of  eternal  love,  and  that 
God  would  assume  his  nature?  Oould  we  have  imagined  that  the 
Almighty  would  give  his  only-begotten  Son  to  die  for  guilty  man  ?  The 
atonement  was  a  thought  which  never  would  have  crossed  man's  mind  if 
it  had  not  first  of  all  been  revealed  to  him  by  the  great  Father.  The 
divine  way  of  lifting  up  the  poor  from  the  dust  and  the  needy  from  the 
dunghill,  by  his  rich,  free,  omnipotent  grace,  is  not  of  man  nor  by  man. 
The  Lord's  thought  of  choosing  the  base  things  of  this  world,  and  things 
that  are  not  to  bring  to  nought  the  things  that  are,  his  thoughts  of  sove- 
reignty and  thoughts  of  grace, — all  consistent  with  his  thoughts  of  justice^ 
are  far  above  human  invention,  and  out  of  man's  range  of  thought. 

Even  when  the  Lord  explains  his  thoughts  and  ways  to  us,  and  brings 
them  down  to  our  comprehension  as  far  as  they  can  be,  yet  we  cannot  fail 
to  wonder  at  their  elevation  and  grandeur — 

"  Great  God  of  wonders !  all  thy  ways 
Are  matchless,  Godlike,  and  divine." 

Have  you  not  often  stood  in  mute  astonishment  as  you  have  discovered 
some  fresh  blessing  of  the  covenant  before  unknown  to  you  ?  Like  a 
miner  who  turns  over  another  nugget  in  the  mine,  and  stands  in  amazed 
delight,  so  have  you  mingled  faith  with  astonishment.  Have  you  not  known 
what  it  is  to  do  as  David  did  when  Nathan  brought  him  tidings  of  the 
Lord's  covenant  with  him — "  Then  went  king  David  in,  and  sat  l^fore  the 
Lord,  and  he  said.  Who  am  I,  0  Lord  God  ?  and  what  is  my  house,  that 
thou  hast  brought  me  hitherto?  And  is  this  the  manner  of  man,  O 
Lord  Gk)d  ?  "  Have  not  such  fits  of  astonishment  been  upon  you  also  ? 
Have  you  not  cried  with  the  apostle, "  0  the  depth  of*  the  riches  both  of 
the  wisdom  and  knowledge  ol  God !  How  unsearchable  are  his  judg- 
ments, and  his  ways  past  finding  out!"  Hundreds  of  times  between 
now  and  heaven  ^viil  the  Uke  glad  astonishment  sei2e  us,  and  perhaps 
in  heaven  itself  wondering  will  be  a  leading  part  of  our  enjoyment. 
We  shall— 

"  Sing  with  wonder  and  surprise 
His  lovingkindness  in  the  skies." 

Do  not  the  victorious  hosts  which  stand  upon  the  sea  of  glass,  having  the 
harps  of  Grod,  sing  the  song  of  Moses,  the  servant  of  the  Lord,  and  of 
the  Lamb,  saying,  "  Great  and  marvellous  are  thy  works,  Lord  God 
Almighty"  ?  The  thoughts  of  God  will  even  in  heaven  be  above  our  sub- 
^^t  thougljts,  and  his  ways  even  then  Jibove  our  most  heavenly  ways. 
rldw  exaJted  is  the  Lord !     His  glory  is  above  the  earth  ana  heav6ii6 1 


ck)d'8  thoughts  and  ways  far  above  ours.  675 

How  tenderly  doth  he  overpower  us  with  the  splendour  of  his  goodness ; 
soothing  where  he  might  confound.  In  grace  and  love,  who  is  like  unto  thee, 
O  Lord  ?  Among  the  gods  who  is  like  unto  thee  ?  Understanding  faints 
in  attempting  to  ascend  to  thee.  Imagination,  to  which  thou  hast  given 
a  half-creative  faculty,  camiot  beget  a  thought  of  equal  height  to  thy 
thoughts,  nor  conceive  a  way  which  may  bear  comparison  with  thy 
\\'ays.  AVhat  better  can  we  do,  great  God,  than  bow  our  heads  and 
reverently  adore  ? 

This  morning,  in  trying  to  discuss  our  text,  we  will  endeavour  to 
illustrate  it  by  its  own  conuection.  There  are  many  ways  of  handling 
Scripture,  but  to  my  mind  the  freshest  and  most  instructive  is  to  expound 
it  by  its  surroundings.  To  pick  out  a  plum  here  and  there  is  the 
children's  method,  but  hardly  satisfies  students  of  the  word.  "  Let  us 
not  rend  it,"  is  exceedingly  good  advice  with  regard  to  Scripture,  which 
is  in  some  sense  the  garment  of  God.  I  will  take  hold  of  the  central  part 
of  the  rich  piece  of  silken  truth  contained  in  this  chapter,  and  I  will  lift 
lip  the  whole  fabric  before  you  and  bid  you  observe  its  texture,  and  note 
how  wonderfully  it  is  wrought  throughout.  Exposition  is  ever  nourish- 
ing to  the  Lord's  people,  and  this  it  is  which  we  shall  aim  at.  I  think 
there  are  three  things  which  are  very  clear  in  the  text  if  viewed  in  its 
connection  :  first,  in  the  text  there  is  rebuke  administered;  secondly, 
there  is  repentance  encoura{)ed ;  and,  thirdly,  there  is  expectation  excited, 

I.  First  in  the  text  there  is  hebukk  administeued,  for  thus  it 
runs  :  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and  the  unrighteous  man  hir 
thoughts  :  and  let  him  return  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  will  have  mercy 
upon  him  ;  and  to  our  God,  for  he  will  abundantly  pardon.  For  ray 
thoughts  are  not  your  thoughts,  neither  are  your  ways  my  ways.'*  Do 
you  not  observe  a  sort  of  ringing  of  the  changes  upon  the  words 
"  thoughts "  and  **  ways  "  ?  This  proves  to  my  mind  that  the  con- 
nection mainly  lies  in  this  first  point.  The  Lord  says,  "  Forsake  your 
way,  for  it  is  not  my  way  ;  leave  your  thoughts,  for  they  are  not  my 
thoughts.  Your  way  ought  to  be  my  way  ;  your  thoughts  ought  to  be 
my  thoughts,  so  far  as  the  weakness  of  crcatureship  will  allow.  But  it 
is  not  so  :  you  have  wandered  away  from  me  ;  you  think  hot  such 
thoughts  as  I  would  have  you  think,  you  walk  not  in  such  a  way  as  I 
would  have  you  choose :  therefore  forsake  your  ways  and  your  thouglits, 
and  turn  unte  your  God."  It  is  a  remonstrance  tenderly  administered, 
mixed  up  with  such  sweet  exhortation  that  no  degi'ce  of  bitterness  is  per- 
ceptible in  it.  The  rebuke  is  enveloped  in  love,  and  made  into  a  sugar- 
coated  pill :  the  sweet  promise  of  abundant  pardon  conceals  the  reproof. 

Now  let  us  take  the  rebuke  and  notice,  first,  the  fault  of  man's 
ihonghts:  "My  thoughts  are  not  your  thoughts."  As  between  each 
othe)'f  God's  thoughts  are  not  man's,  though  they  ought  to  be.  God's 
thoughts  are  love,  pity,  tenderness ;  ours  are  forgetfulness,  ingratitude, 
and  hard-heartedness.  He  thinks  of  us  as  lost  sheep  are  thought  of  by 
the  shepherd,  as  a  prodigal  child  is  thought  of  by  his  father :  but  our 
thoughts  are  not  of  Uke  kind.  In  its  wandering  state  the  sheep  has 
no  thought  of  returning  to  the  Shepherd,  and  the  prodigal  son,  until 
converting  grace  meets  with  him,  has  no  reciprocal  affection  towards  his 
Father.  It  is  sad  that  the  God  of  love  should  have  to  say,  "  My  thoughts 
are  not  your  thoughts."    God's  thoughts  to  us  are  thoughts  of  love,  but 


■f  -  -^T- ' 


676  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

jiot  SO  ours  to  him.  He  is  tender  of  our  comfort,  but  we  are  not  tender  of 
his  honour ;  he  considers  our  interests,  but  we  think  not  of  his  glory ;  ho 
watches  over  our  safety,  but  we  are  not  watchful  to  keep  his  statutes. 
He  loads  us  with  benefits,  but  we  only  load  him  with  our  sins ;  he  has 
given  us  all  that  we  have,  but  we  bring  him  cold  thanks  in  return.  You 
love,  0  ungodly  men,  to  live  without  remembering  God :  he  is  not  in 
all  your  thoughts.  You  have  no  consideration  for  your  Maker,  no  defer- 
ence for  your  Preserver,  no  care  for  your  best  Friend.  He  feels  your 
ungenerous  conduct,  for  he  says,  "  If  then  I  be  a  father,  where  is  mine 
honour  ?  and  if  I  be  a  master,  where  is  my  fear  ?"  Alas,  man  returns 
not  according  to  the  benefit  received,  but  often  renders  evil  for  good. 
A\Tien  the  Lord  deigned  to  visit  earth  as  the  incarnate  God,  the  acts  of 
man  proved  that  his  thoughts  are  not  God's  thoughts.  God's  thoughts 
were  all  goodness  to  men,  but  men  found  him  here  in  human  form,  and 
their  thoughts  and  ways  were  fiill  of  enmity  and  murder  towards  him ; 
therefore  they  cried,  "  Crucify  him!  Crucify  him!"  How  terribly  has 
man  departed  from  his  God ! 

Your  thoughts  as  to  your  conduct  are  not  God's  thoughts.  He  con- 
siders that  the  creatures  he  has  made  should  obey  him,  but  you  judge 
that  it  matters  not  what  a  man  does  towards  his  Maker  so  long  as  he  is 
just  towards  his  fellow-men.  God  declares  that  no  conduct  can  justify  a 
man  unless  it  be  absolutely  perfect,  and  wholly  conformed  to  his  law  ;  but 
man  imagines  that  if  he  does  his  best  it  will  suffice,  and  that  even  if  he 
does  not  do  his  best  a  little  profession  of  repentance  will  wipe  off  old 
scores,  and  he  may  stand  self-justified  before  God.  Man  thinks  that  he 
has  done  wondrously  if  he  gives  now  and  then  a  little  attention  to  outward 
religion,  even  though  his  heart  may  be  far  from  God ;  but  the  Lord 
looks  at  the  heart,  and  searches  the  secret  places  of  the  mind,  and  he 
values  nothing  but  what  is  done  out  of  love  to  him.  Man  slights  the 
inward  and  only  regards  the  outward,  for  God's  thoughts  are  not  his 
thoughts.  Oh  you  that  are  satisfied  with  your  own  conduct,  and  perfectly 
content  that  things  are  well  enough  with  you,  I  beseech  you  to  recollect 
that  your  self-congratulatory  thoughts  are  not  the  thoughts  of  God. 
He  looketh  into  the  souFs  secrets,  and  he  is  not  deceived  by  the  words 
and  professions  of  those  who  draw  near  to  him  with  their  lips  but  in 
secret  continue  in  their  iniquity. 

God's  thoughts,  again,  as  to  the  life  which  a  man  needs  in  order  to 
salvation  are  very  different  from  man's  thoughts.  Did  yon  notice  how 
in  this  chapter  he  says,  "  Hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live"  ?  He  reckons, 
then,  that  man  is  dead  till  he  has  heard  the  word  of  Qod  in  his  soul. 
Man  reckons  that  he  is  alive  enough ;  he  is  perfectly  satisfied  with  the 
mental  life  which  he  possesses,  and  does  not  desire  spiritual  life,  for 
as  yet  he  cannot  apprehend  it.  Here  is  a  wide  difference!  God 
thinketh  of  thee,  0  sinner,  as  dead  and  beginning  to  corrupt.  He 
thinketh  of  thee  as  we  thiii  of  a  corpse  when  wq  cry,  **  Bury  my  dead 
out  of  my  sight."  But  thou  thinkest  of  thyself  as  of  a  creature  feir  to 
look  upon,  filled  \rith  beauty,  abounding  with  ability,  and  able  to  perform 
all  spiritual  acts  at  pleasure.  Thy  boast  is  that  thou  hast  freedom  of  will 
and  force  of  heart  to  set  all  things  right  whenever  it  pleases  thee,  and 
courage  and  resolution  to  rout  every  wrong  which  may  assail  thee.  Thou 
Art  as  strong  as  Goliath  and  as  brave  as  David  in  thine  own  esteem ;  bat 


GOD'S  THOUGHTS  ANI)  WAYS  FAR  ABOVE  OURS.  C77 

God  thinks  not  so.  His  eternal  Sijirit  knows  that  thou  art  dead,  and  he 
has  come  to  bring  thee  hie :  take  heed  that  thou  do  not  reject  it.  Do 
not  say  in  thy  heart,  "  I  have  Hfe  enough,  and  want  nothing  from  the 
Most  High,"  for  this  would  be  thy  sure  destruction. 

God's  thoughts  are  not  our  thoughts,  again,  in  reference  to  the  Irutfu 
God's  thoughts  of  truth  are  evidently  not  man's,  for  nothing  but  divine 
grace  can  bring  man  to  beHeve  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  or  keep  him 
faithfiil  to  them.  Each  generation  seems  to  bring  forth  its  own  set  of  men 
who  set  themselves  to  oppose  God's  tnith  from  some  fresh  point.  These 
scribes  and  counters  of  the  towers  are  wonderfully  busy  just  now.  We 
have  among  us  a  great  company  of  men  who  have  attained  repute 
through  daring  to  assail  established  truth — wise  men  if  we  take  tneir 
own  judgment  of  themselves,  for  they  are  never  more  at  home  than 
when  sounding  the  praises  of  their  own  culture  and  breadth  of  mind. 
These  Philistines  have  iutmded  into  the  temple  under  the  pretence  of 
trimming  our  lamps,  but  their  aim  is  to  put  them  out.  Evangelistic 
light  is  too  clear  for  them,  and  they  seek  to  obscure  it,  hence  they  give 
new  readings  to  texts  which  are  translated  by  better  scholars  than  they 
will  ever  be,  and  put  new  interpretations  upon  the  doctrines  which  their 
fathers  held, — interpretations  which  their  sires  would  indi^iantly  repu- 
diate. Koughly  speaking,  these  iiieu  deny  everything  which  faith  holds 
dear,  and  yet  expect  to  be  considered  to  be  Christians.  They  tear  the 
vitals  from  every  truth,  and  yet  pretend  to  believe  it.  Their  advanced 
thought,  hke  a  vampire,  sucks  the  blood  out  of  the  veins  of  truth,  and 
he  who  would  drive  away  the  foul  thing  is  called  a  bigot  and  a  fool. 
These  reverend  infidels  are  to  be  tolerated  as  our  ministers,  or  if  we 
decline  to  reckon  those  to  be  Christian  ministers  who  spend  all  their 
energies  in  undermining  Christianity,  we  are  in  danger  of  being  ridiculed 
by  the  sage  party  which  now  clamours  in  the  public  ear.  Well,  it  was 
always  so.  Man  thinks  himsdlf  so  wise  and  good  that  he  does  not  Uke 
God's  thoughts  concerning  himself,  his  fall,  his  guilt,  and  his  danger. 
He  tries  to  think  revelation  over  again,  he  places  it  upside  down,  and 
tlien  he  calls  his  maunderings  "  culture,"  and  thought.  To  get  away 
from  the  plain  teaching  of  Scripture  he  babbles  about  advancement—- 
an  advancement  which  consists  in  going  away  from  the  hght,  an  ad- 
vancement w^hich  will  bring  us  back  to  stark  naked  infidelity  unless 
God  in  infinite  mercy  shall  arrest  it.  Man  likes  not  the  thoughts  of 
God.  If  God  thinks  of  man  as  depraved  he  will  not  have  it:  he  feels 
that  it  is  a  shameful  thing  to  speak  thus  of  such  a  noble  being  as  him- 
self. If  God  declares  that  man  is  so  fallen  that  he  must  be  bora 
again,  he  will  not  have  it :  he  wall  sprinkle  a  few  drops  of  water  on 
a  babe's  face — heigh,  presto  I  the  thing  is  done.  If  God  thinketh  that 
the  sinner  shall  be  cast  into  hell,  where  their  worm  dieth  not,  men's  fears 
are  quieted  by  being  assured  by  some  great  divine  that  there  is  no  hell, 
that  he  cannot  find  mention  of  it  in  the  Bible,  and  that  at  the  worst 
he  will  only  cease  to  be.  Thus  do  they  think,  in  opposition  to  the  divine 
thinking,  for  evermore  is  it  true,  "  My  thoughts  are  not  your  thoughts, 
neither  are  your  ways  my  ways,  saith  the  Lord." 

In  the  matt«r  of  salvation  God's  thoughts  are  not  man's  thoughts,  for 
God  thinketh  that  man  has  so  sinned  that  he  must  be  condemned  except 
a  substitute  be  found.    Man  thinks  not  so.    God  sets  before  him  pardon 


678  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

fireely  presented  through  the  precious  blood  :  man  thinks  to  buy  it  by  hi» 
devotions,  or  to  win  it  by  his  merits.  Hence  the  language  {H^ceding  our 
text :  **  Wherefore  do  ye  spend  money  for  that  which  is  not  bread  ?  and 
your  labour  for  that  which  satisfieth  not  ?  Hearken  diligently  unto  me^ 
and  eat  ye  that  which  is  good,  and  let  your  soul  dehgbt  itself  in  tatoatL 
Incline  your  ear,  and  come  unto  me  :  hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live " ; 
and  so  on.  Those  verses  hold  in  solution  the  thought  of  our  text ;  **My 
thoughts  are  not  your  thoughts,  neither  are  your  ways  my  ways,  saith 
the  Lord." 

See  theu,  dear  friends,  that  this  is  a  call  to  repentance.  Han,  if  yon 
think  rightly,  you  will  submit  to  think  as  God  thinks.  If  your  thoughts 
are  what  they  should  be,  they  Avill  not  contradict  God's  thoughts,  for  he 
knows  more  than  you,  and  knows  better  than  you.  The  Infinite,  the 
Eternal,  is  he  to  be  judged  of  man's  judgment  ?  Is  he  to  be  analysed 
in  tlie  chemist's  laboratory  ?  Are  his  thoughts  to  be  ridiculed  because 
they  are  contrary  to  the  reigning  philosophy  which  is  probably  no  more 
true  than  the  many  other  forms  of  human  ignorance  which  have  aforetime 
come  and  gone  in  the  centuries  of  the  past  ?  Will  not  the  present  dream 
of  mortal  wisdom  melt  Uke  a  mist  before  the  sun  of  gospel  truth  ?  Is 
God's  great  system  of  salvation  and  providence  to  be  called  to  the  bar  of 
the  scientists,  who  can  do  no  more  than  dote  after  the  manner  of  their 
predecessors?  Shall  divine  revelation  be  judged  and  condemned,  as  men 
try  a  thief  ?  Nay,  worse  than  tliis,  these  sjiges  so  despise  the  teaching 
of  the  Lord,  that  one  would  think  they  were  a  committee  of  doctors  ex- 
amining a  maniac.  Let  us  abhor  the  presumption  of  scepticism,  and 
let  us  be  wise  enough  to  know  our  folly ;  rational  enough  to  feel  that 
God  is  to  be  obeyed,  and  not  questioned ;  and  that  his  revelation  is  to  be 
believed,  and  not  criticised.  Though  we  think  crookedly,  God's  thoughts 
are  upright;  though  we  think  grovellingly,  God  thinks  subhmely: 
though  we  think  upon  a  finite  and  erroneous  scale,  God  tliinks  infinitely 
and  infallibly  ;  and  it  is  ours  continually  to  correct  our  thoughts  by  the 
infallible  word,  so  that  our  minds  are  kept  in  harmony  with  the  sure 
utterances  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Now,  the  text  advances  to  say  that  man* 8  ways  are  not  like  God's: 
"  My  ways  are  not  your  ways."  Our  ways  are  the  outward  actions  which 
spring  out  of  our  thoughts.  God's  ways  are  ways  of  hohness  and  purity. 
God  hath  never  done  anything  unjust  to  his  creature  or  unrighteous  to 
himself.  But  our  ways  are  not  so  ;  they  ai'e  full  of  error,  marred  with 
evil,  polluted  with  impurity.  By  nature  we  love  that  which  we  ought 
to  hate.  Wc  often  put  bitter  for  sweet  and  sweet  for  bitter.  Oh, 
brethren,  when  you  think  of  the  character  of  God  and  then  think  of  the 
best  man  that  ever  lived,  truly  "  as  high  as  the  heavens  are  above  the 
earth  '*  are  his  ways  above  our  ways.  God's  ways  are  ways  of  love  and 
tenderness,  he  is  very  pitiful,  and  full  of  compassion  :  but  our  ways  are 
not  so — we  are  often  very  harsh  to  one  another,  and  w^e  do  not  return  a 
fihal  love  to  God.  I  mean  not  unless  his  grace  meets  with  us,  and  even 
then  we  fall  far  short  of  walking  in  the  love  of  God  as  he  walks  in  love 
toward  us.  God's  ways  are  ways  of  truth :  he  never  hes,  he  has  never 
tgi  nnfiEdthfiil  to  us  or  untrue  to  his  promise ;  but  we,  on  the  other  hand, 
B^royed  fsdse  to  him  many  a  time.  *'  Thou  hast  dealt  very  treacher- 
*     *i  the  prophet  of  oli  and  the  charge  lies  against  us  to  this  day. 


god's  THOUaHTS  AND  WAYS  FAR  ABOVE  OURS.        679 

We  have  been  traitors  to  God,  but  he  has  been  fidelity  itself  to  ns.  Our 
good  resolves  have  dissolved  in  air ;  our  promises  have  been  broken ; 
our  vows  have  all  been  forgotten.  God  is  all  truth  and  faithfulness  to  us, 
and  we  are  all  mistrust  and  doubt  and  treachery  towards  him,  and  were 
it  not  for  his  di\dne  grace  we  should  have  even  fallen  into  apostasy,  and 
been  like  the  son  of  perdition  who  betrayed  his  Lord. 

God's  ways  are  ways  of  forgiveness  and  peace.  He  doth  not  desire  the 
death  of  the  sinner.  He  is  very  patient,  he  suffers  long,  he  bears  con- 
tinually with  our  provocations.  He  is  desirous  that  men  should  acquaint 
themselves  with  him,  and  be  at  peace.  His  ways  are  ways  of  reconcilia- 
tion, ways  of  forgiveness,  ways  of  love  and  kindness ;  but  see  ye  not 
that  the  ways  of  the  natural  man  are  perverse  ?  By  nature  we  do  not 
desire  to  be  at  amity  with  God ;  on  the  contraiy,  we  seize  upon  any- 
thing that  can  aggravate  our  transgression  and  widen  the  breach  between 
ourselves  and  our  offended  Lord.  We  have  no  patience,  we  cannot  even 
bear  with  a  little  suffering  or  trial  from  him,  without  complaint  and 
murmur.  There  are  men  around  us  who  will  turn  round  and  curse  him 
to  his  face,  when  his  hand  is  smiting  and  correcting  them  for  their  good ; 
ay,  and  they  will  do  it  wantonly  without  the  shadow  of  reason.  Our 
ways  are  not  God's  ways.  This  is  true  of  every  sinner  under  heaven, 
and  in  some  measure  true  of  the  best  of  men, — "  My  ways  are  not  your 
ways,  saith  the  Lord.'' 

Well,  now,  beloved,  two  cannot  walk  together  in  heaven  except  they  be 
of  one  mind  ;  so  that  our  ways  and  God's  ways  must  be  made  to  be  alike 
in  character.  Now,  it  is  not  possible  for  us  to  conceive  of  God's  nmhin/j  his 
thoughts  to  he  like  our  thoughts.  Who  would  wish  such  a  thing  ?  Who 
would  desire  that  the  wise  and  good  should  stoop  to  think  our  folly, 
and  act  our  madness  ?  Who  could  wish  that  the  glorious  and  the  perfect 
should  come  down  to  think  and  act  after  the  manner  of  unjust,  un- 
righteous man  ?  His  thoughts  cannot  be  reduced  to  ours — what  then  ? 
Why,  we  must  rise  to  him.  Not,  of  course,  to  his  majesty  and  sublimity, 
but  we  must  rise  to  his  hohness,  truth,  and  love.  Hence  the  command 
which  comes  before  our  text,  "  Seek  ye  the  Lord  while  he  may  be  found, 
call  ye  upon  him  while  he  is  near :  let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and 
the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts :  and  let  him  return  unto  the  Lord." 
If  infinite  purity  cannot  be  expected  to  become  impure,  let  us  ask  that 
our  impurity  may  bo  taken  away,  and  that  we  may  be  made  clean  in  the 
Lord's  sight,  so  as  to  hold  fellowship  with  him. 

And  now  I  ask  you  to  consider  the  difficulty  of  this,  "  As  the  heavens 
are  higher  than  the  earth,  so  are  my  ways  higher  than  your  ways." 
Turn  thine  eyes  hither,  0  self-sulficiency  I  Canst  thou  vault  into 
heaven?  Standing  here  upon  this  lower  earth  canst  thou  with  a  spring 
leap  above  yon  stars,  ascend  into  the  holiness  of  God,  and  become  a  par- 
taker of  the  divine  nature  ?  Surely,  now  thou  hast  a  task  set  before  thee 
which  will  make  thee  confess  thine  inability.  Yet  such  an  uprising  must 
be  accompHshed  if  we  are  to  dwell  with  God  and  have  fellowship  with  him. 
These  miry,  filthy  ways  of  earth  must  become  like  the  pure  and  perfect  path 
of  the  thrice  Holy  One  or  we  cannot  walk  with  him.  How,  then,  are  we 
to  be  lifted  up  from  earth  to  heaven  ?  The  word  that  answers  the  ques- 
tion is  that  matchless  syllable,  "grace."  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  by  his 
almighty  grace,  must  raise  us  up  together  with  Christ.    He  who  brought 


680  METBOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

again  from  the  dead  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  must  stoop  down  to  lift  us 
up  from  the  grave  of  sin,  and  quicken  us  into  life  eternal,  or  we  shall 
never  think  his  thoughts  or  follow  his  ways.  Into  the  light  wherein  he 
dwelleth  we  can  never  come  except  by  the  operations  of  his  divine 
Spirit.  Jesus  says,  "  No  man  cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  me,"  and 
"  No  man  can  come  unto  me  except  the  Father  wliich  hath  sent  me  draw 
him."  The  Holy  Ghost  must  quicken  us  out  of  our  trespasses  and  sins, 
deliver  us  from  the  ways  in  which  we  walk  according  to  the  course  of 
this  world,  and  redeem  us  from  the  dominion  of  the  carnal  mind,  which 
is  enmity  against  God.  By  ganctification  he  must  deliver  us  from  oiu* 
indwelling  corruption,  and  continue  the  process  till  he  conforms  us  per- 
fectly to  the  image  of  the  peerless  Son  of  God.  Likeness  to  Jesus  he  will 
work  in  all  believers,  and  it  shall  be  said  of  us,  "They  are  without  feult 
before  the  throne  of  God,"  and  Christ  himself  shall  say,  "They  shall  walk 
with  me  in  white,  for  they  are  worthy."  It  is  clear,  then,  that  our  text 
is  a  gentle  but  earnest  rebuke,  veiled  in  abounding  love. 

IL  Now,  secondly,  we  shall  view  the  text  under  another  aspect. 
Here  we  have  kepentance  encouraged.  Kindly  look  at  the  seventh 
verse  :  "  Let  him  return  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  will  have  mercy  upon 
him ;  and  to  our  God,  for  he  will  abundantly  pardon.  For  my  thoughts 
are  not  your  thoughts."  It  is  clear  that  there  is  a  connecting  link  be- 
tween the  abundance  of  pardon  and  the  lolly  character  of  God,  and  that 
men  are  encouraged  to  forsake  their  ways  and  thoughts  by  the  hope  of 
pardon  derived  from  the  greatness  of  the  divine  thoughts  and  ways. 

First,  0  sinner,  turn  from  your  way  at  once,  and  seek  the  Lord,  and 
do  iiot  stand  hack  because  you  cannot  undei'stand  God.  It  is  not  needful 
that  you  should  comprehend  hia  ways  and  thoughts  ;  you  are  not  asked 
to  do  so  ;  in  fact,  you  are  told  in  the  text  that  you  cannot  do  anything  of 
the  kind.  You  are  bidden  to  foi*sake  your  way  and  receive  mercy  by 
hearing  his  word  and  believing  it,  for  as  the  heavens  are  high  above  the 
earth,  so  high  are  his  ways  above  your  ways.  You  cannot  understand 
it :  you  waste  time  while  raising  this  question  and  that,  prying  into  God's 
eternal  purposes,  gazing  into  the  dazzling  light  of  sovereignty,  quos- 
•tioning  electing  love,  diving  into  mysteries  of  the  trinity,  and  the  like : 
you  are  to  "  hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live."  Ecturn  you  unto  our  God, 
and  he  will  abundantly  pardon  you.  Though  you  cannot  grapple  with 
his  sublimfty,  submit  to  his  mercy.  You  may  conclude  that  it  is  not 
intended  that  you  should  understand  the  infinite,  for  you  are  told  that 
his  thoughts  and  ways  are  far  above  you ;  but  you  are  required  to  seek 
him  while  he  may  be  found,  and  call  upon  him  while  he  is  near.  Come 
and  close  with  his  free  invitation  to  give  you  wine  and  milk  without 
money  and  without  price.  Foi-saking  your  sin,  come  and  be  at  peace 
with  him  at  once. 

Neither  start  hath  because  you  cannot  find  a  parallel  to  the  grace  which 
God  declares  that  he  will  display  towards  you.  What  if  you  have  looked 
over  all  the  history  of  man  and  you  can  find  nothing  among  men  that 
can  at  all  equal  the  abundance  of  divine  pardon,  do  not  therefore  hesitate 
to  believe,  for  God's  thoughts  are  above  all  human  thoughts.  Man  finds 
it  hard  to  forgive  at  all.  One  of  the  sternest  lessons  wliich  some  men 
have  to  learn  is  to  forgive  their  brethren  unto  seventy  times  seven.  Mau 
can  with  difficulty  forgive  repeated  offences :    he  usually  draws  an 


GOD*a  THOUGHTS  AND  WAYS  FAll  ABOVE  OURS.  681 

argamcnt  for  anger  from  the  repetition  of  the  provocation.  Nor  can  he 
forgive  a  large  number  of  otfenders  :  lie  might  pardon  one,  but  to  forgive 
many  is  more  than  most  men  will  even  attempt  to  do :  they  are  filled 
Avith  indignation,  and  resist  those  who  annoy  them.  When  offences  are 
aggravated  wilfully,  when  thoy  provoke  by  being  committed  against  love 
and  against  kindness,  men  will  not  forgive.  Even  the  most  forgiving 
become  at  last  incensed,  but  God  passes  by  myriads  of  transgressions. 
Do  not  wait  until  you  find  a  man  who  could  forgive  you,  God  can  do 
what  man  never  dreams  of  doing.  His  thoughts  are  above  your  thoughts 
and  his  ways  above  your  ways.  Peradventure  conscience  has  been  busy 
as  to  your  own  shortcomings,  and  you  feel  yourself  to  be  self-condemned. 
In  the  honesty  of  your  judgment  you  have  felt  compelled  to  cry,  "I 
could  not  do  otherwise  than  pass  sentence  of  condemnation  upon  myself 
if  I  were  made  my  own  judge."  *Tis  a  right  verdict,  but  do  not  forget 
that  Jesus  died,  and  now  fiir  above  all  thoughts  of  ours  mercy's  wing 
can  mount ;  yea,  the  everlasting  mountains  of  Jehovah's  forgiving  love 
are  above  the  heavens:  grace  overtops  all  things.  Think  of  this,  0 
repenting  sinner,  and  be  encouraged. 

Man's  forgiveness  is  seldom  free,  like  that  of  God,  who  delights  to  pardon 
sin.  No  sooner  do  we  transgress  than  God  is  ready  to  forgive.  Man's 
forgiveness  is  never  so  full  as  God's,  for  the  Lord  forgives  and  harbours 
no  resentment,  he  preserves  no  recollection  of  our  transgressions  :  he  casts 
them  into  the  depths  of  the  sea,  and  remembers  them  no  more.  Man's 
f  )rgiveness  is  seldom  so  real  as  God's,  for  though  man  says  he  has  for- 
given, he  does  not  afterwards  delight  in  the  offender  as  he  may  have 
done  before  :  there  is  a  chill  in  his  heart  towards  the  pei'son  who  in- 
jured him,  and  by  his  cautious  dealing  he  shows  that  he  remembers  the 
wrong  ;  but  the  Lord  God  so  effectually  and  wholly  forgets  transgression 
that  he  presses  the  offender  to  his  heart,  adopts  him  into  his  family,  and 
lifts  him  up  to  dwell  for  ever  with  him  above. 

Now,  beloved,  according  to  our  text,  wliatever  your  ways  towards  Ood 
shall  he  in  the  future,  he  will  exceed  them.  Are  your  ways  right  to- 
wards your  Father  now  ?  Do  you  begin  with  trembling  footsteps  to 
seek  his  house  ?  Lo,  he  runs  to  meet  you.  The  prodigal's  Father  meets 
him  far  more  than  half  way,  for  his  ways  are  above  our  ways.  Do  you' 
stand  before  him  weeping  ?  It  is  well  :  these  ways  of  repentance  are 
good,  but  better  are  the  ways  of  God,  for  Jesus  stands  before  you,  bleeding 
for  your  sake.  Blood  he  gives,  instead  of  tears.  Do  you  love  the  Re- 
deemer because  of  his  dying  for  you  ?  Alas,  you  do  not  love  so  greatly 
as  he  loves  you  :  his  love  is  a  sea,  and  yours  a  tiny  brooklet.  Will 
you  heaccforth  give  him  all  your  life  ?  Yet  not  such  a  life  as  he 
gives  to  you — a  life  perfect  and  eternal,  and  all  for  you  !  He  lives  for 
y«^u,  and  saith,  **  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also."  Come  back,  0 
penitent,  for  when  you  do  come  back,  if  divine  grace  has  put  some  good- 
ness into  your  ways,  yet  there  shall  be  still  infinitely  more  goodness  in  the 
ways  of  God. 

And  as  to  your  thoughts — can  you  think  of  how  he  will  receive  you  ? 
Oh,  you  do  not  dream  how  gladly  he  will  meet  you,  and  how  Idndly  he 
will  receive  you.  You  are  about  to  cry,  "I  am  not  worthy  to  be  called 
thy  son  ";  but  he  will  say  to  his  servants,  "Bring  forth  the  best  robe, 
and  put  it  on  him ;  put  a  ring  on  his  hand,  and  shoes  on  his  feet."    You 


682  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT, 

hope  that  there  will  be  gladness  when  you  are  restored,  but  you  have  no 
idea  of  the  music  and  the  dancing  which  will  flood  even  heaven  itself 
with  rejoicing.  You  faintly  hope  that  God  will  love  you,  but  you  have 
no  idea  how  much ;  nor  what  great  things  his  love  will  do  for  you.  The 
half  has  never  been  told  you  by  the  most  faithful  witness  for  God.  Those 
who  have  experienced  most  of  the  divine  love  have  never  been  able  to 
communicate  to  you  any  idea  of  what  that  love  is.  God*s  thoughts  are 
abovo  your  thoughts  as  much  as  the  heavens  are  above  the  earth.  Oome, 
then,  to  him.  Infinite  grace  awaits  you,  a  tender  reception,  a  perfect 
cleansing,  a  divine  adorning,  eternal  security,  endless  bliss  shall  all  be 
yours  !  AVhy  do  you  linger  ?  The  life  of  God  shall  be  in  you,  and  the  joy 
of  Christ  shall  fill  you  to  the  full.  If  this  does  not  encourage  men  to 
repent,  what  can  ? 

III.  And  now  let  us  touch  upon  the  third  point,  which  is  this, 
EXPECTATION  EXCITED.  I  Said  I  was  going  to  keep  to  the  connection 
of  the  text,  and  so  I  will ;  but  this  time  the  link  is  forward  instead  of 
backward.  "As  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth,  so  are  mv  ways 
higher  than  your  ways,  and  my  thoughts  than  your  thoughts.  For  " — 
you  see  there  is  the  link  word  "  for"  to  join  our  text  to  that  which  follows, 
"  For  as  the  rain  cometh  down,  and  the  snow  from  heaven,  and  retumeth 
not  thither,  but  w^atereth  the  earth,  and  maketh  it  bring  forth  and  bud, 
that  it  may  give  seed  to  the  sower,  and  bread  to  the  eater.  So  shall  my 
word  be."  Now,  if  you  hearken  to  the  Lord  and  take  his  thoughts  to  be 
your  thoughts,  and  earnestly  pray  him  to  make  his  ways  to  be  your  ways, 
from  this  time  forth  and  for  ever,  you  may  justly  indulge  the  highest 
expectations,  and  they  shall  be  exceeded.  This  chapter  tells  you  what  to 
expect.  First,  you  are  to  expect  that  the  Lord^s  ward  will  he  unfailmg 
to  you.  What  is  this  "  word  '  ?  You  see  we  have  had  "  thought"  and 
"way,"  and  now  we  come  to  "word."  God*s  word  is  his  thoughts 
spoken,  and  God's  word  is  also  his  ways,  for  "  He  speaks  and  it  is  done, 
he  commands  audit  stands  fast."  His  "word"  is  "thought)"  and  "way" 
put  together.  Now  that  "word"  of  his  shall  never  be  broken  to  you. 
roor  sinner,  forsake  your  ways,  forsake  yoiu*  thoughts,  and  come  and 
trust  in  God,  and  his  word  shall  be  like  himself,  immutable,  eternal, 
infallible,  and  fall  of  boundless  blessing  to  you.  It  shall  be  powerful 
to  bless  you,  mighty  to  fertilize  you ;  it  shall  be  like  rain  and  snow, 
which  go  not  back  to  heaven,  but  sink  into  the  earth  to  make  it  bring 
forth  and  bud.  From  that  day  forward,  when  you  are  reconciled 
to  God,  you  may  take  any  promise  you  find  in  the  word  and  say,  "  Lord, 
fulfil  this  w^ord  unto  thy  servant  whereon  thou  hast  caused  me  to 
hope,"  and  it  shall  be  so.  Come  and  trust  him,  and  promises  which  now 
appear  above  you,  and  far  too  rich  for  such  a  poor  worm  as  you  are, 
shall  all  be  fulfilled  to  you ;  they  shall  come  down  upon  your  soul  like 
gentle  showers,  and  make  you  full  of  gladness.  Such  is  the  fulness  of 
its  power  that  you  shall  be  able  to  respond  to  God's  word  by  a  holy  and 
gracious  hfe,  and  your  soul,  barren  as  it  now  is,  shall  be  made  to  bring 
forth  and  bud.  That  is  one  blessed  thing  which  you  may  confidently 
expect,  for  you  are  coming  to  a  God  of  great  ways  and  thoughts. 

The  next  is  that  you  are  returning  to  a  God  whose  ways  are  so  much 
above  your  ways,  and  his  thoughts  so  much  above  your  thoughts, 
that  your  heart  shall  be  filled  with  joy-^'^'^Q  shall  go  out  with  joy,  and 


god's  thoughts  and  ways  far  above  ours.  683 

be  led  forth  with  peace."  God  will  not  merely  break  ofif  your  chains 
and^say  in  cold  accents,  '*  You  are  free ;"  but  he  will  release  yon  amid 
the  music  of  the  spheres ;  and  angels  shall  lead  yon  forth  in  peace,  and 
your  tongue  shall  sing,  "  I  am  forgiven  !  I  am  forgiven  I  I  am  ac- 
cepted !  I  am  redeemed !  Behold,  now  do  I  go  forth  out  of  my  cap- 
tivity with  joy,  and  God*s  angels  lead  me  forth  with  peace."  Who  would 
not  be  a  penitent  if  such  things  may  be  expected  from  the  sublime 
grandeur  of  the  goodness  of  God  ? 

Next  to  this,  .all  your  siirroiindinffs  shall  minister  to  your  gladness, 
"The  mountains  and  the  hills  shall  break  forth  before  you  into  singing, 
and  all  the  trees  of  the  field  shall  clap  their  hands."  In  your  journey 
through  life  mountains  have  hitherto  been  hard  to  climb,  and  forests 
tangled  and  dark  have  been  your  dread ;  but  now  so  greatly  good  is 
God  to  those  whose  ways  become  his  ways,  that  the  mountain  which 
you  feared  shall  break  forth  into  song,  and  the  forest  at  which  you 
trembled  shall  become  an  orchestra  in  which  every  tree  shall  clap  its 
hands  for  joy.  You  do  not  know  what  awaits  coming  sinners.  You 
that  are  willing  to  hear  that  your  soul  may  live, — you  that  are  willing 
to  accept  the  covenant  which  God  made  with  great  David's  greater  son — 
you  shall  see  the  whole  world  robed  in  the  garments  of  praise,  and  your 
heart  shall  be  so  filled  with  gladness  that  it  shall  overflow  and  flood  all 
nature  with  joy. 

And  then  there  shall  happen  to  you  wonderful  transformations. 
Because  God*s  ways  are  above  your  ways,  he  will  do  what  you  never 
thought  could  be  done ;  the  thonis  shall  be  transmuted  into  fir  trees, 
and  the  briers  into  myrtles.  There  shall  be  a  change  in  you,  such  a 
wonderful  change,  that  all  things  shall  become  new.  There  shall  be  a 
change  in  all  that  concerns  you ;  the  Bible  shall  become  a  treasure  and 
the  Sabbath  a  delight,  the  mercy-seat  a  loved  resort  and  the  path  of 
obedience  a  way  of  pleasantness.  Sin  shall  be  uprooted  and  virtue  shall 
be  implanted.  Evil  habits  shall  be  withered  and  holy  principles  shall 
be  nourished.  You  do  not  know,  and  you  cannot  guess,  what  honour, 
pleasure,  dignity,  and  glory  it  is  to  be  in  Christ.  You  who  have  never 
come  to  God  cannot  conceive  the  bliss  of  life  with  God  by  Jesus  Christ. 
As  a  deaf  man  can  have  no  notion  of  music,  as  a  man  born  blind  can 
have  no  conception  of  the  splendour  of  the  rainbow,  so  ye  deaf  and 
blind,  you  do  not  know  what  the  Christian  life  is  for  excellence  and 
happiness,  but  you  may  guess  that  it  is  surpassingly  delightful  when 
you  hear  that  as  high  as  the  heavens  are  above  the  earth,  so  high  are 
the  Lord's  ways  above  our  ways. 

Last  of  all,  this  mercy  is  to  etidurefor  ever,  Man's  thoughts  are  for  a 
time,  and  his  ways  but  for  a  season  ;  God  is  eternal:  when  he  thinks 
his  thoughts  abide  for  ever,  and  when  he  acts  his  woys  are  everlast- 
ing.  The  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  without  repentance-— he  never 
changes  his  mind.  Perhaps  you  think  that  salvation  is  a  thing  to  be 
found  and  lost,  to  be  gained  and  forfeited,  to  be  enjoyed  to-day  and 
deplored  to-morrow,  and  truly  there  are  some  who  tell  us  so  ;  but  so 
speaks  not  the  word  of  the  Lord,  for  it  is  written,  "  It  shall  be  to  the 
Lord  for  a  name,  for  an  everlasting  sign  that  shall  not  be  cut  off." 
Once  come  and  walk  in  the  ways  of  God,  and  his  grace  will  keep  you 
in  them,  and  you  shall  find  a  growing  delight  in  them.     Once  come 


684  METROPOLITAK  TABEENAOLB  PULPIT. 

and  Icam  the  tbonghts  of  Ood,  and  sarrender  intellect  and  heui  en- 
tirely to  his  supremacy,  and  if  it  be  a  sincere  surrender  his  Holy  Spirit 
will  henceforth  guide  your  thinkings  and  direct  your  belieTincs,  so  Uiai 
you  shall  continue  steadfast  in  his  fear,  and  your  path  shall  be  that  of 
the  just,  which  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day. 

Oh,  who  would  not  yield  to  such  a  God  as  our  God,  whose  goodnes 
excels  our  largest  desires?  If  I  were  engaged  upon  the  wretched 
errand  of  charging  you  to  submit  to  a  remorseless  tyrant  who  woald 
never  forgive,  my  message  would  be  hard  to  deliver  ;  but  because  Jesus 
the  Son  of  God  has  died,  and  by  his  death  has  expiated  sin,  we  are 
authorised  and  empowered  to  cry  in  the  name  of  God,  **  Let  the  wicked 
forsake  his  way,  and  the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts:  and  let  him 
return  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  will  have  mercy  upon  him ;  and  to  our 
God,  for  ho  will  abundantly  pardon.*' 

If  all  this  should  seem  to  be  too  good  to  be  true,  as  often  it  hag 
done, — if  the  sinner  should  feel  unable  to  believe  that  he  can  obtain 
immediate  forgiveness  for  a  long  life  of  transgression,  we  are  then  com- 
manded to  tell  you  that  you  must  not  measure  God  by  yourself,  nor 
calculate  what  he  can  do  by  what  your  fellow  man  can  perform.  The 
Lord  can  forgive  what  else  could  never  be  forgiven.  He  can  poor 
out  mercies  so  multiplied  as  to  baffle  human  arithmetic.  He  can 
bless  you  beyond  your  desire.  He  can  delight  you  beyond  a  dream, 
and  he  can  finally  give  you  a  heaven  which  "  eye  hath  not  seen  nor 
ear  heard,  neither  hath  entered  into  the  heart  of  man."  Close  in  with 
him,  Boul,  at  once,  while  yet  in  the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  he  com- 
mands your  faith.  Go  not  about  by  good  works  and  pmyers  and 
tears  to  obtain  forgiveness  ;  spend  not  your  money  on  that  which  is 
not  bread,  but  come,  penniless  and  poor  as  you  are,  and  bay  the  wine 
and  milk  of  covenant  blessing,  without  money  and  without  price.  Lend 
the  willing  ear  and  yield  the  beKeving  heart.  '^  Hear,  and  your  soul 
shall  live";  believe,  and  you  shall  be  saved.  Through  Jesus  Christ 
we  proclaim  the  good  news,  and  for  his  sake  we  implore  a  blessing 
upon  it.     Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Isaiah  Iv. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 36  (Vers.  I.),  103,  202. 


Two  Lectures  addressed  to  the  Students  of  the  Pastors*  College,  Metropolitan 

Tabernacle.     Together  with  a  Catalogue  of  Biblical  Couinicntaries 

and  Expositions.     By  C.  H.  SPURGEON.     Price  2s.  6d. 

^  Dr.  Schaff  writes : — "  Spurgeon's  book  is  a  very  valuable  addition  to  oxegtlical 
literature.  I  know  no  more  complete  list  of  Commentaries  interspersod  with  so 
many  apt,  pointed,  and  witty  remarks." 

Pabbmore  k  Alabastbk,  4,  Paternoster  Buildings;  and  all  BookseUen. 


tt(j}pIitHtt  i^Hhtnarb  §u\pli. 


JESUS  CHRIST  HIMSELF. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-Day  Morning,  December  9th,  1877,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINQTON. 


**  Jesus  Christ  himself." — Ephesians  ii.  20. 

*'  Jesus  Christ  himself"  is  to  occupy  all  our  thoughts  this  morning. 
Wliat  an  ocean  opens  up  before  me  !  Here  is  sea-roora  for  tJie  largest 
barque  I  In  whicli  direction  shall  I  turn  your  thoughts  ?  I  am  embar- 
rassed with  riches.  I  know  not  where  to  begin  :  and  when  I  once  begin 
where  shall  I  end  ?  Assuredly  we  need  not  go  abroad  for  joys  this 
moniing,  for  we  have  a  feast  at  home.  The  words  are  few,  but  the 
meaning  vast — "  Jesus  Christ  himself." 

Beloved,  the  rehgion  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  contains  in  it  nothing 
so  wonderfid  as  himself.  It  is  a  mass  of  irutrvelSy  but  he  is  the  miracle 
of  it ;  the  wonder  of  wonders  is  "  The  Wonderful "  liimself.  li proof  be 
asked  of  the  truth  which  he  proclaimed,  we  point  men  to  Jesus  Christ 
himself.  His  character  is  unique.  We  defy  unbelievei*s  to  imagine  another 
like  him.  He  is  God  and  yet  man,  and  we  challenge  them  to  compose  a 
narrative  in  which  the  two  apparently  incongruous  characters  shall 
be  so  harmoniously  blended,  —  in  which  the  human  and  divine 
shall  be  so  marvellously  apparent,  without  the  one  overshading  the 
other.  They  question  the  authenticity  of  the  four  Gospels ;  will  they 
try  and  write  a  fifth  ?  Will  they  even  attempt  to  add  a  few  incidents  to 
the  life  which  shall  be  worthy  of  the  sacred  biography,  and  congruous 
with  those  facts  which  are  already  described  ?  If  it  be  all  a  forgery,  will 
they  be  so  good  as  to  show  us  how  it  is  done  ?  Will  they  find  a  novelist 
who  will  write  another  biography  of  a  man  of  any  century  they  choose, 
of  any  nationahty,  or  of  any  degree  of  experience,  or  any  rank  or  station, 
and  let  us  see  if  they  can  describe  in  that  imaginai'y  life  a  devotion,  a 
aelf-sacrifice,  a  truthfulness,  a  completeness  of  character  at  all  comparable 
to  that  of  Jesus  Christ  himself  ?  Can  they  invent  another  perfect  cha- 
racter even  if  the  divine  element  be  left  out  ?  They  must  of  necessity 
fail,  for  there  is  none  like  unto  Jesus  himself. 

The  character  of  Jesus  has  commanded  respect  even  from  those  who 


686  METROPOLITAN  TABEBNAOLB  PULPIT. 

have  abhorred  his  teaching.  It  has  beea  a  stamblmg-stone  to  all 
objectors  who  have  preserved  a  shade  of  candour.  Jesus'  doctrine  they 
could  refute,  they  say  ;  his  precepts  they  could  improve,  so  they  boast ; 
his  system  is  narrow  and  outworn,  so  they  assert :  but  himself — ^what  can 
they  do  with  him  ?  They  must  admire  him  even  if  they  will  not  adore 
him;  and  having  done  so  they  have  admired  a  personage  who  must 
be  divine,  or  else  he  wilfully  left  his  disciples  to  believe  a  lie.  How 
will  they  surmount  this  difficulty?  They  cannot  do  so  by  railing  at 
him,  for.  they  have  no  material  for  accusation.  Jesus  Christ  himself 
silences  their  cavillings.  This  is  a  file  at  which  these  asps  do  bite,  but 
break  their  teeth.  Beyond  all  argument  or  miracle,  Jesus  Christ  himself 
is  the  proof  of  his  own  gospel. 

And  as  he  is  the  proof  of  it,  so,  beloved,  he  is  the  marr&tv  and  essence 
of  it.  When  the  apostle  Paul  meant  that  the  gospel  was  preached  he 
said,  *'  Christ  is  preached,"  for  the  gospel  is  Christ  himself.  If  you  want 
to  Imow  what  «Jesus  taught,  know  himself.  He  is  the  incarnation  of 
that  truth  which  by  him  and  in  him  is  revealed  to  the  sons  of  men.  Did 
he  not  himself  say,  "I  am  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life"?  You 
have  not  to  take  down  innumerable  tomes,  nor  to  pore  over  mysterious 
sentences  of  double  meaning  in  order  to  know  what  our  great  teacher 
has  revealed,  you  have  but  to  turn  and  gaze  upon  his  countenance,  behold 
his  actions,  and  note  his  spirit,  and  you  know  his  teaching.  He  lived  what 
he  taught.  If  we  wish  to  know  him,  we  may  hear  his  gentle  voice  saying 
"  Come  and  see."  Study  his  wounds,  and  you  understand  his  innermost 
philosophy.  "  To  know  him  and  the  power  of  his  resurrection  "  is  the 
nighest  degree  of  spiritual  learning.  He  is  the  end  of  the  law  and  the 
soul  of  the  gospel,  and  when  we  have  preached  his  word  to  the  full,  we 
may  close  by  saying,  "  Now,  of  the  things  which  wq  have  spoken  this  is 
the  sum, — we  have  an  high  priest  who  is  set  on  the  right  hand  of  the 
throne  of  the  majesty  in  the  neavens." 

Nor  is  he  alone  the  proof  of  his  gospel  and  the  substance  of  it,  but  he  is 
ihQ  power  and  force  by  which  it  spreads.  When  a  heart  is  tnUy  broken 
for  sin,  it  is  by  him  that  it  is  bound  up.  If  a  man  is  converted,  it  is 
by  Christ,  the  power  of  God.  If  we  enter  into  peace  and  salvation  it 
is  by  the  gracious  manifestation  of  Jesus  himself.  If  men  have  enthu- 
siastically loved  Christianity,  it  is  because  firet  of  all  they  loved  Christ : 
for  him  apostles  laboured,  and  for  him  confessors  were  brave ;  for  him 
saints  have  suffered  the  loss  of  all  things,  and  for  him  martyrs  have 
died.  The  power  which  creates  heroic  consecration  is  "Jesus  Christ 
himself."  The  memories  stirred  by  his  name  have  more  influence 
over  men's  hearts  than  all  things  else  in  earth  or  heaven.  The 
enthusiasm  which  is  the  very  life  of  our  holy  cause  comes  from  himself. 
They  who  know  not  Jesus  know  not  the  life  of  truth,  but  those  who  dwell 
in  him  are  filled  with  power,  and  overflow  so  that  out  of  the  midst  of 
them  streams  forth  living  water.  Nor  is  it  only  so,  beloved ;  for  the 
power  which  propagates  the  gospel  is  Jesus  himself.  In  heaven  he  pleads, 
and  therefore  does  his  kingdom  come.  "  The  pleasure  of  the  Lord  shall 
prosper  in  his  hand."    It  is  from  heaven  that  he  rules  all  things  so  as  to 

E remote  the  advance  of  the  truth.    All  power  is  given  unto  him  in 
eaven  and  in  earth,  and  therefore  are  we  to  proclaim  his  life-giving  word 
with  full  assurance  of  success.    He  causes  the  wheel  of  providence  to 


JESUS  CHRIST  HIMSELF.  687 

revolve  in  such  a  manner  as  to  lielp  his  cause ;  he  abridges  the  power  of 
tyrants,  overrules  the  scourge  of  war,  establishes  hbertj  in  nations,  opens 
the  mysteries  of  continents  long  unknown,  breaks  down  systems  of  error, 
and  guides  the  current  of  human  thought.  He  works  by  a  thousand 
means,  preparing  the  way  of  the  Lord.  It  is  from  heaven  that  he  shall 
shortly  come,  and  when  he  cometh,  when  Christ  liimself  shall  put  forth 
all  his  might,  then  shall  the  wilderness  rejoice  and  the  solitary  place  be 
glad.  The  reserve  force  of  the  gospel  is  Christ  Jesus  himself.  The 
latent  power  which  shall  at  last  break  every  bond,  and  win  universal 
dominion,  is  the  energy,  the  hfe,  the  omm'potence  of  Jesus  himself.  He 
sleeps  in  the  vessel  now,  but  when  he  arises  and  chides  the  storm  there 
will  be  a  deep  calm.  He  now  for  awhile  concealeth  himself  in  the  ivory 
palaces  of  glory,  but  when  he  is  manifested  in  tliat  day  his  chariot  wheels 
shall  bring  victory  to  his  church  militant. 

If  these  things  be  so,  I  have  a  theme  before  me  which  I  cannot  com- 
pass. I  forbear  the  impossible  task,  and  I  shall  but  briefly  note  some 
few  apparent  mattci*s  which  lie  upon  the  surface  of  the  subject. 

Brethren,  "Jesus  Christ  himself"  should  always  be  the  prominent 
thought  of  our  minds  as  Christians.  Our  theology  should  be  framed  upon 
the  fiict  that  he  is  the  Centre  and  Head  of  all.  We  must  remember 
that  "  in  him  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge."  Some 
of  our  brethren  are  mainly  taken  up  with  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  and 
arc  somewhat  bitter  in  their  narrow  orthodoxy.  We  are  to  love  every 
"word  of  our  Lord  Jesus  and  his  apostles,  and  are  to  contend  earnestly  for 
the  faith  once  delivered  unto  the  saints,  but  yet  it  is  well  always  to  hold 
truth  in  connection  with  Jesus  and  not  as  in  itself  alone  the  sum  of  all 
things.  Truth  isolated  from  the  person  of  Jesus  grows  hard  and  cold. 
Wc  know  some  in  whom  the  slightest  variation  from  their  system  arouses 
their  indignation,  even  though  they  admit  that  the  brother  is  full  of 
the  Spirit  of  Christ.  It  is  with  them  doctrine,  doctrine,  doctrine ;  with 
lis,  I  trust,  it  is  Christ  himself  True  doctrine  is  to  us  priceless  as  a 
throne  for  our  living  Lord,  but  our  chief  delight  is  not  in  the  vacant 
throne,  but  in  the  King's  presence  thereon.  Give  me  not  liis  garments, 
though  I  prize  every  thread,  but  the  blessed  wearer  whose  sacred  energy 
made  even  the  hem  thereof  to  heal  with  a  touch. 

There  are  others  of  our  brethren  who  delight  above  measure  in  what 
they  call  experimental  preaching,  which  sets  forth  the  inner  life  of 
the  believer,  both  the  rage  of  depravity  and  the  triumph  of  grace : 
this  is  well  in  due  proportion,  according  to  the  analogy  of  faith :  but 
still  Jesus  himself  should  be  more  conspicuous  than  our  frames  and 
feelings,  doubts  and  fears,  struggles  and  victories.  We  may  get  to  study 
the  action  of  our  own  hearts  so  much  that  we  fall  into  despondency  and 
despair.  "  Looking  unto  Jesus  "  is  better  than  looking  unto  our  own 
progi'css :  self-examination  has  its  necessary  uses,  but  to  have  done  with 
self  and  hve  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  himself  is  the  best  course  for  a 
Christian. 

Then,  there  are  others  who  rightly  admire  the  precepts  of  the  gospel, 
and  are  never  so  happy  as  when  they  are  hearing  them  enforced,  as, 
indeed,  they  ought  to  be;  but  after  all  the  commands  of  our  Lord 
are  not  our  Lord  himself,  and  they  derive  their  value  to  us  and  their 
power  over  our  obedience  from  the  fact  that  they  are  his  words,  and  that 


688  METROPOLITAN  tABEBNAOLB  I»ULPIT. 

he  said,  "  If  ye  love  me,  keep  my  commandments."  We  know  the  truth 
of  his  declaration,  "  If  a  man  love  me  he  will  keep  my  sayings,"  but 
there  must  be  the  personal  love  to  begin  with.  Brethren,  all  the  benefits 
of  these  three  schools  will  be  ours  if  we  live  npon  Jesus  himself.  They 
gather  each  a  flower,  but  our  divine  "  plant  of  renown  "  has  aU  the 
beauty,  and  all  the  fiigrance,  of  all  that  they  can  gather ;  and  without 
the  thorns  which  are  so  apt  to  grow  on  their  peculiar  roses.  Jesus 
Christ  himself  is  to  us  precept,  for  he  is  the  way  :  he  is  to  us  doctrine, 
for  he  is  the  truth  :  he  is  to  us  experience,  for  he  is  the  life.  Let  us  make 
him  the  pole  star  of  our  religious  life  in  all  things.  Let  him  be  first, 
last,  and  midst ;  yea,  let  us  say,  "  He  is  all  my  salvation  and  all  my 
desire."  And  yet  do  not,  I  beseech  you,  disdain  the  doctrine,  lest  in 
marring  the  doctrine  you  should  be  guilty  of  insult  to  Jesus  himself. 
To  trifle  with  truth  is  to  despise  Jesus  as  our  Prophet.  Do  not  for  a 
moment  underrate  experience,  lest  in  neglecting  the  inner  self  you  also 
despise  your  Lord  himself  as  your  cleansing  Priest ;  and  never  for  a 
moment  forget  his  commandments  lest  if  ye  break  them  ye  transgress 
against  Jesus  himself  as  your  King.  All  things  which  touch  upon  his 
kingdom  are  to  be  treated  reverently  by  us  for  the  sake  of  himself:  his  book, 
his  day,  his  church,  his  ordinances,  must  all  be  precious  to  us,  because 
they  have  to  do  with  him ;  but  in  the  front  of  all  must  ever  stand  "  Jesus 
Christ  himself,"  the  personal,  living,  loving  Jesus ;  Christ  in  us  the  hope  of 
glory,  Christ  for  us  our  full  redemption,  Christ  with  us  our  guide  and  our 
solace,  and  Christ  above  us  pleading  and  preparing  our  place  in  heaven. 
Jesus  Christ  himself  is  our  captain,  our  armour,  our  strength,  and  our 
victory.  We  inscribe  his  name  upon  our  banner,  for  it  is  helPs  terror, 
heaven's  delight,  and  earth's  hope.  We  bear  this  upon  our  hearts  in  the 
heat  of  the  conflict,  for  this  is  our  breastplate  and  coat  of  mail. 

I  shall  not  endeavour  to  say  anything  this .  morning  which  uill  strike 
you  as  beautiful  in  language,  for  to  endeavour  to  decorate  the  altogether 
Lovely  One  would  be  blasphemy.  To  hang  flowers  upon  the  cross  is  ridi- 
culous, and  to  endeavour  to  adorn  him  whose  head  is  as  the  most 
fine  gold,  and  whose  person  is  as  bright  ivory  overlaid  with  sapphires, 
would  be  profane.  I  shall  but  tell  you  simple  things  in  simple  language: 
yet  are  these  the  most  precious  and  soul-satisfying  of  the  truths  of 
revelation. 

I.  With  Jesus  Christ  himself  we  begin  by  saying,  first,  that  Jesus  him- 
self is  THE  ESSENCE  OF  HIS  OWN  WORK,  and  therefore  hoiv  readily  we  ought 
to  trust  him.  Jesus  liimself  is  the  soul  of  his  own  salvation.  How 
does  the  apostle  describe  it?  "  He  loved  me,  and  gave  himself  for  me." 
He  gave  his  crown,  his  throne,  and  his  -joys  in  heaven  for  us,  but  that 
was  not  all — he  gave  himself.  He  gave  his  life  on  earth,  and  renounced 
all  the  comforts  of  existence,  and  bore  all  its  woes ;  he  gave  his  body,  he 
gave  his  agony,  he  gave  his  heart's  blood :  but  the  summary  of  it  is,  he 
gave  himself  for  me.  "  Christ  loved  the  church  and  gave  himself  for 
it."  "Who  his  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree." 
No  proxy  service  here !  No  sacrifice  which  runs  as  far  as  his  own  person 
and  there  stops !  There  was  no  limit  to  the  grief  of  Jesus  like  that  set 
upon  the  suffering  of  Job, — "  Only  on  himself  lay  not  thine  hand,"  or 
"Only  spare  his  life."  No,  every  reserve  was  taken  down,  for  he  gave 
himself.    "  He  saved  others ;  himself  he  could  not  save,"  because  he 


JESUS  CHRIST  HIMSELF,  689 

himself  was  the  very  essence  of  his  own  sacrifice  on  our  behalf.  It  is 
because  he  is  what  he  is  that  he  was  able  to  redeem  us :  the  dignity  of 
his  person  imparted  efficacy  to  his  atonement.  He  is  divine,  God  over 
all,  blessed  for  ever,  and  therefore  infinite  virtue  is  found  in  him ;  he  is 
human,  and  perfect  in  that  humanity,  and  therefore  capable  of  obedience 
and  suilering  in  man*s  place  and  stead.  He  is  able  to  save  us  because  he  is 
Immanuel— "  God  with  us."  If  it  were  conceivable  that  an  angel  could 
have  suffered  the  same  agonies,  and  have  performed  the  same  labours,  as 
©ur  Lord,  yet  it  is  not  conceivable  that  the  same  result  would  liave  fol- 
lowed. The  pre-eminence  of  his  person  imparted  weight  to  his  work. 
Always  think  then  when  you  view  the  atonement,  that  it  is  Jesus  him- 
self who  is  the  soul  of  it.  Indeed  the  efficacy  of  his  sacrifice  lies  there ; 
hence  the  apostle  in  the  Hebrews  speaks  of  him  as  having  "  by  himself 
purged  our  sins."  This  purging  was  wrought  by  his  sacrifice,  but  the  sacri- 
fice was  himself  Paul  says,  "  he  offered  up  himself"  He  stood  as  a  priest 
at  the  altar  offering  a  bloody  sacrifice,  but  the  offering  was  neither  bullock, 
nor  ram,  nor  turtle  dove;  it  washimself  "  Once  in  the  end  of  the  world  hath 
he  appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself"  The  sole  reason 
why  we  are  well-pleasing  with  God  is  because  of  him,  for  he  is  our  sweet 
Favour-offering ;  and  the  only  cause  for  the  putting  away  of  our  sin  is  found 
in  him  because  he  is  our  sin-oftoring.  The  cleansing  by  the  blood,  and 
the  washing  by  the  water,  are  the  result,  not  of  the  blood  and  the  water 
in  and  of  tlicmsclves  and  separate  from  him,  but  because  they  were  the 
essentials  of  himself  You  see  this,  I  am  j^ersuaded,  without  my  en- 
larging upon  it. 

Now,  because  of  this,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself  is  the  object  of  our 
faith.  Is  he  not  always  so  described  in  Scripture  ?  "  Look  unto  me, 
and  be  ye  saved,  all  ye  ends  of  the  earth," — not  "  look  to  my  cross,"  nor 
**  look  to  my  life,"  nor  "  to  my  death,"  much  less  "  to  ray  sacraments  or 
to  my  servants,"  but  ''  look  unto  nie."  From  his  own  lips  the  words 
sound  forth,  "  Come  tmto  me  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and 
I  will  give  you'rest."  In  fact,  it  is  the  Christian's  life  motto,  "  Looking 
unto  Jesus,  the  author  and  finisher  of  our  faith."  May  I  not  go  further 
and  say,  hotv  very  simple  arid  haw  very  easy  and  natural  ought  faith  to 
he  henceforth  ?  I  might  be  puzzled  with  various  theories  of  the  atone- 
ment, but  I  can  believe  in  Jesus  himself:  I  might  be  staggered  by  the 
divers  mysteries  which  concern  theology,  and  overpower  even  master- 
minds, but  I  can  confide  in  Jesus  himself  He  is  one  whom  it  is  difficult 
to  distrust :  his  goodness,  gentleness,  and  truth  command  our  confidence. 
We  can  and  do  trust  in  Jesus  himself  If  he  be  proposed  to  me  as  my 
Saviour,  and  if  faith  in  him  be  that  which  saves  me,  then  at  his  dear 
feet  I  cast  myself  unreseiTedly,  and  feel  myself  secure  while  he  looks 
down  on  me.  He  who  bled  that  sinners  might  be  sa^'ed  cannot  be 
doubted  any  more :  "  Lord,  I  believe ;  help  thou  mine  unbelief"  Now 
you  who  have  been  looking  to  your  faith,  I  want  you  to  look  to  Jesus 
himself  rather  than  at  your  poor  feeble  faith.  Now  you  who  have  been 
studying  the  results  of  faith  in  yourselves  and  are  dissatisfied,  I  beseech 
jou  turn  your  eyes  away  from  yourselves  and  look  to  Jesus  himself 
Now  you  who  cannot  understand  this  and  cannot  understand  that,  give 
up  wanting  to  understand  for  the  while,  and  come  and  look  at  Jesus 
Cnrist  himself,  "  that  the  God  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Father  of 


690  METROPOLITAN  TABEBNAOLB  PULPIT. 

glory,  may  give  unto  you  the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  revelation  m  the 
knowledge  of  him."  The  Lord  grant  us  grace  to  view  Jesus  Christ 
himself  in  the  matter  of  our  salvation  as  all  in  all,  so  that  we  may  have 
personal  deaUngs  with  him,  and  no  more  think  of  him  as  a  mere  idea,  or 
as  an  historical  personage,  but  as  a  personal  Saviour  standing  in  the 
midst  of  us,  and  bidding  us  enter  into  peace  through  him. 

II.     "Jesus  Christ  himself"  is  as  we  have  said  the  substance  of 
THE  GOSPEL,  and  therefore  how  closely  should  we  study  him.  While  he  was 
here  he  taught  his  disciples,  and  the  object  of  his  teaching  was  that  they 
might  knoiv  himself,  and  through  him  might  know  the  Father.    They 
did  not  learn  very  fast,  but  you  see  what  he  meant  them  to  learn  by  the 
observation  he  made  to  Philip,  "  Have  I  been  so  long  time  with  you, 
and  yet  hast  thou  not  known  me,  Philip  ?"     He  meant  them  to  know 
himself;  and  when  he  had  risen  from  the  dead  the  same  object  was  still 
before  him.    As  he  walked  with  the  two  disciples  to  Emmaus  they  had 
wide  choice  of  subjects  for  conversation,  but  he  chose  the  old  theme,  and 
"  beginning  at  Moses  and  all  the  prophets,  he  expounded  unto  them  in 
all  the  Scriptures  the  things  concerning  himself.'*    No  topic  was  one  half 
so  important  or  profitable.    No  mere  man  may  come  to  teach  himself, 
but  this  divine  One  can  have  nothing  better  to  reveal,  for  he  himself,  the 
incarnate  Grod,  is  the  chief  of  all  truth.     Hence  our  Lord  was  concerned 
to  be  known  to  his  people,  and  therefore  again  and  again  we  read  that 
"Jesus  showed  himself  unto  his  disciples."      Whatever  else  they  may  be 
ignorant  of,  it  is  essential  to  disciples  that  they  know  their  Lord.     His 
nature,  his  character,  his  mind,  his  spirit,  his  object,  his  power,  we 
must  know — ^in  a  word,  we  must  know  Jesus  himself. 

This  also,  beloved,  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,    "  He  shall  glorify 
me :  for  he  shall  receive  of  mine,  and  shall  shew  it  unto  you."     The 
Holy  Ghost  reveals  Christ  to  us  and  in  us.     Whatsoever  things  Christ 
hath  spoken  while  he  was  here,  the  Holy  Ghost  opens  to  the  mind  and  to 
the  understanding,  and  thus  by  speaking  of  Christ  within-  us  he  carries 
on  the  work  which  our  Lord  began  when  here  below.     The  Comforter  is 
the  instructor  and  Jesus  is  the  lesson.     I  dare  say  you  long  to  know  a 
thousand  things,  but  the  main  point  of  knowledge  to  be  desired  is  Jesus 
himself.    This  was  his  teaching,  and  this  is  the  Holy  Spirit's  teaching,  and 
this  is  the  end  and  object  of  the  Bible.    Moses,  Esaias,  and  all  the  prophets 
spake  of  him,  and  the  things  which  are  recorded  in  this  book  were  written 
that  ye  might  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  and  that  believing  ye  mfght 
have  Ufe  through  his  name.    Precious  is  this  book,  but  its  n\ain  prccious- 
ness  lies  in  its  revealing  Jesus  himself,  it  is  the  field  which  contains  the 
pearl  of  great  price,  the  casket  which  encloses  heaven's  brightest  jewel. 
We  have  missed  our  way  in  the  Bible  if  its  silken  clue  has  not  led  us  to 
the  central  chamber  where  we  see  Jesus  himself.    We  have  never  been 
truly  taught  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  we  have  missed  the  teaching  of 
the  life  of  Christ,  unless  we  have  come  to  abide  in  Jesus  himself.    To 
know  him  is  our  beginning  of  wisdom  and  our  crown  of  wisdom.    To  know 
him  is  our  first  lesson  on  the  stool  of  penitence  and  our  last  attainment 
as  we  entor  heaven.     Our  ambition  is  that  we  may  know  the  love  of  Christ 
which  passeth  knowledge.     Here  is  our  life  study,  and  we  have  good  asso- 
ciates in  it,  for  these  things  the  angels  desire  to  look  into.    May  the  Lord 
grant  that  the  eyes  of  your  vmderEtanding  may  be  enlightened,  that  we 


JESUS  CHRIST  HIMSELF.  691 

may  know  what  is  the  hope  of  his  calling,  and  what  the  riches  of  the  glory 
^f  his  inheritance  in  the  saints. 

Beloved,  because  Jesus  is  the  snm  of  the  gospel  he  must  he  our  con- 
.stunt  theme,  "  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory  save  in  the  cross  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ."  "  I  determined  not  to  know  anything  among  you 
:save  Jesus  Christ  and  him  crucified."  So  spake  men  of  old,  and  so  say 
we.  When  we  have  done  preaching  Christ  we  had  better  have  done 
preaching ;  when  you  have  done  teaching  in  your  classes  Jesus  Christ 
himself,  give  up  Sunday  school  work,  for  nothing  else  is  worthy  of  your 
pains.  Put  out  the  sun,  and  light  is  gone,  life  is  gone,  all  js  gone. 
When  Jesus  is  pushed  into  the  background  or  left  out  of  a  minister's 
teaching,  the  darkness  is  darkness  that  might  be  felt,  and  the  people 
escape  from  it  into  gospel  light  as  soon  as  they  can.  A  sermon  Tsithout 
Jesus  in  ic  is  savourless,  and  worthless  to  God's  tried  saints,  and  they  soon 
seek  other  food.  The  more  of  Christ  in  our  testimony  the  more  of  light 
and  life  and  power  to  save.  Some  preachers  are  guilty  of  the  most  weari- 
some tautology,  but  this  is  not  laid  to  their  charge  when  their  theme  is 
Jesus.  I  have  heard  hearers  declare  that  their  minister  appeared  to  have 
bought  a  barrel  organ  on  which  he  could  grind  five  or  six  tunes  and  no 
more,  and  these  he  ground  out  for  ever  and  ever,  amen.  They  have  been 
weary,  very  weary,  of  such  vain  repetitions ;  but  to  this  day  I  never  heard 
of  anybody  against  whom  the  complaint  was  urged  that  he  preached  Christ 
too  much,  too  often,  too  earnestly,  or  too  joyfully.  I  never  recollect  seeing 
a  single  Christian  man  coming  out  of  a  congregation  with  a  sorrowful  face 
saying,  "  He  extolled  the  Redeemer  too  highly :  he  grossly  exaggerated 
the  praises  of  our  Saviour."  I  do  not  remember  ever  meeting  with 
a  case  in  which  the  sick  upon  the  bed  of  languishing  have  complained 
that  thoughts  of  Jesus  were  burdensome  to  them.  I  never  ruc-Hect 
that  a  single  book  has  been  denounced  by  earnest  Christian  men 
because  it  spoke  too  highly  of  the  Lord,  and  made  him  too  promi- 
nent. No,  my  brethren,  he  who  is  the  study  of  the  saints  must  be 
the  daily  theme  of  ministers  if  they  would  feed  the  flock  of  God. 
No  theme  so  moves  the  heart,  so  arouses  the  conscience,  so  satisfies  the 
desires,  and  so  calms  the  fears.  God  forbid  we  should  ever  fail  to  preach 
Jesus  himself.  There  is  no  fear  of  exhausting  the  subject,  nor  of  our 
driving  away  our  hearers,  for  his  words  are  still  true,  '*  I,  if  I  be  lifted 
up,  will  draw  all  men  unto  me." 

III.  Jesus  Christ  himself  is  the  object  of  our  love,  and  hoio  dear 
he  should  le.  We  can  all  of  us  who  are  really  saved  declare  that  "  We 
love  him  because  he  first  loved  us."  We  have  an  intense  aiTection 
for  his  blessed  person  as  well  gratitude  for  his  salvation.  The  per- 
sonality of  Christ  is  a  fact  always  to  be  kept  prominently  in  our 
thoughts.  The  love  of  a  truth  is  all  very  well,  but  the  love  of  a 
person  has  far  more  power  in  it.  We  have  heai'd  of  men  dying  for 
an  idea,  but  it  is  infinitely  more  easy  to  awaken  enthusiasm  for  a 
person.  When  an  idea  becomes  embodied  in  a  man  it  lias  a  force 
which  in  its  abstract  form  it  never  wielded.  Jesus  Christ  is  loved 
by  us  as  the  embodiment  of  everything  that  is  lovely,  and  true, 
and  pure,  and  of  good  report.  He  himself  is  incarnate  perfection, 
inspired  by  love.  We  love  his  offices,  we  love  the  types  which  describe 
him,  we  love  the  ordinances  by  which  he  is  set  forth,  but  we  love 


^7 


692  METROPOLITAN  TABEENACLB  PULPIT. 

himself  best  of  all.  He  himself  is  our  beloved ;  our  heart  rests  only  in 
him. 

Because  we  love  Mm  we  hve  bis  people,  and  through  him  we  enter 
into  union  with  them.  Our  text  is  taken  from  a  Terse  which  says, 
"  Jesus  Christ  himself  being  the  chief  comer  stone."  He  is  the  binder 
at  the  comer,  joining  Jew  and  Gentile  in  one  temple.  In  Jesus  those 
ancient  differences  cease,  for  he  "  hath  made  both  one,  and  hath  broken 
down  the  middle  wall  of  partition  between  us;  to  make  in  himself  of  twain 
one  new  man,  so  making  peace."  We  are  at  one  with  every  man  who  is  at 
one  with  Christ.  Only  let  our  Lord  say,  **  I  love  that  man,"  and  we  love 
him  at  once ;  let  us  only  hope  that  our  friend  can  say, "  I  love  Jesus,"  and 
wc  hasten  to  respond, "  And  I  love  you  for  Jesus'  sake."  So  warm  is  the 
fire  of  our  love  to  Jesus  that  all  his  friends  may  sit  at  it,  and  welcome. 
Our  circle  of  affection  comprehends  all  who  in  any  shape  or  way  have 
tmly  to  do  with  Jesus  himself. 

Because  tve  love  himself  we  delight  to.  render  service  to  him.  What- 
ever service  we  do  for  his  church,  and  for  his  tmth,  we  do  for  his  sake, 
even  if  we  can  only  render  it  to  the  least  of  his  brethren  we  do  it  unto 
him.  The  woman  with  the  alabaster  box  of  precious  ointment  is  a 
type  which  we  greatly  prize,  for  she  would  only  break  the  precious 
box/(?r  A«m,  and  every  drop  of  its  delicious  contents  must  be  poured 
only  upon  his  head.  The  bystanders  complained  of  waste,  but  there 
can  be  no  waste  in  anything  that  is  done  for  Jesus.  If  the  whole 
world,  and  the  heavens,  and  the  heaven  of  heavens  were  all  one  great 
alabaster  box,  and  if  all  the  sweets  which  can  be  conceived  were  mved 
within  it,  we  would  wish  to  see  the  whole  broken,  that  every  drop  of  the 
sweetness  might  be  poured  out  for  Jesus  Christ  himselfl 

"  Jesus  is  worthy  to  receive 
Honour  and  power  divine  ; 
And  bleseinnrs  more  than  we  can  give, 
Be  Lord,  for  ever  thine.'* 

Oh  our  Beloved,  if  we  can  do  anything  for  thee,  we  are  charmed  at  pos- 
sessing such  a  privilege.    If  we  are  aSowed  to  wash  thy  disciples'  feet, 
or  to  care  for  the  poorest  of  thy  poer,  or  the  least  lamb  of  thy  flock,  we 
accept  the  ofi&ce  as  a  high  honour,  for  we  love  thee  with  aH  our  hearts. 
Our  love  to  Jesus  should  be  as  much  a  matter  of  fact  as  our  affection 
for  our  husband,  wife,  or  child,  and  it  should  be  fer  more  influential 
upon  our  Uvcs.    Love  to  our  Lord  is,  I  trust,  moving  all  of  you  to  per- 
sonal service.    You  might  have  paid  a  subsciiption  and  allowed  others 
to  work,  but  you  cannot  do  it  when  you  see  that  Jesas  gave  himself  for 
you.    Jesus  himself  demands  that  I  myself  should  be  consecrated  to  his 
praise.     Personal  service  is  due  to  a  personal  Christ,  who  personally 
loved  and  personally  died  for  us.    When  nothing  moves  us  to  zeal,  when 
the  jaded  spirit  cannot  follow  up  its  industries,  let  but  Jesus  himself 
appear,  and  straightway  our  passions  are  all  in  a  blaze,  and  the  fiery 
spirit  compels  the  flesh  to  warm  to  its  work  again.    We  even  gloiy  in 
infirmity  when  Jesus  is  near,  and  venture  upon  works  which  eke  had 
seemed  impossible.  We  can  do  anything  and  everything  for  "  Jesus  Christ 
himself." 
IV.    Fourthly,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself  is  the  soukob  of  AMi 


JESUS   CIIKIST   IILMSELF.  C/ri) 

OUR  JOY.  How  ought  we  to  rejoice  when  we  liave  such  a  sprinyinfi  well  of 
hUssedness,  In  times  of  sorrow  our  solace  is  Jesus  himself,  it  is  no 
gmall  ground  of  comfort  to  a  mourner  that  Jesus  himself  is  a  man.  How 
cheering  to  read,  "  Forasmuch  as  the  children  are  partakers  of  flesh  and 
blood,  he  also  himself  took  part  of  the  same."  The  humanity  of  Christ 
has  a  charm  about  it  which  the  quietly  sorrowful  alone  discover.  I  have 
known  what  it  is  to  gaze  upon  the  incarnation  with  calm  repose  of  heart 
when  ray  brain  ha.  seemed  to  be  on  fire  with  anguish.  If  Jesus  be 
indeed  my  brother  i  lan,  there  is  hope  at  all  times.  This  is  better  balm 
than  that  of  Gilead,  "  Himself  took  our  infirmities,  and  bare  our  sick- 
nesses"; "For  in  that  he  himself  hath  suffered,  being  tempted,  he  is 
able  also  to  succour  them  that  are  tempted."  Pain,  hunger,  thirst, 
desertion,  scorn,  and  agony  Jesus  himself  has  borne.  Tempted  in  all 
points  like  as  we  are,  though  without  sin,  he  has  become  the  chief 
Comforter  of  the  sorrowful.  Many  and  many  a  sufferer  in  the  lone 
watches  of  the  night  has  thought  of  him  and  felt  his  strength  renewed. 
Our  patience  revives  when  we  see  the  Man  of  Sorrows  silent  before  his 
accusers.  Who  can  refuse  to  drink  of  his  cup  and  to  be  baptized  with 
his  baptism  ? 

"  His  way  was  much  rougher  and  darker  than  mine  : 
Did  Christ,  my  Lord,  suffer,  and  shall  I  repine  ?" 

The  darkness  of  Gethsemane  has  been  light  to  many  an  agonized  soul, 
and  the  passion  even  unto  death  has  made  the  dying  sing  for  joy  of  heart. 
Jesus  himself  is  the  solace  of  our  soul  in  sorrow,  and  when  we  emerge 
from  the  storm  of  distress  into  the  deep  calm  of  peace,  as  we  often  do, 
blessed  be  his  name,  he  is  our  peace.  Peace  he  left  us  by  legacy,  and 
peace  he  creates  in  person.  We  never  know  deep  peace  of  heart  until 
we  know  the  Lord  Jesus  himself  You  remember  that  sweet  word  when 
the  disciples  were  met  together,  the  doors  being  shut  for  fear  of  the 
Jews,  "Jesus  himselfstood  in  the  midst  of  them,  and  said.  Peace  be  unto 
you."  Jesus  himself  you  see  brought  the  message  ;  for  nothing  but  his 
presence  could  make  it  effectual.  AVhen  we  see  him  our  spirit  smells  a 
sweet  savour  of  rest.  Where  can  an  aching  head  find  such  another 
pillow  as  his  bosom  ? 

On  high  days  and  holidays  our  spirits  soar  beyond  rest :  we  ascend 
into  the  heaven  of  joy  and  exultation ;  but  then  it  is  our  Lord's  joy 
^vhich  is  in  us  making  our  joy  full.  "Then  were  the  disciples  glad  when 
they  saw  the  Lord,"  and  then  are  we  glad  also.  By  faith  we  see  Jesus 
himself  enthroned,  and  this  has  filled  us  with  delight,  for  his  glorification 
is  our  satisfaction.  "  Him  also  hath  God  highly  exalted,  and  given  him 
a  name  which  is  above  every  name."  I  care  not  what  becomes  of  mo 
so  long  as  he  is  glorified.  The  soldier  dies  happy  when  the  shout  of  vic- 
tory sSutes  his  ear,  and  his  faihng  sight  beholds  his  prince  triumphant. 
What  a  joy  to  think  that  Jesus  is  risen — lisen  to  die  no  more  :  the  joy 
of  resurrection  is  superlative.  What  bliss  to  know  that  he  has  ascended, 
leading  captivity  captive,  that  he  sitteth  now  enthroned  in  happy  state, 
and  that  he  will  come  in  all  the  gloiy  of  the  Father  to  break  his  enemies 
in  pieces  as  with  a  rod  of  iron.  Here  lies  the  gi-andcst  joy  of  his  expectant 
church.  She  has  in  reserve  a  mighty  thunder  of  hosannahs  for  that 
auspicious  day. 


694  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

If  there  is  any  joy  to  be  had,  0  Christian,  that  is  both  safe  and  swoefc, 
a  joy  of  which  none  can  know  too  much,  it  is  to  be  found  in  him  whom 
as  yet  you  see  not,  but  in  whom  believing  you  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable 
and  full  of  glory. 

"We  must  tear  ourselves  away  from  that  thouffht  to  turn  to  another,  but 
assuredly  it  is  rich  in  happy  memories  and  in  blessed  expectations.- 

V.    Fifthly,  Jesus  Christ  himself  is  the  model  of  our  life,  and 
therefore  how  blessed  it  is  to  he  like  him.    As  to  our  rule  for  life,  we  are 
like  the  disciples  on  the  mount  of  transfiguration  when  Moses  and  Eliaa 
had  vanished,  for  we  see  "  no  man  save  Jesus  only."   Every  virtue  found 
in  other  men  we  find  in  him  in  greater  perfection ;  we  admire  the  grace 
of  God  in  them,  but  Jesus  himself  is  our  pattern.     It  was  once  said  of 
Henry  VIII.,  by  a  severe  critic,  that  if  the  characteristics  of  all  the 
tyrants  that  had  ever  lived  had  been  forgotten,  they  might  all  have 
been  seen  to  the  life  in  that  one  king :  we  may  more  truly  say  of  Jesus, 
if  all  graces,  and  virtues,  and  sweetnesses  which  have  ever  been  seen  in 
good  men  could  all  be  forgotten,  you  might  find  them  all  in  him :  for  in 
him  dwells  all  that  is  good  and  great.    We,  therefore,  desire  to  copy  his 
character  and  put  our  feet  into  his  footprints.     Be  it  ours  to  follow  the 
Lamb  whithersoever  he  goeth.    What  saithour  Lord  himself?    "  Follow 
me,"  and  again,  "  Take  my  yoke  upon  you  and  learn  of  me,  for  I  am  meek 
and  lowly  in  heart,  and  ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls."    Not  Christ's 
apostle,  but  Christ  himself,  is  our  guide ;  we  may  not  take  a  secondary 
model,  but  must  imitate  Jesus  himself.     By  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  and  his  gracious  operations  we  are  developing  into  the  image  of  Christ 
till  Christ  be  formed  in  us ;  and  we  thus  develop  because  the  heavenly  life 
in  us  is  his  own  life.    "  I  in  them,"  said  he,  and  again,  "  I  am  the  life." 
For  "  we  are  dead,  and  our  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God."     "  He  that 
hath  the  Son  hath  life,  and  he  that  hath  not  the  Son  hath  not  life."     It 
is  not  passing  through  baptism,  nor  bearing  the  name  of  Christ,  it  is 
having  Jesus  himself  in  our  hearts  that  makes  us  Christians,  and  in 
proportion  as  he  is  formed  in  us  and  the  new  life  grows  we  become  more 
and  more  like  him.    And  this  is  our  prospect  for  eternity,  that  we  are 
to  be  with  him  and  like  him,  for  "  when  he  shall  appear,  we  shall  be  b'ke 
him,  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is."    Think  of  him,  you  that  mourn  your 
imperfectness  to-day — think  of  Jesus  Christ  himself,  and  then  be  assured 
that  you  are  to  be  like  him.    What  a  picture !    Come,  artist,  bring  your 
best  skill  here.    What  can  you  do  ?    All  pencils  fail  to  depict  him.    It 
needs  a  poet's  eye  as  well  as  an  artist's  hand  to  picture  the  Lovely  One. 
But  what  can  the  poet  do  ?    Ah,  you  also  foil ;  you  cannot  sing  him  any 
more  than  your  friend  can  paint  him.     Fruitful  conception  and  soaring 
imagination  may  come  to  your  aid,  but  they  cannot  prevent  your  feilure. 
He  is  too  beautuul  to  be  described — ^he  must  be  seen.   Yet  here  comes  tlic 
marvel — "  We  shall  be  like  him  " — ^like  Jesus  Christ  himself.     0  saint, 
when  thou  art  risen  from  the  dead  how  lovely  thou  wilt  be  !    Wilt  thou 
know  thyself  ?    To-day  thou  art  wrinkled  with  old  age,  scarred  with  the 
marks  of  disease   and  pain,  and  perhaps  deform^  by  accident,  or 
blanched  with  consumption,  but  none  of  these  shall  blemish  thee  then. 
Thou  wilt  be  without  spot  or  wrinkle,  feultless  before  the  throne. 

"  O  glorious  hoar!  O  blest  abode! 
I  shall  be  near  and  like  my  God.*] 


JESUS  CHRIST  HIMSELF.  695 

And  not  in  bodily  form  alone  shall  we  be  like  unto  hira  whose  eyes  are 
as  the  eyes  of  doves,  and  whose  cheeks  are  as  beds  of  spices  ;  but  in 
spirit  and  in  soul  shall  we  be  perfectly  conformed  to  the  Well-beloved. 
ne  shall  be  holy  even  as  he  is  holy,  and  happy  as  he  is  happy.  We  shall 
ent-er  into  the  joy  of  our  Lord — the  joy  of  Jesus  himself.  1  say  not  that 
"we  can  be  divine — that  cannot  be ;  but  still,  brothers  to  him  that  is  the  Son 
of  God,  we  shall  be  very  near  the  throne.  0  what  rapture  to  know  that 
iny  next  of  kin  Uveth,  and  when  he  shall  stand  in  the  latter  day  upon 
the  earth  I  shall  not  only  see  God  in  this  my  flesh,  but  I  shall  be  like 
him,  for  I  shall  see  him  as  he  is.  Christ  himself  then  becomes  to  us 
unspeakably  precious,  as  the  model  of  our  present  life  and  the  image  of 
thq  perfection  towards  which  the  Holy  Ghost  is  working  us. 

VI.    Lastly,  he  is  the  Lord  of  our  soul.    Hotv  stveei  it  will  he  to  he 
with  him.    We  find  to-day  that  his  beloved  company  makes  everything 
move  pleasantly  whether  we  run  in  the  way  of  his  commands,  or  traverse 
the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death.     Saints  have  lain  in  dungeons,  and 
yet  they  have  walked  at  liberty  when  he  has  been  there  ;  they  have 
been  stretched  on  the  rack,  and  even  called  it  a  bed  of  roses  when  he  has 
stood  by.     One  lay  on  a  gridiron,  with  the  hot  fires  beneath  him ;  but 
amidst  the  fiames  he  challenged  his  tormentors  to  do  their  worst,  and 
laughed  them  to  scorn,  for  his  Lord  was  there.    Martyrs  have  beev 
seen  to  claj)  their  hands  when  every  finger  burned  like  a  lighted  candle, 
and  they  have  been  heard  to  cry,  "  Christ  is  all,"  *' Christ  is  all."    AVhen 
the  Fourth,  like  unto  the  Son  of  God,  walks  in  the  furnace,  all  the  fire 
can  do   is  but  to  snap  their  bonds  and  set  the  suflerers  free.     Oh, 
brethren,  I  am  sure  your  only  happiness  that  has  been  worth  the  having 
has  been  found  in  knowing  that  he  loved  you  and  was  near  you.     If 
you  have  ever  rejoiced  in  the  abundance  of  your  corn  and  wine  and  oil, 
it  has  been  a  sorry  joy  ;  it  has  soon  palled  upon  your  taste,  it  never 
touched  the  great  deeps  of  your  spirit ;  and  anon  it  has  gone  and  left  you 
sore  wearied  in  heart.     If  you  have  rejoiced  in  your  children,  and  your 
kinsfolk,  and  your  bodily  Health,  how  readily  has  God  sent  a  blight 
upon  them  all.     But  when  you  have  rejoiced  in  Jesus  you  have  heard 
a  voice  bidding  you  proceed  to  further  delights.     That  voice  has  cried, 
"  Drink,  0  friends,  yea,  drink  abundantly,  0  beloved  ;"  for  to  be  ine- 
briated with  such  joy  as  this  is  to  come  to  the  best  condition  of  mind, 
and  to  fix  the  soul  where  it  should  be.    We  are  never  right  till  we  come 
out  of  ourselves  and  into  Jesus  ;  but  when  the  ecstatic  state  comes,  and  we 
stand  right  out  of  self,  and  stand  in  him,  so  that  whether  in  the  body  or 
out  of  the  body  we  can  scarcely  tell,  God  knoweth ;  then  are  we  getting 
back  to  where  God  meant  man  to  have  been  when  he  walked  with  him  in 
Eden,  getting  near  to  where  God  means  we  shall  be  when  we  shall  see 
him  face  to  face.     Brethren,  what  must  the  unveiled  vision  be  !     If  the 
sight  of  him  here  be  so  sweet,  what  must  it  be  to  see  him  hereafter  ! 
It  inay  be  we  shall  not  live  till  he  cometh,  for  the  Master  may  tarry ;  but 
if  he  doth  not  come,  and  we  therefore  are  called  to  pass  through  the 
gate  of  death,  we  need  not  fear.     I  should  not  wonder  if  when  we  pass 
under  the   veil  and  come  out  in  the  disembodied  state,  one  of  our 
astonishments  will  be  to  find  Jesus  himself  there  waiting  to  receive  us. 
The  soul  hoped  that  a  convoy  of  ministering  angels  would  be  hear  the  bed 
and  would  escort  it  across  the  stream  and  up  the  mountains  to  the  Celestial 


606  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLK  PULPIT. 

City  ;  bufc  no  :  instead  thereof  the  spirit  will  be  saluted  by  the  Lord  him- 
self. Will  it  be  amazed  and  cry  :  '*  It  is  he,  e*en  he,  my  best  Beloved, 
Jesus  himself ;  he  has  come  to  meet  me.  Heaven  might  have  been  too 
great  a  surprise  ;  even  my  disembodied  spirit  might  have  swooned  away, 
but  it  is  he,  the  man  Christ  Jesus  whom  I  trusted  down  below,  and  who 
was  the  dear  companion  of  my  dying  hours,  I  have  changed  my  place 
and  state,  but  I  have  not  changed  my  Friend  nor  changed  my  joy,  for 
here  he  is !"  What  a  glance  of  love  will  that  be  which  he  will  give  to 
us  and  which  we  shall  return  to  him.  Shall  we  ever  take  our  eyes  away 
from  him  ?  Shall  we  ever  wish  to  do  so  ?  Will  not  the  poet's  words 
be  true, 

**  Millions  of  years  my  wondering  eyos^ 
Shall  o'er  thy  beauties  rove  ; 
And  endless  ages  1*11  adore 
The  glories  of  thy  love.** 

Within  a  week  it  may  be  our  meeting  with  Jesus  himself  may  take 
place  ;  perhaps  within  an  hour.  A  poor  girl  lying  in  the  hospital  wag 
told  by  the  doctor  or  the  nurse  that  she  could  only  live  another  hour  ; 
she  waited  patiently,  and  when  there  remained  only  one  quarter  of  an 
hour  more,  she  exclaimed :    "  One  more  quarter   of  an  hour,  and 

then "  she  could  not  say  what,  neither  can  I ;  only  Jesus  himself 

hath  said,  '*  Father,  I  will  that  they  also,  whom  thou  hast  given  me, 
be  with  me  where  I  am ;  that  they  may  behold  my  glory."  And  as  he 
has  prayed,  so  shall  it  be,  and  so  let  it  be.    Amen  and  Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Song  of  Solomon 

iv.  16;  V.J  vi.  1,  2. 


Hymns  from  "  Our  Own  Hymn  Book  " — 422,  793,  872, 


Now  ready.    Price  One  Penny  each, 

JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S  SHEET  ALMANACK  for  1878, 

Suitable  for  the  Cottages  of  the  Poor,  the  Workshop  of  Artizans, 

and  Kitchens  everywhere. 

SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATED  ALMANACK  for  1878, 

CONTAtKINO 

Articles  hy  the  Editor  and  other  Writers,  Texts  of  Scripture  selected  for 
Meditation  for  every  Day  in  the  Year,  Metropolitan  Tabernacle 

Directory,  &c. 

Passmobb  a  Alabastib,  4,  Paternoster  Baildings ;  and  aU  Booksellort, 


:k 


|ileti(opIito  ifakrniide  pulpit. 


A  GOSPEL  SERMON  TO   OUTSIDERS, 


t 


Dei-ivetied  on  Lord's-day  Evening,  August  19th,  1877,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


Preached  on  a  night  ichcn  the  Tabernacle  was  free  to  all  comers^  the 
regular  congregation  having  vacated  their  seats. 


**  Be  of  good  comfort,  rise ;  he  calleth  thee." — Mark  x.  49. 

Thkse  open  services,  as  most  of  you  will  judge,  are  intended  to  be 
purely  evangelistic.  No  doubt  a  large  number  of  believers  are  here, 
many  of  them  well-established  in  the  faith,  who  would  like  to  hear  a 
doctrine  argued,  a  type  int'irpretcd,  or  an  ajjocalyptic  symbol  unfolded, 
but  really!  cannot  attend  to  you  this  evening.  I  feel  something  liko 
Luther  when  preaching  to  a  mixed  assembly.  He  said,  as  nearly  as 
I  can  remember,  words  to  this  efi'ect,  "  I  perceive  in  the  church 
Dr.  Justus  Jonas  and  ^Telancthon,  and  other  learned  doctors.  Now, 
if  I  preach  to  their  edification  what  is  to  become  of  the  rest?  There- 
fore, by  their  leaye,  I  shall  forget  that  Dr.  Jonas  is  here  at  all,  and 
I)reach  to  the  multitude."  So  must  I  do  at  this  good  hour,  asking 
those  of  you  who  are  advanced  in  the  divine  life  to  unit€  your  prayers 
V{  ith  mine,  which  will  continually  ascend,  that  the  word  of  the  gospel 
may  be  l)lcssed  to  the  unconverted. 

Dear  friends,  tliere  are  so  many  of  you  that  have  been  for  years 
listening  to  the  proclamation  of  the  gospel,  borderers,  almost  in 
Eomianners  land,  but  not  quite — that  1  feel  most  earnest  that  this 
night  should  be  the  time  of  your  decision  for  the  Saviour — that  you 
should  not  remain  any  longer  hearers  only,  but  should  become  believers 
forthwith,  and  afterwards  doers  of  the  word.  There  are  gentlemen  in 
England  who  can  afford  to  drive  a  coach  and  four  fi'om  town  to  town 
and  carry  nobody,  performing  their  journeys  for  their  own  amusement ; 
but  I  am  not  able  or  willing  to  do  anything  of  that  kind.  Unless  I  oan 
have  my  coach  loaded  with  passengers  to  heaven  I  would  sooner  it  was 
No.  1,889. 


698  METROPOLITAN  TABEENACLB  PULPIT. 

never  started,  and  had  rather  my  team  stopped  in  the  stable.  We 
must  carry  some  souls  to  heaven,  for  our  call  is  from  above,  and  oar 
time  is  too  precious  to  throw  away  on  mere  pretence  of  doing  good.  AVe 
cannot  play  at  preaching  :  we  preach  for  eternity.  We  cannot  feel  satis- 
fied merely  to  deliver  sermons  to  senseless  throngs,  or  to  the  most 
attentive  crowds.  Whatever  smiles  may  greet  ns  as  we  start,  and 
whatever  salutation  may  welcome  us  at  our  close,  we  are  not  content 
unless  Jesus  works  salvation  by  us.  Our  desire  is  that  grace  should  be 
iliagnified,  and  that  sinners  should  be  saved.  They  used  to  jeer  at  the 
Tabernacle  in  Moorfields,  and  the  one  in  Tottenham  Court  Road,  and 
call  them  Mr.  Whitfield's  soul  traps.  A  very  excellent  name  for  a  place 
of  worship  ;  such  may  this  Tabernacle  ever  be !  It  ought  to  be  a  soul 
trap,  and  we  shall  be  disappointed,  indeed,  if  there  are  not  some  souls 
taken  in  the  trap  to-night.  If  God  does  not  bless  the  word  and  make 
it  so  potent  that  some  of  you  shall  really  close  in  with  the  gospel  pro- 
clamation, and  enter  into  eternal  life,  I  shall  be  heavy  of  heart. 

Before  I  attempt  to  deal  with  my  text,  let  me  describe  to  you  the  plan 
of  salvation.  You  know  it,  the  most  of  you.  Oh  that  we  could  get  at 
the  thousands  of  London  that  do  not  know  it,  the  multitudes  that  never 
enter  a  house  of  prayer  or  yield  attention  to  the  gospel  message.  Our 
heart  yearns  over  them  :  but  what  more  can  we  do  for  them  ?  They 
are  perishing  in  wilful  ignorance.  Thanks  be  to  OtoA  that  so  many  are 
here  to-night ;  I  will  seize  the  opportunity  to  declare  the  plan  of  grace. 
Though  so  many  of  you  know  it,  let  us  tell  it  to  you  again.  By  sin, 
by  unrighteousness,  by  violation  of  6od*s  law,  we  have  broken  our 
peace  with  God.  We  are  lost,  for  he  must  punish  sin.  It  is  not 
possible  that  he  should  be  the  righteous  governor  of  the  universe 
and  allow  sin  to  go  unpunished.  To  punish  sin  is  no  arbitrary 
puq^ose  of  an  angry  God.  It  is  inevitable  in  the  universe  that 
where  there  is  evil  there  should  be  suffering.  If  not  in  this  life 
yet  in  another  life,  which  will  shortly  succeed  that  which  now  is, 
every  transgression  must  receive  its  meet  recompense  of  reward.  The 
question  is,  how  can  we  be  forgiven  ?  How,  consistently  with  divine 
justice,  can  our  iniquities  be  blotted  out?  This  is  not  an  abstruse 
problem  left  for  us  to  work  out ;  God*s  way  of  peace  is  made  clear  by 
revelation.  God,  in  his  infallible  word,  has  told  us  the  means  and 
appliances  by  which  guilty  sinners  can  be  made  righteous  before  him ; 
and,  instead  of  being  driven  from  his  presence  at  the  last,  may  be 
accepted  and  dwell  at  his  right  hand.  He  tells  us  that,  inasmuch  as 
the  first  sin  that  ruined  us  was  not  ours,  but  Adam's,  and  by  the  trans- 
gression of  one  man  we  all  fell,  so  it  became  possible  for  him,  in  con- 
sistency with  jnstice,  to  ordain  that  another  man  should  be  forthcoming 
in  whom  we  may  rise,  and  be  restored.  That  other  man  has  come — "  the 
second  Adam,  the  Lord  from  heaven."  But  the  task  of  lifting  up  was 
much  harder  than  that  of  casting  down.  A  mere  man  could  ruin  us, 
but  a  mere  man  could  not  redeem  and  rescue  us.  Therefore,  God 
himself,  the  ever  blessed,  clothed  himself  with  the  nature  of  man, 
was  bom  of  a  woman,  lay  in  Bethlehem's  manger,  lived  here  on 
earth  a  life  of  humiliation  and  self-denial,  and  at  the  last  took  upon 
himself  the  sins  of  men  in  one  vast  load.  Even  as  the  fabled  Atlas  was 
said  to  carry  the  world  upon  his  shoulders,  so  he  took  sin  and  guilt  upon 


A  GOSPEL  SERMON  TO  OUTSIDERS.  699 

him  and  bore  it  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree.  On  the  cross  Jesns  hung 
as  the  substitute  for  all  of  our  race  that  ever  will  beliere  on  him,  and  there 
and  then  he  put  away  by  his  suffering  all  the  transgression  and  iniquity 
of  believing  men,  so  that  now  we  can  preach  to  mankind  and  say,  "He 
that  believeth  in  him  is  not  condemned.  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  of 
God  hath  everlasting  life."  When  you  go  to  a  foreign  city  for  the  first 
time  and  stay  at  an  inn,  it  may  be  that  you  miss  your  way  when  you  go 
out,  and  are  not  able  to  get  back  again  as  easily  as  you  wish ;  it  is 
generally  expedient,  therefore,  for  travellers  to  learn  the  main  streets 
of  every  town  which  they  visit.  In  Rome  we  come  to  know  which  way 
the  Corso  runs,  and  when  we  get  an  idea  of  the  run  of  that  main 
thoroughfare  we  by-and-by  are  able  to  pick  our  way  through  the  city. 
Now,  the  main  street  of  the  gospel  is  suhstilution,  "  He  made  him  to  be 
sin  for  us  who  knew  no  sin,  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness 
of  God  in  him.'*  The  main  street  of  the  gospel  runs  crosswise ;  follow 
it,  and  you  will  know  the  ins  and  outs  of  the  other  great  streets  before 
long.  This  is  the  High  Street  of  the  City  of  Grace — "  Christ  hath 
redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being  made  a  curse  for  us." 
Christ  stood  in  our  stead,  and  suffered  that  we  might  not  suffer.  He 
"  died,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  to  bring  us  to  God."  Whosoever 
believes  in  Christ  is  saved  from  the  damning  power  of  sin  and  delivered 
from  the  wrath  to  come.  Take  this  fact  in  all  its  breadth  and  length, 
and  never  doubt  it,  and  you  have  the  key  of  the  gospel.  Who- 
soever, I  say,  trusts  his  soul  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  relying  on. 
that  sacrifice  which  he  offered,  and  that  death  which  he  endured,  is 
saved.  Let  him  not  doubt  it.  He  has  God^s  word  for  it;  let 
him  believe  it  and  rejoice  in  it.  **  Whosoever  believeth  in  him  is  not 
condemned,*'  for,  "  like  as  Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  in  the  wilder- 
ness, even  so  has  the  Son  of  man  been  lifted  up,  that  whosoever  be- 
lieveth in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life.**  Simple, 
child-like  reliance  upon  the  Lord  Jesus  gives  immediate  and  complete 
salvation  to  the  trustful  soul. 

Well  that  is  the  main  street  of  the  city.  Now  how  to  get  into  it  is 
the  question  ;  and  I  earnestly  desire,  and  devoutly  hope,  to  bo  the  means, 
if  God  will  help  me,  of  leading  some  thereto.  May  the  Holy  Ghost 
now  bear  witness  with  the  truth,  and  make  it  the  power  of  God  unto 
salvation.     Our  text  says,  **  Be  of  good  comfort,  rise ;  he  calleth  thee.** 

Our  first  point  is  that  some  who  are  seeking  Christ  greathj  tvant 
comforting.  Secondly,  their  verg  best  comfort  lies  in  the  fact  that  Jesus 
calls  tJiem,  But,  thirdly,  if  theg  take  the  comfort  of  that  call,  it  urges 
them  to  immediate  action — *'  Arise."  "  Be  of  good  comfort,  rise  ;  he 
calleth  thee.*' 

I.  First,  then,  many  persons  who  are  really  bbekinq  the 
Saviour  greatly  want  co3ifortino. 

I  know  there  are  many  such  here  to-night.  You  long  after  everlast- 
ing life.  God  has  wrought  in  you  a  desire  to  be  reconciled  to  himself ; 
but  you  need  encouraging,  for  you  labour  under  a  sort  ofundefimd  fear 
(hat  these  good  things  are  not  for  you.  Partly  your  conscience,  partly 
your  unbelief,  and  partly  Satan — these  three  have  joined  together  to 
throw  a  mist  over  you,  and  you  really  think  that  you  cannot  be  forgiven. 
You  would  not  like  to  put  it  into  exactly  those  words,  but  such  is  the 


Z'^JU'X    \ 


700  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

tenor  of  your  thoughts.  There  is  a  hazy  idea  about  you  that  there  are 
many  very  good  saintly  people  who  will  be  saved,  and,  indeed,  that  thei*e 
are  some  great  transgressors  who  will  be  saved ;  but  you  do  not  think  tliat 
you  can  be.  Oh  that  I  could  destroy  that  unbelieving  thought !  There 
is  salvation,  there  is  mercy,  there  is  forgiveness,  ana  it  is  free  to  eveiy 
soul  that  will  come  and  take  it.  It  is  as  free  as  the  air  you  breathe,  or  as 
the  water  leaping  from  the  street  fountain  yonder.  *'  Whosoever  will, 
let  him  come  and  take  of  the  water  of  life  freely."  You  are  mistaken 
in  those  gloomy  reflections.  You  write  bitter  things  against  yourself,  but 
God  has  not  written  them.  What  if  you  should  take  heart  and  grt  a 
hope,  "Perhaps  I  may  to-night  find  eternal  life.  Perhaps  I  may 
to-night  go  out  of  this  house  relieved  of  the  burden  of  my  sin."  It 
were  a  good  beginning  if  thou  hadst  such  a  hope,  but  thou  mayest 
with  confidence  go  a  great  deal  further. 

It  may  be  that  you  are  cast  down  because  you  think  that  you  have 
been  seeJcing  In  vam.  You  began  to  pray  a  few  months  ago,  younjj 
man,  and  I  am  glad  to  hear  of  it ;  but  you  have  not  yet  obtained 
peace.  Do  not  give  up  praying.  I  know  you  are  discouraged,  but  do 
not  cease  seeking.  I  myself  was  for  many  months  an  earnest  seeker 
after  God  by  the  way  of  prayer.  I  thought  that  by  importunate 
prayer  I  should  find  pardon.  I  did  not  understand  that  he  had  said, 
**  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  So  I  set 
to  work  praying.  Nevertheless,  I  am  thankful  that  I  did  not  cease 
from  prayer,  though  it  often  seemed  as  if  I  wasted  my  words  and 
spent  my  tears  for  nought.  Be  not  discouraged.  This  blind  man  was 
not  heard  at  first,  though  he  cried  earnestly.  He  had  to  cry  for  sight 
again  and  again,  increasing  in  vehemence  each  time.  Do  not  be  driven 
to  despair.  There  may  be  delays,  but  there  shall  never  be  denials  to 
those  who  cry  in  earnest.  Be  of  good  comfort.  Press  on,  dear  heart, 
press  on,  and  thou  shalt  find  peace  and  comfort  yet. 

Perhaps,  too,  you  are  sad  because  there  are  many  round  about  you  tclio 
discouraae  you.  They  tell  you  there  is  nothing  in  religion.  How  should 
they  know  ?  Theirs  is  a  strange  infatuation.  There  are  a  great  many 
individuals  in  the  world  who  are  considered  to  be  honest  in  busi- 
ness :  you  would  take  their  note  of  hand,  you  would  trust  their  woni 
about  any  goods  they  were  selling,  and  yet  when  these  good  folks  begin 
to  say  that  they  are  conscious  of  a  new  life  within  them — that  they  have 
found  out  that  God  is  real  and  spiritual,  and  that  they  have  received 
a  Spirit  which  dwells  within  them,  or  that  they  commune  with  God, 
straightway  a  number  of  people  say  that  it  is  not  true — in  effect  calling 
them  liars.  And  why  not  true  ?  On  what  ground  are  they  to  be  dis- 
credited ?  Simply  because  the  aforesaid  people  who  deny  it  say  that 
they  never  saw  such  a  thing  themselves  and  never  felt  such  a  thing 
themselves.  But  if  there  were  a  world  full  of  blind  people,  and  among 
them  a  few  persons  blessed  with  sight,  whose  eyes  had  been  opened,  if  these 
began  to  talk  of  sunlight  and  colour,  all  the  blind  men  might  say,  "  It 
is  not  true."  Why  ?  **  Because  toe  never  saw  the  sunlight  or  the 
colour."  Does  that  prove  that  it  is  not  true?  Though  you  do  not 
possess  the  faculties  of  vision,  others  do.  If  those  men  are  honest 
in  other  things  they  have  as  much  right  to  be  believed  in  this  thing 
as  in  the  rest.    We  solemnly  assert  that  there  is  something  real  in 


A  G0<5iPKL   SERMON  TO  OUTSIDERS.  701 

religion.  It  is  not  a  creed  alone,  it  is  a  life.  Tlic  recccnerate  belong 
to  a  new  creation.  If  any  man  be  in  Christ  he  is  a  new  creature 
with  new  faculties  and  new  powers,  so  that  he  is  introduced  altogether 
into  a  new  world.  Do  not  believe  those,  then,  who  tell  you  that 
there  is  nothing  in  it,  for  they  do  not  know,  and  therefore  are  not  fair 
witnesses.  They  can  witness  to  nothing  but  the  fact  that  they  are  not 
in  the  secret.  The  man  who  was  bronght  up  for  a  murder  which  was 
Bworn  against  him  by  six  witnesses  said  that  he  ought  not  to  be  con- 
demned, because  he  could  bring  sixty  witnesses  who  did  not  see  him  do 
it.  Of  course  he  could ;  and  so  we  can  bring  sixty  thousand  people 
to  say  there  is  no  spiritual  life  because  ihey  have  never  felt  it.  What 
does  that  prove?  It  only  proves  that  they  know  nothing  about  it. 
But  if  you  bring  a  few — even  though  they  should  be  but  a  few — 
straightforward,  honest,  simple-minded  people  whom  you  would  believe 
in  other  things,  you  are  bound  to  accept  their  testimony  about  this. 
There  is  something  real  in  faith  in  Jesus.  There  is  a  peace  which 
passeth  all  understanding  obtained  through  pardoned  sin.  There  is  a 
new  birth,  for  we  have  felt  it ;  there  is  a  new  life,  for  we  enjoy  it. 
There  is  a  joy  that  overleaps  earth's  naiTow-  bounds  :  there  is  a  rest  of 
heart  akin  to  the  rest  of  the  blessed  in  heaven,  and  it  can  be  enjoyed 
liere  and  now  ;  thousands  of  us  bear  witness  that  it  is  so.  Do  not  be 
discouraged  then,  for  we  tell  you  no  old  wives'  iabks,  but  the  very 
truth  which  we  have  ourselves  tasted  and  handled.  You  that  are  seek- 
ing after  eternal  life  need  not  be  baffled  by  sceptics  ;  we  are  true  men, 
and  tell  you  what  we  have  proved  for  ourselves.  You  will  yet  find  it  to 
be  as  God  declares. 

One  reason  why  you  have  not  obtained  comfort  is,  perhaps,  lecause  you  do 
not  knmv  all  the  qo^vel  yet.  Good  news  half  told  may  often  seem  to  be 
bad  news.  I  have  read  that  in  the  days  of  the  semaphore  signals  a 
niessago  came  across  to  England  concerning  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  and 
lialf  the  message  was  read  as  it  appeared  upon  the  semaphore,  and  as- 
tonished all  England  with  the  sad  intelligence.  It  ran  thus,  "  Wellington 
defeated."  Everybody  was  distressed  as  they  read  it,  but  it  so  happened 
that  they  had  not  seen  all  the  message.  Fog  had  intervened,  and  when, 
by-and-by,  the  air  was  clearer  and  the  telegraph  flashed  out  a  second 
time,  it  was  read  thus — "Wellington  defeated  tJie  French^' — quite 
another  thing,  quite  the  reverse  indeed  of  what  half  the  message  had 
led  men  to  fear.  Thus  when  you  hear  half  the  gospel  it  may  appear 
to  condemn  you  ;  but  you  have  only  to  hear  the  other  half  to  find  out 
its  encouraging  tidings.  I  would  say,  be  diligent  in  hearing  the  gospel ; 
be  diligent  in  searching  it  out  in  the  sacred  book,  which  God  has  given 
to  US;  and  when  you  know  the  truth  more  fully  you  will  find  faith 
come  to  you  by  the  hearing  and  the  understanding  of  the  word  of  God. 
Leave  those  ministei-s  who  preach  only  a  portion  of  the  gospel,  and  try 
to  know  all  the  message  of  love,  and  you  will,  by  the  teaching  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  soon  lose  your  fears. 

Do  you  not  think,  too,  that  some  seekers  miss  comfort  because  ihey 
forget  that  Jesus  Christ  is  alive  ?  The  Christ  of  the  Church  of  Home 
is  always  seen  in  one  of  two  positions — either  as  a  babe  in  his  mother's 
arms,  or  else  as  dead.  That  is  Home's  Christ,  but  our  Christ  is  alive.  Jcsns 
wlio  rose  has  "  left  the  dead  no  more  to  die."     I  was  requested  in  Turin  to 


702  KETROPOLITAK  TABBBIWLOLV  PUIiPIT. 

join  with  others  in  askin^:  to  see  the  abroad  in  which  the  SaTioar 
buried.  I  must  confess  that  I  had  not  &ith  enough  to  belieTC  intiie 
ghroad,  nor  had  I  curiosity  enough  to  wish  to  look  at  the  fictitaoos 
linen.  I  would  not  care  a  penny  tor  the  article,  eyen  if  I  knew  it  to  be 
genuine.  Our  Lord  hao  left  his  shroud  and  sepulchre^  and  lives  in  heaTOL 
To-night  he  so  lives  that  a  sigh  of  yours  will  reach  him,  a  tear  will  find 
him,  a  desire  in  your  heart  will  bring  him  to  you.  Only  seek  him  as  a 
loving,  living  Saviour,  and  put  your  trust  in  him  as  risen  from  the  dead 
no  more  to  die,  and  comfort  will,  I  trust,  come  into  your  spirit. 

Perhaps,  too,  you  have  a  notion  that  conversion  is  sonuOmg  very  ler- 
rihle.    A  young  woman  came  to  me  the  other  day,  after  a  serrioe, 
to  ask  me  whether  I  reuUj  meant  what  I  said  when  I  declared  that  he 
that  believed  in  Jesus  Christ  was  saved  there  and  then.    "Yes,"  I  said; 
and  I  gave  her  the  sci'iptural  warrant  for  it.     "Why,"  she  said,  "my 
grandfather  told  me  that  when  he  found  i-eligionit  took  him  six  montJu, 
and  they  had  nearly  to  put  him  into  a  lunatic  asylum.     He  was  in  sach 
a  dreadful  state  of  mind."     "  AVell,  well,"  I  said,  *'  that  sometimes 
happens.     But  that  distress  of  his  did  not  save  him.     That  was  simply 
his  conscience  and   Satan  together  keeping  him   away  from  Chmt 
When  he  was  saved  it  was  not  by  his  deep  feelings;  it  was  by  his 
believing  in  Jesus  Christ."     I  then  went  on  to  set  Cnrist  before  her  as 
our  sole  ground  of  hope  in  opposition  to  inward  feelings.     "  I  see  it," 
she  said  ;   and  I  rejoiced  as  I  noticed  the  bright  light  that  passed  over 
her  fiice,  a  flash  of  heavenly  sunlight  which  I  have  often  seen  on  the 
countenances  of  those  who  have  believed  in  Jesus  Christ,  when  peace 
fills  the  soul  even  to  the  brim,  and  lights  up  the  countenance  with  a  minor 
transfiguration.   It  is  so.   You  have  but  to  trust  Christ, and  it  is  done:  but 
you  are  afraid.     Have  you  never  heard  of  the  man  who  lost  his  way  one 
night,  and  came  to  the  edge  of  a  precipice,  as  he  thought,  and  fell  over,  and 
clutched  at  some  old  tree,  and  there  hung,  clinging  to  his  frail  support 
with  all  his  might,  for  he  felt  that  he  should  be  dashed   to  pieces 
if  he  fell  ?    There  he  hung  till  he  got  into  a  desperate  state  of  fever, 
and  his  hands  could  hold  up  his  body  no  longer ;  so  at  last  he  dropped 
and  fell — about  half-a-dozen  inches — on  to  a  smooth  mossy  bank,  where- 
on he  lay,  altogether  unhurt,  and  quite  safe.     Xow,  there  are  many 
who  think 'that  sure  destruction  must  aw^ait  them  if  they  confess  sin 
and  resign  all  into  the  hands  of  God.     It  is  an  idle  fear.     Give  up  your 
hold  ujx)n  everything  but  Christ,  and  drop  down.     Soft  and  mossy 
shall  the  bank  be  which  receives  you.     Jesus  Christ,  by  his  love  and 
by  the  efficacy  of  his  precious  blood,  shall  give  you  immediate  rest  and 
peace.     Only  drop  now.     Drop  down  at  once  :  this  is  the  major  part 
of  faith — the  giving  up  of  every  other  hold,  and  simply  falling' upon 
Christ.    That  dropping  down  will  bring  you  present  salvation. 

II.  Now,  in  the  second  place,  the  greatest  comfort  which  I  can  very 
well  conceive  is  that  which  is  conveyed  in  the  text.  It  is  this — "  Be  op 
GOOD  comfort,  rise  ;  II K  CALLETH  thee" — a  good  word  for  the 
blind  man,  for  he  knew  that  Jesus  did  not  call  him  to  mock  him,  and  that 
he  did  not  say,  "come  hither"  that  he  might  merely  tell  him,  "your 
eyes  cannot  be  opened."  Jesus  did  not  call  him  to  sport  with  him  and 
send  him  away  disappointed.  Christ's  calls  are  honest  calls, and  guarantee 
'  lessing  to  those  who  accept  them. 


A  GOSPEL  SERMON  TO  OUTSIDERS.  703 

Now,  beloved  friends,  there  are  two  calls  mentioned  in  Scripture. 
The  one  is  the  general  call  of  the  gospel,  and  the  other  is  the  effeciiud 
call,  the  personal  call,  by  which  men  are  saved. 

Tlie  general  universal  call  ought  to  yield  great  comfort  to  any  seek- 
ing soul.  In  the  word  of  God,  you,  dear  hearer,  are  called  to  come 
to  Christ,  even  you.  Why  do  I  know  that  ?  Because  when  Jesus  gave 
the  commission  to  his  disciples  he  said,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world  and 
preach  tlie  gospel  to  every  creature."  You  are  a  creature,  are  you  not  ? 
Well,  then,  you  must  be  included  in  that  range.  We  are  to  preach  the 
gospel  to  you.  And  then  again,  "  This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy 
of  all  acceptation,  thaD  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners.** 
You  are  a  sinner,  are  you  not?  Do  you  not  admit  that?  Very  well, 
then,  according  to  the  text  that  faithful  saying  is  to  be  addressed  to 
you.  And  you,  dear  seeker,  feel  a  burden  upon  your  soul,  do  you 
not?  You  are  labouring  hard  to  get  salvation.  Therefore,  the  gospel 
call  must  be  addressed  to  you.  "  Come  unto  me  all  ye  that  labour  and 
are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  Indeed  there  are  many  such 
calls,  but  there  is  another  which  must  include  you — **  Whosoever  will,  let 
him  come  and  take  the  water  of  life  freely."  Are  you  willing  to  come  ? 
then  you  are  undoubtedly  called  to  come  to  Christ.  Should  not  that  fact 
comfort  you?  because,  as  I  have  already  said,  he  does  not  call  you-to  mock 
you,  or  invite  you  to  come  without  intending  to  bless  you.  Oh,  hear  his 
honest  call,  and  pluck  up  courage  and  come  to  him.  Nobody  feels  any 
trouble  about  going  w^iere  there  is  a  general  invitation.  Did  you  ever 
cross  the  Mont  St.  Bernard  ?  If  so,  I  do  not  suppose  you  wanted  much 
pressing  to  turn  into  the  hospice  there  and  spend  the  night.  When  they 
came  out  and  told  you  that  everybody  was  welcome,  rich  and  poor,  and 
that  travellers  nearly  all  stayed  there,  you  turned  in.  I  went  the  other 
day  to  St.  Cross  Hospital,  near  Winchester,  which  some  of  you  may 
know.  There  they  give  away  a  piece  of  bread  to  everybody  who  knocks 
at  the  door.  I  knocked  as  bold  as  brass.  Why  should  I  not  ?  If  they 
gave  the  bread  away  to  everybody,  why  should  not  I  have  my  piece  ? 
And  so,  of  course,  the  hatch  was  opened,  and  I  had  my  little  piece  of 
bread  with  the  friends  who  were  with  me.  It  was  a  dole  to  be  given  to 
everybody  that  called.  I  did  not  humble  myself  particularly  and  make 
anything  special  of  it ;  it  was  for  all,  and  I  came  and  received  as  one 
of  the  people  who  were  willing  to  knock.  Now,  even  so,  if  the  gospel 
is  to  be  preached  to  every  creature,  why  stand  you  higgling  and  haggling 
when  you  want  the  bread  of  life?  Why  should  you  waste  time  in 
raising  question  after  question  when  you  only  need  to  take  what  Jesus 
freely  gives  ?  I  warrant  you  do  not  raise  such  quibbles  against  your- 
selves in  money  matters.  If  an  estate  is  bequeathed  you,  you  do  not 
employ  a  solicitor  to  hunt  for  flaws  in  the  title,  or  to  invent  objections 
to  the  will.  Why  do  men  raise  difficulties  against  their  own  salva- 
tion, instead  of  cheerfully  accepting  what  the  infinite  mercy  of  God  so 
graciously  provides  for  all  who  with  broken  hearts  and  willing  minds 
are  ready  to  take  what  God  the  ever-bountiful  is  so  pleased  to  give. 

The  invitation  is  so  large,  and  there  is  this  to  be  noted  concerning  it. 
No  one  teas  ever  refused  yet.  There  is  a  well-known  institution  in 
London  w-liich  bears  across  the  front  of  it,  **  No  destitute  boy  ever  re- 
fused."   Well  may  we  put  this  over  Christ's  great  house  of  mercy — 


704  METROPOLITAN  TABfcRNACLE  PULPIT. 

'*  No  destitute  soul  ever  refused."  T  can  imagine  two  boys  standing  on 
tlic  pavement  in  front  of  Dr.  Barnardo's  institution,  and  one  sajinj;  to 
the  otlior,  **  Can  we  go  in  there  ?"  "  Yes,"  says  the  other,  "  I  sbonld 
rather  think  we  could.  We  are  destitute,  aren^t  we?  Look  here,  my 
clothes  are  all  in  rags,  and  I  have  not  a  penny  in  the  world,  and  no 
father  and  no  mother.  I  slept  under  a  dry  arch  last  night.  I  am  a 
destitute  boy,  and  no  mistake."  I  can  only  suppose  that  the  other 
might  boastfully  say,  "I  ain't  destitute;  not  I.  I  can  earn  my  livinj^ 
any  day,  and  I  have  got  a  half-crown  in  my  pocket."  Now,  that  fellow 
bus  no  claim  to  be  admitted,  because  he  is  not  destitute ;  but  the  boy 
who  is  hungry  and  ragged  and  homeless  is  sure  to  be  welcomed.  As  he 
reads  those  lines,  '*  No  destitute  boy  ever  refused,"  he  says,  "There  is 
hope  for  me  then."  Now,  then,  destitute  soul,  Jesus  Christ  never 
refused  one  like  you  yet.  If  you  have  a  store  of  merit  of  your  own,  if 
you  believe  you  can  be  saved  by  your  good  works,  you  do  not  come 
under  the  head  of  "destitute."  **  The  whole  have  no  need  of  a  physi- 
cian, but  they  that  are  sick."  But  if  you  are  stripped  of  all  boasting, 
if  you  are  brought  to  bankruptcy  as  to  personal  merit,  if  yon  have 
come  down  to  absolute  poverty  as  to  any  hope  in  yourself,  then,  as  no 
destitute  soul  ever  was  rejected  or  ever  shall  be,  come  to  Jesus  at  once! 
Come  at  once,  I  say.    "  Be  of  good  comfort,  rise ;  he  calleth  thee." 

But,  dear  friends,  I  said  that  there  was  another  and  an  effectual 
rail.  That  call  the  Holy  Spirit  directs  to  individuals,  and  when  it 
comes,  it  is  not  resisted,  or  if  resisted  for  a  while,  it  is  ultimately 
yielded  to,  so  that  the  man  is  constrained  to  come.  O  Holy  Spirit,  give 
that  call  to-night.  There  were  two  brothers  fishing,  and  Jesus  said 
to  them,  "  Follow  me."  They  threw  down  their  nets  and  followed  him 
Matthew  was  sitting  at  the  receipt  of  custom,  with  his  pen  behind  his 
ear  and  his  account  books  before  him.  Jesus  said,  '^  Follow  me." 
Up  Matthew  rose,  and  followed  him  at  once.  That  little  fellow,  the 
tax  gatherer,  had  climbed  up  a  tree  because,  being  short  of  stature, 
he  could  not  see  over  the  heads  of  the  crowd.  While  he  was  looking 
down  from  among  the  leafy  branches,  the  Master  stood  at  the  bottom 
of  the  tree,  and  said,  **  Zacchcus,  make  haste  and  come  down,  for  to- 
day I  must  abide  in  thy  house."  Down  came  Zaccheus.  How  could 
he  help  it?  The  Spirit  of  God  had  given  the  effectual  call,  and  Christ 
was  in  that  man's  house  shortly  after,  and  the  man  gave  abundant 
evidence  of  a  change  of  heart.  Oh,  may  the  eternal  Spirit  speak  in 
that  fashion  to  some  here  present,  so  that  they  may  at  once  yield  and 
follow  Jesus  Christ. 

Tliat  call,  wherever  it  comes,  casts  a  sweet  softtuss  over  the  saul 
The  man  cannot  make  it  out,  but  he  feels  so  differently  from  what  he 
did  before.  The  iron  sinew  of  his  neck  is  gone.  The  cold  stone 
within  his  breast  has  melted  into  j3csh.  He  listens  to  the  gospel  which 
once  he  despised.  Listening,  he  thinks ;  and  it  is  a  grand  matter  to 
get  a  man  to  think  about  himself,  his  God,  eternity,  heaven,  hell,  the 
Redeemer.  As  he  thinks,  he  sees  his  life  in  a  different  light.  He  pcT- 
ceiyes  that  there  has  been  sin  in  it — very  much  more  of  sin  than  he  ever 
thought  could  have  been  there;  and,  as  he  sees  his  i^iin,  he  mourns  over 
it.  He  almost  wishes  that  he  had  never  been  born  rather  tiian  have 
transgressed  as  he  has  done.  His  heart  iioi'rcus  down  under  the  iuilucu.43 


A  GOSPEL  SERMON  TO  OUTSIDERS.  705 

of  the  law  of  God.  He  lays  aside  his  proud  boastings,  and  confesses  that 
he  is  full  of  transgression  and  sin.  Next  to  this  thoughtfulness  and 
repentance  comes  a  little  hope:  he  perceives  that  there  is  a  salvation 
worth  having,  and  he  asks  himself  why  he  should  not  have  it.  Then 
comes  faith :  he  perceives  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,  and  he  says  to 
himself,  "If  he  be  divine  he  can  save  even  me."  He  trusts,  and,  as  ho 
trusts,  the  darkness  which  enveloped  him  begins  to  disappear.  Ho 
obtains  a  little  light,  and  yet  a  little  more,  and  at  last  he  cries,  "  I  do 
believe  that  Jesus  died  for  me.  I  rest  my  soul  in  his  pierced  hands.  I 
am  forgiven — I  am  saved."  That  man  has  been  called  by  the  blessed 
Spirit. 

It  is  very  strange,  too,  how  God  calls  some  men.  I  have  known  it 
happen  many  times  in  this  Tabernacle.  I  have  been  preaching  and  I 
have  made  a  remark  which  has  suited  the  case  as  well  as  if  I  had  been 
tliat  man's  companion,  or  better.  How  was  it?  I  will  tell  you.  God 
had  been  at  Avork  on  that  man,  and  he  led  his  servant  to  work  to  the 

*  same  point.  The  Lord  was  by  his  providence  tunnelling  one  side  of  the 
mountain  of  the  man's  indiftercnce,  and  then  he  set  me  to  work  on  the 
A  other  side  by  guiding  me  in  my  thoughts  so  that  I  preached  the  gospel 
in  a  suitable  manner.  Just  as  when  they  made  the  Mont  Cenis  tunnel, 
one  set  of  engineers  were  boring  one  way  and  one  set  the  other  way,  and 
then  they  met  in  the  heart  of  the  great  mass.  A  pious  mother  has  been 
boring  away  at  the  mountain  by  her  entreaties,  or  an  earnest  Christian 
teacher,  or  a  wife  or  a  sister  has  been  at  the  same  work.  Perhaps  sick- 
ness, like  the  diamond  boring  rod,  has  been  piercing  into  the  man,  and 
then  at  last  in  this  place  the  word  of  the  Lord  has  exactly  hit  the  case, 

'  so  that  the  tunnel  through  the  soul  has  been  completed,  and  eternal  sal- 
vation has  been  the  result.  Perhaps  the  chance  words  of  this  night  are 
no  chance  words  to  some  of  you  now  present,  but  the  very  words  of  God 
sent  straight  to  your  soul.  God  grant  that  it  may  be  so,  and  he  shall 
have  the  praise.     0  eternal  Spirit,  thus  let  it  be. 

III.  Xow,  lest  I  weary  you,  I  am  going  to  close  with  the  third 
head,  which   is    that   the    comfort    drawn    from   our  calling 

SHOULD   LKAD   TO    IMMEDIATE    ACTION.      *'  Bc  of    gOOd    COmfort,  rUQ ; 

he  calleth  thee." 

That  exhortation  to  rise  means  instant  decision.  Yon  have  been  hesi- 
tating and  hanging  like  the  scales  of  a  balance,  trembling  between  heaven 
and  hell.  AVhich  is  it  to  be  ?  May  the  Holy  Spirit  call  you  so  that 
it  shall  be  Christ,  salvation,  eternal  life.  I  am  not  always  sorry  when 
men  grow  angry  while  hearing  a  sermon.  The  worst  thing  that  can 
happen  to  me  to-night  is  for  you  all  to  be  satisfied.  But  when  some 
l^cople  get  very  angry  they  will  think,  and  thinking  they  will  feel,  and 
feeling  they  may  turn  unto  God.  Despite  their  anger  they  will  come 
again.  The  hook  is  in  the  man's  jaws.  We  shall  have  that  fish.  Let 
him  draw  out  the  line  further  and  further,  for  it  will  hold  him.  Let 
him  have  play.  AVe  shall  have  him  back  again  before  long.  Have  the 
landing  net  ready !  There  is  nothing  better  for  some  men  than  to 
hare  their  antagonism  to  the  gospel  aroused  for  a  time.  The  truth  has 
come  home  to  them.  It  is  at  work  on  them,  and,  before  long,  we  trust 
the  blessed  work  will  be  complete,  and  the  soul  will  be  saved.  This  is 
tiio  point  aimed  at. 


706  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

"  Rise,"  says  the  text.  That  is,  do  not  let  it  be  any  longer  a  question, 
''  Shall  it  be  ?  "  or  "  Shall  it  not  be  ?  "  bnt  decide  to-night—"//  shall 
he.  By  the  grace  of  God  I  will  be  a  Christian.  By  the  grace  of 
God,  if  there  is  salvation  to  be  had,  I  Trill  have  it."  I  do  not  ask 
you  to  come  to  that  decision  for  the  mere  sake  of  making  a  resolve, 
which  yon  will  cordially  adopt  and  then  carelessly  forget,  but  I  do 
ask  the  grace  of  God  to  lead  you  to  say  with  purpose  of  heart, 
"  It  shall  be."  Alas,  very  many  of  you  come  and  go :  you  hear, 
and  hear,  without  profit ;  for  it  ends  in  hearing  and  never  ripens 
into  decision.  Too  many  of  our  regular  hearers  still  remain  unconverted 
though  occasional  hearers  have  been  saved.  AVlien  you  take  hold  of  a  piece 
of  india-rubber,  you  may  make  any  impression  that  you  like  all  over  it, 
but  after  all  it  resumes  its  old  shape.  There  are  hosts  of  hearers  of  that 
kind  :  very  impressible,  but  they  quickly  return  to  their  old  tastes  and 
habits.  But  you  meet  with  other  people  who  seem  to  be  hard  as  flint. 
I  have  observed  some  who  have  sat  in  the  aisle  biting  their  lips,  who 
have  never  intended  to  believe  the  gospel,  and  yet  with  one  blow  of 
the  Master's  hammer  their  hearts  have  gone  to  shivers  directly.  Their 
armour  of  resistance  and  their  mail  of  defiance  have  been  broken 
through,  and  they  have  proved  afterwards  the  heartiest  and  most 
earnest  of  Christian  converts.  That  is  an  unfortunate  impressibility 
which  ends  in  indecision.  Those  who  show  this  plastic  character  mean 
to  be  right,  but  they  manage  to  remain  in  the  wrong.  They  intend 
to  go  to  heaven,  but,  alas,  alas,  little  hope  is  there  that  they  will  ever 
reach  the  city  of  the  blessed.  The  probabilities  are  against  it :  they 
have  passed  so  many  years  in  procrastination  that  their  indecision  has 
become  chronic,  and  fetters  them  to  their  sins.  After  the  many  seasons 
in  which  fair  leaves  have  disappointed  the  hope  of  sweet  fruits,  our 
despondency  is,  we  fear,  the  herald  of  their  despair.  There  seems  so 
little  probability  that  they  will  ever  decide  for  God  and  for  his  Christ 
that  we  scarcely  hope  with  trembling ;  nay,  we  rather  tremble  to  hope. 
Would  God  it  were  not  so. 

Oh  dear  friends !  1  pray  you  listen  to  the  text.  "  Be  of  good  comfort. 
He  calleth  you.  Rise.  Kise  to  something  more  than  decision :  rise  to 
resolution.  You  have  all  heard  of  the  poor  woman  who  could  not  get 
justice  done  her  by  the  judge.  She  called  on  him  a  great  many  times, 
but  he  would  not  hearken  to  her.  At  length  she  made  up  her  mind  that 
he  should  attend  to  her ;  so  she  was  present  on  the  first  court  day,  and  as 

soon  as  the  judge  came  in  she  rose  and  said,  *'  My  lord "     "  Have 

I  not  told  you  not  to  trouble  me  ?  "  "  But,  my  lord,"  she  cried  again. 
'*  I  tell  you  to  sit  down."  She  sits  down,  but  before  the  court  is  up, 
she  says,  " Can't  I  have  a  hearing?"  "I  cannot  attend  to  you  now, 
my  good  woman."  But,  when  the  judge  comes  out  of  court  to  go 
home,  there  she  is  standing  at  the  carriage  window,  saying,  "  When 
will  you  hear  my  case  ?  There  are  my  poor  children  starving."  She 
goes  to  the  house  and  knocks  at  untimely  hours.  "  Who  is  it  ?  "  the 
judge  asks  ;  and  they  tell  him,  *'It  is  that  poor  woman  who  wants  her 
case  to  be  heard."  He  bids  them  chase  her  from  his  gate.  She  goes 
home,  sad  but  determined,  and  the  next  morning  she  is  in  court  again. 
The  unjust  judge  had  commanded  the  ushers  not  to  let  her  in,  but  she 
haa  entered  somehow,  and  the  first  thing  that  is  heard  is  that  shrill 


A  GOSPEL  SERMON  TO  OUTSIDERS.  707 

voice — "  My  lord,  will  you  hear  me  ?  '*  At  lasfc  he  gi'ows  tired,  and  he 
says,  **  Though  I  fear  not  God,  nor  regard  man,  yet  because  this  widow 
troubleth  me  I  will  avenge  her.'*  And  he  does  avenge  her.  Though 
the  just  God  bears  no  resemblance  to  an  unjust  judge,  yet  the  widow's 
importunity  that  prevailed  in  the  teeth  of  such  unpromising  surround- 
ing may  urge  you  to  incessant  prayer.  Treat  the  great  God  with 
the  importunity  which  Christ  by  so  bold  a  simile  counsels  and  com- 
mends. Say  thus  to  yourself :  "  I  cannot  perish.  I  must  perish  if  I  do 
not  have  salvation ;  and  therefore  I  will  have  it.  I  will  die  at  the 
foot  of  the  cross  if  die  I  must,  but  I  will  have  it."  It  happened  to  Yne 
some  few  years  ago  to  have  to  lecture  at  the  City  Hall,  Glasgow.  I 
went  at  the  hour  appointed  to  keep  my  engagement,  and  the  Provost  of 
Glasgow  went  to  the  hall  with  me,  but  the  policeman  said  that  he 
could  not  let  us  in,  for  we  had  no  tickets,  and  nis  orders  were  to  admit 
none  without  them.  That  was  a  pretty  state  of  things.  So  the  Lord 
Provost  said,  "  But  you  must  let  us  in.'*  The  policeman  said  that  he 
could  not,  no  matter  who  we  were.  I  said,  "This  is  the  Lord  Pro- 
vost," but  the  policeman  said  he  did  not  know  that,  neither  did  he  care 
who  he  was  :  he  should  not  let  us  pass  against  rules.  He  had  received 
orders  from  the  inspector  to  let  nobody  in,  and  he  was  sure  no  Lord 
Provost  would  wish  him  to  disobey  orders.  Then  the  Lord  Provost 
said,  **  But  this  is  Mr.  Spurgeon.  He  has  got  to  deliver  the  lecture." 
"I  cannot  help  that.  I  have  my  orders,  and  he  shall  not  come  in 
without  a  ticket."  What  do  you  think  we  did?  Did  we  take  **No" 
for  an  answer  ?  Not  so.  We  meant  to  get  in.  So  we  talked  and  par- 
leyed and  reasoned,  but  he,  like  a  good  policeman,  did  his  duty,  and 
would  take  no  commands  from  us  which  were  contrary  to  orders. 
There  we  stopped.  At  last  he  was  condescending  enough  to  let  us 
send  our  cards  in  to  his  inspector,  and  straightway  we  were  ad- 
mitted. Now,  if  we  had  taken  "No"  for  an  answer,  and  had 
gone  away,  I  should  have  had  to  this  day  the  repute  of  having 
gathered  the  people  together  to  disappoint  them.  No,  I  knew  I  had 
a  right  to  go  in,  and  I  meant  to  get  in,  and  I  did  get  in.  You  must 
do  the  same.  Even  though  your  sin  should  proscribe  you,  and  the 
law  should  denounce  you,  and  the  officer  of  justice  should  refuse  you  and 
say, "  You  cannot  come  in ;  no  sinner  comes  this  way,"  yet  insist  upon  it 
that  you  are  a  creature  and  a  sinner — that  the  gospel  is  sent  to  every 
creature,  and  specially  invites  sinners,  and  therefore  you  mean  to  go  in 
to  the  feast  of  grace,  whoever  may  oppose.  Stand  to  it  that  you  will 
enter,  and  as  surely  as  God  is  tnie  if  there  be  this  resolve,  and  perseve- 
rance in  you,  you  shall  enter  into  the  banquet  of  love,  you  shall  inherit 
eternal  life,  and  rejoice  for  evermore. 

But,  dear  friends,  if  you  get  to  that  decision  and  resolution,  there  is 
one  thing  more,  and  that  is,  cast  away  everything  that  hinders  youffom 
finding  salvation.  The  poor  blind  man  cast  away  his  garment.  Now, 
if  you  would  be  saved  you  must  resolve  in  your  soul,  by  the  blessing  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  that  every  sin  and  every  habit  of  Jpurs  which  hinders 
your  finding  Christ  at  once  shall  be  given  up.  There  is  no  pleasure 
worth  keeping  at  the  price  of  your  soul.  No  sin  is  worth  preserving  on 
any  account  whatever;  let  all  your  old  pleasures  and  habits  go  ;  let  them 
all  go,  and  give  yourself  up  to  Jesus  Christ.     How  I  wish  that  many, 


1 


708  METROPOLITAN  TABBWTACLE  PULPlT. 

to-night,  might  be  led  to  say,  "There  is  salvation  then  for  me  bf 
believing.  I  believe  that  the  word  of  God  is  true,  and  I  take  Christ  to 
be  mine.'*  Do  give  yourselves  up  wholly  to  Christ.  No  half  measnres; 
no  hesitating  and  halting  now.  Tou  know  what  Cortez  did  when  he 
went  to  Mexico,  and  intended  to  conquer  it.  The  soldiers  that  were 
with  him  were  few  and  dispirited.  The  Mexicans  were  many,  and  the 
enterprise  hazardous.  The  soldiers  would  have  gone  back  to  Spain, 
but  Cortez  took  two  or  three  chosen  heroes  with  him,  and  went  down 
to  the  seaside  and  broke  up  all  the  ships;  and,  **Now,"  he  said, 
**  we  must  conquer  or  die.  vVe  cannot  go  back."  Bum  your  boats ; 
get  rid  of  all  thoughts  of  return;  leave  sin,  and  abhor  it.  God 
help  yon  to  do  so,  for  this  is  his  gospel — '*  Repent  and  be  converted, 
every  one  of  yon."  Forsake  sin  and  believe  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  let  the 
boats  be  burned,  making  this  your  resolution — that  there  shall  be  no 
going  back  to  sin  any  more. 

Thus  have  I  told  you  what  should  be  done,  but  God  alone  can  make 
you  do  it.  We  can  lead  a  horse  to  the  water,  but  we  cannot  make 
liini  drink  ;  so  we  can  set  the  plan  of  salvation  before  men,  but  we 
cannot  induce  them  to  accept  it,  save  only  as,  in  answer  to  prayer, 
the  eternal  Spirit  moves  in  the  souls  of  men.  He  is  moving  npon 
you  now.  We  are  conscious  that  he  is  brooding  over  some  of  you  at 
tin's  hour.  Resist  him  not.  Yield  yourselves  wholly  to  his  monitions. 
As  the  bulrushes  in  the  stream  bow  their  heads  to  the  passing  breeze, 
so  bow  before  the  motions  of  the  ever  blessed  Spirit.  May  he  help  you 
60  to  do,  for  Jesus^s  sake.     Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Mark  x.  13 52. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 427,  550,  556,  and 

"  Come  every  soul  by  sin  oppressed,**  62b  (Sankey), 


Second  Scries    Price  2s,  6d, 

LECTURES    TO    MY    STUDENTS: 

A  Selection  from  Addresses  delivered  to  the  Students  of  the  Pastors* 
College,  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  by  C.  H.  SPURGEON. 


"  Mr.  Spurgeon  has  such  a  unique  power  of  reaching  the  universal  hearty  that 
whfin  he  is  addressing  an  elect  cltiss  everybody  else  wants  to  hear  what  he  has  to 
say.  It  would  bo  cruel  to  an  eager  public  not  to  print  such  lectures  as  these.  The 
lectures  of  this  second  series  are  as  racy  in  style,  rich  in  wit,  apposite  in  anecdote 
and  illustration,  forcible  and  homely  in  statement,  earnest  in  spirit,  and  intensely 
practical  ih  aim  as  the  first,  and  are,  in  the  midst  of  an  abounding  literature  of  this 
kind,  simply  unique.  Let  all  our  deacons  see  that  their  pastors  have  a  copy  by  the 
next  post.  You  may  give  liim  much  more,  you  cannot  get  him  a  better  Chrisimus 
gift  at  the  price.**— Ge?icral  Baptist  Magazine. 

Passmoae  ic  Alabaster,  4,  Paternoster  Buildings ;  and  all  BooksoUera. 


^dt[D|0lHHn  i^nkmnrfe  fulpit 


EJACULATORY  PRAYER, 


% 


Delivered  on  Lord's-Day  Evening,  September  9th,  1877,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON, 


*  So  I  prayed  to  the  God  of  heaven.** — Nebemiah  ii.  4, 

As  we  have  already  seen  in  the  reading  of  the  Scripture,  Nehemiah  had 
made  enqniiy  as  to  the  state  of  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  tidings  he 
lieard  caused  him  bitter  grief.  "  Why  should  not  my  countenance  be 
sad,"  he  said,  "  when  the  city,  the  place  of  my  fathers*  sepulchres,  lieth 
waste,  and  the  gates  thereof  are  consumed  with  fire  ?  "  He  conld  not 
endure  that  it  should  be  a  mere  ruinous  heap — that  city  which  was  once 
beantiful  for  situation  and  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth.  Laying  the 
matter  to  heart,  he  did  not  begin  to  speak  to  other  people  about  what 
they  would  do,  nor  did  he  draw  up  a  wonderful  scheme  about  what  might  he 
done  if  so  many  thousand  people  joined  in  the  enterprise ;  but  it  occurred 
to  him  that  he  would  do  something  himself  Thig  is  just  the  way  that 
practical  men  start  a  matter.  The  unpractical  will  plan,  arrange,  and 
speculate  about  what  may  be  done,  but  the  genuine,  thorough-going  lover 
of  Zion  puts  this  question  to  himself — "  AVhat  can  you  do  ?  Nehemiah, 
what  can  yon  do  yourself?  Come,  it  has  to  be  don^  and  you  are  the 
man  that  is  to  do  it — at  least,  to  do  your  share.  What  can  you  do?'* 
Coming  so  far,  he  resolved  to  set  apart  a  time  for  prayer.  He  never  had 
it  oflp  his  mind  for  nearly  four  months.  Day  and  night  Jerusalem  seemed 
written  on  his  heavt,  as  if  the  name  were  painted  on  his  eyeballs.  He 
could  only  see  Jerusalem.  When  he  slept  he  dreamed  about  Jerusalem. 
When  he  woke,  the  fii-st  thought  was  "  Foot  Jerusalem ! "  and  before  he 
fell  asleep  again  his  evening  prayer  was  for  the  ruined  walls  of  Jerusalem. 
The  man  of  one  thing,  you  know,  is  a  terrible  man;  and  when  one  single 
passion  has  absorbed  the  whole  of  his  manhood  something  will  be  sure 
to  come  of  it.  Depend  upon  that.  The  desire  of  his  heart  will  de- 
velop into  some  open  demonstration,  especially  if  he  talks  the  matter 
over  before  God  in  prayer.  Something  did  come  of  this.  Before  long 
Nehemiah  had  an  opportunity.  Men  of  God,  if  yon  want  to  serve  Goa 
No.  1,890. 


710  METROPOLITAlf  TABEBNACLt  PULPIT. 

and  cannot  find  the  propitious  occasion,  wait  awhile  in  prayer  and  your 
•ppottunity  will  breat  on  your  path  like  a  sunbeam.  There  was  never  a 
true  and  yaliant  heart  that  &iled  to  find  a  fitting. rohere  somewhere  or 
other  in  his  service.  Every  diligent  labourer  is  needed  in  some  part  of  his 
vineyard.  You  may  have  to  linger,  you  may  seem  as  if  you  stood  in  the 
market  idle,  because  the  Master  would  not  engage  you,  but  wait  there  in 
prayer,  and  mth  your  heart  boiling  over  with  a  warm  purpose,  and  your 
chance  will  come.  The  hour  will  need  its  man,  and  if  you  are  ready,  you,  as 
a  man,  shall  not  be  without  your  hour.  God  sent  Nehemiah  an  opportimity. 
That  opportunity  came,  'tis  true,  in  away  which  he  could  not  have  expected. 
It  came  through  his  own  sadness  of  heart.  This  matter  preyed  upon  his 
mind  till  he  began  to  look  exceedingly  unhappy.  I  cannot  tell  whether 
others  remarked  it,  but  the  king  whom  he  served,  when  he  went  into 
court  with  the  royal  goblet,  noticed  the  distress  on  the  cupbearer's 
countenance,  and  he  said  to  him,  **  Why  is  thy  countenance  sad,  seeing 
thou  art  not  sick  ?  This  is  nothing  else  but  sorrow  of  heart."  Nehemiah 
little  knew  that  his  prayer  was  making  the  occasion  for  him.  The 
prayer  was  registering  itself  upon  his  face.  His  &sting  was  making  its 
marks  upon  his  visage ;  and,  though  he  did  not  know  it,  he  was,  in 
that  way,  preparing  the  opportunity  for  himself  when  he  went  in  before 
the  king.  But  you  see  when  the  opportunity  did  come  there  was  trouble 
with  it,  for  he  says,  "I  was  very  sore  afraid.  You  want  to  serve  God, 
young  man :  you  want  to  be  at  work.  Perhaps  you  do  not  know  what 
that  work  involves.  It  is  not  all  pleasure.  You  are  longing  for  the  battle, 
young  soldier:  you  have  not  smelt  powder  yet,  but  when  you  have 
Deen  in  a  battle,  and  have  had  a  few  cuts,  or  a  ballet  or  two  have  pierced 
you,  you  may  not  feel  quite  so  eager  for  the  fray.  Yet  the  courageous  man 
sets  those  things  aside,  and  is  ready  to  serve  his  country  or  his  sovereign, 
ajid  so  the  courageous  Christian  puts  all  difficulty  aside,  and  he  is  reiuiy 
to  serve  his  comrades  and  his  Qody  cost  what  it  may.  What  if  I  should 
be  sore  afraid  ?  yet  so  let  it  be,  my  Otod,  if  thus  there  shall  be  an  oppor- 
tunity to  seek  and  to  secure  the  welfiure  of  Jerusalem  for  thy  servant, 
who  longs  to  promote  it  with  all  his  heart. 

Thus  have  we  traced  Nehemiah  up  to  the  particular  point  where  our 
text  concerns  him.  The  king,  Artaxerxes,  having  asked  him  why  he 
was  sad,  he  had  an  opportunity  of  telling  hhn  that  the  city  of  his  &therB 
was  a  ruin.  Thereupon  the  king  asks  him  what  he  really  widies;  by 
the  manner  of  the  question  he  would  seem  to  imply  an  assurance  that 
he  means  to  help  him.  And  here  we  are  somewhat  surprised  to  find 
that,  instead  of  promptly  answering  the  king — the  answer  is  not  given 
immediately — an  incident  occurs,  a  feet  is  related.  Though  he  was  a 
man  who  had  lately  given  himself  up  to  prayer  and  festing,  this  little 
parenthesis  occurs — "  So  I  prayed  to  the  Grod  of  heaven.'*  My  preamble 
leads  up  to  this  parenthesis.  Upon  this  prayer  I  propose  to  preach. 
Three  thoughts  occur  to  me  here,  on  each  of  which  I  intend  to  enlarge 
— the  fact  that  Nehemiah  did  pray  Just  then;  the  manuier  of  hds  prayer; 
and,  the  excellent  kind  of  prayer  he  need. 

I.  The  pact  that  Nehemiah  prayed  cjhallbnges  attention. 
He  had  been  asked  a  question  by  his  sovereign.  The  proper  thing  you 
would  suppose  was  to  answer  it.  Not  so.  ^^fore  he  answered  he  prayed 
to  the  God  of  heaven.    I  do  not  suppose  the  king  notioed  the  pause. 


BJAOITLATORY  PRAYER.  711 

Probably  the  interval  was  not  long  enough  to  be  noticed,  but  it  was  long 
enough  for  God  to  notice  it— long  enough  for  Nchemiah  to  have  sought 
and  have  obtained  guidance  from  God  as  to  liow  to  frame  his  answer  to 
the  king.  Are  you  not  surprised  to  find  a  man  of  God  having  time  to  pray 
to  God  between  a  question  and  an  answer  ?  Yet  Nehemiah  found  that 
time.  AVe  are  the  more  astonished  at  his  prating,  because  he  was  so 
evidently  perturbed  in  mind,  for,  according  to  the  second  verse,  he  was 
very  sore  afraid.  When  you  arc  fluttered  and  put  out  you  may  forget 
to  pray.  Do  you  not,  some  of  you,  account  it  a  valid  excuse  for  omitting 
your  ordinary  devotion  ?  At  least,  if  anyone  had  said  to  you,  "  You  did 
not  pray  when  you  were  about  that  business/*  you  would  have  replied,  "  How 
could  I  ?  There  was  a  question  that  I  was  obliged  to  answer.  I  dared 
not  hesitate.  It  was  a  king  that  aslced  it.  I  was  in  a  state  of  con- 
fusion. I  really  was  so  distressed  and  terrified  that  I  was  not  master  of 
my  own  emotions.  I  hardly  knew  what  I  did.  If  I  did  not  pray,  smxjly 
the  omission  may  be  overlooked.  I  was  in  a  state  of  wild  alarm. 
INehemiah,  however,  felt  that  if  he  was  alarmed  it  was  a  reason  for 
praying,  not  for  forgetting  to  pray.  So  habitually  was  he  in  oommunion 
with  God  that  as  soon  as  he  found  himself  in  a  dilemma  he  flew  away 
to  God,  just  as  the  dove  would  fly  to  hide  hersslf  in  the  clefts  of  the 
rock. 

His  prayer  was  the  more  remarkable  on  this  occasion,  because  he 
mmt  havejelt  very  eager  about  his  ohjccf.  The  king  asks  him  what  it  is  he 
wants,  and  his  whole  neart  is  set  upon  building  up  Jerusalem.  Are  not 
you  surprised  that  he  did  not  at  once  say,  "  0  king,  live  for  ever.  I 
long  to  build  up  Jerusalem's  walls.  Give  me  all  the  help  thou  canst "? 
But  no,  eager  as  he  was  to  pounce  upon  the  desired  object,  hd  withdraw* 
his  hand  until  it  is  said,  **  So  I  prayed  to  the  God  of  heaven."  I  con- 
fess I  admire  him.  I  desire  also  to  imitate  him.  I  would  that  every 
Christian's  heart  might  have  just  that  holy  caution  that  did  not  permit 
him  to  make  such  haste  as  to  find  ill-speed.  **  Prayer  and  provender 
hinder  no  man's  journey."  Certainly,  when  the  desire  of  our  heart 
is  close  before  us,  we  are  anxious  to  seize  it ;  but  we  shall  be  all  the 
surer  of  getting  the  bird  we  spy  in  the  bush  to  be  a  bird  we  grasp  in 
the  hand  if  we  quietly  pause,  nft  up  our  heart  and  pray  unto  the  God  of 
heaven. 

It  is  all  the  more  surprising  that  he  should  have  deliberately  prayed  just 
then,  because  Afi  had  been  already  praying  for  the  pad  three  or  fourmoiiihs 
concerning  the  selfsame  matter.  Some  of  us  would  have  said,  "  That  is 
the  thing  I  have  been  praying  for  ;  now  all  I  have  got  to  do  is  to  take  it 
and  use  it.  Why  pray  any  more  ?  After  all  my  midnight  tears  and  daily 
cries,  after  setting  myself  apart  by  fasting  to  cry  unto  the  God  of  heaven, 
afler  such  an  anxious  conference,  surely  at  last  the  answer  has  come.  What 
is  to  be  done  but  to  take  the  good  that  God  provides  me  with  and  rejoice  in 
it  ?"  But  no,  you  will  always  find  that  the  man  who  has  prayed  much  is 
the  man  to  pray  more.  "  For  unto  every  one  that  hath  shall  be  given,  and 
he  shall  have  abundance."  If  you  do  but  know  the  sweet  art  of  prayer, 
you  are  the  man  that  will  be  often  engaged  in  it.  If  you  are  familiar 
with  the  mercy-seat  you  will  constantly  visit  it. 

"  For  who  that  knows  (lie  power  of  prayer 
IJiit  wislics  to  l>e  ofioii  tlicro?" 


718  METROPOLITAB  TABBBKJtCUB  PULriT- 

Althougli  Neliemioh  hail  been  prnj-ing  all  this whilf,  he  iicTC-rthcl«8 mtvt 
offer  another  petition.    "  So  I  prajed  to  the  God  of  heavep." 

One  thing  more  is  worth  recollecting,  namely,  that  Ac  uas  i«  a  hnj'i 
palace,  and  in  the  palace  of  a  heathen  Kiug  too  i  and  lio  was  in  the  rvj 
act  of  handing  up  to  tlie  king  the  guhlet  of  wiue.  Ho  was  fiilFilliiig  liis 
pai't  ill  the  Btat«  festival,  I  duubt  not,  aniongst  the  glare  of  lampe  anil  the 
glitter  of  gold  and  ailver,  in  the  midst  of  princca  and  peers  of  the  nalai. 
Or  even  if  it  were  a  private  festival  with  the  king  and  quceu  oalj,  jet 
etill  men  generally  feel  so  iniprcssed  on  sudi  occasions  with  the  tcskig- 
Bihility  of  their  higli  pisition  tJiat  they  are  apt  to  forget  prayer.  But 
this  devout  Ii^rjiclite,  at  such  a  time  aud  in  snch  a  place,  wlieu  he  standj 
at  the  king's  foot  to  hold  up  to  him  the  golden  goblet^  refrans  &ijm 
answering  the  king's  qiicstiun  until  lirKt  he  has  praved  to  Ihe  Gi)d  of 
heaven, 

II,  Tlicre  is  the  fact,  and  I  think  it  seeniB  to  prompt  further  enquiij. 
So  we  pass  on  to  obMrvo — the  maxxkii  of  tuis  pbaykr. 

Well,  very  bricHy,  it  was  what  we  call  ijaenlatory  prayer — prayer 
which,  as  it  were,  huria  a  dart  and  then  it  is  done.  It  was  not  the  prajiT 
which  stiinda  knocking  at  mercy's  door — ^knock,  knock,  knock  ;  but  it 
was  tlic  coiiccntnition  of  many  knocks  into  one.  It  was  b^un  aud  com* 
plcicd,  03  it  were,  with  one  stroke.  This  ejaculatory  prayer  I  desire  to 
commend  to  you  as  among  the  very  best  forms  of  prayer. 

Notice,  how  very  short  it  must  liave  been.  It  was  introdaeed — slipped 
in — sandwiched  in — between  the  king's  question  and  Nehemiah's  answw; 
and,  as  I  have  ali'eadj  said,  I  do  not  suppose  it  took  tip  any  time  at  all 
that  was  appreciable — scarcely  a  second.  Most  likely  the  kii^  nenr 
obsen-ed  niiy  kind  of  pause  or  hesitation,  fur  Nehemiah  was  in  such  a 
state  of  alarm  at  the  question  that  I  am  persuaded  he  did  not  alloir 
auy  demur  or  vacillation  to  appear,  bnt  the  prayer  innst  have  been 
ofl'er^d  like  an  electric  flash,  very  rapidly  indeed.  In  certain  states  of 
strong  excitement  it  is  wonderful  how  much  the  mind  gets  throu^ 
in  a  short  tluie.  You  may,  perhaps,  have  dreamed,  and  yonr  dream 
occupied,  to  your  idea,  an  hour  or  two  at  the  very  least,  yet  it  is  probaUe 
—nay,  I  thiuK  certain — thut  all  the  dreaming  is  done  at  the  nionieut  yon 
wake.  Yo:i  never  dreameil  at  all  when  you  were  asleep  :  it  was  just  in 
that  instant  when  you  woke  that  the  whole  of  it  went  throngh  your 
mind.  As  di-oivning  men  when  i-escned  and  recovered  have  been  licard 
to  say  thfit  while  tliey  were  sinking  they  saw  the  whole  panorama  of  their 
lives  pii.M  hcf  ire  tliem  in  a  few  sccomls,  so  the  mind  ransi  be  capable  of 
ac(!oiu]ilis!LLng  much  in  a  brief  space  of  time.  Thus  the  prayer  woa 
presented  like  the  winking  of  an  eye  ;  it  was  done  intuitively  ;  yet  douc 
it  was,  and  it  proved  to  be  a  prayer  tlmt  prevailed  with  God. 

We  know,  also,  tJiat  it  must  have  been  a  silent  jjraycr  ;  and  not  merely 
silent  as  to  soiuids  but  silent  an  to  any  outward  signs — perfectly  secret. 
Artaxerxes  never  knew  tliat  Xcliemiah  prayed,  though  lie  st<x)d  probably 
within  a  yard  of  litin.  He  did  not  even  move  his  lips  as  Hannah  did. 
nor  did  lie  deem  it  right  even  to  close  his  eyes,  but  the  prayer  was  strictly 
within  himself  offeitld  unto  God.  In  the  innermost  slirino  of  tJie  temple 
— in  the  holy  of  hoLcs  of  his  own  secret  soid — there  did  he  pray.  Siwrt 
k^d  silent  «as  the  pi'ayer.  It  was  a  prayer  on  the  spot.  He  did  not  go 
^^  Ilia  chainlwr  as  Ihm'iel  did,  aud  open  the  window,     Daniel  wna  riglil, 


EJACULATOUY  PUAYER.  718 

but  this  was  a  different  occasion.  Neliemiah  could  not  have  been  per- 
mitted to  retire  from  the  palace  just  then.  He  did  not  even  turn  his 
face  to  the  wall  or  seek  a  airner  of  the  apartment.  No,  but  there  and 
then,  with  the  cup  in  his  hand,  he  prayed  unto  the  God  of  heaven,  and 
then  answered  th-a  question  of  the  king. 

I  have  no  doubt  from  the  very  wording  of  the  text  that  it  was  a 
very  intense  and  direct  piaijer.  He  says,  "  So  I  prayed  to  the  God  of 
lieaven.**  That  was  Nehemiah's  ftivouritc  name  for  God — the  God  of 
heaven.  He  knew  whom  he  was  praying  to.  He  did  not  draw  a  bow 
at  a  venture  and  shoot  his  prayers  anyhow,  but  he  prayed  to  the  God  of 
heaven — a  right  straight  prayer  to  God  for  the  thing  he  wanted; 
and  his  prayer  sped,  though  it  occupied  less,  perhaps,  than  a  second  of 
time. 

It  was  a  prayer  of  a  reynarkahle  kind.  I  know  it  was  so,  because 
Nehemiah  never  forgot  that  he  did  pray  it.  I  have  prayed  hundreds  of 
times,  and  thousands  of  times,  and  not  recollected  any  minute  particular 
afterwards  either  as  to  the  occasion  that  prompted  or  the  emotions  that 
excited  me ;  but  there  are  one  or  two  prayers  in  my  life  that  I  never  can 
forget.  I  have  not  jotted  them  down  in  a  diary,  but  I  remember  when 
I  prayed,  because  the  time  was  so  special  and  the  prayer  was  so  intense, 
and  the  answer  to  it  was  so  remarkable.  Now,  Nehemiah's  prayer  was 
never,  never  erased  from  his  memory  ;  and  when  these  words  of  history 
were  written  down  he  Avrote  that  down,  "  So  I  prayed  to  the  God  of 
heaven  " — a  little  bit  of  a  prayer  pushed  in  edgeways  between  a  question 
and  an  answer — a  mere  fragment  of  devotion,  as  it  seemed,  and  yet  so  im- 

Eortant  that  it  is  put  down  in  an  historical  document  as  a  part  of  the 
istory  of  the  restitution  and  rebuilding  of  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  and  a 
link  in  the  circumstances  which  led  up  to  that  event  of  the  most  important 
character.  Nehemiah  felt  it  to  be  so,  and  therefore  he  makes  the  record 
— "  So  I  prayed  to  the  God  of  heaven." 

III.  Now,  beloved  friends,  I  come,  in  the  third  place,  to  recommend  to 

you  THIS    EXCELLENT    STYLE   OF   PRAYING. 

I  shall  si^eak  to  the  children  of  God  mainly,  to  you  that  have  faith  in 
God.  I  beg  you  often,  nay,  I  would  ask  you  always  to  use  this  method 
of  cjaculatory  prayer.  And  I  would  to  God,  also,  that  some  here  who 
have  never  prayed  before  would  oiler  an  ejaculation  to  the  God  of  heaven 
before  they  leave  this  house — that  a  short  but  fervent  petition,  something 
like  that  of  tlie  publican  in  the  temple,  might  go  up  from  you — "  God  bo 
merciful  to  me  a  sinner." 

To  deal  with  this  matter  practically,  then,  it  is  tlie  duty  and  privilege  of 
every  Christian  to  have  set  times  of  prayer.  I  cannot  understand  a  man's 
keeping  up  the  \itaKty  of  godliness  unless  he  regularly  retires  for  prayer, 
morning  and  evening  at  the  very  least.  Daniel  prayed  three  times  a  day, 
and  David  say^,  "  Soven  times  a  day  will  I  praise  thee."  It  is  good  for 
your  hearts,  good  for  your  memory,  good  for  your  moral  consistency  that 
you  should  hedge  about  certain  portions  of  time  and  say,  "  These  belong 
'  to  God.  I  shall  do  business  with  God  at  such-and-such  a  time,  and  try 
to  be  as  punctual  to  my  hours  with  him  as  I  should  be  if  I  made  an  en- 
gagement to  meet  a  friend."  When  Sir  Thomas  Abney  was  Lord  Mayor 
of  London  the  banquet  somewhat  troubled  him,  for  Sir  Thomas  always  had 
prayer  with  his  family  at  a  pertain  time.     The  difficulty  was  how  to  quit 


71  i  METROPOLITAN  TABERHAOLB   PULPIT. 

the  banquet  to  keep  up  fiftmily  devotion ;  bat  so  important  did  be  e» 
Bider  it  that  he  vacated  the  chair,  saying  to  a  person  near  that  helnii 
special  enga^^cnieut  with  a  dear  friend  which  he  most  keep.  AodhedU 
keep  it,  and  he  returned  again  to  his  place,  none  of  the  companj  being 
the  wiser,  but  he  himself  being  all  the  better  for  observing  hii  wopted 
habit  of  worship.  Mrs.  Kowe  used  to  saj  that  when  her  time  cvne  fa 
prayer  she  would  not  give  it  up  if  the*apoBtle  Paul  were  pieaohing. 
Nay,  she  said,  if  all  the  twelve  apostles  were  there,  and  could  be  hesni 
at  no  other  time,  she  would  not  absent  herself  fix)ni  her  doset  when  tbt 
set  time  came  round.  Well,  I  do  not  feel  very  sore  that  mj  aonqibi 
would  go  quite  so  far,  for,  I  think,  if  I  had  the  opportunity  of  heiriic 
the  apostle  at  the  time  when  I  un  wont  to  pray,  and  could  not  at  ai^ 
other  time  hear  him,  I  should  postpone  my  prayer  to  hear  the  sennoii, 
nor  would  there  be  any  impropriety  in  the  arrangement;  probably  it 
wonld  show  a  little  shrewd  sense.  Yet,  as  a  general  principle,  it  is  de- 
sirable to  be  punctual  and  punctilious  in  respect  to  your  private  as  well 
as  your  p.iblic  devotions.  Be  not  negligent,  but  vigilant;  never  remiss, 
but  always  regular  in  keeping  up  your  appointed  seasons  of  prayer. 

But  now,  having  urged  the  imiwrtance  of  such  habitual  piety,  I  want 
to  iinpi  ess  on  you  the  value  of  another  sort  of  prayer ;  namely,  the  ihorty 
hripfy  (juicky  froqucnf  rjnculaHmis  of  which  Nehemiah  gives  us  a  Bpedmen. 
And  I  recommend  this,  because  it  hinders  no  engagement  and  occupies 
no  time.     You  may  be  measuring  off  your  calicoes,  or  weighing  yonr 
gioceries,  or  you  may  be  ciisting  up  an  account,  and  between  the  iteae 
you  may  say,  "  Lord,  help  me."    You  may  breathe  a  prayer  to  heaveB 
and  say,  "  Lord,  keep  me.'*     It  wiU  take  no  time.     It  is  one  great  ad- 
vantage to  persons  who  are  hard  pressed  in  business  that  sudi  prayers  as 
those  will  not,  in  the  slightest  degree,  inc<ipacitatc  them  firom  attending 
to  the  business  they  may  have  in  hand.    It  requires  you  to  go  to  no  par- 
ticulai"  place.    You  can  stand  where  you  are,  ride  in  a  cab,  walk  along 
the  streets,  be  the  bottom  sawyer  in  a  saw  pit,  or  the  top  one  either, 
and  yet  pray  just  as  well  such  prayers  as  these.     No  altar,  nO  church,  no 
so-called  sacred  place  is  needed,  but  wherever  yon  arc,  just  such  a  little 
prayer  as  that  will  reach  the  ear  of  God,  and  win  a  blessing.     Such  a 
prayer  as  that  can  be  offered  anywhere,  under  any  circumstances.     I  do 
not  know  in  what  condition  a  man  could  be  in  wliich  he  might  not  offer 
Bolne  such  prayer  as  that.     On  the  land,  or  on  the  sea,  in  sickness  or  in 
health,  amidst  losses  or  gains,  great  reverses  or  good  returns,  still  might 
he  breathe  his  soul  in  short,  quick  sentences  to  God.     The  advantage  of 
such  a  way  of  praying  is  that  you  can  pray  often  and  pray  always.    If 
you  must  prolong  your  prayer  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  you  might 
possibly  be  unable  to  spare  the  time,  but  if  it  only  wants  the  quarter  of 
a  minute,  why,  then,  it  may  come  again  and  again  and  again  and  again 
hundred  times  a  day.     The  habit  of  prayer  is  blessed,  but  the  spirit 


EJACULATOEY  PRAYER.  715 

of  prayer  is  better ;  and  the  spirit  of  prayer  it  is  which  is  the  mother 
of  these  ejaculations;  and  therefore  do  I  like  them,  because  she  is  a 
plentiful  mother.  Many  times  in  a  day  may  we  speak  with  the  Lord 
our  God. 

Such  prayer  may  be  suggested  by  all  sorts  of  surroundings.  I  recollect 
a  poor  man  once  paying  me  a  compliment  which  I  highly  valued  at  the 
time.  He  was  lying  in  a  hospital,  and  when  I  called  to  see  him  he  said, 
**  I  heard  you  for  some  years,  and  now  whatever  I  look  at  seems  to  remind 
me  of  something  or  other  that  you  said,  and  it  comes  back  to  me  as  fresh 
as  when  I  first  heard  it."  "Well,  now,  he  that  knows  how  to  pray  ejacu- 
latory  prayers  will  find  everything  about  him  helping  him  to  the  sacred 
habit.  Is  it  a  beautiful  landscape  ?  Say,  "  Blessed  be  God  who  has 
strewn  these  treasures  of  form  and  colour  through  the  world,  to  cheer 
the  sight  and  gladden  the  heart."  Are  you  in  doleful  darkness,  and  is  it 
a  foggy  day  ?  Say,  "  Lighten  my  darkness,  0  Lord."  Are  you  in  the 
midst  of  company  ?  You  will  be  reminded  to  pray,  "  Lord,  keep  the 
door  of  my  lips."  Are  you  quite  alone  ?  Then  can  you  say,  *^Let  me 
not  be  alone,  but  be  thou  with  me.  Father."  The  putting  on  of  your 
clothes,  the  sitting  at  the  breakfast  table,  the  getting  into  the  convey- 
ance, the  walking  the  streets,  the  opening  of  your  ledger,  the  putting  up 
of  your  shutters — everything  may  suggest  such  prayer  as  that  which  I 
am  trying  to  describe  if  you  be  but  in  the  right  frame  of  mind  for 
offering  it. 

These  prayers  are  commendable,  because  they  are  truly  spiritual.  Wordy 
prayers  may  also  be  windy  prayers.  There  is  much  of  praying  by  book 
that  has  nothing  whatever  to  recommend  it.  When  you  have  found  the 
benefit  of  a  manual  of  French  conversation  to  anyone  travelling  in 
France  without  a  knowledge  of  the  language,  then  try  how  much  good  a 
manual  of  prayers  will  do  a  poor  soul  who  does  not  know  how  to  ask 
our  heavenly  Father  for  a  boon  or  benefit  that  he  needs.  A  Tnanualy 
a  handbook,  forsooth !  Tush !  Pray  with  your  heart,  not  with  your 
hands.  Or,  if  you  would  lift  hands  in  prayer,  let  them  be  your  own 
hands,  not  another  man's.  The  prayers  that  come  leaping  out  of  the 
soul — the  gust  of  strong  emotion,  fervent  desire,  lively  faith — these  are 
the  truly  spiritual ;  and  no  prayers  but  spiritual  prayers  will  God  accept. 

This  kind  of  prayer  is  free  from  any  suspicion  that  it  is  prompted  by 
the  corrupt  motive  of  being  offered  to  please  men.  They  cannot  say  t^at 
the  secret  ejaculations  of  our  soul  are  presented  with  any  view  to  our 
own  praise,  for  no  man  knows  that  we  are  praying  at  all ;  therefore  do 
I  commend  such  prayers  to  you,  and  hope  that  you  may  abound  therein. 
There  have  been  hypocrites  that  have  prayed  by  the  hour.  I  doubt  not 
there  are  hypocrites  as  regular  at  their  devotions  as  the  angels  are  before 
the  throne  of  God,  and  yet  is  there  no  life,  no  spirit,  no  acceptance  in 
their  pretentious  homage ;  but  he  that  ejaculates — whose  heart  talks 


716  uETRoroLrriN  tibkhitjIcle  ruLrrr. 

with  God — he  U  no  hypocrite.  There  is  &  reality,  ami  for«,  indfb 
about  .it.  If  I  see  eparks  come  out  of  a  chimney  1  know  there  ii  * 
fire  inside  somewhere,  and  cjacnlatory  prayera  nre  lil;e  the  spttcta  tha 
fly  fi-om  a  soul  that  is  filled  with  burning  coals  of  love  to  Jcsos  Cbrisl. 

Shf^rt,  cjacnlatory  prayers  are  of  s^at  use  to  ns,  dear  friends.  Ofen- 
times  they  check  us.  Uad-tempcrcd  people,  if  yoii  were  alwayg  lo  pnj 
just  a  little  before  you  let  angry  expressions  fly  from  your  lijis,  itj 
many  tinies  you  mould  not  eay  thdsc  naughty  words  at  alL  Tlicyai- 
vised  a  good  woman  to  take  a  glaffi  of  water  and  hold  some  of  it  iu  Iiet 
mouth  five  minutes  before  she  scolded  her  husband.  I  dare  say  it  «* 
not  a  bad  receipt,  but  if,  instead  of  practising  that  little  ee-.t-ntriHlj. 
she  would  just  breathe  a  short  prayer  to  God,  it  wi.t:V'.  r-iT.-':.'- V: 
more  effectual,  and  tar  more  scriptLiral.  I  canrcctmin.  ! 
prescription  for  the  hasty  and  the  peeviBh  ;  for  all  ivlio  are  quic'i  to  tote 
offence  and  alow  to  foi^ve  insult  or  injury.  IVheu  in  business  you  are 
about  to  close  in  with  an  offer  about  the  propriety  of  which  you  have  a 
little  doubt,  or  a  ]>o?itive  scmple,  such  a  prayer  as  *'  Guide  mc,  good 
Lord  "  woidd  often  keep  yon  back  from  doing  what  you  will  aflen(-ards 
regret. 

The  habit  of  offering  these  brief  prayers  would  also  check  yonr  confi- 
dence in  yourself.  It  would  show  your  dependence  upon  God.  It  would 
kcej)  you  from  getting  worldly.  It  would  be  like  sweet  perfume  bnnit 
in  the  chamber  of  your  soul  to  keep  away  the  fever  of  the  world  fmm 
your  heart.  I  can  strongly  recommend  these  short,  Bweet,  blessed 
prayera.     May  the  Holy  Ghost  give  them  to  you  ! 

Besides,  they  admtVij  briiiij  us  blessings  from  hfavm.  Ejflcidatjry 
prayers,  as  in  the  cr.se  of  Eliezer,  the  servant  of  Abraham,  as  in  tlie  casi 
of  Jacob  when  he  strid  ei'cn  in  dying,  "  I  have  waited  for  thy  Bali-atioo, 
0  God," — prayers  s:ich  as  SIoscs  offered  when  we  do  not  read  that  lie 
prayed  at  all,  and  yet  God  said  to  him,  Why  cryest  thou  unto  mc ;  ejaciili- 
tiona  such  as  Darid  freijuently  presented,  tlicso  were  all  successful  with 
the  Moat  High.  Therefore  abound  in  tliem,  for  God  loves  to  encourage 
and  to  answer  them.  , 

I  might  thus  keep  on  recommending  cjacnlatory  prayer,  but  I  will 
say  ono  more  thing  in  its  favour.  I  believe  it  is  very  suitable  to  some 
persona  of  a  peculiar  temperament  who  could  not  pray  for  a  long  time  ta 
save  their  lives.  Their  minds  arc  rapid  and  quick.  Well,  dear  frieuds, 
time  ifl  not  au  clement  in  the  busitiLss,  Go<l  does  not  hear  us  because  of 
the  length  of  our  prayer,  but  because  of  the  sincerity  of  it.  Prayer  ii 
not  to  be  measured  by  the  yard,  nor  weighed  by  the  pound.  It  is  the 
might  and  force  of  it — the  truth  and  reality  of  it — the  eneigy  and  the 
intensity  of  it.  You  tliiit  are  oitlier  of  so  little  a  mind  or  of  so  quiet 
a  mind  that  you  cannot  use  many  words,  or  continue  long  to  think  of 
■fepa  thing,  it  should  be  to  your  couifurt  that  cjacnlatory  prayers  are 


EJACULATORY   PHAYER.  717 

acceptable.  Aud  it  may  be,  clear  fi'icii<l,  that  you  arc  in  a  condition  of 
body  in  uhicli  you  cannot  pray  any  other  way.  A  headache  such  as 
sonic  pcjple  arc  frequently  allcctcd  with  the  major  part  of  their  lives — ^a 
state  of  body  whicli  the  physician  can  explain  to  you — might  prevent  the 
miud  from  concentrating  itself  long  upon  one  subject.  Then  it  is  re- 
freshing to  be  able  again  and  again  and  again — fifty  or  a  hundred  times 
a  day — to  adtkesa  one's  self  to  God  in  short,  quick  sentences,  the  soul 
being  all  on  fire.     This  is  a  blessed  style  of  praying. 

Now,  I  shall  conclude  by  just  mentioning  a  few  of  the  times  when  I 
think  we  ought  to  resort  ta  tliis  practice  of  ejaculatory  prayer.  Mr. 
Itowland  Hill  was  a  remarkable  man  for  the  depth  of  his  piety,  but 
when  I  asked  at  AYotton-under-Edge  for  his  study,  though  I  rather 
pressed  the  question,  I  did  not  obtain  a  satisfactory  reply.  At  length 
the  good  minister  said,  "  The  fact  is,  we  never  found  any.  Mr.  Hill  used 
to  study  in  the  garden,  in  the  i)arlour,  in  the  bod-room,  in  the  streets, 
in  the  woods,  anywhere."  *' But  where  did  lie  retire  for  prayer?'* 
'^llicv  said  they  supposed  it  was  in  his  chamber,  but  that  he  was  always 
praying — that  it  did  not  matter  wlr^re  lie  was,  the  good  old  man  was 
always  praying.  It  seemed  as  if  his  whole  life,  though  he  spent  it  in 
the  midst  of  his  fellow-men  doing  good,  was  passed  in  pei'petual  prayer. 
You  know  the  story  of  his  being  over  there  in  AValworth  at  Mr. 
George  Clayton's  chapel,  where  our  brother  Paul  Turquand  now  is  the 
pastor,  and  of  his  being  seen  in  the  aisles  after  e^'erybody  was  gone, 
while  he  was  waiting  for  his  coachman.  There  was  the  old  man  toddling 
up  and  down  the  aisles,  and  as  some  one  listened,  he  heard  him  singing 
to  himself — 

"  And  when  I  shall  die,  receive  me  Til  cry, 
For  Jesus  has  loved  me,  I  cannot  tell  why  ; 
But  this  thing  I  find,  we  two  are  so  joined. 
He  won't  be  in  bearcn  and  leave  me  beliind.'* 

And  Anth  such  rhymes  and  ditties,  and  choice  words,  he  would  occupy 
every  moment  of  his  life.  He  has  been  known  to  stand  in  the  Black- 
friars'  road,  with  his  hands  under  his  coat  tails,  looking  in  a  shop 
:window,  and  if  you  hstened  you  nnght  soon  perceive  that  he  was  breath- 
ing out  his  soul  before  God.  He  had  got  into  a  constant  state  of 
prayer.  I  believe  it  is  the  Ixjst  condition  in  which  a  man  can  be — 
praying  always,  praying  without  ceasing,  always  drawing  near  to  God 
with  these  ejaculations. 

But  if  I  must  give  you  a  selection  of  suitable  times  I  should  mention  such 
as  these.  Whenever  you  have  a  great  joy,  cry,  "  Lord,  make  this  a  real 
blessing  to  me.'*  Do  not  exclaim  with  others,  "  Am  I  not  a  lucky  fellow  ?" 
but  say,  "  Lord,  give  me  more  grace,  and  more  gratitude,  now  tliat  thou  dost 
multiply  thy  favours."  When  you  have  got  any  arduous  undertaking  on 
Jiand  or  a  heavy  piece  of  business,  do  not  t<^ucb  it  till  vou  have  breathed 


718  METROPOLITAN  TABERITACLB  PULPIT. 

your  soul  out  in  a  short  prayer.  When  you  hare  a  difficulty  before 
you,  and  you  are  seriously  perplexed,  when  business  has  got  into  a  tangle 
or  a  confusion  which  you  cannot  unravel  or  arrange,  breathe  a  prayer. 
It  need  not  occupy  a  minute,  but  it  is  wonderful  how  many  snarls  come 
loose  after  just  a  word  of  prayer.  Are  the  children  particularly  trouble- 
some to  you,  goiod  woman  ?  Do  you  seem  as  if  your  patience  was  almost 
Worn  out  with  the  worry  and  harass  ?  Now  for  an  ejaculatory  prayer. 
You  will  manage  them  all  the  better,  and  you  will  bear  with  their  naughty 
tempers  all  the  more  quietly.  At  any  rate  yoxu*  own  mind  will  be  the  less 
ruffled.  Do  you  think  that  there  is  a  temptation  before  you  ?  Do  you 
begin  to  suspect  that  somebody  is  plotting  against  you?  Now  for  a 
prayer,  "  Lead  me  in  a  plain  path  because  of  mine  enemies."  Are  you 
at  work  at  the  bench,  or  in  a  shop,  or  a  warehouse,  whei-e  lewd  con- 
versation and  shameful  blasphemies  assail  your  ears  ?  Now  for  a  short 
prayer.  Have  you  noticed  some  sin  that  grieves  you?  Let  it  move 
you  to  prayer.  These  things  ought  to  remind  you  to  pray.  I  believe 
the  devil  would  not  let  people  swear  so  much  if  Christian  people  always 
prayed  every  time  they  heard  an  oath.  He  would  then  see  it  did  not 
pay.  Their  blasphemies  might  somewhat  be  hushed  if  they  provoked 
us  to  supplication.  Do  you  feel  your  own  heart  going  off  the 
lines?  Does  sin  begin  to  fescinate  you?  Now  for  a  prayer — ^a 
warm,  earnest,  passionate  cry,  "Lord,  hold  thou  me  up."  Did  you 
see  something  with  your  eye,  and  did  that  eye  infect  your  heart? 
Do  you  feel  as  if  "  your  feet  were  almost  gone,  and  your  steps  had  well 
laigh  slipped"?  Now  for  a  prayer — "Hold  me.  Lord,  by  my  right 
hand."  Has  something  quite  unlocked  for  happened?  Has  a  friend 
treated  you  badly  ?  Then  like  David  say,  "  Lord,  put  to  nought  the 
counsel  of  Ahithophel."  Breathe  a  prayer  now.  Are  you  anxious  to  do 
some  good  ?  Be  sure  to  have  a  prayer  over  it.  Do  you  mean  to  speak 
to  that  young  man  as  he  goes  out  of  the  Tabernajcle  to-night  about  his 
soul  ?  Pray  first,  brother.  Do  you  mean  to  address  yourself  to  the 
members  of  your  class  and  write  them  a  letter  this  week  about  their 
spiritual  welfare  ?  Pray  over  every  line,  brother.  It  is  always  good  to 
have  praying  going  on  while  you  are  talking  about  Christ.  I  always  find 
I  can  preach  the  better  if  I  can  pray  while  I  am  preaching.  And  the 
mind  is  very  remarkable  in  its  activities.  It  can  be  praying  while  it  is 
studying :  it  can  be  looking  up  to  God  while  it  is  talking  to  man ;  and 
there  can  be  one  hand  held  up  to  receive  supplies  from  God  while  the 
other  hand  is  dealing  out  the  same  supplies  which  he  is  pleased  to  give. 
Pray  as  long  as  you  live.  Pray  when  you  are  in  great  pain ;  the  sharper 
the  pang  then  the  more  urgent  and  importunate  should  your  cry  to  Qoi 
be.  And  when  the  shadow  of  death  gathers  round  you,  and  strange 
feelings  flush  or  chill  you,  and  plainly  tell  that  you  near  the  journey's 
end,  then  pray.    Oh !  that  is  a  time  for  ejaculation.     Short  and  pithy 


KJICULATOHY   PRAYER.  719 

prayers  like  this:  "  Hide  not  thy  face  from  me,  0  Lord  ";  or  this,  "Be 
not  far  from  me,  0  God";  will  doubtless  suit  you.  "Lord  Jesus,  receive 
my  spirit,"  were  the  thrilling  words  of  Stephen  in  his  extremity ;  and 
"  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  conmiend  my  spirit,"  were  the  words  that  your 
Master  himself  uttered  just  before  he  bowed  his  head  and  gave  up  the 
ghost.    You  may  well  take  up  the  same  strain  and  iknitate  him. 

These  thoughts  and  counsels  are  so  exclusively  addressed  to  the  saints 
and  faithful  brethren  in  Christ  that  you  will  be  prone  to  ask,  "  Is  not 
there  anything  to  be  said  to  the  unconverted  ?"  Well,  whatever  has  been 
spoken  in  their  hearing  may  be  used  by  them  for  their  own  benefit.  But 
let  me  address  myself  to  you,  my  dear  friends,  as  pointedly  as  I  can. 
Though  you  are  not  saved,  yet  you  must  not  say,  "  I  cannot  pray." 
Why,  if  prayer  is  thus  simple,  what  excuse  can  you  have  for  neglecting 
it  ?  It  wants  no  measureable  space  of  time.  Such  prayers  as  these  Qod 
will  hear,  and  ye  have  all  of  you  the  ability  and  opportunity  to  think 
and  to  express  them,  if  you  have  only  that  elementary  faith  in  God 
which  believes  "  that  he  is,  and  that  he  is  a  rewarder  of  them  that  dili- 
gently seek  him."  Cornelius  had,  I  suppose,  got  about  as  far  as  this, 
when  he  was  admonished  by  the  angel  to  send  for  Peter,  who  preached 
to  him  peace  by  Jesus  Christ  to  the  conversion  of  his  soul.  Is  there 
such  a  strange  being  in  the  Tabernacle  to-night  as  a  man  or  woman  that 
never  prays  ?  How  shall  I  expostulate  with  you  ?  May  I  steal  a  passage 
from  a  li\ing  poet  who,  though  he  has  contributed  nothing  to  our  hymn 
books,  hums  a  note  so  suited  to  my  purpose,  and  so  pleasant  to  my  ear 
that  I  like  to  quote  it — 

"  More  things  are  wrought  by  prayer 
Than  this  world  dreams  of.     Wherefore  let  thy  voice 
Rise  like  a  fountain,  flowing  night  and  day  : 
For  what  are  men  better  than  sheep  or  goats. 
That  nourish  a  blind  life  within  the  brain, 
If,  knowing  God,  they  lift  not  hands  of  prayer. 
Both  for  themselves  and  those  who  call  them  friend? 
For  so  the  whole  round  world  is  every  way 
Bound  by  gold  chains  about  the  feet  of  God.** 

I  do  not  suspect  there  is  a  creature  here  who  never  prays,  because  people 
generally  pray  to  somebody  or  other.  The  man  that  never  prays  to  God 
such  prayers  as  he  ought,  prays  to  God  such  prayers  as  he  ought  not. 
It  is  an  awful  thing  when  a  man  asks  (jod  to  damn  him ;  and  yet  there 
are  persons  that  do  that.  Suppose  he  were  to  hear  you ;  he  is  a  prayer- 
hearing  God.  If  I  address  one  profane  swearer  here  I  would  like  to  put 
this  matter  clearly  to  him.  Were  the  Almighty  to  hear  you.  If  your  eyes 
were  blinded  and  your  tongue  were  struck  dumb  while  you  were  uttering 
a  wild  imprecation,  how  would  you  bear  the  sudden  judgment  on  your 
impious  speech  ?     If  some  of  those  prayers  of  yours  were  answered  for 


720  METROPOLITAN  TABEBNAClE   PFLPIT. 

joureelf,  and  Bomc  that  you  have  oSenA  in  your  p&ssion  for  yoorw 
and  for  yonr  child,  were  Aitfilled  to  their  hnrt  and  yotir  distraction,  ri* 
an  awfal  thing  it  woald  be.  Well,  God  doea  answer  prayer,  and  one  rf 
those  days  he  may  aa'^wcr  yonr  prayers  to  yoiir  Ehame  and  evBriifiiiij 
confusion.  Would  not  it  be  well  now.  before  yoii  leave  yonr  Mat,ta 
pray,  "  Ijord  have  mercy  upon  me ;  I^ord,  save  me ;  Lord,  change  mj 
heart;  Lord,  pive  me  to  believe  in  Ohrist;  I>ord,  pii-e  me  nowanit 
terest  in  the  precious  blood  of  .lesna ;  Lord,  save  me  now"?  WiUtmt 
each  one  of  you  breathe  such  a  prayer  as  that  ?  May  the  Holy  Spnl 
lend  you  bo  to  do,  and  if  yon  rmca  begin  to  pray  aright  I  tira  not  afail 
that  yon  nill  ever  leave  off,  for  there  is  a  something  that  holdi  litt  soal 
fast  in  real  prayer.  Sham  prayers — what  is  the  gocnl  of  them  ?  But 
refll  heart  pleading — the  soni  talking  with  God — irhen  it  once  befia 
Trill  never  cease:  Ton  will  Jiave  to  pray  till  yon  exchange  prayer  tt 
praise,  and  go  from  the  mercy-seat  b«!ow  to  the  throne  of  Ood  above. 

May  God  blcM  you  all ;  all  of  yon,  I  Bay ;  all  who  are  my  kindred  ia 
ChriBt,  and  all  for  whose  salvation  I  yearn.'  God  bleu  you  aU  and  eraij 
one,  for  onr  dear  Redeemer's  sake.    Amen, 


Portion  of  Scripture  Rbad  before  Berxon — Neliemiahi.  ii.  1— 8. 


Htmhs  FEOa  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 181,  686,  978. 


END    OF    VOLUME    XXIII. 


Punnora  ft  Almbartsr,  Sl«am  Prioten,  SI,  Little  Britun,  Ra 


BRITISH    EQUITABLE 

ASSURANCE  COMPANY. 


Office— 4,  QUEEN  STREET  PLACE,  LONDON,  E.C. 


Fartioolars  of  tbe  Inveatment  of  the  Aoonmnlated  Fund,  as  per  Bklanoa  . 
Sheet,  January  81st,  1876  ;• 

HortflECl  on  piopri'v  wiituD  tbs  Ilnilcd  Kinjilam 
Ground  n:AU  ...  ...  ...  ... 

BiitUi  CoKramEnt  Sscuniid 

Indiin  ud  CDlanial  Govtrnncnt  Sccuchio 
FonigD  Gorcmiaent  do.  (ITnitod  Suua  Debt)  ... 
lUilmy  udolhETi]i.tMnturct9iid  debcDtun  ilocki 
Do.  di>.      iharcsfprefcfence  AndordiiuLry)        ... 
Home  property  ...  ...  ...  ... 

AginB' Sliiwa  ...  '.'.'.  ".'.  '.'.', 

Loiuu  on  (he  Compuiy'i  PoUdei 

Cull- 


IVepTtci«ti«i  Fund 

Otbcr  (ums  Owine  by  the  Company— 

diuini  Bdmiiied  but  not  jald  (not  being  diK} 




£ 
ti«,71o 

•• 

'9 

'; 

:::     :::      ::: 

I 

t 

tlu 

I 

I 



•0.0,1 

'A 

■; 

...          ^M.«.J  .3  » 



■  ,w 

i- 

0 

-.             ^.=0.  H  .O 

.flM-XO 

s 

' 

4  Mil 

».<H9 

■s 

» 

^4M.S4>    1      T    j      I 

EXTRACTS  FEOU  NOTICES  OF  THE  PRESS. 


^TIiH  »l|l«muaJ)i.lliilvin»  Comfimr  prtunu  InrpoH  •kith 
inn  Kill  ^aai  Ihi  liHIi  ot  In  UiaiclKMen.  inHlylioldnl, 
udblBiiii.    Thc'llitlnh  tobiuWt'hMliomUwfaMttciiKd 


"  Tlie  boHtn  ItliOditfuiii 
CMimtMilInt  H  (be  MCvrUy 


^     ,^-      -      -  -„ '"iWiamr.liid  denote  good 

cwhc1hcfpln1afll4  4n,iio«Gartl*<^t  Id  mt  upon  their  eitft- 
blldtedrnmiAlkpiiL  llieybue  huiilrMl  iheJr  Indl^iAul  inaititini 
•ittli  ttaSa  ind  n-rn  ihjit  tHTi  dlilliKiiiibid  iMr  oriwibulH 
rrwnlhfldiivorro'pikBIEiin,  Ir^lVduih  In  Aval  ngHBben  he** 
bkendU  tUo  iialch.crr  «  '0«erelH>x.'  This  b  odmlteUe,' 
—ygiirSiiMk  Ciwt^Hiii  y*Hnmt,  June  »ib.  iM. 

=Ih.n:rNini.hlthtm  Jii  bMn  li-uol  ^  >Mi  lilihly  (uc. 
ctAUUCadtpinyrymlUuBmatta  torffrtvccfintiilrrdtC^,  mDr« 
expaElinr  it  tt«  JPOBUllUI  ■IMTlbl'W  poition  al  (be    cuiv 

huliMiiuiUiin^rfrfnr^udai " 


Idatu&l  Entranti  In   1B78  participate   In  the  Etihth  DMtim  of  Proftta. 


INFLUENTIAL   AGENTS   WANTED.- 


tl^.—N*  fajmiM  mfit  m  mmjimemliirtllurfrmwillitJMMidafiymtHim 


iijui^i  n 

BRITISH  EQUITAl 

ASSURANCE    COMPANY. 

Office— 4,  QUEEN  STREET  PLAC^-LOND0N,E.ej 


GEORGE  THOMAS  DaIe,  B«.,  Buyii 
WILUAM  SUn-ON  C0VER/£*<1„  4  Qon 
SinH  PIkj,  Cky.  ^  ^^      ^^ 

JOHN  MIDDLETON  HARE,  E^. 


WILLIAU  MACDONALD  DASDEN,  E«i^         I  FOOMTAm  JOH!»    HARTl^T.    Ba,  Mfi 
-Gn«_&iMH«l™->.aiyi™i  Ubi*.                  (      Sna.  On  (Hob  Sk.  Siuidw  StUilulU.   1 
E  THOMAS DAl.e^B«i.,BiL]rmtcr.        WILLTAMriEORGKLEMO.VEkQ.Jimk.l* 
WILLIAM  SMITH.  E«i^U™So™,rf.       j 
EDWABD  BRAN  (JNDKRmLU  tkii..  LUk 
ILuMpswl (Uai. See. Bi«iti« T"-' "  •** 

iUxnasfng  SimisT  tc  Vcraarv. 

WILLIAM   SUTTOM  COVER,  b^..   F.&S..  F.IJL 

BiWiRaiuin. 

.  JOHN  WIUUMSbN  FAIREY,  ttf 

Hitrlton. 

ALFRED  HENRY  BAYNES,  Esq.,  Piuhr  (SeereOiv  Baslal 

JAUES  CLARKE.  Eb,.,  F1c«  S^.  Cijrift<vri«««^.3^( 

HENRY  GOULD  5HAJiQ>,  Etq.,  Tuf4in<l|«  1 

TWENTY-FIRST  ANNUAL  BEPOBT  (MAY,  1876). 

2,164  FoUclea  laaned  for ...    £43fi,T00 

Kew  Annoal  Income         -  JO^oA 

21,151  Policiea  in  force  for       .£3,734,488 

Annaal  Premium  Income  £1I6,T88 

305  Death  Claims,  Matured  Polloiea  and  Boniuae         £64^ 

From  commencement  paid  for  Claima—         £350,636 

Laid  by  in  the  Year £S9^ 

Amoant  of  Accomnlated  Fand        £439,B4S 


Tabic  show 

BE  Specimens  of  Piofilj  oo  Polidet  ai  youi  in  force  :- 

!  ^ 

Sam. 

'^'^P^'"™             Bomo. 

Duib. 

^nsa; 

!        21 

1        25 

'5« 

40S     ig    6 
a75       I     6 
45      3    0 

■S  It 

1}  PER  Cent,  fek  Ahhuil 


Uatnal  Assurance  without  Untual  Liability. 

Policies  Pojalile  In  Lifetime. 

Nod -Forfeiture  Polloles  bj  Limited  Payments. 


SEPARATE    USE    POLICIES. 

Under  the  provisions  of  "The  Married  Women's  Property  Act,  1870," 
the  Company  issues  Tolicics  for  tlie  separate  use  and  benefit  of  Manied 
AV'omen  on  tlie  lives  of  their  husbands. 

Tlicse  Policies  do  not  form  part  of  the  husband's  personal  estate,  aaA 
ate,  therefore,  secured  to  their  intended  use  from  the  claims  of  his 
creditors,  should  he  afterwards  become  insolvent. 

Similar  Policies  are  issued  on  the  lives  of  Married  Women  (when  the 
husband  is  already  assured),  and  in  either  case  the  wife  has  entire  oontrol 
•ver  the  money  secuicd  to  her  by  the  Policv, 


BRITISH    EQUITABLE 

ASSURANCE    COMPANY. 


4,  Queen  Street  Place,  E.C. 

At  the  TWENTY-SECOND  ANNUAL  GENERAL  MEETING,  held  on  May 
24tli,  1877,  at  the  Office  of  the  Company,  4,  Queen  Street  Place,  E.C.,  FOUNTAIN 
JOHN  HARTLEY,  Esq.,  the  Chairman  of  the  Company  (Honorary  Secretary  of 
the  Sunday  School  Union),  presiding. 

The  Managing  Director,  WILLIAM  SUTTON  COVER,  Esq.  (Member  of  the 
London  School  Board— Deputy  Governor  of  the  Honourable  Irish  Society),  road  the 
following 

REPORT.  * 

The  Twenty-Second  Year's  Business  of  the  Company  presents  satisfactory 
results,  accomplished  in  face  of  a  general  depression  of  trade. 

2, 348  new  Policies  have  been  issued  assuring  £449,410,  }'ielding  a  New  Annual 
Tremium  Income  of  £12,950. 

The  Policies  in  force  at  the  end  of  the  year  were  22,594,  assuring  £4,014,886| 
and  yielding  an  Annual  Premium  Income  of  £124,810. 

The  amount  of  Death  Clauns  admitted,  Matured  Policies,  and  Bonuses,  has  been 
£41,869. 

From  the  commencement  of  the  Comptmy  £389,411  have  been  paid  fcr  Claims 
and  Bonuses  under  Policies. 

£60,255  have  been  added  to  the  Accumulated  Fund,  which  is  thus  raised  to 
£500,097. 

The  amount  laid  by  in  the  year  does  not  contain  either  purchase-money  for  annuities 
or  single  premiums. 

The  Investments  and  re-mvcstments  of  the  year,  exclusive  of  investments  iu  the 
Public  Funds,  have  been  as  follows  : — 

Freehold  Ground  Rents         £70,859 

Mortgages        17,400 

l^ans  on  Policies,  &c.  4,805 


Total £93,124 


The  average  rate  of  interest  on  the  Investments  of  the  year  being  £4.  13s.  lOd. 
per  cent 

The  amount  paid  for  Surrenders  was  £2,171— less  than  ij  per  cent  on 
premiums  received. 

The  Accounts  and  Securities  have  been  thoroughly  examined  by  the  Auditors. 

The  thanks  of  the  Board  are  presented  to  the  Policyholders  for  their  invaluable  aid 
in  extending  the  Company's  business. 

The  Managing  Director,  WILLIAM  SUTTON  COVER,  Esq.,  then  addressed  the 
Meeting  as  follows  : — 

Last  Year,  for  the  Twenty-first  time,  I  had  the  pleasant  task,  at  the  "Coming  of 
age"  of  the  British  Equitable  Assuranxe  Company,  of  presenting  my  Twenty- 
first  exposition  of  the  affairs  of  the  Company,  and  my  seventh  VaUiation  of  its  assets 
nnd  liabilities,  and  on  that  occasion  our  seventh  Division  of  Profits  was  declared,  which 
had  averaged  a  Reversionary  Bonus  of  One  and  a  quarter  per  cent,  per  annum  on  the 
amounts  assured  during  the  whole  duration  of  the  Company. 

That  Report  and  Division  of  Profits  gave  universal  satisfaction  to  our  Policyholders 
nnd  Shareholders,  and  notwithstanding  an  unexampled  stagnation  of  trade  has  con- 
tributed in  no  small  degree  in  enabling  me  this  day  to  present  to  you,  at  our  Twenty- 
second  Anniversary — \vliich  I  do  with  thankfulness — an  a<jcount  of  by  far  the  most 
mpccssful  year  the  Company  has  ever  hj\d. 


For  six  years  each  year's  New  Business  has  been  larger  than  the  preceding. 


No.  of 

Amount 

Year. 

Policies. 

Assured. 

17 

1,934 

£Z^»3^9 

18 

2,190 

380,050 

19 

2,307 

406,630 

20 

2,352 

420,570 

21 

2,154 

436,700 

22 

2,348 

449,410 

6 

13.285 

;C2.4I3,679 

As  22,594  Policies  Assuring  £4, 014, 886  were  in  force  at  end  of  Twenty-second 

year,  it  will  be  seen  that  about  three-fifths  of  all  Policies  in  force  have  been  taken 
out  in  the  kst  six  years,  and  are  fresh  from  selection.    They  are  also  on  young  lives. 


VTASTE  AND  REPARATION. 


At  the  end  of  our  Twenty-first  year  we  had 

IN  FORCE  ..  • _•_: 

Amount 
Received 
thereon . 


Waste. 


The  year's  waste  of 
business  has  been — 
By  Death  . . 

Surrender  . , 
Discontinued 


Total 


No.  of 
Policies 


225 

"7 

563 


905 


Amount 

of 
Policies. 


37,981 

24.350 
96,625 


158,956 


Annual 

Pie- 
miun)<i. 

~~£' 

1,444 
726 

2,722 


4,892 


15*291 
5.667 

6,526 


No.  of 

Policies. 


21,151 


•  • 


27,484 


Amount 

of 
Policies. 


Annual 
Premiums 


£ 

3»  724,432 


905       158.956 


£ 
116,753 


■  • 


4,892 


Thus  reducing  the  Business  that  was  in  force  at  the 
end  of  the  Twenty-first  year  to 

The  New  Business  of  the  Twenty-second  year  has 
increased  those  figures  by . .     .  •  

Making  the  Business  in  force  at  the  end  of  the 
Twenty-second  year       


20,246 
2,348 


3.565,476 
449,410 


111,861 
12,950 


22,594  ;f4,oi4,886;f  124,811 

I 


This  process  of  waste  and  reparation  goes  on  in  every  Life  Assurance  Company  every 
year  of  its  existence. 

It  renders  it  necessary  that  New  Busmess  in  adequate  amount  should  be  obtained 
yearly,  and  tlic  profit  on  a  portion  of  the  waste  goes  mr  towards  paying  the  cost  jof  its 
obtainaL 

We  see  that  905  Policies  which  had  been  some  years  in  force  have  been 
extinguished,  and  that  more  than  one-tenth  of  the  Business  in  force  at  the  end  of  the 
Twenty-second  year  has  been  taken  out  during  that  year,  and  is  fresh  from  selection. 

Thus  a  large  proportion  of  new  blood  has  been  transfused  into  the  Society,  and 
the  rate  of  mortality  is  prevented  from  so  rapidly  increasing  as  would  otherwise  be 
the  case. 

It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  the  proportion  of  waste  this  year  has  been  less  than  in 
any  former  year. 

The  New  Business  is  larger  than  in  any  of  the  preceding  five  years — an  incidental 
proof,  not  only  of  the  efficiency  of  our  agents,  but  likewise  of  the  just  confidence  placed 
ty  the  Policyholders  in  the  character  of  the  Directors ;  their  conviction  that  tlie 
Company  is  in  a  sound,  prosperous,  and  satisfactory  condition ;  and  their  knowledge 
that  its  affairs  are  administered  with  the  design  of  benefiting  the  Policyholders  to  the 
utmost.  But  it  shows  more  than  this,  viz.,  the  active  and  influential  exertions  of  the 
Policyholders  to  induce  others  to  assure  in  the  Company,  and  their  ready  sympathy 
with  the  agents  whom  thv'y  promptly  and  unceasingly  help  in  their  important  work. 

The  **Onc-get-onc"  plan  has  never  been  carried  out  by  any  Life  Office  with  the  same 
systematic  organization  and  successful  results  as  in  the  **  British  Equitable.** 

The  confidence  of  the  Policyholders  is  niore  particularly  shown  l^  the  small  number 


of  Policies  surrendered.  Out  of  2 1 , 1 51  Policies  in  force  at  the  end  of  the  Twenty-first 
year,  117  only  have  been  surrendered  to  the  Company.  There  was  paid  for  these 
surrendered  Policies  £2,171,  or  about  IJper  cent  upon  the  premiums  received  in  the 
year — the  smallest  percentage  we  have  had  for  many  years. 

We  had  at  risk,  we  have  seen,  21,151  Policies,  assuring  £3,724,432,  at  the 
commencement  of  the  year,  and  the  number  of  deaths  has  been  225,  or  a  little  over 

I  per  cent,  and  the  amount  paid  for  Death  Claims  and  Bonuses  has  been  £41,869  or 

I I  per  cent  on  the  amount  at  risk,  or  34f  per  cent  on  the  premiums  received  in  the 
Twenty-second  year.  A  continuous  low  mortality — almost  unexampled— has  charac- 
terized the  Company  from  the  commencement,  and  shows  how  carefully  our  large 
Business  has  been  selected  ;  the  influence  of  our  large  New  Business  in  keeping  down 
the  death  rate,  the  character  and  habits  tending  to  longevity  of  the  classes  firom  whom 
we  obtain  our  Assurances :  and  to  myself,  who,  from  the  commencement,  have  gone 
over  the  life  cases  of  the  Company,  and  recommended  to  the  Board,  on  the  data  of 
facts  and  professional  opinions  before  me,  the  disposition  of  every  case,  it  yields 
unalloyed  personal  satisfaction. 

There  are  few  Life  Offices  who  have  so  many  lives  assured  as  the  **  British  Ecjuitable," 
notwithstanding  its  comparative  youth  :  and  the  average  amount  per  Policy  is  smaller 
than  in  most  Companies,  and  this,  in  some  particulars,  places  us  at  a  disadvantage,  as 
being,  in  some  sense,  intermediate  between  an  ordinary  Life  Office  and  what  is  called  an 
Industrial  Office.  This,  of  course,  increases  both  the  expenses  of  the  searching  examina- 
tion and  investigation  of  each  new  Policy  we  feel  it  necessary  to  make,  and  also  the 
working  expenses  of  Policies  already  in  force ;  but  our  experience  shows  that  this  dis- 
advantage is  more  than  compensated  by  a  lower  continuous  rale  of  mortality,  and 
that  the  benefits  and  profits  to  the  Policyholders  are  not  inferior  to  those  in  Offices  less 
exceptionally  situated. 

While  on  this  question:  of  expenses,  I  will  observe  that  they  are  about  7J  per 
cent  less  on  the  premium  income  than  they  were  six  years  ago,  and  that,  seeing  the 
Company  has  now  a  fine  large  Business  in  force,  built  up  in  Twenty-two  years,  and 
exceeding  £4,000,000,  the  Directors  have  wisely  determined  to  discontinue— 
save  in  exceptional  cases — the  services  of  our  esteemed  Lecturer — Jabez  Inwards — whose 
services  to  the  Company  have  been  invaluable,  placing  him  on  a  retiring  pension,  with 
which  he  is  entirely  satisfied  ;  and  they  have  also  determined  on  other  measures  which, 
while  it  is  believed  they  will  not  decrease  the  ratio  of  New  Business  of  the  Company, 
will  materially  lessen  the  cost  of  its  obtainal,  so  that  a  gradual  but  effective  reduction 
of  percentage  of  expenses  to  premiums  vnW  in  future  take  place. 

In  reference  to  our  expenses  during  the  past  year,  it  must  be  observed  that,  as  New 
Business  costs  much  more  in  the  first  year  than  afterwards,  the  large  proportion  of  New 
Business  to  Business  previously  in  force,  has  greatly  tended  to  increase  the  ratio  of  ex- 
penses ;  and,  paradoxical  as  it  may  appear,  it  is  really  the  case  that,  if  we  had  been  less  suc- 
cessful in  obtaining  New  Business,  we  should  have  appeared  more  prosperous  if  viewed 
from  tlie  expense  standpoint  only.  It  is,  however,  not  fair  to  consider  tlie  expenses  of  a 
Company  solely.  It  is  more  equitable  to  take  the  claims  and  expenses  together,  and  to 
see  what  proportion  they  bear  to  the  premiums  received,  and  here,  as  our  claims  added 
to  our  expenses  only  amount  to  62  per  cent,  of  the  premiums  received,  we  stand  so  low 
that  only  six  Offices  in  the  Kingdom  are  lower,  of  which  six  the  ages  of  the  Com- 
panies are  5,  7,  9,  10,  11,  and  14  years. 

In  our  Twenty-second  year  we  received  from  premiums  £120,737,  the  premium 
income  from  Policies  in  force  at  the  end  of  the  year  was  £124, 81 1,  a  larger  sum;  but,  as 
a  large  proportion  of  our  premiums  are  paid  quarterly,  we  do  not  get  a  full  year's 
income  in  the  year  from  our  New  Business,  and  when  the  New  Business  is  in  excess  of  the 
prior  year's  New  Business,  which  has  been  the  case  for  the  last  six  years,  it,  to  a  small 
extent,  increases  the  apparent  percentage  of  expenses. 

We  have  also  received  in  interest  £19,318,  making  our  year's  revenue  £140,055, 

At  our  Twenty-first  Annual  Meeting,  by  reference  to  our  printed  report,  I  note  that  I 
said,  ''The  revenue  in  our  Twentv-first  year  was  £131,000  or  £9,000  in  excess  of  the 
preceding  year,  and  I  estimate  the  revenue  for  our  Twenty-second  year  at  not  less  than 
£140,000."  It  has  actually  exceeded  that  sum  by  £55.  I  also  said,  "  Our  Accumu- 
lated Fund,  at  the  moment  1  am  speaking,  amounts  to  about  £450,000,  while  it  is 
highly  probable  that  at  our  Twenty-second  Annual  Meeting  it  will  amount  to  Haif- 
a-Million sterling." 

My  calculation  was  this.  At  the  end  of  the  Twenty-first  Financial  Year  we  had 
laid  by  £439,842,  and,  making  allowance  for  the  period  of  a  year  between  that  dale 
and  the  Annual  Meeting,  we  must  have  laid  by  enough  to  bring  it  up  to  £450,000, 
and,  estimating  the  Twenty-second  year's  savings  at  £50,000*  we  should  have  Haif- 
a-Million by  the  date  of  the  Twenty-second  Annual  Meeting. 

We  hare  really  accumulated  that  amount  by  the  end  of  the  Twenty-second  year— thrca 


xnontl»s  earlier  than  I  expect*.  J— so  that  my  aRlicipat:or.s  liavc  been  more  iKan  fully 
realized. 

The  Twenty-third  year  will  have  an  increase  of  revenue.  First — from  the  interest 
yielded  by  the  £60,000  laid  by  and  profitably  invested  this  year,  and  Secondly — from 
an  increase  in  the  premium  income,  from  the  growth  of  the  Company's  Business,  and  I 
think  our  revenue  will  not  be  less  than  £150,000  for  the  year,  while  we  may  hope 
to  make  a  considerable  advance  in  our  Accumulated  Fund. 

Our  Accumulated  Fund  al  the  end  of  the  Twenty-first  year  amounted  to  £439, 842,  and 
we  have  laid  by  in  the  year — after  all  payments  for  Death  Claims  and  Bonuses,  Surrenders 
and  expenses — £60,255,  making  the  Accumulated  Fund,  at  the  end  of  the  Twenty- 
second  year,  £500,097.  This  sum,  laid  by,  is  equal  to  alx)ut  half  the  premiums  received 
in  the  year,  or,  if  we  consider  the  sum  laid  by  over  and  above  the  interest  received  in  the 
year,  £40,937,  is  about  34  per  cent,  on  the  premiums  received.  Now  I  remark  that 
only  four  Offices  have  laid  by  so  much  beyond  interest  and  annuity  receipts  during  the 
past  year  as  we  have,  and  one  only  has  laid  by  so  large  a  percentage  of  the  premiums^ 
besides  the  interest  and  excluding  purchase  moneys,  as  we  liave  done. 

Accumulated  Funds  of  Offices  at  end  of  their  Twenty-second  year  of  age : — 


Name  of  OfHce. 

Accumulated 
Fund. 

Of  which  laid 
by  in  year. 

Scottish  Equitable 

;£  763,871 

•  •  • 

OLftli    «••                        •••                        •••                        •••                         ••• 

647,030 

;C56,7'^4 

Equity  and  Law 
British  Equitable 

544,651 

/47.3»7 

500,097 

/^6o,25S 

English  and  Scottish  Law 

492,841 

••• 

British  Empire 

409,12! 

•  ■• 

Marine  and  General 

283,238 

/"l6,02I 

General           ..• 

261,000 

•  •• 

Lancashire 

254,972 

;^i3.452 

Mutual 

244,000 

•  •  • 

Provident  Clerks 

197,400 

;£'27,7!4 

Provincial 

193,624 

• 
••• 

Reliance 

125,264 

1 
« • . 

I  have  not  been  able  to  find  the  Accumulated  Funds  of  any  other  Offices  at  their 
Twenty-second  year,  nor  could  I  ascertain  the  amounts  laid  by  in  the  year  excq^t 
in  the  six  cases  quoted  above. 
Our  Investments  during  the  year  have  amounted  to  £93,124. 

£70,859  m  Freehold  Ground  Rents 
17,400  on  Common  Mortgage 
4,865  Loans  on  Policies,  etc. 

£93,124 


So  that  nearly  one-fifth  of  our  Accumulated  Fund  has  been  invested  during  the  last  year 
on  excellent  securities  and  yielding  interest  at  the  rate  of  £4.  13s.  lOd.  percent  per 
annum. 

The  year's  purchases  increase  the  amount  of  Freehold  Ground  Rents  to  nearly  one- 
half  of  the  Accumulated  Fund,  and  considering  that  these  have  been  well  purchased — 
that  many  have  Reversions  attached  to  them — that  the  value  is  set  down  at  cost 
price  only,  and  considering  also  the  high  price  this  class  of  securities  is  now  fetching^,  I 
think  it  probable  that  they  would  realize  between  £30,000  and  £40,000  more  than 
they  stand  at  in  our  Balance  Sheet,  so  that  you  see  we  have  not  overstated  our  wealtli. 

I  have  thus  endeavoured  to  give  you  a  bird's-eye  view  of  the  position  of  our  Company, 
and  shall  now  make  an  all-round  comparison  of  the  British  Equitable  Assurance  Com- 
pany with  all  other  Offices. 

I  shall  do  this  under  two  heads,  the  one  having  reference  to  the  actual  state  of  the 
Company,  the  other  to  the  governing  principles  which  render  this  Company  unlike  all 
others.  And  I  shall  quote  for  my  purposes  both  from  the  Government  Returns 
furnished  by  the  Offices,  and  from  the  **  A  13  C  Assurance  Guide." 

I  may  premise  that  this  Company  has  never  been  amalgamated  with  any  other,  or 

bought  the  Business  of  any  other  Company.       It   follows,  that   every  life   assured 

in  this  Office  has  been  examined  by  its  medical  staff  and  accepted  by  the  Directors  on 

what  they  have  deemed  sufficient  proof  of  its  quality. 

I  find  by  the  **  A  B  C  Guide**  0\?vl  ouX  ol^Z  Cwv^x^^wt  txam<«attd,  28  are 

amnlgamatcd  Offices, 


Nor  does  this  Company  cany  on  the  hazardous  businesses  of  Fire  Assurance  o? 
Marine  Assurance,  deeming  that  safety  imperatively  requires  that  a  Life  Office  should 
transact  Life  Assurance  only,  whereas  it  appears  that  36  Companies  carry  on  one 
or  other  of  these  businesses. 

Nordoes  the  Company  transact  Foreign  or  Colonial  Life  Assurance.  It  confines 
itself  to  English  Life  Assurance.  Many  Offices  transact  Life  Assurance  all  over  the 
world,  which  to  my  mind  renders  their  English  Life  Assurances  less  safe  than  they  other- 
wise would  be. 

Nor  does  this  Company  adopt  the  common  practice  of  issuing  half-credit  Policies, 
or  lend  money  on  personal  security,  as  many  Life  Offices  do,  to  the  peril,  as  I  think,  of 
their  Policyholders. 

This  Company  has  had  the  great  advantage,  moreover,  of  having  been  founded  since 
the  Government  has  issued  the  English  Life  Table,  based  on  data  so  extensive  that  no 
other  Life  Table  can  be  compared  to  it,  and  which,  being  deduced  from  observations  of 
the  experience  of  a  population  under  normal  conditions,  is  the  tniest  of  all  Tables  for 
the  purposes  of  Life  Assurance,  and  will,  I  think,  eventually  supersede  all  others. 

This  Office  has  been  guarded  by  that  Table  from  a  great  danger,  which  has  either 
been  experienced  or  come  very  near  to  by  Offices  adopting  tlie  rates  of  the  Northampton 
Table  of  mortality,  which,  giving  an  untrue  representation  of  the  longevity  likely  to  be 
experienced  by  older  lives,  has  Ted  to  the  assurance  of  those  lives  at  rates  viitually 
inadequate  to  the  risk.  Of  course  Offices  which  adopted  these  rates  have  been  flooded 
with  older  lives,  and  although  they  have  afterwards  abandoned  the  **  Northampton ''  and 
adopted  the  Carlisle  rates,  it  has  not  been  until  they  have  granted  assurances  for — 
in  some  cases — millions  of  money,  upon  the  **  Northampton  **  inadequate  rates.  These 
Offices  are  marked  by  a  continuous  excessive  rate  of  mortality,  which  will  be  seen  by 
comparing  them  with  other  Offices  of  their  own  ages. 

This  evil  has  been  rendered  greater,  because,  seeing  business  come  in  so  fast  and  not 
suspecting  they  were  selling  Life  Assurance  at  the  older  ages  under  cost  price,  they 
have,  it  is  to  be  feared,  been  lax  in  their  investigations  of  the  fitness  for  assurance  of  the 
lives  proposed,, by  which  several  large  bodies  of  inferior  lives  have  been  assured. 
Thus,  while  dwelling  in  a  fool's  paradise,  they  have  incurred  two  of  the  greatest 
dangers  that  Life  Assurance  Offices  could  bring  upon  themselves.  Our  rates  are  calcu- 
lated on  the  English  Life  Table,  and  our  periodical  Valuations  are  by  the  same  Table  of 
mortality. 

Although  valuing  temperance  as  one  ofthe  greatest  safeguards  of  life,  and  scrutinizing 
the  habits  of  life  in  this  respect  of  all  applicants  for  assurance  with  jealous  care,  we 
have  considered  it  would  be  inexpedient  either  to  confine  Life  Assurance  to  total 
abstainers  or  to  have  a  separate  section  devoted  to  temperance  lives,  as,  unfortunately, 
many  total  abstainers  fall  into  intemperate  habits — passing  fiom  one  extreme  sometimes 
to  the  other.  These  would  have  to  be  draughted  off  yearly  from  a  temperance  section 
to  a  general  section,  and  although  in  such  a  case  there  would  be  a  great  difference 
in  the  rate  of  death  claims  between  the  two  sections,  it  would  be  mainly  through  the 
unjuvt  importation  of  so  many  back-sliders  yearly  into  the  general  section.  The 
practice  of  this  Office  is  not  to  make  any  invidious  distinction,  and  to  assure  none 
but  really  temperate  lives — not,  of  course,  confining  that  title  to  total  abstainers. 

With  these  preliminary  observations  I  remark  there  are  16  Companies  younger  and 
73  older,  2  Offices  being  of  the  same  age  with  our  own. 

13  Companies  have  in  force  less  than  1,000  Policies 

26  ,,  „  over  1,000  and  under    5,000  Policiei 

28  „  „  „     5.000         „        10,000    „ 

12  „  ..  „  10,000         „        20,000    „ 

8  ,,  „  »»  20,000  and  upwards. 

We  are  in  the  '*  8,"  having  the  largest  number  of  Policies,  and  4  Companies  only 
not  being  Industrial  Companies  have  a  larger  number  of  Policies  than  we  have.  It 
may  be  wondered  why  we  have  so  large  a  body  of  policyholders  ;  in  fact,  many  times 
as  numerous  as  those  of  many  Offices.  The  reason  is,  that  long  before  Mr.  Gladstone 
advised  those  who  wished  to  succeed,  to  go  to  the  masses  of  the  people  for  their 
supporters,  we  did  it ;  neglecting  the  hackne}'ed  and  well-beaten  preserves  of  Life 
Assurance,  we  went  into  the  uncultivated  regions  and  harvested  our  Policies  by 
tliousands. 
Looking  at  the  Amount  op  Assurances  in  Force,  we  hare  upwards  of  Four 

Millions  assured. 

19  Companies  have  less  thanl  Million  in  Force. 

10  „  more  than    .••    1  and  less  than  2  Millions  in  Force 

12  ,,  ,,  •••    2  ,,  3  ,, 

13  „  „  •••     o  ,,  ^  ,, 
34             „                    „           ••.    4  Millions 


Considering  the  Premium  Income  we  have  an  income  of  over  £124,000. 

II  Companies  have  a  Premium  Income  less  than  ...  £10,000 

17  „  „  bctAveen   ...  £10,000  tnd    £50,000 

25     „      ;;      :;         „    ...  £50,000  „  £124,000 

36  have  a  Premium  Income  exceeding  ours. 

Considering  the  progress  made  by  The  increase  OF  Premiums  received  ill  the 

YEAR  OVER  THE  {"RECEDING  YEAR,  OUF  IncieaSC  waS  £6,710. 

In  the  case  of  32  Offices  there  was  a  Decrease. 

In  37  other  Companies,  where  there  was  an  increase,  it  was  smaller  than  in  our  own. 

And  our  increase  has  been  exceeded  by  21  Offices  only.  It  is  curious  to  note  that 
there  are  7  Companies  whose  total  Premium  Income  is  less  than  our  net  incretse 
over  the  previous  year. 

In  the  Average  Amount  assured  per  Policy,  we  stand  lower  than  all  utt 
Offices,  with  six  exceptions. 

Our  Accumulated  Fund  exceeds  Half-a-Million,  and  it  was  increased 
IN  the  Twenty-second  year  by  £60,255. 

22  Offices  have  a  smaller,  and  58  a  larger  Accumulated  Fund  than  the  "  British 
Equitable." 

In  1 7  Companies  the  Accumulated  Fund  has  decrf-ASED  in  the  last  year.  In  52 
other  Companies  the  increase  on  the  year  has  been  less  than  our  own, 
and  only  22  Companies  have  laid  by  more,  in  the  year,  than  we  have. 

I  come  now  to  amounts  paid  for  Death-claims  and  Bonuses. 

62  Companies  have  paid  larger  amounts;  29  Companies  have  paid  SMALLER 
amounts.  Our  ratio  of  Death-claims,  &c.,  to  premiums  is  smaller  than 
IN  ANY  other  Company— with  six  exceptions — of  which  the  ages  are  5,  7,  9f 
10,  11  and  14  years. 

II  Offices,  more  recently  established  than  our  own,  have  A  MUCH  LARGER  RATIO 
of  mortality.  Taking  the  per  centage  of  Death-claims  and  Expenses 
added  together,  only  5  Offices  are  below  us,  and  ok  these  5,  4  are 
YOUNGER  Companies. 

Out  of  92  Offices,  only  41  have  laid  BY,  besides  Interest'  and  price  of 
Annuities,  anything  out  of  Premiums  received,  and  out  of  the  41,  only  4 
have  laid  by  more,  out  of  premiums  received,  than  the  "British 
Equitable." 

34  Offices  indeed — many  of  whom  boast  of  their  low  expenses— have  laid  by  LESS 
than  they  have  received  for  Interest  and  price  of  Annuities,  and  in  17 
cases  the  Accumulated  Fund  has  largely  Decreased. 

As  to  New  Business.  The  number  of  new  Policies  issued  by  our  Company  has 
been  exceeded  in  three  Companies  only,  while  the  Amount  of  our  New  Policies  is 
exceeded  in  only  14  Offices,  and  the  New  Annual  Premiums  by  21  Companies 
only. 

'1  here  is  no  essential  particular  in  the  position  of  a  life  Office  that  is  omitted  in  this 
bird's-eye  comparison  of  the  "  British  Equitable  "  with  other  Offices. 

In  this  brief  survey  I  have  avoided  the  designation  of  any  particular  Office  by  name 
or  otherwise,  and  the  comparison  is  to  my  own  mind  most  satisfactory. 

The  mar\'ellous  growth  and  prosperous  state  of  the  Company  are  really  the  outgrowth 
of  the  policy  inaugurated  at  its  foundation  and  steadfastly  pursued  ever  since. 

The  Company  is  unique  in  this  respect,  that  it  is  based  on  the  important  principle 
of  "Mutual  Assurance,  without  Mutual  Liability,"  and  its  rates  on  the  English 
Life  Table.  It  depends  for  its  Business  on  the  masses  of  the  people  whom  it  educates 
in  Life  Assurance.  It  strives  by  the  origination  and  adoption,  from  time  to  time,  0( 
sound  and  valuable  improvements  in  the  practice  of  Life  Assurance,  to  render  it  as 
beneficial  as  possible  to  the  Policyholders.  Hence — among  other  features-  Policies  made 
payable  in  life  time  by  the  application  of  the  profits  to  this  purpose,  and  Separate  use 
Policies.  It  cultivates  a  spirit  of  brotherhood  among  the  Policyholders.  And  finally  it 
enlists  their  invaluable  aid  by  the  *'One-get-one"  plan,  so  that  every  Policyholder 
may  become  a  perennial  source  of  Business  to  the  Company. 

The  Chairman  :  It  now  becomes  my  duty  to  move  the  adoption  of  the  Report  and 
Balance-sheet,  and  I  must  say  that  every  year  as  1  rise  to  perform  this  duty  I  do  it 
with  increasing  pleasure  and  ever-growing  confidence.  There  are  one  or  two  personal 
matters  I  must  refer  to  in  the  first  instance,  and  one  is  tlie  absence  of  our  good  friend 
Mr.  George  Thomas  Dale,  the  Vice  Chairman,  who  has  been  connected  with  the 
Company  ever  since  its  formation,  lie  has  l)een  suffering  from  a  bronchial  attack, 
whicii  has  confined  him  to  his  house.  I  saw  him  yesterday,  and  he  wished  to  be 
kindly  rtmembeied  to  his  brother  Directors  and  Shareholders,  and  I  am  glad  to  hope 
thiit  in  the  course  of  a  week  or  Iwo  he  will  be  with  us  again.  Another  personal  matter 
wiijcii  1  must  mention  is  ihe  very  eslVas^^cXotj  <:vtt>iTsca\asic^>&^TAm^(riend  Dr.  Under- 


tlLL  has  received,  within  a  very  recent  period,  a  testimonial,  richly  deserved  by  twenty- 

ren  years  of  faithful  service,  from  the  Baptist  Missionary  Society.     There  are  two  or 

things  in  the  Report  which  I  should  like  to  refer  to  by  way  of  emphasizing  them. 

satisfactory  amount  of  new  business — 2,348  Policies  for  £449,410,  being  an 

on  the  past  year.    This  is  not  a  small  matter.     It  involved  a  large  amount  of 

)ur  on  the  part  of  the  Agents,  the  Board,  and  every  member  of  the  staff  of  the 

my.     Then  there  is  another  ihing  not  less  important.  .  The  small  number  of 

it£  claims — £41 ,869,  or  34  per  cent,  of  the  premium  income — and  the  small 

lount  of  waste  by  surrendered  and  discontinued  policies^  testifies  fo  the  growth  of 

^confidence  in  the  Company.    Another,  and  not  the  least  mfiportant,  item  is  the  satis- 

'::^iCtQiy  addition  of  £60,000  to  the  Accumulated  Fund,  bringing  it  up  to  the  very 

■  'Snpectable  figure  of  a  little  above  Half-a-MilUon.     The  growth  of  that  fund  has  been 

*^^rery  satisfactory.     It  is  just  double  what  it  was  five  years  ago,  and  five  years    ag  >  it 

.  ^ad  just  doubled  what  it  was  five  years  previously.     I  am  quite  sure  everything  in  the 

"present  state  of  things  shows  that  there  is  a  growing  amount  of  confidence  in  the 

Company  which  we  may  fairly  rejoice  in,  which  we  think  the   Company  has  fairly 

^.^amed,  and  which  I  have  no  doubt  will  tell  in  the  future  to  the  increase  of  its  business. 

Kot  only  is  there  a  very  ample  proportion  of  the  future  premiums  reserved  to  meet 

every  contingency  likely  to  arise,  but  we  have  in  hand  between  50  and  60  per  cent. 

of  the  premiums  received  on  all  policies  in  force. 

^  Mr.  John  MiDDLETON  Hare  :  In  the  temporary  absence  of  our  valued  friend  Mr. 
Dale,  I  second  the  motion,  and  beg  leave  to  express  my  entire  concurrence  With 
everything  that  has  fallen  from  the  Chairman. 

Mr.  James  Clarke — ^Auditor — (Propiietor  and  Editor  of  the  Christian  World)  : 
I  am  very  glad  to  be  able  once  more  to  bear  my  emphatic  testimony  to  the  admirable 
manner  in  which  the  accounts  of  the  Company  are  kept,  and  in  which  all  the  books, 
vouchers,  and  deeds  were  presented  to  tne  Auditors  for  their  inspection.  I  need 
hardly  say  that  the  attention  of  the  Auditors  was  especially  directed  to  the  Securities 
of  the  Company  and  we  are  abundantly  satisfied  that  the  funds  are  very  wisely  and 
securely  invested. 

Mr.  Alfred  Henry  BAYNRS—Auditor— (Secretary  of  the  Baptist  Missionary  Society) : 
I  am  glad  of  an  opportunity  of  confirming  everything  that  Mr.  Clarkr  has  said.    I  am 
here  to  testify  my  perfect  and  entire  satisfaction  with  the  way  in  which  all  the  business,  as 
represented  by  the  books,  has  been  conducted.     I   should   like   to  say  how  very 
orderly  we  found  everything,  and  how  very  ready  we  found  the  Staff  to  assist  us  in 
every  conceivable  way.     Bersonally,  I  am  very  glad  indeed  to  be  connected  with  a 
Company  that  has  been  so  ably  managed,  and  that  has,  so  far  as  my  judgment  goes,  a 
vciy  fine  future  before  it. 
The  Resolution  was  then  put  to  the  meeting,  and  carried  unanimously. 
The  Directors  retiring  by  rotation — Mr.  George  Thomas  Dale  and  Mr.  William 
Macdonald  Basden  were  re-elected. 
The  Auditor  retiring  by  rotation — Mr.  James  Clarke,  was  re-elected. 
Mr.  John  Middleton,Hare  proposed,  Mr.  W.  R.  Simmons,  of  Manchester,  seconded, 
and  Mr.  '.Tuttle,  of  Norwich,  supported  the  motion  :  "  lliat  in  view  of  the  Report 

E resented  to-day,  and  recollecting  tlie  luminous  and  comprehensive  address  which  he 
as  given  us,  the  thanks  of  the  Shareholders  are  most  eminently  due  to  the  Managing 
Director  for  his  past  efforts,  and  for  the  ability  which  he  manifests  on  all  occasions  in 
meeting  every  exigency  and  emergency  as  it  anses,"  which  was  carried  by  acclamation. 
The  Rev.  Samuel  Dunn  moved,  and  Mr.  Jabez  Inwards  seconded  the  followmg 
lesblution  :  "  That  the  cordial  thanks  of  the  Shareholders  are  due  and  are  hereby  pre- 
sented to  the  different  Officers  by  whose  faithful,  diligent  efforts  the  Company  continues 
to  be  promoted  and  advanced.  To  the  Solicitor — Mr.  Henry  Cover — who  besides 
his  directly  professional  services  regularly  attends  the  Sittings  of  the  Board  of 
Directors,  thereby  contributing  both  legal  and  practical  assistance  m  numerous  cases  as 
they  arise,  and  facilitating  the  prompt  as  well  as  the  prudent  dispatch  of  business.  To 
the  Medical  Officers— the  exercise  of  whose  skill  and  care  cannot  be  dissociated  from 
the.  low  rate  of  mortality  which  has  happily  marked  the  past  year.  To  the  Sub- 
Manager — Mr.  Fairey — whose  intelligent  assiduity  and  watchful  attention  over  the 
business  of  his  office  have  greatly  contributed  to  the  regularity  and  punctuality  of 
its  transaction,  and  to  the  Agents  of  the  Company,  who  together  with  the  Department^al 
Staff  have  extended  and  maintained  its  interests  in  the  respective  spheres  of  their 
constant  enterprise  or  steady  activity.'* 

.  The  Proceedings  closed  with  a  vote  of  thanks  to  the  Chairman)  m.oved  by  Mr. 
IIvlford,  and  seconded  by  Mr.  Baugh,  of  Birmingham. 

^,B. — YkQ  payment  made  to  any  A^ent  or  other  person  will  be  deemed  a  payment  made  to  or 
for  the  Company,  unless  the  party  making  such  payment  obtain  a  receipt,  signed  by  the  Manager  or 
^ub -Manager,  for  the  same. 
Cloo,ooo-6-77-) 


BRITISH  EQUI 

ASSURANCE    COMPANY. 


Jl'^ffl 


CAPITAL— A  QUAUTEE  OP  A^JEELIOI. 

Office— 4,    QUEEN    STREET    PLACE,    LONDON,    F-C 


wlUtyfit. 


Qirtttois. 

WILLIAM  MACDON:aLD  BASDEN,  Eiq.,  Gnat  SiiiU  Hditf i,  n 

GEORGE  THOMAS  DALE.  Eiq.,  lUyiwMH. 

VMIXIAM  SUTTON  COVER,  Ew,  4.  Qotoi  Sini*  Pbee  (Uembtr  of  tie  L=*.  xv 

Ikurd— Dcpuiy-GoTEmorol  Ihc  MoDoiiUe  h'ah  Saci«U). 
JOHN'ilinDLETOtl  HARE,  Eji^  Sydeoban. 

I'-OUNTAINJOHNHARTLEV,  Eiq.,  Addl* Sunt,  (Hm.  Sk.— Suna«r  Si^^  <^^U- 
WILLIAKI  GEORGE  LEGION,  E«|.,  LinoilDri  In. 
WILLIAM  SMITH,  Eiq..  Upper  Nunrosd. 
LDWARD  CEAX  UNDERHILL,  Ex),  LUD,  Haiftpttod  (Hm.  Sec— Bt^tal  lbk>  . 

Socioy). 

SDlidlOT. 
HENRY  COVER,  Eiq,.4o,  King  Wmiam  Eiratr,  E.IZ.  (Memhw  of  Iba  t 


aBd«lt>-- 


LONDON  AND  WESIMINSTER  BANK, 
WILLIAItl     SUTTON     COVER,     Eiq.,    F.S.S, 


TluDitoK. 

ALFRED  HENRV  DAVNES,  Eiq,  Puukt  (Secrrtuy— B^irt  UnmBioTT  »>da:rt> 

AMLS  CLARKE,  E!.q..  Fleet  StreeL,  Cilr  (PiDpn<^l<'*»d  Edilot  "CtriilimK  HVrtf'lt 

HENRY  GOULD  SHARP,  E»i.,  Tiubridsc  Wdk. 


MaTlEiii;c«<^  pmperty  within  IheVuIted  KiacOom 

CraiiiHl  Rum  (CiKT.lA;  Freebalil) 

Killi  h  GMimineiil  Secuiilia 
l.dlMTi  sDd  Ci>lHlinl  Governnifllt  Reciirlllei       ... 
Fo'ciffn  Corenimeni -hi.  (Uniled  Sim«  DebO... 
J^jlivny  andDlherdebenturauid  de1iEnluT«  FLfiElci 

U".  di.  tlutel  (pnfenii«WKl«diiiaiy]   ,. 

llniL'LC  prepcfir  ■■-  —  ■"  '-' 

l.aniii  uihtti  perb^DaliccuLiEy  ...  ,.. 

Agenu-  tiabDce.        

JjTiii  OH  ibfi  CDiapui/i  rotJd» 


lluefnmiundtypEtionl 
Fuinltute,  Flliinai,  &<^ 

Sediicl— 

CalmadmlttedbulDi] 


Parllculars   of    ElghUon    Hundred    Death    Claims    paid     br  I 
Company  may  be  obtftlaed  of  llio  A§eQt&  ' 


JAUTTABT  SI,  1877. 


^^^^m 


Price  Bd. 


BUu  IL 


i?" 


Br  r,  n. 


r> 


aO  N  TENTS- 
Ko^  l^L— THB  TWO  "COUm" 

I^tt-OUB  UROSHT  KBED  OF  TBI!  HOLY  SPIBIT 
l,8ai^"B1Wr  IS  THE  LORD.- 
l,MI.-COUIKa— ALWAYS  COinNQ. 

ijm^^  oasEAT  WORD  IK  T&orBUiu8  raass 


PABUXOBB  *  ALABASTEB,  4,  pAtstneftir  BdUiu>> 


Ai>v«iri»*ifKirr«< 


SAMPLE 


PAC 


500,000 

CHOCOLATE  POWDI 

Wm  Ql*»  Aw«7  U  tbc 

literaatiMil  KitikiUra   cf  IHl, 

It  ifl  B»ooiamend«d  by  tbe  Fsoolty,  DUI7- 

lOne  Cap  o;  Twmty  made  in  Ons  lOciii 

'  UJUi  OB  SVOdK  HOT  RSiiUlXKD. 

0.^  hy  tiX  Qtvat*.  On*  ShUlin^  pv  P.mbI. 

By  Hor  Hajei^'i  Boyal  Letton  Patent 

SBI^  Commercial  Steam  Mills,  Londai 


lAIBlZSS  DBNHBTaT 


w 


AATUIQIAL  Trnfffl. 


SMITHS 


TASTELESS 


)ST 

lUNDEUO.V     ANTItlJLl 


*ut^  3r*t  and  :« 
hu  ■lllKftla  but  1 


••"-r.    frM  bf  p^  b; 


HOM.OWAY'S  OINTMENT 
tbroml  far  the  C 

Olomtloni,  BDd  rRm«.l._    

•dMUrrir  extirpate*  «li  nrglocUil  or 


Mr.  G.  H.  JONES,  Surgeon  Denthl 

67,     OREAT    RtrSSELL    STREET,     LONDON 

HAS  OBTAINED  HER  MAJESTY'S  ROYAL  LETTERS  PATE 

F«hki.B,(KU»  ptol™.j.l«»^  »,U,.liOg-Jtu- M..!J  [Uaadun.pHV,.-. 

Artificial  Teeth  by  Atmospheric  Pressnr,^ 
PAIWPHLET     GRATIS     AND      POST       r 


won  >  n-puiniioa  b„,t  ^  f^, 

'  -"inRl/  lrt«»J  Rcabhjr  o-md (ilajnls. 

JOHN    QOSNELL     &     CO.'S 

Traill  k    p«i.UkO  wklleUM,    prwUeto   ifa,  JILj  fnm 
Ttj  1.  b«J  or  «U    Pofumro.  Mil    f.%>wj.i^  «,.: 


▲DVERTISBMBNT8. 


FIELD  &  CO.'S  HOM(EOPATHIC   SPECIFICS 

BaTO  proved  from  the  moiit  ample  experienoe  an  entire  BuceeBa.    Simple,  Prompt, 
ElBciont,  and  Koliablc.    Each  Ko.  indicates  a  distinct  remedy. 

Nos.  Cures  a   4. 

8.  Boili,  Carbuncles,  and  Painfnl 
Eruptions 1     1 

9.  Trouble!  of  Infknt  Lifb,  Teeth- 
ing, Ilostlessnoss,  Crying, 
Broken  Sleep,  Stomach-ache, 
and  Convulsions        1     1 

10.  Aithma,  Oppressed  Breathing, 
Palpitation,  Woak  Circulation, 
and  Unhealthy  Skin 1     1 

11.  Coldi,  Chill,  Fevers,  Inflamma- 
tion, &Q,  1     I 


1 
1 
1 
1 
1 


Cons  s. 

U  iBdigttStioii,    Waterbrash,     Foul 

Mouth,  and  Flatulency  ...  1 
IL  VennOgiu,  and  InflnensaColds ...  1 
I  EoopiBg  Cough  and  Violent  Cough  1 
L  AiArrhoBa,  in  Adults  or  Children .  1 
L  Wormf,  Worm  Fever,  Worm  Colic,  1 

L  VuToni  Debility,  Hysteria,  Fear, 

Molancholy,  Loss  of   Vigour, 

and  Dopression  of  Spirits     ...  1 
.  OoniUpatioB,  Blind  Pile,  dsc.     ...  1 

The  Bemtdiu  are  sent  by  poat  to  any  part  of  the  country^  on  receipt  oftheprice^ 

in  Pontaye  or  lUccipt  Stampe, 

iomflMputhio  Tincture  or  Pilules,  forwarded  on  receipt  of  price,  post  free.    A  strong 
3am,  eontainiag  12  Bottlei  of  HomoBopathio  Kedicines  (Pilules  or  Tinotnxei),  with 

Guide  Book,  post  free,  for  6e. 


1 
1 


»e  T'. 


(LATE  RENDALL  *•  Co.) 

HOMCEOPATHIO   CHEMISTS, 

IIIGUI     HOLBOHN 

Hext  Door  to  the  Inns  of  Court  Hotel. 


MR.    GEO.    THOS.    CONGREVE'S    WORK 

onsr  co3srsTJ3iwfl::pa?ion^, 

Its  Nature,  Symptoms,  Stages,  and  Successful  Treatment. 

Xhs  Bxperience  of  many  years  from  Cases  in  all  part^  of  the  Kingdom.     Also,  conUinin^  chapters  oa 

the  troatment  of 

ASTHMA,   CHRONIC    BRONCHITIS,   COUOH,  etc,  etc. 
Post-free  for  6  NtanipH.  Arom  the  Author, Cooxaa  Laiuob.  Pbckii  %m. 

jronCE. -Mr.  rONOREVK  will  be  at  home  for  personal  oonsultanon  on  Tl'KSDAY,  TiniRS- 
DAY,  and  SAIl^RDAY  mornings  ONLY,  btfom  One  o'clock.  But,  na  he  is  oocttM«»nally  called  away 
sn  Saturday.  PatieiitH  from  the  ronntrv  are  |»artii*ularly  retiucKtod  to  chf  ose  th«  lonnor  day*. 

OBSERVX:.— It  in  not  E.**SKNTIAL  for  an  v  to  have  a  iier^onal  intcrriiw,  thouph  in  «ome  casei  an 
sdTontage.  Thfise  who  do  not  ^hould  M/nd  a  ututiment  of  their  catfeK,  in  full,  by  letter  (tttc  ^ueitions 
fsr  that  purpose,  pu^*  32  of  Mr.  Conf?revcV  TiM»itihc). 


New  Cases— First  Publislied,  January,  1877. 

Case  of  Consumption  (Advanced  StaffO)  in  Cornwall. 


On  the  fith  May  I  revived  :i  letter  from  Mr.  W.  IT.  II .  of  1*. ,  ('«.mwull.  with  refer 

to  hi*  bTothrr*H  r.iM—  a  MmnK  ninn  24  vear*  of  a^'C,  *•  th*-  only  h'T'*  "f  «*  widowfl  m-.thrr.  lie 
had  plenri-V  in  thr  Trrvi«.ijR  PoptrniNT.  from  trhirh  thrre  w;in  wp-irti  il  re-  ovi-iy.  I'M'-i-nt  illness  1 
tbn-e  to  four  wet»k^  hut  f.,r  nin*-  w.eks  tntir"!v  hiil  by  ;  cxp'Ctoriitwin  T'U'ulrnt,  JUi.l  haU-.'i-pii 


— ,  C«*mw!ill.  with  refereneo 

"'e  had 
from 

^^^ _ „.,„,^. , intin 

twentv-foiir  hour- ;'»p.i«imodic  breith-nj?;  8«'creti»n»  unhaliir.il;  1os.k  cif  fl»-h  anil  ntrenKth.  At  thii 
time  hi*,  onn  doctor's  ir-poit  w;i«.  th.it  "  hf  could  not  rrrorer^  he  must  dit  V  I  •  •  nt  nud».  ine  with  .ettjr 
of  advic.-.  &c.  In  tbrn*  wi-.  k>  tli.'  p.iti.-nt  f«  U  "  slr.»npT,  :uul  roneh  n  Httl«*  esi^l.  r'  In  another  r«»Tt- 
niffht,  **sv:i  nioH"  Jmprovid,  anl  ^xpfctor.ition  1«— ,  md  app«i;ti-  impiovid."  Alter  this,  in  c"n-cquenoe 
of  b«'in»r  •.  id«nt.i!ly  without  mt  vli.  in.-  f..r  .i  f.w  dnvx.  the  psitiml  M-niewhat  ruUp-i  d,  but,  at  th.-  enci  of 
July  he  hni  acain  "-o  proKri»>*r.|  uh  to  prt  dtiwn  to  V>ri:ikf;i-t  every  day.  "AH  i.ur  frij  ndj«,  ./^^jtc*  tlie 
brother, 
and  p 

iVTOpt' -  ._  ,-     — ,  _  .. „    --    ,  .. 

•  great  pli-a-Mire  in  "ayiisfcmv  br'.th«r  has  r«*»unied  hi-s  work.     I  uttr.butc  hi«  rect»v«rjiiir  to  you,  under 
the  bles^ir.g  of  llira  in  whom  we  live,  and  move,  and  havo.  our  b<  iuR.        Yours  gnitufully,  W.  II.  K. 

Extract  fVom  a  letter  of  Bev.  H.  Bax,  St.  Keot*8. 

••  I  am  hnppy  to  inform  von  that  in  almost  every  cn^c  in  which  T  huTC  rccomiuvuded  your  medicine 
(whether  Cough  or  Whooping  Cough,  Ac.)  it  has  proved  cffivaciotus.'*  Juiy  li*'*!  l*'®- 


her.  •'  .IT*  MirpriM-d.  ITjw  »iwn  uu  d-cal  att*  nd.u.t  railed  v«  .ti.-id.iy.  and  •  xpn-sM-d  hiifit-ell  Mirjinw!*! 
p  eii5id."  In  Ai!RU!«t  he  lepottid  him-eli  o.--  fei  hnjr  'Mi't  for  work."  And  ho.  imimivi  ment  in  all 
ptonis  r..ntinu«"d  unMl  0«:'<iI.it  .^th,  when  I  rrrrived  tlie  loUcwinjc  letter  :— *•  Vi-ry  Dear  Sir,— I  take 


I  PORTRAIT  ALBUMS 


f  Barut  £HV£LOPE  CASES,  18t. 
ntto  fiLOrCXHG  BOOXS,  lOk.  ed 
TU  CAJ}D1S8,  10*.  6d.  to  a  Onilicu. 
XUrwt  hSmcnSSy  lOi.  «il. 
y  SLOTS  lOZBS,  8*.  U.,  ISi.  U. 

3  aoxAP  Boon  aid  albuke. 

C  OABO  OAS£S,     aSAS  OASBS. 
^  nUTAUDS.  KoiulUd,  7>.  ed. 

fBOOK  SUSS  ItoiiDM.  b.  ed. 
WOSX  BOX£>,  7%.  Sd. 
nATioi£&;  cAiunEn.  su 


OF   THE    NE-w 

will  iBit  fcr  yoan,  fro 

.^-  ■WEITIHG  CASES  of  evei^  description,  a  choice 

:  DRESSING  BAGS  for  Ladies  &  Geni 

^  POBTMAMTEATJS,  DRESSING  CASES,  from  21 

POCKII  BOOKB.  PEHCI 
DESPATCH  BOXES.  21.  i 
FDRSEa,  li.  to  40*.  PA1 
601*1  CAEEB  of  a  47^ 

IBUHai  B0XB8  ?rj 
BEBKB  for  Bo«  g.  st 
lADIlB-  KAHD  BAOK^ 


»•  Children's  &  other  Gift  Books,  from  is, 


I 


xnrs 

WRITING    PAPER    AND    BNviTZ^SrrA 

RO  C<£ABOS  Duulo  far  Plmln  lUunping.     P»rti*«  mb  brfn^  ^' 

P«eW  (rf  UO  ShMta  Dj  ».>t-  P>pac     ...     6d.  I     S50  DMhU  Kdv.,  *"**** 


TUek 


L 


\      Hon  REJUiwas,  atora,  vtsKw/  "md  day  "" 


DAY  B| 


MS. 


FEBHPARY  28.  18T7.  Pries  8d. 


18  M  r.  H.  fspi  RfiElli 


aOlSTTEaSTTS- 

No,  ],336.— A  FAMILY  SERMON, 

1^37.— LOVE'8  MEDlCr.VHa  AND  MIBACLK8. 

1^S8.— WORK  FOR^,IE.SUS.  ^ 

""    1.339— IDOLS  ABOLISHED. 

1,8*0,— MANOAH'S    WIFE    AND    HBE    EXCELLENT 
AEGUMKNT. 


&I)VBBTlB81tEMT9. 


500,000    SAMPLE    PACI 

^  CHOCOLATE  POWDl 

W«n  QlTM  A"»7  *t  ttw 

UterutiMul  EiUUHm  •<    „„. 

AnJ  TlKiiuuidt  arc  aow  aiiof  It,  ntouiuMtaS  H  W  ^ 
It  U  BaoommQDdad  by  tlio  VaoaJty.  ^^^^ 

One  Cup  or  Twenty  made   In  OM  tti»«* 

J*//Jt  OS  BVGAK  for  KEQirlMSI^ 
BM  bj  «ll  Qnmt,  One  libllUac  jxw  ?"«»*• 


By  Her  Majoity-.  Eoyal  I*ettorm  Pft«iA 

ConmieTclal  Steam  MiUs,  Loudon 


I 


ItKLUfijl'   FROM   OQUQH   IW   TEM     WITNUTKH, 

HAYMAN'S    BALSAM    OF    HOREHOUNO 

MMttM.  nnntMIU.  (k>>abt.  tD■lnti^  INSaliy  i4  ltt>>itac.  SlMUiui    oT    U«— •     !!»«—■»*■ 
TlSlwT   Uii  n-Trr-,  fr-    t l-mgiT^  hfitiiiniir-ii  nil-'  -"■'^   If  v*<' 


kn^'-ril 


•TrliifT.anfMniltdirrMirK'bKanAivn-u-h  kpni^ft  .l.r  Iwti"- 

il»MI.T..Inllfc»ll»tMII»MBIlfljrUrMf»M  kg.  U'H<    Bite     i*     UOW    •I<li><    L 

rwM— fnilf;r  tiim  itium  lygM— >ra,  <■<  nil  tief  itnjJmita  tx*Oi  U. 

nt  Tlnl  X17D■K1l\tth>l^nluUI^■••ll"-  " ..----.-.-   --  -      .    . 


P«|.r 


•ff««T*"«  •<■■  *«  ■''</A« 


TO      THE      D&AP. 

Mr.  E.  J.  SILVERTON.  BauUst.    Miniater, 

-VLJJERT  flonSB.  PAnK  PTUK    i  '{.Kit, 

b  mUIdk  •  mvdcilol  E^&ft  TDUUTET  tv  L'^  P-cmU  oIk  Ixd 

liMrri  for  twtaiv  jfhtb  w«  limrloir  !ienni<nr  -'  _  — 

Cmms  Ccan  i«'  >  hlnwung  lo  t!w  dsUialfu 
MMfnio. 


FACE    WOODCOCK'S 

WIND   PILLS 


'o^^  *y 


l«a*»  VboJoW,  m  WiMiWtlli.W.jS^QdV^—A.w.UMjrl- 


iJ^ 


MS.  MABCHM,  1877, 


Price  6d. 


^^oUtait  fe 


St.  1,341.— RETREAT  [JErOSSIELE. 

l,3ia.— DAGON'S  L:J'S  AA'D  DOWNS. 

1,313.— THE  JEWEL  OF  PEACE. 

1,34*.— THE  STUDENTS  PRAYER. 

1^45.— FOR  WHOM  IS  THE  GOSPEL  MEANT  t 


lobdon: 


FA6SM0S£  ft  ALABASTEB,  4,  Fatemoiter  BnUdiagi. 


if  Offi^^^  Entered  ftt  St»tionorB'  H»U. 


500.000    SAMPLE 

CHOCOLATE  POWDI 

liUrutiHiI   EikibiiiH  %i  I8U, 

AAd  TbDiuu)(ti  m  n4w  oaing  lt,uroaDiuialiif  tt  to  l~ 
«4uIM  la  t"*"*?  *M  tuirtlwftM 
It  !■  BaooDuaoadad  br  tt>*  Twniltr*  ^ 

One  Cup  or  Twenty  made  In  One  ' 

iriU  OU  BV04K  SOT  BMQOlJUOi. 


By  Her  MttjeitVi  Koyal  Letters  Patent. 

Comniercial  Steam  MlUs^  London 
LAMPLOUGH'S 

.  PYRETIC  SALINE 

UIoaadpi>»-«mlBCDUFNai<'AciBl  Id  rir«TCQllrijt*n>)4Urfii«  SHALL  POXfbv  Punhls^ 
iDTlcncsllnc,  Bad  VrUIlRiiig  Uii<  Illuyl.  Aqv  tir<rK)D  wbo  hu  mim^y  iKbeaaW'il" 
ibonld  Uike  It.  bu-I  b»  kept  b  •  «ool  and  •ittkOiod  room,  to  [iivt*iit  ita  ksTinf  W 


» 


-_ —  —  j»  k^pt  u 
we  un  llie  (»Bturea. 

HIOKKKdi.  IlKAbAOUI,  wd  ai.nXA,  u*  tn  m_     _ 
uoaful  III  ■  tiiRiMu  Dt  dnld  «aur>    Tlili  <iui  Im  npHUd  oi 

KKA  TOrAOM^Ilf •  -■-■ '-     - 


[(.■fflS." 


fofBlLfOlK  CO 


qiuuilltj  Ml  pDii^S  ">  Iwl'  Uu  be  obuinol  or  tbu  Pnii-rielai 

B.  IiAHPLDOaH,  Cotmlunc  Ch«inlst,  113,  Bolborn.  S.O^ 
JOHN    QOSNELL    &    00/8 

0HSS3T   TOOTB   PABTl 

Tad)  a  pivl-Ulu  wMtubNiv  F"'«*c*>  ttiB  atuunnl  1^^ 

To  ba  luU  of  all   I'arfoiBtTi  and 
Anfd  I'MMga,  S8,  Ufipw  Tlunu*  SI 

Poaseeaing  aU  tho  ProporUfli  of  ttao  FinMt  Arrow- root 

BROWN  AND  POLSON'S   CORN   FLOUR 

Has  Twenly  Years'  World-wldi  Kepulat/on. 

r  ouuliu  p«k«i  htan  tlu  Qui-dmUs  lipatnra  of  tlie  Mabn. 


^tU/^rrrUlii 


164. 


APBUSO,  1ST7. 


Price  64. 


f      .^■i^«^»™%^. 


U^'-"'M.,t„u"% 


!  e!s 


'  SERM8  n  I  n.  SPMfiEOl  i 


GOlSTTElSrTS 
No.  1,846.— GOILE  FOK-SAKEN  WHEN  GUILT  IS  FOKQIVBN. 
IJliT.— HOW  18  8ALVATT0M   BECEIVBD  ) 
1,8*8.— THE  GREAT  HOUSE  ANJl  TIlE  VESSEla  IN  IT. 
],S4B.— FAJTH  Pintlt'YING  THE  HEART. 
1,350.— ENLIVENING  AND  IN VIGOBATINO. 


PASBKO&E  ft  ALABASTER,  4,  Fatenoiter.  fiaildiiie:t. 


500,000    SAMPLE    PACKETS 
.  CHOCOLATE  POWDER 

Wore  UlTuo  A»»j  *l  tb* 

UtcrMlivBal   KiklbiUM  af  \H9% 

_  Asa  TbanauKti  kth  now  uliiff  0,  prMMMii«lsfl  U  to  U  ia< 

cqiiklM  bi  tMllty  Mil  ncaUeiMC. 
_     It  u  B9oomm«Did*il  by  tbe  Tftonlty,  Dsilr. 

lose  Cap  01  Twenty  mide  in  One  Minntft 

mu  OM  SOOAR  .VDT  KMaClXXD. 
BoU  by  kU  QnxNm,  Om  BhUUiis  ptr  Po«ii4, 

By  Her  Majesty's  Boyal  Letters  Patent 

Commercial  St^-am  Mills,  London. 


I 


LAMPLOUGH'8 

PYRETIC  SALINE 

lil<winii  pn^minitlUf  Imni-SnM  in  i-rr-v-minp;  .niil  iriiriiiff  MfAT.T.  PQS.  hv  Pliitfill^ 
IiiilKoiiifiui;,  uuil  Vitaltufiip  tho  ItlouJ.  Adv  jwroon  vbo  Iim  alrraJr  ttii*  uuiiir>UU 
•li.-:!  '  ;  >,..-  kr.pt  in  ■  M^  and  liarkoicid  room,  W  pranct  lu  le*rl>f  ■>! 

nsB  la  in  houn.  i/  naMful 


I*,  uil  ICA^mtA,  It*  In  mi 


H-  LAWPU300H.  Cor. 


JOHN    GOSNELL    &     CO. '8 

OSSSST   TOOTS   7A8TI 

■  mOly  auparior  ta  mj  Tooth  I*cnrJ«r — gHw  I 
r«n^  k  p«w>'Ukn  wbllcsiM,  protrcU  ti>*  ana^  A> 
(boy,  mJ  Iniiarto  a  [ilM«liif  (ngrau*  la  Ui«  bi  J.H 

i'ria  Out  SiiiHtig  mJ  SiJpme*  ptr  At. 

Td  ht  lud  of  an    PNifumm  Bttd   Oimbli^  im| 

Aug*!  Pmu^  BII,  ITppw  Tliama  SlnBt,  Lonita,  I 


PoMBsatng  (Ui  tbo  Proparuiw  of  tfta  FlnOflt  Arrow-root. 

BROWN   AND  POISON'S   CORN   FLOUl 

Has  Twentji  Years'  World-wide  Reputation.  ■" 

r  Ooitui,  p,rt«l  biaii  Uu  bo.ilMlla  ntutuw  of  Ike 


'^ftuSmm,, 


Mi. 


HAY  31,  1377. 


Fric«  6d. 


Hd,  MSl^TUB  DIVINE  CALL  FOR  MISSIONAltlBS. 

1^G3.— STRONG      CONSOLATION     FOB      THK      LORD'S 

UEFCOESS. 
I,1J3.— ECCE  REX. 

I,8fi«.— ALL  THINfia  ARE  ItEADV.    COME. 
1,9«S.— OUR  LOKD'a  QliESTION  TO  THK  BLIND  MEN. 


ADVXRTIBmmTS. 


500.000    SAMPLE    PACKETS 

"""^    CHOCOLATE  POWDEB 


ytm  Ql*«a  Aoaj  KttJw 

■■lenatiMil  Eikibilua   (f  VM, 

Anil  TtunwMula  an  M«  ndat  tt,  pnmmniinK  H  ta  k* 
eqBklM  In  twlkjr  «id  MBKUeaic. 
It  to  Baaommniaad  by  tl)«  Taoaltr*  DnOy, 

One  Cup  or  Tventy  made  in  Oqb  Hioite. 

tf/XJ  OR  aVaAB  MOT  SKUmitlD. 
Ijaid  ty  >tl  Onrav*,  Oca  ShOIIiiB  v«  PnaaAr 

By  ^)r  Hg^OAtf'*  ^7^^  L«tten  Patant 

Commercial  Steam  Mills,  Londoiu 


LAMPLOUGH'S 

PYRETIC  SALINE' 

wg  ocd  miig;  6KALL  P0X«1>7 1'l^ib'tai 
All!  pmuB  nboliaa klmJtrlMi owigltli 
iUriMu«d  r««m,  to  v**^*^  '>■  ImtI^  WI 

H.  niUtlAOKR,  al  XiinUL  an  bi  no4  OM  liBBalUrfr  nb«4  kr  taU<W  >  *■■ 
MMw  «<  oaU  in«a.    ltd*  an  b*  np^Md -mi  «r  ntnla  W«  haBn,  ll  nwliA.     , 


InrioonUait,  and  T^Mm  Uw  I 
_A(FnU  tako  It,  and  b«  hipi  m  ■  oo 


LfOVS  CDimTTTimONS.«t'lDaHnMTltlslirfMnltaH 
*  WMimtfaf  abuM  U».i4cn  Mir  wtUi  liui.nnH,  In  »  Ml 

K.  LAMPLiODOK  OanTOltlng  OhamUt,  lU,  Bdbora,  Ka„ 

Sm!..!  Daor'nMU  H»ttan  Omirji.  I^iiIm.  »n<  »f  i»ll«f  Uhlii  tJI-jmiM,. 


JOHN    003NELL    &    OO.'S 

OaaXST    7007B   ?A8! 

I'  rmtly  niparlnr  bi  uit   Toolti    r^iwdor— gjfw  : 

1'«Ui  >  |«ri.llk>  irUw»M,   iotfUoU  Uw  aMMri  b 

<iM*y.  koil  impwu  •  ptpirfiirb*;;muv  to  Ihs  lirMlk 

To  b*  likd  of  bH    p«riiiBMn  4Ml   Clanlato,   Wkd 
&i>C<:l  Pmb^h,  83;  [?i>r>or  niftUHSIniM,  I<nile«,  J 

Pomosiias  aU  thtf  PropnrUea  at  tho  Ptnost   Arrow-root 

BROWN  AND  POISON'S   CORN  FLOU! 

,  "as  Twenty  rears'  World-wliis  Reputation. 

'^ntr  Osmiiiui  P«istat  bun  Ui«  fko-dmilo  Hfiutani  of  tka  lUki 

1  


368. 


JTISE  30,  1877. 


Frico  ea. 


aih  moult  I-  lloiJ.INOH  A  liB'i'K,  ArlHftUii 


500,000    SAMPLE    PACKETS 

._    '    .  .  (Bacb  infflcieBt  t«  nuke  t  Cnp)  ol  thii 

CHOCOLATE  POWDER 

Won  Olven  Awfty  U  the 

Intfrnatiaiial   Bihibiti«H  tf  18SS, 

And  Tbouaand*  are  now  tulng  it,  prononociDS  tt  to  bt  n* 

equalled  in  qunllty  and  exceltenae. 

It  is  Booommonded  by  tbe  Fooult;,  Dftily. 

One  Gap  or  Twenty  made  in  One  Minute. 

MILK  OR  aCGAS  HOT  REQCIRED. 
9<Ak  by  all  OTO<«n,  One  BbtlUng  per  Fonnd. 

By  Her  Majesty's  Boyal  Letters  Patent 

Cominercial  Steam  Mis,  londoiL 


nupa  H*Mr 


JKmS  >»»>>  KBi».e«B       KMlJVa 


LAMPLOUGH'S 

PYRETIC  SALINE 


1'  Umai\  rre-vniinriitlv  liOTcnoinl  in  provi 

"  "  '  '■'-"  '--  -lie  Uloxl ,  , - 

a  cool  und  dnrkvuml 


-biMilil  laki:  it.  niHl  lio  kpiil  ii 
litoe  on  llu-  r'-:ittirpi>. 

KICKM>S.  II>;.l]iA"riE.«ldirAI'f>EA.  nrelnni'HtnH'ilnnnnllmtrtj-mltovrdU  tihinraU^ 
tnviitnlliiai.iiu'.^i-K'Ic-i.lw&l-T.    T.it>  ciH  l>u  ri<|  .i        ..'. 

MIU  VUVAClKiN— It  I- 1  Trry  nlnijitc  aecmioi 
Inriiatl*  >lliin  t  ha  va  or  liillnu*  (tiiuHiH. 

RiT  HlUorS  mKKTtTt'TIONH.BiTfnriHiATilbit-Hl  -iiTrotiani.  Iiirlin-^tion.  uid  EniptiODi 
HI  the  Hk  in.  a  tra-op-< -11(111  kbuUldlHiliik-nilaiGr  Willi"    " -■ — ■-  -  '— -'■'■ 


mVaiS 
0  |>r<iT«nt  itn  Icuving  any 


oii  m-iiiK  111  hp 


ildlHiliik<-nilaib'willilliriliii'i..'r,  inktu 
SLv  IM  (Malai'd  rf  lbi>  l'n>i>ni-t<m 


JOHN    GOSNELL    &    CO.'S 

I«  HTi-atly  mii-ri-r  in  any   Tnnth   P.iwJir— givef  th« 

Tm-IIi  a   ivsrl-liki!  tt'liitt«<''i'ii,   |irulvclH  tho  <!nauu:l  flMn 

Jucay,  und  inii>.irU  a,  y],-MUf'  frnj-ranci'  to  ttiit  brvatk 

J'n'n;  One  ■•^/litliit;)  iiail  ffixptrnt  /vr  P6I. 

To  W  bail  ol  all   Pi-rFiimen  mi<1   ChiimatA,   and  at 

Angel  l^umi^i',  a%  {.'pptx  Ttuunt'H  Street,  Lundiin,  E.C 


foBaoaMing  all  tlio  Proportioa  of  tho  Finear  Arrow-root. 

BROWN   AND   POLSON'S   CORN  PL  OUR 

Has  Twenty  Years'  World-wide  Reputation. 
Brwy  Oennioe  Packet  bears  the  fac-simiJe  aiffnatare*  of  the  Uaken. 

J"/ttiSrtrU)H  ^8^(Mnv 


M7. 


JTILT  SI,  1877. 


Price  6d, 


ill  BY  II  n.  m 


COTSITEISTTS 
v,..  i.M\    rm.  rixAi.  rKU<Kvi:i;ANri-:  ok  iiik  saints. 

!.:•*.■..  ..MUi;!XIS<i  KUli  I'llKlsr. 

l.;i(H.     XKVKliTllKl.KSS.     IlK.liEAKTKll. 

O      FASSKOBE  ft  ALABASTEB,  4.  Fsternoiter  Suildiagi.   ^^^' 

*J  A.4D  JIU.   B0ORHEU.E*!.  l^^  .V 

Enurad  at  Etfttionert'  HftU.  C^^^^^^J^" 


*,*  AiJB^tuia^mtt  OKd  BUUjor  Uu  "i. ... 


500,000    SAMPLE    PAC 

^a.  CHOCOLATE  POWBl 


IiterutiMd  bkibttlM  rf  180;    ' 

id  ThDuuda  H*  DOW  aiiBf  It,  PMOWMlf  tt  M  1(  • 

eqaaOad  In  4UIU9  ud  iMrilMii. 
It  Is  Beeommendsd  by  ttas  TMmltr,  M^ 

One  Cup  oz  Twenty  made  In  Obi  mam 

MILL  OB  anOAM  KOT  MMQVIEEB. 
BoU  bj  all  QRMcn.  Om  BhOUni  p«  ?taL 

By  Her  MtyeitT*!  Royal  Letten  Fitiat 

'GommerciaJ  Steam  Sills,  londfli 


LAMPLOUGH'S         ^M 

.  PYRETIC  SALINEf 

Ik  fnund  pre-emlneDtly  bencflols]  in  nrsTt  ntinft  knd  earing  8K  ALL  FQZi  ^  f^'T!! 
Inviporatinir,  and  Vitaliaine  the  Blood.  Any  poracn  who  hsaklreMrlhlitM^ 
diuulft  Iftke  It.  Bixl  be  kept  b  «  oool  tmi  dukened  tooib,  to  pTBTOnt  Hi  kin|  ■ 


Inwe  on  the  fottturrH. 
HirKVKMB.  IlKAlUi  I 
himhl  in  ■  lonhltr  nt  cnli 
HKA  VOYACiKS.— Itli 


kept  ii 

e,  md  ITAXrSEA,  w  In  I 


»  DO  anoBBl  ta  i^>^ ' 


•si-itpmmlUl  iboulil  lie 


,.., „ Uu  be  obtained  Bf  Ilia  PropHtton 

B.  LAMFLOUGB.  ConanltttiE  ClieniUt  113,  Bolboni,  SO. 


rir  *Hiiu  H«lt"n  0»filrii 


JOHN    GOSNELL    &    CO.'S 

05B5ST   TOOTS   tiSi 

I«  gt™tly  lupetjar  to  »ny  Tooth  Powder— p"i 
Teoth  ■  prarl-Ukc  wbitntew,  pntecte  the  eMJiJ  ■ 
dec*;,  and  iii)|iuti  >  ptraoiig  fngnnce  to  tb*  bw 

Prift  On  ShiJiTy  and  SiiptMt  ptr  Pit. 
To  be  had  of  all    Petfamen  and  Chemiili,  *ad 
Aogel  Paauge,  93,  Upper  Ttuunea  StiMt,  LondVi 


Posaassiag  all  the  Propertias  of  the  Fiaeat  Arrow-root 

BEOWN  AND  POISON'S   CORN  PLOTl 

Has  Tmntf  Years'  World-wUe  Reputation. 

Irery  Senuiiu  Faoket  bean  tha   fju-iimile  ligiiatiun  of  tlia  Id 


368. 


AVaVSn  31,  1877. 


Frica  Sd. 


A  nVKHTWRMFNTB. 


iSS3ii 


SAMPLE    FACKEIB 


500,000 . 

^^^  CHOCOLATE  POWDER 

Wm  Given  Awfty  u  Ite 

litemti«Ml   Exkibitlaa  vf  IMI, 

Aod  Thnaswid*  ftre  now  iwinf  It,  promwuidiit  It  u  kll^ 

equalled  tc  qiwUty  ud  cBeeUnM. 

It  IB  Rsoommended  hj  tb«  rsonltT,  Ptflf.^ 

One  Gup  or  Trenty  made  In  One  Minro 

jr;Lx  OR  suoAS  not  REQUISED. 
Sold  bf  all  Qiwen.  Une  BhiHlnit  pec  Pomd. 

By  Her  Majesty's  Royal  Letters  Fatoit 

GommerGial  Steam  Mills,  londoiL 
«-•«»*>■■«■««»■  ■■«■*. 

LAMPLOUGH'S 

PYRETIC  SALINE' 

emiDently  Imffirial  in  iirevcnlin);  am)  curing  SMAXL  VOX.  tV  V«"*^ 
•»»iiiilt.  and  Vila1i«in«  tha  Blowt.  Anv  permm  who  tiaa  alTM^y  thftanapW 
il  tuke  it,  nii-l  hit  kept  in  ■  cool  and  darkeiiod  room,  to  pnraat  iU  )M*bi(  ■ 
on  tlw  fpaluiw^ 

rKNL«^  IIKVUACIIR,  ma  VAUTCA,  m  fnnMotHlmiiwdlaMTiiKnHhirMWt* 
fultnaiiimNunroiUwUrr.  TM< on  Im  npntKloMaortwtaalD  tw«  Imin.  VMM-,  , 
\  X'uY.ViKi— ltl<><Tr7>iiuii>K«C"ni|«miiwut.«iil  ibculd  en M WMgnrt W  — WMi  I 


F.'mUuVR«i\8T1TLTIONS.iriiitiahwt«vfiiit<4wiTMIon(.IndhaithabaalliM>!<! 

oiitli->IVm.iil.i-i>ri..'i.rulihuuMlwuk"iiili>ily>riih[hc>l<niin',  inatiuBblartf  iratcr.airflMaM 
qUBDtltji  im  EUnK  to  bciL  M^  bi  olitmiinl  of  the  Pnipnclon 

H.  LAKFLOUOB.  Consulting  Chvmlst,  113,  McSham,  BiO^ 

^ HofnTid  I'lwr^Vnm  Hat^m  G»Mfi>,  l.<m<i<in.  and  of  all  nwptr tifcb><  mwimt.       _^^^ 

JOHN    GOSNELL    &    CO.'S 

CHBBsy  TOOTS  fAsn 

I*  imatly  luperior  (n  any   Tooth    Powder — gnrn  tkl 

Tn>th  a  prarl-likc  whitcuMii,   prntn:t>  tit  nianid  fi^ 

deoy,  and  impnrta  a  pleadng  frajfranoe  to  tLe  bnatk. 

Price  Out  ShiUing  and  SiapttKapt  Fat. 

To  be  bad  of  all   Parfumen  mail   CbemwU,  nd  il 

Angil  Painiige,  B!l,  Upper  TltaiiMi  .Street,  London.  BJX 

FoBBDBsii^  all  the  Properties  of  the  Finoat  Arrow-root. 

BROWN  AND  POLSON'S   CORN   FLOnR 

Has  Twenty  Yean'  WorU-Klde  Reputation. 

Every  Qennine  Faoket  beari  tlie   fko-unile  dgnatorei  of  tbt  ]Ii3E«fc 


SEPTEMBER 


CONTEJSTTS 
N*  i;jn.-BnAVK  waiting. 

I,s;j>-GOD    nUB     PORTIOIf    AHU     alS    WOBD    00b 

TBEAfiDKB. 
l^WS.— OFB  LAST  JOltB.VBY, 
1^4.— "FOB  fiVKR  WITH  THB  LORD.- 
I47ft^"SOW  THEN  DO  IT." 


TABSXOKE  ft  ALAfiASIKB,  4,  FitcrsoMr  BniUiagi. 


______  *  P VWtTIMWtltTS. 

* ^''/UtetTtiimtnU  <i»d  lliHt  for  ri(~"«Mrrf(iM  IVvaW  "fhiuMfa!  MittVMi  MlMf 
■mA  mmtli  In  lldLu.xux  A  ItaiiCK,  AdvwtiMJmii  V»»lrmlen,^  Pttw^ilw Bm,lmt^ 

500,000    SAMPLE    FACKEB 

^^  CHOCOLATE  POWCSB 

UterutiMal  RiUbitiH  tf  IttI, 

And  ThouModi  ue  now  ndng  It,  prwiwmdt  It  U  kt  • 
tqiMltod  Id  qnalUy  ud  czoellMM. 
It  Is  BAoommendad  by  tbe  I^ooUy,  Mlf* 

One  Cup  or  Tventy  made  in  (me  mni 

UILK  ox  aVGAK  KOT  BEQUIKED.  ■ 

BaUbjBUOTiK!en,OneShiUliicp(aP«i>l.  ] 

By  Her  Majesty's  Royal  Letters  Pateat  | 

Gommercml  Steam  Hills,  Londini  ] 

LAMPLOUGH'S 

PYRETIC  SALINE' 


lass' 


\i-kSif-.  IIi.ADACtlR.  Htd  STAVflEA.  m  In unrt  oux ImaidlaMT 

III!  Ill  n  iiiiiii'l>-r  uf  «.>u  mt-r.    TM-wi  bg  nimlHl  onoa  or  iiria*  Id  M 

y.K  Vi'YAUES— liKi  iinr  nliulil*  McqnpuiliiHnt,  md  itaAuld  asM 

itLv  nlliii'i tlir  ii.li  or  I>|lb4h  upkMN>. 

.«■  ItlLltH'S  ('(iN>-nTl"ri<tNii.civ<n«rUrloTUimlfd«KT»tlon«,I> 

'Skiii.km-ip"'<iiraiiihuuldhaiakiii'liillvwilbtliiidiimKr.inBtaaibtara>w,a— .— ^ 

.11;  on  taiiiM:  ti.  IhhL  Uiy  b«  olitsnivd  of  thu  Propnuton 

H.  UIHFLOUOB.  Conflnlting  CbeinlBt,  113,  Helbom,  KCL. 
JOHN    GOSNELL    ft    CO.'S 

*  im'at.ly  miiirrior  Ui  any  Tooth  Powder— (W*  *• 
Pi-Hfa  a  p-'.'Lrl-Iihii  wUtPDiwi,  prol«cU  tha  enimd  tl** 
■i'l'.iy,  and  iinparta  a  jiWiiing  b^gtitux  W  Hia  to««4 

J'ri'cr  One  Sliil/ii'S  and  Siiptnet  per  Pol. 
To  )io  had  <if  aJl   PtTfiimi-ra  uid   Chanlni,  Hid  « 
njri-l  Pai«;igo,  (13,  I'ppnr  lliMura  Street,  London,  KC 

Fosjtesaing  all  tlio  Proportias  of  tho  Finest  Arrow-root 

BROWN  AND  POLSON'S   CORN  FLCDS 

Has  Tmnty  Years'  World-wide  Reputathn. 

Every  GeiHiine  Paoket  bears  the    fac-simile  ngnattirei  of  tile  Kaksl. 


OCTOBER  31,  1877. 


Price  6d. 


|KlpJt. 

BI 0.  H. 


GONTEITTS 


1^77.— TAKIKti  HOLD  UPON  GOD. 

1.37H.-TIIE  HIlillTKUUS   FATHKEl  KNOWS   ANU  LOVED. 

1,.17!'.— TUK  MAQSANISHTY  OF  tiOlJ, 

1.7Wt.-VANITtESAND  VERITIES. 


AitVKBTWBMRWTN 


500,000    SAMPLE    FAC 

(Bx'b  lufflcleBt  tfl  nuke  ■  Cap)  ot  iMi 

CHOCOLATE  POWDl 

Wen  GlTCD  Awcj  u  tba 

iDlcrBitisRal   ExkibitJoa  af  lUl, 

And  Thonutndi  kre  now  uing  It,  pTononiicliif  It  tu 
equKUed  id  qiuUty  vA  esc^eaM, 
It  is  Beooniinended  by  the  f  aoulty,  I 

'One  Clip  or  Twenty  made  in  One  J 

MILS.  OS  BUGAB  SOT  REQOIREB. 
Gold  by  mil  Qrooen,  One  Bhillinc  per  Pdodj, 

By  Her  Majesty's  Royal  Letters  Patent  '• 

afii^Gonmiercial  Steam  Stills.  LoiLdoiLj 
LAMPLOUGH'S 

PYRETIC  SALINE' 


should  take  it.  and  lie  kept  in  A  cool  mad  darkened  room,  to  pravent  lH  iMTUf  ■ 
tnce  on  tlip  fnttures. 

8ICKNKM,  lltLlDACHE,  ud 
■qnmrfal  In  ■  tiimMer  of  uld  wmUr.    , 

MKA  VllYAUKS.— It  h  ■  >«t  nliubls  w»nii>uilmin 


>■  rtpotitd  DE 


■llaiil 


FurtllLlOrB  OONSTiTUTlUXS,  Eiviniriii  lo  viii.iM  ■ler.tloiu, „ 

•ath»>kin.atra->|r>i>n[lili>hoiilillHiUihii>n  ilail.v  wiDilhcdmniT.  in  ■  tumbler  efvitar.iiilMH 

'Itr  on  tamn  lu  bad.  Uar  be  ut>UiiK'd  or  ihe  l>mi>neIon 

H.  XiAHPLOUOB.  Consulting  Chemist.  U3,   Holbom,  ILd, 
ft'iiirni  thfir  *rmu  lUttnii  i;iiritfii.  l^.ndon.  and  of  »]1  rciiifTtolile  ChimnH. 


JOHN    GOSNELL    &    CO.'S  1 

CHISSY   TOOTH   PABSBj 

In  RTutly  mjpi'ritit  lo  »ny   Tooth   Powiiw— p-rw  4> 

Tn'th  •  pearl-likn  wiiitenw*,  protvcbi  tLe  enund  h» 

ili^ay.  and  imp-vt*  ■  plcaiiing  fngnuioe  ia  thr  bn>lh> 

Piiet  Out  .■titling  and  Sirprnetprr  PU. 

To  be  but  of  ftU   P.^umtpn  ud   Cbtmitti,  and  •■ 

Angel  PaMingv,  03,  l'[iper  Thames  Street,  Lomi'-a.  E.C. 


Poasesslug  all  the  Properties  of  the  Finest  Arrow-root 

BROWN  AND  POLSON'S   CORN  PLOnR 

Was  Twenty  Years'  World-wide  Reputation, 
Mu/fimwv,.  ^>fi/»3?^ 


WCVEMBEB  CO,  1877. 


Price  6d. 


-^^  iWpi  '% 


APyEKTMMBHTS. 


500,000    SAMPLE    Pi 


(BtclL  nflkint  to  aimk»  %  Ca0  it 

CHOCOLATE  POl 

Whs  aivto  Awmj  U  tta 

literaititul   KiUbitin  af  1811, 

And  ThouMod*  ue  dow  uiing  It,  prononndBg  b  to  li'^ 
eqnaJled  in  inality  and  aKoeHante. 
It  u  Beoonuneoded  b^  tbs  Waaultf,  1 

One  Cup  or  Twenty  made  in  One  1 

MILK  OR  8U0AB  NOT  aBQUlSXli. 
Bali  by  ftll  Orooera,  One  ShiUing  par  Foni. 

By  Her  Majesty's  Boyal  Letters  FatanL^ 

Commercial  Steaan  Mills, ' 


LAMPLOUGH'S 

PYRETIC  SALINE 

Iiifoaniiiinseiiiiii^ntly  K^nvfluiul  in  iirpv<'ii(jn)itiii<l  curing  SMALL  POZit^l^ 
InviKiiniiliiK.  Biiil  Vil!ilii>iii;{  tlic  Ulooii     Any  ptriiuii  who  haa  alread;  llu*M  . 
riiiiulil  hik>.-ft,  aiul  Iw  kept  in  a  cuul  aud  diu-kcnuJ  room,  to  prevent  Ita  kara|4 
tnus'  iin  till)  foaturw.  „ 

Mi-KSKS^  II1--lliAf'nK,sndHAVSEA,  >n)lnia<i«i9iM»<inrasili>UlTTPtleniliTt>a«>l" 
q»-uulul  II.  !ilii;nii|.T"(  i-iia  »i>L-'r.    TI.Kiaii  Iw  n).u-jIcd.i>uaor  iiiice  In  two  liDiin.UuriA 


LdiFwthin.«iljft 


(STrn,TICl>S,Kiiii"tri»tovttiiiInl«Krelioni,  Indifi 

gntlii-Skiii.  um"-|»u>irul  ihuuld  ih'iak<'ii  il»ily  viLliIli^iliiiiii^r.  \nt  Cuubler  uT  wi 
foaulity  DM  h'oiiw  t<i  Ih'iL  May  bv  uliluimil  uf  tlw)  Pni|>rii![ar, 

H.  LAMPLOUQH.  Consulting  Ctaemlst.  U3,  Holboni,  KO. 

f-..i\»iil  Ihur  fmm  ILiillnii  Onnir.'ii.  Londuii,  aiiil  gf  ftll  respecUlila  Clu~'~'~ 

SYMINGTON'S    PEA    FLOUR 

FOR   SOrPS,  ific. 

SYMINGTON'S    PEA    SOUP. 

Seasoned  and  Flavoured. 

SYMINGTON'S    SCOTCH     OATMEAL 
SYMINGTON'S     EGYPTIAN      FOOD 

Ksti'ii-.iii'lviiTil  ill  |ipftr,-ni\' tuuiiy  iiiliiT.at  8iii".lLi-j-'iiII.v(irop«lliioBat«bIiilini«Bt, 
lI:ktt(K-k  Kitik,  Ul.-rll>'^lli^".    In  Tina  La.  per  lb. 

W.  SYICINOTON  &  Co.,  Bowden  Stsam  MUls,  Xarket  HarboiAogL 

BOLD     BY    ALI.    OB0CEB8.  

FoBsesaing  all  the  Propertioa  of  tho  Finost  Arrow-root- 

BROWN  AND  POISON'S    CORN  FLOUS 

Has  Twenty  Years'  World-wide  Reputation, 

Every  Qeniime  PoAket  b«axk  tlu  &ft-umilA  ncnatiirw  of  the  \ 


DECEMBEB  31,  U77, 


^^^M  fe 


iulpit  %f 

w  I  n.  s 


CONTEISTTS 


I.8tS-SL\3  OF  IGKORANCE. 

1  38T_OOD'3  THOUGHTS  AND  WATS  FAB  ABOVE  OURS. 
]  3S8— JESUS  CHRIST  HIMSBLP. 
1  sea— A  GOSPEL   SERMON   TO   OUTSIDERS. 
r.3!K)— EJACULATORY  PRATER. 

TITLE.    CONTESTS,    AND    INDEX    OF     SCRIPTURB 
TEXTS  TO  VOL.  XXUl. 


'^     7A8S1C0&E  ft  ALABASTEB,  4,  f  fttwaMter  BBildiaffi.     "^^ 


"^ 


ADVERTtSEMENT-S. 


COMPILED  FOR  A.  J.  CLARKE  ft  J.  M.   SMITH. 


THE 


FifiWERS  ^  mmj%  M  SACM®  %mm 


AND 


EVANGELISTIC   HYMNS. 

EDITtD  BT 

VERNON  J.  CHARLESAVORTH  k  J.  MANTON  SMITH. 


PREFATORY  NOTE   BY  C.   H.   SPURGEON. 

The  following  Editions  have  been  issued,  and  may  be  had  through 
Bookseller,  or  direct  from  the  Pablishers. 

fEu0ic  anH  lIZSor))0. 

1  Paper  Covers 

2  Cloth  limp '. 

3  Cloth  gilt     

Superior  Edition  in  preparation. 

4  Cloth  extra,  gilt  edges      

IKSortns  Gnlg. 

1  Paper  Covers  ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ... 

2  Cloth  Covers 

LARGE    TYPE    EDITION    IN    PREPARATION, 


•  •  • 
■  •  • 


1  0 

1  6 

V  0 

8  0 

0  1 

0  3 


PASSMORE  &  ALABASTER.  4,  PATERNOSTER  BUILDINGS,  LONDON,  K.C. 

V^^MITHVS     TASTELESS    DANDELION    ANTI  BILIOUS    PILLS^ 

k^  price  1h.  Ij^d.  and  2ii  9d.  per  box.  have  been  for  22  jean  a  moiit  raccesiiftil  rabntituta  fbr  «*"WnfL 
They  clear  the  Iivct,  stuinai  h,  head,  and  kidneys — free  the  nkin  of  hnmonn  and  pfuiify  the  blood— they 
are  tnfitou>sH,  nevi^r  ^ivo  c<ild,  m  iv  be  tiikcn  at  nil  time*  by  either  sex,  and  regulate  the  hovels  wick 
I  omfort  and  wtfctv.     Theu  greatly  aid  in  change  q/"  l\fe. 

Sole  Maktir,  W.F.  RMITH.  M.l'.S.,  280.  Walworth  Rood,  and  281.  Brixton  Road,  and  pcupiieter  of 
Fowler'ti  Com,  Dunion.  an  Chilblain  Plasters,  who  will  send  a  box  of  either,  free  hj  post,  ftir  15  Ov  M 
Ktamps.    To  be  had  of  all  Chetnista. 


HOLLOW  AY'S  PILLS.— Feverjnfluenza,  BronchitiH.— In  onr  cold  and 
changeable  climate,  Uolloway*8  Pills  have  proved  theniHelves  the  beii  nwraii* 
tives   of    ill  health.     They  expel  all   impurities,  steady'  the  circuUticni,  repiiiite  tfat 


eiARKE'S 


WORLD  FAMED 


BLOODMIXTURE 


Is  warranted  to  oleanae  the  blood  fttm  aU  fanmiiftus 
from  whatever  chum  arising.  For  8ct»ftila.  Seurvy. 
Sorea  of  all  kinda,  Skin  and  Blood  rtigonawt/lti  eAiil 
are  marvellou<k  Thousands  of  TastimoniiJa  horn  al 
parta  In  bottlea  2a.  6d.  each,  and  in  eaaea  of  iU  tiMM 
the  quantity,  lis.  each,  of  all  chemista.  8«Dt  to  Uf 
addrem  for  3ft  or  182  at  imps  by  the  Fioptiotor, 
F.  J.  CLARKE, 
Chemist,  Apothaoariea' Hall.  Lindn. 

I  a  r  ja       ^^      m         •     ^ . 


UO, 


Oxibrd  Stiaet 


i!l«>l»Mir«r! 


IND   PILL 


«m!»inrT  of  rhi'tr  «crion.  «inin.*»i..i  rhem  to  chiMc  who 
Sf4>iii.-4rh.i>);iTl.ii  Arifi-lnl  liinuiiiii 


«  Macetaerter, 

[ITo  Mr.  Paob  D.  Woodoook,  Norwleh. 
Bir.^I  hare  found  jroor  nila  as 
paratlon  for  the  O(»natlparion  aad 
common  In  buth  M>zea    TImy  I 


real 
lO  tl 


^  rnmmoii  in  oui'n  wzen.  ^unr  pooaeas  araat  av 
M  vanuurea  over  other  Pflla  Their  aaUnrnler  la 
^^  atren«rtli.  the  omallneaa  of  ttaa  duaoL  aad  Che 
aire  a  Ti>nic  tu  aaalat  di^pstlon,  relieve  Wfad  in  Ifea 


ClirVn  0  i  .  1  ;  ,M?.^ r^^       VJir"";' *::'  'V,'^  ';•''"•  5^**  *"^  ""^  p.»rl*t«Itlr  motion  of  the  B-Wela,  remltiac 
Si- iViuiv  ii.Hr  V^n^ti^lixmnLll  ^ •*•""»■•»•»"•     Tbo  in..re  my  ei|Kjrl«ice  In  their  Tarlcd  aH^lcaMlit      .1 
tSa  »ft  miiV  1.1.  ..f  •  iViT^h'^H^Il.'VV**^"'''^?."^  '"/"^  hoimehoNU  have  ftaiml  a  great  friend  In  vour  pranuact^^ 
umttrtmunu,u  of  a  healthy  iil^mtVm.   Tiielr  Uvuurabir  action  aw  all  hat  «>ttld  be  wl-hed  for.  ""*■"**  ' 

#%•     ««   w    -.   .         ^^»».taifc'^t»VViv»utvTao«.  FOOTER  KRR.  Sn 

or  all  Vttdlc^a  ^an&OTm  iwX.\\\  a.Ti«. '^^. 


ADVBRT1SEMENT8. 

JOHN    QOSNELL    ft    CO.'S 

GSESSST   S003B   FASTI 

Ii  gMfttly  luperior  to  mnj  Tooth  Powdei — glna  tbi 

T««th  ■  pearl-liko  whiteneai,  protocts  tL*  eiuiiuit  from 

dixkj,  uid  impart)  ft  pinuuug  fngruice  to  the  txektli. 

Pria  Om  Siiliing  and  SaptaetpT  Pot. 

To  be  bed  o[  >11   Parfumen  and  Ctwniirti,  Hid  at 

Angel  PaMaga,  B3t  Upper  Thamei  Street,  Losdoo,  B.C. 


BORWICK'S  COLD  MEDAL 
BAKING    POWDER. 


^Em  bMn  awHd«d  FOUE  GOLD  HEDAIS  tar  tti  npoiority  oTar  aU  othan.  lUkM 
"P^HcloM  Broad,  Fliun  Fnddlasi,  uid  all  kinda  of  Faatry  light,  iweet,  and  digeitiblf. 
Sold   aTOTywhaia  In  Id.,  2d.,  4(L,  and  Sd.  paeketa,  and  M..  la.,  2a,  ad.,  uid  Ba.  bosM. 

TO     THE     DEAF. 

XLev.  E.  J.  SILVEETOK'S  AUSIAL  REMEDIES. 

DetiuBsa  rcliered  imuiedisteljr,  and  enrod  ullimiLtcIy.  Tbe  Trumpot  onnblei  persona 
tit)  hear  at  oncv.  and  tbe  JLvdiciite  removes  tlio  csuao  of  deafnesii.  Tlioussnds  are  being 
b«neflted. — Send  lor  Fapora  und  Testimoniula  to  E.  J.  SilTortOQ,  Baptist  Miniitcr,  Albert 
Z3oua»,  Park  Street,  Nottingham. 


DR.  J.  COLLIS  BROWNE'S  CHLORODTHE, 

TBE    ORiaiHAL    AND    ONLY     aSNUINE. 

IBVICK  TO  IirTALina.—I(ygu  wish  to  obtain  qnletrefraiMniilHp.rn*  mm  hMdnehi.rdM 

tta  MTVuim  medlk,  mnH  ra^ii'bU  ths  glraukllif  lynUi".  ul  tli<  b^lr.  T<it!'*lll  pnriU  TOVn^wlU 
UM  mw\*1l»i»  rtmmly  dlw>v*nd  by  Dl.  J.  COLUB  BBOWltB,  Hunbar  at  Iha  O^llp  al 
FbjkidAiii,  LoodDD,  to  vbicb  ht  g art  tha  name  of 

OSIIjOiaOID'S-lIT^, 

tnd  wMch  l>  adnltiad  by  Uw  Pntxiloa  to  ba  tha  nirnr  nniiiliifiiliiuil  iibuhls  manlj  iiiai  illimiipri 
OHLOaoaTltl  li  tha  belt  nmodr  knnvn  lor  Uouglu.  CouumptiDn.  lironubltla,  Arthnu. 
OELOBODXin  aSactually ehacka  lod  armM ttaoas  too  ottan  laial  rtiiii  ii    riTihlbirli.  Feiar, 

OHIiOBODTlfl  acta  Ukaaohirai  Inrifuitioa,  audlithaODlvipaiilllBlDCtaolanBndDyHataiT, 

B  cActuallT  cuu  ibort  til  attickt  ot  Epllepiy.  Hj-.iwla,  PalpllaUon,  and  Bpauu. 

■  Is  Um  odIj  nall^Uia  lu  llaunlgu,  KbgumaUnn,  Oout,  Caoou',  ToOtWba, 

-janiaitltli,  *». 


M  cif  Cnlored^iH  In  our  jnclica  IttaW,  anil  look  apon  It  as  ai 
10(1)0.  Ibaaemivi  allay  pain  aJKi  iTTttallon  In  whala  Tsr  onian 
a  Ibellng  uf  amnlort  aud^qulatuda  But  obtainable  bf  mj  ollia 


Bart  Ri»«U  nmmuntoatad  to  tba  Cellcfa  et  PL, _         , 

Xalvty'i  Connil  at  Moidlla,  to  Uw  f9w»  that  Cbolm  tiad  beaa  n^ng  harfully,  and  tbal  tfaa  ONLT 
taaudr  or  aarHTTisa  wa.  CULOHODVKS.— S««  lamc^  I>M)«nbeT  II,  IBS4. 

OAimiHI— XSWARI    07    FIXAOT    ASS    IMITATIOVI.— enrnoi-Tlce^AanoiUOT  Si>  W. 
Pas*  Wood  lUMil  thai  I)r.  J.  Collli  Br»wne  van,  undnanlwIlT,  IIm  Invaator  ot  ChlDrodTDa  j    that  t 
ttartol  tka  datendant,  Fmman,  waa  daUbaistalV  untrua,  vblsli,  im  rtnaltsd  to  My,  W  baso  awe 
to   ■»«■■,  July  H  I8U1 

anMliiBolUMatlii.iM..li.U.,>nd<i.  "      "  ' ■-..~_.~... 

BBOWm-S  CHLOROOT.SX,     «  Iba  I 
aecaapaalai  OMh  botUa. 

tout  MAjrorACTUKKHi 

J.  T,  OanopDit  33,  QiMt  BoueU  &tz«rt,  KVocn&Anx^ , 


ADVERTISEMENTS. 


AS     THE       BEST        FOOD 


E  fACULTY  I^ECOMMEHi 


Thof^oughly  Cooked 

^^ERFECTLY  DiGESTIBLEA^ 


n'ili  be  ready  itt  a  f^w  Ja^t.     Price  U.  -d, 

I  loth. 


THE    ANNUAL   VOLUME 
OF  "AFTER  WORK," 


IMMMXO 


RICH     IN     PHOSPHATES 


A  COMPLETE  TALE  by  EMMA 
JAHE  WORBOISE, 

Entitled  Lilian  Gkkv.  or.  Th.«  W.'fe'H 
Trials.  Other  Tales,  Sketclits  and 
Kssays  by  popular  Autlmrs.  l*i>etrv, 
iScience,  Hi«>;xraphy,  Hist<»rv,  Travefs 
and  Contributions    A»r  aircl.i'>>»?s  vi 

readers. 
S.Mit  poht  fno  for  Is  >t.iii.p^  Ir  th.  T i- ;.-tv::, 

M  ILLIAM  I'ooM  ,  12.  l'ittCint."'t'cr-rt;T»-.  Uli-kC. 


FIELD  &  CO.'S  HOHCEOPATHIC    SPECIFICS 

Have  proved  from  the  mott  .iiiiple  experlenw  an  entire  mirtvsA.    Simple  I*roiuut  E.*5cii:it 

and  Kvliable.    Each  No.  indicates  a  distinct  rcMneUy.  *  ^  •     "         « 


Jfof.  rui>'<  !>.    d' 

1.  Xndi^ition,  YTaterbruhij,  Foul  Mouth, 

■nd  Klatuleney 11 

2.  Neuralgia,  and  lull wnza  Colds  11 

3.  Hooping  Coug^h  and  Viulfni  (\muh  II 

4.  Diarrhoea,  in  Adult K  or  Children  11 
.',    Worms,  Wonn  Fever.  Wonn  Colic    ..11 

Ifervous     Debility,    Hysteria.     Fear.    1    1 
Melanchjly.  Loss  of    Viguur.   and 
IH'prehSion  of  Spirits  . .        ..        ..11 

CoBstipation.  Blind  IMle,  «V-c II 


«. 


10. 


II. 


Boila.  Carbuncles,  aud  Painful  Krup 
tlons 


,< 


Tmibles  of  Infant  Life.  T»-<ihJUi:. 
Kestli'SHuesi).  Crviug,  Hrolcin  Sl.t-j'. 
iStouiach-ache,  and  Convulsions 


Asthma.  Oppn>>M'(t    Knstihin::.   r.'il- 
pitation,     Weiil< 
L'n healthy  Skin 


Mik    Circulittiou.    and 
Colds. Chill. Fivers,  rnllammatiou. iv. 


1   1 


1   1 


1    I 
1   1 


Tfit  licmtdies  are  sent  h^^  post  to  any  part  of  the.  vmmtrjf^  on  receipt  ofSuvi4i'i. 
liomflDopathio  Tln»«lure  or  Tiluh-N  lorwanl***!  on  receipt  of  price,  post  tr\'v.      A  strun;:  t  im  .  .vin- 
:uinhi;j;  12  llottlus  of  llouueopathic  Me'licines  (Pilules  or  TinclureM),  willi  Guide  Dook.  j  j.  i  iiw. 

lor  6a. 

riELD  &  CO.,  Homoeopathic  Chemists,  267,  High  Holborn. 

"By  a  thoroii.ij:li  knowledge  of  the  natural  laws  which  "govern  the 
operations  of  di»(estiou  and  nutrition,  and  by  a  careful  application 
of  the  fine  properties  of  well-selected  Cocoa, '^Ir.  Erra  has  piovided 
tnr  breakfast  tables  with  a  delicately- flavoured  bevera&^e  which  may 
save  us  many  heavy  doctors'  bills.  It  is  by  the  judicious  u.m5  of 
.vuch  articles  of  diet  that  a  constitution  may  be  gradually   built  up 


(JAMES  EFFS  &  Co.,  Homoeopatliic  Chemists.) 


COCOA. 

ff-ntil  strong  enough  to  resist  every  tendency  to  disease.  Hundreds 
l^'  subtle  maladies  are  floating  around  us  ready  to  attack  wherever 
[*-  re  is  a  weak  point.  We  may  escape  many  a  fatal  shaft  by 
;;.:  .ing  ourselves  well  fortified  with  pure  blood  and  a  iiroperly 
^'"^'""'hed  frame."— On  Dv^t,  m  Uv^  Cici7  Semce  Gazetle, 


N. 


-^ 


r- 


\ 


