DUKE 

UNIVERSITY 


DIVINITY  SCHOOL 
LIBRARY 


,M! 


rrii 


^■i!(;V,  ;,;■ 
' :■  :ti%M 

»ii:  -V  ' ■'ft* 


tv 


1» 


IB 


f • 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2016  with  funding  from 
Duke  University  Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/worksofrevjohnwe23wesl 


THE 


WORKS 

O F T H E 


Rev.  JOHN  WESLEY,  M.  A. 


Late  FdIo\v  of  Lincoln-College,  Oxford. 


Volume  XXIII. 


BRISTOL: 

Printed  by  WILLIAM  PINE,  in  Wine-Street. 
MDCC-LXXIII. 


• f 


- 


C a ] 


CTTT  i ^ 

■7733^ 


TREATISE 


- O N 

JUSTIFICATION. 


Part  the  Second. 


CHAP.  I. 

A hriej propofol  of  the  particulars  in  this  fecond 
part. 

Having  brought  forth  our  flrength,  both 
of  fcripture  and  reafon,  feconded  with  fuf- 
ficient  authorities,  as  well  to  overthrow  the  con- 
clufion  fet  up  by  the  advcrfary,  as  to  eftablifli  that 
which  we  have  undertaken  to  prove,  it  remains 
to  anfwer  thofe  fcriptures  and  reafons  whereby 
A 2 they 


[ 4 ] 

they  endeavour  to  prove  the  contrary.  And  I 
fhall  no  way  diJTemble  any  of  their  objefHons, 
or  leek  to  diminiflr  the  ftrength  of  any  argument: 
but  rather  endeavour  to  fupply  wliat  is  wanting 
on  their  part,  in  maintenance  of  the  caufe  they 
have  undertaken. 

I fhall  therefore  in  this  fecoTid pa<rf,  firC;  lay 
down  and  prove  fome  conclufions,  which  have 
relation  to  the  queflion,  and  will  be  as  founda- 
tions to  frame  anfwers  upon,  to  feveral  objections 
that  may  be  made. 

•2.  I fnail  lay  do'A'n  fome  diflinftions.  which 
will  make  a clear  way  for  the  truth,  through  the 
darknefs  of  many  difficulties. 

3.  I fhall  lay  down  the  nature  juftijication^ 
and  the  feveral  caufes  thereof  according  to  fcrip- 
ture. 

4.  I ffiall  briefly  propound  and  anfwer  the 
fcriptures  that  are  conceived  to  make  againlt 
what  has  been  obferved. 

5.  And  haflly,  I ffiall  clofe  the  whole,  by 
propounding  and  anfwering  the  oppofite  argu- 
ments. 


CHAP. 


i:  5 ] 


C H A P.  II. 

Some  conclufions  laid  down,  to  prepare  the  way  for 
anfwering  fundry  objedions. 

SECT.  I.  He  for  whofe  fins  a full  fatisfaftion 
hath  been  made  (either  by  hrimfelf,  or  ano- 
ther for  him)  and  accepted  by  him  againfl  whom 
the  tranfgrefiion  was  committed,  is  as  righteous 
as  he  that  never  finned.  This  is  evident ; be- 
caufe  there  is  as  much  righteoufnefs  in  repairing 
the  wrongs  done  to  any,  as  in  abftaining  from 
doing  wrong.  He  that  by  liis  cattle  hath  made 
fpoil  in  his  neighbour’s  corn,  and  hath  given  him 
full  fatisfadfion  for  it,  deals  as  juftly  and  honeflly 
with  him,  as  he  that  never  trefpalfed  in  that 
kind. 

Sedf.  II.  There  is  no  medium  between  a per- 
fedl  abfolution  from  ail  fin,  and  a perfedt  righte- 
oufnefs; but  he  that  is  fully  difeharged  from  fin, 
is  made  ipfo faElo  perfedlly  and  compleatly  righte- 
ous. The  reafon  is  evident : nothing  can 
diminifii  the  perfedlion  of  righteoufnefs,  but  fin  ; 
as  nothing  can  hinder  light  but  darknefs  in  one 
degree  or  other.  So  that  as  the  air  when  it  is 
free  from  all  degrees  of  darknefs,  muft  of  necef- 
fity  be  perfedlly  light ; fo  he  that  is  perfedlly 
A3  freed 


[ 6 ] 

freed  from  all  fin,  muft  be  compleatly  and  per* 
feftly  righteous. 

- Seft.  III.  Adam,  till  his  fall  by  fin,  was  com-* 
pleatly  righteous,  and  in  a fiate  of  juftification 
before  God.  To  fav  that  Adam  was  not  perfectly 
righteous,  and  confequently  in  a juftified  ftate, 
till  his  fall  hy  fin,  is  to  place  him  in  a Hate  of 
condemnation  before  his  fin.  Wherever  juftifi- 
cation and  condemnation  are  mentioned  infcrip- 
ture,  you  fhall  find  an  immediate  oppofition  be- 
tween them.  But  efpecially  this appeareth  from 
Rom.  viii.  j,  2.  compared  with  verfe  3 and  4. 
where  you  will  find  juftification  defcribed  by 
non-condemnation  ; if  there  were  a third  ftate, 
between  juftification  and  condemnation,  non- 
condemnation would  not  imply  juftification, 
much  lefs  be  ufed  as  a term  equivalent  thereto. 
Therefore  to  grant,  that  forgivenefs  of  fin  puts  a 
man  into  the  fame  ftate  wherein  Adam  ftood  be- 
fore his  fall,  (which  is  general!)'  granted  by  all 
men]  is  to  grant  the  point  in  queftion. 

Se61.  IV.  PerfeQ:  forgivenefs  of  fins.  Includes 
the  imputation  or  acknowledgment  of  the  obfer- 
vation  of  the  whole  law,  even  as  the  imputation 
of  the  law  fulfilled,  neceflarily  includes  the  non- 
imputation of  fin,  or  the  forgivenefs  of  all  fin,  in 
cafe  any  hath  been  committed.  For  how  can  he 
be  faid  to  have  all  his  fins  forgiven,  who  is  yet 
looked  upon  as  one  that  hath  tranfgreffed,  any 
part  of  the  law  ? And  he  that  is  looked  upon  as 
one  that  never  tranfgreffed  the  law,  muft  needs 

be 


r 7 ] 

fie  conceived  as  one  that  hath  fulfilled  the  whofe 
law,  which  is  nothing  elfe  but  to  have  a perfeft 
righteoufnefs,  or  (which  is  the  fame)  a perfeft 
fulfilling  of  the  law  imputed  to  him.  So  that 
befides  that  perfect  remiffion  of  fins,  Avhich  hath 
been  purchafed  by  the  blood  of  Chrift  for  thofe 
that  believe,  thei'e  is  no  need  of  (indeed  no  place 
for)  the  imputation  of  any  righteoufnefsperform- 
ed  by  Chrift ; becaufe  in  that  very  aft  of  remif- 
fion of  fins,  there  is  included  the  imputation  of 
a perfeft  righteoufnefs  ; or  to  fpeak  more  pro- 
pel Iv,  and  with  fcripture  exaftnefs,  that  aft  of 
God  whereby  he  pardoneth  fin,  is  interpreta- 
tive!}', nothing  elfe  but  an  imputation  of  a perfeft 
righteoufnefs,  or  of  a fulfilling  of  the  law.  Com- 
pare Rom.  iv.  ver.  6.  with  ver.  7 and  11.  Even 
as  that  aft  of  the  phyfician  by  t\'hich  he  recover- 
eth  a patient  from  his  ficknefs,  may  with  full 
propriety  be  called  that  aft  whereby  he  reftoreth 
him  to  his  health:  and  fo  that  aft,  by  which  the 
fun  difpels  the  darknefs,  ma}'  be  called  that  aft, 
by  which  it  fills  the  air  with  light.  And  as  the 
phyfician  doth  not  heal  the  difeafe  by  one  aft,  and 
reftore  health  by  another,  but  doth  both  by  one 
and  the  fame  aft,  healing  the  difeafe  and  reftor- 
ing  health : in  like  manner,  God  doth  not  heal 
or  forgive  fin  by  one  aft,  and  reftore  or  impute 
righteoufnefs  by  another ; but  by  one  and  the 
fame  aft,  doth  the  one  and  the  other ; forgive- 
nefs  of  fins,  and  imputation  af  righteoufnefs, 
A ^ being 


I 8 ] 

fceing  but  two  different  names  for  one  and  the 
fame  thing. 

Seft.  V.  If  it  be  here  demanded,  but  how  can 
God  be  faid  to  impute  a righteoufnefs  to  a man, 
which  never  was  ? I anfwer,  to  fay  God  cannot 
impute  a righteoufnefs  which  never  was  actually 
performed,  is  to  den)'  that  he  hath  power  to  for-  ' 
give  fins.  Becaufe  forgivenefs  of  fin  is  an  im- 
putation of  righteoufnefs,  and  of  fuch  a righte- 
oufnefs as  is  without  works.  (Rom.  iv.  6.  Rom. 
iii.  28,  &c.)  i.  e.  A righteoufnefs,  not  confifting 
of  any  works  performed  by  any  man. 

Seel.  VI.  He  that  is  fully  acquitted  from  his 
fins,  needeth  no  otlier  righteoufnefs  to  give  him 
a title  to  life.  The  reafon  is  evident.  Death  is 
the  wages  of  fin,  and  of  fin  only  ; being  due  to 
no  other  creature  in  any  other  refpeft,  nor  upon 
any  other  term  ; and  therefore  cannot  in  a svay 
of  ordinary  juftice  be  inflified  upon  any  creature, 
but  for  fin. 

He  then  tliat  is  free  from  death,  and  no  ways 
obnoxious  thereto,  cannot  but  have  a right  to 
life  ; there  being  no  middle  condition  between 
death  and  life.  Adam  while  he  was  free  frotn 
fin,  had  a title  to  life,  yea,  and  had  the  poffefiion 
of  it ; though  he  had  not  yet  performed  the  law, 
either  by  himfelf  or  any  other  for  him,  in  any 
fuch  fenfe  as  is  contended  for  by  fome,  as  of  ab- 
folute  necefiity  to  give  a title  to  life:  and  if  he 
had  not  a right  to  life  by  his  freedom  from  fin, 
but  was  to  purchafe  it  by  an  aflual  fulfilling  of 

the 


[ 9 ] 


the  law,  I afk,  what  quantities  of  obedience  to 
the  law  he  muft  have  paid  before  he  had  made 
this  purchafe,  and  how  long  he  muft  have  obeyed 
the  law  before  this  title  to  life  would  have  ac- 
crued unto  him  ? For  had  he  lived  a thoufand 
years  in  his  integrity,  without  the  leaft  touch  oh 
tranfgreftion,  he  had  ftiil  been  a debtor  of  obe- 
dience to  the  law,  upon  the  fame  terms  that  he 
was  at  the  beginning,  and  the  leaft  interruption 
in  the  courfe  of  his  obedience  had  been  the  for- 
feiture of  that  life.  So  then  this  alfo  isunquefti- 
onably  true,  that  there  needs  no  other  r.ighteouf- 
nefs  but  the  forgivenefs.  of  lin,  to.  giy^  a,  m?ji 
a clear  title  to  life. 

Scft.  VII.  Thatfatlsfaftlon  which  Chrift  made- 
to  the  juftice  of  God,  for  fin,  and  whereby  he 
procured  remifilon.  of  fins,  (or  perfect  righteouf- 
nefs)  lor  thofe  that  believe,  confifts  in  that  obe- 
dience which  he-  performed  to  that  peculiar  law 
of  mediation,  vvhich,  God  irapofed  upon  him, 
(which  we  commonly, _ though  perhaps  not  alto- 
ther  fo  properly  call  his  paftive  obedience,)  aqd 
not  at  all  in  that  obedience  which  he  exhibited 
to  the  morallatsu  Tins  is  evident;:  becaufe  no- 
thing can  be  fatlsfaftory  to  div'ine  juftice  for  fin, 
but  that  which  is.  penal;  without  Jhtdding  of 
bloody  (faith  the  .apoftle,  Heb.  ix.  2-2.)  there  is  no 
remijjion,  and  confeqaently  no  fatisfacllon  now 
that  the  obedience  which  Chrift  exhibited  to  the 
moral  law  was^no  ways  penal,  is  evident  from 
hence  penal  in  refpeft  of  his  godhead  it  could 

A 5 . nQt 


C lo  ] 

not  be,  the  divine  nature  being  not  capable  of 
punifhment.  Again,  in  refpedl  of  his  human  na- 
ture, this  obedience  could  not  be  penal,  becaufe 
it  was  required  of  man  in  his  innocency,  even  of 
Adam  before  his  fall  ; yea,  and  ftlll  lieth,  and 
fhall  lie  to  the  days  of  eternity,  upon  men  and 
angels,  in  their  glorified  conditions.  Love 
(which  the  apoftle  affirmeth  to  be  the  fulfilling  of 
the  law)  never  falleth.  Therefore  to  make  obe- 
dience to  the  moral  law  penal,  is  to  affirm,  that 
man  rvas  punifhed,  and  that  by  appointment 
from  God,  before  he  finned,  and  that  the  glorified 
faints  and  angels,  yea  and  Jefus  Chrill  himfelf, 
are  now  puniflied  in  heaven. 

Befides,  the  fcriptures  themfclves  no  where 
afcrlbe  this  fatisfaftion,  or  the  rvork  of  redemp- 
tion, or  any  part  or  degree  of  it,  to  the  holincfs 
or  aftive  obedience  of  Chrifi,  but  ftill  to  his  paf- 
five,  fee  Rom.  iii.  25.  Rom.  v.  6,  8.  2 Cor.  v. 
21.  Eph.  i.  7.  Eph.  ii.  i6.  Col.  i.  iq.  Heb.  it. 
iq.  Heb.  i\'.  12,  iq,  26.  Heb.  x.  10.  1 Pet. 

li.  2q.  1 Pet.  iii.  18.  1 John.  i.  7.  Revel,  i. 

5.  &c. 

t If  Chrlft  had  fulfilled  the  law  in  our  flead, 
till  the  ntmoft  period  ol  his  life,  there  had  been 
no  necelfity  ol  his  d\;lng  for  us.  T.  here  is  no 

liglit 

+ Q^ui  I'ero  dedietUia:  .aCIiva,  aut  fiinPiitaii  nctk'ir,  merits 
jifPilifr  ajeribunt,  motion  Chrijli  fine  dubio  inaiiem  redduvt-  Pt(r. 
de  bfiit.ChriJIi  ABiva  & Pujiva.  p 181,  182.  Luo  ijle  pronun- 
chilli,  C/iri/lus  fanguinij  rjfujwne  redemil  nos  al>  execralione  le^ts,  & 
C/iripits  ^dedientiam  praf  itil  pro  nolds,  implicant  contradiibonem. 
i'ijcelor. 


[ ] 

light  clearer  than  this.  For  if  tve  ftand  beford 
God,  by  virtue  of  the  perfeft  obedience  of  Chrift 
iii-nputed  to  us  as  our  own,  perfectly  righteous, 
we  are  no  more  obnoxious  to  the  curfe  of  the 
law,  and  confequentlv  have  no  need  of  any  fa- 
tisfaftion  to  divine  jaitice,  nor  of  any  remiflion 
of  fins  by  blood.  There  needs  nothing  more  to 
a perfetl  julHfication,  than  a perfetf  righteouf- 
ncfs,  or  a perfeff  fulfilling  of  the  law : this  the 
apoftle  tdearlv  layeth  down.  Gal.  ii.  21.  I/righ- 
teoiifnefs  be  by  the  law  (whether  performed  by 
ourfeh'es,  or  bv  another  for  us)  then  Ckrifi  I's 
dead  in  vain.  This  propofition  is  fo  clear,  that 
both  Pifcator  and  Pereus  lieretoibre,  and  Mr. 
Gataker  o-f  late,  have  not  fun  ply  alfirmed,  but 
with  more  than  an  ordinary  confidence  avouched, 
that  to  liohl  an  imputation  of  the  atlive  obedi- 
ence of  Chrifl,  amounts  to  no  lefs  than  an  abro- 
gation of  his  death. 

Seft.  VIIJ.  That  union  and  communion 
wliich  believers  hat  e with  Chrift,  doth  no  ways 
require  any  fuch  impiitatioii-.ot  his  righteoufuefs 
to  them.  That  union  and;  communion  which  the 
wife  hath  with  the  hu-fband,  doth  not  require, 
that  w’hatfoever  the  hufband  hath  fliould  be  im- 
puted to  the  wife,  or  that  the  wile  Ihould  be 
reputed  to  have  wdratfoever  the  hiuband  hath. 
1 he  wile  is  not  reputed  wife,-  becaufe  the  huf- 
band is  wife  ,-  fhe  may  be  weak  notivithllanding, 
and  jufily  fo  reputed  : neither  is  the  honefty  or 
the  hulband  fo  imputed  to  the  wife, that  file  mult 
A 6 be 


L 12  ] 

be  reputed  honeft.  Neither  doth  the  union  arid 
communion  which  the  members  of  the  body  hath 
with  the  head,  neceffarily  require,  that  whatfo- 
ever  the  head  hath  or  doth,  fhould  be  imputed 
to  all  the  members  refpeftively.  The  eyes 
which  are  in  the  head,  are  not  imputed  to  the 
hands  or  feet,  nor  the  ears  which  grow  upon 
the  head,  imputed  to  the  heels,  nor  the  aclions 
of  feeing  and  hearing,  the  one  performed  by 
the  eyes,  the  other  by  the  ears,  imputed  to  the 
arms  or  legs  ; fo  that  thele  fhould  be  faid  either 
to  fee  or  hear.  In  like  manner,  there  is  not 
the  leafl  pretence,  to  build  a neceffity  of  the  im- 
putation of  Chrifl’s  righteoufnefs  to  believers, 
upon  that  union  and  communion  which  they 
have  with  him;  or  to  conclude,  that  becaufe be- 
lievers have  union  and  communion  with  Chrifl, 
therefore  his  righteoufnefs  muff  be  theirs  in 
fuch  a fenfe,  that  they  may  be  conftituted  right- 
eous therewith. 

That  union  and  communion  which  believers 
have  with  Chrift,  ate  abundantly  made  good  in 
ihefe  particulars,  i.  By  virtue  of  this  union 
and  communion  with  him,  they  are  aclual  mem- 
bers of  that  myltical  body,  whereof  he  is  the 
head.  2.  They  are  partakers  of  the  fame  fpirit 
with  him,  who  dwellcth  in  them  as  he  dw'elleth 
in  Chrift  himfelf.  3.  They  have  fellowlhip  in  the 
fame  fruits  of  the  fpirit  with  him.  4.  1 hey 

have  fellowfhip  in  that  redemption  which  he 
hath  puvehafed  wuh  his  blood.  They  have 

fpecial 


[ 13  ] 

fpeclal  intel'eft  in  his  infinite  wifdom  and  power, 
as  in  all  his  otliQj-  perfefilions  \vhercby  he  is 
both  able,  and  willing  to  do  niaivelLonlly  for 
them,  and  to  advance  the  things  of  their  peace. 
6.  They  have  a compleat  right  and  litle  to  that 
immortal  inheritance,  which  is  referved  in  hea- 
ven. 7.  They  have  commnnion  and  fellowfhip 
with  God  himfelf,  and  fpecial  imereft  in  his 
love.  8.  And  laftly,  they  have  fellowfliip  one 
with  another,  and  are  dearlv  and  deeply  interefi- 
ed  in  the  affeSions  one  of  another.  So  that  to 
deny  the  imputation  of  Chrift’s  righteonfnefs  is 
no  more  to  deny  their  union  and  communion 
with  Chrilf,  than  to  deny  that  the  miracles 
which  Chrift  wrought  are  imputed  to  us  ; or 
than  to  deny  that  a man  feeth  with  his  hands, 
or  heareth  with  his  heels,  is  a denying  that  the 
.members  of  the  body  have  any  union  or  commu- 
nion with  the  head. 

Seft.  X.  The  fin  of  Adam  is  no  wherein  fcrip- 
ture  faid  to  be  imputed  to  Ills,  pofierlty  ; neuher 
can  any  other  imputation  thereof  be  proved, 
either  by  fcripture  or  found  reafon,  than  that 
wliich  Hands,  either  in  a comnuinion  of  all  his 
poflerity  with  him  therein;  (the  fecond  Adam 
only  excepted]  or  elfe  in  a propagation  of  his 
nature  defiled  therewith  ; or  laflly  in  that  punilh- 
ment  or  condemnation  that  is  come  upon  the 
world  by  it.  But  as  for  any  ftich  imputation 
of  it,  by  virtue  whereof  precifely  confidered,  all 
his  poflerity  were  made  formally  Tinners,  neither 

do 


C M ] 

do  the  fcripturcs  acknowledge,  nor  found  reafon 
admit.  Tlie  former  claufe  of  tliis  concliifion  is 
unquehionable.  The  fcriptures  wherefoever 
they  fpeak  of  Adam’s  fin,  and  the  relation  of  it 
to  his  polferitv,  wholly  a'ollain  from  the  term  of 
imputation,  neither  do  they  ufe  anv  other  word 
of  like  hgiuhcMtion  with  it,  at  lead  in  that  fenfe, 
wherein  it  is  ufed  in  iliis  controverf\'.  But  firff, 
they  acknowledge  a communion  heiween  Adam 
and  his  pollcrity  i.n  his  fin,,  in  refpcft  whereof 
the  fm  liny  as  well  he  attrlhnted  to  anV,  and  to 
all  oi  his  po'lcniy,  as  to  Adam  lilmfelf ; as 
Abtahani%  act  ol  pat'lng  tvtluis  to  Mefchijedechy 
is  alcribed  to  Levi,  being  in  h>s  loins,  as  well  as 
to  Abraham  himfelf.  And  Lmialfo,  (faith  the  Holy 
Gliod,  Hcb.  vli.  9.)  xidiich  radvetk  txtiits,  paid 
tythts  in  Abialuinu  The  truth  and  propriety  of 
tvliich  faying,  he  makes  good  by  this  demon- 
dratlon..  Far  he.  zras  yd  m the  loins  of  his  father 
Ahrakani  rrhen  Mrlckifaleeh  met  him.  It  is  not  here 
fail!  that  Ab>  ahands  pa)inp  tsthes^  runs  imputed  to 
Levi,  hut  that  Levi  himlell  jiaved  tribes  (in  that 
afl  of  A5r«/nz/«h)  as  well  as  Abraham.  So  that 
this  aff,  was  a,s  well  Levi’saftas  Alrahains,  and 
is'imputed  to  him  rmt  as  Abraham's,  apt,  but  his 
own.  In  like  manner  the  feripture  j.dainly  af- 
firineth  that  all  Adam's  poderiiy  finuetl  in  Adam 
(in  that  fiift  fin  of  his)  Rom.  v.  12.  hut  it  no 
where  affirmeth,  that  Adam's  fin  is  imputed  to 
them.  I'heir  own  fin  in  Adam,  may  with  good 
propriety  of  fjieedi,  be  faid  to  he  imputed  to 

tliem 


[ ^5  ] 

them.  'BlU  that  Aflam’s  fin,  otherwife  than  as  it 
was  theirs,  as  well  as  his,  by  reafon  of  that  fub- 
fiflence  they  had  in  his  loins,  fhould  be  Lmpiitecl 
to  them,  hath  neither  ground  i|i  leripture,  nor 
confdleiice  with  re?wfoii. 

2.  Adam’s  fin  has  refereiiee  to  his  pofteritv, 
in  matter  of  defilement,  and  confeq^uently  of 
guilt  and  piinilhment,  b}'  natural  propagation 
from  him.  Adam’s  perfoii,  the  fountain  of 
all  his  poderity,  being  corrupted  and  po'.foned 
with  him,  except  God  fhould  ha.ve  wrouglit  mi- 
raculoully,  eulicr  by  a thorough  purging  of  the 
fountain,  before  any  ftream  illucd  from  it,  or  bv 
dilfeveidng  the  poifon  from  the  waters,  in  the 
very  moment  of  their  lilae,  (ncliher  of  which 
he  was  any  way  bound  to  do)  could  not  but  fend 
lorth  Itrciuus  ol  like  defdenient  tvith  the  foun- 
tain ilfelf.  This  the  fcvipuire  plainly  teacheilm 
Who  can  b.nng  a chan  thing  eui  of  an  unckan? 
Not  oncy  Job  xiv.  4.  So  our  Saviour,  Jolmdii- 
6.  That  n hick  if  bo^n  of  the  flejh  ["corrupted  by 
fill]  IS  (by  the  courfe  of  nature,  whei'eunto  God 
hinifdf  hath  righteoufly  confemed)  Jhjh.  i.  e. 
A creature  of  the  fame  finful  nature.  And  (to 
forbear  other  texts)  the  apofile,  Rom.  yx  19- 
exprefiy  affirmeth,  that  by  the  chj obedience  of  one 
?nany  were,  made  [inner s : i>ot  by  the  imputation 
of  the  aft  of  his  fm  to  them  (this  is  neither  fcrip- 
ture,  nor  good  reafon)  but  by  corrupting  his  own 
perfon,  by  reafon  whereof,  all  that  are  born  of 

him 


C ] 

him  in  a way  of  natural  propagation,  muft  needs 
be  born  Tinners.  - 

3.  Death  and  condemnation  are  juftly  come 
upon  the  world,  not  fo  much  (to  fpeak  properly 
for  Adam’s  tranfgreflion,  as  by  Adam's  tranfgref- 
fion ; partly  as  thistranfgreffion  of  his  was  the  fin 
and  tranfgrellion  of  the  world,  partly  as  by  means 
of  this  fin,  the  v.;orld,  I mean  all  the  fons  and 
daughters  of  men,  born  in^o  it,  are  become  per-,' 
Tonally  and  compleatiy  finful.  In  tltis  fenfe,  it 
is  faid,  that  by  ike  cffe.nce  of  one  dr.ath  reigned 
(viz.  ovtx  2\\)  by  one,  Rom.  v.  17.  And  fo  that 
death  pnjfed  over  all,,  in  that  ail  had'fianed,  ver. 
12.  And  again,  tha* judgment  came' by  one  unto 
condemnation,  ver.  1 6..  And  that  all  men  by  na- 
ture are  children  of  wrath,  l£c.  Eph.  ii.  3.  If 
men  can  find  any  propriety  in  the  \ecx<S..imputa- 
tion,  to  fignify  any  of  thefe  three  confideralions, 
let  the  fin  of  Adam  be  faid  to  be  imputed  to  his 
poflerity,  I fhall  no  wav  rontradi6t  it:  but  for 
any  fuch  imputation,  as  is  prefTed  by  many,  by 
which  men  fhoidd  be  made  fonnaily  Tinners  be- 
fore God,  and  the  fin  no  ways  looked  upon  as 
theirs,  but  only  bv  means  o'  fuch  imputation,  I 
neither  find  the  Tcriptures  affirming,  nor  am  able 
to  comprehend  it. 

SeTf.  X.  Though  juflification  and  falvation 
came  by  the  Tecond  Adam,  as  condemnation  and 
death  came  by  the  firfi,  yet  are  there  many  dif- 
ferent confidcrations  between  the  bringing  in  of 
falvation  by  the  one,  and  of  condemnation  by 
• the 


[ ^7  ] 

tiie  other.  The  apohle  himfelf  inftances  in 
particulars  wherein  they  differ  greatl)',  Rom.  v. 
15,  16.  And  befidcs  thefe  there  are  many 
others.  As  firft,  the  fin  of  Adam  by  which  he 
brought  condemnation  upon  the  world,  w'as  as 
well  the  ati  of  all  his  pollerity  as  his  own,  in 
wTich  refpeft  they  may  as  truly  be  faid  to  hare 
brought  condemnation  upon  themfelves,  as 
Adam;  but  that  obedience,  by  which  Chrill 
brought  falvation  into  the  world,  can  with  na 
propriety  be  faid  to  have  been  theirs,  or  per- 
formed by  them,  who  are  faved  by  it,  fo  that 
thefe  cannot  now  be  faid  with  any  more  truth  to 
have  faved  themfelves,  than  if  they  had  not  been 
faved  at  alf.  It  it  faid  indeed,  that  God  znas  in 
Chrifl  reconciling  the  world  unto  himfelf,  2 Cor. 
v.  ig.  But  it  is  no  tvhere  faid,  that  the  tvorld 
W'as  in  Chrill  reconciling  itfelf  unto  God.  2. 
Adam  by  his  fin  brought  condemnation  upon 
thofe  who  were  in  his  loins,  and  had  a natural 
being  in  him : but  Chrifl  by  his  obedience 
brought  falvation  unto  them,  that  had  no  fuch 
relation  to  him,  nor  any  being  in  him,  but  were 
wholly  aliens  and  flrangers  from  him,  yea  and 
enemies  to  him.  3.  All  thofe  that  are  condemn- 
ed by  x\dam  had  their  being  in  him,  at  one  and 
the  fame  time.  Cain  tvas  not  in  Adam  before 
Judas,  nor  Judas  after  Cain.  But  among  thofe 
that  are  faved  oy  Chrifl  there  is  a difference  of 
time  in  refpeft  of  their  ingrafting  into  him  : 
fame  are  foouer,  and  fome  later  in  him..  An- 

dronicus 


[ ] 

(Jronicus  and  Junla,  Paul’s  coufins,  were  in 
Cknjl  before  him.  Rom.  xvi.  7.  4.  That  difobe- 
dience  of  Adam  by  which  he  brought  condem- 
nation upon  the  tvorld,  was  aftive  ; but  that 
obedience  by  which  Chri ft  brings  falvation  ta 
the  world,  i&paffive,  as  hath  been  already  prov- 
ed, and  may  farther  appear  by  comparing,  Rom. 
V.  ig.  with  Phil.  ii.  8,  &c.  5.  Laftly,  the 
whole  weight  of  the  redemption  of  the  world  by 
Chrift,  depended  upon  the  merit  of  that  obedi* 
tnee  of  his  by  which  it  was  j)rocured‘;  and  not 
at  all  upon  any  relation  of  thofe  to  him,  or  fe- 
minal  comprehenfion  in  him,  for  whom  it  was 
procured.  But  the  burthen  of  the  condemnation 
coming  by  the  tranfgreffion  of  Adam,  depended 
not  only  upon  the  demerit  of  the  tranfgreflion, 
but  upon  the  relation  of  thofe  to  him  who  were 
eondemned  by  him,  as  having  a true  feminal 
being  in  his-  loims,  when  he  tranfgrelfed.  So 
that  though  the  fm  of  i\.dam  had  been  oflefs  de- 
merit in  the  fight  of  God  than  it  was,  yet  might 
Adam’s  pofterity  juftlv  have  been  involved  in 
the  fame  condemnation  bv  it,  wherein  now  it  is. 
But  if  the  obedience  or  fufterings  of  Chrift  had 
been  of  lefs  value  than  thev  were,  the  redemp- 
tion of  the  world,  could  not  have  been  obtained 
bv  them. 

Hence  the  different  manner  of  the  feriptures 
fpeaking  of  the  one  and  of  the  other,  is  very 
confiderable.  When  it  fpeaks  of  the  redemption 
or  juftification  by  Chrift,  it  ufeih  an  expreftion 

importing 


C ^9  ] 

importing  the  ^\'orth  of  Chrifl  in  his  fufferingSj 
as  where  God  is  faidyor  Chrifl' s fake,  to  have 
forgiven  us  our  fms,  as  Eph.  iv.  32.  But  wheii 
it  fpeaketh  of  the  condemnation  of  the  world  by 
Adam,  it  no  where  faith,  that  God  for  Adames 
fake,  futy’efted  the  world  to  death  and  condem- 
nation i but  only  thus.  By  one  man  fin  entered  in- 
to the  world,  and  death  by  fn,  Rom.  v.  12.  And 
again,  through  the  offence  oj  one  many  are  dead, 
ver.  ig.  Again,  By  oneman’'s  offence  death  reign- 
ed by  one.  ver.  17.  Still  ufmg  exprelTions  which 
do  not  necelfarily  import  the  fm  of  Adam  to 
have  been  the  meritorious  caufe,  (though  this  be 
not  denied)  but  rather  the  inllruraental  caufe  of 
this  condemnation. 

And  doubtlefs  the  confideration  of  that  dif- 
ference between  the  firfl  and  fecond  Adam, 
which  we  have  in  hand,  I mean  in  refpeft  ot  the 
great  difproportion  between  the  demerit  of  the 
one,  and  merit  of  the  other,  is  the  ground  of  that 
comfortable  difference  between  them,  wherein 
the  apoflle  fo  triumpheth,  Rom.  v,  13.  But  not 
as  the  offence,  fo  alfo  is  the  free  gift,  viz.  in  re- 
fpeff  of  the  efficacy  in  the  one  to  condemn,  and 
in  the  other  to  juftify  and  fave.  There  is  a great 
difference  between  them  in  this  regard  ; For  if 
through  the  0 fence  of  one,  many  be  dead,  much 
more  the  grace  of  God,  and  the  gift  by  grace, 
which  IS  by  one  ih  :n  Jcfis  Chrif,  hath  abounded 
unto  many.  If  the  fm  of  Adam  hath  been  able  to 
involve  many,  i.  e.  Elis  whole  pofterity,  all  that 

' fliall 


[ 20  ] 

fiiall  be  born  of  blm,  in  death  and  condemna- 
tion;  much  more  the  grace,  i.  e.  the  gracious 
purpofe  of  God  towards  men,  and  the  gift  by  that 
grace,  juflification,  by  fuch  a man  as  Jefns 
Chrilf,  who  is  both  God  and  man,  doth  abound 
tint 0 many,  i.  e.  doth'juflify  and  fave  with  far 
greater  efficacy,  all  thofe  that  by  fpiritual  regene- 
ration-and  true- faith  defcend  from  him. 

There  being  thefe  differences  between  Adam, 
in  his  condemning  the  world  and  Chrift  in  his 
faring  it ; it  is  evident  that  all  fuch  arguments 
as  are  drawn  from  the  agreement  between  them, 
are  invalid  and  infufficient,  except  they  have 
fome  other  foundation  to  bear  them. 

. Se£i.  XI.  It  hath  no  foundation,  either  in 
fcripture  or  reafon  to  fay,  that  Chrift  by  any  im- 
putation of  fins  was-  m-dA^  formally  a Tinner;  or, 
that  fin  in  any  other  fenfe  was  imputed  to  him, 
than  as  the  puniffiment  due  to  it  was  inflidled  on 
him.  So  bilhop  Davenant  makes  the  imputa- 
tion of  fin  to  Chrift,  to  ftand  in  the  tranflation 
of  the  puniffiment  of  fin  upon  him.  And  in 
another  place,  Chrift  was  willing  fo  to  take  our 
fins  upon  him,  as  not  to  be  made  a [inner  hereby, 
but  a facTifce  for  fn.  So  that  if  the  men  with 
whom  we  have  to  do  in  this  bufinefs  of  imputa- 
tion, would  but  ftand  their  own  ground,  and 
walk  peaceably  with  their  own  principles,  we 
ffioiild  foon  compromlfe.  For  their  great  maxim 
is,  that  in  that  manner  wherein  our  fins  are  im- 
puted to  Chrift,  in  the  fame  ChrilFs  righteouf- 

nefi 


I ] 

refs  is  Imputed  to  us.  If  fo,  then  we  are  not 
made  formally  righteous  by  any  t'ighteoufnefs  of 
Chrift  imputed  to  us,  becaufe  Chrift  w'as  not 
made  formally  a {inner  by  any  fm  of  ours  imput- 
ed to  him. 

Se£f.  XII.  Faith  doth  not  only  declare  a man  to 
he  in  ajulfified  ftate,  but  is  the  means  by  which 
juRification  is  obtained  ; fo  that  no  man  is  juRi- 
fied  in  the  fight  of  God,  until  he  obtains  this 
grace  by  believing.  This  is  the  conRant  doflrine 
of  the  fcriptures  : -and  there  is  not  one  of  our 
reformed  divines  that  oppoles  it.  IV a covclude, 
(faith  the  apoRle,)  that  a man  is  jujlified  by  faith, 
without  the  zoorls  of  the  lav,  Rom.  iii.  28. 

Sedl:.  XIII.  In  this  fenfe  ChriR  mav  be  fald 
tT)  have  fuiFered  the  penalty  or  curfe  of  the  law. 
FirR,  it  was  tlie  curfe  or  penalty  of  the  law,  now 
ready  to  be  executed  upon  all  men  for  fin,  that 
occafioned  his  fLifTering.  Had  not  the  curfe  of 
the  law  been  incurred  by  man,  ChriR  had  not 
fuffered  at  all.  Again  adhg  ChriR  may  be 
faid  to  have  fuRered  the  curfe  of  the  'law, 
becaufe  the  thinirs  which-  he  fuffered  were 

O 

of  the  fame  kind  (at  leaf!  in  partj  with  thofe 
which  God  intended,  by  the  curfe  of  the  law 
againR  tranfgreirors,  namefy  death.  But  if  by 
the  curfe  of  the  law  we  underRand  either  that 
intire  fyRem  of  penalties,  wTich  the  law  itfelf 
intends  in  the  term  death,  or  the  intent  of 
the  law,  touching  the  quality  of  the  perfons,  on 
whom  it  was  to  be  executed  : in  neither  ofthefe 

fenfes 


I 22  ] 

fonfes  did  Chrifl  fuffer  the  curfe  of  the  law  ; nei- 


tlier  ever  hath  it,  nor  ever  fhall  be  fuffered,  by 
any  tranfgreffors  of  the  law  that  fhall  believe  in 
Irim.  So  that  God  reqrdred  the  death  and  fuf- 
ferings  of  Chrift,  not  that  the  law  properly,  either 
in  the  letter -or  intention  of  it  might  be  executed, 
but  on  the  contrarv,  that  it  might  not  be  execut* 
upon  thofe  that  believe. 


Some  diJ}in&.iori5  nectary  for  the  farther  undei- 
Jlanding  the  quefiou^  and  the  clearing  of  many 
difjkukies. 

ECT.  I.  The  word  jufif cation  is  taken  in  a 


double  fenfe-.;  . either  aSiucly,  ox  pafively  : 
in  the  aElive  fignification  it  fignifieth  that  aft  of 
God,  whereby  he  jujlifie/h,  i.  e.  abfolveth  a be- 
lieving firmer  from  the  guilt  of,  and  punilhment 
due  to,  his  fins.  It  may,  in  this  fignification,  fig- 
'iiify  alio  any  aft  of  any  other  efficient  caufe  (of 
which  kind  there  are  manv)  whereby  it  contri- 
butes any  thing  towards  the  juJHJication  of  a fin- 


Iii  t\\tpajjive  {cn{o,ju/lificalionxx\2.y  fignif)'  the 
effeft  itfelf,  that  alteration  which  is  made  in  the 


•C  HAP.  III. 


ner. 


ftate 


[ S3  ] 

^ftate  of  a perfon,  ^vhen  he  is  juftified  : which 
flancleth  in  this  that  whereas  he  was  before  under 
the  guilt  of  fin,  and  liable  to  condemnation,  now 
h«  is  a free  man,  acquitted  and  difcharged  from 
both. 

Seft.  II.  Juflicc  'or  rigliteoufncfs  hath  feveral  ac- 
ceptations in  fcripture.  When  it  is  attributed  to 
God,  it  fignifies  fometimes,  that  univerfal  holi- 
nefsofhis  nature,  which  inalceth  him  infinitely 
averfe  from  doing  any  thing  contrary  to  the  rules 
of  jujiice  and  equity,  and  inclines  him  to  -do  all 
things  agreeable  hereunto.  Sometimes  it  figni- 
fieth,  what  we  commonly  call  truth  or  Jaith- 
fulnefs,  in  keeping  promife.  Thirdli’,  it  fignifies 
that  gracious  difpofiti on ‘ towards  his  people  by 
trhich  he  is  ftill  inclinable,  to  do  them  good,  to 
fupport  them  in  trouble,  or  to  deliver  them  out 
of  trouble':  and  this  is  the  moft  frequent  figni- 
fication  of  the  word.  Thus  PfaL  cxlv.  7.  They 
Jliall  abundantly  utter  the  memory  of  thy  great  good- 
nefs,  and  jhall  fing  of  thy  righteou fiefs,  that  is,  of 
thy  clemency  and  grace  terwards  th)"  people.  It 
fometimes  means  fourthl)',  his  wav  or  method  of 
juJHfication.  Thus  Rom.  iii.  21.  The  righteouf- 
nefs  of  Godwhich  is  loithout  the  htw,  ft  e.  the  way 
God  hath  found  out  for  the  jujiiftcation  o^rrytv., 
which  confifts  not  in  the  obfervation  of  the  law, 
is  faid  to  be  manifeftcd,  being  uitrieffed  by  the  law, 
the  writings  of  Mojes,  -and  the  prophets.  So  the 
verfe  following  ; 'The  ' ‘righteoufnefs  of  God  which 
is  by  the faith  of  fejus  Chriji,  In  the  like  fenfe 

the 


C 24  ] 

t’le  word  is  alfo  ufed  Rom.  i.  17,  Rom.  x.  3.  In 
all  which  places  by  the  ri ghleoufnefs  of  God,  is 
meant  that  way  of  jujUficalion  which  God  himfelf 
out  of  his  fpecial  wifdom  and  grace  hath  found 
oul,  being  far  differing  from  that  o{juJ}ifica- 
tion  which  the  thoughts  of  men  run  fo  much  upon, 
viz.  by  the  works  of  the  law.  In  the  fame  kind  of 
exprelhon,  men’s  own  righteoujnefs  lignifies  (Rom 
X.  3.)  that  way  or  means  by  which  they  feek  to 
bejulllfied. 

In  the  fixth  place,  I conceive  that  fometimcs, 
God’s  feverity  againlf  fin  and  fmners,  is  expreff- 
ed  by  this  word  righteoijnejs.  In  this  fenfe  the 
word  may  well  be  taken,  Rom,  iii.  26. 
£^c.  that  he  might  bejvJ},  avd  ajujhfier  oj  himihat 
bclievdh  in  Jefus.  That  is,  that  God  might  appear 
to  be  afevere  judge  and  punillier  of  fm,  and  yet 
jullify  and  acquit  all  thofe  from  fin  who  believe 
in  Jefus.  Sevently,  Chrift  himfelf  fometimes 
fecms  to  be  called  the  rigiutou/nefs  of  God  as  he 
is  the  orreat  author  or  mediator  of  that  rig  UtoufntJs 
■or juJUfication  which  God  vouchfafeth  toih?  world. 
• Seft.  III.  Again  fccondly,  this  woxdijufUce  or 
righteoufnefs  when  applied  to  men,  fometimcs 
fiiini.deth,  that  frame  ol  heart,  confillinq  of  all 
thofe  holy  difpofitions  which  are  found  in  fome 
-degiee,  in  every  child  ofGod.  It  fignifies  fecond- 
ly,  the  fruits,  works,  or  actions,  arifing  from 
fuch  a frame  of  heart.  Tims  it  is  ufed  Atls  x.  35. 

1 John  iii.  7.  and  elfewhere.  It  means  thirdly, 
that  particular  difpoGiion,  which  inclineth  a man 

to 


[ 25  ] 

to  deal  uprightly  with  all  men,  together  with  the 
fruit  of  fuch  adifpofition.  Fourthly, 
itfelf  {in  the  palhve  fenfe,)  is  fometimes  expreffed 
by  the  word,  nghteoufnejs.  Thus  Gal.  ii.  21. 
If  right  eoujnefs  {jaJlifLcalion)  conic  by  the  law,  by  the 
works  of  the  law,  then  Chrift  is  dead  in  vain.  So 
Rom.  X.  4.  Chrill  is  the  end  of  the  law,  for  right- 
eoufnefs[i.  e.  for  judification)  to  them  that  believe. 
Fifthly,  fometimes  Clirift  hirafelf  is  called  the 
righteoufnefs  of  men.  i.  e^  the  author  or  procurer 
of  Caeir  jujlification  or  r'lghtemfnejs : as  fer.xxin. 
6.  33.  16,  &c.  By  the  lame  figure  of  fpeech,  he 
is  elfewherc  called  nziir our  life,  our  fancli- 
fication,  our  redemption,  &c.  i.  e.  the  author,  and 
procurer  of  all  thefe  refpeftively.  Sixthly,  by  a 
metonymy  of  the  catife  for  the-effeft,  ctr  of  the- 
antecedent  for  the  confequent,  (a  common  dialeft 
alfo  in  fcripturej  as  well  the  benefits  and  rewards 
oi  a man’s  rightcou/nefs  in  the  firft  and  third  ac- 
ceptation of  the  trord,  as  the  blellings  that  ac- 
company tire  rigliteoufifs  which  we^have  in  our 
jujlification,  are  fometimes  expreffed  by  the  term 
ripjdeoufnefs.  Thus  Job  xxxul.  26.  God  will 
render  u-nto  man  his  rightecu/nefs,  i.  e.  will  reward 
every  man’s  uprlghtnefs  with  fuitable  blelEngs. 
So  PJal.  cxii.  9.  His  righteoufnefs  remaineth  for 
ever,  i.  t.  thepraife  and  rewards  of  his  righteouf- 
nefs fnall  be  durable  and  lafling.  Seventhly,  the 
word  righteoufnefs  in  fome  coullrufiion  hath  no 
precife  fignification,  diflinft  from  the  word  with 
which  it  is  joined,  but  together  with  that  word 
VoL.  XXIII.  B makes 


[ 26  ] 

makes  a fignification  of  one  and  the  fame  thing. 
Thus  in  the  phrafe  of  imputing  right eoujhejs^ 
Rem.  IV.  6,  11,  &C.J  the  word  imputing  doth  not 
fignify,  one  thing  and  righteoufnefs  another,  but 
together  they  fignify  one  and  the  fame  act  of- 
God,  which  we  call,  free  jufirfying : fo  that  to 
impute  righteoafnofs,  is  nothing  elfe  but  freely 
'tofupify  : ami  righteoufnefs  imputed,  free  junifea- 
tion  {pajjive.)  Many  other  mQances  might  be 
given  in  feveral  forms  of  fpeech,  the  true  fenfe 
whereof  is  not  to  be  gathered  from  the  proper 
fignification  which  the  words  have  ieverally  in 
other  conftruftions,  but  from  the  joint  afpeff  of 
'•them  in  that  pofition. 

The  word  nfileoufnefs,  according  to  the  pro- 
priety of  the  Hebrew  tongue,  whidi  often  ufeth 
abftrads  for  concretes,  fignifieth  fometimes  a 
fociety  or  company  of  jujlified  ones,  of  jufl  or 
upright  ones.  In  the -former  fenfe  you  have  it, 
2 Cor.  V.  2 1.  'That -we  might  be  made  the  lighle- 
oufnefs  af  God  in  him,  i.  e.  a company  oijupifi- 
ed  perfons,  made  fuch  by  God,  through  Jefus 
Chrifi.  In  the' latter  fenfe  you  Tiave  it,  Ifa.  lx. 
17.  where  God  promifeth  to  his  church  and 
people  to  make  their  exaEiors  rifhtecufiefs,  i.  e. 
men  that  fnould  deal  rlghteoufly.  In  this  dia- 
led; of  fpeech,  povertv,  (fo  it  is  in  the  original) 
is  put  for  a company  of  poor  men,  2 Kings  xxiv. 
1 4.  So  captivity,  for  a company  oj  captives,  2 
Clir.  xxviii.  g.  Dent.  xxi.  lo,  and  in  fundry 

other 


L ^7  ] 

cthei'  places.  So  again,  Circumcijion  for  circum- 
ci/ed,  Phil.  iii.  3.  EkBion foreleSed,  Rom.  xi.  7. 

So  that  in  the  queftion  in  hand,  great  care 
mull  be  had,  that  we  be  not  intangled  hy  the  va- 
rious fignifications  of  the  word,  righteoufnefs, 
■which  without  much  heedfulnefs,  may  occalion 
our  llumblinsr. 

O 

T\\q  righteoufnefs  of  Chrill  is  twofold  : the 
one,  + Divines  cal!  the  righteoufnefs  of  his  per- 
fon  ; the  other,  the  righteoufnefs  of  his  merit. 

The  rigkleoufnefs  of  his  perfon  is  that,  where- 
by he  is  himfelf  righteous  : the  righteoufnefs  of 
his  merit,  that,  whereby  be  jufifiefh  others. 
The  former  conhlleth  partly  of  that  integrity 
which  Avas  in  him,  partly  of  that  obedience 
which  he  perforra;ed  to  the  moral  law,  or  that 
law  which  is  impqfed  upon  all  men.  The  latter, 
of  that  obedience  which  he  performed  to  tlizl pe- 
culiar law  of  mediatorfhip,  which  was  impofed 
upon  him  alone,  and  never  upon  any  man  be- 
fides.  For  it  is  evident  that  Chrill  both  did  and 
fullered  many  things,  not  fimply  as  be  w’as  man, 
but  as  he  was  mediator;  efpecially  his  voluntary 
B 2 fubmilTion 

+ Sec  Parccus  De  Ir.ftI,  ChritU  A£Uv.  |et  Pafliv.  P.  180.  Dr. 
PrideatiX  Left.  5.  de  luftifi.  P.  462.  Mr.  Brad/haio  Jtpijica.  P. 
68,  69.  &c.  Mr.  Forbez  JuJlipca.  c 25.  P,  iii,  112,  &c. 

J Ohedienia  Ckrifii  duplex  tjl,  ahera,  quam  vi  legis  ccvimunh,  qua 
creatum  ratiomlis,  virus  homa  cum  ejjet ; altera,  qmrti  vi  legis  de  media- 
tionij  pecuUaris,  five  pacli  de  redcwptioris  negotia  initi,,  quam  generis  hu- 
vumi  Mediator  et  Redemptor,  Deo  Patri,  debuit  et  exhibuk,  Gata'ker 
againft  Gomarus,  P.  4.  See  further  ?.  15. et,  P.  25  ihid% 


[ 28  ] 

fubmiflion  to  death,  for  the  ranfom  of  the  world. 
If  Chrift  had  been  bound,  by  the  moral  law,  to 
die,  his  death  had  been  ineffeflual  for- others: 

§ for  certain  it  is,  that  no  man  difchargeth  another 
mans  debt,  by  paying-  his  own.  Befides  he  that 
maintaineth,  that  Chrift  was  bound  by  the  moral 
law  to  die,  faith  (in  efteftjlhat  if  he  had  not  died 
he  had  been  a finner  and  fo  abafeth  to  the  duft 
•the  infinitenefs  of  that  grace,  which  he  manifeft- 
ed  to  the  world  by  dying  for  it. 

The  truth  and  neceftity  of  this  diftincfion, 
might  be  evinced  from  many  fcriptures,  particu- 
Jariy  IJa.  liii.  ii.  2 Cor.  v.  21.  H S.  vii.  26. 
Heb.ix.  14.  1 Pet.  iii.  18.  By  all  which  paftages 
it  is  evident,  that  Chrift  doth  not,  jujbjy  others 
by  the  moral  righleoiijinji  oi  W\%  perfon, whereby 
himfelf  was  made  nghttous,  but  by  that  other 
righttoufnejs,  which  we  may  call  mediatt.r^;,  fatis- 
faClory,  pajjive,  or  merUorious  ; and  yet  that  this 
righteoufnefs  itfelf  could  have-^one  nothing  but 
upon  prefuppofal  of  the  other. 

Pareus  obferves,  touching  this  ■ diftinftion, 
the  neglctl  hereof  caufeth  much  corfvjion.  and  tn- 
cunibittli  the  doclritte  of  jiijCifigaiion  which  many 
dificidties  and  iuconx:enieriCcj,  and  renders  it  hard- 
ly dejenfible  againji  the  papijls  and  other  adver- 
faries  of  it.  Theieiore  in  managing  the  prefent 

cjueftion 

. ^ Qui  chidketi^  atliide aui  rjlkj-,  '.•jjltiia: aferiiurs, 

■aortcm  Uiriju/n:^  e.iLtno  iiiancm  rcduurj.  l^aitus  De  Iiulx.  Chrifti. 
et  J’dlL  P.  i8i,  i32;  &c. 


r 29  ] 

<fueffion  about  imputation  fpecial  care  muft  be 
Bad,  that  we  neither  ufe  ourfelves,  nor  admit 
from  others,  thefe  words,  the  righieoufnefs  oj 
Ghrifi,  butwith  an  eye  to  this  diflinflion.  v 

Seft.  IV,  A thing  may  be  faid  to  be  imputed 
to  a man  in  feveral  refpefis.'  Fird,  a man’s  own 
a£ls  whether  good  or  evil,  are  faid  to  be  imputed 
to  him,  when  he  is  fnnply,  and  without  reference 
either  to  reward  or  punifliment,  reputed  or  pro- 
nounced the  doer  of  them.  In  this  fenfe,  as  well 
the  active  as pajjive  obedience  of  Chrift,  are  by 
God  imputed  to  Chrift  himfelf  and  to  no  other  : 
and  the  fins  of  believers,  to  themfelves  that  have 
committed  them,  and  to  none  other. 

Secondly,  a man’s  doings  whether  good  or 
evil,  are  faid  tb  be  imputed  to  him,  when  he  is 
either  rewarded,  or  punifhed  becaufe  of  them. 
In  this  fenfe  Shimei  requefts  David,  that  he 
would  not  impute  folly  to  him,  that  is,  that  he 
would  not  punifh  his  folly.  So  the  fins  of  unbe- 
lievers may  be  faid  to  be  imputed  to  them,  when 
they  are  punifhed  by  God  in  this  world,  or  the 
next  for  them. 

Thirdly',  another  man’s  offence  may  be  faid 
to  be  imputed  X.O  ■whe.n  either  Asm  are  looked 
upon  asadvifers,  or  furtherers  of  him  therein,  or 
are  punifhed,  as  if  we  had  been  acceffary  there- 
to : and  fo  another  man’s  virtue,  learning,  valour, 
may  be  faid  to  be  imputed  to  him,  who  is  look- 
ed upon  as  the  author,  teacher,  or  incourager 
of  the  other,  in  any  of  thofe.  In  this  fenfe  the 
B 3 fair 


C 30  ] 

fair  carriage  of  king  JoaJk  towards  the  begin- 
ning of  his  reign,  may  be  imputed  to  Jthoiada 
the  prieft,  2 Kings  xii,  2.  with  2 Ch.  xxiv. 
2.  Thus  the  knowledge  and  courage  which  were 
found  in  Peter  and  John  are  (in  effedtj  imputed 
to  Chrifl  by  the  priefts  and  rulers,  A£ls  iv.  13. 
In  this  lenfe  alfo  the  viftory  w’on  by  the  foldiers 
is  oft  to  the  general.  ■ 

Fourthly,  ©ne  man’s  wickednefs,  may  be  faid 
to  be  imputed  to  others,  when  they  are  punifhed 
in  confideration  thereof  : as  on  the  contrary,  a 
man’s  virtue  or  well-defervings  may  be  faid  to  be 
iinputed  to  others,  to  his  children,  or  kinsfolk, 
when  they  are  w’ell  dealt  with,  becaufe  of  their 
relation  to  fuch  a man.  In  this  feafe  David 
imputed  Jonathan’s  kindnefs  to  Mephiboflieth 
his  fon,  when  he  perferred  him  to  honour,  in 
confideration  thereof : and  fo  the  wicked  aft  of 
thofe  that  accufed  Daniel,  may  be  faid  to  have 
been  imputed  to  their  waves  and  children,  b)'  the 
king,  w'hen  he  caufed  them  alfo  to  be  call  into 
the  lions  den.  In  this  fenfe  of  imputation  (and 
in  this  only)  the  fins  of  men  may  be  faid  to  be 
imputed  to  Chrid,  viz.  becaufe  he  fuffered  the 
things  which  he  did  fuffer,  in  confideration  of 
them  : and  thefe  fufferings  of  his  may  be  faid  to 
be  imputed  to  us,  becaufe  we  are  rewarded,  that 
is,  jujiijied  and  fared  in  confideration  of  them. 
But  that  either  our  fins  fhould  be  faid  to  be 
imputed  to  Chrift,  becaufe  he  is  reputed  by  God 
to  have  committed  them,  or  that  his  righteouf- 


[ 31  ] 

nefs,  whether  aEiive  or  pajfive,  {hould  be  faicl  to 
be  imputed  \.o  us,  becaufe  we  are  reputed  by  God 
to  have  done  or  fuffered  the  one  or  the  other,  + 
hath  no  foundation  either  in  fcripture  or  reafon. 

Fiftlily,  a thing  may  be  faid  toFe  imputed  to  a 
man  when  he  is  dealt  with,  as  if  he  had  fome 
qualification  in  him,  whereto  there  are  fpecial 
privileges  belonging,  when  yet  he  hath  not  that 
qualification,  but  comes  to  the  privileges  fome 
other  way.  In  this  fenfe  righteoufuejs  is  faid  to 
ht.  imputed  to  him  that  helieveth,  Rom.  iv.  6,  ii. 
See.  that  is,  he  that  truly  believeth  in  Clirifl,  is 
looked  upon  by  God,  and  partly  hath,  and  partly 
fhall  have  all  the  privileges  which  belong,  by  co- 
venant, to  a perfetl  law-righteoufnefs,  though  there 
be  no  fuch  righteoujnejs  found  in  him  - becaufe 
Chrift  by  his  death  hath  purchafed  a right  for 
him  to  thefe  privileges,  which  are  aftually  given 
him  on  his  believing.  * So  that  to  fay,  God  im^ 
puteth  righteoujhefs  to  a vian,-  is  but  in  effefl  to 
fay,  that  God  looks  upon  him  with  the  fame 
favour,  wherewith  he  would  look  upon  him,  if 
he  were  properly  and  legally  righteous,  and  in- 
tends all  the  farther  privileges  of  fuch  a righteouf- 
vefs  unto  him. 

There  is  no  term  belonging  to  the  doflrine  of 
jujlification,  more  incumbered  with  variety  of 
fignifications  than  this  of  imputation,  and  confe- 
B 4 quently 

+ In  this  fenfe  th'e  imputation  as  wellof  the  pafTive,  as  aftive 
obedience  of  Chrift,  arc  clfe  where  denied  in  this  Treatife.  See 
Part  I,  Ch.  ix.  Seft.  4. 


[ 32  ] 

quently  more  obnoxious  to  miftake.  There  is 
fcarce  any  propofition  wherein  this  word  is  ufed 
indefinitely;  but  may  both  be  granted  and  denied, 
according  to  the  different  fenfe  thereof.  For  ex- 
ample, fuch  propofitions  as  thefe;  The  adive 
obedience  of  Ckriji  is  imputed-,  the,aclive  obedience 
of  Chrijl  is  not  imputed:  the  pajfive  obedience  oj 
Chrijl  is  imputed ; the  pajfive  obedience  of  Chrijl  is 
'-not  imputed,  &c.  ate  either  true  or  falfe,  accord- 
ingas  the  word  imputed  is  underftcod  in  them. 
Therefore  fpecial  care  muff  be  had  how  this 
word  paffeth,  or  is  admitted  in  the  prefent  con- 
troverfy. 

" Seff.  V.  Obedience  to  the  moral  law  may  be 
faid  to  be  lequired  of  men  in  two  refpefts:  firfl, 
by  way  of jujlif  cation,  that  a man  may  beefteem- 
ed  righteous  by  God,  and  have  the  pri\  ileges  of 
rightcoujnefs  conferred  upon  him.  Secondly, 
by  way  oifanClification,  that  he  may  exprcfs  his 
fubje61:ion  to  God,  and  his  unleigned  defire  of 
pleafinghim  in  all  things.  In  both  refpefts  this 
obedience  was  required  of  man  in  his  ftate  of  in- 
nocency,  and  is  ftill  required  of  the  holy  angels, 
yea,  and  was  required  of  the  Lord  Jefus  himfelf. 
Compare  Matt.  ill.  i6.  w’ith  John  xv.  lo,  &c. 
But  fince  the  fall  of  man,  it  is  not  required  of 
him  byway  oljuflification.  This  is  evident  from 
thefe  two  confiderations.  Firft,  becaufe  a man 
once  failing  in  the  leaf!  point  of  obedience  fas  all 
men  did  in  the  fall)  is  not  capable  of  any  fuch 
obedience  to  the  law,  whereby  he  ma)‘  be  jufii- 

fied 


C 33  1 

Jied,  no,  though  he  fhould  keep  the  law  with 
all  pofTible  exaflnefs  ever  after  to  the  world’s, 
end  ; the  condition  of  a legal  jujhfitation.  being, 
that  a man  muff  continue,  from  the  firft  entrance 
upon  his  being  to  the  end  thereof,  in  all  things 
that  art  written  in  the  law  to  do  them.  Secondlv, 
becaufe  God  hath  opened  another  way  for  the 
jujlif  catior.  of  fmners,  viz.  jaith  in  Chrift,  and 
he  never  fets  up  one  way  again  ft  another. 
Therefore  to  affirm,  that  the  fulfilling  of  the  law 
is  required  of  anv  man,  either  by  himfelf  or  by 
another  in  his  ftead,  ioi  Xnsju/Iification,  is  to  af- 
firm, either  that  a man  that  hath  finned,  hath  not 
finned,  or  that  that  which  God  hath  faid,  he  hath 
unfaid. 

* Se£t.  VI.  Chri-ft  may  be  faid  to  have  kept 
the  law,  in  reference  to  our  jujlijication,  in  a 
double  feiife,  either  i.  for  us,  or  2.  in  our  ftead. 
In  the  former  fenfe  it  may  be  admitted,  that 
Chrift  kept  the  law  for  our  jujhfication,  but  not  in 
the  latter.  The  former  only  imports,  that  this 
obedience  of  his  had  an  influence  on  our  jujlift- 
cation,  and  did  contribute  what  was  of  abfolute 
neceffity  thereto  : the  latter  ferrfe  im>ports,  that 
the  keeping  the  law  was  primarily  required  cf 
ever)’  man  for  \(\'i  jujlijication,  fracethe  fall,  and 
that  God,  in  refpefl;  of  the  perfonal  difabilides 
of  men  for  this,  fent  his  Son  to  perform  it  in 
their  room.  But  this-  fuppofition  ffands  con> 
vift  of  a manifeft  untruth  in.  the  former  diftinc..: 

B 5 ' Se^x 


tion. 


['  34  ] 

Seft.  VII.  The  ju/lificafion  of  a fimier  (I  mean 
pajfive)  though  it  be  but  one  effect,  yet  may  be 
afcribed  to  many  different  caufes,  according  to 
their  feveral  influences.  God  may  be  faid  to 
juftify,  Chrift  may  be  faid  to  jujhfy,  yea,  the 
Holy  Gboft  may  be  faid  to  jujiify,  faith  may  be 
faid  to  jtijlify,  the  minifer  may  be  faid  to jufify, 
(as  well  as  to  fave,  i Tim.  iv.  i6.)  Remiffion 
of  fins  may  be  faid  to  jufify.  Wbatfoever  con- 
tributeth  any  thing,  more  or  lefs,  either  in  a fu- 
perior  or  inferior  way,  towards  the  producing  an 
effeft,  the  e'^eft  itfelf  may  not  improperly  be 
afcribed  to  it.  So  it  is  as  true  to  fay,  the  fling 
in  David’s  band,  or  the  fmootb  ftone  which  he 
flang,  or  his  aft  of  flinging,  killed  Goliab,  as  to 
fay,  that  David  himfelf  killed  him  ; though  it 
is  true,  David  was  the  principal  efficient  in  this 
aftion. 


CHAP.  III. 

A furvey  of  juftiflcation,  in  the  Jiveral  caufes 
of  it. 

SECT.  I.  To  give  fome  farther  light,  whereby 
to  difcover  the  weaknefs  of  thofe  arguments, 
that  are  brought  againft  the  main  0000100071  I 

•have 


[ 35  ] 

have  defended,  I thought  it  not  amils  to  idiew 
how  the  grace,  judicc.  and  wifdom  of  God 
fw'eetly  confpire  in  the  j uJHfication  of  a finner. 
And  becaufe  the  perfcft  knowledge  hereof 
depends  upon  the  knowledge  of  the  feveral 
caufes  concurring  thereto,  I defire  leave  to  pre- 
iiiife  fome  rules  touching  the  nature  of  caufes  in 
general. 

1.  There  are  four  kinds  of  caufes  under  which 
all  manner  of  caufes,  be  they  never  fo  various, 
are  comprehended.  Thefe  are  ufually  called,  i. 
th&ejJiLiait,  2..  3.  the  ma!erial,  and  4. 

the  foimal. 

The  efficient  caufes  of  ju/liftcation,  are 
many,  and  thofe  of  very  different  confidera- 
tion. 

The  principal,  natural,  efficient  caufe  of  juJ- 
tification,  is  God  him/i’if.  Father,  Son,  and  Holy 
Ghojl^  confulered  as  one  and  the  fame  fimple 
effence  : though  this  aid  of  ju/Hficahon  is  in  fpe- 
elal  manner  appropriated  to  the  Father,  as  re- 
demption to  the  Son,  and  fanclification  to  the 
Holy  Ghojl,  (in  both  which  notwithftanding,  all 
the  three  perfons,  being  one  undivided  effence^ 
muft  needs  concur.)  Thus  Rom.  viii.  33.  where 
k is  fald,  it  IS  God  that  jujiijit’th,  it  is  meant  by 
way  of  approbation  of  God  the  Father,  becaufe 
there  is  mention  made  of  Chrifl  immediately,,  it 
is  Chrijl  that  died, 

Secondly,  that  he  is  the  principal  efficient 
caufe,  and  not  Indrumental,  Is  evident  alfo  ; he- 
B 6 caufe 


[ 36  ] 

eaufe  hie  is  not  ninde  ufe  of  by  any  other  in  the 
jujlijication  ofafinner,  but  himfdf  projefteth  the 
whole  frame  of  all  things,  yea  and  manageth  all 
things  inftrumentally  concurring  thereto.  It  is 
God  that  jujlijieth  the  Genii! ts  by  or  through  Jailh. 
Gal.  lii.  8.  fo  Rom.  iii.  30,  &c.  God  maketh  ufe 
of  faith,  and  fo  of  his  word,  and  of  the  minifters 
of  his  woi'd,  to  produce  faith  in  the  hearts  of 
men,  and  confequently  to juJHfy  them  : but  none 
of  thefe  can  be  faid  to  make  ufe  of  God,  in  or 
about  this  great  cfTeft. 

Thirdl--,  that  he  is  the  natural  efficient  eaufe 
o{jujhficalion  is  evident,  becaufe  herein  hea£leth 
out  of  that  authority  and  power  which  are  natural 
to  him.  It  is  true,  he  is  moved  to  this  by  what 
is  extrinfical  atid  not  effiential  to  him,  viz.  the 
death  and  fufferings  of  Chrift:  ) et  the  att  itlelf 
proceeds  by  virtue  of  that  authority  and  power, 
which  are  effential  to  him. 

Se£l.  II.  The  moral  eaufe  o{ jujlific alien,  as  it 
is  an  aft  of  God,  is  that  infinite  love,  gcodneis, 
and  gracioufnefs  in  God  toward  his  poor  crea- 
ture, man,  looked  upon  as  miferable,  and  lying 
under  condemnation  for  fin.  d his  was  the  pro- 
curing eaufe  of  the  gift  of  Chrill,  and  his  death 
and  fufferings  from  him,  and  confequently  of 
x\\ztjuflifcaIon  which  is  procured  and  purchafed 
by  Chrill  and  his  fuHei  ings.  So  God  loved  the 
world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that  who- 
foever  believeth  in  him,  fiould  not  perifi,  but  hasoe 
tverlafing  life,  John  iii.  16. 


The 


[ 37  ] 

The  external  impulfive  caufe  of  this  act  of 
God,  is  Chrifl  himfelf,  through  his  death  and 
fufferings;  or  (which  is  the  fame,j  the  death  and 
fufferings  of  Jefus  Chrill.  God  looking  upon 
Chrift  as  a fnfferer  for  the  fins  of  men,  is  thereby 
moved  to  deliver  thofe  that  believe  in  him  from 
that  condemnation  which  is  due  unto  them. 
The  feripture  is  clear  in  la)’ing  down  this  caufe : 
E,ven  as  God, for  Chnji' s fake,  hath  Jreely  for  given 
yfiu,  Eph.  iv.  32.  Thefe  words, /or  Chrijl’s Jake, 
are  a plain  and  p(!rfe6t  charatter  of  that  kind  of 
caufe  we  now  fpeak  of.  This  with  the  former 
caufe  are  joined  together.  Rom.  iii.  2:^.  And 
areju/hfud J'eely  by  hisg^iace,  (here  is  the  inward 
impulfive  caufe  of  jnltification,)  through  the  re- 
demption that  is  in  Chiiji  JeJus,  viz.  by  means  of 
Ills  death  and  fufferings  : here  is  the  outward 
moving  caufe.  Neither  can  the  death  and  fuf- 
ferings of  Chrift,  with  any  fhew  of  reafon,  or 
with  any  tolerable  congruity  of  fpeaking,  be 
referred  to  any  other  caufe  in  the  bufinefs  of 
jufl location.,  hwx.  the  impulfive  only.  He  that 
would  make  Chrift  the  inflrumental  caufe  of 
judification,  thrufts  his  faith  out  of  doors.  And 
it  is  ftill  more  abfurd  to  make  either  Chrifl  him- 
felf, or  any  of  his  w’hatfoever,  either 

the  material  caufe  of  ju/iification,  or  the  formal 
caufe  thereof.  But  it  fs  above  all  the  reft,  to 
make  either  Chrift  or  his  righteoufnej's,  both  the 
formal  and  material  caufe  too,  thefe  caufes  being 
offo  oppofite  a nature. 

Tc 


r 38  ] 

To  this  kind  of  caufe-muft  be  reduced  alfo  the 
adlive  or  perfdnal  righteoufnefi  oj  Chrijt,  as  far  as 
it  hath  any  influence  upon  the  jujiificalion  of  a 
finner.  For  though  it  be  not JuluJadory  in  itfelf, 
nor  contributing  immediately  towards  \\\c  jufiiji- 
cation  of  a fiuner : yet  falling  in  conjun6lion 
with  the  pafjme  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift,  and  mak- 
ing his  blood  to  be  the  blood  of  a Lamb  u ithout 
Jpot,  (iPet.  i.  19.)  it  hath  fome  kind  of  impulfive 
efficiency  towards^'y/??yif«^mn,  qualifying  (in  partj 
the  facrifice  of  Chrid  for  that  height  of  accepta- 
tion with  God. 

Themiferyof  the  poor  creature,  m.an,  lying 
under  condemnation  for  fm,  cannot  properly  be 
called  the  caufe  of  hn  jujhf  cation : yet  it  is 
fcmeways  reducible  to  this  external  impulfive 
caufe,  inafmuch  as  the  goodnefs  of  God  was 
hereby  moved  to  take  fome  courfe  for  \ns  jvfHfi~ 
cation  and  fah'ation^ 

Seff.  III.  Concerning  faith^  the  general  and 
uniform  doflrine  of  reformed  authors,  gives  it  for 
an  inflrumental,  efficient  caufe  of  jpjlijication.. 
But  there  are  likewife  other  inflrumental  caufes 
thereof,  as  the  word  of  God,  the  preaching  of  his 
word,  the  minifter  by  whom  it  is  preached,  the 
right  apprehending  this  rvord,-  the  operation  of 
the  Holy  Ghoft  by  which  this  word  is  made 
effeflual  in  the  heart : and  in  general,  whatever 
contributes  to  the  work  olfaith  in  the  foul,  may 
be  called  inflrumental  to  juf  if  cation. 

Se£l.  IV.  Secondly,  concerning  the  final  caufes 

of 


r 39  ] 

ju.lifccation,  all  parties  are  nearlp  agreed  aifej 
no  man  denieth  that  the  glory  of  God,  which  is 
the  fovereign  end  of  all  things,  hath  the  pre- 
eminence alfo  among  all  the  oi'ju/Hfication, 
The  great  fubordinate  end  is  the  advancement 
of  the  perfons  jujltjiid  to  glory  and  endlefs  hap- 
pinefs. 

Thirdly,  concerning  the  material  caufe 
Jication,  fome  conceive  it  is  the  righte.oufnefs-2.rx5. 
JatirfaElion  of  Chriil. 

But  by  making  thefe  the  material  caufe  of 
juffication,  they  divefl  them  of  the  honour 
which  is  proper  and  peculiar  to  them,  viz.  of  be-  . 
ing  the  meritorious  caufe.  This  is  evident  by 
this,  that  no  one  caufe  can -put  on  more  relations 
of  caufality  than  one,  in  refpeft  of  one  and  the 
fanie  effedf.  So  that  if  the  right eoufne/s  of 
Chriil  be  the  meritorious  caufe  ofju/Hfication 
(which  is  granted  on  all  hands,)  it  cannot  be  the 
material  caufe  alfo.  But  in  truth,  the  matter  or 
material  caufe  of  juftification,  is  no  other  than 
tlie  believing  finner. 

Fourthly,  what  is  the  fonnal  caufe  of  jufifica- 
iiqn  ? Some  believe  it  is  the  righteoufnefs  of 
Chriil  imputed  to  us.  But  that  which  is  an  effi- 
cient caufe  of  juftification,  cannot  be  the  formal ' 
caufe  alfo.  This  is  clear  by  the  tenor  of 
that  general  rule.  But  that  the  righteoufnefs 
of  Chriil  is  ah  efficient  caufe  of  jufification^ 
hath  been  already  proved ; and  is  acknow- 
ledged ' 


[ 4°  3 

ledged  by  the  authors  themfelves  of  this  opi- 
nion. 

Se£t.  V.  And  indeed  if  the  righteov/nefs  of 
Chrill  be  the  Formal  caiife  of jujlification,  then  is 
a believer  righteous  witli  the  jightfoufnejs  of 
Chrift.  But  that  a believer  is  not  to  be  reputed 
righteous  with  the  rigkteovfnefi  of  Chrifl,  or  with 
the  fame  right^aufuefs  wherewith  Chrift  is  righte- 
ous, I thus  demonhrate  ; he  that  may  lawfully 
be  repuied  righteous,  with  the  fame  rightecufnefs 
wherewith  Chrift  was  righteous,  may  lawfully  be 
reputed  never  to  have  finned  : becaufe  that  righ- 
teoufnefs  which  either  fuppofeth  or  admitteth  fin, 
can  be  none  of  the  rightecufnefs  ofChrifi;  the 
cffential  property  whereof  was  to  be  Ins  righte- 
ohfnefs  who  never  finned.  But  that  it  ihoidd  be 
lawful  to  xcpvLttmy  jfiif<.d  perfon  under  heaven, 
never  to  have  finned,  is  fo  notorious  an  untruth, 
that  men  need  no  farther  light  to  comprehend 
the  darknefs  of  it.  Therefore  the  nghnoufnefs 
of  Chrifl  imputed,  is  not  the  formal  caufe  of 
jufificalion. 

Seff.  VI.  And  thh  is  the  confeflion  of  the  moft 
learned  abettors  themfelves  of  that  way  of  vnpu~ 
tation,  which  we  oppofe.  Indeed  the  general 
current  of  reformed  divines,  runs  quite  the  other 
vray.  Who  of  our  writers,  (faith  Doflor  Prideau.xJ 
ever  affirmed,  that  n e are  formady  jjiffifed  by  the 
righteoufiefs  oj  Ckrifi  imputed  f And  bifiiop 
Downham  a great  champion  alfo  of  imputation,  ^ 
chargeth  it  upon  his  adverfaries  as  a depr avation 

of 


r 4^  ] 

■ tf  their  doSrine,  (he  means  his  own  and  other 
proteftant  divines,]  that  they  will  needs,  zuith 
the  Pap'ijis,  make  them  hold,  that  zue  are  Jor- 
mally  righteous  by  that  zighteoufnefs,  zvhick 
IS  not  in  us,  but  out  of  us  in  Chrif,  zvhick  is 
ahfurd. 

Out  of  that  which  hath  been  reafoned  at  large 
in  this  chapter,  concerning  j u/lification  and  the 
feveral  caufes  thereof,  a defcription  of  it  may  be 
framed,  wherein  the  attentive  reader  may  ob- 
ferve,  either  all  or  the  greateff  part  of  the  caufes 
inuffed  upon.  , 

Juilification  is  an  acl  of  God,  whereby  having 
out  of  his  ozvn  unfpeakable  grace  and  goodnefs 
towards  finncrs,  given  his  only  begotten  Son 
to  make  atonement  for  them  by  his  death  ; in 
con/tder  ation  of  this  atonement,  he  freely 
pardoneth  the  fins  of  all  thofe  that  believe 
in  him  through  Jfus  Chi  if  preached, 
or  oiheriuife  revealed  by  thf  Holy  Ghojl  unt& 
them. 


CHAP.  V. 

Scriptures  alledged  for  the  imputation  of  Chrif' s 
righteovfnefs  or  a&ive  obedience  in  jif  ification 
anfweted,  and  the  true  fenfe  of  them  refpec~ 

tively 


[ 42  J 

lively  ejlahlijhed,  according  to  the  judgment  cj^ 
thi  bejl  ex-pcfitors^ 

*•  QECT.  T.  Miftakes  in  matters  of  religion^ 
are  ufually  occafioned  by  fomewhat  which 
God  hath  vrcil  faid,  but  men  have  not  well  un- 
derflood. And  as  Gregory  long  fince  obferved 
in  matter  of  practice,  when  men  conceive  a fin 
to  be  a duty,  there  it  is  committed  with  an  high 
liand  : fq  in  poirrt  of  judgment,  when  men  con- 
ceive mifapprehenfions  to  be  countenanced  from 
heaven,  their  confidence  lifts  up  itfclf  verv  high, 
and  the  mlldeft  contradictions  is  an  abomination 
to  them.  Among  many  fig  ns  that  might  be  gi- 
ven of  fuch  an  opinion,  this  is  one  of  frequent 
obfervation  ; when  the  maintainers  of  it  heap  up 
citations  of  feripture,  without  end,  as  it  were  to 
overwhelm  their  adverfaries  with  divine  teftimo- 
nies.  For  as  the  faying  is,  Wufquivn  eft,  qui 
lihique  ejl,  “ He  that  is  every  where,  is  no 
■where:”  fo  it  is  much  to  be  feared,  an  opinion 
is  no  where  in  fciipture,  which  is  pretended 
to  be  everv  v.here.  Wlien  men  fliaik  about 
for  fcripturcs,  and  not  finding  thofe  that  freely 
offer  themf elves,  labour  as  it  were,  in  the  fire, 
to  redeem  the  dcfe£l  of  full  proofs  with  mul- 
titudes of  fuch  as  they  can  find,  it  is  aground  of 
much  fufpicion,  that  the  opinion  is  not  of  God, 
butof  men. 

The  feriptures  are  manv,  which  are  muflered 
up  by  the  mafters  of  that  way  of  hnputaiion 

which 


[ 43  ] 

which  we  oppofe,  but  among  them  all  there  is 
not  one  that  fpeaks  plainly  or  direflly  to  thebu- 
finefs  in  hand.  A plain  fign,  it  is  not  they  that 
fpeakat  all,  but  the  fpirit  of  the  men  that  fpeak- 
eth  in  them,  whatever  they  feem  ta  fpeak  in 
this  kind.  I make  no  queftion  but  I (hall  be  able 
to  give  a thorough  account  of  what  I now  af- 
firm, by  a particular  examination  of  thofe  fcfip- 
tures.  I begin  with  thofe  ufually  alledged  from 
the  Old  Te (lament. 

Se£i.  II.  The  firft  place  is  Pfal.  xxxii.  i.  Blef- 
fed  IS  the  man  whoje  tranfgrejfion  is  for  given  ^ 
whofe  fn  is  covered : Blejfed  is  ike  man,  unto 
whom  the  Lord  imputeth  not  iran/greffion,  &c. 
The  covering  of  fin,  mentioned  here,  is  by 
fome  conceived  to  be  the  righteoufne.fs  or  ac- 
tive obedience  of  Chrifi:,-  which  God  imputing  to 
believers,  covereth  all  their  (ins  therewith  : to 
this  I anfwer, 

1.  Some  of  our  heft  expofitors  conceive  all 
the  three  exprelTions  to  be  fynonymous,  of  one 
and  the  fame  fignification  ^ and  yet  conceive 
this  variety  to  be  emphatical,  and  to  note  that 
abundance  of  grace  in  God,  whereby  our  fins 
are  forgiven,  t So  doftor  Ames  upon  this 

pfalm 

-r  Mdgna  ep  Da  gratia  qua  pcccata  noflra  rcmittuntar.  Ho',  (a  ipfi 
innuitur,  quod  tarn  enpkatica  rcpclkione  clquaft  cenga  ie  fcrborum  declara- 
tur:  quia  rei  tantx  nulla ft^dtOrationisfarma.  Amefius  in  Pfal.  32, 
Document,  6.  £t  mox.  Gratia  Dei  abundans  ejl  au  amnia  ^peccata]  tel- 
tenda,  levaf,  tegk,  et  non  imputsd. 


i 44  ] 

pfalra,  :j|;  So  Luther  in  his  fummary  of  the  pfalntj. 
Pareus  hlvcwife,  on  Rom.  vi.  y,  is  of  the  fame 
jiid-jment,  and  cites  Amhrofe  with  him. 

* 2.  Fox  thofe  two  expreflions,  imputing  of 
fn,  and  covaing  of  fin  : Calvin  holds  them  to  be 
the  fame  in  fenfe,  and  that  they  are  of  the  fame 
importance  with  thafe  other  feripture  phrafes,. 
wdiere  God  is  faxd  not  to  remember  fn,  to  Hot  it- 
out,  to  caf  it  behind  Jus  hack,  or  into  the  depths 
of  the  fe a : and  cites  Augnltinc,  as  his  predecef- 
for  in  this  interpretation,  f So  that  none  of  all 
thefe  (with  many  more  that  migh.t  be  put  to 
themj  ever  dreamt  of  the  rightepufnefs  of  Clmift, 
lying  fo  clofe  under  tliis  covering  oj fn.  . 

3.  Neither  cany?«  be  faid  to  be  covered  WvCsi 
tlie  nghfeou/nefs,  or  aElivc  obedienceoi  Chrift,  fince, 
according  to  that  very  opinion  we  oppofc,yf«  is 
wholly  taken  away  by  tlie  imputation  oild^dtath, 
orpafive  obedience,  and  this  before  the  imputation 
oi  \\\<i  aclive  obedience  ho.  made  to  ns.  Now  that 
which  is  wholly  taken  away,  needs  no  further  co- 
vering in  refpeft  of  God,  nor  indeed  is  capable 
ofanv'. 

Sea 

J tujld  it  refira  j reprk  ep  rempio  pKcatorum-,  fe  [tit  lorutlur  PfJmus) 
peccata  rov  imputitre,  peccata  tegere.  Liiihcv.  m Sum?!-.  Pf.  32.  Pez- 
catsrum  Rernffmem  trihus  toquendi generilus  exprimh,  euxtamen  cmKS 
in  idem  caduut,  Steph.  Fabrit  in  Pf.  32. 

+ Pezcalotum  non  reeordari,  ^ eanon  fejtu'ure  adpoenxm.  Id  ipfuin 
alibi  dicitnr,  pro,  icere  p<qfl  tergum,  delete  in  far  nuhis,  demegert  in  pro- 
fund  urn  mark,  turn  imputare,  tcaumque  hahire.  Cerie  f pur.it  Deus, 
peccaSa  imputal : fi  liniicat,  tecordatur  ; ft  ad  judicium  vocat,  tefia  rn 
hahet.  Atque  in  /nine  modutn  interprctaluT  Aujutlin.  c/j-iV  ierhi, 
Calvin.  Inti.  lib.  3.  c.  4. 


[ 45  ’] 

III.  2.  TlioTe  parallel  fcriptares,  Jer, 
^'xiii.  6.  and  xxxiii.  i6.  are  alledged.  And  this 
is  his  name  whereby  he  Jhall  be  called,  the  Lord 
our  righteoiifnejs. 

I anfwer,  neither  is  there  any  colour  in  thefe 
■words  for  the  pretended  imputation.  For, 

Firft,  .it  is  not  here  faid,  that  the  righteoufnef s 
■of  the  Lord  fliall  be  our  righteoufncfs,-or  that  the 
righteoufnej's  of  the  Lord  (hall  be  imputed  to  us 
ioY  righteou/nefs.  No  ; here  is  profound  lilence, 
•concerning  any  imputation. 

Secondlv,  it  is  wholly  repugnant  both  to  the 
grammatical  and  rhetorical  importance  6i  the 
words,  as  lilcewife  difagreeing  from  the  fcripture 
phrafe,  and  manner  of  fpeaking  in  the-iike  cafes, 
•to  put  fuch  an  interpretation  upon  them  as  this, 
Chrift  Is  our  rigkteoujnefs,  b)'  mputation.  CFii  ift 
can  in  no  tolerable  conflruflion  of  fpeech  be  faid 
to  be  imputed  to  .ns  (the  imputation  of  a perfon 
■ was  never  heard  of)  therefore  cannot  be  faid  to 
be  imputed  to  us  for  our  righteoufnefs.  But, 

* F hirdh',  and  lafily,  the  plain  and  direft 
’ meaning  of  the:  place,  is  this.  This  is  his  name 
■ -tuherehy  he  Jh  'all  he  called.  The  Lord  our  -rio hit- 
oufnefs,  that  ■'is,  he  fliali  be  generally  acknow- 
ledged by.his  people  the  Jews  (for  the  prophet 
fpeaks  particbLrly  of  thefe,  as  is  evident  in  the 
context)  as  the  great  author  and  procurer  of  that 
righteoufnefs  ox jujhp cation  in  the  fight  of  God, 
f ox  right eoifnefs  is  very  ufually  put  for  jujlifica- 
cation)  upon  which  abundance  of  outward  glorj-, 

peace. 


[ 4S  i: 

“peace,  and  profperity  fliould  be  caft  upon  them,' 
This  interpretation  is  agreeable  to  the  fcripture 
■phrafe,  and  manner  of  fpcaking  in  the  like 
cafes.  For, 

Firfl,  the  impofition  of  a name  upon  either 
thing  or  perfon,  often  notes  quality  in  either, 
or  fome  benefit  redounding  from  either,  anfwer- 
able  thereto.  His  n am ejliall  be  called,  ivonderjul 
counfellor,  z3c.  ( Ifa^  ix.  6.)  that  is,  he  Ihall  be 
acknowledged  by  men,  as  an  affor  of  things  very 
flrange  and  excellent,  as  one  that  is  able  and 
ready  to  give  the  bell;  counfel  to  thofe  that  repair 
vmto  him.  See  like  expreffions,  Ezek.  xlviii. 
35.  Mat.  i.  21.  23.  Rev.  viii.  to. 

Secondly,  There  is  nothing  more  familiar  in 
fcripture,  than  to  attribute  an  effedl;  to  its  caufc 
or  author,  bv  a verb  fubfiantive  only,  or  to  affirm 
theeffeflof  the  caufe  dircftly.  Thus  Chrift  is 
faid  to  be  our  hope,  iTim.  i.  1,  To  be  out  life. 
Col.  iii.  4.  To  be  the  rcfurreBion.  John  xi.  25, 
To  be  our-  peace.  Ephef.  ii.  14.  To  be  the  glory  of 
■his  people.  Luke  ii.  32.  Meaning  that  he  is  au- 
thor, purchafer,  or  procurer  ofall  thefe.  So  when 
he  is  faid  to  be  our  r.ighteoufricfs,  there  can  no 
other  conflruffion  be  made  of  it  but  this,  that 
he  is  the  author  or  procurer  of  our  rightcouf- 
Tiefs.  Calvin  is  exprefs  for  this  inmrpretation  of 
tlie  palfage.  Alltheje  expiejfwns  (faith  he)  t carry 

the 

+ Omnes  ijl<x  locuthnts  pcnt^ur  vrlcvt  jvJUJican  nos  Dei  gratia,  CJivf- 
twa  ejfe  j ujlitmm  nojlram,  mortc  ec  rejurreiliime  ChriJU  nobis 

accuij-tdm.  CaJvin,  in  Gal,’.  6. 


-C  47  ] 

^tie  faint  meaning,  that  we  are juflifed  by' the  grace 
of  God,  that  Chrifl  is  our  righteoifnfs,  thatrigh-- 
ieoufiefs  is  procured for  us  by  the  death  and  rfur- 
redlion  of  Chr'idc. 

Thirdly,  and  laftly,  tliat  by  nghteoufnefs  in 
this  place,  is  meant  juJUfication  or  remiffionof 
fins,  and  that  by  Chrifl’s  being  called,  the  Lord 
then Tighteoufnefs  is  only  meant,  that  through 
him  God  would  be  reconciled  to  them  and  paci- 
fied with  them  cone  erning  all  their  provocations, 
appears  from  the  tenor’of  other  feripture  paffages. 
For  ufually,  when  Ged  promifeth  deliverance 
and  profperity  to  his  people,  after  long  and  fore 
afflictions  (as  he  doth  in  the  former  part  of  this 
verfe,  and  in  the  two  verfes  following)  he  mak- 
-eth  mention  of  his  favour  towards  them  in  the 
"free  pardon  of  their  fins,  and  of  his  being  pacified 
' with  them.,  thefe  notwithflanding.  And  this  la- 
■ vour  ol  his  being  reconciled  to  them,  expreffing 
dtfelf  in  abaundance  of  outward  peace  and  glory, 
is  oft  called  his  righteoufiefs,  hecaufe  he  confers 
it  upon  them|:  and  fometimes  their  righteoufnefs, 
becaufe  they  receive  it  from  him.  Compare 
Ifa.  xlv.  8,  2a.  25.  Ifa.  xlvi.  13.  Ifa.  xlviii.  18. 
Ifa.  li.  5,  6.  8.  Ifa.  liv.  17.  Jer.  1.  20,  19.  Jer. 
ii.  10.  with  many  others. 

Se£f.  IV.  Some  have  digged  for  the  treafure 
olimputaticn  in  that  feripture,  Ifa.  xlv.  24.  Surely 
Jhall  one  fay,  in  the  Lord  have  1 righteoufnefs  and 
flrength.  But 

FirfI, 


[ 48  ] 

Tlirft,  neither  is  here  the  lead  breathing  of  that 
imputation  fo  much  wondered  after  : nor  do  I 
find  any  intimation  given  of  any  fuch  bufinefs 
here  by  any  found  expofitor. 

Secondly,  the  plain  and  direcf  meaning  of  the 
place  is  this,  that  when  God  fhould  communi- 
cate the  knowledge  of  himfelf  in  his  fon  to  the 
v'orld,  [whereof  he  fpake  in  the  words  immedia- 
tely preceding  they  fhould  generally  have  this 
fenfe  of  the  means  of  their  falvatiou  and  peace, 
viz.  that  they  receive  them  of  the  free,  grace  of 
God  by  Jefus  Chrill,  and  not  of  themfclves 
or  by  the  merit  of  their  own  righteoujntj'i,  which 
was  a leaven,  wherewith  the  greateft  part  of  the 
Jewifh  lump  was  ^for  the  orefent)  leavened.  So 
that  for  a man  to  fay,  in  the  Lord  I have  righteouf- 
nefs,  imports  only  a prolefTion  made  by  him  of 
\\\&htc.juJlLficationhy  Godin  and  through  Chi  iff. 
Af=  it'folioweth  ver.  2^.  In  the  Lord jliall  all  the  feed 
of  Ifrael  bejvjlijied.  And  this  alfo  is  Calvin's  cx- 
pofition  upon  the  place,  who  writeth  thus  : be- 
cauft  righteonfnefs  ami  firength  at  c the  two  mam 
points  oj  our Jalvation,  the JaichJul  acluiowledgeGod 
to  be  the  author  of  both. 

Seft.  V.  The  lafl:  fcrijmire  that  I knoiv  pro- 
duced from  the  Old  Teflament,  with  any  co- 
lour of  reafon,  is  Ifa.  Ixi.  10.  I xvtll greatly  re- 
joice in  the  Lord.,  my.  foul  [hail  be  joyful  in  my 
God:  for  he  hath  cloathedme  with  the  gannenti  of 
falvation,  he  hath  covered  me  with  the  robe  of 
rightcoufnefs.  Thefe  garments  of  falvation,  and 

robe 


[ 49  ] 

robe  of  right eoufnefs,  are  conceived  to  be  the 
righleoujhefs  of  Chrift  imputed  to  believers,  and 
as  a robe  or  garment  put  upon  them,  wherein 
they  j ujiified  in  the  fight  of  God.  But  I 

anfwer. 

This  cloathing  ^vith  the  garments  of  falvation, 
and  covering  with  the  robe-  of  right  eoufnefs,  are 
expreffions  concerning  chiefly  the  church  of  the 
Jews  in  their  deliverance  from  the  captivity  of 
Babylon  ; (if  not  from  that  greater  captivity  un- 
der which  they  lie  at  this  day) -as  the  whole 
chapter  from  the  beginning  to  the  end,  raaketli 
manifeft.  f And  fo  Mufculus  with  the  othef 
learned  expofitors,  interpret  this  verfp.  The  pro- 
phet (faith  he)  taketh  upon  liim  the  perjon  of  thA 
church  of  Sion  delivered  from  Babylon,  S3c.  And 
a little  after,  coming  to  expound  thofe  metaphoi 
rical  claufes,  \ he  hath  [ox,  as  he  rendereth  it) 
when  he Jhall  have ) cloathcd  me  with  the  garments 
of  falvation,  and  covered  me  with  the  robs  ofright- 
eoufnefs,  he  writeth  as  follows  ; The  meaning  is, 
when  he  Jhall fave  and  redeem,  and  declare  his 
righteou fiefs,  that  is,  his  faithjulnefs  and  good- 
nefs  towards  me.  So  that  by  cloathing  with  gar- 
ments of  falvation,  and  covering  with  a robe  of 
vighteoufnefs,  is  not  meant  any  fpiiitual  blef- 
fing,  wherewith  God  fliould  inrich  his  church, 
VoL.  XXIII.  C as 

■ ■ f Sufeipit  in  fi  vales  pe'rfonam  Ecclefue  Sionis  e Babylmie  liberata,  &c. 

Mufcu.  in;I/a.6i.  lo. 

};  Sergas  ejl ; cum  fervaveril  et  redemerit  me,  juPitiamqna: fuam,  id 
gipjhfiilareni  prohitatem  et  bonitatem  erga  me  declaraverit,  ibid. 


[ <50  ] 

unification  is,  but  an  external  and  temporal. 
And  neither  by  the  robe,  of  rigliLeoufnefs,  are  we 
to  underftand,  the  obedience  of  Chrift  to  the 
moral,  law  (there  being  neither  word,  fyllable, 
letter,  nor  tittle  any  ways  leading  to  fuch  an  in- 
terpretation) but  the  elfefl;  of  the  righteoujnefs , 
that  is,  of  the  truth  and  faithfulnefs,  or  of  the 
goodnefs  and  gracioufnefs  of  God  (both  which 
are  ufually  expreffed  in  the  fcriptures,  by  the 
'wordi  right eoujnefs ) viz.  their  deliverance  from 
their  captivity,  together  with  their  peace  and 
fafety,  and  many  other  fweet  and  comfortable 
privileges. 

Seff.  VI.  And  if  we  underhand  the  palTage 
of  an  external  deliverance,  (as  we  hear  Mufcu- 
lus  and  other  interpreters  do)  the  metaphor  will 
be  found  very  emphatical,  yea  and  confonant  to 
the  language  of  fcripture  elfewhere.  Wc  know 
it  was  a cuhom  among  the  Jews  (and  there  are 
few  nations  but  have  fomewhat  of  it,  more  or 
lefs)  to  cloath  themlelves  fuitable  to  their  pre- 
fent  conditions.  They  had  fackcloth  to  wear  in 
times  of  mourning,  and  they  had  garments  too, 
proper  for  times  of  joy  and  gladnefs.  I forbear 
to  cite  fcriptures  for  the  confirmation  of  this,  be- 
caufe  the)’  are  obvious.  Now  then  when  God  pro- 
mifeth  to  cloath  his  church  being  yet  in  bondage 
and  miferv,  with  the  garments  offalvation  he  iin- 
pbeth  that  for  the  prefent,  they  were  cloaihed 
like  exiles  and  captives,  that  is,  that  they  were 
in  thefe  conditions,  and  fo  fubje£f  to  all  the  in- 
conveniences 


['  51  ] 


conveniences  and  miferies  incident  to  them. 
But  he  will  change  their  garments,  that  is,  alter 
their  conditions ; of  fervants,  he  will  make  them 
free  ; of  banifhed,  he  will  make  them  pofleffors 
of'their  own  land  ; of  poor,  he  will  make  them 
rich;  of'  vile  and  contemptible,  he  will  make 
themdionourable.  The  happinefs  of  which  new 
condition,  the  prophet  expreffeth  by  the  change 
of  their  garments  according  to  the  ufual  manner 
of  fcripftu^e-^  which  often  fignifieth  the  condition, 
by  t'herg'Efrmetits  proper  to  it.  . So  Junius,  f 
eminent^ ^oj ‘■place  tir  office,  is  knozun  by  garments 
fuitable and pT’oper  to  it,' Jh  is  it  in  the  Jcriptures, 
often  fignifted-  And  expreffisd  thereby.  - As  when 
pod  threatened  Shebna  with  the  lofs  of  his  great 
place,  and  that''he -wopld  put  his  fervant  Eliakim 
into  it,  he  expreljeth'it.  fhos.  . And  I.zmll  cloath 
him  ivitk  diy{\robe\:\a7td.f  rengthkn' him  with  . thy 
gtr.dki  Ifai.f'jyse.\i..  21.  So  the  whole  multitude  of 
faints,  out  of  allrnatk*ns,.'are  faid  to  /land  before 
the  Lamb  cloathed  with  tong  white  robe}  (robes  I con- 
ceive of  the  fame  importance  with  thefe  robes  of 
fahration  ih  liiidjUinfpQlmi  irt  theit.  hands..  Chap, 
viirg.;::  Sonlfo- Cbap.1  ?(ii-  tvheret.it  is  farj 
that  it  was  granted- to  the  L'amb’s.  wife  {the  church) 
that  jhe  fiould  be  arrayed  with  pure  white  linen  and 
f lining,  which  is  faid  to  hephe  righteoufne/l  of 
the  faint's.  Chap,  xix.,7.  8.  It  is  evident  that  no- 
C 2 thing 

.,+  Dignitas.  'lU'-abinfigniSus  v^imentis  cognofdtur,\ita.S}n'tcdachice  in 
fcripturis  dcpgmUir^  vejlitncntarum  appclladonc.  lunios.  Annot.  in 
Ifi.  22.  17, 


[ >52  ] 

thing  is  meant  concerning  juJlijicaLion  by  Chrift, 
or  his  righteoufnefs ; but  that  great  honour  and 
rewards  is  hereby  fignified,  which  Chrift  was  now 
pleafed  to  confer  upon  his  faints,  who  were 
juftifted  by  him  long  beforci  The  />ure^  and 
Jliining  linen,  is  laid  to  be  the  righteoufnefs  of  ike 
faints,  to  Ihew  that  the  great  glory,  honoiirf  and 
dignity,  which  Chrift  now  ' conferred!  upon  his 
church  is  the  gracious  reward  of  her  hufband, 
by  him  given  unto  her;  in  confideration  of  her 
righteoufnefs,  that  is, her  holinefs,  faithfulnefs,  ieafi 
conttancy,  under  the  perfecution  of  the  beaft, 
and  great  apoftacy  of  th6  Chriftian  world.  It  is  an 
tifual  manner  of  fpeech  in  fefipture,  to  exprefs 
the  reward  of  a thing  by  the  name  of  the  thing 
itfelf.  Thus  Numb.  xxii.  7.  the  elder^ofMidian 
and  Moab,  are  faid  to  have  deplarted,  having  du 
vinations  fo  it  is  in  the  original.)  in  their  hand, 
that  is  the  r fwdir A oi divinations.  So  zSam.  iv.  10. 
Good  tidings,  is  put  for  the  reward  of  good  tidings- 
Again,  ^evel.  xiii.  10.  Here  is  the  patience  and 
faith  of  the  faints,  that  is,  the  reward  of  the  pa- 
tience and  faithful  'cleaving  of  thi  faints  untd 
Chrift,  - when  they  {halt  fee  vengeahee  executed 
upon  their  enemies.  1^0  the  pur^  andjhinhigdinen 
(that  is,  the  bright  ^lory  wherewidi  the  church  is 
now  inveft'ed)  is  faid  to  be  (he  righteoufiefs  of  the 
faints,  becaufe  it  is  the  re\vard  of  it,  this  is  the 
plain  and  direfl  meaning  of  the  place.  And 
this  place  is  parallel  with  that.  Chap.  iii.  4- 
'Viefe  f mil  walk  with  me  in  white for- they  are 

worthy. 


[ <5  3 ] 

worthy.  The  worlhinefs  of  the  one,  and  the  right- 
eoufnefs  of  the  other  are  the  fame,  and  both 
affigned  as  the  r.eafon  of  the  honour  done  to 
■tjlerp,, ' By  all  ithefe  fcriptyres  diligently  compar- 
ed (and  many  more  might  be  added)  it  is  mani- 
foft,  that  by  thdfe  metaphors  of  garments  and 
robes  in  Ifaiali,  there  is  nothing  meant  touching 
the  inward  and  fpiritual  condition  of  the  church, 
much  le  fs  hey;  ufi'^fication  by  the  aftlve  righteoufnefs 
of  Chrjfl;  imf  lilt'd.  And  indeed  it  is  very  ftrangc 
•to  build 'a  point  of  faith  upon  figurative  and  me- 
taphorical exprellions,  there  being  no  plain  fcrip- 
ture  to  confirm  or  warrant  it. 

As  for  thdfe  expreffions  in  Paul,  of  putting  on 
Chrift,  Rom.  xiii.  14.  Gal.  iii.  27.  neither  of 
them  fpeaks  of  jufUficalion  : but  the  former  of 
fanBification,  and  the  falter  of  profelBon  ; both 
.which,  if  they  were  not  apparent  enough,  might 
be  proved  without  much  labour.  Let  t Calvin, 
4:  Miifculus,  and  other  proteftant  interpreters  be 
, cpnfujted.  about  them. 

. We  have  found  nothing  in  the  OldTeftament, 
for  the  building  up  of  \.\ns  imputation.  Let  us 
.pafs  from  prophets  to  apoftles,  and  confider, 
whether,  they  alfo  be  not  made  to  fpeak  the  minds 
C 3 of 

+ Indure  Chrijlum,-  hie  figmjicat,  virluie  fpirkus  ejus  undigut  nosmu- 
iiiri,  qua.  idonei  ad  omn&s.fanBiiaiis  partis  reddamur.  Calvin,  in  Rem- 
’3-  . . ■ . 

■f:  Qmrriadmdum  gnotquot  circumciduntur,  'i-loj'm  induunt,  hoc  eji. 
Mops. fc pr.ojittntur  ejji  difcipulos,  ut  Jucumdum  illius  iiijlitutionem  amhu- 
Unt:  iia^quibaptizantur,  Ckrifizmindmjtt,  profitentes  fe  illius  difcipulos, 
&c.  Mafculus  in  Gal.  3.  27. 


r 54  ] 

of  other  men,  and  not  their  own,  when  they 
are  made  to  fpeak  for  it.  The  far  greateh  part 
of  teftimonies  brought  out  of  the  New  Teffament, 
are  lodged  within  the  compafs-of  that  one  epif- 
tle  to  the  Romans. 

The  firft  place  alledged  is,  Rom.  hi.  21,  22. 
But  now  is  the  righteoujhejs  of  God  made  manifejl 
without  the  taw,  having  witnefs  of  the  law  and  of 
the  prophets,  even  the  rigkleoufnefs  of  God,  which 
IS  by  the  faith  of  Jefus  Chrijl.  By  the  nghtecuf 
nefs  of  God  (fay  they)  is  here  meant,  the  righte- 
oufnefs  or  aftive  obedience  of  Chrift,  who  is 
God,  imputed  to  all  that  believe,  &c. 

I anfwer,  Firft,  this  feripture  hatirbeen  al- 
ready fully  opened,  in  the  firft  part  of  thh  trea- 
tife,  where  it  was  found  to  fpeak  t-  ainlyTor  the 
imputation  of faith  for  righteoufiety  but  no  ways 
ioT  the  imputation  oi the  rightevufnefs  of, Chrift, 
for  any  fuch  pnrpofe. 

Secondly,  Somehy  the  right  oif nefs  oi  God  in 
this  place,  underftand  the  truhi  and  faithfulnefs 
of  God  in  keeping  promife.  This  was  the  ex- 
pofition  of  Ambrofe  long  fmce.  And  that  this 
faithfulnefs  of  God  is  frequently  in  feripture  cal- 
led his  righteoufnefs,  hath  been  already  obfen’ed. 

'Fhirdly,  (and  laftly)  by  the  righteoufnefs  of 
God  in  thefe  feriptures,  is  meant  either  that  w.ay, 
or  method,  which  God  himfelf  hath  found  out 
to  jujlify  or  make  men  righteous,  or  (whicli 
comes  to  the  fame)  that  very,  righteoufnefs  by 
which  we  ^ecadjiflifed  or  righteous  in  the  fight 


[ 55  ] 

of  God.  This  is  the  general  interpretation  of 
the  heft  Proteftant  expofitors,  as  t Calvin,  Muf- 
culus,  § Beza,  &c.  Neither  have  I met  with  any 
that  underftands  it  of  the  righteoujnejs  of  Chrilf, 
nor  is  there  the  lead;  pretence  fo  to  take  it. 

Again,  the  laft  verfe  in  the  fame  chapter  is 
laid  hold  on  by  fome  as  a favourer  of  their  im- 
putation. Do  we  then  make  void  the  law  through 
faith  ? God  forbid ; yea,  we  efablifh  the  law. 
They  conceive,  that  the  law  cannot  be  faid  to 
be  eftabliflied  by  faith,  but  only  by  imputation 
of  Chrift’s  fulfilling  it  to  believers. 

O 

I anfwer,  i.  There  is  no  necedity,  that  by 
law  in  this  place,  fhould  be  meant  precifely  the 
moral  law  : Calvin  underftands  it  as  well  of  the 
ceremonial  law,  as  of  the  moral ; and  explains, 
how  as  well  the  one',  as  the  other,  may  be  faid 
C 4 to 

y Duliumejl,  qua  ratione  Dd'juflitiam  appellet,  quam  per  jidem  cki- 
nemus;  ideone,  quia  ftla  coram  Deo  conjijlit,  an  quod  earn  nobis  Dominus 
fua  mifericerdia  largiatur  ? Calvin  in  Rom.  3.  21. 

' :};  Exponi  potcjl  de  eajuflilia,  qua  nos  coram.  Deo  jujlijicamur,  See. 
Mufculu.  in  Rom.  3.  21. 

§ Pqfita  ejl  omnisjujlijicatio  in  remijjione  peccatorum  ; El  ideo  jujlilvi 
hxcin  imputatione pcfxta,  juftitia  Dei  vocatur.  Beza.  De  CoenaDom. 
lufitia  Dei,  id  efl,  falus  vel  redemptio,  quam  Deus prcrjlat.  Cam, 
Myrolh.  p . 178. 

Juflitia  imputata  retie  diciiur  jujlitia  Oirijli,  quia  Chrijlus  earn  Jua  ohedi. 
entia  nobis  acquijivit.  Sicut  etiam  juftitia  Dei,  quia  Deus  prop- 

ter Qhrijli  meritum,  earn  nobis  'impviat,  Pareus  de  lufti.I.  2.  r.  2.  P. 
388.  Ro.  3.  31.  cleared. 


[ 56  ] 

to  be  eftabliilied  by  Jaith  +.  Therefore  he  is  far 
from  conceiving,  that  the  imputation  of  Chiiji's 
righteovjnefs  fhould  be  eftabliflied  by  Paul’s  af- 
firming the  law  to  be  eflablilhed  by Jailk.  Am- 
brofe  likewife  long  before  him,  conceived  the 
fame  thing  of  this  fcripture. 

Seft.  VII.  The  next  fcripture  fometimes  cit- 
ed for  the  mputation  we  oppofe,  is  Rom.  iv.  6. 
Even  as  David  declaretk  the  blijfeanefs  oj  the  man 
to  whom  God  imputed  righteoujue  ' ■ without  works. 

ThaX  righteoujhejs  which  God  is  here  faid  to 
impute  to  a man,  can  be  no  other  but  the  tighle- 
onfnefs  of  Chrift.”  To  this  I anfwer, 

- ■Firfi,  that  which  C-c'.  is  faid  here 

to  impute,  is  by  ihe  Left  expofitors  placed  in  re- 
million  of  fins,  llighleoufaefs  imputed  (faith  Pa- 
rzm)- cotr/ijls  in  a free  remijfion,  covering,  or  non- 
imputation  of  fin.  And  a little  after,  Ihcwing  in 
%vhat  fenfe  the  righteoufnefs  which  is  imputed  by 
God  to  believers,  may  be  called  the  righteouf 
nefs  of  Chrift,  he  exprefieth  himfelf  thus.  In 
thisfenfe  imputed . righteoufnefs  is  called  the  righte- 
Gvfnefs  of  Chnf,  viz.  by  way  of  merit  or  efftd, 
hecaufe  uis  procured  for  us  by  the  merit  oJLhnJi, 

not' 

f Quart  hartc  Pauli  excufationem,  neque  de  cenmoruis  forf.m,  rtequt  dc 
mariLlis{ut  vocant)  moratihus,  fed  in  uniurfuvi  dc  teta  Uge  auifw. 
Calvin.  InRom.  3.  31. 

J Iwiitid  impuiata  conjiftit  in  grrduita  rcir.ijione,  Uciime,  rent  irfu- 
iatione  peccatorum  Pa  reus  ad  Rom.  4.  7.  P.  371. 

IJoc  fnfu  juJUtia  imputata  dicilur  jujlitia  Chrifti,  rntTiiorie  feu  tffec- 
tii  e,  qnia  Chrip  merito  nobis  ejl  parta,  non  fuijenivt,  quia  & Chrijia 
intjcereat.  lAem,  ibidem. 


C 57  ] 

'not  btcaufe  it  is  fuhjtElively  or  iniierently  in  Chrift. 
A'lany  teftimonies  have  been  before from 
other  good  authors  of  concurrent  judgment  with 
him  herein.  We  are  taught  (faith  Calvin  upon 
the  place)  [|  that  remiflion  of  fins  is  free,  be- 
caufe  it  is  imputed  without  works.  But, 

* Secondly,  The  phrafe  of  imputing  righte- 
oufnefs,  may  (I  conceive)  be  the  beft  interpi'eted 
by  the  contrary  expreflioiii.  oi  imputing  fin.  To 
impute  fin  fignifieth  only,  either  to  look  upon 
a perfon  as  juftly  liable  to  punilhment,  or  to  in- 
flift  pimifhment  upon  a perfon,  for  fin.  This 
latter  fignification  I find  more  frequent,  in  au- 
thors of  bell  efteem.  God  imputes  fin  (faith  T 
Pareusj'when  he  punifheth  : and  he  doth  not 
impute  it,  when  he  doth  not  punilh,  but  par- 
doneth.  So  i Calvin  maketh.  tke  non-imputa- 
tion of  fin,  and  the  not  punifhing  of  fin,  of  one 
and  the  fame  fignification.  If  therefore  to  im- 
pute fin,  fignifieth  only,  either  to  hold  a man. 
liable  to  pimifhment  for  fin,  or  to  inflifl  punifli- 
C 5 ment 

H Pofirtmo  \_dixemui^  harx  qaoque  rent^onent  gratuitam  ejfe,  quia  pne 
*peribus  imputatur.  Calvin  in  Rom.  4.  6. 

Qua  to  auiem  capite  ad  Romanos  primum  cppettat  jufliua:  imputationtm: . 
me  earn  dubitat  in  rcmijfionc  ptccaUrum  coitocare,  idem..  Intlit.  I.  3. 
£h.  11.  Seft.  4, 

+ Imputat  Dtus  peccatam,  cum,  pimit,  non  impulai,  am  non  JniTtitiJid. 
cttndmai et  tegit,  quafi  non  ejfet.  Pareus  ad  Rom.  4.  -j. 

Ergo  <t  piccatcrum  non  recordari,  p ta  non  ppulart  adpoenam, 
Mpfum  alibi  dkitur  proqkere  poji  tergtan,  delert  injbr  nubk,  See.  eso 
vnp'Uare,  Ublumqut,  kJrere,  &c,  Calvin,  Inftit.  h 3.  c.  4,  Seft.  ag. 
■yi,  etiam  in  Rom.  |.  ig,. 


C 58  ] 

merit  upon  him,  doubtlefs  to  impute  righteouf- 
nefs,  importeth  nothing  elfe,  but  either  to  look 
upon  a man  as  a righteous  perfon,  or  to  confer 
upon  him  the  privileges  that  belong  to  perfons 
truly  righteous.  But  however, 

Laftly,  here  is  not  the  leaft  ground  or  reafon 
toconceive,  that  by  righteoufnefs  in  this  fcripture 
is  meant  the  righleoufnej's  of  Chrift. 

Se£l.  VIII.  The  next  fcripture  mifufed  for  that 
imputation,  is  Rom.  v.  19.  For  as  by  one  maris 
difobedience  many  were  made  finners,fo  by  the  obe~ 
dience  of  one Jhall  many  be  made  righteous.  Hence 
it  is  argued,  that  as  by  the  imputation  of  Adam's 
difobedience,  men  are  made  fonnally  finners  ; 
in  like  manner  . by  the  imputation  oiChvxU's,  riglit- 
eoufnefs,  men  are  made  formally  righteous.  To 
this  I anfwer, 

It  is  not  here  faid  that  by  the  imputation  of 
Adam’s  difobedience,  men  are  made  formally 
finners,  but  fimply  finners  ; that  is,  either  ob- 
noxious to  death  and  condemnation  (as  bifliop.  t 
Davenant  with  forae  others  interpret)  and  as  the 
■u’ord  finner  is  often  ufed  in  fcripture:};,  of  elfe, 
finners  by  propagation  (not  imputation)  as  Au- 
gufline  [J  of  old,  and  Peter  Mart^T  and  Mufculus 

of 

+ Certum  cjl,  ilhxm.  ipfa  maclulcnn  inoiedientiam  ntbis  imputdri,  id  ut 
ptr  cam  Jlemus  damnati,  &c.  Bi  fli.  Davcn.  de  lufti.  aft.  &c,  P. 

' 363- 

4;  1 Kin.  1.2  1.  Pfov.  6.  29.  Pfal.  109.  7,  ffc. 

II  Priondc  Ap^otus,  cum  ittud  pcccatum  ac  vwrUm  commcmorarct,  qux 
abuno  in  omnes  propagalioitc,  cum  Princ  ipcm  pojuie,  a quo  propagatiir 
generis  humani fumpjit  exordiumi  Auguft.  de  Peccat.  Mer.  & Rem. 
t.  I . c.  g.  vi.  eliam  c,  13.  iSci  c.  15. 


C -59  ] 

of  late,  with  divers  others.  So  that  according  to 
either  of  thefe  Interpretations  of  the  word  Jinners,, 
here  is  neither  little  nor  much  for  the  imputation. 
of  Chrift’s  right eoufnejs. 

2.  Neither  doth  the  apoftle  here  compare  the 
obedience  of  Chrift  with  the  difobedience  of 
Adam,  as  one  aft  with  another,  but  as  fatisfaftion. 
with  the  provocation,  or  remedy  with  the  difeafe- 
Otherwife  he  would  make  fins  of  omiffion,  to  be 
no  difobedience,  becaufe  omiffions  are  no  afts.. 
And  Adam’s  tranfgreffion  did  not  only  Hand  im 
the  commifTion.  of  evilj  but  iri  the  omiffion  of 
that  which  was  good  alfo.  Therefore,. 

gi  By  that  obedience  of  Chrift  whereby  it  is 
here  faid,  many  are  (or  ffiall  bej  made  righteous 
that  isyt^z)f(?d',  we  cannot  underftand  that  right- 
toufnej's  of  Chrift  which  confifts  only  in  his  obedi- 
ence to  the  moral  law,  but  that  fatisfaftory  rights 
eoufnefs  or  obedience  which  he  performed,  to  that 
peculiar  law  of  mediation,  which  wasimpofedupom 
him,  and  which  chiefly  confiftedin  his  fufferings». 
And  for  this  expofition  of  the  word  obedience, 
in  this  place,  there  Is  as  great  a vote  of  interpret-- 
ers,  both  antient  and  modern,  as  for  any  one  fcrip.-.- 
ture  r know  which  hath  the  leaft  degree  of  diffi- 
culty in  It.  And  (for  the  moft  part)  they  compare- 
this  place,  with  that  Philp..  ii.,  8;  where  if  is  faick' 
of  Chrift  that^d  humbled'Jurnfelfi,  and  became-obedi*- 
entunto  death,  making  both  fcriptures  to  fpeak 
of  one  and  the  fame  obediencej.  TheopHylaft,' 
C.  6 Peter.' 


C «°  ] 

+Peter  Martyr,  ^ Calvin,  |]Mufculus,  Parens,  Pif- 
cator,  Gualter,  and  of  our  own  Mr.  §Gataker, 
are  men  of  this  interpretation,  among  whom, 
Pareus  gives  two  reafons  of  this  his  expofition. 
The  firll  is,  the  oppofition  which  the  apoftle. 
makes  between  the  difobedience  of  Adam,  and 
the  obedience  of  Chrift  ; which  (faith  he)  will  not 
confift,  if  by  the.  obedience  of  Chrift  we  under- 
ftand  his  univerfal  conformity  with  the  law,  the 
difobedience  of  Adam  being  but  a fingle  tranf- 
greftion.  But  his  latter  and  greater  reafon  is,  the 
eSe6l  attributed  to  this  obedience  of  Chrift,  viz. 
the  jujlification  of  many,  which  (faith  he)  the 
apoftle  hitherto  hath  conftantly  appropriated  to 
the  death  of  Chrift,  yea  and  the  whole  fcripture 
throughout  teacheth  our  faith  to  feek  its  rigkte- 
dufnefs  in  this  obedience  of  his.  So  that  all  this 
while  here  is  nothing  at  all  appears  for  the  coun- 
tenancing that  imputation  of  the  aftive  obedi- 
ence of  Chrift. 

4.  But 

+ Docet  quod  namfutrat  illui  hanam,  quod  per  unum  Ckrijtum  lejita 
fjutem  hominibus  recuperax'h.  Mlud  autemaitfuijfe  Chin/lo  obedieiUiait, 
dequafcribensad  Pliilippenfes,  &c,  P.  Mart,  ad  Rom.  5,  19.  And 
a little  after  : Qua:  verba  docet,  id  quod  Apo/ioloj  ait,  per  ohedieutiam 
Chrifli,  quanqjlra  cauja  mortem  fubiit,  &c. 

Quam promintiat  nos  Cirijli  chedier.ii  conjlkuti  jujlos,  hinc  coUigimts 
Chrijhim,  eo  quod  Patri  Jatisfecerit  jujliham  nolb  comparajfe,  Calv.  ad 
Rom.  5.  19. 

||  Hu  verbis  aperit  de  qtu,  jujliiia  Chrijti  hquatur,  videlicet  de  HIlus- 
ebedientia,  de  qualegis  ihilip  2.  Mufculus  ad  Rcra.  5.  19.  Padeitt 
Jere  hdbentPixexi%,  Pifr'ator,  & Gualterus  in  locum. 

IjVterque  locus  (Rom.  v.  19.  PWiVi^.  ni.  ifl.)  tnielSgerudus  eft  at 
obedientia,  quam  mediations  tegi peculiari,  Chrijtus  t.xhibuit,  &c.  Gatak» 
in  Elenchj  Gomar,  P.  49. 


C 6.  ] 

4.  But  fuppofe  by  the  obedience  of  Chrijl  we- 
fhould  here,  contrary  to  the  general  current,  as 
well  of  interpreters  as  the  feriptures  themfelves, 
underhand  that  aBive  righteoufnefs  or  obedience 
which  he  performed  to  the  moral  law,  yet  will  it 
not  follow,  that  men  muft  be  juJUfied,  or  made 
righteous  by  it  in  fuch  a way  of  imputation  as  is 
contended  for.  For  certain  it  is,  that  that  jufliji. 
cation,  which  the  apoflle  fpeaks  of  in  this  19 
verfe,  is  the  fame  with  that  which  he  had  fpoken 
of,  ver.  16,  17,  18.  Now  that  righteoufnefs  (as 
he  calls  it  ver.  17.)  is  deferibed  ver.  16.  to  be  the 
gift  (i.  e.  the  forgivenefs)  of  many  offences,  i.  e. 
of  all  the  offences  whereof  a man  either  doth,  or 
fhall  ftand  guilty  before  God;  and  evident  it  is,, 
that  that,  righteoufifs  or  juflif cation,  which 
hands  in  the  fofgivenefs  of  offences  or  fins,  can- 
not ftand  in  the  imputation  of  a fulfilling  of  the 
law. 

Se£f.  IX.  Another  text  alledged,  is  Rom.viiL 
4.  That  the  righteoufnefs  of  the  law  might  he  ful- 
filled in  us,  who  walk  not  after  the  fefi,  but  after 
the  Spirit.  From  the  former  claufe  it  is  argued, 
that  the  righteoufnefs  f the  law,  can  in  no  fenfe 
be  faid  to  be  fulfilled  in  us,  but  only  by  the 
righteoufnefs  or  obedience  of  Chrift,  imputed  to  us.. 
But  to  this  I anfwer, 

1.  That  fome  both  learned  and  orthodox,  un- 
derftand  this  claufe  of  fanElification,  rather  than 
juflif  cation ; and  by  the fulflling  of  the  righte- 


[ ] 

oufnefs  of  the  law,  that  evangelical  obedience, 
which  all  that  truly  believe  do  perform. 

2.  That  by  the  righteoufnefs  of  the  law,  fulfilled 
in  thofe  that  believe,  cannot  be  meant  the  rigkte- 
oufnefs  or  aElive  obedience  of  Chrift  imputed,  is 
evident  from  hence,  becaufe  it  muft  be  fuch  a 
righteoufnefs,  and  fuch  a fulfilling  in  believers,  as 
is  a proper  effeft  of  Chrift’s  condemning fn  in  the 
fejh,  immediately  preceding,  ver.  3.  The  con- 
text, plainly  fhews,  that  the  latter  was  intended 
by  God  as  a fruit  or  end  of  the  former.  For 
what  the  law  could  not  do  (faith  the  apofllej  in  that 
it  was  weak  through  thefefi,  God fending  his  own 
Son  in  the  likenefs  oj  finful feJh,  and  for  fin,  con- 
demned Jin  in  the  fefi ; that  the  righteoufnefs  of 
the  law  might  befulfdled,  &c.  The  particle,  (fiat, 
imports  the jd filling  of  the  righteoufnefs  of  the  law 
in  thofe  that  believe,  to  be  a direft  effeft  of 
Chrifi's  condemning  Jin  in  the flefi.  Now  it  is  inr- 
poffible,  that  the  obedience  of  Chrift,  or  the 
imputation  of  it,  fhould  be  any  effeft  of  his  con- 
demning fin  in  the  fejh.  For  by  this  expreffion, 
it  is  evident  the  apoftle  means  the  abolifliing  the 
guilt  of  fin,  by  the  death  of  Chrift.  But  how  the 
abolifliing  the  guilt  of  fin  by  the  death  of' Chrift, 
fhould  be  a means  of  the  imputation  of  the 
righteoufnefs  of  his  life,  I am  not  able  to  corapre* 
hend. 

Seff.  X.  The  next  place,  which  hath  been, 
taken  hold  of  by  fome,  to  fupply  that  which  is 
wanting  in  others,  is  Rom.  ix.  31,  32.  But  Ifrael 

which 


[ % J 

which  followdh  after  the  law  of  righteoufnefs^ 
hath  not  attained  to  the  law  of  righteoufiejs, 
Wherfore  ? Becaufe  they  fought  it  not  by  faith, 
but  as  it  were  by  the  works  of  the  law.  From 
hence  it  is  argued,  had  Ifrael,  that  is,  the  Jews, 
who  followed  after  the  law  of  righteoufnefs , be- 
lieved in  Chrift,  they  had  attained  the  law  of 
righteoufnefs,  that  is,  fhould  have  had  the  righte- 
oufnefs performed  byChrift,  imputed  unto  them. 

I anfwer^ 

In  this  expreflion,  the  law  of  righteoufnefs  in 
the  former  claufe  of  the  verfe,  Calvin  finds  an 
hypallage,  the  law  of  righteoufnefs,  put  for  the 
righteoufnefs  of  the  law  : t in  the  latter  claufe,  he 
takes  it  in  fomewhat  a different  fignification,  for 
a rule  of  righteoufnefs.  :{:  Mufculus  diffents  little 
(if  any  thing)  from  this  interpretation,  by  the.  law 
of  righteoufnefs,  underftandirrg  that  righteoufnefs 
which  Hands  in  the  works  of  the  law.  So  that 
neither  of  thefe  authors,  (nor  any  other  that.  I 
have  yet  met  with)  rellrainthe  vioxAlaw,  in  thefe 
phrafes  to  the  moral  law. 

Neither  is  there  any  reafon  to  limit  the  apotfi- 
tie’s  expreffions  of  law  of  rigJiteoufnefs,  to  the 
moral  law  only,  and  the  righteoufnefs  thereof 
becaufe  it  is  notorioufly  known,  that  the  Jews 

never 

+ /am  priore  tool  legem  jujlkicc,  per  hypalhgen  pofidfe  miki  videittr 
pro  fjbtia  legis : in  repetitime  fecundi  membri,  aliofenfue  fic  vocafe 
jufiitice  formam  fat  regulam.  Calvin,  in  Rom.  g.  i. 

J Nam  illud,  fetlando  legem  juJlitice,f.mpUciter  ejfe  diBim  delegis 
ju/Utia,  i.  e.  ea,  quae  tx  operibus  legis  ejt,  patebit  inffa,  (be,  Muf,  ia^ 
Rom.  g.  31, 


[ 64  ] 

. never  hoped  for,  nor  fought  after  righteoufiefs, 
or  juf  if  cation,  by  the  moral  law  only,  but  by  the 
ceremonial  law  alfo,  yea  and  principally  by  this. 
So  that  by  the  law  of  righteoufnefs,  whereof  they 
mifcarried  by  not  feeking  it  by  faith,  cannot  be 
meant  the  moral  law,  becaufe  they  never  had 
thought  or  hope  of  h&ingjififed,  or  made  righ- 
teous, by  the  moral  law  or  righteoufnefs  thereof 
only. 

Laftly,  (to  give  the  clear  meaning  of  this  fcrip- 
ture)  by  the  law  of  righteoufnefs,  vyhich  Ifrael  is 
faid  to  have  foUcrwed  after,  but  not  to  have  at- 
tained, can  be  meant  nothing  elfe  huijujlfcation, 
which  the  Jews  feeking  to  attain,  by  tlie  works  <f 
the  law,  that  is,  by  the  merit  of  their  own  doings, 
and  not  by  faith  in  Chrift,  were  never  able  to 
attain,  but  loft  the  favour  of  God,  and  periftied 
in  their  fins. 

This  expofition  makes  the  double  oppofition-, 
which  the  apoftle  makes  between  the  Gentiles, 
ver.  30.  and  the  Jews  ver.  31.  clear,  and  full; 
whereas  any  other  interpretation  dilTolves  the 
ftrength,  and  darkens  the  light  of  them.  The 
Gentiles  (faith  he,  ver.  30.)  followed  not  after 
righteoufnefs,  that  is,  took  no  care  for  inyjuftf- 
cation  before  God.  Bui  Ifrael  (ver.  fought 
cfter  the  law  of  righteoufnefs,  that  is,  propounded 
unto  themfelves  as  a bufinefs  of  importance,  a 
righteoufnefs  or  juf  f cation  in  the  fight  of  God, 
and  ran  a courfe  of  means,  fuch  as  it  was,  to  ob- 
tain it.  Again,  The  Gentiles  (faith  he,  ver.  30.) 

atiainsd 


C 65  ] . 

attained  unto  righteoufnefs^  that  is,  unto  juftifica^ 
tion  in  the  fight  of  God ; many  of  them  have  been 
juftified  and  faved.  But  Ifratl  could  not  attain 
unto  the  law  of  righteoufne/s,  {vox-  31.)  that  is, 
conlAnoicoxn'^d.hjuffificattoai  ■ 

Se6f.  XL  The  next  proof  ajledged  for, the 
fuppofed  imputation,  is  Rom.  x.  4.  For  Chrifl 
is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righleoufnefs,  to  every 
one  that  believeth.  Therefore  the  '^ighleoufnefs  of 
Chrift,  or  the  obedience  performed  by  him  to  the 
moral  law,  is  imputed  to  thofe  that  believe,  fcur 
their  righteoufnefs.  But  neither  doth  this  fcripr 
ture  prove  any  fuch  thing.  For, 

Firft,  There  is  not  the  leafl:  colour  of  reafon, 
that  by  the  law  in  this  place,  fhould  be  meant 
precifely  the  moral  law,  becaufe  the  Jews,  with 
whom  chiefly  the  apoftle  grapples  in  this  place, 
never  dreamt  j unification  by  the  moral  law, 

onl",  but  chiefly  by  the  ceremonial.  Neither 
doth  Calvin,  or  any  other  interpreters  that  I 
have  met  with,  underftand  the  place  of  the  moral 
law.  Befides,  it  is  evident  from  that  which  im- 
mediately follows,  ver.  5.  that  he  doth  not 
fpeak  here  of  the  moral  law;  for  there  he  citeth 
that  defcription,  which  Mofes  giveth  of  the  right' 
eoufnefs  of  the  law,  not  out  of  any  part  of  the 
moral  law  but  out  of  the  midft  of  the  ceremonial 
law.  Thofe  words,  The  man  which  doth  thefe 
things  Jhall  hx)e  by  .them,  wherein  he  placeth 
Mofes’s  defcription  of  the  righteoufnefs  which  is 
of  the  law,  are  taken  from  Levit.  xviii.  and 

are 


[ 66  ] 

are  in  a fpecial  manner  fpoken  of  the  ceremoni- 
als and  judicials.  For  thus  the  words  lie  ; Ye 
Jhall therejore  keep  my  flatutes  and  my  judgments, 
which  if  a man  do,  he  JhaU  live  in  them.  There- 
fore doubtlefs  the  apoftle  doth  not  fpeak  here  of 
the  moral  law. 

Secondly,  The  Greek  expofitors,  as  Chryfof- 
tom,  Theophylafl;,  and  Theodoret,  make  Chrift 
in  this  fenfe  to  be  called  by  the  apoftle,  the  end 
oj  the  law  for  nghteoiif atfs  unto  thofe  that  believe, 
becatife  he  exhibited  to  them,  what  the  law  pro- 
pounded to  itfelfas  its  end,  and  would  have  per- 
formed, but  could  not,  viz.  \htir:  jujlification. 

But,  Thirdly,  the  plain  meaning  of  the  apof- 
tle feems  to  be  this.  Chrijt  is  the  end  of  the  law 
for  righteoufnefs  to  every  one  that  believeth  ; that 
is,  the  whole  Mofaical  difpenfation  was  for  that 
end  given  by  God  to  the  Jews,  to  inftruft  them 
concerning  the  Meftiah,  that  they  might  believe 
in  him,  and  be  juftlfied,  and  that  they  might  be 
trained  up,  and  prepared  for  the  Meftiah  him- 
felf,  and  that  perfeft  worfhip  of  God,  which  he 
fliOLild  eftablifb  in  the  world.  This  interpreta- 
tion was  both  Chryfoftom’s  of  old,  and  is  Mr. 
Gataker’s,  yet  living : Pareus  likewlfe  is  large 
in  the  vindication  of  it  ; and  t Calvin  himfelf 

feems 

+ Indkat  trim  legis  prcepojitrum  hterprettm  ejfe,  qui  ptr  tjus  Optra 
jujtijkati  quarit:  qvonim  in  hoc  it x data  tji,  queries  ad  aliamjuJHtiam 
rnanuductret.  Into  qukquid  doctat  Lex,  qttkquid  pracipiat.  qukquid 
pTomiUat,  femper  Oirijhim  hjtet  pro  fcopo : Ergo  in  ipfum  dirig tndtzfiaU 
nines  Partes,  i3c.  Calvin  in  Ro.  lo.  4. 


L 6>"] 

feems  very  inclinable -to  it.  This  interpretation 
may  be  confirmed, 

Firft,  from  the  context.  For  doubtlefs  the  apof- 
tle’s  meaning  is,  that  Chrift  {hould  the  end  of 
that  law  ffoT  righteoufriefs  by  the  obfervation 
whereof,  the  Jews  againlf  whom  he  here  reafons 
fought  to  be  jujlified.  Now  it  hath  been  fuffici- 
ently  proved,  that  the  Jews  fought  iuJUfication 
as  well  from  the  obfervation  of  the'ceremonial,  as 
of  the  moral  law.' 

Secondly,  from  the  corifent  of  other  fcriptures 
-2  Cor;  iii;  13.  It  is  faid  that  the-  children  of  Ifrael 
could  not  Jledfajily  look  to  the  end  of  that  winch  is 
^tibolifhed , i\idX  is,  of  the  difpenfation  of  Mofes, 
-Us  is  evident  front  the  whole  chapter.  Now 
what  was  thfe  end  oFthis  difpenfation,  but  Chrift 
'atid  jufhf  cation  by  him  ? So  Gal.  iii.  '2c^.JVkere~ 
forethe  law'wa's  vur  fchool-mafl'er  untwChrif,  that 
'we'  might  be  jufifed  by  faith.  By  the  law 
Hirthis  place,  eanndtbe  meant  the' moral  laW  ^;  the 
-whole  Ferids  ‘of  the  context  from  ver.  1-3.  to 
• 25.  fife'th  up  againft  fuch  an  interpretation';  nei- 
ther- i'S>the'te  any  expofitor  1 'knowl  that.  fo  uader- 
-ftafids  jr:  ’ but  the  whole  frame  of  the.  adrriii^iftra- 
-tion  of  Mofes,  yet  with  a more  peculiar, reference 
to  the’ceremonial  part  of  it.  ' , ■ 

..  .Thus , at  lafl  we  . have  .abundantly,  vindicated 
the  non-imputation  of  the  adlive  obedience  'of 
Ghrifl^from.thofeueafonings,  that  are  ufually  built 
upon  the:  epiftle  to  the  Romans ; wherein  not- 
withllanding  the  greatefl  part  of  the  hrength 

of 


[,  68  ] 

of  our  adverfaries  lieth,  I fhall  with  more 
brevity  anfwer  the  other  fcriptures  \vhich 
remain. 

Seft.  XII.  The  firft  of, which  is,  i Cor.  i.  ^o. 
But  ye  are  offiim  thrift  Jefus,  zuho  of  t^oct is 
niatie  unto  us  .wifdom  and  righteoufnef,,  and 
JhndBJi cation  and  redemption.  , Becavife  Chrift 
is  here  faid  to  be  made  right'eoufnefs  unto  us 
ky  God,  it  is  argued,  that  thereforp  the  i-i^hte. 
oufnefs  of  Chrift  is  imputed  tp  us.  But  to 
this  I anfwef,  th^t  here  i§  le.fs  colour,  for  the 
deemed  imputation  than  in  any  of  the  foriuef 
fcriptures.  For, 

Firft,  Chrift  is  here  no  ofherwife  afErnapd  tp 
be  mud^  _ righteoujhejs  unto  us,  than  he  is  made 
wifdom  ot  fandlf  cation,-  Therefore  there  i^  atp 
more  ground  tp  , conclude  from  hence  the  V^p>^- 
tation  ofChrift’s  righieoujnejs  for  oiir  righteoufqefs, 
than  of  his  wifdom  for  our  wifdom,  or  his  fan£U- 
fication  for  our  fanflification.  And  if  it  be  a 
weak  inference  from  this  place,  that  w§  ai^(>v;ife 
with  the  fame  wifdom  wherewith  Chrift' was  wife, 
being  imputed  unto  us  it.muft  be-_ the  fame,  to 
infer,  that  we  are  righteous  with  the  i^vixe  right^ufr 
nefs  wherewith  Chrift  was  righteous,  beibg  imputed 
to  us.  Here  is  no  more  mention  or  intimation 
of  the  imputation  of  the  one,  than  of  that  of  the 
other.  ... 

Secondly,  when  Chrift  is  faid  to‘ bemade  righte 
oujhefs  unto  us,  the  meaning  is,  that  he  is  made  by 

God 


[ ^9  ] 

God  to  be  the  authoir  oh-  foie  thearis,  by 
way  of  merit,  of 
ahd  procured  for  us 
For,  , ' ^ 

' tliB'  word'  righuoufrikfs  is 

v'ery  frecju'enlly  ufed  by  tfiis' apoftle  iorjufiifica- 
as' Hath' been' often  oBFen^d.- 
Secondly,  tiiali  "rigMk'oi^ntJs  'of  -fuflijicatim 
which  ’ bdrecehs  hav^edn,  or  by-Ghrlfl:  Is  flifl  aL 
fributed  in  the  fci'tptures  to  the  death  and  fufier- 
ihi^  ofChrift  '('a's  ' i^kth  beehsfprmerly^obferved) 
arid  never  to  his-  . fightCotifnefs  of  ablive  obe* 
^ienhe.'  •■''o 

■ Thirdly,^ 'Neither  is  it  true  according  , to  the 
ptinciples  of  our  opponents,  ^ that  Ghrill  by 
his  aftive  obedience  only^  flioiild  be  made  right- 
ioitfnefs  or  juji^cation  to  , Therefore  ■they 
forfafee  their  own  guided  .when  they  feek  for 
the 'iruptiiatipn  dl  this  righteddfnefs  but  of  this 
place.v 

• Fourthly,  and  laftly,  the  interpretation  given, 
hMh  the  CO hdufre-nt  judgment  of  rriany  found 
andlnble  expofitOf^,  who/by  ChriH  being  rHUcfe 
lighteoiiffi^s  ' UnCe)' -its,  nii'dbrftamd  nothing. oMe 
but  our  jujlification  by  him  ; fome  placing  : this 
jujlificdtioil  ' in  the'  forgivenefsi  of  bur  fins, 
fome  afcribing  it  to  the  fatt-sfabiion,  that,  is,  the 
fufierings  of  Ghrift  : none  of  them  either  afcrib- 
ing the  purchafe , of  it  tq  his  aBive  obedience,  or 
placing  it  \xr.  . tkio  impulalim  of  this  to  us.  ■''"Let 

Chryfoftom 


our  jujHfication  purchafed 
by  his-death  and  - fufferings. 


r 70  ] 

Chryfoftprn  and  Thepphylacl,  bA  confuked  upon 
the  place?  and  of  later  times,  + Pomeranus,  and  j. 
Pifcatof.  Mr,  Gataker  likewife,  rejects  that  Inter- 
pretation, as  wanting  as  well  colour  as  fub fiance - 
of  truth,  which  feeketh  to  eftablilji  the^v^puiaiion 
of  the  a^ive  obedience  o{  Chrik  upon  this  fcrip- 
ture.  Bernard  is  exprefs  ^ud  fyll  over  and  over 
for  that  fenfe  of  the  place  which  we  maintain. 
Chrift  (faith  he,  as  bifl)op  Downham  tranflates. 
him)'  zuasr  madA  unto-^us  , wijdom  in  preaching  ; 
jujlke  [drrighteoufmfs]  in  dhfolut.vQn  of  fitts.  Agairfr^ 
enlighten' mine  eyes, .'that  I maybe^  wife reman- 
her  not  the Jin  of  my  youth  and  my  igiior  ances,  ar[d  I 
amjuf.;  Yet  again-,  he'was  made.  vAto.  oj.  God 
wifdom,  itdLching  prudence  : jujlice,  forgiving  fins. 
They  only  are  wife  who  at  e inJtruEled  by  his.  doc- 
trine \ ^ they  only  juft,-n.hd  of  his  .mercy  have 
obtained pardomop fn,  In.all  this  variety,  ofexpref- 
fion  itiis  obfervable,..  that . he  kill  placeth  that 
righteoufiefs  or juftif  cation  which  Chrift  is. made 
unto  us  in  the  remiffion  or  pat  don  of  our  fins : 
.which  with  the  premiffes?  uppn  jthh  fcripturP 
duly  coirfidered,  I prefume  np  imputation  pf  the 
riBivt,obhdience  of  Chrift  wjll  be  any  mdre  urged 
from  hence. 

MiSeft.  XIV.  The  next  fcripture  that  is  urged  is, 
2.  Cpr.  V.  21.  .For  he  hath  made  him  lobe  fin  for 

■ !i:i  ■ US, 


+ Qu\ ergo  in  nolis  .pcccatores  funais,  in  ip/o  ctper  ip>fum,  jufli  fumus, 
nonTmputato  'pr'opttr  ipfum  mbit  peccMo.'  . PomCTan.’  ’ ‘ 

■‘’t  IkpitiiQ-rdeF,  cujus  feUis/a&ione  nebis  ienata,  atque  imputiUi, 
ti fumus.  Pifeator  in  i Cor.  i.  30. 


[ 7^  ] 

us,  who  knew  no  fin,  that  we  might  be  made  the 
right eoufnefs  of. God  in  him.  Prom  hence  they  infer, 
that  as  our  fins,  are  imputed  to  Chrifl,  fo  Chrift’s 
righteoufnefs  or  .aBwe  obedience  is  imputed  to  us. 
Of  all  the  fcriptures  which  they  .'take  up,  Mr.  Ga- 
taker  hath  well  obferved  'thjs:  is  moft  clear  againft 
themfelves.  For,  > 

Firft,  there  is  no  footing,  in  this  fcripture,  for 
the  inference  drawn  from  it ; here  is  nothing  faid 
touching  any  imputation  of  our  fins  to  Chrift  : and 
confeqiiently,  nothing. to  build, a reciprocal  impu- 
tation of  his  righteoufnefs  to  us.  ' As  for  that  ex- 
prelfion,  of  Chrift’s  being  madefinfor  us^  it  imports 
no  fuch  imputation,  as  will  appear  pr|efe«tly. 

Secondly,  Some  of  the  moil  learned  afiertors 
of  this  imputation,  abfqlutelyrejefl  this  equality 
or  rtc\’^xocdX\on,oifmp^utation^  between  the  fin.s 
of  believers  to  Chrift  and  the  righteoufnefs  of 
Chrift  to  them.  There  is  not  the  fame  force  of 
power  (faith  bifhopDavenant)  of  our  unrighteouf- 
nefs,  to  make  Chrift  ^unrighteous,  which  is  of 
his  righteoufnefs  to  makethofe  that  believe  rights 
eous.  So  that  (according  to  their  own  principles) 
if  the  righteoufnefs-  or  dBive  obedience  ot  Chrift 
be  no  otherwife  imputf  to  us,  than  our  fins  are 
imputed  to  him,  we.  are  njotTuade  formally  right- 
eous by  fuch  an  imputation. 

Thirdly,  neither  is  there  fo  much  as  the  appear- 
ance in  this  place  of  any  comparifon  made,  be- 
tween Chrift’s  being  madefn  for  hi,,(w!iatfoever 
be  meant  by  itj  and  our  \if\rif  made  the  Hghte- 


[ 72  3 

ovtfnifs  of  Cod  in  him  ; but  only  the  latter  is  af- 
firmed as  the  endj  confequent,  or  effeft  of  the 
former. 

Fourthly,  that  the  importance  of  that  particle 
in  him,  fhould  bfe  by  the  imputation  ofhis  aftive 
obedience,  there  » neither  irlftance,  nor  parallel 
exprelTion  in  fcripture,  nor  rule  in  grammar,  nor 
figure  in  rhetoric,  ta  make  probable  in  the  low- 
ed degree.  Therefore,  " 

Fifthly,  the  clear  meaning  of  the  place,  is  this; 
that  God  for  that  end  made  Chrift  fin,  that  is  an 
offering  or  facrifice  for  fin,  for  us,  that  ue  'might 
be  made  the  righteoufnfs  of  God  in  him,  that  is, 
that  we  might*  be  juftified,  or  made  a fociety  of 
righteous  ones,'  after  that  peculiar  manner  of 
juftification  which  God  hath  eftablifhed  through 
that  facrifice  or  'ioffering  of  hii  Son.  This  inter- 
pretation is  judifiable  uponthefe  confiderations. 

Se£l.  XV.  firft,  it  is  a frequent  fcripture  expref- 
fiem,  to  call  the  fin-offering,  or  the  facrifice 
for  fin,  by  the  name  of  fin  fimply.  See  for  this, 
Exod.  xxix.  14.  Exod.  xxx;  10.  Levit.  v.  0,  16, 
18.  19.  Levit.  vii.  i.ii. 7.  Le\;tt.  ix.  7.  Ezek.  xliv. 
izy.Ezek.  xv.  19.  23.  Hof.  iv.  8. 

Secondly,  To  exprefs  a number  of  juftified  bV 
righteous  perfons  ty  the  abftradl  term  of  righte- 
oufnefs,  is  agreeable  liketyife  with  the  .fcripture 
dialefl  in  many  other  pla'ces. 

1 hirdly,  that  addition,  of  God.  {the  righteouf- 
nefs  of  God)  imports,  that  that  righteoufnefs  dr 


[ 73  ] 

juJUJicalion  which  believers  obtain  by  the  facri- 
fice  or  death  of  Chrift,  is  not  only  a right eoufneji 
«f  God’s  free  gift,  but  of  his  fpecial  contrivance. 

Fourthly,  By  the  dependence  of  die  latter 
'clatife,  our  being  made  the  right eoitfnefs  oj  God  in 
Chriji,  upon  the  former,  his  being  made  fin  for  us,  if 
is  evident,  that  in  the  latter,  fuch  an  effeO;  muff 
be  fignified  as  may  fuit  with  the  canfe  mentioned 
in  the  former,  viz.  the  death  of  Clirift  for  us. 
Now  the  proper  and  direcf  effecl  ofniic  death  of 
Chrift;  is  deliverance  from  the  guilt  and  punifli- 
ment  of  fin,  not  the  imputation  of  hisaiitive  obe- 
dience. Chrifi  did  not  die  for  men,  that  they 
might  be  jufilfied  by  the  nghteoufne/’s  ofhis  life.t 
Fifthly,  The  fcriptnres,  when  thev  fpeak  of 
the  death  dr  mlferings  of  Chrifl,  in  refpeft  of 
jujlification,  never  afcribe  aYiy  other  efiecf  to 
them,  but  the  remiffion  nf  fins,  deliverance  frorn 
wrath,  redemption,  or  the  like.  Ckrijl  hath  re- 
deemed us  from  the  curfe-oj  the  lau\  being  made  d 
turfejor  in.  Gal.  iii.  13. 

Sixthly,  The  interpretation  given,  touching 
the  fubftance  of  it,  is  the  expofition  of  interpre- 
ters vuthont  number,  as  of  Chryfofiom,  Theo- 
phvlaff,  Occumenius,  Calvin,  Ivlufculus,  Pifcator. 
I forbear  the  citation  of  pafiages  from  them,  he- 
VoL.  XXIII.  D caufe 

■f  Quis  enlm  jic  argmitniirdur,  mentis  comfos:  Chriflus  f atlas  ejl 
^ro  nobis  pcccatum,  i.  e.  facrificium  peccati  expiatoriu7n,  qviinosjajli 
co'nJlitueremuT : Ergo  obedientia  Chrijli  in  x ita  p>rcrjhta,  non  autem 
morte  free  fuerijick  QbAJlijujli  conjlituimur  ? -Gaiak.  Elciich.  Gom. 
P.  l8  . ■ . 


O 


[ 74  ] 

caufe  the  authors  themfelves  (if  any  man  doubt) 
may  readily  be  confulted. 

Seft.  X\^I.  I (hall  only  touch  upon  one  fcrip- 
turemore.  Gal.  iii.  lo.  For  it  is  zvritten,  curfed  is 
every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things,  U'hvJi_ 
are  written  m the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them. 
Hence  foine  argue,  If  every  one  be  curfed,  that 
continueth  not  in  all  things  that  are  written  in  the 
law  to  do  them,  then  can  no  man  he  ju/IJied.,  but 
Temains  accuifed,who  hath  not  theperfefl  obfcr- 
A-ation  of  the  law  imputed  from  Chrift  unto  him. 
J anhver, 

hill},  If  tlierc  be  no  other  means  to  diflolve 
the  curfe  denounced  againfl  ail  non  continuers 
in  all  things  that  are  written  in  the  law  to  do  them, 
but  a perfefl  firlftlhug  of  tire  law  by  Chrill  im- 
puted unto  them,  woe  lo  the  whole  world  without 
exception.  For  certain  it  is,  i.  That  there  is 
no  ftich  perfect  fidfilliug  of  the  law  imputed  from 
Chrill  to  any  man,  (as  hath  been  proved  at  large] 
and  2.  That  Avere  there  any  fuch  imputation,  yet 
this  would  not  dillolvc  that  curfe  ; this  cleaves 
fader  to  the  whole  of  Adam’s  poderity,  than  to 
bc  'diffolved  by  any  other  means  than  the  blood 
of  Chrid.  It  i.s  not  faid,  that  without  keeping 
the  law,  but,  that  without  Jhedding  of  blood,  there 
is  no  lemijjion.  Heh.  ix.  22.  Chrid  might  liave 
kept  the  law  a thoufand  years  for  us ; and  yet 
never  have  lound  redemption  from  the  curfe  of 
the  law  for  us,  had  he  not  been  made  a curfe  for 
its,  by  his  death  and  fufferings.  Gal.  iii.  13. 

SecOmllv, 


0 


[ 75  ] 

SecoruHy,  He  that  is  fully  dlfcharged  from  the 
guilt  of  all  his  fins  committed  againll  the  law,  is 
doiibtlefsoutof  the  reach  of  the  curfe  of  the  law. 
Now  the  principles  which  we  oppofe,  aferibe  a 
perfedl  forgi\-cnefs  of  all  fins  to  the  palfive  obe- 
dience or  death  of  Chrift  imputed,  without  ihe 
imputatio’n  of  the  aftive  obedience  with  it  for 
that  end.  XherefOTe  the  argtiment  in  hand  is  no 
more  a friend  to  that  opinicni  it  feeks  to  efiablifh, 
than  to  the  truth  itfclJ. 

Thirdly,  The.  imputation  of  perfeft  fulfilling 
the  law  from  another,  were  it  granted,  cannot 
make  him  a continuer  in  all  thinp^s  that  are  writ- 
ten in  the'law  to  do  them,  who  opfends  ddiXy  in  many 
things:  and  confequently,  will  leave  him  in  a bad 
oafe,  in  refpefl  of  the  curfe  of  the  law  as  it  finds 
iiim.  All  tlm  imputations  under  heaven,  cannot 
make  him,  who  hath  not  continued  m all  things 
cf  the  law  to  do  them,  to  have  continued  in  them. 
Itis  well  that  this  argument  is  weak:  for  it  is  of 
a mofl  bloody  and  tuimerciful  fpirit,  and  would 
bear  down  all  the  world  before  it  into  hell.  If 
there  be  no  other  way  for  poor  finful  men  to 
come  off  from  the  curfe  of  the  law,  but  by  conti-.. 
vuing  in  all  things  that  are  written  therein  to  do 
them:  doubtlefs  they  mull  all  fall  under  this  curfe, 
and  ner'tr  rife  again,  Tlicrefore, 

Fourtlily,  The  direfi  meaning  of  this  paiTage 
is  this,  Cur  Jed  be  everyone  that  continueth  not, 
that  is,  every  one  that  expetleth  iullification  bv 
the  law ; w'oe  be  to  every  fuch  perfon,  T 'they  con- 
D 2 tinue 


[ 76  ] 

tinue.  not  in  all  things  that  are  written  in  the  lam 
to  do  them : tlie  curfe  of  the  law  Avill  fall  heavy 
. and  terrible  upon  them. 

Other  fcriptures  than  thefe  alledged  with  any, 
colour  of  reafon  in  the  caufe  of  that  imputation^ 
I know  none.  As  for  thofe  that  are  confident, 
that  they,  fee  that  imputation  of  Chrill’s  righUouf- 
nefs,  in  that  and  the  like  fcriptures,  Deliver  me 
from  blood  gmltinefs  0 God,  and  my  tongue  fliall 
’right eon fnejs,  Plal.  li.  14.  I leave 
them  and  their  confidence  to  the  convictions  of 
miracles  and  figns  from/heaven,  lor  doubtlefs 
as  for  te.xts  and  interpretations,  thev  are  turned 
into  Jliibble  until  them, 'andi  reafons  and  demonfl ra- 
tions are  efleemed  by  them  but  as  Leviathan 
ejleemeth  iron  and  brdjs,  that  is,  as  Jifmoj  and 
rotten  wood^ 


C H A P.  VI. 

The  arguments  againfi  the  imputati’nnioffaith  for 
righleoujnejs  anjuaed. 

Q ECT.  I.  The  firfi;  and  great  argument-againti 
^ the  iiuputaiiun  of  faith  for  rnghttojuftejs  is 
this, 

I 

That  which  impcachcth  the  truth  orjullice  of 
God,  cannot  be  true. 


But 


r 77  ] 

But  the  imputation  of  faith  for  righteoiijhej's 
impeacheth  the  truth  and  jilllice  of  God.  ' 

Beeaufe,  if  God  fhould  impute  faith  Sor^righ- 
teoufnefs  he  .would  account  that  \o  \i^  rigkteouf- 
nefs  which  is  none.  I anfwer, 

. FiHt,  this  was  the  pica  of  the  counfel  of  Trent, 
(as  Calvin  hath  obferved)  that  the  word  juJUfica- 
tion  in  fcripture  was  not  to  be,  taken  in  a juridical 
fenfe,  for  ablblution,  but  in  a moral  fenfe,  for  the 
making  of  .a  man  m right eousj  And  tlris  is 
the  common  argument  of  t^e  Papifts,  |br  their 
juftification  by  inherent  grace  and  works.  But, 
Secondly,  it  doth  not  follow,  that  God  ac- 
xounts  tliat  for  rigJuecufnefs  which  is  no  righte- 
.oujnefs,  though  he  counts ,/uzV/^  ioe  righfeogjnejs. 
For  any  obedience,  or  a6Hon_  conformable  to, a 
■righteous  law,  may  truly  be  called  ri^htcoufnejs. 
So  Plal.  cvi,  30.  Then  ficod  up  Pkineas,  and  exe- 
cuted judgment , Sc.  and  it  was  counted  unto  him 
-for  righteoufnefs.  By  right eoiijiiejs  in  this  place, 
cannot  be  nicant  a conformity  or  obedience  to 
the  whole  law';  one  particular  acl,  whatfoever  it 
were,  cannot  be  called  righieoufnejs  in  fuch  a 
fenfe.  Therefore  it  fignifies  only  a conformity 
with  fome  particular  precept.  See  the  word 
ufed  much  in  a like  fenfe  Gen.  xxx.  33.  2 Cor. 
ix.  9,  10.  Heb.  xi.  33,-  &c.  And  fo  faith,  or 
believing,  being  an  obedience  to  a fpecial  com- 
mandmentof  God,  (1  John  iii.  23.  2 Pet.  ii.  21. 
Rom.  i.  5,  &C.J  may  both  with  truth,  and  fu’ffi- 
D 3 cient 


[ 78  ] 

Vicnt  propriety,  be  called  righteoufnejs : yet 
vhere  God  is  faid  to  impute  faith  for  righteouf 
nejs,  I do  not  conceive  is  meant  an  aft  of  obe- 
dience to  any  particular  precept.  Therefore, 

Thirdiv,  Vi'hen  with  the  feripturcs  tve  affirm, 
that  God  impuielh  a man’s  faith  unto  him  Jor  righ- 
teov fiefs,  we  do  not  mean  that  God  only  accounl- 
eth  fuch  believing  for  a righteous  aft  unto  him  ; 
much  lefs  do  we  mean,  that  he  efleemeth  it  a 
literal^  and  corapleat  fulfilling  of  the  whole  moral 
law  : + but  that  God  looks  upon  a man  who  be- 
lieves with  as  mucit  favour,  and  intends  to  do  as 
gracioiilly  by  him,  as  if  he  were  a man  of  perfeft 
righteoujnejs,  and  had  intirely  fulfilled  the  whole 
law.  In  this  ionic  to  account  faith  Jor  righteouf 
nefs,  hath  not  the  leaft  colour  of  injuftice,  or  re- 
pugnancy to  the  truth. 

Fourthly,  there  is  fcarce  any  thing  affirmed 
more  freq^Lientiy,  by  the  l eft  reformed  writers, 
than  that  Gotl  accounts  thofe  juft,  who  in  flrift- 
nefsof  fpeech  are  not  fuch,  but  only  have  their 
Cns  forgiven.  Therefore  they  apprehended  no 
matter  of  injuftice  or  contrariety  to  truth  therein. 
From  hence  we  gather,  (faith  Calvin  j:)  that 
Paul’s  difpute  is,  not  what  men  are  in  thera- 
fgJves,  but  in  what  place  God  is  pleafed  to  ac- 
count 

+ Ncahoc  dkiiur,  Deum  apudje  judkarc  iltos,  pro  quer-um  pcccalis 
VMVcrftS  Chrijlus  Jatisfecit,  niiit  ixali  uoquam  cartniif'JJe,  aut  boni  debiti 
emiftjje,  Jed  eodem  habere  loco,  quoad  mortis  realuir,  ct  jus  ad  vitant 
aUrnam,  ac  ft  nihil  vel  mail  admfjfeul,  led  boni  debiti  orr.ifijjiiit^  Gai. 
Ekoch.  P.  35,  36. 

J luRsm..  iv.  3. 


[ 79  } 

count  thera.  Ami  elfewhere ; § it  fonows  then 
that  we  are  juft  or  righteous,  becaufe  our  fins  are 
not  imputed  to  us.  Therefore  we  ftand  righteous 
before  God,  faith  Mr.  Fox  f|  becaufe  our  fins  are 
forgiven  us.  We  have  remiffion  of  fins,  (faith 
Melanfthon  +)  for  and  through  Chrlft;  which 
havinsj  obtained,  we  are  ritjhteous  before  God. 
Paul  (faith  Calvin)  eftimates  the  bleftediiefs  of  a 
man  from  hence,  becaufe  he  is  after  this  manner 
righteous,  not  in  very  deed,  but  by  imputation. 

Seel.  II.  Afecond  cbjeftion  is  this. 

If  faith,  in  fuch  a fenfe,  fhould  be  imputed  for 
righteoujhejs,  then  -would  jujlification  be  by 
works,  or  by  fomewhat  in  ourfelves.  But  the 
feripture  every  where  rejefleth  works,  and  all 
things  in  ourfelves  from  having  any  thing  to  dcr 
in  fujhf cation. 

* I anfwer.  By  works  may  be  underftood  two 
ways:  either firft,  by  the  merit  of  works,  which 
is  ftill  the  Icripture  fenfe;  or  elfe  fecondly,  by 
way  offimple  performance.  If  the  firft  propofi- 
tion  be  taken  in  the  former  fenfe,  it  is  altogether 
falfe,  and  the  confequence  thereof  denied  : faith 
maybe  imputed  kox  righteoufnefs,  and  yet  no  man 
'juJHfied  by  the  merit  of  any  tvorks  in  himfelf. 
If  it  be  taken  in  the  latter  fenfe,  the  fecond  pro- 
pofition  is  falfe.  For  the  feripture  no  v’here 
D4  rejeffeth 

^ Deiera  Eccks.  R<fnr.  ratione.  p.  368. 

II  DeChriJlo gratis  1.  3.  p.  280. 

+ In  Exam,  Theo!.  de  Juftific.  p.  529.  Inllit.  1.  3.  c.  ii.Seft. 
II.  Gratuita  Deiaaeptatio fuirogatuT  in  lotam  jtifiitij;,  idun. 


[ 8a  ] 

rejefteth  every  thing  that  may  be  done  by  us,  ir> 
refpedl  of  a fimple  performance  from  having  to 
do  in  the  matter  of  juJUJication.  Nay  it  exprefly 
requireth  fomething  in  us,  as-of  ahfolute  neceffity 
to  ji^iificalion  : and  fomething  which  itfelf  call- 
«th  a work.  This  is  the  work  of  God,  faith  our 
Saviour  to  the  Jews,  that  ye  believe  in  him  whom 
he  hath  fnt.  Now,  that  believing  in  Chrift  is 
required  as  of  abfolute  neceffity  to  jufiificationy 
is  a thing  ofuniverfal  confeffion.  And  thus  our 
befl  writers,  without  fcruple,  call  that  believing^ 
by  which  we  dx^jufified,  a work,  or  doing  of 
fomething.  Faith  (faith  Calvin  is  the  chief 
work  that  God  requiretii  of  us.  And  what  did 
Abraham  (faith  Mufculus  ^ that  fhoiild  be 
imputed  for  righleoufnejs,  but  only  believe  God? 

Se£l.  III.  A third  objection  is  this.  That 
which  .maketh  jojiification  not  to  be  of  grace, 
cannot  ftand  w’ith  the  truth  of  the  gofpel.  But 
the  imputalio-n  of  faith  for  rightconfnefs,  makes 
jujlification  not  to  be  of  grace. 

The  former  propofition,  I allow,  but  the  latter 
is  utterly  falfe ; for  the  fcripture  flill  acknow- 
ledgeth  a perfeft  confiflence  of  grace,  with  the 
condition  of faith  in juflification.  For  by  grace 
ye  are faved  through  faith.  Ephef.  ii.  8.  And  are 
freely  jujlified  by  kis  grace,  e?r.  Rom.  iii.  2q. 
Through  faith  in  his  blood,  ISc.  ver.  25.  Nay,  the 

truth 

J Fides pTCcdpnvtn  optis  «/?,  qued  a notie-  Dcus  exi^il.  Cal\io  in 
J»c.  1.22. 

^ Qtiidenm  feck  Atrahmm,  quod  imf'vUKtur,  tie.  Muk,  ia  GiL 

6. 


[ 8i  3 

trutli  is,  iTie  work  of  believing,  as  cur  Saviour 
called  it,  is  fo  far  from  carrying  any'  opporition. 
in  it  to  the  freenefs  of  God’s  gi'ace  in  jujiificalion, 
that  it  is  purpol'ely  required  of  men  (and  it  only'] 
by  him,  that  the  freenefs  of  his  grace  in  their 
jufHficaiion  might  be  eftablilhed,  Rom.  iv.  i6. 
Therefore  it  is  hy  faith,  that  it  might  be  by  grace. 
And  in  leafon,  ho^v  can  a gift  be  more  freely' 
given,  than  when  nothing  more  is  required  of 
him  to  whom  it  is  given,  than  thatjie  receives 
it  ? Now  believing  is  nothing  but  receiving  that 
'jujlification,  which-  God  giveth  in  and^vith  his 
Son  Jefus  Chi  ill.  As  many  as  i cceivid  him^^c. 
John  i.  12.  that  is,  (as  it  is  explained  in  th,e  end 
^)f  the  verfe,}  as  many  as  A/ilfrvi/ in  his  name. 
So  that  in  the  imputation  of  faith Jor  righteau/nefs 
there  is  not  any  prejudice  at  all  to  the  freenefs  of 
'mj ufification, 

Se£f.  y.  A fourth  is  this.  That  which  mi- 
iiillreth  dccafion  ofboafring,  is  no  way  confonant 
to  the  truth  of  the  gofpel.  But  the  imputation 
■oi  faith  for  right coufnefs,  minillreth  occafion  of 
hoafli  ng.'  Ergo. 

I anfwcr,  firft,  fuppofe  the  work  or  aft  of  be- 
lieving, wdiich  is  imputed-  for  righteeufnefs,  be  a 
man’s  own' work  or  aft:-,  vet -it  is  fo  by'  gift,  and  . 
b-y  the  meer  grace  ofanother,  viz.  God, 

- Now  fince  a man  liath  nothing  and  doth  nothing 
nh believing,  but  what  he  receivethffoni  another, 
all  -occafion  of  Boaftin-g  is  cut  ‘off,  even  according 
to  ’the  apoflie’s-'Ot'/ii-  reafoniug,  • i -Cos.,  iv,  y. 

r>3  jrZ’iK. 


. 


[,8a  ] 

IVkathaJi  thou,  that  thou  hajl  not  received?  And 
if  thou  hafl  received  it,  why  gloriejl  thou  as  though 
thou  hadji  not  received  it  ? Evidently  impl\  ing, 
that  no  man  hath  any  pretence  of  boafling,  (I 
mean  of  himfelfj  for  any  thing,,  but  what  he  hath 
of  hi*  own,  and  from  himfelf.  Let  the  thing  be 
never  fo  excellent,  if  he  hath  recei\  ed  it  frojn 
another,,  he  hath  caufe  only  to  glory  in  him  froai 
whom  he  hath  received  it.  If  God  miraculotifly 
raifed  up  children  unto  Abraham  of  the  Jlones,  had 
'thefe  ftones,  being  now  made  men,  and  men  of 
the  greateft  excellency,  any  pretence  of  glorying 
in  themfelves  concerning  that  dignity  .which  is 
now  come  upon  them  ? No  moie  hath  any  flefh 
•the  leaft  colour  of  boafling  in  itfclf,  how  excel- 
lent focver  the  afl  of faith  may  be,  becaufe  it  is 
given  them  by  another : it  is  the  glorv  of  the 
giver,  and  the  comfort  only  or  blelfednefs  of  th« 
receiver. 

But  fecondly,.  fuppofe  the  aft  ofbclieving  wer* 
in  part  from  a- man’s  felf,  yet  hath  he  no  caufe 
to  boaft  in  liimfelii  that  God  fhould  be  pleafed 
to  impute  it  unto  him  for  righteoufmj's : bccaufe 
that  weight  of  glory,  thofe  excellem  -things  which 
attend  upon  faith,  are  not  given  to  it  for  an/ 
worth  that  is  found  in  it,,  but  by  the  mod  free, 
and  good  pleafure  of  God.  Though  a believer 
therefore  hath  the  forglvenefs  of  fins,  and  the 
love  and  favour  of  God  given  him  upon  it,  and  a 
title  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  yet  all  this  is  no 
ground  why  any  man  fhould  boafl  of  himfelf  or 

ei 


C 83  3 

of  his  faith,  though  it  were  from  himfelf,  (which 
yet  we  abfolutely  deny)  becaufe  if  tliis  faith  had 
not  met  with  a God  of  infinite  grace  and  bount)', 
we  might  have  been  acfurfed  for  all  our  faith.- 
Yea,  by  the  apoflle’s  own  rule,  when  God  is 
pleafed  to  chufe  weak  and Joolifh  things  to  confound 
the  mighty,  all  occafion  of  boafling  is  cut  off. 
Indeed  if  men  had  fulfilled  the  law,  and  been 
juJ}ifedihAi\‘^2.Yf  there  had  been  room  to-boafL 
Firil,  becaufe  fuch  a righteoufnejs  had  held  fome 
proportion  \vith  the  reward  given  to  it.  To  him 
that  worketh  (faith  Paul,}  that  is,  that  keepeth  the 
law,  the  reward  is  counted,  not  by  favour,  but  of 
debt,  God  would  have  given  them  no  more, 
than  what  they  had,  in  fome  fort,  defer  ved.  Se- 
condly, becaufe  if  they  had  made  out  their  hap- 
pinefs  that  way,  they  had  done  it  out  of  the 
flrength  of  thofe abilities  which  were  effential  to 
their  n-atures,  and  in  the  mofl  proper  fenfe  that 
can  be  fpoken  of  a creature,  their  own:  both 
which  being  apparently  wanting  in  faith,  or  in 
the  aft  of  believing,  there  ean  be  no  pretence 
©f  boaflrng,  though  i-t  be  imputed  by  Godfor  righ~ 
teoufnefs, 

Seft.  VI.  Fifthly,  fome  objeft,  if faith  be  im- 
puted t©  us  for  righteoufnefs , then  are  we  juflified 
by  that  which  is  imperfeft,  for  no  man’s  faith  is- 
perfeft  in  this  life.  But  there  is  no-jujiifcutiort 
before- God  by  that  which  is  imperfeft.. 

I anfwer,  that  claufe,  then  are  we  juftified  by 
that  which  is  imperfeB,  may  have  a double  mean- 
D 6 iiw; 


[ .^4  1 

iug  ; either  that  we  zre.juftifLed  without  the  con- 
curreace  of  any  thing  that  is  fimply  perfect  to 
owrjujiification  : or  that  fomewhat  that  is  compa- 
ratively wealc  and  imperfeft,  may  fomeway  con'* 
cur  and  contribute  towards  our  ju/nfication.  If 
the  former  fenfe  be  intended,  the  propofition  is 
abfolutely  falfe,  and  the  confequence  to  be  detri- 
ed  : it  doth  not  follow,  if  faith  be  imputed  for 
righteoufnefs  in  the  fenfe  given,  then  is  there  no- 
thing that  is  perfeft  required  as  neceffarv  to  juf~ 
tif  cation.  For  the  imputation  of  faith  Jor  righte- 
£»Myfleyr-pre-fuppofeth  fomewhat  that  is  abfolutely 
perfeft,  as  neceffary  to  juftification..  Had  not  the 
Lord  Chrift,  who- is  per  fed-  himfelf,  made  diperfecl. 
atonement  for  fm,  there  had  been  r.o  place  for 
\!l\q  imputation  of  faith  for  rightcoiijaefs'.  yea^ 
there  had  been  no  place  for  the  being  eidner  of 
fuph.  a faith,  or  of  any  juftifcaticn  for  men.  For 
ft.  is  through  the  atonement  made  by  Chrife  for 
U5,  that  either  we  believe  hi  him,  or  in  God' 
tjirough  him ; and  it  is  through  the  fante  atone- 
ment that  God  jufaftdh  us  upon,  our  believing, 
that  is,,  imputes  our  faith  unto  us  for  nghteouf- 
nefs. 

If  the  claufe  be  meant  in  the  latter  fenfe,  viz., 
tliat  fomewhat  that  is  weak  and  irnperfeft  may 
concur  towards  jvfifcalion,  fo  the  propoGtion  is. 
true.  Yoi  jiflificalicn  may  be,  exprcled,  though 
that  faith  whereby  we  believe,  yea,  and  that  by 
whom  we.  believe,  are.bctli  weak  and  imperfeef, 
and  y.et  both  th.efe,  we  know,  foraeway  cortlri- 
Biute  towai'ds  juftification^  JVe  have  helievei  in 

Ckr.if 


[ 8s  ] 

Chriji.  Jffus,  that  we  n.i^ht  bejuft  'ified.  Gal.  n". 

And  that  the  minifler  hath  (or  at  leafl  may  have), 
his  part  \n  om  jujhjicalion  is  evident.  How  Jhall 
they  believe  in  him,  of  whom  they  have  not  heard?t 
And  how  JJiall  they  hear  without  a preacher? 
Rom.  X..  14.  But  our  jujiif  cation  does  not  de- 
pend on  the  perfeftion  of  our  firiith,  but  on  the 
troth  of  it : and  the  tmtii  of  our  faith  doth  not 
depend  on  the  perfcfHon  of  him,  hy  whom  tve  be- 
lieve, bi’.t  tire  truth  of  what  he  dehvereth.  So 
that  the  light  of  this  truth  (bines  on  every  hand, 
tb.at  men  may  be  jujlified,  miniilcrially  and 
indrur.ientally,  by  things  that  are  wreak  and' 
imperfefl. 

Sert.  \"I.  Some  have  objeBed,  ftxthly,  If  faitlv 
be  imputed  to  as  lor  rig-hteou/nef,  then  God  ra- 
ther receives  a righteou/nejs  Ironi  us,  than  w'e- 
from  him,  in  our  jufification.  But  God  doth, 
not  receive  a rightcouj'nrjs  from -us,  but  we  from 
him  m j'jflifcahon. 

I aui-wer.  It  no  tvav  folTotvs  upon  that 
tatio'n  o.naith  lac  right coti/nefs,'x\\\c\\  we  defend,, 
that  God  either  receives  a righteoujhcfs  from  us»- 
or  that  tve  receive  none  from  him,,  in  our  jnjli- 
jication.  Becaufe,. 

Firft,  God's  imputing  faith  for  righteoiifiejb 
doth  not  impl\'  that  faith  is  a righteoitfnejs  pro- 
perly fo  called,  but  only  that  God,  upon  the  ten- 
der of  it.'  looks  upon  us  as  righteous,  yet  not  as 
made  either  meritorioufly,  or  fonnaliy  righteous 
sy  it,  but  as  having  fulfilled  that  condition,  upon- 
il’ts  fulfilling  tvlrereof  he  hath  covenanted  to- 

Hiaker 


[ 86  ] 

make  us  righteous,  meritorioufly  by  the  death 
and  fufferings  of  his  Son,  formally,  with  the  pcir- 
don  of  all  our  fins. 

Secondly,  Suppofe  faith. were  a proper  righ- 
teoufnefs.  Vet  neither  would  this  prove,  that  God 
receives  a righteoufnefs  from  us  in  our  juftif. ca- 
tion. For  we  receive  our  faith  itfelf  from  God^ 
not  God  from  us.  But, 

Thirdly,  That  the  imputation  of  faith  for  righ- 
icoufnefs  Inppofeih  a righLeoufnf  received  by 
men  from  God  iny.'//??/7r^7/2<?w,'(andconrequently, 
is  far  from  denying  it)  is  evident  from  hence» 
becaufe  it  could  not  be  truly  fald,  that  God  doth 
impute  faith  for  righttoufnefs  to  any  man,  except 
he  fhould  make  him  righteous  upon  his  believ- 
ing. Now  as  it  is  impoffible  that  a man  fhould 
be  made  without  a righleou/nefs  in  one 

kind  or  other;  fo  is  k impoflible  alfo,  that  the 
righteoufnefs  wherewith  a man  is  made  righteous 
in  juftification,  fhould  be  given  from  any  other 
but  from  God  alone.  For  this  riofteoufnfs  is 
none  other,  but  forgivenefs  of  fins : And  who  cat 
forgive fins  but  God  alone  ? 


CHAP. 


[ «7  3 


CHAP.  VII. 

The  chief  arguments  firr  the  imputation  ofChrif's. 
* adive  obedience  (in  the  ferfe  oppofed)  anfwered. 

SECT.  I.  The  firft  argument  for  the  imputa- 
tion of  Chrift’s  righteonfnefs  in  the  fenfe  re- 
fufed^  is  this, 

■If  there  he  na  landing  in  judgment  before  God^ 
unlfs  zee  be  endued  xiith  a perfeil  righteoujl 
nejsy  then  muf  the  righlecufnefs  of  Chrijl  be 
imputed  to  us,  in  our  jifif  cation. 

But  th^'e  is  no- Jlanding  in  judgment  before  God, 
unlefs  we  he  endued  with  a perfed  rigkteouf 
neJL 

* I anhver,  by  denyingtheco-nrequence  in  the 
former  propofition  : there  may  be  na  Handing  in 
judgment  before  God  without  a perfeft  righte- 
oufnefs,  and  vet  the  lighteoufnefs  of  ChriH,  in 
the  fenfe,  controverted,  not  be  hnpuied.  The 
reafon  is,  becaufe  remiffion  of  fins,  which  is  the 
purchafe  of  the  death  of  ChriH,  (jis  our  adver- 
faries  themfekes  acknowledge]  is  a perfeft  right- 
eoufnefs,  and  every  way  able  to  bear  us  out  in 
judgment  before  God.  Yea,  and  our  bell  re- 
formed  divines,  find  a fuffident  confidence  for 

believers 


r 88  ] 

believers  in  the  prefence  of  God,  in  the  death  of 
Chrift  alone.  Calvin  t having  mentioned  that 
of  the  apoftle,  Rom.  iii,  24.  &c.  being  jujlified 
freely  by  his  grace,  ihiough  ike  redemption  that  is 
in  Jefus  Chrijl,  whom  God  hath  fet  forth  to  be  a 
pi  opitiation,  through  faith  in  his  blood,  adds  as 
followeth  : Paul  commendeth  the  grace  cf  God  in 
this,  that  he  hath  given  the  price  of  our  redemption 
in  the  deathc  of  Chriji : and  then  n illeth  us  to  be- 
take ourjelues  unto  his  blood,  that  fo  obtaining 
righteoufiefs,  we  may  fland  fecure  before  the  judge- 
ment of  God.  And  elfewhere.  \ In  this  placOy 
slenders  that  have  but  their  zoits  about  them,  though 
I fiould fay  nothing,  cannot  but  achnorvledge  that 
nothing  elfe  is  meant,  quam  nos  mortis  Chrijfi pia- 
culo  fuffultos  apud  Dei  tribunal  flare,  i.  e.  than 
that  wcjland  at  God's  judgment  feat,  bourne  up  with 
the  atonement  of  Chrifi’s  death.  If  God  zoill judge- 
thee  (faid  Anfelm  ]]  long  before  him)  fay.  Lord, 
I inter pofe  the  death  of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chi  if,  be- 
tween me  and  thee  and  thy  judgment.  So  that  a 
a man,  needs  not  take  thought  for  any  other 
righteoufnefs  in  the  predence  of  God,  than  the 
foro-ivenefs  of  his  fins,  through  the  death  of 

Chdd. 

Seft.  IL  The  fecond  is^  lie  that  isjuf  fedhy 

ihf 

V ■Injift.I.  2.f.  17.  Seft.  g. 

J I-  c.  II.  Seft.  9. 

* ]f  Si  Dcus  zotuerit  1e  judicare,  die,  Damint,  novU’n  Domini  mflri 
lejii  Clirifti  olj icio  inter  me  cl  te,  <t  j udicium  tuami  Jitcr  Ucum  nor.  (oc.- 
■ endii.  Aafaltn.- 


r 

L 


89  ] 

t\e  righleoujkejs  of  another^  muj}  needs  ht 
jitjlified  by  the  right eoufnfs  oj  Chrijl  imput- 
ed ; becaufe  there  is  no  righteoufnefs  to  be 
found  in  any  other  ft  for  the  juff  cation  of 
any  man,  hut  the  nghteoufiefs  of  Chrijl. 

But  every  man  that  is  juflified,  isjujlified  by  the 

V,  righteoufnefs  of  another,  I anAver, 

Firft,  A man  may  be  juftlficd  by  the  riglite- 
©ufnefs  of  another,  and  yet  no  neceflity  of  the 
7‘ig.hteoafnefs  of  Chrift,  that  is,  of  his  aftive  obe- 
dience (for  of  this  only  the  queftion  is)  to  be  im- 
puted to  him.  For  the  paffive  obedience  of  Chrift, 
is  the  righteoufnefs  of  another,  and  men  may  be 
and  are  fully  and  throughly  juflified  by  the  merit 
hereof  communicated  to  them  in  the  free  par- 
don of  their  fins,  without  any  farther  righteouf- 
iiefs  derived  upon  them,  either  from  him  or 
from  any  efther. 

Secondly,  I anfwer,  a man  may  \r&  juflified 
by  the  righteoufnefs  of  another,  in  a double  fenfe, 
either,  1.  by  way  of  merit,  or  2.  by  way  of  form. 
In  the  firR  fenfe  the  propofition  is  admitted  : 
whofo  ever  is  juflified,  isjuRifiedby  the  righte- 
oufnefs of  another,  that  is,  is  juflified  by  the 
merit  of  the  righteoufnefs  of  another,  and  not 
by  the  merit  of  his  own.  But  this  fenfe  maketh 
nothing  to  the  point  in  hand.  In  the  latterfenfe,  it 
is  altogether  untrue  ; for  that  righteoufnefs,  where- 
with a man  is  formally  juRified  or  made  righteous, 
is  always  a man’s  own,  I mean  by  donation  and 

poffeRion, 


[ 90  J 

po/Teffion,  ancl  not  anotiier’s,  except  in  refpecl 
of  procurement,  anci  fo  it  is  Ciui/l’s  ; or 
of  collation,  and  fo  it  is  God’s.  RemUTion 
of  fins,  whcrebv'  a believer  is  formallv  juflificd, 
IS  a man’s  own  righteoufnefs  in  fuch  a fenfe,  as 
lus  repentance  or  faith  is  his  own,  being  all  given 
to  him  by  God  or  Chrill,  Him  hath  God  exalt- 
6d  xvilhlm  tight  hand,  lobe  a Pnnce  and  a Sa\ 
.vioiir,  to  givejtptnlance  unto  Ifiael,  and  r.emijb 
(lon  of  jins.  A6ls  v.  31.  Kow  that  which  is 
_given  unto  a man  by  God,  mav  properlv  be  cal- 
led his  own.  There  is  no  merit  indeed  in  re- 
miflion  of  fins,  but  there  is  propriety  in  it  to 
him  that  receiveth  it. 

Seff.  JII.  A tliird  argument  for  the  imputa- 
tion gain-faid,  is  this. 

. Ifbtkevers  have  a true  and  real  communion  with 
Chnjl,  then  fj  his  righteouftefs  theirs  by  tin- 
putaticn.  • 

But  b<  Levers  have  a true  and  real  communicn 
with  Chnjl.  I anfwer. 

* The  firft  propofitlon  wants  both  reafon,  and 
truth.  Fii  It,  it  wants  truth,  becaufc  a true  and 
real  communion  with  Chrifl.  may  {land,  without 
lus  active  obedience  being  made  theirs  by  impu- 
tation. There  is  a real  communion  between  the 
head  and  the  feet  in  the  natural  body,  yet  is  not 
the  brain,  or  the  proper  funftions  of  the  head, 
made  the  functions  of  the  feet  by  imputation. 
So  there  is  a real  communiem  between  the  buf- 

band 


[ 9^  ] 

land  ’ arid  the  u ife,  yet  is  not  the  hollrrefs, 
ftrenoth,  or  wifdom  o/  the  hufband,.  made  the 
hollneis,  ftrengtb,  or  viriftiom  of  the  wife,  by 
imputation. 

Again,  as  it  tt'ants  truth,  fo  it  wants  reafon 
■alfo.  It  hath  neither  colour  nor  appearanee  of 
truth,  that  the  comnnmion  which  believers  have 
with  ChrifI,  fliould  imply,  the  appropriation  of 
his  aftive  obedience  to  them  by  way  of  imputa- 
tion : at  leafl  of  tliat  imputatuni  for  wluch  our 
adverfarles  fo  eagerly  contetid.  For  what  pof- 
-flble  reafon  cair  be  found  from  the  communion 
between-  ChriH  and  the  believer,  why  rather  the 
righleoii/nefs  or  aflive  obetllence,  than  the  wif- 
dom, or  power,  or  glory  of  Clirift,  (hould  be 
made  die  believer\s,  by  imputation  ? 

Seef.  IV.  A fourth  foundation  upon  which 
this  imputation  is  built  by  fo.me,  is  this.: 

IJ  there  be  no  other  end,  or  necejjity,  why  Chriji 
JJiould  fulfil  the  law,  only  that  his  obedience 
might  be  imputed  to  us  for  righteoufnefs  in 
eur  jufUfcation,  then  is  not  the  imputation 
thereoj  to  he  denied. 

But  no  other  end,  or  necejfityean  he  given,  zvhy^ 
Chrifl fioutd fulfil  the  law,  only  that  his  obe- 
dience to  it  might  be  imputed  for  righteoufnefs 
to  us  in  our  jujiification. 

The  latter  propofition  is  an  entire  mifiake  : 
diverfe  othef  ends  may  be  afligned  of  Chrifl ’s 
obedience  to  the  law. 


Firfl, 


[90 

Firfl,  this  righicoufnefs  or  aftive  ohcclienci. 
to  the  law,  was  ferviceable  to  that  fame  great 
end  whereto  ours  Is  fubfervienr,  viz.  the  glorr 
of  God  and  the  advancement  of  his  kingdom. 
Bang  jilkd  wilh  the.  fruits  c,f  righUoufntfs  (faith 
Paul]  which  are  hy  Jefus  Chrijl,  unto  the  glory  and 
praije  of  God.  Phil.  i.  1 1.  If  other  men’s  righte- 
oulnels  by  means  of  Jefus  Chrifl:,  is  made  fit 
matter  for  the  praife  and  glory  of  God  ; much 
more  mufi  his  own  perfonal  righteoufnefs  make 
for  the  e.xaltation  of  God,  far  above  the  mca- 
fure  of  other  men.  So  that  we  fee  here  is  ano- 
ther end  of  the  aftive  obedience  of  Chrifl,  he- 
fides  imputation. 

^ A fecond  end  of  this  righteoufnefs  of  Chrifl, 
is  the  exemplarinefs  of  it;  it  is  the  pattern  in  the 
mount  for  all  Adam’s  poflerity  to  work  by.  It 
is  true,  the  law  itfelf  is  as  perfcfl  a rule  or  pat- 
tern of  righteoufnefs  as  the  obedience  of  Chrifl 
himfelf  to  it  is  ; but  it  k not  fo  plain  and  diftin£l 
a rule  in  fome  cafes.  And  therefore  the  Holy 
Ghofl  fometimes  mentioning  the  rule  of  the  law, 
makeih  ufe  of  the  obedience  of  Chrifl,  as  it 
jvere,  to  illullrate  and  interpret  it.  And  walk  in 
love,  even  as  Chrijl  hath  loved  us,  and  hath  given 
himfdf for  vs.  Ephef.  v.  2. 

Thirdly,  the  obedience  of  Chrifl  to  the  moral 
law,  is  of  excellent  importance  and  hath  a fpirit 
of  provocation  in  it,  to  draw  all  the  world  after  it 
in'  imitation  ; it  is  an  holy  and  bleffed  tempta- 
tion to  the  world  to  work  righteoufnefs,  the  force 
i'  = whereof, 


[ 93  ] 

whereof,  no  man  can  withfland,  but' with  an  high 
hand  of  defperate  wickednefs.  This  end  like- 
wi-fe  is  infmnated  in  fcripture.  Take  my  yoke 
upon  you  and  learn  of  me,  (faith  oiir  Saviour  hiin- 
fdf,  A'lat.  xi.  29.)  for  lam  meek  and  lomly  in  heart 
&c.  implying,  tiiat  there  was  in  his  meeknefs, 
not  only  a pattern  to  lollow,  but  a provocation 
alfo  to'make  them  willing  and  defirous  to  fol- 
low. 

Fourthl)',  the  right  eon  fnefs  of  Chriil,  was  a 
means  of  continuing  his  perfon  in  tlie  love  of  his 
father,  which'  was  of  abfolute  necefTity  for  the 
carrying  through  that  great  -work  of  redemotion 
which  he  had  undertaken.  For  if  the  mediator, 
himfelf,  uponwliofe  favour  ^vith.God,  the  favour 
and  falvation  of  the  whole  world  depended,  had 
but  once  mifearried  and  difpleafed  him,  who 
fhduld  have  mediated  for  him,  or  made  an  atone- 
rhent  for  him  ? This  cud  of  his  obedience  to  liis. 
father,  himfelf  plainly  expre'feth  John  xv.  10. 
If- ye  keep  my  com)ndndjnnit.s,  you  fiatl  abide  in  my 
loue  : eve n as  1 have  kept. my  fathers  command- 
visnls,  and  abide  in  his  dove.  See  alfo  John  viii.' 

29-  - 

Fifthly,  the  righleoufnefi  01  was  of^ab- 

folute  neceffiyto  qualify  the  facrifice.forthe  altar* 
I mean  to  render  him  meet  to  make  atonement 
for  the  world,  and  to  purge  and  take  aivay  the 
fin  of  it.'  It  is  true,  the  infinitenefs  of  the  value  of 
his  death  fprang'  from  the  God-head,  with  which 
4he  humanity  of  Chriil  had  perfonal  union  : yet 

was 


r 94  ] 


was  the  abfelate  holinefs  of  the  humanity  itfelf 
neceffarv  tliereto,  and  that  in  two  refpe£ls.  Firft, 
fliere  is  no  capacity  in  the  human  nature  of  per- 
fonal  union  with  the  divine,  except  it  be  ahfo- 
Jutely  free  from  all  fin.  Secondly,  fuppofe  (for 
armiment  fake)  that  the  divine  nature  nil<jht  be 
perfonally  united  to  an  humanitv  tainted  with 
fm,  yet  could  it  not  give  an  expiatory  value  there- 
to for  others,  in  cale  it  were  offered,  or  made  a 
lacrifice  by  it  ; becaufe  fuch  an  ofterlng  were  of 
abfolute  neceCity  lor  the  expiation  of  its  own  fm 
at  leaft,  it  would  be  due,  and  the  juflice  of  God 
might  lawfully  require  it.  For  no  relation  what- 
fover  of  an^■  creature  to  the  divine  nature,  be  it 
ever  fo  intimate,  is  able  to  dtifol\e  any  right 
which  is  ellential  to  God,  as  the  right  of  recjuir- 
ingafull  fatisfattion  for  fin  is.  Ko'v  whatever 
God  either  doth,  or  in  juffice,  may  require,  of 
anv  man,  to  make  fatisfaction  for  liLs  own  fin,  tlie 
payment  thereof  cannot  make  fatisfattioii  for  the 
fins  of  othets,  as  it  is  impoffible  in  a courfe  of 
law,  tliat  a nian  by  paying  his  own  debt,  Ihouhf 
thereby  difeharge  anotlicr  man's.  The  fiigb  priefl 
under  the  law,  did  not  make  atonement  for  hlm- 
felf,  and  for  the  people,  with  one  and  the  fame 
facrilice  ; but  he  offered  fact if.ee  fffl  for  hi<>  ou'n 
fin^,  and  then  (needing  no  farther  atonement 
himfeltj  for  the  people,  Heh.  vil.  27.  It  is-then  evi- 
dent that  tho’  the  facisfacForincfs  of  the  death  of 
‘Chrift  rifes  from  the  divine  nature,  yet  could  no 
fuch  fatisfafforinefs  have  taken  place  in  rclpeft 

of 


r 95  3 

t>f  Olliers,  liad  not  Chriil  -as  man,  been  free  from 
all  fin,  that  fo  be  might  fiand  in  no  need  himfelf 
of  that  facrifice  which  he  offered  of  himfelf.  Dy- 
ins  rio'hteous  and  beintj  God,  his  death  holds  out 
weight  and  fatislaftion  for  the  whole  world  : 
whereas  had  he  died  a finner  in  tlie  leaf!  degree, 
though  his  death  by  reafon  of  the  God-head  per- 
fonally  united  to  the  manhood,  had  been  of  infi- 
nite value,  flor  otherwife  it  could  riot  have  been 
ex])iatoiy  for  him  fell,)  yet  had  this  fatisfaft  ion- 
extended  only  fo  himlelf,  and  not  fo  much  as  to 
one  other.  In  fo  much  that  in  this  cafe  had  he 
meant  to  liave  propitiated  for  the  world,  after  he 
had  once  died  for  himfelf,  he  muff  have  returned 
again  into  the  flefh,  and  have  fuffeied  death  the 
fecond  time.  Upon  this  confideration  douhtlefs 
it  is,  that  the  Holy  Ghojt,  fiill  inferteth  the  men- 
tion of  his  perfeft  righ'teoufne/s,\vh(.tn  he  fpeaketh 
of  his  death  or  fuffering  for  us,  by  kis  /inowltc/ge 
JJiaUmy  righteous  fervqnt  juJU/y  many  : for  he  Uiall 
bear  ikdr  iniquities,  that  is,  the  punifhment  due 
to  their  iniquites,  Ifa.  liii.  ii.  manifelllv  implv- 
ing,  that  there  is  a great  weight  in  the  righleouf 
«yj- of  Chrifl’s  perfon  to  fecLire  the  confciences 
of  men  concerning  jufification  by  his  death. 
Thus  then  we  have  difeovered  anotlier  great  end 
of  the  righleou fiefs  or  adive  obedience  oiC\\n[\, 
viz.  The  qualifying  him,  (at  le.ill  in  part}  for  that 
meritorioufnels  of  his  deaih  which  may  Hand  the 
world  in  flead  for  their  juflification.  Ido  that 
there  is  no  need  of  having  recourfe  to  the  pr-etend- 

cd 


[ 96  ] 

ed  imputation,  for  falving  the  neceffity  or  ufeful- 
nefs  of  it. 

* Sixthly,  as  Chrifl  ^vas  a facrifice,  fo  xvas  lie, 
and  yet  is,  and  is  to  be  for  ever  (Heb.  vii.  17. 
&c.j  an  high-prieft:  and  that- righteoufnefs  of 
his,  qualifieth  him,  that  is,  contribiueth  to  qua- 
lify for  a pricil,  as  well  as  for  a facrifice.  If  lie 
had  not  been  perfe611y  rigJueous,  and  confc- 
quently  fulfilled  the  moral  law,  as  well  as  any 
other  law,  vdiich  concerned  him,  he  had  been 
incapable  of  that  piieft-hood,  which  now  he 
executes.  1 his  is  evident  from  that  feripiure, 
Heb.  vii.  26,  27.  lor  Jack  an  high-pneji  became 
us,  who  IS  holy,  liarmUfs,  vndejiied,  ftparated 
from  finntrs  meaning  that  no  priell  wiihout 
rhefe  qualifications,  had  been  fit  to  intercede  with 
God  for  us,  as  Chrill  now  doth. 

Seft.  V.  A fifth  ai'gument  imployed  in  th# 
fame  fervice  is  this. 

' Jj  we  are  debtors  to  the  law,  not  only  in  mailer 
of punjjhment,  but  in  pefecUon  oj  obedience 

4 atfo,  then  did  Chrifl  not  only  fujfer  death  for 
us,  that  we  might  be  deliveitd  from  punijh- 
?nent,  but  alfo  J id  filled  the  law  for  us,  that 
fo  lot  may  be  reputed  to  have  Julfilled  the  law 
in  him,  otherwife  the  law  would  yet  remain  to^ 
be  fulfilled  by  us. 

Silt  we  are  debtors  to  the  law,  net  only  in  mat- 
ter of  punijhmeut,  but  in  perjethon  of  obcdi- 
ence  alfo. 


I anfts'er. 


C 97  ] 

I anfwer,  When  you  affirm,  we  are  debtors 
to  the  law  in  perfeftion  of  obedience,  as  well  as 
in  matter  of  puniffiment ; as  this  debt  of  obedi- 
ence may  be  varioufly  underftood,  the  propofi- 
tion  may  either  be  true  or  falfe.  If  this  be  the 
meaning,  that  we  are  debtors  to  the  law  in  per- 
feftion  of  obedience,  for  our  juftification,  it  is 
utterly  falfe.  For  we  need  no  obedience  to  it, 
for  our  juftification,  but  are  jiy'lifred  by 

Chrift’s  blood,  Rom.  v.  9.  Neither  are  believ- 
ers debtois  to  it  fo  much  as  in  matter  of  punifli- 
ment,  Chrift  having  eafed  them  of  this  burthen, 
by  taking  it  on  himfelf.  It  is  true,  thofe  that 
believe  not,  may  be  faid  to  be  debtors  to  the  law, 
as  well  in  matter  of  perfect  obedience,  as  of  pu- 
niftnnent : fo  that  if  they  mean  to  be  juftifted, 
and  to  efcape  the  puniffiment,  under  whicli  they 
lie,  otherwife  than  by  Chrift,  they  muft  keep 
the  whole  law,  becaufe  no  third  way  of  jujlific'a- 
lion,  was  ever  heard  of,  but  either  by  faith  in 
Chrift,  or  by  a perfonal  obfervation  of  tlie  whole 
taw.  But, 

Secondly,  If  the  propofttion  meaneth,  that 
believers  are  debtors  of  perfedi  obedience  to  the 
law,  in  a way  of  thankfulnefs  to  God,  this  is 
true  : but  in  this  fenfe  it  concerneth  not  the 
queftion  in  hand. 

Thirdly,  We  are  not  exempted  from  keep- 
ing the  law,  no  not  in  refpeef  of  juftification,  be- 
caufe we  have  tranfgreffed  it:  but  1.  having  once 
tranlgreffed,  wm  are  incapable  of  fuch  keeping  it, 

VoL.  XXIII.  E whether 


[ 98  ] 

"wliether  perfonally  or  by  imputation,  as  will  ex- 
empt us  from  punifhment : 2.  that  reieafe  whidi 
we  have  from  an  obfervation  of  the  law  for  juf- 
tification,  accrueth  to  us  by  means  of  our  depend- 
ance  upon  Chrift,  Pvom.  vii.  4.  For, 

Fourthly,  God  never  required  of  any  man, 
but  Chrift,  both  exattnefs  of  obedience  to  tire 
la\y,  and  fubjefiion  to  punifhment  due  to  tl>e 
tranfgreffion  of  the  law.  He  that  fhall  perfefily 
keep  the  la\v,  is  no  where  bound  to  fuffer  the 
penalty  due  to  the  tranfgreffion  of  it  ; nay, 
the  exprefs  tenor  of  the  law,  promifeth  exemp- 
tion from  punifnment  unto  fuch  ; Do  lias,  and 
thou  Jlialt  live.  The  law  doth  not  make  any  m.an 
a debtor  to  punifhment.  fimply  and  abfolutely, 
but  conditionally  only,  upon  fuppofition  of  fin. 

Laffly,  In  cafe  a man  hath  tranfgrefled  the 
law,  and  fiiffered  (whether  by  himfelf  or  fome 
other  for  him)  the  full  punifhment  of  it,  he  is  no 
farther  a debtor  to  it,  either  in  point  ol  obedi- 
ence, or  ol  puniflnncnt,  nor  hath  any  thing  to 
do  with  the  law  more  or  lefs,  for  his  juftifica- 
tion  ; becaufe  the  puniflnnent  which  hath  been 
lo  luffered,  is  of  equal  confideration  to  the  law, 
with  the  moll  abfolute  conformity  to  its  precepts. 
So  that  as  no  man  is  or  ever  vras,  bound  to  ful- 
fill the  law  twice  over,  for  his  jullification  ; fo 
neither  is  it  equal,  tliat  he,  that  hath  fuffered  in 
full  the  penalty  of  the  la.w,  wliich  is  as  fatis- 
faftory  to  it,  as  the  exatlefl  obedience,  fliould 
be  fill!  bound  to  the  obfet  ration  of  the  law  (whe- 
ther 


[ 99  ] 

ther  by  himfelf,  or  any  other)  for  his  juftifica^ 
tion ; this  being  all  one,  as  the  requiring  a fe- 
cond  obedience  to  the  law,  after  a man  hath  per- 
feftly  fulfilled  it  once. 

Se£i.  VI.  Sixthly,  for  the  imputation  of 
Chrift’s  aftive  obedience,  fome  have  argued 
thus. 

IJ iherthe  no jujlification  without  aperftB  right- 
eoujiicfs,  and  no  fiich  r'ighteouj  fs  to  be 
found,  but  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chriji,  then 
this  righteoufnefs  mufl  be  imputed  to  us,  hi 
jujlification. 

But  neither  can  there  be  any  jiffication  without 
a ptrfeEl  righteoufnefs,  nor  any  fuck  righte- 
oufnefs found,  but  the  righteoifiefs  of  ChriJL 
Ergo^ 

I anfwer,  Firfl,  that  thou,gIi  jufification  cannot 
take  place  without  a perfefil  righteoujnefs,  yet 
fuch  a righteoufnefs,  as  fome  intend,  a nghteoif- 
nefs  confining  determinately  ol  fuch  a number  of 
righteous  afts  asChrill  performed  unto  the  moral 
law,  is  not  of  abfolute  neceflity  thereto  : for  if 
the  Jews  under  the  law  were  juftified  by  the  im- 
putation of  Chrlft’s  righteoufnefs,  this  righteouf 
nefs  of  his  is  not  to  be  meafiared  by  the  righteous 
a61s  performed  by  him  only  to  the  moral  law, 
but  to  the  ceremonial  alfo,  as  hath^  been  prov- 
ed more  than  once. 

Secondly,  that  perfeft  righteoufnefs  wherein' 
E 2 ^ jujlif cation 


[ 100  ] 

jujlification  confifts,  and  wherewith  men  are  mad? 
righteous  when  they  are  jnllified,  is  nothing  elfe 
but  remifhon  of  fins,  as  hath  been  abundantly 
proved.  This  is  that  rlghteoufnefs,  which  the 
fcripture  calls  a righteoufmfs  without  works.  Rom. 
iv.  ver.  6 and  7.  compared  together.  And  which 
Augufline.t  Haymo,i:  Bernard,^  with  others  of 
former  times,  as  likewife  Luther, j|  Calvin, 5 Muf- 
culus.T  P^3reus,:i;  Chamier,§  with  others  of  later 
times  without  number,  yea  and  the  homilies  of 
our  own  church,]]  have  {fill  with  confidence  and 

without 

+ Ij)fa  norjlajujlitia.  (juamvis  Vira fit,  propter  vin  toni fnem  ad  quam 
rcfertur,  tamen  tanta  ejl  in  hac  z ita,  nt  pctivs  peccatorum  rtmijjione  con- 
Jlet,  quam piiJcTione  vsrtutum.  Aug.  dcCivit.  I.  ig.  c.  27. 

Quia  credidit  Deo,  reputatum  ejl  ei  adjuJUtiam,  id  eji,  adtemijfic- 
nem  peccatorum . Haym.  a</Rom.  4.  3. 

Dei  jujlitia  rjl,  non  peccare:  Iwminis  aiitem  juJliSia,  Dei  indulgeit. 
tia.  Bcrnaidus,  Serm.  23.  in  Cantic.  Ckrijlusfacius  ejl  neAis juj- 
titia,  in  ahfolutione peccatorum.  Hid.  Serm.22. 

II  lujlitia  nejlra  proprie  ejl  remijfio  peccatorum.  feu  [ut  loquitur  Pfa!. 
mis)  peccata  non  imputurCi  &c.  Luthur  in  Summa.  Pf.  32. 

II  Sequitur  ergo  eo  nos  ejfe  jujlos,  quia  nobis  peccata  non  imputatantur, 
Calvin  A T'tra  Ecclef.  Reform,  ratione.  p.  368. 

+ Incurdum  efl  quod  jujlitia  et  beatitudo  nqjlra  ejl  remijfo  peccotc:  um, 
perRiemin  Chrifum.  Mufeu.  in  Pfal.  32.  p.  298. 

j Sic  Dcus  Ahrahcc  ct  omnibus  nobis  peccatoribus,  fdeni  imputat  j’r: 
jvftitia,  quandocredentes  in  filiumjuflifeat,  hoc  eft,  abfokit,  tac.  Parens 
ad  Rom.  4.  3.  p.  363.  Fide  acceft  juftitiam.fcn  rernffianem  peccatorum 
a Deo  gratis  donatem,  &c.  Ibid. 

^ Remijfio  peccatorum,  eft  juftitia  imputata-  Cham.  Panftrat.  t.  3. 
1.  21.  c.  19.  fc6l.  10.  Idem  juftitia:  proram  et  puppim  cerftituimus  in 
remijfwne peccatorum.  Ibid.  'eft.  9. 

II  Bccaiife  all  men  are  finncrs  and  o.'Tcnders  againft  Cod,  &c. 
every  man  of  nccetTvy  is  cor.ftj  ained  to  fee!,  for  another  righlconf- 
nefs  or  juftification,  to  be  received  at  God’s  ovn  hands,  that  is 
to  fay,  the  forgivenefs  of  his  hns  and  trcfpafTcs  in  fuch  things  at 


[ ] 

without  fcruple,  called  by  the  name  of  a righte- 
oufnefs.  And  becaufe  fome  have  a great  mindr 
to  make  Calvin  theirs,  in  the  imputation  of 
Chrift’s  aftive  obedience  ; I lhall  by  a paffage  or 
two  from  him  on  the  point  fully  dear  his  inten- 
tion. In  zvhich  words  (faith  Calvin,  meaning 
thofeofthe  apoftle,  Rom.  iv.  6.  in  his  commen- 
taries upon  the  place)  we  are  taught^  juflitiara 
Paulo  nihil  elTe  quam  remlffionera  peccatortim, 
i e.  that  righleoufnefs  with  Paul,  is  nothing  elfe 
hut  remijfion  of  fins.  And  not  long  after  upon  the 
9th  verfe  of  the  fame  chapter  ; fi  juflitia  Ahrahce 
ef}.  peccatorum  remijjio  [quod fecurt  ipfe  pro  confef- 
fo  affumit,  &c.)  i.  e.  If  Abraham’ s righteoufnefs  be 
the  forgiventfs  of  his  fins  f which  he,  meaning  Paul, 
takes for  granted.)  By  thefe  palfagesit  is  evident, 
that  whatfoever  his  own  judgment  was  in  the 
point  under  queftion,  viz.  whether  remiflion  of 
fms  ftmply  and  alone,  without  any  other  addi- 
tion, were  the  righteoufnefs  of  a believer  in  juf- 
tification,  he  attributes  the  affirmative  to  Paul, 
and  makes  his  judgment  to  ftand,  for  remiffion 
of  fins  fimply,  excluding  not  the  infufion  of  grace 
only,  but  all  other  things  whatfoever.  But  for 
Calvin  to  afcribe  one  opinion  to  Paul  in  the  point 
of  juftification,  and  to  be  himfelf  of  another,  is 
neither  better  nor  worfe,  than  to  profefs  himfelf 
E 3 wifer 

he  hath  offended.  Hom'd,  of  Salvation,  Part  i.  p.  13.  luftitia 
Chrijti,  eft  abfoktio  a feccalis  per  Cliriftum  ex  fdc,  Pet.  Mai  t.  ai 
Rom.  10.  8.  Credimus  totam  noftram  jujl'iliam  pojitam  ejfe  in  peccatorum 
nojtforum  Remijfme,  &c.  Hscm.Confef,  Gallic,  ■oxt.  13. 


[ 102  ] 

vifer  than  he,  yea  than  the  Holy  Ghoft  himfelf 
fpeaking  by  him. 

Seft.  VII.  A feventh  argument  Is  this: 

If  do  tlris,  and  live,  he.  an  everlcfing  rule  of 
God,  which Jhall  never  be  dijjolved,  then  ninjl 
the  aBive  obedience  of  Chrfbe  imputed  to  men 
in  jufdfication,  that  fo  they  may  be  faid  to 
have  done  this,  to  have  fulfilled  the  law,  and 
fo  live. 

But  do  this,  and  live,  is  an  everlajling  rule  of 
God,  which  fall  never  be  dijfolved.  Ergo. 

In  this  fenfe  I grant,  that  Do  this,  and  live,  is 
an  everlalling  rule : it  is,  and  hath  been,  and 
fhall  be  everlaflingly  true,  that  tvhofoever  fhall 
do  this,  that  is,  fulfil  the  law  perfectly,  fli all  live 
and  enjoy  the  favour  of  God.  But  this  fenfe 
makes  nothing  to  the  purpofe,  neither  is  there  fo 
much  as  the  face  of  a confequence  in  the  firft 
propofition  : whofoever  continueth  in  all  things 
that  are  written  in  the  law  to  do  them,  fhall  livt 
and  be  faved,  -whether  Clirift’s  righteoufnefs  be 
imputed  or  not.  But  if  the  meaning  of  the  claufe, 
is  an  everlajling  rule,  be  this,  it  is  the  only  per- 
petual law,  according  to  which  men  muft  be 
Juflified  and  faved,  fo  that  no  man  can  be  jufti- 
fied,  but  he  that  may  be  truly  faid  to  have  done 
this,  that  is,  performed  univerfal  obedience  to 
every  jot  and  tittle  of  the  law  ; in  this  fenfe  it 
neither  is,  nor  ever  was,  nor  ever  fliall  be  a rule 

of 


[ 103  ] 

ef  God,  nor  a rule  of  truth.  For  God  hath  al- 
ways had,  and  for  ever  will  have,  another  rule 
for  the  j unification  of  men,  even  that  rule  which 
is  ftill  in  fcripture  oppofed  to  this.  Believe  this 
and  live. 

Se6f.  VIII.  Another  foundation  to  build  this 
imputation  upon,  is  laid  after  this  manner. 

That  righteoufiiejs  which  God  acctpteth  on  our 
behalf,  is  the  righteoujnefs  imputed  to  us  in 
jujlif cation. 

But  the  righleoufiefs  of  Chrijl,  is  that  rigJile- 
oufnefs  which  God  accepteth  on  our  behalf. 

I anfwer  firft,  by  denving  the  former  propofi,- 
tion,  becaufe  God  may  and  doth  accept  that  for 
us,  which  vet  he  need  not  impute  to  us»  God 
accepted  Abraham’s  prayer  for  Ifmael,  and  yet 
did  not  impute  this  pray&r  to  Ifmael,  as  if  he  had 
prayed  it.  In  like  manner  he  accepted  the  pray- 
er ofElilha  for  the  Shunamite’s  fon,  and  yet  did 
not  look  upon  the  child  as  if  he  had  made  it  for 
liimfclf.  In  thefe  and  many  other  cafes,  the 
perfons  prayed  for  by  others,  received  benefit  by 
thofe  prayers  : but  there  is  no  reafon  to  conceive 
that  God  Looked  upon  fuch  prayers,  as  if  they 
had  been  made  by  the  perfons  themfelves  : it 
is  like  they  prevailed  more  on  their  behalf,  be- 
caufe they  were  made  by  others  for  them,  (efpe- 
cially  by  perfons  of  fuch  grace)  than  if  they  had 
been  made  by  themfelves.  In  like  manner,  thofe 
E 4 on 


[ 104  ] 

on  whofe  behalf  Chrift’s  fufferings  were  accepted, 
receive  an  imfpeakable  bleffing  by  them ; but 
this  proves  not,  that  therefore  God  mull  look 
upon  thefe  fufferings  of  Chrill,  as  if  they  had  per- 
fonally  endured  them  : nay  fuch  a fuppo- 

fition  rather  tends  to  deftroy  their  acceptation, 
than  to  furtherit.  The  fufferings  of  Chrill  have 
the  height  of  their  acceptation  with  God  on  the 
behalt  of  thofe  that  believe,  becaufe  they  are  look- 
ed upon  by  him  as  the  fufferings  of  himfelf,  I 
mean  of  Chrill,  and  no  other. 

Secondly,  to  the  other  propofuion,  I anfwer : 
if  by  the  righlfoufaefs  of  Chrill,  you  mean,  pre- 
cifely  that  obedience  which  he  exhibited  to  that 
common  law,  whereto  all  men  arc  obliged,  confi- 
dered  apart  from  his  obedience  to  that  peculiar 
law  of  mediator,  given  to  himfelf  alone,  it  is  alto- 
gether falfe.  For  God  did  not  accept  this  righte- 
0 u fiefs  Chri^  on  our  behalf,  fo  as  to  julHfy  us 

cither  wdth  it,  or  for  it.  If  by  this  righteoufnefs 
be  meant,  that  obedience  of  Chrill  fo  commonly 
known  by  the  name  of  paffive,  or  both  aflive  and 
paffive  together,  this  propofuion  may  be  granted. 
But  then  the  other  will  be  found  tardy,  the  fame 
words  being  taken  in  one  fenfe  in  the  major,  and 
in  another  fenfe  in  the  minor  propofuion. 

Se£l.  IX.  Some  reafon  after  this  manner. 

If  Chrifl  was  a public  perfon,  /landing  in  the 
place  of  all  tkatjkculd  believe,  then  all  that  he 

did. 


[ 105  ] 

did,  and  Jujfcred,  is  reputed  as  done  and 
fiiffered  by  them. 

ButChiijl  was  a public  per fon,  Jlanding  in  tile 
place  of  all  that fiould  believe. 

* I anfwer,  the  former  propolition  is  untrue  : 
becaufe  the  publicknefs  of  Chrift’s  perfon,  is 
no  fufhcient  ground  to  build  this  inference  upon  : 
Therefore  all  that  he  did,  and  fuffered,  is  looked 
upon  by  God,  as  done  or  fuffered  by  us.  This  is- 
evident  : his  conception,  incarnation,  birth, 
circumcifien,  fubjeftion  to  Jofeph,  hisfuppofed 
father,  his  whipping  the  buyers  and  fellers  out 
of  the  temple,  his  redemption  of  the  world,  and 
other  particulars  without  number,  were  all,  either 
things  done  or  fuffered  by  him  : )'et  are  they 
not  looked  upon  by  God  as  done  or  fuffered 
by  all  that  believe  in  him.  For  to  what  purpofe 
(for  example)  flrould  1 being  a believing  Gentile,, 
and  fo  not  only  free  from  the  yoke  of  Jewlfh  cere- 
monies, but  under  command  not  to  ufe  them,  be 
looked  upon  by  God  as  one  circumcifed  ? So 
what  can  it  in  reafon  advantage  me;  to  be  looked 
upon  by  God,  as  one  who  in  Chrift,  was  in  Tub-- 
jeftion  unto  Jofeph  ? Efpeclally  how  fhall  I not 
fear  and  tremble,  to  fancy  that  God  looks  upon 
me,  as  having  ■ redeemed  the  world  ? Adam  waa 
as  public  aperfon,  yea  and  more  publie  inalenfe 
than  Chriff  ■ himfelf ; nay,  and  is-  conceived  by 
moft  to  have  flood  as  much  in  the  place  of  hi^s- 
poflerity,  as- Chrift  did  in  the  flead  of  his,  of 
5 thofe 


[ 3 

thofe  that  defcend  fpiritually  from  him  by  faith  ; 
and  yet  how  ridiculous  is  it  to  fuppofe  that  all  that 
Adam  did,  is  imputed  to  all  his  pofteritv,  as  if 
they  had  done  it  ? Of  what  advantage  can  it  be 
to  me,  that  God  fhould  look  upon  me,  as  one 
gav6  names  to  all  cattle^  and  to  the  Jowls  of 
heaven,  and  to  every  beajl  of  the  field,  which  yet 
Adam  did  ? Gen.  ii.  20.  Or,  as  upon  one,  that 
firft  propagated  mankind,  and  begat  Cain,  which 
we  know  were  done  by  Adam  ? With  twenty 
things  more  of  like  nature. 

Secondly,  it  hath  been  formerly  demonflrated 
how  little  confidence  it  hath  with  truth,  to  fay, 
that  the  fulferings  of  Chrift,  are  by  God  looked 
upon  as  our  fufferlngs.  It  is  not  all  one  to  fay  we 
arepunifhed  in  Chrid,  and  Chrift  was  punifhed  for 
us,  and  in  our  dead  : this  is  warranted  by  the 
fcripture  ; but  the  other  cannot  be  affirmed,  for 
feeing  in  Chrift’s  death  we  have  rcmillion  of  our 
fins,  we  cannot  be  faid  for  the  fame  fins,  to  be 
punifhed  in  and  with  Chrift,  whereof  we  have 
remiffion  in  his  death. 

Thirdly,  the  publicknefs  of  a pcrfon,  who  ne- 
gociates  the  bufinefs  of  others,  as  Chrift  did  of 
tliofe  that  fliall  believe,  doth  no  farther  intcreft 
thofe  w’hofc  affairs  they  manage,  in  wliat  they  do 
than  with  reference  to  the  ilfue  of  what  they  do 
for  them.  If  aman  undertakes  fuch  a bufinefs  for 
me,  and  deals  difhonedly  with  others  therein, 
and  at  laft  makes  a conclufion  with  much  da- 
mage to  me,  which  might  by  a wife  carriage, 

have 


[ 6oj  ] 

have  been  prevented  ; I am  in  this  cafe  liable  to 
fufferallthe  damage,  which  the  unconfcionable- 
nefs,  or  weaknefs  of  my  agent  hath  brought 
upon  me  ; but  I am  not  to  be  looked  upon,  as 
one  that  have  ufed  the  fame  unconfcionablenefs 
with  Jiim,  or  as  if  his  weaknels  ^vere  mine.  Or 
in  cafe  he  had  dealt  wifely  or  faithfully  for  me, 
and  had  brought  my  bufinefs  to  a good  end,  I 
here  receive  benefit  by  fuch  a man’s  wifdom  and 
faithfulnefs  : but  thefe  are  not  imputed  unto  me 
as  my  own,  becaufe  he  ^vas  my  agent  that  ufed 
them.  The  client  that  prevails  againll  his  adver- 
fary  before  thejudge,  by  the  Ikill  of  his  lawyer, 
is  not  therefore  reputed  as  Ikilful  in  the  law,  as 
Ins  advocate,  nor  to  have  pleaded  his  own  caufe 
as  his  lam'er  did.  In  like  manner,  as  far  as  Adam 
had  a commiflion  from  God  to  deal  for  me,  being 
one  of  bis  pofterity,  I am  bound  to  fuffer  my 
fhare  in  that  evil  which  he  brought  upon  the 
world,  through  his  weaknefs  or  unfaithfulnefs  : 
but  this  weaknefs  or  unfaithfulnefs  of  his  is  not 
looked  upon  as  my  perfonal  weaknefs  or  unfaith- 
fulnefs : only  fo  far  as  my  perfon  was  in  his, 
they  are  imputed  to  me  as  mine  otvn.  So  on 
the  other  hand,  as  far  as  Chrifi:  had  a power 
from  God  to  deal  forme,  being  one  that  believe 
in  him,  I have  my  part  inithat  bleffed  end,  ■where- 
to by  his  hohnefs,  wifdom,  faithfulnefs  and  pa- 
tience he  brought  the  affairs  of  the  world;  but 
God  doth  never  the  more  look  upon  rne,  as  if 
E 6 that 


[ io8  ] 

that  holinefs,  wifdom,  faitlifulnefs  and  patience 
had  been  mine,  nor  is  it  any  ways  neceffar)'  that 
he  fhouidjto  make  me  capable  of  that  which  falls 
to  my  fhare,  as  a believer,  in  that  great  and 
blelfed  tranfaftion  of  Chrilf. 

Fourthly,  neither  is  it  fo  found  a truth,  as  is 
fiippofed  that  Chrift  Jlood  in  the  place  of  thofe 
that  Jhould  believe  in  him,  efpecially  in  all  things 
performed  by  him,  and  which  tended  to  the  qua- 
lification of  hisperfon  for  accomplifliing  that  great 
work  of  redemption.  Tolland  in  the  place  of 
another,  implies  a necelTity  of  his  being  in  the 
^am.e  place,  and  doing  the  fame  things  himfelf, 
wherein  he  Hands,  and  wdiich  he  dothj  who  is 
fuppofcd  to  Hand  in  his  Head.  Now  Chrift  did 
a thoufand  things,  yea  and  fuffered  many  for 
the  doing  and  fufiering  whereof,  there  lay  no 
necellity  upon  many  believers  whether  Chrift  had 
done  or  fullered  them,  or  no.  For  example, 
there  was  no  necellity,  either  in  w'ay  of  duty,  or 
of  penalty,  lying  upon  any  believer,  to  be  con- 
ceived or  born  of  a virgin,  to  turn  water  into 
wine,  to  command  the  winds  and  the  feas.  Again 
there  was  no  necelTity  upon  any  believing  Gen- 
tile to  have  been  circumcifed,  to  have  been  in 
fubjeflion  unto  Jofeph,  to  have  eaten  the  palT- 
over  at  Jerufalem,  &c.  Therefore  in  all  thefe  paf- 
fagcs  of  his  life,  with  many  others,  it  is  evident 
that  he  Hood  not  in  the  place  of  all  believers. 
All  that  the  fcripture  fpeaketh  in  this  cafe  is, 
that /te  fuffered  for  us,  xv as  made  a curfefor  us, 

which 


[ i°9  ] 

which  espreffions,  though  they  imply,  (in  the 
general)  a necefhty  of  our  fuffering,  unlefs  Chrift 
had  fuffered  for  us,  yet  do  they  not  imply,  a 
neceffity  of  our  fuffering  in  the  fame  kind,  or 
after  the  fame  manner,  in  all  particulars.  It 
doth  not  follow,  that  except  Chrift  had  been  cir- 
cumcifed,  we  muft  have  been  circumcifcd,  ex- 
cept he  had  failed  forty  days,  we  muft  have  failed 
forty,  except  he  had  been  fcourged  with  rods,  or 
crucified,  we  muft  have  been  fcourged  or  crucifi- 
ed : only  it  follows,  that  except  Chrift  had  fuffered 
either  in  thefe  or  fome  other  particulars  fatisfac- 
tory  to  divine  juftice,  we  muft  have  fuffered,  and 
that  moft  grivoufly.  Therefore  it  is  not  a truth 
that  Chrift,  even  in  his  fufferings  themfelves, 
particularly  confidered,  flood  in  our  Head.  But 
the  fcriptures  which  fay,  that  Chrift  fuffered  for 
us,  never  fay,  that  he  kept  the  moral  or  cere- 
monial law  for  us  ; though  this  expreffion  may 
be  admitted,  without  granting  that  he  did  thefe 
in  our  ftead.  And  thus  we  fee  that  this  argu- 
ment alfo  is  defeftive  on  every  fide. 

Se£l.  X.  Another  aiming  at  the  fame  conclu- 
fion  is  this ; 

If  we  cannot  be  jufifed  by  the  righteoufnefs  of 
Chrijl,  otherwife  than  by  the  imputation  of 
then  muf  it  be  imputed  in  our jifiif cation. 

Mut  we  cannot  be  jujlifed  by  the  righteoufnefs  of 
Chrift,  other  v)ife  than  by  the  imputation  of  it. 
Ergo. 


I anfwer, 


L ] 

I anfwer  to  the  latter  propofition,  if  the  righu 
coufnefs,  <he  aftive  obedience  of  Chrift  could 
have  no  influence  on  jujtijicaiion,  but  in  that  way 
of  imputation,  either  juJHJication  mull  Hand 
without  it,  or  elfe  fall.  For  certain  it  is,  that  no 
fuch  imputation  can  ftand,  as  hath  been  proved 
at  large.  But  the  wcaknefs  of  the  propofition  is 
fufficiently  evinced  from  hence,  becaufethe  rigkt- 
eoiifnefsoi  Chrift  concurs  toward  by 

qualifying  his  perfon  for  that  facrifice  of  him- 
felf,  by  which  juftijicalion  hath  been  purchafed 
for  all  that  believe. 

Seft.  XI.  Another  argument  is,  if  we  may  truly 
be  faid  to  be  dead,  and  crucified  with  Chrift,  to 
be  quickened  with  Chrift,  to  have  rifen  again 
with  Chrift,  to  fit  in  heavenly  places  in,  or  with 
Chrift,  then  mav  tve  be  truly  faid  to  have  fulfilled 
the  law  with  Chrift  alfo,  and  confequently  the 
fulfilling  of  the  law  by  Chrift.  is  imputed  to  us. 

But  we  may  truly  he  faid  to  be  dead,  arid  crucifi- 
ed, and  quickened,  and  rifen  again,  and  to  fit 
with  Chrijl  in  heavenly  places. 

I anfwer,  the  reafon  of  the  difference,  why  we 
may  l>e  faid  to  be  dead,  and  rifen  again  with 
Chrift  &c.  and  yet  cannot  be  faid  to  have  fulfilled 
the  law  with  Chrift  is  this.  \\'  hen  the  fcripture 
faith  weare  dead,  we  are  crucified,  we  are  quicken- 
ed or  rifen  again  with  Chrift,  the  meaning  is  not 
that  God  looks  upon  us,  as  if  we  had  laid 
down  our  natural  lives,  wheji  he  laid  down  his, 

and 


[ 111  ] 

and  as  if  this  laying  down  our  lives,  wera 
a fatisfaclion  to  his  jullice  for  our  fin  ; for 
then  wc  might  as  well  fie  faid  to  have  fatis- 
fied  for  ourfelves,  or  to  have  redeemed  ourfelves 
with  Chrifi,  as  to  have  died,  or  been  crucified 
with  him.  Such  expreffions  as  thefe  only  import, 
either  a profeffion  of  fuch  a death  in  us,  as  hath 
a fpiritual  kind  of  refemblarrce  with  the  death  of 
Chrifi,  which  is  ufually  called  a death  unto  fin, 
and  to  the  world,  Rom.  vi.  or  elfe,  this  death 
ilfelf  really  wrought  in  us  by  that  death  of  Chrift 
being  therefore  called,  the  fellowflrip  of  his  fuf- 
ferings,  as  well  as  conformity  to  his  death,  Phil, 
iii.  lo.  Yon  have  the  expreffion  u fed  in  the  for- 
mer fenfe  Rom.  vi.  2.  How  [hall  we,  that  anredead 
to  [n,  (that  is  who  profefs  being  dead  to  fin  with 
Chrifi)  live  yet  therein  ,-  and  fo  be  a reproach  to 
our  profeffion  ? In  the  latter  fenfe,  it  is  found. 
Gal.  ii.  so.  I am.  crv.afied  with  Chrifi,  that  is, 
the  natural  death  of  Chrift  for  me  and  many  more 
hath  wrought  upon  me  in  a way  of  affiimilation  to 
itfelf,  and  hath  made  me  a dead  man  to  the  world. 
So  when  believers  are  faid  to  be,  quickened  or  rifen 
with  Chrift,  the  meaning  is  not,  that  God  looks 
upon  them  as  quickened  from  a natural  death,  to 
a natural  or  glorified  life,  as  Chrift’s  quiekening 
and  rifing  again  was  ; which  yet  muft'  be  the 
meaning,  if  any  thing  be  made  of  it  in  this  argu- 
ment. But  it  either  fignifies  the  profeffion  that 
is  made  by  us  of  that  newnefs  of  life,  which  in 
way  of  a fpiritual  analogy,  anfwers  the  life  where- 
to 


L 112  ] 

to  Chrift  rofe  again,  Rom.  vi.  5.  or  elfe  the  new 
hfe  itfelf  wrought  in  us,  by  that  rifing  again  of 
Chrift  from  the  dead.  The  former  fenfe,  ) ou 
fhall  find,  Colof.  iii.  1.  If  ye  be  rifen  with 
Chrift  that  is,  fince  you  make  profeflion  of 
that  new  and  excellent  life,  which  anfwers  the 
life  which  Chrift  lived  after  his  refurreftion, 
give  this  evidence  of  it  to  the  world,  ftek 
the  things  that  art  above  &c.  The  latter  fenfe 
you  find,  Eph.  ii.  5,  Even  when  we  were  dead  in 
Jins,  hath  quickened  us  together  with  Chrift,  mean- 
ing that  God  by  the  quickening  and  raifing  of 
Chrift  from  the  dead,  had  begotten  them  (as 
Peter  fpeaks)  to  fuch  a life,  as  fpirltually  anfwer- 
eth  that  quickening  and  rifing  again  of  Chrift, 
But  on  the  other  hand,  as  there  is  no  fuch  ex- 
preffion  infcripture  as  this,  we  have  fulfilled  the 
law  with  Chrift  : fo  neither  if  there  were,  would 
it  make  any  thing  at  all  to  falve  the  truth  of  the* 
propofition  under  queftion,  if  the  fenfe  of  it 
were  carried  according  to  the  interpretation  of 
thofe  other  exprefiions.  For  what  if  tve  fliould 
be  faid  either  to  profefs  fuch  a fulfilling  of  the 
law,  as  holds  a fplritual  analogy  with  Chirft’s 
fulfilling  the  law,  or  really  and  perfonally  to  ful- 
fil the  law  after  fuch  a manner  : were  there  any 

thing  in  this  to  infer  an  imputation  of  ChrilFs- 
perfonal  fulfilling  the  law,  in  the  letter  thereof 
to  us  ? Doubtlefs  Chrift’s  quickening  and  rifing 
again,  are  not  in  the  letter  of  them  imputed  to  the 
faints  for  their  quickening  and  rifing  again  in  the 

lame 


[ 1^3  ] 

fanie  manner  : if  they  were,  Hymeneus  and  Phi- 
Ictus  had  been  no  heretics,  for  teaching  that 
the  refurrtQion  was  already,  2 Pini. 

ii.  28. 

Se£f.  XII.  Upon  the  whole.  If  any  man  fin,  we 
have  an  advocate  with  the  Father,  Jefus  Chrift  the 
righteous  ; And  he  is  the  propitiation  for  our  fins, 

1 John  ii.  1,2.  So  that  for  the  taking  away  all  the 
guilt,  danger  and  inconveniences  of  the  fins  of 
believers  in  every  kind,  there  needs  no  imputa- 
tion of  the  adlive  obedience  ofChrif,  the  propi- 
tiation which  he  is  unto  them  by  his  blood  and 
interceflion,  hath  done  thisfervice  for  them  to  the 
uttermoft,  before  this  imputation  .is  fuppofed  to 
comeat  them.  And  doubtlefs  it  is  no  more  to 
the  jollification  of  a finner,  than  the  midwives 
were  to  the  delivery  of  thofe  Hebrew  women, 
who  were  fafely  delivered  before  the  raidwives 
came  at  them.  What  propitiation  (faith  Auguf- 
tine  f)  is  there  with  the  Lord,  but  facrifice  ? 
And  what  faerifice  is  there,  but  that  which  was 
offered  for  us  in  the  death  of  Chrill  ? Nor  are  we 
to  think  that  the  fulnefs  of  the  merit  of  the  death 
of  Chrill,  is  fo  fpent  upon  the  purchafe  of  the  par- 
don of  our  fins,  that  it  will  not  hold  out  to  pro- 
cure our  acceptation  alfo  with  God.  Yes,  by  the 
redundancy  of  this  merit  (faith  Mr.  Reynolds  j) 
after  fatisfadlion  made  thereby  unto  his  father’s 

jullice 

+ Qiueapud  Dominumpropitiatlo  eft,  ntfi  fucrificium  ? et  qitod  eft  fxcrU 
Jicitm,  rtifi  quod  pro  nobis  ablalum  eft  inmorteChrifti?  Au''. 

if  The  life  of  Chrift,  p.  402, 


r ] 

juftice  for  our  debt,  there  is  farther  a purchafe 
made  of  grace,  and  glory,  and  all  good 
things  in  our  behalf.  Yea  adoption  itfelf, 
and  tne  acceptation  of  our  perfons,  and  ad- 
mittance into  the  high  favour  of  God,  to  be  made 
heirs  of  falvation,  fpring  all  from  one  and  the 
fame  moft  precious  and  fruitful  root  of  the  blood 
of  Chnft,  the  perfect  holinefs  of  his  perfon,  and 
righteoufnefs  of  his  life  prefuppofed.  So  that 
he  that  had  communion  in  the  fulnefs  of  his 
d^th,  fhall  not  know  what  to  do  with  the 
imputation  of  the  righteoufnefs  of  his  life  after 
it,,  were  it  made  unto  him,  or  conferred  upon 
him. 

Thus  have  we  at  lad  fullv  anfwered  all  tliofe 
arguments,  which  (to  my  knowledge)  have  yet 
been  infifted  upon,  for  the  imputation  ofChrift’s 
rtghleoufn'’fs,  in  the  fenfe  fo  often  contradicted, 
VIZ.  in  the  letter  and  formality  of  it,  or  as  the 
formal  caufe  (whether  in  whole  or  in  part)  of 
jujlification.  Ifanyman  of  contraryjudgment,  will 
vouchfafe  in  a fpirit  of  raecknefs  and  love, 
either  to  difcovertheinfuHiciencyof  any  of  thofe 
anfwers,  or  elfe  farther  to  objedl,  what  he  con- 
ceives to  be  ofgreater  weight,  than  the  arguments 
already  anfwered,  I fhall  willingly  and  impar- 
tially confider  it.  And  if  I fliall  find  any  thing  of 
folid  conviclion,  I fliall  be  glad  to  be  delivered 
of  an  error.  I had  much  rather  be  employed 
in  defacing  mine  osvn  errors,  than  thofe  of 
other  men  : and  defire  to  make  it  m;c  daily 

occupation. 


C 1^5  3 

occupation,  to  exchange  darknefs  for  lights 
crooked  things  for  flrait,  errors  for  truths. 
The  Lord  by  his  fpirit  lead  us  into  the  way 
of  all  truth,  and  keep  us  that  we  turn  not 
afide,  either  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the 
left,  that  fo  we  may  be  built  up  in  our  moft 
holy  faith,  and  prepared  hereby  for  hiseverla^ 
ing  kingdom ! 


REASONS 


C ] 


R 

E A S O 

N S 

AGAINST  A 

s 

E P A R A T I 

O N 

FROM  1’  H E 

CHURCH  of  ENGLAND. 

WHETHER  it  be  lawful  or  no  (which 
itfelf  may  be  difputed,  being  not  fo  clear 
a point  as  fome  may  imagine}  it  is  by  no  means 
expedient  for  us  to  feparate  from  the  eftablifhed 
church  : 

j.  Becaufe  it  would  be  a contradiftion  to  the 
folemn  and  repeated  declarations  which  we  have 
made  in  all  manner  of  wavs,  in  preaching,  in 
print,  and  in  private  confervation  ; 

2.  Becaufe  (on  this  as  well  as  on  many  other 
accounts)  it  would  give  huge  occafion  of  offence 

to 


L ^^7  ] 

to  thofe  who  feek  and  defire  occafion,  to  all  the  , 
enemies  of  God  and  his  truth  : 

3.  Becaufe  it  would  exceedingly  prejudice 
againll  us  many  who  fear,  yea,  who  love  God, 
and  thereby  hinder  their  receiving  fo  much,  per- 
haps any  farther,  benefit  from  our  preaching: 

4.  Becaufe  it  would  hinder  multitudes  of  thofe 
who  neither  love  nor  fear  God,  from  hearing  us 
at  all : 

5.  Becaufe  It  would  occafion  many  hundreds, 
if  not  fome  thoufands  of  thofe  tvho  are  now  united 
•with  us,  to  feparate  from  us;  yea,  and  fome  of 
thofe  who  have  a deep  work  of  grace  in  their 
fouls : 

6.  Becaufe  it  would  be  throwing  balls  of  wild- 
fire among  them  that  are  notv  quiet  in  the  land. 
We  are  now  fweetly  united  together  in  love. 
We  moftly  think  and  fpeak  the  fame  thing.  But 
this  would  occafion  inconceivable  flrife  and  con- 
tention, between  thofe  who  left,  and  thofe  who 
I'emained  in  the  church,  as  well  as  between  thofe 
who  left  us,  and  thofe  who  remained  with  us  : 
nav,  and  between  thofe  very  perfons  who  re- 
mained, as  they  were  varioufly  inclined  one  way 
or  the  other: 

7.  Becaufe,  whereas  controverfy  is  now  afleep, 
and  we  in  great  meafure  live  peaceably  with  all 
men,  fo  that  we  are  ftrangely  at  leifure  to  fpend 
our  whole  time  and  ftrength  in  enforcing  plain, 
praftical,  vital  religion,  (O  -^vhaf  would  many  of 
our  fore-fathers  have  given,  to  have  enjoyed  fo 

bleifed 


t >19  ] 

lilefTed  a calm  ?)  This  would  utterly  banlfh  peace 
from  among  us,  and  that  without  hope  of  its  re- 
turn. It  would  engage  me  for  one,  in  a thoufand 
■controverfies,  both  in  public  and  private;  {for  t 
fhould  be  in  confcience  obliged  to  give  thereafons 
of  my  conduft,  and  to  defend  thofe  reafons 
agalnft  all  oppofers)  and  fo  take  me  off  from  thofe 
more  ufeful  labours,  which  might  otherwife  em- 
ploy tlie  flrort  remainder  of  my  life  ; 

8.  Becaufe  to  form  the  plan  of  a new  churcli 
would  require  irtfinite  time  and  care,  (which 
might  be  far  more  prontablv  bellowed)  with 
much  more  wifdom  and  greater  depth  and  exten- 
fivenefs  of  thought,  than  any  of  us  are  mailers 
of : 

g.  Becaufe  from  fome  having  barely  enter- 
tained a dillant  thought  of  thus,  evil  fruits  have 
already  followed,  fuch  as  prejudice  againft  the 
clergy  in  general ; and  aptnefs  to  believe  ill  of 
them  ; contempt  (not  without  a degree  of  hitter- 
Tiefs,)  of  clergymen  as  fuch,  and  a fharpnefs  of 
language  toward  the  \\  hole  order,  utterly  unbe- 
coming either  gentlemen  or  Chriflians  : 

10.  Becaufe  the  experiment  has  been  fo  fre- 
quently tried  already,  and  the  fuccefs  never  an- 
fwered  the  expeflatlon.  God  has  fmee  the 
reformation  raifed  up  from  time  to  time  many 
witneffes  of  pure  religion.  If  ihefe  lived  and 
died  (like  John  x\rndt,  Robert  Bolton,  and  many 
others)  in  the  churches  to  which  they  belonged, 
aiotwithHandingtlie  wickednefs which  overflowed 

both 


[ 120  3 

l)oth  the  teachers  and  people  therein;  they 
fpread  the  leaven  of  true  religion  far  and  wide, 
and  were  more  and  more  ufeful,  till  they  tvent  to 
paradife.  But  if  upon  any  provocation  or  conli- 
deration  whatever,  they  feparated,  and  founded 
diftiiift  parties,  their  influence  was  more  and 
more  confined ; they  grew  lefs  and  lefs  ufeful  to 
others,  and  generally  loll  the  fpirit  of  religion 
themfelves  in  the  fpirit  of  controverfy  : 

11.  Becaufe  we  have  melancholy  inftances  of 
this,  e\’en  now  before  our  eyes.  Many  have  in 
■our  memory  left  the  church,  and  formed  thera- 
felves  into  diftinft  bodies.  And  certainly  fome  of 
them  from  a real  perfuafton,  that  they  fliould  do 
God  more  fervice.  Btit  have  any  feparated 
1‘hemfelves  and  profpered  ? Have  they  been 
either  more  holy,  or  more  ufeful  than  they  were 
before  ? 

12.  Becaufe  by  fuch  a fejiaration  v,'e  fhould 
.not  only  thrmv  away  die  peciiliar glorying  which 
God  has  given  us,  that  ive  do  and  will  fuffer  ail 
tilings  for  our  brethren’s  fake,  though  the  more 
we  love  them,  the  lefs  we  he  loved : but  fhould 
aft  in  direft  contradiftion  to  that  very  end,  for 
idiich  we  believe  God  hath  raifed  us  up.  The 
chief  defign  of  his  providence  in  -fending  ns  out, 
is  undoubted!}',  to  cjuickeu  our  brethren.  And 
the  firflmeifage  ofall  our  preachers  is,  to  the  lofl 
flieep  of  the  church  of  England.  Now  would  it 
•not  be. a flat  contradiftion  to  this  defign,  to  fepa- 
rate  from  the  church  ? Tliefe  things  being  coji- 

fulered 


[ 120  ] 

Tidered,  we  cannot  apprehend,  (whether  it  be 
lawful  in  itfelf  or  no,)  that  it  is  lawful  for  us ; 

' were  it  only  on  this  ground,  that  it  is  by  no 
means  expedient. 

II.  It  has  indeed  been  objccled,  that  till  we 
do  feparate,  we  cannot  be  a compact,  united 
body. 

It  is  true,  we  cannot  till  then  be  a co?npaB 
muted  body,  if  you  mean  by  that  exprefbon,  a 
body  diftintt  from  all  others.  And  we  have  no 
lie  fire  fo  to  be. 

It  has  been  objefted,  fecondly,  “ It  is  mere 
cowardice  and  fear  of  perfecution  which  makes 
you  defjre  to  remain  united  with  them.” 

This  cannot  be  proved.  Let  every  one  exa- 
mine his  own  heart,  and  not  judge  his  brother. 

It  is  not  piobable.  We  never  yet,  for  any 
perfecution,  when  we  were  in  the  midll  of  it, 
either  turned  back  from  the  work,  or  even 
flackened  our  pace. 

But  this  is  certain ; that  although  perfecution 
many  timesproves  an  unfpeakable  blelTing  to  them 
that  fuffer  it,  yet  we  ought  not  wilfully  to  bring  it 
upon  ourfelves.  Nay,  we  ought  to  do  whatever 
can  lawfully  be  done,  in  order  to  prevent  it. 
We  ought  to  avoid  it  fo  far  as  we  lawfully  can  ; 
when  pcrfecutedin  one  city,  to  flee  into  anodier. 
If  God  fltould  fufler  a general  perfecution,  ivho 
would  be  able  to  abide  it,  we  know  not.  Per- 
haps 


r 121  >] 

haps  thofe  who  talk  loudell  might  flee  hrft.  Re- 
member the  cafe  of  Dr.  Pendleton. 

III.  Upon  the  whole,  one  cannot  but  obferve, 
how  defirable  it  is,  that  all  of  us  who  are  engaged 
in  the  fame  work,  fliould  think  and  fpeak  the 
fame  thing,  be  united  in  one  judgment,  and  ufe 
one  and  the  fame  language. 

Do  Ave  not  all  now  fee  ourfelves,  the  Methodijls 

(fo  called]  in  general,  the  church  and  the  clergy  in 

a clear  lidit  ? 
o 

We  look  upon  ourje'ves,  not  as  the  authors,  or 
ringleaders  of  a particular  left  or  party  ; (it  is  the 
fartheil  thing  from  our  thoughts  ;)  but  as  melTen- 
crers  ofGod,  to  thofe  Avho  are  Chriffians  in  name, 
but  Heathens  in  heart  and  in  fife,  to  cal!  them 
back  to  that  from  which  they  are  fallen,  to  real, 
genuine  Chriflianity.  We  are  therefore  debtors 
to  all  thefe,  of  rvliatever  opinion  or  denomina- 
tion : and  are  confequently  to  do  all  chat  in  us 
lies,  to  pleafe  all,  for  their  good,  to  edification. 

We  look  upon  the  Methodijls  (fo  called]  in 
general,  not  as  any  particular  party  ; (this  would 
exceedingly  obflruft  the  grand  defign,  for  which 
we  conceive  God  has  raifed  them  up)  but  as  liv- 
ing witnelfes  in,  and  to  every  party,  of  that 
Chriflianity  which*  we  preach  ; which  is  hereby 
demonflrated  to  be  a real  thing,  and  vifibly  held 
out  to  all  the  world. 

We  look  upon  England  as  that  part  of  the 
world,  and  the  church  as  that  part  of  England,  to 
VoL.  XXIII.  F which 


[122  ] 

xvhich  all  we  who  are  born  and  haVe  becn'brotight 
up  therein,  owe  our  firft  and  chief  regard.  We 
feel  in  oiirfelves  a ftrong  a kind  of  natural 

alfeflion  for  our  countr)’,  which  we  apprelicnd 
'Chriftianity  was  never  dcfigned  either  to  root 
but  or  to  impair.  We  have  a more  peculiar 
fconcern  for- our  brethren,  for  that  part  of  our 
countrymen,  to  whom  we  have  been  joined 
‘from  our  vouth  up,  by  ties  of  a religious  as  well 
as  a civil  nature.  True  it  is,  that  they  are  in 
general,  without  God  in  the  world.  So  much  the 
more  do  our  bowels  yearn  over  them.  They  do 
lie  in  darknefs  and  the  Jliadow  of  death.  The 
more  tender  is  our  compaflion  for  them.  And 
when  we  have  the  fulleft  coirviftion  of  that  com- 
■plicated  wickednefs  which  covers  them  as  a flood, 
then  do  we  feel  the  moft  (and  we  defire  to  feel 
yet  more)  of  that  inexprelTible  emoticm,  with 
which  our  bleffed  Lord  beheld  Jerufalem,  and 
wept  and  lamented  over  it.  Then  are  we  the 
moft  willing  to  fpend  and  to  he  [pent  for  them, 
yea,  to  lay  down  our  lives  for  our  brethren. 

We  look  upon  the  dergy^  not  only  aS  a part  of 
thefe  our  brethren,  but  as  that  part  whom  God  by 
his  adorable  providence,  has  called  to  be  watch- 
men over  the  reft,  for  whom  therefore  they  are 
to  give  a ftrift  account.  If  thefe  then  iiegleSl 
iheir  important  charge,  if  they  do  not  watch 
over  them  with  all  their  power,  they  will  be  of 
all  men  moftmiferablc,  and  fo  arc  entitled  to  our 
jdeepeft  compaflion.  So  that  to  feel,  and  muc4i 

more 


[ 123  3 

inore  to  exprcfs  eitlier  contempt  or  bitternefs 
towards  them,  betrays  an  utter  ignorance  of  our- 
felves  and  of  the  fpirit  which  \re  efpecialfy 
fhouldbe  of. 

Becaufethis  is  a point  of  uncommon  concern, 
let  us  confider  it  a little  fartlier. 

The  clergy  ^^■hcrever  we  are,  are  either  friends 
to  the  truth,  or  neuters,  or  enemies  to  it. 

If  they  are  friends  to  it,  certainly  we  fliould  do 
every  thing,  and  omit  every  thing  we  can  with  a 
fafe  confclence,  in  order  to  continue,  and  if  it  be 
pofTible,  increafe  their  good-will  to  it. 

If  thev  neither  further  nor  hinder  it,  wefiiould 
■do  all  that  in  us  lies,  both  for  their  lakes  and  for 
the  fake  of  their  feveral  flocks,  to  give  their  neu- 
trality the  righ-t  turn,  that  it  may  change  into 
love  rather  than  hatred. 

If  they_are  enemies,  Hill  we  fhould  not  defpair 
of  lelfening,  if  not  removing  their  prejudice. 
Weilrouldtry  ever)’  means  again  and  again.  We 
fhould  employ  all  our  care,  labour,  prudence, 
joined  with  fervent  prayer,  to  overcome  evil  with 
good,  to  melt  their  hardneTs  into  love. 

It  is  true,  that  when  any  of  thefe  openly  wreft 
the  fcriptines,  and  deny  the  grand  truths  of  the 
gofpcl,  we  cannot  but  declare  and  defend,  at  con- 
venient opportunities,  the  important  truths  which 
they  deny.  But  in  this  cafe  efpecially  we  have 
•need  of  all  gentlenefs  and  meeknefs  of  wifdom. 
Contempt,  lliarpnefs,  bitternefs  can  do  no  good. 
Tht  titath  of  man  worketh  not  the  ri^hleoufnfs  of 
Fs  God. 


[ 124  ] 

God.  Harfh  methods  have  been  tried  again  and 
again  (by  two  or  three  unfettled  railers ;)  at  Wed- 
nefbury,  St.  Ives,  Cork,  Canterbur)’.  And  how 
did  they  fucceed  ? They  always  occafioned  num- 
berlefs  evils ; often  wholly  llopt  the  courfe  of 
the  gofpel.  Therefore,  were  it  only  on  a prur 
dential  account,  were  confcience  unconcerned 
therein,  it  fliould  be  a facred  rule  to  all  cur 
preachers,  “ No  contempt,  no  bitternefs  to  ths 
clergy.” 

2.  Might  it  not  be  another  (at  leaft  prudential) 
rule,  for  every  Mdhodijl  preacher,  “ Not  to  fre- 
quent any  dill'enting  meeting?”  (Though  we 
blame  none  who  have  been  always  accuflomed  to 
itj  But  if  we  do  this,  certainly  our  peopde  will. 
Now  this  is  aOiually  feparating  from  the  church. 
If  therefore  it  is  (at  leaft)  not  expedient  to  fepa- 
rate,  neither  is  this  expedient.  Indeed  we  mav 
attend  our  aftemblies,  and  the  church  too;  becaufe 
they  are  at  different  hours.  But  we  cannot  attend 
both-, the  meeting  and  the  church,  becaufe  they 
are  at  the  fame  hours. 

If  it  be  faid,  “ But  at  the  church  we  are  fed 
with  chaff,  whereas  at  the  meeting  we  have  whcle- 
fome  food;”  we  anfwer,  i.  The  prayers  of  the 
church  are  not  chaft:  they  are  fubftaatial  food 
for  any  who  are  alive  to  God.  2.  The  Lord's 
flipper,  is  not  chaff,  but  pure  and  wholcfome  for 
all  who  receive  it  with  upright  hearts.  Yea,  3. 
In  ahnoft  all  the  fermons  we  hear  there,  we  hear 
many  great  and  important  truths.  And  whoever 

has 


[ ^=^5  ] 

has  a’fpiritual  difcernment,  may  eafily  feparate 
the  chaff  from  the  wheat  therein.  4.  How  little 
is  the  cafe  mended  at  the  meeting  ? Either  the 
teachers  ai  e nfw  light  men,  denying  the  Lord  that 
bought  them,  and  overturning  his  gofpel  from  the 
very  fotmdations  ; or  they  are  Predeflinarians, 
and  fo  preach  predeftination  and  final  perfeve- 
rance,  more  or  lefs.  Now  whatever  this  may  be 
to  them  who  were  educated  therein,  yet  to  thofe 
of  our  brethren  who  have  lately  embraced  it,  re- 
peated experience  fiiews  it  is  not  wholefome 
food : rather  to  them  it  has  the  effefl;  of  deadly 
poifon.  In  a fiiort  time  it  deftroys  all  their  zeal 
for  God.  They  grow  fond  of  opinions  andftrife 
of  words.  They  defpife  felf-denial  and  the  daily 
crofs ; and  to  compleat  all,  wholly  feparate  from 
their  bretlmen. 

g.  Nor  is  it  expedient  for  any  Methodiji 
preacher,  to  imitate  the  Diffenters  in  their  man- 
ner of  praying  : either,  in  his  tone : all  -particular 
tones  both  in  prayer  and  preaching  fliould  be 
avoided  with  the  utmoft  care : nor  in  his  lan^ 
guage ; all  his  words  fhould  be  plain  and  fimple, 
fuch  as  the  loweft  of  his  hearers  both  ufe  and 
underftand  : or  in  the  length  oildis,  prayer,  which 
fhould  not  ufually  exceed  four  or  five  minutes, 
either  before  or  after  fermon.  One  might  add, 
lieither  fliould  we  fing,  like  them  in  a flow, 
drawling  manner ; w’c  fing  fwift,  both  becaufe  it 
faves  time,  and  becaufe  it  tends  to  awake  and 
enliven  the  foul. 

^3 


4.  Fourthly, 


[ 126  ] 

4-  Fourthly,  If  we  continue  in  the  church  not 
by  chance-,  or  for  want  of  thought,  but  upon  fo- 
lid  and  well  weighed  reafons,  then  we  fhould 
never  fpeak  conteraptuoufly  of  the  church,  or  any 
thing  pertaining  to  it.  In  fome  fenfe,  it  is  the 
mother  of  us  all,  who  have  been  brought  up 
therein.  We  ought  never  to  make  herblemiflies 
matter  of  diverfion,  but  rather  of  folemn  fon'ow 
before  God.  We  ought  never  to  talk  ludi- 
croufly  of  them  ; no,  not  at  all,  withcxat  clear  na- 
ceffity.  Rather,  we  fhould  conceal  them,  as  far 
as  ever  we  can,  without  bringing  guilt  upon  our 
own  confcience.  And  we  fhould  all  I'lfe  every 
rational  and  fcriptural  means,  to  bring  others  to 
the  fame  temper  and  behaviour.  I fay,  all ; for 
if  fome  of  us  are  thus  minded,  and  others  of  an 
oppofite  fpirit  and  behaviour,  this  will  breed  a 
real  fchifm  among  ourfelves.  It  will  of  courfe 
divide  us  into  two  parties ; each  cf  which  will  b« 
liable  to  perpetual  jealoufies,  fufpiclons  and  ani- 
mofities  againfl  the  other.  Therefore  on  this 
account  likewife,  it  is  expedient  in  the  higheft 
degi  ee,  that  we  fliould  be  tender  of  the  church  to 
which  we  belong. 

5.  In  order  to  fecurc  this  end,  to  cut  off  all 
Jealoufy  and  fufpicion  from  our  friends,  and  hope 
from  our  enemies,  of  our  having  any  defign  to 
feparate  from  the  church,  it  would  be  tvell  for 
every  Methodijl  preacher,  who  has  no  fcruple 
concerning  it,  to  attend  the  fervice  of  the  church 
as  often  as  conveniently  he  can.  And  the  more 


[ m 3 

We  attend  it,  the  more  we  love  it,  as  sonftant 
experience  Ihews.  On  the  contrary,  the  longer 
we  abftain  from  it,  the  lefs  defire  we  have  to  at- 
tend it  at  all, 

h.Laflly,  Whereas  we  are  frrrrounded  on  every 
fide,  by  thofr  who  are  equally  enemies  to  us  and 
to  the  church  of  England  ; and  whereas  thefe  are- 
long  pja^ifed  in  this  tvar,  and  fkilled  in  all  the 
objeftioDS  againft  it : while  our  brethren  on  the 
«ther  hand  quite  ftrangers  to  them  all,  and 
to  on  a fudden  know  not  how  to  anfwer  them : 
it  is  highly  expedient  for  every  preacher  to  be 
provided  with  found  anfwers  to  thofe  objeflions, 
and  then  to  inftruft  the  focieties  w^here  he  la- 
bours, how  to,  defend  themfelves  againft  thofe 
affaults.  It  would  be  therefore  well  for  you  care- 
fully to  read  over  the  Prejkrvative.  againji  vnftt- 
tied  Notions  in  Religion,  together  with  Serious 
Thoughts  concerning' Per/ever ance  and  Predejlina~ 
tion  calmly  conjidered.  And  when  you  cure  maf- 
ters  of  them  yourfelves,  it  will  be  eafily  for  you 
to  recommend  and  explain  them  to  our  focie-_ 
tie's  t that  they  may  no  more  be  iofl  to  and  fro 
by  every  luind  oj  doElrine\  but  being  fettled 
in  one  mind  and  one  judgment,  by  folid  ferip- 
tural  and  rational  arguments,  may  grow  up  in 
all  things  into  him  who  is  our  head,  even  Jefus 
Chrif. 


JOHN  WESLEY, 

L 4 I think 


[ 128  ] 

I think  myfelf  bound  in  duty,  to  add  mv  tef- 
timony  to  my  brother’s.  His  twelve  reafons 
againft  our  ever  feparating  from  the  church  of 
England,  are  mine  alfo.  I fubfcribe  to  them  with 
all  my  heart.  Only  with  regard  to  the  firft,  /am 
quite  clear,  that  it  is  neither  expedient,  nor 
lawful  for  Me  to  feparate ; and  I never  had  the 
leaft  inclination  or  temptation  fo  to  do.  My 
affeftion  for  the  church  is  as  hrong  as  ever: 
and  I clearly  fee  my  calling ; which  is,  to 
live  and  to  die  in  her  communion.  This,  there- 
fore, I am  determined  to  do,  the  Lord  being  my 
helper. 

I have  fubjoined  the  hymns  for  the-  lay- 
preachers;  Hill  farther  to  fecure  this  end,  to  cut 
off  all  jealoufy  and  fu/picion  from  our  friends, 
or  hope  from  our  enemies,  oj  our  having  any 
defign  of  ever  feparating  from  the  church.  ■ I 
have  no  fecret  referve,  or  diftant  thought  of 
it.  I never  had.  Would  to  God  all  the  Me- 
thodift  preachers  were,  in  this  refpeft,  like 
minded  with 

CHARLES  WESLEY. 


HYMNS 


[ 129  ] 


HYMNS 


For  the  U S E of  the 

METHODIST  PREACHERS. 

HYMN  -- 

1 Lord,  our  ftrength  and  righteoufners. 

Our  bafe,  and  head,  and  corner-ftone. 
Our  peace  with  God,  our  mutual  peace, 
Unite,  and  keep  thy  fervants  one; 

That  while  we  fpeak  in  Jefu’s  name. 

We  all  may  fpeak,  end  think  the  fame. 

2 That  fpirit  of  love  to  each  impart, 

That  fervent  mind,  which  was  in  Tlree, 

So  fhall  we  all  our  ftrength  exert. 

In  heart,  and  word,  and  deed  agree 
T’  advance  the  kingdom  of  thy  grace. 

And  fpread  thine  everlafting  praife. 

3 Onever  may  the.  Fiend  fteal  in. 

Or  one  unftable  foul  deceive  : 

AlTail’d  by  our  befettingfin, 

And  ternpted  fore  the,  work  to  leave,  . 

F 5 Preferve 


C 130  ] 

Preferve  us,  Lord,  from  felf  and  pride. 

And'  let  nor  life,  nor  death  divide, 

4 Pride,  only  pride,  can  caufe  divorce. 

Can  feparate  ’twixt  our  fouls  and  Thee  : 
Pride,  only  pride,  is  difcord’s  fource, 

The  bane  of  peace  and  charity  : 

But  us  it  nevermore  Ihall  part. 

For  Thou  art  greater  than  our  heart. 

^ Wherefore  to  thine  almighty  hand 
The  keeping  of  our  hearts  w e give. 

Firm  in  one  ujind  and  fpirit  Hand, 

To  Thee,  and  to  each  other  cleave, 

Fixt  oathe  Rock  which  cannot  move. 

And  meekly  fafe  in  humble  love. 

HYMN  II. 

1 TT'ORTH  in  thy  Arength,  O Lord,  we  go. 

Forth  in  thy  Aeps  and  loving  mind, 

To  pay  the  gofpel-debt  we  owe, 

(The  word  of  grace  for  all  mankind) 

To  fow  th’  incorruptible  feed. 

And  find  the  loA,  and  wake  the  dead. 

2 The  wand’ring  Iheep  of  England’s  fold 

Demand  our  firA  and  tendereA  care. 

Who  under  fin  and  Satan  fold 
Ufurp  the  Chrijlian  charafter. 

The  ChriAian  <;hara6Ier  prophanr. 

And  take  thy  Church’s  name  in  vain. 

3 Or 


[ ] 

5 Or  fliamelefs  advocates  for  hell, 

7'heir  crimes  they  Sodom-Hke  confefs, 

Or  varnifli’d  with  a fpecious  zeal, 

An  empty  form  of  godlinefs, 

The  power  they  impioufly  blafpheme, 

And  call  our  hope  a madman’s  dream. 

^ 4 Haters  of  God,,  yet  ftill  they  cry, 

“ The  temple  of  the  Lord  are  we! 

“ The  Cimrch,  the  Church!” — who  dare  defy 
Thy  Celf-exiflent  Deity  ; 

Proudly  oppofe  thy  righteous  reign, 

And  crucify  their  God  again. 

5 ’Gainft  thefe  by  Thee  fent  forth  to  fight, 

A fufiering  war  we  calmly  wage. 

With  patience  meet  their  fierce  defpite, 

With  love  repay  their  furious  ragCj 
Revil’d,  Ave  blefs;  defam’d,  intreat';  . 

And  fpurn’d-,  wekifs  the  fpurner’s  feet. 

6 Arm’d  with  thine  all-fufficient  grace. 

They  rneek  unconqiierable  mind,. 

Our  foes  we  cordially  embrace, 

(The  filth  and  refufe  of  mankind] 

We  gladly  all  refign  our  breath, 

To  jave  one  precious  foul  from  death; 

HYMN  HI.  , 

1 O O be  it.  Lord ! if  Thou  ordain, 

We  come  to  fuifer  all  thy  will, 

P 6 


The 


C *32  ] 

The  utmoft  violence  to  fuftain 
Of  thpfe  that  can  the  body  kill. 

But  having  pufh’d  us  to  the  fliore. 

The  feeble  worms  can  do  no  more. 

2 We  come,  depending  on  thy  name, 

For  we  have  counted  firfl  the  coft ; 

Let  eafe,  and  liberty,  and  fame. 

And  friends,  and  life  itfelf  be  loll, 

^We  come.our  faithfulnefs  t’  approve. 

And  pay  Thee  back  thy-dying  love. 

^ Not  in  a confident  conceit 

Of  our  own  ftrength,  and  virtuous  power. 
We  offer  up  ourfelves,  to  meet 
The  fiercenefs  pf  that  fiery  hour ; 

Left  to  ourfelves  we,  afi  fhal!  fiv,  . 

And  I flrall  firll  my  Lord  deny.' 

4 I firfl,  of  ill  o’ercome,  fhah  yieltJ, 

Apoftate  from  thy  glorious  caufe. 

Shall  vilely  caff  away  mv  fliield. 

And  hafa  the  haters  ol  thy  crofs ; 

Retort  the  fhai^  opprobrious  word. 

Or  finite  with  the  offetiCve  fword. 

....i  !• 

5 Strange  fire  will  in  this  bofom  burn, 

UnlefsjThou  quench  it  ,\yith.  thy  blood 
Impatient  of  their  cruel  fcorn 

My  fpirit  tvill  tjirow  6ff  the  load; 

“ And  Baal's  Priefis  with  wrath  repel, 

“ And  fend  th’  accurfed  brood  to  hell.” 


6 Or 


[ *33  1 

6 Or  I {hall  gaul  the  mitred  race 

By  retire  keen,  and  railings  rude* 

By  proud  contempt,  and  malice  bafe,. 

Scurrilous  tv^it,  and  laughter  lewd» 
Laughter  which  foon  itfelf  bemoans,. 

And  ends  in  everlafting groans. 

y But  do  not,  Lord,  from  us  remove. 

While  fm  and  Satan  are  fo  near. 

But  arm  us  with  thy  patient  love, 

That  only  to  ourfelves  fcvere 
The  world  we  may,  like  Thee,  oppofe. 

And  die,  a ranfo.m  for  our  foes. 

HYMN  IV. 

* /T ^^STER,  at  thy  command  we  rile, 

LVX  No  Prophets  we,  or  Prophets  fons,. 
Or  mighty,  or  well-born,  or  mfe ; 

But  quick'ned  clods, 'but  breathing ftones:,, 
Urg’d  to  cry  out,  conftrain’d  to  call. 

And  tell  mankind — He  died  for  all  1 

i • ' 

2 We  fpeak,  becaufe  they  hold  .their  peace„ 

Who  flipuldtXvf  dying  love  proclaim  : 

We  mujl  declare  thy  righteoufnefs,- 

Thy  truth,  and  power,  and  favingname,. 
Though  the  dumb  afs  with  accent  clear 
Rebuke  the  filenCe  of  the  feer. 

3 But  fhall  tre  e’er  ourfelves  forget. 

And  in  our  gifts  and  graces  truft. 


withr 


[ m ] 

With  wild  contempt  the  Prophets  treat, 
Proudly  againft  the  branches  boaft, 

Or  dare  the  rulers  vilify, 

Or  mock  the  PrieOs  of  God  moft  high  ! 

4 Let  them  alone,  thy  Wifdom  cries. 

If  blind  conductors  of  the  blind! 

Let  them  alone,  our  heart  replies, 

And  draws  us  to  the  work  afTig-n'd, 

The  work  of  publifliing  the  word, 

And  feizinff  finners  for  our  Lord. 

O 

^ Here  let  us  fpend  our  utmoft  zeal, 

Here  let  us  all  our  powers  exert,  ' 

To  teftify  thy  gracious  will. 

Inform  the  world  how  kind  Thou  art. 

And  nothing,  know,  defire,  approve. 

But  Jefus—  and  thy  bleeding  love. 

H Y M N V. 

1 TESU,  tlry  waiting  fervants  fee 

Affembled  here  with  one  accord. 

Ready  to  be  fent  forth  by  Thee, 

To  preach,  when  Thou  fhalt  give,  the  word: 
Now,  Lord,  our  work,  our  province  (hew, 
forlo!  we  come,  thy  will  to  do. 

2 O what  a feene  artraftsonr  eyes! 

What  multitudes  oflifelefs  fouls! 

An  open  vale  before  us  lies, 

A place  of  graves,  a place  of  Ikulls, 


The 


[ ^35  ] 

The  defolate  houfe  of  England’s  fons, 

A Church — a charnel  of  dry  bones! 

3 The  ilavesof  pride,  ambition,  lufi:. 

Our  broken  pale,  alas,  receives! 

The  world  into  the  temple  thruft. 

And  make  our  Church  a den  of  thieves,. 
Her  grief,  her  burthen,  and  her  fhame. 

Yet  all  allume  the  Church’s  name. 

^ Her  defolate  date  too  well  we  know. 

But  neither  hate  her,  nor  defpife  : 

O ur  bofoms  bleed,  our  tears  o’erflow  ; 

We  view  her.  Saviour,  with  thine  eyes, 

(O  might  Ihe  know  in  this  her  day  .f) 

And  ftill  we  weep,  and  ftill  we  pray. 

^ We  pray  that  thefedry  bones  may  live  r 
We  fee  the  anfwer  of  our  prayer! 

Thou  doft  a thoufand  tokens  give. 

That  England’s  Church  is  Hill  thy  care. 

Ten  thoufand  witneffes  appear. 

Ten  thoufand  proofs,  that  God  is  here ! 

€ Here  then,  O God,  vouchfafe  to  dwell. 

And  mercy  on  our  Sion  fhew  ; 

Her  inbred  enemies  expel. 

Avenge  her  of  her  hellifh  foe, 

Caufe  on  her  waftes  thy  face  to  fhine. 

And  comfort  her  with  light  divine. 

7 O Light  of  life,  thy  fpirlt  fhed, 

In  all  his  cheating,  quick’^ning  power : 

Thy 


[ 136  3 

Thy  word  that  rais'd  us  from  the  dead. 

Can  raife  ten  thoufand,  thoufand  more^ 
Can  bring  them  up  from  nature's  grave, 
And  the  ^vhole  houfe  of  Ifrael  fave. 

HYMN  VI. 

1 REAT  guardian  of  Britannia’s  land. 

To  Thee  we  here  prefent  our  bloody 
Set  forth  the  laft,  a defperate  band 
Devoted  for  our  country’s  good, 

Our  brethren  dear,  our  flefh  and  bone. 

We  live,  and  die,  for  them  alone. 

2 Our  brethren  ; tho’  they  ftill  difclaim. 

And  us  defpitefully  intreat. 

With  fcornful  rage  call  out  our  name. 
Trample  as  dirt  beneath  their  feet. 

Out  of  their  fynagogues  expel, 

And  doom  us  to  the  hotted  hell. 

2 If  Thou  preferve  our  fouls  in  peace. 

Our  brethren  fhall  afflift  in  vain  : 

Mod  patient,  when  they  mod  opprefs. 

We  all  their  cruel  wrongs  fudain. 

And  drengthen’d  by  thy  meek’ning  power,. 
The  more  they  hate,  ^v•e  love  the  more. 

No,  never  diall  their  rage  prevail. 

Or  force  us  the  dry  bones  to  leave  :■ 

The  more  the\'  pudi  us  from  the  pale. 

The  clofer  we  to  Sioncfeave, 


Ami 


[ 1,37  ] 

And  daily  in  the  temple-found. 

Delight  to  kifs  the  facred  ground. 

5 Ifforrie  defile  the  hallow’d  place, 

The  truth,  and  us  with  Handers  load, 

, Or  fiercely  from  their  altars  chafe, 

And  rob  us  of  the  children’s  food, 

V/e  will  not  quit  thy  houfe  and  word, 

Or  lo3.th  the  offerings  of  the  Lord. 

6 Should  thofe  who  fit  In  Mcfes’ feat, 

Confpire  thy  little  flock  to  harm, 

Judge  in  their  courts,  and  fcourge,  and  beaf» 
And  bruife  us  with  the  Ruler’s  arm. 

Matter  of  joy  our  fiiame  we  make, 

And  bear  it.  Saviour,  for  thy  fake. 

7 OrfhoLild  they  flir  the  people  up 

Our  goods  to  fpoil,  our  limbs  to  tear, 

Suflain’d  by  that  immortal  hope. 

Their  lawlefs  violence  we  bear  : 

Or  laid  in  bonds  our  voices  raife. 

And  fhake  the  dungeon  with  thy  praife. 

8 A gazing-fiook  to  fiends  and  men. 

When  arm’d  with  thine  all-patient  power. 

As  fheep  appointed  to  be  flain. 

We  wait  the  laft,  the  fiery  hour. 

And  ne’er  from  England’s  church  will  move,, 
Till  torn  away — to  that  above. 


HYMN 


[ ^S8  ] 


HYMN  \’II. 

The  Pr  eacher’s  Prayer  for  the  fioch, 

1 QHEPPIERD  of  fouls^  the  great,  the  good, 
^ For  the  dear  p;urchafe  o.i  thy  blood 
To  thee  in  faitli  we  pray  : 

The  lambs  and  fheep  of  England-s  fold. 

Now  in  thy  book  oflife  inroll'd, 

Preferve  unto  that  day. 

' fi  Whom  thou  by  us  half  g-uher’d  in. 

Defend  the  little  flock  from  fm. 

From  error’s  paths  fecure  : 

Slay  with  them,  Lord,  when  we  depart. 

And  guard  the  iiTues  of  their  heart, 

And  keep  their  confcicnce  pure. 

3 Soon  as  their  guides  are  taken  home, 

We  know  the  grievous  wolves  will  come. 

Determined  not  to  fpare  ; 

The  ftragglers  from  thy  wounded  fide, 

The  woK'es  will  into  fe£fs  divide, 

And  into  paf  ties  tear. 

4 Ev’n  ofourfelves  (hall  men  arife, 

With  words  perverfe  and  fooihlng  lies. 

Our  children  to  befet, 

Difciples  for  themfelves  to  make, 

And,  draw  for  fihhy  lucre’s  fake. 

The  fheep  into  their  net. 


5 What 


[ J39  ] 

5 What  then  can  their proteftioirlie  ?■ 

I’he  virtue  that  proceeds  From  Thee, 

The  power  of  humble  love  ; 

Theftrength  of  all-fufncicnt  grace, 

Received  in  thine  appointed  ways. 

Can  land  them  Ikfe  above. 

JS  Now,  Saviour,  cloath  them  with  thy  power. 
And  arm  their  fouls  againft  that  hour 
With  faith  ^n^■i^cible  ; 

Teach  them  to  wield  the  fpirit’s  hvord. 

And  mighty  in  the  written  word 
To  chafe  both  earth  and  hell. 

7 When  I from  all  my  burthens  freed, 

Am  number’d  with  the  peaceful  dead. 

In  everlalling  reft, 

Pity  the  fheep  I leave  behind. 

My  God,  unutterably  kind. 

And  lodge  them  in  thy  breaft. 

8 Ah  ! never  fuffer  them  to  leave 

The  church,  where  Thou  art  pleas’d  to  give 
Such  tokens  of  thy  grace! 

Confirm  them  in  their  calling  here, 

Till  ripe  by  holieft  lovet’  appear 
Before  thy  glorious  face. 

g Whom  I into  thy  hands  commend, 

\Wlt  Thou  not  keep  them  to  the  end. 

Thou  infinite  in  love  ? 


Afthre 


[ MO  ] 

Allure  me,  Lord,  it  fhall  be  fo, 
And  let  iny  quiet  fpirlt  go 
lojoin  the  church  above. 

10  Sion,  my  firft,  ^my  lateft  care, 
The  burthen  of  my  dying  prayer, 
Now  in  thine  arms  I fee  ; 

And  Tick  on  earth  of  feeing  more, 

■ I haften  home,  my  God  t’  adore, 
Thro”  all  eternity. 


THE 


r 3 


The  ' C H R I S T I A N 


SACRAMENT 


ne  importance  of  well  unclerjianding  the  nature 
ef  this  Sacrament, 

1.  HE  facrament  ordained  by  Chriil  the 


night 'before  he  fuPfered,  which  St.  Paul 
calls  The  Lord’s  /upper,  is  without  doubt,  one  of 
the  greateft  myfleries  of  godlinefs,  and  the  inoft 
Culemn  feallof  the  Chrihian  religion.  At  the  hoj- 
ly  table  the  people  jneet  to  worlhip  God,  and 
God  is  prefeat  to  meet  and  blefs  his  people-. 


A K'D 


SACRIFICE: 


Extrafted  from  a late  Author. 


SECT  I. 


Here 


I M2  ] 

Here  we  are  in  a fpecial  manner  invited  to  offer 
up  to  God  our  fouls,  our  bodies,  and  wlvat&V'Cr 
we  can  give  : and  God  offers  to  us  the  body  and 
blood  of  his  Son,  and  all  the  other  bleffings  which 
we  have  needto  receive'.  So  that  the  holy  facra- 
ment,  like  the  antient  paffover,  is  a great  myf- 
tery,  confifting  oifacr ament  and  facrifue  ; that  is, 
of  the  religious /ervice  trffich  the  people  owe  to 
God,  and  of  the  full  Jalvation  which  God  has 
promifed  to  his  people. 

2.  How  careful  then  fliould  cv^rv  Chriftian 
be  t.0  (inderlland,  what  fo  nearly  concerns  both 
his  happincfs  and  his  duty!  It  was  on  this  ac- 
count tliat  the  devil  from  the  very  beginning, 
has  been  fo  - bufy  about  this  facrament,  driving 
men  either  to  make  it  a Jalfe  God,  or  an  empty 
ceranony.  So  much  the  more,  let  all  who  liave 
either  piety  toward  God,  or  any  care  of  their 
own  fouls,  fo  manage  dieir  devotions,  as  to  avoid 
fuperftition  on  the  one  hand,  and  jrrophanenefs 
on  the  ether. 


S E G T.  II. 

Concerning  the  facrament,  as  it  is  a memorial  of 
the  fuffnings  and^eath  of  Chrif. 

1.  ' I H E Lord's  flipper  was  chiefly  ordained 
for  a facrament,  i.  To  reprefent  the  fui- 
ferings-of  Chrill  which  are  pif,  whereof  it  is  a 
• mtmoria  L 


■■memorial.  2,  To  convey  the  firfl  fraits  -of  thefe 
Tufferings,  mpre/ent graces,  whereof  it  is  Z7neans-, 
-and  3.  To  ajfure  v.%  glory  to  come,  whereof  it 
•is  an  infallible 

2.  As  this  facrament  looks  back,  it  is  a me- 
morial wTicT  our  Lord  hatli  left  in  his  church, 
■of  what  he  was  pie  a fed  to  fuller  for  her.  For 
though  thefe  fufferings  ol  his  were  both  fo  dread- 
ful and  holy,  as  to  make  the  heavens  mourn,  the 
«arth  quake,  and  all  men  tremble  : yet  becaufe 
the  greatell  things  are  apt  to  be  forgotten  when 
they  are  gone,  therefore  he  was  pleafed  at  his 
daft  fupper,  to  ordain  tins,  as  a holy  memorial 
and  7 (Tpr efentation  of  what  he  was  then  about  to 
fufler.  So  that  when  Chriftian  pofterity  (like 
the  youirg  Ifraelites  who  had  not  feen  the  kil- 
ling of  the  firft  palfover)  fhould  come  to  afk  after 
the  meaning  of  the  bread  broken,  the  loiae poured 
out,  and  the  partaking  of  both  ; this  holy  myf- 
tery  migltt  fet  forth  both  the  martyrdom  and  the 

facrifice  oi  this  crucifted  Saviour;  giving  up  his 
JleJh,  Ihedding  his  blood,  and  pouring  out  his 
\ nr j foul,  to  atone  for  tliar  furs. 

3.  Therefore,  as  at  the  palfover,  the  late  Jews 
•^coLild  fay,  77iis  is  the  Lamb-,  thefe  are  the  herbs 

our  fathers  did  eat  in  Lg)pt ; becaufe  thefe  latter 
feafts  did  fo  elfeff  ually  repreicnt  the  former  : fo 
at  our  holy  communion,  which  fets  before  our 
■eyes,  Chriji  our  pajfover  who  is  facrijiced  for  us  ■ 
‘Our  Saviour,  fays  St.  Aujhn  doubted  not  to  Jay, 


[ M4  ] 

Jigure  of  his  body  : efpecially  bccaufe  this  facra-* 
, merit  duly  received,  makes  the  thing  which  it 
reprefents,  really  prefent  for  our  ufe,  as  if  it 
were  newly  done.  Eating  this  b^ead,  and  drink- 
ing this  cup,  ye  do  Jliezu  forth  the  Lord's  death. 

4.  And  furely,  it  is  no  common  regard  we  ought 
to  'have  for  thefe  venerable  reprefentations, 
which  God  himfelf  hath  fet  up  in  and  for  his 
church.  For  thefe  are  far  more  thau  an  ordi- 
nary figure.  All  forts  oi  figns  or  monuments,  are 
more  or  lefs  venerable,  according  to  the  things 
which  they  reprefent.  And  thefe,  belides  their 
ordinary  ufe,  bear  as  it  -were  on  their  face  the 
-glorious  character  of  their  divine  appointment, 
and  the  exprefs  defign  that  God  hath  to  revive 
thereby,  and  to  expofe  to  all  our  fenfes,  liis  fuf- 
ferings,  as  if  they  were  prefent  nova. 

5.  Ought  not  then  one  who  looks  on  thefe 
ordinances,  and  confiders  the  great  and  dreadful 
palTages  which  they  fet  before  him,  to  fay  in  his 
heart,  I obferve  on  this  altar  fomewhat  very 
like  the  facrifice  of  my  Saviour  ? For  thus  the 
bread  of  life  was  broken  ; thus  the  Lamb  of  God 
was  {lain,  and  his  blood  filed.  And  when  I look 
on  the  minifter,  who  by  fpecial  order  from 
God,  diftributes  this  bread  and  this  wine,  I con- 
ceive, that  thus  God  himfelfhath  both  given  his 
Son  to  die,  and  gives  us  Rill  the  virtue  of  his 
death. 

6.  Ought  he  not  alfo  to  reverence  and  adore, 
when  he  looks  toward  that  good  hand,  which 

has 


[ H5  ] 

ias  appointed  for  the  ufe  of  the  church,  the  f»e~ 
morial  of  thefe  great  things  ? As  the  Ifraelites 
whenever  they  faw  the  cloud  on  the  temple, 
which  God  had  hallowed  to  be  the  fign  of  his 
prefence,  prefently  ufed  to  throw  themfelves  on 
their  faces,  not  to  worlhip  the  cloud,  but  God ; 
fo  whenever  I fee  thefe  better  figns  of  the  glori- 
ous mercies  of  God,  I will  not  fail  both  to  re- 
member my  Lord  who  appointed  them,  and  to 
worfhip  him  whom  they  reprefent. 

7.  To  complete  this  worfliip,  let  us  exercife 
fuch  a faith,  as  may  anfwer  the  great  end  of  this 
facrament.  The  main  intention  of  Chrifl  here- 
in, was  not,  the  bare  remembrance  of  his  paf- 
fion  ; but  over  and  above,  to  invite  us  to  his  fa- 
crifice,  not  as  done  and  gone  many  years  fince, 
but,  as  to  grace  and  mercy,  ftill  lalling,  flill  new. 
Hill  the  fame  as  when  it  was  firll  offered  for  us. 
The  facrifice  of  Chrift  being  appointed  by  the 
Father  for  a propitiation  that  fliould  continue  to 
ail  ages  ; and  withal  being  everlafling  by  the 
privilege  of  its  avmorder,  \vhich  is  an  unchange- 
able priejlhood,  and  by  his  worth  who  offered 
it,  that  is,  the  bleffed  Son  of  God,  and  by  the 
power  of  the  eternal  Spirit  though  whom  it  was 
offer’d  ; it  muff  in  all  refpe£ls  ftand  eternal,  the 
fame  yefterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever. 

8.  Here  then  faith  muff  be  a true fuhfijlence 
of  thofe  things  pall  which  wc  believe,  it  is  of 
the  things  yet  to  come,  which  we  hope  for  : 
by  the  help  of  which,  the  believer  being  proft- 
VoL.  XXIII.  G rate 


[j  ] 

rate  at  tlie  Lord’s  table,  as  at  -the  vert'  foot  of 
his  crofs,  fhould  with  earneft  forrow  confefs  and 
lament  all  his  fins,  which  were  the  nails  and 
fpears  that  pierced  his  Saviour.  We  ourfelves 
have  crucified  that jtijl  One.  Men  and  brethren,  what 
Jhall  we  do?  Let  us  fall  amazed  at  that  firoke 
of  divine  juftice,  tliat  could  not  be  fatisfied  but 
by  the  death  of  God  ! How  dreadful  is  this  place  ! 
How  deep  and  holy  is  this  myftery!  What 
thanks  fhould  we  pay  for  thofe  inconceivable 
mercies  of  God  the  Father,  who  fo  gave  up  his 
only  Son  ! And  for  the  mercies  of  God  the  Son, 
who  thus  gave  himfelf  up  for  us  ! 

9.  My  Lord  and  my  God,  I behold  in  this 
bread,  made  of  corn,  that  was  cut  down,  beaten, 
ground,  and  bruifed  by  men,  all  the  heavy  blows 
•and  plagues  and  pains,  which  thou  didft  fuffer 
from  thy  murderers.  I behold  in  this  bread  dried 
up  and  baked  with  fire,  the  fiery  wrath  w’hich 
thou  didft  fuffer  from  above!  hly  God,  my 
God,  why  haft  thou  forfaken  him?  The  vio- 
lence of  wicked  men  fir  ft  hath  made  him  a fnar- 
tyr , then  the  fire  of  heaven  hath  made  him  a 
burnt- facr if  ce.  And  lo,  he  is  become  to  me  the 
bread  oj  Ife ! 

Let  us  go  then  to  take  and  eat  it.  For  thgugh 
the  inftruments  that  bruifed  him  be  broken,  and 
the  flames  that  burnt  him  be  put  out,  yet  this 
bread  continues  new'.  The  fpears  and  fwords 
that  flew,  and  tire  burnings  that  compleated  the 
faciifice,  are  many  years  fiace  fcattered  and  fpent. 

But 


[ H7  ] 


Biu  t}ie  fweet  fmell  of  the  offering  ftill  remains, 
the  blood  is  ftill  warm,  the  wounds  ftill  frefh, 
and  the  Lamb  ftill Jianding  as  Jlain,  Any  other 
facrifice  by  time  may  lofe  its  ftrength.  But  thou, 
O eternal  vibfim,  offered  up  to  God  through  the 
eternal  Spirit,  remaineft  always  the  fame.  And 
as  thy'years  fhalfnot  fall,  fo  they  fltall  never 
abate  any  thing  of  thy  faving  ftrength  and  mer- 
cy. O help  me,  that  they  abate  nothing  of  my 
faith  ! Help  me  to  grieve  for  my  fins  and  thy 
pains,  as. they  did  who  faw  t;he,e  fuffer.  Let  my 
heart  burn  to  follow  yhee  .now,  when  this  bread 
is  broken  at  this  table,  as  the  heai'ts  of  thy  dif- 
ciples  did,  when  thou  didft  break  it  in  Emmaus. 
O rock  . of  Ifrael,  rock  of  falvation,  rock  ftruck 
and  cleft  for  me,  let  thofe  two  ftreams  of  blood 
and  water  which  once  gullied  out  of  thy  fide, 
bring  down  pardon  and  holinefs  into-nly  foul: 
And  let  me  thirft  after  them  now,  as  if' I flood 
on  the  mountain  whence  fprung  this  water ; and 
near  the  cleft  of  that  rock,  the  wounds  of  my 
Lord,  whence  gulhed  this  facred  blood.  All  the 
diftance  of  times  and  countries  between  Adam 
and  me,  doth  not  keep  his  fin  and  punifliment 
from  reaching  me,  any  more  than  if  I had  been 
born  in  hishoufe.  Adam  defeended  from  above, 
let  thy  blood  reach  as  far,  and  come  as  freely  to 
fave  and  fanflify  me,  as  the  blood  of  my  firft  Fa- 
ther did,  both  to  deftroy  and  to  defile  me.  Blef- 
fedjefu,  ftrengthen  my  faith,  prepare  my  heart, 
and  then  blefs  this  thine  ordinance.  If  I but 
G 2 touch. 


[ h8  ] 

touch,  as  I ought,  the  hem  of  thy  garment,  the 
garment  of  thypaffion,  virtue  will  proceed  out  of 
thee;  it  fhall  be  done  according  to  my  faith,  and 
my  poor  foul  fhall  be  made  whole  ! 


SECT.  Ill, 

Concerning  thefacrament,  as  it  is  a fgn  of  prefent 
i;'  graces. 

1.  A S to  the  prefent  gracesxkizx  attend  the  due 
ufe  ofthis  facrament,  it  is,  i.  A figure 
whereby  God  reprefents.  2.  An  injirument 
whereby  he  conveys  them. 

1. ;  It  is  a figure  or  fign  thereof.  It  is  the  ordi- 
nary ,way  nf  God,  when  he  either  promifes  or 
bellows  on  men  any  confiderable  bleffing  to  con- 
firm his  word  and  his  gift,  with  the  addition  of 
fome  fign.  So  the  burning  biijh  was  a fign  to 
Mofes,  and  the  cloud  that  went  with  them  to  the 
Ifraelites.  And  in  like  manner  hath  C brill  or- 
dained outward  vifible  figns  of  his  inward  and 
fpiritual  grace,  to  affure  every  one  who  believes, 
that  he  fhall  be  cleanfed  from  his  fins,  as  certain- 
ly as  he  fees  that  water,  and  that  he  fliall  be  fed 
with  the  grace  of  God,  as  certainly  as  he  feeds 
on  this  bread  and  wine. 

2.  And  as  icaier  was  fitly  chofen  for  the  out- 

ward 


[ H9  ] 

ward  fign  in  baptifm,  becaufe  of  the  virtue  it 
hath  to  cleanfe  and  purify;  fo  were  bread  and 
wine  fitly  chofen  for  the  outward  figns  of  the 
Lord’s  fupper,  Thefe  fignify,  i.  The  fufferings 
of  Chrift ; and  2 Thebleffings  which  we  receive 
thereby.  Firft,  The  fufferings  of  Chrift.  This 
bread  and  wine  do  not  fuftain  me,  till  the  one' 
has  been  cut  down,  ground  and  baked  with  fire,  and 
the  other  prefted  and  trodden  under  foot.  Nor  did 
the  Son  of  God  fave  me,  but  by  being  bruifed, 
and  preft  and  confumed,  as  it  were,  by  the  fire 
of  God’s  wrath.  As  the  beft  corn  is  not  bread 
while  it  ftands  in  the  field  : fo  neither  could  Je- 
fus  living,  teaching,  working  miracles,  be  the 
bread  of  life  : it  muft  be  Jefus  fuffering,  Jefus 
crucified,  Jefus  dying.  Nothing  lefs  than  the 
erofs,  than  wounds  and  death,  my  Lord,  my 
God ! could  of  thy  deareft  Son  make  my  Savi- 
our. 

3.  This  facrament.  Secondly,  reprefents  the 
bleffings  which  we  receive  by  his  paffion.  NoW 
as  with®ut  bread  and  wtne,  or  fomething  an- 
fwerable  to  it,  the  ftrongeft  bodies  foon  decay, 
fo  without  the  virtue  of  the  body  and  blood  of 
Chrift,  the  holieft  fouls  muft  foon  perifh.  And 
as  bread  and  wine  keep  up  our  natural  life,  fo 
doth  our  Lord  Jefus  by  a continual  Jupply 
of  ftrength  and  grace,  reprefented  by  bread  and 
wine,  fuftain  that  fpiritual  life  which  he  hath 
procured  us  by  his  crofs. 

4.  The  firft  breath  of  fpiritual  life  in  our  nof- 

G 3 rils, 


[150  ] 

trils,  is  the  firil:  purchafe  of  Chrift’s  blood.  . But 
alas!  how  loon  would  this  fir  It  life  vauifh  awav, 
w^re  it  not  followed  and  fup’pbrted  by  a fecond  ? 
Therefore  the  facrifite  of  Chrift' procures  alfo 
grace,  to  renew  and  prefeiwe  the  Hfe  he  hath 
given.  As  the  blood  which  he  filed,  fatlsfied  the 
divine  juftice,  and  removed  our  punilhment,  fo 
the  water  Wafiies  and  cleanfes  the  pardoned  fotl  ; 
and  both  thefe  blefiings  are'irrfeparable ; ev^  as 
the  blood  and  water  were,  which  floWed  toge- 
ther dbt  of  his  fide. 

5.  There  remains  yet  afiother  life;  which  is  an 
abfolute  redemption  from  death  and  our  miferies. 
This,  as  to  the  right  of  it,  is  together  with  the 
other,  purchafedby  the  fame  facrifice:  but  as  to 
the  poflefiion,  it  is  referved  for  u$'  in  heavenj’ 
till  Chrift  become  our  full  afid  final  rbdefnp'ron. 
Now  the  giver  of  thefe  IH'es,  is  the  preferver  of 
them  too;  and  to  this  end,  he  fets  up  a tible 
bv  his  altar,  where  he  engages  t6  feed  our  fouls, 
with  thfe  conftant  lunplyof  his  mercies,  as  really 
as  he  feeds  our  bodies  with  this  bread  an4  wine. 
In  the  deliverance  I’rom  Tgypt,  here  is  a people 
faved  by  the  facrifice  of  the  pafibver;  and.  left 
they  fiiould  die  in  the  wlldernefs,  there  y6u  fee 
an  angel  leading  them  with  his.  light,  keeping 
them  cool  under  the  fhadow  of  his  cloud,  and 
feeding'them  with  manna.  .Jefusis  the  triitn 
forefiiewed  bv  thefe  figures.  He  was  the  true 
pafibver,  when  he  died  upon  the  crofs.  And  he 
feeds  from  heaven,  by  continually  pouring  out 

his 


L 151  ] 

liis  ble(Tmgs  on  the  fouls  he  redeemed  by  pour- 
ing o.ut  his  blood. 

6.  Thus  this  facraraent  alone  reprefents  at 
once,  both  what  our  Lord  fuffered,  and  what 
he  ftill  doth  for  us.  What  we  take  and  eat,  is 
made  of  a fubftance,  cut,  bruifed  and  put  to  the 
fire ; that  fhews  my  Saviour’s  paffion  ; and  it 
was  ufed  thus,  that  it  might  alford  me  food : 
that  fhews  the  benefit  I receive  by  his  paflTion. 
In  the  facrament  are  reprefented  both  life  and 
death  ; the  life  is  mine ; the  death  my  Saviour’s. 
O blelfed  Jefus,  my  life  comes  out  of  thy  death  ; 
and  the  falvation  which  I hope  for,  is  purchafed 
with  all  the  pains  and  agonies,  which  thou  didft 
fuffer. 

7.  Author  of  my  falvation,  bellow  on  me  thefe 
two  bleffings,  which  this  facrament  fhews  toge- 
ther, mercy  and  llrength  to  keep  mercy.  Ho- 
fanna,  O Son  of  David,  fave  and  preferve  ! Save 
me  that  I may  not  fall  by  the  hand  of  the  dellroy- 
er  : and  preferve  me,  that  after  this  falvation  I 
may  not  fall  by  my  own  hand  : but  fet  forward 
in  me,  notwithllanding  all  my  fins,  the  work  of 
thy  faithful  mercies.  Let  me  not  increafe  my 
guilt,  by  abufing  what  thou  gavefl.  My  Saviour 
my  preferver,  give  me  always  what  thou  giVell 
once.  Create  in  me  anew  heart  ; but  keep  v'hat 
thou  createll,  and  increafe  more  and  more  what 
thou  plantell.  O Son  of  God,  feed  this  tender 
branch,  which  without  thee  cannot  but  wither : 
and  llrengthen  thou  a bruifed  reed,  w'hich  with- 
out thee  cannot  but  fall.  Father  of  everlafting 
G 4 com- 


[ 152  ] 

compafTions  forfake  not  in  the  wildernefs  a feeble 
Ifraelite,  whom  thou  haft  brought  away  out  of 
Egypt ; and  let  not  a poor  foul  whom  thou  haft 
helped  a-while,  ever  faint  and  fall  from  the  right 
way.  Thou  art  as  able  to  perfeft  me  with  the 
bleflings  out  of  thy  throne,  as  to  redeem  me  by 
thy  facrifice  on  thy  crofs.  O thou  who  art  the 
truth  of  what  thou  biddeft  me  take,  perform  in 
me  what  thou  doft  fhew.  Give  me  eternal  life 
by  thofe  thy  fufferings ; for  here  is  the  body 
broken : give  alfo  ftrength  and  nourilhment  for 
this  life  ; for  here  is  the  bread  of  heaven. 


SECT.  IV. 


Concerning  ike  Sacrament.,  as  it  is  a means  of 
grace. 

1.  T TITHERTO  we  have  confidered  this 
X JL  holy  facrament  both  as  a memorial  of 
the  death  of  Chiift,  and  a fign  of  thofe  graces 
wherewith  he  fuftains  and  nourilhes  believing 
fouls.  But  this  is  not  all;  for  both  the  end  of 
the  holy  communion,  the  wants  and  defiresof 
thofe  who  receive  it,  and  the  ftrength  of  other 
places  of  feripture,  require^  that  much  more  be 
contained  therein,  than  a bare  memorial  or  repre- 
fenlation.  i.  The  end  of  the  holy  communion, 

which 


[ 153  ] 

which  is  to  make  us  partakers  of  Chrift  in  ano- 
ther manner  than  when  we  only  hear  his  word  ; 
2.  The  wants  and  defires  of  thofe  wdro  receive 
it  ; who  feek  not  a bare  1 eprejentation  or  remrm- 
brance.  I want  and  feek  my  Saviour  himfelf,  and 
I hafte  to  this  facrament  for  the  fame  purpofe, 
that  Su  Peter  and  John  hailed  to  his  fepulchie  ; 
becaufe  I hope  to  find  him  there.  3.  The  Ilrength 
of  other  places  of  fcripture  which  allow  it  a lar 
greater  virtue  than  that  ol  reprefenting  only. 
The.  cup  of  blejfing  which-  eve  bleji,  is  it  not  the 
communion  of  the  blood  of  Chrill;  ? A means  of 
communicating  the  blood  there  reprefented  and 
remembered,  to  every  believing  foul! 

2.  And  that  it  doth  convey  grace  andblelTing 
to  the  true  believer,  is  evident  from  its  convey- 
ing a curfe  to  theprophane.  Whofoever  eaieth  un- 
worthily, {dxt\\St.VA\A,eateth damnation  to  himfelf 
And  how.  can  we  think,  that  it  is  thus  really  hurt- 
ful when  abufed  ; but  not  really  blifsful  in  its 
right  ufe  ? Or  that  this  bread  fliould  beeffeftual  i 
to  procure  death  but  not  effeftaul  to  procure 
fal.vation  ? God  forbid  that  the  body  cjf  Chrift,  . 
who  came  to  fave,  not  dellroy,  fhould  not  (lied  . 
as  much  of  favour  of  Ufe  to  the  devout  foul,  as  . 
it  doth  of  its  favour  of  death  to  the  wicked  and, 
impenitent. 

3.  I come  then  to  God’s  altar,  with  a full  per- 
fuafion,  that  thefe  words,  This  is  my  body,  pro-  - 
mife  me  more  than  difgure  ; that  this.holy  ban-  . 
guetisnot  a bare  memorial ovhy,  but  may  acbiall)?/ 

G 5 convey 


C 154  ] 

convey  as  many  bleffings  to  me,  as  it  brings  curfes 
on  the  profane  receiver.  Indeed  in  what  manner 
this  is  done,  I know  not,  it  is  enough  for  me  to 
admire.  One  thing  I know,  (as  faid  the  blind  man 
of  our  Lord)  He  laid  day  upon  ?nine  eyes,  and  be- 
hold I Jee.  He  hath  blefied  and  giveri  me  this 

bread,  and  my  foul  received  comfort.  I know, 
that  clav  hath  nothing  in  itfelf,  which  can  impart 
grace,  hollnefs  and  falvation.  But  I know  alfo, 
that  it  is  the  ordinary  way  of  God,  to  produce 
his  greaieft  works,  at  the  prefence  (tho’  not  by 
the  power)  of  the  moft  ufelefs  inftruments.  At 
the  very  ftroke  of  a rod,  he  divdded  the  fea.  At 
the  blowing  fome  trumpets,  he  threw  doUm  maf- 
fy  walls.  At  the  wafhing  in  Jordan,  he  cured  Naa  ■ 
man  of  a plague,  that  was  naturally  Incurable. 
And  when  but  a fliadow  went  by,  or  fome  oil  was 
d.ropped,  or  cloalhs  were  touched  by  thofe  that 
were  fick,  prefently  virtue  went  out,  not  of  rods, 

or  trumpets,  or  fliadows,  dr  cloaths, but  of 

himfelf. 

4.  It  was  the  right-hand  of  the  Lord,  which  of 
old  time  brought  thefe  mighty  things  to  pafs, 
either  wlien  the  red-fea  opened  a way  for  Ifrael 
to  march,  or  when  the  rock  poured  out  rivers  to 
refrelh  them.  And  fo  now  it  it  Chrift  himfelf 
with  his  body  and  blood,  once  offered  to  God 
upon  the  crofs,  and  ever  fince  {landing  before 
him  as  flain,  who  fdls  his  church  with  the  per- 
fumes of  his  facrifice,  whence  faithful  communi- 
cants retiun  borne,  with  the  flrft  fruits  offalvation.. 

Bread 


[ ^55  3 

Bread  and  wine  can  contribute  no  more  to  it, 
than  the  rod  of  Mofes,  or  the  oil  of  the  apoHles. 
But  yet  fince  it  pleafeth  Chrift  to  work  thereby, 

0 my  God,  whenfoever  thou  flialt  bid  me,  Go 
and  waPiin  Jordan,  I will  go  ; and  will  no  more 
doubt  being  made  clean  from  my  fins,  than  if  I 
had  bathed  in  thy  blood.  And  when  thou  fayeft. 
Go,  Take  and  eat  this  bread  which  I have  bleffed, 

1 will  doubt  no  more  of  being  fed  with  the  bread 
of  life,  than  if  I were  eating  thy  very  flefli. 

5.  This  viflim  having  been  offered  up  in  the  ful- 
nefs  of  time,  and  in  the  midfl  of  the  world,  which 
is  Chrifl’s  great  temple,  and  having  been  thence 
carried  up  to  heaven,  which  is  his  fanftuary  ; 
t from  thence  fpreads  falvation  all  around,  as  the 
burnt-offering  did  its  fmoke.  And  thus  his  body 
and  blood  have  every  where,  but  efpecially  at 
this  facrament,  a true  and  real  prefence.  When . 
he  offered  himfelf  upon  earth,  the  vapour  of  his 
atonement  went  up  and  darkened  the  very  fun  ; 
and  by  rending  the  great  veil,  it  clearly  fhewed  . 
he  had  made  a -way  into  heaven.  And , fince  he 
is  gone  up,  he  fends  down  to  earth  the  , 
graces  that  fpring  continually  both  from  his 
everlafting  facrifice,  and  from  the  continual  in- 
terceffion  that  attends  it.  So  that  we  need  not  - 
fay,  IVho  will  go  up  into  heaven?  Since  without  ^ 
either  afcending  or  defcending,  thisfacred  bt/dy 
of  Jefus,  fills  with  atonement  and  bleffing,  the. 
remoteft  parts  of  this  temple, 

6»  Of  thefe  bleffings  Chrift  from  aboveis  pleafed  I 

G.6 


[ j 

to  beft«w  fometimes  more,  fometimes  lefs,  in  the 
feveral  ordinances  of  his  church,  which  as  the 
flars  in  heaven,  differ  from  each  other  in  glory. 
Fafling,  prayer,  hearing  his  word,  are  all  good 
velfcls  to  draw  water  from  this  well  of  falvation. 
But  they  are  not  all  equal.  The  holy  communi- 
on when  well  ufed,  exceeds  as  much  in  the  blef- 
fing,  as  it  exceeds  in  danger  of  a curfe,when  wick- 
edly and  irreverently  taken. 

7.  This  great  and  holy  myftery  communicates 
to  us,  the  death  of  our  blelfed  Lord,  both  as 
offering  himjelj to  God,  and  as  giving  himfelf  to 
man.  As  He  eff^ered  himfdf  to  God,  it  enters  me 
into  that  myflical  body  for  which  he  died,  and 
which  is  dead  with  Chrift : yea,  it  fets  me  on 
the  flioulders  of  that  eternal  prieft,  while  he 
offers  up  himfelf  and  intercedes  for  his  fpiriiual 
Ifrael.  And  by  this  means  it  conveys  to  me  the 
commvnion  of  his  fufferings,  which  leads -to  a com- 
munion in  all  his  graces  and  glories.  As  he  offers 
himfelf  to  man,  the  holy  facrament  is,  after  the 
facrifice  for  fin,  the  true  facrifice  of  peace-offer- 
ings, and  the  table  purpofely  fet ; to  receive 
thofe  mercies  that  are  fent  down  from  hlis.  altar. 
Take  and  eat  ; this  is  my  body  which  is  broken  for 
you.  And  this  is  my  blood  which  v:as  jhed  for 
you. 

8.  Here  then  I wait  at  the  Lord’s  table,  which 
both  jheu's  me  ts  hat  an  apofile,  who  had  heaven 
for  his  fchcol,  had  the  greateft  mind  to  fee  and 
learn,  and  offers  me  thericheft  gift  which  a faint 
can  receive  on  earth,  the  Lord  jfefus  crucified. 

* Amen 


[ ^57  ] 

* Amen,  my  Lord  and  my  God!  Give  me  all 
which  thou  fheweft,  and  grant  that  I may  faith- 
fully keep  all  thou  givelt.  Blefs  thine  ordinance, 
and  make  it  an  effeBual  means  of  thy  grace  : then 
blefs  and  fanftify  my  heart  alfo.  O my  Father, 
here  -I  offer  up  to  thee  my  foul ; and  thou  offerefl 
tome  thy  Son.  What  I offer,  is  indeed  an  unclean 
habitation  to  receive  the  Holy  One  of  Ifrael. 
Gome  in  neverthelefs,  thou  eternal  prieft ; but 
cleanfe  thy  houfe  at  thy  coming.  I am  a poor, 
fmful,  loft  creature  ; but  fuch  as  I am,  finful,  and 
loft,  I wait  for  thy  falvation.  Come  in,  O Lord, 
with  thy  falvation  to  a dying  man  and  make  me 
whole;  to  a finner  bound  hand  and  foot,  andre- 
leafe  me.  Come  as  thou  didft  to  the  Publican. 
Oh  I Let  this  day  falvation  come  to  this  houfe. 


SECT.  V. 

Concerning  the facr ament,  as  it  is  a pledge  of  future 
glory. 

A Pledge  and  an  earneft  differ  in  this,  that 
an  earnejl  may  be  allowed  upon  account, 
for  part  of  that  payment  which  is  promifed, 
whereas  pledges  are  taken  back.  Thus  for  exam- 
ple, zeal,  love,  and  thofe  degrees  of  holinefs, 
•which  God  beftows  in  the  ufe  of  his  facraments, 

- will 


[ -i8  ] 

will  remain  with  us  when  we  are  in  heaven, 
and  there  make  part  of  our  happinefs.  But  the 
facraments  tbemlelves  fliall  be  taken  back,  and 
fhall  no  more  appear  in  heaven,  than  did  the 
cloudy  pillar  in  Canaan.  We  Hiall  have  no  need 
of  thefe  facred Jigures  of  Chrift,  when  we  fee  him 
'face  to  face  ; or  of  thefe  pledges  of  that  glory  to 
be  revealed,  when  we  fliall  aflually  polfefs  it. 
But  till,  this  day,  the  holy  facrament  hath  that 
third  life,  of  being  a pledge,  from  the  Lord  that  he 
will  give  us  that  glory. 

2.  Our  Lord  pointed  at  this,,  when  he  faid  to. 

his  difciples,  the  holy  cup  being  in  his  hand,  that 
he  would.  no  more,  of  that  Jruit,  till  he  Jhould 

drink  it  new  in  the  kingdom  of  his  Father.  In  the 
purpofe  of  God,  his  church  and  heaven  go  both 
together  : that  being  the  way  that  leads  to  this, 
as  the  holy  place  to  the  holiejl ; both  which  are  . 
implied  in  what  Chrift  calls  the  kingdom  of  God. 
Whofoever  thei'efore  are  admitted  to  this  dinner 
of  the  Lamb,  unlefs  they  be  wanting  to  them- 
felves,  need  not  doubt  of  being  admitted  to  the 
marriagefupper  of  him,  wdio  was  dead,  but  now 
liveth  for  evermore. 

3.  Our  Saviour  hath  given  us  by  his  death  three 
kinds  of  life  ; and  he  promifes  to  nourifli  us  inu 
every  one  of  them,  by  thefe  toketis  of  bread  and 
wine.  Two  of  thefe  are  already  nourilhed  here- 
by ; but  the  third  we  are  not  yet  come  to.  This 
is  that  eternal  life,  for  which  tve  are  as  yet  too 
vile  vefiels.  We  are  now  neither  of  age  to  enjoy 

our 


[ 159  ] 

our  inheritance,  nor  able  to  bear  the  weight  of' 
eternal  glory.  And  therefore  it  is,  it  lies  for  us 
in  his  hands.  But  we  know  in  whom  we.  have  be- 
lieved, and  are  per  funded  he  is  able  io  keep  thatfafe, 
which  we  have  committed  unto  him  agairji  that  day. 
By  faith  we  depofit  or  lay  down  this  great  trea- 
fure  in  the  hands  ol  God  to  keep.  And  God  by 
this  facrament  alfures  us,  both  that  he  will 
keep  it  fafe,  and  will  reftore  it  to  us  when  w'e 
are  meet  for  it. 

4.  'I  he  third  ufe  is  the  crown  of  the  other 
two  ; and  indeed  they  all  aim  at  the  fame  glory. 
The  firfl:  is,  to  fet  out  as  new  and  frelh  the  holy 
fufferings,  which  have  purchafed  our  title  to 
eternal  happinefs:  The  fecond  is,  both  to  repre- 
fent  and  to  convey  to  our  fouls,  all  neceffary 
graces  to  qualify  us  for  it : And  the  third  is,  to 

.^affure  us,  that  when  we  are  qualified  for  it,  God 
will  faithfully  render  to  us  the  purchafe.  And 
thefe  three  make  up  the  proper  fenfe  of  thofe 
words.  Take,  eat  ^ this  is  my  body,  for  the  con- 
fecrated  bread  doth  not  only  reprefenthis  body, 
and  bring  the  virtue  of  it  into  our  fouls  on  earth  ; 
but  as  to  our  happinefs  in  heaven  bought  with 
that  price,  it  is  the  mofl  folemn  inflrument  to  af- 
fure  our  title  to  it., 

5.  Our  bleffed  Lord  being  defirous  before  his, 
death,  as  by  adeedof  hislaftwill,  to  fettle  on  his 
difciples  both  fuch  a meafure  of  grace  in  this, 
life,  as  might  now  make  them  holy;  and  after 
■dus  life,  fuch  a fulnefs  of bleffings  as  migLt  make- 

them 


r ] 

them  eternally  happy : he  delivers  into  our 
hands,  by  way  of  inftrument  and  conveyance,  the 
blefled  facrament  of  his  body  and  bipod  : in  the 
fame  manner  as  kings  ufe  to  bellow  dignities,  by 
the  bellowing  of  a Jiaff  or  a /word and  as  fa- 
thers bellow  ellates  on  their  children  by  giving 
them  fome  few  writings. 

6.  The  reafon  of  afl  this  is,  the  giver  cannot 
put  into  his  friend’s  hands,  houfes  and  lands,  be- 

. caufe  they  are  of  an  immoveable  nature.  And 
therefore  this  may  be  fupplied  by  fome  forms  or 
tokens,  by  which  his  delign  may  be  fufficiently 
made  known.  Now  Chrill  and  his  ellate,  his 
happinefs  and  his  glory,  his  eternity  and  his  hea- 
ven, are  not  things  that  may  be  moved  any 
more  than  the  mountains  on  the  earth.  And 
therefore  thefe  can  be  no  otherwife  made  over, 
than  great  immoveable  ellates  are.  Wherefore 
as  the  kingdom  of  Ifrael,  was  once  made  over  to 
David,  w'ith  the  oil  that  Samuel  poured  upon 
Kis  head ; fo  the  body  and  blood  of  Jefus  is  in full 
value,  and  heaven  with  all  its  glor\',  in  Jure  title 
made  over  to  true  Chrillians  by  that  bread  and 
wine  which  they  receive  in  the  holy  commu- 
nion; the  miniller  of  Chrill  having  as  much 
power  from  his  Mailer  for  doing  this,  as  any  pro- 
phet ever  had  for  what  he  did. 

7.  O Lord  Jefu,  who  hall  ordained  thefe  myf- 
teries  for  a communion  of  thy  body,  a means  of 
thy  grace,  and  a pledge  of  thy  glory  ; fettle  me 
hereby  in  the  communion  of  thy  fufferings  which 

(her 


[ ] 

they Jhew forth  ; feed  me  with  that  living  bread 
which  they  prefont,  and  fanftify  me  in  body  and 
fpirit  for  that  eternal  happinefs  which  they  pro- 
mifoe,. 

* Eternal  Prieft,  who  art  gone  up  on  high,  to 
receive  gifts  for  men,  fill  my  heart,  I befeech 
thee,  with  blefiangs  out  of  thy  holy  fe^t,  as  now 
thou  fillell  my  mouth  with  the  holy  things  of  thy 
church.  O that  in  the  ftrength  of  this  meat,  I 
may  walk  my  forty  days,  till  I come  to  that  holy 
mountain,  where  without  the  help  of  any  bread 
or  outw'ard  fign,  I fhall  fee  my  God  face  to  face. 
Blelfed  Spirit,  help  me  to  drink  fo  worthily  of 
this  fruit  of  the  vine,  that  I may  drink  it  new  in 
the  kingdom  of  my  Father! 


SECT.  VI. 

Concerning  the foacr ament,  as  it  is  a facrifice.  And 
firfo,  of  the  commemorative  foacrifoce. 

1.  ^ I ''HERE  never  was  on  earth  a true  religion, 
without  fome  kind  of  facrifices.  And 
the  Heathens  who  call  this  flander  on  the  Chrif* 
tian  church,  did  It  for  no  better  reafon  than  this, 
becaufe  they  faw  neither  altars  fet  up,  nor  beads 
flainor  burnt  among  them.  Even  as  theyaccufed 

the 


[ J 

the  Jews  of  adoring  nothing  but  clouds,  bec^ufe 
they  had  no  gods  of  ftone  or  filver.  Whereas 
in  truth,  as  what  was  ftone  or  filver,  could  not  be 
a god  ; fo  neither  could  the  bare  flaughter  of 
beads  be  a real  facrifice.  None  of  thefe  facrifi- 
ces  could  ever  take  away  fin,  but  in  dependance 
on  that  of  Jefus  Chrift.  And  no  facrifice  under 
-the  law  could  reprefent  our  fervice  to  God,  fo 
tully  as  it  is  done  under  the  gofpel.  The  holy 
communion  alone  brings  together  thefe  two  great 
ends,  atonement  of  fins,  and  acceptable  dutv  to 
God,  of  which  all  the  facrifices  of  old  were  no 
more  than  w^eak  fhadows.  As  for  the  atonement 
of  fin,  it  is  fure  the  facrifice  of  Chrifl:  alone  was 
fufficient  for  it;  and  that  this  great  facrifice,  be- 
ing both  of  an  infinite  value,  to  fatisfy  the  mod 
fevere  juftice,  and  of  an  infinite  virtue,  to  pro- 
duce all  its  elfefts  at  once,  need  never  more  be 
repeated.  This  perhaps  was  the  want  of  faith  in 
Mofes  ; (Numb.  xx.  12.)  to  ftrike  a fecond  time, 
and  w'ithout  order,  that  mvfterious  rock,  which 
to  ftrike  once  h^d  been  enough.  For  this  fecond 
blow  could  only  proceed  from  a faithful  miftruft, 
as  if  the  firft,  which  alone  was  enjoined,  could  not 
fuffice.  But  it  were  a much  greater  offence 
againft  the  blood  of  Chrift,  to  queftion  its  infinite 
worth.  The  offering  of  it  therefore  muft  needs 
be  once  only;  and  the  repeating  thereof,  utterly 
fuperfluous. 

2.  Neverthelefs,  this  facrifice,  which  by  a real 
oblation  was  not  to  be  offered  more  than  once,  is 

by 


' 163  ] 

by  a devout  and  thankful  commemoration,  , to  be 
offered  up  every  day.  This  is  what  tlie  apoflie 
calls,  To  ftt  forth  the  death  oj the  Lord : to  fet  it 
forth  as  well  before  the  eyes  of  God  his  Father, 
as  before  the  eyes  of  men : and  what  St.  Auflin 
explained,  when  he  faid.  The  hofy  flefli  ofjefus 
was  offered  in  three  manners ; by  prefiguring 
facrifices  under  the  law,  before  his  coming  into 
the  world,  in  real  deed  upon  his  crofs,  and  by  a 
commernorative  facrafnent  after  he  afcended  into 
heaven.  All  comes  to  this,  1.  That  the /ur/  y?ce 
in  itfelf  can  never  be  repeated  ; 2.  That  never- 
thelefs,  this ‘facrament,  by  our  remembrance,  be- 
comes a kind  of  facrijice,  whereby  we  prefent 
before  God  the  Father,  that  precious  oblation  of 
his  Son  once  offered.  And  thus  do  we  every 
day  offer  unto  God,  the  meritorious  fufferings  of 
our  Lord,  as  the  only  fate  groun'd  whefeon'God 
may  give,  and  A'^e  obtain  thd  blfe'ffings' we  pray 
for.  Norv,  there  is  no  ordinance  or  myftery, 
that  is  fo  bleffedan  inflrument  to  reach  this  ever- 
lafting-  facrifice,  and  to  fet  it  foleranly  forlh  be- 
fore the  eyes  of  God,  as  the  holy'  com'rritmion  fs.‘ 
To  men  it  -x  fatred  table,  where  God's  minifter 
is  ordered  to  reprefenf  from  God  his  maflef,  the 
paffion  of  his  dear  Son,  as  ftill  freflr,  and  ftill 
powerful  for  their  eternal  falvation.  And  to  God 
it  is  an  altar,  wAereonm.en  myftically  prefent  to 
him  the  fame  facrifice,  as  ftill  bleeding  and  filing 
for  mercy.  And  becaufe  it  is  the  High  Prieft 
himfelf,  the  true  anointed  of  the  Lord,  who  hath 

fet 


C 164  ] 

fet  up  both  this  table  and  the  altar,  for  the  com- 
munication of  his  body  and  blood  to  men,  and  for 
the  reprefentation  of  both  to  God  : it  cannot  be 
doubted  but  that  the  one  is  moft  profitable  to  the 
penitent  finner,  and  the  other  moft  acceptable  to 
his  gracious  Father. 

3.  The  people  of  Ifrael  in  worfhipping,  ever 
turned  their  eyes  and  their  hearts  towards  that 
facrifice,  the  blood  whereof  the  high  prieft  was 
to  carry  into  the  fanftuary.  So  let  us  ever  turn 
our  eyes  and  hearts  tow’ai'ds  Jefus  our  eternal 
High  Prieft,  who  is  gone  up  into  the  true  fanftu- 
ary,  and  doth  there  continually  prefent  both  his 
own  body  and  blood  before  God,  and  (as  Aaron 
did)  all  the  true  Ifrael  of  God  in  a memorial.  In 
the  mean  time  we,  beneath  in  the  church,  pre- 
fent to  God  his  body  and  blood  in  a manorial, 
that  under  this  fhadow  of  his  crofs,  and  figure  of 
his  facrifice,  w'e  may  prefent  ourfelves  in  very 
deed  before  him. 

4.  O Lord,  who  feeft  nothing  in  me  that  is 
truly  mine,  but  finful  duft  and  afhes,  look  upon 
the  facrifice  of  thy  dear  Son,  once  offered  for  my 
fins.  Turn  thine  eyes,  O merciful  Father,  to 
the  fatisfaflion  and  interceflion  of  my  Lord, 
who  now  fits  at  thy  right  hand  j to  the  feals  of 
thy  covenant,  which  lie  before  thee  upon  this 
table;  and  to  all  the  wants,  weakneflcs  and  dif- 
trelfes,  which  thou  feeft  in  my  heart.  O Father, 
glorify  thy  Son  ; O Son  of  God,  blefs  thou 
thine  ordinance,  and  fend  w’ith  it  the  influence 

of 


[ 1^5  ] 

of  that  Spirit  whom  thou  hall  promifed  to  all 
flelh : that  by  the  help  of  thefe  mercies,  the 
world,  the  church,  and  our  fouls  may  glorify 
thee  now  and  ever. 


SECT,  VII. 

Concerning  the  facrifice  of  ourjllves. 

1. ' I "'OO  many  who  are  called  Chriftians,  live 
as  if  under  the  gofpel,  there  were  no  fa- 
crifice but  that  of  Chrift  on  the  crofs.  And  in- 
deed there  is  no  other,  that  can  atone  for  our  fins, 
or  fatisfy  the  juflice  of  God.  Though  the  whole 
church  fhould  offer  up  herfelf  as  a burnt-facrifice 
to  God,  yet  could  fhe  contribute  no  more  to- 
wards bearing  away  the  wrath  to  come,  than 
thofe  who  Hood  near  Chrift  when  he  gave  up  the 
Ghoft,  did  towards  the  darkening  of  the  fun,  or 
the  fhaking  of  the  earth.  But  what  is  not  ne- 
ceflary  to  this  facrifice  which  alone  redeemed 
mankind,  is  abfolutely  necelfary  to  our  having  a 
fhare  in  that  redemption.  So  that  though  the 
facrifice  of  ourfelves  cannot  procure  falvatlon, 
yet  it  is  altogether  needful  to  our  receiving  it. 

2.  As  Aaron  never  came  in  before  the  Lord 
without  the  whole  people  of  Ifrael,  reprefented 

both 


[ I&6  ] 

botli  by  the  twelve  (tones  on  liis  Lieatt,  and  bv 
tlje  two -.others  on  his  fhouldcr  : fo  JeCus  Chrift 
does  nothing  without  his  church,  infomuch  that 
fometimes  they  are  rep  re  fen  ted  as,  only  one  per- 
fon  ; feeing  Chrift  afls  and  fuffers  for  his  body, 
in  that  manner  which  becomes  the  head,  and  the 
church  follows,  all  ..the  motions- and- fufferings  of 
her  head,  in  fuch  a manner  as  is  poffible  to  its 
weak  members. 

Q.  The  whole  divinity  of  St.  Paul  turns  upon 
this  conformity  both  ot  aftions  and  fufferings  ; 
and  that  oi  St.  John  likewife,  upon  this  fame 
communion  and  fellowfhip.  The  truth  is,  our 
Lord  had  neither  biriio,  nor  death,  nor  refurrer- 
tion  on  earth,  but  fuch  as  we  are  to  conform  to  : 
as  he  hath  neither  afcenhon,  nor  everlafling  life, 
nor  glory  in  heaven,  but  fuch  as  we  may  have  in 
common  with  him. 

4.  This  conformity  to  Chrif,  which  is  the 

grand  principle  of  the  whole  Chriftian  religion, 
relates  firft  to  our  duty,  about  his  f {firings  ; and 
then  to  our  happinefs  about  his  exaltation,  pre- 
fuppofing  his  Jvfferings.  And  both  make  up  a 
full  comment  on  our  Lord’s  frequent  command 
to  his  difciples.  To  follow  him.  For  without 
doubt  w^e  fhall  follow  him  into  heaven,  if  we  will 
follow  him  on  earth : and  (liall  have  communion 
with  him  in  glory,  if  we  have  confoi  mity  w'ith 
him  here  in  hisyiv^^m>/gr.  < 

5.  Thefe  expreftions  to  follow,  to  have  confor- 
mity, and  to  have  comniunion,  oblige  us  all  to  fol- 
low 


[16;] 

low  him,  as  much  as  in  us  lies,  through  ail  the 
parts  of  his  life,  and  every  funflion  of  his  office. 
We  mult  be  born  with  him,  die  on  his  crofs,  be 
buried  in  his  grave,  fuffer  in  his  tribulations. 
Chrift  and  Chriflians  ipufl  be  continually  toge- 
ther: Whtre  I am,  faith  he,  there  Jhall  mv  fer- 
vant  be.  But  of  all  thefe  duties,  the  molt  ne- 
celfary  is,  the  bearing  the  crofs,  and  dying  v^ith 
him  in  facrifice. 

6.  Chrift  never  defi^ned  to  offer  himielf  for 
his  people,  without  his  people,  no  more  than  the 
high-priells  of  old.  He  prefented  liimfelf  to 
God  in  this  great  temple,  the  world,  at  the  head 
of  whole  mankind.  He  came  as  a voluntary 
viftim  to  the  altar,  being  attended  on  by  his  Ifrael 
wdro,  as  it  were,  with  their  hands  laid  all  their 
fins  upon  his  (head.  Therefore  as  it  was  neceffan' 
that  they  who  fought  for  atonement  fhould  wait 
upon  the  facrifice  : fo  it  is  that  whoever  feeks 
eternal  falvation,  fhould  wait  at  that  altar,  the 
crofs,  whereon  this  eternal  priefl  and  facrifice, 
was  pleafed  to  offer  up  himfelf. 

7.  The  finners  indeed  under  the  law  did  not 
die  at  the  altar,  the  viftim  alone  being  burned 
and  deflroyed.  But  becaufe  they  laid  their 
hands  on  it,  when  it  was  dying,  and  fell  on  their 
faces  to  the  ground,  when  it  fell  bleeding  to 
death,  they  were  reputed  to  offer  up  themfelves 
as  well  as  tlie  viftim.  So  Chriflians  are  not 
crucified  in  the  fame  manner  as  Chrift  was,  yet 
becaufe  they  call  themfelves  upon  his  crofs  and 

fufferings, 


[ ■68  ] 

Fufferings,  as  the  only  means  of  atonement  for 
their  fins,  and  falvation  for  their  fouls,  becaufe 
of  the  grief  they  fuffer,  to  think  of  the  Son  of 
God  thus  dying,  dying  only  for  their  fake, 
which  is  as  -a  fword  hgth  to  pierce  their 
hearts,  and  to  pierce  and  crucify  their  fins  ; and 
becaufe  their  whole  body  of  fin  being  thus  cruci- 
fied, there  remains  no  life  in  them,  but  what  is 
offered  up  to  God’s  fervice  ; on  allthefe  grounds, 
the  Saviour  thus  offering  himfelf,  and  the  faved 
fo  united  to  him  by  faith,  fo  partaking  of  his  fuf- 
ferings,  andfo  given  up  to  his  will,  are  accounted 
before  God  one  and  the  fame  facrifice. 

8.  But  be  it  obferved,  that  in  order  to  their 
being  fo  accounted,  they  are  to  crucify  their  fin- 
ful  members,  as  really  as  Chrift  himfelf  had  his 
finlefs  body  crucified  : fo  that  each  may  fav, 
I am  crucifud  to  the  world,  and  the  world  crucified 
to  me.  And  thus  Jefus  Chrift  and  his  whole 
church  do  together  make  up  that  compleat  facri- 
fice which  was  forefhewn  by  that  of  old,  whereof 
the  kidneys  and  fat  were  burnt  upon  the  altar ; 
but  the  flefh,  the  fkin,  feet,  and  dung,  (emblems 
of  fin)  were  thrown  and  burnt  without  the  camp. 
For  Chrift  and  his  church  fo  join  in  one  offering 
that  he  contributes  all  than  can  go  up  into  heaven, 
to  appeafe  and  pleafe  God;  and  we  contribute 
nothing  but  fin,  but  what  muft  be  removed  out 
of  the  way  ; yea,  and  fo  that  it  is  needful  far- 
ther, in  order  to  our  being  accounted  one  facrifice 
with  him,  that  not  only  our  perfons,  but  ail  our 

affions, 


['  1^9  j: 

afUons  likewife,  be  wholly  devoted  to  God. 
lam  crucified  with  Chrijl.  Now  (faith 

the  QhniYia.n)  bud  Chrfi  liveth  in  me.'.  And  the 
life  which  / noke  live  in  the'jlejh,  7 live  by  faith  in 
theSonqf  o.  . 

9.  This  a£l  of  th'e  thurch  confecrating  herfelf 
to  God,  and-  fo!  joined  to  Chrift,  as  to  make  but 
one  oblation  with  hirii,  is  the  myfierv  which  was 
once  reprefented  by  the  daily'  facrifice  :.the  firll 
and  chief  part  whereof  was  the  Lamb,  which  did 
forefliew  the  Lamb' of  God  ; the  ftcond  was  the 
meat  (or  rather  meal)  and  drink-oBering,  made 
of  flour,  mingled  with  oil  and  wine  ; all  syhich 
being  thrown  on  the  lamb  contihiially,  was  ac- 
counted one  and’ the  fame  facrifice.  Now  ihefe 
which  were  fo  thrown  on  the  main  facrifice, 
fignified  properly  thefe  offerings,  which  Chrif- 
tians  muit  prefent  to  God  of  themfelves,  their 
goods  and  their  praifes.  From  i\\\&meal  and  drink- 
offering  came  the  bread  and  wine  to  be  ufed  in 
the  Lord’s  fupper.  Now  all  we  can  offer  on  our 
own  account,  is  but  fuch  an  oblation,  as  this  meal 
and  drink-offering  was,  which  cannoibe  prefent-- 
ed  alone,  but  only  with  the  merits  of  Jefus  Chriff,- 
and  which  cannot  go  to  heaven,  but  tvith  the 
fmoke  of  that  great  burtit-facrifice.  On  the  one 
fide,  neither  our  perfons  nor  works  can  be  pre- 
fented  to  God,  otherwife  than  as- thefe  addi- 
tional offerings,  which  of  themfelves  fall  to  the 
ground,  unlefs  the  great  facrifice  fuflain  them. 
And  on  the  othej  fide,  this  great  facrifice  faftains 
VoL.  XXIII.  H and 


C 170  3' 

and  fanctilies  only  thofe  things,  that  are  throwa 
into  his  fire,  hallowed  upon  his  altar,  and  toge-  . 
ther  with  him  confecrated  to  God. 

10.  Now  though  we  are  called  at  all  times  to 
this  conformily  and  communion  in  the  fufferings 
of  Chrift,  yet  more  efpecially  when  we  approach 
this  dreadful  myfiery,  let  us  take  a peculiar  care, 
that  as  both  the  principal  and  additional  facrifi-  , 
ces  went  up  toward  heaven  in  the  fame  flame, 
fo  Jefus  Chrift  and  all  his  members,  may  joint- 
]y  appear  before  God,  that  we  may  offer  up  our 
fouls  and  bodies,  at  the  fame  tince,  in  the  fame 
place,  and  in  the  fame  oblation.  Let  U3  take 
care  to  attend  on  this  facrifice  in  fuch  a manner, 
1.  As  may  become  faithful  difciplcs,  who  are  re- 
folved  to  die  for  and  with  their  mafler.  2.  As 
true  members  that  cannot  outlive  their  head  ; and 
3.  As  penitent  finners,  who  cannot  look  for  any 
fhare  in  the  glory  of  their  Saviour,  unlefs  thev 
really  enter  info  the  communion  of  that  facrifice 
and  thofe  fufferings,  which  their  mailer,  tlieir 
head,  and  their  Saviour  has  pafi  through,  and 
which  they  are  engaged  to,  by  this  very  facra~ 
nient. 

1 1.  To  this  effect,  the  faithful  Worfliipper,  pre- 
fenting  that  foul  and  bodv.  whi».h  God  hath 
given  him,  at  the  altar,  inav  fay, 

^ Lo,  1 come  ! If  this  foul  and  hod'c  may  be  ufe- 
ful  to  any  thing,  io  do  thy  will,  O God.  And 
if  it  pleafe  thee  to  ufe  the  powder  thou  ha  ft  over 
<Juft  and  allies,  over  weak  flefh  and  blood,  ov'er 

*l  brittle 


[ 3 

a brittle  vefTel  of  clay,  over  tlie  work  of  thine 
hands  ; lo,  here  they  are,  to  fuffer  alfo  thy  good 
pleafure.  If  thou  pleafe  to  vifit  me  either  with 
pain  or  difhonour,  I vijlW  humble  7ny f elf  it, 

and  through  thy  grace,  be  obedient^  unto  death, 
even  the  death  upon  the  crofs.  Whatfoever  may 
befall  me  either  from  neighbours  or  ftrangers, 
iince  it  is  thou  employeft  them,  though  they 
know  it  not,  (unlefs  thou  help  me  to  fome  lawful 
means  of  redreding  the  wrong)  I will  not  open 
Iny  mouth  before  the  Lord  who  fmiteth  me,  except 
only  to  ling  the  pfalm,  after  I have  eaten  thofe 
bitter  herbs  wliich  belong  to  this  paf  over,  and  to 
blefs  the  Lord.  Hereafter  no  man  can  take  away 
any  thing  from  me,  no  life,  no  honour,  no  ef- 
tate  ; fince  I am  ready  to  lay  them  down,  as  foon 
I perceive  thou  requireft  t'hem  at  m'/  hand.  Ne- 
verthelefs,  0 Father  I if  thou  be  willing,  remove 
this  cup  from  me-;  but  if  not,  thy  will  be  done. 
Whatever  fuITeriiigs  hereafter  may  trouble  my 
flefli,  or  whatever  agonies  may  trouble  my  fpirit, 
0 Father,  into  thy  hand  will  I commend  my  life, 
and  all  that  concerneth  it.  And  if  thou  be  pleaf- 
ed,  either  that  1 live,  yet  awhile,  or  not,  I will 
with  my  Saviour,  bow  down  my  head,  I will  hum- 
ble myfelf  under  thy  hand  ; I will  give  up  all 
thou  art  pleafed  to  aik,  until  at  laft  I give  up  the. 
-Ghojl. 

* 12.  O God  and  Father,  beflow  on  me  fuch 

meafure.  of  that  fpirit,  through  which  thy-  Son 
as  may  fanftify  for  ever  the 
H 2 


body 

and 


offered  himfelf 


I 172  ] 

foul  which  I now  pfler  : a fplrlt  of  contriii^ 
on,  that  I may  loath  thofe  fins  which  deliyered 
my  God  to  death  ; and  a fpirit  of  holinefs,  that 
I may  never  be  tempted  to  them  again,  any 
more  than  a crucified  man  can  be  tempted.  O 
let  this  body  never  be  untied  from  his  crofs,  to 
return  a-frefii  to  folly  and  vanity.  Arm  and  rod 
of  the  Lord,  who  didft  revenge  my  fins  on  thy 
own  Son,  corrcft  and  deftroy  them  alfo  in  me. 
O my  God,  accept  of  a heart,  that  flieds  now 
before  thee  its  tears,  as  a poor  viflim  docs  its 
blood;  and  that  raifes  up  unto  tliee  all  its  dcfires, 
as  a burnt-offering  does  its  flames.  And  fince 
my  facnfice  can  neither  be  holy  nor  accepted,  be- 
ing alone,  receive  it,  O Father,  cloathed  with 
the  righteoufnefs  of  thv  S(  n,  and  made  accG])ta- 
hle  with  that  holy  pcriumc  which  rifes  from  off 
hhs  altar  ; and  gi'ant  th^t  be  who  faiiftifies,*  and 
they  who  are  fanttified,  may  partake  of  one  paf- 
fion,  and  enjoy  with  thee  the  fame  glory  1 


/ 


SECT.  VIJI. 

Concerning  ike  Sacnjice  cf  cur  goccs. 


1.  TT  it  an  exprefs  comm  and  of  God  bv  Mofes, 
A That  no  worihipper  IhouM  appear  before 
the  Lord  einpt)’.  Nor  is  this  repealed  bv  Chrilf. 
Sincere  Chnihans  theieiOie,  at  the  receiv  ing  of 

tlie 


[ ^73  ] 

the  holy  communion,  fhould  together  with  the 
a61ual  facrifice  of  themfelves,  bring  thefree-will- 
cff^ering  o{x\\e.'iT  goods.  Indeed  this  as  naturally 
follows  the  former,  as  the  fruits  and  leaves  follow 
the  free  ; arid  as  what  we  'hahe  or  can,  comes 
alter  trhat  we  are.  Otherwife,  our  facrifice 
were  maimed,  and  would  not  fuit  with  that  of 
Chrift,  w’hich  was  whole  and  entire.  Therefore 
as  orir  bodies  and  fouls  are  facrifices  attending 
the  facrifice  of  Chrifi,  fo  mull:  all  our  goods  at- 
tend the  facrifice  of  our  perfons.  In  a word, 
whenfoever  we  offer  ourfelves,  we  offer  by  the 
ftli-fame  'acf,  all  that  tve  hav^e,  all  that  we  can, 
and  do  therein  engage  fur  all,  that  it  Ihall*  be 
dedicated  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  that  it  fhall  be 
furrendered  into  his  hands,  and  employed  for  fuch 
tifes  as  hefiidll  appoint. 

2.  It  behoved  Ifrael  to  go  forth  out  ofEgypt, 
with  all  their  cattle  and  goods,  to  offer  them  unto- 
the  Lord,  that  he  might  take  either  all,  or  fuch 
a part,  as  he  would  be  pleafed  to  chufe.  And 
fo  it  behoves  every  fmner  at  his  converfion  to 
God,  and  whenever  he  approaches  his  table, 
to  Confecrate  all  he  has  to  Jefus  Chrift.  From 
that  very  m.oment  that  we  give  up  ourfelves  to 
Chrift,  who  hath  likewlfe  given  himfelf  for  us, 
as  allhepoffelles  becomes  ours,  namely  bis  grace 
his  immortality,  his  glory,  (which  he  beftows 
upon  us  at  the  times  he  fees  heft  for  dur  falva- 
tidn)  fo  all  we  have  becomes  his,  and  he  may  take 
it  afrer,  in  what  time  and  irianner  he  fhall  fee  beft 
H 3 for 


[ 174  ] 

for  his  glory.  All  things  are  his,  as  he  is  fov*- 
relgn  Lord  and  God.  But  all  that  we  have 
is  his,  by  a farther  title,  becaufe  we  have  . 
given  them,  with  our  own  perfons,  by  our 
own  aft  and  deed.  So  that  all  which  we  are, 
which  we  can  give,  even  to  the  leaft  velTel 
in  pur  houfes,  is  made  holy  in  this  one  confecra- 
tion,  according  to  the  words  of  tlie  prophet : Jn 
that  day  Jliall  be  upon  the  very  bridles  of  thehorfes, 
holinefs  unto  the  Lord:  And  every  pot  in  Jerufalem 
and  Judah,j/I^fl//  be  holy  unto  the  Lord,  Zech.  xivi 
20,  21. 

3.  This  confecration  whereby  the  worfhipper 
offers  up  hirafelf  and  all  his  concerns  to  God,  is 

Firft,as  to  our  fouls  and  bodies,  an  ioexpref- 
fible  bleffing,  raifing  us  to  the  very  nature,  the  ho* 
Hnefs,  and  immortality  of  God. 

* Secondly,  as  to  the  confecrated  things,  it  is 
a miraculous  privilege,  which  infinitely  multiplies 
whatever  is  thus  parted  with.  It  bleffes  the  ufe 
of  it,  although  it  be  but  prefented,  as  long  as 
tve  can  enjoy  it  : and  exchanges  it,  when  we 
can  enjoy  it  no  more,  not  as  if  water  was  turned 
into  wine,  or  dirt  into  gold  ; but  as  if  we  con- 
ceive a glafs  of  w’ater  turned  into  ftreams  of  ever* 
lafling  comforts,  fmall  cottages  of  clay  into  royal 
palaces,  or  the  duft  of  Ifrael  into  fo  many  ftars  of 
heaven. 

4.  Now  though  our  Lord,  by  that  everlafling 
facrlfice  ofhimfelf,  offers  himfelf  at  all  times  and 
in  all  places,  as  w C likewife  offer  ourfelves  and 

all 


C 175] 

all  that  is  ours,  to  be  a continual  facrificc':  yet 
hecaiife  Chrift  offers  himfelf  for  us  at  the'  Koly 
communion,  in  a peculiar  manner,  we  alfo  fhould 
then,  in  a more  fpecial  manner,  renewal!  our 
facrifices.  Then-  and  there,  at  the  altar  ®f  God, 
it  is  right,  both  to  repeat  all  the  vows  and  pro-^ 
mifes,  which  for  fdme  hindrance  or  other,  we  had 
not  yet  the  covenience  to  fulfill  ; and  to  renew 
all  thofe  other  performances-,  which  can  never 
be  fulfilled  but  with  the  end  of  our,  days. 

5.  But  at  the  fame  time  that  the  Chriftian- 
believer  does  any  good  work,  let  him  draw  out 
of  the  good  treafure  of  his  heart,  fire  and  Jrank- 
incenfe,  that  is,  fuch  zeal  and  love  as  may  raife 
good,  moral  works,  inta  religious  facrifices. 
Whenever  he  helps  his  neighbour,  fet  him  fo 
reverently  and  fervently  lift  up  liis  heart  to  God 
as  may  become  both  that  majeffy  he  adores,  and 
the  pious  a61,^which  he  intends.  And  then  when- 
ever fie  do  it,  at  his  door,  or  in  the  tvay,  or  in 
the  temple,  it  matters  not : for  the  hour  is  long 
fince  come,  that  a61s  of  religion  are  not  confined 
either  to  Jtrufahm,  err  to  this  mountain.  Where- 
loever  thou  haft  the  occafion  of  doing  a holy 
work,  there  God  makes  holy  ground  for  thee ; 
only,  in  order  to  become  a fpiritual  ivorfhipper, 
the  work  muft  be  done  in  fpirit  and  in  truth  : 
with  fuch  a mind  and  thought,  with  fuch  faith 
and  love,  as  though  thou  wert  laying  thy  oblation 
upon  the  altar,  where  thou  knoweft  that  Chrift 
will  both  effe£lually  find,  and  gracioufly  accept  it. 

H 4 6.1 


[ ^76  3 

' 6 I .dare,  appear  before  the  Lord,  with  all 
my  fins  and  my  forrows.  It  is  juftalfothatl 
fhould  appear  with  thefe  few  bleffings.  Having 
receivedthem  of  thy  harfd^  now  do  l ofifer  them  to 
thee  again.  Forgive,  I hefpech  the.e,  my  fins,  de- 
liver me  from  my  forrows,  and  accept  of  this  my 
facrifice,;  or  rather  look,,  in  ray  behalf  on  that 
■only  true  facrifice,  whereof  here  .is  the  facra- 
ment,  the  facrifice  of  thy  well-belpyed  Son,  pro- 
ceeding from  thee,  to  die  for  me.  O let' him 
come  unto  me  no'vy,  as, the  only  begotten.of thp 
.Father,  full  of  grace  and  ■ uth  ! 


■(!;  ■I . ■ ■ ^ J ' . • - I- 

0 u ■ ’ ' 


[ »77  } 


Aa  EXTRACT  from  a 

T R - E A T I S E 

CONCERNING 

RELIGIOUS  AFFECTIONS 

Ill  Three  Parts. 

Part  I.  Coneerning  the  nature  of  the  afftBions^  ^ 
and  their  importance  in  religion,  i 

I o 

Part  II.  Shewing  what  are  no  certain  figns 
that  religious  ajfeilions  are  gracious,  or.  that’- 
they  are  not. 

Part  III.  Shewing  what  are  dijlinguijhingjigns , 
of  truly. grridoza  anal  holy  affetlions. 


By  the  late  Rev.  JONATHAN  EDWARDS.,^ 
A.  M.  and  Prelident  of  the  College  of  Nezo-?^.. 
Jtrfey. 

H5  Tst. 


r 178  ] 


To  the  READER. 

i.J'HE  dejign  of  Mr.  Edwards  in  the  treatife^ 
from  which  the  following  extracl  is  made, 
feems  to  have  been  (chief y,  if  not  altogether)  to 
ferve  his  hypothefis.  In  three  preceding  iraHs,  he 
had  given  an  account  of  a glorious  work  in  New- 
England  ; of  abundance  ojfnner  s of  every  fort  and 
degree,  who  were  in  a fort  time  converted  to  God. 
But  in  a few  years,  a corfiderable  part  of  thefe, 
turned  back  as  a dog  to  the  vomit.  What  was 
the  plain  inference  to  be  drawn  from  this  ? Why, 
that  a true  believer  may  make  fliipwreck  of  the 
faith.  How  then  could  he  evade  the  force  oj  this? 
Trtdy  by  eating  Ins  own  words,  and  proving,  ( as 
well  as  the  nature  of  the  thing  would  bear)  that 
they  were  no  believers  at  all! 

2.  In  order  to  this,  he  heaps  together  fo  many 
euriou},  fubtle,  metaphyfical  difindions,  as  are 
fuffeient  to  puzzle  the  brain  and  confound  the  in- 

telleEls  of  all  the  plain  men  and  women  in  the  uni- 
verfe,  and  to  make  them  doubt  of,  f not  wholly 
deny,  all  the  work  which  God  had  wrought  in  their 
fouls. 

3.  Out  of  this  dangerous  heap,  wherein  muth 
■uholfome  food  is  mixt  with  much  deadly  poifon,  I 
have  JelcBed  many  remarks  and  admonitions, 
■which  may  be  of  great  ufe  to  the  children  of  God. 

May 


[ 179  ] 

May  God  write  them  in  the  hearts  of  all  that 
defire  to  walk  as  Chrifi  alfo  walked  I 
Bristol, 

Sept.  1,  i773‘ 


PART  I. 

Concerning  the  nature  of  the  affe£)ions,  and  thc-ir 
importance  in  religion. 

1 Peter  i.  8. 

Jlliom  having  not  feen  ye  love:  in  whom,  though 
now  ye  fee  him  not,,  yet  believing,  ye  rejoice  wilri- 
joy  unfpeakable  and full  of  glory  ^ 

IN  thefe  words,  the  apoftle  reprefents  the  date 
ol  mind  of  the  Clirilliaus  to  whom  he  wrote, 
under  the  perfecutions  they  then  fuffered. 
Thefe  perfecutions  are  what  he  has  refpeft  to  in 
tlie  two- preceding  verfes,  when  he  fpeaks  of  the 
trial  of  their  faith,  and  of  their  being  in  heavinefs 
through  ^manifold  temptations. 

Such  trials  are  of  three-fold  benefit  to  true 
religion. 

j.  The  truth  of  it  is  n^anifafled'by  them.  Thev 
above  all  things  have  a tendency  to  diftinguifii 
between  true  and  falfe  religion? 

H6 


E.  They 


[ x8o  ] 

■2.  They  ferve  to  difcover  its  heauly  and  amfa- 
blenefs.  True  virtue  never  appears  fo  lovely, 
as  when  it  is  moft  opprefTed:  and  the  excellency 
of  Chrlftianity  is  never  exhibited  with.fuch  ad- 
vantage, as  when  under  the  greateO  trials. 

3.  They  purify  it  from  evil  inixttires.  They 
increafe  its  beauty,  by  freeing  it  from  thofe 
things  that  obfcured  its  glory. 

In  the  next,  theapoftle  obferves  how  religion 
operated  in  thofe  he  wrote  to,  under  their  per- 
fecutions,  whereby  thefe  benefits  of  perfecution 
appeared.  And  there  are  two  kinds  of  exercife 
in  them,  he  takes  notice  of,  wherein  the  above- 
mentioned  benefits  appeared. 

1.  Love  to  Chriji\  whom  havmg  not  Jeen  ye 
love.  The  world  wondered  what  a principle  it 
•was,  that  influenced  them  to  cxpofe  themfelves 
to  fo  great  ftifferings.  There  was  nothing  vifible 
that  could  induce  them  thus  to  fuffer,  and  could 
carry  them  through  fuch  trials.  But  dtoucrh 
there  was  nothing  that  the  world  faw,  or  that 
they  themfelves  faw  with  their  bodily  eyes,  that 
thus  ftipported  them,  yet  they  had  a fupernatural 
principle  of  love  to  fomething  unj'een;  they  loved 
Jeftis  Chrifl,  whom  they  faw  fpirittiallv. 

2.  Joy  m Chrijh  Though  their  outward  fuf- 
ferings  were  grievous,  their  inward  joys  were 
greater. 

1 here  are  two  things  which  the  apoftle  takes 
notice  of  concerning  this  jcty.  1.  The  manner 
in  which  it  rlfes,  the  way  in  which  Chrifl,  though 

unfeen, 


[ ] 

unleen,  is'  founcUtlon  of  It,  viz.  by  faith;  in 
zchoni,  though  now  ys Jet  him  not,  believing  yc 

jepict. 2.  Tlte  nature  of  it,  unfpeahaUe  and 

full  of  glory.  Vnfpeakahle—m  its  kind,  being  fu- 
pernatural  and  divine,  and  fo  ineffiibly  excellent; 
the  fubliinity  and  excellent  fveelnefs  of  which, 
there  were  no  words  to  fet  forth.  In  its  degree',, 
it  pleafmg  God  to  give. them  this  holy  joy  In  a 
lartre  meafure,  in  their  ftate  of  perfeculion.  And  ^ 
then  it  was  full  of  glory  : although  it  tvas  unfpeak- 
t able,  foniething  might  be  faid  of  it,  that  it  tva:s 
full  of  glory,  or,  as  it  is  in  the  original, 
joy.  It  was  a prelibation  of  the  joy  of  heaven, 
that  filled  them  with  the  light  of  God’^s  glory. 

The  doftrine  1 would  raife  from  thefe  words  is 
this,-  viz. 

True  religion,  in  great  part,  cenffls  in  holy 
aJfcHions. 

We  fee,  the  apoflle,  in  obferving  thofe  exer- 
cifes  of  religion  in  the  Chrifiians  he  v.'rote  to, 
tvhich  difeovered  it  to  be  true  and  excellent. 
Tingles  out  the  affefilions  of /one  andycy. 

Here  I tvould, 

I.  Shew  what  is  intended  by  the  affeilions. 

II.  Obferve  fome  things  which  make  if  evi- 
dent, that  a great  part  of  true  religion  lies  in 
them. 

I.  It  may  be  enquired  what  are  the  affefHons  ? 

I anfwer,  they  are  no  other  than  the  more  vi- 
'gorousand  fenfible  exercifes  of  the  will. 


God 


C 182  ] 

God  has  endued  the  foul  tvith  two  faculties  ; 
one  is,  that  by  which  it  difcerns,  views,  and 
judges  of  things;  which  is  called  the  undtrjiand~ 
ing.  The  other  is,  that  by  which  the  foul  is 
fome  way  inclined  with-refpe£l  to  the  things  it 
views  ; either  is  inclined  to  them,  or  is  difinclined 
from  them.  This  faculty  is  varioudy  named: 
foinetimes  it  is  called  the  inclination : fometimes 
the  will.  The  mind,  with  regard  to  the  exer- 
cifes  of  tins  faculty,  is  often  called  the  heart. 

The  exercifes  of  this  faculty  are  of  tvro  forts; 
either  thofe  by  which  the  foul  is  carried  out  to- 
wards things  in  approving  them,  being  pleafed 
with  and  inclined  to  them or  thofe  in  which 
it  oppofes  them,  in  difapproving  them,  and  in 
befug  difpleafed  with  and  averfe  from  them. 

As  the  exercifes  of  the  will  are  various  in 
their  kinds,  fo  th.ey  are  in  tlttir  degrees.  There 
are  fome  exercifes,  wherein  the  foul  is  carried 
but  a little  beyond  a Hate  of  perfeft  indifference. 
There  are  others  wherein  the  approbation  or 
diflike  are  Wronger;  wherein  we  may  rife  higher 
and  higher,  till  the  foul  comes  to  aft  fo  vigor- 
oufly,  that  (through  the  laws  of  the  union  which 
the  Creator  has  fixed  between  foul  and  body) 
the  motion  of  the  blood  and  animal  fpirits  be- 
>gins  to  be  fenfibly  altered.  And  they  are  thefe 
more  vlG;orous  and  fenfible  exercifes  of  this  fa- 
culty,  that  are  called  tlie  affetlions. 

I he  will  and  the  affetlions  are  not  two  facul- 
ties; 


[ >83  3 

ties ; the  latter  aot  being  effentially  diftinft  from 
the  former. 

In  every  aff  of  the  will  the  foul  either  likes  or 
(liflikes  ; that  liking,  if  it  be  in  any  high  degree, 
is  the  fame 'with ; and  that  difliking,  if  in 
any  great  degree,  the  very  fame  with  hatred.  In 
every  aft  of  the  will  for  or  totnards  fomethingnot 
prefent,  the  foul  is  in  fome  degree  inclined  to 
that  thing  ; and  that  inclination  is  the  fame  with 
defire. 

Such  feems  to  be  our  nature,  that  there  never 
is  any  vigorous  exercife  of  the  will,  without 
fome  effeft  upon  the  body,  in  fame  alteration  of 
the  motion  of  its  fluids,  efpecially  of  the  animal 
fpirits.  And  on  the  other  hand,  the  conllitution 
of  the  body,  and  the  motion  of  its  fluids,  may 
promote  the  exercife  of  the  affeftions : but  yet 
it  is  not  the  body,  but  the  mind  only,  that  is  the 
proper  feat  of  them. 

The  ajfediions  and  pafftons  are  frequently 
fpoken  of  as  the  fame ; and  yet  there  is  fome 
difference;  affeBion  is  a word,  that  in  its  ordi- 
naiy  fignification,  is  more.extenfive  than  paf- 
fion,  being  ufed  for  all  vigorous  aftings  of  the 
w'lll;  but  for  thofe  that  are  more  hidden, 

and  whofe  effeSs  on  the  animal  fpirits  are  more 
violent,  and  by  which  the  mind  is  lefs  in  its  own 
command. 

The  lid.  thing  propofed,  was  to  fliew,  that  a 
great  part  of  true  religion  lies  in  the  affeftions. 
And  here 


1.  What 


[ 184  ] 

1.  What  hath  been  faid  of  the  nature  of  the 
afPeflions,  miglit  put  this  nratter  out  of  doubt : 
for  who  can  deny  that  true  religion  confifls  in  a 
great  mealure,  In  vigorous  actings  of  the  will,  or 
the  lervent exercifes  of  the  heart? 

That  religion  rvhich  God  requires  does  not 
confift  in  weak,  dull,  and  lifelefs  wiflres  ; he  in- 
fills that  we  be  in  good  fervent  injpirit, 

and  that  our  hearts  be  vijjoroufly  engaged.  If 
our  wills  and  inclinations  are  not  ftrongly  exer- 
cifed,  we  are  nothing.  The  things  of  rehgion  are 
fo  great,  that  there  can  be  no  faitablenefs  in  the 
exercifes  of  the  heart,  unlefs  they  be  lively  and 
porveflul.  True  religion  is  evermore  a powerful 
thing;  and  the  power  of  it  appears,  in  the  firft 
place,  in  the  inward  exercifes  of  it  in  the  heart. 
Hence  it  is  called  the  power  oj  godanefs,  in  dif- 
tinftion  from  the  external  appearances  of  it,  that 
are  the  form,  2 Tim.  iii.  ,5.  The  bufinefs  of  re- 
ligion is  from  time  to  time  compared  to  thofe 
exercifes,  wherein  men  are  wont  to  have  their 
hearts  and  ftrength  greatly  engaged,  fuch  as  run- 
tiitig,  wrejlling,  Jighting,  and  warring.  And 
though  true  grace  has  va'rious  degrees,  vet,  every 
one  that  hath  the  power  of  godlinefs,  hath  his 
heart  fo  exercifed  towards  divine  things,  that 
thefe  holy  exercifes  prevail  in  him  above  all  na- 
tural afTcftions : for  every  true  difciple  of 
Chrift,  loves  him  above  father  and  mother,  wife 
and  children,  brethren  and fijlers,  houjes  end  lands,, 
yea  his  own  life. 

2.  The  author  of  human  nature  has  not  only 

give  a 


£ ] 

‘given  affefiions  to  men,  but  has  made  them  the 
fpring  of  their  adfions.  As  the  alTeflions  noton- 
ly  belong  to  the  human  nature,  but  are  a great 
part  of  it,  fo  hqly'  affeftioris  do  not  only' be- 
long fp  true  religion,  but  are'  a ver}^  great 
parr  of  it.-  And  as  true  religion  is  of  apratfical 
nature,  and'tUe  affedlions  ate  the  fpring  of  mens 
aHion’s,  it  fnuft  confift  very  much  in  th^'in.  The 
afiTeflions  we,  fee  are  the  fpring.^  that  fet  men  a 
going  in  ah  the  affairs  of  life.  Take  away  /Ag/?, 
.and  there  w.ouId'-be  no  aefivity  among' mankind, 
__pr  any  earneff  piirfnit  wbaifoever.  And  as  in 
, worldly  things  worldly  affefiions  are  the  fpring 
of  ^jinens  affions  ; fo  in  religious  .matters,  the 
. fpring  of  tlieir  aflions  arc  religious  affedllons. 
He  that  has  knowledge  only,  without  affedilon, 
.fiiev.er  is.engagedpn  the  bufinefs  of  religion. 

; 3.  Nothing  is  more  manifeff  in  than  that 
-the  things  of  feligion  take  hold  of  mens  fouls,  no 
, fttrt-her  than  they  .'z^fcF  them.  , There  are  mul- 
titudes that  often  hear  of  the  divine,  perfedlions, 
of  the  unspeakable  love  of  God  and  Chriff;,  of 
heaven  and’hell,  and  yet  rernain  as  they  were 
, before,' -witlr  no  fenfible  ttheration,  either  in  heart 
_ ,or  pradfice,  becaufe  they  are  not  affeEled  with  what 
. they  hear.  Yea,  there  never  was  any  conftderable 
change  ,v/rought  in  the  mind  or  converfation  of 
any  one  that  had  not  his  affeclions  moved.  Never 
.-was  tlrere  a uaturalman  engaged  earneflly  to  feek 
( falvation,  v/hile.  the,  heart  remained  unaffefted. 

-j.  ,The  holy  feriptures  "place  religion  very 

much 


r >«6  j 

-Tnuch  in  the  aflTe£lions  i fudi  zsyear,  hope,  love, 
.haired,  defire,  joy,  forrov',  gratitude,  compaf- 
Jion,  and  zeal : tliey  place  fo  much  in  godlyy^ar, 

, that  it  i;s  olten  fpoken  of,  as  the  character  of  thofe 
that  are  truly  religious,  that  they  tremble  at  God^s 
word,  Jear  bcfor e him,  are  afraid  of  his  judg- 
ments ; and  a compellation.  commonly  given 
them  in  fcripture,  \z,  fearers  of  God,  ox  they  that 
fear  the  Lord.  ^ And  true  godliriefs  in  general  is 
very  ofren  called  the  fear  of  God.  So  hope  in 
God  and  his  prornifes  is  often  fpoken  of,  as  a 
confiderahle  part  of  religion;  It  is  mentione'd 
as  one  of  the  three  great  things  of  which  reli- 
gion confifts,  1 Cor.  xiii.  ig.  It  is  fo  great  a 
part,  that  the  apollle  fays,  tvc  are  faved  by  hope, 
Rom.  viii,  24.  Hope  in  the  Lord  is  alfo  ffe- 
' quently  mentioned  as  the  character  of  good  men; 
and  this  and  religious  fear  are,  once  and  again^ 
joined  together,  as  jointly  defcriptive  of  the  godly 
man.—- In  like  manner  much  is  placed  in  love, 
love  (.oGod,  and  the  Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  and  ta 
people  of  God  and  to  mankind.  The  contrary' 
affeflion  of  hatred  alio,  as  having  lin  for  its  ob- 
jefl,  is  fpoken  of  as  no  inconfiderablepart  of 
Religion.  It  is  fpoken  of  as  that  by  which  true 
.religion  may  be  dillinguilhed  ; Prov.  viii..  13. 
The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  to  hate  evil.  And  accords 
ingly  the  faints  are  called  upon  to  give  evidence 
of  their  lincerity'  by  this ; Pf.  xcvii.  10.  Ye  that 
love  the  Lord  hate  evil.  — So  holy  defire  exer- 
cifed  in  hungrings,  and  thirftings  after  God  and 

holinefs. 


[ ^8;  ] 

liolinefs,  is  mentioned  as  one  ©f  thofe  great 
things  which  denotes  a man  truly  bleffed  ; Matt. 
V.  6.  BekJJ'ed  are  they  that  do  hunger  and  tkirjl 
after  righteoufnefs,for  theyJJiall  be  filled. — So  holy 
joy  as  an  important  part  of  religion,  is  often  pref- 
, fed,  with  great  earneftnefs : and  it  is  mentioned 
among  the.  principal  fruits  ol  the  fpirit  Gai. 

V.  22. 

Religious  foiTow”,  mourning  and  broRennefs 
of  heart  are  alfo  frequently  fpoken  of  as  a great 
part  of  religion.  Again  the  holy  fcriptures  fr«-« 
quently  fpeak  of  cornpafion,  or  mercy,  an  elTen- 
tial  thing,  infomuch  that  a merciful  man  and  a 
good  man  are  equivalent  terms  in  the  bible. 
Zeal  is  alfo  fpoken  of  as  an  effential  part  of  reli- 
gion. It  is  fpoken  of  as  a great  thing  Chrift  had 
in  view%  in  giving  himfelf  for  our  redemption  ; 
Tit.  ii.  iq.  Who  gave  himfelf  for  us,  that  he 
might  purify  unto  himfetf  a peculiar  people,  zealous 
ef  good  works^  And  this  is  fpoken  of  as  the  great 
thing  wanting  in  the  luke-warm  Laodiceans,  Rev, 
iil.  15,  16,  19. 

They  then  who  would  deny  that  much  of 
tnie  religion  lies  In  the  affeflions  mull  throw 
away  thebible,  and  get  fome  other  rule  by  which 
to  judge  of  the  nature  of  religion. 

5.  The  fcriptures  repi'efent  religion,  as  fum- 
marlly  comprehended  in  love,  the  chief  of  the 
affefHons. 

So  our  bleffed  Saviour  in  anfwer  to  the  lawyer, 
who  afked  him,  which  was  the  great  command- 
ment 


t i88  3 

rnent  of  the  law,  Matf.  xr.ii.  ^7,  38,  39,  ^o. 

Jaid  unto  hint,  thoufacdt  love  the  Lord  thy 
God,  zvitk  all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  foul,  and 
with  all  thy  mind,  tins  is  the  fir jl,  and  great  com^ 
mahdment  ; and  the Jleo'r.d id Uke  'uvto  it,  thcujhalt 
love  thy  neighbour  as  thyjljf.  Gn  theje  two  com- 
•mandments  hang  all  the  law  and  the  prophets ; 
which  lad  words  fignifythat  tliefe  twocommand- 
■ments  comprehend  all  the  duty  preferibed,  and 
^lie  religion  taught  in  the  law  and  tlie  prophets. 
•The  apoflle  Paul  from  time  to  time  makes  the 
dame  reprefentation.  He  fpeaks  of  love  as  the 
^reatelt  thing  in  religion,  without  which,  the 
•greateft  knowledge  and  gifts  are  vain  and  worth- 
•lefs,  1 Cor.  xiii.  ' ’ 

Now  though  it  be  true,  that  the  love  thus  fpoken 
of  includes  the  whole  of  a right  temper,  towards 
God  and  fnan  ; yet  it  may'  be  conffdered  that  this, 
•when  in  vigorous  excrcife,  is  no  other  than  affec- 
tionate love.  And  finely  it  is  fuch  love  which 
Ghrilt  fpeaks  of  as  the  fum  of  all  religion.  Indeed 
it  cannot  be  fuppofed,  when  this  is  fpoken  of  as  the 
fum  of*^ill  religion,  th.at  hereby  is  meant  the  a£t, 
Texclufive  of  the  habit,  or  that  the  exercife  of  the 
tunderdanding  is  excluded.  But  it  is  evident 
from  feripture,  that  the  effence  of  all  true  reli- 
gion lies  in  holy  love-,  and  that  in  this  divine  affec- 
tion, and  an  habitual  difpofition  to  it,  and  thofc 
tilings  which  are  the  fruits  of  it  confidsthe  whole 
of  religion. 

FiQin  hence  it  clearly  appears,  that  a great 

part 


[ ‘Sg  ] 

part  of  religion  confills  in  the  affeflions  ; for* 
love  is  the  firfl:  and  chief  of  them  and  the  foun- 
tain of  all  the  reft.  From  love  arifes  hatred  of 
thofe  things  which-  are.  contrary  to  what  we  love; 
and  from  the  various  exercifes  of  love  and  hatred 
according  to  the  circumftances  of  their  objetfs, 
tirife  all  other  affeffions. 

6.  He  whom  God  fent  into  the  world,  to  be 
the  light  of  the  world,  and  the  perfect  example 
of  true  religion,  even  the  Lord  Jefus  Chrift,.  was 
a perfon  who  was  remarkably:  of  a tender  and  af- 
fedfionaie  heart ; and  his  vu'tue  was  expreffed 
very  much  in  the  exercife  of  holy  aftedf  ions.  He 
was  the  greateft  inftance  of  ardency  and  ftrength 
of  iove,  to  both  God  and  man,  that  ever  was. 
They  were  thefe  afteftfions  that  got  the  'viftory, 
in  that  mighty  -confli-ft,  when  he  prayed  more 
earneJUy,  and  offered Jlrong  crying  and  tears,  and 
wreftled  in  tears  and  in  blood.  Such  ivas  the 
pow’er  of  the  exercifes  ol  his  holr  love,  that  they 
were  ftronger  than  death,  and  in  that  great  ftrug- 
gle,  overcame  thofe  flrong  exercifes  of  the  na- 
tural afleftions  of  fear  and  grief,- when  he  was 
fore  amazed,  and  his  loul  was  exceeding  forrosv- 
ful,  even  unto  death.  And  he  alfo  appeared  to- 
be  full  of  affefcHon,  in  the  courfe  of  his  life. 
W eread  of  his  great  zea!,  of  his^rza/'xor  the  fins 
of  men,  and  of  his  pity  or  compajjion-.  And  hoiy 
ineffably  affedfionate  ivas  that  laft  and  dying  dif- 
courfe,  which  Jefus  had  with  his  eleven  difciples 
tlie  evening  before  he  was  crucified  ? Of  all  the 

difeourfes 


tilfcourfes  ever  uttered  by  the  "mouth  of  mau, 
this  feems  to  be  the  moft  aflfeftionate  and  affedl- 
ing. 

7*  The  religion  of  heavea  confifts  much  in  af> 
feflion. 

Tliere  true  religion  is  in  its  utmoft  pnritv,  and 
perfeftion : but  according  to  the  fcripture  repre- 
fentation,  the  religion  of  heaven  confifts  chiefly 
in  holy  love  and jo)\  and  the  expreftion  of  thefe, 
in  fervent  and  exalted  praifes. 

8.  It  is  an  evidence  that  true  religion  lies 
much  in  the  affeftions  of  the  heart,  that  the  ferip- 
tures  place  the  fm  of  the  heart  much  in  kardiiejs 
of  heart.  It  was  hardnefs  of  heart  that  excited 
grief  and  difpleafure  in  Chi  ift  towards  the  Jews  ; 
Mark  iii.  5.  The  reafon  given  why  the  houfe  of 
Ifrael  would  not  obey  God,  was  that  they  were 
hard-hearted ; Ezek.  iii.  7.  And  that  great 
w'ork  of  God  in  conveiTion,  is  expreffed  once 
and  again,  by  God's  taking  aicay  the  heart  of  font 
and  giving  an  heart  of  jlejh. 

Now  by  a hard  heart.  Is  plainly  meant,  a 
heart,  not  eafy  to  be  moved  with  virtuous  affec- 
tions, likeaftone,  infcnfible  ^nd  hard  to  be  im- 
preffed.  Hence  the  hard  heart  is  called  Ajlony  heart, 
and  is  oppofed  to  an  g/ that  is  fenfi- 

bly  touched  and  moved.  We  read  oia.haid  heart 
and  a tender  heart  ; and  doubtlefswe  are  to  un- 
derftand  thefe,  as  contraty  to  each  other.  But 
what  is  a tender  heart  but  one  that  is  eafily  im- 
prefiedwhh  what  ought  to  afteftit? 


t 3 

Upon  the  whole  I think  it  abundantl}'- evident 
that  true-  religion  lies  very  much  in  the  affec- 
tions. Indeed  fo  much  that  without  holy  affec- 
tion there  is  no  true  religion-;  and  no  light  in  , 
the  underllandingis  good,  which  does  not  produce 
holy  affeftion  in  the  heart;  no  habit  or  prin- 
ciple is  good,  which  has  no  fuch  exercife  : and 
no  external  fruit  is  good,  which  does  not  pro- 
ceed from  fuch  exercifes. 

Having  thus  confideredthe  evidence  of  the  pro- 
pofition  laid  down,  I proceed  to  fome  inferences. 

1.  We  may  hence  learn  how  great  their  error 
is,  v/ho  are  for  difcarding  all  religious  affeclions. 

Becaufe  many  that  have  appeared  to  have  great 
religious  affeftlons,  have  not  manifefted  a riaht 
temper  of  mind,  and  have  run  Into  many  errors, 
religious  affeftions- in  general  are  grown'out  of 
credit,  as  though  religion  did  not  at  all  confift  in 
them.  Thus  we  run  Irom  one  extreme  to  ano- 
ther. Sometime  back,  we  were  in  the  other  ex- 
treme ; there  was  a prevalent  difpofuion  to  look 
upon  all  high  religious  affeflons,  as  eminent  exer- 
cifes ofbigh  grace.  If  perfons  did  but  appear  to  be 
muchmoved,  fo  as  to  be  lullof  religious  talk,  it  was 
too  much  the  mahneriwithout  further  examination, 
to  conclude  them  full  of  thefpiritof  God.  But 
of  late  indead  of  admiring,  it  is  a thing  much 
more  prevalent  to  rejefl  all  religious  affeftions 
without.  dijRnEiwn.  Whereas,  though  to  true 
religion,  there  muff  be  fomething  befides  affec- 
tion ; yet  it  confiffs  fo  much  in  the  affeftions, 

that 


C 193.  ]• 

tliat  there  can  be  no  true  religion  without  them. 
He  who  has  no  religious  affection  is  in  a ftateof. 
fpiritual  death  and.  is  'wholly:  deftitute  of  the. 
faving  influences  of  the  fpirit  of  God. 

The  manner  of  flighting  all  religious  affeclionSy 
is  the  Way  exceedingly  to  harden  the  hearts  of/ 
men,  and  to  encourage  them  in  their  fkipidity 
and  fenfelcflhefs.  Prejudice  againft  them  has  a 
tendency  to  ftun  the  life  and  power  of  religion, 
preclude  the  effeFt  of  ordinances^  and  hold  iis 
dowm  in  a ftateof  dulnefs.  .And  for  j3crfons  to 
defpife  and  cry  them  all  down,  is  the  way  to  fliut 
all  religion  out  of  their  own  hearts,  They  who 
condemn  high  affeftions  in  others,  are  not  like 
to  have  them  in  themfelves.  .And  they  who  have 
but  little  religious  affeftion,  have  certainly  but 
little  religion  ; and  they  who  condemn  others 
for  their  religious  affeftions,  and  have  none 
theinfelves,  have  no  religion. 

There  are  falfe  affections,  and  there  are  true. 

A man’s  having  Jiiuch  ajfeBicn,  does  not  prove 
that  he  has  religion : but  his  having  no  affedion, 
proves  that  he  has  not.  1 he  right  way,  is  not  to 
rejeft  all  affections,  nor  to  approve  all;  but  to 
dillingnilh  between  them,  approving  fome  and 
rejefting  others. 

2.  If  true  rciiginn  lies  much  in  the  aJfeSions, 
fuch  means  are  to  be  defired,  as  have  a tenden- 
cy to  move  the  aflTeftions.  Such  books,  and  fuch 
away  of  preaching  the  word,  adminiftring  the 
CH'dlnances,  worfliipping  God  in  prayer,  and 

ringing 


C *93  ] 

fmging  praifes,  as  have  a tendency  to  afFefl  the 
heart,  are  much  to  be  defired. 

Indeed  there  may  be  fuch  means,  as  may 
have  a tendency  to  ftir  up  the  paflTions  of  ignor- 
ant perfons,  and  yet  no  tendency  to  benefit  their 
fouls:  for  they  may  have  a tendency  to  excite 
afieftions,  but  little  or  none  to  excite  gracious 
affeftions.  But  undoubtedly,  if  the  things  of 
religion,  are  .exhibited  truly,  fo  as  tends  to  con- 
vey juft  apprehenfions  oftliem,  the  more  they 
have  a tendency  to  move  the  affeftions ‘the 
better. 

3-  If  true  religion  lies  much  in  the  afTeftlons, 
■\vhat  caufe  have  we  to  be  afhamed,  that  we  are 
no  more  affeHed  with  the  great  things  of  reli- 
cfion  ! 

God  has  given  to  mankind  afleftlons,  for  the 
famcpurpofe  which  he  has  given  alkour  faculties, 
viz.  that  they  might  be  fubfervicnt  to  religion. 
And  yet  how  common  is  it  among  mankind, 
that  their  alfeftions  are  much  more  exercifed  in 
other  matters  than  in  that ! How  infenfible  are 
moft  men,  about  the  great  things  of  another 
world  ! How  dull  are  their  affeffions ! How  cold 
their  love,  languid  their  defires,  and  fmall  their 
gratitude  1 How  can  they  fit  and  hear  of  the  in- 
finite height  and  depth,  length  and  breadth  of  the 
love  of  God  in  Chrift  Jefus,  and  yet  be  cold, 
heavy,  and  infenfible ! Where  are  the  exercifes 
of  our  affeffions  proper,  if  not  here  ? W4iat  is  it 
Vo  L.  XXIII.  I that 


[ 194  ] 

-Hhat;  does  not  require  them  ? Can  any  tiling  be 
' fet  in  our  view  greater  and  more  important  ? 

If  we  ought  ever  to  ex’ercife -our  affecHons  at 
all,  they  ought  to  be  exercifed  about  thofe  ob- 
je£l§  which  are  moil  worthy  of  them.  ButTs 
there  any  thing,' which  men  can  find  in  heaven^ 
or,  earth.,  fo  worthy  to  be  the  ohjefts  of  their  ad- 
iniration.  and  love,  their  earneft  and  longing  de- 
fir.es,  their  hope  and  their  rejoicing,  and  their 
-feiwent  zeal,  as  thofe  things  that  are  held  forth  to 
us  in  the  gofpel  of  Jefus  Chrill  ? God  has  fo 
difpofed  thin.gs,  in  hk  glorious  dlfpenfations, 
revealed  to  »us  jn  the-  gofpel,  as  though  every 
thing'  was  contrived  to  have,  the  greatell  poflible 
to  reach  our  hearts  in  the  moft  tender 
part,  ancl  move  our  affeftions  mofl;  fenfibly. . 
How  great  caufe  therefore  have  we  to  be  lium- 
bled  to  the  dull,  tlm  we  are  no  more  affected  t 


PART  II. 

Shelving  ivhat  are  no  ceri am  fgns  that- religious 
njfeclwns  are  truly  gracious,  or  that  they  art 
not. 

IF  any  one,  on  reading  what  has  been  find,  is 
readv  to  acqvHt  himfelf  and  fav,  I am  not 
“ one  of  thofe  who  have  no  religious.  alTettions, 

I 


[ 195  ] 

* I am  often  greatly  moved  with  the  confidera- 
“ tion  of  the  great  things  of  religion,”  let  him 
not  conclude  from  this,  that  he  has  religious 
affeftlons.  We  have  already  obferved,  that  as 
we  ought  not  to  condemn  all  affeflions,  fo  we 
ought  not  to  approve  of  all,  as  though  every  one 
that  teas  religioufly  affefled,  had  the  favlng  in- 
fluence of  the  Spirit  of  God  ; but  to  diftinguilli 
among  religious  afieftions  between  one  fort  and 
another.  Now  in  order  to  this  I would 

I.  Obferve  fomc  things,  which  are  no  figns 
one  way,  or  other,  either  that  alfeftions  are  fuch 
as  religion  coniffls  in,  or  that  they  are  otherwife. 

IT.  I would  obferve  fame  things,  wherein  thofe 
affeftions  which  are  fpiritual,  differ  from  thofe 
which  are  not. 

Firfl,  I wmuld  take  notice  of  fome  things 
which  are  no  figns  that  affections  are  gracious, 
or  tliat  they  are  not. 

I.  It  is  no  fign,  cither  one  way  or  other,  that 
religious  affeclions  are  raijed  very  high'. 

Some  are  ready  to  condemn  all  high  affeftions. 
Ifperfons  appear  to  have  their  religious  afl'eftions 
raifed  to  an  extraordinary  pitch,  they  are  preju- 
diced againft  them,  and  determine  that  they  ar.e 
delufions  without  anv  farther  enquiry.  But  if 
true  religion  lies  much  in  religious  affetlion,  then 
there  will  be  great  religious  arfeefions  where 
there  is  a great  deal  of  true  •■eligioti. 

Love  is  an  afieflion ; but  will  any  Chriflian 
fay,  men  ought  not  to  love  God  in  a high  de- 
I 2 gree  ? 


L *96  ] 

gfee  ? And  will  any  fay,  that  we  ought  not  to 
have  a great  hatred  of  fin,  and  a deep  forrow  for 
it  ? Or  that  we  fltould  not  have  very  ftrong  de- 
fires after  hollnefs  ? Who  is  there  that  will  go 
and  blefs  God,  that  he  is  affefted  enough  with 
what  he  has  read  and  heard  of  the  wonderful 
love  of  God  to  rebels  in  giving  his  only  begotten 
Son  to  die  for  them,  and  of  the  dying  love  of 
Chrifl ; and  will  pray  that  he  may  not  be  afietled 
with  them  in  any  higher  degree,  becaufe  high 
affeBions  are  enthufiaftical  and  ruinous  to  reli- 
gion ? 

Our  text  fpeabs  of  high  affcBions,  when'  it 
fpeaks  of  rejoicing  with  jo\  unj'peahable  and  full  of 
glory : here  the  mofi  fuperlative  expreffions  are 
ufed,  that  language  will  afford.  And  the  fcrip- 
tures  often  require  us  to  exercife  very  high  af- 
feBions  ; thus  in  the  firfi  and  great  command- 
ment of  the  law.  There  is  ah  accumulation  of 
expreffions,  as  though  words  Avere  wanting  to 
exprefs  the  degree,  in  which  Ave  ought  to  loA'e 
God  ; thou  fialt  love  the  Lord  thy  God,  with  all 
thy  heart,  with  a’l  thy  foul,  with  all  thy  mind,  and 
with  all  thy  flrength.  We  find  themoft  eminent 
faints  in  fcripture  often  profeffing  high  affeBtions. 
Thus  the  pfalmift  again  and  again.  The  apoftle 
Paul  the  fame.  He  expreffes  the  exercife  of 
pity  and  concern  for  others,  even  to  anguifh  of 
heart ; and  fpeaks  of  tiie  exultation  and  triumphs 
of  his  foul.  It  is  often  foretold  of  the  church  in 
her  happy  feafons  on  earth,  that  fhe  fhall  cxceed- 

ingfy 


[ ] 

ingly  rejoice.  The  angels  in  heaven  are  exceed- 
ingly affefted  with  what  they  behold  and  con- 
template. They  are  all  as  a pure  flame  of  fire,  in 
their  love,  and  in  the  greatnefs  of  their  joy  and 
gratitude  : their  praifes  are  reprefented,  as  the 
voice  oj  many  waters^  and  the  voice  of  a gr  eat 
thunder. 

From  thefe  things  it  appears  that  religious  af- 
feftions  being  very  high,  is  no  evidence  that 
they  have  not  the  nature  of  true  religion. 
Therefore  they  greatly  err  who  condemn  per- 
fons  as  enthufiafts,  merely  becaufe  their  affedli- 
ons  are  very  high. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  no  evidence  that  re- 
ligious affedlions  are  ofafpiritual  nature,  becaufe 
they  are  great.  Great  multitudes,  who  were 
affedled  with  the  miracle  of  raifiug  Lazarus  from 
the  dead,  were  elevated  to  a high  degree,  rvhen 
Jefus  entered  into  Jerufalem,  and  cried  with  loud 
voices,  H»fanna  to  the  Son  of  David,  biffed  is  he 
that  Cometh  in  the  name  of  the  the  Lord,  hojanna  in 
the  higheji.  But  how  quickly  was  this  at  an  end  ? 
When  this  Jefus  flands  bound,  it  is  not  then 
hofanna,  but  crucify,  crucify. 

II.  It  is  no  fign  that  affeftions  have  the  nature 
of  true  religion,  or  that  they  have  not,  that  they 
have  great  effeEls  on  the  body. 

Such  are  the  laws  of  union  of  foul  and  body, 
that  the  mind  can  have  no  vigorous  exercife, 
without  fome  effefi;  upon  the  body.  Yea,  it  is 
queftionable,  whether  an  embodied  foul  ever  To 
1 3 much 


[ 198  ] 

iTuicli  as  thinks  one  thought,  or  has  any  exercife 
at  all,  but  there  is  fome  correfponding  motion  in 
fome  part  of  the  body.  Univerfal  experience 
fhews,  that  the  exercife  of  the  affections  have  in 
a fpecial  manner  an  effecf  on  the  body.  And  it 
is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  that  very  great  exercifes 
of  the  afifedlions,  flrould  \\2mz  great  effe&s  on  the 
body  ; and  that  as  there  are  very  great  affedfions, 
both  common  and  fpiritual,  great  effedfs  on  the 
body  fhould  arife  from  both  thefe  kinds  of  affec- 
tions. However,  great  effefts  on  the  body  are 
no  hire  evidences  that  aflfeftic>ns  are  fpiritual : 
for  we  fee  that  fudi  effedls  often  arife  from  great 
affedfions  about  temporal  things ; and  if  great 
affedlions  about  fecular  things  may  have  thefe 
effedfs,  I know  not  why  we  fliould  determine  that 
liigh  affedlions  about  religious  things  cannot  have 
the  like  effedl. 

Nor  on  the  other  hand,  do  I know'  of  any  rea- 
fon  to  determine,  that  gracious  and  holy  affedti- 
ons,  when  raifed  as  high  as  any  natural  affedlions, 
cannot  have  a great  effedl  on  the  bodv.  I know’ 
of  no  reafon,  w'hy  being  affedled  with  a view  of 
God’s  glory  fliould  not  caufe  the  body  to  faint, 
as  well  as  being  affedled  with  a view  of  Solomon’s 
glory.  I'here  is  a great  power  in  fpiritual  af- 
fedlions : w'e  read  of  the  pow'er  which  worketh 
in  Chrillians,  and  of  the  effedlual  working  of 
God’s  power  in  them.  The  text  we  are  upon 
fpeaks  of  joy  unfpeakabJe  and Jull  of  glory.  Arid 
who  that  confiders  w’hat  man’s  nature  is,  and 

what 


[ ^99  ] 

what  the  nature  of  the  affeftions  arc,  can  rea- 
fonabJy  doubt  but  that  fuch  unutterable  joys  may 
be  too  mighty  for  weak  duft  and  aflres  ? 

The  pfalmihTpeaking  of  the  vehement  religi- 
ous affeffions  he  had,  fpeaks  of  an  effebl:  on  his 
flcfh  or  body,  hefides  what  was  on  his  foul,  ex- 
prefly diflinguifliing  one  from  the  other,  My 
ion\  ikirjlftk  for  thee,  my  flefli  longdh  for  theCy 
in  a dry  and  thirjly  land  where  no  water  is,  Pfal. 
Ixxiii.  1. 

The  prophet  Habakkttk  fpeaks  of  his  body’s 
being  overbome,  by  a fenfe  of  the' majefty  of 
God,  Hab.  iii.  i6.  IVhen  I heard,  my  belly  trem- 
bled, my  lips  quivered  at  the  voice,  rotterinef  entered 
into  my  bones,  and  I trembled  in  myfef. 

That  fuch  ideas  of  God’s  glory,  as  are  fome- 
tlmes  given  in  this  tvorld,  have  a tendency  to 
overbear  the  body,  is  evident,  becaufe  the  fcrip- 
ture  gives  us  an  account,  that  this  has  aftually 
been  the.  effebl  of  thofe  external  maaifeflations, 
God  has  made  to  fome  for  that  end,  to  g;i\’e  them 
an  idea  of  his  majefty  and  glory.  Such  inftances 
we  have  in  the  prophet  Daniel  and  the  apoftle 
John,  Daniel  giving  an  account -of  an  external 
reprefentation  of  the  glory  of  Chrift,  fays,  Dan. 
X.  8.  And-there  remained  no  Jirength  in  me,  for  my 
comelinefs  was  turned  into  corruption,  and  I retained 
no  Jirength,  And 'the  apoftle  John  giving  an  ac- 
count of  a like  manifeftation  made  to  him,  fays, 
Rev.  i.  17..  And  when  I faw  him,  I fell  at.his  feet 
as  dead.  It  is  i'n.vain  to  fay  here,- thefe  were 
I 4 only 


[ 200  ]| 


only  external  manifellations  of  the  glory  of 
Chrift ; for  though  it  be  true,  yet  the  end  of 
them  was  to  give  an  idea  of  the  thing  reprefented, 
the  divine  glory  and  majelly  of  Chrifl;  and  thus 
undoubtedly  they  improved  them,  and  were  af- 
fefted  by  them.  According  to  the  end,  for 
which  God  intended  thefe  outward  hgns,  they 
received  by  them  a great  and  lively  apprehenfion 
of  the  real  glory  and  majelly  of  God’s  nature, 
tvhich  they  were  figns  of ; and  thus  were  greatly 
affe£led,  their  fouls  being  fwallowed  up,  and 
their  bodies  overborne.  And  I think  they  are 
very  bold  and  daring,  who  will  fay  God  cannot, 
or  will  not  give  the  like  clear  and  alfeftingappre- 
henfions  of  the  fame  glory  and  majelly  of  his  na- 
ture, to  any  of  his  faints,  without  the  interven- 
tion of  fuch  external  flradows  of  it. 

Before  I leave  this  head,  I would  further  ob- 
ferve,  that  the  feripture  often  makes  ufe  of  bo- 
dily elFefls,  to  exprefs  the  ftiength  of  holy  and 
fpiritual  alfeftions ; fuch  as  trembling  t,  groan- 
ing j:,  being  Jick  §,  crying  out  ||,  panting  t+,  and 
fainting  Now  if  it  he  fuppofed  that  thefe  are 
only  figurative  expreflions,  to  reprefent  the  de- 
'•  gree  of  alfeftions ; yet  I hope  all  will  allow, 

that  they  are  fuitable  figures.  Which  how  could 
they  be,  if  thofe  fpiritual  alfeftions  they  are  de- 
ligned  to  reprefent,  have  no  tendency  to  any 


fuch 


Pfal.  cxix.  lao. 

§ Cant.  ii.  j. 

•ff  Pfal.  xxxviii.  101 


J Rom.  viii.  a6. 

II  Pfal.  Ixxxiv.  2. 
Pfal.  Ix.xxiv.  2. 


C 201  ] 

fuch  things  ? I cannot  think  God  would  com- 
monly make  ufe  of  things  which  are  very  alien 
from  fpiritual  affeftions,  and  are  (hrewd  marks 
of  the  hand  of  Satan,  as  figures,  to  reprefent  the 
high  degree  of  holy  and  heaveniy  affections. 

III.  It  is  no  fign  that  affections  are  truly  gra- 
cious, or  that  they  are  not,  that  they  caufe  thofe 
who  have  them,  to  be  Jluent,  fervent,  and  *abun- 
dant  in  talking  of  the  things  of  religion. 

There  are  many  who  if  they  fee  this  in  others 
are  greatly  prejudiced  againff  them  ; their, being 
fo  full  of  talk,  is  with  them,  a fufficient  ground 
to  condemn  them  as  Pharifees  or  hypocrites. 
On  the  other  liand,  there  are  many,  who  if  they 
fee  this  effeft  in  any,  are  forward  to  determine 
that  they  are  under  the  influences  of  God’s  Spirit, 
More  efpecially  are  they  perfuaded  of  this,  if 
they  are  not  only  abundant,  but  very  affcCfionate 
and  earncll  in  their  talk. 

But  this  is  the  fruit  of  little  judgment,  as  events 
abundantly  fhew. 

That  perfons  are  difpofed  to  be  abundant  in 
talking  of  religion,  may  be  from  a good  caufe, 
and  it  may  be  from  a bad  one.  It  may  be  be- 
caufe  their  hearts  are  full  of  holy  affections;  for 
out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  fpeak- 
eth ; and  it  may  be  becaufe  they  are  full  of  that 
affeCfion  that  is  not  holy.  It  is  the  nature  of 
affeftions,  of  whatever  kind,  if  the)'  are  llrong, 
to  difpofe  perfons  to  be  much  in  fpcaking  of  that 
which  they  are-affeCIed  with,  and  to  fpcakearnelll)'.  ■ 
I j And 


[ 202  ] 

And  therefore  perfons  talking  abundantly  and 
fervently  about  religious  things,  can  be  an  e\d- 
dence  of  no  more  than  this,  that  they  are  much 
aflFefted  with  them,  which  maybe,  and  yet  there 
be  no  great  grace. 

A perfon  may  be  full  of  talk  of  his  own  expe- 
rience, falling  upon  it,  in  all  companies,  and 
when  it  is  fo,  it  is  rather  a dark  fign  than  a good 
one  : as  a tree  that  is  over-full  of  leaves  felioni 
bears  much  fruit. 

IV.  It  is  no  fign  that  affeftions  are  gracious, 
or  that  they  are  othertvife,  that  perfons  did  not 
make  them  themfeh'es,  or  excite  themoj  their  own 
contrivance,  and  by  their  own  ftrength. 

There  are  many  that  condemn  all  affe£Hons 
which  are  excited  in  a way  that  the  fubjefls  of 
them  can  give  no  account  of,  as  not  feeming  to 
be  the  natural  confequence  of  the  principles  of 
human  nature,  in  fuch  circumftances  ; but  to  be 
from  the  influence  of  fome  extrinfic  power  upon 
their  minds.  How  greatly  has  the  doflrine  of 
fenfibly  perceiving  the  immediate  power  of  the 
Spirit  of  God,  been  ridiculed  ? Many  fay  the 
manner  of  the  Spirit  of  God  is  to  co-operate  in  a 
filent,  fecret,  and  undifcernable  way,  with  the 
life  of  means  and  our  own  endeavours;  fo  that 
there  is  no  diflinguifhing  between  the  influences 
of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  the  natural  operations 
of  our  own  minds. 

And  it  is  true,  that  for  any  to  expefl  the  in- 
•fiuences  of  the  Spirit,  without  a diligent  im- 
provement 


[ 203  ] 

provement  of  the  appointed  means,  is  prefump- 
lion:  and  to  expeft  that  he  will  operate  upon 
■their  minds,  without  means  fubfervient  to  the 
effedl,  is  enthufiaftical.  It  is  alfo  undoubtedly 
true; -that  the  Spirit  of  God  is  very  various  in. 
the  manner  arid  circumflances  of  nis  operations, 
and  that  fometimes  he  oper.ates  in  a way  more 
fecret,  and  gradual,  than  at  others.  ^ 

But  if  there  be  indeed  a power,  different  from 
the  power  of  all  means  and  inflruments,  and 
above  the  power  of  nature,'  which  is  requifite  in 
order  to  the  production  of  faving  grace  in  the 
heart;  then,  k is  not  unreafonable  to  fuppofe, 
that  this  fhould  frequently  be  produced  after  fuch 
a manner,  as  to  make  it  manifelf,  that  it  is  fo.  If 
grace  be  indeed  owing  to  aH,iutrlnfic  ^gent, 
why  is  it  unreafonable  to. fuppofe  it  fnoiild  feein 
to  be  fo  to  them  rv-ho  are  the  fubjefts  of  it  ? Is  it 
a fli;ange  thing,  that  it, fhopld  feem^to  b.e;as  it  is? 
V/hen  grace  is  the  workm.anfhip  oi  the  Almighty, 
is  it  ftrange  'that  it  ^fliould  feem  to  them  rvho-  are 
lubjefls  of  it,  agreeable^to  truth?  Amd  if  perfons 
tell  of  effefts  in  their  own  minds,  that  feem  to 
them  not  to  be  from  the  nc^tura!  operation  of  their 
minds,  but  kom  the  fupernatural  po'.ver  of  fome 
other  agdnV,'  flro,u|d  itat.bpcpbe  looked  upon  as  a 
fare  ' evidence  of  delufio'n,'  becaufe  things  feeki 
. to  them'  to  be'as  they  are  ? Yet  this  is  the  object 
fion  which  is  rna.de  : it  is  looked  upbn  a.s'  a clear 
ivide'nce  that  the  affeSioris  rriany  perfbris  have, 
'ire  riot  from  fuch'a  carife,  becaufe  ihqy  fisem  to 
" - ..  . 2 g . thejJi 


[ 204  ] 

them  to  be  from  that  caufe  : they  declare  that 
what  they  are  confcious^of,  feems  to  them  to  be 
not  from  themfelves,  but  from  thd  mighty  power 
of  God  ; and  others  from  hence  determine  what 
they  experience  is  not  from  God,  but  from  them- 
felves, or  from  the  devil. 

If  grace  in  the  foul  is  fo  the  effefl:  of  God’s 
power,  that  it  is  fitly  compared  to  thofe  effefts, 
which  are  fartheft  from  being  owing  to  any 
ftrength  in  the  fubjeft,  fuch  aS  a geneiation,  or 
a bang  begotten,  and  a refurredion,  or  a being 
raifed  from  the  dead,  and  a creation,  or  a being 
brought  out  • of  nothing  into  beiiig ; then  wh^ 
fhould  the  Almighty,  in  fo  great  a work  of  his 
power,  fo  carelully  hide  his  power,  that  the  fiib- 
jefts  of  it  fltouldbe  able  to  difcern  nothing  of  it? 
Or  what  reafon  have^any  to  determine  that- he 
does  fo  ? It  is  frequently  God’s  manner  to  make 
his  hand  vifihie,  that  he  alone  might  be  exalted, 
and  that  the  excellency  of  the  power  might  le 
of  God  and  not  of  man.  So‘it  was,  among  other 
works,  in  that  great  one,  . his  converting  the 
Heathen  world,  after  all  the'encreavours  of  phi- 
lofophers  had  proved  in  vain,  for  many  ages, 
and  it  was  become  abundantly  evident  that  the 
world  was  utterly  helplefs,.  by  any  thing  but 
the  mighty  power  of  God.  And  fo  it  was  m 
moil  of  the  converfions  of  particular  perfons  we 
hav^ean  accoryit  of  in  the  New  Teftament : they 
were  not  wrought  on  in  a filent,  fecret,  gradual, 
and  infenfible  matiuer;  but  with  thofe  manifeft 

evi- 


' C 205  ] 

evidences  of  a fupernatural  power,  wonderfully 
and  fuddenly  caufing  a great  change,  which  in 
thefe  days  »re  looked  upon  as  certain  figns  of 
delufion. 

The  apoftle  in  Eph.  i.  i8,  19.  fpeaks  of  God’s 
enhghtning  the  minds  of  Chrifiians,  and  fo 
bringing  them  to  believe  in  Chrift,  that  they 
might  know  the  exceeding  greatnefs  of  his  potver 
to  them  who  believe.  He  can  mean  nothing  elfe 
'than  that  they  might  know  by  experieyice.  But  if 
Chriftians  know  this  power  by  experience,  then 
they  feel  it,  and  difcern  it,  as  fenfibly  diflin- 
guilhable,  from  the  natural  operations  of  their 
own  minds  ; which  is  not  agreeable  to  the  notion 
of  God’s  operating  always  fo  fecretly  and  undif- 
-cerniblv;  that  it  cannot  be  known  to  be  the  in- 
dtience  of  any  extrinhc  power,  any  otherwife 
than  as  thcv  may  argue  it  from  fcripture. 

So  that  it  is  unreafonable  and  unfcriptural,  to 
(letermine  that  affeftions  are  not  from  God’s 
Spirit,  becaufe  they  are  not  fenfibly  from  the 
perfons  themfdves,  that  are  the  fubjedfs  of 
them. 

On  tlie  other  hand,  it  is  no  evidence  that  af- 
fefiions  are  gracious,  that  they  are  notpurpofely 
produced  by  thofe  who  are  Jre  fubjects  of  them, 
or  that  they  arife  in  their  minds  in  a manner  they 
cannot  account  for. 

There  are  fome  who  make  this  an  argument 
in  their,  own  favour,  they  fay,  “ I am  fure  I did 
“ not  make  it  myfelf : it  was  no  contrivance  of 

“ mine  i 


r 206  j 

“ mine  ; it  came  when  I thought  nothing  of  it  r 
“ if  I might  have  the  world  for  it,  I can’t  make 
“ it  again  when  I pleafe  -and  heitf  e they  de- 
termine that  what  they  have  experienced, 
mull  be  from  the  influence  of  tlic  Spirit  of  God, 
but  this  does  not  follow.  There  are  other  fpirits 
who  have  influence  on  the  minds  of  men,  be** 
Tides  the  Holy  Ghoft.  There  arc  many  falfe  fpi- 
rits,  who  with  great  fubtilty  and  power,  mimic 
the  operations  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  And  there 
are  many  of  Satan’s  operations,  which  are  difr 
tinguifhable  from  the  voluntary  exercifesof  mens 
own  minds.  They  are  lb  in  thofe  dreadfuf  and 
horrid  fuggeflions,  with  wliich  he  follows  many 
perfons.  And  the  power  of  Satan  may  be  as 
immediate  in  falfe  comforts  and  joys;  and  often 
is  fo  in  fa£f. 

And  where  neither  a good  nor  evil  fpirit  have 
any  immediate  hand,  perfons,  of  a weak  and 
vapoury  habit  of  body,  may  have  flrong  appre- 
henfions  and  ffrong  afftcfions  unaccountably  ari- 
fing,  v/bich  are  not  voluntarily  produced  by 
tbemfelves. 

V.  It  is  no  fign  that  religious  affedfions  are 
truly  fpiritual,  or  they  are  not,  that  they  come 
with  tents  of  fcripture,  remarkably  brought  to  the 
mind. 

It  is  no  Cgn  that  afTeftions  are  not  gracious, 
that  they  are  occafioned  by  fcriptures  fo  coming 
to  the'  mind.  . ^ 

On  the  other  hand,  neither,  is  it  any  fign  th^ 

affetuons 


affections  are  gracious,  that  they  arife  on  occafion 
of  fcriptures  brought  fuddenly  and  wonderfully 
to  the  mind.  .Some  feera  to  look  upon  this  as 
a good  evidence  ; and  will  fay,  “ there  w'ere  fuch 
and  fuch  fweet  promifes  brought  to  rny  mind  ; 
th.ey  came  fuddenly  as  if  they  were  fpoke  to  me  : I 
had  no  hand  in  it : I was  not  thinking  of  it  : I did 
not  kno^v  at  firft  that  it  was  fcripture.'"’  And  it 
may  be  they  will  add,  “ one  fcripture  came 
flowincr  in  after  another,  and  fo  texts  all  over 
the  bible,  the  mod  fweet  and  pleafant,  the 
mod  apt  and  fuitable  which  could  be  devifecL 
Thus  they  think  they  have  undoubted  evidence 
that  their  date  is  good.  But  where  is  there  any 
fuch  rule  to  be  found  in  the  bible. 

What  evidence  is  there  that  the  devil  cannot 
bring  texts  to  the  mind,  and  mifapply  them,  to 
deceive  perfons  ? If  he  has  potver  to  bring  any 
words  at  all  to  perfons  minds,  he  may  have  power 
to  bring  words  contained  in  the  bible.  If  he  w'as 
permitted  to  put  Chrid  himfelf  in  mind  of 
texts  o;  fcripture  to  tempt  him,  what  reafon  have 
we  to  determine  that  he  may  not  do  the  fame  to 
men.  And  if  he  may  abufe  one  text  of  fcripture 
fo  he  may  another.  And  if  he  can  bring  one  com® 
fortable  text  to  the  mind,  fo  he  may  a thoufand  j 
and  may  choofe  out  fuch  as  tend  mod  to  ferve 
his  purpofe,  and  may  heap  up  fcripture  promi- 
fes, tending  according  to  the  perverfe  application 
lie  makes  of  them,  wonderfully  to  remove  thq 


f 208  ] 

rifing  doubts,  and  to  confirm  the  falfejoyan(f 
confidence  of  a poor  deluded  fiiiner. 

VI.  It  is  no  evidence  that  religious  aflfeftions 
are  faving,  or  that  they  are  otherwife,  that  there 
is  an  appearance  oj love  in  them. 

No  Chrilllans  pretend,  that  this  is  an  argu- 
ment againft  the  faving  nature  of  religious  affec- 
tions. But  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  fome 
who  fuppofe,  it  is  a good  evidence,  that  affec- 
tions are  from  the  faving  influences  of  the  Holy 
Ghoff.  Their  argument  is,  that  Satan  cannot 
love,  this  affeclion  being  direflly  contrary  to  his 
nature.  And  it  is  true  nothing  is  more  excel- 
lent than  a fpirit  of  Chriilian  love  ; it  is  that  by 
which  we  are  rnofl  conformed  to  heaven,  and 
moft  contrary  to  hell  and  the  devil.  But  yet  it 
is  ill  arguing  from  hence,  that  there  are  no 
counterfeits  of  it.  And  the  fubtilty  of  Satan, 
and  mens  deceitful  hearts,  are  wont  chiefly  to 
be  'exercifed  in  counterfeiting  tbofe  virtues  and 
graces  that  are  in  highefl  repute.  And  there  are 
none  it  may  be  that  have  more  counterfeits  than 
love  and  humility. 

. VII.  Perfons  having  religious  affeflions  of 
many  kinds,  accompanying  one  another,  is  not  fuf- 
ficient  to  determine  whether  they  are  real  believers 
or  no. 

Though  falfe  religion  is  wont  to  be  maimed 
and  monllrous,  and  not  to  have  that  entirenefs 
and  fymmetiy  of  parts,  which  is  to  be  feen  in 
true  religion  ; yet  there  may  be  a great  variety 

of 


[ 209  ] 

of  falfe  affections  together,  that  may  refenable 
gracious  ones. 

There  are  flight  touches  of  all  kinds  of  graci- 
ous affeftions,  as  of  hve  to  God,  and  love  to  the 
brethren,  fo  of  godly  for  row  for  fin,  as  in  the 
children  of  Ifrael  in  the  wildernefs;  fo  of  fpiri- 
tual  joy,  as  in  the  ftony- ground  hearers.  So  un- 
believers may  have  earneft  religious  d fires,  like 
Balaam’s,  which  he  expredes  under  an  extraor- 
dinary view  that  he  had  of  the  eftate  of  God’s 
people,  as  diftjnguifhed  from  all  the  reft  of  the 
world,  Numb,  xxiii.  g,  i_o. 

And  as  men,  while  in  a ftate  of  nature  are  ca- 
pable of  a refemblance  of  all  kinds  of  religious 
affeftions,  fo  nothing  hinders  but  that  they  may 
have  many  of  them  together. 

VIII,  Nothing,  can  certainly  be  determined 
concerning  the  nature  of  . the  affeflions  by  this, 
that  comforts  and  joys  follow  awakenings  and  con- 
viChons  of  confcience. 

Many  perfons  feem  to  be.  prejudiced  againft 
affeftions  and  experiences,  that  come  in  fuch  a 
method,  as  has  been  much  infifled  on  by  many 
divines;  firft  fuch  awakenings,  fears  and  awful 
apprehenOons,  followed  with  fuch  humblings, 
in  a fenfe  of  total  fmfulnefs  and  helpleffnefs,  and 
then  fuch  light  and  comfort  : they  look  upon  all 
fuch  fchemes,  laying  down  fuch  methods  and 
fteps,  to  be  of  mens  devifitig  : and  particularly  if 
high  affeftions  of  joy  follow  great  diftrefs  and 
terror,  it  is  made  by  many  an  argument  againft 

thofe 


[ 2JO  J . 

thofe  afTeftions.  But  f(ach  prejudices  and  oK- 
jeftions  are  ^\'ithol.lt  reafon  or  fcripture.  Surely 
It  cannot  be  unreafonable  to  fuppofe^  that  before 
God  delivers  perfons  from  a flate  of  fm,  and  ex- 
pofednefs  to  eternal  deirraflion,  he  ibould  give 
them  fome  fenfe  of  the  evil  he  delivers  them- 
from  and  that  they  fliould  be  fiift  fenfible  of 
their  abfolute  neceffity,  and  afterwards  of  Chrift’s 
■fnfficiency,  and  God’s  mercy  through  him. 

And  that  it  is  God’s  manner  of  dealing  with 
men,  io  Lad  them  into  a zoilderrtejs,  before  he 
f peaks  co'mjortably  to  them,  and  fo  to  order  it, 
that  they  be  brought  into  diflrefs,'  and  made  to 
lee  their  own  helpleffnefs,  and  abfolute  dcpend- 
ance  on  his  grace,  before  he  works  anv  great  de- 
liverance for  them,  is  abundantly  raanifefl.by  the 
fcripture.  Backfliding  Ifrael,  before  God  heals 
•them  are  brought  to  tcknorakdge  that  they  have 
finned,  and  have  not  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord'', 
and  to  fee  that  they  lie  dovn  in  their  fiatne  and 
that  confufton  trovers  them,  and  that  in  vain  is 
falvation  hoped  for  from  the  hills  and  from  the  mul- 
titude of  mountains , and  that  God  only  can  fave 
them  ; Jer.  iii.  23,  24,  25. 

But  there  are  many  things  in  fcripture  which 
direflly  fhew  that  this  is  God’s  ordinar)-  manner 
in  working  falvation  for  the  fouls  of  men,  and  in 
the  manifeftations  he  makes  ofhimfelfand  of  his 
mercy  in  Chrill,  in  the  ordinary  works  of  his 
gi'ace  on  the,hearts  of  finners.  An  old  inveter- 
ate wound  muft  be  fearched  to  the  bottom^  in 

order 


. C 211  ] 

order  to  healing;  and  the  fcripture  compares  fin, 
the  wound  of  the  fgul,  tothi?,  and  {peaks  ofheal- 
ing  this  wound  without  fearching  it,  as  vain  and 
deceitful;  Jer.  viii.  ii.  YV^hcn  John  the  Baptill 
came  to  prepare  the  way  lor  Chrifi,  and  prepare 
mens  hearts  for  his  reception,  he  did  it,  by  fliew- 
ing  them  their  fms,  and  by  bringing  the  felf-right- 
eoLis  Jews  off  from  their  oirn  rightcoufnefs,  tel- 
ling them  that  they  were  generation  of  vipers, 
and  {hewing  them  their  danger  of  the  wrath  t(f 
come. 

And  if  it  be  indeed  God’s  manner  (as  the  fore- 
going confiderations  fhew)  before  he  gives  men 
the  comiott  of  a deliverance  from  their  fin  and 
mifery,  to  give  them  a confiderable  lenfe  of  the 
greatnefs  and  dreadfidnefs  of  thofe  evils,  and 
their  extreme  wretcliednefs  by  realon  of  them; 
{urely  it  is  not  unrealonable  to  fuppofe,  that  per* 
Tons,  at  lead  often,  while  under  thefe  views, 
fhould  have  great  dillrefs  of  mind;  efpecially  if 
it  be  confidered  what  thefe  evils  are,  that  they 
have  a view  of,  v/hich  are  no  other  than  ereat 
and  manifold  fms,  againft  the  inlinite  majefty  of 
the  great  Jehovah,  and  the  luffering  of  the  fierce- 
nefs  of  his  wrath  to  all  eternity.  And  we  have 
many  plain  indances  in  fcripture,  of  perfons  that 
have  been  affually  brought  into  extreme  didrefs, 
by  fuch  (jonviftions,  before  they  have  received 
favlng  confolations  : as  the  multitude  at  Jerufa- 
lem,  who  were  pricked  in  their  heart,  and /aid  un- 

tif 


[ 212  ] 

fo  P etei\  and  the  rejl  of  the  apofles,  men  and  breth~ 
ren  what Jhall  we  do?  And  ihe  apoftle  Paul,  who 
trembled  and  was  ajlonified,  before  he  was  cora- 
foried  ; and  the  jailor  when  he  called  for  a light, 
and Jprang  in,  and  came  trembling,  and jell  down 
before  Paul  and  Silas,  and  faid.  Sirs,  what  mvjl  I 
do  to  be  faved? 

From  thefe  things  it  appears  unreafonable,  to 
make  this  an  ’objeftion  againd  the  truth  and  fpi- 
ritual  nature  of  the  coniiortable  andjoylul  afifec* 
tions  which  any  have,  t’tiat  they  follow  atyful  ap- 
prehenfions  and  dilfrelTes. 

And  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  no  evidence  that 

4 

comforts  and  joys  are  right,  becaufe  they  fucceed 
great  terrors,  and  fears  of  hell.  This  feems  to  be 
what  fome  perfons  lay  great  weight  upon  ; ef- 
tecming  great  terrors  an  evidence  of  a great 
work  wrought  on  the  heart,  well  preparing  the 
way  for  foiid  comfort ; not  confidering  that  ter- 
or  and  a conviftion  of  confcicnce,  are  different 
things  : for  though  convi£lions  of  confcience  do 
often  caufe  terror,  yet  they  do  not  confifl  in  it  ; 
and  terrors  do  often  arife  from  other  caufes.  Con- 
viQions  of  confcience,  through  the  influences  of 
God’s  Spirit,  confifl  in  conviftionof  finfulnefs  of 
heart  and  praflice,  and  of  the  dreadfulnefs  of  fin, 
as  committed  againfl  a God  of  terrible  majefly,  in- 
finite holinefs,  and  hatred  of  fin,  and  flrifl  juf- 
tice  in  puniflring  of  it.  But  there  are  fome  per- 
fons that  have  frightful  apprehenfions  of  hell,  a 

dreadful 


C 213  3 

dreadful  pit  ready  to  fwallow  them  up,  and 
flamesjult  ready  to  lay  hold  of  them,  who  at  the 
fame  time  feem  to  have  very  little  enlightnings 
of  confcience,  really  convincing  them  of  their 
finfulnefs  of  heart  and  life. 

Nay,  fome  fpeak  of  a great  fight  they  have  of 
their  wickednefs,  who  really,  when  the  matter 
comes  to  he  well  examined , are  found  to  have 
little  or  no  conviffions  of  confcience.  They  tell 
of  a dreadful  hard  heart,  when  they  have  none 
ofthofe  things  in  their  thoughts,  wherein  the 
hardnefs  of  mens  hearts  confill.  They  tell  of 
a dreadful  load  and  fink  of  fin  within  them, 
when  if  the  matter  is  carefully  inquired  into, 
they  have  not  in  view  any  thing  wherein 
the  corruption  of  nature  does  truly  confift,  nor 
any  thought  of  any  particular  thing  wherein  their 
hearts  are  finfully  defeflive. 

And  if  perfons  have  had  great  terrors,  which 
really  have  been  from  the  convincing  influences 
of  the  Spirit,  it  docs  not  thence  follow  that  thein 
terrors  mull  needs  end  in  true  comfort.  The 
unmortified  corruption  of  the  heart  may  quench 
the  Spirit  of  God  (after  he  has  been  ftriving]  by 
leading  men  to  prefumptuous,  and  felt-exalting 
hopes  and  joys,  as  well  as  otherwife. 

And  as  feeming  diftinflnefs,  as  to  fteps  and 
method,  is  no  certain  fign  that  a perfon  is  convert- 
ed\  fo  the  being  without  it,  is  no  evidence  that 
a perfon  is  not  converted.  For  though  it  might 
he  made  evident  on  fcripture  principles,  that 

a finner 


[ 214  J 

a finner  cannot  heartily  receive  Chrift  as  his  Sa-* 
viour,  who  is  not  convinced  of  his  fm  and  mi* 
fer/,  and  of  his  own  einptinefs  and  helpleffnefs, 
and  his  juft  defert  of  eternal  condemnation  ; and 
that  therefore  fuch  conviftions  muft  be  fomewa'y 
implied  in  what  is  wrought  in  his  foul  ; yet  it  is 
not  neceffary,  that  all  thofe  things  which  are  im- 
plied in  an  aft  of  faith  in  Chrift  muft  be  dlftintt- 
ly  wrought  in  the  foul,  in  fo  many  fucceftive 
works  of  the  Spirit  that  ftiall  be,  each  one,  plain 
and  manlfeft,  in  all  tvho  are  truly  converted.  On 
the  contrary  fometimes  the  change  made  at  ftrft 
is  like  a confufed  chaos,  fo  that  we  know  not 
what  to  make  of  it.  The  manner  of  the  Spirit’s 
proceeding  in  them  that  are  born  of  the  Spirit,  is 
very  often  exceeding  myfterious  ; we  as  it  were, 
hear  the  found  of  it,  the  effeft  of  it  is  difcernible, 
but  no  man  can  tell  whence  it  came,  or  whither 
it  went.  Ifis  oftentimes  as  difficult  to  know  the 
way  of  the  Spirit  in  the  new  birth,  as  in  the  firft 
birth  ; Eccl.  xi.  5.  As  thcu  knozoefl  not  uhat  is 
ike  way  of  (he /pint,  or  h,ow  the  bones  do  grow  vi 
the  womb  of  her  that  is  with  child:  even  Jo  thou 
knoweft  not  (he  work  cjGod,  that  woiketh  all. 

'^VIlat  tve  have  principally  to  do  with,  in  our 
inquiries  into  our  own  ftate,  or  in  the  diretfions 
we  give  to  others,  is  the  nature  of  the  effeft  that 
God  has  brought  to  pafs  in  the  fold.  As  to  the 
ft eps  which  the  Spiiit  of  God  took  to  bring  that 
effeft  to  pafs,  we  may  leave  them  to  him.  We 
are  often  in  fcripture  exprefly  direfted  to  try 

ourfelves 


diirfelves  by  the  nature  ofthefmits  of  the  Spirit ; 
but  no  where  by  the  Spirit’s  method  of  producing 
them.  Many  greatly  err-  in  their  notions  of  a 
clear  work  of  converfron,  calling  that  a clear 
work,  where  the  fucceffive  fteps  of  influence, 
and  method  of  experience  is  clear:  tvhereas  that 
indeed  is  the  clearefl;  work,  (not  where  the  or-> 
der  of  doing  is  clearefl,  butj  where  the  fpiritual 
and  divine  nature  of  the  work  and  effedl; 

wrought,  is  moft  clear. 

IX.  It  is  no  certain  fign,  that  religious  affec- 
tions have,  the  nature  of  true  religion,  or  havft 
n,ot,  that  they  difpofe  perfons  to  [pend  much  lime, 
inreligion,  and.  to  be zealoujly  engaged  in  the  exter~ 
raal  duties  ofworjhip. 

This  has  very  unfeafonably  been  looked  upon 

an  argument,  againfl  the  religious  affeftions 
which  fome  have -had,  that  they  fpend  fo  much 
time  in  reading,  pra)’ing,  flinging,  Jiearing  fler- 
mons,  and  the  like.  It  is  plain  from  flcripture 
that  the  tendency  of  true  grace  is  to  caufe  per? 
fons  much  to  delight  in  fuch  exercifes.  Grace 
had  this  effeft  upon  the  primitive  Chriflians  in 
Jeruflalem  ; Afts  ii.  46,  47.  And  they  continuing 
daily,  zoith  one  accord  in  the  temple,  and  breaking 
-bread from  houjeio  houje,  did  eat  their  meat  with 
gladnefs,  and  finglenefs  of  heart  prai/ing  God.  It 
made  Daniel  and  David  delight  in  prayer,  and. 
■fojemnly  attend  it  three  times  a day.  It  makes 
the  faints  delight  in  flinging  praifes  to  God  ; Pfl. 
cxlvii.  1*.  Fraife  ye  the  Lord,  for  it  is  good  to 


C ’“■s  ] 

fmg  praijes  unto  our  God,  for  it  is'pleafant,  and 
praife  is  comely.  It  makes  them  delight  to  hear 
the  word  of  God,  and  leads  them  to  love  public 
worfhip. 

This  is  the  nature  of  true  grace.  But  yet  on 
the  other  hand,  perfons  being  difpofed  -to  a- 
bound,  and  to  be  zealoufly  engaged  in  the  ex- 
ternal exercifes  of  religion,  and  to  fpend  much 
time  in  them,  is  no  fure  evidence  of  grace.  So 
it  was  with  the  Pharifees,  who  made  long  prayers, 
and  fajled  twice  a week.  And  Ezekiel’s  hearers 
delighted  in  heafing  him,  and  vnth  their  mouth 
Jhtwed  much  love,  while  they  did  not  the  things  he 
[aid,  and  their  hearts  werd  after  their  covetoufnefs', 
Ezek.  xxxiii. 

Experience  fhcwsthat  perfons,  from  falfe  reli- 
gion, may  be  inclined  to  be  abundant  in  the  exter- 
nal exercifes  of  religion  ; yea  to  give  theinfelves 
up  to  them,  and  devote  almoft  their  whole  time 
to  them. 

X.  Nothing  can  be  certainly  known  of  the  na- 
ture of  religious  alfeffions  by  this,  that  they  muck 
difpofe  perf  ons  with  their  mouths  to  praife  and  glo‘ 
rify  God.  > 

This  is  implied  in  what  has  been  juft  now  ob- 
ferved,  but  bee aufe  many  look  upon  it  as  a bright 
evidence  of  gracious  affeflion,  when  perfons  ap- 
pear greatly  difpofed  to  praife  God,  and  affefHon- 
ately  to  call  on  others  to  do  it,  I thought  it  de- 
ferved  a more  particular  confideration. 

No  chriflian  will  make  it  an  argument  againft 

a perfon 


[ 217  ] 

a perfon,  that  he  feems  to  have  fach  a difpoG- 
tion.  Nor  can  it  reafonably  be  looked  upon  as 
an  evidence,  ifthofe  things  that  have  been  alrea- 
dy obferved  be  confidered.  But  it  will  appear 
more  evidently  that  this  is  no  certain  fign  of 
grace,  if  tve  confider  what  inllances  the  fcripture 
gives  us  of  it,  we  often  have  an  account  of  this 
in  the  multitude  that  were  pfefent  when  Chriil 
preached  and  wrought  miracles  ; they  glorified 
God  faying  we  never  Jaw  it  on  this  fajldon  ; Maxk 
ii.  12.  The  children  of  Ifrael  at  the  RedTea, 
fang  God' s pro  Je,  but  foon  Jorgalhis  works.  And 
the  Jews  in  Ezekiel's  time,  with  their  mouth Jiewed 
much  love,  while  their  heart  went  after  their  covet- 
eoufnejs. 

XI.  It  Is  no  fign  that  affeftions  are  right,  or 
that  they  are  ^vrong,  that  the  perfons  that  have 
them,  are  exceeding  confident  that  what  they  experi- 
ence is  divine,  and  that  they  are  in  a good 
ejate. 

It  is  an  argument  with  fome  againft  perfons 
that  they  are  deluded,  if  they  prelend  to  be  af- 
fured  oftbeir  good  eftate  and  to  be  carried  beyond 
all  doubting  of  the  favour  of  God  ; fuppofing 
that  there  is  no  fuch  thing  to  be  expefted  in  the 
church  of  God,  as  a full  affurance  ofhdpe  ; un- 
lefs  it  be  in  fome  very  extraordinary  circum- 
ftances,  as  in  the  cafe  of  martyrdom  : contrary 
to  the  plained;  fcripture  evidence.  It  is  manifed 
that  it  was  a common  thing  for  the  faints,  that  tve 
have  a particular  account  of  in  fcripture,  to  be 
Vo  L.  XXIII.  K adlired. 


aiTured.  God  in  the  plaineft  manner,  revealed 
and  teflified  his  fpecial  favour  to  Noah,  Abra- 
ham, Ifaac,  Jacob,  Mofes,  Daniel,  and  others. 
Job  oaen  fpeaks  with  the  greatefl  alTurance. 
David,  throughout  the  book  of  pfalms,  almoft 
every  where  fpeaks  in  tlie  mod  pofitive  manner 
ol  God  as  his  God.  Hezekiah  appeals  to  God, 
as  one  that  knew,  ht  had  walked  before  him  in  truth 
and  with  a perJeEl  heart 2 Kings  xx.  3.  The 
apoflle  Paul,  through  all  his  epidles,  fpeaks  in 
an  allured  drain  : ever  fpeaking  pofitively  of 
his  fpecial  relation  to  Clirid,  and  his  interell  in 
andexpeftation  of  the  future  reward. 

The  nature  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  and  God's 
declared  ends  in  that  covenant,  plainly  (hew  it 
to  be  God’s  delign,  to  make  ample  provifion  for 
having  an  alTured  hope  of  eternal  life,  while 
upon  earth.  The  promifes  are  full,  often  repeat- 
ed, and  various  trays  .exhibited  ; and  there  are 
many  witneffes  and  many  feals  ; and  God  has  con- 
firmed his  promifes  with  an  oath : and  his  declared 
defign  in  all  this  is  that  the  heirs  of  the  promifes 
might  have  an  undoubting  hope,  and  full  alTur- 
ance  of  their  future  ,gJoiAn 

Moreover  all  Chriftians  are  diredlied  to  give  all 
diligence  to  make  their  calling  and  elefrion  lure, 
and  are  told  how  they  may  do  it,  2 Pet.  i.  3 — 8. 
And  it  is  fpoken  of  as  a thin.g  vert'  unbecoming 
Chrillians,  not  to  know  whetlrcr  Chrifl  be  in 
them  or  no  ; 2 Cor.  xiii.  5.  To  add  rfo  more, 
it  is  manifefl,  that  Chrillians  knowing  their  in- 
terells  in  the  faving  benefits  of  Chiiflianitv  is  a 

thing 


r 219  ] 

thing  onlinarily  attainable,  becaufe  the  apoftles 
tell  us  by  what  means  common  Chriftians  (and 
iiot  only  apoftles  and  martyrs)  were^  wont  to 
know  this.  See  1 Cor,  ii.  12.  1 John  ii- 3,  5, 
Chap.  iii.  14.  19,  24.  Chap.  iy.  13.  and  Chap. 
,v.  2,  19. 

Thereforq  it  mull  needs  be  very  unreafon- 
able  to  determine,  that  perfons  are  hypocrites, 
becaufe  they  feem  to  be  out  of  doubt  of  their 
falvation. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  no  fufficient  reafon  to 
determine  that  men  are  faints,  becaufe  they  have 
an  exceeding  confidence  that  their  ftate  is  good. 
•Nothing  can  certainly  be  argued  from  their  con- 
fidence, how  great  and  ftrong  foever  it  be.  If 
Ave  fee  a man  that  commonly  fpeaks  in  the  moft 
bold  language  in  prayer,  with  whom  it  is  com- 
mon to  ufe  the  moft  confident  expeffions  fuchas 
I know  certainly  that  God  is  my  father  : I know 
I Jhall  go  to  heaven  as  well  as  if  I was  there,  and 
that  feems'to  have  done  for  ever  with  any  exami- 
nation into  his  ftate,  as  a ihingfufficiently  known, 
and  to  contemn  all  that  fo  much  as  intimate,  there 
is  fome  reafon  to  doubt  whether  all  is  right  ; 
fuch  things  are  no  figns  at  all  that  it  is  indeed  fo. 
Such  an  over-bearing  and  violent  fort  of  confi- 
dence  as  this,  has  not  the  countenance  of  a true 
Chriftian  alTurance  ; it  favours  more  of  the  fpirit 
of  the  pharifees,  who  never  doubted  but  that  they 
w’ere  faints.  If  they  had  more  of  the  fpirit  of  the 
publican  with  their  confidence,  it  would  have 
K 2 more 


E 220  ] 

more  of  the  afpeft  of  one  that  has  no  confidence 
in  himfelf. 

There  are  two  forts  of  felf-deceivers,  one  that 
are  deceived  with  their  outward  morality  and 
external  religion  ; the  other  are  thofe  who  are 
deceived  with  difcoveries  and  elevations,  who 
often-cry  down  works,  and  mens  own  rightcouf- 
nefs,  and  talk  much  of  free  grace  ; but  at  the 
fame  time  make  a righteoufnefs  of  their  difcove- 
ries, and  of  their  humiliation,  and  exalt  them- 
felves  to  heaven  with  them.  Of  thefe  two,  the 
latter  are  the  worft;  for  they  are  commonly  hy 
far  the  moll  confident  and  with  the  moft  difficul- 
ty brought  off  from  it  : I have  fcarcely  known 
the  in  fiance  of  fuch  a one,  in  my  life,  that  has 
been  undeceived.  The  chief  grounds  of  ihe 
confidence  of  many  of  them  are  impuifes,  and 
fuppofed  revelations,  fometimes  with  texts  of 
fcripture,  and  fometimes  without.  Thefe  ira- 
pulfes  they  hav’e  called  the  witnefs  of  the  Spirit. 
And  it  is  found  by  abundant  experience,  that 
thofe  who  are  led  away  by  impuifes  and  imagin- 
ed revelations  are  extremely  confident  ; lor 
they  fuppole  that  the  great  Jehovah  has  declared 
thefe  things  to  them,  and  that  having  his  immedi- 
ate tefiimony,  a firong  confidence  is  the  higbeft 
virtue.  Hence  they  are  bold  to  fay, 

0'  that  ; I kn  on;  certainly.  I am  as  fin  (as  that  I 
have  a being  ; and  the)’  defpife  all  argument  and 
Inquiry  in  the  cafe.  And  above  all  things  elle,  it 
is  eafy  to  be  accounted  lor  that  impreffinns  and 

impidfe.s 


[ 221  ] 

impulfes  about  that  which  is  fo  pleafing,  fo  fuit- 
ing  their  felf-love  and  pride,  as  their  being  the 
dear  children  of  God,  fliould  make  them  ftrong- 
ly  confident;  efpecially  when  they  have  with  their 
impulfes  and  revelations  high affeft ions,  which  they 
take  to  be  the  moft  eminent  exercifes  of  grace. 

1 he  confidence  of  many  of  this  fort  of  men,  is  like 
the  confidence  of  fome  mad  men  who  think  they 
are  kings : they  will  maintain  it  againft  all  manner 
of  reaion  and  evidence.  And  in  one  fenfe,  it  is 
much  more  immoveable  than  a truly  gracious  .af- 
furance,  which  is  not  upheld,  but  by  the  fouls 
being  kept  in  a holy  frame,  and  grace  maintain- 
ed in  a lively  exercife.  If  the  Chriftian  falls 
into  a lifelefs  frame,  and  grace  decays,  he  lofes 
his  alTurance  : but  this  confidence  will  not  be 
fhaken  bv  fin  ; and  fome  maintain  their  boldnefs 
in  their  hope,  in  the  moft  wicked  ways,  which 
is  a fure  evidence  of  their  delufions. 

*Here  I cannot  but  obferx^e,  that  there  are 
certain  doflrines  often  preached  which  need 
to  be  delivered  with  more  caution  and  ex- 
planation than  they  frequently  are  : for  as  they 
are  by  many  underftood,  they  tend  greatly  to 
eftablifh  this  falfe  confidence.  The  doffrines  I 
fpeak  of  are  thofe  of  Chrijiians  living  by  faith  not 
by  fight ; their  giving  glory  to  God  by  trufting-  him 
in  the  dark  ; living  upon  Chnjl,  and  not  upon  ex- 
periences : not  making  their  good  frames  the  foun- 
dation of  their  faith  : which  are  excellent  doc- 
trines when  rightly  underftood,  but  corrupt  and 
K 3 deftru&ive 


[ 222  ] 

deftru6Hve  as  many  underhand  them.  The  fcrip- 
ture  fpeaks  of  living,  or  walking  by  faith,  and 
not  by  fight,  in  no  other  way  than  thefe,  viz. 
a being  governed  by  a refpeft  to  eternal  things, 
that  are  the  objefls  of  faith  and  are  not  feen,  and 
not  by  arefpeftto  temporal  things,  which  are 
feen  ; a believing  things  revealed  that  we  never 
faw  with  bodily  eyes  ; and  alfo  living  by 
faith  in  the  promife  of  future  things,  without 
yet  feeing  or  enjoying  the  things  promifed. 
This  will  be  evident  to  any  one  that  looks  over 
the  feriptures  which  fpeak  of  faith  in  oppofition 
to  fight  ; as  2 Cor.  iv.  i8.  and  v.  7.  Heb.  xi. 
1.  8,  13,  17.  27,  29.  Rom.  viii.  24,  John  xx. 
29.  But  this  doflrlne  as  it  is  underftood  by  many 
is,  that  Chrillians  ought  firmly  to  believe  and 
truft  in  God  without  fpiritual  fight  or  light, 
and  although  they  are  in  a dark  dead  frame,  and 
for  the  prefent  have  no  fpiritual  difeoveries.  It 
is  truly  the  duty  of  thofe  who  are  thus  in  dark- 
nefs,  to  come  out  of  darknefs  into  light  and  be- 
lieve. But  that  they  fhouH  confidently  believe, 
while  tltey  remain  without  fpiritual  light  or  fight, 
is  an  antifcriptural  and  abfurd  deftrine.  The 
feripture  is  ignorant  of  any  faith  in  Chriftofthe 
operation  of  God,  that  is  not  founded  in  a fpi- 
ritual fight  of  Chrift.  True  faith  in  Chrifi  is 
never  exercifed,  any  further  than  perfons  behold 
as  in  a glafs,  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  and  have  the 
knowledge  of  the  glory  of  Godin  the  face  of  Jefus 

Uinf, 


[ 223  ] 

Chrjl,  2 Cor.  iii.  i8.  and  iv.  6.  'I'hat  faith  which 
is  without  fpiritual  light,  is  not  the  faith  of  the 
children  of  light,  but  the  prefumption  of  the 
children  of  darkuefs.  And  therefore  to  prefs 
perfons  to  believe,  without  any  fpiritual  light  or 
fight,  greatly  helps  forward  the  delufions  of  the 
prince  of  darknefs.  Men  not  only  cannot  exer- 
cife  faith  without  fpiritual  light,  but  they  can 
exercife  faith  only  juft  in  fuch  proportion  as  they 
have  fpiritual  light.  Men  will  truft  in  God  no  fur- 
ther than  they  know  him  ; and  they  cannot  be  in 
the  exercife  of  faith  in  him  one  ace  further  than 
they  have  a fight  of  his  fullnefs  and  faithfulnefs  in 
exercife.  Nor  can  they  have  the  exercife  of  truft  in 
God,  any  further  than  they  are  in  ?l  gracious frame. 
They  that  are  in  a dead  carnal  frame,  doubtlefs 
ought  to  truft  in  God  : becaufe  that  would  be  the 
fame  thing  as  coming  out  of  their  bad  frame,  and 
turning  to  God  ; but  to  exhort  men  confidently 
to  truft  in  God,  and  fo  hold  up  their  hope  and 
peace,  though  they  are  not  in  a gracious  frame, 
and  continue  not  to  be  in  it,  is  the  fame  thing  in 
effe£l  as  to  exhort  them  confidently  to  truft  in 
God,  but  not  with  a gracious  truft  ; and  what 
is  that  but  a wicked  prefumption  ? 

* It  is  true,  it  is  the  duty  of  God’s  people  to 
■ truft  in  him,  when  in  darknefs,  in  this  fenfe  they 
ought  to  truft  in  God  when  the  afpefts  of  his 
providence  are  dark,  and  look  as  though  God 
had  forfaken  them,  and  when  many  clouds  ga- 
ther, and  many  enemies  furround  them  with  a 
K 4 formidable 


[ 224  ] 


formidable  appearance,  and  when  all  circum- 
ftances  feem  to  render  the  promifes  of  God  dif- 
ficult to  be  fulfilled.  And  God  muft  be  trufted 
out  of  fight,  when  we  cannot  fee  which  way  it  is 
polfible  for  him  to  fulfil  his  word,  as  every  thing 
but  God’s  mere  w'-ord  makes  it  look  unlikelv,  fo 
that  if  perfons  believe,  they  muft  hope  againft 
hope.  Thus  the  antient  Patriarchs,  thus  Job, 
David,  Jeremiah,  Daniel,  Shadrach,  Mefliech, 
Abednego,  and  the  apoftle  Paul,  gave  glory  to 
God,  by  trufting  in  him  in  darknefs.  But  how 
diflerent  a thing  is  this  from  trufting  in  God  with- 
out fpiritual  fight,  and  being  at  the  fame  time  in 
a dead  and  carnal  frame  ! 

* There  is  alfo  fuch  a thing  as  fpiritual  light 
being  let  into  the  foul,  in  one  way,  when  it  is 
notin  another;  and  fo  there  is  fuch  a thing  as 
believers  trufting  in  God,  and  alfo  knowing 
their  good  eftate,  when  they  are  deftitute  of  fome 
kinds  of  experience.  As  for  inftance,  they  may 
have  clear  views  of  God’s  fufiiciency  and  faithful- 
nefs,  and  fo  confidently  truft  in  him,  and  know 
that  they  are  his  children,  and  at  the  fame  time 
not  have  thofe  clear  ideas  of  his  love,  as  at  other 
times  ; for  it  was  thus  with  Chrifi  himfelf  in  his 
laft  paffion.  But  how  different  things  are  thefe 
from  ‘confidently  trufting  in  God  without  fpiri- 
tf.al  light  or  experience  ? 

* Thofe  that  thus  infift  on  perfons  living  by 
- faith,  w'hen  they  have  no  experience  and  are  in 

very  bad  frames,  are  alfo  very  abfurd  in  their  no- 
tions 


r 225  ] 

lions  of  faith.  What  they  mean  by  faith  is,  be- 
lieving that  they  are  in  a good  eftate.  Hence 
they  count  it  a dreadful  fin  for  them  to  doubt  of 
their  eftate,  whatever  frames  they  are  in,  and 
whatever  things  they  do,  becaufe  it  is  the  great 
and  heinous  fin  of  unbelief ; and  he  is  the  bed 
man  and  puts  moft  honour  upon  God,  that  main- 
tains his  hope  of  his  good  eftate  the  moft  confi- 
dently, when  he  has  the  leafl  light  or  experience, 
that  is  to  fay,  when  he  is  in  the  worfe  frame  ; be- 
caufe  forfooth,  that  is  a fi^n  that  he  is  flroncr  in 
faith,  giving  glory  to  God,  and  againfl  hope  be- 
lieves in  hope.  But  what  bible  do  they  learn 
this  notion  of  faith-out  of,  that  it  is  a man’s  con- 
fidently believing  that  he  is  in  a good  eftate  ? If 
this  be  faith,  the  Pharifees  had  faith  in  an  emi- 
nent degree..  The.  fcripture  reprefents  faith,  as 
that  by  which  men  are  brought  into  a good  eftate,, 
and  therefore  it  cannot  be  the  fame  thing,  as  be- 
lieving that  they  are  already  in  one.  To  fuppofe 
that  faith  confifts  in  perfons  believing  that  they 
are  in  a good  eftate,  is  in  effeft  the  fame  thing, 
as  to  fuppofe  that  faith  confifts  in  a perfon’s  be- 
lieving that  he  has  faith,,  or  in  believing  that  he 
believes. 

Men  are  doubtlefs  to  blame  for  being  in  a 
dead  carnal  frame  ; but  when  they  are  in  fuch  a 
frame,  when  they  have  no  fenfible  experience 
of  the  exercifes  of  grace,  but  on  tlie  contraiy  are 
under  the  prevalency  of  their  lufts,  and  an  un- 
chriftian  fpirit,  they  are  not  to  blame  for  doubt-- 
K g ing 


[ 226  ] 

ing  of  their  flate.  It  is  as  irapoffible  in  the  nature 
of  things,  that  a holy  and  chrillian  hope  fhould 
be  kept  alive,  in  its  clearnefs  and  llrength,  in  . 
fuch  circumftances,  as  it  is,  to  maintain  the 
bright  funfhine  in  the  air,  when  the  fun  is  gone 
down.  Diftant  experiences,  when  darkened  by 
prefent  prevailing  corruption,  <vill  never  keep 
alive  a gracious  confidence,  for  it  fickens  and 
decays  upon  it.  Nor  is  it  at  all  to  be"  lamented 
that  perfons  doubt  of  their  Hate  in  fuch  circum- 
ftances ; hut  on  the  contrary,  it  is  defirable,  and 
every  way  beft  that  they  fhould.  It  is  agreeable 
to  that  wife  and  merciful  conftitution  of  things, 
which  God  hath  eftablifiied,  that  it  fhould  be  fo. 
For  fo.hath  God  conftituted  things  in  his  difpen- 
fations  towards  his  people,  that  when  their  love 
decays  and  the  excrcifes  of  it  fail,  or  become 
Aveak,  fear  ftiould  arife  ; for  then  they  need  it  to 
reftrain  them  from  fin,  and  to  excite  them  to  care 
for  their  fouls  and  to  watchfulnefs  and  diligence 
in  religion.  But  God  hath  fo  ordered  that  when 
love  rifes  and  is  vigorous,  tlien  fear  fltould  vanifli ; 
for  then  they  need  it  not,  being  adluated  by  a 
more  , excellent  principle.  There  are  no  other 
principles,  which  human  nature  is  under  the  in- 
fluence of,  that  will  ever  make  men  confcientions, 
but  one  of  thefe  two,  fear  or  love : and  there- 
fore if  one  of  thefe  fhould  not  prevail  as  the 
other  decayed,  when  love  is  afleep  we  fhould  be 
expofed  indeed : and  therefore  God  has  wifely 
ordained,  that  thefe  two  oppofite  principles 

fliouM 


r 227  ] 

fhould  rife  and  fall,  like  the  two  oppofite  fcales 
of  a balance.  Love  is  the  /pint  of  adoption  or 
the  child-like  principle  ; if  that  flumbers,  men 
fall  under  fear,  which  is  the  fpirit  of  bondage,  or 
the  fervile  principle : and  fo  on  the  contrary'. 
\And  if  love,  or  the  fpirit  of  adoption,  be  carried 
to  a great  height,  it  drives  away^  all  fear  ; agree- 
able to  that  of  the  apo’ftle,  1 John  iv.  18.  ThcTt 
is  no  fear  in  love,  but  perfeB  love  cajls  out  fear. 
The  two  oppofite  principles  of  fin  and  holy  love, 
bring  hope  and  fear  into  the  hearts  of  God’s  chil- 
dren, in  proportion  as  they  prevail;  that  is, 
without  fomething  accidental  intervening,  as 
melancholy,  ignorance,  prejudices  of  education, 
wrong  inflruftion,  falfe  principles,  or  peculiar 
temptations. 

* Fear  is  caft  out  by  the  Spirt  of  God,  no 
other  way  than  by  the  prevailing  of  love ; nor  is 
peace  ever  maintained  by  his  Spirit  when  love 
IS  afleep.  At  fuch  a time,  in  vain  are  all  our 
felf-examinations,  and  poring  on  paft  experi- 
ences, in  order  to  get  alfurance : for  it  is  con- 
trary to  the  nature  of  things,  as  God  hath  confti- 
tuted  them,  that  we  fhould  have  alfurance  ai  fucli 
a time. 

* They  therefore  diretlly  thtvart  God’s  wife 
conftitution  of  things,  who  exhort  others  to  be 
confident  in  - their  hope  when  in  dead  frames, 
under  a notion  of  liidng  by  faith,  diwA  net  by  fghf, 
and  trufing  God  in  tke  dark,  and  living  upon  Chriji 
and  not  upon  experiences-,  and  w'arn  them  not 

K6  ta 


[ 228  ] 

to  doubt  of  thelrgood  eftate,  leaft  they  fhould  be 
guilty  of  the  dreadful  fin  of  unbelief.  And  it 
has  a direft  tendency  to  prevent  their  ever 
calling  their  ftate  in  queftion,  how  much 
foever  wickednefs  reigns  in  their  hearts  or 
lives,  under  a notion  of  honouring  God  by 
hoping  againjl  hope,  and  confidently  trufting  in 
God. 

But  to  return  from  this  digreffion,  I would 
mention  one  thing  more  under  this  general 
head. 

XII.  Nothing  can  be  certainly  concluded  con- 
cerning the  nature  of  religious  affeilions,  from 
this,  that  the  outward  manifejlations  of  them,  and 
the  relation  p erf ons  give  of  them,  are  very  affeding, 
and  fuch  as  greatly  win  the  heart. 

Even  true  faints  have  not  fuch  a fpirit  of  dif- 
cerning,  that  they  can  certainly  determine 
who  are  godly,  and  who  are  not : for  though 
they  know  experimentally  what  true  religion  is, 
in  the  internal  exercifes  of  it;  yet  thefe  are  what 
they  can  neither  feel  nor  fee,  in  the  heart  of 
another.  There  is  nothing  in  others,  that 
comes  within  their  view%  but  outward  appeai'- 
ances ; but  the  fcripture  plainly  intimates  that 
judging  by  outward  appearances,  is  at  beft  un- 
certain. 

Before  I finifh  this  head,  I tvould  fpeak  fome- 
thing  to  a firange  notion  fome  have  given  into, 
of  certainly  knowing  the  good  eftate  that  others 
are  in,  as  though  it  was  immediately  revealed  to 

them 


[ 229  ] 

them  from  heaven,  by  their  love  flowing  out 
them  in  an  extraordinary  manner.  They  argue  thus,, 
that  their  love  being  very  fenfible,  may  be  cerminly 
known  bv  them  who  feeli%  to  be  a true  Chriftian 
love;  and  if  it  be  a true  Chriftian  love,  the  Spirit 
of  God  muft  be  the  author  of  it ; and  inafmuch 
as  the.  Spirit  of  God,  who  knows  certainly  whe- 
ther others  are  the  children  of  God  or  no ; it 
muft  needs  be  that  this  infallible  Spirit  who  de- 
ceives none,  knows  that  perfon  is  a child  of 
God.  But  fuch  perfons  might  be  convinced  of 
the  falfenefs  of  their  reafoning,  if  they  would 
confider  whether  it  be  not  their  duty,  to  love 
thofe  as  the  children  of  God  who  they  think  are 
fo,  and  whom  they  ,have  no  reafon  to  think 
otherwife,  though  God  who  fearches  the  hearts 
knows  them  not  to  be  his  children  ? If  it  be 
their  duty,  then  it  is  good,  and  the  want  of  it  is 
fin ; and  therefore,  the  Spirit  of  God  may  be 
the  author  of  it : the  Spirit  of  God,  without  be- 
ing a fpirit  of  falflrood,  may  in  fuch  a cafe 
aflift  a perfon  to  do  his  duty,  and  keep  him  from- 
fm. 


PART 


[ 230  ] 


PART.  III. 

Shewing  what  are  dijlinguijhing  figns  of  truly 
gracious  and  holy  aJfeElions. 

T Come  now  to  the  fecond  thing  appertaining 
A-  to  the  trial  of  religious  affeft ions,  viz.  to  take 
notice  of  fome  things,  wherein  thofe  affeftions 
that  are  fpiritual  and  gracious,  differ  from  thofe 
that  are  not  fo.. 

I.  Affeftions  truly  fpiritual  and  gracious,  arife 
from  thofe  influences  and  operations  on  the 
heart,  which  are  fpiritual,  divine,  and  fuperna- 
tural.. 

We  find  that  thofe  who  are  fanftified  by  the 
Spirit  of  God,  are  in  the  New  Teflament  called 
fpiritu-al  perfons ; and  their  being  fpiritual  is 
fpoken  of  as  their  peculiar  charafter,-  and  that 
wherein  they  are  diflinguiflied  from  thofe  who 
are  not  fanSfificd. 

Chiiflians  are  called  fpiritual  perfons,  becaufe 
they  are  born  of  the  Spirit,  and  becaufe  of  the 
indwelling  and  holy  influences  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  in  them;  and  things  are  called  fpiritual  as 
related  to  the  Spirit  of  God. 

But'  although  it  is  with  relation  to  the  Spirit 
©f  God  and  Iris  influences,  that  perfons  and 

things. 


[ 231  j 

things  are  called  fpiritual ; yet  not  all  thofe  per- 
fons,  who  are  fubjeft  to  any  kind  of  influence  of 
the  Spirit  of  God,  are  called  fpiritual  in  the  New 
Teftament. 

Natural  men  may  he  the  fubjeCis  of  many  influ- 
ences of  the  Spirit  of  God,  yet  they  are  not  in 
the  fenfe  of  the  {cn^tnve,  fpiritual  perfons;  nei- 
ther are  any  of  thofe  effedfs,  gifts,  qualities  or 
affedtions,  that  are  from  the  influence  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  upon  them,  called  fpiritual 
things.  The  great  difference  lies  in  thefe  two 
thinijs. 

1.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  given  to  true  believers 
to  dwell  in  them,  and  to  influence  their  hearts, 
as  a divine  fupernatural  fpring  of  life  and  adfion,. 
The  fcripture  reprefents  the  holy  Spirit,  not 
only  as  moving,  and  occafionally  influencing  the 
faints,  but  as  dwelling  in  them  as  his  temple,  his 
proper  abode  and  dwelling-place,  i Cor.  iii.  i6. 
2 Cor.  vi.  i6.  John  xiv.  i6,  17.  And  he  isre- 
prefented  as  being  fo  united  to  the  faculties 
of  the  foul,  that  he  becomes  a principle  of  nev/ 
nature. 

And  the  Spirit  of  God  being  thus  communi- 
cated and  united  to  them,  they  are  from  thence 
properly  denominated  fpiritual. 

On  the  other  hand,  though  the  Spirit  of  God 
may  many  ways  influence  natural  men ; yet  be- 
caufe  it  is  not  thus  communicated  to  them,  they 
do  not  derive  any  denomination  from  it,  fo  as  to 
be  ililed  fpiritiiak. 

2.  Another 


[ 232  ] 

2.  Anotherrcafon  why  the  faints  and  their  vir- 
tues are  called  fpiritual,  is,  that  the  Spirit  of 
God,  dwelling  as  a vital  principle  in  their  fouls, 
there  produces  thofe  effefts  wherein  he  commu- 
nicates himfelf  in  his  own  proper  nature.  Ho- 
linefs  is  the  nature  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  therefore 
he  is  called  in  fcripture  the  Holy  Ghoft.  The 
Spirit  of  God  fo  dwells  in  the  hearts  of  the  faints, 
that  he  there,  as  a fpring  of  life,  communicates 
himfelf,  in  this  his  fweet  and  divine  nature, 
making  the  foul  a partaker  of  God’s  beauty  and 
Chrift’s  joy,  fo  that  the  faint  has  truly  fellowlhip 
vnlh  the  Father,  and  with  his  Son  Jefus  Chrift, 
in  thus  having  the  participation  oj  the  Holy 
Ghoft. 

Now  thefe  influences  of  the  Spirit  of  God  be- 
ing thus  peculiar  to  God,  and  being  thofe  wherein 
God  does,  in  fo  high  a manner,  communicate 
himfelf,  and  make  the  creature  partaker  of  the 
divine  nature,  this  is  wha±  I mean  when  I fay, 
that  truly  gracious  affe&ions  arife  from  thofe  in^ 
fuences  that  are  fpiritual  and  divine. 

From  thefe  things  it  is  evident,  that  thofe  gra- 
cious influences  which  the  faints  are  the  fubjefts 
of,  are  entirely  above  nature,  altogether  of  a dif- 
ferent kind  from  any  thing  that  men  find  in  them- 
felves  by  nature,  or  only  in  the  exercife  of  na- 
tural principles ; and  are  things  which  no  im- 
provement of  principles  that  are  natural,  no 
advancing  or  exalting  them  to  higher  degi'ees, 
and  no  kind  of  corapofition  of  them,  will  ever 

bring 


[ 233  ] 

bring  men  to  ; becaufe  they  not  only  differ  from 
what  is  natural,  and  from  evefy  thing  that  natural 
men  experience,  in  degree  and  drcumjlances ; 
but  alfo  in  kind ; and  are  of  a nature  vaftly  more 
excellent.  And  this  is  what  I mean,  when  I fay, 
that  gracious  ajfeBions  are  from  tkofe  influences 
that  are  fupernaiural. 

From  hence  it  follows,  that  in  thofe  gracious 
affeftions  which  are  wrought  through  the  faving 
influences  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  there  is  a new 
inward  perception  or  Jerifation,  entirely  different 
in  its  nature,  from  any  thing  that  ever  their 
minds  were  the  fubjefts  of,  before  they  v/ere 
faiiQified,  If  grace  be,  in  the  fenfe  above  de- 
fcribed,  an  entirely  new  kind  of  principle;  then 
the  exercifes  of  It  are  alfo  entirely  a new  kind  of 
exercife.  And  if  there  be  in  the  foul  a new  fort 
of  exercifes  which  it  knew  nothing  of  before, 
and  which  no  improvement,  compofition  or  ma- 
nagement of  what  it  tvas  before  confcious  of, 
could  produce,  or  any  thing  like  it ; then  it  fol- 
lows that  there  is,  as  it  were,  a new  fpiritual  fenfe 
in  the  mind,  or  an  entirely  new  kind  of  percep- 
tion or  fpiritual  fenfaiion,  which  is  in  its  whole 
nature  different  from  any  former  kinds  of  fenfa- 
tion  ; and  fomething  is  perceived  by  a true  faint, 
in  the  exercife  of  this  new  fenfe,  in  fpiritual  and 
divine  things,  as  entirely  diverfc  from  any  thing 
that  is  perceived  in  them,  by  natural  men,  as  the 
tafte  of  honey  is  diverfe  from  the  ideas  men  get 
of  honey  by  only  looking  on  and  feeling  it.  So 

that 


[ 234  J 

> that  the  fpiritual  perceptions  which  a fpiritual 
perfon  has,  are  not  only  diverfe  from  all  that  na- 
tural men  have,  after  the  manner  that  the  ideas 
or  perceptions  of  the  fame  fenfe  may  differ  one 
from  another,  but  rather  as  the  ideas  and  fenfa- 
tions  of  different  fenfes  differ. 

II.  Truly  gracious  affeftions  are  attended  with 
a conviction  of  the  reality  and  certainty  of  divine 
things. 

This  feems  to  be  implied  in  the  text  that  was 
laid  as  the  foundation  of  this  difcourfe,  whom 
having  not Jeen,  ye  love  •,  in  whom,  though  new  ye 
fee  him  not,  yet,  believing,  ye  rejoice  with  joy  un~ 
Jpeakable  andj-idl  of  glory. 

All  truly  gracious  perfons  have  a full  and  ef- 
fectual conviction  of  the  truth  of  the  great  things 
ofthegofpel.  They  no  longer  halt  between  two 
opinions  ; the  great  doCtrines  of  the  gofpel  ceafe 
to  be  any  longer  doubtful  things,  but  with  them 
are  fettled  and  determined  points,  fo  that  they 
are  not  afraid-to  venture  their  all  upon  them. 
Their  conviCfion  is  effeBual,  fo  that  the  invifible 
things  of  the  gofpel,  have  the  influence  of  real 
and.certain  things  upon  them,  have  the  weight 
and  power  of  real  things  on  their  hearts,  and  ac- 
cordingly rule  in  their  affeCfions,  and  govern 
them  throucrh  the  courfe  of  iheir  lives.  They 

O •' 

have  not  only  an  opinion  that  thefe  things  are 
true,  but  they  fee  that  it  ii  really  fo,  their  eyes 
being  opened:  and  therefore  thefe  things  are  of 
great  weight  with  them,  and  have  a mighty 

potver 


r 235  ] 

pou’er  upon  their  hear  ts  and  influence  over  their 
praftice. 

There  are  many  religious  afleflions  which  ar'e 
not  attended  with  luch  a conviftion  of  the  judg- 
ment. There  are  many  apprehenfions  which 
fome  have,  that  they  call  divine  difeoveries^ 
which  are  affefting  but  not  convincing.  Though 
for  a little  while,  they  may  feem  to  be  perfuaded 
of  the  truth  of  the  things  of  religion,  yet  they 
have  no  thorough  effeftual  convi6Hon,  or  at  leaft 
there  is  no  remarkable  alteration  : they  live  not 
under  the  influence  of  a realizing  conviflion  of 
the  infinite  things  which  the  gofpel  reveals ; if 
they  did,  it  would  be  impoflible  for  them  to  live 
as  they  do. 

But  how  do  men  attain  this  thorough  convic- 
tion of  the  truth  of  the  gofpel  ? By  the  internal 
evidences  of  it,  by  a fight  of  its  glory  ; otherwife 
it  is  impolfible  that  thofe  who  are  iljiterate,  and 
unacquainted  with  hiltory,  fhould  have  any  ef- 
fefilual  convi£lion  of  it  at  all.  They  may  without 
this,  fee  a great  probability  of  it : but  it  is  impof- 
fible.  that  men  who-  have  not  fomething  of  a ge- 
neral view  of  the  hiflorical  world,  or  the  feries 
of  hiflory  from  age  to  age,  fliould  come  at  the 
force  of  arguments  for  the  truth  of  Chriftianity, 
drawn  from  hiflory,  to  that  degree,  as  eflec- 
tually  to  induce  them  to  venture  their  all  upon  it. 
After  all  that  learned  men  have  faid  to  them, 
there  vs’ill  remain  innumerable  doubts  on  their 

m.inds^ 


[ 236  ] 

minds.  Now  the  gofpel  was  not  given  only  for 
learned  men.  There  are  at  leaft  nineteen  in 
twenty,  if  not  ninety-nine  in  a hundred,  of  thofe 
for  whom  the  fcriptures  were  written,  that  are 
rfot  capable  of  any  certain  convIfHon  of  the  di- 
vine authority  of  fcripture,  by  fuch  arguments 
as  learned  men  make  ufe  of.  If  men  who  have 
been  brought  up  in  heathenifm,  mufl  wait  for  a 
clear  conviflion  of  the  truth  of  Chriliianitv,  till 
they  have  learning  and  acquaintance  with  the 
liiftory  of  politer  nations,  enough  to  fee  the 
force  of  fuch  kind  of  arguments  ; it  will  make  the 
evidence  of  the  gofpel  to  them  immenfely  cum- 
berfome,  and  will  render  its  propagation  among 
them  infinitely  difficult. 

It  is  unreafonable  to  fuppofe.  that  God  has 
provided  for  his  people  no  more  than  probable 
evidences  of  the  truth  of  the  gofpel.  There  is 
certainly  fome  fort  of  evidence  which  God  has 
gaven,  that  the  Chrifiian  religion  is  true,  and 
that  the  gofpel  is  his  word,  beyond  mere  proba- 
bility. Doubtlefs  there  ai'e  fome  grounds  of  af- 
furance  held  forth,  which,  if  we  are  not  blind  to 
them,  tend  to  give  an  higher  perfuafion,  than 
any  arguing  from  hiftory  and  human  tradition, 
which  the  illiterate  are  capable  of;  yea,  that 
which  is  good  ground  of  the  higheft  affurance, 
that  mankind  have  in  any  cafe  whatfoever. 

If  we  come  to  faft  and  experience,  there  is 
not  the  leaft  reafon  to  fuppofe,  that  one  in  an 
hundred  of  thofe  who  have  been  fincere  Chrif- 

tians. 


[ 237  J 

tians,  have  come  by  their  conviftion  of  the  truth 
of  thegofpel,  by  arguments  fetched  from  ancient 
traditions,  hiftories  and  monuments.  Among 
the  many  thoufands  that  died  martyrs  for  Chrift 
fmce  the  beginning  of  the  reformation,  how  few 
came  by  their  affured  perfuafion  this  way  ? The 
greateft  part  of  them  were  illiterate  perfons, 
many  of  whom  were  brought  up  in  popifli  dark- 
nefs,  and  lived  when  fuch  arguments  were  but 
very  imperfeftly  handled.  It  is  but  lately  that 
thefe  arguments  have  been  fet  in  a clear  light, 
even  by  learned  men  themfclves  : and  fmce  it 
has  been  done,  there  were  never  fewer  tho- 
rough believers,  among  thofe  who  have  been 
educated  in  the  true  religion.  Infidelity  never 
prevailed  fo  much  in  any  age,  as  in  this  wherein 
thefe  arguments  are  handled  to  the  greateft  ad- 
vantage. 

The  true  martyrs  of  Jefus  Chrift,  are  not 
thofe  who  have  only  been  ftrong  in  opinion  that 
the  gofpel  of  Chrift  is- true,  but  thofe  that  have 
fen  the  truth  of  it ; as  the  very  name  of  martyrs 
or  witnefies  (by  which  they  afe  called  in  ferip- 
ture)  implies.  Thofe  are  very  improperly  called 
witneffes  of  the  truth  of  any  thing,  who  only 
declare  they  are  of  opinion,  fuch  a thing  is  true. 
Thofe  only  are  proper  witneffes  who  teftify  that 
they  have  feen  th^,  truth  of  the  thing  they  affert. 
But  yet  it  muft  be  noted,  that  among  thofe  who 
have  a fpiritual  fight  of  the  divine  glory  of  the 
gofpel,  there  is  a great  variety  of  degrees  of 

ftrength 

O 


[ 238  ] 

> - 

f^rengtl:  of  faith,  as  there  is  a vaft  variety  of  the 
degree  ofclearnefs  of  views  of  this  glory : but  there 
is  no  true  and  faving  faith,  or  fpiritual  conviftion 
of  the  truth  of  the  gofpel,  that  has  this  manifefla- 
tion  of  its  internal  e\ddence,  in  fome-  degree. 
The  gofj>el  does  not  go  abroad  a begging  for  its 
evidence,  fo  much  as  fome  think;  it  has  its  higheft 
evidence  in  itfelf.  Still  great  ufe  may  be  made 
of  external  arguments,  and  they  are  not  to  be 
negiefted,  for  they  may  be  ferviceable  to  awaken 
unbelievers,  and  bring  them  to  ferious  confide- 
ration,  and  to  confirm  the  faith  of  true  faints  ; yea 
they  may  be  in  fome  refpefls  fubfen.nent  fo  the 
hegeif'ing  of  faving  faith  in  men.  And  yet  it 
remains  true,  that  there  is  no  fpiritual  convic- 
tio'n  but  what  arifes  from  an  apprehcnfion  of  the 
fpiritual  beauty  and  gloiy  of  divine  things. 

But  I proceed  to  another  diflinguifliing  fign  of 
gracious  affeftions. 

III.  G racious  afleftions  are  attended  with 
evangelical  humilintiGn. 

Evaiwelical  humiliation  is  a fenfe  that  a 
c? 

Cdrriflian  has  of  his  own  utter  infulhciency,  def- 
picablenefs,  and  odioufnefs,  with  an  anfwerable 
frame  of  heart.  There  is  a diftinftion  to  be  made 
between  a legal  and  evangelical  humiliation.  In 
a lepal  humiliation  men  are  convinced  that  they' 
are  exceeding  finful  and  guilty  ; but  they  do  not 
fee  their  own  odioufnefs  on  the  account  of  fin,  nor 
the  hateful  nature  of  fm  ; a fenfe  of  this  is  given 

in 


[ 239  ] 

i n evangelical  humiliation,  by  a difcovery  of  God’s 
liolinefs. 

They  that  are  deftitute  of  this,  have  no  true 
religion,  whatever  profeffion  they  may  make. 
God  has  abundantly  manifefted  in  his  tvord,  that 
nothing  is  acceptable  to  him  without  it.  As  we 
would  make  the  holy  fcriptures  our  rule  in  judg- 
ing of  our  own  Ifate;  it  concerns  us  greatly  to 
look  at  this  humiliation,  as  one  ofthemoft  effen- 
tial  things  pertaining  to  true  Chrifllanity. 

It  is  true  that  many  hypocrpcs  make  great  pre- 
tences to  humility,  as  well  as  other  graces;  many 
of  them  are  much  in  declaring  that  Umy  are  lium- 
ble,  and  telling  how  they  were  humbled  to  the 
duff  at  fuch  and  fuch  times,  and  aboundino-  in 
very  bad  exprefTions  about  diemfelves;  fuch  as, 
1 am  a poor  vile  creature  I Oh,  1 have  a dreadful 
wicked  heart!  My  heart  is  voorfe  than  the  devil! 
Oh  this  curfed  heart  of  mine!  Such  exprefTions 
are  very  often  ufed,  not  with  a heart  that  is 
broken,  not  with  fpiritual  mourning;  but  With  a 
light  air,  with  fmiles  in  the  countenance  ; and 
we  muff  believe  that  they  are  humble,  upon  the 
credit  of  their  fay  fo  ; for  there  is  nothing  of  the 
favour  of  humility,  in  the  manner  of  their  de- 
portment. There  are  many  that  are  full  of  ex- 
preffions  of  their  own  viienefs,  who  yet  expefl  to 
be  looked  upon  as  eminent  faints  by  others;  and  it 
is  dangerous  for  any  to  carry  it  towards  them  any 
otherwife,  than  as  fome  of  the  chief  of  Chrifti- 
ans.  I'here  are  many  that  are  much  in  crying 

out 


[ 240  ] 

out  of  their  wicked  liearts,  and  their  great  fiiort- 
comings,  and  unprofitablenefs,  and  fpeaking  as 
though  they  looked  on  themfelves  as  die  meaneft 
■ci  the  faints  who  yet^  if  a minifter  (hould  feri- 
oufly  tel!  them  the  fame  things  in  private,  and 
(hould  fignify,  that  he  feared  they  vrere  ver)'  low 
and  weak  Chriflians;  they  would  think  them- 
felves highly  injured  ; and  there  would  he  danger 
of  a rooted  prejudice  in  them  againft  fuch  a mi- 
nider. 

There  is  a fort  of  men,  who  abundantly  crt' 
down  works,  and  cry  up  faith  in  oppofition  to 
works,  and  fet  up  themfelves  much  as  evangeli- 
cal perfons,  in  oppofition  to  thofe  that  are  of  a 
legal  fplrit,  and  make  a fair  fiiew  of  advancing 
Chrlll  and  the  gofpel,  and  the  way  of  free  grace ; 
who  are  indeed  fome  of  the  grcatell  enemies  to 
tlie  gofpel  tvay  of  free  grace,  and  the  mod  dan- 
gerous oppofers  of  pure,  humble  Chridianlty.  j 
There  is  a pretended  humiliation,  and  being  ! 
dead  to  the  law,  and  empued  of  felf,  which,  is 
one  of  the  biggeft  and  mod  elated  things  in  the 
world.  Some  who  think  themfelves  quite  empti-  I 
ed  of  themfelves,  and  are  confident  that  thev  are 
abafed  in  the  dud,  are  as  full  as  they  can  hold 
with  the  glory  of  their  own  hurailitv,  and  lifted  . 
up  to  heaven  with  an  high  opinion  of  ih.eirabafe- 
inent.  Tlielr  humility  is  a fwelllng,  lelf-conceit- 
c'd,  confident,  diewv,  noifv.  affuming  humility. 

It  is  adonidiuig  how  greatly  manv  are  deceived 
about  themfelves  as  to  this  matter,  im..gining 

themfelves 


[ ] 

tlierafelves  moft  humble,  when  they  are  moft 
proud.  The  deceitfulnefs  of  the  heart  appears 
in  no  one  thing  foinuch  as  this  of  fpiritual  pride. 

But  though  fpiritual  pride  be  fo  fubtle  an  ini- 
quity, yet  there  are  t\yo  things  by  which  it  may 
furely  be  difcovered. 

The  firjl  is  ; he  that  is  under  the  prevalence 
of  this  diftemper,  is  apt  to  think  highly  of  his 
attainments  in  religion,  compared  vrith  others. 
It  is  natural  for  him  to  fall  into  that  thought  of 
hlmfelf  that  the  uppermofl;  feat  belongs  to  him, 
and  that  others  Ihould  yield  to  him,  and  regard 
him  as  a mader,  in  matters  of  religion. 

But  he  whofe  heart  is  under  the  power  of  Chrif- 
tian  humllit}',  is  apt  to  think  his  attainments  com- 
paratively mean,  and  to  efteem  hlmfelf  low  a- 
mong  the  faints.  Such  a one  is  not  apt  to  af- 
fume  aiuliority,  and  to  take  upon  him  to  be.  chief 
manager,  but  rather  to  be  fubjeTf  to  others. 

There  are  fome  pcrfons  experiences  that  na- 
turally tvork  that  wav,  and  they  often  fpeak  of 
them  as  the  gteat  things  they  have  met  xnlh.  This 
may  be  fpoken,  and  meant  in  a good  fenfe.  In 
one  fenfe,  every  degree  of  faving  mercy  is  a 
^reat  thing ; and  the  more  humble  a perfon  is 
that  hopes  God  has  bellowed  fich  mercy  on  him, 
the  more  apt  will  he  be  to  call  it  a great  thinglhat 
ke  has  met  with.  But  if  by  great  things  which  they 
have  experienced,  they  mean  comparatively  great 
fpiritual  experiences,  which  is  often  the  cafe  ; 
then  for  a perfon  to  {ay,  I have  met  with  great 
VoL.  XXIII.  L things. 


r 242  ] 

things,  is  the  fame  as  to  fay,  I am  an  eminent 
faint,  and  have  more  grace  than  ordinarv  : for  to 
have  great  experiences,  is  the  fame  as  to  have 
great  grace.  The  perfons  that  talk  thus  about 
their  experiences,  expeft  that  others  fhould  ad- 
mire them.  Indeed  they  do  not  call  it  boafling 
to  talk,  thus ; hecaufe  they  fay,  they  know  it  was 
not  they  that  dtciil,  it  was  free  grace.  But  their 
.Verbally  afcribiaig  it  to  the  grace  of  God,  does 
not  hinder  their  forwardnefs  to  think  highly  of 
their  holinefs.  Were  they  under  the  influence 
of  an  humble  Ipirit,  their  attainments  would  not 
be  fo  apt  to  fhine  in  their  own  eyes. 

Such  is  the  naiure  of  grace,  that  Chri Rians  in 
the  prcfent  Rate,  look  upon  their  goodnefs  as  lit- 
tle, and  their  deformity  as  great ; and  they  that 
have  moR  grace,  have  moR  of  this  difpofiiion,  as 
will  appear  to  any  that  confidcrs  the  things  fol- 
lowing. 

That  grace  is  wonhv  ib  be  called  little,  that  is 
little  in  comparifon  of  what  it  ought  to  be;  and 
fo  it  feems  to  one  that  is  truly  gracious;  lor  he 
hath  his  eve  upon  the  rule  of  his  dut\'  ; a confor- 
mity to  that  is  what  he  aims  at;  and  it  is  by  that 
he  judges  of  what  he  doe.s,  and  hath.  '1  o a gra- 
cious Joiii,  efpecially  if  enuneiTly  fo,  that  holi- 
nefs  appears  lit  le,  which  is  little  of  what  it  fiiould 
be;  little  o!  what  he  iees  infinite  reafon  foi,  and 
obligation  to.  I!  his  holinefs  appears  to  him  to 
beat  avail  difiance  irom  this,  i.  naturally  appears 
little  in  his  e\  cs. 


True 


C 243  ] 

True  grace  opens  to  a perfon’s  view  the  inSnite 
reafon  there  is  that  he  fhould  be  holy  in  a high 
degree.  And  the  more  grace  he  has,  the  more 
this  is  opened  to  view;  the  grea'.er  fenfe  he  has 
of  the  oblitJ'a  ions  he  is  under  to  love  God  and 

O 

Chrilf.  The  more  he  apprehends,  the  more  the 
fmalinefs  of  his  grace  and  love  appears  flrange  and 
wonderful;  and  therefore  he  is  more  ready  to 
think,  that  others  ate  beyond  him.  Wondering 
at  the  litdenefs  of  his  own  grace,  he  can  fcarce 
believe  that  fo  ftrange  a thing  happens  to  other 
■faints.  It  is  amazing  to  him,  that  one  that  is  real- 
ly a child  ol  God,  Ihould  love  no  more  ; and  he 
is  apt  to  look  upon  it  as  a tiling  peculiar  to  him- 
fclf ; for  he  fees  only  the  outfide  of  other  Chrif- 
tians,  but  he  fees  his  own  infide. 

Grace  and  love  in  the  moll  eminent  faints,-, 
are  truly  very  little  in  comparifon  of  what  they 
ought  to  be  ; becaufe  the  highefl  love;  that  any 
attain  to,  is  poor,  and  not  worthy  to  be  named  , 
in  comparifon  of  what  our  obligations  appear  to 
be,  from  the  joint  confideration  of  thefe  two 
things,  viz.  1.  The  rcafons  God  has  given  us  to 
love  him,  in  the  manifeltafions  he  has  made  of 
his  glory:  and  2.  The  capacity  there  is  in  the 
foul,  by  thofe  intellectual  faculties  v/hicliGod  has 
given  it,  of  feeing  and  underllanding  thefe  rea- 
fons.  He  that  has  much  grace,  cfrimates  his  love 
by  the  v/hole  height  of  his  duty,  and  hence  itap- 
pears  alfonilhingly  little  and  low  in  his  eyes. 

That  nature  of  great  difeoveries  (as  they  are 
L 2 called)  ■ 


[ 244  ] 

called)  in  many  perfons,  is  to  hide  the  corrup- 
tion of  their  hearts,  and  to  make  it  feem  to  them 
as  if  all  their  fin  was  gone. 

The  more  eminent  faints  arc,  and  the  more 
they  have  of  the  light  of  heaven  in  their  fouls, 
the  more  do  they  appear  to  themfelves,  as  the 
moll  eminent  faints  in  this  world  do,  to  the  an- 
gels in  heaven.  Now  tve  can  fuppofe  no  other 
th^n,  that  the  highefl  attainments  of  the  former, 
appear  mean  to  the  latter  becaufe  thefe  dwell  in 
the  light  ol  God's  glory,  and  fee  him  as  lie 
is. 

I would  not  be  underflood,  that  the  faints  on 
earth  have  in  all  rcfjrefls  ilie  word  opinion  of 
themfelves,  when  they  have  mod  grace.  In 
manv  refpefls,  it  is  otherwife.  With  refpecl 
to  profitive  corruption,  they  may  appear  to 
th'emifelves  freed  when  ^raceis  mod  in  exercife. 

O 

But  t et  it  is  true,  that  the  children  of  God  never 
liavefo  much  conviftion  of  their  deformitv,  and 
fo  abafing  a fenfe  of  their  prefent  vilenefs  as  when 
thev  are  highed  in  the  exercife  of  grace. 

IV.  Another  thin^,  wherein  erac.ious affections 

O’  O 

didinguifhed  from  others,  is  \\vaX  they  are  alltnded 
mill  a change  of  nature. 

AH  gracious  adeftions  arife  from  a fpiritual  un- 
derdanding,  in  which  the  foul  has  the  excellency 
of  divine  things  difeovered  to  it.  But  all  fpiri- 
tual difeoveries  are  transforming,  and  not  only 
make  an  alteration  of  th.e  prefent  fenfation  of  the 
foul 4 but  in  the  very  nature  of  it.  Such  power 

as 


C 245  ] 

as  tins  is  properly  divine,  and  is  peculiar  io  the 
Spirit  of  theLord.  Otherpower  may  make  agreat 
alteration  in  mens  prefent  tempers,  but  it  is  the 
power  of  a creator  only  that  can  change  the 
nature.  And  no  dlfcoveries,  but  thofe  that  are 
fupernatural,  will  have  this  fupernatural  effetl. 
But  this-  effetl  all  thefe  difoveries  have,  that  are 
irulv  divine.  The  foul  is  deepl}’  affccled  by  thefe 
dlfcoveries,  and  fo  affefted  as  to  be  tranfo 
formed. 

Therefore  if  there  be  no  fuch  change  in  per- 
fons,  that  think  they  have  experienced  a work 
of  converfion,  vain  are  all  their  imaginations, 
however  they  have  been  affefted.  Converfion 
is  a great  and  univerfal  change  of  the  man,  turn-, 
ing  him  from  fin  to  God.  If  therefore,  after 
a perfon’s  fuppofed  converfion  there  is  no  fenfi- 
blc  or  renrarkable  alteration  in  him,  as  to  thofe 
bad  qualities,  and  evil  habits,  which  before  were 
vifible  in  him,  and  he  is  ordinarily  under  the 
prevalence  of  the  fame  dirpofitions  that  he  ufed 
to  be,  he  appears  as  felfifh.as  ftupid,  and  perverfe, 
as  unchrifllan,  and  unfavoury  as  ever  ; it  is  great- 
er evidence  againft  him,  than  the  brighteff  flory 
of  experiences  that  ever  was  told,  is  for  him. 

Indeed  allowances  mufl  be  made  for  the  na- 
tural temper,  which  is  not  entirely  rooted  out 
by  converfion.  Thofe  fins  which  a man  was 
moft  inclined  to  before  his  converfion,  he  may 
be  moft  apt  to  fall  into  ftlll;  but  yet  converfion 
will  make  a great  alteration  even  with  lefpeft 
L 3 to 


[ 246  ] 

to  thefe.  If  a man  before  liis  converfion,  ^vas  by 
his  conftitution,  inclined  to  lafcivioufnefs,  or 
drunkennefs,  or  malicioufnefs  ; converting  grace 
will  make  a great  alteration  in  him,  fo  that  they 
fhall  no  longer  hav'e  dominion  over  him. 

There  is  a fort  of  high  affections  that  fame 
liave  from  time  to  time,  that  leave  them  without 
any  abiding  effefl;.  They  go  off  fuddenly  : fo 
that  from  the  very  height  of  their  emotion,  they 
pafsatonce  to  he  quite  dead.  Itfurely  is  not  wont 
to  be  thus  with  high  gracious  affeflions  ; they 
leave  a fweet  relifli  of  divine  things  on  the  heart 
and  a flronger  bent  of  foul  towards  God  and 
holinefs. 

V.  Ti'uly  gracious  affefHons  differ  from  thofe 
that  are  falfe  in  that  they  naturally  beget  and 
promote  fuch  a fpirit  of  love,  vieeknefs,  quietnefs, 
forgivenejs  and  mercy,  as  appeared  in  Chriji. 

The  evidence  of  this  in  the  fcrlpture  is  very 
abundant.  If  we  judge  of  the  proper  fpirit  of 
the  gofpel,  by  the  word  of  God,  this  fpirit  is 
,what  may  by  way  of  eminence  be  called  the 
Chriftiari  fpirit  : and  may  be  looked  upon  as 
the  true,  and  dlltinguifhing  dilpofition  of  Chrif- 
tians.  When  fome  of  the  difciples  of  Chrift 
faid  fomething,  that  was  not  agreeable  to  fuch 
a fpirit,  Chrift  told  them  that  they  knew  net  what 
manner  of /pint  they  were  of\  Luke  ix.  5.5.  im- 
plying that  this  fpirit  is  the  proper  fpirit  of  his  re- 
ligion. All  that  are  truly  godly,  are  of  this  fpirit ; it 

is 


[ 247  ] 

is' the  fpirit  by  which  tliey  are  fo  governed,  that 
it  is  their  true  and  proper  charafter. 

Every  thing  that  appertains  to  holinefs  of  heart 
does  indeed  belong  to  the  nature  of  true  Chriftia- 
Tiity  ; but  a fpirit  of  holinefs  appearing  in  fome 
particular  graces,  may  more  efpecially  be  called 
the  Chriflian  fpirit.  There  are  fome  amiable  qua- 
lities that  more  efpecially  agree  with  the  nature 
of  the  gofpel,  fuch  are  humility,  meeknefs,  lov^ 
forglvenefs,  and  mercy.  Thefe  therefore  efpe- 
cir.lly  belong  to  the  charafler  of  Chrillians. 

Thefe  tldngs  are  fpoken  of,  as  what  are  efpeci- 
ally thecharafler  of  Chrill  liimfelf,  the  great  head 
of  the  Chriflian  church.  And  as  thefe  are  efpaci- 
ally  the  character  of  Chrifl,  fo  they  are  alfo  of 
chiftians.  Chriflians  are  Chrift-like  : none  de< 
ferve  the  name  of  Chriflians  who  are  not  fo  in 
their  prevailing  charafter. 

■ Meeknefs  is  fo  much  the  charafter  ofthe  faints, 
that  tlu  meek  and  the  godly  are  ufed  as  fynony- 
mous  terms  in  fcripture. 

But  fome  may  fay,  “ Is  there  no  fuch  things- 
as  Chriflian  fortitude,  boldnefs  for  Chrifl,  being 
•good  foldiers  in  the  Chriflian  warfare  ?” 

I anfwer,  there  is.  The  whole  Chriflian  life  is 
■compared  to  a warfare.  And  the  mofl  eminent 
Chriflians  are  the  befl  foldiers,  endowed  with  the 
greateft  degrees  of  fortitude.  But  many  perfons 
feem  to  be  quite  miflaken  concerning  the  nature 
of  Chriflian  fortitude.  It  is  not  brutal  fiercenefs. 
True  Chriflian  fortitude  confifls  in  flrength  of 
L 4 mind, 


[ 1 

mind,  through  grace,  exerted  in  two  things  ^ in 
ruling  andfuppreffing  of  evil,  and  unruly  paf- 
fions,  and  in  ftedfaifly  following  good  affeffions, 
without  being  hindred  by  ftnful  fear,  or  the  op- 
pofition  of  enemies  : but  the  palhons  that  are 
retrained,  in  this  Chriftian  fortitude,  are  thofe 
very  palhons  that  are  vigoroufly  exerted,  in 
falfe  boldnefs,  and  thofe  affeftions  that  are 
yigoroufly  exerted  in  true  fortitude,  are  thofe 
holy  afieflions,  that  are  direflly  contrary  to  them. 
Though  Chrihian  fortitude  appears,  inwithftand- 
ing  the  enemies  that  are  without  us  ; yet  it  much 
more  appears,  in  refilling  the  enemies  that  are 
within  us.  The  flrength  of  the  good  foldier  of 
Jefus  Chrift,  appears  in  nothing  more,  than  in 
fledfaftly  maintaining  the  holy,  calm,  meeknefs, 
fweetnefs,  and  benevolence  of  his  mind,  amidft 
all  the  florins,  injuries,  and  furprihng  events  of 
this  evil  world.  The  fcripture  Intimate  that  true 
fortitude  confills  chiefly  in  this;  Prov.  xvi.  32.  He 
that  is Jlow  to  anger,  is  better  than  the  mighty,  and 
he  that  ruleth  his  fpirit,  than  he  that  taketh  a city. 

The  way  to  make  a right  judgment,  what  a 
holy  fortitude  is  in  fighting  with  God’s  enemies,  is 
to  look  to  the  captain  of  our  falvation,  even  to 
Jefus  in  the  time  of  his  lafl  fuflferings,  when  his 
enemies  in  earth  and  hell  made  their  mofl  vio- 
lent attack  on  him.  How  did  he  fhew'  his  bold- 
nefs ? Not  in  any  fiery  pafhons ; not  in  fierce 
and  violent  fpeeches,  and  crying  out  of  the  wick- 
ednefs  of  oppofers,  giving  them  their  own  in 

plain 


[ 249  ] 

plain  terms  , but  in  not  opening  his  mouth,  pray- 
ing that  the  father  would  forgive  his  murderers-; 
not  in  {bedding  the  blood  of  otirers  but  with  all- 
conquering  patience  and  love,  fliedding  his  own. 
Indeed  one  of  his  difciples,  that  made  a pretence 
to  boldnefs  forChnJi,  began  to  la)'  about  him  with 
a fword  ; but  Chrift  quickly  rebukes  him,  and 
heals  the  wound  he  gives.  And  never  was  the 
patience,  meeknefs,  love,,  and  foi^ivenefs  of  Chrifl 
in  fo  glorious  a manifeftation,  as  at  that  time. 

When  perfons  are  fierce  and  violent,  and  exert 
their  ffiarp  and  bitter  pafTions,  it  fliews  weaknefs, 

inffead  of  flrength Whereas  there  is  among  you 

eiivving  at, id  Jirife  and  divi/ions,  are  ye  not  cat  nal 
and  walk  as  men  ? 

There  is  a pretended  boldnefs  for  Chrifl  thatarifes 
from  no  better  principle  than  pride.  Men  may 
be  forward  to  expofe  themfclves  to  the  dtflike  of 
tlie  world,  and  even  to  provoke  their  difpleaiure- 
out  of  pride,  that  they  may  be  more  highly  exalted 
among  their  party.  That  duty  which  tries  whether 
a man  is  willing  to  be  defpifedby  them  that  are  of 
his  own  party,  is  a much  more  proper  trial  of 
his  boldnefs  for  Chrift,  than  his  being  forward 
to  expofe-  himfelf  to  the  reproach  of  oppofers.. 
He  is  bold  for  Chrift,  that  has  Chriflian  fortitude 
to  confefs  his  fault  openlv,  wlien  he  has  com- 
mitted one  that  requires  it,,  and  as  it  were  to 
come  down  upon  his  knees  before  oppofers. 
Such  things  as  thefe  are  a vaflly  greate.'"  evidence^ 
of  holy  boldnefs  than  refolutely  a_nd  fiercely  cop^ 
fronliiig  oppofers. 

L 5 . As. 


C 250  ] 

As  fome  are  much  miflaken  concerning  the 
nature  of  true  boldnefs  for  Chrift,  fo  they 
are  concerning  Chrifiian  zeal.  It  is  indeed  a 
■flame,  but  a fweet  one  ; or  rather  it  is  the  heat 
and  fervour  of  a fweet  flame  ; for  the  flame  of 
■which  it  is  the  heat,  is  no  other  than  that  of  di- 
vine love.  Zeal  is  the  fervour  of  this  flame,  as  it 
vigoroufly  goes  out  towards  the  good  that  is  its 
objeft,  in  defires  of  it  and  confequently,  in  op- 
pofition  to  the  evil  that  is  contrary  to  it.  There 
is  indeed  oppofition,  and  vigorous  oppofition, 
that  is  an  attendant  upon  it ; but  it  is  againft 
things,  and  not  perfons.  Bitternefs  againft  the 
per  fans  of  men  is  no  part  of  it,  but  is  contrary 
to  it.  And  as  to  what  oppofition  there  is  in  it, 
to  things,  it  is  firft  and  chiefly,  againft  the  evil 
things  in  the  perfon  himfelf  who  has  this  zeal, 
againft  the  enemies  of  God  and  holinefs,  that 
are  in  his  own  heart;  and  hut  fecondarily,  againft 
the  fins  of  others.  And  therefore  there  is  no- 
thing in  true  Chriftian  zeal,  that  is  contrary  to 
the  fpirit  of  meeknefs,  gentlenefs  and  love,  but 
it  is  entirely  agreeable  to  it,  and  tends  to  pro- 
mote it. 

But  to  fay  fomething  particularly  concerning 
this  Chriftian  fpirit  I have  been  fpcaking  of,  as 
exercifed  in  thefe  three  things,  Joigivenefs,love 
and  mercy  : I would  obferve  that  the  fcripture 
is  very  clear  and  exprefs  concerning  the  abfo- 
lute  neceffity  of  each  of  thefe,  as  belonging  to 
the  temper  of  every  chriftian.  It  is  fo  as  to  a 

forgiving 


L 251  ] 

yor giving  fpirit,  or  a difpofitlon  to  overlook  and 
forgive  injuries.  Chrift  gives  it  to  us  both  as  a 
negative  and  pofitive  evidence,  and  is  exprefs 
in  teaching  us,  that  if  we  are  of  fuch  a fpirit, 
it  is  a fign  that  we  are  in  a Hate  of  forgivenefs 
ourfelves,  and  that  if  we  are  not  of  fuch  a fpirit, 
we  are  not  forgive'n  of  God. 

And  the  fcripture  is  as  plain  as  podlble,  that 
none  are  true  faints,  but  thofe  that  are  of  a 
difpofition  to  pity  and  relieve  their  fellotv-crea- 
tLires.  Jmes  iii.  ij,  16.  If  a krother  cr  JiJler  be 

naked — -and  one  oj  you  fay  depart  in  peace — not- 
xvithjlanding  ye  give  them  710 1 thofe  things  that  are 
needful  to  the  bod)’,  what  doth  it  pjoft^  1 John 
iii.  17.  IVhofo  hath  this  world'' s goods,  and feeth 
his  brother  have  need,  and Jliuiteth  up  his  bowels  of 
compafton  from  him,  how  clwelleth  the  love  of  God 
in  him  ? Chrift  in  that  defcription  he  gives  of  the 
da.y  of  judgment,  Matth.  xxv.  reprefents,  that 
judgment  will  be  palled  at  that  day,  according 
as  men  have  been  found  to  have  been  of  a m.erci- 
ful  fpirit  and  praftice,  or  othcrwife. 

Some  place  religion  fo  much  in  certain  tranfi- 
ent  illuminations,  (efpeciallv  if  they  are  in  fuch 
a particular  method^ and  order]  and  fo  little  in  the 
fpirit  and  temper  perfons  are  of,  that  they  great- 
ly deform  religion,  and  form  notions  of  Chrifti- 
anlty  quite,  different  from  the  fcriptures.  Tlie  ■ 
fcripture  knows  of  no  fuch  Chriftianr.,  as  are  of 
a fordid,  felfifl],  crofs  and  contentious  fpirit.  Nor- 
thing can  be  invented  that  is  a greater  ?,bfurdity, 
L 6 thasi 


[ 2^2  ] 

than  a morofe,  hard,  clofe,  high-fpirited,  fpiteful 
Chriftian.  We  mull:  learn  the  way  of  bringing 
men  to  rides,  and  not  rules  to  men,  and  fo  llrain 
the  rules  of  God’s  word,  to  take  in  ourfelves,  and 
foine  of  our  neighbours,  till  we  make  them 
wholly  of  none  effe£f. 

VI.  Grac  ious  affefHons  fojten  the  heart,  and 
are  attended  and  followed  with  a Chrijlian  ttn- 
dernejs  of  fpirit. 

Falfe  affeflions  tend  to  flupify  the  mind;  and 
the  effeft  of  them  at  lafl  is,  that  perfons  become 
lefs  affefted  with  their  prefcnt  and  paft  fins,  and 
lefs  confcientious  with  refpeft  to  future  fins,  lefs 
moved  wdth  the  cautions  of  God’s  word,  or  God's 
chaftifements  in  his  providences,  lefs  afraid  ol 
the  appearance  of  evil,  than  they  were  while  un- 
der legal  awakenings.  Now  they  had  looked  on 
their  flate  to  be  fafe,  they  can  be  more  eafy  than 
before  in  the  negleft  of  duties  that  are  trouble- 
fome,  and  are  not  fo  alarmed  at  their  own  de- 
fe£ts.  Formerly,  under  conviftions,  they  took 
much  pains  in  religion,  and  denied  themfelves 
in  many  things  ; hut  now  they  think  themfelves 
out  of  danger,  they  put  off  this  burden  of  the 
crofs,  and  allow  themfelves  more  of  the  enjoy- 
ment of  their  eafe  and  their  lufls.'^ 

Such  perfons  as  thefe,  Inftcad  of  embracing 
Chrili  as  their  Saviour  from  fn,  trull  in  him  as 
the  Saviour  of  their  fins.  They  trull  in  him,  to 
preferve  to  them  the  quiet  enjoyment  of  their 
fins,  and  to  be  their  fliield  to  defend  them  from 

God’s 


[ 2^3  1 

God’s  clifpleafare,  while  they  come  clofe  to  him 
to  fio'ht  affainft  him  ; however  home  of  thefe,  at 
the  fame  time,  make  a great  profefTion  of  love 
to  God,  and  affurance  of  his  favour. 

Gracious  affeftions  are  of  a contrary  tendency, 
turning  a heart  of  ftone,  more  and  more  into  a 
heart  of  flefh.  An  holy  love  and  hope  are  more 
efficacious  upon  the  heart,  to  make  it  tender  and 
fill  it  trith  a dread  of  fin,  or  whatever  might  dif- 
pleafe  God,  and  to  engage  it  to  watchrulnefs  and 
care  and  ftriftnefs,  than  a llaviOi  fear  of  hell. 
And  let  it  be  obferved,  that  holy  fear  is  fo  much 
the  nature  of  true  godlinefs,  tliat  it  is  called  in 
fcripture  by  no  other  name  more  frequently,  than 
the  jcar  of  God. 

Hence  gracious  afiecUt^ns  do  not  tend  to  make 
men  bold,  forward,  noify  and  boifterous,  but  ra» 
ther  to  [peak  Iremthng. 

■ But  fome  may  objeft,  “ is  there  no  fuch 
“ thing  as  a holy  bold.nefs  in  prayer,  and  the 
“ duties  of  divine  worfhip  ? ’ I anfwer,  there  is 
doubtlefs' fuch  a thing.  But  this  is  not  oppofite  to 
reverence,  though  it  be  to  fervilily.  No  boldnefs 
in  poor  finful  worms,  tliat  have  a right  fight  of 
God  and  themfelves,  will  prompt  them  to  ap- 
proach God  with  Ie.fi)  fear  and  reverence,  than 
olorious  anrrels  In  heaven,  who  cover  their  faces 
before  his  throne.  There  is  in  fome  perfons,  a 
inofi  unfufferable  boldnefs,  in  their  addreffes  to 
to  the  great  Jehovah,  in  an  affeftation  of  an  holy 
boldnefs,  and  oflentation  of  eminent  nearnefs  and 

familiarity  % 


[ 254  ] 

familiarity  ; the  very  thoughts  of  which  would 
make  them  thrink  into  nothing,  with  horror  and 
confufion,  if  they  faw  the  diflance  that  is  be- 
tween God  and  them.  It  becomes  fuch  finful 
creatures  as  we,  to  approach  a holy  God  (al- 
though with  faith,  and  without  terror,  yet)  with 
contrition,  and  penitent  ftiame  and  confufion  of 
face. 

One  reafon  why  gracious  affecf  ions  are  attend- 
ed with  tendernefs  of  fpirit,  is  that  true  grace 
tends  to  promote  coiivi6tions  of  confcience^ 
Perfons  are  wont  to  have  conviciions  before  they 
believe  ; and  afterwards  peace  in  believing,  has  a 
tendency  to  put  an  end  to  terrors,  but  not  to  con- 
viclions  oj  fin.  It  does  not  ftupify  a man’s  confei- 
ence,  but  makes  it  more  fenfible.  Grace  tends 
to  give  the  foul  a further  aird  better  ccnviBion  of 
the  fame  things  concerning  fm,  that  it  was  con- 
vinced of  under  a legal  work,  viz.  its  great  contra- 
riety to  the  will  and  law  of  God,  thegreatnefs  of 
God’s  difpleafure  againfl  it,  and  the  dreadful 
punifliment  it  deferves. 

All  gracious  affeftions  have  a tendency  to  pro- 
mote tendernefs  of  heart  ; not  only  a godly  for- 
row,  butalfoa  g.racious  joy,  and  a gracious  hope. 
The  moft  confident  hope  that  is  truly  gracious, 
has  this  tendenev.  The  banilhing  of  afervile 
fear,  by  a hop  affurance,  is  attended  with  a pro- 
portionable incieafe  of  reverential  fear.  The  di* 
minifhingof  the  fear  of  the  fruits  of  God’s  difplea- 
fure is  attended  with  a proportionable  increafe 

ol 


[ 255  1 

t)f  fear  oflus  difpJeafure itfelf ; the  diminifhing  of 
the  fear  of  hell,  with  an  iiicreafe  of  the  fear  of 
fm.  The  vanifliing  of  jealoufies  of  the  perfon’s 
Ifate,  is  attended  with  a proportionable  increafe 
ofjealoufy  of  his  heart. 

VII.  Another  thing  wherein  thofe  affecfions 
that  are'  truly  gracious  differ  from  thofe  that  are 
falfe,  is  beautijulfymmetry  and  proportion. 

Not  that  this  f)  mmetry  of  the  virtues,  and  gra« 
cions  affeftions  is  perfecf  : it  oftener  is,  in  many 
things  dcrcffive,  through  the  imperfeftion  of 
grace,  for  want  of  proper  inftmffions,  through 
errors  in  judgment  or  fome  particular  unhappi- 
nefs  of  natural  temper,  and  many  other  difad- 
vantagcs.  But  yet- -there  is  not  that  difpropor- 
tion  in 'gracious  affeflions  and  the  various  parts 
of  true  religion,  that  is  commonly  to  be  obferved 
in  falfe  religion. 

In  truly  holy  affeftions  is  found  that  propor- 
tion, ■which  is  the  natural  confequence  of  the 
univerfality  of  their  fandlification.  They  have 
the  whole  image  of  Chrxlf  upon  them  : they  have 
put  ojf  the  old  man  and  put  on  the  new  man  entire,, 
in  all  his  parts  and  members.  They  that  are 
Chrlft’s,  do  of  his  fulnefs  receive,  grace  Jor 
grace,  i.  e.  grace  anfwerable  to  grace  : there 
is  no  grace  in  Chrlff,  but  there  is  its  image 
in  believers ; there  is  feature  for  feature,  and  mem- 
ber for  member. 

But  it  is  with  the  unconverted,  as  it  is  with 
Ephraim  of  old.  Ephraim  is  a cake  not  turned^ 

half 


[ 256  ] 

La'f  roafted  and  half  raw:  there  is  commonly  no 
uniformity  in  their  affeftions.  There  is  great 
affeftion  in  fome  things,  and  no  manner  of  pro- 
portion in  others.  An  holy  hope  and  holy  fear 
go  together  in  true  believers;  but  in  fome  is 
tlte  molf  confident  hope,  while  they  are  void  of 
reverence,  feif-jealoufy  and  caution,  and  to  a 
great  degree  call  off  fear. 

Nor  only  is  there  an  elfential  deficiency,  as  to 
the  various  kinds  of  religious  affections  : but  al- 
fo  a firange  difproportioni  in  ihs  fame  affeftions 
'with  regard  to  different  obje6ls. 

1 bus  as  to  love,  fome  make  a great  flrew  of 
love  to  God  and  Chrifl,  but  they  have  not  a love 
and  benevolence  towards  men,  but  are  difpofed 
to  contention,  envy,  and  revenge  ; and  will,  it 
may  be,  fuffer  an  old  grudge  to  reft  in  their  bo- 
foms  for  years,  living  in  bitternefs  of  fpirit  to- 
wards their  neighbour.  On  the  other  hand, 
there  are  others,  that  appear  as  if  they  had  a great 
deal  of  benevolence  to  men,  but  have  no  love  to 
God. 

And  as  to  love  to  men,  there  are  fome  that 
have  flotving  affeftions  to  fome,  but  their  love  is 
not  of  an  e.xtenfive  and  univerfal  nature;  Tliev  are 
full  of  dear  affeclitms  to  fome,  and  bitternefs  to- 
wards others.  They  are  knit  to  their  own  party;, 
but  are  fierce  againft  thofe  that  oppofe  them.. 
Some  pretend  to  be  ravilhed  with  the  company, 
of  the  cliildren  of  God  abtoad ; and  at  the  fam.e 
time  are  churlifh  towards  their  wives,  and  othen 


near 


[ 257  ] 


near  relations  at  home,  and  negligent  of  relative 
duties.  And  as  to  the  great  love  to  fmners, 
that  there  is  an  appearance  of  in  fome,  even  to 
extreme  diflrefs,  they  Cngle  out  a particular 
perfon  from  among  a multitude,  hut  at  the 
fame  time  have  no  general  ccimpauion  to 
fmners,  that  are  in  equally  mifei'able  circum- 
ftances. 

As  there  is  a monftrous  difproportlon  in  the 
love  of  fome,  in  its  exercifes  to^vards  different 
perfons,  fo  there  is  in  their  exercilcs  of  love 
towards  the  fame  perfons.  Some  Ihew  a love 
to  others  as  to  their  outward  man ; but  have 
no  love  to  the  fouls  of  men.  Others  pretend 
a great  love  to  mens  fouls,  hut  are  not  com- 
palhonate  towards  their  bodies.  The  making 
a great  fliew  ol  love  for  fouls,  cods  them  no- 
thing;  but  in  order  to  fiiew  mercy  to  mens 
bodies,  they  m.uft  part  vdth  monev’  out  of 
their  pockets.  But  Chriliian  love  to  our  bre- 
thren, extends  both  to  their  fouls  and  bo- 
dies : and  herein  is  like  the  love  of  Jefus 
Chrift. 

Here  bv  the  way,  I would  obferve,  it  may  be 
laid  down  as  a general  rule,  that  if  perfons  pre- 
tend, they  are  come  to  high  attainments  in  reli- 
gion, but  have  never  yet  arrived  to  the  lefs,  it  is 
a bad  fign.  7\s  if  perfons  pretend  that  they  have 
got  beyond  mere  morality,  to  live  a fpiriiual  and 
divine  life  ; but  really  have  not  come  to  be  fo 
much  as  moral  perfons  ; or  pretend  to  be  greatly 

alfefled 


[ =58  ] 

affeflecl  with  the  wicketlnefs  of  their  hearts,  and 
are  not  affected  with  the  palpable  violations  of 
God'  s commands  in  their  praftice ; or  pretend 
that  they  are  not  afraid  to  venture  their  fouls 
upon  Chrift  for  their  eternal  'welfare  ; but  at  the 
fame  time  have  not  confidence  enoiioh  in  God  to 

O 

trull  him  with  a little  of  their  cllates,  for  pious 
and  charitable  ufes : I fay,  when  it  is  thus  with 
perfons,  their  pretences  are  manifellly  vain. 

Tlie  fame  that  has  been  obferved  of  the  affec- 
tion of  love,  is  allb  to  be  obferved  of  other  religi- 
ous affe.flions.  Thofe  that  are  true,  extend  in 
fome  proportion,  to  the  various  things  that  are 
their  proper  objeOs  : but  when  they  are  falfe, 
they  are  commonly  ffrangelv  difproportionate. 
So  it  is  with  religious  dejires  : thofe  in  true  be- 
lievers are  to  thofe  things  that  are  excellent  in 
general,  and  that  in  fome  proportion  to  their 
excellency:  but  in  falfe  longings,  it  is  often  far 
•otherwife.  They  will  run  with  vehemence, 
•after  fomething  of  lefs  importance,  when  other 
things  of  greater  importance  are  negleffted. 

And  fo  as  to  zta! ; when  it  is  from  right  prin- 
ciples, it  is  againft  fin  in  general,  in  lome  pro- 
portion to  the  degree  of  fiiifulncfs  : but  falfe  zeal 
againll  fin,  is  againff  fome  particular  fin  only. 
Thus  fome  feem  to  be  vert'  zealous  againll  pro- 
fanenefs,  and  pride  in  apparel,  who  themfelves 
arc  notorious  lor  covetoiifnefs,  and  it  may  be 
backbiting,  envv,  turbulence  ol  fpirit,  or  ill- 
will  to  them  that  have  injured  them.  Falfe  zeal 

is 


C 259  ] 

is  againft  the  fins  of  others,  while  men  have  n6 
zeal  againft  their  own  fins  : but  he  that  has  true 
zeal,  exercifes  it  chiefiy  agaiall  his  mvn  fins, 
though  he  fhetvs  alio  a proper  zeal  againft  dan- 
gerous iniquity,  in  others. 

VIII.  Anoiher  diftiitguifiring  difference  be- 
tween gracious  afi'etitions  and  others  is,  that  the 
Iwgher  they  are  raifed,  the  more  is  the  appetite  and 
longing  after  ff  1111101  attainments  increajed. 

The  more  a true  Chriftian  loves  God,  the 
more  he  defires  to  love  him  ; the  more  he  hates 
fin,  the  more  he  defires  to  hate  it.  The  kindling 
of  gracious  affeflions  is  like  kindling  aflame; 
the  higher  it  is  raifed,  the  more  ardent  it  is.  So 
the  anpetite  after  holinefs  is  much  more  lively 
and  keen  in  thofe  that  are  eminent  in  holinefs, 
than  in  others. 

But  with  mixt  or  degenerating  religious  affec- 
tions it  is  oiherwife.  If  before,  there  was  a great 
defire  after  grace,  as  thefe  affeftions  rife,  that 
defire  ceafes,  or  is  abated.  It  may  be  before, 
while  the  man  was  afraid  of  hell,  he  earneftly 
longed  that  he  might  obtain  faith  in  Chrift  and 
love  to- God;  but  now,  that  he  is  confident  he 
is  converted,  there  are  no  more  earneft  longings 
after  light  and  grace  ; he  is  confident  that  his  fins 
are  forgiven  him,  and  that  he  fliall  go  to  heaven, 
and  fo  is  fatisfied. 

Laftly,  Gracious  affeQions  have  their  exercife 
and fruit  in  Chrf.ian  praclice^ 


But 


2 6o  J 

But  what  is  Implied  in  this  ? 

3.  That  men  fhoulJ  be  univerfallv  obedient. 

1 John  ni.  g,  &c.  Every  man  that  hath  this  hope 
tnhvn,  purijitth  kimfelf,  even  as  he  is  pure. — Who- 
foever  abideth  in  him  f'nntth  r.ol:  zchofoever  finnetk 
hath  not  J'een  him,  neither  Lnou  n /’zw.Jolin  xv.  i a. 
} e are  my  Jr  lends  ij  ye  do  udiatjoever  I command 
you.  James  ii.  lo.  IVhoJoever  Jhall  keep  the  u hole 
law,  and  yet  offend  in  one  point,  he  is  guilty  of 
all.  If  one  member  only  be  corrupt,  and  we  do 
not  cut  it  off,  it  will  carry  the  'whole  body  to 
liell  i Matt.  V.  20,  30. 

2.  In  order  to  mens  being  true  Chriflians,  it 
is  necelTary  that  they  profecute  the  bufinefs  of 
religion,  with  earnellnefs  and  diligence,  as  the 
work  which  they  deyote  themfelyes  to.  All 
Chrifl’s  peculiar  people,  not  only  do,  but  are  zea- 
lous of  good  works.  Tit.  ii.  ig.  Chriflians  are 
not  called  to  idlcnefs,  but  to  labour  in  God’s 
vineyard ; and  their  work  is  every  where  com- 
pared in  the  New  leltament  to  thofe  exercifes, 
V.  herein  men  aie  wont  to  exert  their  flrengih, 
V. ith  the  greatell  earneflnefs,  as  running,  wreft- 
ling,  fighting.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  not 
to.be  taken,  but  by  violence.  Without  earneft- 
nefs  ihere  is  no  getting  along  in  that  narrow  way 
that  leads  to  life  ; no  afeending  the  fleep  and 
high  hill  of  Zion  ; and  fo  no  arriving  at  the  hea- 
venly city  on  the  top  of  it.  There  is  need,  that 
we  fhould  watch  and  pray  always  ; that  we  fliould 
put  on  the  whole  armour  cj  God ; that  r\  e fhould 

forget 


[ 26i  ] 

Jhrget  the  things  which  are  behind,  and  be  reaching 
forth  to  the  things  that  are  before^  Slothfulnefs 
in  the  fervire  of  God,  is  as  damning  as  open  re- 
bellion : for  the«  jlothful  Jervant  is  a wicked  fer. 
vant,  and  fliall  be  caft  into  utter  darknefs,  amontr 
God’s  enemies,  Matt.  xxv.  26,  30.  They  that 
are  fothfid,  are  not  followers  of  them,  who  through 
faith  and  patience  inherit  the  promijes. 

A true  Chriftian  perfeveres  in  this  way  of  uni- 
verfal  obedience,  through  all  the  various  kinds 
of  trials  that  he  meets  with.  That  all  thofe  that 
obtain  eternal  life,  peiTevere  in  the  pratfice  of 
religion  and  the  fervice  of  God,  is  a doffrine  fo 
abundantly  taught  in  the  fcripiure,  that  par- 
ticularly 10  rehearfe  the  texts  tchich  imply  it  is 
needlefs. 

The  tendency  of  grace  in  tlie  heart  to  holy 
praftice,  is  direft,  and  the  conneefion  clofe  and 
neceffary.  True  grace  is  notan  inaflive,  bairen 
thing,  for  it  is  in  its  very  nature  a principle  of 
holy  aftion.  Regeneration  has  a direht  _ relation 
to  praftice  ; for  it  is  the  end  of  it,  rvith  a view 
to  which  the  whole  work  is  wu'ought : all  is 
framed  in  this  mighty  change,  fo  as  directly  to 
tend  to  this  end,  Eph.  ii.  10.  For  we  are  his 
workmanjhip,  created  in  Chnji  f fas  unto  good 
vwrks.  Yea  it  is  the  very  end  of  the  redemption 
of  Chrid,  Tit.  ii,  1.^.  Who  gave  hirn/cf  for  us, 
that  he  migk  ‘ redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  pu- 
rify unto  himj elf  a.peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good 
works.  Holy  practice  is  as  much  the  end  of  all 

that 


[ 262  ] 

that  God  does  about  his  faints,  as  fruit  is  the  end 
of  all  that  the  hufbandman  does  about  the  growth 
of  his  field  : and  therefore  every  thing  in  a true 
Chriftian  is  calculated  to  reach  -this  end.  This 
fruit  of  holy  practice,  is  what  evert  grace,  and 
every  difcover)%  and  every  individual  thing 
which  belongs  to  Chriftian  experience,  has  a di- 
reff  tendency  to. 

From  what  has  been  faid  it  is  manifelf,  that 
Chriftian  praftice  or  a holy  life,  is  a dijhnguipi- 
ingpign  of  true  grace.  But  I may  further  aifert, 
that  it  is  the  chief  of  all  the  figns  ol  grace, 
both  as  an  evidence  of  the  fincerity  of  Chrif- 
flians  to  others,  and  alio  to  their  own  confti- 
ences. 

But  then  it  is  necefiar/  that  it  be  well  iinder- 
ftood,  in  wh'at  fenfc  Chriftian  praftice  is  the 
greaiejl  fgn  of  grace. 

And  it  is  fo  as  a manifeftation  of  the  fincenty 
of  a Chriftian  to  his  neighbours.  Now'  that  this 
is  the  chief  fgn  of  grace  in  this  refpcct,  is  very 
evident  from  thesrordof  God.  Chi  ill  who  knetr 
beft  how'  to  give  us  rules  to  judge  of  others,  has 
repeated  it.  Matt.  vii.  i6.  \ e fiaU  knou)  them  by 
their  fruits.  Chrift  no  where  fays,  ye  ftnall  know 
the  tree  by  its  leaves  or  flowers,  or  ' e fliall  knd\^ 
men  bv  their  talk,  or  by  tlie  manner  and  air  of 
their  fpeaking,  or  by  tb.eir  fpeaking  feelingly,  or 
by  their  tears  and  aflefliointte  expreflions,  or  by 
the  afleclions  ye  I'cel  in  yourhearts  towards  them  ; 
but  by  their  fruits  fiall  ye  hnoxv  than..  And  as 


[ 263  ] 

this  Is  the  evidence  that  Chrifl  has  directed  us 
mainly  to  look  at  in  others,  fo  it  is  the  evidence 
that  Chrill  has  mainly  direftly  us  to  give  to 
others.  Matt.  v.  i6.  'Let  your  light  fo  fune  before 
men,  that  others  feeing  your  good  ivurks,  may  glo~ 
rify  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven.  Chrift  does 
not  fay,  that  others  hearing  your  good  words,  but 
that  others  feeing  your  good  works,  may  glorify 
your  Father  which  is  in  heaven. 

And  as  the  fcripture  teaches  that  praftice  is  the 
heft  evidence  of  fincerity,  fo  reafon  teaches  the 
fame  tliincr.  Reafon  fhews  that  mens  deeds  are 
more  faithful  interpreters  of  their  minds,  than 
their  words.  The  common  fenfe  of  mankind, 
teaches  them  to  judge  of  mens  beans  chiefly  by 
their  praclice  in  other  matters ; as  whether  a 
man  be  a loyal  fubjetd,  a true  lover,  a dutilul 
child,  or  a faithful  fervant.  A wife  man  will 
truft  to  praftical  evidences  of  the  flncerity  of 
friendlhip,  further  than  a thoufand  carnefl;  pro- 
feflions.  Now  there  is  equal  reafon  whv  prac- 
tice IhoLiId  be  looked  upon  as  the  bell  evidence 
of  friendlhip  toward.s^  Chrift.  Re<>fon  favs,  the 
fame  that  Chrift  faid,  in  John  xiv.  21.  He  that 
hath  my  commandments  and  keepeth  them,  he  it  is 
that  loveth  me.  If  a man  in  declaring  his  experi- 
ences, tells  liow  he  found  his  heart  weaned 
from  the  world,  and  faw  the  vanity  of  it  at  fuch 
and  fuch  times,  and  profeffes  that  he  gives  up 
all  to  God,  yet  in  his  praftice  is  violent  in  pur- 
fuing  the  world,  and  what  he  gets  he  keeps 

clofe : 


[ 264  ] 


clofe ; if  there  Is  another  that  fays  not  a great 
deal,  yet  appears  ready  to  forfake  the  world, 
whenever  it  hands  in  the  way  - of  his  duty,  we 
believe  this  man  to  be  weaned  from  it ; not  the 
former. 

And  as  Chnflian  pratfice  is  the  bejl  evidence  of 
our  fincerity  to-others,  fo  it  is  a fine  evidence  of 
grace  to  perjbns  cwn  ccn/aaices.  This  is  very 
plain  in  i John  ii.  3.  Hereby  we  do  know  that  we 
know  him,  if  we  keep  his  commandments.  And 
1 John  iii.  18,  19.  iSly  little  children,  let  us  not, 
love  in  vtord,  neither  in  tongue,  but  in  deed  (in  the 
original  it  is  if/u  in  work ) and  in  truth.  And 
hereby  lue  know  that  we  are  of  the  truth,  and  Jliull 
ajfure  our  hearts  before  him. 

But  for  the  greater  clearnefs  in  this  matter,  I 
would  frp.  Shew  how'  Chrillian  practice,  or 
keeping  Chrifl’s  commandments,  is  to  be  taken, 
when  the  fcripture  reprefents  it  as  a fure  evi- 
dence to  our  own  confciences,  that  we  are  (in- 
cere  Chriflians:  and  fecondly.  Will- prove  that 
this  is  the  chief  of  all  evidences  that  men  can 
have  of  their  ywn  fincere  godlinefs. 

¥irj],  I would  (hew  how  Chrillian  praftice  is 
to  be  taken,  when  the  fcripiure  reprefents  it  as  a 
fure  evidence  to  our  own  confciences,  that  we 
are  fincere  Chridians. 

And  here  I would  obfcrve,  \ve  cannot  ia?afon- 
ably  (uppofe  that  when  the  fcripture  in  this  cafe 
{peaks  of  goods  works,  and  keeping  Chriifs  com- 
mandments. 


[ 265  ] 

itiandment^,  it  has  refpeft  merely  to  what  is  ex- 
ternal, or  the  aftion  of  the  body,  without  refpedl 
■to  the  intention  of  the  agent,  or  any  a£f  of  his 
underftanding  or  will.  The  aftions  of  the  body, 
taken  thus,  are  neither  aftsof  obedience  nor  dif- 
obedience. 

But  obedience  and  good  works,  given  in  fcrip- 
ture  as  a fure  evidence  to  our  own  confciences 
of  true  grace  ; and  include  the  obedience  and 
praffice  of  the  foul,  as  preceding  and  governing 
the  aflions  of  the  body.  So  v/hen  we  are  told  in 
fcripture  timt  men  hiall  be  judged  at  the  laft  day, 
according  to  their  works.,  and  all  Jhall  receive  ac- 
cording to  the  things  done  in  the  body,  it  is  not  to 
be  underflood  only  of  outward  a£ls ; for  if  fo, 
why  is  God  fo  often  fpoken  of  as  fearching  the 
hearts  and  trying  the  reins,  that  he  may  render  to 
every  one  according  to  his  works  ? If  only  the  ac- 
tions of  the  body  are  meant,  what  need  of 
fearching  the  heart  and  reins,  in  order  to  know 
them  ? 

A common,  acquaintance  with  the  fcripture, 
together  with  a little  attention,  will  fhew  to 
■ any  one,  that  this  is  ten  times  more  infifted  ' 
on  as  a note  of  true  piety,  throughout  the 
fcripture,  from  the  beginning  of  Genefis  to 
the  end  of  Revelations,  than  any  thing  elfe. 
And  in  the  New  Teftament,  where  Chrifl 
and  his  apodles  do  exprefly,  lay  down  figns  of 
true  godllnefs,  this  is  almoft  wholly  infifted  upon. 
Indeed  in  many  of  thefe  places,  love  to  the  bre- 
VoL.  XXIIL  M thren 


f 266  ] 

thren\%  fpoken  of  as  a fign of  godllnefs,  and  there 
is  no  one  virtuous  afTeftiou  fo  often  exprefly 
fpoken  of  as  a fign  of  true  grace,  as  our  having 
love  one  to  another:  but  then  the  fcriptures  ex- 
plain themfelves  to  intend  chiefly  this  love  as 
exercifed  in  pradlice.  So  that  when  the  fcripture 
To  much  infills  on  our  loving  one  another,  as  a 
great  fign  of  godlinefs,  we  are  not  thereby  to  un- 
derhand the  workings  of  affection  which  men  feel, 
fo  much  as  the  praftifing  all  the  duties  of  the  fe- 
cond  table,  all  which  the  New  Tellament  tells  us 
again  and  again,  a true  love  comprehends.  So 
that  really,  there  is  noplace  in  the  ^-w  Tefla- 
ment,  where  the  declared  dcfign  is  to  give  figns  of 
godlinefs,  but  thatholy.pradlice,  is  the  mai'k  chofen 
out  from  all  otliers  to  be  infifled  on  ; which  is  an 
in'  incible  argument,  that  it  is  the  chief  of  all  the 
evidences  of  godlinefs.  And  furely  thofe  things 
which  Chrift  and  his  apoflles  chiefly  infifled  on  in 
the  rules  they  gave,  miniflers  ought  chieflv  to  in- 
fift  upon  in  the  rules  they  give.  To  infill  much 
on  thofe  things  that  the  fcripture  infills  little  on, 
and  to  infill  very  little  on  thofe  things  on  which 
the  fcripture  infills  much,  is  a dangerous  thing  ; 
becaufe  this  is  to  judge  ourfelves  and  guide 
others,  in  an  unfcriptural  manner.  God  knew 
which  way  of  leading  fouls  was  fafell ; which  is 
the  reafon,  why  he  infilled  fo  much  on  fome 
things,  and  let  others  more  alone.  The  ferip- 
tuies  were  made  for  man  ; we  fhould  therefore 
make  them  our  guide  in  ail  things : and  for  us 

to 


[ 26;  ] 

lo  make  that  great  which  the  fcripture  makes 
little,  and  that  little  which  the  fcripture  makes 
great,  tends  to  give  us  a monllrous  idea  of  reli- 
gion ; and  fat  lead  indireflly  and  gradually]  to 
lead  us  wholly  away  from  the  right  rule,  and  to 
ellahh  fli  delufion. 

Another  thing  which  makes  it  evident  that  ho- 
ly praftice  is  the  chief  of  all  the  figns  of  fincerity, 
not. only  to  the  world,  but  to  our  own  confci- 
enccs,  is,  that  this  is  the  grand  evidence  which 
will  hereafter  be  made  ufe  of,  before  the  judg- 
ment-leat  of  God,  according  to  which  his  judg- 
ment will  be  regulated,  and  the  date  of  every 
profelTor  unalterably  determined.  In  the  future 
judgment,  there  will  be  an  open  trial  of  all,  and 
evidences  will  be  made  ufe  of : for  God’s  fu- 
ture judging  of  men,  in  order  to  their  eternal  re- 
tribution, will  not  be  his  palling  a judgment  up-' 
on  men  in  his  ov,m  mind : but  it  will  be 
the  manifellation  of  his  judgment,  and  the  right- 
eoufnefs  of  it,  to  mens  own  confciences,  and  to 
the  ■world.  And  therefore  though  God  needs  no 
medium,  whereby  to  make  the  truth  evident  to 
himfelf,  yet  evidences  wdll  be  made  ufe  of  in  his 
futute  judging  of  men.  And  doubtlefs  the  evi- 
dences that  will  be  made  ufe  of  In  their  trial, 
will  be  fuch  as  wdll  be  heft  fitted  to  ferve  the  ends 
of  the  judgment,  viz.  the  manifellation  of  the 
righteous  judgment  of  God,  not  only  to  the 
world,  but  to  mens  own  confciences.  But  the 
fcriptures  abundantly  teach,  that  the  grand  evi- 
M 2 dence, 


[ 268  ] 


8ence,  which  the  judge  will  make  ufe  of,  will  be 
mens  works,  or  praftice,  here  in  this  world.  For 
God  willbring  every  work  into  judgment,  with  every 
fecret  thing',  whether  it  be  good,  or  whethf'  it  bt 
evil. 

Hence  we  may  undoubtedly  infer,  that  mens 
works  are  the  higheft  evidences,  by  which 
they  ought  to  try  ihemfelves.  Certainly  that 
which  our  fupreme  judge  will  chiefly  make  ufe 
of,  to  judge  us  by,  when  we  come  to  ftand  be- 
fore him,  we  fhould  chiefly  make  ufe  of  to  judge 
ourfelves  by. 

Now  from  all  that  has  been  faid,  it  is  .abun- 
dantly inatiifeft,  that  Chriflian  praftice  is  the 
jhofl;  proper  evidence  of  our  gracious  fmeerity, 
to  ourfehies  and  others,  and  the  chief  of  all  the 
marks  of  grace.  I had  rather  have  the  teflimony 
of  my  confcience,  that  I have  fuch  a faying  of 
my  fupreme  judge  on  my  fide,  as  that,  John 
xiv.  21.  He  that  hath  my  commandments  and 
keepeth  them,  he  it  is  that  loveth  me  : than  the 
fulleft  approbation,  of  all  the  wife  and  experi- 
enced divines,  that  have  lived  this  thoufand  years, 
on  the  m<*ll  exaft  and  critical  examination  of 
my  experiences.  . . 

Chriflian  prafiice  is  the  fign  of  figns  ; it  is  the 
great  evidence  iN'hich  confirms  and  crowns  all 
other  figns  of  godlinefs.  There  is  no  one  grace 
of  the  Spirit  of  God,  but  Chrflian  pratlice  is  the 
mofl  proper  evidence  of  the  truth  of  it. 


Holy 


[ 269  ] 

Holy  prafHce  is  the  proper  proof  of  the  true 
and  faving  knowledge  of  God ; hereby  we  know  that 
we  knoio  him,  if  we  keep  his  com?nandments,  1 
Johnii.  3.  It  is  alfo  oi  repentance.  John,  when 
the  Jews  profeffed  repentance  upon  coming  to 
his  baptifin,  dire£led  tliem  to  bring  forth fruits  meet 
for  repentance.  Matt.  iii.  8.  In  like  manner,  oi  a 
faving  faith,  as  appears  from  the  apoftle  James 
fpeaking  of  works,  as  what  do  eminently  prove 
faith,  and  manifeft  our  fincerity.  It  is,  of  a fav- 
ing of  the  truth.  That  is  fpoken  of  as  the 
proper  evidence  of  the  truth's  being  in  a Chrif- 
tian,  that  he  walks  in  the  truth,  3 John  3.  It  is 
the  moft  proper  evidence  of  a true  coming  to 
Chrif,  and  accepting  of,  and  clofing  with  him.  A 
true  and  faving  coming  to  Chrift,  is  (as  Chrift 
often  teachesj  a coming  fo,  as  to  forfake  all  for 
him.  As  hath  been  obferved,  to  forfake  all  lor 
Chrift  in  heart,  is  the  fame  thing  as  to  have  a 
heart  a£lually  to  forfake  all ; but  the  proper  evi- 
dence of  having  fuch  a heart,  is  indeed  aftually 
to  forfake  all,  fo  far  as  called  to  it.  Chrift  and 
other  things  are  fet  before  us  together,  for  us  to 
cleave  to  the  one,  and  forfake  the  other ; in  fuch 
a cafe,  a praftical  cleaving  to  Chrift,  is  an  accep- 
tance of  him. 

Praftice  is  the  moft  proper  evidence  of  trujl- 
ing  in  Chrif  for  falvation.  The  proper  fignifica- 
tion  of  the  word  truf,  both  in  common  fpeech 
and  in  the  holy  feriptures,  is  the  encouragement 
©f  a perfon  to  run  fome  venture  on  the  credit  of 
M 3 another’s 


[ 270  ] 

another’s  fufficiency  and  faithful nefs  : and  there- 
fore the  proper  evidence  of  his  truliing,  is  the 
venlure  he  runs  in  zcJiat  he  does.  Hence  it  is, 
that  perfons  complying  with  the  difficulties  and 
dangeis  of  Chriftian  praftice,  in  a dependance 
on  Chrift’s  fufficiency  and  faithfulnefs,  are  faid 
to  venture  themfelves  upon  Chrift,  and  trufl  in 
him  for  happinefs  and  life.  They  depend  on 
fuch  prornifes  as  that,  Matt.  x.  39.  Hethat  lojtlh 
his  life  for  my  Jakt-Jhall  fndit.  He  that  on  the 
credit  of  what  he  hears  of  a future  world,  forfakes 
all,  at  leaf!;  as  far  as  there  is  occafion,  making 
every  thing  give  place  to  his  eterna'  interefl ; he, 
and  he  onlv,  may  properly'  be  faid  to  venture 
himfelf  on  the  gofpel.  And  this  is  the  proper 
evidence  of  a true  truft  in  Chrifl  for  falvation. 

Praftice  is  the  proper  evidence  oi  love,  -both 
to  God  and  men,  as  appears  from  what  hath 
been  already  mentioned.  It  is  alfo,  of  humility, 
for  that  manifeftation  of  heart-humilitv,  which 
God  fpeaks  of,  confilfs  in  walking  humbly,  ^licah 
vi.  8.  It  is  likewife,  of  the  true  fear  oj  God, 
Prov.  viii.  13.  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  to  hate  evil. 
Prov.  xvi.  6.  By  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  men  depart 
from  evil.  So  praftice,  in  rendering  again  ac» 
cording  to  benefits  received,  is  the  proper  evi- 
dence of  true  thankfulnefs-,  Pfa.  cxvi.  12.  JVhat 
Jhall  I render  to  the  Lord,  for  all  his  benefits  to- 
wards me?  So  the  proper  evidence  of  gracious 
d fires  and  longings,  is  that  they  are  effectual  m 
praftice,  to  fiir  up  perfons  earneftly  to  feek  the 

things 


[ 271  ] 

things  they  long  for ; Pfa.  xxvii.  4.  One  thing 
have  I de fired  of  the  Lord,  that  will  Ifeek  after. 

Praftice  is  the  proper  evidence  of  a gracious 
hope,  1 John  iii.  3.  Every  man  that  hath  this  hope 
in  him,  purifielh  himfelf  even  as  he  is  pure.  Pa- 
tient continuance  in  well-doing,  through  the 
difficulties  of  the  Chriftian  courfe,  is  often  men- 
tioned as  the  proper  expreffion  of  a Chriftian 
hope.  A chearful  praflice  of  our  duty  and  doing 
the  will  of  God,  is  the  proper  evidenee  of  a 
truly  holy  joy,  Ifaiah  Ixiv.  5.  Thou  meetef  him 
that  rejoiceth,  and  worketh  righteoifnefs.  Pfa. 
cxix.  Ill,  112.  Thy  tefunonics  have  I taken  as 
an  heritage  for  ever,  for  they  are  the  rejoicing  of 
my  heart : I have  inclined  my  heart  to  perform  thy 
fatutes  always,  even  unto  the  end. 

And  as  holy  praftice  is  the  chief  evidence  of 
thre  truth  of  grace;  fo  the  degree  in  which  expe- 
rience influences  a peiTon’s  practice,  is  the  fureft 
evidence  of  the  degree  of  that  which  is  fpiritual 
and  divine  in  his  experiences.  Whatever  pre- 
tences perfons  may  make  to  great  difcoveries, 
great  love  and  joy,  they  are  no  further  to  he  re- 
garded, than  they  have  influence  on  their  prac- 
tice. Not  but  that  allowances  muft  be  made  for 
the  natural  temper  : but  that  does  not  hinder, 
but  that  the  degree  of  grace  is  juftly  m.eafured, 
by  the  degree  of  the  effeft  in  praflice  ; for  the 
efteft  ol  grace  is  as  great  and  the  alteration  as  re- 
markable, in  a perfon  of  a very  ill  natural  temper, 
as  another.  Although  a perfon  of  fuch  a temper, 
M 4 will 


[ 272  ] 

■will  not  behave  himfelf  fo  well,  with  the  fame 
degree  of  grace  as  another,  the  diverfity  from 
what  was  before  converfion  may  be  as  great ; 
becaule  a perfon  of  a good  natural  temper  did 
not  behave  himfelf  fo  ill  before  converfion. 

Thus  I have  endeavoured  to  reprefent  the  evi- 
dence there  is,  that  Chriftian  praftice  is  the 
r/^zg/^of  all  the  defigns  of  faving  grace.  But  be- 
fore I conclude,  I would  fay  fomething  briefly, 
in  anfwer  to  two  objefiions. 

1.  Some  may  fay,  this  feems  to  be  contrar)-  to 
that  opinion,  fo ' much  received  among  good 
people,  that  we  fhould  judge  of  our  ftate  chiefly 
by  our  inward  experience,  and  that  fpiritual 
experiences  are  the  main  evidences  of  true 
grace. 

I anfwer.  It  is  doubllefs  a true  opinion,  and 
jtiflly  much  received,  that  we  fliould  chiefly 
judge  of  our  ftate  by  our  experience.  But  it  is  a 
great  mi  flake,  that  what  has  been  faid  is  at  all 
contrary  to  that  opinion.  Chriftian  practice  is 
fpiritual  pratiice  ; the  praftice  of  fpirit  and  body 
jointly,  or  the  prafHce  of  a fpirit,  animating, 
commanding  and  afluating  a body  to  which  it  is 
united.  And  therefore  the  main  thing  in  this 
holy  pratfice,  is  the  holy  afts  of  the  mind,  di- 
refting  and  governing  the  motions  of  the  body; 
and  the  motions  of  the  body  are  to  be  looked 
upon  as  belonging  to  Chriftian  prafiice,  only  as 
thev  are  dependant  on  the  afts  of  the  foul.  The 
exercifes  of  grace  that  Chriftians  find  within 

them-. 


C 273  ] 

themfelves,  are  what  they  experience  withia 
themfelves ; and  herein  therefore  lies  Chriftian- 
experience  ; and  this  Chriftian  experience  con- 
fifts  as  much  in  thofe  exercifes  of  grace  in  the 
will,  that  are  Immediately  concerned  in  the  beha- 
viour of  the  body,  as  in  other  exercifes.  Thefe 
inward  exercifes  are  not  the  lefs  a part  of  Chrif- 
tian experience,  becaufe  they  have  outward  be- 
haviour conneffed  with  them. 

To  fpeak  of  Chriftian  experience  andpraftice,  . 
as  if  they  were  two  things,  entirely  dihinef,  is  to 
make  a diftin£fion  without  all  reafon.  Indeed 
all  Chriftian  experience  is  not  properly  called 
pradfice  : but  all  Chriftian  prafiice  is  properly 
experience ; and  the  diftinftion  that  is  made- 
between  them,  is  not  only  an  unreafonable, 
but  an  unfcriptural  diftinffion.  Holy  prafHce  is 
one  part  of  Chriftian  experience  ; and  both  rea-  • 
ion  and  feripture  reprefent  it  as  the  chief  and 
molt  important  part  of  it.  So  it  is  reprefented  ' 
in  Jer.  xxii.  15,  16.  Did  not  tli\i  Jather  eat  and 
drink,  and  do  jujiice  and  judgment? — He  judged 
the  caufe  of  the  poor  and  needy: — was  not  this  to 
know  me?  faith  the  Lord.  Our  inward  acquaint- 
ance with-  God  flvrely  belongs  lo  the  head  of  ex- 
perimental religion : but  thefe  the  feriptures 
reprefent  as  confifting  chiefly  in  praHice.  The  exer- 
cifes of  thofe  graces  of  the  love  of  God,  andthe- 
fear  of  God,  are  a part  of  experimental  religion  p- 
but  thefe  the  feriptnres  reprefent  as  confifting' 
chiefly  in  praffice  ; ijohn.  v.  gv  2 Jbhn  6.  Ffa,- . 

M-5  ;vx.xiy,^. 


[ =/-^  J 

xxxiv.  1 1,  &c.  Such  experiences  as  liiefe  the 
pfalraill:  chiefly  infifls  on.  Such  the  apoflle  Paul 
mainly  infills  upon,  when  he  fpeaks  of  his  expe- 
riences in-  his  epillles.  And  fuch  as  thefe  thev 
were,  that  this  blefied  apollle  chiefly  comforted 
himfdf  in  the  confideration  of,  when  he  w’as  go- 
ing to  martyrdom,  2 Tim.  iv.  6,  7.  For  lam  nozo 
reaay  to  be  offered,  and  the  time  of  my  departure  is 
at  hand.  I have  fought  a good  fight : I have 
fnif  ied  my  courfe:  1 have  kept  the  faith. 

And  not  only  does  the  moll  important  part  of 
Chrillian  experience  he  in  fpiritua!  practice,  but 
nothing  is  fo  properly  called  by  the  name  of  fA- 
perimental  religion  : for  that  experience  which  is 
in  thefe  exercifcs  of  grace,  that  prove  effeftual 
at  the  t'ery  point  of  Jrial,  are  the  proper  experi- 
ment ofthe  truth  of  our  godlinefs,  wdierein  its  vic- 
torious power  is  found  by  experience.  This  is 
properly  Chriftian  experience,  wherein  we  have 
opportunity  to  fee,  by  atlual  experience  and  trial. 
tvhether  we  have  a heart  to  do  the  will  of 
God,  and  to  forfake  other  things  for  Chri-ll, 
or  no. 

There  is  a fort  of  external  religious  practice, 
wherein  is  no  inward  experience  i but  this  is  good 
for  nothing:  and  there  is  what  is  called  experi- 
ence, that  is  without  prafHce,  and  this  is  tvorfe 
than  nothing.  Afany  perfons  feem  to  have 
wrong  .notions  of  Chriftian  experience  and  fpiri- 
tual  light  and  difcoveries.  Whenever  a perfon 
finds  a heart  to  treat  God  as  God,  at  the  time  that 

he 


[ 273  ] , 

he  has  the  trial,  and  finds  his  difpofition  eHhc 
tual  in  the  experiment,  that  is  the  moft  proper 
and  diftingtriliaing  . experience  : and  to  have  at 
fucli  a time  that  fenfe  of  divine  things,  which 
governs  his  heart  and  Iiaiids  ; this  is  the  moll  ex- 
cellent fpiritual  light,  and  thefe  are  the  moll 
dillinguifiring  difcoveries. 

Indeed  the  witnefs  or  zeal  of  the  fpirit,  con- 
fills  in  the  eftecl  of  the  Spirit  ol  God  in  the  heart, 
in  the  implantation  and  eXercifes  of  grace  there, 
and  fo  confills  in  experience ; and  it  is  beyond 
doubt,  that  this  feal  of 'the  Spirit  is  the  highelt 
kind  of  evidence  of  our  adoption,  -that  ever  we 
obtain  ; but  in  thefe  exercifes  of  grace  in  praftice, 
God  gives  witnefs,  and  fets  to  his  feal,  in  the 
mioll  confpicuous,  eminent  and  evident  manner. 

It  has  been  abundantly  found  to  be  true  in  fa£l, 
by  the  experience  of  the  Chrillian  church,  that 
Chrilt  commonly  gives  by  his  Spirit,  the  greatell 
and  moll  joyful  esddences  of  fonfhip,  in  thofe 
effeflual  exercifes  of  grace,  under  trials,  wdiich  - 
have  been  fpoken  of;  as  is  manifelt  in  the  full 
alTurance  and  unfpeakable  joy's  of  many  of  the 
martyrs. 

2.  Some  may  objecl  that  this  is  legal  doflrine  % 
and  that  making  praflice  of  fuch  great  impor- 
tance in  religion,  magaiifies  works,  and  leadsmen 
to  make  too  much  of  their  own  doings,  to  the 
dimunition  of  the  glory  of  free  grace,  yea,  does 
not  well  confill  with  that  great  gofpel  doflrine  of 
jujiijication  by  faith  alone. 

M 6 


Bat 


•9 


' [ 276  ] 

* But  this  objeflion  is  altogether  without  rea- 
fon.  Which  way  is  it  inconfiftent  with  the  free- 
nefs  of  God’s  grace,  thatholy  practice  fhould  be  a 
fign  of  God’s  grace  ? It  is  our  tvorks  being  the  price 
of  God’s  favour,  and  not  their  being  a^gn  of  it,  that 
is  inconfiftent  with  the  freenefs  of  that  favour. 
Surely  the  beggar’s  looking  on  the  money  he  has 
in  his  hands,  as  a/ign  of  the  kindnefs  of  him  who 
gave  it,  is  in  no  refpeft,  inconfiftent  with  the 
freenefs  of  that  kindnefs.  The  notion  of  the 
freenefs  of  God’s  grace,  is  not  that  no  holy  qua- 
lifications or  aftions  in  usftiall  be  a fruit,  and  fo 
a fign  of  that  grace  ; but  that  it  is  not  the  worthi- 
nefs  of  any  qualification  or  a£lion  of  ours  which 
recommends  us  to  that  grace;  that  kindnefs  is 
fhewn  to  the  unworthy  ; that  there  is  great  ex- 
cellency in  the  benefit  beftowed,  and.  no  excel- 
lency in  the  fubjefl  as  the  price  of  it.  And  this 
is  the  notion  of  juftificatlon  without  works,  that 
it  is  not  the  worthinefs  of  our  worLs,  or  any  thing 
in  us,  which  is  accepted  wdth  God  as  'abatance  for 
the  guilt  of  fin,  or  a recommendation  of  finners 
to  his  acceptance,  Thus  we  arejuftifiedonlyby 
therighteoufnefs  of  Chrift,  and  not  by  our  righ- 
teoufnefs.  And  when  works  are  oppofed  to  faith 
in  this  affair,  and  it  is  fafd  that  we  are  juftified 
by  faith  and  not  by  works thereby  is  meant, 
that  it  is  not  the  worthinefs  of  our  w:orks,  or  any 
thlnff  in  us,,  which  recommends  us  to  an  intereft 
in  Chrift;  but  that  we  have  this  Intereft  only  by 
faith,  or  by  our  foul’s  receiving  Chrift.  But 

that 


[ 277  ] 

that  the  worthinefs  of  nothing  In  us  brings 
us  to  an  interefl  in  Chrift,  is  no  argument 
that  nothing  in  us  is  a fign  of  an  intereft  in 
Chrift. 

* If  the  doftrines  of  free-grace,  and  juftifica- 
tion  by  faith  alone,  be  meonfiftent  with  the  im=. 
porlance.of  holy  praftice  as  a .fign  of  grace,;  then 
they  are  equally  inconfifient  with  the  importance, 
of  any  thing  whatfoever  in  us  as  a fign  of  grace 
and  holinefs,  or  any  of  our  experiences  of  reli- 
ligion;  for  it.  is  as  contrary  to  the  doftrines  of 
free-grace,  that  any  of  thefe  (hould  be  the  righ- 
teoufnefs  which  we  are  juftified  by,  as.  that  holy.- 
pradlice  fliould  be  fo.  It  is  with  holy  qualifi- 
cations, as  it  i.s  with  holy  works  ; it  is  incon- 
fiftent  with  the,  freenefs  of  gofpel  grace,  that 
a,  title  to  falvation  fiiould  be  giyen  to  men 
for  any  of  their  holy  qualifications,  as  much, 
as  that  it  fhould  be  given  for  the  holinefs  of 
their  work  ; , and  yet  this  does  not  hinder  the 
importance  of  thefe  things  as  evidences  of  an 
intereft  in  Chrift. . Juft  fo  it  is  with  refpeft 
to  holy  works.  To  make  light  of  works,  be-- 
caufe  we  be  not  juftified  by  works,  is  the 
fame  thing  in  eftefl;,  as  to  make,  light  of  all 
religion,  all  holinefs,  and  all  gracious  experi- 
ence; for  all  is  included,  when  the  fcripture 
■Cays,  we  are  not  juftified  by  works:  for  by 
works  in  this  cafe,  is  meant  all  our  owa.righ,- 
teoufnefs,  holinefs,  and  every  thing  that  is, 

in-: 


r ^78  ] 

tis,  all  the  good  Ave  do,  and  all  the  good 
we  are  confcious  of,  and  all  thofe  holy  things 
wherein  the  very  elfence  of  religion  confifts, 
and  even  faith  itfelf,  confidercd  as  a part  of 
our  holinefs;  for  we  are  juhified  by  none  of 
thefe  things,  and  if  we  were,  we  fhould,  in  a 
fcripture  fenfe,  be  juftified  by  works.  And 
therefore  if  it  be  not  legal  to  infill  on  any  of 
thefe,  as  evidences  of  an  interell  in  Chrift; 

f 

any  more  than  it  is,  thus  to^  infill  upon  the 
importance  of  holy  practice.  It  would  be 
legal  to  fuppofe  that  holy  practice  juflifies 
by  bringing  us  to  a title  to  Chrill's  benefits, 
as  the  price  of  it ; but  it  is  not  legal  to  fuppofe 
that  holy  practice  jullifies  the  fincerity  of  a 
believer,  as  the  proper  evidence  of  it. 

So  that  in  what  has  been  faid  of  the  im- 
portance of  holy  pradlice,  as  the  main  fign 
of  fincerity,  there  is  nothing  legal,  nothing 
derogatory  to  the  freedom  of  gofpel  grace, 
nothing  clafhing  with  the  gofpel  dcftrine  of 
j unification  by  faith,  nothing  in  the  leafl;  tend- 
ing to  leflen  the  glory  of  the  Mediator,  and 
our  dependance  on  his  righteoufnefs,  nothing 
detra£ling  from  the  glory  of  God  and  his  mercy, 
or  exalting  man.  If  then  any  are  againfl 
fuch  an  importance  of  holy  pra6llce,  it  mull 
be  only  from  a fenfelefs  averfion  to  the  let- 
ters and  found  of  the  word  u orh  ; when  there 
is  no  reafon  in  the  world  to  be  given  for  it, 

but 


[ .279  j 

but  what  may  be  given  with  - equal  force,  why* 
they  fiiould  have  an  averfion  to  the  words 
holmefs,  godliruj's,  religion,  experience,  and  even 
Jaith  itfelf;  for  to  tmft  in  any  of  thefe,  is  ' 
as  legal,  and  as  inconfiftent  with  the  way  of 
the  new  covenant,  as  to  trull  in  holy  pra6lice» 


SOME 


[ 28o  ] 


SOME 


REMARKS 

On  Mr.  HILL’S 
FARRAGO  Double-Distilled* 

If  It  be  pojfible,  as  much  lieth  in  you,,  live  peaceably 
with  all  men.  ' Rom.  xii.  i8. . 


1.  TT  is  far  from  my  clefign  to  give  a particular- 
anfwer  to  every  thing  contained  in  Mr.  . 
Hill’s  late  treatife.  I intend  only  to  offer  to  the 
impartial  reader,  a few  curfory  remarks,  which, 
mav  partly  .explain  and  partly  confirm  what  1 
have  already  faid  upon  the  fubjetf. 

2.  “ Poor  Mr  Wefleyt,”  fays  Mr.  Hill,  open- 
ing 

+ 3-  Quotations  from  Mr.  Hill  are  marked  with  double, 

from,  the  Remarks,  witL  tingle  comma’s. 


[ 28i  ] 

iiig  hh  cavife  with  native  eloquence,  “ has  pub- 
lilhed  various  trafts,  out  of  which  Mr.  Hill  col- 
“ lefts  above  an  hundred  grofs  contradiftions. 
“ At  this  Mr.  W.’s  temper  is  much  ruffled  (I 
believe  not;.  I am  not  fenfible  of  it;)  “he 
“ primes,  cocks,  and  fires  at  Calvinifni ; and 
“ there  is  fmoke  and  fire  in  plenty.  But  if  you 
“ can  bear  the  flench,  (which  indeed  is  very  nau- 
“ feoLis)  there  is  no  danger  of  being  wounded^. 
“ He  calls  this  laft  cannon,  or  pop-gun.  Remarks 
“ on  my  review.  Men  of  fenfe  fay,  it  is  quite 
“ unfit  lor  duty  ; men  of  grace  compaffionate 
“ the  cafler  of  it : men  of  pleafantry  laugh  hearti- 
“ ly  at  it ; but  fome  good  old  women  fpeak  high- 
“ of  it§.  I give  this  paflage  at  fome  length,  as  a 
genuine  fpecimen  of  Nlr.  Hill’s  manner  of  wrk- 
ing. 

3.  But  “ as  Mr.  Hill  did  not  chafe  to  prefix 
“ his  name,  it  argued  no  great  proof  of 'fslr.  AV.’s 
politenefs,  to  addrefs  him  in  the  perfonalman- 
he  has  done.”  Which  of  us  began  ? Was  it 
not  Mr.  Hill  ? Did  not  he  addrefs  me  in  a per- 
fonal  manner  firfl  ? And  fome,  befide  the  old 
woman,  are  of  opinion,  he  did  not  do  it  in  the 
politejl  manner  in  the  world. 

q.,  “ Mr.  W,  would  have  us  know,,  that  his 
“ piece  is  written  in  much  love.  But  what  love? 

“ Love  to  his  own  inconfiflencies ; love  of  fcold- 
“ ing,  love  of  abufe.  Let  the  reader  find  out 
any  other  fort  of  love  through  the  whole  per- 

“ formance.’^, 

1 Page  4.  § Page  5^. 


[ 282  ] 

“ formance.”  In  order  to  judge  whether  I wrote 
in  love  or  no,  let  any  one  read  the  words  he  has 
picked  out  of  fifty-four  pages,  juft  as  they  ftand 
connefted  with  others  in  each  page  : it  will  then 
appear  they  are  not  . contrary  either  to  love  or 
meeknefs. 

5.  But  Mr.  W.  fays,  Mr.  Hill  “ is  umvorthy 
“ the  name  either  of  the  gentleman  or  the  Chrif- 
“ tian ; and  is  amazed,  that  Mr.  Hill  fhould  lay 
“ claim  to  either  of  thofe  titles||.”  Notfo.  - It  is 
my  belief,  that  Mr.  Hill  is  both  a gentleman  and 
a Chriftian:  though  I ftill  think,  in  his  treat- 
ment of  Mr.  Fletcher  and  me,  he  has  acted  be- 
neath his  charafter.  Yet  it  is  vety  likely,  “ a 
“ friend  of  yours  § (not  mine)  might  fay,  I wrote 
“ in  much  zcrath.”  1 wrote  then  in  juft  as  much 
wrath  as  I do  now;  though  friend  might 
think  otherwife. 

6.  Nay,  but  Mr.  W.  “ gives  i all  the  calvinift 
“ Miniftersthemoft  fcurrilous,  Billingfgate  lan- 
“ guage,  tvhile  he  is  trumpeting  forth  his  own 
“ praifes,  in  Mr.  F.’s  Second  Check  to  Anti- 
“ nomianifm.”  A fmall  miftake.  I do  not  give 
Billingfgate  language  to  any  one;  I have  not  fo 
learned  Chrift.  Every  one  of  thofe  hymns,  out 
ofwhich  Mr.  Hill  culls  the  harlheft  expreftions 
are  not  mine,  but  my  brother  s.  Neither  do  I 
“ trumpet  forth  my  own  praifes.”  Mr.  Hill  s 
imagining  I do,  arifes  from  an  innocent  miftake. 
He  continually  takes  for  granted  that  I read  over 


1)  Page  6. 


h Page  7. 


Page  8. 


E ] 

and  correft  all  Mr.  F.’s  books  before  they  go  to 
thcprefs.  So  far  from  it,  that  the  Fourth  Clieck 
to  Aminomianifm  I have  not  read  over  to  this 
day.  But  Mr.  W.  “ thinks  himfelf  to  he  ike 
grtaleji  minijltr  in  the  world.''  Exceedingly  far 
from  it.  I know  many  now  in  England,  at  whofe 
feet  I defire  to  be  found  in  the  day  of  the  Lord 
Jefus. 

* 7.  To  that  queflion,  Why  does  a man  ‘ fall 
‘ upon  me,  becaufe  another  gave  him  a good 
‘beating?’  Mr.  Hill  anfwers,  “ If  your  trumpet 
“ had  not  given  the  alarm,  we  {Irould  not  have 
“ prepared  ourfelves  for  ihe  battle.”^  Nay  truly, 
not  mine,  but  Mr.  Shirley’s.  I was  fitting  quietly 
in  my  lludy,  on  the  other  fide  of  St.  George’s 
channel,  when  his  trumpet  gave  the  alarm.  Yet 
I fay  again,  I am  not  now  fony  for  thefe  difputes 
though  I was  forry.  You  fay,  truly,  “ Mr.  W.’s 
“ temper  has  been  manifelled”  hereby.  ||  Let  all 
candid  men  judge  between  us.  Whether  Mr.  F. 
and  Ion  the  one  hand,  or  Mr.  Hill  on  the  other 
has  Ihewn  more  “ meekriefs  and  lowlinefs  ?” 
And  which  of  us  has  expreffed  the  greateft  heat, 
and  the  mod;  cordial  contempt  of  his  oppo- 
nent. 

Mr.  H.  adds,  “ Hereby  Mr.  Charles  Wefley’s 
“■  Calvinlfm  is  expofed  by  Mr,  John.”  Then  that 
isexpofed,  which  never  exided,  for  he  never 
was  a Calvinift  yet.  And  “ hereby  Mr.  H. 
“ fays,  the  Chriftian  Library  is  given  up  as  noth- 

“ ingd" 

t Page  53.  I]  P»ge  56.  . 


[ 284  ] 

ing.”  Mere  fineffe!  Everyone  fees  my  meaning,, 
but  thofe  that  will  not  fee  it.  It  is  nothing  to 
your  purpoje  : improves  nothing  of  what  it  is  brought 
to  prove.  In  the  fame  fenfe  I fet  the  word  nothing 
over  againfl  the  citations  from  Mr,  Baxter,  and 
Goodwin. 

* 8.  If  Mr.  Hill  fays,  he  always  was  a Calvinill,., 
I have  no  right  to  contradift  him.  But  I am  fure 
he  was  of  a widely  different  temper,  from  that 
he  has  Ihewm  in  his  late  writings.  I allow  much 
to  his  belief,  that  in  expoflng  me  to  the  utmoft 
of  his  power,  he  is  doing  God  fervice.  Yeti 
muff  needs  fay,  if  I were  writing  againff  a Turk  or 
a Pagan,  I durft  notufe  him  as  Mr.  Hill  does  me. 
And  if  I really  am  (which,  will  one  day  appear) 
employing  all  my  tiraCi  and  labour,  and  talents, 
(fuch  as  they  are)  for  this  fingle  end,  that  the 
kingdom  of  Chriftmay  be  fet  up  on  earth  : Then 
he  whom  I ferve  inthegofpel  of  his  Son,  will  not 
commend  him  for  his  prefent  work. 

9.  But  what  makes  Mr.  Hill  fo  warm  againff 
me  ? I ffill  believe  it  is  for  this  chiefly,  be- 
caufe  I am.  an,  Arminian,  an  ElefHon-doubter. 
For,  fays  he,,  the  good  old.  preacher,  places  all 
“ eleftion-dbubters,  (that  is,  thofe  who  are  not 
“ clear  in  the  belief  of  Abfolute  Predeftination 
“ among  the  numerous  hofts  of  the  Diabolonlans. 
“ One  of  thefe  being  brought  before  the  judge,. 
“ the  judge  tells  him  he  muff  die.'T  That  i,s 
plainly,  he  mull  die  eternally  for  this  damnable 

fin. 


■t  Review,  Page  35. 


Cm.  I beg  Mr.  Hill  to  explain  himfelfon  this  head. 
Does  he  ftill  fubfcribe  to  the  fentenceof  good 
old  preacher  '?  Are  all  eleftion- doubters  to  be 
placed  among  the  Diabolonians  ? Is  the  fentence 
irreverfibly  paffed.  That  they  inuft  all  die  eter- 
nally ? I muft  infill  on  Mr.  Hill’s  a-nfwerirlgthis 
quellion  : If  not,  filence  gives  confent. 

lo.  Mr.  H.  farther  affirms,  “ The  only  ce- 
“ ment  of  .Chriftian  union  is  the  love  of  God. 
“ And  the  foundation  of  that  love  mull  be  laid, 
in  believing  the  truths  oj  God.  dl  (that  is,  you 
muji  believe  particular  redemption,  or  it  is  impof- 
fible  you-lliould  love  God.  For,  to  ufe  “ the 
“ words  of  Dr.  Owen  in  his  difplay  ofArmini- 
anifm,”  (fee  what  truths  Mr.  Hill  means  !j  “ an 
“ argeement  without  truth  is  no  peace,  but  a 
“ covenant  with  death,  and  a confpiracy  againll 
the  kingdom  of  Chrill.”,:i;  Here  again  I beg  an 
explicit  anfwer.  Will  Mr.  H.  affirm  this  in  cool 
blood?  If  he  will,  there  needs  no-more  to  account 
Tor  his  enmity  both  to.  me  and  the  minutes.  “Nay 
“ but  the  foundation  is  llruck. at  by  thofe  wretched 
minutes,”j|  True,  the  foundation  of  Calvinifm. 
So  I obferved  before.  I know  it  well.  If  the  mi- 
nute? Hand,  Calvinifm  falls.  .But  Mr.  Hill  fays, 
The  doflrines  of  eleftion  and  perfeverance 
“ are  vey  little,  indeed  fcarcely  at  all  dwelled  on 
“ in  the  Review.”  Now  I think  they  are  much 
dwelt  on  therein,  and  defire  any  that  have  eyes 
, to judge. 

11.  We 


J Review,  Page  93. 


ji’  Page  52- 


L 286  ] 

11.  We  come  now  to  the  main  'queftion,  Is 
llie  Farrago  true  or  falfe  ? I aver  it  to  be  totally 
falfe  : except  in  one  fingle  article,  out  of  an  hun- 
t rirecl  and  one.  I mean,  Mr.  Hill  has  not  proved 

that  I contradict  myfelf,  except  in  that  fingle  in- 
fiance.  To  come  to  particulars. 

I. 

“ There  was  an  exierlajiing  covenant  between 
“ the  Father  and  Son,  concerning  man’s redemp- 
“ tion.  (T  here  never  was  fuch  a covenant.’  j 

The  lormer  propofition  is  taken  from  the 
Chriflian  Library  ; On  which  Mr.  Hill  fays  again, 
“ Mr.  W.  affirms,  that  the  Chriflian  Library  is 
“ all  true,  all  agreeable  to  the  zvord  of  GodF  I 
anfwered  before,  ‘ I dot  not;’  My  words  are 
Pref.  p.  4.  ‘ I have  endeavoured  to  extradl  fuch  a 
‘ colleflion  of  Englifli  divinity,  as  I believe  is  all 
‘ true,  all  agreeable  to  the  oracles  of  God.’  I 
did  believe  and  do  believe  every  traEl  therein  to  be 
true  and  agreeable  to  the  oracles  of  God.  But  I 
do  not  roundly  affirm  this  ‘ of  roery  fentence  con- 
‘ tained  in  the  fifty  volumes.  I could  not  poffibly 
‘ affirm  it  for  two  reafons.  1.  I was  obliged  to 
‘ prepare  inofl  of  thofe  trafts  for  the  prefs,  juft  as 
‘ I could  fnatch  time  in  travelling  ; not  tranferib- 
‘ ing  them  ; (none  expefted  it  of  me)  but  only 
‘ marking  the  lines  with  my  pen,  and  altering  a 
* few  words  here  and  there,  as  I had  mentioned 
‘ in  the  preface.  2.  As  it  was  not  in  my  power 
‘ to  attend  the  prefs,  that  care  neceffarily  devolv- 

‘ eJ 


•t  Remarks,  Page  12. 


[ 28.7  ] 

^ ed  on  others ; through  whofe  inattention  ,an 
‘ hundred  paffages  ^vere  left  in,  whicli  I had 
‘ fcratched  out.  It  is  probable  too,  that  I my- 
‘ felf  mio'ht  overlook  fome  fentences  which  wei'e 

■ O 

‘ not  fuitable  to  my  own  principles.  It  is  certain, 

‘ the  correflors  of  the  prefs  did  this  in  not  a few 
‘ inftances.  The  plain  inference  is,  if  there  are 
‘ an  hundred  pafiages  in  the  Chriflian  Library, 

‘ which  contradicf  any  or  all  of  my  doftrines, 

‘ thefe  are  no  proofs  that  I contradift  myfelf.  Be 
‘ it  obferved  once  for  all  therefore,  citations  from 
‘ the  Chriftian  Library  prove  nothing,  but  the 
‘ carelelTnefs  of  the  correctors.’ 

12.  Yet  Mr.  Hill,  as  if  he  had  never  feen  awoi'd 
of  this,  or  had  folidly  refuted  it,  gravely  tells  us 
again  “ If  Air.  W.  may  f be  credited,  the  Far- 
“ rago  is  all  true  : part  of  it  being  taken  out  of 
“ his  own  Chriftian  Library,  in  the  preface  of 
“ which  he  tells  us,  that  the  contents  are  all  true, 

“ all  agreeable  to  the  oracles  of  God,  Therefore 
every  fingle  word  of  it  is  his  own,  either  by  birth 
“ or  adoption.”  No  ; I never  adopted,  I could 
not  adopt  every  fingle  word  of  the  Chriftian  Llbra- 
rv.  It  was  impoffible  I fliould  have  fuch  a 
thought,  foy  the  reafons  above-mentioned. 

But  “ there  j is  very  great  evafion,”  fays  Mr. 
Hill,  “ in  Mr.  W.’s  faying,  that  though  he  be- 
“ lieves  every  tradl  to  be  true,  yet  he  will  not  be 
“ anfwerable  for  every  fenltnce  or  exprejjion  in  the 
“ Chriftian  Library  : whereas  the  matter  by  no 

“ means . 

f Page  12.  J Page  i6. 


[ 288  ] 

■'*  means  refts  upon  a few  fentences  or  expref- 
“ fiens,  but  upon  whole  treatijes,  which  are  dia- 
“ metrically  cppofite  to  Mr.  W.’s  prefent  tenets  ; 
“ particularly  the  treatifes  of  Dr.  Sibs,  Dr.  Pref- 
“ ton,  Bifhop  Beveridge,  and  Dr.  Owen,  on  In- 
dwelling  Sin.” 

13.  Juft  before  Mr.  H.  affirmed,  “ Every  /in- 
■ “ gle  word  in  the  Chriftian  Librar\’  is  his  ownE 
Beaten  out  of  this  hold,  he  retreats  to  another; 
but  it  is  as  untenable  as  the  former.  “ The  mat- 
“ ter,”  be  fays,  “ does  not  reft  on  a few  fm- 
“ tenets  : whole  treatifes  are  diametricallv  oppo- 
■“  fite  to  his  prefent  tenets.”  He  inftances  in  the 
works. of  Dr.  Sibs,  Prefto.n,  Beveridge,  and  a 
treatife  of  Dr.  Owen’s. 

I join  iffue  with  him  on  this  point.  Here  I pin 
him  down.  The  works  of  Dr.  Prefton  and  Sibs, 
are  in  the  ninth  and  tenth  volumes  of  the  Libra- 
ryr:  that  treatife  of  Dr.  Owen's  in  the  feven- 
teenth;  that  of  Bifiiop  Beveridge  in  the  forty-fe- 
venth.  Take  which  of  them  you  pleafe  ; fup- 
pofe  the  laft,  Bifhop  Be^■erid,ge’s  Thoughts  upon 
Religion.  Is  this  whole  treatife  “ diametricallv' 
oppofite  to  my  prefent  tenets?”  The  Rflu- 
tions  take  up  the  greateft  part  of  the  book ; every 
fentence  of  which  exaftly  agrees  with  ray  pre- 
fent judgment ; as  do  at  leaft  nine  parts  in  ten 
of  the  preceding  Thoughts,  on  which  thofe  Re~ 
folulions  are  formed.  * Now  what  could  pofTibly 
induce  a perfon  of  Mr.  Hill’s  charaHer,  a man 
of  a good  underftanding  and  of  a generous  tem- 
per. 


[ 289  ] 

per,  a well-bred  gentleman  and  a ferious  Chrif- 
tian,  to  violate  all  the  rules  of  juftice  and  truth, 
which  at  other  times  he  fo  earneftly  defends,  by 
pofitively,  deliberately,  roundly  aflerting  fo  in- 
tire a falhiood,  merely  to  blacken  one  who 
loves  his  perfon,  who  efteems  his  charafter,  and 
is  ready  to  ferve  him  in  any  thing  within  his 
power  ? What,  but  fo  violent  an  attachment  to 
his  opinion,  as  while  that  is  in  danger,  fufpends 
all  his  faculties,  fo  that  he  neither  can  fed,  nor 
think,  nor  [peak  like  himfelf  ? 

14.  In  the  ninth  and  tenth  volumes  are  two 
treatifes  of  Dr.  Prefton’s,  The  Breajlplaie  of  Faith 
and  Love,  and  The  New  Covenant.  Is  either  of 
thefe  “ diametrically  oppofite  to  my  prefent  te- 
“ nets  ” By  no  means.  If  a few  fentences  here 
and  there,  (and  this  I only  fuppofe,  not  grant,) 
were  carelefsly  left  in,  though  I had  fcratched 
them  out,  which  feem  (perhaps  only  feem)  to 
contradift  them  ; thefe  are  not  the  whole  trads: 
the  general  tenor  of  which  I flill  heartily  fub- 
fcribe  to. 

The  tenth  volume  likewife  contains  .Sfr- 
nons  of  Dr.  Sibs,  and  his  Trad  upon  Solomon  s 
Song.  Are  any  of  thefe  “ diametrically  oppofite 
“ to  my  prefent  tenets  ?”  No  more  than  thofe  of 
Dr.  Prellon’s.  I as  v/illingly  as  ever  fubfcribe  to 
thefe  alfo. 

Is  Dr.  Owen’s  traft.  Of  the  remainder  of  In- 
dwelling fin  in  believers,  “ diametrically  oppofite 
“ to  my  prefent  tenets  ?”  So  far  from  it,  that 

VoL.  XXIII.  N a few 


[ £90  ] 

a few  years  fince  I publiflied  a fermon  on  the 
A'ery  fame  fubjeft.  I hope  there  is  no  room  to 
charge  me  with  “ quirk,  quibble,  artifice,  evafion,” 
on  this  head  ; (though  I believe  as  much  as  on 
any  other.)  I ufe  only  plain,  manly  reafoning ; and 
fuch  logic  I am  not  afliamed  to  avow  before  the 
whole  learned  world. 

15.  But  “ I will  go  farther  ftillf,”  (fays  Mr. 
Hill.)  “ Let  Mr.  W.  only  bring  me  twenty  lines 
“ together,  out  of  the  writings  of  thofe  four  emi- 
■“  nent  divines,  as  they  Hand  in  the  Chriflian- 
“ Library  ; and  I will  engage  to  prove,  that  be 
“ has  twenty  times  contradifted  them  in  fome  of 
his  other  publications.”  Agreed.  I bring  hi.m 
the  following  twenty  lines  with  which  Dr.  Prefton 
begins  his  treatife  called  The  New  Covenant,  i 
[Thefe  words  of  God  to  Abraham  contain  a 
percept  of  fincenty,  or perfeff  walking  with  God, 
Walk  before  me,  and  be  thou  perfeB  ; and  alfo  the 
motive  thereunto,  God’s  all-fufficiency,  / am  God 
all  fufficienl.  As  if  he  fliould  fay,  if  there  were 
any  defeft  in  me,  if  thou  didft  need  or  couldft 
deft  re  any  thing  that  were  not  to  be  had  in  me, 
and  thou  mighteft  have  it  elfewhere,  perhaps 
thy  heart  might  be  imperfeft  in  walking  towards 
me.  Thou  mighteft  then  ftep  out  from  me,  to 
take  in  advantages  elfewhere.  But  feeing  I am 
all-fufficient  ; fince  I have  enough  in  me  to  ful- 
fil all  thy  defires  ; fince  I am  evert'  way  an  ade- 
quate objeff,  fo  that  all  thy  foul  can  wifti  for  thou 

may  ft 

f Vol.  X.  Page  47. 


+ Page  19. 


[ 291  ] 

mayft  have  in  me;  why  then  fnouldfl;  thou 
not  confecrate  thyfelf  to  me  alone  ? \yhy  then 
fliOLildft  thou  be  uneven  in  thy  ways,  ferving  me 
fometimes,  and  fometimes  the  creature  ? For 
there  is  nothing  in  the  creature,  but  thou  mayft 
find  in  me.  / arn  all  firfficicnt : thtrejore  walk 
b^ore  me,  and  be  thou  perfeB  ! 

Here  are  exaftly  twenty  lines,  neither  more  nor 
“ lefs,  as  they  ftand  in  the  Chriftian  library.’’  Now 
fulfil  your  engagement : prove  that  I “ havetwen- 
“ ty  times  contradifted  them  in  fome  other  of  my 
“ publications.’’  If  you  cannot,  acknowledge  you 
have  done  me  wrong.  In  the  heat  of  your  refent- 
ment,  you  have  undertaken  what  you  are  not 
able  to  perform.  You  have  fpoken  rafltly  and  un- 
advifedly.  You  have  gone  m.uch  too  far,  far  be- 
yond the  bounds  of  wifdom  as  v/ell  as  of  love. 
i6.  Nay,  but  “ I will  go  one  ftep  farther  yet, 
I defy  Mr.  W.  to  bring  me  twenty  Hues  out 
of  the  above  trafis,  by  Prefton,  Sibs,  Owen, 
“ and  Beveridge,  which  he  now  believes.”  Is  it 
poffible,  that  Mr.  H.  fhould  believe  himfelf, 
while  he  is  talking  at  this  rate  ? Or  does  he  expeft 
that  any  one  elfe  fhould  believe  him,  unlefs  he 
be  drunk  with  paffion  or  prejudice  ? Was  ever 
any  thing  fo  tvild  ? But  I accept  of  this  chal- 
lenge, and  that  tvith  more  ferioufnels  than  itde- 
ferves.  1 ^vill  go  no  farther  than  the  twentv 
lines  cited  afiove  ; All  thefe  I “ now  belieVe.” 
And  I believe,  as  I faid  before,  not  only  the 
, N 2 whole 


^ C 292  ] 

whole  treatife  from  \v'hich  thofe  words  are  tahen, 
but  the  tenor  of  the  whole  Chriflian  Librars'. 

Meantime  it  has  been  acknowledged  again  and 
again,  ^z^ftveral  fcntences  ftahd  therein,  which  I 
had  put  out  in  my  iifual  manner,  by  drawing  my 
pen  through  them.  Be  itobfervcd  therefore  once 
more,  that  thofe  pafTages  prove  nothing  but  the 
careleffnefs  of  the  correciors  ; confequently  all  the 
pains  bellowed  to  colleClthem  togetlrer,  whether 
by  Mr.  Hill  or  his  coadjutors,  is  abfolutely  loll  la- 
bour, and  never  can  prove  that  I contradicf  miyfelf 

17.  The  cafe  is  nearly  the  fame  with  regard  to 
thofe  other  trafls  which  I publiflred  man}-  years 
ago,  Mr.  Baxter  s Aphorifms  on  JuJHfication, 
and  John  Gooduins  TraB  on  the  fubjefi.  I have 
lately  read  them  both  over  with  all  the  attention 
I am.  capable  of  ; and  I Hill  believe  they  con- 
tain the  true  fcripture-dotlrine  concerning  julHfi- 
cation  by  faith  ; but  it  ^does  not  follow,  that  I am 
accountable  for  every  fenteiice  contained  in 
either  of  thofe  treatifes. 

“ Bi)t  docs  Mr.  W.  believe  the  doftrine 
“ therein  contained,  or  does  he  not  ?”  I do  : 
and  John  Goodtein  believed  the  doftrine  contain- 
ed in  the  fcnnon  on  The  Lord  our  righteoiifnefs: 
the  fum  of  which  is,  ‘ We  arc  jultified,  fanftified, 

‘ and  glorified,  for  the  fake  of  what  Chrill  has 
‘ .done  and  fuffered  for  us.’  Nothing  healferts  is 
inconliilent  with  this;  though  it  may  be  incon- 
hllent  with  palfagesleft  in  the  ChriHian  Library-: 
when  therelore  I write  nothing  againft  thofe 

pafTages 


r 293  ] 

pafTages,  or  the  extrafts  from  Goodwin, that  con- 
tradift  them,  this  does  not  prove,  (as  Mr.  Hil! 
archly  fays  ) that  “ I have  nothing  to  fay,”  but 
that  all  thofe  pafTages  and  extra^s  put  together 
are  nothing  to  the  purpofe.  For  were  it  true, 
that  John  Goodwin  and  Richard  Baxter  cont,ra- 
didled  all  thofe  paffages,  it  is  nothing  to  the  point 
in  hand  it  never  can  prove,  that  I John  W efley, 
contradidl  myfelf. 

18.  But  to  return  to  the  Ever lajling  Covenant^ 
“ Mr,  W.  himfclf,  in  his  annotations  on  Gen.  i. 
“ I.  calls  the  Elohim,  z.  covenant  GodJ’  True,  in 
covenant  with  man.  But  I fay  not  one  word  of 
any  covenant  between  the  Father  and  the  Son. 
But  “ in  his  note  on  Ifa.  Iv.  4.  fpeaking  of  the  co- 
“ venant  made  between  God  and  David,  he  fays, 
•'  This  David  is  ChriJlE  Undoubtedly  I do  : but 
what  is  this  brought  to  prove  ? My  words  are, 

* f I have  appointed,  and  will  in  due  time  give 
‘ him — the  David  laft-mentioned,  even  Chrift — 
‘ a zvitnejl — to  declare  the  will  of  God  concern- 
‘ ing  the  duty  and  falvation  of  men,  to  bear 
‘ witnefs  to  the  truth,  to  confirm  God’s  promifes, 
‘ and  among  others,  thofe  which  refpeff  the  call- 
‘ ing  of  the  Gentiles : to  be  a witnefs  to  both 
‘ parties  of  that  covenant  made  between  God  and 

* mand  Yea,  of  the  covenant  made  between  God 
and  man  ! Of  a covenant  between  the  Father  and 
the  Son  here  is  not  a word. 

“ The  only  pofhble  conclufion  to  be  drawn 
N 3 from 

•}■  Page  203. 


[ 294  ] 

from  this  defence  of  Mr,  W.’s,  is,  That  he 
became  a commentator  on  tlie  bible,  before 
“ he  could  read  the  bible.”  That  is  pity  ! If  he 
could  not  read  it  when  he  was  three-fcore  years 
old,  I doubt  he  never  will.  See  the  candor,  the 
good-nature  of  Mr.  Hill ! Is  this  attic  fait,  or 
w’ormwood  ? 

What eoncluCon  can  be  poflTibly  drawn  in 
favour  of  Mr.  Hill  ? The  mofl  favourable  I can. 
draw  is  this,  That  he  never  read  the  book  which 
he  quotes : that  he  took  the  word  of  fome  of  his 
friends.  But  how  fhall  we  excufe  them  ? I hope 
they  trufted  their  memories,  not  their  eyes. 
But  what  recorapence  can  he  make  to  me,  for 
publilliiiig  fo  grofs  a falflrood ; which  neverthe- 
lefs  thofe  who  read  his  traft,  and  not  mine,  will 
take  to  be  as  true  as  the  gofpel  ? 

II._ 

Of  EleBion  and  Perftverance. 

19.  In  entering  upon  this  head,  I obferved  f, 
‘ Mr.  Sellon  has  clearly  lliewn,  that  the  feven- 
‘ teenth  article  does  not  affert  abfolute  predefti- 
‘ nation.  Therefore  in  denying  this,  I neither 
‘ contradifi  that  article  nor  myfelf.’ 

It  lies  therefore  upon  Mr.  Hill,  to  anfwer  hir. 
Sellon  before  he  witticizes  upon  me.  Let  him 
do  this,  and  he  talks  to  the  purpofe  : otherwife 
all  the  pretty,  lively  things  he  fays  about  Dr. 
Baroe,  Bifhop  Wilkins,  Dr.  Clark,  and  George 
Bell,  are  utterly  throwm  away. 


+ Page  13. 


[ 295  ] 


As  to  George  Bell,  Mr.  Richard  fays,  M. 

M d “ jultly  cenfures  ^ enthufiajm  and 

credulity  of  Mr.  John,  in  paying  fo  muoh  alten- 
tion  to  Bell’s  ridiculous  reveries;  in  calling 
him  a fenfiblerazo,  and  entreating  him  to  coii- 
“ tinue  in  his  fociety,  on  account  of  the  great 
“ good  he  did.  However  Bell  rejuftd  to  remain 
“ in  connexion  with  him,  becaufe  of  his  double 
“ dealings  and  unfaithful  proceedings : for  he 
“ fometimes  was  full  of  Bell’s  praifes;  at  other 
“ times  he  would  warn  the  people  againft  him. 
“ He  alfo  gives  a particular  narration  of  what  he 
“ rightly  calls  the  Comet- Enthufiaf/n.  Mr.  John 
“ preached  more  than  ten  times  about  the  comet, 
“ which  he  fuppofed  M'^as  to  appear  in  1758,  to 
burn  up  all  the  produce  of  the  earth,  and 
“ laflly  to  execute  its  grand  commiffion  on  the 
“ globe  itfelf,  caufing  the  itars  to  fall  from  hea- 
“ ven.” 

What  an  heap  of  dirt  is  here  raked  together? 
I muH  not  let  it  pafs  quite  unnoticed.  1.  He 
“ juftly  cenfures  the  enthuftafrn  and  credulity  of 
“ Mr.  W.  in  paying  fo  much  attention  to  Bell’s 
“ ridiculous  reveries.”  Nay,  fo  very  little,  that 
I checked  them  ftrongly,  as  foon  as  ever  they 
came  to  my  knowledge : p'articularly  his  whim 
about  the  end  of  the  world,  which  I earneftly 
oppofed  both  in  private  and  public.  2.  “ Brag- 
“ ging  of  the  many  miraculous  cures  he  had 
“ wrought.”  I bragged  of  that  is,  fimply  related 
N 4 the 

t Page  37* 


[ 296  ] 

the  cafe  of  Mary  Special,  and  no  other ; in  the 
clofe  of  which  I faid,  ‘ Here  are  three  plain 
‘ fa8;s,  fire  was  ill ; Ihe  is  well ; fhe  became  fo  in 
‘ a moment.  Which  of  thefecan,  with  any  mo- 
* defly,  be  denied  ?’  1 flill  afk  the  fame  queflion. 
3.  That  I ever  called  him  a fenfibh  man,  is  alto- 
gether falfe.  A man  of  faith  and  love  I then 
kntw  him  to  be ; but  I never  thought  him  a man 
of  fenfe.  4.  That  I entreated  him  to  continue  in 
the  fociety,  is  likewife  totally  falfe.  3.  Nor  did 
I ever  tell  him,  on  that  or  any  other  occafion, 
of  “ the  great  good”  he  did.  I know,  he  was  an 
inflrument  in  God’s  hand,  of  convincing  and 
converting  many  finners.  But  though  I fpeak 
this  now  to  all  the  world,  I never  fpoke  it  to 
himfelf.  6.  Neither  did  he  ever  refuje  what  ne- 
ver was  afked,  “ to  remain  in  connexion  wdth 
“ me.”  7.  Leaft  of  all  did  he  refufe  it  becaufe 
of  my  double  dealings  or  unfaithful  proceedings. 
He  never  mentioned  to  me  any  fuch  thing,  nor 
had  he  any  pretence  fo  to  do.  8.  Nay,  but  you 
“ was  at  fome  times  full  of  Bell’s  praifes” — Very 
moderately  full : — “ At  other  times” — that  is, 
after  he  ran  mad — “ you  tvarned  the  people 
“ againft  him.”  I tvarned  them  not  to  regard 
his  prophecies;  particularly  with  regard  to  the 
t 28th  of  February. 

io.  “ He  alfo  gives  us  a particular  narration 
“ of  what  he  rightly  calls  the  Comet-Enthufiafm. 
“ Mr.  John  preached  more  than  ten  times  about 

thi 


f Journal  X,  page  99. 


C 297  ] 


” the  Comet  he  fuppofed  was  to  appear  in  1758^ 

V'  and  to  conTume  the  globe.”  This  is  a fooliflr 
blander,  as  it  is  fo  eafily  confuted.  A traft  was 
publilhed  at  that  very  time,  intitled,  “ Serious 
thoughts  occafionedby  the  earthquake  at  Lifbon.” 
The  thing  which  I then  accidentally  mentioned 
in  preaching,  (twice  or  thrice ; it  may  be,  four 
times)  is  there  fet  down  at  large,  much  more  at 
large  than  ever  I mentioned,  it  in.  any  fermort. 
The  words  are  thefe.  t 

“ Dr.  Halley  fixes  the  return  of  the  Comet, 

“ which  appeared  in  1682,  in  the  year  17,58.” 
(Obferve  Dr.  Halley  does  this,  not  I.)  On  which 
he  adds,  “ But  may  the  great,  good  God  avert 
“ fuch  a fhock  or  contaH  of  fuch  great  bodies, 
moving  with  fuch  forces,  (which  however  is  by 
” no  means  poflTible)  leaft  this  moft  beautiful 
“ order  of  things  be  entirely  deftroyed,  and  re- 
“ duced  into  its  ancient  chaos.” 

‘ But  what  if  God  firould  not  avert  this  con.» 

‘ taff  ? what  would  the  confequence  be.?’ — That 
confequence  I afterwards  defcribe. — ‘ Burning 
‘ up  all  the  produce  of  the  earth,  and  then  the 
‘ globe  itfelf.’  But  do  I affirm  or  JuppoJe^AhAX  it 
aBually  will  do  this  ? I fuppofe,  nay  affirm,  at 
the  bottom  of  the  fame  page,  the  direft  contrary... 
‘-What  fecurity  is  there  againft  all  this,,  on  the 
^■injidel  hypothefis  ? But- on  the  ChriiUan  there' 
‘ abundant  fecurity ; for  the  prophecies  are  not 
‘ yet  fulfilled.^ 

zj...  So  much,  for  the  Comet-Enthufidfm^.  We 
Nq-j  ifiturn 

+ Page  1 4,  & fsqi 


[ 298  ] 


return  now  to  die  point  of  unconditional  elcdlion, 
“ One  would  :j;  imagine,”  fays  Mr.  Hill,  “ by 
“ Mr.  W.’s  quoting  the  thirty-firfl  article,  in 
“ contradiElion  to  the  feventeenth,  that  he 
“ thought  the  reformers  as  inconfillent  as  him*- 
“ felf.”  I did  not  quote  the  31ft  in  conlr adiclion 
to  the  17th,  but  in  explication  of  it.  The  latter, 
the  thirty-firft  can  bear  but  one  meaning : there- 
fore it  fixes  the  fenfe  of  the  former.  “ Nay, 
“ this  article  fpeaks  nothing  of  the  extent  of 
“ Chrlft’s  death,  but  of  its  all~fujfficiency.'’\  No- 
thing of  the  extent ! Why,  it  fpeaks  of  nothing, 
elfe : its  all-fufficiency  is  out  of  the  queftion. 
The  words  are,  “ The  offering  of  Chrift  once 
“ made,  is  that  perfecf  redemption,  propitiation 
■“  and  fatisfaftion,  for  all  the  fins  of  the  whole 
“ world,  both  original  and  acfual.”  It  is  here 
affirmed,  the  death  of  Chrift  is  a peifeft  fatisfac- 
llon  for  all  the  Jins  of  the  whole  world.  It  would 
be  fufficient  for  a thoufand  wmrlds.  But  of  this 
the  article  fays  nothing. 

But  “ even  Bifhop  Burnet  allows  our  reform- 
“ ers  to  have  been  zealous  Calvinifts.”  He  does 
not  allow  them  all  to  be  fuch : he  knew  and  you 
know  the  contrary.  You  cannot  but  know,  that 
Bifhop  Ridley,  Hooper,  and  Latimer,  to  name 
no  more,  were  firm  Unlverfalifts. 

22.  But  the  contradictions ! Where  are  the 
contraflions  ? “ Why,  fometimes  you  deny  elec- 
“ tion  : yet  another  time  you  fay, 

From 

i Pass  §Pa3e51-55» 


[ 299  3 

“ From  all  eternity  with  love 
“ Unchangeable  thou  haft  me  view’d.”  j| 

I anfw’ered,  ‘ I believe  this  is  true,  on  the  fuppo- 
‘ fttion  ol faith  for tf ten,  not  otherwife.’ 

Here  is  therefore  no  contradiffion,  unlefs  on 
that  fuppofition,  which  I do  not  allow. 

But  fometimes  “ you  deny  the  perfeverance 
“ of  the  faints.”  Yet  in  one  place  you  fa}',*  I do 
‘ not  deny,  that  thofe  eminently  ftiled  the  eJeEl 
‘•fall  peiftevere.’  I mean  thofe  that  are  pcrfeBed 
in  love.  So  I was  inclined  to  think  for  many 
years.  Bui  for  ten  or  twelve  t’ears  I have  been 
fully  convinced,  that  even  thefe  may  make  Jhip- 
wreck  of  the Jailh. 

23.  But  “ feveral  of  Mr.  Hill’s  quotations  are 
“ from  Mr.  Charles  Wefley’s  hymns,  for  whicli 
“ Mr.  John  fays,  he  will  not  be  anfwerable.” 

* I will  now  explain  myfelf  on  this  head. 
Though  there  are  fome  expreftions  in  mv  bro- 
ther’s hymns,  which  I do  not  ufe,  as  being  very 
liable  to  be  niifconftrued : yet  I am  fully  fatisfied,.. 
that  in  the  whole  tenor  of  them,  the\  thoroughly, 
asree  with  mine,  and  with  the  bible;  2.  That 
there  is  no  jot  of  Calvinifm  therein  that  notone 
hymn,  not  one  verfe  of  an  hymn,  maintains 
either  unconditional  eleftion,,  or  infallible  perfe- 
verance. I herefore  I can  readily  anlvver  Mr.  H.’s 
queftion,  “ How  ean  Mr.  W anfwer  it  to  his 
“ own  confcience,  to  write  prefaces  and  recoin-, 
‘Emendations  to  hymns  whicn  he  does  not  be-. 

N 6 lieve- 

I Page  21, 


r 300  ] 

“ lieve  ?”  There  is  the  miftake.  I da  beheve 
them  ; although  ftill  I will  not  be  anfwerable  for 
every  exprejjion  which  may  occur  therein.  But 
as  to  thofe  exprellions  which  you  quote,  in  proof 
of  final  perfeverance,  they  prove  thus  much,  and 
no  more,  that  the  perfons  who  ufe  them  have  at 
that  time  the  full  affurance  of  hope.  Hitherto 
then  Mr.  Hill  has  brought  no  proof,  that  I coiir 
tradift  myfelf. 

III. 

Of  Imputed  Rightioufnefs.\ 

24.  “ Bleffed  be  God,  we  are  not  among  thofe 
“ who  are  fo  d-ark  in  their  conceptions  and  ex- 
“ preffions.  We  no  more  deny  (fays  Mr.  W.) 
“ the  phrafe  of  imputed  righteoufnefs,  than  the 
“ thing,”  It  is  true:  fori  contintially  affirm, To 
them  that  f aith  is  imputed for  righteouf 

nefs.  And  I do  not  contradicl  this,  in  ftill  deny- 
ing ihat phrafe,  \\\zimputed  righteoufnefs  oJChrif, 
to  be  in  the  bible ; or  in  befeeching  both  Mr. 
Hervey  and  you,  ‘ Not  to  difpute  for  that  parti- 
‘ cular  phrafe' 

But  “ fince  Mr.  W.  blefies  God  for  inlighten- 
“ iiig  him  to  receive  the  docfrine,  and  to  adopt 
“ the  phrafe  of  imputed  righteoufnefs  j how  came 
“ he  to  think  that  clear  conceptions  of  the  doc- 
“ trine  were  fo  unnecefTary,  and  the  phrafe  itfelf 
“ fo  ufelefs,  after  having  fo  deeply  lamented 
dark  conceptions  of  thofe  who  rejefted  the  term 
“ and  the  thing  ?” 


i Page  23,. 


L 30  ] 


It  was  neither  this  term^  The  imputed  righleoup^ 
nefs  of  CJiriji,  nor  the  thing  which  Antinomians 
mean  thereby,  thereje£lion  of  which  I fuppofed 
to  argue  any  darknejs  of  conception.  Butthofe  I 
think  dark  in  their  conceptions,  who  rejeft  either 
the fcriptiiref  hr afe,. Faith  impiUed for  Righteouf- 
ne/s,  or  the  thing  it  means..  > 

G5,  However,  to  prove  his  point,  Mr.  Hill 
goes  on 


The  life  of  the  term 
(the  imputed  righteouf.- 
nefs  of  ChriffJ  is  not 
fcriptural,  it  is  not  ne* 
ceflary ; it  has  done 
immenfe  hurt. 


“ This  doflrine  of  (the 
“ imputed  righteoufuefs 
“ ofChrifi)  I have  con- 
“ flantly  believed  and 
“ taught  for  near  eight 
“ and  twenty  years.” 

“ It  has  done  immenfe  hurt,  fays  Mr.  W.  but 
“ here  is  no  contradifHon.  Whether  there  be 
“ or  not,. there  is  a plain  eonceffion  from  Mr.  W, 
“ himfelf,  that  he  has  been  preaching  a doElrine 
“for  eight  and  twenty  years  together,  which  has 
“ done  immenfe  hurt.'’ 

Let  this  (one  inftance  out  of  an  hundred)  be  a 
fpecimen  of  Mr.  Hill’s  fairnefs  ! The  whole 
ftrength  of  the  argument  depends  on  the  artful 
jumbling  of  two  fentences  together,  and  infert- 
ing  two  or  three  little  words  into  the  latter  of 
them. 

My  words  are,  ‘ § W^e  no  more  deny  the 
' phrafe  (of  imputed  righteoufnefs)  than  the 


thing; 


§ Rexnaiksj  Page  14. 


This- 


r 302  ] 

‘ |[  This  doBrine  I have  believed  and  taught  for 
‘ near  eight  and  twenty  years.’ 

Thefe  diftinft  fentences  Mr.  Hill  is  pleafed  to 
thrufl  together  into  one,  and  to  mend  thus: 

“ This  dodlrine  (oF  the  imputed  righteoufnefs 
“ of  Chrift)  I have  conFFantly  believed  and  taught 
“ for  near  eight  and  twenty  years.” 

And  here,  fays  Mr.  H.  is  a “ plain  conceHion 
“ from  Mr.  W.  himfelf,  that  he  has  been  preach- 
“ ing  a doftrine  for  28  years  together,  whieh  has 
“ done  immenfe  hurt.” 

No,  the  doftrine  which  I believe  has  done 
immenfe  hurt,  is  that  of  the  imputed  righteouf- 
riefs  of  Chrift  in  the  Antinomian  fenfe.  The 
doftrine  which  I have  conftantly  held  and  preach- 
ed is,  that  faith  is  impu  ed  for  righteoufnefs. 

And  when  I have. either  in  that  fcnnon  or 
elfe  where  faid,  that  the  right  eon  fiefs  ofChriJl  is 
imputed  to  every  believer,  I mean,  everv  believer 
isjuftified,  for  the  fake,  of  what  Chrift  has  done 
and  fuflered.  Yetftill  I think,  “ There  is  no  ufe 
in  contending  for  that  particuhir  phrafef'  And 
I fay  ftill,  ‘ I dare  not  infift  upon  it,  becaufe 

* I cannot  find  it  in  the  bible.’ 

To  contradift  this.  Mr.  H.  cites  thefe  words. 
‘ This  is  fully  confiftent  with  our  being  juftlfied, 

‘ through  the  imputation  of  Chrift’s  rlghteouf- 

* nefs.’  Mr.W.’s  notes  oni?<7w.  Iv.  9 Air  H.adds, 
“ Thefe  + two  taken  together,  produce  the  fol- 
“ lowing  conclufion,  that  it  is  ptrjetlly  confjlent 

iO 


i 


f Page  2j. 


[ 3^3  ] 

“ to  fay,  that  we  arejufllfied  by  that,  which  cannot 
“ be  found  in  thebibleJ’ 

That  note  runs  thus  : ‘ Faith  was  imputed  to 
‘ Abraham  for  nghteoafnefs.  This  is  fully  confif- 

* tent  witli  our  being  juftlfied  through  the  impu- 
‘ tation  of  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrifl;  ; that  is^ 

* our  being  pardoned  and  accepted,  of  God,  for 
‘ the  fake  of  what  Chrift  has  done  and  fuffered. 

* For  though  this,  and  this  alone,  be  the  meri- 
‘ torious  caufe  of  our  acceptance  with  God,  yet 
‘ faith  may  be  faid  to  be  imputed  to  us for  right- 
‘ eoufnefs^  as  it  is  the  foie  condition  of  our  ac- 
^ ceptance.’ 

Now  is  there  any  fhadow  of  contradiftion  in 
this  ? Or  of  our  being  juftified^^  that  which  can^ 
not  be  found  in  the  bible  ? 

26.  “ Mr.  W frequently  puts,  the  exprefhon, 
“ imputed  righteoufnefs,  in  the  mouth  of  a whole 
“ congregation,”  Yet  he  fays,  ‘ I dare  not  require 
‘ any  to  ufe  it.’  Hence  Mr.  Hill  deduces  thefe 
two  conclufions  : 

1.  “ That  Mr.  W.  gives  out  fuch  doftrines, 
“ as  he  dares  not  require  any  others  to  bclieveFt. 

By  what  logic  is  this  deduced  ? We  are  not 
fpeaking  of  doElrines  at  all,  but  limply  of  a particu- 
\&v  expreffioiu  And  that  expreffion  is  not,  imputed 
righteoufnefs  ; but  the  imputed  righteoufnefs  of 
Chrilf.’ 

2.  “ That  a whole  congregation  may  have 
“ words  in  their  mouths,  and  yet  be  all JdentF 

Well 


J Page  255 


[ 304  ]' 

Well  inferred  again ! But  did  I fay,  ‘ A whole 
“ congregation  had  in  their  mouths?" 

1 did  not  either  fay  or  fuppofe  it  ; any.  more 
than  that  they  were  all  fiknt. 

“ Will  Mr.  W.  be  ingenuous  enough  to  tell* 
“ me,  Whether  he  did  not  write  this,  when  he 
“ was  la(t  in  a certain  country,  which  abounds 
“with  crajfa  ingeniaf”  I will.  I did  not  write 
tills  in  the  fogs  of  Ireland,  but  in  the  clear  air 
of  Yorkfhire. 

27.  The  two  next  propofitlonsMr.  Hill  quotes* 
are,  ‘ They  to  whom  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrill 
‘ is  imputed,’  (I  mean,  who  truly  believe)  ‘ ara 
‘ made  righteous  by  the  Spirit  of  Chrift,  are  re- 
‘ newed  in  the  image  of  God,  in  righteoufnefs 
‘ and  true  holinefs.’ 

‘ The  nice,  metaphyfical  doftrine  of  imputed 
‘ righteoufnefs,’  (if  it  is  not  carefully  guarded) 

‘ leads  not  to  repentance,  but  to  licentioufnefs.. 

‘ I have  known  a thoufand  Inftances  of  this.’ 

And  where  is  the  contradiHion  between  thefe 
propofitlons  ? “ It  is  juft  this||,’’  fays  hir.  Hill, 
“ That  the  doHrine  of  imputed  righteoufnefs 
“ makes  thofe  who  believe  it  both  holy  and  un- 
“ holy." 

Unfold  the  propofitions  a little  more,  and  then 
let  any  man  judge. 

The  firft  means  juft  this.  They  whom  God 
juftifies,  for  the  fake  of  what  Chrift  has  done  and 
fuSered,  (whether  they  ever  heard  of  that  phrafe, 

imputing 


I Page 


C 305  ] 

imputing  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift,  or  not)  are 
fanftified  by  his  Spirit;  are  renewed  in  the  image 
of  God,  in  righteoufnefs  and  trueholinefs. 

The  fecond  means,  I have  known  very  many, 
who  fo  reded  in  the  doftrine  of  the  righteoufnefs 
of  Chrift  imputed  to  them,  that  they  were  c^uite 
fatisfied  without  any  holinefs  at  all. 

Now  tvhere  is  the  contradiftion  ? 

But  my  inferting  in  my  own  fentence  thofe 
explanatory  words,  ‘ I mean,  who  tnily  believe,’ 
Mr.  H.  calls  an  interpolation,  and  fuppofes  I 
“ mean  to  make  a diftinftion  between  faith  in 
“ Chrift,  and  faith  in  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift.” 
I mean  juft  what  I have  faid  again  and  again, 
particularly  in  the  note  above-cited.  And  this 
is  the  very  thing  which  John  Goodwin  means, 
as  he  declares  over  and  pver. 

^ Mr.  W.  “ winds  up  this  point  of  imputed 
“ righteoufnefs  with  a refolution  which  aftonifhes 
“ me.  That  ‘ he  will  never  more  ufe  the  phrafe, 
“ the  imputed  righteoufnefs  of  Chrif,  unlefs  it  occur 
“ to  him  in  a hymn,  or  fteal  upon  him  una- 
“ wares.”  This  is  my  refolution.  I repeat  once 
more  what  I faid  in  the  Remarks,  ‘ The  thing, 
‘ that  we  are  juftified  merely  for  the  fake  of  what 
‘ Chrift  has  done  z.n6.fufered,  I have  conftantly 
* and  earneftly  maintained  above  four  and  thirty 
‘ years.  And  I have  frequently  ufed  the  phraf, 
‘ hoping  thereby  to  others  for  their  good,  to 

‘ edif  cation.  But  it  has  had  a contrary.elfeft, 
‘ fmce  fo  many  improve  it  into  an  objeftion, 

‘ Therefore 


] 

* Therefore  I will  ufe  it  no  more,  (I  mean,  the 
‘ phrafe  imputed  righteou/nejs : that  phrafe,  the 
‘ imputed  righteoufnefi  of  Ckri/i,  I never  did  ufe.) 

*■  I will  endeavour  to  ufe  only  fuch  phrafes  as 
‘ dire  jlridlly  fcripturalP  And  I will  advife  all  my 
‘ brethren,  all  who  are  in  connexion  with  me 
‘ throughout  the  three  kingdoms,  to  lay  afide 
‘ that  ambiguous,  unfcriptural  phrafe,  f the  im- 
puted  right  e.ou fiefs  of  CkriJiJ  v.hich  is  fo  liable 
‘ to  be  mifinterpreted,  and  fpeak  in  all  inftanccs, 
‘ this  in  particular,  as  the  oracles  of  Godd 

IV. 

0/ a Two-fold  Jufiifcalion:\ 

My  words  cited  as  contradifting  this,  run  thus. 
- 28.  ‘ In  the  afternoon  I was  informed,  how 
‘ many  wife  and  learned  men,  who  cannot  in 
‘ terms  deny  it,  (becaufe  our  anicles  and  homilies 
‘ are  not  yet  repealed)  explain  juftification  by 
‘ faith  :+  They  fay  jullificatlon  is  iw’o-fold,  the 
‘ firfl;  in  this  life,  the  fecond  at  the  lad  day,  &c. 

‘ -In  oppofition  to  this,  I maintain,  T\\aX  the 

' juflification  fpoken  of  by  Gt.  Paul  to  the  Romans, 
‘ and  in  our  articles,  is  not  twm-fold : it  is  one 
‘ and  no  more.’  True.  And  where  do  I contra- 
ditl;  this?  Where  do  I fay,  the  jiijiification  fpok- 
en of  by  St.  Paul  to  the  Romans,  and  in  our  arti- 
cles, is  any  more  than  one  ? The  queftion  be- 
tween them  and  me  concerned  this  jullificatlon, 

and 

+ Page  37.  ^ Page  38. 


[ 307  ] 

and  this  only,  which  I affirmed  to  be  but  one. 
They  averred,  But  there  is  a fecond  juftifica’ 
tion  at  the  laft  day  ; therefore  juftification  is  not 
one  only.  Without  entering  into  that  queftion, 
I replied,  ‘ The  juji^xation  zchereqf  St.  Paul,  and 
* our  articles  /peak,  is  one  only.’  And  fo  I fay 
ftill.  And  yet  I do  not  deny,  that  there  is  ano- 
ther fuflificatiOn  (of  which  our  Lord  fpcak.g)  at 
the  laft  day. 

I do  not  therefore  condemn  the  diftinffion 
of  a two-fold  juftification,  in  faying,  that  fpoken 
of  in  our  articles  is  but  one.  And  this  is  the 
thing  which  I affirmed,  “ in  flat  oppofition  to 
thofe  men,” 

29.  But  “ how  is  it  poffiible  to  encounter  fuch 
“ a man  as  this,  wdthout  watching  him  through 
“ every  line  ? And  therefore  1 wiih  my  readers 
“ would  clofely  compare  the  Remarks  with  the 
“ Review  itfelf:”  (I  defire  no  more.  Whoever 
does  this,  will  eafily  difcern  on  which  fide  the 
truth  lies  :)  “ As  it  is  imprafticable  to  point  out 
“ half  the  little  arts  of  this  kind  which  Mr.  W. 
“ has  ftooped  to.”  That  is,  in  civil  terms,  “ Sir, 
“ you  are  a knave.”  Sir,  I crave  )’our  mercy.  I 
floop  to  no  art,  but  that  of  plain,  found  reafoning. 
By  this  art,  and  by  this  alone,  1 am  able  to  un- 
twill  truth  from  falffiood,  ho'v  fkilfully  foever 
they  are  woven  together.  I dare  ufe  no  other; 
for  (whether  you  know  it  or  no)  I fear  God. 
And  by  his  grace,  in  fimplicity  and  godly  fince- 
rity  I have  my  converfation  in  the  world. 


But 


[ 3o8  ] 

But  how  agrees  this,  with  what  Mr.  W» 
“ tells  us,  that  he  has  never  contradicted  himfelf 
“ with  regard  to-  juftification,  fince  the  year 
“ 173^  it  Perfeftly  well.  “ How  long  has  he 
“ held,  that  juftification  is  four-fold  ?”  I have 
faid  nothing  about  it  yet,  “ And  how  will  he 
“ reconcile  this  with  its  being  two-fold,,  and  with 
his  preceding  affirmation,  that  it  is  one  and  no 
“ moreT'  .When  time  is,  this  inyfiery  too  may 
be  cleared  up. 

V. 

Of  a Jujlifed  ScaU.^ 

30.  Mr.  W.fays,  “ The  fate  of  zjuffed  per- 
“ fon  it  inexpreffibly  great  and  glorious.” 

Yet  he  afks  elfewhere,  “ Does  not  talking  of  a 
' “juftified  or  fanflified  ftate,  tend  to  miflead 
“ men  ?”  He  anfwers,  ‘ It  frequently  does  mif- 
lead men,’  (namely,  when  it  is  fpoken  of  in  an 
unguarded  manner)  ‘ But  where  is  the  contra- 
diftion?’  “ Whatever  may  be  the  contradiftion, 
“ this  is  clearly  the  conclufion,  that  Mr.  W.  by 
“ his  own  confeffion,  is  a mfeader  of  men," 

It  is  not  quite  clear  yet.  You  have  firft  to 
prove,  that  I ufe  the  phrafc  ‘ in  an  unguarded 
manner d I confefs,  when  it  is  fo  ufed,  it  tends 
to  miflead  men ; but  I do  not  confefs,  that  I ufe 
it  fo. 

VI. 

1!  39-  S 34‘ 


[ 3®9  ] 

VI. 

Are  Works  a Condition  of  JuJliJication  ? 

31.  “ Mr.  W.  fays,  ‘ No  good  wor'ks  can  be 
previous  to  juflification.’  And  yet  in  the  fame 
“ page  he  afferts,  ‘ Whoever  defires  to  find  fa- 
“ vour  Vvdth  God,  fliould  ccafe  from  evil,  and 
■“  learn  to  do  well.” 

I anfwered,  + ‘ Does  not  the  bible  fay  fo  ? 

‘ Who  can  deny  it  ? Nay,  but  Mr.  W.  afks.  If 
‘ this  be  not  in  order  to  find  favour,  what  does 
‘ he  do  them  for  ? And  I afic  it  again.  Let  Mr. 
Hill,  or  any  one  elfe,  give  me  an  anfwer.  So 
if  there  is  any  contiadiftion  here,  it  is  not  I 
contradift  myfelf,  but  Ifaiah  and  our  Lord  that 
‘ contradiff  St.  Paul.’ 

Mr.  Hill  replies,  “ Then  a man  may  do  works 
“ in  order  to  find  favour,  and  yet  fuch  works 
“ cannot  be  called  You  may  call  them 

i fo,  if  you  pleafe  : but  be  not  angry  with  7ne,  if 

j I do  not.  I ftill  believe,  no  good  works  can  be 

j done  before  juftification.  Yet  I believe,  (and 
that  without  the  leaft  felf-contradi£lion)  that  final 
falvation  is  ‘ by  works  as  a condition.’  And  let 
any  one  read  over  the  twenty-fifth  chapter  of  St. 
Matthew,  and  deny  it  if  he  can. 

1 ' VIL 


+ Remarks,  Page  Z2. 


[ 310  3 

VII. 

Is  Jiiflificationby  Faith  Articulus  jlantisvd  caden-^ 
tis  ecdejix  ? 

32.  In  the  beginning  of  the  year  1738,  I be- 
lieved it  was  fo.  Soon  after  I found  reafon  to 
doubt.  Since  that  time  I have  not  varied. 
“ Nay,  but  in  the  year  1763  you  fav,  ‘ This  is 
“ the  name  tv’hereby  he  niall  be  called,  The  Lord 
“ our  righteoufnejs.  A truth  this,  of  which 
“ may  be  affirmed,  (tvhat  Luther  affirms  of  a 
truth  nearly  connefled  with  it,  juftincation  by 
“ faith)  it  is  Articulus  ftardis  vel  cadentis  ecclc/icc. 
“ It  is  certainly  the  pillar  and  ground  of  that 
*'■  faith  of  which  alone  eom.eth  falvation.” 

I anfwered,  ||  ‘It  is  certain,  here  is  i feeming 
‘ contradiction  ; but  it  is  not  a real  one  : for 
‘ thefe  two  oppcfite  propofitions  do  not  fpeak  of 
‘ the  fame  thing.  The  latter  fpeaks  of  jujlifica- 
‘ tion  hy  faith  : tlse  former,  oUruJling  in  ike  right- 
‘ eoufnefs  or  merits  of  Chrift.  (Jufllficatlon  bv 
‘ faith  Is  only  mentioned  incidentally  in  a pa- 
‘ renthefis)  Now  although  Mr.  I^vr  denied 
\juftification  by  faith,  he  miglu  trujl  in  the  mc- 
* nts  of  Chrijl.  It  is  tills,  and  tins  only 
‘ that  I affirm  (whatever  Luther  docs)  to  be 
< Articulus  Jlantis  vd  cadentis  ecchfjcd 

But  Air.  Hill  thinks  “ Jullification  bv  faiih, 

“ and 


J P'Se  15- 


jl  Romasks,  Paje  24. 


C 3‘*  ] 

and  by  truftlng  in  the  merits  of  Chrift,  are  all 
one.”  § Be  they  or  not,  I ftill  think,  ‘ Some  may 
doubt  ofjuflification  by  faith,  and  yet  not  pe= 

‘ rifh  everlaftingly.’  Does  Mr.  Hill  judge,  that 
fuch  an  one  cannot  be  fawd  ? That  all  Myftics 
(as  well  as  Mr.  Law)  go  to  hell  ? 

VTII. 

Both  Adams jiu  and  Chrift’s  RighteOujneJs  are 

imputid. 

They  are  ; the  g^ueftion  is  only,  in  what  fenfe  1 
IX. 

Of  M E R I TA 

33.  In  the  Minutes  I fay,  ‘ We  are  rewarded 
according  to  our  works,  yea,  becaufe  of  our 
works,  (Gen.  xxii.  16,  17  ) How  differs  this 
{lomjor  the  fake  oj  our  works  ? And  how  dif- 
‘ fers  this  from  fccundum  mcrita  operurn,  or  as 
‘ our  works  deferve  ? Can  you  fplit  this  hair? 
I doubt  I cannot.’  I fay  fo  ffill.  Let  Mr.  Hill, 
if  he  can. 

‘ And  yet  I ftlJ!  maintain,’  (fo  I added  in  the 
Remarks  -;  fo  I firmly  believe)  ‘ there  it  no  me- 
‘ nt,  taking  the  word  ftriftly,  but  in  the  blood 
‘ of  Chrill  : that  falvation  is  not  by  the  merit  of 
‘ works ; and  that  there  is  nothing  we  are,  or 

‘ have, 

yPage  16.  tPageoS- 


r 3*2  3 

‘ liave,  or  do,  which  can,  ftricliy  fpeaking,  dt- 
‘‘Jerve  the  leaft  thmg  at  God’s  hand.’ 

‘ And  all  this  is  no  more  than  to  fay,  take  the 
‘ word  merit  in  a JiriSt  fenfe,  and  I utterly  re- 
‘ nounce  it take  it  in  a looftr  fenfe,  and  though 
‘ I never  ufe  it,  (I  mean,  I never  afcribe  it  to 
‘ any  man)  yet  I do  not  condemn  it.  Therefore 
^ Vv’ith  regard  to  the  word  merit,  I do  not  contra- 
‘ di£l  myfelf  at  all.’ 

* “ You  never  ufe  the  word  !”  fays  Mr.  Hill. 
“ WTiat  have  we  then  been  difputing  about  ?'’’i 
"VVliv,  about  a firaw : namely.  Whether  there 
be  a fenfe  in  t^’hich  others  may  ufe  that  word 
tvithout  blame. 

But  can  Mr.  Hill,  or  any  one  living,  fuppofe 
me  to  mean,  I do  not  ufe  the  \rord  in  the  pre- 
fent  quellion  ? 

Vv’hat  Mr.  Hill  adds,  is  a mere  play  upon 
words.  “ Does  Mr.  W.  by  this  loofer  merit, 
“ mean  a merit  that  does  not  ?”  Yes.  By 
terming  a workmcritorioiis  in  this  improper  fenfe, 
I do  not  m.ean,  that  it  merits  or  dejerves  a re- 
ward in  the  proper  fenfe  of  the  word.  Inllances 
of  the  word  taken  in  this  improper  fenfe,  oc- 
cur all  over  the  bible. 

* “ This ' is  fhamcfully  evafive.”  No  more 
than  it  is  Greek.  It  is  a plain,  rational,  folid 
diftinflion : and  it  holds  with  regard  to  nuinbcr- 
lefs  words  in  all  languages,  which  may  be  taken 
either  in  a proper  or  mproper  fenfe. 

Wlien 


I Page  36, 


[ 3^3  ] 

When  I fay,  ‘ I do  net  gi'ant,  that  works  are 
* }neTitorious,  even  when  accompanied  by  faith,’ 
i take  that  word  in  a proper  fenfe.  But  others 
take  it  in  an  improper,  as  nearly  equivalent  with 
reu'ar dable.  Here  therefore  I no  more  contra- 
dL£f  Mr.  Fletcher,  than  I do  myfelf.  Lead  of 
all  do  I plead,  as  Air.  Hill  roundly  affirms,  “ for 
iuftification  by  the  merit  of  my  own  good 
works. 

X. 

Of  MARRIAGE.^ 

3q.  “ Mr.  W.  faj's,  his  tlioughts  on  a fingle 
life  are  juft  the  fame,  they  have  been  thefe 
thirty  ) ears.”  (I  mean  with  regard  to  the  ad- 
vantages which  attend  that  date  in  general.) 
“ V/hy  then  did  he  inarrv  ?”  I anfwered  fnort, 
‘ For  reafons  bed  known 'to  hiinfelR’  As  much 
as  to  fay,  I judge  it  extremely  impertinent,  for 
-any  but  a fuperior  to  a!k  me  the  queftion.  So 
the  harmlefs  raillery  which  Mr.  Hill  pleafes  him- 
fclf  with  upon  the  occafion,  may  ftandjuft  as  it 
is. 

XL 

Concerning  D R E S iSf;. 

3^.  “ Mr.  W.  advifes  his  followers  to  wear  no- 
“ thing  oj  a glaring  colour,  nothing  made  in  the 
VoL.  XXIII.  O hdghtk 

\ Page  52.  + Page  39.  + Page  4.0. 


*4 


r 314  ] 

hdghth  of  the  fajhion,  in  order  to  increaft  their 
“ reward,  and  brighten  their  crown  in  heaven’' 

“ Neverthelefs  in  his  letter  to  a Quaker,  he 
“ fays,  ‘ To  make  it  a point  of  confcience,  todif- 
“ fer  from  others,  as  to  the  fhape  and  colour  of 
their  apparel,  is  mere  fuperfihon." 

“ Yet  he  fays,  ‘ So  ladvife;  but  I do  not 
“ make  it  point  of  confcience.'  It  follows,  that 
“ we  are  to  increafe  our  reward,  and  brighten 
“ our  crown  in  heaven,  by  doing  that  which  is 
mere  fuperjiiiion,  and  without  afting  from  a 
point  of  confcienced 

1 fhall  fay  more  on  this  head  than  I other- 
wife  would,  in  order  to  fhew'  ever)-  impartial 
reader,  by  one  inftance  in  a thoufand,  the  man- 
ner wherein  Mr.  H.  continually  dillorts  and 
murders  my  words. 

In  my  advice  to  the  people  called  Metho- 
difls,::];  I fay,  ‘ I would  notadvife  you  to  imitate 
‘ the  people  called  Quakers,  in  thofe  particulari- 
‘ lies  of  drefs,  w’hich  can  anfwer  no  end,  but 
‘ to  dlftinguifh  you  from  all  other  people. 
‘ But  I advife  vou  to  imitate  them  in  plainnefs  : 
‘ 1.  Let  your  apparel  be  cheap,  not  expenfive  ; 
‘ 2.  Let  it  be  grave,  not  gay  or  Ihowy  ; not  in 
* the  point  of  the  falhion.’ 

‘ Would  you  have  a farther  rule  ? Then  take 
‘ one  you  may  always  carry  in  your  bofom.  Do 
‘ every  thing  with  a (ingle  eye,  and  this  will  di- 
‘ reft  you  in  every  circumftance.  Let  a fingle  in- 

‘ tention 

J Ver  nons,  Vol.  IV.  Page  i^8  <5c  feq.  Fiift  Edit. 


[ 3^5  ] 

* tention  to  pleafe  God  prefcribe,  both  what 
‘ cloathing  you  {hall  buy,  and  the  manner  where- 
‘ in  it  fhall  be  made,^  and  how  you  fhall  put  on 
■*  and  wear  it.  In  other  words,  let  all  you  do  in  this 
‘ refpeft,  be  fo  done,  that  you  may  offer  it  to 
‘ God,  a facrifice  acceptable  through  Jefus 
‘ Chrift : fo  that  confequently  it  may  incrtaft 
'■your  reward,  and  brighten  your  crown  in 
‘ heaven^ 

Now  is  there  any  thing  ridiculous  in  all  this  ? 
I would  appeal  even  to  a rational  deifl,  whether 
it  be  not,  upon  the  Chriflian  fcheme,  all  agreea- 
ble to  the  higheft  reafon  ? 

36.  “ But  it  is  inconfiftent  with -what  you  faid 
“ elTe-where,  ‘ To  make  it  a point  of  confcience, 
“ to  differ  from  others,  as  the  Quakers  do,  in 
“ the  fhape  or  colour  of  their  apparel,  is  mere 
“ fuperflition.” 

Not  inconfiflent  at  all.  It  is  mere  fuperftition 
to  make  wearing  a broad-brimmed  hat,  or  a coat 
with  four  buttons,  (the  very  thing  I reierred  to 
in  the  preceding  page)  a point  o’l  confcience, 
that  is,  a thing  neceifary  to  falvation. 

Why  then,  fays  Mr.  Hill,  “ we  are  to  in- 
creafe-our  reward,  and  brighten  our  crown  in 
“ heaven,  by  doing  what  is  mere.  JuperJiition,  and 
without  a£ling  from  a point  of  confcience 
* AV as  ever  fuch  twiding  of  words  ? Has  be 
not  great  reafon  to  cry  out,  “ O rare  Logica  Wef- 
leieiifis!  0_ui  bene  dijiingiiit,  bene  docetl"  I blefs 
God,  lean  diflinguifn  reafon  from  fophillry;  un- 
O 2 kind, 


[ 3<6  ] 

kind,  unjuft,  ungenteel  fophlftry,  ufed  purely 
for  this  good  end,  to  afperfe,  to  blacken  a fel- 
low Cbriftian — becaufe  he  is  not  aCalvinift! 

No,  Sir:  What  I call  fuperftiiion,  and  no 
point  of  confcience,  is  wearing  a Quaker  hat  or 
coat ; which  is  widely  different  from  the  plain- 
nefs  ofdrefs  that  I recommended  to  the  people 
called  Methodifts, 

My  logic  therefore  ftands  unimpeached  ; I wifh 
your  cayidbr  fo  too. 

I would  engage  to  anfwer  every  objection  of 
Mr.  HilTs,  as  fairly  and  fully,  as  this.  But  I 
cannot  fpare  fo  much  time,  I am  called  to  other 
employment. 

And  I Ihould  really  think,  Mr.  Hill  might 
fpend  his  time  better,  than  in  throwing  dirt  at 
his  quiet  neighbours. 

XII. 

Of  T E A.  X 

37.  “ Mr.  W.'publlftied  atraft  again  ft  drinking 
“ tea,  and  told  the  tea-drinkers,  he  would  let 
“ them  an  example  in  that  piece  of  felf- denial.” 

‘ I did  fet  them  an  example  for  twelve  years. 
‘ Then  at  the  clofe  of  a confumption,  by  Dr.  Fo- 
‘ therglll’s  direftion,  I ufed  it  again.’ 

“ Why  then  did  Mix  W.  re-publifli  this  trabl, 
“ making  the  world  believe,  it  brought  a paraly- 

“ tic 


t Page  41. 


[ 317  ] 


tic  diforder upon  him?”  Before  I was  twenty 
years  old,  it  made  my  hand  fiiake,  fo  that  I could 
hardly  write.  “ 'Is  it  not  ftrange  then,  that- Dr. 
“ Fofhergill  fhould  advife  Mr.  W,  to  ufe  what 
“ had  before  thrown  him  into  the  palfy  T did 
not  fay  fo : I never  had  the  palfy  yet ; though 
my  hand  fliook,  which  is  a parahi'ic  diforder. 
But  be  it  ftrange  or  not,  fo  Dr.  F.  advifed ; if 
you  believe  not  me,  you  may  enquire  of  himfelf. 
The  low  wit  that  follows,  I do  not  meddle  v/ith  : 
I leave  it  with  the  gentle  reader, 

XIII.  . 

Of  B A P T I S M.  § 

38.  Mr.  W.  fays,  ‘ As  there  is  no  clear  proof 
‘ {ox  dipping  in  fcripture,  fo  there  is  very  proba- 
‘ ble  proof  to  the  contrarv.’ 

“ Why  then  did  you  at  Savannah  baptize  all 
“ children  by  immerfion,  unlefs  the  parents  cer- 
tified  they  were  weak  ?” 

I anfwered,  ‘ Not  becaufe  I had  any  fcruple, 
‘ but  in  obedience  to  the  rubric.’ 

Mr.  Hill,  according  to  cuftom,  repeats  the 
objeflion,  without  taking  the  leaft  notice  of  the 
anfwer. 

* As  to  the  ftory  of  half  drowning  Mrs.  L.  S. 
let  her  aver  it  to  my  face,  and  I fliall  fay  more. 
Only  obferve,  Mr.  Toplady  is  not“  my  friend.” 
O 3 ' He 

^ Page  4*. 


, [ 3i8  ] 

Heis  all  jour  own  ; your  frined,  ally,  and  fello^r- 
foldier  ; 

Ul  non 

Compqfili  melius  cum  Byiho  Bacchius  ! 

You  are  in  tru;h,  Duo  fulniina  belli.  It  is  not 
ftrange,  if  their  thunder  Ihould  quite  drown  the 
found  of  my  “ poor  pop-guns.  ’ 

39.  “ But  what  furpalfes  every  thing  elfe  is, 
“ that  A!r.  W.  cannot  even  fpeakof  his  contia- 
“ diftions,  without  contradiftinghlmfelf  afrefh. 
“ For  he  abfolutely  denies,  + not  only  that  he 
“ ever  was  unfettled  in  his  principles,  but  that 
“ he  was  everaccufed  of  being  {o, either  by  friends 
“ or  Joes."  Either  by  friends  or foes  ! I will  reft 
the  w'hole  caufe  upon  this.  If  this  be  true,  I am 
out  of  my  wits.  If  it  be  falfe,  wdiat  is  Mr.  Hill? 
An  honefl,  upright,  fenfible  man  ; but  a little 
too  warm,  and  therefore  not  feeing  fo  clearly 
in  this  as  in  other  things. 

My  words  are,  ‘ My  friends  X have  oftner  ac- 
‘ cufed  me  of  being  too  Iliff  in  mv  opinions, 
‘ than  too  flexible.  My  enemies  have  accufed 
‘ me  of  both,  and  of  every  thing  befides.’  Is 
this  “ denying  that  ever  I was  accufed  of  incon- 
“ fiftency  either  by  friends  or  foes  F" 

I do  ftill  deny,  that  Mr.  Delamotte  ||  fpoke  to 
me,  “ of  my  wavering,  unfettled  difpofition.”  But 
“ he  fpoke  to  you,  fays  Mr.  Hill,  of  fomething 
elfe.'"  Tis  very  likely  he  might. 

qo.  Mr. 

i Pages  38,  49.  t Remarks,  Page  39.  ||  Page  43. 


[ m i 


40.  Mr.  W.  is  equally  felf-inconfiftent,  “ witH 
“ regard  to  the  Myftics.  t Thefe  he  tells  us  he 
“ bad  once  in  great  veneration^'  (I  had,  two  or 
three  and  forty  rears  ago)  “ as  the  beji  explain- 
‘‘  trs  of  the  gofpel  of  Chriji,  Yet  afterwards 

he  declares  he  looks  upon  them,  as  one  great 
“ Antichrif.”  I did  look  upon  them  as  fuch 
thirty  years  ago.  But  in  my  Remarks  I fay,  ‘ I 
retradithis.  It  is  far  too  liron^.’  But  obferve,  I 
' never  contradifled  it  till  now. 

But  hotr  does  this  asree  with  Mr.  W.’s  far- 
ing,  “ I never  was  in  the  way  of  Myfticifm  at 
“ all  ?” 

Perfeflly  well : I admired  the  mv flic  writers- 
But  I never  was  in  their  way ; leaving  oflF  the 
the  outward  means. 

■“  But  why  did  Mr.  W.  let  the  expreflioii 
“ Hand  “ Solomon  is  the  chief  of  the  myflics  ? ’ 
Perhaps  becaufe  I thought  it  an  harmlefs  one, 
and  capable  of  a good  meaning.  But  I 'obferve 
again;  Mr.  H.  takes  it  for  granted,  that  I have 
the  corredlion  of  Mr.  Fletcher’s  books.  This  i-s 
a millake  : of  fome  I have ; of  others,  I have 
not. 

41.  Now  comes  the  capital  indance  of  felf-in- 
confiftency.  “ |1  In  1770,  Mn  W.  edeems  the 
“ Minutes  the  ftandard  of  orthodoxy.  In  1771, 
“ he  figns  a paper,  owning  them  to  be  unguard- 
“ ed.  In  1772,  he  tells  us,  he  does  not  know 
“ but  it  would  have  been  better,  not  to  have 

O 4 “ figned 

§ Page  14.  U Pags  13.- 


[ 320  ] 


“ figned  that  paper  at  all !'’  Suppofe  all  this  true^ 
what  will  it  prove  ? Only,  that  I made  a concef- 
iion  which  was  made  an  ill  ufe  of. 

But  “ Mr.  F.’s  defence  makes  poor  Mr.  W. 
“ appear  more  and  more  inconfiitent.  Mr.  W. 
“ declares  the  Minutes  to  be  unguarded:"  (that  is 
not  enough  guarded  againft  cavillers :)  “ Mr.  F. 
“defends  them,  and  ftrives  to  reconcile  them 
“with  the  Declaration.  But. then  comes  Mr. 
“ kV.  and  tells  us,  he  does  not  know,  but  it  had 
“ been  better  not  to  have  figned  it  at  all.”  And 
what  then  ? WJiy  “ hereby  he  intimates,  that 
“ he  has  fixed  a different  fenfe  upon  the  Minutes 
“ from  that  which  they  originally  bore.”  No 
fuch  thing  ; he  intimates  this  and  no  more,  that 
by  that  welhintended  conceffion,  he  had  given 
occafion  to  thofe  who  fought  occafion  of  offence 
againft  him. 

So  all  this  laboured  charge  vanifties  into  air, 
and  no  more  proves  inconfiftency  than  high- 
trcafon. 

We  come  now  to  the  main  point, ; 
the  objeftions  to  which  fpread  almoft  through- 
out the  book.  But  the  queftion  is  not.  Whe- 
ther the  doctrine  be  true  or  falfe  ? But  whether 
I contradifl;  mvfelf  concerning  it  ? 

As  to  what  occurs  in  the  fourth  and  fifth  pages 
it  may  therefore  fuffice  to  fay,  I do  believe 
(as  you  obfervej  that  real  Chrijlians  (meaning 
thofe  that  are  perjedled  in  love)  are  freed  front 

evil 


[ 321  ] 

evil  or  [infill  thoughts.  And  where  doTcontra- 
di£t  this  ? 

P.  lo.  “ You  fay,  I cannot  prove  the  fafls  al- 
“ leriged  againft  forae  profe{Ibrs  of  perfc'^dion. 
“ Indeed  I can.”  If  you  could,  that  would  not 
prove  that  I contradiff  myfelf  on  this  head. 

“ Bat  one  at  Wore — r writes,  ‘ I fend  you 
“ an  account  of  two  or  three  fhocking  inftances 
“ of  bad  behaviour  among  the  profelfors  of  per- 
*•  fefdion  here.”  Perhaps  fo.  But  will  that  prove 
my  inconfiRency  ? 

43.  Awliile  (ince  Mr.  Ma d -related  to 

me  the  whole  floiy  of  Samuel  Wi n.  I know 

not  that  lever  heard  it  before,  but  only  fome 
imperfeft  fragments-  of  it.  The  other  llory,  of 
“ onewhofaid,  the  Hof  Gholf  vifibly  defeend- 
ted  on  all  true  converts,”  may  be  true  for  ought 
I know;  but  I queftion  much,  whether  that  mad- 
man was  a preacher  ? It  may  likewiie  be  true, 
that  feveral  wild  expreffions  were  uttered  at  Weff 
Street  Chapel.  Yet  1 think,  all  tlieie  put  togetlier 
will  not  prove,  that  I contradift  mvfelf. 

Hov/ever,  I am  glad  to  read,  “ If  I piibliOi 
“ another  edition  of  \\\t  Review,  thef  inltances 
“ fhall  all  be  omitted;,  and  perfonai  v'hfi-  eif/oiis 
« fhall  be  left  to  the  foie  pen  of  Mr.  W.”  I aen 
you  will  reduce  your  barrago  to  a page,  and 
your  Review  to  a penny  pamphlet.  But  flill  ’•  -r-. 
Joh  I vAifcmion  will  not  fuit  iijy  pen.  1 have 
better  emplo)  raent  for  it. 

O5 


44.  You 


[ 322  ] 

44*  You  fay,  p.  26.  “ Let  us  now  proceed  to 
“ Mr.  W.!s  all'ertionson  finlcfs  perfection.” 

As  I obferved  before,  I am  not  now  to  difpute 
Whether  they  are  right  or  wrong  ? I keep  there- 
fore to  that  fingle  point.  Do  1 herein  contradift 
myfelf,  or  not  ? 

When  I faid,  ‘ If  fome  of  our  hymns  con* 
traditt  others,’  I did  not  allow,  they  do.  I meaiit 
only,  if  it  were  fo,  this  would  not  prove  that  I 
contradifl  myfelf.  “ But  flill  it  proves,  the  peo- 
“ pie  mull  fing  contradifHons.”  Obferve  ; that 
is,  If 

In  your  account  of  perfeflion,  blot  out  A’b 
wandering  thoughts.  None  in  the  body  are  ex- 
empt from  thefe.  This  we  have  declared  over 
and  over;  particularly  in  the  fennon  wrote  upon 
that  fubjedf. 

If  in  the  fermon  on  Eph.  ii.  8.  (not  xi.  j, 
as  your  blunderer  prints  it)  the  words  which  I 
liad  flruck  out  in  the  preceding  edition,  are, in- 
fected again,  what  will  this  prove  ? Only  that 
the  printer,  in  my  abfence,  printed,  not  fro.na 
the  lad,  but  from  an  uncorrefted  copy.  How- 
ever, you  are  hereby  excufed  from  unfalrne fs,  as 
to  that  quotation.  But  wh-at  excufe  have  you 
in  the  other  Inflance,  with  regard  to  Enoch  and 
Elijah  ? On  which  I afked,  ‘ Why  is  Mr.  Hill 
‘ fo  careful  to  name  the  firll  edition  ? Becaufe 

* in  the  fecond  the  inlftake  is  correBed.  Did  lie 

* know  this  ? And  could  he  avail  himfelf  of  a mif- 

‘ take 


[ 323  ] 

* take  which  he  knew  was  removed  before  he 
‘ wrote  ?’f 

It  is  now  plain  he  could  I Nay,  inftead  of  owning 
his  Linfairnefs,  he  endeavoursto  turn  the  blame  up- 
on me  ! “ You  are  as  inconfiftent  in  your  cenfures 
“ as  in  vouf  doftrines  ; you  blame  me  for  quot- 
“ ingthe  lall  edition  of  your  fermon ; whereas 
“ you  call  me.  to  account  for  quoting  the fir  ft  edi- 
“ tion  of  your  notes,  concerning  Enoch  and  Eli- 
“ jah  : each  of  whom  you  have  proved,  by  a 
“ peculiar  rule  of  Foundery-Logic,  to  be  both  in 
“ heaven  and  out  of  heaven.”  So  witjtout  any 
remorfe,  nay,  being  fo  totally  unconcerned  as  even 
to  break  jefts  on  the  occalion,  you  again  ‘ avail 
‘ yourfelf  of  a miflake  which  ) ou  knew  was  re- 
‘ moved  before  you  v.?rote.  ’ 

45.  But  Mr.  W.  “ hath  both  ftruck  out  fome 
“ words,  and  put  in  others,  into  the  fermon.” — - 
This  is  a common  complaint  with  Mr.  Hill; 
on  which  therefore  it  is  needlul  to  explain. 

I generally  abridge  what  I anlwer  ; which  can- 
not be  done  svithout  flrikinr  out  all  unelTentlal 
words.  And  I generally  put  in  to  quotations 
from  my  owm  writing',  fucdi  words  as  I judge 
Will  prevent  miffakes. 

Now  to  the  contradiHions. 

‘ If  we  fav  we  have  no  fm  noxF Temaining,  'I 

* mean,  after  we  are  judifiedj  w’e  deceive  our- 

* felves.’ 

I believe  this  : and  yet  I believe 

O 6 

i Remarks,  Page  29. 


* Sin 


C 324  ] 

‘ Sin  fhall  not  always  in  our  fiefli  remain^ 

Again,  * Many  infirmities  do  remain.’ 

This  I believe  : and  I believe  alfo 
* He  that  is  born  of  God,  keepelh  himfelf, 
‘ 1 John  V.  18.)  fmneth  not  by  infirmities,  whe- 
‘ ther  in  aft,  word  or  thought.’ 

I believe  likewife,  that  in  thofe  perfefted  in 
iove, 

‘ No  wrinkle  of  infirmity 
‘ No  fpot  of  fin  remains.’ 

My  brother,  at  the  bottom  of  the  page,  exprefsly 
favs,  ‘ No  fiinjul  infirmity.’  So  whether  this  be 
fcriptural  or  not,  here  is  no  contradiftion. 

I have  fpoken  fo  largely  already  concerning 
fins  of fiurprize  and  infirmity,  that  it  is  quite  need- 
fefs  to  add  any  more.  I need  only  refer  to  the 
Remarks,  at  the  thirty-fourth  and  following  pages. 
q6.  But  to  go  on. 

' I wrcflle  not  now.’ 

This  is  an  expreffion  of  my  brother’s,  which  I 
do  not  fubfcrife  to. 

* We  wreflle  not  with  flefh  and  bfood,’ 

“ This  he  allows  to  be  his  ov.m.”J 
Indeed  I do  not : although  it  is  true,  ‘ the 
‘ peiual  war  v;hich  I fpeak  of  in  the  note  on  Eph. 

‘ vi. 


% Page  30 


[ 3^5  ] 

* vl.  13.  is  a war  with  principalities  and powers,  but 
‘ not  wvh  JleJh  and  blood.’  “ But  either  way  Mr^ 

»“  John  is  ftuck  fall,  in  the  mire.  For  in  his  isle- 
“ marks  he  contraditls  Ins  brother  : in  his'  Anno- 
“ tations  he  contraditls  himfeli : and  in  his  Hymn 
“ he  contraditls  both  his  brother  and  himfelf.” 

Mr.  John  is  not  quite  /luck  fajl.  yet : for  this  is. 
a miflake  from  beginning  to  end.  1.  I do  not 
eontradifl:  my  brother  in  my  Remarks.  In  faying^ 
‘ I do  not  fubfcrihe  to  that  expreflion,’  I mean,  I 
do  not  make  it  my  own  I do  not  undertake  to 
defend  it.  Yet  neither  do  I enter  the  lifts  againft 
it:  it  is  capable  of  a found  meaning.,  2.  Ido 
not  contradifl  niyfelf  in  the  note-,  let  him  prov'e 
it  that  can.  3.  I contradift  nobody  in  the  hymn  ; 
for  it  is  not  mine. 

Again.  ‘ I never  faid,'  While  one  evil  thought 
‘ can  rife,  I am  not  horn  again.  My  brother 

* faid  fo  once : but  he  took  the  words  in  too- 
‘ high  a fenfe.’  I add,  and  irra  fenfe  not  warrant- 
ed by  the  bible.  And  yet  I believe,  that  ‘ real 
‘ Chrijlians,  I mean  thofe  perletted  in  love,  are 

* freed  from  evil  or  finjul  thoughts.’ 

“ But  is-  not  a babe  in  Chrift  born  again?  Is 
“ he  not  a real  Chnjhan  ?”  He  is  doubtlefs  borm 
again;  and  in  fome  fenfe  he  is  a real  Chriftian  ; 
but  not  in  the  fenfe  above  defined. 

47.  We  come  now  to  the  additional  contradic- 
tions which  Mr.  Flill  undertakes  to  find  in  rny 
writings.  They  are  already  dwindled  into  one: 

and 


[ 3^6  ] 


and  I hope  to  fhew  quickly,  this  one  is  none  at 
all It  dands  thus. 

• Mod;  exprefs  are  the  words  of  St.  John,  We 
‘ know,  that  whofnevtr  is  horn  of  God,  finneth  not.' 

‘ Indeed  it  is  faid,  this  means  onh , he  doth 
* jiot  commit  fin  wilfully  or  habitually.' 

(Obferve.  I do  not  deny  the  text  to  mean 
this  ; but  I deny  that  it  means  this  only) 

As  a contradiftion  to  this,  Mr.  Hill  places 
thele  words  in  the  oppofite  column. 

‘ The  apollle  John  declares,  Whofever  is  born 
‘ of  God  finneth  not,  i.  By  any  habitual  fm; 
‘ nor,  2.  by  any  wilful  fin.’  True  ; but  do  I fay, 
the  apollle  means  this  only?  Otherwife  here  is 
no  contradi£tion.  So  although  you  have  got  the 
gallows  ready,  you  have  not  turned  off  o.W  dfor- 
decai  yet.  As  )'ou  fo  frequently  give  me  that  ap- 
pellation, I for  once  acrept  of’vour  favour. 

q8.  “ Before  1 quit  this  fubjefl”  (of  perfection) 
“ I cannot  help  expreffing  my  aftonilhment,  that 
“ Mr.  W.  Ihould  deny  that  his  tenets  on  that 
“ p>oint  exaCtly  harmonize  with  thofe  of  the  po- 
pilh  church  ; fmce  all  the  decrees  and  books 
“ that  have  been  pubhfhed  by  the  Roman  cTigy, 
“ prove  this  matter  beyond  a doubt.’" 

I believe,  vou  have  been  told  fo.  But  you 
fhould  not  alfert  it,  unlefs  from  perfonal  know- 
ledge. “ Alexander  Rofs  fays  l^o.’’  What  is 
Alexander  Rofs?  Seeivith  your  own  eyes.  “ Mr. 
“ Hervey  too  gives  an.  account  of  Lindeniis  and 
“ Andradius.”  Second-hand  evidence  ilill.  Have 

you 


[ 327  J 


you  feen  them  yourfelf  ? Olherwife  you  ought 
not  to  allow  their  teitimony.  * “ As  to  that- 
“ mofl  excellent  and  evangelical  work,”  as  you 
term  it,  the  eleven  letters  afcribed  to  Mr.  Her- 
vey,  Mr.  Sellon  has  abundautly  fiiewn,  that  they 
are  moft  excellently  virulent,  fcurrilous  and  abu- 
Cve  ; and  full  as  far  from  the  evangelical  fpirit, 
as  the  Koran  oi  Mahomet. 

“ But  Bilhop  . Cowper”- 1 objeft  to  him, 

befide  his  being  a hot^  bitter  Calvinifl,  that  he  is 
a dull,  heavy,  lliallow  writer.  And  let  him  be 
what  he  may,  all  you  cite  from  him,  is  butfe- 

cond-hand  authority. “ Kay,  I refer  to  the 

bilhop ’s  own  words.”  But  ffill  you  have  only’^ 
the  words  at  fecond  hand.  In  order  to  know  the 
tenets  of  the  church  of  Rome,  you  mull  read 
the  Rornifli  authors  therafelves.  Nay,  it  does 
not  iutnce  to  read  their  own  private  authors. 
They  will  difown  any  thing  we  charge  them  with, 
unieis  we  can  prove  it,  by  recurring  to  their  pub- 
lic and  authentic  reyogJ^i.—B-uch  are  the  Canones 

Decreia  Concilii  Tridentim.'’  Such  the  “ Cate- 
“ cki/ms  ad  Parochos.”'  Till  you  have  read  thefe 
at  leaft,  you  flrould  never  undertake  to  deter- 
mine what  is,  or  what  is  not  popery. 

49.  “ But  as  I am  now  on  the  fubjedf  of  po- 
“ pery,  + I muff  make  a few  animadveiTions  on 
“ what  Mr.W.  affirms,  ‘ I always  thought  the  te- 
“ nets  of  the  church  of  Rome,  were  nearer  by 
“ half  to  Mr.  Hill’s  tenets,  than  to  Mr.  W.’s’* 

Nay, 


'■J-  Page  3 3 


C 3^8  ] 

Nay,  give  the  honour  of  this  to  its  true  author ; 
Mr.  Hill  goes  to  confult  a Popifli  friar  at  Paris,  a 
Beaedi6tine  Monk,  one  Father  Wallh,  concern- 
ing the  Minutes  of  the  Conference.  Father  Walfh 
(Mr.  Hill  fays  ; and  I fee  no  reafon  to  fcruple 
his  authority  here  aflures  him,  that  the  \Iinutes 
contain  falfe  doftrine;  and  that  the  tenets  of  the 
church  of  Rome  aie  nearer  by  half  to  his  Mr. 
Hilfs)  tenets  than  they  are  to  Mr.  W.’s  fSo 
hir.  Fiiil  himielf  informs  the  world,  in  the  Paris 
Converfaiion,  of  lamous  memory  ; which  I real- 
ly think,  he  would  never  have  publifhed,  unlefs 
as  the  vulgar  fay,  the  devil  had  owed  him  a 
fhanie  ) I add,  ‘ Trulv  I always  thought  fo.’  But 
I am  the  more  confirmed  thereiji,  by  the  autho- 
ritv  of  fo  competent  a judge  ; efpecially  hen 
his  judgment  is  publicly  delivered  by  fo  unexcep-f 
tionable  a witnefs., 

50.  Nay,  but  “ you  know  the  principles  of 
“ the  Pope  and  of  John  Calvin  are  quite  op- 
“ pcfite  to  each  other.”  I^do  not  know,  that  they 
are  oppofite  at  ail  in  this  point.  Many  Popes 
have  been  either  Dominicans  or  Bcnediflines. 
And  many  of  the  Benedictines,  with  all  the  Do- 
minicans, areas  firm  predeftinarians  as  Calvin 
himfelf.  M hether  the  prefcnl  poj  e is  a Domi- 
nican, I cannot  tell;  If  he  is  he  is  iar  neaicr 
your  tenets  than  mine. 

Let  us  make  the  trial  with  regard  to  >our  ten. 
propofitioiis. 


1.  “ You. 


C 329  ] 


1. “  You  deny  f/fc- 
ti  ou . 

2.  “ You  deny^gr- 
'Jiverance, 

3.  “ You  deny  im- 
puted righteoiifiiefs. 

4.  “ You  hold  fm-XD 
Rome.”  No,  not  as  I 1 
dellinarian  ; otherwife) 
I to  grace.. 


So  does  the  pope  of 
Rome.”  I know  not 
that.  Probably  he  holds 

It. 

So  does  the  pope  of 
Rome.”  That  is  much, 
to  be  doubted. 

Perhaps,  the  Pope 
of  Rome  does  ; but 
lalTert  it  cominuaily. 

III.  So  does  the  pope  of 
lo  (unlefs  he  is  a pre- 
he  afcribes  Lt  to  nature^ 


5‘  “ You  hold,  that 
works  are  a condition 
of  juftification. 

. 6.  “ You  hold  a two- 
fold jujlification,  one 
now,  another  at  the 
lad  d<iy. 

7-  “ You  hold  the 
dotlrine  of  merit. _ 

8.  » You  hold  fin- 
tejs  perjediori. 

9.  “ You  hold,  that 
fins  arfe  only  infirmi- 
ties. 


j If  you  mean  good 
I works,  I do  not. 

I So  does  the  pope  of 
I Rome.”  And  fo  do  all 
Proteftants,  if  they  be- 
lieve the  bible. 

I do  not.  Neither 
does  the  Pope,  if  father 
I WalQi  fays  true. 

! So  does  the  Pope.” 

I I deny  that.  How  do 
you  prove  it  ? 

I hold  no  fuch  thln^. 

I _ ^ 

And  you  know  it  well. 


10.  " You 


[ 33^  ] 

lo.  “ You  diflin-  Notfo;  I abhor  the 
guifh  between  venial  diflinCtion. 
and  mortal  fins.” 

Now  let  _ every  man  of  underRanding  judge. 
Whether  father  Walfh  did  not  fpeak  the  very 
truth  ? 

51..“  This  pamphlet  was  finilhed,  + when  I 
“ was  told,  that  Mj-.  W.  had  lately  a very  re- 
“ markable  dream,  which  awakened  him  out  of 
“ a found  fleep.  This  dream  he  communicated  to 
“ hisfociety.  It  was  in  fubftance  as  follows.  A 
“ brig,  rough  man  came  to  him,  and  gave  hinr 
“ a violent  blow  upon  the  arm  with  a red-hot 
“ iron.” 

“■  New  the  interpertation  thereofi  conceive  to 
“ be  as  follows  : 

1.  “ The  big,  rough  man,  is  Mr.  Hill  : 

2. '  “ The  bar  of  iron  (red-hot  !)  is  Logica  lVef~ 
“ leienfs : 

3.  “ The  blow  denotes  the  fiock  which  Mr. 
“ John  will  receive  hv  the  faid  pamjihlet  : 

a.,  “ His  being  awakened  out  of  a found Jleep, 
“ fignifies  there  is  yet  hope,  that  he  will  fome 
\ “ time  or  other  come  to  the  right  ufe  of  his  fpiri- 

“ tual  faculties.” 

Pretty  and  well  devifed ! And  though  it  is 
true  I never  hadanyfuch  dreamfincel  was  born, 
yet  I am  obliged  to  the  inventor  of  it  ; and  that 
on  many  accounts. 

I am  obliged  to  him. 


■t  Piige6i. 


1.  For 


[ 331  ] 

1.  For  fending  againft  me  only  a big,  rough 
man  : it  might  have  been  "a  lion,  or  a bear  ; 

2.  For  direfllng  the  bar  of  iron  only  to  my 
arm  ; it  might  have  been,  my  poor  fcull  : 

3.  For  letting  the  big  man  give  me  only  one 
blow  ■ had  he  repeated  it,  1 had  been  (lain  out- 
right : and, 

4.  For  hoping  I fliall,  fome  time  or  other, 
come  to  the  right  ufe  of  my  fpiritual  facul- 
ties. 

52.  Perhaps  Mr.  Hill  may  expeft,  that  I 
fhould  make  him  fome  return  for  the  favour  of 
his  heroic  poem,  But 

“ Certes  I have,  for  many  days. 

“ Sent  my  poetic  herd  to  graze.’' 

And  had  I not,  I fltould  have  been  utterly  unable 
to  prefenthim  with  a parallel.  Yet  upon  reflec- 
tion, I believe  I can,  although,  I own,  it  is 
rather  of  the  lyric,  than  the  heroic  kind.  And 
becaufe  podibly  he  may  be  inclined  to  write 
notes  on  this  too,  I v/111  tell  him  the  origin  of  it. 
One  Sunday,  immediately  after  fermon,  my  fa- 
ther’s clerk  faid,  with  an  audible  voice,  “ Let  us 
“ fmg  to  the  praife  and  glory  of  God,  An  hymn 
“ of  mine  own  compofing.”  It  was  fhort  and 
fw'eet,  and  ran  thus  ; 

“ King  William  is  come  home,  come  home  : 

“ King  William  home  is  come  ! 


“ Therefore 


[ 332  ] 


“ Therefore  letus  together  fing 

“ The  hymn  that’s  call’d  Te  D'uin  !”’ 

53.  Before  I conclude,  1 beg  leave,  in  my  turn,, 
to  give  vou  a few  advices. 

And  1.  Bt  calm.  Do  not  venture  into  the 
field  again,  till  you  are  mafierofyour  temper. 
You  know,  the  zvrath  of  man  zvorhtth  not  lie 
righteoujnefs,  neither  promotes  the  truth,  of 
God. 

2.  BjO.  good  natured.  PalTion  is  not  commend- 
able ; but  ill-nature  flill  lefs.  Even  irrational  an- 
ger is  more  excufable  \\\o.x\.  bit‘ernefs,  lefs  offenfive 
to  God  and  man. 

3.  Be  courteous.  Skew  good  manners  as  well  as 
good-nature  to  your  opponent  of  whate^'er  kind. 

“ But  he  is  rude.’’  You  need  not  be  fo  too.  If 
you  regard  not  him,  “ Reverence  yourfclf.” 

Abfolutely  contrary  to  this,  is  the  erving  out 
at  every  turn,  “ Quirk,  fophiilry,  evafion!”’ 
IiT  controverfv  thefe  exclamations  o;o  for  nothing’. 
This  is  neither  better  nor  worle  than  calling 
names. 

4.  Be  merciful.  M'hen  you  Irave  gained  an  ad- 
vantage over  ) our  opponent,  do  not  prefs  it  to 
the  uttermofe.  Remember  the  honed  Quaker’s 
advice  to  his  friend  a few  years  ago,  “ Art  thou 
“ not  content  to  las  JohnWcfl  y upon  his  back, 

“ but  thou  wilt  ti'ead  his  g’jts  out  ? ’ 

5.  In  writing  do  not  confider  yourfelf  as  a 
man  of  fortune,  or  take  any  liberty  v/ith  others 

on 


[ 333  ] 

■^on  that  -account.  Thefe  diftinftions  weigh  little 
mo,re  in  the  literary  world,  than  in  the  world  of 
• dp  hits.  Men  of  fenfe  fimply  co.nfider,  what  is 
written  ; not  whether  the  writer  be  a lord  or  a 
coaler  ? 

Lailly,  Remember,  For  every  idle  word  men 
Jhuil /peak,  they Jlial!  give  an  account-  in  the  da:  (]f 
judgment.  Remember,  bv  thy  words jlialt  thou  be 
jujiified  ; or  by  thy  words  Jlialt  thou  be  condemned  < 

Bristol,  March  14, 

^773- 


A SHORT 


[ 334  ] 


A SHORT 

A C C O U N T 

O F 

JOHN  DILLON. 


By  Mr.  Johnfon"-s  advice,  I will  endeavour 
to  leave  foine  little  account  of  myfelf  be- 
hind me.  But  1 muft  be  very  brief:  my  weak- 
nefs  being  fuch,  that  I cannot  fay  much  at  once. 

1 was  born  in  the  army,  and  received  bis 
Majefly’s  pay  at  about  fourteen'years  of  age,  be- 
longing to  General  Montague’s  regiment.  In 
the  year  1746  I was  called  abroad,  and  was  in 
the  battle  of  Dettingen,  in  the  midft  of  the 
French  Gens  d’arms  and  Gard  a corp,  which 
W'ere  cutting  down  our  men  on  every  fide.  Yet 
not  a hair  of  my  head  was  hurt : but  I was  no-  [ 

thing 


[ 335  ] 

thing  affefled  either  by  the  danger  or  the  deli- 
verance. 

At  the  battle  of  Fotinteno}'',  thoufands  fell  on 
my  right  and  my  left.  I was  taken  prifoner,  but 
had  not  one  wound.  This  did  affedt  me  deeply, 
and  I folemnly  refolved,  to  lead  a new  life.  .But 
if  was  in  my  own  llrength,  fo  that  after  a few 
weeks  I was  the  fame  man  as  before. 

Another  danger  I was  in,  from  which,  hu- 
manly fpeaking,  it  was  fcarce  poffible  to  efcape. 
We  were  fourteen  regiments  of  Englilln  Hano- 
varian  and  Dutch,  who  were  left  near  Maeftricht, 
to  cover  the  retreat  of  our  grand  army.  The 
next  morning,,  about  nine  o’clock,  w'e  faw  the 
French  grand  army  near  us,  who  advanced  in 
good  order.  We  had  thrown  up  a little  brea^- 
work  in  our  front  the  night  before.  From  this 
we  kept  a conilant  fire,  with  grape-lhot  from  our 
cannon,  and  fmalJ  fiiot  from  otir  mulketry : 
-numbers  of  them  were  killed,  but  they  continu- 
,ally  fupplied  their  places  with  frefh  men,  till 
coming  up  to  our  breaft-work,  they  pouted  their 
•fire  all  upon  us  at  once.  W e were  then  obliged 
to  make  the  befl  or  our  way,  to  a plain,  where 
we  expedled  to  find  our  grand  ai'my.  But  they 
had  marched  the  night  before,  near  twelve  miles, 
and  had  palfed  the  river  Mayne.  Yet  a few  of 
us  v,rere  enabled  to  overtake  them;  though  when 
we  came  out  of  the.  field,  the  ftrongeft  company 
:in  our  regiment  could  mufter  only  eleven  out  of 
. feventy 


C 336  ] 

feventy  men.  Yet  I continued  in  open  re- 
bellion againft  God,  till  the  war  broke  out  again. 

It  was  on  March  27,  1^44,  that  I married  at 
Preftonin  Lancafhire.  Some  years  after  Gene- 
ral Montague,  Lieutenant  Colonel  before,  being 
preferred  to  a regiment,  made  me  his  Drum 
Major,  but  told  me,  uniefs  I left  off  cards,  he 
would  fend  me  about  my  bufmefs.  1 did  leave 
them  off;  but  in  other  things  was  as  bad  as  ever, 
till  we  were  ordered  for  Ireland,  and  Rationed  at 
Cork.  *But  1 \vas  not  eafy.  Fearful  thoughts 
followed  me.  1 often  wifned,  that  there  was  no 
God,  or  that  1 had  no  foul.  Yet  I went  on  in 
fm:  although  frequently  in  the midftofmy  drinking 
^and  Rnging  obfcene  fongs,  I have  been  fuddenly 
flVuck;  my  countenance  changed,  and  I could 
not  open  my  mouth.  I then  made  frefh  refolu- 
tions ; but  when  frefn  temptations  came  they  va- 
nifhed  awav.  So  I continued  in  fm,  though  as 
weary  of  fm  as  the  Ifraelites  of  their  Egyptian 
bondage.  I was  in  this  Rate,  when  I had  two 
fits  of  ficknefs,  in  each  of  which  1 vebem.emlv 
promifed  amendment;  but  alraoR  as  foon  as 
they  were  over,  I returned  as  a dog  to  tlie 
vomit. 

During  mv  recovery  from  a third  fit  of  fick- 
nefs, the  Holy  Spirit  began  to  work  powerfully 
in  me,  bringing  all  m\-  fins  to  my  remembrance, 
which  had  been  from  mv  very'  childhood.  Now 
the  conRant  cry'  of  mv  heart  was,  “ What  muR 
1 do  to  .be  faved  ?”  And  as  foon  as  I go  better,  1 

went 


p "3 

[ 337  J 

went  to  chmrcli  every  day  : but  ^vliencver  the 
commandments  were  read  in  the  communion  fer- 
vice,  I was  cut  to  the  heart,  and  at  the  end  of  each 
my  cry  was,  “ Guilty,  O God!  I am  the  man! 
But  have  mercy  upon  me,  and  I will  never  do 
fo  any  more/’ 

I continued  thus  for  about  eight  or  ten  davs : 
when  on  Friday,  Oft.  ii,  17,57,  in  the  forenoon 
the  curate  read  (the  fecond  lellon)  the  1,5th  of 
St.  Luke.  From  the  beginning  of  the  chapter 
I found'  that  cloud  which  was  on  mv  fSul  begin 
to  give  tvav-  At  the  loth  verfe  my  defpair  al- 
rnoft  pall  awav,  and  the,  tears  began  to  fiow  from 
,my  eyes.  Yet  I was  not  fitis.^ed  : I thought 
fomething  was  wanting,  but  could  not  tell  what 
it. was.  I felt  aftraitners  in  my  heart  : but  at  the 
beginning  of  the  parable  ol  the  prodigal,  I was 
all  attention.  I do  not  remember,  that  one  thought 
wandered  from  the' narrative  wlule  it  was  read- 
ing; I found  myfelf  the  very'  man.  With  my 
whole  heart  I joined  in  that,  I u'lll  arije  and  go 
v.nto  ?ny  father . My  heart  now  began  to  foften 
much  more  ; and  from  the  iptli  to  the  end  of  the 
23d  verfe,  I found  all  within  me  juld  like  wax 
mcltinst  before  the  lire.  And  when  thofe  words 

O 

svere  read.  This  my  fon  u'as  dead,  and  is  alive 
■again  ; he  teas  If  I and  is  found,  my  foul  was 
fully  fet  at  liberty,  from  all  guilt  and  condemna- 
tion for  pafl  fins.  My  heart  rejoiced  in  God  my 
Saviour,  and  mv  mouth  broke  out  in  hoh^ 
nraife.  I came  home  rejoicing  to  my  wife,  and 
VoL.  XXIIL  P told 


[ 33«  ] 

told  her,  I believed  fome  good  thing  had  hap- 
peiid  to  me.  I could  then  exprefs  invfeif  in  no 
better  manner  : for  I did  not  underfiand  what 
juflification  meant. 

I had  not  continued  in  this  joy  many  days 
when  Satan  came  upon  me  like  a flood,  charged 
me  alrefli  with  all  my  fins,  and  told  mm,  there 
M'as  no  pofllbility  of  my  being  faved.  1 his  funk 
me,  very  low.  I went  to  the  curate  and  told  him 
all  my  trouble.  He  bid  me,  “ Not  be  afraid,  for 
all  would  be  well.”  I went  away  pretty  Avell  con- 
tented. But  I had  not  beenlontjat  home  before 
Satan  began  to  tempt  me  another  way.  He  fug- 
gefled.  That  the  bible  was  but  a cunningly  devif- 
ed  fable  : that  there  Was  no  Chrill,  yea,  no  God. 
The  temptation  was  the  heavier,  becaufe  I had 
no  man  to  open  my  mind  to.  But  the  Lord  was 
with  me  in  my  temptation,  and  gave  me  the  con- 
folation  of  his  fpitit ; which  tho’  not  continuing 
long  at  a time,  yet  gently  refrelhed  my  foul. 

After  fome  time,  a maid  fervant  of  our  colo- 
nel, obferving  a change  in  my  life  and  converfa- 
tion  came  to  my  room,  and  after  a little  dilcourfe 
afkedme,  “ If  I w-ould  go  with  hcrtohearthe 
IMeiliodifls  ?”  I told  her  what  a blelTinglhad 
found  at  church,  and  faid,  1 did  not  care  to  go 
anv  where  elfe.  But  fome  days  after,  another 
w'oman  importuned  me  much.  I promife<l,  I 
would  go  once.  1 tvent  w ith  her  to  hear  hir. 
Trembath,  and  was  wonderfully  pleaft  d,  to  hear 
him  preach  without  book.  Yet  it  tvas  fome  time 

before 


[ 339  J 

before  I went  to  hear  again.  In  the  mean  time  I 
was  overcom.e  by  one  of  my  befetting  fins,  anger. 
For  a mere  trife,  I fpoke  haftily  to  my  wife, 
and  continued  for  fome  time  in  a violent  paflion. 
My  peace  was  gone  ; the  vifitations  of  the  Holy 
One  were  withdrawn,  and  my  foul  covered  with 
darknefs  and  horror.  What  to  do,  I could  not  tell  : 
I would  have  done  any  thing,  to  regain  what  I 
had  loft.  When  I was  advifed  to  go  and  hear 
the  Methodifls  again,  1 readily  w^ent,  and  hear- 
ing the  preacher  fay,  y^//  jnanner  of  fins  fliallbe 
forgiiJen  unto  man  ; only  let  him  come  to  Chrift 
my  hope  fo  fweetly  revived,  that  I had  no  more 
occafion  to  be  alked  to  hear  the  Methodifts,  I 
now  longed  for  every  opportunity  of  hearing. 
And  the  people,  feeing  a ftranger  attend  fo  clofe, 
came  to  me  after  preaching,  firft  one,  then 
another  talking  of  the  things  of  God,  encouragr 
ing  me  to  go  on,  and  always  pointing  me  to 
Chrift.  After  a time,  I wanted  to  fee  the  man- 
ner of  their  meeting  together  in  a clafs.  I met  in 
one,  and  foon  after  joined  the  fociety. 

In  a few  days  the  Lord  vifited  my  foul  and  re- 
ftored  the  lidit  of  his  countenance.  I walked 

O 

comfortably  again,  praHing  and  adoring  God. 
But  it  was  not  long,  before  I was  grievoufly  at- 
tacked by  the  enemy,  concerning  the  divinity  of 
Chrift  ; and  the  more  I reafoned  with  him,  the 
more  I was  perplexed.  At  length  I faw,  Itwas  e- 
nough  for  me,  to  reft  in  that  general  declaration. 
There  are  three  that  hear  record  in  heaven,  and. 

P 2 theje 


[ 340  ] 

ihefe  thr-te  are  one.  J was  then  cleliv'ered  from 
the  force  of  the  temptation,  which  never  alter 
returned  with  tlie  fame  violence. 

By  the  time  I had  heard  the  preaching  about  a 
) ear,  I was  clearly  convinced,  that  altho’ juftifi- 
cation  was  an  invaluable  blefTmg,  yet  without 
lanftrfication,  without  tlte  mind  which  was 
in  Chrili,  I was  not  meet  for  heaven.  Indeed 
there  is  not  the  leafl  doubt,  but  every  child  of 
God  who  endures  unto  the  end,  flrallbe  put  into 
pofTefrion  of  this  : feeing  he  hath  proinifedwho 
cannot  lie.  Bnt  how  long  or  how  fhort  a time 
before  death,  thistvasto  be  expected',  I could  not 
tell.  I had  heard  that  manv  in  London  had  ob- 
tained this,  and  many  more  were  expefling 
it  continually.  I confidered,  it  was  of  or 
by  u'oi  Jis,  but  the  Iree  gift  of  God  ; that  the 
heart  is  purified  by  faith  alt  things  ^ m 

Chrifl,  arenozu  ready.  I was  conviticed,  that  God 
may  do  what  he  pleafes  with  his  own,  if  he  could 
give  it  at  the  article  of  death,  fo  he  might  give 
it  lo,  20  or  30  minutes,  or  as  many  years  before 
death.  I found  a ftrong  defire  to  be  a partaker  of 
it,  and  began  to  pra\'  for  it  with  my  whole  heart. 
But  it  was  fuggeflcd,  “ \ouhavc  not  been  jufti- 
liedlong  enougii  yet,  to  e>cpe6f  fo  great  ablelling:  ’ 
and,  “ Such  an  unworthy  unlaithful  wretch  as 
you,  cannot  expetf  fuch  a favour  from  God.  ’ 
And  hereby  I was  prevailed  upon  to  give  up  my 
earneft  purfuit  of  it.  At  other  times,  when  I 
have  been  juft  grafping  the  blefiing,  I have  been 

turned 


[ 34i  ] 

timed  back  by  another  fuggeftion,  “ Not  7iow  : 
you  cannot  receive  it  now  ; you  are  not  earnejl 
enough.”  But  I have  always  remarked,  that  when; 
I gave  up  the  earneft  expefling  it  now,  my  foul 
grew  barren  and  lifelefs. 

I continued  thus  for  near  two  years,  whea. 
Mr.  Wtjley  come  to  Limencl,  where  the  regi- 
ment I was  in  then  lay,  juft  before  the  ground  lor 
the  pieaching-houfe  was  taken.  Under  his- 
lirft  fermon,  on,  Now  is  ike  day  af  Jalvation.^ 
I was  ftirred  up  more  than  everi  I faid,  if  I cam 
only  believe,  I lhall  obtain  the  prize  : but  found, 
the  utter  impoftibility  of  doing  this  of  myfelf,. 
However  the  ftrong  dcfire  continued  in  my  heart 
with  earneft  prayer  for  it.  Before  - Mr.  Wefley 
left  Limerick,  be  told  the  fociety,  if  they  could 
procure  ground  for  building,  while  he  was  at  Cork, 
and  fend  him  word,  he  would  come  back,  ancL 
fpend  four  days  with. them.  They.fent  him  word^ 
When  I heard  Mr.  Wefley  was  come  (in  June 
17.62)  1 \rent  to  fee  him  difeffly.  He  told  me  of 
foine  in.Co.rk,  who  had  lately  received  the  pure-- 
love  of  God.  At  that  very  inftant,  my  foul,  broke, 
out  into  ill ong  defire  and  prayer.. In  coming  back, 
to  m.v  room  along  the  ftreets,  my  foul  was  im 
conftant  praver.  But  I found  like  a large  raoun-- 
tain  of  unbelief  Handing  in  - my  way.  As  I came, 
over  I horaond-bridge,  1-  .gave,  over  parying  in» 
words,  and  began  to  - mourn  and  .ftah,  when  in  an. 
irdHnt,  I felt  a-change  through:  jny  whole- fjoa  id - 
and.foiil  fuch  as  my  tongue,  cannot  exprek. 


[ 342  ] 

foul  was  filled  with  love,  my  mouth  with  prarfe,, 
and  as  I went  along,  I could  do  nothing  but  look 
to  heaven. 

You  may  afk.  What  difference  is  there  be- 
tween this  ftate,  and  that  I experienced  before  ?’ 
I will  fimply  declared  what  I felt.  i.  Though  I 
walked  comfortably  with  God  for  near  two  years 
before,  yet  I often  doubted,  and  was  ready  to 
give  up  all  as  a dehifion,  . But  I have  never 
fince  had  the  leaft  flradow  of  doubt,  but  can- 
every  hour  and  every  moment,  behold  the  light 
of  the  glory  of  God,  in  the  iace  of  Je(us  Chriff.. 
2,  In  my  former  ftate  my  affections  were  never 
quite  free  from  one  particular  idol,  it  was  dear 
to  me  as  life  itfelf,  and  I could  not  give  it  up. 
But  my  heart  was  now  intirely  free,  nor  had  it 
thedeaft  part  of  rny  aaeftions.  3.  Befewe  I found 
anxious  cares  and  ^diftreffmg  fears.  Now  they 
are  all  vanhhed  away.  a.  After  the  firft  charge^ 

} ftill  felt  pride,  anger,  and  felf-will,  more  than 
1-cbuId'well  bear.  Since  the  fecond  I have  not? 
felt  thfe  ‘leaft  degree,  of  any  of  thefe  evil  tem- 
•pers  r cilthough  .temptations  to  all  have  not  been 
■■wanting  ; but  they  paiied  by  ;a.s  a dart.  Not  tl-iat 
my  natural  tempers-  were  dellroyed  only  they', 
were  changed  by  the  mi.ehtv  power  of  God,  and 
directed  into  their  right  channels,  grace  flowing 
throu'gh  every  faculty  of  my  foul,  and  enabling 
me  to  offer  up  my  body,  foul,  friends,  all  I am, 
and-alll  have,  as  a^facrifice  to  God,  every  mo-: 
jQent,  and  that  without  the  leaft  referve.  > 

1 likewife 


r 343  ] 

I Tikewife  ftill  found  myfelfliable  to  ten  thou» 
Jan  - m'.’lakes;  which  though  they  had  no  con- 
currence of  mv  will,  yet  were  violations  of  that 
hoi  . law",  which  demands  perfect,  uninterrupted 
obedience  in  every  thought,  word  and  attion. 
Thefe  therefore  would  Qjiit  us  out  from  the  glory 
of  God,  were  it  not  for  the  atoning  blood  , fo 
that  ftill,.  although  through  the  power  of  the  eter-- 
nal  Spirit,  I am  altogether  thine,  yet 

“ Every  moment.  Lord.  I need 
The  merit  of  thy  death. 

From  this  time,  through  the  great  bleiTing  or 
God,  I enjoyed  health  of  foul  and  body,  till  in- 
Jah'  1^767,  I was  appointed  for  Ae  North  of  Ire- 
land. J'hat  into  which  I v/en-t,  was  a new  cir- 
cuit, in  wtfich  there  trere  not  yet  things- very 
convenient  for  the  preachers.  The  [reds,  were- 
gen'crall)-  damp,  the  hou.fes  wet  and  cold,  not 
well  feeured  from  either  rain  or  wind.  And  my 
biboar  was  great.  Hearing  the  people  crying  out 
oh  evhry  fide  ior  preaching,  I ibrgot  rayfetf,  ahd 
almofl;  continually  went  be)’ond  my  flrength. 
Nevenkelefs,  I held  out  preftv  well  till  the 
fpring  ; but  in  April  1768,.  I w'as  feized  With  the 
fever.  The  houfe  I was  in  was  on  the  fide  of  a 
niouhtain,  very  bleak  and' cold..  It  was  aboitt 
fix  yards  long  and  four  broad.  There  were  four 
b'gds  in  it : in  three  of  which  lay  the  hufband, 
wife',,  five’  finaJl  thildhen,  -with  a man  and  maid 

fervaat 


[ 344  ] ’ 

fervant.  Here  I lay  fix  weeks  all  but  a day. 
From  tills  time  I had  not  my  former  ftrength,  al- 
though the  people  were  exceeding  kind,  and  let 
me  want  nothing  that  was  in  their  power.  When 
I was  a little  recovered,  my  fellow  labourers  be- 
ing hill  fick,  I laboured  to  fupph  their  lack  of 
fervice,  and  thereby  broiight-that  weaknefs  upon 
myfelf,  which  never  was  quite  removed.  But 
the  Lord  made  my  bed  in  all  my  ficknefs.  The 
cabin  was  a little  Bethel  to  me.  He  kept  my 
fotil  in  perfecl  peace,  and  in  a full  alfurance  of 
dwelling  in  his  houfe  for  ever. 

The  Augull  1768  following  I was  appointed 
for  Cork.  Here  it  pleafed  God  to  vifit  me  firft 
with  a fever:  afterwards  with  an  inflammation  of 
the  lungs  once  and  again,  and  then  wuth  a fiflu- 
lu.  Hero  I met  with  good  friends,  who  fuffered 
me  to  want  nothing-  which  could  be  of  anv  ufe. 
Mean  time  my  foul  was  kept  exceeding  happy. 

I had  no  repining  thought,  nor  any  choice,  but 
was  willing  to  live  or  to  die,  as  he  faw  moft  for 
his  glory  : as  foon  as  I was  able  to  take  a jour- 
nev,  on  Sunday,  Sept  3,  I fet  out  for  Dublin, 
where  1 was  ftationed.  I came  thither,  Thurfday 
y.  With  much  difficulty  I continued  in  mv  la- 
bour, till  a little  after  Cliriflmas;  when- fume 
mercurial  pills,  which  I was  advifed  to  -take  for  the 
fiflula,  gave  me  the  finifhing  ftroke.  But  here  I 
found  Chririlan  friends  in  plenty.  Had  I been 
the  Lord  Lieutenant,  there  could  not  have  been 
more  care  taken  of  me.  May  they  all  hear  at. 

lafl;> 


[ 345  ] 

Jaft,  In  as  much  as  ye  have  done  it  unto  the  letijl  of 
ih^e,  ye  have  done  it  unto  me. 

As  to  my  own  conduft,  fmce  I fird,  through 
mercy  believed,  which  is  about  fourteen  years,  I 
am  aOiamed  and  confouncfed  in  the  fight  of  God, 
at  his  great  love  to  me  a poor  finner  ; at  thy 
long  fuffering,  O my  God  and  Saviour,  bearing 
fo  long  with  me  ; at  thy  great  love,  as  it  were 
forcing  thyfelf  upon  me,  and  after  my  conftant- 
ly-repeated  fiiort- comings,  fiill  fliewing  me  the 
precious  blood  that  deanfetli  me  from  all  fin. 

But  it  may  be  afked,  “ Are  you  not  deceived 
in  tills  ?”  I anfismr,  God  gives  his  children,  not 
the  fpirit  of  the  world,  but  his  own  Spirit,  for 
this  very  end,  that  they  may  know  the  things, 
which  are  freely  given  to  them  of  God.  By  this 
Spirit  I am  not  deceived.  As  plainly  as  I can 
feel  the  wind  blow,.  I felt  a work,  of  orace  in  mv 
heart,  drawing  me  nearer  and  nearer  to  God.  I 
felt  a dairy  dying  to  this  vain  world,  'and  a daily 
overcoming  the  remains  of  fin,  till  God  was 
pleafed  to  remove  it  all  at  one  ftroke.  At  the 
fame  time  the  Spirit  tePdfied,  that  thefe  things 
were  freely  given  of  God  to  a poor  finner. 

O Lord,  keep  me  from  e'^'ery  appearance  of 
boafling!  Of  thee  only  wdll  I boaft,  my  Lord, 
m\'  God  and  my  all  : I will  fpeak  of  thy  loving- 
kindne.fs,  while  I have  a voice.  Only  keep  my 
heart  filled  rvuth  thy  love,  and  open  my  mouth  to 
fliew  thy  praife.  O that  the  few  days,  I have  on 
this  fide  eternity,  may  be  filled  up  with  holy 

praife 


r 346  ] 

praife  and  adoration,  telling  to  all  around,  how 
good,  how  gracious,  how  kind,  how  long-fufFer- 
ing,  how  merciful,  how  full  of  compalTion  thou 
art  ; how  willing  to  fave  all  that  will  come  to 
thee,  yea,  the  very  chief  offinners  : otherwife  I 
mull  have  been  lifting  up  my  eyes  in  hell  long 
ago.  O J c-fiis,  thou  Saviour  and  lover  of  men, 
haften  to  dellroy  the  darkne.hj  of  unbelief,  and 
fpread  the  light  of  faith  over  all  the  earth,  that 
alk  may  love  and  adore  thee  ! 

It  is  now  near  three  months,  that  I have  had, 
with  little  intermlfhon,  grievous  pains  of  body. 
But  m\  compafiionate  high  prieft  has  hitherto 
laid  his  everlading  arms  of  love  underneath  me. 
He  has  bore  me  up  under  all  without  a murmur- 
ing thought,  without  the  lead  ffuidow  of  difcon- 
tent.  I cannot  yet  believe,  I have  one  pain  too 
much.  The  Lord  give  me  to  think  the  famie  to 
the  end  1 

And  now’  O Lord  God  of  love,  look  down 
in  mercy  upon  me  the  meaneh  and  weakeft  ofalH 
by  thy  free  grace  faved  thus  far,  and  lave  me, 
moft  holy  and  gracious  God  to  the  end.  For- 
fake  me  not,.  O Lord,  for  a moment;  for  with- 
out thee  I cannot  Hand  ; and  whatever  fufferings 
thou  givelt  me,  onl)'  increafe  tb)' love  abundant- 
ly in  my  heart,  and  give  me  grace  and  patience, 

“To  fuffer  all  thy  righteous  will. 

And  to  the  end  endure.  ’ 

And 


[ 347  ] 

And  now  into  , thy  hands,  O Saviour  of  fin- 
ners,  I commit  my  body,  foul  and  fpirit ! Be 
mercifully  pleafed  to  fulfil  thy  faithful  prom.ife 
to  thy  fe:  vant  and  hand-m.aid,  (who,  thou  know- 
eft,  loveth  thee,  and  has  freely  given  me  up  to 
thee)  aind  when  thou  calleft  me  hence,  be  an 
hufband  to  the  widow,  and  a"  father  to  ourfather- 
iefs  babe,  keep  them  from  the  evils  of  the  pre- 
fent  world  ; and  of  thine  infinite  mercy,  bring 
us  to  meet  round  thy  throne,  to  praife  thee  world 
w'itliout  end  ! 

He  grew  weaker  in  February,  March- and 
April  1769.  Flay  10,  his  wife  would  fain  have 
fit  up  with  him  ; but  he  would  not  fuffer  it. 
About  feven  in  the  morning,  May  11,  he  chang- 
ed: but  ftill  lay  quiet  and  compofed,  till  about 
ten  he  moved  his  head  a little,  and  v;ithout  any 
ftruggle  or  groan,  fell  afleep. 


The  End  of  the  Twenty- third  Volume^ 


THE 


CONTENT  S 

Of  the  Twenty-ThipvD  Volume. 

Pdge 

A treati/e  on  jujiificalion.  Part  II.  - 3 

Reafons  agahijl  a feparalion  from  the  Church 


of  England  - - 116 

The  Chrifian  facr ament  and facrifce  141 

ExtraB from  a treatife  concerning  religious 

affeBions  - - - 177 

Some  Remarks  on  Mr.  lU’Ts  Farrago  Bouble- 

df til  led  - - 280 

A fiort  account  of  John  Dillon  - 334 


ERRATA,  Vol.  XXIIL 


i'age  Unt  lint 

I I 14  r Pareas  194  i r does  more 

35  27  r appro^r/ation  22^  10  r worft 

^2  3 r rewards  are  229  7 dele  who 

■Ji6  antepen.  r con'yrrfation  236  26  ^/if/ethat 
— infert  Written  in  the  238  4 r has  xot 


Year  1758. 

252  17  r they  look. 

127 

21 

r eafy 

had 

*52 

2 

r a little  way 

2165  9 dele  and 

162 

23 

r faith/f/5 

27^  8 r feal 

j68 

26 

r all  that 

28^  antepen.  r very 

186 

22 

r the  people 

2()’j  1"}  r mpoffiblc 

*87 

12 

r as  an 

307  24  r m€B» 

0 


i 

FEB  3 *67, 

MAR  0 3 

1 

- 

^■v 

V- 

/*?> 

V.' 

. 

1 

1 

i 

1 

Demco  293-5 


nk  r - 

