^Rv  Of  nfficf^ 


BX   6275    .E92   v.l 

Evans,   B. 

The  early  English  Baptists 


THE  BUNYAN  LIBEARY: 

rOR   THE    PUBLICATION    AND    REPUBLICATION    OF   STANDARD  WORKS 

BY  EMINENT  BAPTIST  AUTHORS. 

VOL.    YII. 

THE    EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS.— Vol.  L 


THE 


EARLY  ENGLISH  BAPTISTS. 


VOL.     I. 


/  BY 

B.    EVANS,    D.D. 


LONDON: 
J.  HEATON  &  SON,  21,  WARWICK  LANE, 

PATERNOSTER   ROW. 
1862. 


TO    MY 

MINISTERIAL      BRETHREN, 
MEN  OF  SIMILAR  DEVOTEDNESS  AND  OF  KINDREP  SPIRIT, 

AND   OF   EQUAL, 

ATTACHMENT  TO  THE  GREAT  PRINCIPLES  OF  RELIGIOUS  LIBERTY, 
WITH  THOSE  WHOSE  HISTORY  IS  HERE  RECORDED, 

THESE    MEMORIALS 

OF   THE 

ARE  AFFECTIONATELY  INSCRIBED  BY  THEIR  FRIEND  AND 
FELLOW  LABOURER, 

B.     EVANS. 


PREFACE. 


I  DO  not  offer  this  volume  as  a  history  of  the  English 
Baptists.  It  aims  at  no  such  dignity.  The  time  has 
not  yet  come  for  the  production  of  such  a  work. 
Other  materials  have  yet  to  be  collected,  and  vast  and 
varied  stores  of  information  have  yet  to  be  explored. 
From  the  national  archives,  the  Bishops'  courts,  the 
wi'itings  of  their  opponents,  and  the  productions  of 
their  own  pens,  much  new  and  very  valuable  informa- 
tion will  be  gleaned.  Hitherto,  very  little  has  been 
done  in  this  department.  Previous  wi'iters  in  our 
history,  either  from  ignorance  or  other  causes,  have 
made  no  research.  Ivimey  is  only  the  bare  copyist  of 
Crosby,  and  adds  scarcely  a  grain  of  information  to 
the  stock  the  latter  had  accumulated.  Facilities  for 
investigation  have  now  increased.  The  labours  of  the 
E-ecord  Commission  are  laying  open  to  the  public  the 
rich  stores  of  important  historical  materials  which 
have  lain  unheeded  for  generations.  It  is  matter  of 
deep  regret  to  the  writer,  that  his  distance  from 
London,  and  pastoral  and  public  duties,  have  rendered 
it  all  but  impossible  for  him  to  avail  himself  of  these 
to  any  great  extent.  The  present  work  is  simply, 
therefore,  offered  as  a  small  contribution  to  the  eluci- 
dation of  the  history  of  the  Baptists. 


VIU  PREFACE. 

A  brief  sketch  of  the  labours  of  my  predecessors 
may  not  be  out  of  place  here,  and  will  not  be  unin- 
teresting to  many  of  my  readers. 

The  first  attempt  at  a  history  of  the  denomination 
was  made  by  Thomas  Crosby.  He  was  a  deacon  of 
the  church  in  Goat  Street,  over  which  the  excellent 
Benjamin  Stinton  presided,  and  kept  a  school  in 
Southwark.  His  work  is  in  four  volumes,  and  is  now 
somewhat  scarce.  Materials  for  a  similar  work  had 
been  collected  by  his  pastor.  These  he  placed  in  the 
hands  of  the  celebrated  historian  of  the  Puritans. 
The  unfair  use,  scarcely,  indeed,  the  use  at  all,  of  the 
information  by  Mr.  Neal,  induced  the  author  to  write 
and  issue  his  work.  There  is  much  valuable  informa- 
tion of  men  and  events,  of  one  of  the  darkest  and 
most  humiliating  periods  of  our  national  history,  con- 
tained in  this  work.  .  Crosby  was  probably  conversant 
with  some  of  the  sufferers.  His  intimacy  with  the 
leading  minivers  in  the  metropolis  was  close.  Keach 
and  others  had  ministered  to  the  church  with  which 
he  was  officially  connected.  From  men,  competent  to 
speak,  he  has  told  us  much  which,  otherwise,  would 
have  been  lost.  To  the  future  historian  this  writer's 
work  will  always  be  of  value. 

Next  in  this  field  of  denominational  literature 
appeared  Mr.  A.  Taylor.  His  work  is  in  two  volumes, 
and  was  issued  more  than  half  a  century  ago.  It  is 
avowedly  a  History  of  the  English  General  Baptists. 
It  contains  a  mass  of  important  information  in  refer- 
ence to  this  increasing  section  of  the  body,  especially 
of  the  New  Connexion,  formed  principally  by  the  late 
Dan  Taylor.  Many  of  Mr.  Taylor's  conclusions  wiU  be 
found  more  than  vindicated,  by  the  documents  which 
wiU  appear  in  this  and  the  subsequent  volume. 


PEEFACE.  IX 

The  History  of  the  English  Baptists,  by  the  Rev. 
J.  Ivimey,  in  four  volumes,  appeared  in  1811—1830. 
The  author  was  a  laborious  and  useful  minister,  and 
for  many  years  the  successful  pastor  of  the  church  in 
Eagle  Street,  London.  The  early  part  of  his  work 
supplies  us  with  only  a  few  fragments  of  additional 
information,  beyond  what  the  pages  of  Crosby  had 
already  given.  It  is  far  more  copious  in  after  periods, 
detailing  public  events  in  which  Baptists  took  part 
with  other  bodies,  and  supplying  us  with  sketches  of 
biography  and  of  the  history  of  individual  churches, 
which  can  be  found  nowhere  else.  The  work  is 
remarkably  heavy,  whilst  its  extent  places  it  beyond 
the  reach  of  the  vast  mass  of  the  community.  Its 
materials  will  be  of  great  value  to  some  future  histo- 
rian of  the  later  periods  of  Baptist  history. 

In  1847,  appeared  a  condensed  History  of  the 
General  Baptists  of  the  New  Connexion,  by  J.  H. 
Wood,  with  a  recommendatory  preface  by  the  late 
Rev.  J.  G.  Pike.  As  its  title  indicates,  the  volume  is 
devoted  to  one  section  of  the  body.  There  is  a  large 
mass  of  information,  especially  on  the  operations  of 
the  New  Connexion  since  the  close  of  Taylor's  work. 
Mr.  Wood  designed  his  volume  for  popular  use;  and 
though  it  will  not  occupy  the  same  position  as  its 
predecessor,  yet  it  will  be  a  good  substitute,  in  the 
absence  of  this,  to  many  readers. 

Of  the  admirable  sketches  of  Mr.  Underhill,  in  the 
various  volumes  of  the  Hansard  KnoUys  Society's 
publications,  it  would  be  worse  than  idle  to  speak. 
In  reading  them,  one  only  regrets  that  he  has  not  laid 
his  brethren  under  larger  obligations.  Beyond  these 
we  have  no  indepei^dent  works.  Rippon's  Registers, 
the    Magazines,    Histories    of   Associations,    Circular 


X  PREFACE. 

Letters,  fcc,  supply  epitomes,  &;c.  Other  writers  have 
not  done  us  justice.  The  complaint  has  been  uttered 
again  and  again.  Crosby  complained  of  Neal;  Ivimey 
is  equally  loud  against  Messrs.  Bogue  and  Bennett. 
Wales  utters  the  same  complaints  still.* 

This  practice  cannot  be  too  strongly  censured.  Truth 
should  be  more  precious  than  party.  By  Christian 
men,  at  least,  her  supremacy  should  be  acknowledged. 
If  they  mangle  or  distort  her  fair  form,  to  whom  can 
she  look  for  protection  ?  Only  as  she  is  honoured,  will 
principle  triumph;  only  as  her  sweet  voice  regulates 
our  conduct,  and  her  instruction  moulds  our  character, 
will  society  be  purified  in  its  lowest  depths,  and  the 
empire  of  light  and  love  be  extended.  The  age  is  one 
of  loud  and  large  professions  of  liberality ;  but  it 
would  be  a  more  satisfactory  sign  of  its  genuineness, 
to  see  Christian  men,  on  the  points  which  divide  them, 
contending  for  truth,  and  not  for  victory.  Under 
the  influence  of  such  a  spirit, .  discussion  woidd  be  a 
blessing,  and  controversy  would  strengthen,  rather 
than  impair,  the  outworks  of  Christianity.  Earnestly 
does  the  writer  pray  for  the  gi-owth  of  this  spirit; 
because,  as  its  influence  is  felt,  the  spiritual  life  of 
Christ's  true  church  will  be  vigorous  and  aggressive 
on  the  masses  of  depravity  around  it. 

The  period  of  our  history  which  this  volume  covers 
is  one  of  a  transition  state.  Principles  were  working 
which  have  exerted  a  mighty  influence  on  the  Church 

*  "The  E.ev.  Thomas  Kees,  of  Beaufort,  in  his  work,  The  History 
of  Nonconformity  in  Wales,  is  guilty  of  doing  the  Welsh  Baptists  a 
flagrant  injustice.  His  conduct  is  unfair,  unjust,  and  unworthy  of 
any  historian,  if  that  historian  does  not  wish  the  English  reader  to 
believe  that  the  Nonconformists  of  Wales  are  the  Independents.^'' — 
The  Welsh  Baptists,  by  the  Eev.  T,  Price. 


PEEFACE.  XI 

and  on  the  State.  The  different  standpoints  from 
which  writers  have  viewed  it,  and  the  great  actors  in 
the  struggle,  have  influenced  the  estimate  which  they 
have  formed  of  the  results.  Impartiality  is  difficult. 
Writers  near  to  the  events  are  frequently  most  want- 
ing in  this.  Their  sympathies  with  certain  principles, 
their  prejudices,  and  their  ignorance,  have  often  led  to 
the  omission  of  certain  things,  to  the  discolouring  of 
others,  and  to  conclusions  which  subsequent  investi- 
gations have  shown  to  be  unfounded.  No  class  of 
men  have,  probably,  suffered  more  from  this  than  those 
to  whom  this  volume  refers.  I  do  not  claim  entire 
exemption  from  this  imperfection.  I  have  tried  in 
every  case  to  be  impartial ;  but,  perhaps,  in  some 
instances  I  may  have  failed.  Still,  I  trust  that,  not- 
withstanding my  attachment  to  the  principles  of  these 
persecuted  ones,  and  my  intense  admiration  of  their 
moral  heroism,  in  no  instance  have  I  acted  unfairly 
towards  their  bitter  and  malignant  foes. 

My  aim  in  this  work,  has  been  to  present  to  the 
minds  of  my  readers  as  graphic  a  sketch  of  the 
illustrious  founders  of  our  body  as  possible.  Their 
rise, — their  principles  and  ecclesiastical  polity, — their 
public  and  social  life, — their  sufferings, — and,  finally, 
their  triumphs, — will  form  prominent  features  in  the 
picture.  Only  in  part  is  this  accomplished  in  the 
present  volume. 

In  preparing  it,  I  have  had  constantly  in  view 
the  interests  of  a  large  and  important,  class  of  the 
denomination.  Thousands  of  young  men  and  maidens 
are  growing  up  around  us.  Many  are  anxious  for 
information  and  mental  culture.  Their  means  are 
limited.  Large  historical  works  they  cannot  purchase, 
nor  have  they  time  to  read  them  if  they  could.     To 


Xll  PKEFACE. 

familiarize  their  minds  with  the  moral  heroism  of  our 
fathers, — to  indoctrinate  them  with  those  deathless 
principles  which  they  were  the  first  to  promulgate, 
and  to  which  the  true  Church  of  Christ  is  now  doing 
homage, — is  a  work  of  incalculable  importance.  Never 
was  it  more  so.  The  conflicts  of  to-day  clothe  it  with 
the  deepest  interest.  Men  of  like  principles  and  of 
kindred  spirit  are  most  fitted  for  the  struggle.  Their 
weapons  are  the  keenest,  and  from  their  vantage 
ground  can  success  only  be  secured.  Only  as  the 
spirituality  of  Christ's  Church  is  exhibited,  and  a 
living  union  with  the  Saviour  urged,  as  essential  to 
its  members,  will  truth  triumph.  Finer  models  of 
the  true,  the  noble,  the  holy,  and  morally  great, 
cannot  be  set  before  them.  They  were  men  of  whom 
the  world  was  not  worthy.  Should  any  one,  therefore, 
find  fault  with  the  details  which  I  have  supplied  on 
collateral  matters,  I  point  to  this  class,  and  urge  its 
wants  as  my  chief  apology. 

The  reader  will  see  that  I  have  used  in  the  text, 
and  equally  so  by  a  reference  to  the  notes,  a  class  of 
writers  whose  views  on  ecclesiastical  polity  are  widely 
different  from  our  own.  No  one  more  highly  values 
the  labours  of  my  friends.  Dr.  Price  and  Mr.  Underbill, 
and  others  who  had  preceded  them,  than  I.  I  have 
read  them  again  and  again  with  profit ;  and,  no 
doubt,  for  many  a  thought  I  am  indebted  to  their 
lucid  pages.  But,  after  all,  I  preferred  my  own  inde- 
pendent inquiry  :  the  reading  of  a  class  of  writers 
who  had  no  sympathy  with  tlie  Anabaptists,  and  from 
their  pages  to  draw  ample  materials  for  the  present 
work.  I  could  present  a  long  list  of  authors  read, 
many  of  whom  have  repaid  the  toil  with  only  a  small 
grain  of  material.     I  will  only  add,  that  whilst  this 


PREFACE.  xiii 

course  has  involved  more  labour,  I  liave  no  regret 
now  it  is  done. 

Upon  some  points  I  have  ventured  to  differ  from 
my  predecessors,  though  sanctioned  by  Danvars,  and  a 
numerous  class  who  have  repeated  from  him,  or  from 
one  another.  I  have  not  done  so  hastily.  When  I 
have  calmly  examined  their  opinions,  and  found 
evidence  against  them,  I  have  not  hesitated  for  a 
moment  in  entering  my  dissent.  Some  may  blame 
me  for  this  as  weakening  our  defences.  I  am  content 
to  bear  it.  Only  that  which  is  true  is  really  of  any 
worth.  The  value  of  our  principles  is  not  dependent 
upon  the  practices  of  the  Early  British  Christian — 
Wickliff,  or  any  other  of  the  illustrious  saints,  who 
shed  the  light  of  Christ's  truth,  and  the  beauty  of  a 
holy  life,  on  the  ages  of  the  past.  To  a  higher  source 
we  can  go.  Whatever  will  not  bear  the  severest 
scrutiny,  let  it  be  rejected.  History  should  deal  only 
with  fact,  not  with  theory.  With  evidence,  not  with 
mere  conjecture.  Any  other  course  will  only  be  a 
source  of  weakness,  and  not  of  strength.  Upon  these 
convictions  I  have  acted.  It  has  been  the  rule  to 
which  I  have  sought  to  conform.  About  its  results 
I  am  not  carefuL  Consequences  which  necessarily 
follow  great  principles  we  should  always  welcome. 
The  cherished  opinions  of  some,  and  men  for  whose 
judgment  I  have  great  respect,  may  be  disturbed  by 
the  facts  and  conclusions  which  I  have  recorded.  All 
I  ask  is,  that  they  will  candidly  examine,  before  they 
reject,  the  conclusions  to  which  I  have  been  led. 

It  was  originally  intended  to  complete  this  work 
in  one  volume.  The  plan  of  it  was  constructed  in 
harmony  with  this  design.  But  I  soon  found  this 
impossible.     The  new  and  valuable  documents  placed 


XTV  PREFACE. 

at  my  command,  some  of  which  aie  given  in  the 
present  volume,  and  others  reserved  for  the  next, 
which  throw  much  light  on  churches  and  proceedings 
in  connexion  with  our  body,  in  the  early  periods  of 
the  reign  of  the  first  Charles,  demanded  an  alteration. 
In  addition  to  a  valuable  series  of  letters, giving  much 
new  and  very  valuable  information  on  one  of  the 
obscurest,  and  yet  interesting,  periods  of  our  history, 
the  proceedings  of  our  brethren  in  Holland,  the  Con- 
fession of  Faith  published  by  the  remainder  of  John 
Smith's  company,  and  known  only  to  us  by  the  frag- 
ments given  by  Eobinson  in  his  reply  to  it,  are  given 
in  the  present  volume.  There  is  also  an  elaborate 
work  by  the  same  author,  on  the  subject  of  Baptism, 
in  reply  to  Clifton,  still  in  MS.  It  is  lengthy  for 
publication  in  connexion  with  this  undertaking;  but 
the  former  are  too  precious  to  be  withheld.  The 
Publishers  must  be  exonerated  from  all  blame.  They 
have  done  all  they  could  to  prevent  it.  The  respon- 
sibility is  mine.  I  unhesitatingly  avow  it.  If  after 
the  volumes  are  published,  my  judgment  in  this  matter 
is  impeached,  I  will  bow  to  the  decision  with  as  much 
dignity  as  I  can. 

To  my  friend  Professor  Muller,  of  Amsterdam,  I  am 
very,  very  deeply  indebted.  His  profound  scholarship 
and  Christian  courtesy  excite  my  warmest  admiration 
and  command  my  esteem.  The  valuable  documents, 
preserved  under  his  care  in  the  archives  of  the  church 
at  Amsterdam,  by  his  ready  kindness,  were  placed 
at  my  disposal ;  whilst  with  the  deepest  interest  and 
untiring  patience  he  has  examined  other  records  for 
me,  and  thus  thrown  a  flood  of  light  on  many  obscure 
points  on  the  state  of  our  brethren  in  Holland.  Some 
of  these  documents,  both  in  the  text  and  appendix, 


PEEFACE.  XV 

were  in  Latin,  others  in  Dutch;  and  when  I  failed  to 
find  a  Dutch  scholar  in  this  country  able  to  translate 
the  language  of  the  sixteenth  century,  Dr.  MuUer 
kindly  undertook  and  accomplished  the  task  for  me. 
His  English  I  have  not  altered.  If  censure  is  uttered, 
I  must  calmly  bear  it.  This  simple  statement  will 
show  the  extent  of  my  obligations ;  but  no  words 
can  express  the  warmth  of  my  gratitude. 

I  have  only  to  add  my  deep  regret,  that  with  all 
my  anxiety  to  present  this  volume  as  correct  as 
possible,  I  find,  when  too  late  for  alteration,  several 
errors  have  crept  into  the  text.  The  work,  tiiough 
laborious,  has  been  a  labour  of  love  ;  and  it  would  be 
to  the  writer  a  source  of  unmingled  thankfulness  if, 
whilst  his  name  is  associated  with  these  memorials  of 
the  great  and  the  good,  he  could  emulate  their  faith 
and  rival  their  devotedness. 

B.  EVANS. 

SCAKBOROUGH, 

August  5th,  1862. 


CONTENTS, 


xvu 


^^L 


-I  y 


CONTENTS. 


Preface 


Introduction  : 
Early  Baptists 

Were  the  British  Churches  Baptist  ? 
Austin's  questions 

Baptist  sufferers  in  Henry  the  Second's  time 
Wickliffe — sentiments  on  Baptism 
The  Lollards  .... 

Anabaptist — its  raisappHcatiou 


PAGE 

vii 


1 
2 
5 
10 
12 
14 
16 


CHAPTER  I. 


THE   TUDOR   DYNASTY. 


State  of  the  nation     . 

Discovery  of  Printing 

Commerce 

The  Papacy 

The  spirit  of  Civil  Liberty 

Accession  of  Henry  the  Seventh    . 

His  policy — favourable  to  the  Church 

Persecution — the  Lollards 


18 
18 
19 
19 
21 
21 
23 
23 


CHAPTER  II. 

HENRY  THE   EIGHTH. 

State  of  Europe  on  Henry's  Accession  . 
His  character  and  magnificence 
Causes  which  led  to  the  Reformation    . 
Low  state  of  religion 

■    h 


25 
25 

27 

27 


XVlll 


CONTENTS. 


Moral  condition  of  the  people 
Glimpse  of  the  popular  superstitions 
Wolsey — his  influence  with  Henry- 
Aspires  to  the  Popedom 
Conflicting  interests  of  parties  in  the  State 
Baptists,  persecution  of,  by  Wareham 
Henry  head  of  the  Church 
James  Bainham  suffers 
Anne  Boleyn  elevated  to  the  throne 
Dutch  Baptists — their  sufferings     . 
Elevation  of  Cranmer  to  the  Primacy  . 
Baptism — its  varied  Ceremonies 
The  Pilgrimage  of  Grace 
Commissions  to  hunt  for  Anabaptists 
Elector  of  Hesse  urges  Henry  to  persecute  them 
Proclamations  against  them 
Excluded  from  a  general  pardon 
Death  of  Cromwell 
Condition  of  the  Anglican  Church 


PAGE 

31 
32 
33 
37 
37 
41 
42 
43 
45 
46 
48 
48 
50 
51 
52 
53 
54 
55 
56 


CHAPTER  III. 


EDWAED  THE   SIXTH. 

The  joy  of  the  nation  at  Edward's  biiiih 

His  Accession  to  the  throne 

Parties  in  the  State  and  the  Church 

Urgent  need  of  Reform 

Moral  state  of  the  People    . 

Cranmer' s  efforts 

The  Prayer-Book  on  Baptism 

Mode  of  Baptism 

Significancy  of  Baptism 

Influence  of  Continental  Reformers  in  England 

Extent  of  the  Reformation 

Baptists  persecuted 

Commission  to  Cranmer  to  seek  them 

Cahdn  excites  persecution  against  them 

Ridley's  Enquiries   . 

Joan  of  Kent   .... 


57 
58 
59 
60 
61 
63 
64 
65 
67 
67 
68 
69 
69 
70 
71 
72 


CONTENTS. 


XIX 


Putts  suffers  at  Colchester 
Baptists  in  Kent 

and  Essex 

Hart  and  the  Free-Willers 
Family  of  Love 
George  Van  Pare 
Giles  Van  Bellan 
Death  of  Edward 


i'AOK 

75 
76 
77 
79 
79 
80 
81 
82 


CHAPTER  IV. 


MARY, 


Accession  of  Mary 
State  of  Parties 

of  the  Church 

Mary's  early  Character 

Influence  of  the  Papacy 

Gardiner 

The  Spanish  Ambassador 

Cardinal  Pole  in  England 

Keconciliation  to  Rome 

The  form  of  ditto 

Articles  issued  to  the  Bishops 

General  Apostacy 

Martyrs 

Enquiries  about  Dissidents 

Baptist  Martyrs 

Robert  Cooke 

Smith  and  others 

Discussion  in  Prison 

Philpot  on  Baptism 

Baptists  in  East  Angiia 

Charge  against  them 

Bonner's  complaints 

Growing  hatred  to  Rome 

Death  of  Gardiner 

Misery  of  the  Queen 

Her  death 

Death  of  Pole 


82 

84 

84 

86 

88 

88 

90 

91 

92 

93 

94 

95 

97 

98 

99 

102 

103 

108 

109 

109 

111 

114 

114 

115 

116 

119 

119 


XX 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  V. 


ELIZABETH. 

Hostility  to  Elizabeth    . 
Her  danger  from  Papal  influence    . 
True  estimate  of  her  reign 
State  of  the  Church 

society  .... 

the  Universities 

The  Reformation  more  political  than  religious 

Elizabeth's  difficulties 

Her  policy  .... 

Debate  between  Romanists  and  Protestants 

Defects  of  Elizabeth's  Reform  . 

Act  of  Uniformity  .... 

Controversy  about  vestments    . 

Influence  of  the  Separatists  from  the  Church 

Destitution  of  ministers 

Moral  state  of  the  j)eople    . 

Rise  of  the  Presbyterians 

Romanists 

Wide  diffusion  of  Baptist  principles 

The  cause     .... 

Anabaptists  ordered  to  leave  the  country 

The  minister  of  the  Dutch  Church 

Dutch  Baptists  sufier 

Their  examinations 

Their  complaints 

Apostacy  of  some    . 

Fox's  sympathy  with  them 

Their  confession 

The  order  for  their  execution     . 

Somers's  account 

Perverted  account  by  historians 

Spread  of  Anabaptists 

Hatred  of  Elizabeth  to  the  Puritans 

Strengthened  by  the  Episcopate 

Spread  of  Puritanism     . 

Personal  character  of  Elizabeth 

State  of  religion 

dosing  scenes 

The  Family  of  Love  (note) 


CONTENTS. 


XXI 


CHAPTER  VI. 

^'THE  STUART  DYNASTY. — JAMES  THE  FIRST. 


The  Stuart  Princes  . 

Influence  at  work 

Accession  of  the  King 

All  parties  hopeful 

James's  principles    . 

Appeal  of  the  Puritans  . 

Hampton  Court  discussion 

James  patronises  the  Episcopates 

Cause  of  this 

Bancroft  raised  to  the  Primacy 

The  Puritans — their  position 

Separatists  in  Holland   . 

John  Smith,  Helwys,  &c.    . 

Smith's  self -baptism,  &c. 

History  of  it 

Action  of  the  Dutch  Baptists    . 

Subsequent  history  of  the  English  Baptists  in  Holland 

Helwys  in  England 

D'Ewes's  testimony  to  the  spread  of  our  principles 

Leonard  Busher — Plea  for  Religious  Liberty 

Pilgrim  Fathers        .... 

Edward  Wightman — his  opinions 

Consigned  to  the  secular  power — martyrdom 

Close  of  James's  reign   .  .  . 

Personal  and  social  character 

Immoral  state  of  his  court 

His  death  and  funeral 


PAGE 

176 
176 
181 
182 
184 
186 
187 
191 
191 
192 
193 
196 
197 
198 
200 
203 
212 
217 
220 
221 
223 
232 
233 
234 
235 
236 
237 


APPENDICES. 

A. 
Rites  and  Ceremonies  observed  about  Baptism 

B. 


.      239 


The  sentence  against  Joan  of  Kent,  with  the  certificate  matle 

upon  it  .......       242 


XXll  CONTENTS. 

a 

PAGE 

Examination  of  Giles  Vanbeller  .  .  .     *•      .       243 

D. 

Names  of  the  English  who  confess  their  errors,  &c.  .       .       244 

E. 
A  short  Confession  of  Faith,  by  John  Smith  and  his  friends    .       245 

F. 

Confession  of  Faith,  by  John  Smith  .  .  .       .       253 
Kichard  Overton          .            .  .       254 

G. 

Confession  by  the  remainder  of  John  Smith's  company     .      .       257 

H. 

Letter  of  Henry  Hart,  &c.         .  .  .  .  .       272 


EARLY  ENGLISH  BAPTISTS, 


THE 


EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 


INTEODUCTION. 

"  The  true  origin  of  that  sect  whicli  acquires  tbe  denomina- 
tion of  Anabaptists  by  their  administering  anew  .the  rite  of 
baptism  to  those  who  come  over  to  their  communion,  .  .  . 
is  hid  in  the  remote  depths  of  antiquity,  and  is,  of  conse- 
quence, extremely  dijSicult  to  be  ascertained."*  No  one 
conversant  with  the  records  of  the  past  can  doubt  this. 
The  whole  facts  of  history  place  the  truth  beyond  dis- 
pute. "  I  have  seen  enough  to  convince  me  that  the  present 
English  dissenters,  contending  for  the  sujficiency  of  Scrip- 
ture, and  for  primitive  Christian  liberty  to  judge  of  its 
meaning,  may  be  traced  back  in  authentic  manuscripts  to 
the  Nonconformists,  to  the  Puritans,  to  the  Lollards,  to  the 
Vallenses,  to  the  Albigenses,  and,  I  suspect,  through  the 
Paulicians  and  others,  to  the  apostles,  "t  Dissidents  from 
the  popular  church  in  the  early  ages,  compelled  to  leave  it 
from  the  growing  corruption  of  its  doctrines  and  morals, 
were  found  everywhere.  Men  of  apostolic  life  and  doctrine 
contended  for  the  simplicity  of  the  church  and  the  liberty 
of  Christ's  flock,  in  the  midst  of  great  danger.  What  the 
pen  failed  to  do,  the  sword  of  the  magistrate  efiected.     The 

*  Mosheim,  vol.  iv.,  cent,  xvi.,  chap,  iii.,  p.  439. 

t  Robinson's  Claude,  vol.  ii. ,  p.  53. 

B 


2  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

Novatians,  tlie  Donatists,  and  others  that  followed  them,  are 
examples.  They  contended  for  the  indei^endence  of  the 
church;  they  exalted  the  divine  Word  as  the  only  standard 
of  faith ;  they  maintained  the  essential  purity  of  the  church, 
and  the  necessity  of  a  holy  life  springing  from  a  renewed 
heart.*  Extinguished  by  the  sword,  not  of  the  Spirit, 
—  their  churches  broken  and  scattered, —  after  years  of 
patient  suffering  from  the  dominant  sect,  the  seed  which 
they  had  scattered  sprang  up  in  other  lands.  Truth  never 
dies.  Its  vitality  is  imperishable.  In  the  wild  wastes  and 
fastnesses  of  Europe  and  Africa  it  grew.  A  succession  of 
able  and  intrepid  men  taught  the  same  great  princij^les,  in 
opposition  to  a  corrupt  and  affluent  State  church,  which 
distinguish  modem  English  jSTonconformists ;  and  many  of 
them  taught  those  peculiar  views  of  Christian  ordinances 
which  are  special  to  us  as  Baptists.  Beyond  all  doubt  such 
views  were  inculcated  by  the  Paulicians,  the  primitive  Wal- 
denses,  and  their  brethren.  Over  Euroj)e  they  were  scat- 
tered, and  their  converts  were  very  numerous,  t  long  before 
the  Reformation  shed  its  light  on  the  darkness  of  Europe. 
But  our  design  is  to  trace  the  history^  not  of  Foreign,  but 
of  Early  English  Baptists. 

Were  the  ancient  British  Christians  Baptists  %  This 
question  meets  us  on  the  threshold,  and  asks  our  attention 
for  a  time.  AVriters  on  both  sides  the  Atlantic,  claim  for 
Wales  the  honour  of  retaining  primitive  ordinances  and 
church  polity  beyond  any  other  nation  of  Europe.    Removed 


*  That  these  early  separatists  taught  doctrines  now  held  by  the  English 
Baptists,  might  be  made  to  appear  by  their  own  works  and  the  statements 
of  their  adversaries.  Long.  Hist.  Donatists.  Lardner's  Works,  vol.  iii. 
Jones's  Ch.  Hist.     E-obinson's  Hist,  of  Baptism. 

+  The  reader  will  find  much  information  on  the  former  in  Lardner, 
Jones,  Robinson's  Ecclesiastical  Eesearches,  and  Mosheim.  Dr.  Allix  says, 
"They,  with  the  Manichees,  were  Anabaptists,  or  rejectors  of  infant  bap- 
tism, and  were,  consequently,  often  reproached  with  that  term." — Rem. 
Ch,  Pied.,  p.  1.38.     Orchard's  Hist.  F.  Baptists,  &c. 


INTRODUCTION".  3 

from  the  influence  of  Rome,  the  autliority  of  the  ambitious 
and  worklly-minded  Pontifis  who  ruled  in  that  city  was  not 
ackiiowledgedfiii  Wales  till  about  a.d.  600,  and  the  grow- 
ing corruptions  of  the  Western  church  had  not  penetrated 
the  fastnesses  of  that  country.  Some  of  our  American 
brethren  speak  of  the  churches  there  as  corresponding,  up 
to  the  time  of  Austin's  invasion,  with  our  present  polity. 
ISTational  Christianity  was  unknown,  and  everywhere  the 
churches  were  based  on  Congregational  prineiples,  and  union 
with  them  was  the  result  of  individual  conviction,  and  was 
professed  and  secured  by  the  immersion  of  the  body  in 
water.  In  other  words,  in  a  true  and  important  sense  they 
were  Baptist  churches.  We  cannot  speak  with  the  same 
confidence.  The  fact  is  not  so  clear  to  us  as  to  some,  and  we 
feel  that  there  are  elements  of  doubt  about  it,  the  solution 
of  which  we  should  be  glad  to  find.  It  is  not  as  to  the 
mode  of  baptism.  That  is  unquestioned.  No  man  would 
risk  his  claim  to  accurate  acquaintance  even  with  English 
liistory,  by  denying  that  the  ancient  mode  of  baptism  was 
immersion.  Wales  knew  nothing  else.  Christendom  knew 
nothing  else.  Trine  immersion  was,*  probably,  all  but  uni- 
versal. It  is  questionable  if  any  other  modes  were  recognized, 
except  in  the  case  of  the  sick.  Austin  and  his  com23anions, 
beyond  all  doubt,  practised  immersion,  t  The  question  for 
settlement  is  not  respecting  mode,  but  simply  this :  Had  the 
practice  of  infant  baptism  at  tliis^  time  made  its  way  into 
Wales,  or  was  it  unknown  amongst  these  primitive  disciples 
till  the  Roman  missionary  forced  it  on  them  hy  the  sword 
of  his  murderous  Saxons  1  We  shall  place  the  evidence 
in  as  clear  a  lignt  as  we  can  before  our  readers.     It  is  only 


*  From  the  writings  of  many  Fathers,  Bingham  places  this  heyond  all 
controversy.  E.  Ant.,  vol.  iv.,  pp.  355 — 358,  360 — 362.  "  If  a  Bishop  or  a 
Presbyter  use  not  three  immersions  In  the  mystery  of  baptism,  but  only 
one  immersion  unto  the  death  of  Christ,  let  him  be  deposed.'* — Apostolic 
Canons,  50 ;  Ihid,  viii.,  p.  65. 

+  Be4e,  by  Giles,  pp.  112,  113,  115,  171,  277. 


4  EAKLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

as  an  liistorical  fact  tliat  we  deal  witli  it.     Beyond  this  it  is 
really  of  no  moment.* 

The  Saxon  invasion  of  Britain  was  followed  by  cruelty 
and  oppression.  Religion  suffered.  Churches  were  demol- 
ished, and  ministers  slain.  The  worshippers  of  Wodin  had 
no  sympathy  with  the  forms  of  faith  which  prevailed  in  the 
island.  To  the  fastnesses  and  morasses  of  Wales  many 
retired.  Austin  was  sent  by  Gregory  to  convert  the  Saxons. 
Success  crowned  his  efforts.  Thousands,  in  various  parts  of 
the  country,  nominally  raised  Christ  to  the  place  of  their 
idols.  They  called  themselves  Christians ;  but  their  know- 
ledge of  the  great  truths  of  the  religion  of  Jesus  was  very 
limited,  and  the  influence  of  those  truths  on  their  life  and 
character  was  as  feeble.  Elevated  to  the  episcopacy,  the  am- 
bition of  Austin  took  a  wider  flight,  and  he  sought  to  bring 
the  Cambro-Britons  under  his  episcopal  control,  and  to  extort 
from  them  the  acknowledgment  of  the  spiritual  supremacy 
of  Kome.  A  meeting  was  convened,  at  which  many  British 
ministers  attended.  The  discussion  was  long,  and  they  did 
not  comply  with  the  exhortations  or  rebukes  of  the  proud 
monk,  but  preferred  their  own  traditions  before  all  the 
churches  in  the  world,  t  At  another  meeting,  Austin  pre- 
sented his  demands  in  the  following  form,  consenting  to 
allow  their  independence  in  other  matters,  if  they  would  yield 
obedience  in  these  :   "  To  keep  Easter  at  the  due  time ;  to 


*  That  difference  existed  in  tlie  Irish,  church  from  the  Saxon  baptism 
admits  of  no  doubt.  Vide  Todd's  Irish  Church,  pp.  97,  99.  In  letters 
from  some  Irish  bishops  to  Lanfranc,  they  ask  the  primate — If  it  was  neces- 
sary to  the  salvation  of  infants  that  they  should  receive  the  eucharist  as 
well  as  be  baptized?  So  late  as  A.D.  1172,  a  Synod  at  Cashel  dirested 
"that  infants  be  catechised  before  the  door  of  the  church,  and  baptized  in 
the  holy  font  in  the  baptismal  churches. "  Ibid,  pp.  100, 12.5.  ' '  The  Britons 
were  contrary  to  the  whole  world,  and  enemies  to  the  Roman  custom." 
Usher's  Religion  of  the  Anct.  Irish,  pp.  33,  34,  108,  109.  Hostility  to 
Rome,  p.  110.  Tliierry  supplies  us  with  abundant  evidence  to  the  same 
effect.    Norman  Conquest,  vol.  i. ,  pp.  64 — 69,  82 ;  vol.  iii. ,  p.  4. 

t  Bade,  by  Gfles,  p.  82. 


INTRODUCTION.  O 

administer  baptism,  hy  which  we  are  again  born  to  God,* 
according  to  the  custom  of  the  Holy  Roman  Apostolic 
Church;  and  jointly  with  us  to  preach  the  Word  of  God  to 
the  English  nation.  We  will  readily  tolerate  all  the  other 
things  you  do,  though  contrary  to  our  custom."  t  This 
sainted  monster  threatened  them  with  war,  and  finally 
induced  the  Northumbrians  to  invade  their  lands  with  fire 
and  sword.  Thousa,nds  then  fell  victims  to  priestly  pride 
and  the  love  of  Romish  dominion. 

Now,  it  is  on  the  form  of  the  second  of  these  propositions 
that  the  whole  dispute  turns.  As  it  stands  before  us,  we 
should  have  no  difiiculty  in  the  matter ;  but  we  are  stopped 
by  the  fact,  that  the  next  writer  who  gives  a  report  modifies 
the  statement  of  Bede.  Fabian,  in  his  Chronicle,  states  the 
proposition  as  follows :  "  That  ye  give  Christendom  to  children^'' 
jBede,  the  father  of  English  ecclesiastical  history,  died  in  735. 
Fabian,  the  merchant  and  chronicler  of  his  day,  died  in  the 
year  1512.  Now  which  of  these  is  the  true  report?  We 
shall  lay  before  our  readers  the  best  evidence  we  can  coUect, 
and  allow  them  to  form  their  own  judgment.  Of  Fabian's 
Chronicle  five  editions  have  been  published,  viz.,  1516,  1533, 
1542,  1549,  and  the  last  in  1811,  under  the  superintendence 
of  Sir  H.  Ellis.  In  this  edition  the  words  agree  with  Bede, 
"as  to  the  manner  of  the  Church  of  Rome  f^  but  Sir  Henry  tells 
us  that  this  phrase  is  wanting  in  the  editions  of  1542  and 
1549.  It  is  right  to  add,  that  the  edition  of  1549,  which 
omits  the  clause,  was  professedly  compared  with  the  first.  J 


*  The  words  of  Bede  are  :  "  Ut  ministerium  baptisandi,  quo  Deo  renasci- 
mur,  juxta  morem  sanctas  Romanse  Apostolicae  Ecclesise,  compleatis.'* 

t  Bede,  p.  82. 

%  "Because  the  last  print  of  Fabian's  Chronicle  was  in  many  places 
altered  from  the  first  copies,  I  have  caused  it  to  be  compared  with  the 
first  print  of  all,  and  set  it  further  in  all  points  according  to  the  author's 
meaning." — The  Printer  to  the  Reader.  Holinshed  and  Stowe  in  their 
Chronicle  report  the  same  as  Bede.  Grafton  refers  his  reader  to  Fabian. 
Harding,  earher  still,  thus  notices  it : — 


6  f  ARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

But  assuming  the  correctness  of  Bede,  what  did  Austin 
mean  ?  Only  one  of  two  things  :  either  that  they  were  to 
baptize  their  children  because  Rome  did,  or  that  they  should 
baptize  them  in  the  same  way.  The  latter  is  affirmed  by 
Baxter,  Wall,  Murdock,  and  others  :  it  is  not  the  mode 
■which  Austin  means,  but  the  ceremonies  which  at  that  time 
had  gathered  around  it.  Let  Baxter  speak :  '■'■And  who  knows 
not  that  the  Church  of  Rome,  and  all  its  communions,  then 
called  the  Universal  church,  used  in  baptism  the  white  gar- 
ment, milk  and  honey,  as  an  apostolioal  tradition  ?  "  Only 
this  interpretation  can  be  j)ut  upon  it,  say  they.  It  admits 
of  no  other.  In  opposition  to  this,  D'Anvers,  Davye,  and 
Ivimey,  in  England,  and  several  Cambro -Americans,  main- 
tain that  it  refers  exclusively  to  the  baptism  of  children. 
It  would  occupy  too  much  space,  and  be  too  large  a  demand 
on  the  patience  of  our  readers,  to  enter  fully  into  the  grounds 
of  their  widely-different  opinions.  We  shall  rather  suggest 
some  facts  which  are  patent  to  both  parties.  It  is  manifest, 
then,  that  Austin  himself  was  not  fully  satisfied  about  the 
baptism  of  infants.  About  that  of  children  he  might;  but 
his  correspondence  with  Gregory  makes  it  manifest  that  the 
former  idea  had  not  lost  the  feature  of  novelty.  Look  at 
these  questions  :  "  May  a  woman  with  child  be  baptized  ?  or 
how  long  after  she  is  confined  may  she  come  into  the  church  ? 
Also,  after  how  many  days  the  infant  born  may  be  baptized, 
lest  he  be  prevented  by  death  ? "  *  It  must  not  be  forgotten, 
either,  that  up  to  this  time  the  baptism  of  children,  though 

"To  converte  and  to  teache  the  Sasons  all, 

The  English  also,  in  Christian  faith  and  treive. 

And  baptize  them ;  through  Brytaine  over  all 

The  pasche  to  keep,  as  Rome  did  then  full  dewe." 

There  is  no  allusion  to  this  in  the  *'Brufe,  Ox*  Chronicles  of  the  Kings  of 

England,"   an  early  work,  translated  from  the  Welsh  by  the  Rev.  P. 

Roberta     London,  1811.     Vide  p.  178.    Appendix  vi.,  p.  317. 

*'  Bede,  p.  52.  Widely  different  on  this  subject  are  the  opinions  of  the 
Fathers,  Greg.  K"az.  thinks  that  healthy  children  should  wait  for  three 
years,— Bingham,  vol,  iv.,  p.  218-9,  Hagenbach's  Hist.  Doctrines,  vol.  i., 
p.  363. 


INTRODUCTION.  7 

in  many  parts  prevalent,  was  purely  voluntary.  No  canon 
had  been  passed  by  any  Council  of  importance  on  this  sub- 
ject. At  a  meeting — what  ecclesiastical  writers  would  call  a 
Council,  very  likely — of  seven  Spanish  bishops,  a.d.  517,  the 
subject  was  discussed.  Robinson  says,  ^^That  they  agreed 
(not  commanded)  to  baptize  catechumens  only  at  Easter  and 
Pentecost,  except  in  case  of  sickness.  Also  in  case  of  infants, 
if  they  loere  ill,  and  woidd  not  such  their  mothers'  milk,  if 
they  were  offered  to  them,  to  baptize  them,  even  though  it  were 
the  day  they  were  born^^'  Later  still,  it  is  obvious,  from  a 
law  of  Charlemagne,  that  the  baptism  of  infants  was  not 
regarded  in  the  same  light  as  by  Romanists  in  subsequent 
times.  He  enacted,  a.d.  789,  a  law  by  ivhich  his  Saxon  sub- 
jects were  obliged,  on  pain  of  death,  to  be  baptized;  and  of 
heavy  fines,  to  baptize  their  children  withi7i  the  year  of  their 
birth. 

Independently  of  these  facts,  which  must  not  be  overlooked 
in  this  inquiry,  there  are  other  considerations  of  some 
weight,  but  at  which  we  can  only  hint  at  present.  For 
example  :  Infant  baptism,  at  this  period,  was  by  no  means 
universal.  It  had  not  yet  everywhere  superseded  that  of 
believers.  In  the  fifth  €entury,  Mabillon  says,  "  Chikken 
were  baptized  at  six  years  of  age."  Catechumens  still  were 
found  nearly  in  all  countries  where  Christianity  was  recog- 
nised; whilst  by  most,  we  might  probably  be  justified  in 
affirming  that  by  all,  of  the  dissidents  from  Rome,  the  bap- 
tism of  infants  was  rejected.  The  supposition,  therefore, 
that  the  British  churches  retained  the  primitive  practice, 

*  Before  this  time,  baptism  was  regarded  as  essential  to  salvation. 
Pages  ceuld  be  filled  by  showing  the  exaggerated  importance  which  the 
singular  old  gentlemen  called  the  Fathers  attached  to  this  simple  rite. 
One  example  shall  suffice  :  "  The  pertinacious  wickedness  of  the  devil  hath 
power  up  to  the  saving  water,  but  that  in  baptism  he  loses  all  the  poison 
of  his  wickedness.  When,  however,  they  come  to  the  saving  water,  and 
to  the  sanctification  of  baptism,  we  ought  to  know  and  be  confident  that 
the  devil  is  then  overcome,"  &c.— Cyprian's  Letters,  p.  69.  Vide  Coun.  at 
Carthage.     Cyprian's  Letters,  Lib.  of  Fathers,  p.  233. 


8      ■  EARLY    ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

involves  no  violation  of  existing  facts  or  probabilities.  May 
we  not  also  regard  this  supposition  as  strengthened  by  the 
fact,  that  up  to  this  time  they  had  not  recognised  the  usur- 
pation of  the  Roman  Pontiff?*  Bede  more  than  warrants 
the  conclusion,  that  on  many  points  they  differed  widely 
from  the  church  at  Rome ;  and  states  positively,  that  when 
Austin  asked  them  to  relinquish  their  mode  of  keeping 
Easter,  and  adopt  that  of  the  West  (the  badge,  let  it  be 
remembered,  of  union  with  Rome),  they  absolutely  refused. 
No  one  can  read  the  accounts  of  this  Father  of  Ecclesiastical 
history,  and  we  have  none  else,  without  feeling  that  the 
pretensions  and  claims  of  this  haughty  monk  were  regarded 
by  the  sturdy  Cambrians  as  an  invasion  of  their  independence. 
In  fragments  of  poems,  written  soon  after,  the  hostility  to 
Rome  is  unmistakable.     Old  Thomas  Fuller  gives  us  this : — 

' '  Wo  be  to  the  priest  unborn, 
That  will  not  cleanly  weed  his  com, 

And  preach  his  flock  among. 
Wo  be  to  that  shepherd,  I  say, 
That  will  not  watch  his  flock  away, 

As  to  his  office  doth  belong. 

"Wo  be  to  him  that  doth  not  keep 
From  E-omish  wolves  his  sheep. 

With  stafl"  and  weapon  strong." 

From  Sharon  Turner  we  select  another  : — 

"I  will  not  receive  the  Sacrament 
From  the  detestable  monks, 
With  their  gowns  upon  their  haunches ; 
May  the  Sacrament  be  administered  to  me 
by  God  himself." 

The  causes  which  contributed  to  shut  out  the  influence  of 
Rome  from  Wales  till  the  time  of  Austin,  are  too  obvious 
to  be  mentioned.  The  church  was  not  yet  lifeless.  Forms 
had  not  yet  destroyed  the  realities  of  spiritual  life.     In- 


TMerry's  Norman  Conquest,  voL  iii.,  p.  4,  5. 


INTRODUCTION.  9 

dividual  freedom  was  not  yet  crushed  by  the  iron  rod  of 
spiritual  despotism.  Its  vitality  was  wounded,  hut  not 
annihilated.  Uniformity  of  worship,  in  rites  and  ceremonies, 
in  doctrine  and  discipline,  did  not  exist  universally.  Yariety 
in  all  these  prevailed,  and  was  held  to  be  compatible  with 
the  unity  of  the  Spirit.  The  correspondence  of  Gregory 
with  the  missionary  priest  is  valuable  on  this  account,  and 
places  the  matter  very  distinctly  before  us.  "  It  ])leases  me 
that  if  you  have  found  anything,  either  in  the  Roman  or 
the  Galilean  or  any  other  church,  which  may  be  more 
acceptable  to  Almighty  God,  you  carefully  make  choice  of 
the  same."  "Choose,  therefore,  from  any  church,  those  tilings 
that  are  pious,  religious,  and  upright."  The  argument  from 
uniformity  against  the  Baptist  view,  utterly  fails.* 

We  offer  these  considerations,  not  in  the  spirit  of  par- 
tizanship,  but  with  calmness  and  impartiality.  The  ques- 
tion cannot  be  decided  with  positivity.  No  evidence  we- 
think  exists  to  warrant  it.  The  utmost  we  can  do  is  to 
reach  the  probable.  From  this  point  we  have  looked  at  it, 
and  ventured  to  submit  reasons  which,  to  us,  demolish  much 
if  not  the  whole  of  the  ground,  on  which  Baxter,  Wills, 
Wall,  and  others,  have  based  their  case.  Our  own  judgment, 
in  the  main,  is  concurrent  with  that  of  our  early  writers, 
although  we   have  arrived   at   it   by  a  process  somewhat 

*  "  A.S  late  as  A.D.  747  it  was  enjoined  that  the  priests  should  take  caro 
to  discharge  the  duty  of  apostolic  commission  in  baptising  according  to 
lawful  right ;  and  in  the  II.  Canon  of  Clovashoo,  the  priests  are  directed 
to  study  to  perform  this  sacerdotal  ministry  in  one  and  the  same  mode  of 
baptising."  Wilkins  Consil,  vol.  i.,  p,  96.  Denne  on  Fonts,  p.  116.  By  a 
canon  of  Edgar,  A.D.  960,  every  priest  was  instructed  to  perform  baptism 
as  soon  as  it  was  required  of  him ;  and  he  was  to  give  it  in  charge  to  his 
parish,  that  the  baptism  of  an  infant  v^as  not  to  be  delayed  beyond  thirty- 
seven  days.  But  by  a  law  of  Northumberland,  A.D.  950,  the  child  was  to 
be  baptised  within  nine  days. — "Wilkins  Consil,  vol.  i.,  p.  218.  Apu6L 
Denne  on  Fonts,  pp.  116-7. 

Hostility  to  Rome  equally  marked  the  Irish  church.  Examples  of  this 
will  be  found  in  Usher,  and  especially  in  Todd's  Ancient  Irish  Church, 
pp.  84,  103-4,  131. 


10  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

different  to  theirs.  We  think  the  preponderance  of  proba- 
bilities decidedly  in  favour  of  the  opinion  that  the  British, 
churcli  at  this  time  did  not  practise  infant  baptism.* 

The  Anglo-Saxon  church  presents  but  very  little  on  which 
the  mind  of  an  intelligent  Christian  can  rest  with  satisfaction. 
The  corruptions  of  Rome  here  found  a  rich  soil,  and 
^hey  flourished  with  increased  ^dgour.  Its  darkness  was 
that  of  midnight,  relieved  only  here  and  there  by  the  feeble 
glimmer  of  some  small  star.  Controversies  about  forms — 
multiplied  ceremonies  clothed  with  some  undefined  super- 
natural power — conflicts  between  the  secular  and  spiritual 
powers — and  the  raj^id  decay  of  all  spiritual  life,  prove  the 
sad  and  prominent  characteristics  of  this  era.t  No  trace  of 
the  Baptist  element  appears  till  some  generations  after, 
under  the  government  of  the  Norman  dynasty.  During 
the  reign  of  the  Second  Henry  we  have  a  glimpse  of  it. 
Historians  of  a  certain  stamp  tell  us  that  this  was  the  first 
appearance  of  heresy  in  this  kingdom.  Not  of  hostility  to 
Papal  ojDpression,  but  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Holy  See.  The 
seamless  coat  of  the  unity  of  the  church  till  now  had  been 
untouched.  The  horrid  crime  which  called  forth  the  holy 
indignation  of  the  church  was  perpetrated  by  Baptists.  The 
facts  of  the  case,  as  we  gather  them  from  the  pages  of  their 
enemies,  are  these.  From  their  language  they  were  from 
Holland.  These  "publican"  heretics  were  about  thirty  of 
both  sexes.  They  pretended  to  visit  this  country  on  business. 
They  were  rustic  in  their  manners,  and  were  headed  by  one 


*  The  reader  will  find  this  matter  fully  discussed  in  the  following 
works  :  D'Anvers's  Treatise  on  Baptism.  Reply  to  WiUs,  Baxter,  &c. 
Benedict's  History  of  Baptists ;  New  York,  1848. 

+  The  reader  who  would  form  an  accurate  opinion  of  the  true  spiritual 
character  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  church,  must  do  more  than  familiarize 
himself  with  the  pages  of  Lingard  and  Soame.  Both  were  written  for  a 
special  purpose,  and  leave  untouched  the  ignorance,  the  superstition,  and 
immorality,  which  everywhere  prevailed.  Let  him  master  the  old  chroni- 
cles of  the  period,  and  his  views  will  approximate  nearer  to  the  reality. 


INTRODUCTION".  11 

Gerliard,  a  man  of  some  learning.  The  watchmen  of  the 
church  soon  detected  their  secret  foes.  Before  a  synocl  at 
Oxford  the  transgressors  were  called.  Their  leader  replied 
to  the  questions  of  their  judges,  on  behalf  of  the  rest.  He 
avowed  their  attachment  to  Christ,  and  that  the  doctrine  of 
the  apostles  was  their  sole  rule  of  faith.  On  the  Trinity 
and  incarnation  they  were  sound,  but  they  rejected  baptism, 
the  eucharist,  and  other  dogmas  of  Rome.  Entreaty  and 
menace  alike  failed.  To  their  opinions  they  adhered,  and  in 
reply  to  the  tlu'eat  of  punishment  as  heretics,  calmly  replied : 
^^  Blessed  are  they  that  suffer  in  persecution  for  righteoustjLes^ 
sake,  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven^  Compassion  for 
their  souls,  and  anxiety  for  the  commonwealth  which  might 
be  diseased  by  the  contagion  of  their  wicked  example, 
induced  the  bishops  to  transfer  them  to  the  secular  magis- 
trate as  confirmed  heretics.  Upon  this  the  king  ordered 
them  to  be  branded  on  the  forehead  and  publicly  whipped  out 
of  the  town  ;  strictly  forbidding  all  persons  either  to  enter- 
tain them  or  give  them  any  manner  of  relief.  They  suffered 
the  execution  of  this  sentence  very  cheerfully,  their  ring- 
leader marching  at  the  head  of  them,  and  singing,  ^^  Blessed 
are  ye  when  men  shall  hate  you^  In  short,  the  rigour  of  the 
sentence  and  the  season  were  such  (it  being  winter),  that 
these  poor  wretches  sunk  under  their  punishment  and  were 
all  despatched.* 

Doubtless  these  martyrs  were  Paulicians.t  Under  this 
name  they  appear  as  dissidents  from  the  Greek  church  about 
the  middle  of  the  seventh  century.  Amidst  persecutions, 
war,  and  sufferings,  they  spread  over  Europe.  Doctrines,  as 
usual,  the  most  revolting,  were  attributed  to  them  by  their 
enemies.     Rome,  at  an  early  period,  excelled  in  this.     She 

''  Collier's  Ecclesiastical  History,  vol.  i.,  pp.  347-8. 

+  "Tliey  called  themselves  the  true  Catholic  church,  opposed  to  the 
corrupt  and  ruling  establishment."  They  were  also  styled  Publicans,  but 
this  was  more  particularly  in  the  southern  provinces  of  France, — Neander's 
Life  of  Brainard,  p.  338. 


12  EAKLY    ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

laid  no  restraint  on  lier  fancy.  She  renounced  her  allegiance 
to  truth  when  dealing  with  her  adversaries.  Cleared  from 
the  calumnies  of  these  men,  their  doctrines  were  far  more 
evangelical  than  those  of  the  corrupt  church,  and  their  lives 
far  more  holy  than  those  of  the  recognized  priesthood.  No 
doubt  the  unbroken  testimony  of  history  justifies  the  state- 
ment of  Dr.  Allix  : — '^  They  were  Anabaptists,  or  rejectors 
of  infant  baptism,  and  were  consequently  often  reproached 
with  that  name."* 

Was  Wicklifie  a  Baptist  1  Many  of  our  writers  have 
claimed  the  illustrious  reformer  as  one  of  a  long  list  of 
witnesses  who  through  many  ages  have  borne  their  testimony 
against  the  baptism  of  infants,  and  have  stated  that,  through 
the  ministry  of  his  poor  priests,  these  opinions  were  widely 
diflfused  through  this  land.t  We  may  be  permitted  to  quote 
from  an  article  of  our  own,  our  matured  opinion  on  this  ques- 
tion :  "  It  is  beyond  all  doubt  that  his  opponents  charged 
him  with  denying  it.  Walden,  one  of  his  most  violent  and 
unscrupulous  opponents,  again  and  again  urges  it ;  and 
subsequent  writers,  historians  and  others,  repeat  the  state- 
ments of  the  monk,  without,  it  is  to  be  feared,  examining 
the  writings  of  the  reformer.  It  is  beyond  all  controversy 
that  he  rejected  many  of  the  superstitious  notions  which  the 
Komish  church  had  gathered  around  the  sacrament.  Not 
only  is  it  probable  that  he  relinquished  many  of  the  absurdi- 
ties which  distinguished  the  outward  ceremony,  but  rejected 
it  altogether  as  productive  of  those  saving  effects  which 
Home  attached  to  its  valid  administration.  Of  this  there 
can  be  little  doubt,  as  one  of  the  charges  against  him,  in  the 
Council  of  1396,  was,  that  he  affirmed  in  his  writings  that  the 


*  Rem,  Ch.  Piedmont,  p.  138.  Gibbon  has  devoted  a  chapter  to  this 
sect;  on  the  whole,  fair  and  candid.  The  reader  may  consult  also 
Robinson's  Ecc.  Researches,  Jones's  Ecc.  Hist.,  Orchard's  F.  Baptists,  Dr. 
Lardner's  work,  vol.  iii.  8vo.  Ed.  To  these  he  may  add  Mosheim  and 
Milner,  on  the  sect. 

+  Vide  D'Anvers,  Ivimey,  and  others. 


INTRODUCTION.  1 3 

chilrlren  of  the  rigliteous  might  be  saved  without  baptism. 
As  held  by  the  church,  baj)tism  was  a  saving  ordinance. 
The  damnation  of  all  infants  who  died  without  it  was 
certain.*  !N'ow  the  modification  of  these  views  would  be 
ground  sufficient  on  which  his  adversary  would  base  his 
charges.  Truth  was  not  his  aim.  Any  misrepresentation 
which  would  damage  his  adversary  would  be  allowed.  No 
men  are  less  to  be  trusted  than  the  monkish  historians, 
when  they  speak  of  the  character  and  doctrine  of  dissidents 
from  Rome. 

"  No  doubt  the  sentiments  of  the  reformer  on  some 
dogmas  were  Baptist,  and  I  think  it  is  more  than  probable 
th«t  many  of  his  followers  were  consistent,  and  rejected  the 
baptism  of  infants  ;  but  I  know  at  present  no  document 
which  warrants  this  conclusion  in  relation  to  Wickliffe 
himself  His  Triologues,  those  on  which  his  enemies  rested 
their  charges,  certainly,  as  given  by  his  latest  biographer, 
supply  no  proof  The  following  may  be  taken  as  embodying 
his  views  on  this  ordinance  at  the  time  of  their  publica- 
tion: — '■On  account  of  the  words  of  the  last  chapter  in 
Matthew^  our  church  introduces  believers  who  answer  for  the 
infant  which  has  not  yet  arrived  at  years  of  discretion,^  (hc.\ 
*■  Nor  is  it  of  moment  xohether  the  haptized  he  immersed  once, 
or  thrice,  or  whether  the  water  he  poured  on  the  head  ;  hut  the 
ceremony  must  he  performed  according  to  the  usage  of  the 
place,  and  is  as  legitimate  one  way  as  another;  for  it  is 
certain,  that  hodily  baptism  or  washing  is  of  little  avail, 
unless  there  goes  with  it  the  washing  of  the  mind  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  from  original  or  actual  sin.  For  herein  is  a  fundor- 
Tiiental  article  of  belief,  that  wherever  a  man  is  duly  haptized, 
^Mptismi  destroys  whatever  sin  ivas  found  in  the  man.^X 
3f  children  dying  unbaptized,  he  says, — '/  think  it  probable 

*  A  writer  in  tlie  Dublin   Quarterly  Review  affirms  tlie   absolute 
damnation  of  all  infants  dying  unbaptized. 

+  Triologue  x.,  p.  156  (Wickliffe  Society).        X  Ibid,  pp.  156-7. 


14  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

that  Chrisi  might,  without  any  such  washing,  spiritually 
baptize,  and  by  consequence  save,  infants.'"^  'When  an  infidel 
baptizes  a  cliild,  not  supposing  tliat  baptism  to  be  of  any 
avail  for  his  salvation,  such  a  baptism  we  are  not  to  regard 
as  serviceable  to  the  baptized.  Yet  we  believe  that  where 
any  old  woman  or  despised  person  duly  baptizes  with  water, 
God  completes  the  baptism  of  the  Spirit  along  with  the 
words  of  the  sacrament.'  " 

At  the  same  time  it  is  only  right  to  add,  that  it  is 
certain  the  Lollards,  who  had  long  preceded  WickliiFe,  and 
had  diffused  their  opinions  far  and  wide  throughout  this 
country,  repudiated  infant  baptism.  Walter  Lollard  had 
visited  this  country  early  in  the  fourteenth  century ;  a  man 
of  enlightened  views,  of  inflexible  courage,  and  impassioned 
eloquence ;  and  he  had  widely  extended  the  circle  of  his 
influence,  t  The  followers  of  both  soon  united.  The  name 
of  the  latter  marked  the  sectarians.  In  a  few  ye&rs  after  the 
death  of  Wicklifle,  more  than  half  the  nation  were  imbued 
with  tho  principles  of  the  "Bible  Men^X  East  Anglia, 
Middlesex,  Kent,  Hereford,  and  the  Midland  Counties,  were 
the  chief  places  of  their  abode.  The  relations  of  England  to 
Kome,  the  state  of  the  Papacy  throughout  Europe,  had  been 
favourable  to  their  peace  and  prosperity.  But  the  tide  soon 
turned.  The  repression  of  Ej^iscopal  anger  only  made  it 
more  fearful. 

Arundel  and  Chicheley,  succes"sively  Archbishops  of  Can- 
terbury, distinguished  themselves  in  this  service  of  blood. 
In  their  hands,  the  laws  enacted  against  the  Lollards  were 

■*  Triologue  xi,,  pp.  159-60  (Wickliffe  Society).        +  Mosheim. 

X  "Some  of  his  followers,"  Knyghton  testifies,  "in  a  very  short  time 
became  eloquent  preachers,  and  very  powerful  disputants."  The  monkish 
chronicles  attribute  this  to  the  devil.  "The  heretics  and  Lollards  of 
Wickliffe's  opinions  were  suffered  to  preach  abroad  so  boldly,  to  gather 
conventicles  unto  them,  to  keep  schools  in  men's  houses,  to  write  books, 
compile  treatises,  and  write  ballads,  to  teach  privately  in  angles  and' 
corners,  as  in  woods,  pastures,  meadows,  groves,  and  caves  of  the  ground, 
&c."    Bales'  Works  (Parker  Society). 


INTRODUCTION.  15 

uy  no  means  a  dead  letter.  Multitudes  were  forced  to  recant 
or  to  expiate  their  crime  at  the  stake.'""  Arundel  employed 
twelve  magistrates  to  search  for  information  against  them, 
and  got  an  Act  passed  forbidding  the  reading  of  the  Scrip- 
tures.! The  first  who  fell  a  prey  to  the  malice  of  this 
prelate,  and  the  first  martyr  in  England,  was  Sautrey,  sup- 
posed by  some  to  have  had  Baptist  views,  but,  we  tliink, 
without  clear  proof  of  the  fact.;}:  The  illustrious  Cobham, 
who  sealed  his  testimony  with  his  blood,  may  again  come 
under  our  notice.  The  king  thought  heresy  very  dangerous, 
and  under  the  advice  of  his  Ejiiscopal  councillors,  he  burnt 
more  of  the  followers  of  Wickliffe  than  any,  since  the  first 
of  the  Lancastrian  kings.  Yet  the  doctrine  of  this  arch- 
heretic  struck  deeper  root  in  the  minds  of  the  people.  § 
Amongst  them  the  prevalence  of  Baptist  principles  admits 
of  no  doubt. 

"I  have  now  before  me,"  says  Robinson,  "a  MS.  register  of  Grey, 
Bishop  of  Ely,  which  proves  that  in  the  year  14.57,  there  was  a 
congregation  of  this  sort  (Baptist)  in  this  village,  Chesterton,  where 
I  live,  who  privately  assembled  for  divine  worship  and  had  preachers 
of  their  own,  Vv'ho  taught  them  the  very  doctrine  which  we  now  preach. 
Six  of  them  were  accused  of  heresy  before  the  tyrants  of  the  district, 
and  condemned  to  abjure  heresy,  and  do  penance  half  naked,  with  a 
faggot  at  their  backs,  and  a  taper  in  their  hands,  in  the  public 
market-place  of  Ely  and  Cambridge,  and  in  the  churchyard  of  Great 
Swaff ham.  "—Claude's  Essay,  vol.  ii.,  p.  54.  Dr.  Richard's  Welsh 
Nonconformist  Memorials,  p.  436. 


*  "Their  necks  were  tied  fast  to  a  post  with  towels,  and  their  hands 
holden,  that  tliey  might  not  stir ;  and  so  the  hot  iron  was  put  to  their 
cheeks.  It  is  not  certain  whether  branded  with  L  for  Lollard,  or  H  for 
heretic,  or  whether  it  was  only  a  formless  print  of  iron." — Fuller's  Ch. 
Hist.,  p.  164. 

Bishop  Longland,  of  Lincoln,  enjoined,  in  1521,  that  none  of  these 
persecuted  Christians  "  should  liide  their  marks  upon  their  cheek,  neither 
with  hat,  cap,  hood,  kercliief,  napkin,  or  otherwise,  nor  shall  suffer  their 
beards  to  gi-ow  past  fom-teen  days." — Foxe,  p.  7G5.  Apud  Soame's  Refor., 
vol.  i.,  p.  159. 

f  Parliamentary  History,  vol.  i. ,  pp.  323-4. 

+  Crosby  and  others.        §  Forster's  Essays,  1.   Plantagenet  et  Tudor,  2. 


16  EARLY    ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

Walsingliam,  referring  to  the  examination  of  some  of 
these  men,  says,  "  That  they  would  by  no  means  bring  an 
infant  to  the  church  to  be  baptized  by  the  parish  priest, 
because,  in  their  ojDinion,  the  Holy  Trinity  would  be  pro- 
faned by  the  sinfulness  of  such  a  ministry,  and  the  dead  be 
in  a  worse  condition  by  being  put  into  the  priest's  hands."* 

The  Lollards'  tower,  with  its  rings  and  chains  of  iron, 
stands  still,  as  the  monument  of  the  bitter  hostility  of  their 
mitred  tyrants,  and  the  fidelity  to  their  tenets  of  these  noble 
and  holy  men. 

Before  entering  on  the  history,  the  reader  may  be  detained 
by  a  sentence  or  two  on  another  topic.  Historians  of  a 
certain  class,  and  partisan  writers,  have  been  fond  of  desig- 
nating us  as  "Anabaptists,"  and  gathering  around  us  all 
those  elements  of  social  disorder  and  fearful  profligacy  which 
the  scenes  of  Munster,  and  the  mad  vagaries  of  Stork  and 
his  brethren,  ever  suggest.t  Hard  have  they  laboured  to 
identify  us  with  these  men.  We  are  not  careful  to  answer 
them  in  this  matter.  The  men  that  slirunk  not  from  the 
severe  privations  of  the  jail,  and  the  more  terrible  punish- 
ment of  the  stake,  were  not  affected  much  by  a  name.  It 
answered  the  purpose  of  their  adversaries  for  a  time;  but 
they  were  blind  to  the  logical  consequences  of  their  own 
position.  They  forgot,  in  the  fulness  of  their  malice,  the 
retribution  to  which  they  were  exposing  themselves.  To 
trace  the  sad  events  which  resulted  fi-om  the  efibrts  to 
secure  social  freedom,  to  the  doctrines  that  the  individual 

*  Walsingliam,  apud  Collier,  vol.  i.,  p.  619.  Other  e^ddence  maybe 
seen  in  Ci-osby,  vol.  i.,  pp.  19-24. 

t  Robertson,  cb.  v.,  book  v.  On  tbe  other  side,  consult  Robinson's 
Ecc.  Res.,  ch.  xiv.,  p.  535.  It  is  no  part  of  our  plan  to  enter  on  this 
subject,  or  it  would  not  be  difficvilt  to  prove  how  prejudice  on  the  one 
hand,  and  ignorance  on  the  other,  have  warped  the  judgment  of  most  of 
o\ir  popular  historians.  Mr.  Underbill  intimated,  some  years  ago,  his 
intention  to  give  to  the  world  his  researches  on  this  subject.  As  yet  that 
promise  is  unredeemed.  Its  fulfilment  would  rectify  many  of  our  popular 
wi'iters  on  these  events. 


INTRODUCTION.  17 

consciousness  of  God's  claim  on  man's  affections,  and  that 
the  Christian  profession  is  only  made  by  an  immersion  of 
the  individual  in  water,  "in  the  name  of  the  Father,  of 
the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  is  only  to  lay  open  their 
own  system  to  the  most  crushing  retort.  It  were  just  as  easy 
to  demonstrate  that  the  world  has  been  the  vast  theatre 
on  which  Psedobaptists  have  perpetrated  crimes  at  which 
humanity  shudders,  and  over  which  piety  and  virtue  must 
weep,  as  that  the  Anabaptists,  as  a  body,  were  found  steeped 
in  crime,  and  revelling  in  lust.*  The  term,  always  one  of 
reproach,  is  now  scarcely  ever  used,  except  by  a  few  remaining 
types  of  the  condensed  bigotry  and  ignorance  of  the  past.  The 
error  in  which  it  originated,  and  the  injustice  on  which  it  was 
based,  are  passing  away.  In  no  sense  was  it  ever  applicable 
to  our  Fathers.  No  indi\T.duals  would  more  strongly  con- 
demn Anabaptism  than  the  persons  to  whom  the  charge  was 
applied.  They  never  advocated  the  repetition  of  baptism. 
Such  a  practice  they  would  have  repudiated.  The  sprinkling 
of  infants  they  never  recognised  as  Christian  baptism.  It 
not  only  violated  their  vital  principles  in  relation  to  the  in- 
dividual, but  not  less  their  views  of  the  scripturalness  of  the 
mode.  With  equal  justice  might  the  charge  of  Anabaptism 
be  applied  to  Cyprian  and  his  African  brethren,  to  Dionysius 
and  his  brethren  in  Egjq^t,  to  Novatian  at  Carthage,  and 
Novatus  at  Home,  and  the  churches  they  founded ;  whilst 
Donatus  and  his  followers,  Arius  and  his  followers,  all  re- 
jected the  baptism  of  those  who  have  since  been  designated 
Catholics,  and  regarded  their  churches  as  habitations  of 
impurity,  and  invariably  baptized  all  who  came  from  them, — 
not  as  a  repetition  of  baptism,  but  from  the  conviction  that 
their  previous  baptism  wanted  some  essential  element.  The 
morality  of  some  of  these  dissidents  was  more  rigid  than 
that  of  the  favoured  sects,  yet  they  invariably  inculcated 

*  Henry  the  Eighth  "charges  the  commotions  and  revolts  in  Gei-many 
upon  Luther's  doctrines,  and  that  he  had  been  the  occasion  of  a  great 
deal  of  rapine  and  disorder  in  the  world." — Collier,  vol.  ii.,  p.  21. 

C 


18  EARLY  ENGLISH  BAPTISTS. 

"  one  Lord,  one  faith,  one  baptism."  *  The  task  would 
be  easy  of  accomplishment  to  show,  that,  on  the  principles 
involved  in  the  application  of  this  term,  nearly  all  the 
purity  and  truth  in  the  world,  for  generations,  was  found  in 
the  community  of  Anabaptists.  Dr.  Wall,  with  a  candour 
which  distinguishes  him  from  many  of  his  brethren,  felt  the 
impropriety  of  this  appellation,  and  used  the  term  Anti- 
psedobaptists.t 

Upon  the  narrative  itself  we  now  enter.  Our  starting- 
point  will  be  the  Tudor  dynasty;  and,  passing  on  to  the  most 
eventful  periods  of  British  history,  we  shall  close  with  the 
final  expulsion  of  the  Stuarts  from  the  throne  of  these 
realms. 


CHAPTER    I. 


THE    TUDOR  DYNASTY. 


The  era  which  marked  the  accession  to  the  throne  of 
England  of  the  descendant  of  the  "Welshman,  was  one  preg- 
nant with  the  most  important  consequences.  Causes  were 
operating  which,  in  their  ultimate  issues,  not  only  affected 
the  social,  the  religious,  and  the  commercial  life  of  England, 
but  more  or  less  the  condition  of  the  civilized  world.  On 
some  of  these  causes,  we  shall  be  pardoned  if,  for  a  moment, 
we  detain  the  reader's  attention. 

The  discovery  of  the  art  of  printing  placed  within  the 
hands  of  the  people  a  power,  the  influence  of  which  is 
even  yet  augmenting.  It  gave  a  mighty  impulse  to  the 
awakened  mind  of  Europe,  which  led  to  the  study  of  those 
great  masterpieces  of  thought,   which  had  lain  entombed 

*  Cyprian's  Letter.    Robinson's  Hist,  of  Baptism,  cli.  xxxiv. 
+  History  of  Infant  Baptism. 


THE   TUDOR   DYNASTY.  19 

amidst  the  dust  and  neglect  of  the  cloister  for  ages.  Kefined 
taste,  mental  culture,  marked  improvement  in  artistic  effort 
and  scientific  inquiry,  were  tlie  result.  Dante,  Petrarch,  Boc- 
caccio, had  thrown  the  splendour  of  their  genius  over  Italy, 
and  its  radiance  had  illumined  other  lands.  In  every  way 
humanity  was  benefited  by  the  discovery  of  printing.  Dog- 
matism, especially,  was  smitten  in  its  high  places,  and  free 
inquiry  was  everywhere  encouraged. 

The  spirit  of  commerce  had  opened  new  regions  to  the 
rivalry  and  enterprise  of  Europe, — regions  clothed  with  all 
the  attractions  wdth  which  the  most  romantic  ardour  could 
invest  them.  Columbus  had  centred  in  himself  the  hopes 
of  thousands.'"'  The  envied  of  multitudes,  the  daring  spirits 
of  the  age  sought  to  emulate  him.  Everywhere  the  influence 
of  his  movement  was  felt.  From  every  seaboard  adven- 
turers started  in  the  search  of  unknown  lands  and  exhaust- 
less  wealth.  The  effect  of  this  on  mind,  liberty,  and  social 
life,  need  not  be  indicated. 

A  series  of  events  had  contributed,  for  generations,  to 
invest  the  Papacy  with  spiritual  supremacy.  The  iron 
sceptre  of  Christ's  \dcar  had  broken  in  pieces  every  oj)posing 
power.  Secure  under  his  triple  crown,  emancipated  from  all 
fear  of  rebellion  against  his  vicariate,  the  insolence  of  the 
successor  of  the  Galilean  fisherman  was  unbounded,  and 
"  the  servant  of  the  servants  of  God  "  exclaimed,  "  Thou  shall 
tram]}le  on  the  lion  and  the  adder^''  as  he  placed  his  foot  on 
the  neck  of  kings,  f  But  in  the  day  of  liis  mightiest  prowess 
there  were  signs  of  weakness.  The  conflicts  of  the  ci^'il  and 
spiritual  powers  had  been  frequent.  The  soil  of  England 
had  witnessed  many  a  struggle.  The  blood  of  martyred 
millions  was  crying  for  vengeance;  and  reason  and  truth 
were  shocked  at  the  cruelties  which  were  inflicted  on  men, 

*  On  the  subject  of  the  %asit  of  this  great  man  to  England,  the  reader 
may  consult  Sharon  Tumei-'s  Henry  VIII.,  and  Washington  Ii'ving's  Life 
of  Columbus.  ^  Eanke's  History  of  the  Popes. 


20  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

far  more  lionest  and  lioly  than  the  very  best  of  their  perse- 
cutors. Virtue  could  find  no  resting-place  within  the  palace 
of  the  Vatican.* 

"  Long  had  the  Pope  proclaimed  himseK  to  the  world 
Half  man,  half  God ; 
Now,  by  God's  blessing,  we  are  enabled  to  see  him 
Half  man,  half  Satan." 

Alexander  had  left  a  memory  far  more  execrable  than 
that  of  Nero  or  Caligula.  The  enormous  wickedness  of  his 
son,  Csesar  Borgia,  stamps  bis  pontificate  with  unmixed 
infamy. t  His  successor  was  Julian  the  Second.  This  Vicar 
of  the  Prince  of  Peace  was  the  most  warlike  Pontiff  who 
had  worn  the  tiara.  The  booming  of  cannon,  the  ring  of  the 
war  cry,  and  the  groans  of  the  dying,  appear  to  have  been 
more  melodious  in  his  ears  than  the  all  but  ravishing  music 
of  the  Lateran.  Turbulent,  plotting,  ambitious  of  power 
and  dominion,  Europe  was  ever  agitated  by  his  malignant 
genius. t  Immorality,  moreover,  afiiicted  the  whole  body. 
From  the  conclave  down  to  the  humblest  monastery,  vice 
flourished.  Arrogance,  wealth,  the  love  of  power,  every- 
where seen,  had  operated  on  the  public  mind,  and  extorted 
from  Europe  a  long  and  loud  cry  "  for  a  reformation  in  the 
head  and  members."  For  generations,  hostility  to  Pome  had 
been  growing.  The  noble,  the  moral,  the  enlightened,  had 
denounced  her.§  Only  by  the  Inquisition  and  the  stake,  by 
massacre  and  carnage,  had  she  repelled  their  attacks.  The 
effoi-ts  of  Luther  were  only  the  utterance  of  the  past ;  the 

*  Vide  Epis.  of  Petrarch.  He  calls  Rome  "a  school  of  error,  a  temple 
of  heresy ;  once  Rome,  now  Babylon,  the  fallen  and  wicked,  the  hell  of 
the  living." 

+  Villiers  on  the  Influence  of  the  Refonnation,  &c. 

X  Ranke's  History  of  the  Popes,  chap.  ii. 

§  The  reader  will  find  abundant  proof  of  this  in  Rosetti's  interesting 

volumes  on  the  Anti-papal  Spirit  which  preceded  the  Reformation,  vol.  i., 

chap,  i.,  ii.,  &c.     Spottiswood  gives  a  melancholy  account  of  the  church 

of  Scotland,  lib.  ii.,  pp.  59-60. 


THE  TUDOR   DYNASTY.  21 

weapons  with  which  he  smote,  with  such  terrific  power,  the 
very  centre  of  Catholic  unity,  were  forged  by  the  martyred 
host  which  had  fallen  in  the  conflict. 

The  spirit  of  civil  liberty  was  shedding  her  light  over  a 
wider  circle,  and  putting  forth  higher  claims,  and  calmly 
but  firmly  asking  for  broader  privileges.  Feudalism  was 
losing  its  hold  on  the  nations,  and  the  peoples  of  Europe 
were  rapidly  improving  their  political  condition.  Society  was 
struggling,  like  some  great  giant  bound  in  fetters,  to  eman- 
cipate itself  from  those  restraints  which  ci\dl  and  spiritual 
despotism  imitedly  had  im2:)0sed  upon  it.  In  no  country 
was  this  struggle,  probably,  more  marked  than  in  England, 
and  no  people  were  more  disposed  to  realise  to  the  full  extent 
the  influence  resulting  from  it.  The  recollection  of  these 
things  is  essential  to  the  correct  understanding  of  the  great 
and  rapid  changes  which  marked  the  close  of  the  fifteenth, 
and  the  greater  portion  of  the  sixteenth,  century.  The 
events  which  transpired  during  these  periods,  which  shed 
such  glory  on  the  world,  and  opened  to  humanity  at  large 
long-hidden  sources  of  happiness,  were  only  the  harvest  of 
those  seeds  which  the  persecuted  had  sown, — the  liberty  and 
the  purity  which  they  had  died  to  secure  to  us. 

Amidst  the  groans  of  the  wounded,  and  the  struggles  of 
the  dying,  the  diadem  was  placed  on  the  head  of  the  first  of 
the  Tudors ;  and  on  the  field  of  Bosworth,  Henry  was  hailed 
by  the  mailed  warriors  as  monarch  of  England.'"'  From  early 
youth  his  life  had  been  tried,  and  his  character  formed,  by  a 
discipline  by  no  means  uncommon  in  those  days  to  the  class 
to  wliich  he  belonged.  Upon  the  whole,  his  mind  had  been 
well  cultivated;  and  one  of  his  eulogists  tells  us  that  he 
was  master  of  several  languages.  The  circumstances  of  his 
early  life  would  more  than  warrant  this  opinion.  Uniting  in 
himself,  by  marriage,  the  rival  claims  of  York  and  Lancaster, 
he  finally  succeeded  in  consolidating  a  policy,  from  which 

*  Loi'd  Bacon's  Henry  VII.,  p.  1.    London,  1622. 


22  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

sprang  results  wliicli  ultimately  changed  tlie  condition  of 
the  whole  island.*  Up  to  this  period  two  classes  appear 
to  have  held  the  throne  in  subjection,  and  ever  and  anon  to 
have  retarded  the  prosperity  of  the  nation  by  their  struggles 
for  supremacy  in  the  State.  The  great  feudal  barons,  and 
the  church,  were  the  chief  sources  of  power.  Royalty  was 
often  a  mere  puppet  in  their  hands ;  whilst  the  wealth  and 
numerous  retainers  of  both  were  a  source  of  frequent,  if  not 
perpetual,  oppression  to  the  commonwealth,  t  Henry  wisely 
sought  to  curb  the  power  of  both.  J  In  all  the  plots  which 
disturbed  his  reign  some  of  them  were  engaged.  Around 
the  pretenders  to  his  throne,  churchmen  threw  their  influ- 
ence. The  ecclesiastical  body  was  very  corrupt.  The  inferior 
clergy  were  almost  lawless,  till,  by  an  enactment  in  a.d.  1497, 
he  authorized  the  bishops  to  punish  them  "by  such  imprison- 
ment as  they  should  think  expedient."§  Intelligent  piety 
was  unknown,  except  in  the  few  dissidents  scattered  here 


*■  "His  direct  male  line  ceased  in  Queen  Elizabeth,  but  the  descendants 
of  his  daughter  Margaret  succeeded  in  the  Stuarts,  The  superior 
Bi-unsAvick  line,  which  has  given  a  stability  to  our  civil  and  religious 
liberties,  &c.,  is  also,  through  her,  a  branch  of  Henry's  descendants," — 
Sharon  Turner's  Middle  Ages,  vol.  iv.,  p.  165. 

f  Turner's  Middle  Ages,  vol.  iv.,  p.  149,  Grafton,  Leland,  and  others, 
supply  ample  materials  illustrative  of  these  statements.  The  income  of 
these  nobles  would  range  from  £6,000  to  £7,000  per  annum.  "Wheat  was 
worth  from  Is.  Qd.  to  2*\  the  quarter.  Lambs  were  worth  Is. ,  fat  sheep, 
3s,  id.,  and  fat  oxen  would  only  realize  £1 3^,  8c?,  These  figaires,  multiplied 
by  twelve,  will  give  the  reader  their  value  in  our  present  money, — 
Froude's  History,  vol.  i,,  chap,  i. 

t  Grafton  says,  "He  used  this  rigour  only,  as  he  said  himself,  to 
bring  low  and  abate  the  high  stomachs  of  the  wild  people  nourished  and 
brought  up  in  seditious  factions  and  civil  rebellion,"  &c, 

§  "  So  much  reverence  was  attributed  to  the  holy  orders,  that  although 
a  priest  had  committed  high  treason  against  his  sovereign  lord,  and  to  all 
other  offenders  in  murder,  rape,  or  theft,  yet  the  life  was  given,  and  the 
punishment  of  death  relaxed."  During  this  reign,  a  petition  was  pre- 
sented by  the  gentlemen  and  farmers  of  Carnarvonshire,  accusing  the 
clergy  of  systematic  seduction  of  their  wives  and  daughters,  Grafton, 
p.  931.     The  privilege  of  sanctuary  was  gi-eatly  reformed  by  Henry. 


THE  TUDOR   DYNASTY.  23 

and  tliere,  who  worshipped  the  Saviour  in  the  solitude  of 
the  woods,  or  by  stealth  in  some  obscure  place,  for  fear  of 
the  spies  of  the  mitred  lords.  That  profligacy  of  the  worst 
kind  flourished  in  the  monasteries,  and  was  indulged  by 
the  priests,  admits  of  no  doubt.  It  would  be  difficult  for 
language  to  exaggerate  the  enormity  of  their  crimes.  The 
evidence  of  this  is  overwhelming. 

The  wise  and  cautious  policy  of  Henry  grapj)led  with 
these  evils.  Under  the  control  of  law  both  these  powerful 
elements  were  brought ;  and  by  the  marriage  of  his  children 
he  laid  the  foundation,  though  unwittingly,  first  of  the 
Heformation,  and  then  of  the  accession  of  the  Stuarts  to 
the  throne  of  these  realms.  Royalty  from  his  reign  became 
a  reality,  and  not  a  form. 

Partly,  perhaps,  to  gratify  the  clergy,  whose  influence  he 
had  weakened,  and  whose  immoralities  he  tried  to  check,  he 
allowed  their  hostility  to  the  godly  to  display  itself.  Of  the 
sentiments  held  by  many  of  their  victims  we  have  no  dis- 
tinct record.  With  the  opinions  of  Lollardism  they  were 
tainted,  there  is  no  doubt.  How  far  they  rejected  the 
baptism  of  infants,  so  common  at  this  time,  the  evidence  is 
not  so  certain.  It  is  not  improbable  that  some  of  them  may 
have  been  foreign  Baptists,  who  fled  from  their  continental 
enemies.  The  first  victim  was  a  poor  old  woman,  who  was, 
A.D.  1494,  burnt  at  the  stake.  Two  years  later,  the  church 
was  gratified  by  the  spectacle  of  many  Lollards  bearing 
faggots  at  St.  Paul's  Cross,  whilst  they  listened  to  the  edify- 
ing exhortations  of  some  fiery  zealot.*  In  a.d.  1498,  public 
curiosity  was  gratified  by  the  exhibition  of  twelve  of  this 


*  "The  Lollards,  after  abjuration,  were  forced  to  wear  the  fashion  of  a 
faggot,  wi'ought  in  thread  or  painted,  on  their  left  sleeves,  all  the  days  of 
their  lives  :  it  being  death  to  put  on  their  cloaks  without  that  cognizance. 
And,  indeed,  to  poor  people  it  was  true,— put  it  off,  and  be  burned ;  keep 
it  on,  and  be  starved  :  seeing  none  generally  would  set  them  on  work 
that  carried  that  badge  about  them,"— Fuller's  Church  History,  book  v., 
p,  165. 


24  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

class ;  and  a  few  years  later,  tlie  prior  of  a  monastery,  and 
£ve  others,  were  doomed  to  the  same  liumiliating  penance. 
These  cruelties  were  enacted  in  the  metropolis;  and  though 
we  have  but  little  information,  no  doubt  provincial  zeal 
would  burn  with  as  bright  and  steady  a  flame  at  Norwich, 
Lincoln,  and  York,  as  it  did  at  Fulham  and  Lambeth. 

We  are  now  approaching  a  period  when  history  throws  a 
clearer  and  steadier  light  on  the  subject  of  our  inquiries; 
and,  guided  by  her  records,  we  may  trace,  with  unmistakable 
distinctness,  the  action  and  principles  of  our  forefathers. 


CHAPTEE    II. 

HENRY   THE   EIGHTH. 

No  monarch  had  ever  ascended  the  throne  of  England 
with  such  promise  as  Henry.  Young,  cultivated,  and  en- 
dowed with  many  of  those  social  and  mental  qualities  which 
inspire  the  most  sanguine  with  brighter  hopes,  and  give 
confidence  to  the  most  cautious  and  prudent,  his  advent  to 
the  throne  was  hailed  with  rapture.  The  heart  of  the 
nation  thrilled  with  ecstacy.  He  was,  to  some  extent,  the 
embodiment  of  the  spirit  of  the  age.  Chivalrous,  fond  of 
gorgeous  splendours,  indulging  in  all  the  martial  and  manly 
exercises  which  distinguished  his  era,  yet  free,  and  throwing 
around  him  a  gladsome  influence,  all  concurred  in  laying  at 
the  feet  of  the  young  and  ambitious  monarch  the  most  glow- 
ing tribute  of  their  admiration.*     Educated  for  the  church, 


*  Details  will  be  found  in  Fabian,  pp.  529 — 535.  Turner's  Henry  VIII., 
ch.  i,  "This  most  serene  king  is  not  only  very  expert  in  arms  and  of 
great  valour  and  most  excellent  in  personal  endowments,  but  is  likewise 
so  gifted  and  adorned  with  mental  accomplishments  of  every  sort,  that 
we  believe  him  to  have  few  equals  in  the  world.     He  speaks  English, 


HENRY   THE    EIGHTH.  25 

and  conversant  with  theological  doctrines,  the  episcopate 
counted  on  his  favours,  whilst  the  politician  and  the  warrior 
anticipated  the  fullest  opportunity  for  displaying  their  pecu- 
liar prowess.  Everything  around  him  was  favourable  to 
the  development  of  the  peculiarities  of  his  nature,  and  the 
gratification  of  his  desires.  The  heir  of  both  Eoses,  no 
competitor  for  the  throne  was  feared,  and  he  had  only  to 
consolidate  his  empire,  and  augment  the  nation's  glory.  The 
state  of  Europe  too  was  singularly  felicitous.  It  is  an 
interesting  fact,  that  on  the  thrones  of  the  three  great 
monarchies  young  men  were  seated, — Charles  of  Germany, 
Spain,  and  the  New  World ;  Francis  of  France ;  and  our 
Henry.  These  men  ha)d  much  in  common.  They  were  all 
endowed  with  great  mental  qualities,  well  trained  and  disci- 
plined according  to  the  spirit  of  the  age,  and  glowed  with 
intense  desire  for  distinction  in  all  those  things  which  mon- 
archs  so  dearly  love.  They  enjoyed,  too,  the  full  affections  of 
the  church.  Their  courtiers  and  nobles  sympathised  with  their 
masters  and  emulated  their  display ;  their  people,  delighting 
in  shows  and  martial  grandeur,  thought,  in  common  with 
their  chiefs,  that  the  greatness  and  glory  of  a  nation  were 
the  savage  war  spirit  by  which  it  was  animated,  and  the 
physical  prowess  of  its  people.  To  this  the  history  of  the 
past  scarcely  furnishes  a  joarallel.* 

The  accumulations  of  his  father  supplied  Henry  with  an 
ample  treasure  from  which  he  could  gratify  his  love  of  dis- 
play, and  he  opened  his  reign  with  a  magnificent  coronation. 
His  marriage  of  his  deceased  brother's  wife,  Catherine  of 
Spain,    after   a   solemn   repudiation  of  the   lawfulness    of 


French,  Latin;  understands  Italian  well;  plays  almost  on  every  instni- 
ment ;  sings,  and  composes  fairly  :  is  prudent  and  sage,  and  free  from 
every  vice."     So  wrote  the  Venetian  Ambassador. 

*  Froude  presents  us  with  a  truthful  and  graphic  picture  of  the  social 
condition  of  the  various  classes  in  England  at  this  time,  vol,  i,,  ch.  i. 
Turner's  Hemy  VIII.,  vol.  i.  Latimer  gives  us  many  interesting  glimpses 
of  social  life.     Vide  Sermons  (Parker  Society). 


26  EAKLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

the  contract,  was  ultimately  the  cause  of  events  which 
have  gathered  around  him  the  most  conflicting  opinions. 
The  pages  of  the  ultra-Protestant  history  are  full  of  light  and 
brilliancy ;  he  is  the  central  figure,  around  which  are  gathered 
the  great  and  the  good  of  that  age  :  w^hilst  the  Komanist 
clothes  him  with  all  those  attributes  which  are  repulsive  to 
our  moral  sense,  and  makes  him  pass  before  us  as  a  fiend 
incarnate.  Both  extremes  need  modifying.  No  doubt  cir- 
cumstances influenced  his  conduct  and  prompted  his  actions. 
Truth  must  trace  up  the  cause  of  his  conduct  in  the  divorce 
exclusively  to  Romish  influence.  The  doubt,  and  protest 
against  the  marriage,  were  almost  forced  by  the  Legate 
of  England.  A  French  bishop  ^wakened  the  doubt  by 
asking  about  the  legitimacy  of  Mary,  and  Wolsey  himself 
had  instituted  inquiries  before  Henry  had  troubled  his  own 
conscience.*  We  have  no  cause,  in  reality  there  is  none, 
to  attribute  to  him  the  selfish  and  brutalised  nature  to 
wliich  one  class  would  trace  all  the  actions  of  his  life ; 
nor,  on  the  other,  can  we  admit  the  encomiums  of  his 
eulogists  without  considerable  allowance.  The  Tudor 
dynasty  was  essentially  iron-willed,  and  fond  of  power. 
In  Henry,  both  these  features  w^ere  exemplified.  A  modei-n 
writer,  whose  recent  researches  and  broad  sympathies  with 
liberty  have  illumined  many  a  dark  page  of  our  history, 
speaks  of  the  family  ^'as  strong-willed,  but  able  to  put  a 
restraint  on  their  passions.      Their  tyranny  fully  indulged 

*  The  reader  will  find  this  placed  in  a  clear  light  by  Turner,  and  later 
still  by  Froude,  vol.  i.,  ch.  ii.  "Of  this  trouble  I  only  may  thank  you, 
my  Lord  Cardinal  of  York,"  said  Catherine ;  "for  because  I  have  wondered 
at  your  high  pride  and  vain  glory,  and  abhor  your  voluptuous  life,  and 
little  regai-d  your  presumptuous  power  and  tyranny,  therefore  of  malice 
you  have  kiadled  this  fire,  and  set  this  matter  abroad,  and  in  especial  for 
the  great  malice  you  bare  to  mj^  nephew,  the  Emperor."  Hall,  p.  75.5, 
Bishop  Godwyn's  Annals  of  Henry  VIII.,  p.  101.  Tyndale  says  he  did  this 
through  his  tool,  the  Bishop  of  Lincoln,  confessor  to  the  King.  In  another 
place  he  says,  that  the  Emperor  affirms  that  "Wolsey  did  this,  because 
lie  would  not  aid  him  in  liis  efforts  for  the  triple  crown.  Tyndale's  "Works, 
vol.  i.,  pp.  463,  465-6. 


HENRY   THE  EIGHTH.  27 

in  the  court,  bnt  watched  and  conciliated  the  people. 
Heniy  the  Eighth  spurned,  renounced,  and  utterly  cast 
off  the  Pope's  authority,  without  too  suddenly  revolting 
the  peoj)le's  usages  and  habits  :  to  arrive  at  blessed  results 
by  ways  that  a  better  man  might  have  held  to  be  accursed  ; 
to  persecute  with  an  equal  hand  the  Komanist  and  Lutheran ; 
to  send  the  Protestant  to  the  stake  for  resisting  Popery, 
and  the  Roman  Catholic  to  the  scaffold  for  not  admitting 
him  to  be  Pope."  '""■ 

To  unfold  the  causes  which  produced  the  Peformation, — 
causes  which  had  been  working  before  either  Henry  or 
Catherine  was  born, — to  mark  the  influence  which  that 
great  event  exerted  on  this  nation  and  Europe  at  large,  is 
not  the  object  of  this  volume,  t  Yet  a  glance  at  the  condition 
of  the  church  cannot  be  withheld,  without  manifold  injustice 
to  the  subject,  as  well  as  to  the  reader. 

It  is  saying  but  little,  that  at  this  era  evangelical  religion 
was  low.  Effects  never  exist  apart  from  causes;  and  as 
the  ministry  was  a  mass  of  ignorance  and  superstition,  no 
one  has  a  right  to  expect  grapes  from  thorns,  or  figs  from 
thistles.  The  people  never  rise  in  moral  excellence  and 
social  virtues  higher  than  their  teachers.  The  religious 
state  of  a  community  can  never  be  accurately  gathered  from 
the  page  of  history.  To  other  sources  we  must  repair; 
and  from  writers  equally  honest,  but  of  a  widely  dif- 
ferent class,  we  must  gather  the  materials  absolutely  ne- 
cessary for  such  a  work.  We  shall  be  forgiven  if  we 
select  from  other  pens  a  few  facts  and.  illustrations.  The 
people  relied  "on  the  merit  of  their  own  works  toward  their 
justification,  such  as  pilgrimages  to  images,  kneeling,  kiss- 
ing, and  cursing  of  them,  as  well  as  many  other  hypocritical 
works  in  their  store  of  religion  ;  there  being  marts  or  mar- 
kets of  merits,  full  of  holy  relics,  images,  shrines,  and  works 

*  Forster's  Essays  :  Plantagenet  et  Tudor,  p.  222. 
+  Vide  Villiers's  Influence  of  the  Reformation. 


28  EARLY    ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

of  supererogation,  ready  to  be  sold;  and  all  things  tliey  had 
were  called  holy :  holy  cowls,  holy  girdles,  holy  pardons, 
holy  beads,  holy  shoes,  holy  rules."*  ''They  were  greatly 
seduced  b}^  certain  famous  and  notorious  images,  as  by  our 
Lady  of  Walsiiigham,  our  Lady  of  Ipswich,  St.  Thomas  of 
Canterbury,  t  St.  Anne  of  Buxton,  the  Rood  of  Grace.  .  .  . 
To  tliese  they  made  vows  and  pilgrimages,  thinking  that 
God  would  hear  their  prayers  in  that  place  rather  than  in 
another  place.  They  kissed  their  feet  devoutly,  and  to 
these  they  offered  candles,  and  images  of  wax,  rings,  beads, 
gold,  and  silver  abundantly.  And  because  they  that  taught 
them  had  thereby  great  commodity,  X  they  maintained  the 
aame  with  feigned  miracles  and  erroneous  doctrines,  teaching 
the  people  that  God  would  hear  their  prayers  made  before 
these  images  rather  than  in  another  place." §  "Sometimes," 
says  Cranmer,  "the  people  would  run  from  their  seats  to  the 
altar,  and  from  altar  to  altar,  and  from  sacring  (as  they 
call  it)  to  sacring,  peeping,  toating,  ||  and  gazing  at  that 
thing  which  the  priest  held  up  in  his  hand."  IF  Sometimes 
the  shout  was  heard  to  the  priest,  "  Hold  up,  hold  up  !" 
and  one  would  say  to  the  other,  "  This  day  I  have  seen  iny 
Maker ;  and  I  cannot  he  quiet,  except  I  see  my  Maker  once  a 
day.^''  *''^  Rough,  racy,  good  old  Father  Latimer,  gives  us 
many  glimpses  of  the  dark  and  gloomy  superstition  en- 
throned everywhere  in  the  kingdom,  ft      The  moral  and 

■*  Homily  of  Good  Woi'ks.     Apud  Todd's  Cranmer,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  14,  15. 

+  Todd's  Illustrations  of  the  Lives  of  Chaucer  and  Gower  supply  us 
with  some  curious  information  about  the  worship  of  this  saint.  The 
reader  may  also  consult  Hume,  vol.  vi.,  p.  181.,  ed.  1798. 

J  Gains.  §  Cranmer's  Catechism,  Todd's  Cranmer,  vol  ii,,  p.  50.  "We 
will  have  the  Sacrament  hung  over  the  high  altar,  and  there  to  be  wpr- 
shipped  as  it  was  wont  to  be  ;  and  they  which  wiU  not  thereto  consent, 
we  will  have  them  die  like  heretics  against  the  holy  Catholic  faith." 
— Petition  of  the  Devonshire  Rebels,  art.  iv. 

11  Gazing  about.  ^  The  elevation  of  the  host. 

**  Todd,  vol.  ii.,  p.  319.  ft  Vide  his  Sermons  (Parker  Society). 


HENRY   THE   EICiHTH.  29 

intellectual  condition  of  the  clergy  can  scarcely  be  described. 
Their  j)ower  over  the  masses  was  complete.  The  destiny  of 
the  people  for  both  worlds  was  in  their  hands.  "With  their 
influence  they  encircled  them  from  the  cradle  to  the  grave. 
Claiming  to  be  the  vicegerents  or  the  representatives  of  the 
Holy  One,  their  lives  were  a  perpetual  exposition  of  the  hypo- 
crisy which  marked  them.  Decency  was  thrown  aside,  and 
morality  unknown.  Brothels  were  kept  in  London  for  the 
especial  use  of  the  priesthood.  The  confessional  was  abused, 
and  profligacy  was  all  but  universal.  The  punishment  for 
their  flagitious  crimes  was  trifling.  Five  paternosters,  a  few 
aves  or  credos,  -svith  the  present  of  a  waxlight  to  some  altar, 
would  cleanse  the  sinner  from  his  pollution.*  Tyndale's 
description  of  this  class  is  abundantly  sustained  by  other 
writers  of  that  age :  "  The  priests  of  the  country  be  unlearned 
as  God  knoweth.  There  are  a  full  ignorant  sort,  which  have 
seen  no  more  Latin  than  that  they  read  in  their  portessest 
and  missals,  which  yet  many  of  them  can  scarcely  read, 
except  it  be  Alhertus  de  Secretis  Midierum,  in  which  yet, 
though  they  be  never  so  lowly  learned,  they  pore  day  and 
night,  and  make  notes  therein,  and  all  to  teach  midAvives 
as  they  say  ;  and  Linwode,  a  book  of  constitutions,  to 
gather  together  mortmains,  oflTerings,  customs,  and  other 
pillage,  which  they  call  not  theirs  but  God's  part,  and  the 
duty  of  holy  church,  to  discharge  their  consciences  withal."  if 


*  Vide  Fronde's  History,  vol.  i. ,  pp.  178-9.  ' '  Moreover,  besides  daily  cor- 
rupting other  men's  wives,  and  open  whoredom,  unto  what  abominations, 
too  filthy  to  be  spoken  of,  hath  their  volnntaiy  chastity  led  them  !"  Tyu- 
dale,  voli.,  pp.  38-39.  Also,  Simon  Fish,  in  1531,  said  to  the  government : 
*'  Tie  the  holy  idle  tliieves  to  the  cart,  to  be  whipped,  naked,  till  they 
fall  to  labour,  that  they  by  their  importunate  begging  take  not  away  the 
alms  that  the  good  charitable  people  would  give  unto  us  sore,  impotent, 
miserable  people,  your  bed  men."— Fox,  vol.  iv.,  p.  664.  Froude,  vol.  i., 
p.  47.  t  The  Breviary. 

t  Works  of  Tyndale  and  Frith,  by  the  Rev.  T.  Eussell,  M.A.,  vol.  i., 
p.  3.  "In  the  rural  districts  the  clergy  were  universally  ignorant,  idle, 
slothful,  superstitious,  proud,  and  vicious;   preaching  very  seldom,  and 


30  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

Keferring  to  the  same  class,  Latimer  says  :  "  Ever  since  the 
prelates  were  made  lords  and  nobles,  their  plough  standeth, 
there  is  no  work  done.  They  hawke,  they  hunt,  they  card, 
they  dice,  they  pastime  in  their  prelacies  with  gallant  gentle- 
men, with  their  dancing  minions,  and  with  their  fresh  com- 
panions, so  that  ploughing  is  set  aside  ;  and  by  the  lording 
and  loitering,  preaching  and  ploughing  is  clean  gone."  * 
"  They  are  so  troubled  with  lordly  living,  they  be  so  placed  in 
palaces,  couched  in  courts,  ruffling  in  their  rents,  dancing  in 
their  dominions,  burdened  with  embassages,  pampering  of 
their  paunches,  like  a  monk  that  maketh  a  jubilee  :  munch- 
ing in  their  mangers,  and  moiling  in  their  gay  manors  and 
mansions,  and  so  troubled  with  loitering  in  their  lordships, 
that  they  cannot  attend.  They  are  otherwise  occupied  : 
some  in  the  king's  matter,  some  are  ambassadors,  some  of 
the  privy  council,  some  to  furnish  the  courts,  some  are  lords 
of  parliament,  and  some  are  presidents  and  controllers  of 
the  mint."  t  "I  hear  that  some  of  these  men  wear  velvet 
shoes  and  velvet  slippers;  such  fellows  are  more  fit  to 
dance  the  morris-dance  than  to  be  admitted  to  preach."  J 
Like  clouds  of  locusts,  the  friars  penetrated  every  nook  and 
corner  of  the  land,  obtruding  their  dirty  bodies  and  their 
shameless  faces  into  every  family.  To  these  cormorants 
nothing  came  amiss.  Their  bag  was  open  for  a  bushel  of 
wheat,  or  malt,  or  rye :  a  piece  of  cheese,  a  side  of  bacon, 
or  a  good  cut  of  beef  Old  Chaucer  has  painted  these 
locusts  of  his  age  with  great  accuracy.  The  Wife  of  Bath 
is  the  reporter  : — 

' '  For  now  tlie  grete  charites  and  prayers 
Of  Hmitiious,  and  other  holy  freres : 
That  serchen  every  laud  and  every  sti'eme, 
As  thicklie  as  motes  in  the  sonne  beame ; 

teaching  the  people  fahles  and  legends,  rather  than  the  true  and  ■whole- 
some word  of  God." — Burnet's  History  of  the  Reformation,  vol.  i.,  p.  21. 
*  Vide  Sermons  (Religious  Tract  Society),  p.  40. 
+  Ihid  (Parker  Society),  p.  67.         %  Ibid  (Parker  Society),  p.  289. 


HENRY   THE   EIGHTH.  31 

Blessing  halles,  cliambers,  kiclienes,  and  boures, 

Citees  and  burghs,  castles  highe,  and  towers, 

Tliropes  *  and  bernes,  sliepenes  and  diavies. 

This  uaaketh  that  ther  ben  no  faeries  : 

For  ther  as  wont  to  walken  was  an  elf, 

Ther  walketh  now  the  limitou  himself, 

In  undumeles  and  in  nior  ueninges, 

And  saitli  his  matins  and  his  holy  thinges, 

As  he  goeth  in  his  limitations."  + 

To  form  accurate  conceptions  of  the  moral  state  of  the 
people  is  all  but  impossible.  By  no  effort  can  we  throw  the 
mind  back  so  as  fully  to  realize  the  past.  It  is  less  difficult 
■with  the  secular  than  with  the  moral.  The  reasons  are  so 
obvious  that  we  need  not  detail  them.  The  data  on  which  we 
can  rest  our  conclusions  are  necessarily  limited.  Ignorance, 
superstition,  and  immorality,  however,  are  features  Avhicli 
stand  out  with  prominency.  The  implicit  obedience  which  the 
people  rendered  to  their  spiritual  guides  necessarily  produced 
these  results.  Doubts,  the  freedom  of  inquiry,  are  requisite 
to  spiritual  life  and  moral  power.  Limit  the  range,  raise  up 
barriers  beyond  which  no  thought  shall  go,  and  you  retard 
the  progress  of  truth,  and  imperil  the  highest  interests  of 
society.  At  no  time  were  these  evils  more  rife.  The  spiritual 
power  was  supreme,  and  hostility  to  it  was  death.  :|:  Above 
all  law  the  priesthood  placed  themselves.  As  fathers  had  a 
right  to  control  and  punish  their  children,  so  these  spiritual 
fathers  could  deal  with  the  laity.  Emperor  and  monarch 
must  bow  to  their  will.  § 

Occasionally  we  get  a  glimpse  of  the  popular  religion  of 

*  ViUages.  t  Wife  of  Bath,  v.  6447-59. 

+  "  The  very  prelates  are  now  so  sore  changed,  that  if  they  smell  that 
one  of  their  flock  do  but  once  long  or  desire  for  the  tnie  knowledge  of 
Christ,  they  will  slay  liim,  burning  him  with  fire  most  cmelly." — T^mdale, 
vol.  i.,  p.  229. 

*'  There  is  not  the  poorest  desolate  widow,  but  with  his  fair  flattery 
he  will  so  deceive  her,  that  he  will  be  sure  either  of  money  or  meal." 
— Frith's  Mirror,  Works  of  Tyndale  and  Frith,  vol.  iii.,  p.  275. 
§  Biu-net,  vol.  i.,  pp.  12 — ^17. 


32  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

tliis  era,  like  the  following,  tliougli  we  can  scarcely  credit 
the  representation,  so  perfectly  destitute  is  it  of  anything 
which  is  consistent  with  the  immaculate  purity  and  dignity 
of  the  Great  Supreme,  and  of  the  most  obvious  necessities 
of  man's  moral  nature.  Tyndale  thus  describes  many  of  the 
ceremonies  in  which  religion  consisted,  and  for  which  more 
or  less  money  was  paid  : — 

*' Christenings,  churchings,  banns,  weddings;  offerings  at  wed- 
dings, offerings  at  bnryings,  offerings  to  images,  offerings  of  wax  and 
lights,  which  come  to  their  damage  ;  besides  the  superstitious  waste 
of  wax  in  tapers  throughout  the  land.  These  brotherhoods  and  par- 
doners, ^  what  get  they  by  confession  ?  Yea  !  and  many  enjoin 
penances,  to  give  a  certain  (sum)  for  to  have  so  many  masses  said, 
and  desire  to  provide  a  chaplain  themselves.  Soid  masses,  dirges,  ^ 
month  minds,  2  peace  minds,  all  souls'  days,  and  trentals.  *  The 
mother  church  and  high  altar  must  have  something  in  every  testa- 
ment. Offerings  at  priests'  first  masses.  No  man  is  professed,  of 
whatsoever  religion  it  be,  but  he  must  bring  something.  The  hal- 
lowing, or,  rather,  conforming  of  chiu-ches,  chapels,  altars,  super- 
altars,  chalice,  vestments,  and  bells.  Then  book,  bell,  candlestick, 
organ,  chalice,  vestments,  copes,  altar-clothes,  surplices,  towels, 
basins,  ewers,  sheep,  censors,  and  all  manner  of  ornaments,  must  be 
found  them  freely,  they  will  not  give  a  mite  thereunto.  Last  of  all, 
what  swarms  of  begging  friars  there  are  !  The  parson  shareth,  the 
vicar  shareth,  the  parish  priest  puUeth,  the  friar  scrapeth,  and  the 
pardoner  pareth ;  we  lack  but  a  butcher  to  pull  off  the  skin."  * 

"  The  people  are  thoroughly  brought  in  belief,"  says  the  same 
writer,  "that  the  deed  in  itself,  without  any  further  respect,  saveth 
them  :  if  they  be  so  long  at  chiu-ch  ;  or  say  so  many  paternosters  ; 
or  read  so  much  in  a  tongue  which  they  vmderstand  not ;  or  go  so 
much  on  a  pilgrimage ;  and  take  so  much  pain ;  or  fast  such  a  super- 
stitious fast ;  or  observe  such  a  superstitious  observance,  neither 
profitable  to  himseK  nor  to  his  neighbours,   but  done  by  a  good 

(1)  A  seller  of  pardons,  (2)  A  hymn  in  the  Romish  service,  beginning 
'^  Dirige  gressos  meos."  (3)  Days  when  the  soul  was  had  in  special  re- 
membrance.    (4)  A  service  of  thirty  masses. 

*  Works,  vol.  i. ,  p.  270.  The  language  of  religion  was  unknown  to  the 
people.  "They  pray  in  Latin,  they  christen  in  Latin,  they  bless  in  Latin, 
they  grant  absolutions  in  Latin ;  only  curse  they  in  the  English  tongue." 
Ibid,  vol.  i.,  p.  305. 


HENRY  THE  EIGHTH.  33 

intent,  say  they,  to  please  God  withal.     Yea,  to  kiss  the  pax  they 
think  it  a  meritorious  deed,  when  before  their  neighbours."  * 

Religion  with  the  mass  of  the  people,  then,  was  a  mere 
form.  Multiplied  ceremonies  had  scarcely  left  a  trace  of 
the  Divine  original.  Taught  to  regard  the  priesthood  as 
the  representatives  of  Christ,  and  crushed  with  the  most 
fearful  power,  their  obedience  was  implicit,  though  the 
tyranny  exercised  over  them  was  without  a  parallel  in  the 
world's  history.  To  submit  to  penances,  to  wear  hair-shirts, 
to  go  barefoot  and  with  head  uncovered,  to  repeat  vows  the 
meaning  of  which  they  knew  not,  to  fast  on  bread  and 
"water — some  once,  some  twice  a  week,  some  all  the  week; 
some  for  one,  two,  or  even  ten  years;  and  to  lie  in  filth; 
to  go  on  pilgrimage  and  visit  the  memorials  of  saints,  and 
expend  their  resources  on  the  church :  this  was  their  faith. 
Or,  if  these  sacrifices  were  too  great,  others  could  be  pur- 
chased to  do  all  the  work  for  them  which  religion  demanded. 
The  moral  state  of  the  people  under  such  teaching  was 
almost  beyond  conception.  Ignorance,  vice,  and  immorality 
of  the  worst  kind,  reigned  all  but  universally,  t 

"  The  soul  of  religion,  however,  had  died  out  of  it  for 
many  generations  before  the  Reformation.  Faith  had  sunk 
into  superstition;  duty  had  died  into  routine."  :}: 

Wolsey,  for  years  the  leading  counsellor  of  the  king,  and 
the  most  influential  man  in  the  nation,  was  a  genuine  type 
of  the  dignified  clergy  of  his  day.  Low  in  his  origin,  he 
rose  to  an  eminence  which  cast  into  the  shade  all  his  rivals. 
We  state  the  former  fact,  respecting  his  origin,  not  from  any 
sympathy  with  those  who  look  on  it  as  a  blot.  Birth  and 
wealth  are  accidents  men  cannot  control.  There  is  no  virtue 
in  being  born  to  a  coronet,  or  to  the  possession  of  vast  estates. 
To  conquer  circumstances,  and  to  make  the  elements  of 
adversity   minister   to   your  elevation,    is   true   greatness. 

*  Tyndale,  vol.  i.,  p.  312,      f  Vide  Tyndale,  vol.  ii.,  p.  413 ;  also  p.  415. 

X  Froude,  vol.  ii.,  p.  408. 

D 


34  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

They  only  are  true  men,  who  leave  the  impress  of  their 
own  genius  or  moral  power  on  the  ranks  of  society  below 
which  they  were  born.  Other  features  marked  Wolsey,  than 
his  being  a  butcher's  son.  His  first  parishioners  gazed  at 
their  pastor  as  he  sat  in  the  stocks  for  drunkenness.  Pro- 
perty belonging  to  the  Bishop  of  Lincoln  he  appropriated 
to  his  own  use ;  whilst  the  powerlessness  of  his  vow  of 
celibacy  was  manifest  in  living  proofs  to  multitudes.* 
Brought  into  contact  with  the  youthful  monarch  by  mere 
accident,  by  his  servile  arts  and  his  more  loose  morality  he 
ministered  to  his  master's  gratification,  and  daily  rose  in  the 
estimation  of  the  pleasure-loving  king.t  His  progress  was 
rapid.  To  the  highest  pinnacle  in  Church  and  State  his 
ambition  carried  him.  Swayed  only  by  one  ever-present 
and  all-absorbing  motive,  he  hesitated  at  no  means,  and  was 
deterred  by  no  moral  principle,  in  the  gratification  of  his 
insatiate  love  of  power,  t    Archbishop,  chancellor,  and  cardi- 


*  "Wolsey  liad  a  son  and  daughter,  hj  tlie  daughter  of  a  man  of  the 
name  of  Lark.  The  daughter  was  a  nun  at  Shaftesbury — what  became 
of  the  son  is  uncertain." — Gait's  Life,  p.  181.  Vide  Articles  of  Impeach- 
ment. Vide  Campbell's  Lives  of  the  Chancellors,  vol.  i.,  pp.  439 — 445, 
449.  Respecting  his  magnificence,  vide  pp.  455 — 457,  459,  Burnet  says 
that  "later  on  in  life  he  had  an  infamous  disease,"  vol.  i.,  p.  8. 

+  "Every  age,"  said  he,  "of  man  had  its  seasons  and  delights  agreeable. 
They  did  not  do  well  that  would  force  the  king  to  act  an  old  man  before 

his  time — youth  being  utterly  averse  from  wrinkled  society Until 

the  time  came,  he  should  enjoy  the  present,  and  not  by  hearkening  to 
others'  needless  persuasions,  any  way  interrupt  the  course  of  that  felicity 
which  the  largeness  of  his  dominions  could  easily  afford  him  to." — God- 
wyn's  Annals  of  Henry  VIIL,  p.  29.  In  this  tone  did  this  teacher  of 
morality  discipline  his  patron,  even  offering  to  free  him  from  the  cares 
of  the  council  table,  by  reporting  to  him  the  chief  points  of  discussion. — 
Ibid,  p.  29. 

X  The  ambition  of  this  unprincipled  priest  was  boundless.  jSTothing 
could  impede  his  gratification.  Upon  all  law  he  would  trample,  over  all 
ranks  he  would  pass.  By  his  insatiable  thirst  for  power,  he  shed  some 
of  the  noblest  blood  in  the  realm.  Charles  said,  when  referring  to  the 
death  of  the  Duke  of  Buckingham,  that  "the  butcher's  dog  had  killed 
the  fairest  hart  in  England,'^  kc.  — Godwyn's  Annals  of  Henry  VIII. ,  p.  47. 
His  appearance  is  thus  described  by  a  cotemporary  poet :— 


HENRY    THE   EIGHTH.  35 

nal,  all  but  royalty  centred  in  him.*  Mingling  with  emperors 
and  monarchs,  his  state  was  little  inferior  to  theirs ;  and 
the  enormous  wealth  which  he  drew  from  his  multiplied 
offices  and  ecclesiastical  dignities,  not  only  enabled  him  to 
gratify  this  love  of  display,  but  to  subordinate  almost  every 
element  of  civil  and  religious  power  to  his  own  sordid 
interest.  Bishop  Godwyn  remarks,  that  except  the  Bishops 
of  Borne,  all  Europe  never  saw  a  more  potent  prelate.  It 
is  doubtful  if  the  bishop's  language  admits  even  of  this 
qualification.  His  splendour  was  quite  imperial.  "  His 
retinue  consisted  of  near  about  a  thousand  persons,  among 
which  was  one  earl,  commonly  nine  barons,  many  knights 
and  gentlemen,  and  ofiicers  belonging  to  his  house  above  four 
hundred — besides  their  servants,  which  far  exceeded  the  for- 
mer number.  His  chapel  was  served  by  a  dean,  a  sub-dean, 
a  chanter,  thirty-five  singers  (sixteen  of  whom  were  clergy). 
In  addition  to  these  were  sixteen  chaplains  of  the  most 

"  A  great  carl  he  is,  and  fat ; 
"Wearing  on  his  head  a  red  hat, 
Procured  with  angels'  subsidy ; 

"And,  as  they  say,  in  time  of  rain 
Four  of  his  gentlemen  are  fain 
To  hold  o'er  it  a  canopy. 

"  Besides  this,  to  tell  them  more  news, 
He  hath  a  pair  of  costly  shoes, 
Which  seldom  touch  the  ground  : 

"They  are  so  goady  and  curious. 
All  of  gold  and  stones  precious. 
Costing  many  a  thousand  pound, 

"And  A?ho  did  for  these  shoes  pay? 
Truly,  many  a  rich  abbay, 

To  be  eased  of  his  visitations." 

—Gait's  Life  of  Wolsey,  p.  168. 

'"  He  was  Archbishop  of  York,  Bishop  of  Winchester  and  of  Bath,  and 
Abbot  of  St.  Alban's.  The  income  from  such  pluraKties  was  enormous. 
That  of  the  Archbishoi3ric  of  Canterbury  alone  was  estimated  at  £6,000 
per  annum.  Multiply  tliis  by  twelve,  and  the  reader  will  then  have  its 
value  according  to  our  present  standard. — Froude,  vol.  i.,  pp.  35,  88. 


36  EAKLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

learned  in  tlie  kingdom,  witli  two  cross-bearers  and  as  many 
pillar-bearers,"  &c.*  Only  the  diadem  and  the  triple  crowa 
were  above  him.f  To  the  latter  he  aspired  more  than  once, 
and  he  thought  the  dazzling  bauble  was  just  within  his 
reach.  He  bribed  largely,  through  his  agents,  in  order  to 
neutralize  hostility  to  his  claim.:]:  The  moral  state  of  the 
conclave  and  court  of  Rome  was  very  low.  "  I  should  say, 
myself  (and  I  have  said  it  often  before),  that  your  majesty 
may  have  the  whole  college  at  your  devotion,  for  ever,  if 
you  will  spend  20,000  ducats  amongst  the  leading  cardinals, 
in  pensions  and  benefices.  Give  one  of  them  a  thousand, 
and  these  2,000  or  3,000,  and  you  will  find  the  money  well 
laid  out  to  your  advantage."  §  In  the  twelfth  century  the 
same  corruption  prevailed.  "  Our  lord  the  Pope,  indeed,  is 
a  holy  and  righteous  man,  and  his  abbot,  as  I  am  told  by 
many,  does  his  best  to  imitate  him ;  but  their  necessities  are 
so  great,  and  the  dishonesty  and  cupidity  of  the  Romans  are 
so  standing,  that  the  Pope,  sometimes  under  his  prerogative, 
and  by  dispensation,  obtains  what  may  benefit  the  state, 
but  cannot  benefit  religion."  |{  ''I  will  not  apply  to  those 
Roman  robbers,  for  they  do  nothing  but  plunder  the  needy 
without  compunction."  IT 

We  have  seen  that  revenge  for  his  disappointment  at  the 


*  Godwyn's  Annals,  p.  113. 
+  "For  pride,  covetousness,  and  ambition,  he  excelled  all  others,  as 
you  shall  hear  after."  ...  "  When  he  was  once  a  perfect  cardinal, 
he  looked  then  above  all  estates,  so  that  all  men  almost  hated  him  and 
disdained  him."  ...  *'In  other  presence  he  woxild  lye  and  say 
untruth,  and  was  double  both  in  speech  and  meaning  :  he  would  promise 
much  and  perform  little.  He  was  vicious  of  his  body,  and  gave  the 
clergy  evil  example.  The  authority  of  this  cardinal  set  the  clergy  in 
such  a  pride  that  they  disdained  all  men,"  &c.,  &c. — Hall,  pp.  567,  583, 
774.     London,  1809. 

t  Gait,  p.  379;  Burnet,  vol.  i.,  p.  19. 
§  Letter  from  the  Spanish  Ambassador  at  Kome  to  Charles  V.,  August 
5th,  1529.— The  Pilgrim.    Apud  Append.,  p.  84. 
II  John  of  SaUsbury. 
m  GHes's  Life  of  Becket,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  18,  157,  171,  201. 


HENRY    THE   EIGHTH.  37 

loss  of  the  Papacy  prompted  Wolsey  to  suggest  thoughts  to 
Henry  which  led  to  the  overthrow  of  the  Papal  authority  in 
this  country,  and  which,  in  the  end,  exhibited  him  crushed 
by  the  power  which  he  had  created,  forsaken  of  the  king 
whom  he  had  served,  and  hated  by  all  the  other  grades  of 
society  below  him.*  With  the  spirit  of  Wolsey  the  inferior 
grades  of  the  clergy  v/ere  animated.  Around  him  they 
moved,  as  the  centre  of  their  hopes  and  fears ;  whilst  the 
"worldliness  and  insensibility  to  high  moral  principle  which 
ever  marked  him,  found  its  reflex  in  the  vices  and  immo- 
ralities which  rioted  in  monastic  establishments  and  in  the 
homes  of  the  priesthood.  "  The  ivJiole  head  was  sick,  and 
the  luhole  heart  fainV 

One  of  the  necessary  results  which  sprang  from  this  re- 
ligious movement — a  movement  which  had  long  been  fore- 
shadowed, which  would  have  transpired  in  spite  of  Henry, 
wliich  the  cardinal  saw,  and,  striving  to  arrest  its  progress, 
was  crushed  beneath  its  powert — was  the  conflicting  prin- 

*  Tyndale  says  that  "wlien  his  hat  was  brought  to  Westminster,  it 
was  set  on  a  cupboard,  and  taken  about,  so  that  the  greatest  duke  in  the 
land  must  make  courtesy  thereto ;  yea,  and  to  his  empty  seat." — The 
Practice  of  Prelates,  vol.  i.,  p.  484,  Cavendish  says  that  "he  was  the 
haughtiest  man  that  lived." — Life,  vol.  ii.,  p.  126. 

+  Froude,  vol.  i.,  chap.  2.  We  gather  the  progress  of  this  conflict 
fi'om  the  letters  of  the  French  Ambassador,  from  which  we  give  an 
extract  or  two  : — 

"  The  bishops  have  had  a  gi-and  struggle.  Part  desired  to  retain  the 
mass  complete,  part  to  make  a  new  service.  The  majority  were  with 
the  conservatives,  who  have  carried  the  day.  The  king,  as  the  leader  of 
this  party,  said  all  which  ought  to  have  been  said.  He  maintained  that 
the  holy  sacrament  ought  to  be  believed  and  adored,  and  to  be  honoured 
with  the  ceremonies  observed  in  the  church  from  immemorial  time.  Evil 
speaking,  therefore,  against  the  sacraments  is  prohibited  under  pain  of 
death ;  and  priests  are  forbidden  to  marry."  (Maillac  to  Francis  I.  1539.) 
— Froude's  Pilgrim,  p.  128. 

In  another  letter,  Maillac  says  that  "the  king's  declaration  about  the 
sacrament  has  given  wide  pleasui'e  and  satisfaction.  The  people  in 
general  are  inclined  to  the  old  religion,  and  only  a  few  bishops  support 
the  new  opinions.  These  bishops  are  in  a  bad  humour,"  &;c.  (Maillac 
to  the  Constable.     Jime,  1539. ) — Ihid,  p.  128. 


38  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

ciples  and  parties  it  brought  into  opposition.  It  opened 
the  prison-house  of  mind,  and  gave  liberty  to  thought. 
Rome  had  its  partizans — numerous,  active,  stem;  men 
blind  to  every  defect  in  the  sensuous  and  superstitious  forms 
of  the  old  faith;  men  who,  from  passion,  self-interest,  or 
sincerity,  believed  all  the  claims  which  the  Vatican  put 
forth  to  spiritual  supremacy  as  the  representative  of  Christ 
on  earth,  and  who  thought  all  means  lawful  to  sustain  its 
pretensions,  and  life  a  trifling  sacrifice  to  lay  on  its  altar. 
Above  all  human  law,  and  responsible  only  to  God,  they 
clung  to  the  old  system,  and  battled  long  for  its  integrity.* 

In  antagonism  to  these  was  another  party,  less  numerous, 
perhaps,  but  li^dng  and  acting  under  the  protection  of  the 

"The  Lords  about  the  Council,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  people,  are 
with  him"  [tlie  king].  (Chastelleon  to  the  Bishop  of  Paris.)— 76 tc?,  p.  69, 
note  B. 

"Things  are  now  at  a  pass  when  either  Cromwell's  party  or  the 
Bishop  of  "Winchester's  party  must  fall ;  and  although  both  are  in  high 
favour  and  au.thority  with  the  king  their  master,  fortune  will  most 
probably  turn  in  favour  of  Cromwell.  The  Dean  of  the  Chapel,  the 
Bishop  of  Winchester's  best  friend,  is  struck  down ;  the  Archbishop  of 
Cantei'bury,  liis  greatest  adversary,  has  been  deputed  to  preach  in  the 
bishop's  place  at  St.  Paul's,  and  has  begun  to  argue  against  his  doctrines 
in  the  same  pulpit  where  the  bishop  preached  in  Lent.  .  .  .  Another 
doctor,  named  Latimer,  Avho  last  year  surrendered  his  see  rather  than 
subscribe  to  the  Six  Articles,  is  recalled,  and  will  shortly  be  replaced  on 
the  bench.  .  .  .  The  state  of  religion  continues  most  unfortunate. 
The  bishops  are  divided,  and  hate  one  another.  The  people  know  not 
what  to  beheve ;  for  those  who  are  inclined  to  the  reformed  views  are 
called  heretics — those  who  adhere  to  the  old  faith  are  charged  with 
papistry."     (Maillac  to  the  Constable.     June  17,  1540. )— J6ic?,  p.  143. 

"The  Bishop  of  Chichester  and  the  Dean  of  the  Chapel  Boyal  have 
been  arrested  on  a  charge  of  high  treason,  &c.  The  rest  of  the  bishops 
are  in  terror.  They  are  afraid  that  they  also  may  be  made  out  guilty  ; 
and  theii"  fate  will  be  certain.  The  rehgious  strife  has  become  so  bitter, 
that  each  party  wiU  destroy  their  antagonists  if  they  can.  There  Avill  be 
prisoners  enough  between  them  by  and  by."  (Maillac  to  Francis  I.  June 
1st,  IMO.)— Ibid, -p.  143. 

*  "For  who  can  doubt,"  said  Becket,  "that  Christ's  priests  are  the 
fathers  and  masters  of  kings,  and  princes,  and  all  the  faithful?" — Giles's 
Life  of  Becket,  vol.  i.,  p.  336, 


HENRY   THE   EIGHTH.  39 

royal  aiitliority.  Their  views  of  Christian  doctrine  had  been 
considerably  modified — their  hostility  to  the  Papal  power 
was  unmixed.  Aiming  to  reform  the  church,  they  abolished 
many  forms  of  superstition  which  for  ages  had  gathered 
round  the  great  verities  of  the  Gospel,  and  had  impaired,  if 
not  quite  destroyed,  their  vital  energies.  Their  minds  were 
largely  imbued  with  the  spirit  and  teaching  of  Moses.  Every- 
thing was  viewed  by  them  through  a  Jewish  medium.  Things 
that  differed  they  confounded,  and  the  beauty  and  simplicity 
of  the  Gospel  were  lost  amidst  the  splendour  of  the  sanctuary. 
Participating  in  tliis,  in  common  with  the  first  class,  their 
pretensions  to  priestly  power  were  not  lower,  and  they 
enforced  them  with  a  power  and  earnestness  which  evinced 
that  their  claim  to  alliance  with  the  Aaronic  order  was  not 
a  form,  but  a  terrible  reality. 

"There  was  a  third  party  in  the  country — the  only  one 
which,  in  a  true  high  sense,  was  of  importance  at  all,  and 
for  the  sake  of  v/hich,  little  as  it  appeared,  the  whole  work 
was  to  be  done : — composed  at  that  time  merely  of  poor 
men, — poor  cobblers,  weavers,  carpenters,  trade  apprentices, 
and  humble  artizans, — men  of  low  birth  and  low  estate, 
who  might  have  been  seen  at  night  stealing  along  the  lanes 
and  alleys  of  London,  carrying  with  them  some  precious 
load  of  books,  which  it  was  death  to  possess,  and  giving 
their  lives  gladly,  if  it  must  be  so,  for  brief  tenure  of  so 
dear  a  treasure."  * 

In  this  latter  class,  regarded  by  both  the  other  parties 
with  deadly  hatred,  as  disturbers  of  public  order  •  as  men  who 
ventured  to  think  for  themselves  on  the  most  vital  matters, 
and  to  express  their  opinions  as  they  had  opportunity ;  men, 
the  triumph  of  whose  convictions  would  involve  in  utter  ruin 
the  religious  theories  of  the  old  and  the  new  form  of  eccle- 
siastical order ;  men  who,  drawing  their  inspirations  from 
the  fountain  of  Eternal  Truth,  held  the  sacred  volume  as 

*  Fronde,  vol.  i.,  p.  152. 


40  EAKLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

dear  as  life ; — amongst  these  we  shall  have  to  trace  the  foot- 
steps of  our  fathers. 

It  is  difficult  for  us  to  realize  their  condition,  or  the 
moral  courage  which  was  requisite  to  sustain  them.  From 
the  Chancellor  down  to  the  merest  parish  constable,  an  oath 
had  been  taken  to  hunt  them  to  the  death.  Wolsey*  and 
his  colleagues  had  a  keen  scent  for  heresy,  and  pursued  it 
with  a  vigour  which  success  only  augmented.  Spies  met 
the  dissident  at  all  points.  In  the  solitude  of  the  woods, 
in  the  obscurity  of  some  dark  narrow  alley  in  the  city,  or  in 
the  quiet  of  the  home  circle,  these  wretches  obtruded  them- 
selves. Like  wild  beasts,  the  people  were  hunted  from  one 
covert  to  another.  Day  and  night  the  fear  of  detection  was 
upon  them.  Escape  at  one  time  only  increased  the  con- 
viction of  their  danger. 

Their  end  was  ever  before  them.  Amidst  the  joys  and 
endearments  of  their  homes,  they  knew  that  the  informer 
might  step  in  at  any  moment,  and  that  then  the  prison,  the 
rack,  or  the  stake  would  await  them.t  They  were  men ; 
men  of  tender  sympathies  and  lofty  principles ;  men  of  noble 
daring  and  holy  aspirations  for  their  country  and  the  world ; 
God's  heroes,  whose  life  was  a  daily  martyrdom.  Many  of 
them  we  can  only  trace  by  the  edicts  of  the  council  or  the 
convocation  of  the  clergy,  as  we  gaze  with  rapture  on  their 
m.anly  and  Christian  steadfastness  in  the  presence  of  the 
haughty  prelate,  or  their  heroic  fortitude  at  the  martyr's 
stake.  Beyond  this  we  have  no  record.  The  pen  of  history 
has  preserved  none.  Their  names  are  embalmed  amongst 
those  who  have  willingly  sacrificed  their  life  for  the  world's 
freedom.     There  is  their  sole  record. 


*  Justice  to  the  Cardinal  demands  from  us  the  acknowledgment,  that 
More,  Longland,  and  others  of  the  episcopal  bench,  had  a  greater 
thirst  for  Protestant  blood  than  "Wolsey. 

i*  In  the  country  any  unknown  face  was  challenged  and  examined ;  if 
the  account  given  was  insufficient,  he  was  brought  before  the  justice. — 
Froude,  vol.  i.,  p.  36. 


HENRY   THE  EIGHTH.  41 

Proceedings  in  the  Court  of  Wareham,  at  Knoll,  a.d.  1511, 
give  a  glimpse  of  some  who  taught  "  that  the  sacrament  of 
ha2)tism  and  confirmation  is  not  necessary  nor  j^rojltable  for 
maris  soul."  "'  Crosby  regards  these  as  Baptists.  "We  think 
the  evidence  is  not  complete.  There  were  ten  altogether — 
six  men  and  four  women.  They  were  residents  at  Tender- 
den.  Their  faith  embraced  some  ten  articles,  differing  from 
that  of  the  mitred  prelate.  They  are  points  of  dissidence  in 
which  all  Baptists  would  agree,  and  such  as  we  know  were 
held  by  them  in  other  times.  In  the  histories  of  the  Re- 
formation fuller  details  are  given  jt  it  is  enough  for  us  to 
say  that  the  prelate  succeeded  in  terrifying  them  and  others 
to  a  renunciation  of  their  supposed  errors,  and  bound  them 
by  an  oath,  not  only  to  this,  but  degraded  them  to  the 
betrayal  of  their  brethren.  Some  were  condemned  to 
carry  faggots  and  leave  them  at  the  church  door ;  others,  to 
go  barefoot,  with  a  lighted  taper  in  their  hands ;  others,  to 
lay  an  offering  on  the  high  altar  when  mass  was  said.;}:  In 
this  way  the  ministers  of  truth  sought  to  repress  error. 
Their  efforts  were  powerless. 

In  1528  a  similar  process  was  carried  on  against  seven, 
individuals,  who  had  probably  fled  from  the  demon  of  per- 
secution in  the  Netherlands.  The  usual  course  was  adopted. 
Imprisonments,  and  blandishments,  and  threats,  overcame 
the  constancy  of  five.  They  recanted,  and  bore  the  faggot 
in  the  usual  way.  Woman's  nature  triumphed.  Stowe  tells 
us  that  one  woman  and  a  man  sealed  their  testimony  with 
their  blood,  and,  in  the  presence  of  a  multitude,  were  burnt 
in  Smithfield.§ 

In  1530,  Wareham,  anxious  for  the  spiritual  well-being 

*  Collier,  vol.  ii.,  p,  2.        f  Vide  Burnet,  Collier,  Crosby,  &c. 

X  Collier,  vol,  ii.,  p.  2.  Burnet  adds, — "And  to  wear  the  badge  of  a 
faggot  in  flames  on  their  clothes  during  their  lives,  or  till  they  were 
dispensed  with  for  it,"  vol.  i. ,  p.  27. 

§  Chron.,  p.  576.  D'Anvers,  p.  306.  Strange  that  he  should  mention 
these  as  coming  in  with  Anne  of  Cleves ! 


42  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

of  the  nation,  issued  an  elaborate  address,  in  whicli  he  says  : 
"  Many  books  in  the  English  tongue,  containing  many  detest- 
able errors  and  damnable  opinions,  are  printed  in  countries 
beyond  the  seas,  to  be  brought  into  divers  towns  and  sundry 
of  this  his  realm  in  England,  and  sown  abroad  in  the  same, 
to  the  great  decay  of  our  faith  and  the  perilous  corruption 
of  the  people,  unless  speedy  remedy  were  briefly  provided," 
&c.  Then  the  works  and  doctrines  are  specified.  Erom  "The 
Sun  of  Scripture"*  we  quote  the  following  on  baptism: — 
*'The  water  in  the  font  has  no  more  virtue  in  it  than  the 
water  of  the  river  :  the  baptism  lies  not  in  hallowed  water, 
or  in  any  other  outward  thing,  but  in  the  faith  only.  The 
water  of  baptism  is  nothing  but  a  sign,  that  we  must  be 
imder  the  standard  of  the  cross."  Collier  supplies  much 
more. 

Invested  with  the  full  powers  of  supreme  head  of  the 
church,  his  claims  to  spiritual  supremacy  recognized  by  the 
legislature  and  by  the  clergy,  Henry  manifested  his  anxiety 
for  the  souls  of  his  people  by  warning  them  of  errors,  and 
by  denunciations  of  those  who  propagated  them.  "^or- 
asmuch,''''  says  one  of  his  proclamations,  "«5  divers  and 
sundray  strangers,  of  the  sects  and  false  opinions  of  the 
Anabaj^tists  and  Sacramentaria7is,f  being  lately  come  into 
this  realme,  ivhere  they  lurhe  secretely  in  divers  corners  and 
places,  minding  craftely  and  suhtilly  to  provoke  and  stir  the 
king's  loving  subjects  to  their  errors  and  ophiions"  &c.  Full 
of  holy  indignation,  he  denounces  "their  wicked  and  abomi- 
nable errors,"  and  enjoins  their  de^Darture  from  the  country 
within  eight  days. 

The  martyr  spirit  never  quails  before  such  agency.  Its 
voice  falls  powerless  on  the  ears  of  such  men.  In  the  "corners 
and  lurking-places,"  in  the  alleys  and  lanes  of  the  city,  they 

*  Collier,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  49,  50.  "We  tMiik  it  more  than  probable  that 
at  least  this  work  was  of  Baptist  paternity. 

t  The  followers  of  Zwingle. 


HENRY   THE    EIGHTH.  43 

remained.  Stronger  denunciations  were  hurled  against  them. 
The  jDublic  were  warned  of  many  strangers,  baptized  in 
infancy,  but  who,  despising  the  holy  sacraments,  had  been 
rebaptized,  and  were  spreading  their  damnable  heresies 
throughout  the  land,  to  the  fearful  injury  of  holy  church, 
and  the  great  annoyance  of  its  sj)iritual  chief  Exile  or 
death  were  the  terms.  Twelve  days  were  granted  to  the 
moral  lepers  to  seek  refuge  in  other  lands.  If  dragged 
from  their  hiding-places  after  that,  death  would  be  the 
consequence.* 

An  Englishman  now  claims  our  sympathy.  James  Bain- 
ham,  a  barrister  of  the  Middle  Temj)le,  and  styled  by  Crosby 
a  knight,  apj)ears  on  the  stage.  His  matrimonial  con- 
nexion had  excited  the  suspicions  of  the  sleepless  guardians 
of  the  faith.  His  wife  was  the  widow  of  Simon  Fish,  the 
author  of  "The  Beggar's  Petition." t  That  he  was  con- 
nected with  the  Christian  brethren  appears  probable ;  and 
Fox  assures  us  that  he  repudiated  the  baptism  of  infants. ;{: 
To  be  suspected,  however,  was  enough.  He  was  called  before 
the  ecclesiastical  tribunal.  Dissent  from  the  leading  doctrines 
of  the  church  was  the  crime  of  which  he  was  guilty.  Befusing 


*  Wilkins,  vol.  iii.,  p.  779.  Tracts  on  Libei-ty  of  Conscience,  vol.  i., 
p.  88  (Introduction). 

+  The  following  is  an  extract  from  it : — "This  is  the  great  scab,  why 
they  will  not  let  the  New  Testament  go  abroad  in  yonr  mother  tongue, 
lest  men  should  spy  that  their  cloaked  hypocrisy  do  translate  thus  fast 
your  kingdom  into  their  hands :  that  they  are  cruel,  unclean,  unmerciful, 
and  hypocrites :  that  they  seek  not  the  honour  of  Christ,  but  their  o^vn." 
— The  Beggai-'s  Petition  against  Papacy,  presented  to  Henry  VIII. ,  1538 ; 
Harlean  Miscellany,  vol.  ii. ,  p.  539. 

J  "Likewise,  touching  the  sacrament  of  baptism,  his  words  were  these  : 
'  Tliat  as  many  as  repent  and  do  on  them  Christ,  shall  be  saved ;  that  is, 
as  m^ny  as  dye  concerning  sin  shall  live  by  faith  with  Christ.  Therefore, 
it  is  not  we  that  live  after  that,  but  Christ  in  us.  And  so,  whether  we 
live  or  dye,  we  are  Christ's  by  adoption  ;  and  not  by  the  water  only,  but 
by  water  and  faith,  that  is,  by  keeping  the  promise  made.  For  ye  are 
kept  by  grace  and  faith,  saith  St.  Paul,  and  that  not  of  youi'selves,  for  it 
is  the  gift  of  God.'  "—Fox,  vol.  ii.,  p.  246. 


4:4:  EARLY  ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

to  recant,  lie  was,  with  his  wife,  committed  to  prison.  Sir 
Thomas  More,  who  had  succeeded  Wolsey  in  the  Chancery, 
was  more  learned  and  had  more  culture  than  the  great  high 
priest,  but  he  had  more  cruelty.  By  his  orders,  the  prisoner 
was  stretched  on  the  rack,  and  tortured  with  severity.  On 
the  17th  of  February  he  was  carried  before  the  Lord  Bishop 
of  London.  Suffering  from  his  torture,  his  spirit  failed  him, 
and  he  abjured  his  errors.  Fearful  as  the  rack  may  be,  it 
is  feeble  compared  with  the  pangs  of  conscious  guilt.  His 
misery  was  unutterable.  The  following  Sunday,  the  con- 
gregation which  had  assembled  in  the  church  of  St.  Augus- 
tine, was  startled  during  the  service.  A  man  rose  in 
their  midst,  pale  from  recent  suffering,  holding  in  his 
hand  a  copy  of  the  New  Testament,  and  with  tears  flowing 
down  his  cheeks,  confessed  his  crime  in  denying  God  in  a 
moment  of  weakness.  "  If,"  said  he,  "  I  should  not  return 
to  the  truth,  this  Word  of  God  would  damn  me  body  and 
soul,  at  the  day  of  judgment."  He  urged  the  people  to 
fidelity,  declaring  that  he  would  not  feel  such  a  hell  again 
for  all  the  world's  good. 

The  die  was  now  cast.  On  endless  ruin  he  was  now 
bent.  Spiritually  dead,  it  was  the  loftiest  exercise  of  mercy 
on  the  part  of  the  spirituality  to  save  him.  What  mattered 
a  moment's  torture  of  the  body,  even  the  roasting  of  it 
at  the  stake,  if  the  soul  could  be  saved  from  everlasting 
burning]  This  doctrine  soothed  the  conscience,  whilst  it 
inflamed  the  zeal,  of  the  spiritual  man.  We  now  find  Bain- 
ham  manacled  and  in  the  stocks,  in  the  coal-cellar  at  Fulham, 
the  residence  of  his  lordship  of  London.  The  chill  w4nds 
of  March,  and  the  damp  and  gloom  of  his  prison,  only 
augmented  his  zeal.  The  bishop  failing,  the  chancellor 
would  try  his  hand.  Before  him  many  a  criminal  .had 
quailed.  Will  Bainham  tremble  ?  Of  the  power  of  More's 
persuasive  eloquence  we  have  no  record.  Of  other  arg-u- 
ments  the  martyrologists  give  us  some  report.  In  his 
house  at  Chelsea  the  confessor  was  kept,  and  for  two  nights 


HENRY   THE    EIGHTH.  45 

was  fastened  to  a  post  and  whipped.  The  lash  drew  blood, 
but  it  produced  no  conviction.  A  week  at  Fulham  was 
again  tried ;  then  the  Tower  for  a  fortnight,  where  the  gaoler 
attempted,  but  ineffectually,  to  flog  the  heresy  from  him. 
A  month  later  sentence  was  pronounced.  The  charity  of 
the  church  was  exhausted;  and,  at  the  close  of  the  month 
of  April,  Smithfield  witnessed  the  blazing  faggots  which 
consumed  the  hero,  and  the  crowd  listened  to  his  last  words. 
Thus  died  one  of  the  noble  army  of  martyrs.* 

The  elevation  of  Queen  Anne  to  the  throne  was  an  event 
of  some  importance.  The  men  of  the  new  learning  held  it 
to  be  pregnant  with  everything  wliich  could  contribute  to  the 
success  of  the  Reformation :  on  the  other  hand,  the  Roman- 
ists denounced  it  everywhere,  and  the  clergy  sought  by  their 
inflammatory  appeals  to  excite  the  peoj)le  against  it.t  The 
power  of  the  pulpit  then  was  no  insignificant  thing.  The 
character  of  this  princess  is  still  an  unsolved  problem  in  our 
annals.  The  pages  of  Saunders,  and  his  copyists  since, 
whilst  they  invest  her  with  the  most  bewitching  influence 
over  the  monarch,  portray  her  as  the  embodiment  of  moral 
and  physical  repulsiveness ;  on  the  other  hand,  her  advocates 
see  no  fault  in  her.:|:  Be  tliis  as  it  may,  one  thing  admits 
of  no  dispute  :  her  influence  over  Henry  was  powerful. 
The  beauty  of  her  person,  the  liveliness  of  her  wit,  and  her 
quenchless  hatred  to  the  Pope,  enabled  her  to  check  the  spirit 
of  persecution.  During  the  tide  of  her  prosperity,  the  war 
of  words  went  on,  but  the  spirit  of  cruelty  was  held  in  check. 
But  though  she  shielded  others,  the  weight  of  royal  and 
episcopal  wrath  still  fell  heavily  on  our  forefathers.  England 
had  been  an  asylum  for  the  persecuted  brethren  in  the  Low 

*  Fox,  vol.  iv. ,  pp.  702 — 705,     A  shorter  account  is  given  Ijy  Burnet,, 
vol.  i.  :  Froude,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  85 — 87.     Crosby  has  six  lines,  vol.  i.,  p.  31. 
+  Burnet,  vol.  i.,  p.  127. 

J  Vide  an  elaborate  examination  of  her  character,  in  Froude,  vol.  ii., 
chap.  11.  In  justice  to  her  memory,  it  should  be  read  with  other 
accounts  (Burnet,  vol.  i.,  p.  188). 


46  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

Countries.  Again  and  again  reference  is  made  to  these 
Dutch  Anabaptists.  During  this  period,  twenty  of  these 
quiet  and  industrious  men  were  secured.  They  were  brought 
before  the  bishops'  council.  The  accusation  was,  their 
denying  of  Christ's  humanity,  &c.  This  was  a  common 
charge.  The  views  held  by  the  Netherland  Baptists  on 
this  matter  are  before  the  reader.  Ten  of  these  heroic 
men  held  fast  to  their  profession ;  and  the  remainder, 
seduced  by  the  promises,  or  terrified  by  the  threats,  of  the 
bishops,  submitted  to  the  usual  degradation  of  those  who 
recanted.* 

The  old  chronicler,  Stowe,  gives  us  the  following  details, 
A.D.  1535  :— 

"The  25tli  day  of  May,  were — in  St,  Paul's  chiircli,  London — 
examined,  nineteen  men  and  six  women,  bom  in  Holland,  whose 
opinions  were— first,  that  in  Christ  is  not  two  natxires,  God  and  man ; 
secondly,  that  Christ  took  neither  flesh  nor  blood  of  the  Virgin  Mary ; 
thirdly,  that  children  born  of  infidels  may  be  saved ;  fourthly,  that 
baptism  of  children  is  of  none  effect ;  fifthly,  that  the  sacrament  of 
Christ's  body  is  but  bread  only ;  sixthly,  that  he  who  after  baptism 
sinneth  wittingly,  sinneth  deadly,  and  cannot  be  saved.  Fourteen 
of  them  were  condemned ;  a  man  and  woman  were  burnt  in  Smith- 
field  ;  the  other  twelve  of  them  were  sent  to  other  towns,  there  to 
be  burnt." 

It  is  more  than  probable  that  old  Father  Latimer  refers 
to  some  of  them,  in  one  of  his  sermons.  He  not  only 
records  the  facts,  but  the  noble  spirit  of  the  men  : — 

"I  should  have  told  you  here  of  a  certain  sect  of  heretics,  that 

*  Wall's  History  of  Infant  Baptism,  p.  423;  Crosby,  vol.  i.,  p.  31.  The 
attitude  of  the  emperor  and  the  Pope  abroad,  and  the  influence  of  the 
clergy  at  home,  alarmed  the  people.  It  is  thus  described: — "The 
common  people,  foreseeing  these  inconveniences,  are  so  violent  against 
the  queen,  that  they  say  a  thousand  shameful  things  of  her,  and  of  all 
who  have  supported  her  in  her  intrigues.  On  them  is  cast  the  odium  of 
all  the  calamities  anticipated  from  the  war."  (D'InteveUe  to  M.  de 
Tiu-bes,  October,  1534.)— The  Pilgrim,  note  B.,  p,  101. — The  same  wiiter 
insinuates  that  the  king's  "  regard  for  the  queen  is  less  than  it  was,  and 
diminishes  every  day.     He  has  a  new  fancy,  as  you  are  aware." — Ibid. 


HENRY  THE   EIGHTH.  47 

sj)ake  against  their  order  and  doctrine ;  they  will  have  no  magistrates 
nor  judges  on  the  earth.*  Here  I  have  to  tell  you  what  I  heard  of 
late,  by  the  relations  of  a  credible  person  and  a  worshipful  man,  of 
a  town  in  this  realm  of  England  that  hath  about  500  of  heretics  of 
this  erroneous  opinion  in  it"  [Anabaptists  are  mentioned  in  the 
margin].  +  "  The  Anabaptists  that  were  burnt  here,  in  divers  towns 
of  England  (as  I  have  heard  of  credible  men,  I  saw  them  not  myself), 
met  their  death  even  intrepid,  as  you  will  sa,y ;  without  any  fear  in 
the  world.  Well,  let  them  go.  There  was,  in  the  old  times,  another 
kind  of  poisoned  heretics,  that  were  called  Donatists ;  and  those 
heretics  went  to  their  execution  as  they  should  have  gone  to  some 
jolly  recreation  or  banquet."  J 

We  cannot  deny  ourselves  the  gratification  of  adding  to 
this  a  sentence  or  two  from  a  writer  whose  pages  we  never 
read  but  with  advantage  : — 

"The  details  are  gone — their  names  are  gone.  Poor  Hollanders 
they  were,  and  that  is  all.  Scarcely  the  fact  seemed  worth  the 
mention,  so  shortly  is  it  told  in  a  passing  paragraph.  For  them  no 
Europe  was  agitated,  no  courts  were  ordered  into  mourning,  no  Papal 
hearts  trembled  with  indignation.  At  their  death  the  world  looked 
on  complacent,  indifferent,  or  exulting.  Yet  here,  too,  out  of 
twenty-five  poor  men  and  women  were  found  fourteen  who  by  no 
terror  of  stake  or  torture  could  be  tempted  to  say  they  believed  what 
they  did  not  believe.  History  for  them  has  no  word  of  praise  ;  yet 
they,  too,  were  not  giving  their  blood  in  vain.  Their  lives  might 
have  been  as  useless  as  the  lives  of  most  of  us.  In  their  deaths  they 
assisted  to  pay  the  pui'chase-money  for  England's  freedom."  § 

The  progress  of  dissent  from  the  old  faith,  and  the  spread 
of  baptistical  opinions,  are  indicated  unmistakably  at  this 
time.  II  Cranmer,  on  the  death  of  Wareham,  had  been 
raised  to  the  primacy.  Much  more  moderate  than  his 
predecessor,  but  more  anxious  for  a  thorough  reformation 

*  Latimer  more  than  once  brings  this  charge  against  them  ;  one  which 
has  no  foundation  in  fact, 

+  Sermons,  p.  151  (Parker  Society,  vol.  v).  J  Ihid^  p.  60. 

§  Froude,  vol.  ii.,  p,  365. 

II  John  Frith,  one  of  the  choice  spirits  of  the  age,  foimd  time,  amidst 
the  solitude  of  his  ■wretched  confiinement,  to  write  against  them. 


48  EAKLY   ENGLISH  BAPTISTS. 

in  the  church  than  Wareham  or  Henry,  the  spirit  of  the 
churchman  was  strong  in  him.  Under  his  presidency  the 
Convocation  met  in  1536.  It  was  an  important  gathering. 
The  struggle  was  long  and  fierce.  Canterbury  and  York 
headed  different  factions,  and  around  their  standards 
bishops,  doctors,  and  mitred  abbots,  gathered  as  interest 
or  principle  prompted.  Passing  over  various  matters  un- 
connected with  our  subject,  and  which  may  be  found  in  the 
ordinary  histories  indicated  below,*  we  select  the  utterances 
of  these  holy  men  on  the  subject  of  baptism,  and  its  bearing 
on  our  brethren  : — 

"  That  the  sacrament  of  baptism  was  instituted  and  ordained  in 
the  New  Testament  by  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Christ,  as  a  thing 
necessary  for  the  attaining  of  everlasting  life,  according  to  that 
saying  of  Christ,  Nisi  quis  renatus  fuerit  ex  aqua  et  Spiritu  SanctOy 
non  potest  intrare  in  regnum  ccelorum. 

*^Item:  That  it  is  offered  unto  all  men,  as  well  infants  as  such  as 
have  the  use  of  reason,  that  by  baptism  they  shall  have  the  remission 
of  sins,  and  the  grace  and  favour  of  God ;  according  to  that  saying  of 
St.  John,  Qui  crediderit  et  baptizatus  fuerit,  salvus  est. 

^'Item:  That  the  promise  of  grace  and  everlasting  life,  which 
promise  is  adjoined  unto  the  sacrament  of  baptism,  peitaineth  not 
only  xmto  such  as  have  the  use  of  reason,  but  also  to  such,  to  infants, 
innocents,  and  children,  and  that  they  ought,  therefore,  and  must 
needs  be  baptized ;  and  that  by  the  sacrament  of  baptism  they  do 
also  obtain  remission  of  their  sins,  the  grace  and  favour  of  God,  and 
be  made  thereby  the  very  sons  and  childreii  of  God;  inasmuch  as 
infants  and  children,  dying  in  their  infancy,  shall  undoubtedly  be 
saved  thereby,  or  else  not. 

"/few;  That  infants  must  needs  be  christened,  because  they  be 
born  in  original  sin ;  which  sin  must  needs  be  remitted,  which  cannot 
be  done  but  by  the  sacrament  of  baptism,  whereby  they  receive  the 
Holy  Ghost,  which  exerciseth  his  grace  and  efi&cacy  in  them,  and 
cleanseth  and  purgeth  them  from  sin,  by  his  most  secret  virtue  and 
operations. 

"/few;  That  children  or  men,  once  baptized,  cannot  (nor  ought) 
ever  be  baptized  again. 


*  Fuller,  Collier,  Burnet,  &c.    Not  less  than  sixty  errors  are  mentioned 
by  the  latter,  as  submitted  to  the  Convocation  by  some  heresy  hunter. 


HENRY    THE   EIGHTH.  49 

*^Item:  That  they  ought  to  repute  and  take  all  the  Anabaptists' 
and  the  Pelagian  opinions,  contrary  to  these  premises,  and  every 
other  man's  opinions,  agreeable  to  the  said  Anabaptist  or  the  Pela- 
gian opinions  in  their  behalf,  for  detestable  heresies,  and  utterly  to 
be  condemned. 

"/fe?7i;  That  men  or  children  having  the  use  of  reason,  willing 
and  desirous  to  be  baptized,  shall,  by  virtue  of  that  holy  sacrament, 
obtain  the  grace  of  the  remission  of  all  their  sins,  if  they  shall  come 
thereunto  perfectly  and  truly  repentant  and  contrite  of  all  their  sins 
before  committed,  and  also  perfectly  and  constantly  confessing  and 
believing  all  the  articles  of  our  faith,  according  as  it  was  mentioned 
in  the  articles  before ;  or  else  not.  And  finally,  to  all,  they  shall 
also  have  firm  credence  and  trust  in  the  promise  of  God,  adjoined  to 
the  said  sacrament :  that  is  to  say,  that  in  and  by  this  sacrament 
which  they  shall  receive,  God  the  Father  giveth  unto  them,  for  His 
Son  Jesus  Christ's  sake,  remission  of  all  their  sins,  and  the  gi'ace 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  whereby  they  be  newly  regenerated,  and  made 
the  very  children  of  God,  according  to  the  saying  of  Christ,  and 
His  apostle  St.  Peter,  Penitentiam  agite,  et  baptizatur  unusquisque 
vestmm,  in  nomine  Jesu  Christi  in  remissionem  peccatorum,  et  accipietis 
donum  Siiiritiis  Sancti ;  and,  according  to  the  saying  of  St.  Paul,  ad 
Titum,  3,  I^on  ex  operibus  jtistitice  quce  fecimus  nos,  sed  secundum 
suam  misericordiam,  salvos  nos  fecit,  per  lavacrum  regenerationis  et 
renovationis  Spiritv^  Sancti,  quern  effudit  in  nos  opulente  per  Jesum 
Christum  Servatorem  nostnim,  ut  justificati  illius  gratia  hceredes  effi- 
ciemur,  juxta  spem  vit<e  ceternce.^^* 

These  dogmas  of  baptismal  regeneration,  subversive  alike 
of  Christ's  teaching  and  of  intelligent  piety,  would  be 
regarded  as  detestable  heresies,  and  utterly  condemned,  by 
all  holding  the  views  of  the  Anabaptists. 

Henry  had  stood  unmoved  before  the  most  hostile  of  Ids 
foes.  Pope  and  Caesar,  as  they  uttered  their  threats  of  inva- 
sion, only  caused  a  deeper  frown  to  gather  around  his  massive 
brow.  In  vain  did  his  Holiness  hurl  the  greater  excom- 
munication, and,  rising  in  all  his  strength,  seek  to  smite  by 
one  blow  the  detested  heretic  to  the  ground ;  it  only  called 
into  stronger  play  all  the  elements  of  his  Tudor  nature, 
and  widened  the  gulf  which  lay  between  them.    Difficulties 

*  The  whole  of  the  articles  are  given  by  Burnet,  vol.  i.  (Addenda), 
p.  283;  CoUier,  vol.  i.,  p.  123. 

E 


50  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

never  made  Henry  quail.  He  was  firm  when  others  hesi- 
tated ;  bold  when  others  trenibled ;  and  never  shrunk  from 
an  encounter  with  any  foe.'^*  Hitherto  the  Reformation  had 
made  gradual  progress.  Steadily  it  had  marched  onwards, 
securing  a  deeper  hold  on  the  minds  of  the  community. 
Untouched  by  the  thunders  of  the  Vatican  and  the  wiles  of 
her  adherents,  it  was  gathering  around  it  the  intelligence  of 
the  nation,  and  exerting  an  influence  over  a  circle  which 
was  widening  daily.  It  awaited  one  fiery  trial  more.  The 
hour  was  now  come.  Lincoln  and  the  northern  counties 
soon  poured  forth  their  bands.  Now  came  ''the  Pilgrimage  of 
Graced  The  clerical  element  pervaded  it.t  Abbots,  monks, 
and  village  priests,  raised  the  war  cry.  The  destruction  of 
heresy,  the  overthrow  of  the  detested  Cromwell,  and  the 
restoration  of  the  monastery  and  the  shrine,  were  the  avowed 
ends  of  this  holy  war.  The  struggle  was  fearful.  The 
barons  and  churchmen  of  the  north  headed  the  hostile 
forces;  the  commanders  of  the  royal  troops  were  doubt- 
ful ;  and  in  many  parts  of  the  country  thousands  were 
waiting  for  the  issue  of  the  first  fight.  The  king  and  his 
minister  were  equal  to  the  crisis.  They  rolled  back  the 
tide  of  rebellion,  and  secured  an  all  but  bloodless  victory. 
Into  details  we  cannot  enter.  To  do  so  would  overstep 
the  boundaries  of  our  design.  Against  the  reformed  doc- 
trines, and  those  of  the  Anabaptists  in  particular,  the  "Pil- 
grims of  Grace"  breathed  the  fiercest  hatred.  Their  first 
proposition,  in  the  list  of  grievances  they  presented  to 
Henry,  was  this  : — 

"  Touching  our  faith,  we  have  the  heresies  of  Luther,  WicklifFe, 

*  The  following,  from  More,  is  rather  a  significant  view  of  the  irritable 
temper  of  the  monarch : — "  Howbeit,  son  Roper,  I  may  tell  them  I  have 
no  cause  to  be  proud  thereof ;  for  if  my  head  Avoiild  win  him  (Henry)  a 
castle  in  France,  it  should  not  fail  to  go." — Butlei-'s  Memoirs  of  English 
Catholics,  vol.  i.,  p.  62. 

+  There  were  ten  thousand  priests  in  the  Rebellion,  in  1536,  "who 
never  ceased  to  stir  them  on  to  their  work,  and  to  tell  them  what  great 
things  they  would  achieve."  (Letter  to  the  Queen  Regent  at  Brussels.) 
—Collier,  p.  113. 


HENRY   THE   EIGHTH.  51 

Huss,  Melancthon,  (Ecolampadius,  Bucer's  Confessio  Germanica, 
Apologia  Melancthouis,  the  works  of  Tyudale,  of  Barnes,  of  Marskal, 
Kaskal,  St.  Germain,  and  such  other  heresies  of  Anabaptists,  clearly 
within  this  realm,  to  be  annihilated  and  destroyed."  * 

The  year  1538 -opens  a  new  chapter.  Henry's  compliance 
with  the  request  of  the  northern  rebels  was  exact  in  relation 
to  the  Anabaptists.  He  was  powerless  in  reference  to  the 
other  parts.  A  commission  of  inquiry  was  issued.  Cran- 
mer,  Stokesley,  Sampson,  and  others,  were  empowered  to 
hunt  out  these  men.  Their  authority  was  plenary.  To  the 
fire  all  the  books  of  the  accused  were  to  be  consigned  :  the 
penitent  were  to  be  restored  to  the  embraces  of  their  affec- 
tionate mother ;  but  the  obstinate,  the  men  of  faith  and  high- 
toned  principle,  must  be  transferred  to  the  secular  power, 
as  the  executioner  of  the  church's  will.t  Bishops  might 
declare  men  worthy  of  death,  but  their  tender  natures 
forbade  their  executing  their  own  decrees.  Diligently  the 
secular  power  executed  the  task  given  to  it.  Two  Dutch 
Anabaptists — a  man  and  a  woman — in  the  course  of  a 
month,  paid  the  penalty  of  their  faith.  Beyond  this  bare 
fact  we  know  nothing.  To  .them  truth  was  precious,  and 
life  was  willingly  sacrificed  as  the  highest  homage  they 
could  offer  to  it.  X  Nor  was  this  all.  The  spirit  of  per- 
secution was  everywhere  rampant.  None  of  the  early  re- 
formers were  free  from  its  influence.  The  cry  for  vengeance 
on  the  Anabaptists  rose  not  only  from  the  rebels,  but  the 
Elector  of  Hesse  about  this  time  threw  the  weight  of  his  in- 
fluence into  the  already  deep  and  rapid  current.  To  Henry 
he  addressed  the  most  exciting  appeals.     His  malignity  is 


*  Froude,  vol.  ill. ,  pp.  156-7.  The  whole  of  this  remarkable  document 
is  given  from  the  MS.  in  the  Rolls'  House. 

+  Fxiller,  vol.  ii.,  p.  152;  Burnet,  vol.  iii.,  p.  159.  Vide  Tracts  on 
Liberty  of  Conscience,  vol.  i. ,  pp.  87 — 00  (Introduction). 

+  Todd's  Cranmer,  vol.  i.,  pp.  256-7.  On  the  former  page  we  have  a 
specimen  of  the  ignorant  and  frantic  abuse  so  frequently  lavished  on  our 
brethi'en. 


52  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

obvious;  the  dangers  which  surrounded  these  confessors  for 
Christ  are  not  less  so.  We  can  only  quote  a  sentence  here 
and  there  from  the  iniquitous  production  of  the  Elector : — ■ 
"  There  are  no  rulers  in  Germany,  whether  they  be  Papists 
or  professors  of  the  doctrines  of  the  Gospel,  that  do  suffer 
these  men  if  they  do  come  into  their  hands.  All  men 
punislj  them  quickly.  We  use  a  just  modera,tion,  which 
God  requireth  of  all  good  rulers."  Then  he  tells  Henry  how 
some  are  corrected  by  these  means,  and  are  led  home  again. 
But,  "If  any  do  stubbornly  defend  the  ungodly  and  wicked 
errors  of  that  sect,  yielding  nothing  to  such  as  can  and  do 
teach  them  truly,  these  are  kept  a  good  space  in  prison,  and 
sometimes  sore  punished  there;  yet  in  such  sort  are  they 
handled,  that  death  is  long  deferred,  for  hope  of  amend- 
ment: and  as  long  as  any  hope  is,  favour  is  showed  to  life. 
If  there  be  no  hope  left,  then  the  obstinate  are  23ut  to 
death."  Urging  the  king  to  make  a  difference  between  the 
Lutherans,  who  "mislike  the  abuses  of  the  Bishop  of  Home's 
baggage,  and  those  that  be  Anabaptists,"  he  says : — "  In 
many  parts  of  Germany,  where  the  Gospel  is  not  preached, 
cruelty  is  exercised  upon  both  sorts  without  discretion. 
The  magistrates  which  obey  the  Bishop  of  Rome  (whereas 
severity  is  to  be  used  against  the  Anabaptists),  they  slay 
good  men  utterly  alien  from  their  opinions.  But  your 
Majesty  will  put  a  difference  great  enough  between  these 
two  sorts,  and  secure  Christ's  glory  on  the  one  side,  and 
save  innocent  blood  on  the  other."  *  The  tender  mercies 
of  the  wicked  are  always  cruel.  The  appeal  was  not  in 
vain.  Immediately  proclamations  were  issued,  denouncing 
the  dangerous  tenets  of  the  Anabaptists,  condemning  their 
books,  and  threatening  very  heavy  punishment  on  those 
who  circulated  them.  Many  of  their  tracts  were  printed 
abroad,  and  very  widely  circulated  in  this  country.  Ever 
ready  to  co-operate,  the  Commons  passed  an  act  of  grace 

*  Froude,  vol.  iii.,  p.  337,  338. 


HENRY   THE   EIGHTH.  00 

about  tlie  same  time,   covering  almost  every  delinquency, 
but  from  which  the  Anabaptists  were  excluded. 

Racy  old  Fuller  tells  us,  that  on  the  marriage  of  Henry 
with  Anne  of  Cleves  '^  Dutchmen  flockt  faster  than  formerly 
unto  this  England.  Many  of  them  had  active  souls,  so  that 
whilst  their  hands  were  busied  about  their  manufactories, 
their  heads  were  also  beating  about  points  of  divinity. 
Hereof  they  had  many  rude  notions,  too  ignorant  to  manage 
them  themselves,  and  too  proud  to  crave  the  direction  of 
others.  Their  minds  had  a  hy-stream  of  activity  more  than 
what  sufficed  to  drive  on  their  vocation,  and  this  waste  of 
their  souls  they  employed  in  needless  speculations,  and  soon 
after  began  to  broach  their  strange  opinions,  being  branded 
with  the  general  name  of  Anabaptists.  These  Anabaptists 
for  the  main  are  but  Donatists  new  dipt.'"  '''* 

Early  in  1539  Henry  tried  to  lessen  the  prevailing  errors. 
In  sj^ite  of  his  efforts,  and  the  rigour  of  the  civil  and  spiritual 
powers,  dissenters  from  his  theological  dogmas  increased. 
In  February,  he  tells  us,  in  a  proclamation  issued  by  him, 
that  "of  late  certain  Anabaptists  and  Sacramentarians, 
coming  out  of  outward  parts  unto  this  realm,  have,  by 
divers  and  many  perverse  and  crafty  means,  seduced 
many  simple  persons  of  the  king's  subjects,  which,  as  his 
highness  trusteth,  now  be  sorry  for  their  offences,  and 
minding  fully  to  return  again  to  the  Catholic  church." 
"Like  a  loving  parent"  he  weeps  over  them,  deplores 
their  wanderings,  promises  the  most  ample  forgiveness 
on  their  repentance ;  but  if  any  fall,  or  continue  in  their 
"  detestable  and  damnable  opinions,"  then  the  full  vengeance 
of  the  law  will  fall  on  them,  t 

*  FuUei-'s  Church  History,  b.  v.,  p.  229.  Vide  Stowe's  Chron.,  p.  576. 
"Their  morality  was  rigid,  their  exterior  simple  ;  they  disdained  riches, 
or  affected  to  do  so ;  and  their  austere  demeanour  impressed  thg  m\ilti- 
tude  Avith  reverence,  at  the  same  time  that  their  doctrine  seduced  them." 
—J.  G.  Hess's  Life  of  Zuingle,  p.  221. 

t  Wilkins  Corr.,  vol.  iii.,  p.  843.  Tracts  on  Liberty  of  Conscience, 
vol.  i.,  p.  9L 


54  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

Again  the  lion  growled,  and  the  detested  heretics  were 
exposed  to  his  fury.  A  general  pardon  was  proclaimed  on 
the  5th  of  July,  1540,  bnt  these  exceptions  marked  it : — 
"These  heresies  and  erroneous  opinions  hereafter  ensuing: 
that  infants  ought  not  to  be  baptized,  and  if  they  be  bap- 
tized, they  ought  to  be  re-baptized  when  they  come  to 
lawful  age;  that  it  is  not  lawful  for  a  Christian  man  to 
bear  office  or  rule  in  the  commonwealth;  that  no  man's 
laws  ought  to  be  obeyed ;  that  it  is  not  lawful  for  a  Christian 
man  to  take  an  oath  before  any  judge;  that  Christ  took  no 
bodily  substance  of  our  blessed  lady;  that  sinners  after 
baptism  cannot  be  restored  by  repentance,"  &c.*  Some  of 
these  monstrous  errors  are  loved  as  precious  truths  by 
thousands  in  our  day.  They  leave  us  in  no  doubt  as  to  the 
character  of  the  individuals  who  held  them  in  the  time 
of  Henry.  Their  opinions  on  magistracy,  oaths,  the  hu- 
manity of  the  Saviour,  are  the  common  property  of  the 
early  Baptists.  The  former  have  given  rise  to  the  notion 
that  they  were  hostile  to  all  governments,  as  such;  that 
if  their  opmions  prevailed,  anarchy  and  confusion  would 
be  universal,  t  The  conclusion  was  monstrous.  It  is  not 
difficult  to  conceive  that  men  whose  minds  were  imbued 
with  intelligent  notions  of  the  purity,  the  spirituality,  and 
the  lofty  tendency  of  Christianity,  and  who  contrasted  these 

*  32ud  Henry  VIII.,  c.  49  (Froucle,  vol.  iii.,  p.  501).  The  Frencli 
ambassador,  in  April  of  tliis  year,  thus  writes  : — "The  see  of  Rome  and 
the  institutions  of  the  monks  were  the  sole  points  on  which  differences 
were  left  remaining ;  and  as  to  the  monks,  there  is  not  one  in  all  England 
who  is  not  now  dressed  as  a  secvdar  priest.  But  in  matters  of  doctrine, 
the  orders  then  taken  have  been  iU  observed.  The  statute  has  been  in- 
fringed by  the  Anabaptists  and  the  Germanizers.  .  .  ,  Ten  op  twelve 
London  citizens  and  fifteen  or  twenty  foreigners  have  been  arrested.  The 
latter  are  chiefly  Flemish  Anabaptists."  (Maillac  to  Francis  I. ;  Apiil  10, 
1540.)— The  Pilgrim,  pp.  139,  140. 

+  I  am  surprised  that  so  acute  an  observer,  and  generally  so  fair  and 
liberal  an  investigator,  as  Mr.  Froude,  should  fall  into  the  vulgar  error, 
and  charge  these  innocent  people,  against  whom  a  singJe  act  of  treason 
was  never  brought,  with  such  aims. — See  his  third  volume,  p.  389  (Note). 


HENRY   THE    EIGHTH.  55 

with  the  wretched  character  of  the  governments  of  Europe, 
shoukl  arrive  at  the  conchision  that  no  good  man  could  fill 
office  in  the  commonwealth.  Beyond  this  we  know  of  no 
evidence  to  criminate  them. 

Age  and  growing  infirmities  by  no  means  calmed  the 
temper  of  Henry.  Cromwell,  one  of  the  greatest  men  of  his 
age,  was  removed.  His  death  was  everywhere  hailed  by  the 
enemies  of  England  with  jojr.  "  The  news  is  more  than  grate- 
ful to  me,"  said  Francis  I.  "It  is  such  as  I  give  most  hearty 
thanks  for  to  Almighty  God,  who  has  been  my  brother's 
perpetual  friend."  ""  Cromwell's  noble  aim  was  the  freedom 
of  his  country,  and  the  destruction  of  her  spiritual  bondage. 
Under  the  shadow  of  his  all  but  limitless  authority,  many 
dissidents  found  mercy,  t  His  removal  threw  back  the 
Reformation  for  a  time,  and  Anglo-Catholic  influence  be- 
came paramount.  Opposition  to  his  spiritual,  was  as  dis- 
tasteful to  Henry  as  treason  against  his  temporal  autho- 
rity. Unconquerable  in  his  aversion  to  all  sectaries,  yet 
many  acts  during  his   eventful  reign   had   contributed  to 

their  increase  and  augmented  their  power  :  [j; — the  liberation 
t 

*  Francis  I.  to  Maillac;  1540. — The  Pilgrim,  by  Fronde,  p.  146. 

^  "  Cromwell  has  lent  himseK  to  the  Lutherans,  and  has  abused  his 
authority  to  show  favour  to  the  teachers  of  false  opinions,  and  to  oppress 

and  hinder  their  opponents He  said  he  hoped  to  put  down 

altogether  the  old  preachers,  and  to  have  none  but  the  new."  (Maillac  to 
Francis  I.  ;  June  10th,  1540. )— The  Pilgrim,  p.  144. 

"Lord  Cromwell's  party  appeared  the  strongest :  a  few  days  since  he 
was  able  to  arrest  the  Bishop  of  Chichester  and  the  Dean  of  the  Chapel. 
But  the  party  have  now  fallen  in  the  fall  of  the  Lord  Cromwell  himself ; 
there  remains  of  them  only  the  Ai'chbishop  of  Canterbury,  whose  mouth 
for  the  future  will  be  closed,  and  the  Lord  Admiral,  who  has  long  learnt 
to  trim  his  sails  to  the  wind.  Against  them  are  the  Duke  of  Norfolk  and 
all  the  rest."  (Maillac  to  the  Constable;  Jime  10th,  15i0.)— Ibid,  p.  145. 

Z  Sir  Thomas  More  anticipated  some  of  these  results  : — "And  yet,  sou 
Roper,  I  pray  that  some  of  us,  high  as  we  seem  to  sit  on  the  mountain, 
treading  heretics  under  feet  like  ants,  live  not  to  see  the  day  that  we 
would  gladly  be  at  league  and  composition  with  them,  to  let  them  have 
their  cluirches  quietly  to  themselves,  so  that  they  would  be  contented  to 
let  us  have  ours  quietly  to  ourselves." — Butler's  Memorials  of  English 
Catholics,  vol.  i.,  p.  62. 


56  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

of  the  Divine  Word  from  the  bondage  in  which  for  cen- 
turies it  had  been  held ;  '"*  the  destruction  of  the  monasteries, 
those  sinks  of  corruption  ;t  the  influence  permitted  to. Crom- 
well, Cranmer,  and  their  colleagues,  in  removing  from  the 
churches  a  variety  of  objects  which  only  gendered  super- 
stition, and  gave  to  the  crafty  and  unprincipled  spirituality 
a  power  which  was  destructive  to  all  morality ;  and  the 
wider  circulation  of  the  simple  but  sublime  verities  of 
Christ's  holy  Gosj)el, — all,  in  various  ways,  contributed  to 
this  result.  The  influence  of  Queen  Catherine  Parr,  and  the 
threatening  attitude  of  the  Papal  power,  had  in  one  way 
worked  well,  by  prej)aring  the  public  mind  for  a  calmer 
examination  of  the  higher  truths,  as  well  as  for  a  simpler 
form  of  worship.  The  Anglican  church,  at  the  death  of 
Henry,  was  but  little  reformed.  "  The  Six  Articles"  em- 
bodied nearly  all  the  essential  elements  of  the  old  faith.  The 
Papal  supremacy,  and  some  of  the  evils  incident  to  it,  were 
thrown  off";  but  the  core  of  the  evil  was  left  untouched. J 


*  Vide  Anderson's  Annals  of  the  English  Bible, — a  work  which  is  an 
honour  to  our  body. 

t  For  the  opinion  of  Cardinal  Pole  on  the  moral  state  of  these  houses 
of  ill  fame,  vide  Madden' s  Life  of  La  Savanarola.  We  give  an  extract : — 
'^Another  abuse  to  he  corrected  is  in  the  religious  orders,  many  of  which 
have  become  so  defiled  that  their  example  has  become  a  scandal  to  the 
laity,  and  noxious  to  the  latter.  We  think  all  conventual  orders  should 
be  abolished;  not  however  to  inflict  injury  on  any,  but  to  prohibit  the 
reception  of  any  novices,  so  that,  without  injury  to  the  existing  orders, 
they  shall  be  suppressed,  and  good  and  religious  men  may  be  substituted 
for  them.  Now,  we  think  it  would  be  best  if  all  youths  who  are  not 
professed  should  be  sent  away  from  these  monasteries."  [The  Cardinals 
Pole  and  Caraffa  signed  this  report.] 

X  "  He  has  been  forced  to  arrest  many  changes  which  were  in  progress 
before  his  last  parliament.  To  satisfy  this  country,  and  to  silence  the 
Christian  powers,  he  has  restored  all  the  old  opinions  and  constitutions, 
save  the  authority  of  the  See  of  Rome  and  the  orders  of  the  monks  and 
nuns ;  while  two  bishops,  who  were  the  chief  promoters  of  the  new 
opinions,  have  been  deprived  of  their  sees,  and  if  they  will  save  their 
lives,  they  must  make  the  best  of  the  time  of  grace  which  is  allowed 


EDWARD    THE    SIXTH.  57 

Other  generations,  and  otlier  conflicts,  must  come  and  go, 
before  *'soul  liberty,"  even  as  a  tlieory,  shall  be  recog- 
nised; and  others,  longer  still,  before  it  shall  be  realized 
as  a  fact. 


CHAPTER    III. 

EDWAED   THE   SIXTH. 

The  birth  of  Edward  was  hailed  by  the  nation  with 
raptures.  Many  a  perplexing  question  was  now  settled. 
The  evils  of  a  disputed  succession  were  at  least  suspended,  if 
not  quite  annihilated.  Latimer,  in  his  own  way,  embodied 
the  gladsome  feelings  of  thousands:  —  "There  is  no  less 
rejoicing  for  the  birth  of  our  prince,  whom  we  have  hun- 
gered for  so  long,  than  there  was,  I  trow,  inter  vicinos,  at 
the  birth  of  John  the  Baptist.  God  give  us  grace  to  yield 
due  thanks  to  our  Lord  God,  the  God  of  England  !  For 
verily  he  hath  showed  himself  the  God  of  England,  or 
rather  an  English  God,  if  we  will  consider  and  ponder  his 
proceedings  with  us.  He  hath  overcome  our  illness  with  his 
exceeding  goodness,  so  that  we  are  now  more  compelled  to 
serve  him  and  promote  his  word,  if  the  devil  of  all  devils 
be  not  in  us.  We  have  now  the  staff  of  various  sects,  and 
the  stay  of  vain  expectations.  Let  us  all  pray  for  his 
preservation." 

A  nation's  hojoes,  for  a  nation's  welfare  in  every  sense, 
hung  on  the  life  of  this  infant.  Extreme  caution  watched 
over  him.  None  were  allowed  to  approach  his  cradle  but 
his  authorized  attendants.  His  food  was  tasted,  and  his 
clothes  washed  only  by  trusty  servants.     Night  and  morning 


them,  and  relinquish  their  erroi's."    (Mavillac  to  Francis  I.  ;  July  ISth, 
1539.)— The  PCgrim,  p.  130.  (Note  F.) 


58  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

high  officers  of  state  watched  whilst  the  royal  babe  was 
washed  and  dressed ;  and  all  the  avenues  of  approach  to  him 
were  guarded  with  sleepless  solicitude.*  There  was  a  needs- 
be  for  all  this.  Not  only  did  Henry  intensely  desire  a  son 
to  perpetuate  his  race;  but  powerful  parties  in  the  state 
had  the  greatest  interest  in  his  death.  The  sickly  child 
gathered  around  him  the  hopes  and  the  fears  of  the  men 
who  had  smitten  the  spiritual  head  of  Christendom  with  a 
force  from  which  it  has  never  recovered,  and  disturbed  the 
faith  and  social  state  of  the  whole  of  Europe. 

The  accession  of  Edward  to  the  vacant  throne  was  in 
January,  1567.  His  youth, f  his  amiability,  his  cultivated 
taste, :}:  and  apparent  devotion,  insj)ired  the  heart  of  the 
nation  with  the  most  j^owerful  emotions.  Hope  predomi- 
nated; and  a  bright  vista  of  peace  and  prosperity  opened  to 
the  eyes  of  the  people.  To  trace  the  jDolitical  intrigues  of 
this  short  reign, — the  rising  of  the  commonalty,  partly,  if 
not  entirely,  from  the  crushing  oppression  and  grasping 
selfishness  of  the  higher  classes  § — the  wars  in  which  the 
nation  was  involved — and  the  fall  of  the  Protector — would 
conduct  us  over  a  field  far  too  wide  to  be  compatible  with 
the  limits  of  this  work.  To  other  topics  our  attention  must 
be  confined. 

The  conflict  of  principles,  which  had  somewhat  subsided 
during  the  closing  period  of  Henry's  life,  was  now  recom- 
menced with  new  vigour.  Both  parties  put  forth  strenuous 
efibrts.      Cranmer,  high  in  official  rank,  was  recognized  as 

*  Froude,  vol.  iv.  f  He  was  only  ten  years  of  age. 

J  His  knowledge  of  Frencli,  Latin,  and  Greek,  appears  to  have  been 
considerable.  Strype's  Life  of  Cheke,  one  of  his  tutors,  supplies  much 
information.  Burnet  has  published,  in  his  second  volume,  some  of  the 
literary  remains  of  the  young  king,  and  also  his  journal. 

§  Latimer,  Gilpin,  and  Lever  supply  us  with  overwhelmmg  evidence. 
Strype's  Memorials,  and  his  Life  of  Cranmer,  may  be  consulted.  Turner 
and  Froude  have  crowded  their  pages  with  the  most  painful  proofs.  The 
religious  element  is  unfolded  in  the  pages  of  the  latter  more  than  in  those 
of  the  former. 


EDWARD    THE    SIXTH.  59 

the  leader  of  the  progressionists;  whilst  Gardiner,  the 
Bishop  of  Winchester,  wielded  the  conservative  power. 
In  many  respects  the  two  men  were  unlike.  In  all  the 
prominent  attributes  of  their  character,  the  contrast  was 
great.  With  mental  powers  inferior  to  none  of  his  con- 
temporaries, the  bishop  had  been  trained  to  all  the  arts  of 
diplomacy  from  his  youth,  and  in  all  the  cunning  of  the 
profession  he  had  made  rapid  progress.  The  archbishop  was 
no  courtier.  His  early  life  had  been  spent  in  comparative 
scholastic  seclusion,  and  he  had  little  fitness  for  the  stormy 
period  on  which  his  lot  was  cast.  Honesty,  the  love  of  the 
truth,  and  anxiety  for  the  nation's  welfare,  ever  marked 
him.*  The  skill  of  both  parties  was  admirable.  With 
sleepless  vigilance  they  watched  every  movement,  and  with 
consummate  art  tried  to  foil  each  other.  Upon  many  points 
their  agreement  was  perfect.  Gardiner,  Bonner,  and  Tun- 
stall  repudiated  with  as  much  distinctness  the  supremacy  of 
the  Pope,  as  Cranmer,  Bidley,  and  Latimer.  The  former 
pleaded  not  for  a  return  to  Rome,  only  that  things  should 
remain  as  Henry  had  left  them ;  f  whilst  the  others  pleaded 
for  a  more  extensive  and  thorough  reform.  One  party  was 
satisfied  with  the  mere  semblance  of  spiritual  life — the 
forms  and  ceremonies  which  still  remained  were  dear  to 
them;  the  other  was  anxious  to  make  the  church,  as  far  as 
they  knew,  a  living  power,  and  to  remove  from  it  every- 
thinof  which  would  weaken    its    influence    or   narrow   the 


*  Strype's  Memorials  of  Cranmer. 

+  Gardiner,  Tonstal,  Bonner,  and  other  bishops,  took  an  oath  "never 
to  consent  that  the  Bishop  of  Rome  should  exercise  or  have  any  manner 
of  authority,  or  jurisdiction,  or  power  within  this  realm,  or  any  other  of 
the  king's  dominions ;  but  that  he  would  resist  the  same,  at  all  times,  to 
the  utmost  of  his  power;  but  that,  from  henceforth,  he  would  accept  and 
repute  the  king's  majesty  to  be  the  only  supreme  head  of  the  Chiu-ch  of 
England ;  and  that  to  the  utmost  of  his  power  he  would  observe  all  acts 
and  statutes,  made  and  to  be  made,  for  the  extirpation  of  the  Bishop  of 
Rome  and  his  authority,  and  for  the  corroboration  of  the  king's  supremacy, 
against  all  persons  whatsoever." — The  Oath  of  Bonner. 


60  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

circle  of  its  operations.  The  old  and  the  new  life  of  England 
were  brought  thus  into  collision. 

Henry  had  composed  the  council  of  nearly  equal  numbers 
of  each  party;  though,  dreading  the  restless,  the  intriguing 
spirit  of  Gardiner,  and  well  knowing  his  bitter  hostility  to 
Cranmer,  he  had  left  him  no  share  in  the  government.  Still, 
the  sympathies  and  the  convictions  of  the  youthful  monarch 
were  yielded  up  to  Cranmer.  Somerset  also  threw  the  whole 
weight  of  his  authority  around  him  and  his  friends.  Only  for 
a  short  time  could  the  issue  be  doubtful.  The  transfer  first 
of  Gardiner,  then  Bonner,  and  finally  Tunstall  and  others, 
from  their  episcopal  palaces  to  the  gloom  and  seclusion  of 
the  Tower,  and  the  elevation  of  Ridley  and  other  friends  of 
the  archbishop  to  the  vacant  thrones,  show  at  once  the 
magnitude  of  their  power  and  the  extent  of  their  triumph. 

Tlie  spirit  of  reform  was  needed.  Only  here  and  there 
a  branch  had  been  cut  off  the  great  upas-tree.  Corruption 
and  vice  were  everywhere  prevalent.  Into  all  circles  they 
had  penetrated.*  Moral  principle  was  feeble  in  the  extreme. 
Gain,  not  the  Gospel,  was  the  spirit  which  influenced  some. 
The  want  of  preachers  was  severely  felt.  '  Calvin,  in  a 
letter  to  Cranmer,  says  "that  a  parcel  of  slowbellies  were 
nourished  from  the  revenue  of  the  church,  to  sing  vespers 
in  an  unknown  tongue."  "The  great  ones,  in  the  minority 
of  the  king,  took  their  opportunity  to  fly  on  the  spoils  of 
the  church  and  charitable  donations,  little  regarding  any- 
thing else  than  to  enrich  themselves.  Very  vicious  and 
dissolute  they  were  in  their  lives,  as  the  soberer  sorts  in. 
those  days  complained."  f  The  great  chiefs  appropriated 
the  ecclesiastical  revenues  to  their  own  use. ;}:     Many  of  the 

*  Vide  Fronde,  vol.  v. ,  chap.  26 ;  Latimer's  Sermons ;  Tiu'ner,  vol.  iii. 
(Modern  History,  chap.  8). 

t  Memorials  of  Cranmer,  vol.  ii. ,  p.  161. 

Ij:  "It  may  seem  strange,"  says  Burnet,  "that  the  Earl  of  Hertford 
had  six  good  prebends  offered  him,  two  of  them  being  afterwards  con- 
verted into  a  deanery  and  treasurership.      But  it  was  ordinary  at  that 


EDWARD   THE    SIXTH.  61 

worst  features  of  the  old  superstitions  remained,  and  the 
mass  of  the  people  were  shrouded  in  darkness,  and  watched 
with  a  sullen  countenance  the  removal  of  many  of  those 
objects  which  had  been  enthroned  in  their  affections  from 
their  earliest  youth.*  If  the  reader  could,  by  an  easy 
fiction  of  the  imagination,  throw  back  his  mind  to  the 
time  of  this  monarch,  he  would  probably  see,  in  many 
a  church,  "the  minister  kiss  the  Lord's  table;  wash  his 
fingers  at  any  time  in  the  communion;  wiping  his  eyes 
with  the  pater  or  sudery,  or  crossing  his  head  with  the 
paters;  shifting  of  the  book  from  one  place  to  another; 
laying  do^vn  and  licking  the  chalice  of  the  communion; 
holding  up  his  fingers,  hands,  or  thumbs,  joined  towards  his 
temple;  breathing  upon  the  bread  or  chalice;  shewing  the 
sacrament  openly  before  distribution  of  the  communion; 
ringing  or  sacrying  bells;  or  setting  any  light  ujDon  the 
Lord's  board  at  any  time."  t 

time.  The  Lord  Cromwell  had  "been  Dean  of  "Wells;  and  many  other 
secular  men  had  these  ecclesiastical  benefices  without  cure  conferred  on 
them." — History  of  the  Reformation,  vol.  ii.,  p.  8  (edit.  1683).  Vide 
Strype's  Cranmer;  Turner,  vol.  ii.,  p.  234;  Soame's  Reformation,  vol.  iv. 

*  Edward  himself  gives  an  affecting  view  of  the  moral  and  social  con- 
dition of  the  people: — "The  coimtry  people  generally  loved  all  those 
shrines,  processions,  and  assemblies,  as  things  of  diversion ;  and  judged 
it  a  dull  business  only  to  come  to  church  for  divine  worship  and  the 
hearing  of  sermons ;  therefore,  they  were  much  delighted  with  the  gaiety 
and  cheerfulness  of  these  rites." — Burnet's  History  of  the  Reformation, 
vol.  ii.,  p.  59. 

f  Articles  put  forth  by  the  King  (Burnet's  Reformation,  vol.  ii..  Appen- 
dix, p.  165;  Instructions  to  Bishop  Ridley,  p.  205).  In  various  forms 
many  of  these  errors  were  exposed.  Poems,  moralities,  ballads,  were  all 
employed  by  the  men  of  progress.     The  following  is  a  sample  : — 

"Holy  pardons,  holy  boads,  "  Holy  days,  holy  fastings, 

Holy  saints,  holy  images,  Holy  twitchings,  holy  tastings, 

With  holy,  holy  blood.  Holy  visions  and  sights ; 

Holy  stocks,  holy  stones,  Holy  wax,  holy  lead. 

Holy  chests,  holy  bones.  Holy  water,  holy  bread. 

Yea,  and  holy,  holy  wood.  To  drive  away  sprites." 
— Hawkin's  Origin  of  the  English  Drama.    Apud  Todd's  Cranmer,  vol.  i., 
p.  330. 


62  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

Ignorant  of  religion,  insensible  to  the  spiritual  wants  of 
tlie  people,  grasping  only  at  the  wealth  of  the  church,  the 
patrons,  the  council,  and  even  "  the  gospelers"  entered  into 
cures,  or  had  three  or  four  served  by  half-famished  ignorant 
monks, — men,  from  their  lives  and  vicious  habits,  totally  unfit 
for  the  ministry.  Some  placed  their  stewards  in  the  pulpit, 
others  induced  their  huntsmen  and  gamekeepers  to  doff  their 
forest  green  and  adorn  themselves  with  clerical  attire.*  The 
influence  of  all  this  was  disastrous  in  the  extreme.  Society 
was  agitated.  The  nation,  from  one  cause  or  another,  was 
heaving  with  deep  feeling,  and  gave  unmistakable  indications 
of  anger.  Lever  has  embodied  these  in  one  of- his  indignant 
outbursts  of  holy  passion  : — "  You  maintain  your  chaplain 
to  take  pluralities,  and  your  other  servants  take  more  offices 
than  they  can  discharge.  Fie,  fie;  for  shame!  Ye  imagine 
there  is  a  parish  priest's  curate  which  does  the  parson's  duty. 
Yea,  forsooth,  he  ministereth  God's  sacraments,  he  sayeth 
the  service,  he  readeth  the  homilies.  The  rude  lobs  of  the 
conntry,  too  simple  to  paint  a  lie,  speak  truly  as  they  find 
it,  and  say,  '  He  ministereth  the  sacraments,  he  slubbereth 
the  service,  he  cannot  read  the  homilies.' "  f 

Hooper,  in  a  letter  to  his  friend  Bullinger,  thus  describes 
the  religious  condition  of  the  nation  : — "As  far  as  true 
religion  is  concerned,  idolatry  is  nowhere  in  greater  vigour. 
Our  king  has  destroyed  the  Pope,  but  not  Popery;  he  has 

*  Bucer  to  Bishop  Hooper,  in  Strype's  Cranmer.  Collier  lias  given 
the  substance  of  this,  vol.  ii.,  p.  294,     Froude,  vol,  v. 

+  Strype's  Memorials,  vol.  iii.  Bacon  gives  a  darker  picture.  Vide 
Works  (Parker  Society),  p.  415.  An  extract  is  given  in  Strype's  Cranmer, 
vol.  i.,  p.  421,  "Edward,  in  1547,  issued  articles  and  injunctions  to 
certain  divines,  for  a  visitation  of  the  various  dioceses.  In  these  it  is 
ordered  '  that  all  dignified  clergy  should  preach  personally  twice  a  year,* 
and  '  that  all  bishops  should  preach  four  times  a  year  in  their  dioceses, 
unless  they  had  a  reasonable  excuse  for  the  omission,' " — Burnet's  History 
of  the  Reformation,  vol,  ii.,  pp.  28,  29.  In  Ireland  it  was  still  worse. 
St,  Leger  informed  the  Council,  in  1549,  that  "there  had  been  but  one 
sermon  made  in  the  country  for  three  years,  and  that  by  the  Bishop  of 
Meath,"— Froude,  vol,  i.,  p,  419  (Note), 


EDWARD   THE    SIXTH.  63 

expelled  all  the  monks  and  nuns,  and  pulled  down  their 
monasteries ;  he  has  caused  all  their  possessions  to  be 
tramped  into  his  exchequer;  and  yet  they  are  bound,  frail 
female  sex,  by  the  king's  command,  to  perpetual  chastity. 
England  has  at  this  time  10,000  nuns,  not  one  of  whom  is 
allowed  to  marry.  The  impious  mass,  the  most  shameful 
celibacy  of  the  clergy,  the  invocation  of  saints,  auricular 
confession,  superstitious  abstinence  from  meats,  and  pur- 
gatory, were  never  held  hy  the  people  in  greater  .esteem  than 
at  the  present  ^nomenty  '"' 

We  will  only  add  another  sentence  or  two  on  this  matter, 
chiefly  because  they  will  enable  the  reader  to  understand  the 
facility  with  which,  in  the  next  reign,  the  "old  faith"  re- 
sumed its  empire  over  the  nations.  The  writer  is  Cecil, 
now  appearing  on  the  political  theatre: — "The  majority  of 
our  people  will  be  with  our  adversaries ;  and  it  is  reasonable 
to  think  that,  although  so  long  as  all  is  quiet  the  crown  can 
maintain  tranquillity,  should  war  break  out,  they  will  listen 
rather  to  what  they  consider  the  voice  of  God  calling  on 
them  to  restore  Popery,  than  to  the  voice  of  the  king  calling 
on  them  to  obey.  The  great  body  of  the  peers,  some  of  the 
council,  all  of  the  bishops  except  three  or  four,  almost  all 
the  judges  and  lawyers,  almost  all  the  justices  of  the  peace, 
the  priests  and  vicars,  will  be  on  the  same  side;  and  the 
commons  are  in  such  a  state  of  irritation,  that  they  will  rise 
at  a  word."  t 

Steadily  did  the  archbishop  and  his  colleagues  seek  to 
lessen  the  number  and  magnitude  of  these  evils.  To  secure 
the  spread  of  sound  doctrines,  and  partly  on  account  of  the 
ignorance  of  the  priesthood,  a  number  of  homilies  were 
prepared,  to  be  read  to  the  people.     Visitors  were  appointed 


*  Letters  of  the  Bishops  (Parker  Society),  vol.  i.,  p,  36. 

t  Froude,  vol.  v.,  p.  304.  Dr.  Lingard  says  that  eleven-tweKths  of  the 
people  were  in  favoiu-  of  the  old  faith.  He  bases  his  estimates  on  a  state- 
ment of  Paget's  to  the  Protector  (vol.  vii.,  p.  81). 


64  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

to  inspect  the  claiirclies  in  every  parish,  to  remove  any  objects 
of  superstition,  and  diminish  the  senseless  ceremonies.  Light 
will  be  thrown  on  the  state  of  the  church  by  the  following 
practices  which  were  to  be  abolished : — "  Casting  holy  water 
on  the  beds,  on  images,  and  other  dead  things;  or  bearing 
about  holy  bread,  or  St.  John's  Gospel ;  or  keeping  of  private 
holy  days — as  bakers,  brewers,  smiths,  shoemakers,  and 
others  do;  or  ringing  of  holy  bells,  or  blessing  with  the  holy 
candle,  to  the  intent  to  be  discharged  of  the  burden  of  sin, 
or  to  drive  away  devils,  or  put  away  dreams  or  fantasies."  * 
Later  on,  the  new  English  Prayer  Book,  sanctioned  by  the 
senate,  was  issued;  and  articles  of  faith — after  many  trials 
of  streno;th  in  the  convocation  and  both  houses — were  given 
to  the  nation,  with  the  hope  that  uniformity  of  faith  and 
practice  would  be  secured,  t  It  was  vain.  Nature  repu- 
diates uniformity.  Her  beauties  everywhere  spring  from 
her  boundless  variety.  In  morals,  minds  are  not  cast  in 
one  mould.  The  consciousness  of  responsibility  precludes 
anything  like  uniformity.  Essential  unity  religion  will 
ever  secure.  Beyond  this,  her  range  is  entirely  free  and 
limitless. 

The  teaching  of  King  Edward's  Prayer  Book  on  baptism  is 
too  instructive  to  be  overlooked.  The  devil  was  exorcised  to 
go  out  and  enter  no  more  into  the  baptized.  The  child  (if 
not  weak)  was  thrice  dipped,  then  anointed,  and  a  chrism, 
or  white  coat,  put  upon  it.  "  Then  the  priest  shall  take  the 
childe  in  his  handes,  and  aske  the  name;  and,  namjaig  the 
childe,  shall  dyppe  it  in  the  water  thrice.  Fyrst  dypping 
the  right  syde;  second,  the  left  syde;  the  thirde  time  dyp- 
ping the  face  toward  the  font;  so  it  be  wisely  and  discretely 
done ;  saying,  I  baptize,  &c.  And  if  the  childe  be  weake,  it 
shall  suffice  to  powre  upon  it,  saying  the  foresade  wordes." 
In  the   public   baptism  a  cross  was  made  on  the  child's 

*  Burnet,  Fuller,  and  Strype  give  this  commission. 
'Y  Collier  presents  us  with  a  long  account  of  them  (vol.  ii.,  book  iv.) 


EDWARD   THE   SIXTH.  65 

forehead  and  breast;  tlie  devil  was  exorcised  to  go  out  of 
him,  and  enter  no  more  into  him.  After  the  triune  immer- 
sion, he  was  anointed,  and  a  chrism,  or  white  coat,  put  upon 
him.*  It  may  interrupt  the  narrative  for  a  moment — more 
so,  perhaps,  if  we  made  it  a  note — but  the  reader  may  be 
pleased  with  the  following,  as  an  illustration  of  the  prac- 
tice of  the  church,  and  the  opinions  of  leading  men.  The 
Sarum  Liturgy  was  republished  in  1541.  The  whole  is 
too  long  for  insertion  here.    We  borrow  the  following  from 

Collier : — 

"  The  Time  foe  Baptizing. 

"Upon  Saturday,  Easter-even,  is  hallowed  the  font,  which  is  as  it 
were  vestigium,  or  a  remembrance  of  baptism,  that  was  used  in  the 
primitive  church ;  at  which  time,  and  Pentecost,  there  was  used  in 
the  church  two  solemn  baptizings,  and  much  concourse  of  people 
came  imto  the  same. 

' '  The  first  was  at  Easter,  because  the  mystery  of  baptism  agrees 
well  to  the  time.  For  like  as  Christ  died  and  was  buried,  and  rose 
again  the  third  day,  so  by  putting  into  the  water  is  signified  our 
death  to  sin,  and  the  immersion  betokens  our  burying  and  morti- 
fication to  the  same ;  and  the  rising  again  out  of  the  water  declares 
us  to  be  risen  to  a  new  life,  according  to  the  doctrine  of  St.  Paul 
(Rom.  vi.). 

"And  the  second  solemn  baptizing,  i.  e.,  at  Pentecost,  was  Tbecause 
that  then  is  celebrated  the  feast  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  is  the 
worker  of  that  spiritual  regeneration  we  have  in  baptism.  And 
therefore  the  church  uses  to  haEow  the  font  also  at  that  time."  f 

*  Collier,  vol.  ii.,  p.  256.  The  author  gives  an  amusing  authority  for 
this,  and  also  for  praying  for  the  dead,  from  Tertullian  : — "If  you  demand 
a  text  of  Scriptvire  for  these  usages,  you  will  find  none.  The  practice 
stands  on  a  bottom  of  tradition ;  'tis  confirmed  by  custom,  and  one  genera- 
tion follows  it  upon  the  credit  of  that  which  went  before."  The  candid 
ever  acknowledge  this.  The  following  lies  before  us: — "In  my  book  of 
tradition  I  said  and  aflfirmed,  that  Christ  and  his  apostles  taught  and  left 
to  the  church  many  things,  without  writing,  which  we  must  both  beheve 
stedfastly  and  also  fulfil  obediently,  under  pain  of  damnation  ever  to 
endui-e."  Amongst  other  instances,  this  author  mentions  : — "  The  hallow- 
ing of  water  in  the  font,  the  thrice  dij)ping  of  the  cliild  in  the  water  at  the 
christening,  the  puttiag  on  of  the  chrism,  the  consecration  of  the  oil,  the 
anointing  of  the  christened  children,"  &c, — Dr.  Smith,  Memorials  of  Gran- 

mer,  vol,  ii.,p.  329. 

T  Sarum  Liturgy,  Comer,  vol  u.,  p.  19b, 

F 


66      '  EAKLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

We  select  now  part  of  the  ceremony,  omitting  the  expla- 
nation : — 

"Wlien  the  child  is  brought,  the  minister  beginneth  to  make  a 
cross  upon  the  forehead  of  tlie  child  that  is  offered  to  be  baptized. 
Then  he  maketh  anotber  cross  upon  the  breast.  Prayer  is  then 
offered  for  the  removal  of  all  bHndness  of  heart,  and  to  make  him 
apt  to  receive  grace  given  him  in  baptism.  Hallowed  salt  is  then 
put  into  his  mouth,  to  signify  the  Spirit's  real  salt,  which  is  the 
word  of  God.  Then  the  minister  makes  the  sign  of  the  cross  on  the 
child's  fqrehead,  adjuring  the  devil  to  depart.  After  this  is  read  the 
Gospel  of  Matthew  xix.  Then  the  minister  putteth  his  finger  into 
his  mouth,  daubs  with  spittle  the  nose,  thurles,  and  ears  of  him  that 
shall  be  baptized.  After  an  exhortation  to  the  sponsors,  the  priest 
makes  the  sign  of  the  cross  in  the  right  hand  of  the  infant.  Taking 
it  by  this  holy  hand,  he  bids  it  enter  into  the  church,  there  to  be 
admitted  as  one  of  Christ's  flock.  Approaching  the  font,  the  name 
of  the  child  is  asked.  Then  follow  these  questions  to  the  godfathers 
and  godmothers,  as  representatives  of  the  child. — Forsakest  thou  the 
devil?  Ans.  I  forsake  him. — All  his  works?  Ans.  I  forsake  them. 
— And  all  his  pomps  and  vanities  ?  Ans.  I  forsake  them. — Satisfied 
with  these,  the  minister  then  anoints  the  child  with  holy  oil  upon 
the  breast  and  betwixt  the  shoulders.  Questions  to  ascertain  the 
orthodoxy  of  the  child  are  then  propounded.  Then  follows  another 
series:  for  example,  to  the  child  the  minister  says, — What  askest 
thou?  Ans.  Baptism. — WUt  thou  be  baptized?  Ans.  /  loill. — 
Satisfied  with  these  sage  replies,  then  the  minister  calls  the  child  by 
name,  baptizes  it  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost 
(putting  it  into  the  water  of  the  font  and  taking  it  out  again,  or 
else  pouring  water  upon  the  infant).  Then,  after  his  baptism,  he  is 
anointed  with  holy  chrism  on  the  head ;  after  that  he  is  clothed  in 
a  white  vesture,  significant  of  his  freedom  from  the  captivity  of  the 
devil ;  and,  finally,  this  superstition  is  closed  by  the  minister  placing 
in  the  infant's  right  hand  a  lighted  candle."  * 

Tyndale  thus  refers  to  the  feeling  of  the  people  about  this : 
— "  If  aught  be  left  out,  or  if  the  child  be  not  altogether 
dipt  in  the  water,  or  if,  because  the  child  is  sick,  the  priest 
dare  not  plunge  him  into  the  water,  but  pours  water  on  his 
head, — how  tremble  they !  how  quake  they !  *  How  say  ye, 
Sii'  John,'  say  they,  '  is  this  child  christened  enough  %  hath 

*  Collier,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  192, 193.— Note  A. 


EDWARD   THE    SIXTH.  67 

it  his  full  Christendom  1 '  They  believe,  verily,  that  the  child 
is  not  christened."  *  "In  the  Prayer  Book  of  Edward  VI., 
the  priest,  looking  upon  the  children,  was  required  to  say, 
'  I  command  thee,  unclean  sj)irit,  in  the  name  of  the  Father, 
of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  thou  come  out,  and 
depart  from  this  infant,'"  &c.t  "After  a  fewe  things  re- 
hearsed, he  taketh  the  child  and  dippeth  it  in,  but  warily 
and  discretely,  as  it  is  in  the  book;  upon  whose  forehead 
also  he  shall  make  a  crosse,"  <kc.  X  Frith,  in  his  Treatise  on 
Baptism,  says: — "The  signification  of  baptism  is  described 
by  Paul,  in  vi.  of  the  Pomans ;  that,  as  we  are  plunged  bodily 
into  the  water,  even  so  we  are  dead  and  buried  with  Christ 
from  sin;  and  as  we  are  lifted  again  out  of  the  water,  even 
so  are  we  risen  with  Christ  from  our  sins,  that  we  mio-ht 
hereafter  walk  in  a  new  conversation  of  life.  So  that  these 
things — that  is,  to  be  plunged  into  the  water,  and  lift  up 
again — do  signify  and  represent  the  whole  pith  and  effect  of 
baptism, — that  is,  the  mortification  of  our  old  Adam,  and 
the  rising  up  of  our  new  man."  § 

The  influence  of  the  continental  Reformers  on  the  Pefor- 
mation  must  not  be  overlooked.  From  the  distance  they  had 
watched  the  early  struggle  with  intense  interest.  Henry 
never  loved  or  hated  like  other  men.  Luther  treated  him 
as  an  ordinary  man,  when  combating  for  the  truth,  and 
inflicted  blows  on  the  chivalric  knight  of  Pome  which  made 
him  reel  more  than  once.  The  pride  of  the  monarch  was 
wounded,  and  the  influence  of  the  German  Reformers  was 
never  very  powerful  with  him.  It  was  not  so  now,  in  the 
period  over  which  we  are  travelling.  Cranmer  appears  to 
have  consulted  them  on  nearly  all  occasions ;  and  the  corres- 
pondence of  the  great  German  Reformer  with  Somerset  and 

*  Obedience  of  a  Christian  Man,  vol.  i,,  p.  310. 
+  Vide  Hans  L'Estrange  (Dinis  Affier),  p.  243.     Apud  Zurich  Liturgy 
(note),  p.  178.  t  Troubles  at  Frankfort  (Petherham  reprint),  p.  32. 

§  Works  of  Tyndale  and  Frith,  vol.  iii,,  p.  289.  On  the  opposite  page 
he  refers  to  the  opinions  of  the  Baptists. 


68  EAKLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

others  was  not  unfrequent.  More  than  this :  theological  chairs 
in  both  universities  were  occupied  by  some  of  the  most  emi- 
nent disciples  of  this  illustrious  man.  Peter  Martyr,  Bucer, 
and  Fagihus,  threw  their  influence  over  these  seats  of  learn- 
ing, and,  from  the  professor's  chair,  sought  to  mould  the 
rising  theological  mind  of  England  with  their  own  views  of 
doctrine  and  polity.  The  influence  of  this  was  soon  percep- 
tible. The  archbishop  and  his  intimate  colleagues  changed 
their  opinions,  and  from  a  Lutheran  tendency  the  Calvinian 
element  became  more  apparent.  At  this  period,  too,  another 
individual  appears,  who  occupies  no  subordinate  place  on  the 
l^age  of  history.  Fiery,  impassioned,  of  indomitable  courage, 
and  imbued  with  the  love  of  the  truth,  John  Knox  was  a 
fitting  instrument  for  the  advancement  of  the  great  work. 
With  the  concurrence  of  the  Council  and  Cranmer,  the 
Scottish  reformer  was  engaged.  For  ten  years  he  devoted 
himself  to  itinerant  labours.  Berwick,  Newcastle,  and  the 
northern  parts,  were  the  chosen  fields  for  his  culture.  Success 
was  the  result,  though  the  Bishop  of  Durham  checked  his 
career  in  every  way  he  could.  Higher  honours  awaited  him. 
First,  a  church  in  the  metropolis ;  and  then,  the  Protector 
oflered  to  confer  upon  him  the  see  of  Rochester,  t 

Amidst  difficulties  of  no  common  kind,  Cranmer  and  his 
co-workers  advanced  the  Reformation  so  far,  in  its  doctrines 
and  polity,  that  the  Anglican  church,  with  certain  modifi- 
cations and  additions,  became  what  it  is  at  present.  They 
left  it  far  below  the  ideal  which  existed  in  their  own  mind; 
tolerating  much,  confessedly,  which  has  no  sanction  in  the 
word  of  God,  and  the  existence  of  which  only  impairs  the 
moral  beauty  of  that  church,  weakens  its  efficiency,  and 
renders  it  of  necessity,  to  minds  who  recognize  and  implicitly 
bow  to  the  supreme  authority  of  Christ,  a  constant  source 
of  dissent  and  divisions. 

*  CoUier,  vol.  ii.,  p.  304. 
t  Macrie's  Life  of  Knox,  chap,  iii.     Select  Works  of  the  Eeformer, 
with  Life,  p.  13. 


EDWARD    THE    SIXTH.  G9 

The  violent  persecutions  to  wliich  the  Baptists  were  eveiy- 
where  exposed  on  the  Continent,  both  in  Catholic  and 
Protestant  countries,  induced  many  of  them  to  take  refuge 
in  this  country.  Life  was  precious.  They  fondly  hoped  that 
in  quietness  and  peace  they  might  worship  God.  Their  zeal 
did  not  slumber.  Their  tenets  were  industriously  dissemi- 
nated, and  many  converts  were  made  to  their  views  of  Chris- 
tian truth.  The  highest  character  was  given  to  these  persons, 
by  men  religiously  opposed  to  them.  To  most  of  our  readers 
the  following  will  be  new : — "In  general,  Anabaptism  re- 
quired that  those  w-ho  came  over  to  it  should  be  possessed  of 
the  strict  heroic  morals  of  the  early  Christians,  the  same  con- 
tempt for  the  Avorld  and  its  pleasures  and  pains,  and  even 
its  outward  forms.  By  baptism  a  renunciation  was  made  of 
the  devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh ;  and  a  vow  taken  to  do 
nothing  but  the  will  of  God.  Any  wilful  sin  of  an  Ana- 
baptist would  not  be  pardoned,  and  entailed  on  its  perpe- 
trator hopeless  expulsion  from  the  community,  and  loss  of 
the  grace  of  God.  It  was  exactly  on  this  account  that  the 
heresy  was  so  dangerous,  for  the  greater  part  of  its  adherents 
could  appeal  to  the  sanctity  of  their  mode  of  life."  * 

But  their  enemies  were  sleepless.  The  mild  and  gentle 
Cranmer,  Bidley,  and  others,  felt  as  much,  nay,  more  horror- 
struck  at  an  Ajiabaptist  heretic  than  at  a  dozen  Papal  ad- 
vocates. Few,  if  indeed  any,  suffered  but  from  this  detested 
sect,  t  In  the  spring  of  1549  a  report  was  laid  before  the 
Council,  charging  them  with  the  usual  errors  of  the  sect. 
Commissioners,  consisting  of  Cranmer  and  six  other  prelates, 
and  divines  of  a  lower  order,  with  various  distingiiished 
laymen,  among  whom  the  names  of  Cecil  and  Sir  Thomas 
Smith  are  found,  were  appointed.  J     They  were  to  try  to 

*  Dr.  Hase  (ISTeue  Proplieten).  Apud  Madden,  Pliantasmata,  vol.  ii., 
pp.  439-440.        +  Vaughan's  Eevolutions  of  English  Hist.,  vol.  iii.,  p.  393. 

X  "An  Ecclesiastical  Commission  in  the  beginning  of  this  year  was 
issued  out  for  the  examination  of  the  Anabaptists  and  Ai'ians,  that  began 
now  to  spring  up  apace  and  show  themselves  more  openly." — Strype's 
Life  of  Sir  Thomas  Smith,  p.  37. 


70  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

reclaim  them,  to  enjoin  them  penance,  and  to  give  them 
absohition;  or,  if  they  were  obstinate,  to  excommunicate 
them,  and  deliver  them  over  to  the  secular  power,  to  be 
dealt  with  in  the  usual  way.  * 

A  singular  statement  appears  in  Strype, — an  accusation 
not  unfrequent  in  subsequent  writers ;  it  is  as  follows  : — 
"  Whereupon  were  sent  two  of  their  emissaries  (Romanists) 
from  Rotterdam  unto  England,  who  were  to  pretend  them- 
selves Anabaptists,  and  preaching  against  baptizing  infants, 
and  preach  uj)  rebaptizing  and  a  fifth  monarchy  upon  earth. 
And  besides  this,  one  D.  G.,  authorized  by  their  learned 
men  (the  Council  of  Trent),  despatched  a  letter,  written  in 
May,  1549,  from  Delf  in  Holland,  to  two  bishops,  whereof 
Winchester  was  one,  signifying  the  coming  of  these  pre- 
tended Anabaptists,  and  that  they  should  receive  them,  and 
cherish  them,  and  take  their  parts,  if  they  should  chance  to 
receive  any  checks;  telling  them,  that  it  was  left  to  them 
to  assist  in  this  cause ;  and  to  some  others,  whom  they 
knew  to  be  well  affected  to  the  Mother  Church."  t 

In  another  form,  which  indeed  would  always  be  welcome, 
the  influence  of  their  principles  was  opposed.  That  they 
were  widely  spread  admits  of  no  doubt.  The  acti^Hity  of 
their  ojoponents  makes  this  manifest.  Either  just  before, 
or  following  in  the  wake  of  the  state-paid  hunters  of  heresy, 
appeared,  "-4  short  Introduction  for  to  Warn  all  Christian 
People  against  the  Pestiferous  Errors  of  the  Common  Sect  of 
Anabaptists.''^  This  professes  to  be  a  translation  from  some 
compilations  of  Calvin,  and  it  is  printed  by  Day.  J  If  the 
Reformer  had  been  content  with  wielding  his  pen  against 
them,  his  character  would  have  stood  before  us  with  more 
brightness  and  beauty.     To  him  may  be  traced  much  of  the 

*  Todd's  Cranmer,  vol.  ii.,  p.  146.  Collier  gives  the  commission, 
vol.  ii.  (Intro.),  p.  12.  Bacon,  the  martyr,  condemns  "the  wicked  and 
ungodly  opinions  of  the  Anabaptists."— Todd's  Cranmer,  vol.  ii.,  p.  351. 

t  Strype's  Cranmer,  vol.  i. ,  pp.  299,  300. 

X  Vide  Todd's  Cranmer,  vol.  ii.,  p.  146. 


EDWARD   THE   SIXTH.  71 

fierce  liostility  which  our  brethren  had  to  encounter.  His 
appeals  sustained,  if  they  did  not  beget,  the  demon  of  perse- 
cution in  the  minds  of  the  Council  and  the  Court.  The  spirit 
of  Antichrist  never  showed  itself  more  intolerant  than  in 
the  following : — "  These  all  together  do  deserve  to  be  well 
punished  by  the  sword,  seeing  they  do  conspire  against  the 
king,  and  against  God,  who  had  set  him  in  the  royal  seat.* 
It  will  be  said  that  we  must  tolerate  our  neighbour's  weak- 
ness, that  great  changes  are  not  easily  to  be  borne.  That  were 
to  be  suffered  in  worldly  affairs,  where  it  is  lawful  for  the 
one  to  give  place  to  the  others,  and  to  give  over  his  right, 
thereby  to  redeem  peace ;  but  it  is  not  like  in  the  spiritual 
rule  of  Christ, — there  we  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  obey 

God Thefts,  fightings,   extortions,  are  strictly 

punished,  because  that  men  thereby  are  offended ;  and  the 
meantime  whoredoms,  adulteries,  and  drunkenness,  are  suf- 
fered as  things  lawful,  or  of  very  little  importance.  That 
the  honour  of  God  be  mindful  ever  to  you,  punish  the  crime 
whereof  men  are  not  wont  to  make  any  great  matter." 

Ridley,  who  filled  the  episcopal  throne  of  the  metropolitan 
city,  was  not  a  whit  behind  his  brethren  in  efforts  for  the 
suppression  of  this  sect.  In  his  first  visitation,  we  believe, 
early  in  June,  questions  were  issued  on  various  matters 
relating  to  the  religious  state  of  his  diocese  and  the  conduct 
of  his  clergy.  Amongst  them  we  may  note  the  following  :-— 
"Whether  Anabaptists  or  any  other  sects  held  conventicles, 
preached  heterodoxies,  or  administered  the  sacraments  in  a 
different  manner  from  the  public  Establishment  1  Whether 
baptism  was  administered  contrary  to  the  public  Establish- 
ment, with  respect  either  to  time  or  language?  Whether 
infant  baptism  was  impugned  ? "  t 

These  efforts  were  successful.  To  escape  was  all  but 
impossible.    Kent  supplied  the  first  victim.     There  is  reason 

*  "He  advised  that  Anabaptists  and  reactionists  should  be  alike  put 
to  death." — Froude,  vol.  v.,  p.  99. 

t  Collier,  vol.  ii.,  p.  304. 


72  EAKLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

for  believing  that  in  this  district  of  the  country,  and  in 
East  Anglia,  Anabaptists  were  numerous.  The  evidence  of 
this  will  be  supplied  presently.  Joan'^  Boucher,  or  Joan 
of  Kent,  was  one  of  the  few  who  sujQfered  martyrdom 
during  the  reign  of  the  youthful  monarch.  The  informa- 
tion about  this  noble-minded  woman  is  only  scant,  and 
tradition  identifies  her  with  the  town  of  Eythorne,  with 
a  small  congregation  of  Baptists  there,  f  Her  life  was 
holy,  her  connections  respectable,  and  her  devotedness  to 
the  truth  of  a  marked  kind.  She  was  intimate  with  some 
of  the  religious  leaders  of  the  court  of  Henry,  and  was  an 
intimate  friend  of  Ann  Askew.  ^  To  the  circulation  of 
Tyndale's  New  Testament  and  religious  books  she  gave 
much  time.  The  heresy  with  which  she  was  charged  was 
one  commonly  alleged  against  the  sect  at  that  time.  Burnet 
says  that  "she  denied  that  Christ  was  truly  incarnate  of  the 
Yirgin,  whose  flesh,  being  sinful.  He  could  take  none  of  it  j 
but  the  Word,  by  the  consent  of  the  inward  man  in  the 
Yirgin,  took  flesh  of  her  :  these  were  her  words."§  We  have 
adverted  to  this  matter  before.  ||  It  will  again  claim  the 
reader's  attention  under  a  subsequent  reign.  Upon  this 
"subtle  fancy  concerning  the  incarnation,"  IF  a  grave  and 
learned  theologian  disputed  with  her,  but  without  efiect.  The 
trial  was  again  made,  but  with  similar  results.  Sentence  was 
then  passed  upon  her;  and,  as  an  obstinate  heretic,  she  was 
consigned  to  the  ci\dl  power.  The  church  never  sheds 
blood.     The  butchery  is  always  left  to  the  state.     In  her 

*  Joan  Knell,  alias  Butcher,  often  Joan  Van  Kent,  was  burnt  in  Smith- 
field. — MS.  in  the  archives  of  the  Mennonite  Church,  Amsterdam. 

t  Private  information.  Ashford  is  mentioned  in  Historia  Der  Beroerten 
van  Engelandt,  p.  2. 

+  Vide  Anderson's  Ladies  of  the  Reformation :  Vaughan's  Revolutions 
of  English  History,  vol.  iii. ,  p.  394 ;  Bui-net's  History  of  the  Reformation, 
vol,  ii.,  p.  110. 

§  "A  poor  frantic  woman,  more  fit  for  Bedlam  than  a  stake."  Just  as 
true  of  D.  Neal,  the  iitterer  of  this,  as  of  Joan  Boucher, — History  of 
the  Puritans,  vol.  ii. ,  Edward's  reign, 

11  Vide  p,  54.  "[[  Vaughan,  vol.  iii.,  p,  394, 


EDWAKD   THE   SIXTH.  73 

wretched  prison  she  continued  for  months.  Amongst  others, 
she  was  visited  by  Mr.  Hutchinson  and  Thomas  Lever,  who 
sought  to  bring  her  opinions  into  harmony  with  the  received 
doctrine.  In  reply  to  an  argument  of  the  former,  she  placed 
beyond  all  reasonable  doubt  her  faith  in  the  perfect  human- 
ity of  Jesus.  "  I  deny  not  Christ  is  Mary's  seed,"  she  said, 
"or  the  woman's  seed;  nor  I  deny  Him  not  to  be  a  man. 
But  Mary  had  two  seeds — one  seed  of  her  faith,  and  another 
seed  of  her  flesh  and  in  her  body.  There  is  a  natural  and  a 
corporeal  seed,  and  there  is  a  spiritual  and  an  heavenly  seed, 
as  we  may  gather  of  St.  John,  when  he  saith,  '  The  seed  of 
God  remaineth  in  him,  and  he  cannot  sin.'  And  Christ  is 
her  seed;  but  He  is  become  man  of  the  seed  of  her  faith 
and  belief — of  spiritual  seed,  not  of  natural  seed;  for  her 
seed  was  sinful,  as  the  seed  and  flesh  of  others."  *  Before 
the  fiery  trial,  another  attempt  was  made.  Their  lordships 
of  London  and  Ely  called  her  before  them.  It  was  the 
day  before  her  execution.  Bidley  used  all  his  eloquence 
with  Joan.  The  attempt  was  vain.  Her  confidence  in  the 
truth  of  her  opinions  was  unshaken.  "It  was  not  long  ago," 
said  the  heroic  woman,  ''since  you  burnt  Ann  Askew  for  a 
piece  of  bread,  yet  came  yourself  to  believe  the  doctrine  for 
which  you  burnt  her;+  and  now  you  will  burn  me  for  a 
piece  of  flesh,  and  in  the  end  you  will  believe  this  also."  J 
To  throw  the  sanction  of  religion  around  the  final  scene, 
Bishop  Scorey  was  employed  to  preach,  and  then  Joan  sub- 
mitted to  the  last  trial  of  her  faith,  and  added  another  to 
the  list  of  the  Smithfield  martyrs. 

Burnet  says  that  Edward  manifested  extreme  reluctance 
to  sign  Joan's  death  warrant,  and  that  the  archbishop  was 
employed  to  remove  his  scruples.  "He  argued  from  the 
law  of  Moses,  by  which  blasphemers  were  to  be  stoned.    He 

*  Martyi'ology,  vol.  i.,  p.  350. 
+  Ann  was    martyred    for    rejecting  transiibstantiation.      Cramner, 
Ridley,  and  others,  had,  before  this,  repudiated  the  same. 
X  Strype's  Memorials,  vol,  iii. 


74  EARLY   ENGLISH  BAPTISTS. 

told  tlie  king  he  made  a  great  difference  between  errors  in 
other  points  of  divinity  and  those  which  were  directly 
against  the  Apostles'  Creed ;  that  there  were  impieties 
against  God,  which  a  prince,  as  God's  deputy,  ought  to 
punish,  as  the  king's  deputies  were  obliged  to  punish  offences 
against  the  king's  person."  Neither  the  principles  nor  the 
logic  of  Cranmer  satisfied  the  king;  and  the  narrator  adds 
that  he  signed  his  name  with  tears,  and  told  his  spiritual 
instructor  that  if  it  was  wrong  he  should  answer  for  it  to 
God.  The  friends  and  the  enemies  of  the  archbishop  have 
expended  much  energy  on  this.  The  former  have  laboured 
to  shield  his  memory  from  the  guilt  of  this  atrocious  act. 
Judging  from  the  evidence  before  us,  we  think  that  they 
have  been  successful.  Few,  if  any,  religionists  of  that  age, 
except  the  despised  sect  which  felt  the  consequences  of  these 
Antichristian  sentiments,  would  have  objected  to  these  prin- 
ciples. The  dogma  was  received  as  a  truth,  by  universal 
Christendom,  that  it  was  the  duty  of  the  state  to  punish 
error.  It  is  not  on  this  ground,  however,  that  the  vindica- 
tion of  Cranmer  can  be  2:>laced.  It  is  on  others  widely  dif- 
ferent. Edward's  journal  gives  no  intimation  of  the  scene. 
The  record  is  as  follows: — "May  the  2nd. — Joan  Boucher, 
otherwise  called  Joan  of  Kent,  was  burnt  for  holding  that 
Christ  was  not  incarnate  of  the  Virgin  Mary;  being  con- 
demned the  year  before,  but  kept  in  ho^e  of  conversion. 
And  on  the  30th  of  April,  the  Bishop  of  London  and  the 
Bishop  of  Ely  were  to  persuade  her,  but  she  withstood 
them,  and  reviled  the  preacher  at  her  death." '"'  No  tears 
are  shed  here.  No  indication  can  be  gathered  from  this  of 
a  troubled  conscience.  Yet  the  opportunity  was  fitting  for 
a  statement  of  the  same,  if  it  had  ever  transpired.  Besides 
all  this,  it  is  certain  that  Cranmer  was  not  present  at  the 
Council  when  the  Lord  Chancellor  was  ordered  to  make  out 
the  writ  for  consigning  Joan  to  the  flames.    The  memory  of 

*  Burnet,  vol.  ii.  (Appendix.) 


EDWARD   THE   SIXTH.  75 

the  archbishop  has  enough  to  bear,  without  imposing  upon 
it  what  in  point  of  fact  has  no  existence.* 

In  the  examination  of  Philpot,  the  following  occurs  in 
relation  to  this  victim  of  episcoj)al  brutality : — "  Riclce  :  All 
heretics  do  boast  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  every  one  would 
have  a  church  by  himself,  as  Joan  of  Kent  and  the  Ana- 
baptists. I  had  myself  Joan  of  Kent  a  fortnight  in  my 
house,  after  the  writ  was  out  for  her  to  be  burnt,  when  my 
Lord  of  Canterbury  and  Bishop  Ridley  resorted  almost  daily 
to  her.  But  she  was  so  high  in  the  spirit,  that  they  could 
do  nothing  with  her  for  all  their  learning;  but  she  went 
wilfully  unto  the  fire,  was  burnt,  and  so  do  you  now. 
Fliil'pot :  As  for  Joan  of  Kent,  she  was  a  vain  woman  (I 
knew  her  well),  and  a  heretic  indeed,  well  worthy  to  be 
burnt,  because  she  stood  against  one  of  the  manifest  articles 
of  our  faith,  contrary  to  the  Scripture."  t  There  is  also  an 
allusion  to  Joan  in  the  examination  of  Thomas  Hawkes. 
We  quote  it : — "  Chidsey :  Ye  die  boldly,  because  ye  would 
glory  in  your  death,  as  Joan  Boucher  did.  Hawkes :  What 
Joan  Boucher  did,  I  have  nothing  to  do  withal;  but  I  would 
my  part  might  be  to-morrow."  X 

"  The  day  after  this  woman's  condemnation,  was  one 
Putts,  a  tanner,  of  Colchester,  brought  before  the  king's 
commissioners.  He  was  either  of  her  opinion  (Joan  of 
Kent's),  or  an  Anabaptist.  For  these  commissioners  were 
appointed  to  sit  upon  inquiry  after  these  sectaries  chiefly. 
But  Putts  recanted,  and  bore  a  fagot  at  St.  Paul's  Cross, 
and  after  that  at  Colchester."  § 

To  Kent  we  must  again  conduct  our  readers  for  a  short 
time.  We  have  intimated  before  that  it  was  fruitful  in  the 
detested  Anabaptistical  error.    "I  was  sent,"  says  Fox,  "fi'om 

*  Vide  Todd's  Life  of  Cranmer;  Vaiiglian,  vol,  iii.,  p.  395.  Todd's 
Defence  of  Cranmer,  pp.  93,  94. 

t  Pliilpot's  Works  (Parker  Society),  p.  55. 
X  Fox,  apud  Maitland's  Essays  on  the  Reformation,  p.  507. — Note  B. 
§  Strype's  Memorials  of  the  Reformation,  vol.  i.,  part  1,  p.  336. 


76  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

the  Council  to  my  lord  of  Wincliester  (Gardiner),  to  exhort 
him  to  receive  also  the  true  confession  of  justification. 
And  because  he  was  very  refractorious,  I  said  to  him, 
'Why,  my  lord,  what  make  you  so  great  a  matter  herein? 
You  see  many  Anabaptists  rise  up  against  the  sacrament  of 
the  altar;  I  pray  you,  my  lord,,  be  diligent  in  confounding 
of  them.'  Eor  at  that  time  my  lord  of  Winchester  and  I 
had  to  do  with  two  Anabaptists  in  Kent.  In  this  sense 
I  willed  my  lord  to  be  stiff  in  the  defence  of  the  Sacraments 
against  the  detestable  errors  of  the  Anabaptists,"  &c.*  Other 
evidence  presents  itself  Knox  had  thrown  the  whole  weight 
of  his  influence  into  the  reform  movement.  Into  the  spirit 
of  Geneva  he  had  not  yet  been  immersed.  Nor  did  "  black 
prelacy"  appear  so  baleful  to  him.  His  sympathies  were  strong 
with  the  doctrine  and  polity  of  the  Anglicans;  and  his  aid 
had  been  solicited  in  the  revision  of  the  Prayer  Book.  That 
high  preferment  had  been  offered  him,  admits  of  no  doubt. 
His  biographers  supj^ose  the  Council  proposed  to  form  a  new 
bishopric  at  Newcastle;  but  a  letter  from  Northumberland 
to  Cecil  mentions  Kochester  as  the  place.  One  of  his  reasons 
for  this  appointment  will  interest  our  readers : — "  I  would 
to  God  it  might  please  the  king  to  appoint  Mr.  Knocks  to 
the  oflice  of  Rochester  bishopric;  which,  for  three  purposes, 
would  do  well.  The  first,  he  would  not  only  be  a  whetstone, 
to  quicken  and  sharpen  the  Bishop  of  Canterbury,  whereof 
he  hath  need;  but  also  he  would  be  a  great  confounder  of 
the  Anabaptists  lately  springing  up  in  Kent."  We  need  not 
give  his  other  reasons;  and  only  add  his  entreaty  to  Cecil : 
— "Herein  I  pray  you  desire  my  Lord  Chamberlain  and 
Mr.  Yice-Chamberlain  to  helj)  towards  this  good  act,  both 
for  God's  service  and  the  king's."  t  From  what  cause  this 
singular  reason  did  not  prevail  with  the  Reformers,  we  know 
not.  Other  letters  from  the  earl  manifestly  indicate  that 
his  respect  for  Knox  had  undergone  a  considerable  modifi- 

*  Fox.     Ridley's  Works  (Parker  Society),  pp.  264,  265. 
t  Macrie's  Life  of  Knox,  Note  D,,  p.  354. 


EDWARD    THE   SIXTH.  77 

cation.  At  a  later  period  he  dipped  his  pen  in  gall,  and 
wrote  in  extreme  bitterness  against  the  Baptists.  *  In  this 
work  he  warns  his  countrymen  against  their  approach,  and 
the  pernicious  influence  of  their  doctrines. 

"Sectaries  appeared  now  in  Essex  and  Kent,  sheltering 
themselves  under  the  profession  of  the  Gospel,  of  whom 
complaint  was  made  to  the  Council.  These  were  the  first 
that  made  separation  from  the  reformed  Church  of  England, 
having  gathered  congregations  of  their  own.  The  congre- 
gation in  Essex  was  mentioned  to  be  at  Bocking ;  that  in 
Kent  at  Feversham,  as  I  have  from  an  old  register.  From 
whence  I  also  collect,  that  they  held  the  opinions  of  the 
Anabaptists  and  Palagians ;  that  there  were  contributions 
made  among  them  for  the  better  maintaining  of  their  con- 
gregations j  that  the  members  of  the  congregations  in  Kent 
went  over  to  the  congregation  in  Essex,  to  instruct  and  to 
join  with  them;  and  that  they  had  their  meetings  in  Kent 
in  divers  places  besides  Feversham.  The  names  of  the  chiefs 
of  these  sectaries  in  Kent  were,  Henry  Hart,  Cole  of 
Feversham,  George  Brobridge,  Humphrey  Middleton  (who 
were  their  teachers,  as  it  seems),  William  Greneland,  John 
Gray,  William  Forstal,  Edmund  Morris,  Laurence  Ramsey, 
Thomas  Broke,  Boger  Linsey,  Richard  Dimeslake,  Clarke, 
Nicoles  Yong,  John  Plumer  of  Lenehame,  and  Cole  of 
Maidstone.  Their  teachers  and  divers  of  these  were  taken 
up,  and  found  sureties  for  their  appearance,  and  at  length 
brought  into  the  Ecclesiastical  Court,  when  they  were 
examined  in  forty-six  articles  or  more.  Many  of  those 
before-named  being  deposed  upon  the  said  articles,  confessed 
them  to  be  some  sayings  and  tenets  amongst  them :  '  That 
the  doctrine  of  f)redestination  was  meeter  for  devils  than 
for  Christian  men ;  that  children  were  not  born  in  original 
sin,'  which  were  Cole's  assertions.     These  that  follow  were 


*  A  notice  of  his  work  will  appear  in  another  part  of  this  volume; 
we  content  ourselves  here  by  referring  the  reader  to  Macrie's  Life, 
pp.  119,  120. 


78  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

taught  by  Hart :  '  That  there  was  no  man  so  chosen  but 
that  he  might  damn  himself;  neither  any  man  so  reprobate 
but  that  he  might  keep  God's  commands,  and  be  saved ; 
that  St.  Paul  might  have  damned  himself,  if  he  listed,'"  &c.* 

We  gather  a  little  more  information  of  these  men  in 
another  work  of  this  writer.  "In  January  27th,"  says 
Strype,  "  a  number  of  persons,  a  sort  of  Anabaptists,  about 
sixty,  met  in  a  house  on  a  Sunday,  in  the  parish  of  Booking, 
in  Essex,  where  arose  among  them  a  great  dispute,  'Whether 
it  were  necessary  to  stand  or  kneel,  bare-headed  or  covered, 
at  prayers  1  And  they  concluded  the  ceremony  not  to  be 
material,  but  that  the  heart  before  God  was  required,  and 
nothing  else.'  Such  other  like  warm  disputes  there  were 
about  Scripture.  There  were,  likewise,  such  assemblies  now 
in  Kent.  These  were  looked  upon  as  dangerous  to  Church 
and  State ;  and  two  of  the  company  were  therefore  com- 
mitted to  the  Marshallsea,  and  orders  were  sent  to  apprehend 
the  rest."t 

Of  Hart  i  and  his  companions  we  know  but  little.  There 
is  a  letter  of  his  now  lying  before  us,  to  which  we  shall 
have  occasion  to  refer  again.  Hart  and  his  brethren  sought 
the  propagation  of  their  religious  views  amongst  their  fellow- 
prisoners.  Bradford,  if  not  other  confessors,  engaged  in  the 
conflict.  §  Strype  has  preserved  two  letters,  no  doubt  from 
parties  more  or  less  interested  in  it.     One  is,  ''A  pious  letter 

*  Strype's  Memorials  of  Reformers.  Oxford:  vol,  i,  booki,,  pp.  369, 
370.     Strype's  Life  of  Parker,  vol.  i.,  pp.  54,  55.     Vide  vol.  iii.,  p.  413. 

+  Memorials  of  Cranmer,  vol.  i,,  p.  337.  Poor  Strype  knew  nothing 
of  the  anxiety  of  a  tender  conscience  to  know  the  will  of  God.  He  had 
been  taught  to  swallow  wholesale  the  creeds  and  f  ormiJaries  of  others,  and 
thought  he  could  afford  to  sneer  at  the  solicitude  of  others  to  be  right. 

J  He  was  the  principal  of  the  Free  Willers  Men,  so  they  were  termed 
by  the  Predestinators.  This  man  drew  up  thirteen  articles  to  be  observed 
among  his  company ;  and  there  came  none  into  their  brotherhood,  except 
they  were  sworn. — Strype's  E.  Memorials  (Mary),  c.  53. 

§  Bradford's  "Works  (Religious  Tract  Society),  p.  45.  "  He  was  the  chief 
maintainer  of  man's  free  will,  and  enemy  to  God's  free  grace." — Letters 
of  the  Martyrs. 


EDWARD   THE    SIXTH.  79 

against  complying  with  the  idolatrous  worship  in  Queeu 
Mary's  days,  by  a  Free  Will  Man."  The  other  is,  "A  letter 
to  a  congregation  of  Free  Willers,  by  one  that  had  been  of 
that  persuasion,  but  came  off,  and  now  a  prisoner  for  reli- 
gion." We  quote  a  sentence  from  it:  "And  although  I 
thought  I  should  lose  many  friends,  yet  it  hath  pleased  God 
to  raise  up  many  friends  for  me.  And  I  thank  God  that 
they,  whom  I  thought  would  have  been  mine  enemies,  are 
become  my  friends  in  the  truth ;  as  in  sample  by  our 
brethren  Ledlay  and  Cole,  and  such  like."* 

These  matters  will  claim  attention  in  another  part  of  our 
work. 

To  stamp  the  character  and  principles  of  these  troublers 
of  the  commonwealth,  the  legislature,  in  closing  its  session 
in  1551,  exempted  the  Baptists  from  the  pardon  which  was 
granted  to  those  who  had  taken  a  part  in  the  late  rebellion. 
Dissent  from  the  dogmas  of  the  church  was  a  crime  of 
deeper  dye  than  rebellion  against  the  state. 

In  1552  a  letter  from  the  Council  ordered  Cranmer  to 
examine  a  new  sect  lately  sprung  up  in  this  country.  Inform- 
ation had  been  lodged  against  them  by  some  of  those  reptiles 
who  are  ever  creeping  into  houses  and  insinuating  them- 
selves into  the  confidence  of  the  simple-minded.  Cranmer 
was  at  home  in  the  work.  The  examination  of  this  new 
sect  was  one  of  the  businesses  the  archbishop  was  employed 
in  while  he  was  in  his  retirement  at  his  house  near  Canter- 
bury. Strype  says: — "What  this  sect  was,  aj^peareth  not. 
It  may  be  they  were  of  the  Family  of  Love,  or  David  George 
sect,  who  made  himself  sometime  Christ  and  sometime  the 
Holy  Ghost."  t     He  favours  us,  in  another  work,  with  a 

*  Strype's  E.  Memorials,  vol.  vii.     A  Catalogue  of  Originals,  p.  172. 

f  Strype's  Memorials  of  Cranmer,  vol.  i.,  p.  421.  Todd  says  that 
Henry  Nicholas,  the  founder  of  the  JFamily  of  Love,  is  i^epresented  by 
Hogers  as  making  his  followers  disclaim  the  doctrines  of  the  Anabaptists. 
Vide  his  Displaying  of  the  Secte  of  the  Family  of  Love. — Life  of  Cran- 
mer, vol,  ii.,  p.  351. — jSTo  doabt  of  this.  That  they  were  Baptists  is  often 
affirmed,  but  without  the  shadow  of  proof. 


80  EAKLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

somewhat  different  account.  "A  commission  was  directed 
this  year,  dated  October,  to  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury 
and  the  Bishop  of  London,  and  other  worsliipful  persons  in 
Kent,  to  make  inquiry  after  sundry  heresies  lately  sprung 
up ;  and  for  the  examination  and  punishment  of  erroneous 
opinions,  as  it  seem,  of  the  Anabaptists  and  Arians,  of 
which  sort  some  now,  notwithstanding  former  severities, 
showed  their  heads."* 

One  of  the  last  acts  in  this  painful  drama  was  now  to  be 
performed.  The  victim  was  a  Dutchman,  of  the  name  of 
George  Yan  Pare.f  He  practised  as  a  surgeon,  and  was  a 
man  of  unblemished  character.  The  names  of  the  commis- 
sioners before  whom  he  appeared  ought  to  be  preserved  in 
this  record.  We  select  a  few.  Archbishop  Cranmer,  Bishop 
Bidley,  Miles  Coverdale,  &c.  Before  these  ghostly  lords 
the  foreigner  pleaded,  through  the  medium  of  an  interpreter. 
The  charge,  as  reported  by  his  enemies,  was,  "  That  God  the 
Father  is  only  God,  and  that  Christ  is  not  very  God  is  not 
heresy.  And  being  asked,  through  an  interpreter,  whether 
he  would  abjure  the  said  opinions,  he  answered,  ^NoI'^'J 
Unmoved  by  the  threats  of  his  merciless  persecutors,  and 
strong  in  the  moral  consciousness  of  the  truth  which  he 
professed,  he  prepared  for  the  fiery  trial.  "  He  suffered 
with  great  constancy  of  mind,  and  kissed  the  stake  and 
fagots  that  were  to  burn  him.  Of  this  Pare  I  find  a  Papist 
wrote,  saying,  that  he  was  a  man  of  a  most  wonderful  strict 
life;  that  he  used  not  to  eat  above  once  in  two  days;  and 
before  he  did  eat,  would  lie  sometimes  in  his  devotions 
prostrate  on  the  ground."  § 

*  Strype's  E.  Memorials,  Edward  VI.,  b.  ii,,  c.  xv. 

f  Vauglian  calls  him  Paris,  vol.  iii.,  p.  394. 

J  We  had  doubts  about  his  Arian  tendencies ;  but  since  writing  the 

above,  we  gather  the  following  statements  from  MSS,  which  have  just 

reached  us  from  Amsterdam : — "Anno  1551,  the  24th  of  April,  Jo  vis  Yan 

Pavis,  one  Dutchman,  was  burnt  in  Smithfield  :  was  one  Arian." 

§  Burnet,  vol.  ii.,  part  i.,  p.  232;  part  ii..,  p.  239  (Oxford  edition). 


EDWARD   THE   SIXTH.  81 

Archdeacon  Todd  says  a  full  account  of  the  opinions  held 
by  this  class  may  be  found  in  the  proceedings  against  Giles 
Van  Bellan,  another  Dutchman,  who  abjured  them  about 
this  time.  His  recantation  has  not  been  published.  From  a 
copy  now  before  us  we  select  the  following  : — 

' '  I  have  diverse  and  sundry  times  affirmed,  said,  taught,  defended, 
and  holden,  in  the  parish  of  Worksop,  of  the  said  diocese,  that  there 
is  no  priest  but  God  only ;  and  that  no  priest  hath  power  to  conse- 
crate the  very  body  of  Christ,  as  he  was  here  reigning  on  earth,  for 
the  apostles  had  no  2)ower  to  consecrate  the  body  of  Christ ;  and  that 
no  priest  had  power  to  take  away  man's  sin. 

"/fern;  That  the  Sacrament  of  the  altar  is  but  bread,  except  it 
be  received  by  faith,  and  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  Item:  That  God 
doth  not  dwell  in  temples  or  churches  made  by  man's  hands,  but  in 

^a  faithfid *  man  to  God.     Item:  That  no  man  can  make  any 

water  holier  than  God  makes  it;  therefore,  the  water  in  the  font, 
nor  the  holy  water  in  the  chiirch,  is  holier  than  the  water  in  the 
river ;  for  the  waier  in  the  river  is  as  holy  as  the  water  in  the  fonts, 
if  a  man  be  baj)tized  in  it,  and  the  words  of  baptism  be  sj)oken  over 

him.     Item:  That  every *  man  may  baptize  in  water  as  well  as 

a  priest.  Item:  That  no  bishop  can  make  no  ground  hoUer  than 
another.  That  no  man  is  bound  to  fast.  That  no  man  ought  to  keep 
any  holy  day  but  the  Sunday.  That  prayer  made  to  saints  is  of  no 
value.  That  no  man  ought  to  go  on  pilgrimage.  That  a  man  may 
be  confessed  of  another  man  as  well  as  of  a  priest.  That  there  is  no 
piu"gatory. "  * 

The  feeling  excited  by  these  cruelties  told  with  fearful 
effect  on  the  bishops.  In  the  discussion  of  a  bill  for 
enforcing  ecclesiastical  laws,  in  1567,  it  is  said,  "All  the 
bishops  joined  in  a  complaint  to  the  Lords,  that  they  were 
much  despised  by  the  common  people;  that  vice  and  dis- 
order much  abounded ;  and  that  they  durst  not  punish  any 
sin,  by  reason  that  some  late  proclamations  had  almost 
totally  deprived  them  of  any  jurisdiction,  so  that  they  could 
not  oblige  any  person  to  appear  before  them,  or  observe  the 
order  of  the  church."t 


(a)  A  word  we  cannot  make  out.     (6)  The  same  word  as  before. 

*  Note  C. 

+  Pari.  History,  vol.  i.,  p.  591. 

G 


82  EARLY  ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

The  power  which  these  men  had  so  shamefully  abused 
was  soon  to  be  taken  away.  The  death  of  the  young 
monarch  soon  followed;  and  though  plans  had  been  formed 
for  the  exclusion  of  the  rightful  heir  to  the  throne  and  the 
election  of  Lady  Jane  Grey,  yet  the  rapid  and  successful 
efforts  of  Mary  to  secure  her  rights,  exposed  them  not  only 
to  the  vindictiveness  of  the  professors  of  the  old  faith 
when  restored  to  power,  but  to  the  penalties  of  treason 
against  the  state.  The  fabric  which  they  raised  by  the 
hand  of  cruelty,  and  cemented  by  the  blood  of  harmless  and 
truth-loving  men,  was  soon  to  crumble  to  dust.  The  measure 
which  they  had  meted  out  to  others  would  be  meted  out  to 
them  again.  Justice  seldom  sleeps  in  the  presence  of  wrong. 
The  cry  of  suffering  innocence  was  heard;  and,  by  a  death 
similar  to  that  of  their  victims,  were  many  of  the  leading 
inquisitors  removed  from  the  world.  But  the  narrative  of 
these  events  will  claim  our  attention  in  another  chapter. 


CHAPTER    lY. 

MARY. 

No  doubt  Mary's  accession  to  the  throne  was  welcomed 
by  the  majority  of  the  nation.*  The  plot  for  her  exclusion 
and  the  enthronement  of  Jane  exploded  at  once,  and  placed 
the  innocent  and  the  guilty  alike  at  her  mercy.  There 
were  causes  which  contributed  to  her  success.  Into  a  full 
detail  of  these  we  cannot  enter.     The  merest  outline  must 

*  "  I  have  seen  the  most  sudden  change  that  could  have  been  believed 
among  mankind ;  and  I  think  that  Heaven  alone  has  conducted  the  work, 
and  caused  such  innumerable  people  to  be  moved  to  the  greatest  affection 
which  has  ever  been  seen  amongst  subjects."  "About  35,000  or  40,000 
men,  foot  and  horse,  armed  at  her  devotion." — NoaiUes,  apud  Turner, 
vol.  iii.,  p.  379. 


MARY.  83 

suffice  for  the  i^resent.  We  have  ah-eady  seen  that  more  than 
three-fourths  of  the  population  were  attached  to  the  Romish 
— perhaps  more  correctly  the  Anglican,  in  contradistinction 
to  the  ultra- Protestant — faith,  though  opposed,  unmistakably, 
to  the  Papal  supremacy.*  Their  king,  in  his  will,  had  re- 
cognised the  claim  of  the  daughter  of  Catherine;  and  both 
houses  of  the  legislature  had  most  deliberately  owned  it. 
Northumberland,  petted  by  the  Reformers,  the  "  Joshua  "t 
of  his  time,  under  the  mask  of  the  loftiest  i">reteusions  to 
sanctity,  was  without  moral  princij)le.  His  tyranny  and 
selfishness,  and  that  of  his  creatures,  had  concentrated  the 
hatred  of  the  community  on  him.  His  plotting  against 
Somerset — a  weaker,  but  far  better  man, — and  finally  the  Pro- 
tector's death  in  violation  of  justice,  had  never  been  forgiven; 
whilst  the  suj^posed  poisoning  of  the  lamented  Edward  had 
filled  to  overflowing  the  cup  of  public  indignation.  Reform, 
too,  had  been  carried  on  in  a  spirit  wliich  had  awakened  the 
hostility  of  thousands.  Force,  not  suasion  ;  punishment, 
not  love;  imprisonment,  not  the  recognition  of  the  rights  of 
conscience, — had  been  the  weapons  with  which  these  mis- 
taken Reformers  had  worked.  Scenes  which  were  a  disgrace 
to  morality  had  been  exhibited.  One  spiritual  tyranny, 
clothed  with  all  the  sacredness  of  antiquity,  and  sanctioned 
by  the  public  religious  sentiments  of  the  civilized  world,  had 
been  thrown  ofi",  only  to  give  place  to  another  which  vio- 
lated the  moral  training  of  many,  and  robbed  them  of  sources 
of  daily  pleasure  and  gain.  Vicious,  selfish,  hyjDOcritical 
men,  under  the  guise  of  piety,  had  made  a  perfect  onslaught 
on  all  holy  things.  Holy  roods,  holy  images,  holy  vessels, 
holy  bread  and  water,  holy  candles,  J  holy  beads,  had  been 

*  The  Pope  felt  "that  she  had  obtained  her  throne  by  the  favour  of 
those  who,  for  the  most  part,  hated  to  death  the  Holy  See." 

+  So  called  by  Sandys,  afterward  Archbishop  of  York. 

X  Father  Latimer,  in  his  own  way,  explains  the  use  of  these  :— "Now 
there  was  an  old  cousin  of  mine,  which,  after  the  man  was  dead,  gave  me 
a  wax  candle  in  my  hand,  and  commanded  me  to  make  certain  +  +  +  over 


84  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

swept  away;  and  above  all,  the  wealth  of  the  church  had 
been  seized  to  gratify  their  ambition  and  their  lust  for 
power.*  Thousands  of  wretched  monks  were  wanderers. 
Thousands,  who  had  been  allowed  to  fill  vacant  cures,  re- 
tained the  fullest  sympathy  with  their  early  religious  train- 
ing. Over  a  wide  circle  their  power  extended.  It  could 
not  be  otherwise.  No  religious  movement  which  is  not 
the  result  of  individual  consciousness,  can  be  genuine. 
Politicians,  for  their  own  worldly  interest,  may  force  the 
outward  man;  civil  power  may  compel  an  external  obe- 
dience,— but  they  leave  the  heart  untouched.  Germany, 
Scotland,  and  England,  are  standing  j)i"oofs  of  the  misery 

lum  that  was  dead ;  for  slie  thought  the  devil  shoiild  run  away  by  and 
by.  So  I  took  the  candle,  but  I  could  not  +  him,  as  she  would  have 
me  to  do,  for  I  had  never  seen  it  before.  Now  she,  perceiving  that  I 
could  not  do  it,  with  a  great  anger  took  the  candle  out  of  my  hand, 
saying,"  &c. — Sermons,  vol.  i.,  p.  543. 

*  Complaints  of  the  spoliation  of  the  church  by  the  lay  lords,  and 
the  poverty  of  the  church  dignitaries,  meet  you  everywhere.  It  may  be 
so.  Large  portions  of  property  had  been  abstracted  from  ecclesiastical 
affluence.  Their  -wTetchedness  may  be  gathered  from  an  item  or  two 
from  the  records  of  the  sjDoil  which  his  enemies  carried  away  from  the 
castles  at  Battersea  and  CaAvood,  palatial  residences  of  Holgate,  the  Ai'ch- 
bishop  of  York.  ' '  From  Battersea  they  carried  £300  in  gold ;  in  specialties 
and  good  debts,  £400  more  ;  in  plate  gilt  and  parcels  gilt,  1,600  ounces  ;  a 
mitre  of  fine  gold,  with  two  pendants,  set  about  the  sides  and  nindit  with 
very  fine  diamonds,  sapj)hires,  and  bailists,  and  all  the  plain  with  very 
good  stones  and  pearls,  and  the  pendants  in  like  manner,  weighing  125 
ovmces  ;  six  or  seven  great  rings  of  fine  gold,  with  stones  in  them,  whereof 
were  three  fine  blue  torquoise  and  a  diamond ;  a  sei'pent's  tongue,  set  in 
a  standard  of  silver,  gilt  and  graven ;  the  Ai'chbishop's  seal,  in  silver ; 
his  signet ;  an  old  antique,  in  gold.  From  Cawood  and  other  places, 
£900 ;  two  miti^es ;  in  plate  and  parcel  gilt,  770  ounces ;  gilt  plate,  1,157 
ounces;  one  broken  +  of  silver  gilt,  weighing  forty-six  ounces."  Substan^ 
tials,  as  well  as  the  ornamental,  were  carried  aAvay.  "  2,500  sheep,  100 
beasts,  200  quarters  of  wheat,  500  of  malt,  sixty  of  oats,  and  five  or  six 
tons  of  wine."  (Strype's  Cranmer,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  8,  9.)  These  are  only  a 
few  of  the  good  things  of  this  life  which  were  found  in  the  stores  of  the 
Archbishop.  Yet  Cranmer,  in  a  note  to  Cecil,  says, — "  If  I  knew  of 
any  bishop  who  was  covetous,  I  would  si;rely  admonish  him,  but  I  know- 
none  ;  but  all  beggared,  except  it  be  one,  and  he  I  deem  will  say  he  is 
not  very  rich." — Ibid,  vol.  ii.,  p.  405. 


MAKY.  85 

aDtl  failure  of  moral  changes  effected  by  such  instinimentality. 
Difficult  we  know  it  is  to  form  anything  like  an  accurate 
conception  of  the  state  of  the  rural  mind  at  this  time.  The 
data  from  which  we  could  draw  our  conclusions  are  very 
limited.  But  it  must  not  be  forgotten,  that  thought  and 
intelligence  had  more  power  and  play  in  the  great  hives  of 
industry  and  commerce  than  in  the  sparsely  populated  dis- 
tricts of  the  country.  The  cities  and  great  towns  were  the 
Reformers'  strongholds.  * 

To  the  rustic  mind  there  was  a  charm  about  the  old  form 
of  worship.  It  appealed  to  the  senses,  if  it  did  not  affect 
the  mind.  The  eye  and  the  ear  were  gratified,  as  the  one 
gazed  on  the  splendours  of  art  and  decorative  effect  in  the 
awful  mysteries  of  the  altar,  and  the  other  drank  in  the 
rolling  notes  of  the  organ  or  the  plaintive  strains  of  the 
officiating  staff  of  priests,  although  the  heart  might  be  im- 
mersed in  all  its  moral  pollution.  Compared  with  the  bald- 
ness of  the  new,  the  auxiliaries  of  the  old  faith  \vere  most 
telling.  Besides,  Mary  had  pledged  her  word  that  there  should 
be  no  changes.  The  ecclesiastical  polity,  the  doctrinal  formu- 
laries of  her  father's  reign,  were  to  be  the  great  standards  of 
the  national  faith.  She  herself  had  consented  to  them.  The 
imprisoned  bishops,  likely  to  wdeld  the  most  powerful  in- 
fluence under  her  reign,  had  worked  them  out  from  the 
mass  of  corruption  with  which  they  had  been  siuTounded. 
Hence,  Protestants  were  as  loud  in  their  welcome  as 
Catholics.  The  reason  is  here :  both  had  confidence  in 
the  sincerity  of  the  queen;  both  hoped  that  their  claims 
would  be  respected.     Toleration  had  been  promised.     These 


*  "In  London  alone  there  were  15,000  French,  Flemish,  and  German 
refugees,  most  of  them  headstrong  and  xmgoveniable  enthusiasts." — 
Froude,  vol.  vi. ,  p.  43.  Many  of  them,  we  have  no  doubt,  were  Flemish 
Baptists — men  who  believed  truth  to  be  a  reality,  and  could  afford  to 
keep  a  conscience,  at  the  risk  of  everything  else. 

"  The  city  of  London  is  a  whirlpool  and  sink  of  all  evil  humoiu's,  where 
they  be  bred,  and  from  thence  spread  into  aU  parts  of  the  world." — Gar- 
diner.    Fox,  book  i.,  Mary's  Reign. 


86  EAKLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

expectations  were  well  grounded;  whilst  the  mass  of  the 
people  were  ready  to  hail  any  change  w^hicli  would  gratify 
their  senses  or  improve  their  social  state.  Heaven,  too,  was 
regarded  as  deeply  interested  in  this  conflict.  Prodigies 
of  no  common  order  were  interpreted  in  Mary's  favour.* 
Let  the  reader  give  but  ordinary  weight  to  these  con- 
current circumstances,  and  the  facility  with  which  the 
eldest  born  of  Henry  ascended  the  throne  will  be  no  longer 
a  mystery. 

"  The  path  of  honour,  of  comfort,  and  of  national  peace 
and  prosperity,  was  never  more  straight  and  perceptible — 
never  more  easy  and  certain  to  any  sovereign,  than  that 
which  opened,  before  Mary."  t  The  past  in  her  history 
warranted,  to  some  extent,  if  not  entirely,  the  confidence  of 
the  nation.  Her  conduct  during  the  reigns  of  her  father 
and  brother,  though  firm,  and  unfolding  many  of  the  Tudor 
elements  of  her  nature,  had  given  no  ground,  even  to  con- 
jecture, that  the  fearful  scenes  which  marked  her  short  and 
unhappy  reign  could  by  any  possibility  transpire.  Amiable, 
cultivating  in  her  retirenjent  an  acquaintance  with  the 
noblest  productions  of  past  ages,  conscientious  in  the  highest 
degree,  :|:  and  standing  out  as  a  lonely  royal  and  suffering 
maiden,  she  enlisted  the  sympathies  of  the  j^eople,  and  war- 
ranted the  hope  that  her  rule  would  be  marked  by  a  wise 
and  tolerant  policy,  and  be  followed  by  all  the  elements  of 
prosj)erity  and  national  wealth.  Besides,  for  a  time,  the 
promise  she  had  so  distinctly  given  to  her  East-Anglican 
supporters  remained  intact.     Whilst  doubt  and  uncertainty 

*  Froude,  vol.  vi. ,  chap.  1.     ' '  Therefore,  no  marvel  whj'^  God  fought 
against  them,  seeing  they  were  hypocrites,  and  under  the  cloak  of  the 
Gospel  would  have  debarred  the  queen's  higlmess  of  her  rights ;  but  God 
would  not  so  cloak  them." — Bradford's  Works,  p.  324. 
+  Turner,  vol.  iii.,  p.  395. 

t  "My  soul  is  God's,"  she  said  to  her  brother;  "my  faith  I  will  not 
change ;  my  opinions  I  will  not  dissemble.  I  therefore  desire  your  high- 
ness rather  to  take  my  life  than  to  restrain  me  from  hearing  mass." — 
Soame's  Reformation,  vol,  iii.,  p.  615. 


MARY.  87 

as  to  certain  final  issues — whilst  dangers,  more  or  less, 
marked  her  pathway,  she  not  only  did  not  violate  her  word, 
but  breathed  the  spirit  of  conciliation ;  and  though  she 
would  indulge  her  own  religious  convictions,  and  devoutly 
conform  to  the  rites  and  ceremonies  of  her  own  faith,  still 
no  embarofo  should  be  laid  on  the  consciences  of  others. 
More  than  this.  The  rabid  zeal  of  her  co-religionists  speed- 
ily manifested  itself  In  more  places  than  one,  the  mass,  in 
violation  of  the  law,  was  publicly  celebrated.  At  Paul's 
Cross,  a  canon  of  the  metropolitan  church  so  aroused  the 
indignation  of  his  audience  by  his  intemperate  eulogies  on 
the  hated  Bonner  and  the  dogmas  of  the  old  faith,  that,  but 
for  the  protection  of  Bradford,  his  life  would  have  been 
sacrificed  by  the  excited  multitude.*  Against  these  un- 
timely and  unexpected  outbreaks,  the  lord  mayor  complained 
to  the  queen.  The  calm  was  ruffled,  and  the  deep  wide  sea 
was  agitated,  and  it  might  be  lashed  into  terrific  fury.  "Go 
tell  them,"  was  the  reply  to  his  lordship,  "in  the  best  words 
the  mayor  and  recorder  can  devise,  that  albeit  her  grace's 
conscience  is  stayed  in  matters  of  religion,  yet  she  meaneth 
graciously  not  to  compel  and  constrain  other  men's  con- 
sciences, otherwise  than  God  shall  put  in  their  hearts  a 
persuasion  of  the  truth  that  she  is  in,  through  the  opening 
of  his  word  unto  them  by  godly,  virtuous,  and  learned 
preachers." 

The  better  qualities  of  her  nature  were  speedily  eradi- 
cated.     Into  all  the  arts  of  duplicity  she  was  very  soon 


*  A  spectator  of  the  scene  thus  describes  the  excitement: — "Others, 
more  excited  than  the  rest,  began  to  climb  up  the  pulpit,  to  pull  him 
down.  Such  an  uproar  began,  such  shouting  at  the  sennon,  such  casting 
up  of  caps,  that  a  bystander,  who  kept  a  journal  of  the  events  of  the  day, 
afl&rmed  that  the  people  seemed  to  be  mad,  and  much  mischief  woidd 
have  been  done  if  the  mayor  and  his  brethren  had  not  been  present." — 
Life  and  Defence  of  Bonner,  p,  156.  Collier,  vol.  ii. ,  p.  345.  Mary  was 
present  at  this  scene,  accompanied  by  sixty  guards,  besides  the  attend- 
ants of  the  nobles  who  accompanied  her. — Howard's  Lady  Jane  Grey, 
pp.  303,  304. 


88  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

indoctrinated ;  and  her  progress  was  rapid.  Before  she  had 
been  three  weeks  on  the  throne,  she  had  received  a  secret 
messenger  from  the  Vatican,  and  had  opened  a  correspond- 
ence with  the  Poj)e.  *  She  stands  before  us,  in  the  page  of 
history,  as  a  fearful,  and,  indeed,  terrific  example  of  the  power 
of  superstition  and  priestly  tyranny  to  convert  a  nature 
which  might  have  unfolded  all  the  elements  of  moral  and 
political  greatness,  into  one  which  the  Moral  Governor  of 
the  Universe — happily  for  man,  at  far  distant  periods — 
sends  as  the  ministers  of  justice  to  correct  nations  for 
their  transgressions.  True  it  is,  the  seeds  of  her  cruel 
tyranny  were  there — deep  hidden  in  her  nature ;  but  her 
youth,  and  the  first  acts  of  her  reign,  gave  the  promise 
of  a  different  harvest.  Like  the  vast  primeval  forests  of 
the  New  World,  which  have  beneath  the  wide-spreading 
roots  of  their  magnificent  trfees  the  seeds  of  other  forms 
of  vegetable  life :  till  the  former  are  removed,  the  latter 
cannot  vegetate. 

Liberated  from  the  Tower,  restored  to  his  see,  and  in- 
vested with  the  highest  legal,  and  probably  at  this  time  the 
highest  political  authority  in  the  kingdom,  Grardiner  soon 
made  liis  influence  felt  in  every  department  of  the  state,  t 
Ambitious,  vindictive,  regardless  in  a  great  measure  of 
high-toned  moral  principle,  he  was  "in  wit  crafty  and 
subtle ;  towards  his  superiors  flattering  and  fair-spoken ;  to 
his  inferiors  fierce;  against  his  equals  stout  and  envious." 
Thoroughly  familiar,  from  early  and  long  practice,  with 
every  diplomatic  art,  more  than  with  theological  science, 
he  was  one  of  those  men,  by  no  means  rare  in  his  age,  who 

*  Vide  Froucle,  vol.  vi.,  p.  83. 

t  "  Wincliester  shows  already,  in  the  opinion  of  many,  that  he  wiU  not 
be  less  arrogant  and  violent  in  the  administration  of  affairs  than  others 
"who  have  had  this  authority ;  and  we  may  see  that  he  has  forgotten 
nothing,  in  his  seven  years'  prison,  of  his  accustomed  manner."  (The 
French  Ambassador  to  his  Court. ) — Turner,  vol.  iii. ,  p.  381. 

"Gardiner,"  said  Mary,  "was  obstinate,  and  would  listen  to  no  one ; 
she  herself  was  helpless  and  miserable." — Froude,  vol,  vi.,  p.  221. 


MARY. 


89 


regarded  the  possession  of  power  as  more  than  justifying 
the  means  by  which  their  boundless  hist  of  dominion  was 
gratified.  Extremes  centred  in  the  bishop.  There  was  much 
that  was  noble  and  commanding,  blended  with  a  reptile 
meanness  which  stamps  his  character  with  features*' which, 
as  a  whole,  are  ever  repulsive.  * 

To  men  of  the  chancellor's  spirit  revenge  was  sweet ;  to 
triumph  over  a  foe  his  highest  glory ;  to  gaze  on  his  suffer- 
ings, and  to  aid  in  augmenting  them,  was  no  very  limited 
source  of  enjoyment.  ^ 

Gardiner  had  felt  the  power  of  Cranmer  and  his  reform- 
ing brethren  during  the  former  reign.  In  his  conflict  with 
the  archbishop  his  overthrow  was  signal.  Deprived  of  his 
bishopric,  stripped  of  all  his  authority,  he  had  cherished  in 
the  solitude  of  his  cell  the  spirit  of  revenge.  His  hour  was 
now  come;  and  in  the  agony  and  blood  of  his  martp^ed  foes 
the  plenitude  of  his  vengeance  was  satisfied.  Nor  was  this 
all.  The  bishop,  in  the  fulness  of  his  zeal,  during  the  reign 
of  Henry,  had  published  a  work  in  defence  of  the  monarch. 
It  now  supplied  his  opponents  with  strong  defensive  armour. 
They  galled  the  apostate  prelate  with  arrows  snatched  from 
his  quiver.     His  work  against  the  Papal  supremacy,  and  his 

*  The  following  is  Bishop  Ponet's  description  of  him:— "The  d6ctor 
hath  a  smart  colour,  hanging  look,  frowning  brows,  eyes  an  inch  within 
his  head,  a  nose  hooked  like  a  buzzard's ;  nostiils  like  a  horse,  ever  snuffing 
in  the  wind ;  a  sparrow  mouth,  great  paws  like  the  devil,  talons  on  his 
feet  like  the  grife,  two  inches  longer  than  the  natural  toes,  and  so  tied 
with  sinews  that  he  cannot  abide  to  be  touched."  Ponet  hated  Gardiner. 
— Frotide,  vol.  vi.,  pp.  105,  197,  295,  395. 

Lloyd  says,  "His  reservedness  was  such,  that  he  never  did  what  he 
aimed  at,  never  aimed  at  what  he  intended,  never  intended  what  he  said, 
and  never  said  what  he  thought ;  whereby  he  carried  it  so,  that  others 
should  do  his  business  when  they  opposed  it,  and  should  undermine  theirs 
when  he  seemed  to  promote  it.  A  man  that  was  to  be  traced  like  the 
fox,  and  read,  like  Hebrew,  backward.  If  you  would  know  what  he  did, 
you  must  observe  what  he  did  not ;  that,  whilst  intending  one  tiling,  he 
professed  to  aim  at  the  very  opposite;  that  he  never  intended  what  he 
said,  and  never  said  what  he  intended." — Lodge's  Illustrations,  vol.  i., 
p.  126. 


90  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

ready  concurrence  in  the  divorce,  had  been  republished.  It 
was  considered  the  best  defence  of  the  king's  divorce,  and 
the  .most  unanswerable  attack  on  the  Pope's  supremacy, 
which  had  hitherto  appeared.  To  this  work  a  preface  had 
been  written  by  Bonner.*  Again  and  again  his  own  senti- 
ments were  quoted  by  the  prisoners  at  his  bar,  and  the  pro- 
tection of  his  opinion  was  invoked  by  thousands  of  dissidents 
from  Popery.  Renegades  always  feel  this  deeply,  t  To 
trample  on  their  own  principles  in  the  madness  of  their 
rage,  to  heap  insult  and  calumny  on  those  who  retain  them, 
is  the  highest  proof  they  can  give  of  the  sincerity  of  their 
conversion  and  the  reality  of  their  faith.  To  rescue  their 
discarded  opinions  from  neglect,  to  lay  them  in  all  their 
breadth  and  importance  before  the  nation,  to  show  that 
interest,  not  principle — selfishness,  not  the  love  of  the  truth, 
may  fairly  be  recognized  as  the  cause  of  the  change,  is, 
beyond  all  dispute,  the  deadliest  blow  which  can  be  inflicted 
on  an  opponent.  This  was  the  doom  of  the  unhappy  chan- 
cellor. His  holy  anger  could  only  be  quenched  in  the  blood 
of  his  enemies. 

Far  less  public  for  a  time,  though  not  less  potent,  was  the 
influence  of  another  councillor.  Penard,  the  ambassador 
from  Spain,  was  early  admitted  to  the  confidence  of  Mary. 
He  was  a  thorough  diplomatist.  The  end  with  him  always 
justified  the  means.  Spanish  interests  were  paramount  with 
him.      At  these  he  ever  aimed.      The  supremacy  of  the 

*  The  Life  and  Defence  of  Bishop  Bonner,  by  a  Tractarian  British 
Critic.     London,  1842.     A  work  of  great  interest  and  equal  clearness. 

"Gardiner's  spite  was  at  this  time  much  impelled  by  the  reprinting  of 
his  book  on  True  Obedience,  which  was  done  at  Strasburg,  and  sent  over. 
In  it  he  called  King  Henry's  marriage  with  Queen  Catherine  incestuous, 
and  had  justified  his  divorce,  and  his  second  marriage  with  his  'most 
godly  and  virtuous  wife,  Queen  Anne.'" — Burnet. 

+  He  had  thus  spoken  also  :  "  The  king's  majesty  hath,  by  the  inspira- 
tion of  the  Holy  Ghost,  componed  all  matter  of  religion,  which  uniformity, 
I  pray  God,  it  may  in  that,  and  all  other  things,  be  extended  unto  us." — 
Address  to  the  University  of  Cambridge,  in  Strype's  Ecclesiastical  Memo- 
rials, vol.  vi.     Apud  243. 


MARY.  .  9 1 

queen's  uncle  in  the  English  Council  was  the  end  of  his 
mission.  Moral  restraint  was  unknown  when  these  were  to 
be  secured.*  The  union  of  the  two  crowns  was  the  triumph 
of  his  skill.  Mary  was  fascinated  bythis  unprincipled  minister. 
In  the  solitude  of  midnight,  and  in  the  loneliness  of  the 
royal  closet,  he  poured  his  insidious  advice  into  her  willing 
ear.  Gradually  her  whole  heart  was  laid  open  before  him. 
Intensely  hating  the  reformed  doctrines,  feeling  that  nothing 
but  the  entire  destruction  of  its  abettors  would  give  security 
to  his  master's  policy,  he  urged  the  death  of  the  unfortunate 
Lady  Jane  Grey  and  her  friends.  And  only  the  dread  of  a 
nation's  rising  prevented  his  infatuated  mistress  from  listen- 
ing to  his  pernicious  counsels,  and  offering  her  sister  as  a 
victim  to  his  malignant  nature. t  His  was  a  dark  spirit  of 
evil,  rejoicing  only  in  the  agony  and  suffering  of  his  fellow 
men.^ 

The  influence  of  these  two  men,  till  the  arrival  of  Pole, 
was  all-powerful ;  yet,  in  many  respects,  their  line  of  policy 
was   divergent,  and   the   ends  they  sought  to  secure  very 

*  The  emperor  and  his  clerical  advisers  had  promised  to  prevent  Mary 
either  from  attempting  innovations  in  religion  without  their  consent,  or 
marrying  against  the  approbation  of  her  subjects.  Mary  herself  had 
authorised  Renard  to  assure  the  Council  that  she  had  no  thought  of 
marrying  a  stranger.  And  yet  Turner  says, — "On  the  30th  of  October 
Mary  sent  for  the  Spanish  ambassador  by  night,  and  in  the  seclusion  of 
her  own  room,  prostrate  on  her  knees  before  the  most  sacred  object  of 
her  faith,  and  after  repeating  the  Veni  Creator,  she  solemnly  vowed  to 
him  that  none  other  than  Philip  would  she  take  for  her  husband.  I  take 
the  substance  of  this  from  Renard's  despatch." — Turner,  vol.  iii.,  p.  392. 
Duplicity  marked  her  character  from  the  first. 

+  "With  Elizabeth,"  he  said  to  Charles,  "there  will  be  religious  revo- 
lution. The  clergy  will  be  put  down,  the  Catholics  persecuted,  and  there 
will  be  such  revenge  for  the  present  proceedings  as  the  world  has  never 
seen." — (Renard  to  the  Emperor.)    Apud  Froude,  vol.  vi.,  p.  355. 

J  "If  England  should  be  ruled  by  such  a  councillor,  woe,  AToe,  to 
England  !  for  then  it  would  come  to  iiiin  and  destruction ;  and  them  that 
favour  God's  AVord  would  be  in  worse  case  than  those  that  were  in  the 
time  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah." — Sir  P.  Hoby  to  Cecil.  Burleigh  State 
Papers,  vol.  i.  Apud  Froude,  vol,  v.,  p.  488.  Hoby  in  tliis  case  was 
all  but  prophetic. 


92  .  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

opposite.  One  in  their  intense  hatred  to  the  reformed, — 
hesitating  at  no  means  to  annihilate  the  friends  of  the  new 
doctrine, — yet  the  one  was  the  Spaniard,  seeking  to  subor- 
dinate England  to  the  polities  of  Spain ;  the  other  the 
Englishman,  not  less  anxious  for  the  independence  and 
greatness  of  his  country,  and  the  union  of  the  queen  with 
an  English  noble.  Renard  triumphed,  and  Philip  was 
declared  king. 

For  the  political  events  which  led  to  the  sacrifice  of  Lady 
Jane  Grey  upon  the  scaffold,* — for  the  various  means  em- 
ployed for  the  restoration  of  the  old  faith  and  the  supremacy 
of  the  Papal  power, — for  the  history  of  the  rebellion  excited 
by  the  intended  marriage  with  Philip,  and  the  hostility  of 
the  peoj)le  to  the  restoration  of  the  ancient  rites, — for  the 
account  of  the  martyrdom  of  some  of  the  best,  the  noblest, 
and  the  most  enlightened  of  England's  sons  at  that  time, 
and  the  sufiering  and  the  misery  which  followed,  we  must 
refer  our  readers  to  other  sources  of  information.  Ours  is 
not  a  history  of  Mary's  reign.  It  is  not  a  martyrology. 
Only  to  these  can  we  refer  so  far  as  it  may  place  before  our 
readers  the  design  of  this  volume. 

The  first  year  of  her  reign  had  not  closed  before  the 
reconciliation  to  Pome  was  complete,  and  the  Cardinal 
Legate  invested  with  full  power.  The  joy  of  the  Pomanists 
was  full.t  The  j)rospects  of  an  heir  to  the  throne  made 
them  all  but  delirious.  She  was  another  Mary  favoured 
of  heaven,  to  give  birth  to  another  son  who  should  save 
the  church.  Gratitude  was  demanded  for  all  this.  Mary 
and   her    Council   were   ready.       Spanish   gold    had   done 

*  Vide  Howard's  Life  of  Lady  Jane  Grey. 

+  "Then  you  might  have  seen  those  which  had  been  bishops,  who  had 
been  displaced  by  the  young  King  Edward  and  his  late  father  Henry, 
coining  in  great  joy  and  magnificence  about  the  town,  mounted  on  mules 
and  little  pompous  horses,  dressed  in  great  gowns  of  black  camlet,  over 
which  were  beautiful  surplices,  their  heads  covered  with  satin  hoods 
like  those  worn  by  the  monks,  being  joyous  on  account  of  the  queen's 
victory."— Howard's  Lady  Jane  Grey,  p.  302. 


MARY.  93 

much,*  and  the  promise  of  undisturbed  possession  of  church 
lands  more,  with  her  councillors  and  senate.  The  past  pre- 
sented them  with  precedents.  The  times  of  Moses,  the  Judges, 
and  the  Kings,  were  full  of  examples  which  they  might  imi- 
tate. Agreements,  and  great  national  festivities,  were  marked 
by  sacrifice.  That  with  Rome  demanded  one.  Completeness 
without  it  would  be  wanting.  Their  sincerity  would  be 
questioned  if  the  land,  once  more  restored  to  the  unity  of 
the  church,  was  not  cleansed  from  the  hated  and  polluting 
presence  of  the  heretics.  The  Cardinal  Legate  demanded  it. 
"Bring  forth,"  said  he,  "fruits  meet  for  repentance.  Here 
is  another  point  that  you  must  show  worthy  of  a  repentant 
mind :  that  whereas  you  have  sore  offended  God  by  giving 
favour  to  heretics,  now  transfer  your  favotir  under  such 
manner,  that  if  you  can  count  them  by  any  means  unto 
the  unity  of  the  church,  then  do  it,  for  it  is  a  great  work 
of  mercy.  But  if  ye  cannot,  and  ye  suffer  or  favour  them, 
there  cannot  be  a  work  of  greater  cruelty  against  the  com- 
monwealth than  to  nourish  or  favour  any  such.  For  be  ye 
assured,  there  is  no  kind  of  men  so  pernicious  to  the  com- 
monwealth as  they  be;  there  are  no  thieves,  no  murderers, 
no  adulterers,  nt)r  no  kind  of  treason,  to  be  compared  to 
theirs,  who,  as  it  were,  undermining  the  chief  foundations 
of  all  commonwealth,  which  is  religion,  maketh  an  entry  to 
all  kinds  of  vice  in  the  most  heinous  manner."t  To  the 
senate,  as  it  knelt  before  the  proud  priest,  he  had  given 


*  Gardiner  "suggested  that  without  great  remittances  of  money  to 
gain  the  principal  nobility  and  leading  men,  the  next  parliament  would 
be  as  troublesome  as  the  last."  £400,000  was  employed  in  this  business. 
— Vide  Collier,  vol,  ii.,  p.  353.  "Upon  Tuesday,  the  2nd  of  October, 
there  came  to  the  Tower  in  20  cartes  made  for  the  show,  accompanied 
with  certain  Spaniards  of  the  king's  gaiard,  iv.  xx.  xvii.  Httle  chests,  of  a 
yeard  long  and  iiii.  inches  broad,  of  silver,  which  wiU  make  by  estimation 
L.  thousand  pound." — The  Chronicle  of  Queens  Jane  and  Mary,  p.  83 
(Camden  Society).  Stowe  makes  it  27  chests.  Fox  says  it  was  matted 
about  with  mats,  &c. 

t  Cardinal  Pole's  Address  to  the  Citizens  of  London. — ^Appendix  to 
Strype's  Ecclesiastical  Memorials. 


94  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

similar  advice.  Philip  and  Mary  responded  to  the  call.  It 
was  a  glorious  work.  The  merits  would  be  enormous.  The 
Divine  favour  would  rest  on  the  land.  A  son  would  be 
given,  and  the  power  of  His  Holiness  consolidated  in  the 
nation.  In  Bonner,  an  officiating  high-priest  was  found. 
His  qualifications  were  of  the  highest  order.  Others  of  the 
episcopal  bench  were  ready  to  aid  in  the  pleasant  work ; 
while  subordinate  Levites,  in  almost  countless  numbers, 
were  ready  to  discharge  the  inferior  duties  in  this  great 
national  holocaust.  But  caution  was  necessary.  The  ele- 
ments of  danger  existed.  Kebellion  had  already  threatened 
Mary's  existence.  The  old  forms  of  faith  were  preferred,  no 
doubt,  by  the  mass  of  the  people,  but  not  the  Papal 
supremacy.'^ 

Early  in  her  reign  articles  were  sent  to  the  bishops  to 
aid  them  in  their  godly  work.  One  or  two  will  illustrate 
their  design  : — 

"/fern;  That  every  bishop,  and  all  other  persons  aforesaid,  do 
diligently  travel  +  for  the  repression  of  heresies  and  notable  crimes, 
especially  in  the  clergy,  duly  correcting  and  punishing  the  same. 

*  "Yet  they  did  not  (tlie  parliament)  gladly  hear  of  the  abolishing 
specially  of  that  law,  that  gave  the  title  of  the  supremacy  of  the  church 
in  the  realm  to  the  crown ;  suspecting  that  to  be  an  introduction  to  the 
Pope's  authority  into  the  realm,  which  they  cannot  gladly  hear  of ;  and 
for  this  cause  cannot  gladly  hear  of  my  legation  in  the  Pope's  name. 
Whereupon  her  Grace,  in  the  same  letter,  doth  exhort  me  to  stay  my 
voyage  until  a  more  opportune  time  ;  and  asketh  my  counsel,  in  case  the 
lower  house  make  resistance  in  renouncing  the  title  of  supremacy,  what 
her  Grace  were  best  to  do,  and  what  way  she  had  best  to  take."  (Cardinal 
Pole. )— Memorials  of  Cranmer,  vol.  ii. ,  414. 

Anxious  that  our  readers  shovild  have  full  evidence  on  this  point,  we 
select  a  sentence  or  two  from  an  appeal  to  the  Council  by  the  prisoners 
for  the  Gospel : — "So  that  there  was  not  one  parish  in  all  England  that 
ever  desired  again  to  have  the  Romish  superstition  and  vain  seiTrices, 
which  is  now  by  the  popish,  proud,  covetous,  clergy  placed  again,  in  con- 
tempt not  only  of  God,  all  heaven,  and  all  the  Holy  Ghost's  lessons  in 
the  blessed  Bible ;  but  also  against  the  honour  of  the  said  two  most  noble 
kings,  against  your  own  conxitry,  fore-agreement,  and  against  all  the 
godly  consciousness  within  this  realm  of  England  and  elsewhere." — Ibid, 
vol.  ii.,  p.  442.  t  Labour. 


MARY.  95 

'■''Item:  That  every  bishop,  and  all  other  persons  aforesaid,  do 
likewise  travel  for  the  condemning  and  repressing  of  corrupt  and 
haughty  opinions,  unlawful  books,  ballads,  and  other  pernicious  and 
hurtful  devices,  engendering  hatred  amongst  the  people  and  discord 
amongst  the  same.  And  the  schoolmasters,  preachers,  and  teachers, 
do  exercise  and  use  their  offices  and  duties,  without  teaching,  preach- 
ing, or  setting  forth  any  evil  and  corrupt  doctrine ;  and  that  doing 
the  contrary,  they  may  be  by  the  bishop  and  his  said  officers  punished 
and  removed. 

'"'■Item :  That  by  the  bishop  of  the  diocese  an  uniform  doctrine  be 
set  forth  by  homilies,  or  otherwise,  for  the  good  instruction  of  all 
people ;  and  that  the  said  bishop,  and  other  persons  aforesaid,  do 
compel  the  parishioners  to  come  to  their  several  churches,  and  there 
devoutly  to  hear  divine  service,  as  of  reason  they  ought."  * 

The  chief  magistrate  of  the  metropolis  was  a  fitting 
instrument  for  this  work.  His  name  was  Blackwall.  In 
obedience  to  the  mandate  of  the  queen,  he  issued  his  orders 
to  the  several  \\%rds,  commanding  them  to  assemble  "all 
and  every  the  said  householders,  that  both  in  their  own 
persons,  and  also  their  wives,  children,  and  servants,  being 
of  the  age  of  twelve  years  and  upwards,  and  every  of  them, 
do  at  all  and  every  time  and  times  henceforth,  and  namely 
at  the  holy  time  of  Easter  now  approaching,  honestly, 
quietly,  and  catholickly,  use  and  behave  themselves  like 
good  and  faithful  Christian  people,"  &c.  They  are  then  to 
see  that  the  admonitions  of  Bonner  "to  all  parsons,  vicars, 
and  curates"  are  executed;  "that  they  and  every  of  them 
do  truly,  without  delay,  advertize  you  of  the  names  and 
surnames  of  all  and  every  person  and  persons,  that  they  or 
any  of  them  can  or  may  at  any  time  hereafter  know,  per- 
ceive, or  uxiderstand  to  transgress  or  offend  in  any  point  or 
article  concerning  the  premises,  at  their  utmost  peril." f 

To  facilitate  her  ends,  and  to  check  the  Protestant  heresy, 
Mary  laid  the  pulpit  under  an  interdict.  Little  need  there 
was  for  such  a  step  in  relation  to  her  friends.  Romanists 
never  liked  it.     Letters  were  sent  to  the  bishops,  command- 

*  Fox  (Madden's  edition),  Mary's  reign,  hook  i.,  p.  22.       f  Ibid,  p.  22. 


96  EAKLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

ing  them  not  to  suffer  any  person  in  their  diocese,  either 
priest  or  deacon,  or  otherwise  distinguished,  to  preach  or 
expound  the  Scriptures  openly  in  any  church,  chapel,  or 
other  place,  without  special  license  from  the  queen.  By 
this  exercise  of  regal  power  she  hoped  to  arrest  the  progress 
of  the  Reformation.  Yain  hope  !  The  rising  tide  is  not 
thrown  back  by  barriers  of  sand.* 

We  have  seen  already  that  vast  multitudes  of  the  people, 
some  from  self-interest,  others  from  fear,  and  various  other 
motives,  had  outwardly  conformed  to  the  new  order  of  things 
during  Edward's  reign. t  Upon  this  class  the  measures  of 
the  government,  and  the  zeal  of  the  episcopate  in  carrying 
them  out,  told  with  speedy  effect.  Many  of  the  clergy  that 
were  forward  men  under  King  Edward,  now,  by  the  terror 
of  the  times,  recanted  and  subscribed.  "And  these  were  of 
two  sorts.  Some  out  of  weakness  did  it,  but  persisted  not 
in  it,  but,  as  soon  as  they  could,  revoked  their  subscriptions 
and  recantations ;  and  after  their  release  and  escape  out  of 
prison  made  a  sorrowful  confession  in  public  of  their  fall.";]: 
Others  conformed,  soothing  their  consciences  with  the  delu- 
sion "that  their  bodies  might  be  there  so  long  as  their 
spirits  did  not  consent. "§  Bradford,  in  one  of  his  letters, 
says  "that  not  the  tenth  person  abode  in  God's  ways; 
and  that  the  more  did  part  stakes  with  the  Paj^ist  and 
Protestant,  &c.  For  they  pretended  Popery  outwardly, 
going  to  mass  with  the  Papists,  and  tarrying  with  them 
personally  at   their   antichristian   and   idolatrous  service ; 

*  Vide  Collier,  vol.  ii, ,  p.  345 ;  Records,  p.  68. 

t  "The  use  of  the  old  religion  is  forbidden  by  law,"  said  Pagit  to 
Somerset,  "and  the  use  of  the  new  is  not  yet  printed;  printed  in  the 
stomachs  of  nearly  eleven  out  of  every  twelve  parts  of  the  realm ;  what 
countenance  soever  men  make  outwardly  to  please  those  in  whom  they 
seethe  power  resteth."  July,  1549. — Strype's  Eccle.  Memorials.  Apud 
Soame's  History  of  the  Refonnation,  vol.  iii.,  p.  391. 

X  Strype's  Cranmer,  vol.  ii.,  p.  88.  Jewel  and  others  belonged  to 
this  class, 

§  Strype's  Cranmer,  vol.  ii.,  p.  90. 


MARY.  97 

but  with  their  hearts  they  said,  and  witli  their  spirits  they 
served  the  Lord."*  Many  fled  to  the  continent,  and  found 
refuge  amongst  the  various  religious  communities  in  Switzer- 
land, Holland,  &c.t 

It  would  give  additional  interest  to  our  narrative,  we  feel 
persuaded,  to  narrate  the  sufferings  and  martyrdom  of  those 
illustrious  servants  of  our  common  Lord — Bradford,  Philpot, 
Saunders,  Kidley,  Hooper,  Latimer,  Cranmer,  and  others; 
but  our  s[)ace  forbids  this.  They  were  victims  upon  whom 
Bonner  and  Gardiner  soon  laid  their  hands.  Their  zeal  was 
kindled  by  their  deadly  hatred  to  the  men,  and  they  rested 
not  till  the  martyr's  fire  had  removed  them  from  their  path. 
Gardiner  "thought  no  argument  would  operate  so  strongly  as 
penalties,  and  that  the  terror  of  fire  and  faggots,  in  some  cases, 
were  the  best  methods  of  conviction ;  that  when  people 
were  incorrigible,  they  ought  to  be  capitally  punished. "J 
The  pages  of  Fox  are  rich  in  details.  In  this  glorious  cloud 
of  witnesses  some  of  our  fathers  are  found.  The  extent  of 
their  sufferings  we  cannot  accurately  estimate.  The  martyr- 
ologist  is  not  sufficiently  explicit.  Internal  evidence  would 
justify  the  conclusion  that  they  were  far  more  than  his  posi- 
tive and  clear  statements  warrant.  Intense  as  the  hatred 
to  the  Reformers  was,  it  did  not  diminish  in  intensity 
when  it  hunted  Anabaptists  from  their  seclusion.  Nowhere 
were  they  safe.  Spies  everywhere  haunted  their  steps. 
"  For  now  a  man  can  go  to  no  place,  but  malicious  busy- 
bodies  curiously  search  out  his  deeds,  mark  his  words,  and  if 
he  agree  not  with  them  in  despising  God's  "Word,  then  will 
they  spitefully  and  hatefully  cavil  against  him  and  it,  calling 


*  "Works,  p.  103  (Religious  Tract  Society).  "They  never  came  to  the 
Gospel  but  for  commodity  and  gain's  sake,  and  even  for  gain  they  leave 
it."— P.  325. 

t  Vide  The  Troubles  at  Frankfort  (Petherham  ed.  ;  London,  A.D.  1846). 
Collier  states  that  about  12,090  of  the  clergy  were  tm-ned  out  of  their 
livings  for  being  married. — See  vol.  ii.,  p.  366. 

t  Collier,  voL  ii.,  p.  378. 
H 


9S  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

it  error  and  heresy,  and  the  professors  thereof  heretics  and 
schismatics;  and  with  other  odious  and  s[;iteful  names,  as 
traitors  and  not  the  Queen's  friends."* 

Amidst  other  means  for  supressing  the  heretics,  an  order 
was  issued  to  the  justices  of  Norfolk,  May  the  27th.  We 
select  a  few  sentences  from  it  to  show  its  spirit.  They  were, 
"  I.  To  divide  themselves  into  several  districtions.  II.  To 
assist  such  preachers  as  should  be  sent.  III.  To  lay  special 
weight  for  teachers  of  heresies,  and  procurers  of  secret 
meetings  to  that  purpose.  Y.  To  procure  one  or  more  of 
every  parish,  secretly  instructed,  to  give  information  of  the 
behaviour  of  the  inhabitants.  VI.  To  charge  the  constable, 
and  four  or  more  Catholic  inhabitants  of  every  parish,  to 
give  account  of  idle  vagabonds  and  suspected  persons,  and 
the  retainers  of  such  persons.  To  observe  hue  and  cry;  and 
to  look  after  the  watches  in  every  parish."  f  These  men 
were  willing  tools  of  the  royal  tyrants.  Men  were  base 
enough,  though  sworn  to  judge  with  equity,  to  examine  the 
accused  on  secret  information,  and  without  the  knowledge 
of  their  accusers.  Norfolk  had  many  individuals  who 
thought  they  were  doing  God  service,  by  hunting  the 
heretics  from  their  hiding  places. 

In  articles  concerning  archdeacons,  issued  this  year,  occurs 
the  following  : — "  Whether  there  be  any  that  will  not  suffer 
the  priest  to  dip  the  child  three  times  in  the  font,  being  yet 
strong  and  able  to  abide  and  suffer  it  in  the  judgment  and 
opinion  of  discreet  and  expert  persons,  but  will  needs  have 
the  child  in  the  clothes,  and  only  be  sprinkled  with  a  few 
drops  of  water  ? "  J 

In  1554,  Pole  ordered  a  visitation  to  be  held  throughout 
the  whole  country.  A  book  was  to  be  kept,  in  which  the 
names  of  conformists  were  to  be  entered,  and  the  separatists 


*  Norfolk  Petition  to  the  Queen.     Fox,  book  ii. 

t  Strype's  Cramner,  vol.  ii.  pp.  93-94. 

:J:  Collier,  vol.  ii.  (Kecords,  p.  87. ) 


MARY.  99 

were  to  be  reported,  and  proceeded  against  with  the  utmost 
severity  of  the  hiw."* 

Kent  supplied  a  large  number  of  Christian  heroes.  Many 
of  them,  no  doubt,  were  Baptists.  It  is  clear  from  Fox, 
that  many  dissidents  from  the  State  Church  resided  here, 
and  met  in  separate  congregations ;  and  the  principles  they 
held,  though  imjDerfectly  stated  by  the  martyrologist,  are 
decidedly  Anabaptistical.  Of  their  existence  in  the  former 
reign  we  have  already  placed  OAddence  before  our  readers. 
Cranmer  and  his  brethren  did  not  convert  them.  Persecu- 
tion never  extinguished  them.  Their  influence  had  sfrown. 
About  the  following  there  can  be-  no  doubt : — In  Maidstone 
resided  John  Deuby,  described  as  a  gentleman,  and  John 
Newman,  by  trade  a  peuterer,  the  progenitor  of  him  of 
Oriel  College,  Oxford,  and  now  a  brother  of  the  Oratory.t 
Visiting  some  friends  in  Essex,  not  unlikely  some  of  their 
Baptist  brethren,  they  were  accosted  by  a  bitter  persecutor, 
who  was  returning  from  an  auto-da-fe,  either  at  Raleigh  or 
Rochford.  "Even  as  I  saw  them,  I  suspected  them;  and 
then  I  did  examine  and  search  them,  and  found  about  them 
certain  letters,  which  I  have  sent  you,  and  also  a  certain 
writing  in  paper  what  their  faith  was.  And  they  confessed 
to  me  that  they  had  forsaken  and  fled  out  of  their  country 
for  religion's  sake."  They  had  visited  other  countries.  The 
papers  found  on  Denby  were  simply  certain  notes  collected 
and  gathered  out  of  the  Scriptures,  with  a  confession  of  his 
faith  touching  the  Sacrament  of  Christ's  body  and  blood. 
Eox  has  given  this  simple  and  Scriptural  confession.  It 
would  secure  Denby's  condemnation.  It  is  more  than  probable 
that  it  was  prepared  for  the  satisfaction  of  some  perplexed 
one.  Its  clearness  and  simplicity  admirably  fitted  it  for 
such  an  end. 

*  Vide  Froude,  vol.  vi.,  p.  314. 
+  "I  am  sui*e  that  the  opinions  of  John  Newman,  who  was  burnt,  on 
transubstantiation,  are  further  from  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  Rome, 
and,  I  must  say,  more  intelligible,  than  the  opinions  of  Oriel  John  New- 
man, lately  published." — Life  of  Bonner,  p.  273. 


100  EARLY    ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

To  the  palace  of  Bonner  we  now  transfer  our  readers. 
"With  Denby  and  Newman  we  find  one  Patrick  Packingliam 
arraigned  before  his  Lordship.  Upon  their  confession  they 
were  examined  ;  the  bishop  "  objecting  also  nnto  them  cer- 
tain other  articles  of  his  own  :  to  which  they  all  answered 
in  effect  one  thing,  although  Denby  answered  more  largely 
than  the  others,  and,  therefore,  I  thought  his  answer  suffi- 
cient to  lay  down  as  containing  the  substance  of  all  the 
rest."*  From  his  examination  by  Bonner  it  will  be  enough, 
from  the  eleven  articles  which  were  objected  against  him,  to 
select  the  seventh  : — "  That  the  said  Denby  hath  believed, 
and  doth  believe,  that  the  christening  of  children,  as  it  is  now 
iised  in  the  Church  of  England,  is  not  good,  nor  allowable  by 
God^s  Word,  but  against  it ;  likewise  confirming  of  children, 
giving  of  orders,  saying  of  matins  and  even-song,  anointing 
of  persons,  making  of  holy  bread  and  holy  water,  with  the 
rest  of  the  church^  His  reply  to  this  was  as  follows  : — 
"  To  the  seventh  article  I  answer,  that  as  touching  the 
christening,  the  sacrament  of  baptism,  which  is  the  christen- 
ing of  children,  it  is  altered  and  changed ;  for  St.  John 
used  nothing  but  the  preaching  of  the  Word  and  water,  as 
it  doth  aj)pear  when  Christ  required  to  be  baptized  of  him, 
and  others  also,  who  came  to  John  to  be  baptized  of  him, 
as  it  appeareth  in  Matthew  iii.,  Mark  i.,  Luke  iii.,  and 
Acts  i.  The  chamberlain  said,  '  See,  here  is  water;  what 
doth  hinder  me  to  be  baptized  1 '  It  appeareth  here  that 
Philip  had  preached  unto  him  ;  for  he  said,  *  Here  is  water.' 
We  do  not  read  that  he  asked  for  any  cream,  oil,  or  spittle, 
or  conjured  water,  or  conjured  wax,  no  croysom,  or  salt,  for 
it  seemeth  that  Philip  had  preached  no  such  things  unto 
him;  for  he  would  as  well  have  asked  for  them  as  for  water; 
and  the  water  was  not  conjured,  but  even  as  it  was  before. 
Also  Acts  x. :  '  Then  answered  Peter,  Can  any  man  forbid 
water,  that  these  should  not  be  baptized  ? '  Acts  xvi. : 
'And  Paul  and  Silas  preached  unto  him  the  Word  of  the 

*  Fox.    Mary's  reign,  book  ii. 


MARY.  101 

Lord,  and  to  all  that  were  in  his  house;  and  he  took  them 
the  same  hour  of  the  night,  and  washed  their  wounds;  and 
so  was  he  baptized,  and  all  them  of  his  household  strait- 
way;'  where  you  see  nothing  but  preaching  the  Word  and 
water." 

Denby  was  finally  condemned,  and  burnt  at  TJxbridge  on 
the  8th  of  Auorust.  In  the  midst  of  his  sufferinsfs  he  gave 
utterance  to  the  joy  of  his  soul  in  a  Psalm.  Fox  tells  us 
that  the  "  cruel  Dr.  Story  commanded  one  of  the  tormentors 
to  throw  a  faggot  at  him,  wherewith  being  so  hurt  that  his 
face  bled,  he  left  singing,  and  clapt  both  his  hands  upon  his 
face.  '  Truly,'  quoth  Dr.  Story  to  him  that  hurled  the  fag- 
got, *  thou  hast  marred  a  good  old  song.'*  Only  momentary 
was  this  effect.  Stretching  his  hands  abroad,  and  whilst 
the  flames  w^ere  licking  off  the  skin  and  flesh,  he  burst  into 
another  song,  and  then  resigned  his  soul  into  the  hands  of 
God,  through  Jesus  Christ."  f 

The  examination  of  Newman  follows,  and  also  his  con- 
fession of  faith.  In  the  former,  the  usual  points  in  discus- 
sion are  urged  on  his  attention,  whilst  the  latter  is  a  clear 
and  manly  exhibition  of  the  great  Christian  verities.  On 
transubstantiation.  Fox  gives  us,  in  a  separate  form,  four  of 
his  arguments.  We  quote  the  last : — "When  remembrance  is 
of  a  thing,  there  is  imported  the  absence  thereof  Remem- 
brance of  Christ's  body  is  in  the  Sacrament, — '  Do  this  in 
remembrance  of  me;'  ergo,  Christ's  body  then  is  imported 
to  be  absent." 

"Packingham  was  charged  by  Bonner  for  his  behaviour 
in  the  bishop's  chapel,  who  at  the  mass  time,  then  standing, 
would  not  pull  off  his  cap,  which  was  taken  for  a  heinous 
offence.  Packingham  being  much  persuaded  by  Bonner  to 
recant,  protested  in  these  words  to  the  bishop  :   '  That  the 

*  "An  earwig  was  singing  a  Psalm  at  the  stake  at  Uxbridge ;  but  I  cut 
him  short ;  for  I  threw  a  faggot  in  his  face  and  a  bush  of  thorns  at  hia 
feet." — Soame's  Reformation,  vol.  iv.,  p.  660.  Strype's  Annals,  vol.  i., 
P-  115.  ^  j'ox,  book  ii. 


102  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

churcli  which  he  believed  was  no  Catholic  church,  but  was 
the  church  of  Satan,  and,  therefore,  he  would  never  turn 
to  it.'  "*  Packingham  suffered  on  the  28th  of  the  same 
month,  and  in  the  same  town,  as  Denby;  and  Newman 
was  burnt  at  Saifron  "Walden  on  the  last  day  of  the  same 
month. 

Later  in  the  same  year,  another  large  contribution  to  the 
noble  army  of  martyrs  was  supplied  by  our  brethren.  We 
are  indebted  to  Fox  for  the  information.  He  mentions  the 
martyrdom  of  ten  persons  in  the  year  1555.  Their  names 
merit  a  transference  to  our  pages.  We  give  them  in  the 
order  in  which  they  occur  in  the  pages  of  the  IMartyr- 

ology  :— 

Elizth.  Warne.  Wulliam  Hale. 

George  Tankerfield.  Thos.  Leyes. 

RoBT.  Smth.  George  King. 

Stephen  Harwood,  John  Wade. 

Thos.  Fust.  Joan  Lashwood. 

Reference  again  and  again  is  made  to  Bow  churchyard,  as 
a  place  where  these  early  Nonconformists  were  accustomed 
to  meet.  Fox  is  not  clear  as  to  the  whole,  but  certainly 
Elizth.  Warne,  whose  husband  had  already  passed  to  the 
martyr's  home,  was  apprehended  on  the  first  of  January,  in  a 
house  in  Bow  churchyard,  as  they  were  gathered  together 
in  prayer.  Most,  if  not  all  of  them,  were  resident  in  the 
city  or  its  neighbourhood.  A  letter  from  the  commissioner 
consismed  these  "  Sacramentarians"  to  the  tender  mercies  of 
Bonner.  His  lordship  was  never  slow  in  the  discharge  of 
these  pleasurable  duties.  Smith  appears  to  have  been  a  man 
of  influence,  if  not  a  teacher.  He  was  acquainted  with 
Denby,t  and  was  probably  a  fellow  labourer  with  him. 
The  examinations  were  long  and  frequent.     Smith's  was  the 

*  Fox,  book  ii.,  pp.  278-280. 
t  *'  Yie  were  baited  by  my  lord's  band  of  servants  almost  all  the  day, 
until  our  keeper,  seeing  their  misorder,  shut  us  all  up  in  a  handsome 
chamber,  while  my  lord  went  into  his  synagogue  to  condemn  Mr.  Denby 
and  John  Newman." — ^E.  Smith. 


MARY.  103 

most  protracted,  or  at  least  it  is  reported  at  greater  length  by- 
Fox.  It  is  full  of  noble  sentiments,  and  discovers  a  spirit  of 
genuine  moral  heroism.  The  bishop  and  his  colleagues  are 
like  children  in  the  hands  of  a  giant.*  The  whole  would  fill 
many  pages  of  this  volume,  if  given  in  full.  Only  a  portion 
can  be  selected,  in  part  illustrative  of  his  Baptismal  views, 
and  the  holy  confidence  in  the  truth  of  God  which  supported 
him  in  the  fiery  conflict.  The  colloquy  on  the  former  will 
not  be  uninteresting  to  our  readers  : — t 

^^ Bonner. — Why  is  God's  order  changed  in  baptism?  In  what 
point  do  lis  differ  from  the  word  of  God  ? 

"Smith. — In  hallowing  your  water;  in  conjuring  of  the  scenes; 
in  baptizing  children  with  anointing  and  spitting  in  their  mouths, 
mingled  with  salt ;  and  many  other  lewd  ceremonies,  of  which  not 
one  point  is  able  to  be  proved  by  God's  order. 

"Bonner. — By  the  mass!  this  is  the  most  unshamefaced  heretic 
that  ever  I  heard  speak ! 

"Smith. — Well  sworn,  my  lord;  ye  keep  a  good  watch. 

"Bonner. — Well,  Mr.  Controller,  ye  catch  me  at  my  words;  but  I 
will  watch  thee  as  well,  I  warrant  thee. 

' '  By  my  troth,  my  lord,  said  Sir  John  Mordant,  I  never  heard  the 
like  in  all  my  life.  But  I  pray  you,  my  lord,  mark  well  his  answer 
for  baptism.  He  disalloweth  therein  holy  ointment,  salt,  and  such 
other  laudable  ceremonies,  which  no  Christian  man  will  deny. 

"Smith. — That  is  a  shamefid  blasphemy  against  Christ,  so  to  use 
any  mingle-mangle  in  baptizing  of  young  infants. 

" Bonner.— I  believe,  I  tell  thee,  that  if  they  die  before  they  be  bap- 
tized, they  be  damned. 

"Smith. — Ye  shall  never  be  saved  by  that  belief.  But  I  pray  you, 
my  lord,  show  me,  are  we  saved  by  water  or  by  Christ? 

"Bonner.— By  both. 

"Smith. — Then  the  water  died  for  our  sins;  and  so  must  ye  say, 
that  the  water  hath  life,  and  it  being  our  servant,  and  created  for  us, 
is  our  Saviour.     This,  my  lord,  is  a  good  doctrine,  is  it  not? 

*  "He  was  smart  and  quick  in  conversation,  and  fervent  in  religion, 
wherein  he  was  confirmed  by  the  preaching  of  Mr.  Turner,  Canon  of 
Windsor,  and  others." — Strype's  Life"  of  Sir  T.  Smith,  p.  51. 

'f  "Thou  art  weary  of  painting,  and  hast  studied  divinity,  and  so  hast 
fallen,  through  thy  departing  from  thy  vocation,  into  heresy,  said  Bonner 
to  R.  Smith,  a  yeoman  of  the  guard  at  Windsor." — Life  of  Bonner,  p.  266. 


104  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

"■Bonner. — Why,  how  understandest  thou  the  Scriptures?  'Except 
a  man  is  born  of  water,'  &c.,  &c.  And  again,  'Suffer  (saith  our 
Saviour)  these  children  to  come  unto  me :'  and  if  thou  wilt  not  suffer 
them  to  be  baptized  after  this  laudable  order,  then  thou  hinderest 
them  to  come  unto  Christ. 

"Smith. — When  ye  allege  St.  John,  '  Except  a  man  be  born,'  &c., 
and  will  thereby  prove  the  water  to  save,  and  so  the  deed  or  work  to 
put  anvay  sins,  I  will  send  you  to  St.  Paul,  which  asketh  of  the  Gal- 
atians,  '  Whether  they  received  the  Spirit  by  the  deeds  of  the  law,  or 
by  the  preaching  of  faith,'  and  then  concludeth  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
accompanieth  the  preaching  of  faith,  and  with  the  Word  entereth  into 
the  heart.  So  now  if  baptism  preach  to  me  the  washing  in  the  blood, 
so  doth  the  Holy  Ghost  accompany  it,  and  it  is  unto  me  as  a  preacher 
and  not  a  Saviour.  And  when  you  say  I  hinder  the  children  from 
coming  to  Christ,  it  is  manifest  by  oiu*  Saviour's  words  that  ye 
hinder  them  to  come,  that  will  not  suffer  them  to  come  unto  him 
without  the  necessity  of  water.  For  he  saith,  '  Suffer  them  to  come 
unto  me,'  and  not  unto  water;  and,  therefore,  if  ye  condemn  them,  ye 
condemn  both  the  merit  and  the  words  of  Christ.  For  our  Saviour 
saith,  ^Except  ye  turn,  and  become  as  children,  ye  cannot  enter  into 
the  kingdom  of  God.'  And  so  brought  I  out  many  other  examples, 
to  make  manifest  that  Christ  hath  cleansed  original  sin,  bringing 
examples  out  of  the  Scriptures  for  the  same. 

"Bonner. — Then  thou  makest  the  water  of  non-effect;  then  put 
away  the  water. 

"Smith.  — ^ It  is  not,'  saith  St.  Peter,  'the  washing  away  the  filth 
of  the  flesh,  but  in  that  a  good  conscience  consenteth  unto  God-' 
And  to  prove  that  water  only  bringeth  not  the  Holy  Ghost,  it  is 
written  in  the  eighth  of  the  Acts,  that  Simon  received  water,  but 
would  have  received  the  Holy  Ghost  for  money.  Also  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  hath  come  before  baptism :  it  is  written  that  John  had  the 
Holy  Ghost  in  his  mother's  womb.  Cornelius,  Paul,  and  the  queea 
Candace's  servant,  with  many  others,  received  the  Holy  Ghost  before 
baptism.  Yea,  and  although  your  generation  have  set  at  naught 
the  Word  of  God,  and,  like  swine,  have  turned  his  words  upside 
down,  yet  must  his  church  keep  the  same  order  which  he  left  them, 
which  his  church  dare  not  break;  and  to  judge  children  damned  that 
be  not  baptized,  it  is  wicked. 

"Mordant. — By  our  lady,  sir,  but  I  believe  that  if  any  child  die 
without  water,  he  is  damned. 

"Bonner. — Yea,  and  so  do  I,  and  all  Catholic  men,  good  Mordant. 

"Smith. — Well,  my  lord,  such  Catholic,  such  salvation."* 

*  "He  calls  the  oyl,  salt,  &c.,  used  in  baptism,  blasphemies,  and  denies 


MARY.  105 

On  the  spiritual  character  of  Christ's  church,  Smith's  views 
were  also  expressed,  notwithstanding  he  was  fully  conscious 
of  the  danger  to  which  the  avowal  would  expose  him.  "  I 
believe,"  said  he,  in  reply  to  his  wily  examiner,  "  that  there 
is  one  Catholic  church  or  faithful  congregation,  which,  as 
the  apostle  saith,  is  built  upon  the  prophets  and  apostles, 
Christ  being  the  head  corner-stone;  which  in  all  her  words 
and  works  maintaineth  the  Word,  and  bringeth  the  same  for 
her  authority,  and  without  doth  nothing,  nor  ought  to  do ;  of 
which  I  am  afraid  I  am  by  grace  a  member."  Equally  dis- 
tinct and  manly  is  the  following :  "  I  told  you  whereon  the 
true  church  is  built,  and  I  affirm  that  in  England  to  be  the 
true  congregation  of  God,  and  also  in  omnem  terram;  as  it  is 
wi'itten,  '  Their  sound  is  gone  forth  into  all  lands;'  and  this 
is  the  afflicted  and  persecuted  church  which  ye  cease  not  to 
imprison,  slay,  and  kill.  And  in  Corinth  was  not  all  the 
congregations  of  God,  but  a  number  of  those  holy  and  elect 
people  of  God  %  For  neither  Paul  nor  Peter  were  present  at 
Corinth  when  they  ^nrote,  and  yet  were  they  of  the  church 
of  God,  as  many  thousands  more  which  also  communicate  in 
that  Holy  Spirit." 

During  his  imprisonment,  he  not  only  sought  to  confirm  his 
companions  in  suffering  in  Christ's  truth,  but  his  pen  was  not 
idle.  Fox  has  given  us  several  of  his  letters  and  pastoral  efiu- 
sions.  Those  to  his  wife  are  full  of  tenderness.  Addressing 
his  brethren,  he  said,  "  Mistrust  not  God ;  be  of  good  comfort ; 
rejoice  in  the  Lord;  hold  fast  your  faith,  and  continue  to  the 
end.  Deny  the  world,  and  take  up  your  cross,  and  follow  him 
who  is  your  leader,  and  is  gone  before.  If  you  suffer  with  him 
you  shall  reign  with  him.  What  way  can  you  glorify  the 
name  of  our  heavenly  Father  better  than  by  suffering  death 
for  his  Son's  sake  %    What  a  spectacle  shall  it  be  to  the  world, 


the  necessity  of  water  baptism  to  children.  Fox  overlooks  these  failings 
and  mistakes,  and  gives  him  commendation  without  abatement;  which 
undistingTiished  regard  is  by  no  means  serviceable  to  the  reader." — Collier, 
vol.  ii.,  p.  381. 


106  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

to  behold  so  goodly  a  fellowship  as  you  servants  of  God,  in 
so  just  a  quarrel  as  the  Gospel  of  Christ  is,  with  so  pure  a 
conscience,  so  strong  a  faith,  and  so  lively  a  hope,  to  offer 
yourselves  to  suffer  so  cruel  torments  at  the  hands  of  God's 
enemies,  and  so  to  end  your  days  in  peace,  to  receive  in  the 
resurrection  of  the  righteous  life  everlasting." 

"Robert  Smith,  to  all  the  faithful  servants  of  Christ, 
exhorting  them  to  be  strong  under  persecution,"  is  a  poet- 
ical effusion.  Whatever  defects  the  reader  may  discern  in 
the  loftiness  and  beauty  of  the  muse,  he  will  find  none  in 
the  subject  of  her  notes  : — 

"Content  thyself  with  patience, 
With  Christ  to  bare  the  cross  of  pain, 
Which  can  and  will  thee  recompence 
A  thousand-fold  with  joys  again. 

Let  nothing  cause  thy  heart  to  quail, — 
Launch  out  thy  boat,  hale  up  thy  sail, — 
Put  from  the  shore  ; 
And  be  thou  sure  thou  shalt  attain 
Unto  the  port  that  shall  remain 

For  evemiore." 

His  noble  spirit  triumphed  over  the  terrors  of  death. 
Uxbridge  was  the  place  of  martyrdom.  The  8th  of  August 
was  the  day  of  sacrifice.  At  the  stake,  and  from  the  midst 
of  the  fire,  he  addressed  the  people.  His  zeal  only  expired 
with  life.  Half  burnt,  and  all  black  with  fire,  clustered 
together  as  in  a  lump  like  a  black  coal,  all  men  thinking 
him  for  dead,  suddenly  he  rose  up  right  before  the  j^eople, 
lifting  up  the  stumps  of  his  arms,  and  clapping  the  same 
together,  and  declaring  a  rejoicing  heart  unto  them.  And 
so  bending  down  again,  and  hanging  over  the  fire,  slept  in 
the  Lord,  and  ended  this  mortal  life."* 

Short  but  interesting  accounts  are  given  by  Fox  of  Smith's 
companions  also.  Elizth.  Warne  was  burnt  at  Stratford; 
Tankerfield,  at  St.  Alban's ;  Harwood  and  Fust  were  burnt, 

*  In  some  editions  of  Fox  there  is  an  engraving  of  these  moral  heroes, 
holding,  evidently,  a  meeting  for  worship  in  the  prison.  Smith  is  in  the 
act  of  teaching.     The  sacred  volume  is  before  him. 


MAEY.  107 

one  at  Stratford,  the  other  at  Ware;  W.  Hale  at  Baraet.  The 
remainder,  from  their  suffering  in  Lollards  To^er,  fell  sick 
and  died.  Heretics  have  no  right  to  the  burial  of  Chris- 
tians. Their  dead  bodies  were  cast  into  the  open  fields,  and 
in  the  darkness  of  midnight  interred  by  some  of  the  faithful.* 
The  imprisonment  and  sufferings  of  these  heroic  men  in 
their  gloomy  prisons,  instead  of  quenching  their  love  of  the 
truth,  rather  intensified  it.  More  and  more  solicitous  they 
became  to  know  the  mind  of  their  Lord.  No  part  of  it  was 
insignificant.  No  means  within  their  reach  were  neglected, 
which  would  realize  this  end.  In  their  interconrse  Avith 
each  other,  as  well  as  from  the  ''lively  oracles,"  they  sought 
instruction,  and  the  interchange  of  thought.  As  we  have 
already  seen.  Predestination,  Grace,  Liberty, — the  Calvinian 
and  Pelagian  views  of  truth, — had  been  discussed.  The 
Anabaptists  were  not  indifferent  to  the  discussion.  Against 
tbeir  views  most  of  the  leading  prisoners  protested.  Their 
whole  influence  was  wielded  against  them.  The  baptismal 
question  was  rife,  and  Philpot  emplo3^ed  his  pen  in  defence 
of  the  ceremony  on  which  State  churches  are  -based ;  and 
from  which,  if  he  had  calmly  traced  effects  to  their  cause,  the 
whole  of  the  cruel  sufiferings  to  which  he  and  his  fellow 
prisoners  were  exposed  had  spriing.  \Ye  select  the  following 
from  a  letter  which  this  confessedly  eminent  servant  of  Christ 
addressed  to  a  fellow  prisoner,  who  if  not  a  Baptist,  had 
most  serious  doubts  about  infant  baptism.  The  following 
shows  him  to  be  a  dissident,  and  probably  he  was  one  of  the 
Kent  or  Essex  brethren  : — "  Hitherto  I  have  showed  you," 
says  Philpot,  '•  (good  brother),  my  judgment  generally  of 
that  you  stand  in  doubt  and  dissent  from  others,  to  which 
I  wish  you,  as  mine  own  heart,  to  be  conformable,  and  then, 
doubtless,  you  cannot  err,  but  boldly  may  be  glad  in  your 
troubles,  and  triumph  at  the  hour  of  your  death,  that  you 
shall  die  in  the  church  of  God,  a  faithful  martyr,  and 
receive  the  cro\\Ti  of  eternal  glory." 

*  Vide  Fox.     Mary's  reign,  book  ii. 


108  EARLY    ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

The  ignorance  of  Philpot  and  the  spirit  of  the  martyr  are 
alike  iinfolded  in  the  following.  Gentleness,  and  even 
sanctified  meekness,  were  aroused  by  the  hated  principles  of 
the  Anabaptist  heretics.  "Aurentius,  one  of  the  Arian 
sect,  with  his  adherents,  was  one  of  the  first  that  denied  the 
baptism  of  children,  and  next  after  him,  Pelagias,  the  heretic, 
and  some  others  that  were  in  St.  Bernard's  time,  as  it  doth 
appear  by  liis  writings,  and  in  our  days  the  Anabaptists,  an 
inordinate  kind  of  men,  stirred  up  by  the  devil  to  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  GospeV 

We  will  only  add  a  sample  of  the  reasoning  of  this  holy 
man.  It  must  liave  excited  the  pity,  if  not  the  contempt,  of 
all  intelligent  Baptists. 

''Now  will  I  prove,  with  manifold  arguments,  that  children 
ought  to  be  baptized,  and  that  the  apostles  of  Christ  did 
baptize  children.  The  Lord  commanded  his  apostles  'to 
baptize  all  nations :  therefore  all  children  ought  to  be 
baptized,  for  they  are  comprehended  under  this  word,  all 
nations. 

"Further,  when  God  doth  account  among  the  faithful, 
they  are  faithful,  for  it  was  said  to  Peter, '  That  thing  which 
God  hath  purified,  thou  shalt  not  say  to  be  common  or 
unclean.'  But  God  doth  repute  children  among  the  faithful. 
Ergo,  they  be  faithful,  except  we  had  rather  to  resist  God, 
and  seem  stronger  and  wiser  than  he. 

"And  without  doubt,  the  apostles  baptized  those  which 
Christ  commanded;  but  he  commanded  the  faithful  to  be 
baptized,  among  which  infants  be  reckoned;  the  apostles 
then  baptized  infants." 

We  need  add  no  more.  It  was  a  mercy  for  the  martyr 
that  orodliuess  and  lo2fic  are  not  identical.* 

Smith  was  not  the  only  Anabaptist  in  the  court  at 
Windsor.      Strype  gives   an  account  of  another,  and  the 


1 


*  Works  of  Philpot  (Parker  Society).     Fox  records  the  whole  letter. 
Vol.  ii.   A.D.  1555,  p.  606. 


MARY.  109 

opinions  held  by  hira.     Though  not  in  exact  chronological 
order,  our  retiders  will  not  object  to  it  : — 

"The  Anabaptists  of  these  days  were  generally  infected  also  with 
Pelagianism  and  other  heresies ;  they  were  also  very  confident  and 
dispntatioiis.  One  of  this  sort  was  now  crept  into  the  court,  namely, 
Robert  Cooke.  He  was  a  person  of  very  courteous,  fair  deportment, 
of  some  learning,  and  particularly  well-skilled  in  music.  When 
Parkhurst  (he  that  afterwards  was  Bishop  of  Nor^ach)  was  preacher 
to  Queen  Katharin  Par,  at  the  court,  he  was  keeper  of  the  wine  cellar. 
Here  he  came  acquainted  with  the  said  Parkhurst,  and  also  with 
Coverdale  and  Dr.  Turner,  and  other  leai'ned  men,  in  their  atten- 
dances at  the  court.  This  man,  besides  that  he  was  against  the  bap- 
tism of  infants,  denied  original  sin,  and  concerning  the  Lord's  Supper 
he  dispersed  divers  odd  things.  The  said  Dr.  Turner  wrote  a  book 
against  him,  in  which  he  confuted  his  opinion  of  original  sin.  He 
often  created  trouble  to  Parkhurst  and  Coverdale,  about  these  contro- 
versies, so  that  they  were  tired  with  him;  for  he  was  a  man  full  of 
words.  When  Jewel,  and  other  learned  men,  his  friends,  came  some- 
times to  court  to  visit  Parkhiu-st,  Cooke  would  presently  begin  a  dis- 
pute with  them,  and  would  never  make  an  end.  This  man  seems  to 
have  been  among  the  exiles  under  Queen  Mary,  and  became  then 
known  to  the  learned  Rudulph  Gaulter,  of  Zuric;  who  afterwards, 
in  his  correspondence  with  the  said  Parkhurst,  then  Bishop  of  Nor- 
wich, enquired  after  him;  which  was  in  the  year  1573.  He  was  then 
alive,  and  still  in  the  court,  being  one  of  the  gentlemen  of  the  queen's 
chapel.  And  for  his  opinions,  which  he  still  retained,  had  sometime 
before  been  like  to  have  been  discharged  of  his  place.  But  he  made 
a  recantation,  and  so  continued  still  in  his  room  at  the  chapel."* 

East  Anglia  was  rich  in  confessors  and  martyrs  to  the  faith 
of  Jesus.  On  one  occasion,  whilst  Hopton,  Bishop  of  l^for- 
wich,  was  engaged  in  his  work  of  extirpation,  at  Ipswich, 
Dunning,  his  chancellor,  ran  up  to  the  ecclesiastical  tribunal 
to  announce  to  his  lordship  the  glad  tidings  that  a  number 
of  heretics  had  just  arrived.  Baxford  and  Lanham,  and 
what  Fox  calls  the  cloth  county,  had  supplied  this  corps  of 
the  sacrificial  hosts.  It  was  maddening  to  hear  them,  the 
chancellor  declared.  There  were  among  them  many  heretics 
and  Anabaptists,  t 

*  Ecclesiastical  Memorials,  voL  ii.,  p.  71.        f  Fox,  Book  ii.,  p.  545. 


110  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

Two  years  later  we  get  another  fact  or  two  from  the 
pages  of  the  venerable  martyrologist.  He  mentions  the  exa- 
minations of  three  men  and  two  women,  by  Bonner,  on 
March  Gth,  1557.  The  proceedings  of  the  bishop  varied 
very  little.  A  string  of  questions  was  always  ready.  It 
embraced  the  true  church,  the  sacrament,  the  real  presence, 
&c.  It  is  evident,  from  the  charges  brought  against  them, 
that  they  were  not  only  Nonconformists,  but  that  the  chief 
of  them  had  taught  in  some  part  of  the  city  and  diocese  of 
London,  "  that  the  faith,  religion,  and  ecclesiastical  service 
here  observed  and  kept,  as  it  is  in  the  realm  of  England,  is 
not  a  true  and  a  laudable  f:iith,  religion,"  &c. 

These  dej)artures  from  the  State  religion  embraced  thirteen 
distinct  articles.     It  is  only  necessary  to  select  one: — 

"  8  Iterii.  Thou  hast  thought,  &c.,  that  the  fashion  and 
manner  of  christening  of  infants  is  not  agreeable  to  God's 
Word,  and  that  none  can  be  effectually  baptized,  and 
thereby  saved,  except  he  have  years  of  discretion  to  believe 
himself,  and  so  willingly  accept  or  refuse  baptism  at  his 
pleasure." 

Their  answers  to  these  charges  are  given  by  Fox,  appa- 
rently in  his  own  words,  and  not  theirs.  In  one  case,  three 
of  them  are  grouped  together,  and  in  general  terms  denied. 
The  eighth  is  one  of  these.  The  threats  of  the  bishop 
availed  not.  Their  confidence  in  the  truth  which  they  had 
professed  was  unshaken,  and  in  April  of  the  same  year 
another  fiery  spectacle  was  exhibited  in  Smithfield,  to  the 
multitude  which  crowded  that  open  space.* 

For  no  crime  did  these  men  suffer.  Against  them  no 
charge  of  rebellion,  conspiracy,  or  disloyalty,  was  ever  urged. 
Their  secret  meetings  had  no  hostile  design  against  their 
cruel  oppressors.  They  stand  before  us  untainted  by  any 
civil  crimes.  Their  bitterest  foes  are  silent  on  these  matters. 
They  are  "fanatics,"  detested,  the  enemies  of  the  church; 

*  Vide  Fox,  book  iii.,  pp.  57§-7. 


MARY.  Ill 

their  principles  are  subversive  of  all  ecclesiastical  rule,  and 
the  fruits  of  Satanic  influence;  their  destruction  would  be  a 
blessing  to  the  church  and  the  nation, — phrases  like  these, 
and  opinions  kindred  to  them,  may  be  found  in  abundance; 
but  even  Bonner  and  his  harpies  never  allege  other  charges. 
They  were  disloyal  to  Kome,  but  not  to  England's  queen. 
They  claimed  the  right  to  think  and  judge  for  themselves  on 
the  great  matters  of  the  present  and  the  future  life.  From 
this  circle  they  excluded  all  influence.  Monarchs,  popes, 
councils,  bishops,  were  not  allowed  to  speak.  Only  One  voice 
was  heard,  only  One  authority  was  recognized.  To  catch 
the  voice  of  Jesus,  to  bow  implicitly  and  reverently  to  his 
authority,  was  the  great  business  of  their  life.  Boldly  they 
avowed  this.  Collision  with  Borne  was  inevitable.  With  the 
spiritual  despot  they  grappled.  Against  his  usurped  power 
they  swore  eternal  hostility,  and  by  their  teaching  and 
patience  in  death  they  inoculated  the  public  mind  with 
the  only  true  principles  of  civil  and  spiritual  freedom.  To 
this  comparatively  small  and  hidden  spring  we  must  trace 
back  the  deep  and  expanding  stream  of  freedom  which  we 
now  enjoy. 

Heresy  was  easily  tested.  Bonner  and  his  companions  in 
blood  had  no  diflSculty.  Their  scent  was  keen,  and  their 
means  ample  and  varied  for  the  detection  of  heretical  pravity. 

Fox,  referring  to  certain  charges"  against  some  persons, 
says,  "  What  their  articles  and  answer  were,  I  need  not 
here  recite,  seeing  all  they  in  the  time  of  queen  Mary  com- 
monly suffered  for  one  manner  of  cause,  that  is,  for  holding 
against  the  seven  Sacraments,  against  the  reality  of  Christ 
being  in  his  Supper,  for  speaking  against  the  Church  of 
Rome,  and  determination  of  the  same  against  images  set  up 
and  worshipped  in  the  church,  for  not  coming  to  church,"  &c. 

Bising  in  importance  and  magnitude  above  all  other  dog- 
mas, were  the  Sacrament  of  the  Mass  and  the  unity  of  the 
Bomish  Church.  Against  these  dogmas  the  Reformers  ex- 
hausted their  strength,  and  Gardiner  and  his  friends  stood 


112  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

forth  in  their  defence.  "  The  said  Darnley  hath  believed,  and 
doth  believe,  that  the  mass  now  used  in  this  realm  of  England, 
is  naught,  and  full  of  idolatry  and  evil,  and  plain  against  God's 
Word,  and  therefore,  he,  the  said  Darnley,  hath  not  heard  it, 
nor  will  hear  it."*  ''I  do  believe,  that  the  mass  now  used 
in  this  realm  of  England,  is  naught,  and  abominable  idolatry 
and  blasphemy  against  God's  holy  Word ;  for  he,  in  his  holy 
Supper,  instituted  the  sacrament  of  bread  and  wine,  to  be 
eaten  together  in  remembrance  of  his  death,  till  he  come, 
and  not  to  have  them  worshipped,  and  made  an  idol  of 
them.  ...  I  pray,  what  do  you  call  kneeling  down, 
holding  up  the  hands,  knocking  of  the  breast,  putting  off  the 
cap,  and  making  curtsey,  and  other  kind  of  superstition  ? 
You  would  make  men  to  be  so  blind  as  to  think  that  this  is 
DO  worshipping. "t  Assent  to  these  dogmas  of  the  Romanist 
would  cover  a  multitude  of  sins.  Attendance  at  the  mass 
secured  a  toleration  for  innumerable  iniquities.  No  moral 
excellence,  no  virtue,  no  social  rank,  no  mental  culture,  could 
shield  the  possessor  from  the  vengeance  of  the  church,  if 
this  absurd  and  revolting  dogma  were  denied.  In  the  one 
case,  it  changed  vice  into  virtue;  in  the  other,  it  converted 
the  loftiest  virtues  into  vices  so  repulsive  and  so  dangerous  to 
social  order  and  the  salvation  of  souls,  that  to  scent  out  a 
heretic  was  a  virtue,  but  to  condemn  him  to  the  stake  was 
an  act  the  most  benignant  to  man,  and  the  most  acceptable 
to  the  God  of  peace  and  love. 

The  holy  anger  of  the  Episcopate  being  kindled,  the 
subordinates  emulated  their  sui3eriors  in  vindictiveness, 
and  exhausted  all  the  means  within  their  reach  to  gratify  it. 
But  excesses  sooner  or  later  produce  a  rebound.  The  first 
intimation  of  the  restoration  of  the  Papal  supremacy 
excited  tumults.  Every  fresh  step  deepened  the  hatred  of 
the  people.     The  sufferings  and  patience  of   the  martyrs 

*  Articles  objected  by  Bonner  against  Darnley,  &c.— Fox,  vol.  ii. 

t  Ibid. 


MARY.  113 

augmented  it.  No  art  was  neglected  to  weaken  this.  Every 
means  were  employed  to  blacken  the  character  of  the  Protes- 
tants. The  restraints  of  moral  principles  were  thrown 
aside,  and  the  pulpit  became  the  vehicle  for  the  grossest 
violation  of  truth.  "  And  so,  my  lord,"  said  Gratwick,  in 
his  examination  by  Gardiner,  "  you  standing  there  in  the 
pulpit,  in  the  meantime  seduced  your  tongue  to  slander  us 
poor  prisoners,  being  then  present  in  iron-bands,  burdening 
us  with  the  sect  of  Arians,  and  with  the  sect  of  Herodians, 
and  with  the  sect  of  Anabaptists,  and  with  the  sect  of  Sac- 
ramentarians,  and  with  the  sect  of  Pelagians."*  Thousands 
gathered  round  the  fiery  pile.  It  is  computed  that  not  less 
than  20,000  gazed  on  the  execution  of  thirteen  persons  at 
Stratford,  t  Indignation,  rage,  execrations  against  the  ruling 
powers — admiration,  veneration,  for  the  patient  sufferers,  be- 
came the  feeling  of  many.  Of  the  deep  hatred  of  the  citizens 
of  the  metropolis  to  the  triumphs  of  the  "bloody  Bonner"  and 
his  colleagues  over  inspired  innocence  and  moral  excellency, 
Pole  complains  in  his  address  to  the  citizens  : — "But  where- 
fore cometh  this,  then,  that  when  any  heretic  shall  go  to 

*  Vide  Fox,  book  iii.,  p.  580. 

+  Strype's  Ecc.  Memorials,  vol.  iii.,  p.  494.  Dr.  Maitland  {a)  labours 
hard  to  prove  the  mildness  of  this  bishop,  and  to  wash  away  the 
filthy  calumnies  which  till  now  have  been  heaped  upon  him.  The  follow- 
ing occurs  in  a  letter  to  some  friends  on  his  restoration.  It  was  wi'itten 
the  day  after  he  heard  of  it.  "By  this  sentence,  my  usiirpei*.  Dr.  Ridley, 
is  utterly  repulsed :  so  that  I  would  ye  did  order  all  things  at  Kid- 
merly  and  Bushley  at  your  pleasure,  not  suffering  Sheepshead  or  Ships- 
side  to  be  any  meddler  there,  or  to  sell  or  caiTy  anything  away  from 
thence ;  and,  I  trust,  at  your  coming  up  now  at  the  parliament,  I  shall  so 
handle  both  the  said  Sheepshead  and  the  other  Calveshead,  that  they 
shall  perceive  their  sweets  shall  not  be  without  sour  sauce," — Letter  from 
Bonner,  Burnet's  Befonnation,  vol,  ii.,  p.  248,  The  cardinal  was  far 
less  severe  than  the  bishop.  The  latter  complains  that  the  former  had 
been  angry  at  his  proceedings,  and  asks  his  advice  as  to  the  way  in  which 
he  shoidd  deal  with  the  heretics. 

(a)  Essays  on  Subjects  Connected  with  the  Reformation,  by  S.  R.  Mait- 
land,  D.D. — Essay  xx.  The  Doctor  admits  that  119  were  burnt  by 
Bonner's  orders, — P.  5,  75-80. 


114  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

execution^  lie  shall  lack  no  comforting  of  you  and  enconrage- 
ment  to  die  in  liis  j)6i^v®^se  opinions,  given  by  those  that 
come  out  of  your  house,  'when  he  shall  be  put  in  prison, 
he  shall  have  more  cherishing:  what  sign  is  this?'"* 

The  same  fact  is  indicated  by  Gardiner: — "For  the  last 
day  when  thou  wast  before  me,  upon  Sunday,  in  St.  Mary 
Overy's  Church,  thou  there  reprovest  my  sermon,  and 
hadst  a  thousand  by  thee,  at  least,  to  bid  God  strengthen 
thee,"  &c. 

Bonner,  in  a  letter  to  Pole,  complains  of  the  attention  of 
the  populace  to  twenty-two  heretics,  and  says  that  "  They 
would  come  no  way  but  through  Cheapside,  so  that  they 
Were  brought  to  my  house  with  about  a  thousand  persons— 
which  thing  I  took  very  strange,  and  spake  to  Sir  John 
Grassam,  these  being  with  me,  to  tell  the  mayor  and  the 
sheriffs  that  this  thing  was  not  well  suffered  in  the  city. 
These  naughty  heretics,  all  the  way  they  came  through 
Cheapside,  both  exhorted  the  people  to  their  part,  and  had 
much  comfort  from  the  promiscuous  multitude,  "t  Earlier 
on  the  Lords  of  the  Council  had  written  to  the  Earl  of 
Shrewsbury  as  follows  : — "  Whereas,  we  have  been  lately 
informed  that  certain  lewd  persons,  to  the  number  of 
six  or  seven  in  a  company,  .  .  .  have  wandered  about 
these  north  parts,  and  represented  certain  plays  and  inter- 
ludes, containing  very  naughty  and  seditious  matter,  touch- 
ing the  king  and  queen's  majesties,  and  the  state  of  the 
realm,  and  to  the  slander  of  Christ's  true  and  Catholic 
religion,  contrary  to  all  good  order,  and  to  the  manifest 
contempt  of  Almighty  God,  and  dangerous  example  to 
others,"  &c.J 

Deeper  and  broader  these  sympathies  became.  Every 
fresh  victim  augmented  the  hatred  to  Rome.     We  get  a 

*  Strype's  Ecc.  Memorials,  vol.  vii.,  p.  355.     Cat. 

+  Fox,  vol.  ii. 

X  Lodge's  Illustrations,  vol.  i. ,  pp.  260-1. 


MARY.  115 

glimpse  of  this  from  a  speaker  in  the  next  reign : — "And  as 
for  the  dealings  in  Queen  Mary's  days,  they  much  misliked 
them;  calling  the  bishops  bloodsuckers,  and  bade  "fie"  on 
these  tormentors  that  delighted  in  nothing  else  but  in  the 
death  of  innocents;  that  threatened  the  whole  realm  with 
their  fire  and  faggots ;  murderers ;  that  they  were  worse  than 
Caiaphas,  worse  than  Judas,  worse  than  the  tniitors  that 
put  to  death,"  &c.*  The  contrast  between  the  sufierers  and 
the  persecutors  told  with  uncommon  effect  on  the  public 
mind.  Repression  was  impossible.  The  government  put 
forth  all  its  power  to  effect  it.f  -Orders  in  Council  were 
issued  to  the  civic  authorities,  commanding  them  to  keep 
the  apprentices  and  the  younger  members  of  their  families 
at  home  during  the  procession  of  the  heretics  to  Smithfield. 
The  bishops  warned,  threatened;  many  imprisoned  the  sym- 
pathizers*, but  in  vain.  Romanism  received  shocks  which 
prepared  the  nation  during  the  next  reign  for  its  easy  and 
final  overthrow.  ^ 

That  Mary,  under  the  influence  of  Spanish  and  Italian 
advisers,  sanctioned,  nay,  stimulated,  these  proceedings,  can 
admit  of  no  doubt.  Apologies  are  vain.  They  violate  the 
plainest  historic  truth.      The  removal  of   Gardiner,:]:  who 

*  Speech  of  John  Atkinson  on  the  Supremacy  Act.  Parliamentary 
History,  vol.  i.,  p.  691. 

t  The  lord  mayor  received  a  letter  from  the  queen  and  Council  early  in 
January,  1556,  commanding  him  "to  give  siibstantial  orders,  that  when 
any  be  delivered  to  be  bound,  there  be  a  good  number  of  officers  and 
others  appointed  to  be  at  the  executions  ;  who  may  be  charged  to  appre- 
hend, and  to  commit  to  ward,  all  such  as  shall  comfort,  aid,  or  praise 
those  that  are  executed.  And  to  charge  all  householders  not  to  suffer  any 
of  their  servants  to  be  abroad  then,  other  than  such  as  they  will  answer 
for." — Strype's  Ecc.  Memorials,  vol.  iii.,  p.  470.  Apiid  Soame's  Reforma- 
tion, vol  iv. ,  p.  555. 

X  Gardiner  died  on  the  12th  of  November,  1555.  On  the  16th  of 
October,  Ridley  and  Latimer  were  committed  to  the  flames.  On  the  day 
of  their  death,  or  three  days  after,  Gardiner  is  said  to  have  anxiously 
•expected  the  news  of  their  execution,  and  to  have  rejoiced,  before  he  died, 
that  the  reconciliation  with  Rome  was  strengthened  by  this  additional 
splendid  sacrifice.    That  day  "the  dart  of  death  struck  his  body,  and  the 


116  EARLY    ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

though  hating  with  intense  hatred  the  Protestant  leaders, 
yet  was  by  no  means  favourable  to  Spain,  gave  full  play  ta 
the  spirit  of  persecution.  His  death  is  thus  mentioned  by  a 
contemporary : — "  My  Lord  of  Winchester,  whose  soul  God 
pardon,  is  departed ;  and  his  bowels  were  buried  at  St.  Mary 
Overy's,  Southwark,  but  his  body,  as  the  saying  is,  shall  be 
carried  to  Winchester,  to  be  buried  there.  What  time  he 
departed  is  not  yet  certainly  known,  but  most  men  say  he 
died  on  Tuesday,  at  night,  being  the  12th  day  of  this  instant 
(1555),  about  two  o'clock  after  midnight,  at  Westminster, 
and  was  brought  in  his  barge  thence  to  Southwark."* 

Deep,  intense,  religious  convictions  swayed  the  mind  of 
Mary.  IS'o  duty  was  so  binding — no  obligation  so  solemn — 
as  the  purging  of  the  land  from  the  presence  and  pollution  of 
heretical  pravity.  So  thoroughly  was  this  unhappy  woman 
prostrated  by  the  power  of  superstition,  that,  when  mistaking 
disease  for  fertility,  she  said,  "that  she  could  never  be  happily 
brought  to  bed,  nor  succeed  well  in  any  other  of  her  affairs, 
unless  she  caused  all  the  heretics  she  had  in  prison  to  be 
burnt,  without  sparing  so  much  as  one."t 

But  all  this  was  in  vain.  Disappointment  and  vexation 
only  resulted  from  her  course.  Upon  her  perjured  and 
bloody  proceedings,  heaven's  deepest,  darkest  frown  apj)eared 
to  rest.  She  had  violated  her  word  to  her  people,  she  had 
con'upted  her  nobles  and  counsellors  with  gold,  and  risked 
civil  war  for  the  match  with  the  heir  of  Charles,  and  soon 
found  that  the  sombre  mind  of  Philip  regarded  her  with 


excruciating  pains  he  endured  were  longer  in  duration,  and  possibly  not 
altogether  less  intense  in  their  agony,  than  those  of  his  brother  bishops  at 
the  stake."  "  Do  not  open  that  gap,"  said  the  wretched,  wealthy,  success- 
ful persecutor,  to  one  who  spoke  to  him  of  the  justification  of  the  sinner 
by  the  blood  of  Jesus.  "He  found  no  comfort  in  that  doctrine,  and  no 
woi'ds  of  faith,  or  hope,  or  confidence,  ai-e  reported  of  his  bed  of  death." — 
Life  of  Bonner,  p.  288.     Fox,  vol.  ii.     Soame  makes  no  allusion  to  it, 

^  Letter  to  Lord  Shi'ewsbury.     Lodge's  Illustrations  of   English  His- 
tory, vol.  i.,  p.  258. 

t  Memorials  of  Cranmer,  vol.  ii. ,  p.  165. 


MARY.  117 

perfect  indifference,*  and  that  lie  exhausted  his  affections,  or 
rather  gratified  his  passions,  with  others,  f  Her  nights  were 
spent  in  sorrow  and  her  days  in  gloom.  With  broken  repose, 
from  the  night's  visions  w^hich  haunted  her,  she  pictured  to 
her  superstitious  mind  a  thousand  horrors.  In  her  agony  of 
disappointment,  she  offered  fresh  hecatombs  of  human  victims 
to  appease  the  wrath  of  the  holy  ones.  But  peace  came  not. 
In  the  splendid,  varied,  and  imposing  ceremonies  of  the 
church,  relief  was  now  sought.  The  Episcopate  exhausted 
its  resources.  Processions  were  planned,  which  she  dignified 
with  her  presence.  Bishops  in  gilt  slippers  and  splendid 
robes,  with  banners  flying  and  priests  chanting,  with  sermons 
and  masses,  intermingled  with  fasts  and  sharp  penances,  and 
all  the  various  religious  ser\dces  which  marked  her  favourite 
church,  occupied  no  inconsiderable  portion  of  her  time.  Still 
relief  came  not.  The  promised  heir  came  not.  Philip  was 
still  a  truant,  and  wandered  far  away  from  her.  Disaster 
abroad  and  discontent  at  home  preyed  upon  her  spirit,  and 
gradually  consumed  her  life.  The  Virgin  and  all  the  saints 
were  angry.  Her  hatred  to  the  detested  heretics  was  not 
sufficiently  intensified.  Many  still  lived.  The  efforts  of  the 
bishops  in  town  and  country  had  not  yet  freed  the  land  from 
these  pollutions.  Peace  with,  heaven  was  incompatible  with 
their  toleration  j  and,  encouraged  and  sustained  by  her  Papist 


*  Philip  had  entreated  his  father  to  give  him  a  Avife  younger  than  him- 
self, and  not  eleven  years  older. — Vide  Strickland's  Queens  of  England, 
vol.  v.,  p.  318. 

+  Henry  of  France,  in  a  letter  to  his  ambassador,  thus  expresses  his  opinion 
of  the  match  between  Philip  and  Mary: — "The  unfortunate  queen  wt.11 
learn  the  truth  at  last.  She  wiU.  Avake  too  late,  in  misery  and  remorse,  to 
know  that  she  has  filled  the  realm  with  hlppd  for  an  object  which,  when 
she  has  gained  it,  will  bring  nothing  bvit  aflSiction  to  herself  or  to  her 
people." — Froude,  vol.  vi.  p.  229.  We  will  onlj'^  add  that,  if  any  one  wishes 
to  see  the  craft  of  the  poHtician,  the  power  of  superstition,  hypocrisy  in 
cruelty,  intensified  to  the  highest  degree,  let  liim  study  the  character  of 
Philip  and  Granville,  in  the  pages  of  Motley.  The  sketch  of  Prescott  is 
that  of  a  master,  but  it  wants  the  fulness,  the  shade,  the  Rembrandt 
touches  of  Motley. — Vide  The  Rise  of  the  Dutch  Republic. 


118  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

counsellors,  she  inflicted  afresh  her  indignation  on  the  Non- 
conformists of  the  land.* 

Happily  for  humanitj,  her  reign  was  short.  Disease,  the 
desertion  of  her  husband,  threatened  insurrection  at  home,  the 
fear  of  invasion  from  abroad,  with  the  absorbing  consciousness 
that  by  thousands  her  memory  would  be  execrated,  and  that 
her  life  was  not  safe,  filled  her  mind  with  torturing  anxiety, 
and  rendered  her  latter  days  very  unhappy.  Thousands 
suffered  the  loss  of  all  that  was  dear  to  them.  From  all  the 
circles  of  social  life  the  victims  of  her  heartless  cruelty  had 
been  snatched,  but  chiefly  from  the  lower  walks  of  society. 
Old  men  and  maidens,  the  matron  and  the  child,  the  trades- 
man from  his  shop,  the  mechanic  from  his  bench,  and  the 
husbandman  from  the  field,  had  swelled  the  number  of 
sufferers.  But  revolting  to  all  the  sensibilities  of  our  nature, 
and  detestable,  as  these  cruelties  were,  there  were  redeeming 
elements.  Popery  stood  before  the  nation  in  all  its  unveiled 
loathsomeness,  and  in  ii^  hostility  to  every  right  view  of  the 
character  of  the  God  of  truth  and  love.  Admit  the  plea  of 
Mary's  apologists.  Grant,  and  we  are  prepared  to  concede 
the  fact,  that  from  disease,  superstition,  and  slighted  passion, 
her  mind  was  not  always  sane.  You  do  not  diminish  the 
difficulty.  The  spirit  of  the  Papacy  must  be  visited  with  a 
heavier  curse.  Sane  or  insane,  never  was  a  governor  so 
entirely  in  the  hands  of  her  spiritual  advisers.  Gardiner 
and  the  Spaniards,  then  Pole  and  his  Italians,  swayed  her 
mind  on  all  ecclesiastical  matters.  The  supreme  power  was 
in  their  hands.  Bonner  and  his  colleagues,  bloodthirsty  and 
vindictive  as  they  were,  only  executed  the  behests  of  thesg 
men.  A  word  from  the  cardinal  would  have  quenched  the 
martyr's  fire,  and  opened  the  dungeons  to  the  multitudes 
who  perished  in  these  living  tombs  from  want  and  disease, 
engendered  by  their  confinement.      But  the  legate  knew 

*  It  was  reported  that  she  had  spoken  of  herself  as  a  virgin  sent  from 
God  to  ride  and  tame  the  people  of  England. — Strype's  Cranmer.  Soame, 
Tol.  iv,,  p.  81. 


MARY.  119 

nothing  of  such  tolerance.  He  was  impelled  by  the 
consciousness  of  a  sacred  duty.  Heretics  were  far  worse 
than  thieves  and  murderers.  The  latter  only  affected  the 
present  and  the  temjDoral :  the  former  were  destructive  to  all 
that  was  vital  to  the  spiritual  and  the  eternal.  The  history 
of  the  past,  the  teaching  of  the  theologians,  the  decisions  of 
councils,  all  influenced  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  taught  this 
prince  of  the  church  that  the  extirpation  of  the  heretics  was 
a  sacred  duty.  Success  in  England  would  invest  him  with  a 
glory  far  more  bright  than  the  triple  crown. 

Both  Mary  and  Pole  lay  on  the  bed  of  death  at  the  same 
time,*  both,  too,  with  the  conviction,  that,  after  all  the 
cruelty  they  had  inflicted,  and  the  blood  they  had  shed  in 
restoring  and  building  up  the  old  faith,  in  a  few  months, 
it  was  more  than  j)robable,  the  edifice  would  crumble  to 
dust,  and  their  memory  would  be  loaded  with  execration 
in  the  country  and  on  the  spot  where  their  dark  deeds 
had  been  perpetrated,  f  Justice  is  sometimes  slow,  but 
8i,lways  sure.  Her  verdict  may  not  come  with  haste,  but 
when  uttered  it  is  irrevocable.  So  here.  Her  pen,  whilst 
recording  the  martyrdom  of  288  victims,  J  not  for  dis- 
loyalty to  the  civil   ruler,  but  for  the  assertion  of  man's 

*  Mary  died  on  the  IZtli  of  ZsTovember,  1558,  deserted  by  her  whole 
court. — Miss  Strickland,  vol.  v.,  p.  443.     Pole  died  a  few  houi's  later. 

+  *' Dying,  to  be  spared  a  second  exile,  and  the  wretchedness  of  seeing 
with  his  eyes  the  dissolution  of  the  phantom-fabric  which  he  had  given 
the  labours  of  his  life  to  build." — Froude,  vol.  vi.,  p.  526. 

J  /1555 — 71  \  making  288. — Besides  those  who  died  of  famine  in 
J  1556 — 89  I  sundiy  prisons. — Strype's  Ecc.  Memorials,  vol.  vii.,  p. 
■^^^  11557—88(419.  Maitland,  from  Fox,  gives  a  list  of  martyrs 
\1558 — 40 -^  amounting  to  739.— Essays,  p.  582.  Lord  Burghley 
says  : — "In  the  time  of  Queen  Mary,  there  were,  by  imprisonment,  tor- 
ment,  famine  and  fixe,  of  men,  women,  maidens,  and  children,  ahnost  the 
number  of  400,  and  of  that  number  above  twenty  that  were  archbishops, 
bishops,  and  principal  prelates  or  officers  in  the  church,  lamentably 
destroyed;  of  women  above  sixty,  and  of  children  above  forty;  and  amongst 
the  women  some  great  with  child,  out  of  whose  bodies  the  child,  by  fire, 
was  expelled  alive,"  &c. — Execution  of  Justice  in  England.  A2nid  Soame's 
Reformation,  vol,  iv.,  p.  588. 


120  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

inalienable  rights,  his  liberty  to  think,  and  to  worship  God 
according  to  the  teachings  of  the  Divine  word,  has  written 
a  sentence  which  succeeding  generations  will  never  revoke. 
History  will  ever  inscribe  on  her  monument,  "  The  Bloody 
Queen  Mary." 


CHAPTEE    V. 


ELIZABETH. 


Just  as  some  traveller,  benighted  in  some  distant  land, 
fearful  of  danger  every  moment,  would  hail  the  dawn  of 
the  moniing  with  gladsome  feelings,  as  he  discovered  the 
pathway  along  which  he  could  journey  without  exposure  to 
peril,  so  did  the  nation  regard  the  removal  of  Mary  and  the 
accession  of  Elizabeth  to  the  throne.  Amidst  the  execrations 
of  thousands,  and  the  deepening  dissatisfaction  of  a  much 
greater  number,  the  spirit  of  the  infatuated  Mary  passed 
to  the  tribunal  of  One,  whose  loving  servants  she  had  offered 
as  a  "burnt  sacrifice"  to  His  Majesty.  Either  truly  or  not, 
hitherto  her  name  has  been  associated  with  deeds  of  cruelty 
and  blood,  and  the  tmnsactions  of  her  reign  have  been 
regarded  as  violating  all  the  principles  of  law,  humanity, 
and  religion. 

On  Elizabeth  the  hopes  and  fears  of  both  parties  in  the 
state  now  centred.  Intensely  hated  by  her  sister,  who 
could  never  love  the  child  of  her  mother's  detested  rival,  her 
life  was  in  constant  danger.  This  was  no  secret.  In  all  the 
courts  of  Europe  the  feeling  was  known.  Nothing  was 
neglected  which  could  by  any  means  implicate  her  in  the 
various  plots  which  marked  her  sister's  unhappy  rule.  Bribes 
were  offered  to  the  unprincipled.  Life  was  promised  to 
imprisoned  rebels,  if  only  they  would  implicate  the  royal 


ELIZABETH.  121 

maiden  in  tlieir  lawless  enterprises.  If  Mary's  power,  and 
that  of  her  most  trusted  advisers,  had  been  equal  to  their 
will,  the  claim  of  Elizabeth  as  the  heir  apparent  to  the  crown 
would  have  been  cut  off.  Depriving  her  of  liberty  for  a  time, 
Jier  steps  tracked  and  her  movements  watched  by  some  veiled 
villain,  she  was  subjected  to  the  most  humiliating  state,  and 
compelled,  at  the  risk  of  the  most  fearful  peril,  to  violate  her 
conscience,  and  outwardly  conform  to  the  rites  of  the  Romish 
faith.  Mary  exhausted  her  vindictiveness  on  this  favourite 
of  the  people. 

Gardiner  and  Renard,  the  governors  of  the  queen,  as  we 
have  already  seen,  till  Pole  bowed  her  to  his  will,  felt  that 
the  death  of  Elizabeth  was  essential  to  the  success  of  their 
enterprise,  and  to  the  stability  of  the  restored  authority  of 
the  Holy  See.  Again  and  again  they  urged  it  on  their  not 
unwilling  mistress.*  This  fact  is  placed  beyond  the  region 
of  doubt.  Every  art  which  cunning  could  employ,  every 
motive  which  policy  could  suggest,  every  reason  wliich 
selfishness,  combined  with  the  most  powerful  superstition, 
could  supply,  were  laid  before  their  mistress.  They  secured 
her  warmest  sympathies.  N"o  sisterly  affection  restrained 
her  blind  devotion  to  her  spiritual  guides.  Her  hand  was 
ready  to  inflict  the  fatal  blow,  but  a  power,  invisible  but 
supreme,  held  her  back,  and  saved  the  maiden  from  the 
butcher's  knife. 

In  the  eyes  of  the  increasing  number  of  Elizabeth's 
admirers,  hers  was  a  charmed  life.t     Her  enemies  had  not 

*  Bishop  Gardiner  remarked,  "that  as  long  as  Elizabeth  lived  there 
was  no  hope  of  the  kingdom  being  tranquillized ;  and  if  any  one  went  to 
work  soimdly  as  he  did,  things  wovild  go  on  better."  "  It  was  of  the 
utmost  conseciuence,"  said  the  Spaniard,  "that  the  trial  and  execution  of 
the  criminals,  and  especially  of  Courtney  and  the  lady  Elizabeth,  should 
take  place  before  the  arrival  of  his  highness  the  prince  of  Spain." — 
Tytler's  Edward  and  Mary,  vol.  ii.,  p.  365.  Strickland's  Queens  of 
England,  vol.  v.,  p.  372.  Turner  supplies  abundant  proof  of  the  truth  of 
the  text,  vol,  iii.,  pp.  376-77. 

t  "Commendone  had  perceived  and  understood  that  the  sister,  both 


122  EARLY    ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

done  these  deeds  in  a  corner.  Heaven  was  her  protection. 
As  months  rolled  over,  many  of  the  young,  the  ardent,  the 
liberty-loving  of  England's  noblest  blood, — thousands  of 
England's  bold  yeomen,  and  the  commercial  classes — now 
rising  as  a  power  in  the  state — were  ready  to  shed  their  bloody 
and  risk  all  that  is  dear  to  men,  in  her  defence.  The  nation's 
love,  the  nation's  sympathies,  became  the  body-guard  of  the 
insulted  and  injured  princess,  and  compelled  even  Philip  to 
warn  his  creatures  against  the  invincible  power. 

The  reign  of  Elizabeth  forms  a  proud  era  in  our  nation's 
history.  It  is  the  "golden,"  the  Augustan  age  of  the  nation's 
literature;  commerce,  science,  and  religion  shed  their  light 
and  beautiful  charms  upon  it.  Poets,  statesmen,  historians, 
have  exhausted  their  genius  in  eulogy  and  narrative.  We 
would  not  detract  an  atom  from  its  glory.  Still  we  think 
the  true  estimate  of  the  character  of  the  queen  and  her  reign. 
has  yet  to  be  formed,  Nor  have  the  times  yet  come  for 
this.  The  magic  influence  of  those  events  which  so  largely 
contributed  to  the  material  splendour  of  her  era,  still  hides 
her  enormous  moral  obliquity,  and  the  crushing  spiritual 
despotism  which  she  exercised  on  those  men  whose  lofty 
principles  and  unflinching  integrity  laid  the  foundations 
of  our  liberties.  Higher,  and  still  higher,  the  moral  tone  of 
the  historian  must  rise, — deeper  and  stronger  must  be  his 
appreciation  of  those  men  who  braved  her  fiercest  wrath 
rather  than  sacrifice  their  allegiance  to  God, — with  a  steadier 
hand  must  he  unveil  the  surpliced  tyi'ants  who  filled  the 
Episcopate, — before  he  can  portray  the  character  and  reign 
of  the  Virgin  Queen  as  truth  will  one  day  demand. 

To  trace  the  political  movements  of  this  age,  to  unfold  the 
plots  which  marked  it, — the  growth  pf  the  commerce,  the 
material  prosperity  of  the  nation,  during  the  reign  of  this 


heretical  and  scliismatical,  who  had  heen  substituted  for  the  present  queen 
Tby  her  father,  was  then  in  the  heart  and  mouth  of  eveiy  one." — Turner 
gives  the  original  of  this,  voL  iii.,  p.  403. 


ELIZABETH.  123 

monarch,  and  the  triumph  of  her  arms  over  her  various  and 
numerous  foes, — is  not  compatible  with  our  design.  We 
have  to  deal  with  loftier  principles, — to  unfold  their  working 
in  laying  the  foundation  of  a  moral  change  which  laughed 
^to  scorn  the  imperious  wrath  of  the  sovereign,  and  treated 
with  contempt  the  more  rabid  rage  of  the  Episcopate,  and 
the  efforts  of  which  have  from  year  to  year  been  affecting 
the  character  and  policy  of  this  great  empire.  Principles 
to  which  we  may  trace  uj),  with  a  distinctness  which  silences 
controversy,  and  with  a  clearness  which  excludes  all  doubt, 
all  that  is  great  and  distinctive  of  us  as  a  nation.  To  under- 
stand the  character  of  the  Early  Baptists  aright,  a  glance  at 
some  of  them  becomes  imj)erative. 

It  is  very  difficult  to  form  anything  like  a  correct  estimate 
of  the  moral  state  of  the  church,  still  more  of  that  of  the 
mass  of  the  community.  Pole  had  tried  to  check  the  pre- 
vailing corruptions,  and  to  pare  down  those  things  w^hich 
heretofore  had  done  violence  to  ordinarily  virtuous  minds. 
But  the  evil  was  deep-seated.  Oentle  means  could  only 
touch  the  surface — they  failed  in  reaching  the  core. 

"  The  monks  were  put  into  all  the  small  benefices  in  the 
king's  gift.  So  that  the  greatest  part  of  the  clergy  were 
such  as  had  been  formerly  monks  and  friars;  veiy  ignorant 
for  most  part,  and  generally  addicted  to  their  former  super- 
stition, though  otherwise  men  that  would  comply  with  any- 
thing rather  than  forfeit  their  livings."  * 

They  luxuriated  in  their  power,  and  aided  in  every  way 
to  deepen  the  hold  of  superstition  on  the  minds  of  the 
people.  The  great  hives  of  industry  and  commerce  were,  to 
some  extent,  exceptions.  There  other  influences  operated. 
Mind  was  there  far  from  stagnant.  Through  these  channels 
voices  from  the  continent  were  heard,  wakening  to  efforts 
and  encouraging  the  faithful.  By  Christian  merchants, 
the    Bible   and    other   books   were   smuggled, — yes !    that 

*  Burnet's  Eefoonation,  vol.  ii.    Preface, 


124  EARLY  ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

is  the  only  word  which  can  be  used  truthfully, — into 
the  country.*  But  in  the  rural  districts  of  the  nation  the 
influence  of  Kome  was  supreme.  Virtue  never  rises  above 
the  standard  with  which  men  are  familiar.  Moral  excel- 
lence never  can  flourish  when  the  only  element  of  its 
nutriment  is  withdrawn.  Some  of  the  exiles  write  in 
strong  language. 

"  Turn  thine  eyes,"  says  one,  "  to  thy  counsel,  England  ; 
how  fierce  tygers,  how  cruel  wolves,  how  ravening  beares, 
how  lecherous  goats,  how  wilie  foxes,  or  to  speak  plainly 
without  figure,  what  perjured  traitors,  to  God  and  thee! 
What  murderers,  what  oppressors  of  the  poor,  v/hat  volup- 
tuous Sardanapales,  what  adulterers,  how  vile  flatterers,  shalt 
thou  finde  amonge  them !  It  were  a  small  fault,  and  a  very 
peccadillo  in  them,  to  dissemble  the  truth  of  religion.  They 
rail  on  it,  they  toss  it  with  scofis  and  mocks,  they  bloodily 
and  tyrannically  persecute  it.  It  might  be  winked  at  if  they 
took  bribes  only  to  oppress  the  cause  of  a  few  poor  men  :  they 
take  bribes  to  betray  the  cause  of  the  whole  realm.  It 
might  be  passed  over  with  silence  if  they  had  murdered  but 
one  man  apiece  :  the  blood  of  innumerable  saints  crieth  up 
to  heaven  against  them,  and  the  groanings  of  many  thousands 
of  oppressed  are  heard  everywhere.  It  might,  perchance,  be 
pardoned  if  they  spent  but  some  weeks  in  pleasure ;  they 
wallow  continually  in  vile  voluptuousness  and  wanton  dalli- 
ance, or  waste  all  their  unhappie  dales  in  beastlie  delites; 
neither  can  change  of  women,  nor  women  only,  satisfie  their 
filthie,  abominable  desires."t  "For  what  idolatry,  what 
pride,  Avhat  covetousness,  what  cruelty,  what  lechery,  what 
sodomity,  was  ever  heard  of  in  any  ages,  that  they  have  not 
far  exceeded  1     Thou  canst  not  name  a  bishop,  but  thou 

*  "  It  is  said  that  there  are  diverse  evil  books  cast  by  night  into  the 
city,  conveyed  from  beyond  the  seas ;  but  I  have  not  seen  any  of  these 
yet."— Lodge,  vol.  i.,  p.  280, 

tTraheron's  Warning  to  England.  Apud  Maitland's  Essays,  pp. 
136-7. 


ELIZABETH.  125 

slialt  see  his  tongue  swollen  with  Ijlasphemy,  his  fingers 
dripping  with  the  blood  of  innocents,  his  body  shattered 
with  most  filthy  villainy;  and  the  rest  of  thy  Egy];)tian 
shaiilings  strive  which  shall  pass  others  farthest  in  all  kinds 
of  beastly  abomination."*  Bale  gives  us  rather  a  curious 
glimpse  of  some  of  the  social  habits  of  the  age  : — "  My 
lord  bishop  hath  a  sum  of  money  of  the  priests  for  doing  his 
part  so  well.  My  lord  abbot  and  master  doctor  have  had 
pheasants,  plovers,  and  partridges,  pigs,  geese,  and  capon,  for 
disputing  their  matters  so  valiantly.  Master  parson  hath 
been  commended  for  scolding,  and  Sir  Saunder  Sm^ll  Smock 
(one  given  to  love  women),  one  parish  priest  for  bearing 
false  witness." t 

The  seats  of  learning, — Oxford,  and  not  less  the  sister 
university, — were  the  strongholds  of  Papal  influence.  Into 
all  offices,  Pole  and  his  colleagues  had  placed  men  of  like 
spirit  with  themselves.  On  the  young  mind  of  England, 
or  the  future  hereditary  and  elective  statesmen  of  the  nation, 
and  the  rising  ministry,  they  sought  to  stamp  their  own 
image,  and  to  control  their  thoughts  and  moral  training. 
Success  in  one  was  realized.  Oxford  has  always  been  noted 
for  its  leaning  that  way.  "  Our  universities  are  so  depressed 
and  ruined,  that  at  Oxford  there  are  scarcely  two  indi\T.duals 
who  think  with  us ;  and  even  they  are  so  dejected  and  broken 
in  spirit  that  they  can  do  nothing.  That  despicable  friar,  Soto, 
and  another  Spanish  monk,  I  know  not  who,  have  so  torn  up 
by  the  roots  all  that  P.  Martyr  had  planted,  that  they  have 
reduced  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord  into  a  wilderness.":}: 

*  Traheron's  Warning  to  England,  p.  84. 
f  Bale's  Image  of  the  Two  Churches  (Parker  Society),  p.  395.  "I  do 
not  know  who  this  Paul  was,"  said  the  ciniel  Mx,  Bishop  of  Norwich, 
"but  sure  I  am  his  writings  smell  of  the  faggot." — Life  of  Bonner,  p.  38. 
"I  am  content  \vith  my  breviary  and  jDontifical,"  said  the  enlightened 
Bishop  of  Dunkeld,  "  and  know  neither  the  Old  or  New  Testament,  and 
yet  thou  seest  I  have  come  on  indifferently  well." — Tytler's  Scotland,  vol. 
v.,  p.  225. 

X.  Jewel.     Zurich  Letters  (Parker  Society).     Letter  xxxiii. 


126  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

Strype  gives  us  a  fuller  account  of  this.*  He  tells  us  that 
Ormaneto,  one  of  Pole's  creatures,  displaced  every  heretic 
and  all  suspected  of  heresy,  and  placed  over  it  Peter  Soto,  a 
Dominican,  who  had  been  confessor  to  Charles  Y.,  and  eight 
others  of  the  same  order,  who  restored  the  solid  scholastic 
theology,  and  abolished  the  affected  elegance  of  words  with 
which  the  heretics  were  enchanting  their  hearers.  Soto  was 
a  Spaniard,  and  Garcia,  another  of  his  countrymen,  was  made 
professor  of  theology  at  Oxford.  Gardiner  fully  sympathized 
with  these  men,  and  thought  that  lectures  on  the  old 
Magistru^a  Scientiarum  were  much  preferable  to  those 
Hebrew  lectures  which  had  been  given  by  their  prede- 
cessors, t 

Nor  was  the  devotion  of  the  students  on  the  banks  of  the 
Cam  less  papal.  Perhaps  the  following  may  be  as  much 
rhetoric  as  fact ;  still  it  is  suggestive  : — "  The  most  reverend 
father  in  Christ,  Cardinal  Pole,"  said  the  Public  Orator,  on 
the  occasion  of  the  Commission  visiting  that  seat  of  learning, 
January  11th,  1557,  "legate,  who  had  restored  oppressed 
religion,  supported  the  views  of  this  country,  brought  back 
from  exile  our  lares, — he,  I  say,  that  English  Pole,  and  our 
town  mostly,  was  the  author  of  our  visitation,  from  whose 
excellent  visitor  many  blessings  have  redounded  to  all  parts 
of  his  country." J 

The  labours  of  the  godly  bishops  ceased  not.  Within 
five  weeks  of  Mary's  death,  five  persons  were  immolated  on 
the  burning  pile.  Necessity  alone  checked  them.  Their 
power  was  broken,  not  their  will.  The  accession  of  the  new 
monarch  filled  them  with  the  most  conflicting  anxiety,  and 
the  reception  of  Bonner  excited  the  worst  fears  of  the 
hierarchy. 

No  sooner  was  Elizabeth  quietly  seated  on  the  throne,  than 
she  threw  off"  the  disguise  which,  to  say  the  least,  had  veiled 

*  Vide  Annals,  vol.  i.,  p.  195. 
t  Vide  Tm-ner,  vol.  iii.,  p.  462.  X   Fox's  Mary. 


ELIZABETH.  127 

her  conduct  more  or  less  during  part  of  her  sister's  reign,* 
and  sought  to  effect  another  of  those  revolutions  which, 
as  our  readers  have  marked,  followed  each  other  through  the 
whole  of  the  Tudor  dynasty.  In  Henry's  time,  we  have  seen 
the  state  religion,  at  the  bidding  of  the  sovereign,  assume 
simply  an  anti-Papal  aspect,  and  its  claims  enforced  by  exile 
or  death.  During  the  reign  of  his  youthful  successor,  at  the 
command  of  his  Council,  the  Papal  aspect  changes,  and  a 
Protestant  phase  now  challenges  the  conscientious  regards 
of  the  nation.  ''The  young  Josiali"  dies,  and  his  sister,  by 
her  royal  will,  in  violation,  too,  of  her  sacred  promise, 
denounces  the  leading  teachers  of  her  brother's  religion  as 
worse  than  the  most  abandoned  of  their  fellow-men,  the 
destroyers  of  souls,  and  burns  them  as  an  offering  to  the  Papal 
power,t  and  bids  her  people  that  they  must  give  up  their 
religious  convictions  and  be  reconciled  to  a  church  which 
they  had  been  taught  to  consider  the  very  seat  and  throne  of 
Antichrist,  on  pain  of  burning  here  and  of  eternal  damna- 
tion hereafter.  ;|:  The  turbulent,  §  and  happily  for  the  nation, 
short  reign  of  this  devotee  to  the  Yicar  of  Christ,  was 
followed  by  a  young  and  reputed  Virgin  Queen  ;  and  she 
issues  her  mandate,  as  sole  arbitress  of  all  spiritual  matters, 
that  her  subjects  up  to  such  a  day  might  remain  in  the 

*  She  heard  divine  service  after  the  Romish  religion,  and  was  often 
■confessed,  yet  at  the  rigorous  solicitation  of  Cardinal  Pole,  professed  her- 
self, for  fear  of  death,  a  Roman  Catholic. — So  says  Camden's  Life  of 
Elizabeth,  p.  9.     The  reader  will  find  more  proof  in  Tvmier,  vol.  iii. ,  pp. 

416-17. 

f  Strickland's  Queens  of  England,  vol.  v.,  pi3.  305-5. 

J  "This  day  was  performed  the  confinnation  of  the  alliance  between 
the  Pope  and  this  king,"  said  the  French  ambassador,  "by  a  public  and 
solemn  saciifice  of  a  preaching  doctor,  named  Rogevus,  who  has  been 
burnt  alive  for  being  a  Lutheran."  "All  heretics,  who  hold  or  teach 
othei-wise  than  the  Roman  Church  believes  and  holds,  damnantur  et 
anathematizantur. " — Cardinal  Pole. 

§  The  same  writer  says,  "She  travels  with  1500  horse,  as  a  guard  to 
protect  her."  "She  has  twenty -five  or  thirty  gentlemen  to  sleep  in  the 
hall  of  the  presence,  near  her  apartment.  Twice  eveiy  night  they  make 
their  rounds  and  \dsit  all  the  palace." 


128  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

Anticliristian  Church  of  Rome,  but  ever  after  that  time,  on 
pain  of  her  imperial  displeasure,  they  must  mould  their 
religious  convictions  according  to  her  will,  through  the  teach- 
ing of  those  whom  she,  as  female  head  of  the  church,  might 
place  over  them  as  their  religious  guides.* 

The  rapidity  and  cruelty  of  these  changes  is  not  the  only- 
thing  which  strikes  us.  There  are  principles  underlying 
them,  of  the  greatest  and  profoundest  kind,  principles  which 
clothe  the  chief  actors  in  these  startling  revolutions  with 
the  most  aggravated  impiety,  or  exliibit  them  as  profoundly 
ignorant  of  the  great  laws  of  our  moral  nature,  as  well 
as  of  the  spirituality  and  majestic  simplicity  of  the  religion 
of  the  Son  of  God.  We  must  not  in  these  matters  confound 
things  which  differ,  nor  allow  the  prejudices,  to  use  a  very  mild 
phrase,  of  writers  of  a  certain  class,  to  blind  us  to  the  nature 
of  things.  Only  in  a  very  modified  and  inferior  sense  must 
we  regard  these  as  religious  movements.  There  was  as  much 
of  the  political  as  the  spiritual  element  in  them.  Perhaps 
more  of  the  spirit  of  earth  than  of  heaven.  The  sovereign 
found  in  existence,  on  his  advent  to  power,  a  great,  wealthy, 
compact,  influential  hierarchy,  the  growth  of  ages,  often  the 
rival  of  the  imperial  power,  which  on  all  political  grounds 
it  was  thought  desirable  he  should  subordinate  to  his  will. 
Ages  had  taught  that  one  was  essential  to  the  other.  The 
full  and  safe  develoj)ment  of  the  one  was  very  dependent 
on  the  other.  The  contract  expressed  or  understood  was,. 
"Throw  your  influence,"  said  the  secular  power,  "around 

*  "  Indeed,  the  Churcli  of  England  hath  the  advantage  of  us,  and,  as  I 
suppose,  of  all  the  churches  in  the  world,  for  monstrous  speedy  growth 
and  increase ;  for  from  that  of  a  synagogue  of  Satan,  consisting  of  Popish 
idolaters,  and  cruel  murderers  of  the  saints,  it  grew  from  top  to  toe  into 
a  true  and  entire  body  of  Christ,  of  a  sudden,  and  before  the  gi^eatest 
part  of  it  so  much  as  heard  the  Gospel  preached  in  any  measure  for  their 
conversion." — Robinson,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  65,  66,  318,  and  319, 

"This  profane  multitude,  without  any  profession  of  faith  and  repent- 
ance, were  forced  and  compelled  by  human  authority,  in  the  beginning  of 
Queen  Elizabeth's  reign,  to  be  members  of  their  church." — J.  Canne's 
Necessity  of  Separation. 


ELIZABETH.  129 

the  monarchy,  and  the  exclusive  right  to  teach  religion  and 
punish  conscience  shall  be  yours ;  and  the  rich  and  ample 
emoluments,  which  fear  or  superstition  will  surrender,  shall 
be  your  reward."  How  any  intelligent  mind,  with  any 
a23prehension  or  right  conceptions  of  the  nature  of  the  reli- 
gion of  Jesus,  and  with  the  Sacred  Oracles  in  his  hand, — the 
only  authority  to  which  we  should  implicitly  bow, — should 
recognize  these  sectarian,  not  national,  movements,  in  any 
other  light,  is  one  of  those  profound  moral  mysteries  of  this 
life  which  we  cannot  solve.  In  this  last  case,  as  we  shall 
presently  see,  the  change  was  marked  by  an  amount  of 
individual  and  social  suffering  which  has  scarcely  a  parallel 
in  the  world's  history,  and  which  only  lost  its  power  of  con- 
tinued mischief  by  the  presence  and  growing  power  of  those 
principles  for  which  so  many  victims,  during  Elizabeth's  reign, 
suffered  either  at  the  stake,  on  the  tree,  or  in  the  prison.* 

The  change  now  was  one  of  no  small  magnitude,  and  its 
accomplishment  was  marked  by  extraordinary  difficulties. 
It  touched  so  many  interests  purely  selfish,  and  it  involved 
consequences  which  perilled  the  throne  of  Elizabeth,  and 
even  her  life.  The  worst  passions  of  human  nature  would 
be  stirred  to  their  very  depth.  Beyond  all  comjmrison, 
religious  strife,  in  its  intenseness,  exceeds  every  other  strife. 
Only  a  mind  animated  by  a  love  of  the  truth  which 
nothing  could  impair,  or  influenced  by  a  lust  of  power 
which  could  bear  no  co-ordinate  authority  within  the  same 
realm,  could  dare  it.  We  have  no  deep  impression  that 
the  former  was  a  very  potent  agent ;  the  latter,  we  think, 
was  more  so.  Elizabeth  had  witnessed  the  power  of  the 
priesthood  over  the  late  sovereign,  its  annihilation  of  all 
sisterly  affection,  the  suffering  which  the  recognition  of  a 


*  "  Much  has  been  said  of  the  excellence  of  the  form  of  worship  by 
them  established ;  but  little,  alas !  of  moral  or  religious  merit  can  be 
awarded  by  the  verdict  of  impartial  history  to  the  motives  or  the  conduct 
of  the  heroine  of  Protestantism,  in  a  transaction  so  momentous  and  so 
memorable." — Miss  Aikins's  Elizabeth,  vol,  i.,  p.  320. 

K 


130  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

foreign  potentate  within  the  realm,  '•'  speaking  like  a  lamb," 
but  over-topping  the  imperial  authority,  had  inflicted  on 
the  people.  Above  all,  her  own  exposure  to  death,  and 
the  cunning  and  deadly  hate  of  Gardiner  and  his  associates 
against  her,  could  not  be  forgotten.  With  such  ex})erience 
of  the  spiritual  powers,  it  excites  no  surprise  that  Elizabeth, 
and  her  trusted  counsellors,  should  be  anxious  to  subordinate 
the  Church  to  the  State,  as  in  Henry  and  Edward's  times. 

Within  her  own  realm  numerous  and  powerful  elements 
of  danger  existed.  Her  treasury  was  exhausted.  The  nation 
was  at  war  with  France.  Scotland  was  in  no  pleasant  mood, 
its  sovereign  proclaiming  Elizabeth  as  illegitimate  and  an 
usurper  of  the  crown,  and  giving  signs  of  a  determination  to 
expel  her.  Ireland  was  under  a  chronic  disease,  relieving  itself 
now  and  then  by  a  rebellion,  and  was  at  present  very  strong  in 
its  blind  attachment  to  Rome.  Much  of  the  spiritual  power  of 
the  kingdom  was  against  her.  Bishops  and  priests  had  given 
signal  proofs  of  their  attachment  to  the  old  faith;  and  the 
fear  of  punishment,  if  any  change  took  place,  made  them  natu- 
rally cling  closer  to  it;  the  majority  of  her  counsellors  were 
men  of  the  same  class ;  while  no  doubt  can  be  entertained 
that  the  majority  of  the  people,  certainly  in  the  northern 
counties  and  in  the  rural  districts,  preferred  the  showy  and 
sensuous  form  of  the  old  religion.  Beyond,  'Hhe  Bishop 
of  Home  will  be  incensed,"  said  Cecil;  "  he  will  excommuni- 
cate the  queen,  interdict  the  realm,  and  give  it  a  prey  to  all 
princes  who  will  enter  upon  it,  and  stir  them  \ip  to  it  by  all 
manner  of  means."*  The  extirpation  of  heresy  was  a  glori- 
ous work.  The  great  Catholic  powers  of  Europe  felt  it  to  be 
so;  and  "all  means,"  as  Cecil  says,  '-'would  be  used  to  incite 
them  to  put  down  the  Islanders,  and  maintain  the  Papal 


*  " There  be  not  in  all  tliis couutiy,"  said  Sadlier  later  ou,  "ten  gentle- 
men that  do  favour  and  allow  of  her  majesty's  proceedings  in  the  cause  of 
religion ;  and  the  common  people  be  ignorant,  full  of  superetition,  and 
altogether  blinded  with  the  old  Popish  doctiine,"  &c.,  &c. — State  Papers, 
vol.  ii.,  p.  55.     Edinbro',  1809. 


ELIZABETH.  L'il 

power."  Francis  the  First  mavked  the  latter  part  ol"  lii.s 
reign  by  entire  subserviency  to  the  priesthood.*  TJie  all- 
powerful  Guises  religiously  and  politically  detested  Elizabeth, 
and  sought  to  combine  Roman  Christendom  in  a  deadly  war 
against  the  Protestant  faith. t  Such  were  some  of  the  evils 
which  stood  before  the  queen  as  she  entered  upon  her  work.^; 
Persecution,  at  least  in  the  horrid  form  in  which  it 
appeared  during  the  late  reign,  ceased  at  once.  Light  was 
poured  into  the  gloomy  cells  of  the  gate-houses,  the  coal- 
cellars,  and  other  dungeons  ;  and  many  confessors  wei'e  per- 
mitted to  revisit  their  desolate  homes  and  suffering  families. § 
From  ail  places  of  trust  and  influence  the  zealots  of  Pome 
were  gradually  removed.  The  punishment  of  line  and 
imprisonment  was  suspended  over  them.  Plied  with  these 
telling  arguments,  no  pardon  was  to  be  granted  Mnthout 
entire  submission  and  conforuiitj^  to  the  sovereign's  will.  || 
Men  of  known  attachment  to  Protestant  principles  were 
called  to  fill  subordinate,  but  still  important,  places  in  various 


*  Burnet,  vol.  ii.,  who  gives  Cecil's  al>le  letter  on  the  difficulties.  Cecil, 
"we  fear,  hud  iin  pi'inciplc.  He  had  passed  through  all  the  religious  changes 
of  Ms  time. 

"The  names  of  all  them  that  dwelleth  in  the  parish  of  Umbleton  (Wim- 
bleton)  that  were  confessed  and  received  the  Sacrament  of  the  altar: — my 
master  Sir  W,  Cecil,  and  my  Lady  Mildred  his  wife."— Tytlei-'s  Edward 
and  Mary,  vol.  ii.,  p.  435.     1556. 

t  "We  desire  that  all  heresies  should  be  extirpated  from  our  kingdom, 
and  the  heretics,  and  those  who  instruct  them." — ^Edict  of  Fnmce.  May 
18th,  1533. 

X  "That  the  Pope,  the  emperors,  and  the  kings  of  Spain  and  France, 
should  band  together  to  ledxice  again  the  most  j)ai-t  of  Europe  to  the 
Roman  Catholic  religion ;  and  to  pursue  and  punisli  with  fire  and  sword 
all  heretics  that  would  not  willingly  condescend  to  the  same. "---Melville's 
Memoirs,  pp.  76-7.  Turner,  vol.  iii.,  p.  541,  where  more  evidence  will  be 
found. 

§  CoUier,  vol.  ii.j  pp..  410-11.     Soame,  vol.  iv.,  p.  600. 

II  "The  premunire  mixst  be  played  upon  them ;  and  when  once  they  are 
in  misericordia,  they  are  not  to  be  pardoned  without  entu-e  submission  and 
conformity  ;  and  by  hampering  them  well,  and  pressing  tlie  laws  close,  her 
majesty's  occasion  for  money  may  be  somewhat  supplied." — Collier  vol. 
ii.,  p.  414.     Soame,  vol.  iv.,  p.  611. 


132  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

pai'ts  of  the  country.  The  return  of  the  exiles,  who  had 
fled  before  the  burning  zeal  of  Mary,  greatly  augmented  tlie 
swelling  tide  of  popular  indignation  against  the  old  faith. 
Many  of  them  were  men  of  rich  and  varied  cu.lture.  More 
valuable  still,  at  this  crisis,  than  even  their  profound  erudition, 
was  their  power  as  ministers  of  God's  Word.*  It  was  their 
forte.  Practice  had  given  them  a  power  their  advocates  had 
failed  to  secure.  These  and  other  signs  awakened  suspicions 
and  alarm  in  some,  and  kindled  hope  in  the  minds  of  others. 
Both  parties  felt  that  the  conflict  would  be  severe  and  final. 
The  pulpit  echoed  with  the  war  cry.  Upon  all  the  ])oints 
of  diiference  between  the  two  churches,  both  parties 
exhausted  their  bitterest  local  and  patriotic  resources.  Pas- 
sions were  inflamed  and  prejudice  excited.  The  Papist,  on 
principle,  from  interest  and  fear,  hated  the  Protestant,  as  a 
man  infamous,  detested  of  God,  as  a  moral  pestilence  in  every 
circle  in  which  he  was  found  :  the  Protestant,  as  a  matter  of 
duty,  declared  exterminating  war  against  the  Papist  as  a  limb 
of  Antichrist,  an  idolater,  one  whose  toleration  as  a  religion- 
ist was  inconsistent  with  the  well-being  of  the  commonwealth 
and  the  salvation  of  men.  Society  was  shaken  to  its  centre 
by  these  combatants.  Against  the  Philistines,  men  who  had 
hidden  themselves  in  caves  and  dens  came  out  to  give  them 
battle,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  The  civil  power 
inter])osed  t(.>  calm  the  tumult.  All  preaching  for  a  time 
was  suspended,  till  the  mind  of  the  country  could  be  ex- 
pressed through  its  constituted  representatives  in  the  senate 
of  the  nation. f 

An  Act  was  })assed  for  restoring  the  supremacy  to  the 
crown.  Its  provisions  are  worthy  the  attention  of  the 
reader.  It  provides  that  all  "such  jurisdiction,  privileges, 
superiority  and  pre-eminence,  spiritual  and  ecclesiastical,  as 

*  They  were  men  of  great  and  diversified  experience,  of  practical  liabita, 
of  energy  and  zeal,  and  above  all,  of  fervent  and  exalted  piety,"— 
Marsdcn's  Early  Puritans,  p.  16. 

i^  Collier,  vol.  ii.,  p.  411.     Strype's  Ann.,  voL  i.,  pp.  58-9. 


ELIZABETH.  133 

by  any  spiritual  or  ecclesiastical  power  or  authority  hath 
heretofore  been,  or  may  lawfully'-  be,  exercised  or  used,  for 
the  visitation  of  the  ecclesiastical  state  and  persons,  and  for 
reformation,  order  and  correction  of  the  same;  and  of  all 
manner  of  errors,  heresies,  schisms,  abuses,  offences,  con- 
tempts, and  enormities,  shall  for  ever,  by  authority  of  this 
present  Parliament,  be  united  and  annexed  to  the  imperial 
crown  of  this  realm,'* 

By  this  act  of  the  senate  the  authority  of  the  Pope  was 
thrown  off,  and  the  independence  of  the  English  Church 
clearly  defined.  Subsequently  most  of  the  persecuting  laws 
were  abolished,  and  others  for  the  security  of  the  throne  passed. 

Policy,  if  not  fairness,  prompted  Elizabeth  to  proceed  with 
caution.  A  disputation  on  important  points  of  difference 
between  the  Papists  and  the  Reformed  was  proposed.  In  the 
abbey  church  of  Westminster  the  combatants  were  to  engage. 
Heath  of  York  was  authorized  to  select  the  champions  on  the 
one  side  :  the  choicest  of  the  returned  exiles  were  nominated 
for  the  other.  The  discussion  fixed  the  attention  of  multi- 
tudes. The  members  of  the  Privy  Council,  most  of  the  nobility 
and  the  courtiers,  with  many  of  the  Lower  House,  crowded 
the  venerable  structure.  Over  this  august  assembly,  and  on 
an  occasion  so  mighty,  the  Lord  Chief  Justice  Bacon  presided. 
Like  many  others,  this  proved  abortive.  Expectations  so 
raised  were  only  disappointed.  The  Romanists,  on  some  plea 
of  informality,  withdrew  from  the  hopeless  contest.  Victory, 
not  truth,  is  too  often  the  object  of  public  disputations. 

The  points  for  discussion  were, — the  service  in  the  English 
tongue,  the  authority  of  every  cburcli  to  set  aside  or  modify 
ceremonies,  and  the  doctrines  of  the  mass.  The  latter  was 
abolished  for  the  administration  of  the  Lord's  Supper  in  both 
kinds :  and  the  use  (^f  Edward  the  Sixth's  second  Prayer 
Book,  with   some  modifications,  was  authorised,  t     Images 


*  Collier,  vol.  ii.,  p.  420. 
+  The  extent  to  which  alteiations  were  made  may  be  seen  in  Collier, 
vol.  ii.     Records,  Ixxviii. 


134  EARLY    kXGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

were  removed  from  tlie  churches,  and  many  of  the  objects 
of  idolatrous  worship  were  speedily  committed  to  the  flames.* 
Subsequently  the  articles  were  reduced  to  their  present 
number.  + 

Partial  as  these  changes  were,  they  touched  some  members 
of  the  old  faith.  ISTot  a  few  of  these  dignitaries  had  rejected 
the  authority  of  the  Pope  before,  in  one  or  other  of  the 
former  reigns,  and  in  that  of  Mary  had  again  sworn  obedi- 
ence to  him  as  the  head  of  the  universal  church ;  but  coercion 
or  shame  inter})osed  now.  One  of  their  own  friends  gives 
the  following  as  the  result: — "Fourteen  bishops,  besides 
three  bishops  elect,  the  al^bot  of  Westminster,  four  priors, 
twelve  deacons,  fourteen  archdeacons,  sixty  canons,  not  so 
few  as  100  priests  of  good  preferment,  fifteen  heads  of  col- 
leges, and  about  twenty  proctors."  J  More  than  10,000 
parishes  existed  at  this  time  in  the  kingdom,  so  tliat  only 
about  243  out  of  the  great  body  of  the  spiritual  men  refused 
to  submit  to  the  change.  The  vacancies  were  filled  up, 
chiefly  from  the  men  who  had  been  in  exile  for  the  truth's 
sake  during  the  reign  of  Mary. 

The  principle  which  influenced  Elizabeth  in  remodelling 
the  English  Church,  v/as  to  give  as  little  annoyance  to  her 
Romish  subjects  as  possible.  §     Opposed  on  many  grounds 


*  Camden's  Elizabeth,  pp.  30-1. 

f  lu  Elizabeth's  Prayer  Book  the  following-  occurs  on  baptism  : — -"Then 
the  priest  shall  take  the  child  in  his  hands,  and  ask  the  name ;  and  naming 
the  child,  shall  dip  it  in  the  water,  so  it  be  discreetly  and  warily  done,"  &c. 
— Liturgical  Service  of  Elizabeth,  p.  203  (Parker  ►Society). 

J  "  In  one  of  the  volumes  of  the  Cotton  Library  (which  volume  seemeth 
once  to  have  belonged  to  Camden),  the  wliole  number  of  the  deprived 
ecclesiastics  is  digested  in  this  catalogue :  bishops,  14 ;  deans,  13 ;  arch- 
deacons, 14;  heads  of  colleges,  15;  prebendaries,  50;  rectors  of  churches, 
8P;  abbots,  priors,  &c.,  6; — in  all,  192." — Strype's  Ann.,  vol,  i.,  p.  108. 

§  "Though  connected,  by  her  position,  with  the  doctrines  of  the 
Reformation,  Elizabeth  had,  in  common  Avith  the  Catholic  clergy,  a 
strong  taste  for  pomp  and  authority.  Her  first  regiilations  in  regard  ta 
religious  matters  were  consequently  of  such  a  character  that  most  of  the 
Catholics  felt  no  repugnance  to  attend  the  divine  worsliip  with  which  th© 


ELIZABETH.  1 35 

as  she  was,  politically  as  well  as  religiously,  to  the  Papal 
authority,  she  yet  loved  the  magnificence  of  the  Romish 
Church.  It  accorded  with  her  taste  and  gratified  her  love 
of  display.  Many  of  the  gorgeous  accessories  to  this  wor- 
ship w^ere  left  untouched  by  her.  "  It  was  with  gi*eat 
difS.culty,  and  not  without  a  protestation  from  the  bishops, 
that  her  majesty  consented  to  have  so  many  monuments  of 
idolatry  removed  out  of  churches  :  but  she  would  not  part  with 
her  altar  or  crucifix  out  of  her  own  chapel.  The  gentlemen 
and  children  appeared  there  in  their  surplices,  and  the  priests 
in  their  copes ;  the  altar  was  furnished  with  rich  plate,  with 
two  gilt  candlesticks,  with  lighted  candles,  and  a  massive 
crucifix  in  the  midst;  the  service  was  sung,  not  only  with 
the  sound  of  organ,  but  with  the  artificial  music  of  cornets, 
sackbuts,  &c.,  on  solemn  festivals.  The  ceremonies  observed 
by  the  Knights  of  the  Garter,  in  their  adoration  towards  the 
altar,  which  had  been  abolished  by  King  Edward,  and 
renewed  by  Queen  Mary,  had  been  retained.  In  short,  the 
service  of  the  queen's  chapel,  and  in  sundry  cathedrals,  was 
so  splendid  and  showy,  that  foreigners  could  not  distinguish 
it  from  Roman,  except  that  it  was  performed  in  the  English 
tongue.  By  this  method  most  of  the  Popish  laity  were 
deceived  into  conformity,  and  came  regularly  to  church  for 
nine  or  ten  years,  till  the  Pope,  being  out  of  all  hopes  of  an 
accommodation,  forbade  them,  by  excommunicating  the  queen 
and  laying  the  kingdom  under  an  interdict."*  Her  majesty 
must  always  approach  God  as  a  queen,  and  not  as  a  poor 

Reformers  were  satisfied ;  and  the  establisliment  of  the  Anglican  Church, 
which  was  entrusted  to  the  hands  of  the  existing  clergy,  met  with  very 
little  resistance,  and  at  the  same  time  veiy  little  encouragement,  from  the 
general  body  of  ecclesiastics.  Religion  continued  to  be  regarded  by  a 
great  many  persons  as  a  mere  political  matter." — Guizot's  Life,  &c.,  of 
Shakspeare,  pp.  14,  1.5. 

*  Neal,  vol.  i.,  p.  95:  "The  doctrine  is  eveiywhere  most  pure;  but 
as  to  ceremonies  and  maskings,  there  is  a  little  too  much  foolery.  Th^t 
silver  cross  of  ill-omened  origin  still  maintains  its  place  in  the  queen's 
chapel.     Wretched  me  !    This  thing  will  be  drawn  into  a  precedent." 


136  .  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

sinner.  With  the  same  end,  as  indicated  above,  she  would 
have  the  clause  in  the  Litany,  to  be  delivered  from  the 
Bishop)  of  Rome,  and  all  his  detestable  enormities,  expunged.* 
We  will  only  add,  that  she  completed  her  work  of  reform- 
ing, for  the  present,  by  a  legislative  enactment  which 
entailed  an  amount  of  misery  on  thousands  of  the  holiest, 
noblest,  and  most  loyal  of  her  subjects,  which  is  almost 
without  a  parallel;  and  presented  the  hierarchy  in  a  light 
which,  the  more  the  truth  and  power  of  Christ  are  spread, 
will  expose  it  to  the  scorn  and  condemnation  of  the  wise 
and  good,  as  a  spiritual  tyranny  which  no  well  regulated 
commonwealth  should  ever  tolerate.  The  Act  of  Uniformity 
was  passed  in  1559,  June  24th.  It  aimed  at  a  hopeless  task. 
It  insisted  on  all  minds  conforming  to  her  majesty's  religious 
notions,  and  conforming  to  her  splendid  pageantry  in  Chris- 
tian worship,  on  pain  of  her  imperial  displeasure ;  and,  worse 
still,  though  that  was  bad  enough,  of  that  of  a  higher  and 
holier  authority.  No  language  is  too  strong  in  denouncing 
the  folly, — yea,  the  madness,  the  very  aggravated  wicked- 
ness,— of  these  attempts.  They  involve  an  invasion  of  the 
rights  of  our  moral  nature;  a  daring  rebellion  against  the 
authority  of  the  Son  of  God. 

From  another  source  we  gather  that  "there  is  yet  a 
general  prohibition  of  preaching;  and  still  a  crucifix  on  the 
altar  at  court,  with  lights  burning  before  it.  Though  by  the 
queen's  order,  images  are  removed  out  of  the  churches  all 
over  the  kingdom ;  yet  the  people  rejoice  to  see  that  this  is 

Jewel  (Zurich  Letters),  p.  55.  "And  yet  is  sche  tliat  now  reigneth  over 
thame,  neither  gude  Protestant  nor  yet  resolute  Papist,  let  the  world 
judge  Quhilk  is  the  third." — J.  Knox.     Macrie,  p.  255. 

*  In  the  Litany  of  Henry  VIII. ,  and  after  in  those  of  Edward,  this 
prayer  was  inserted :  '^'' From  the  tyranny  and  all  the  detestable  enormities 
of  the  Bishop  of  Rome."  Elizabeth  would  have  it  expunged.  The  sacra- 
mental bread  was  made  round,  like  the  wafer  of  the  Romanist.  A  table 
was  also  placed  where  the  altar  formerly  stood,  and  many  of  the  old 
festivals  retained  in  the  church,  &c.  Vide  "Ward's  Reformation,  canto  ii., 
pp.  283-4.     Note  Heylin,  p.  208.     Soame,  vol,  iii.  &c. 


ELIZABETH.  137 

still  kept  in  the  queen's  chapel.  Three  bishops  officiate  at 
the  altar;  one  as  priest,  another  as  deacon,  and  a  third  as 
sub-deacon,  all  in  rich  copes  before  the  idol  ;  and  there  is 
sacrament  without  sermon.  Injunctions  are  sent  to  preachers 
not  to  use  freedom  in  reproving  vice."* 

It  is  not  compatible  with  the  design  of  these  pages  even 
to  glance  at  some  of  those  events  which  agitated  Elizabeth's 
government,  but  which  invest  her  reign  with  all  its  material 
brilliancy.  We  cannot  now  dwell  on  the  conspiracy  of  the 
Pope  and  the  Catholic  States  of  Europe  to  assassinate  Eliza- 
beth, and  uproot  the  Protestant  fixith;t  on  the  Northern 
rebellion,  for  the  restoration  of  the  Papal  power; J  or  on  the 
armada  of  the  sombre-minded  Philip,  and  its  providential 
defeat;  whilst  the  bitter  hostility  of  the  bishops  to  holy, 
conscientious  men,  will  claim  attention  hereafter :  but  on 
another  topic  we  must  touch,  as  bearing  powerfully  on  early 
Baptist  history. 

The  Act  of  Uniformity  brought  into  full  play  some  of  those 


*  Buruet,  iii.,  p.  292.  Congregational  Magazine,  1840,  p.  89.  "After 
I  had  written  this,  lo  !  good  news  was  brought  me,  namely,  that  the 
crucifix  and  candlesticks  in  the  queen's  chapel  are  broken  in  pieces,  and, 
as  some  one  has  brought  word,  reduced  to  ashes." — Parkhurst,  Bishop  of 
Norwich.  Zurich  Letters,  p.  122,  Aug.,  1562.  "I  wrote  you  word  that 
the  Christmas  candles  and  candlesticks  had  been  removed  from  the 
queen's  chapel ;  but  they  were  shortly  after  brought  back  again,  to  the 
great  grief  of  the  godly." — Ibid,  April  26th,  1563. 

t  The  reader  will  find  ample  details  of  this  in  Tui-ner,  vol.  iv. 

X  That  this  was  purely  a  religious  rebellion  admits  of  no  doubt.  The 
Bowes  MS.  supplies  a  large  amount  of  information.  We  give  an  exti-act : 
"The  mass  of  the  people  were  in  favour  of  the  old  superstition.  There 
was  no  part  of  the  British  empire  where  the  first  pale  and  struggling  ray 
of  the  Reformation  broke  with  more  vermilion  lustre."  "All  the  gentle- 
men, save  a  few  in  the  East-Biding  of  York,  remained  neuter  in  the  con- 
test; but  either  their  sons  and  heirs,  or  second  sons,  are  ^xit\\  the  i-ebels." 
"Bibles  and  Prayer  Books  were  everywhere  bm^nt,  and  altars  and  the 
mass  everywhere  restored."  "  With  tears  and  entreaties  the  Coimtess  of 
Westmoreland  induced  her  reluctant  husband  to  enter  on  the  wai\" — 
Memorials  of  the  Rebellion  of  1.596,  from  the  Bowes  MS.,  pp.  10,  41, 
76,  2.52,  261.     London,  Mchols  and  Son,  1840. 


138  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

great  and  everliving  principles,  the  existence  of  wliicli  we 
have  already  indicated;  which,  whilst  they  have  checked  the 
pride  and  persecuting  power  of  the  hierarchy,  have  kept  the 
holy  fire  burning  on  the  church's  altars,  and  contributed 
beyond  anything  else  to  the  moral  and  social  greatness  of  the 
nation.  The  great  Puritan  controversy  forms  one  of  those 
grand  national  euochs,  the  results  of  which  are  endless.  It 
stands  before  ns  in  all  its  commanding  majesty,  curbing 
tyranny  in  the  State  and  the  Church,  and  opening  a  thousand 
channels  through  which  the  most  benignant  influences  can 
flow  to  elevate  the  commonwealth.  Its  ability  to  benefit  is 
not  impaired.  Over  a  wider  and  still  wider  circle  it  is  mul- 
tiplying its  triumplis.  Every  year  presents  us  with  fresh 
proofs  of  its  vitalizing  energy  in  this  and  in  other  lands. 
To  overlook  this  would  be  a  sin  against  the  truth,  and  an 
injury  to  our  readers. 

For  more  than  thirty  years  the  battle  about  coi)es,  sur- 
plices, &:c.,  raged.  It  had  mainly  to  do  with  "the  cere- 
monial of  religion,  not  with  the  purity  of  its  doctrine,  but 
with  its  external  fabric."  Priestly  vestments,  the  cross  in 
baptism,  the  use  of  the  ring  in  marriage,  baptism  by  women, 
kneeling  or  sitting  at  the  Supper,  the  use  of  organ  music  in 
divine  services,  plui-alities,  and  the  wealth  and  display  of  the 
bishops,* — these  were  the  great  subjects  of  controversy. 
Upon  religious  dogmas,  the  nature  of  the  sacraments,  and 


*  In  an  age  of  state  and  j^ageantiy,  Archbisliop  Parker  exhibited  a 
model  of  almost  regal  magnificence.  Wliitgift,  shortly  afterwards  raised 
to  the  primacy  on  the  death  of  Grindal,  surpassed  even  Parker  in  stateli- 
ness.  It  is  recorded  of  him  by  one  of  his  biographers,  that  he  travelled 
with  a  retinue  of  a  hundred  servants,  including  forty  gentlemen  with 
chains  of  gold.  And  that  nothing  might  be  wanting,  he  kept  a  good 
armoury  for  the  exercise  of  military  discipline,  and  a  fair  stable  of  horses, 
insomuch  that  he  was  able  at  all  times  to  equip  both  horse  and  foot, 
and  frequently  mustered  a  hundred  of  the  former  and  fifty  of  the  latter, 
his  own  servants  trained  and  mounted.  No  wonder  that  prelacy,  with  its 
pomp  and  pride,  was  the  favourite  mark  of  the  keen  shafts  of  the  Puri- 
tans.— Marsden,  p.  83.  Certainly  the  church  was  very  militant  at  this 
time,  and  its  cliiefs  needed  this  protection. 


ELIZABETH.  139 

the  constitution  of  the  cliurcli,  opinion;,  were  nnifoini.*  Into 
the  grounds  of  these  objections  we  enter  not.  The  Puritans 
regard  these  things  "  as  masks  of  the  heart,"  "  rags  of  Anti- 
christ," "  the  gear  of  the  apostate  church."  lu  similar  robes 
"the  massing  priests"  performed  their  idolatrous  services. 
They  were  Jewish  in  their  origin,  and  marred  the  .sim])licity 
of  Christian  worship.  "  If  we  are  bound,"  said  one,  ''  to 
wear  Popish  aj^parel  when  commanded,  we  may  be  obliged  to 
have  shaven  crowns,  and  to  use  oil  and  cream  and  spittle, 
with  all  the  rest  of  the  Papistical  additions  to  the  ordinances 
of  Christ."  Again  and  again  their  removal  was  imj>lored. 
Against  their  imposition  the  plea  of  conscience  was  heard. 
The  queen,  the  prelates,  the  senate,  the  lord  treasurer,  were 
memorialized,  but  in  vain.  The  loyalty  of  the  Puritans  was 
unimpeached ;  their  attachment  to  the  church,  as  constituted, 
strong.  But  the  episcopate  was  immovable.  Parker,  once 
an  exile,  then  meek  and  gentle,  after  a  doubtful  consecration 
now  reigned  at  Lambeth.  Plis  government,  sustained  by 
Aylmer,  another  exile,  but  now  renegade  to  his  former 
principles,  was  exceedingly  severe.  Elizabeth,  sustained  and 
incited  by  her  spiritual  advisers,  was  inexorable.  Her 
imperious  Tudor  temper  could  brook  no  opposition.  She 
was  jealous  of  her  spiritual,  as  of  her  temporal  power.t 
Burnet  says  :  "  Men  opposed  to  the  improvements  suggested 
by  the  leading  Puritans,  demonstrated  to  her  that  these  new 
models  would  certainly  bring  with  them  a  great  abatement 
of  her  prerogative;  since  if  the  concern  of  religion  came 
into  popular  hands,  there  would  be  a  power  set  up  distinct 
from  hers,  over  which  she  could  have  no  authority.  This 
she  perceived  well,  and  therefore  resolved  to  maintain  the 
ancient  government  in  the  church ;  but  by  this  means  it 
became  a  matter  of  interest,  and  so  those  differences  which 


^'  Marsden,  c.  viii. 
-f  "She  was  so  proud  of  her  ecclesiastical  power  that  she  coiidemued 
the  Commons  for  ordering  a  public  fast  without  her  authority." — Lord 
Campbell's  Chief  Justices,  vol.  i.,  p.  186. 


140  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

might  have  been  more  easily  reconciled  before  grew  more 
into  formal  factions."*  Or,  as  one  of  the  most  illustrious 
of  living  writers  records  :  "To  allow  churches  with  contrary- 
rules  and  ceremonies  (said  Elizabeth),  were  nothing  else 
but  to  sow  discord  out  of  religion  ;  to  distract  good  men's 
minds,  to  cherish  factious  men's  humours,  to  disturb  religion 
and  commonwealth,  and  mingle  divine  and  human  things, 
which  were  a  thing  indeed  evil  ;  to  our  own  subjects  hurtful, 
and  to  themselves  to  whom  it  is  granted  neither  greatly 
commodious,  nor  yet  at  all  safe."t 

Jewel,  one  of  the  best,  as  certainly  he  was  one  of  the 
ablest  of  the  brotherhood,  thus  complains  to  his  Swiss 
correspondent :  "  The  bishops  are  a  great  hindrance  to  us  ; 
for  being,  as  you  know,  among  the  nobility  and  leading  men 
in  the  Upper  House,  and  having  none  there  on  our  side  to 
expose  their  artifices  or  confute  their  falsehoods,  they  reign 
as  sole  monarchs  in  the  midst  of  ignorant  and  weak  men, 
and  easily  overreach  our  little  party.  The  queen,  mean- 
while, though  she  openly  favours  our  cause,  yet  is  wonder- 
fully afraid  of  allowing  any  innovations;  this  is  owing, 
partly,  to  her  own  friends,  by  whose  advice  everything  is 
carried  on,"  (feet 

Upon  two  results  arising  from  this  unholy  and  impolitic 
conduct  of  Elizabeth  and  her  bishops,  we  would  detain  the 
reader's  attention  for  a  moment.  The  injury  it  inflicted  on 
the  State  Church  was  irreparable.  Sooner  or  later  this 
result  always  follows.  Facts  place  this  beyond  all  doubt. 
We  select  two  classes.  The  first  we  gather  from  the  confi- 
dential utterances  of  private  friendshijxs.  Most  of  the 
exiles  who  had  been  elevated  to  dignified  positions  in  the 


*  Burnet,  vol.  ii.,  preface.  "The  queen  valued  her  ecclesiastical 
supremacy  more  than  any  part  of  her  prerogative.  Next  to  the  succession 
to  the  crown,  it  was  the  point  she  could  least  endure  to  be  toiiched." — • 
Hallam's  Con.  History,  vol.  i.,  p.  2.53. 

t  Motley's  Dutch  Republic,  vol.  i. ,  p.  26. 
X  Jewel.     Zurich  Letters,  p.  10. 


ELIZABETH.  141 

church,  kept  up  an  intimate  corresi^ondence  with  Bullinger, 
Ganlter,  and  others. 

Bisho])  Cox,  whoso  spirit  was  chafed  by  the  Puritan  con- 
troversy, says  in  a  letter  to  R.  Gaulter,  in  no  very  respectful 
tone,  that  "  many  obstinately  refuse  to  enter  our  churches, 
either  to  baptize  their  children,  or  to  partake  of  the  Lord's 
Supper,  or  to  hear  sermons.  They  are  entirely  sepai-ated 
both  from  us  and  from  those  good  brethren  of  ours :  they 
seek  bye-paths ;  they  establish  a  private  religion,  and  assem- 
ble in  private  houses,  and  there  perform  their  sacred  rites, 
as  the  Doiiatists  of  old,  and  the  Anabaptists  now,"  &c.* 
''Many  of  the  parishes,"  writes  Lever,  "have  no  clergymen, 
and  some  dioceses  are  without  a  bishop.  And  out  of  the 
very  small  number  who  administer  the  sacrament  throughout 
this  great  country,  there  is  hardly  one  in  a  hundred  who  is 
both  able  and  willing  to  preach  the  Word  of  God,  but  all 
persons  are  obliged  to  read  what  is  prescribed  in  books,  "t 

From  another  source  we  gather  fresh  proofs.  Bishop 
Sandys,  writing  of  his  metropolitan  city,  says,  "The  city 
(London)  will  never  be  quiet  till  these  authors  of  sedition, 
who  are  now  esteemed  as  gods,  as  Field,  Wilcox,  Cartwright, 
and  others,  be  far  removed  from  the  city.  The  people  resort 
unto  them,  as  in  Popery  they  were  wont  to  run  on  pilgrim- 
age. If  these  idols,  who  are  honoured  as  saints,  and  greatly 
enriched  with  gifts,  were  removed  from  hence,  their  honour 
would  fall  into  the  dust ;  they  would  be  taken  for  blocks,  as 
they  be.  There  be  some  aldermen  and  some  wealthy  citizens 
v/]io  give  them  great  and  stout  countenance,  and  persuade 


*  Zuiicli  Lettei-s,  p.  237. 
t  Lever  to  Bullinger.  Zurich  Letters  (Parker  Society).  Letter  Lxxxv. 
"Let  it  be  remembered  that  there  existed  few  books  of  divinity  in 
English ;  that  all  books  were,  comparatively  to  the  value  of  money,  far 
dearer  than  at  present;  that  the  majoiity  of  the  clergj-  were  nearly 
illiterate,  and  many  of  them  addicted  to  drunkenness  and  low  Adces; 
above  all,  that  they  had  no  means  of  supplying  their  deficiencies  by 
preaching  the  discourses  of  others." — HaUam's  Con.  History,  vol.  iL, 
p.  200,  note. 


142  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

what  they  can,  that  others  may  do  tlie  like.     A  sharp  letter 
from  her  majesty  would  cut  the  courage  of  these  men."* 

"  Our  (bishops')  estimation  is  weak;  our  authority  is  less; 
so  tiiat  we  are  become  contemptible  in  the  eyes  of  the  baser 
sort  of  the  people.  How  or  by  what  means,  or  who  is  in  the 
fault,  I  will  not  dispute,  but  leave  to  the  Setircher  of  all 
hearts  to  judge. "t 

The  influence  on  the  people  was  deplorable.  We  take  one 
illustration  from  opposite  parts  of  the  empire.  In  a  petition 
to  parliament  from  Cornw^all,  the  inhabitants  say  :  "  We 
have  about  160  churches,  the  greatest  part  of  which  are 
supplied  by  men  who  are  guilty  of  the  grossest  sins;  some 
fornicators,  some  adulterers,  some  felons,  bearing  the  marks 
in  their  hands  for  the  said  offence;  some  drunkards,  game- 
sters on  the  Sabbath  day,"  &c.  "There  were  140,  scarcely 
any  of  whom  could  preach  a  sermon,  and  most  of  whom 
were  pluralists  and  non-residents.":|: 

,  Ministerial  destitution  in  Suflblk  in  1567  is  thus  de- 
scribed in  a  letter  to  the  primate,  asking  for  the  restoration 
of  Mr.  Lawrance  to  his  ministry.  The  petitioners  say  "there 
is  not  one  preacher  within  a  circuit  of  twenty  miles,  in 
which  circuit  he  was  wont  to  preach."§  "It  appears  from  an 
impartial  survey  of  all  the  counties  in  England,  that  there 
were  only  2,000  preachers  to  serve  nearly  10,000  parishes, 
only  416  ministers  in  the  county  of  Norfolk,  and  457  in  the 
Lincoln,  who  could  not  preach,"  &c.|l      Yet  Aylmer  and  his 


*  Letter  to  Burghley,  Congregational  Magazine,  1840.  p.  222. 

t  Hid,  p.  225.  Other  instances  from  Parker  occui-  on  p.  1.55.  "I  am 
hated  hke  a  dog,  and  even  called  the  oppressor  of  the  children  of  God." 
—Ibid,  p.  370. 

X  Brooke's  Puiitans,  vol.  i.,  Introduction,  p.  41. 
§  Ibid,  vol.  i.  p.  237. 

H  Ibid,  vol.  i.j  p.  49.  Neal,  and  even  Marsdeu,  supply  the  most  painful 
fact*  on  these  points.  The  latter  says,  "Many  there  are  that  hear  not  a 
sermon  in  seven  years ;  I  might  say  in  seventeen."  Only  two  preachei-s 
were  found  in  the  whole  diocese  of  Bangor.    In  Cornwall,  Neal  tells  us, 


ELIZABETH.  143 

brethren  persecuted  godly  and  well-{|ualitied  ministers,  and 
ejected  them  from  their  livings,  because  they  could  not  wear 
a  certain  garment,  &c.,  in  their  ministry. 

Only  one  other  instance.  The  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council, 
in  a  letter  of  rebuke  to  Whitgift  and  Aylmer,  say,  "That 
they  had  lately  received  information  that  great  numbers  of 
zealous  and  learned  preachers  were  suspended  from  their 
cures :  that  there  was  no  preaching,  prayer,  nor  sacraments 
in  vacant  places;  that  in  some  cases,  the  persons  ajjpointed 
to  succeed  them  had  neither  good  learning  nor  good  name, 
but  were  drunkards  and  of  filthy  life;*  and  that,  in  other 
places,  a  great  number  of  persons  occupying  cures  were 
notoriously  unfit;  some  for  lack  of  learning,  and  others 
charged  with  enormous  crimes;  as  drunkenness,  filtlfiness  of 
life,  gaming  at  cards,  and  haunting  of  alehouses,  against 
whom  they  heard  of  no  proceedings,"  &c.t 

That  the  moral  state  of  the  people  was  low,  admits  of  no 
doubt.  Hitherto  the  glorious  Reformation  had  shed  but 
little  light  on  them.  We  catch  a  glimpse  of  their  state  in 
some  injunctions  issued  by  Grindal  in  1570.  •  We  select  the 
following  from  them: — "That  no  pedlar  shall  be  admitted 
to  sell  his  wares  in  the  church  porch  in  divine  service;  that 
parish  clerks  shall  be  able  to  read  ;  that  no  lord  of  misrule, 
or  summer  lords  and  ladies,  or  any  disguised  persons,  or 
morris-dancers,  or  others,  shall  come  irreverently  into  the 
ohurch,  or  play  any  unseemly  parts  with  scoffs,  jests,  wanton 
gestures,  or  ribald  talk,  in  the  time  of  divine  ser^dce.";}! 

The  other  great  results  touched  the  interests  of  the  non- 
there  was  not  a  single  preaclier  capable  of  preaching  a  sermon.  Oxford 
had  three,  but  they  were  all  chief  men  amongst  tlie  Pui'itans. — Vide 
Marsden,  pp.  100-1. 

*  "In  the  diocese  of  Bangor  it  was  usual  for  the  clei-gy,  some  years 
after  Elizabeth's  accession,  to  pay  the  bishop  for  a  license  to  keep  a  con- 
cubine."— Hallam,  vol.  i.,  p.  17G. 

1"  Stiype's  Whitgift,  pp.  1G5-G.  Congi-egatioual  Magazine,  1840,  p.  525. 
Vide  Letter  from  KnoUys  to  Burghley. — Ibid,  pp.  734-5. 

t  Biog.  Britt.,  vol.  vii.,  Sup.,  p.  73.     Brooke,  vol.  i,,  p.  256. 


144  EARLY  'ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

conforming  body.  Multitudes  were  forbidden  to  preach,  and 
were  exposed  to  suffering  in  every  form.  The  great  martjr- 
ologist  passed  his  old  age  in  povert}''  and  shame.  He  complains 
even  of  want  of  clothes.  His  words  to  Dr.  Humphreys  are 
touching:  ''  I  still  wear  the  same  clothes,  and  remain  in  the 
same  sordid  condition,  that  England  received  me  in  when.  I 
first  came  home  from  Germany  ;  nor  do  I  change  my  degree 
or  order,  which  is  that  of  the  mendicant;  or,  if  you  will,  of 
the  friar  preacher."*  Coverdale,  the  venerable  translator  of 
the  Bible,  and  formerly  Bishop  of  Exeter,  v>''as  brought  with 
sorrow  to  the  grave.  Sampson,  Lever,  and  others,  the  equals 
of  Parker  in  mental  power  and  scholarly  attainments,  in  all 
the  elements  of  moral  greatness  his  superiors,  suffered  greatly. 
Littleness  was  enthroned  in  high  places,  and  wielding  a 
power,  the  accident  of  its  i)osition,  sought  to  make  the  great 
and  the  noble  conform  to  its  tyrannical  will.  A  dark  and 
painful  history  is  that  of  the  treatment  of  these  holy  men. 

The  intercourse  of  the  exiles  with  the  Swiss  and  German 
reformei's  has  been  indicated  before.  We  have,  in  part, 
noticed  its  influence,  but  its  full  power  only  now  began  to 
unfold  itself  From  the  externals  in  Christian  worship  the 
Puritans  now  aimed  at  a  more  radical  change,  and  sought  a 
more  distinctive  alteration  in  the  constitution  of  the  national 
church.  The  pomp  of  the  bishops,  their  cruelty  in  persecu- 
tions, the  hatred  of  the  people,  the  teaching  and  influence 
of  Knox  and  his  brethren  in  Scotland,  forced  the  question 
on  public  attention :  Are  bisho])s  necessary  to  the  church  of 
Christ  'i  Lender  various  forms  it  presented  itself  :  Are  not 
all  Christian  ministers  on  an  equality  1  Does  not  the  New 
Testament  warrant  this  l  Is  not  all  the  evidence  which 
the  primitive  church  supplies,  in  its  fivour?  Is  not  the 
practice  of  all  other  Protestant  churches  in  favour  of  this  ] 
Or,  if  there  be  anything  exceptional  to  this,  is  it  anything 
more    than    that    which    accident    or    moral    worth    would 


Neal,  vol.  ii,,  chap.  iv. 


ELIZABETH.  145 

supply?  Cranmer,  and  many  of  the  early  reformers  in 
Edward's  time,  fully  agreed  with  the  Swiss  pastors  as  to  the 
constitution  of  the  church. 

The  elements  of  Presbyterianism  were  wrapt  in  these 
guises.  Their  advocacy  followed.  Cartwright,  the  most 
able  and  sturdy  champion,  early  demanded  "that  bishops, 
priests,  and  deacons  ought  to  be  reduced  to  the  apostolical 
institutions  (meaning  that  bishops,  as  a  third  order  in  the 
church,  should  be  abolished),  and  that  presbyters  only  should 
remain  to  preach  the  Word  of  God  and  pray :  and  deacons 
be  employed  in  taking  care  of  the  poor.  That  every  church 
ought  to  be  governed  by  its  ministers  and  presbyters ; 
that  no  man  ought  to  solicit,  or  be  a  candidate  for,  the  min- 
istry;  and  that  ministers  ought  to  be  oj^enly  and  fairly  chosen 
by  the  people."*  The  alterations  involved  here  were  vital. 
Cartwright  would  overthrow  Prelacy,  and  fix  instead  of  it 
the  Presbyterian  power.f  Around  these  grave  questions  the 
champions  exhausted  their  great  powers.  Long  and  angry 
was  the  contest  between  Whitgift  on  the  one  side,  and 
Cartwright  on  the  other.  The  discussion  was  exhaustive. 
Old  Thomas  Fuller  remarks  "that  if  Cartwright  had  the 
better  of  his  adversary  in  learning,  Whitgift  had  more 
power  to  back  his  argument ;  and  by  this  he  not  only  kept 
the  field,  but  gained  the  AT^ctory."  Just  so;  no  one  can 
study  the  controversy  impartially  without  rising  up  with 
the  conviction  that  truth  was  on  the  one  side  and  the  civil 
power  on  the  other.  :|:     God's  Word  sustained  the  one,  the 

*  MarscleD,  pp.  76-7.  In  a  letter  from  Hooper  to  Bullinger,  he  says 
that  "the  archbishop  of  Canterbmy,  the  bishops  of  Rochester,  Ely,  St. 
David's,  Lincoln,  and  Bath,  were  sincerely  bent  on  advancing  the  purity 
of  doctrine,  agreeing  in  all  things  with  the  Helvetic  Church. "  Cranmer 
avowed  his  conviction  that  "bishops  and  presbyters  had  but  one  oflSce  in 
the  beginning  of  Christ's  religion."  He  proposed  to  establish  church 
courts  and  synods,  like  those  afterwards  introduced  by  Knox  into  Scot- 
land.— Vide  a  large  body  of  evidence  in  Chrichton's  edition  of  Knox. 

+  "In  1572  a  Presbyterian  church  was  formed,  and  a  meeting-house 
erected  at  "Wandsworth,  in  January." — Marsden,  p.  61. 

+  "The  queen  was  for  laying  hold  of  all  opportunities  to  suppress  a 

L 


146  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

imperious  will  of  fclie  monarch,  was  the  shield  of  protection 
for  the  other.*  Cartwright,  Field,  and  Wilcox,  though  they 
had  not  the  clear  conceptions  of  the  true  constitution  of 
Christ's  church  which  the  despised  Anabaptists  held,  yet 
were  noble  explorers  in  the  field  of  truth,  and  have  laid 
posterity  under  a  vast  debt  of  obligation.  Much  as  we 
admire  these  spiritual  heroes,  it  has  its  limits  ;  and  we  can- 
not dismiss  them  without  a  word  more  on  the  matters  for 
which  they  contended.  Neal  says,  "  Both  parties  agreed  too 
well  in  asserting  the  necessity  of  uniformity  of  public  wor- 
ship, and  of  calling  in  the  sword  of  the  magistrate  for  the 
support  and  defence  of  the  several  principles,  which  they 
made  an  ill  use  of  in  their  turns,  as  they  could  grasp  the 
power  into  their  hands.  The  standard  of  uniformity,  accord- 
ing to  the  bishojps,  was  the  queen's  supremacy  and  the 
law  of  the  land ;  according  to  the  Puritans,  the  decrees  of 
provincial  and  national  synods,  allowed  and  enforced  by  the 
civil  magistrate  ;  but  neither  party  were  for  admitting  that 
liberty  of  conscience  and  freedom  of  j)rofession  which  is 
every  man's  right,  as  far  as  is  consistent  with  the  j)eace  of 
the  government  he  lives  under."  t 

But  other  men  appeared  with  clearer  views  and  wider 
aims.  The  question  naturally  arose,  Can  the  tree  be  good, 
the  fruit  of  which  was  so  essentially  bitter  and  destructive  I 

number  of  conscientious  men,  whom,  she  would  often  say,  she  hated  more 
than  the  Papists." — Neal,  vol.  i.,  ch.  v. 

"A  sharpe  letter  from  her  magesty,"  said  his  lordship  of  London, 
"  would  cut  the  courage  of  these  men.  Good  my  lord,  for  the  love  you 
bear  to  the  church  of  Christ,  resist  the  tumultuous  enterprises  of  these 
new-fangled  fellows." — Ihid,  vol.  i.,  ch.  v. 

*  Sandys,  another  exile  in  Maiy's  time,  says,  "The  matter  is  merely 
temporal,  fittest  for  temporal  men  to  deal  with.  It  is  not  convenient  that 
men  of  my  calling  deal  with  matters  of  conscience,  and  to  send  men  to 
the  Tower  and  torture.  As  your  lordship  well  remembered,  in  yovir  last 
letter  to  me,  we  should  rather  be  feeders  than  punishers." — Letter  to 
Burghley,  Congregational  Magazine,  1840,  p.  225.  Quite  right,  though, 
for  a  successor  of  the  apostles  to  excite  others  to  send  men  to  the  Tower 
and  torture  !        +  Neal's  Ehzabeth,  vol,  i, ,  p.  147.    Apud  Hallam. 


ELIZABETH.  147 

The  Baptists  had  always  been  Separatists.  Their  views  of 
the  mitiire  of  Christ's  church  were  now  embraced  by  others. 
Robert  Brown  enunciated  the  principles  of  Congregationalism 
from  the  pulpit  and  the  press.  Brown  was  a  minister  of  the 
State  Church,  and  a  relative  of  Cecil.  For  some  years  he 
laboured  to  diffuse  his  newly-discovered  principles  ; — they 
spread,  disciples  increased;  but  after  long  and  severe  suffer- 
ing, he  died  in  comparative  obscurity,  a  minister  of  the 
church  ujDon  which  he  had  flung  every  malediction,  and 
whose  very  foundation  he  had  laboured  to  upturn.  The 
Church  of  England  and  her  ministers  he  held  to  be  unchris- 
tian ;  its  discipline  was  Popish,  and  its  ordinances  and  sacra- 
ments invalid.  Separation  was  to  be  entire.  Truth  cannot 
perish.  These  great  principles  are  more  j)otent,  after  the 
test  of  centuries,  than  ever.  Barrow,  Greenwood,  and 
others,  men  of  the  loftiest  principles  and  of  heroic  spirit, 
embraced  and  preached  them.  Their  homage  to  these 
verities  was  entire;  their  love  to  them  quenchless;  whilst 
a  life  of  suffering  and  the  martyr's  death,  proclaimed  the  in- 
tenseness  of  Episcopal  hate  and  dread  of  freedom  of  thought 
and  the  rights  of  conscience.  But  their  history  is  not  within 
the  design  of  this  work.*  It  is  quite  time  the  attention  of 
the  reader  was  fixed  on  other  men  and  their  doings. 

Not  only  the  existence,  but  the  wide  spread  of  Baptist 
principles,  during  the  reign  of  the  "  royal  Tudor  lioness,"  is 
acknowledged  on  all  hands.  One  of  the  latest,  and  we  are 
bound  to  say,  one  of  the  calmest  and  most  candid  writers 
on  the  Puritanic  history,  says:  "But  the  Anabaj^tists  were 
the  most  numerous,  and  for  some  time  by  far  the  most 
formidable,  opponents  of  the  church.  They  are  said  to 
have  existed  in  England  since  the  early  days  of  the  Lollards, 
but  their  chief  strength  was  more  abroad,"  &c.t  "You 
must  not  be  grieved,  my  Gaulter,"  wi-ote  Bishop  Cox,  "  that 
sectaries   are   showing   themselves   to  be  mischievous  and 

*  Tlie  reader  is  referred  to  ISTeal,  Brooke,  and  Fletcher's  histories. 
+  Marsden,  p.  144. 


148  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

wicked  interpreters  of  your  most  just  opinion.  For  it  can- 
not be  otherwise  but  that  tares  must  grow  in  the  Lord's 
field,  and  that  in  no  small  quantity.  Of  this  kind  are  the 
Anabaptists,  Donatists,  Arians,  Papists,  and  all  the  good- 
for-nothing  tribe  of  Sectaries."*  Approximation  to  some  of 
their  distinctive  princij)les  was  growing,  but  love  to  the  pro- 
fessors of  them  existed  not.  The  writer  already  quoted  truth- 
fully says :  "In  the  judgment  of  the  church  party,  and  of  not 
a  few  of  the  Puritans,  Anabaptists  were  heretics  of  the  worst 
kind,  and  those  who  denied  the  necessity  or  validity  of  infant 
baptism,  however  orthodox  on  other  points,  are  constantly 
classed  by  writers  of  that  period,  with  Donatists,  infidels, 
and  atheists,"  tfecf  This  is  true :  eminently  so  with  some  of 
the  bishops.  Aylmer's  malice  was  intense.  The  following 
more  than  justifies  the  opinion: — ''The  Anabaptists,  with 
infinite  other  swarms  of  Satanistes,  do  you  think  that  every 
pulpit  may  wyll  be  liable  to  aunswer  them  1  I  pray  God 
there  may  be  many  that  can. "J  "And  in  these  latter  dales, 
the  old  festered  sores  newly  broke  out,  as  the  Anabaptists, 
the  free-willers,  or  rather  the  forward-willers,  with  infinite 
other  swarms  of  God's  enemies.  These  'vgglie  monsters,' 
'brodes  of  the  devvil's  brotherhood.' "  § 

In  Dr.  Parker's  letter  declining  the  A.rchbishopric  of 
Canterbury,  the  following  occurs  :  "They  say  that  the  realm 
is  full  of  Anabaptists,  Arians,  libertines,  free-will  men,  &c., 
against  whom  I  only  thought  ministers  should  have  need  to 
fight  in  unity  of  doctrine."  jj 

Jewel,  in  his  correspondence  with  the  Swiss  divines, 
utters  the  same  complaint :  "  We  found,  at  the  beginning 
of  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  large  and  inauspicious  crops  of 
Arians,  Anabaptists,  and  other  pests,  which,  I   know  not 

^  Bishop  Cox  to  Gavilter,  1575.     Ziiricli  Letters,  285. 
-t*  Marsden,  p.  65.     "I  am  not  an  Anabaptist,  thank  God,"  said  Green- 
wood.— Brooke's  Puiitans,  vol.  ii.,  p.  36. 
J  Bishop  Aylmer's  Harborough  for  Faithful  Subjects.    Maitland,  p.  216. 
§  Ibid,  p.  205.         11  Bui-net's  Reformation,  vol.  ii.,  p.  359. 


ELIZABETH.  149 

how,  but  as  mushrooms  spring  up  in  the  night  and  in  dark- 
ness, so  these  sprung  up  in  that  darkness  and  unhappy- 
night  of  the  Marian  times.  These,  I  am  informed,  and  hope 
it  is  the  fact,  have  retreated  before  the  light  of  pure  doc- 
trines, like  owls  at  the  light  of  the  sun,  and  are  nowhere  to 
be  found."* 

Two  causes  may  account  for  the  number  of  our  brethren 
in  this  country  at  this  time.  Protection  had  been  given  to 
Dutch  and  French  refugees.  Churches  had  been  given  to 
them  in  which  divine  worship,  according  to  their  own  views, 
could  be  conducted.  The  state  of  the  Netherlands  supplies 
another  cause.  England  appeared  the  land  of  freedom  under 
the  rule  of  the  Protestant  queen,  and  the  liberty  granted  to 
others  many  hoped  to  find  here,  partial  liberty  of  conscience. 
These  hopes  were  only  temporary.  No  rest  could  be  found 
for  their  weary  spirits.  The  animus  of  the  government  soon 
manifested  itself,  t  Burghley,  Knolleys,  Leicester,  and  others, 
threw  the  shield  of  their  protection  around  the  Puritans  and 
Brownists,  and  frequently  employed  their  great  powers  in 
checking  the  fury  of  the  bishops,  delivering  their  victims 
from  their  iron  grasp.  But  whoever  found  mercy,  the  Bap- 
tists had  none.  As  we  have  seen,  detested  by  all,  obnoxious 
to  the  government,  and  hated  by  all  religionists,  they  were 
"hunted  like  a  partridge  on  the  mountains." 

In  the  fourth  year  of  her  reign  a  proclamation  was  issued 
by  the  queen,  commanding  "  the  Anabaptists  and  such  like 
heretics,  which  had  flocked  to  the  coast  towns  of  England, 
from  the  parts  beyond  the  seas,  under  colour  of  shunning 
persecution,  and  had  spread  the  poison  of  their  sects  in 
England,  to  depart  the  realm  within  twenty  days,  whether 
they  were  natural-born  people   of  the   land   or  foreigners, 

*  Zuricli  Letters,  92. 
+  Elizabeth  said,  "That  it  was  not  with  safety,  honour,  and  credit,  to 
permit  diversity  of  opinion  in  a  kingdom  where  none  but  she  and  her 
Council  governed." — Foxes    and  Firebrands,  part  iii.     Apud  Strype's 
Annals,  vol.  i.,  p.  128. 


150  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

upon  pain  of  imprisonment  and  loss  of  goods."*  Many  were 
forced  tO  wander  in  other  lands,  and  probably  fell  victims  to 
the  persecuting  power.  Collier  says,  "  Several  secured  them- 
selves with  their  Protestancy,  and  joined  the  French  and 
Dutch  congregations,  both  in  London  and  the  coast  towns. 
And  here,  by  venting  some  of  their  dotages,  they  occasioned 
such  warm  contentions  that  P.  Martyr  found  it  necessary  to 
interpose  his  interest  for  bringing  them  to  more  temper." 
An  example  of  these  "warm  commotions"  is  given  us  by 
Strype:  "In  the  year  1560  one  of  their  ministers,  of  the 
Dutch  Church,  Austin  Friars,  namely,  Hamstedius,  was 
convened  before  the  said  bishop  (Grindal),  judicially,  for 
fe,vouring  some  Dutch  Anabaptists  that  desired  to  be  received 
into  his  church,  and  had  supplicated  the  bishop  to  be  ad- 
mitted. He  had  asserted  in  their  behalf  concerning  that 
heresy  of  theirs  (viz.,  that  Christ  took  not  his  flesh  of  the 
Virgin  Mary,  but  brought  it  from  heaven),  that  the  doctrine 
of  the  incarnation  of  Christ,  and  his  partaking  of  our  nature, 
was  not  a  foundation  (i.e.,  a  fundamental  doctrine),  but  a 
circumstance  only  of  the  foundation ;  and  that  children  and 
distracted  persons  were  saved  without  faith.  But  the  bishop 
required  him  to  renounce  these  and  other  like  errors;  which 
he  refused  to  do,  and  continuing  obstinate  in  them,  was 
excommunicated  by  the  bishop,  and  so  was  declared  next 
Sunday  in  the  Dutch  Church."  The  annalist  adds:  "Soon 
after  Hamstedius  retired  beyond  the  sea.  And  in  the  year 
1564  there  happened  again  an  earnest  contention  in  the 
church,  concerning  baptizing  infants,  which  was  finally  re- 
ferred to  the  Bishop  of  London,  their  superintendent,  to 
decide."t 


*  Camden's  Elizabeth,  p.  47  :  "Some  of  these  were  German  Anabaptists, 
and  others  propagated  opinions  of  a  very  dangerous  tendency ;  and  thus 
misbelief  gains  grou.nd,  and  some  of  the  ignorant  natives  were  miserably 
misled."— Collier,  vol.  ii.,  p.  471. 

+  Annals,  vol.  i.,  p.  176.  In  another  volume  he  gives  an  account, 
extending  over  several  pages,  of  a  disturbance  in  the  same  church,  by  one 


ELIZABETH.  151 

Tlie  year  1575  was  marked  by  one  of  those  eveuts  which 
stamp  the  character  of  this  reign  with  many  of  its  dark 
spots.  Macintosh  says: — ''This  was  the  first  blood  spilt  by 
Elizabeth  for  religion,  after  a  reign  of  fourteen  years;  and 
it  forms,  in  the  eye  of  posterity,  a  dark  spot  upon  a  gov- 
ernment, hitherto  distinguished,  beyond  that  of  any  other 
European  community,  by  a  religious  administration  which, 
if  not  unstained,  was  bloodless."*  True,  it  witnessed  the 
martyrdom  of  servants  of  Christ;  it  was  blood-shedding  by 
the  fires  of  Smithfield.  We  have  but  an  imperfect  narrative 
at  command,  but  from  the  various  sources  within  our  reach 
we  shall  give  as  much  completeness  to  it  as  we  can. 

It  was  the  morning  of  Easter-day,  a  season  of  joy  and 
festivity,  at  this  time,  to  the  whole  church,  when  some  of 
the  bishop's  creatures  discovered  a  body  of  Flemish  Bap- 
tists, who  had  assembled  in  a  house  in  Aldgate,  to  com- 
memorate the  triumph  of  their  risen  Lord.  Their  number 
is  variously  reported,  but  the  best  authority  gives  thirty. t 
They  were  hurried  to  prison.  Grindal  at  this  time  filled  the 
metropolitan  chair.  He  was  one  of  the  exiles,  and  had 
tasted  the  bitterness  of  persecution  under  the  former  reign. 
Into  his  court  the  prisoners  were  conducted.  His  lordship 
was  aided  in  this  Christian  affair  by  "Master  Joris,  James 
de  Koninck,  John  de  Rode-Maker,  two  membei-s  of  the 
Council,  and  a  French  clergyman.  We  were  placed  before 
these  lords  and  their  servants,  who  propounded  four  ques- 
tions to  us,  to  which  we  were  to  give  either  an  affirmative 
or  negative."  The  questions  which  were  put  by  these 
inquisitors  were  the  following  : — "  1.  Whether  Christ  did 

Velsius.  He  calls  liim  sometimes  an  enthusiast,  at  others  a  madman,  and, 
of  course  an  Anabaptist.  He  was  finally  banished  the  kingdom  by  Eliza- 
beth.—/6to?,  vol.  ii.,  c.  xxxiv.  Strype  professes  to  draw  his  accounts 
from  Dutch  MSS.  These,  we  believe,  still  exist,  and  yet  unpublished. 
Their  publication  is  much  to  be  desired. 

*  History  of  England,  vol.  iii.,  p.  170. 
+  Collier,  Fuller,  and  Wall  only  give  twenty-seven. 


152  EARLY    ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

not  assume  his  flesh  from  the  body  of  Mary  ?  We  replied 
that  he  is  the  Son  of  the  living  God.  2.  Whether  infants 
should  not  be  baptized  1  We  cannot  understand  matters  so, 
for  we  read  nothing  of  it  in  the  Scriptures.  3.  Whether  it 
was  lawful  for  a  Christian  to  attend  to  or  discharge  the 
duties  of  a  magistrate's  officer  1  We  replied  that  our  con- 
science would  not  suffer  us  to  do  so ;  but  we  conside?'  the 
magistracy  as  a  minister  of  God  for  the  protection  of  the  ser- 
vants of  God.  4.  Whether  a  Christian  was  allowed  to  take 
an  oath  ?  We  again  replied,  our  conscience  would  not  even 
allow  us  to  do  so,  for  Christ  said,  '  Let  your  communications 
be  yea,  yea,  and  nay,  nay.'  We  then  kept  silent.  The  bishop 
said  that  our  misdeeds  were  very  gross,  and  we  could  not 
inherit  the  kingdom  of  God.  Oh,  Lord  !  avenge  not.  The 
bishop  then  remanded  us  to  prison.  A  young  brother,  who 
was  first  interrogated,  boldly  confessed  the  truth;  and  on 
that  account  was  sorely  accused,  and  led  to  Westminster, 
where  he  was  imprisoned  by  himself  This  caused  us  much 
grief"  From  the  same  document  we  get  a  further  glimpse 
of  the  proceeding.  During  this  first  interview,  as  one  of  the 
prisoners  appeared  to  take  the  lead  in  the  conversation,  the 
judges  said  : — "  ^  This  is  the  captain ;  you  shall  no  longer 
scatter  your  baneful  seed  in  our  country ; '  and  they  secured 
him  immediately.  The  bishop  then  showed  them  a  letter, 
and  said  to  them  in  a  very  surly  tone,  that  the  court 
had  agreed  that  all  the  strangers  should  subscribe  the 
above  four  questions.  The  one  that  would  do  so  should 
be  at  perfect  liberty  in  the  country ;  but  all  who  should 
refuse  should  be  punished  with  death ;  '  therefore,  you  may 
now  choose.'  This  cruel  and  unchristian  ordinance  alarmed 
some,  so  that  on  account  of  the  weakness  of  the  flesh,  five 
of  them  fell  from  the  truth,  and  refused  to  offer  their 
bodies  for  the  name  of  Christ."  During  the  interval  between 
their  first  and  second  examinations,  means  were  employed  to 
seduce  them  from  the  truth.  Master  Jovis  visited  them  in 
prison.     In  the  name  of  his  episcopal  chief,  he  promised 


ELIZABETH.  153 

them  freedom  from  bonds  on  condition  that  they  would  join 
the  church.  The  voice  of  the  tempter  was  powerless.  Their 
attachment  to  the  faith  was  unwavering.  It  was  on  the 
morning  of  another  great  festival,  when  the  church  com- 
memorates the  effusion  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  that  these  con- 
fessors were  again  led  from  their  prisons  before  the  lords. 
They  were  chained  two  and  two  like  the  worst  malefactors  of 
the  land.  The  narrative  is  brief  and  touching  : — "When  we 
were  brought  before  them  they  presented  the  same  four 
questions,  urgiug  us  to  subscribe  them ;  but  we  told  them 
that  we  would  abide  by  the  Word  of  the  Lord.  We  were 
then  remanded  to  prison,  fettered  as  before  :  the  women 
were  confined  at  Newgate,  together  with  a  young  brother, 
but  they  were  all  released  and  transported.  The  young 
man,  however,  was  tied  to  a  cart  and  scourged,  and  after- 
wards whipped  out  of  town.  We  were  in  the  midst  of 
thieves  and  malefactors.  These  the  bishop  and  a  preacher 
worried,  lest  they  might  be  corrupted  by  us  and  deceived." 

We  have  a  clear  view  of  the  charges  brought  against  them 
and  the  nature  of  their  replies,  in  one  or  two  letters  written 
by  the  martyrs  during  their  imprisonment  : — 

"We  poor  and  despised  strangers,  who  are  persecuted  for  the 
testimony  of  Jesns,  desire  that  God  may  grant  all  mankind  peace,  so 
that  they  may  live  together  in  all  godliness,  to  the  praise  of  the  Lord 
and  to  the  advancement  of  their  soids'  salvation.  Since  so  many, 
both  by  writing  and  verbal  statements,  do  us  great  injustice,  accusing 
and  charging  lies  upon  us,  I  am  constrained  to  present  our  belief  very 
summarily. 

"  They  do  not  speak  to  us,  and  do  not  in  a  mild  manner  inquire  of 
us  what  our  religious  views  are,  as  the  Scriptures  teach,  but  they 
speak  all  manner  of  evil  of  us,  so  that  they  may  increase  our  miseries 
and  sufferings ;  and  besides,  they  have  no  compassion  either  on  our 
distressed  wives  or  helpless  children.  We  had  to  forsake  our  friends, 
our  country,  and  our  possessions,  on  account  of  tyranny,  and  fled  as 
lambs  from  a  wolf,  only  because  of  the  pure  evangelical  truth  of 
Christ,  and  not  for  uproar  or  faction's  sake,  like  those  of  Munster, 
whose  views  are  an  abomination,  of  which  we  have  been  slanderously 
accused. 

"Who  would  like  to  be  persecuted  in  a  strange  country,  when  he 


154  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

is  already  wretched  and  poor  ?  Therefore,  says  Christ,  '  Whatsoever 
ye  would  that  men  should  do  unto  you,  do  ye  even  so  to  them  ;  this 
is  the  law  and  the  prophets.'  Oh,  that  they  would  thus  treat  us ! 
How  soon  persecutions  would  cease !  Christ  and  his  followers  never 
persecuted  any  one,  but,  on  the  contrary,  taught  that  we  should  '  love 
those  who  hate  us,  and  pray  for  those  who  despitefully  use  us,  that 
we  may  be  the  children  of  our  Father  in  heaven,  who  lets  his  sun 
shine  over  the  righteous  and  the  wicked. 

' '  We  seek  no  salvation  in  our  works,  as  it  is  reported  we  do,  but  we 
hope  to  be  saved  alone  through  the  merits  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Nor  do  we  boast  that  we  are  without  sin,  but  we  always  confess  our- 
selves sinners  before  God.  But  we  have  to  refrain  from  voluntary  sins 
if  we  would  be  saved,  such  as  adultery,  fornication,  sorcery,  sedition, 
bloodshed,  cursing  and  swearing,  lying  and  cheating,  pride  and 
drunkenness,  hatred,  envy :  these  are  the  sins  which  the  Scriptures 
declare,  who  do  them  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God. 

"  They  also  say,  we  refuse  to  hear  the  Word  of  God,  because  we  do 
not  go  to  hear  the  preaching  of  the  church.  To  this  charge  we  would 
say,  that  why  we  do  not  hear  the  preacher,  is,  that  the  Word  of  God 
constrains  us  so  to  do ;  because  they  are  people  not  fit  to  attend  to  the 
sacred  callings  of  a  Gospel  preacher;  for  Paul  teaches  Timothy,  and 
says  : — 'The  things  which  thou  hast  heard  of  me,  among  many  wit- 
nesses, the  same  commit  thou  to  faithful  men,  who  shall  be  able  to 
teach  others;  because  if  a  man  undertakes  to  teach  or  reprove 
another,  he  must  be  blameless  himseK. '  Now  if  the  preachers  were 
such  as  the  apostles  required,  we  should  cheerfully  hear  them, — we 
would  be  the  first  and  the  last  in  the  church. 

"We  are  also  accused  of  not  being  subject  to  the  magistrates, 
because  we  do  not  baptize  our  infants.  To  this  v/e  reply,  we  desire 
to  submit  to  the  magistracy,  in  all  things  not  contraiy  to  the  Word 
of  God.  That  we  do  not  suffer  our  children  to  be  baptized  by 
the  priests,  is  not  done  out  of  temerity,  but  we  do  it  out  of  fear  to 
God,  for  Christ  commands  believers  to  be  baptized;  for  Christ's 
apostles  did  not  baptize  infants,  but  adults  only,  and  those  on  their 
faith  and  confession  of  their  sins.  .  .  .  If  it  had  been  the  will 
of  God  that  infants  should  be  baptized,  he  would  have  commanded  it 
to  be  done.  Christ  would  have  been  baptized  in  his  infancy,  as  well 
as  circumcised ;  but  as  it  is  not  the  will  of  God,  therefore  did  he  teach 
them  differently,  and  received  baptism  differently  himself. 

"But  they  have  stretched  considerably  in  bringing  charges  against 
us,  saying  there  are  many  thousands  of  us.  Our  belief  has  not  been 
so  generally  embraced;  we  are  not  treated  so  kindly  as  to  induce  the 
crowd  to  adopt  our  views.     True,  here  and  there  you  may  find  some 


ELIZABETH.  155 

secluded  family,  like  the  lily  among  the  thorns, — as  the  apple-tree 
among  the  trees  of  the  woods,  bringing  forth  good  friiit."* 

These  are  noble  words,  and  worthy  of  the  martyr's  spirit. 
Of  these  thirty,  five  recanted,  five  were  imprisoned,  and  the 
remainder  were  banished  from  the  country,  t  The  narrative 
from  which  we  gather  these  facts,  says  : — "  Instead  of 
honouring  the  five  apostates,  they  were  scandalized  and 
exposed  at  St.  Paul's  Cross,  and  were  branded  as  having 
been  deceived,  and  had  to  confess  that  it  was  the  truth ;  and 
then  to  enter  bail  that  they  would  unite  themselves  to  the 
German  Church,  and  then  become  brethren."  Crosby  has 
preserved  the  form  of  renunciation  which  was  imposed  on 
these  weak  brethren.  The  document  is  curious,  and  we  fear 
no  censure  in  transferring  it  to  our  pages  : — 

"  Whereas,  we  being  seduced  by  the  de\dl,  the  spirit  of  error,  and 
by  false  teachers,  have  fallen  into  those  most  damnable  and  detest- 
able errors : — that  Christ  took  not  flesh  of  the  Virgin  Mary ;  that  the 
infants  of  the  faithful  ought  not  to  be  baptized ;  that  a  Christian  man 
may  not  be  a  magistrate,  or  bear  the  sword  and  office  of  authority ;  and 
that  it  is  not  lawful  for  a  Christian  man  to  take  an  oath.  Now,  by 
the  grace  of  God,  and  by  the  assistance  of  good  and  learned  ministers 
of  Christ's  church,  I  understand  the  same  to  be  most  damnable  and 
detestable  heresies  :  and  do  ask  God,  before  his  church,  mercy  for  my 
said  former  errors,  and  do  forsake,  recant,  and  renoimce  them  ;  and  I 
abjure,  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart,  protesting  I  certainly  believe 
the  contrary.  And  further,  I  confess  that  the  whole  doctrine  estab- 
lished and  published  in  the  Church  of  England,  and  also  that  as 
received  in  the  Dutch  Chiu-ch,  in  London,  is  foimd  true  and  according 
to  God's  Word :  whereimto  in  all  things  T  submit  myself,  and  will 
be  most  gladly  a  member  of  the  said  Dutch  Church,  from  henceforth 
utterly  abandoning  and  forsaking  all  and  every  Anabaptistical 
error.":]: 

Poor  men !  But  life  is  sweet !  This  scene,  more  humili- 
ating to  those  who  imposed  it  than  to  the  unfortunate  ones 
so  prominent  in  it,  took  place  in  the  Dutch  Church,  Austin 

*  References  to  Origen,  Luther,  and  others,  in  support  of  these  views, 
are  omitted  here. 

+  Crosby  states  f oui'.         J  CoUier,  vol.  ii. ,  p.  549. 


156  EARLY    ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

Friars,  in  the  presence  of  De  Laune,  one  of  tlie  ministers  of 
that  community.* 

The  condition  of  the  incarcerated  excited  much  sympathy. 
Even  those  who  dissented  from  their  religious  views  greatly 
compassionated  their  state.  Petitions  and  a  confession  of  their 
faith  were  laid  before  the  imperious  monarch.  Fox,  who 
had  recorded  with  touching  interest  and  graphic  power  the 
martyrology  of  the  past,  in  a  Latin  letter  pleaded  with  the 
queen  on  their  behalf.  But  all  was  in  vain.  Submission  or 
death  was  the  alternative. t  Fox's  letter  is  a  noble  specimen 
of  enlightened  piety.  We  give  a  sentence  or  two.  This  act 
of  brotherly  kindness  should  be  embalmed  in  every  Baptist 
memorial  of  this  age : — 

"I  understand  there  are  some  here  in  England,  though  not  English, 
but  come  here  from  Holland,  I  suppose  both  men  and  women,  who, 
having  been  tried  according  to  law,  publicly  declared  their  repentance, 
are  happily  reclaimed.  Many  others  are  condemned  to  exile;  a  right 
sentence,  in  my  opinion.  But  I  hear  there  is  one  or  two  of  these  who 
are  appointed  to  the  most  severe  piuiishment,  viz.,  burning,  except 
your  clemency  forbid.  Now  in  this  one  affair  I  conceive  there  are 
two  things  to  be  considered ;  the  one  is  the  wickedness  of  their  errors, 
the  other  the  sharpness  of  their  punishment.  As  to  the  errors, 
indeed,  no  man  of  sense  can  deny  that  they  are  most  absurd ;  and  I 
wonder  that  such  monstrous  opinions  could  come  into  the  mind  of  any 
Christian;  but  such  is  the  state  of  human  weakness,  if  we  are  left 
ever  so  little  awhile  destitute  of  the  Divine  life,  whither  is  it  we  do 
not  fall  ?  and  we  have  good  reason  to  give  God  thanks  on  this  account, 
that  I  hear  not  of  any  Englishman  that  is  inclined  to  this  madness. 
As  to  these  fanatical  sects,  therefore,  it  is  certain  they  are  by  no 
means  to  be  countenanced  in  a  commonwealth,  but,  in  my  opinion, 
ought  to  be  suppressed  by  proper  correction.      But  to  roast  alive  the 

*  Crosby,  vol.  i.,  p.  69. 
+  "  She  was  of  a  proud  and  imperious  spirit,  and  usually  carried  things 
with  a  very  high  hand,  expecting  all  to  bow  to  her  will  and  pleasure. 
Her  own  clergy  felt  it.  On  one  occasion.  Dr.  Nowell,  the  Dean  of 
St.  Paxil's  and  one  of  her  chaplains,  spoke  less  reverently  of  the  cross, 
in  a  sermon  he  was  preaching  before  her,  when,  from  the  closet  window, 
her  voice  was  heard,  forbidding  his  \ingodly  digressions,  and  commanding 
him  to  retvirn  to  his  text," — Vide  Haylin's  Reformation,  p.  124,  Ed.  1670. 
Brooke,  vol.  i.,  p.  208. 


ELIZABETH.  157 

bodies  of  poor  wretches  that  oflfend  rather  through  blindness  of 
judgment  than  j)erverseness  of  will,  in  fire  and  flames,  raging  with 
pitch  and  brimstone,  is  a  hard-hearted  thing,  and  more  agreeable  to 
the  practice  of  Romanists  than  the  customs  of  the  Gospeller.  .  . 
Wherefore,  if  I  may  be  so  bold  with  the  majesty  of  so  great  a 
princess,  I  humbly  beg  of  your  royal  highness,  for  the  sake  of  Christ, 
who  was  consecrated  to  suffer  for  the  lives  of  many,  this  favour  at 
my  request,  which  even  the  Divine  clemency  would  engage  you  to, 
that  if  it  may  be — and  what  cannot  your  authority  do  in  these  cases? 
— these  miserable  wretches  may  be  spared ;  at  least,  that  a  stop  may  be 
put  to  the  horror  by  changing  their  punishment  into  some  other  kind. 
.  .  .  This  one  thing  I  most  earnestly  beg,  that  the  piles  and 
flames  of  Smithfield,  so  long  ago  extinguished  by  your  happy  govern- 
ment, may  not  more  be  revived." 

Warmly  did  these  sufferers  for  Christ  feel  the  kindness  of 
the  venerable  man.  Their  gratitude  was  ardent ;  and  in  a 
letter,  from  which  we  extract  a  sentence  or  two,  they  gave 
utterance  in  language,  which  if  we  had  no  other  evidence, 
would  give  them  a  high  ]Aa,ce  in  our  Christian  regards, 
as  they  deserved.  After  recognizing  his  personal  kindness 
and  his  efforts  on  their  behalf  with  the  queen,  and  noticing 
the  advice  of  some  to  give  up  their  peculiar  views,  they 
say  :— 

"We  confess  that  the  flesh  of  Christ  is  not  a  phantasm,  or  ethereal, 
but  true  human  flesh,  like  unto  us  in  all  things,  sin  excepted  ;  that  he 
is  the  true  seed  of  the  woman,  the  son  of  David,  and  the  fruit  of  the 
body  of  Mary.  Finally,  we  believe  all  which  the  Holy  Scrij)tures 
f lu-ther  testify  concerning  him,  and  we  place  our  salvation,  whether 
in  our  life  or  our  death,  not  in  our  own  works  or  holiness,  but  alone 
in  his  death  and  resiu'rection.  If  men  would  only  be  content  with 
this,  and  not  wish  to  constrain  us  to  confess  that  Christ  assmned  his 
humanity  from  the  flesh  of  Mary,  which  we  can  neither  comprehend 
or  believe,  because  the  word  humanity  is  not  expressed  in  the  Scripture. 
Hence  it  is  inferred  against  us  that  we  teach  that  Christ  is  not  very 
man,  and  in  general  that  we  deny  our  salvation;  whereas  on  the  con- 
trary, the  inference  should  be  even  as  charity  teaches  us.  That  when 
we  say  that  Christ  had  flesh,  as  truly  as  our  first  parent  Adam  had 
before  the  fall,  even  as  we  at  the  same  time  confess  that  he  is  a  true 
man  and  our  Saviovu-,  we  make  specific  confession  of  this  in  express 
terms.  But  if  you  say  that  you  discover  little  or  no  difference 
between  your  faith  and  ours,  except  in  the  phrase,  '  humanity  of  the 


158  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

woman'  (wesen  des  weibes),  and  that  we  ought  not  obstinately  to 
reject  it  on  this  account,  our  reply  on  the  other  hand  is,  that  we 
ought  not  to  be  constrained  thereto  by  violence,  but  our  weakness  in 
this  part  ought  to  be  borne  with,  inasmuch  as  we  are  not  otherwise 
convinced  in  our  conscience,  and  would  commit  a  great  sin  against 
God,  if  we  would  sjieak  contrary  to  the  testimony  of  our  conscience. 
Wherefore,  if  we  are  delivered  to  death  (the  contrary  of  which  we 
hope  from  her  majesty's  clemency),  we  testify  before  God  that  we  do 
not  die  for  this  or  that  article  (which  we  would  willingly  accept  if 
they  could  only  convince  us  with  solid  arguments)  but  for  conscience 
sake ;  for,  if  we  would  act  contrary  thereto,  even  if  we  did  right,  yet 
we  would  do  amiss,  and  bear  testimony  against  ourselves,  which  you, 
by  your  learning,  are  better  able  to  understand  than  we  common  and 
illiterate  people.  Finally,  we  are  men,  and  what  is  further,  unlearned 
men,  who  are  liable  to  err.  Hence,  we  are  willing  to  submit  to  the 
instruction  of  all  those  who  are  able  to  prove  to  us,  by  the  Scriptures, 
something  that  is  better ;  but  that  men  should  constrain  us  with  fire 
and  sword,  appears  to  us  to  be  vain,  and  to  militate  against  reason — 
for  it  is  possible  to  constrain  us,  through  fear  of  death,  to  speak 
differently  from  what  we  understand ;  but  that  we  should  understand 
differently  from  our  belief,  you  are  well  aware  is  an  impossibility." 

Two  of  these,  Von  Byler  and  Von  Straatam,  after  much 
suffering  in  their  dreary  prison,  were  liberated  ;  Kernels, 
another  of  the  martyrs,  died  in  prison.  Pieters  and  Ter- 
woort  finished  their  course  in  Smithfield,  and  thus  "became 
the  proto-martyrs  under  the  reign  of  Elizabeth." 

The  following  is  a  copy  of  the  writ  issued  by  the  queen 
for  the  execution  of  these  men  : — 

"Elizabeth,  by  the  grace  of  God,  Queen  of  England,  France, 
and  Ireland,  Defender  of  the  Faith,  unto  oiu-  righteously 
and  right  well-beloved  Councillor,  Sir  Nich.  Bacon,  knight, 
Lord  Keeper  of  our  great  Seal  of  England,  greeting  : — 
'^  When  the  Reverend  Fathers  in  God,  Edwin,  Bishop  of  London, 
Edmund,  Bishop  of  Rochester,  and  our  right  trusty  and  well-beloved 
Sir  W.  Cordell,  knight.  Master  of  ^he  Bolls,  Roger  Manhood,  and 
Robert  Mounsou,  two  of   the  Justices  of  oiu'  Common  Pleas,  with 
other  Commissioners  sufficiently  authorised  by  our  Commission,  under 
our  great  Seal  of  England,  have  travelled  upon  the  examination,  hear- 
ing, and  determination  of  John  Pieters  and  Henry  Terwoort,  being 
Flemings  born,  and  now  living  in  this  our  realm,  concerning  their 
false  opinions,  and  sects  of  Anabaptists,  holden  and  averred  by  them. 


ELIZABETH.  159 

wherein  they  have,  before  the  said  Reverend  Father,  and  others,  our 
said  Commissioners,  maintained  their  said  most  perilous  and  danger- 
ous opinions,  for  the  which  they  are  by  definite  sentences,  declared 
by  the  said  Reverend  Father,  the  Bishop  of  London,  with  the  consent 
of  others,  our  said  Commissioners,  justly  adjudged  and  declared  to  be 
heretics ;  and  therefore,  as  corrupt  members,  to  be  cut  off  from  the 
rest  of  the  flock  of  Christ,  lest  they  should  infect  others  professing 
the  true  Christian  faith,  and  are  by  them  left  under  the  sentence  of 
the  great  excommunication,  to  be  by  oiu-  secular  power  and  authority 
pimished  as  heretics,  as  by  the  significavit  of  the  said  Reverend  Father 
in  God,  the  Bishox)  of  London,  with  the  assent  of  our  said  Commis- 
sioners, remaining  in  our  Coiut  of  Chancery,  more  at  large  appeareth ; 
and  although  the  said  Anabaptists  have,  since  the  said  sentence  pro- 
nounced against  them,  been  often  and  very  charitably  travelled  with, 
as  well  by  the  ministers  of  the  Dutch  Church  in  the  city  of  London, 
as  by  other  godly  and  learned  men,  to  dissuade,  revoke,  and  remove 
them  from  their  Anabaptistical  and  heretical  opinions,  yet  they  arro- 
gantly and  wilfully  persist  and  continue  in  the  same. 

"We,  therefore,  according  to  our  regal  functions  and  office,  vindica- 
ting the  execution  of  justice  in  this  behalf,  and  to  give  example  to 
others,  lest  they  should  attempt  the  like  hereafter,  have  determined, 
by  the  assent  of  our  Council,  to  will  and  require  you,  the  said  Lord 
Keeper,  immediately  on  the  recei^ot  hereof,  to  award  and  make  out  our 
writ  of  execution,  according  to  the  tenor  in  these  presents  ensuing, 
and  these  our  letters  signed  with  our  hand  shall  be  your  sufficient 
wan*ant  for  the  same."* 

Long  as  tliis  narrative  is,  we  cannot  even  now  close  it 
without  appending  to  it  a  beautiful  letter,  written  by  one  of 
their  coimtrymen  to  his  mother,  then  resident  at  Ghent. 
Both  appear  to  have  been  members  of  the  Dutch  Church. 
Besides,  it  contains  additional  particulars  of  great  interest. 

"Beloved  Mothee, — This  has  reference  to  the  peculiar  circum- 
stances attending  the  execution  of  the  Anabaptists,  though  I  have 
not  the  least  doubt  but  you  have  aheady  received  from  others  much 
information  relative  thereto,  even  as  it  is  with  extreme  reluctance 
that  I  write  upon  a  subject  of  which  you  cannot  even  thiak,  without 
emotions  of  the  deepest  distress.  But,  as  you  desire,  and  it  is  j^robable 
that  I  am  better  acquainted  with  the  circumstances  than  the  generality 
of  people,  inasmuch  as  I  have  had  frequent  intercourse  with  them,  and 

*  Collier,  vol.  ii.,  p.  15. 


160  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

have  received  information  from  all  of  tliem ;  so  I  cannot  forbear  giving 
such  an  account  of  it  as  accords  with  the  extent  of  my  information 
in  reference  to  the  matter.  In  connection  with  which  I  send  you  a 
copy  of  their  confession,  on  account  of  which  some  died,  and  others 
are  retained  in  prison ;  and  a  petition  was  presented  by  them  to  her 
majesty,  but  which  was  not  accepted  by  her. 

"It  happened  on  Easter,  the  3rd  of  April,  a.d.  1575,  that  thirty 
Anabaptists  of  both  sexes  had  assembled  together  in  a  house  near 
Alligator,  on  the  road  leading  to  Spiegelzhof,  for  the  purpose  of 
mutual  exhortation  and  prayer ;  but  being  detected  by  the  neighbours 
they  were  nearly  all  taken  then  to  prison,  by  so  small  a  guard  that 
some  could  easily  have  escaped,  if  they  could  have  felt  liberty  of 
conscience  to  do  so.  Having  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  magistracy, 
they  were  conducted  to  the  house  of  the  Bishoji  of  London,  in  order 
to  be  examined  by  him  concerning  their  faith,  which  examination 
had  to  be  conducted  through  the  mediimi  of  a  German  and  a  French 
preacher,  because  the  bishop  did  not  understand  the  language. 

"  Their  confession  of  faith  was  Scriptural,  and  drawn  up  in  such  a 
manner  that  I  would  be  free  to  subscribe  to  every  tenet,  with  the 
exception  of  the  article  concerning  oaths,  in  which  they  publicly 
confessed  their  belief  that  men  should  'Swear  not  at  all.' 

"The  bishop,  not  satisfied  with  this  confession,  presented  four 
articles  to  be  subscribed,  with  the  provision  that  if  any* remained 
obstinate,  they  should  be  burned  alive;  adding  that  such  charge 
was  imposed  upon  him  by  the  court. 

' '  These  articles  were  the  same  as  those  which  have  been  mentioned 
before. 

"They  replied  that  they  were  conscientious  in  regard  to  these 
matters,  and  maintained  the  principles  set  forth  in  their  first  profes- 
sion ;  so  they  were  reconducted  to  prison.  But  on  their  way  thither, 
ten  or  twelve  of  them  made  their  escape,  as  they  were  aware  of  the 
danger  to  which  they  were  exposed,  and  perceived  the  fine  opportunity 
of  escape  that  presented  itself,  the  guard  consisted  of  but  one  or  two 
individuals.  The  whole  of  them,  however,  in  the  course  of  two  or 
three  days,  returned  to  the  prison,  partly  in  order  to  acquit  their  bail, 
who  were  bound  in  the  sum  of  one  hundred  pounds,  and  partly 
because  the  bishop,  as  a  man  of  honour,  promised  with  an  oath  that 
he  would  set  them  all  at  liberty  in  the  course  of  five  or  six  days,  if 
they  would  return ;  but  if  not,  the  rest  should  remain  in  prison  tiU 
Candlemass.  Immediately  after  this,  five  of  the  men  were  converted 
(through  much  disputation  with  these  Netherlanders,  who  belonged  to 
the  church)  before  they  were  condemned  as  heretics,  nevertheless,  they 
were  placed  upon  a  rostrum  in  St.   Paul's  churchyard,  in  a  large 


ELIZABETH.  161 

assembly  of  some  thousands  of  Englishmen,  and  a  bundle  of  faggots 
was  laid  upon  each  one's  shoulder,  as  a  sign  that  they  deserved  to  be 
burnt ;  in  addition  to  which,  they  inflicted  many  other  injuries  and 
much  ignominy  ujion  them,  though  the  bishop  had  promised  that  he 
woidd  set  them  at  liberty  without  any  incumbrances  if  they  would 
only  sign  the  four  articles;  biit  the  event  jiroved  to  the  contrary. 
This  transpired  on  the  25th  of  May,  a.d.  1575.  In  the  course  of  a 
few  days,  the  bishop  perceiving  that  the  rest  would  not  apostatize 
from  their  faith,  sentenced  them  all  to  death,  in  the  ecclesiastical 
court -room,  in  St.  Paul's  Church  (as  was  customary  with  the  Papis- 
tical bishops  during  Queen  Mary's  reign,  who  were  wont  to  condemn 
the  Christians  to  death),  and  deliver  them  into  the  hands  of  the  civil 
judge;  then  they  bound  the  women  hand  to  hand,  and  conducted 
them  to  Newgate, — the  prison  for  capital  convicts, — together  with 
one  of  the  men,  which  was  considered  the  youngest  and  most  innocent 
among  them ;  but  the  rest  of  the  men  were  conducted  to  their  old 
episcopal  prison,  for  which  reason  it  was  supposed  that  the  women 
would  be  executed  first,  even  as  persons  came  daily  to  threaten  them, 
and  to  present  death  to  them,  unless  they  would  aj)ostatize.  Hence 
they  suffered  great  anguish  and  temptation  for  five  or  six  days,  suppo- 
sing every  day  that  they  would  be  burnt, — nay,  on  the  very  day  that 
the  sentence  of  their  banishment  came  from  the  court,  for  the  bailiff 
came  with  his  servants  at  ten  in  the  evening  into  the  prison  to  take  an 
inventory  of  all  their  property,  informing  them,  in  addition,  that  they 
should  prepare  for  death  the  next  day.  This  he  did  in  order  to  see 
whether  any  of  them  would  apostatize  through  fear  ;  but  perceiving 
that  they  all  remained  steadfast,  he  informed  them  that  it  was  the 
queen's  pleasure  to  be  gracious  to  them,  and  merely  to  banish  them 
from  the  country,  and  have  the  young  man  whipped  behind  a  cart. 
Accordingly,  in  the  course  of  five  or  six  days,  about  fourteen  women 
were  conveyed  from  the  prison,  which  is  situated  in  the  space  between 
St.  Martin's  Church  and  St.  Catherine's,  to  the  ship,  by  the  apparitors ; 
but  the  young  man  was  whipped  behind  a  cart,  which  moved  on 
before  him.  Thus  they  were  all  banished  from  the  country,  on  pain 
of  imprisonment,  and  reside  for  the  present  in  Holland  and  Zealand.  A 
few  days  after,  the  five  men  that  remained  in  the  bishop's  prison,  were 
likewise  sentenced  to  death  by  the  bishop,  and  conveyed  to  Newgate, 
where  one  of  them  died  of  wretchedness  and  of  a  load  of  chains,  and 
the  rest  were  apprehensive  that  they  would  inflict  extreme  punish- 
ment upon  them,  becausethey  had  exercised  so  much  severity  towards 
the  women.  They  were  also  informed  that  the  queen  and  her  whole 
Council  were  so  highly  offended  at  them  that  no  person  would  venture 
to  present  a  petition  for  them,  since  an  evil  report  arose  that  they 


162  EARLY    i:NGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

denied  God  and  Christ,  and  rejected  all  government,  and  all  respect 
for  the  magistrates  and  civil  power,  as  ungodly  and  unchristian. 
Therefore  they  sent  a  petition  to  her  majesty,  together  with  their 
confession  concerning  the  four  articles,  which  had  been  presented  to 
them  ;  a  copy  of  which  I  send  enclosed.  But  she  was  so  exasperated 
at  them  that  she  refused  to  accept  it,  but  severely  reprimanded  the 
Staats  who  presented  it  to  her,  as  they  informed  those  who  handed  in 
the  petition  to  them.  When  they  perceived  this  they  delivered  the 
articles,  together  with  the  petition,  which  was  somewhat  altered,  to 
Lord  Bodley  [or  Burghley],  who  having  laid  the  matter  before  the 
bishop,  answered  them  on  the  succeeding  day,  that  he  was  very  much 
distressed  on  their  account ;  but  there  was  no  hope  of  favour  unless 
they  would  sign  the  articles  and  abjure  their  heresy.  In  the  meantime, 
the  bishop  issued  certain  articles  in  her  majesty's  name,  one  of  which 
was  that  a  Christian  magistrate  may  with  propriety  punish  obstinate 
heretics  with  the  sword ;  and  commanded  all  strangers  to  sign  it,  or 
otherwise  give  sufficient  security  to  appear,  at  the  pleasure  of  the 
bishop,  before  him  and  the  queen,  to  undergo  a  circumstantial 
examination,  and  be  punished  according  to  their  deserts.  So  almost 
all  the  foreigners,  induced  by  fear  more  than  any  other  consideration, 
sio^ned  it,  with  the  exception  of  some,  who  chose  rather  to  incur  the 
danger,  than,  by  their  signing,  to  approve  of  the  putting  to  death  of 
poor  people  ;  the  issue,  however,  is  yet  imknown.  Soon  after,  orders, 
were  issued  from  the  court  to  the  sheriff  or  bailiflf  of  London,  to 
execute  the  two  oldest,  according  to  their  sentence  :  one  of  them,  Jan 
Pieters,  was  a  poor  man,  upwards  of  fifty  years  old,  and  had  nine 
children.  His  first  wife  was  previously  burnt  at  Ghent,  in  Flanders, 
on  account  of  her  religion ;  and  he  married  a  second  wife,  whose  first 
husband  had  likewise  been  burnt  at  Ghent  for  his  religious  principles. 
But  these  two  had  fled  into  England  on  account  of  persecution,  on 
supposition  that  they  coidd  live  there  and  enjoy  liberty  of  conscience 
without  being  exposed  to  any  danger,  which  circumstance  he  repre- 
sented to  the  bishop,  and  desired  the  favour  of  removing  from  the 
country  with  his  wife  and  children ;  but  he  could  not  obtain  it.  The 
other,  called  Henry  Terwoort,  was  a  handsome  and  respectable  man, 
about  twenty-six  years  old ;  a  goldsmith  by  trade,  and  had  been 
married  eight  or  ten  weeks  before  he  was  apprehended. 

"The  German  and  French  preachers  not  succeeding,  in  much  dis- 
putation, to  induce  these  men  to  sign  the  articles,  but  having  much 
rather  confirmed  them  in  their  opinion,  by  the  cruel  and  unchristian 
conduct  of  those  who  boast  of  the  Gospel  and  Christian  faith,, 
although  many  English  and  Germans  petitioned  in  their  favour ;  yet 
on  the  22nd  of  July,  at  six  o'clock,  A.M.,  they  were  miserably  burnt 


ELIZABETH.  163! 

to  ashes,  at  the  same  stake,  without  having  been  strangled,  and 
without  powder,  according  to  the  custom  at  Smithfield,  where  they 
used  to  burn  the  people  who  professed  our  religion. 

"This  was  done  the  Friday  succeeding  the  Tuesday  on  which  the 
stake  had  been  erected.  I  have  no  doubt  but  the  queen  assented  to 
this  measure  with  reluctance ;  but  she  was  persuaded  to  it  by  certain 
Papists,  or  other  perv^erse  men  and  enemies  of  the  truth,  of  whom 
there  are  many  here,  who  asserted  that  the  Anabaptists,  with  v/hose 
religion  this  people  are  luiacquainted,  did  not  only  deny  God  and 
Christ,  and  overthrow  the  salvation  of  the  soul,  but  also  that  they 
rejected  all  worldly  policy,  laws,  and  government,  and  incited  the 
people  to  mutiny  and  sedition,  because  they  taught  that  the  magistracy 
is  ungodly  and  imchristian ;  for  which  reason,  no  doubt,  she  was 
chiefly  exasperated  at  them,  so  that  she  would  not  accept  their 
petition. 

"The  Lord  forgive  those  who  were  authors  and  abettors  in  this 
matter,  and  so  misrepresented  these  poor  people  to  her  majesty,  as 
you  may  judge  from  their  confession,  which  they  signed  near  me, 
with  their  own  hand ;  for,  though  I  do  not  assent  to  the  whole,  and  am 
assured  that  they  are  under  a  mistake  in  regard  to  the  article  concern- 
ing the  original  conception  of  Christ  and  the  origin  of  his  flesh,  yet 
as  they  made  a  Christian  confession  in  express  terms,  and  often  con- 
fessed orally,  in  my  presence,  that  Christ  is  very  God  and  very  man, 
like  unto  us  in  flesh  and  blood,  and  in  all  other  respects,  sin  excepted, 
so  be  it  far  from  me  to  acknowledge  that  they  were  gviilty  of  death  ; 
nay,  I  would  much  rather  acknowledge  them  as  brethren,  and  have 
not  the  least  doubt  of  their  salvation,  if  they  only  feared  the  Lord, 
and  walked  before  him  with  a  good  conscience. 

"Touching  the  two  young  men  who  still  remain,  they  continue 
firm  and  steadfast,  and  are  in  daily  expectation  of  the  same  punish- 
ment. Luke  and  I  endeavoured,  if  possible,  to  get  them  out  of 
prison  four  days  after  the  execution  of  the  others ;  we  even  prevailed 
on  them,  through  much  conversation,  to  sign  the  confession  (a  copy  of 
which  I  send  you),  in  the  hope  that  the  bishop  would  be  satisfied  with 
it.  Ha^dng  read  it,  he  found  it  good  throughout ;  but  he  will  not 
receive  them  into  favour  unless  they  sign  the  first  four  articles  with- 
out contradiction,  and  join  the  Dutch  Church,  which  they  are  deter- 
mined not  to  do,  even  if  they  perfectly  agree  with  us  in  doctrine ; 
since  thereby  they  would  condemn  the  two  that  had  been  executed, 
and  all  the  rest  of  their  comrades  who  died  or  still  live  in  the  same 
faith,  and  would  confess  that  they  had  been  seduced  by  the  devil,  the 
spirit  of  lies  and  error,  to  this  damnable  heresy,  of  which  they  declare 
that  they  are  by  no  means  con\anced  in  their  own  consciences,  but 


164  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

that  they  are  much  more  assured  of  their  salvation  in  Christ,  the 
very  God  and  very  man ;  they  would,  therefore,  as  they  say,  provoke 
God  in  the  highest  if  they  would  speak  contrary  to  the  testimony  of 
their  own  conscience.  Hence  we  know  of  nothing  else  than  they  will 
have  to  suffer  the  same  punishment  that  was  endured  by  their  partners, 
the  more  esj)ecially  as  they  attempted  to  break  out  of  prison,  having 
filed  off  an  iron  bar  of  the  window,  for  which  cause  they  are  kept 
more  closely  in  bonds  than  at  any  former  time,  and  may  consider 
themselves  fortunate  if  an  early  and  preferable  death  should  release 
them  from  the  great  distress  and  misery  of  the  prison,  for  they  lie 
separate  from  each  other,  so  that  they  cannot  afford  each  other  any 
consolation,  and  no  one  dare  to  converse  with  them,  on  the  pain  of 
immediate  imprisonment. 

"  Here,  dear  mother,  you  have  a  distressing  history  from  first  to  last, 
of  these  imprisoned,  converted,  proscribed,  and  executed  Anabaptists, 
concerning  which,  I  am  likewise  aware,  that  it  appears  to  you  very 
strange  and  incredible,  and  that  you  are  very  much  distressed  that 
those  who  formerly  suffered  persecution  should  now  persecute  other 
people  on  accoiuit  of  their  religion,  constraining  the  consciences  of 
others  with  fire  and  sword,  whereas  they  formerly  taught,  and  which 
is  the  plain  truth,  that  it  is  the  province  of  no  man  to  lord  it  over  the 
consciences  of  others ;  and  that  faith  is  a  special  gift  of  God,  and  is 
not  implanted  in  men  by  any  human  power,  but  by  the  Word  of  God 
and  the  illumination  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  So  I  say,  that  I  am  well 
awaf  e  that  the  affair  has  been  the  cause  of  extreme  distress  to  you 
and  all  the  compassionate,  as  I  also  hope  that  it  will  not  be  a  cause 
of  offence  to  you,  and  occasion  you  to  doubt  the  true  faith ;  and 
remember,  as  it  is  the  truth,  that  some  of  the  pious  and  learned,  as 
well  English  as  foreigners,  who  are  here,  did  not  ajiprove  nor  assent 
to  it.  I  would  write  more  diffusely  upon  this  subject  if  time  would 
permit.  But  I  will  now  conclude,  and  I  pray  the  Lord  to  strengthen 
you,  together  with  all  who  fear  God  and  love  the  truth,  confirming 
you  in  all  virtue  and  godliness,  to  the  salvation  of  your  souls. — Amen. 

"Your  obedient  son, 

"Jacques  de  Somers."* 

We  give  two  examples  of  the  manner  in  which  these  facts 
are  presented  by  our  historians  : — 

Strype  says:    "I  find  two  Anabaptists  were  burnt  in 

*  We  are  indebted  to  Benedict  for  most  of  the  particulars  in  this  narra- 
tive. He  has  borrowed  them  from  "The  Martyr's  Mirror,"  a  work  we  have 
in  vain  tried  to  procure. — History  of  the  Baptists.     New  York,  1848. 


ELIZABETH.  165 

Smitlifield  not  long  after  (July  22nd),  namely,  John  Wiel 
Macker,  and  Hendrick  Terwoort  (who  it  seems  had  recanted 
before,  if  it  were  the  same),  after  that  they  had  been  sixteen 
weeks  in  prison.  The  Privy  Council  would  not  spare  them, 
notwithstanding  the  earnest  intercessions  of  the  Dutch  con- 
gregations, for  divers  mighty  reasons  laid  before  them.  But 
the  chief  causes  of  their  execution  were,  because  they  would 
not  own  them  for  Christian  magistrates,  and  had  been 
banished  a  year  before."* 

Miss  Aikin  says  :  "  Two  of  these  unhappy  men,  how- 
ever, repented  of  the  disingenuous  acts  into  which  human 
frailty  had  betrayed  them,  and  returning  to  the  open  pro- 
fession of  their  opinions,  were  burnt  at  Smitlifield."  Obvi- 
ously a  mistake. t 

It  is  difficult  to  say  which  feeling  most  predominates  in 
the  mind  of  an  intelligent  Christian, — pity,  contempt,  or 
indignation,  at  the  perusal  of  such  comment  as  the  follow- 
ing, by  one  of  our  church  writers :  "  But  though  Queen 
Elizabeth  constantly  called  him  Father  Fox;  yet  herein  was 
she  no  dutiful  daughter,  giving  him  a  flat  denial.  Indeed, 
damnable  were  their  impieties,  and  she  was  necessitated 
to  this  severity,  who  having  punished  some  traitors,  if  not 
spurning  these  blasphemers,  the  world  would  condemn  her 
as  being  more  earnest  in  asserting  her  own  safety  than  God's 
honour.  Hereupon  the  writ  De  hceretico  comhurendo  (which 
for  seventeen  years  had  hung  only  up  in  terrorem),  was  now 
taken  down  and  put  in  execution,  and  the  two  Anabaptist^, 
burnt  in  Smithfield,  died  in  great  horror,  with  crying  and 
roaring."j:  What  a  specimen  of  the  power  of  prejudice  to 
blind  the  mind,  and  to  blunt  the  symj)athies  of  our  nature  ! 
Only  think  of  the  character  of  that  religion  which  hails  the 
roasting  of  men  alive,  for  harmless  speculation  in  the  faith, 
as  an  acceptable  vindication  of  the  honour  of  the  God  of  love ! 

■*  Annals,  vol.  ii.,  part  i.,  p.  564.     He  professes  to  have  the  latter  from 
Dutch  MSS.  t  Elizabeth,  vol.  ii.  p.  43. 

%  Fuller's  Church  History,  cent,  xvi.,  p.  104.     Crosby,  vol.  i.,  p.  74. 


166  EARLY    ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

The  errors  were  not  extirpated.  Three  years  later  another 
hunt  for  the  heretics  was  ordered.  Alva's  persecution  in 
the  l!»[etherlands  had  forced  many  unto  this  island.  The 
primate  and  his  suffragan  were  ordered  to  undertake  this 
work.  The  character  and  religion  of  every  foreigner  in  the 
kingdom  were  to  be  investigated.  Into  every  parish  a 
visitor  was  to  enter,  whose  special  work  it  was  to  write  the 
name  of  every  stranger  in  a  register,  together  with  their 
country,  quality,  and  circumstances.  Beyond  this  they  were 
to  extend  their  inquisitions.  Inquiry  was  to  be  made  into 
the  probable  motives  of  their  coming  over,  the  manner  of 
their  behaviour,  and  what  church  they  frequented.  Sus- 
pected ones  were  to  be  reported  to  the  justices  of  the  peace, 
that  they  might  be  brought  for  trial  and  punishment.  Tliis 
was  necessary,  says  the  writer,  "  for  the  Dutch  Anabaptists 
held  private  conventicles  in  London,  and  perverted  a  great 
many.  * 

In  1589  the  same  fact  is  admitted  by  Dr.  Some  in  his 
reply  to  Barrow,  &c/  He  affirms  that  "there  were  several 
Anabaptistical  conventicles  in  London  and  other  places." 
They  were  not  Dutchmen,  certainly  not  exclusively  so,  for 
he  says  that  "  some  persons  of  these  sentiments  have  been 
bred  at  our  universities."t 

The  hostility  of  Elizabeth  to  the  dissidents  was  undimin- 
ished. "Of  toleration,  of  the  rights  of  conscience,  she  had 
as  little  feeling  or  understanding  as  any  prince  or  polemic 
of  her  age.  Her  establishment  was  formed  throufjhout  in 
the  spirit  of  compromise  and  political  expediency.  She  took 
no  pains  to  ascertain,  either  by  assembling  of  a  national 
synod,  or  by  the  submission  of  the  articles  to  free  discussion 
in  Parliament,  whether  or  not  they  were  likely  to  be  agree- 

*  Collier,  vol.  ii.,  p.  517. 
+  Ivimey's  History  of  the  Baptists,  vol.  i. ,  p.  109.   "We  cannot  find  a  copy 
of  Dr.  Some's  work  either  in  the  British  Museum  or  the  Bed  Cross  Street 
Library.     Some  of  the  statements  of  this  writer  (as  given  in  Ivimey)  %viU 
appear  in  another  section  of  this  work. 


ELIZABETH.  167 

able  to  tlie  opinions  of  the  majority  :  it  sufficed  that  she 
had  decreed  their  reception;  and  she  prepared,  by  means  of 
penal  statutes,  strictly  executed,  to  prevent  the  propagation 
of  any  doctrine,  or  the  observance  of  any  rite,  capable  of 
interfering  vvith  the  exact  uniformity  in  religion  then  re- 
garded as  essential  to  the  peace  and  stability  of  any  well 
constituted  state."*  Age  and  growing  infirmities  shed  no 
softening  influence  on  her  proud  spirit.  The  primate,  by 
every  art  in  his  jDower,  fed  this  flame.  With  the  queen's 
hostility  to  the  Puritans  of  every  class,  Whitgift  had  the 
fullest  sympathy,  t  To  the  Anabaptists  his  hatred  was 
intense.  At  all  times  it  breaks  out.  X  Some  says,  that 
"with  a  view  of  obviating  objections  to  the  principles  of  min- 
isters, a  brief  declaration  of  belief  in  some  leading  articles 
was  drawn  up  in  Latin,  for  their  subscription.  This  contains 
an  assent  to  the  fundamentals  of  the  Christian  religion,  and 
a  disclaimer  of  Romish  and  Anabaptistical  errors." § 

*  Miss  Aikin's  Elizabeth,  vol.  i.,  pp.  319,  320. 

+  "Whitgift,  at  his  first  coming  to  the  See,  had  instructions  from  the 
queen  to  hold  a  strait  rein,  to  press  the  discipline  of  his  church,  and 
recover  his  province  to  uniformity.  This  method  agreed  with  the  arch- 
bishop's sentiments,  and  was  probably  suggested  by  himself." — Collier. 

"  This  man  (Wliitgift)  was  thorough  in  all  he  did,  especially  if  souls 
were  to  be  snared,  or  persons  of  real  piety  to  be  punished.  He  seemed 
to  take  a  malicious  delight  in  bending  the  laws  over  to  the  side  of  perse- 
cution; and  when  no  law  existed  which  could  be  thus  used,  he  either 
made  or  sought  to  procure  one.  He  was  probably  more  feared  and 
detested  than  any  man  of  his  day." — Fletcher's  History  of  Independency, 
vol.  ii.,  p.  145. 

J  The  archbishop's  views  on  baptism  are  thus  expressed  : — "  If  I  had  a 
child  dying  without  baptism,  I  should  be  doubtful  of  its  salvation." — 
Brooke,  vol.  i.,  p.  268. 

"Though  I  do  not  affirm,"  he  also  says,  "that  children  dj-ing  Avithout 
baptism  will  certainly  be  lost,  yet,  because  I  should  fear  and  doubt  the 
safety  of  their  state,  I  would  have  them  baptized  by  a  woman  rather 
than  not  at  all." — Examination  of  Travers.     Brooke,  vol.  ii.,  p.  319. 

§  Reformation,  vol.  iv.,  p.  717.  A  Romish  writer  charges  Elizabeth, 
in  an  infamous  work  published  in  1538,  A\'ith  making  the  country  a  place 
of  refuge  for  Atheists,  Anabaptists,  heretics,  and  rebels  of  all  nations. 
The  substance  of  this  tract  is  in  Lingard,  vol.  xiii. ,  p.  535.     Note  B  B. 


168  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

It  is  difficult  to  ascertain  with  accuracy  the  extent  to 
which  these  opinions  prevailed.  That  they  were  widely 
diffused  admits  of  no  doubt.  It  has  been  affirmed  by  some, 
and  those,  too,  not  of  Puritanic  principles,  that  *'the  Church 
of  England  party, — that  is,  the  party  adverse  to  any  species 
of  ecclesiastical  change, — was  the  least  numerous  of  the 
three  (parties)  during  this  reign."  Hallam,  in  a  note,  says, 
**  The  following  observation  will  confirm  (which  may 
startle  some  readers)  that  the  Puritans,  or  at  least  those 
who  rather  favoured  them,  had  a  majority  among  the 
Protestant  gentry  in  the  queen's  days.  It  is  agreed  on  all 
hands,  and  is  quite  manifest,  that  they  predominate  in  the 
House  of  Commons.  But  that  House  was  composed,  as  it 
has  ever  been,  of  the  princij^al  landed  proprietors,  and  as 
much  represented  the  general  wish  of  the  community  when 
it  demanded  a  further  reform  in  religious  matters,  as  on  any 
other  subject.  One  would  imagine,  by  the  manner  in  which 
some  express  themselves,  that  the  discontented  were  a  small 
faction,  who,  by  some  unaccountable  means,  in  despite  of 
the  government  and  the  nation,  formed  a  majority  of  the 
Parliament  under  Elizabeth  and  her  two  successors."* 

Of  the  prosperity  of  the  kingdom  under  Elizabeth's  govern- 
ment, there  can  be  no  doubt.  To  better  hands  than  those  of 
her  ministers,  the  destinies  of  a  great  nation  could  not  be 
entrusted.  Many  and  grievous  as  were  the  civil  disabilities 
under  which  society  groaned ;  despotic  and  violent  as  she 
ever  was;  thoroughly  politic,  i.e.,  knowing  no  other  rule  of 
action  but  self-interest  in  all  her  dealings  with  others ; 
tramj)ling  on  all  right  in  her  dealings  with  some  of  the  most 
learned  and  moral  of  her  subjects;  yet  in  all  the  material 
elements  of  prosperity,  and  the  humanizing  influence  of 
literature,  science,  and  commerce,  her  reign  had  never  been 
surpassed.  To  her  country's  well-being,  according  to  her 
view  of  what  would  contribute  to  it,  she  was  unquestionably 

*  Constitutional  History,  vol.  i.,  p.  189  (Note). 


ELIZABETH.  169 

devoted.  On  all  tliese  grounds  she  merits  the  glowing  and 
unbroken  eulogy  which  succeeding  ages  have  awarded  her. 
Beyond  this  truth  cannot  go.  On  other  grounds  the  present 
generation  can  give  her  no  praise.  The  imposing  splendour 
of  the  sensual  blinded  her  contemporaries  to  the  violation  of 
truth  and  high  moral  principles,  on  which  too  many  of  her 
public  measures  were  based.  The  haziness  is  past,  and  we 
of  the  present  can  look  at  her  conduct  in  a  clearer  light,  and 
analyze  it  with  more  calmness. 

No  one,  with  right  conceptions  of  the  nature  of  true 
religion,  can  become  familiar  with  the  personal  character  of 
this  princess  without  great  pain.  The  head  of  the  church, 
the  great  reformer  of  the  religion  of  the  state,  claiming  the 
right  to  dictate  to  her  subjects  what  they  should  believe  and 
how  they  should  express  their  homage  to  and  dependence 
on  God,  and  inflicting  the  severest  punishment  upon  them 
for  disobedience;  yet,  the  more  we  know  of  the  hidden 
springs  of  her  actions,  and  the  character  of  her  doings, 
the  more  the  conviction  is  forced  on  the  mind,  that  her 
ignorance  of  its  pure  and  vitalizing  power  was  profound. 
Bishops  praised  her  "as  the  good  and  godly  queen,"  and 
the  holy  incense  of  Episcopal  worship  was  never  wanting  to 
sustain  her  vanity,  and  blind  her  to  her  real  state ;  but  she 
could  "swear  like  a  trooper,"  and,  to  say  the  least, — perhaps 
stern  truth  would  demand  a  more  decided  verdict, — could 
violate  all  those  decencies  which  invest  female  nature  with 
its  sweetest  charm.  The  hypocrisy  of  Leicester,  one  of  her 
chief  favourites,  was  as  deep  as  his  conduct  was  loathsome. 
Quoting  the  sacred  volume  like  a  divine,  mingling  with  the 
Puritan  leaders,  and  ever  and  anon  throwing  around  them 
the  shield  of  his  high  j)rotection,  in  private  life  he  was  luxu- 
riating in  every  sensual  gratification.*     The  court  of  Mary 

*  "The  queen,"  said  Cecil,  "was  rusliing  on  to  destruction.  She  had 
made  Lord  R.  Dudley  master  of  her  government  and  of  her  own  person. 
Only  the  fear  of  France  and  Mary  Stuart  prevented  the  dethronement  of 
Elizabeth." — Vide  Eraser's  Magazine.  The  article  is  startling  from  its 
revelations.     The  date,  unfortunately,  has  been  mislaid. 


170  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

would  compare  with,  that  of  her  virgin  sister  -with  great 
advantage.*  Make  all  jDossible  allowance  for  the  social  con- 
dition of  society  in  those  days,  and  enough  will  remain  to 
justify  the  decision.  Her  court  was  by  no  means  of  a  higher 
order.  Yice  was  not  very  sharply  rebuked,  and  many  of 
her  favourites  were  men  of  the  most  profligate  habits. t 
''Elizabeth,  we  have  no  doubt  whatever,  ran  herself  into 
great  danger ;  she  indulged  in  most  unbecoming  and  almost 
degrading  familiarities  ;  she  went  to  the  very  verge  of  virtue, 
but  there  is  no  positive  evidence  that  she  ever  actually  over- 
stepped the  line."  Referring  to  her  connexion  with  Hatton, 
the  same  writer  says :  "  It  proves  that  Elizabeth's  passion 
for  Hatton  had  carried  her  to  lengths  quite  unbecoming  her 
position  :  it  does  not  positively  prove  that  it  had  carried 
her  to  the  extremest  length  of  all.  Our  own  notion  of  the 
relation  between  them  is,  she  did  certainly  'descend  very 
much  in  her  sex  as  a  woman;'  and  perhaps  'frailties,'  not 
used  in  the  technical  sense,  might  not  be  too  strong  an 
expression.  Still  this  testimony  is  quite  explicit  enougli  to 
hinder  us  from  pronouncing  a  positive  judgment  in  her 
favour,  though  individually  we  certainly  incline  to  that  side 
of  the  balance,  and  they  are  almost  damaging  enough  to  con- 
vert our  verdict  of  'not  guilty,'  into  one  of  'not  proven.'" t 
"  Elizabeth  was  coarse  and  savage  in  her  personal  tastes, 
we  should  almost  think  beyond  the  standard  of  her  time, 
though  from  her  capacity  she  might  be  fairly  expected  to 

*  "  It  was  a  iDlace  in  which,  according  to  Faust,  'all  enormities  reigned 
in  the  highest  degTee.'  '  The  only  discontent  I  have  is  to  hve  where  there 
is  so  little  godliness  and  exercise  of  religion,  so  dissolute  manners  and 
corrupt  conversation  generally.'" — ^Birch,  vol.  i.,  pp.  25, 39.  Apud  Lingard, 
vol.  viii.,  p.  501.    (Note.) 

+  "No  married  man  could  hope  to  retain  her  favour  if  he  lived  on 
terms  of  affection  wdth  his  wife," — Strickland's  Queens  of  England. 

:J:  Quarterly  Review,  June  1854,  pp.  240-1,  3.  Letters  given  by  Sir  N. 
H.  Nicholas,  in  his  Life  of  the  Chancellor,  express  the  feelings  of  the 
most  impassioned  lover,  if  not  something  more.  Dr.  H.  Campbell,  in  his 
"Case  of  Mary  Queen  of  Scots,  and  Elizabeth,"  has  raked  up,  with  a 
malicious  pleasure,  all  the  scandal  about  the  latter.  — Vide  Camden, 
Lingard,  Froude,  Strickland,  &c.,  &c. 


ELIZABETH.  171 

have  risen  above  it."  Of  her  swearing  we  have  spoken. 
The  degrading  vice  was  habitual.  It  frequently  accompanied 
her  infliction  of  persona,l  chastisement  on  her  maids  of 
honour.*  From  her  royal  lips  the  oath  would  come,  before 
the  Tudor  spirit  prompted  her  to  spit  ujDon  her  courtiers, 
or  to  box  the  ears  of  the  gallant  Essex.  In  bull- baiting 
and  bear-baiting  she  delighted.  The  latter  was  one  of  her 
favourite  pastimes.  On  one  occasion,  going  to  hear  a  sermon 
at  St.  Mary's,  Spital,  she  was  followed  by  two  white  bears 
in  a  cart,  that  at  the  close  of  her  devotions  they  might  be 
ready  to  contribute  to  her  more  congenial  gratification,  t 

"  Many  good  people  who  are  scandalized  at  the  Latin  plays 
at* Westminster,  will  be  surprised  that  in  the  pious  days  of 
England,  in  the  glorious  morning  of  the  Reformation,  in 
'  great  Elizabeth's  golden  time,'  under  kings  and  queens  that 
were  the  nursing  fathers  and  mothers,  the  public  acting  of 
plays  should  be,  not  the  permitted  recreation,  but  the  com- 
pulsory employment  of  childi-en  devoted  to  sing  the  praises 
of  God, — of  plays  too,  the  best  of  which  children  may  now 
only  read  in  a  'family'  edition,  some  of  whose  titles  a 
modern  father  would  scruple  to  pronounce  before  a  woman 
or  a  child. ":|: 

Of  the  religious  state  of  the  kingdom,  one  of  the  most 
candid  writers  on  this  period  of  our  religious  history  says  : 
*' Towards  the  conclusion  of  her  reign,  the  example  of  the 
court  of  Elizabeth  was  decidedly  irreligious,  and  the  con- 
tagion spread  rapidly  among  the  common  people.  "§     On  the 

*  "The  queen  hatli  of  late  used  the  fair  ]\Ii-s.  Bridge  -with  words  and 
blows  of  anger."— Sidney  Papers.     Apud  Strickland,  vol.  vii.,  p.  197. 

+  She  delighted  in  those  brutal  sports  which  marked  her  era.  Bear- 
baiting  formed  a  prominent  feature  in  many  of  the  f esti\'ities  which  greeted 
her  in  those  visits  to  the  nobility  which  her  penuriousness  or  her  policy 
induced  her  to  pay.  She  had  her  own  master  of  the  bears  and  dogs,  and 
H.  Coleridge  tells  us  that  a  farthing  a  day  was  the  salary  attached  to  this 
office.  Men  of  distinction  and  wealth  frequently  held  it.  — IsTote  on 
Introduction  to  the  Plays  of  Massinger,  p.  32.     Guizot's  Shakspeare. 

X  Coleridge's  Massinger,  p.  36.     Vide  Guizot's  Shakspeare,  p.  53. 

§  Marsden,  p.  239.     "How  cometh  it  to  pass  that  the  common  people 


172  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

otlier  hand,  of  those  whom  she  and  her  surpliced  flatterers 
had  sought,  by  every  form  of  oppression,  to  extirpate,  he 
says,  "But  after  all,  the  preponderance  of  real  piety  lay,  we 
suspect,  at  the  close  of  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  amongst 
those  who  were  roughly  classed  as  Puritans.  So  much  con- 
stancy in  suffering,  a  zeal  as  fervent,  domestic  habits,  by  the 
confession  of  their  bitterest  enemies,  so  pure  and  blameless, 
religious  duties  properly  discharged  in  the  face  of  scorn  and 
the  instant  dread  of  punishment,  can  in  justice  be  regarded 
only  as  the  marks  of  a  piety  sincere  and  deeply  seated."* 
This  witness  is  true.  They  were  the  best,  the  most  laborious, 
and  conscientious  of  her  clergy.  + 

The  closing  scenes  which  marked  the  last  days  of  this 
mighty  queen  are  most  affecting.  "We  can  scarcely  realize 
them  without  the  profoundest  sorrow.  The  graphic  pen  of  Sir 
J.  Harrington  thus  describes  her  in  October,  1601: — ''Her 
taste  for  dress  was  gone;  she  had  not  changed  her  clothes 
for  many  days.  Nothing  could  please  her;  she  was  the  tor- 
ment of  the  ladies  who  waited  on  her  person.  She  stamped 
with  her  feet,  and  swore  violently  at  the  objects  of  her 
anger.  For  her  protection  she  had  ordered  a  sword  to  be 
placed  by  her  table,  which  she  often  took  in  her  hand,  and 
thrust  with  violence  into  the  tapestry  of  her  chamber." 

Another  writer  says,  "The  queen  kept  her  bed  for  fifteen 
days,  besides  the  three  she  sat  upon  a  stool ;  and  one  day, 
being  pulled  up  by  force,  she  obstinately  stood  upon  her 
feet  for  fifteen  hours.  When  she  was  near  her  end,  the 
Council  sent  to  her  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  and  other 

in  tlie  country  universally  come  so  seldom  to  common  prayer  and  divine 
service ;  and  when  they  do  come,  be  many  times  so  vainly  occupied  there, 
or  at  least  do  not  there  as  they  should  do,  but  for  want  of  this  discipline  ?" 
— The  Lord  Keeper's  Speech,  1572.  Pari,  History,  vol.  i.,  p.  774. 
*  Marsden,  pp.  244-5. 
=f*  '*^Then  it  came  to  pass,  and  very  much,  it  must  be  admitted,  from 
their  own  extravagance,  that  the  Puritans  were  regarded  in  the  court  'of 
Elizabeth,  not  as  men  of  scrupulous  minds,  but  as  a  party  ill  affected  to 
the  state." — Marsden,  p.  59. 


ELIZABETH.  173 

prelates,  at  the  sight  of  whom  she  was  much  offended, 
cholericly  rating  them,  'bidding  them  be  packing,  saying  she 
was  no  atheist,  but  she  knew  full  well  they  were  but  hedge- 
priests.'"*  Her  kinsman.  Sir  K.  Carey,  informs  us  "that 
about  six  at  night  she  made  signs  for  the  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury  and  her  chaplain  to  come  near."  After  she  had 
been  examined  by  his  grace  as -to  the  grounds  of  her  faith, 
"  he  began  to  pray,  and  all  that  were  by  did  answer  him. 
After  he  had  continued  long  in  jDrayer,  the  old  man's  knees 
were  weary:  he  blessed  her,  and  meant  to  rise  and  leave 
her.  The  queen  made  a  sign  with  her  hand.  My  sister 
Scroope,  knowing  her  meaning,  told  the  bishop  the  queen 
desired  he  would  pray  still.  He  did  so  for  a  long  half  hour 
after,  and  then  thought  to  leave  her.  She  made,  a  second 
time,  a  sign  for  the  archbishop  to  continue  in  prayer.  He 
did  so  for  half  an  hour  more,  with  earnest  cries  to  God  for 
her  soul's  health,  which  he  uttered  with  that  fervency  of 
spirit  that  the  queen,  to  all  our  sight,  much  rejoiced 
thereat. "t  Exhausted  by  these  efforts,  she  sank  into  a  deep 
sleep,  from  which  she  never  awoke.  Thus  died  "  Elizabeth, 
by  the  grace  of  God,  Queen  of  England,  France,  and  Ire- 
land ;  defender  of  the  true,  ancient  Catholic  faith ;  most 
worthy  Empress  from  the  Arcade  isles  to  the  mountains  of 
the  Pyrenees."  X 

*  Strickland,  vol.  vii.,  pp.  294-296. 
*t*  Morris,  who  had  been  imprisoned  wrongfully  for  proposing  a  Bill  to 
remedy  some  ecclesiastical  evils,  thus  indignantly,  in  a  letter  to  Burghley, 
writes  :  "I  had  thought  that  the  judge  ecclesiastical,  being  charged  in  the 
great  Coimcil  of  the  realm,  to  the  dishonour  of  God  and  of  her  majesty, 
of  violation  and  pervertion  of  law  and  public  justice,  and  wrong  done  unto 
the  liberties  and  freedom  of  all  her  majesty's  subjects,  by  their  extorted 
oaths,  wrongful  imprisonment,  lawless  subscriptions,  and  imjust  absolu- 
tions, would  rather  have  sought  means  to  be  cleared  of  this  mighty 
accusation,  than  to  shroud  themselves  under  the  suppressing  of  the 
complaint,  and  shadow  of  my  imprisonment." — Lodge's  Illustrations  of 
History,  vol.  ii.,  p.  444.  Morris  had  forgot  loho  had  said,  "Men  love 
darkness  rather  than  light,  because  their  deeds  are  evil." 
X  Quarterly  Review,  January,  1854,  p.  249. 


174j  early    ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

THE  FAMILY  OF  LOVE. 

Since  the  note  on  page  79  was  printed,  we  have  obtained 
additional  information  about  the  founder  of  this  sect.  We 
are  indebted  to  Professor  Miiller,  of  Amsterdam,  for  these 
details.  "  In  the  month  of  August,  1536,  the  great  assembly 
of  Anabaptists  was  held  at  Bockholt,  in  Westphalia,  wherein 
the  different  directions  (tendencies)  among  the  defenders  of 
Teleio  baptism,  were  manifested  and  came  to  light,  and 
were  revealed  to  the  conference.  It  was  the  grand  crisis. 
Some  of  the  most  violent  who  had  escaped  from  the  fall  of 
Munster,  but  had  learnt  nothing  by  that  fall,  ran  as  bands 
of  pilgrims  through  the  country,  w^ith  Jan  Willemsz  at  their 
head;  they  were  the  Anabaptist  veri-nominis ;  others,  more 
calm  and  sedate,  wanting  a  chief,  wandered  or  rambled  as 
sheep  who  had  no  pastor,  till  they  persuaded  Menno,  in 
December,  1536,  or  January,  1537,  to  place  himself  at  their 
head.  This  is  the  origin  of  Doopsgezinden,  or  Teleio-baptists, 
in  the  Netherlands.  A  third  jifarty  consisted  of  them  who 
were  less  violent  than  the  first  in  practice,  but  in  theory  as 
much  fanatic,  whom  David  George  (Jovis)  proceeded  to  win 
for  himself,  when  he  had  (in  November,  1536)  his  first  vision, 
or  pretended  to  have,  from  which  time  dates  a  total  change 
in  his  life." 

"  Hendrik  Ni€las  (or  Niclaasson),  in  accordance  with  the 
numerous  testimonies  of  history,  began  his  preaching  not 
before  1540,  i.e.,  four  years  after  the  severing  of  the  Ana- 
baptists and  the.Doop;  and  I  may  therefore  state,  with  an 
able  historian  of  our  denomination,  that  he  ivas  not  a 
Doopsgezinden,  nor  an  adherent  of  Menno.  He  was,  in  many 
respects,  a  follower  of  Da\dd  Jo\ds, — not  as  this  man  was 
in  the  first  period  of  his  life  (1536),  but  in  the  latter.  After 
the  removal  of  David  Jovis  to  Basle,  H.  Niclas  became  the 
leader  of  his  followers  in  the  Netherlands,  who  had  sepa- 
rated themselves  angrily  from  Menno;  and  it  may  be  that 
some  few  Doopsgezinden  joined  him  perhaps  at  Embden. 


ELIZABETH.     ^  175 

Tlien  these  must  have  been  banished  persons,  who  were 
attracted  and  seduced  by  his  boasting  of  the  Love.  Be- 
sides, H.  Niclas  did  not  disapprove  of  the  taking  of  an 
oath,  from  the  beginning  down  to  our  age  considered  and 
practised  among  us  as  interdicted  by  the  word  of  Christ,  a 
tenet  which  was  always,  and  is  now-a-days,  resj)ected  even 
by  the  constitution  and  the  law  of  the  Netherlands.  We 
agree  herein  with  your  church  to  admit  of  nothing  as  an 
article  of  faith,  or  of  duty  in  the  worship  of  God,  which  is 
not  practised  by  apostolic  precept  or  approved  example." 

His  views  on  baptism,  we  may  add,  are  invested  in  all  but 
impenetrable  mystery.  The  following  is  from  a  work  called, 
^^  The  Upright  Christian  Faith  of  the  Communion  of  Sai7its 
of  the  Family  of  Love,  wherein  also  the  upright  Christianas 
Baptism  is  testified  and  confessed^  In  the  eighth  article 
of  this  tract  will  be  found  the  following  words  : — 

"The  upright  believers,  who  follow  Christ  in  death  and 
life,  are  baptized  in  the  living  waters  of  the  Holy  Ghost  by 
Christ,  and  superfused  superabundantly  with  full  clearness 
of  God." 

"  We  confess  that  all  who  are  not  founded  in  this  upright 
faith  of  Christ,  and  are  not  baptized  in  the  name  oT  the 
Father,  in  the  name  of  the  Son,  and  in  the  name  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  are  not  true  Christians;  and  that,  likewise,  all 
who,  without  that  upright  faith  and  baptism,  boast  to  be 
Christians,  are  false  Christia:^s.  Therefore,  nobody  may 
boast  to  be  a  Christian,  who,  in  the  upright  faith,  has  not 
received  the  true  token  of  Christianity,  viz.,  the  true  bap- 
tism in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  or  who  carries  not,  essentially,  their  names  in 
himself  Otherwise  he  will  be  found  false  and  lying  in  the 
day  of  love  of  the  righteous  judgment  before  all  the  saints 
of  God,  who  are  comprised  in  the  communion."* 

■""  Letter  of  Professor  Miiller.  There  is  a  life  of  David  George,  by  Mr. 
Ci"amer,  minister  of  the  Mennonite  church  at  Middlebui-g.  Additional 
information  on  this  sect  will  be  found  in  the  volxune  of  tracts  on  Liberty 
of  Conscience ;  Appendix,  B.  K.  Society. 


176  EAKLY  English  baptists. 


CHAPTEE,    VI. 

THE   STUART   DYNASTY. — JAMES  THE  PIRST. 

With  a  new  race  of  princes,  a  new,  and  in  many  im- 
portant respects,  very  different  era  opened  on  this  England 
of  ours.  The  Tudor  spirit  had  expended  itself.  The  imperial 
majesty  of  the  last,  and  incomparably  the  greatest,  of  the 
race,  fomid  no  resemblance  in  the  feeble  and  pedantic  cha- 
racter of  her  successor.  Events  of  the  most  disastrous  kind, 
and  others  unfolding  the  loftiest  and  purest  principles, 
marked  this  reign.  National  honour  was  never  so  debased; 
civil  and  spiritual  tyranny  ruled  with  an  iron  sceptre ;  law, 
both  human  and  divine,  was  sacrificed  to  profligate  ambition 
and  the  lust  of  power;  yet,  in  the  very  depths  of  our 
national  degradation,  men  were  found  with  the  love  of 
liberty  so  quenchless  that  they  vindicated  the  rights  of 
humanity,  and  threw  before  the  world  such  views  of  politi- 
cal and  moral  science  as  have  commanded  the  homage  of  the 
wise  and  good  till  the  present  day. 

The  seeds  of  these  great  changes  had  been  sown  during 
the  latter  periods  of  the  former  dynasty.  The  great  religious 
movement, — the  awakened  mind, — the  spread  of  religious 
truth, — the  wide  diffusion  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures, — the 
influence  of  commerce,  and  other  causes,  demanded,  and  of 
necessity  produced  them.  Elizabeth's  strong  arm  was  too 
feeble  to  roll  back  the  deepening  and  swelling  torrent  of 
national  2:)rogress.  She  frowned,  stormed,  and  threatened, 
either  in  person  or  by  the  lips  of  her  lord  keepers,  but  her 
faithful  Commons  spoke,  tremblingly  at  first,  but  louder  and 
more  firmly  the  voice  of  the  rising  genius  of  British  liberty 
was  heard  in  the  utterances  of  the  Wentworths,  the  Morrises, 
the  Stricklands,   and  others.     The  seeds  of  constitutional 


THE   STUART   DYNASTY.  177 

and  religious  freedom  were  sown;  the  harvest,  during  the 
reign  of  the  Stuarts,  was  abundant.* 

No  careful  and  candid  reader  of  our  history  at  this  period 
can  be  ignorant  of  the  fact,  or  insensible  to  the  influence  it 
exerted,  that  jjopular  liberty  carried  on  a  long  and  triumph- 
ant struggle  with  despotic  and  arbitrary  power.  James's 
kingcraft  was  his  boast.  His  son  was  animated  by  the  same 
delusion.  The  divine  right  of  monarchs  to  do  wrong, — to 
oppress  their  people,-^was  a  doctrine  ardently  cherished  by 
them. 

No  despots  of  the  past  ever  put  forth  more  blasphemous 
pretensions.  The  Senate  was  doomed,  at  Whitehall,  where 
they  had  been  summoned,  to  listen  to  thes'e  words  : — 
''  Kings  are  justly  called  gods,  for  that  they  exercise  a 
manner  or  resemblance  of  divine  jDower  upon  the  earth; 
for  if  you  will  consider  the  attributes  of  God,  you  shall  see 
how  they  agree  in  the  person  of  a  king.  God  hath  power 
to  create  or  destroy,  to  make  or  unmake  at  his  pleasure; 
to  give  life  or  send  death;  to  judge  all,  and  be  judged 
nor  accountable  to  none ;  to  raise  low  things,  and  to 
make  high  things  low  at  his  pleasure ;  and  to  God  both  soul 
and  body  are  due.  And  the  like  power  have  kings.  They 
make  and  unmake  their  subjects;  they  have  power  of  raising 
and  casting  down;  of  life  and  death;  judges  over  all  their 
subjects  and  in  all  causes;  and  yet  accountable  to  none  but 
God  only.  They  have  power  to  exalt  low  things  and  abase 
high  things,  amd  make  of  their  subjects  like  men  at  chess, 
a  pawn  to  take  a  bishop  or  a  knight,  and  to  cry  up  or  down 
any  of  their  subjects  as  they  do  their  money.  And  to  the 
king  is  due  both  the  affections  of  the  soul  and  the  services 

*  Referring  to  a  vindication  of  its  privileges  by  the  House  of  Commons, 
in  1571,  Lingard  says,  "This  victory  was  owing  to  that  tone  of  mind 
which  religious  enthusiasm  always  imparts.  It  formed  a  new  era  in  the 
liistory  of  the  House  of  Commons.  The  members  learned  to  cherish  their 
privileges,  to  think  more  highly  of  their  own  importance,  to  resist  witk 
greater  confidence  the  arbitrary  pretensions  of  the  crowTi." — History  of 
England,  vol.  v.,  p.  318.     4to. 

N 


178  EARLY  "ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

of  the  body  of  his  subjects,"*    To  such  lofty  claims  were  the 
true  manhood  of  England,  at  this  time,  doomed  to  listen  ! 

To  his  kingcraft  the  monarch  still  clung.  Age,  and  re- 
peated defeats,  brought  no  wisdom  to  his  councils;  and  in 
1621  he  thus  insulted  the  patriotism  of  England  in  a  letter 
to  the  Commons  :  — "  These  are,  therefore,  to  command 
you  to  make  known,"  he  said  in  a  letter  to  the  Speaker,  to 
be  read  to  the  assembled  Commons  of  England,  "in  our 
name,  unto  the  House,  that  none  therein  shall  presume 
henceforth  to  meddle  with  anything  concerning  our  govern- 
ment, or  deep  matters  of  state;  and,  namely,  not  to  deal 
with  our  dearest  son's  match  with  the  daughter  of  Spain, 
nor  to  touch  the  honour  of  that  king,  or  any  other  our 
friends  and  confederates;  and,  also,  not  to  meddle  with 
any  man's  particulars  which  have  their  due  motives  in  our 
ordinary  courts  of  justice.  .  .  .  You  shall  resolve,  then, 
in  our  name,  that  we  think  ourselves  very  free  and  able  to 
punish  and  warn  misdemeanants  in  parliament,  as  well 
during  their  sitting  as  after;  which  we  mean  not  to  spare 
hereafter,  upon  any  occasion  of  any  man's  insolent  beha- 
viour there,  that  shall  be  ministered  unto  us. — From  New- 
market, December  3rd,  1621."  t 

His  successors  clung  to  the  pleasing  delusion.  But  con- 
stitutional liberty  advanced.  Long  and  fierce  was  the  con- 
test. Step  by  step  the  Eliots,  the  Hampdens,  the  Pyms, 
and  others  of  the  noble  band  of  patriots  who  have  shed 
lustre  on  the  British  name,  advanced  in  spite  of  bribes, 

*  "Works,  pp.  529,  531,  He  issued  a  proclamation  forbidding  liis  sub- 
jects, from  tbe  highest  to  the  lowest,  from  speaking  of  state  aifairs,  or 
discussing  the  conduct  of  any  of  the  princes  in  alliance  with  him. — ^Aikin's 
Life  of  James,  vol,  ii.,  p.  195. 

+  Ibid,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  281-2.  "  I  heard  that  the  Lord  Coke,  amongst  other 
offensive  speeches,  should  say  to  liis  majesty  that  his  highness  was  de- 
fended by  the  laws.  At  which  saying,  with  other  speeches  then  used  by 
the  Lord  Coke,  his  majesty  was  very  much  offended,  and  told  him  he 
spake  foolishly,  and  said  that  he  was  not  by  his  laws,  but  by  God." — 
Letter  to  the  Earl  of  Shrewsbury,  1608.    Lodge,  vol,  iii,,  p,  250. 


THE    STUART    DYNASTY.  179 

intimidation,  and  royal  frowns,  till  the  death  of  Charles 
proclaimed  the  overthrow  of  despotic,  of  irresponsible  power. 
Later  on,  the  expulsion  of  James  from  a  throne  which  he 
had  degraded,  and  a  nation  whose  liberties  he  had  betrayed, 
proclaimed  the  fact  that  nations  were  not  made  for  kings, 
but  kings  for  the  people. 

P-arallel  with  this  was  the  great  and  glorious  struggle  for 
religious  freedom.  The  progress  of  the  one  may  always  be 
measured  by  the  advancement  of  the  other.  On  the  side  of 
civil  despotism  a  State  Church  is  generally  found.  In  this 
case  it  was  so.  The  flattery  of  the  hierarchy  was  fulsome  in 
the  extreme.  Beyond  all  other  men,  it  encouraged  these 
unhappy  princes  in  their  headlong  career.  The  past  shows 
us  that  a  dominant,  wealthy,  and  insolent  church  is  a  fearful 
national  curse.  That  it  is  a  violation  of  all  right,  and  of 
necessity  has  the  will,  if  not  the  power,  to  oppress  any 
dissident  from  its  dogmas,  or  the  form  of  its  worship.  True 
statesmanship  will  always  regard  and  treat  it  as  such.  Many 
of  Elizabeth's  most  sage  counsellors  felt  this.  Burghley, 
Knollis,  Walsingham,  Leicester,  and  others,  protected  many 
of  the  persecuted  from  the  crushing  fury  of  the  bishops. 
The  successive  defeats  of  the  dissidents  augmented  the  inso- 
lence of  the  spiritual  princes  of  the  church.  The  divine 
right  of  Episcopacy,  broached  by  Bancroft,  was  hailed  by  his 
brethren.  Parker  and  his  brethren  had  flogged  with  whips; 
now  the  hierarchy  used  scorpions.  With  these  lofty  preten- 
sions, the  corruption  of  Christian  doctrine  proceeded. 

Laud's  influence  was  disastrous  in  the  extreme.  He 
centered  the  suspicion  of  the  nation  on  his  proceedings, 
and  awakened  the  fear  of  the  wise  and  good.  The  free- 
dom of  thought  would  have  been  repressed.*  A  striking 
instance  of  this  is  seen  in  James's  dealina:  with  the  efreat 

*  "  The  clergy  had  begun  by  advancing  that  the  king-'s  authority  was 
sufficient  to  reform  what  was  amiss  in  any  of  his  owa  courts  ;  all  jurisdic- 
tions, spiritual  and  temporal,  being  annexed  to  his  crown." — Hallam, 
vol.  i.,  p.  324. 


180  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

Seldon.  Referring  to  a  confutation  of  his  History  of  Tytlies^ 
he  said,  "  If  you,  or  any  of  your  friends,  shall  wi*'ite  against 
this  confutation,  I  will  throw  you  into  prison/'*  Difference 
of  opinion  would  have  entailed  the  loss  of  all  that  is  dear  to 
man  in  his  social  and  civil  relations.  Upon  the  ruins  of  the 
nation's  dignity  he  would  have  based  the  authority  of  the 
church.  The  senate  became  a  theological  school.  The  most 
important  doctrines, — the  Calvinist  and  Arminian  theories, 
— the  tendencies  of  the  high-church  principle, —  are  ever 
mingled  up  with  "  the  great  remonstrance,"  and  "  petitions 
for  the  redress  of  grievances."  The  Commons  felt  that  the 
triumph  of  Laud  would  be  the  destruction  of  those  liberties 
for  which  they  had  so  long  and  so  earnestly  striven.  The 
prostration  of  the  church  was  the  necessary  effect.  By  its 
degrading  flattery  to  civil  despotism, — by  the  unholy  depend- 
ence it  placed  on  the  will  of  kings, — by  the  readiness  with 
which  it  lent  all  its  power  to  rivet  the  chains  of  slavery  on. 
the  neck  of  the  people,— it  was  identified  by  the  popular 
will  as  the  supporter,  if  not  the  originator,  of  all  that  was 
oppressive  in  kingly  government,  and  the  fall  of  the  mon- 
archy was  the  overthrow  of  the  power  of  the  church.  These 
elements,  and  others  which  the  historian  of  this  era  notices, 
essentially  distinguished  the  Stuart  dynasty.  No  period  of 
the  modem  history  of  this  nation  is  so  fraught  with  national 
debasement  and  disaster,  as  well  as  with  that  which  gives 
us  brighter  proofs  of  the  nation's  power,  and  the  unsullied 
dignity  of  true  Englishmen.  With  a  race  of  princes  the  most 
worthless,  we  have  a  race  of  patriots  whose  names  will  excite 
the  veneration  of  the  wise  and  good  in  all  ages :  with  a  race 
of  statesmen  ever  ready  to  sacrifice  right  to  the  will  of  a 
monarch,  we  have,  in  the  speeches,  the  writings,  and  acts  of 
others,  the  soundest  principles  of  political  science  :  with  a  race 
of  bishops,  captivated  only  with  the  sensual  and  the  formal, 
who  delighted  more  in  compelling  the  observance  of  senseless 
trifles  than  in  the  proclamation  of  Christian  virtue  or  the 

*  Aikin's  James  I.,  vol.  i.,  p.  131. 


JAMES   THE    FIRST.  181 

moral  improvement  of  the  people,  we  have  divines  whose 
writings  will  be  a  ceaseless  spring  at  which  the  faithful, 
throughout  all  time,  will  quench  their  thirst  for  the  know- 
ledge of  the  Lord.  Beyond  all  doubt,  the  dynasty  of  this 
unhappy  family  was  one  of  extremes,  during  which  the  con- 
flict of  great  i:)rinciples  wrought  that  change  which  ultimately 
placed  the  Dutchman  on  the  throne,  and  laid  a  solid  basis 
for  our  constitutional  freedom. 

The  accession  of  James  to  the  English  throne  was  un- 
disputed.* There  were  no  competitors  to  excite  alarm  in  his 
pathway.  The  claims  of  all  who  had  disturbed  the  minds  of 
his  predecessors  now  centered  in  him.  His  proclamation,  by 
Cecil  and  the  Council,  was  immediate.  The  information 
reached  the  Scottish  king  in  his  capital.  He  was  transported 
at  the  tidings.  No  possessor  of  the  English  throne  had  greater 
power  or  wdder  dominion  than  the  founder  of  the  House  of 
Stuart.  The  three  kingdoms  bowed  to  his  authority,  and 
he  felt  that  he  had  within  his  reach  the  means  he  had  long 
coveted,  of  gratifying  his  ambition,  and  indulging  those 
visions  of  royal  magnificence  which  had  long  been  floating 
before  him.t  His  journey  to  the  metropolis  of  his  new 
dominion  was  by  easy  stages,  and  it  was  quite  an  ovation. 
He  was  marching  to  "  the  land  of  promise,"  and  everywhere 
the  greetings  of  his  people  were  hearty  and  loud.   Addressing 

*  James  was  born  in  the  Castle  of  Edinburgh,  1566.  Of  the  mode  of 
his  baptism  there  can  be  no  doubt.  "At  convenient  time  you  are  to  pre- 
sent her  the  font  of  gold,  which  we  send  with  you.  You  may  pleasantly 
say  that  it  was  made  as  soon  as  we  heard  of  the  prince's  birth,  and  then 
it  was  big  enough  for  liim ;  but  now  he,  being  grown,  is  too  big  for  it. 
Therefore  it  may  be  better  used  for  the  next  child,  provided  that  it  be 
christened  before  it  outgrow  the  font." — Keith,  p.  357.  Tiu'ner,  vol.  iv., 
p.  86  (Note). 

James  also  refers  to  "the  font  wherein  I  was  christened." — "Works. 
London,  1616.  Of  Prince  Henry's  baptism  the  reader  will  find  a  lengthy 
account  in  a  volume  of  Tracts  illustrative  of  Traditional  History  of  Scot- 
land.    Edinburgh,  1836. 

+  Lingard,  vol.  vi.,  p.  3.     4to. 


182  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

his  first  parliameut,  he  thus  alhides  to  it: — "Shall  I  ever, 
nay,  can  I  ever  be  able,  or  rather  so  unable  in  memory  as  to 
forget  your  unexpected  readiness  and  alacrity,  your  ever 
memorable  resolution,  and  your  most  wonderful  conjunction 
and  harmony  of  your  hearts,  in  declaring  and  embracing  me 
as  your  undoubted  and  lawful  king  and  governor  1  Or  shall 
it  ever  be  blotted  out  of  my  mind  how,  at  my  first  entry 
into  this  kingdom,  the  people  of  all  sorts  rid  and  ran,  nay, 
rather  flew  to  meet  me; — their  eyes  flaming  nothing  but 
sparkles  of  afiection,  their  mouths  and  tongues  uttering 
nothing  but  sounds  of  joy;  their  hands,  feet,  and  all  the 
rest  of  their  members,  in  their  gestures,  discovering  a  pas- 
sionate longing  and  earnestness  to  meet  and  embrace  their 
new  sovereign  1  "* 

The  hopes  and  fears  of  the  great  religious  parties  gathered 
around  the  new  chief  of  the  nation.  There  were  grounds 
on  which  all  were  warranted  to  expect  the  favour  of  the 
monarch.  Romanists  recalled  the  devotedness  and  suffering 
of  his  mother  for  the  old  faith,  and  the  sympathy  v/hich 
the  Scottish  king  had,  not  un frequently,  manifested  with 
it;t  and  though,  probably,  despairing  of  the  restoration  of 
their  church  to  its  former  supremacy  and  glory,  yet  they 
very  naturally  expected  a  modification  of  the  sharp  laws 
under  which  they  had  sufiered  during  the  former  reign. 

The  Nonconformists,  and  even  the  Separatists,  on  the  other 
hand,  were  sanguine  that  not  only  would  their  claims  be 
heard  by  a  sympathizing  judge,  but  that  large  and  important 
concessions  w^ould  be  made  to  their  just  and  Scriptu.ral  de- 
mands. The  ground  on  which  these  hopes  were  based  was 
broad  and  solid.  The  discipline  of  Geneva  had  been  enthroned 
in  the  northern  kingdom,  by  the  successful  efforts  of  Knox 
and  his  brethren.     James  had  been  nurtured  in  it.     All  his 

*  Pari.  History,  vol.  i. ,  p.  977.     James's  speech  to  his  Parliaraent. 
i*  He  even  solicited  the  Pope  to  confer  a  cardinal's  hat  on  Dnimniond, 
Bishop  of  Vaison. — Aikin's  James  I.,  vol.  i.,  p.  33.     Lingard,  vol.   ix,,. 
p.  439.     (Note.) 


JAMES   THE    FIRST.  183 

public  acts  were  associated  with  it.  The  English  Episcopate, 
and  the  constitution  of  the  church,  had  been  condemned  by 
him  in  the  severest  language,  and  on  his  own  kirk  he  had 
lavished  the  warmest  expressions  of  affection.  They  had  not 
forgotten,  that  "  with  head  uncovered  and  hands  uplifted  to 
heaven,  he  had  protested  that  their  Presbyterian  Church  was 
the  purest  in  the  world ;  that  the  English  service  was  but 
an  evil  said  mass  in  English ;  and  that  except  the  adoration 
of  the  host,  it  wanted  nothing  of  the  mass  itself""""  The 
church  had  more  reason  for  alarm.  Hope  and  fear  would 
mingle  in  the  minds  of  the  prelates  at  the  prospect  of  the 
change  which  the  growing  infirmities  of  Elizabeth  assured 
them  could  not  be  distant.  The  succession  of  a  Presbyterian 
monarch  to  a  queen  devoted  to  the  most  splendid  Episcopacy 
in  the  world,  was  an  event  which  might  be  disastrous.  But 
wise  men  swayed  the  destinies  of  the  church  at  this  crisis, 
though  not  invested  with  spiritual  power.  Another  religious 
revolution  would  be  fearful.  The  contending  elements  were 
more  varied  and  powerful  now  than  before,  and  there  was 
no  master  mind  to  grasp  and  control  them.  The  sympathies 
of  the  leading  statesmen  at  this  time,  from  many  causes, 
would  be  in  favour  of  the  hierarchy.  Whitgift,  too,  was 
alert.  His  emissaries  had  visited  the  monarch.  Of  the 
devotedness  of  the  prelates  to  his  interest  he  was  fully 
assured;  and  if  the  royal  word  was  of  any  worth,  their 
fears  were  allayed  by  the  assurance  of  James,  that  without 
their  counsel  and  consent  he  would  make  no  alteration  in 
the  ecclesiastical  condition  of  the  kingdom.  The  bishops 
had  promised  him  an  obsequiousness  to  which  he  had  been 
little  accustomed,  and  a  zeal  to  enhance  his  prerogative 
which  they  afterwards  too  well  displayed. t 

Old  Thomas  Fuller,  in  his  quaint,  but  racy  style,  thus 
describes  the  conflict: — "And  now  it  is  strange  with  what 

*  In  1590,  bsfoi'e  his  Parliament. — Marsclen,  p.  249.  , 

t  Hallam's  History,  p,  297. 


184  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

assiduity  and  diligence  the  two  potent  parties,  the  defenders 
of  Episcopacy  and  Presbytery,  with  equal  hopes  of  success, 
made  (besides  particular  and  private  addresses)  public  and 
visible  application  to  King  James  I. ;  the  first  to  continue, 
the  latter  to  restore,  or  rather  to  set  up  their  government. 
So  that  whilst  each  side  was  jealous  his  rival  should  get  the 
start  by  early  stirring,  and  rise  first  in  the  king's  favour, 
such  was  their  vigilance  that  neither  may  seem  to  go  to 
bed ;  incessantly  diligent,  both  before  and  since  the  queen's 
death,  in  despatching  posts  and  messages  into  Scotland,  to 
advance  their  several  designs,"  &c.* 

Such  was  the  condition  of  religious  parties  when  the  first 
of  the  Stuarts  came  to  take  possession  of  his  long-coveted 
crown.  The  character  of  James  presents  us  with  a  singular 
mixture  of  contrarieties.  A  glance  at  it  is  requisite  to  our 
design.  The  present  has  reversed  the  decisions  of  the  past. 
"The  Solomon  of  his  age"  is  now  regarded  as  only,  in  the 
language  of  a  contemporary,  "the  wisest  fool  in  Christen- 
dom."t  Extremes  seem  to  have  centered  in  him.  With  the 
loftiest  pretensions  to  political  wisdom,  his  sim})licity  was 
extreme.^  Boasting  of  his  unbounded  authority,  he  was 
governed  by  a  succession  of  the  most  unprincipled  and 
worthless  men.  With  a  style  of  the  most  imposing  regality 
there  were  associated  vices  of  the  lowest  and  most  degrading 
kind.  Grave  at  times,  yet  volatile;  impetuous,  yet  patient; 
studious,  yet  frivolous; — in  a  word,  so  varied  and  changing 
as  to  justify  the  conflicting  opinions  which  the  pen  of  history 
has  recorded  both  of  the  man  and  the  king.  His  duplicity 
was  unbounded.  "  Early  trained  to  dissimulation,  by  the 
time  he  was  sixteen  his  mastery  in  this  despicable  art  was 
entire.     No  motive  had  power  to  influence  him  which  did 

*  Church  History,  book  ix.,  p.  5.     Vide  Bishop  Goodman's  Court  of 
James  I.,  vol.  i.,  p.  28.     (Note.) 

+  Sir  P.  Warwick's  Memoirs,  p.  3.     (Note. ) 

J  "Sagacity  that  often  wore  the  appearance  of  consummate  wisdom,  of 
folly  scarcely  distinguishable  from  that  of  an  idiot." — Marsden,  p.  247. 


i 


JAMES    THE    FIRST.  185 

not  touch  his  personal  gratification  or  selfish  interest.  Lost 
to  all  filial  affectioDj  the  suflferings  of  his  misguided  and 
unfortunate  mother  were  lost  upon  him."*  Of  the  extent 
to  which  this  despicable  vice  was  cultivated  by  James,  we 
can  have  no  more  striking  instance  than  his  treatment  of 
his  all-powerful  favourite,  upon  whose  worthless  head  he 
had  showered  the  highest  honours  : — "  The  Earl  of  Somer- 
set never  parted  from  him  (James)  with  more  seeming  afiec- 
tion  than  at  tliis  time,  when  he  knew  Somerset  should  never 
see  him  more.  .  .  The  Earl,  when  he  kissed  his  hand, 
the  king  hung  about  hi^  neck,  slubbering  his  cheeks,  saying, 
^  For  God's  sake,  when  shall  I  see  thee  again  1  On  my  soul, 
I  shall  neither  eat  nor  sleep  until  you  come  again.'  The 
Earl  told  him  on  Monday  (this  being  on  Friday).  'For 
God's  sake  let  me,'  said  the  king;  ^ shall  I — shall  I  V  then 
lolled  about  his  neck.  '  Then,  for  God's  sake,  give  thy  lady 
this  kiss  for  me.'  The  Earl  had  scarcely  entered  his  coach 
before  the  monarch  said,  '  I  shall  never  see  his  face  more."'t 
His  extravagance  was  boundless.  "Already,"  says  Cecil, 
*'our  sovereign  spends  ,£100,000  yearly  in  his  house,  which 
was  wont  to  be  but  £50,000.";|:  Coming  from  a  country 
where  money  was  scarce,  he  had  no  conception  of  its  value, 
and  he  squandered  away  the  treasure  of  the  kingdom  with 
the  most  lavish  hands  on  many  of  his  needy  countrymen 

*  Lingard,  vol.  viii.,  p.  214.  "But  his  opinion  is,  that  it  cannot  stand 
■with  his  honour  that  he  be  a  consenter  to  take  his  mother's  life ;  but  he 
is  content  how  strictly  she  be  kept,  and  all  her  old  knavish  servants 
hanged,  chiefly  they  who  be  in  hand." — The  Master  of  Grey  (James's 
Ambassador,  1586),  Goodman,  vol.  i.,  p.  129. 

+  Court  and  Character  of  James  I.  Secret  History  of  James  I.,  vol.  i., 
pp.  411-12. 

Tytler  says,  "He  was  influenced  by  favourites  through  life."  He  was 
"  an  early  adept  in  diplomatic  hypocrisy."  "  The  king  was  known  to  be 
so  great  a  dissembler  that  few  trusted  his  professions." — History  of 
Scotland,  vol.  viii.,  pp.  133,  203,  245,  333.  "James,  however,  was  aU  his 
life  rather  a  bold  liar  than  a  good  dissembler." — Hallam,  vol.  i.,  p.  297. 

J  Cecil  to  Lord  Shrewsbury,  September,  1603.  Lodge's  Illustrations, 
vol.  iii.,  p.  34. 


186  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

who  followed  Mm,*  and  tlie  wortliless  favourites  who  ruled 
him  according  to  their  will.t  "  Such  were  the  crowds  that 
followed  his  majesty  of  the  former,  that  the  Privy  Council 
issued  orders  to  prevent  the  emigration  of  his  northern  sub- 
jects to  the  newly-acquired  English  Goshen."  [j;  His  wants 
were  always  great,  and  his  recklessness  often  brought  him 
into  collision  with  his  Commons,  and  led  him  to  the  adop- 
tion of  means  for  raising  of  money  which  laid  the  founda- 
tion of  the  ruin  of  his  son,  And  the  disasters  which  more  or 
less  marked  his  family.  Bribery  was  shameless,  and  the  sale 
of  all  offices  was  notorious.  §  * 

This  rough  outline  of  the  character  of  the  king  is  requi- 
site to  our  design.  Ignorant  of  it,  the  facts  which  our 
subsequent  narrative  v/ill  embody  would  lose  much  of  their 
interest. 

At  an  early  period  the  Puritans  laid .  their  claims  before 
the  Presbyterian  monarch.  Their  grievances  were  embodied 
in  a  petition.  It  was  called  the  Millionary  one,  from  the 
number  of  subscribers  to  it.  |1  Their  demands  were  moderate. 
At  no  time  could  they  have  been  conceded  with  a  better 

*  "This  vast  treasure  was  bestowed  on  the  needy  Scots,  who,  like 
horse-leeches,  sucked  the  exchequer  dry ;  so  that  honour  and  offices  were 
set  to  sale  to  fill  the  Scots'  purses  and  empty  the  kingdom's  treasure," — 
Sir  E.  Pa^ton's  Catastrophe  of  the  House  of  Stuart.  Secret  History  of 
James  I.,  vol.  ii.,  p.  343. 

+  "  His  favourite  Scot,  who  from  a  lowly  position  was  raised  to  the 
highest  honour.  His  tyranny  for  a  season  was  complete.  Offices  about 
the  court  were  sold  to  the  highest  bidder :  no  plunder  of  the  public  was 
obtained  without  purchase ;  and  the  king's  titles  were  bought  Jind  sold, 
whilst  no  seclusion  could  resist  the  intrusion  of  his  potent  influence." — 
Thomson's  Life  of  Villiers,  Duke  of  Buckingham,  vol.  i. ,  p.  91. 

J  Osborne's  Traditional  Memorials  of  James  I.  Secret  History  of  the 
Court  of  James  I.,  vol.  i.,  p.  143. 

§  "  Every  inferior  department  which  was  not  filled  by  their  relations 
or  dependents,  was  sold  without  scruple  to  the  highest  bidder." — Lingard, 
vol.  ix.,  p.  151.  Vide  note  also.  Proof  of  this  aboimds  in  Lodge's 
Illustrations,  vol.  iii. 

II  "It  was  subscribed  by  825  ministers,  from  twenty-five  counties." — 
Hallam,  vol.  i.,  p.  296. 


JAMES    THE    FIRST.  187 

grace.  "Many  of  these  have  since  been  wrung,  by  a  necessity 
they  could  not  resist,  from  chui'chraen  of  succeeding  days; 
some,  in  a  far  better  spirit,  have  been  cheerfully  conceded 
in  our  own  time,  by  churchmen  as  well-affected,  as  learned, 
and  as  pious  as  the  most  unyielding  of  their  forefathers."* 
We  need  not  recapitulate  their  claims.  We  have  mentioned 
them  before.  They  asked  for  nothing  which  was  incon- 
sistent with  the  existence  of  the  established  hierarchy. 

Policy  demanded  that  some  regard  should  be  paid  to  their 
modest  request.  A  conference  was  proposed.  Some  of  the 
most  eminent  of  the  nonconforming  clergy  should  meet  with 
the  bishops,  and  in  a  Christian  and  fraternal  spirit  confer, 
under  the  presidency  of  the  king,  on  the  various  points  in 
dispute.  Hampton  Court  was  selected  as  the  place  for  this 
celebrated  ecclesiastical  gathering.  The  project  was  suited 
to  the  tastes  of  the  king.  It  would  give  the  royal  theologian, 
who  had  been  trained  in  all  the  dialectics  of  the  schools  in 
his  northern  states,  an  opportunity  of  exhibiting  his  skill  in 
the  discussion ;  whilst  his  fairness,  in  trying  to  hold  the  bal- 
ance between  the  contending  parties,  and  to  bring  them 
into  a  more  fraternal  union,  would  be  manifest  to  his  people. 
But  it  was  one  of  the  first  pieces  of  kingcraft  with  which 
he  sought  to  betray  and  impose  on  his  people.  A  more 
glaring  and  shameful  piece  of  hypocrisy  was  never  practised 
in  the  worst  days  of  Romish  tyranny.  Four  Puritans  and 
eighteen  churchmen,  with  the  king  at  their  head,  met  on  the 
14th  of  January,  1603.  The  archbishops  of  both  provinces,, 
eight  bishojos,  seven  deans,  and  two  others,  formed  the 
clerical  party.  On  the  other  side  were  Dr.  Reynolds,  Dr. 
Sparkes,  Mr.  Knewstubs,  and  Mr.  Chaderton.  Everything, 
after  the  first  day's  proceedings,  was  a  mere  sham.  Prac- 
tically, the  monarch  and  his  ecclesiastical  staff  had  settled 
the  matter  before  the  representatives  of  the  dissenting 
brethren  had  uttered  a  word  in  conference.      "  During  the 

*  Marsclen,  p.  251. 


188  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

first  day,"  says  a  candid  writer,  "  tlie  Puritans  were  not 
present,  being  expressly  excluded  by  his  majesty's  commands. 
Yet  in  their  absence  the  questions  were  discussed,  ound^  in 
fact,  decided^  on  which  they  were  most  anxious  to  obtain  a 
hearing.  The  king  opened  the  proceedings  with  a  speech,  in 
which  he  expressed  his  satisfaction  that  he  was  in  the  jDre- 
sence  of  grave,  learned,  and  reverend  men;  not  as  before, 
elsewhere,  a  king  without  state,  without  honour;  where 
beardless  boys  braved  him  to  his  face.  He  said  he  was 
averse  to  any  innovations;  at  the  same  time,  should  any- 
thing be  found  to  need  redress,  he  wished  it  to  be  done, 
though  as  quietly  as  possible,  and  without  any  visible  alter- 
ation ;  a  remark  which  he  several  times  repeated ;  and  on 
this  account  he  had  called  in  the  bishops  by  themselves."* 
Over  three  days  this  farce  was  extended.  The  arguments 
of  the  Puritans  were  heard  only  with  contempt  and  inso- 
lence. Truth  was  with  them,  but  the  union  of  royal  and 
episcopal  interest  triumphed  over  them  for  a  season.  We 
cannot  narrate  the  proceedings  of  this  synod.  Our  readers 
will  find  ample  details  of  them  in  the  authors  indicated 
below.  +  We  can  only  give  one  sample  of  the  way  in  which 
the  royal  theologian  dealt  with  questions  which  were 
shaking  the  church  to  its  centre.  Dr.  Reynolds  had  been 
pleading  for  the  restoration  of  the  prophesyings,  as  Grindal 
and  other  dignitaries  of  the  church  had  recommended.  For 
the  benefit  of  the  church,  and  the  more  efficient  discharge 
of  clerical  duty,  he  also  advocated  provincial  synods,  under 
the  presidency  of  the  bishops.  "The  king,"  says  Bishop  Bar- 
low, "was  stirred  at  this ;  yet,  which  was  admirable  in  him, 
without  passion  or  show,  thinking  that  they  aimed  at  a 
Scotch  Presbytery,  which  he  said  agreed  with  monarchy  as 
God  and  the  devil.  '  Then  Jack  and  Tom,  and  Will  and 
Dick  shall  meet,  and,  at  their  pleasure,  censure  me  and  my 
Council,  and  all  our  proceedings :  then  Will  shall  stand  up 

*  Marsden,  p.  257.         +  Marsden,  Price,  Neal,  Brooks,  Fletcher,  &c. 


JAMES    THE    FIRST.  189 

and  say,  "  It  must  be  thus ; "  then  Dick  shall  reply,  and  say 
"Nay,  marry,  but  we  will  have  it  thus;"  and  here  I  must 
once  reiterate  my  former  speech,  Le  roy  s'  avisera,' "  &c.* 
Looking  at  Dr.  Reynolds,  the  royal  hypocrite  said,  "Well, 
doctor,  have  you  anything  else  to  say  V  Dr.  Reynolds. 
"  No  more,  if  it  please  your  majesty." — The  King.  "  If  this 
be  all  your  party  hath  to  say,  I  will  make  them  conform 
themselves,  or  else  I  will  harry  them  out  of  the  land,  or  else 
do  worse."  '^The  jeers  and  pleasantries  of  Jeffries,  on  the 
judgment  seat,  were  scarcely  more  unfeeling. "f  From  the 
character  of  the  monarch,  as  already  delineated,  our  readers 
will  feel  no  surprise  at  his  treatment  of  these  Christian 
men.  But  what  shall  we  sAy  of  the  bishops  1  They  were 
the  anointed  of  the  Lord;  the  successors  of  apostolic  men; 
yet  the  profound  learning  of  Reynolds,  the  holy  character 
of  his  colleagues,  the  moral  worth  and  transparent  sincerity 
of  their  and  the  doctor's  motives,  ought  to  have  called  forth 
manifestations  of  the  most  exalted  tenderness  and  sympathy. 
But  littleness,  under  the  mask  of  lofty  pretensions,  in  the 
flush  of  triumph,  never  feels  thus.  His  Grace  of  Canterbury, 
in  the  fulness  of  his  joy,  exclaimed,  "that,  undoubtedly,  his 
Majesty  spake  by  the  especial  assistance  of  God's  Spirit." 
The  Bishop  of  London,  on  his  knees,  protested  "that  his 
heart  melted  within  him,  as,  he  doubted  not,  did  the  hearts 
of  the  whole  company,  with  joy,  and  made  haste  to  acknow- 
ledge to  Almighty  God,  his  singular  mercy  in  giving  us  such 
a  king,  as  since  Christ's  time  the  like  had  not  been  seen." 
So  writes  the  episcopal  historian  of  this  celebrated  confer- 
ence. Well  might  a  subsequent  member  of  the  same  church, 
compelled  by  the  force  of  truth,  say,  in  reference  to  this, 
"  that  the  scene  that  followed  was  one  of  the  most  humili- 
ating upon  the  page  of  English  history."  "  The  Puritans 
had  been  unfairly  treated,  browbeaten,  jeered  at,  silenced." J 

*  Collier,  vol.  ii.,  p.  681.  t  Marsden,  p.  262. 

J  Ibid,  pp.  266-7.   "Welwood's  Memoirs,  p.  21,    Mosheim's  Ecclesiastical 
History,  vol.  v.,  p.  386. 


190  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

"We  will  only  add  a  sentence  or  two  from  one  of  the  most 
able  of  modern  historians,  but  by^o  means  one  partial  to 
the  character  of  the  Puritans.  '^  His  measures  towards  the 
Nonconformist  party  had  evidently  been  resolved  upon  before 
hje  summoned  a  few  of  their  divines  to  thfe  famous  confer- 
ence at  Hampton  Court.  In  the  account  that  we  read  of 
this  meeting,  we  are  alternately  struck  with  wonder  at  the 
indecent  and  partial  behaviour  of  the  king,  and  at  the  abject 
baseness  of  the  bishops,  mixed,  according  to  the  custom  of 
servile  natures,  with  insolence  towards  their  opponents."* 

The  spirit  of  the  monarch  manifested  itself,  in  relation 
to  religion,  in  the  proclamation  for  his  first  parliament. 
After  various  directions,  he  sAys : — "  ISText,  and  above  all 
things,  considering  that  one  of  the  main  pillars  of  this 
estate  is  the  preservation  of  unity  in  the  profession  of 
sincere  religion  of  Almighty  God,  we  do  also  admonish 
that  there  be  great  care  taken  to  avoid  the  choice  of  any 
persons,  either  noted  for  their  superstitious  blindness  one 
way,  or  for  their  turbulent  humour  other  ways,  because 
their  disorderly  and  unquiet  spirits  will  disturb  all  the  dis- 
creet and  modest  proceedings  in  that  greatest  and  gravest 
Council."t 

His  hatred  to  the  Puritans  was  intense.  In  a  letter, 
supposed  to  be  addressed  to  the  Earl  of  Dunbar,  his 
treasurer  in  Scotland,  he  says :  "  And  so  farewell  from  my 
wilderness,  which  I  had  rather  live  in  (as  God  shall  judge 
me),  like  an  hermit  in  his  forest,  than  be  a  king  over  such  a 
people  as  the  pack  of  Puritans  are  that  overrule  the  Lower 
House/'t 

James  held  "no  bishop,  no  king,"  for  as  real  an  article  in 
the  mystery  of  monarchy,  as  they  did  '^no  ceremony,  no 
bishop,"  in  that  of  the  hierarchy.  § 

*  Hallam's  Constitutional  History,  vol.  i. ,  p.  297. 

i"  Parliamentary  History,  vol.  i.,  p.  968. 
X  Hallam's  Constitutional  History,  vol.  i.,  p.  308. 
§  Court  of  James  I.     Secret  History,  vol.  i. ,  p.  175. 


JAMES   THE    FIRST.  191 

It  is  not  very  difficult  to  account  for  this.  The  pliancy 
of  the  Episcopate,  and  the  imposing  splendour  of  its  cere- 
monies, were  in  perfect  harmony  with  James's  notion  of  his 
regal  state,  and  deepened  his  dislike  to  the  naked  platform 
of  Geneva  and  the  republican  notions  of  its  advocates,  to  a 
great  extent,  no  doubt.  He  believed  the  bishops  "were 
useful  instruments  to  turn  a  limited  monarchy  into  absolute 
dominion,  and  subjects  into  slaves,  the  design  in  the  world 
he  minded  most."  Upon  men  like  James  this  would  operate 
with  invincible  power.  We  have  a  glance  at  it  in  his  address 
to  Dr.  Reynolds.  The  Jack  and  Tom,  the  Will  and  Dick, 
the  beaixlless  boys  censuring  him  and  his  Council,  were  not 
fancies,  but  stern  realities.  The  experience  of  the  past  sug- 
gested this.  The  Presbyterian  power  had  checked  him  in  his 
northern  states.  The  struggle  between  his  despotic  authority 
and  the  liberal  tendencies  of  the  reformed  clergy  had  been 
long  and  fierce.  No  monarch  in  Christendom  had  been 
more  roughly  handled  by  his  spiritual  teachers.  Humbled  by 
stern  advocates  of  freedom,  preached  at  in  public  assemblies, 
the  worst  terms  of  reproach  applied  to  his  majesty,  deprived 
of  liberty  for  months,  his  experience  of  the  Presbyterian 
government  was  destitute  of  every  element  of  p>leasure. 
"Admit  that  our  king  be  a  Christian  king,"  said  John  Poss, 
in  a  sermon,  in  1594,  "yit,  but  amen  de  ment,  he  is  a 
reprobate  king.  Of  all  the  men  in  this  nation,  the  king 
himself  is  the  maist  fynest,  and  niaist  dissembling  hyjDO- 
crite."  "All  kings,"  said  David  Black,  two  years  later, 
"were  children  of  the  devil;  but  that  in  Scotland  the  head 
of  the  court  was  Satan  himself."  James's  vocabulary  of 
abuse  was  not  scanty.  "  Loanes,  smaikes,  snivelling  knaves," 
were  terms  often  applied  by  the  royal  lips  to  these  holy 
men.  He  "  frequently  declared  that  he  never  looked  ujjon 
himself  to  be  more  than  King  of  Scotland  in  na,me,  till 
he  came  to  be  King  of  England ;  but  now,  he  said,  one 
kingdom  would  help  him  to  govern  the  other,  or  he  had 
studied  kingcraft  to  very  little  purpose  from  his  cradle  to 


192  EARLY    ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

that  time."*  These  facts  will  throw  much  light  on  the 
ecclesiastical  proceedings  during  his  reign,  both  in  relation 
to  doctrine  and  the  constitution  of  the  church,  to  which  we 
must  now  ask  the  attention  of  our  readers. 

"Whitgift,t  who  had  died  soon  after  the  Hampton  Court 
conference,  was  succeeded  in  the  primacy  by  the  Bishop  of 
London.  Bancroft  was  a  man  after  the  king's  own  heart. 
A  not  unfriendly  pen  thus  truthfully  describes  him  : — 
"  Bancroft  was  a  man  of  vehement  zeal,  but  of  the  most 
grasping  avarice,  as  appears  by  an  epigrammatic  epitaph  on 
his  death,  in  Arthur  Wilson  : — 

'  Here  lies  His  Grace,  in  cold  earth  clad, 
Who  died  with  "^ant  of  what  he  had.'  " 

We  find  a  characteristic  trait  of  this  Bishop  of  London,  in 
this  conference  (Hampton  Court).  Ellesmere,  Lord  Chan- 
cellor, observed,  that  livings  rather  want  learned  men, 
than  learned  men  livings,  many  in  the  universities  pining 
for  want  of  places  :  ''I  wish,  therefore,  that  some  may  have 
single  coats  (one  living)  before  others  have  doublets  (plurali- 
ties) ;  and  this  method  I  have  observed  in  bestowing  the 
king's  benefices."  Bancroft  replied,  "I  commend  your  mem- 
orable care  that  way;   but  a  doublet  is  necessary  in  cold 

*  We  are  indebted  for  these  extracts  to  Buckle's  History  of  Civiliza- 
tion, &c.,  vol.  ii.,  chap,  iii.,  p.  253;  chap,  iv.,  pp.  261-2.  His  pages  are 
crowded  with  similar  examples. 

t  Wigginton  says,  "The  archbishop  hath  treated  me  more  like  a  Turk 
or  a  dog  than  a  man  or  a  minister  of  Jesus  Christ."  Another  Puritan  of 
that  day  says,  as  quoted  by  Bancroft,  "  Of  all  the  bishops  that  ever  were 
in  the  see  of  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbiuy,  there  was  never  any  did  so 
much  hurt  to  the  church  of  God  as  he  hath  done.  No  bishop  that  ever 
had  such  an  aspiring  and  ambitious  mind  as  he ;  no,  not  Cardinal  Wolsey. 
None  so  proud  as  he ;  no,  not  Stephen  Gardiner  of  Winchester.  None  so 
tyrannical  as  he ;  no,  not  Bonner.  .  .  .  He  sits  upon  his  cogging-stool, 
which  may  truly  be  called  the  chair  of  pestilence.  His  mouth  is  full  of 
cursing  against  God  and  his  saints.  His  feet  are  swift  to  shed  blood. 
There  is  npne  of  God's  children  but  had  as  lieve  see  a  serpent  as  meet 
him." — Hanbury's  Mem.,  vol.  i.,  p.  38. 


JAMES    THE    FIRST.  193 

weather."  Thus  an  avaricious  bishop  could  turn  off,  by  a 
miserable  jest,  the  open  avowal  of  his  love  of  phiralities.* 

With  the  knowledge  of  the  king's  feeling  towards  the 
Puritans,  the  hierarchy  entered  on  their  work.  The  royal 
head  of  the  church  had  agreed  to  interpose  the  shield  of  his 
protection  against  any  attack  on  the  Episcopate,  while  the 
spiritual  lords  had  bound  themselves  to  support  the  prero- 
gative of  the  king.  This  understanding  was  early  arrived  at, 
and  the  ends  aimed  at  were  steadily  pursued  hy  both.  Hallam 
has  correctly  said  :  "  The  real  aim  of  the  clergy  in  thus  enor- 
mously enhancing  the  pretensions  of  the  crown,  was  to  gain 
its  sanction  and  support  for  their  own.  Schemes  of  ecclesias- 
tical jurisdiction,  hardly  less  extensive  than  had  warmed  the 
imagination  of  Becket,  now  floated  before  the  eyes  of  his 
successor,  Bancroft.  He  had  fallen,  indeed,  upon  evil  days, 
and  perfect  independence  of  the  temporal  magistrate  could 
no  longer  be  attempted ;  but  he  acted  upon  the  refined 
policy  of  making  the  royal  supremacy  over  the  church, 
which  he  was  obliged  to  acknowledge  and  professed  to 
exaggerate,  the  very  instrument  of  its  dependence  upon  the 
law.  The  favourite  object  of  the  bishops  in  this  age  was  to 
render  these  ecclesiastical  jurisdictions,  no  part  of  which 
had  been  curtailed  in  our  hasty  reformation,  as  unrestrained 
as  possible  by  the  courts  of  law."t 

In  1604,  the  first  convocation  after  the  accession  of  James 
was  held.  It  has  become  memorable  for  its  w^ork.  Bancroft 
presided,  though  only  then  Bishop  of  Loudon,  and  the  spirit 
of  the  dominant  sect  revealed  itself  We  cannot  narrate  all 
its  proceedings.  Suffice  it  to  say,  that  the  doctrine  which  had 
been  propounded  by  Bancroft,  so  gratifying  to  Episcopal 
pride,  that  the  bishops  governed  the  church  and  tlie  inferior 
clergy,  jure  divino,  by  a  right  derived  from  God  alone,  was 
affirmed.     To  deny  the  Church  of  England   to  be  a  true 

^'  D'Israeli's  Miscellaneous  Literature,  p.  331. 
f  Constitutional  History,  vol.  i.,  p.  323. 
O 


194  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

church ;  to  say  that  its  worship  was  erroneous,  or  any  part 
repugnant  to  Holy  Scriptures,  or  that  any  of  its  ceremonies 
were  superstitious;  to  deny  the  authority  of  archbishops, 
bishops,  deacons,  or  to  separate  from  the  communion  of 
the  church,  and  form  separate  assemblies,  was  to  expose  the 
parties  to  excommunication.  Bancroft  and  his  brethren  car- 
ried out  these  decisions  with  no  gentle  hand.  The  best  of  the 
clergy,  finding  no  prospect  of  relief,  were  compelled  to  quit 
the  church;  some  wasted  their  lives  in  prison,  others  escaped 
to  foreign  lands.  Everything  was  done  which  the  monarch 
and  his  spiritual  advisers  could  do  to  crush  out  the  spirit 
of  Puritanism  from  the  city  and  parochial  churches,  and 
their  success  must  have  exerted  an  all-powerful  influence 
on  the  morals  of  society.  It  could  not  be  otherwise.  The 
policy  of  James  and  his  minions  could  only  be  realized  by 
exposing  to  scorn  the  teaching  and  saintly  character  of  the 
Puritan  ministers.  The  truthful  pen  of  Lucy  Hutchinson 
gives  us  some  glimpses  of  the  social  and  moral  life  of  England 
at  this  time,  wliile  it  presents  us  with  the  outline  of  the 
true  Puritan  character  during  the  same  trying  period.  "At 
court  these  were  hated  (the  godly  ministers),  disgraced,  and 
reviled,  and  in  scorn  had  the  name  of  Puritans  fixed  upon 
them.  And  now  the  ready  way  to  preferment  there  was  to 
declare  an  opposition  to  the  power  of  godliness  under  that 
name  :  so  that  these  pulpits  might  justly  be  called  the 
scorner's  chair ;  those  sermons  only  pleasing  that  flattered 
them  in  their  vices,  and  told  the  poor  king  that  he  was 
Solomon,  that  his  sloth  and  cowardice,  by  which  he  betrayed 
the  cause  of  God  and  the  honour  of  the  nation,  was 
gospel  meekness  and  peaceableness,  for  which  they  raised 
him  above  heaven,  while  he  lay  wallowing  like  a  swine  in 
the  mire  of  his  lust."  In  lower  circles,  "  if  any,  out  of  mere 
morality  and  civil  honesty,  discountenanced  the  abominations 
of  those  days,  he  was  a  Puritan,  however  he  conformed  to 
the  superstitious  worship  :  if  any  showed  favour  to  any 
godly,  honest  person,  kept  their  company,  relieved  them  in 


JAMES    THE    FIRST.  195 

want,  or  protected  them  against  violent  or  unjust  oppressors, 
lie  was  a  Puritan  :  if  any  gentleman  in  his  county  main- 
tained the  good  laws  of  the  land,  or  stood  up  for  any  public 
interest,  for  good  order  or  government,  he  was  a  Puritan  : 
in  short,  all  that  crossed  the  views  of  the  needy  courtiers,  the 
proud,  encroaching  priests,  the  thievish  projectors,  the  lewd 
nobility  and  gentry  ;  whoever  was  zealous  for  God's  glory  or 
worship,  could  not  endure  blasphemous  oaths,  ribald  conver- 
sation, profane  scofls,  Sabbath  breach,  derision  of  the  Word 
of  God,  and  the  like;  whoever  could  endure  a  sermon, 
modest  habit,  or  conversation,  or  anything  good,  all  these 
were  Puritans :  and  if  Puritans,  then  enemies  to  the  king  and 
his  government,  seditious,  factious  hypocrites,  ambitious  dis- 
turbers of  the  public  peace,  and  finally,  the  pest  of  the  king- 
dom :  such  false  logic  did  the  children  of  darkness  use  to  argue 
with  against  the  hated  children  of  light,  whom  they  branded 
besides  as  illiterate,  morose,  melancholy,  discontented,  crazed 
sort  of  men,  not  fit  for  human  conversation  :  as  such  they 
made  them  not  only  the  sport  of  the  j^ulj^it,  which  was 
become  but  a  solemn  sort  of  stage,  but  every  stage,  every 
table,  and  every  puppet  play,  belched  forth  profane  scoffs 
upon  them ;  drunkards  made  them  their  songs  ;  all  fiddlers 
and  mimics  learned  to  abuse  them,  as  finding  it  the  most 
gainful  way  of  fooling."*  We  will  only  add  from  another 
source  the  following: — "The  vicious  multitudes  called  all 
Puritans  that  were  strict  and  serious  in  a  holv  Hfe,  thousrh 
ever  so  conformable ;  so  that  the  same  name  in  a  bishojD's 
mouth    signified    a    Nonconformist,    and    in    an    ignorant 


*  Memoirs  of  Colonel  Hutchinson,  pp.  27,  28.  "The  generality  of  the 
gentry  of  the  land  soon  learned  the  couii;  fashion,  and  every  great  house 
in  the  country  became  a  sty  of  unclean ness." 

Macaulay,  referring  to  the  habits  of  the  Puritans,  with  the  hand  of  a 
master  sketches  some  of  their  leading  traits.  There  is  an  element  of 
truth  in  his  description,  but  only  a  moiety.  "It  was  a  sin  to  hang  garlands 
on  a  Maypole,  to  drink  a  friend's  health,  to  fly  a  hawk,  to  hunt  a  stag, 
to  play  at  chess,  to  wear  lovelocks,  to  put  starch  into  a  niff,  to  touch  the 
virginals,  tq  read  the  '  Fairy  Queen.'  " — History,  vol.  i.,  p.  81. 


196  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

drunkard's  mouth,  a  godly  obedient  Christian.  Now  the 
ignorant  rabble  hearing  that  the  bishops  were  against  the 
Puritans,  were  the  more  embolden  against  all  those  which 
they  gave  the  name  to,  and  their  rage  against  the  godly  was 
the  more  increased;  and  they  cried  up  the  bishops,  partly 
because  they  were  against  the  Puritans,  and  partly  because 
they  were  earnest  for  that  way  of  worship  which  they  found 
most  suitable  to  their  ignorance,  carelessness,  and  formality ; 
and  thus  the  interest  of  the  diocesans,  and  of  the  pro- 
fane and  ignorant  sort  of  people,  was  unhappily  twisted 
together."* 

The  glory  of  the  hierarchy  was  the  curse  of  the  spiritual 
life  of  the  church.  The  Calvinian  element,  which  had  still 
marked  its  teaching  so  late  as  Whitgift,  and  which,  in  an 
eminent  degree,  distinguished  the  Puritans,  gradually,  indeed 
rapidly,  gave  way  to  the  Arminiau,  long  before  the  close  of 
James's  reign,  t  Macaulay  has  truly  said :  '- Opinions  which, 
at  the  accession  of  James,  no  clergyman  could  have  avowed 
without  imminent  risk  of  being  stri])t  of  his  gown,  were 
now  the  best  title  to  preferment.  A  di^'ine  of  that  age, 
who  was  asked  by  a  simple  country  gentleman  what  the 
Arminians  held,  answered,  with  as  much  truth  as  wit,  that 
they  held  all  the  best  bishoprics  and  deaneries  in  England. "[j; 
James  had  denounced  Arminius.  To  the  Synod  of  Dort 
he  had  sent  some  English  divines  to  aid  the  Dutch  in  their 
opposition  to  his  teaching ;  yet,  under  the  same  monarch, 
the  views  of  the  Dutch  heretic  were  patronized,  and  shed 
a   withering   influence   upon   the   religion   of   the   nation. 


*  Baxter's  Life,  &c. ,  by  Calamy,  p.  48. 
+  "  Ai'minianism  crept  in,  to  the  corruption  of  sound  doctrines,  till  at 
length  they  had  the  impudence  to  forbid  the  preaching  of  those  great  and 
necessary  truths  concerning  the  decrees  of  God." — Mrs.  Hutchinson's  Life 
of  her  Husband,  p.  27.     Bohn's  Standard  Library. 

X  History  of  England,  vol.  i.,  pp.  79,  188. 
"We  know  King  James's  round  answer  when  some  asked  him  where- 
fore he  preferred  not  good  men  to  bishoprics?     'The  devil  an  honest 
man,'  says  he,  'will  accept  them.'  "— Hanbxiry,  vol.  ii.,  p.  252, 


JAMES    THE    FIRST.  197 

Montague,  Mainwaring,  Sibtliorpe,  and  Laud,  names  which 
will  pass  under  review  again,  were  the  chief  instruments  in 
eflfecting  this  doctrinal  change.  The  country  was  alarmed. 
The  senate  was  alarmed.  Arminianism  and  Popery  were 
twins.  The  one  always  followed  the  other;  and  neither 
were  compatible  with  the  liberties  of  the  nation.  Again 
and  again  the  House  remonstrated  with  the  thoughtless 
monarch  on  the  progress  of  the  error.  Again  and  again 
the  Senate  House  rung  with  the  thunders  of  some  zealous 
Puritan,  as  in  glowing  language  he  condemned  the  foe  of 
British  freedom.  The  records  of  parliament  are  full  of 
them: — "I  desire  that  we  may  consider  the  increase  of 
Arminianism  an  error  that  maketh  the  Grace  of  God  lackey 
it  after  the  will  of  man  :  that  maketh  the  sheep  to  keep  the 
shepherd  :  and  makes  mortal  seed  of  an  immortal  God.  I 
desire  that  we  may  look  into  the  very  belly  and  bowels  of 
this  Trojan  horse,  to  see  if  there  be  not  in  it  men  ready  to 
open  the  gates  of  Romish  tyranny  and  Spanish  monarchy : 
for  an  Arminian  is  the  spawn  of  a  Papist;  and  if  there 
come  the  warmth  of  court  favour  upon  him,  you  shall  see 
him  turned  into  one  of  those  frogs  of  the  bottomless  pit: 
and  if  you  mark  it  well  you  will  see  an  Arminian  reaching 
out  his  hand  to  a  Papist;  a  Papist  to  a  Jesuit;  a  Jesuit 
gives  one  hand  to  the  Pope  and  the  other  to  the  King  of 
Spain,"  &c.*  Main  waring  had  been  compelled  to  appear  before 
the  Commons  and  ask  pardon  for  his  doctrine.  The  House 
felt  that  the  purity  of  Christian  truth  as  well  as  the  pro- 
tection of  liberty  were  in  their  keeping.  The  senate  was  the 
conservator  of  both.  In  the  spirit  of  indignant  remonstrance 
the  following  was  added  about  Mainwaring : — '-'Yet  was  this 
man  also  immediately  after  our  rising  (when  he  was  cen- 
sured and  obliged  to  ask  pardon)  released  from  his  imprison- 
ment, reported  to  have  the  honour  to  kiss  the  king's  hand  ; 
obtained  his  pardon  in  folio ;  was  preferred  to  a  rich  living ; 

*  Speech  of  Mr.  Rouse,  1628.    Parliamentary  History,  vol.  ii. ,  pp.  444-5. 


198  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

and,  if  some  say  true,  cherished  assured  hopes  of  dignity  in 
the  church.  If  these  be  steps  to  church  preferment,  God  be 
merciful  to  those  churches  which  shall  fall  under  the  govern- 
ment and  feeding  of  such  a  clergy,"  &c.*  The  fact  is  true, 
from  whatever  cause  it  may  arise,  that  the  pulpit  was  pros- 
trated to  the  very  worst  of  purposes.  The  contrast  between 
this  period  and  the  era  of  the  Reformation  was  very  striking. 
The  rugged  boldness  of  Latimer  and  his  brethren  is  wanting. 
^'From  the  pulpit,"  says  one,  "came  all  our  future  missions, 
God  not  being  served  there  as  he  ought.  The  court  sermons 
informing  his  majesty  he  might,  as  Christ's  vicegerent,  com- 
mand all,  and  that  the  people,  if  they  denied  him  supplement, 
or  inquired  after  the  disposal  of  it,  were  presumptuous 
people  luito  the  ark  of  the  state;  not  to  be  done  under 
the  severest  curse,"  (fecf  The  doctrines  of  passive  obedience 
and  non-resistance  were  more  frequently  heard  than  those 
of  Paul.  Bisho2>  Goodman  tells  us  that  ''these  flatterers 
proceeded  further,  that  if  princes  should  intend  to  destroy 
their  subjects,  yet  their  subjects  were  bound  to  obey  them  : 
yea,  farther,  if  they  should  destroy  all  religion,  and  labour 
as  much  as  possible  to  bring  in  atheism,  yet  their  subjects 
had  no  other  way  to  resist  them  but  with  their  prayers  and 
tears  to  God,"  &G.X  "Yesterday  Dr.  Buckeridge  preached 
before  the  king,  and  proved  by  Scripture  and  history,  with 
many  excellent  examples,  the  supremacy  of  the  king,  and 
that  in  all  ages  the  authority  of  tiie  kings  governed  and 
ruled  all  presbyters  and  clergy.  At  this  sermon  were  all  the 
Puritans  of  Scotland  that  were  here."§ 

The  connexion  between  correct  Christian  doctrine  and  a 
holy  life  is  closer  than  some  suppose.     The  one  will  ever 

*  Speech  of  Sir  E.  Grosvenor,  1628.     Ibid,  pp.  470-1. 
t  Secret  History  of  James  I. ,  vol.  i. ,  p.  193. 
X  Annals  of  James  I.,  vol.,  i.,  p.  268.    Vide  Robinson's  Claude,  vol.  ii., 
notes,  for  various  examples. 

§  Lodge,  vol.  iii.,  p.  186.     Letter  to  the  Earl  of  Shrewsbury,   Sep- 
tember 24th,  1606. 


JAMES   THE    FIRST.  199 

produce  the  other.  Many  of  the  clergy,  both  of  the  higher 
and  lower  order,  were  examples  of  this.  It  is  said  that  the 
notorious  Bishop  of  Lincoln,  "when  any  one  preached  (before 
the  king)  who  was  remarkable  for  his  piety,  desirous  of  with- 
drawing the  king's  attention  from  truths  he  did  not  wish  to 
have  his  majesty  reminded  of,  would,  in  the  sermon-time, 
entertain  the  king  with  a  merry  tale,  which  the  king  would 
laugh  at,  and  tell  those  near  him  that  he  could  not  hear  the 
preacher  for  the  old  bishop,  prefixing  an  epithet  expletive 
of  the  character  of  these  merry  tales."*  The  character  of 
Williams,  first  Bishop  of  Lincoln,  and  afterwards  raised  to 
the  Archiepiscopal  See  of  York,  is  thus  delineated: — "In 
Bacon's  place  comes  Williams,  a  man  on  purpose  brought  in, 
at  first  to  serve  turns,  but  in  this  place  to  do  that  which 
none  of  the  laity  could  be  found  bad  enough  to  undertake  ; 
whereupon  this  observation  was  made,  that  first  no  layman 
could  be  found  so  dishonest  as  a  clergyinan."t 


*  Kennet's  History  of  England,  vol.  ii,,  p.  729.  IVIsraeli's  Modem 
Literature,  p.  331.  Of  the  same  bishop  the  following  is  recorded : — 
*' Andrews,  Bishop  of  Winchester,  and  Neil  of  Ely,  were  present  with 
James,  soon  after  the  Commons  had  refused  him  suppKes  in  1621,  when 
the  monarch  asked  them  aloud  '  if  he  might  not  levy  money  upon  his 
subjects  when  he  wanted  it,  without  applying  to  parliaments?'  'God 
forbid,'  said  Ely,  '  you  might  not !  for  you  are  the  breath  of  our  nostrils.' 
'  Well,  my  lord,'  said  James  to  Andrews,  '  and  what  say  you?'  '  Sir,'  said 
Winchester,  'I  am  not  skilled  in  parliamentary  cases.'  'No  put-oflFs,* 
said  the  king,  '  answer  me  presently.'  '  I  think,  then,'  said  Andrews,  'that 
it  is  lawful  for  you  to  take  my  brother  Neil's  money,  for  he  offers  it.'" — 
Aikin's  James  I.,  vol.  ii.,  p.  271. 

+  Court  of  James  I.  Secret  History,  vol.  i.,  p.  449.  Hackett,  in  his 
Life  of  Williams,  mentions  an  instance  of  baseness  and  treachery  which 
must  always  stamp  his  character  with  infamy.  He  says  that  in  an 
interview  with  Buckingham,  "his  grace  had  the  bishop's  consent,  with 
a  letter  asking  that  he  would  be  his  grace's  faithful  servant  in  the  next 
session  of  parliament,  and  was  allowed  to  hold  up  a  seeming  enmity, 
and  his  own  popular  estimation,  that  he  might  sooner  do  the  work." — 
Life  of  Williams,  pp.  77 — 80.  He  was  not  alone  in  this  revolting  work. 
Many  episcopal  dignitaries  forgot  the  Christian  in  the  base  proceedings 
of  the  politician. 


200  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

Lodge  gives  us  the  following  illustration  of  the  social 
life  of  many  of  the  clergy  of  this  period.  It  is  the  Vicar 
of  Hope  to  whom  he  is  referring  : — "  In  the  latter  day, 
when  all  the  justices  but  himself  and  one  other  were  risen, 
he  would  have  had  the  said  vicar  licensed  to  sell  ale  in  his 
vicarage,  although  the  whole  bench  had  commanded  the 
contrary;  whereupon  Sir  J".  Poole  being  advertised,  returned 
to  the  bench  (contradicting  his  speech),  who,  with  Mr.  Bain- 
bridge,  made  this  warrant  to  bring  before  them,  him,  or  any 
other  person  that  shall  for  him,  or  in  his  vicarage,  brew  or 
sell  ale,  &c.  He  is  not  to  be  punished  by  the  justices  for  the 
multitude  of  his  v,^omen,  until  the  bastards  whereof  he  is 
the  reputed  father  be  brought  in."* 

The  alarm  of  the  Commons  at  the  Popish  tendencies  of 
James  and  his  favourite  advisers  was  not  without  founda- 
tion. Lingard  admits  that  he  was  willing  to  connive  at  the 
silent  introduction  of  the  Catholic  missionaries  into  the 
country,  and  even  to  receive  one  at  court,  as  his  tutor  in  the 
Italian  language,  t  On  another  occasion  James  said  : — "And 
for  myself,  if  that  were  yet  the  question,  I  would  with  all 
my  heart  give  my  consent  that  the  Bishop  of  Rome  should 
have  the  first  seat.  I,  being  a  western  king,  would  go  with 
the  Patriarch  of  the  West.  And  for  his  temporal  princi- 
palities over  the  signories  of  Kome,  I  do  not  quenell  it, 
neither  let  him  in  God's  name  be  primus  Episcopus  inter 
omnes  Episcopus  et  Princeps  Episcoporum,  so  it  be  no  other 
ways  but  as  St.  Peter  was  Princeps  Apostolorum."| 

"  Secret  treaties  were  entertained  with  the  court  of  Boma 
.  .  .  The  Papists  lost  not  their  credit  at  court,  where  they 
now    wrought    no   longer   by   open    and    direct   ways,   but 

*  Illustrations  of  English  History,  vol.  iii.,  p.  280. 

f  History  of  England,  vol.  viii.,  pp.  190,  244;  vol.  ix.,  p.  154. 

+  Mrs.  Thompson's  Life  of  the  Duke  of  Buckingham,  vol.  i.,  p.  364. 

He  ordered  his  son's  chaplain,  when  in  Spain,  to  go  "as  near  the  Roman 

form  as  lawfully  can  be  done,  for  it  hath  ever  been  my  way  to  go  with  the 

church  of  Kome,  usque  et  aras."     Ibid,  ?jI7.    Vide  Marsden,  pp.  343-45. 


JAMES    THE    FIRST.  201 

humouring  the  king  and  queen  in  their  lusts  and  excesses, 
found  the  most  ready  way  to  destroy  the  doctrine  of  the 
Gospel  was  to  debauch  its  professors."*  No  one  conversant 
with  his  court  and  his  favourite  divines  can  doubt  this.  The 
power  of  Laud  was  increasing.  By  his  influence  everything 
in  the  church,  which  could,  was  made  to  resemble  Rome  as 
much  as  possible.  He  was  the  founder  of  the  High  Church 
School,  which  from  that  time  to  this  has  confounded  the  form 
with  the  substance,  and  ignored  every  claim  to  piety  which 
does  not  bear  the  name  and  superscription  of  the  Beast. 

It  would  be  difficult  to  trace,  in  the  space  we  have  allotted 
to  ourselves,  the  effects  of  this  combination  of  very  power- 
ful influences  on  the  morals  of  the  community  at  large.  That 
they  were  of  the  very  worst  kind,  admits  of  no  doubt : — 
the  luxury  and  corruptions  of  the  court  and  the  higher 
classes ;  the  pride,  the  oppression,  and  the  sycophancy  of  the 
bishops  and  the  clergy;!  and  the  ejection  of  the  wisest  and 
best  of  the  Nonconforming  ministers,  largely  contributed 
to  this  result. 

The  course  of  the  narrative  now  demands  advertence  to 
another  event,  which  has  exerted  an  influence  on  the  English 
Baptists.  It  transpired  in  that  land  from  which  so  many  had 
fled  to  our  own  island  home,  in  the  hope  of  protection  from 
the  power  of  the  persecutors.     Holland  had  sheltered  large 


*  Mrs.  Hutchinson,  p.  27. 

+  "  Tobey  Mathews,  Archbishop  of  York,  on  receiving  some  of  James's 
works,  threw  himself  on  his  knees  to  receive  them  from  the  messenger, 
kissed  them,  promised  to  keep  them  as  the  apple  of  his  eye,  and  to  read 
them  over  and  over  again." — Lingai-d,  vol.  ix.,  p.  105. 

"Mr.  Mchols,  in  his  Plea  of  the  Innocents,  expressly  affirms,  p.  218, 
that  conferring  with  the  pai-ticular  persons  in  his  parish,  after  he  had 
preached  some  good  space  amongst  them,  about  the  means  of  salvation, 
of  four  hundred  communicants  he  scarce  found  one  but  that  thought 
and  professed  a  man  might  be  saved  by  his  own  well-doing,  and  that  he 
trusted  he  did  so  live  by  serving  Grod  and  good  prayers." — Robinson, 
vol.  ii.,  p.  288. 


202  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

numbers  of  Protestant  refugees  during  the  Marian  persecu- 
tions. It  now  welcomed  another  class,  glad  to  escape  to  its 
reclaimed  swamps  from  the  crushing  tyranny  of  the  Protes- 
tant hierarchy  of  England.  It  was  about  the  year  1606.  A 
company  of  Brownists  or  Separatists  left  for  Amsterdam. 
An  English  church  already  existed  there,  but  rather  Puritan 
than  Separatist.  The  exiles  were  headed  by  their  pastor, 
J.  Smith.  He  had  ministered  in  the  English  church,  but 
was  compelled  to  leave  it,  and  for  some  time  he  officiated 
probably  as  the  pastor  of  a  Separatist  church,  at  Gainsbro',  in 
Lincolnshire.  Others  followed,  and  in  1608,  Hobinson  and 
most  of  the  remaining  members  of  his  flock,  arrived  in  the 
same  city.*  To  trace  the  history  of  these  pilgrims,  the  con- 
flicts, the  separations  which  marked  them,  is  not  our  province. 
Only  on  one  case  we  detain  the  attention  of  the  reader, — the 
separation  of  John  Smith  and  the  formation  of  the  English 
Baptist  church  in  that  city.  We  stop  not  to  investigate  the 
causes  which  led  to  this.  Ivimey  and  Adam  Taylor  will 
supply  this  information  to  those  who  are  curious  enough  to 
inquire  into  them.  We  do  not  dismiss  the  subject  from 
want  of  interest.  Whatever  contributes  to  the  formation 
of  character,  or  is  productive  of  results  which  afiect  com- 
munities, especially  in  their  highest  relations,  can  never  be 
matter  of  indifference  to  the  thoughtful. 

Upon  two  points  differences  had  grown  up  in  the  church. 
Smith,  Helwys,  and  certain  others  had  renounced  the  Cal- 
vinistic  doctrine,  and  had  embraced  Arminianism.  Holland, 
at  this  time,  was  shaken  by  the  teaching  of  the  man  who 
gave  his  name  to  this  system.  The  religious  war  was  carried 
on  with  the  fiercest  spirit.  Not  only  the  English  Separatists, 
but  the  Dutch  churches,  were  divided  by  the  strife.  To  calm 
it,  and  uproot  the  error,  the  Synod  of  Dort  was  convened,  t 
England  sent  some  of  her  best  theologians  to  aid  in  the 

*  Life  of  Robinson,     Works,  vol.  i.,  p.  25. 
t  Vide  History  of  the  Council  of  Dort,  by  Thomas  Scott. 


JAMES    THE    FIRST.  203 

work.  The  power  and  prevalence  of  Arminian  sentiments 
is  a  sufficient  comment  on  the  efficiency  of  national  Synods 
or  (Ecumenical  Councils.  But  these  exiles  imbibed  another 
error,  probably  graver  at  that  time  in  the  eyes  of  their 
brethren,  for  "they  advocated  the  practice  of  believeiV 
and  adult  baptism,  to  the  exclusion  of  infants  from  that 
ordinance."*  The  adoption  of  these  views  not  only  involved 
separatioji  from  the  communion  of  the  church  with  which 
Johnson  and  Ainsworth  were  connected,  but  the  formation 
of  a  new  one.  Smith  and  Helwys  were  not  alone  in  this. 
A  considerable  number,  we  cannot  say  a  majority,  simply 
because  we  do  not  know  the  extent  of  the  membership  of 
the  community  of  the  Amsterdam  church,  sympathised 
with  them.  Upon  the  verj'  threshold  of  their  enterprise 
a  formidable  difficulty  presented  itself.  Who  should  bap- 
tize them  ?  There  were  Baptists  in  Holland,  those  wdio 
administered  the  ordinance  by  immersion,  as  well  as  those 
who  adopted  the  mode  at  present  practised  by  our  brethren 


*  Robinsou's  Works,  vol.  iii.,  p.  461.  The  editor  says:  "It  is  rather 
a  singular  fact  that  zealous  as  were  Mr.  Smith  aud  his  friends  for  believers' 
baptism,  and  earnest  as  were  their  opponents  on  behalf  of  infant  baptism, 
the  question  of  the  mode  of  baptism  was  never  mooted  by  either  party. 
Immersion  baptism  does  not  ajopear  to  have  been  practised  or  pleaded  for 
by  either  Smith  or  Helwys,  the  alleged  founder  of  the  General  Baptist 
denomination  in  England.  I^othing  appears  in  these  controversial  writ- 
ings to  warrant  the  supposition  that  they  regarded  immersion  as  the 
proper  and  only  mode  of  administering  that  ordinance.  Incidental  allu- 
sions there  are,  in  their  own  works  and  in  the  replies  of  Eobinson,  that 
the  baptism  which  Mr.  Smith  performed  on  himself,  must  have  been 
rather  by  effusion  or  pouring.  Nor  is  this  supposition  improbable,  from 
the  fact  that  the  Dutch  Baptists,  liy  whom  they  were  surrounded,  uni- 
formly administered  baptism  by  immersion."  Robinson's  Works,  vol.  iii., 
p.  461.  The  remark  of  the  editor  is  equally  true  of  a  considerable  period 
of  the  controversy  in  this  country.  The  all  but  universal  practice  of 
immersion  in  the  English  Church,  rendered  the  discussion  of  the  mode 
unnecessary  In  Tombes's  replies  to  his  many  opponents,  the  claims  of 
infants  are  the  points  in  dispute.  Upon  the  mode  of  Smith's  baptism,  we 
shall  have  more  to  say  presently ;  and  we  only  add  that  there  were  a 
portion  of  the  Dutch  Baptists  who  miiformly  administered  baptism  by 
immersion. 


204  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

in  the  Netherlands.  From  some  cause  or  other,  applica- 
tion was  not  made  to  any  of  them,  and  the  story  goes  that 
after  much  prayer  Smith  baptized  himself,  then  Helwys, 
and  then  the  remainder  of  the  company.  He  has  since 
been  called  a  Sebaptist.  The  story  has  been  used  with 
uncommon,  but  to  us  amusing  gravity,  by  the  opponents 
of  Baptist  principles,  and  repelled  with  no  small  amount  of 
indignant  feeling  as  a  calumny  on  the  men.*  Crosby,  Ivimey, 
Taylor,  and  others  in  the  past,  and  of  living  authors  Messrs, 
Underbill  and  Cutting,  have  displayed  considerable  ingenuity 
in  shielding  their  brethren  from  reproach  in  this  matter.  To 
us  it  is  of  no  moment  whether  it  be  true  or  false,  beyond  the 
interest  which  we  have  in  it  as  an  historical  fact.  Writers 
who  can  fiud  in  it  materials  for  accusation,  will  never  have 
their  fancied  complacency  disturbed  by  us.  They  are  perfectly 
welcome  to  all  their  ingenuity  can  extract  from  it.  We  lay 
the  whole  case  before  our  readers.  Adam  Taylor  has  assumed 
that  Robinson  was  the  first  re^Dorter  of  this  charge,  and  that 
it  did  not  appear  till  some  years  after  the  event.  Kobinson's 
work  was  printed  in  1614,  and  the  separation  took  place 
certainly  not  later  than  early  in  1609,  more  probably  in  the 
very  year  Robinson  left  for  Leyden.  Robinson  certainly  was 
not  the  originator  of  the  story.  The  following  was  published 
four  years  earlier  than  his  work  : — 

' '  By  what  rule  baptized  you  you^rself  ?  What  word  or  example 
had  you  for  that  in  all  the  Scriptures  ?  Do  you  affirm  the  baptism 
of  children  to  be  the  mark  of  the  Beast,  because,  you  say,  there  is  no 
word  nor  example  in  all  the  Scripture  to  prove  that  they  may  be 
baptized  :  and  yet  durst  you  presume  without  either  word  or  example 
to  baptize  yourself  ?  If  you  go  about  to  j^rove  that  lawfvd  which  you 
have  done,  by  any  word  or  example  in  the  Scripture,  I  say  you  can- 
not set  one  step  forward  to  that  purpose,  but  you  must  allow  thereby 
the  baptism  of  children.  I  marvel  you  did  not  prevent  this  objec- 
tion, which  will  be  as  hard  a  bone  for  you  to  gnaw  upon  as  you  think 
the  baptism  of  children  is  to  us.     It  was  a  wonder  you  woukl  not 

*  Hanbury,  vol.  i. 


JAMES   THE    FIRST.  205 

receive  youi"  Ijaptism  first,  from  some  one  of  the  elders  of  the  Dutch 
Anabaptists  ;  but  you  will  be  holier  than  all,  and  see  how  you  have 
marred  all  !"^ 

The  following  is  Robinson's  statement  : — "  If  the  church 
be  gathered  by  baptism,  then  will  Mr.  Helwy.s's  church 
appear  to  all  men  to  be  built  upon  the  sand,  considering  the 
baptism  it  has  and  had ;  which  was,  as  I  have  heard  from 
tliesnielves,  on  this  manner  : — Mr.  Smith,  Mr.  Helwys,  and 
the  rest,  ha\ang  utterly  dissolved  and  disclaimed  their  former 
church,  state,  and  ministry,  came  together  to  erect  a  new 
church  by  baptism  ;  unto  which  they  also  ascribed  so  great 
virtues,  as  that  they  would  not  so  much  as  pray  together 
before  they  had  it.  And  after  some  straining  of  courtesy 
who  should  begin,  and  that  John  Baptist  (Matt.  iii.  14) 
misalleged,  Mr.  Smith  baptized  first  himself,  and  next  Mr. 
Helwys,  and  so  the  rest^  making  their  jDarticular  confession. 
Now  to  let  pass  his  not  sanctifying  a  public  action  by  public 
prayer  (1  Tim.  iv.  4,  5) ;  his  taking  unto  himself  that  honour 
which  was  not  given  him,  either  immediately  from  Christ  or 
by  the  church  (Heb.  v.  4),  his  baptizing  himself,  which  was 
more  than  Christ  did  (Matt.  iii.  14);  I  demand  unto  what 
church  he  entered  by  baptism;  or  entering  by  baptism  into 
no  church,  how  his  baptism  could  be  true  by  their  own 
doctrine  1  Or,  Mr.  Smith's  baptism  not  being  true,  nor  he 
by  it  entering  into  any  church,  how  Mr.  Helwys's  baptism 
could  be  true,  or  into  what  church  he  entered  by  it  1  These 
things  then  being,  all  wise  men  will  think  that  he  had  small 
cause  either  to  be  so  much  enamoured  of  his  own  baptism, 
or  so  highly  to  despise  other  men  for  the  unorderly  or  other- 
wise unlawful  administration  of  it."t 

The  substance  of  Mr.  Taylor's  arguments  are  very  fairly 
condensed  by  Benedict,  under  the  following  particulars  :-— 

*  A  Description  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  as  against  certain  Ana- 
baptists, &c.     By  J.  H.     London,  1610,  p.  23. 

t  Works,  vol.  i.,  p.  168.     London,  1851. 


206  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

"1.  It  is  not  easy  to  trace  the  story  to  an  earlier  date  than  tlie 
middle  of  the  seventeenth  contury,  that  is,  nearly  half  a  century  after 
he  became  a  Baptist. 

"  2.  Bishoj)  Hall,  who  wrote  at  this  time,  and  appears  to  have  had 
an  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  persons  and  circumstances,  would 
have  seized  with  avidity  a  fact  like  this ;  yet  he  never  alludes  to  it ; 
a  strong  presumption  that  no  such  report  was  then  in  circulation. 
The  righteous  soul  of  this  good  prelate  seems  to  have  been  sore  vexed 
at  the  conduct  of  the  whole  company  of  the  Separatists  in  leaving 
the  church;  and  in  conformity  to  the  spirit  of  the  times,  he  was 
assiduous  to  detect  all  their  imperfections,  and  exceedingly  severe  in 
his  castigations. 

"3.  F.  Johnson,  in  his  Christian  Plea,  and  H.  Ainsworth,  in  his 
Eeply  to  it,  though  they  frequently  mention  Mr.  Smith  and  his 
sentiments,  make  no  allusion  to  this  circumstance.  When  we  reflect 
that  they  were,  at  first,  Mr.  Sjnith's  associates,  and  afterwards  his 
avowed  opponents,  it  is  probaT)le  that  either  had  never  heard  the 
report,  or  knew  it  to  be  false. 

' '  4.  This  is  rendered  still  more  probable  l)y  consulting  Mr.  Smith's 
Character  of  the  Beast.  There  was  the  fairest  occasion,  in  that 
work,  to  mention  such  a  circumstance;  and  yet  it  does  not  appear 
to  be  alluded  to  by  either  party.  This  work  was  in  the  form  of  a 
dialogiie,  and  all  the  objections  of  his  opponents  are  put  down  before 
Mr.  Smith  proceeds  to  answer  them ;  and  as  the  fact  of  his  Se,  or 
self -baptism,  was  an  event  of  but  yesterday,  if  it  had  really  taken 
place,  it  is  indeed  singular  that  nothing  was  said  about  it  in  this 
severe  scrutiny  of  errors  and  mistakes,  from  Mr.  Clifton  and  others 
concerned  in  the  discussion. 

"  From  some  exj^ressions  in  the  writings  of  this  man,  and  from  what 
appears  in  a  book  published  liy  his  followers  in  less  than  five  years 
after  his  death,  Mr.  Taylor  draws  the  conclusion  that  Smith  and  one 
of  his  companions  baptized  each  other,  as  was  the  case  with  Roger 
Williams  and  some  others."* 

Oui-   readers  will   see  liow  ])art  of  Mr.   Taylor's  argii- 


*  "As  the  whole  company,  in  their  estimation,  were  unbaptized,  and 
they  knew  of  no  administration  in  any  of  the  settlements  to  whom  they 
could  apply,  they  with  much  propriety  hit  on  the  following  expedient : — 
Ezekiel  Holliman,  a  man  of  gifts  and  piety,  by  the  suffrages  of  the  little 
company  was  appointed  to  baptize  Mi-.  WilUams,  who,  in  return,  liaptized 
Mr.  Holliman  and  the  other  ten." — Benedict's  History  of  the  Baptists, 
p.  4.50.  Many  examples  of  a  like  kind  might  be  adduced  from  Eccle- 
siastical History. 


JAMES    THE    FIRST.  207 

ment  is  weakened  by  the  paragraph  we  have  inserted 
from  an  earlier  work  than  Kobinson's,  which  he  had  not 
seen.* 

Mr.  Underbill  has  offered  a  new  and  very  different  argu- 
ment. He  questions  the  fact  altogether.  He  states  it  in  a 
letter  to  the  venerable  Dr.  Benedict,  of  the  United  States, 
the  Baptist  historian.     He  says  : — 

"In  a  visit  I  lately  paid  to  Amsterdam,  I  found  some  more  inte- 
resting manuscripts  relative  to  the  church  of  which  John  Smith  was 
pastor,  with  the  original  Confessions  of  Faith  published  by  him  and  his 
company.  I  was  also  able  to  discover  and  elucidate  the  name  of  Se- 
baptist,  given  to  Smith,  and  so  often  used  as  a  name  of  reproach.  As 
these  documents  are  now  being  copied  for  me,  I  am  not  able  to  send 
you  the  particulars,  but  the  general  facts  are  as  follows  : — 

"On  Smith  and  his  people  becoming  Baptists,  the  question  arose 
how  they  were  to  commence  the  practice  of  the  rite,  and  by  whom  it 
should  be  administered.  The  Dutch  Baptists  or  Mennonites  held  at 
that  time  the  opinion  that  baptism  should  be  administered  only  by  a 
minister  or  elder  in  office.  As  Smith  did  not  agree  in  several  matters 
with  the  Dutch,  they  were  unwilling  to  resort  to  them  for  baptism, 
and  became  of  opinion  that  it  might  be  originated  among  themselves ; 
they  were  therefore  called  "  Se-baptists," — persons  baptizing  them- 
selves ; — not  that  each  one  dipped,  or  baptized  Jihnself,  but  among 
them  they  commenced  the  practice.  Aftei-  this.  Smith  and  several 
more  came  to  be  of  the  same  opinion  on  this  and  other  points  with 
the  Dutch,  and  applied  to  lie  admitted  to  communion  with  them. 
The  Dutch  received  them,  but  at  the  same  time  required  a  recanta- 
tion of  their  error.  A  far-simile  of  this  dociiment  I  possess.  The 
heading  is  in  Latin,  purporting  that  the  persons  whose  names  are 
subscribed,  renounce  the  sentiment  thatjthey  may  'se  ipsos  bapti- 
zare,' — baptize  themselves, — as  contrary  to  the  order  of  Chi'ist.  It 
thus  appears  that  the  etpiivocal  phrase,  '  se  ipsos  baptizare,'  became 
the  foundation  of  the  charge  that  Smith  baptised  himself.  But  from 
the  controversy  which  arose  it  is  evident  that  the  meaning  of  the 
words  is  as  I  have  stated  it. 


*  The  following  work  we  have  not  seen,  but  it  is  contradictoiy  to 
Mr.  Taylor's  theory  : — "Plain  Evidences  :  the  Church  of  England  is  Apos- 
tolical :  the  Separation  Schismatical.  Directed  against  Mr.  Ainsworth, 
and  Mr.  Smith  the  Sebaptist,  &c.  By  Richard  Bernard,  preacher  of  the 
Word  of  God  at  "Worksop.  Set  out  by  authority,  KJIO." — Fide  Robinson's 
Works,  vol.  ii.,  p.  2,  Preface. 


208  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

"Among  the  names  which  follow  is  the  autograph  of  John  Smith 
and  his  wife  Mary.  A  few  remained  of  the  first  opinion,  among 
whom  was  Thomas  Helwys.  I  have  seen  a  MS.  letter  of  his,  in 
which  this  subject  is  taken  up  and  argued  with  the  two  Dutch  pastors 
to  whom  this  letter  is  addressed,  and  he  also  treats  of  the  succession 
of  the  ministry  in  reference  to  the  same  su.bject,  in  a  printed  work 
still  extant.  A  copy  of  this  letter  I  hope  soon  to  possess.  I  may, 
therefore,  confidently  aifirm  that  the  charge  of  baptizing  himself  is, 
with  repect  to  Smith,  a  cahimny,  but  arose  from  the  circumstances 
referred  to.  In  no  other  way  can  we  account  for  the  silence  with 
respect  to  it,  observed  by  himself  in  his  writings  and  in  those  of  his 
friends.""'' 

In  this  conclusion,  the  last  writer  on  this  subject  whom 
we  have  seen,  fully  concurs. t  How  far  this  is  justified 
by  the  facts,  we  shall  leave  our  readers  to  decide,  after 
we  have  laid  the  documents  before*  them.  Mr.  Underhill 
had  only,  we  apprehend,  seen  one.  The  whole,  for  the 
first  time,  we  now  submit  to  our  readers.  It  is  only  right 
to  add  that  Mr.  Underhill  himself  now  gives  up  this 
theory. 

It  is  admitted,  on  all  hands,  that  from  some  cause  or 
other,  the  church  over  which  Smith  and  Helwys  presided 
was  divided,  but  the  cause  of  division  is  not  so  manifest. 
Smith,  with  some  twenty-four  persons,  was  excluded  from 
the  church,  and  these  sought  communion  with  one  of  the 
Mennonite  churches  in  the  city.  It  is  more  than  probable 
that  it  was  one  of  the  Waterland,  one  of  the  most  liberal 
of  the  Mennonite  churches,  and  their  mode  of  baptism 
was  by  sprinkling,  or  affusion.  "  The  said  English  were 
questioned  about  their  doctrine  of  salvation,  and  the  ground 
and  the  form  (mode)  of  their  baptism."  "No  difference  was 
found  between  them  and  us."  This  statement  is  singular, 
as  the  members  of  this  community  w  ere  not  immersionists. 

*  The  "Watchman  (U.  S.),  July  14th,  1853. 

t  Historical  Vindications,  &c.,  by  S.  S.  Cutting,  Professor  of  Rhetoric 
and  History  in  the  University  of  Rochester.  Boston,  1859.  Page  60, 
note  (a). 


JAMES    THE    FIRST.  209 

To  satisfy  their  brethren,  Smith  and  his  friends  made  the 
following  acknowledgment,  on  which  Mr.  Underhill  has 
founded  his  defence  : — 

"  The  names  of  the  EngUsh  who  confess  this  their  error,  and  repent 
of  it,  viz. ,  that  they  undei-took  to  baptize  themselves  contrary  to  the 
order  appointed  by  Christ,  and  who  now  desire,  on  this  account,  to 
be  brought  back  to  the  true  church  of  Christ  as  quickly  as  may  be 
sufiered. 

"  [Names  of  men.]  [Of  women.] 

"We  unanimously  desire  that  this  our  wish  should  be  signified  to 
the  chm'ch."* 

The  date  of  this  is  uncertain.  It  called  forth,  we  think, 
the  following  letter  :  — 

"Beloved  in  the  Lord, — Your  approved  care,  dihgence  and  faith- 
fulness in  the  advancement  of  God's  holy  truth,  being  the  good 
experience  (to  God  be  given  the  glory)  well  known  unto  us,  makes 
us  that  we  can  do  no  less  than,  with  our  best  hopes,  hope  that, 
through  the  grace  of  God  (his  word  and  Spirit  directing  you),  we 
shall  find  you  so  still.  And  therefore  we  are  with  much  gladness 
and  willingness  stirred  up  to  write  to  you,  praying  you,  as  you  love 
the  Lord  and  his  truth,  that  you  will  take  wise  counsel,  and  that 
from  God's  Word,  how  you  deal  in  this  cause  betwixt  us  and  those 
who  are  justly,  for  their  sins,  cast  out  from  us.  And  the  whole 
cause  in  question  being  Succession  (for  so  it  is  in  deed  and  in  truth), 
consider,  we  beseech  you,  how  it  is  Antichrist's  chief  hold,  and  that  it 
is  Jewish  and  ceremonial,  an  ordinance  of  the  Old  Testament,  but  not 
of  the  New.  Furthermore,  let  it  be  well  considered  that  the  Succes- 
sion which  is  founded  upon  neither  the  times,  person,  nor  place,  can 
be  proved  to  any  man's  conscience,  and  so  herein  we  shoidd  ground 
our  faith,  we  cannot  tell  upon  whom,  nor  when,  nor  where.  We 
beseech  you  consider,  how  can  we,  if  faith  forsake  the  evident  light 
of  God's  truth  to  walk  in  such  darkness?  And  this  is  om-  warrant 
by  the  Word  of  truth.  First,  from  Baptism.  John  Baptist,  being 
imbaptized,  preached  the  baptism  of  repentance,  and  they  that 
believed  and  confessed  their  sins  he  baptized.  And  whosoever  shall 
now  be  stirred  up  by  the  same  Spirit  to  preach  the  same  Word,  and 
men  thereby  being  converted,  may,  according  to  John  his  example, 
wash  them  with  water,  and  who  can  forbid  ?  And  we  pray  that  we 
may  speake  freely  herein,  how  dare  any  man  or  men  challenge  imto 

*  The  original,  with  the  names,  will  be  found  in  the  Appendix,  Note  D. 

P 


210  EARLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

themselves  a  pre-eminence  herein,  as  though  the  Spirit  of  God  was 
only  in  their  hearts,  and  the  Word  of  God  now  only  to  be  fetched 
at  their  mouthes,  and  the  ordinance  of  God  only  to  be  had  from 
their  hands,  except  they  were  apostles?  Hath  the  Lord  thus  re- 
strained his  Spirit,  his  Word,  and  Ordinances,  as  to  make  particular 
men  lordly  over  them,  or  the  keepers  of  them?  God  forbid.  This  is 
contrary  to  the  liberty  of  the  Gospel,  which  is  free  for  all  men,  at  all 
times,  and  in  all  places:  yea,  so  our  Saviour  Christ  doth  testify, 
wheresoever,  whosoever,  and  whensoever,  two  or  three  are  gathered 
together  in  his  name,  there  is  he  in  the  midst  of  them.  And  thus 
much  in  all  Christian  love  we  do  advertise  you,  that  this  ground  of 
truth  is  and  will  be  maintained  against  all  the  world,  and  that  by 
the  great  adversaries  of  our  faith  in  divers  other  main  points,  who 
will  be  glad  to  have  such  an  advantage  against  you  if  you  shall 
publish  or  practice  any  things  against  this  groimd  in  the  xviii.  of 
Matthew,  and  the  professors  of  Christ  shall  sustain  much  reproach 
by  it;  and  therefore  we  earnestly  entreat  you,  even  by  the  love  of 
Christ  that  is  in  you,  that  you  will  be  well  advised  what  you  do  in 
these  things. 

"And  now  for  the  other  question,  that  elders  must  oi'dain  elders; 
or  if  this  be  a  true  j)erpetual  rule,  then  from  whom  is  your  eldership 
come?  And  if  one  church  might  once  ordain,  then  why  not  all 
churches  always?  Oh,  that  we  might  be  thought  worthy  to  be 
answered  in  these  things,  or  that  the  poor  advice  of  so  few,  so 
simple,  and  so  weake,  might  prevail  with  you  to  cause  you  to  look 
circumspectly  to  your  ways  in  these  things !  The  Lord  that  know- eth 
all  hearts,  knoweth  ours  towards  you  herein,  that  we  do  desire  that 
there  may  be  found  no  way  of  error  in  you ;  but  that  you  and  we 
might  walk  uprightly  in  the  ways  of  God,  casting  utterly  away  all 
the  traditions  of  men,  and  this,  we  are  persuaded,  is  your  unfeigned 
desire  also ;  now  fulfil  our  persuasion  herein,  and  try  your  standing 
in  these  points,  and  respect  not  how  many  hold  these  things  with 
you,  but  respect  from  what  grounds  of  truth  you  hold  then!. 

"Thus  bechewing  (sic)  the  Lord  to  pei'suade  your  hearts  that 
your  hands  may  not  be  against  his  truth,  and  against  us,  the  Lord's 
unworthy  witnesses,  we  take  leave,  commending  you  to  the  gracious 
protection  of  the  Almighty,  and  to  the  blessed  direction  of  his  Word 
and  Spirit,  beseeching  the  Lord  to  do  by  you  according  to  the  great 
love  and  kindness  that  you  have  shown  unto  us.  Grace  and  peace 
be  with  you.    Amen. — Your  brethren  in  Christ, 

"Thos.  Helwys, 
"William  Piggott, 
"Thos.  Seamee, 

'^  Amsterdam,  "JOHN   MOETON. 

this  12ih  of  March,  16]  0. 


JAMES    THE    FIRST.  211 

*'P.S. — We  have  "written  to  you  iu  our  own  tongue  because  we  are 
not  able  to  express  oiu*  minds  in  any  other,  and  seeing  you  have  an 
interjjreter.  And  we  have  been  much  grieved,  since  oiir  hist  confer- 
ence with  you,  because  we  dishonoured  the  truth  of  God  much  for 
want  of  speech,  in  that  we  were  not  able  to  utter  that  poor  measure 
of  knowledge  which  God  of  his  grace  hath  given  us." 

There  is  also  a  confession  of  friitli,  consisting  of  thirty- 
eight  articles,  and  signed  by  thirty-nine  individuals,  which 
it  is  probable  was  presented  by  Smith  and  liis  friends  to  the 
church  at  the  same  time.*  A  short  confession,  also  signed  by 
Smith,  is  preserved,  but  on  what  occasion  it  was  prepared, 
or  to  whom  j^resented,  the  MS.  affords  no  clue.t 

The  following  will  throw  some  additional  light  on  this 
subject.  It  will  be  seen,  from  this  and  a  subsequent  page, 
with  what  caution  our  Dutch  brethren  acted  in  the  new 
and  delicate  affair.  This  letter  has  no  date.  The  writer  was 
Lubbert  Gerrits.^:  It  was  addressed  to  the  church  at  Leeu- 
warden,  the  chief  town  of  the  province  of  Tariso,  asking 
the  advice  of  the  brethren  about  'Hhe  English  persons,  of 
whom  formerly  they  got  intelligence,  who  long  ago  entreated, 
by  iterations,  to  unite  with  our  church  : " — 

"Jesus,  the  eternal  "Wisdom  of  the  Father,  be  with  you,  heartily- 
regarded  brothers  and  fellow-servants  in  the  Lord. 
' '  Our  piu'pose  is,  dearly  beloved  in  Christ,  to  inform  you  by  this 
about  the  state  of  the  affau's  here  with  us  and  the  English  persons 
(about  whom  soma  informations  have  been  given  you  already),  who 
have,  a  long  time  since  and  continually,  requested  the  luiion  with  our 
churches.  In  the  first  place,  know  that,  as  well  by  the  ardent 
requests  of  the  persons  already  mentioned  as  by  the  insisting  desires 
of  some  of  our  brethren  by  whom  their  doings  and  godly  walks  are 
perfectly  known,  we  have  been  brought  thus  far  that  we,   by  no 

*  Appendix,  Note  E.  t  Note  F. 

t  Gerrits  was  one  of  the  principal  Waterland  ministers  in  Amsterdam. 
He,  and  the  not  less  celebrated  Hans  de  Ries,  drew  up,  in  behalf  of  the 
EngUsh  Baptists,  the  Confession  of  Faith,  generally  known  under  their 
names.  It  has  been  translated  into  Latin,  Enghsh,  Gennau,  &c. ,  and  is 
genei'ally  quoted  as  the  authentic  exposition  of  the  religious  views  of  the 
Dutch  Baptists  (Confessio  fidei  Johannis  Risfii  et  Lubberti  Gerardi), 
This  creed  has  no  authority  now  in  the  Mennouite  Church. — Dr.  Muller. 


212  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

means,  could  shut  our  ears  any  longer  before  tliem  with  a  good  con- 
science, but  have  represented  their  affair  to  our  whole  brotherhood, 
in  order  to  see,  with  our  congregation,  what  will  be  the  results  which 
the  merciful  God  will  allow  us,  as  the  affair  here  principally  concerned 
us  most.  Therefore,  first  of  all,  we  ministers  have,  according  to 
the  desire  of  our  brethren,  summoned  these  English  before  us,  and 
again  most  perfectly  examined  them  as  regards  the  doctrine  of  salva- 
tion and  the  government  of  the  church,  and  also  inquired  for  the 
foimdation  and  form  of  their  baptism,  and  we  have  not  found  that 
there  was  any  difference  at  all,  neither  in  the  one  nor  the  other 
thing,  between  them  and  us ;  while  we  have  also,  concerning  their 
baptism,  received  as  an  answer,  that  they,  in  baptizing,  have  taken 
notice  of  1°  Act  ii.  38:  'Eej^ent  and  be  baptized,  every  one  of  you, 
in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,'  &c.,  in  order  to  demonstrate  repentance 
and  to  explain  fundamentally  the  death  from  sins  (which  is  also 
symbolized  by  baptism)  according  to  the  manner  of  Peter  here, — 2°  of 
Act  viii.  37 :  '  If  thou  believest  with  all  thine  heart,  thou  mayest,' 
&c.,  in  order  to  add  to  all  this  the  belief  in  Jesus  Christ,  that  he 
is  the  Son  of  God,  and  to  demand  this  from  him  who  is  to  be  baj)- 
tized ;  and  after  this  they  have  baptized  him,  receiving  the  promise 
from  the  chi-istened  one  that  he  will  bend  himself  luider  the  whole 
Gospel,  with  the  doctrine  of  it ;  it  might  be  that  they  did  understand 
it  or  did  not  yet  understand  it ;  so  then  we  remark,  that  they  have 
not  taught  persons  with  an  impure  vmderstanding,  nor  instructed 
them  who  were  to  be  baptized  to  found  their  baptism  on  any  mis- 
imderstanding  whatsoever,  as  has  sometimes  happened  with  other 
Baptists,  but  that  they  have  only  folloM^ed  therein  the  Scriptural 
foundation ,  and  have,  therefore,  acted  unanimously  with  us. 

"All  this  is  afterwards  and  at  a  due  time  explained  before  the 
brethren,  and  we  have  represented  to  them  oiu-  judgment  upon  their 
baptism,  according  to  the  desire  of  the  brethren,  and  because  we 
were  considered  the  maintainers  of  the  congregation;  and  then  we 
have  advised  them  to  take  this  into  consideration  (as  they  desired 
also),  and  admonished  them  to  bring  the  affair  before  God  in  their 
prayers.  And,  after  some  weeks,  again  having  met,  we  have  de- 
manded to  relate  to  us,  every  one  of  them  in  particular,  what  was  given 
in  their  hearts  by  God,  and  so  we  found  that  most  of  the  brethren, 
only  a  few  excepted,  had  the  same  opinion  as  we  represented 
them,  and,  therefore,  agreed  with  us.  Now  then,  the  state  of  the 
affair  is,  that,  though  we  have  obtained  here  a  reasonable  residt  in 
the  affair  among  oiu-  brethren,  we,  however,  have  resolved  (as  we 
thought  this  much  better)  not  to  go  on  before  we  had  informed  our 
neighbouring  fellow-ministers  about  this  matter,  in  order  to  instruct 


JAMES    THE    FIRST.  213 

ourselves  and  our  congregation  by  them  out  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord, 
if  it  were  that  we  were  erring. 

"Our  opinion  and  our  best  idea  about  this  affair  is,  then,  that 
these  English,  without  being  baptized  again,  must  be  accepted ;  and 
we  ourselves,  also,  are  too  scrupulous,  and  should  not  venture  to 
baptize  them  again,  as  this  is  said  also  by  every  one  of  us,  and  by  far 
the  greatest  part  of  the  congregation,  as  we  have  told  already ;  and 
this  being  the  reason,  viz.,  that  we  know,  and  have  seen  and 
observ^ed,  we  oiu'selves,  that  formerly  those  persons  that  belonged 
to  the  Munster  party,  the  Amsterdam  naked-walkers,  the  Harers- 
wonde*  sect,  and  that  of  the  Old  Cloister,  who  were  already  baptized, 
not  are  re-baptized,  as  they  did  not  dare  to  do  it  in  that  time,  but 
have  accepted  them  without  re-baptizing  them ;  while,  at  the  same 
time,  even  in  our  days,  their  baptism  is  considered  as  valualjle. 
Moreover,  the  manner  in  which,  and  the  foundation  on  which  bap- 
tizing these  persons  [the  English]  is  performed,  are,  according  to  our 
opinion  which  we  have  of  these  affairs,  when  we  mutually  consider 
them,  much  better  and  more  Christian-like  than  the  former  which 
were  suffered  among  us,  and  still  are  suffered. 

"Now  then,  if  it  be  the  case,  dearly  beloved  l)rethren,  that  you 
think  that  we  err  in  this  affair,  you  will  act  well  to  come  hither,  and 
to  teach  us  and  the  congregation  with  the  Word  of  God,  as  this  is 
the  kind  and  fraternal  prayer  and  desire  of  us  and  the  whole 
congregation.  We  are  most  willing  to  be  taught  by  any  one  whoso- 
ever, if  we  are  eri'ing  and  lack  the  truth  in  this  affair.  Be  so  kind 
and  teach  the  English  also  with  the  Word  of  God,  if  it  were  neces- 
sary that  they  ought  to  be  baptized  again ;  for  they  declare  that  they 
have  no  objection  to  be  baptized  again,  if  you  can  prove  with  the 
Word  of  God  and  with  reason,  that  their  baptism  is  a  less  valuable 
one  than  that  of  the  Flemings,  Frisians,  and  other  Baptists  (to  take  into 
consideration,  and  distinguish  the  baptism  of  those  that  are  baptized 
by  their  minister  himself,  for  we  om'selves  do  distinguish  the  act  of 
baptizing  by  which  he  has  baptized  himself ;  this  is  an  affair  quite 
different;  at  present  the  other  baptism  is  the  question — do  notice 
this).  We  have  no  courage  to  do  this,  because  they  are  very  intelligent 
people,  Avho  will  not  at  all  be  blinded  with  discourses  without  good 
reason.  We  pray  you  once  more,  pay  attention  to  that  which  we 
desire  ;  notice  our  proposition,  and  consider  all  things  well.  If  it  be 
your  opinion  that  we  are  erring,  come  to  us  and  deliver  us  from  error, 
and  bring  us  into  the  right  way ;  if  this  were  not  yoiu-  opinion,  you 
can  satisfy  us  by  being  silent,  and  leaving  the  affair  to  God  and  our 
conscience." 

*  Harerswonde,  a  village  in  the  neiglibourhood  of  Ley  den,  the  seat  of 
certain  notorious  Anabaptists  in  the  first  times. 


214  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

To  this  request  the  brethren  at  Leeuwarden  forwarded 
the  foHowing  reply  : — 

' '  Mercy  and  peace  from  God  oiu-  Father  and  yonr  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
be,  very  dear  and  beloved  brethren,  with  us  all  who  love  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  without  end. 

"Very  dear,  and  in  God,  beloved  brother  and  fellow-servant  in  the 
Lord,  Lubbert  Gerritsen,  and  you,  beloved  fellow-servants,  we  wish 
you  altogether,  with  all  our  hearts,  all  good  things  from  the  Lord, 
with  our  Christian  greetings.  We  have  received  your  letter  sent  to 
us,  and  understood  the  contents  of  it  for  the  greatest  part ;  this  in 
particular,  that  you,  dear  brother,  request  us,  and  are  desiring  very 
humbly  to  come  to  you  at  Amsterdam,  on  May  23,  stilo  novo;  the 
cause  of  which,  being,  as  we  understand,  to  make  peace  with  the 
English  who  are  with  you  there.  In  consequence  of  this,  we  write, 
our  dear  brother,  as  an  ans"v^"er,  on  this  moment,  that  our  visit  would 
be  very  inconvenient  to  us  at  this  time.  Misfortune  also  teaches  us 
to  pay  particular  attention  to  your  request ;  for  several  times  we 
have  been  in  Holland,  according  to  the  desire  and  letters  of  othei's, 
and  in  order  to  settle  several  affairs ;  and,  indeed,  we  have  then 
given  our  best  advice  that  we  could  give,  it  has  availed  very  little  for 
the  promotion  of  peace,  and  even  ingratitude  and  cooling  of  love  were 
the  consequences,  which  we  most  sadly  have  taken  to  heart,  as  the 
Lord  knows.  Therefore,  dear  brethren,  if  it  had  been  convenient  to 
us  to  come  to  you,  which  you  most  seriously  desired,  we  are  yet  very 
scrupidous  about  this  matter  of  uniting  yourselves  with  the  English, 
as  long  as  we  have  no  more  knowledge  of  their  affairs.  It  is,  indeed, 
a  very  critical  thing,  and  ought  seriously  to  be  taken  into  considera- 
tion, what  might  be  the  consequences  on  our  side  that  are  still  in 
peace  ;  for  experience  teaches  us  very  well,  &c. 

"Therefore,  dear  brethren,  our  opinion  would  be  in  these  affairs, 
that  we  shoiild  desire  to  deal  with  our  congregations,  which  we 
acknowledge  to  serve  unworthily,  with  open  doors  and  not  secretly, 
for  .it  concerns  them  as  well  as  us.  And  if  it  were  that  we  were  all 
with  you,  and  saw  and  heard  all  things,  we  should  not  be  inclined  ta 
consent  for  our  own  persons,  in  any  affair  whatsoever,  unless  it  were 
that  we,  in  the  first  place,  received  from  you  a  short  account  of  the 
chief  articles  of  your  doctrine  and  the  customs  of  the  congregations, 
which  you  have  pointed  out  for  them,  in  writing,  and  on  which  these 
persons  would  be  inclined  to  unite  themselves  with  you,  in  order  to 
afford  us  the  opportunity  to  examine  these  with  our  congregations 
everywhere  ;  for,  as  the  affair  would  be  spoken  of  everywhere  among 
us,   as  you  youi^selves  wi'ite    us,  dear  brethren,   if   they  were   not 


JAMES    THE    FIRST.  215 

informed  of  it,  it  requires  much  responsibility.  Therefore,  we  should 
be  inclined  to  take  care,  that  our  congregation  also  knew  everj^thing 
that  we  should  do  and  advise  in  this  affair,  that  we,  afterwards, 
will  not  be  involved  in  any  trouble  or  un quietness.  For  as  neither 
we  ourselves,  without  the  congregation,  nor  they  without  us,  are  one 
body,  so  we  think  it  necessary  (though  we  are  unworthy  servants)  not 
to  do  anything  without  their  knowledge,  as  we  know,  dear  brethren, 
the  condition  of  our  congregation  here  perfectly  well.  This  is,  as 
nearly  as  possible,  our  humble  opinion  of  these  affairs.  Do  not  take 
it  amiss.  If  you  were  anything  else  but  happy,  it  would  grieve  our 
hearts  very  much.  For  this  time  no  more,  but  that  we  recommend 
you  altogether  to  the  Lord  and  his  mercy,  and  offer  you  our  kind 
greetings  in  the  Lord  of  peace.  Pray  God  for  us.  We  remain  most 
willingly  your  debtors.- — May  5,  old  style,  a°  1610. 
"  Undersigned  by  us,  in  Leeu warden  : — 

"Hans  Mathyszoojn",         "Jan  Janszoon  Schellinckwoun, 
"Ana  Anesz,  "Yeme  de  Eynck." 

"Dyrck  Doedesz, 

Dissatisfied  with  this  reply,  the  Amsterdam  brethren 
again  addressed  the  following  epistle  to  their  friends  in 
Prussia  : — 

"Loving,  and  in  God  beloved,  brethren  and  fellow-servants  in  the 
Lord,  Jan  Schellinckwoun  or  Hans  Mathys,  with  your  fellow- 
helpers  in  the  service  of  the  Lord,  we  wish  you  the  peace  of  the 
Lord  and  a  merciful  illumination  in  Christ,  in  all  your  ways. — 
Amen. 
' '  May  it  please  you,  that  we  inform  you  that  we  are  very  much» 
desiring  for  some  answer  on  that  which,  a  long  time  ago,  we  have 
asked  and  desired  concerning  the  affair  with  the  English,  with  which 
affair  we  have  acquainted  you.     We  are  very  surprised  that  this 
affair  seems  to  have  been  taken  at  heart  by  you  so  very  little,  for 
which  we   are  ashamed  before  these  persons,    and   scarcely  know 
what  to  answer  that  this  affair  is  put  off  such  a  long  time.     There- 
fore, our  request  and  serious  desire  is,  that  you  do  not  defer  this 
affair  any  longer,  but  shortly,  and  within  a  fortnight  after  the  date 
of  this,   send   us  some  answer,   either  by  coming  yourselves,   if  it 
be  possible  that  we  may  be  valued  by  you  so  much,  or  by  writing  us 
something  concerning  the  two  following  questions  : — 

"  Firstly,  What  there  may  be  in  the  confession  which,  according  to 
your  desire  is  sent  to  you,  as  you  wished  to  examine  it  with  your  con- 
gregations in  comparing  it  with  the  Word  of  God, — that  deserves  to  be 


216  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

rejected  and  to  be  improved?*  Secondly,  What,  according  to  your 
opinion,  and  according  to  the  Word  of  God,  must  be  thought  of  their 
being  baptized  ?  Concerning  the  last  question,  on  this  especially  we 
should  like  very  much  to  receive  an  answer  and  good  instruction  as 
soon  as  it  is  possible.  And  if  you  do  not  send  us  this  within  the  time 
above-mentioned,  we  shall  take  it,  therefore,  that  you  leave  it  to  us 
and  put  it  wholly  in  our  hands  to  do,  or  to  leave  this,  what  we,  with 
our  congregation,  think  best  of  all,  after  the  wisdom  which  we  pos- 
sess, and  that  you  will  be  contented  and  quite  at  ease  in  this  after- 
wards. Therefore,  act  with  diligence,  beloved  brethren,  if  you  think 
it  necessary,  in  virtue  of  God's  Word,  to  warn  us  in  one  thing  or 
another,  and  to  teach  us  to  our  welfare  ;  and  forward  it  to  us  most 
speedily,  as  we  asked  already,  that  we  the  sooner  the  better  may  be 
able  to  do  what  our  duty  is. 

"Besides  this  we  have  nothing  else  to  mention,  but  the  hearty 
greetings  to  you,  our  dear  brethren  and  fellow-servants  in  the  Gospel 
of  the  Lord,  yonder  in  Friesland.  Jesus  remain  everlastingly  with 
you  with  his  Spirit.  — Amen. 

^^  At  Amsterdam,  July  16  a°,  1610,  stilo  novo." 

The  correspoDdence  was  closed  with  the  following  decided 
refusal  to  have  anything  to  do  with  the  affair  of  the 
English  : — 

"Our  loving  greeting,  and  great  affection  of  our  hearts  to  you, 
very  dear  and  beloved  brethren  and  fellow- servants  in  the  kingdom 
of  God,  Lubbert  Gerrits  and  your  fellow-servants.  We,  undersigned, 
may  not  conceal  from  you  our  astonishment  at  your  ardent  and  impetu- 
ous writing  to  us,  in  which  you  demand  our  answer  within  a  fortnight, 
or  that  we  afterwards  shall  be  quiet  about  the  alliance  or  union  with 
the  English,  in  yoiu-  town,  having  taken  place  or  intended,  &c.  We  are, 
dear  men,  after  very  much  thinking  about  the  affair,  about  which  you 
demand  and  request  most  ardently  and  impetuously  the  advice  from 
us  in  Friesland  ;  though  it  is  an  aflFair  quite  new  and  never  heard  of. 
Therefore,  it  were  very  necessary  that  all  churches  in  Prussia  and  the 
whole  of  Germany,  and  wherever  established,  were  acquainted  with 
it,  as  you  yourselves,  dear  brethren,  know  very  well  what  words  and 
promises  have  been  given  by  us  in  formerly  transacted  affairs,  viz. : 
not  to  do  anything  without  asking  the  advice  of  every  one  in  particu- 
lar. What  astonishment  will  be  occasioned  in  several  congregations, 
as  well  as  with  private  persons  everywhere,  at  this  alliance  or  union 
of  this  people  with  their  absurd  labour  and  service,  you,  yourselves, 

*  Probably  the  Confession,  Appendix,  Note  E. 


JAMES    THE    FIRST.  217 

dear  men,  may  easily  understand,  and  therefore,  it  is  not  necessary 
"widely  to  explain  this.  In  short,  we  thought  it  very  advisable  (save 
correction)  still  to  tarry  a  little  time  in  this  affair,  not  to  he  so  zealous 
and  ardent,  but  to  apy)ly  much  more  all  diligence,  trouble,  and  lal)our 
that  is  possible,  in  order  to  prevent  ruin,  harm,  hurt,  and  perdition 
of  the  churches  concerning  the  Westerland  peace-making  or  union  : 
if  this  first  was  brought  to  an  end,  that  fire  extingiiished,  and  every- 
thing was  brought  again  to  peace,  quietness,  and  silence,  it  would  be 
a  hearty  joy  and  gladness  of  soul  to  us.  Do  not  leave  so  easily  the 
old  friends,  by  choosing  new  ones,  who,  perhaps,  will  not  be  so  good. 
We  take  very  much  at  heart  the  augmentation  of  the  kingdom  and 
the  improvement  of  the  Church  of  Christ  (God,  our  Lord,  knows  it) ; 
but  if  the  scattering  of  our  friends  is  connected  with  it,  it  is  not  to 
be  desired.  This  harm  is  woe  to  our  hearts  ;  your  intemperate  zeal  is 
partly  the  cause  of  it  as  well.  We  will  finish  this  affair  here,  though 
we  had  to  say  much  more  concerning  it. 

"As  regards  the  request  for  our  advice  and  examination  which  you 
desire  about  the  thirty-eight  articles  of  creed  presented  to  us, — this 
is  all  in  vain ;  as  they  are  all  revealed  in  piinted  books  before  the 
eyes  of  every  man,  we  may  now  expect  with  you  a  general  judgment  of 
it  from  all  men.  Therefore,  we  think  it  rather  impertinent  to  demand 
this  from  us  in  particular.  Time  will  teach  us  that  commodity  has 
yet  been  nothing  else  with  many,  obiter,  seen  once  and  read  over 
once,  expect  what  time  will  reveal ;  in  this  affair,  also,  we  have  to  do 
something  else. 

"Finally,  that  you  demand  principally,  and  before  all  things,  our 
advice  and  opinion  about  their  baptism,  this  makes  us  astonished 
very  much,  because  you  yourselves  have  not  shown  your  opinion  nor 
thoughts  about  this  piece,  and  this  you  ought  to  have  done.  If  we, 
then,  had  seen  this,  we  ourselves  might  have  examined  it,  and  ours 
put  together  with  it,  in  order  to  choose  the  best  with  each  other. 
But  to  give  a  short  answer  and  correction,  we  say,  that  we  do  not 
know  such  use,  custom,  or  ordinance  from  the  Holy  Scriptures,  and, 
therefore,  we  are  sciiipulous  and  have  no  courage  to  say  much  of  this. 
It  is  an  affair  never  heard  of,  therefore  we  will  leave  it  as  it  is  ;  and  we 
shall  behave  ourselves  according  to  the  instruction  given  us  in  the 
Word  of  God,  and  not  according  to  the  work  and  actions  of  men. 
We  think,  for  this  instance,  to  have  suflSciently  answered  your 
writing  and  your  request ;  you,  certainly,  will  perform  your  service 
and  the  duty  of  your  office  in  this  and  all  other  affairs,  if  oiu'  answer 
cannot  satisfy  you, — with  the  observation  only  to  inform  every  one, 
and  in  all  places  already-mentioned,  about  the  condition  of  the  affairs. 
Deliberate  together  most  seriously,  and  keep  watch  over  the  flock  of 


218  EARLY    ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

tlie  Lord.  Let  us  try  to  restore,  first  of  all,  the  present  harm,  before 
some  new  affair  is  inbended ;  to  this  we  exhort  yon,  this  we  pray  from 
you.  Be  recommended,  all  together,  to  the  eternal  and  Almighty 
God  and  his  merciful  Word,  and  to  his  eternal  and  merciful  protec- 
tion. We,  altogether,  your  unworthy  brethren  and  fellow-servants, 
offer  you  our  hearty  greetings.     Farewell ! 

"DmcK  DoEDEs,  1610  7/18 
"Mr.  Doume  Lybrants, 

"by  me,  Hans  Mathysz. 

"  Jidy  IBlh,  1610.  (I  am  nearly  tired  of  this,  by  anxiety.) " 

Upon  the  minds  of  the  brethren  this  letter  liad  little 
effect.  The  English  were  finally  admitted  into  the  fellowship 
of  the  church,  and  a  subsequent  J^age  will  disclose  to  us  the 
manner  of  their  admission. 

The  effect  of  this  change  of  sentiment  on  the  community 
was  not  powerless.  It  awakened  the  most  virulent  hostility 
from  the  wise  and  the  good  in  Holland.  Not  only  the 
/'charity  which  thinketh  no  evil"  was  violated,  but  truth 
itself  was  sacrificed,  to  the  injury  of  a  dissenting  friend.* 
It  had  other  results.  Judging  from  the  statements  of  an 
opponent,  it  gave  an  extension  to  Baptist  statements  of  no 
ordinary  magnitude.  Of  this  truthfulness  we  have  collateral 
proof. 

Mr.  Pagit,  in  his  Arrow  against  Separation,  says  'Hhat 
out  of  a  few  members  in  the  Brownist's  churches,  more  fell 
to  Anabaptism  than  out  of  many  thousand  members  of  the 
Presbyterian  churches  amongst  the  Dutch,  or  out  of  all  the 
English  Reformed  churches  there." 

"Brown's  church,  at  Middleborow,  abundance  turned  Ana- 
baptists, which  discontented  him.  Sn)ith  himself,  the  great 
leader  in  this  new  way,  turned  Anabaptist.      So  also  did 


*  As  a  sample,  and  that  a  rather  mild  one,  take  the  following  : — "As  I 
acknowledge  the  unblamable  conversations  of  many  amongst  you,  so  do 
many  Papists,  Anabaptists,  and  other  vile  heretics  and  schismatics,  walk 
as  unblamably  this  way  as  you  :  and  yet  are  they  not  true  shepherds  of 
Christ's  sheep." — Robinson's  Reply  to  Bernard,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  409-10. 


JAMES    THE    FIRST.  219 

Cann,  at  last,  as  I  have  heard.  Johnson  and  Ainsworth's 
church,  at  Amsterdam,  abundance  of  them  turned  Anabap- 
tists, and  were,  therefore,  excommunicated.  So  also  hath  it 
fallen  out  in  England  :  the  church  that  came  from  Holland, 
many  of  the  members  fell  to  Anabaptism,  both  of  Shadrack 
Sympson's  and  Thomas  Goodwin's,  and  some  separated  upon 
it  into  distinct  congregations."*  He  attributes  this  to  the 
logical  tendency  of  Independency. 

"  The  tendency  of  Independency  doth,  as  it  were  of 
course,  breed  Anabaptism  ;  so  that,  if  they  judge  Anabap- 
tism a  pestilent  error,  as  others  do,  they  should  renounce 
their  Independency,  which  is  so  natural  an  occasion  of  it. 
St.  Austin  said  of  Anabaptism,  that  it  shaketh  the  very 
foundations  of  the  church.  And  holy  Philpot,  the  martyr, 
said  it  was  undoubtedly  set  on  foot  by  the  devil  to  destroy 
the  Gospel."t 

"  The  reason  is  plain,  because  no  man  can  be  true  to  the 
principles  of  Independents  and  Brownists,  but  they  must 
turn  Anabaptists."  How  far  this  reasoning  of  the  accuser 
of  our  brethren  be  true,  we  stop  not  to  say.  Certainly, 
others  besides  Jessey,  Simson,  Lawrance,  Blackwood,  and 
Allen,  mentioned  by  this  author,  have  felt  its  force,  and  we 
greatly  mistake  if  multitudes  more  will  not  yet  acknowledge 
its  power. 

Before  dismissing  this  matter  of  the  English  in  Holland, 
a  word  or  two  on  the  subsequent  condition  of  the  church, 
may  not  be  "uninteresting  to  the  reader.  Little,  indeed 
nothing,  is  known  in  this  country  about  it.  From  the 
date  of  this  correspondence  iTp  to  1614,  the  period  when 
Helwys  left  Holland,  its  history  is  unknown.  Nor  could 
we  fully  fill  up  this  gap  in  our  annals  till  now.  Supposing 
that  materials  might  exist  in  some  of  the  archives  of  our 
Dutch   brethren,   we   sought   information   in  Holland,  and 

*  Lamb's  Fresh  Suite  against  Independency,  p.  37. 
f  Vide  his  Letter  to  an  Anabaptist,  in  Fox.     Ibid,  p.  33. 


220  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

the  result  we  now  lay  before  our  readers.  "  Assisted  by 
one  of  the  two  professors  of  our  seminary,"  says  Professor 
Miiller,  "I  have  made  further  researches,  and  I  have  the 
pleasure  to  impart  to  you  the  following  results.  We  have 
ascertained  by  various  dispersed  notes,  that  the  above- 
said  English  Baptists  at  Amsterdam,  held  their  usual 
meeting  in  the  building  known  as  '  the  Cake-House  of  John 
Munter,'*  where  some  of  them  dwelt,  and  where  old  and 
necessitous  people  belonging  to  the  Waterland  church  found 
a  refuge.  John  Munter  was  one  of  the  most  considerable 
and  rich  members  of  that  church.  The  records  of  the  con- 
sistory contain  nothing  about  the  English  in  question,  nor 
about  their  desire  to  unite  with  the  Waterlanders,  before 
November  6th,  16 14.+ 

"  On  that  day  the  consistory  resolved  to  bring  the  proposal 
of  the  English  to  join  the  community  on  the  next  Sunday, 
before  the  brethren,  granting  them  a  fortnight  or  three  weeks 
for  taking  it  into  consideration.  This  was  done  accordingly 
on  the  9th  of  November,  and  ample  details  of  their  affairs 
were  given  at  the  same  time. 

''  On  the  18th  of  January,  1615,  when  some  young  people, 
desiring  to  be  baptized,  were  presented  to  the  community, 
the  consistory  declared  that  on  the  next  Wednesday  the 
English  would  be  taken  up  in  the  community,  according  to 
their  demand,  provided  none  of  the  members  objected  to  it, 
as  no  one  had  done  until  that  time.  On  the  followingr  Tues- 
day,  the  20th  of  January,  the  English  (worshij)ping)  in  the 
*  Cake-House,'  numbering  about  thirty  individuals,  male  and 


*  "  Some  of  our  chiii'ches  had  formerly  peculiar  bakehouses  for  the 
baking  of  bread,  &c. ,  for  the  necessitous  people  amongst  them.  Perhaps 
the  building  alluded  to  here  was  such  a  house,  and  at  the  same  time 
afforded  accommodation  as  a  dwelling  for  indigent  members." — Professor 
MiiUer. 

+  These  are  evidently  to  be  distinguished  from  Smith's  party, 
and  no  doubt  are  the  remains  of  the  early  church  over  which  Helwys 
presided. 


JAMES    THE    FIRST.  221 

female,  were  called  before  the  consistory,  in  the  *  Sj)yker' 
(an  old  granary,  adapted  for  a  meeting-house  of  the  Water- 
landers,  of  which  transmutation  there  are  many  instances), 
and  asked  : — '  1st.  If  they  persisted  in  their  demand  to  join 
the  community  1  2nd.  If  they  stood  firm  in  their  agreeing 
to  our  interpretation  of  the  dogmas  and  professions  of  faith, 
which  they  had  signed  with  their  own  hands  1  when  they 
fully  declared  such  to  be  the  case,  except  a  few,  about  four, 
who  stood  not  firm  in  some  points,  having  a  difierent  opinion, 
principally  in  what  regards  magistracy,  and  from  taking  an 
oath ;  but  who  promised  to  behave  themselves  quietly  and 
to  make  no  opposition. 

"  The  consistory,  however,  objected  to  take  up  these  few 
who  differed  in  opinions,  but  all  the  English  declared  forth- 
with, that  if  some  were  struck  out,  all  of  them  would  stick 
to  their  seclusion,  as  they  were  too  much  attached  to  each 
other  to  separate.  To  this  demand  the  consistory  would  not 
accede,  unless  the  community  granted  leave  to  take  up  also 
those  few  whose  opinions  differed  from  those  of  the  Water- 
landers,  and  refused  once  more  to  the  signing  of  the  profes- 
sions of  faith,  from  which  not  one  of  these  had  refrained 
himself  On  that  night  this  matter  remained  undecided,  to 
the  regret  of  all. 

"  But  already,  on  the  early  morning  of  Wednesday,  the 
20th  of  January,  the  English  returned  to  the  consistory  and 
declared  that  they  had  amply  discussed  the  matter  during 
the  last  night,  and  were  happy  to  state,  that  to  tlieir  great 
relief  and  joy,  eventually  the  four  dissenting,  advised  to,  and 
approved  of,  the  joining  of  the  others  to  the  community, 
even  if  they  were  to  be  rejected.  Accordingly  they  were 
admitted  in  the  community,  after  those  being  baptized 
who  were  to  be  baptized  (administered  by  Hans  de  Ries), 
in  the  open  congregation,  without  baptism.  Room  has  been 
left  in  the  memorial  for  filling  iu  their  names,  but  it  has 
been  omitted  to  set  them  down.  It  appears,  however, 
clearly,  that  on  the  same  day  were  baj)tized,  amongst  many 


222  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

others,  four  English :  Swithin  Grindall,  a  young  man ; 
Thomas  Ociell,  a  spur  maker ;  Anthony  Thomassen,  an 
old  man,  husband  of  Lysbeth,  an  English  woman ;  and 
Thomas  Huysbertsen,  glover,  a  bachelor,  in  the  '  Cake- 
House.' 

"After  their  joining  us,  the  English,  however,  continued 
their  separate  worship  in  the  '  Cake-House,'  where  they 
preached  in  English.     Even  on  the  8th  of  June,  in  1620, 

their  preacher,  Thomas ,  was  confirmed  to  full  service 

{i.e.,  to  administer  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper,  &c.)  by 
the  old  minister,  E-einier  Wybrands,  and  his  colleague,  Peter 
Andriessen,  and  until  1637  baptism  was  frequently  admin- 
istered in  their  place  of  w^orship,  although  it  does  not  appear 
by  whom."  A  list  of  names  and  dates  of  persons  baptized 
follows,  which  we  omit,  as  adding  nothing  of  interest  to 
the  narrative;  but  the  close  of  the  list  presents  us  with 
the  name  of  Jane  Morton,  the  wife,  we  have  little  doubt, 
of  the  John  Morton  whose  name  occurs  in  the  letter  of 
Helwys.  We  give  this  record:  "September  26th,  1630, 
Janneker  (Jane)  Morton,  and  12th  December,  1638,  Michael 
Wallis:  the  five  first,  because  they  were  baptized  formerly 
by  Mr.  Smith ;  the  latter,  because  he  was  baptized  an  adult 
in  England." 

"  It  is  consequently  evident,"  the  Professor  adds,  "  that 
although  the  English  congregation  had  in  some  respects  a 
separate  existence,  it  was  nevertheless  closely  united  to  the 
Waterlanders.  Those  who  were  baptized  and  admitted 
were  instantly  considered  as  members  of  the  Waterland 
church,  and  while  those  who  w^anted  relief  were  assisted, 
likewise  those  who  misbehaved  were  censured  by  the 
consistory.  The  marriages  of  the  English  were  concluded 
by  the  Waterlanders,  of  which  five  instances  can  be 
quoted.''  AYe  omit  them,  as  of  no  comparative  interest 
to  our  readers. 

''Several  of  the  English,  probably  those  who  understood 
Dutch  better,  were  baptized  in  the  church  of  the  Water- 


JAMES   THE   FIRST.  223 

landers,  and  not  in  their  own  place  of  worship.  The 
instances  noted  in  the  memorial  are  the  following.  '  The 
list  extends  from  1G15  to  1645,  and  in  it  are  the  names  of 
Piggott,  Overton,  Drew,  Armfield,  &c.,  children,  no  doubt, 
of  some  of  those  whose  names  are  attached  to  the  confession. 
Some  in  this  list  were  admitted  as  members,  without  bap- 
tism, being  already  baptized  adults  in  England.' 

"  Later  on,  the  difference  between  the  English  and  the 
Waterlanders  cannot  be  traced  any  further.  No  mention  is 
made  any  more,  as  formerly,  of  an  '  Englishman'  or  '  English- 
woman,' and  the  names  are  wholly  Dutchified  ;  nay,  already 
in  1615,  behind  the  name  of  S within  Grindall,  we  read,  in 
Dutch,  called  Swithin  Janssoon,  and  behind  the  name 
Margaret  Morris,  Grietje  Thomas. 

"  The  union  of  the  two  parties  had  become  so  close,  that 
on  the  8th  of  July,  1640,  an  Englishman,  Joseph  Drew,  was 
proposed  by  the  Waterland  consistory  as  minister,  which  offer 
he  accepted  on  the  8th  December,  'altliough  he  was  rather 
afraid  that  his  language  might  be  an  objection,  he  being  used 
to  the  English.'  It  does  not  appear  that  he  actually  officiated 
as  ininister.  He  and  his  two  brethren,  Alexander  and  John, 
belonged  to  the  most  respectable  number  of  the  English 
congregations." 

To  these  statements  Dr.  Miiller  says :  "I,  for  myself,  add 
the  following  remark  :  It  appears  to  me  that  the  persons 
mentioned  in  the  memorial,  who  were  not  yet  baptized,  were 
admitted  to  the  Waterlanders  by  the  baptism  not  of  immer- 
sion, but  of  sprinkling.  This  mode  of  baptizing  was,  from 
the  days  of  Menno,  the  only  usual  mode  amongst  them,  and 
•it  is  still  amongst  us.  The  Waterlanders,  nor  any  other 
of  the  various  parties  of  the  I^etherland  Doopsgezinden, 
practised  at  any  time  baptism  by  immersion.  Had  they 
made  an  exception,  in  that  use,  on  behalf  of  the  English, 
who  in  their  country  had  not  yet  received .  baptism,  it  is 
more  than  probable  that  the  memorial  would  have  mentioned 
that  alteration.     But  they  cared  only  for  the  very  nature 


224:  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

of  the  baptism,*  and  were  therefore  willing  to  admit  even 
those  who  were  baptized  by  a  mode  differing  from  theirs, 
just  as  we  are  wonted  to  do  now-a-days." 

This  narrative  supplies  us  with  very  valuable  material, 
and  enables  us  to  correct  some  mistakes  into  which,  previous 
writers  on  our  history  liave  fallen.  The  course  of  the  Eng- 
lish refugees  in  Amsterdam  may  be  thus  traced.  Smith's 
first  negotiation  to  unite  with  the  Waterlanders,  in  1610, 
was,  after  some  application,  successful ;  later  on,  Helwys, 
in  1611  or  1612,  returned  to  England,  which  evidently  led 
the  people,  who  were  left  behind,  to  seek  a  union  with  the 
Dutch  Church,  and  which  was  consummated  in  1615. 

We  have  now  arrived  at  a  period  in  our  annals  when  our 
information  becomes  more  abundant,  and  the  movements  of 
our  brethren  much  more  distinct  and  traceable.  In  the  past, 
the  persecuting  edicts  of  monarchs,  and  the  ruthless  proceed- 
ings of  the  professed  ministers  of  Christ,  have  been  our 
guides;  the  existence  of  the  Anabaptists  has  been  indicated 
by  the  sufferings  of  the  Gatehouse  and  the  Fleet,  or  the  fires 
of  Smithfield.  Though  suffering  will  still  mark  their  course, 
intense  and  very  cruel,  for  another  generation  or  two,  still 
we  can  listen  to  their  own  statements,  and  are  less  dependent, 
consequently,  on  the  prejudiced  accounts  of  their  bittered 
foes  for  our  knowledge  of  their  principles  and  our  estimate 
of  their  characters.  As  we  hear  their  own  voice,  and  become 
more  familiar  with  their  proceedings  and  their  great  prin- 
ciples, the  mists  which  ignorance  and  malice  have  gathered 
around  them  disappear,  and  they  stand  before  us  invested 
with  a  moral  grandeur  which  few,  if  any,  of  their  contem- 
poraries could  surpass. 

We  have  seen  that  Mr.  Helwys,  and  probably  some  of 
his  brethren,  returned  to  England  about  1611  or  1612.  The 
unhappy  condition  of  the  Amsterdam  church  may  have  had 

*  "  As  founded  on  full  ages."  The  meaning  is,  that  they  baptized  only- 
adults,  and  that  by  sprinkling. 


JAMES   THE    FIRST.  225 

some  weight  in  his  decision.*  The  motives  which  he  avows 
are  of  the  veiy  highest  kind,  though  his  judgment  in  the 
matter  may  not  meet  with  unmixed  approval.  He  thought 
it  wrong  to  flee  from  persecution.  It  had  "  been  the  over- 
throw of  religion  in  this  island;  the  best,  ablest,  and  greater 
part  being  gone,  and  leg-ving  behind  them  some  few  who,  by 
the  others'  departure,  have  had  their  aJ93iction  and  their  con- 
tempt increased,  hath  been  the  cause  of  many  falling  back, 
and  of  their  adversaries  rejoicing."  London  was  fixed  on  as 
the  place  of  their  future  residence.  Many  causes  would 
contribute  to  this  decision.  Here  "they  continued  their 
church  state  and  assemblies  for  worship  as  publicly  as  the 
evils  of  the  time  would  admit."  Mr.  Taylor  regards  this  as 
the  first  General  Baptist  church  formed  in  England.  The 
claim,  we  think,  cannot  well  be  questioned,  though  Crosby 
appears  to  be  of  a  difierent  opinion.t  There  is  no  evidence 
to  sustain  his  views.  We  refer  not  only  to  the  fact  in  the 
former  part  of  this  chapter,  but  the  General  Baptist  historian 
has  supplied  an  amount  of  evidence  that  must  silence  every 
doubt.  Still  Helwys  held  some  opinions  which  the  intelligent 
members  of  that  section  of  our  body  would  repudiate.  The 
doctrine  "  that  the  New  Creation,  which  is  begotten  of 
God,  needeth  not  the  outward  Scripture,  or  ordinances  of 
the  church,  to  support  him,  but  is  above  them  (I  Cor.  xiii. 
10,  1  John  ii.  27),  seeing  he  hath  in  himself  three  witnesses, 


*■  "Neither  is  it  likely,  if  he,  and  the  people  with  him  at  Amsterdam, 
could  have  gone  on  comfortably  as  they  desired,  that  the  unlawfulness  of 
flight  would  ever  have  troubled  him,"  &c. — Robinson's  Works,  vol.  iii., 
p.  159. 

f  Crosby,  vol.  i.,  p.  270.  His  own  witnesses  fail  him.  "Mr,  Helwys, 
elsewhere  and  rightly,  disclaims  all  free  will,  or  power  in  a  man's  self  to 
work  out  his  salvation,  but  teacheth  that  'this  grace,  which  is  Ms  mercy  in 
Christ,  God  hath  given  to  all,  though  all  receive  it  not.'"  "That  original 
sin  is  an  idle  term,  and  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  men  intended  by 
the  word  (Ezek.  xviii.  20) ;  because  God  threatened  death  only  to  Adam 
(Gen.  ii.  17),  not  to  his  posterity ;  and  because  God  created  the  soul." — 
Robinson,  vol,  iii.,  pp.  232-3,  248,  Other  instances  will  be  found  pp.  251, 
253,  258. 

Q 


226  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

the  Father,  the  Word,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  are  better 
than  all  Scripture;  or  creation,  though  such  as  have  not 
attained  the  new  creation  need  them  for  instruction,  com- 
fort, and  to  stir  them  up,"  &c.  (2  Peter  i.  19;  1  Cor.  xi.  26; 
Eph.  iv.  12,  13,*)  would  find  no  welcome  from  them. 

Crosby  supposes  that  the  Baptists  were  mixed  up  more 
or  less  with  other  Christian  organizations.  The  facts  of 
their  prevalence,  and,  yet,  of  the  absence  of  all  records  of 
their  separate  organization,  he  would  thus  reconcile.  No 
one,  we  apprehend,  acquainted  with  the  estimate  in  which 
these  religious  outcasts  were  held  by  all  classes  of  the  com- 
munity, as  indicated  by  the  facts  laid  before  our  readers, 
can  doubt  this.  The  success  of  Helwys  and  his  friends 
was  considerable.     Of  his  death  we  know  nothing,  t 

*  Quoted  by  Robinson,  vol.  iii.,  p.  268. 

t  On  the  fly-leaf  of  a  book  of  212  pages,  entitled,  "A  Short  Declaration 
of  the  Mistery  of  Iniquity,"  printed  "anno  1612,"  without  any  indication 
of  the  place  where  it  was  printed,  there  is  the  following  passage  written 
by  the  author : — 

"Heare,  O  king,  and  dispise  not  ye  counsell  of  y«  poore,  and  let 
their  complaints  come  before  thee. 

"The  king  is  a  mortall  man,  and  not  God,  therefore  hath  no  power 
over  ye  jmmortall  soules  of  his  subiects,  to  make  lawes  and  ordinances 
for  them,  and  to  set  spirituall  lords  over  them. 

"If  the  king  have  authoi-ity  to  make  spirituall  lords  and  lawes,  then 
he  is  an  jmmortall  God,  and  not  a  mortall  man. 

"O  king,  be  not  seduced  by  deceivers  to  sin  so  against  God,  whome 
thou  oughtest  to  obey,  nor  against  thy  poore  subiects,  who  ought  and  will 
obey  thee  in  all  thinges,  with  body,  life,  and  goods,  or  els  let  their  lives 
be  taken  from  y^  earth. 

"God  save  ye  king.  "THOMAS  Helwys. 

""  SpitUeAeld,  neare  London." 

Our  friend,  Mr.  Wenger,  who  kindly  copied  this  for  us,  says  : — "I  am 
inclined  to  think  the  volume  from  which  this  passage  is  copied  was  what 
we  should  call  a  presentation  copy,  and  that  the  fly-leaf  contained  what 
was  intended  to  occupy  the  place  of  a  dedication.  The  reasons  which 
suggest  this  are  certainly  not  conclusive,  yet  deserving  of  attention. 
1.  The  handwriting  is  beautiful,  and  betrays  special  care.  2.  The  closing 
line,  '  God  save  the  king,'  would  hardly  have  been  added  in  an  ordinary 
copy.    3.  The  signature,  '  Thomas  Helwys,'  is  placed  as  low  down,  and  as 


JAMES    THE    FIRST.  227 

Under  the  date  of  1616,  Sir  S.  D'Ewes  says  :  "  In  the  Low- 
Countries  the  heretical  faction  of  the  Anabaptists,  under  the 
new  and  false  name  of  Arminians,  began  openly  to  defend 
the  errors  of  their  Pelagian  blasphemies,  which  to  this  day, 
like  all  weeds,  have  grown  to  such  a  rankness  as  they  have 
almost  outgrown  the  truth.  Notwithstanding,  our  learned 
King  James  did  now  labour  earnestly,  by  Sir  D.  Carlton, 
his  ambassador,  with  the  States,  to  have  these  heretics  sup- 
pressed, as  lie  had  at  first  after  the  death  of  Arminius,*  the 
enemy  of  God."     In  1629  he  commends  the  zeal   of  the 

completely  in  the  comer,  as  you  would  expect  in  a  piece  intended  for  the 
king's  eye :  but  it  is  most  beautifully  written,  though  in  plain  unadorned 
characters." 

In  the  same  library  there  are  two  other  woi'ks  by  this  wi'iter.  The 
following  is  the  Title  of  a  Tract  of  144  leaves,  8vo.,  printed  in  1611.  "A 
Short  and  Plaine  Proofe,  by  the  Word  and  Workes  of  God,  that  God's 
Decree  is  not  the  Cause  of  anye  Man's  Sinne  or  Condemnation  : 

AND 

That  all  Men  are  Redeemed  by  Christ ; 

AS   ALSO 

That  no  Infants  are  Condemned." 
The  following  is  one  of  94  pages,  and  was  printed  in  the  same  year : — 

"An  adveiiiisement  or  admonition  unto  the  congregations  which  men 
call  the  New  Fryesters,  in  the  Lowe  Countries,  ^vritten  in  Dutclie,  and 
published  in  Englis. 

"  "Wlierein  is  handled  four  principall  pointes  of  religion  : — 

"  1.  That  Christ  took  his  flesh  of  Marie,  having  a  true  earthlie,  uaturall 
bodie. 

"2.  That  a  Sabbath,  or  day  of  rest,  is  to  be  kept  holy  everie  first  day 
of  the  weeke. 

"3.  That  there  is  no  succession  nor  privilege  to  persons  in  the  holie 
thinges. 

"4.  That  magistracie,  being  an  holy  ordinance  of  God,  debarreth  not 
anie  from  being  of  the  church  of  Christ. 

"After  these  foil  owes  certen  demandes  concerning  God's  decree  of 
salvation  and  condemnation." 

[These  scarce  works  are  in  the  Bodleian  Library  at  Oxford.] 

'■•  "King  James,  after  the  death  of  James  Arminius,  Professor  at 
Ley  den,  in  Holland,  an  arch  Anabaptist,  &c.    .    ,    .     He  called  him  a 
blasphemer,  an  atheist,  &c.,  terming  the  deceased  Anabaptist,  Ai-minius 
the  enemy  of  God." — Life  of  Sir  S.  D'Ewes,  vol.  i.,  p.  82. 


228  EAKLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

Commons  "that  the  true  religion  might  not  be  intermixed 
with  Popish  ceremonies  or  idolatrous  actions,  nor  the  pure 
doctrine  of  the  Church  of  England  be  corrupted  with  the 
blasphemous  tenets  of  the  Anabaptists,  in  derogation  of 
God's  grace  and  providence;  which  tenets  had  been  freely 
broached  by  Sebastian  Castellio,  in  Latin,  and  by  other 
Anabaptists  in  England,  about  seventy  years  past;  and 
now,  some  twenty  years  past,  in  the  Low  Countries,  by 
James  Arminius  and  his  fellow  Anabaptists,  in  Latin  and 
Dutch."  From  other  sources  the  same  conclusions  would 
be  reached.  Though  we  have  no  distinct  proof  of  the 
separate  organization  of  our  churches  at  this  time,  yet  the 
evidence  is  abundant  as  to  the  wide  prevalence  of  our 
opinions.*  Johnson,  referring  to  the  denial  of  infant 
baptism,  says :  "  How  greatly  it  spreadeth,  both  in  these 
parts  (Holland,  1617)  and  of  late  in  our  own  country,  that 
is,  England,  "t 

Important  as  this  movement  of  Helwys  and  his  friends 
was,  it  was  not  alone.  The  pen  was  wielded,  and  from  the 
press  various  works  issued  in  defence  of  Baptist  principles. 
Against  the  ignorance,  the  intolerance,  the  cruelty  of  the 
ruling  faction,  they  appealed.  Sentiments  were  uttered  then 
which  have  exerted  the  most  benignant  influence  on  society. 
Sentiments  which  surpliced  hypocrites,  wanton  courtiers, 
and  a  sensual  monarch,  could  not  appreciate,  but  which 
Williams,  Taylor,  Milton,  and  Locke,  in  after  years,  heard 

*  D'Ewes'  Life,  vol.  i.,  pp.  97,  400.     The  Knight  is  very  angry  with 
the  Anabaptists,  and  in  every  instance  identifies  them  with  the  followers 
of  Arminius.— Fi^^e  pp.  102,  120,  201,  388,  405-6. 
+  Crosby,  vol.  i.,  p,  94, 

"  There  was  also  another  sect  amongst  the  Anabaptists,  that  were  called 
the  Puritans;  from  whence  the  Precisians  of  our  kingdom,  who,  out  of 
self-will  and  fancy,  refuse  to  conform  themselves  to  the  order  of  our 
Church,  have  borrowed  this  name." — King  James's  Works,  p.  371. 

"Pagit  also  mentions  a  kind  of  Anabaptists,  so  called  {i.  e..  Separatists) 
because  they  pretended  to  be  separated  from  the  world." — Heresiog,  p.  35. 
Hanbury,  vol.  i.,  p.  35. 


JAMES    THE    FIRST.  229 

with  rapture  and  propagated  witli  success.  Scarcely  were 
they  heard  at  first.  The  rigid  Presbyterians,  as  well  as  the 
Right  Divine  Episcopalians,  repudiated  them.  Bub  they 
were  not  powerless.  In  the  senate  and  in  the  church 
they  worked,  and  on  them  rests  the  mighty  structure  of 
England's  liberties. 

In  1614  there  resided  in  London  a  humble  citizen,  who 
obtained  his  daily  bread  with  difficulty.  Persecution  was  in 
part  the  cause  of  this.  He  had  been  an  exile,  and  probably 
had  mingled  with  his  brethren  in  Holland.  His  scholarly 
attainments  were  considerable.  With  the  Greek  of  the  'New 
Testament  he  was  familiar.  Of  the  exact  period  of  his 
return  to  London  we  know  nothing:.  The  rajre  asrainst  the 
Puritans  was  not  abating.  Episcopacy  and  arbitrary  power 
were  in  the  ascendant.  To  the  wilds  of  the  New  World 
multitudes  of  the  holiest  of  the  nation  were  repairing,  to 
find  in  the  wilderness  a  home,  and  to  lay  the  foundation 
of  a  purer  civil  and  ecclesiastical  commonwealth.  Leonard 
Busher* — a  name  that  will  never  perish — issued  his  work : 
^^  Religious  Peace;  or,  A  Plea  for  Liberty  of  Conscience.  Long 
since  presented  to  King  James,  and  the  High  Court  of  Parlia- 
ment then  sitting,  hy  Leonard  Busher,  Citizen  of  London;  and 
printed  in  the  Year  1614."  We  cannot  analyze  this  book, 
or  present  an  outline  of  the  noble  sentiments  it  advocates. 
The  exterior  may  be  rough,  but  there  is  a  massive  grandeur 
about  it  which  is  well  worthy  the  mighty  theme  it  embodies. 
It  will  pass  before  us  again.  Still  there  are  two  or  three 
sentences  the  production  of  which  justice  demands: — 

"/  r&xd  tliat  Jews,  Christians,  and  Turks,  are  tolerated  in  Con- 
stantinople, and  yet  are  peaceable,  though  so  contrary  the  one  to  the 
other.  If  this  he  so,  hoio  much  more  ought  Christians  not  to  force  one 
another  to  religion?    And  how  much  more  ought  Christians  to  tolerate 


*  He  was  probably  a  descendant  of  one  of  the  Walloon  refugees.  "We 
find  a  Domynic  Busher  amongst  them,  as  a  subscriber  of  £100  to  a  loan 
to  Elizabeth  in  1588.  — Burns's  History  of  the  French  and  Walloon 
Church,  &c.,  pp.  6,  7. 


230  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

Christians  when  the  TurTcs  do  tolerate  them?     vShall  we  be   less 

MERCIFUL  THAN   THE   TUEKS?    OR   SHALL  WE    LEAVE    THE    TuEKS    TO 

PERSECUTE  Christians?  It  is  not  only  unmerciful,  but  un- 
natural AND  abominable:  YEA,  MONSTROUS,  FOR  ONE  CHRISTIAN 
TO  VEX  AND  DESTROY  ANOTHER  FOR  DIFFERENCES  AND  QUESTIONS 
OF   RELIGION," 

"And  the  king  and  parliament  may  please  to  permit  all  sorts  of 
Christians;  yea,  Jews,  Turks,  and  Pagans,  so  long  as  they  are 
peaceable,  and  no  malefactors,  as  is  above  mentioned,  which  if  they 
be  found  to  be,  under  two  or  three  witnesses,  let  them  be  punished 
according  to  God's  Word,  Also,  if  any  be  found  to  be  willing  liars, 
false  accusers,  false  allegers  and  quoters  of  Scripture,  or  other  men's 
writings, — as  some  men  willingly  do, — let  them  be  punished  according 
to  right  and  justice;  it  is  due  desert,  not  persecution.  But  let 
GocVs  Word  have  its  full  and,  free  passage  among  them  all;  even  to  the 
end  of  their  lives,  in  all  bountifulness,  longsuffering,  and  patience: 
knowing  that  it  is  ordained  by  God's  rich  mercy  to  lead  infidels  and 
such  as  err  into  repentance  and  amendment,  out  of  the  snare  of  fJie 
devil,  by  v)hom  they  are  taken  and  deceived^ 

The  whole  work  breathes  this  loftiness  of  spirit;  the  same 
enlarged  view  and  nobleness  of  purpose  pervade  it.  We  can 
only  give  another  example : — 

"  That  for  the  m^re  peace  and  quietness,  and  for  the  satisfying  of  the 
iveak  and  simple,  among  so  many  -persons  differing  in  religion,  it  be 
lawful  for  any  person  or  persons,  yea,  Jews  and  Pajnsts,  to  unite, 
dispute,  confer  and  reason,  print  and  publish  any  matter  touching 
religion,  either  for  or  against  whomsoever;  always  provided  they 
allege  no  Fathers  for  pi^oof  of  any  p)ovnt  of  religion,  but  only  the  Holy 
Scriptures.''^* 

Not  only  is  the  broadest  libei-ty  for  thought  and  utter- 
ances on  religious  matters  pleaded,  but  the  doctrine  of 
''unlicensed  printing"  was  within  the  wide  circle  of  his 
advocacy.     Another  and  yet  another  of  these  compositions 


*  Tracts  on  Liberty  of  Conscience,  pp.  24,  33,  51.  Cecil,  in  reply  to  a 
letter  from  the  Archbishop  of  York,  who  pleaded  with  him  for  the  use  of 
gentler  means  with  the  Puritans,  says :  "I  love  not  to  procure  or  yield  to 
any  toleration ;  a  matter  which  I  well  know  no  creature  living  dare  pro- 
pound to  our  religious  sovereign." — Lodge,  vol.  iii.,  p.  128.  The  spirit  of 
the  great  Burghley  had  not  rested  on  his  son. 


JAMES   THE    FIRST.  231 

followed,*  pleading  the  cause  of  the  oppressed  with  a  power 
and  earnestness  which  at  that  time  had  no  parallel.  Presby- 
terians and  Separatists  asked  for  toleration,  but  it  was  for 
the  liberty  of  a  sect.  The  Anabaptists  only,  though  despised 
and  persecuted,  pleaded  the  claims  of  all,  and  maintained 
that  no  power,  civil  or  ecclesiastical,  had  authority  over 
conscience. 

Other  events,  which  have  exerted  an  unmistakable  and 
not  less  powerful  and  benignant  influence  on  the  church, 
transpired  about  this  time.  They  form  an  epoch  in  the 
world's  history.  They  have  given  an  impulse  to  commerce, 
to  liberty  and  religion,  which  arrested  the  downward  ten- 
dency of  this  nation,  and  have  contributed  more  than  any- 
thing else  to  its  present  greatness.  Whilst  in  many  places, 
in  England  especially,  the  power  and  life  of  the  Church  were 
dying  out,  from  the  pressure  of  the  multiplied  ceremonies 
and  superstitious  forms  which  clothed  it,t  the  Redeemer  was, 
from  other  causes,  giving  it  a  new  and  more  Scriptural 
development,  and  preparing  a  wider  circle  in  which  its 
triumphs  should  be  won.  We  have  seen  already,  that  many 
devout  men,  despairing  of  liberty  in  England,  and  anxious 
for  freedom  from  the  intolerable  oppression  of  the  hierarchy, 
had  fled,  some  to  Holland,  and  others  to  the  wilds  and 
wastes  of  the  new  world.  To  the  latter,  the  church  over 
which  Robinson,  the  antagonist  of  Smith  and  Helwys, 
presided,  resolved  to  go.     As  a  religious  community  they 


*  "  Persecution  for  Religion  Judged  and  Condemned.  1615."  "A  most 
HumWe  Supplication  of  many  of  the  King's  Majesty's  Subjects.  1620." 
Both  these  works  will  claim  attention  again. 

+  The  decay  of  piety  towards  the  close  of  the  reign  of  James,  i.  e., 
when  his  pernicious  example  and  worthless  character  had  wrought  their 
full  effect  upon  the  nation,  is  an  afflicting  topic.  The  lewdness  of  his 
court  was  such,  that  those  who  drew  the  sword  against  his  son  and 
brought  him  to  the  scaffold,  do  not  hesitate  to  contrast  the  many  virtues 
of  King  Charles,  and  the  discourse  of  his  courtiers,  with  the  low  and  in- 
famous bebaucheries  of  the  court  of  James." — Vide  Mrs.  Hutchinson's 
Memoirs.     Marsden,  p.  337. 


232  EABLY   ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

would  emigrate.  The  history  of  the  enterprise  is  one  of 
thrilling  interest.  Genius  has  adorned  it  with  some  of  her 
noblest  efforts.  In  the  pages  of  the  historian  and  of  the 
poet  it  forms  a  commanding  and  glowing  episode,  and  the 
pencil  of  the  painter  has  pourtrayed  it  in  a  lasting  form. 
To  the  pages  of  Bancroft  and  others  we  must  refer  our 
readers  for  the  full  details.*  Only  a  sentence  or  two  will 
our  limits  allow.  The  Puritan  character,  with  all  its  excel- 
lencies and  defects,  marked  the  civil  and  ecclesiastical  consti- 
tution of  the  colony,  which  after  almost  unparalleled  suffering 
this  noble  band  of  Christian  heroes  succeeded  in  founding. 
Suffering  for  conscience  sake  had  not  taught  them  forbear- 
ance. Dissent  from  the  opinions  of  the  ruling  power  was 
not  tolerated.  Hence  the  annals  of  the  State  are  marked 
with  blots  of  the  deepest  hue.  Roger  Williams  was  perse- 
cuted, and  had  to  flee  for  his  life.  He  subsequently  estab- 
lished another  colony,  founded  on  the  broadest  principles  of 
civil  and  religious  freedom,  and  gave  rise  to  the  Baptist 
body  in  that  distant  land.t 

From  the  struggles  and  mistakes  of  the  Pilgrim  Fathers 
we  must  turn  to  another  scene.  It  is  the  last  of  the  long 
series  of  sacrifices  which  pampered  bigotry  and  ignorance 
offered  in  this  kingdom.  Other  victims  followed,  as  we 
shall  presently  see,  but  their  tortures  were  more  refined  and 
protracted.  This  was  the  last  auto-da-fe  which  the  church 
offered  to  attest  the  purity  of  its  faith,  and  the  accordance  of 
its  spirit  with  the  tender  and  loving  mind  of  the  Prince  of 
Peace.  The  episcopal  city  of  Lichfield  was  the  spot  selected 
for  this  act  of  devotion.  The  victim  was  the  very  embodiment 
of  all  the  heresies  of  the  past.  In  him  were  embodied  "  the 
wicked  heresies  of  the  Ebionites,  Cerienthians,  Valentinians, 
Arians,  Macedonians,  of  Simon  Magus,  of  Manes,  Manichees, 

*  Bancroft's  History  of  the  United  States. 

t  Vide  Life  of  Roger  Williams,  by  Professor  Knowles.     Dr.  R.  Elton's 
smaller,  bat  interesting,  volume  may  be  consulted. 


JAMES   THE    FIRST.  233 

of  Photiniis,"  and,  to  crown  all,  "of  the  Anabaptists,  and  of 
other  heretical,  execrable,  and  unheard-of  opinions,  by  the 
instinct  of  Satan,  by  him  excogitated  and  holden."  He 
held  "that  the  baptizing  of  infants  is  an  abominable  cus- 
tom. That  there  ought  not  to  be  in  the  church  the  use  of 
the  Lord's  Supper  to  be  celebrated  in  the  elements  of  bread 
and  wine;  and  the  use  of  baptism  to  be  celebrated  in  the 
element  of  water,  as  they  are  now  practised  in  the  Church 
of  England.  But  that  the  use  of  baptism  is  to  be  adminis- 
tered in  water  only  to  converts  of  sufficient  age  and  under- 
standing, converted  from  infidelity  to  the  faith."  Edward 
Wigbtman  was  of  Burton-on -Trent.  Few,  excepting  epis- 
copal judges,  would  doubt  his  insanity.  An  asylum,  where 
he  might  have  indulged  his  wild  fancies,  would  have  been  a 
more  appropriate  place  than  the  martyr's  stake.*  Before  the 
bishop  the  heretic  was  called,  but  reasoning  and  threats  were 
powerless.  The  warrant  for  his  execution  informs  us  that 
his  lordship  was  aided  by  "  other  divines  and  learned  in  the 
law;"  the  aforesaid  wicked  crimes,  heresies,  and  other  detes- 
table blasphemies  and  errors  ''were  stubbornly  and  per- 
tinaciously, knowingly,  maliciously,  and  with  an  hardened 
heart,  published,  defended,  and  dispersed,"  &c.  Only  one 
alternative  remained.  The  Church  could  do  no  more.  Her 
tender  mercies  were  exhausted.  "  As  a  blasphemous  and 
condemned  heretic"  he  was  "  left  to  the  secular  power  to  be 
punished  with  condign  punishment."  The  bidding  of  the 
church  was  heard.  "  We,  therefore,"  says  the  royal  execu- 
tioner, "as  a  zealot  of  justice  and  a  defender  of  the  Catholic 
faith,  and  willing  that  the  holy  church,  and  the  rights  and 
liberties  of  the  same,  and  the  Catholic  faith  to  maintain 
and  defend,  and  such  like  heresies  and  errors  everywhere,  so 
much  as  in  us  lies,  to  root  out  and  extirpate,  and  heretics 


*  "  Wightman  was  a  visionary  who  should  have  been  placed  in  the  hands 
of  a  keeper  rather  than  in  the  hands  of  the  executioner," — Vaughan's 
History  of  England,  vol,  v.,  p.  121. 


234  EARLY    ENGLISH    BAPTISTS. 

SO  convict  to  punish  with  condign  punishment,  holding  that 
such  an  heretic,  in  the  aforesaid  form  convict  and  condemn, 
according  to  the  laws  and  customs  of  this  our  kingdom  of 
England,  in  this  part  accustomed,  ought  to  be  burnt  with 
fire.  We  command  thee  (the  sheriff)  that  thou  cause  the 
said  Edward  Wightman,  being  in  thy  custody,  to  be  com- 
mitted to  the  fire  in  some  public  and  open  place  below  the 
city  aforesaid,  for  the  cause  aforesaid,  before  the  people; 
and  the  same  Edward  Wightman  cause  really  to  be  burnt, 
in  the  detestation  of  the  said  crime,  and  for  manifest 
example  of  other  Christians,  that  they  may  not  fall  into 
the  same  crime."  Evidently  there  was  a  burning  sense  in 
which  royal  theologians  and  episcopal  divines  understood 
Paul,  "^y  the  terrors  of  the  Lord  we  persuade  menr 

The  closing  period  of  this  reign  was  marked  by  the 
stronger  development  of  those  princii^les  which  were  disas- 
trous to  the  highest  interests  of  the  nation,  and  finally  led 
the  first  Charles  to  the  scafibld.  The  graphic  pen  of 
Macaulay  thus  describes  the  opposing  elements : — 

"  Theories  tending  to  Turkish  despotism  were  in  fashion 
at  Whitehall.  Theories  tending  to  republicanism  were  in 
favour  with  a  large  portion  of  the  House  of  Commons.  The 
violent  prelatists,  who  were  to  a  man  zealous  of  their  pre- 
rogatives, and  the  violent  Puritans,  who  were  to  a  m.an 
zealous  for  the  privileges  of  parliament,  regarded  each 
other  with  animosity  more  intense  than  that  which,  in 
the  preceding  generation,  had  existed  between  Catholics 
and  Protestants."* 

Every  year  augmented  this.  The  folly,  the  debasement 
of  this  despicable  creature,  increased  till,  after  an  illness  of 
some  fourteen  days,  he  closed  his  ignoble  reign  the  27th  of 
March,  1625.  We  shall  be  forgiven  if,  in  addition  to  the 
remarks  on  a  previous  page,  we  ofier  one  or  two  on  the 
character  of  James. 

*  History,  vol.  i.,  p.  82. 


JAMES    THE    FIRST.  235 

His  personal  appearance  is  thus  described  by  a  contempo- 
rary : — "  His  eye  large,  ever  rolling  after  any  stranger  tbat 
came  in  his  presence,  insomuch  as  many  for  shame  have  left 
the  room,  as  being  out  of  countenance.  His  beard  was  very 
thin ;  his  tongue  too  large  for  his  mouth,  and  made  him 
drink  very  unseemly,  as  if  eating  his  drink,  which  came  out 
into  the  cup  of  each  side  of  his  mouth.  His  skin  was  as 
soft  as  taffate  sarsnet;  which  felt  so  because  he  never 
washed  his  hands,  only  rubbed  his  finger  ends  slightly  with 
the  wet  end  of  a  napkin.  His  legs  were  very  weak,  having 
had,  as  some  thought,  some  foul  play  in  his  youth,  or  rather 
before  he  was  born,  that  he  was  not  able  to  stand  at  seven 
years  of  age ;  that  weakness  made  him  ever  leaning  on  other 
men's  shoulders."* 

The  social  habits  of  the  monarch  were  as  filthy  as  his  per- 
son. His  drunkenness  was  excessive.  The  presence  of  the 
most  illustrious  of  his  guests  had  no  influence  on  him.  From 
under  the  table  the  royal  drunkard  was  not  unfrequently 
taken  by  his  attendants  from  the  company  of  his  visitors,  t 
The  disgustino;  vices  of  the  monarch  were  reflected  with  the 
fullest  accuracy  by  his  courtiers.  "  The  court  of  the  king  was 
a  nursery  of  vice  and  licentiousness  j  he  had  brought  in  with 
him  a  company  of  poor  Scots,  who,  coming  into  this  plentiful 
kingdom,  surfeited  with  riot  and  debaucheries,  and  got  all 
the  riches  of  the  land  only  to  cast  away.  The  honour, 
wealth,  and  glory  of  the  nation,  when  Queen  Elizabeth  left 
it,  were  soon  prodigally  wasted  by  this  thriftless  heir ;  the 
nobility  of  the  land  utterly  debased,  by  setting  honours  to 
public  sale,  and  conferring  them  on  persons  that  had  neither 

*  Weldon's  Court  and  Character  of  James  I. ,  p.  177-179. 
"  It  vs'as  no  light  thing  that,  on  the  eve  of  the  decisive  struggle  between 
our  kings  and  parliaments,  royalty  should  he  exhibited  to  the  world 
stammering,  slabbering,  shedding  unmanly  tears,  trembling  at  a  drawn 
sword,  and  talking  in  the  style  alternately  of  a  buffoon  and  a  pedagogue, 
— Macaiday's  History,  vol.  i.,  p.  74. 

t  History  of  England,  vol.  i. ,  p.  166. 


236  EARLY   ENGLISH   BAPTISTS. 

blood  nor  merit  to  wear,  nor  estates  to  bear  up  their  titles, 
but  were  fain  to  invent  projects  to  pill  (plunder)  the  people 
and  pick  their  purses  for  the  maintenance  of  vice  and 
lewdness."*  "  Ebrietj  was  not  confined  to  the  male  sex,  and 
on  some  occasions  females  of  the  highest  rank,  who  had  spent 
weeks  in  the  study  of  their  respective  parts,  presented  them- 
selves to  the  spectators  in  a  state  of  the  most  disgusting 
intoxication."!  "Those  whom  I  never  could  get  to  taste 
good  liquor,  now  follow  the  fashion,  and  wallow  in  beastly 
delight.  The  ladies  abandon  sobriety,  and  are  seen  to  roll 
about  in  intoxication. ";|l 

The  Earl  of  Worcester,  in  a  letter  to  Lord  Shrewsbury, 
thus  speaks  of  the  maids  of  honour  :  "  But  the  plotting  and 
malice  amongst  them  is  such,  that  I  think  envy  hath  tied  an 
invisible  snake  about  most  of  their  necks  to  sting  one  another 
to  death."§  The  details  so  supplied  by  contemporaries,  are, 
at  least,  many  of  them,  totally  unfit  for  our  pages,  and  more 
than  justify  the  statement  of  a  modern  writer,  that  "to 
remain  incorrupt  in  the  reign  of  James,  would  have  argued 
almost  superhuman  strength  of  character."  [j 

Four  days  before  James's  death,  great  religious  prepara- 
tions were  made  for  the  solemn  event.  The  drunken  sensual- 
ist went  through  the  form  of  confession,  devoutly  making 
his  professions  of  faith  to  the  Lord-Keeper  Williams.  The 
sacrament  was  then  administered  with  great  solemnity,  and 
the  bishop  says  "that  the  dying  monarch  received  it  with 
that  zeal  and  devotion  as  if  he  had  not  been  a  frail  man,  but 
a  cherubim  clothed   with  flesh   and   blood."     "  Our   only 

*  Life  of  Colonel  Hutchinson,  p.  27. 
f  Lingard,  vol.  ix.,  p.  109.  +  Ibid.  vol.  ix. 

§  Lodge's  Illustrations,  vol.  iii.,  p.  68.  Vide  Sir  A.  "Weldon's  Secret 
History  of  James  I.,  vol.  i.,  p.  399;  ii.  p.  387  (note). 

II  Vide  Hallam,  vol.  i.,  p.  331  (note).  Life  of  Villiars,  vol.  i.,  p.  133. 
Bishop  Williams  was  charged  with  an  improper  intimacy  with  the  mother 
of  Buckingham.  Ibid,  vol.  i.,  pp.  208,  308.  Bishop  Goodman  doubts  the 
truth  of  the  charge,  vol.  i.,  p.  286. 


JAMES   THE   FIRST.  237 

comfort,"  says  the  courtly  prelate,  "  is  this,  that  as  he  lived 
like  a  king,  so  he  died  like  a  saint.  Never  have  you  read 
of  any  king  that  left  this  world  more  resolved,  more  pre- 
pared, as  though  he  had  embraced  himself  for  bed  rather 
than  for  his  grave."*  We  cannot  forget  a  sentence  from 
another  pen :  "  The  wicked  have  no  bands  in  their  death." 
Thus  "  the  monarch  who  broke  the  heart  of  Arabella  Stuart 
by  long  imprisonment  and  blighted  hopes,  and  who  beheaded 
Raleigh,  and  denied  restitution  to  his  son  Carew,  died  well ! 
So  self-deceived  is  the  rich  man  ;  so  easy  is  it  to  substitute 
profession  for  practical  Christianity."! 

The  funeral  of  the  monarch  lasted  from  ten  in  the  morn- 
ing to  seven  in  the  evening.  Charles  was  present  as  chief 
mourner.  Williams  pronounced  the  warmest  eulogy  on 
the  king.  Though  an  habitual  swearer,  drunkard,  and  a 
notorious  liar,  yet  he  was  equal  to  Solomon  in  every  view, 
and  his  superior  in  many  things.  The  bishop  told  them 
that  the  abandoned  prince  "was  now  reigning  gloriously 
with  God  in  heaven."  The  strain  of  Bishop  Hall  was 
equally  disgraceful.;}: 


*  Williams's  Sermon;  Somers'  Tracts,  vol.  ii.,  p.  51.  "He  breathed 
forth  his  blessed  soul  most  religiously,  and  with  great  consistency  of 
faith  and  courage."— Laud's  Diary.    London,  1695,  p.  15. 

t  Life  of  Villiars,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  146-7. 

X  Vide  D'Ewes'  Journal,  vol.  i.,  p.  267;  Rushworth,  vol.  i.,  p.  171; 
Marsden,  p.  367. 


APPENDICES. 


A.  —  Page  66. 

(Prom  a  Book  of  Ceremonies.    Vide  Strype's  Ecc.  Memorials,  vol.  vi.,  pp.  170-74.) 

THE  RITES  AND  CEREMONIES  OBSERVED  ABOUT  THE  SACRAMENT 

OF  BAPTISM. 

First,  the  catechism  which  goeth  before  the  baptism ;  and  it  is  as 
much  as  to  say,  a  teaching  and  instruction.  For  in  the  primitive  church, 
where  many  came  to  the  Christian  faith,  at  the  year  of  age  and  discretion, 
it  was  used  that  such,  before  they  were  admitted  to  baptism,  should  be 
taught  the  articles  of  the  faith,  and  the  sum  of  Christian  religion,  and 
should  promptly  and  readily  render  the  same  to  their  pastors  or  curates ; 
which  were  yet  to  be  used,  if  any  such  would  desire  to  receive  baptism. 
But  in  baptism  of  infants,  which  for  lack  of  age  cannot  be  instructed,  the 
priest  shortly  expresseth  then  such  instruction,  and  then  chargeth  the 
godfather  and  godmother  further  to  teach  the  child  or  children  when  they 
come  to  lawfid  age ;  and  then  beginneth  to  make  a  cross  upon  the  forehead 
of  the  child  that  is  offered  to  be  baptized ;  entokening  that  he  is  coming 
to  be  professed  and  totally  to  be  dedicated  to  Christ  crucified ;  whom  he 
will  never  be  ashamed  openly  before  men  to  confess  and  acknowledge. 

Then  he  maketh  another  cross  upon  the  bi'east,  from  whence  cometh 
the  belief ;  signifying  that  it  is  not  enough  to  confess  Christ  with  mouth 
openly,  unless  he  doth  steadfastly  believe  in  heart  inwardly.  And,  there- 
fore, the  minister  calleth  Almighty  God  to  take  away  the  blindness  of  his 
heart,  and  to  make  him  apt  to  receive  grace  in  baptism. 

And  then  he  putteth  hallowed  salt  into  his  mouth,  to  signify  the  spiri- 
tual salt,  which  is  the  Word  of  God,  wherewith  he  should  be  seasoned  and 
powdered  ;  that  thereby  the  filthy  savour  of  stinking  sin  should  be  taken 
away ;  preserving  him  from  corruption,  and  making  him  a  more  apt  vessel 
to  continue  in  the  moisture  of  wholesome  and  godly  wisdom.  And, 
therefore,  the  minister  prayeth  that  he  may  lie  replenished  Avitli  heavenly 
food,  and  that  he,  receiving  his  grace  of  baptism,  may  obtain  his  ever- 
lasting reward.  Then  the  minister  maketh  the  sign  of  the  cross  on  the 
child's  forehead ;  adjuring  the  devil  to  depart,  and  no  more  to  approa  eh 
to  him,  but  to  acknowledge  his  sentence  of  damnation,  and  to  give  glory 


240  APPENDICES. 

unto  God  and  to  Christ,  which- triumphed  on  the  cross  over  him  in  his 
own  person  ;  praying  that  this  child,  now  purged  from  the  wicked  spirit, 
may  be  the  sanctified  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

After  this  is  read  the  Gospel,  taken  out  of  Matt.,  chap.  xix. ,  beginning, 
Ablati,  sweet  Jesus,  pueri  et ;  wherein  is  showed,  that  the  oblation  of 
young  children  is  acceptable  to  Christ,  of  whose  church,  without  baptism, 
they  cannot  be  made  members.  Wherefore  the  people,  according  to  this 
example,  offereth  their  children  to  the  minister  to  be  baptized. 

Then  the  minister  wetteth  with  spittle  the  nose,  thurles,  and  ears  of 
him  that  shall  be  baptized  ;  putting  us  in  remembrance  of  the  miracle  of 
the  deaf  and  dumb  made  by  Christ,  who  looking  up  into  heaven,  putteth 
his  spittle  with  his  finger  to  his  ear,  and  touching  his  tongue,  saith, 
Ephatha,  i.  e.  to  say,  Be  opened.  And  so  he  healed  him ;  signifying 
thereby  the  grace  and  godly  influence  descending  from  heaven,  which,  by 
the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  openeth  our  nose  to  take  the  sweet 
savour  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ ;  and  our  ears  to  hear  his  "Word  and 
commandment. 

Then  the  minister  exhorteth  the  godfather  and  godmother,  with  all 
others  that  are  present,  to  pray  to  God  that  the  child  may  worthily  receive 
the  blessed  sacrament  of  baptism,  to  the  honour  of  God,  and  to  the  salva- 
tion of  his  soul,  and  confusion  of  his  ghostly  enemy  the  devil;  and  so 
the  minister  and  all  they  together  say,  Pater  Noster. 

Then  immediately  the  minister  maketh  the  sign  of  the  cross  in  the  right 
hand  of  the  infant,  which  cross  should,  in  all  our  lifetime,  admonish  us 
valiantly  to  defend  Christ,  and  withstand  the  crafty  assaults  of  our  enemy 
the  devil,  and  all  our  corrupt  and  perverse  affections  and  designs.  And 
BO  blessing  the  child  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost,  taketh  it  by  the  right  hand,  and  biddeth  it  enter  into  the  church, 
then  to  be  admitted  as  one  of  Christ's  flock  and  congregation,  and  so 
proceedeth  to  the  font. 

And  then  entering  towards  the  baptism,  the  first  inquisition  is  made  of 
the  name  of  him  that  should  be  baptized,  to  the  intent  that  by  giving  in 
his  name,  he  may  now  profess  himself  to  a  new  master,  Christ.  For  of  a 
certain,  such  professions  were  made  by  such  in  Scripture,  and  giving  in 
their  name. 

Then  there  f  olloweth  a  stipulation  under  prescript  words  :  the  minister 
demanding  certain  questions,  and  he  that  is  baptized,  or  his  sureties, 
making  answer  to  any  questions  and  demands  particularly.  fWhich 
demands,  questions,  and  answers  (to  the  intent  the  godfather,  with  others 
then  present,  may  know  what  is  a  Christian  man's  profession  at  his  bap- 
tism), we  think  it  veiy  convenient  and  meet  to  be  uttered  hereafter  in 
English],  and  first  to  this  interrogation  by  the  minister.* 

The  minister  saith,  "Forsakest  thou  the  devil?"  He,  or  his  sureties 
for  him,  answereth,  ''I  forsake  him."    The  minister  saith,  "And  all  his 


•  The  words  within  brackets  [  ]  were  added  in  the  margin  bj  Bishop  Gardiner's  own  hand. 


APPENDICES.  241 

works?"  It  is  answered,  "I  forsake  them."  The  minister saith,  "And 
all  his  pomps  and  vanities?"    The  answer  is,  "I  forsake  them." 

After  tliis  the  minister,  with  holy  oil,  anointeth  the  child  before,  upon 
his  breast,  and  behind,  between  Ms  shoulders.  Which  unction  signifieth 
that  our  hearts  and  affections  should  be  wholly  dedicated  to  Christ,  and 
established  in  a  perfect  faith  in  his  mercy ;  which  the  oil  doth  commonly 
signify  in  Scriptui'es.  And  the  anointing  between  the  shoulders  with 
the  sign  of  the  cross,  signifieth  that  we  should  be  bold  and  strong  to 
bear  the  yoke  of  our  Lord;  and  particularly  to  sustain  such  cross  of 
persecutions,  trouble,  and  aflBictions,  as  our  most  merciful  Lord  shall  lay 
upon  us. 

That  further,  the  minister  maketh  inquisition  of  his  belief  that  is  to  be 
christened,  saying,  "Believest  thou  in  God,  the  Almighty  Father,  Maker 
of  heaven  and  earth?"  It  is  answered,  "  I  believe."  The  minister  saith, 
"Believest  thou  in  Clirist,  his  only  Son,  our  Lord?"  and  the  answer  is 
made,  "I  believe."  The  minister  saith,  "Believest  thou  in  the  Holy 
Ghost,  the  holy  Catholic  Church,  the  commtinion  of  saints,  the  remission 
of  sins,  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  and  after  death,  to  have  everlasting 
life?"  It  is  answered,  "I  believe."  All  which  promises  and  professions 
of  renouncing  the  old  errors,  and  believing  and  embracing  the  truth, 
made  in  baptism,  every  Christian  man  ought  to  have  in  his  after  remem- 
brance. 

And  after  this  the  minister  saith  unto  him  that  is  to  be  baptized,  these 
words,  "What  asketh  thou?"  It  is  answered,  "Baptism."  The  minister 
demandeth  further,  "Wilt  thou  be  baptized?"  It  is  answered,  "I 
will."  For  there  is  no  man  saved  against  his  will,  but  willingly.  For 
as  man  by  his  own  free  will,  obeying  the  serpent,  did  perish;  so  when 
God  calleth  by  grace,  by  the  conversion  of  his  own  mind,  every  man 
truly  believing  and  intending  to  work  accordingly,  is  saved. 

Then  the  minister  calleth  the  child  by  the  name,  and  baptizeth  it  in 
the  name  of  the  Father,  and  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  putting  it 
into  the  water  of  the  font,  and  taking  it  out  again ;  or  else  pouring  water 
upon  the  infant,  whereby  the  person  christened  hath  not  only  the  remis- 
sion of  all  his  sins,  by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  but  also  by  the 
same  is  signified  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ,  the  only  cause  of 
our  health  and  salvation.  And,  moreover,  that  we  should  clearly  mortify 
our  evil  desires  and  corrupt  affections ;  and  so  washed  from  sin,  walk  in 
a  new,  pui'e,  and  godly  life  and  conversation. 

Then  after  this  baptism,  he  is  anointed  with  holy  chrism  on  the  head, 
as  the  supreme  and  principal  part  of  man.  Signifying  thereby,  that  he  is 
made  a  Cliristian  man  by  the  head  of  the  congregation,  and  that  he  is 
anointed  with  the  spiritual  unction  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  by  his 
assistance  and  grace  he  may  obtain  everlasting  life. 

Then  he  that  is  baptized  is  clothed  with  a  white  vestment,  in  token  of 
his  manumission  and  freedom  from  his  former  captivity  of  the  devil.  And 
it  signifieth  also  a  Christian  puiity  and  innocence,  which,  after  the  wash- 
ing away  of  the  spots  of  his  old  sins,  he  ought  studiously  to  conserve  and 

B 


242  APPENDICES. 

keep,  and  so  to  come  to  the  presence  of  Christ  at  the  day  of  judgment, 
and  remain  with  him  in  glory  everlasting. 

Finally,  the  minister  putteth  a  candle-light  in  the  right  hand  of  him 
that  is  baptized,  in  token  that  he  should,  through  all  his  lifetime,  show- 
before  all  men  a  light  of  good  example  and  godly  works ;  that  he  may 
be  always  in  readiness  with  the  saints,  to  meet  our  Lord,  and  receive  the 
fnutions  of  everlasting  joy. 


B.— Page  75. 

THE  SENTENCE  AGAINST  JOAN  OF  KENT,  WITH   THE  CERTIFICATE 

MADE  UPON  IT. 

In  Dei  Nomine,  Amen.     Nos  Thomas,  permissione  divina  Cantuarien. 
Archiepiscopus,  totius  Anglise  primas  et  Metrapolitanus,  Thomas  Smith 
Miles,   Willielmus  Cooke  Decanus  de  Arcubus,   Hugo  Latimer  Sacrse 
Theologise  Professor,  et  Richardus  Lyell  Legum  Doctor,  iUustrissimi, 
invictissimi  in  Christo  Principis  et  Domini  nostri  Domini  Edwardi  sexti, 
Dei  Gratia  Anglias,  &c.,  per  Literas  suas  Regias  Patentes,  dat.  duodecimo 
die  mensis  Aprilis,  Anno  Regni  sui  tertio,  contra  te  Joannam  Bocher, 
alias  nuncupatam  Joannam  de  Kente,  coram  nobis  super  hasretica  pravi- 
tate,  juxta  et  secundum  Commissionem  dicti  Domini  nostri  Regis  detectam 
et  declaratam,  ac  in  ea  parte  apud  bonos  et  gi-aves  Notorie  et  Publice, 
diffamatam,  rite  et  legitime  procedentes,  auditis,  visis,  intellectis,  cog- 
nitis,  rimatis,  et  matura  deliberatione  discussis  et  ponderatis  dicti  negotii 
meritis  et  circumstantiis,  servatisq ;  in  omnibus  et  per  omnia  in  eodem 
negotio  de  jure  servandis  in  quomodolibet  requisitis :  judicialiter  et  pro 
tribunali  sedentes,  Christi  nomine  invocato  ac  ipsum  solum  Deum  prse 
oculis  nostris  habentes;  Quia  per  acta  inactitata,  deducta,  probata,  con- 
fessata,  ac  per  te  esepius  coi-am  nobis  in  eodem  negotio  recognita,  com- 
perimus  et  clare  invenimus  te,  tum  per  confessiones,  tum  per  recognifciones 
tuas  coram  nobis  judicialiter  factas,  nefandum  et  intollerabilem  errorem, 
hgeresin  damnatam  et  scandalosam  opinionem  subscriptam,  juri  Divino  et 
Fidei  Catholicai  obviantem,  contrariam  et  repugnantem :   \dz. — "That 
you  believe,  that  the  Word  was  made  flesh  in  the  Virgin's  belly ;  but  that 
Christ  took  flesh  of  the  virgin,  you  believe  not ;  because  the  flesh  of  the 
vu-gin,  being  the  outward  Man,  was  sinfully  gotten  and  born  in  sin ;  but 
the  Word,  by  the  consent  of  the  inward  Man  of  the  virgin,  was  made 
flesh."      Manutenuisse :    quem   quidem   errorem,   hferesin   damnatam   et 
scandalosam  opinionem,  juii  divino  et  Fidei  Catholicae,  obviantem,  con- 
trai-iam   et  repugnantem,   &c.      Idcirco   nos  Thomas  Archiep.    &c.,   te 
Joannam  Bocher,  alias  Joannam  de  Kente  prsedictam,  de  meritis,  culpis, 
obstinaciis  et  contumaciis,  &c. ,  de  et  super  horrendo  hsereticte  pravitatis 
reatu    confessam,   ad    Ecclesiae  unitatem    redire    nolentem,    haereticam 
opinionem  credentem,  praemissorum  prsetextu  fuisse  et  esse,  cum  animi 
dolore  et  cordis  amaritudine  Judicamus,  teq;   ex  nunc  tanquam  perti- 
nacem  et  obstinatam  haereticam,  judicio  sive  curias  seculari  ad  omnem 
juris  effectum,  qui  exinde  sequi  debeat,  aut  poterit,  rehnquendam  fore 


APPENDICES.  243 

decemimus  et  declaramus,  et  sic  per  preeseutes  de  facto  relinquimus: 
Teq :  Joannam  Bocher,  alias  Joannam  de  Kent,  memoratam  hsereticara, 
pertinacem,  in  majoris  Excommuuicationis  sententiam  occasione  prsemis- 
8orum  incidiase  et  inciirrisse,  nee  non  excomraunicatam  fuisse  et  esse, 
etiam  senteutialiter  et  definitive  pronuriciamus  et  declaramus,  per  hanc 
nostram  sententiam  definitivam,  qiiam  ferimus  et  promulgamus  in  his 
scrip tis.     Lecta  fuit  Lsec  sententia  per  pi'aenominatos,  Reverendum,  &c. 


C— Page  81. 
EXAMINATION  OF  GILES  VANBELLER. 

In  the  Name  of  God,  Amen.  I,  Giles,  a  Dutchman  bom,  now  of  the 
diocese  and  jurisdiction  of  York,  arrested  and  detected  of  heresy,  here 
before  you.  Master  "William  Clyff,  Doctor  of  Law  and  Vicar-General  to 
the  most  Reverend  Father  in  God,  Lord  Edward,  Archbishop  of  York, 
Primate  of  England  and  Metropolitan  in  Ordinary,  openly  confess  and 
acknowledge  that  I  have  heretofore  spoken,  affirmed,  declared,  divers 
erroneous  opinions  and  articles  against  the  true  faith  of  holy  church,  and 
contrary  to  the  determination  of  the  same.  Which  articles  and  erroneous 
opinions  the  principal  hereafter  follow  : — 

I  have  divers  and  sundry  times  afiirmed,  said  and  taught,  defended  and 
holden,  in  the  pai-ish  of  Worksop,  of  the  said  diocese,  that  there  is  no 
priest  but  God  only ;  and  that  no  priest  hath  power  to  consecrate  the  very 
body  of  Christ,  as  he  was  here  reigning  on  earth ;  for  the  apostle  had  no 
power  to  consecrate  the  body  of  Clirist,  and  that  no  priest  had  power  to 
take  away  man's  sins. 

Item  :  That  the  sacrament  of  the  altai'  is  but  bread,  except  it  be 
received  by  faith  and  in  the  name  of  Christ.  Item  :  That  God  doth  not 
dwell  in  temple  or  church  made  by  man's  hands,  but  in  a  faithful  * 
man  to  God.  Item  :  That  no  man  can  make  any  water  holier  than  God 
made  it :  therefore  the  water  in  the  font,  nor  the  holy  water  in  the  church, 
is  holier  than  the  water  in  the  river,  for  the  water  in  the  river  is  as  holy 
as  the  water  in  the  font,  if  a  man  be  baptized  in  it,  and  the  words  of  bap- 
tism be  spoken  over  him.  Item  :  That  any  man  may  baptize  in  water 
as  well  as  a  priest. 

Item  :  That  no  bishop  can  make  one  ground  holier  than  another.  That 
no  man  is  bound  to  fast.  That  no  man  ought  to  keep  any  holy  day  but 
the  Sunday.  That  prayers  made  to  saints  be  of  no  value.  That  no  man 
ought  to  go  on  pilgrimage.  That  a  man  may  be  confessed  of  another  man, 
as  well  as  of  a  priest.  That  there  is  no  purgatory.  Also,  I  have  kept, 
holden,  taught,  and  read  some  books  called  the  New  Testament,  in  the 
Dutch  tong-ue ;  a  false  and  corrupt  translation,  prohibited  for  me  to  have, 
to  the  infection  and  evil  example  of  Clu-istian  people.  For  which  cause, 
articles,  and  erroneous  opinions,  and  many  other  by  me  holden  and  believed 

*  A  word  we  cannot  make  out.   We  think  it  is  Christian. 


244  APPENDICES. 

upon,  I  was  brought  before  you,  to  tliem,  and  every  of  them,  to  make 
answer;  by  whom  I  am  now  sufficiently  and  truly  enforced  that  these 
articles,  and  every  of  them,  be  erroneous  and  heretical,  and  contrary  to 
the  true  understanding  and  interpretation  of  the  Holy  Scripture,  and  the 
holy  doctrine  of  the  good  and  Catholic  doctors  opposed  by  our  mother  the 
holy  church,  and  her  determination,  slanderous  and  evil  sounding  to  all 
true  and  faithful  (as  before)  ears.  Whereas,  I  do  now  acknowledge  and 
confess,  and  believe  upon  the  true  Catholic  faith  in  all  points ;  and  do, 
above  all  and  every,  these  erroneous  opinions  and  heresies,  personified  on 
all  manners  of  heresies,  contravening  the  determination  of  the  said  mother 
holy  church ;  and  in  case,  hereafter,  I  be  found  culpable  in  this  or  any 
other  like  contraries  to  the  determination  aforesaid  :  I  do  submit  myself 
to  the  holy  canon  and  laws  of  the  church,  and  promise,  and  do  show  by 
these  holy  evangelists,  here  by  me  bodily  touched,  that,  from  henceforth, 
I  will  no  more  speak,  declare,  affirm,  teach,  pronounce,  hold  in  belief 
the  said  erroneous  opinions,  in  any  order,  nor  anything  that  is  or  shall  be 
condemned  for  heresy  by  holy  church's  determination.  Ne,  that  I  will 
hereafter  use,  read,  teach,  keep,  buy  or  sell,  any  books,  volumes,  or 
quires,  any  works  called  Luthen,  or  any  other  man's  books,  or  his  hereti- 
cal sects,  or  of  any  other,  containing  heresy  in  them,  or  prohibited  by  the 
laws  of  holy  church ;  .  .  .  nor  be  conversant  or  familiar,  if  meeting 
with  any  person  or  persons  suspected  or  defamed  of  heresy.  But,  so  soon 
as  I  shall  know  any  such,  I  shall  forthwith,  upon  such  my  knowledge, 
detect  them,  and  eveiy  of  them,  to  his  or  their  ordinary  or  ordinai'ies, 
with  all  their  heresies  and  errors,  submitting  myself  most  humbly  to 
our  mother  holy  church  and  to  your  correction.  In  witness  whereof  to 
this  my  present  submission,  I  have  subscribed  my  name,  and  set  the  sign 
of  the  cross. 

+    Giles  Vanbeller. 


D.— Page  209. 

Nomina  ^nglorum  qui  hunc  errorem  suum  agnoscunt,  ejusque  poeni- 
tentice  agunt,  viz. ,  quod  incoeperint  se  ipsos  baptizare,  contra  ordinem  a 
Christo  constitutum,  quique  jain  cupiunt  hinc  verce  Christi  ecclesioe  veniri, 
ea  qua  feri  possit  expeditione. 

Nomina  virorum,  &c.  Nomina  feeminarum,  &c. 

Cupimus  unanimiter  votum  hoc  nostrum  ecclesioj  significari. 

Hugh  Bromhead,  Ann  Bkojihead, 

Jarvase  Nevill,  Jane  Southworth, 

John  Smyth,  Mart  Smyth, 

Thomas  Canadyne,  Joan  Halton, 

Edward  Hankin,  Alis  Arnfield, 

John  Hardy,  Isabell  Thomson, 

Thomas  Pygott,  Margaret  Stanly, 

Francis  Pygott,  Mary  Grindall, 

Robert  Stanly,  Mother  Pygott, 


APPENDICES.  245 

Alexander  Fleming,  A  lis  Pygott, 

Alexander  Hodgkins,  Margaret  Pygott, 

John  Grind  all,  Betteris  Dickinson, 

Solomon  Thomson,  Mary  Dickinson, 

Samuel  Halton,  Ellyn  Paynter, 

Thomas  Dolphin.  Alis  Parsons, 

Joane  Briggs, 
Jane  Argan. 


E.— Page  211. 
A  SHORT  CONFESSION  OF  FAITH. 

Article  1.  We  believe,  through  the  power  and  instruction  of  the  Holy 
Scriptures,  that  there  is  one  only  God,  who  is  a  Spirit,  eternal,  incompre- 
hensible, infinite,  almighty,  merciful,  righteous,  perfectly  wise,  only  good, 
and  only  fountain  of  life  and  all  goodness;  the  Creator  of  heaven  and 
earth,  things  visible  and  invisible. 

2.  This  only  God  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  is  manifested  and  revealed  in 
Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  being  three,  and  nevertheless  but  one 
God. 

3.  The  Father  is  the  original  and  beginning  of  all  things;  who  hath 
begotten  his  Son  from  everlasting  before  all  creation  :  that  Son  is  the 
everlasting  word  of  the  Father,  and  his  wisdom.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  hia 
virtue,  power,  and  might,  proceeding  from  the  Father  and  the  Son. 
These  three  are  not  divided,  nor  separated  in  essence,  nature,  property, 
eternity,  power,  glory,  or  excellency. 

4.  This  only  God  hath  created  man  good,  according  to  his  image  and 
likeness,  to  a  good  and  happy  estate,  and  in  him  all  men  to  the  same 
blessed  end.  The  first  man  was*  fallen  into  sin  and  wrath ;  and  was*  again 
by  God,  through  a  sweet  comfortable  promise,  restored  and  affirmed  to 
everlasting  life,  with  all  those  that  were  guilty  through  him;  so  that 
none  of  his  posterity  (by  reason  of  this  institution)  are  guilty,  sinful,  or 
born  in  original  sin. 

5.  Man  being  created  good,  and  continuing  in  goodness,  had  the  abUity, 
the  spirit  of  wickedness  tempting  him,  freely  to  obey,  assent,  or  reject 
the  propounded  evil:  man  being  fallen  and  consisting  (.sic)  in  evil,  had 
the  ability,  the  T —  himself  moving  him  freely  to  obey,  assent,  or  reject 
the  propounded  good ;  for  as  he  through  free  power  to  the  choice  of  evil, 
obeyed  and  aflM-med  that  evil ;  so  did  he  through  free  power  to  the  choice 
of  good,  obey  and  reassent  that  propounded  good.  This  last  power  or 
ability  remaineth  in  all  his  posterity. 

6.  God  hath  before  all  time  foreseen  and  foreknown  all  things,  both 
good  and  evil,  whether  past,  present,  or  to  come.  ISTow  as  he  is  the  only 
perfect  goodness,  and  the  very  fountain  of  life  itself,  so  is  he  the  only 
author,  original,  and  maker  of  such  things  as  are  good,  holy,  pure,  and  of 

*  Interlined. 


246  APPENDICES. 

nature  like  unto  him;  but  not  of  sin,  or  damnable  uncleanness.  He 
forbiddeth  the  evil,  he  forewarneth  to  obey  evil,  and  threateneth  the  evil 
doer:  he  is  the  permitter  and  punisher.  But  evil  men,  through  free 
choice  of  all  sin  and  wickedness,  together  with  the  spirit  of  wickedness 
wliich  ruletli  in  them,  are  the  authors,  originals,  and  makers  of  all  sin, 
and  so  worthy  the  punishment. 

7.  The  causes  and  ground,  therefore,  of  man's  destruction  and  damna- 
tion are  the  man's  free  choice  of  darkness  or  sin,  and  living  therein.  De- 
struction, therefore,  cometh  out  of  himself,  but  not  from  the  good  Creator. 
For  being  perfect  goodness  and  love  itself  (following  the  nature  of  love 
and  perfect  goodness),  he  willeth  the  health,  good,  and  happiness  of  his 
creatures;  therefore  hath  he  j^redestinated  that  none  of  them  should  be 
condemned,  nor  ordained,  or  willed  the  sinner,  or  means  whereby  they 
should  be  brought  to  damnation :  yea,  much  more  (seeing  he  hath  no 
delight  in  any  man's  destiaiction,  nor  willing  that  any  man  perish,  but 
that  all  men  should  be  saved  or  blessed)  hath  he  created  them  all  to  a 
happy  end  in  Christ,  hath  foreseen  and  ordained  in  him  a  medicine  of  life 
for  all  their  sins,  and  hath  willed  that  all  people  or  creatures,  through  the 
preaching  of  the  Gospel,  should  have  these  tidings  published  and  declared 
unto  them  :  Now  all  they  that  with  penitence  and  faithful  hearts  receive 
and  embrace  the  gracious  benefits  of  God,  manifested  in  Christ,  for  the 
reconciliation  of  the  world,  they  are  and  continue  the  elect  which  God 
hath  ordained  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  to  make  partakers 
of  his  kingdom  and  glory.  But  they  which  despise  and  contemn  this 
proffered  gTace  of  God,  which  love  the  darkness  more  than  the  light, 
persevere  in  impenitence  and  unbelief,  they  make  themselves  unworthy 
of  blessedness,  and  are  rejected,  excluded  from  the  end  whereto  they 
were  ci'eated  and  ordained  in  Christ,  and  shall  not  taste  for  ever  of  the 
Supper  of  the  Lord,  to  which  they  were  invited. 

8.  The  purpose  which  God.  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  had  for 
the  reconciliation  of  the  world  (which  he  saw  would  fall  into  wrath  and 
want  of  gi'ace),  he  hath  in  the  fulness  of  time  accomplished ;  and  for  this 
pui-pose  hath  sent  out  of  heaven  his  everlasting  "Word,  or  Son,  for  the 
fulfilling  of  the  promises  made  unto  the  fathers,  and  hath  caused  him  to 
become  flesh  .  .*  in  the  womb  of  a  holy  virgin  (called  Mary)  by  his 
word,  and  power,  and  working  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Not  that  the  essence 
of  God,  the  eternal  Word,  or  any  part  thereof,  is  changed  into  a  visible 
mortal  flesh  or  man,  ceasing  to  be  Spirit,  God,  or  God's  essence ;  but  that 
he,  the  everlasting  Son  of  God,  continuing  that  he  was  before,  namely, 
God  or  Spirit,  became  what  he  was  not,  that  is,  flesh  or  man ;  and  he  is 
in  one  person  true  God  and  man,  born  of  Mary,  being  visibly  and 
invisibly,  inwardly  and  outwardly,  the  true  Son  of  the  liAdng  God. 

9.  Tliis  Person,  God  and  Man,  the  Son  of  the  living  God,  is  come  into 
the  world  to  save  sinners,  or  to  reconcile  the  sinful  world  to  God  the 
Father :  therefore  now  acknowledge  him  to  be  the  only  Mediator,  King> 

♦  Word  wanting. 


APPENDICES.  247 

Priest  and  Prophet,  Lawgiver  and  Teacher,  which  God  hath  promised  to 
send  into  the  world,  whom  we  must  trust,  believe,  and  follow. 

10.  In  him  is  fulfilled,  and  by  him  is  taken  away,  an  intolerable  burden 
of  the  Law  of  Moses,  even  all  the  shadows  and  figures ;  as,  namely,  the 
priesthood,  temple,  altar,  sacrifice ;  also  the  kingly  office,  kingdom, 
sword,  revenge  appointed  by  the  law,  battle,  and  whatsoever  was  a  figure 
of  his  person  or  office,  so  thereof  a  shadow  or  representation. 

11.  And  as  the  true  promised  Prophet  he  hath  manifested  and  revealed 
unto  us  whatsoever  God  asketh  or  requireth  of  the  people  of  the  New 
Testament ;  for  as  God,  by  Moses  and  the  other  prophets,  hath  spoken 
and  declared  his  will  to  the  people  of  the  Old  Testament ;  so  hath  he  in 
those  last  days,  by  his  Prophet,  spoken  unto  us,  and  revealed  unto  us  the 
mystery  (concealed  from  the  beginning  of  the  world),  and  hath  now 
manifested  to  us  whatsoever  yet  remained  to  be  manifested.  He  hath 
preached  the  promised  glad  tidings,  appointed  and  ordained  the  sacra- 
ments, the  offices  and  ministeries,  by  God  thereto  destinated ;  and  hath 
showed  by  doctrine  and  life,  the  law  of  Christians,  a  rule  of  their  life,  the 
path  and  way  to  everlasting  life. 

12.  Moreover,  as  a  High  Priest  and  Mediator  of  the  New  Testament, 
after  that  he  hath  accomplished  the  will  of  his  Father  in  the  foresaid 
works,  he  hath  finally  given  himself  obediently  (for  the  reconciliation  of 
the  sins  of  the  world)  to  all  outward  suffering,  and  hath  offered  up  him- 
self in  death  upon  the  cross  unto  the  Father,  for  a  sweet  savour  and 
common  oblation. 

13.  We  acknowledge  that  the  obedience  of  the  Son  of  God,  his  suffering, 
dying,  bloodshed,  bitter  passion,  death,  and  only  sacrifice  upon  the  cross, 
is  a  perfect  reconciliation  and  satisfaction  for  our  sins  and  the  sins  of  the 
world;  so  that  men  thereby  are  reconciled  to  God,  are  brought  into 
power,  and  have  a  sure  hope  and  certainty  to  the  entrance  into  ever- 
lasting life. 

14.  Christ,  our  Prophet  and  Priest,  being  also  the  promised,  only 
spii'itual,  heavenly  King  of  the  New  Testament,  hath  erected,  or  built,  a 
spiritual  kingdom,  and  united  a  company  of  faithful,  spiritual  men  ;  these 
persons  hath  he  endowed  with  spiritual,  kingly  laws,  after  the  nature  of 
the  heavenly  kingdom,  and  hath  established  therein  justice,  righteous- 
ness, and  the  ministers  thereof, 

15.  Having  accomplished  and  performed  here  upon  the  earth,  by  dying 
the  death,  his  office  of  the  cross,  he  was  afterwards  buried,  thereby 
declaring  that  he  was  truly  dead ;  the  third  day  he  rose  again,  and  stood 
up  from  the  dead,  abolishing  death,  and  testifying  that  he  was  Lord  over 
death,  and  that  he  could  not  possibly  be  detained  by  the  hands  of  death, 
thereby  comfortably  assuring  all  the  faithful  of  their  resurrection  and 
standing  up  from  death. 

16.  Afterwards,  forty  days  spent,  he  conversed  amongst  his  disciples, 
and  ofttimes  showed  himself  unto  them,  that  there  might  no  doubt  be 
had  concerning  his  resurrection ;  after  that,  being  compassed  by  a  cloud, 
he  was  carried  up  into  heaven,  and  entered  unto  his  glory,  leading 


24:8  APPENDICES. 

captivity  captive,  and  making  a  show  of  his  enemies,  hath  gloriously 
triumphed  over  them,  and  is  sat  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  of  God, 
and  is  become  a  Lord,  and  Christ,  glorified  in  body,  advanced,  lifted  up, 
and  crowned  with  praise  and  glory,  and  remaineth  over  Mount  Sion,  a 
Priest  and  King  for  everlasting. 

17.  The  holy  office  of  this  glorified  Priest,  King,  Lord,  and  Christ,  in 
the  heavenly  glorious  being,  is  to  help,  govern,  and  preserve,  by  his  holy 
Spirit,  his  holy  church  and  people  in  the  world,  through  the  storm,  wind, 
and  troubles  of  the  sea ;  for,  according  to  his  priestly  office,  as  an  overseer 
or  steward  of  the  true  tabernacle,  is  he  our  Intercessor,  Advocate,  and 
Mediator  by  the  Father.  He  teacheth,  comforteth,  strengtheneth,  and 
baptizeth  us  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  his  heavenly  gifts  and  fiery  victims, 
and  keepeth  his  spiritual  supper  with  the  faithful  soul,  making  it  partaker 
of  the  life-giving  food  and  drink  of  the  soul,  the  fruit,  virtue,  and  worth 
of  his  merits  obtained  upon  the  cross;  the  only  and  necessary  good 
signified  in  the  sacraments. 

18.  And  according  to  his  kingly  office,  in  his  heavenly*  being  he 
governeth  the  hearts  of  the  faithful  by  his  Holy  Spirit  and  Word ;  he 
taketh  them  into  his  protection,  he  covereth  them  under  the  shadow  of 
his  wings,  he  armeth  them  with  spiritual  weapons  for  the  spiritual  war- 
fare against  aU  their  enemies,  namely,  the  Spirit  of  wickedness,  under 
heaven,  and  whatsoever  dependeth  on  them  in  this  earth.  He,  their  most 
Glorious,  Almighty,  Heavenly  King,  standeth  by  them,  delivereth  and 
freeth  them  from  the  hands  of  their  enemies,  giveth  them  victory  and  the 
winning  of  the  field,  and  hath  prepared  for  them  a  crown  of  righteousness 
in  heaven.  And  they  being  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord,  who  dwell  in  the 
house  of  the  Lord,  upon  the  Mount  Sion,  do  change  their  fleshly  weapons, 
namely,  their  swords  into  shares,  and  their  spears  into  sythes,  do  lift  up 
no  sword,  neither  hath  nor  consent  to  flesWy  battle. 

19.  All  these  spiritual  good  things  and  beneficial,  which  Christ,  by  his 
merits,  hath  obtained  for  the  saving  of  sinners,  we  do  graciously  enjoy 
through  a  true,  living,  working  faith.  Which  faith  is  an  assured  under- 
standing and  knowledge  of  the  heart,  obtained  out  of  the  Word  of  God, 
concerning  God,  Christ,  and  other  heavenly  things  which  are  necessary 
for  us  to  know,  and  to  believe  to  salvation,  together  with  a  hearty  confi- 
dence in  the  only  God,  that  he,  as  a  gracious  and  heavenly  Father,  will 
give  and  bestow  upon  us,  through  Christ,  and  for  his  merits,  whatsoever 
is  helpful  and  profitable  for  body  and  soul  for  salvation. 

20.  Through  such  a  faith  we  obtain  true  righteousness,  forgiveness, 
absolution  from  sin  through  the  bloodshed  of  Christ,  and  true  righteous- 
ness, which  through  the  Christ  Jesus,  by  the  co-operation  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  is  plentifully  shed  and  poured  into  us,  so  that  we  truly  are  made, 
of  evil  men,  good;  of  fleshly,  spiritual;  of  covetous,  liberal;  of  proud, 
humble ;  and  through  regeneration  are  made  pure  in  heart,  and  the 
children  of  God. 

*  Interlined. 


APPENDICES.  249 

21.  Man  being  thus  justified  by  faith,  liveth  and  worketh  by  love 
(which  the  Holy  Ghost  sheddeth  into  the  heart)  in  all  good  works,  in 
the  laws,  precepts,  ordinances  given  them  by  God  through  Christ ;  he 
praiseth  and  blesseth  God,  by  a  holy  life,  for  every  benefit,  especially  of 
the  soul ;  and  so  are  all  such  plants  of  the  Lord  trees  of  righteousness, 
who  honour  God  through  good  works,  and  expect  a  blessed  reward. 

22.  Such  faithful,  righteous  people,  scattered  in  several  parts  of  the 
world,  being  the  true  congregations  of  God,  or  the  church  of  Christ,  whom 
he  saved,  and  for  whom  he  gave  himself,  that  he  might  sanctify  them,  ye 
whom  he  hath  cleansed  by  the  washing  of  water  in  the  word  of  life :  of 
all  such  is  Jesus  the  Head,  the  Shepherd,  the  Leader,  the  Lord,  the  King, 
and  Master.  Now  although  among  these  there  may  be  mingled  a  com- 
pany of  seeming  holy  ones,  or  hypocrites ;  yet,  nevertheless,  they  are  and 
remain  only  the  righteous,  true  members  of  the  body  of  Christ,  according 
to  the  spirit  and  the  truth,  the  heirs  of  the  promises,  truly  saved  from 
the  hypocrites  and  dissemblers. 

23.  In  this  holy  church  hath  God  ordained  the  ministers  of  the  Gospel, 
the  doctrines  of  the  holy  "Word,  the  use  of  the  holy  sacraments,  the  over- 
sight of  the  poor,  and  the  ministers  of  the  same  offices ;  furthermore,  the 
exercise  of  brotherly  admonition  and  correction,  and,  finally,  the  separa- 
ting of  the  impenitent ;  which  holy  ordinances,  contained  in  the  Word  of 
God,  are  to  be  administered  according  to  the  contents  therereof . 

24.  And  like  as  a  body  consisteth  of  divers  parts,  and  every  part  hath 
its  own  proper  work,  seeing  every  part  is  not  a  hand,  eye,  or  foot ;  so  is  it 
also  in  the  church  of  God ;  for  although  every  believer  is  a  member  of 
the  body  of  Christ,  yet  is  not  every  one  therefore  a  teacher,  elder,  or 
deacon,  but  only  such  who  are  orderly  appointed  to  such  offices.  There- 
fore, also,  the  administration  of  the  said  offices  or  duties  pertaineth  only 
to  those  that  are  ordained  thereto,  and  not  to  every  particular  common 
person. 

25.  The  vocation  or  election  of  the  said  officers  is  performed  by  the 
church,  with  fasting,  and  prayer  to  God  ;  for  God  knoweth  the  heart ;  he 
is  amongst  the  faithful  who  are  gathered  together  in  his  name ;  and  by 
his  Holy  Spirit  doth  so  govern  the  minds  and  hearts  of  his  people,  that 
he  by  them  bringeth  to  light  and  propoundeth  whom  he  knoweth  to  be 
profitable  to  his  church. 

26.  And  although  the  election  and  vocation  to  the  said  offices  is  per- 
formed by  the  foresaid  means,  yet,  nevertheless,  the  investing  into  the 
said  service  is  accomplished  by  the  elders  of  the  church  through  the 
laying  on  of  hands. 

27.  The  doctrine  which  by  the  foresaid  ministers  must  be  proposed 
to  the  people,  is  even  the  same  which  Christ  brought  out  of  heaven, 
which  he,  by  word  and  work,  that  is,  by  doctrine  and  life,  hath  taught, 
which  was  preached  by  the  apostles  of  Christ,  by  the  commandment  of 
Christ  and  the  Spirit,  which  we  find  written  (so  much  as  is  needful  for  us 
to  salvation)  in  the  Scripture  of  the  New  Testament,  whereto  we  apply 
whatsoever  we  find  in  the  canonical  book  of  the  Old  Testament,  which 


250  APPENDICES. 

hath  affinity  and  verity,  wliich  by  doctrine  of  Christ  and  his  apostles,  and 
consent  and  agreement,  with  the  government  of  his  Spii^tual  kingdom. 

28.  There  are  two  sacraments  appointed  by  Christ,  in  his  holy  church, 
the  administration  whereof  he  hath  assigned  to  the  ministry  of  teaching, 
namely,  the  Holy  Baptism  and  the  Holy  Supper.  These  are  outward 
visible  handlings  and  tokens,  setting  before  our  eyes,  on  God's  side,  the 
inward  spiritual  handling  which  God,  through  Ciirist,  by  the  co-operation 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  setteth  forth  in  the  justification  in  the  penitent 
faithful  soul;  and  which,  on  our  behalf,  witnesseth  our  religion,  expe- 
rience, faith,  and  obedience,  through  the  obtaining  of  a  good  conscience 
to  the  service  of  God. 

29.  The  Holy  Baptism  is  given  unto  these  in  the  name  of  the  Father, 
the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  hear,  believe,  and  with  penitent 
heart  receive  the  doctrines  of  the  Holy  Gospel.  For  such  bath  the  Lord 
Jesus  commanded  to  be  baptized,  and  no  unspeaking  children. 

30.  Tlie  whole  dealing  in  the  outward  visible  baptism  of  water,  setteth 
before  the  eyes,  witnesseth  and  signifyeth,  the  Lord  Jesus  doth  inwardly 
baptize  the  repentant,  faithftd  man,  in  the  laver  of  regeneration  and 
renewing  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  washing  the  soul  from  all  pollution  and  sin, 
by  the  virtue  and  merit  of  his  bloodshed ;  and  by  the  power  and  working 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  true,  heavenly,  spiritual,  living  "Water,  cleanseth 
the  inward  evil  of  the  soul,  and  maketh  it  heavenly,  spiritual,  and  living, 
in  true  righteousness  or  goodness.  Therefore,  the  baptism  of  water 
leadeth  us  to  Christ,  to  his  holy  office  in  glory  and  majesty ;  and  ad- 
monisheth  us  not  to  hang  only  upon  the  outward,  but  with  holy  prayer 
to  mount  upward,  and  to  beg  of  Christ  the  good  thing  signified. 

31.  The  Holy  Supper,  according  to  the  institution  of  Christ,  is  to  be 
administered  to  the  baptized ;  as  the  Lord  Jesus  hath  commanded  that 
whatsoever  he  hath  appointed  should  be  taught  to  be  observed. 

32.  The  whole  dealing  in  the  outward  visible  suj^per,  setteth  before 
the  eye,  witnesseth  and  signifyeth,  that  Christ's  body  was  broken  upon, 
the  cross,  and  his  holy  blood  spilt  for  the  remission  of  our  sins.  That 
the  being  glorified  in  his  heavenly  Being,  is  the  alive-making  bread,  meat, 
and  drink  of  our  souls  :  it  setteth  before  our  eyes  Christ's  office  and 
ministry  in  glory  and  majesty,  by  holding  his  spiritual  supper,  which  the 
believing  soul,  feeding  and  *  the  soul  with  spii'itual  food  :  it  teacheth 
us  by  the  outwaixl  handling  to  mount  upwards  with  the  heart  in  holy 
prayer,  to  beg  at  Christ's  hands  the  true  signified  food ;  and  it  admonish- 
eth  us  of  thankfulness  to  God,  and  of  verity  and  love  one  with  another. 

33.  The  church  discipline,  or  external  censures,  is  also  an  outward 
handling  among  the  believers,  whereby  the  impenitent  sinner,  after 
Christian  admonition  and  reproof,  is  severed,  by  reason  of  his  sins,  from 
the  communion  of  the  saints  for  his  future  good  ;  and  the  wi'ath  of  God 
is  denounced  against  him  until  the  time  of  his  ccmtrition  and  reforma- 
tion ;  and  there  is  also,  by  this  outward  separation  of  the  Church,  mani- 

»  Word  wanting. 


APPEXDICES.  251 

fested  what  God  before  had  judged  and  fore-handled,  concerning  thia 
secret  sinner,  by  reason  of  his  sin.  Therefore,  first  before  the  Lord,  the 
prejudging  and  predetermining  of  the  matter  must  pass  *  in  respect 
of  the  sinner        *  and  the  after-judging  and  handling  by  the 

church.  Therefore  the  chvirch  must  carefully  regard  that  none  in  the 
church  be  condemned  with  it,  and  be  condemned  in  the  Word  of  God. 

34.  The  person  separated  from  the  church  may  not  at  all  be  admitted 
(so  long  as  he  proceedeth  in  sin)  to  the  use  of  the  holy  supper  or  any 
other  *  handling,  but  he  must  be  avoided  therein,  as  also  in 
all  other  things  betokening  the  communion  of  saints  or  brotherhood. 
And  as  the  rebellious  life,  conversation,  or  daily  company  of  the  godless 
and  perverse,  or  anything  with  them,  is  dangerous  and  hurtful,  and  oft- 
times  promoteth  scandal  and  slander  to  the  godly,  so  must  they  withdraw 
themselves  from  the  same  rebels,  avoiding  them  in  all  works  and  ends 
whereby  their  pure  souls  might  be  polluted  and  defiled :  yet  so  that 
always  the  Word  of  God  take  place,  and  that  nothing  take  place  or  be 
performed  that  is  contrary  to  love,  mercy,  Christian  discretion,  promise, 
or  any  other  like  matter. 

35.  Worldly  authority  or  magistracy  is  a  necessary  ordinance  of  God, 
appointed  and  established  for  the  preservation  of  the  common  estate,  and 
of  a  good,  natural,  politic  life,  for  the  reward  of  the  good  and  the 
punishing  of  the  evil :  we  acknowledge  ourselves  obnoxious,  and  bound 
by  the  Word  of  God  to  fear,  honour,  and  show  obedience  to  the  magis- 
trates in  all  causes  not  contrary  to  the  Word  of  the  Lord.  We  are 
obliged  to  pray  God  Almighty  for  them,  and  to  thank  the  Lord  for  good 
reasonable  magistrates,  and  to  yield  unto  them,  without  murmuring, 
beseeming  tribute,  toll,  and  tax.  This  ofRce  of  the  worldly  authority 
the  Lord  Jesus  hath  not  ordained  in  his  spiritual  kingdom,  the  church  of 
the  New  Testament,  nor  adjoined  to  the  offices  of  his  church.  Neither 
hath  he  called  his  disciples  or  followers  to  be  worldly  kings,  princes, 
potentates,  or  magistrates ;  neither  hath  he  burdened  or  charged  them  to 
assume  such  offices,  or  to  govern  the  world  in  such  a  worldly  manner ; 
much  less  hath  he  given  a  law  to  the  members  of  his  church  which  is 
agreeable  to  such  office,  or  government.  Yea,  rather  they  are  called  of 
him  (whom  they  are  commanded  to  obey  by  a  voice  heard  from  heaven) 
to  the  following  of  his  unarmed  and  unweaponed  life,  and  of  his  cross- 
bearing  footsteps.  In  whom  approved  nothing  less  than  a  worldly 
government,  power,  and  sword.  This  then  considered  (as  also  further, 
that  upon  the  office  of  the  worldly  authority  many  other  things  depend, 
as  wars  *  to  hurt  his  enemies  in  body  or  goods  *  with 
evilly  or  not  at  all  will  fit  or  consort  with  the  Christ,  and  the  crucified 
life  of  the  Christians),  so  hold  we  that  it  beseemeth  not  Christians 
to  administer  these  offices  ;  therefore  we  avoid  such  offices  and  adminis- 
trations, notwithstanding  by  no  means  thereby  willing  to  despise  or  con- 
demn reasonable  discreet  magistrates,  nor  to  place  him  in  less  estimation 
than  he  is  described  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  of  PauL 

*  Cannot  decipher  the  word. 


252  APPENDICES. 

36.  Christ,  the  King  and  Lawgiver  of  the  New  Testament,  hath  pro- 
hibited Christians  the  swearing  of  oaths;  therefore  it  is  not  permitted 
that  the  faithful  of  the  New  Testament  should  swear  at  all. 

37.  Tlie  married  estate,  or  matrimony,  hold  we  for  an  ordinance  of 
God,  which,  according  to  the  first  institution,  shall  be  observed.  Every 
man  shall  have  his  one  only  wife,  and  every  woman  shall  have  her  one 
only  husband ;  those  may  not  be  separated  but  for  adultery.  "We  permit 
none  of  our  commtinion  to  marry  godless,  unbelieving,  fleshly  persons  out 
of  the  church;  but  we  censure  such  (as  other  sinners)  according  to  the 
disposition  and  desert  of  the  cause. 

38.  Lastly,  we  believe  and  teach  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  both  of 
the  just  and  the  unjust,  as  Paul  (1  Cor.  xv. )  soundly  teacheth  and 
witnesseth :  The  soul  shall  be  united  to  the  body,  every  one  shall  be 
presented  before  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ  Jesus,  to  receive  in  his  own 
body  wages  according  to  his  works.  And  the  righteous,  whosoever  hath 
lived  holily,  and  through  faith  brought  forth  the  works  of  love  and  mercy, 
shall  enter  into  everlasting  life  with  Christ  Jesus,  the  Bridegroom  of  the 
Christian  host.  But  the  unsanctified,  which  have  not  known  God,  and 
have  not  obeyed  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  shall  go  into  everlasting  fire. 
Tlie  Almighty,  gracious,  merciful  God,  preserve  us  from  the  punishment 
of  the  ungodly,  and  grant  us  grace  and  gifts  helpful  to  a  holy  life,  saving 
death,  and  joyful  resurrection  with  all  the  righteous.     Amen. 

We  subscribe  to  the  truth  of  these  Articles,  desiring  further  informa- 
tion. [Forty- two  names  are  attached  to  this  document.  We  cannot 
decipher  the  whole,  but  the  following  are  plain.  A  line  is  drawn  through 
some  of  them.     The  *  mark  them,     t  Uncertain,] 

*  John  Smyth,  * , 

Hugh  Broomhead,  *  Matthew  Pigott, 

*  John  Grindall,  Mart  Smyth, 


Samuel  Halton,  Janus , 

Thomas  Piggott,  Margarett  Staveley, 

John  Hardie,  t  Isabella  Thomson, 

Edward  Hawkins,  *  Jane  ARGAN,t 
Thomas  Jessopp,  Mary  Dickins, 

Robert  Staveley,  Bettriss  Dickens, 

Alexander  Fleming,  Dorothe  Hamand, 

John  Arnfeld,  *  Elnh.  Buywater, 
Hannah  Piggott,  Ann  Broomhead, 

Thomas  Solphin,  Alexander  Parsons, 

Solomon  Thomson,  *  Joan  Haughton, 

Alexander  Hodgkin,  *  Joane  Brigge, 
Ursula  Bywater,  Alexander  Pigott, 

Dorothea  Oakland,  Margaret  Pigott, 

John ,  Alexander  Armfield, 

Fylis ,  Elnh.  White, 

Dorothe  Thomson, 
Margaret  Morris. 

[We  judge  the  whole  of  these  signatures  autograph.] 


APPENDICES.  .  253 

F.— Page  211. 

We  believe  with  the  heart  and  with  the  mouth  confess  : — 

(1.)  That  there  is  one  God,  the  best,  the  highest,  and  most  glorious 
Ci'eator  and  Preserver  of  all ;  who  is  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit. 

(2. )  That  God  has  created  and  redeemed  the  human  race  to  his  own 
image,  and  has  ordained  all  men  (no  one  being  reprobated)  to  Hfe. 

(3. )  That  God  imposes  no  necessity  of  sinning  on  any  one ;  but  man 
freely,  by  Satanic  instigation,  departs  from  God. 

(4. )  That  the  law  of  life  was  originally  placed  by  God  in  the  keeping  of 
the  law ;  then,  by  reason  of  the  weakness  of  the  flesh,  was,  by  the  good 
pleasure  of  God,  through  the  redemption  of  Christ,  changed  into  justifi- 
cation of  faith  ;  on  which  account,  no  one  ought  justly  to  blame  God,  but 
rather,  with  his  inmost  heart,  to  revere,  adore,  and  praise  his  mercy, 
that  God  shoidd  have  rendered  that  possible  to  man,  by  liis  grace,  which 
before,  since  man  had  fallen,  was  impossible  by  nature. 

(5.)  That  there  is  no  original  sin  (lit.,  no  sin  of  origin  or  descent),  but 
aU  sin  is  actual  and  voluntary,  viz.,  a  word,  a  deed,  or  a  design  against 
the  law  of  God ;  and  therefore,  infants  ai'e  without  sin. 

(6. )  That  Jesus  Cluist  is  true  God  and  tj-ue  man ;  viz. ,  the  Son  of  God 
taking  to  himself,  in  addition,  the  true  and  piu-e  nature  of  a  man,  out 
of  a  tme  rational  soul,  and  existing  in  a  true  human  body. 

(7. )  That  Jesus  Christ,  as  pertaining  to  the  flesh,  was  conceived  by  the 
Holy  Spirit  in  the  womb  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  afterwards  was  born,  cir- 
cumcised, baptized,  tempted ;  also  that  he  hungered,  thirsted,  ate,  di'ank, 
increased  both  in  statm-e  and  in  knowledge ;  he  was  wearied,  he  slept,  at 
last  was  crucified,  dead,  buried,  he  rose  again,  ascended  into  heaven ;  and 
that  to  himself  as  only  King,  Priest,  and  Prophet  of  the  church,  aU  power 
both  in  heaven  and  earth  is  given. 

(8. )  That  the  gxace  of  God,  through  the  finished  redemption  of  Christ, 
was  to  be  prepared  and  offered  to  all  without  distinction,  and  that  not 
feignedly  but  in  good  faith,  partly  by  things  made,  which  declare  the 
invisible  things  of  God,  and  partly  by  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel, 

(9. )  That  men,  of  the  grace  of  God  through  the  redemption  of  Christ, 
are  able  (the  Holy  Spirit,  by  grace,  being  before  unto  them  grace  pre- 
vement)  to  repent,  to  believe,  to  turn  to  God,  and  to  attain  to  eternal 
life ;  so  on  the  other  hand,  they  are  able  themselves  to  resist  the  Holy 
Spirit,  to  depart  from  God,  and  to  perish  for  ever. 

(10.)  That  the  justification  of  man  before  the  Divine  tribunal  (which  is 
botlj  the  throne  of  justice  and  of  mercy),  consists  partly  of  the  imputa- 
tion of  the  righteousness  of  Christ  apprehended  by  faith,  and  partly  of 
inherent  righteousness,  in  the  holy  themselves,  by  the  operation  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  which  is  called  regeneration  or  sanctification ;  since  any  one 
is  righteous,  who  doeth  righteousness. 

-    (11. )  That  faith,  destitute  of  good  works,  is  vain ;  but  true  and  living 
faith  is  distinguished  by  good  works. 


254:  APPENDICES. 

(12. )  That  the  church  of  Christ  is  a  company  of  the  faithful ;  baptized 
after  confession  of  sin  and  of  faith,  endowed  with  the  power  of  Christ, 

(13. )  That  the  church  of  Christ  has  power  delegated  to  themselves  of 
announcing  the  word,  administering  the  sacraments,  appointing  ministers, 
disclaiming  them,  and  also  excommunicating ;  but  the  last  appeal  is  to  the 
brethren  or  body  of  the  church. 

(14.)  That  baptism  is  the  external  sign  of  the  remission  of  sins,  of 
dying  and  of  being  made  alive,  and  therefore  does  not  belong  to  infants. 

(15.)  ITiat  the  Lord's  Supper  is  the  external  sign  of  the  communion  of 
Christ,  and  of  the  faithful  amongst  themselves  by  faith  and  love. 

(16.)  That  the  ministers  of  the  church  are,  not  only  bishops  ("Epis- 
copos"),  to  whom  the  power  is  given  of  dispensing  both  the  word  and  the 
sacraments,  but  also  deacons,  men  and  widows,  who  attend  to  the  affairs 
of  the  poor  and  sick  brethren. 

(17. )  That  brethren  who  persevere  in  sins  known  to  themselves,  after 
the  third  admonition,  are  to  be  excluded  from  the  fellowship  of  the  saints 
by  excommunication. 

(18.)  That  those  who  are  excommunicated  are  not  to  be  avoided  in  what 
pertains  to  worldly  business  (civile  commercium). 

(19.)  That  the  dead  (the  living  being  instantly  changed)  will  rise 
again  with  the  same  bodies;  not  the  substance  but  the  qualities  being 
changed. 

(20. )  Tliat  after  the  resurrection,  all  will  be  borne  to  the  tribunal  of 

Christ,  the  Judge,  to  be  judged  according  to  their  works  ;  the  pious,  after 

sentence  of  absolution,  will  enjoy  eternal  life  with  Christ  in  heaven ;  the 

wicked,  condemned,  will  be  punished  with  eternal  torments  in  hell  with 

the  devil  and  his  angels.* 

John  Smith. 


I  believe  with  the  heart  and  confess  with  the  mouth  : — 

(1. )  That  there  is  only  one  God,  one  Christ,  one  Holy  Spirit,  one  church, 
one  truth,  one  faith,  one  true  religion. 

(2. )  In  the  Godhead  are  three  persons  really  distinct, — Father,  Son,  and 
Holy  Spirit,  co-eternal,  co-equal,  co-original ;  all  and  singular  of  them 
one  and  the  same  God,  not  divided,  but  really  distinct  among  themselves 
in  their  specialities,  viz.,  in  Creation,  Redemption,  and  Sanctification. 

(3.)  God  the  Father  is  self-existent  from  himself,  not  from  another; 
God  the  Son  is  also  self-existent,  not  from  himself,  but  from  the  Father; 
God  the  Holy  Spirit  is  also  self -existent,  but  not  from  himself,  but  from 
the  Father  and  the  Son  :  so  that  the  Divine  essence  of  these  three  i^  the 
same,  and  one  in  number. 

(4. )  Tliis  Trinity  in  unity  ought  to  be  worshipped  both  in  spirit  and  in 
truth,  and  whosoever  shall  so  worship  God  shall  be  happy  in  eternal  life ; 
and  the  rule  of  so  worshipping  God  is  thoroughly  expressed  by  God  him- 


*  This  has  no  dat?.     The  MS.  is  in  Latin. 


APPENDICES.  255 

self  in  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  by  the  hands  of  prophets  and  apostles. 
And  whoever  shall  worship  God  in  any  other  method  than  that  expressed 
in  these  two  Testaments,  shall  l)e  cast  from  the  presence  and  favour  of 
God  to  eternal  death  with  demons  and  their  angels. 

(5. )  I  believe  and  confess  that  onr  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  preached  by  the 
apostles,  was  Messiah  himself,  promised  from  eternity,  concerning  whom 
the  prophets  prophesied  and  wrote. 

(6. )  I  believe  all  tilings  written  and  contained  in  the  Law  and  the  Gos- 
pel are  true,  divine,  and  are  to  be  affirmed  and  maintained  by  all. 

(7. )  Christ,  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God,  was  Priest,  Prophet,  and 
King,  according  to  the  order  of  Melchisedec,  for  ever.  And  his  church 
ought  to  be  governed  by  no  other  in  heaven,  earth,  or  hell,  but  by  him- 
self. 

This  prophetic  office  is  (1)  to  reveal  the  will  of  the  Father,  and  (2)  to 
appoint  a  ministry,  and  (3)  to  teach  internally,  or  to  be  effectual  through 
the  ministry. 

His  priestly  office  is.  First,  To  teach  us,  and  otherwise  than  any  other 
priest,  that  is,  not  only  to  the  ears  by  words,  but  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy 
Spirit ;  Second,  To  offer  himself  a  propitiatory  sacrifice  for  all  and  singu- 
lar the  sins  of  the  whole  world ;  Third,  To  pray  and  intercede  for  us  con- 
tinually with  the  Father.  So  that  his  sacrifice  is  enough  and  sufficient 
for  the  people  of  all  and  every  nation  in  the  whole  universe,  for  their 
redemption  and  salvation,  if  it  be  by  them  received  in  true  faith,  and  held 
fast  to  the  end. 

His  kingly  office  consists  in  his  resurrection  from  the  dead,  and  his 
ascension  into  heaven  to  the  right  hand  of  the  Father,  living,  and  casting 
beneath  his  feet,  hell,  death,  sin,  and  final  condemnation;  governing 
with  all  power  in  heaven  and  earth,  spiritually,  his  church ;  adorning  her 
with  spiritual  gifts,  and  at  length  freeing  her  from  all  the  evil;  and 
openly  thrusting  down  the  conquered  into  eternal  punishment. 

His  true  and  visible  church  is  a  certain  number  of  people,  separated 
from  the  world  by  the  Word  of  God,  and  by  the  baptism  of  faith  and 
repentance,  gathered  together  and  constituted. 

Christ  allowed  full  power  and  authority  to  his  church,  assembled 
together,  cordially  and  unanimously,  to  choose  persons  to  bear  offices  in 
this  church.  And  these  and  no  other  are  to  be  included,  viz.  (the  offices), 
of  pastors,  of  teachers,  of  elders,  of  deacons,  of  sub-ministei's,  who,  by 
the  Word  of  God,  from  every  part  are  qualified  and  approved. 

All  antichristian  offices  of  whatever  kind  they  may  have  been,  are  not 
to  be  admitted  into  this  church,  but  utterly  extii-pated. 

All  human  traditions  and  opinions  are  to  be  pursued  with  cordial  hatred 
(lit.,  the  hate  of  the  heart),  and  avoided;  and  if  ever  they  should  be 
adopted  by  any,  they  are  not  to  be  encouraged,  but  immediately  put 
down. 

But  before  I  proceed,  or  come  to  an  end,  that  it  may  not  (I  pray)  be  a 
hindrance  to  you  to  have  known  me  as  an  Englishman,  lately  of  the 
English  church,  but  convinced  by  the  Word  and  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  I 


25Q  APPENDICES. 

give  up  all  its  errors,  and  renounce  its  maternity,  and  witli  the  whole 
soul  and  mind,  desire  to  enter  by  baptism  into  the  true  chiu'ch. 

I  believe  that  there  are  but  two  sacraments  to  be  administered  and 
embraced  in  the  church  of  Christ,  viz..  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper, 
and  these  sacraments  are  to  be  administered  to,  and  participated  by,  those 
who  are  penitent  and  manifest  faith;  so  that  both  of  them  are  to  be 
denied  to  all  infants  and  all  imbelievers,  because  they  do  not  belong  to 
such. 

Lastly,  I  gi'ieve  most  of  all  for  sin ;  and  with  sadness  and  great  grief  I 
do  confess  myself  to  be  the  greatest  sinner,  and  heretofore  to  have  lived 
in  great  and  daily  sins ;  but  I  expect  and  seek  their  remission  through 
Jesus  Christ,  the  eternal  Son  of  God,  and  after  death  to  enter  into  eter- 
nal life.  In  his  name,  therefore,  with  all  the  powers  of  body  and  mind, 
I  wish  and  seek  to  enter,  by  baptism,  into  the  true  church,  and  to 
persevere. 

What  doth  hinder,  therefore,  that  I  should  not  be  baptized  ? 

Richard  Overton. 


[The  above  has  no  date.  Neither  can  we  ascertain  to  which  commimity 
in  Holland  it  was  addressed.  The  writer  is  probably  the  author  of 
a  book  entitled  : — 

"  Man's-  Mortalitie  :  or,  a  Treatise  wherein  'tis  proved,  both  Theologi- 
cally and  Philosopliically,  that  whole  Man  (as  a  rationall  Creature)  is  a 
Compound  wholly  mortall,  contrary  to  that  common  distinction  of  Soule 
and  Body :  And  that  the  present  going  of  the  Soule  into  Heaven  or  HeU 
is  a  meer  Fiction:  And  that  at  the  Resurrection  is  the  beginning  of  our 
immortality,  and  then  Actual  Condemnation,  and  Salvation,  and  not 
before. 

"With  all  doubts  and  Objections  Answered,  and  resolved,  both  by 
Scripture  and  Reason ;  discovering  the  multitude  of  Blasphemies,  and 
Absurdities  that  aiise  from  the  fancie  of  the  Soule. 

"Also,  divers  other  Mysteries,  as,  of  Heaven,  Hell,  Christ's  humane 
residence,  the  extent  of  the  Resurrection,  the  New  Creation,  &c.,  opened, 
and  presented  to  the  tryall  of  better  Judgments. 

"By  R.  O. 

'"  That  which  be/alleth  the  sons  of  men,  hefulMh  leasts;  even  one  thing hefalleth  them  all: 
as  the  (me  dyeth,  so  dyeth  the  other;  yea,  they  have  aU  oJie  breath,  so  that  inan,  hath  no  pre- 
heminence  above  a  beast;  for  all  is  vanity.' — Ecclesiastes  iii.  19. 

"Amsterdam:  Printed  by  John  Caune.    Anno  Dom.  1644."] 


APPENDICES.  257 

G. 

SMITH'S  CONFESSION. 

The  following  is  now,  for  the  first  time,  given  to  the  English  public. 
It  was  issued  l)y  the  remainder  of  John  Smith's  company.  The  only 
knowledge  we  have  of  it  is  from  Robinson's  remarks  on  it  (Robinson's 
work  was  published  in  1614).*  From  the  latter  work,  Crosby  has 
extracted  a  few  fragments.  It  Is  a  translation  from  the  Dutch, 
executed  for  the  author  by  his  friend  Professor  Mllller,  from  the  copy 
preserved  in  the  archives  of  the  Church  at  Amsterdam.  This  Creed 
must  not  be  confounded  with  another,  articles  from  which  have  been 
given  by  Crosby,  and  subsequently  by  Mr.  Underhill,  in  a  fragmen- 
tary form.t  The  title  of  the  one  differs  somewhat  from  the  other. 
Mr.  Underhill  regards  the  latter  as  the  joint  production  of  Smith 
and  Helwys,  and  wonders  that  his  name  is  not  attached  to  it.  The 
mystery,  we  think,  can  be  solved.  It  is  clear,  that  the  one  which 
we  have  given  in  a  former  note,  with  the  forty-two  names  attached, 
was  the  Confession  of  Faith  presented  to  the  Waterland  church 
on  the  application  of  Smith  and  his  companions  for  fellowship  with 
that  community,  and  is  altogether  different  from  the  one  which  he 
has  given.  He  says,  "A  facsimile  of  the  subscriptions  before  the 
editor  begins  thus:  'We  subscribe  to  the  truth  of  these  articles, 
desiring  further  instruction.  Forty-two  names  follow,  and  among 
them  those  of  John  Smyth,  and  of  Mary  Smyth,  his  wife. '  "4:  I  need 
not  say  that  this  is  altogether  a  mistake.  A  moment's  comparison 
will  settle  the  question.  The  one  now  given  covers  a  wider  circle,  and 
embraces  a  larger  variety  of  subjects.  Its  teaching  will  pass  under 
review  in  the  second  volume  of  this  work.  As  the  first  Baptist  Creed, 
at  least  of  modern  times,  it  will  be  perused  with  great  interest  by 
most  of  our  readers : — 

r. 
We  confess,  that  there  is  a  God  (Job  xi.  6),  against  all  Epicureans 
and  Atheists,  who  say  with  the  heart,  or  pronoimce  with  the  mouth,  that 
there  is  no  God.     (Pslm.  xiv,  1. ;  Job  xxii.  13.) 

n. 
That  there  is  only  one  God  in  number  (1  Cor.  viii.  6),  against  the 
heathens,  and  some  others,  who  introduce  many  gods. 

in. 
That  God  is  incomprehensible  and  inexpressible,  i.e.,  that  the  essence 
or  substance  of  God  cannot  be  comprehended  by  the  understanding,  nor 
expressed  by  words  of  men  and  angels. 

»  "  A  Survey  of  the  Confessions  of  Faith,  puhlished  in  Certain  Conclusions,  by  the  remain- 
der of  Mr.  Smith's  company,  after  his  death."— Robinson's  Works,  vol.  iii.,  p.  237. 

t  Hansard  Knollys  Society.  Confessions  of  Faith,  Introd.,  p.  vii.  Crosby,  vol.  ii.,  Ap. 
No.  1.  J  Ibid,  p.  vii. 

S 


258  APPENDICES. 

IV. 

That  God  has  not  designed  the  creatures  and  holy  writings  to  teach 
ns,  how  God  is  in  his  essence  or  substance,  but  how  he  is  in  his  working 
(operating)  and  attributes.     (Eom.  i.  19-21. ) 

V. 

That  the  words  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  do  not  declare  God's 
essence  or  substance,  but  only  his  back  or  nearest  parts  that  can  be  known 
of  God.     (Rom.  i.) 

VI. 

That  God  is  to  be  known  by  his  names,  attributes,  and  works 
expressed  in  the  creatures  and  revealed  in  the  Scriptures.    (John  xvii.  3.) 

vn. 

That  to  understand  and  conceive  God  in  the  mind,  or  in  the  under- 
standing, is  not  the  saving  knowledge  of  God ;  but  to  be  like  to  God  in 
his  effects  and  properties,— to  be  made  conformable  to  his  divine  and 
heavenly  attributes :  this  is  the  true  saving  knowledge  of  God,  whereunto 
we  ought  to  give  all  diligence.  (2  Cor.  iii.  18 ;  Matt.  v.  49 ;  2  Peter  i.  4. ) 

vm. 

That  this  God  is  revealed  as  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  (Matt, 
iii.  16),  and  is  infinite  in  mercy,  in  all  omnipotence,  holiness,  righteous- 
ness, truth,  glory,  and  eternity.     (Pslm.  xc.  2;  cii.  27.) 

IX. 

That  God,  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  did  foresee  and  deter- 
mine the  issue  and  event  of  all  his  works  (Acts  xv.  18);  and  that  he 
accomplishes  at  the  just  time,  instantly,  all  things  by  his  disposition, 
according  to  the  pleasure  of  his  will  (Ephes.  i.  11) ;  and  that  we  consider, 
therefore,  as  an  abomination,  the  understanding  (sentiment)  of  those  who 
teach  that  all  things  happen  by  luck  and  fortune.  (Acts  iv.  27,  28 ;  Matt. 
X.  29,  30.) 

X. 

That  God  is  not  the  author  and  worker  of  sin  or  wickedness  (Pslm. 
v.  4  •  Jas.  i.  13) ;  but  that  He  only  has  foreseen  and  determined  what 
evil  the  free-will  of  angels  and  men  would  do  :  yet  he  gave  no  influence, 
instinct,  motion,  or  inclination  to  the  least  sin. 

XI. 

That  God  has  created,  iii  the  beginning,  the  world,  namely,  the 
heavens,  the  earth,  and  all  things  Avhich  are  therein  (Gen.  i. ;  Acts  xvii. 
24) ;  so  that  things  which  are  seen,  were  not  made  of  things  which  do 
appear.     (Heb.  xi.  3.) 

XII. 

That  God  has  created  man  for  salvation  (bliss,  happiness)  in  his  own 
image,  in  a  state  of  innocence,  without  a  spot  of  sin  (Gen.  i.  27;  ii.  25). 
He  created  them  male  and  female,  namely,  an  only  male  and  an  only 
female  (Gen.  i.  27).  He  formed  man  of  the  dust  of  the  ground,  and 
breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of  life ;  and  man  became  a  living. 


APPENDICES.  2r59 

soul  (Gen.  ii.  21,  22) ;  and  God  has.  blessed  them,  and  said  unto  them,  Be 
fruitful,  and  multiply,  and  replenish  the  earth,  and  subdue  it,  and  have 
dominion  over  all  that  is  therein.   (Gen.  i.  28.) 

xm. 

Tliat,  therefore,  marriage  be  honourable  amongst  all,  and  the  bed 
undefiled,  namely,  between  a  man  and  his  wife  (Heb,  xiii.  4 ;  1  Cor.  vii. 
2) ;  but  God  shall  judge  adulterers  and  fornicators. 

XIV. 

That  God  created  man  with  a  free  will,  having  the  faculty  to  choose 
what  is  good,  and  to  avoid  what  is  evil;  or,  to  choose  what  is  evil,  and  to 
avoid  what  is  good  :  and  that  this  liberty  of  will  was  a  natural  power  and 
property,  ci^eated  by  God  in  the  soul  of  man.  (Gen.  ii.  16 ;  xvii.  3 ; 
xvii.  10;  Gen.  i.  17;  vii.  31.) 

XV. 

That  Adam,  when  falling,  was  not  moved  or  caused  by  God,  or  by  any 
instigation  of  God :  that  he  has  fallen  out  of  his  innocence,  and  has  died 
the  death,  only  from  the  temptation  of  Satan,  while  his  free-will  yielded 
freely  therewith  (or  consented).     (Gen.  iii.  6.) 

XVI. 

That  Adam  died  the  same  day  that  he  sinned  (Gen.  ii.  17) :  for  the 
reward  of  sin  is  death  (Rom.  vi.  23) ;  and  it  is  that  the  apostle  calls 
(Ephes.  ii.)  dead  in  sins  and  transgressions ;  that  is,  a  loss  of  innocence,  of 
peace  of  conscience,  and  of  the  comfortable  presence  of  God.    (Gen.  iii.  7.) 

xvn. 

That  Adam  being  fallen,  did  not  lose  any  natural  power  or  faculty 
which  God  created  in  his  soid  ;  because  the  work  of  Satan,  who  is  sin, 
cannot  abolish  God's  works  and  creatures ;  and  therefore,  being  fallen,  he 
still  retained  freedom  of  will.     (G«n.  iii.  23,  24.) 

xvm. 

That  original  sin  is  not  a  Scriptural  term,  and  that  there  is  no  such 
thing  as  men  intended  by  the  word  (Jerem.  xviii.  20);  because  as  God 
threatened  death  only  to  Adam  (Gen.  ii.  17),  not  to  his  posterity,  for 
their  sins,  and  because  God  over-rates  the  soul.     (Heb.  xii.  9. ) 

XIX. 

Tliat  if  original  sin  might  have  passed  from  Adam  to  his  posterity, 
yet  is  the  issue  thereof  stayed  by  Christ's  death,  which  was  effectual 
before  Cain  and  Abel's  birth,  as  Christ  is  the  Lamb  slain  from  the  beginning 
of  the  world.    (Rev,  xiii.  8. ) 

XX. 

That  infants  are  conceived  and  bom  in  innocency,  without  sin,  and 
that  they  dying,  therefore,  are  all  undoubtedly  saved  ;  which  is  to  be 
understood  of  all  infants  who  live  in  the  world  (Gen.  v,  12;  Gen.  i.  17; 
1  Cor.  XV.  19),  for  the  sin  is  not  imputed ;  because,  where  there  is  no  law, 
there  is  no  transgression.  Now,  the  law  was  not  given  to  infants,  but  to 
them  that  could  imd§rstand.     (flom.  v.  13;  Matt.  xiii.  9;  Matt.  viii.  3.) 


260  APPENDICES. 

XXI. 
That  all  actual  sinners  bear  the  image  of  the  first  Adam,   in  his 
innocency,  fall,  and  restitution,  in  the  offer  of  grace  (1  Cor.  xv.  49),  and  so 
pass  under  this  threefold  estate. 

xxn. 
That  Adam  being  fallen,  God  did  not  hate  hijn,  but  loved  him  still,  and 
sought  his  welfare  with  all  his  heart  (Gen.  iii.  8 ;  xv.  1) ;  neither  doth  he 
hate  any  man  that  falleth  with  Adam  ;  but  he  loves  mankind,  and,  fi'om 
his  love,  sent  his  only  begotten  Son  to  save  that  which  was  lost,  and  to  find 
that  which  was  gone  astray.     (John  iii.  16;  Matt,  xviii.  11-14;  Luke  15.) 

xxm. 
That  God  never  forsaketh  a  man  till  there  be  no  remedy;  neither 
doth  he  cast  away  his  innocent  creature  from  all  eternity,  but  casteth 
away  men  irrecoverable  in  sin  (literally,  who  will  not  be  aided).  (Job  v.  4 ; 
Ezek.  xviii.  23-32;  xxxiii.  6.) 

XXIV. 

But  as  there  is  in  all  creatures  an  inclination  to  their  young,  to  do 
them  good,  so  in  the  Lord  is  an  inclination  towards  men  to  promote 
their  welfare  (happiness) ;  for  each  spark  of  goodliness  that  is  in  the 
creatures,  is  also  infinitely  in  God.    (Rom.  i.  20;  Pslm.  xix.  4;  Hom.  x.  18.) 

XXV. 

That  God  has  determined,  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  that 
the  way  of  life  and  salvation  should  be  by  Christ,  and  that  he  has  foreseen 
who  would  follow  it  (Eph.  i,  4,  v.  2;  Tim.  i.  9),  and  also  who  would 
follow  the  way  of  infidelity  and  impenitency.     (Job  i.  8.) 

XXVI. 

That  no  more  than  a  father  begets  his  child  to  the  gallows,  and  a 
potter  forms  a  pot  to  be  broken,  so  Go4  predestinates  and  creates  nobody 
to  damnation.     (Ezek.  xxxiii.  11;   Gen.  i.  17;   1  Cor.  xv.  49;  Gen.  v.  3.) 

xxvn. 
That  as  God  created  all  men  according  to  his  image,  sa  hath  he 
redeemed  all  that  fall  by  actual  sin  to  the  same  end  ;  and  that  God,  in 
his  redemption,  has  not  swerved  from  the  way  of  his  mercy  which  he 
manifested  in  his  creation.  (John  i.  3-16 ;  2  Cor.  v.  19 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  4,  5,  6  ; 
Ezek.  xxxiii.  11.) 

xxvni. 

That  Jesus  Christ,  who  was  in  the  beginning,  has  laid  the  foundation 
of  heaven  and  earth,  which  perish  or  are  to  be  changed.  (Heb.  i.  10; 
Pslm.  cii.  28.)  He  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  beginning  and  the  end, 
the  first  and  the  last  (Rev.  xxii.  13).  He  is  the  brightness  of  the  glory  and 
the  expressed  image  of  the  substance  of  his  Father,  upholding  all  things 
by  the  word  of  his  power.  (Heb.  i.  3.)  He  is  the  wisdom  of  God, 
begotten  from  all  eternity,  before  all  creatures.  (Prov.  viii,  20. ;  Mic.  v, 
4 ;  Luke  xi.  49. )  He  was  in  that  form  of  God,  and  thought  it  no  robbery 
to  be  equal  with  God ;  but  took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  so, 


APPENDICES.  2G1 

in  the  body  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  miraculously  (marvellously),  by  the  power 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  overshadowing  of  the  Almighty,  the  word  is 
made  flesh  (John  i.  4 ;  Luke  i.  34) ;  being  of  the  seed  of  David,  as  con- 
cerning the  flesh  (origin),  God  having  prepared  him  a  body.  (Phil.  ii.  7  ; 
Rom,  i.  3;  Heb.  x.  5.) 

XXIX. 

That  Jesus  Christ,  after  being  baptized,  by  a  voice  out  of  heaven  from 
his  Father,  and  by  the  anointing  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  appeared  on 
his  head  in  the  form  of  a  Dove,  is  ordained  to  be  the  pi'ophet  over  his 
church,  whom  all  men  might  hear  (Matt.  xvii. ;  Heb.  i.  2) ;  and  that  both 
by  his  doctrine  and  life,  which  he  has  lived  here  on  earth,  by  all  his 
doings  and  sufferings,  he  has  declared  and  preached,  as  the  only  prophet 
and  lawgiver  of  his  church,  the  way  of  peace  and  life,  the  glad  message  of 
the  Gospel.     (Acts  iii.  22,  23.) 

XXX. 

That  Jesus  Christ  is  come  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,  and  that 
the  love  of  God  towards  liis  enemies  has  sent  him  thereunto  out  of  heaven 
(John  iii.  IG) ;  that  Christ  has  died  for  his  enemies  (Rom.  v.  10) ;  that  he 
has  bought  them  who  denied  him  (2  Peter  ii.  1),  teaching  us  thereby  to 
love  our  enemies.     (Matt.  v.  44,  45. ) 

XXXI. 

That  Christ  was  surrendered  unto  the  death  for  our  sins  (Rom.  iv.  25), 
as  we  obtain  forgiveness  of  sins  by  his  death  (Eph.i.7) ;  for  himself  lessen- 
ing or  anniliilating  (sic),  he  has  humbled  himself,  and  is  become  obedient 
unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross  (Phil.  ii.  8),  redeeming  us  from  our 
vain  conversation,  not  with  silver  and  gold,  but  with  his  own  precious 
blood,  as  of  a  lamb  without  blemish  and  without  spot  (1  Pet.  i.  18-19) ; 
for  he  has  blotted  out  the  handwriting  of  ordinances  that  was  against  us 
(Eph.  ii.  15 ;  Col.  ii.  14 ;  Deut.  xxxi.  26),  and  has  spoiled  piincipalities 
and  powers,  and  made  in  that  cross  a  show  of  them  openly,  triumphing  over 
them  in  it  (Col.  ii.  15),  and  through  death  has  destroyed  him  who  had  the 
power  of  death, — that  is,  the  devil.     (Heb.  ii.  14.) 

xxxn. 

That  the  enemies  of  our  salvation,  whom  Christ  has  conquered  (van- 
quished), are  the  gates  of  hell,  the  powers  of  darkness ;  namely,  Satan, 
sin,  death,  the  grave,  the  curse  and  damnation,  wicked  men  and  persecu- 
tors (Ephes.  vi.  12 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  26 ;  1  Cor.  v.  4,  5-7 ;  Rev.  xx.  10-14,  15) ; 
and  these  enemies  we  must  vanqiiish  in  no  other  manner  than  Christ  has 
vanquished.     (John  xxi.  12  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  21 ;  Rev.  xiv.  4. ) 

xxxm. 
That  tlie  sacrifice  of  Christ's  body  and  blood,  offered  unto  God  his 
Father,  upon  the  cross,  though  a  sacrifice  of  sweet  savour,  and  though  God 
be  well  pleased  with  him,  doth  not  reconcile  God  unto  us,  who  did  never 
hate  us,  nor  was  our  enemy,  but  reconcileth  xis  unto  God,  and  slayeth  the 
enmity  and  hatred  which  is  in  us  against  God.  (2  Cor.  v.  19 ;  Ephes.  ii. 
ii.  14-17;  Rom.  i.  30.) 


262  APPENDICES. 

XXXIV. 

That  the  efficacy  of  Christ's  death  is  only  effectual  to  the  salvation  of 
those  who  mortify  their  sins,  and  who  have  been  planted  together  in  the 
likeness  of  his  death  (K.om.  vi.  3-6);  who  are  circumcised  with  the 
circumcision  made  without  hands  ;  in  putting  off  the  body  of  the  sins  of 
the  flesh,  whereof  Chiist  has  become  a  servant  of  the  circumcision  for  the 
truth  of  God  to  secure  the  promises  of  the  Father.  (Eom.  xv. ;  Deut. 
XXX.  6.) 

XXXV. 

That  there  are  three  who  bear  witness  in  earth — the  Spirit,  the  Water, 
and  Blood,  and  these  three  are  one  in  their  witness,  testifying  that 
Christ  in  truth  has  died  (1  John  v.  8) ;  for  he  gave  up  the  ghost  (John  xix. 
30),  and  out  of  his  side,  which  was  pierced  by  the  spear,  came  water  and 
blood,  because  that  included  (encompassed)  that  wherein  the  heart  is 
preserved.    (John  xix.  36-38. ) 

xxxvr. 

That  every  man  being  in  truth  dead  to  sin,  has  likewise  these 
three  witnesses  in  himself  (1  John  v.  10);  for  the  spirit,  the  blood,  and 
water  of  the  sins,  that  is,  the  life,  the  food,  and  the  enjoyment  of  sins,  is 
put  away.     (1  Pet.  iv.  1 ;  Rom.  vi.  7  ;  1  John  iii.  9.) 

xxxvn. 
That  Christ  being  dead  in  truth,  is   also  buried  (John   xix.  39-42), 
and  that  he  has  lain  in  the  grave  the  whole  Sabbath  of  the  Jews  ;  but  he 
has  not  seen  corruption  in  the  grave.     (Pslm.  xvi,  10 ;  Acts  ii.  31.) 

XXXVIII. 

That  all  men,  in  truth  died,  are  also  with  Christ  buried  by  baptism 
into  death  (Rom.  vi.  4 ;  Col.  ii.  12),  holding  their  Sabbath  in  the  grave 
with  Christ ;  that  is,  ceasing  from  their  works  as  God  did  from  his  (Heb. 
iv.  10),  expecting  there,  in  hope  of  a  resurrection.     (Pslm.  xvi.  9. ) 

XXXIX. 

That  Christ,  early  in  the  morning  of  the  first  day  of  the  week,  has 
risen  after  his  death  and  burial  (Matt.  xx.  6) ;  and  he  has  risen  for  our 
righteousness  (Rom.  vi.),  and  is  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with 
power,  according  to  the  spirit  of  holiness,  by  the  resurrection  from  the 
dead.     (Rom.  i.  4.) 

XL. 

That  those  who  have  been  planted  with  Christ  together  in  the  like- 
ness of  his  death  and  biu'ial,  shall  be  also  in  the  likeness  of  his  resurrection 
(Rom.  vi.  4,  5) ;  for  he  quickens  (re-creates)  them,  and  quickens  them  to- 
gether with  himself  (Col.  ii.  13  ;  Eph.  ii.  5,  6) ;  for  that  is  their  bliss,  and 
it  is  done  by  gi'ace.     (Eph.  ii.  5 ;  1  -John  v.  11-15 ;  Tit.  iii.  5-7. ) 

XLI. 

That  this  re-creation  and  quickening  of  Christ,  in  the  bath  of  regenera- 
tion, is  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  our  justification  and  salvation. 
(Tit.  iii.  3-7. )    This  is  the  pure  stream  of  the  living  water,  clear  as  crystal, 


APPENDICES.  263 

coming  from  the  throne  of  God  and  tlie  Lamb  (Rev.  xxii.  1) ;  which  also 
flows  from  the  body  of  those  who  believe  in  Christ.  (John  vii.  38.)  These 
are  the  precious  promises  whereby  we  are  made  partakers  of  the  divine 
nature,  having  escaped  the  corruption  that  is  in  the  world  through  lust. 
(2  Peter  i.  4. )  This  is  the  fruit  of  the  tree  of  life,  which  is  in  the  midst 
of  the  paradise  of  God  ;  this  is  the  white  stone,  and  in  the  stone  a  name 
written,  which  no  man  knoweth,  saving  he  that  receiveth  it ;  this  is  the 
morning  star ;  this  is  the  new  name — the  name  of  God,  the  name  of  the 
city  of  God,  of  the  new  Jerusalem,  which  has  descended  from  God  out  of 
heaven  :  it  is  the  hidden  manna,  the  white  cloth,  the  eye-salve,  the  gold 
and  the  heavenly  repast,  which  Christ  promises  them  who  vanquish.  (Rev. 
ii.  7,  17,  28;  Rev.  iii.  5-12;  xviii.  20.) 

xm. 
That  there  are  three  who  bear  witness  in  heaven— the  Father,  the 
Word,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  that  these  three  are  one  in  their  witness, 
declaring  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  The  Father  says  :  Thou  art  my  son ; 
to-day  1  have  begotten  you.  (Acts  xiii.  33-35.)  The  Son  declares  his 
resurrection,  conversing  forty  days  with  his  discii)les.  (Acts  i.  3. )  The 
Holy  Ghost  declares  the  same  thing,  that  Christ  did  rise,  unto  his  dis- 
ciples on  the  day  of  Pentecost.     (Acts  ii.) 

XLin. 
That  every  regenerated  man  who  has  risen  with  Chrisb,  has  also  in 
himself  the  three  above-mentioned  witnesses  (1  John  v.  20);  for  Christ 
dwells  in  his  heart  by  faith  (Eph.  iii.  17) ;  and  the  Father  dwells  -with  his 
Son  (John  xiv.  2),  and  likewise,  the  Holy  Ghost  (1  Cor.  x.  3) ;  and  the 
grace  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  love  of  God,  and  the  communion  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  is  with  them,     (2  Cor.  xiii.  13. ) 

XLIV. 

That  Christ  having  conversed  forty  days  after  his  resurrection 
amongst  his  disciples  (Acts  i.  18),  was  visibly  and  bodily  taken  up  into 
heaven,  whom  the  heaven  must  receive  until  the  times  of  restitution  of 
all  things,  which  God  has  spoken  by  the  mouth  of  all  his  holy  prophets 
since  the  world  began.     (Acts  iii.  21.) 

XLV. 
That  those  who  are  risen  spiritually,  are  taken  up  with  him  into 
the  heaven,  seeking  the  things  which  are  above,  where  Christ  sitteth  on 
the  right  hand  of  God ;  and  they  set  their  affections  on  things  above,  not 
on  things  on  earth.     (Col.  iii.  1,  2. ) 

XLVI. 

That  Christ  being  now  in  the  heaven,  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of 
God.  (Mark  xvi.  9. )  He  led  captivity  captive,  and  gave  gifts  unto  men 
(Eph.  iv.  8) ;  that  God  highly  has  exalted  him,  and  given  him  a  name 
which  is  above  every  name  ;  that  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  should 
bow,  of  things  in  heaven,  and  things  on  earth,  and  things  under  the  earth ; 
and  that  every  tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  to  the 


264  APPENDICES. 

glory  of  God  the  Father  (Phil.  ii.  29) ;  that  he  alone  has  received  power 
in  heaven  and  in  earth  (Matt,  xxviii.  18);  that  God  has  put  all  things 
under  his  feet,  and  gave  him  to  be  head  over  all  things  to  the  church, 
which  is  his  body,  the  fulness  of  him  that  fiUeth  all  in  aU.  (Eph.  i.  22, 
23.) 

XLvn. 

That  the  regenerated  are  made  to  sit  together  in  heavenly  places,  in 
Christ  Jesus  (Eph.  ii.  6) ;  that  they  sit  with  him  in  his  throne  (Rev.  iii. 
21) ;  that  they  shall  have  poAver  over  the  nations,  and  that  they  shall  rule 
them  with  a  rod  of  iron,  and  break  them  to  shivers  as  the  vessels  of  a 
potter  (Rev.  ii.  6-27) ;  and  that  they  sit  upon  the  twelve  thrones,  judging 
the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel  (Matt.  xix.  28),  which  is  to  be  understood 
spiritually,  that  all  their  enemies  shall  be  subjected  under  their  feet,  so 
that  wicked  one  will  not  touch  them  (1  John  v.  18),  nor  the  gates  of  hell 
shall  prevail  against  them  (Matt,  xvi.);  and  that  they  are  become  pillars 
in  the  temple  of  God,  which  shall  never  perish.     (Rev.  iii.  12. ) 

XLvni. 

That  Christ  being  exalted  at  the  right  hand  of  God  his  Father,  far 
above  all  principalities  and  power,  and  might  and  dominion,  and  every 
name  that  is  named, — not  only  in  this  world,  but  also  in  that  which  is  to 
come  (Eph.  i.  21), — has  received  from  his  Father  the  promise  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  which  he  has  also  poui'ed  out  on  his  disciples  on  the  day  of  Pente- 
cost.    (Acts  ii.  23. ) 

XLIX. 

That  Christ,  in  his  resurrection,  ascension,  and  exaltation  in  heaven, 
is  become  the  Lord  Christ,  Saviour,  anointed,  and  King,  dearer  and 
more  than  in  his  humiliation,  passion,  and  death  (Acts  ii.  36;  PhiL 
ii.  7);  for  the  end  is  more  worthy  than  the  means;  and  the  sufferings 
and  dying  of  Christ  were  the  way  through  which  he  entered  into  his  glory 
(Luke  xxiv.  26) ;  and,  in  consequence,  the  power  of  his  resurrection  in  the 
new  creature  is  more  excellent  and  glorious  than  that  which  is  in  the 
dying  to  sin,  the  moi-tification  of  sin,  and  the  rising  from  it. 

L. 

That  to  know  Christ  after  the  flesh,  is  of  little  advantage  (2  Cor.  v. 
16,  17);  and  the  knowledge  of  the  lineage  and  the  history  of  Christ,  is 
nothing  more  than  what  the  devil  knows  as  well,  or  possibly  better,  than 
some  men  ;  but  the  knowledge  after  the  spirit  is  serviceable  for  salvation, 
that  is,  to  become  embodied  by  Christ  in  a  spiritual  manner,  in  the  like- 
ness of  Christ's  birth,  life,  miracles,  facts,  sufferings,  dying,  burial, 
resurrection,  ascension,  and  exaltation.     (Rom.  vi.  3-6.) 

LI. 

That  Christ,  after  the  flesh  and  history,  in  his  operations  and  suffer- 
ings, is  a  great  mystery,  and  holy  sacrament  of  himself,  and  of  his  service 
in  the  Spirit,  and  of  such  heavenly  things  which  he  performs  in  those  who 
shall  be  inheritors  of  the  salvation  (Rom.  vi.  3,  6,  7 ;  Eph.  ii.  5,  6) ;  and 
that  he,  in  a  spiritual  manner,  performs  all  his  miracles  in  the  regenerate 
which  he  formerly  performed  in  the  days  of  his  flesh.     He  heals  their 


APPENDICES.  2G5 

leprosy,  bloody  flux,  blindness,  dumbness,  lameness,  paralysis,  and  fevers ; 
he  casts  out  the  devils  and  impure  spirits  ;  he  raises  the  dead  ;  he  checks 
the  winds,  and  the  sea  becomes  calm ;  he  entertains,  feeds  thousands 
with  barley  loaves  and  fishes.  (Matt.  viii.  16,  17 ;  Isaiah  liii.  4  ;  John  vL 
27.) 

LH. 

That  Christ  (in  that  manner)  is  become  a  Mediator  of  the  new 
Covenant,  namely,  priest  and  prophet  unto  his  church,  and  that  the 
regenerated  are  become  also  through  him  spiritual  kings  and  prophets. 
(Rev.  i.  6  ;  1  John  ii.  20. ) 

Lin. 

That  the  Holy  Ghost  proceeds  from  the  Father  and  the  Son  of  God 
(John  xiv.  26 ;  xiv.  7) ;  that  he  is  one  only  spirit,  through  whom  Christ 
offered  himself  without  spot  to  God  (Heb.  ix.  14);  that  he  is  the  only 
comforter,  whom  Christ  begs,  obtains,  and  sends  down  unto  us  from  the 
Father  (John  xiv.  16),  which  dwelleth  in  the  regenerate  (1  Cor.  iii.  16), 
which  teacheth  them  all  things ;  and  they  need  not  that  any  man  teach 
them,  as  the  same  anointing  teaches  all  things,     (1  John  ii.  20-27.) 

LIV. 

Tliat  although  there  are  diversities  of  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  there 
is  but  one  spirit,  dividing  to  every  man  severally  as  he  will  (1  Cor.  xii.  4— 
11 ;  Eph.  iv.  4) ;  that  the  external  gifts  which  the  Holy  Ghost  poured  out 
on  the  day  of  Pentecost  on  the  disciples,  as  tongues,  prophecies,  and 
miracles,  which  are  called  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Ghost  (Acts  i.  5), 
were  only  figures  and  introductions  to  better  gifts, — namely,  the  proper 
gifts  of  the  Spirit  of  Sanctification, — which  gifts  are  the  new  creatures  of 
our  only  baptism.    (Eph.  iv.  4 ;  Acts  ii.  23-28  ;  Luke  x.  17. ) 

LV. 
That  John  the  Baptist  and  Christ  were  two  diverse  persons  :  their 
oflBces,  two  diverse  offices ;  and  their  baptism,  two  diverse  baptisms, — the 
one  differing  from  the  other.     (John  i.  20 ;  Acts  xiii.  25 ;  Acts  i.  4,  5 ; 
Matt.  iii.  2.) 

LVI. 

That  John  has  taught  the  baptism  unto  repentance  for  the  forgive- 
ness of  sins,  baptising  with  water  unto  amendment  of  life  (Matt.  iii.  11),  to 
prepare,  in  that  manner,  the  way  for  Christ  and  his  baptism  (Luke  iii.  3), 
bringing  men  to  repentance  and  faith  in  the  Messiah,  whom  he  had  indi- 
cated Avith  his  finger,  saying  :  "Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh 
away  the  sin  of  the  world."    (John  i.  29-31) ;  Acts  xix.  4.) 

LVII. 

That  Christ  is  mightier,  and  has  a  greater  office  and  service  than 
John  (Matt.  iii.  11) ;  that  he  baptises  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire ; 
that  he  comes  and  walks  in  the  way  which  John  had  prepared  for  him  ; 
and  that  the  new  creature  comes  after  repentance.     (Luke  iii.  6. ) 

Lvin. 

That  repentance,  and  faith  in  the  Messiah,  are  the  things  or  condi- 
tions which  we  must  perform  on  our  side,  that  we  may  enjoy  the  promise 


2G6  APPENDICES. 

of  God  (Acts  ii.  38) ;  John  i.  12) ;  that  the  circumcision  of  the  heart,  that 
is,  the  mortification  of  the  sin,  and  the  promise  of  the  spirit,  that  is,  the 
new  creature,  are  the  promises  given  to  us  for  tlie  performing  of  the  first 
conditions  of  I'epentance  and  faith.  (Deut.  xxx.  6 ;  Acts  ii.  38  ;  Gal.  iii. 
14  ;  2  Peter  i.  4,  5. )  Procure  the  promises  of  God,  which  are  yea  and  nay 
and  amen  in  Jesus  Christ  (2  Cor.  i.  20),  and  in  the  regenerated.  (Gal.  iii. 
16.) 

LIX. 

That  repentance  and  faith  are  effected  (brought  about)  in  the  hearts 
of  men  by  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  and  by  the  Holy 'Scriptures, 
inwardly  in  the  creature ;  while  God's  grace  helps  us  by  the  motion  and 
inspiration  (afflatus)  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  man  is  able  to  receive 
or  reject.     (Matt,  xxiii.  27  ;  Acts  vi.  10 ;  E,om,  x.  14,  15.) 

LX. 

That  our  justification  before  God  consists,  not  in  the  performing  of 
the  works  or  conditions  which  God  requires  on  our  side,  but  only  in  the 
enjoying  the  promises,  in  the  possession  of  Christ,  the  forgiveness  of  sins, 
and  the  new  creature.— ^Fzc^g  Article  41. 

LXI. 

That  God  the  Father  begets  us  of  his  own  wiU  and  with  the  word 
of  truth  (James  i.  18),  which  word  is  not  a  corruptible  seed  (1  Peter  i.  23) ; 
not  the  doctrine  of  repentance  and  faith  that  can  be  lost  (Luke  viii.  17) ; 
and  that  God  the  Father  in  the  work  of  regeneration,  needs  not,  nor 
employs  the  assistance  or  the  means  of  the  creature,  but  that  the  Father, 
the  Word,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  perform  that  work  in  the  soul  without 
means,  wherein  the  free-will  of  man  reigns.    (John  i.  13. ) 

Lxn. 

That  those  who  have  not  yet  obtained  the  new  creature,  stand  in 
need  of  the  Scriptures,  creatures,  and  ordinances  of  the  outward  or 
visible  church,  to  teach,  to  comfort,  and  to  expite  them  in  order  to  perform 
better  the  condition  of  repentance  and  faith,  to  enjoy  forgiveness  of  sins. 
(2  Peter  i.  19;  1  Cor.  ii.  26;  Eph.  iv.  12,  13.) 

Lxin. 

That  the  new  creature  which  is  born  from  God,  needs  not  the  out- 
ward Scripture,  creature,  or  ordinances  of  the  external  churches,  so  that 
it  might  bear  itself  on  it  for  support  (1  Cor.  xiii.  10-12;  1  John,  ii.  17; 
1  Cor.  i.  15,  16 ;  Rev.  xxi.  23) :  because  it  hath  three  witnesses  in  itself, 
the  Father,  the  Word,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  are  better  than  all 
Scriptures,  creatures,  ordinances,  whatever  they  may  be. 

LXIV. 

That  even  as  (likewise)  he,  who  was  above  the  law,  nevertheless  is 
made  under  the  law  for  our  sakes,  so  the  regenerated  can  and  will  not  do 
other  thing,  from  love  towards  their  .  .  .  than  to  employ  the  external 
things  that  therewith  they  might  come  to  aid  and  support  men,  and  that, 
therefore,  the  visible  church  and  ordinances  are  at  all  time  necessary  for 
all  men,  whatever  they  may  be.  (Matt.  iii.  15;  xxviii.  19,  20;  1  Cor. 
viii.  9.) 


APPENDICES.  267 

LXV. 
That  the  new  creature,  although  being  above  the  law  and  the  Scrip- 
ture, cannot  act  contrary  to  the  law  and  tlie  Scriptures,  but  strives  that 
all  its  works  may  serve  to  confirm  and  establish  the  law  (Rom.  iii.  31); 
therefore  he  cannot  lie,  nor  steal,  nor  fornicate,  nor  slay  or  hate  any  man, 
nor  perform  any  carnal  works  :  all  carnal  lusts  and  libertinism,  or  f leedom, 
is  against  the  regeneration,  and  a  damned  and  execrable  abomination. 
(Rom.  vi.  15,  16,  18 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  18,  19 ;  John  viii.  34  ;  1  John  v.  18.) 

LXVI, 

That  the  outward  visible  chui-ch  is  an  .  .  .  figure  of  the  real 
spiritual  and  invisible  church,  which  consists  of  the  spirits  only  of  perfect 
and  justified  men,  namely,  of  the  regenerated.    (Rev.  i.  20;  xxi.  2.) 

Lxvn. 

That  the  outward  and  visible  church  consists  of  "regenerated  and 
believing  men,  as  much  as  men  can  judge  thereof,  who  bring  forth  fruits 
worthy  of  amendment  of  life  (1  Tim.  vii.  3-5;  2  Tim.  iii.  5-10;  Acts 
xix.  4);  although  hypocrites  and  feigners  are  often  hidden  among  the 
repenting.  • 

Lxvni. 

That  repentance  is  the  changing  of  the  mind  from  evil  to  good  (Matt, 
iii.  2),  and  sadness  for  the  sins  before  committed,  with  art  heart  humbled 
on  account  of  them,  with  an  intention  of  amendment  for  the  future,  and 
with  a  sincere  diligence  therein.    (2  Cor.  vii.  8,  11 ;  Jer.  xxxi.  18,  19. ) 

LXIX. 

That  when  we  shall  have  done  all  these  things  which  we  are  able  to 
do,  we  are  still  unprofitable*servants,  and  all  our  righteousness  is  nothing 
else  but  a  soiled  cloth  (Luke  xvii.  10) ;  and  that  we  only  can  suppress  and 
cut  off  the  branches  of  the  sin,  but  we  are  not  able  to  pluck  up  the  roots 
of  sin  from  our  hearts.   (Jer.  iv.  4 ;  Deut.  xxx.  6,  7. ) 

LXX. 

That  faith  is  a  science  (knowledge)  of  the  mind  of  the  doctrine  of 
the  law  and  the  Gospel  in  the  prophetic  and  apostolic  Scriptures  of  the 
Old  and  the  New  Testaments,  accompanying  repentance  with  a  confidence 
that  God  will  accomplish  by  Christ,  in  us  all,  the  promise,  namely,  the 
forgiveness  of  sins,  the  mortifying  of  them,  with  the  new  creature  which 
is  the  eternal  life,  on  the  conditions  of  our  sincere  repentance  and  amend- 
ment of  life.    (Acts  ii.  38,  39;  Heb.  ii.  i;  Matt.  i.  15.) 

LXXI. 

That  all  repenting  and  believing  Christians  are  brethren  in  the  com- 
munion of  the  outward  visible  church,  wherever  they  may  live,  or  by  what 
name  they  may  be  named,  be  they  Roman  Catholics,  Lutherns,  Zuingiians, 
Calvinists,  Brownists,  Anabaptists,  or  any  other  pious  Chi'istians,  who  in 
truth,  and  by  godly  zeal,  strive  for  repentance  and  faith,  although  they 
are  implicated  in  great  ignorance  and  weakness.  Nevertheless,  we  greet 
them  altogether  with  a  holy  kiss,  deploring  Avith  our  whole  heai-t,  that 
we,  who  strive  for  one  faith,  one  Spirit,  one  Lord,  one  God,  one  body, 


268  APPENDICES. 

one  baptism,  sliould  be  so  divided  and  severed  into  so  many  sects  and 
splitting,  and  that  for  so  less  considerable  reason. 

Lxxn. 
That  the  external  water-baptism  ought  only  to  be  administered  to 
those  who  are  repentant  and  believing,  as  is  mentioned,  and  not  to  inno- 
cent infants  or  wicked  men.   (Matt.  iii.  23 ;  xxviii.  19,  20 ;  John  iv.  1. ) 

Lxxni, 

That  baptism  put  before  the  repentant  and  believing,  and  preached, 
is  the  spiritual  baptism  of  Christ,  that  is,  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
and  fire,  the  baptism  for  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Chi'ist,  the 
promises  of  the  Spirit,  which  he  shall  siu'ely  partake  off,  if  he  perseveres 
unto  the  end. 

LXXIV. 

That  only  the  baptized  are  to  taste  the  elements  of  the  Lord's  Sup- 
per, wherein,  before  the  repentant  and  believers,  are  put  and  preached, 
the  spiritual  Lord's  Supper,  which  is  prepared  from  the  flesh  and  blood  of 
him  who  was  crucified,  and  his  blood  poured  out  for  the  forgiveness  of 
sins,  even  as  the  bread  is  broken,  and  the  wine  is  poured  out,  and  is  eaten 
and  drunken  as  bread  and  wine,  in  a  bodily  manner  only  by  those  who  are 
flesh  of  his  flesh,  and  bone  of  his  bone,  in  the  communion  of  the  same 
spirit.    (1  Cor.  xii.  13;  Apo.  iii.  20;  1  Cor.  xxi.  23,  26;  Jolin  vi.  53,  58.) 

'  LXXV. 

That  the  outward  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  give  not,  nor 
administer  grace  and  regeneration  to  those  who  enjoy  or  partake  them 
(see  Art.  61),  but  even  as  the  word  which  is  preached ;  so  the  sacraments 
only  serve  to  awaken  and  support  repentai^e  and  faith  in  those  who 
enjoy  them,  unto  the  time  when  Christ  comes,  and  the  day  breaks,  and 
the  morning  star  arises  in  their  hearts.  (1  Cor.  xi.  26  ;  2  Peter  i.  9  ;  1  Cor. 
XV.  8.) 

LXXVI. 

That  the  sacraments  have  the  same  use  or  advantage  that  the 
preached  word  has  ;*for  they  are  a  visible  word,  and  they  teach  to  the  eyes 
of  them  that  can  understand,  as  the  word  teaches  to  the  ears  of  them  that 
have  ears  to  hear  (Pro.  xx.  11),  and  that,  therefore,  they  pertain  no  more 
to  infants  than  the  word  doth. 

LXXVII. 

That  the  preaching  of  the  word  and  the  use  of  the  sacraments  put 
before  the  eyes  the  service  of  Christ  in  the  Spirit,  which  teaches  baptism, 
and  nourisheth  the  regenerated  through  the  Holy  Spirit,  inwardly  and 
iuAdsibly.    (See  Art.  41.) 

Lxxvni. 

That  Christ  in  his  outward  church  has  appointed  two  sorts  of  ser- 
vants, namely,  some  who  are  called  pastors,  teachers,  elders,  or  bishops, 
who  administer  the  word  and  sacrament :  and  some  who  are  called  dea- 
cons, men  and  women,  whose  office  it  is  to  serve  tables  and  to  wash  the 
feet  of  the  saints.   (Acts  vi.  2,  4 ;  Phil.  i.  1 ;  1  Tim.  iii.  2,  8.) 


APPENDICES.  269 

LXXIX. 
That  the  separation  of  the  impenitent  from  the  external  communion 
of  the  church,  is  a  figure  of  the  eternal  rejection  and  punishment  of  those 
who  are  impenitent  and  persevere  so  until  the  end.    (Apo.  xxi.  27;  xxii. 
14, 15  ;  Matt.  xvi.  16,  18;  Matt,  xviii.  18;  John  xx.  23;  Apo.  iii.  12.) 

LXXX. 

That  none  ought  to  be  kept  from  the  outward  communion  of  the 
church  but  those  who  remain  impenitent  and  deny  the  power  of  godliness. 
(2  Tim.  iii.  5,  18.)  And  that  none  ought  to  be  rejected  on  account  of  igno- 
rance and  error,  or  weakness,  so  long  as  they  retain  their  repentance  and 
faith  in  Christ  (Rom.  xiv.  1 ;  Thess.  v.  14  ;  Rom.  xvi.  17,  18) ;  but  they 
ought  to  be  taught  with  meekness  :  those  who  are  strong  ought  to  bear  the 
weak,  and  support  one  another  in  love. 

LXXXI. 

That  one  may  speak  a  word  against  the  Son  and  be  forgiven;  that 
is,  one  may  err  in  the  historical  knowledge  of  God  and  in  the  matter  of 
the  outward  church,  and  obtain  forgiveness,  if  it  springs  from  an  unripe 
zeal ;  but  whosoever  speaks  a  word  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  is,  who- 
ever, after  his  enlightenment,  forsakes  repentance  and  faith  in  Christ,  and 
tramples  under  his  feet  the  blood  of  the  holy  covenant,  turning  with  the 
dog  to  its  own  vomit  again,  such  shall  not  be  forgiven  neither  in  tlxis  world 
nor  in  the  world  to  come.    (Matt.  xii.  31,  32;  Heb.  vi.  4.) 

Lxxxn. 

That  they  who  are  separated  from  the  outward  communion  of 
churches,  ought  to  be  reckoned  as  heathen  and  publicans  (Matt, 
xviii,  17) ;  and  that  they  ought  to  be  shunned  and  avoided,  so  far 
as  they  might  infect  us.  ISTevertheless,  we  ought  to  be  always  ready  to 
teach  them,  and  provide  them  with  necessaries,  and  by  all  means  seek  to 
win  them,  because  the  separation  is  designed  only  to  mortify  the  flesh, 
that  the  spirit  may  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord.  (1  Cor.  v.  5,  11 ; 
Matt.  xiv.  19;  Luke  xv.  12.) 

Lxxxm. 

That  there  is  no  succession  in  that  outward  church  where  the  truth 
is ;  but  the  succession  is  only  from  heaven ;  and  that  the  new  creature 
only  has  the  thing  signified,  and  the  substance,  whereof  tlie  visible 
church  with  its  ordinances,  are  the  figure  and  shadow.  (Col.  ;i.  16,  17.) 
The  regenerated,  therefore,  only  have  power  and  knowledge  to  ofiiciate  in 
the  visible  church,  for  the  service  and  benefit  of  others.  (John  vi.  45.) 
Nevertheless,  God  is  not  the  author  of  confusion,  but  of  peace  and  unity : 
and,  therefore,  we  ought  to  adhere  as  near  to  the  primitive  institution  of 
the  visible  church,  or  to  effectuate  it,  as  far  as  it  is  possible.  Where- 
fore, it  is  not  permitted  that  all  the  brethren  administer  the  sacrament 
(Eph.  iv.  11,  12 ;  1  Cor.  xii.  4,  5,  6,  28,  29),  except  those  only  who  are 
called  and  ordained  to  it. 

LXXXIV. 

That  Christ  has  ordained  in  his  visible  church  the  vocations  of 
masters  and  servants,  of  parents  and  children,  of  husbands  and  wives 


270  APPENDICES, 

(Eph.  V.  22,  25  ;  \i.  1,  4,  5,  9) ;  and  has  ordered  that  every  soul  be  subject 
to  the  higher  powers,  not  only  for  wi'ath  but  for  conscience  ^ake  ;  that  we 
must  pay  tribute,  fear  to  whom  fear  is  (Rom.  xiii.  1,  2,  3,  7) ;  that  we 
ought  not  to  despise  dominion,  or  speak  evil  of  dignities  ( Jud.  8) ;  that  we 
ought  to  make  prayer  or  thanksgiving  for  them  (1  Tim.  ii,  1,  2,  3),  for  this 
is  good  and  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God  our  Savioui'. 

LXXXV. 

That  the  office  of  the  magistrate  is  a  permissive  ordinance  of  God 
(Rom.  xiii.  1),  or  an  ordinance  of  man  (1  Pet.  ii.  13;  1  Sam.  viii.  5,  22) 
which  God  has  permitted,  that  the  one  might  not  devour  the  other,  as  the 
wild  beasts;  so  that  honesty,  decency,  sobriety,  amongst  men  might  be 
maintained,  and  that  the  magistrate  hereby  may  please  God  in  his  voca- 
tion, doing  what  is  right  and  just  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  in  order  that 
they  may  obtain  a  temporal  blessing  from  God  for  themselves,  their 
families,  and  their  subjects.    (2  Kings  x.  30.) 

LXXXVI. 

That  the  magistrate,  by  virtue  of  his  office,  is  not  to  meddle 
with  religion  or  matters  of  conscience,  nor  to  compel  men  to  this  or  that 
form  of  religion  or  doctrine,  but  to  leave  the  Christian  religion  to  the  free 
conscience  of  every  one,  and  to  meddle  only  with  political  matters  (Rom. 
xiii.  3,  4),  namely,  injustice  and  wrong  of  one  against  another,  so  as  mur- 
der, adultery,  theft,  and  the  like ;  because  Christ  alone  is  the  King  and 
Lawgiver  of  the  church  and  the  conscience.    (James  iv.  12.) 

Lxxxvn. 

That  the  magistrate,  so  far  as  he  will  follow  Christ  and  be  his 
disciple,  ought  to  deny  himself,  take  tip  his  cross  and  foUoAv  him.  He 
must  love  his  enemies  and  not  kill  them ;  pray  for  them  and  not  hate 
them ;  feed  and  comfort  them,  but  not  let  them  die  from  hunger ;  he 
must  visit  them  in  prison,  but  not  throw  them  there  ;  he  must  not  banish 
them  out  of  the  country,  nor  divest  them  or  rob  them  of  their  goods,  or 
appropriate  them  to  himself.  He  must  suffer  persecution  with  Christ,  be 
scolded,  slandered,  flogged,  beaten,  spit  on,  imprisoned,  and  put  to  death 
with  Christ,  and  tha^  by  the  power  of  the  magistrate,  which  it  is  impos- 
sible to  do,  and  to  keep  the  sword  of  vengeance.  ' 

Lxxxvm. 
That  Christ's  disciples,  the  members  of  the  visible  church,  must 
judge  and  compose  all  their  own  differences  amongst  themselves,  and  may 
not  go  to  law  before  magistrates  (1  Cor.  vi.  17),  and  that  all  their  differ- 
ences must  be  decided  by  yea  and  nay,  peacefully,  without  using  an  oath- 
(Matt.  V.  33,  37;  James  v.  12.) 

LXXXIX. 

That  Christ's  disciples,  the  members  of  the  visible  chm-ch,  ought  not 
to  marry  wicked  and  impiotis  people  of  the  world,  but  that  every  one  must 
marry  in  the  Lord  (1  Cor.  vii.  39,  40);  that  is,  every  man  only  one  wife, 
and  every  woman  only  one  man.  (1  Cor.  vii.  2;  Acts  xiii.) 


APPENDICES.  27 1 

XC. 
That  parents  are  bound  to  nourisli  their  children,  or  to  bring  them 
up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord  (Eph.  vi.  4) ;  and  that  they 
must  provide  for  their  house  :  otherwise  they  have  denied  the  faith,  and 
are  worse  than  the  infidel.    (1  Tim.  v.  8.) 

xci. 
But  in  so  far  as  any  man  of  a  particular  vocation  serve  the  Lord,  so 
as  Simeon,  Andrew,  James,  and  John,'  then  he  must  forsake  all,  father, 
ships,  nets,"  wife,  children,  nay,  his  life,  to  follow  Christ.   (Luke  x.  4-26 ; 
Markiv.  18-22.) 

XCII. 

That  in  the  necessity  of  the  church  and  poor  brethren,  all  things 
ought  to  be. common  (Acts  iv.  32);  nay,  that  the  one  church  ought  to 
assist  the  other  church  in  its  wants.  (Gal.  ii.  10;  Acts  xi.  30;  2  Cor. 
viii.  29.) 

xcin. 

That  the  bodies  of  all  men  who  have  died,  shall  be  raised  out  of  the 
earth  at  the  last  day,  by  the  almightiness  of  Christ,  and  to  every  one  his 
own  seed,  even  as  the  grain  out  of  the  seed  corrupting  in  the  earth. 

XCIV. 

Thai?  all  who  are  remaining  on  the  earth  at  the  day  of  judgment, 
shall  not  die,  but  shall  be  changed  in  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an 
eye,  at  the  last  trump  (1  Cor.  xv.  52),  for  the  trumpet  shall  sound  and  the 
dead  shall  be  raised  incorruptible,  and  we  shall  be  changed  :  not  in  the 
essence  or  substance,  biit  in  the  quality.  For  the  bodies  being  sown 
spiritually  in  dishonour,  in  weakness,  in  corruptibility,  and  natural, 
shall  rise  in  glory,  power  and  incorruptibility.    (1  Cor.  xv.  42,  44.) 

xcv. 

That  the  bodies  being  risen,  are  to  be  joined  to  the  soul,  wherewith 
or  whereto  they  were  foi-merly  united  in  life,  which,  until  this  time,  ai-e 
kept  under  the  protection  of  the  Lord.    (Apo.  vi.  9  ;  Job  xix.  25,  27.) 

XCVI. 

That  it  is  appointed  unto  all  men  once  to  die,  and  after  this  the 
judgment.    (Heb.  ix.  27.)    And  the  change  of  those  who  remain  alive  at 
the  last  day,  shall  be  equivalent  to  death.   (1  Cor,  xv.  12 ;  1  Thess  iv 
15,17.) 

XC\'1I. 

That  there  will  be  a  general  or  universal  day  of  judgment,  wherein 
every  one  shall  receive  (according)  to  the  things  done  in  his  body,  whether 
they  be  good  or  bad.    (2  Cor.  v,  10 ;  Acts  x\di.  31. ) 

xcvm. 

That  of  that  day  and  that  hour  knoweth  no  man,  no  not  the  angels 
which  are  in  heaven,  neither  the  Son,  but  the  Father  only.  (Mark  xiii.  3.) 
But  at  this  time,  if  it  be  revealed  imto  the  church  or  not,  we  dare  not  say 
anyihing  positively. 


*  The  word  may  be  metten,  "  with,"  or  mitten,  nets.    We  have  preferred  the  latter  word. 


272  APPENDICES. 

XCIX. 

That  Christ  shall  be  the  Man  and  Judge  in  that  day  (Acts  xvii.  31) ; 
that  he  shall  come  in  his  glory  in  the  clouds,  with  all  his  holy  angels 
(Matt.  XXV.),  with  a  shout  and  the  voice  of  the  archangel  and  trump  of 
God  (1  Thess.  iv.  16) :  he  shall  sit  on  the  throne  of  his  glory,  and  all 
nations  shall  be  gathered  before  him,  and  he  shall  separate  them  one  from 
the  other,  even  as  the  shepherd  divideth  his  sheep  from  the  goats,  setting 
the  sheep  on  his  right  hand,  but  the  goats  on  the  left.    (Matt.  xxv. ) 

c. 
That  the  King  shall  say  unto  the  sheep,  the  regenerated,  who  stand 
on  his  right  hand,  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom 
of  my  Father,  prepared  for  you  from  the  foundations  of  the  world  :  and 
so  it  shall  be  done.    (Matt,  xxv.) 

CI. 
That  the  King  shall  say  unto  those  who  stand  on  his  left  hand,  the 
goats,  which  are  wicked  men,  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  everlasting 
fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels  :  and  so  it  shall  be  done. 

en. 

That  after  the  judgment  is  finished  and  consummated,  andthe  last 
enemy,  that  is,  death,  is  put  under  the  feet  of  Christ,  the  Son  also  him- 
self shall  deliver  the  kingdom  into  the  hands  of  the  Father,  and  shall  be 
subject  to  him  who  put  all  things  under  him,  that  God  may  be  all  in  all. 
(1  Cor.  XV.  24.) 


[Dr.  Miiller  says : — "I  have  made  the  translations  as  faithful  as 
possible,  and  as  literal,  as  far  as  it  could  be  done.  The  incorrect- 
ness of  style,  and  the  writing,  have  caused  much  obscurity  in  many 
parts.  I  have  occasionally  altered  a  word,  and  in'  some  instances 
transposed  one,  to  make  the  meaning  plainer.  In  no  case  is  the  sense 
altered.  I  have  carefully  avoided  that.  I  wish  I  could  have  removed 
all  obsciu-ity  from  some  of  the  articles,  but  that  I  found  all  but  im- 
possible."] 


H. 

There  is  an  allusion  to  this  letter  at  page  78.  It  should  have  been 
inserted  earlier,  but  from  some  cause  it  was  overlooked.  The 
author  is  indebted  to  the  coui'tesy  of  the  authorities  of  Emanuel 
College,  Cambridge,  for  the  transcript  of  the  MS.  in  their  possession, 
and  to  his  friend  the  Hev.  W.  Robinson,  for  obtaining  it  for  him. 

The  men  to  whom  this  letter  was  addressed  were  from  Essex.  They 
were  burnt  in  Smithlield  on  the  23rd  of  April,  1556.     They  were — 


APPENDICES. 


273 


Egbert  Drake,  minister,  of  Thundersly. 

Wm.  Tyms,  curate  of  Hockley. 

EicHARD  Spurge,  shewman. 

Thos.  Spurge,  fuller. 

John  Caral,  weaver. 

George  Ambrose,  tailor. 
Fox  has  given  an  account  of  tliem,  and  some  of  the  letters  of  John 
Careless,  given  by  the  same  historian,  are  addressed  to  Tyms.  I  can 
find  no  allusion  to  this  controversy  in  the  details  of  the  martyrolo- 
gists.  It  is  perhaps  difficult  to  say  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for  the 
marginal  notes.  Mr.  Robinson  says: — "The  spelling  is  modernized 
by  me,  and  here  and  there  is  an  (?),  indicating  a  little  doubt  on  my 
part.     The  figui-es  on  the  first  page,  I  am  not  sure  about." 

"A  true  copy  of  letter  which  Henry  Hart  sent  to  Newgate, 
to  the  prisoners  there  condemned  to  die  for  the  confes- 
sion of  Christ's  verity,  against  certain  articles  which 
they  allowed,  that  were  set  forth  by  certain  prisoners  in 
the  King's  Bench,  to  appease  the  contentions  that  theu* 
fellow-prisoners  had  with  them,  if  it  might  have  been. 
" '  As  ye  know  not  what  God  is,  otherwise  than  he  hath 
shewed  himself  in  his  word,  no  more  do  you  or  any  other 
man  else  (?)  know  whether  he  have  any  parts  or  passions  or 
not.     Wherefore,  as  ye  ought  to  teach  nothing  which  ye 
cannot  prove,  no  more  ought  you,  or  any  other,  though 
they  think  them  of  the  church,  or  the  church  itself,  to 
search  after  secrets  w^  y®  Holy  Ghost  f orbydeth    you, 
lest  you  perish. 

"  'And  where  ye  say  that  every  one  of  you  doth  acknow- 
ledge other  to  be  true  and  lively  (?)  members  of  your  church, 
if  ye  maintain  any  errors,  ye  bear  witness  against  your- 
selves. 

"  'In  the  second  article,  ye  say  that  God  and  man  were 
joined  together  in  Christ  into  one  person,  never  to  be  divi- 
ded ;  and  in  the  first,  ye  say  that  God  was  three  persons, 
without  beginning  and  ending,  so  that  ye  make  quaternyty 
in  God  if  ye  hold  the  humanity  which  our  Saviom-  Christ 
took  of  the  blessed  Virgin  Mary  for  a  person,  and  is  not  : 


"  '  This  is  of  verity  imcertaine  faith  for  a  man  to  give  his 
life  for,  when  ye  hold  and  affirm  in  your  first  article  that  God 
is  three  persons,  and  then  ye  say  in  the  second  that  he  is 
made  one  person  for  ever,  I  pray  you,  let  me  know  which 
of  these  ye  intend  to  hold  for  the  ti'uth,  when  ye  have  well 
weighed  the  matter  amongst  yourselves. 

'"In  your  fourth  article  you  say  you  do  believe  all  your 

T 


Against  tht 
first  article. 


(?)  Eccl.  iii. 
(?)  Prov.  XXV. 
(?)  Ps.vi.  131-4. 


Though  yccou- 
fess  all  that 
Christ  hath 
done,  and  believe 
it  as  an  im- 
doubted  verity, 
as  it  is  indeed, 
yet,  if  ye  leave 
that  and  one 
which  ye  should 
do,  yet  shall  ye 
perish. 


274 


APPENDICES. 


salvation,  redemption,  and  the  remission  of  sins,  cometh 
xinto  you,  wholly  and  solely  by  the  mercy  and  favour  of 
God  in  Christ,  purchased  unto  you  through  his  most  pre- 
cious death  and  bloodshedding  only,  and  in  no  part  or  piece 
(?)  by,  or  through,  any  of  your  own  merits,  works,  or  deser- 
vings,  how  many  or  good  soever  they  be ;  and  yet  ye  say  ye 
do  not  deny  nor  destroy  good  works,  but  ye  acknowledge 
and  confess  that  all  men  are  bound  to  do  them,  and  to 
know  and  to  keep  God's  commandments.  But  for  all  the 
confession  of  this  your  stronger  faith,  ye  were  best  to 
follow  St.  Paul,  who  thought  it  no  derogation  to  Christ's 
death  nor  passion,  to  say,  Now  joy  I  in  any  sufferings  which 
suffer  for  you,  and  fulfil  that  which  is  behind  or  lacking  of 
the  passion  of  Christ  in  my  flesh,  for  his  body's  sake,  which 
is  the  congregation ;  for,  indeed,  friends,  if  ye  do  them,  ye 
shall  find  them  works  of  Christ,  and,  therefore,  profitable  ; 
for,  although  ye  allow  good  works  in  word,  yet,  if  ye 
declare  no  benefit  to  be  towards  them  which  do  them,  ye 
were  almost  as  good  to  deny  them.  Friends,  I  fear  ye 
accept  a  careless  man  to  be  your  teacher,  and  he  hath 
taught  ye  as  careless  a  faith ;  but  yet,  I  say  unto  you,  look 
to  the  matter,  for  it  is  weighty ;  put  yourselves  under  the 
covenant  of  God,  and  do  it,  and  see  that  your  hearts  at  the 
least  keep  his  commandment:  which  things,  if  ye  do,  you 
shall  obtain  all  the  benefit  of  Christ  promised,  which  ye 
speak  of,  and  at  the  end  the  crown  of  glory ;  but  if  not,  ye 
shall  be  sui-e,  by  God's  promise,  though  you  gave  yourselves 
twice,  (?)  to  be  refused  and  cast  off  out  of  the  kingdom  of 
God.  I  spare,  because  I  want  time  to  speak  anything  now 
of  your  fifth  and  sixth  articles,  lest  T  should  lose  more 
labour  imtil  I  may  hear  how  this  is  accepted  at  your 
hands. 

"  'By  your  friend,  whatsoever  ye  say  or  find,  (?)  HENRY 
Hart,  as  far  as  charity  bindeth  me,  as  knoweth  God. 

'"If  your  last  article  were  true,  then  would  ye  hear  one 
man  as  another,  depend  not  of  men  but  on  the  truth  ;  for 
such  as  trust  in  men  are  cursed  of  God.' 

("Here  followeth  that  which  the  aforesaid  prisoners  in 
Newgate  wrote  upon  the  backside  of  the  letter. )  (?) 

"  '  Before  God  and  man,  I  protest  this  doctrine  of  Henry 
Hart  to  be  most  blasphemous  to  Christ's  death  and  passion. 
By  me,  William  Tyms,  the  day  of  April,  in  Newgate, 
condemned  to  die  for  Christ's  verity.'* 


Colossians  i. 

Ye  shall  find 
somewhat  also 
for  you  to  do  in 
the  flesh,  beside 
all  that  Christ 
hath  done,  which 
if  ye  do  not  ye 
shall  perish,  not 
withstanding  all 
his  doings. 


*  "  Blessed  be  God  for  thee,  my  dear  brother  Tyms,  and  blessed  be  God  again,  that  ever  I 
knew  thee,  for  iu  a  most  happy  time  I  came  first  into  thy  company."- Letter  of  Careless,  in 
Fox. 


APPENDICES. 


275 


Also  I, 


Lister,  do  affirm  the   same  that  our 


brother  Tyms  hath  said ;  yea,  (?)  I  say,  moreover,  that  this 
doctrine  of  Henry  Hart  is  more  to  the  derogation  of  God's 
glory  than  ever  was  heard  at  any  Papist  mouth :  from  the 
which  good  Lord  deliver  us  and  all  other.  Signed  by  me, 
Lysteryd.' 

"  'Also  I,  Robert  Drake,  earnestly  affirm  the  same  that 
our  brother  Tyms  hath  said  ;  yea,  (?)  I  say  further,  that  this 
doctrine  of  Henry  Hart  is  more  to  the  derogation  of  God's 
glory  and  Clu-ist's  passion  than  all  that  ever  any  Papist 
taught :  from  which  God  deliver  us.  Signed  by  me,  Robert 
Drake.'* 

"  'And  so  doth  George  Ambrose  affirm  the  same  that  is 
above  said.' 

"'Also  I,  Thomas  Spurge,  affirm  the  same  above  writ- 
ten, and  so  doth  Richard  Spvu'ge,  and  so  doth  Richard 
Gratmck.'  (?)t 

(Another  attestation  apparently,  but  illegible,  through 
the  fold.) 

"  '  This  is  to  certify  you  and  all  men,  that  I,  Simon 
Few,  (?)  do  gTant  to  the  whole  of  Christ's  Testament ;  but 
as  for  your  false  opinions  and  slanderous  report  of  my 
faithful  brethren,  I  utterly  deny  and  defy  with  all  my 
heart.'" 


*  "Ah,  my  loving  brother  Drake,  whose  soul  now  draweth  nigh  unto  God,  of  whom  you  have 
received  the  same,  full  glad  may  ye  be  that  ever  God  gave  you  a  life  to  leave  for  his  sake."— 
Letter  of  Careless,  in  Fox. 

t  "Ah,  mine  own  hearts,  and  most  dearly  beloved  brethren,  Caral,  Ambrose,  and  both  the 
Spurges ;  blessed  be  tlie  Lord  on  your  behalf,  and  praised  be  his  name,  wliich  hath  given  you 
8uch  a  glorious  victory."— /&id. 


END    OF    VOL.    I. 


J,    HEATON  AND   SON,    PKINTEKS,    PATERNOSTER-ROW,    LONDON. 


le. 


BX6275  .E92  v.l 

The  early  English  Baptists. 

Princeton  Theological  Seminary-Speer  Library 


1    1012  00035  6206 


DATE  DUE 


,,,,gpis,iiiiiwiW«'»^*'**'*^ 


GAYLORD  #3523PI       Printed  in  USA 


