LIBRARY  OF  TRINCnCN 


NOV        ..JO 


THEOLOGICAL  SEMINARY 


THE    BEATITUDES 


AND     OTHER    SERMONS 


ALEXANDER     MACLAREN     B.A.     D.D. 


London 

ALEXANDER     AND     SHEPHEARD 

21     FURNIVAL     STREET     HOLBORN 

1896 


LONDON 

ALEXx\.NDER   AND    SHEPHEARD,    TRIKTERS, 

27,   CHANCERY   LANE,   W.C. 


CONTENTS. 


The    Beatitudes. 


PAGE 

The  First  Beatitude      1 

"  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit,  for  theirs  is  the  Kiugdom 
of  Heaven." — Matt.  v.  3. 


II. 

The  Second  Beatitude 11 

"  Blessed  are  they  that  mourn,  for  they  shall  be  oom- 
forted."~MATT.  v.  4. 

III. 

The  Third  Beatitude     21 

"  Blessed  are  the  meek,  for  they  shall  inherit  the  earth." 
— Matt.  v.  5. 

IV. 

The  Fourth  Beatitude 32 

"  Blessed  are   they   which   do  hunger   and  thirst  after 
righteousness,  for  they  shall  be  filled." — Matt.  v.  0. 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

TuE  Fifth  Beatitude     42 

"  Blessed  are  the  merciful,  for  they  shall  obtain  mercy." 
— Matt,  v.  7. 


VI. 

The  Sixth  Beatitude     ...         53 

"  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,  for  they  shall  see  God." — 
Matt.  v.  8. 

VII. 

The  Seventh  Beatitude  63 

"  Blessed  are  the  peacemakers,  for  they  shall  be  called 
the  children  of  Grod." — Matt.  v.  9. 


Other    Sermons, 

VIII. 
Teacheii  or  Saviouk       74 

"  The  same  came  to  Jesus  by  night,  and  said  unto  Him, 
Kabbi,  we  know  that  Thou  art  a  Teacher  come  from 
God  :  for  no  man  can  do  these  miracles  that  Thou 
doest,  except  God  be  with  him." — John  iii.  2. 

IX. 

A  Common  MibXAicE  and  Lame  Excuse       ., SG 

" he  prophesieth  of  the  timtb  that  are  far 

ofi." — EzEKlEL,  xii.  27. 


CONTENTS. 


X. 

PAGE 

GoiNCr  Out  and  Going  In         97 

"An  entrance    .     .    .    my  decease." — 2  Petek  i.  11,  15. 


XI. 

Slaves  and  Free 107 

"  He  that  is  called  in  the  Lord,  being  a  servant,  is  the 
Lord's  freeman  ;  likewise  also  he  that  is  called,  being 
free,  is  Christ's  servant." — 1  CoR.  vii.  22. 


XII. 
Two  Forms  of  One  Saying       118 

"  He  that  endureth  to  the  end,  the  same  shall  be  saved." 

— Matt.  xxiv.  13. 
"  In  your  patience  possess  ye  your  souls." — Luke  xxi.  I'J. 


XIII. 

God  and  the  Godly        ..         12S 

"  His  righteousness  endureth  for  ever." — Psalms  cxi.  3  ; 
cxii.  3. 

XIV. 

A  Petulant  Wish ...     13!) 

"  And  Abraham  said  unto  God,  0  that  Ishmael  might  live 
before  Thee  !  "-  Gen.  xvii.  IS. 

XV. 

Seeking  and  Seeing        UG 

'•  Whom  seek  ye  .'    .    .    .    Come  and  seb." — John  i.  88,39. 


CONTENTS. 


XVI. 

PAGE 

The  Servant  of  the  Lord       157 

"  Unto  you  first  G-od,  having-  raised  up  His  Son  Jesus, 
sent  Him  to  bless  you,  in  turning  away  every  one  of 
you  from  his  iniquities." — Acts  iii.  26. 

XVII. 

The  Healixg  Power  of  the  Name 167 

"His  name  through  faith  in  His  name  hath  made  this 
man  strong,  whom  ye  see  and  know  :  yea,  the  faith 
which  is  by  Him  hath  given  him  this  perfect  sound- 
ness in  the  present     of  you  all." — Acts  iii.  16. 

XVIII. 

Peter's  List  of  Valuables      ...    177 

"  Much  more  precious  than  gold  that  perishetli.  — 
1  Peter  i.  7. 

XIX. 

How  to  Secure  a  Prosperous  Voyage       18'J 

"  And  after  Paul  had  seen  the  vision,  immediately  we 
endeavovired  to  go  into  Macedonia,  assuredly  gathering 
that  the  Lord  had  called  us  to  preach  the  gospel  unto 
them.  Therefore,  we  came  with  a  straight  course." — 
Acts  xvi.  10, 11. 

XX. 

Love  makes  Suns  ...         11''-' 

"  Let  them  that  love  Him  be  as  the  sun  when  he  goeth 
forth  in  his  might."^JuDf;ES  v.  31. 

XXI. 

Christ's  Question  to  Each      ...    208 

"  Believest  thou  this  .'  She  saitli  unto  Him,  Yea,  Lord." 
John  xi.  26,  27. 


CONTENTS. 

xxir. 

God's  Banished  Ones      ...  page 

"God  doth  devi..e  means,  that  Hi«  banished  be  not  ov' 
pelled  from  Him."-2  Sam.  xiv.  H.  '" 


XXI  [I. 

The  Common  Salvation 

"  The  common  salvation."- Jude  3 
"  The  common  faith."— Titus  i.  4.' ' 


2%\ 


JO 


XXIV. 

The  Persistence  of  Thwarted  Love 

"'UntiAVfil^:  find  it."-MATT.  xviii.  LS. 
Until  he  find  it."— Luke  xv.  4. 


XXV 
A  New  Yeab's  Message  ... 


243 


"'^iBr^X'^:::.-^ 


XXVI.      . 

The  Names  on  Aaron's  Breastplate 

shall  bear  the  names  of  the  Child  en  of'  Iste   ta  the 


2(i4 


viii  CONTENTS. 


XXVII. 

PAGE 
TlTEEE  iNSCRirTIOXS  WITH   ONE  MEANINf!        272 

"  Thou  shalt  make  a  plate  of  pure  gold,  and  g-rave  upon 
upon  it,  ...  '  Holiness  to  the  Lord.'  " — ExODUS 
xxviii.  36. 

"  In  that  day  there  shall  be  upon  the  bells  of  the  horses, 
'  Holiness  unto  the  Lord.'  " — Zech.  xiv.  20. 

"  His  name  shall  be  in  their  foreheads." — Rev.  xxii.  4. 


XXVIII. 

The  Weight  of  Sand     281 

"  Sand  is  weighty." — Proverbs  xxxii.  ?>. 

XXIX. 

A  Soul's  Tragedy  292 

"  Then  Herod  questioned  with  Jesus  in  many  words,  but 
He  answered  him  nothing." — Luke  xxiii.  fi. 

XXX. 

The  Gifts  that  Accompany  Forgiveness .    bob 

"  Bring  forth  the  best  robe,  and  put  it  on  him,  and  put 
a  ring  on  his  hand,  and  shoes  on  his  feet  :  and  bring 
hither  the  fatted  calf,  and  kill  it." — Luke  xv.  22, 28. 


I. 
Zbc  first  Bcatitube. 

"Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit,  for  theirs  is  the  Kingdom  of" 
Heaven." — Matt.  v.  3. 

E  are  not  come  unto  the  mount  that 
burned  with  fire,  nor  unto  the  sound 
of  a  trumpet,  and  the  voice  of  'awfuP 
words."     With  such  accompaniments 
the   old   law  was   promulgated,    but 
here,  in  this  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  as  it  is  called,  the 
laws  of  the  Kingdom  are  proclaimed   by  the  King 
Himself ;  and  He  does  not  lay  them  down  with  the 
sternness  of  those  written  on  tables  of   stone.      No 
rigid  "  thou  Shalt  "  compels,  no  iron  "  thou  shalt  not " 
forbids;  but  each  precept  is  linked  with  a  blessino- 
and  every  characteristic  that  is  required  is  enforced 
by  the  thought  that  it   contributes  to  our  highest 
good.     It  fitted  well  Christ's  character,  and  the'  lips 
"  into  which  grace  is  poured,"  that  He  spake  His  laws 
under  the  guise  of  these  beatitudes. 

This,  the  first  of  them,  is  dead  in  the  teeth  of  flesh 
and  sense,  a  paradox  to  the  men  who  judge  good  and 
evil  by  things  external  and  visible,  but  deeply,  ever- 
lastingly, unconditionally,  and   inwardly   true.'    All 

1 


THE  FIRST  BEATITUDE. 


that  the  world  commends  and  pats  on  the  back, 
Christ  condemns,  and  all  that  the  world  shrinks  from 
and  dreads,  Christ  bids  us  make  our  own,  and  assures 
us  that  in  it  we  shall  find  our  true  blessing.  "  The 
poor  in  spirit,"  they  are  the  happy  men. 

The  reason  for  the  benediction  is  as  foreign  to  law 
and  earthly  thoughts  as  is  the  benediction  of  which 
it  is  the  reason — "for  theirs  is  the  Kingdom  of 
Heaven."  Poverty  of  spirit  will  not  further  earthly 
designs,  nor  be  an  instrument  for  what  the  world 
calls  success  and  prosperity.  But  it  will  give  us 
something  better  than  earth,  it  will  give  us  heaven. 
Do  you  think  that  that  is  better  than  earth,  and 
should  you  be  disposed  to  acquiesce  in  the  benediction 
of  those  who  may  lose  the  world's  gifts  but  are  sure 
to  have  heaven's  felicities  ? 

Now,  I  think  I  shall  best  deal  with  these  words  by 
considering,  most  simply,  the  fundamental  character- 
istic of  a  disciple  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  blessed 
issues  of  that  character. 

1. — First,  then,  the  fundamental  characteristic  of 
Christ's  disciples. 

Now  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  Luke's  version  of  the 
Sermon  on  the  Mount,  which  is  much  briefer  than 
Matthew's,  omits  the  words  "in  spirit,"  and  so  seems  at 
first  sight  to  be  an  encomium  and  benediction  upon  the 
outward  condition  of  earthly  poverty.  Matthew,  on  the 
other  hand,  says  "  poor  in  spirit."  And  the  difference 
between  the  two  evangelists  has  given  occasion  to 
some  to  maintain  that  one  or  the  other  of  them 
misunderstood  Christ's  meaning,  and  modified  His 
expression  either  by  omission  or  enlargement.     But  if 


THE  FIRST  BEATITUDE. 


you  will  notice  another  difference  between  the  two 
forms  in  the  saying  in  the  two  Gospels,  you  will,  I 
think,  find  an  explanation  of  the  one  already  rfifcrred 
to ;  for  Matthew's  Beatitudes  are  general  statements, 
"  Blessed  are  "  ;  and  Luke's  are  addresses  to  the  circle 
of  the  disciples,  "  Blessed  are  ye."  And  if  we  duly 
consider  that  difference,  we  shall  see  that  the  general 
statement  necessarily  required  the  explanation  which 
Matthew's  version  appends  to  it,  in  order  to  prevent 
the  misunderstanding  that  our  Lord  was  setting  so 
much  store  by  earthly  conditions  as  to  suppose  that 
virtue  and  blessedness  were  uniformly  attached  to 
any  of  these.  Jesus  Christ  was  no  vulgar  demagogue 
flattering  the  poor  and  inveighing  against  the  rich 
Luke's  "  ye  poor  "  shows  at  once  that  Christ  was  not 
speaking  about  all  the  poor  in  outward  condition,  but 
about  a  certain  class  of  such.  No  doubt  the  bulk  of 
His  disciples  were  poor  men  who  had  been  drawn  or 
driven  by  their  sense  of  need  to  open  their  hearts  to 
Him.  Outward  poverty  is  a  blessing  if  it  drives  men 
to  God ;  it  is  not  a  blessing  if,  as  is  often  the  case,  it 
drives  men  from  Him ;  or,  as  is  still  oftener  the  case, 
if  it  leaves  men  negligent  of  Him.  So  that  Matthew's 
enlargement  is  identical  in  meaning  with  Luke's  con- 
densed form,  regard  being  had  to  the  difference  in  the 
structure  of  the  two  Beatitudes. 

And  so  we  come  just  to  this  question — What  is 
this  poverty  of  spirit  ?  I  do  not  need  to  waste  your 
time  in  saying  what  it  is  not.  To  me  it  seems  to  be  a 
lowly  and  just  estimate  of  myself,  my  character,  my 
achievements,  based  upon  a  clear  recognition  of  my 
own  necessities,  weaknesses,  and  sins. 

1* 


THE  FIRST  BEATITUDE. 


The  "  poor  in  spirit  "—I  wonder  if  it  would  be  very 
reasonable  for  a  moth  that  flits  about  the  light,  or  a 
gnat  that  dances  its  hour  in  the  sunbeam,  to  be  proud 
because   it  had  longer  wings,  or  prettier  markings 
on  them,  than  some  of  its  fellows.     Is  it  much  more 
reasonable  for  us  to  plume  ourselves  on,  and  set  much 
store  by,  anything  that  we  are,  or  have  done  ?     Two 
or  three  plain  questions,  to  which  the  answers  are 
quite  as  plain,  ought  to  rip  up  this  swollen  bladder  of   . 
self-esteem  which  we  are  all  apt  to  blow.     "What 
hast  thou  that  thou  hast  not  received  ? "     Where  did 
you  get  it  ?     How  came  you  by  it  ?     How  long  is  it  j 
going  to  last  ?     Is  it  such  a  very  big  thing  after  all  ?  ^ 
You^have   written   a   book;    you   are   clever   as   an  | 
operator,   an   experimenter ;     you    are    a    successful  * 
student.     You  have  made  a  pile  of  money  in  Man- 
chester;  you  have  been  prosperous  in  your  earthly 
career,  and   can  aftbrd  to  look  upon  men  that  are  | 
failures  and  beneath  you  in  social  position  with   a  t 
smile  of  pity,  or  of  contempt,  as  the  case  may  be. 
Well !     I  suppose  the  distance  to  the  nearest   fixed 
star  is  pretty  much  the  same  from  the  top  of  one 
ant-hill  in  a  wood  as  from  the  top  of  the  next  one, 
though  the  one  may  be  a  foot  higher  than  the  other. 
I   suppose   that   we   have  all  come  out  of  nothmg, 
and  are  anything,  simply  because  God  is  everything. 
If  He  were  to  withhold  His  upholding  and  inbreathing 
power  from  any  of  us  for  one  moment,  we  should 
shrivel  into  nothingness  like  a  piece  of  paper  calcined 
in  the  fire,  and  go  back  into  that  vacuity  out  of  which 
His  fiat,  and  His  fiat  alone,  called  us.     And  yet  here 
we  are,  setting  great  store,  some  of  us,  by  our  quahties 


THE  FIRST  BEA  TITUDE. 


or  belonsfincfs,  and  thinkinsf  ever  so  much  of  ourselves 
because  we  possess  tliem,  and  all  the  while  we  are  but 
great  emptmesses ;  and  the  things  of  which  we  are  so 
proud  are  what  God  has  poured  into  us. 

You  think  that  is  all  commonplace.  Bring  it  into 
your  lives,  brethren;  apply  it  to  your  estimate  of 
yourselves,  and  your  expectations  from  other  people, 
and  you  will  be  delivered  from  the  bigger  half  of  the 
annoyances  and  the  miseries  of  your  present. 

But  the  deepest  reason  for  a  habitual  and  fixed 
lowly  opinion  of  ourselves  lies  in  a  sadder  fact.  We 
are  not  only  recipient  nothingnesses  ;  we  have  some- 
thing that  is  our  own,  and  that  is  our  will,  and  we 
have  lifted  it  up  against  God.  And  if  a  man's 
position  as  a  dependent  creature  should  take  all  lofty 
looks  and  high  spirit  out  of  him,  his  condition  as  a 
sinful  man  before  God  should  lay  him  flat  on  his  face 
in  the  presence  of  that  Majesty;  and  should  make 
him  put  his  hand  on  his  lips,  and  say,  from  behind 
the  covering,  "  Unclean  !  unclean  !  "  Oh,  brethren,  if 
we  would  only  go  down  into  the  depths  of  our  own 
hearts,  every  one  of  us  would  find  there  more  than 
enough  to  make  all  self-complacency  and  self-conceit 
utterly  impossible,  as  it  ought  to  be,  for  us  for  ever. 
I  have  no  wish,  and  God  knows  I  have  no  need,  to 
exaggerate  about  this  matter  ;  but  we  all  know  that 
if  we  were  turned  inside  out,  and  every  foul,  creeping 
thing,  and  every  blotch  and  spot  upon  these  hearts  of 
ours  spread  in  the  light,  we  could  not  face  one 
another ;  we  could  scarcely  face  ourselves.  If  you  or 
I  were  set,  as  they  used  to  set  criminals,  up  in  a 
pillory  with  a  board  hanging  round  our  necks,  telling 


THE  FIRST  BEATITUDE. 


all  the  world  what  we  were,  and  what  we  had  done, 
there  would  be  no  need  for  rotten  esfgfs  to  be  flimcj  at 
us;  Ave  should  abhor  ourselves.  You  know  that  is 
so.  I  know  that  it  is  so  about  myself,  "  and  heart 
answereth  to  heart  as  in  a  glass."  And  are  we  the 
people  to  perk  ourselves  up  amongst  our  fellows,  and 
say,  "  I  am  rich  and  increased  with  goods,  and  have 
need  of  nothing "  ?  Do  we  not  loiow  that  we  are 
poor  and  miserable  and  blind  and  naked  ?  Oh, 
brethren,  the  proud  old  saying  of  the  Greeks,  "  Know 
thyself,"  if  it  were  followed  out  unflinchingly  and 
honestly  by  the  purest  saint  this  side  heaven,  would 
result  in  this  profound  abnegation  of  all  claims,  in 
this  poverty  of  spirit. 

So  little  has  the  world  been  influenced  by  Christ's 
teaching  that  it  uses  "  poor-spirited  creature  "  as  a 
term  of  opprobrium  and  depreciation.  It  ought  to  be 
the  very  opposite;  for  only  the  man  who  has  been 
down  into  the  dungeons  of  his  own  character,  and  has 
cried  unto  God  out  of  the  depths,  will  be  able  to  make 
the  house  of  his  soul  a  fabric  which  may  be  a  temple 
of  God,  and  with  its  shining  apex  may  pierce  the 
clouds  and  seem  almost  to  touch  the  heavens.  A  great 
poet  has  told  us  that  the  things  which  lead  life  to 
sovereign  power  are  self-knowledge,  self-reverence,  and 
self-control.  And  in  a  noble  sense  it  is  true,  but  the 
deepest  self-knowledge  will  lead  to  self-abhorrence 
rather  than  to  self-reverence  ;  and  self-control  is  only 
possible  when,  knowing  our  own  inabihty  to  cope  with 
our  own  evil,  we  cast  ourselves  on  that  Lamb  of  God 
that  beareth  away  the  sin  of  the  world,  and  ask  Him 
to  guide  and  to  keep  us.      The  one  "attitude  for  us  is, 


THE  FIRST  BEA  TITUDE. 


"  He  did  not  so  much  as  lift  up  His  eyes  unto  heaven, 
but  smote  upon  his  breast,  saying,  God  be  merciful  to 
me  a  sinner."  And  then,  sweeter  than  angels'  voices 
fluttering  down  amid  the  blue,  there  will  come  that 
gracious  word,  "  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit,  for 
theirs  is  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven." 

II.  Turn,  now,  to  the  blessed  issues  of  this  charac- 
teristic. 

Christ  does  not  say  "joyful,"  "mirthful,"  "glad." 
These  are  poor,  vulgar  words  by  the  side  of  the  depth 
and  calmness  and  permanence  which  are  involved  in 
that  great  word  "  blessed."  It  is  far  more  than  joy, 
which  may  be  turbulent  and  is  often  impure.  It  is 
far  deeper  than  any  gladness  which  has  its  sources  in 
the  outer  world,  and  it  abides  when  joys  have  vanished, 
and  all  the  song-birds  of  the  spring  are  silent  in  the 
winter  of  the  soul.  "  Blessed  are  the  poor  .  .  . 
for  theirs  is  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven." 

The  bulk  of  the  remaining  Beatitudes  point  onward 
to  a  future  ;  this  deals  with  the  present ;  not  "  shall 
be"  but  "  is  the  Kingdom."  It  is  an  all-comprehensive 
promise,  holding  the  succeeding  ones  within  itself,  for 
they  are  but  diverse  aspects  —  modified  according 
to  the  necessities  which  they  supply — of  that  one 
encyclopsedia  of  blessings,  the  possession  of  the  King- 
dom of  Heaven, 

Now  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  (or  of  God)  is  a 
state  in  which  the  will  of  God  is  absolutely  and 
perfectly  obe3-ed.  It  is  caj)able  of  partial  reaUsation 
here,  and  is  sure  of  complete  fulfilment  hereafter.  To 
the  early  hearers  of  these  words  the  phrase  would 
necessarily  suggest  the  idea  which  bulked  so  large  in 


THE  FIRST  BEATITUDE. 


prophecy  and  in  Judaism,  of  the  Messianic  Kingdom  ; 
and  we  may  well  lay  hold  of  that  thought  to  suggest 
the  first  of  the  elements  of  this  blessedness.  That 
poverty  of  spirit  is  blessed  because  it  is  an  indispen- 
sable condition  of  becoming  Christ's  men  and  subjects. 
I  believe,  dear  friends,  for  my  part,  that  the  main 
reason  why  so  many  of  us  are  not  out-and-out 
Christian  men  and  women,  having  entered  really  into 
that  kingdom  which  is  obedience  to  God  in  Christ, 
is  because  Ave  have  a  superficial  knowledge,  or  no 
knowledge  at  all,  of  our  own  sinful  condition,  and  of 
the  gravity  of  that  fact.  Intellectually,  I  take  it  that 
an  under  estimate  of  the  universality  and  of  the 
awfulness  of  sin  has  a  great  deal  to  do  in  shaping  all 
the  maimed,  imperfect,  partial  views  of  Christ,  His 
character  and  nature,  which  afflict  the  world.  It  is 
the  mother  of  most  of  our  heresies.  And,  practically, 
if  you  do  not  feel  any  burden,  you  do  not  care  to  hear 
about  One  who  will  carry  it.  If  you  have  no  sense 
of  need,  the  message  that  there  is  a  supply  will  fall 
perfectly  ineffectual  upon  your  ears.  If  you  have  not 
realised  the  truth  that  whatever  else  you  may  be  to 
be  proud  of — wise,  clever,  beautiful,  accomplished, 
rich,  prosperous — you  have  this  to  take  all  the  self- 
conceit  out  of  you,  that  you  are  a  sinful  man ;  if  you 
have  not  realised  that,  it  will  be  no  gospel  to  you  that 
Jesus  Christ  has  died,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  and 
lives  to  cleanse  us. 

Brethren,  there  is  only  one  way  into  the  true  and 
full  possession  of  Christ's  salvation,  and  that  is 
poverty  of  spirit.  It  is  the  narrow  door,  like  the  mere 
low  slits  in  the  wall  which   in   ancient    times  were 


THE  FIRST  BEATITUDE. 


the  access  to  some  wealth-adorned  palace  or  stately 
structure — narrow  openings  that  a  man  had  to  stoop 
his  lofty  crest  in  order  to  enter.  If  you  have  never 
been  down  on  your  knees  before  God,  feeling  what  a 
wicked  man  or  woman  you  are,  I  doubt  hugely 
whether  you  will  ever  stand  with  radiant  face  before 
God,  and  praise  Him  through  eternity  for  His  mercy 
to  you.  If  you  want  to  have  Christ  for  yours,  you 
must  begin,  where  He  begins  His  Beatitudes,  with 
that  poverty  of  spirit. 

It  is  blessed  because  it  invites  the  riches  of  God  to 
come  and  make  us  wealthy.  It  draws  towards  itself 
communication  of  God's  infinite  self,  with  all  His 
quickening  and  cleansing  and  humbling  powers. 
Grace  is  attracted  by  the  sense  of  need,  just  as  the 
lifted  finger  of  the  liG^htning  rod  brings  down  fire  from 
heaven.  The  heights  are  barren.  It  is  in  the  valleys 
that  rivers  run,  and  flowers  bloom.  "  God  resisteth 
the  proud,  and  giveth  grace  to  the  humble."  If  we 
desire  to  have  Him,  who  is  the  one  source  of  all 
blessedness  in  our  hearts,  as  a  true  possession,  we  must 
open  the  door  for  His  entrance  by  poverty  of  spirit. 
Desire  brings  fulfilment ;  and  they  who  know  their 
wants,  and  only  they,  will  truly  long  that  they  may  be 
supplied. 

This  poverty  of  spirit  is  blessed  because  it^  is  its 
own  reward.  All  self-esteem  and  self-complacency  are 
like  a  hedgehog,  as  someone  has  said,  "  rolled  up  the 
wrong  wa}^  tormenting  itself  with  its  prickles."  And 
the  man  that  is  always,  or  often,  thinking  how  much 
above  A.,  B.,  or  C.  he  is,  and  how  much  A.,  B.,  or  C. 
ought  to  offer  of  incense  to  him,  is  sure  to  get  more 


10  THE  FIRST  BEATITUDE. 

cuffs  than  compliments,  more  enmity  than  affection  ; 
and  will  be  sore  all  over  with  wounded  vanities  of  all 
sorts.  But  if  we  have  learned  ourselves,  and  have 
departed  from  these  lofty  thoughts,  then  to  be  humble 
in  spirit  is  to  be  wise,  cheerful,  contented,  simple, 
restful  in  all  circumstances.  You  remember  John 
Bunyan's  shepherd  boy,  down  in  the  valley  of  humilia- 
tion. Heart' s-ease  grew  there,  and  his  song  was,  "  Ho 
that  is  low  need  fear  no  fall."  If  we  have  this  true, 
deep-rooted  poverty  of  spirit,  we  shall  be  below  the 
tempest,  which  will  go  clean  over  our  heads.  The  oaks 
catch  the  lightnings  ;  the  grass  and  the  primroses  are 
unsinged.  "  The  day  of  the  Lord  shall  be  upon  all 
high  things,  and  the  loftiness  of  men  shall  be  brought 
low." 

So,  dear  brethren,  blessedness  is  not  to  be  found 
outside  us.  AVe  need  not  ask  "  who  shall  go  up 
into  the  heavens,  or  who  shall  descend  into  the 
deep,"  to  bring  it.  It  is  in  thee,  if  at  all.  Christ 
teaches  us  that  the  sources  of  all  true  blessedness 
are  within  us  ;  there  or  nowhere  is  Eden.  If  we 
have  the  tempers  and  dispositions  of  these  great 
Beatitudes,  condition  matters  but  very  little.  If 
the  source  of  all  blessedness  is  within  us,  the  first 
step  to  it  all  is  poverty  of  spirit.  "  Be  ye  clothed 
with  humility."  The  Master  girt  Himself  with  the 
servant's  towel,  and  His  disciples  are  to  copy  Him 
who  said  :  "  Take  My  yoke  upon  you.  ...  I  am 
meek  and  lowly  in  heart  .  .  .  and  ye  shall  find 
rest" — and  is  not  that  blessedness? — "ye  shall  find 
rest  unto  your  souls." 


II. 
Zbc  Scconb  Bcatitube* 

"  Blessed  are  they  that  mourn,  for  they  shall  be  comforted." — 
Matt.  v.  4. 

N  ordinary  superficial  view  of  these  so- 
called  Beatitudes  is  that  they  are 
simply  a  collection  of  unrelated  sayings. 
But  they  are  a  great  deal  more  than 
that.  There  is  a  vital  connection  and 
progress  in  them.  The  jewels  are  not  flung  down  in 
a  heap  ;  they  are  wreathed  into  a  chain,  which  who- 
soever wears  shall  have  "  an  ornament  of  grace  about 
his  neck."  They  are  an  outgrowth  from  a  common 
root ;  stages  in  the  evolution  of  Christian  character. 

Now,  I  tried  to  show  in  a  former  sermon  how 
the  root  of  them  all  is  the  poverty  of  spirit  which 
is  spoken  of  in  the  preceding  verse ;  and  how  it 
really  does  lie  at  the  foundation  of  the  highest 
type  of  human  character,  and  in  its  very  self  is 
sure  of  possessing  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven.  And 
now  I  turn  to  the  second  of  these  Beatitudes.  Like 
all  the  others,  it  is  a  paradox,  for  it  starts  from  a 
wholly  dift'erent  conception  from  the  common  one  of 
what  is  man's  chief  good.  If  the  aims  which  usually 
engross  us  are  really  the  true  aims  of  life,  then  there 


12  THE  SECOND  BEATITUDE. 

is  no  meaning  of  this  saying  of  our  Lord,  for  then  it 
had  been  better  not  to  sorrow  at  all  than  to  sorrow 
and  be  comforted.  But  if  the  true  purpose  for  which 
we  are  all  gifted  with  this  solemn  gift  of  life  is  that 
we  may  become  "  imitators  of  God  as  dear  children," 
then  there  are  few  things  for  which  men  should  be 
more  thankful  than  the  sacred  sorrow,  than  which 
there  are  few  instruments  more  powerful  for  creating 
the  type  of  character  which  we  are  set  here  to  make 
our  own.  All  lofty,  dignified,  serious  thinkers  and 
poets  (who  for  the  most  of  men  are  the  best  teachers) 
had  said  this  same  thing  before  Christ.  But  He  says 
it  with  a  difference  all  His  own,  which  deepens  in- 
calculably its  solemnity,  and  sets  the  truth  of  the 
otherwise  sentimental  saying,  which  flies  often  in  the 
face  of  human  nature,  upon  immovable  foundations. 

Let  me  ask  you,  then,  just  to  look  for  a  moment 
with  me,  in  the  simplest  possible  way,  at  the  two 
thoughts  of  our  text.  Who  are  the  mourners  that  are 
"  blessed  "  ?  and  What  is  the  consolation  that  they 
receive  ? 

I. — The  mourners  who  are  blessed. 
(  "  Blessed  are  they  that  mourn."  Ah  !  That  is  not 
a  universal  bliss.  All  mourners  are  not  blessed.  It 
would  be  good  news,  indeed,  to  a  world  so  full  of 
miseries  that  men  sometimes  think  it  were  better  not 
to  be,  and  holding  so  many  wrecked  and  broken  hearts, 
if  every  sorrow  had  its  benediction.  But  just  as  we 
saw  in  a  former  discourse  that  the  poverty  which 
Christ  pronounced  blessed  is  not  mere  straitness  of 
circumstances,  or  lack  of  material  wealth,  so  here  the 
sorrow  round  the  head  of  which  he  casts  this  halo  of 


THE  SECOND  BEATITUDE.  13 

glory  is  not  that  which  springs  from  the  mere 
alteration  of  external  circumstances,  or  from  any 
natural  causes.  The  influence  of  the  first  saying 
runs  through  all  the  Beatitudes,  and  since  it  is  "  the 
poor  in  spirit "  who  are  there  pronounced  happy,  so 
here  we  must  go  far  deeper  than  mere  outward  con- 
dition, in  order  to  find  the  ground  of  the  benediction 
pronounced.  Let  us  be  sure,  to  begin  with,  of  this, 
that  no  condition,  be  it  of  wealth  or  woe,  is  absolutely 
and  necessarily  good,  but  that  the  seat  of  all  true 
blessedness  lies  within,  in  the  disposition  which  rightly 
meets  the  conditions  which  God  sends. 

So  I  would  say,  first,  that  the  mourners  whom 
Christ  pronounces  "blessed"  are  those  who  are  "  poor 
in  spirit."  The  mourning  is  the  emotion  which  follows 
upon  that  poverty.  The  one  is  the  recognition  of  the 
true  estimate  of  my  own  character  and  failings  ;  the 
other  is  the  feeling  that  follows  upon  that  re- 
cognition. The  one  is  the  prophet's  clear-sighted 
"  I  am  a  man  of  unclean  lips " ;  the  other  is  the 
same  prophet's  contemporaneous  wail,  "  Woe  is 
me,  for  I  am  undone;  for  I  am  a  man  of  unclean 
lips." 

And  surely,  brethren,  if  you  and  I  have  ever  had 
anything  like  a  glimpse  of  what  we  really  are,  and 
have  brought  ourselves  into  the  light  of  God's  face, 
and  have  pondered  upon  our  characters  and  our 
doings  in  that — not  "fierce"  but — all-searching,  "lio-ht" 
that  flashes  from  Him,  there  can  be  no  attitude,  no 
disposition,  more  becoming  the  best,  the  purest,  the 
noblest  of  us  than  that  "  Woe  is  me,  for  I  am 
undone." 


14  THE  SECOND  BEATITUDE. 

Oil,  dear  friends,  if — not  as  a  theological  term,  but 
as  a  clinging,  personal  fact — we  realise  what  sin 
against  God  is,  what  must  necessarily  come  from  it, 
what  aggravation  His  gentleness,  His  graciousness, 
His  constant  beneficence  bring — hoAV  facilely  we  do  the 
evil  thing  and  then  wipe  our  lips  and  say,  "  We  have 
done  no  harm  " — we  should  be  more  familiar  than  we 
are  with  the  depths  of  this  experience  of  mourning 
for  sin. 

I  cannot  too  strongly  urge  upon  you  my  own  con- 
viction— it  may  be  worth  little,  but  I  am  bound  to 
speak  it — that  there  are  few  things  which  the  so- 
called  Christianity  of  this  day  needs  more  than  an 
intenser  realisation  of  the  fact,  and  the  gravity  of  the 
fact,  of  personal  sinfulness.  There  lies  the  root  of  the 
shallowness  of  so  much  that  calls  itself  Christianity 
in  the  world  to-day.  It  is  the  source  of  almost  all 
the  evils  under  which  the  Church  is  groaning.  And 
sure  I  am  that  if  millions  of  the  people  that  com- 
placently put  themselves  down  in  the  census  as 
Christians  could  but  once  see  themselves  as  they  are, 
and  connect  their  conduct  with  God's  thought  about 
it,  they  would  get  a  shock  that  would  sober  them. 
And  sure  I  am  that  if  they  do  not  thus  see  them- 
selves here  and  now,  they  will  one  day  get  a  shock 
that  will  stupify  them.  And  so,  dear  friends,  I  urge 
upon  you,  as  I  would  upon  myself,  as  the  foundation 
and  first  step  towards  all  the  sunny  heights  of  God- 
likeness  and  blessedness — go  down,  down  deep  into 
the  hidden  corners,  and  see  how,  like  the  elders  of 
Israel  that  the  prophet  beheld  in  the  dark  chamber, 
we  worship  creeping  things,  abominable  things,  lust- 


THE  SECOND  BEATITUDE.  15 

ful  tilings,  in  the  recesses  within.  And  then  we 
shall  possess  more  of  that  poverty  of  spirit,  and  the 
conscious  recognition  of  our  own  true  character  shall 
merefe  into  the  mourning  which  is  altooether  blessed. 

Now,  note,  again,  how  such  sorrow  will  refine  and 
ennoble  character.  How  different  our  claims  upon 
other  men  would  be  if  we  possessed  this  sober, 
saddened  estimate  of  what  we  really  are  !  How  our 
petulance,  and  arrogance,  and  insisting  upon  what  is 
due  to  us  of  respect  and  homage  and  deference  would 
all  disappear !  How  much  more  rigid  would  be  our 
guard  upon  ourselves,  our  own  emotions,  our  own 
inclinations  and  tastes !  How  much  more  lenient 
would  be  our  judgment  of  the  openly  and  confessedly 
naughty  ones,  who  have  gone  a  little  further  in  act, 
but  not  an  inch  further  in  essence,  than  we  have 
done !  How  different  our  attitude  to  our  fellows ; 
and  how  lowly  our  attitude  to  God !  Such  sorrow 
would  sober  us,  would  deliver  us  from  our  lustinsr 
after  the  gauds  of  earth,  would  make  us  serious  and 
reflective,  would  bring  us  to  that  "sad,  wise  valour" 
which  is  the  conquering  characteristic  of  humanity. 

There  is  nothing  more  contemptible  than  the  lives 
which,  for  want  of  this  self-knowledge,  foam  away  in 
idle  mirth,  and  effervesce  in  what  the  world  calls 
"  high  spirits." 

"  There  is  no  music  in  a  life 

That  sounds  with  idiot  laughter  solely, 
There's  not  a  string  attuned  to  mirth 
But  hag  its  chords  in  melancholy." 

So  said  one  whose  reputation  in  English  literature  is 
mainly  as  a  humourist.     He   had   learned  that  the 


16  THE  SECOND  BEATITUDE. 

only  noble  humanity  is  that  in  which  the  fountains 
of  laughter  and  of  tears  lie  so  close  together  that 
their  waters  intermingle.  I  beseech  you  not  to 
confound  the  "  lausfhter  of  fools,"  which  is  the 
"  crackling  of  thorns  under  the  pot/'  with  the  true, 
solemn,  ennobling  gladness  which  lives  along  with 
this  sorrow  of  my  text. 

Further,  such  mourning  infused  into  the  sorrow  that 
comes  from  external  disasters  will  make  it  blessed  too. 
As  I  have  said,  there  is  nothing  in  any  condition  of 
life  which  necessarily  and  universally  makes  it  blessed. 
Though  poets  and  moralists  and  Christian  people  have 
talked  a  great  deal,  and  beautifully  and  truly,  about 
the  sanctifying  and  sweetening  influences  of  calamity, 
do  not  let  us  forget  that  there  are  perhaps  as  many 
people  made,  worse  by  their  sorrows  as  are  made 
better  by  them.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  being  made 
sullen,  hard,  selfish,  negligent  of  duty,  resentful 
against  God,  hopeless,  by  the  pressure  of  our  calamities. 
Blessed  be  God,  there  is  such  a  thing  as  being  drawn 
to  Him  by  them.  Then  they,  too,  come  within  the 
sweep  of  this  benediction  of  the  Master,  and  the  out- 
ward distress  melts  into  the  sorrow  which  is  blessed. 
A  drop  or  two  of  this  tincture,  the  mourning  vfhich 
comes  from  poverty  of  spirit,  slipped  into  the  cup  of 
affliction,  clears  and  sweetens  the  waters,  and  makes 
them  a  tonic  bitter.  Brethren,  if  our  outward  losses 
and  disappointments  and  pains  help  us  to  apprehend, 
and  are  accepted  by  us  in  the  remembrance  of,  our 
own  unworthiness,  then  these,  too,  are  God's  sweet 
gifts  to  us. 

One  word  more.     This  mourning  is  perfectly  com- 


THE  SECOND  BEATITUDE.  17 


patible  with,  and  indeed  is  experienced  in  its  purest 
form  only  along  with,  the  highest  and  purest  joy.  I 
have  been  speaking  about  the  indispensable  necessity 
of  such  sadness  for  all  noble  life.  But  let  us  remember, 
on  the  other  hand,  that  nobody  has  so  much  reason 
to  be  glad  as  he  has  who,  in.  poverty  of  spirit,  has 
clasped  and  possesses  the  wealth  of  the  Kingdom. 
And  if  a  man,  side  by  side  with  this  profound  and 
saddened  sense  of  his  own  sinfulness,  has  not  a  hold 
of  the  higher  thing — Christ's  righteousness  given  ta 
penitence  and  faith — then  his  knowledge  of  his  own 
unworthiness  is  still  too  shallow  to  inherit  a  bene- 
diction. There  is  no  reason  why,  side  by  side  in  the 
Christian  heart,  there  should  not  lie — there  is  every 
reason  why  there  must  lie — these  two  things,  not 
mutually  discrepant  and  contradictory,  but  capable  of 
being  blended  together — the  mourning  which  is 
blessed,  and  the  joy  which  is  unspeakable  and  full  of 
glory. 

II. — And  now  a  word  or  two  with  regard  to 
the  consolation  which  such  mourning  is  sure  to 
receive. 

It  is  not  true,  whatever  sentimentalists  may  say,  that 
ill  sorrow  is  comforted  and  therefore  blessed.  It  may 
)e  forgotten.  Pain  may  sting  less ;  men  may  betake 
hemselves  to  trivial,  or  false,  unworthy,  low  allevia- 
ions,  and  fancy  that  they  are  comforted  when  they  are 
'nly  diverted.  But  the  sorrow  meant  in  my  text 
lecessarily  ensures  for  every  man  who  possesses  it  the 
(consolation  which  follows.  That  consolation  is  both 
present  and  future. 

As  for  the  present,  the  mourning  which  is  based, 
i  2 


18  TEE  SECOND  BEATITUDE. 

as  our  text  bases  it,  on  poverty  of  spirit,  will  certainly 
bring  after  it  the  consolation  of  forgiveness  and  of 
cleansing.  Christ's  gentle  hand  laid  upon  us,  to  cause 
our  guilt  to  pass  away,  and  the  inveterate  habits  of 
inclination  towards  evil  to  melt  out  of  our  nature,  is 
His  answer  to  His  child's  cry,  "  Woe  is  me,  for 
I  am  undone."  And  anything  is  more  probable 
than  that  Christ,  hearing  a  man  thus  complain 
of  himself  before  Him,  should  fail  to  send  His  swift 
answer. 

Ah,  brethren,  you  will  never  know  how  deep  and 
ineffably  precious  are  the  consolations  which  Christ 
can  give,  unless  you  have  learned  despair  of  self,  and 
have  come  empty,  helpless,  hopeless,  and  yet  coniEident, 
to  that  great  Lord.  Make  your  hearts  empty,  and  He 
will  fill  them ;  recognise  your  desperate  condition,  and 
He  will  lift  you  up.  The  deeper  down  we  go  into  the 
depths  the  surer  is  the  rebound,  and  the  higher  the 
soaring  to  the  zenith.  It  is  those  who  have  poverty 
of  spirit,  and  mourning  based  upon  it,  and  only  they, 
who  pass  into  the  sweetest,  sacredest,  secretest  recesses 
of  Christ's  heart,  and  there  find  all-sufficient  conso- 
lation. 

In  like  manner,  that  consolation  will  come  in  it,s 
noblest  and  most  sufficing  form  to  those  who  take 
their  outward  sorrows,  and  link  them  with  this  sens  e 
of  their  own  ill-desert.  Oh,  dear  friends,  if  I  am 
speaking  to  anybody  who  to-day  has  a  burdene  d 
heart,  be  sure  of  this,  that  the  way  to  consolation  lie  s 
through  submission;  and  that  the  way  to  submission  a 
lies  through  recognition  of  our  own  sin.  If  Ave  wil^ 
only  "  lie  still,  let  Him  strike  home,  and  bless  the  rod,  " 


THE  SECOND  BEATITUDE.  19 

the  rod  will  blossom  and  bear  fruit.  The  water  of  the 
cataract  would  not  flash  into  rainbow  tints  against  the 
sunshine,  unless  it  had  been  dashed  into  spray  against 
black  rocks.  And  if  you  and  I  will  but  say  with  good 
old  Dr.  Watts : 

"  When  His  strokes  are  felt, 
His  strokes  are  fewer  than  our  crimes, 
And  lighter  than  our  guilt," 

it  will  not  be  hard  to  bow  down  and  say,  "  Thy  will 
be  done,"  and  with  submission  consolation  will  be 
ours. 

Is  there  anything  to  say  about  that  future  con- 
solation ?  Very  little,  for  Ave  know  very  little.  But 
"God  Himself  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their 
eyes."  The  hope  of  that  consolation  is  itself  con- 
solation, and  the  hope  becomes  all  the  more  bright 
when  we  know  and  measure  the  depths  of  our  own 
evil.  Earth  needs  to  be  darkened  in  order  that  the 
magic,  ethereal  beauty  of  the  glow  in  the  western 
heavens  may  be  truly  seen.  The  sorrow  of  earth  is 
the  background  on  which  the  light  of  heaven  is 
painted. 

So,  dear  friends,  be  sure  of  this,  the  one  thing 
which  ought  to  move  a  man  to  sadness  is  his  own 
C3haracter.  For  all  other  causes  of  grief  are  instru- 
ments for  good.  And  be  sure  of  this,  too,  that  the 
one  thing  which  can  ensure  consolation  adequate  to 
the  grief  is  bringing  the  grief  to  the  Lord  Christ  and 
asking  Him  to  deal  with  it.  His  first  word  of  ministry 
ran  parallel  with  these  two  Beatitudes.  When  He 
spoke  the  latter  He  began  with  j)overty  of  spirit,  and 


20 


THE  SECOND  BEATITUDE. 


passed  to  inourning  and  consolation.  And  when  He 
opened  His  lips  in  tlie  synagogue  of  Nazareth  He 
began  with,  "The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  Me, 
because  He  hath  anointed  Me  to  preach  good  tidings 
unto  the  poor,  to  give  unto  them  that  mourn  in  Zion 
a  diadem  for  ashes,  the  oil  of  joy  for  mourning,  the 
garment  of  praise  for  the  spirit  of  heaviness." 


III. 
^be  ^bir^  Beatitude, 

"  Blessed    are    the  meek,  for    they  shall  inherit   the  earth." — 
Matt.  v.  5. 

HE  originality  of  Christ's  moral  teaching 
lies  not  so  much  in  the  novelty  of  His 
precepts  as  in  the  new  relation  in  which 
He  sets  them,  the  deepening  which  He 
gives  them,  the  motives  on  which  He 
bases  them,  and  the  power  which  He  communicates 
to  keep  them.  Others  before  Him  had  pronounced  a 
benediction  on  the  meek,  but  our  Lord  means  far 
more  than  they  did,  and,  both  in  His  description  of 
the  character  and  in  the  promise  which  He  attaches, 
vmdicates  the  uniqueness  of  His  notion  of  a  perfect 
man. 

The  world's  ideal  is,  on  the  whole,  very  different 
from  His.  It  inclines  to  the  more  conspicuous  and 
.Mo-caUed  heroic  virtues;  it  prefers  a  great,  flaring, 
yellow  sunflower  to  the  violet  hiding  among  the  grass, 
and  making  its  presence  known  only  by  fragrance. 
"  Blessed  are  the  strong,  who  can  hold  their  own," 
says  the  world.  "  Blessed  are  the  meek,"  says  Christ. 
The   Psalmist  had   said   it   before   Him,  and  had 


22 


THE  TIIIED  BEATITUDE. 


attaclied.  verbaUy  the  same  promise  to  the  word.  But 
our  Lord  means  more  than  David  did  when  he  said 
"  The  meek  shall  inherit  the  earth."  I  ask  you  tcl 
thmk  with  me  this  morning-,  first,  what  this  Christiad 
meekness  is;  then,  whence  it  issues;  and  then/ 
whither  it  leads.  ) 

I. — What  Christian  meekness  is. 
NoAv,  the  ordinary  use  of  the  word  is  to  describe  an 
attitude,  or  more  properly  a  disposition,  in  regard  to 
men,  especially  in  regard  to  those  who  depreciate   or 
wrong,  or  harm  us.     But  the  Christian  conception  of 
meekness,  whilst  it  includes  that,  goes  far   deeper; 
and,  primarily,  has  reference  to  our  attitude,  or  rather 
our  disposition,  towards  God,     And  in  that   aspect. 
What  IS  It  ?    Meek  endurance  and  meek  obedience  ■ 
the  accepting  of  His  dealings,  of  whatever  complexion 
they  are,  and  however  they  may  tear  or  desolate  our 
hearts,  without  murmuring,  without  sulking,  without 
rebellion  or  resistance,  is  the  deepest  conception  of 
the     meekness    which    Christ    pronounces    blessed 
When  sorrovv  comes  upon  us,  unless  we  have  some- 
thing more  than  natural  strength  bestowed  upon  ns 
we  are  all  but  certain,  like  fractious  children  when 
beaten  to_  kick  and  plunge  and  scream,  or  to  take 
the  infliction  of  the  sorrow  as  being  an  affront  and  an 
injury.     If  we  have  any  claim  to  this  benediction  wo 
must   earn   it    by  accepting   our    sorrows;   and  'the 
accepted  sorrow  becomes  a  solemn  joy,  or  almost  akin 
liere  o.     The  ox  that  kicks  against  the  goads  only 
'  oes  two  things  thereby;  it  does  not  get  away  from 
them,  but  It  wounds  its  own  hocks,  and  it  drives  the 
snarp  points   deeper  into  the  ragged  wounds.     Let 


THE  THIRD  BEATITUDE.  23 

Him  Strike,  dear  friend,  for  when  He  strikes  He  cuts 
clean;  and  there  is  no  poison  on  the  edge  of  His 
knife.  Meekness  towards  God  is,  first,  patient 
endurance  of  His  Will. 

And,  in  reference  to  Him,  it  is,  next,  unquestioning 
docility  and  obedience.  Its  seat  is  in  the  will.  When 
the  will  is  bowed,  a  man  is  far  on  his  road  to  perfec- 
tion ;  and  the  meaning  of  all  that  God  does  with  us — 
joys  and  sorrows,  light  and  darkness,  when  His  hand 
gives,  and  when  His  hand  withdraws,  as  when  His 
authoritative  voice  commands,  and  the  sweet  impulses 
of  His  love  graciously  constrain — is  that  our  wills 
may  be  made  plastic  and  flexible,  like  a  bit  of 
wrought  leather,  to  every  touch  of  His  hand.  True 
meekness  goes  far  deeper  down  than  any  attitude 
towards  men.  It  lays  hold  on  the  sovereign  will  of 
God  as  our  supreme  good,  and  delights  in  absolutely 
Riid  perfectly  conforming  itself  thereto. 

And  then  there  follows,  as  a  matter  of  course,  that 
which  is  usually  the  whole  significance  of  the  word, 
the  meekness  which  is  displayed  in  our  attitude 
towards  men.  The  truly  meek  heart  remains  unpro- 
Toked  amidst  all  provocation.  Most  men  are  like 
dogs  that  answer  bark  for  bark,  and  only  make  night 
hideous  and  themselves  hoarse  thereby.  But  it  is  our 
business  to  meet  evil  with  good ;  and  the  more  we 
are  depreciated,  the  more  we  are  harmed,  the  more 
we  are  circled  about  by  malice  and  by  scorn,  the 
more  patiently  and  persistently  to  love  on. 

Ah,  brethren,  it  is  easy  to  say,  and  hard  to  do 
thus ;  but  it  is  a  plain  Christian  duty.  Old-fashioned 
people  believe  that  the  sun  puts  out  the  fire.     I  know 


24  THE  THIRD  BEATITUDE. 

not  how  that  may  be,  but  sure  I  am  that  the  one 
thing  that  puts  out  the  fire  of  antagonism  and  wrath 
and  maHce  in  those  who  disHke  or  would  harm  us  is 
that  we  should  persistently  shine  upon,  and  perchance 
overcome,  evil  with  good.  Provoked  we  remain,  if  we 
are  truly  meek,  masters  of  ourselves,  and  calm  and 
equable,  and  so  are  blessed  in  ourselves.  Meekness 
makes  no  claims  upon  others.  Plenty  of  people  are 
sore  all  over  with  the  irritation  caused  by  not  getting 
what  they  consider  due  respect.  They  howl  and 
whine  because  they  are  not  appreciated.  Do  not 
expect  much  of  men.  Make  no  demands,  if  for  no 
better  reason  than  because  the  more  you  demand  the 
less  you  will  get ;  and  the  less  you  show  you  think 
to  be  your  due,  the  more  likely  you  are  to  receive 
what  you  desire. 

But  that  is  a  poor,  shallow  ground.  The  true 
exhortation  is,  "Be  ye  imitators  of  God,  as  de»r 
children." 

Ah,  what  a  different  world  we  should  live  in  if  the 
people  that  say,  "  Oh,  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  is 
my  religion,"  really  made  it  their  religion !  How 
much  friction  would  be  taken  out  of  all  our  lives  ; 
how  all  society  would  be  revolutionised,  and  earth 
would  become  a  Paradise  !  __ 

But  there  is  another  thing  to  be  taken  into  accoun*: 
in  the  description  of  meekness.  That  grace,  as  iho 
example  of  our  Lord  shows,  harmonises  with  un- 
daunted bravery  and  strenuous  resistance  to  the  evil 
in  the  world.  On  our  own  personal  account,  there 
are  to  be  no  bounds  to  our  patient  acceptance  of 
personal  wrong ;    on  the  world's   account,  there  are 


THE  THIRD  BEATITUDE.  25 


to  be  no  bounds  to  our  militant  attitude  against 
public  evils.  Only  let  us  remember,  "  the  wrath  of 
men  worketh  not  the  righteousness  of  God."  If  con- 
tending theologians,  and  angry  philanthropists,  and 
social  reformers,  that  are  ready  to  fly  at  each  other's 
throats  for  the  sacred  cause  of  humanity,  would  only 
remember  that  there  is  no  good  to  be  done  except  in 
this  spirit,  there  would  be  more  likelihood  of  the 
errors  and  miseries  of  the  world  being  redressed 
than,  alas !  there  is  to-day.  Gentleness  is  the 
strongest  force  in  the  world,  and  the  soldiers  of 
Christ  are  to  be  priests,  and  to  light  the  battles  of 
the  Kingdom,  robed,  not  in  jingling,  shining  armour 
or  with  sharp  swords,  nor  with  tierce  and  eager 
bitterness  of  controversy,  but  in  the  meekness  which 
overcomes.  You  may  take  all  the  steam-hammers 
that  ever  were  forged  and  batter  at  an  iceberg,  and, 
except  for  the  comparatively  little  heat  that  is  deve- 
loped by  the  blows  and  melts  some  small  portion,  it 
will  be  ice  still,  though  pulverised  instead  of  whole. 
But  let  it  get  into  the  silent  drift  of  the  Arctic 
current,  and  let  it  move  quietly  down  to  the  south- 
w  ird,  then  the  sunbeams  smite  its  coldness  to  death, 
and  it  is  dissipated  in  the  warm  ocean.  Meekness  is 
conqueror.  "  Be  not  overcome  of  evil,  but  overcome 
evil  with  good." 

II. — Notice  whence  this  Christian  meekness  flows. 

You  observe  the  place  which  this  Beatitude  holds  in 
the  linked  series  of  these  precious  sayings.  It  follows 
upon  "  poverty  of  spirit  "  and  "  mourning."  And  it 
follows,  too,  upon  the  "  comfort"  which  the  mourner 
is  promised  that  he  will   receive.      It   suggests   the 


26  THE  THIRD  BEATITUDE. 

conduct  and  disposition  towards  God  and  man  which 
follows  from  the  inward  experience  described  in  the 
two  former  Beatitudes,  which  had  relation  only  to 
ourselves. 

The  only  thing  that  can  be  relied  upon  as  an  ade- 
quate cold  water  douche  to  the  sparks  of  anger,  resent- 
ment, retaliation,  and  rebellion  is  that  we  shall  have 
passed  through  the  previous  experiences,  have  learned 
a  just  and  lowly  estimate  of  ourselves,  have  learned  to 
come  to  God  with  penitence  in  our  hearts,  and  have 
been  raised  by  His  gracious  hand  from  the  dust  where 
we  lay  at  His  feet,  and  been  welcomed  to  His  embrace. 
He  who  thus  has  learned  himself,  and  has  felt  re- 
pentance, and  has  received  the  comfort  of  forgiveness 
and  cleansing,  he,  and  he  only,  is  the  man  who,  under 
all  provocation  and  in  any  and  every  circumstance, 
can  be  absolutely  trusted  to  live  in  the  spirit  of 
meekness. 

If  I  have  found  out  anything  of  my  own  sin,  if  my 
eyes  have  been  filled  with  tears  and  my  heart  with 
conscious  unworthiness  before  Him,  oh,  then,  surely  1 
shall  not  kick  or  murmur  against  discipline  of  which 
the  main  purpose  is  to  rid  me  of  the  evil  which  is 
slaying  me  ;  but  rather  I  shall  recognise  in  the  sorrows 
that  do  fall  upon  me,  in  the  losses  and  disappointments 
and  empty  places  in  my  life  and  heart,  one  way  cf 
God's  fulfilling  His  great  promise,  "  From  all  your 
filthiness,  and  from  all  your  idols,  I  will  cleanse  you." 
The  man  who  has  thus  learned  the  purpose,  the 
highest  purpose,  of  sorrow,  is  not  likely  to  remonstrate 
with  God  for  giving  Him  too  much  of  the  cleansing 
medium. 


THE  THIRD  BEATITUDE.  27 

In  like  manner,  if  we  have,  in  any  real  way,  re- 
ceived for  our  own  the  comfort  which  God  gives  to 
the  penitent  heart,  we  shall  be  easily  pleased  with 
anything  that  He  sends.  And  if  we  have  measured 
ourselves,  not  against  ourselves,  but  against  His  law, 
and  have  found  out  how  much  we  owe  unto  our  Lord, 
it  is  not  likely  that  we  shall  take  our  brother  by  the 
throat  and  say,  "  Pay  me  that  thou  owest."  If  any 
treat  me  badly,  try  to  rob  me,  harm  me,  sneer  at  me, 
or  turn  the  cold  shoulder  to  me,  who  am  I  that  I 
should  resent  that  ?  Oh,  brethren,  Ave  need,  for  our 
right  relation  to  our  fellows,  a  deeper  conviction  of 
our  sinfulness  before  Him.  Many  of  us  are  blessed 
with  natural  tendencies  to  meekness,  but  these  are  in- 
sufficient. Many  of  us  seek  to  cultivate  this 
grace  from  true  and  right,  though  not  the  deepest, 
motives.  Let  us  reinforce  them  by  that  which 
conr'^s  from  the  consideration  of  the  place  which 
this  Beatitude  holds  in  the  wreathed  chain,  and 
remember  "  poverty  of  spirit  "  and  "  mourning  "  must 
precede  it. 

Now,  there  is  a  sharp  test  for  us  Christian  people. 
If  I  have  learned  myself,  and  have  penitently  re- 
ceived God's  pardon,  I  shall  be  meek  with  God  and 
with  man.  If  I  am  not  meek  with  God  and  with 
man,  have  I  received  God's  pardon  ?  One  great 
reason  why  so  many  of  you  Christian  people  have  so 
little  consciousness  of  God's  forgiving  mercy,  as  a  con- 
stant joy  in  your  lives,  is  because  you  have  so  little 
obeyed  the  commandment,  "  Be  ye  imitators  of  God, 
and  walk  in  love,  as  God  hath  forgiven  and  loved 
us." 


28  THE  THIRD  BEATITUDE. 

III. — And  now,  lastl}',  note  whither  this  meek- 
ness leads, 

"  They  shall  inherit  the  earth."  The  words  are 
quoted,  as  I  have  already  said,  from  one  of  the  psalms, 
and  in  the  Psalmist's  mouth  they  had,  I  suppose, 
especial  reference  to  Israel's  peaceful  possession  of  the 
promised  land,  which  in  that  Old  Dispensation  was 
made  contingent  on  the  people's  faithfulness.  In 
that  aspect,  and  looking  at  this  Sermon  on  the  Mount 
as  the  programme  of  the  King  Himself,  what  a  bucket 
of  cold  water  such  words  as  these  must  have  poured 
on  the  hot  Messianic  expectations  of  the  carnal  Jew  ! 
Here  was  a  King  that  did  not  expect  to  win  back  the 
land  by  armed  rebellion  against  the  Roman  legions, 
but  said,  "  Be  meek,  and  you  will  truly  possess  it, 
whether  there  is  a  Pilate  in  the  procurator's  house  in 
CfEsarea  or  not." 

But  for  us  the  -^v^ords  have  a  double  reference,  fvt  all 
the  promises  annexed  to  these  Beatitudes  have. 
They  apply  to  the  present ;  they  apply  to  the  future. 
And  that  is  no  mere  looseness  of  interpretation, 
eking  out  an  insufficent  verification  of  them  here 
upon  earth  by  some  dim  hopes  of  a  future  fulfilme  it, 
but  it  flows  from  the  plain  fact  that  the  gifts  which  a 
man  receives  on  condition  of  his  being  a  true  disciple 
are  one  and  the  same  in  essence,  and  only  differ  in 
degree,  here  and  hereafter.  Circumstances  alter,  no 
doubt,  and  there  will  be  much  in  that  heavenly  state 
unhke  that  which  we  experience  here.  But  the 
heart  of  the  Christian  beatitude  is  the  same  in 
this  world  and  in  the  furthest  reach  of  the 
shining  but  dim  eternity  beyond.     And  so  we  take 


THE  THIRD  BEATITUDE.  29 


the  double  reference  of  these  words  to  be  inherent 
in  the  liicts  of  the  case,  and  not  to  be  a  makeshift  of 
mterpretation. 

There  is  a  present  inheritance  of  the  earth  which 
goes,  as  certainly  as  the  shadow  with  the  sunshine, 
with  the  meekness  spoken  of  in  our  text.  Not  literal, 
of  course,  for  it  is  not  true  that  this  Christian  grace 
has  in  it  any  tendency  whatever  to  draw  to  itself 
material  good  of  any  sort.  The  world  in  outward 
possession  belongs  to  the  strong  men,  to  the  men 
of  faculty,  of  force  and  push  and  ambition.  If 
you  want  to  get  through  a  crowd,  make  your 
elbows  as  sharp,  and  your  feet  upon  the  toes  of 
your  neighbours  as  heavy  as  you  can,  and  a  road 
will  be  made  for  you ;  but,  in  the  majority  of 
cases,  the  meek  man  on  the  edge  of  the  crowd 
will  stop  there. 

Nor  is  it  true  that  there  would  be  any  real  blessed- 
ness, though  the  earth  were  ours  in  that  outward 
sense.  For  you  cannot  measure  happiness  by  the 
acre,  nor  does  an  outward  condition  of  the  most  full- 
fed  abundance,  and  of  wealth  beyond  the  dreams  of 
avarice,  and  above  the  gnawings  of  care,  ensure  to 
any  man  even  the  shabby  blessedness  that  the  world 
knows,  to  say  nothing  of  the  solid  beatitude  that 
Christ  proclaims. 

So  we  must  go  deeper  than  that  for  the  meaning  of 
*'  inherit."  Whatever  are  our  circumstances,  it  is  true 
that  this  calm,  equable,  submissive  acceptance  of  the 
Divine  will  and  obedience  to  it,  and  this  loving  and 
unresentful  attitude  towards  men,  brings  with  it 
necessarily  a  peacefulness  of  heart  which   gets   the 


30  THE  THIRD  BEATITUDE. 

highest  good  out  of  the  modicum  of  material  supplies 
which  God's  providence  may  send  us.  It  used  to  be 
the  old  idea  that  gods  and  beatified  spirits  were 
nourished,  not  by  the  gross,  material  flesh  of  the 
sacrifices,  but  by  a  certain  subtle  aroma  and  essence 
that  went  up  in  the  incense  smoke.  So  Christ's  meek 
men  do  live  and  thrive,  and  are  blessed  in  a  true 
possession  of  earthly  good,  even  though  their  outward 
portion  of  it  may  be  very  small.  "  Better  is  a  little 
that  a  righteous  man  hath  than  the  riches  of  many 
wicked." 

And,  beyond  that,  there  is  a  further  fulfilment  of 
this  promise,  upon  which  I  venture  to  say  but  very 
little.  It  seems  to  me  very  probable  that  our  Lord's 
words  here  fall  in  with  what  appears  to  be  a  general 
stream  of  representation  throughout  Scripture,  to  the 
effect  that  the  perfected  form  of  the  Kingdom  of  God 
shall  be  realised  in  this  renovated  earth,  when  it 
becomes  the  "  new  earth  in  which  dwelleth  righteous- 
ness," Whether  that  be  so  or  no,  at  all  events  we 
may  fairly  gather  from  the  words  the  thought  that  in 
the  ultimate  state  of  assimilation  and  fellowship  with 
God  and  Christ  to  which  Christian  people  have  a 
right  to  look  forward,  there  shall  be  an  external 
universe  on  which  they  may  exercise  their  activities, 
and  from  which  they  may  draw  as  yet  unimagined 
delights. 

But,  at  all  events,  dear  brethren,  we  may  be  sure  of 
this  blessed  thought,  that  they  Avho  meekly  live, 
knowing  and  mourning  their  sin,  and  who  meekly 
take  to  their  hearts  as  their  only  hope  the  comfort 
of  Christ's  pardon   and   cleansing,  who    are   meekly 


THE  THIRD  BEATITUDE,  31 


recipient,  meekly  enduring,  meekly  obedient,  shall 
have  in  their  hearts,  even  here,  a  quiet  fountain  of 
peace  which  shall  make  the  wilderness  rejoice  and 
blossom  as  the  rose,  and  hereafter  shall  be  crowned 
with  the  lordship  of  all.  Meekness  overcomes,  "  and 
he  that  overcometh  shall  inherit  all  thinp^s." 


IV. 


Zbc  ffourtb  Bcatitube* 

Blessed  are  they  which  do  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness, 
for  they  shall  be  tilled." — Matt.  v.  6. 


WO  preliminary  remarks  Avill  give 
us  the  point  of  view  from  which"  I 
desire  to  consider  these  words  now. 
First,  we  have  seen,  in  previous  ser- 
mons, that  these  paradoxes  of  the 
which    we    call    the    Beatitudes    are 


Christian    life 
a  linked   chain 


or,    rather,   an    outgrowth    from    a 


common  root.  Each  presupposes  all  the  preceding. 
Now,  of  course,  it  is  a  mistake  to  expect  uniformity 
in  the  process  of  building  up  character,  and  stages 
which  are  separable  and  successive  in  thought  may 
be  simultaneous  and  coalesce  in  fact.  But  none  the 
less  is  our  Lord  here  outlining  successive  stages  in  the 
growth  of  a  true  Christian  life.  I  shall  have  more  to 
say  about  the  place  in  the  series  which  this  Beatitude 
holds,  but  for  the  present  I  simply  ask  you  to  remera- 
ber  that  it  has  a  background  and  set  of  previoas 
experiences,  out  of  which  it  springs,  and  that  we  shall 
not  understand  the  depth  of  Christ's  meaning  if  w(3 
isolate  it  from  these  and  regard  it  as  standing  alone. 


THE  FOURTH  BEATITUDE.  33 

Then,  another  consideration  is  the  remarkable 
divergence  in  this  Beatitude  from  the  others.  The 
"  meek,"  the  "  merciful,"  the  "  pure  in  heart,"  the 
"  peacemakers,"  have  all  attained  to  certain  character- 
istics. But  this  is  not  a  benediction  pronounced  upon 
those  who  have  attained  to  righteousness,  but  upon 
those  who  long  after  it.  Desire,  which  has  reached 
such  a  pitch  as  to  be  comparable  to  the  physical 
craving  of  a  hungry  man  for  food,  or  to  the  imperious 
thirst  of  parched  throats,  seems  a  strange  kind  of 
blessedness ;  but  it  is  better  to  long  for  higher — though 
it  be  unattained — good  than  to  be  content  with  a 
lower  which  is  possessed.  Better  to  climb,  though 
the  summit  be  far  and  the  path  be  steep,  than  to 
browse  amongst  the  herds  in  the  fat  valleys.  Aspira- 
tion is  blessedness  when  it  is  worthily  directed.  Let 
us,  then,  look  at  these  two  points  of  this  Beatitude ; 
this  Divine  hunger  of  the  soul,  and  its  satisfaction 
which  is  sure. 

I. — Note,  then,  the  hunger  which  is  blessed. 

Now  "  righteousness "  has  come  to  be  a  kind  of 
theological  term  which  people  use  without  attaching 
any  very  distinct  meaning  to  it.  And  it  would  be 
little  improvement  for  "  righteousness  "  to  substitute 
the  abstraction  of — moral  conformity  to  the  will  of  God. 
Suppose  we  try  to  read  the  words  of  my  text  into 
modern  English,  and  instead  of  saying,  "  Blessed  are 
those  that  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness,"  say, 
Blessed  are  the  men  and  women  that  long  more  than 
anythiiig  else  to  be  good.  Does  not  that  sound  a 
little  more  near  our  daily  lives  than  the  well-worn 
and  threadbare  word  of  my  text  ?     Righteousness  is 

3 


3  4  THE  FO  URTH  BE  A  TITUDE. 

neither  more  nor  less  than  in  spirit  a  will  submitted 
to  God,  and  in  conduct  the  practice  of  whatsoever 
things  are  noble  and  lovely  and  of  good  report. 

The  production  of  such  a  character,  the  aiming 
after  the  perfection  of  spirit  and  of  conduct,  is  the 
hidfhest  aim  that  a  man  can  set  before  him.  There 
are  plenty  of  other  hungers  of  the  soul  that  are 
legitimate.  There  are  many  of  them  that  are  bracing 
and  ennobling  and  elevating.  It  is  impossible  not  to 
hunger  for  the  supply  of  physical  necessities.  It  is 
good  to  long  for  love,  for  wisdom.  It  is  better  to  long 
most  to  be  good  men  and  women.  For  what  are  we 
here  for?  To  enjoy?  To  work?  To  know?  Yes!  But 
it  is  not  conduct,  and  it  is  still  less  thought,  and  it  is 
least  of  all  enjoyment,  in  any  of  its  forms,  Avhich  is 
the  purpose  of  life,  and  ought  to  be  our  aim  here  upon 
earth.  We  are  here  to  learn  to  he  ;  and  the  cultiva- 
tion and  production  of  characters  that  lie  parallel 
with  the  will  of  God  is  the  omega  of  all  our  life  in 
the  flesh.  All  these  other  things,  even  the  highest 
of  them,  the  yearning  desire 

"To  follow  knowledge,  like  a  sinking'  star, 
Beyond  the  furthest  bounds  of  human  thought," 

ought  to  be  subordinate  to  this  further  purpose  of 
beinsf  crood  men  and  women.  All  these  are  scaffold- 
ing.  The  building  is  a  character  conformed  to  God's 
will  and  assimilated  to  Christ's  likeness. 

That  commends  itself  as  a  statement  of  man's  chief 
end  to  all  reasonable  and  thoughtful  men  in  their 
deepest  and  truest  moments.  And  so,  whilst  we  must 
let  our  desires  go  out  on  the  lower  levels,  and  seek  co 


THE  FOURTH  BEATITUDE.  35 

draw  to  ourselves  the  various  gifts  tliat  are  necessary 
for  the  various  phases  and  sides  of  our  being,  here  is 
one  that  a  man's  own  conscience  tells  him  should 
stand  clearly  supreme  and  dominant,  the  hunger  and 
thirst  after  righteousness. 

Still  further,  notice  how  this  desire,  on  which  our 
Lord  pronounces  His  benediction,  comes  in  a  series. 
I  know  that  all  men  have  latent,  and  sometimes  par- 
tially and  fragmentarily  operative  in  their  lives  and 
manifest  on  the  surface,  sporadic  desires  after  good- 
ness. The  existence  of  these  draws  the  line  between 
man  and  devil.  And  there  is  no  soul  on  earth  which 
has  not  sometimes  felt  the  longing  to  be  better  than 
it  is,  to  its  own  consciousness,  to-day.  But  the  yearn- 
ing which  our  Lord  blesses  comes  after,  and  is  the 
result  of,  the  previous  characteristics  which  He  has 
described.  There  must  be  the  poverty  of  spirit  which 
recognises  our  own  insufficiency  and  unworthiness ; 
or,  to  put  it  into  simpler  words,  we  must  know  our- 
selves to  be  sinners.  There  must  be  the  mourning 
which  follows  upon  that  revelation  of  ourselves ;  the 
penitence  which  does  not  wash  away  sin,  but  which 
makes  us  capable  of  receiving  forgiveness.  There 
must  be  the  comfort  which  comes  from  pardon  re- 
ceived ;  and  there  must  be  the  yielding  of  ourselves 
to  the  Supreme  Will,  which  is  the  true  root  of  all 
meekness,  in  the  face  of  antagonism  from  creatures  and 
of  opposition  from  circumstances.  When  thus  a  man's 
self-conceit  is  beaten  out  of  him,  and  he  knows  how 
far  he  is  from  the  possession  of  any  real,  deep 
righteousness  of  his  own ;  and  when,  further,  his  heart 
has  fdowed  with  the  consciousness  of  forf^iveness  ;  and 


36  THE  FOVRTH  BEATITUDE. 


when,  further,  liis  will  has  bowed  itself  before  the 
Father  in  heaven,  then  there  will  spring  in  his  heart 
a  hungering  and  thirsting,  deeper  far,  and  far  more 
certain  of  fruition,  than  ever  can  be  realised  in 
another  heart,  a  stranger  to  such  experiences. 
Brethren,  if  we  are  ever  to  possess  the  righteousness 
which  is  itself  blessed,  it  must  be  because  we  have  the 
hunger  and  the  thirst  which  are  sharpened  and 
accentuated  by  profound  discovery  of  our  own  evil, 
lowly  penitence  before  God,  and  glad  assurance  of  free 
and  full  forgiveness. 

Then  note,  still  further,  how  that  which  is  pro- 
nounced blessed  is  not  the  realisation  of  a  desire,  but 
the  desire  itself.  And  that  is  so,  not  only  because,  as 
I  said,  all  noble  aspiration  is  good,  fulfilled  or  unful- 
filled, and  aim  is  of  more  importance  than  achievement, 
and  what  a  man  strongly  wishes  is  often  the  revelation 
of  his  deepest  self,  and  the  prophecy  of  what  he  will 
be ;  but  Christ  puts  the  desire  for  a  quality  here  as 
in  line  with  the  possession  of  a  number  of  other 
qualities  attained,  because  He  would  hint  to  us  that 
such  a  righteousness  as  shall  satisfy  the  immortal 
hunger  and  thirst  of  our  souls  is  one  to  be  received  in 
answer  to  longing,  and  not  to  be  manufactured  by 
our  own  efforts. 

It  is  a  gift ;  and  the  condition  of  receiving  the  gift 
is  to  wish  it  honestly,  earnestly,  deeply,  continually. 
The  Psalmist  had  a  glimpse  of  the  same  truth  when  he 
crowned  his  description  of  the  man  who  was  fit  to 
ascend  the  hill  of  the  Lord,  and  to  stand  in  His  holy 
place,  with  "he  shall  receive  the  blessing  from  the 
Lord,  and  rigliteousness  from  the  God  of  his  salvation." 


THE  FO  UR  TH  BE  A  TITUDE.  37 

Of  course,  in  saying  that  the  first  step  towards  the 
possession  of  this  Divinely  bestowed  and  Divinely 
blessed  rifditeousness  is  not  effort  bnt  lonsfino-  I  do 
not  foro-et  that  the  retention  of  it,  and  the  working  of 
it  into  our  characters,  and  out  in  our  conduct,  is  to  be 
the  result  of  our  own  diligence  continually.  But  it  is 
effort  based  on  faith ;  and  it  is  mainly,  as  I  believe,  the 
effort  to  keep  open  the  line  of  communication  between 
us  and  God,  the  great  Giver,  which  ensures  our  posses- 
sion of  this  gift  of  God.  Dear  friends,  the  righteousness 
that  avails  for  us  is  not  our  making,  but  God's  giving, 
through  Jesus  Christ. 

So,  before  I  pass  to  the  other  thoughts  of  my  text> 
may  I  pause  here  for  a  moment  ?  "  Blessed  are  they 
that  hunger  and  thirst."  Think  of  the  picture  that 
that  suggests — the  ravenous  desire  of  a  starving  man, 
the  almost  fierce  longing  of  a  parched  throat.  Is  that 
a  picture  of  the  intensity,  of  the  depth,  of  our  desires 
to  be  good  ?  Do  we  professing  Christian  men  and 
women  \on^  to  be  delivered  from  our  evils  and  to  be 
clothed  in  righteousness,  with  an  honesty  and  an 
earnestness  and  a  continuity  of  longing  which  would 
make  such  words  as  these  of  my  text  anything  else,  if 
applied  to  us,  than  the  bitterest  irony  ?  Oh,  one  looks 
out  over  the  Christian  Church,  and  one  looks — which 
is  more  to  the  purpose — into  one's  own  heart,  and 
contrasts  the  tepid,  the  lazy,  the  occasional,  and,  I  am 
afraid,  the  only  half-sincere  wishes  to  be  better,  with 
the  unmistakable  earnestness  and  reality  of  our 
longings  to  bo  rich,  or  wise,  or  prosperous,  or  famous, 
or  happy  in  our  domestic  relationships,  and  the  like. 
Alas  !  alas  !  that  the  whole  current  of  the  great  river 


38  THE  FOURTH  BEATITUDE. 

of  SO  many  professing  Christians'  desires  runs  towards 
earth  and  creatures,  and  the  tiniest  Httle  trickle  is 
taken  off,  Hke  a  lade  for  a  mill,  from  the  great  stream 
and  directed  towards  higher  things.  It  is  hunger  and 
thirst  after  righteousness  that  is  blessed.  You  and  I 
can  tell  whether  our  desires  deserve  such  a  name  as 
that. 

II, — And  now,  secondly,  the  satisfying  of  this  Divine 
hunger  of  the  soul. 

"  They  shall  be  filled,"  says  our  Lord,  Now  all  these 
promises  appended  to  the  Beatitudes  have  a  double 
reference — to  the  certainty  of  the  present,  and  to  the 
perfection  of  the  future.  That  there  is  such  a  double 
reference  may  be  made  very  obvious  if  we  notice  that 
the  first  of  the  promises,  which  includes  them  all,  and 
of  which  the  others  are  but  aspects  and  phases,  is  cast 
into  the  present  tense,  whilst  the  remainder  stand  in 
the  future,  "  Theirs  is  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven," 
not  shall  he — "  they  shall  be  comforted,"  they  "  shall 
inherit  the  earth,"  and  so  on.  So,  then,  we  are 
warranted,  indeed  we  are  obliged,  to  regard  the  great 
promise  here  as  having  two  epochs  of  fulfilment — 
one  partially  here  upon  earth,  one  complete  hereafter. 
And  these  two  differ,  not  in  kind,  but  in  degree. 

So  then,  with  regard  to  the  present,  they  "  shall  be 
filled,"  Should  not  that  be  a  gospel  to  the  seeking 
spirit  of  man,  that  knows  so  well  what  it  is  to  be 
crucified  with  the  pangs  of  a  vain  desire,  and  to  set 
his  heart  upon  that  which  never  comes  into  his 
hands  ?  There  is  one  region  in  which  nothing  is  so 
impossible  as  that  any  desire  should  be  in  vain,  or 
any  wish  should  be  unfulfilled,  and  it  is  the  region 


THE  FOURTH  BEATITUDE. 


into  which  Christ  points  us  in  these  great  words  of 
my  text.  Turn  away  from  earth,  where  fulfilled 
desires  and  unfulfilled  are  equally  disappointed  ones. 
Turn  away  from  the  questionable  satisfactions  which 
come  to  those  whose  hearts  go  out  in  longing  for 
love,  wisdom,  wealth,  transitory  felicity ;  and  be  sure 
of  this,  that  the  one  lonijinGc  which  never  will  be 
disappointed,  nor,  when  answered,  will  prove  to  have 
given  us  but  ashes  instead  of  bread,  is  the  longing  to 
be  like  God,  and  like  Christ,  and  that  that  alone  is  sure 
to  be  fulfilled,  and,  being  fulfilled,  is  sure  to  be  blessed. 
It  is  not  true  that  all  desires  after  righteousness 
are  fulfilled.  Those  which  spring  up,  as  I  have  said, 
in  men's  hearts  sporadically,  and  apart  from  the  back- 
ground of  the  experiences  of  my  text,  are  not  always, 
not  often,  even  partially  accomplished.  There  are  in 
every  land,  no  doubt,  souls  that  thirst  after  righteous- 
ness, as  they  are  able  to  discern  it.  And  we  are  sure 
of  this,  that  no  such  effort  and  longing  passes 
unnoticed  by  Him  "  who  hears  the  young  ravens 
when  they  cry,"  and  is  not  deaf  to  men  who  long  to 
be  good.  But  the  experience  of  the  bulk  of  us,  apart 
from  Jesus  Christ,  is  "  the  things  that  I  would  not, 
these  1  do,  and  the  things  that  I  would,  these  I  do 
not."  The  hunger  and  thirst,  imperfect  as  they  are, 
which  are  felt  at  intervals  by  all  men,  do  not  avail  to 
break  the  awful  continuity  of  their  conduct  as  evil  in 
the  sight  of  God  and  of  their  own  consciences.  And 
so,  just  because  every  man  knows  something  of  the 
sting  of  this  desire  after  righteousness,  which  yet 
remains  for  the  most  part  unfulfilled,  the  world  is  full 
of  sadness.     "  Oh,  wretched  man  that  I  am,  who  shall 


4  0  THE  FO  UR  TH  BE  A  TIT  UDE. 

deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ? "  comes  to 
be  the  expression  of  the  noblest  amongst  us.  Then 
this  great  Gospel  comes  to  us,  and  the  Nazarene 
stands  up  before  a  world  dimly  conscious  of  its  need, 
and  sometimes  miserable  because  it  is  bad,  and  says : 
"  Ho  !  Everj'one  that  thirsteth  come  ye  to  the  waters. 
.     .     .     Come  to  Me,  and  drink." 

What  right  had  He  to  stand  thus  and  say,  "  Every 
desire  after  goodness  shall  be  fulfilled  in  Me."  He  had 
the  right,  because  He  Himself  had  the  jDower  and  the 
purpose  to  fulfil  it.  For  this  is  the  very  heart  of  His 
Gospel :  that  He  will  give  to  everyone  that  asks  that 
spirit  of  life  which  was  His  own,  that "  shall  make  us 
free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death," 

Thus,  dear  friends,  we  have  to  be  content  to  take 
the  place  of  recipients,  and  to  accept,  not  to  work  out 
for  ourselves,  this  righteousness  for  which,  more  or  less 
feebly,  and  all  of  us  too  feebl}^,  we  do  sometimes  long. 
Oh,  believe  me,  away  from  Him  you  will  never  receive 
into  your  characters  the  goodness  that  will  satisfy 
yourselves  !  Siberian  prisoners  sometimes  break  their 
chains  and  escape  for  some  distance.  They  are  gene- 
rally taken  back  and  shut  up  in  their  captivity.  If  we 
are  able,  as  we  are  in  some  measure,  to  break  the 
bondage  of  evil  in  ourselves,  we  are  not  able  to  com- 
plete our  emancipation  by  any  skill,  effort,  or  act  of 
ours.  \Ye  must  be  content  to  receive  the  blessing. 
There  is  no  loom  of  earth  which  can  weave,  and  no 
needle  that  man's  hands  can  use  which  can  stitch 
together,  the  pure  garment  that  befits  a  soul.  We  must 
be  content  to  take  the  robe  of  righteousness  which 
Jesus  Christ  has  wrought,  and  to  strip  off,  by  His  help, 


TEE  FOURTH  BEATITUDE.  41 

the  ancient  self,  splashed  with  the  filth  of  the  world, 
and  spotted  by  the  flesh :  and  to  "  put  on  the  new 
man,"  which  Christ,  and  Christ  alone,  bestows. 

For  the  future  fulfilment  of  this  promise — desire 
will  live  in  heaven,  desire  Avill  dilate  the  spirit,  the 
dilated  spirit  will  be  capable  of  fuller  gifts  of  God- 
likeness,  and  increased  capacity  will  ensure  increased 
reception.  Thus,  through  eternity,  in  blessed  alterna- 
tion, we  shall  experience  the  desire  that  brings  new 
gifts  and  the  satisfying  that  produces  new  desires. 

Dear  friends,  all  that  I  have  been  trying  to  say  in 
this  sermon  is  gathered  up  into  the  one  word,  "  that  I 
may  be  found  in  Him,  not  having  my  own  righteous- 
ness, but  that  which  is  through  the  faith  of  Christ, 
the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  faith." 


^be  J^iftb  Bcatitu^c. 

"Blessed  are  the  merciful  :  for  they  shall  obtain  mercy." — 
Matt.  v.  7. 

HE  Divine  simplicity  of  the  Beatitudes 
covers  a  Divine  depth,  both  in  regard 
to  the  single  precepts  and  to  the 
sequence  of  the  whole.  I  have  already 
pointed  out  that  the  first  of  the  series 
is  to  be  regarded  as  the  root  and  germ  of  all  the  sub- 
sequent ones.  If  for  a  moment  we  set  it  aside  and 
consider  only  the  fruits  which  are  successively  de- 
veloped from  it,  we  shall  see  that  the  remaining 
members  of  the  sequence  are  arranged  in  pairs,  of 
Avhich  each  contains,  first,  a  characteristic  more  in- 
ward and  relating  to  the  deep  things  of  individual  re- 
ligion ;  and,  second,  a  characteristic  which  has  its 
field  of  action  in  our  relations  to  men.  For  example, 
the  "  mourners  "  and  the  "  meek  "  are  paired.  Those 
who  "  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness  "  and  the 
"  merciful "  are  paired.  "  The  pure  in  heart "  and  "  the 
peacemakers  "  are  paired. 

Now  that  sequence  can  scarely  be  accidental.     It  is 
the  application  in  detail  of  the  great  principle  which 


THE  FIFTH  BEATITUDE.  43 

our  Lord  endorsed  in  its  Old  Testament  form  when 
He  said  that  the  first  great  commandment,  the  love 
of  God,  had  a  companion  consequent  on  and  like  unto 
it,  the  love  of  our  neighbour.  Religion  without 
beneficence,  and  beneficence  without  religion,  are 
equally  maimed.  The  one  is  a  root  without  fruit,  and 
the  other  fruit  without  a  root.  The  selectest 
emotions,  the  lowliest  faith,  the  loftiest  aspirations, 
the  deepest  consciousness  of  one's  own  unworthiness, 
the  priceless  elements  of  personal  religion,  are  of 
little  worth  unless  there  are  inseparably  linked  with 
them  meekness,  mercifulness,  and  peacemaking. 
"What  God  hath  joined  together,  let  no  man  put 
asunder."  If  any  Christian  people  have  neglected 
the  service  of  man  for  the  worship  of  God,  they  are 
flying  in  the  face  of  Christ's  teaching.  If  any 
antagonists  of  Christianity  attack  it  on  the  ground 
that  it  fosters  such  neglect,  they  mistake  the  system 
that  they  criticise,  and  are  judging  it  by  the  imperfect 
practice  of  the  disciples  instead  of  by  the  perfect  pre- 
cepts of  the  Master. 

So,  then,  here  we  have  a  characteristic  lodged  in 
the  very  heart  of  this  series  of  Beatitudes  which 
refers  wholly  to  our  demeanour  to  one  another.  My 
remarks  this  morning  will,  therefore,  be  of  a  very 
homely,  commonplace,  and  practical  kind, 

I. — Note  the  characteristic  on  which  our  Lord  here 
pours  out  His  blessing,  Mercy. 

Now,  like  all  the  other  members  of  this  sequence, 
with  the  exception,  perhaps,  of  the  last,  this  quality 
refers  to  disposition  much  rather  than  to  action. 
Conduct  is  included,  of  course  ;    but   conduct   only 


44  THE  FIFTH  BEATITUDE. 

secondarily.  Jesus  Christ  always  puts  conduct  second, 
as  all  wise  and  great  teachers  do.  "  As  a  man  thinketh 
in  his  heart  so  is  he."  That  is  the  keynote  of  all 
noble  morality.  And  none  has  ever  carried  it  out 
more  thoroughly  than  has  the  morality  of  the  Gospel. 
It  is  a  poor  translation  and  limitation  of  this  great 
word  which  puts  in  the  foreground  merely  merciful 
actions.  The  mercifulness  of  my  text  is,  first  and 
foremost,  a  certain  habitual  way  of  looking  at  and 
feeling  towards  men,  especially  to  men  in  suffering 
and  need,  and  most  especially  to  men  who  have 
proved  themselves  bad  and  blameworthy.  It  implies 
that  a  rigid  retribution  would  lead  to  severer  methods 
of  judgment  and  of  action. 

Therefore  the  first  characteristic  of  the  merciful 
man  is  that  he  is  merciful  in  his  judgments  ;  not 
making  the  worst  of  people,  no  Devil's  Advocate  in 
his  estimates  of  his  fellows  ;  but,  endlessly,  and,  as  the 
world  calls  it,  foolishly  and  incredibly,  gentle  in  his 
censures,  and  ever  ready  to  take  the  charitable — which 
is  generally  the  truer — construction  of  acts  and 
motives.  That  is  a  very  threadbare  thought,  brother, 
but  the  way  to  invest  commonplace  with  startling 
power  is  to  bring  it  into  immediate  connection  with 
our  own  life  and  conduct.  And  if  you  will  try  to 
walk  by  this  threadbare  commonplace  for  a  week,  I 
am  mistaken  if  you  do  not  find  out  that  it  has  teeth 
to  bite  and  a  firm  grip  to  lay  upon  you.  Thread- 
bare truth  is  not  effete  until  it  is  fulfilled.  And  when 
we  try  to  fulfil  it  it  ceases  to  be  commonplace. 

Again,  I  may  remind  you  that  this  mercifulness, 
which  is  primarily  an  inward  emotion,  and  a  way,  as  I 


THE  FIFTH  BEA  TITUDE.  45 

said,  of  thinking  of,  and  of  looking  at,  unworthy  people, 
must  necessarily,  of  course,  find  its  manifestation  in 
our  outward  conduct.  And  there  will  be,  what  I 
need  not  dilate  upon,  a  readiness  to  help,  to  give  ;  to 
forgive  not  only  offences  against  society  and  morality 
but  offences  ao'ainst  ourselves. 

I  need  not  dwell  longer  upon  this  first  part  of  my 
subject.  I  wished  mainly  to  emphasise  that  to  begin 
with  action,  in  our  understanding  of  mercifulness,  is  a 
mistake ;  and  that  we  must  clear  our  hearts  of  anti- 
pathies, and  antagonisms,  and  cynical  suspicions,  if 
we  would  inherit  the  blessings  of  our  text. 

Before  I  go  further,  I  would  point  out  the  con- 
nection between  this  incumbent  duty  of  mercifulness 
and  the  preceding  virtue  of  meekness.  It  is  hard 
enough  to  bear  "  the  scorn  that  patient  merit  from 
the  unworthy  takes,"  without  one  spot  of  red  in 
the  cheek,  one  perturbation  or  flush  of  anger  in 
the  heart ;  and  to  do  that  might  task  us  all  to  the 
utmost.  But  that  is  not  all  that  Christ's  ethics 
require  of  us.  It  is  not  sufficient  to  exercise  the 
passive  virtue  of  meekness  ;  there  must  be  the  active 
one  of  mercifulness.  And  to  call  for  that  is  to  lay 
an  additional  weight  upon  our  consciences,  and  to 
strain  and  stretch  still  further  the  obliajation  under 
which  we  come.  We  have  never  done  what  the  worst 
men  and  our  most  malicious  enemy  have  a  right  to 
from  us  when  we  say,  with  the  cowardly  insincerity  of 
the  world,  "  I  can  forgive,  but  I  cannot  forget."  That  is 
no  forgiveness,  and  that  is  no  mercifulness.  It  is  not 
enough  to  stand  still,  unresisting.  There  must  be  a 
hand  of  helpfulness  stretched  out,  and  a  gush  of  pity 


46  THE  FIFTH  BEATITUDE. 

and  mercifulness  in  the  heart,  if  we  are  to  do  what  our 
Master  has  done  for  us  all,  and  what  our  Master 
requires  us  to  do  for  one  another.  Mercifulness  is  the 
active  side  of  the  passive  meekness. 

Further,  in  a  word,  I  would  note  here  another  thing, 
and  that  is,  what  a  sad,  stern,  true  view  of  the  con- 
dition of  men  in  the  world  results  from  noticing  that 
the  only  three  qualities  in  regard  of  our  relation  to  them 
which  Christ  sets  in  this  sevenfold  tiara  of  diamonds 
are  meekness  in  the  face  of  hatred  and  injustice; 
mercifulness  in  the  face  of  weakness  and  wickedness ; 
peacemaking  in  the  face  of  hostility  and  wrangling. 
What  a  world  in  which  we  have  to  live,  where  the 
crowning  graces  are  those  which  presuppose  such 
vices  as  do  these  !  Ah !  dear  friends,  "  as  sheep  in  the 
midst  of  wolves  "  is  true  to-day.  And  the  one  con- 
quering power  is  patient  gentleness,  and  the  re- 
compense of  overcoming  good  for  all  evil. 

People  talk  a  great  deal,  and  a  good  deal  of  it  very 
insincerely,  about  their  admiration  for  these  precepts 
gathered  together  in  this  chapter.  If  they  would  try 
to  live  them  for  a  fortnight,  they  would  perhaps  pause 
a  little  longer  than  some  of  them  do  before  they  said, 
as  do  people  that  detest  the  theology  of  the  New 
Testament,  "The  Sermon  on  the  Mount  is  my  religion." 
Is  it  ?  It  does  not  look  very  like  it.  At  all  events, 
if  it  is,  it  is  a  religion  behind  which  practice  most 
wofully  limps. 

II. — Let  me  ask  you  to  look  at  what  I  have  already 
in  part  referred  to — the  place  in  this  series  which 
mercifulness  holds. 

Now,  of  course,  I  know,  and  nothing  that  I  say  this 


THE  FIFTH  BE  A  T I  TUBE.  47 

morning  is  to  be  taken  for  a  moment  as  questioning 
or  under-estimating  it,  that,  altogether  apart  from 
religion,  there  is  interwoven  into  the  structure  of 
human  nature  that  sentiment  of  mercifulness  which 
our  Lord  here  crowns  with  His  benediction.  But  it  is 
not  that  natural,  instinctive  sentiment — which  is 
partially  unreliable,  and  has  little  power  apart  from 
the  reinforcement  of  higher  thoughts  to  carry  itself 
consistently  through  life — that  our  Lord  is  here 
speaking  about ;  but  it  is  a  mercifulness  which  is 
more  than  an  instinct,  more  than  a  sentiment,  more 
than  the  natural  answer  of  the  human  heart  to  the 
sight  of  compassion  and  distress,  which  is,  in  fact,  the 
product  of  all  that  has  preceded  it  in  this  linked 
chain  of  characteristics  and  their  blessings. 

And  so  I  ask  you  to  recall  these.  "  Poor  in 
spirit,"  "  mourning,"  "  meek,"  "  hungering  and  thirst- 
ing after  righteousness  " — these  are  the  springs  that 
feed  the  flow  of  this  river ;  and  if  it  be  not  fed  from 
them,  but  from  the  surface-waters  of  human  senti- 
ment and  instinct,  it  will  dry  up  long  before  it  has 
availed  to  refresh  barren  places,  and  to  cool  thirsty 
lips.  And  note,  also,  "theirs  is  the  kingdom  of 
heaven."  "  They  shall  be  comforted."  "  They  shall 
inherit  the  earth."  "  They  shall  be  filled."  These 
are  experiences  which,  again,  are  another  collection  of 
the  head-waters  of  this  stream. 

That  is  to  say,  the  true,  lasting,  reliable,  conquering 
mercifulness  has  a  double  source.  The  consciousness 
of  our  own  weakness,  the  sadness  that  creeps  over  the 
heart  when  it  makes  the  discovery  of  its  own  sin,  the 
bowed  submission  primarily  to  the  will  of  God,  and 


43  THE  FIFTH  BEATITUDE. 

secondarily  to  the  antagonisms  which,  in  subservience 
to  that  will,  we  may  meet  in  life,  and  the  yearning 
desire  for  a  fuller  righteousness  and  a  more  lustrous 
purity  in  our  own  lives  and  characters — these  are  the 
experiences  which  will  make  a  man  gentle  in  his 
judgment  of  his  brother,  and  full  of  melting  charity  in 
all  his  dealings  with  him.  If  I  know  how  dark  my 
own  nature  is,  how  prone  to  uncommitted  evils,  how 
little  I  have  to  thank  myself  for  the  virtues  that  I 
have  practised,  which  are  largely  due  to  my  exemp- 
tion from  temptation  and  to  my  opportunities,  and 
how  little  I  have  in  my  own  self  that  I  can  venture 
to  bring  to  the  stern  judgment  which  I  am  tempted 
to  apply  to  other  people,  then  the  words  of  censure 
will  falter  on  my  tongue,  and  the  bitter  construction 
of  my  brother's  conduct  and  character  will  be  muffled 
in  silence.  "  Except  as  to  open  outbreakings,"  said 
one  of  the  very  saintliest  of  men,  "  I  want  nothing  of 
what  Judas  and  Cain  had."  If  we  feel  this,  we  shall 
ask  ourselves,  "  Who  art  thou  that  judgest  another 
man's  servant  ? "  and  the  condemnation  of  others  will 
stick  in  our  throats  when  we  try  to  utter  it. 

And,  on  the  other  hand,  if  I  have,  through  these 
paths  of  self-knowledge,  and  lowly  estimate  of  self, 
and  penitent  confession  of  sin,  and  flexibility  of  will 
to  God,  and  yearning,  as  for  my  highest  food  and  good, 
after  a  righteousness  which  I  feel  I  do  not  possess, 
come  into  the  position  in  which  my  poverty  is,  by  His 
gift,  made  rich,  and  the  tears  are  Aviped  away  from  off 
my  face  by  His  gracious  hand,  and  a  full  possession  of 
large  blessings  bestowed  on  my  humble  will,  and  the 
righteousness  for  which  I  long  imparted  to  me,  shall  I 


THE  FIFTH  BEATITUDE.  A9 

not  have  learned  how  Divine  a  thing  it  is  to  give  to  the 
unworthy,  and  so  be  impelled  to  communicate  what  I 
have  already  received  ?  "  Be  ye  therefore  imitators  of 
God,  as  beloved  children  ;  and  walk  in  love  as  Christ 
also  hath  loved  us."  They  only  are  deeply,  through 
and  through,  universally  and  always  merciful  who 
have  received  mercy.  The  light  is  reflected  at  the 
same  angle  as  it  falls.  And  the  only  way  by  which 
there  can  come  from  our  faces  and  lives  a  glory  that 
shall  lighten  many  dark  hearts,  and  make  sunshine  in 
many  a  shady  place,  is  that  these  hearts  shall  have 
turned  full  to  the  very  fountain  itself  of  heavenly 
radiance,  and  so  "have  received  of  the  Lord  that 
which  also  "  they  "  deliver  "  unto  men. 

And  so,  brethren,  there  are  two  plain,  practical  ex- 
hortations from  these  thoughts.  One  is,  let  us 
Christian  people  learn  the  fruits  of  God's  mercy,  and 
be  sure  of  this,  that  our  own  mercifulness  in  re- 
gard to  men  is  an  accurate  thermometer  of  the 
amount  of  the  Divine  mercy  which  we  have  received. 

The  other  is,  let  all  of  us  learn  the  root  of  man's 
mercy  to  men.  There  is  plenty,  of  a  sort,  of  philan- 
thropy and  beneficent  and  benevolent  work  and 
feeling  to-day,  entirely  apart  from  all  perception  of, 
and  all  faith  in,  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  in  so  far 
as  the  individuals  who  exercise  that  beneficence  are 
concerned.  I,  for  my  part,  am  narrow  enough  to 
believe  that  the  streams  of  non-Christian  charitable- 
ness, which  run  in  our  land  and  in  other  lands  to-day, 
have  been  fed  from  Christ's  fountain,  though  the 
supply  has  come  underground,  and  bursts  into  light 
apparently  unconnected   with   its   source.     If  there 

4 


60  THE  FIFTH  BE  A  TITUDE. 

had  been  no  New  Testament  there  would  have  been 
very  little  of  the  beneficence  which  flouts  the  New 
Testament  to-day.  Historically,  it  is  the  great  truths, 
which  we  conveniently  summarise  as  being  evangelical 
Christianity,  that  have  been  mother  to  the  new 
charity  that,  since  Christ,  has  been  breathed  over  the 
world.  I,  for  my  part,  believe  that  if  you  strike  out 
the  doctrine  of  universal  sinfulness,  if  you  cover  over 
the  Cross  of  Christ,  if  you  do  not  find  in  it  the  mani- 
festation of  a  God  who  is  endlessly  merciful  to  the 
most  unworthy,  you  have  destroyed  the  basis  on 
which  true  and  operative  benevolence  will  rest.  So 
then,  dear  brethren,  let  us  all  seek  to  get  a  humbler 
and  a  truer  conception  of  what  we  ourselves  are,  and 
a  loftier  and  truer  faith  of  what  God  in  Christ  is ; 
and  then  to  remember  that  if  we  have  these,  we  are 
bound  to,  and  we  shall,  show  it,  by  making  that  which 
is  the  anchor  of  our  hope  the  pattern  of  our  lives. 

III. — Lastly,  notice  the  requital,  "  They  shall  obtain 
mercy." 

Now,  it  is  a  wretched  weakening  of  that  great 
thought  to  suppose  that  it  means  that  if  A.  is  merciful 
to  B.,  B.  will  be  merciful  to  A.  That  is  sometimes 
true,  and  sometimes  it  is  not.  It  does  not  so  very 
much  matter  whether  it  is  true  or  not ;  that  is  not 
what  Jesus  Christ  means.  All  these  beatitudes  are 
God's  gifts;  and  this  is  God's  gift  too.  It  is  His 
mercy  which  the  merciful  man  obtains. 

But  you  say :  "  Have  you  not  just  been  telUng  us 
that  this  sense  and  experience  of  God's  mercy  must 
precede  my  mercy,  and  now  you  say  that  my  mercy 
must  precede  God's  ? "     No  !     I  do  not  say  it  must 


THE  FIFTH  BEATITUDE.  51 


precede  it;  I  do  say  that  my  mercifulness  is,  as  it 
were,  lodged  between  the  parts  of  a  golden  circle,  and 
has  on  one  side  the  experience  of  the  Divine  mercy 
which  quickens  mine  by  thankfulness  and  imitation ; 
on  the  other  side,  the  larger  experience  of  the  Divine 
mercy  which  follows  upon  my  walking  after  the 
example  of  my  Lord. 

This  is  only  one  case  of  the  broad  general  principle 
"  to  him  that  hath  shall  be  given,  and  from  him  that 
hath  not  shall  be  taken  even  that  which  he  hath." 
Salvation  is  no  such  irreversible  gift  as  that  once 
bestowed  a  man  can  go  on  anyhow  and  it  will  con- 
tinue ;  but  it  is  given  in  such  a  fashion  as  that,  for  its 
retention,  and  still  more  for  its  increase,  there  must 
be  a  certain  line  of  feeling  and  of  action. 

Our  Lord  does  not  mean  to  say,  of  course,  that  this 
one  isolated  member  of  a  series  carries  with  it  the 
whole  power  of  bringing  down  upon  a  man  the 
blessings  which  are  only  due  to  the  combination  of 
the  whole  series,  but  that  it  stands  as  one  of  that 
linked  band  which  shall  receive  the  blessing  from  on 
high.  And  the  blessing  here  is  given  in  the  terms  of 
the  conditions,  according  to  that  great  law  of  re- 
taliation which  works  life  unto  life  and  death  unto 
death. 

No  man  who,  having  received  the  mercy  of  God, 
lives  harsh,  hard,  self-absorbed,  implacable,  and  un- 
communicative, will  keep  that  mercy  in  any  vivid 
consciousness  or  to  any  blessed  issue.  The  servant 
took  his  fellow-servant  by  the  throat,  and  said,  "  Pay 
me  that  thou  owest,"  and  his  master  said,  "  Deliver 
him  to  the  tormentors  until  he  pay  the  very  uttermost 

4* 


52  THE  FIFTH  BEATITUDE. 


farthing."     You  get  your  salvation  as  a  free  gift ;  you 
keep  it  by  feelings  and  conduct  correspondent  to  the 

gift. 

Whilst  benevolence  which  has  an  eye  to  self  is  no 
benevolence,  it  is  perfectly  legitimate,  and  indeed 
absolutely  necessary,  that  whilst  the  motive  for  merci- 
fulness is  mercy  received,  the  encouragement  to  merci- 
fulness should  be  mercy  still  to  be  given.  "  Walk 
in  love,  as  Christ  also  hath  loved  us."  And  when  you 
think  of  your  own  unworthiness,  and  of  the  great  gifts 
which  a  gracious  God  has  given,  let  that  impel  you  to 
move  amongst  men  as  copies  of  God,  and  be  sure  that 
you  deepen  your  spiritual  life,  not  only  by  meditation 
and  by  faith,  but  by  practical  work,  and  by  showing 
towards  all  men  mercy  like  the  mercy  which  God  has 
bestowed  u^^on  you. 


YI. 

^be  Siytb  Beatitude, 

"  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,  for  they  shall  see  God." — 
Matt.  v.  8. 

T  first  hearing  one  scarcely  knows  wliether 
the  character  described  in  this  great 
saying,  or  the  promise  held  out,  is  the 
more  inaccessible  to  men.  "  The  pure 
in  heart,"  who  may  they  be  ?  Is  there 
one. of  us  that  can  imagine  himself"  possessed  of  a 
character  fitting  him  for  the  vision  of  God,  or  such  as 
to  make  him  bear  with  delight  that  dazzling  blaze  ? 
"  They  shall  see  God";  whom  "no  man  hath  seen  at 
any  time,  nor  can  see."  Surely  the  requirement  is 
impossible,  and  the  promise  not  less  so.  But  does 
Jesus  Christ  mock  us  with  demands  that  cannot  be 
satisfied,  and  dangle  before  us  hopes  that  can  never 
be  realised  ?  There  have  been  plenty  of  moralists  and 
would-be  teachers  who  have  done  that.  What  would 
be  the  use  of  saying  to  a  man  lying  on  a  battle-field 
sore  wounded,  and  Avith  both  legs  shot  off,  "  If  you 
will  only  get  up  and  run,  you  will  be  safe  ?  "  What 
would  be  the  use  of  telling  men  how  blessed  they 
would  be  if  they  were  the  opposite  of  what  they  are  ? 
But  that  is  not  Christ's  way. 


fi4  THE  SIXTH  BEATITUDE. 


These  Avords,  lofty  and  remote  as  they  seem,  are  in 
truth  amongst  the  most  hopeful  and  radiant  that  ever 
came  from  even  His  lips.  For  they  oft'er  the  realisation 
of  an  apparently  impossible  character.  They  promise 
the  possession  of  an  apparently  impossible  vision ;  and 
they  soothe  fears,  and  tell  us  that  the  sight  from  which, 
were  it  possible,  we  should  sometimes  shrink,  is  the 
source  of  our  purest  gladness.  So  there  are  three 
things,  it  seems  to  me,  worth  our  notice  in  these  great 
words — How  hearts  can  be  made  pure ;  how  the  pure 
heart  can  see  God ;  and  how  the  sight  can  be  simple 
blessedness. 

I. — How  hearts  can  be  made  pure. 

Now,  the  key  which  has  unlocked  for  us,  in  previous 
sermons,  the  treasures  of  meaning  in  these  Beatitudes 
is  especially  necessary  here.  For,  as  I  have  said,  if 
you  take  this  to  be  a  mere  isolated  saying,  it  becomes 
a  mocker}^  and  a  pain.  But  if  you  connect  it,  as  our 
Lord  would  have  us  connect  it,  with  all  the  preceding 
links  of  this  wreathed  chain  describing  the  charac- 
teristics of  a  devout  soul,  then  it  assumes  an 
altogether  different  appearance.  "  The  pure  in  heart " 
are  they  who  have  exercised  and  received  the  previous 
qualifications  and  bestowments  from  God.  That  is  to 
say,  there  must  precede  all  such  purity  as  is  capable 
of  the  Divine  vision,  the  poverty  of  spirit  which 
recognises  its  true  condition,  the  mourning  which 
rightly  feels  the  gravity  and  awfulness  of  that  condi- 
tion, the  desire  for  its  opposite,  which  will  never  be 
the  "  hunger  and  thirst  "  of  a  soul,  except  it  is  preceded 
by  a  profound  sense  of  sin  and  the  penitence  that 
ensues  thereupon. 


THE  SIXTH  BEATITUDE.  55 

But  when  these  things  have  gone  before,  and  when 
they  have  been  accompanied,  as  they  surely  will  be, 
with  the  results  that  flow  from  them  without  an 
interval  of  time — viz.,  enrichment  with  possession  of 
the  kingdom,  the  comforting  and  drying  of  the  tears 
of  penitence,  and  the  possession  of  a  righteousness 
bestowed  because  it  is  desired,  and  not  won  because 
it  is  worked  for  —  then,  and  only  then,  will  the 
heart  be  purged  and  defecated  from  its  evils  and  its 
self-regard,  and  its  eyes  opened  and  couched  and 
strengthened  to  behold  undazzled  the  eternal  light  of 
God.  The  word  of  my  text,  standing  alone,  ministers 
despair.  Regarded  where  Christ  set  it,  as  one  of  the 
series  of  characteristics  which  He  has  been  describing, 
it  kindles  the  brightest  and  surest  hope. 

"  Can  the  Ethiopian  change  his  skin,  or  the  leopard 
his  spots  ?  "  No  !  but  God  can  change  them,  and  the 
implication  of  my  text,  regarded  in  its  due  relation  to 
these  other  Beatitudes,  is  just  that  the  requisite  purity 
is  not  my  working,  but  is  God's  gift.  The  same  truth 
which  here  results  from  the  study  of  the  place  of  our 
text  in  this  series  is  condensed  into  a  briefer,  but  sub- 
stantially equivalent,  form  in  the  saying  of  another 
part  of  the  New  Testament,  about  "  purifying  their 
hearts  by  faith." 

Dear  brethren,  we  come  back  to  the  old  truth — all 
a  man's  hope  of  and  effort  after  reformation  and  self- 
improvement  must  begin  with  the  consciousness  of 
sin,  the  lament  over  it,  the  longing  for  the  Divine 
good,  the  opening  of  the  heart  for  the  reception 
thereof ;  and  only  then  can  we  rise  to  these  serene 
heights  of  purity  of  heart.     This,  and  this  alone,  is 


5^  THE  SIXTH  BEATITUDE. 


the  way  by  which  "a  clean  thhig"  can  be  brought 
*'  out  of  an  unclean  one,"  and  men  stained  and  foul 
with  evil,  and  bound  under  the  chains  of  that  which 
is  the  mother  of  all  evil,  the  undue  making  them- 
selves the  centres  of  their  lives,  can  be  washed  and 
cleansed  and  emancipated ;  and  God  be  made  the  end 
and  the  aim,  the  motive  and  the  goal,  the  power  and 
the  reward,  of  all  their  work.     Righteousness  is  a  gift 
to  begin  with,  and  it  is  a  gift  bestowed  on  condition 
of  "repentance  toward  God,  and  faith  in  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."      We  all  have  longings  after   purity, 
suppressed,  dashed,  contradicted  a  thousand  times  in 
our  lives  day  by  day,  but  there  they  are;  and  the 
only  way  by  which  they  can  be  fully  satisfied  is  when 
we  go  with  our  foul  hands,  empty  as  well  as  foul,  and 
lift  them  up  to  God,  and  say,  "  Give  what  thou  com- 
mandest,  even  the  clean  heart,  and  we  shall  be  clean." 
But  then,  do  not  let  us  forget,  either,  that  this  gift 
bestowed  not  once  and  for  ever,  but  continuously  if 
there  be  continuous  desire,  is  to  be  utilised,  appro- 
priated, worked  into  our  characters,  and  worked  out 
in  our  lives,  by  our  own  efforts,  as  well  as  by  our  own 
faith.      "Having,    therefore,  these    promises,   dearly 
beloved,  let  us  cleanse  ourselves  from  all  filthiness  of       j 
flesh  and  spirit,  perfecting  holiness  in  the  fear  of  the       I 
Lord."     « Every  man  that  hath  this  "  gift  bestowed,       I 
"purifieth   himself  even   as    He  is   pure."     He  that 
brings  to  us   the  gift  of  regeneration,  by  which  we 
receive  the  new  nature  which  is  free  from  sin,  calls  to 
each  of  us  as  He  presents   to  us  the  basin  with  the 
cleansing  Avater,  "Wash  you,  make  you  clean,    put 
away  the  evil  of  your  doings   .    .    .    cease  to  do  evil. 


TEE  SIXTH  BE  A  TITUDE.  57 


learn  to  do  well."  "What  God  hath  joined  together 
let  not  man  put  asunder,"  viz.,  the  act  of  faith  by 
which  we  receive,  the  act  of  diligence  by  which  we 
use,  the  purifying  power. 

II.— Note  how  the  pure  heart  sees  God. 

One   is   tempted   to   plunge   into   mystical  depths 
when  speaking  upon  such  a  text  as  this,  but  I  wish  to 
resist  the  temptation  now,  and  to  deal  with  it  in  a 
plani,  practical  fashion.     Of  course  I  need  not  remind 
you,  or  do  more  than  simply  remind  you,  that  the 
matter  in  question  here  is  no  perception  by  sense  of 
Him  who  is  invisible,  nor  is  it,  either,  an  adequate  and 
direct  knowledge  and  comprehension  of  Him  who  is 
mtinite,  and  whom  a  man  can  no  more  comprehend 
than  he  can  stretch  his  short  arms  round  the  flaming 
orb  of  the  central  sun.     But  still,  there  is  a  relatioS 
to  God  possible  for  sinful  men  when  they  have  been 
purified  through  the  faith  that  is   in   Jesus   Christ, 
which  is  so  direct,  so  immediate,  that  it  deserves  the 
name  of  vision  ;  and  which,  as  I  believe,  is  the  ground 
of  a  firmer  certitude,  and  of  a  no  less  clear ''appre- 
hension, than  is  the  sense  from  which  the  naDie  is 
borrowed.     For  the  illusions  of  sense  have  no  place  in 
the  sight  which  the  pure  heart  has  of  its  Father,  God. 
^  Only,  remember,  that  here,  and  m  the  interpreta- 
tion of  all  such  Scriptural  words,  we  have  ever  to  be 
guided  and  governed  by  the  great  principle  which  our 
Lord  laid   down,  under  very   solemn  circumstances, 
when  He  said  :  "  He  that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the 
Father."     Jesus  Christ,  whose  name  from  Eternity  is 
the  Word,  is,  from  Eternity  to  Eternity,  that  which 
the  name  indicates— viz.,  the  reveahng  Activity  of  the 


58  THE  SIXTH  BEA  TITUDE. 

Eternal  God.  And,  as  I  believe,  wherever  there  have 
been  kindled  in  men's  hearts,  either  by  the  contem- 
plation of  nature  and  providence,  or  by  the  intuitions 
of  their  own  spirits,  any  glints  or  glimpses  of  a  God, 
there  has  been  the  operation  of  "  the  Light  that 
lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world,"  And 
far  beyond  the  limits  of  historical  Revelation  within 
Israel,  as  recorded  in  Scripture,  that  Eternal  Word  has 
been  unveiling,  as  men's  dim  eyes  were  capable  of 
perceiving  it,  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory 
of  God.  But  for  us  who  stand  in  the  full  blaze  of  that 
historical  manifestation  in  the  character  and  work  of 
Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour,  our  vision  of  God  is  neither 
more  nor  less  than  the  apprehension  and  the  realisation 
of  Christ  as  "  God  manifest  in  the  flesh." 

Whether  you  call  it  the  vision  of  God,  or  whether 
you  call  it  communion  with  God  in  Jesus  Christ,  or 
whether  you  fall  back  upon  the  other  metaphor  of 
God  dwelling  in  us  and  we  dwelling  in  God,  it 
all  comes  to  the  same  thing,  the  consciousness  of 
His  presence,  the  realisation  of  His  character,  the 
blessed  assurance  of  loving  relations  with  Him,  and 
the  communion  in  mind,  heart,  will,  and  conduct, 
with  God,  who  has  come  near  to  us  all  in  Jesus 
Christ. 

Now,  I  need  not  remind  you,  I  suppose,  that  for 
such  a  realisation  and  active,  real,  communion,  purity 
of  heart  is  indispensable.  That  is  no  arbitrary  re- 
quirement, but  inherent,  as  we  all  know,  in  the  very 
nature  of  the  case.  If  we  think  of  what  He  is,  we 
shall  feel  that  only  the  pure  in  heart  can  really  pass 
into   loving  fellowship   with    Him.      "  How  can  two 


THE  SIXTH  BEATITUDE.  5& 

walk  together  except  they  be  agreed  ?  "  And  if  we 
reflect  upon  the  history  of  our  own  feehngs  and  rea- 
lisation of  God's  presence  with  us,  we  shall  see  that 
impurity  always  drew  a  membrane  over  the  eye  of 
our  souls,  or  cast  a  mist  of  Id  visibility  over  the 
heavens.  The  smallest  sin  hides  God  from  us.  A 
very,  very  little  grain  of  dye  stuff  will  darken  miles  of 
a  river,  and  make  it  incapable  of  reflecting  the  blue 
sky  and  the  sparkling  stars.  The  least  evil  done  and 
loved  blurs  and  blots,  if  it  does  not  eclipse,  for  us  the 
doers  the  very  Sun  of  Righteousness  Himself.  No 
sinful  men  can  walk  in  the  midst  of  that  fiery  furnace 
and  not  be  consumed.  "The  pure  in  heart" — and 
only  they — "  shall  see  God." 

Now,  I  need  not  remind  you,  I  suppose,  that  in  this, 
as  in  all  these  Beatitudes,  the  oferminal  fulfilment  in 
the  present  life  is  not  to  be  parted  off"  by  a  great  gap 
from  the  perfect  fulfilment  in  the  life  which  is  to 
come.  And  so  I  do  not  dwell  so  much  on  the 
differences,  great  and  wonderful  as  these  must 
necessarily  be,  between  the  manner  of  apprehension 
and  communion  with  God  which  it  is  reserved  for 
heaven  to  bestow  upon  us,  and  the  manner  of  those 
which  we  may  enjoy  here ;  but  I  rather  would  point  to 
the  blessed  thought  that  in  essence  they  are  one, 
however  in  degree  they  may  be  different.  No  doubt, 
changed  circumstances,  new  capacities,  the  withdrawal 
of  time  and  sense,  the  dropping  away  of  the  veil  of 
flesh,  which  is  the  barrier  between  us  and  the  unseen 
order  of  things  in  which  "  we  live  and  move  and  have 
our  being,"  will  induce  changes  and  progresses  in  the 
manner  and  in  the  dearree  of  that  vision  about  which 


€0  THE  SIXTH  BE  A  TITUDE. 


it  would  be  folly  for  us  to  speak.  If  there  were  any- 
thing here  with  which  we  could  compare  the  state  of 
the  blessed  in  heaven,  in  so  far  as  it  differs  from  their 
state  on  earth,  we  could  form  some  conception  of 
these  differences ;  but  if  there  were  anything  here 
with  which  we  could  compare  it,  it  would  be  less 
glorious  than  it  is.  It  is  well  that  we  should  have 
to  say,  "  Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither 
have  entered  into  the  heart  of  man,  the  things 
that  God  hath  prepared."  So  let  us  be  thankful  that 
"  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be  ";  and  let  us 
never  allow  our  ignorance  of  the  manner  to  make  us 
doubt  or  neglect  the  fact,  seeing  that  we  know  "  that 
when  He  shall  appear  ...  we  shall  see  Him  as 
He  is." 

III. — Lastly,  notice  how  this  sight  brings  blessed- 
ness. 

There  is  nothing  else  that  will  "  satisfy  the  eye  with 
seeing."  The  vision  of  God,  even  in  its  incipient  and 
imperfect  form  which  is  possible  upon  earth,  is  the 
one  thing  that  will  calm  our  distractions,  that  will 
supply  our  needs,  that  will  lift  our  lives  to  a  level  of 
serene  power  and  blessedness,  impossible  by  any  other 
method.  Such  a  sight  will  dim  all  the  dazzling 
illusions  of  earth,  as,  when  the  sun  leaps  into  the 
heavens,  the  stars  hide  their  faces  and  faint  into 
invisibility.  It  will  make  us  lords  of  ourselves, 
masters  of  the  world,  kings  over  time  and  sense  and 
the  universe.  Everything  will  be  diti'erent  when 
"  earth  is  crammed  with  heaven,  and  every  common 
bush  afire  with  God."  That  is  what  is  possible  for  a 
Christian  holding  fast  by  Jesus  Christ,  and  in  Him 


T  HE  SIX  TH  BE  A  TITUDE.  61 


having  communion  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy 
Spirit. 

Brethren,  I  venture  to  say  no  word  about  the 
blessedness  of  that  future.  Heaven's  o^olden  elates 
keep  their  secret  well.  The  purest  joys  of  earth, 
about  Avhich  poets  have  sung  for  untold  centuries, 
after  all  singing  need  to  be  tasted  before  they  are 
conceived  of;  and  all  our  talk  about  the  blessedness 
yonder  is  but  like  what  a  chrysalis  might  dream  in 
its  tomb  as  to  the  life  of  the  radiant  winged  creature 
which  it  would  one  day  become.  Let  us  be  content 
to  be  ignorant,  and  believe  with  confidence  that  we 
shall  find  that  the  vision  of  God  is  the  heaven  of 
heavens. 

We  shall  owe  that  eternal  vision  to  the  Eternal 
Revealer ;  for,  as  I  believe,  Scripture  teaches  us  that  it 
is  only  in  Him  that  the  glorified  saints  see  the  Father, 
as  it  is  only  in  Him  that  here  on  earth  Ave  have  the 
vision  of  God.  That  sight  is  not,  like  the  bodily  sense 
to  which  it  is  compared,  a  far-off  perception  of  an  un- 
grasped  brightness,  but  it  is  the  actual  possession  of 
what  we  behold.  We  see  God  when  we  have  God. 
When  we  have  God  we  have  enough. 

But  I  dare  not  close  without  one  other  word. 
There  is  a  vision  of  God  possible  to  an  impure  heart, 
in  which  there  is  no  blessedness.  There  comes  a  day 
in  which  "  they  shall  call  upon  the  rocks  to  fall  and 
cover  them  from  the  face  of  Him  that  sits  upon  the 
throne."  The  alternative  is  before  each  of  us,  dear 
friends — either  "  every  eye  shall  see  Him,  and  they 
also  which  pierced  Him;  and  all  kindreds  of  the  earth 
shall  wail  because  of  Him  ; "  or,  "  I  shall  behold  Thy 


«2 


THE  SIXTH  BEATITUDE. 


face  in  righteousness.  I  sliall  be  satisfied,  when  I 
awake,  with  Thy  Hkeness."  If  we  cry  "  Create  a  clean 
heart  in  me,  0  God  ! "  He  will  answer,  "  I  will  give 
you  a  new  heart,  and  take  away  the  stony  heart  out 
of  your  flesh,  and  I  will  give  you  a  heart  of  flesh,  and 
I  will  pour  clean  Avater  upon  you,  and  ye  shall  be 
clean." 


i 


VII. 

^be  Seventb  Beatitude 

Blessed  are  the  peacemakers,  for  they  shall  be  called  the  children 
of  God." — Matt.  v.  9. 

HIS  is  tlie  last  Beatitude  descriptive  of 
the  character  of  the  Christian.  There 
follows  one  more,  which  describes  his 
reception  by  the  world.  But  this  one 
sets  the  top  stone,  the  shining  apex, 
upon  the  whole  Temple-structure  which  the  previous 
Beatitudes  had  been  gradually  building  up.  You  may 
remember  that  I  have  pointed  out  in  previous  sermons 
how  all  these  various  traits  of  the  Christian  life  are 
deduced  from  the  root  of  poverty  of  spirit.  You  may 
also  remember  how  I  have  had  occasion  to  show  that 
if  we  regard  that  first  Beatitude,  "  Blessed  are  the 
poor  in  spirit,"  as  the  root  and  mother  of  all  the  rest, 
the  remainder  are  so  arranficed  as  that  we  have  alter- 
nately  a  grace  which  regards  mainly  the  man  himself 
and  his  relations  to  God,  and  one  which  also  includes 
his  relations  to  man. 

Now  there  are  three  of  these  which  look  out  into 
the  world,  and  these  three  are  consummated  by  this 
one  of  my  text.     These  are  "  the  meek,"  which  des- 


64  THE  SEVENTH  BEATITUDE. 


cribes  a  man's  attitude  to  opposition  and  hatred  ;  "  the 
merciful,"  which  describes  his  indulgence  in  judgment 
and  his  pitifulness  in  effort ;  and  "  the  peacemakers." 
For  Christian  people  are  not  merely  to  bear  injuries 
and  to  recompense  them  with  pity  and  with  love,  but 
they  are  actively  to  try  to  bring  about  a  wholesomer 
and  purer  state  of  humanity,  and  to  breathe  the  peace 
of  God,  which  passes  understanding,  over  all  the 
j  anglings  and  struggles  of  this  world. 

So,  I  think,  if  we  give  a  due  depth  of  significance 
to  that  name  "  peacemaker,"  we  shall  find  that  this 
grace  worthily  completes  the  whole  linked  series  ;  and 
is  the  very  jewel  which  clasps  the  whole  chain  of 
Christian  and  Christlike  characteristics. 

I. — I  wish  then,  first,  to  ask  how  Christ's  peace- 
makers are  made. 

Now  there  are  certain  people  whose  natural  dis- 
position has  in  it  a  fine  element,  which  diffuses  sooth- 
ing and  concord  all  around  them.  I  daresay  we  all 
have  known  such — perhaps  some  good  woman,  with- 
out any  very  shining  gifts  of  intellect,  who  yet  dwelt 
in  such  peace  of  heart  herself  that  conflict  and  jang- 
ling were  rebuked  in  her  presence.  And  there  are 
other  people  who  love  peace,  and  seek  after  it  in  the 
cowardly  fashion  of  letting  things  alone ;  whose 
"  peace-making  "  has  no  nobler  source  than  hatred  of 
trouble,  and  a  wish  to  let  sleeping  dogs  lie.  These, 
instead  of  being  peacemakers,  are  warmakers,  for  they 
are  laying  up  materials  for  a  tremendous  explosion 
some  day. 

But  it  is  a  very  different  thing  that  Jesus  Christ 
has  in  view  here,  and  I  need  only  ask  you  to  do  again 


THE  SEVENTH  BEATITUDE.  6& 


what   we  have  had  occasion  to    do  in  the  previous 
sermons  of  this  series— to  link  this  characteristic  with 
those  that  go  before  it,  of  which  it  is  regarded  as  being 
the  briu'ht  and  consummate  flower  and  final  outcome. 
No  man  can  bring  that  which  he  does  not  possess. 
Vainly  will  a  man  whose  own  heart  is  torn  by  con- 
tending passions,  whose  own  life  is  full  of  animosities 
and  unreconciled  outstanding  causes  of  alienation  and 
divergence  between  him  and  God,  between  him  and 
duty,  between  him  and  himself,  ever  seek  to  shed  any 
deep  or  real  peace  amongst  men.      He  may  super- 
ficially solder  some  external  quarrels,  but  that  is  not 
all  that  Jesus  Christ  means.     His  peacemakers  are 
created  by  having  passed  through   all  the  previous 
experiences    which    these    preceding    verses    bring 
out.      They    have    learned    the    emptiness   of   their 
own  spirits.     They  have  wept  tears,  if  not  real  and 
literal,  those  which  are  far  more  agonising — tears  of 
spirit  and   conscience — when   they  have   thought  of 
their  own  demerits  and  foulnesses.     They  have  bowed 
in  humble  submission  to  the  will  of  God,  and  even  to 
that  will  as  expressed  by  the  antagonisms  of  man. 
They  have  yearned  after  the  possession  of  a  fuller  and 
nobler    righteousness    than    they    themselves    have 
attained.     They  have  learned  to  judge  others  with  a 
gentle  judgment  because  they  know  how  much  they 
need   it,   and   to   extend   to  others   a   helping  hand 
because  aware  of  their  own  impotence  and  need  of 
succour.     They  have  been  led  through  all  these,  often 
painful,  experiences  into  a  purity  of  heart  which  has 
been  blessed  by  some  measure  of  vision  of  God ;  and, 
having  thus  been  equipped  and  prepared,  they  are  fit 


66  THE  SEVENTH  BEATITUDE. 

to  go  out  into  the  world  and  say,  in  the  presence  of 
all  its  tempests,  "  Peace  !  Be  still."  And  something 
of  the  miracle-working  energy  of  the  Master  whom 
they  serve  will  be  shed  u]3on  those  who  serve  Him. 

Brethren,  the  peacemaker  who  is  worthy  of  the 
name  must  have  gone  through  these  deep  spiritual 
experiences.  I  do  not  say  that  they  are  to  come  in 
regular  stages,  separable  from  each  other.  That  is 
not  the  way  in  which  a  character  mounts  towards 
God — not  by  a  flight  of  steps,  at  distinctly  different 
elevations,  but  rather  by  an  ascending  slope.  And, 
although  these  various  Christian  graces  wdiich  precede 
that  of  my  text  are  separable  in  thought,  and  are 
linked  in  the  fashion  that  our  Lord  sets  forth  in 
experience,  they  may  be,  and  often  are,  con- 
temporaneous. 

But  whether  separated  from  one  another  in  time 
or  not,  whether  this  life-preparation  of  which  the 
previous  verses  give  us  the  outline  has  been  realised 
drop  by  drop,  or  whether  it  has  been  all  flooded  on  to 
the  soul  at  once,  as  it  quite  possibly  has  in  some 
fashion  or  other,  it  must  precede  our  being  the  sort 
of  peacemakers  that  Christ  desires  and  blesses. 

There  is  only  one  more  point  that  I  would  make 
here  before  I  go  on,  and  that  is,  that  it  is  well  to 
notice  that  the  climax  of  Christian  character,  accordingf 
to  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  is  found  in  our  relations  to 
men,  and  not  in  our  relation  to  God.  Worship  of 
heart  and  spirit,  devout  emotions  of  the  sacredest, 
sweetest,  most  hallowed  and  hallowing  sort,  are 
absolutely  indispensable,  as  I  have  tried  to  show  you. 
But  equally,  if  not  more,  important  is  it  for  us  to 


THE  SEVENTH  BEATITUDE.  67 

remember  that  the  purest  communion  with  God,  and 
the  selectest  emotional  experiences  of  the  Christian 
Ufe,  are  meant  to  be  the  bases  of  active  service ;  and 
that,  if  it  does  not  follow  these,  there  is  good  reason 
for  supposing  that  these  are  spurious,  and  worth  very 
httle.  The  service  of  man  is  the  outcome  of  the  love 
of  God.  He  who  begins  with  poverty  of  spirit  is 
perfected  when,  forgetting  himself,  and  coming  down 
from  the  mountain-top,  where  the  Shekinah  cloud  of 
the  glory  and  the  audible  voice  are,  he  plunges  into 
the  struggles  of  the  multitude  below,  and  frees  the 
devil- ridden  boy  from  the  demon  that  possessed  him. 
Begin  by  all  means  with  poverty  of  spirit,  or  you  will 
never  get  to  this — "Blessed  are  the  peacemakers." 
But  see  to  it  that  poverty  of  spirit  leads  to 
the  meekness,  the  mercifulness,  the  peace-bringing 
influence  which  Christ  has  pronounced  blessed. 

II. — What  is  the  peace  which  Christ's  peacemakers 
bring  ? 

This  is  a  very  favourite  text  with  people  that  know 
very  little  of  the  depths  of  Christianity.  They  fancy 
that  it  appeals  to  common  sense  and  men's  natural 
consciences,  apart  altogether  from  minutenesses  of 
doctrine  or  of  Christian  experience.  They  are  very 
much  mistaken.  No  doubt  there  is  a  surface  of  truth, 
but  only  a  surface,  in  the  application  that  is  generally 
given  to  these  words  of  our  text,  as  if  it  meant  nothing 
more  than  "  He  is  a  good  man  that  goes  about  and 
tries  to  make  contending  people  give  up  their  quarrels, 
and  produces  a  healing  atmosphere  of  tranquillity 
wherever  he  goes."  That  is  perfectly  true,  but  there 
is  a  oi'eat  deal  more  in  the  text  than  that.     If  we 


CS  THE  SEVENTH  BEATITUDE. 

consider  the  Scrij)tural  usage  of  this  great  word 
"  peace,"  and  all  the  ground  that  it  covers  in  human 
experience ;  if  we  remember  that  it  enters  as  an 
element  into  Christ's  own  name,  the  "  Peace-Bringer," 
the  "  Prince  of  Peace "  ;  and  if  we  notice,  as  I  have 
already  done,  the  place  which  this  Beatitude  occupies 
in  the  series,  we  shall  be  obliged  to  look  for  some  far 
deeper  meaning  before  Ave  can  understand  the  sweep 
of  our  Lord's  intention  here. 

I  do  not  think  that  I  am  going  one  inch  too  far,  or 
forcing  meanings  into  His  words  which  they  are  not 
intended  to  bear,  when  I  say  that  the  first  characteristic 
of  the  peace  which  His  disciples  have  been  passed 
through  their  apprenticeship  in  order  to  lit  them  to 
bring  is  the  peace  of  reconciliation  with  God.  The 
cause  of  all  the  other  fightings  in  the  world  is  that 
men's  relation  to  the  Father  in  heaven  is  disturbed, 
and  that,  whilst  there  flow  out  from  Him  only  amity 
and  love,  these  are  met  by  us  with  antagonism  often, 
with  opposition  of  will  often,  with  alienation  of  heart 
often,  and  with  indifference  and  forgetfulness  almost 
uniformly.  So  the  first  thing  to  be  done  to  make  men 
at  peace  with  one  another  and  with  themselves  is  to 
rectify  their  relation  to  God,  and  bring  peace  there. 

We  often  hear  in  these  days  complaints  of  Christian 
Churches  and  Christian  people  because  they  do  not 
fling  themselves  with  sufficient  energy  to  please  the 
censors  into  movements  which  are  intended  to  bring- 
about  happier  relations  in  society.  The  longest  way 
round  is  sometimes  the  shortest  way  home.  It  does 
not  belonsf  to  all  of  us  Christians,  and  I  doubt  whether 
it  belongs  to  the  Christian  Church  as  such  at  all,  to 


i 


THE  SEVENTH  BEA  TITUDE.  69 


fling  itself  into  the  movements  to  which  I  have 
referred.  But  if  a  man  go  and  carry  the  great 
message  of  a  reconciled  and  a  reconciling  God  mani- 
fest in  Jesus  Christ,  and  bringing  peace  between  men 
and  God,  he  will  have  done  more  to  sweeten  society 
and  put  an  end  to  hostility  than  I  think  he  will  be 
likely  to  do  by  any  other  method.  Christian  men  and 
women,  whatever  else  you  and  I  are  here  for,  we  are 
here  mainly  that  we  may  preach,  by  lip  and  life,  the 
great  message  that  in  Christ  is  our  peace,  and  that 
God  was  in  Christ  "reconcihng  the  world  to  Him- 
self." 

We  are  not  to  leave  out,  of  course,  that  which  is  so 
often  taken  as  being  the  sole  meaning  of  the  great 
word  of  my  text.  There  is  much  that  we  are  all 
bound  to  do  to  carry  the  tranquillising  and  soothing 
influences  of  Gospel  principles  and  of  Christ's  example 
into  the  littlenesses  of  daily  life.  Any  fool  can  stick 
a  lucifer  match  into  a  haystack  and  make  it  burn.  It 
is  easy  to  promote  strife.  There  is  a  malicious  love 
of  it  in  us  all ;  and  ill-natured  gossip  has  a  great  deal 
to  do  in  bringing  it  about.  But  it  takes  something 
more  to  put  the  fire  out  than  it  did  to  light  it,  and 
there  is  no  nobler  office  for  Christians  than  to  seek  to 
damp  down  all  these  devil's  flames  of  envy  and 
jealousy  and  mutual  animosity.  We  have  to  do  it, 
first,  by  making  very  sure  that  we  do  not  answer 
scorn  with  scorn,  gibes  with  gibes,  hate  Avith  hate,  but 
"  seek  to  overcome  evil  with  good."  It  takes  two  to 
make  a  quarrel,  and  3^our  most  hostile  antagonist 
cannot  break  the  peace  unless  you  help  him.  If  you 
are  resolved  to  keep  it,  kept  it  will  be. 


THE  SEVENTH  BEATITUDE. 


May  I  say  anotlier  word  ?  I  think  that  our  text, 
though  it  goes  a  good  deal  deeper,  does  also  very 
]ilainly  tell  us  Christian  folk  what  is  our  duty  in  rela- 
t  ion  to  literal  warfare.  There  is  no  need  for  me  to 
discuss  here  the  question  as  to  whether  actual  fighting 
\x\t\\  armies  and  swords  is  ever  legitimate  or  not.  It 
is  a  curious  kind  of  Christian  duty  certainl}^,  if  it  ever 
gets  to  be  one.  And  when  one  thinks  of  the  militarism 
that  is  crushing  Europe  and  driving  her  ignorant 
classes  to  wild  schemes  of  revolution ;  and  when  one 
thinks  of  the  hell  of  battlefields,  of  the  miseries  of  the 
wounded,  of  mourning  widows,  of  ruined  peaceful 
peasants,  of  the  devil's  passions  that  war  sets  loose, 
some  of  us  find  it  extremely  hard  to  believe  that  that 
is  ever  in  accordance  with  the  mind  of  Christ.  But 
whether  you  agree  with  me  in  that  or  no,  surely  my 
text  points  to  the  duty  of  the  Christian  Church  to 
take  up  a  very  much  more  decisive  position  in  re- 
ference to  the  military  spirit  than,  alas  !  it  ever  has 
done.  C'ertainly  it  does  seem  to  be  not  very  obviously 
in  accordance  with  Christ's  teachings  that  men- of- war 
should  be  launched  with  a  religious  service,  or  that 
Te  Devmfi  should  be  sung  because  thousands  have 
been  killed.  It  certainly  does  seem  to  be  something 
]  ike  a  satire  on  European  Christianity  that  one  of  the 
chief  lessons  we  have  taught  the  East  is  that  we 
have  instructed  the  Japanese  how  to  use  Western 
weapons  to  fight  their  enemies.  Surely,  surely,  if 
(■hristian  churches  laid  to  heart  as  they  ought  these 
plain  words  of  the  Master,  they  would  bring  their 
united  influence  to  bear  against  that  demon  of  war, 
and  that  pinchbeck,  spurious  glory  which  is  connected 


THE  SEVENTH  BE  A  TITUDE.  71 


with  it.     "  Blessed  are  the  peacemakers."     Let  its  try 
to  earn  the  benediction, 

III. — Lastly,  note  the  issue  of  this  peacemaking. 

"  They  shall  be  called  the  sons  of  God."  Called  ? 
By  Avhom  ?  Christ  does  not  say,  but  it  should  not  be 
difficult  to  ascertain.  It  seems  to  me  that  to  suppose 
that  it  is  by  men  degrades  this  promise,  instead  of 
making  it  the  climax  of  the  whole  series.  Besides,  it 
is  not  true  that  if  a  Christian  man  lives  as  I  have 
been  trying  to  describe,  protesting  against  certain 
evils,  trying  to  diffuse  an  atmosphere  of  peace  round 
about  him  ;  and,  above  all,  seekinof  to  make  known  the 
Name  of  the  great  Peacemaker,  men  will  generally  call 
him  a  "  son  of  God."  The  next  verse  but  one  tells  us 
what  they  will  call  him.  "  Blessed  are  ye  when  men 
shall  revile  you,  and  persecute  you,  and  say  all  manner 
of  evil  against  you  falsely  for  My  sake."  They  are  a 
great  deal  more  likely  to  have  stones  and  rotten  eggs 
flung  at  them  than  to  be  pelted  with  bouquets  of 
scented  roses  of  popular  ajDproval.  No  !  no  !  it  is  not 
man's  judgment  that  is  meant  here.  It  matters  very 
little  what  men  call  us.  It  matters  everything  what 
God  calls  us.  It  is  He  who  Avill  call  them  "  sons  of 
God."  So  the  Apostle  John  thought  that  Christ 
meant,  for  he  very  beautifully  and  touchingly  quotes 
this  passage  when  he  says  "  Beloved !  behold  what 
manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us,  that 
we  should  be  called  the  sons  of  God," 

God's  calling  is  a  recognition  of  men  for  what  they 
are.  God  owns  the  man  that  lives  in  the  fashion  that 
we  have  been  trying  to  outline — God  owns  him  for 
His    child ;   manifestly  a   son,   because   he   has   the 


72  THE  SEVENTH  BEATITUDE. 

Father's  likeness.  "  Be  ye  therefore  imitators  of  God 
as  beloved  children,  and  walk  in  love."  The  Peace- 
maker is  first  the  name  of  God  in  Christ,  and  they  who 
go  about  the  world  proclaiming  His  peace  and  making 
peace,  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly,  and  are  owned 
by  God  as  His  sons. 

What  does  that  owning  mean  ?  Well,  it  means  a 
great  deal  which  has  yet  to  be  disclosed,  but  it  means 
this,  too,  that  the  whisper  of  the  Voice  which  owns  us 
for  children  will  be  heard  by  ourselves.  The  Spirit 
which  cries  "  Abba,  Father ! "  will  open  our  ears  to 
hear  Him  say,  "  Thou  art  My  beloved  Son."  Or,  to  put 
it  into  plain  English,  there  is  no  surer  way  by  which 
we  can  come  to  the  calm,  happy,  continual  conscious- 
ness of  being  the  children  of  God  than  by  this  living 
like  Him,  to  spread  the  peace  of  God  over  all  hearts. 

I  have  said  in  former  sermons  that  all  these 
promises,  which  are  but  the  natural  outcome  of  the 
characteristics  to  which  they  are  attached,  have  a 
double  reference,  being  in  germ  here,  and  in  maturity 
hereafter.  Like  the  rest,  this  one  has  that  double 
reference.  For  the  consciousness,  here  and  now,  that 
we  are  the  children  of  God  is  but,  as  it  were,  the 
morning  twilight  of  what  shall  hereafter  be  an  un- 
setting  meridian  sunshine.  What  depths  of  Divine 
assimilation,  what  mysteries  of  calm,  peaceful,  filial 
fellowship,  what  riches  beyond  count  of  Divine  in- 
heritance, lie  in  the  name  of  son,  the  possession  of  these 
alone  can  tell.  For  the  same  Apostle  whose  comment 
upon  these  words  we  have  already  quoted  goes  on  to 
say,  "  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be." 

Only  we  have  one  assurance,  wide  enough   for  all 


THE  SEVEXTH  BEATITUDE.  73 

anticipation,  and  firm  enough  for  solid  hope :  "  If 
children,  then  heirs;  heirs  of  God,  and  joint-heirs 
with  Christ."  He  must  make  us  sons  before  we  can 
be  called  the  sons  of  God.  He  must  give  us  peace 
with  God,  with  ourselves,  with  men,  with  circum- 
stances, before  we  can  go  forth  effectually  to  bring 
peace  to  others.  If  He  has  given  us  these  things.  He 
has  bound  us  to  spread  them.  Let  us  do  so.  And  if 
our  peace  ever  is  spoken  in  vain  as  regards  others,  it 
will  come  back  to  us  again  ;  and  we  shall  be  kept  in 
perfect  peace,  even  in  the  midst  of  strife,  until  we 
enter  at  last  into  the  City  of  Peace  and  serve  the 
Kinsf  of  Peace  for  ever. 


VIII. 

^cacber  or  Saviour? 

"The  same  came  to  Jesus  by  night,  and  said  unto  Him,  Rabbi,  \re 

know  that  Tbou  art  a  Teacher  come  from  God  :    for  no  man  can  do 

ihese    miracles    that    Thou   doest,    except   G-od   be   with   him." — 

John  iii.  2. 

21HE  connection  in  which  the  EvangeHst 
introduces  the  story  of  Nicodemus 
throws  great  light  on  the  aspect  under 
which  we  are  to  regard  it.  He  has 
just  been  saying  that  upon  our  Lord's 
first  visit  to  Jerusalem  at  the  Passover  there  was  a 
considerable  amount  of  interest  excited,  and  a  kind  of 
imperfect  faith  in  Him  drawn  out,  based  solely  on  His 
miracles.  He  adds  that  this  faith  was  regarded  by 
Christ  as  unreliable.  And  lie  goes  on  to  explain  that 
our  Lord  exercised  great  reserve  in  His  dealings  with 
the  persons  Avho  professed  it,  for  the  reason  that  "He 
knew  all  men,  and  needed  not  that  any  should  testify 
of  man,  for  He  knew  what  was  in  man." 

Now,  if  you  note  that  reiteration  of  the  word 
"  man,"  you  will  understand  the  description  Avhich  is 
given  of  the  person  who  is  next  introduced.  "  He 
knew  what  was  in  man.  There  was  a  "man  of  the 
Pharisees  named  Nicodemus,  a  ruler  of  the  Jews."     It 


TEACHER  OR  SAVIOUR?  75 

would  have  been  enough  to  have  said,  "  There  was  a 
Pharisee."  When  John  says  "  a  man  of  the 
Pharisees  "  he  is  not  merely  carried  away  by  the  echo 
in  his  ears  of  his  own  last  words,  but  it  is  as  if  he 
had  said,  "  Now,  here  is  one  illustration  of  the  sort  of 
thing  that  I  have  been  speaking  about ;  one  specimen 
of  the  imperfect  faith  built  upon  miracles ;  and  one 
illustration  of  the  way  in  which  Jesus  Christ  dealt 
with  it." 

He  was  "  a  Pharisee."  That  tells  us  of  the  school 
to  which  he  belonged,  and  the  sfeneral  drift  of  his 
thought.  He  was  "  a  ruler  of  the  Jews."  That  tells 
us  that  he  held  an  official  position  in  the  supreme 
court  of  the  nation,  to  which  the  Romans  had  left 
some  considerable  shadow  of  power  in  ecclesiastical 
matters.  And  this  man  comes  to  Christ,  and  acknow- 
ledges Him.  Christ  deals  with  him  in  a  very  suggestive 
fashion.  His  confession,  and  the  Avay  in  which  our 
Lord  received  it,  are  what  I  desire  to  consider  briefly 
in  this  sermon. 

I. — Note,  then,  first,  this  imperfect  confession. 

Everything  about  it,  pretty  nearly,  is  wrong,  "  He 
came  to  Jesus  by  night,"  half  ashamed,  and  wholly 
afraid,  of  speaking  out  the  conviction  that  was  work- 
ing in  him.  He  was  a  man  in  position.  He  could 
not  compromise  himself  in  the  eyes  of  his  co-sanhe- 
drists.  "  It  would  be  a  grave  thing  for  a  man  like  me 
to  be  found  in  converse  with  this  new  Rabbi  and 
apparent  Prophet,  I  must  go  cautiously,  and  have 
regard  to  my  reputation  and  my  standing  in  the 
world ;  and  shall  steal  to  Him  by  night."  There  is 
something  wrong  with  any   convictions  about  Jesus 


76  TEACHER  OR  SAVIOUR? 

Christ  which  let  themselves  be  huddled  up  in  secret. 
The  true  apprehension  of  Him  is  like  a  fire  in  a  man's 
hones,  that  makes  him  "  wearj'-  of  forbearing  "  when  he 
locks  his  lips,  and  forces  him  to  speak.  If  Christians 
can  be  dumb,  there  is  something  dreadfully  wrong 
with  their  Christianity.  If  they  do  not  regard  Jesus 
Christ  in  such  an  aspect  as  to  oblige  them  to  stand 
out  in  the  world  and  say,  "  Whatever  anybody  says  or 
thinks  about  it,  I  am  Christ's  man,"  then  be  sure  that 
they  do  not  yet  know  Him  as  they  ought  to  do.  He 
"  came  to  Jesus  by  night."  And  therein  condemned 
himself 

He  said,  "  Rabbi,  we  know."  There  is  more  than  a 
soupgon  of  patronage  in  that.  He  is  giving  Jesus 
Christ  a  certificate,  duly  signed  and  sealed  by  Rab- 
binical authority.  He  evidently  thinks  that  it  is  no 
small  matter  that  he  and  some  of  his  fellows  should 
have  been  disposed  to  look  with  favour  upon  this  new 
Teacher.  And  so  he  comes,  if  not  patronising  the 
young  man,  at  all  events  extremely  conscious  of  his 
own  condescension  in  recomisincf  Him.     "  We  know." 

Had  he  the  right  to  speak  for  any  of  his  fellows  ? 
If  so,  then  at  that  very  early  stage  of  our  Lord's 
ministr}^  there  was  a  conviction  beginning  to  work  in 
that  body  of  ecclesiastics  which  casts  a  very  lurid  light 
on  their  subsequent  proceedings.  It  was  a  good  long 
while  after,  when  Jesus  Christ's  attitude  towards  them 
had  been  a  little  more  clearly  made  out  than  it  was  at 
the  beginning,  that  they  said  officially,  "  As  for  this 
fellow,  we  know  not  whence  He  is."  They  "  knew  " 
when  He  did  not  seem  to  be  trenching  on  their  pre- 
rogatives, or  driving  His  Ithuriel-spear  through  their 


TEACHER  OR  SAVIOUR?  77 


ti'caditional  professions  of  orthodoxy  and  punctiHous 
casuistries.  But  when  He  trod  on  their  toes,  when  he 
ripped  up  their  pretensions,  when  He  began  to  show 
his  antagonism  to  their  formahsm  and  traditionahsm 
then  they  did  not  know  where  He  came  from  And 
there  are  plenty  of  us  that  are  very  pohte  to  Jesus 
thrist  as  long  as  He  does  not  interfere  with  us  and 
who  begin  to  doubt  His  authority  when  He  begins  to 
rebuke  our  sins. 

The  man  that  said, "  We  know,"  and  then  proceeded 
to  tell  Christ  the  grounds  upon  which  He  was 
accepted  by  him,  was  not  in  the  position  which 
becomes  smful  men  drawing  near  to  their  Saviour 
"  We  know  that  Thou  art  a  Teacher."  Contrast  that 
with  its  ring  of  complacency,  and,  if  not  superior,  at 
east  co-ordmate,  authority,  with  "  Jesus  I  Master  t 
have  mercy  on  me,"  or  Avith  "  Lord !  save  or  I  perish  " 
and  you  get  the  difference  between  the  way  in  which 
a  formalist,  conceited  of  his  knowledge,  and  a  poor 
perishing  sinner,  conscious  of  his  ignorance  and 
need,  go  to  the  Saviour. 

Further,  this  imperfect  confession  was  of  secondary 
value,  because  it  was  built  altogether  upon  miraculous 
evidence.  Now,  there  has  been  a  great  deal  of  ex- 
aggeration about  the  value  of  the  evidence  of  miracle 
The  undue  elevation  to  which  it  was  lifted  in  the 
apologetic  hterature  of  the  last  century,  when  it  was 
made  out  almost  as  if  there  was  no  other  proof  that 
Jesus  came  from  God  than  that  he  wrought  miracles 
has  naturally  led,  m  this  generation  and  in  the  last  one,' 
to  an  equally  exaggerated  undervaluino-  of  its  worth' 
Jesus  Christ  did  appeal  to  signs ;  He^did  also  most 


78  TEACHER  OR  SAVIOUR? 

distinctly  place  faith  that  rested  merely  upon  miracle 
as  second  best ;  wlicu  He  said,  for  instance,  "  If  ye 
believe  not  Me,  yet  believe  the  works."  Nicodemus 
says,  "  We  know  that  Thou  art  a  teacher  sent  from 
God,  because  no  man  can  do  these  miracles  except 
God  be  with  him,"  Ah  !  Nicodemus !  did  not  the 
substance  of  the  teaching  reveal  the  source  of  the 
teaching  even  more  completely  than  the  miracles 
that  accompanied  it  ?  Surely,  if  I  may  use  an  old 
illustration,  the  bell  that  rings  in  to  the  sermon 
(which  is  the  miracles)  is  less  conclusive  as  to  the 
Divine  source  of  the  teaching^  than  is  the  sermon  itself. 
Christ  Himself  is  His  own  best  evidence,  and  His 
words  shine  in  their  own  light,  and  need  no  signs  in 
order  to  authenticate  their  source.  The  signs  are 
there,  and  are  precious  in  my  eyes  less  as  credentials 
of  His  authority  than  as  revelations  of  His  charactei 
and  His  work.  They  are  wonders ;  that  is  much 
They  are  proofs  ;  as  I  believe.  But,  high  above  botb 
of  these  characteristics,  they  are  signs  of  the  spiritual 
work  that  He  does,  and  manifestations  of  His  redeeming 
power.  And  so  a  faith  that  had  no  ears  for  the  ring  oi' 
the  Divine  voice  in  the  words,  and  no  eyes  for  the 
beauty  and  perfection  of  the  character,  w^as  vulgar  and 
low  and  unreliable,  inasmuch  as  it  could  give  no  better 
reason  for  itself  than  that  Jesus  had  wrought  miracles. 
I  need  not  remind  you  of  how  noticeable  it  is  that 
at  this  very  early  stage  in  our  Lord's  ministry  there 
were  a  sufficient  number  of  miracles  done  to  be 
qualified  by  the  Evangelist  as  "  many,"  and  to  have 
been  a  very  powerful  factor  in  bringing  about  this 
real,  though  imperfect,  faith.     John  has  only  told  us 


TEACHER  OR  SA  VIOUR  ?  79 

of  one  miracle  prior  to  this.  And  the  other  Evangel- 
ists do  not  touch  upon  these  early  days  of  our  Lord's 
ministry  at  all.  So  that  we  are  to  think  of  a  whole 
series  of  works  of  power  and  supernatural  grace  which 
have  found  no  record  in  these  short  narratives.  How 
much  more  Jesus  Christ  was,  and  did,  and  said,  than 
any  book  can  ever  tell !  These  are  but  parts  of  His 
ways ;  a  whisper  of  His  power.  The  fulness  of  it 
remains  unrevealed  after  all  revelation. 

But  the  central  deficiency  of  this  confession  lies  in 
the  altogether  inadequate  conception  of  Jesus  Christ 
and  His  work  which  it  embodies.  "  We  know  that 
Thou  art  a  teacher,  a  miracle  worker,  a  man  sent  from 
God,  and  in  communion  with  Him."  These  are  large 
recognitions,  far  too  large  for  any  but  a  select  fcAv  of 
the  sons  of  men.  But  they  fall  miserably  beneath  the 
grandeur,  and  do  not  even  approach  within  sight  of 
the  central  characteristic,  of  Christ  and  of  His  work. 
Nicodemus  is  the  type  of  large  numbers  of  men 
nowadays.  All  the  people  that  have  a  kind  of  loose, 
superficial  connection  with  Christianity  re-echo  sub- 
stantially his  words.  They  compliment  Jesus  Christ 
out  of  His  Divinity,  and  out  of  His  redeeming  work, 
and  seem  to  think  that  they  are  rather  conferring  an 
honour  upon  Christianity  when  they  condescend  to 
say,  "  We,  the  learned  pundits  of  literature ;  we,  the 
arbiters  of  taste ;  we,  the  guides  of  opinion ;  we,  the 
writers  in  newspapers  and  magazines  and  periodicals ; 
we,  the  leaders  in  social  and  philanthropic  move- 
ments— we  recognise  that  Thou  art  a  teacher."  Yes, 
brethren,  and  the  recognition  is  utterly  inadequate  to 
the  facts  of  the  case,  and  is  insult,  and  not  recognition. 


80  TEACHER  OR  SAVIOUR. 


II. — Let  me  ask  you  to  look  noAv,  in  the  next  place, 
at  tlie  way  in  which  Jesus  Christ  deals  with  this 
imperfect  confession. 

It  was  a  great  thing  for  ayoung  Rabbi  from  Nazareth, 
that  had  no  certificate  from  the  authorities,  to  find 
an  opening  thus  into  the  very  centre  of  the  Sanhedrim. 
There  is  nothing  in  life,  to  an  ardent  young  soul,  at 
the  beginning  of  his  career — especially  if  he  feels  he 
has  a  burden  laid  upon  him,  to  deliver  to  his  fellows 
— half  so  sweet  as  the  early  recognition  b}^  some 
man  of  wisdom  and  weight  and  influence,  that  he, 
too,  is  a  messenger  from  God.  In  later  years  praise 
and  acknowledgment  cloy.  And  one  might  have 
expected  some  passing  word  from  the  Master  that 
would  have  expressed  such  a  feeling  as  that,  if  He  had 
been  only  a  young  Teacher  seeking  for  recognition. 
I  remember  that  in  that  strange  medley  of  beauty  and 
absurdity,  the  Koran,  somewhere  or  other,  there  is  an 
outpouring  of  Mahomet's  heart  about  the  blessed- 
ness of  his  first  finding  a  soul  that  would  believe 
in  him.  And  it  is  strange  that  Jesus  Christ  had 
no  more  welcome  for  this  man  than  the  story  tells 
that  He  had.  For  He  meets  him  without  a  word 
of  encouragement ;  without  a  word  that  seemed 
to  recognise  even  a  growing  and  a  groping  confi- 
dence. And  yet  He  would  not  quench  the  smoking 
flax.  Yes !  Sometimes  the  kindest  way  to  deal 
with  an  imperfect  conception  is  to  show  unsparingly 
why  it  is  imperfect;  and  sometimes  the  apparent 
repelling  of  a  partial  faith  is  truly  the  drawing  to 
Himself  by  the  Christ  of  the  man,  though  his  faith 
be  not  approved. 


TEACHER  OR  SAVIOUR?  81 

So,  notice  how  our  Lord  meets  the  imperfections  of 
this  acknoAvledgment.  He  begins  by  pointing  out 
what  is  the  deepest  and  universal  need  of  men. 
Nicodemus  had  said :  "  Rabbi,  we  know  that  Thou  art 
a  Teacher  come  from  God,"  And  Christ  says :  "  Verily, 
verily,  I  say  unto  you,  ye  must  be  born  again,"  What 
has  that  to  do  with  Nicodemus'  acknowledofment  ? 
Apparently  nothing ;  really  everything.  For,  if  you 
will  think  for  a  moment,  you  will  see  how  it  meets  it 
precisely,  and  forces  the  rabbi  to  deepen  his  concep- 
tion of  the  Lord.  The  first  thing  that  you  and  I  want, 
for  our  participation  in  the  Kingdom  of  God,  is  a 
radical  out-and-out  change  in  our  whole  character  and 
nature.  "  Ye  must  be  born  again."  Noav,  whatever 
more  that  means,  it  means,  at  all  events,  this — a 
thorough-going  renovation  and  metamorphosis  of  a 
man's  nature,  as  the  deepest  need  that  the  world 
and  all  the  individuals  that  make  up  the  world 
have. 

The  deepest  ground  of  that  necessity  lies  in  the 
fact  of  sin.  Brother,  we  can  only  verify  our  Lord's 
assertion  by  honestly  searching  the  depths  of  our  own 
hearts,  and  looking  at  ourselves  in  the  light  of  God. 
Think  what  is  meant  when  we  say,  "  He  is  Light,  and 
in  Him  is  no  darkness  at  all."  Think  of  that  absolute 
purit}^  that,  to  us,  awful  aversion  from  all  that  is  evil 
from  all  that  is  sinful.  Think  of  what  sort  of  men 
they  must  be  who  can  see  the  Lord.  And  then  look 
at  3'Ourself.  Are  we  fit  to  pass  that  threshold  ?  Are 
we  fit  to  gaze  into  that  face  ?  Is  it  possible  that  we 
should  have  fellowship  with  Him  ?  Oh,  brethren,  if 
we  rightly  meditate  upon  two  facts,  the  holiness  of 

6 


82  TEACHER  OR  SAVIOUR? 

Ood,  and  our  own  characters,  I  think  we  shall  feel 
that  Jesus  Christ  has  truly  stated  the  case  when  He 
says,  "  Ye  must  be  born  again."  Unless  you  and  I 
can  get  ourselves  radically  changed,  there  is  no 
heaven  for  us  ;  there  is  no  fellowship  with  God  for  us. 
"We  must  stand  before  Him,  and  feel  that  a  great  gulf 
is  fixed  between  us  and  Him. 

And  so  when  a  man  comes  with  his  poor  little, 
"  Thou  art  a  Teacher,"  no  words  are  wanted  in  order 
to  set  in  glaring  light  the  utter  inadequacy  of  such  a 
conception  as  that.  What  the  world  wants  is  not  a 
Teacher,  it  is  a  Life-giver.  What  men  want  is  not 
to  be  told  the  truth ;  they  know  it  already.  What 
they  want  is  not  to  be  told  their  duty ;  they  know 
that,  too.  What  they  want  is  some  power  that  shall 
turn  them  clean  round.  And  what  each  of  us  wants 
before  we  can  see  the  Lord  is,  that,  if  it  may  be, 
something  shall  lay  hold  of  us,  and  utterly  change 
our  natures,  and  express  from  our  hearts  the  black 
drop  that  lies  there  tainting  everything. 

Now,  this  necessity  is  met  in  Jesus  Christ.  For 
there  w^ere  tw^o  "  musts  "  in  His  talk  with  Nicodemus, 
and  both  of  them  bore  directly  on  the  one  purpose  of 
deepening  Nicodemus'  inadequate  conception  of  what 
He  was  and  w^hat  He  did.  He  said,  "  Ye  must  be 
born  again,"  in  order  that  the  hearer,  and  we,  might 
lay  to  heart  this,  that  we  need  something  more  than 
a  Teacher,  even  a  Life-giver ;  and  He  said,  "  the  Son 
of  j\Lan  must  be  lifted  up,"  in  order  that  we  might  all 
know  that  in  Him  the  necessity  is  met,  and  that  the 
Son  of  Man  who  came  doAvn  from  heaven,  and  is  in 
heaven,  even  whilst  He  is  on  earth,  is  the  sole  ladder 


TEACHER  OR  SA  VIOUR  ?  83 

by  wliicli  men  can  ascend  into  heaven  and  gaze  upon 
God. 

Tims  it  is  Christ's  work  as  Redeemer,  Christ's  sacri- 
fice on  the  Cross,  Christ's  power  as  bringing  to  the 
world  a  new  and  holy  life,  and  breathing  it  into  all 
that  trust  in  Him,  which  makes  the  very  centre  of 
His  work.  Set  by  the  side  of  that  this  other,  "  Thou 
art  a  Teacher  sent  from  God."  Ah,  brethren,  that  will 
not  do;  it  will  not  do  for  you  and  me.  We  want 
something  a  great  deal  deeper  than  that.  The  secret 
of  Jesus  is  not  disclosed  until  we  have  passed  into  the 
inner  shrine,  where  we  learn  that  He  is  the  Sacrifice 
for  the  world,  and  the  Source  and  Fountain  of  a  new 
life.  I  beseech  you,  take  Christ's  way  of  dealing  with 
this  certificate  of  His  character  given  by  the  rabbi 
that  did  not  know  his  own  necessities,  and  ponder  it. 

Mark  the  underlying  principle  which  is  here — viz., 
if  you  want  to  understand  Christ  you  must  understand 
sin;  and  whoever  thinks  lightly  of  it  will  think 
meanly  of  Him.  An  under-estimate  of  the  reality, 
the  universalit}^  the  gravity  of  the  fact  of  sin  lands 
men  in  the  superficial  and  wholly  impotent  concep- 
tion, "  Rabbi !  Thou  art  a  Teacher  sent  from  God.' 
A  true  knowledge  of  myself  as  a  sinful  man,  of  my 
need  of  pardon,  of  my  need  of  cleansing,  of  my  need 
of  a  new  nature,  which  must  be  given  from  above,  and 
cannot  be  evolved  from  within,  leads  me,  and  I  pray 
it  may  lead  you,  to  cast  yourself  down  before  Him,-- 
with  no  complaisant  Avords  of  intellectual  recognition 
upon  your  lips,  but  with  the  old  cry,  "Lord  !  be 
merciful  to  me  a  sinner." 

in. — And  now,  dear  friends,  one  last  word.     Notice 

G* 


84  TEACHER  OE  SAVIOUR? 

when  and  where  this  imperfect  disciple  was  trans- 
formed into  a  courageous  confessor. 

We  do  not  know  what  came  immediately  of  this 
conversation.  We  only  know  that  some  considerable 
time  after  Nicodemus  had  not  screwed  himself  up  to 
the  point  of  acknowledging  out  and  out,  like  a  brave 
man,  that  he  was  Christ's  follower ;  but  that  he 
timidly  ventu]'ed  in  the  Sanhedrim  to  slip  in  a 
remonstrance  ingeniously  devised  to  conceal  his  own 
opinions,  and  yet  to  do  some  benefit  to  Christ,  when 
he  said,  "  Does  our  law  judge  any  man  before  it  hear 
him  ?  "  And,  of  course,  the  timid  remonstrance  was 
swept  aside,  as  it  deserved  to  be,  by  the  ferocious 
antasfonism  of  his  co-sanhedrists. 

But  when  the  Cross  came,  and  it  was  a  great  deal  more 
dangerous  to  avow  cliscipleship,  he  plucked  up  courage, 
or  rather  courage  flowed  into  him  from  that  Cross, 
and  he  went  boldly  and  craved  the  body  of  Jesus,  and 
got  it,  and  buried  it.  No  doubt  when  he  looked  at 
Jesus  hanojing  on  the  Cross  he  remembered  that  night 
in  Jerusalem  Avhen  the  Lord  had  said,  "  The  Son  of 
Man  must  be  lifted  up,"  and  he  remembered  how  He 
had  spoken  about  the  serpent  lifted  in  the  wilderness, 
and  a  great  light  blazed  in  upon  him,  which  for  ever 
ended  all  hesitation  and  timidity  for  him.  And  so  he 
was  ready  to  be  a  martyr,  or  anything  else,  for  the 
sake  of  Him  whom  he  now  found  to  be  far  more  than 
a  "  Teacher,"  even  the  Sacrifice  by  whom  his  stripes 
were  healed. 

Dear  brethren,  I  bring  that  Cross  to  you  now,  and 
pray  you  to  see  there  Christ's  real  work  for  us,  and 
for  the  world.     He  has  taught  us,  but  He  has  done 


TEACHER  OR  SAVIOUR?  85 

more.  He  has  not  only  spoken,  He  has  died.  He  has 
not  only  shown  us  the  path  on  which  to  walk,  He  has 
made  it  possible  for  us  to  walk  in  it.  He  is  not  merely 
one  amongst  the  noble  band  that  have  guided  and 
inspired  and  instructed  humanity,  but  He  stands 
alone — not  a  Teacher,  but  the  Redeemer,  "  the  Lamb 
of  God,  which  taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world." 

If  He  is  a  Teacher,  take  His  teachings,  and  what  are 
they  ?  These,  that  He  is  the  Son  of  God;  that  "He  came 
from  God  "  ;  that  He  "  went  to  God  "  ;  that  He  "  gives 
His  life  a  ransom  for  many";  that  He  is  to  be  the  Judge 
of  mankind ;  that  if  we  trust  in  Him,  our  sins  are  for- 
given and  our  nature  is  renewed.  Do  not  go  picking 
and  choosing  amongst  His  teachings,  for  these  which 
I  have  named  are  as  surely  His  as  "  Whatsoever  ye 
would  that  men  should  do  to  you  do  ye  even  so  to 
them,"  or  any  other  of  the  moral  teachings  which  the 
world  professes  to  admire.  Take  the  whole  teachings 
of  the  whole  Christ,  and  you  will  confess  Him  to  be  the 
Redeemer  of  your  souls,  and  the  Life-giver  by  whom, 
and  by  whom  alone,  we  enter  the  Kingdom  of  God. 


IX. 


B  Common  flDistaJ^e  an^  Xamc  ]6ycu6c. 

"  .      .      .      .      he   prophesieth  of    the   times    that  are    far   off." 
EzEKlEL  xii.  27. 


UMAN  nature  was  very  much  the  same 
in  the  exiles  that  listened  to  Ezekiel 
on  the  banks  of  the  Chebar  and  in 
Manchester  to-day.  The  same  neg- 
lect of  God's  message  was  grounded 
then  on  the  same  misapprehension  of  its  bearings 
which  profoundly  operates  in  the  case  of  many  people 
now.  Ezekiel  had  been  proclaiming  the  fall  of 
Jerusalem  to  the  exiles  Avhose  captivity  preceded  it  by 
a  few  years ;  and  he  was  confronted  by  the  incredulity 
which  fancied  that  it  had  a  great  mau}^  facts  to  support 
it,  and  so  it  generalised  God's  long-suftering  delay  in 
sending  the  threatened  punishment  into  a  scoffing 
proverb  which  said,  "The  days  are  prolonged,  and  every 
vision  faileth."  To  translate  it  into  plain  English,  the 
prophets  had  cried  "Wolf!  wolf!"  so  long  that  their 
alarms  were  disbelieved  altogether. 

Even  the  people  that  did  not  go  the  length  of  utter 
unbelief  in  the  prophetic  threatening  took  the  com- 
fortable   conclusion    that    these     threatenincrs     had 


A  COMMON  MISTAKE  AND  LAME  EXCUSE.  87 

reference  to  a  future  date,  and  they  need  not  trouble 
themselves  about  them.  And  so  they  said,  accordmg 
to  my  text,  "  They  of  the  house  of  Israel  say,  The 
vision  that  he  sees  is  for  many  days  to  come,  and  he 
prophesieth  of  the  times  that  are  far  off."  "  It  may 
be  all  quite  true,  but  it  lies  away  in  the  distant  future 
there;  and  things  will  last  our  time,  so  we  do  not 
need  to  bother  ourselves  about  what  he  says." 

So  the  imagjined  distance  of  fulfilment  turned  the 
edge  of  the  plainest  denunciations,  and  was  like  wool 
stuffed  in  the  people's  ears  to  deaden  the  reverbera- 
tions of  the  thunder. 

I  wonder  if  there  is  anybody  here  now  whom  that 
fits,  who  meets  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  with  a 
shrug,  and  with  this  saying,  "  He  prophesies  of  the 
times  that  are  far  oftV  I  fancy  there  are  a  few ;  and 
I  wish  to  say  a  word  or  two  about  this  ground  on 
which  the  widespread  disregard  of  the  Divine  message 
is  based. 

I. — First,  then,  notice  that  the  saying  of  my  text — 
in  the  application  which  I  now  seek  to  make  of  it — 
is  a  truth,  but  it  is  only  half  a  truth. 

Of  course,  Ezekiel  was  speaking  simply  about  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem.  If  it  had  been  true,  as 
his  hearers  assumed,  that  that  was  not  going  to 
happen  for  a  good  many  years  yet,  the  chances  were 
that  it  had  no  bearing  upon  them,  and  they  were 
right  enough  in  neglecting  the  teaching.  And,  of 
course,  when  I  apply  such  a  word  as  this  in  the 
direction  in  which  I  wish  to  do  now,  we  do  bring  in 
a  different  set  of  thoughts ;  but  the  main  idea  remains 
the  same.     The  neglect  of  God's  solemn  message  by  a 


A  COMMON  MISTAKE  AND  LAME  EXCUSE. 


great  many  people  is  based,  more  or  less  consciously, 
upon  the  notion  tliat  tlie  message  of  Christianity — or, 
if  you  like  to  call  it  so,  of  the  Gospel ;  or,  if  you  like 
to  call  it  more  vaguely,  religion — has  to  do  mainly 
with  blessings  and  woes  beyond  the  grave,  and  that 
there  is  plenty  of  time  to  attend  to  it  Avhen  we  get 
nearer  the  end. 

Now  is  it  true  that  "  he  prophesies  of  times  that 
are  far  off"  ?  Yes  !  and  No !  Yes  !  it  is  true,  and  it 
is  the  great  glory  of  Christianity  that  it  shifts  the 
centre  of  gravity,  so  to  speak,  from  this  poor,  transient, 
contemptible  present,  and  sets  it  away  out  yonder  in 
an  august  and  infinite  future.  It  brings  to  us  not 
only  knowledge  of  the  future,  but  certitude,  and  takes 
the  conception  of  another  life  out  of  the  region  of 
perhapses,  possibilities,  dreads,  or  hopes,  as  the  case 
may  be,  and  sets  it  in  the  sunlight  of  certainty. 
There  is  no  more  mist.  Other  faiths,  even  when  they 
have  risen  to  the  height  of  some  contemplation  of  a 
future,  have  always  seen  it  wrapped  in  nebulous  clouds 
of  possibilities,  but  Christianity  sets  it  clear,  definite, 
solid,  as  certain  as  yesterday,  as  certain  as  to-day. 

It  not  only  gives  us  the  knowledge  and  the  certi- 
tude of  the  times  that  are  afar  off,  and  that  are 
not  times  but  eternities,  but  it  wives  us,  as  the  all- 
important  element  in  that  future,  that  its  ruling 
characteristic  is  retribution.  It  "brings  life  and  im- 
mortality to  light,"  and  just  because  it  does,  it  brings 
the  dark  orb  which,  like  some  of  the  double  stars  in 
the  heavens,  is  knit  to  the  radiant  sphere  by  a  neces- 
sary band.  It  brings  to  light,  with  life  and  im- 
mortality, death  and  woe.     It  is  true — "  he  prophesies 


A  COMMON  MISTAKE  AND  LAME  EXCUSE.  89 

of  times  that  are  far  off,"  and  it  is  the  glory  of  the 
Gospel  of  Christ's  revelation,  and  of  the  religion  that 
is  based  thereon,  that  its  centre  is  beyond  the  grave, 
and  that  its  eye  is  so  often  turned  to  the  clearly  dis- 
cerned facts  that  lie  there. 

But  is  that  all  that  Ave  have  to  say  about 
Christianity  ?  Many  representations  of  it,  I  am  free 
to  confess,  from  pulpits  and  books  and  elsewhere,  do 
talk  as  if  that  uxis  all,  as  if  it  was  a  magnificent  thing 
to  have  when  you  came  to  die.  As  the  play  has  it, 
"  I  said  to  him  that  I  hoped  there  was  no  need  that 
he  should  think  about  God  yet,"  because  he  was  not 
going  to  die.  But  I  urge  you  to  remember,  dear 
brethren,  that  all  that  prophesying  of  times  that  are 
far  off'  has  the  closest  bearing  upon  this  transient, 
throbbing  moment,  because,  for  one  thing,  one 
solemn  part  of  the  Christian  revelation  about  the 
future  is  that  Time  is  the  parent  of  Eternity,  and 
that,  in  like  manner  as  in  our  earthly  course  "  the 
child  is  father  of  the  man,"  so  the  man  as  he  has 
made  himself  is  the  author  of  himself  as  he  will  be 
through  the  infinite  spaces  that  lie  beyond  the  grave. 
Therefore,  when  a  Christian  preacher  prophesies  of 
times  that  are  afar  oft',  he  is  prophesying  of  present 
time,  between  wdiich  and  the  most  distant  eternity 
there  is  an  iron  nexus — a  band  which  cannot  be 
broken. 

Nor  is  that  all.  Not  only  is  the  truth  in  my  text 
but  a  half  truth,  if  it  is  supposed  that  the  main 
business  of  the  Gospel  is  to  talk  to  us  about  heaven 
and  hell,  and  not  about  the  earth  on  which  we  secure 
and  procure  the  one  or  the  other ;  but  also  it  is  a  half 


00  A  COMMON  MISTAKE  AND  LAME  EXCUSE. 

truth  because,  larofe  and  transcendent,  eternal  in  their 
duration,  and  blessed  beyond  all  thought  in  their 
sweetness  as  are  the  possibilities,  the  certainties  that 
are  opened  by  the  risen  and  ascended  Christ,  and 
tremendous  beyond  all  Avords  that  men  can  speak  as 
are  the  alternative  possibilities,  yet  these  are  not  all 
the  contents  of  the  Gospel  message ;  but  those 
blessings  and  penalties,  joys  and  miseries,  exaltations 
and  degradations,  which  attend  upon  righteousness 
and  sin,  godliness  and  irreligion  to-day  are  a  large 
part  of  its  theme  and  of  its  effects.  Therefore,  whilst 
on  the  one  hand  it  is  true,  blessed  be  Christ's  name  ! 
that  "he  prophesies  of  times  that  are  far  off";  on  the 
other  hand  it  is  an  altogether  inadequate  description 
of  the  Gospel  message  and  of  the  Christian  body  of 
truth  to  say  that  the  future  is  its  realm,  and  not  the 
present. 

II. — So,  then,  in  the  second  place,  my  text  gives  a 
very  good  reason  for  prizing  and  attending  to  the 
prophecy. 

If  it  is  true  that  God,  speaking  through  the  facts  of 
Christ's  death  and  Resurrection  and  Ascension,  has 
given  to  us  the  sure  and  certain  hope  of  immortality, 
and  has  declared  to  us  plainly  the  conditions  upon 
which  that  immortality  may  be  ours,  and  the  woful 
loss  and  eclipse  into  the  shadow  of  which  wo  shall 
stumble  darkling  if  it  is  not  ours,  then  surely  that  is 
a  reason  for  prizing  and  laying  to  heart,  and  living 
by  the  revelation  so  mercifully  made.  People  do  not 
usually  kick  over  their  telescopes,  and  neglect  to  look 
through  them,  because  they  are  so  powerful  that  they 
show  them  the  craters  in  the  moon  and  turn  faint 


A  COMMON  MISTAKE  AND  LAME  EXCUSE.  91 

specks  into  blazing  suns.  People  do  not  usually 
neglect  a  word  of  warning  or  guidance  in  reference  to 
the  ordering  of  their  earthly  lives  because  it  is  so 
comprehensive,  and  covers  so  large  a  ground,  and  is 
so  certain  and  absolutely  true.  Surely  there  can  be 
no  greater  sign  of  Divine  loving-kindness,  of  a 
Saviour's  tenderness  and  care  for  us,  than  that  He 
should  come  to  each  of  us,  as  Ho  does  come,  and  say 
to  each  of  us,  "  Thou  art  to  live  for  ever ;  and  if  thou 
wilt  take  Me  for  thy  light,  thou  shalt  live  for  ever, 
blessed,  calm,  and  pure."  And  Ave  listen,  and  say, 
"  He  prophesies  of  times  that  are  far  off."  Oh  !  is  that 
not  rather  a  reason  for  coming  very  close  to,  and  for 
grappling  to  our  hearts  and  living  always  by  the 
power  of,  that  great  revelation?  Surely  to  announce 
the  consequences  of  evil,  and  to  announce  them  so 
long  beforehand  that  there  is  plenty  of  time  to  avoid 
them  and  to  falsify  the  prediction,  is  the  token  of 
love. 

Now  I  wish  to  lay  it  on  the  hearts  of  you  people 
who  call  yourselves  Christians,  and  who  are  so  in 
some  imperfect  degree,  whether  we  do  at  all  adequately 
regard,  remember,  and  live  by  this  great  mercy  of 
God,  that  He  should  have  prophesied  to  us  "  of  the 
times  that  are  far  off."  Perhaps  I  am  wrong,  but  I 
cannot  help  feeling  that,  for  this  generation,  the 
glories  of  the  future  rest  with  God  have  been  some- 
what paled,  and  the  terrors  of  the  future  unrest 
away  from  God  have  been  somewhat  lightened. 
I  hope  I  am  wrong,  but  I  do  not  think  that 
the  modern  average  Christian  thinks  as  much 
about  heaven   as   his    father   did.      And   I    believe 


•92  A  COMMON  MISTAKE  AND  LAME  EXCUSE. 

that  his  rehgion  has  lost  something  of  its  buoyancy,  of 
its  power,  of  its  restraining  and  stimulating  energy, 
because,  from  a  variety  of  reasons,  the  bias  of  this 
generation  is  rather  to  dwell  upon,  and  to  realise,  the 
present  social  blessings  of  Christianity  than  to  project 
itself  into  that  august  future.  The  reaction  may  be 
good.  I  have  no  doubt  it  was  needed,  but  I  think  it 
has  gone  rather  too  far.  And  I  would  beseech  Chris- 
tian men  and  women  to  try  and  deserve  more  the 
sarcasm  that  is  flung  at  us  that  we  live  for  another 
world.  Would  God  it  were  true — truer  than  it  is  ! 
We  should  see  better  work  done  in  this  world  if  it 
were.  So  I  say,  that  "  he  prophesieth  of  times  that 
are  far  off"  is  a  good  reason  for  prizing  and  obeying 
the  prophet. 

III. — Lastly,  this  is  a  very  common  and  a  very  bad 
Teason  for  neglecting  the  prophecy. 

It  does  ojDerate  as  a  reason  for  giving  little  heed  to 
the  prophet,  as  I  have  been  saying.  In  the  old  men- 
of-war,  when  an  engagement  was  impending,  they 
used  to  bring  up  the  hammocks  from  the  bunks  and 
pile  them  into  the  nettings  at  the  side  of  the  ship,  to 
defend  it  from  boarders  and  bullets.  And  then,  after 
these  had  served  their  purpose  of  repelling,  they  Avere 
taken  down  again  and  the  crew  went  to  sleep  upon 
them.  That  is  exactly  what  some  of  my  friends  do 
with  that  misconception  of  the  genius  of  Christianity 
which  supposes  that  it  is  concerned  mainly  with 
another  world.  They  put  it  up  as  a  screen  between 
them  and  God,  between  them  and  what  they  know 
to  be  their  duty — viz.,  the  acceptance  of  Christ  as 
their  Saviour,     It  is    their  hammock  that  they  put 


A  COMMON  MISTAKE  AND  LAMB  EXCUSE.  9a 


between   the   bullets  and  themselves ;    and   many  a 
good  sleep  they  get  upon  it ! 

Now,  that  strange  capacity  that  men  have  of  ignor- 
ing a  certain  future  is  seen  at  work  all  round  about 
us  in  every  region  of  life.  I  wonder  how  many  young 
men  there  are  in  Manchester  to-day  that  have  begun 
to  put  their  foot  upon  the  wrong  road,  and  who 
know  just  as  well  as  I  do  that  the  end  of  it  is  disease, 
blasted  reputation,  ruined  prospects,  perhaps  an  early 
death.  Why !  there  is  not  a  drunkard  in  the  city  that 
does  not  know  that.  Every  man  that  takes  opium 
knows  it.  Every  unclean,  unchaste  liver  knows  it ; 
and  yet  he  can  hide  the  thought  from  himself,  and 
go  straight  on  as  if  there  was  nothing  at  all  of  the  sort 
within  the  horizon  of  possibility.  It  is  one  of  the 
most  marvellous  things  that  men  have  that  power ; 
only  beaten  by  the  marvel  that,  having  it,  they  should 
be  such  fools  as  to  choose  to  exercise  it.  The  peasants 
on  the  slopes  of  Vesuvius  live  very  careless  lives,  and 
they  have  their  little  vineyards  and  their  olives. 
Yes,  and  every  morning  when  they  come  out,  they  can 
look  up  and  see  the  thin  wreath  of  smoke  going  up  in 
the  dazzling  blue,  and  they  know  that  some  time  or 
other  there  will  be  a  roar  and  a  rush,  and  down  will 
come  the  lava.  But  "  a  short  life  and  a  merry  one  " 
is  the  creed  of  a  good  many  of  us,  though  we  do  not 
like  to  confess  it.  Some  of  3'ou  will  remember  the 
strange  way  in  which  ordinary  habits  survived  in 
prisons  in  the  dreadful  times  of  the  French  Revolution, 
and  how  ladies  and  gentlemen,  who  were  going  to  have 
their  heads  chopped  off  next  morning,  danced  and 
flirted,  and  sat  at  entertainments,  just  as  if  there  was 


«1  A  COMMON  MIHTAKE  AND  LAME  EXCUSE. 

no  sucli  tiling  in  the  world  as  the  public  prosecutor 
and  the  tumbril,  and  the  gaoler  going  about  with  a  bit 
of  chalk  to  mark  each  door  where  the  condemned 
Avere  for  next  day. 

That  same  strange  power  of  ignoring  a  known  future, 
Avhicli  works  so  widely  and  so  disastrously  round  about 
us,  is  especially  manifested  in  regard  to  religion.  The 
great  bulk  of  English  men  and  women  who  are  not 
Christians,  and  the  little  sample  of  such  that  I  have 
in  my  audience  now,  as  a  rule  believe  as  fully  as 
we  do  the  truths  which  they  agree  to  neglect.  Let  me 
speak  to  them  individually.  You  believe  that  death 
will  introduce  you  into  a  world  of  two  halves — 
that  if  3^ou  have  been  a  good,  religious  man,  3'ou 
will  dwell  in  blessedness;  that  if  you  have  not, 
you  will  not — yet  you  never  did  a  single  thing, 
nor  refrained  from  a  single  thing,  because  of  that 
belief.  And  when  I,  and  men  of  my  profession, 
come  and  plead  Avith  you  and  try  to  get  through  that 
strange  web  of  insensibility  that  you  have  spun  round 
you,  you  listen,  and  then  j^ou  say,  with  a  shrug,  "  He 
prophesies  of  things  that  are  far  oft',"  and  you  turn 
with  relief  to  the  trivialities  of  the  day.  Need  I  ask 
you  whether  that  is  a  Avise  thing  or  not  ? 

Surely  it  is  not  wise  for  a  man  to  ignore  a  -future 
that  is  certain  simply  because  it  is  distant.  So  long  as 
it  is  certain,  Avhat,  in  the  name  of  common  sense,  has 
the  time  when  it  begins  to  be  a  present  to  do  with  our 
wisdom  in  regard  to  it  ?  It  is  the  uncertainty  in 
future  anticipations  Avhich  makes  it  uuAvise  to  regulate 
life  largely  by  them,  and  if  you  can  eliminate  that 
element  of  uncertainty — Avdiich  you  can   do   if  you 


A  COMMON  MISTAKE  AND  LAME  EXCUSE.  95 

believe  in  Jesus  Christ — then  the  question  is  not 
when  is  the  prophecy  going  to  be  fulfilled,  but  is  it 
true  and  trustworthy  ?  The  man  is  a  fool  who, 
because  it  is  far  off,  thinks  he  can  neglect  it. 

Surely  it  is  not  wise  to  ignore  a  future  which  is  so 
incomparably  greater  than  this  present,  and  which 
iilso  is  so  connected  with  this  present  as  that  life  here 
is  only  intelligible  as  the  vestibule  and  preparation 
for  that  great  world  beyond. 

Surely  it  is  not  wise  to  ignore  a  future  because  you 
fancy  it  is  far  away,  Avhen  it  may  burst  upon  you  at 
an}'  time.  These  exiles  to  whom  Ezekiel  spoke  hugged 
themselves  in  the  idea  that  his  words  Avere  not  to  be 
fulfilled  for  many  days  to  come ;  but  they  Avere 
mistaken,  and  the  crash  of  the  fall  of  Jerusalem 
stunned  them  before  many  months  had  passed  by. 
We  haA'e  to  look  forAvard  to  a  future  Avhich  must  be 
.very  near  to  some  of  us,  which  may  be  nearer  to 
others  than  they  thmk,  Avhich  at  the  remotest  is  but  a 
little  Avay  from  us,  and  which  must  come  to  us  all. 
Oh,  dear  friends,  surely  it  is  not  Avise  to  ignore  as  far 
off  that  which  for  some  of  us  may  be  here  before  this 
day  closes,  Avhich  will  probably  be  ours  in  some  cases 
before  the  fresh  young  leaves  noAv  upon  the  trees  have 
dropped  yellow  in  the  autumn  frosts,  AAdiich  at  the 
most  distant  must  be  very  near  us,  and  Avhich  Avaits 
for  us  all. 

What  Avould  you  think  of  the  crcAv  and  passengers 
of  some  ship  lying  in  harbour,  Avaiting  for  its  sailing 
orders,  who  had  got  leave  on  shore,  and  did  not  knoAv 
but  that  at  any  moment  the  blue-peter  might  be 
flying  at  the  fore — the  signal  to  AA'eigh  anchor — if  they 


9G  A  COMMON  MISTAKE  AND  LAME  EXCUSE. 


behaved  themselves  m  the  port  as  if  they  were  never 
going  to  embark,  and  made  no  preparations  for  the 
voyage  ?  Let  me  beseech  you  to  rid  yourselves  of 
that  most  unreasonable  of  all  reasons  for  neglecting 
the  Gospel,  that  its  most  solemn  revelations  refer  to 
the  eternity  beyond  the  grave. 

There  are  many  proofs  that  man  on  the  whole  is  a 
very  foolish  creature,  but  there  is  not  one  more 
tragical  than  the  fact  that  believing,  as  many  of  you 
do,  that  "  the  wages  of  sin  is  death,  and  the  gift  of 
God  is  eternal  life  through  Jesus  Christ,"  you  stand 
aloof  from  accepting  the  gift,  and  risk  the  death. 

The  "  times  far  off "  have  long  since  come  near 
enouQfh  to  those  scoffers.  The  most  distant  future 
will  be  present  to  you  before  you  are  ready  for  it, 
unless  you  accept  Jesus  Christ  as  your  All,  for  time 
and  for  eternity.  If  you  do,  the  time  that  is  near  wilt 
be  pure  and  calm,  and  the  times  that  are  far  off  will 
be  radiant  Avith  unfading  bliss. 


X. 


(Boincj  ®ut  anb  Gotno  3n. 

"An  entrance    .    .     .    my  decease." — 2  Peter  i.  11,  15. 

DO  not  like,  and  do  not  often  indulo^e 
in,  tlie  practice  of  taking  fragments  of 
Scripture  for  a  text,  but  I  venture  to 
isolate  these  two  words,  because  they 
correspond  to  one  another,  and  Avhen 
thus  isolated  and  connected,  bring  out  very  pro- 
minently tAvo  aspects  of  one  thing.  In  the  original 
the  correspondence  is  even  closer,  for  the  words, 
hterally  rendered,  are  "  a  going  in  "  and  "  a  going  out." 
The  same  event  is  looked  at  from  two  sides.  On  the 
one  it  is  a  departure ;  on  the  other  it  is  an  arrival. 
That  event,  I  need  not  say,  is  Death. 

I  note,  further,  that  the  expression  rendered  "  my 
decease "  employs  the  word  which  is  ahvays  used  in 
the  Greek  translation  of  the  Old  Testament  to  express 
the  departure  of  the  Children  of  Israel  from  bondage, 
and  which  gives  its  name,  in  our  language,  to  the 
Second  Book  of  the  Pentateuch.  "  My  exodus  " — 
associations  suggested  by  the  word  can  scarcely  fail  to 
have  been  in  the  writer's  mind. 

Further,  I  note  that  this  expression  for  Death  is 

7 


GOING  OUT  AND  GOING  IN. 


only  emploj^ecl  once  again  in  the  New  Testament — 
viz.,  in  St.  Luke's  account  of  the  Transfiguration, 
Avhere  Moses  and  Elias  spake  with  Jesus  "  concerning 
His  decease — the  exodus — which  He  should  accom- 
plish at  Jerusalem."  If  you  look  on  to  the  verses 
which  follow  the  second  of  my  texts  you  will  see 
that  the  Apostle  immediately  passes  on  to  speak 
about  that  Transfisjuration,  and  about  the  voice 
which  He  heard  then,  in  the  holy  mount.  So  that  I 
think  we  must  suppose  that  in  the  words  of  our 
second  text  he  was  ah*eady  beginning  to  think  about 
the  Transfiguration,  and  was  feeling  that,  somehow  or 
other,  his  "  exodus "  was  to  be  conformed  to  his 
Master's. 

Now,  bearing  all  these  points  in  mind,  let  us  just 
turn  to  these  words  and  try  to  gather  the  lessons 
which  they  suggest. 

I. — The  first  of  them  is  this,  the  double  Christian 
aspect  of  death. 

It  is  well  worth  noting  that  the  New  Testament 
very  seldom  condescends  to  use  that  name  for  the 
mere  physical  fact  of  dissolution.  It  reserves  it  for 
the  most  part  for  something  a  great  deal  more  dread- 
ful than  the  separation  of  body  and  soul,  and  uses  all 
manner  of  periphrases,  or  what  rhetoricians  call 
euphemising,  that  is,  gentle  expressions  which  put 
the  best  face  upon  a  thing  instead  of  the  ugly  word 
itself.  It  speaks,  for  instance,  as  you  may  remember, 
in  the  context  here,  about  the  "putting  off"  of  a  tent 
or  "  a  tabernacle,"  blending  the  notions  of  stripping  oft* 
a  garment," and  pulling  down  a  transitory  abode.  It 
speaks  about  death  as  a  sleep,  and  in  that  and  other 


GOING  OUT  AND  GOING  IN.  9& 

ways  sets  it  forth  in  gracious  and  gentle  aspects,  and 
veils  tlie  deformity,  and  loves  and  hopes  away  the 
dreadfulness,  of  it. 

Now  other  languages  and  other  religions  besides- 
Christianity  have  done  the  same  things,  and  Roman 
and  Greek  poets  and  monuments  have  in  like  manner 
avoided  the  grim,  plain  word — death,  but  they  have 
done  it  for  exactly  the  opposite  reason  from  that  for 
which  the  Christian  does  it.  They  did  it  because  the 
thing  was  so  dark  and  dismal,  and  because  they  knew 
so  little  and  feared  so  much  about  it.  And  Christianity 
does  it  for  exactly  the  opposite  reason,  because  it  fears, 
it  not  at  all,  and  knows  it  quite  enough.  So  it  toys, 
with  leviathan,  and  "  lays  its  hand  on  the  cockatrice 
den,"  and  my  text  is  an  instance  of  this. 

"  My  decease  ...  an  entrance."  So  the  terrible- 
ness  and  mystery  dwindled  down  into  this — a  change 
of  position  ;  or  if  locality  is  scarcely  the  right  class  of 
ideas  to  apply  to  spirits  detached  from  the  body — a 
change  of  condition.     That  is  all. 

We  do  not  need  to  insist  upon  the  notion  of  change 
of  place.  For,  as  I  say,  we  get  into  a  fog  when  we 
try  to  associate  place  with  pure  spiritual  existence. 
But  the  root  of  the  conviction  which  is  expressed 
in  both  these  phrases,  and  most  vividly  by  their 
juxtaposition,  is  this,  that  what  happens  at  death  is 
not  the  extinction,  but  the  withdrawal,  of  a  person, 
and  that  the  man  is,  as  fully,  as  truly  as  he  was, 
though  all  the  relations  in  which  he  stands  may  be 
altered. 

Now,  no  materialistic  teaching  has  any  right  to  come 
in  and  bar  that  clear  faith  and  firm  conclusion.     For 

7* 


100  GOING  OUT  AND  GOING  IN. 


by  its  very  saying  that  it  knows  nothing  about  life 
except  in  connection  with  organisation, it  acknowledges 
that  there  is  a  diiierence  between  them.  And  until 
science  can  tell  me  how  it  is  that  the  throb  of  a  brain, 
or  the  quiver  of  a  nerve,  becomes  transformed  into 
morality,  into  emotion,  I  maintain  that  it  knows  far 
too  little  of  personality  and  of  life  to  be  a  valid 
authority  when  it  asserts  that  the  destruction  of  the 
organisation  is  the  end  of  the  man.  I  feel  myself 
perfectly  free — in  the  darkness  in  which,  after  all 
investigation,  that  mysterious  transformation  of  the 
physical  into  the  moral  and  the  spiritual  lies — I  feel 
perfectly  free  to  listen  to  another  voice,  the  voice 
which  tells  me  that  life  can  subsist,  and  that  personal 
being  can  be  as  full— ay,  fuller — apart  altogether  from 
the  material  frame  which  here,  and  by  our  present 
experience,  is  its  necessary  instrument.  And  though 
accepting  all  that  physical  investigation  can  teach  us, 
we  can  still  maintain  that  its  light  does  not  illumine 
the  central  obscurity ;  and  that,  after  all,  it  still 
remains  true  that  round  about  the  being  of  each 
man,  as  round  about  the  being  of  God,  clouds  and 
darkness  roll, 

"  Life  and  thought  have  gone  away, 
Side  by  side, 
Leaving  door  and  window  wide." 

That,  and  nothing  more,  is  death — "My  decease 
.     .     .     an  entrance." 

Then,  again,  the  combination  of  these  tAvo  words 
suggests  to  us  that  the  one  act,  in  the  same  moment, 
is  both  departure  and  arrival.     There  is  not  a  pin- 


GOING  OUT  AND  GOING  IN.  101 


point  of  space,  not  the  millionth  part  of  a  second  of 
time,  intervening  between  the  two.  There  is  no  long 
journey  to  be  taken.  A  man  in  straits,  and  all  but 
desperation,  is  recorded  in  the  old  Book  to  have  said : 
"  There  is  but  a  step  between  me  and  death."  Ah, 
there  is  but  a  step  between  death  and  the  King- 
dom ;  and  he  that  passes  out  at  the  same  moment 
passes  in. 

I  need  not  say  a  word  about  theories  which  seem 
to  me  to  have  no  basis  at  all  in  our  only  source  of  in- 
formation, which  is  Revelation  ;  theories  which  would 
interpose  a  long  period  of  unconsciousness — though 
to  the  man  unconscious  it  be  no  period  at  all — 
between  the  act  of  departure  and  that  of  entrance. 
Not  so  do  I  read  the  teaching  of  Scripture :  "  This 
day  thou  shalt  be  with  Me  in  Paradise."  We  pass 
out,  and,  as  those  in-  the  vestibule  of  a  presence- 
chamber  have  but  to  lift  the  curtain  and  find  them- 
selves face  to  face  with  the  King,  so  we,  at  one  and 
the  same  moment,  depart  and  arrive. 

Friends  stands  round  the  bed,  and  before  they  can 
tell  by  the  undimmed  mirror  that  the  last  breath  has 
been  drawn,  the  saint  is  "  with  Christ,  which  is  far 
better."  To  depart  is  to  be  v/ith  Him.  There  is  a 
moment  in  the  life  of  every  believing  soul  in  which 
there  strangely  mingle  the  lights  of  earth  and  the 
lights  of  heaven.  As  you  see  in  dissolving  views,  the 
one  fades  and  the  other  consolidates.  Like  the 
mighty  Angel  in  the  Apocalypse,  the  dying  man 
stands  for  a  moment  with  one  foot  on  the  earth,  and 
the  other  already  laved  and  cleansed  by  the  waters 
of   that  sea  of   glass  mingled    with   fire  which       s 


102  GOING  OUT  AND  GOING  IN. 

before  tlie  Throne,  "  Absent  from  the  body ;  present 
with  the  Lord." 

Further,  these  two  words  suggest  that  the  same 
act  is  emancipation  from  bondage  and  entrance  into 
royalty. 

"  My  exodus,"  Israel  came  out  of  Egyptian  servi- 
tude, and  dropped  chains  from  wrists,  and  left  task- 
masters cracking  their  useless  whips  behind  them, 
and  the  brick  kilns  and  the  weary  work  were  all  done 
with  when  they  went  forth.  Ah,  brethren,  whatever 
beauty  and  good  and  power  and  blessedness  there 
may  be  in  this  mortal  life,  there  are  deep  and  sad 
senses  in  which,  for  all  of  us,  it  is  a  prison-house  and 
a  state  of  captivity.  There  is  a  bondage  of  flesh ; 
there  is  a  dominion  of  the  animal  nature ;  there  are 
limitations,  like  hirfi  walls,  cribbing^,  cabininof,  con- 
fining  us — the  limitations  of  circumstance.  There  is 
the  slavery  of  dependence  upon  this  poor,  external, 
and  material  world.  There  are  the  tyranny  of  sin 
and  the  subjugation  of  the  nobler  nature  to  base  and 
low  and  transient  needs.  All  these  fetters,  and  the 
scars  of  them,  drop  away.  Joseph  comes  out  of  prison 
to  a  throne.  The  kingdom  is  not  merely  one  in 
which  the  redeemed  man  is  a  subject,  but  one  in 
which  he  himself  is  a  prince.  "  Have  thou  authority 
over  ten  cities."  These  are  the  Christian  aspects  of 
death. 

II. — Now,  note,  secondly,  the  great  fact  on  which 
this  view  of  death  builds  itself. 

I  have  already  remarked  that  in  one  of  my  texts 
the  Apostle  seems  to  be  thinking  about  Jesus  Christ 
and  His  decease.     The  context  also  refers  to  another 


GOING  OUT  AND  GOING  IN.  103 

incident  in  liis  own  life,  when  our  Lord  foretold  to  him 
that  the  putting  off  his  tabernacle  was  to  be  "  sudden," 
and  added  :  "  Follow  thou  Me." 

Taking  these  allusions  into  account  they  suggest 
that  it  is  the  death  of  Jesus  Christ — and  that  which 
is  inseparable  from  it,  His  Resurrection — that  changes 
for  a  soul  believing  on  Him  the  whole  aspect  of  that 
last  experience  that  awaits  us  all.  It  is  His  exodus 
that  makes  "  my  exodus  "  a  deliverance  from  captivity 
and  an  entrance  upon  royalty. 

I  need  not  remind  you,  how,  after  all  is  said  and 
done,  we  are  sure  of  life  eternal,  because  Jesus  Christ 
died  and  rose  again.  I  do  not  need  to  depreciate  other 
imperfect  arguments  which  seem  to  point  in  that 
direction,  such  as  the  instincts  of  men's  natures,  the 
craving  for  some  retribution  beyond,  the  impos- 
sibility of  believing  that  life  is  extinguished  by  the 
fact  of  physical  death.  But  whilst  I  admit  that  a 
good  deal  may  be  said,  and  strong  probabilities 
may  be  alleged,  it  seems  to  me  that  however  much 
you  may  argue,  no  words,  no  considerations,  moral 
or  intellectual,  can  suffice  to  establish  more  than 
that  it  would  be  a  very  good  thing  if  there  were  a 
future  life  and  a  probable  one  that  there  is.  But 
Jesus  Christ  comes  to  us  and  says,  "  Touch  Me, 
handle  Me ;  a  spirit  bath  not  flesh  and  bones  as  I 
have.  Here  I  am.  I  ivas  dead ;  I  am  alive  for 
evermore."  So  then  one  life,  that  we  know  about, 
has  persisted  undiminished,  apart  from  the  physical 
frame,  and  that  one  Man  has  gone  down  into  the 
dark  abyss,  and  has  come  up  the  same  as  when  He 
descended.     So  it  is  His  exodus — and,  as  I  believe, 


104  GOING  OUT  AND  GOING  IN. 

His  death  and  Resurrection  alone — on  which  the  faith 
in  immortaUty  impregnably  rests. 

But  that  is  not  the  main  point  which  the  text 
suggests.  Let  me  remind  you  how  utterly  the  whole 
aspect  of  any  difficulty,  trial,  or  sorrow,  and  especially 
of  that  culmination  of  all  men's  fears — death  itself — 
is  altered  when  we  think  that  in  the  darkest  bend  of 
the  dark  road  we  may  trace  footsteps,  not  without 
marks  of  blood  in  them,  of  Him  that  has  trodden  it  all 
before  us.  "  Follow  thou  Me,"  He  said  to  Peter  ;  and 
it  should  be  no  hard  thing  for  us,  if  we  love  Him,  to 
tread  where  He  trod.  It  should  be  no  lonely  road  for 
us  to  walk,  however  the  closest  clinging  hands  may  be 
lui twined  from  our  grasp,  and  the  most  utter  solitude 
of  which  a  human  soul  is  capable  may  be  realised, 
when  we  remember  that  Jesus  Christ  has  walked  it 
before  us. 

The  entrance,  too,  is  made  possible  because  He  has 
preceded  us.  "  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you."  So 
Ave  may  be  sure  that  when  we  go  through  those  dark 
gates  and  across  the  wild,  the  other  side  of  which 
no  man  knows,  it  is  not  to  step  out  of  "  the  warm 
})recincts  of  the  cheerful  day  "  into  some  dim,  cold, 
sad  land,  but  it  is  to  enter  into  His  presence. 

Israel's  exodus  was  headed  by  a  mummy  case,  in 
Avhich  the  dead  bones  of  their  whilom  leader  Avere 
contained.  Our  exodus  is  headed  by  the  Prince  of 
Life,  Avho  Avas  dead  and  is  alive  for  evermore. 

So,  brethren,  I  beseech  you,  treasure  these  thoughts 
more  than  you  do.  Turn  to  Jesus  Christ  and  His 
resurrection  from  the  dead  more  than  you  do.  I 
may    be    mistaken,    but   it   seems    to    me    that    the 


GOING  OUT  AND  GOING  IN.  105 


Christianity  of  this  day  is  largely  losing  the  habitual 
contemplation  of  immortality  which  gave  so  much  of  its 
strength  to  the  religion  of  past  generations.  AVe  are 
all  so  busy  in  setting  forth  and  enforcing  the  blessings 
of  Christianity  in  its  effects  in  the  present  life  that,  I 
fear  me,  we  are  largely  forgetting  what  it  does  for  us 
at  the  end,  and  beyond  the  end.  And  I  Avould  that 
we  all  thoucjht  more  of  our  exodus  and  of  our  entrance 
in  the  light  of  Christ's  death  and  resurrection.  Such 
contemplation  will  not  unfit  us  for  any  duty  or  any 
enjoyment.  It  will  lift  us  above  the  absorbed  occu- 
pation with  present  trivialities,  which  is  the  bane  of 
all  that  is  srood  and  noble.  It  will  teach  us  "a  solemn 
scorn  of  ills."  It  will  set  on  the  furthest  horizon  a 
QTeat  lisfht  instead  of  a  doleful  darkness,  and  it  will 
deliver  us  from  the  dread  of  that  '■'  shadow  feared  of 
man,"  but  not  by  those  who,  listening  to  Jesus  Christy 
have  been  taught  that  to  depart  is  to  be  with  Him. 

III. — Now,  I  meant  to  have  said  a  word,  in  the 
close  of  my  sermon,  about  a  third  point — viz.,  the 
way  of  securing  that  this  aspect  of  death  shall  be  our 
experience,  but  your  time  will  not  allow  of  my 
dwelling  upon  that  as  I  should  have  wished.  I 
would  only  point  out  that,  as  I  have  already 
suo'^ested,  this  context  teaches  us  that  it  is  His 
death  that  must  make  our  deaths  what  they  may 
become ;  and  would  ask  you  to  notice,  further,  that 
the  context  carries  us  back  to  the  preceding  verses. 
"  An  entrance  shall  be  ministered  unto  you  ahiin- 
daathj."  We  have  just  before  read,  "If  these 
things  be  in  you  and  abound,  they  make  you  that 
ye   shall    neither    be   barren   nor   unfruitful   in   the 


106  GOING  OUT  AND  GOING  IN. 


knowledge  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  ;  and  just  before 
is  the  exhortation,  "giving  all  diligence,  minister  to 
your  faith  virtue." 

So  the  Apostle,  by  reiterating  the  two  words  which 
he  had  previously  been  using,  teaches  us  that  if  death 
is  to  be  to  us  that  departure  from  bondage  and 
entrance  into  the  Kingdom,  we  must,  here  and  now, 
bring  forth  the  fruits  of  faith.  There  is  no  entrance 
hereafter,  unless  there  has  been  a  habitual  entering 
into  the  Holy  Place  by  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  even 
whilst  we  are  on  earth.  There  is  no  entrance  by  reason 
of  the  fact  of  death,  unless  all  throuofh  life  there  has 
been  an  entrance  into  rest  by  reason  of  the  fact 
of  faith. 

And  so,  dear  brethren,  I  beseech  you  to  remember 
that  it  depends  on  yourself  whether  departing  shall 
be  arrival,  and  exodus  shall  be  entrance.  One  thing 
or  other  that  last  moment  must  be  to  us  all — either  a 
dragging  us  reluctant  away  from  what  we  would  fain 
cleave  to,  or  a  glad  departure  from  a  foreign  land  and 
entrance  to  our  home.  It  may  be  as  when  Peter  w^as 
let  out  of  prison,  the  angel  touched  him,  and  the 
chains  fell  from  his  hands,  and  the  iron  gate  opened 
of  its  own  accord,  and  he  found  himself  in  the  city. 
It  is  for  you  to  settle  which  of  the  two  it  shall  be. 
And  if  you  will  take  Him  for  your  King,  Companion, 
Saviour,  Enlightener,  Life  here,  "  the  Lord  shall  bless 
your  going  out  and  coming  in  from  this  time  forth 
and  even  for  evermore." 


XI. 


Slaves  anb  jTree. 


"  He  that  is  called  in  the  Lord,  being  a  servant,  is  the  Lord's  freeman  ; 

likewise  also  he  that  is  called,  being  free,  is  Christ's  servant." — 

1  Cor.  vii.  22. 


°^^l 

^ 

°  ^ //  o- 

0   £ I' 

l^ti(S\ 

^77 

0M^/ 

W 

oKc^ 

^^ 

X« 

0>m1/ 

/a^2v    / 

i\ 

■"  »H(' 

'♦^ir^    o  * 

KAi 

HIS  remarkable  saying  occurs  in  a  re- 
markable connection,  and  is  used  for  a 
remarkable  purpose.  The  Apostle  has 
been  laying  down  the  principle  that 
the  effect  of  true  Christianity  is  greatly 
to  diminish  the  importance  of  outward  circumstance. 
And  on  that  principle  he  bases  an  advice,  dead  in  the 
teeth  of  all  the  maxims  recognised  by  worldly  prudence. 
He  says,  in  effect,  "  Mind  very  little  about  getting  on 
and  getting  up.  Do  God's  will  wherever  you  are,  and 
let  the  rest  take  care  of  itself."  Now,  the  world  says, 
"  Struggle,  wriggle,  fight,  do  anything  to  better  your- 
self." Paul  says,  '"You  will  better  yourself  by  getting 
nearer  God,  and  if  you  secure  that — art  thou  a  slave  ? 
care  not  for  it ;  if  thou  mayest  be  free,  use  it  rather. 
Art  thou  bound  to  a  Avife  ?  seek  not  to  be  loosed.  Art 
thou  loosed  ?  seek  not  to  be  bound.  Art  thou  circum^- 
cised  ?  seek  not_  to  be  uncircumcised^^^  Ajrf  x-fequire 
more,   or   can    ever    get    more,    than    the    outward 


lOS  SLAVES  AND  FREE. 


Never  mind  about  externals  :  the  main  thing  is  our 
relation  to  Jesus  Christ,  because  in  that  there  is  what 
will  be  compensation  for  all  the  disadvantages  of  any 
disadvantageous  circumstances,  and  in  that  there  is 
what  will  take  the  gilt  off  the  gingerbread  of  any 
superficial  and  fleeting  good,  and  will  bring  a  deep- 
seated  and  permanent  blessing. 

Now,  I  am  not  going  to  deal  in  this  sermon  with 
that  general  principle,  nor  even  to  be  drawn  aside  to 
speak  of  the  tone  in  which  the  Apostle  here  treats  the 
great  abomination  of  slavery,  and  the  singular  advice 
that  he  gives  to  its  victims ;  though  the  consideration 
of  the  tone  of  Christianity  to  that  master-evil  of  the 
old  world  might  yield  a  great  many  thoughts  very 
relevant  to  pressing  questions  of  to-day.  But  my 
one  object  is  to  fix  upon  the  combination  which  he 
here  brings  out  in  resfard  to  the  essence  of  the  Chris- 
tian  life  ;  how  that  in  itself  it  contains  both  mem- 
bers of  the  antithesis,  servitude  and  freedom ;  so  that 
the  Christian  man  who  is  free  externally  is  Christ's 
slave,  and  the  Christian  man  who  is  outwardly  in 
bondage  is  emancipated  by  his  union  with  Jesus 
Christ. 

There  are  two  thoughts  here,  the  application  in 
diverse  directions  of  the  same  central  idea — viz.,  the 
slavery  of  Christ's  free  men,  and  the  freedom  of 
Christ's  slaves.  And  I  deal  briefly  with  these  two 
now. 

I. — First,  then,  note  how,  according  to  the  one-half 
^  the  antithesis,  Christ's  freed  men  are  slaves. 

'  -  —-'  e  New  '^'^'^'^amf"^^"   '^oil'^ 


SLAVES  AND  FREE.  109 


by  a  man  is  extremely  remarkable.  It  might  seem  as 
if  such  a  hideous  piece  of  immorality  were  altogether 
incapable  of  yielding  any  lessons  of  good.  But  the 
Apostles  have  no  hesitation  whatever  in  taking  slavery 
as  a  clear  picture  of  the  relation  in  which  all  Christian 
people  stand  to  Jesus  Christ  their  Lord.  He  is  the 
owner  and  we  are  the  slaves.  For  you  must  remember 
that  the  word  most  inadequately  rendered  here,  "  ser- 
vant "  does  not  mean  "  a  hired  man  "  who  has,  of  his 
own  volition,  given  himself  for  a  time  to  do  specific 
work,  and  get  wages  for  it ;  but  it  means  "  a  bond- 
slave," a  chattel  owned  by  another.  All  the  ugly 
associations  which  gather  round  the  word  are  trans- 
ported bodily  into  the  Christian  region,  and  there, 
instead  of  being  hideous,  take  on  a  shape  of  beauty, 
and  become  expressions  of  the  deepest  and  most  bles- 
sed truths,  in  reference  to  Christian  men's  dependence 
upon,  and  submission  to,  and  place  in  the  household 
and  the  heart  of,  Jesus  Christ,  their  owner. 

And  what  is  the  centre  idea  that  lies  in  this  meta- 
phor, if  you  like  to  call  it  so  ?  It  is  this  :  absolute 
authority,  which  has  for  its  correlative — for  the  thing 
in  us  that  answers  to  it — unconditional  submission. 
Jesus  Christ  has  the  perfect  right  to  command  each 
of  us,  and  we  are  bound  to  bow  ourselves,  unreluctant, 
unmurmuring,  unhesitating,  with  complete  submission 
at  His  feet.  His  authority,  and  our  submission,  go 
far,  far  deeper  than  the  most  despotic  sway  of  the 
most  tyrannous  master,  or  than  the  most  abject  sub- 
mission of  the  most  downtrodden  slave.  For  no  man 
can  coerce  another  man's  will,  and  no  man  can  require 
more,   or   can    ever    get    more,    than    the    outward 


110  SLAVES  AND  FREE. 


obedience,  which  ma}^  be  rendered  with  the  most 
sullen  and  fixed  rebellion  of  a  hating  heart  and  an 
obstinate  will.  But  Jesus  Christ  demands  that  if  we 
call  ourselves  Christians  we  shall  bring,  not  our  mem- 
bers only  as  instruments  to  Him,  in  outward  surrender 
and  service,  but  that  we  shall  yield  ourselves,  with  our 
capacities  of  willing  and  desiring,  utterly,  absolutely, 
constantl}^  to  Him, 

The  founder  of  the  Jesuits  laid  it  down  as  a 
rule  for  his  Order  that  each  member  of  it  was  to 
be  in  the  master's  hand  like  a  corpse,  or  a  staff 
in  the  hand  of  a  blind  man.  That  was  horrible. 
But  the  absolute  laying  of  myself  at  the  disposal 
of  another's  will,  which  is  expressed  so  tyrannously 
in  these  figures,  is  the  simple  duty  of  every  Chris- 
tian, and  as  long  as  we  have  recalcitrating  wills, 
which  recoil  at  anything  which  Christ  commands 
or  appoints,  that  perk  up  their  own  inclinations 
in  the  face  of  His  solemn  commandment,  or  that 
shrink  from  doing  and  suffering  whatsoever  He  im- 
poses and  enjoins,  we  have  still  to  learn  what  it  means 
to  be  Christ's  disciples. 

Dear  brethren,  absolute  submission  is  not  all  that 
makes  a  disciple,  but,  depend  upon  it,  there  is  no 
discipleship  worth  calling  by  the  name  without  it. 
So  I  come  to  each  of  you  Avith  His  message  to  you : — 
Down  on  your  faces  before  Him  !  Bow  your  obstinate 
wills,  surrender  yourselves  and  accept  Him  as  abso- 
lute, dominant  Lord  over  your  whole  being!  Are 
you  Christians  after  that  pattern?  Being  freemen, 
are  you  Christ's  slaves  ? 

It  does  not  matter  what  sort  of  work  the  owner 


SLA  VES  AM)  FREE.  Ill 

sets  his  household  of  slaves  to  do.  One  man  is  picked 
out  to  be  his  pipe-bearer,  or  his  shoe-cleaner ;  and,  if 
the  master  is  a  sovereign,  another  one  is  sent  off', 
perhaps,  to  be  governor  of  a  province,  or  one  of  his 
council.  They  are  all  slaves;  and  the  service  that 
each  does  is  equally  important.  "  All  service  ranks 
the  same  with  God.  There  is  no  last  nor  first."  What 
does  it  matter  what  you  and  I  are  set  to  do  ?  Nothing ! 
And,  so,  why  need  we  struggle  and  wear  our  hearts 
out  to  get  into  conspicuous  places,  or  to  do  work  that 
shall  bring  some  revenue  of  praise  and  glory  to  our- 
selves ?  "  Play  well  thy  part ;  there  all  the  honour 
lies,"  the  world  can  say.  Serve  Christ  in  anything, 
and  all  are  alike  in  His  sioht. 

The  slave-owner  had  absolute  power  of  life  and 
death  over  his  dependents.  He  could  split  up 
families ;  he  could  sell  away  dear  ones ;  he  could 
part  husband  and  wife,  parent  and  child.  The  slave 
was  his,  and  he  could  do  what  he  liked  with  his  own, 
according  to  the  cruel  logic  of  ancient  law.  And 
Jesus  Christ,  the  Lord  of  the  household,  the  Lord  of 
providence,  can  say  to  this  one,  "  Go !  "  and  he  goes 
into  the  mists  and  the  shadows  of  death.  And  He 
can  say  to  those  that  are  most  closely  united, 
"  Loose  your  hands  !  I  have  need  of  one  of  you 
yonder.  I  have  need  of  the  other  one  here."  And  if 
we  are  wise,  if  we  are  His  servants  in  any  real  deep 
sense,  we  shall  not  kick  against  the  appointments  of 
His  supreme,  autocratic,  and  yet  most  loving  Pro- 
vidence, but  be  content  to  leave  the  arbitrament  of 
life  and  death,  of  love  united  or  of  love  parted,  in 
His  hands,  and  say,  "Whether  we  live  we  are  the 


112  SLAVES  Ay  I)  FREE. 


Lord's,  or  whether  we  die  we  are  the  Lord's ;  living  or 
dving  we  are  His," 

The  slave-owner  owned  all  that  the  slave  owned. 
He  gave  him  a  little  cottage,  with  some  humble  sticks 
of  furniture  in  it ;  and  a  bit  of  ground  on  which  to 
grow  his  vegetables  for  his  family.  But  he  to  whom 
the  owner  of  the  vegetables  and  the  stools  belonged 
owned  them  too.  And  if  we  are  Christ's  servants,  our 
banker's  book  is  Christ's,  and  our  purse  is  Christ's, 
and  our  investments  are  Christ's ;  and  our  mills,  and 
our  warehouses,  and  our  shops,  and  our  businesses  are 
His.  We  are  not  His  slaves  if  we  arrogate  to  our- 
selves the  right  of  doing  what  we  like  with  His 
possessions. 

And,  then,  still  further,  there  comes  into  our 
Apostle's  jiicture  here  yet  another  point  of  resem- 
blance between  slaves  and  the  disciples  of  Jesus.  For 
the  hideous  abominations  of  the  slave  market  are 
transferred  to  the  Christian  relation,  and  defecated 
and  cleansed  of  all  their  abominations  and  cruelty 
thereby.  For  what  follows  my  text  immediately  is, 
"  Ye  are  bought  with  a  price."  Jesus  Christ  has  won 
us  for  Himself.  There  is  only  one  price  that  can  buy 
a  heart,  and  that  is  a  heart.  There  is  only  one  way 
of  getting  a  man  to  be  mine,  and  that  is  by  giving 
myself  to  be  his.  So  we  come  to  the  very  vital, 
palpitating  centre  of  all  Christianity  when  we  say, 
"He  gave  Himself  for  us,  that  He  might  acquire  to 
Himself  a  people  for  His  possession."  Thus  His 
purchase  of  His  slave,  Avhen  we  remember  that  it  is 
the  buying  of  a  man  in  his  inmost  personality,  changes 
all   that   might  seem  harsh   in  the   requirement   of 


SLAVES  ANL  FREE.  113 

absolute  submission  into  the  most  gracious  and  blessed 
privilege.  For  when  I  am  won  by  another,  because 
that  other  has  given  him  or  her  whole  self  to  me, 
then  the  lanofuasfe  of"  love  is  submission,  and  the 
conformity  of  the  two  wills  is  the  delight  of  the  loving 
will.  Whoever  has  truly  been  wooed  into  relation- 
ship Avith  Jesus,  by  reflection  upon  the  love  with 
which  Jesus  grapples  him  to  His  heart,  finds  that 
there  is  nothing  so  blessed  as  to  yield  one's  self 
utterly  and  for  ever  to  His  service. 

The  one  bright  point  in  the  hideous  institution  of 
slavery  was  that  it  bound  the  master  to  provide  for  the 
slave,  and  though  that  was  degrading  to  the  inferior, 
it  made  his  life  a  careless,  child-like,  merry  life,  even 
amidst  the  many  cruelties  and  abominations  of  the 
system.  But  what  was  a  good,  dashed  with  a  great 
deal  of  evil,  in  that  relation  of  man  to  man,  comes  to 
be  a  pure  blessing  and  good  in  our  relation  to  Him. 
If  I  am  Christ's  slave,  it  is  His  business  to  take  care  of 
His  own  property,  and  I  do  not  need  to  trouble  myself 
much  about  it.  If  I  am  His  slave.  He  will  be  quite 
sure  to  find  me  in  food  and  necessaries  enough  to  get 
His  tale  of  work  out  of  me ;  and  I  may  cast  all  my  care 
upon  Him,  for  He  careth  for  me.  So,  brethren, 
absolute  submission  and  the  devolution  of  all  anxiety 
on  the  Master  are  what  is  laid  upon  us,  if  we  are  Christ'^ 
slaves. 

II. — Then  there  is  the  other  side,  about  which  I 
must  say,  secondly,  a  Avord  or  two ;  and  that  is,  the 
freedom  of  Christ's  slaves. 

As  the  text  puts  it,  he  that  is  called,  being  a  servant, 
is  the  Lord's  freedman.    A  freedman  was  one  who  Avas 

8 


14  SLAVES  AND  FREE. 

emancipated,  and  who  therefore  stood  in  a  relation  of 
gratitude  to  his  emancipator  and  patron.  So  in  the 
very  word  "  freedman  "  there  is  contained  the  idea  of 
submission  to  Him  who  has  struck  off  the  fetters. 

But,  apart  from  that,  let  me  just  remind  you,  in  a 
sentence  or  two,  that  whilst  there  are  many  other  ways 
by  which  men  have  sought,  and  have  partially  attained, 
deliverance  from  the  many  fetters  and  bondages  that 
attach  to  our  earthly  life,  the  one  perfect  way  by  which 
a  man  can  be  truly,  in  the  deepest  sense  of  the  word 
and  in  his  inmost  being,  a  free  man  is  by  faith  in  Jesus 
Christ. 

I  do  not  for  a  moment  forget  how  wisdom  and 
truth,  and  noble  aims  and  high  purposes,  and  culture 
of  various  kinds  have,  in  lower  degrees  and  partially, 
emancipated  men  from  self  and  flesh  and  sin  and  the 
world,  and  all  the  other  fetters  that  bind  us.  But 
sure  I  am  that  the  process  is  never  so  completely  and 
so  assuredly  effected  as  by  the  simple  way  of  absolute 
submission  to  Jesus  Christ,  taking  Him  for  the 
supreme  and  unconditional  Arbiter  and  Sovereign  of 
a  life. 

If  we  do  that,  brethren,  if  we  really  yield  ourselves 
to  Him,  in  heart  and  will,  in  life  and  conduct,  sub- 
mitting our  understanding  to  His  infallible  Word,  and 
our  wills  to  His  authority,  regulating  our  conduct  by 
His  perfect  pattern,  and  in  all  things  seeking  to  serve 
Him  and  to  realise  His  presence,  then  be  sure  of  this, 
that  we  shall  be  set  free  from  the  one  real  bondage,  and 
that  is  the  bondage  of  our  own  wicked  selves.  There 
is  no  such  tyranny  as  mob  tyranny  ;  and  there  is  no 
such  slavery  as  to  be  ruled  by  the  mob  of  our  own 


SLAVES  AND  FREE.  115 

passions  and  lusts  and  inclinations  and  other  mean- 
nesses that  yelp  and  clamour  within  us,  and  seek  to 
get  hold  of  us  and  to  sway.  There  is  only  one  way 
by  which  the  brute  domination  of  the  loAver  part  of 
our  nature  can  be  surely  and  thoroughly  put  down, 
and  that  is  by  turning  to  Jesus  Christ  and  saying  to 
Him,  "Lord!  do  Thou  rule  this  anarchic  Idngdom 
within  me,  for  I  cannot  govern  it  myself.  Do  Thou 
guide  and  direct  and  subdue."  You  can  only  govern 
yourself  and  be  free  from  the  compulsion  of  your  own 
evil  nature  when  you  surrender  the  control  to  the 
Master,  and  say  ever,  "  Speak,  Lord  '  for  Thy  slave 
hears.     Here  am  I,  send  me." 

And  that  is  the  only  way  by  which  a  man  can  be 
delivered  from  the  bondage  of  dependence  upon 
outward  things.  I  said  at  the  beginning  of  these 
remarks  that  my  text  occurred  in  the  course  of  a 
discussion  in  which  the  Apostle  was  illustrating  the 
tendency  of  true  Christian  faith  to  set  man  free  from? 
and  to  make  him  largely  independent  of,  the  varieties 
in  external  circumstances.  Christian  faith  does  so, 
because  it  brings  into  a  life  a  sufficient  compensation 
for  all  losses,  limitations,  and  sorrows,  and  a  ffood 
which  is  the  reality  of  which  all  earthly  goods  are  but 
shadows.  So  the  slave  may  be  free  in  Christ,  and  the 
poor  man  may  be  rich  in  Him,  and  the  sad  man  may  be 
joyful,  and  the  joyful  man  may  be  delivered  from  excess 
of  gladness,  and  the  rich  man  kept  from  the  tempta- 
tions and  sins  of  wealth,  and  the  free  man  taught  to 
surrender  his  liberty  to  the  Lord  who  makes  him  free. 
Thus,  if  we  have  the  all-sufficient  compensation  which 
there  is  in  Jesus  Christ,  the  satisfaction  for  all  our 

8» 


1 1 G  SLA  FES  AND  FREE. 

needs  and  desires,  we  do  not  need  to  trouble  ourselves 
so  much  as  we  sometimes  do  about  these  changing 
things  round  about  us.  Let  them  come,  let  them  go  ; 
let  the  darkness  veil  the  light,  and  the  light  illuminate 
the  darkness :  let  summer  and  winter  alternate ;  let 
tribulation  and  prosperity  succeed  each  other ;  we  have 
a  source  of  blessedness  unaffected  by  these.  Ice  may 
skin  the  surface  of  the  lake,  but  deep  beneath  the 
water  is  at  the  same  temperature  in  winter  and  in 
summer.  Storms  may  sweep  the  face  of  the  deep, 
but  in  the  abyss  there  is  calm  which  is  not  stagnation. 
So  he  that  cleaves  to  Christ  is  delivered  from  the 
slavery  that  binds  men  to  the  details  and  accidents  of 
outward  life. 

And  if  we  are  the  servants  of  Christ,  we  shall  be  set 
free,  in  the  measure  in  which  we  are  His,  from  the 
slavery  which  daily  becomes  more  oppressive  as  the 
means  of  communication  become  more  complete,  the 
slavery  to  popular  opinion  and  to  men  round 
us.  Dare  to  be  singular;  take  your  beliefs  at  first 
hand  from  the  Master.  Never  mind  what  fellow- 
slaves  say.  It  is  His  smile  or  frown  that  is  of 
importance.  "  Ye  are  bought  with  a  price ;  be  not 
servants  of  men." 

And  so,  brethren,  "  choose  you  this  day  whom  ye 
will  serve."  You  are  not  made  to  be  independent. 
Yon  must  serve  some  thing  or  person.  Recognise 
the  narrow  limitations  within  which  your  choice  lies, 
and  the  issues  which  dejoend  upon  it.  It  is  not 
whether  you  will  serve  Christ  or  whether  you  will  be 
free.  It  is  whether  j^ou  will  serve  Christ  or  your 
own  worst  self,  the  world,  men,  and  I  was  going  to 


SLA  VES  AND  FREE.  11 

add,  the  flesh  and  the  devil.  Make  your  choice.  He 
has  bought  you.  You  belong  to  Him  by  His  death. 
Yield  yourselves  to  Him ;  it  is  the  only  way  of 
breaking  your  chains.  He  that  doeth  sin  is  the 
servant  of  sin.  "  If  the  Son  make  you  free,  ye  shall 
be  free  indeed."  And  not  only  free ;  for  the  King's 
slaves  are  princes  and  nobles,  and  "  all  things  are 
yours,  and  ye  are  Christ's."  They  who  say  to  Him 
*'  0  Lord  !  truly  I  am  Thy  servant,"  receive  from  Him 
the  rank  of  kings  and  priests  to  God,  and  shall  reign 
with  Him  for  ever. 


xn. 
Zwo  fovme  of  Qnc  S^a^ing, 

"  He   that    endureth   to   the   end,   the   same    shall    be    saved." — 

Matt.  xxiv.  13. 

"  In  your  patience  possess  ye  your  souls." — Luke  xxi.  19. 

HESE  two  sayings,  different  as  they  sound 
in  our  version,  are  probably  divergent 
representations  of  one  original.  The 
reasons  for  so  supposing  are  manifold 
and  obvious  on  a  little  consideration. 
In  the  first  place,  the  two  sayings  occur  in  the  Evan- 
gelists' report  of  the  same  prophecy  and  at  the  same 
point  therein.  In  the  second  place,  the  verbal  re- 
semblance is  much  greater  than  appears  in  our 
Authorised  Version,  because  the  word  rendered 
"  patience "  in  Luke  is  derived  from  that  trans- 
lated "  endureth "  in  Matthew ;  and  the  true 
connection  between  the  two  versions  of  the  saying 
would  have  been  more  obvious  if  we  had  had  a 
similar  word  in  both,  reading  in  the  one  "he  that 
endureth,"  and  in  the  other  "in  your  endurance." 
In  the  third  place,  the  difference  between  these  two 
sayings  presented  in  our  version,  in  that  the  one  is  a 
promise  and  the  other  a  command,  is  due  to  an 
incorrect  readinof  of  St.  Luke's  words.     The  Revised 


TWO  FORMS  OF  ONE  SA  YING.  119 

Version  substitutes  for  tlie  imperative  "  possess  "  the 
promise  "  ye  shall  possess,"  and  with  that  variation  the 
two  sayings  come  a  great  deal  nearer  each  other.  In 
both  endurance  is  laid  down  as  the  condition,  which 
in  both  is  followed  by  a  promise.  Then,  finally,  there 
need  be  no  difficulty  in  seeing  that  "  possessing,"  or, 
more  literally,  "gaining  your  souls,"  is  an  exact 
equivalent  of  the  other  expression,  "ye  shall  be  saved." 
One  cannot  but  remember  our  Lord's  solemn  anti- 
thetical phrase  about  a  man  "losing  his  own  soul." 
To  "  win  one's  soul  "  is  to  be  saved ;  to  be  saved  is  to 
win  one's  soul. 

So  I  think  I  have  made  out  my  thesis  that  the  two 
sayings  are  substantially  one.  They  carry  a  great 
weight  of  warning,  of  exhortation,  and  of  encourage- 
ment to  us  all.  Let  us  try  now  to  reap  some  of  that 
harvest. 

I. — First,  then,  notice  the  view  of  our  condition 
which  underlies  these  sayings. 

It  is  a  sad  and  a  somewhat  stern  one,  but  it  is  one 
which,  I  think,  most  men's  hearts  will  respond  to,  if 
they  give  themselves  leisure  to  think  ;  and  if  they  "  see 
life  steadily,  and  see  it  whole."  For  howsoever  many 
days  are  bright,  and  howsoever  all  days  are  good,  yet, 
on  the  whole,  "  man  is  a  soldier  and  life  is  a  fight." 
For  some  of  us  it  is  simple  endurance ;  for  all  of  us  it 
has  sometimes  been  agony  ;  for  all  of  us,  always,  it 
presents  resistance  to  every  kind  of  high  and  noble 
career,  and  especially  to  the  Christian  one. 

Easy-going  optimists  try  to  skim  over  these  facts 
but  they  are  not  to  be  so  lightly  set  aside.  You  have 
only  to  look  at  the  faces  that  you  meet  in  the  street 


120  TJFO  FORMS  OF  ONE  SAYING. 

to  be  very  sure  that  it  is  always  a  grave  and  sometimes 
a  bitter  thing  to  live.  And  so  our  two  texts  pre- 
suppose that  life  on  the  whole  demands  endurance, 
whatever  may  be  included  in  that  great  word. 

Think  of  the  inward  resistance  and  outward 
hindrances  to  every  lofty  life.  The  scholar,  the  man 
of  culture,  the  philanthropist — all  that  would  live  for 
anything  else  than  the  present,  the  low,  and  the 
sensual — find  that  there  is  a  banded  conspiracy,  as  it 
were,  against  them,  and  that  they  have  to  fight  their 
way  by  continual  antagonism,  by  continual  persistence, 
as  well  as  by  continual  endurance.  Within  weakness, 
torpor,  weariness,  levity,  inconstant  wills,  bright 
purposes  clouding  over,  and  all  the  cowardice  and 
animalism  of  our  nature  Avar  continually  against  the 
better,  higher  self.  And  without,  there  is  a  down- 
dragging,  as  persistent  as  the  force  of  gravity,  coming 
from  the  whole  assemblage  of  external  things  that 
solicit,  and  would  fain  seduce  us. 

The  old  legends  used  to  tell  us  how,  whensoever  a 
knight  set  out  upon  any  great  and  lofty  quest,  his 
path  was  beset  on  either  side  by  voices,  sometimes 
whispering  seductions,  and  sometimes  shrieking  male- 
dictions, but  always  seeking  to  withdraw  him  from 
his  resolute  march  onwards  to  his  goal.  And  every 
one  of  us,  if  we  have  taken  on  us  the  orders  of  any 
lofty  chivalry,  and  especially  if  we  have  sworn  our- 
selves knights  of  the  Cross,  have  to  meet  the  same 
antagonism  ;  and  then  there  are  golden  apples  rolled 
upon  our  path,  seeking  to  draw  us  away  from  our 
steadfast  endurance. 

Besides     the    hindrances    in    every    noble    path. 


TWO  FORMS  OF  ONE  SA  YIXG.  121 

the  hindrances  within  and  the  hindrances  without, 
the  weight  of  self,  and  the  drawing  of  earth,  there 
come  to  us  all — in  various  degrees  no  doubt,  and  in 
various  shapes— but  to  all  of  us  there  come  the 
burdens  of  sorrows  and  cares,  and  anxieties  and  trials. 
There  never  assemble  as  many  people  as  there  are  in 
this  chapel  this  morning  without  some  of  them 
having  to  carry  a  sorrow  which  they  know  well  will 
never  be  lifted  off  their  shoulders  and  their  hearts ; 
until  they  lay  down  all  their  burdens  at  the  grave's 
mouth ;  and  it  is  weary  work  to  plod  on  the  path  of 
life  with  a  weight  that  cannot  be  shifted,  with  a 
wound  that  can  never  be  stanched. 

Oh,  brethren,  rosy-coloured  optimism  is  all  a  dream. 
The  recognition  of  the  good  that  is  in  the  evil  is  the 
devout  man's  talisman,  but  there  is  always  need  for  the 
resistance  and  endurance  which  my  texts  prescribe. 
And  the  youngest  of  us,  the  gladdest  of  us,  the  least 
experienced  of  us,  the  most  frivolous  of  us,  if  we  will 
go  into  our  own  hearts,  will  hear  the  Amen !  to  the 
stern,  sad  view  of  the  facts  of  earthly  life  which 
underlies  this  text. 

Though  it  has  many  other  aspects,  the  world  seems 
to  me  sometimes  to  be  like  that  pool  at  Jerusalem  in 
the  five  porches  of  which  lay,  groaning  under  various 
diseases,  but  none  of  them  without  an  ache,  a  great 
multitude  of  impotent  folk,  halt,  and  blind.  Astrono- 
mers tell  us  that  one,  at  any  rate,  of  the  planets  rolls 
on  its  orbit  swathed  in  clouds  and  moisture.  The  world 
moves  wrapped  in  a  mist  of  tears.  God  only  knows 
them  all,  but  each  heart  knoAvs  its  own  bitterness  and 
responds  to  the  words,  "  Ye  have  need  of  patience." 


122  TJVO  FORMS  OF  ONE  SAYING. 

II. — Now,  secondly,  mark  the  victorious  temper. 
That  is  referred  to  in  the  one  saying  by  "  he  that 
endureth,"  and  in  the  other   "  in  your   endurance." 
Now,  I  have  often  had  occasion  to  point  out  to  you,  and 
I  daresay  often  shall  in  future,  that  the  notion  either 
of  patience  or  of  endurance  by  no  means  exhausts 
the  power  of  this  noble  Christian  word.     For  these 
are  passive  virtues,  and  however  excellent  and  needful 
they  may  be,  they  by  no  means  sum  up  our  duty  in 
regard  of  the  hindrances  and  sorrows,  the  burdens  and 
the  weights,  of  which  I  have  been  trying  to  speak. 
For  3^ou  know  it  is  only  "  what  cannot  be  cured  "  that 
"  must  be  endured."    And  even  the  incurable  things  are 
not  merely  to  be  endured,  but  they  ought  to  be  utilised. 
It  is  not  enough  that  we  should  build  up  a  dam   to 
keep  the  floods  of  sorrow  and  trial  from  overflowing 
our  fields ;  we  must  turn  the  turbid  waters  into  our 
sluices,  and  get  them  to  drive  our  mills.     It  is  not 
enough  that  we  should  screw  ourselves  up  to  lie  un- 
resistingly under   the   surgeon's  knife ;  though,  God 
knows,  that  is  as  much  as  we  can  manage  sometimes, 
and  we  have  to  do  like  the  convicts  under  the  lash, 
get  a  bit  of  lead  or  a  bullet  into  our  mouths,  and  bite 
at  it  to  keep  ourselves  from  crying  out.     But  that  is 
not  all  our  duty  in  regard  of  our  trials  and  difliculties. 
There  is  required  something  more  than  the  passive 
endurance. 

This  noble  word  of  my  texts  does  mean  a  great  deal 
more  than  that.  It  means  active  persistence  as  well 
as  patient  submission.  It  is  not  enough  that  we  shall 
stand  and  bear  the  pelting  of  the  pitiless  storm, 
unmurmuring  and  unbowed  by  it ;  but  we  are  bound 


4 


TTFO  FORMS  OF  ONE  SAYING.  123 

to  go  Oil  our  course,  bearing  up  and  steering  right 
onwards.  Persistent  perseverance  in  the  path  that 
is  marked  out  for  us  is  especially  the  virtue  that  our 
Lord  here  enjoins.  It  is  well  to  sit  still  unmurmuring ; 
it  is  better  to  march  on  undiverted  and  unturned. 
And  when  we  are  able  to  keep  straight  on  the  path 
which  is  marked  out  for  us,  and  especially  on  the 
path  that  leads  us  to  God,  notwithstanding  all 
opposing  voices,  and  all  inward  hindrances  and  reluc- 
tances :  when  we  are  able  to  sfo  to  our  tasks  of  what- 
ever  sort  they  be,  and  to  do  them,  though  our  hearts- 
are  beating  like  sledge-hammers ;  when  we  say  to 
ourselves,  "  It  does  not  matter  a  bit  Avhether  I  am  sad 
or  glad,  fresh  or  wearied,  helped  or  hindered  by 
circumstances,  this  one  thing  I  do,"  then  we  have 
come  to  understand  and  to  practise  the  grace  that 
our  Master  here  enjoins.  The  endurance  which  wins 
the  soul,  and  leads  to  salvation,  is  no  mere  passive 
submission,  excellent  and  hard  to  attain  as  that  often 
is ;  but  it  is  brave  perseverance  in  the  face  of  all 
difficulties,  and  in  spite  of  all  devices. 

Mark  how  emphatically  oar  Lord  here  makes 
the  space  within  which  that  virtue  has  to  be  exercised 
conterminous  with  the  whole  duration  of  our  lives.  I 
need  not  refer  to  what  "  the  end  "  was  in  the  original 
application  of  the  words ;  that  would  take  us  too  far 
afield.  But  this  I  desire  to  insist  upon,  that  right  on 
to  the  very  close  of  life  we  are  to  expect  the  necessity 
of  putting  forth  the  exercise  of  the  very  same  persist- 
ence by  which  the  earlier  stages  of  any  noble  career  must 
necessarily  be  marked.  In  other  departments  of  life 
there  may  be  relaxation,  as  a  man  goes  on  through  the 


124  TWO  FORMS  OF  ONE  SAYING. 

years;  but  in  the  culture  of  our  characters,  and  in 
the  deepening  of  our  faith,  and  in  the  drawing 
near  to  our  God,  there  must  be  no  cessation  or 
•diminution  of  earnestness  and  of  eftbrt  right  up  to 
the  close. 

There  are  plenty  of  people,  and  I  daresay  there 
are  some  of  them  here  to-day,  who  began  their 
Christian  career  full  of  vigour,  with  a  heat  that  was 
too  hot  to  last.  And  then  in  a  year  or  two  all  the 
fervency  was  past,  and  they  settled  down  into  the 
average,  easy-going,  unprogressive  Christian,  who  is  a 
wet  blanket  to  the  devotion  and  work  of  a  Christian 
church.  I  wonder  how  many  of  us  in  this  congre- 
gation would  scarcely  know  our  own  former  selves 
if  we  could  see  them.  Christian  people,  of  how  many 
of  us  should  the  word  be  rung  in  the  ears :  "  Ye  did 
run  well ;  what  did  hinder  you  ?  "  The  answer  is — 
myself. 

But  may  I  say  this  emphatic  "  to  the  end "  has 
a  special  lesson  for  us  older  people,  who,  as  natural 
strength  abates,  and  enthusiasm  cools  down,  are  apt  to 
be  but  the  shadows  of  our  old  selves  in  many  things  ? 
But  there  should  be  lire  within  the  mountain,  though 
there  may  be  snow  on  its  crest.  Many  a  ship  has 
been  lost  on  the  harbour  bar ;  and  there  is  no  excuse 
for  the  captain  leaving  the  bridge,  or  the  engineer 
coming  up  from  the  engine-room,  stormy  as  the  one 
position  and  stifling  as  the  other  may  be,  until  the 
anchor  is  down,  and  all  is  moored  and  quiet  in  the 
desired  haven.  The  desert,  with  its  Avild  beasts 
and  its  Bedouin,  reaches  right  up  to  the  city 
gates,   and   until   we   are   within   these   we   need   to 


TWO  FORMS  OF  ONE  SAYING.  125^ 


keep  our  hands  on  our  sword  hilts  and  be  ready 
for  conflict.  "  He  that  endure th  to  the  end  the  same 
shall  be  saved." 

III. — Lastly,  note  the  crown  which  endurance  wins. 
Now,  I  need  not  spend  or  waste  your  time  in  mere 
verbal  criticism,  but  I  wish  to  point  out  that  that  word 
"  soul "  in  one  of  our  two  texts  means  both  the  soul 
and  the  life  of  which  it  is  the  seat ;  and  also  to  remark 
that  the  being  saved  and  the  Avinning  of  the  life  or 
the  soul  has  distinct  application,  in  our  Lord's  words, 
primarily  to  corporeal  safety  and  preservation  in  the 
midst  of  dangers ;  and,  still  further,  to  note  the  em- 
phatic "  in  your  patience,"  as  suggesting  not  only  a 
future  but  a  present  acquisition  of  one's  own  soul,  or 
life,  as  the  result  of  such  persevering  endurance  and 
enduring  perseverance.  All  which  things  being  kept 
in  view,  I  may  expand  the  great  promise  that  lies  in 
my  text,  as  follows  :  — 

First,  by  such  persevering  persistence  in  the  Christian 
path,  we  gain  ourselves.  Self-surrender  is  self-posses- 
sion. We  never  own  ourselves  till  we  have  given  up 
owning  ourselves,  and  yielded  ourselves  to  that  Lord 
who  gives  us  back  saints  to  ourselves.  Self-control  is 
self-possession.  We  do  not  own  ourselves  as  lono-  as 
it  is  possible  for  any  weakness  in  flesh,  sense,  or  spirit 
to  gain  dominion  over  us  and  hinder  us  from  doing 
what  we  know  to  be  right.  We  are  not  our  own 
masters,  then.  "  Whilst  they  promise  them  liberty, 
they  themselves  are  the  bond-slaves  of  corruption." 
It  is  only  when  we  have  the  bit  well  into  the  jaws 
of  the  brutes,  and  the  reins  tight  in  our  hands,  so  that 
a  finger-touch  can  check  or  divert  the  course,  that  we 


126  TJFO  FORMS  OF  ONE  SAYING. 

are  truly  lords  of  the  cliariot  in  which  we  ride  and  of 
the  animals  that  impel  it. 

And  such  self-control  which  is  the  winning  of  our- 
selves is,  as  I  believe,  thoroughly  realised  only  when, 
by  self-surrender  of  ourselves  to  Jesus  Christ,  we  get 
His  help  to  govern  ourselves  and  so  become  lords  of 
ourselves.  Some  little  petty  rajah,  up  in  the  hills,  in 
a  quasi-independent  State  in  India,  is  troubled  by 
mutineers  whom  he  cannot  subdue.  What  does  he  do  ? 
He  sends  a  message  down  to  Lahore  or  Calcutta,  and 
up  come  English  troops  that  consolidate  his  dominion, 
and  he  rules  securely,  when  he  has  consented  to  become 
a  feudatory,  and  recognise  his  overlord.  And  so  you 
and  I,  by  continual  repetition,  in  the  face  of  self  and 
sin,  of  our  acts  of  self-surrender,  bring  Christ  into  the 
field ;  and  then,  when  we  have  said,  "  Lord  !  take  me. 
I  live ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me  "  ;  and  when 
we  daily,  in  spite  of  hindrances,  stand  to  the  surrender, 
and  repeat  the  consecration  then,  "  in  our  perseverance 
we  acquire  our  souls." 

Again,  such  persistence  wins  even  the  bodily  life, 
whether  it  preserves  it  or  loses  it.  I  have  said  that 
the  words  of  our  texts  have  an  application  to  bodily 
preservation  in  the  midst  of  the  dreadful  dangers  of 
the  sieofe  and  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  But  so  reofarded 
they  are  a  paradox.  For  hear  how  the  Master  intro- 
duces them.  "  Some  of  you  shall  they  cause  to  be  put 
to  death,  but  there  shall  not  a  hair  of  your  heads 
perish.  In  your  perseverance  ye  shall  win  your  lives." 
"  Some  of  you  they  will  put  to  death,"  but  ye  "  shall 
win  your  lives."  A  paradox  which  can  only  be  solved 
by  experience.     Whether  this  bodily  life  be  preserved 


TIFO  FORMS  OF  ONE  SAYING.  127 

or  lost,  it  is  gained  when  it  is  used  as  a  means  of 
attaining  the  higher  life  of  union  with  God,  Many  a 
martyr  had  the  promise,  "  Not  a  hair  of  your  head 
shall  perish,"  fulfilled  at  the  very  moment  Avhen  the 
falling  axe  shore  his  locks  in  twain,  and  severed  his 
head  from  his  body. 

Lastly,  full  salvation,  the  true  possession  of  himself, 
and  the  acquisition  of  the  life  which  really  is  life, 
comes  to  the  man  who  perseveres  to  the  end,  and  thus 
passes  to  the  land  Avhere  we  shall  receive  the  recom- 
pense of  the  reward.  The  one  moment  the  runner, 
Avith  flushed  cheek  and  forward  swaying  body,  hot, 
with  panting  breath,  and  every  muscle  strained,  is 
straining  to  the  winning  post ;  and  the  next  moment, 
in  utter  calm,  he  is  wearing  the  crown. 

"  To  the  end,  to  the  end."  And  what  a  contrast  the 
next  moment  will  be.  Brethren !  May  it  be  true  of 
you  and  of  me  that  "  we  are  not  of  them  that  draw 
back  unto  perdition,  but  of  them  that  believe  to  the 
winninsf  of  their  souls." 


rt               c         o     _    n] 

o  ^  ■■  ■     \^^JV 

0^ 

yM^)Xt 

&X\~ 

W<jh^l^ 

\*^(l 

^^^"/Cy 

°\\\ 

7^^V7^° 

o  ^ 

>*Sk^^\  ■Ivt^ 

XIII. 

(Bob  anb  the  6oM^. 

"  His  righteousness  endureth  for  ever." — Psalms  cxi.  3  ;  cxii.  3. 

HESE  two  psalms  are  obviously  intended 
as  a  pair.  They  are  identical  in  number 
of  verses  and  in  structure,  both  being 
acrostic,  that  is  to  say,  the  first  clause 
of  each  commences  with  the  first  letter 
of  the  Hebrew  alphabet,  the  second  clause  with  the 
second,  and  so  on.  The  general  idea  that  runs  through 
them  is  the  likeness  of  the  godly  man  to  God.  That 
resemblance  comes  very  markedly  to  the  surface 
at  several  points  in  the  psalms,  and  pervades  them 
traceably  even  where  it  is  less  conspicuous.  The  two 
corresponding  clauses  which  I  have  read  as  my  text 
this  morning  are  the  first  salient  instances  of  it.  But 
I  propose  to  deal  not  only  with  them,  but  with  a  couple 
of  others  whicli  occur  in  the  course  of  the  psalms,  and 
will  appear  as  I  proceed. 

The  general  underlying  thought  is  a  noteworthy 
one.  The  worshipper  is  to  be  like  his  God.  So  it  is 
in  idolatry ;  so  it  should  be  with  us.  Worship  is,  or 
should  be,  adoration  of  and  yearning  after  the  highest 
conceivable  good.     Such  an  attitude  must  necessarily 


GOD  AND  TEE  GODLY.  129 

lead  to  imitation,  and  be  crowned  by  resemblance. 
Love  makes  like,  and  they  who  worship  God  are  bound 
to,  and  certainly  will,  in  proportion  to  the  ardour  and 
sincerity  of  their  devotion,  grow  like  Him  whom  they 
adore.  So  I  desire  to-day  to  look  with  you  at  the 
instances  of  this  resemblance  or  parallelism  which  the 
Psalmist  emphasises. 

I. — The  first  of  them  is  that  in  the  clauses  which  I 
have  read  as  our  starting-point,  viz.,  God  and  the 
godly  are  alike  in  enduring  righteousness. 

That  seems  a  bold  thing  to  say,  especially  when  we 
remember  how  lofty  and  transcendent  were  the  Old 
Testament  conceptions  of  the  righteousness  of  God. 
But,  lofty  as  these  were,  this  psalmist  lifts  an  un- 
presumptuous  eye  to  the  heavens,  and  having  said  of 
Him  who  dwells  there,  "  His  righteousness  endureth 
for  ever,"  is  not  afraid  to  turn  to  the  humble 
worshipper  on  this  low  earth,  and  declare  the  same 
thing  of  him.  Our  finite,  frail,  feeble  lives  may  be 
really  conformed  to  the  image  of  the  heavenly.  The 
dewdrop  with  its  little  rainbow  has  a  miniature  of  the 
great  arch  that  spans  the  earth  and  rises  into  the 
high  heavens.  And  so,  though  there  are  differences, 
deep  and  impassable,  between  anything  that  can  be 
called  a  creatural  righteousness,  and  that  which  bears 
the  same  name  in  the  heavens,  the  fact  that  it  does 
bear  the  same  name  is  a  guarantee  to  us  that  there  is 
an  essential  resemblance  between  the  righteousness  of 
God  in  its  lustrous  perfectness  and  the  righteousness 
of  his  child  in  its  imperfect  effort. 

But  how  can  we  venture  to  run  any  kind  of 
parallelism  between  the  eternity  of  the  one  and  that 

9 


130  GOD  AND  TEE  GODLY. 

of  tlie  otlier  ?  God's  righteousness  we  can  under- 
stand as  enduring  for  ever,  because  it  is  inseparable 
from  His  very  being ;  because  it  is  manifested 
unbrokenly  in  all  tlie  works  that  for  ever  pour  out 
from  that  central  source,  and  because  it  and  its 
doings  stand  fast  and  unshaken  amidst  the  passage  of 
ages  and  the  wreck  and  crash  of  matter  and  of  worlds. 
But  may  there  not  be,  if  not  an  eternity,  yet  a 
perpetuity  in  our  reflection  of  the  Divine  righteous- 
ness which  shall  serve  to  vindicate  the  application  of 
the  same  mighty  word  to  both  ?  Is  it  not  possible 
that,  unbroken  amidst  the  stress  of  temptation,  and 
running  on  without  interruptions,  there  may  be  in 
our  hearts  and  in  our  lives  conformity  to  the  Divine 
will  ?  And  is  it  not  possible  that  the  transiencies  of 
our  earthly  doings  may  be  sublimed  into  perpetuity  if 
there  is  in  them  the  preserving  salt  of  righteousness  ? 

"The  actions  of  the  just  smell  sweet, 
And  blossom  in  the  dust." 

And  may  it  not  be,  too,  that  though  this  psalmist 
may  have  had  no  clear  articulate  doctrine  of  eternal 
life  beyond,  he  may  have  felt,  and  rightly  felt,  that 
there  were  things  that  were  too  fair  to  die,  and  that  it 
was  inconceivable  that  a  soul  which  had  been,  in  some 
measure,  tinged  with  the  righteousness  of  God  could 
ever  be  altogether  a  prey  to  the  law  of  transiency  and 
decay  which  seizes  upon  things  material  and  corporeal  ? 
That  which  is  righteous  is  eternal,  be  it  manifested  in 
the  acts  of  the  unchanging  God  or  in  the  acts  of  a 
dying  man.  And  when  all  else  has  passed  aAvay,  and 
the  elements  have  melted  with  fervent  heat,  "he  that 


GOD  AND  THE  GODLY.  131 

doetli  the  will  of  God,"  and  the  deeds  which  did  it, 
"  shall  abide  for  ever."  His  rioiiteousness  endureth 
for  ever. 

Now,  brethren,  thero  are  two  ways  in  which  we  may 
look  at  this  resemblance  of  our  text :  the  one  is  as 
containing  a  stringent  requirement;  the  other  as 
holding  forth  a  mighty  hope.  It  contains  a  stringent 
requirement.  Your  religion  does  not  consist  in  assent- 
ing to  any  creed.  Your  religion  is  not  wholly  to  consist 
of  devout  emotions  and  loving  and  joyous  acts  of 
eommunion  and  friendship  with  God.  There  must  be 
more  than  these.  These  thintifs  there  must  be.  For 
if  a  man  is  to  be  guided  mainly  by  reason,  there  must, 
first  of  all,  be  creed.  Then  there  must  be  corresponding 
emotions.  But  creed  and  emotions  are  both  meant  to 
be  forces  which  shall  drive  the  wheels  of  life.  And 
conduct  is,  after  all,  the  crown  of  religion  and  the  test 
of  godliness.  They  that  hold  communion  with  God  are 
bound  to  mould  their  lives  into  the  likeness  of  His. 
■'  Little  children,  let  no  man  deceive  you."  And  let 
not  3'our  own  hearts  deceive  you.  You  are  not  a 
Christian  because  you  believe  the  truths  of  the  Gospel. 
You  are  not  such  a  Christian  as  vou  ought  to  be,  if 
your  religion  is  more  manifest  in  loving  trust  than  in 
practical  obedience  which  comes  from  trust.  "  He 
that  doeth  righteousness  is  righteous,"  and  he  is  to  be 
righteous  "  even  as  He  is  rio'hteous."  If  vou  are  God's, 
3^ou  will  be  like  God.  Apply  the  touchstone  to  your 
lives,  and  test  your  Christianity  by  this  simple  and 
most  stringent  test. 

But,  again,  we  may  look  at  the  thought  as  holding 
forth  a  great  hope.     I  do  not  wish  to  force  upon  Old 

9* 


132  GOB  AND  TEE  GODL  Y. 

Testament  writers  New  Testament  truth.  It  would 
be  an  anachronism  and  an  absurdity  to  make  this 
psalmist  responsible  for  anything  like  a  clear  evan- 
gelistic statement  of  the  way  by  which  a  man  may  be 
made  righteous.  That  waited  for  coming  days,  and 
eminently  for  Jesus  Christ.  But  it  would  be  quite  as 
great  a  mistake  to  eviscerate  the  words  of  their  plain 
implications.  And  when  he  puts  side  by  side  the 
light  and  the  reflection,  God  and  the  godly,  it  seems 
to  me  to  be  doing  violence  to  his  meaning  for  the 
sake  of  trying  to  make  him  mean  less  than  he  does,  if 
we  refuse  to  recognise  that  he  had  at  any  rate  an 
inkling  of  the  thought  that  the  original  and  pattern 
of  human  righteousness  was  likewise  the  source  of  it. 
This  at  least  is  plain,  that  he  thought  that  "  the  fear 
of  the  Lord  "  was  not  only,  as  he  calls  it  at  the  close 
of  the  former  of  the  two  psalms,  "  the  beginning  of 
wisdom,"  but  also  the  basis  of  goodness,  for  he  begins 
his  description  of  the  godly  with  it. 

I  believe  he  felt,  what  is  assuredly  true,  that  no 
man,  by  his  own  unaided  eflbrt,  can  ever  work  out 
for  himself  a  righteousness  which  will  satisfy  his  own 
conscience,  and  that  he  must,  first  of  all,  be  in  touch 
with  God,  in  order  to  receive  from  Him  that  which 
he  cannot  create.  Ah  !  brethren,  the  "  fine  linen, 
clean  and  white,  which  is  the  righteousness  of  saints," 
is  woven  in  no  earthly  looms  ;  and  the  lustrous  light 
with  Avhich  it  glistens  is  such  as  "  no  fuller  on  earth 
can  white  "  men's  characters  into.  Another  psalmist 
has  sung  of  the  man  who  can  stand  in  the  holy  place. 
"  He  shall  receive  the  blessing  from  the  Lord,  even 
riofhteousness  from  the  God  of  his  salvation."     And 


GOD  AND  THE  GODLY.  133 

our  psalms  hint,  if  they  do  not  articulately  declare, 
how  that  reception  is  possible  for  us,  when  they  set 
forth  waiting  upon  God  as  the  condition  of  being 
made  like  Him.  We  translate  the  psalmist's  feeling 
after  the  higher  truth  which  we  know,  when  we 
desire  "  that  we  may  be  found  in  Him,  not  having  our 
own  righteousness  which  is  of  the  law,  but  that 
which  is  of  God  by  faith."  So  much,  then,  for  the 
first  point  of  correspondence  in  these  two  psalms. 

II. — God  and  the  godly  are  alike  in  gracious  com- 
passion. 

If  you  will  turn  to  your  Bibles  for  a  moment,  and 
look  at  the  last  clauses  of  the  two  fourth  verses,  you 
will  see  how  that  is  brought  out.  In  the  former  psalm 
we  read,"The  Lord  is  gracious  and  full  of  compassion"  : 
in  the  latter  we  find  "^he "  (the  upright  man)  "  is 
gracious  and  full  of  compassion,  and  righteous." 

I  need  not  trouble  you  with  any  remarks  about 
certain  difiiculties  that  lie  in  the  rendering  of  that  latter 
verse.  Sufiice  it  to  say  that  they  are  such  as  to  make 
more  emphatic  the  intentional  resemblance  between 
the  godly  as  there  described,  and  God  as  described  in 
the  previous  one.  Of  both  it  is  said  "  gracious  and 
full  of  compassion." 

Now  that  great  truth  of  which  I  have  been  speak- 
ing, the  Divine  righteousness,  is  like  white  Alpine 
snow,  sublime,  but  cold ;  awful  and  repellent  when 
taken  by  itself.  Our  hearts  need  something  more 
than  a  righteous  God  if  we  are  ever  to  worship  and 
draw  near.  Just  as  the  white  snow  on  the  high  peak 
needs  to  be  flushed  with  the  roseate  hue  of  the  morning 
before  it  can  become  tender,  and  create  longings,  so 


134  GOD  AND  THE  GODLY. 


the  righteousness  of  the  great  White  Throne  has  to  be 
tinged  with  tiie  ruddy  heart-hue  of  gracious  com- 
passion if  men  are  to  be  moved  to  adore  and  to 
love.  Each  enhances  the  other.  "  What  God  hath 
joined  together,"  in  Himself,  "  let  not  man  put 
asunder  "  ;  nor  talk  about  the  stern  Deity  of  the  Old 
Testament,  and  pit  Him  against  the  compassionate 
Father  of  the  New.  He  is  righteous,  but  the 
proclaimers  of  His  righteousness  in  old  days  never 
forgot  to  blend  with  the  righteousness  the  mercy  ; 
and  the  combination  heightens  the  lustre  of  both  the 
colours. 

The  same  combination  is  absolutely  needful  in  the 
copy,  as  is  emphatically  set  forth  in  our  text  by  the 
addition  in  the  case  of  the  man,  of  "  and  righteous." 
For  whilst  with  God  the  two  attributes  do  lie,  side  by 
side,  in  perfect  harmony,  in  us  men  there  is  always 
danger  that  the  one  shall  trench  upon  the  territory  of 
the  other,  and  that  he  who  has  cultivated  the  habit  of 
looking  upon  sorrows  and  sins  with  compassion  and 
tenderness  shall  somewhat  lose  the  power  of  looking 
at  them  with  righteousness.  So  our  text,  in  regard 
of  man,  proclaims  more  emphatically  than  it  needs  to 
do  in  regard  to  the  perfect  God,  that  ever  his  highest 
beauty  of  compassion  must  be  wedded  to  righteous- 
ness, and  ever  his  truest  strength  of  ricrhteousness 
must  be  softened  with  compassion. 

But,  beyond  that,  note  how,  wherever  there  is  the 
loving  and  childlike  contemplation  of  God,  there  will 
be  an  analogy  to  His  perfectness,  in  our  compassion. 
We  are  transformed  by  beholding.  The  sun  strikes  a 
poor  little  pane  of  glass  in  a  cottage  miles  aAvay,  and 


GOD  AND  THE  GODLY.  135 

it  flashes  with  some  likeness  of  the  sun  and  casts  a 
light  across  the  plain.  The  man  whose  face  is  turned 
Godwards  will  have  beauty  pass  into  his  face,  and  all 
that  look  upon  him  will  see  "  as  it  had  been  the  coun- 
tenance of  an  angel." 

If  we  have,  in  any  real  and  deep  measure,  received 
mercy  we  shall  reflect  mercy.  Remember  the  parable 
of  the  unmerciful  debtor.  The  servant  that  cast 
himself  at  his  lord's  feet,  and  got  the  acquittal  of  his 
debt,  and  went  out  and  gripped  his  felloAV-servant 
by  the  throat,  leaving  the  marks  of  his  fingernails  on 
his  windpipe ;  with  his  "  Pay  me  that  thou  owest,"  had 
all  the  pardon  cancelled,  and  all  the  debt  laid  upon 
his  shoulders  again.  If  we  owe  all  our  hope  and  peace 
to  a  forgiving  God,  how  can  we  make  anything  else 
the  law  of  our  lives  than  that,  having  received  mercy, 
we  should  show  mercy  ?  The  test  of  your  being  a  for- 
given man  is  your  forgivingness.  There  is  no  getting 
away  from  that  plain  principle,  which  modifies  the 
declaration  of  the  freedom  of  God's  full  pardon. 

But  I  would  have  you  notice,  further,  as  a  very 
remarkable  illustration  of  this  correspondence  between 
the  gracious  and  compassionate  Lord  and  His  servant, 
that  in  the  verses  which  follow  respectively  the  two 
about  which  I  am  now  speaking,  the  same  idea  is 
■wrought  out  in  another  shape.  In  the  psalm  dealing 
with  the  Divine  character  and  works  we  read,  imme- 
diately after  the  declaration  that  He  is  "  gracious  and 
full  of  compassion,"  this — "He  hath  given  meat  to 
them  that  fear  Him " ;  and  the  corresponding  clause 
in  the  second  of  our  psalms  is  followed  by  this — to 
translate  accurately—"  It  is  well  with  the  man  who 


136  GOD  AND  THE  GODLY. 

showetii  favour  and  lendeth."  So  man's  open-lianded- 
ness  in  regard  of  money  is  put  down  side  by  side  with 
God's  open-handedness  in  regard  of  giving  meat  unto 
them  that  fear  Him.  And  again,  in  the  ninth  verse 
of  each  psalm,  we  have  the  same  thought  set  forth 
in  another  fashion.  "  He  sent  redemption  unto  His 
people,"  says  the  one ;  "  He  hath  dispersed.  He  hath 
given  to  the  poor,"  says  the  other.  That  is  to  say, 
our  paltry  giving  may  be  paralleled  with  the  un- 
speakable gifts  which  God  has  bestowed,  if  they  come 
from  a  love  which  is  like  His.  It  does  not  matter 
though  they  are  small  and  His  are  so  great ;  there  is 
a  resemblance.  The  tiniest  crystal  may  be  like  the 
hugest.  God  gives  to  us  the  possession  of  things  in 
order  that  we  may  enjoy  the  luxury,  which  is  one  of 
the  elements  in  the  blessedness  of  the  blessed  God, 
who  is  blessed  because  He  is  the  giving  God,  the 
luxury  of  giving.  And  poor  though  our  bestowments 
must  be,  they  are  not  unlike  His.  The  little  burn 
amongst  the  heather  carves  its  tiny  bed,  and  impels 
its  baby  ripples,  by  the  same  laws  which  roll  the 
waters  of  the  Amazon,  and  every  fall  that  it  makes 
over  a  shelf  of  rock  a  foot  high  is  a  miniature 
Niagara, 

ni. — So,  lastly,  we  have  still  another  point,  not 
so  much  of  resemblance  as  of  correspondence,  in 
the  firmness  of  God's  utterances  and  of  the  godly 
heart. 

In  the  first  of  our  two  psalms  we  read,  in  the 
seventh  verse,  "  all  His  commandments  are  sure."  In 
the  second  we  read,  in  the  corresponding  verse,  "  his 
heart  is  fixed,  trusting  in  the  Lord."    The  former  psalm 


{ 


GOD  AND  THE  GODLY.  137 

goes  on,  "  His  commandments  stand  fast  for  ever  and 
€ver ;  and  the  next  psalm,  in  the  corresponding  verse, 
says  "  his  heart  is  estahlished,"  the  original  employing 
the  same  word  in  both  cases,  which  in  our  version  is 
rendered,  in  the  one  place,  "stand  fast,"  and  in  the 
other  "  estabhshed."  So  that  the  psalmist  is  thinking 
of  a  correspondence  between  the  stability  of  God's 
utterances  and  the  stability  of  the  heart  that  clasps 
them  in  faith. 

His  commandments  are  not  only  precepts  which 
enjoin  duty.  All  which  God  says  is  law,  whether  it 
be  directly  in  the  nature  of  guiding  precept,  or  whether 
it  be  in  the  nature  of  revealing  truth,  or  whether  it  be 
in  the  nature  of  promise.  It  is  sure,  reliable,  utterly 
trustworthy.  We  may  be  certain  that  it  will  direct  us 
aright,  that  it  will  reveal  to  us  absolute  truth,  that  it 
will  hold  forth  no  flattering  and  false  promises.  And 
it  is  "  established."  The  one  fixed  point  amidst  the 
whirl  of  thino^s  is  the  uttered  will  of  God. 

Therefore,  the  heart  that  builds  there  builds  safely. 
And  there  should  he  a  correspondence,  whether  there 
is  or  no,  between  the  faithfulness  of  the  Speaker  and 
the  faith  of  the  hearer.  A  man  who  is  doubtful  about 
the  solidity  of  the  parapet  which  keeps  him  from 
toppling  over  into  the  abyss  will  lean  gingerly  upon  it, 
until  he  has  found  out  that  it  is  firm.  The  man  that 
knows  how  strong  is  the  stay  on  which  he  rests  ought 
to  lean  hard  upon  it.  Lean  hard  upon  God,  put  all 
your  weight  upon  Him.  You  cannot  put  too  much, 
you  cannot  lean  too  hard.  The  harder  the  better ;  the 
better  He  is  pleased,  and  the  more  He  breathes  support 
and  strength  into  us.     And,  brethren,  if  thus  we  build 


138  GOD  AND  THE  GODLY. 

an  established  faith  on  that  sure  foundation,  and  match 
the  unchangeableness  of  God  in  Christ  with  the 
constancy  of  our  faith  in  Him,  then,  "  he  that  beheveth 
shall  never  make  haste."  And  as  my  psalm  says,  "  he 
shall  not  be  afraid  of  evil  tidings ;  his  heart  is  fixed, 
trustino-  in  the  Lord." 

O 

The  upshot  of  the  whole  matter  is, — we  cannot  work 
out  for  ourselves  a  righteousness  that  will  satisfy  our 
own  consciences,  nor  secure  for  ourselves  a  strength 
that  Avill  give  peace  to  our  hearts,  and  stability  to  our 
lives,  by  any  other  means  than  by  cleaving  fast  to 
God  revealed  in  Jesus  Christ. 

We  have  borne  the  imago  of  the  earthly  long  enough; 
let  us  open  our  hearts  to  God  in  Christ.  Let  us  yield 
ourselves  to  Him ;  let  us  gaze  upon  Him  with  fixed 
eyes  of  love,  and  labour  to  make  our  own  what  He 
bestows  upon  us.  And  thus  living  near  Him,  we  shall 
be  bathed  in  His  lio-ht,  and  show  forth  somethinof  of 
His  beauty.  Godliness  is  God-likeness.  It  is  of  no 
use  to  say  that  we  are  God's  children  if  we  have 
none  of  the  family  likeness.  "  If  ye  were  Abraham's 
sons  ye  would  do  the  works  of  Abraham,"  said  Christ 
to  the  Jews.  If  we  are  God's  sons  we  shall  do  the 
works  of  God.  "  Be  3-0  therefore  perfect,  as  your 
Father  in  Heaven  is  perfect "  ;  be  ye  merciful  as  your 
Father  is  merciful.  And  if  thus  we  here,  dwelling 
with  Christ,  are  being  conformed  to  the  image  of  His 
Son,  we  shall  one  day  "  be  satisfied  "  when  we  "  awake 
in  His  likeness." 


I 


xiy. 
a  petulant  mieb. 

"  And  Abraham  gaid  unto  God,  0  that  Ishmael  might  live  before 
Thee  !  "—Gen.  xvii.  18. 

HESE  words  sound  very  devout,  and 
they  have  often  been  used  by  Christian 
parents  yearning  for  the  best  interests 
of  their  children,  and  sometimes  of 
their  wayward  and  prodigal  children. 
But,  consecrated  as  they  are  by  that  usage,  I  am 
afraid  that  their  meaning,  as  they  were  uttered,  was 
nothing  so  devout  and  good  as  that  which  is  often 
attached  to  them. 

I. — Note  the  temper  in  Avhich  Abraham  speaks 
here. 

The  very  existence  of  Ishmael  was  a  memorial 
of  Abraham's  failure  in  faith  and  patience.  For  he 
thought  that  the  promised  heir  was  long  in  coming, 
and  so  he  thought  that  he  would  help  God.  For 
thirteen  years  the  child  had  been  living  beside  him, 
winding  a  son's  way  into  a  father's  heart,  with  much 
in  his  character,  as  was  afterwards  seen,  that  would 
make  a  frank,  daring  boy  his  old  father's  darling. 
Then  all  at  once  comes  the  Divine  message,  "  This  is 
not  the  son  of  the  covenant ;   this  is  not  the  heir  of 


140  A  PETULANT  WISH. 

the  promise.  Sarali  shall  have  a  child,  and  from  him 
shall  come  the  blessings  that  have  been  foretold." 
What  does  Abraham  do  ?  Fall  down  in  thankful- 
ness before  God  ?  leap  up  in  heart  at  the  conviction 
that  now  at  last  the  long  looked  for  fulfilment  of  the 
oath  of  God  was  impending  ?  Not  he.  "  0  that 
Ishmael  might  live  before  Thee  !  Why  cannot  he  do  ? 
Why  may  he  not  be  the  chosen  child,  the  heir  of  the 
promise  ?     Take  him,  0  God  ! " 

That  is  to  say,  he  thinks  he  knows  better  than  God. 
He  is  petulant,  he  resists  His  blessing,  he  fancies  that 
his  own  plan  is  quite  as  good  as  the  Divine  plan.  He 
does  not  want  to  draw  away  his  heart  from  the  child 
whom  it  has  twined  round.  So  he  loses  the  blessing  of 
the  revelation  that  is  being  made  to  him ;  because  he 
does  not  bow  his  will,  and  accept  God's  way  instead 
of  his  own.  Now,  do  you  not  think  that  that  is  what  we 
do  ?  When  God  sends  us  Isaac,  do  vv^e  not  often  say, 
'  Take  Ishmael ;  he  is  my  own  making.  I  have  set 
all  my  hopes  on  him.  AVhy  should  I  have  to  wrench 
them  all  away  ?  "  In  our  individual  lives  we  want  to 
prescribe  to  God,  far  too  often,  not  only  the  ends,  but 
the  luay  in  which  we  shall  get  to  the  ends ;  and  we 
think  to  ourselves  "  that  road  of  my  own  engineering 
that  I  have  got  all  staked  out,  that  is  the  true  way 
for  God's  providence  to  take."  And  when  His  path 
does  not  coincide  with  ours,  then  we  are  discontented, 
and  instead  of  submitting  we  go  with  our  pet  schemes 
to  Him,  and,  if  not  in  so  many  words,  at  least  in 
spirit  and  temper,  we  try  to  force  our  way  upon  God. 
When  He  is  speaking  to  us  about  Isaac  we  insist  on 
pressing  Ishmael  on  His  notice. 


A  PETULANT  WISE.  141 

It  is  often  so  in  regard  of  our  individual  lives ;  and  it 
is  so  in  regard  of  the  united  action  of  Christian  people 
very  often.  A  great  deal  of  what  calls  itself  earnest 
contending  for  "  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the 
saints "  is  nothing  more  nor  less  than  insistini;  that 
methods  of  men's  devising  shall  be  continued,  when 
God  seems  to  be  substituting  for  them  methods  of 
His  own  sending,  and  so  fighting  about  externals- 
and  church  polit}^,  and  determining  that  the  world 
has  got  to  be  saved  in  our  own  special  fashion,  and  in 
no  other,  though  God  Himself  seems  to  be  sucforestinGr 
a  new  thing  to  us.  That  is  a  very  frequent  pheno- 
menon in  the  experience  of  Christian  communities 
and  churches.  Ishmael  is  so  very  dear.  He  is  not 
the  child  of  promise,  but  he  is  the  child  that  we  have 
thought  it  advisable  to  help  God  with.  It  is  hard  for 
us  to  part  with  him. 

Dear  brethren,  sometimes,  too,  God  comes  to  us  in 
various  providences,  and  not  only  reduces  into  chaos 
and  a  heap  of  confusion  our  nicely  built  up  little* 
houses,  but  He  sometimes  comes  to  us,  and  lifts  us  out 
of  some  lower  kind  of  good,  which  is  perfectly  satisfac- 
tory to  us,  or  all  but  perfectly  satisfactory,  in  order  to 
give  to  us  something  nobler  and  higher.  We  resist 
that  too;  and  do  not  see  why  Ishmael  should  not 
serve  God's  turn  as  he  has  served  ours ;  or  think  that 
there  is  no  need  at  all  for  Isaac  to  come  into  our  lives. 
God  never  takes  away  from  us  a  lower,  unless  for  the 
purpose  of  bestowing  upon  us  a  higher  blessing. 
Therefore,  not  to  submit  is  the  foolishest  thing  that 
men  can  do. 

But   if  this  is   anything  like   an   account   of  the 


^42  A  PETULANT  WISH. 

temper  expressed  by  this  saying,  is  it  not  strange  that 
murmuring  against  God  takes  the  shape  of  praying  ? 
Ah  !  there  is  a  great  deal  of  "  prayer/'  as  it  calls  itself, 
which  is  just  moulded  upon  this  petulant  word  of 
Abraham's  momentarily  failing  faith  and  submission. 
How  many  people  think  that  to  pray  means  to  bring 
their  wishes  to  God,  and  try  to  coax  Him  to  make 
them  His  wishes !  Why,  half  the  shallow  sceptical 
talk  of  this  generation  about  the  worthlessness  of 
prayer  goes  upon  that  fundamental  fallacy,  that  the 
notion  of  prayer  is  to  dictate  terms  to  God ;  and  that 
unless  a  man  gets  his  wishes  answered  he  is  not  to 
suppose  that  his  prayers  are  answered.  But  it  is  not 
so.  Prayer  does  not  mean,  "  0  that  Ishmael  might 
live  before  Thee."  That  is  a  poor  kind  of  prayer,  of 
which  the  inmost  spirit  is  resistance  to  a  clear  dictate 
of  the  Divine  will ;  but  the  true  prayer  is,  "  Oh,  that 
I  may  be  willing  to  take  what  Thou  art  willing,  in 
Thy  mercy  and  love,  to  send." 

I  believe  in  importunate  prayer,  but  I  believe  also 
that  a  great  deal  of  what  calls  itself  importunate 
prayer  is  nothing  more  than  an  obstinate  determina- 
tion not  to  be  satisfied  with  what  satisfies  God.  If  a 
man  has  been  bringing  his  wishes — and  he  cannot 
but  have  such — continuously  to  God,  with  regard  to 
any  outward  things,  and  these  have  not  been 
answered,  he  needs  to  look  very  carefully  into  his 
own  temper  and  heart  in  order  to  make  sure  that 
what  seems  to  be  waiting  upon  God  in  importunate 
petition  is  not  pestering  Him  with  refused  desires. 
To  make  a  prayer  out  of  my  rebellion  against  His  will 
is  surely  the  greatest  abuse  of  prayer  that  can  be  con- 


A  PETULANT  WISH.  143 

ceived.  And  when  Abraham  said,  "  0  that  Ishmael 
might  hve  before  Thee,"  if  he  said  it  in  the  spirit  in 
which  I  think  he  did,  he  was  not  praying,  but  he  was 
grumbhng. 

II. — Notice,  still  further,  how  such  a  temper  and 
such  a  prayer  have  the  effect  of  hiding  joy  and 
blessing  from  us. 

This  was  the  crisis  of  Abraham's  whole  life.  It 
was  the  moment  at  which  his  hundred  years  nearly 
of  patient  waiting  was  about  to  be  rewarded.  The 
message  which  he  had  just  received  was  the  most 
loving  and  gracious  word  that  ever  had  come  to  him 
from  the  heavens,  although  many  such  words  had 
come.  And  what  does  he  do  with  it  ?  Instead  of 
falling  down  before  God,  and  letting  his  whole  heart 
go  out  in  jubilant  gratitude,  he  has  nothing  to  say 
but  "  I  would  rather  that  Thou  didst  it  in  another 
way.  It  is  all  very  well  to  speak  about  sending  this 
heir  of  promise.  I  have  no  pleasure  in  that,  because 
it  means  that  my  Ishmael  is  to  be  passed  by  and 
shelved."  So  the  proffered  joy  is  turned  to  ashes,  and 
Abraham  gets  no  good,  for  the  moment,  out  of  God's 
greatest  blessing  to  him  ;  but  all  the  sky  is  darkened 
by  mists  that  come  up  from  his  own  heart. 

Brethren,  if  you  want  to  be  miserable,  perk  up 
your  own  will  against  God's.  If  you  want  to  be 
blessed,  acquiesce  in  all  that  He  does  send,  in  all  that 
He  has  sent,  and,  by  anticipation,  in  all  that  He  will 
send.  For,  depend  upon  it,  the  secret  of  finding  sun- 
beams in  everything  is  simply  letting  God  have  His 
own  way,  and  making  your  will  the  sounding-board 
and  echo  of  His.     If  Abraham  had  done  as  he  ou^ht 


144  A  PETULANT  WISH. 

to  have  done,  tliat  would  have  been  the  gnladdest 
moment  of  his  hfe.  You  and  I  can  make  out  of  our 
deepest  sorrows  the  occasions  of  pure,  though  it  is 
quiet,  gladness,  if  only  we  have  learned  to  sa}', 
"  Not  my  will,  but  Thy  will  be  done."  That  is  the 
talisman  that  turns  everything  into  gold,  and  makes 
sorrow  forget  its  nature,  and  almost  approximate  to 
solemn  joy. 

III. — My  last  word  is  this  :  such  a  prayer  God 
loves  us  all  too  well  to  listen  to. 

Abraham's  passionate  cry  was  so  much  empty  wind, 
and  was  like  a  straw  laid  across  the  course  of  an 
express  train,  in  so  far  as  its  power  to  modify  the 
gracious  purpose  cf  God  already  declared  was  con- 
cerned. And  would  it  not  be  a  miserable  thing  if  we 
could  deflect  the  solemn,  loving  march  of  the  Divine 
Providence  by  these  hot,  foolish,  purblind  wishes  of 
ours,  that  see  only  the  nearer  end  of  things,  and  have 
no  notion  of  where  their  further  end  may  go,  or  what 
it  may  be  ? 

Is  it  not  better  that  we  should  fall  back  upon  this 
thought,  though  it  seems  so  to  limit  the  power  of 
petition  at  first  sight,  "  We  know  that  if  we  ask  any- 
thing according  to  His  will  He  heareth  us  "  ?  There 
is  nothing  that  would  more  wreck  our  lives  than  if 
what  some  people  wish  were  to  be  the  case— that  God 
should  let  us  have  our  own  way,  and  give  us  serpents 
because  we  asked  for  them  and  fancied  they  were  eggs  ; 
or  let  us  break  our  teeth  upon  bestowed  stones,  because, 
like  whimpering  children  crying  for  the  moon,  we  had 
asked  for  them  under  the  delusion  that  they  were 
bread. 


A  PETULANT  WISH.  145 

Leave  all  things  in  His  hands ;  and  be  sure  of  this, 
that  the  true  way  to  peace,  to  rest,  to  gladness,  and  to 
wringing  the  last  drop  of  possible  sweetness  out  of 
gifts  and  losses,  disappointments  and  fruitions,  is  to 
have  no  will  but  God's  will  enthroned  above  and  in 
our  own  wills.  If  Abraham  had  acquiesced  and  sub- 
mitted, Ishmael  and  Isaac  would  have  been  a  pair  to 
bless  his  life,  as  they  stood  together  over  his  grave. 
And  if  you  and  I  will  leave  God  to  order  all  our  ways, 
and  not  try  to  interfere  with  His  purposes  by  our 
short-sighted  dictation,  "  all  things  will  work  together 
for  good  to  us,  because  we  love  God,"  and  lovingly 
accept  His  will  and  His  law. 


la 


xy. 
Scel^ino  anb  Sceincj- 

"  Whom  seek  ye  ?    .    .    .    Come  and  see." — John  i.  38,  39. 

HESE  are  the  first  words  of  Christ's  re- 
corded in  this  gospel.  The  evangehst 
had  undoubtedly  been  one  of  the  two 
disciples  of  John  the  Baptist  to  whom 
they  were  spoken,  and  it  is  beautiful 
to  see  how,  after  so  many  years  had  dimmed  other 
memories,  that  unforgettable  day  on  which  he  first 
heard  Christ's  voice  and  felt  the  charm  of  His  presence, 
was  all  sun-clear  and  bright  before  him  to  its  minutest 
detail.  But  I  think  that,  as  in  so  many  other  places 
in  this  gospel,  John  would  here  have  us  see  a  deeper 
meaning  than  the  original  one  in  these  words.  It  is 
surely  noticeable  that  the  first  words  of  Christ's  which 
he  records  suggest  such  wide  and  deep  truths  as  do 
these  two  sayings.  It  is  in  that  higher  application 
that  I  desire  to  look  at  them  in  this  sermon. 

I  need  do  little  more  than  recall  to  your  remem- 
brance their  occasion.  It  is  the  first  day  of  Christ's 
public  ministry.  Yesterday  John  the  Baptist  had 
proclaimed  Him  to  be  the  Lamb  of  God.  To-day  he 
crowns   his   sublime    self-suppression    by,   in    effect, 


I 


SEEKING  AND   SEEING.  147 

bidding  his  two  disciples  leave  him  and  attach  them- 
selves to  Jesus  Christ.  No  base  envy  embittered  his 
recognition  that  he  must  decrease,  whilst  Christ  must 
increase.  Rather,  like  the  planet  of  morning,  he 
rejoiced  to  "  fade  in  His  light  and  to  die."  Never  was 
a  nobler  piece  of  self-effacement  than  that  which  John 
achieved  that  day  by  the  fords  of  the  Jordan. 

The  two  disciples  heard,  and  understood,  and  obeyed. 
They  seem  to  have  followed  Christ,  as  they  thought, 
unobserved,  without  any  further  purpose  than  that  of 
marking  where  He  dwelt,  in  order  that  they  might 
seek  a  future  interview.  But  He  who  never  leaves 
unnoticed  and  unfostered  the  first  faint  inclination 
to  follow  Him,  turned  upon  them  with  the  question 
"  What  seek  ye  ? "  They  answer,  hesitating  and 
embarrassed,  hinting  rather  than  daring  to  speak  out 
their  wish  for  an  interview,  and  more  than  hinting 
their  purpose  to  attach  themselves  to  Him,  since  they 
address  Him  as  "  Rabbi !  "  Master.  He  met  the  two 
shy  youths  more  than  half  way,  and  smiled  on  them 
with  an  invitation  which,  according  to  the  reading  of 
the  Revised  Version,  is  a  promise  as  well  as  an  invita- 
tion.    "  Come  !  and  ye  will  see." 

Surely  the  words  carry  a  tone  of  invitation  and 
interrogation  far  deeper  than  their  application  to  the 
comparatively  trivial  incident  of  that  moment. 
Surely  they  are  meant  for  us  all.  Let  us  try  to 
profit  by  them. 

I. — Note  the  penetrating  question. 

"  What  seek  ye  ? "  In  its  original  application  it 
was  the  obvious  question  for  anyone  to  ask,  who 
found  two  men  stealing  along  behind  him.     But  the 

10* 


148  SEEKING  AND  SEEING. 

whole  character  of  it  depended  on  the  tone  and  look 
which  accompanied  it.  "  What  do  you  want  ? "  might 
be  as  harsh  as  a  blow,  and  equivalent  to  a  refusal 
beforehand ;  or  it  might  be  icy  and  indifferent ;  or, 
it  might  pass  through  all  the  varying  shades  of 
amiability,  until  it  came  to  be  what  it  was  to  these 
two,  as  commented  on  by  the  beaming  look  that  went 
with  the  tone,  an  encouragement  to  boldness,  and 
more  than  half  a  promise  to  grant  their  request. 

"  What  seek  ye  ? "  It  is  a  penetrating  question. 
It  is  a  question  that  Jesus  Christ  asks  us  all.  Now, 
that  is  not  rhetoric  ;  that  is  plain,  simple  fact.  For 
one  distinct  purpose  of  His  whole  mission  was  to 
force  men  to  front  this  question,  "  What  am  I  living 
for  ? "  and  to  look  at  it  in  the  light  of  the  principles 
that  are  drawn  from  His  own  personality.  His  life  and 
His  death.  By  setting  forth  before  the  whole  world 
the  one  true  model  of  what  the  aims  of  a  man  should 
be,  Jesus  Christ  Avon  the  right,  and  exercises  the  right 
wherever  that  revelation  comes,  of  questioning  each 
man  to  whom  it  comes,  "  Dost  tliou  make  thy  life  run 
parallel  with  Mine  ?  Are  the  things  that  I  sought  in 
My  manhood  the  things  that  thou  dost  seek  ? " 

And  not  only  by  that  past  revelation,  but  in  a  still 
deeper  and  solemner  way,  by  His  present  action  upon 
all  men  who  come  within  the  range  of  the  Gospel,  He 
is  asking  them  this  question,  and,  as  I  beheve,  we 
might  extend  the  principle  and  say  that  wherever 
there  is  a  man  with  the  light  of  conscience  and  reason 
within  him,  that  is  a  spark  and  effluence  from  the 
light  which  was  incarnated  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  that 
He  Himself,  in  very  deed,  does  speak  in  men's  hearts, 


SEEKING  AND  SEEING.  H9 

and  that  it  is  His  solemn  voice  that  sounds  bo  each  of 
us  in  what  we  call  conscience.  And  so,  brethren,  I 
venture  to  assert  that  the  question  which  opens  His 
ministry,  in  the  deepest  of  all  the  gospels,  is  the 
question  with  which  He  fronts  the  world  still,  and 
:asks  them,  "  What  seek  ye  ?  " 

And  mind.  He  has  a  right  to  ask  the  question,  "  for 
the  Father  hath  committed  all  judgment  to  the  Son." 
And  you  have  got  to  submit  a  programme  of  your  life 
to  Him  which  will  pass  muster  with  Him  before  you 
a,re  right. 

As  was  the  case  here,  remember  He  knows  the 
answer  before  it  is  given.  There  is  nothing  more 
characteristic  of  these  earlier  chapters  of  John's 
Gospel  than  the  pains  which  he  takes  to  bring  out 
Christ's  knowledge  of  all  the  men  and  women  that 
met  Him,  before  they  opened  their  lips.  So  do  not 
try  to  masquerade  before  Him,  but  see  that  your 
answers  be  according  to  truth,  when  He  says,  as  He  is 
saying  to  each  of  you,  by  my  poor  word  now,  "  What 
is  it  that  you  really  want  and  live  for  ? " 

Brethren,  there  can  be  no  greater  blessing  to  men 
than  that  they  should  thus  be  forced  (as  I  am  trying, 
I  hope  gently  and  lovingly,  to  oblige  my  hearers)  to 
look  this  question  in  the  face.  For  there  is  nothing  in 
which  men's  stupidity  and  gregariousness  are  more 
sadly  displayed  than  in  the  lack  of  any  habitual  clear 
presentation  to  themselves  of  what  it  is  that  they  are 
living  for,  and  what  the  meaning  of  all  the  hubbub 
and  fret  and  "  business  "  and  anxiety  really  at  bottom 
is.  To  live  without  ever  facing  this  question  is  the 
melancholy  condition  in  which  millions  of  men  are. 


ISO  SEEKING  AND  SEEING. 


And  there  is  nothing  more  needful,  and  few  things 
more  unwelcome,  to  some  of  us  than  that  the  sharp 
point  of  this  interrogation  should  be  driven  deep  into 
our  consciences,  "  What  seek  ye  ? " 

Suppose  the  question  put  to  some  man  in  this  chapel 
to-night.  If  he  is  honest,  he  says,  if  I  may  turn  into 
English  the  old  Latin  proverb,  "  Money  !  money  got 
anyhow  !  Money  ! "  Is  that  your  answer  ?  Another 
man  says  :  "  Culture  !  culture  !  culture  ! "  Another 
one  says,  if  he  is  true  :  "  Lust !  That  is  what  I  seek — 
the  gratification  of  the  beast  that  is  in  me "  ;  the 
satisfaction  of  the  appetites  that  are  there  and  are  to 
be  rigidly  kept  in  restraint,  and  so  kept  in  restraint, 
are  elements  in  perfection  and  allies  of  nobleness.  And 
some  of  you  would  have  to  say :  "  What  am  I  seeldng 
for  ?  Well,  really,  upon  my  word,  I  do  not  know  !  I 
never  thought  of  what  the  trend  of  my  life  w^as,  and 
what  I  was  really  aiming  at."  Does  the  cap  fit — do  any 
of  the  caps  lit — any  of  my  hearers  ?  In  some  measure 
they  lit  us  all,  brethren.  Do  not  let  us  try  to  wriggle 
out  of  the  solemn  necessity  that  is  laid  upon  us,, 
because  we  are  rational  creatures  with  a  conscience 
Avithin  us,  and  for  whom  Christ  died,  of  giving  account 
of  ourselves  and  of  our  aims  to  Him. 

If,  as  I  am  sure  is  the  case,  there  are  some  of  us 
who  can  say :  "  Well,  I  seek  for  the  highest,  the  perma- 
nent, the  all-sufficient  e^ood,"  then  the  recooiiition  of 
what  we  really  do  require  will  go  a  long  way  to  settle 
for  us  the  question  where  we  are  to  find  it.  "  Men  do 
not  gather  grapes  of  thorns."  The  gold-seeker  does 
not  hunt  in  dunghills.  If  you  want  to  pick  roses  you 
will  not  go  into  the  slums.     If  you  desire  treasures,. 


SEEKING  AND  SEEING.  151 

jewels,  and  precious  things  you  know  that  they  He  up 
amongst  the  mountains  in  the  rocks.  And  if  we  have 
once  clearly  recognised  what  is  the  aim  of  our  lives — 
viz.,  as  I  have  said,  adequate,  permanent,  supreme 
good — then,  if  we  seek  for  good,  we  must  look  for  it, 
and  find  it,  in  God. 

Remember,  too,  that  Jesus  Christ  will  ask  a  similar 
question  of  each  of  us  another  day.  On  earth  He  says, 
"  What  seek  ye  ? "  When  we  stand  at  His  judgment 
bar.  He  will  ask,  "  "What  sought  ye  ?  "  And,  that  we 
may  be  able  to  answer  that,  let  us  answer  this  one  as 
these  men  did.  Blessed  are  they  who,  when  Christ 
asks  "What?"  Could  answer  "  Thee  ! "  The  "What" 
that  a  human  heart  should  seek  is  a  "  Whom."  And 
only  those  who  say  "  Master !  we  would  come  and  dwell 
with  Thee,"  have  learned  the  true  answer  to  the  ques- 
tion as  to  what  they  seek.  If  we  answer  thus,  then  all  ■ 
the  weariness  and  failures  of  hunting  after  substances 
amidst  shadows,  and  groping  for  diamonds  in  mud- 
heaps,  are  at  an  end ;  and  the  dove  folds  its  wings  and 
rests,  and  the  blessedness  of  having  found  takes  the 
place  of  the  unrest  and  anxiety  of  continual  search  and 
continual  failure. 

But  there  is  another  side  to  this  penetrating 
question  :  for,  as  I  remarked  at  the  beginning  of  this 
sermon,  there  lay  in  it,  as  it  was  originally  put,  more 
than  half  a  promise  that,  whatever  the  request  was,  it 
should  Tdc  granted.  Christ's  look — and,  be  sure,  the 
intonation  of  that  voice,  into  which  "grace  was 
poured  " — took  all  the  possible  harshness  out  of  the 
interrogation,  and  made  it  all  but  an  assurance  that, 
whatever  the  petition  was,  it  would  be  fulfilled. 


152  SEEKING  AND  SEEING. 

"  What  seek  ye  ?  "  is  almost  like  putting  tlie  key  of 
His  treasure-house  into  our  hands.  And  He  still 
says  to  us,  "  What  is  thy  petition  ?  and  what  is  thy 
request  ?  and  it  shall  be  granted  thee." 

The  measure  of  our  requests  is  the  working  measure 
of  the  power  that  He  bestows.  We  get  in  and  from 
Jesus  Christ  just  as  much,  and  just  that  which  our 
desires  are  wide  enough  to  receive,  and  our  expecta- 
tions firm  enough  to  retain.  The  whole  Christ  is 
offered  to  each  of  us,  and  whatsoever  may  be  our 
petition,  that  we  shall  get. 

Oh,  brother,  there  is  only  one  region  of  human 
experience  in  which  wish  is  identical  with  fulfilment ; 
only  one  source  from  which  we  can  draw  exactly  as 
much  as  we  want.  It  is  that  great  fountain  which, 
like  the  fountain  of  oil  in  the  old  miracle,  flows  and 
fills  every  vessel  that  the  poverty-stricken  and  starving 
widow  woman  can  bring,  and  only  stops  its  flow  when 
she  stops  presenting  the  emptinesses  to  be  filled. 
"  What  seek  ye  ? "  That  is  to  say,  "  Ask  and  ye  shall 
receive  ;  seek  and  ye  shall  find."  Are  any  of  our 
other  aims  so  sure  of  accomplishment  as  this  ?  Why, 
then,  should  men  be,  as  so  many  of  us  are,  and  as  all 
of  us  are,  more  or  less,  such  fools  as  to  fling  away  our 
efforts,  and  wrack  our  brains,  and  torture  our  hearts, 
and  wear  our  finger-nails  to  the  stump,  in  grasping 
and  clutching  and  driving  and  scheming  and  toiling, 
when  all  the  while  a  wish  for  the  highest  Qfood  brinofs 
the  inrush  of  that  good  into  our  souls  ? 

There  are,  as  the  wise  old  psalm  tells  us,  two  ways 
of  seeking.  The  one  of  them  is  effort,  which  always 
fails — "  the  young  lions  do  lack  and  suffer  hunger." 


SEEKING  AND  SEEING.  153 

The  other  is  turning  to  the  one  Source  with  a  great 
emptiness,  and  a  great  desire,  and  a  great  trust,  and 
"  they  that  seek  the  Lord  shall  not  want  any  good." 
So,  brother,  when  Christ  says  to  you,  "  What  seekest 
thou  ? "  answer,  "  Thyself,  O  Lord." 

IL — Note  here  the  universal  invitation.  "  Come  ! " 
And  if  we  adopt  the  other  rendering  to  which  I 
have  already  referred,  "  Come,  and  ye  shall  see." 

Now,  I  suppose  I  need  not  vindicate  my  purpose  of 
putting  away  altogether  the  original  simple  applica- 
tion of  these  words,  and  reading  into  them  a  deeper 
meaning.  I  take  it  that  their  place  in  this  gospel 
stamps  upon  them  such  a  significance  as  being 
intended  by  the  Evangelist. 

"  Come  " — a  universal  invitation.  Now,  do  not  let 
us  have  any  misunderstandings  about  metaphors. 
Jesus  Christ  is  gone  away.  That  is  no  reason  why 
you  and  I  should  not  come  to  Him.  What  is 
"  presence "  ?  Is  it  the  juxtaposition  of  material 
atoms  ?  or  is  it  the  union,  as  of  two  polished  plates 
of  metal,  of  soul  with  soul  and  heart  with  heart  ? 
"  Where  a  man's  treasure  is,  there  shall  his  heart  be 
also,"  And  where  his  heart  is,  he — the  best  part  of 
him — is. 

So  through  the  mists  of  nineteen  centuries,  and 
through  the  clouds  of  the  lower  sky  and  the  upper 
strata  of  glories,  we  to-day  can  come  to  Christ,  more 
really  by  far,  than  these  two  men  who  knew  so  little 
about  Him,  and  clung  so  closely  to  His  skirts. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  metaphor?  A  very 
threadbare  meaning.  Jesus  Christ  shall  be  His  own 
commentator  when  He  savs  :   "  He  that  cometh  unto 


154  SEEKING  AND  SEEING. 

Me  shall  never  hunger  ;  and  He  that  believeth  on  Me 
shall  never  thhst."  So,  then,  you  may  put  the  one 
phrase  for  the  other  wherever  it  occurs.  Coming  is 
trust  and  trust  is  coming.  And  where  the  mind  is 
occupied  believingly  with  Jesus  Christ  and  the  truth 
that  lives  in  Him  and  flows  from  Him,  and  where  the 
heart  twines  its  tendrils  round  that  perfectly  loving 
and  infinite  heart,  and  the  will,  in  contact  with  His 
supreme  will,  is  supplied  and  made  docile  for,  and 
strengthened  by,  obedience,  and  where  the  conscience 
is  cleansed  from  guilt  by  the  touch  of  His  finger  laid 
on  the  believing  soul,  there,  even  here  and  now,  we 
may  be  "  present  with  the  Lord." 

There  is  no  mystery  about  that  beyond  the  mystery  of 
love.  The  path  is  plain,  the  requirement  is  reasonable, 
and  the  reward  is  great.  Come  I — that  is,  trust  your- 
self body,  soul,  and  spirit  to  Christ ;  and,  having  come, 
keep  beside  Him  by  the  exercise  of  the  same  faith, 
meditation,  outgoing  of  affection,  submission  of  will, 
and  practical  obedience  ;  and  though  you  are  present 
in  the  body,  you  will  not  be  absent  from  the  Lord. 

Brethren,  that  invitation  is  given  to  the  world, 
because  it  is  given  to  each  individual  soul.  It  is  given 
to  thee.  You  would  not  refuse  an  invitation  from  a 
prince.  Why  do  yon  turn  away  from  this  one  ?  By  His 
own  word,  by  His  voice  in  your  hearts,  by  the  very 
make  of  your  spirits.  He  is  calling  to  you  to  come. 
By  sorrows,  disappointments,  experience  of  the  illusions 
of  earthly  search,  and  the  vanity  of  earthly  findings. 
He  is  at  least  saying  to  you,  "  Go  !  this  is  not  your 
rest,"  and  in  the  "  Go  !  "  there  is  a  "  Come  ! "  And 
oh.  brethren,  surely  it  is  not  the  part  of  wise  men  and 


SEEKING  AND  SEEING.  15& 

women,  nor  of  people  that  have  regard  to  their  own 
supreme  good,  to  turn  a  deaf  ear,  as  so  many  of  us  do,, 
to  that  gracious  invitation. 

It  was  almost  His  first  word  to  the  world — "  Come, 
and  ye  shall  see."  It  echoes  all  through  His  earthly 
ministry :  "  If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  Me, 
and  drink."  With  open  hands  of  invitation,  like  the 
great  statue  of  a  modern  sculptor  in  the  pediment  of 
a  church,  the  Christ  stands,  beckoning  all  to  come  to 
Him,  and  ready  to  fold  the  extended  arms,  when  they 
come,  and  clasp  them  to  His  bosom ;  "  come  unto 
Me,  all  ye  that  labour."  And  all  but  the  last  word 
Vv^hich  this  same  evangelist  records  as  having  heard 
Christ  speak  from  heaven,  in  the  Book  of  Revelation^ 
is,  "  Let  him  that  is  athirst  come  ;  and  whosoever  will, 
let  him  come  and  take  of  the  water  of  life  freely." 

Just  as  in  the  earlier  interrogation  there  was  a 
promise  couched  and  half  concealed,  so,  if  we  adopt 
the  reading  already  referred  to,  in  this  last  invitation 
there  is  another  promise :  "  Come,  and  ye  shall  see."^ 
Yes  !  faith  is  the  condition  of  vision.  Trusting  Him 
we  have  experience  of  Him,  His  preciousness.  His 
power,  the  veracity  of  His  promises,  the  faithfulness  of 
His  fulfilment,  which  they  who  do  not  exercise  faith 
in  Him  can  never  possess. 

The  verification  of  Christianity  requires  a  Christian. 
That  is  perfectly  reasonable.  You  cannot  tell  the 
savour  of  any  food  till  you  have  eaten  of  it.  You  do- 
not  know  what  the  meaning  of  love  is  till  you  have 
loved.  No  words  nor  demonstrations  of  any  sort  can 
teach  any  of  the  emotions  of  life  to  a  man  until  he 
himself  has  passed  through  them.     You  cannot  make 


156  SEEKING  AND  SEEING. 

a  blind  man  know  the  glories  of  the  sunshine,  nor  a 
deaf  one  understand  the  magnificent  roll  of  the 
thunder.  No  more  can  you  judge  of  Christianity, 
in  its  greatness,  its  sweetness,  its  reality,  and  its  power, 
until  you  have  "  tasted  "  and  then  "  seen  "  that  "  the 
Lord  is  good."  Come,  and  you  will  see,  here  and  now, 
how  great  and  precious  Jesus  Christ  is. 

No  man  that  has  come  has  ever  gone  away 
and  said,  "  It  is  a  delusion ;  there  is  nothing  to 
see."  The  language  of  all  who  have  trusted  is,  "  Once 
I  was  blind  ;  now  I  see." 

That  has  been  the  experience  of  millions,  and  it  will 
be  yours,  until  the  day  comes  when  the  promise  shall 
receive  its  sublimest  fulfilment,  and  our  coming  to 
Christ  amidst  the  dusk  and  the  darknesses  of  earth 
shall  lead  on  to  the  full  vision  of  the  undying  day  in 
the  heavens. 

I  beseech  you,  dear  friends,  to  answer  Christ's 
invitation  as  promptly  and  as  fully  as  these  two  did  ; 
and  then  their  blessed  experience  will  be  yours.  "  He 
saith  unto  them.  Come,  and  ye  shall  see."  "  And  they 
came,  and  they  saw." 


^ 


XVI. 

^be  Servant  of  tbe  Xor^, 

"  Unto  you  first  God,  having  raised  up  His  Son  Jesus,  sent  Him  to 

bless  you,  in  turning  away  every  one  of  you  from  his  iniquities." — 

Acts  iii.  26. 

10  ended  Peter's  bold  address  to  the  won- 
dering crowd  gathered  in  the  Temple 
Courts,  around  him,  with  his  companion 
John  and  the  lame  man  whom  they 
had  healed.  A  glance  at  his  words 
will  show  how  extraordinarily  outspoken  and  coura- 
geous they  are.  He  charges  home  on  his  hearers  the 
guilt  of  Christ's  death,  unfalteringly  proclaims  His 
Messiahship,  bears  witness  to  His  resurrection  and 
ascension,  asserts  that  He  is  the  end  and  fulfilment  of 
ancient  revelation,  and  offers  to  all  the  great  blessings 
that  Christ  brings.  And  this  fiery,  tender  oration 
came  from  the  same  lips  which,  a  few  weeks  before 
had  been  blanched  with  fear  before  a  flippant  maid- 
servant, and  had  quivered  as  they  swore,  "  I  know  not 
the  man." 

One  or  two  simple  observations  may  be  made  by 
way  of  introduction.  "  Unto  you  first " — "  first "  im- 
plies second ;  and  so  the  Apostle  has  shaken  himself 
clear  of  the  Jew's  narrow  belief  that  Messias  belonged 


158  THE  SERVANT  OF  THE  LORD. 

to  them  onl}^,  and  is  already  beginning  to  contemplate 
the  possibility  of  a  transference  of  the  kingdom  of 
God  to  the  outlying  Gentiles.  "  God  having  raised 
up  His  Son  " — that  expression  has  no  reference,  as  it 
might  at  first  seem,  to  the  fact  of  the  resurrection ; 
but  is  employed  in  the  same  sense  as,  and,  indeed, 
looks  back  to,  previous  words.  For  he  had  just  quoted 
Moses'  declaration,  "  A  prophet  shall  the  Lord  your 
God  raise  up  unto  you  from  your  brethren,"  So  it  is 
Ghrist's  equipment  and  appointment  for  His  office, 
and  not  His  resurrection,  which  is  spoken  about  here. 
"  His  Son  Jesus  " — the  Revised  Version  more  accu- 
rately translates  "  His  Servant  Jesus,"  I  shall  have  a 
word  or  two  to  say  about  that  presently,  but  in  the 
meantime  I  simply  note  the  fact. 

AVith  this  slight  explanation  let  us  now  turn  to  two 
-or  three  of  the  aspects  of  the  words  before  us, 

I. — First,  I  note  the  extraordinary  transformation 
which  they  indicate  in  the  speaker. 

I  have  already  referred  to  his  cowardice  a  very 
short  time  before.  That  transformation  from  a  coward 
to  a  hero  he  shared  in  common  with  his  brethren. 
On  one  page  we  read,  "  They  all  forsook  Him  and  fled." 
We  turn  over  half  a  dozen  leaves  and  we  read :  "  They 
departed  from  the  council,  rejoicing  that  they  were 
■counted  Avorthy  to  suffer  shame  for  His  name," 
What  did  that  ? 

Then  there  is  another  transformation  no  less  swift, 
sudden,  and  inexplicable,  except  on  one  hjrpothesis. 
All  through  Christ's  life  the  disciples  had  been  singu- 
larly slow  to  apprehend  the  highest  aspects  of  His 
teachings,  and  they  had  clung  with  a  strange  obstinacy 


THE  SERVANT  OF  THE  LORD.  159 

to  their  narrow  Pharisaic  and  Jewish  notions  of  the 
Messiah  as  coming  to  estabHsh  a  temporal  dominion, 
in  which  Israel  was  to  ride  upon  the  necks  of  the  sub- 
ject nations.  And  now,  all  at  once,  this  apostle,  and 
his  fellows  with  him,  have  stepped  from  these  puerile 
and  narrow  ideas  out  into  this  large  place,  that  he  and 
they  recognise  that  the  Jew  had  no  exclusive  posses- 
sion of  Messiah's  blessings,  and  that  these  blessings 
were  no  external  kingdom  of  the  earth,  but  lay  mainly 
and  primarily  in  his  "  turning  every  one  of  you  from 
your  iniquities."  At  one  time  the  apostles  stood  upon 
a  gross,  low,  carnal  level,  and  in  a  few  weeks  they  were, 
at  all  events,  feeling  their  way  to,  and  to  a  large  extent 
had  possession  of,  the  most  spiritual  and  lofty  aspects 
•of  Christ's  mission.     What  did  that  ? 

Something  had  come  in  between  which  wrought 
more,  in  a  short  space,  than  all  the  three  years  of 
■Christ's  teaching  and  companionship  had  done  for 
them.  What  was  it  ?  Why  did  they  not  continue  in 
the  mood  which  two  of  them  are  reported  to  have  been 
in,  after  the  Crucifixion,  when  they  said — It  is  all  up ! 
■"  We  trusted  that  this  had  been  He,"  and  the  force  of 
■circumstances  has  shivered  the  confidence  into  frag- 
ments, and  there  is  no  such  hope  left  for  us  any 
longer.  What  brought  them  out  of  that  Slough  of 
Despond  ? 

I  would  put  it  to  any  fair-minded  man  whether  the 
psychological  facts  of  this  sudden  maturing  of  these 
childish  minds,  and  their  sudden  change  from  slinking 
■cowards  into  heroes,  who  did  not  blanch  before  the 
torture  and  the  scaffold,  are  accountable,  if  you  strike 
out  the  Resurrection,  the  Ascension,  and  the  Pentecost  ? 


160  THE  SERVANT  OF  THE  LORD. 

It  seems  to  me  that,  for  the  sake  of  avoiding  a  miracle, 
the  disbehevers  in  the  resurrection  accept  an  impossi- 
bility, and  tie  themselves  to  an  intellectual  absurdity. 
And  I  for  one  would  rather  believe  in  a  miracle  than 
believe  in  an  uncaused  change,  in  which  the  apostles- 
take  exactly  the  oj)posite  course  from  that  which  they 
necessarily  must  have  taken,  if  there  had  not  been  the 
facts  that  the  New  Testament  tells  us  there  were, 
Christ's  risino^  again  from  the  dead  and  ascension. 

Why  did  not  the  Church  share  the  fate  of  John's 
disciples,  who  scattered  like  sheep  without  a  shepherd 
when  Herod  chopped  off  their  master's  head  ?  Why 
did  not  the  Church  share  the  fate  of  that  abortive 
rising,  of  Avhich  we  know  that  when  Theudas,  its 
leader,  was  slain,  "  all,  as  many  as  believed  on  him, 
came  to  nought."  Why  did  these  men  act  in  exactly 
the  opposite  way  ?  I  take  it  that,  as  you  cannot 
account  for  Christ  except  on  the  hypothesis  that  He 
is  the  Son  of  the  Highest,  you  cannot  account  for  the 
continuance  of  the  Christian  Church  for  a  week  after 
the  Crucifixion  ;  except  on  the  hypothesis  that  the 
men  that  composed  it  were  witnesses  of  His  resur- 
rection, and  saw  Him  floating  upwards  and  received 
into  the  Shekinah  cloud  and  lost  to  their  sight. 
Peter's  change,  witnessed  by  the  words  of  my  text — 
these  bold  and  clear-sighted  words — seems  to  me  to 
be  a  perfect  monstrosity,  and  incapable  of  explication, 
unless  he  saw  the  risen  Lord,  beheld  the  ascended 
Christ,  was  touched  with  the  fiery  spirit  descending 
on  Pentecost,  and  so  "out  of  weakness  was  made 
strong,"  and  from  a  babe  sprung  to  the  stature  of  a 
man  in  Christ. 


THE  SERVANT  OF  THE  LORD.  161 

II. — Look  at  these  words  as  setting  forth  a  remark- 
able view  of  Christ. 

I  have  already  referred  to  the  fact  that  the  word 
rendered  "son"  on^ht  rather  to  be  rendered  "ser- 
vant."  It  literally  means  "child"  or  "boy,"  and 
appears  to  have  been  used  familiarly,  just  in  the  same 
fashion  as  we  use  the  same  expression  "  boy,"  or  its 
equivalent  "  maid,"  as  a  more  gentle  designation  for  a 
servant.  Thus  the  kindly  centurion,  when  he  would 
bespeak  our  Lord's  care  for  his  menial,  calls  him  his 
"  boy  "  ;  and  our  Bible  there  translates  rightly  "  ser- 
vant." 

Again,  the  designation  is  that  which  is  continually 
employed  in  the  Greek  translation  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment as  the  equivalent  for  the  well-known  prophetic 
phrase  "  the  Servant  of  Jehovah,"  which,  as  you  will 
remember,  is  characteristic  of  the  second  portion  of 
the  prophecies  of  Isaiah.  And  consequently  we  find 
that,  in  a  quotation  of  Isaiah's  prophecy  in  the  Gospel 
of  Matthew,  the  very  phrase  of  our  text  is  there 
employed :  "  Behold  My  Servant  whom  I  uphold." 

Now,  it  seems  as  if  this  designation  of  our  Lord  as 
God's  servant  was  very  familiar  to  Peter's  thoughts 
at  this  stage  of  the  development  of  Christian  doc- 
trine. For  we  find  the  name  employed  twice  in  this 
discourse — in  the  thirteenth  verse,  "  the  God  of  our 
Fathers  hath  orloriiied  His  Servant  Jesus,"  and  a^ain 
in  my  text.  We  also  find  it  twice  in  the  next 
chapter,  where  Peter,  offering  up  a  prayer  amongst 
his  brethren,  speaks  of  "  Thy  Holy  Child  Jesus,"  and 
prays  "  that  signs  and  wonders  may  be  done  through 
the  name  "  of  that  "  Holy  Child."     So,  then,  I  think 

11 


162  THE  SERVANT  OF  THE  LORD. 

we  may  fairly  take  it  that,  at  the  time  in  question, 
this  thouQfht  of  Jesus  as  the  "  Servant  of  the  Lord  " 
had  come  with  especial  force  to  the  primitive  Church. 
And  the  fact  that  the  designation  never  occurs  again 
in  the  New  Tesvament  seems  to  show  that  they  passed 
on  from  it  into  a  deeper  perception  than  even  it 
attests  of  who  and  what  this  Jesus  was  in  relation 
to  God. 

But,  at  all  events,  Ave  have  in  our  text  the  Apostle 
looking  back  to  that  dim,  mysterious  Figure  that 
rises  up  with  shadowy  lineaments  out  of  the  great 
prophecy  of  the  past,  and  thrilling  with  awe  and 
wonder,  as  he  sees,  bit  by  bit,  in  the  face  painted  on 
the  prophetic  canvas,  the  likeness  of  the  face  into 
wdiicli  he  had  looked  for  three  blessed  years,  that  now 
began  to  tell  him  more  than  they  had  done  whilst 
their  moments  were  passing. 

"  The  Servant  of  the  Lord  " — that  means,  first  of 
all,  that  Christ,  in  all  that  He  does,  meekly  and 
obediently  executes  the  Father's  will.  As  He  Himself 
said,  "  I  come  not  to  do  Mine  own  Avill,  but  the  will  of 
Him  that  sent  Me."  But  it  carries  us  further  than 
that,  to  a  point  about  which  I  would  like  to  say  one 
word  now ;  and  that  is,  the  clear  recognition  of 
the  prophetic  disclosure  in  ancient  revelation  of  the 
personality  of  Jesus  Christ.  Now,  it  seems  to  me 
that  present  tendencies,  discussions  about  the  nature 
xmd  limits  of  inspiration,  investigations  which,  in 
many  directions,  are  to  be  welcomed  and  are  fruitful 
as  to  the  manner  of  origin  of  the  books  of  the  Old 
Testament,  and  as  to  their  collection  into  a  canon 
-and  a   whole — that  all   that   set   of  thought   has   a 


THE  SERVANT  OF  THE  LORD.  163 

coimtorbalancing  disadvantage,  in  that  it  tends 
somewhat  to  obscure  in  men's  minds  the  great  central 
truth  about  the  revelation  of"  God  in  Israel — viz.,  that 
it  was  all  progressive,  and  that  its  goal  and  end  was 
Jesus  Christ.  "  The  testimony  of  Jesus  is  the  spirit 
of  prophecy,"  and  however  much  we  may  have  to 
learn — and  I  have  no  doubt  that  we  have  a  great 
deal  to  learn  about  the  composition,  the  structure, 
the  authorship,  the  date  of  these  ancient  books — I 
take  leave  to  say  that  the  unlearned  reader,  who 
recognises  that  they  all  converge  on  Jesus  Christ, 
has  hold  of  the  clue  of  the  labyrinth,  and  has  come 
nearer  to  the  marrow  of  the  books  than  the  most 
learned  investigators,  who  see  all  manner  of  things 
besides  in  them,  and  do  not  see  that  "  they  that  went 
before  cried,  saying,  Hosanna !  Blessed  be  He  that 
Cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord." 

And  so  I  venture  to  commend  to  you,  brethren — not 
as  a  barrier  against  any  reverent  investigation,  not  as 
stopping  any  careful  study — this  as  the  central  truth 
concerning  the  ancient  revelation,  that  it  had,  for  its 
chief  business,  to  proclaim  the  coming  of  the  Servant 
of  Jehovah,  Jesus  the  Christ. 

III. — And  now,  lastly,  look  at  these  words  as  setting 
forth  the  true  centre  of  Christ's  work. 

"  He  has  sent  Him  to  bless  you  in  turning  away 
every  one  of  you  from  his  iniquity."  I  have  already 
spoken  about  the  gross,  narrow,  carnal  apprehensions 
of  Messiah's  work  which  cleaved  to  the  disciples  during 
all  our  Lord's  life  here,  and  which  disturbed  even  the 
sanctity  of  the  upper  chamber  at  that  last  meal  with 
squabbles    about   precedence  which   had   an   eye   to 

11* 


164  THE  SERVANT  OF  THE  LORD. 

places  in  the  court  of  the  Messiah  when  He  assumed 
His  throne.  But  here  Peter  has  shaken  himself  clear 
of  all  these,  and  has  grasped  the  thought  that,  what- 
soever derivative  and  secondary  blessings  of  an  external 
and  visible  sort  may,  and  must,  come  in  Messiah's 
train,  the  blessing  Avhicli  He  brings  is  of  a  purely 
spiritual  and  inward  character,  and  consists  in  turning 
away  single  souls  from  their  love  and  practice  of  evil. 
That  is  Christ's  true  work. 

The  Apostle  does  not  enlarge  as  to  how  it  is  done. 
We  know  how  it  is  done.  Jesus  turns  away  men  from 
sin  because,  by  the  magnetism  of  His  love,  and  the 
attractive  raying  out  of  influence  from  His  cross,  He 
turns  them  to  Himself.  He  turns  us  from  our  iniqui- 
ties by  the  expulsive  power  of  a  new  affection,  which, 
coming  into  our  hearts  like  a  great  tide  into  some  foul 
Augean  stable,  sweeps  out  on  its  waters  all  the  filth 
that  no  broom  can  ever  clear  out  in  detail.  He  turns 
men  from  their  iniquities  by  His  gift  of  a  new  life, 
kindred  with  that  from  which  it  is  derived. 

There  is  an  old  superstition  that  lightning  turned 
whatever  it  struck  towards  the  point  from  which  the 
flash  came,  so  that  a  tree  with  its  thousand  leaves  had 
each  of  them  pointed  to  that  quarter  in  the  heavens 
where  the  blaze  had  been. 

And  so  Christ,  when  He  raj^s  out  the  beneficent 
flash  that  slays  only  our  evil,  and  vitalises  ourselves, 
turns  us  to  Him,  and  away  from  our  transgressions, 
"  Turn  us  !  0  Christ !  and  we  shall  be  turned." 

Ah,  brethren,  that  is  the  blessing  that  we  need 
most,  for  iniquities  are  universal ;  and  so  long  as  man 
is  bound  to  his  sin  it  will  embitter  all  other  sweet- 


THE  SERVANT  OF  THE  LORD.  165 


nesses,  and  neutralise  every  other  blessing.  It  is  not 
culture,  valuable  as  that  is  in  many  Avays,  tbat  will 
avail  to  stanch  man's  deepest  wounds.  It  is  not  a 
new  social  order  that  will  still  the  discontent  and  the 
misery  of  humanity.  You  may  adopt  collective 
economic  and  social  arrangements,  and  divide  property 
out  as  it  pleases  you.  And  as  long  as  man  continues 
selfish  he  will  continue  sinful,  and  as  long  as  he  con- 
tinues sinful  any  social  order  will  be  pregnant  with 
sorrow,  "  and  when  it  is  finished  it  will  bring  forth 
death."  You  have  to  go  deeper  down  than  all  that, 
down  as  deep  as  this  Apostle  goes  in  this  sermon  of 
his,  and  recognise  that  Christ's  prime  blessing  is  the 
turning  of  men  from  their  iniquities,  and  that  only 
after  that  has  been  done  will  other  good  come. 

How  shallow,  by  the  side  of  that  conception,  do 
modern  notions  of  Jesus  as  the  threat  social  Reformer 
look  !  These  are  true,  but  they  want  their  basis,  and 
their  basis  lies  only  here,  that  He  is  the  Redeemer  of 
individuals  from  their  sins.  There  were  people  in 
Christ's  lifetime  who  were  all  untouched  by  His 
teachings,  but  when  they  found  that  He  gave  bread 
miraculously  they  said,  "  Ah !  This  is  of  a  truth  the 
Prophet !  That's  the  prophet  for  my  money ;  the  Man 
that  can  make  bread,  and  satisfy  material  well-being." 
Have  not  certain  modern  views  of  Christ's  work  and 
mission  a  good  deal  in  common  with  these  vulgar  old 
Jews — views  which  regard  Him  mainly  as  contributing 
to  the  material  good,  the  social  and  economical  well- 
being  of  the  world  ? 

Now,  I  believe  that  He  does  that.  And  I  believe 
that   Christ's   principles    are  going    to  revolutionise 


166  THE  SERVANT  OF  THE  LORD. 

society  as  it  exists  at  present.  But  I  am  sure  that 
we  are  on  a  false  scent  if  we  attempt  to  preach  con- 
sequences without  proclaiming  their  antecedents,  and 
that  it  will  end,  as  all  such  attempts  have  ended,  in 
confusion  and  disappointment. 

They  used  to  talk  about  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  first 
French  Revolution,  as  "  The  Good  Sansculotte."  Per- 
fectly true  !  But  as  the  basis  of  that,  and  of  all 
representations  of  Him,  that  will  have  power  on  the 
diseases  of  the  community,  we  have  to  preach  Him  as 
the  Saviour  of  the  individual  from  his  sin. 

And  so,  brethren,  has  He  saved  you  ?  Do  you 
begin  your  notions  of  Jesus  Christ  where  His  work 
begins  ?  Do  you  feel  that  what  you  want  most  is 
neither  culture  nor  any  superficial  and  external 
changes,  but  something  that  will  deal  with  the  deep, 
indwellinof,  rooted,  obstinate  self-regard  which  is  the 
centre  of  all  sin  ?  And  have  you  gone  alone  to  Him 
as  a  sinful  man  ?  As  the  Apostle  here  suggests, 
Jesus  Christ  does  not  save  communities.  The  doctor 
has  his  patients  into  the  consulting  room  one  by  one. 
There  is  no  applying  of  Christ's  benefits  to  men  in 
batches,  by  platoons  and  regiments,  as  Clovis  baptized 
his  Franks;  but  you  have  to  go,  everyone  of  you,  through 
the  turnstile  singly,  and  alone  to  confess,  and  alone  to 
be  absolved,  and  alone  to  be  turned  from  your  iniquity. 

If  I  might  venture  to  alter  the  position  of  words  in 
my  text,  I  would  lay  them,  so  modified,  on  the  hearts 
of  all  my  friends  listening  to  me  now,  and  say,  "  Unto 
you — unto  thee,  God,  having  raised  up  His  Son  Jesus, 
sent  Him  to  bless  you,  first  in  turning  away  every 
one  of  you  from  his  iniquities." 


XVII. 

ZTbe  IbcaliuG  power  of  the  Bainc. 

"  His  name,  through  faith  in  His  name,  hath  made  this  man  strong:, 

whom  ye  see  and  know  :    yea,   the  faith  which  is  by  Him  hath 

given  him  this  perfect  soundness  in  the  presence  of  you  all. ' — 

Acts  iii.  16. 

ETER  said,  "  ^\'lly  look  ye  so  earnestly 
on  us,  as  though  by  our  own  power  or 
holiness  we  had  made  this  man  to  walk  ?" 
eagerly  disclaiming  being  anything  else 
than  a  medium  through  Avhich  Another's 
power  operated.  Jesus  Christ  said,  "  that  ye  may 
know  that  the  Son  of  Man  hath  power  on  earth  to 
forgive  sins,  I  say  unto  thee.  Arise  !  take  up  thy  bed, 
and  walk  "  ;  unmistakably  claiming  to  be  a  great  deal 
more  than  a  medium.  Why  the  difference  J*  Jesus 
Christ  did  habitually  in  His  miracles  adopt  the  tone 
which  Moses  once  ventured  on,  when  he  smote  the 
rock,  and  said,  "  Ye  rebels  !  must  lue  bring  the  w\ater 
for  you  ?  "  and  he  was  punished  for  it  by  exclusion 
from  the  Promised  Land.  Why  the  difference  ?  j\Ioses 
was  "  in  all  his  house  as  a  servant,  but  Christ  as  a  Son 
over  His  own  house  "  ;  and  what  was  arrogance  in  the 
servant  was  natural  and  reasonable  in  the  Son. 

The  gist  of  this  verse  is  a  reference  to  Jesus  Christ 


168  THE  HEALING  POWER  OF  THE  NAME. 

as  a  source  of  miraculous  power,  not  merely  because 
He  wrouGfht  miracles  when  on  earth,  but  because  from 
heaven  He  gave  the  power  of  which  Peter  was  but  the 
channel.  Now  it  seems  to  me  that  in  these  emphatic 
and  singularly  reduplicated  words  of  the  Apostle 
there  are  two  or  three  very  important  lessons  which  I 
oft'er  for  3'our  consideration. 

I. — The  first  is  the  power  of  the  Name. 

Now  the  Name  of  which  Peter  is  speaking  is  not 
the  collocation  of  syllables  which  are  sounded  "  Jesus 
Christ."  His  hearers  were  familiar  with  the  ancient 
and  Eastern  method  of  regarding  names  as  very 
much  more  than  distinguishing  labels.  They  are^  in 
the  view  of  the  Old  Testament,  attempts  at  a 
summary  description  of  things  by  their  prominent 
characteristics.  They  are  condensed  definitions.  And 
so  the  Old  Testament  usao^e  of  the  "  Name  "  of  God 
is  as  equivalent  to  that  which  God  is  manifested 
to  be.  Hence,  in  later  days — and  there  are  some 
tendencies  that  way  even  in  Scripture — in  Jewish 
literature  "  the  Name "  came  to  be  a  reverential 
synonym  for  God  Himself.  And  there  are  traces 
that  this  peculiar  usage  with  regard  to  the  Divine 
Name  was  beginning  to  shape  itself  in  the  Church 
with  reference  to  the  Name  of  Jesus,  even  at  that 
period  in  which  my  text  was  spoken.  For  instance, 
in  the  fifth  chapter  we  read  that  the  Apostles 
"  departed  from  the  council  rejoicing  that  they  were 
counted  worthy  to  suffer  shame  for  the  Name,"  and 
we  find  at  a  much  later  date  that  missionaries  of  the 
Gospel  are  described  by  the  A]3ostle  John  as  going 
forth  for  the  sake  of  the  Name. 


THE  HEALING  POWER  OF  THE  NAME.  169 

The  name  of  Christ,  then,  is  the  representation  or 
embodiment  of  that  which  Christ  is  declared  to  be  for 
us  men,  and  it  is  that  Name,  the  totaHty  of  what  He 
is  manifested  to  be,  in  which  hes  all  power  for  healing 
and  for  strengthening.  The  Name,  the  whole  Christ, 
in  His  nature.  His  offices,  His  work,  His  Incarnation, 
His  life,  His  death,  Resurrection,  session  at  the  right 
hand  of  God — it  is  this  Christ  whose  name  made  that 
man  strong,  and  will  make  us  strong.  Brethren,  let 
us  remember  that,  while  fragments  of  the  Name  will 
have  fragmentary  power,  as  the  curative  virtue  that 
resides  in  any  substance  belongs  to  the  smallest  grain 
of  it,  if  detached  from  the  mass — whilst  fras^ments  of 
the  Name  of  Christ  have  power,  thanks  be  to  Him,  so 
that  no  man  can  have  even  a  very  imperfect  and 
rudimentary  view  of  what  Jesus  Christ  is,  and  does, 
without  getting  strength  and  healing  in  proportion 
to  the  completeness  of  his  conception,  yet  in  order  to 
realise  all  that  He  can  be  and  do,  a  man  must  take 
the  whole  Christ  as  He  is  revealed. 

The  early  Church  had  a  symbol  for  Jesus  Christ,  a 
fish,  to  which  they  were  led  because  the  Greek  word 
for  a  fish  is  made  up  of  the  initials  of  the  words  which 
they  conceived  to  be  the  Name.  And  what  was  it  ? 
"  Jesus  Christ,  God's  Son,  Saviour."  Jesus,  humanity  ; 
Christ,  the  apex  of  Revelation,  the  fulfilment  of  pro- 
phecy, the  Anointed  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King ;  Son 
of  God,  the  Divine  nature.  And  all  these,  the 
humanity,  the  Messiahship,  the  Divinity,  found  their 
sphere  of  activity  in  the  last  name,  which,  without 
them,  would  in  its  fulness  have  been  impossible — 
Saviour.     He  is  not  such  a  Saviour  as  He  may  be  to 


170  THE  HEALING  POWER  OF  THE  NAME. 

each  of  us  unless  our  conception  of  the  Name  grasps 
these  three  things  :  the  humanity,  the  Messiahship, 
the  Divinity.   "  The  Name  has  made  this  man  strong." 

II. — Notice  how  the  power  of  the  Name  comes  to 
operate. 

Now,  if  you  will  observe  the  language  of  my  text 
you  will  note  that  Peter  says,  as  it  would  appear,  the 
same  thing  twice  over.  "  His  Name,  throuofh  faith  in 
His  Name,  hath  made  this  man  strong."  And  then, 
as  if  he  were  saying  something  else,  he  adds  what 
seems  to  be  the  same  thing :  "  Yea  !  the  faith  which 
is  by  Him  hath  given  him  this  perfect  soundness." 

Now,  note  that  in  the  first  of  these  two  statements 
nothing  appears  except  the  man,  the  "  Name,"  and 
"  faith."  I  take  it,  though  of  course  it  may  be 
questionable,  that  that  clause  refers  to  the  man's 
faith,  and  that  we  have  in  it  the  intentional  exclusion 
of  the  human  workers,  and  are  presented  with  only 
the  two  parties  really  concerned — at  the  one  end  the 
Name,  at  the  other  end  this  man  made  strono-.  And 
the  link  of  connection  between  the  two  in  this  clause 
is  faith — that  is,  the  man's  trust.  But  then,  if  we 
come  to  the  next  clause,  we  find  that  although  Peter 
has  just  previously  disclaimed  all  merit  in  the  cure, 
yet  there  is  a  sense  in  which  somebody's  faith,  work- 
ing as  from  without,  gave  to  the  man  "  this  perfect 
soundness."  And  it  seems  very  natural  to  me  to 
understand  that  here,  where  human  faith  is  repre- 
sented as  beiuGf,  in  some  subordinate  sense,  the 
bestower  of  the  thing  which  really  the  Name  had 
bestowed,  Ave  have  the  faith  of  the  human  miracle- 
worker  or  medium  referred  to.     Peter's  faith  did  give, 


THE  HEALING  POWER  OF  THE  NAME.  171 

but  Peter  only  gave  what  he  had  received  through 
faith.  And  so  let  all  the  praise  be  given  to  the  water, 
and  none  to  the  cup. 

^Vhether  that  be  a  fair  interpretation  of  the  words 
of  my  text,  with  their  singular  and  apparently  meaning- 
less tautology  or  no,  at  all  events  the  principle  which 
is  involved  in  the  explanation  is  one  that  I  wish  to 
dwell  upon  briefly  wo^v ;  and  that  is  that  in  order  for 
the  Name,  charged  and  supercharged  with  healing  and 
strengthening  power  as  it  is,  to  come  into  operation, 
there  must  be  a  tw^ofold  trust. 

The  healer,  the  medium  of  healino',  must  have  faith 
in  the  Name.  Yes  !  of  course.  In  all  regions  the  first 
requisite,  the  one  indispensable  condition,  of  a  success- 
ful propagandist  is  enthusiastic  confidence  in  what 
he  promulgates.  "  That  man  will  go  far,"  said  a  cynical 
politician  about  one  of  his  rivals,  "  he  believes  every 
word  he  says."  And  that  is  the  condition  always  of 
getting  other  people  to  believe  them.  Faith  is  con- 
tagious ;  men  catch  from  other  people's  tongues  the 
accent  of  conviction.  If  one  wants  to  enforce  any 
opinion  upon  others,  the  first  condition  is  that  he  shall 
be  utterly  self-oblivious  ;  and  when  he  is  manifestly 
saying,  as  the  Apostles  in  this  context  did,  "  do  not 
fix  your  eyes  on  us,  as  though  we  were  doing  any- 
thino',"  then  hearts  will  bow  before  him,  as  the  trees 
of  the  wood  are  bowed  by  the  w^ind. 

If  that  is  true  in  all  regions,  it  is  eminently  true  in 
reofard  to  relicfion.  For  what  we  want  there  most  is 
not  to  be  instructed,  but  to  be  impressed.  Most  of  us 
have,  lying  dormant  in  the  bedchamber  and  infirmary 
of  our  brains,  convictions  which  only  need  to  be  woke 


172  THE  HEALING  POWER  OF  THE  NAME. 

np  to  revolutionise  our  lives.  Now  one  of  tlie  most 
powerful  ways  of  waking  them  is  contact  with  any 
man  in  whom  they  are  awake.  So  all  successful 
teachers  and  messengers  of  Jesus  Christ  have  had 
this  characteristic  in  common,  however  unlike  each 
other  they  have  been.  The  divergencies  of  tempera- 
ment, of  moods,  of  point  of  view,  of  method  of  working 
which  prevailed  even  in  the  little  group  of  Apostles, 
and  distinguished,  broadly,  Paul  from  Peter,  Peter 
from  James,  and  Paul  and  Peter  and  James  from  John, 
are  only  types  of  what  has  been  repeated  ever  since. 
Get  together  the  great  missionaries  of  the  Cross,  and 
you  would  have  the  most  extraordinary  collection  of 
miscellaneous  idiosyncrasies  that  the  world  ever  saw, 
and  they  would  not  understand  each  other,  as  some  of 
them  wofully  misunderstood  each  other  when  here 
together.  But  there  was  one  characteristic  in  them 
all,  a  flaming  earnestness  of  belief  in  the  power  of  the 
Name.  And  so  it  did  not  matter  much,  if  at  all,  what 
their  divergencies  were.  Each  of  them  was  fitted  for 
the  Master's  use. 

And  so,  brethren,  here  is  the  reason — I  do  not  say 
the  only  reason,  but  the  main  one,  and  that  which 
most  affects  us — for  the  slow  progress,  and  even 
apparent  failure,  of  Christianity.  It  has  fallen  into 
the  hands  of  a  Church  that  does  not  half  believe  its 
own  Gospel.  By  reason  of  formality  and  ceremonial 
and  sacerdotalism  and  a  lazy  kind  of  expectation  that, 
somehow  or  other,  the  benefits  of  Christ's  love  can 
come  to  men  apart  from  their  own  personal  faith  in 
Him,  the  Church  has  largely  ceased  to  anticipate  that 
great   things   can  be   done   by  its  utterance  of  the 


THE  HEALING  POWER  OF  THE  NAME.  173 

Name.  And  if  you  have,  I  do  aot  say  ministers, 
or  teachers,  or  official  proclaimers,  or  Sunday-school 
teachers,  or  the  like,  but  I  say  if  you  have  a 
Church  that  is  honeycombed  with  doubt,  and  from 
which  the  strength  and  flood  tide  of  faith  has  in 
many  cases  ebbed  awa}',  why,  it  may  go  on  uttering 
its  formal  proclamations  of  the  Name  till  the  Day  of 
Judgement,  and  all  that  will  come  of  it  will  be — "  the 
man  in  whom  the  devils  were  leaped  upon  them,  and 
overcame  them,  and  said — as  he  had  a  good  right  to 
say — Jesus  I  know,  and  Paul  I  know,  but  who  are 
ye  ?  "  You.  cannot  kindle  a  fire  with  snowballs.  If 
the  town  crier  goes  into  a  quiet  corner  of  the  market- 
place and  rings  his  bell  apologetically,  and  gives  out 
his  message  in  a  whisper,  it  is  no  wonder  if  nobody 
listens.  And  that  is  the  way  in  which  too  many  so- 
called  Christian  teachers  and  communities  hold  forth 
the  Name,  as  if  begging  pardon  of  the  Avorld  for  being 
so  narrow  and  old-fashioned  as  to  believe  in  it  still. 

And  no  less  necessary  is  faith  on  the  other  side. 
The  recipient  must  exercise  trust.  This  lame  man,  no 
doubt,  like  the  other  that  Paul  looked  at  in  a  similar 
case,  had  faith  to  be  healed.  That  was  the  length  of 
his  tether.  He  believed  that  he  was  going  to  have 
his  legs  made  strong ;  and  they  were  made  strong  ac- 
cordingly. If  he  had  believed  more,  he  would  have 
got  more.  Let  us  hope  that  he  did  get  more,  because 
he  believed  more,  some  day  after.  But  in  the  mean- 
time the  Apostles'  faith  was  not  enough  to  cure  him  ; 
and  it  is  not  enough  for  you  that  Jesus  Christ  should 
be  standing  with  all  His  power  at  your  elbow,  and 
that,  earnestly  and  enthusiastically,  some  of  Christ's 


174  THE  HEALING  POWER  OF  THE  NAME. 

messengers  may  press  upon  you  the  acceptance  of 
Him  as  a  Saviour.  He  is  no  good  in  the  world  to 
you,  and  never  will  be,  unless  you  have  the  personal 
faith  that  knits  you  to  Him. 

It  cannot  be  otherwise.  Depend  upon  it,  if  Jesus 
Christ  could  save  everj^body  Avithout  terms  and  con- 
ditions at  all,  He  would  be  only  too  glad  to  do  it. 
But  it  cannot  be  done.  The  nature  of  His  work,  and  the 
sort  of  blessings  that  He  brings  by  His  work,  are  such 
as  that  it  is  an  impossibility  that  any  man  should 
receive  them  unless  he  has  that  trust  which,  begin- 
ning with  the  acceptance  by  the  understanding  of 
Christ  as  Saviour,  passes  on  to  the  assent  of  the  will, 
and  the  outgoing  of  the  heart,  and  the  yielding  of  the 
whole  nature  to  Him.  How  can  a  truth  do  any  good 
to  a  man  that  does  not  believe  in  it  ?  How  is  it  pos- 
sible that,  if  you  do  not  take  the  medicine,  it  will 
work  ?  How  can  you  expect  to  see,  unless  you  open 
your  eyes  ?  How  do  you  propose  to  have  your  blood 
purified,  if  you  do  not  till  }'our  lungs  with  air  ?  Is  it 
any  use  to  have  gas  fiCtings  in  your  house,  if  they  are 
not  connected  with  tlie  main  ?  Will  a  water  tap  run 
in  your  sculleries,  if  there  is  no  pipe  that  joins  it  with 
the  source  of  supply  ?  My  dear  friend,  these  rough 
illustrations  are  only  approximations  to  the  absolute 
impossibility  that  Christ  can  help,  heal,  or  save  any 
man  without  the  man's  personal  faith.  "  Whosoever 
believeth  "  is  no  arbitrary  limitation,  but  is  inseparable 
from  the  very  nature  of  the  salvation  given. 

III. — And  now,  lastly,  note  the  effects  of  the  power 
of  the  Name. 

The  Apostle  puts  in  two  separate  clauses  what,  in 


THE  HEALING  POWER  OF  THE  NAME.  175 

the  case  in  hand,  was  really  one  thing — "  hath  made 
this  man  strong,"  and  "  hath  given  him  perfect 
soundness."  Ah,  we  can  part  the  two,  cannot  we  ? 
There  is  the  disease,  the  disease  of  an  alienated  heart, 
of  a  perverted  will,  of  a  swollen  self,  all  of  which  we 
need  to  have  cured  and  checked  before  we  can  do 
right.  And  there  is  weakness,  the  impotence  to  do 
what  is  good,  "  how  to  perform  I  find  not,"  and  we 
need  to  be  strengthened  as  well  as  cured.  There  is  only 
one  thino-  that  will  do  these,  and  that  is  that  Christ's 
power,  aye,  and  Christ's  own  life,  should  pass,  as  it 
will  pass  if  we  trust  Him,  into  our  foulness  and  preci- 
pitate all  the  impurity — into  our  weakness  and  infuse 
strength.  A  reed  shaken  with  the  wind,  and  without 
substance  or  solidity  to  resist,  may  be  placed  in  what 
they  call  a  petrifying  well,  and,  by  the  infiltration  of 
stony  substance  into  its  structure,  may  be  turned 
into  a  rigid  mass,  like  a  little  bar  of  iron.  So,  if 
Christ  comes  into  my  poor,  weak,  tremulous  nature, 
there  will  be  an  infiltration  into  the  very  substance  of 
my  being  of  a  present  power  which  will  make  me 
strong. 

My  brother,  you  and  1  need,  first  and  foremost, 
the  healing,  and  then  the  strength-giving  power, 
which  we  never  find  in  its  completeness  anywhere  but 
in  Christ,  and  which  we  shall  always  find  in  Him. 

And  now  notice,  Jesus  C'hrist  does  not  make  half 
cures — "  this  perfect  soundness."  If  any  man,  in 
contact  with  Him,  is  but  half  delivered  from  his 
infirmities  and  purged  from  his  sins,  it  is  not  because 
the  power  is  inadequate,  but  because  the  faith  is 
defective. 


176  THE  HEALING  POWER  OF  THE  NAME. 

Christ's  cures  should  be  visible  to  all  around.  A 
man's  own  testimony  is  not  the  most  satisfactory. 
Peter  appeals  to  the  bystanders.  "  You  have  seen 
him  lying  here  for  years,  a  motionless  lump  of  mendi- 
cancy at  the  Temple's  gate.  Now  you  see  him  walking 
and  leaping  and  praising  God.  Is  it  a  cure,  or  is  it 
not  ?  "  You  professing  Christians,  would  you  like  to 
stand  that  test,  to  empanel  a  jury  of  people  that  have 
no  sympathy  with  your  religion,  in  order  that  they 
might  decide  whether  you  were  healed  and  strengthened 
or  not  ?  It  is  a  good  thing  for  us  when  the  world 
bears  witness  that  Jesus  Christ's  power  has  come  into 
us,  and  made  us  what  we  are. 

And  so,  dear  friends,  I  lay  all  these  thoughts  on 
your  hearts.  Christ's  gift  is  amply  sufficient  to 
deliver  us  from  all  evils  of  weakness,  sickness,  in- 
capacit}' :  to  endue  us  with  all  gifts  of  spiritual  and 
immortal  strength.  But,  while  the  limit  of  what 
Christ  gives  is  His  boundless  wealth,  the  limit  of  what 
you  possess  is  your  faith.  The  rainfall  comes  down 
in  the  same  copiousness  on  rock  and  furrow,  but  it 
runs  off  the  one,  having  stimulated  no  growth  and 
left  no  blessing,  and  it  sinks  into  the  other  and 
quickens  every  dormant  germ  into  life  which  will  one 
day  blossom  into  beauty.  We  are  all  of  us  either 
rock  or  soil,  and  which  we  are  depends  on  the  reality, 
the  firmness,  and  the  force  of  our  faith  in  Christ.  He 
Himself  has  laid  down  the  principle  on  which  He 
bestows  His  gifts  when  He  says,  "  According  to  thy 
faith  be  it  unto  thee." 


XVIII. 

IPeter'6  Xiet  ot  \Daluat)le0, 

Much  more  precious  than  gold  that  perisheth." — 1  Peter  i.  7. 

ETER  is  very  fond  of  this  word  "  precious." 
He  uses  it  more  frequently  than  all  the 
other  New  Testament  writers,  with  the 
exception  of  John  in  the  Revelation, 
where,  however,  it  is  only  employed  in 
reference  to  things  of  material  value,  such  as  jewels 
and  costly  woods.  Paul  uses  it  only  once,  and  in  a 
similar  connection,  speaking  about  "gold,  silver,  and 
precious  stones."  James  employs  it  once  in  regard  of 
the  fruits  of  the  earth ;  and  all  the  other  instances  of 
its  use  are  in  Peter's  writings.  It  is  his  stock  epithet, 
not  discriminating  the  various  excellences  of  the  things 
to  Avhich  he  applies  it,  but,  in  a  naive  and  beautifully 
simple  fashion,  extolling  their  worth. 

Here  are  the  cases  in  which  he  uses  it.  First,  in  my 
text,  about  the  process  by  Avhich  Christian  faith  is 
tested ;  then  about  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ ;  then, 
in  a  quotation  from  Isaiah,  about  Christ  Himself  as  the 
corner-stone.  These  three  are  the  instances  in  the 
first  Epistle.  In  the  second  we  find  two,  where  he 
speaks  of  "like  precious  faith"  and  of  "exceeding 
great  and  precious  promises." 

12 


178  PETER'S  LIST  OF  VALUABLES. 

I  ma}'  just  note  in  passing  that  the  persistency  of  the 
use  of  this  characteristic  word  and  its  cognate  in  the 
second  Epistle  is  a  httle  morsel  of  evidence  in  favour  of 
the  contested  genuineness  of  that  Epistle.  It  does  not 
carry  us  very  far,  but  it  may  stand  for  something. 

Now,  my  purpose  in  this  sermon  is  to  gather  together 
these  various  applications  of  this  one  epithet.  In  the 
mass  they  give  us  Peter's  catalogue  of  the  Christian's 
treasures,  and  if  we  laid  them  to  heart  they  would 
rectify  our  estimates  and  revolutionise  our  lives.  I 
classify  them  a  little  differently  from  the  order  in 
which  they  occur  in  the  letters. 

I. — I  ask  you,  first,  to  take  this  general  principle, 
that  our  true  treasures  are  all  contained  in,  and 
clustered  round,  the  person  and  work  of  Jesus  Christ. 
Now,  in  order  to  estimate  the  value  of  a  thing,  the 
lirst  necessity  is  a  correct  standard.  And  this  is  the 
misery  of  men,  that,  whilst  they  are  prepared  to  give 
abundant  thought  to  the  means  whereby  they  may 
compass  the  ends  that  they  select,  so  few  of  them 
have  given  anything  like  adequate,  sober,  and 
deliberate  consideration  to  the  question  of  what  these 
ends  should  be.  If  we  would  only  fairly  set  ourselves 
to  settle  this  question  of  what  is  good,  and  what  are 
the  relative  degrees  of  good  in  the  different  aims  that 
we  can  set  before  us,  there  would  be  fewer  tragedies 
in  life. 

I  Avonder  how  many  men  and  women  in  this  con- 
gregation have  given  one  serious  hour  to  the  question 
of  what  really  is  of  value  to  them  ;  and  how  many  of 
us  could  say,  "  To  the  best  of  my  ability  I  have 
looked  at   life   steadily  and  completely,  and  I  have 


PETEKS  LIST  OF  VALUABLES.  179 

come  to  Lie  reasoned,  deliberate  conclusion  tliat 
so-and-so  is  the  course  which  offers  to  me  the  fairest 
prospect  of  highest  and  permanent  good."  Have  yon 
done  it,  brother  ?  Or  have  you  let  yourself,  like  so 
tragically  many  of  us,  be  drifted  into  a  course  of  life 
by  impulse,  accident,  example,  bodily  needs,  or  like 
trivial  causes  ? 

Xow,  if  we  are  seekinsj  for  a  standard  of  value, 
surely  the  following  points  are  very  plain.  Our  true 
treasure  must  be  such  as  helps  us  towards  the  highest 
ends  for  which  we  aie  titted  by  our  make.  It  must 
be  such  as  satisfies  our  deepest  needs  ;  it  must  be 
such  as  meets  our  whole  nature ;  and  it  must  be  such  as 
cannot  be  wrenched  from  us.  These  things  are  as 
plain  as  A  B  C.  Ay,  and  men  in  crowds,  who  ac- 
knowledge them  because  they  cannot  dispute  them, 
are  living  in  flagrant  contradiction  of  every  one  of 
them.  I  do  not  want  to  undervalue  lower  and  relative 
good  of  any  kind,  or  to  preach  an  over-strained  con- 
tempt of  material,  transient,  and  partial  blessing. 
Competence  and  wealth,  gold  and  what  gold  buys, 
and  what  it  keeps  away,  are  good.  High  above  them 
we  rank  the  treasures  of  a  cultivated  mind,  of  a  refined 
taste,  of  eyes  that  see  the  beauty  of  God's  fair  creation. 
Above  these  we  rank  the  priceless  treasures  of  pure, 
reciprocated  human  love.  But  none  of  them,  nor  all 
of  them  put  together,  meet  our  tests,  simple  and 
obvious  as  they  are.  They  help  us  but  a  little  way 
towards  our  goal.  They  do  not  satisfy  the  whole  or 
the  depths  of  our  natures  ;  but  ever  there  is  the  hun- 
gry heart,  or,  worse,  the  atrophy  of  the  best  longings 
of  our  souls.     You  can  no  more  fill  a  man's  nature 


ri 


0* 


180  PETER'S  LIST  OF  VALUABLES. 


with  creatures  and  creatural  bliss  than  a  child,  with 
its  little  Avheelbarrow  and  spade,  can  fid  the  bed  of 
the  ocean  by  shovelling  and  tiltino-  barrowfuls  of  sand 
into  it.  Chily  God  can  fill  a  soul.  Mai. Chester  men 
do  not  need  to  be  told  that  capitalists  )nay  become 
paupers.  All  of  us  who  have  lived  long  enough  in  this 
Lancashire  have  seen  plenty  of  mills  and  warehouses 
"  change  hands,"  as  they  say,  and  their  possessors 
vanish  into  poverty.  And  death  comes,  and  takes  all 
the  treasures  out  of  the  powerless  fingers,  and  un- 
clasps the  linked  hands  of  dear  ones. 

80,  dear  brethren,  perhaps  Peter  is  right  after  all, 
Avhen  he  points  us  in  a  wholly  different  direction  for 
the  true  precious  things.  He  numbers  in  the  first 
rank,  as  in  themselves  intrinsically  and  always  pre- 
cious beyond  the  estimate  of  men,  Christ,  Christ's 
blood,  Christ's  promises. 

"Christ  is  precious."  Now,  the  word  that  he 
employs  there  is  slightly  different  from  that  which 
occurs  in  the  other  verses.  And  since  it  is  slightly 
different  there  is  just  a  shade  of  difference  of  meaning 
in  it,  which  is  brought  out  by  observing  that  the 
speaker  in  the  original  words  of  the  prophet  is  God 
Himself.  It  is  the  preciousness  in  God's  sight  of  the 
stone  which  He  "  lays  in  Zion  "  that  is  glanced  at  in 
the  epithet.  I  must  not  dwell  upon  that ;  but  let  me 
just  suggest  to  you  how  the  preciousness  of  His 
l)clovedSon,  in  the  eyes  of  the  Father  who  gave  Him, 
enhances  the  preciousness  of  the  gift  to  us.  God 
obeys  the  law  which  He  lays  upon  His  servants ;  and 
He  "will  not  give"  to  us  "that  which  costs  Him 
nothing."     His  recognition  of  the  preciousness  of  the 


PETERS  LIST  OF  VALUABLES.  181 


Son  whom  He  did  not  spare  invests  the  Avork  of 
Christ  with  a  heart-melting  aspect  and  the  mystery  of 
a  Divine  surrender. 

But  Christ  is  precious  to  us.  Yes,  if  we  know 
ourselves  and  what  we  want ;  if  we  know  Him  and 
what  He  gives  ;  if  our  emptiness  feels  that  it  is  filled 
by  His  fulness,  as  a  concavity  may  be  rounded  so  as 
to  receive,  and  embrace,  and  touch  at  every  point,  a 
convexity.  Do  you  want  wisdom  ?  He  is  the  wisdom 
of  God.  Do  you  seek  power  ?  He  is  the  power  of 
God.  Do  you  long  for  joy  (  He  will  give  you  His 
own.  Do  you  weary  for  peace  ?  "  My  peace  I  leave 
with  you."  Do  you  hunger  for  righteousness  ?  "  He 
of  God  is  made  unto  us  wisdom  and  righteousness." 
Do  you  need  fulness  and  abundance  ?  In  Him  dwells 
all  the  fulness  of  God ;  and  "  of  His  fulness  have 
all  we  received."  Whatever  good  any  soul  seeks, 
Christ  is  the  hiorhest  c^ood,  and  is  all  good.  And  so 
unto  us  believing  the  preciousness  of  Jesus  will  surely 
come.  Ah,  brethren,  let  us  turn  our  hearts  awa}^ 
from  false  treasures  and  lay  hold  on  Him  who  is  the 
true  Riches. 

Further,  Christ's  blood  is  precious.  Peter  believed  in 
Christ's  atoning  sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  the  Avorld,  and  of 
each  single  soul  therein ;  and  I  venture  to  more  than 
doubt  whether  any  man  comes  to  apprehend,  as  it  may 
be  apprehended,  the  worth  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  has  not 
apprehended  the  worth  of  His  blood.  If  you  strike 
that  aspect  and  element  out  of  the  work  of  our  Lord, 
what  remains,  precious  as  it  is,  does  not  seem  to  me 
to  satisfy  human  necessities  so  completely  as  to 
make  Him  the  all-sufficient  and  single  treasure  and 


182  PETER'S  LIST  OF  VALUABLES. 


riches  of  men's  souls,  I  suppose  that  to  say  so  is 
considered  nowadays  to  be  old-fashioned  and  narrow. 
The  more  is  the  pity  !  Brethren,  the  precious  Clirist 
is  precious  because  of  His  blood  shed  for  the  remission 
of  sins,  and  because  in  His  blood,  which  is  His  life, 
flowing  in  our  veins  by  the  faith  that  partakes  of  Him , 
there  is  a  power  which  will  make  our  lives  pure  and 
gracious  and  good,  as  derived  from,  and  kindred  with 
Him.  And,  as  I  believe,  only  they,  who  in  full  faith 
recognise  the  fact  that  the  death  of  Christ  is  the  life 
of  the  world,  can  understand  or  re-echo  the  raptures 
of  confidence  with  which  apostles  and  saints  exalt  His 
preciousness  and  magnify  His  great  name,  (/hrist 
Himself  is  our  true  treasure,  and  in  that  treasure  not 
the  least  precious  of  its  contents  is  the  mighty  act  by 
which,  on  the  Cross,  He  takes  away  the  sins  of  the 
Avorld.  I  beseech  you  to  ask  3'ourselves  whether,  in 
your  conception  of  Christianit}',  and  what  it  is  and 
does  for  the  world,  you  can,  with  full  consent  of 
understanding  and  heart,  accord  not  only  with 
Peter's  extolling  of  the  precious  Christ,  but  with 
his  magnifying  the  worth  of  the  precious  blood 
of  Christ  as  of  "  a  Lamb  without  blemish  and  without 
spot." 

And  then  there  is  a  third  precious  thing,  cluster- 
ing round  and  flowing  from  Jesus  Christ  and  His  work 
— and  that  is,  the  "exceeding  great  and  precious 
promises,"  which  are  given  to  us  "  that  by  them  we 
may  be  partakers  of  a  Divine  nature." 

I  presume  that  the  promises  referred  to  by  the 
Apostle  are  largely,  if  not  exclusively,  those  which 
have  reference  to  what  we  call  the  future  state.     And 


PETEKS  LIST  OF  VALUABLES. 


they  are  precious  because  they  come  straight  to  meet 
one  of  the  deepest  needs  of  humanity,  often  neglected, 
but  always  there — an  ache,  if  not  a  conscious  need. 
What  about  that  dark,  dim  beyond  ?  Is  there  any 
solid  ground  in  it  ?  Is  there  any  place  on  which  a 
firm  foot  may  be  planted  ?  any  fast  holding-ground 
in  which  the  anchor  of  our  souls  may  be  tixed  with- 
out dragging  ?  Is  there  anything  that  we  can  know 
and  believe  and  trust  to  r  anything  which  we  can  be 
so  sure  of  that  it  has  a  right  to  influence  our  lives 
and  to  press  in  amongst  the  seeming  solidities  of  the 
present  ?  or  is  it  but  shadow  and  cloud-wrack,  or,  as 
people  say,  "subjective  impressions"  thrown  upon 
the  black  curtain  beyond  ?  Christ  comes  with  the 
answer,  "  I  am  the  Resurrection  and  the  Life ;  he  that 
believeth  on  Me,  though  he  were  dead,  yet  shall  he 
live."  Then  it  is  not  mist ;  then  I  can  fling  my 
grappling-iron  into  it,  and  it  will  hold,  and  I  can  hold 
on  to  it.  Then  I  can  be  sure  of  the  farthest  point  of 
boundless  Time  which  men  call  Eternity ;  as  sure  as 
I  am — I  was  going  to  sa}^,  of  the  next  moment,  but  I 
can  be  surer — as  sure  as  I  am  of  yesterday.  For 
Christ's  future  is  as  fixed  as  my  past.  So,  brethren, 
His  promises  are  precious.  They  are  not  coin,  they  are 
cheques  with  a  good  Name  on  them ;  and  that  is 
quite  as  reliable  and  as  true  wealth  as  if  you  had  the 
shining  metal  in  your  hands  to-da}-  which  they 
represent. 

Thus,  dear  friends,  Christ  Himself,  and  in  Christ 
Christ's  blood,  and  from  Christ's  lips  Christ's  promises 
— these  are  the  true  treasures  which  we  should  seek  to 
amass  and  call  our  own.      "  My  God  shall  supply  all 


184  PETEKS  LIST  OF  VALUABLES. 

your  need,  according  to  His  riches  in  glory  in  Christ 
Jesus." 

II. — If  so,  that  Avhich  puts  us  in  possession  of  the 
precious  things  is  itself  precious. 

So  the  Apostle  speaks,  in  his  second  Epistle,  about 
"like  precious  faith,"  using  a  compound  word,  which, 
however,  is  substantially  identical  with  the  simple 
expression  in  the  other  cases.  Now,  I  am  not  going 
to  diverge  from  my  present  purpose  to  say  anything 
about  that  very  significant  little  addition,  "  like 
precious  faith,"  except  just  to  drop  a  passing  remark 
that,  seeing:  that  it  occurs  in  the  salutation  at  the 
beginning  of  the  letter,  it  presents  us  with  a  very 
beautiful  instance  of  the  Apostle's  humble  and  joyful 
identification  with  himself  of  all  those,  of  whatever 
nationality,  degree  in  life,  or  attainment  in  Chris- 
tianity, who  were  trusting  in  Jesus  Christ.  He,  the 
Apostle  of  Jesus,  addresses  the  whole  multitude  of 
believers,  he,  the  Jew,  addresses  the  whole  multitude 
of  Gentiles,  as  having  obtained  "  like  precious  faith 
with  us." 

But  I  pass  from  that  for  the  purpose  of  making  one 
observation,  and  that  is,  that  the  only  preciousness  of 
that  faith,  which  the  New  Testament  magnifies  so 
greatly,  is  that  it  brings  us  into  possession  of  the  things 
that  are  intrinsically  precious.  I  believe  that  hosts 
of  people  in  all  our  congregations  who  have  had 
Christian  teaching  dinned  into  their  ears  ever  since 
they  were  babes  have  but  the  haziest  notion,  both  of 
what  the  New  Testament  means  by  faith,  and  of  why 
it  magnifies  it  so  much.  If  only  you  would  under- 
stand that  it  is  nothing  more  than  simple  trust,  and 


PETER'S  LIST  OF  VALUABLES.  185 


that  tlie  only  reason  why  it  is  worth  anything  is 
because  it  gives  you  the  possession  of  that  which  is 
worth  everything,  mountains  of  misapprehension  and 
clouds  of  mist  would  be  cleared  away  from  the  whole 
system  (^f  Christian  teaching ;  and  you  would  come  to 
understand  how  it  was  no  arbitrary  appointment,  the 
reasons  of  which  were  not  discernible,  but  a  necessity, 
arising  from  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  that  the 
only  way  by  which  a  man  could  obtain  possession 
of  the  Christ,  "  in  whom  are  hid  all  the  treasures 
of  wisdom  and  knowledge,"  was  by  the  simple 
act  of  opening  his  heart  and  saying,  "  Come  in, 
Lord,  and  till  me  with  Thyself"  That  is  the  pre- 
ciousness,  and  it  is  the  only  preciousness  that  attaches 
to  faith. 

Suppose  a  door  worth  half  a  crown ;  yes  I  but  it  is 
the  door  of  a  storehouse  full  of  bullion.  Here  is  a 
bit  of  lead  pipe,  worth  twopence. ;  yes,  but  through  it 
comes  the  water  that  keeps  a  besieged  city  alive. 
And  so  your  faith,  worth  nothing  in  itself,  is  worth 
everything  as  the  means  by  which  you  lay  hold  of  the 
durable  riches  and  risxhteousness  of  Jesus  Christ. 
Therefore,  brethren,  cherish  it.  A  cultivated  mind  is 
a  treasure  because  it  is  the  key  to  many  treasures. 
Refined  tastes  are  treasures  because  they  bring  us  into 
possession  of  lofty  gifts.  .Esthetic  sensibilities  are 
precious  because  they  make  our  own  a  pure  and 
ennobling  pleasure.  And,  for  precisely  the  same 
reason,  high  above  the  cultivated  understanding,  and 
refined  tastes,  and  the  artistic  sense,  ay,  and  even 
above  the  loving  heart  that  twines  its  tendrils  round 
another  heart  as  loving,  we  rank  the  faith  which  joins 


PETEKS  LIST  OF  VALUABLES. 


US  to  Christ.  It  is  like  a  hand  iipUfted,  and  with  open 
fingers,  eager  to  close  round  the  outstretched  hand  in 
which  alone  is  strength.  If  Christ,  His  blood,  His 
promises,  are  precious,  then  in  the  second  rank  of  a 
derived  preciousness  is  the  faith  which  clasps  and 
keeps  Him  and  them. 

Ill, — If  so,  the  process  which  strengthens  that 
faith  is  precious. 

My  nominal  text  speaks  about  "  the  trial  of  your 
faith  "  as  being  "  much  more  precious  than  of  gold 
that  perisheth  though  it  be  tried  with  fire."  There 
are  ambiguities  about  the  phrase,  and  this  is  not  the 
place,  nor  is  there  now  time,  to  say  a  word  about 
these.  Suffice  it  to  say,  I  accept  the  common  under- 
standing of  the  words  as  the  correct  one,  and  suppose 
that  Peter  meant  that  the  process  by  which  faith  is 
tested,  purified,  and  perfected  is  a  precious  treasure. 
Ah,  that  is  a  strange  reversal  of  our  lazy  and  sense- 
bound  estimates,  but  it  is  plainl}^  true,  if  what  I  have 
been  saying  in  the  previous  part  of  this  sermon  is  true. 
If  Christ  and  what  pertains  to  Him  are  real  wealth, 
and  if  our  faith  is  the  means  of  our  coming^  into 
possession  of  our  projjerty,  then  everything  that 
tightens  our  grasp  upon  Him,  and  increases  our 
capacity  of  receiving  Him,  is  valuable. 

Let  us  la}^  that  to  heart,  brethren,  and  it  changes 
all  our  estimates  of  this  world's  mistaken  ill  and  good. 
Let  us  la}^  that  to  heart,  and  it  interprets  much.  We 
do  not  understand  life  until  we  have  c^ot  rid  of  the 
prejudice  that  enjoyment,  or  any  lower  thing,  is  the 
object  of  it.  Let  us  understand  that  the  deepest 
meaning  of  all  our  experience  here  is  discipline,  and 


PETER'S  LIST  OF  VALUABLES.  187 


we  have  come  within  sio^ht  of  the  sohition  of  most  of 
our  perplexities.  Education,  character-building,  the 
widening  of  our  capacity  to  desire  and  to  receive 
God — that  is  what  we  are  sent  into  the  world  for,  and 
what  we  are  schooled  and  tormented  and  bothered  and 
gladdened  for.  Sorrow  and  joy,  light  and  darkness, 
summer  and  winter,  sunshine  and  storm,  life  and  death, 
gain  and  loss,  fiiilures  and  successes — they  all  have  the 
one  end,  that  we  may  be  partakers  of  the  wealth  of 
His  holiness.  So,  brethren,  take  the  lamp  of  that 
simple  truth  in  your  hands,  and  the  dark  places  of 
life  will  be  less  dark,  and  you  will  understand  that 
not  enjoyment  and  not  sorrow,  but  God-likeness  and 
the  full  possession  of  Jesus  Christ  is  the  purpose  of 
all. 

Lapidaries  will  tell  you  that  the  most  precious  pearls 
are  black.  The  white  ones  strike  the  vulgar  eye,  but 
they  are  worth  less  than  the  dark  ones.  If  you  have 
wisely  dealt  with  your  sorrows,  they  are  your  truest 
treasures.  Take  care  that  you  do  not  waste  them  ; 
take  care  that  you  get  out  of  them  all  that  they  are 
meant  to  brins,'. 

And,  dear  brethren,  let  us  try  to  clear  our  minds  of 
the  delusions  of  this  world,  and  to  rectify  our  estimates 
of  true  good.  A  very  perverted  standard  prevails,  and 
we  are  too  apt  to  fall  in  with  it.  Many  of  us  are  no 
wiser  than  savages  who  will  exchange  gold  for  trash, 
and  barter  away  fertile  lands  for  a  stand  of  old  muskets 
or  a  case  of  fiery  rum.  Think  of  yourselves,  your 
nature,  your  wants,  your  aching  hearts,  your  sure 
departure  from  life,  and  the  eternity  that  is  before 
you.     Think  of  your  necessities  in  their  depth,  their 


PETERS  LIST  OF  VALUABLES. 


sweep,  their  duraiion.  Listen  to  Jesus  Christ  coun- 
selling you  to  buy  of  Him  gold  tried  in  the  lire.  Turn 
away  from  the  fairy  gold  which  by  daylight  will  be 
seen  to  be  but  a  heap  of  yellow,  fading  leaves,  and 
cling  in  faith,  which  is  precious,  to  Him  who  is  price- 
less, and  in  whom  the  poorest  will  iind  riches  that 
cannot  be  corrupted  nor  lost  for  ever. 


I 


XIX. 

Ibow  to  Secure  a  prosperous  Do^atje. 

"  And  after  Paul  had  seen  the  vision,  immediately  we  endeavoured 
to  g'i  into  Macedonia,  assuredly  gathering'  that  the  Lord  had 
called  us  to  preach  the  gospel  unto  them.  Therefore  we  came 
with  a  straight  course." — Acts  xvi.  10. 


°"HIS  book  of  the  Acts  is  careful  to  point 
out  how  each  fresh  step  in  the  exten- 
sion of  the  Church's  work  was  directed 
and  commanded  by  Jesus  Christ  Him- 
self. Thus  Philip  was  sent  by  specific 
injunction  to  "join  himself"  to  the  chariot  of  the 
Ethiopian  statesman.  Thus  Peter  on  the  house-top 
at  Joppa,  looking  out  over  the  waters  of  the  western 
sea,  had  the  vision  of  the  great  sheet,  knit  at  the  four 
corners.  And  thus  Paul,  in  singularly  similar  circum- 
stances, in  the  little  seaport  of  Troas,  looking  out 
over  the  narrower  ocean  which  separates  Asia  from 
Europe,  had  the  vision  of  the  man  of  Macedonia,  with 
his  cry,  "  Come  over  and  help  us ! "  The  whole 
narrative  before  us  bears  upon  the  one  point,  that 
Christ  Himself  directs  the  expansion  of  His  kingdom. 
And  there  never  was  a  more  fateful  moment  than 
that    at    which   the   Gospel,   in    the   person   of   the 


190  HOW  TO  SECURE  A  PROSPEROUS  VOYAGE. 

Apostle,  crossed  the  seas,  and  ettected  a  lodgment  in 
the  progressive  quarter  of  the  world. 

Now,  what  I  wish  to  do  is  to  note  how  Paul  and  his 
little  company  behaved  themselves  when  they  had 
received  Christ's  commandment.  For  I  think  there 
are  lessons  worth  the  gathering  to  be  found  there. 
There  was  no  doubt  about  the  vision;  the  question 
was  what  it  meant.  So,  note  three  stages.  First, 
careful  consideration,  with  one's  own  common  sense, 
of  what  God  wants  us  to  do — "  Assuredly  gathering 
that  the  Lord  had  called  us."  Then,  let  no  OTass 
OTow  under  our  feet — "  immediate  "  obedience — 
"  Straightway  we  endeavoured  to  go  into  Macedonia." 
And,  then,  patient  pondering  and  instantaneous  sub- 
mission get  the  reward — "  We  came  with  a  straight 
course."  He  gave  the  Avinds  and  the  waves  charge 
concerning  them.  Now,  there  are  three  lessons  for  us. 
Taken  together,  they  are  patterns  of  what  ought  to  be 
in  our  experience,  and  will  be,  if  the  conditions  are 
complied  with. 

I. — First,  careful  consideration. 

Paul  had  no  doubt  that  what  he  saw  Avas  a  vision 
from  Christ,  and  not  a  mere  dream  of  the  night,  born 
of  the  reverberation  of  waking  thoughts  and  anxieties, 
that  took  the  shape  of  the  plaintive  cry  of  the  man  of 
Macedonia.  But  then  the  next  step  Avas  to  be  quite 
sure  of  what  the  vision  meant.  And  so,  wisely,  he 
does  not  make  up  his  mind  himself,  but  calls  in  the 
three  men  that  Avere  Avith  him.  And  Avhat  a  sicmiticant 
little  group  it  Avas !  There  Avere  Timothy,  Silas,  and 
Luke — Silas,  from  Jerusalem  ;  Timothy,  half  a  Gentile  ; 
Luke,  altogether  a  Gentile;   and  1'huI  himself — and 


HO  IF  TO  SECURE  A  PROSPEROUS  VOYAGE.         191 

these  three  shook  the  world.  They  get  together,  and 
they  talk  the  matter  over.  The  word  of  my  text 
rendered  '•'  assuredly  gathering  "  is  a  picturesque  one. 
It  literally  means  "  laying  things  together."  They  set 
various  facts  side  by  side,  or,  as  we  say  in  our 
colloquial  idiom,  "  They  put  this  and  that  together." 
And  so  they  came  to  understand  what  the  vision 
meant. 

What  had  they  to  help  them  to  understand  it  ? 
Well,  they  had  this  fact,  that  in  all  the  former  part  of 
their  journey  they  had  been  met  by  hindrances;  that 
their  path  had  been  hedged  up  here,  there,  and  every- 
where. Paul  set  out  from  Antioch,  meaning  a  quiet 
little  tour  of  visitation  amongst  the  churches  that  had 
been  already  established.  Jesus  Christ  meant  Philippi, 
and  Antioch,  and  Corinth,  and  Ephesus,  before  Paul 
got  back  again.  So  we  read  in  an  earlier  portion  of 
the  chapter  that  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  forbade  them  to 
speak  the  Word  in  one  region,  and  checked  and  hin- 
dered them  when,  battled,  they  tried  to  go  to  another. 
There,  then, remained  only  one  other  road  open  to  them, 
and  that  led  to  the  coast.  Thus,  putting  together 
their  hindrances  and  their  stimuluses,  they  came  to 
the  conclusion  that  the  two  unitedly  said  plainh-, 
"  Go  across  the  sea,  and  preach  the  Word  there." 

Now  it  is  a  very  commonplace  and  homely  piece  of 
teaching  to  remind  you  that  time  is  not  wasted  in 
making  quite  sure  of  the  meaning  of  providences 
which  seem  to  declare  the  will  of  God,  before  we 
begin  to  act.  But  the  commonest  duties  are  very 
often  neglected;  and  we  preachers,  I  think,  would 
very  often  do  more  good  by  hammering  at  common- 


192         IfOJF  TO  SECURE  A  PROSPEROUS  VOYAGE. 

place  themes  than  by  bringing  out  original  and  fresh 
ones.  And  so  I  venture  to  say  a  Avord  about  the 
immense  importance,  to  Christian  hfe  and  Christian 
service,  of  this  prehminary  step  ;  "  assuredly  gathering 
that  the  Lord  had  called  us."  What  have  we  to  do, 
in  order  to  be  quite  sure  of  God's  intention  for  us  ? 

Well,  the  first  thing  seems  to  me  to  make  quite 
sure  that  we  Avant  to  knoAv  it,  and  that  Ave  do  not  Avant 
to  force  our  intentions  upon  Him,  and  then  to  plume 
ourselves  upon  being  obedient  to  His  call,  Avhen  Ave 
are  only  doing  Avhat  Ave  like.  There  is  a  \^ast  deal  of 
unconscious  insincerity  in  us  all ;  and  especially  in 
regard  to  Christian  Avork  there  is  an  enormous  amount 
of  it.  People  Avill  say,  "  Oh,  I  have  such  a  strong 
impulse  in  a  given  direction,  to  do  certain  kinds  of 
Christian  service,  that  I  am  quite  sure  that  it  is  God's ' 
Avill,"  HoAv  are  you  sure  ?  A  strong  impulse  may  be 
a  temptation  from  the  Devil  as  Avell  as  a  call  from  God, 
And  men  Avho  simplj'  act  on  untested  impulses,  e\'en 
the  most  benevolent,  Avhich  spring  directly  from  large 
Christian  principles,  may  be  making  deplorable  mis- 
takes. It  is  not  enough  to  have  pure  motiA^es,  It  is 
useless  to  say,  "  Such  and  such  a  course  of  action  is 
clearly  the  result  of  the  truths  of  the  Gospel,"  That 
may  be  all  perfectly  true,  and  yet  the  course  may  not 
be  the  course  for  you.  For  there  may  be  practical 
considerations,  Avhich  do  not  come  into  our  view  unless 
Ave  carefully  think  about  them,  Avhich  forbid  us  to  take 
such  a  path.  So,  remember,  strong  impulses  are  not 
guiding  lights ;  nor  is  it  enough  to  vindicate  our 
pursuing  some  mode  of  Christian  service  that  it  is  in 
accordance  with  the  principles  of  the  Gospel,    "  Circum- 


HOW  TO  SECURE  A  PROSPEROUS  VOYAGE.        193 

stances  alter  cases  "  is  a  very  homely  old  saying ;  but 
if  Christian  people  would  only  bring  the  common-sense 
to  bear  upon  their  religious  life  which  they  need  to 
bring  to  bear  upon  their  business  life,  unless  they  are 
going  into  the  Gazette,  there  would  be  less  waste  work 
in  the  Christian  Church  than  there  is  to-day.  I  do 
not  want  less  zeal ;  I  want  that  the  reins  of  the  fiery 
steed  shall  be  kept  well  in  hand.  The  difference 
between  a  fanatic,  who  is  a  fool,  and  an  enthusiast, 
who  is  a  wise  man,  is  that  the  one  brings  calm  reason 
to  bear,  and  an  open-eyed  consideration  of  circum- 
stances all  round ;  and  the  other  sees  but  one  thing  at 
a  time,  and  shuts  his  eyes,  like  a  bull  in  a  field,  and 
charges  at  that.  So  let  us  be  sure,  to  begin  with,  that  we 
want  to  know  what  God  wants  us  to  do ;  and  that  we 
are  not  palming  our  wishes  upon  Him,  and  calling 
them  His  providences. 

Then  there  is  another  plain,  practical  consideration 
that  comes  out  of  this  story,  and  that  is,  Do  not  be 
above  being  taught  by  failures  and  hindrances.  You 
know  the  old  proverb,  "It  is  waste  time  to  flog  a  dead 
horse."  There  is  not  a  little  well-meant  work  flunsf 
aAvay,  because  it  is  expended  on  obviously  hopeless 
efforts  to  revivify,  perhaps,  some  moribund  thing  or  to 
continue,  perhaps,  in  some  old,  well-worn  rut,  instead 
of  striking  out  into  a  new  path.  Paul  was  full  of 
enthusiasm  for  the  evangelisation  of  Asia  Minor,  and 
he  might  have  said  a  great  deal  about  the  importance 
of  going  to  Ephesus,  He  tried  to  do  it,  but  Christ 
said.  No ;  and  Paul  did  not  knock  his  head  against 
the  stone  wall  that  lay  between  him  and  the  accom- 
plishment of  his  purpose,  but  he  gave  it  up  and  tried 

13 


194         HOW  TO  SECURE  A  PROSPEROUS  VOYAGE. 

anotlier  tack.  He  next  wished  to  go  up  into  Bithynia, 
and  he  might  have  said  a  great  deal  about  the  needs 
of  the  people  by  the  Black  Sea  ;  but  again  down  came 
the  barrier,  and  he  had  once  more  to  learn  the  lesson, 
"  Not  as  I  will,  but  as  Thou  wilt."  He  was  not  above 
being  taught  by  his  failures.  Some  of  us  are  ;  and  it 
is  very  difficult,  and  needs  a  great  deal  of  Christian 
wisdom  and  unselfishness,  to  distinguish  between 
hindrances  in  the  way  of  work  which  arc  meant  to 
€voke  larger  efforts,  and  hindrances  which  are  meant 
to  say,  "  Try  another  path,  and  do  not  waste  time  here 
any  longer." 

But  if  we  wish  supremely  to  know  God's  will,  He 
will  help  us  to  distinguish  between  these  two  kinds  of 
difficulties.  Someone  has  said,  "  Difficulties  are  things 
to  be  overcome."  Yes,  but  not  always.  They  very 
often  are,  and  we  should  thank  God  for  them  then ; 
but  they  sometimes  are  God's  warnings  to  us  to  go  by 
another  road.  So  we  need  discretion,  and  patience, 
and  suspense  of  judgment  to  be  brought  to  bear  upon 
all  our  purposes  and  plans. 

Then,  of  course,  I  need  not  remind  you  that  the 
way  to  get  light  is  to  seek  it  in  the  Book,  and  in 
communion  with  Him  whom  the  Book  reveals  to  us, 
as  the  true  Word  of  God  :  "  He  that  followeth  Me 
shall  not  walk  in  darkness,  but  shall  have  the 
light  of  life."  So,  careful  consideration  is  a  pre- 
liminary to  all  good  Christian  work.  And,  if  you 
€an,  talk  to  some  Timothy  and  Silas  and  Luke  about 
your  course,  and  do  not  be  above  taking  a  brother's 
advice. 

II. — The  next  step  is  immediate  submission. 


HOW  TO  SECURE  A  PROSPEROUS  VOYAGE.         195 

When  they  had  assuredly  gathered  that  the  Lord 
had  called  them  "  immediately  " — there  is  great  virtue 
ill  that  one  little  word  —  "  we  endeavoured  to  go 
into  Macedonia."  Delayed  obedience  is  the  brother 
— and,  if  I  may  mingle  metaphors,  sometimes  the 
father — of  disobedience.  It  sometimes  means  simple 
feebleness  of  conviction,  indolence,  and  a  general  lack 
of  fervour.  It  means,  very  often,  a  reluctance  to  do 
the  thing  that  lies  plainly  before  us.  And,  dear 
brethren,  as  I  have  said  about-  the  former  lesson, 
so  I  say  about  this.  The  homely  virtue,  which  we 
all  know  to  be  indispensable  to  success  in  common 
daily  life  and  commercial  undertakings,  is  no  less 
indispensable  to  all  vigour  of  Christian  life  and  to 
all  nobleness  of  Christian  service.  We  have  no 
hours  to  waste  ;  the  time  is  short.  In  the  harvest- 
field,  especially  when  it  is  getting  near  the  end 
of  the  week,  and  the  Sunday  is  at  hand,  there  is 
little  leisure  and  little  tolerance  of  slow  workers. 
And  for  us  the  fields  are  Avhite,  the  labourers  are 
few,  the  Lord  of  the  harvest  is  impaertive,  and  the 
sun  is  hurrying  to  the  west,  and  the  sickles  will  have 
to  be  laid  down  before  long.  So  "immediately  we 
endeavoured." 

Delayed  duty  is  present  discomfort.  As  long  as  a 
man  has  a  conscience,  so  long  will  he  be  restless  and 
uneasy  until  he  has,  as  the  Quakers  say,  "  cleared 
himself  of  his  burden,"  and  done  what  he  Iniows  he 
ought  to  do,  and  got  done  with  it.  Delayed  obe- 
dience means  wasted  possibilities  of  service,  and  so 
is  ever  to  be  avoided.  The  more  disagreeable  any- 
thing is  which  is  plainly  a   duty,  the   more   reason 

13* 


196        HOW  TO  SECURE  A  PROSPEROUS  VOYAGE. 

there  is  for  doing  it  right  awa}-.  "  I  made  haste, 
and  delayed  not,  but  made  haste  to  keep  Thy  com- 
mandments." 

Did  you  ever  count  how  many  "  straightway s" 
there  are  in  the  first  chapter  of  Mark's  Gospel  ?  If 
you  have  not,  will  you  do  it  when  you  go  home ;  and 
notice  jow  they  come  in  ?  In  the  story  of  Christ's 
opening  ministry  every  fresh  incident  is  tacked  on  to 
the  one  before  it,  in  that  chapter,  by  that  same  word 
"straightway."  " Straightway  "  He  does  that ;  "anon" 
He  does  this ;  "  immediately "  He  does  the  other 
thing.  All  is  one  continuous  stream  of  acts  of  service. 
The  Gospel  of  Mark  is  the  Gospel  of  the  servant,  and 
it  sets  forth  the  pattern  to  which  all  Christian  service 
ousfht  to  be  conformed. 

So,  if  we  take  Jesus  Christ  for  our  example,  unhast- 
ing  and  unresting  in  the  work  of  the  Lord,  we  shall 
let  no  moment  pass  burdened  Avith  undischarged 
duty  ;  and  we  shall  find  that  all  the  moments  are 
few  enough  for  the  discharge  of  the  duties  incumbent 
upon  us. 

III. — ^So,  lastly,  careful  consideration  and  unhesi- 
tating obedience  lead  to  a  straight  course. 

Well,  it  is  not  so  always,  but  it  is  so  generally. 
There  is  a  wonderful  power  in  diligent  doing  of  God's 
known  will  to  smooth  away  difficulties  and  avoid 
troubles.  I  do  not,  of  course,  mean  tliat  a  man  who 
thus  lives,  patiently  ascertaining,  and  then  promptly 
doing  what  God  would  have  him  do,  has  any  miracu- 
lous exemption  from  the  ordinary  sorrows  and  trials 
of  life.  But  sure  I  am  that  a  very,  very  large  proportion 
of  all  the  hindrances  and  disappointments,  storms  and 


HOW  TO  SECURE  A  PROSPEROUS  VOYAGE.  197 

quicksands,  calms  which  prevent  progress,  and  head- 
winds that  beat  in  our  faces,  are  directly  the 
products  of  our  negligence  in  one  or  other  of  these 
two  respects,  and  that  although  by  no  means  absolutely, 
yet  to  an  extent  that  we  should  not  believe  if  we  had 
not  the  experience  of  it,  the  wish  to  do  God's  will,  and 
the  doinsf  of  it  with  our  misfht  when  we  know  what  it 
is,  have  a  talismanic  power  in  calming  the  seas  and 
bringing  us  to  the  desired  haven. 

But  though  this  is  not  always  absolutely  true  in 
regard  of  outward  things,  it  is,  without  exception  or 
limitation,  true  in  regard  of  the  inward  life.  For,  if 
my  supreme  will  is  to  do  God's  will,  then  nothing 
which  is  His  will,  and  comes  to  me  because  it  is,  can 
be  a  hindrance  in  my  doing  that. 

As  an  old  proverb  says,  travelling  merchants  can 
never  be  out  of  their  road.  And  a  Christian  man 
whose  path  is  simple  obedience  to  the  will  of  God  can 
never  be  turned  from  that  path  by  whatever  hin- 
drances may  affect  his  outward  life.  So,  in  deepest 
truth,  there  is  always  a  calm  voyage  for  the  men 
whose  eyes  are  open  to  discern,  and  whose  hands  are 
swift  to  fulfil,  the  commandments  of  their  Father  in 
heaven.  For  them  all  winds  blow  them  to  their 
port ;  for  them  "  all  things  work  together  for  good  "  ; 
with  them  God's  servants  who  hearken  to  the 
voice  of  His  commandments,  and  are  His  ministers 
to  do  His  pleasure,  can  never  be  other  than  in 
amity  and  alliance.  He  who  is  God's  servant  is 
the  world's  master.  "  All  things  are  yours  if  ye 
are  Christ's." 

So,   brethren,   careful    study   of   providences    and 


/ 


198  JIOTF  TO  SECURE  A  PROSPEROUS  VOYAGE. 

visions,  of  hindrances  and  stimukises,  careful  setting 
of  our  lives  side  by  side  with  the  IMaster's,  and  a 
swift  delight  in  doing  the  will  of  the  Lord,  will  secure 
for  us,  in  inmost  truth,  a  prosperous  voyage  till 
all  storms  shall  be  hushed.  "  Then  are  they  glad 
because  they  be  quiet ;  so  He  bringeth  them  to  their 
desired  haven." 


XX. 

%ovc  makes  Suns, 

"Let  them  that  love  Him  be  as  the  sun  when  he  goeth  forth  in  his 
might." — Judges  v.  31. 

HESE  are  the  closing  words  of  Deborala, 
the  great  warrior-prophetess  of  Israel. 
They  are  in  singular  contrast  with  the 
tone  of  fierce  enthusiasm  for  battle 
which  throbs  through  the  rest  of  the 
chant,  and  with  its  stern  approval  of  the  deed  of  Jael 
when  she  slew  Sisera.  Here,  in  its  last  notes,  we 
have  an  anticipation  of  the  highest  and  best  truths 
of  the  Gospel.  "  Let  them  that  love  Him  be  as  the 
sun  when  he  goeth  forth  in  his  might."  If  we  think 
of  the  singer,  of  the  age  and  the  occasion  of  the  song, 
such  purely  spiritual,  lofty  words  must  seem  very 
remarkable. 

I. — Note,  then,  first  of  all,  how  here  we  have  a 
penetrating  insight  into  the  essence  of  religion. 

This  woman  had  been  nourished  upon  a  more  or 
less  perfect  edition  of  what  we  know  as  the  "  Mosaic 
Law."  Her  faith  had  been  fed  by  forms.  She  moved 
amidst  a  world  full  of  the  cruelties  and  dark  con- 
ceptions of  a  mysterious  Divine  power  which  torture 


200  LOVE  MAKES  SUNS. 

heathenism  apart  from  Christianity.  She  had  forced 
her  Avay  through  all  that,  and  laid  hold  of  the  vital 
centre.  And  there,  away  out  amidst  cruelty  and  mur- 
d'Cr,  amidst  the  unutterable  abominations  and  terrors 
of  heathenism,  in  the  centre  of  a  rigid  system  of 
ceremonial  and  retaliation,  the  woman's  heart  spoke 
out,  and  taught  her  what  was  the  great  command- 
ment. Prophetess  she  was,  lighter  she  was,  she  could 
burst  into  triumphant  approval  of  Jael's  bloody  deed ; 
and  yet  with  the  same  lips  could  speak  this  profound 
word.  She  had  learned  that  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord 
thy  God  Avith  all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul, 
and  with  all  thy  strength,  and  with  all  thy  mind," 
summed  up  all  duty,  and  was  the  beginning  of  all 
good  in  man.  That  precept  found  an  echo  in  her 
heart.  Whatever  part  in  her  religious  development 
may  have  been  played  by  the  externalisms  of  cere- 
monial, she  had  pierced  to  the  core  of  religion.  Ad- 
vanced modern  critics  admit  the  antiquity  of  Deborah's 
song,  and  this  closing  stanza  witnesses  to  the  existence, 
at  that  early  period,  of  a  highly  spiritual  conception 
of  the  bond  between  God  and  man.  Deborah  had 
got  as  far,  in  a  moment  of  exaltation  and  insight,  as 
the  teaching  of  the  Apostle  John,  although  her 
thought  was  strangely  blended  with  the  fierceness  of 
the  times  in  which  she  lived.  Her  approval  of  Jael's 
deed,  by  no  means  warrants  our  approving  it,  but  we 
may  thankfully  see  that  though  she  felt  the  fierce 
throbbing  of  desire  for  vengeance,  she  also  felt  this — 
"  Them  that  love  Him ;  that  is  the  Alpha  and  the 
Omega  of  all." 

Our  love  must  depend  on  our  knowledge.  Deborah's 


LOVE  MAKES  SUNS.  201 


knowledge  was  a  mere  skeleton  outline  as  compared 
with  ours.  Contrast  the  fervour  of  emotional  affection 
that  manifestly  throbbed  in  her  heart  with  the  poor, 
cold  pulsations  which  we  dignify  by  the  name  of  love, 
and  the  contrast  may  put  us  to  shame.  There  is  a 
religion  of  fear  which  dominates  hundreds  of  professing 
Christians  in  this  city  of  ours.  There  is  a  religion  of 
duty,  in  which  there  is  no  delight,  which  has  many 
adherents  amongst  us.  There  is  a  religion  of  form, 
which  contents  itself  with  the  externals  of  Christianity, 
and  that  is  the  religion  of  many  men  and  women 
in  this  audience  now.  And  I  may  further  say, 
there  is  a  religion  of  faith,  in  its  narrower  and  im- 
perfect  sense,  which  lays  hold  of  and  believes  a  body 
of  Christian  truth,  and  has  never  passed  through  faith 
into  love.  Not  he  who  "  believes  that  God  is,"  and 
comes  to  Him  with  formal  service  and  an  alienated 
or  negligent  heart ;  not  he  who  recognises  the  duty  of 
worship,  and  discharges  it  because  his  conscience 
pricks  him,  but  has  no  buoyancy  within  bearing  him 
upwards  towards  the  object  of  his  love ;  not  he  who 
cowers  before  the  dark  shadow  which  some  call  God  ; 
but  he  who,  knowing,  trusts,  and  who,  knoAving  and 
trusting  the  love  which  God  hath  to  us,  pulses  back 
the  throbs  of  a  recipient  heart,  and  loves  Him  in  return 
— he,  and  he  only,  is  a  worshipper.  Let  us  learn  the 
lesson  that  Deborah  learnt  below  the  palm-trees  of 
Lapidoth,  and  if  we  want  to  understand  what  a 
religious  man  is,  recognise  that  he  is  a  man  who  loves 
God. 

II. — Further,   note  the   grand   conception   of    the 
character  which  such  a  love  produces. 


202  LOVE  MA KES  S UNS. 


"  Let  them  be  as  the  sun  when  he  goeth  forth  in 
his  might."  Think  of  the  fierce  eastern  sun,  with 
"sunbeams  hke  swords,"  that  springs  up  from  the 
east,  and  rushes  to  the  zenith,  and  "  nothing  is  hid 
from  the  heat  thereof" — a  sun  the  Hke  of  which  we, 
in  our  cloudy  skies,  never  see  nor  feel,  but  which,  to 
the  Oriental,  is  the  very  emblem  of  splendour  and  of 
continuous,  victorious  power.  There  are  two  things 
here,  radiance  and  energy,  light  and  might. 

"As  the  sun  when  he  goeth  forth  in  his  strength." 
Deborah  was  a  "  prophetess,"  and  people  say,  "  What 
did  she  prophesy  ? "  Well,  she  prophesied  the  heart 
of  religion — as  I  have  tried  to  show  you — in  reference 
to  its  essence,  and,  as  one  sees  by  this  phrase,  in 
reference  to  its  effects.  What  is  her  word  but  a 
partial  anticipation  of  Christ's  sajing,  "  Ye  are  the 
light  of  the  world " ;  and  of  His  disciple's  utterance, 
"  Ye  were  sometimes  darkness,  but  now  are  ye  light 
in  the  Lord  :  walk  as  children  of  light "  ? 

It  is  too  plain  to  need  any  talking  about,  that  the 
direct  tendency  of  what  we  venture  to  call  love  to 
God,  meaning  thereby  the  turning  of  the  whole 
nature  to  Him,  in  aspiration,  admiration,  longing 
for  likeness,  and  practical  imitation,  is  to  elevate, 
ennoble,  and  illuminate  the  whole  character.  It  was 
said  about  one  woman  that  "  to  love  her  was  an 
education."  That  was  exaggeration;  but  it  is  below 
the  truth  about  God.  The  true  way  to  refine  and 
elevate  and  educate  is  to  cultivate  love  to  God.  And 
when  we  get  near  to  Him,  and  hold  by  Him,  and  are 
continually  occupied  with  Him  ;  when  our  being  is 
one  continual  aspiration  after  union  with  Him,  and 


I 
I 


LOVE  MAKES  SUKS.  203 

we  experience  the  glow  and  rapture  included  in  the 
simple  word  "  love,"  then  it  cannot  but  bo  that  we 
shall  be  like  Him. 

That  is  what  Paul  meant  when  he  said,  "  Now  are 
ya  light  in  the  Lord."  Union  with  Him  illuminates. 
The  true  radiance  of  saintly  character  will  come  in 
the  measure  in  which  we  are  in  fellowship  with  Jesus 
Christ.  Deborah's  astronomy  was  not  her  strong 
point.  The  sun  shines  by  its  own  light.  We  are 
planets,  and  are  darkness  in  ourselves,  and  it  is  only 
the  reflection  of  the  central  sun  that  ever  makes  us 
look  silvery  white  and  radiant  before  men.  But 
though  it  be  derived,  it  is  none  the  less  our  light,  if  it 
has  passed  into  us,  as  it  surely  will,  and  if  it  streams 
out  from  us,  as  it  no  less  surely  will,  in  the  measure 
in  which  love  to  God  dominates  our  whole  lives. 

If  that  is  so,  dear  brethren,  is  not  the  shortest  and 
the  surest  way  to  have  our  faces  shining  like  that  of 
Moses  when  he  came  down  from  the  mountain,  or  like 
Stephen's  when  he  saw  the  heavens  opened,  to  keep 
near  Jesus  Christ  ?  It  is  slow  work  to  hammer  bits 
of  ore  out  of  the  rock  with  a  chisel  and  a  mallet. 
Pitch  the  whole  mass  into  the  furnace,  and  the  metal 
will  come  out  separated  from  the  dross.  Get  up  the 
heat,  and  the  light,  which  is  the  consequence  of  the 
heat,  will  take  care  of  itself.  In  the  Lord  ye  shal 
be  light. 

Is  Deborah's  aspiration  fulfilled  about  me  ?  Let 
each  of  us  ask  that.  "  As  the  sun  when  he  goeth 
forth  in  his  strength" — would  anybody  say  that 
about  my  Christian  character  ?  Why  not  I  Only 
because   the    springs    have   run   low   within    is    the 


204  LOVE  MAKES  SUNS. 

Stream  low  through  the  meadows.  Only  because  the 
love  is  cold  is  the  light  feeble. 

There  is  another  thought  here.  There  is  power  in  sun- 
light as  well  as  radiance.  On  that  truth  the  prophetess 
especially  lays  a  finger ;  "  as  the  sun  when  he  goeth 
forth  in  his  strength."  She  did  not  know  what  we 
know,  that  solar  energy  is  the  source  of  all  energy  on 
this  earth,  and  that,  just  as  in  the  deepest  spiritual 
analysis  "  there  is  no  power  but  of  God,"  so  in  the 
material  region  we  may  say  that  the  only  force  is  the 
force  of  the  sun,  which  not  only  stimulates  vegetation 
and  brings  light  and  warmth — as  the  pre-scientific 
prophetess  knew — but  in  a  hundred  other  ways, 
unknown  to  her  and  known  to  modern  science,  is  the 
author  of  all  change,  the  parent  of  all  life,  and  the 
reservoir  of  all  energy. 

So  we  come  to  this  thought :  The  true  love  of 
God  is  no  weak,  sentimental  thing,  such  as  narrow 
and  sectional  piety  has  often  represented  it  to  be,  but 
it  is  a  power  which  will  invigorate  the  whole  of  a 
man,  and  make  him  strong  and  manly  as  well  as 
gentle  and  gracious  ;  being,  indeed,  the  parent  of  all 
the  so-called  heroic  and  of  all  the  so-called  saintly 
virtues. 

The  sun  "  goeth  forth  in  his  strength,"  rushing 
through  the  heavens  to  the  zenith.  As  one  of  the 
other  editions  of  this  metaphor  in  the  Old  Testament 
has  it,  "The  path  of  the  just  is  as  the  shining  light, 
that  shineth  more  and  more  until  the  noontide  of  the 
day."  That  light,  indeed,  declines,  but  that  fact  does  not 
come  into  view  in  the  metaphor  of  the  progressive 
growth  towards  perfection  of  the  man  in  whom  is  the 


LOVE  MAKES  SVA'S.  205 

all-conquering  might  of  the  true  love  of  Jesus 
Christ. 

Note  the  context  of  these  words  of  our  text,  which, 
I  said,  presents  so  singular  a  contrast  to  them.  It  is  a 
strange  thing  that  so  fierce  a  battle-chant  should 
settle  down  into  such  a  sweet  swan-song  as  this  at  the 
end.  It  is  a  strange  thing  that  in  the  same  soul  there 
should  throb  the  delight  in  battle  and  the  almost 
delight  in  murder,  and  these  lofty  thoughts.  But  let 
us  learn  the  lesson  that  true  love  to  God  means  hearty 
hatred  of  God's  enemy.  And  it  Avill  always  have  to 
be  militant,  and  sometimes  stern,  and  what  people  caU 
fierce.  Amidst  the  amenities  and  sentimentalities  of 
modern  life  there  is  much  necessity  for  remembering 
that  the  Apostle  of  love  was  a  "  son  of  thunder,"  and 
that  it  was  the  lips  which  summoned  Israel  to  the  fight, 
and  chanted  hymns  of  triumph  over  the  corpses  borne 
down  by  the  rushing  Kishon,  which  also  said  :  "  Let 
them  that  love  Him  be  as  the  sun  when  he  shineth 
forth  in  his  strength."  If  you  love  God,  you  will 
surely  be  a  strong  man  as  well  as  an  emotional  and 
affectionate  Christian. 

That  energy  is  to  be  continuous  and  progressive. 
The  sun  that  Deborah  saw  day  by  day  spring  from  his 
station  in  the  east,  and  climb  to  his  height  in  the 
heavens,  and  ray  down  his  beams,  has  been  doing 
that  for  millions  of  years,  and  it  will  probably  keep 
doing  it  for  uncounted  periods  still.  And  so  the 
Christian  man,  with  continuity  unbroken  and  pro- 
gressive brilliance  and  power,  should  shine  more  and 
more  till  the  unsetting  noontide  of  the  day. 

III. — That  brings  me  to  the  last  thought,  which 


206  LOVE  MAKES  SUNS. 

passes  beyond  the  limits  of  the  prophetess'  vision. 
Here  is  a  prophecy  of  which  the  utterer  was  unaware. 
There  is  a  contrast  drawn  in  the  words  of  our  text 
and  in  those  immediately  preceding.  "  So,"  says 
Deborah,  after  the  fierce  description  of  the  slaughter 
of  Sisera — "  So  let  all  Thine  enemies  perish,  0  Lord  ! 
but  let  them  that  love  Thee  be  as  the  sun  when  he 
shineth  in  his]strength."  She  contrasts  the  transiency 
of  the  lives  that  pit  themselves  against  God  with  the 
perpetuity  that  belongs  to  those  which  are  in  harmony 
with  Him.  The  truth  goes  further  than  she  probably 
knew ;  certainly  further  than  she  was  thinking  when 
she  chanted  these  words.  Let  us  widen  them  by 
other  words  which  use  the  same  metaphor,  and  say, 
'  they  that  be  wise  " — that  is  a  shallower  word  than 
'  them  that  love  Thee " — "  they  that  be  wise  shall 
shine  as  the  brightness  of  the  firmament ;  and  they 
that  turn  many  to  righteousness  as  the  stars  for  ever 
and  ever."  Let  us  widen  and  deepen  them  by  sacreder 
words  still ;  for  Jesus  Christ  laid  hold  of  this  old 
metaphor,  and  said,  describing  the  time  when  all  the 
enemies  shall  have  perished,  and  the  weeds  have  been 
flung  out  of  the  vineyard,  "  Then  shall  the  righteous 
shine  forth  like  the  sun,  in  the  Kingdom  of  their 
Father,"  with  a  brilliancy  that  will  fill  heaven  with 
new  galaxies,  bright  beyond  all  that  we  see  here  amidst 
the  thick  atmosphere  and  mists  and  clouds  of  the 
present  life ! 

Nor  need  we  stop  even  there,  for  Jesus  Christ  not 
only  laid  hold  of  this  metaphor  in  order  to  describe 
the  eternal  glory  of  the  children  of  the  Kingdom,  but 
at  the  last  time  that  human  eyes  on  earth  saw  Him ; 


I 


LOVE  MAKES  SUNS.  207 

the  glorified  Man  Christ  Jesus  is  thus  described :  "  His 
countenance  was  as  the  sun  shineth  in  his  strength." 
Love  always  tends  to  likeness ;  and  love  to  Christ  will 
bring  conformity  with  Him.  The  perfect  love  of 
heaven  will  issue  in  perfect  and  perpetual  assimila- 
tion to  Him.  Science  tells  us  that  the  light  of  the 
sun  probably  comes  from  his  contraction ;  and  that 
the  process  of  contraction  will  go  on  until,  at  some  point 
within  the  bounds  of  time,  though  far  beyond  the 
measure  of  our  calculations,  the  sun  himself  shall  die, 
the  ineffectual  beams  will  be  paled,  and  there  will 
be  a  black  orb,  with  neither  life  nor  light  nor  power. 
And  then,  then,  and  after  that  for  ever,  "they  that 
love  Him  "  shall  continue  to  be  as  that  dead  sun  once 
was,  when  he  went  forth  in  his  lost  might. 


XXI. 

•     Cbil6t'6  Question  to  ^aclx* 

"  Believest   thou   this .'       She    saith    unto   him,    Yea,   Lord." — 
John  xi.  26,  27. 

IS  each  of  these  annual  sermons  which  I 
have  preached  for  so  long  comes  round 
I  feel  more  solemnly  the  growing  pro- 
bability that  it  may  be  the  last.  Like 
a  man  nearing  the  end  of  his  day's  work, 
I  want  to  make  the  most  of  the  remaining  moments. 
Whether  this  is  the  last  sermon  of  the  sort  that  I 
shall  preach  or  not,  it  is  certainly  the  last  of  the  kind 
that  some  of  you  will  hear  from  me,  or  possibly  from 
anyone. 

So,  dear  friends,  I  have  felt  that  neither  you  nor  I 
can  afford  to  waste  this  hour  in  considering  subjects  of 
secondary  interest,  appropriate  as  some  of  them  might 
be.  I  wish  to  come  to  the  main  point  at  once,  and  to 
press  upon  you  all,  and  especially  on  the  younger 
portion  of  this  audience,  the  question  of  your  own 
personal  religion. 

The  words  of  my  text,  as  you  will  probably  remem- 
ber, were  addressed  by  our  Lord  to  Martha,  as  she  was 
writhing   in   agony   over   her  dead    brother.     Christ 

*  Annual  Sermon  to  the  Young. 


CHRIST'S  QUESTION  TO  EACH.  209 


proclaims,  with  singular  calmness  and  majesty,  His 
character  and  work  as  the  Resurrection  and  the  Life, 
and  then  seeks  to  draw  her  from  her  absorbing 
sorrow  to  an  effort  of  faith  which  shall  grasp  the 
truths  He  proclaims.  He  flashes  out  this  sudden 
question,  like  the  swift  thrust  of  a  gleaming  dagger. 
It  is  a  demand  for  credence  to  His  assertion — on  His 
bare  word — tremendous  as  that  assertion  is.  And 
nobly  was  the  demand  met  by  the  as  swift,  unfaltering 
answer,  "  Yea,  Lord,  I  beheve "  in  Thee,  and  so  I 
believe  in  Thy  word. 

Now  friends,  Jesus  Christ  is  putting  the  same 
question  to  each  of  us.  And  I  pray  that  our  answers 
may  be  Martha's. 

L — Note  first  the  significance  of  the  question. 

"This."  What  is  this?  The  answer  will  tell  us 
what  are  the  central  essential  facts,  faith  in  which 
makes  a  Christian  ?  Of  course  the  form  in  which  our 
Lord's  previous  utterance  was  cast  was  coloured  by 
the  circumstances  under  which  He  spoke,  and  was  so 
shaped  as  to  meet  the  momentary  exigency.  But 
whilst  thus  the  form  is  determined  by  the  fact  that  He 
was  speaking  to  a  heart  wrung  by  separation,  and  as 
a  preliminary  to  a  mighty  act  of  Resurrection,  the 
essential  truths  which  are  so  expressed  are  those 
which,  as  I  believe,  constitute  the  fundamental  truths 
of  Christianity — the  very  core  and  heart  of  the  Gospel. 

Turn,  then,  but  for  a  moment,  to  what  immediately 
precedes  my  text.  Our  Lord  says  three  things. 
First,  He  asserts  His  supernatural  character  and 
Divine  relation  to  hfe,  "I  am  the  Resurrection  and 
the  Life."     Next,  He  declares  that  it  is  possible  for 

14 


210  CHRIST'S  QUESTION  TO  EACH. 


Him  to  communicate  to  dying  and  to  dead  men  a  life 
which  triumphs  over  death,  and  laughs  at  change, 
and  persists  through  the  superficial  thing  which  we 
christen  by  the  name  of  Death,  unaffected,  un- 
diminished, as  some  sweet  spring  might  gush  up  in 
the  heart  of  a  salt,  solitary  sea.  And  then  He  declares 
that  the  condition  on  which  He,  the  Life-giver,  gives 
of  His  immortal  life,  to  dying  men,  is  their  trust  in 
Him.  These  three.  His  character  and  work,  the  gifts 
of  which  His  hands  are  full,  and  the  way  by  which 
the  gifts  may  be  appropriated  by  us  men — these  three 
are,  as  I  take  it,  the  central  facts  of  Christianity. 
"  Believest  thou  this  ?  " 

The  question  comes  to  us  all ;  and  in  these 
days  of  unsettlement  it  is  well  to  have  some  clear 
understanding  of  what  is  the  "  irreducible  minimum  " 
of  Christian  teaching.  I  take  it  that  it  lies  here. 
There  are  two  opposite  errors  which,  like  all  opposite 
errors,  are  bolted  together,  and  revolve  round  a  com- 
mon centre.  The  one  of  them  is  the  extreme 
conservative  tendency  which  regards  every  pin  and 
bolt  of  the  tabernacle  as  if  it  were  equally  sacred  with 
the  altar  and  the  ark.  And  the  other  is  the  tendency 
which  christens  itself  "  liberal  and  progressive,"  and 
which  is  always  ready  to  exchange  old  lamps,  though 
they  have  burnt  brightly  in  the  past,  for  new  ones 
that  are  as  yet  only  glittering  metal  and  untried.  In 
these  days,  when  it  is  a  presumption  against  any 
opinion  that  our  fathers  believed  it  (an  error  Avhich 
young  people  are  most  prone  to  fall  into),  and  when, 
by  the  energy  of  contradiction,  that  error  has  evoked, 
and  is  evoking,  the  opposite  exaggeration  that  adheres 


CBsrsrs  question'  to  each.  211 

to  all  that  is  traditional,  to  all  that  has  been  regarded 
as  belonging  to  the  essentials  of  the  Christian  faith, 
and  so  is  fearful,  trembling  for  the  Ark  of  God  when 
there  is  no  need,  let  us  fall  back  upon  these  great 
words  of  the  Master,  and  see  that  the  things  which 
constitute  the  living  heart  of  His  message  and  gift  to 
the  world  are  neither  more  nor  less  than  these  three  : 
the  supernatural  Christ,  the  life  which  He  imparts, 
and  the  condition  on  which  He  bestows  it.  "  Believest 
thou  this  ? "  If  you  do,  you  need  take  very  little  heed 
of  the  fluctuations  of  contemporary  opinion  as  to 
other  matters,  valuable  and  important  as  these  may 
be  in  their  place  ;  and  may  let  men  say  what  they  will 
about  disputed  questions  on  the  method  by  which  the 
vehicle  of  Revelation  has  been  created  and  preserved, 
about  the  regulation  of  the  external  forms  of  the 
Church,  about  a  hundred  other  things  that  men  often 
lose  their  tempers  and  spoil  their  Christianity  by 
fighting  for,  and  fall  back  upon  the  great  central 
verity,  a  Christ  from  above,  the  Giver  of  Life  to  all 
that  put  their  trust  in  Him. 

Let  me  expand  this  question  for  you.  "We  all 
have  sinned  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God  " — 
"  believest  thou  this  ?  "  "  We  must  all  appear  before 
the  judgment  seat  of  Christ " — "  believest  thou  this  ? " 
"  God  so  loved  the  world  that  He  sent  His  only 
begotten  Son,  that  Avhosoever  believeth  on  Him  should 
not  perish " — "  believest  thou  this  ? "  "  The  Son  of 
Man  came  ...  to  give  His  life  a  ransom  for 
many  " — "  believest  thou  this  ? "  "  Being  justified  by 
faith  we  have  peace  with  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ " — "  believest   thou   this  ? "      "  Now   is   Christ 

14* 


212  CHRIST'S  QUESTION  TO  EACH. 


risen  from  the  dead,  and  become  the  first  fruits  of  them 
that  slept " — " behevest  thou  this  ? "  "I go  to  prepare 
a  place  for  j-ou  " — "  believest  thou  this  ?  "  "  Where 
I  am  there  shall  also  My  servant  be " — "  believest 
thou  this  ?  "  "  So  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord  " — 
"  believest  thou  this  ?  "  That  is  Christianity  ;  and  not 
theories  about  inspiration,  and  priesthood,  and  sacra- 
mental efficacy,  or  any  of  the  other  thoni}'^  questions 
which  have,  in  the  course  of  ages,  started  up.  Here 
is  the  living  centre  ;  hold  fast,  I  beseech  you,  by  it. 

Then,  again,  the  significance  of  this  question  is  in 
the  direction  of  making  clear  for  us  the  way  by  which 
men  lay  hold  of  these  gi'eat  truths.  The  truths  are  ot 
such  a  sort  as  that  merely  to  say, "  Oh,  yes,  I  believe  it ; 
it  is  quite  true  ! "  is  by  no  means  sufficient.  If  a  man 
tells  me  that  two  parallel  lines  produced  ever  so  far 
will  never  meet,  I  say,  "  Yes,  I  believe  it  "  ;  and  there 
is  nothing  more  to  be  done  or  said.  If  a  man  says 
to  me,  "  Two  and  two  make  four,"  I  say,  "  Yes " ; 
and  there  my  assent  ends.  If  a  man  says,  "It  is 
right  to  do  right,"  it  is  quite  clear  that  the  attitude 
of  intellectual  assent,  which  was  quite  enough  for 
the  other  order  of  statements,  is  not  enough  for 
this  one ;  and  to  merely  say,  "  Oh,  yes,  it  is  right 
to  do  right,"  is  by  no  means  the  only  attitude 
which  v\-e  ought  to  take  in  regard  of  such  a  truth. 
And  if  God  comes  to  me  and  says,  "  Thou  art  a  sinful 
man,  and  Jesus  Christ  has  died  for  thee;  and  if 
thou  takest  Him  for  thy  Saviour  thou  shalt  be  saved 
in  this  life,  and  saved  for  ever,"  it  is  just  as  clear  that 
no  mere  acceptance  of  the  saying  as  a  verity  exhausts 
m}^  proper  attitude  in  reference  to  it.     Or,  to  come  ta 


xION-  TO  EACH.  213 


plainer  words  ^an  will  really,  and  out  and  out, 

and  adequately ,  believe  this  Gospel  unless  he  does  a 
great  deal  more  than  assent  to  it  or  refrain  from 
contradicting  it. 

So  I  desire  to  urge  this  form  of  the  question  on 
jou  to-night.  Dear  brethren,  do  you  tnist  in  "  this," 
which  you  say  you  believe  ?  There  is  no  greater 
enemy  of  the  Christian  faith  than  the  ordinary  lazy 
— what  the  philosophers  call  otiosp,  which  is  only  a 
grand  Avord  for  lazy — assent  of  the  understanding, 
because  men  will  not  take  the  trouble  to  contradict  it 
or  think  about  it. 

That  is  the  sort  of  Christianity  which  is  the 
Christianity  of  a  good  many  people  in  this  chapel 
to-night.  They  do  not  care  enough  about  the  subject 
to  contradict  the  ordinary  run  of  belief.  Of  all 
impotent  things  there  is  nothing  more  impotent  than 
a  creed  which  lies  snugly  in  a  man's  head,  and  never 
has  touched  his  heart  or  his  Avill.  Wh}^,  I  should  get 
on  a  great  deal  better  if  I  were  talking  to  people  that 
had  never  heard  anything  about  the  Gospel  than  I 
have  any  chance  of  getting  on  with  you,  who  have  been 
drenched  with  it  all  your  days,  till  it  goes  over  you  and 
runs  off  hke  water  off  a  duck's  back.  The  shells  that 
were  hurled  against  the  earthworks  of  Sebastopol 
broke  away  the  front  surface  of  the  mounds,  and  then 
the  rubbish  protected  the  fortifications;  and  that  is 
what  happens  with  many  of  my  hearers.  You  have 
heard  the  Gospel  so  often  that  the  debris  of  your  old 
hearings  is  raised  between  you  and  me,  and  my  words 
cannot  get  at  you.  "  Believest  thou  this  ? " — not  in  the 
fashion  in  which  people  stand  up  in  church  or  chapel 


214  CHRIST'S  QUESTION  TO  EACH. 


unci  look  about  them  and  rattle  otF  the  creed  every 
Sunday  of  their  lives,  and  attach  not  the  ghost  of  an 
idea  to  a  single  clause  of  it ;  but  in  the  sense  that  the 
conviction  of  these  truths  is  so  deep  in  your  hearts 
that  it  moves  your  whole  nature  to  cast  yourselves  on 
-Tesus  Christ  as  your  Saviour  and  your  all.  That  is. 
the  belief  to  which  alone  the  life  that  is  promised  here 
will  come.  Oh,  brethren,  I  have  no  business  to  ask 
3^ou  the  question,  and  you  have  no  need  to  answer  it 
to  me !  Sometimes  good,  well-meaning  people  do  a 
mint  of  harm  by  pushing  such  questions  into  the 
faces  of  people  unprepared.  But  take  the  question 
into  your  own  hearts,  and  remember  what  belief 
is,  and  what  it  is  that  you  have  to  believe,  and 
answer  according  to  its  true  significance,  and  in  the 
light  of  conscience,  the  solemn  question  that  I  press 
upon  you. 

II. — Now,  secondly,  let  me  ask  you  to  think  of  what 
depends  upon  the  answer. 

In  the  case  before  us — if  I  may  look  back  to  it 
for  an  instant — there  is  a  very  illuminative  instance 
of  what  does  depend  upon  it.  Martha  had  to 
believe  that  Christ  was  the  Resurrection  and  the 
Life  as  a  condition  precedent  to  her  seeing  that 
He  was.  For,  as  He  said  Himself  before  He  spoke 
the  mighty  word  which  raised  Lazarus,  "Said  I 
not  unto  thee  that  if  thou  wouldest  believe  thou 
shouldest  see  the  glory  of  God  ? "  And  so  her  faith 
was  the  condition  of  her  being  able  to  verify  the  facts 
which  her  faith  grasped.  Well,  let  me  put  that  into 
plainer  words.  It  is  just  this — a  man  gets  from 
Christ  Avhat  he  trusts  Christ  to  give  him.      And  there 


CHRIST'S  QUESTION  TO  EACH.  215 

is  no  other  way  of  proving  the  truth  of  His  promises 
than  by  accepting  His  promises,  and  then  they  fulfil 
themselves.  You  cannot  know  that  a  medicine  will 
cure  you  till  you  swallow  it.  You  must  first  "  taste  " 
before  you  "  see  that  God  is  good."  Faith  verifies 
itself  by  the  experience  it  brings. 

And  what  does  it  bring  ?  I  said,  all  that  a  man 
trusts  Christ  for.  All  is  summed  up  in  that  one 
favourite  word  of  our  Lord  as  revealed  in  this  fourth 
Gospel,  which  includes  in  itself  everything  of  blessed- 
ness and  of  righteousness — life,  life  eternal.  Dear 
brethren,  you  and  I,  apart  from  Jesus  Christ,  are  dead 
in  trespasses  and  sins.  The  life  that  we  live  in  the 
flesh  is  an  apparent  life,  which  covers  over  the  true 
death,  separation  from  God.  And  you  young  people, 
fix  this  in  your  minds  at  the  beginning,  it  will  save 
you  many  a  heartache,  and  many  an  error — there  is 
nothing  worth  calling  life,  except  that  which  comes  to 
a  quiet  and  submissive  and  enfranchised  heart  through 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  And  if  you  will  trust  your- 
selves to  Him,  and  answer  this  question  with  your 
ringing  "  Yea,  Lord ! "  then  you  will  get  a  life  which 
will  quicken  you  out  of  your  deadness ;  a  life  which 
will  mould  you  day  by  day  into  more  entire  beauty 
of  character  and  conformity  with  Himself;  a  life 
which  will  shed  sweetness  and  charm  over  dusty 
commonplaces,  and  make  sudden  verdure  spring  in 
dreary,  herbless  deserts ;  a  life  which  will  bring  a 
solemn  joy  into  sorrow,  a  strength  for  every  duty, 
which  will  bring  manna  in  the  wilderness,  honey 
from  the  rock,  light  in  darkness,  and  a  present 
God   for  your   sufficient    portion;   a  life  which   will 


216  CHRISrS  QUESTION  TO  EACH. 

run  on  into  the  dim  ^^lories  of  eternit}^,  and  know 
no  change  but  advancement,  through  the  millen- 
niums of  ages. 

But,  dear  brethren,  whilst  thus,  on  condition  ot 
their  faith,  the  door  into  all  Divine  and  endless 
blessedness  and  progress  is  flung  wide  oj^en  for  men, 
do  not  forget  the  other  side  of  the  issues  which  depend 
on  this  question.  For  if  it  is  true  that  Jesus  Christ  is 
Life,  and  the  Source  of  it,  and  that  faith  in  Him  is 
the  way  by  which  you  and  I  get  it,  then  there  is  no 
escape  from  the  solemn  conclusion  that  to  be  out  of 
Christ,  and  not  to  be  exercising  faith  in  Him,  is  to  be 
infected  with  death,  and  to  be  shut  up  in  a  charnel 
house.  I  dare  not  suppress  the  plain  teaching  of 
Jesus  Christ  Himself :  "He  that  hath  the  Son  hath 
life ;  he  that  hath  not  the  Son  hath  not  life."  The 
issues  that  depend  upon  the  answer  to  this  question 
of  my  text  may  be  summed  up,  if  I  may  venture  to 
say  so,  by  taking  the  words  of  our  Lord  Himself  and 
converting  them  into  their  opposite — "He  that 
believeth  .  .  .  though  he  were  dead,  yet  shall  he  live ; 
and  whosoever  liveth  and  believeth  on  ]\Ie  shall  never 
die."  He  that  believeth  not  in  Christ,  though  he  were 
living,  yet  shall  he  die,  and  whosoever  liveth  and 
believeth  not  shall  never  live.  These  are  the  issues — 
the  alternative  issues — that  depend  on  your  answer 
to  this  question. 

HL — And  now,  lastly,  let  me  ask  you  to  think  of 
the  direct  personal  appeal  to  every  soul  that  lies 
in  this  question. 

I  have  dwelt  upon  two  out  of  the  three  words  of 
which   the   question    is    composed — "  believest    thou 


CHRIST'S  QUESTION  TO  EACH.  217 

tliis  ?  "  Let  me  dwell  for  a  moment  on  the  third  of 
them — "  believest  tlioiC 

Now,  that  suofocests  the  thoue^ht  on  which  I  do  not 
need  to  dwell,  but  which  I  seek  briefly  to  lay  upon 
your  hearts  and  consciences — viz.,  the  intensely 
personal  act  of  your  own  faith,  by  which  alone  Jesus 
Christ  can  be  of  any  use  to  you.  Do  not  be  led  away 
by  any  vague  notions  which  people  have  about  the 
benefits  of  a  Church  or  its  ordinances.  Do  not 
suppose  that  any  sacraments  or  any  priest  can  do  for 
you  what  you  have  to  do  in  the  awful  solitude  of 
your  own  determining  will — put  out  your  hand  and 
grasp  Jesus  Christ.  Can  any  person  or  thing  be  the 
condition  or  channel  of  spiritual  blessing  to  you, 
except  in  so  far  as  your  own  individual  act  of 
trust  comes  into  play  ?  You  must  take  the  bread 
with  your  own  hands,  you  must  masticate  it  with 
your  own  teeth,  you  must  digest  it  with  your 
own  orcfans,  before  it  can  minister  nourishment  to 
your  blood  and  force  to  your  life.  And  there  is 
only  one  way  by  which  any  man  can  come  into 
any  vital  and  life-giving  connection  with  Jesus 
Christ,  and  that  is,  by  the  exercise  of  his  own  per- 
sonal faith. 

And  remember,  too,  that  as  the  exercise  of  uniting 
trust  in  Jesus  Christ  is  exclusively  your  own  affair,  so 
exclusively  your  own  affair  is  the  responsibility  of 
answering  this  question.  To  you  alone  is  it  addressed. 
You,  and  only  you,  have  to  answer  it. 

There  was  once  a  poor  woman  who  went  after 
Jesus  Christ,  and  put  out  a  pale,  wasted,  tremulous 
finger  to  touch  the  hem  of  His  garment.     His  fine 


218  CHRIST S  QUESTION  TO  EACH. 

sensitiveness  detected  tlie  light  pressure  of  that  peti- 
tioning finger,  and  allowed  virtue  to  go  out,  though 
the  crowd  surged  about  Him  and  thronged  Him. 
No  crowds  come  between  j^ou  and  Jesus  Christ.  You 
and  He,  the  two  of  yow,  have,  so  to  speak,  the  world 
to  yourselves,  and  straight  to  yoii  comes  this  question, 
"  Believest  thou  ? " 

Ah !  brethren,  that  habit  of  skulking  into  the 
middle  of  the  multitude,  and  letting  the  most  earnest 
appeal  from  the  pulpit  go  diffused  over  the  audience^ 
is  the  reason  vy-hy  you  sit  there  quiet,  complacent, 
perhaps  wholly  unaffected  by  what  I  am  trying  to 
make  a  pointed,  individual  address.  Suppose  all  the 
other  people  in  this  place  to-night  were  away  but  you 
and  I,  would  not  the  word  that  I  am  trying  to  speak 
come  with  more  force  to  your  hearts  than  it  does- 
now  ?  Well,  think  away  the  world  and  all  its  millions, 
and  realise  the  fact  that  you  stand  in  Christ's  presence, 
Avith  all  His  regard  concentrated  upon  you,  and  that 
to  thee  individually  this  question  comes  from  a 
gracious,  loving  heart,  which  longs  that  you  answer, 
"  Yea,  Lord,  I  believe  ! " 

Why  should  you  not  ?  Suppose  you  said  to  Him, 
"  No,  Lord,  I  do  not "  ;  and  suppose  He  said,  "  Why 
do  you  not  ? "  vfhat  do  you  think  you  would  say 
then  ?  You  will  have  to  answer  it  one  day,  in  other 
circumstances,  when  all  the  crowds  will  fall  away,  as 
they  do  from  a  soldier  called  out  of  the  ranks  to 
go  up  and  answer  for  mutiny  to  his  commanding 
officer.  "Every  one  of  us  shall  give  an  account  of 
himself,"  and  the  lips  that  said  so  lovingly  at  the 
ffrave  of   Lazarns,  "  Believest   thou   this  ? "    and  are 


CHRIST'S  QUESTION  TO  EACH. 


21& 


saying  it  again,  dear  friend,  to  you  even  through  my 
poor  words,  will  ask  it  once  more.  For  this  is  the 
question  the  answer  to  which  settles  whether  we  shall 
stand  at  His  right  hand  or  at  His  left.  Say  now,  with 
humble  faith,  "Yea,  Lord,"  and  you  will  have  the 
blessing  of  them  Avho  have  not  seen,  and  yet  have, 
believed. 


XXII. 

(3o^'5  Bantebcb  ©nes. 

<xOD  doth  devise  means,  that  His  banished  be  not  expelled  from 
Him." — 2  Sam.  xiv.  14. 

AVID'S  Q'ood-for-nothino'  son  Absalom 
had  brought  about  the  murder  of  one 
of  his  brothers,  and  had  fled  the  coun- 
try. His  father  Aveakly  loved  the 
brilliant  blackguard,  and  would  fain 
have  had  him  back,  but  was  restrained  by  a  sense  of 
kingly  duty.  Joab,  the  astute  commander-in-chief,  a 
devoted  friend  of  David,  saw  how  the  land  lay,  and 
laid  a  plan  to  give  the  king  an  excuse  for  doing  what 
he  wished.  So  he  got  hold  of  a  person  who  is  called 
"  a  wise  woman  "  from  the  country,  dressed  her  as  a 
mourner,  and  sent  her  with  an  ingeniously  made-up 
story  of  how  she  was  a  Avidow  with  two  sons,  one  of 
whom  had  killed  the  other,  and  of  how  the  relatives 
insisted  on  their  right  of  avenging  blood,  and  demanded 
the  surrender  of  the  murderer ;  by  which,  as  she 
pathetically  said,  "  the  coal "  that  was  left  her  would 
be  "quenched."  The  king's  sympathy  was  quickly 
roused — as  was  natural  in  so  impulsive  and  poetic  a 
nature — and  he  pledged  his  word,  and  finally  his  oath, 
that  the  offender  should  be  safe. 


GOD'S  BANISHED  ONES.  221 

So  the  woman  had  him  in  a  trap,  having  in- 
duced him  to  waive  justice  and  to  absolve  the  guilty 
by  an  arbitrary  act.  Then  she  turns  upon  him  with 
an  application  to  his  own  case,  and  bids  him  free 
himself'  from  the  guilt  of  double  measures  and  incon- 
sistency by  doing  with  his  banished  son  the  same 
thing — viz.,  abrogating  law  and  bringing  back  the 
offender.  In  my  text  she  urges  still  higher  con- 
siderations— viz.,  those  of  God's  way  of  treating 
criminals  against  His  law,  of  whom  she  says  that  He 
spares  their  lives,  and  devises  means — or,  as  the  words 
might  perhaps  be  rendered,  "  plans  plannings  " — by 
which  He  may  bring  them  back.  She  would  imply 
that  human  poAver  and  sovereignty  are  then  noblest 
and  likest  God's  when  they  remit  penalties  and  restore 
wanderers. 

I  do  not  further  follow  the  story,  which  ends,  as  we 
all  know,  with  Absalom's  ill-omened  return.  But  the 
wise  woman's  saying  goes  very  deep,  and,  in  its 
picturesque  form,  may  help  to  bring  out  more  vividly 
some  truths — all-important  ones — to  which  I  wish  to 
beg  your  very  earnest  consideration  and  acceptance. 

I. — Note,  then,  who  are  God's  banished  ones. 

The  woman's  words  are  one  of  the  few  glimpses 
which  we  have  of  the  condition  of  religious  thought 
amongst  the  masses  of  Israel.  Clearly  she  had  laid 
to  heart  the  teaching  which  declared  the  great, 
solemn,  universal  facts  of  sin,  and  consequent  separa- 
tion from  God.  For  the  "  banished  ones  "  of  whom 
she  speaks  are  no  particular  class  of  glaring  criminals,, 
but  she  includes  within  the  designation  the  whole 
human  race,  or,  at   all  events,  the  whole  Israel  to 


222  GOD'S  BANISHED  ONES. 

which  she  and  David  belonged.  There  may  have 
been  in  her  words — though  that  is  very  doubtful — a 
reference  to  the  old  story  of  Cain  after  the  murder  of 
his  brother.  For  that  narrative  symbolises  the  con- 
sequences of  all  evil-doing  and  evil-loving,  in  that  he 
was  cast  out  from  the  presence  of  God,  and  went  away 
into  a  "  land  of  wandering,"  there  to  hide  from  the 
face  of  the  Father.  On  the  one  hand,  it  was  banish- 
ment; on  the  other  hand,  it  was  flight.  So  had 
Absalom's  departure  been,  and  so  is  ours. 

Strip  away  the  metaphor,  dear  brethren,  and  it  just 
comes  to  this,  which  I  seek  to  lay  upon  the 
hearts  of  all  my  hearers  this  evening — you  cannot  be 
blessedly  and  peacefully  near  God,  unless  you  are  far 
away  from  sin.  If  you  take  two  polished  plates  of 
metal,  and  lay  them  together,  they  will  adhere.  If 
you  put  half  a  dozen  tiny  grains  of  sand  or  dust 
between  them,  they  will  fall  apart.  So  our  sins 
have  come  between  us  and  our  God.  They  have 
not  separated  God  from  us,  blessed  be  His  name !  for 
His  love,  and  His  care,  and  His  desire  to  bless.  His 
thought,  and  His  knowledge,  and  His  tenderness,  all 
come  to  every  soul  of  man.  But  they  have  rent  us 
apart  from  Him,  in  so  far  as  they  make  us  unwilling 
to  be  near  Him,  incapable  of  receiving  the  truest 
nearness  and  blessedness  of  His  presence,  and  some- 
times desirous  to  hustle  Him  out  of  our  thoughts, 
and,  if  we  could,  out  of  our  world,  rather  than  to 
expatiate  in  the  calm  sunlight  of  His  presence. 

That  banishment  is  self-inflicted.  God  spurns  away 
no  man,  but  men  spurn  Him,  and  flee  from  Him. 
Many  of  us  know  what  it  is  to  pass  whole  days,  and 


GOD'S  BANISHED  ONES.  223 


weeks,  and  years,  practical  Atheists.  God  is  not  in 
all  our  thoughts. 

And  more  than  that,  the  miserable  disgrace  and 
solitude  of  a  soul  that  is  Godless  in  the  world  is  what 
many  of  us  like.  The  Prodigal  Son  scraped  all  his 
goods  together,  and  thought  himself  freed  from  a 
very  unwelcome  bondage,  and  a  fine  independent 
youth,  when  he  went  away  into  the  far  country.  It 
Avas  not  quite  so  pleasant  when  provisions  and  clothing 
fell  short,  and  the  swine's  trough  was  the  only  table 
that  was  spread  before  him.  But  yet  there  are  many 
of  us,  I  fear,  who  are  perfectly  comfortable  away  from 
God,  as  far  as  we  can  get  away  from  Him,  and  who 
never  are  aware  of  the  degradation  that  lies  in  a  soul's 
having  lowered  itself  to  this,  that  it  had  rather  not 
have  God  inconveniently  near. 

Away  down  in  the  luxurious  islands  of  the  Southern 
Sea  you  will  find  degraded  Englishmen  who  have 
chosen  rather  to  cast  in  their  lot  with  savao^es  than 
to  have  to  strain  and  work  and  grow.  These  poor 
beach-combers  of  the  Pacific,  not  happy  in  their 
degradation,  but  wallowing  in  it,  are  no  exaggerated 
pictures  of  the  condition,  in  reality,  of  thousands  of 
us  who  dwell  far  from  God,  and  far  therefore  from 
righteousness  and  peace. 

11. — Notice  God's  yearning  over  His  banished  ones. 

The  woman  in  our  story  hints  at,  or  suggests,  a 
parallel  which,  though  inadequate,  is  deeply  true. 
David  was  Absalom's  father  and  Absalom's  king  ;  and 
the  two  relationships  fought  against  each  other  in  his 
heart.  The  king  had  to  think  of  law  and  justice ; 
the  father  cried  out  for  his  son.     The  young  man's 


224  GOD'S  BANISHED  ONES. 


offence  had  neither  altered  his  relationship  nor  affected 
the  fother's  heart. 

All  that  is  true,  far  more  deeply,  blessedly  true,  in 
regard  to  our  relation,  the  wandering  exile's  relation, 
to  God.  For,  whilst  I  believe  that  the  highest  form 
of  sonship  is  only  realised  in  the  hearts  ot  men  who 
have  been  made  partakers  of  a  new  life  through 
Jesus  Christ,  I  believe,  just  as  firmly  and  earnestly, 
that  every  man  and  woman  on  the  face  of  the  earth, 
by  virtue  of  physical  life  derived  from  God,  by  virtue 
of  a  spiritual  being,  which,  in  a  very  real  and  deep 
sense,  still  bears  the  image  of  God,  and  by  reason  of 
His  continued  love  and  care  over  them,  are  children 
of  His.  The  banished  son  is  a  son  yet,  and  is  "His 
banished  one."  If  there  is  love — wonderful  as  the 
thought  is,  and  heart-melting  as  it  ought  to  be — 
there  must  be  loss  when  the  child  goes  away.  Human 
love  would  not  have  the  same  name  as  God's  unless 
there  were  some  analogy  between  the  two.  And 
though  we  walk  in  dark  places,  and  had  better  acknow- 
ledge that  the  less  we  speak  upon  such  profound 
subjects  the  less  likely  we  are  to  err,  yet  it  seems  to 
me  that  the  whole  preciousness  of  the  revelation  of 
God  in  Scripture  is  imperilled  unless  we  frankly 
recognise  this — that  His  love  is  like  ours,  delights  in 
beinof  returned  like  ours,  and  is  like  ours  in  that  it 
rejoices  in  presence  and  knows  a  sense  of  loss  in 
absence.  If  you  think  that  that  is  too  bold  a  thing 
to  say,  remember  who  it  was  that  taught  us  that  the 
father  fell  on  the  neck  of  the  returning  prodigal,  and 
kissed  him  ;  and  that  the  rapture  of  his  joy  was  the 
token  and  measure  of  the  reality  of  his  regret,  and 


GOD'S  BANISHED  ONES.  225 

that  it  was  the  father  to  whom  the  prodigal  son  was 
"  lost."  Deep  as  is  the  mystery,  let  nothing,  dear 
brethren,  rob  us  of  the  plain  fact  that  God's  love 
moves  all  around  the  worst,  the  unworthiest,  the  most 
rebellious  in  the  far-off  land,  and  "desires  not  the 
death  of  a  sinner,  but  rather  that  he  may  turn  from 
his  iniquity  and  live." 

And  it  is  you,  ijou,  whom  Ho  wants  back ;  you 
He  would  fain  rescue  from  3-our  aversion  to  good  and 
your  carelessness  of  Him.  It  is  you  whom  He  seeks, 
according  to  the  great  saying  of  the  Master,  "the 
Father  seeketh  "  for  worshippers  in  spirit  and  in  truth. 
III. — Xote  the  formidable  obstacles  to  the  restora- 
tion of  the  banished. 

The  words  "  banished  "  and  "  expelled  "  in  my  text 
are  in  the  original  the  same ;  and  the  force  of  the 
whole  would  be  better  expressed  if  the  same  English 
word  was  employed  as  the  equivalent  of  both.  We 
should  then  see  more  clearly,  than  the  variation  of 
rendering  in  our  text  enables  us  to  see,  that  the  being 
■■'  expelled "  is  no  further  stage  which  God  devises 
means  to  prevent,  but  that  what  is  meant  is  that  He 
provides  methods  by  which  the  banished  should  not 
be  banished — that  is,  should  be  restored  to  Himself 

Now,  note  that  the  language  of  this  "  wise  woman," 
unconsciously  to  herself,  confesses  that  the  parallel 
that  she  was  trying  to  draw  did  not  go  on  all  fours  ; 
for  what  she  was  asking  the  king  to  do  was  simply, 
by  an  arbitrary  act,  to  sweep  aside  law  and  to  remit 
penalty.  She  instinctively  feels  that  that  is  not  what 
can  be  done  by  God,  and  so  she  says  that  He  "  devises 
means  "  by  which  He  can  restore  His  banished. 

15 


226  GOD'S  BANISHED  ONES. 


That  is  to  say,  forgiveness  and  the  obliteration  of 
the  consequences  of  a  man's  sin,  and  his  restoration 
to  the  blessed  nearness  to  God,  which  is  life,  are  by 
no  means  such  easy  and  simple  things  as  people 
sometimes  suppose  them  to  be.  The  whole  drift  of 
popular  thinking  to-day  goes  in  the  direction  of  a 
very  superficial  and  easy  gospel,  which  merely  says, 
"  Oh,  of  course,  of  course  God  forgives  !  Is  not  God 
Love  ?  Is  not  God  our  Father  ?  What  more  do  you 
want  than  that  ? "  Ah !  you  want  a  great  deal  more 
than  that,  my  friends.  Let  me  press  upon  you  two 
or  three  plain  considerations.  There  are  formidable 
obstacles  in  the  way  of  Divine  forgiveness. 

If  there  are  to  be  any  pardon  and  restoration  at 
all,  they  must  be  such  as  will  leave  untouched  the 
sovereign  majesty  of  God's  law,  and  untampered  with, 
the  eternal  gulf  between  good  and  evil.  That  easy- 
going gospel  which  says, "  God  will  pardon,  of  course  ! " 
sounds  very  charitable  and  very  catholic,  but  at 
bottom  it  is  very  cruel.  For  it  shakes  the  very 
foundations  on  which  the  government  of  God  must 
repose.  God's  law  is  the  manifestation  of  God's 
character;  and  that  is  no  flexible  thing  which  can 
be  bent  about  at  the  bidding  of  a  weak,  good-nature. 
I  believe  that  men  are  right  in  holding  that  certainly 
God  must  pardon,  but  I  believe  that  they  are  fatally 
wrong  in  not  recognising  this — that  the  only  kind  of 
forgiveness  which  is  possible  for  Him  to  bestow  is  one 
in  which  there  shall  be  no  tampering  with  the  tre- 
mendous sanctions  of  His  awful  law ;  and  no  tendency 
to  teach  that  it  matters  little  whether  a  man  is  good 
or  bad.    The  pardon,  which  many  of  us  seem  to  think 


GOD'S  BANISHED  ONES.  227 

is  quite  sufficient,  is  pardon,  which  is  nothing  more 
noble  than  o-ood-natured  winkinoj  at  transo^ression. 
And  oh,  if  this  be  all  that  men  have  to  lean  on, 
they  are  leaning  on  a  broken  reed.  The  motto  on 
the  blue  cover  of  the  Edinhargh  Review,  for  a  hun- 
dred years  now,  is  true :  "  The  judge  is  condemned 
when  the  guilty  is  acquitted."  David  struck  a  fatal 
blow  at  the  prestige  of  his  own  rule,  when  he  weakly 
let  his  son  oft'  from  penalty.  And,  if  it  Avere  possible  to 
imagine  such  a  thing,  God  Himself  would  strike  as 
fatal  a  blow  at  the  justice  and  judgment  which  are 
the  foundations  of  His  throne,  if  His  forgiveness  was 
such  as  to  be  capable  of  being  confounded  with  love 
which  was  too  weakly  indulgent  to  be  righteous. 

Further,  if  there  are  to  be  forgiveness  and  restora- 
tion at  all,  they  must  be  such  as  will  turn  away  the 
heart  of  the  pardoned  man  from  his  evil.  The  very 
story  before  us  shows  that  it  is  not  every  kind  of 
pardon  which  makes  a  man  better.  The  scapegrace 
Absalom  came  back  unsoftened,  without  one  touch  of 
gratitude  to  his  father  in  his  base  heart,  without  the 
least  gleam  of  a  better  nature  dawning  upon  him,  and 
went  flaunting  about  the  court  until  his  viciousness 
culminated  in  his  unnatural  rebellion.  That  is  to  say, 
there  is  a  forgiveness  which  nourishes  the  seeds  of  the 
crimes  that  it  pardons.  We  have  only  to  look  into 
our  own  hearts,  and  we  have  only  to  look  at  the  sort 
of  people  round  us,  to  be  very  sure  that,  unless  the 
forgiveness  that  is  granted  us  from  the  heavens  has 
in  it  an  element  which  will  avert  our  wills  and  desires 
from  evil,  the  pardon  will  be  very  soon  needed  again, 
for  the  evil  will  very  soon  be  done  again. 

15* 


228  GOD-S  BANISHED  ONES. 

If  there  are  to  be  fororiveness  and  restoration  at  all,, 
they  must  come  in  such  a  fashion  as  that  there  shall 
be  no  doubt  whatsoever  of  their  reality  and  power. 
The  vague  kind  of  trust  in  a  doubtful  mercy,  about 
wdiich  I  have  been  speaking,  may  do  all  very  well  for 
people  that  have  never  probed  the  depths  of  their  own 
hearts.  Superficial  notions  of  our  sin,  which  so  many 
of  us  have,  are  contented  with  superficial  remedies  for 
it.  But  let  a  man  get  a  glimpse  of  his  own  real  self, 
and  I  think  that  he  Avill  want  something  a  great  deal 
more  solid  to  grip  hold  of,  than  nebulous  talk  of  the 
kind  that  I  have  been  describing.  If  once  we  feel 
ourselves  to  be  struggling  in  the  black  flood  of  that 
awful  river,  we  shall  want  a  firmer  hold  upon  the  bank 
than  is  given  to  us  by  some  rootless  tree  or  other. 
We  must  clutch  something  that  will  stand  a  pull,  if 
we  are  to  be  drawn  from  the  many  waters. 

People  say  to  us,  "  Oh,  God  will  forgive,  of  course  !  "' 
Does  this  world  look  like  a  place  where  forgiveness  is- 
such  an  easy  thing  ?  Is  there  anything  more  certain 
than  that  consequences  are  inevitable  when  deeds 
have  been  done,  and  "  that  whatsoever  a  man  sows 
that  shall  he  also  reap,"  and  whatsoever  he  brews, 
that  shall  he  also  drink  ?  And  is  it  into  a  grim,  stem 
world  of  retribution  like  this  that  people  will  come, 
mth  their  smiling,  sunny  gospel  of  a  matter-of- 
course  forgiveness,  upon  very  easy  terms  of  a. 
slight  penitence  ? 

Brethren,  God  has  to  "devise  means,"  which  is  a 
strong  Avay  of  sa3ang,  in  analogy  to  the  limitations  of 
humanity,  that  He  cannot,  by  an  arbitrary  act  of  His 
will,  pardon  a  sinful  man.     His  eternal  nature  forbids. 


GOUS  BANISHED  ONES.  '229 

it.  His  established  law  forbids  it.  The  fabric  of  His 
universe  forbids  it.  The  good  of  men  forbids  it.  The 
problem  is  insoluble  by  human  thought.  The  love  oi 
God  is  like  some  great  river  that  pours  its  waters 
down  its  channel,  and  is  stayed  by  a  black  dam  across 
its  course,  along  which  it  feels  for  any  cranny  through 
which  it  may  pour  itself.  We  could  never  save  our- 
selves, but  "  He  that  might  the  vengeance  best  have 
took,  found  out  the  remedy." 

IV. — And  so  the  last  word  that  I  have  to  say  is 
to  note  the  triumphant.  Divine  solution  of  these 
difficulties. 

The  work  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  work  of  Jesus 
Christ  alone,  meets  all  the  requirements.  It  vindicates 
the  majesty  of  law,  it  deepens  the  gulf  between 
rio-hteousness  and  sin.  Where  is  there  such  a  demon- 
stration  of  the  awful  truth  that  "  the  wages  of  sin  is 
death  "  as  on  that  Cross  on  which  the  Son  of  God  died 
for  us  and  for  all  His  "banished"  ones?  Where  is 
there  such  a  demonstration  of  the  fixedness  of  the 
Divine  law  as  in  that  death  to  which  the  Son  of  God 
submitted  Himself  for  us  all  ?  Where  do  we  learn 
the  hideousness  of  sin,  the  endless  antagonism  between 
Ood  and  it,  and  the  fatal  consequences  of  it,  as  we 
learn  them  in  the  sacrifice  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  ? 
Where  do  we  find  the  misery  and  desolation  of  banish- 
ment from  God  so  tragically  uttered  as  in  that  cry 
which  rent  the  darkness  of  eclipse,  "  My  God !  My 
God !  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me  ? " 

That  work  of  Christ's  is  the  only  way  by  which  it  is 
made  absolutely  certain  that  sins  forgiven  shall  bo 
sins  abhorred ;  and  that  a  man  once  restored  shall 


230  GOD'S  BANISHED  ONES. 


cleave  to  liis  restorer  as  to  his  life.  That  work  is  the 
only  way  by  which  a  man  can  be  absolutely  certain 
that  there  is  forgiveness,  in  spite  of  all  the  accusations 
of  his  own  conscience  ;  in  spite  of  all  the  inexorable 
working  out  of  penalties  in  the  system  of  the  world 
which  seems  to  contradict  the  fond  belief ;  in  spite  of 
all  that  a  forebodino'  o-aze  tells,  or  ousfht  to  tell,  of  a 
judgment  that  is  to  follow. 

Brethren,  God  has  devised  a  means.  aSTone  else 
could  have  done  so.  I  beseech  you,  realise  these  facts 
that  I  have  been  trying  to  bring  before  you,  and  the 
considerations  that  I  have  based  upon  them,  so  far  as 
they  commend  themselves  to  your  hearts  and 
consciences  ;  and  do  not  be  content  with  acquiescing 
in  them,  but  act  upon  them.  We  are  all  exiles  from 
God,  unless  we  have  been  brought  nigh  by  the  blood 
of  Christ.  In  Him,  and  in  Him  alone,  can  God  restore 
His  banished  ones.  In  Him,  and  in  Him  alone,  can 
we  find  a  pardon  which  cleanses  the  heart,  and  ensures 
the  removal  of  the  sin  which  it  forgives.  In  Him,  and 
in  Him  alone,  can  we  find,  not  a  peradventure,  not  a 
subjective  certainty,  but  an  external  fact  which  pro- 
claims that  verily  there  is  forgiveness  for  us  all.  I 
pray  you,  dear  friends,  do  not  be  content  with  that 
half  truth,  which  is  ever  the  most  dangerous  lie,  of 
Divine  pardon  apart  from  Jesus  Christ.  Lay  your  sins 
upon  His  head,  and  your  hand  in  the  hand  of  the 
elder  Brother,  who  has  come  to  the  far-off  land  to 
seek  us,  and  He  Avill  lead  you  back  to  the  Father's 
house  and  the  Father's  heart,  and  you  will  be  "no 
more  strangers  and  wanderers,  but  fellow-citizens  with 
the  saints  and  of  the  household  of  God." 


XXIII. 

^be  donimou  Salvation, 

"  The  common  salvation." — Jude  3. 
"The  common  faith."— Titus  i.  4. 

UDE  was  probably  one  of  Christ's 
brothers,  and  a  man  of  position  and 
influence  in  the  Church.  He  is  writing 
to  the  whole  early  Christian  community, 
numbering  men  widely  separated  from 
each  other  by  nationality,  race,  culture,  and  general 
outlook  on  life ;  and  he  beautifully  and  humbly  unites 
himself  with  them  all  as  recipients  of  a  "common 
salvation."  Paul  is  writing  to  Titus,  the  veteran 
leader  to  a  raw  recruit.  Wide  differences  of  mental 
power,  of  maturity  of  religious  experience,  separated 
the  two ;  and  yet  Paul  beautifully  and  humbly 
associates  himself  with  his  pupil,  as  exercising  a 
"  common  faith." 

Probably  neither  of  the  writers  meant  more  than  to 
bring  himself  nearer  to  the  persons  whom  they  were 
respectively  addressing;  but  their  language  goes  a 
great  deal  further  than  the  immediate  application  of 
it.  The  "  salvation  "  was  "  common  "  to  Jude  and  his 
readers,  as  "  the  faith  "  was  to  Paul  and  Titus,  because 
the  salvation  and  the  faith  are  one,  all  the  world  over. 
It  is  for  the  sake  of  insisting  upon  this  community, 


232  THE  COMMON  SALVATION. 

which  is  universal,  that  I  have  ventured  to  isolate 
these  two  fragments  from  their  proper  connection, 
and  to  bring  them  together.  But  you  will  notice  that 
they  take  up  the  same  thought  at  two  different  stages, 
as  it  were.  The  one  declares  that  there  is  but  one 
remedy  and  healing  for  all  the  world's  woes  ;  the  other 
declares  that  there  is  but  one  way  by  which  that 
remedy  can  be  applied.  All  who  possess  "the 
common  salvation "  are  so  blessed  because  they 
exercise  "  the  common  faith," 

I. — Note  the  underlying  conception  of  a  universal 
deepest  need. 

That  Christian  word  "  salvation  "  has  come  to  be 
threadbare  and  commonplace,  and  slips  over  people's 
minds  without  leaving  any  dint.  We  all  think  we 
understand  it.  Some  of  us  have  only  the  faintest  and 
vaguest  conception  of  what  it  means,  and  have  never 
realised  the  solemn  view  of  human  nature  and  its 
necessities  which  lies  beneath  it.  And  I  want  to  press 
that  upon  you  now.  The  word  "  to  save  "  means 
either  of  two  things — to  heal  from  a  sickness,  or 
to  deliver  from  a  danger.  These  two  ideas  of 
sickness  to  be  healed  and  of  dangers  to  be  secured 
from  enter  into  the  Christian  use  of  the  word.  Under- 
lying it  is  the  implication  that  the  condition  of 
humanity  is  universally  that  of  needing  healing  of  a 
sore  sickness,  and  of  needing  deliverance  from  an 
overhanging  and  tremendous  danger.  Sin  is  the 
sickness,  and  the  issues  of  sin  are  the  danger.  And 
sin  is  making  myself  my  centre  and  my  law,  and  so 
distorting  and  flinging  out  of  gear,  as  it  were,  my 
relations  to  God. 


THE  COMMON  SALVATION.  233 

Surely  it  does  not  want  many  words  to  show  that 
that  must  be  the  most  important  thing  about  a  man. 
Deep  down  below  all  superficialities  there  lies  this 
fundamental  fact,  that  he  has  gone  wrong  with  regard 
to  God;  and  no  amount  of  sophistication  about 
heredity  and  environment  and  the  like  can  ever  wipe 
out  the  blackness  of  the  fact  that  men  willingly  do 
break  through  the  law,  which  commands  us  all  to  yield 
ourselves  to  God,  and  not  to  set  ourselves  up  as  our 
own  masters  and  our  own  aims  and  ends,  indepen- 
dently of  Him.  I  say  that  is  the  deepest  wound  of 
humanity. 

In  these  days  of  social  unrest  there  are  plenty 
of  voices  round  us  that  proclaim  other  needs  as 
being  clamant,  but,  oh,  they  are  all  shallow  and 
surface  as  compared  with  the  deepest  need  of  all ;  and 
the  men  that  come  round  the  sick  bed  of  humanity 
and  say,  "  Ah,  the  patient  is  sutfering  from  a  lack  of 
education,"  or  "  the  patient  is  suffering  from  unfavour- 
able enviroment,"  have  diagnosed  the  disease  super- 
ficially. There  is  something  deeper  the  matter  than 
that,  and  unless  the  physician  has  probed  further 
into  the  wound  than  these  surface  appearances,  I  am 
afraid  his  remedy  will  go  as  short  a  way  down  as  his 
conception  of  the  evil  goes. 

Oh,  brethren,  there  is  something  else  the  matter 
with  us  than  ignorance  or  unfavourable  conditions. 
"  The  whole  head  is  sick,  and  the  whole  heart 
faint."  The  tap-root  of  all  human  miseries  lies  in 
the  solemn  fact  of  human  transsrression.  That  is 
a  universal  fact.  Wide  differences  part  us,  but 
there  is  one  thincj  that  we  have  all  in  common :    a 


234  THE  COMMON  SALVATION. 

conscience  and  a  will  that  lifts  itself  against  disliked 
good.  Beneath  all  surface  differences  of  garb  there 
lies  the  same  fact,  the  common  sickness  of  sin.  The 
king's  robe,  the  pauper's  uniform,  the  student's  gown, 
the  mill-hand's  fustian,  the  naked  savage's  brown 
skin,  each  cover  a  heart  that  is  evil,  and  because  it  is 
evil,  needs  salvation  from  sickness  and  deliverance 
from  danger. 

For  do  not  forget  that  if  it  is  true  that  men  have 
driven  their  rebellious  chariots  through  God's  law, 
they  cannot  do  that  without  bringing  down  God's 
hand  upon  them,  and  they  ought  not  to  be  able  to  do 
it ;  and  He  would  not  be  a  loving  God  if  it  were  not 
so.  There  are  dangers ;  dangers  from  the  necessary 
inevitable  consequences,  here  and  yonder,  of  rebellion 
against  Him. 

Now,  do  not  let  us  lose  ourselves  in  generalities. 
That  is  the  way  in  which  many  of  us  have  all  our 
lives  long  blunted  the  point  of  the  message  of  the 
Gospel  to  our  hearts.  That  is  what  we  do  with  all 
sorts  of  important  moral  truths.  For  instance,  I 
suppose  there  never  was  a  time  in  your  lives  when  you 
did  not  believe  that  all  men  must  die.  But  I  suppose 
most  of  us  can  remember  some  time  when  there  came 
upon  us,  with  a  shock  which  made  some  of  us  cower 
before  it  as  an  unwelcome  thing,  the  thought,  "  And 
/  must." 

The  common  sickness  ?  Yes  !  "  Thou  art  the 
man."  Oh,  brother,  whatever  you  may  have  or  what- 
ever you  may  want,  be  sure  of  this  :  that  your  deepest 
needs  will  not  be  met,  your  sorest  sickness  will  not  be 
healed,   your   most    tremendous    peril    not    secured 


THE  COMMON  SALVATION.  235 

against,  until  the  fact  of  your  individual  sinfulness 
and  the  consequences  of  that  fact  are  somehow  or 
other  dealt  with,  staunched,  and  swept  away.  So 
much,  then,  for  the  first  point. 

II. — Now  a  word  as  to  the  common  remedy.  One 
of  our  texts  gives  us  that — "  the  common  salvation." 

You  all  know  what  I  am  going  to  say,  and  so, 
perhaps,  you  suppose  that  it  is  not  worth  while  for  me 
to  say  it.  I  dare  say  some  of  you  think  that  it  was 
not  worth  while  coming  here  to-night  to  hear  the 
whole,  threadbare,  common-place  story.  Well !  is  it 
worth  while  for  me  to  speak  once  more  to  men  that 
have  so  often  heard  and  so  often  neglected  ?  Let  me 
try.  Oh,  that  I  could  get  you  one  by  one,  and  drive 
home  to  each  single  soul  that  is  listening  to  me,  or 
perhaps,  that  is  not  listening,  the  message  that  I  have- 
to  bring ! 

"  The  common  salvation."  There  is  one  remedy  for 
the  sickness.  There  is  one  safety  against  the  danger. 
There  is  only  one,  because  it  is  the  remedy  for  all 
men,  and  it  is  the  remedy  for  all  men  because  it  is  the 
remedy  for  each.  Jesus  Christ  deals,  as  no  one  else 
has  ever  pretended  to  deal,  with  this  outstanding  fact 
of  my  transgression  and  yours. 

He,  by  His  death,  as  I  believe,  has  saved  the  world 
from  the  danger,  because  He  has  set  right  the  world's- 
relations  to  God.  I  am  not  going,  at  this  stage  of  my 
sermon,  or  to  my  present  audience,  to  enter  upon  any- 
thing in  the  nature  of  discussion.  My  purpose  is  an 
entirely  different  one.  I  want  to  press  upon  you,  dear 
brethren,  this  plain  fact,  that  since  there  is  a  God,  and 
since  you  and  I  have  sinned,  and  since  things  are  as. 


■236  THE  COMMON  SALVATION. 


they  are,  and.  the  consequences  will  be  as  they  will  be, 
both  in  this  world  and  in  the  next,  we  all  stand  in 
danger  of  death — death  eternal,  which  comes  from, 
-and,  in  one  sense,  consists  of,  separation  in  heart  and 
mind  from  God. 

You  believe  in  a  judgment  day,  do  j^ou  not  ? 
Whether  you  do  or  not,  you  have  only  to  open  your 
■eyes,  you  have  only  to  turn  them  inwards,  to  see  that 
even  here  and  now,  every  sin  and  transgression  and 
disobedience  does  receive  its  just  recompense  of 
reward.  You  cannot  do  a  wrong  thing  without 
hurting  yourself,  without  desolating  some  part  of  your 
nature,  Avithout  enfeebling  your  power  of  resistance  to 
■evil  and  aspiration  after  good,  without  lowering  your- 
self in  the  scale  of  being,  and  making  yourself  ashamed 
to  stand  before  the  bar  of  your  own  conscience.  You 
•cannot  do  some  wrong  things,  that  some  of  you  are 
fond  of  doing,  without  dragging  after  them  conse- 
quences, in  this  world,  of  anything  but  an  agreeable 
kind.  Sins  of  the  flesh  avenge  themselves  in  kind,  as 
some  of  you  young  men  know,  and  will  know  better 
in  the  days  that  are  before  you.  Transgressions  which 
are  plain  and  clear  in  the  eyes  of  even  the  world's 
judgment  draw  after  them  damaged  reputations, 
enfeebled  health,  closed  doors  of  opportunity,  and  a 
whole  host  of  such  things.  And  all  these  are  but  a 
kind  of  premonitions  and  oversh  ado  wings  of  that 
solemn  judgment  that  lies  beyond.  For  all  men  will 
have  to  eat  the  fruit  of  their  doings  and  drink  that 
which  they  have  prepared.  But  on  the  Cross,  Jesus 
Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  bore  the  weight  of  the  world's 
&m,  yours  and  mine  and  every  man's.     There  is  one 


THE  COMMON  SA  L  VA  TION.  237 

security  against  the  danger ;  and  it  is  that  He,  front- 
ing the  incidence  of  the  Divine  law,  says,  as  He  said 
to  His  would-be  captors  in  the  garden,  "  If  ye  seek 
Me,  let  tJiese  go  their  way."  And  they  go  their  way  by 
the  power  of  His  atoning  death. 

Further,  Jesus  Christ  imparts  a  life  that  cures  the 
sickness  of  sin. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  this  Whitsuntide  that  all  the 
Christian  world  is  professing  to  keep  to-day  ?  Is  it 
to  commemorate  a  thing  that  happened  nineteen 
centuries  ago,  when  a  handful  of  Jews  for  a  few 
minutes  had  the  power  of  talking  in  other  languages, 
and  a  miraculous  light  flamed  over  their  heads  and 
then  disappeared  ?  Was  that  all  ?  Have  you  and  I 
any  share  in  it  ?  Yes.  For  if  Pentecost  means  any- 
thing it  means  this,  that,  all  down  through  the  ages, 
Jesus  Christ  is  imparting  to  men  that  cleave  to  Him  the 
real  gift  of  a  new  life,  free  from  all  the  sickness  of  the- 
old,  and  healthy  with  the  wholesomeness  of  His  own. 
perfect  sinlessness,  so  that,  however  inveterate  and 
engrained  a  man's  habits  of  wrong-doing  may  have 
been,  if  he  will  turn  to  that  Saviour,  and  let  Him  work 
upon  him,  he  will  be  delivered  from  his  evil.  The 
lepros}^  of  his  flesh,  though  the  lumps  of  diseased 
matter  may  be  dropping  from  the  bones,  and  the 
stench  of  corruption  may  drive  away  human  love  and 
sympathy,  can  be  cleansed,  and  his  flesh  become  like 
the  flesh  of  a  little  child,  if  only  he  AviU  trust  in  Jesus 
Christ.  The  sickness  can  be  cured.  Christ  deals  with 
men  in  the  depths  of  their  being.  He  will  give  you, 
if  you  will,  a  new  life  and  new  tastes,  directions,, 
inclinations,  impulses,  perceptions,  hopes,  and  capa- 


-238  THE  COMMON  SALVATION. 

cities,  and  the  evil  will  pass  away,  and  you  will  be 
whole. 

Ah,  brethren,  that  is  the  only  cure.  I  was  talking  a 
minute  or  two  ago  about  imperfect  diagnoses ;  and 
there  are  superficial  remedies  too.  Men  round  us  are 
trying,  in  various  ways  to  staunch  the  world's  wounds, 
to  heal  the  world's  sicknesses.  God  forbid  that  I 
should  say  a  word  to  discourage  any  such  !  I  would 
rather  wish  them  ten  times  more  numerous  than  they 
are  ;  but  at  the  same  time  I  believe  that,  unless  you 
deal  with  the  fountain  at  its  head,  you  will  never 
cleanse  the  stream,  and  that  you  must  have  the 
radical  change,  which  comes  by  the  gift  of  a  new  life 
in  Christ,  before  men  can  be  delivered  from  the  sick- 
ness of  their  sins.  And  so  all  these  panaceas,  whilst 
they  may  do  certain  surface  good,  are,  if  I  may  quote  a 
well-known  phrase,  like  "  pills  against  an  earthquake," 
or  like  giving  a  lotion  to  cure  pimples,  when  the  whole 
head  is  sick  and  the  whole  heart  faint.  You  will 
never  cure  the  ills  of  humanity  until  you  have 
delivered  men  from  the  dominion  of  their  sin. 

Jesus  Christ  heals  society  by  healing  the  individual. 
There  is  no  other  way  of  doing  it.  If  the  units  are 
corrupt  the  community  cannot  be  pure.  And  the 
only  way  to  make  the  units  pure  is  that  they  shall 
have  Christ  on  the  Cross  for  their  redemption,  and 
Christ  in  the  heart  for  their  cleansing.  And  then  all 
the  things  that  men  try  to  produce  in  the  shape  of 
social  good  and  the  like,  apart  from  Him,  will  come 
as  a  consequence  of  the  new  state  of  things  that  arises 
when  the  individuals  are  renewed.  Apart  from  Him 
all  human   attempts   to   deal  with   social   evils   are 


THE  COMMON  SALVATION.  239 

inadequate.  There  is  a  terrible  disillusionising  and 
disappointment  awaiting  many  eager  enthusiasts 
to-day,  who  think  that  by  certain  external  arrange- 
ments, or  by  certain  educational  and  cultivated  pro- 
cesses, they  can  mend  the  world's  miseries.  You 
educate  a  nation.  Well  and  good,  and  one  result  of 
it  is  that  your  bookshops  get  choked  with  trash,  and 
that  vice  has  a  new  avenue  of  approach  to  men's  hearts. 
You  improve  the  economic  condition  of  the  people. 
Well  and  good,  and  one  result  of  it  is  that  a  bigger 
percentage  than  ever  of  their  funds  finds  its  way  into 
the  drink -shop.  You  give  a  nation  political  power. 
Well  and  good,  and  one  result  of  it  is  that  the  least 
worthy  and  the  least  wise  have  to  be  flattered  and 
coaxed,  because  they  are  the  rulers.  Every  good  thing, 
divorced  from  Christ,  becomes  an  ally  of  evil,  and 
the  only  way  by  which  the  dreams  and  desires  of  men 
can  be  fulfilled  is  by  the  salvation  which  is  in  Him 
entering  the  individual  hearts  and  thus  moulding 
society. 

III. — Now,  lastly,  the  common  means  of  possessing 
the  common  healing. 

My  second  text  tells  us  what  that  is — "  the  common 
faith."  That  is  another  of  the  words  which  is  so 
familiar  that  it  is  unintelligible,  which  has  been 
dinned  into  your  ears  ever  since  you  were  little 
children,  and  in  the  case  of  many  of  you  excites  no 
definite  idea,  and  is  supposed  to  be  an  obscure  kind  of 
thing  that  belongs  to  theologians  and  preachers,  but 
has  little  to  do  with  your  daily  lives.  There  is  only 
one  way  by  which  this  healing  and  safety  that  I  have 
been  speaking  about  can  possibly  find__its  way  into  a 


240  THE  COMMON  SALVATION. 


man's  heart.  You  have  all  been  trained  from  child- 
hood to  believe  that  men  are  saved  by  faith,  and  a 
great  many  of  j'ou,  I  dare  say,  think  that  men  might 
have  been  saved  by  some  other  way,  if  God  had  chosen 
to  appoint  it  so.  But  that  is  a  clear  mistake.  If  it  is 
true  that  salvation  is  a  gift  from  God,  then  it  is  quite 
plain  that  the  only  thing  that  we  require  is  an  out- 
stretched hand.  If  it  is  true  that  Jesus  Christ's  death 
on  the  Cross  has  brought  salvation  to  all  the  world, 
then  it  is  quite  plain  that,  His  work  being  finished,  we 
have  no  need  to  come  in  pottering  with  any  works  of 
ours,  and  that  the  only  thing  we  have  to  do  is  to 
accept  it.  If  it  is  true  that  Jesus  Christ  will  enter 
men's  hearts,  and  there  give  a  new  spirit  and  a  new 
life,  which  will  save  them  from  their  sins  and  make 
them  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death,  then  it  is 
plain  that  the  one  thing  that  we  have  to  do  is  to  open 
our  hearts  and  say,  "  Come  in,  Thou  King  of  Glory, 
come  in  ! "  Because  salvation  is  a  gift ;  because  it  is 
the  result  of  a  finished  work ;  because  it  is  imparted 
to  men  by  the  impartation  of  Christ's  own  life  to 
them :  for  all  these  reasons  it  is  plain  that  the  only 
way  by  which  God  can  save  a  man  is  by  that  man's 
putting  his  trust  in  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  no  arbitrary 
appointment.  The  only  possible  way  of  possessing 
"  the  common  salvation "  is  by  the  exercise  of  "  the 
common  faith." 

So  we  are  all  put  upon  one  level,  no  matter  how 
diiferent  we  may  be  in  attainments,  in  mental  capacity 
— geniuses  and  blockheads,  scholars  and  ignoramuses, 
millionaires  and  paupers,  students  and  savages,  we  are 
all  on  the  one  level.     There  is  no  carriage  road  into 


THE  COMMON  SALVATION.  241 


heaven.  We  have  all  to  go  in  at  the  strait  gate, 
and  there  is  no  special  entry  for  people  that  come 
with  their  own  horses ;  and  so  some  people  do  not 
like  to  have  to  descend  to  that  level,  and  to  go  with 
the  ruck  and  the  undistinguished  crowd,  and  to  be 
saved  just  in  the  same  fashion  as  Tom,  Dick,  and 
Harry,  and  they  turn  away. 

There  was  a  book  published  not  long  ago — I  have 
not  read  it — with  a  very  conceited  title,  "  The  Religion 
of  a  Literary  Man."  I  should  have  thought  that  the 
religion  of  a  literary  man  was  just  the  same  as  the 
religion  of  a  lurryman ;  and  that  if  cultivated  people 
insist  upon  having  a  private  door  of  their  own  into 
Heaven,  it  is  extremely  likely  that  they  will  find  them- 
selves shut  out.  "  There  is  no  difference  ...  all 
have  sinned  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God ; 
being  justified  freely  by  His  grace." 

Plenty  of  people  believe  in  a  "common  salvation," 
meaning  thereby  a  vague,  indiscriminate  gift  that  is 
flung  broadcast  over  the  mass.  Plenty  of  people 
believe  in  a  "  common  faith."  We  hear,  for  instance, 
about  a  "  national  Christianity,''  and  a  "  national 
recognition  of  religion,"  and  "  Christian  nations,"  and 
the  like.  There  are  no  Christian  nations  except 
nations  of  which  the  individuals  are  Christians, 
and  there  is  no  "  common  faith "  except  the  faith 
exercised  in  common  by  all  the  units  that  make  up  a 
community. 

So  do  not  suppose  that  anything  short  of  your  own 
personal  act  brings  you  into  possession  of  "  the  com- 
mon salvation."  The  table  is  spread,  but  you  must 
take  the  bread  into  your  own  hands,  and  you  must 

16 


2  42  THE  COMMON  SA  L  VA  TION. 

masticate  it  with  your  own  teeth,  and  you  must 
assimilate  it  in  your  own  body,  or  it  is  no  bread  for 
you.  The  salvation  is  a  "  common,"  like  one  of  the 
great  prairies,  but  each  separate  settler  has  to  peg  off 
his  own  claim,  and  fence  it  in,  and  take  possession  of  it, 
or  he  has  no  share  in  the  broad  land.  So  remember 
that  "  the  common  salvation "  must  be  made  the 
individual  salvation  by  the  individual  exercise  of  "  the 
common  faith."  Cry,  "  Lord  !  I  believe ! "  and  then 
vou  will  have  the  right  to  say,  "  The  Lord  is  iriy 
strength  ;  He  also  is  become  my  salvation," 


XXIV. 

^be  per6i6tence  of  ^bwarte^  Xove* 

"  If  so  be  that  he  fiad  it." — Matt,  xviii.  13. 
"  Until  he  find  it." — Luke  xv.  i. 

IKE  other  teachers,  Jesus  seems  to  have 
had  favourite  points  of  view  and 
utterances  which  came  naturally  to 
His  lips.  There  are  several  instances 
in  the  Gospels  of  His  repeating  the 
same  sayings  in  entirely  different  connections  and 
with  different  applications.  One  of  these  habitual 
points  of  view  seems  to  have  been  the  thought  of 
men  as  wandering  sheep,  and  of  Himself  as  the 
Shepherd.  The  metaphor  has  become  so  familiar 
that  we  need  a  moment's  reflection  to  grasp  the 
mingled  tenderness,  sadness,  and  majesty  of  it.  He 
thought  habitually  of  all  humanity  as  a  flock  of  lost 
sheep,  and  of  Himself  as  high  above  them,  unpar- 
ticipant  of  their  evil,  and  having  one  errand — to  bring 
them  back. 

And  not  only  does  He  frequently  refer  to  this 
symbol,  but  we  have  the  two  editions,  from  which  my 
texts  are  respectively  taken,  of  the  Parable  of  the 
Lost  Sheep.  I  say  two  editions,  because  it  seems  to 
me  a  great  deal  more  probable  that  Jesus  should  have 

16* 


244  THE  PERSISTENCE  OF  THWARTED  LOVE. 

repeated  Himself  than  that  either  of  the  Evangelists 
should  have  ventured  to  take  this  gem  and  set  it  in 
an  alien  setting.  The  two  versions  differ  slightly  in 
some  unimportant  expressions,  and  Matthew's  is  the 
more  condensed  of  the  two.  But  the  most  important 
variation  is  the  one  which  is  brought  to  light  by  the 
two  fragments  which  I  have  ventured  to  isolate  as 
texts.  "  //  He  find  "  implies  the  possible  failure  of 
the  Shepherd's  search ;  "  till  He  find "  implies  His 
unwearied  persistence  in  the  teeth  of  all  failure.  And, 
taken  in  conjunction,  they  suggest  some  very  blessed 
and  solemn  considerations,  which  I  pray  for  strength 
to  lay  upon  your  minds  and  hearts  this  evening. 

I. — But  first  let  me  say  a  word  or  two  about  the 
more  general  thought  brought  out  in  both  these 
clauses — of  the  Shepherd's  search. 

Now,  beautiful  and  heart-touching  as  that  picture  is, 
of  the  Shepherd  away  amongst  the  barren  mountains 
searching  minutely  in  every  ravine  and  thicket, 
it  wants  a  little  explanation  in  order  to  be  brought 
into  correspondence  with  the  fact  which  it  expresses. 
For  His  search  for  His  lost  property  is  not  in  ignor- 
ance of  where  it  is,  and  His  finding  of  it  is  not  His 
discovery  of  His  sheep,  but  its  discovery  of  its  Shep- 
herd. We  have  to  remember  wherein  consists  the 
loss,  before  we  can  understand  wherein  consists  the 
search. 

Now,  if  we  ask  ourselves  that  question  first,  we  get 
a  flood  of  light  on  the  whole  matter.  The  great 
hundredth  Psalm,  according  to  its  true  rendering, 
says,  "  It  is  He  that  hath  made  us,  and  lue  are  His  ; 
.     .     .     we  are    .    .     .     the    shee^D  of  His  pasture." 


THE  PERSISTENCE  OF  THWARTED  LOVE.  245 

But  God's  true  possession  of  man  is  not  simply  tlie 
possession  inherent  in  the  act  of  creation.  For  there 
is  only  one  way  in  which  spirit  can  own  spirit,  or 
heart  can  possess  heart,  and  that  is  through  the 
voluntary  3rielding  and  love  of  the  one  to  the  other. 
So  Jesus  Christ,  who,  in  all  His  seeking  after  us  men, 
is  the  voice  and  hand  of  Almighty  Love,  does  not 
count  that  He  has  found  a  man  until  the  man  has 
learned  to  love  Him,  For  He  loses  us  when  we  are 
alienated  from  Him,  when  we  cease  to  trust  Him, 
when  we  refuse  to  obey  Him,  when  we  will  not  yield 
to  Him,  but  put  Him  far  away  from  us.  Therefore 
the  search  which,  as  being  Christ's  is  God's  in  Christ> 
is  for  love,  for  trust,  for  obedience ;  and  in  reality  it 
consists  of  all  the  energies  by  which  Jesus  Christ,  as 
God's  embodiment  and  representative,  seeks  to  woo 
and  win  you  and  me  back  to  Himself,  that  He  may 
truly  possess  us. 

If  the  Shepherd's  seeking  is  but  a  tender  meta- 
phor for  the  whole  aggregate  of  the  ways  by  which 
the  love  that  is  Divine  and  human  in  Jesus  Christ 
moves  round  about  our  closed  hearts,  as  the  water 
may  round  some  hermetically  sealed  vessel,  seeking 
for  an  entrance,  then  surely  the  first  and  chiefest 
of  them,  which  has  its  appeal  to  each  of  us  as 
directly  as  to  any  man  that  ever  lived,  is  that  great 
mystery  that  Jesus  Christ,  the  eternal  Word  of  God, 
left  the  ninety  and  nine  that  were  safe  on  the  high 
pastures  of  the  mountains  of  God,  and  came  down 
among  us,  out  into  the  wilderness,  "  to  seek  and  to 
save  that  which  was  lost," 

And,  brother,  that  method  of  winning — I  was  going 


•246  THE  PERSISTENCE  OF  THWARTED  LOVE. 

to  say,  of  earning — our  love  comes  straight  in  its 
appeal  to  every  single  soul  on  the  face  of  the  earth. 
Do  not  say  that  thou  wert  not  in  Christ's  heart  and 
mind  when  He  willed  to  be  born  and  willed  to  die. 
Thou,  and  thou,  and  thou,  and  every  single  unit  of 
humanity  was  there  clear  before  Him  in  its  individu- 
ality ;  and  He  died  for  thee,  and  for  me,  and  for  every 
man.  And,  in  one  aspect,  that  is  more  than  to  say  that 
He  died  for  all  men.  There  was  a  specific  intention 
in  regard  to  each  of  us  in  the  mission  of  Jesus  Christ ; 
and  when  He  went  to  the  Cross  the  Shepherd  was  not 
giving  His  life  for  a  confused  flock  of  which  He  knew 
not  the  units,  but  for  sheep  the  face  of  each  of  whom 
He  knows,  and  each  of  whom  He  loves.  There  is  His 
first  seeking ;  there  is  His  chief  seeking.  There  is 
the  seeking  which  ought  to  appeal  to  every  soul  of 
man,  and  which,  ever  since  you  were  children,  has 
been  making  its  appeal  to  you.  Has  it  done  so  in 
vain  ?     Dear  friend,  let  not  the  heart  still  be  hard. 

He  seeks  us  by  every  record  of  that  mighty  love 
that  died  for  us,  even  when  it  is  being  spoken  as 
poorly,  and  with  as  many  limitations  and  imperfec- 
tions, as  1  am  speaking  it  now.  "As  though  God 
did  beseech  you  by  us,  we  pray  in  Christ's  stead." 
It  is  not  arrogance,  God  forbid  !  it  is  simply  true  when 
I  say.  Never  mind  about  me  ;  but  my  word  to-night,  in 
so  far  as  it  is  true  and  tender,  is  Christ's  word  to  you. 
And  here,  in  our  midst,  that  unseen  Form  is  passing 
along  these  pews  and  speaking  to  these  hearts,  and 
the  Shepherd  is  seeking  His  sheep. 

He  seeks  each  of  us  by  the  inner  voices  and 
emotions  in  our  hearts  and  minds,  by  those  strange 


THE  PERSISTENCE  OF  THWARTED  LOVE.  247 


whisperings  which  sometimes  we  hear,  by  the 
suddenly  upstarting  convictions  of  duty  and  truth 
which  sometimes,  without  manifest  occasion,  flash 
across  our  hearts.  These  voices  are  Christ's  voice, 
for,  in  a  far  deeper  sense  than  most  men  superficially 
beheve,  "  He  is  the  true  Light  that  lighteth  every  man 
coming  into  the  world." 

He  is  seeking  us  by  our  unrest,  by  our  yearnings 
after  we  know  not  what,  by  our  dim  dissatisfaction 
which  insists  upon  making  itself  felt  in  the  midst  of 
joys  and  delights,  and  which  the  world  fails  to  satisfy 
as  much  as  it  fails  to  interpret.  There  is  a  cry  in 
every  heart,  little  as  the  bearer  of  the  heart  translates 
it  into  its  true  meaning — a  cry  after  God,  even  the 
living  God.  And  by  all  your  unrests,  your  disappoint- 
ments, your  hopes  unfulfilled,  your  hopes  fulfilled  and 
blasted  in  the  fulfilment,  your  desires  that  perish  un- 
fruited;  by  all  the  mystic  movements  of  the  spirit 
that  yearns  for  something  beyond  the  material  and 
the  visible,  Jesus  Christ  is  seeking  His  sheep. 

He  seeks  us  by  the  discipline  of  life,  for  I  believe 
that  Christ  is  the  active  Providence  of  God,  and  that 
the  hands  that  were  pierced  on  the  Cross  do  move  the 
wheels  of  the  history  of  the  world,  and  mould  the 
destinies  of  individual  spirits. 

The  deepest  meaning  of  all  life  is  that  we  should  be 
won  to  seek  Him  who  in  it  all  is  seeking  us,  and  led  to 
venture  our  hopes,  and  fling  the  anchor  of  our  faith 
beyond  the  bounds  of  the  visible,  that  it  may  fasten  in 
the  Eternal,  even  in  Christ  Himself,  "  the  same  yester- 
day and  to-day  and  for  ever,"  when  earth  and  its 
training  are  done  with.     Brethren,  it  is  a  blessed  thing 


248  TEE  PERSISTENCE  OF  THWARTED  LOVE. 


to  live,  when  we  interpret  life's  smallnesses  aright  as  the 
voice  of  the  Master,  who,  by  them  all — our  sadness  and 
our  gladness,  the  unrest  of  our  hearts  and  the  yearnings 
and  longings  of  our  spirits,  by  the  ministry  of  His 
Word,  by  the  record  of  His  sufferings — is  echoing  the 
invitation  of  the  Cross  itself,  "  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye 
.  .  .  and  I  will  give  you  rest !  "  So  much  for  the 
Shepherd's  search. 

II. — And  now,  in  the  second  place,  a  word  about  the 
search  that  is  thwarted. 

"  If  so  be  that  He  find."  That  is  an  awful  if,  when 
we  think  of  what  lies  below  it.  The  thing  seems  an 
absurdity  when  it  is  uttered,  and  yet  it  is  a  grim  fact 
in  many  a  life — viz.,  that  Christ's  effort  can  fail  and  be 
thwarted.  Not  that  his  search  is  perfunctory  or  care- 
less, but  that  we  shroud  ourselves  in  darkness  through 
which  that  love  can  find  no  way.  It  is  we,  not  He, 
that  are  at  fault  when  He  fails  to  find  that  which  He 
seeks.  There  is  nothing  more  certain  than  that  God 
and  Christ,  the  image  of  God,  desire  the  rescue  of 
every  man,  woman,  and  child  of  the  human  race.  Let 
no  teaching  blur  that  sunlight  fact.  There  is  nothing 
more  certain  than  that  Jesus  Christ  has  done,  and  is 
doing,  all  that  He  can  do  to  secure  that  purpose.  If 
He  could  make  every  man  love  Him,  and  so  find  every 
man,  be  sure  that  he  would  do  it.  But  He  cannot. 
For  here  is  the  central  mystery  of  creation,  which  if 
we  could  solve  there  would  be  few  knots  that  would 
resist  our  fingers,  that  a  finite  will  like  yours  or 
mine  can  lift  itself  up  against  God,  and  that,  having 
the  capacity,  it  has  the  desire.  He  says,  "  Come ! " 
We  say,  "  I  will  not."     That  door  of  the  heart  opens 


THE  PERSISTENCE  OF  THWARTED  LOVE.  249 

from  within  ;  and  He  never  kicks  it  open.  He  stands 
at  the  door  and  knocks.  And  then  the  same  solemn 
if  comes — "  If  any  man  open,  I  will  come  in."  "  If 
any  man  keeps  it  shut,  and  holds  on  to  it  to  prevent 
its  being  opened,  I  will  stop  out." 

Brethren,  I  seek  to  press  upon  you  this  evening 
the  one  plain  truth,  that  if  you  are  not  saved  men  and 
women,  there  is  no  person  in  heaven  or  earth  or  hell 
that  has  any  blame  in  the  matter  but  yourself  alone. 
God  appeals  to  us,  and  says,  "  What  more  could  have 
been  done  to  My  vineyard  that  I  have  not  done  unto 
it  ? "  His  hands  are  clean,  and  the  infinite  love  of 
Ohrist  is  free  from  all  blame,  and  it  all  Hes  at  our  own 
doors. 

1  must  not  dwell  upon  the  various  reasons  which 
lead  so  many  men  among  us — as,  alas  !  the  utmost 
charity  cannot  but  see  that  there  are — to  turn  away 
from  Christ's  appeals,  and  to  be  unwilling  to  "  have  this 
Man  "  either  "  to  reign  over  them "  or  to  save  them. 
There  are  many  such,  I  am  sure,  in  my  audience 
to-night ;  and  I  would  like,  if  I  could,  to  draw  them 
to  that  Lord  in  whom  alone  they  have  life,  and  rest, 
and  holiness,  and  heaven. 

One  great  reason  is  because  you  do  not  believe  that 
you  need  Him.  There  is  an  awful  inadequacy  in 
most  men's  conceptions — and  still  more  in  their 
feeling — about  their  sin.  Oh,  dear  friends,  if  you 
would  only  submit  your  consciences  for  one  meditative 
half-hour  to  the  light  of  God's  highest  law,  I  think 
you  would  find  out  something  more  than  many  of  you 
know,  as  to  what  you  are  and  what  your  sin  is.  Many 
of  us  do  not  much  believe  that  we  are  in  any  danger. 


250  THE  PERSISTENCE  OF  THWARTED  LOVE. 


I  have  seen  a  sheep  comfortably  cropping  the  short 
grass  on  a  doAvn  over  the  sea,  with  one  foot  out  in  the 
air,  and  a  precipice  of  500  feet  below  it,  and  at  the 
bottom  the  crawling  water.  It  did  not  know  that 
there  was  any  danger  of  going  over.  That  is  like 
some  of  us.  If  you  believed  what  is  true — that  "  sin 
when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth  death,"  and  under- 
stood what  "  death  "  meant,  you  would  feel  the  mercy 
of  the  Shepherd  seeking  you. 

Some  of  us  think  we  are  in  the  flock  when  we  are 
not.  Some  of  us  do  not  like  submission.  Some  of  us 
have  no  inclination  for  the  sweet  pastures  that  He 
provides,  and  would  rather  stay  where  we  are,  and 
have  the  fare  that  is  going  there. 

We  do  not  need  to  do  anything  to  put  Him  away. 
I  have  no  doubt  that  some  of  us  this  evening,  as  soon 
as  my  voice  ceases,  will  plunge  again  into  worldly  talk 
and  thoughts  before  they  are  down  the  chapel  steps, 
and  so  blot  out,  as  well  as  they  can,  any  vagrant  and 
superficial  impression  that  may  have  been  made. 
Dear  brethren,  it  is  a  very  easy  matter  to  turn  away 
from  the  Shepherd's  voice.  "  I  called,  and  ye  refused. 
I  stretched  out  My  hands,  and  no  man  regarded." 
That  is  all !     That  is  what  you  do,  and  that  is  enough. 

III. — So,  lastly,  the  thwarted  search  prolonged. 

"  Till  He  find  ! "  That  is  a  wonderful  and  a  merciful 
word.  It  indicates  the  infinitude  of  Christ's  patient 
forgiveness  and  perseverance.  Wc  tire  of  searching. 
"  Can  a  mother  forget "  or  abandon  her  seeking  after 
a  lost  child  ?  Yes  !  if  it  has  gone  on  for  so  long  as  to 
show  that  further  search  is  hopeless,  she  will  go  home 
and  nurse  her  sorrow  in  her  heart.     Or,  perhaps,  like 


THE  PERSISTENCE  OF  THWARTED  LOVE.         251 

some  poor  mothers  and  wives,  it  will  turn  her  brain, 
and  one  sign  of  her  madness  will  be  that,  long  years 
after  grief  should  have  been  calm  because  hope  was 
dead,  she  will  still  be  looking  for  the  little  one  so  long 
lost.  But  Jesus  Christ  stands  at  the  closed  door,  as  a 
great  modern  picture  shows,  though  it  has  been  so 
long  undisturbedly  closed  that  the  hinges  are  brown 
with  rust,  and  weeds  grow  high  against  it.  He  stands 
there  in  the  night,  with  the  dew  in  His  hair,  unheeded 
or  repelled,  like  some  stranger  in  a  hostile  village 
seeking  for  a  night's  shelter.  He  will  not  be  put 
away ;  but,  after  all  refusals,  still,  with  gracious  finger, 
knocks  upon  the  door,  and  speaks  into  the  heart. 
Some  of  you  have  refused  Him  all  your  lives,  and 
perhaps  you  have  grey  hairs  upon  you  to-night.  And 
He  is  speaking  to  you  still.  He  "  suft'ereth  long, 
is  not  easily  provoked,  is  not  soon  angry ;  hopeth  all 
things,"  even  of  the  obstinate  rejectors. 

For  that  is  another  thing  that  this  word  "till" 
preaches  to  us — viz.,  the  possibility  of  bringing  back 
those  that  have  gone  furthest  away  and  have  been 
longest  away.  The  world  has  a  great  deal  to  say 
about  incurable  cases  of  moral  obliquity  and  deformity. 
Christ  knows  nothing  about  "incurable  cases."  If 
there  is  a  worst  man  in  the  world — and  perhaps  there 
is — there  is  nothing  but  his  own  disinclination  to  pre- 
vent his  being  brought  back,  and  made  as  pure  as  an 
angel. 

But  do  not  let  us  deal  with  generalities,  let  us  bring 
the  truths  to  ourselves.  Dear  brethren,  I  know  nothing 
about  the  most  of  you.  I  should  not  know  you  again  if 
I  met  you  in  five  minutes.     I  have  never  spoken  to 


252  THE  PERSISTENCE  OF  THWARTED  LOVE. 

many  of  you,  and  probably  never  shall,  except  in  this 
public  way ;  but  I  know  that  you  need  Christ,  and 
that  Christ  wants  you.  And  I  know  that,  however 
far  you  have  gone,  you  have  not  gone  so  far  but  that 
His  love  feels  out  through  the  remoteness  to  grasp 
you,  and  would  fain  draw  you  to  itself. 

I  daresay  you  have  seen  upon  some  dreary  moor, 
or  at  the  foot  of  some  "  scaur  "  on  the  hillside,  the 
bleached  bones  of  a  sheep,  lying  white  and  grim  among 
the  purple  heather.  It  strayed,  unthinking  of  danger, 
tempted  by  the  sweet  herbage ;  it  fell ;  it  vainly 
bleated ;  it  died.  But  what  if  it  had  heard  the 
shepherd's  call,  and  had  preferred  to  lie  where  it  fell, 
and  to  die  where  it  lay  ?  We  talk  about  "  silly  sheep." 
Are  there  any  of  them  so  foolish  as  men  and  women 
sitting  in  these  pews  to-night,  who  will  not  answer  the 
Shepherd's  voice  when  they  hear  it,  with,  "  Lord,  here 
am  I,  come  and  help  me  out  of  this  miry  clay,  and 
bring  me  back."  He  is  saying  to  each  of  you,  "  Turn 
ye,  turn  ye,  why  will  ye  die  ?  "  May  He  never  have 
to  say  about  any  of  us,  "  Ye  will  not  come  to  Me,  that 
ye  might  have  life  ! " 


XXY. 

"  But  go  thou  thy  way  till  the  end  be  :  for  thou  shalt  rest,  and 
stand  in  thy  lot  at  the  end  of  the  days." — Dan.  xii.  13. 

■  ANIEL  had  been  receiving  partial  insight 
into  the  future,  by  the  visions  recorded 
in  previous  chajDters.  He  sought  for 
clearer  knowledge,  and  was  told  that 
the  book  of  the  future  was  sealed  and 
closed,  so  »that  no  further  enlightenment  was  possible 
for  him.  But  duty  was  clear,  whatever  might  be  dark  ; 
and  there  were  some  things  in  the  future  certain, 
whatever  might  be  problematic.  So  he  is  bidden 
back  to  the  common  paths  of  hfe,  and  is  enjoined  to 
pursue  his  patient  course  with  an  eye  on  the  end  to 
which  it  conducts,  and  to  leave  the  unknown  future 
to  unfold  itself  as  it  may. 

I  do  not  need,  I  sujDpose,  to  point  the  apphcation. 
Anticipations  of  what  may  be  before  us  have,  no 
doubt,  been  more  or  less  in  the  minds  of  all  of  us 
in  the  last  few  days.  The  cast  of  them  will  have  been 
very  different,  according  to  age  and  present  circum- 
stances. But  bright  or  dark,  hopes  or  dreads,  they 
reveal  nothino-.  Sometimes  we  think  we  see  a  little 
way  ahead,  and  then  swirling  mists  hide  all. 


254  A  NEW  YEARS  MESSAGE. 

So  I  think  that  the  words  of  my  text  may  help  us 
this  morning,  not  only  to  apprehend  the  true  task  of 
the  moment,  but  to  discriminate  between  the  things 
in  the  unknown  future  that  are  hidden  and  those 
that  stand  clear.  There  are  three  points,  then,  in  this 
message — the  journey ;  the  pilgrim's  resting  place  ;  and 
the  final  home.  "  Go  thou  thy  way  till  the  end  be : 
for  thou  shalt  rest,  and  stand  in  thy  lot  at  the  end  of  the 
days,"     Let  us,  then,  look  at  these  three  points  briefly. 

I. — The  journey. 

That  is  a  threadbare  metaphor  for  life.  But  thread- 
bare as  it  is,  its  significance  is  inexhaustible.  But 
before  I  deal  with  it,  note  that  very  significant  "  but  " 
with  which  my  text  begins.  The  prophet  has  been 
asking  for  a  little  more  light  to  shine  on  the  dark  un- 
known that  stretches  before  him.  And  his  request  is 
negatived — "  But  go  thou  thy  way."  In  the  connec- 
tion that  means,  "  Do  not  waste  your  time  in  dreaming 
about,  or  peering  into,  what  you  can  never  see,  but  fill 
the  present  with  strenuous  service,"  "  Go  thou  thy 
way,"  Never  mind  the  far-off  issues  ;  the  step  before 
you  is  clear,  and  that  is  all  that  concerns  you.  Plod 
along  the  path,  and  leave  to-morrow  to  take  care  of 
itself  There  is  a  piece  of  plain  practical  wisdom, 
none  the  less  necessary  for  us  to  lay  to  heart  because 
it  is  so  obvious  and  commonplace. 

And  then,  if  we  turn  to  the  emblem  with  which  the 
continuity  of  daily  life  and  daily  work  is  set  forth 
here,  as  the  path  along  which  we  travel,  how  much 
wells  up  in  the  shape  of  suggestion,  familiar,  it  may 
be,  but  very  needful  and  wholesome  for  us  all  to  lay 
to  heart ! 


A  NEW  YEAR'S  MESSAGE.  265 


The  figure  implies  perpetual  change.  The  landscape 
glides  past  us,  and  we  travel  on  through  it.  How 
impossible  it  would  be  for  us  older  people  to  go  back 
to  the  feelings,  to  the  beliefs,  to  the  tone  and  the 
temper  with  which  we  used  to  look  at  life  thirty  or 
forty  years  ago  !  Strangely  and  solemnly,  like  the  silent 
motion  of  some  gliding  scene  in  a  theatre,  bit  by  bit, 
inch  by  inch,  change  comes  over  all  our  surroundings, 
and,  saddest  of  all,  in  some  aspects,  over  ourselves. 

"  We  all  are  changed,  by  still  degrees, 
All  but  the  basis  of  the  soul." 

And  it  is  foolish  for  us  ever  to  forget  that  we  live  in  a 
state  of  things  in  which  constant  alteration  is  the  law, 
as  surely  as,  when  the  train  whizzes  through  the 
country,  the  same  landscape  never  meets  the  eye 
twice,  as  the  traveller  looks  through  the  windows. 
Let  us,  then,  accept  the  fact  that  nothing  abides  with 
us,  and  so  not  be  bewildered  nor  swept  away  from  our 
moorings,  nor  led  to  vain  regrets  and  paralysing  retro- 
spects when  the  changes  that  must  come  do  come, 
sometimes  slowly  and  imperceptibly,  sometimes  with 
stunning  suddenness,  like  a  bolt  out  of  the  blue.  If 
life  is  truly  represented  under  the  figure  of  a  journey, 
nothing  is  more  certain  than  that  we  sleep  in  a  fresh 
hospice  every  night,  and  leave  behind  us  every  day 
scenes  that  we  shall  never  traverse  again.  What 
madness,  then,  to  be  putting  out  eager  and  desperate 
hands  to  clutch  what  must  be  left,  and  so  to  contra- 
dict the  very  law  under  which  we  live  ! 

Then  another  of  the  well-worn  commonplaces  which 
are  so  believed  by  us  all  that  Ave  never  think  about 
them,  and  therefore  need  to  be  urged,  as  I  am  trying, 


256  A  NEW  YEARS  MESSAGE. 

poorly  enough,  to  do  now — another  of  the  common- 
places that  spring  from  this  image  is  that  Hfe  is  con- 
tinuous. Geologists  used  to  be  divided  into  two 
schools,  one  of  whom  explained  everything  by  invok- 
ing great  convulsions,  the  other  by  appealing  to  the 
uniform  action  of  laws.  There  are  no  convulsions  in 
life.  To-morrow  is  the  child  of  to-day,  and  yesterday 
was  the  father  of  this  day.  What  we  are  springs 
from  what  we  have  been,  and  settles  what  we  shall  be. 
The  road  leads  some-whither,  and  we  follow  it  step  by 
step.     As  the  old  nursery  rhyme  has  it — 

"  One  foot  up  and  one  foot  down, 
That's  the  way  to  London  Town." 

We  make  our  characters  by  the  continuity  of  our 
small  actions.  Let  no  man  think  of  his  life  as  if 
it  Avere  a  heap  of  unconnected  points.  It  is  a  chain 
of  links  that  are  forged  together  inseparabl3^  Let  no 
man  say,  "  I  do  this  thing,  and  there  shall  be  no  evil 
consequences  impressed  upon  my  life  in  consequence 
of  it."  It  cannot  be.  "  To-morrow  shall  he  as  this 
day,  and  much  more  abundant."  We  shall  to-morrow 
be  more  of  everything  that  we  are  to-day,  unless  by 
some  strong  eftbrt  of  repentance  and  change  we  break 
the  fatal  continuity,  and  make  a  new  beginning  by 
God's  grace.  But  let  us  lay  to  heart  this,  as  a  very 
solemn  truth  which  Ijfts  up  into  mystical  and 
unspeakable  importance  the  things  that  men  idly  call 
trifles,  that  life  is  one  continuous  whole,  a  march 
towards  a  definite  end. 

And  therefore  we  ought  to  see  to  it  that  the  direc- 
tion in  which  our  life  runs  is  one  that  conscience  and 
God  can  approve.     And,  since  the  rapidity  with  which 


A  NEW  YEARS  MESSAGE.  257 

a  body  falls  increases  as  it  falls,  the  more  needful  that 
we  give  the  right  direction  and  impulses  to  the  life. 
It  will  be  a  dreadful  thing  if  our  downward  course 
acquires  strength  as  it  travels,  and,  being  slow  at  first, 
gains  in  celerity,  and  accrues  to  itself  mass  and 
weight ;  like  an  avalanche  started  from  an  Alpine 
summit,  which  is  but  one  or  two  bits  of  snow  and  ice 
at  first,  and  falls  at  last  into  the  ravine,  tons  of  white 
destruction.     The  lives  of  many  of  us  are  like  it. 

Further,  the  metaphor  suggests  that  no  life  runs  its 
fitting  course  unless  there  is  continuous  effort.  There 
will  be  crises  when  we  have  to  run  with  panting 
breath  and  strained  muscles.  There  will  be  long 
stretches  of  level  commonplace  where  speed  is  not 
needed,  but  "  pegging  away  "  is,  and  the  one  duty  is 
persistent  continuousness  in  a  course.  But  whether 
the  task  of  the  moment  is  to  "  run  and  not  be  weary," 
or  to  "  walk  and  not  faint,"  crises  and  commonplace 
stretches  of  land  alike  require  continuous  eftbrt,  in 
order  to  "run  with  patience  the  race  that  is  set 
before  us." 

Mark  the  emphasis  of  my  text,  "Go  thy  way 
till  the  end."  You,  my  contemporaries,  you  older 
men !  do  not  fancy  that  in  the  deepest  aspect  any  life 
has  ever  a  period  in  it  in  which  a  man  may  "  take  it 
easy."  You  may  do  that  in  regard  of  outward  things, 
and  it  is  the  hope  and  the  reward  of  faithfulness  in 
youth  and  middle  age  that,  Avhen  the  grey  hairs  come 
to  be  upon  us,  we  may  slack  off  a  little  in  regard  of 
outward  activity.  But  in  regard  of  all  the  deepest 
things  of  life,  no  man  may  ever  lessen  his  diligence 
until  he  has  attained  the  goal. 

17 


258  A  NEW  YEAR'S  MESSAGE. 

Some  of  you  will  remember  how,  in  a  stormy 
October  night  years  ago,  the  Royal  CJiarter  went  down 
when  three  hours  from  Liverpool,  and  the  passengers 
had  met  in  the  saloon  and  voted  a  testimonial  to  the 
captain  because  he  had  brought  them  across  the 
ocean  in  safety.  Until  the  anchor  is  down  and  we 
are  inside  the  harbour  we  may  be  shipwrecked,  if  we 
are  careless  in  our  navigation.  "  Go  thou  thy  way 
until  the  end."  And  remember,  you  older  people  I 
that  until  that  end  is  reached  you  have  to  use  all 
your  power,  and  to  labour  as  earnestly,  and  guard 
yourself  as  carefully,  as  at  any  period  before. 

And  not  only  "  till  the  end,"  but  "  go  thou  thy  way 
to  the  end."  That  is  to  say,  let  the  thought  that  the 
road  has  a  termination  be  ever  present  Avith  us  all. 
Now,  there  is  a  great  deal  of  the  so-called  devout  con- 
templation of  death  which  is  anything  but  wholesome. 
People  were  never  meant  to  be  always  looking  forward 
to  that  close.  Men  may  think  of  "  the  end "  in  a 
hundred  different  connections.  One  man  may  say, 
"  Let  us  eat  and  drink,  for  to-morrow  we  die." 
Another  man  may  say,  "  I  have  only  a  little  while  to 
master  this  science,  to  make  a  name  for  myself,  to  win 
wealth.  Let  me  bend  all  my  efforts  in  a  fierce  deter- 
mination— made  the  fiercer  because  of  the  thought  of 
the  brevity  of  life — to  win  the  end."  The  mere  con- 
templation of  the  shortness  of  our  days  may  be  an 
ally  of  immorality,  of  selfishness,  of  meanness,  of 
earthly  ambitions,  as  well  as  lay  a  cooling  hand  on 
fevered  brows,  and  bring  down  the  pulsations  of 
hearts  that  throb  for  earth. 

But  whilst  it  is  not  wholesome  to  be  always  think- 


A  NEJF  YEAKS  MESSAGE.  259 

ing  of  death,  it  is  more  unwholesome  still  never  to  let 
the  contemplation  of  that  end  come  into  our  calcula- 
tions of  the  future,  and  to  shape  our  lives  in  an 
obstinate  blindness  to  what  is  the  one  certain  fact 
which  rises  up  through  the  whirling  mists  of  the 
unknown  future,  like  some  black  cliff  from  the  clouds 
that  wreath  around  it.  Is  it  not  stransfe  that  the 
surest  thing  is  the  thing  that  we  forget  most  of  all  ? 
It  sometimes  seems  to  me  as  if  the  sky  rained  down 
opiates  upon  people,  as  if  all  mankind  were  in  a  con- 
spiracy of  lunac}',  because  they,  with  one  accord, 
ignore  the  most  prominent  and  forget  the  only  certain 
fact  about  their  future ;  and  in  all  their  calculations 
do  not  "  so  number  their  days  "  as  to  "  apply  "  their 
"  hearts  unto  wisdom."  "  Go  thou  thy  way  until  the 
end."  And  let  thy  way  be  marked  out  with  a  con- 
stant eye  towards  the  end. 

II. — Note,  again,  the  resting-place. 

"  Go  thou  thy  way,  for  thou  shalt  rest."  Now,  I 
suppose,  to  most  careful  readers  that  clearly  is 
intended  as  a  gracious,  and  what  they  call  a  euphem- 
istic, way  of  speaking  about  death.  "  Thou  shalfc 
rest."  Well,  that  is  a  thought  that  takes  away  a  great 
deal  of  the  grimness  and  the  terror  with  which  men 
generally  invest  the  close.  It  is  a  thought,  of  course, 
the  force  of  which  is  very  different  in  different  stages 
and  conditions  of  life.  To  you  young  people,  eager, 
perhaps  ambitious,  full  of  the  consciousness  of  inward 
power,  happ3^  and,  in  all  human  probabilit}-,  with  the 
greater  portion  of  your  lives  before  you  in  which  to 
do  what  you  desire,  the  thought  of  "  rest  "  comes  with 
a  very  faint  appeal.      And  yet  I  do  not  suppose  that 

17* 


260  A  NEW  YEAR'S  MESSAGE. 

there  is  anybody  who  has  not  some  burden  that  it  is 
hard  to  carry ;  or  who  has  not  learned  what  weariness 
means. 

But  to  us  older  people,  who  have  tasted  dis- 
appointments, who  have  known  the  pressure  of  grind- 
ing toil  for  a  great  many  years,  whose  hearts  have  been 
gnawed  by  harassments  and  anxieties  of  different 
kinds,  whose  lives  are  apparently  drawing  nearer  their 
end  than  the  present  moment  is  to  their  beginning, 
the  thought,  "  Thou  shalt  rest,"  comes  with  a  very 
different  appeal  from  that  which  it  makes  to  these 
others. 

"  There  remaineth  a  rest  for  the  people  of  God, 
And  I  have  had  trouble  enough  for  one," 

says  our  great  modern  poet ;  and  therein  he  echoes  the 
deepest  thoughts  of  most  of  this  congregation.  That 
rest  is  the  cessation  of  toil,  but  the  continuance  of 
activity — the  cessation  of  toil,  and  anxiety,  and 
harassment,  and  care.  And  so  the  darkness  is  made 
beautiful  when  we  think  that  God  draws  the  curtain, 
as  a  careful  mother  does  in  her  child's  chamber, 
that  the  light  may  not  disturb  the  slumberer. 

But,  dear  friends,  that  final  cessation  of  earthly  work 
has  a  double  character.  '•'  Thou  shalt  rest "  was  said 
to  this  man  of  God.  But  what  of  people  whom  death 
takes  away  from  the  only  sort  of  work  that  they  are 
fit  to  do  ?  It  will  be  no  rest  to  long  for  the  occupa- 
tions which  you  never  can  have  any  more.  And  if 
you  have  been  living  for  this  wretched  present,  to  be 
condemned  to  have  nothing  to  do  any  more  in  it  and 
with  it  will  be  torture,  and  not  repose.  Ask  yourselves 
how  you  would  like  to  be  taken  out  of  your  shop,  or 


A  NEIV  YEAKS  MESSAGE.  261 

your  mill,  or  your  study,  or  your  laboratory,  or  your 
counting-house,  and  never  to  be  allowed  to  go  into  it 
again.  Some  of  you  know  how  wearisome  a  holiday 
is  when  you  cannot  get  to  your  daily  work.  You  will 
get  a  very  long  holiday  after  you  are  dead.  And  if 
the  hungering  after  the  withdrawn  occupation  persists, 
there  will  be  very  little  pleasure  in  rest.  There  is  only 
one  way  by  which  we  can  make  that  inevitable  end  a 
blessing,  and  turn  death  into  the  opening  of  the  gate 
of  our  resting-place  ;  and  that  is  by  setting  our  heart's 
desires  and  our  spirit's  trust  on  Jesus  Christ,  who  is 
the  "  Lord  both  of  the  dead  and  of  the  living."  If  we 
do  that,  even  that  last  enemy  will  come  to  us  as 
Christ's  representative,  with  Christ's  own  word  upon 
his  lip,  "  Come  unto  Me,  ye  that  are  weary  and  are 
heavy  laden,  and  I — because  He  has  given  me  the 
power — I  will  give  you  rest." 

"  Sleep,  full  of  rest,  from  head  to  foot ; 
Lie  still,  dry  dust,  secure  of  change." 

III. — That  leads  me  to  the  last  thought,  the  Home. 

'•'Thou  shalt  stand  in  thy  lot  at  the  end  of  the 
days."  "  Stand  " — that  is  Daniel's  way  of  preaching, 
what  he  has  been  preaching  in  several  other  parts  of 
his  book,  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection.  "Thou 
shalt  stand  in  thy  lot."  That  is  a  reference  to  the 
ancient  partition  of  the  land  of  Canaan  amongst  the 
tribes,  where  each  man  got  his  own  portion,  and  sat 
under  his  own  vine  and  fig  tree.  And  so  there  emerge 
from  these  symboUcal  words  thoughts  which,  at  this 
stage  of  my  sermon,  I  can  barely  touch  upon.  First 
comes  the  thought  that,  however  sweet  and  blessed 
that  reposeful  state  may  be,  humanity  has  not  attained 


262  A  NEW  YEARS  MESSAGE. 

its  perfection  until  once  again  the  perfected  spirit  is 
mated  Avith,  and  enclosed  within,  its  congenial  servant, 
a  perfect  body.  "  Corporeity  is  the  end  of  man." 
Body,  soul,  and  spirit  partake  of  the  redemption  of 
God. 

But  then,  apart  from  that,  on  which  I  must  not 
dwell,  my  text  suggests  one  or  two  thoughts.  God  is 
the  true  inheritance.  Each  man  has  his  own  portion 
of  the  common  possession.  Or,  to  put  it  into  plainer 
words,  in  that  perfect  land  each  individual  has 
precisely  so  much  of  God  as  he  is  capable  of  possessing. 
"  Thou  shalt  stand  in  thy  lot."  And  what  determines 
the  lot  is  how  we  wend  our  way  till  that  other  end,  the 
end  of  life.  "  The  end  of  the  days  "  is  a  period  far 
beyond  the  end  of  the  life  of  Daniel.  And  as  the 
course  that  terminated  in  repose  has  been,  so  the 
possession  of  "  the  portion  of  the  inheritance  of  the 
saints  in  light "  shall  be,  for  which  that  course  has 
made  men  meet.  Destiny  is  character  worked  out. 
A  man  will  be  where  he  is  fit  for,  and  have  what  he  is 
fit  for.  Time  is  the  lackey  of  eternity.  His  life  here 
settles  how  much  of  God  a  man  shall  be  able  to  hold, 
Avhen  he  stands  in  his  lot  at  the  "  end  of  the  days." 
And  his  allotted  portion,  as  it  stretches  around  him, 
will  be  but  the  issue  and  the  outcome  of  his  life  here 
on  earth. 

Therefore,  dear  brethren,  tremendous  importance 
attaches  to  each  fugitive  moment.  Therefore  each 
act  that  we  do  is  weighted  with  eternal  consequences. 
If  we  will  put  our  trust  in  Him,  "  in  whom  also  we 
obtain  the  inheritance,"  and  will  travel  on  life's 
common  way  in  cheerful  godliness,  we  may  front  all 


A  NEW  YEAR'S  MESSAGE.  263 

the  uncertainties  of  the  unknown  future,  sure  of  two 
thinsfs — that  we  shall  rest,  and  that  we  shall  stand  in 
our  lot.  We  shall  all  go  where  we  have  fitted  ourselves, 
by  God's  grace,  to  go  ;  get  what  we  have  fitted  our- 
selves to  possess ;  and  be  what  we  have  made  ourselves. 
To  the  Christian  man  the  word  comes,  "  Thou  shalt 
stand  in  thy  lot."  And  the  other  word,  that  was 
spoken  about  one  sinner,  will  be  fulfilled  in  all  whose 
lives  have  been  unfitting  them  for  heaven  :  "  Judas  by 
transgression  fell,  that  he  might  go  to  his  own  place." 
He,  too,  stands  in  his  lot.  Now  settle  which  lot  is 
yours. 


xxvr. 
^be  1llamc6  on  BaroiVs  Breastplate. 

Aabon  shall  bear  their  names  before  the  Lord  upon  his  two 
shoulders  for  a  memorial.  .  .  .  And  Aaron  shall  bear  the 
names  of  the  Children  of  Israel  in  the  breastplate  upon  his 
heart  when  he  goeth  in  unto  the  Holy  Place." — Exodus- 
xxviii.  12,  29, 


J^VERY  part  of  the  elaborately  prescribed 
dress  of  the  high  priest  was  signifi- 
cant. But  the  significance  of  the 
whole  was  concentrated  in  the  inscrip- 
tion upon  his  mitre,  "  Holiness  to  the 
Lord,"  and  in  those  others  upon  his  breastplate  and 
his  shoulder. 

The  breastplate  was  composed  of  folded  cloth,  in 
which  were  lodged  twelve  precious  stones,  in  four 
rows  of  three,  each  stone  containing  the  name  of  one 
of  the  tribes.  It  was  held  in  position  by  the  ephod, 
which  consisted  of  another  piece  of  cloth,  with  a  back 
and  front  part,  which  were  united  into  one  on  the 
shoulders.  On  each  shoulder  it  was  clasped  by  an 
onyx  stone  bearing  the  names  of  six  of  the  tribes. 
Thus  twice,  on  the  shoulders,  the  seat  of  power,  and 
on  the  heart,  the  organ  of  thought  and  of  love,  Aaron, 
entering  into  the  presence  of  the  Most  High,  bore 
"  the  names  of  the  tribes  for  a  memorial  continually." 


THE  NAMES  ON  AARON'S  BREASTPLATE.         265 


Now,  I  think  we  shall  not  be  indulging  in  the  very 
dangerous  amusement  of  unduly  spiritualising  the 
externalities  of  that  old  law  if  we  see  here,  in  these 
two  things,  some  very  important  lessons. 

I. — The  first  one  that  I  would  suggest  to  you  is 
— here  we  have  the  expression  of  the  great  truth  of 
representation  of  the  people  by  the  priest. 

The  names  of  the  tribes  laid  upon  Aaron's  heart  and 
on  his  shoulders  indicated  the  significance  of  his  office 
— that  he  represented  Israel  before  God,  as  truly  as  he 
represented  God  to  Israel.  For  the  moment  the 
personality  of  the  official  was  altogether  melted  away 
and  absorbed  in  the  sanctity  of  his  function,  and  he 
stood  before  God  as  the  individualised  nation.  Aaron 
was  Israel,  and  Israel  was  Aaron,  for  the  purposes  of 
worship.  And  that  was  indicated  by  the  fact  that 
here,  on  the  shoulders,  from  which,  according  to  an 
obvious  symbol,  all  acts  of  power  emanate,  and  on  the 
heart,  from  which,  according  to  most  natural  meta- 
phor, all  the  outgoings  of  the  personal  life  proceed, 
were  written  the  names  of  the  tribes.  That  meant, 
"  This  man  standing  here  is  the  Israel  of  God,  the 
concentrated  nation," 

The  same  thought  works  the  other  way.  The  nation 
is  the  diffi^ised  priest,  and  all  its  individual  components 
are  consecrated  to  God.  All  this  was  external  cere- 
monial, with  no  real  spiritual  fact  at  the  back  of  it. 
But  it  pointed  onwards  to  something  that  is  not 
ceremonial.  It  pointed  to  this,  that  the  true  priest 
must,  in  like  manner,  gather  up  into  himself,  and  in  a 
very  profound  sense  be,  the  people  for  whom  he  is  the 
priest ;  and  that  they,  in  their  turn,  by  the  action  of 


266  THE  NAMES  ON  AARON'S  BREASTPLATE. 


their  own  minds  and  hearts  and  wills,  must  consent 
to  and  recognise  that  representative  relation,  which 
comes  to  the  solemn  height  of  identification  in  Christ's 
relation  to  His  people.  "  I  am  the  Vine,  ye  are  the 
branches,"  says  He,  and  also,  "  That  they  all  may  be 
one  in  us  as  Thou,  Father,  art  in  Me,  and  I  in  Thee." 
So  Paul  says,  "  I  live,  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in 
me."  "  The  life  which  I  live  in  the  flesh,  I  live  by  the 
faith  of  the  Son  of  God." 

So  Christ  gathers  us  all,  if  we  will  let  Him,  into 
Himself;  and  our  lives  may  be  hid  with  Him — 
in  a  fashion  that  is  more  than  mere  external  and 
formal  representation,  as  people  have  a  member  of 
Parliament  to  represent  them  in  the  councils  of  the 
nation — even  in  a  true  union  with  Him  in  whom  is  the 
life  of  all  of  us,  if  we  live  in  any  real  sense.  Aaron 
bore  the  names  of  the  tribes  on  shoulder  and  heart, 
and  Israel  was  Aaron,  and  Aaron  was  Israel. 

II. — Further,  we  see  here,  in  these  eloquent  symbols, 
the  true  significance  of  intercession. 

Now,  that  is  a  word  and  a  thought  which  has  been 
wofully  limited  and  made  shallow  and  superficial  by 
the  unfortunate  confining  of  the  expression,  in  our 
ordinary  language,  to  a  mere  action  by  speech.  Inter- 
cession is  supposed  to  be  verbal  asking  for  some  good 
to  be  bestowed  on,  or  some  evil  to  be  averted  from, 
someone  in  whom  we  are  interested.  But  the  Old 
Testament  notion  of  the  priest's  intercession,  and  the 
New  Testament  use  of  the  word  which  we  so  render, 
go  far  beyond  any  verbal  utterances,  and  reach  to  the 
very  heart  of  things.  Intercession,  in  the  true  sense 
of  the  word,  means  the  doing  of  any  act  whatsoever 


THE  NAMES  ON  AARON'S  BREASTPLATE.  '267 


before  God  for  His  people  by  Jesus  Christ.  Whenso- 
ever, as  in  the  presence  of  God,  He  brings  to  God 
anything  which  is  His,  that  is  intercession.  He 
undertakes  for  them,  not  by  words  only,  though  His 
mighty  word  is,  "  I  will  that  they  whom  Thou  hast 
given  Me  be  with  Me  where  I  am,"  but  by  acts  which 
are  more  than  even  the  words  of  the  Incarnate  Word. 
If  we  take  these  two  inscriptions  upon  which  I  am 
now  commenting,  we  shall  get,  I  think,  what  covers 
the  whole  ground  of  the  intercession  on  which 
Christians  are  to  repose  their  souls.  For,  with  regard 
to  the  one  of  them,  we  read  that  the  high  priest's 
breastplate  was  named  "  the  breastplate  of  judgment "  ; 
and  what  that  means  is  explained  by  the  last  words  ot 
the  verse  following  that  from  which  my  text  is  taken  : 
"  Aaron  shall  bear  the  judgment  of  the  children  of 
Israel  upon  his  heart  before  the  Lord."  Judgment 
means  a  judicial  sentence ;  in  this  case  a  judicial 
sentence  of  acquittal.  And  that  Aaron  stood  before 
God  in  the  Holy  Place,  ministering  with  this  breast- 
plate upon  his  heart,  is  explained  b}^  the  writer  of 
these  reofulations  to  mean  that  he  carried  there  the 
visible  manifestation  of  Israel's  acquittal,  based  upon 
his  own  sacrificial  function.  Now,  put  that  into  plain 
English,  and  it  is  just  this — Jesus  Christ's  sacrifice 
ensures,  for  all  those  whose  names  are  written  on 
these  gems  on  His  heart,  their  acquittal  in  the  judg- 
ment of  Heaven.  Or,  in  other  words,  the  first  step 
in  the  intercession  of  our  great  High  Priest  is  the 
presenting  before  God  for  ever  and  ever  that  great 
fact  that  He,  the  Sinless,  has  died  for  the  love  of  sin- 
ful men,  and  thereby  has  secured  that  the  judgment 


268  THE  NAMES  ON  AARON'S  BREASTPLATE. 


of  Heaven  on  them  shall  now  be  "  no  condemnation." 
Brethren,  there  is  the  root  of  all  our  hope  in  Christ, 
and  of  all  that  Christ  is  to  individuals  and  to  society 
— the  assurance  that  the  breastplate  of  judgment  is  on 
His  heart,  as  a  sign  that  all  who  trust  Him  are 
acquitted  by  the  tribunal  of  Heaven. 

The  other  side  of  this  Gfreat  continual  act  of  inter- 
cession  is  set  forth  by  the  other  symbol — the  names 
written  on  the  shoulders,  the  seat  of  power.     There  is 
a  beautiful  parallel,  which  yet  at  first  sight  does  not 
seem  to  be  one,  to  the  thought  that  lies  here  in  the 
Book  of  the  Prophet  Isaiah,  where,  addressing  the 
restored  and  perfected  Israel,  he  says,  speaking  in  the 
person    of    Jehovah :    "  I    have    graven    thee    upon 
the  palms  of  My  hands."     That  has  precisely  the  same 
meaning  that  I  take  to  be  conveyed  by  this  symbol  in 
the  text.     The  names  of  the  tribes  are  written  on  His 
shoulders ;    and   not   until   that   arm   is   wearied   or 
palsied,  not  till  that  strong  hand  forgets  its  cunning, 
shall  our  defence  fail.      If  our  names  are  thus  written 
on  the  seat  of  power,  that  means  that  all  the  Divine 
authority  and  omnipotence  which  Jesus  Christ,  the 
Eternal  Son  of  the  Father,  wields  in  His  state  of  Royal 
glory,  are  exercised  on  behalf  of,  or  at  all  events  on 
the  side  of,  those  whose  names  He  thus  bears  upon 
His  shoulders.     That  is  the  guarantee  for  each  of  us 
that  our  hands  shall  be   made  strong,  according  to 
the  ancient  prophetic  blessing,  "  by  the  hands  of  the 
mighty  God  of  Jacob."     Just  as  a  father  or  a  mother 
will  take  their  child's  little  tremulous  hand  in  theirs 
and  hold  it,  that  it  may  be  strengthened  for  some 
small  task  beyond  its  unbacked,  uninvigorated  power  ; 


THE  NAMES  OX  AARON'S  BREASTPLATE.  269 


SO  Jesus  Christ  will  give  us  strength  within,  as  well 
as  will  order  the  march  of  His  Providence  and  send 
the  gift  of  His  Spirit,  for  the  succour  and  the 
strengthening  of  all  whose  names  are  written  on  His 
ephod.  He  has  gone  within  the  veil.  He  has  left  us 
heavy  tasks,  but  our  names  are  on  His  shoulders,  and 
we  can  do  all  things  in  Christ  that  strengtheneth  us. 

III. — Still  further,  this  symbol  suggests  to  us  the 
depth  and  reality  of  Christ's  sympathy.  The  heart  is, 
in  our  language,  the  seat  of  love.  It  is  not  so  in  the 
Old  Testament.  Affection  is  generally  allocated  to 
another  part  of  the  frame ;  but  here  the  heart  stands 
for  the  organ  of  care,  of  thought,  of  interest — and,  we 
may  say,  of  affection.  For,  according  to  the  Old 
Testament  view  of  the  relation  between  man's  body 
and  man's  soul,  the  very  seat  and  centre  of  the  indi- 
vidual life  is  in  the  heart.  I  suppose  that  was  because 
they  knew  that,  somehow  or  other,  the  blood  came 
thence.  Be  that  as  it  may,  the  thought  is  clear 
throuQfhout  all  the  Old  Testament.  The  heart  is  the 
man ;  and  the  man  is  the  heart.  And  so,  if  Jesus 
bears  our  names  upon  His  heart,  that  does  not  express 
merely  representation  nor  merely  intercession,  but  it 
expresses  also  personal  regard,  individualising  know- 
ledge. For  Aaron  wore  not  one  great  jewel  with 
"  Israel "  written  on  it,  but  twelve  little  ones,  with 
"Dan,"  "Benjamin,"  and  "Ephraim,"  and  all  the  rest 
of  them,  each  on  his  o^vn  gem. 

So,  we  can  say :  "  Such  a  High  Priest  became  us, 
who  could  have  compassion  upon  the  ignorant,  and 
upon  them  that  are  out  of  the  way  " ;  and  we  can  fall 
back  on  that  old-fashioned  but  inexhaustible  source 


270  THE  NAMES  ON  AARON'S  BREASTPLATE. 

of  consolation  and  strength :  "  In  all  their  affliction 
He  was  afflicted " ;  and  though  the  noise  of  the 
tempests  which  toss  us  can  scarcely  be  supposed  to 
penetrate  into  the  veiled  place  where  He  dwells  on 
high,  yet  Ave  may  be  sure — and  take  all  the  peace  and 
consolation  and  encouragement  out  of  it  that  it  is 
meant  to  give  us — that  "  we  have  not  a  High  Priest 
that  cannot  be  touched  with  a  feeling  of  our  in- 
firmities," but  Himself,  having  known  miseries,  "is 
able  to  succour  them  that  are  tempted."  Our  names 
are  on  Christ's  heart. 

IV. — Then,  lastly,  we  have  here  a  suggestion  of  how 
precious  to  Aaron  Israel  is.  Jewels  were  chosen 
to  symbolise  the  tribes.  Bits  of  tin,  potsherds,  or 
anything  else  that  one  could  have  scratched  letters 
upon  would  have  done  quite  as  well.  But  "the 
precious  things  of  the  everlasting  mountains"  were 
chosen  to  bear  the  dear  names.  "  The  Lord's  portion 
is  His  people  " ;  and  precious  in  the  eyes  of  Christ 
are  the  souls  for  Avhich  He  has  given  so  much.  They 
are  not  only  precious,  but  lustrous,  flashing  back  the 
light  in  various  colours  indeed,  according  to  their 
various  laws  of  crystallisation,  but  all  receptive  of  it 
and  all  reflective  of  it.  I  said  that  the  names  on  the 
breastplate  of  judgment  expressed  the  acquittal  and 
acceptance  of  Israel.  But  does  Christ's  work  for  us 
stop  with  simple  acquittal  ?  Oh  no  !  "  Whom  He 
justified  them  He  also  glorified."  And  if  our  souls 
are  "  bound  in  the  bundle  of  life,"  and  our  names  are 
written  on  the  heart  of  the  Christ,  be  sure  that  mere 
forgiveness  and  acquittal  is  the  least  of  the  blessings 
which  He  intends  to  give,  and  that  He  will  not  be 


THE  NAMES  ON  AARON'S  BREASTPLA  TE.         271 


satisfied  until  in  all  our  nature  we  receive  and  flash 
back  the  light  of  His  own  glory. 

It  is  very  significant  in  this  aspect  that  the  names 
of  the  twelve  tribes  are  described  as  being  written  on 
the  precious  stones  which  make  the  walls  of  the  New 
Jerusalem.  Thus  borne  on  Christ's  heart  whilst  He 
is  within  the  veil  and  we  are  in  the  outer  courts,  we 
may  hope  to  be  carried  by  His  sustaining  and  perfect- 
ing hand  into  the  glories,  and  be  made  participant  of 
the  glories.  Let  us  see  to  it  that  we  write  His  name 
on  our  hearts,  on  their  cares,  their  thought,  their 
love,  and  on  our  hands,  on  their  toiling  and  their 
possessing;  and  then,  God  helping  us,  and  Christ 
dwelhng  in  us,  we  shall  come  to  the  blessed  state  ot 
those  who  serve  Him,  and  bear  His  name  flaming 
conspicuous  for  ever  on  their  foreheads. 


XXVII. 

ZTbrce  Snecriptions  wttb  one  fIDeaning* 

^'  Thou  shalt  make  a  plate  of  pure  gold,  and  grave  upon  it,    .    . 

'  Holiness  to  the  Lord.'  "— ExODU6  xxviii.  3(3. 
"  In  that  day  there  shall  be  upon  the  bells  of  the  horses,  '  Holiness 

unto  the  Lord.'" — Zech.  xiv.  20. 
"  His  name  shall  be  in  their  foreheads." — Rev.  xxii.  4. 

OU  will  have  perceived  my  purpose  in 
putting  these  three  widely  separated 
texts  together.  They  all  speak  of 
inscriptions,  and  they  are  all  obviously 
connected  with  each  other.  The  hrst 
of  them  comes  from  the  ancient  times  of  the  institu- 
tion of  the  ceremonial  ritual,  and  describes  a  part  of 
the  high  priest's  official  dress.  In  his  mitre  Avas  a 
thin  plate  of  gold  on  which  was  written,  "  Holiness  to 
the  Lord."  The  second  of  them  comes  from  almost 
the  last  portion  recorded  of  the  history  of  Israel  in  the 
Old  Testament,  and  is  from  the  words  of  the  great 
Prophet  of  the  Kestoration — his  ideal  presentation  of 
the  Messianic  period,  in  which  he  recognises  as  one 
feature,  that  the  inscription  on  the  mitre  of  the  high 
priest  shall  be  written  on  "  the  bells  of  the  horses." 
And  the  last  of  them  is  from  the  closing  vision  of  the 
celestial  kingdom,  the  heavenly  and  perfected  form  of 


THREE  INSOIIIPTIONS  WITH  ONE  MEANING.      273 


the  Christian  Church.  John,  probably  remembering 
the  high  priest  and  his  mitre,  with  its  inscription  upon 
the  forehead,  says,  "  His  servants  shall  do  Him  priestly 
service " — for  that  is  the  meaning  of  the  Avord 
inadequatel}^  translated  "  serve  Him  " — "  and  see  His 
face,  and  His  name  shall  be  in  their  foreheads." 

Three  things,  then — the  priest's  mitre,  the  horses' 
bells,  the  foreheads  of  the  perfected  saints — present 
three  aspects  of  the  C-hristian  thought  of  holiness. 
Take  them  one  by  one. 

I. — The  priest's  mitre. 

The  high  priest  was  the  official  representative  of 
the  nation.     He  stood  before  God  as  the  embodied 
and  personified  Israel.     For  the  purposes  of  worship 
Israel  was  the  high  priest,  and  the  high  priest  was 
Israel.     And  so,  on  his  forehead,  not  to  distinguish 
him  from  the  rest  of  the  people,  but  to  include  all  the 
people  in  his  consecration,  shone  a  golden  plate  with 
the   motto,   "  Holiness   to    the    Lord."      So,   at    the 
beginning,  there  stands  a  protest  against  all  notions 
that  make  "  saint "  the  designation  of  any  abnormal 
or  exceptional  sanctity,  and  confine  the  name  to  the 
members  of  any  selected  aristocracy  of  devoutness  and 
goodness.     All  Christian  men,  ex  officio,  by  the  very 
fact  of  their  Christianity,  are  saints,  in  the  true  sense 
of  the  word.     And  the  representative  of  the  whole  ot 
Israel  stood  there  before  God,  with  this  inscription 
blazing  on  his  forehead,  as  a  witness  that,  whatsoever 
holiness  may  be,  it  belongs  to  every  member  of  the 
true  Israel. 

And  what  is  it  ?     It  is  a  very  unfortunate  thing — 
indicating  superficiality  of  thought — that  the  modern 

18 


274        THREE  INSCRIPTIONS   WITH  ONE  MEANING. 


popular  notion  of  "  holiness  "  identifies  it  with  purity, 
righteousness,  moral  perfection.  Now  that  idea  is  in 
it,  but  is  not  the  whole  of  it.  For,  not  to  spend 
time  upon  mere  remarks  on  words,  the  meaning  of 
the  word  thus  rendered  is  in  Hebrew,  as  Avell  as  in 
Greek  and  in  our  own  English,  one  and  the  same. 
The  root-meaning  is  "  separated,"  "  set  apart,"  and  the 
word  expresses  primarily,  not  moral  character,  but 
relation  to  God.  That  makes  all  the  difference  ;  and 
it  incalculabl}^  deepens  the  conception,  as  well  as  puts 
us  on  the  right  track  for  understanding  the  only 
possible  means  by  which  there  can  ever  be  realised 
that  moral  perfection  and  excellence  Avhich  has  un- 
fortunately monopolised  the  meaning  of  the  word  in 
most  people's  minds.  The  first  thought  is  "  set  apart 
to  God."     That  is  holiness,  in  its  root  and  germ. 

And  how  can  we  be  set  apart  for  God  ?  You  may 
devote  a  dead  thing  for  certain  uses  easily  enough. 
How  can  a  man  be  separated  and  laid  aside  ? 

Well,  there  is  only  one  way,  brethren,  and  that  is  by 
self- surrender.  "  Yield  yourselves  to  God  "  is  but  the 
other  side,  or,  rather,  the  practical  shape,  of  the  Old 
and  the  New  Testament  doctrine  of  holiness.  A  man 
becomes  God's  when  he  says,  "Lord,  take  me  and 
mould  me,  and  fill  me  and  cleanse  me,  and  do  with 
me  what  Thou  wilt."  In  that  self-surrender,  which  is 
the  tap-root  of  all  holiness,  the  first  and  foremost 
thing  to  be  offered  is  that  most  obstinate  of  all,  the 
will  that  is  in  us.  And  when  we  yield  our  wills  in 
submission  both  to  commandments  and  providences, 
both  to  gifts  and  to  withdrawals,  both  to  gains  and  to 
losses,  both  to  joys  and  to  sorrows,  then  we  begin  to 


THREE  INSCRIPTIONS  WITH  ONE  MEANING.      275 


write  upon  our  foreheads  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord." 
And  when  we  go  on  to  yield  our  hearts  to  Him,  by 
enshrining  Him  sole  and  sovereign  in  their  innermost 
chamber,  and  turning  to  Him  the  whole  current  of 
our  lives  and  desires,  and  hopes  and  confidences, 
which  we  are  so  apt  to  allow  to  run  to  waste  and  be 
sucked  up  in  the  desert  sands  of  the  world,  then  we 
write  more  of  that  inscription.  And  when  we  till  our 
minds  with  joyful  submission  to  His  truth,  and  occupy 
our  thoughts  with  His  mighty  name  and  His  great 
revelation,  and  carry  Him  with  us  in  the  hidden 
corners  of  our  consciousness,  even  whilst  we  are  busy 
about  daily  work,  then  we  add  further  letters  to  it. 
And  when  the  submissive  will,  and  the  devoted  heart, 
and  the  occupied  thoughts  are  fully  expressed  in  daily 
life  and  its  various  external  duties,  then  the  writing  is 
complete.  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord "  is  self-surrender 
of  will,  and  heart,  and  mind,  and  everything.  And 
that  surrender  is  of  the  very  essence  of  Christianity. 

What  is  a  saint  ?  Some  man  or  woman  that,  has 
practised  unheard-of  austerities  ?  Somebody  that  has 
lived  an  isolated  and  self-regarding  life  in  convent  or 
monastery  or  desert  ;  Xo  !  a  man  or  woman  in  the 
world  who,  moved  by  the  mercies  of  God,  yields  self 
to  God  as  a  living  sacrifice. 

So  the  New  Testament  writers  never  hesitate  to 
speak  even  of  such  very  imperfect  Christians  as  were 
found  in  abundance  in  churches  like  Corinth  and 
Galatia  as  being  all  "  saints,"  every  man  of  them. 
That  is  not  because  the  writers  were  minimising  their 
defects,  or  idealising  their  persons,  but  because,  if 
they  are  Christians  at  all,  they  are  saints  ;  seeing  that 

18* 


276       THREE  INSGllIPTIONS  Wl  TH  ONE  MEANING. 


no  man  is  a  Christian  who  has  not  been  drawn  by 
Christ's  great  sacritice  for  him  to  yield  himself  a 
sacrifice  for  Christ. 

Of  course  that  intrusive  idea  which  has,  in  popular 
apprehension,  so  swallowed  up  the  notion  of  holiness 
— viz.,  that  of  perfection  of  moral  character  or 
conduct  —  is  included  in  this  other,  or  rather  i& 
developed  from  it.  Because  the  true  way  to  conquer 
self  is  to  surrender  self;  and  the  more  entire  our 
giving  up  of  ourselves,  the  more  certainly  shall  we 
receive  ourselves  back  again  from  His  hands.  "  By 
the  mercies  of  God,  I  beseech  you,  yield  yourselves 
livir.Qf  sacrifices." 

II. — I  come  to  my  next  text — the  horses'  bells. 

Zechariali  has  a  vision  of  the  ideal  Messianic  times, 
and,  of  course,  as  must  necessarily  be  the  case,  his 
picture  is  painted  with  colours  laid  upon  his  palette 
by  his  experience,  and  he  depicts  that  distant  future 
in  the  guise  suggested  to  him  by  what  he  saw  around 
him.  So  we  have  to  disentangle  from  his  words  the 
sentiment  which  he  expresses,  and  to  recognise  the 
symbolic  way  in  which  he  puts  it.  His  thought  is 
this.  The  inscription  of  the  high  priest's  mitre  shall 
be  written  on  the  bells  which  ornament  the  harness 
of  the  horses,  which  in  Israel  were  never  used  as 
with  us,  but  only  either  for  war  or  for  pomp  and 
display,  and  the  use  of  Avhich  was  alwaj's  regarded 
with  a  certain  kind  of  doubt  and  suspicion.  Even 
these  shall  be  consecrated  in  that  far-off  day. 

And  then  he  goes  on  with  variations  on  the  same 
air,  "  In  that  day  there  shall  be  upon  the  bells  of  the 
horses,   '  Holiness   unto   the   Lord,' "  and  adds   that 


THREE  IXSCRIPTIONS  WITH  OXE  MEANING.       '277 


"the  pots  in  the  Lord's  house" — the  humble  vessels  that 
were  used  for  the  most  ordinary  parts  of  the  Temple 
services — "  shall  be  like  the  bowls  before  the  altar," 
into  which  the  sacred  blood  of  the  offerings  was 
poured.  The  most  external  and  secular  thing  bear- 
ing upon  religion  shall  be  as  sacred  as  the  sacredest. 
But  that  is  not  all.  "  Yea  !  every  pot  in  Jerusalem 
and  in  Judah  shall  be  holiness  unto  the  Lord  of 
hosts,  and  all  they  that  sacrifice  shall  come  and  take 
of  them,"  and  put  their  offerings  therein.  That  is  to 
say,  the  coarse  pottery  vessels  that  were  in  every 
poverty-stricken  house  in  the  city  shall  be  elevated 
to  the  rank  of  the  sacred  vessels  of  the  Temple. 
Domestic  life  with  all  its  secularities  shall  be  hallowed. 
The  kitchens  of  Jerusalem  shall  be  as  truly  places 
of  worship  as  is  the  inner  shrine  of  the  Most  High. 

On  the  whole,  the  prophet's  teaching  is  that,  in 
the  ideal  state  of  man  upon  earth,  there  shall  be  an 
entire  abolition  of  the  distinction  between  "  sacred "' 
and  "  secular  "  ;  a  distinction  that  has  wrought  infinite 
mischief  in  the  world,  and  in  the  lives  of  Christian 
people. 

Let  me  translate  these  words  of  our  prophet  into 
English  equivalents.  Every  cup  and  tumbler  in  a 
poor  man's  kitchen  may  be  as  sacred  as  the  Com- 
munion chalice  that  passes  from  lip  to  lip  with  the 
"  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  "  in  it.  Every  common  piece 
of  service  that  we  do,  down  among  the  vulgarities  and 
the  secularities  and  the  meannesses  of  daily  life,  may 
be  lifted  up  to  stand  upon  precisely  the  same  level  as 
the  sacredest  office  that  we  undertake.  The  bells  of 
the    horses    may  jingle    to    the    same   tune   as   the 


278       THREE  INSCRIPTIONS  WITH  ONE  MEANING. 


trumpets  of  the  priests  within  the  shrine,  and  on  all, 
g-reat  and  small,  may  be  written,  "  Holiness  to  the 
Lord," 

But  let  us  remember  that  that  universally  diftused 
sanctity  will  need  to  have  a  centre  of  diffusion,  else 
there  will  be  no  diffusion,  and  that  all  life  will  become 
sacred  when  the  man  that  lives  it  has  "  Holiness  to 
the  Lord  "  written  on  his  forehead,  and  not  else.  If 
that  be  the  inscription  on  the  driver's  heart,  the 
horses  that  he  drives  will  have  it  written  on  their 
bells,  but  they  will  not  have  it  unless  it  be.  Holy  men 
make  all  things  holy.  "To  the  pure  all  things  are 
pure,"  but  unto  them  that  are  unclean  and  disobedient 
there  is  nothing  pure.  Hallow  thyself,  and  all  things 
are  clean  unto  thee. 

III. — And  so  I  come  to  my  third  text — the 
perfected  saints'  foreheads. 

The  connection  betAveen  the  first  and  the  last  of 
these  texts  is  as  plain  and  close  as  between  the  first 
and  the  second.  For  John  in  his  closinof  vision  sj'ives 
emphasis  to  the  priestly  idea  as  designating  in  its 
deepest  relations  the  redeemed  and  perfected  Christian 
Church.  Therefore  he  says,  as  I  have  already  ex- 
plained, "  His  servants  shall  do  Him  priestly  service, 
and  His  name  shall  be  in  their  foreheads."  The  old 
official  dress  of  the  high  priest  comes  into  his  mind, 
and  he  paints  the  future,  just  as  Zechariah  did,  under 
the  forms  of  the  past,  and  sees  before  the  throne  the 
perfected  saints,  each  man  of  them  with  that  inscrip- 
tion clear  and  conspicuous. 

But  there  is  an  advance  in  his  words  which  I  think 
it  is  not  fanciful  to  note.     It  is  only  the  name  that  is 


THREE  INSCRIPTIONS   WITH  ONE  MEANING.      270 

written  in  the  perfected  saint's  forehead.  Not  the 
"  Holiness  unto  the  Lord,"  but  just  tlie  bare  name. 
What  does  that  mean  ?  Well,  it  means  the  same  as 
your  writing  your  name  in  one  of  your  books  does, 
or  as  when  a  man  puts  his  initials  on  the  back  of  his 
oxen,  or  as  the  old  practice  of  branding  the  master's 
mark  upon  the  slave  did.  It  means  absolute  owner- 
ship. 

But  it  means  something  more.  The  name  is  the 
manifested  personality,  the  revealed  God,  or,  as  we 
say  in  an  abstract  way,  the  character  of  God.  That 
name  is  to  be  in  the  foreheads  of  His  perfected 
people.  How  does  it  come  to  be  there  ?  Read  the 
clause  before.  "  His  servants  shall  see  His  face, 
and  His  name  shall  be  in  their  foreheads."  That 
is  to  sa3%  the  perfected  condition  is  not  reached 
by  surrender  only,  but  by  assimilation ;  and  that 
assimilation  comes  by  contemplation.  The  faces  that 
are  turned  to  Him,  and  behold  Him,  are  smitten  with 
the  light  and  shine,  and  those  that  look  upon  them 
see  "as  it  had  been  the  face  of  an  angel,"  as  the 
Sanhedrim  saw  that  of  Stephen,  when  he  beheld  the 
Son  of  Man  standing  at  the  right  hand  of  God. 

My  last  text  is  but  a  picturesque  way  of  saying 
what  the  writer  of  it  says  in  plain  words  when  he 
declares,  "  We  shall  be  like  Him,  for  we  shall  see  Him 
as  He  is."  The  name  is  to  be  "  in  their  foreheads," 
where  ever3^body  can  see  it.  Alas  !  alas  !  it  is  so  hard 
for  us  to  live  out  our  best  selves,  and  to  show  to  the 
world  what  is  in  us.  Cowardice,  sheepishness,  and  a 
hundred  other  reasons  prevent  it.  In  this  poor 
imperfect   state   no   emotion   ever   takes   shape   and 


280       THREE  INSCRIPTIONS  WITH  ONE  MEANING. 


visibility  without  losing  more  or  less  of  its  beauty. 
But  yonder  the  obstructions  to  self-manifestation  will 
be  done  away ;  and  "  when  He  shall  be  manifested,  we 
also  shall  be  manifested  with  Him  in  glory." 

"  Then  shall  the  righteous  blaze  forth  like  the  sun 
in  My  heavenly  Father's  Kingdom."  But  the 
beginning  of  it  all  is  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord  "  written 
on  our  hearts  ;  and  the  end  of  that  is  the  vision  which 
is  impossible  without  holiness,  and  which  leads  on  to 
the  beholder's  perfect  likeness  to  his  Lord. 


XXVIIl. 

Zbe  Meiobt  of  ^anb. 

Saxd   is   weighty." — Pkoverbs  xxxii.   S. 

HIS  Book  of  Proverbs  has  a  very  whole- 
some horror  of  the  character  which  it 
calls  "  a  fool " ;  meaning  thereby,  not 
so  much  intellectual  feebleness  as 
moral  and  religious  obliquity,  which 
are  the  stupidest  things  that  a  man  can  be  guilty  of. 
My  text  comes  from  a  very  picturesque  and  vivid 
description,  by  way  of  comparison,  of  the  fatal  effects 
of  such  a  man's  passion.  The  proverb-maker  com- 
pares two  heavy  things,  stones  and  sand,  and  says 
that  they  are  feathers  in  comparison  with  the  immense 
lead-like  weight  of  such  a  man's  wrath. 

Now  I  have  nothinof  more  to  do  with  the  imme- 
diate  application  of  my  text.  I  want  to  make  a 
parable  out  of  it.  What  is  lighter  than  a  grain  of 
sand  ?  What  is  heavier  than  a  bagful  of  it  ?  As  the 
grains  fall  one  by  one,  how  easily  they  can  be  blown 
away  !  Let  them  gather,  and  they  bury  temples,  and 
<3rush  the  solid  masonry  of  pyramids.  "  Sand  is 
weighty."  The  accumulation  of  hght  things  is  over- 
whelmingly ponderous.     Are  there  any  such  things 


282  THE  WEIGHT  OF  SAND. 


in  our  lives  ?  If  there  are,  what  ought  we  to  do  ?  So 
3-011  get  the  point  of  view  from  which  I  want  to  look 
at  the  words  this  evening. 

I. — The  first  suggestion  that  I  make  is  that  they 
remind  us  of  the  supreme  importance  of  trifles. 

If  trivial  acts  are  unimportant,  what  signifies  the 
life  of  man  ?  For  ninety -nine  and  a  half  per  cent,  of 
every  man's  life  is  made  up  of  these  light  nothings ; 
and  unless  there  is  potential  greatness  in  them,  and 
they  are  of  importance,  then  life  is  all  "  a  tale  told  by 
an  idiot,  full  of  sound  and  fury,  signifying  nothing." 
Small  things  make  life ;  and  if  they  are  small,  then 
it  is. 

But  remember,  too,  that  the  supreme  importance  of 
so-called  trivial  actions  is  seen  in  this,  that  there  may 
be  every  bit  as  much  of  the  noblest  things  that  belong" 
to  humanity  condensed  in,  and  brought  to  bear  upon, 
the  veriest  trifle  that  a  man  can  do,  as  on  the  greatest 
things  that  he  can  perform.  We  are  ver}-  poor  judges 
of  what  is  great  and  what  is  little.  We  have  a  very 
vulgar  estimate  that  noise  and  notoriety  and  the 
securinof  of,  not  (ireat  but  "  bisf,"  results  of  a  material 
kind  make  the  deeds,  by  which  they  are  secured,  great 
ones.  And  we  think  that  it  is  the  quiet  things,  those 
that  do  not  tell  outside  at  all,  that  are  the  small  ones. 

Well!  here  is  a  picture  for  you.  Half  a  dozen 
shabby,  travel-stained  Jews,  sitting  b}'  a  river-side 
upon  the  grass,  talking  to  a  handful  of  Avomen  outside 
the  gates  of  a  great  city.  Years  before  that,  there  had 
been  what  the  world  calls  a  sfreat  event,  almost  on  the 
same  ground — a  sanguinary  fight,  that  had  settled 
the  emperorship  of  the  then  civilised  world,  for  a  time. 


THE  WEIGHT  OF  SAXD.  283 


I  want  to  know  whether  the  first  preaching  of  the 
Gospel  in  Europe  by  the  Apostle  Paul,  or  the  battle 
of  Philippi,  was  the  great  event,  and  which  of  the 
two  was  the  little  one.  I  vote  for  the  Jews  on  the 
grass,  and  let  all  the  noise  of  the  fight,  though  it 
reverberated  through  the  world  for  a  bit,  die  away,  as 
•'  a  little  dust  that  rises  up,  and  is  lightly  laid  again." 
Not  the  noisy  events  are  the  great  ones  ;  and  as 
much  true  greatness  may  be  manifested  in  a  poor 
woman  stitching  in  her  garret  as  in  some  of  the  things 
that  have  rung  through  the  world  and  excited  all 
manner  of  vulgar  applause.  Trifles  may  be,  and  often 
are,  the  great  thinos  in  life. 

And  then  remember,  too,  how  the  most  trivial 
actions  have  a  stranoe  linack  of  all  at  once  leading  on 
to  large  results,  beyond  what  could  have  been  ex- 
pected. A  man  shifts  his  seat  in  a  railway  carriage, 
from  some  passing  whim,  and  five  minutes  afterwards 
there  comes  a  collision,  and  the  bench  where  he  had 
been  sitting  is  splintered  up,  and  the  place  where  he 
is  sitting  is  untouched,  and  the  accidental  move  has 
saved  his  life.  According  to  the  old  story  a  bo3% 
failing  in  applying  for  a  situation,  stoops  down  in  the 
courtyard  and  picks  up  a  pin,  and  the  millionaire 
sees  him  through  the  window,  and  it  makes  his  for- 
tune. We  cannot  tell  what  may  come  of  anything ; 
and  since  we  do  not  know  the  far  end  of  our  deeds, 
let  us  be  quite  sure  that  we  have  got  the  near  end  of 
them  right.  Whatever  may  be  the  issue,  let  us  look 
after  the  motive,  and  then  all  will  be  right.  Small 
seeds  grow  to  be  great  trees,  and  in  this  strange  and 
inexplicable  network  of  things  which  men  call  circum- 


284  THE  WEIGHT  OF  SAND. 


Stances,  and  Christians  call  Providence,  the  only 
thing  certain  is  that  "great"  and  "small"  all  but 
cease  to  be  a  tenable,  and  certainly  altogether  cease  to 
be  an  important,  distinction. 

Then  another  thing  which  I  Avould  have  you  re- 
member is,  that  it  is  these  trivial  actions  which,  in  their 
accumulated   force,  make   character.      Men   are   not 
made   by  crises.      The   crises   reveal  what  we   have 
made  ourselves   by   the   trifles.     The  way  in  which 
we  do  the  little  thing's  forms  the  character  according 
to  which  we  shall  act  when  the  great  things  come. 
If  the  crew  of  a  man-of-war  were  not  exercised  at 
boat  and  fire  drill  during  many  a  calm  day,  when  all 
was  safe,  what  would  become  of  them  when  tempests 
were  raging,  or  flames  breaking  through  the  bulk- 
heads ?     It  is  no  time  to  learn  drill  then.     And  we 
must  make  our  characters  by  the  way  in  which,  day 
out  and  day  in,  we  do  little  things,  and  find  in  them 
fields  for  the  great  virtues  which  will  enable  us  to 
front  the  crises  of  our  fate  unblenchinsf,  and  to  master 
whatsoever  difficulties  come  in  our  path.     Geologists 
nowadays  distrust,  for  the  most  part,  theories  which 
have  to  invoke  great  forces  in  order  to  mould  the  face 
of  a  country.     They  tell  us  that  the  valley,  with  its 
deep  sides  and  wide  opening  to  the  sky,  may  have 
been  made  by  the  slow  operation  of  a  tiny  brooklet 
that  trickles  now  down  at  its  base,  and  by  erosion  of 
the  atmosphere.     So  we  shape  ourselves — and  that  is 
a  great  thing — by  the  way  we  do  small  things. 

Therefore,  I  say  to  you,  dear  friends,  think  solemnly 
and  reverently  of  this  awful  life  of  ours.  Clear  your 
minds  of  the  notion  that  anything  is  small  which 


THE  ir EIGHT  OF  SAND.  235 

offers  to  you  the  alternative  of  being  done  in  a  right 
way  or  in  a  wrong;  and  recognise  this  as  a  fact — 
"  sand  is  weighty,"  trifles  are  of  supreme  importance. 

II. — Now,  secondly,  let  me  ask  you  to  take  this 
saying  as  suggesting  the  overwhelming  weight  of 
small  sins. 

That  is  only  an  application  in  one  direction  of  the 
general  principle  that  I  have  been  trying  to  lay 
down  ;  but  it  is  one  of  such  great  importance  that  I 
wish  to  deal  with  it  separately.  And  my  point  is 
this,  that  the  accumulated  pressure  upon  a  man  of  a 
multitude  of  perfectly  trivial  faults  and  transgressions 
makes  up  a  tremendous  aggregate  that  weighs  upon 
him  with  awful  ponderousness. 

Let  me  remind  you,  to  begin  with,  that,  properly 
speaking,  the  words  "great"  and  "small"  should  not 
be  applied  in  reference  to  things  about  which  "right " 
or  "  wrong  "  are  the  proper  words  to  employ.  Or,  to 
put  it  into  plainer  language,  it  is  as  absurd  to  talk 
about  the  "  size  "  of  a  sin,  as  it  is  to  take  the  super- 
ficial area  of  a  picture  as  a  test  of  its  greatness.  Tlie 
magnitude  of  a  transgression  does  not  depend  on  the 
o-reatness  of  the  act  which  transgresses — according  to 
human  standards — but  on  the  intensity  with  which 
the  sinful  element  is  working  in  it.  For  acts  make 
crimes,  but  motives  make  sins.  If  you  take  a  bit  of 
prussic  acid,  and  bruise  it  down,  every  little  micro- 
scopic fragment  will  have  the  poisonous  principle  in 
it ;  and  it  is  very  irrelevant  to  ask  Avhether  it  is  as  big  as 
a  mountain  or  small  as  a  grain  of  dust,  it  is  poison  all 
the  same.  So  to  talk  about  magnitude,  in  regard  to 
sins,  is  rather  to  introduce  a  foreign  consideration. 


•286  THE  WEIGHT  OF  SAND. 


But  still,  recognising  that  there  is  a  reality  in  the 
distinction  that  people  make  between  great  sins  and 
small  ones,  though  it  is  a  superficial  distinction,  and 
does  not  {^o  down  to  the  bottom  of  things,  let  us  deal 
with  it  now. 

I  say,  then,  that  small  sins,  by  reason  of  their 
numerousness,  have  a  terrible  accumulative  power. 
They  are  like  the  green  flies  on  our  rose  bushes,  or 
the  microbes  that  our  medical  friends  talk  so  much 
about  nowadays.  Like  them,  their  power  of  mischief 
does  not  in  the  least  degree  depend  on  their  magnitude, 
and,  like  them,  they  have  a  tremendous  capacity  of 
reproduction.  It  would  be  easier  lo  find  a  man  that 
had  not  done  an}-  one  sin  than  to  find  out  a  man  that 
had  only  done  it  once.  And  it  would  be  easier  to  find  a 
man  that  had  done  no  evil  than  a  man  who  had  not 
been  obliged  to  make  the  second  edition  of  his  sin  an 
enlarged  one.  For  this  is  the  present  Nemesis  of  all 
evil,  that  it  requires  repetition,  partly  to  still  con- 
science, partly  to  satisfy  excited  tastes  and  desires  ; 
so  that  animal  indulgence  in  drink  and  the  like  is  a 
type  of  what  goes  on  in  the  inner  life  of  every  man, 
in  so  far  as  the  second  dose  has  to  be  stronsrer  than 

O 

the  first  in  order  to  produce  an  equivalent  effect ;  and 
so  on  ad  infinitum. 

And  then  remember  that  all  our  evil  doings,  how- 
ever  insignificant  they  may  be,  have  a  strange  affinity 
with  one  another,  so  that  you  will  find  that  to  go 
wrong  in  one  direction  almost  inevitably  leads  to  a 
whole  series  of  consequential  transgressions  of  one 
sort  or  another.  You  remember  the  old  story  about 
the  soldier  that  Avas  smuggled  into  a  fortress  con- 


THE  WEIGHT  OF  SAND.  287 


cealed  in  a  hay  cart,  and  opened  the  gates  of  a  virgin 
citadel  to  his  allies  outside.  Every  evil  thing,  great 
or  small,  that  we  admit  into  our  lives,  still  more  into 
our  hearts,  is  charged  with  the  same  errand  as  he 
had : — "  Set  wide  the  door  when  you  are  inside,  and  let 
us  all  come  in  after  you."  "  He  taketh  with  him 
seven  other  spirits  worse  than  himself,  and  they 
dwell  there."  "None  of  them,"  says  one  of  the 
prophets,  describing  the  doleful  creatures  that  haunt 
the  ruins  of  a  deserted  city,  "shall  by  any  means 
want  its  mate,"  and  the  satyrs  of  the  islands  and  of 
the  woods  join  together,  and  hold  high  carnival  in 
the  city.  And  so,  brethren,  our  little  transgressions 
open  the  door  for  great  ones,  and  every  sin  makes 
us  more  accessible  to  the  assaults  of  every  other. 

So  let  me  remind  you  how  here,  in  these  little 
unnumbered  acts  of  trivial  transgression  which 
scarcely  produce  any  effect  on  conscience  or  on 
memory,  but  make  up  so  large  a  portion  of  so  many 
of  our  lives,  lies  one  of  the  most  powerful  instru- 
ments for  making  us  what  we  are.  If  we  indulsfe  in 
slight  acts  of  transgression,  be  sure  of  this,  that  we 
shall  pass  from  them  to  far  greater  ones.  For  one 
man  that  leaps  or  falls  all  at  once  into  sin  which  the 
world  calls  gross,  there  are  a  thousand  that  slide  into 
it.  The  storm  only  blows  down  the  trees  whose 
hearts  have  been  eaten  out  and  their  roots  loosened. 
And  when  you  see  a  man  having  a  reputation  for 
wisdom  and  honour  all  at  once  coming  crash  down 
and  disclosing  his  baseness,  be  sure  that  he  began 
with  small  deflections  from  the  path  of  right.  The 
evil  works  underground ;    and  if   we  yield   to   little 


2S8  THE  WEIGHT  OF  SAND. 

temptations,  when  great  ones  come  we  shall  fall  their 
victims. 

Let  me  remind  you,  too,  that  there  is  another  sense 
in  which  "  sand  is  weighty."  You  may  as  well  be 
crushed  under  a  sandhill  as  under  a  mountain  of 
marble.  It  matters  not  which.  The  accumulated 
weight  of  the  one  is  as  great  as  that  of  the  other. 
And  I  wish  to  lay  upon  the  consciences  of  all  that 
are  listening  to  me  now  this  thought,  that  an  over- 
whelminof  weis^ht  of  guilt  results  from  the  accumula- 
tion  of  little  sins.  Dear  friends,  I  do  not  desire  to 
preach  a  gospel  of  fear,  but  I  cannot  help  feeling  that, 
very  largely,  in  this  day,  the  ministration  of  the 
Christian  Church  is  defective  in  that  it  does  not  give 
sufficient,  though  sad  and  sympathetic,  prominence 
to  the  plain  teaching  of  Christ  and  of  the  New 
Testament  as  to  future  retribution  for  present  sin. 
We  shall  "  every  one  of  us  give  account  of  him- 
self to  God "  ;  and  if  the  account  is  long  enough  it 
will  foot  up  to  an  enormous  sum,  though  each  item 
may  be  only  halfpence.  The  weight  of  a  lifetime  of 
little  sins  will  be  enough  to  crush  a  man  down  with 
guilt  and  responsibility  when  he  stands  before  that 
Judge.  That  is  all  true,  and  you  know  it,  and  I 
beseech  you,  take  it  to  your  hearts,  "  Sand  is  weighty." 
Little  sins  have  to  be  accounted  for,  and  may  crush. 

IIL — And  now,  lastly,  let  me  ask  you  to  consider 
one  or  two  of  the  plain,  practical  issues  of  such 
thoughts  as  these. 

And,  first,  I  would  say  that  these  considerations  set 
in  a  very  clear  light  the  absolute  necessity  for  all- 
round  and  ever-wakeful  watchfulness  over  ourselves. 


THE  WEIGHT  OF  SAND.  289 

A  man  in  the  tropics  does  not  say,  "  Mosquitoes  are 
so  small  that  it  does  not  matter  if  two  or  three  of 
them  get  inside  my  bed-curtains."    He  takes  care  that 
not  one  is  there  before  he  lays  himself  down  to  sleep. 
There  seems  to  me  nothing  more  sad  than  the  com- 
placent, easy-going  way  in  which  men  allow  them- 
selves to  keep  their  higher  moral  principles  and  their 
more  rigid  self-examination  for  the  "  great  "  things,  as 
they  suppose,  and  let  the  little  things  often  take  care 
of  themselves.     What  would  you  think  of  the  captain 
of  a  steamer  who  in  calm  weather  sailed  by  rule  of 
thumb,   only  getting   out  his   sextant   when   storms 
began  to  blow  ?     And  what  about  a  man  that  lets  the 
myriad  trivialities  that  make  up  a  day  pass  in  and 
out  of  his  heart  as  they  will,  and  never  arrests  any  of 
them   at   the   gate   with    a   "  How    camest   thou   in 
hither  ? "     "  Look  after  the  pence,  and  the  pounds 
will  look  after  themselves."     Look  after  your  trivial 
acts,  and,  take  my  word  for  it,  the  great  ones  will  be 
as  they  ought  to  be. 

Again,  may  not  this  thought  somewhat  take  down 
our  easy-going  and  self-complacent  estimate  of  our- 
selves ?  I  have  no  doubt  that  there  are  a  number  of 
people  in  my  audience  this  evening  who  have  been 
more  or  less  consciously  saying  to  themselves  whilst  I 
have  been  groing  on,  "  What  have  /  to  do  with  all  this 
talk  about  sin,  sin,  sin  ?  I  am  a  decent  kind  of  a 
man.  I  do  all  the  duties  of  my  daily  life,  and  nobod}- 
can  say  that  the  white  of  my  eyes  is  black.  I  have 
done  no  ffreat  transgressions.  What  is  it  all  about  ? 
It  has  nothing  to  do  with  me." 

Well,  my  friend,  it  has  this  to  do  with  you — that  in 

19 


290  THE  WEIGHT  OF  SAND. 

your  life  there  are  a  whole  host  of  things  which  only 
a  very  superficial  estimate  hinders  you  from  recog- 
nising to  be  what  they  are — small  deeds,  but  great 
sins.  Is  it  a  small  thing  to  go,  as  some  of  you  do  go, 
on  from  year  to  year,  with  your  conduct  and  your 
thoughts  and  your  loves  and  your  desires  utterly 
unaffected  by  the  fact  that  there  is  a  God  in  heaven, 
and  that  Jesus  Christ  died  for  you  ?  Is  that  a  small 
thing  ?  It  manifests  itself  in  a  great  many  insignifi- 
cant actions.  That  I  grant  you  ;  and  you  are  a  most 
respectable  man,  and  you  keep  the  Commandments  as 
well  as  you  can.  But  "  the  God  in  whose  hand  thy 
breath  is,  and  whose  are  all  thy  ways,  hast  thou  not 
glorified."     I  say  that  that  is  not  a  small  sin. 

So,  dear  brethren,  I  beseech  you  judge  yourselves 
by  this  standard.  I  charge  none  of  you  with  gross 
iniquities.  I  know  nothing  about  that.  But  I  do 
appeal  to  you  all,  as  I  do  to  myself,  whether  we 
must  not  recognise  the  fact  that  an  accumulated 
multitude  of  transgressions  which  are  only  super- 
ficially small,  in  their  aggregate  weigh  upon  us  with 
"  a  weight  heavy  as  frost,  and  deep  almost  as  life." 

Last  of  all,  this  being  the  case,  should  we  not  all 
turn  ourselves  with  lowly  hearts,  with  recognition 
of  our  transgressions,  acknowledsfing  that  whether  it 
be  five  hundred  or  fifty  pence  that  we  owe,  we  have 
nothing  to  pay,  and  betake  ourselves  to  Him  who 
alone  can  deliver  us  from  the  habit  and  power  of 
these  small  accumulated  faults,  and  who  alone  can 
lift  the  burden  of  guilt  and  responsibility  from  off  our 
shoulders  ?  If  you  irrigate  the  sand  it  becomes  fruit- 
ful soil.     Christ  brinsfs  to  us  the  river  of  the  water  of 


THE  WEIGHT  OF  SAND.  291 


life ;  the  inspiring,  the  quickening,  the  fructifying 
power  of  the  new  Hfe  that  He  bestows,  and  the  sand 
may  become  soil,  and  the  wilderness  blossom  as  the 
rose.  A  heavy  burden  lies  on  our  shoulders.  Ah ! 
yes !  but  "  behold  the  Lamb  of  God  that  beareth 
away  the  sins  of  the  world."  What  was  it  that 
crushed  Him  down  beneath  the  olives  of  Gethsemane  ? 
What  was  it  that  made  Him  cry,  "  My  God  !  why  hast 
Thou  forsaken  Me  ? "  I  know  no  answer  but  one,  for 
which  the  world's  gratitude  is  all  too  small.  "  The 
Lord  hath  laid  on  Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all," 

"  Sand  is  weighty."  Christ  has  borne  the  burden. 
Oast  thy  burden  upon  the  Lord,  and  it  will  drop  from 
your  emancipated  shoulders,  and  they  will  henceforth 
bear  only  the  light  burden  of  His  love. 


19^ 


XXIX. 

Then  Herod  questioned   with    Jesus   in   many   words,   but  He 
answered  him  nothing." — Luke  xxiii.  9. 

r^OUR  Herods  play  their  parts  in  the  New 
Testament  story.  The  first  of  them  is 
the  grim  old  tiger  who  slew  the  infants 
at  Bethlehem,  and  soon  after  died.  This 
Herod  is  the  second — a  cub  of  the 
litter,  with  his  father's  ferocity  and  lust,  but  without 
his  force.  The  third  is  the  Herod  of  the  earlier  part 
of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  a  grandson  of  the  old 
man,  who  dipped  his  hands  in  the  blood  of  one 
apostle,  and  would  fain  have  slain  another.  And  the 
last  is  Herod  Agrippa,  a  son  of  the  third,  who  is  onl}' 
remembered  because  he  once  came  across  Paul's 
path,  and  thought  it  such  a  good  jest  that  anything 
should  be  supposed  capable  of  making  a  Christian  out 
of  Jiim. 

There  is  a  singular  family  likeness  in  the  whole  of 
them,  and  a  very  ugly  likeness  it  is.  This  one  was 
sensual,  cruel,  cunning,  infirm  of  purpose,  capricious 
like  a  child  or  a  savage.  Roman  policy  amused  him 
with  letting  him  play  at  being  a  ruler,  but  kept  him 


A  SOUUS  TRAGEDY.  293 

well  in  hand.  And  I  suppose  he  Avas  made  a  worse 
man  by  the  difficulties  of  his  position  as  a  subject- 
prince. 

Xow  I  wish  to  put  together  the  various  incidents  in 
this  man's  life  recorded  in  the  Gospels,  and  try  to 
gather  some  lessons  from  them  for  you. 

I. — First,  I  take  him  as  an  example  of  half-and-half 
convictions,  and  of  the  inner  discord  that  comes  from 
these. 

I  do  not  need  to  remind  you  of  the  shameful 
story  of  his  repudiation  of  his  own  wife,  and  of  his 
disgusting  alliance  with  the  wife  of  his  half-brother, 
who  was  herself  his  niece.  She  was  the  stronger 
spirit,  a  Biblical  Lady  Macbeth,  the  Jezebel  to  this 
Ahab ;  and,  to  complete  the  parallel,  Elijah  was 
not  far  away.  John  the  Baptist's  outspoken  remon- 
strances of  course  made  an  implacable  enemy  of 
Herodias,  who  did  all  she  could  to  compass  his  death, 
but  was"  unable  to  manage  that,  though  she  secured 
his  imprisonment.  The  reason  for  her  inability  is 
given  by  the  Evangelist  Mark,  in  words  which  are 
very  inadequately  rendered  by  our  Authorised 
Version,  but  may  be  found  more  correctly  translated 
in  the  Revised  Version.  It  is  there  said  that  King 
"  Herod  feared  John " — the  gaoler  afraid  of  his 
prisoner!  "  Knowing  that  he  was  a  just  man  and  a 
holy  " — goodness  is  awful.  The  worst  men  know  it, 
and  it  extorts  respect.  "  And  kept  him  safe  " — from 
Herodias,  that  is.  "  And  when  he  heard  him  he  was 
perplexed " — drawn  this  way  and  that  way  by  these 
two  magnets,  alternately  veering  to  lust  and  to 
purity,  hesitating  between  the  kisses  of  the  beautiful 


294  A  sours  TRAGEDY. 

temptress  at  his  side  and  the  words  of  the  prophet. 
And  yet,  with  strange  inconsistency,  in  all  his  vacil- 
lations "  he  heard  him  gladly  " ;  for  his  better  part 
approved  the  nobler  voice.  And  so  he  staggered  on, 
having  religion  enough  to  spoil  some  of  his  sinful 
delights,  but  not  enough  to  make  him  shake  them  oft'. 

That  is  a  picture  for  which  in  its  essence  many  a 
man  and  woman  in  this  congregation  might  have 
sat.  For  I  suppose  that  there  is  nothing  more 
common  than  these  half-and-half  convictions  Avhich, 
like  inefficient  bullets,  get  part  way  through  the 
armoured  shell  of  a  ship,  and  there  stick  harmless- 
Many  of  us  have  the  clearest  convictions  in  our  un- 
derstandings, which  have  never  penetrated  to  that 
innermost  chamber  of  all,  where  the  will  sits  sovereign. 
It  is  so  about  little  things,  it  is  so  about  great  ones. 
Nothing  is  more  common  than  that  a  man  shall  know 
perfectly  well  that  some  possibly  trivial  habit  stands 
in  the  way  of  something  that  it  is  his  interest  or  his 
duty  to  pursue ;  but  the  knowledge  lies  inoperative  in 
the  outermost  part  of  him.  It  is  so  in  regard  to 
graver  things.  The  majority  of  the  slaves  of  any  vice 
whatsoever  know  perfectly  well  that  they  ought  to 
give  it  up,  and  yet  nothing  comes  of  the  conviction. 

"  He  was  much  perplexed."  What  a  picture  that 
is  of  the  state  of  unrest  and  conflict  into  which  such 
half-and-half  impressions  of  duty  cast  a  man.  Such 
a  one  is  like  a  vessel  with  its  head  now  east,  now 
west,  because  there  is  some  weak  or  ignorant  steers- 
man  at  the  helm.  I  know  nothing  more  sure  to 
produce  inward  unrest  and  disturbance  and  deso- 
lation than  that  a  man's  knowledge  of  duty  should 


A  sours  TRAGEDY.  295 


be  clear,  and  his  obedience  to  that  knowledge  partial. 
If  we  have  John  down  in  the  dungeon,  if  conscience 
is  not  allowed  to  be  master,  there  may  be  feasting  and 
revelry  going  on  above,  but  the  stern  voice  will  come 
up  through  the  grating  no^v  and  then,  and  that  will 
spoil  all  the  laughter,  "  \\'hen  he  heard  him,  he  was 
much  perplexed." 

The  reason  for  these  imperfect  convictions  is 
generally  found,  as  Herod  shows  us,  in  the  unwilling- 
ness to  get  rid  of  something  which  has  fastened  its 
claws  around  us,  and  which  we  love  too  well,  although 
we  know  it  is  a  serpent,  to  shake  oft".  If  Herod  had 
once  been  man  enough  to  screw  himself  up,  and  say 
to  Herodias.  "  Now  you  pack,  and  go  about  your 
business  ! "  everything  else  would  have  come  right  in 
time.  But  he  could  not  make  up  his  mind  to  sacrifice 
the  honeyed  poison,  and  so  everything  went  wrong  in 
time.  M}'  friend,  how  many  of  us  are  prevented  from 
following  out  our  clearest  convictions  because  they 
demand  a  sacrifice  ?  "  If  thine  eye  cause  thee  to 
stumble,  pluck  it  out,  and  cast  it  from  thee.  It  is 
better  for  thee." 

And  then,  further,  note  that  these  irresolute  con- 
victions and  shirking  of  plain  duty  are  not  atoned  for 
by,  though  they  are  often  accompanied  with,  a  strange 
acquiescence  in,  and  approval  of,  God's  truth.  Herod 
fancied,  inconsistently  enough,  that  he  was  making 
some  kind  of  compensation  for  disobedience  to  the 
message,  by  liking  to  listen  to  the  messenger.  And 
there  are  a  great  man}-  of  us,  all  whose  Christianity 
consists  in  giving  ear  to  the  words  which  we  never 
think  of  obeying.     I  wonder  how  many  of  you  there 


296  A  sours  TRAGEDY. 


are  this  evening  who  fancy  that  you  have  no  more 
concern  with  this  sermon  of  mine  than  approving  or 
disapproving  of  it,  as  the  case  may  be;  and  how  many 
of  us  there  are  who,  all  our  lives  long,  have  substi- 
tuted criticism  of  the  Gospel  as  ministered  by  us  poor 
preachers — be  it  approving  or  disapproving  criticism — 
for  obedience  to  the  Christ  and  acceptance  of  His 
salvation. 

II. — We  see  in  Herod  an  example  of  the  utter 
powerlessness  of  such  partial  convictions  and  reforma- 
tion. 

I  am  not  going  to  tell  over  again  the  ghastly  story 
of  John's  death,  which  no  other  words  than  the 
Evangelist's  can  tell  half  so  powerfully.  I  need  only 
remind  you  of  the  degradation  of  the  poor  child 
Salome  to  the  position  of  a  dancing  girl,  the  half- 
tipsy  generosity  of  the  excited  monarch,  the  grim 
request  from  lips  so  young  and  still  reddened  by  the 
excitement  of  the  dance,  Herod's  unavailing  sorrow, 
his  fantastic  sense  of  honour  which  scrupled  to  break 
a  wicked  promise,  but  did  not  scruple  to  kill  a 
righteous  man,  and  the  ghastly  picture  of  the  girl 
carrying  the  bleeding  head— such  a  gift : — to  her 
mother. 

But  out  of  all  that  jumble  of  lust  and  blood  I  desire 
to  gather  one  lesson.  There  you  have — in  an  extreme 
form,  it  is  true — a  tremendous  illustration  of  what 
half-and-half  convictions  may  come  to.  Whether 
or  no  we  ever  get  anything  like  as  far  on  the 
road  as  this  man  did  matters  very  little.  The 
process  which  brought  him  there  is  the  thing  that 
I  seek  to  point  to.     It  was  because  he  had  so  long 


A  SOUL'S  TRAGEDY.  297 


tampered  with  the  voice  of  his  conscience  that  it 
was  hilled  into  silence  at  that  last  critical  moment. 
And  this  is  always  the  case,  that  if  a  man  is  false 
to  the  feeblest  conviction  that  he  has  in  regard  to  the 
smallest  duty,  he  is  a  worse  man  all  over  ever  after. 
We  cannot  neglect  any  conviction  of  what  we  ought 
to  do,  without  lowering  the  whole  tone  of  our 
characters  and  laying  ourselves  open  to  assaults  of 
evil  from  which  we  would  once  have  turned  shudder- 
ing and  disgusted.  A  partial  thaw  is  generally  fol- 
lowed by  intenser  frost.  An  abortive  insurrection  is 
sure  to  issue  in  a  more  grinding  tyranny.  A  soul 
half  melted  and  then  cooled  off  is  less  easy  to  melt 
than  it  was  before.  And  so,  dear  brethren,  remember 
this,  that  if  you  do  not  swiftly  and  fully  carry  out  in 
life  and  conduct  whatsoever  you  know  you  ought  to 
be  or  do,  you  cannot  set  a  limit  to  what,  some  time  or 
■other,  if  a  strong  and  sudden  temptation  is  sprung 
upon  you,  you  may  become.  "  Is  thy  servant  a  dog 
that  he  should  do  this  thing  ? "  Yes  1  But  he  did  it. 
No  mortal  reaches  the  extreme  of  evil  all  at  once, 
says  the  wise  old  proverb  ;  and  the  path  by  which  a 
man  is  let  down  into  depths  that  he  never  thought  it 
was  possible  that  he  should  traverse  is  by  the  con- 
tinual neglect  of  the  small  admonitions  of  conscience. 
Neglected  convictions  mean,  sooner  or  later,  an  out- 
burst  of  evil. 

John's  murder  may  illustrate  another  thing  too — 
viz.,  how  simple,  facile  Aveakness  of  character  may  be 
the  parent  of  all  enormities.  Herod  did  not  want  to 
kill  John.  He  very  much  wanted  to  keep  him  alive. 
But  he  was  not  man  enough  to  put  his  foot  down,  and 


298  A  sours  TMAGEDY 


say,  "  There !  I  have  said  it ;  and  there  is  to  be  no 
ijiore  talk  about  slaying  this  prophet  of  God."  So 
the  continual  drop,  drop,  drop,  of  Herodias'  sugges- 
tions and  wishes  wore  a  hole  in  the  loose-textured 
stone  at  last ;  and  he  did  the  thinsf  that  he  hated  to 
do  and  had  long  fought  against.  Why  ?  Because  he 
was  a  poor  weak  creature. 

The  lesson  from  this  is  one  that  I  would  urge  upon 
all  you  young  people  especially,  that  in  a  world  like 
this,  where  there  are  so  many  more  voices  soliciting 
us  to  evil  than  inviting  us  to  good,  to  be  weak  is,  in 
the  long  run,  to  be  wicked.  So  do  you  cultivate  the 
wholesome  habit  of  saying  "  No,"  and  do  not  be  afraid 
of  anything  but  of  hurting  your  conscience  and 
sinning  against  God. 

III. — Once  more,  we  have  in  Herod  an  example  of 
the  awakening  of  conscience. 

When  Jesus  began  to  be  talked  about  beyond  the 
narrow  limits  of  the  shores  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  and 
especially  when  he  began  to  organise  the  Apostolate, 
and  His  name  was  spread  abroad,  some  rumours 
reached  even  the  court,  and  there  were  divergent 
opinions  about  him.  One  man  said.  It  is  Elias ;  and 
another  said,  It  is  a  prophet.  "  And  Herod  said,  It  is 
John,  whom  I  beheaded.  He  has  risen  from  the 
dead,  and  therefore  mighty  works  do  show  forth 
themselves  in  him." 

Ah,  brethren,  when  a  man  has,  away  back  in  the 
chambers  of  his  memory,  some  wrong  thing,  be  it 
great  or  be  it  little,  he  is  at  the  mercy  of  any  chance  or 
accident  to  have  it  revived  in  all  its  vividness.  It  is  an 
awful  thing  to  walk  this  world  with  a  whole  magazine 


A  sours  TRAGEDY.  29(^ 


of  combustibles  in  our  memories,  on  which  any  spark 
may  fall  and  set  up  lurid  and  sulphurous  flames.  A 
chance  thing  may  do  it,  a  scent,  a  look  upon  a  face,  a 
sound,  or  any  trifle  may  bring  all  at  once  before  the 
wrongdoer  that  ancient  evil.  And  no  lapse  of  time 
makes  it  less  dreadful  Avhen  it  is  unveiled.  The 
chance  thrust  of  a  boat-hook  that  gets  tangled  in  the 
grey  hairs  of  a  corpse,  brings  it  up  grim  to  the 
surface.  Press  a  button,  by  accident,  upon  a  wall  in . 
some  old  castle,  and  a  door  flies  open  that  leads  awa}- 
down  into  black  depths.  You  and  I  have  depths  of 
that  sort  in  our  hearts.  Then  there  are  no  more 
illusions  about  whose  fault  the  deed  was.  When 
Herod  killed  John,  he  said,  "  Oh !  It  is  not  1 !  It 
is  Herodias.  It  is  Salome.  It  is  my  oath.  It  is 
the  respect  I  bear  to  the  people  who  heard  me 
swear.  I  must  do  it,  but  I  am  not  responsible."  But 
when,  in  "  the  sessions  of  silent  thought,"  the  deed 
came  back  to  him,  Salome  and  Herodias,  the  oath, 
and  the  company  were  all  out  of  sight,  and  he  said, 
"  I !  /  did  it." 

That  is  what  we  all  shall  have  to  do  some 
day,  in  this  world  possibly,  in  the  next  certainly. 
Men  sophisticate  themselves  with  talk  about  pallia- 
tions, and  excuses,  and  temptations,  and  companions, 
and  the  like.  And  philosophers  sophisticate  them- 
selves nowadays  with  a  great  many  learned  explana- 
tions, which  tend  to  show  that  a  man  is  not  to  blame 
for  the  wrong  things  he  does.  But  all  that  rubbish 
gets  burned  up  when  conscience  wakes,  and  the  doer 
says,  "  Whom  /  beheaded." 

Brethren,  unless  we  take  refuge  in  the  great  sacrifice 


300  A  sours  TRAGEDY. 

for  the  sins  of  the  world  which  Jesus  Christ  has  made, 
we  shall,  possibly  in  this  life,  and  certainly  hereafter, 
be  surrounded  by  a  company  of  our  own  evil  deeds 
risen  from  the  dead,  and  every  one  of  them  will 
shake  his  gory  locks  at  us,  and  say,  "  Thou  didst  it." 

IV. — The  last  lesson  that  I  gather  from  this  man's 
life  is  the  final  insensibility  which  these  half-and-half 
convictions  tend  to  produce. 

Jesus  Christ  was  sent  by  Pilate  to  Herod  as  a  kind 
of  peace-offering.  The  two  had  been  squabbling  about 
some  question  of  jurisdiction ;  and  so,  partly  to  escape 
from  the  embarrassment  of  having  to  deal  with  this 
enigmatical  Prisoner,  and  partly  out  of  a  piece  of 
politic  politeness,  Pilate  sends  Jesus  to  Herod,  because 
He  was  in  his  jurisdiction.  Think  of  the  Lord  of  men 
and  angels  being  handed  about  from  one  to  the  other 
of  these  two  scoundrels,  as  a  piece  of  politeness  ! 

When  Christ  stands  before  Herod,  note  that  all  its 
former  convictions,  partial  or  entire,  and  all  its 
terrors,  superficial  or  deep,  have  faded  clean  away 
from  this  frivolous  soul.  All  that  he  feels  now  is  a 
childish  delight  in  havinof  this  well-known  Man 
before  him,  and  a  hope  that,  for  his  delectation,  Jesus 
will  work  a  miracle  ;  much  as  he  might  expect  a  con- 
juror to  do  one  of  his  tricks  !  That  is  what  killing 
John  came  to — an  incapacity  to  see  anything  in  Jesus. 

"And  he  asked  Him  many  questions,  and  Jesus 
answered  him  nothing."  He  locked  His  lips.  Why  i 
He  was  doing  what  He  Himself  enjoined  :  "  Give  not 
that  which  is  holy  to  the  dogs.  Cast  not  your  pearls 
before  swine."  He  said  nothing,  because  He  knew 
it   was   useless   to   say  anything.     So  the  Incarnate 


A  SOUL'S  TRAGEDY.  301 


Word,  whose  very  nature  and  propert}'^  it  is  to  speak, 
was  silent  before  the  frivolous  curiosity  of  the  man 
that  had  been  false  to  his  deepest  convictions. 

It  is  a  parable,  brother,  of  what  is  being  repeated 
over  and  over  again  amongst  us.  I  dare  not  say  that 
Jesus  Christ  is  ever  absolutely  dumb  to  any  man  on 
this  side  of  the  grave ;  but  I  dare  not  refrain  from 
saying  that  this  condition  of  insensibility  to  His  words 
is  one  that  we  may  indefinitely  approach  to,  and  that 
the  surest  way  to  approach  to  it  and  to  reach  it  is  to 
fight  down,  or  to  neglect,  the  convictions  that  lead  up 
to  Him.  John  Avas  the  forerunner  of  Christ,  and  if 
Herod  had  listened  to  John,  to  him  John  would  have 
said  :  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God ! "  To  you  I  say  it, 
and  beseech  you  to  take  that  Lamb  of  God  for  the 
Sacrifice  of  j^our  sins,  for  the  Healer  and  Cleanser  of 
your  memories  and  yowc  consciences,  for  the  Helper 
who  will  enable  you  to  make  all  sacrifices  to  duty 
joyfully,  and  to  carr}'  into  effect  every  conviction 
which  His  own  merciful  hand  writes  upon  your 
hearts. 

And  oh,  dear  friends,  many  of  you  strangers  to  me, 
to  whom  my  voice  seldom  comes,  let  me  plead  with 
you  not  to  be  content  with  "  hearing "  any  of  us 
"  gladly,"  but  to  do  what  our  words  point  to,  and  to 
follow  Christ  the  Saviour.  If  you  hear  the  Gospel, 
however  imperfectly,  as  you  are  hearing  it  proclaimed 
now,  and  if  you  neglect  it  as — must  I  say  ? — you  are 
doing  now,  you  will  bring  another  film  over  your  eyes 
which  may  grow  thick  enough  to  shut  out  all  the 
light ;  you  will  wind  another  fold  above  your  hearts 
which  may  prove  impenetrable  to  the  sword  of  the 


302  A  SOUL'S  TRAGEDY. 

Spirit ;  you  will  put  another  plug  in  your  ears  which 
may  make  them  deaf  to  the  music  of  Christ's  voice. 
Do  what  you  know  you  ought  to  do,  yield  yourselves 
to  Jesus  Christ.  And  do  it  now,  whilst  impressions 
are  being  made,  lest,  if  you  let  them  sleep,  they  may 
never  return.  Felix  trembled  when  Paul  reasoned  ; 
but  he  waved  away  the  messenger  and  the  message, 
and  though  he  sent  for  Paul  often,  and  communed 
with  him,  he  never  trembled  any  more. 

"  There  is  a  tide  in  the  affairs  of  men 
Which,  taken  at  the  flood," 

would  lead  us  into  the  haven  of  rest  in  Christ ;  and, 
if  allowed  to  pass,  may  leave  us,  stranded  and  ship- 
wrecked, among  the  rocks. 


XXX. 

tTbc  (5ift6  tbat  accompany  f  oraiveness. 

"  Bring  forth  the  best  robe,  and  put  it  on  him,  and  put  a  ring  on 
his  hand,  and  shoes  on  his  feet :  and  bring  hither  the  fatted 
calf,  and  kill  it."— Luke  xv.  22,  23. 

'  OD'S  giving  always  follows  His  forgiving. 
It  is  not  so  with  us.  We  think  our- 
selves very  magnanimous  when  we 
pardon ;  and  we  seldom  go  on  to 
lavish  favours  where  we  have  over- 
looked faults.  Perhaps  it  is  right  that  men  who  have 
offended  against  men  should  earn  restoration  by  acts, 
and  should  have  to  ride  quarantine,  as  it  were,  for  a 
time.  But  I  question  whether  forgiveness  is  ever  true 
which  is  not,  like  God's,  attended  by  large-hearted 
o-ifts.  If  pardon  is  only  the  non-infliction  of  penalty, 
then  it  is  natural  enough  that  it  should  be  considered 
sufficient  by  itself,  and  that  the  evildoer  should  not  be 
rewarded  for  having  been  bad.  But  if  pardon  is  the 
outflow  of  the  love  of  the  offended  to  the  offender, 
then  it  can  scarcely  be  content  with  simply  giving 
the  debtor  his  discharge,  and  turning  him  into  the 
world  penniless. 

However  that  may  be  with  regard  to  men,  God's 
forgiveness  is  essentially  the  communication  of  God's 


3C4     TEE  GIFTS  THAT  ACCOMPANY  FORGIVENESS. 

love  to  US  sinners,  as  if  we  had  never  sinned  at  all. 
And,  that  being  so,  that  love  cannot  stay  its  working 
until  it  has  given  all  that  it  can  bestow  or  we  can 
receive.  God  does  not  do  things  by  halves  ;  and  He 
always  gives  Avhen  He  forgives. 

Now  that  is  the  great  truth  of  the  last  part  of  this 
immortal  parable.  And  it  is  one  of  the  points  in 
which  it  differs  from,  and  towers  high  above,  the  two 
preceding  ones.  The  lost  sheep  was  carried  back  to 
the  pastures,  turned  loose  there,  needed  no  further 
special  care,  and  began  to  nibble  as  if  nothing  had 
happened.  The  lost  drachma  was  simply  put  back 
in  the  woman's  purse.  But  the  lost  son  was  pardoned, 
and,  being  pardoned,  was  capable  of  receiving,  and 
received,  greater  gifts  than  he  had  before.  These  gifts 
are  very  remarkably  detailed  in  the  words  of  our  text. 

Now,  of  course,  it  is  always  risky  to  seek  for  a 
spiritual  interpretation  of  every  point  in  a  parable, 
many  of  which  points  are  mere  drapery.  But,  on  the 
other  hand,  we  may  very  easily  fall  into  the  error  of 
treating  as  insignificant  details  which  really  are  meant 
to  be  full  of  instruction.  And  I  cannot  help  thinking 
— although  many  would  differ  from  me — that  this 
detailed  enumeration  of  the  gifts  to  the  Prodigal  is 
meant  to  be  translated  into  the  terms  of  spiritual 
experience.  So  I  desire  to  look  at  them  as  suggesting 
for  us  the  gifts  of  God  which  accompany  forgiveness. 
I  take  the  catalogue  as  it  stands — the  Kobe,  the  Rinsf, 
the  Shoes,  the  Feast. 

I. — First,  the  Robe. 

"  Bring  forth  the  best  robe,  and  put  it  on  him," 
That  was  the  command.     This  detail,  of  course,  like 


THE  GIFTS  THAT  ACCOMPAXY  FORGIVEXESS.      305 


all  the  others,  refers  back  to,  and  casts  light  upon,  the 
supposed  condition  of  the  spendthrift  when  he  came 
back.  There  he  stood,  ragged,  with  the  stain  of 
travel  and  the  stench  of  the  pig-sty  upon  his  gar- 
ments, some  of  them,  no  doubt,  remains  of  the  tawdr}^ 
finery  that  he  had  worn  in  the  world ;  wine-spots,  and 
stains,  and  filth  of  all  sorts  on  the  rags.  The  father 
says,  "  Take  them  all  off  him,  and  put  the  best  robe 
upon  him."     What  does  that  mean  ? 

Well,  we  all  know  the  very  familiar  metaphor  by 
which  qualities  of  mind,  traits  of  character,  and  the 
like  are  described  as  being  the  dress  of  the  spirit.  We 
talk  about  being  "  arrayed  in  purity,"  "  clad  in  zeal," 
"  clothed  with  humility,"  "  nested  with  power,"  and  so 
on.  If  we  turn  to  Scripture,  we  find  running  through 
it  a  whole  series  of  instances  of  this  metaphor,  which 
ijuide  us  at  once  to  its  true  meaninof.  Zechariah  saw 
in  vision  the  high  priest  standing  at  the  heavenly 
tribunal,  clad  in  filthy  garments.  A  voice  said, 
"  Take  away  the  filthy  garments  from  him,"  and  the 
interpretation  is  added :  "  Behold  !  I  have  caused 
thine  iniquity  to  pass  from  thee,  and  I  will  clothe 
thee  with  a  change  of  raiment."  You  remember  our 
Lord's  parable  of  the  man  with  a  wedding  garment. 
You  remember  the  Apostle  Paul's  frequent  use  of  the 
metaphor  of  "  putting  off  the  old  man,  putting  on  the 
new."  You  remember,  finally,  the  visions  of  the  last  days, 
in  which  the  Seer  in  Patmos  saw  the  armies  in  heaven 
that  followed  their  victorious  Commander,  "  clothed  in 
fine  linen,  white  and  pure,  which  is  the  righteousness 
of  the  saints."  If  we  put  all  these  together,  surely 
I    am    not   forcing  a  meaning   on  a  non-significant 

'  20 


506     THE  GIFTS  THAT  ACCOMPANY  FORGIVENESS. 


detail,  wlien  I  say  that  here  we  have  shadowed  for  us 
the  great  thought,  that  the  result  of  the  Divine 
forgiveness  coming  upon  a  man  is  that  he  is  clothed 
with  a  character  which  fits  him  to  sit  down  at  his 
father's  table.  They  tell  us  that  forgiveness  is  impos- 
sible, because  things  done  must  have  their  conse- 
quences,  and  that  character  is  the  slow  formation  of 
actions,  precipitated,  as  it  were,  from  our  deeds.  That 
is  all  true.  But  it  does  not  conflict  with  this  other 
truth  that  there  may  and  does  come  into  men's 
hearts,  when  they  set  their  faith  on  Jesus  Christ,  a 
new  power  which  transforms  the  nature,  and  causes 
old  things  to  pass  away. 

God's  forgiveness  revolutionises  a  life.  Similar  effects 
follow  even  human  pardons  for  small  offences.  Brute 
natures  are  held  in  by  penalties,  and  to  them  pardon 
means  impunity,  and  impunity  means  licence,  and 
licence  means  lust.  But  wherever  there  is  a  heart 
with  love  to  the  offended  in  it,  there  is  nothing  that 
so  bows  the  spirit  in  loathing  of  its  past  self  as  the 
assurance  that  the  offended,  though  loved,  one  loves, 
and  is  not  offended,  and  that  free  forofiveness  has 
come.  AVhether  is  it  the  rod  or  the  mother's  kiss 
that  makes  a  child  hate  its  sin  most  ?  And  if  we  left 
our  thoughts  to  Him,  and  think  how  He,  up  there  in 
the  heavens, 

"  Who  mig-htest  vensfeance  best  have  took," 

bends  over  us  in  frank,  free  forgiveness,  then  surely 
that,  more  than  all  punishments  or  threatenings  or 
terrors,  will  cause  us  to  turn  away  from  our  evil,  and  to 
loathe  the  sins  which  are  thus  forgiven.     The  prophet 


THE  OlFTS  THAT  ACCOMPANY  FORGIVENESS.     307 


went  very  deep  when  he  said,  "Thou  shalt  be  ashamed 
and  confounded,  and  never  open  thy  mouth  any  more 
because  of  thine  iniquity,  when  I  am  pacitied  towards 
thee  for  all  that  thou  hast  done,  saitli  the  Lord." 

But  not  only  so,  there  is  given  along  with  forgive- 
ness, and  wrapped  up  in  it,  a  new  power,  which  makes 
all  things  new,  and  changes  a  man.  It  would  be  a 
poor  Gospel  for  me  to  stand  up  and  preach  if  I  had 
only  to  proclaim  to  men  the  Divine  forgiveness ;  and 
if  that  onl}'  meant  that  hell's  door  was  barred  and 
some  outward  heaven  was  flung  open.  But  the  true 
Gospel  offers  forgiveness  as  preliminary  to  the  be- 
stowal of  the  highest  gifts  of  God.  The  pardoned 
man  is  stripped  of  his  rags  and  clothed  with  a  new 
nature  which  God  Himself  bestows. 

That  is  what  we  all  need.  AVe  have  not  all  been  in 
the  pig-sty ;  we  have  not  all  fallen  into  gross  sin. 
AVe  liave  all  turned  our  backs  on  our  Father  ;  Ave  leave 
all  wanted  to  be  independent ;  we  hare  all  preferred 
the  far-off  land  to  being  near  home.  And,  dear 
brethren,  the  character  that  you  have  made  for  your- 
selves clings  to  you  like  the  poisoned  Nessus'  shirt  to 
Hercules.  You  cannot  strip  it  off.  You  may  get 
part  of  it  away,  but  you  cannot  entirely  cast  it 
from  your  limbs,  nor  free  yourselves  from  the  en- 
tanglements of  its  tatters.  Go  to  God,  and  He  will 
smile  away  your  sin,  and  His  forgiving  love  will  melt 
the  stains  and  the  evil,  as  the  sun  this  morning-  drank 
up  the  mists  ;  and  they  who  come  knowing  themselves 
to  be  foul,  and  needing  forgiveness,  will  surely  receive 
fi'om  Him  "  the  tine  linen  white  and  pure,  the 
righteousness  of  saints." 

20* 


308     THE  GIFTS  THAT  ACCOMPANY  FORGIVENESS. 

II.— The  Ring. 

This  prodigal  lad  only  wanted  to  be  placed  in  the 
position  of  a  slave,  but  his  father  said,  "  Put  a  ring  on 
his  finger."  The  ring  is  an  emblem  of  wealth,  posi- 
tion, honour :  that  is  one  sisfnification  of  this  gift  to 
the  penitent.  Still  further,  it  is  an  ornament  to  the 
hand  on  which  it  glistens ;  that  is  another.  It  is  a 
sign  of  delegated  authority  and  of  representative 
character ;  as  when  Joseph  was  exalted  to  be  the 
second  man  in  Egypt,  and  Pharaoh's  signet-ring  was 
plucked  off  and  placed  upon  his  finger.  All  these 
thoughts  are,  as  it  seems  to  me,  clustered  in,  and  fairly 
deducible  from,  this  one  detail. 

Freedom,  exaltation,  dignity  of  position  are  ex- 
pressed. And  that  opens  up  a  thought  which  needs 
to  be  set  forth  with  many  reservations,  and  much 
guarding,  but  still  is  true — viz.,  that,  b}^  the  mercy 
and  miraculous  loving-kindness  and  quickening  power 
of  God  in  the  Gospel,  it  is  possible  that  the  lower  a 
man  falls  the  higher  he  may  rise.  I  know,  of  course, 
that  it  is  better  to  be  innocent  than  to  be  cleansed. 
I  know,  and  every  man  that  looks  into  his  own  heart 
knows,  that  forgiven  sins  may  leave  scars ;  that  the 
memory  may  be  loaded  with  many  a  foul  and  many  a 
painful  remembrance  ;  that  the  fetters  may  be  stricken 
oft'  the  limbs,  but  the  marks  of  them,  and  the  way  of 
walking  that  they  compelled,  may  persist  long  after 
deliverance.  But  I  know,  too,  that  redeemed  men 
are  higher  in  final  position  than  angels  that  never 
fell ;  and  that,  though  it  is  too  much  to  say  that  the 
greater  the  sinner  the  greater  the  saint,  it  still  re- 
mains true  that  sin  repented  and  forgiven  may  be,  as 


o 


THE  GIFTS  THAT  ACCOMPAyV  FORGIVENESS.     309 

it  were,  an  elevation  upon  which  a  man  may  stand  to 
reach  higher  than,  apparently,  he  otherwise  would  in 
the  Divine  life. 

And  so,  though  I  do  not  say  to  any  man,  Make  the 
experiment;  for,  indeed,  the  poorest  of  us  has  sins 
enough  to  get  all  the  benefit  out  of  repentance  and 
forgiveness  which  is  included  in  them,  yet,  if  there  is 
any  man  here — and  I  hope  there  is — saying  to  him- 
self, "I  have  got  too  low  down  ever  to  master  this, 
that,  or  the  other  evil ;  I  have  stained  myself  so  foully 
that  I  cannot  hope  to  have  the  black  marks  erased,"  I 
say  to  such :  "  Remember  that  the  man  who  ended  with 
a  ring  on  his  tinofer,  honoured  and  dimitied,  was  the 
man  that  had  herded  with  pigs,  and  stank,  and  all  but 
rotted,  with  his  tleshly  crimes."  And  so  nobody  need 
doubt  but  that  for  him,  however  low  he  has  gone,  and 
however  far  he  has  gone,  there  is  restoration  possible 
to  a  higher  dignity  than  the  pure  spirits  that  never 
transgressed  at  any  time  God's  commandment  will 
ever  attain ;  for  he  who  has  within  himself  the  ex- 
perience of  repentance,  of  pardon,  and  who  has  come 
into  living  contact  with  Jesus  Christ  as  Redeemer, 
can  teach  angels  how  blessed  it  is  to  be  a  child  of 
God. 

Xor  less  distinctly  are  the  other  two  things  which 
I  have  referred  to  brought  out  in  this  metaphor.  Not 
only  is  the  ring  the  sign  of  dignity,  but  it  is  also  the 
sign  of  delegated  authority  and  representative  char- 
acter. God  sets  poor  penitents  to  be  His  Avitnesses 
in  His  world,  and  to  do  His  work  here.  And  a  ring  is 
an  ornament  to  the  hand  that  wears  it ;  which  being 
translated  is  this  :  where  God  gives  pardon,  He  gives  a 


310     TEE  GIFTS  THAT  ACCOMPANY  FORGIVENESS. 

strange  beaut}^  of  character,  to  Avliich,  if  a  man  is  true 
to  himself,  and  to  his  Redeemer,  he  Avill  assuredly 
attain.  There  should  be  no  lives  so  lovely,  none  that 
flash  with  so  many  jewelled  colours,  as  the  lives  of  the 
men  and  women  who  have  learned  what  it  is  to  be 
miserable,  what  it  is  to  repent,  what  it  is  to  be  for- 
given. So,  though  our  "  hands  have  been  full  of 
blood,"  as  the  prophet  says,  though  they  have 
dabbled  in  all  manner  of  pollution,  though  they  have 
been  the  ready  instruments  of  many  evil  things,  we 
may  all  hope  that,  cleansed  and  whitened,  our  hands 
will  not  want  the  lustre  of  that  adornment  which  the 
loving  father  clasped  upon  the  fingers  of  his  penitent 
boy. 

III.— Further,  "  Shoes  on  his  feet." 

No  doubt  he  had  come  back  barefooted  and  filthy 
and  bleeding,  and  it  was  needful  for  the  "  keeping  "  of 
the  narrative  that  this  detail  should  appear.  But  I 
think  it  is  something  more  than  drapery. 

Does  it  not  speak  to  us  of  equipment  for  the  walk 
of  life  ?  God  does  prepare  men  for  future  service,  and 
for  every  step  that  they  have  to  take,  by  giving  to 
them  His  forgiveness  for  all  that  is  past.  The  sense 
of  the  Divine  pardon  will  in  itself  fit  a  man,  as 
nothing  else  will,  for  running  with  patience  the  race 
that  is  set  before  him.  God  does  communicate,  along 
with  His  forgiveness,  to  every  one  who  seeks  it,  actual 
power  to  "  travel  on  life's  common  way  in  cheerful 
godliness " ;  and  his  feet  are  "  shod  with  the  pre- 
paredness of  the  gospel  of  peace." 

Ah,  brethren,  life  is  a  rough  road  for  us  all,  and  for 
those  whose  faces  are  set  towards  duty,  and  God,  and 


THE  GIFTS  THAT  ACCOMPANY  FORGIVENESS.    311 


belf-denial,  it  is  especiall}-  so,  tliougli  there  are  many 
compensating  circumstances.  There  are  places  where 
sharp  flints  stick  up  in  the  path  and  cut  the  feet. 
There  are  places  where  rocks  jut  out  for  us  to 
stumble  over.  There  are  all  the  trials  and  sorrows 
that  necessaril}^  attend  upon  our  daily  lives,  and 
which  sometimes  make  us  feel  as  if  our  path  were 
across  heated  ploughshares,  and  every  step  was  a 
separate  agony.  God  Avill  give  us,  if  we  go  to  Him 
for  pardon,  that  which  will  defend  us  against  the 
pains  and  the  sorrows  of  life.  The  bare  foot  is  cut  by 
that  which  the  shod  foot  tramples  upon  unconscious. 

There  are  foul  places  on  all  our  paths,  over  which, 
when  we  pass,  if  Ave  have  not  something  else  than  our 
own  naked  selves,  we  shall  certainly  contract  defile- 
ment. God  will  give  to  the  penitent  man,  if  he  will 
have  it,  that  which  will  keep  his  feet  from  soil,  even 
when  they  walk  amidst  filth.  And  if,  at  any  time, 
notwithstanding  the  defence,  some  mud  should  stain 
the  foot,  and  he  that  is  washed  needs  again  to  wash 
his  feet,  the  Master,  with  the  towel  and  the  basin,  will 
not  be  far  away. 

There  are  enemies  and  dangers  in  life.  A  veiy 
important  part  of  the  equipment  of  the  soldier  in 
antiquity  was  the  heavy  boot,  which  enabled  him  to 
stand  fast,  and  resist  the  rush  of  the  enemy.  God 
will  give  to  the  penitent  man,  if  he  will  have  it,  that 
which  will  set  his  foot  upon  a  rock,  "  and  establish  his 
ooinof,"  and  which  "  will  make  him  able  to  Avithstand 
in  the  evil  da}',  and  having  done  all,  to  stand." 

Brethren,  defence,  stability,  shielding  from  pains, 
and  protection  against  q\\\  are  all  included  in  this 


312     THE  GIFTS  THAT  ACCOMPANY  FORGIVENESS. 


great  promise,  which  each  of  us  may  realise,  if  we 
will,  for  ourselves, 

lY. — Lastly,  the  Feast. 

Now  that  comes  into  view  in  the  parable,  mainly  as 
teaching  us  the  great  truth  that  Heaven  keeps 
holiday,  when  some  poor  Avaif  comes  shrinking  back 
to  his  Father.  But  I  do  not  touch  upon  that  truth 
now,  though  it  is  the  main  significance  of  this  last 
part  of  the  stor}^ 

The  prodigal  was  half  starving,  and  the  fatted 
calf  was  killed  "  for  him,"  as  his  ill-conditioned 
brother  grumbled.  Remember  what  it  was  that  drove 
him  back — not  his  heart,  nor  his  conscience,  but  his 
stomach.  He  did  not  bethink  himself  to  go  back, 
because  dormant  filial  affection  woke  up,  or  because 
a  sense  that  he  had  been  wrong  stirred  in  him,  but 
because  he  was  hungry ;  and  well  he  might  be,  when 
"  the  husks  that  the  swine  did  eat "  were  luxuries 
beyond  his  reach.  Thank  God  for  the  teaching  that 
even  so  low  a  motive  as  that  is  accepted  by  God ;  and 
that,  if  a  man  goes  back,  even  for  no  better  reason — as 
long  as  he  does  go  back,  he  will  be  welcomed  to  the 
Father.  This  poor  boy  was  quite  content  to  sink  his 
sonship  for  the  sake  of  a  loaf ;  and  all  that  he  wanted 
was  to  stay  his  hunger.  So  he  had  to  learn  that  he 
could  not  oet  bread  on  the  terms  that  he  desired,  and 
that  what  he  wished  most  was  not  what  he  needed 
first.  He  had  to  be  forgiven  and  bathed  in  the  out- 
tlow  of  his  father's  love  before  he  could  be  fed.  And, 
being  thus  received,  he  could  not  fail  to  be  fed.  So 
the  message  for  us  is,  first,  forgiveness,  and  then  every 
hunger  of  the  heart  satisfied  ;  all  desires  met ;  every 


THE  GIFTS  THAT  ACCOMPANY  FORGIVENESS.     313 

aieedfiil  nourishment  communicated,  and  the  true 
bread  ours  for  ever,  if  we  choose  to  eat.  "  The  meek 
shall  eat  and  be  satisfied." 

I  need  not  draw  the  picture — that  picture  of  which 
there  are  many  originals  sitting  in  these  pews  to- 
night— of  the  men  that  go  for  ever  roaming  with 
-a  hungry  heart,  through  all  the  regions  of  life  separate 
from  God ;  and  whether  they  seek  their  nourishment 
in  the  garbage  of  the  sty,  or  whether  fastidiously 
they  look  for  it  in  the  higher  nutriment  of  mind 
and  intellect  and  heart,  still  are  condemned  to  be 
vUifiUed. 

Brethren,  "  why  do  you  spend  your  money  lor  that 
.  .  which  satisfies  not  ? "  Here  is  the  true  way 
for  all  desires  to  be  appeased.  Go  to  God  in  Jesus 
Christ  for  forgiveness,  and  then  everything  that  you 
need  shall  be  yours.  "  I  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  Me 
.  .  .  white  raiment  that  thou  mayest  be  clothed." 
•  He  that  eateth  of  this  bread  shall  live  for  ever." 


ALEXANDER  &  Shepheard,  Printers,  27,  Chancery  Lane. 


^ 


^ 


■/ 


6«8m  296| 

11MG-20  321B0      MS    fe 


Princeton  Theological  Seminary  Libraries 


1    1012   01244  4149 


DATE  DUE 


l2/;i}/^x 

f 

>      y 

I 

""1 1 

--^-r-^—^ 

^t. 



GAYLORD  #3523PI       Printed  in  USA 


