Division      'Ci  cr^  AC\  \ 

4512. 


X? 


INVALUABLE  IN  THE  STUDY. 

The  Biblical  Illustrator; 

OB 

Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  and  Illustrations,  Expository,  Scientifio, 
Geographical,  Historical  and  Homiletic. 

Gathefed  from  a  wide  range  ot  Home  and  Foreign  Literattsre^ 
on  the  verses  of  the  Bible,  by  the 

Rev.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 


Royal  Octaro,  Cloth,  each  about  650  pages,  per  Volamo,  $2.00. 


"No  matter  how  full  his  library  may  be,  nor  how  empty  his 
pocket-book,  the  minister  who  s§es  this  work  will  want  it." — Observer. 

"It  promises  to  be  the  most  useful  cyclopedia  for  ministers  is- 
sued as  yet." — Christian. 

•'Every  volume  is  profusely  treated  and  explained  verse  by  verse, 
with  apposite,  varied  and  suggestive  extracts  from  a  vast  number 
of  ancient  and  modern  authors.  The  meaning  of  v/ords,  the  lessons 
deducible  from  the  text,  the  doctrine  it  teaches,  the  duty  it  enjoins, 
pithy  remarks  of  commentators  and  other  writers  upon  it,  and  an- 
ecdotes with  which  to  enforce  its  teachings  follow  each  verse.  .  . 
The  author  has  put  the  condensed  substance  of  many  commentaries 
In  one,  giving  the  results  reached  by  many  learned  experts." — Meth- 
odist Review. 

"There  is  little  or  no  exposition,  properly  so  called,  but  an  abun- 
dant citation  of  the  opinions  of  men  called  forth  by  the  inspired 
writers.    In  this  respect  the  book  is  unique." — Christian  Intelligencer. 

OLD  TESTAMENT  VOLUMES: 

Genesis,  Vol.  1.  Joshua,  Judges  and  Ruth. 

Genesis,  Vol.  2.  I.  and  II.  Chronicles,  Ezra,  Ne- 
exodus.  hemiah  and  esther. 

Leviticus  and  Numbers.  Proverbs. 

Deuteronomy.  The  Psalms.    Vol.  1:  1-xxvl. 

NEW  TESTAMENT  VOLUMES: 

St.  Matthew.  Philippians  and  Colossians, 

St.  Mark.  Thessalonians. 

St.  Luke,  Vol.  1.  First  Timothy. 

St.  Luke,  Vol.  2.  Second  Timothy,   Titus,   and 
St.  Luke,    Vol.  3.  Philemon. 

■  St.  John,    Vol.  1.  Hebrews,  Vol.  1. 

St.  John,    Vol.  2.  Hebrews,  Vol.  2. 

St.  John,    Vol.  3.  James. 

Acts,  Vol.  1.  First  Corinthians,  Vol.  L 

Acts,  Vol.  2.  First  Corinthians,  Vol.  2. 

Acts,  Vol.  3.  Second  Corinthians. 

Romans,  Vol.  1.  First  and  Second  Peter, 

Romans,  Vol.  2.  First,  Second  and  Third  John, 
Galatians,  and  Jude. 

Ephesians.  Revelation. 

Index  Volume  to  Entire  New  Testament,  $5.00. 

Bend  for  our  circular  giving  special  offers. 

Fleming  H.  RevcII  Company, 

New  York:  Chicago:  Toronto; 

158  Fifth  Avenuk.       63  Washington  Street.      27  Richmond  St.  W. 


THE 


Biblical  Illustrator 


OR 

Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  Illustrations; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
literature,    on  the   Verses   of    the    Bible 


Rbv.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A, 


ROMANS,  Vol  II 


New  YoRr  Chicago  Toronto 

Fleming   H.  Revell   Company 

London    and     Edinburgh 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR. 

ROMANS. 

CHAPTER  YUL 

Ver.  11.  Bnt  If  the  Spirit  of  Him  tliat  raised  np  JesTU  .  .  .  dwell  In  yon.— TK« 
indwelling  Spirit : — The  indwelling  of  God  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  common  mark 
of  all  believers  in  Christ.  It  is  the  shepherd's  mark  of  the  flock  of  the  Lord  Jesru, 
distingnishing  them  from  the  rest  of  the  world.  It  is  the  goldsmith's  stamp  on  the 
genuine  sons  of  God,  which  separates  them  from  the  dross  and  mass  of  false  pro- 
fessors. It  is  the  king's  own  seal  on  those  who  are  his  peculiar  people,  proving 
them  to  be  his  own  property.  It  is  the  earnest  which  the  Eedeemer  gives  to  His 
believing  disciples,  while  they  are  in  the  body,  as  a  pledge  of  the  fuU  redemption 
yet  to  come  on  the  resurrection  morning.  This  is  the  case  of  all  believers.  {Bp. 
Eyle.)  The  indwelling  Spirit  the  Raiser  of  tht  dead  : — I.  The  inhabitation  o» 

THE  Spibit.  Dwelling  may  relate  either  to  a  man  in  his  house  (1  John  iii.  24)  or 
of  God  in  His  temple  (1  Cor.  vi.  16).  The  Spirit  buildeth  us  np  for  so  holy  a  use, 
and  then  dwelleth  in  us  as  our  Sanctifler,  Guide,  and  Comforter.  1.  He  sanctifleth 
and  reneweth  us  (Tit.  iii.  6 ;  John  iii.  6).  2.  He  guideth  and  healeth  us  in  the 
ways  of  hoUness  (chap.  zt.  14  ;  Gal.  v.  25).  3.  He  comforts  us  with  the  sense  of 
God's  fatherly  love  and  our  eternal  inheritance  (ver.  16;  2  Cor.  ii.  22).  H. 
Why  this  inhabitation  is  the  oeound  op  a  BiiESSED  EESUBRECTioN.  1.  To  preserve 
the  order  of  the  personal  operations.  (1)  The  rising  from  the  dead  is  a  work  of 
Divine  power  (2  Cor.  i.  10).  (2)  This  Divine  power  belongeth  in  common  to  Father, 
Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  who,  being  one  and  the  same  God,  concnrred  in  the  same 
work.  We  are  raised  by  the  Father  (text),  by  Christ  (John  v.  21),  by  the  Spirit 
(text).  (3)  They  all  concur  in  a  way  proper  to  them.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  the 
operative  love  of  God,  working  from  the  power  of  the  Father  and  grace  of  the  Son  ; 
and  whatever  the  Father  or  Son  doth,  you  must  still  suppose  it  to  be  communicated 
to  us  by  the  Spirit.  2.  Because  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  bond  of  union  between  us 
and  Christ.  We  are  united  to  Him,  because  we  have  the  same  Spirit  which  Christ 
had ;  and  therefore  He  will  work  like  effects  in  you  and  Him.  If  the  Head  rise, 
the  members  wiU  follow  after.  8.  Because  the  Spirit  of  sanotification  worketh  in 
ns  that  grace  which  giveth  us  a  right  and  title  to  this  glorious  estate  (Luke  zz.  85, 
86 ;  Gal.  vi.  8).  4.  Because  the  Spirit  abides  in  us  as  an  earnest  (Eph.  i.  14).  5. 
Because  of  His  respect  to  His  old  dwelling-place  (1  Cor.  vi.  19 ;  1  Thess.  v.  23).  6. 
Because  the  great  work  of  the  Spirit  is  to  retrench  our  bodily  pleasures,  and  to  bring 
ns  to  resolve  by  all  means  to  save  the  soul,  whatever  beoometh  of  the  body  in  this 
world,  and  to  use  the  body  for  the  service  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (1  Cor.  vi  18, 
20;  Eom.  viiL  13;  Gal.  v.  16,  24;  Bom.  xiii.  14).  {T.  Manton,D.D.)  The 
completing  teork  of  the  Holy  Spirit : — The  acceptance  of  Christ  does  not  prevent  the 
death  of  the  body.  The  destruction  of  the  body  by  death  is  complete ;  bnt  is  it 
destroyed  for  ever  ?  1.  Infidelity  affirms  that  when  you  are  dead  that  is  the  end  of 
you.  2.  Science  teaches  that  the  substance  of  the  body  can  never  be  annihilated. 
8.  The  Bible  declares  that  the  body  shall  be  raised  up  at  the  last  day.  L  Tbi 
AOBHT.  The  same  power  that  raised  up  Jesus.  U.  Its  obdeb,  1.  Regeneration. 
2.  Sanotification.  8.  Resurrection.  IH.  A  couflbts  balvatiom  Obbist  bbimos  to 
08.  1.  It  justifies  us  before  the  law.  2.  It  includes  the  redemption  of  the  body. 
Z,  It  provides  lor  the  reonion  of  body  and  seal.  4.  It  eBtabliihea  personiJ  identity 
▼OL.  n*  1 


S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOB.  [OHA».  Tm. 

for  erer.  5.  It  makes  certain  the  reonion  and  recognition  of  friends  throaghoai 
eternity.  lY.  Pbesbmt  pbactioaxi  BEABiNas.  1.  We  eboold  now  seek  after  the  only 
possible  antidote  to  spiritual  death,  with  all  its  glorious  proyisions  for  time  and 
eternity.  If  the  Spirit  of  Christ  dwell  in  us,  we  have  nothing  to  fear  from  sin  and 
death.  2.  The  Spirit  comes  only  to  those  who  welcome  His  coming  and  cherish 
His  indwelling.     (L.  0.  Thompson.)  The  resurrection  of  the  body: — Our  atten- 

tion is  not  directed  to  the  awakening  produced  by  the  trump  of  the  archangel,  bnl 
to  the  quickening  produced  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  We  have  to  consider  here  the 
completion  of  our  freedom  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death.    Observe — L  That  bt 

THX    BESUBBECTION    THE   LAST   LINK   OF    THE  CHAIK    OF  COBBUPTIOM    WILL   BB    FINALLT 

BBOEEN.  The  work  of  salvation  is  an  ordered  scheme,  every  step  of  which  is 
arranged  by  infinite  wisdom.  God  first  uncloses  the  fingers  of  sin  on  the  spirit, 
and  at  last  frees  the  body  from  its  fatal  grasp.  "  The  last  enemy  that  shall  be 
destroyed  is  death."  What  if  the  order  had  been  reversed  f  Why,  then  the  spirit 
would  have  been  placed  beyond  that  discipline  through  which  its  purification  is  now 
being  carried  on.  A  body  fit  only  for  heavenly  service  would  not  be  fit  for  earthly 
pain,  sorrow,  and  death.  £1.  That  this  emancipation  is  to  be  effected  by  thb 
Holt  Spibit.  It  is  Spirit  operating,  not  on  spirit — as  in  conversion — but  on  the 
body.  It  is  the  same  Spirit,  and  it  follows  that  it  is  even  part  of  the  same  work. 
The  work  is  effected  by  the  Spirit  dwelling  in  us.  There  is  in  the  believer  a  Divine 
seed,  which  is  destined  to  break  forth  from  amidst  the  corruption  of  the  grave  into 
beauteous  life.  UI.  That  teb  besubbection  of  believebs  is  associated  with  thai 
OF  Chbist.  The  relation  is  that  of  cause  and  effect,  type  and  fulfilment,  pledge  and 
redemption.  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also."  (P.  Strutt.)  The  resurrection 
maintained : — First,  to  speak  of  Christ's  resurrection.  If  the  Spirit  of  Him  that 
raised  up  Jesus  from  the  dead.  This  is  a  circumlocution  whereby  we  have  described 
onto  us  God  the  Father,  under  this  notion  of  raising  up  of  Christ.  For  the  first, 
the  Person  here  signified  or  implied,  that  is  God  the  Father.  Indeed,  the  whole 
Trinity  of  Persons  had  a  share  in  this  performance.  But  yet  it  is  here  ascribed  to  the 
Father,  as  that  Person  who  is  usually  expressed  to  be  the  Fountain  of  the  Godhead,' 
as  from  whom  all  the  actions  of  the  Deity  do  originally  flow  and  proceed.  The, 
second  thing,  which  is  here  chiefly  considerable,  is  the  action  attributed  to  this 
Person,  and  that  is,  the  raising  up  of  Jesus  from  the  dead.  Jesus  Christ,  He  is 
thus  risen.  This  is  a  main  article  of  our  Christian  faith.  The  ground  of  this 
dispensation  is  first  of  all  taken  from  the  nature  and  condition  of  Christ  Him- 
self,  who  was  such  an  One  as  death  could  not  long  keep  in  bondage  to  itseU 
(Acts  11.  24).  Secondly,  He  is  therefore  risen  to  manifest  the  completeness 
of  that  redemption  which  He  had  wrought  for  us,  and  to  declare  ub  absolved 
and  acquitted  in  the  sight  and  presence  of  God  (chap.  iv.  25).  The  use 
of  this  doctrine  in  hand  is  especially  to  oppose  it  to  the  scandal  and 
reproach  of  the  Cross.  The  second  is  the  Spirit's  inhabitation  in  those 
who  are  the  members  of  Christ.  If  or  forasmuch  as  this  Spirit  dwelleth  in  yon. 
Thus  it  makes  much  for  the  honour  and  dignity  of  the  servant  of  God,  that  He 
whom  the  heaven  of  heavens  cannot  contain  should  vouchsafe  to  take  up  His 
residence  in  such  narrow  rooms  as  our  hearts.  And,  further,  it  also  minds  as  of 
our  duty :  so  to  carry  and  behave  ourselves  as  fit  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to 
reside  in,  and  to  be  continually  offering  up  of  sacrifices  of  praises  unto  Him.  The 
second,  which  is  principjJly  considerable  of  us,  is  the  inference  in  these,  "He 
that  raised  up  Christ  from  the  dead  shall  also  quicken  your  mortal  bodies  by  His 
Spirit  that  dwelleth  in  you."  First,  to  look  upon  this  passage  in  its  simple  and 
absolute  consideration,  "  He  that  raised  up  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead  will  also 
quicken  and  raise  up  us,  who  are,"  &c.  And  here,  again,  two  things  more :  first, 
uie  state  or  condition  itself  which  is  here  propounded.  And  that  is  the  resurrection 
of  the  saints  and  true  believers.  '  •  He  shall  quicken  your  mortal  bodies .' '  Secondly, 
the  conveyance  of  this  state  or  condition  unto  them,  or  the  grace  of  conferring  it 
apoB  them  by  or  because  of  His  Spirit,  which  dwelleth  in  you.  First,  to  speak  of 
tne  former — viz.,  the  state  or  condition  itself  which  is  here  propounded,  and  that 
is  the  resurrection  of  tiie  saints.  "  He  shall  quicken  your  mortal  bodies";  that  is, 
He  shall  raise  you  from  death  to  life.  It  is  that  which  hath  been  set  forth  unto 
08  and  shadowed  under  sundi^r  resemblances — of  Aaron's  dry  rod  budding  forth 
and  flourishing ;  of  the  prophet  slain  by  the  lion,  but  not  devoured ;  of  Enoch'i 
translation;  of  Elijah's  rapture ;  of  Elisha's  sepulchre  reviving  a  dead  man  that 
was  cast  into  it.  And  it  is  very  suitable  and  agreeable  to  reason  rightly  qualified, 
though  it  does  not  depend  upon  it.    First,  to  reason  that  it  vokj  be  so  in  regard  of 


«BAP.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  I 

the  possibility.  It  is  no  way  opposite  or  repugnant  to  this.  Let  as  consider  what 
onr  bodies  were  made  of  and  fetched  out  of  at  first,  and  then  it  will  be  no  difficulty 
at  all.  He  that  thoroughly  believes  the  creation  need  never  to  doubt  of  the  resur- 
rection. Could  God  ma^e  the  body  out  of  the  dust  ?  and  cannot  He  then  restore  it 
from  the  dust  ?  Secondly,  it  is  also  in  the  equity  of  it,  as  that  which  should  be ; 
that  so  there  may  be  an  execution  of  the  just  judgment  of  God  upon  either  part  of 
man  which  hath  done  either  good  or  evil.  Thirdly,  it  is  so  also  in  the  necessity  of 
it,  as  that  which  must  be  ;  and  here  are  divers  and  sundry  things  considerable  of 
as  as  very  much  making  for  it.  First,  from  the  covensmt  of  grace,  "  I  will  be  thy 
God,"  4o.  Now  to  be  our  God  is  to  be  the  God  of  our  whole  persons ;  not  only  of 
oar  souls,  bat  of  our  bodies  too  (Matt.  xxii.  32).  Secondly,  from  the  work  of 
redemption,  which  extends  to  the  destroying  of  death  as  the  last  enemy,  and  to  get 
the  conquest  and  victory  over  that.  Thirdly,  from  the  resurrection  of  Christ  Him. 
self :  He  is  risen  in  His  body,  therefore  we  also  shall  rise  in  ours.  Fourthly,  from 
the  work  of  the  Spirit.  The  Spirit  of  God,  which  is  in  us.  He  does  certify  and 
assure  us  hereof — namely,  by  these  gracious  effects  of  His  wrought  in  our  souls ; 
while  He  raises  us  from  the  death  of  sin.  He  will  also  raise  us  from  the  death  of  the 
grave.  He  that  hath  done  the  one.  He  is  ready  also  to  do  the  other  for  us.  Hence 
is  the  Spirit  of  God  called  the  earnest  and  pledge  hereof  unto  us  (2  Cor.  v.  6). 
This  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  is  more  particularly  considerable  of  as  in  the 
expression  which  is  here  in  the  text  fastened  upon  it;  whilst  it  is  said  that  "He 
that  raised  up  Christ  from  the  dead  shall  also  quicken  your  mortal  bodies." 
And  here,  again,  two  things  more.  First,  to  speak  of  the  cause  of  it.  He  that 
raised  ap  Christ  from  the  dead  ;  where  the  resurrection  of  Christians  seems  to  be 
made  an  effect,  and  consequent  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  And  so  indeed  it  is, 
and  that  according  to  a  threefold  influence — first,  of  merit ;  secondly,  of  actual 
efficacy  ;  and,  thirdly,  of  example.  The  ground  and  reason  of  all  is  this  :  because 
Christ  is  the  Boot  and  Head  of  all  believers,  as  Adam  was  of  all  mankind.  And  so 
much  may  be  spoken  of  the  first  particular  which  is  here  considerable  of  us,  and 
that  is  the  cause  of  our  resurrection :  in  these  words,  "  He  that  raised  up  Christ 
from  the  dead."  The  second  is  the  carriage  of  it  in  these :  •'  shall  quicken  your 
mortal  bodies."  He  shall  quicken  our  mortal  bodies  by  making  them  absolutely 
immortal.  And  so  now  I  have  done  with  the  first  branch  in  this  second  general — 
to  wit,  the  state  or  condition  itself  which  is  here  propounded;  and  that  is  the 
resurrection  of  the  saints  and  true  believers,  in  these  words :  "He  that  raised  ap 
Christ  from  the  dead  shall  quicken  your  mortal  bodies."  The  second  is  the  con- 
veyance of  this  state  and  condition  unto  them,  or  the  ground  of  conferring 
it  upon  them,  in  these  words:  "By,"  or  "because,  of  His  Spirit  that,"  Ac. 
I  read  it  both  ways,  either  "  by "  or  "  because,"  according  to  the  different 
translation  in  the  text  and  in  the  margin,  and  each  of  them  different,  accord- 
ing to  different  copies  in  the  original.  We  may,  if  we  please,  take  it  either 
way.  First,  take  it  in  the  textual  translation :  "  By  His  Spirit  that  dwelleth  in 
you."  Where  we  see  how  the  dwelling  of  God's  Spirit  in  the  children  of  God  is 
the  means  and  cause  and  conveyance  of  resurrection  to  such  as  are  His  children. 
They  rise,  but  they  rise  by  the  virtue  of  the  Spirit  of  God  that  dwells  in  them ; 
and  that  because  they  rise  in  reference  to  their  relation  to  Christ,  as  we  showed 
before.  But,  secondly,  we  may,  if  we  please,  take  it  also  in  the  marginal  transla- 
tion, which  is  for,  or  because,  of  the  Spirit  that  dwelleth  in  you,  as  denoting  not 
only  the  cause  from  which,  but  also  the  reason  for  which,  this  resurrection  is  con- 
ferred upon  them.  First,  I  say  here  is  that  which  is  implied  :  that  the  Spirit  of 
Ck)d  dwells  in  the  children  of  God.  The  second  is  that  which  is  inferred :  that 
because  and  in  regard  of  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelling  in  them,  therefore  their  bodies 
should  be  raised  and  restored  again  to  life.  This  follows  from  hence,  because  the 
Holy  Ghost  will  not  quit  His  own  interest,  nor  lose  anything  of  that  which  belongs 
onto  Him,  which  He  should  do  if  the  bodies  of  the  saints  lay  still  in  their  graves, 
or  were  wholly  annihilated  and  brought  to  nothing.  The  second  is  conditional,  or 
connective  with  the  words  which  went  before  in  the  beginning  of  the  verse:  "If  the 
Spirit  of  Him  that  raised  up,"  &o.,  where  resurrection  to  eternal  life  is  made 
dependent  upon  the  inhabitation  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  such  persons  as  shall  so  rise. 
The  consideration  of  this  point  may  be  useful  to  as,  to  a  twofold  purpose.  First, 
aa  matter  of  comfort  to  the  saints  and  servants  of  God.  Secondly,  here  is  matter 
of  terror  to  all  wicked  and  reprobate  persons  in  regard  of  the  different  dispensation 
of  it  from  that  of  the  children  of  God.  First,  as  to  the  manner  of  it.  Whereof  the 
one  ahall  be  with  rejoicing,  the  other  with  horror.    Secondly,  in  regard  of  the  end 


4  TEB  BIBUOAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chav.  nn. 

of  tt.  The  godly,  thev  rise  that  they  may  receive  their  orown  and  garland.  But 
the  wicked,  they  rise  that  they  may  receive  their  ponisliment  and  torment.  Thirdly 
and  laBtly,  in  regard  of  the  canse  and  proceeding  of  it.  The  godly,  they  rise  by 
virtue  of  their  onion  with  Christ  as  His  members,  and  by  virtne  of  their  relation  to 
the  Holy  Ghost  as  His  temples ;  but  the  wicked,  they  rise  by  virtue  of  God's  cnrse 
apon  them  and  designment  to  everlasting  destruction.  The  godly,  they  rise  by  the 
power  of  Christ  as  a  Mediator ;  the  wicked,  they  rise  by  the  power  of  Christ  as  a 
Judge.    (Thomat  Eorton,  D.D.) 

Ver.  12.  Therefore,  brethren,  we  are  debtors,  not  to  the  flesh  to  live  after  the 
flesh. — The  Christian — a  debtor  : — I.  How  abb  wb  to  undbbstand  ims.  We  are 
debtors — 1.  To  all  times.  (1)  To  the  past.  To  such  who  have  preceded  us  we  owe 
the  purity  of  the  Church.  Shall  we  not,  in  some  degree,  repay  the  immense  debt 
of  our  obligation  by  seeking  to  make  the  future  also  debtors  to  us,  that  our 
descendants  may  acknowledge  that  they  owe  us  thanks  for  preserving  the  Scriptures, 
for  maintaining  liberty,  for  glorifying  God  ?  (2)  To  the  present.  We  are  living  in 
a  most  marvellous  age.  We  have  around  us  appliances  for  doing  good,  such  as 
never  before.  We  have  a  work  to  do,  as  great  as  our  forefathers,  and,  perhaps,  far 
greater.  (3)  To  the  future.  Who  can  tell  the  fearful  consequences  to  future 
generations  if  we  now  betray  our  trust  ?  Sow  well,  for  others  must  reap.  You  are 
fountains  for  coming  generations ;  oh,  be  careful  that  your  streams  are  pure. 

2.  To  all  classes.  There  are  some  that  always  get  well  paid  for  what  they  do, 
whose  claims,  therefore,  need  no  advocacy.  I  will  only  mention  one  class — the 
poor.  Charity  to  them  is  a  debt,  and  God  requires  us  to  remember  the  poor.  The 
rich  are  indebted  to  them,  for  while  the  one  hoard  wealth  the  other  make  it.  But 
in  the  case  of  the  believing  poor,  their  claim  upon  us  is  far  more  binding.  When 
I  think  how  the  poor  toU  day  after  day  and  receive  barely  enough  to  keep  their 
floals  within  their  bodies,  and  how  frequently  they  serve  their  Church,  unhonoured 
and  unrewarded,  I  cannot  but  say  that  we  are  their  debtors  in  very  large  degree. 
We  little  know  how  many  a  blessing  the  poor  man's  prayer  brings  down  upon  us. 

3.  To  our  covenant  God;  that  is  the  point  which  swallows  up  aU.  I  owe  nothing 
to  the  past,  future,  rich,  poor,  compared  with  what  I  owe  to  my  God.  We  are  all 
bom  God's  creatures,  and  as  such  we  are  debtors  to  obey  Him.  When  we  have 
broken  His  commandments  we  are  debtors  to  His  justice,  and  owe  him  a  vast 
amount  of  punishment  which  we  are  not  able  to  pay.  But  in  the  case  of  the 
Christian,  Christ  has  paid  the  debt.  I  am  a  debtor  to  God's  love,  to  God's  power, 
to  God's  forgiving  mercy,  and  are  we  not  His  sons,  and  is  there  not  a  debt  the  son 
owes  to  the  Father  which  a  Ufetime  of  obedience  can  never  remove  ?  Eemember 
again,  we  are  Christ's  brethren,  and  there  is  a  debt  in  brotherhood.  II.  What 
onoHT  WB  TO  DRAW  FEOM  THIS  DOCTBiNE.  1.  A  Icssou  of  humility.  If  we  be  debtors 
we  never  ought  to  be  proud,  2.  How  zealous  we  should  be  for  our  Master  1 
Though  we  cannot  pay  all,  we  can  at  least  acknowledge  the  debt,  and,  if  we  cannot 
pay  Him  the  principal,  yet  to  give  Him  some  little  interest  upon  the  talent  which  He 
has  lent  to  us,  and  those  stupendous  mercies  which  He  has  granted  to  us.  If  we 
all  believed  this,  how  much  easier  it  would  be  to  get  our  Churches  into  good  order  1 
I  go  to  one  brother  and  say,  "  There  is  such-and-such  an  office  in  the  Sabbath 
school ;  will  you  take  it  ?  "  '  *  Well,  sir,  I  really  work  so  hard  all  the  week  that 
I  cannot."  There,  you  see,  that  man  does  not  know  that  he  is  a  debtor.  I  take  him 
a  bill  to-morrow  morning,  and  he  says,  "  Do  you  come  begging?  "  I  say,  •'  No ;  I 
have  brought  a  bill."  "  Oh,  yes,"  he  says,  "  I  see  ;  there  is  the  cash."  Now  that 
is  the  way  to  act.  Conclusion  :  Be  just  before  you  are  generons,  and  especially 
before  you  are  generous  to  yourselves.  Take  care  that  you  pay  your  debts  before 
you  spend  money  upon  your  pleasures.  If  it  is  robbing  man  to  spend  the  money  in 
pleasure  wherewith  we  ought  to  pay  our  debts,  it  is  robbing  God  if  we  employ  our 
time,  our  talents,  or  our  money,  in  anything  but  His  service,  until  we  feel  we  have 
done  our  share  in  that  service.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  We  are  not  debtors  to  the 
flesh : — The  word  "  flesh  "  may  be  taken  in  its  physical  consideration.  There  is  a 
debt  which  every  man  in  a  sense  does  owe  unto  it.  We  may  be  said  to  be  debtors 
to  the  flesh,  that  is,  to  our  bodies,  in  sundry  regards:  as  to  feed  them,  clothe,  and  to 
nourish  them.  No  man  ever  yet  hated  his  own  flesh  (Eph.  v.  29).  And  there  are 
some  kind  of  people  in  the  world  which  are  scandalously  debtors  to  it :  as,  for 
example,  your  misers  and  muck-worms,  which  pinch  and  straighten  themselves 
even  where  God  has  enlarged  them ;  live  poor,  that  they  may  die  rich.    And  so 

ilikewise  not  only  your  oovetoas,  bat  your  Baperstitious  persons,  which  need- 


«BAP.  nn.l  BOMANS.  f 

lessly,  and  oat  of  a  eonoeit  of  merit,  macerate  their  flesh,  and  put  a  piece  of 
religion  in  abstaining  from  such  kind  of  meats,  which  God  had  created  to  be 
received  with  thanksgiving  of  them  that  believe  and  know  the  truth,  as  it  is  in 
1  Tim.  iv.  3.  The  denial  of  the  flesh,  in  this  sense,  is  the  withholding  of  a  debt 
from  it  which  is  due  unto  it.  Indeed,  as  to  the  pampering  and  inordinate  setting  out 
of  our  bodies,  so  we  are  not  debtors  unto  them.  A  Christian  owes  his  flesh  no  such 
special  or  extraordinary  service  as  this  is.  And  the  reasons  hereof  is  taken  from 
the  nature  and  conditions  of  the  body,  considered  in  itself,  which,  as  it  is  styled  in 
the  verse  before,  is  corruptible  and  mortal.  And  then,  besides,  the  great  impedi- 
ments which  it  does  cause  and  contract  to  the  soul,  from  the  inordinate  serving  of 
it,  whereby  it  is  made  so  much  the  more  unflt  for  the  duties  and  exercises  of 
religion,  taken  in  its  physical  consideration,  so  far  forth  as  it  does  denote  the 
body,  or  outward  man.  The  second  is  by  taking  it  in  the  moral.  The  flesh, 
that  is  sin  and  corruption :  and  so  it  seems  principally  to  be  understood  here  in 
tkis  place.  Christians,  they  are  by  no  means  debtors  to  the  fulfilling  of  their 
lusts.  First,  we  are  not  debtors  to  the  flesh,  nor  have  any  cause  to  do  service  to 
that,  because  we  have  received  no  answerable  benefit  from  it.  A  debt  it  is  upon 
consideration,  and  does  usually  and  for  the  most  part  imply  some  benefit  received. 
We  never  got  a  farthing  by  sin,  any  of  us,  in  all  our  lives.  All  that  we  get  by  sin  is 
nothing  but  shame  and  loss.  Therefore  it  is  not  we  that  are  debtors  to  it,  but  it  is 
it,  indeed,  rather  that  is  a  debtor  to  us,  in  all  those  fair  promises  which  it  hath 
some  time  made  unto  us,  whilst  it  has  performed  none.  Secondly,  as  we  are  not 
debtors  by  receipt,  so  neither  are  we  debtors  by  promise.  That  is  another  way 
sometimes  of  coming  into  debt.  Though  a  man  have  nothing  which  he  hath 
received  from  anofher,  yet  if  he  hath  promised  him,  and  bound  himself  to  him,  he 
becomes  a  debtor  to  him  notwithstanding.  There  is  no  man  that  is  a  true  believer, 
and  that  has  given  up  his  name  to  Christ,  who  has  made  any  promise  to  sin  for  the 
gratifying  of  it  in  any  particular.  Thirdly,  there  are  too  many  of  us  who  are,  as  I 
may  say,  aforehand  with  the  flesh,  in  the  days  of  vanity  and  un-conversion,  there- 
fore not  debtors  to  it.  If  ever  they  owed  anything  to  it,  they  have  paid  it  over 
and  over  again,  and  more  than  enough  (1  Pet.  iv.  3).  Fourthly,  we  are  not  debtors 
to  the  flesh,  because  the  flesh  and  we  are  at  absolute  enmity  and  opposition  one  to 
another.  We  have  killed  and  crucified  the  flesh,  as  many  of  us  as  belong  to  Christ, 
therefore  we  are  no  longer  debtors  to  it.  "They  that  are  Christ's  have  crucified 
the  flesh  with  the  affections  and  lusts  "  (Gal.  v.  24).  Now,  therefore,  we  are  not  to 
conceive  as  if  we  owed  anything  to  it.  Why,  thus  it  is  now  with  us  in  regard  of 
the  flesh.  It  concerns  us  all  we  can  to  spoil  it,  and  to  divest  it  of  that  which  it 
has,  therefore  we  are  not  to  think  that  we  should  owe  anything  to  it.  Fifthly,  we 
are  absolutely  freed  and  discharged  from  the  exactions  of  it.  It  has  no  part  or 
share  in  as,  nor  anything  at  all  to  do  with  us,  therefore  we  are  not  debtors  to  it 
(Bom.  vi.  28).  Those  who  are  regenerate  and  born  again  they  are  made  free  from 
sin,  and  so  nothing  engaged  to  the  services  of  it.  Sixthly  and  lastly,  we  are  not 
debtors  to  the  flesh,  because  the  flesh  is  not  a  warrantable  creditor  for  any  to  be 
indebted  unto.  Where  there  is  nothing  due,  there  is  no  man  can  be  said  to  be  a 
debtor.  Now  for  the  flesh,  it  is  a  cheater,  and  an  usurper,  and  an  oppressor.  The 
consideration  of  this  point  serves  to  this  purpose  :  First,  to  discover  to  us  the  sad 
and  miserable  condition  of  all  such  persons  as  are  out  of  Christ.  There  is  no  man 
so  deeply  engaged  as  that  man  who  is  in  thraldom  to  his  lusts  ;  and  he  has  all  the 
properties  of  a  sad  debtor  npon  him.  First,  he  is  a  servant  to  it  ;  this  is  the 
property  of  a  debtor ;  the  borrower  is  a  servant  to  the  lender,  as  Solomon  speaks. 
He  that  committeth  sin  is  the  servant  of  sin,  so  says  our  Saviour.  Why,  thus  now 
is  every  carnal  and  unregenerate  person  to  his  lusts ;  he  is  a  slave  and  servant  to 
them,  and  they  lead  him  whither  they  please.  He  that  is  a  debtor  to  one  lust,  he 
shall  be  a  slave  to  many  more  with  it,  which  will  engage  him  occasionally  from  it. 
Thus  he  who  is  a  debtor  to  ambition  and  pride  and  vain  glory  in  the  world,  he  is  a 
debtor  occasionally  to  flattery  and  falsehood  and  sinful  correspondences,  for  the 
promoting  of  such  ends  to  himself.  He  that  is  a  debtor  to  oovetousness,  he  is  a 
debtor  consequently  to  cozenage  and  fraud  and  oppression,  and  such  causes  as 
these  for  the  satisfying  of  that  humour  in  him.  And  he  that  is  a  debtor  to  wanton- 
ness  and  lascivionsness  and  drunkenness  and  intemperance,  and  the  like,  he  is  a 
debtor  also  to  other  sins  which  have  an  affinity  and  agreement  thereunto.  Thtu 
lost  is  not  a  single  debt,  but  involves  many  others  besides  together  with  itself, 
which  is  a  special  misery  considerable  in  it.  Secondly,  another  misery  in  a  debtor 
IB  that  he  laboois  all  for  another  many  times  and  not  for  himself.    He  is  not  only 


6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHiJ.  TML 

a  servEint  bat  a  drudge.  Those  that  are  addicted  and  given  up  to  saoh  affections 
as  these  are,  they  can  have  time  and  leisure  for  little  else  but  the  following  of  them, 
whereas  in  the  meantime  their  inward  man  it  lies  waste,  and  those  means  which 
God  has  appointed  for  the  advancing  thereof  are  neglected  accordingly.  Thirdly, 
another  inconvenience  of  debtors  is  restraint  and  want  of  freedom.  Lastly,  he 
that  is  a  debtor  to  sin,  he  ia  the  worst  kind  of  debtor  of  all,  because  the  more  that 
he  pays  to  it  the  more  he  stUl  comes  in  debt  to  a  greater  Creditor,  and  runs  in 
arrears  with  Him,  who  will  be  sure  at  last  to  call  him  to  a  most  strict  account  about 
it.  And  so  now  I  have  done  with  the  first  general  part  of  the  text,  which  is  the 
negative  in  that  which  is  expressed,  "  We  are  not  debtors  to  the  flesh,  to  hve  after  the 
flesh."  The  second  is  the  affirmative,  as  that  which  is  implied.  But  we  are  debtors 
to  the  Spirit,  to  live  after  the  Spirit.  First,  for  the  Creditor :  the  Spirit.  Every 
Christian  is  a  debtor  that  is  bound  and  engaged  to  do  this.  And  first  of  aU,  as  it 
denotes  the  third  person  in  the  Trinity,  which  was  spoken  of  in  the  verse  imme- 
diately preceding.  Every  Christian  is  a  debtor  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  that  in  these 
respects.  First,  as  the  beginner  and  worker  of  all  grace  in  him.  Secondly,  we  are 
engaged  to  the  Spirit,  not  only  as  the  first  beginner,  but  also  as  the  further  increaser 
of  those  graces  in  us  which  are  begun.  TMrdly,  as  our  Comforter  in  afflictions  : 
we  are  debtors  to  the  Spirit  thus.  Lastly,  as  the  continual  suggester  of  good 
thoughts  unto  us,  and  restrainer  of  us  from  evil.  But,  secondly,  we  may  take  it  as 
denoting  the  regenerate  part  in  us,  in  reference  to  a  spiritual  life.  And  thus  in  this 
sense  are  we  debtors  to  the  Spirit  also.  First,  we  are  debtors  to  the  spirit,  that  is, 
to  the  spiritual  part  in  us,  in  regard  of  what  we  have  not  paid  already.  There  is 
no  man,  whoever  he  be,  but  he  is  behindhand,  as  I  may  say,  to  the  spirit  in  this 
respect.  He  has  not  bestowed  that  time,  and  pains  and  endeavour  upon  his  heart, 
and  soul,  and  spirit  as  he  should,  and  as  it  hath  become  him  to  do.  Secondly,  we 
are  debtors  to  the  spirit,  in  regard  of  what  we  ought  and  are  bound  to  pay  unto  it. 
It  is  a  debt  which  lies  upon  us  to  lead  a  godly  and  holy  life :  and  that  in  sundry 
respects.  Thirdly,  we  are  debtors  to  the  Spirit,  from  the  great  benefit  which  does 
accrue  and  come  to  us  herefrom,  and  which  we  have  already  had  experience  of.  Let  us 
consider  how  far  we  have  discharged  this  debt  which  we  are  so  much  engaged  in. 
Let  ns  cast  up  our  reckonings  and  see  what  we  have  expended  answerable  to  what 
we  have  received.  Set  creditor  on  one  hand  and  set  debtor  on  the  other,  as  we  use 
to  do  in  other  matters.  We  are  debtors  to  the  Spirit,  and  He  wUl  not  be  put  off 
with  such  payments  as  belong  rather  to  the  flesh.  Were  it  not  a  strange  thing  for 
a  debtor  to  mistake  his  true  creditor — to  run  and  carry  that  to  one  man  which 
belonged  rather  to  another  ?  Why  thus  it  is  with  many  people  in  regard  of  their 
debts  for  their  souls.  They  are  debtors  to  the  Spirit,  of  their  health,  of  their 
strength,  of  their  time,  of  their  parts,  of  their  estates,  and  of  all  they  have.  And 
they  offer  the  payment  hereof  all  to  the  flesh.  What  an  incongruous  thing  is  this  ? 
Therefore  I  say  stUl,  let  us  be  careful  to  discharge  our  proper  duty  in  that  particular. 
And  to  set  this  so  much  the  more  upon  us,  let  us  consider  these  things  with  our- 
selves. First,  the  power  of  the  Creditor.  And  if  we  neglect  or  refuse  to  pay  Him, 
He  knows  how  to  help  Himself.  No  securing  or  saving  themselves  from  Him  who 
is  able  to  meet  with  them.  Secondly,  the  strictness  of  the  Creditor.  That  is  another 
thing  considerable  likewise.  He  is  one  that  is  exact  in  His  demands,  which  should 
make  us  in  our  returns  to  be  so  Hkewise.  Thirdly,  let  us  further  consider  to  this 
purpose  the  great  advantage  of  paying,  and  the  special  benefit  which  comes  to  as 
by  it,  while  being  debtors  to  the  Spirit  we  are  careful  to  be  payers  too.  We  have 
a  threefold  accommodation  from  it.  First,  a  further  entrusting  and  committing  of 
more  unto  ns.  Such  debtors  as  are  not  careful  to  pay,  there  is  nobody  will  trust 
them  with  any  more.  Secondly,  further  enablement.  The  more  we  are  careful  to 
pay  the  more  we  shall  be  able  to  pay.  Every  new  performance  is  a  preparation  and 
disposition  to  another.  To  him  that  thus  hath  shall  be  given.  Thirdly,  peace  of 
conscience  and  satisfaction  and  tranquility  of  mind.  Debts  they  are  commonly 
troublesome,  and  do  much  disquiet  the  minds  of  those  who  are  entangled  with 
them.      {Th&mat  Horton,  D.D.)  A   debtor  to  the  flesh : — At  the  time  this 

Epistle  was  written,  and  among  the  people  to  whom  it  was  addressed,  the 
creditor  exercised  over  the  debtor  a  power  which  the  humanity  of  modem  times 
has  abolished.  The  unfortunate  man  who  was  insolvent  was  at  the  mercy  of 
his  creditor,  and  might  be  treated  as  he  chose.  It  has  long  been  a  qnestion 
whether,  according  to  the  Boman  law,  the  creditors  had  not  the  right  of  catting 
the  man's  body  in  pieces  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  their  claims;  and 
there  can  be  no  doabt  that  the  debtor's  person  as  well  as  his  property,  hii 


CBAV.  vm.]  ROMANS.  T 

family  as  well  as  himself,  were  liable  to  be  apprehended  and  disposed  of;  jast 
as  we  read  in  the  parable,  where  the  king  is  found  ordering  that  the  servant  who 
owed  him  ten  thousand  talents  should  be  sold,  with  his  family  and  all  that  he  had, 
that  payment  might  be  made.  In  this  sense,  therefore,  the  debtor  of  the  flesh 
would  have  been  a  man  over  whom  the  flesh  had  established  an  absolute  power  ; 
whose  mind  as  well  as  body  were  devoted  to  its  service,  and  bound  to  do  its  will — 
who,  if  he  laboured,  was  to  labour  that  he  might  make  "  provision  for  the  flesh,  to 
fulfil  the  lusts  thereof  " ;  who,  if  he  rested,  was  to  rest  that  he  might  indulge  it  in 
all  its  inclinations  more  freely  ;  who,  if  he  thought,  was  to  be  thinking  about  things 
to  be  had  in  the  body,  or,  if  he  spoke,  was  to  be  speaking  of  them,  and  was  to  show 
a  distaste  for  thought  and  conversation  of  a  higher,  purer  character.  There  are 
many  who  are  debtors  to  the  flesh ;  who  acknowledge  the  obligations,  and  show  no 
inclination  to  be  released  from  it.  Listen  to  the  voice  of  the  world.  Hear  how 
the  young  are  told  that  they  ought  to  enjoy  themselves  while  they  are  able,  and 
that  no  one  can  condemn  them  if  they  do  so.  Hear  how  those  who  are  more 
advanced  are  told  that  in  dress,  furniture,  table,  amusements,  they  ought  to  do 
what  others  do,  and  that  they  ought  not  to  give  offence  by  adopting  a  more  Christian 
course  of  life  than  that  which  their  neighbours  lead.  And  when  this  language  of  the 
world  comes  to  be  translated  into  the  words  of  the  text,  is  it  not  equivalent  with 
saying,  '*  We  are  debtors  to  the  flesh,  to  make  provision  for  its  indulgence  ;  we  are 
debtors  to  the  flesh  for  everything  we  enjoy  or  desire  ;  and  therefore  we  are  bound 
to  do  all  we  can,  in  order  to  fulfil  its  purposes  and  gratify  its  wishes  "  ?  "  There- 
fore," as  the  apostle  continues,  "  if  ye  live  after  the  flesh,  ye  shall  die."  If  you 
have  persuaded  yourselves  that  you  must  owe  to  the  flesh  the  happiness  you  wish  for, 
and  if,  acting  under  this  impression,  that  you  are  "  debtors  to  the  flesh,"  you 
determine  to  "  live  after  the  flesh,"  death  will  soon  come  and  put  an  end  to  all 
these  dreams  you  have  been  cherishing  ;  but  long  before  death  comes  to  chill  your 
mirth,  long  before  those  rosebuds  are  withered  with  which  you  have  been  crowning 
yourselves,  a  deadness  of  heart  shall  come  over  you,  a  deadness  to  all  spiritual 
things,  which  shall  be  the  pledge  and  token  of  eternal  death.  {H.  Raikes,  M.A.) 
Debtors  to  the  flesh: — I.  The  obligation  doe  to  the  body.  We  are  in  the  flesh, 
and  the  flesh  has  claims  which  rest  upon  Divine  appointment.  1.  Observe  the 
form  in  which  the  apostle  puts  the  matter.  We  may  be  debtors  to  the  flesh,  but 
not  to  live  after  it.  The  duty  we  owe  it  is  not  that  of  servants  to  a  master,  but 
of  a  master  to  his  servants.  We  are  debtors  in  respect  to  food,  medicine,  raiment, 
shelter,  temperance  and  cleanliness.  And  to  those  who  belong  to  us  after  the  flesh 
we  are  debtors  for  earthly  things  ;  and  he  that  careth  not  for  them  is  worse  than 
an  infidel.  2.  Let  us  go  further.  Our  bodies  are  the  Divine  workmanship,  and 
their  faculties  are  of  God's  making  and  giving.  Why?  Not  that  they  should  run 
away  with  us  or  rule  us,  but  that  they  should  be  subject  to  us.  II.  The  limit  of 
THE  OBLIGATION.  "  Not  to  live  after  the  flesh."  Men  Uve  after  the  flesh — 1.  When 
the  flesh  is  made  the  chief  object  of  care,  and  this  we  are  not  obliged  to  do  by  any 
Divine  law.  2.  When  we  allow  carnal  indulgence  to  interfere  with  Christian  duty. 
8.  When  we  decline  bodily  suffering  in  the  cause  and  at  the  call  of  God.  4. 
When  we  are  guided  by  a  carnal  policy  in  the  conduct  of  life.  III.  The  difficulty 
OF  the  obligation.  We  shall  find  the  flesh  so  tyrannical  that  to  keep  within  the 
actual  limit  of  obligation  is  no  easy  matter.  To  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body 
thus  becomes  an  important  duty.  This  mortification  is  evangelical  in  motive, 
spiritual  in  nature,  gradual  in  consummation.    lY.  This  mobtitioation  is  at  oncb 

THE   test   op   SPIBITUALITY   OF   MIND  AND   THE     FBUIT    OF    THE     EFFECTUAL     WOEK    OF 

THE  Spibit  OF  GoD.  Salvatiou  is  not  only  a  work  for  us,  but  in  us.  1.  The 
Great  Helper.  We  are  not  left  to  ourselves.  2.  But  a  helper  implies  our  own 
activity.  3.  This  proclaims  the  energy  and  reaUty  of  the  spiritual  life.  (Percy 
Strutt.)  Believers  not  debtors  to  the  fl£sh: — I.  Not  fbom  belationship.  The 
flesh  is  no  part  of  our  original  nature.  11.  Not  fbom  gbatitudb.  Its  effects 
upon  as  have  been  only  evil.  III.  Not  fbom  duty.  It  is  opposed  to  God,  who 
commands  us  to  crucify  it.  IV.  Not  fbom  intebest.  Only  misery  and  death 
ever  to  be  reaped  from  it  (Gal.  vi.  8).  We  are  debtors  to  the  body,  which  ia 
God's  creature  (Acts  xxvii.  34;  Eph.  v.  29),  but  not  debtors  to  the  flesh,  which  ia 
Satan's  production  (Matt.  xili.  38 ;  1  John  iii.  8).  We  are  debtors  to  the  body  to 
satisfy  its  wants,  but  not  to  the  flesh  to  gratify  its  lusts  (chap.  xiii.  14).  (T.  RoHnson, 
D.D.)  The  Christian  a  debtor  not  to  the  flesh,  but  to  the  Spirit : — ^You  take  a  wild 
briar  from  the  hedge,  and  plant  it  in  your  garden ;  upon  that  briar  you  graft  the 
choicest  rose,  and  tiie  result  is — ^what?  not  two  distinct  identities,  t^e  briai 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chat.  ^m. 

flourishing  as  a  briar,  and  the  rose  as  a  rose,  nor  tbe  briar  being  completely 
absorbed  into  the  rose,  but  two  distinct  natures  formirg  one  individuality,  of  which 
one  represents  the  original  individuality  of  the  briar,  while  the  other  the  imparted 
nature  of  the  rose.  This  original  individuality  is  only  to  be  allowed  to  express 
itself  through  the  imparted  nature.  All  self-assertion  on  the  part  of  the  original 
briar  stock,  as  distinct  from  the  new  nature  engrafted  upon  it,  is  to  be  rigorously 
repressed.  Neglect  this  process  of  repression,  and  the  briar  may  make  shoote 
below  the  graft ;  and  as  these  shoots  develop  themselves  the  rose  nature  begins  to 
lose  ground,  and  suffers  in  foliage  and  flower,  until,  if  the  process  be  only  allowed 
to  go  far  enough,  the  rose  is  extinguished,  the  old  briar  is  supreme.  Yet  observe : 
the  briar  itself  is  not  repressed  ;  it  is  allowed  to  develop  itself  in  accordance  with 
the  laws  of  its  own  nature,  but  only  through  the  rose.  None  of  its  personal  rights 
or  functions  are  to  be  interfered  with  ;  it  is  not  to  be  robbed  of  the  enjoyment  of 
full  vital  vigour  ;  but  all  this  is  to  go  to  the  production  of  a  flower  worthy  of  your 
garden,  instead  of  the  scanty  and  quickly-fading  bloom  of  the  hedge-rose.  What 
is  it  that  produces  the  standard  rose  ?  Not  the  rose  without  the  briar ;  not  the 
briar  without  the  rose,  but  the  rose  and  the  briar  united  in  one.  In  that  standard 
rose,  Christian,  behold  a  picture  of  thyself  if  Christ  is  formed  in  thee  1  Thy 
individuality  is  not  to  be  repressed  ;  no  healthy  function  of  thy  nature  is  to  be  laid 
aside.  Yet  is  it  necessary  that  you  should  be  prepared  to  mortify  the  deeds  of  the 
body,  or  the  old  nature  may  assert  itself  apart  from  all  reference  to  the  new. 
*'  Mortify,  therefore,  your  members  which  are  upon  the  earth."  Do  you  ask  how  ? 
I  reply  that  the  same  Spirit  which  has  already  introduced  the  new  nature,  and 
united  Himself,  provides  the  pruning-knife.  "  We  are  debtors,  not  to  the  flesh,  to 
live  after  the  flesh.  For  if  ye  live  after  the  flesh,  ye  shall  die  ;  but  if  ye  through 
the  Spirit  do  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body,  ye  shall  live."  We  are  debtors,  not  to 
the  old  briar-stock  apart  from  the  rose,  for  what  did  that  ever  bear  that  was  worth 
gathering  ?  what  fruit  had  we  but  those  things  whereof  we  are  now  ashamed  ?  the 
end  of  those  things  was  death.  But  we  are  debtors,  not  only  to  that  God  whose 
sovereign  love  has  made  us  what  we  are ;  not  only  to  that  Saviour  who  has  re- 
deemed us  from  the  slavery  of  sin  ;  not  only  to  that  Spirit  who  has  condescended 
to  make  our  body  His  temple ;  but  we  owe  it  to  our  new  selves — that  self  into 
which  the  new  Adam  has  been  grafted,  and  wherein  the  new  Adam  claims  to  have 
His  way ;  we  owe  it  to  that  sense  of  harmony  which  pervades  the  once  distracted 
elements  of  our  nature ;  to  that  calm  which  has  taken  the  place  of  our  former 
disquietude ;  to  that  joy  which  has  already  furnished  us  with  a  foretaste  of  heaven; 
that  we  should  be  true  to  the  instincts  of  our  new  life,  and  to  the  laws  of  our 
renovated  nature!  To  forget  this  solemn  debt  is  to  turn  our  backs  on  all  that  makes 
life  profitable,  is  to  give  ourselves  over  to  spiritual  bankruptcy;  to  recognise  it  and 
pay  it  with  loyal  and  grateful  devotion,  is  to  secure  boundless  resources  of  infinite 
wealth.  "  If  ye  live  after  the  flesh,  ye  shall  die  "  ;  and  he  who  dies  is  stripped  of 
aU :  "If  ye  through  the  Spirit  do  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body,  ye  shall  live " ; 
and  he  who  thus  lives,  lives  in  the  enjoyment  of  all.  ( W.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A. )  The 
believers'  obligation: — I.  The  solemn  obligation  of  the  children  of  God.  We 
are  debtors ;  but  the  flesh  is  not  our  creditor.  Do  we  owe  anything  to  sin,  the 
parent  of  all  woe  ?  To  Satan — who  plotted  our  temptation  and  accomplished  our 
downfall?  To  the  world — ensnaring,  deceitful,  and  ruinous?  No;  to  these,  the 
allies  of  the  flesh,  we  owe  nothing  but  hatred  and  opposition.  And  yet  the  saints 
of  God  are  "  debtors."  1.  To  the  Father,  for  His  electing  love,  His  unspeakable  gift. 
His  spiritual  blessings  in  Christ.  2.  To  the  Son.  He  was  the  active  agent  in  our 
redemption.  He  left  no  path  untrodden,  no  portion  of  the  curse  unborne,  no  sin 
nnatoned,  no  part  of  the  law  uncancelled,  nothing  for  us  in  the  matter  of  our 
Balvation  to  do,  but  simply  beheve  and  be  saved.  3.  To  the  Holy  Spirit,  for  lead- 
ing QB  to  Christ ;  for  dwelling  in  our  hearts ;  for  His  healing,  sanctifying,  comfort- 
ing, and  restoring  grace  ;  for  His  influence  which  no  ingratitude  has  quenched ;  for 
His  patience  which  no  backsliding  has  exhausted ;  for  His  love  which  no  sin  has 
annihilated.  We  owe  Him  the  intellect  He  has  renewed,  the  heart  He  haa 
Banotified,  the  body  He  inhabits,  every  breath  of  life  He  has  inspired,  and  every 
pulse  of  love  He  has  awakened.  II.  The  duty  to  which  that  obligation  binds 
IHXM.  Holiness,  or  the  mortification  of  sin,  the  opposite  of  "  living  after  the 
flesh,"  a  subject  strangely  misunderstood  to  mean  a  mere  maceration  or  mortification 
I  of  the  body,  the  mere  excision  of  outward  sins,  or  the  destmction  of  sin  altogether. 
True  morUfication  is— 1.  An  annulling  of  the  coTenant  with  sin:  "Have  no 
fellowship  with  the  oufraitful  works  of  darknesf,"  no  onion,  **  bat  rather  repror* 


8Bi?.  rm.]  B0MAN8.  9 

them.**  "  What  have  I  to  do  any  more  with  idols  f  "  The  resoarcM  of  ihi  most 
beeot  ofif :  "  Make  no  provision  for  the  flesh,  to  fulfil  the  lasts  thereof."  Whatever 
tends  to,  and  terminates  in,  the  sinful  gratification  of  the  flesh,  ia  to  be  relin- 
quished. 2.  A  crucifixion :  "  Thej  that  are  Christ's  have  oraoified  the  flesh." 
Death  hj  the  cross  is  certain,  yet  lingering.  UI.  Thb  twotolo  jlokmct  bt  which 
THX  woBK  IS  accomplished.  1.  "  If  ye."  The  believer  is  not  a  cipher  in  this 
work.  His  asefnlness,  his  happiness,  his  hope  of  heaven,  are  all  included  in  it. 
The  work  of  the  Spirit  is  not,  and  never  was  designed  to  be,  a  substitute  tor  the 

Krsonal  work  of  the  believer.  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation."  Let  us,  then, 
cautious  of  merging  human  responsibility  in  Divine  influence ;  of  exalt- 
ing  the  one  at  the  expense  of  the  other;  of  cloaking  the  spirit  of  slothful- 
ness  beneath  an  apparently  jealous  regard  for  the  honour  of  the  Holy  Ohost. 
Is  no  self-effort  to  be  made  to  dethrone  an  unlawful  habit,  to  resist  a  power- 
fol  temptation,  to  dissolve  the  spell  that  binds  us  to  a  dangerous  enchant- 
ment, to  unwind  the  chain  that  makes  us  the  slave  of  a  wrong  inclination  f  Oh, 
surely,  God  deals  not  vrith  us  as  we  deal  with  a  piece  of  mechanism — but  as 
reasonable,  moral,  and  accountable  beings.  "  I  drew  you  with  the  bands  of  a 
man."  2.  And  it  infinitely  transcends  Uie  mightiest  puttings  forth  of  oreativt 
power.  "  If  ye  through  the  Spirit  do  mortify."  1.  This  He  does  by  making  us 
more  sensible  of  the  existence  of  indwelling  sin,  by  deepening  our  aspirations  after 
holiness,  by  shedding  abroad  the  love  of  Ood  in  the  heart.  But  above  all,  by 
leading  us  to  the  Cross,  and  showing  us  that,  as  Christ  died  for  sin,  so  we  must  die 
to  sin,  and  by  the  self-same  instrument  too.  2.  The  Spirit  effects  it,  but  through 
the  instrsmentality  of  the  Atonement.  There  must  be  a  personal  contact  with 
JasoB.    This  only  is  it  that  draws  forth  His  grace.    (A.  WimUno,  D.D.) 

Yer.  18.  For  If  ye  live  after  tbe  flesh,  79  shall  die :  but  If  ye  through  the 
Spirit  do  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body,  y«  shall  live. — Sin  and  death,  or 
grace  and  life ;— L  If  bin  uva  nc  us,  wb  shall  deb.  1.  To  live  "  after 
the  flesh "  is  to  obey  the  orders  of  our  corrupt  nature ;  to  gratify  its  sinful 
desires  without  regard  to  or  in  contradiction  of  the  will  of  Gh>d.  And  this 
will  appear  if  we  consider— (1)  The  actions  of  a  carnal  man  (Gal.  t.  19 ;  Eph.  v. 
12  ;  Heb.  xiii.  4 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  10).  (2)  His  words  (Matt.  xii.  S4 ;  Eph.  t.  4 ;  James 
iii.  6).  (3)  His  thoughts  (Prov.  xxiii.  7 ;  Matt.  xv.  18 ;  Psa.  x.  4 ;  PhiL  iii  19 ; 
1  John  ii.  15).  2.  Now,  mark  the  consequence  of  living  after  the  flesh ;  "  ye  shall 
die ! "  (ver.  6 ;  1  Tim.  v.  6 ;  Eph.  ii.  1  ;  Rom.  vi.  2).  What  else  could  be  reason- 
ably expected  ?  There  are  but  two  eternal  states,  and  every  man  is  training  up  for 
one  of  these.  The  carnal  man  is  unfit  for  heaven  ;  for  aU  the  joys  and  employ- 
ments of  the  blessed  are  spiritual.  IL  If  sin  dib  in  us,  wb  shall  litb.  1.  To 
mortify  sin  is  to  put  it  to  death,  as  the  magistrates  put  a  felon  to  death  by  due 
course  of  justice ;  he  is  suspected,  apprehended,  tried,  and  executed.  Crucifixion 
is  the  manner  of  killing  it  which  God  has  appointed  (Gal.  v.  24).  This  is — (1)  A 
violent  and  painful  death.  (2)  A  scandalous  death.  (3)  A  slow  and  lingering 
death.  2.  By  what  means  may  we  effectually  mortify  sin  ?  "  Through  the  Spirit." 
We  must  first  have  the  Spirit,  that  we  may  experience  His  sanctifying  power.  Tha 
Spirit  helps  us  to  mortify  sin— (1)  By  enabling  us  to  discover  it,  and  by  showing 
OS  its  abominable  nature ;  filling  our  souls  with  a  sincere  dislike  to  it,  and  a  holy 
determination  to  destroy  it.  (2)  By  giving  us  faith,  and  leading  us  to  Christ  for 
pardon,  righteousness,  and  strength.  3.  This  promised  help  of  tiie  Spirit  does  not 
exclude  the  use  of  means  on  our  part.  The  Spirit  so  works  in  us,  as  also  to  work 
by  US.  The  duty  is  ours ;  the  grace  is  His.  4.  Thus  doing,  we  "  shall  live." 
There  Is  no  condemnation  to  persons  of  this  character.  This  is  an  evidence  that 
they  have  "  jwssed  from  death  unto  life  "  (John  v.  24).  They  live  indeed,  for 
Chnst  liveth  in  them.  They  Uve  to  God ;  and  in  this,  their  gradual  sanctification, 
consists  their  meetness  for  heaven,  where  sin  shall  be  all  done  away.  But,  oh 
sinner,  what  will  be  the  end  of  thy  present  pursuits  ?  (chap.  vi.  21).  {O.  Burder.) 
Orace  the  only  source  of  goodneu : — L  Without  God,  bndlkss  conflict.  1.  "  The 
body"  or  "the  flesh"  (chap.  vii.  25;  Gal.  v.  17),  or  "the  earthly  members"  (Col. 
iii.  6 ;  Rom.  viii.  23).  (1)  Is  regarded  as  the  source  of — (o)  Our  animal  appetites 
(Gal.  T.  19,  "fornication,"  &o.).  (6)  Our  selfish  passions  (Gal.  v.  20,  "hatred," 
&0.).  (c)  Our  mental  perversities  (Gal.  v.  20,  "idolatry,"  Ac.)— all  those  false 
notions  which  are  called  (Eph.  ii.  3)  the  working  of  the  understanding  that  judges 
aecording  to  sense,  as  distinguished  from  the  pore  reason  (chap.  i.  21).  (2)  All 
these  workings  of  "  tiie  flesh "  are  sinful,  i.e.,  abnormal,  contrary  to  the  end  foff 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ym. 

which  God  has  made  ns  "  (chap.  vii.  14, 18).  2.  "  The  spirit,"  "  the  mind,"  "  the 
inward  man  "  (chap.  vii.  22,  23)  is  the  source  of  our — (1)  Moral  principles  (chap, 
vii.  22 ;  Matt.  xxvi.  41).  (2)  Social  affections  (Gal.  v.  22).  3.  These  workings  of 
'♦  the  Spirit "  are  in  endless  conflict  with  the  workings  of  the  flesh  (GaL  v.  17 ; 
Bom.  viii.  7-25),  bat  with  no  sufficient  power  to  overcome  them  (chap.  vii.  18,  19 ; 
Matt.  xxvi.  41) ;  so  that  the  result  is  only  self-contradiction,  self-condemnation, 
misery,  and  death  (chap.  vii.  24).  II.  With  God,  final  victoby  (vers.  2-4). 
"  The  deeds  of  the  body,"  or  "  works  of  the  flesh "  (Gal.  v.  19),  mean  the 
products  of  our  lower  nature,  whether  of  thought,  or  feeling,  or  act.  To 
"  mortify,"  "  crucify  "  (Gal.  v.  24),  "  deaden  "  them  (Col.  iii.  5),  is  to  reduce  them 
to  impotence.  Observe  the  antithesis :  If  ye  put  to  death  your  animal  nature,  you 
yourself,  who  are  spirit,  shall  live.  And  this  death  of  sin  is  to  be  effected  by  the 
life  of  God  in  the  soul.  1.  Baise  us  above  sin.  God's  Spirit  in  us  raises  us  into 
the  region  of  spirit.  And  in  this  atmosphere  sin  cannot  reach  us  (1  John  v.  18). 
The  thought  of  sin  is  most  alien  when  the  thought  of  God  is  most  vivid.  In 
fellowship  with  holy  men,  how  hateful  sin  appears  I  How  much  more,  therefore, 
when  in  fellowship  with  the  Holy  One?  Aaron  down  in  the  plain  was  soon 
seduced  from  God's  commandments.  Moses  in  the  mount  grasped  them  firmly 
with  both  hands.  Whence  the  importance  of  prayer  (Matt.  xvii.  21).  2.  Hearten 
us  against  sin  (ver.  15).  Knowing  that  we  are  on  God's  side,  we  know  also  that 
God  is  on  our  side  (Gen.  vi.  24  ;  Numb.  xix.  9 ;  2  Kings  vi.  16 ;  Isa.  xli.  10).  And 
so  the  animation  of  Moses  fills  us :  "  Fear  not  I  Stand  still,  and  see  the  salvation 
God  can  work  "  (Exod.  xiv.  13,  14).  Jesus,  full  of  the  spirit  of  Sonship,  put  back 
easily  all  the  suggestions  of  the  tempter.  3.  Make  us  triumphant  over  sin.  The 
things  impossible  to  man  by  himself  are  possible  to  him  with  God  (1  John  iv.  4 ; 
Eph.  vi.  10  ;  Phil.  iv.  13).  (Preh.  Griffith.)  Mortification  a  Christian  duty  : — 
In  the  text  itself  there  are  two  general  parts  considerable.  First,  a  conditional 
threatening  or  dreadful  commination  upon  supposition  of  miscarriage :  "  If  ye  live 
after  the  flesh,  ye  shall  die."  When  it  is  said  of  such  persons  that  they  shall  die, 
we  must  take  it  in  the  full  latitude  and  extent  of  death,  that  is — First,  as  to 
temporal  death,  or  natural,  which  consists  in  the  mere  separation  of  soul  and  body. 
This  it  holds  good,  according  to  a  twofold  account.  First,  in  the  course  of  God's 
justice,  who  hath  so  ordained  it  and  appointed  it  (chap.  i.  32).  Secondly,  from  a 
connection  of  the  cause  with  the  effect.  Sin,  and  especially  a  living  and  conversing 
in  the  ways  of  it,  brings  death.  Secondly,  spiritual  death,  which  consists  in 
deprivation  of  grace,  and  hoUness,  and  peace,  and  spiritual  comfort.  "  If  ye  live 
after  the  flesh,  ye  shall  die."  Thirdly,  there  is  another  death,  and  that  is  death 
eternal.  The  separation  of  soul  and  body  from  God  for  ever  in  heU.  And  this  is 
also  consequent  upon  living  after  the  flesh.  The  second  is  the  conditional  promise 
or  comfortable  intimation  upon  supposition  of  repentance  and  new  obedience  in 
these :  "  But  U  ye  through  the  Spirit  do  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  flesh,"  Ac. 
Wherein  again  we  have  four  particulars.  First,  to  speak  of  the  duty  itself,  which 
is  mortification.  "  If  ye,"  &c.  This  is  a  duty  which  lies  upon  every  Christian,  to 
exercise  and  inure  himself  to  mortification,  that  is,  to  the  killing  and  crucifying  of 
Bin  in  him.  For  the  better  opening  of  this  present  point  unto  us,  there  are  two 
things  especially  which  are  here  to  be  declared  by  us.  First,  wherein  this  mortifying 
of  sin,  whereof  we  now  speak,  does  mainly  and  principally  consist.  And  this  we 
may  take  according  to  these  following  explications.  First,  it  does  imply  an  active 
and  spontaneous  opposition  of  sin  of  our  own  accord.  Secondly,  it  does  imply 
difficulty  and  trouble  in  the  performance  of  it.  Dying,  it  is  usually  with  some 
pain :  as  being  that  which  nature  does  struggle  with  and  strive  against,  especially 
violent  death  and  tiiat  which  follows  upon  killing.  This,  it  is  painful,  especially. 
Created  nature  does  not  more  abhor  natural  death,  the  death  of  the  body,  than 
corrupted  nature  does  abhor  this  mystical  death.  The  killing  of  sin.  Oh,  it  is 
that  which  a  carnal  person  cannot  endure  to  hear  or  think  of.  This  arises  from 
that  strength  and  settlement  which  sin  hath  in  the  heart.  As  we  see  it  is  again  in 
nature,  that  those  who  have  the  strongest  constitutions,  they  have  commonly  the 
painf ullest  deaths.  Even  so  is  it  likewise  in  grace :  those  who  have  the  strongest 
corruption,  they  have  the  hardest  mortification.  Thirdly,  this  mortification,  it  does 
imply  a  weakening  of  the  power  and  vigour  of  sin  in  us.  That  look  as  a  body 
which  is  dead,  it  is  thereby  made  unserviceable  and  unfit  for  the  actions  of  life.  So 
a  man  also,  that  is  spiritually  mortified,  sin  is  in  him  made  unactive  and  unfit  for 
the  former  services  and  performances  wliich  proceeded  from  it.  Fourthly,  it  implies 
imiversahty,  that  is,  s  resisting  of  all  kind  of  sin,  without  exception.     Killing,  it 


CBAJP.  Tm.]  ROMANS.  11 

18  a  destroying  of  life  in  every  part.  There  mast  not  be  only  a  restraining  of  some 
■ins,  bat  a  fighting  against  all.  Where  any  one  reigns  there  is  no  true  mortification. 
Fifthly  and  lastly,  it  implies  oontinuanoe  and  the  often  renewing  of  this  act  time 
after  time.  The  second  is  the  grounds  or  reasons  which  do  make  for  the  per- 
formance of  it,  which  may  be  reduced  to  these  heads.  First,  the  nature  of  sin  and 
the  thing  itself,  which  is  to  be  mortified,  and  that  is  our  mortal  and  deadly  enemy. 
"  If  a  man  find  his  enemy,"  says  Saul,  "  will  he  let  him  go  well  away  ?  "  Enmity, 
it  invites  destruction  as  well  as  threatens  it.  Secondly,  there  is  reason  for  it  also 
from  that  power  which  is  wrought  in  a  Christian  by  Christ's  Spirit  tending  thereto, 
and  the  special  virtue  which  is  contained  in  the  death  and  sufferings  of  Christ  to 
this  purpose.  Because  ye  are  dead  and  risen  with  Christ,  therefore  "mortify  your 
earthly  members,"  &c.  Thirdly,  it  ia  requisite  also  from  that  obedience  which  we 
owe  to  God  in  the  whole  course  of  our  hves.  No  man  can  be  alive  to  God,  that  is, 
perform  lively  service  to  Him,  but  he  that  is  first  dead  to  sin,  that  is,  that  hath  sin 
and  corruption  first  crucified  and  mortified  in  him.  Fourthly,  as  an  evidence  of 
our  justification  and  the  forgiveness  of  our  sins  unto  us.  No  man  can  be  bo 
oomfoiiably  assured  that  his  sin  is  pardoned  that  does  not  find  his  sin  mortified. 
Wherever  sin  remains  in  the  power  of  it,  it  remains  also  in  the  guilt  of  it. 
To  quicken  and  provoke  us  so  much  the  more  hereunto,  let  us  take  in  these 
considerations  with  us.  First,  the  command  of  God,  who  has  laid  this  duty 
apon  us.  Secondly,  our  own  interest  and  the  great  good  which  we  reap  from 
it,  both  in  point  of  grace  and  comfort,  and  at  last  of  salvation  itself,  as  it 
follows  afterwards  in  the  text,  where  it  is  said,  "  Ye  shall  live ."  Thirdly, 
the  evil  of  the  contrary,  and  the  great  disparagement  which  Hes  upon  sin 
nnmortified.  Sin  it  is  an  odious  business  in  many  respects,  and  hath  sundry 
inconveniences  with  it.  First,  there  is  no  true  pleasure  or  contentment  in  it. 
Secondly,  sin  is  also  insatiable,  and  the  more  that  men  give  way  unto  it  the  more 
it  prevails  still  upon  them.  Thirdly,  sin  is  deceitful  and  dangerous.  It  makes  us 
slaves  to  Satan  ;  it  makes  us  enemies  to  God ;  it  crucifies  Christ ;  it  fights  against 
the  soul.  Now  for  the  right  performance  of  this  duty,  and  that  we  may  do  it  so  as 
we  should  do,  it  is  requisite  for  us  to  take  notice  of  these  three  following  rules,  or 
directions,  which  conduce  hereto.  First,  there  must  be  a  steadfast  purpose  of 
opposing  and  resisting  of  sin  with  might  and  main.  Secondly,  there  must  be  a 
diligent  heed  for  the  avoiding  of  all  occasions  of  sin  and  all  inducements  which  lead 
thereunto.  Thirdly,  there  must  be  a  conscionable  use  of  all  such  means  as  serve 
to  the  subduing  of  sin  in  us.  What  are  they  ?  First,  a  sober  and  moderate  use  of 
the  creatures  in  those  things  which  in  their  own  nature  are  lawful  and  warrantable. 
Secondly,  prayer  and  fasting ;  that  is  another  help  likewise.  Thirdly,  and 
principally,  an  act  of  faith  in  the  death  and  sufferings  of  Christ.  The  second  is 
the  object  of  this  duty,  or  the  matter  which  it  is  conversant  about.  And  that  is 
here  expressed  to  be  the  deeds  of  the  body.  What  is  the  meaning  of  this  ?  that  is, 
indeed,  the  sins  and  miscarriages  of  the  whole  man.  We  are  not  here  to  take  it  in 
the  limited  sense  only,  but  in  the  extended.  This  work  of  mortification,  it  begins 
first  of  all  in  the  inward  man,  and  so  ends  in  the  outward ;  only  the  outward  is 
here  mentioned  and  named.  And  it  is  said  the  deeds  of  the  body  expressly, 
because  the  body  it  is  that  wherein  sin  does  especially  show  and  discover  itself ; 
whereas  the  mind  is  not  so  easily  discerned  in  the  corruptions  of  it.  So  2  Cor.  t. 
10.  The  things  which  are  done  in  the  body,  though  comprehending  the  soul 
likewise,  the  actions  of  the  whole  person ;  and  CoL  iii.  9,  the  old  man  with  his 
deeds:  The  third  particular  is  the  principle  whence  this  duty  doth  proceed  in  us, 
or  the  means  whereby  we  perform  it.  And  that  is  here  expressed  to  be  the  Spirit. 
"  If  ye  by  the  Spirit,"  &c.  By  the  Spirit  we  are  here  to  understand  the  Spirit  of 
Ood,  the  Holy  Spirit  which  is  called  so  emphatically.  Mortification  of  sin  is  the 
proper  work  of  this  Spirit  in  as,  and  is  effected  in  no  other  way.  The  same  Spirit 
that  is  active  in  quickening  of  us  and  in  infusing  of  grace  into  as ;  the  same  Spirit 
is  also  active  in  mortifying  of  us  and  in  killing  of  sin  in  as.  This  must  needs  be 
10  upon  these  following  considerations.  First,  from  the  strength  and  power  of  sin, 
and  that  rooting  which  it  hath  in  the  soul.  None  can  overcome  the  strong  man, 
but  some  one  that  is  stronger  than  he  indeed  is.  Secondly,  from  the  proper  means 
of  the  killing  of  sin  in  as,  which,  as  we  showed  before,  is  the  application  of  Christ's 
death  onto  ns.  Now,  this  is  done  only  by  the  Spirit  which  is  active  in  as  to  this 
purpose.  Thirdly,  from  the  covenant  of  grace  which  God  hath  made  with  iJl 
oelieyers,  which  is  to  bestow  His  Spirit  apon  them  to  this  purpose,  as  Ezek.  xzxvi. 
ST.    The  fourth,  and  last,  is  the  boiefit  or  reward  consequent  upon  it.     That  is  in 


H  THB  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [om*.  tih. 

these  words,  "  Te  shall  liTe."  It  holds  good  in  all  the  notions  and  stpeoifioations 
of  life  whatsoever.  First,  of  natural  life,  "  Length  of  days  is  in  her  right  hand  " 
(ProT.  iii.  16).  Secondly,  of  spiritual  life,  "  I  am  crucified  with  Christ,  nevertbelesa 
I  lire ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me ;  and  the  life  which  I  now  live  in  the  flesh, 
I  live  by  the  faith,"  &o.  Thirdly,  of  eternal  life  (chap.  vi.  22),  "  Ya  have  yoar 
fruit  unto  holiness,  and  the  end  everlasting  life."  And  Gal.  vi.  8,  "He  that 
soweth  to  the  flesh,  shall  of  the  flesh  reap  corruption."  (Thomas  Horton,  D.D.) 
Mortification: — I.  Thb  act — <' Mortify."  1.  Sin  is  active  in  the  soul  of  an  an* 
regenerate  man.  Justification  supposeth  guilt,  sanctification  filth,  mortificatioa 
life,  preceding  those  acts.  2.  Nothiiig  but  the  death  of  sin  must  content  a  renewed 
soul.  No  indulgence  to  be  shown  to  it ;  not  the  loss  of  a  member,  but  the  loss  of 
its  life.  As  nothing  but  the  death  of  Christ  would  satisfy  the  justice  of  God,  so 
nothing  but  the  death  of  sin  must  satisfy  the  justice  of  the  soul.  3.  '*  Do  mortify." 
The  time  present.  As  sin  must  have  no  pardon,  so  it  must  have  no  reprieve. 
Dangerous  enemies  must  be  handled  with  a  quick  severity.  4.  "  Do  mortify."  It 
notes  a  continued  act.  It  must  be  a  quick  and  an  uninterrupted  severity.  U.  Tsoi 
OBJSCT — "  The  deeds  of  the  body."  1.  Mortification  must  be  universal ;  not  one 
deed,  but  deeds,  little  and  great.  Though  the  main  battle  be  routed,  yet  the  wingi 
of  an  army  may  get  the  victory.  2.  The  body  signifies  corrupt  nature,  deeds  ar« 
the  products  of  it ;  all  the  sparks  issue  from  the  furnace  within.  3.  The  greatest 
object  of  our  revenge  is  within  us.  Our  enemy  has  got  possession  of  our  souls, 
which  makes  the  work  more  difficult.  An  enemy  may  better  be  kept  out  than  oast 
oat  when  he  has  got  possession,  in.  Thb  aqbnis— "  ye,"  "  the  Spirit."  1.  Man 
must  be  an  agent  in  this  work.  We  have  brought  this  rebel  into  our  souls,  and 
CK)d  would  have  us  make  as  it  were  some  reoompence  by  endeavouring  to  cast  it 
oat.  2.  Through  the  Spirit.  (1)  Mortification  is  not  the  work  of  nature ;  it  is  a 
spiritual  work.  We  must  engage  in  the  duel,  but  it  is  the  strength  of  the  Spirit 
only  can  render  us  victorious.  The  duty  is  ours,  but  the  success  is  from  God.  W* 
can  sin  of  ourselves,  but  not  overcome  sin  by  ourselves.  (2)  The  difficulty  of  this, 
work  is  manifested  by  the  necessity  of  the  Spirit's  efficacy.  Not  all  the  powers  on^ 
earth,  nor  the  strength  of  ordinances,  can  do  it.  lY.  Thb  fbohisb — "  Ye  shall 
live."  1.  Heaven  is  a  place  for  conquerors  only  (Bev.  iii.  21).  He  that  will  be 
sin's  friend,  cannot  be  God's  favourite.  There  must  be  a  combat  before  a  victory, 
and  a  victory  before  a  triumph.  2.  The  more  perfect  our  mortification,  the  clearer 
oar  assurance  of  glory.  The  more  sin  dies,  the  more  the  soul  lives.  3.  Mortifica- 
tion is  a  sure  sign  of  saving  grace.  It  is  a  sign  of  the  Spirit's  indwelling  and 
powerful  acting,  a  sign  of  an  approach  to  heaven.  (S.  CJuimock,  B.D.)  Th4 
mortification  of  tin: — I.  What  MOBTrFiCATiON  is.  1.  A  breaking  of  the  league 
naturally  held  with  sin  (Eph.  v.  11;  Hosea  ziv.  8).  2.  A  declaration  of  open 
hostility.  When  leagues  between  princes  are  broken  war  ensues.  This  hostility 
begins  in  catting  ofF  all  the  supplies  of  sin  (chap.  xiii.  14,  (&o.).  3.  A  powerful 
resistance,  by  using  all  the  weapons  of  the  Christian  armoury  (Eph.  vi.  13, 14,  Ac). 
4.  A  killing  of  sin.    U.  How  wb  uay  judoe  o7  ocb  uobtifioation.     1.  Negatively. 

!1)  All  cessation  from  some  particular  sin  is  not  a  mortification.  It  may  only  be— - 
a)  An  exchange.  It  may  be  a  divorce  from  a  sin  odious  to  the  world,  and  an 
embracing  another  that  hath  more  specious  pretences,  (b)  A  cessation  from  some 
outward  gross  acts  only,  not  from  a  want  of  will  to  sin.  There  may  be  pride, 
ambition,  covetousness,  uncleanness,  when  they  are  not  externally  acted ;  which  is 
more  dangerous,  as  infectious  diseases  are  when  they  are  hindered  by  cold  from  a 
kindly  eruption,  and  strike  inward  to  the  heart,  and  so  prove  mortal,  (c)  A  cessa- 
tion merely  because  of  the  alteration  of  the  constitution.  Lust  reigns  in  young 
men,  but  its  empire  decays  in  an  old  withered  body  ;  some  plants  whioh  grow  in 
hot  countries  will  die  in  colder  climates.  Ambition  decays  in  age  when  strength  is 
wasted,  but  sprouts  up  in  a  young  man.  A  present  sickness  may  make  an  epicure 
nauseate  the  dainties  which  he  would  before  rake  even  in  the  sea  to  procure,  (d)  A 
cessation  may  be  forced  by  some  forethoughts  of  death,  some  pang  of  conscience, 
or  some  judgment  of  God ;  which  as  a  pain  in  one  part  of  the  body  may  take  away 
a  man's  appetite,  but  when  removed,  his  appetite  returns,  (e)  A  cessation  from 
want  of  opportunity.  (2)  Restraints  from  sin  are  not  mortification  of  it.  (a)  Mor- 
tification is  always  from  an  inward  principle,  restraints  from  an  outward.  A 
restraint  is  merely  a  pull  back,  by  a  stronger  power,  but  mortification  is  from  a 
strength  given,  a  new  mettle  put  into  the  sool  (Eph.  iii  16).  {Vj  Mortification 
proceeds  from  an  anger  with,  and  a  hatred  of,  sin,  whereas  restramts  are  from  a 
itar  of  the  conseqaents  of  nn ;  aa  a  man  may  love  the  wine,  whioh  is  as  yet  too 


CHAP,  vm.]  ROMANS.  13 

hot  for  his  lips,  (c)  Mortification  is  a  voluntary,  rational  work  of  the  soul; 
restraints  are  not  so.  2.  Positively.  The  signs  are — (1)  When  the  beloved  lust 
doth  not  stir  npon  a  temptation  that  did  usually  excite,  as  it  is  a  sign  of  the  clear- 
ness of  a  fountain  when  after  tbe  stirring  of  the  water  the  mud  doth  not  appear ; 
or  as  it  is  with  a  man  that  is  sick — set  the  most  savoury  meat  before  him,  if  his 
appetite  be  not  provoked,  it  is  an  argument  of  the  strength  of  his  distemper,  and 
where  it  is  lasting,  of  his  approaching  death.  None  will  question  the  deadness  of 
that  tree  at  the  root  which  doth  not  bud  upon  the  return  of  the  spring  sun ;  nor 
need  we  question  the  weakness  of  that  corruption  which  doth  not  stir  upon  the 
presenting  a  suitable  temptation.  (2)  When  we  meet  with  few  interruptions  in 
duties  of  worship.  Easy  compliance  with  diversions  is  a  sign  of  an  unmortified 
frame ;  as  it  is  the  sign  of  much  weakness  in  a  person,  and  the  strength  of  his 
distemper,  when  the  least  blow  or  jog  makes  him  let  go  his  hold  of  anything. 
(3)  When  we  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  the  contrary  graces.  The  more  sweet  and 
full  fruit  a  tree  bears,  the  more  evidence  there  is  of  the  weakness  of  thof  e  suckers 
which  are  about  the  root  to  hinder  its  generous  productions.    III.  The  reasons 

WHY  THERE    CAN   BE    NO   EXPECTATION   OP   ETERNAL   LIFE  WITHOUT   MORTIFICATION,       An 

unmortified  frame  is— 1.  Unsuitable  to  a  state  of  glory  (Col.  i.  12).  Conformity  to 
Christ  is  to  fit  us  for  heaven.  He  descended  to  the  grave  before  He  ascended  ;  so 
our  sins  must  die  before  our  souls  can  mount.  It  is  very  unsuitable  for  sin's 
drudges  to  have  a  saint's  portion.  Every  vessel  must  be  emptied  of  its  foul  water 
before  it  can  recei-,  'lat  which  is  clean.  No  man  pours  rich  wine  into  old  casks. 
2.  Such  as  God  cannot  delight  in.  To  delight  in  such  would  be  to  have  no  delight 
in  his  own  nature.  To  keep  sin  alive  is  to  defend  it  against  the  will  of  God,  and 
to  challenge  the  combat  with  our  Maker.  3.  Against  the  whole  design  of  the 
gospeL  Eather  than  sin  should  not  die,  Christ  would  die  Himself  ;  it  is  therefore 
a  high  disesteem  of  Christ  to  preserve  the  life  of  sin,  and  if  we  defend  what  He 
died  to  conquer,  how  can  we  expect  to  enjoy  what  He  died  to  purchase  ?  For  what 
the  grace  of  the  gospel  doth  more  especially  teach,  read  Tit.  ii.  4  ;  Psa.  v.  4.  It  is 
an  inseparable  character  of  them  that  are  Christ's,  that  *'  they  have  crucified  the 
flesh  with  the  affections  and  lusts."  Conclusion  :  Let  us  labour  to  mortify  sin.  If 
we  will  not  be  the  death  of  sin,  sin  will  be  the  death  of  our  souls.  1,  Implore  the 
help  of  the  Spirit.  2.  Listen  to  His  convictions.  3.  Plead  the  death  of  Christ, 
the  end  of  which  was  to  triumph  over  sin.  4.  Often  think  of  Divine  precepts. 
5.  Be  jealous  of  our  own  hearts.  Venture  not  to  breathe  in  corrupt  air,  for  fear  of 
infection.  6.  Bless  God  for  whatsoever  mortifying  grace  we  have  received. 
{Ibid.)  Life  in  mortification  of  the  flesh : — I.  What  it  is  to  mortify.  This 
word  occurs  but  twice  in  the  whole  Scriptures — in  the  text,  and  in  Col.  iii.  5. 
1.  "  To  mortify  "  is  now  commonly  used  in  a  far  less  extreme  sense  than  its  original 
signification.  Thus  we  speak  of  mortified  pride,  which  has  been  simply  dis- 
appointed of  its  passing  object ;  whereas  to  mortify  is  to  be  in  a  process  of  death, 
though  joined  to  something  living — as  a  diseased  limb  may  be  mortified,  while  the 
other  parts  of  the  body  are  healthy ;  and  it  is  only  by  tbe  process  of  the  healthy 
part  of  the  body  casting  off  from  itself  the  mortified  flesh,  that  the  whole  system 
can  escape  dissolution.  In  this  sense  we  are  to  understand  the  mortification  of 
the  carnal  and  ungodly  desires,  which  the  power  of  Divine  grace,  the  vital  energy 
of  the  new  creature,  will  enable  it  to  east  from  itself,  and  thereby  save  the  soul 
ahve,  which  the  process  of  moral  putrefaction  had  otherwise  corrupted  and  slain. 
Hence  the  striking  force  of  the  injunctions — "Crucify  the  flesh";  "put  away 
the  old  man  "  ;  "  cast  out  the  bondwoman  "  ;  "  cut  off  the  offending  right  hand," 
or  "  pluck  out  the  right  eye."  2.  Then  to  mortify  sin  is  not  to  deal  equivocally 
with  it,  to  fight  against  its  practices  and  leave  untouched  the  principle,  as  Saul 
slew  the  Amalekites,  but  spared  Agag.  To  mortify  sin  is  not  merely  to  smite  and 
oppose  it,  but  to  put  it  to  death — to  have  "  no  confidence  in  the  flesh  " — to  "  yield 
no  member  to  uncleanness" — to  "deny  all  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts" — to 
**  avoid  the  very  appearance  of  evil" — to  "  let  it  not  be  so  much  as  named  among 
you  as  becometh  saints."  It  means,  that  "if  sinners  entice,  we  are  to  consent 
not " ;  but  in  every  sense  to  "  be  not  overcome  with  evQ,"  but  to  "  resist  the  devil, 
and  he  will  flee  from  us,"  clinging  hard  and  fa  t  by  "  the  God  of  peace,  who  shall 
bruise  Satan  under  our  feet  shortly."  II.  What  is  to  be  mortified?  " The  deeds 
of  the  body  " — that  is,  not  one  deed,  but  all,  whether  of  the  inward  or  of  the  out- 
ward man.  This  may  be  illustrated  by  the  injunction — "  If  thy  right  eye  offend 
thee,  pluck  it  out "  ;  not  that  Jesus  would  have  us  literally  maim  the  body  which  He 
created  perfect.    But  as  He  had  just  been  speaking  of  the  adultery  of  the  eye,  as 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rm. 

distinguished  from,  yet  identified  in  guilt  with  the  actual  sin,  and  there  called  it 
"  the  adultery  of  the  heart,"  His  meaning  is,  that  we  should  begin  the  cure  of  sin 
at  the  seat  of  the  disease,  the  corrupt  heart — that  we  should  destroy  the  fruits  of 
sin  by  plucking  up  the  lust  at  its  roots.  What  so  delicate,  so  useful,  or  so  expres- 
sive a  feature  as  the  right  eye !  But  if  rather  than  sin,  and  imperil  the  whole 
body,  the  right  eye  is  to  be  plucked  out,  then  we  learn  that  the  tenderest  affections 
and  the  most  necessary  comforts  that  would  impair  the  beauty  of  holiness  are  all  to 
be  sacrificed.  Again,  "  If  thy  right  hand  offend  thee,  cut  it  off."  The  right  hand  ig 
the  emblem  of  dignity — Joseph  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  Pharaoh;  of  power — 
"Thy  right  hand  shall  teach  thee  terrible  things";  of  friendship — "To  me  and 
Barnabas  the  right  hand  of  fellowship  "  ;  of  covenants — "  Though  Coniah  were  the 
signet  on  My  right  hand  " ;  of  industry  and  business — "  Let  my  right  hand  forget 
her  cuiming."  If,  then,  the  "right  hand"  that  casts  a  stumbling-block  in  oar 
way  is  to  be  "  cut  off,"  then  is  the  place  of  secular  dignity  to  be  resigned,  if  we 
find  it  lifting  up  our  luats  above  humility.  And  the  post  of  power  must  be 
renounced  if  we  discover  that  it  has  led  us  to  forget  our  weakness  apart  from  God. 
And  the  bond  of  friendship,  if  it  has  led  us  to  soften  down  the  points  of  distinction 
between  the  worldling  and  the  believer,  must  be  broken.  And  the  covenant  with 
ungodUness  must  be  dissolved.  Even  industry  in  business  may  be  in  our  way,  and 
if  so  we  must  consent  to  mortification  here.  Better  cut  off  the  hand  than  lose  the 
head ;  rather  maim  the  body  than  mar  the  soul.  If  religion  be  worth  anything,  it 
is  worth  everything ;  therefore  sacrifice  anything  but  Christ.  IIL  By  whom  the 
DEEDS  OP  THE  BODY  ARE  TO  BE  MORTIFIED  ?  There  are  two  ageuts — the  one  active, 
the  Holy  Spirit ;  the  other  passive,  the  believer  himself.  "  If  ye  through  the  Spirit 
do  mortify."  We  can  do  nothing  without  Him  ;  He  will  do  nothing  without  us. 
IV.  The  animatiho  result  of  the  successful  conflict  with  the  flesh.  "  Ye 
shall  live  "  a  life  of  grace  and  holiness,  of  estrangement  from  the  world  and  com- 
munion with  God ;  of  happiness,  usefulness,  and  comfort  on  earth,  and  of  glory 
and  blessedness  in  heaven.  {J.  B.  Owen,  M.A.)  Higher  or  lower  :  which  shall 
win : — 1.  We  shall  all  agree,  who  have  tried  to  do  right  and  avoid  wrong,  that 
there  goes  on  in  us  a  strange  struggle.  We  wish  to  do  a  right  thing,  and  at  the  very 
same  time  long  to  do  a  wrong  one,  as  if  we  were  a  better  and  a  worse  man  struggling 
for  the  mastery.  One  may  conquer,  or  the  other.  We  may  he  hke  the  drunkard  who 
cannot  help  draining  off  his  liquor,  though  he  knows  that  it  is  going  to  kill  him  ; 
or  we  may  be  like  the  man  who  conquers  his  love  for  drink,  and  puts  the  liquor 
away,  because  he  knows  that  he  ought  not  to  take  it.  We  know  too  well,  many  of 
ns,  how  painful  this  inward  struggle  is.  We  all  understand  too  well  how  Paul 
was  ready  at  times  to  cry.  "  Oh  wretched  man  that  I  am,  who  shall  deliver  me  from 
the  body  of  this  death  ?  "  We  can  understand  too  the  parable  of  Plato,  who  says, 
that  the  soul  of  man  is  like  a  chariot,  guided  by  a  man's  will,  but  dravm  by  two 
horses — the  one  horse  white,  beautiful  and  noble,  well-broken  and  winged,  always 
trying  to  rise  and  fly  upward  with  the  chariot  toward  heaven ;  but  the  other  black, 
evil,  and  unmanageable,  always  trying  to  rush  downward,  and  drag  the  chariot  and 
the  driver  into  hell.  2.  In  the  text  St.  Paul  explains  this  struggle.  First,  there  is 
a  flesh  in  us — that  is,  an  animal  nature.  We  come  into  the  world  as  animals  do — 
eat,  drink,  sleep  as  they  do^have  the  same  passions  as  they  have — and  our  carnal 
bodies  die  exactly  as  they  die.  But  are  we  nothing  more  ?  God  forbid.  We  know 
that  to  be  a  man  we  must  be  something  more  than  a  mere  brute — for  when  we  call 
any  one  a  brute,  what  do  we  mean  ?  That  he  has  given  himself  up  to  his  animal 
nature  till  the  man  in  him  is  dead,  and  only  the  brute  remains.  Our  giving  way 
to  the  same  selfish,  shameless  passions,  which  we  see  in  the  lower  animals,  is 
letting  the  "  brute  "  in  us  conquer.  The  shameless  and  profligate  person — the  man 
who  beats  his  wife — or  ill-treats  his  children — or  in  any  wise  tyrannises  over  those 
who  are  weaker  than  himself,  gives  way  to  the  "brute"  within  him.  He  who 
grudges,  envies,  tries  to  aggrandise  himself  at  his  neighbour's  expense — he  too  gives 
way  to  the  "  bruts  "  within  him,  and  puts  on  the  likeness  of  the  dog  which  snatches 
and  snarls  over  his  bone.  He  who  spends  his  life  in  cunning  plots  and  mean 
tricks,  gives  way  to  the  "  brute  "  in  him,  just  as  much  as  the  fox  or  ferret.  And 
those,  let  me  say,  who,  without  giving  way  to  those  grosser  vices,  let  their  minds  be 
swallowed  up  with  vanity,  always  longing  to  be  seen  and  looked  at,  and  wondering 
what  folks  will  say  of  them,  they  too  give  way  to  the  flesh,  and  lower  themselves  to 
the  likeness  of  animals.  As  vain  as  a  peacock,  says  the  old  proverb.  And  what 
shall  we  say  of  them  who  like  the  swine  live  only  for  eating  and  drinking  and 
enjoyment?     Or  what  of  those  who  like  the  butterflies  spend  all  their  time  in 


CHAP,  vm.]  ROMANS.  15 

frivolous  amusement  ?  Do  not  all  these  in  some  way  or  other  live  after  the  flesh  ? 
And  do  they  not  fulfil  St.  Paul's  words,  "  If  ye  live  after  the  flesh  ye  shall  die  "  ? 
8.  But  some  one  will  say — "  Of  course  we  shall  all  die — good  and  bad  alike."  Then 
why  does  our  Lord  say,  "  He  that  liveth  and  believeth  in  Me  shall  never  die  '•  ? 
And  why  does  St.  Paul  say,  "  If  ye  through  the  Spirit  do  mortify  the  deeds  of  the 
body  ye  shall  live  "  ?  Let  us  look  at  the  text  again.  '•  If  ye  live  after  the  flesh  ye 
shall  die."  If  you  give  way  to  those  animal  passions  you  shall  die ;  not  merely 
your  bodies — they  will  die  in  any  case — the  animals  do — for  animals  they  are, 
and  as  animals  die  they  must.  But  over  and  above  that,  yoa  yourselves  shall 
die — your  character,  your  manhood  or  your  womanhood,  your  immortal  soul 
will  die.  There  is  a  second  death  to  which  that  first  death  of  the  body  is  a 
mere  trivial  and  harmless  accident,  and  that  may  begin  in  this  life,  and  if  it  be  not 
stopped  and  cured  in  time,  may  go  on  for  ever.  4.  This  is  the  dark  side  of  the 
matter.  But  there  is  also  a  bright  side.  "  If  ye  through  the  Spirit  do  mortif.  he 
deeds  of  the  body,  ye  shall  live."  If  you  will  be  true  to  your  better  selves,  if  you 
will  listen  to  and  obey  the  Spirit  of  God,  when  He  puts  into  your  hearts  good 
desires,  and  makes  you  long  to  be  just  and  true,  pure  and  sober,  kind  and  useful. 
If  you  will  cast  away  and  trample  under  foot  animal  passions,  low  vices,  you  shall 
live.  Yoxi  shall  live,  your  very  soul  and  self  for  ever — all  that  is  merciful,  kind, 
pure,  noble,  useful — in  one  word,  all  in  you  that  is  like  Christ,  like  God,  that  is 
spirit  and  not  flesh,  shall  live  for  ever.  So  it  must  be,  for  "As  many  as  are  led 
by  the  Spirit  of  God,  they  are  the  sons  of  God."  Those  who  let  the  Spirit  of  God 
lead  them  upward  instead  of  letting  their  own  animal  nature  drag  them  downward, 
are  the  sons  of  God.  And  how  can  a  son  of  God  perish  ?  How  can  he  perish,  who 
like  Christ  is  full  of  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  ? — of  love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering, 
gentleness,  goodness,  faith,  meekness,  temperance  ?  The  world  did  not  give  them 
to  him,  and  the  world  cannot  take  them  from  him.  They  were  not  bestowed  on 
him  at  his  bodily  birth — neither  shall  they  be  taken  from  him  at  his  bodily  death. 
5.  Choose,  especially  you  who  are  young  and  entering  into  life.  Remember  the 
parable  of  the  old  heathen.  Choose  in  time  whether  the  better  horse  shall  win  or 
the  worse.  And  let  no  one  tell  you,  "  We  shall  do  a  great  many  wrong  things 
before  we  die.  Every  one  does  that ;  but  we  hope  we  shall  be  able  to  make  our 
peace  with  God  before  we  die."  That  kind  of  religion  has  done  more  harm  than 
most  kinds  of  irreligion.  It  tells  you  to  take  your  chance  of  beginning  at  the  end. 
Common  sense  tells  you  that  the  only  way  to  get  to  the  end  is  by  beginning  at  the 
beginning,  which  is  now.  Do  not  talk  about  making  your  peace  with  God  some 
day — like  a  naughty  child  playing  truant  till  the  last  moment,  and  hoping  that  the 
schoolmaster  may  forget  to  punish  it.     {Charles  Kingsley,  M.A,) 

Ver.  14.  For  as  many  as  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  they  are  the  sons  of  Ood. — 
The  leading  of  the  Spirit : — We  are  led  not  as  brute  beasts,  but  as  reasonable 
creatures ;  not  as  though  we  do  nothing,  but  lest  we  should  do  no  good  thing. 
Neither  are  we  led  against  our  will,  but  in  the  leading  made  willing  to  be  led ;  so 
willing,  that  when  God  hath  once  breathed  His  grace  unto  us,  we  cannot  resist, 
but  earnestly  desire  to  be  led.  And  yet  is  not  the  nature  of  the  will  overthrown. 
But  as  orators  by  their  eloquence  do  rule  in  the  mind  of  their  auditors,  so  God 
much  more  effectually  draws  us  to  desire  Christ,  and  affect  the  gospel.  If  a 
covetous  man  were  offered  to  take  what  he  would  of  a  heap  of  gold,  no  man 
doubts  but  he  would  gladly  embrace  such  occasion,  though  simply  and  absolutely 
it  were  in  his  power  to  refuse  it.  So  our  Heavenly  Father  doth  so  commodiously 
show  us  the  riches  of  His  grace,  so  lovingly  doth  He  invite  us  to  receive  it,  and 
so  aptly  doth  He  exhort  us,  that  He  doth  persuade  us,  without  any  impairing  of  our 
wills;  so  a  beast  with  provender,  children  with  nuts,  and  every  one  is  led  or  drawn  by 
his  pleasure.  {Elnathan  Parr,  B.D.)  The  leading  of  the  Spirit : — I.  It  leads  the 
WILLING.  1.  '•  Led."  Not  drawn  by  rope,  not  hauled,  but  led.  2.  Yea,  more — 
gladly  led.  It  is  not  the  leading  of  the  sulky  horse  behind  the  dray,  pulling  and 
being  pulled,  but  of  one  following  along  with  dangling  halter.  It  is  not  the 
picture  of  him  who  says,  "  my  name  is  down  on  the  church-book — that  is  enough," 
but  of  him  who  says,  "Here  am  I,  Lord;  send  me."  This  is  the  test  of  our 
discipleship — if  we  go  gladly.  II.  Leadership  of  the  Spiiut  is  possible.  There 
are  those  who  doubt  this.  They  say,  "  How  can  God  influence  us  this  way  or  that  ?  '* 
Well,  look  at  the  things  that  do  influence  us.  Sometimes  we  are  aU  down  with  the 
blues.  It  is  not  that  we  are  weaker  than  usual,  but  some  influence  from  the  outside 
world  ii  moving  npon  as.    The  market  has  gone  wrong,  politioians  are  sending  the 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tm. 

country  to  ruin,  &o.  At  other  times  other  influences  come  to  us.  The  silent  treei 
swaying  gently  in  the  wind,  or  the  smooth  surface  of  some  quiet  lake  soothes  us ; 
and  if  the  things  of  nature  can  so  affect  us,  cannot  the  Creator  ?  Then  surrender 
to  Him.  Open  your  heart,  and  He  will  come  in  and  reign.  III.  God  will  lead 
His  childeen.  The  other  night  you  heard  a  faint  knock  at  the  door,  and  when  it 
was  opened  there  stood  a  timid  little  beggar  girl  with  a  pinched,  wan  face,  and  as 
you  looked  down  at  her  she  said  something  about  bread.  By  and  by  the  door 
burst  open  and  in  came  a  great  big  boy.  He  bounded  across  the  room,  jumped 
upon  your  knee,  flung  his  arm  around  your  neck  and,  plunging  his  hand  into  your 
pocket,  helped  himself.  So  we  who  are  led  by  the  Spirit  do  not  go  to  God  as 
beggars,  but  as  His  own  sons,  whom  He  receiveth  as  a  father  receiveth  his 
children.  Conclusion  :  1.  Led  by  the  Spirit !  So  let  us  live,  work,  believe,  enjoy 
and  triumph  by  the  Spirit.  2.  He  comes  into  our  hearts  as  the  old  warriors  used 
to  go  into  a  city.  When  they  had  broken  through  the  wall  they  marched  straight 
for  the  citadel.  Merchants,  when  they  entered,  went  about,  this  way  and  that, 
through  the  streets.  But  the  conqueror  went  first  to  the  citadel,  and,  when  he  had 
taken  that,  he  sent  one  platoon  down  this  street  to  clear  out  the  enemy  there,  and 
another  down  that  street  to  drive  out  that  body,  until  all  were  driven  out ;  then  he 
had  the  city  in  his  grasp,  and  he  ruled  over  it.  So  when  the  Spirit  comes  into 
our  hearts  it  goes  straight  to  the  conscience  and  lays  hold  on  that,  then  it  sends  a 
truth  down  this  way  to  drive  out  this  passion,  and  another  that  way  to  subdue  that 
jealousy,  and  another  that  other  way  to  quell  that  rebellion.  Then,  when  all  is 
driven  out,  He  makes  His  abode  in  that  heart,  and  becomes  its  counsellor,  guide 
and  ruler  for  ever.  (C.  H.  Foioler,  D.V.)  The  leading  of  the  Holy  Spirit : — I. 
The  natuee  of  the  act.  1.  Distinctions  premised.  (1)  It  is  either  common  or 
peculiar.  There  is  a  leading  which  extends  to  all  creatures.  For  all  of  them,  by 
His  Divine  power,  are  to  the  glory  of  the  Creator  and  the  good  of  the  universe. 
This  also  may  be  said  to  extend  to  all  men ;  as  He,  the  first  Cause  and  Sovereign 
(Acts  xvii.  28),  in  a  common  and  providential  way,  orders  all  their  several 
actions.  Now,  most  certainly,  this  is  not  that  "  leading  "  in  the  text,  for  many  are 
thus  "  led  by  the  Spirit "  who  yet  are  far  from  being  "the  sons  of  God'M  The 
leading  here  intended  is,  therefore,  peculiar  to  God's  people.  (2)  The  special 
leading  of  the  Spirit  is  extraordinary  or  ordinary.  Prophets  and  apostles  were 
"  led  by  the  Spirit "  as  they  were  immediately  inspired  and  guided  by  Him  in 
their  work  (2  Pet.  i.  21).  But  this  was  extraordinary,  and  so  limited  and 
temporary.  The  latter  leading  appertains  to  all  God's  children,  and  at  all  times. 
(3)  This  act  of  the  Spirit  may  be  considered  either  as  it  is  exerted  at  conversion 
or  after.  He  leads  at  and  in  order  to  conversion ;  as  He  irradiates  the  mind, 
inclines  the  will,  spiritualises  the  affections,  and  so  leads  the  whole  soul  to  God 
and  Christ.  Then  He  leads  all  along  in  the  whole  course  of  a' Christian's  life.  (4) 
There  is  the  having  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  leading  of  the  Spirit  (ver.  9).  Now, 
although  these  be  inseparable,  yet  they  are  distinct.  To  "  have  the  Spirit  "  is  to 
be  made  a  possessor  of  Him  in  His  indwelling  in  us  ;  to  be  "  led  by  the  Spirit  "  is 
our  partaking  of  His  directive  influence,  after  we  tr.3  made  possessors  of  Him. 
2.  The  special  acts  included  in  the  Spirit's  leading.  (1)  Something  on  the  Spirit's 
part,  (a)  His  special  guidance  (Isa.  xxx.  21,  xlviii.  17,  Iviii.  11,  Ixi.  8 ;  Psa.  xxv. 
5,  xxxvii.  23,  Ixxxiii.  24,  cxliii.  10).  What  the  cloud  was  to  the  IsraeUtes,  what  the 
guide  is  to  the  traveller  who  knows  not  his  way,  that  the  Spirit  of  God  is  to 
believers.  (6)  His  powerful  inclination.  He  leads  not  only  by  a  naked  guidance 
or  directive  light  (Col.  i.  9 ;  Eph.  v.  10),  but  also  by  the  efiBcacious  inclining  of  the 
heart,  the  bowing  and  bending  of  the  will,  the  overpowering  of  the  affections,  to 
close  with  and  follow  His  guidance  in  the  doing  of  what  is  good,  and  in  the 
shunning  of  what  is  evil  (Psa.  cxix.  35,  36).  (c)  His  co-operation  and  corrobora- 
tion. When  one  leads  another  both  have  their  proper  action  and  motion,  and  both 
unite  and  concur  therein  (Isa.  xxvi.  12 ;  Phil.  ii.  12,  13).  So  His  leading 
resembles  the  mother's  or  nurse's  leading  the  chUd.  They  take  it  by  the  hand, 
hold  it  up,  join  their  strength  with  its  weakness ;  and  so  they  enable  it  to  go 
(ver.  26;  Eph.  iii.  16).  (d)  His  Agency.  Where  He  governs,  there  He  leads.  It 
is  like  a  general  leading  an  army  :  they  are  subject  to  his  will,  steered  by  him  in 
their  motions,  as  the  ship  is  by  the  pilot,  or  the  chariot  by  him  that  drives  it.  (2) 
Something  on  the  creatures'  part.  And  that  is  their  yielding  up  of  themselves  to 
this  guidance.  Without  this,  it  is  not  "  leading  "  ;  for  that  imports  motion  after 
something  that  goes  before.  And  that  motion  must  be  voluntary,  or  else  it  ia 
2)eing  dragged,  not  "  led  "  (Isa.  ii.  3 ;  Cant.  i.  4).    3.  Four  things  opened  about 


CHAP,  vm.]  ROMANS.  17 

the  Spirit's  leading.  (1)  What  the  Spirit  leads  onto — trath  and  holiness  (John 
xvi.  13 ;  Eph.  v.  9 ;  Psa.  xxiii.  3).  This  holiness  includes  holy  affections,  the 
exercise  of  the  several  graces  (2  Thess.  iii.  5),  and  the  avoiding  and  mortifying  of 
sin  (chap.  viii.  13).  (2)  The  rule  by  which  He  leads — the  written  Word  (Prov.  vi. 
22,  23 ;  Psa.  oxix.  105,  133 ;  Micah  vL  8),  which  is  the  Christian  compass  by 
which  he  must  steer  his  course,  the  star  that  must  direct  him  in  all  his  motions 
(Isa.  viii.  20).  The  Spirit  gives  light  and  Ufe  to  the  Word ;  and  the  Word  gives 
evidence  that  the  guidance  is  from  the  Spirit.  (3)  The  manner  of  His  leading, 
(a)  With  power  and  efficacy.  The  person  led  shall  certainly  follow  Him  (Ezek. 
xxvi.  27 ;  Jer.  xxxi.  18).  (6)  With  all  sweetness  and  gentleness.  The  will  is 
determined,  but  so  as  that  not  the  least  violence  is  done  to  it,  to  the  infringing  of 
its  Uberty  (Psa.  ex.  3  ;  Hosea  ii.  14).  (4)  The  extent  of  His  leading,  (a)  In  regard 
of  the  subject  or  person  led.  It  extends  to  the  whole  man;  first  to  the  soul, 
understanding,  will,  and  affections,  and  then  to  the  body,  yea,  to  the  whole  con- 
versation, (b)  In  regard  of  the  object  or  matter  that  the  Spirit  leads  unto.  The 
whole  duty  of  a  Christian ;  to  all  that  he  is  to  know,  beheve,  and  do.  (c)  In  regard 
of  the  degree  and  measure  of  it.  All  have  the  thing  in  the  necessary  and 
substantial  part  of  it,  yet  some  have  more  and  some  less.  II.  Some  pkactical 
iNQUiBiES  ABOUT  IT.  1.  What  inducements  are  there  to  excite  men  to  attain  and 
live  under  this  leading  t  (1)  The  excellency  of  the  thing.  The  person  leading, 
the  great  Spirit  of  God ;  the  act,  Divine  and  supernatural  leading ;  the  object,  the 
loving  of  God,  delighting  in  God,  conformity  to  God.  (2)  The  necessity  of  it. 
What  becomes  of  the  blind  man  that  has  none  to  guide  him  ?  of  the  weak  child  that 
has  none  to  uphold  it?  (3)  As  the  natural  guide  is  defective  and  insufficient,  so 
there  are  other  guides  which  are  destructive  and  damnable.  Such  as  Satan, 
depraved  nature,  indwelling  sin,  the  flesh,  the  world.  (4)  Weigh  the  way  and 
manner  of  the  Spirit's  leading — (a)  With  great  exactness  and  wisdom  (Isa.  xi.  2 ; 
Psa.  xxxii.  8).  (b)  With  infinite  truth  and  faithfulness  (Prov.  iv.  11 ;  Gen.  xxiv. 
27,  48  ;  Psa.  cvii.  7).  (c)  Safely,  in  reference  both  to  the  way  and  to  the  end  (Psa. 
Ixxviii.  53).  (5)  The  blessings  that  result  from  this  leading,  (a)  Inward  peace 
and  comfort,  (b)  A  readiness  to  all  duties  of  holiness,  (c)  Sonship  to  God.  (d) 
The  glory  and  blessedness  of  heaven  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  24).  2.  How  may  this  leading  of 
the  Spirit  be  attained  ?  (1)  There  must  be  the  having  of  the  Spirit  before  there 
can  be  the  leading  of  the  Spirit.  Therefore  attend  upon  the  gospel,  by  which  He  is 
conveyed.  (2)  The  first  leading  of  the  Spirit  must  be  had  before  the  secondary 
leading.  He  must  first  lead  you  to  God  by  conversion.  (3)  Be  willing  to  follow 
the  motions  of  the  Spirit.  (4)  Let  your  dependence  be  upon  God  and  His  Spirit 
for  guidance  (Psa.  xxv.  9 ;  Prov.  iii.  5,  6 ;  Job  xviii.  7  ;  Prov.  xx.  24).  (5)  Pray 
much  for  this  grace  of  the  Spirit  (Psa.  cxliii.  10).  3.  What  duties  are  incumbent 
upon  those  who  are  led  by  the  Spirit?  (1)  They  should  more  and  more  follow 
the  leadings  of  the  Spirit,  (a)  More  exactly  (Numb.  ix.  18,  21).  (&)  More  fully 
(Numb.  xvi.  24).  (c)  More  uniformly  and  constantly,  (d)  More  readily  and  freely. 
(e)  So  as  to  make  further  progress  in  the  way.  (/)  With  stronger  resolution  and 
purpose  of  heart.  (2)  Let  it  be  your  great  and  constant  care  and  endeavour  to  get 
the  Spirit's  leading  continued  to  you.  (3)  Labour  after  the  having  of  the  leading 
of  the  Spirit  in  a  higher  degree  and  measure.  (4)  So  Hve  as  that  it  may  appear 
to  others  that  you  are  led  by  this  Spirit.  (5)  Be  very  thankful  for  this  glorious 
mercy.  4.  May  such  who  are  led  by  the  Spirit  fetch  comfort  from  it?  Un- 
doubtedly—(1)  It  is  a  clear  evidence,  a  deciding  argument,  of  your  being  the  sona 
of  God.  (2)  As  it  is  certain  evidence  of  sonship  here,  so  it  is  a  certain  pledge  of 
heaven  and  salvation  hereafter.  (J.  Jacomb,  D.D.)  Leadings  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  (Isa.  xlii.  16,  and  text) : — Both  Isaiah  and  St.  Paul  affirm  the  reality  of  a 
very  intimate  and  tender  connection  between  good  men  and  God.  There  is  a 
leading  and  a  being  led — with  a  privilege  mysteriously  grand,  growing  out  of  that 
relation.  So  far  the  two  writers  agree.  What  is  it,  then,  that  distinguishes  them  ? 
I.  Isaiah  bepeesents  that  more  advanced  cultube,  in  the  eldeb  Chdeoh,  where 
the  original  meaning  of  the  revelation  at  Sinai  had  begun  to  come  out  into  a 
clearness  approaching  that  of  the  gospel-day.  More  confiding  impressions  of  the 
unseen  Father  were  certainly  stealing  into  the  soul.  Hence  comes  the  promise  of 
Divine  guidance,  personal  and  gentle.  1.  There  is  no  one  that  has  not  found  out 
by  rough  experience  that  there  are  crooked  things  in  his  life  which  need  to  be  made 
straight,  and  dark  places  which  need  to  be  made  light.  This  common  need  of 
heavenly  leading  puts  us  into  one  company  with  those  Hebrews,  and  makes  as 
prize  the  p.cmise  that  was  so  comforting  to  them.  2.  This  instinct  which  desires 
VOL.  n,  2 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rai. 

and  follows  leadership  is  nearly  universal,  and  religion  employs  it  to  train  our  best 
attachments  and  confidences  up  to  heaven.     With  all  his  self-reliance  and  self- 
will  man  likes  to  trust  and  follow  a  leader.    It  appears  among  bands  of  youth,  in 
exploring  parties  in  political  combinations  and  social  reforms,  and  especially  in  the 
military  spirit.     3.  The  next  step  shows  us  this  guiding  love  of  the  Heavenly 
Father  as  independent  of  anything  that  we  think,  or  do,  or  feel.    It  leads  as  in 
paths  that  we  had  not  known.     It  deals  with  us  as  a  mother  handles  her  child 
just  beginning  to  know  only  her  face  or  her  voice  (see  Isa.  xlv.  5).     We  were  too 
infantile  in  the  childhood  of  our  spiritual  life  to  know  God  when  He  took  us  up. 
Who  of  us  cannot  recall  some  trying  time  when  the  utter  dismay  came  over  him  of 
not  knowing  what  way  to  take — the  sun  gone  down,  human  helpers  away  or  feeble, 
human  advisers  indifferent  or  undecided  ?    But  God  was  there  before  us,  and  when 
W8  waited  on  Him  we  found  He  was  waiting  for  us  ;  and  then,  very  often,  the  one 
path  which,  of  all  those  that  opened,  was  the  least  inviting  was  the  one  into  which 
He  led  our  unwilling  feet.    4.  God  goes  invisibly  before  His  child,  like  the  good 
shepherd  of  the  Eastern  pastures,  to  reassure  the  alarmed  and  doubting,  to  take 
the  briers  and  stones  and  to  scare  the  beasts  out  of  the  way,  to  straighten  what 
is  crooked,  to  hold  a  lamp  over  the  dark  passages  among  the  rocks,  to  lead  those 
that  have  faith  enough  to  be  willing  to  be  led  in  paths  that  they  have  not  known. 
II.  From  this  promise  we  pass  oveb  to  that  given  us  by  St  Paul.     1.  We  see 
at  once  that  there  is  an  advance  into  another  plane  of  religious  thought.     Instead 
of  Jehovah  we  are  told  of  "  the  Spirit."     Then,  instead  of  being  taught  of  a  mere 
outward  change  wrought  by  this  leading,  there  is  a  transformation  of  our  whole 
interior  nature  and  condition.      They  who   were   before  merely  creatures   and 
servants,  or  children  only  as  by  creation,  become  children  in  a  new  and  profounder 
way.     Nothing  is  taken  away  that  Isaiah  had  said,  only  much  is  added.     2.  What 
is  signified  by  being  "  led  by  the  Spirit "  ?    In  the  Greek  there  are  two  terms  for 
"  leading."    The  one  signifies  a  violent  and  rather  irregular  act  of  propelling  a 
body — a  driving  or  pushing  on  as  by  winds  or  waves.      This   St.   Peter   uses 
when  he  speaks  of  the  moving  of  the  minds  of  the  Old  Testament  saints  by  the 
mind  of  God.     The  other,  employed  in  the  text,  refers  to  an  even,  constant, 
unbroken  force,  acting  not  less  powerfully  because  it  acts  gently  and  steadily  ;  the 
leading  of  a  Spirit  who  abides,  always  at  His  gracious  work  on  the  heart,  in  His 
chamber  within  it,  and  does  not  come  and  go.    You  can  illustrate  this  by  any 
mother  walking  with  a  little  child  or  shepherd  with  sheep.     The  hireling,  who  only 
follows  after,  and,  when  the  charge  wanders  or  falls  into  danger,  hurries  up  and 
catches  hold  irregularly,  pushing  the  body  here  and  there  over  a  hollow  or  through 
a  thicket,  does  not  lead  as  that  blessed  Comforter  leads.     "  He  shall  abide  with 
you  for  ever,  even  the  Spirit  of  Truth,"  &o,   3.  What,  then,  is  the  peculiar  privilege 
of  those  who  are  so  led  ?    "  They  are  the  sons  of  God."    How  can  it  be  ?    There 
is  one  only-begotten  Son  of  God,  becoming  also  the  Son  of  man,  born  of  Mary,  our 
humanity  being  for  ever  taken  up  into  His  Divinity  and  glorified  by  it.   It  is  only  by 
our  spiritual  union  with  Him,  that  we,  in  a  secondary  sense,  yet  a  most  vital  and 
precious  one,  are  made  also  "  sons  of  God."    Hence  the  expressions  "  Spirit  of 
God"  and  "Spirit  of  Christ  "and  "Holy  Spirit"  are  often  used  as  equivalent. 
Christ  gives  the  Comforter.    When  He  is  received  into  the  heart  a  new  nature  is 
bom;  a  Son  of  God,  in  the  image  of  Christ.    Here  "  the  Spirit"  is  not  a  mere 
influence  exerted  on  character  as  by  a  foreign  beuefactor ;  it  is  an  inwrought 
and  essential  principle  of  the  believer's  life.    He  is  a  new  creature,  a  son.    And  as 
there  are  two  New  Testament  terms  in  the  original,  to  signify  two  kinds  of  leading, 
BO  there  are  two  to  signify  children.     One  has  reference  to  mere  natural  descent  or 
begetting,  irrespective  of  any  tender,  fihal  feeling.     The  other,  used  when  sons  of 
God  in  Christ  are  intended,  includes  an  affectionate  and  sacred  dependence,  or 
lovingness  of  the  child's  and  the  parent's  heart.     The  tree  may  take  an  infiuence 
from  the  sun,  and  that  foreign  infiuence  tends  to  make  the  tree  tall,  vigorous, 
green,  and  fruitful.      But  the  tree  is  not  the  child  of  the  son.      4.  With  this 
oomes  a  special  characteristic  of  our  service  to  Christ.    It  is  not  a  service  of 
compulsion  or  restraint,  rendered   "grudgingly  or  of  necessity."    It  is  labour 
in  a  free  and  joyous  spirit,  such  as  befits   the  thankful  receivers  of  an  nn- 
epeakable  gift  in  its  true  character.     Wise  employers  always  select  workmen 
that  love  tibeir  work.      This  distinction  between  sonship  and  servantship  runs 
through    all    that    pertains    to    a    Christian's    obedience.       (Bp.    Huntington.) 
Led  by  the  Spirit : — L   What  is  it  to  bk  led  by  the  Spikit  ?    1.  Our  answer 
most  depend  on  our  idea  of  the  nature  of  the  Spirit  of  God  and  His  relations  to  as. 


CHAP.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  19 

Men  speak  of  the  Spirit  as  a  mere  inflnence,  an  effect  of  the  outgoing  of  Divine 
energy.  But,  according  to  the  New  Testament,  the  Spirit  of  God  is  God,  regarded 
especially  as  within  ns  and  in  communion  with  our  spirits.  His  presence  is  not 
discerned  by  mystic  signs  :  we  do  not  see  it  in  a  burning  bush  or  in  cloven  tongijea 
of  fire,  we  do  not  hear  it  in  a  mighty  rushing  vnnd,  or  in  a  still  small  voice ;  but  as 
we  do  not  see  the  air  above  us,  nor  even  hear  it  in  the  calm  of  summer,  yet  we 
perceive  its  existence  by  the  gentle  stirring  of  the  trees,  the  strong  flight  of  birds, 
the  slow  sailing  of  great  clouds  ;  so  the  unseen  and  silent  Spirit  reveals  His 
presence  by  the  hfe  He  briugs,  the  influence  He  exerts.  2.  The  leadership  of  the 
Spirit  must  be  regarded  as  the  influence  which  is  thus  exerted  over  the  souls  of  men, 
and  freely  yielded  to  by  them.  All  who  choose  to  follow  are  led.  It  depends  upon 
our  will  and  action  (ver.  13).  It  implies  following  the  Spirit — (1)  As  a  guide  for  the 
intellect — seeking  light  in  prayer,  and  humbly  searching  the  inspired  Scriptures. 
(2)  As  a  leader  for  the  will,  and  yielding  self-will  to  the  voice  of  God  in  the  con- 
science and  in  revealed  law.  (3)  As  the  loving  presence  of  God,  with  the  over-ruliug 
of  earthly  passion  by  the  love  of  God.  II.  The  prfvileges  of  Divine  sonship  to 
WHICH  THE  LEADERSHIP  OF  THE  Spieit  IN1R0DCCE8  US.  By  nature  we  are  all  God's 
children,  and  cannot  cease  to  be  so.  Yet  we  may  be  practically  orphans  when  we 
wander  far  from  our  Father  and  live  in  rebellion  against  Him,  To  be  reconciled 
to  God  is  practically  to  be  made  sons  again  in  a  fuller  sense  than  that  in  which 
nnfaUen  man  was  a  son  in  the  ignorance  and  tutelage  of  childhood.  St.  Paul 
regards  this  as  an  adoption  (ver.  16),  St.  John  as  a  second  birth  (John  i.  12).  The 
effects  of  this  are  many  and  great.  1.  Liberty  in  deliverance — (1)  From  the  bondage 
of  sin.  (2)  From  the  slave-like  obedience  of  the  subjects  of  mere  law  (2  Cor.  iii. 
17).  2.  Security  from  fear,  either — (1)  Of  God  as  an  avenging  judge,  or — (2)  of 
any  evil  in  life,  since  now  we  are  safe  in  our  Father's  care  (ver.  15).  3.  Restoration 
of  the  love  of  God  in  our  hearts.  We  now  cry,  "  Abba,  Father."  This  restoration 
is  the  source  of  our  deepest  joy.  4.  Heirship  of  glory  (ver.  17).  The  son  is  not 
simply  saved^  he  is  honoured.  The  returned  prodigal  is  not  treated  as  a  hired 
servant,  but  as  a  privileged  child  (Luke  xv.  22,  23).  {W.  F.  Adeney,  M.A.)  The 
guidance  of  the  Spirit : — Man  is  a  traveller  to  the  eternal  world.  Left  to  self-guid- 
ance he  possesses  vast  and  uncontrollable  powers  of  self-destruction.  What  is  he 
without  a  guide  in  the  wilderness,  a  pilot  on  the  ocean  ?  Some  recognise  no  other 
spirit,  and  are  guided  by  no  other  spirit,  than  the  spirit  of  the  world — i.e.,  by  the 
*'  god  of  this  world."  I.  The  qualifications  of  the  Spirit  fob  this  guidance. 
1.  He  knows  the  path  to  heaven — all  its  intricacies  and  dangers  :  the  sunken  rock, 
the  treacherous  quicksand,  the  concealed  pit,  the  subtle  snare,  the  windings,  and 
intricacy,  and  straitness  of  the  way.  It  is  utterly  impossible,  then,  that  He  should 
mislead.  2.  He  knows  His  own  work  in  the  souL  All  its  light  and  shade,  its 
depressions  and  revivings,  its  assaults  and  victories,  are  vivid  to  His  eye.  Dwelling 
in  that  heart  He  knows  where  wisely  to  supply  a  check,  or  gently  to  administer  a 
rebuke,  or  tenderly  to  whisper  a  promise,  or  sympathetically  to  soothe  a  sorrow,  or 
effectually  to  aid  an  incipient  resolve,  or  strengthen  a  wavering  purpose,  or  confirm 
a  fluctuating  hope.  II.  What  is  it  to  be  led  by  the  Spirit  ?  1.  It  assumes — (1) 
The  existence  of  spiritual  life  in  those  He  leads.  He  does  not  undertake  to  lead  a 
spiritual  corpse,  a  soul  dead  in  sins.  The  leading  of  the  Spirit,  then,  is  His  acting 
upon  His  own  life  in  the  soul.  (2)  Entire  inability  to  lead  themselves.  What  can 
we  see  of  truth,  of  providence,  of  God's  mind  and  will,  of  ourselves  ?  2.  It  involves 
leading  as — (1)  From  ourselves — from  all  reliance  on  our  own  righteousness,  and 
strength.  But  this  divorce  from  the  principle  of  self  is  the  work  of  a  life.  And  who 
bat  this  Divine  Spirit  could  so  lead  us  away  from  self,  in  all  its  forms,  as  to  constrain 
us  to  trample  all  our  own  glory  in  the  dust  ?  But  more :  He  leads  us  from  an  opposite 
extreme  of  self — from  a  despairing  view  of  our  personal  sinfulness.  How  many 
walk  in  painful  and  humiliating  bondage  from  not  having  thus  been  suflBciently  led 
out  of  themselves  1  Thus  from  sinful  self,  as  from  righteous  self,  the  Spirit  leads 
as — (2)  To  Christ.  Aie  we  guilty? — the  Spirit  leads  us  to  the  blood  of  Jesus.  Are 
we  weary  ? — the  Spirit  leads  us  to  abide  in  Jesus.  Are  we  sorrowful  ? — the  Spirit 
leads  us  to  the  sympathy  of  Jesus.  Are  we  tempted  ? — the  Spirit  leads  as  to  the 
protection  of  Jesus.  Are  we  sad  and  desolate  ? — the  Spirit  leads  us  to  the  tender 
love  of  Jesus.  Are  we  poor,  empty,  and  helpless  ? — the  Spirit  leads  us  to  the  fulness 
of  Jesas.  The  holy  Spirit  is  our  Comforter,  but  the  holy  Jesus  is  our  comfort.  (3) 
To  truth — "  He  shall  guide  you  into  all  truth."  Though  many  claim  Him  as  their 
Teacher,  He  disowns  them  as  His  disciples.  Tossed  from  opinion  to  opinion, 
perplexed  by  conflicting  creeds,  are  yoa  anxiously  inquiring,  "  What  is  truth  ?  "— 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  na: 

commit  yonrself  to  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit.    He  can  harmonise  apparent  oon< 
tradictions,  reconcile  alleged  discrepancies,  clear  away  overshadowing  mists,  and 
place  each  doctrine,  precept,  and  institution  clear  before  your  mind.    (4)  To  all 
holiness.     As  the  "  Spirit  of  holiness,"  it  is  his  aim  to  deepen  the  impress  of  the 
restored  image  of  God  in  the  soul,  to  increase  our  happiness  by  making  us  more 
holy,  and  to  advance  our  holiness  by  making  us  more  like  God.    All  His  unfoldinga 
of  Christ,  views  of  God,  rebukes,  joys,  have  this  for  their  object — the  perfection  of 
us  in  holiness.    (5)  To  all  comfort.    If  sorrows  abound,  consolation  much  more 
abounds,  since  "  the  Comforter  "  is  the  Holy  Ghost.    He  comforts  by  applying  the 
promises — by  leading  to  Christ — by  bending  the  will  in  deep  submission  to  God — 
and  by  unveiling  to  faith's  far-seeing  eye  the  glories  of  a  sorrowless,  tearless,  sinless 
world.     (6)  To  glory.    There  He  matures  the  kingdom,  and  perfects  the  building, 
and  completes  the  temple  He  commenced  and  occupied  on  earth.     In  conclusion  : 
Beware  of  being  guided  by  any  other  than  the  Spirit  of  God.    The  temptation  is 
strong  of  being  biassed  by  the  profound  research,  the  distinguished  talents,  the 
exalted  piety,  and  admired  example  of  men.  But  this  must  not  be.  It  is  inconsistent 
with  the  honour  that  belongs,  and  with  the  love  that  we  owe,  to  the  Spirit.    "  Thoa 
shalt  guide  me  by  Thy  counsel,  and  afterwards  receive  me  to  glory."    (0.  Winslow, 
D.B.)        The  leading  of  the  Spirit  an  evidence  of  Divine  sonship  : — I.  The  wokk  op 
THE  Spieit.     He — 1.  Leads  and  instructs  in  tbe  way  of  salvation  (John  xvi.  7-10). 
He  is  infinitely  wise,  powerful,  good,  &o.,  and  therefore  His  guidance  will  be  perfect. 
2.  To  a  perception  of  our  lost  and  ruined  condition.     The  methods  are  various — 
meditation,  personal  affliction,  the  prayers  of  Christians,  some  sermon,  &o.      3. 
To  contrition.     Sin  now  appears  in  all  its  hateful  qualities  and  effects ;  as  that 
which  has  offended  God,  which  condemns,  curses,  and  defiles  the  soul.     The  Spirit 
leads  to  "  godly  sorrow,  which  worketh  repentance  unto  salvation,"  &c.    4.  To  a 
discovery  of  Christ  as  the  Saviour  (John  xvi.  13,  14).     He  removes  "  the  veil  on  the 
heart,"  dispels  prejudice,  and  affords  that  inward  and  Divine  light  by  which  alone 
Christ  is  perceived  for  saving  purposes  (Gal.  i.  16).     (1)  Christ's  greatness  and 
dignity.     Sinners  have  very  mean  thoughts  of  Christ.     (2)  The  power  of  Christ  to 
save,  as  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness,  the  great  atonement,  our  "  Wisdom, 
righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemption."     6.  To  the  exercise  of  saving  faith 
in  Christ.     6.  So  He  renovates  the  mind,  deadens  the  soul  to  sin,  and  disposes  it 
to  holy  obedience  and  love  (Tit.  iii.  4,  5).    II.  The  pbivilege  op  God's  people  : 
"  They  are  the  sons  of  God."    Consider — 1.  The  names  by  which  they  are  dis- 
tinguished— "  sons  and  children  of  God,"  a  "  chosen  generation,"  a  "  royal  priest- 
hood," "  kings  and  priests  unto  God."    2.    Their  liberty.     They  were  under  the 
dominion  of  sin,  the  tyranny  of  Satan,  the  curse  of  the  law,  and  consequently  the 
sting  of  death.     3.  "AU  things  are  theirs."    4.  Christ  is  engaged  to  protect  and 
defend  them.    5.  They  have  free  and  certain  access  to  God  as  their  Father  (chap. 
V.  2  ;  Eph.  iii.  12).    6.  They  enjoy  a  title  to  an  everlasting  inheritance  (Gal.  iii.  29  : 
Bom.  viii.  17 ;  1  John  iii.  1,  2).     III.  The  people  op  God  cheeish  and  enjoy  the 

INFLUENCE    OF   THE    SpIKIT,  AND   THEEEBY   EVIDENCE  THAT  THEY  AEE  THE  SONS  OF  GoD. 

By  the  Spirit  sinners  not  merely  become  children  of  God,  but  followers.  1.  They 
are  sensible  of  their  ignorance  and  weakness,  and  recognise  the  enlightening  and 
strengthening  energy  of  the  Spirit.  2.  They  are  careful  not  to  "  quench  "  or 
«'  grieve  "  the  Spirit  (1  Thess.  v.  19 ;  Eph,  iv.  30).  3.  They  pray  for  that  influence. 
4.  In  the  discbarge  of  all  their  duties  they  seek  His  aid.  5.  They  have  the  inward 
witness  of  the  Spirit  (ver.  16),  and  the  '•  fruits  of  the  Spirit"  (Gal.  v.  22).  (J.  J.  S. 
Bird,  B.A.)  The  leading  of  the  Spirit  the  secret  token  of  the  sons  of  God: — I. 
Whithee  does  the  Spirit  of  God  lead  the  sons  of  God  ?  1.  To  repentance.  2. 
He  leads  them,  while  they  think  Mttle  of  themselves,  to  think  much  of  Jesus.  If 
the  Holy  Ghost  has  never  made  Christ  precious  to  you,  you  know  nothing  about 
Him.  3.  "When  the  Spirit  has  glorified  Jesus  He  leads  us  to  know  other  truths. 
He  leads  the  sons  of  God  into  all  truth.  On  the  otber  hand,  truth  is  like  a  closed 
chamber  to  the  unregenerate  man.  4.  The  children  of  God  are  led  not  only  into 
knowledge,  but  into  love.  The  Spirit  causes  every  true-born  son  of  God  to  burn 
with  love  to  the  rest  of  the  family.  *'  We  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death 
onto  life,  because  we  love  the  brethren."  And  not  only  so,  but  He  leads  us  into 
intense  love  for  the  souls  of  sinners.  If  any  man  shall  say,  "It  is  no  business  of 
mine  whether  men  are  lost  or  saved,"  the  Spirit  of  God  never  led  him  into  such 
inhumanity.  5.  The  Spirit  leads  the  sons  of  God  into  holinpss.  If  you  are 
proud,  covetous,  lustful  after  worldly  gain,  false  in  your  statements,  and  unjust 
in  your  actions,  the  Holy  Ghost  never  led   you  there.      If  I  find   a   child  ol 


CHAP.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  21 

God  mixing  with  the  ungodly,  nsing  their  speech,  and  doing  their  actions,  I  am 
persuaded  the  Holy  Ghost  never  led  him  there.  But  if  I  see  a  man  devout  before 
God,  and  full  of  integrity  before  men,  I  know  that  the  Spirit  of  God  is  his  leader. 
"  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace."  6.  luto  vital  godliness— the  mystio 
essence  of  spiritual  life.  For  instance,  the  Holy  Ghost  leads  the  saints  to  prayer, 
which  is  the  vital  breath  of  their  souls.  7.  Into  usefulness,  some  in  one  path,  and 
some  in  another,  while  a  few  are  conducted  into  very  eminent  service.  If  you  are 
doing  nothing  for  Jesus  the  Spirit  of  God  has  never  led  you  into  this  idleness.  II. 
How  DOES  THE  Spibit  LEAD  THE  SONS  OF  GoD  ?  1.  We  cauuot  explain  His  mode  of 
operation,  but  probably  it  is  somewhat  in  the  same  way  in  which  our  spirits  operate 
upon  other  men's  spirits.  We  act  upon  matter  by  machinery,  but  upon  mind  by 
argument,  by  instruction,  and  so  we  endeavour  to  fashion  men  as  we  desire.  (1) 
One  great  instrument  which  the  Holy  Ghost  uses  upon  the  mind  is  the  Word  of 
God.  Quote  chapter  and  verse  for  an  action,  and,  unless  you  have  wrested  the 
passage,  you  may  rest  assured  you  have  acted  rightly.  (2)  The  Spirit  also  speaks 
through  His  ministers.  The  Word  preached  is  often  blest,  as  well  as  the  Word 
written,  but  this  can  only  be  the  case  when  the  Word  preached  is  in  conformity  with 
the  Word  written.  (3)  He  directly,  apart  from  the  Word,  speaks  in  the  hearts  of  the 
saints.  There  are  inward  monitions  which  are  to  be  devoutly  obeyed,  guidances 
mysterious,  which  must  be  implicitly  followed.  Thnre  will  come  to  you  sometimes, 
you  know  not  why,  certain  inward  checks,  such  as  Paul  received  when  he  essayed 
to  go  into  Mysia,  but  the  Spirit  suffered  him  not.  At  another  time  a  proper  thing 
comes  upon  you  strongly  that  it  is  to  be  done  at  once,  and  for  some  reason  you 
cannot  shake  off  the  impression.  Do  no  violence  to  that  impulse.  2.  Note  that 
the  Spirit  "  leads."  The  text  does  not  say,  "  As  many  as  are  driven  by  the  Spirit 
of  God."  No,  the  devil  is  a  driver.  Whenever  you  see  a  man  fanatical  and  wild, 
whatever  spirit  is  in  him  it  is  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  III.  When  does  the  Spibit 
LEAD  the  sons  OF  GoD  ?  1.  He  would  always  lead  them,  but,  alas,  there  are  times 
when  they  will  not  be  led.  They  are  wilful  and  headstrong,  and  start  aside.  2. 
The  healthy  condition  of  a  child  of  God  is  to  be  always  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God. 
Not  on  Sundays  only,  nor  alone  at  periods  set  apart  for  prayer,  but  during  every 
minute  of  every  hour  of  every  day.  We  ought  to  be  led  by  the  Spirit  in  little  things 
as  well  as  in  great.  If  only  one  action  apart  from  the  Spirit  were  suffered  to  run 
to  its  full  results,  it  would  ruin  us.  A  pilot  who  only  occasionally  directs  the  ship 
is  very  little  better  than  none.  Child  of  God,  the  Spirit  must  lead  you  in  every- 
thing. 3.  "  Well,  but,"  say  you,  "  will  He?  "  Yes.  When  you  are  in  diflSculties, 
consult  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  Word.  If  no  light  comes  from  thence  kneel  down 
and  pray.  Cast  yourself  upon  the  Divine  guidance,  and  you  shall  make  no  mistake. 
The  Lord  will  never  let  a  vessel  be  dashed  upon  the  rocks  whose  tiller  has  been 
given  into  His  hands.  Conclusion :  Use  the  text — 1.  As  a  test.  Am  I  a  child  of 
God  ?  If  so,  I  am  led  by  the  Spirit.  2.  As  a  consolation.  If  you  are  a  child  of 
God  you  will  be  led  by  the  Spirit.  3.  As  an  assurance.  If  you  are  led  by  the  Spirit 
of  God  then  you  are  most  certainly  a  son  of  God.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  sons 
of  God  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God  : — The  Spirit  is  everywhere  present.  He  controls 
all  the  operations  of  nature.  He  operates  on  the  minds  of  men,  endowing  and  con- 
trolling them.  He  specially  operates  on  the  children  of  God — 1.  In  renewing  them. 
2.  In  imbuing  them  continually  with  a  new  Ufe.  3.  In  determining  their  inward 
and  outward  life.  I.  What  is  meant  by  being  led  by  the  Spirit  ?  It  is  not  by 
blind  suggestions  or  impulses.  It  is  not  by  a  miraculous  or  abnormal  operation, 
directing  what  text  the  eye  shall  fall  upon.  The  Spirit  is  the  determining  principle 
of  the  hfe,  and  His  leading — 1.  Is  consistent  with  our  rational  nature,  liberty,  and 
responsibility.  2.  Mingles  with  our  consciousness,  and  determines  it,  but  cannot 
be  distinguished  from  it.  3.  Is  not  always  irresistible.  Hence  men  are  said  to 
resist,  grieve,  quench  the  Holy  Spirit.  U.  The  besult  of  it.  1.  The  knowledge 
of  the  truth — not  by  inspiration  or  revelation,  but  illumination.  2.  The  love  of 
truth,  or  the  conformity  of  our  hearts  to  the  standard  of  God's  will.  3.  The  conformity 
of  our  outward  life  to  the  wiU  of  God.  (1)  It  leads  to  the  government  of  the  tongue, 
the  control  of  the  passions,  the  ordering  of  the  condict.  (2)  It  gives  right  views  and 
motives  to  determine  us  in  all  emergencies.  (3)  It  enables  us  to  choose  that  Chris- 
tian work  for  which  we  are  best  qualified.  HI.  Why  are  those  who  are  led  by  the 
Spirit  the  sons  of  God.  1.  What  is  meant  by  the  sons  of  God  ?  Those  who — (1) 
Partake  of  His  nature  by  regeneration.  (2)  Are  adopted  into  His  family  and  made 
the  objects  of  His  parental  care  and  heirs  of  His  kingdom.  (3)  Governed  by  a 
filial  as  opposed  to  a  slavish  spirit.    2.  Why  are  such  led  by  the  Spirit  t    Because 


33  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOB.  [chap.  Tm. 

(1)  Sabmission  to  the  spirit  of  our  whole  inward  and  outward  life  is  the  only 
evidence  of  our  sonship.  (2)  The  Holy  Spirit  is  in  His  nature  the  Spirit  of 
adoption.  He  is  not  a  servile  Spirit,  but  the  Spirit  of  the  Son,  and  therefore  sent 
into  sons.  Those  only  who  are  actuated  by  this  filial  Spirit  are  the  sons  of  God, 
ue,,  are  such  in  their  inward  character  and  temper.  (3)  In  so  far  as  sonship 
involves  the  idea  of  exaltation,  power,  blessing,  &o.,  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  is 
the  immediate  source  of  all  these  distinctions.  IV.  The  necessaby  conbitions  on 
CUB  PAET  IN  order  TO  THIS  GUIDANCE.  1.  We  must  renounce  our  own  guidance 
and  that  of  others,  whether  of  the  world.  Church,  or  individuals.  2.  We  must 
submit  to,  and  have  full  faith  in,  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit.  (C.  Hodge,  D.D.) 
The  sons  of  Qod  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God : — I.  A  privilege — to  be  the  sons  of  God. 
The  glory  of  children  is  their  fathers  (Prov.  xvii.  6) ;  but  the  privilege  is  not  only 
of  honour  but  of  profit  (ver.  17).  All  God's  children  are  heirs,  as  all  are  partakers 
of  the  Divine  nature.  They  have — 1.  A  spiritual  right  to  all  the  creatures — "  All 
things  are  yours."  2.  An  interest  in  God  Himself,  and  in  His  promises,  mercies, 
&c.  3.  Eight  to  guardianship  of  angels  (Psa.  xci.  11 ;  Matt,  xviii.  10 ;  Heb.  i.  14). 
What  a  safeguard  against  the  powers  of  darkness  I  4.  A  claim  to  eternal  glory  (Col. 
i.  12 ;  Matt.  xxv.  34).  In  comparison  with  this  how  poor  the  thoughts  of  men  1 
"  How  may  I  get  a  good  bargain,  enjoy  myself,  be  revenged  on  my  enemy  ?  "  rather 
than,  "  How  shall  I  become  a  child  of  God  ?  "  II.  The  qualification.  "  So  many 
as  are  led,"  &c.  It  is  not  enough  to  be  the  sons  of  God,  unless  we  know  ourselves 
to  be  so.  1.  How  shall  we  know  ourselves  to  be  the  sons  of  God  ?  There  are 
many  signs  besides  the  one  here  mentioned,  as — (1)  Every  child  is  like  His  Father. 
It  is  not  so  in  carnal  generation  always.  But  you  must  try  your  spiritual  sonship 
by  this  rule — your  Heavenly  Father  is  holy  (1  Pet.  i.  15,  16),  merciful,  righteous, 
slow  to  anger,  abhors  all  manner  of  evil ;  are  we  like  that,  or  the  reverse  ?  (2)  Bears 
a  filial  love  to  His  Father.  His  love  to  us  is  infinite  (Psa.  ciii.  13)  ;  what  return  do 
we  make  ?  We  can  perhaps  talk  largely  of  our  love,  but  if  we  loved  Him  could  we 
estrange  ourselves  from  His  interest,  hear  His  sacred  name  blasphemed,  &c.  (3) 
Reverence  Him.  (a)  As  for  his  actions,  he  dares  not  do  anything  wilfully  that 
would  displease  Him  (Mai.  i.  6).  (6)  As  for  his  sufferings,  he  receives  them  sub- 
missively as  corrections.  (4)  Depends  on  His  provision,  expecting  such  patrimony 
as  He  shall  bestow  upon  him,  and  waiting  for  it  patiently.  (5)  Is  led  by  His 
Spirit ;  which  brings  us  to — 2.  What  it  is  to  be  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  In  leading 
there  must  be  a  hand  to  guide  and  a  foot  to  follow  ;  good  motions  on  God's  part, 
and  motions  to  good  on  ours.  Every  man  is  led  by  some  spirit ;  one  by  a  spirit  of 
error  (1  Tim.  iv.  1),  another  by  the  spirit  of  giddiness  (Isa.  xix.  14),  another  by  the 
spirit  of  bondage,  another  by  the  spirit  of  the  world  (1  Cor.  ii.  12),  and  all,  besides, 
by  the  unclean  spirit.  Let  us  see,  then,  how  a  man  may  know  that  he  is  led  by  the 
Spirit  of  God.  He  leads — (1)  In  a  right  way,  the  way  of  God's  commandments. 
All  other  ways  are  crooked,  as  deviating  from  the  straight  line  of  righteousness. 

(2)  By  a  just  rule — the  Word  of  truth.  Uncertain  and  variable  traditions,  private 
and  ungrounded  revelations  which  cross  this  recorded  will  of  God,  are  the  deceitful 
guides  of  the  spirit  of  error.  (3)  Sweetly  and  gently.  Those  who  are  carried  with 
furious  impetuousness  are  not  led  by  the  spirit  of  meekness.  (4)  Progressively, 
from  grace  to  grace  and  virtue  to  virtue,  whereas  passion  goes  by  sudden  flashes. 
(5)  To  life,  whereas  other  spirits,  the  flesh  included,  lead  to  death.  III.  The  con- 
nection OF  this  qualification  with  the  privilege.  How  far  does  the  leading  of 
God's  Spirit  evince  our  sonship.  If  we  would  have  a  comfortable  assurance  we 
must  be  led  by  the  Spirit  in — 1.  Judgment  (John  xvi.  13),  i.e.,  into  all  saving  and 
necessary  truths ;  so  as  to  free  us  from  gross  ignorance  and  error.  2.  Disposition. 
If  the  Spirit  have  wrought  our  hearts  to  be  right  with  God  in  all  our  affections  we 
may  be  assured  that  we  are  His  sons.  3.  Practice  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  27).  (Bp.  Hall.) 
The  sons  of  God  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God : — I.  What  is  meant  by  being  led  by  the 
Spirit  ?  It  is  as  if  a  blind  man  had  asked  the  way  to  a  certain  city,  and  one  had 
not  only  told  him  of  it,  but  taken  him  by  the  hand  to  lead  him  therein.  Or  it  is  as 
if  a  httle  child  in  the  dark  had  not  only  asked  direction  from  his  father,  but  had 
seized  that  father's  hand,  so  to  trust  implicitly  to  his  guidance  (see  also  Psa. 
xxiii.  2-4;  cxliii.  10).  This  leading  by  the  Spirit  is — 1.  A  practical  thing.  If  the 
Spirit  leads  us  it  is  to  govern  and  control  our  words  and  actions  (Titus  ii.  10-15 ; 
Isa.  xlviii.  17,  18  ;  Gal.  v.  16-25 ;  1  John  iii.  1-10).  2.  A  work  of  inward  influence 
and  sweet  secret  suasion  of  all  our  moral  being.  True,  there  is  a  law,  but  it  is  a 
law  of  liberty — a  commandment  which  love  delights  to  obey.  "  Where  the  Spirit 
of  the  Lord  is  there  is  liberty,"  not  licentiousness  ;  that  liberty  which  consists  not 


ORiP.  ym.]  ROMANS. 


of  freedom  from  moral  obligation,  bat  of  disposition  to  comply  with  such  obliga- 
tion (Psa.  oxix.  32).  3.  Thorough  and  perfect,  steadily  and  continuously  main- 
tained. Do  not  confound  with  it  transient  emotions,  occasional  convictions,  fitful 
resolutions,  and  short-lived  periods  of  a  reformation  of  life.  4.  "  According  to  the 
Scriptures,"  and  is  maintained  through  the  habit  and  exercise  of  prayer.  Here  is 
nothing  mystical,  fanciful,  fanatical.  All  is  sober  and  rational,  as  it  is  sacred  and 
solemn.  II.  The  high  privileqe  of  those  who  ake  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God. 
They  are  the  sons  of  God  (2  Cor.  vl.  18).  God  is  our  Father — 1.  Nominally.  He 
calls  us  His  children,  and  we  may  call  Him  our  Father.  A  formal  act  and  covenant 
of  adoption  is  entered  into,  whereby  our  Maker  assumes  in  our  favour  a  parental 
position  and  name,  and  we  are  permitted  to  beliere  in  His  paternal  relation  to  us, 
to  talk  about  it,  and  to  act  upon  it  (John  i.  12,  13  ;  Gal.  iv.  4,  6  ;  1  John  iii.  1).  2. 
Really  God  does  more  than  call  us  children.  He  makes  us  so.  We  are  His  by 
regeneration  as  well  as  adoption,  by  a  new  birth  as  well  as  by  a  new  title.  Just  as 
children  resemble  their  parents  in  physical  form  and  feature,  and  so  prove  them- 
selves partakers  of  their  nature,  so  do  th^  sons  of  God  resemble  Him  in  moral 
lineaments,  in  spirit  and  disposition,  and  thus  prove  themselves  partakers  of  His 
nature.  3.  Effectively.  Our  Father  treats  us  as  His  sons.  He  feels  a  parents 
sympathy  for  us,  and  He  fulfils  all  a  parent's  duty.  He  provides  for  us,  defends 
us,  extricates  us  out  of  our  difficulties,  instructs  us,  corrects  us,  makes  us  privy  to 
His  plans,  and  will  eventually  take  us  home  to  Himself,  that  we  may  dwell  for  ever 
in  our  Father's  house.  Conclusion:  1.  If  led  by  God's  Spirit,  rejoice  in  the 
thought  of  your  Divine  sonship.  2.  As  God's  children  let  us  evermore  seek  to  be 
led  by  His  Spirit.  (T.  G.  Horton.)  First,  to  take  notice  of  the  property  itself 
here  mentioned  which  is  to  be  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  where  we  may  observe  that 
there  is  such  a  thing  indeed  in  the  world  as  this  is,  which  some  persons  are  par- 
takers of.  There  is  a  twofold  leading  by  the  Spirit ;  the  one  is  common  and 
ordinary,  the  other  is  special  and  peculiar.  Now  this  is  considerable  with  a  double 
reference,  either  first  of  all  to  our  first  conversion ;  or,  secondly,  to  our  following 
conversation.  There  is  the  leading  and  guiding  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  requisite 
and  necessary  for  Christians  in  each  of  these  conditions.  First,  to  look  upon  it  in 
order  to  our  first  and  primitive  conversion.  The  children  of  God  they  are  led  on 
by  His  Spirit  in  this.  And  there  are  three  things  which  do  make  up  this  unto  us. 
First,  information,  or  discovery  of  such  and  such  truths  in  the  proposition. 
Secondly,  illumiuation,  or  enabling  of  the  mind  to  conceive  and  apprehend  those 
truths  which  are  thus  discovered.  Thirdly,  inclination,  or  bowing  of  the  will  and 
affections  to  close  and  comply  with  such  truths  and  motions  which  are  apprehended. 
The  Spirit  of  God  does  all  these  three  in  the  work  of  conversion.  The  second  ia 
the  communication  of  this  property  to  a  diversity  and  plurality  of  persons — "As 
many  as  are  led."  From  whence  we  may  observe  this  much,  that  this  being  led 
and  acted  and  guided  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  it  is  not  only  the  property  of  one  or  two 
particular  persons,  who  are  singular  and  alone  by  themselves,  but  it  is  the  condi- 
tion of  a  whole  society  and  generation  of  men.  There  are  many  of  them  that  are 
thus  led  (John  i.  12 ;  Acts  ix.  42  ;  Gal.  vi  16  ;  Phil.  iii.  15).  There  is  a  variety  and 
diversity  of  such  persons  as  are  thus  guided  and  carried.  First,  in  a  succession  of 
times,  in  one  age  after  another.  There  have  been  always  men  guided  by  God's 
Spirit,  and  still  are,  and  always  will  be.  There  were  so  in  the  times  of  the 
prophets,  and  there  were  so  in  the  times  of  the  apostles,  and  there  are  so  still  in 
ours,  and  will  be  further  to  the  end  of  the  world.  And  secondly,  for  one  and  the 
same  time.  There  are  many  that  go  the  same  way  and  are  in  the  like  manner 
inchned.  That  as  some  thrive  in  wickedness,  so  others  should  thrive  in  goodness ; 
and  as  Satan  enlarges  his  kingdom,  so  the  Lord  also  should  increase  His.  This 
may  therefore  take  off  the  slander  which  is  cast  upon  religion  as  a  private  and 
singular  business,  as  the  invention  only  of  some  few  persons,  which  they  take  up 
to  themselves.  No,  it  is  no  such  matter ;  there  are  multitudes  and  varieties  of 
them.  The  third  is  the  consent  or  correspondency  of  this  conduct  in  this  variety, 
where  many  and  different  persons  are  intimated  to  be  guided  by  one  and  the  self- 
same Spirit.  Grace  is  one  and  the  same  for  substance  in  all  sorts  of  Christians, 
and  they  are  led  by  the  same  Spirit  of  God,  which  is  the  worker  and  preserver  of  it 
in  them  there  where  it  is  wrought.  "  We  having  the  same  Spirit  of  faith,  according 
as  it  is  written  "  (2  Cor.  iv.  13).  "By  one  Spirit  we  are  all  baptized  into  one  body, 
and  have  been  made  all  to  drink  into  one  Spirit  "  (1  Cor.  xii.  13).  This  appears  ta 
be  so  in  regard  of  the  same  effects,  which  it  works  in  several  persons.  Where  we 
find  the  same  opertttions  we  may  conclude  there  are  the  same  principles.    AgaiOt 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  vm. 

they  are  not  neither  after  one  and  the  same  manner.  Grace,  though  it  be  in  all 
one  for  substance,  yet  it  is  not  in  all  one  for  modification,  for  the  ordering  and 
disposing  of  it.  And  lastly,  it  should  very  much  persuade  and  prevail  with  Chris- 
tians to  mutual  love  and  charity  to  one  another,  forasmuch  as  they  are  all  led  by 
the  same  common  Spirit.  The  second  is  the  predicate,  or  consequent,  in  the 
privilege  belonging  to  these  persons.  It  may  further  be  cleared  to  us  upon  these 
considerations.  First,  such  as  are  led  by  th«  Spirit  they  are  undoubtedly  the 
children  of  God,  because  they  have  the  seed  of  Cod  remaining  in  them,  as  the 
apostle  John  declares  it  of  them  (1  John  iii.  9).  Secondly,  those  that  are  led  by 
the  Spirit,  they  are  made  conformable  and  like  unto  God,  and  -  have  His  image 
stamped  upon  them.  Thirdly,  they  are  members  of  Christ.  Whosoever  belong  to 
Christ,  who  is  the  natural  Son  of  God,  they  are  consequently  themeelves  the 
adopted  sons  of  God.  And  this  are  they  which  are  led  by  His  Spirit.  Now  for  a 
further  clearing  of  this  point  still  unto  us,  we  may  moreover  take  notice  of  it  !Q  a 
twofold  illustration ;  the  one  as  holding  indefinitely,  and  the  other  as  holding 
exclusively.  Indefinitely,  if  they  be  led  by  God's  Spirit,  they  are  His  children,  let 
them  be  who  they  will  be.  Exclusively,  if  they  be  not  led  by  His  Spirit,  whatever 
they  be  else  they  are  none  of  His  children.  First,  take  it  indefinitely.  If  they  are 
such  as  are  led  by  God's  Spirit  they  are  His  children,  let  them  be  who  they  will. 
And  that  again  in  a  twofold  explication.  First,  in  the  indefiniteness  of  nations ; 
and  secondly,  in  the  indefiniteness  of  conditions.  This  word,  as  many,  it  carries 
each  of  these  latitudes  in  it.  This  teaches  us  likewise  to  own  religion  wheresoever 
we  find  it,  let  the  persons  in  other  respects  be  what  they  will  be.  The  second  is  as 
it  may  be  taken,  exclusively.  If  they  be  not  led  by  His  Spirit,  whatever  they  be 
else,  they  are  none  of  His  children.  This  proposition  here  before  us  is  to  be  under- 
stood convertibly  and  by  way  of  reciprocation.  As  many  as  are  led  by  the  Spirit 
of  God,  they  are  the  children  of  God.  And  again,  as  many  as  are  God's  children, 
they  are  such  as  are  led  by  God's  Spirit.  Whosoever  are  none  of  the  former  they 
are  none  of  the  latter.  There's  nothing  less  than  the  conduct  of  God's  Spirit 
which  will  entitle  one  to  a  state  of  adoption.  And  here  again  two  more.  First, 
who  are  led  by  a  different  spirit,  and  they  are  excluded  as  defective.  Secondly,  as 
are  led  by  an  opposite  spirit,  and  they  are  excluded  as  destructive.  Now  this  being 
led  of  the  Spirit  of  God  may  be  very  much  judged  of  by  us  from  these  observations. 
First,  by  our  delight  in  the  Word  of  God,  and  our  conformity  and  agreeableness  to 
that.  Secondly,  by  the  goodness  of  the  ways  themselves  in  which  we  converse,  we 
find  these  two  joined  together  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  27,  28).  Thirdly,  by  our  cheerful- 
ness and  activity  in  the  ways  of  God.  And  then  lastly,  as  a  concomitant, 
and  that  which  is  annexed  hereunto.  If  we  be  led  by  the  Spirit  we  shall 
be  tender  of  grieving  the  Spirit,  and  doing  anything  which  may  be  offensive 
to  Him.  There  is  no  wise  man  who  would  offend  his  guide  whom  he  depends 
upon   for   safety   and   direction.      (Thomas  Horton,   D.D.)  The   nature   and 

tokens  of  the  Spirit's  operation : — I.  What  it  is  to  be  led  by  the  Spirit  ; 
or  what  it  is  that  the  Holy  Spirit  does  for  the  furthering  our  salvation.  Our 
Lord,  taking  His  leave  of  His  disciples,  consigned  them,  as  it  were,  over  to  the 
care  and  guidance  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (John  xvi.  13),  who  would  guide  them  into  all 
truth,  and  abide  with  them  and  the  Church  for  ever  (John  xiv.  16 ;  Acts  i.  5-8). 
This,  however,  is  not  to  be  so  understood,  as  if  the  Holy  Ghost  were  now  our  sole 
conducter,  exclusive  of  the  other  two  Divine  Persons  (John  xiv.  23  ;  Matt,  xxviii.  20). 
Such  guidance  (which  often  goes  under  the  name  of  grace)  is  ascribed  to  the  Father, 
to  the  Son,  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  it  is  the  common  work  of  all.  And  yet  the 
Holy  Ghost  is  emphatically  styled  •'  the  Spirit  of  Grace,"  as  being  more  imme- 
diately concerned  in  the  work  of  grace.  He  gives — 1.  Illuminating  or  enlightening 
grace,  inasmuch  as  He  instils  good  thoughts  and  salutary  instructions ;  opening 
the  understanding  to  receive  them  (Psa.  cxix.  18 ;  Acts  xvi.  14).  2.  Sanctifying 
grace,  when  He  rectifies  the  heart,  incUnes  the  will,  and  meliorates  the  affections 
(Phil.  iii.  18).  This  is  distinguished  into  preventing,  assisting,  perfecting  ;  being 
considered,  first,  as  laying  the  early  seeds  of  that  spiritual  life  ;  next,  as  contributing 
to  its  growth ;  and  lastly,  as  adding  the  finishing  hand  to  it.  3.  The  grace  of  true 
devotion,  attended  with  deep  compunction  of  heart  (ver.  26).  II.  In  what  manneb 
DOES  Hb  opebatb  AND  EFFECTUATE  WHAT  Hb  DOES.  1.  Ordinarily  in  a  gentle, 
moral,  insinuating  way,  and  not  by  mechanical,  irresistible  impulses,  such  as 
would  take  away  human  liberty,  or  reduce  men  to  intelligent  clockwork,  or  reason- 
ing machines.  For  upon  that  supposition  every  good  work,  word,  or  thought, 
would  be  BO  entirely  God's,  that  no  part  of  it  would  be  ours.     The  operations  of 


CHAT.  Yni.]  ROMANS.  25 

Ood's  Holy  Spirit,  then,  only  prepare  us  for  godliness,  or  incite  us  and  enable  us 
thereto ;  the  rest  must  come  from  ourselves.  Accordingly,  men  are  capable  of 
resisting,  grieving,  and  even  quenching  the  Holy  Spirit.  2.  To  be  a  little  more 
particular,  the  Holy  Spirit  works  upon  the  mind  by  proper  applications  to  the 
reason  and  conscience,  the  hopes  and  fears ;  suggesting  what  is  right  and  good, 
and  laying  before  men,  in  a  strong  Ught,  the  happiness  to  be  obtained  by  obedience, 
and  the  misery  consequent  upon  disobedience.  And  one  very  considerable  article 
of  Divine  wisdom  and  goodness  Ues  in  the  providential  ordering  affairs  so  as  to 
serve  the  purposes  of  grace  ;  not  exempting  good  men  altogether  from  temptations, 
but  BO  restraining,  limiting,  and  governing  the  temptations,  that  they  shall  not 
press  harder,  or  continue  longer,  than  may  best  answer  the  design  of  God's  permit- 
ting them.  III.  By  v?hat  marks  we  may  discern  when  the  Holy  Spirit  operates 
UPON  us,  AND  WHEN  WE  ARE  LED  BY  HiM.  1.  These  appear  chiefly  either  in  checks 
of  conscience  dissuading  us  from  evil,  or  in  godly  motions,  inciting  us  to  what  is 
right  and  good.  For  though  what  passes  within  us  of  that  kind  is  not  distinguish- 
able by  the  manner  of  it  from  the  natural  workings  of  our  own  minds,  yet  revela- 
tion, in  conjunction  with  our  enlightened  reason,  assures  us  that  every  good 
thought,  counsel,  and  desire,  oometh  from  above.  2.  But  before  we  draw  such 
conclusion  vnth  respect  to  any  particular  thought,  special  care  should  be  taken 
that  we  proceed  upon  sure  grounds ;  otherwise  we  may  be  apt  to  ascribe  the 
rovings  of  fancy,  or  mere  dreams  of  our  own,  to  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  Some 
very  good  men  have  been  observed  to  make  it  a  rule  in  oases  of  perplexity  to  lean 
to  that  side  wherein  they  And  most  ease  to  their  own  minds.  But  sometimes  it 
happens  that  a  person  maybe  under  the  influence  of  unperceived  prejudices,  or 
passions,  which  warp  him  to  a  side.  And  therefore  tliere  is  no  safe  and  certain 
rule  to  go  by  in  such  oases,  but  a  strict  examination  into  the  nature  and  quality  of 
the  action.  And  if,  upon  reflection,  we  find  that  what  we  are  inwardly  dissuaded 
from  is  really  evil,  or  what  we  are  inwardly  prompted  to  is  really  good,  then  may  we 
safely  and  justly  ascribe  such  motions  to  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  As  to  our  judging 
of  our  whole  conduct,  and  whether,  or  how  far  we  are  conducted  by  the  Holy  Spirit, 
we  have  a  safe  rule  to  go  by — God's  commandments  (1  John  iii.  24  ;  Gal.  v.  22-25), 
IV.  The  use  and  improvement  to  be  made  op  the  whole.  1.  To  be  ever  mindful 
of  the  world  of  spirits  whereunto  we  belong;  and  particularly  of  that  blessed 
Spirit  who  presides  over  us,  and  whose  temple  we  are,  while  we  behave  as  becomes 
US.  2.  To  pray  that  the  Spirit  of  God  may  alway  dwell  with  us,  and  to  take  care 
to  avoid  all  such  practices  as  may  offend  the  Holy  Spirit.  3.  Since  the  benefit  of 
all  depends  upon  our  own  willing  compliance  and  hearty  endeavours,  let  us  make 
it  our  constant  resolution  to  attend  the  motions,  and  to  obey  the  suggestions  of 
God's  Holy  Spirit,  and  so  to  work  out  our  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling. 
(D.  Waterland,  D.D.)  Sons  of  God : — By  nature  we  are  children  of  God,  but  we 
do  not  occupy  the  place  of  children.  The  prodigal  was  still  the  child  of  his  father, 
but  he  was  away  from  his  father.  I.  The  nature  op  this  sonship.  1.  A  renovated 
heart.  2.  Leading  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  (1)  To  clear  views  of  the  truth,  (a)  By 
understanding  the  Bible.  (6)  By  comprehending  the  meaning  of  Divine  provi- 
dences. (2)  To  safety.  He  who  is  led  does  not  lead.  Some  Christians  think 
themselves  wise  enough  to  instruct  God  as  to  the  experiences  through  which  they 
should  pass.  3.  Peculiar  love.  Say  what  we  will  about  universal  charity,  we 
love  our  children  with  a  special  love.  4.  Heirship  with  Christ;  sharers  of  His 
glory,  n.  Its  duties.  1.  Keverence.  2.  Trust.  3.  Obedience.  4.  Maintenance 
of  the  family  honour.  5.  Besignation.  A  true  son  will  let  God  have  His  way. 
III.  How  abb  we  to  become  sons  op  God.  By  our  natural  birth?  By  hearing 
His  Word?  By  admission  into  His  Church?  No;  John  gives  ub  the  answer 
(John  i.  12).  Conclusion  :  1.  To  all  those  who  come  home  the  door  is  open.  2. 
God  takes  great  delight  in  being  loved.  3.  We  come  to  God  through  prayer,  then 
find  provision,  then  protection.  {T.  L.  Cuyler,  D.D.)  The  sons  oJfGod : — I.  The 
description.  We  might  almost  nave  called  it  a  picture.  We  are  all  travellers,  and 
every  step  of  our  journey  is  under  the  guidance  of  influences  which  never  cease  to 
operate  upon  our  character.  Some  are  guided  by  the  spirit  of  the  world,  some  by 
the  spirit  of  self-dependence,  some  by  the  spirit  of  superstition ;  but  the  children  of 
God  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  1.  Why  does  the  Spirit  lead  them  ?  Because — 
(1)  They  need  guidance.  Neither  in  thought  nor  action  are  we  competent  to  take  a 
single  step  by  ourselves ;  and  yet  every  step  we  take  brings  us  nearer  to  God  or 
takes  us  farther  from  Him.  (2)  Other  guides  are  ready  to  lead  astray.  2.  Where 
does  the  Spirit  lead  them?    Not  in  the  paths  where  the  garments  will  be  defiled ; 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  Ttvu 

not  into  the  scenes  of  worldlj  dissipation  and  amasement,  bat  often  through  many 
obstacles — (1)  To  the  Cross,  where  they  find  rest  to  their  souls.  (2)  To  the  closet, 
where  they  may  find  communion  with  their  heavenly  Friend.  (3)  To  the  house  of 
God.  (4)  To  the  Lord's  table.  (5)  To  duty.  (6)  To  conflict.  (7)  To  heaven. 
3.  How  does  He  guide  them  ?  By  an  inward  impulse  and  by  an  outward  ministry, 
and  by  these  conjointly.    II.  Thb  privilege.    "  The  sons  of  God."    This  privilege — 

1.  Commences  with  adoption.  Adoption  is  the  taking  and  treating  a  stranger  as 
one's  own  child.  It  is  a  mere  act  of  grace.  2.  Is  effectuated  by  regeneration. 
For  it  is  in  nature  as  well  as  in  name  that  believers  become  the  children  of  God. 
3.  Is  sustained  by  Divine  nourishment.  There  is  milk  for  babes,  and  meat  for 
strong  men,  4.  Is  confirmed  by  Divine  instruction.  The  world  is  converted  into 
a  vast  school  for  the  benefit  of  the  Church,  as  the  wilderness  was  when  God  brought 
His  people  out  of  Egypt  (Deut.  iv.  36,  ixxii.  10).  5.  Is  manifested  by  Divine 
resemblance.  6.  Is  witnessed  by  the  Divine  Spirit.  7.  It  is  the  pledge  of  the 
highest  glory.  (P.  Strutt.)  Sons  of  God : — I.  The  condition  on  which  we  aeb 
"  sons  of  God."  1.  Not  mere  creatureship.  The  stars,  the  birds,  the  flowers,  are 
God's  creatures.  2.  Not  mere  resemblance.  Even  fallen  men  are  made  in  the 
image  of  God,  and  have  a  potential  likeness  to  Him.  3.  But  filial  disposition. 
Men  are  the  special  creation  of  God  ;  may  have  a  special  resemblance  to  Him  ;  may 
have  affection,  not  fear;  may  cry  "Abba,  Father."  H.  The  evidence  that  wb 
ABE  "sons  of  God."  There  is — 1.  The  witness  of  God's  Spirit.  2.  The  testimony 
of  the  spirit  of  man.  IH.  The  besults  of  odb  being  "  sons  of  God."  1.  We 
are  heirs  of  God.  2.  We  are  joint-heirs  with  Christ.  (17.  R.  Thomas.)  The  sons 
of  God : — I.  Theib  spibix  is — 1.  Obedient.  2.  Confident.  3.  Loving.  II.  Theib 
ASSUEANCE  is — 1.  Divine.     2.  Unquestionable.    IIL  Theib  peospects.     1.  Glorious. 

2.  Certain.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  condition  and  privilege  of  a  son  of  God : — I.  His 
PRESENT  condition.  He  is  "  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God. "  1.  There  are  two  things  which 
may  render  it  necessary  for  a  person  to  be  led,  defect  of  vision  or  circumstances  of 
peril.  A  blind  man  is  under  the  necessity  of  being  led,  in  order  that  he  may 
be  preserved  from  the  dangers  into  which  he  would  be  otherwise  betrayed.  2.  Or 
a  man  may  be  exposed  to  such  perils  that  it  is  necessary  that  he  should  put  himself 
under  the  guidance  of  some  one  who  may  enable  him  to  detect  and  overcome  the 
danger.  Both  these,  in  a  moral  point  of  view,  coalesce  in  the  case  of  every  one  by 
nature.  (1)  Our  moral  eyesight  is  blinded.  The  reason  of  man  is  perverted  ;  it  is 
clouded  by  prejudice  ;  it  attaches  undue  weight  to  things  that  are  of  no  importance, 
and  overlooks  the  things  which  are  of  first-rate  importance.  Spiritual  truth  we  are 
utterly  unable  to  perceive.  The  various  sciences  have  distinct  nomenclatures 
which  they  who  are  not  initiated  do  not  understand.  Now,  gospel  truth  is  just  as 
unintelligible  to  one  who  has  not  been  renewed  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  Mr.  Pitt  was 
once  taken  by  Wilberforce  to  hear  William  Cecil ;  that  statesman  listened  attentively, 
and  when  he  was  retiring,  upon  being  asked  by  his  friend  how  he  liked  the  state- 
ments he  had  heard,  the  honest  answer  was,  that  he  could  not  understand  one 
single  sentence.  Why  ?  Not  that  the  preacher  had  clothed  the  truth  in  imintelli- 
gible  language,  but  in  the  language  of  Scripture,  inspired  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and 
therefore  in  a  language  which  that  statesman  was  unable  to  comprehend  because  it 
was  to  be  spiritually  discerned.  (2)  And  our  way  is  encompassed  with  peril,  (a)  We 
are  treading,  as  it  were,  upon  the  margin  of  eternity,  and  in  an  instant  we  might  be 
summoned  to  stand  before  the  bar  of  judgment,  (b)  We  are  surrounded  with  a 
host  of  spiritual  beings,  who  are  continually  operating  against  our  safety,  (c)  The 
world  around  ub  is  continually  placing  temptation  in  our  way.  (d)  We  have  a 
traitor  within.  Now,  if  all  this  be  the  case  we  need  a  leader  such  as  the  Spirit  of 
God.  2.  How  is  it  that  the  Spirit  of  God  leads  ?  (1)  By  unfolding  the  meaning 
of  the  written  Word.  That  Word  is  our  great  sheet-anchor  in  the  present  day,  and 
we  have  an  infalhble  interpreter  thereof  in  the  Spirit  who  indited  it  (2)  By  the 
various  providences  of  which  Christians  are  the  subjects  in  their  passage  through 
life.  He  who  will  watch  for  providences  shall  never  want  a  providence  to  watch. 
It  is  true  that  we  have  not  a  visible  pillar  of  cloud  and  of  fire  ;  yet  if  we  will  only 
attentively  listen  to  the  voice  of  God's  providence  often  we  shall  find  it  true — 
"  Thine  ear  shall  hear  a  word  behind  thee,  saying.  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it, 
when  ye  turn  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left."  3.  How  is  it  to  be  known 
whether  a  person  is  led  of  the  Spirit  ?  The  marks  are — (1)  Separation  from  the 
world.  (2)  Obedience  to  God's  will.  (3)  A  single  eye  to  God's  glory.  II.  Hia 
FBIVII.EOE.  1.  As  relating  to  the  present  life.  (1)  He  may  look  up  to  Qoi  as  his 
reconciled  Father  in  Jesus.    (2)  Trials  may  befall  him  ;  but  he  knows  that  "  all 


CHAP,  vm.]  ROMANS.  27 

things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God."  God  loves  him  too  well  not 
to  try  him.  Thus  he  can  look  upon  his  trials  with  thankfulness,  believing  that 
they  shall  work  out  for  him,  "afar  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory." 
(3)  He  may  coma  to  God  with  the  confidence  of  a  child.  (4)  As  his  course  draws 
nearer  and  nearer  to  eternity  it  grows  brighter  and  brighter.  2.  And  as  for  his  privi- 
leges in  eternity,  '•  Eye  hath  not  seen  "  Ac.  (Bp.  R.  Bickersteth.)  The  happiness  of 
the  tons  of  God  :—\.  They  are  led  by  His  Spirit.  2.  They  bear  the  name  of  children 
(vers.  14,  16).  3.  They  speak  the  language  of  children  (ver.  16).  4.  They  render 
the  obedience  of  children.  5.  They  feel  the  confidence  of  children.  6.  They 
participate  in  the  inheritance  of  children.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  character  and 
privileges  of  true  Christians  : — I.  Their  character.  They  are  "  led  by  the  Spirit 
of  God."  This  implies — 1.  An  active  and  progressive,  not  a  passive  and  stationary 
life.  2.  Something  altogether  different  from  abandonment  to  natural  impulses. 
3.  A  contrast  with  the  leading  of  the  spirit  of  the  world,  which  conducts  so  many 
astray.  4.  Guidance  by  means  of  the  revealed  Word  of  God,  yet  due  to  a  Divine 
and  supernatural  influence.  5.  Issues  in  progress  in  the  way  of  holiness  and  obedi- 
ence which  leads  to  life  eternal.  II.  Their  privileges.  They  are  regarded  and 
treated  by  God  as  His  sons.  This  involves— 1.  Their  regeneration  and  adoption 
by  Divine  grace.  2.  Participation  in  the  Divine  character  and  likeness.  3.  Favour 
and  fellowship.  4.  Heirship.  They  are  joint  heirs  with  Christ,  and  the  time  shall 
come  when  they  shall  enter  upon  a  heavenly  and  immortal  inheritance.  {Clerical 
World.)  Four  important  questions  : — 1  How  may  I  became  a  child  of  God  ?  2. 
How  can  I  know  that  I  am  a  child  of  God  7  3.  How  must  I  prove  that  I  am  a  child 
of  God  ?    4.  What  advantage  have  I  as  a  child  of  God?    {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 


«^ 


'Ver.  15.  For  ye  have  not  received  the  spirit  of  bondage  .  .  .  bat  .  .  .  the 
Spirit  of  adoption. — The  spirit  of  bondage  and  of  adoption: — I.  The  spirit  of 
BONDAGE.  Much  of  the  bondage  of  ouFfallen  nature  is  not  the  work  of  the  Spirit 
ofUod  at  all.  Bondage  under  sin,  the  flesh,  worldly^customs,  the  fear  of  man — 
this  is  the  work  of  the  devil.  1.  But  there  is  a  sense  of  bondage  which  is  of  the 
Spirit  of  God.  The  bondage  of — (1)  Conviction  of  sin.  (2)  Assurance  of  punish- 
ment for  sin  from  which  there  is  no  escape.  (3)  The  feeling  of  the  inutility  of  the 
works  of  the  law.  "  By  the  deeds  of  the  law  there  shall  no  flesh  be  justified  in  His 
sight. "  2.  The  result  of  this  spirit  of  bondage  in  the  soul  is  fear.  There  are  five 
sorts  of  fears,  and  it  is  well  to  distinguish  between  them.  4  (1)  The  natural  fear 
which  the  creature  has  of  its  Creator,  because  of  its  own  insignificance  and  its 
Maker's  greatness.  From  that  we  shall  never  be  altogether  delivered.  (2)  Carnal 
fear  :  i.e.,  the  fear  of  man.  From  this  God's  Spirit  delivers  believers.  (3)  Servile 
fear — the  fear  of  a  slave  towards  his  master,  lest  he  should  be^eaten  when  he  has 
offended.  That  is  a  fear  which  should  rightly  dwell  in  every  unregenerate  heart. 
(4)  If  servile  fear  be  not  cast  out  it  leads  to  a  fourth  fear,  namely,  a  diabolical  fear; 
that  of  devils  who  "  believe  and  tremble."  (5)  Filial  fear  which  is  never  cast  out 
of  the  mind.  This  is  "  the  fear  of  the  Lord  "  which  is  "  the  beginning  of  wisdom." 
When  the  spirit  of  bondage  is  at  work  there  is  much  of  servile  fear.  The  Spirit  of 
truth  brings  this  to  us,  because  we  are  in  a  condition  which  demands  it.  Would 
you  have  the  bondsman  rejoice  in  a  liberty  which  he  does  not  possess  ?  Is  he^  not 
the  more  likely  to  be  free  if  he  loathes  his  slavery  ?  3.  This  bondage,  which  causes 
fear,  breaks  us  off  from  self -righteousness,  and  puts  an  end  to  certain  sins.  Many 
B  man,  because  he  is  afraid  of  the  consequences,  leaves  off  this  and  that  which 
would  have  ruined  him  ;  and,  so  far,  the  fear  is  useful  to  him ;  and,  in  after  life, 
will  keep  him  nearer  to  his  Lord.  4.  In  due  time  we  outgrow  this  bondage,  and 
never  receive  it  again.  Because  we  are  made  to  be  the  children  of  God ;  and  God 
forbid  that  God's  children  should  tremble  like  slaves.     U.  The  Spirit  of  adoptiom. 

1.  The  apostle  said,  "  Ye  have  not  received  the  spirit  of  bondage."  If  he  had  kept 
strictly  to  language  he  would  have  added,  •'  But  ye  Have  received  the  Spirit  of 
liberty."  That  is  the  opposite  of  bondage.  But  our  apostle  is  not  to  be  hampered 
by  the  rigid  rules  of  composition.  He  has  inserted  a  far  greater  word — "  Ye  have 
received  the  Spirit  of  adoption."    If  the  Son  make  you  free,  ye  shall  be  free  indeed. 

2.  The  apostle  said,  "  Ye  have  not  received  the  spirit  of  bondage  again  to  fear." 
Should  he  not  have  added  ••  but  ye  have  received  the  Spirit  of  liberty  by  which  ye 
have  confidence  "  ?  He  says  a  great  deal  more,  •'  Whereby  we  cry,  Abba,  Father." 
This  is  the  highest  form  of  confidence.  3.  The  Spirit  of  adoption  is  a  spirit  of 
gratitude.  Oh,  that  ever  the  Lord  should  put  me  among  the  children  1  4.  A  spirit  of 
«hild-likeness.    It  is  pretty,  though  sometimes  sad,  to  see  how  children  imitate  their 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vin. 

parents.  III.  The  Spibit  op  pbateb.  Whenever  the  Spirit  of  adoption  enters  into 
a  man  it  sets  him  praying.  And  this  praying  is — 1.  Earnest,  for  it  takes  the  form 
of  "  crying."  2.  Natural.  For  a  child  to  say, "  Father,"  is  according  to  the  fitness 
of  things.  3.  Appealing.  True  prayer  pleads  the  fatherhood  of  God.  4.  Familiar. 
Slaves  were  never  allowed  to  call  their  masters  •'  abba. "  That  was  a  word  for  free- 
born  children  only :  no  man  can  speak  with  God  as  God's  children  may.  Distance 
is  the  slave's  place;  only  the  child  may  draw  near.  5.  Delightful.  "Abba, 
Father  " — it  is  as  much  as  to  say — "  My  heart  knows  that  thou  art  my  Father." 
IV.  The  SptRTE  of  witness.  In  the  mouth  of  two  witnesses  this  shall  be 
established.  1.  The  man's  own  spirit.  God's  own  Word  declares, "  To  as  many  as 
received  Christ  to  them  gave  He  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God,  even  to  them 
that  believe  on  His  name  " ;  now,  I  have  received  Christ,  and  I  do  believe  on  His 
name  :  therefore  I  have  the  right  to  be  one  of  tho  sons  of  God.  That  is  the 
witness  of  my  spirit :  I  believe,  and  therefore  I  am  a  child.  2.  The  witness  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  which  works — (1)  Through  the  Word  of  which  He  is  the  Author. 
(2)  By  His  work  in  us.  He  works  in  us  that  which  proves  us  to  be  the  children  of 
God  ;  and  what  is  that  ?  (a)  Great  love  to  God.  None  love  God  but  those  that  are 
born  of  Him.  (6)  Veneration  for  God.  We  fear  before  Him  with  a  childlike 
reverence,  (c)  A  holy  confidence.  By  His  grace  we  feel  in  days  of  trouble  that  we 
can  rest  in  God.  (d)  Sanctification.  (e)  Besides  which,  there  is  a  voice  unheard 
of  the  outward  ear,  which  drops  in  silence  on  the  spirit  of  man,  and  lets  him  know 
that  he  has,  indeed,  passed  from  death  unto  life.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Spirit 
of  bondage  and  adoption : — I.  What  is  meakt  by  "  the  spibit  ob*  bondaob  "  ?  1.  A 
distressing  apprehension  of  danger,  arising  from  the  conviction  of  sin,  which  is  one 
of  the  first  effects  of  the  law  upon  the  conscience.  2.  A  sense  of  our  lost  and 
undone  oonditioiu  A  sense  of  sin  is  generally  attended  with  a  sight  of  wrath,  and 
a  conviction  of  the  worth  of  the  soul ;  and  where  the  one  is  deeply  felt,  the  other  is 
greatly  feared.  Hence  the  anxious  inquiries  of  the  Philippian  jailor,  and  of  the 
multitudes  under  Peter's  sermon.  3.  Apprehensions  respecting  present  judgments. 
Unpardoned  guilt  fills  the  mind  with  continual  terrors  (Job  xv.  20-24).  4.  An 
habitual  fear  of  death.  5.  The  expectation  of  future  punishment.  6.  The  con- 
viction of  utter  inability  to  extricate  himself  out  of  his  present  situation. 
n.  Inquire  in  what  bespects  believers  are  delivered  from  this,  bo  as  not  to  be 
AOAiN  IN  FEAR.  Though  bclievers  are  not  wholly  exempt  from  a  spirit  of  bondage — 
1.  They  seldom  feel  it  in  the  same  degree,  nor  do  they  feel  it  for  long.  2.  It  does  not 
arise  from  the  same  source  as  before,  and  therefore  is  not  of  the  same  nature.  The 
terror  which  a  sinner  feels  is  from  God,  but  that  which  a  believer  often  experiences 
is  the  work  of  Satan,  taking  advantage  of  a  constitutional  melancholy,  or  of  some 
adverse  dispensation.  3.  They  are  relieved  and  sustained  by  the  hopes  and 
promises  of  the  gospel.  4.  This  servile  spirit — (I)  Is  by  no  means  adapted  to  the 
present  dispensation,  and  therefore  believers  cannot  be  said  to  have  received  it,  as 
forming  any  part  of  their  real  or  proper  character  (2  Tim.  i.  7).  (2)  Is  also 
highly  injurious  to  the  practical  part  of  religion.  The  more  we  walk  in  the  light 
of  God's  countenance,  the  more  readily  shall  we  run  in  the  way  of  His  command- 
ments,   in.  What  is  that  "  Spirit  of  adoption  "  which  believers  have  received. 

1.  The  Spirit  of  adoption  is  distinct  from  adoption  itself,  and  is  not  essential  to  its 
existence.  2.  Of  those  who  enjoy  the  Spirit  of  adoption,  some  have  more  of  it,  and 
others  less.  3.  The  same  saints  do  not  at  all  times  enjoy  the  same  measure  of  this 
Spirit,  but  differ  as  much  from  themselves  as  they  do  from  one  another.  4.  Wher- 
ever  this  Spirit  is  received,  it  must  be  considered  as  the  fruit  of  sovereign  grace. 
5.  It  more  especially  consists  in  the  Holy  Spirit  bearing  witness  with  our  spirit  that 
we  are  the  children  of  God.  The  Spirit  is  not  only  a  witness  to  Christ  without  us, 
but  to  Christ  within  us  ;  and  therefore  when  our  conscience  bears  us  witness  in  the 
Holy  Ghost,  it  is  to  be  acquiesced  in  as  a  faithful  and  unerring  report ;  for  if 
conscience  itself  be  as  good  as  a  thousand  witnesses,  how  much  more  when  its 
decisions  are  made  under  the  influences  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  6.  The  Holy  Spirit 
in  becoming  a  Spirit  of  adoption,  imparts  to  the  adopted  a  temper  suited  to  that 
relation.  IV.  The  blessed  effect  arising  from  our  havinq  received  the  Spirit 
OF  adoption:  Hereby  we  cry,  "Abba,  Father."  Prayer  is  the  very  breath  of  a 
child  of  God;  the  first  effort  of  Divine  grace  in  the  heart.  The  cry  of  "Abba, 
Father,"  now  proceeds  from  the  fulness  of  his  heart,  and  this  includes  in  it  the 
following   particulars — 1.  Familiarity  and  holy  boldness  at  a  throne   of    grace. 

2.  A  comfortable  persuasion  of  the  love  of  God  towards  as.  3.  Beverenceand 
honour  (Mai.  i.  6).    4.  Trast  and  confidence  in  God  as  oar  Father  and  oar  Friend. 


CJHAP,  vm.]  ROMANS.  29 

5.  Great  earnestness  and  importunity  (2  Kings  ii.  12).     (B.  Beddome,  M.A.)       The 
Spirit  of   bondage    and    the    Spirit    of   adoption:—!.  What    is    "the  spnirr  of 
bondage"?     1.  There  are  many  of  you  who  love  money,  pleasure,   vanity,  sin. 
And  yet  there  are  times  when  you  tear  yourselves  away  to  say  your  prayers — to 
come  to  church ;  to  read  a  chapter  in  the  Bible ;  but  whilst  engaged  in  these 
exercises  you  long  for  them  to  be  over.    But  why  do  them  at  all  ?     "  Because  it  is 
our  duty.    We  know  these  things  must  be  attended  to  ;  if  we  neglect  them  we  shall 
go  to  hell."    Then,  I  need  not  describe  to  you  "  the  spirit  of  bondage  "—you  feel  it. 
2.  But  perhaps  "  the  spirit  of  bondage"  is  still  more  strikingly  displayed  in  those 
who  are  just  awakened  to  a  sense  of  their  sins.    And  what  does  the  poor  trembling 
sinner  do  to  mend  his  case?    Labours  with  all  his  might  to  make  himself  accep- 
table to  God  ;  multipUes  his  prayers  and  duties  ;  resolves  to  mortify  his  sins.    And 
yet,  alas  I  he  goes  about  feeling  that  he  has  undertaken  a  work  which  is  far  beyond 
his  strength.    And   why  has  the  Lord  so  ordered  it?    Evidently  to  teach   the 
humbling  lesson  of  man's  utter  inability  to  save  or  sanctify  himself  (see  Gal.  iii.  23, 
24).    II.  What  is  the  "  Spirit  of  adoption"  ?     1.  Adoption  is  an  act  whereby  one 
person  takes  another  into  his  family,  calls  him  his  son,  and  treats  him  as  such. 
Thus  Moses  was  the  adopted  son  of  Pharaoh's  daughter,  and  Esther  was  the 
adopted  daughter  of  Mordecai.    Adoption,  then,  in  a  spiritual  sense,  is  that  act  of 
grace  whereby  God  chooses  into  the  dear  relation  of  His  children   every    true 
beUever  in  His  Son.    The  very  term  implies  that  they  were  by  nature  not  His 
children.     No ;  they  were  strangers  and  enemies  when  He  took  them  in.     2.  But  a 
man  who  adopts  a  stranger  for  his  child  cannot  bestow  on  him  a  spirij  suitable  to 
that  relationship.    He  may  give  him  a  son's  portion,  but  he  cannot  give  him  a  son's 
feelings.    Now  this  is  what  the  Lord  does.     He  gives  them  "  the  Spirit  of  adoption." 
He  puts  into  them,  by  His  grace,  a  fitness  for  their  glorious  relationship.     They  not 
only  are  the  Lord's  children,  but  they  feel  as  Buch  (ver.  16).     Their  former  terrors 
drop  away,  for  they  view  God  now  as  their  reconciled  Father  in  Christ,  and  the 
nneasiness  they  felt  at  their  inability  to  satisfy  His  law  is  now  changed  into  a 
delightful  confidence  in  the  satisfaction  which  His  Son  hath  wrought  for  them. 
And  in  consequence  of  aU  His  love  to  them  they  love  Him.     They  are  followers 
— imitators — of  God  as  dear  children.     "His  commandments  are  not  grievous  to 
them,"  for  they  have  now  both  the  power  and  the  will  to  follow  them.     3.  '|  Father  " 
is  the  first  word  the  infant  lisps  ;  and  how  continually  it  is  running  to  its  parent 
with  that  word  upon  its  tongue.     In  beautiful  allusion  to  this  the  child  of  God  is 
represented  as  crying  to  his  heavenly  Parent,  '•  Abba  1  Father!  "     {A.  Roberts, M.A.) 
'^— T?ie  Spirit  of  adoption: — I.  The  gift  which  God  confers  on  His  children.     "  Ye 
have  received  the  Spirit  of  adoption."    1.  The  Spirit  of  God  seals  the  children  of 
adoption.     This  serves  to  mark  the  particular  property  God  has  in  believers ;  to 
distinguish  them  from  others  of  the  human  family  ;  and  to  preserve  them  for  the 
end  of  their  election  and  faith,  even  the  salvation  of  their  souls.   2.  The  Holy  Spirit 
is  to  believers  the  witness  of  their  adoption  (vers.  16).   It  is  reasonable  that  professors 
of  religion  should  be  anxious  to  ascertain  their  own  state  in  God's  sight.     3.  The 
Holy  Spirit  communicates  to  believers  the  comfort  arising  from  their  adoption  inta 
God's  family,  i.e..  He  discovers  to  believers  the  path  of  light;  qualifies  them  for 
their  present  rank ;  and  supports  them  during  their  pilgrimage.    II.  The  Christian 
enjoys  true  liberty.     Christian  liberty  is  equally  opposed  to  slavery  and  licen- 
tiousness.   It  is  opposed  to  restraint  and  violence,  but  not  to  subordination  and 
cheerful  obedience.     1.  They  who  are  adopted  into  God's  family  are  delivered  from 
the  dominion  of  sin.     They  now  walk  at  liberty.    They  feel  that  they  are  free  to 
serve  God  without  the  fear  of  wrath.    They  delight  in  the  law  of  the  Lord  after  the 
inward  man.    2.  Christians  are  delivered  from  the  power  of  Satan.    3.  Christian 
liberty  implies  deliverance  from  undue  human  influence  (Psa.  cxix.  45 ;  Prov.  ixix. 
25).     Independence  of  mind,  and  courage  in  Christian  behaviour,  aje  desirable 
objects.  He  who  attains  to  them,  puts  his  trust  in  God,  and  does  not  fear  what  man 
can  do  unto  him.    In  matters  of  right  and  wrong,  the  Christian  claims  to  himself, 
and  allows  to  others,  the  right  of  private  judgment ;  but  he  neither  claims  to  him- 
self, nor  guarantees  to  another,  the  liberty  of  contravening  in  a  single  instance,  the 
commandment  of  his  God.   III.  Consider  the  expressions  which  we  abk  enabled  bt 
THE  Spirit  of  adoption  to  utter — "Whereby  we  cry,  Abba,  Father."  The  repetition. 
Father,  Father,  also  evidences  the  earnestness  with  which  a  Christian,  feeling  his 
deliverance  from  bondage,  recognises  his  present  delightful  relation  to  God  as  an 
adopted  son.    1.  The  believer  approves  of  his  relation  to  God  in  Jesus  Christ.   "  For 
je  are  all  the  children  of  God  hj  faith  in  Chris  Jesos."    2.  The  reUgious  man  it 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

soothed  in  all  his  afflictions  when  he  contemplates  the  compassion  of  his  Father 
who  is  in  heaven.  3.  God's  children  consider  Him  as  their  instructor  (Psa,  Ixxi. 
17|;  Isa.  liv.  13).  4.  God's  children  submit  to  such  chastisement  as  He  thinks 
proper  to  administer  (Prov.  iii.  11).  6.  The  children  of  adoption  place  themselves 
under  the  protection  of  their  heavenly  Father  (Psa.  xxxi.  5,  15).  6.  By  the  Spirit 
of  adoption,  we  are  enabled  to  approach  with  boldness  the  throne  of  grace, 
in  prayer  to  God  (Eph.  ii.  18).  (A.  McLeod,  D.D.)  The  spirit  of  bondage 
and  the  Spirit  of  adoption; — I.  The  state  of  the  natueaij  man.  1.  It  is  a 
state  of  sleep  :  the  voice  of  God  to  him  is,  "  Awake,  thou  that  sleepest." 
2.  For  this  reason  he  is  in  some  sense  at  rest :  because  blind  he  is  secure,  he 
cannot  tremble  at  the  danger  he  does  not  know.  He  has  no  dread  of  God,  because 
he  thinks  Him  merciful,  and  that  he  can  at  any  time  repent.  3.  From  the  same 
ignorance  there  may  arise  joy  either  in  congratulating  himself  on  his  own  wisdom 
and  goodness,  or  in  indulgence  of  pleasure  of  various  kinds,  and  so  long  as  he 
doeth  well  unto  himself  men  will  doubtless  speak  good  of  him.  4.  It  is  not 
surprising  if  thus  dosed  with  the  opiates  of  flattery  and  sin,  one  should  imagine 
among  his  other  waking  dreams  that  he  walks  in  great  liberty,  being  free  from  all 
vulgar  errors,  prejudices,  enthusiasm,  &c.  But  all  this  time  he  is  the  servant  of 
sin.  He  commits  it  every  day.  Yet  he  is  not  troubled.  He  contents  himself  with 
"  Man  is  frail ;  every  man  has  his  infirmity."  II.  The  state  of  a  man  dndeb  the 
LAW.  1.  By  some  awful  providence,  or  by  His  Word  applied  by  His  Spirit  God 
touches  the  heart  of  the  slumbering  sinner,  who  awakes  into  a  consciousness  of 
danger — perhaps  in  a  moment,  perhaps  by  degrees.  2.  The  inward  spiritual 
meaning  of  the  law  now  begins  to  glare  upon  him,  and  he  sees  himself  stripped 
of  all  the  fig  leaves  he  had  sewn  together — of  all  his  pretences  to  religion  or 
excuses  for  sin.  He  now,  too,  feels  that  the  wages  of  sin  is  death.  3.  Here 
ends  his  pleasing  dream,  his  delusive  rest,  his  vain  security,  &c.  The  fumes  of 
these  opiates  being  dispelled,  he  feels  the  anguish  of  a  wounded  spirit — he  fears, 
indeed — God's  wrath,  death,  &c. ,  almost  to  the  verge  of  despair.  4.  Now  truly 
he  desires  to  break  loose  from  sin  and  begins  to  struggle  with  it.  But  though 
he  strive  with  all  his  might,  sin  is  mightier  than  he.  The  more  he  strives 
the  more  he  feels  his  chains.  He  toils  on,  sinning  and  repenting,  repenting 
and  sinning,  until  he  cries,  "  O  wretched  man  that  I  am,"  &c.  This  whole 
state  of  bondage  is  described  in  chap.  vii.  III.  The  state  of  a  man  undeb 
GBACB.  1.  His  cry  is  heard  and  heavenly  healing  light  breaks  in  on  his  soul — the 
light  of  the  glorious  love  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ.  Overpowered  by  the 
sight  he  cries  out,  "  My  Lord  and  my  God,"  for  he  sees  all  his  iniquities  laid  on 
Christ  and  borne  away ;  God  in  Christ  reconciling  him  unto  Himself.  2.  Here 
end  the  guilt  and  power  of  sin.  He  can  now  say,  "  I  am  crucified  with  Christ," 
Ac.  Here  ends  the  bondage  unto  fear.  He  cannot  fear  the  wrath  of  God,  for  it  ia 
turned  away ;  the  devil,  because  his  power  is  ended;  hell,  for  he  is  an  heir  of  the 
kingdom ;  death,  for  that  is  now  but  the  vestibule  of  heaven.  3.  And  "  Where 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  there  is  liberty,"  liberty  not  only  from  guilt  and  fear,  but 
sin.  Henceforth  he  does  not  serve  sin ;  being  made  free  from  sin  he  is  become  the 
servant  of  righteousness.  4.  Having  peace  with  God,  and  rejoicing  in  hope,  he 
has  the  Spirit  of  adoption  who  sheds  abroad  the  love  of  God  and  man  in  the  heart, 
and  works  in  him  to  will  and  do  of  His  good  pleasure.  Conclusion  :  The  natural 
man  neither  fears  nor  loves  God ;  one  under  the  law  fears  :  one  under  grace  loves. 
The  first  has  no  light,  the  second  painful  light,  the  third  joyous  Ught.  He  that 
sleeps  in  death  has  a  false  peace  ;  he  that  is  awakened  no  peace ;  he  that  beUeves 
true  peace.  The  heathen  baptized  or  unbaptized  has  a  fancied  freedom,  the  Jew 
or  legalist  a  grievous  bondage,  the  Christian  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of 
God.  An  unawakened  child  of  the  devil  sins  willingly ;  one  that  is  awakened  sins 
unwillingly;  a  child  of  God  *'  sinneth  not."  The  natural  man  neither  conquers 
nor  fights ;  the  man  under  the  law  fights  but  cannot  conquer ;  the  man  imder  grace 
is  "  more  than  conqueror."  {John  Wesley,  M.A.)  The  Spirit  of  adoption : — 1.  In 
what  sense  are  we  to  understand  the  word  "  spirit "  ?  Our  own  spirit,  inasmuch  as  it 
refers  to  that  fihal  disposition  which  prompts  us  to  cry,  Abba,  Father ;  yet  also  God's 
Spirit,  because  it  is  only  by  His  power  and  inspiration  that  this  temper  of  mind  is 
produced  or  sustained  (chap.  v.  5).  2.  To  what  does  "again"  refer?  ^  No  doubt 
to  the  former  dispensation,  Judaism  (see  the  argument  in  Gal.  iv.,  especially  verses 
4-7  and  22-31,  and  again,  Heb.  xii.  18-24).  3.  This  Spirit  of  adoption  is  a  spirit 
of — I.  Eeverentul  admibation  and  love.  Who  so  good  or  wise  in  the  eyes  of 
a  son  as  his  beloved  parent?    Yet  our  fiUal  partiality  may  be  grossly  mistaken. 


CHAP.  VIII.]  ROMANS.  31 

N<it  thus  is  it  with  our  regard  for  God.    If  His  children,  we  learn  to  discern  in 
Him  every  excellence,  and  each  in  its  highest  perfection  and  purest  form.     U. 
Gbatitdde  and  praise.    The  son  acknowledges  his  obligation  to  his  father,  is  ever 
•  grateful  to  him,  and  learns  to  speak  of  him  with  becoming  expressions  of  thankful- 
ness and  filial  pride.     So  it  is  with  us  and  God.     III.  Dependence  and  trust. 
While  we  acknowledge  His  kindness  in  the  past,  we  depend  on  Him  at  the  present 
moment,  and  we  commit  to  Him  all  our  care  for  the  future.     How  little  anxiety 
for  th«  morrow  has  the  coniiding  child.    IV.  Meek    submission   and  cheerfuij 
OBEDIENCE.     A  father's  will  is  law  to  a  good  son  ;  and  all  that  a  father  imposes  or 
inflicts  is  submitted  to  without  murmuring,  from  a  persuasion  of  his  wisdom  and 
right  to  correct  us  when  we  do  wrong,  combined  with  a  firm  conviction  that  he 
seeks  only  our  welfare  and  good.     How  much  rather  should  we  be  in  subjection  to 
the  Father  of  our  spirits  (Heb.  xii.  5-10).    V.  Communion  and  fellowship.     It 
cries,  "  Abba,  Father."    It  is  natural  for  a  son  to  seek  his  father's  society,  and  to 
tell  him  all  his  wishes,  all  his  wants.     So  do  the  sons   of   God  come  to  Him 
in  supplication  and  prayer  (Matt.  vi.  6.)    Further,  a  good  son  is  interested  in  his 
father's  pursuits,  knowing  that  he  himself  will  be  enriched  by  his  father's  successes 
and  advanced  by  his  father's  promotion.     So  do  we  know,  as  God's  children,  that 
He  conducts  aU  the  affairs  of  His  empire  for  our  honour  and  welfare,  and  we 
constantly  pray,  "Father,  Thy  kingdom  come,"  &C.     VI.  Confidence  and  hope.   A 
child  who  incidentally  does  wrong  can  come  to  his  father  in  penitence  and  sorrow, 
assured  of  readily  obtaining  acceptance  and  forgiveness.     So  Ukewise  we  can  come 
to  God  when  we  have  sinned  against  Him,  believing  that  He  will  quickly  restore 
us  to  His  favour,  and  not  vindictively  cast  us  oft  for  ever.     Therefore,  we  shall  at 
length  be  brought  home  to  our  Father's  house  above.    A  wealthy  parent  may  send 
his  child  away  for  a  season,  and  place  him  under  tutors  and  governors,  but  it  is  to 
receive  him  back  eventually  with  increased  honour  and  joy.    Thus  will  Jehovah 
act  with  regard  to  us.     (T.  G.  Horton.)        Without  fear: — See  yonder  little  bird. 
It  floats  fearlessly  in  the  spray  that  arises  out  of  the  thunders  of  Niagara.     It 
cleanses  its  plumage  in  that  ever-ascending  and  radiant  mist.    It  flies  through  the 
rainbow  which  spans  that  awful  presence.    It  is  not  afraid.     The  colours  of  its 
wings  are  kindred  to  the  tints  in  that  rainbow.    It  sings  its  gayest  songs  as  it 
darts  back  and  forth  in  front  of  that  terrible  glory.    It  has  no  controversy  with 
Niagara.     It  gains  its  living  along  its  banks.     It  builds  its  nest  and  rears  its 
nestlings  in  the  tree  that  overhangs  the  cataract.     The  beUever  in  revelation  has 
ended  his  controversy  with  God,  and  is,  like  that  flying,  floating,  singing  bird, 
without  fear.        The  Spirit  of  adoption : — The  question  has  been  raised  whether 
this  means  the  Holy  Ghost,  or  a  consciousness  of  being  a  child  of  God.     It  is  both, 
and  we  cannot  distinguish  between  the  two.    But  we  must  not  confound  "  adoption  " 
and  the  "  Spirit  of  adoption,"  though  they  are  never  very  far  apart.     1.  "  Adop- 
tion" is  that  act  whereby  we  are  received  into  the  family  of  God.    And  the  way  in 
which  this  is  brought  about  is  thus  :  Christ  is  the  one  Son  of  God.    Into  the  Son, 
God  elects  and  engrafts  members.    As  soon  as  the  union  takes  place,  God  sees  the 
•oul  in  the  relationship  in  which  He  sees  Christ.     He  gives  it  a  partnership  in  the 
same  privileges.    2.  But  this  "  adoption,"  if  it  stood  alone,  would  be  no  blessing. 
A  rich  man,  well  educated,  "  adopts  "  a  poor  illiterate  child.    The  child  moves  in 
the  social  circle  of  his  adopted  father,  and  shares  his  wealth.    Now,  if  his  benefactor 
be  a  wise  man,  he  wiU  endeavour  to  give  him  a  filial  spirit,  and  the  qualifications 
which  are  necessary  for  his  elevation.     But  if  not,  the  "  adoption  "  will  only  issue 
in  disappointment  and  unhappiness  to  all  parties.      3.  We  cannot,   therefore, 
sufficiently  thank  God  that  wherever  He  gives  "  adoption,"  He  follows  by  "  the 
Spirit  of  adoption."    But,  as  in  nature,  as  soon  as  ever  a  branch  is  grafted  into 
a  tree  the  sap  begins  to  flow  into  that  branch  ;  and  however  dissimilar  the  graft  to 
the  parent  stock,  the  passing  of  the  graft  into  that  stock  gradually  makes  them  one : 
— so  in  Christ,  the  "  Spirit  of  adoption  "  following  the  "  adoption,"  seals  the  union 
by  making  the  affinity  close,  happy,  and  eternal  I    4.  Of  all  words  that  which 
comprises  most  of  wisdom,  tenderness,  and  love,  is  "  Father."    What  a  repose  lies 
in  that,  "  My  Father."    And  as  soon  as  the  Spirit  begins  to  work  in  a  sinner'a 
heart,  the  very  first  thing  He  plants  there  is,  "  I  will  arise  and  go  to  my  Father," 
&o.    And  if  only  we  could  take  in  the  simple  conception  that  God  is  a  "  Father," 
well-nigh  the  whole  work  of  our  religion  would  be  done.    Thousands  acknowledge 
it  is  true  ;  but  few  think  of  how  much  has  passed  in  the  deepest  councUs  and 
■ablimest  operations  of  God,  that  we  might  use  that  paternal  function.    All  heaven 
had  to  come  down  to  earth  that  we  might  stand  to  God  again  in  that  lost  relation- 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  vm. 

ship.  The  blood  of  Christ  only  could  purchase  it ;  and  no  man  could  ever  frame 
his  heart  to  conceive,  or  his  lips  to  utter  it,  but  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
5.  Now  let  me  examine  what  a  "  Spirit  of  adoption  "  is.  It  is  not  a  spirit  of  doubi 
and  anxiety,  in  which  I  say,  "  Does  God  really  love  me?  Am  I  forgiven  ?  How 
shall  I  overcome  all  my  difficulties  ?  "  That  is  not  what  a  little  child  ever  feels,  if 
he  has  got  an  affectionate  father.  The  "  Spirit  of  adoption  "  is  all  hope.  Hence, 
prayer  becomes  a  very  bold  thing  where  there  is  the  •'  Spirit  of  adoption."  A  child 
does  not  ask  a  father  as  a  stranger  asks  him.  He  goes  as  one  who  has  a  right.  If 
he  finds  his  father's  door  for  a  moment  closed,  see  how  he  knocks.  He  does  not 
want  wages  ;  but  he  receives  rewards.  All  creation  is  his  Father's  house,  and  he 
can  say,  "  Everything  in  it  is  mine,  on  to  death  itself."  The  "  Spirit  of  adoption  " 
longs  to  go  home.  For,  if  the  love  of  an  unseen  Father  has  been  so  sweet,  what 
will  it  be  to  look  in  His  face  ?  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  Spirit  of  adoption: — 
We  are  not  merely  criminals  unwhipped  of  justice,  but  since  Christ  has  met  the 
demands  of  the  law  for  us  we  are  entirely  acquitted  ;  and  then  there  is  implanted 
in  us,  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  sweet,  glad  consciousness  of  sonship.    I.  Therefore 

THE    COWERING    FEAEFULNESS   OF    SIN    IS    SUPPLANTED    BY    A  LOVING   FILIALNESS.       Very 

beautiful  is  that  word,  "Abba"  just  here.  It  is  a  little  up-thrusting  of  the 
Apostle's  mother  tongue.  Though  we  be  adepts  in  any  other  language,  the  speech 
we  use  to  express  overflowing  feeling  is  always  that  which  we  learned  at  our 
mother's  knee.  And  there  is  such  a  swell  and  throb  of  filialness  in  the  apostle's 
heart  toward  the  heavenly  Father,  that  even  though  he  must  immediately  translate 
it,  there  is  no  word  to  tell  his  consciousness  of  his  close,  free  sonship  but  the  word 
that  used  to  be  prattle  on  Lis  lips  when  he  was  a  child.  So  swept  away  is  the  bad 
fear  which  comes  from  sin,  so  dear  and  deep  is  his  sense  of  a  holy  familiarity  with 
God,  that  the  only  word  that  can  in  the  least  even  shadow  it  forth  is  the  nursery 
word  back  there  in  Tarsus,  Abba.  1.  How  easy  prayer  is  to  a  God,  who  thus 
reinstating  us  in  sonship,  will  allow  from  us  such  address.  2.  How  "  in  every- 
thing "  (PhiL  iv.  6)  may  we  make  request  of  Him.  II.  There  is  such  a  thing 
AS  AN  ASSURANCE  OP  THIS  SONSHIP.  «' The  Spirit  itself  beareth  witness."  III. 
Being  thus  adopted  into  sonship  we  are  heirs  of  God  and  joint-heirs  with 
Christ.  Then — 1.  I  have  title  to  illimitable  Divine  possession.  2.  I  may  dismiss 
fear  that  I  shall  fail  to  enter  upon  my  unimaginable  wealth.  IV.  Such  adoption 
DOES  NOT  PRECLUDE  THE  NECESSITY  OF  DISCIPLINE.  It  compcls  it  rather.  For  so 
great  a  destiny  and  glory  I  must  be  prepared.  But  there  is  this  infinite  solace 
under  chastisement — it  is  not  punitive  ;  it  is  educative.  Its  intention  is  to  fit  me 
for  the  splendid  destiny  God  intends  for  me.  It  is  thus  quite  possible  to  be  glad 
and  thankful  for  my  pain.  (Wayland  Hoyt,  D.D.)  Adoption: — The  spiritual 
connection  of  the  true  disciple  with  God  is  repeatedly  represented  to  us  in  Paul's 
Epistles  under  the  figure  of  sonship.  The  idea  of  simple  sonship,  indeed,  is  brought 
prominently  forward  by  St.  John ;  as  1  John  iii.  1 ;  iv.  6 ;  v.  9,  10,  &q.  But 
whereas  St.  John  always  represents  this  idea  in  its  simplest  form,  St.  Paul,  and 
St.  Paul  only,  describes  this  sonship  more  artificially  as  adoptive.  This  illustra- 
tion is  not  taken  from  any  Jewish  custom  ;  the  law  of  Moses  contains  no  provision 
for  such  a  practice.  Adoption  was  essentially  a  Boman  usage,  and  was  closely 
connected  with  the  Roman  ideas  of  family.  The  son  was  declared  to  be  the  absolute 
property  of  his  father  from  his  birth  to  his  father's  decease.  In  order  to  being 
adopted  out  of  his  own  family  into  that  of  another  man  it  was  necessary  that  he 
should  undergo  a  fictitious  sale.  But  if  a  son  had  been  thus  sold  by  his  father  and 
had  again  recovered  his  liberty,  he  fell  again  under  the  paternal  dominion,  and  it 
was  not  till  he  had  been  thus  sold,  emancipatus,  three  times,  that  he  became  finally 
free  from  this  paramount  authority.  Accordingly,  the  adopter  required  that  the 
fiction  of  sale  should  be  three  times  repeated,  before  the  son  could  be  received  into 
his  new  family,  and  fall  under  the  dominion  of  his  new  father.  When,  however, 
these  formalities  had  been  complied  with,  the  adopted  son  became  incorporated 
into  the  family  of  his  adopter,  indentified,  as  it  were,  with  his  person,  made  one 
with  him  ;  so  that  on  the  adopter's  decease  he  became  not  so  much  his  representa- 
tive as  his  second  self,  the  perpetuator  of  his  legal  personality.  He  assumed, 
moreover,  on  adoption,  the  burdens  or  privileges  incident  to  the  performance  o£ 
the  rights  of  his  new  family.  He  relinquished  his  former  rites,  and  attached  him- 
self to  those  of  his  new  parent.  All  this  appears  to  have  been  in  the  apostle's  mind 
when  he  addressed  the  Eoman  disciples  in  this  passage.  The  Spirit  of  God,  h© 
Bays,  bears  witness  with  our  spirit,  or  confers  upon  us  an  inward  persuasion,  that 
we  are  now  by  adoption  the  children  of  God  Himself,  whereas  we  were  before  th« 


<jHAP.  vm.]  ROMANS.  88 

children  of  some  other  father— namely,  the  world  or  the  Evil  One.  But  henceforth 
we  are  relieved  from  the  bondage  of  corruption,  from  the  state  of  legal  subjection 
to  this  evil  parent,  and  admitted  to  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  happy  children  of  a 
good  and  gracious  father,  even  God.  And  how  was  this  escape  from  bondage  to 
be  effected  ?  God  paid  a  price  for  it.  As  the  Roman  adopter  paid,  or  made  as 
though  he  paid  down  a  certain  weight  of  copper,  bo  God  gave  His  Son  as  a  precious 
sacrifice,  as  a  ransom  to  the  world,  or  the  Evil  One,  from  whom  He  redeemed  His 
adopted  children.  Henceforth  we  became  the  elect,  the  chosen  of  God.  The  same 
illustration  is  indicated  in  Gal.  iv.  3  :  "  When  we  were  children  we  were  in  bondage 
under  the  elements  of  the  world,"  addicted  to  the  rites  of  our  original  family ; 
•'  but  when  the  fulness  of  the  time  was  come,  God  sent  forth  His  Son,"  &o.  But 
now,  after  ye  have  known  God  .  .  .  how  turn  ye  again  to  the  weak  and  beggarly 
elements,"  such  as  the  sacra  of  your  original  family,  "  whereunto  ye  desire  to  be 
again  in  bondage  "  (Eph.  i.  5).  {Dean  Merivale.)  Adoption,  sacred  and  secular: — 
Betwixt  civil  and  sacred  adoption  there  is  a  two-fold  agreement  and  disagreement. 
They  agree  in  this,  that  both  flow  from  the  pleasure  and  good  will  of  the  adoptant ; 
and  in  this,  that  both  confer  a  right  to  privileges  which  we  have  not  by  nature ; 
but  in  this  they  differ :  one  is  an  act  imitating  nature,  the  other  transcends 
nature:  the  one  was  found  out  for  the  comfort  of  them  that  had  no  children, 
the  other  for  the  comfort  of  them  that  had  no  Father,  Divine  adoption 
is  in  Scripture  cither  taken  properly  for  that  act  or  sentence  of  God  by  which 
we  are  made  sons,  or  for  the  privileges  with  which  the  adopted  are  invested. 
We  lost  our  inheritance  by  the  fall  of  Adam:  we  receive  it  by  the  death 
of  Christ,  which  restores  it  again  to  us  by  a  new  and  better  title.  {J.  Flavel.) 
A  childlike  spirit  towards  God  .—1.  The  contrast  between  the  tempeb  of  a  child 
OF  God  and  the  temper  of  an  unreoenerate  person.  1.  Naturally  fallen  creatures 
have  a  "spirit  of  bondage" — the  temper  of  a  slave  towards  God.  (1)  All  the 
systems  of  heathenism  are  marked  by  this  spirit.  The  love  of  God  never  enters 
into  them,  but  either  their  self-love  is  addressed  by  certain  hopes  which  appeal  to 
their  natural  feelings,  or  else  they  are  under  the  constraining  influence  of  a  dread 
of  those  misfortunes  which  the  gods  are  supposed  to  have  the  power  and  will  to 
inflict.  (2)  Among  Mohammedans  we  find  the  same  spirit  prevailing.  They  are 
sometimes  told  that,  if  they  obey  the  admonitions  of  the  Koran,  they  shall  have  a 
sensual  paradise.  They  are  more  frequently  told  that,  if  they  violate  the  same 
directions,  they  shall  expose  themselves  to  the  anger  of  God.  (3)  In  the  Roman 
Catholic  Church,  although  there  may  be  sometimes  a  reference  to  the  promises  of 
the  gospel,  how  much  more  frequently  and  powerfully  the  fear  of  its  votaries  is 
addressed.  They  dread  the  church  censures,  the  indignation  of  their  priest,  and 
their  fancied  purgatory.  Nay,  they  dare  not  approach  the  merciful  Mediator  unless 
there  be  some  other  mediator.  (4)  Nor  is  Protestantism  by  any  means  free  from 
this  unhappy  spirit.  For  what  is  a  fashionable  religion  but  a  compromise  between 
men's  passions  and  their  fears  ?  Anything  of  loving  Him  is  often  absolutely  ridi- 
culed. 2.  Now,  if  we  turn  to  this  Book  for  the  explanation  of  that  universal 
feeling,  we  find  that  it  is  truly  reasonable.  The  account  which  St.  Paul  gives  of  it 
in  chap.  vii.  is  applicable  to  all  the  world.  It  is  obvious  that,  in  proportion  as  this 
is  comprehended,  men  must  "  fear."  A  man  may  sometimes  contrive,  either  by 
forgetfulness  of  God,  or  by  forming  to  himself  false  notions  respecting  God,  to 
escape  from  the  influence  of  fear,  but  then  his  mind  is  sunk  into  a  state  of  torpor 
and  death-like  slumber.  When  once  the  light  is  let  in  on  the  understanding,  and 
the  man  sees  anything  of  the  attributes  of  God  and  what  they  demand,  and  finds 
that  he  has  violated  all,  and  that  his  own  nature  is  opposed  to  that  Holy  God,  he 
♦'  dies."  In  the  language  of  the  apostle,  it  is  the  law  which  "  shuts  us  up,"  allows 
us  no  hope.  3.  But  when  a  man  finds  the  gospel,  that  spirit  is  changed.  Then 
all  the  sources  of  dread  are  gone.  How  can  he  dread  God  any  more  ?  Do  you 
think  that  the  poor  prodigal,  when,  all  ragged  and  worn  as  he  was,  he  came  back 
to  his  father's  house,  and  felt  his  father's  arms  around  him,  and  his  father's  kiss 
upon  his  pale  and  withered  cheek — think  you  that  he  dreaded  that  father  then  ? 
4.  And  now  the  whole  of  the  sinner's  future  course  is  characterised  by  love  ;  he  is 
no  longer  a  slave,  but  he  is  become  a  child.  This  is  seen  doubtless,  and  seen  very 
mainly,  in  the  character  of  the  Christian's  obedience,  which  is  now  wholly  changed. 
The  child  of  God  has  the  law  written  on  his  heart — loves  every  one  of  its  requisi- 
tions, because  he  loves  the  wise  and  just  Parent  that  enacted  them — and  would 
obey  them  all.  His  obedience  is  now  unfettered,  unrestricted,  unreserved,  cheerful, 
gratr-ful,  and  generous.    5.  The  filial  spirit  prevails  in  the  whole  of  the  exporienca 

VOL.    II.  3 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

of  every  one  of  the  children  of  God.  If  he  receives  any  temporal  blessings,  he 
receives  them  from  the  hand  of  his  Father ;  if  he  looks  at  the  promises  of  the 
gospel,  they  come  to  him  as  the  promise  of  his  heavenly  Father ;  if  he  receives 
any  of  the  painful  events  of  life,  it  is  a  wise  and  gracious  Father  who  has  sent 
them,  and  it  is  his  inclination  and  his  pleasure  to  submit.  So,  likewise,  this  same 
filial  spirit  pervades  all  the  exercises  of  religion  ;  if  others  pray  because  conscience 
compels  them  to  pray,  the  child  of  God  rejoices  that  he  may  come  to  "  his  Father, 
who  seeth  in  secret."  If  he  looks  forward  to  death,  when  no  other  being  can  go 
with  him  and  sustain  his  faltering  spirit,  he  feels  his  Father  can  ;  and  when  he 
looks  to  glory,  it  is  with  the  same  feelings ;  he  is  going  to  the  house  of  his  Father. 
II.  The  origin  of  this  Spirit.  It  is  characterised  in  our  text  as  a  gift ;  it  is  not 
spoken  of  as  an  attainment.  "Ye  have  received."  It  is  a  gift  received  from  God ; 
therefore  His  favour  and  His  blessing  must  have  preceded  it.  If,  then,  we  are  told 
that  the  sinner  must  first  love  God,  must  first  serve  God,  and  then  he  may  hope 
for  the  favour  of  God — this  is  just  a  sentence  of  despair  to  any  man  who  knows 
himself.  How  can  he  love  God  ?  The  source  of  that  "  Spirit  of  adoption  "  is  in 
adoption  itself,  and  the  source  of  that  adoption  is  the  sovereign,  unmerited,  bounty 
and  mercy  of  God.  1.  Its  meritorious  cause  is  the  Cross  of  Christ.  There  is  no 
other  reason  why  a  sinner  deserves  to  be  a  child  of  God  but  this,  that  Jesus  Christ 
has  deserved  it.  "  When  the  fulness  of  the  time  was  come,"  (fee.  2.  The  instru- 
mental cause  is  faith.  "  Ye  are  all  the  children  of  God  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus." 
3.  The  Agent  is  the  Spirit  of  God.  He  only  it  is  who  implants  faith,  and  He  it  is 
who  alone  communicates  "the  Spirit  of  adoption."  4.  The  means  is  that  view  of 
the  love  of  God  which  none  but  an  adopted  chUd  can  have.  "  We  love  Him  because 
He  first  loved  us."  {Baptist  Noel,  M.A.)  The  temper  of  gospel  obedience: — 
Consider  this — I.  By  way  of  contrast,  as  it  is  opposed  to  any  form  of  obedience 
performed  in  a  slavish  and  unready  mind.  1.  With  the  severe  discipline  of  the  law. 
On  this  point  the  apostle  is  the  best  exponent  of  his  own  views  in  that  allegory  of 
Agar  and  Sarah  (Gal.  iv.  22-26).  To  the  same  purport  there  is  another  illustration 
of  the  two  dispensations,  addressed  to  the  same  Church  (Gal.  iv.  3-7).  These  dis- 
tinct tendencies  of  the  two  dispensations  are  discoverable  in  almost  every  circum- 
stance. Contrast — (1)  The  method  of  their  introduction,  the  thunderings  of  Siuai 
with  the  stillness  of  Bethlehem ;  the  voice  of  the  trumpet  with  the  melody  of 
angels ;  the  blackness  and  darkness  and  tempest  with  tbe  mild  halo  of  glory  which 
played  around  the  wondering  shepherds  as  they  kept  watch  over  their  flocks  by 
night.  (2)  The  miracles  of  the  two  dispensations.  Look  at  the  earth  opening  her 
mouth  to  swallow  up  the  rebellious,  the  fiery  serpents,  the  pestilence,  and  compare 
with  these  the  blind  receiving  their  sight,  the  multitudes  fed  with  bread,  and  the 
widow  receiving  from  death  her  child.  (8)  In  their  outward  ordinances — those  of 
the  one  multitudinous,  obscure,  oppressive ;  those  of  the  other  easy,  refreshing, 
simple.  Of  course  we  do  not  mean  that  this  servile  temper  extended  to  every 
individual  worshipper.  The  Spirit  is  not  bound.  Enoch's  was  no  servant's  walk, 
nor  could  fear  have  wrought  Abraham's  faith.  Neither  do  we  speak  disparagingly 
of  that  dispensation  itself.  The  law  is  a  system  of  progressive  teaching  (Gal.  iv. 
1,  2).  We  must  be  disciplined  to  habits  of  reverence  and  subjection  The  law  was 
our  schoolmaster  to  bring  us  to  Christ.  2.  With  the  service  of  the  man  who  is 
trying  to  work  out  a  righteousness  for  himself.  This  fault  first  discovered  itself  in 
the  newly-converted  Jews,  who  could  but  feel  a  rude  shock  to  their  ancient  sympa- 
thies when  they  were  required  to  pass  from  the  pride-fostering  works  of  the  ancient 
ritual  to  the  simple  faith  and  self-abasing  truths  of  the  gospel.  And  many  now 
feel  the  stirrings  of  an  alarmed  conscience,  and  are  urged  on  by  an  unresting 
anxiety  to  feel  that  their  souls  are  safe,  and  yet  God  is  not  satisfied  with  them, 
neither  are  they  satisfied  with  themselves.  Now  what  is  the  secret  of  such  painful 
experience  happening  to  men  who  are  taking  more  pains  to  be  miserable  than  it 
would  cost  them  to  be  happy  ?  They  will  be  servants,  and  not  sons  ;  they  will  be 
labouring  to  obey,  and  not  trying  to  believe.  If,  then,  you  are  in  earnest  about 
your  souls'  salvation,  take  Heaven's  simple  answer,  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,"  &c.  Then  the  works  will  follow.  But  all  attempts  to  get  peace  before  or 
without  this  wiU  be  mere  labour  in  vain.  This  one  thing  done,  the  whole  character 
of  our  obedience  becomes  changed.  It  is  not  the  spirit  of  bondage  again  to  fear;  it 
is  the  filial  obedience  of  those  who,  having  received  the  Spirit  of  adoption,  are 
enabled  to  cry,  Abba,  Father.  II.  By  way  of  comparison.  Four  marks  of  Eoman 
civil  adoption  you  will  find  exactly  paralleled  in  the  spiritual  adoption.  Did  the 
child  among  the  Eomans  share  in  the  privileges  of  the  natural  children  7    It  ia 


emr.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  85 

affirmed  of  the  believer  that  "if  children  then  heirs,  heirs  with  God  and  joint 
heirs  with  Christ."  Did  the  Roman  bestow  his  own  name  on  the  child  he  adopted  ? 
"  Thou,  0  Lord,  art  in  the  midst  of  us,  and  we  are  called  by  Thy  name."  Did  the 
civil  law  exact  from  the  adopted  all  honour  and  reverence  to  the  parent  ?  "  If  I 
be  a  Father,  where  is  Mine  honour  ?  "  '*  God  is  greatly  to  be  feared  in  the  assembly 
of  the  saints,"  &o.  Did  the  new  father  engage  to  treat  the  stranger  with  parental 
care  and  kindness  ?  •'  I  will  receive  you  and  will  be  a  Father  unto  you,  and  ye  shall 
be  My  sons  and  daughters,  saith  the  Lord  Almighty."  From  this  vi«w  of  the  con- 
dition of  the  believer  we  may  infer  three  characteristics  of  evangelical  service.  1. 
Reverence.  2.  Cheerfulness.  No  labour  in  the  Lord  can  be  in  vain ;  no  command- 
ment of  God  can  be  grievous.  3.  Confidence.  {D.  Moore,  M.A.)  Whereby  we 
cry,  Abba,  Father. — Abba,  Father  : — I.  The  fact.  "  We  cry,  Abba,  Father."  1.  In 
one  aspect  this  seems  little.  It  is  only  a  cry,  a  name  named,  and  that  a  child's  lisp 
of  the  first  two  sounds  of  the  alphabet.  True,  but  I  am  not  anxious  to  get  from  you 
more  than  what  all  Christians  confess.  "  We  "  cry,  Abba,  Father.  Visions  and 
revelations  are  exceptional,  but  we  all  cry,  "Abba,  Father."  2.  This  is  not  a  small 
thing.  It  means  carrying  the  clear  proof  of  our  being  God's  children.  True,  we 
are  infants,  but  no  infant  would  ever  cry  "Abba  "  unless  it  were  a  child.  Here 
are  weakness  and  strength,  but  the  one  is  linked  to  the  other  by  a  bond  that  cannot 
be  broken.  And  what  a  distance  between  us  in  our  helplessness  and  God  in  His 
glory,  but  "Father  "  reaches  all  the  way.  Only  a  cry  1  God  hears  nothing  else. 
Observe  the  refrain  of  Psalm  ovii.  Mark  the  reason  why  universal  power  is  given 
to  the  Mediator  (Psa.  Ixxii.  11,  12).  3.  This  cry  is  the  product  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
(see  also  Gal.  iv.  6).  This  is  the  Divine  side  of  the  matter,  of  which  we  have  both 
the  human  and  Divine  sides  in  John  i.  12-13).  II.  The  consequences.  1.  You 
have  the  witness  of  the  Spirit.  The  cry  and  the  groaning  (ver.  26)  are  His  work ; 
the  natural  man  knows  nothing  of  them.  2.  You  are  heirs  of  God  (ver.  19 ;  Matt. 
xiii.  48).  8.  You  are  joint  heirs  with  Christ.  (1)  An  interest  in  all  His  glory. 
(2)  He  has  entered  on  the  inhentance  as  our  Forerunner  (Heb.  vi.  20).  III.  Box 
WHAT  OF  THE  PEESENT  ?  "  If  WO  suffcr  with  Him."  Suffer  we  must ;  but — 1.  These 
pangs  are  hopeful ;  they  are  of  birth,  not  death,  and  prove  a  heaven-sent  longing 
after  home  and  God.  2.  The  Saviour  is  with  us  in  them.  His  Spirit  causes  them. 
Christ  sympathises  and  succours  (Heb.  ii.  17, 18).  (A.  M.  Symington,  D.D.)  The 
Abba,  Father: — The  expression  is  used  once  by  Christ,  twice  by  Paul.  Why  should 
the  Saviour  in  Gethsemane  employ  two  languages,  and  Paul  when  speaking  of  the 
free  Spirit  which  animates  believers  ?  Is  it  conformity  to  the  custom  of  giving  to 
persons  a  variety  of  names  ?  Or  is  the  one  name  an  interpretation  of  the  other  ? 
Augustine  and  Calvin  think  that  it  is  to  show  that  both  Jews  and  Greeks  each  in 
their  own  respective  language  would  call  on  God  as  a  Father.  Dr.  Morison  says 
that  "  the  dual  form  is  delightfully  fitted  to  suggest  that  in  Hjs  great  work  Christ 
personated  in  His  single  self  not  Jews  only,  but  Gentiles."  And  not  only  fitted, 
but  designed.  And  so  Paul  may  have  caught  the  spirit  and  aim  of  the  Master's 
words.  And  thus  we  have  a  speaking  testimony  to  the  fusion  of  Jew  and  Greek 
which  prepared  the  way  for  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  to  the  heathen.  The  idea 
of  Father  clasps  not  only  the  languages,  but  the  people.  What  other  word  so  fitted 
as  a  basis  for  all  the  nations  to  meet  on  and  be  made  one  1  Grandly  prophetic  of 
the  time,  to  bring  about  which  the  Saviour  died  and  the  apostle  laboured,  is  "  Abba, 
Father."  The  term  illustrates  how  the  idea  of  Fatherhood — I.  Evokes  the  deepest 
FiMAL  FEELING.  In  the  Only  instances  in  which  we  have  the  words  there  is  every- 
thing to  justify  this.  It  is  the  child-cry  coming  not  from  the  surface,  but  from  the 
depths.  How  much  larger  and  more  tender  the  word  than  master,  magistrate, 
king,  Ac.  II.  Begets  the  most  CHiLDLrKE  familiabitt.  Only  in  the  home  circle 
can  such  feelings  play.  It  is  the  child,  not  the  subject  or  servant,  that  cries 
••  Abba,  Father."  Eefinement  of  feeling  and  manner  is  always  beautiful  in  a  child, 
but  it  is  not  natural  that  it  should  express  itself  in  courtly  language.  The  charm 
of  the  family  is  in  the  freedom  which  love  imparts.  The  parental  heart,  shining 
like  a  warm  sun  in  the  centre  of  the  home,  draws  young  affection  to  it  as  the 
flowers  turn  to  the  heat  and  light.  III.  Stirs  the  intensest  eaknestness.  So  it 
did  in  Christ  and  Paul.  There  are  moments  in  Christian  experience  when  the 
language  of  famiMarity  rises  into  the  language  of  anguish.  Though  in  the  Divine 
family,  men  are  still  on  earth — not  the  most  congenial  place,  and  even  Jesus  seems 
to  have  had  quite  enough  of  it  when  He  said,  "  And  now  I  come  to  Thee."  The 
definition  suggests  emphasis  or  urgency.  As  a  chUd's  whisper  will  sometimes  wake 
the  family,  even  the  gentlest  raffle  on  the  heart  will  not  pase  the  heavenly  Father's 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼in. 

notice.    How  much  more  shall  a  ory  of  anguish  reach  Him  and  bring  Him  to  ova 
relief.     {R.  Mitchell.) 

Yer.  16.  The  Spirit  Itself  heareth  witness  with  our  spirit. — The  tritnett  of  the 
Spirit  with  our  spirita : — I.  The  BESPECTrvE  offices  of  the  two  witnesses.  1. 
••  The  Spirit  itself  beareth  witness,"  (1)  The  subject  of  the  testimony  is  not  that 
we  have  been  awakened,  that  we  have  repented,  that  a  number  of  moral  changes 
have  taken  place  in  us,  so  that  we  may  conclude  that  we  are  the  children  of  God . 
Its  direct  and  simple  object  is  to  assure  us  "  that  we  are  the  children  of  God."  (2) 
Of  this  the  Spirit  is  the  only  competent  witness.  To  this  fact  of  our  reconciliation 
to  God,  considered  as  a  fact,  our  own  spirits  neither  do  nor  can  bear  testimony. 
That  the  act  of  pardon  takes  place  upon  our  believing  in  Christ ;  but  this  act  of 
mercy  is  one  which  takes  place  in  the  mind  of  God.  "  The  things  of  God  knoweth 
no  man,  but  the  Spirit  of  God."  •'  For  the  Spirit  searcheth  all  things,  even  the 
deep  things  of  God."  He,  therefore,  alone  can  be  cognizant  of  the  fact  of  forgive- 
ness and  adoption,  to  whom  that  fact  is  made  known  by  the  testimony  of  the 
Spirit.  (3)  How  this  testimony  is  borne  may  be  difiBcult  to  describe,  but  it  is  that 
by  which  doubt  is  put  away  and  the  fact  ascertained.  For  why  else  is  a  witness 
called  in  but  to  clear  up  some  doubt  ?  For  what  purpose  do  we  bring  forward  wit- 
nesses but  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  some  truth  ?  Now,  whatever  be  the  method, 
the  fact  is  communicated,  and  known,  because  communicated,  2,  The  witness  of 
our  own  spirits.  Why  this?  Certain  it  is  that  the  Holy  Spirit  speaks  with  a 
voice  by  which  the  faithful  soul  cannot  be  deceived,  yet  there  may  be  impressions 
not  from  Him,  and  which  we  may  mistake  for  His  sacred  testimony.  Against  such 
delusion  you  must  be  carefully  guarded.  Nor  are  the  means  by  which  it  may  be 
detected  difficult.  Where  the  Spirit  of  God  dwells  He  dwells  as  the  author  of 
regeneration.  Of  this  change  our  own  spirits  must  be  conscious.  If  we  love  God 
and  our  neighbour,  if  we  are  spiritually  minded,  as  having  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit, 
then  have  we  the  witness  of  our  own  spirits  to  the  fact  that  we  have  received  the 
Spirit  of  God.  II.  The  errors  connected  with  this  doctrine  into  which  men 
HAVE  sometimes  FALLEN.  1.  That  there  can  be  no  certainty  of  our  being  now  in  a 
state  of  salvation.  Well,  if  this  blessing  be  not  attainable,  the  state  of  good  men 
under  the  New  Testament  dispensation  is  far  inferior  to  the  state  of  good  men 
under  the  Old,  "  Enoch  before  his  translation  had  this  testimony,  that  he  pleased 
God."  Now,  what  was  there  peculiar  in  the  case  of  Enoch  ?  See  the  filial  con- 
fidence that  Abraham  had  in  God  from  the  time  that  his  faith  was  counted  to  him 
for  righteousness.  When  David  prays,  "  Restore  unto  me  the  joy  of  Thy  salva- 
tion," did  he  not  recollect  that  joy  in  the  salvation  of  God  which  he  had  previously 
experienced?  We  may  say,  also,  that  this  notion  is  contrary  to  all  the  words  of 
Christ  and  His  apostles.  When  our  Lord  says,  "  Come  unto  Me,  and  I  will  give 
you  rest,"  can  such  words  be  reconciled  with  the  idea  of  our  being  in  a  state  of 
uncertainty  ?  Remember  that  that  uncertainty  implies  this,  "  I  am  uncertain 
whether  God  be  my  friend  or  my  enemy. "  Now,  if  this  be  the  only  state  into 
which  religion  brings  us,  with  what  truth  can  Christ  be  said  to  have  given  rest  to 
the  soul  ?  2,  That  there  is  a  great  danger  of  fanaticism  in  this,  and  that,  there- 
fore, it  will  be  much  more  safe  to  proceed  in  the  way  of  argument  and  inference. 
But  upon  this  theory  what  are  we  to  do  with  the  text  ?  There  are  certain  fruits  of 
the  Spirit,  it  is  said,  by  the  existence  of  which  in  ourselves  we  are  to  infer  that  we 
are  the  children  of  God.  What  are  these  fruits  ?  If  you  examine  them  you  will 
find  that  several  are  such  as  must  necessarily  imply  a  previous  persuasion  of  our 
being  in  the  favour  of  God,  communicated  by  God  Himself  (Gal.  v.  22,  23),  Love 
to  God  directly  implies  the  knowledge  of  His  love  to  us.  So,  too,  as  to  peace.  Can 
we  have  this  before  we  know  whether  we  are  at  peace  with  God  ?  The  fruits  of  the 
Spirit  flow  from  the  witness  of  the  Spirit,  3,  That  this  is  the  privilege  only  of 
some  eminent  Christians.  But  there  is  no  authority  for  this  in  the  Word 
of  God.  This  blessing  is  as  common  a  blessing  as  pardon  ;  it  is  put  on 
the  same  ground,  and  is  offered  in  the  same  general  manner.  4.  That  this 
is  an  assurance  of  final  salvation.  I  find  no  authority  for  this  in  the  book 
of  God.  We  are  called  to  live  in  the  comfortable  assurance  of  the  Divine 
favour,  and  to  rejoice  in  the  hope  of  the  glory  of  God ;  but  this  conveys  to 
us  no  certain  assurance  of  final  salvation.  Conclusion  :  1.  This  doctrine 
may  well  lead  those  of  you  to  consider  your  own  condition  who  feel  that  yoa 
are  under  the  Divine  displeasure,  that  you  are  living  carelessly,  and  neglecting 
the  great  salvation.     2.  The  subject  applies  itself  to  those  whose  conscience  is 


CHi».  vm.]  BOM  AN  8.  87 

hardened  by  the  sense  of  guilt  and  8in.  When  once  you  get  the  faith  that  waita 
and  pleads  and  prays  it  will  not  be  long  before  God  will  hear  your  earnest  prayer, 
and  say  unto  you,  "I  am  thy  salvation."  3.  Let  those  who  have  received  the 
Spirit  of  adoption  recollect  both  their  privileges  and  their  duties.  Walk  worthy  of 
the  vocation  wherewith  you  are  called,  and  of  the  blessings  you  profess  to  enjoy. 
{R.  Watson.)  The  witness  of  the  Spirit : — In  the  text  itself  there  are  two  general 
parts  considerable.  First,  the  witnesses  mentioned.  Secondly,  the  thing  itself, 
which  they  bear  witness  onto.  The  witnesses  mentioned  they  are  two.  First,  our 
own  spirit.  We  begin  with  the  former  of  these  parts,  viz.,  the  witnesses  them- 
selves here  mentioned,  which  are  here  expressed  to  be  of  two  sorts.  Our  own 
spirit,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  with  it.  Each  of  these  do  bear  witness  to  the  truth 
of  adoption  in  those  who  are  true  believers.  First,  onr  own  spirit ;  that  is,  the 
spirit  of  the  children  of  God  considered  by  itself.  This  is  one  witness  to  them  of 
their  condition  in  grace,  and  of  their  relation  to  God  as  their  Father.  Our  own 
spirit  is  not  to  be  taken  in  a  corrupt  sense  for  our  carnal  spirit.  This  is  sometimes 
too  much  our  own,  and  so  denominated,  but  such  as  is  no  competent  judge  or 
witness  of  such  a  business  as  this  we  now  speak  of.  Nor,  secondly,  is  it  to  be 
taken  in  a  common  sense,  for  our  mere  natural  spirit,  our  soul  in  its  physical  con- 
sideration, for  there  is  a  witness  (as  we  acknowledge)  even  in  that  of  civil  and 
natural  actions.  But  it  is  to  be  taken  in  a  more  refined  and  spiritual  sense.  Our 
spirit,  so  far  forth  as  sanctified  and  renewed  by  grace,  sprinkled  with  the  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ,  and  having  His  image  stamped  upon  it,  making  up  the  regenerate 
part  in  us.  This  is  our  spirit  in  the  sense  of  this  scripture.  Look,  as  this  is  the 
difference  betwixt  a  man  and  other  creatures,  that  he  is  able  to  reflect  upon  his 
actions,  which  another  cannot ;  so  this  is  the  difiference  betwixt  a  Christian  and 
other  men,  that  he  can  reflect  upon  his  own  grace,  which  others  are  not  able  to  do. 
The  spirit  of  a  regenerate  person  is  a  witness  to  him  of  his  adoption.  This  is 
suitable  and  agreeable  to  other  places  of  Scripture  besides  (2  Cor.  i.  12  ;  1  John  iii. 
21).  "  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  of  God  hath  the  witness  in  himself  "  (1  John  v. 
10).  "My  conscience  bearing  me  witness  in  the  Holy  Ghost," &c.  (chap.  ix.  1).  For 
the  better  opening  of  this  point  unto  us  we  must  know  that  a  man's  own  spirit 
does  witness  to  him  his  adoption,  or  state  in  grace,  according  to  a  threefold  reflec- 
tion. First,  upon  his  primitive  conversion,  and  the  manner  and  carriage  of  that. 
Secondly,  upon  his  habitual  disposition,  and  the  frame  and  temper  of  that. 
Thirdly,  upon  his  general  conversation,  and  the  ordering  and  regulating  of  that. 
By  reflecting  upon  each  of  these,  in  the  right  and  due  observation  of  them,  does  a 
man's  own  private  spirit  and  conscience  witness  to  him  that  he  is  a  child  of  God. 
The  second  is  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  more  expressly  the  Spirit  of  adoption,  which 
we  find  to  be  mentioned  in  the  close  of  the  preceding  verse  of  this  chapter.  The 
Spirit  itfelf,  or  the  self-same  Spirit.  This  bears  witness  of  our  adoption  and 
state  in  grace.  And  it  may  be  conceived  to  do  so  two  manner  of  ways.  We 
begin  in  order  with  the  first  of  these  testimonies,  which  is  that  which  is  distinct 
and  immediate,  wherein  the  Spirit  of  God  does  without  the  intercurrence  or  media- 
tion of  any  discourse  on  our  part,  or  argument  on  His,  signify  His  love  and  good- 
will to  such  persons  as  are  partakers  of  it.  This  is  the  testimony  which  we  are 
now  to  speak  of.  First,  to  speak  of  the  nature  of  it ;  what  or  what  manner  of  thing 
it  is.  Now  for  this  it  is  nothing  else  but  a  gracious  hint  or  intimation  given  to  the 
soul  by  God,  assuring  our  hearts  and  consciences  of  His  favour  and  love  towards 
us,  and  of  our  atonement  and  reconciliation  with  Him  through  the  blood  of  His 
Son.  "  Be  of  good  cheer,  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee,"  "  I  am  thy  salvation,"  "  thou 
art  Mine,"  and  the  like.  It  is  not  a  violent  ecstasy  or  rapture  of  soul  beyond  itself, 
as  illuminatists  and  enthusiasts,  and  such  kind  of  people  as  those  are,  are  sometimes 
deluded  withal,  but  a  sober  and  judicious  and  composed  frame  of  spirit,  which  lies 
not  at  all  in  the  fancy,  as  the  subject  of  it,  but  in  the  heart.  To  speak  distinctly 
of  it  we  may  look  upon  it  under  a  threefold  property,  or  qualification.  First,  this 
manner  of  testimony  of  the  Spirit  is  secret  and  inexpressible,  a  hidden  mystery, 
and  such  as  is  easier  felt  than  described ;  as  a  man  that  tastes  honey  sweet  cannot 
make  another  to  conceive  the  sweetness  of  it,  therefore  it  is  called  the  hidden 
manna  (Rev.  ii.  17).  It  is  called  unspeakable  joy  (1  Pet.  i.  8;  2  Cor.  xii.  4). 
Secondly,  it  is  certain  and  infallible.  This  it  is  like  the  witness  of  a  prince, 
which  puts  all  presently  out  of  controversy.  Thirdly,  this  witness  of  the 
Spirit,  it  is  moreover  inconstant  and  various,  Rara  hora  brevis  mora  (Bernard). 
And  is  not  always  or  at  all  times  alike  vouchsafed  to  those  that  receive  it,  and  are 
partakers  of  it.    Now  the  second  thing  here  considerable  of  us  is  the  discovery 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  vin. 

of  it,  whereby  it  may  be  known.    This  inquiry  is  very  necessary  for  us  in  regard 
of  the  manifold  mistakes  and  deceits  which  are  in  this  particular.    First,  from 
the  antecedents.    In  Eph.  i.  13  it  is  said,  "After  that  ye  believed,  ye  were  sealed." 
Sealing  comes  after  believing,  that  so  it  may  not  be  a  seal  to  a  blank.     The 
Spirit's  witness  of  our  salvation  is  consequent  to  His  work  of  our  conversion. 
Aiid  there  are  two  reasons  for  it.    First,  because  this  witness  of  the  Spirit  is  an 
act  of  special  favour,  therefore  it  is  such  as  belongs  only  to  those  who  are  friends, 
and  in  a  state  of  actual  reconcilement  unto  Him.     Secondly,  because  the  judg- 
ment, and  so  also  the  witness  of  God,  is  according  to  truth.     Never  is  a  Spirit 
of   consolation  where  it  is  not  first  a  spirit  of  renovation.      Secondly,  we  may 
take  notice  of  it  in  its  concomitants,  and  those  things  which  do  usually  attend 
it.     At  first  a  reverend  esteem  of  the  ordinances.      And  then  it  is  also  accom- 
panied with   humility  and   meekness   of   spirit,   and  a  holy  care   and  fear  of 
offending.     And  again,  there  is  a  holy  boldness  and  confidence  at  the  throne  of 
grace  which  does  accompany  this  testimony  of  the  Spirit.     "  Seeing  we  have  such 
hope,  we  use  great  freedom  of  speech  "  (2  Cor.  iii.  12).    Thirdly,  for  its  consequences 
and  effects.     They  are  also  various.     Joy  in   the  Holy  Ghost ;  contempt  of  the 
world  ;  comfortable  thoughts  even  of  death  itself.     From  these  and  the  like  dis- 
coveries may  we  discern  the  testimony  of  the  Spirit  to  be  such  as  it  is.    But 
moreover,  to  make  all  clear,  we  must  further  know  this  much,  that  the  Spirit  of 
God  bears  witness  to  itself  in  its  witnessing  to  us.    As  it  is  infallible  in  regard  of 
the  matter  of  its  testimony,  so  it  is  convincing  in  regard  of  the  evidence  and  manner 
of  its  proceeding.    And  it  shows  itself  to  be  far  different  from  all  delusions  and 
mistakes  whatsoever.    And  it  is  a  sufficient  witness  to  itself,  though  there  were  no 
other  besides  ;  as  the  sun  which  discovers  other  things  is  also  seen  by  the  same 
light  itself  whereby  it  discovers  them.     The  second  is  the  conjunctive,  or  con- 
current testimony.     As  the  Spirit  witnesses  to  us,  so  it  witnesseth  with  us.    And 
with  us,  not  only  by  the  way  of  concomitancy,  but  by  way  of  assistance.     His 
testimony  has  an  influence   upon   ours ;    that   is,   He   helps   us   to  witness   to 
ourselves.     We  are  not  sufficient  of  ourselves  to  think  anything  to  this  purpose  of 
ourselves,  but  our  sufficiency  is  of  God  (2  Cor.  iii.  5).     This  is  different  from  the 
former  testimony  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  two  regards.     First,  that  in  that  He  has 
no  concurrence  with  us,  neither  are  we,  by  way  of  activity,  but  merely  passively  any 
parties  at  all  in  it,  but  in  this  we  are.     Secondly,  that  in  that  He  proceeds  by  way 
of  simple  assertion,  but  in  this  by  way  of  argument  and  reason,  clearing  both  the 
premises  of  the  practical  syllogism  to  us,  and  enabling  us  to  infer  the  conclusion. 
Here  we  need  His  concurrence  with  us  to  help  us  out  of  those  difficulties  which  are 
upon  us.     And  this  is  that  which  through  His  grace  and  goodness  we  do  receive 
from  Him,  as  is  here  signified,  while  it  is  said  that  He  bears  witness  with  our 
spirits  that  we  are  the  children  of  God.     The  second  is  the  matter  of  this  witness, 
or  the  thing  itself  witnessed  unto.    And  that  we  have  in  those  words,  that  we  are 
the  children  of  God.     That  there  is  such  a  thing  as  an  assurance  of  our  state  in 
grace,  and  so  of  future  salvation,  here  in  this  life.     This  it  may  be  cleared  upon 
thes^e  arguments  which  make  for  it,  as  first,  from  the  description  of  faith  itself  in 
the  highest  notion  and  degree  of  it,  which  the  Scripture  does  set  forth  to  us,  under 
terms  of  certainty  and  assurance,  caUing  it  the  full  assurance  of  faith  (Heb.  x.  22) ; 
the  full  assurance  of  hope  (Heb.  vi.  11).     Speaking  of  Abraham,  it  is  said  that  he 
was  fully  persuaded  (chap.  iv.  21).     Secondly,  from  the  exhortations  which  are 
given  to  Christians  to  this  purpose.     For  trial  and  self- examination.     "  Examine 
yourselves,  prove  yourselves,  know  ye  not  your  own  selves,"  &c.  (2  Cor.  xiii.  5  ;  2 
Pet.  i.  10  ;  Heb.  vi.  11).     Lastly,  this  may  be  confirmed  unto  us  from  the  manifest 
absurdity   and    inconvenience    which    does  follow  from    the  contrary  doctrine. 
(Thomas  Horton,  D.D.)        The  witness  of  the  Spirit : — I.  The  high  peivileqe  of 
God's  people.     There  is  a  sense  in  which  all  are  His  children,  for  "  we  are  all  His 
offspring."    But  all  are  not  related  to  God  as  His  children  in  the  sense  of  the  text. 
Certain  Jews  pretended  that  they  were  "  the  children  of  God."     Jesus  said  unto 
them,  "  If  God  were  your  Father,  ye  would  love  Me" ;  but  they  loved  Him  not. 
Consequently  He  spoke  still  more  plainly  to  them,  "  Ye  are  of  your  father  the 
devil,"  &c.     The  same  applies  exactly  to  men  in  the  present  day.     But  let  us 
observe  what  this  high  privilege  denotes.     1.  Distinguished  honour.     The  Lord 
puts  His  name  upon  them.     If  this  be  our  privilege  we  need  envy  none.     The  name 
of  the  ungodly,  whatever  rank  they  hold,  shall  be  "  blotted  out."    2.  Peculiar 
affection.     There  is  no  feeling  so  congenial  to  the  heart  of  a  father  as  affection  for 
hit;  children.    3.  Constant  care.     4.  The  most  liberal  kindness.    "If  ye,  being 


CHIP,  vin.]  ROMANS.  39 

evil,  know  how  to  give  good  gifts,"  (fee.  II.  The  way  by  which  this  pritileob  la 
ASCERTAINED  AND  ENJOYED.  Two  witnessss  come  forwatd — 1.  The  testimony  of 
conscience — "our  spirit."  Have  you,  or  have  you  not,  a  persuasion  in  your  own 
breast  that  you  are  a  child  of  God  ?  "  If  our  heart  condemn  us,"  that  is,  if  the 
verdict  of  conscience  be  clearly  against  us,  "  God  is  greater  than  our  heart,  and 
knoweth  all  things.  But  if  our  heart  condemn  us  not,"  if  its  verdict  be  impartially 
in  our  favour,  "  then  have  we  confidence  towards  God."  2.  But,  secondly,  here  is 
the  testimony  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  this  is  more  particularly  to  be  regarded  ; 
but  when  both  agree  then  the  case  is  beyond  all  reasonable  doubt.  Many  a  man, 
sinfully  partial  to  himself,  hath  the  witness  of  his  own  spirit  that  he  is  a  Christian, 
while  the  Spirit  of  God  witnesses  no  such  thing.  Let  us,  therefore,  consider  this 
witness.  This  is  given  in  two  ways.  1.  In  the  Scriptures.  The  Word  of  God 
describes  the  children  of  God,  the  mind  compares  itself  with  this,  and  so  far  as  an 
agreement  really  eidsts  an  inference  friendly  to  ourselves  is  fairly  drawn.  2,  But 
there  is  the  Spirit's  witness  by  supernatural  influence,  or  direct  iajprtssions  on  the 
mind.  If  Satan,  that  evil  spirit  "  which  now  worketh  in  the  children  of  dis- 
obedience," has  a  pernicious  and  destructive  influence,  much  more  the  Holy  Spirit 
of  God  for  saving  purposes.  The  Spirit's  witness  may  be  distinguished — (1)  By 
what  precedes  it.  In  vain  does  any  one  pretend  to  it  unless  he  be  first  experi- 
mentally acquainted  with — (a)  True  repentance.  (6)  Unfeigned  faith,  (c)  Sincere 
devotedness  to  God.  (2)  By  what  attends  it.  A  high  estimation  of  God's  Word. 
(3)  By  what  follows  it.  (a)  Deep  humility.  (6)  Holy  jealousy  of  self,  (c)  Close 
walking  with  God.  (d)  Holiness.  {T.  Kidd.)  The  witness  of  the  Spirit : — I. 
The  testimony.  There  must  be  a  fact  before  there  can  be  evidence.  To  be  a  child 
of  God  is  a  privilege  marked — 1.  By  its  greatness.  It  is  a  great  privilege  that 
commences  in  adoption,  that  is  effectuated  by  regeneration,  sustained  by  Divine 
nourishment,  confirmed  by  Divine  instruction,  manifested  by  Divine  resemblance, 
and  witnessed  by  the  Divine  Spirit.  Now,  God  has  said,  "If  any  man  provide  not 
for  those  of  his  own  household,  he  hath  denied  the  faith  and  is  worse  than  an 
infidel."  We  conclude  that  God,  in  proclaiming  His  own  Fatherhood,  will  not  be 
wanting  towards  the  members  of  His  own  family.  (1)  He  has  a  home  for  them 
(John  xiv.  2).  Wherefore  He  is  not  ashamed  to  be  called  their  God,  for  He  hath 
provided  for  them  a  city.  (2)  He  will  provide  for  their  pilgrimage  and  journey 
home.  (3)  He  will  afford  them  the  special  tokens  of  His  love.  "  I  will  not  leave 
you  orphans."  2.  By  its  distinguishing  privilege.  To  be  the  children  of  God  by 
adoption  and  grace  is  not  a  common  privilege.  3.  By  its  operative  power.  "He 
that  hath  this  hope  in  Him  purifieth  himself,  even  as  He  is  pure."  The  child  of 
God  longs  to  be  liie  God.  4.  By  its  evangelical  influence.  "  Ye  have  received  not 
the  spirit  of  bondage."  II.  The  witnesses.  "  In  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  wit- 
nesses shall  every  word  be  established  "  (John  viii.  18).  1.  Our  own  spirit.  Not 
that  it  has  always  done  so,  nor  that  our  actual  safety  is  always  in  proportion  to  the 
assurance  of  safety.  We  may  be  safer  than  our  fears  will  permit  us  to  think.  But 
there  are  times  when  our  own  spirit  delivers  no  faint  or  hesitating  testimony. 
"  Should  I  thus  love  God  if  He  were  not  more  to  me  than  He  is  to  others  ? 
Should  I  thus  run  to  Him  in  my  sorrows,  feel  this  deUght  in  prayer,  love  His 
house.  His  day.  His  Word,  His  ministers — choose  His  people  ? "  2.  But  our  hearts 
are  deceitful.  We  need  a  second  witness  to  confirm  the  testimony  of  our  own. 
The  Spirit  is  a  fellow- witness.  How  does  the  Spirit  bear  witness  ?  (1)  By  direct 
communication.  But  lest  this  should  be  thought  to  encourage  a  dreamy  fanaticism — 
(2)  By  the  doctrines  and  promises  of  the  written  Word.  The  voice  of  the  Spirit 
within  agrees  with  the  voice  without — to  the  law  and  the  testimony.  (8)  By  His 
effectual  work  as  the  Comforter  and  Sanctifier  of  the  people  of  God,  tempers,  fruit. 
in.  To  whom  do  these  witnesses  testify  ?  1.  To  ourselves  for  comfort.  We 
are  hard  to  satisfy.  He  thoroughly  pleads  our  cause  and  argues  it  to  us.  2.  To 
the  Church  for  communion.  3.  To  the  world  for  usefulness.  (P.  Strutt.)  The 
witness  of  the  Spirit : — The  sin  of  the  world  is  a  false  confidence — that  a  man  is  a 
Christian  when  he  is  not.  The  fault  of  the  Church  is  a  false  diffidence — whether  a 
man  be  a  Christian  when  he  is.  The  two  are  perhaps  more  akin  than  they  look. 
Their  opposites,  at  all  events — the  true  confidence,  which  is  faith  in  Christ ;  and 
the  true  diffidence,  which  is  distrust  of  self — are  identical.  But  there  often  is  the 
combination  of  a  real  confidence  and  a  false  diffidence.  Now  this  text  is  one  that 
has  often  tortured  the  mind  of  Christians.  Instead  of  looking  to  other  sources  to 
ascertain  whether  they  are  Christians  or  not,  and  then  thinking  thus,  That  text 
asserts  that  all  Christians  have  this  witness,  therefore  certainly  I  have  it  in  sume 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  Tin. 

shape  or  other  ;  they  say,  I  do  not  feel  anything  that  corresponds  with  my  idea  of 
the  witness  of  God's  Spirit,  and  therefore  I  doubt  whether  I  am  a  Christian  at  all. 
Note — I.  OtJB  CBY  "  Father  "  is  the  witness   that  we  abe  sons.      "  The  Spirit 
itself  beareth  witness  with  our  spirit. "    It  is  not  that  my  spirit  bears  witness  that 
I  am  a  child  of  God,  and  that  the  Spirit  of  God  comes  in  with  a  separate  evidence 
to  say  Amen ;  but  that  there  is  one  testimony  which  has  a  conjoint  origin ;  from 
the  Spirit  of  God  as  true  source,  and  from  my  own  soul  as  recipient  and  co-operant 
in  that  testimony.     1.  So  far,  then,  as  the  form  of  the  evidence  goes,  you  are  not 
to  look  for  it  in  anything  parted  ofif  from  your  own  experience,  but  you  are  to  try 
and  find  out  whether  there  be  a  "still  small  voice,"  no  whirlwind,  Ac,  but  the 
voice  of  God  taking  the  voice  and  tones  of  your  own  heart  and  saying  to  you.  Thou 
art  My  child,  inasmuch  as  through  Me  there  rises,  tremblingly  but  truly,  in  thine 
own  soul  the  cry,  Abba,  Father.     2.  Then  with  regard  to  the  substance  of  it, 
*'  The  Spirit  itself,"  by  means  of  our  cry,  Abba,  Father,  "  beareth  witness  with  our 
spirit  that  we  are  the  children  of  God."    The  substance  of  the  conviction  is  not 
primarily  directed  to  our  relation  or  feelings  to  God,  but  to  God's  feelings  and 
relation  to  us.     The  two  things  seem  to  be  the  same,  but  they  are  not.     Instead  of 
being  left  painfully  to  search  amongst  the  dust  and  rubbish  of  our  own  hearts,  we 
are  taught  to  sweep  away  all  that  crumbled,  rotten  surface,  and  to  go  down  to  the 
living  rock  that  lies  beneath  it.     There  is  all  the  difference  in  the  world  between 
searching  for  evidence  of  my  sonship  and  seeking  to  get  the  conviction  of  God's 
fatherhood.     The  one  is  an  endless,  profitless,  self-tormenting  task ;  the  other  is 
the  light  and  glorious  hberty  of  the  children  of  God.     II.  That  crt  is  not  simply 
0UB8,  BUT  IT  IS  THE  VOICE  OF  God's  Spieit.      1.    OuT  owu  couvictions  are  ours 
because  they  are  God's.     Our  own  spirits  possess  them,  but  our  own  spirits  did  not 
originate  them.     This  passage  with  Gal.  iv.  6  puts  this  truth  very  forcibly.     In  the 
one  text  the  cry  is  regarded  as  the  voice  of  the  believing  heart ;  and  in  the  other 
the  same  cry  is  regarded  as  the  voice  of  God's  Spirit.    And  these  two  things  are 
both  true ;  the  one  would  want  its  foundation  if  it  were  not  for  the  other ;  the  cry 
of  the  Spirit  is  nothing  for  me  unless  it  be  appropriated  by  me.     And  the  whole 
doctrine  of  my  text  is  built  on  this  one  thought — without  the  Spirit  of  God  in  your 
heart  you  never  can  recognise  God  as  your  Father.    There  is  no  ascent  of  the 
human  desires  above  their  source.     2.  But  if  this  principle  be  true  it  does  not 
apply  only  to  this  one  single  attitude  of  the  believing  soul,  it  comprehends  the 
whole  of  a  Christian's  life.     "  The  Spirit  itself  heart th  witness  with  our  spirit"  in 
every  perception  of  God's  Word,  in   every  revelation  of  His  counsel,  in  every 
aspiration  after  Him,  in  every  holy  resolution,  in  every  thrill  and  throb  of  love  and 
desire.     Each  of  these  is  mine,  inasmuch  as  in  my  heart  it  is  experienced  and 
transacted  ;  but  it  is  God's,  and  therefore  only  has  it  come  to  be  mine  !     And  if  it 
be  objected  that  this  opens  a  wide  door  to  delusion,  here  is  an  outward  guarantee. 
"  As  many  as  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God  they  are  the  sons  of  God."     The  test  of 
the  inward  conviction  is  the  outward  life,  and  they  that  have  the  witness  of  the 
Spirit  within  them  have  the  light  of  their  life  lit  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  whereby  they 
may  read  the  handwriting  on  the  heart,  and  be  sure  that  it  is  God's  and  not  their 
own  I      in.  This  Divine  witness  in  oub  spibits   is    subject   to  the   obdinaey 
influences  which  affect  oub  spibits.      1.   The  notion  often  prevails  that  this 
Divine  witness  must  needs  be  perfect,  never  flickering,  never  darkening.     The 
passage  before  us  gives  us  the  opposite  notion.     The  Divine  Spirit,  when  it  enters 
into  the  narrow  room  of  the  human  spirit,  condescends  to  submit  itself  to  the 
ordinary  laws  and  conditions  which  befall  our  own  human  nature.     Christ  came 
into  the  world  Divine,  but  the  humanity  He  wore  modified  the  manifestation  of  the 
Divinity  that  dwelt  in  it.     And  not  otherwise  is  the  operation  of  God's  Holy  Spirit 
when  it  comes  to  dwell  in  a  human  heart.     There,  too,  working  through  man,  it 
"  is  found  in  fashion  as  a  man."    The  witness  of  the  Spirit,  if  it  were  yonder  in 
heaven,  would  shine  like  a  perpetual  star  ;  here  in  the  heart  on  earth  it  burns  like 
a  flame,  not  always  bright,  wanting  to  be  trimmed,  and  needing  to  be  guarded  from 
rude  blasts.     Else  what  does  an  apostle  mean  when  he  says,  "  Quench  not  the 
Spirit,"  "  Grieve  not  the  Spirit  "  ?    2.  And  the  practical  conclusion  that  comes  from 
all  this  is  just  the  simple  advice,  Do  not  wonder  if  that  evidence  vary  in  its  clearnesa 
and  force.     Do  not  think  that  it  cannot  be  genuine  because  it  is  changeful.     There 
are  heavenly  lights  too  that  wax  and  wane ;  they  are  lights,  they  are  in  the  heavens 
though  they  change.     You  have  no  reason  to  be  discouraged  because  you  find  that 
the  witness  of  the  Spirit  changes.     Watch  it,  and  guard  it,  lest  it  do.    Live  in  the 
contemplation  of  the  person  and  the  fact  that  it  calls  forth,  that  it  may  not.    Yoa 


CHAP,  mi.]  ROMANS.  41 

will  never  "brighten  your  evidences "  by  polishing  at  them.  To  polish 
the  mirror  ever  so  assiduously  does  not  secure  the  image  of  the  sun  on 
its  surface.  The  only  way  to  do  that  is  to  carry  the  poor  bit  of  glass  out 
into  the  sunshine.  It  will  shine  then,  never  fear.  (A.  3Iaclaren,  D.D.) 
The  witness  of  the  Spirit : — It  is  the  high  and  distinguishing  privilege  of  true 
Christians  that  they  are  the  children  of  God ;  but  there  is  a  wide  difference  between 
possessing  a  privilege  and  knowing  that  we  possess  it.  A  man  may  have  in  law  a 
clear  title  to  an  estate  without  feeling  sure  in  his  own  mind  that  he  has  such  a 
title.  He  may  possess  a  real  interest  in  some  very  beneficial  concern,  and  yet  may 
be  ignorant  of  his  claim,  or  perhaps  have  considerable  doubts  as  to  the  justice 
of  his  pretensions.  The  text  discloses  the  way  by  which  the  true  Christian  may 
attain  to  a  strong  and  lively  hope  of  his  adoption — namely,  through  the  testimony 
of  the  Spirit.  What,  then,  is  this  witness  of  the  Spirit  T  I.  It  is  a  privilege  which 
THE  Spirit  of  God  freely  bestows  ;  which  He  confers  or  withholds  as  He  sees  fit. 
Some  may  wait  many  years  before  they  are  favoured  with  it,  and  may  afterwards 
lose  it.  Nor  is  the  Spirit  less  free  as  to  the  degree  of  the  testimony.  To  one  He 
bears  a  weaker,  to  another  a  stronger  witness.  II.  It  is  a  secret  inward  operation 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  "  with  our  spirit."  Consequently  it  can  be  known  only  to 
the  person  to  whom  it  is  given.  By  his  fruits  others  know  him.  III.  It  perfectly 
AGREES  WITH  THE  WRITTEN  WoRD  OF  GoD ;  for  the  Spirit  canuot  contradict  Himself — 
e.g.,  should  a  person  pretend  to  have  it  whose  life  exhibited  none  of  those  marks 
with  which  Scripture  distinguishes  the  children  of  God,  it  would  be  plain  that 
he  was  mistaken  in  his  pretensions.  For  could  the  Spirit  witness  to  him  a 
falsehood  7  IV.  It  has  nothing  to  do  with  sudden  and  violent  impulses,  new 
revelations,  sensible  impressions,  &o.  Let  us  not  deny  or  overlook  the  real  operations 
of  the  Spirit  of  God  ;  but  let  us  not  blaspheme  Him,  nor  bring  them  into  contempt, 
by  ascribing  to  His  agency  effects  which  are  proofs  of  nothing  but  of  error,  weakness, 
or  imposture.    V.  Wherever  the  Spirit  bears  witness  to  the  adoption  of  sons, 

THERE  He  has  been  FIRST  RECEIVED  AS  THE  SpiRIT  OF  ADOPTION  (vcr.  15).     {E.   Cooper.) 

The  witness  of  the  Spirit : — Christ  taught  the  doctrine  of  regeneration  by  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  St.  Paul  taught  the  complemental  doctrine  of  a  direct  personal  witness 
of  the  same  Spirit  to  the  soul  that  had  become  renewed.  The  act  of  regeneration  is 
succeeded  by  the  act  of  confirmation  ;  which  is  the  Diviue  method  in  nature.  Not 
only  did  God  create  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  but  He  followed  each  act  of  creation 
with  the  assurance  that  it  was  "  very  good. "  It  is  quite  true  that  the  works  of 
nature  are  continually  vindicating  their  own  goodness,  and  it  is  not  less  true  that 
spiritual  sonship  is  its  own  witness  in  the  presence  of  all  men  ;  yet  the  soul  which 
has  passed  through  the  agonies  of  penitence  and  reconstruction  needs  just  that  word 
of  tender  assurance  and  comfort  which  is  expressed  in  the  doctrine  of  the  witness 
of  the  Spirit.  I.  This  witness  brings  with  it  comfort.  In  all  the  great  experiences 
of  life  we  need  a  voice  other  than  our  own  to  complete  the  degree  of  satisfactic.n 
which  begins  in  our  own  consciousness.  In  common  affairs  we  may  be  strong 
enough  without  external  encouragement ;  but  when  life  is  sharpened  into  a  crisis 
we  need  something  more  than  is  possible  to  our  unaided  powers.  There  are  time-s 
when  we  need  to  hear  our  own  convictions  pronounced  by  the  voice  of  another. 
Let  that  second  witness  be  greater  than  ourselves,  and  his  testimony  will  bring 
with  it  proportionate  comfort;  let  him  be  the  wisest  of  men,  and  still  the  consola- 
tion is  increased :  let  that  witness  be  not  a  man,  but  God  Himself,  and  at  once 
we  are  filled  with  peace  and  joy  unspeakable.  II.  Still,  the  very  Divineness  of 
this  comfort  clothes  the  witness  with  the  severity  of  inexorable  discipline.  Son- 
ship  has  responsibilities  as  well  as  enjoyments.  "  Know  ye  not  that  ye  are  the 
temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost?"  Will  any  man  make  the  temple  of  the  Lord  a 
temple  of  idols  ?  We  are  to  walk  in  the  Spirit ;  to  mind  the  things  of  the  Spirit ; 
and  to  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  Otherwise  there  can  be  no  comfort  1 
If  there  is  sweetness  in  the  mouth,  it  is  the  taste  of  stolen  honey.  The  comfort  is 
not  a  spiritual  luxury.  The  apostoUc  doctrine  is  that  the  promises  of  God  should 
move  the  heart  towards  more  and  more  purity  (2  Cor.  vii.  1).  God's  purpose  as  to 
character  is  growth.  Let  the  sacred  germ  lie  dormant  in  the  heart,  and  the  witness 
of  the  Spirit  will  decline  in  vividness  and  emphasis,  and  the  germ  itself  will  perish 
(Heb.  vi.  4-6).  Once  interrupt  the  communion  of  the  soul  with  the  Father,  and 
the  soul  may  never  be  able  to  resume  the  fellowship  :  then  (the  apostle  would  say) 
"  Pray  without  ceasing,''  if  you  would  enjoy  the  permanent  witness  of  the  Spirit. 
Thus  the  argument  arising  out  of  Divine  comfort  in  the  human  soul  points  stead- 
fastly towards  discipline  (vers.  5, 13).    III.  Yet  with  all  the  comfort  is  thbuk 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

NOT   AN   ASPIRATION    HARDLY   DISTINGUISHABLE   FROM   DISCONTENT,   AND   WITH   ALL  THB 

DISCIPLINE  18  THERE  NOT  A  HOPE  WHICH  MAKES  IT  EASY  ?  The  explanation  is  found  in 
the  fact  that  the  present  enjoyment  of  the  Spirit  is  but  an  earnest  of  the  coining 
fulness  (ver.  23).  The  Church  by  mistaking  the  "  earnest "  for  the  "  fulness,"  runs 
the  risk  of  stating  incomplete  truths  as  final  revelations.  The  "  earnest  "  of  the 
Spirit  constitutes  a  lien  upon  the  future  service  of  the  receiver ;  if  the  service  be 
unperformed,  the  "  earnest "  will  be  withdrawn  ;  whereas,  if  the  service  be  lovingly 
rendered  with  the  whole  might  of  the  heart,  the  measure  of  the  gift  will  be  filled 
up  even  to  the  sanctification  of  the  "  whole  body,  soul,  and  spirit."  "What  is 
delaying  the  outpouring  of  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit  ?  There  is,  indeed,  a 
still  sterner  inquiry.  Is  not  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  Church 
less  distinct  to-day  than  in  the  apostolic  age  ?  Can  modern  piety  enrich 
its  history  with  such  a  passage  as  Acts  ii.  1-4,  iv.  31  ?  Is  the  Church 
baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire?  Is  it  honourable  to  suggest  that 
such  manifestations  were  confined  to  the  early  Church?  It  was  after  those 
manifestations  that  the  Apostle  Paul  described  the  measure  of  the  Spirit  already 
given  as  an  "  earnest,"  and  if  only  an  earnest  where  is  the  fulness  which  there  is 
not  room  enough  to  receive  ?  We  may  be  said  to  receive  more  and  more  of  the  sun 
as  noontide  approaches,  and  to  receive  a  "  double  portion  "  of  the  spirit  of  every 
author  whose  writings  we  study  with  admiring  affection.  Now,  why  has  not  a 
Church  eighteen  hundred  years  old  a  fuller  realisation  of  the  witness  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  than  had  the  Church  of  the  first  century  ?  Has  the  Church  accomplished 
all  the  purpose  of  God,  and  passed  for  ever  the  zenith  of  her  light  and  beauty? 
How,  then,  are  men  to  know  that  they  enjoy  the  witness  of  the  Spirit  ?  Partly  by 
the  anxiety  with  which  they  put  the  question,  and  partly,  too,  by  the  occasional 
comforts  which  suffuse  the  soul  with  inexplicable  gladness,  but  mainly  by  the  daily 
sacrifice  of  loving  service,  and  by  enrapturing  expectation.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
The  witness  of  the  Spirit : — How  much  there  is  in  this  chapter  as  to  the  work  of 
the  Holy  Spirit.  He  helps  against  sin  (ver.  2).  He  leads  and  guides  (ver,  14). 
He  aids  in  prayer  (ver.  26).  And  (text)  gives  believers  a  happy  sense  of  their 
acceptance.  Not,  indeed,  by  voice  from  heaven,  nor  by  angelic  messenger  (Dan.  ix. 
23),  rather  by  revealing  the  Saviour's  love  and  glory  (John  xv.  26),  and  by  bringing 
peace-giving  words  to  remembrance  (John  xiv.  26,  27).  Let  us  now  consider  the 
great  happiness  of  possessing  this  witness.  I.  It  comforts  in  trial.  How  com- 
forting to  remember  that  these  are  a  Father's  dealings  1  (Heb.  xii.  7 ;  John  xviii. 
11).  II.  It  encourages  to  prater.  Let  it  fill  the  mind,  and  then  we  know  we  are 
welcome.  What  a  difference  does  this  make !  III.  It  restrains  in  temptation. 
If  we  have  a  happy  consciousness  of  our  adoption,  we  shall  fear  to  offend.  We 
shall  fear  to  bring  a  cloud  over  our  joy.  IV.  It  stirs  up  to  active  service.  Joy 
makes  one  active.  V.  It  supports  in  the  prospect  of  death.  Under  such 
circumstances  the  valley  becomes  illuminated.  Death  is  then  going  to  a  Father — 
going  to  a  proper  home.  (J.  Lancaster,  M.A.)  The  witness  of  the  Spirit : — I.  Thh 
WITNESSES.  The  text  suggests  that  we  are  entering  upon  a  calm  judicial  process, 
in  which  the  verdict  can  be  obtained  only  by  the  testimony  of  two  witnesses  of  tried 
competency  and  proved  faithfulness.  1.  The  importance  of  having  the  Holy 
Spirit  as  the  chief  witness  will  appear  from  the  nature  of  the  facts  to  be  witnessed 
to — namely,  that  we  are  the  children  of  God,  &c.  For  on  the  authority  of  no 
mere  man  could  I  receive  this  testimony.  Wise  he  might  be,  and  holy ;  but  the 
subject  is  beyond  his  province.  Neither  could  I  take  the  testimony  of  an  angel. 
Note  the  requirements  essential  to  the  competency  of  our  witness.  The  counsels 
of  God's  will,  the  goings  forth  of  His  love  and  peace,  must  be  naked  and  open  to 
the  witness  with  whom  we  have  to  do.  He  must  know  when  the  act  of  grace  went 
forth,  when  the  wandering  spirit  turned,  and  when  the  heart  surrendered.  These 
are  things  which  must  be  known  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  because  of  Him  and  through 
Him  are  all  these  effects  wrought.  Are  the  eyes  opened  ?  It  is  His  to  enlighten. 
Is  conscience  awakened  ?  It  is  His  to  reprove.  Does  the  will  yield  ?  It  is  His  to 
subdue.  Is  the  heart  at  peace  ?  It  is  His  to  seal.  2.  The  second  witness  is  the 
spirit  of  the  man  himself — the  responsive  testimony  of  our  own  hearts  echoing  the 
s&ent  utterances  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  giving  us  confidence  toward  God.  This 
view  of  course  supposes  the  witness  of  our  own  spirits  to  be  of  a  derived  and 
reflected  kind.  It  is  a  witness  to  a  witness — the  interpreter  of  that  testimony 
which  is  borne  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  Of  themselves  our  own  spirits  can  testify 
nothing.  II.  In  what  language  does  the  Spirit  sfbas,  and  in  what  signs  does 
THE  heart  maeb  ANSWER?    The  joint  witness  is  to  be  looked  for  in  the  inward 


CHAP  vm.]  ROMANS,  43 

peace  arising  from  the  discovery  of  certain  tendencies  and  dispositions  answerable 
to  the  state  of  sonship.   And  it  is  properly  called  a  joint  witness,  because  the  same 
Spirit  wbo  forms  tbese  tendencies  in  us,  also  manifests  their  existence  to  us.    We 
can  only  know  that  we  are  children  when  the  Spirit  reveals  the  existence  of  those 
moral  dispositions  which  prompt  us  to  act  and  feel  as  children,  and  these  we  find 
only  in  the  written  Word.    But  this  still  makes  the  Spirit  of  God  the  chief  witness, 
because  until  He  shines  upon  the  Word  it  is  a  sealed  book  to  us.    But  when  He 
opens  our  understanding  we  find  that  the  entrance  of  God's  Word  giveth  light.   A.nd 
it  is  just  the  agreement  between  these  two — the  Scripture  calling  and  the  heart 
answering ;  the  Spirit  insisting  on  certain  feelings,  and  our  own  spirits  testifying 
that  we  have  such  feelings — that  constitutes  our  double  witness.     "  To  the  law  and 
to  the  testimony  ;  if  they  speak  not  according  to  My  Word,  it  is  because  there  is  no 
life  in  them."    But  to  what  purpose  does  our  text  come  in  at  the  close  of  several  of 
the  most  distinguishing  marks  of  true  grace  which  Scripture  contains,  if  it  be  not  to 
set  the  heart  upon  the  inquiry  whether,  by  the  secret  illumination  of  the  Spirit,  these 
marks  be  discoverable  in  ourselves  ?  Now  it  is  manifest  that  if  these  marks  be  found 
in  us  we  have  the  witness  of  the  Word  to  our  adoption  ;  and  what  is  the  witness  of  the 
Word  but  the  witness  of  the  Spirit,  who  both  indited  the  Word  and  gave  us  under- 
standing to  comprehend  the  truth  ?   Conclusion  :  The  text  describes  a  real  blessing. 
It  is  no  visionary  good.     Do  not  let  any  difficulties  connected  either  with  its  mani- 
festation or  its  source  affect  your  possession  of  it  as  a  great  spiritual  reality.     It  is 
a  witness,  and  a  witness  to  a  great  fact.   The  heart's  peace,  the  soul's  comfort,  Ufe's 
prospects,  death's  fears,  all  hinge  and  turn  upon  the  clearness  of  this  twofold  testi- 
mony.    It  brings  with  it  heaven's  credentials  ;  it  is  stamped  with  heaven's  seal ;  it 
leaves  behind  it  heaven's  peace ;  it  is  the  witness  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  (D.  Moore,  M.A.) 
The  witness  of  the  Spirit : — I.  The  geneeal  attainableness  op  the  Spirit.     The 
sense  of  adoption,  so  far  from  being  heaven's  far-off  prize  held  out  to  the  highest 
saints,  is  a  near,  present  good  which  babes  in  Christ  may  grasp,  which  is  offered 
to  the  prodigal  first  returning  from  his  wanderings  and  to  the  publican  first 
humbled  for  his  sins.     This  fact  will  appear  in  the  exhortations  to  this  assurance 
(Heb.  vi.  11,  X.  22;  2  Pet.  i.  10).    To  these  add  the  passages  holding  out  to  the 
believer  the  promise  of  peace  (Isa.  xxvi.  3,  xxxii.  17 ;  Rom.  v.  1).    Such  a  peace, 
it  is  manifest,  could  never  be  ours  while  doubt  and  misgiving  hung  over  the  great 
business  and  design  of  our  existence.     Peace  in  duty,  in  suffering,  in  our  spiritual 
approaches,  in  the  contemplation  of   the  great  future,  not  only  is  set  forth  in 
Scripture  as  attainable,  but  is  commonly  made  to  give  forth  an  utterance  as  plain 
as  a  testimony  addressed  to  the  ear.    II.    Must  it  be  attained  ?    Let  us  ask, 
What  is  necessary  to  salvation  ?    Faith,  of  course.     But  faith  in  what  ?     In  some- 
thing done  for  us,  or  in  something  done  in  us  ?    In  the  sufficiency  of  Christ's  work, 
or  in  the  sufficiency  of  our  conscious  interest  in  that  work?     The  faith  which 
justifies  is  an  act  of  trust,  exerted  objectively  upon  the  mediation  of  Christ,  and 
justification  is  the  instantaneous  effect  ensuing  upon  this  act.    But  it  may  be  long 
before  we  are  made  conscious  of  our  new  condition,  or  its  resulting  peace,  e.g.,  a 
ship  is  labouring,  and  ill-piloted,  on  a  dangerous  coast.     A  spectator  knows  that  if 
she  once  make  a  certain  point,  her  danger  is  over.     She  does  make  this  point,  and 
is  safe  ;  but  the  crew  do  not  know  she  is  safe,  and  therefore  they  continue  to  be 
afraid  where  no  fear  is.  Her  deliverance  takes  place  before  the  comfort  of  deliverance. 
And  just  so  it  will  often  be  in  our  spiritual  deliverance.     It  is  not  that  a  man  has 
not  faith,  but  he  has  not  the  comfort  of  faith.    Faith,  justification,  peace,  is  the 
declared  order  of  the  Divine  procedure.     Between  faith  and  justification  thers  is 
no  appreciable  interval ;  but  between  justification  and  peace  there  may  be  a  long 
and  trying  interval.    And,  further,  to  make  our  salvation  depend  upon  any  form  of 
inward  testimony,  is  to  make  the  trust  of  the  beUever  turn  in  part  upon  something 
within,  rather  than  turning  absolutely  upon  the  finished  work  of  Christ.    And  tha 
difference  to  our  spiritual  safety,  whether  we  exercise  faith  in  Christ  immediately, 
or  mediately  on  some  inward  feeling  which  unites  us  to  Christ,  is  as  great  as  would 
be  the  difference  to  a  drowning  man  whether  he  laid  hold  on  a  rock,  or  merely  on 
a  loose  weed  which  was  growing  to  the  rock.      We  may  have  the  faith  of  reliance 
when  we  cannot  get  the  faith  of  assurance ;  and  when  through  the  weakness  of  the 
flesh  we  cannot  lay  hold  on  the  witness  that  is  within  us,  we  may  yet  be  saved  by 
laying  firm  hold  on  the  hope  that  is  set  before  us.    III.  How  is  it  to  be  attained  ? 
1.  This  witness  is  an  impression  of  inward  peace,  the  fruit  of  a  certain  comparison 
which  the  mind  has  been  enabled  by  the  Spirit  to  make  between  the  statements  of 
revelation  and  its  own  moral  experience.    But  this  done,  the  chief  practical 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

directions  for  gaining  an  inward  assurance  are  that  we  cultivate  a  believing 
contemplation  of  gospel  truth,  and  institute  a  frequent  and  close  examination  into 
the  state  of  our  own  hearts.  2.  And  then  there  must  be  much  of  self-examination 
followed  up  by  the  repairing  of  all  conscious  deficiencies,  and  the  renouncing  of 
all  discovered  faults.  {Ibid.)  The  witness  of  the  Spirit : — I.  To  whom  is  this 
WITNESS  GIVEN  ?  1.  Truc  religion  is  not  a  set  of  creeds,  defined  and  believed  just 
as  a  man  may  believe  in  the  North  Pole  or  the  law  of  gravitation.  The  sphere  of 
religion  is  not  in  the  man's  head,  but  in  the  heart.  Nor  is  it  a  matter  of  forms  of 
worship — singing  hymns  or  saying  prayers  or  hearing  sermons.  These  things  may 
be  gone  through,  and  all  the  time  the  real  man  may  be  unmoved  and  asleep.  It  is 
precisely  here  that  a  great  many  people  make  a  mistake.  They  are  not  satisfied 
with  their  religious  life.  That  which  they  have  is  unreal,  outside.  So  they  either 
set  to  work  to  examine  their  creed,  or  else  they  change  it.  Or  else  they  think  the 
form  of  worship  is  at  fault.  And  at  last  they  are  ready  to  give  up  all  in  despair. 
2.  The  only  religion  that  can  satisfy  is  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  our  spirits. 
By  all  means  see  that  your  creed  stands  square  with  the  Word  of  God,  and  seek  the 
forms  of  worship  that  help  you  to  get  nearest  to  God.  But  be  slire  of  this,  that  creeds 
however  true,  and  forms  of  worship  however  solemn  and  impressive,  can  never  give 
you  the  religious  life.  We  must  be  bom  of  the  Spirit.  The  manner  of  this  new  creation 
may  differ  in  a  thousand  ways.  With  some  it  may  be  gentle  and  gradual  as  the 
dawn  of  day  ;  with  others  it  may  be  as  a  day  when  the  noise  of  battle  rolled.  3. 
Although  this  life  is  begotten  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  yet  is  He  to  be  willingly  received 
and  submitted  to  (ver.  14).  Now  to  such  there  is  given  the  witness  of  the  Spirit. 
II.  What  this  witness  is.  1.  There  is  much  significance  in  the  emphatic  assurance 
with  which  St.  Paul  speaks.  He  bids  us  take  it  for  granted  that  if  we  are  the 
children  of  God  this  witness  of  the  Spirit  is  ours.  Children  do  not  know  what  the 
estate  is  worth,  but  they  do  know  that  it  is  theirs,  and  whatever  there  is  in 
it  belongs  to  them.  Think  of  a  child  saying,  "  I  am  going  to  see  what  I  am  heir 
to,"  and  spending  all  its  time  in  prying  into  everything  with  a  microscope  to  make 
sure  that  it  is  there.  Since  the  realm  of  the  religious  life  is  in  the  spirit,  do  not  let 
us  be  always  analysing  and  defining  and  perplexing  ourselves  about  all  sorts  of 
mysteries.  There  are  some  people  who  always  begin  to  tell  me  their  symptoms, 
and  ask  me  what  I  think  of  them  and  what  they  ought  to  do.  Well,  forget  that 
you  have  any  constitution.  Give  up  the  luxury  of  a  Uver.  Work  hard  at  some 
outdoor  work  so  that  you  have  not  time  to  think  about  yourself ;  and  then  when 
you  get  very  hungry,  eat ;  and  when  you  have  got  very  tired,  sleep.  There  are 
spiritual  dyspeptics,  too,  who  are  always  talking  about  their  symptoms,  and  who 
think  they  have  not  got  any  religion  at  all  unless  they  are  finding  something 
to  worry  themselves  and  other  people  about.  Come,  let  us  be  bold  to  say,  "  Well, 
■whatever  the  witness  of  the  Spirit  is,  if  Jesus  Christ  is  mine,  this  too  is  mine." 
And  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  let  us  honour  the  Giver  of  the  estate  by  seeking 
to  make  the  most  of  it ;  finding  out  how  rich  and  blest  we  are.  Now  there  are 
some  who  think  of  the  witness  of  the  Spirit  as  a  kind  of  revelation  from  heaven, 
or  a  thrill  of  rapture — something  which  lifts  us  up  above  other  people  and  singles 
us  out  as  the  favourites  of  God.  If  anything  could  make  a  man  a  Pharisee  it 
is  surely  that.  It  is  the  very  root  of  that  Pharisaism  which  the  Lord  denounced. 
The  witness  of  the  Spirit  is  not  to  our  spirits  that  we  are  the  children.  It  is  with 
our  spirits  that  God  is  our  Father.  He  is  to  take  of  the  things  of  Christ  and 
manifest  them  unto  us.  There  is  in  Jesus  Christ  a  sight  of  our  sin  that  humbles 
and  shames  us,  yet  there  is  a  sight  of  love  that  overwhelms  us.  The  Spirit  puts 
us  in  possession  of  that  love  as  our  own ;  and  in  loving  tenderness  the  Father  beuds 
over  us  so  pitiful,  so  careful  for  us  that  all  the  heart  cries,  "Abba,  Father."  A 
blessed  consciousness  is  thus  wrought  within  us,  which  has  no  room  for  pride,  but 
only  for  self-forgetfulness,  wonder,   gratitude,   and  glad   obedience.      III.  This 

WITNESS    Ifl    NO    LESS    DiVINE    BECAUSE    IT    MOVES    ON    THE    OBDINABT    AND    NATURAL 

LINES  OF  SPIRITUAL  INFLUENCE.  There  are  men  and  women  who  help  to  create 
within  us  a  new  experience.  Their  influence  is  at  once  distinct  yet  indistinguish- 
able. We  cannot  mark  exactly  the  influence,  how  it  came  and  how  it  wrought. 
Now  it  is  in  this  quiet  and  natural  way  for  the  most  part  that  the  witness  of  the 
Spirit  is  given.  The  idea  is  of  a  blending  of  spiritual  influence.  The  Gulf  Stream 
may  be  taken  as  a  parable  of  this.  For  some  eight  months  of  the  year  our  seas 
ought  to  be  frozen  over  so  that  no  ship  could  approach  our  shores.  Our  islands 
should  be  a  rough  rude  tract  of  country  where  only  the  hardiest  forms  of  life  could 
survive — a  land  of  forest  where  wild  funy  beasts  should  roam,  and  where  the  deep 


CHAP,  vm.]  ROMANS.  45 

snows  should  make  agriculture  almost  impossible.  What  mystery  is  this  which 
delivers  us  ?  Away  in  the  distant  southern  world,  in  the  fierce  heat  of  the  tropica 
starts  the  Gulf  Stream.  It  gathers  the  warmth  of  the  sun  and  sends  it  for  thousands 
of  miles  across  the  seas  to  lave  our  shores.  And  thus  the  arctic  winter  is  driven 
from  us ;  and  our  ports  are  open  all  the  year  round ;  over  us  stretch  the  kindlier 
skies;  about  us  blow  the  gentler  winds;  our  fields  are  covered  with  grass,  the 
valleys  are  thick  with  corn.  But  where  is  this  Gulf  Stream  which  does  such 
wonders  ?  Can  you  see  it?  No,  we  cannot  see  it,  but  it  is  there.  The  parable  is 
a  many-sided  illustration  of  the  truth.  Of  nature,  of  ourselves,  we  do  dwell  in  a 
land  of  winter— frozen  and  well-nigh  dead ;  without  the  energy  to  put  forth  any 
life  of  God.  But  lo,  we  know  not  how,  but  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  there 
is  breathed  about  us  and  within  us  the  love  of  God,  softening,  transforming, 
bringing  to  us  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth.  And  now  do  grow  and  flourish 
blessed  things  which  before  we  knew  not.  "  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy, 
peace,"  &c.     {Mark  Guy  Pearse.)         The  witness  of  the  Spirit : — I.  There  abk 

MAin  TERMS   WHICH   DESCRIBE   OCR    NATURE    AND    CONDITION   WHEN   WE    ARB    NOT   THE 

CHILDREN  OF  GoD.  "The  children  of  the  world,"  "children  of  the  night," 
"children  of  iniquity,"  "children  of  the  devil,"  "children  of  wrath."  II.  Con- 
trasted  WITH    ALL    this     THERE     IS    THE    TEXT    "  CHILDREN   OF   GOD,"    they     whose 

nature  is  derived  from  the  parentage  of  heaven,  whose  character  is  formed  by  that 
nature,  whose  actions  and  prospects  spring  from  that  nature.  1.  And  this  state 
is  clearly  set  before  us  not  as  a  thing  that  comes  by  nature,  or  by  accident,  or 
unawares.  It  is  not  that  we  are  all  the  creatures  of  God ;  the  pebbles  are  that. 
Nor  is  it  that  we  are  merely  objects  of  the  Divine  benevolence  ;  God  is  good  to  the 
worst  man  living.  Nor  merely  that  we  are  the  offspring  of  God — those  whose  origin 
was  from  Him  and  who  will  always  bear  in  them  some  characteristics  of  that  origin, 
such  as  immortality,  conscience,  &c.  The  fallen  angels  have  all  that.  "  I  know," 
said  the  Lord  in  speaking  to  the  Jews,  "  that  ye  are  the  seed  of  Abraham,"  but 
then  in  the  same  breath  He  denied  it.  They  were  the  offspring  of  Abraham,  but 
they  ceased  to  be  his  children,  or  they  would  have  shown  forth  his  nature.  But 
God  was  "  able  of  those  stones  to  raise  up  children  unto  Abraham  " ;  God  was  able 
to  take  those  fallen  Jews  and  restore  them  to  the  place  that  they  had  lost  in  the 
family  of  faith.  And  so  with  any  unconverted  man,  any  teacher  who  is  teaching  a 
pardon  and  a  peace  that  he  has  never  experienced;  God  is  able  out  of  the  very 
stones  to  raise  up  children  to  God.  2.  And  this  was  the  glory  of  our  Saviour's 
mission  among  men  that  to  them  that  received  Him  He  gave  power  to  become  the 
sons  of  God  :  and  to  be  constituted  the  children  of  God  always  implies  the  double 
idea  of  adoption  and  regeneration,  the  restoration  of  the  soul  to  the  favour  of  God, 
the  restoration  of  the  name  to  its  place  in  the  family  roll.  ILL  This  grace,  how 
SHALL  WE  TELL  IT,  OR  WHO  CAN  TELL  IT?  1.  "Eye  hath  not  scen,"  <fcc.  Then 
should  they  remain  unknown  ?  It  is  very  certain  that  the  eye  cannot  see  when 
God  forgives  the  soul.  You  may  hearken  as  you  wiU,  but  you  will  never  hear  it. 
And  as  to  the  heart  imagining  it,  it  passes  in  another  world.  Am  I  to  say,  then, 
if  I  cannot  see  it  or  hear  it,  &c.,  I  cannot  believe  it  ?  The  apostle  meets  you  at 
once.  He  says,  "  The  things  of  a  man  knoweth  no  man,  save  the  spirit  of  man 
that  is  in  him."  A  son  was  wandering  disinherited  in  America.  The  father  says 
to  an  uncle,  "  Will  you  be  my  executor  ?  "  "  Yes,  on  condition  that  you  restore 
the  name  of  your  eldest  son."  "  He  is  dead,"  says  the  father.  "  He  is  not  dead," 
says  the  uncle.  "  Put  in  his  name  and  I  will  be  your  executor."  The  father  puts 
in  his  name,  and  actually  the  boy  is  restored  to  his  rights  and  titles  of  inheritance. 
He  knows  nothing  about  it.  That  mind  of  hi  father's  is  as  much  an  invisible 
world  to  him  as  is  God's  to  us.  The  only  ques  on  is,  Had  his  father  any  power  of 
putting  what  was  in  his  mind  into  the  mind  of  his  boy  ?  No  ;  because  he  did  not 
know  where  his  boy  was,  and  the  boy  never  got  his  inheritance,  for  the  father  again 
altered  his  will,  thinking  the  boy  was  dead,  and  dead  he  was  not.  There  is  the  simple 
case  supposed  in  1  Cor.  ii  11.  Just  as  the  spirit  of  the  father  knew  the  acts  of  the 
father,  although  the  son  did  not,  so  doth  the  Spirit  of  God  know  the  acts  of  God. 
Bat  then  the  difference  was  this,  that  man's  spirit  did  not  search  all  things ;  it 
sould  not  tell  where  bis  son  was.  But  the  Spirit  searcheth  all  things,  not  only  the 
deep  things  of  God,  but  the  deep  things  of  you  heart  and  your  ways.  "  Eye  hath 
not  seen,"  <&o.,  but  God  doth  reveal  them  unto  us  by  His  Spirit.  2.  A  witness  is 
simply  one  who  has  witnessed  a  transaction,  a  d  who  bears  witness  of  that  trans- 
action to  another  who  did  not  witness  it.  ow  doth  the  Spirit  bear  witness? 
I  do  not  know,  any  more  than  I  know  how  the  father  held  up  his  hand  to  write  the 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

name  of  his  son.  I  do  not  know  how  that  is  done.  I  know  that  joa  and  I  can  do 
it.  I  do  not  know  how  it  was  that  one  day  when  in  my  house  they  were  anxiously 
inquiring  whether  a  certain  ship  from  America  was  nearing  the  shore,  a  telegram 
came,  and  we  knew  the  ship  was  there  a  couple  of  hours  before  the  telegram  came 
from  the  ship  itself.  Those  that  were  on  the  ship  had  no  means  of  communicating 
it ;  but  the  people  on  shore  had  seen,  and  they  could  send  the  news  of  what  they 
had  seen  right  into  the  minds  of  people  here  in  London,  and  produced  within  those 
minds  all  the  change  and  all  the  impression  that  was  wanted  to  be  produced  by  that 
piece  of  intelligence.  So  it  is  the  mission  and  ofi&ce  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  the 
revealer  of  Christ  and  of  the  Father,  to  uncover  the  pardoning  countenance  of  God, 
and  to  make  that  countenance  shine  upon  His  forgiven  child.  Conclusion  :  II  you 
need  the  Holy  Spirit  to  bear  witness  with  you  that  you  are  the  children  of  God,  the 
world  needs  a  witness,  and  that  witness  you  can  give  only  in  your  actions,  in  your 
conduct.  The  world  will  not  believe  your  word,  and  it  ought  not  to  believe  your 
word  if  that  word  is  not  supported  by  your  conduct  and  your  character.  But 
if  your  conduct  and  character  bear  upon  them  the  Divine  stamp,  then  your  word 
win  not  be  an  empty  sound.  When  you  have  made  that  impression  upon  the 
hearts  of  men,  you  have  gone  far  towards  testifying  that  there  is  such  a  thing 
as  being  a  child  of  God.  To  the  Church  you  can  testify  your  sonship  in  Christ  by 
the  one  proof  of  your  love  to  the  brethren.  No  other  proof  will  avail.  And  if  the 
Spirit  is  really  bearing  witness  with  your  spirit  that  you  are  the  child  of  God  you 
will  love  Him,  and  loving  Him  you  will  take  delight  in  pleasing  Him  ;  and  you  will 
love  all  that  are  begotten  of  Him ;  you  will  love  His  cause.  His  kingdom,  His  glory, 
and  the  witness  of  the  Spirit  filling  your  soul  with  light  from  above  will  illuminate 
your  whole  conduct,  and  that  conduct  shall  be  that  of  a  child  of  the  light.  (W. 
Arthur,  M.A.)  The  witness  of  the  Spirit: — I.  The  thing  testified  to — that 

we  are  the  children  of  God.  There  is  the  same  difference  between  tekvov  and 
vibc  as  there  is  between  child  and  son ;  the  former  applies  to  either  sex,  and  is 
more  tender.  We  are  bom  of  God,  i.e.,  we  are  produced  by  Him.  This  does  not 
refer  to  us  as  creatures,  nor  as  rational  creatures,  but  as  regenerated ;  so  that  we 
are  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature.  1.  It  expresses  the  relation  in  which  we  stand 
to  God  as  the  objects  of  His  love  and  as  loving  Him.  This  filial  spirit  on  our  part 
includes — (1)  Confidence  in  His  love  to  us.  (2)  Reverence.  (3)  Zeal  for  His  glory. 
(4)  Devotion  to  His  service.  2.  It  indicates  the  privileges  arising  from  this 
relation.  We  are  heirs  of  God,  partakers  of  all  the  blessings  which  He  haa 
provided  for  His  children.  H.  The  nature  of  the  testimony.  It  is  not  involved 
in  our  filial  feelings,  but  is — 1.  Direct  or  immediate.  The  Spirit  assures  us  just 
as  He  produces  the  assurance  of  the  truth.  2.  Mysterious,  but  not  more  so  than 
the  operations  of  the  Spirit,  nor  indeed  than  the  action  of  mind  on  matter  or  of  one 
created  spirit  on  other  created  spirits.  3.  Self -evidencing,  i.e.,  it  reveals  itself  as 
the  testimony  of  God.  Just  as  the  voice  of  God  in  the  heavens,  in  conscience,  in 
the  law,  in  the  gospel,  reveals  itself  in  His  Word  ;  so  when  the  Spirit  speaks  to  the 
soul  it  is  known  to  be  the  Spirit.  4.  Infallible,  and  produces  assurance.  This 
is  not  inconsistent  with  doubt  and  anxiety,  because — (1)  This  witnessing  is  inter- 
mittent, more  or  less.  (2)  This  voice  of  God  may  vary  from  the  slightest,  almost 
inaudible  whisper,  to  the  most  clear  and  articulate  enunciation.  6.  Sanctifying. 
That  is  its  nature.  It  produces  that  effect,  just  as  fire  burns,  or  light  dispels 
darkness.  It  is  never  given  where  it  is  not  true.  And  where  it  is  true,  where 
the  soul  is  regenerated,  then  to  banish  doubt  and  fear  and  anxiety  is  to  infuse 
new  life  and  vigour.  It  is  to  give  peace  and  call  out  graces.  [C.  Hodge,  D.D.) 
The  witness  of  the  Spirit : — How  many,  not  understanding  what  they  spoke,  have 
wrested  this  scripture  to  their  great  loss  1  How  many  have  mistaken  the  voice  of 
their  own  imagination  for  this  witness,  and  presumed  that  they  were  the  children 
of  God  while  they  were  doing  the  works  of  the  devil  I  These  are  the  enthusiasts. 
Who,  then,  can  be  surprised  if  many  reasonable  men  seeing  the  dreadful  effects  of 
this  delusion  should  regard  this  wit  ess  as  exclusively  an  extraordinary  gift  of  the 
apostolic  age?  But  we  may  steer  a  middle  course,  and  keep  a  safe  distance  from 
enthusiasm  without  denying  the  pr  vilege  of  God's  children.  I.  The  witness  of 
the  Spirit  with  oub  spirit.  1.  The  witness  of  our  spirit.  (1)  The  foundation 
of  this  is  laid  in  those  scriptures  which  describe  the  marks  of  the  children  of  God. 
Every  man  applying  these  marks  to  himself  may  know  whether  he  is  a  child  of 
God.  If  he  know — (a)  "  As  many  as  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God  "  into  aU  holy 
tempers  and  actions,  "  they  are  the  ons  of  God."  (b)  I  am  thus  "  led  by  the  Spirit 
of  God";  he  will  easily  conclude  "therefore  I  am  a  son  of  God,"     AgreeabUi 


CHAP.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  47 

to  this  are  all  those  plain  declarationd  of  St.  John  in  his  First  Epistle  (chaps,  ii. 
3,  6,  29,  iii.  14,  19,  iv.  13,  iii.  24).  (3)  But  how  does  it  appear  that  we  have  these 
marks  ?  I  would  reply,  How  does  it  appear  to  you  that  you  are  alive,  and  in  ease, 
not  in  pain  ?  Are  you  not  immediately  conscious  of  it  ?  By  the  same  conscious- 
ness you  will  know  if  your  soul  is  alive  to  God ;  if  you  are  saved  from  the  pain  of 
proud  wrath  and  have  the  ease  of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit.  2.  The  testimony  of 
God's  Spirit  is  an  inward  impression  on  the  soul  whereby  the  Spirit  of  God  directly 
•witnesses  with  my  spirit  that  I  am  a  child  of  God  ;  "  that  Jesus  Christ  hath  loved 
me  and  given  Himself  for  me  ;  and  that  all  my  sins  are  blotted  out,  and  I,  even  I, 
am  reconciled  to  God."  (1)  That  this  testimony  must  needs  be  antecedent  to  the 
other  appears  from  the  fact  that  we  must  be  holy  of  heart  and  life  before  we  are 
conscious  that  we  are  so.  But  we  must  love  God  before  we  can  be  holy,  and  we 
cannot  love  Him  till  we  know  He  loves  us,  which  we  cannot  know  till  God's  love  is 
shed  abroad  in  the  heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  (2)  Not  that  the  operation  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  to  be  excluded  even  from  the  testimony  of  our  own.  He  not  only 
works  in  ns  every  manner  of  good,  but  also  shines  upon  His  own  work  and  clearly 
shows  what  He  has  wrought.  Accordingly  one  great  end  of  our  receiving  the 
Spirit  is  ••  that  we  may  know  the  things  which  are  freely  given  us  of  God."  (3)  If 
it  be  inquired  how  the  Spirit  bears  witness,  such  knowledge  is  too  wonderful  for 
ns.  "  The  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth  I  "  But  the  fact  we  know,  viz.,  that  the 
Spirit  of  God  does  give  the  believer  such  a  testimony  of  His  adoption,  that  while  it 
is  present  to  the  soul,  he  can  no  more  doubt  the  reality  of  his  sonship  than  he  can 
doubt  of  the  shining  of  the  sun  while  he  stands  in  the  full  blaze  of  his  beams.    II. 

How    TOIS   JOINT   TESTIMONY   MAY    BE     DISTINGUISHED    FBOM — 1.    The    preSUOiptlon    of 

the  natural  mind.  The  Scriptures  abound  with  marks  whereby  we  may  distinguish 
the  one  from  the  other  ;  and  whoever  carefully  attends  to  them  will  not  put  dark- 
ness for  light.  (1)  Eepentance  precedes  this  witness  (Acts  ii.  38,  iii.  19),  but  the 
natural  mind  is  a  stranger  to  this.  The  being  born  again — that  mighty  change 
from  darkness  to  light,  death  to  life,  Ac.  (Eph.  ii.  1,  5,  6),  must  also  precede  ;  but  what 
knoweth  he  of  this  ?  It  is  a  language  he  does  not  understand.  He  has  always  been 
a  Christian,  and  knows  no  time  when  he  had  need  of  such  a  change.  (2)  Humble 
joy  in  God  accompanies  it,  and  meekness,  patience,  gentleness,  &o.  But  do  these 
fruits  attend  the  supposed  testimony  in  the  presumptuous  man  ?  The  more  con- 
fident he  is  of  the  favour  of  God  the  more  does  he  exalt  himself.  It  is  also  accom- 
panied with  the  love  which  rejoices  to  obey  (1  John  v.  3  ;  John  liv.  21).  But  this 
is  not  the  character  of  the  presumptuous  pretender  to  the  love  of  God.  But  how 
may  one  who  has  the  real  witness  distinguish  it  from  presumption  ?  How  do  you 
distinguish  day  from  night?  or  the  light  of  a  glimmering  taper  from  that  of  the 
noonday  sun  ?  In  like  manner  there  is  an  essential  difference  between  spiritual 
light  and  darkness,  and  between  the  light  wherewith  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  shines 
upon  our  heart,  and  the  glimmering  Ught  which  arises  from  "  sparks  of  our  own 
kindling."  To  require  a  more  minute  and  philosophical  accoimt  is  to  make  m 
demand  which  can  never  be  answered,  or  else  the  natural  man  would  be  able  to 
discern  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  2.  The  delusions  of  the  devil.  By  the 
eame  fruits.  That  proud  spirit  cannot  humble  thee  before  God,  or  melt  thy  heart 
into  filial  love,  or  enable  thee  to  put  on  meekness,  Ac.  As  surely,  then,  as  holiness  is 
of  God  and  sin  of  the  devil,  so  surely  the  witness  thou  hast  in  thyself  is  not  of  Satan 
but  of  God.  (John  Wesley,  M.A.)  The  witness  of  the  Spirit : — There  are  here — I. 
Two  PERSONS.  1.  The  Spirit.  (1)  He  is  God,  and  if  so,  equal  to  the  Father  and 
the  Son.  This  is  proved  inasmuch  as — (a)  The  essential  name  of  God  is  given  Him 
(Isa.  vi.  9;  cf.  Acts  xxviii.  25).  {h)  The  Divine  attributes — eternity  (Gen.  i.  2); 
omnipresence  (Psa.  cxxxix.  7) ;  omniscience  (1  Cor.  ii.  10).  (c)  The  works  of  God 
— creation  (Job  xxxiii.  4) ;  miracles  (Isa.  Ixiii.  14) ;  the  calling  and  sending  of  the 
prophets  (Isa.  xlviii.  16)  and  of  Christ  Himself  (Luke  iv.  18) ;  prophecy  (Acts  i.  16) ; 
illumination  (John  xvi.  14);  justification  (1  Cor.  vi.  11) ;  conviction  of  sin  (John 
xvi.  8) ;  comfort  (Acts  ix.  31) ;  resurrection  (chap.  viii.  11) ;  the  earnest  and  seal  of 
our  evidence  (Eph.  i.  13) ;  spiritual  refreshment  (John  iv.  14) ;  zeal  ^Matt.  iii.  11) ; 
prayer  (Zech.  xii.  10;  Bom.  viii.  26);  gladness  (Heb.  i.  9);  spiritual  gifts  (1  Cor. 
xii.  4).  He  is  God,  because  the  essential  name  of  God  is  His ;  therefore  let  ns  call 
npon  His  name,  because  the  attributes  of  God  are  His ;  therefore  let  us  attribute  to 
Him  all  might,  majesty,  dominion,  &c.,  because  the  works  of  God  are  His  ;  therefore 
let  us  co-operate  with  Him :  then  shall  we  be  of  the  same  spirit  with  Him.  (2)  He 
is  a  distinnt  person  in  the  Godhead.  He  is  not  the  highest  and  powerfullest  work- 
ing of  God  in  man,  not  the  breathing  of  God  into  the  soul  of  man :  these  are  only 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

His  gifts  and  not  Himself.  It  is  not  the  power  of  the  King  that  signs  His  pardon, 
but  His  person.  (3)  He  proceeds  from  the  Father  and  the  Son  (ver.  9  ;  Gal.  iv.  6). 
As  to  the  manner  of  this,  when  we  are  able  to  tell  how  the  Spirit  proceeds  which 
beats  in  our  pulse,  we  shall  be  able  to  explain  that.  2.  Our  spirit.  The  word  is 
applied  either  to  the  soul  itself,  or  to  its  superior  faculties  in  the  regenerate.  In 
Heb.  iv.  12  the  soul  is  that  which  animates  the  body,  and  enables  the  senses  to  see 
and  hear  ;  the  spirit  is  that  which  enables  the  soul  to  see  God  and  hear  His  gospel 
(c/.  1  Thess.  V.  25).  The  soul  is  the  seat  of  affections,  the  spirit  is  rectified  reason 
or  the  conscience  (chap.  ix.  1).  II.  Theib  office — to  testify.  1.  The  testification 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  Himself.  A  witness  ever  testifies  of  some  matter  of  fact.  The 
Spirit  here  witnesses'that  we  are  the  children  of  God.  Now,  if  a  witness  prove  that 
I  am  a  tenant  to  such  land  or  lord  of  it,  I  do  not  become  so  by  this  witness,  but 
his  testimony  proves  I  was  so  before.  I  have,  therefore,  a  former  right  to  be  the 
child  of  God — i.e.,  the  election  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  Holy  Ghost  produces 
the  decree  of  this  election.  And  upon  such  evidence  shall  I  give  sentence  against 
myself  ?  I  should  not  doubt  the  testimony  of  an  angel,  and  when  God  testiles  to 
me  it  is  a  rebellious  sin  to  doubt.  But  though  there  be  a  former  evidence  for  my 
being  a  child  of  God,  a  decree  in  heaven,  yet  it  is  not  enough  that  there  is  such  a 
record ;  it  must  be  produced ;  and  by  that,  though  it  do  not  become  my  election  then, 
it  makes  my  election  appear.  2.  But  even  that  Spirit  will  not  be  heard  alone.  He 
will  fulfil  His  own  law  "  in  the  mouth  of  two  witnesses. "  Sometimes  our  spirit 
bears  testimony  without  the  Spirit.  The  natural  conscience  has  much  to  say  about 
sin,  and  God  and  our  relation  to  Him  (Acts  xvii.  28).  And  the  Holy  Spirit  testifies 
when  ours  does  not.  How  often  He  presents  to  us  the  power  of  God  in  the  mouth 
of  the  preacher,  and  we  bear  witness  to  one  another  of  the  preacher's  wit  and 
eloquence,  and  no  more  1  How  often  He  bears  witness  that  such  an  action  is  odious 
to  God,  and  our  spirit  bears  witness  that  it  is  acceptable  to  men !  How  often  He 
bears  witness  for  God's  judgments,  and  our  spirit  deposes  for  mercy  by  presumption, 
or  He  testifies  for  mercy  and  ours  for  judgment  in  desperation !  But  when  the 
Spirit  and  our  spirit  agree  ;  when  He  speaks  comfortably  to  my  soul  and  my  soul 
hath  apprehended  comfort ;  when  He  deposes  for  the  decree  of  my  election,  and  I 
depose  for  the  seals  and  marks  of  that  decree,  these  two  witnesses — 3.  Induce  a 
third  witness — the  world  itself  to  testify  what  is  the  testimony  of  the  text.  III. 
The  TESTiMoirr — "  that  we  are  the  children  of  God,"  1.  The  Holy  Ghost  could  not 
express  more  danger  to  a  man  than  when  He  calls  him  "  the  child  of  this  world  " 
(Luke  xvi.  18);  nor  a  worse  disposition  than  when  He  calls  him  "the  child  of 
dififidence  and  distrust  in  God  "  (Eph.  v.  6) ;  nor  a  worse  pursuer  of  that  ill  disposi- 
tion than  when  He  calls  him  *'  the  child  of  the  devil  "  (Acts  xiii.  10) ;  nor  a  worse 
possessing  of  the  devil  than  when  He  calls  him  "  the  child  of  perdition  "  (John  xviL) ; 
nor  a  worse  execution  of  all  this  than  when  He  calls  him  "a  child  of  hell" 
(Matt,  xxiii.  15).  2.  So  it  is  also  a  high  exaltation  when  the  Spirit  draws  our 
pedigree  from  any  good  thing,  as  when  He  calls  us  ••  the  children  of  light  "  (John 
xii.  36) ;  "  the  children  of  the  bridechamber  "  (Matt.  ix.  15) ;  but  the  highest  of  all 
is  "the  children  of  God."  This  is  an  universal  primogeniture,  and  makes  every 
true  beUever  heir  of  the  joys,  the  glory,  the  eternity  of  heaven.  (J.  Donne,  D.D,) 
The  witness  of  the  Spirit : — Sometimes  the  soul,  because  it  hath  somewhat  remain- 
ing in  it  of  the  principle  that  it  had  in  its  old  condition,  is  put  to  question  whether 
it  be  a  child  of  God  or  not ;  and  thereupon,  as  in  a  thing  of  greatest  importance, 
puts  in  its  claim,  with  all  the  evidence  it  hath  to  make  good  its  title.  The  Spirit 
comes  and  bears  witness  in  this  case.  It  is  an  allusion  to  judicial  proceedings  in 
point  of  titles.  The  judge  being  set,  the  person  concerned  lays  his  claim,  produces 
his  evidences  and  pleads  them,  his  adversaries  endeavouring  all  that  in  them  lies 
to  disannul  his  plea.  In  the  midst  of  the  trial  a  person  of  known  and  proved 
integrity  comes  into  the  court,  and  gives  testimony  fully  and  directly  on  behalf  of 
the  claimer,  which  stops  the  mouth  of  all  his  adversaries,  and  fills  the  man  with 
joy  and  satisfaction.  So  is  it  in  this  case.  The  soul,  by  the  power  of  its  own  con- 
science, is  brought  before  the  law  of  God  ;  there  a  man  puts  in  his  plea  that  he  is  a 
child  of  God,  and  for  this  end  produceth  all  his  evidences,  everything  whereby  faith 
gives  him  an  interest  in  God.  Satan,  in  the  meantime,  opposeth  with  all  his  might ; 
many  flaws  are  found  in  the  evidences ;  the  truth  of  them  all  is  questioned,  and  the 
soul  hangs  in  suspense  as  to  the  issue.  In  the  midst  of  the  contest  the  Comforter 
comes,  and  overpowers  the  heart  with  a  comfortable  persuasion,  and  bears  down  all 
objections,  that  his  plea  is  good,  and  that  he  is  a  child  of  God.  When  our  spirits  are 
pleading  their  right  and  title,  He  comes  in  and  bears  witness  on  our  side,  at  the  same 


CHAP,  vm.]  EOMANS.  49 

time  enabling  as  to  pnt  forth  acts  of  filial  obedience,  crying,  "  Abba  Father."  (J. 
Owen,  D.D. )  TTie  witness  of  the  Spirit  abiding: — Believers  have  a  double  testimony, 
one  without,  and  one  within ;  and  this  witness  within  as  will  go  with  as,  which  way 
soever  we  go :  it  will  accompany  us  through  all  straits  and  difiSculties.  The  external 
testimony  may  be  taken  from  us,  our  Bibles,  our  teachers,  oar  friends ;  or  the^  may 
imprison  us  where  we  cannot  enjoy  them  :  but  they  cannot  take  from  us  the  Spirit  of 
Christ.  This  witness  within  is  a  permanent,  settled,  habituate,  standing  witness. 
(Ambrose.)  The  witness  of  the  Spirit  instantaneoiu : — The  witness  of  the  Spirit,  from 
its  nature  as  a  witness,  must  be  instantaneous.  A  witness  deposes  to  a  particular  fact ; 
and  there  must  be  aparticular  instant  of  time  when  his  testimony  is  given.  The  mathe- 
matician slowly,  by  the  ase  of  single  cyphers  and  symbols,  works  out  his  problems 
in  order  to  find  a  result  concerning  which  he  is  altogether  in  doubt ;  the  chemist 
slowly  and  cautiously  conducts  experiments  to  find  out  the  nature  of  substances 
concerning  which  he  is  totally  ignorant ;  but  a  witness  enters  a  court  to  depose  to 
a  fact  of  which  he  has  already  a  f uU  knowledge,  and  whose  testimony  the  court  is 
now  waiting  to  hear.  He  who  beUeves  in  Jesus  Christ  is  in  a  scriptural  condition 
to  receive  the  witness  of  the  Spirit  that  he  is  a  child  of  God  ;  and  the  case  neither 
requires  nor  admits  that  the  witness  should  be  gradually  imparted.  When  a  parent 
has  forgiven  his  child  he  does  not  gradually  reveal  that  fact  to  him,  but  gives  im- 
mediate proof  in  his  countenance  and  actions,  if  not  in  words,  that  he  again  loves 
him.  (S.  Hid  me.)  The  two  witnesses: — I.  The  witness  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 
1.  Direct.  2.  Divine.  3.  Manner  unknown.  4.  Distinct  from  and  anterior  to  the 
witness  of  our  own  spirit.  5.  Attested  by  Scripture.  6.  Confirmed  by  reason.  7. 
If  no  such  witness,  no  assurance,  all  induction,  n.  The  witness  of  our  own  spirit. 
1.  Inward  consciousness.  2.  Holy  tempers.  3.  Obedience.  4.  Peace  and  confi- 
dence. 5.  Flowing  from  repentance  and  faith.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  two  wit- 
nesses : — The  witness  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  work  of  faith,  the  witness  of  our 
spirits  the  sense  of  faith  wrought.  This  is  better  felt  by  experience  than  expressed 
by  words,  known  altogether  and  only  to  them  which  have  it.  For  me  to  speak  of 
this  to  them  which  have  it  not,  were  as  if  I  should  speak  a  strange  language.  The 
witness  is  that  "  we  are  the  children  of  God."  Not  that  we  shall  be,  or  may  be,  but 
are.  And  what  though  my  very  name  be  not  written  in  the  Scripture,  thou  Thomas, 
thou  John  ?  It  is  not  convenient.  What  a  huge  volume  should  the  Bible  be  if 
every  saint's  name  were  there  written  I  It  is  not  necessary,  because  all  particulars 
are  included  in  their  generals ;  as  he  that  saith, "  All  my  children  are  here,"  means 
every  one  in  particular,  though  he  name  them  not ;  bo  God,  that  saith  all  believers 
shall  be  saved,  means  every  one  as  though  they  were  named.  And  yet  the  Scripture 
doth  speak  in  particular  (chap.  x.  9).  When  the  law  saith,  Thou  shalt  not  kill, 
steal,  (fee,  every  one  is  to  take  it  as  spoken  to  himself,  as  if  he  were  named.  Why 
should  not  such  particulars  in  the  gospel  be  also  so  taken  ?  True,  say  the  Papists, 
if  you  believe  you  shall  be  saved ;  but  where  does  the  Scripture  say  that  you  do 
believe  ?  Eidiculous  1  The  act  of  faith  is  not  set  down  in  the  Scriptures,  but  the 
object.  The  faith  which  I  believe  is  in  the  Bible.  The  faith  whereby  I  believe  is 
in  my  heart,  and  is  not  believed  (for  that  were  absurd^,  but  known  by  feeling.  We 
do  not  believe  that  we  believe,  but  we  feel  it  (2  Tim.  i.  12).  If  man  should  witness, 
or  an  angel,  there  might  be  doubt ;  but  when  there  is  such  a  witness  as  is  the  Spirit 
we  ought  not  to  doubt.  If  a  man  of  a  weak  brain  were  on  the  top  of  some  high 
tower,  and  should  look  down,  it  would  make  him  wonderfully  afraid  ;  but  when  he 
considers  the  battlements  that  keep  him  from  falling  his  fear  abates.  So  fares  it 
with  the  regenerate  when  we  look  on  our  sins,  and  so  down  and  down  to  hell.  Alas! 
whose  heart  quails  not  ?  But  when  we  consider  the  brazen  wall  of  the  love,  truth, 
and  promise  of  God  in  Christ,  we  may  be  assured  without  fear.  Look  upon  thy 
defects,  but  forget  not  the  truth  and  power  of  God.  Pretend  not  the  testimony  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  without  thine  own  spirit :  nor  contrarily,  for  they  go  together. 
Faith,  repentance,  &c.,  are  the  testimony  of  God's  Spirit ;  ii  from  these  thy  spirit 
witnesseth,  then  it  is  current.  But  if  thou  beest  a  drunkard,  a  Sabbath-breaker, 
unclean,  &c.,  and  sayest  the  Spirit  witnesseth  thy  salvation,  it  is  not  God's  Spirit, 
but  a  lying  spirit,  for  such  works  are  of  the  devil.  God's  Spirit  indeed  witnesseth ; 
but  the  witness  is  that  they  which  do  such  things  shall  be  damned.  {Elnathan  Parr, 
B.p.)  The  Spirit  testifying  to  the  believer's  adoption : — Having  afiBrmed  the 
Divine  relationship  of  the  beUever,  the  apostle  now  proceeds  to  adduce  the  Divine 
evidence  of  a  truth  so  great.     I.  It  is  not  strange  that  the  fact  of  his  adoption 

SHOULD  meet  with  MUCH  MISGIVING  IN  THE  CHRISTIAN'S  MIND.      The  Very  StUpCndoUB- 

ness  of  the  relationbhip  staggers  our  belief.     To  be  fuUy  assui'ed  of  our  Divine 
VOL.   u.  4 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vin. 

adoption  demands  other  than  the  testimony  either  of  our  own  feelings  or  the 
opinion  of  men.  Our  feelings  may  mislead,  the  opinion  of  others  may  deceive. 
There  exists  a  strong  combination  of  evil  tending  to  shake  the  Christian's  confidence 
in  the  belief  of  his  sonship.  1.  Satan  ig  ever  on  the  watch  to  insinuate  the  doubt. 
He  tried  the  experiment  with  our  Lord  (Matt.  iv.  6).  2.  The  world,  too,  presumes 
to  call  it  in  question  (1  John  iii.  1).  Ignorant  of  the  Divine  original,  how  can  it 
recognise  the  Divine  lineaments  in  the  faint  and  imperfect  copy?  3.  But  the 
strongest  doubts  are  those  gendered  in  the  believer's  own  mind.  There  crowd  upon 
it  thoughts  of  his  own  sinfulness,  and  unworthiness  of  so  distinguished  a  blessing. 
And  when  to  this  are  added  the  varied  dispensations  of  his  heavenly  Father,  often 
wearing  a  rough  garb,  it  is  no  marvel  that,  staggered  by  a  discipline  so  severe,  the 
fact  of  God's  love  should  sometimes  be  a  matter  of  painful  doubt.    11.  Bot  God  has 

OBACIOUSLT  AND  AMPLY  PROVIDED  TOR  THIS  PART  OP  CHRISTIAN  EXPERIENCE  IN  THE  WIT- 
NESS OF  THE  SpIRIT.  1.  The  perfect  competence  of  the  Spirit  is  assumed.  Who  can 
reasonably  question  it?  (1)  Is  verity  essential  to  a  witness?  He  is  the  "  Spirit  of 
truth."  (2)  Is  it  essential  that  he  should  know  the  fact  whereof  he  affirms  ?  Who 
so  competent  to  authenticate  the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  the  heart  as  the  Spirit  Him- 
self ?  2.  As  to  the  truth  thus  witnessed,  we  are  not  to  suppose  that  the  testimony 
is  intended  to  make  the  fact  itself  more  sure ;  nor  for  the  benefit  of  our  fellow- 
creatures,  still  less  for  the  satisfaction  of  God  Himself,  but  for  the  assurance  and 
comfort  of  our  own  hearts.  3.  But  the  question  arises.  What  is  the  mode  of  His 
testimony  ?  Not  by  visions  and  voices ;  not  by  heats  and  fancies  ;  nor  by  any  direct 
inspiration,  or  new  revelation  of  truth.  By — (1)  Begetting  in  us  the  Divine  nature. 
(2)  Producing  in  us  spiritual  fruits.  (3)  Breathing  in  our  souls  a  desire  for  holiness, 
the  Spirit  conducts  us  to  the  rational  conclusion  that  we  are  born  of  God.  (0. 
Wimlow,  D.D.)  The  believer^  testiviony  : — The  value  of  any  testimony  is  deter- 
mined by  the  character  of  the  person  who  gives  it.  To  be  spoken  of  fcr  our  know- 
ledge by  a  fool  is  of  idle  account ;  whilst  a  word  from  the  wise,  how  good  is  it ! 
To  be  spoken  of  for  our  valour  by  a  coward  is  a  vain  matter  ;  whilst  the  commenda- 
tion of  the  hero  is  of  great  moment.  Now  in  this  way  the  greatest  and  best  of  all 
testimonies  are  those  to  the  soul  of  the  behever  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  I.  The  author 
or  THE  believer's  testimony — the  Spirit  I  The  Spirit  beareth  witness  with  our 
spirit.  1.  Secretly  in  the  sense  which  He  conveys  of  our  personal  interest  in  the 
great  scheme  of  Christ's  atonement,  by  the  gift  of  faith.  2.  Openly  before  the  eyes 
of  the  world,  that  the  world  may  take  knowledge  of  His  work.  II.  The  substance 
OF  THE  testimony — "  that  we  are  the  children  of  God."  In  what  way  does  this 
testimony  discover  itself?  There  will  be  a  filial — 1.  Love  to  God's  person  through 
Christ.  2.  A  trust  and  dependence  upon  His  supplies.  3.  Lowhness.  4.  Fear. 
6.  Confidence  in  His  wisdom.  6.  Resignation  to  His  will.  7.  Obedience.  8.  Like- 
ness. 9.  Delight  in  His  presence.  HI.  The  deduction  from  this  testimony — "  if 
children,  then  heirs;  heirs  of  God,  and  joint  heirs  with  Christ."  1.  Not  one  in  a 
family,  but  all  heirs — not  heirs  who  may  lose  their  inheritance  by  premature  death,  or 
be  defrauded  of  it,  or  have  it  wasted  away  by  the  delays  and  chicaneries  of  law,  but  an 
heirdom  where  the  possession  is  certain  as  universal,  and  full  as  certain,  2.  The 
heir  of  God  !  To  the  heir  of  a  king  what  glorious  expectancies  are  there  ! — of  a 
throne,  a  crown,  a  treasury,  a  nation  !  But  how  poor  are  these  to  the  objects  before 
the  heir  of  God !  The  heir  of  God  I — of  all  things  temporal,  spiritual,  and  eternal, 
of  all  which  God  can  devise  and  bestow  for  our  good.  IV.  The  condition  of  those 
WHO  RECEIVE  THE  TESTIMONY.  It  is  a  Buffering  condition — "  if  so  be  that  we  suffer 
with  Him."    The  disciple  is  not  above  his  Lord,  nor  the  servant  his  master.    V. 

The  EXALTATION  OP  THOSE  WHO  ARE  AFFECTED  BY  THE  TESTIMONY — "  that  We  may  also 

be  glorified  together."  {T.  J.  Judkin.)  The  evidence  of  Christian  sonship: — I. 
Its  NATURE.  1.  Paul  draws  a  distinction  between  God's  Spirit  and  our  spirit ;  it  is 
not  our  spiritual  life  that  bears  this  testimony,  but  the  Spirit  of  God.  There  are 
those  who  conceive  that  a  feeling  suddenly  rises  in  the  Christian,  which  is  a  con- 
viction of  his  election,  and  that  this  is  the  witness  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Hence  men 
have  waited  for  it  with  anxiety.  Of  course  a  sudden  emotion  may  come,  but  to  rely 
on  any  emotion  is  to  rely  upon  our  own  spirit  bearing  witness  with  itself.  Man  is 
not  saved  by  feeling  that  he  is  saved.  Nor  has  he  the  witness  of  sonship  by  feeling 
that  he  is  a  son  of  God ;  but  by  the  Spirit  of  God  apprehending  and  quickening  his 
Boul.  2.  The  apostle  is  speaking  of  continued  evidence.  If  men  imagine  that 
certain  ecstatic  spiritual  emotions  are  proofs  of  the  witness  of  sonship,  the  witness 
is  fitful  and  transient ;  for  the  inner  life  is  as  full  of  changes  as  an  April  day,  and 
if  a  man  founds  hia  assurance  on  this,  he  will  to-day  believe  in  his  sonship,  and 


CBkt.  vm.]  ROMANS.  51 

to-morrow  utterly  doubt  it.  Paul,  in  the  former  part  of  this  chapter,  has  epoken  of 
being  freed  from  condemnation  ;  of  being  spiritually  minded ;  of  being  led  by  the 
Spirit ;  all  these  are  continued  facts  of  Christian  life,  therefore  the  witness  of  the 
Spirit  is  equally  continued.  3,  The  ground  on  which  Paul  bases  the  evidence  of 
sonship  is  that  of  a  Divine  Spirit,  greater  than  the  emotions  of  our  souls,  consciously 
acting  upon  us.  But  how  do  we  know  this  ?  When  we  feel  conscious  not  so  much 
of  possessing  a  life,  as  of  a  life  possessing  us.  (1)  This  distinction  holds  through 
all  the  higher  forms  of  human  liie.  The  man  who  proclaims  the  truth  he  holds  is 
never  the  highest  kind  of  preacher ;  he  who  speaks  because  the  truth  possesses  him 
leaves  an  impress  on  the  ages.  The  true  artist  is  not  the  man  who  depicts  his  own 
ideas,  but  he  who  is  filled  by  a  mighty  inspiration  which  compels  him  to  paint  the 
forms  of  beauty  which  he  sees  glowing  around  him.  (2)  Passing  to  the  moral  life, 
we  find  the  same  distinction.  He  who  does  right  because  he  may  give  pleasure, 
and  fears  to  do  wrong  because  it  is  painful,  is  never,  in  the  highest  sense,  a  moral 
man  at  all ;  but  he  only  is  such  who  does  right  because  filled  with  a  life  grander 
than  his  own.  (3)  So  in  spiritual  lite.  When  we  are  led  by  a  Spirit  of  life  greater 
than  our  own,  we  know  that  the  Divine  Spirit  is  acting  upon  us.  That  is  a  witness 
of  sonship  founded  on  the  rock  of  God's  eternal  truthfulness.  4.  The  manner  in 
which  this  evidence  rises  in  the  soul.  Observe  how  the  text  is  woven  into  the 
chapter.  Paul  speaks  of  the  action  of  God's  Spirit  as — (1)  Deliverance  from  the 
carnal  (ver.  13).  Here,  then,  is  the  witness — when  the  old  affections  are  being 
uprooted  and  a  deep  desire  is  created  after  perfect  purity.  (2)  The  spirit  of  prayer 
(ver.  26).  (3)  The  spirit  of  aspiration  (ver.  23).  The  feeling  that  here  there  is  no 
rest — the  whole  Ufe  becoming  one  prayer  for  more  Ught,  greater  power,  deeper  love  ; 
not,  mark,  the  cry  for  happiness,  but  the  cry — "  Nearer,  my  God,  to  Thee."  II.  Its 
NECESSITY.  1.  To  enable  us  to  enter  into  perfect  communion  with  God.  Till  we  can 
feel  His  power  possessing  us — till  we  can  see  His  smile  behind  every  sorrow,  we 
shall  fear  Him.  2.  To  realise  our  spiritual  inheritance.  You  know  the  feeling  of 
sadness  which  comes  when  gazing  at  night  into  immensity — the  thought  that  this 
short  life  will  soon  be  over,  and  we  shall  be  swept  away  and  forgotten.  Then  how 
grandly  comes  the  witness  to  our  sonship,  saying,  "  Thou  cast  down  ?  Look  up 
into  immensity,  it  is  all  thine,  fear  not,  thou  art  a  child  of  the  Infinite."  3.  In 
order  to  comprehend  the  glory  of  suffering.  Mark  the  connection  in  Paul's  words 
between  the  sufferings  of  this  life  and  the  glory  to  be  revealed  hereafter,  as  if  he 
had  said,  "  As  the  suffering  is  great,  so  also  shall  be  the  glory."  None  but  the  man 
who  has  the  "vntness  of  the  Spirit"  is  able  to  look  through  the  sorrow  to  the 
blessedness  hereafter.  III.  Its  attaikuemt.  In  order  to  acquire  this  witness,  carry 
into  action  every  spiritual  power  you  possess — translate  every  emotion  into  life. 
Remember  you  have  to  "  work  together  with  God."  Take  care  that  you  "grieve 
not  the  Holy  Spirit."  Feel  that  every  point  gained  in  spiritual  hfe  is  a  point 
to  be  maintained.  Take  care  that  when  you  are  brought  nearer  to  God  by 
suffering,  you  do  not  allow  yourself  to  fall  back ;  if  you  do,  the  light  of  the  Spuit 
will  fade.  "  If  then  ye  live  in  the  Spirit,  walk  in  the  Spirit."  (E.  L.  Hull,  B.A.) 
The  sons  of  God  : — I.  A  special  privilege.  "  We  are  the  children  of  God."  1. 
This  is  an  act  of  pure  grace.  No  man  has  any  right  to  be  a  son  of  God.  If  we  are 
born  into  His  family  it  is  a  miracle  of  mercy.  2.  This  is  a  great  dignity.  The 
archangels  are  the  most  favoured  of  God's  servants,  but  not  His  children.  Speak 
of  pedigrees,  thou,  poor  Christian,  hast  more  than  heraldry  could  ever  give  thee,  or 
all  the  pomp  of  ancestry  could  ever  bestow.  II.  A  special  proof — "  The  Spirit 
itself  beareth  witness,"  &o.  Notice  that  there  are  two  witnesses.  It  is  as  if 
a  poor  man  were  called  into  court  to  prove  his  right  to  some  piece  of  land 
which  was  disputed.  He  standeth  up  and  beareth  his  own  faithful  testi- 
mony; but  some  great  one  of  the  land  confirms  his  witness.  1.  Our  spirit 
bears  witness — (1)  When  it  feels  a  filial  love  to  God;  when  we  can  boldly  say, 
"  Abba,  Father."  If  I  were  not  a  child,  God  would  never  have  given  to  me  that 
affection  which  dares  to  call  Him  "  Father."  (2)  By  trust.  In  the  darkest  hour 
we  have  been  able  to  say,  "  The  time  is  in  my  Father's  hands ;  I  cannot  mur- 
mur ;  I  feel  it  is  but  right  that  I  should  suffer,  otherwise  my  Father  would  never 
have  made  me  suffer."  "  Though  Thou  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  Thee."  (3)  And 
are  there  not  times  when  your  hearts  feel  that  they  would  be  emptied  and  void 
unless  God  were  in  them?  You  feel  you  must  have  your  Father,  or  else  the 
gifts  of  His  providence  are  nothing  to  you.  That  is,  your  spirit  beareth  witness 
that  you  are  the  child  of  God.  2.  The  Holy  Ghost  graciously  condescendeth  to  say 
"  Amen  "  to  the  testimony  of  our  conscience.    And  whereas  our  experience  some- 


52  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

times  leads  our  spirit  to  conclude  that  we  are  bom  of  God,  there  are  times  when 
the  eternal  Spirit  descends  and  fills  our  heart,  and  then  we  have  the  two  witnesses 
bearing  witness  with  each  other  that  we  are  the  children  of  God.  Perhaps  you  ask 
me  how  is  this.  (1)  The  Holy  Spirit  has  written  this  Book,  which  contains  an 
account  of  what  a  Christian  should  be,  and  of  the  feelings  he  must  have.  I  have 
certain  experiences  and  feelings  ;  turning  to  the  Word,  I  find  similar  experiences 
and  feelings  recorded ;  and  so  I  prove  that  I  am  right,  and  the  Spirit  bears  witness 
with  my  spirit  that  I  am  born  of  God.  (2)  But,  again,  everything  that  is  good  in  a 
Christian  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  When  at  any  time,  then,  the  Holy  Spirit 
comforts  you,  instructs  you,  opens  to  you  a  mystery,  inspires  you  with  an  unwonted 
affection,  an  unusual  faith  in  Christ,  these  are  the  works  of  the  Spirit.  Now,  inas- 
much as  the  Spirit  works  in  you,  He  doth  by  that  very  working  give  His  own 
infallible  testimony  to  the  fact  that  you  are  a  child  of  God.  If  you  had  not  been  a 
child.  He  would  have  left  you  in  your  natural  state.  (3)  But  I  must  go  further. 
There  is  a  supernatural  way  in  which,  apart  from  means,  the  Spirit  of  God  com- 
municates with  the  spirit  of  man.  He  assures  and  consoles  directly,  by  coming 
into  immediate  contact  with  the  heart.  lU.  A  noble  dionitt.  1.  "Heirs  of  God" 
with  Christ.  (1)  It  does  not  always  follow  in  human  reasoning  "if  children,  then 
heirs,"  because  in  our  families  but  one  is  the  heir.  All  God's  children  are  heirs, 
however  numerous  the  family,  and  he  that  shall  be  born  of  God  last  shall  be  as 
much  His  heir  as  he  who  was  born  first.  (2)  And  see  what  it  is  that  we  are  heirs 
of  ;  not  of  God's  gifts  and  God's  works,  but  of  God  Himself,  It  was  said  of  Cyrus 
that  when  he  sat  down  at  meat,  if  there  were  augbt  that  pleased  his  appetite,  he 
would  order  it  to  be  given  to  his  friends  with  this  message, "King  Cyrus  found  that 
this  food  pleased  his  palate,  and  he  thought  his  friend  should  feed  upon  that  which 
he  enjoyed  himself."  This  was  thought  to  be  a  singular  instance  of  his  kindness 
to  his  courtiers.  But  our  God  doth  not  send  merely  bread  from  His  table ;  He  gives 
Himself — Himself  to  us.  Talk  we  of  His  omnipotence? — His  Almightiness  is  ours. 
Speak  we  of  His  omniscience  ? — all  His  wisdom  is  engaged  in  our  behalf.  Do  we 
say  that  He  is  love  ? — that  love  belongs  to  us.  2.  "  Joint  heirs  with  Christ."  That 
is,  whatever  Christ  possesses,  as  Heir  of  all  things,  belongs  to  us.  He  gives  us  His 
raiment,  and  His  righteousness  becomes  our  beauty.  He  gave  to  us  His  Person  ; 
we  eat  His  fiesh  and  drink  His  blood.  He  gives  us  His  inmost  heart.  His  crown. 
His  throne.  "  All  things  are  yours,"  &o.  We  must  never  quarrel  with  this  Divine 
arrangement.  "Oh,"  say  you,  "we  never  shall."  Stay;  for  when  all  that  is 
Christ's  belongs  to  you,  do  ye  forget  that  Christ  once  had  a  cross,  and  that  belongs 
to  you  ?  "  If  so  be  that  we  suffer  with  Him  that  we  also  may  be  glorified  together." 
IV.  The  SPECIAL  CONDOCT  naturally  expected  from  the  children  of  God.  In  the 
golden  age  of  Bome,  if  a  man  were  tempted  to  dishonesty,  he  would  stand  upright, 
look  the  tempter  in  the  face,  and  say  to  him,  "  I  am  a  Koman."  It  ought  to  be  a 
ten  times  more  than  sufficient  answer  to  every  temptation  for  a  man  to  be  able  to 
say,  "  I  am  a  son  of  God;  shall  such  a  man  as  I  yield  to  sin?  "  I  have  been 
astonished,  in  looking  through  old  Roman  history,  at  the  wonderful  prodigies  of 
integrity  and  valour  which  were  produced  by  patriotism  or  love  of  fame.  And  it  is 
a  shameful  thing  that  ever  idolatry  should  be  able  to  breed  better  men  than  some 
who  profess  Christianity.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Varieties  of  Christian  character: 
— This  witness  of  the  Spirit  varies — I.  In  the  same  iNDivrDUAij.  1.  "  There  have 
been  moments,"  says  some  weary  soul,  "  when  I  have  had  that  witness — in  some 
time  of  great  spiritual  struggle,  when  through  my  very  weakness  there  came  a 
strength  which  made  me  conquer  even  myself,  and  also  in  moments  of  great 
spiritual  exaltation ;  but  there  has  come  a  reaction  after  the  victory,  a  depression 
after  the  joy,  and  the  evidence  which  seemed  so  strong  has  worn  gradually  away. 
If  that  had  been  the  witness  of  God's  strong  uuchanging  Spirit,  surely  it  could  not 
have  been  so?  "  2.  Yes,  it  could  be,  and  is  so ;  for  God's  Spirit  bears  witness  with  our 
spirit.  It  is  just  as,  in  natural  things,  the  sun  in  heaven  bears  witness  with  our  human 
sight  to  the  existence  of  physical  objects ;  and  its  shining  is  constant  and  unchang- 
ing, but  the  evidence  of  it  varies  with  the  conditions  of  our  vision.  It  cannot  but 
be  so  when  there  is  so  intimate  a  connection  between  our  body  and  spirit,  and  the 
one  acts  on,  and  is  reacted  on,  by  the  other.  We  know  how  a  depressed  or  nervous 
physical  condition  will  tinge  our  feelings,  will  make  us  take  a  widely  different  view 
of  things  from  that  which  we  had  taken  before.  Who  is  there  who  has  not 
experienced  the  difference  of  a  bright  spring  morning  and  a  dull  November  day  ? 
Our  spiritual  nature  has  its  noontide,  when  we  work  in  the  light  and  rejoice  in  the 
brightness  of  Gud's  love ;  and  it  will  have  its  night,  when  we  can  only  see  the  Ught, 


OHAP.  Tin.]  ROMANS,  6$ 

as  it  were,  coming  from  some  passionless  moon,  or  from  the  cold  steel  stars  in  some 
far-off  heaven.  8.  Those  moments  of  dulness  and  of  coldness  in  oar  religious  life 
are  times  of  peril.  There  is  a  danger  of  despair,  and  the  remedy  is  a  more  perfect 
trust  in  God.  There  is  danger  of  turning  to  spiritual  stimulants.  Never  try  by 
physical  means,  or  so-called  religious  exercises,  to  galvanise  yourself  into  feeling 
what  you  know  you  do  not  feel.  The  true  remedy  is  to  strengthen  and  improve 
generally  your  spiritual  nature,  instead  of  nervously  looking  for  artificial  tests  of 
its  vitality.  More  earnest  communing  with  God ;  more  thoughts  of  Him  and  Hia 
great  love,  and  less  of  ourselves  and  of  our  feelings ;  more  study  of  the  deep  mean- 
ing of  His  Word ;  more  seeking  to  do  His  will ;  more  use  of  the  means  of  grace  will 
be  helps  to  us  in  such  moments.  The  keen  appetite  and  the  clear  vision  will  return 
with  the  increasing  health  of  the  spiritual  man  in  us,  and  again  and  again  those 
glad  moments  will  be  ours,  when  we  feel  the  Spirit  bearing  "  witness  with  our  spirit 
that  we  are  the  sons  of  God."  II.  In  DiFrERENT  individuals.  1.  The  witness  of 
the  Spirit  must  vary,  as  do  our  individual  natures.  The  boat  in  the  harbour  ia 
none  less  safe  because  it  has  not  come  across  the  storm-swept  sea,  but  only  down 
some  inland  river  with  no  grand  convulsions,  but  still  with  strange,  commonplace, 
yet  fascinating  dangers  of  its  own.  It  is  a  perilous  and  a  very  wrong  thing  to  set 
up  some  one,  sole,  exclusive,  monotonous  standard  of  spiritual  evidence  and  of 
spiritual  life.    There  is  no  rigid  rule  of  uniformity  in  God's  treatment  of  souls. 

2.  The  risen  Lord  came  under  great  variety  of  circumstances,  and  with  every  differ- 
ing kind  of  evidence  of  His  presence,  to  each  and  all  of  His  disciples.  First,  He 
came  to  the  loving  hearts  of  women,  whose  words  seemed  only  "  idle  tales  "  to  the 
apostles  themselves ;  and  then  with  logical  demonstration  to  the  cold  reasoning 
intellect  of  St.  Thomas  ;  now  to  individaal  disciples  walking  on  the  common  high- 
way, and  who  only  saw  Him  when  He  broke  and  blessed  the  bread,  and  it  revealed 
to  them  why  their  hearts  had  so  burned  within  them  on  the  way ;  and  then  to  the 
assembled  Church  with  words  of  benediction  and  of  peace.  And  thus  still  He  and 
His  Holy  Spirit's  witness  come — now  to  some  tender  soul  who  cannot  reason,  but 
can  only  love,  with  simply  an  angel's  message,  which  not  only  the  world,  but  the 
Church,  may  for  a  moment  think  but  an  "  idle  tale  "  ;  and  again  to  some  consum- 
mate, lordly  intellect,  which  is  at  last  convinced  by  touching  the  nail-print  and  the 
riven  side.  Now  He  comes  to  solitary  individuals  on  the  dusty  highway  of  life,  who 
know  not  whence  sprang  every  earnest  pulsation  of  their  burning  hearts,  till  some 
day,  perhaps  in  the  breaking  of  the  Eucharistic  bread,  they  see  at  last  that  it  must 
have  been  He  that  was  with  them ;  and,  again.  He  is  present  to  the  assembled 
Church  when  in  some  hour  of  danger  it  has  shut  the  door,  and  then  found  that  He 
is  with  them  in  the  midst.  3.  Do  not  think  that  you  are  not  near  to  Christ,  that 
He  does  not  love  you,  because  you  have  not  had  some  one  else's  experience,  because 
you  are  not  like  some  saint  whose  biography  you  admire.  There  has  been  a  terrible 
tendency  to  magnify,  in  every  age,  some  one  sole  idea  of  Christian  usefulness  and 
beauty.  At  one  time  it  has  been  solely  the  apcetic,  and  again  solely  the  active  life. 
At  one  time  it  has  been  the  purely  contemplative,  and  again  the  exclusively  intel- 
lectual. This  has  done  much  to  rob  many  a  sweet  life  of  its  hopefulness ;  to  create 
in  others  an  almost  unconscious  hypocrisy.  Surely  the  Master's  life  is  a  protest 
against  it:  "  Jesus  loved  Martha,  and  her  sister,  and  Lazarus" — all  utterly  different 
and  unhke  natures.  We  are  too  ready  to  unduly  exalt  Mary  at  the  expense  of  her 
sister  and  her  brother.  Many  a  Lazarus  and  many  a  Martha  are  full  of  sorrow  and 
even  despair  because  they  are  not  like  Mary.  (T.  T,  Shore,  M.A.)  Christian 
assurance  IB — I.  The  basis  of  the  Chbistian  life.  Inasmuch  as — 1.  By  it  we  have 
the  first  testimony  of  our  filial  relation  to  God.  2.  It  notifies  to  us  all  the  benefits 
of  the  New  Testament.  3.  By  it  all  that  is  involved  in  Christianity  is  made  living 
and  real  to  us.  II.  The  sustaining  power  of  the  Christian  life.  1.  As  the 
inward  spiritual  testimony  is  our  encouragement  against  defection.  2.  As  it  is  an 
effective  solace  in  the  hour  of  trial.  3.  As  it  is  the  communion  of  that  Spirit  who 
is  the  strength  of  righteousness.  4.  As  it  renders  us  non-susceptible  in  the  hour  of 
temptation.  HI.  The  pledge  of  the  future  blessedness  of  the  Christian  life. 
1.  The  fact  of  such  a  relation  subsisting  between  God  and  the  soul  gives  the  highest 
warrant  of  eternal  life.  "If  children,  then  heirs,"  &c.  2.  The  character  of  this 
assurance  as  the  work  of  the  Divine  Spirit  is  a  testimony  to  its  possible  perpetuity. 

3.  In  this  assurance  is  involved  the  idea  of  a  pledge — "the  earnest  of  the  Spirit  " 
(ver.  11).  Learn  :  1.  To  cherish  this  assurance,  especially  by  cultivating  an 
obedient  sensibility  to  the  Holy  Spirit's  suggestions.  2.  To  guard  against  anything 
that  would  grieve  or  quench  the  Holy  Spirit.     {Eomiletic  Quarterly.) 


54  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vnfc 

Yer  17.  And  If  children,  then  heirs ;  heirs  of  God,  and  Jotnt-helrs  with  Christ. — 

Sonship :  certainty  and  uncertainty  about : — It  is  not  easy  to  imagiue  a  more 
cautious,  lawyer-lie  record  than  that  of  Lord  Eldon's,  '*  I  was  born,  I  believe,  on 
the  4th  of  June,  1751."  We  may  suppose  that  this  hesitating  statement  refers  to 
the  date,  and  not  to  the  fact  of  his  birth.  Many,  however,  are  just  as  uncertain 
about  their  spiritual  birth.  It  is  a  grand  thing  to  be  able  to  say,  "  We  have  passed 
from  death  unto  life,"  even  though  we  may  not  be  able  to  post  a  date  to  it.  (C.  U. 
Spurgeon.)  Sons  and  heirs : — God  Himself  is  His  greatest  gift.  The  loftiest 
blessing  which  we  can  receive  is  that  we  should  be  heirs,  possessors  of  Qod.  The 
text  teUs  us — I.  No  inheritance  withodx  sonship.  1.  The  lower  creatures  are 
shut  out  from  the  gifts  which  belong  to  the  higher  forms  of  life,  because  these 
cannot  find  entrance  into  their  nature.  Man  has  higher  gifts  because  he  has 
higher  capacities.  In  man  there  are  more  windows  and  doors  knocked  out.  He 
can  think,  and  feel,  and  desire,  and  wiU,  and  resolve ;  and  so  he  stands  on  a 
higher  level.  2.  And  so  Spiritual  blessings  require  a  spiritual  capacity  for  the 
reception  of  tbem  ;  you  cannot  have  the  inheritance  unless  you  are  sons.  Salvation 
is  not  chiefly  a  deliverance  from  outward  consequences,  but  a  renewal  of  the  nature 
that  makes  these  consequences  certain.  3.  But  the  inheritance  is  also  future,  and 
the  same  principle  applies  there.  There  is  no  heaven  without  sonship ;  because 
aU  its  blessings  are  spiritual.  It  is  not  the  golden  harps,  &c.  that  makes  the 
heaven  of  heaven ;  but  the  possession  of  God.  To  dwell  m  His  love,  and  to  be 
filled  with  His  light,  and  to  walk  for  ever  in  the  glory  uf  His  sunlit  face,  to  do  His 
will,  and  to  bear  His  character  stamped  upon  our  foreheads — that  is  the  glory  and 
the  perfectness  to  which  we  are  aspiring.  Do  not  then  rest  in  the  symbols  that 
show  us,  darkly  and  far-off,  what  that  future  glory  is.  4.  WeU  then,  if  all  that  be 
true,  what  a  flood  of  light  does  it  cast  upon  the  text  I  For  who  can  possess  God 
but  they  who  love  Him  ?  who  can  love  but  they  who  know  His  love  ?  How  can 
there  be  fellowship  betwixt  Him  and  any  one  except  the  man  who  is  a  son  because 
he  hath  received  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  in  whom  that  Divine  nature  is  growing 
up  into  a  Divine  likeness  ?  II.  No  sonship  without  a  bpibitdal  birth.  1.  The 
Apostle  John,  in  that  most  wonderful  preface  to  his  Gospel,  teaches  that  sonship  is 
not  a  relation  into  which  we  are  born  by  natural  birth,  that  we  become  sons  after 
we  are  men,  and  that  we  become  sons  by  a  Divine  act,  the  communication  of  a 
spiritual  life,  whereby  we  are  born  of  God.  The  same  apostle,  in  his  Epistles, 
contrasts  the  sons  of  God  who  are  known  for  such  because  they  do  righteousness, 
and  the  world  which  knew  not  Christ,  and  says,  "  In  this  the  children  of  God  are 
manifested  and  the  children  of  the  devil" — echoing  thus  Christ's  words,  "  If  God 
were  your  Father,  ye  would  love  Me  :  ye  are  of  your  father,  the  devil."  2.  Nothing 
in  all  this  contradicts  the  belief  that  all  men  are  the  children  of  God  inasmuch  as 
they  are  shaped  by  His  Divine  hand,  and  He  has  breathed  into  their  nostrils  the 
breath  of  life.  But,  notwithstanding,  it  still  remains  true  that  there  are  men  created 
by  God,  loved  and  cared  for  by  Him,  for  whom  Christ  died,  who  might  be,  but  are 
not,  sons  of  God.  3.  Fatherhood  1  what  does  that  word  itself  teach  us  ?  It 
involves  that  the  Father  and  the  child  shall  have  kindred  Ufe,  and  that  between 
the  Father's  heart  and  the  child's  heart  there  shall  pass  answering  love,  flashing 
backwards  and  forwards,  Hke  the  Ughtning  that  touches  the  earth  and  rises  from  it 
again.  A  simple  appeal  to  your  own  consciousness  will  decide  if  that  be  the 
condition  of  all  men.  No  sonship  except  by  spiritual  birth ;  and  if  not  such 
sonship,  then  the  spirit  of  bondage.  You  are  sons  because  born  again,  or  slaves  and 
"enemies  by  wicked  works."  III.  No  spiritual  birth  without  Christ.  If  for 
sonship  there  must  be  a  birth,  the  very  symbol  shows  that  such  a  process  does  not 
lie  within  our  own  power.  The  centre  point  of  the  gospel  is  this  regeneration. 
If  we  understand  that  the  gospel  simply  comes  to  make  men  live  better,  to  work 
out  a  moral  reformation — why,  there  is  no  need  for  a  gospel  at  all.  If  the  change 
were  a  simple  change  of  habit  and  action  on  the  part  of  men,  we  could  do  without 
a  Christ.  But  if  redemption  be  the  giving  of  life  from  God,  and  the  change  of 
position  in  reference  to  God's  love  and  God's  law,  neither  of  these  two  changes  can 
a  man  effect  for  himself.  No  new  birth  without  Christ ;  no  escape  from  the  old 
standing-place,  "  enemies  to  God  by  wicked  works,"  by  anything  that  we  can  do. 
But  Christ  has  effected  an  actual  change  in  the  aspect  of  the  Divine  government  to 
us ;  and  He  has  carried  in  the  golden  urn  of  His  humanity  a  new  spirit  and  a  new 
life  which  He  has  set  down  in  the  midst  of  the  race  ;  and  the  urn  was  broken  on 
the  Cross  of  Calvary,  and  the  water  flowed  out,  and  whithersoever  that  water 
comes  there  is  life,  and  whithersoever  it  comes   not  there  id  death !    lY.  No 


CHAP,  vra,]  ROMANS.  65 

Christ  without  r.aTH.  Unless  we  are  wedded  to  Jesus  Christ  by  the  simple 
act  of  trust  in  His  mercy  and  His  power,  Christ  is  nothing  to  us.  We  may  talk 
about  Christ  for  ever.  He  may  be  to  as  much  that  is  very  precious ;  but 
the  question  of  questions,  on  which  everything  else  depends,  is,  Am  I  trusting  to 
Him  as  my  Divine  Redeemer  ?  am  I  resting  in  Him  as  the  Son  of  God  ?  Cere- 
monies, notions,  beliefs,  formal  participation  in  worship  is  nothing.  Christ  is 
everything  to  him  that  trusts  Him.  Christ  is  nothing  but  a  judge  and  a  condemna- 
tion to  him  that  trusts  Him  not.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Heirs  of  God  : — We  begin 
in  order  with  the  privilege  itself,  wnich  belongs  to  God's  children  by  virtue  of  their 
adoption :  "And  if  children,  then  heirs. "  That  all  God's  children  are  heirs.  Whoso- 
ever do  partake  of  the  relation,  they  do  partake  of  the  inheritance.  This  is  suitable 
and  agreeable  to  some  other  places  of  Scripture  (Gal.  iii.  28,  29,  iv.  7  ;  Tit.  iii.  7). 
Now  there  is  a  various  account  which  may  be  given  hereof  unto  us,  which  we  may 
take  in  these  following  particulars.  First,  their  Father's  affection  and  special  love 
which  He  bears  unto  them.  Afifection  has  a  very  great  influence  oftentimes  upon 
an  inheritance.  There  is  affection  and  there  is  the  constancy  and  immutability  of 
it.  Secondly,  as  there  is  their  Father's  affection,  so  there  is  likewise  thi  ir  Father's 
promise  ;  as  we  know  how  Bathsheba  urged  it  to  David  in  the  case  of  Solomon, 
against  Adonijah  (1  Kings  i.  17).  Thirdly,  their  very  relation  and  condition  wherein 
they  are  it  gives  them  right  and  title  hereto.  Fourthly,  the  largeness  and  vastness 
of  the  estate,  that  is  another  advancement  hereunto.  All  God's  children  are  heirs, 
because  there  is  means  enough  for  them  all.  But  here  it  may  be  seasonably 
demanded.  What  is  it  that  God's  children  do  inherit,  and  are  heirs  unto  ?  First,  for 
the  things  of  this  life.  They  are  heirs  of  them,  and  have  a  special  right  and  title 
to  them.  "  All  things  are  yours,"  says  the  apostle,  and  amongst  the  rest  he  reckons 
the  world  (1  Cor.  iii.  21,  22).  It  is  true  that  these  things  are  not  their  portion. 
But  yet  they  are  oftentimes  their  possession.  God's  children  they  have  an  interest 
and  a  propriety  even  in  temporal  blessings ;  and  such  as  none  other  else  have 
besides  themselves,  for  they  have  a  sanctified  right  in  them.  No  good  thing 
will  God  withhold  from  them  that  walk  uprightly.  Secondly,  they  are  heirs 
more  especially  of  the  things  of  a  better ;  and  they  are  reducible  to  two 
heads,  as  the  Scripture  itself  reduces  them.  Grace  and  glory  (Psa.  Ixxxiv.  11) — 
the  one  considered  as  the  means,  and  the  other  considered  as  the  end.  God's 
children  they  are  heirs  of  them  both.  First,  for  grace  and  holiness.  This  is  not  a 
small  kind  of  portion  which  God's  children  have  an  interest  in.  "  Heirs  of  the 
grace  of  Ufe  "  (1  Pet.  iii.  7).  All  the  graces  of  the  Spirit,  they  belong  to  the  children 
of  God,  and  they  are  heirs,  as  it  were,  of  them.  Secondly,  which  is  here  principally 
to  be  understood  :  they  are  heirs  of  glory,  and  so  frequently  denominated.  "  Heirs 
of  salvation  "  (Heb.  i.  14) ;  "  heirs  of  the  kingdom  "  (James  ii.  5) ;  "  heirs  of  eternal 
life"  (Tit.  iii.  7  ;  Col.  1.  12).  This  we  have  assured  unto  us  by  the  firstfruits  of  the 
Spirit  within  us.  We  may  see  what  we  are  likely  to  have  hereafter  by  what 
already  we  partake  of  here,  in  the  beginnings  of  heaven  to  us.  In  what  proportion 
this  inheritance  of  the  saints  is  dispensed  and  distributed  unto  them.  Because  it  is 
said  here  that  they  all  have  a  share  in  this  business.  That  though  all  God's 
children  are  heirs  of  eternal  happiness  and  glory,  yet  they  are  not  aU  of  them  in 
the  same  degree  partakers  of  it.  As  a  father  may  give  portions  to  all  his  children, 
but  one  may  have  a  greater  portion  than  the  rest.  It  is  said  of  Elkanah,  in  his 
carriage  to  Hannah,  that  he  gave  her  a  worthy  portion,  or,  as  some  read  it,  a  double 
portion.  And  Benjamin's  lot  from  Joseph  it  was  five  times  as  much  as  of  the  rest 
ef  his  brethren.  Thus  is  it  likewise  in  God's  dispensations.  He  gives  a  portion  to 
all  His  children,  but  He  gives  not  the  same  portion  to  them  all.  Though  the  same 
for  kind  and  specification,  yet  not  the  same  for  degrees  and  intention.  All  the 
saints  shall  come  to  heaven,  but  some  may  go  further  in  than  the  rest.  Therefore 
this  should  stir  us  all  up  to  an  endeavour  after  the  greatest  measure  that  may  be. 
And  now  for  the  life  and  application  of  the  whole  doctrine  itself  to  our  selves.  We 
may  draw  it  forth  in  athreefold  improvement  especially.  First :  Here  is  that  which 
may  satisfy  God's  children  which  are  in  a  mean  and  low  condition  here  in  the 
world,  as  it  is  possible  for  them  to  be,  and  as  sometimes  they  are.  Though  they 
may  be  destitute  of  many  things  here,  yet  they  are  heirs  of  heaven.  Secondly,  it 
further  teaches  God's  children  to  live  answerably  to  this  noble  condition,  and  the 
inheritance  which  they  are  appointed  unto.  First,  in  a  holy  magnanimity  and 
nobleness  of  spirit.  Secondly,  in  making  good  their  titles,  and  clearing  their 
evidences  for  heaven.  Those  who  are  great  heirs  they  are  careful  to  make  good 
theii  inheritances,  and  to  prove  their  right  and  interest  in  them.    Thhrdly,  in  more 


56  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vni. 

cheerful  serrice  and  obedience  to  God's  commands.    We  should  henceforth  serve 
Him  not  as  bare  hirelings,  but  as  those  who  are  sons  and  heirs.     Fourthly,  take 
heed  of  losing  it  and  parting  with  it  upon  any  terms  whatsoever.    Take  heed  of 
Esau,  that  parted  with  his  birthright.    Lastly,  seeing  God's  children  are  heirs, 
and  are  heirs  of  glory,   we  see  then  from  hence   the   vanity  of  those  persons 
who   would  make  salvation  to  be  a  matter  of  merit.     The  second  is  the  ex- 
plication or  amplification  of  this  privilege  to  them,  and  that  consists  of  two  branches. 
The  first  is  taken  from  the  person  that  they  are  heirs  of:  "heirs  of  God." 
And  the  second  is  taken  from  the  person  that  they  are  heirs  with :  "  joint  heirs  with 
Christ."     We  begin  with  the  first  of  these  branches,  viz.,  the  person  that  they  are : 
"  Heirs  of  God."    This  is  added  here  by  the  Apostle  Paul  both  by  way  of  explication 
and  of  enlargement.    When  we  hear  that  God's  children  are  heirs  we  might  be 
ready,  it  may  be,  presently  to  dream  of  some  earthly  inheritance.     They  are  heirs 
of   God,   as  the  giver  of  the  inheritance ;   and  they  are  heirs  of    God,  as  the 
inheritance  itself  which  is  given  unto  them.    First,  they  are  so  relative.    Heirs  of 
God,  as  related  to  Him  for  such  a  purpose  as  this  is.     It  is  He  that  does  entitle  them 
to  all  the  things.     They  are  heirs  of  God,  they  have  a  worthy  and  an  honourable 
inheritance.     There  is  some  credit  in  being  heir  unto  Him.     Secondly,  in  point  of 
profit,  heirs  of  God.    Heirs  of  God ;  therefore  not  only  honourable,  but  rich.    They 
must  needs  be  great  heirs,  because  He  is  great  Himself  and  has  great  revenues 
(1  Cor.  X.  26).     Thirdly,  in  point  of  conveniency  and  accommodation.     There  is 
a  great  matter  in  point  of  inheritance.     The  manner  of  ordering  and  disposing  of 
it  to  the  best  advantage  of  him  that  shall  heir  it,  and  as  to  the  circumstances 
wherewith  he  does  enjoy  it.     Secondly,  heirs  of  God.     They  are  such  as  do  inherit 
God  Himself.     He  that  is  their  Father  is  also  their  portion.    And  He  which  gives 
them  the  inheritance  is  the  inheritance  itself  which  He  gives  them.     Sometimes  the 
Lord  is  pleased  to  account  His  people  to  be  His  inheritance.     "  The  Lord's  portion 
is  His  people  ;  Jacob  is  the  lot  of  His  inheritance  "  (Deut.  xxxii.  9).    And  sometimes 
again  He  is  pleased  to  declare  Himself  to  be  theirs  (Fsa.  Ixxiii.  25,  26 ;  Lam.  iii. 
24  ;  Psa.  xvi.  5  ;  Gen.  xvi.  ;  xvii.  1).    Now  for  the  opening  of  this  point  unto  us,  that 
we  may  know  what  this  business  is  of  inheriting  God  Himself.    The  meaning  of  it 
is  this — to  have  full  interest  in  all  His  attributes.     His  wisdom  is  theirs,  to  direct 
them.    His  power  is  theirs,  to  preserve  them.     His  goodness  is  theirs,  to  relieve 
them.     His  justice  is  theirs,  to  avenge  them.    His  faithfulness  is  theirs,  to  support 
them.     Every  good  is  so  much  the  more  excellent,  and  the  rather  to  be  prized  by 
ns,  as  it  is  anything  more  large  and  comprehensive,  and  is  containing  of  other 
things  in  it.    Why  thus  it  is  now  to  be  an  heir  of  God.     We  have  in  Him  every- 
thing else.     All  the  beams  of  comfort  in  the  creature  they  are  derived  from  this 
Sun.    And  so  again,  in  the  want  of  other  things,  he  may  very  much  comfort 
himself  in  this.     Alas,  what  are  the  stars  to  the  sun  ?    And  what  are  the  streams 
to  the  fountain  ?    The  second  is  taken  from  the  person  whom  they  are  heiis  with — 
"  Joint  heirs  with  Christ."    Believers,  they  do  partaie  of  the  same  inheritance  with 
the  Son  of  God  Himself.     First,  here  is  this  implied,  that  Christ  Himself  is  an  heir, 
and  an  heir  of  God.     Thus  Heb.  i.  2  He  is  called  "  the  heir  of  all  things."    Again, 
besides,  as  He  is  an  heir  by  nature,  so  He  is  also  an  heir  by  donation.     Therefore 
He  is  said  in  the  place  before  alleged  to  be  appointed  heir.     The  Father  hath 
given    all    things    to    Christ    (Matt.    xi.    27).      Thus  is  Christ  an  heir  by  gift 
Therefore  we  see  what  great  cause  we  have  to  please  Him,   and  to  endeavour 
to    be    in   favour  with   Him.    We   see  how  it  is  amongst  men.     How  careful 
they    are    to   give   contentment   to    an    heir    if   it    be    but    of    some   ordinary 
inheritance.     The    second   is    that  which  is  expressed,  that  as  Christ  Himself 
is  an  heir,   so  God's  children  are  heirs  also  with  Him  (Gal.  iv.  7 ;  Matt.    xix. 
28).     This   must   needs   be   so.    First,  in  regard   of   that   union  which   is  knit 
betwixt  Christ  and  His  Church.    God's  children,   they  are  members  of  Christ, 
therefore  they  must  be  heirs  with  Him  (1  Cor.  3,  22).     Secondly,  this  is  grounded 
in  His  promise  which  He  hath  made  to  us.     Thirdly,  His  prayer  for  us  (John 
xvii.   20-24).    Fourthly,  His   office   towards  us   as   He   is   the   Mediator  of  the 
Church.    Therefore  all  things  which  come  to  us  they  must  come  to  us  through  His 
hands.    Now  the  life  of  all  to  ourselves  comes  to  this.    First,  we  see  here  how 
nearly  it  concerns  us  to  find  ourselves  to  be  ingrafted  into  Christ  and  to  become 
members  of  Him.     Secondly,  we  may  from  hence  see  the  certainty  and  infalli- 
bility of  a  Christian's  salvation.     We  are  joint-heirs  with  Christ.     Therefore  He 
being  glorified,  we  shall  be  glorified  also.     Thirdly,  we  should  hence  learn  to  love 
Christ,  ftnd  to  give  Him  the  glory  of  all.    Considering  that  all  we  have  it  is  from 


CHAP.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  67 

Him,  and  by  Him.  If  we  are  elected,  we  are  elected  in  Christ.  If  we  are  justified, 
we  are  jastiti>  d  for  Christ.  If  we  are  sanctified  we  are  sanctified  through  Christ. 
If  we  are  glorified  we  are  glorified  with  Christ.  Christ  is  all  in  all  unto  us. 
{Thomas  Eorion,  D.D.)        Heirs  of  God: — I.  The  pbtvilegeb  of  God's  childben. 

1.  Heirs  of  Qod.  2.  Joint  heirs  with  Christ.  3.  Glorified  together.  II.  Thb 
connection  between  the  pbivileoe  and  the  belation.     1.    None  but  children. 

2.  All  children  participate.  III.  The  condition  of  final  glort.  1.  If  so  be  we 
suffer.  2.  With  Christ.  3.  For  Him.  4.  Like  Him.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Heirs  oj 
Qod : — I.  The  qeound  of  heirship.  1.  It  does  not  follow  from  ordinary  creation. 
It  is  not  "  if  creatures,  then  heirs."  2.  Neither  is  it  found  in  natural  descent.  It 
is  not  "  if  children  of  Abraham  then  heirs  "  (chap.  ix.  7-13).  3.  Nor  can  it  come  by 
meritorious  service.  It  is  not  "  if  servants,  then  heirs"  (Gal.  iv.  30).  4.  Nor  by 
ceremonial  observances.  It  is  not  "if  circumcised  or  baptized,  then  heirs" 
(chap.  iv.  9-12).  5.  Our  being  born  again  of  God  by  His  Spirit  is  the  one  ground 
of  heirship.  Let  us  inquire—  (1)  Have  we  been  born  again  (John  iii.  3)  ?  (2)  Have 
we  the  spirit  of  adoption  (Gal.  iv.  6)  ?  (3)  Are  we  fashioned  in  the  likeness  of 
God  (Col.  iii.  10)  ?  (4)  Have  we  believed  on  Jesus  (John  i.  12)  ?  II.  Thb 
untveksalitt  of  the  heirship.  "  Children,  then  heirs."  1.  The  principle  of 
priority  as  to  time  cannot  enter  into  this  question.  The  elder  and  the  younger  in 
the  Divine  family  are  equally  heirs.     2.  The  love  of  God  is  the  same  to  them  all. 

3.  They  are  all  blessed  under  the  same  promise  (Heb.  vi.  17).  4.  They  are  all 
equally  related  to  that  great  First-bom  Sou  through  whom  their  heirship  comes  to 
them.  He  is  the  first-born  among  many  brethren.  5.  The  inheritance  is  large 
enough  for  them  all.  They  are  not  all  prophets,  preachers,  apostles,  or  even  well- 
instructed  and  eminent  saints ;  they  are  not  all  rich  and  infiuential  ;  they  are  not 
all  strong  and  useful ;  but  they  are  aU  heirs.  Let  us,  then,  all  Uve  as  such,  and 
rejoice  in  our  portion.  HI.  The  inheritance  which  is  the  subject  of  heirship. 
"  Heirs  of  God."  1.  Our  inheritance  is  Divinely  great.  We  are — Heirs  of — (1)  All 
things  (Rev.  xxi.  7;  2  Cor.  iii.  21).  (2)  Salvation  (Heb.  i.  14).  (3)  Eternal  life 
(Tit.  iii.  7).  (4)  Promise  (Heb,  vi.  17).  (5)  The  grace  of  life  (1  Pet.  iii.  7). 
(6)  Eighteonsness  (Heb.  xi.  7).  (7)  The  kingdom  (James  ii.  5).  2.  Whereas  we 
are  said  to  be  "  heirs  of  God,"  it  must  mean  that  we  are  heirs  of — (1)  AU  that  God 
possesses.  (2)  All  that  God  is.  Of  His  love  ;  for  God  is  love.  Hence  heirs  of  all 
possible  good ;  for  God  is  good.  (3)  God  Himself.  What  an  infinite  portion  1 
(4)  All  that  Jesus  has  and  is,  as  God  and  man.  IV.  The  partnership  of  the 
claimants  to  heirship.  "  And  joint  heirs  with  Christ."  1.  This  is  the  test  of  our 
heirship.  We  are  not  heirs  except  with  Christ,  through  Christ,  and  in  Christ. 
2.  This  sweetens  it  all.  Fellowship  with  Jesus  is  our  best  portion.  3.  This  showfl 
the  greatness  of  the  inheritance.  Worthy  of  Jesus.  Such  an  inheritance  as  the 
Father  gives  to  the  well-beloved.  4.  This  ensures  it  to  us ;  for  Jesus  will  not  lose 
it,  and  His  title-deed  and  ours  are  one  and  indivisible.  5.  This  reveals  and  endears 
His  love.  That  He  should  become  a  partner  with  us  in  all  things  is  love 
unbounded.  (1)  His  taking  as  into  union  with  Himself  secures  our  inheritance. 
12)  His  prayer  for  us  attains  it.  (3)  His  going  into  heaven  before  us  prepares  it 
(4)  His  coming  again  will  bring  us  the  full  enjoyment  of  it.  6.  This  joint  heirship 
binds  as  faster  to  Jesus,  since  we  are  nothing,  and  have  nothing  apart  from  Him. 
Conclusion — 1.  Let  us  joyfully  accept  the  present  suffering  with  Christ,  for  it  ia 
part  of  the  heritage.  2.  Let  us  believe  in  the  ultimate  glorification  and  anticipate 
it  with  joy.  (C.  H.  Sjpurgeon.)  Heirs  of  God : — I.  Then  the  Christian  is 
ooma  TO  A  RICH  home  and  a  glorious  future.  Therefore,  he  ought  not  to  be  too 
much  elated  or  depressed  by  the  pleasures  or  privations  of  the  journey.  An  eye  to 
the  rest  and  glory  at  the  end  should  keep  him  from  getting  weary  of  the  way. 
II.  Then  the  Christian  shoih^d  not  debase  himself  by  an  undue  attachment  to 
the  things  of  time.  How  unreasonable  to  see  an  "  heir  of  God  "  so  swallowed  up 
in  the  world  that  he  has  neither  taste  nor  time  to  pray,  or  make  suitable  efforts  to 
get  ready  for  His  Heavenly  inheritance.    IIL  Then  no  man  should  speak  of  having 

MADB  BACBIFICES  IN  BECOMING  A  CHRISTIAN.       IV.    ThEN  AN  BEIB  OF   GoD   SHOULD   BE 

HADE  "  MEET  FOB  HIS  INHEBITANCE."  Without  a  mcetuess  for  it,  the  inheritance 
would  be  a  burden  rather  than  a  blessing.  V.  Then,  in  secubino  this  meetness, 
IHE  Chbistian  may  CONFIDENTLY  EXPECT  DiviNE  AID.  (T.  Kelly).  Heirs  of  God : 
— I.  The  pbitilbgb  of  God's  childben.  1.  As  the  law  of  natore  and  the  institu- 
tioiiB  of  society  authorise  children  to  expect  the  possession  of  property  which  once 
belonged  to  their  parents,  so  God  has  pledged  Himself  that  He  will  act  the  part  of 
ft  Father.    2.^Looked  at  with  the  eye  of  sense,  the  inheritance  of  God's  children  on 


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  yin. 

this  world  is  not  much  to  be  enTied ;  bat,  iD  reality,  whatever  be  their  outward  lot, 
they  are  all  the  while  richer  than  the  richest,  and  greater  than  the  greatest. 
3.  They  may  be  said  to  be  heirs  of  God  even  at  present,  inasmuch  as  they  are 
entitled,  by  virtue  of  His  covenant,  to  as  much  of  what  God  is,  and  has,  as  shall 
be  requisite  for  their  welfare.  4.  Of  the  future  inheritance  we  have  various 
accounts.  It  is — (1)  "  An  inheritance  among  them  that  are  sanctified."  Heaven 
will  confer  on  those  who  are  admitted  into  it,  a  much  higher  degree  of  holiness  than 
they  before  attained.  (2)  "  An  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  li^ht."  In  heaven  we 
shall  receive  a  great  addition  to  our  knowledge.  (3)  "  An  inheritance,  incorruptible, 
undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away."  The  circumstances  of  earthly  parents  may 
be  suddenly  reversed,  and  their  children  therefore  deprived  of  the  inheritance. 
But  the  children  of  God  have  nothing  to  apprehend  from  reverses.  All  those  ideas 
are  epitomised  in  the  text.  God  shall  be,  in  heaven,  fully  and  perfectly  His 
people's  portion.  More  than  this  God  cannot  promise  or  give.  5.  Further 
particulars  are  included  in  the  phrase,  "  joint-heirs  with  Christ,"  and  "  glorified 
together,"  viz : — (1)  That  we  are  altogether  indebted  to  God's  mercy  in  Christ,  for 
our  title  to  the  inheritance.  Heaven  is  a  purchased  possession  ;  not  by  penitence 
or  faith,  holiness  or  usefulness,  suffering  or  dying,  but  by  the  precious  blood  of 
Christ.  (2)  That  the  title  of  true  believers  is  in  the  highest  degree  valid  and 
satisfactory.  Christ's  title  is  unquestionable ;  what  He  hath  amply  merited  He 
hath  a  right  to  bestow;  and  He  wills  to  bestow  it  upon  all  believers.  There  are, 
indeed,  differences  between  Christ's  title  and  ours.  His  is  original,  earned  by 
Himself ;  ours  is  borrowed.  His  is  one  actually  recognised.  He  is  in  possession 
of  the  inheritance  ;  whereas  we  are  but  on  our  way  to  it.  But  He  has  gone  as  our 
forerunner  to  take  possession  for  as.  (3)  That  there  shall  be  a  blessed  similarity 
in  point  of  nature — though,  of  coarse,  not  in  degree — between  the  enjoyment  of 
Christ  in  heaven  and  the  enjoyment  of  His  glorified  people  there.  "  The  glory 
which  Thou  givest  Me  I  have  given  them."  11.  Thb  connection  between  this 
PEiviLKGE  AND  ouB  BELATiON  TO  GoD  AS  His  CHiLDBEN.  "  If  children,  then  heirs." 
This,  of  course,  implies — 1.  That  none  but  children  will  be  recognised  as  heirs,  or 
be  allowed  to  inherit.  2.  That  all  children  are  heirs.  In  the  arrangements  of 
haman  society,  and  it  often  happens  that  the  estates  descend  exclusively  to  the 
male  children,  or  to  the  eldest.  But  this  is  not  the  rule  which  God  will  adopt. 
•'  If  children  " — it  matters  not  whether  sons  or  daughters — "  then  heirs."  Nor  will 
this  inheritance  lose  any  value  from  being  distributed  among  so  many.  Every  man 
in  heaven  will  feel  himself  much  the  happier,  because  he  will  know  there  are  so 
many  millions  of  ransomed  spirits  who  share  the  same  bliss.    HI.  The  way  in 

WHICH  Wt     BE  JO  walk  so  AS  TO  SECUBE  THE  ACTUAL  BESTOWMENT  OF   THIS  PBIVILEGE. 

First  of  all,  to  become  children,  we  must  apply  to  God  in  the  way  of  penitence  and 
faith  that  our  sentence  of  alienation  may  be  reversed.  But  if  children,  we  are  not 
to  conclude  that  there  is  no  further  need  of  watchfulness  or  prayer.  We  are  to 
remember  the  other  clause : — "  If  so  be,"  &o.  Not  that  the  sufferings  of  the  saints 
are— like  those  of  Christ — meritorious.  Yet  they  may  be  fitly  termed  "  suffering 
with  Christ " — 1.  Because  a  large  portion  of  the  suffering  of  good  people  comes 
upon  them  in  consequence  of  their  devotedness  to  the  truth,  and  cause,  and  service 
of  Christ.  If  we  would  forsake  Christ  we  should  then  escape  much  of  — (1)  The 
world's  reproach.  (2)  Temptation  from  Satan.  (3)  Self-denial.  (4)  Providential 
Bufferings.  "  Whom  the  Lord  loveth  He  ohasteneth,  and  scourgeth  every  son 
whom  He  receiveth."  2.  If  it  be  endured  in  the  temper  and  spirit  of  Christ,  who 
said,  "  Not  My  will,  but  Thine  be  done."  The  servant  is  not  above  his  lord.  Ought 
the  private  soldier  to  complain  of  privations  or  perils  to  which  his  general  submits  ? 
It  is  not  hard  or  anreasonable  that  we  suffer  with  Christ  before  we  are  glorified, 
becanse  the  subsequent  glory  will  far  more  than  compensate  the  previous  suffering 
(ver,  18).  Conclusion :  We  learn  from  this  subject  the  extreme  desirableness  and 
importance  of  being  found  among  the  regenerated  people  of  God.  Many  of  you 
have  realised  these  privileges.  Then — 1.  Be  thankful.  2.  Be  submissive  to  your 
worldly  lot.  3.  Be  consistent,  be  heavenly  minded.  4.  Remember  what  God 
requires  of  yoa  in  order  to  your  being  glorified — that  yoa  should  suffer  with  Him. 
(J.  Bunting,  D.D.)  The  heirs  of  God  : — I.  The  supposition.  "If  children,  then 
neirs."  1.  Unquestionably,  in  a  general  sense,  God  is  the  Father  of  all  mankind. 
Bat  the  New  Testament  continually  speaks  of  a  higher  form  of  paternity  and 
childhood.  This  men  may  or  may  not  sustain.  If  all  men,  without  exception, 
were  the  children  of  God  there  would  be  uo  "  if "  about  it,  just  as  any 
hypothetical  expression  is  unknown  in  heaven ;   o^  if  all  men  were  so  placed 


CTAP .  vm.]  EOMANS.  69 

that  it  was  impossible  for  them  ever  to  sustain  any  relation  to  God,  but  the 
general  one  of  creatures,  then,  also,  there  would  be  no  room  for  question, 
just  as  there  is  none  in  respect  to  the  brutes  that  perish,  or  to  the  devils  and 
the  damned  in  hell.  The  possibility  of  using  conditional  language,  in  relation 
to  men,  involves  the  idea  that  while  they  may  be,  in  the  language  of  Scripture, 
**  children  of  the  wicked  one,"  they  may  also  be  sons  of  God  in  the  highest  and 
most  emphatic  acceptation.  In  relation  to  this  subject,  we  may  employ  the 
language,  "  Howbeit,  that  is  not  first  that  is  spiritual,  but  that  which  is  natural, 
and  afterwards  that  which  is  spiritual."  In  neither  case,  however,  does  it  neces- 
sarily follow  that  the  spiritual  must  succeed  the  natural.  Men  may  live  and  never 
be  changed  in  the  spirit  of  their  minds ;  and  they  may  die,  and  not  rise  after  the 
likeness  of  the  Lord's  glorious  body.  But  if  any  man  is  a  child  of  God,  then  the 
Scripture  teaches  that  this  is  his  second  state,  not  his  first ;  that  he  has  undergone, 
or  been  the  subject  of,  a  process  by  which  he  has  passed  from  the  one  to  the  other. 
2.  This  process  is  described  as  being  "  born  of  the  Spirit,"  "  created  anew," 
*'  quickened,"  "  raised  from  the  dead,"  Ac,  and  we  cannot  suppose  that  this  is 
accomplished  by  the  mechanical  agency  of  any  outward  rite.  It  is  represented  as 
connected  with  repentance  and  faith  in  Christ.  3.  In  addition  to  an  actual  spiritual 
birth,  we  have  the  frequent  use  of  the  word  "  adoption,"  to  illustrate  the  process  by 
which  man  passes  frum  his  first  to  his  second  condition.  This  word  is  used  in 
allusion  to  the  reception  into  a  family  of  a  slave  or  a  stranger.  In  like  manner 
men,  who,  contemplated  as  sinners,  are  strangers,  foreigners,  and  in  bondage  to  the 
devil,  are  taken  out  of  this  state  of  distance  and  degradation,  and,  by  an  act  of 
God's  grace  adopted  into  His  family  and  constituted  His  sons.  4.  And  however 
humbhng  it  may  be  to  think  of  the  necessity  in  which  we  stand  of  adoption  and 
renewal,  yet  that  nature  is  not  to  be  disparaged,  respecting  which  such  things  are 
possible.  A  brute  animal  could  not  be  adopted  and  made  a  child  by  man  ;  nor  if  it 
were  could  it  be  made  the  subject  of  human  sympathies  and  afifections.  And  so, 
unless  man,  in  spite  of  all  his  corruption,  had  within  him  a  nature  distinguished 
by  moral  and  religious  capacity,  it  would  be  impossible  for  him  to  be  either  adopted 
by  or  born  of  God ;  and  that  nature  of  which  this  can  be  said,  however  rained 
now,  must  have  been  originally  great  and  God-like.  II.  Thb  distinguished 
PRIVILEGE.  1.  An  heir  is  one  who,  by  legal  or  natural  right,  possesses  a  title  to  an 
inheritance.  A  stranger  may  be  constituted  such,  in  virtue  of  the  will  and  deed  of 
another;  a  child  may  be  such  from  natural  relationship.  Both  these  ideas  are 
employed  in  Scripture  to  illustrate  the  subject.  Men,  considered  as  guilty,  need 
pardon  or  justification,  which  is  a  legal  as  well  as  merciful  act  on  the  part  of  God, 
by  which  the  relation  of  men  to  law  is  altered.  It  is  in  connection  with  this  act 
that  adoption  is  more  especially  to  be  regarded,  and  the  heirship  of  the  adopted  as 
flowing  from  that  act.  Thus  Paul  speaks  in  the  Epistle  to  Titus — "  being  justified, 
we  are  made  heirs,  according  to  the  hope  of  eternal  life."  As  possessing  a  corrupt 
nature  men  need  to  be  regenerated,  in  virtue  of  which  they  become  God's  children, 
not  merely  by  a  legal  or  declaratory  act,  but  by  the  positive  sanctification  of  their 
nature,  and  then  heirship  results  by  way  of  natural  consequence.  "  Thou  art  no 
more  a  servant,  but  a  son  ;  and  if  a  son,  then  an  heir."  2.  "  Heirs  of  God."  It 
would  seem  to  be  impossible  to  have  too  high  ideas  of  what  may  be  anticipated  by 
those  who  are  the  children  and  heirs  of  a  Divine  Parent ;  of  Him  who  created  and 
who  possesses  all  things ;  whose  paternal  affection  is  measureless,  and  who  even 
speaks  of  Himself  as  the  portion  of  His  people.  3.  "  Joint  heirs  with  Christ." 
There  is  something  in  this  expression  more  than  the  idea  of  filial  relationship  to 
God.  That  to  which  the  Christian  is  heir  is  not  merely  the  inheritance  of  a  son, 
but  of  such  a  son  as  Christ  is  represented  to  be :  "  the  only  begotten  and  well- 
beloved  of  the  Father,  in  whom  He  is  ever  well  pleased."  The  Church  is  His  body, 
and  whatever  glory  invests  the  head,  the  members  participate.  Conclusion :  From 
all  this  we  learn — 1.  The  love  and  power  of  God.  2.  The  ultimate  security  of  the 
Church.  3.  Obligations  and  motives  to  obedience.  4.  Encouragement  to  all  anxious 
and  earnest  men,  who  are  seriously  inquiring  for  and  seeking  after  God.  {T.  Binney). 
The  believer's  heirship  : — This  little  word  "  if  "  intimates  to  us  that  all  men  are  not 
children  of  God.  No  doubt  there  is  a  sense  in  which  His  intelligent  creatures 
generally  may  be  regarded  as  His  offspring.  But  the  title  •'  sons  of  God  "  is  con- 
fined exclusively  to  those  who  have  been  re-created  in  His  image.    I.  How,  then, 

MAT   WB   KNOW    WHETHER   WE   BE    THE     CHILDBEN   OF    GoD    OB  NOT  ?        1.     By    the   COU- 

sciousness  we  have  that  we  have  co  jplied  with  those  conditions  of  repentance  and 
faith,  on  tha  fulfilment  of  which  the  privilege  is  suspended.    2.  By  believing  th« 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

testimony  of  the  Word,  which  declares  that  all  those  who  thus  repeut  and  believe 
are  acknowledged  to  be  the  children  of  God.  3.  By  considering  the  fruits  of  grace 
in  our  Uves,  and  then  comparing  these  with  the  characteristics  of  sonship  which 
are  deUneated  in  the  Word  of  God.  4.  By  the  fact  that  we  have  received  the 
Spirit  of  adoption,  whereby  we  cry,  Abba,  Father.  5.  By  the  direct  witnessing  of 
the  Spirit  itself,  with  and  to  our  spirits,  that  we  are  the  children  of  God.  II.  "  Ip 
cHUiDBEN,  THEN  HEIRS."  The  children  of  the  wealthy  and  noble  are  the  heirs  of 
nobihty  and  wealth.  Now,  it  is  not  strange  that  God's  children  should  also  be 
heirs ;  for  who  is  so  rich  and  noble  as  their  Heavenly  Father?  1.  They  come  into 
possession  of  their  inheritance,  not  on  the  death  of  their  Father  (for  He  can  never 
die),  but  when  they  reach  their  majority.  This  occurs  at  difEerent  periods  of 
spiritual  life,  and  under  varying  circumstances  of  purification  and  trial ;  for  some 
are  no  sooner  born  of  God  than  they  are  ready  for  translation,  while  others  have, 
like  the  Captain  of  their  salvation,  to  "  be  made  perfect  through  suffering,"  2. 
That  inheritance  is — (1)  A  reality.  It  may  not,  indeed,  consist  of  tangible  tene- 
ments, land,  silver  and  gold ;  but  it  does  consist  of  aU  that  can  gratify  the  cravings 
of  an  immortal  spirit.  Whether  you  caU  heaven  a  place  or  a  state,  it  is  a  posses- 
sion and  an  enjoyment — (2)  Vast  and  grand,  surpassing  all  that  earthly  potentates 
have  ever  coveted  or  earthly  conquerors  won.  (3)  Pure  and  undefiled,  neither 
acquired  by  injustice  nor  retained  by  wrong.  (4)  Ensured.  Every  child  of  the 
new  birth  is  bom  to  it ;  nor  is  there  any  man  who  can  rob  him  of  it.  (4)  Enduring. 
It  fadeth  not  away.  (5)  There  is  this  difference,  that  whereas  on  earth  the  portion 
of  each  diminishes  as  the  number  of  heirs  is  increased,  in  heaven  it  is  quite  the 
reverse.  Have  we  not,  then,  a  direct  interest  in  seeking  to  take  others  with  us  to 
glory?  m.  "Joint  hexes  with  Christ."  1.  Our  heavenly  happiness  is  to  be  of 
the  same  nature  as  His.  If  His  consists  of  transcendent  holiness,  and  dignity, 
authority,  and  power,  then  ours  will  comprehend  the  same  elements  of  feUcity.  2. 
Our  happiness  will  be  reahsed  in  the  same  state,  or  place,  or  sphere  as  His.  Where 
He  is,  we  shall  be  also.  3.  Our  iuheritance  has  been  purchased,  or  procured  by 
the  same  means  as  His.  By  His  sufferings,  for  after  these  came  the  glory ;  and  all 
those  sufferings  were  endured  for  us.  Jesus  has  conquered  for  us  our  inheritance 
by  the  conquest  of  His  own.  In  conclusion :  1.  Be  humble.  The  heirs  of  earthly 
kingdoms  are  apt  to  be  elated  with  pride  in  proportion  to  the  magnitude  of  their 
prospective  possessions.  But  with  the  sons  of  God,  the  clearer  their  views  of  future 
glory,  the  more  astounded  are  they  with  the  greatness  of  the  gift  of  God  ;  and  this 
proportionally  makes  them  feel  their  own  unworthiness.  2.  Be  hearty.  How 
much  owest  thou  to  thy  Lord  ?  How,  then,  shouldst  thou  love,  praise,  own,  obey, 
and  serve  Him  1  3.  Be  holy.  Thou  art  an  heir  of  glory.  How,  then,  shouldest 
thou  prepare  for  it?     (T.  G.  Horton.)  The  Christian's  heirship: — I  was  in  a 

provinci^  town  some  time  ago,  when  I  was  told  of  a  nobleman  who  for  many 
years  worked  as  a  porter  in  the  railway  station,  because  he  did  not  know  his  true 
position  in  the  world,  till  one  day  a  gentleman  entered  the  station,  and  after 

saluting  him  said,  "  Sir,  may  I  ask  your  name  ?  "     "  John ,"  was  the  answer. 

"  I  have  come  to  tell  you  that  you  are  the  Earl  of  ,  and  entitled  to  a  large 

estate,"  rephed  the  visitor.  Do  you  think  that  man  stood  about  the  station  touching 
his  cap  for  tips  any  longer  ?  Not  he.  He  took  possession  of  his  inheritance  at  once. 
That  is  j  ust  what  we  Christians  should  do.  The  joint  heirs  and  their  Divine  portion : 
— Let  us — I.  Consider  the  teems  of  the  will.  1.  Our  right  to  the  Divine  heritage 
stands  or  falls  with  Christ's  right  to  the  same.  (1)  If  He  be  not  truly  an  heir, 
neither  are  we.  (a)  If  there  be  any  flaw  in  the  will,  then  it  is  no  more  valid  for 
Christ  than  it  is  for  us.  (6)  Perhaps  there  may  be  a  suit  in  law  made  against  the 
wUl.  But  then  it  is  Christ's  interest  that  is  at  stake  as  well  as  mine.  If  Satan 
bring  an  accusation  against  us,  that  accusation  is  made  against  Christ,  for  we  are 
one  with  Him.  You  must  enter  your  suit  against  the  Head  if  you  would  attack  the 
members,  (c)  Yet  suppose,  after  the  will  has  been  proved,  it  shall  be  found  that 
nothing  is  left  to  distribute,  or  a  debt  against  the  estate  ?  Why,  if  we  get  nothing, 
Christ  gets  nothing ;  if  there  should  be  no  heaven  for  us,  there  is  no  heaven  for 
Christ,  (d)  And  then  suppose  that,  though  there  be  something  left,  yet  it  be  a 
mere  trifle  ;  that  heaven  should  be  but  inferior  joy,  such  as  might  be  found  even  in 
this  world.  Then  saints  with  httle  glory  means  Christ  with  httle.  (2)  I  have  been 
dwelling  upon  the  black  side  in  order  to  bring  the  bright  one  out  by  contrast.  Let 
OS  revel  in  that  contrast,  (a)  There  is  no  flaw  in  God's  will  with  regard  to  Christ, 
and  He  has  said,  *'  I  will  that  they  whom  Thou  hast  given  Me  be  with  Me  where  I 
am."    {b)  No  suit  in  law  can  stand  against  Christ.    He  has  satisfied  God's  law. 


«BAP.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  61 

Who  shall  accuse  the  Redeemer?  Nor  can  any  creature  accuse  His  saints,  nor 
infringe  upon  our  title  so  long  as  His  title  stands,  (c)  And  there  is  no  fear  that 
the  Son  of  God,  the  infinitely  rich,  will  have  a  trifling  portion.  And  "  all  things 
are  yours,  for  ye  are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's."  2.  If  we  are  joint  heirs  with 
Christ,  we  legsJly  have  no  inheritance  apart  from  Him.  The  signature  of  the  one 
will  not  avail  to  alienate  the  estate,  nor  can  he  sell  it  by  bis  own  right,  nor  have  it 
all  at  his  own  separate  disposal.  You  have  no  right  to  heaven  in  yourself ;  your 
right  lieth  in  Christ.  The  promises  are  yea  and  amen,  but  only  in  Christ  Jesus,  in 
whom  also  we  have  obtained  an  inheritance.  3.  Christ,  as  co-heir,  has  so  identified 
Himself  with  us,  that  His  rights  are  not  to  be  viewed  apart  from  ours.  Before  we 
leave  this  point,  note  what  an  honour  is  conferred  upon  us.  To  have  auything  to 
do  with  a  great  man  is  thought  to  be  a  distinguished  privilege ;  but  what  honour  is 
conferred  on  the  believer  to  be  joint  heir  with  the  King  of  kings  !  Lift  up  thine 
head ;  think  no  man's  princeship  worth  thy  coveting ;  thou  art  greater  than  the 
greatest,  for  thou  art  joint  heir  with  Christ.  U.  View  the  estates.  1.  The 
inheritance  of  suffering.  (1)  Just  on  the  edge  of  your  Father's  great  inberitauce 
lies  the  swamp  of  affliction.  Now  this  is  yours.  If  this  be  not  yours,  neither  are 
the  rest,  for  they  are  bequeathed  to  you  in  the  same  will.  The  same  legacy  that 
left  peace  also  left  tribulation.  No  cross,  no  crown.  But,  remtmber,  Christ  ia 
co-heir  with  you  in  this.  "In  all  their  afflictions  He  was  afflicted."  (2)  You 
must  also  be  the  heir  of  persecution.  Christ  had  to  be  persecuted,  and  so  must 
you.  (3)  Another  black  portion  is  temptation.  In  this,  too,  Christ  is  your  co-heir. 
"  He  was  tempted  in  all  points  hke  as  we  are."  2.  Now  let  us  march  joyfully  to 
the  other  part  of  the  inheritance.  As  in  matters  of  wills  everything  should  be 
proven  and  sworn  to,  let  us  have  the  evidence  of  God,  that  cannot  lie.  (1)  As 
co-heirs  with  Christ,  we  are  heirs  of  God  (Psa.  xvi.  5  ;  Ixiii.  26).  (2)  In  Eom.  iv. 
13  the  promise  made  to  the  Seed  was  that  He  should  be  heir  of  the  world.  "  Ask  of 
Me,  and  I  will  give  thee  the  heathen  for  thine  inheritance,"  &c.  "  The  world  is 
ours,"  because  it  is  Christ's  by  right  of  inheritance.  There  is  nothing  here  below 
which  does  not  belong  to  a  believer.  If  he  hath  wealth,  let  him  use  it  in  his 
Master's  service,  for  it  is  his.  If  he  hath  poverty,  poverty  is  his  to  help  him  to  be 
sanctified,  and  to  long  for  heaven.  Whatever  happens  to  him — sickness  or  health 
— everything  is  his  here  below.  "  The  meek  shall  inherit  the  earth."  (3)  In  Heb. 
i.  2,  we  are  told  that  God  has  appointed  Christ  heir  of  all  things.  Then  we  are 
heirs  of  all  things  conceivable  and  inconceivable,  finite  and  infinite,  human  and 
Divine.  Christ's  property  extends  to  all,  and  we  are  co-heirs.  (4)  Then  in  James 
ii.  5,  we  are  spoken  of  as  being  heirs  of  the  kingdom.  Doth  Christ  call  Himself  a 
King  ?  He  hath  made  us  kings.  Does  He  sit  upon  a  throne  ?  We  shall  overcome 
and  sit  down  with  Him  upon  His  throne.  Will  He  judge  the  nations  ?  The  saints 
shall  judge  the  world.  Will  He  be  received  with  triumph  by  His  Father  ?  So  shall 
we  when  His  Father  shall  say,  "  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant."  E^th  He 
joy?  We  shall  have  His  joy.  Is  He  everlasting?  So  shall  we  be,  for  because  He 
lives,  we  shall  live  also.  IH.  Administeb  the  effects.  1.  There  is  one  part 
of  the  property  which  we  may  enjoy  at  once.  Take  your  cross  up  and  bear  it 
with  joy.  Resignation  takes  the  weight  out  of  the  cross,  but  a  proud  spirit  that 
will  not  bow  to  God's  will  changes  a  wooden  cross  into  an  iron  one.  Say,  "  I  count 
it  to  be  my  joy  to  be  permitted  to  be  a  partaker  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ. "  All  the 
sheep  of  the  Great  Shepherd  are  marked  with  the  cross,  and  this  not  only  in  the 
fleece,  but  in  the  flesh.  "If  ye  be  without  chastisement  whereof  aU  are  partakers, 
then  are  ye  bastards  and  not  sons."  2.  Why  cannot  we  administer  also  to  the 
blessed  part  of  the  testament?  (1)  If  you  have  faith  enough,  you  may  this  morn- 
ing be  raised  up  to  sit  together  in  heavenly  places  with  Christ  Jesus.  (2)  God  has 
given  Christ  the  heathen  for  His  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  ends  of  the  earth 
for  ffis  possession,  and  we  are  co-heirs  with  Him.  Let  us  advance  to  take  the  pro- 
perty. Some  of  you  can  do  so  by  preaching  in  the  streets.  Others,  by  teaching 
your  children  in  the  class.  You  can  say,  "  God  has  given  these  souls  to  Christ;  I 
am  going  to  take  them  in  Christ's  name."  Others,  who  can  do  little  themselves, 
can  assist  by  sending  forth  men  to  preach  the  gospel.  AU  that  the  Church  wants 
to-day  is  courage  and  devotion.  Let  her,  then,  as  Christ's  queen,  claim  the  earth 
as  hers,  and  send  her  heralds  forth  from  sea  to  sea  to  bid  all  men  bow  before  Him, 
and  confess  Him  to  be  their  King.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  glory  of  the  good : — 
They  are  in  a  distinguishing  sense — I.  Thb  c  ildben  of  God.  They  have — 1.  A 
special  resemblance  to  Him.  2.  A  special  a£f  ction  for  Him.  3.  A  special  atten- 
tion from  Him.    II.  Tbk  nrECBunoBS  of  all  oood.    (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)         If  bo 


'62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vni. 

be  tbat  we  suffer  wltb  Him,  tliat  we  may  be  also  glorlfled  together. — Buffering 
with  Christ : — Believers  sufter  with  Christ — ^I.  In  the  same  cause — that  of  truth 
and  righteousness.  11.  Fob  the  same  end — the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  His 
Church.  III.  Fkom  the  same  hand — Satan,  their  common  enemy,  and  the  world. 
IV.  In  the  same  manner,  and  with  the  same  spirit  of  patience  and  resignation. 
(T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Suffering  with  Christ,  a  condition  of  glory  with  Christ : — L 
SoNSHip  WITH  Christ  neoessarilt  involves  sufferino  vhth  Him.  1.  We  mis- 
apprehend the  force  of  this  passage  if  we  suppose  it  to  refer  merely  to  outward 
calamities,  and  see  in  it  only  that  the  sorrows  of  daily  life  may  have  in  them  a  sign 
of  our  being  children  of  God,  and  some  power  to  prepare  us  for  the  glory  that  is  to 
come.  The  text  does  not  merely  contain  a  law  for  a  certain  part  of  life,  but  for  the 
whole  of  life.  The  foundation  of  it  is  not  that  Christ  shares  in  our  sufferings ;  but 
that  we,  as  Christians,  participate  in  Christ's.  2.  Do  not  suppose  that  I  am  for- 
getting the  awful  sense  in  which  Christ's  suffering  stands  as  a  thing  by  itself, 
incapable  of,  and  needing  no,  repetition.  But  do  not  let  us  forget  that  the  very 
writers  that  emphasise  this,  say  to  us,  " '  Be  planted  together  in  the  likeness  of  His 
death ' :  you  are  '  crucified  to  the  world '  by  the  Cross  of  Christ ;  you  are  to  '  fill  up 
that  which  is  behind  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ.'  "  He  Himself  speaks  of  our 
drinking  of  the  cup  that  He  drank  of,  <fcc.  The  fact  is,  that  the  life  of  Christ 
remains  to  be  lived  by  every  Christian,  who  in  like  manner  has  to  fight  with  the 
world,  to  stand,  by  God's  help,  pure  in  the  midst  of  a  world  that  is  full  of  evil.  (1) 
The  sufferings  of  the  Lord  were  not  only  those  that  were  wrought  upon  Calvary. 
Conceive  of  that  perfect  life  in  the  midst  of  a  system  full  of  sin,  and  ask  yourselves 
whether  part  of  His  sufferings  did  not  spring  from  the  contact  with  it.  "  Oh  that 
I  had  wings  like  a  dove,"  &c.,  must  often  be  the  language  of  those  who  are  like 
Him  in  spirit  and  in  consequent  sufferings.  (2)  Another  branch  of  the  "  sufferings 
of  Christ  "  is  to  be  found  in  that  deep  and  mysterious  fact  that  Christ  wrought  out 
His  perfect  obedience  as  a  man,  through  temptation  and  by  suffering.  There  was 
no  sin  within  Him.  "  The  Prince  of  this  world  cometh,  and  hath  nothing  in  Me." 
But  yet,  when  that  dark  Power  stood  by  His  side,  and  said,  "  If  Thou  be  the  Son 
of  God,  cast  Thyself  down,"  it  was  a  real  temptation,  and  not  a  sham  one.  And 
though  the  doing  of  His  Father's  will  was  His  delight ;  yet  obedience,  sustained  in 
the  face  of  temptation  and  the  "  contradiction  of  sinners,"  may  well  be  called 
suffering.  (3)  But  not  only  is  the  life  of  Christ  as  a  life  of  suffering  a  model  for 
ns,  but  His  death,  besides  being  an  atonement,  is  a  type  of  the  Christian's  life, 
which  is  to  be  one  long  and  daily  dying  to  sin,  to  self,  to  the  world.  There  is  the 
"old  man,"  "the  flesh,"  "the  old  Adam,"  your  own  godless,  independent,  selfish, 

Eroud  being.  And  crucifying,  plucking  out  the  right  eye,  maiming  self  of  the  right 
and,  mortifying  the  deeds  of  the  body,  teach  us  that  there  is  no  growth  without 
Bore  sorrow.  And  not  until  you  can  say,  "  I  live,  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in 
me,"  have  you  accomplished  that  to  which  you  are  consecrated  and  vowed  by  your 
sonship — "being  conformed  unto  the  likeness  of  His  death,"  and  "knowing  the 
fellowship  of  His  sufferings."  On  this  high  level,  and  not  upon  the  lower  one — 
viz. ,  that  Christ  will  help  us  to  kear  afflictions — do  we  find  the  true  meaning  of  all 
that  Scripture  teaching ;  which  says  to  ns.  If  you  want  the  power  for  holy  living, 
have  fellowship  in  that  atoning  death ;  and  if  you  want  the  pattern  of  holy  living, 
look  at  that  Cross  and  feel,  "  I  am  crucified  to  the  world  by  it,  and  the  life  that  1 
live  in  the  flesh  I  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God."  3.  Such  considerations, 
however,  io  not  necessarily  exclude  the  comforting  thought,  "  In  all  our  affliction 
He  is  afflicted."  In  some  trackless  lands,  when  one  friend  passes  through  the  path- 
less forests,  he  breaks  a  twig  ever  and  anon  as  he  goes,  that  those  who  come  after 
may  see  the  traces  of  his  having  been  there,  and  know  that  they  are  not  out  of  the 
road.  So  when  we  are  journeying  through  the  murky  night,  and  the  dark  woods 
of  affliction,  it  is  something  to  find  here  and  there  a  spray  broken,  or  a  leafy  stem 
bent  down  with  the  tread  of  His  foot  and  the  brush  of  His  hand  as  He  passed ;  and 
to  remember  that  the  path  He  trod  He  has  hallowed,  and  thus  to  find  lingering 
fragrances  and  hidden  strengths  in  the  remembrance  of  Him  as  "  in  all  points 
tempted  like  as  we  are,"  bearing  grief  for  us,  with  us,  like  us.  4.  Do  not  keep 
these  sacred  thoughts  of  Christ's  companionship  in  sorrow  for  the  larger  trials  of 
life.  If  the  mote  in  the  eye  be  large  enough  to  annoy  you,  it  is  large  enough  to 
bring  out  His  sympathy;  and  if  the  grief  be  too  small  for  Him  to  compassionate 
and  share,  it  is  too  small  for  you  to  be  troubled  by  it.  If  yon  are  ashamed  to 
apply  that  Divine  thought,  ••  Christ  bears  this  grief  with  me,"  to  those  petty  mole- 
hills that  you  magnify  into  mountains  sometimes,  think  it  a  shame  to  stambleover 


CHAP.  viu.J  ROMANS.  68 

til  em.  But  never  fear  to  be  too  familiar  in  the  thought  that  Christ  is  willing  to 
bear,  and  help  me  to  bear,  the  most  insignificant  of  daily  annoyances.  Whether  it 
be  a  poison  from  one  serpent  sting,  or  from  a  million  of  tiny  mosquitoes,  if  there  be 
a  smart,  go  to  Him,  and  He  will  bear  it  with  you ;  for  if  so  be  that  we  suffer  with  Him, 
He  suffers  with  liS.  H.  This  communitt  of  suffering  is  a  neoessaki  prepah.'  tion  fob 
THE  COMMUNITY  OF  GLORY.  1.  I  name  this  principally  for  the  sake  of  putting  iu  a  cau- 
tion. The  apostle  does  not  mean  that  if  a  son  of  God  have  no  occasion,  by  brevity 
of  life  or  other  causes,  for  passing  through  the  discipline  of  sorrow,  his  inheritance 
would  be  forfeited.  We  must  always  take  such  passages  as  this  in  conjunction 
with  the  truth  which  completes  them,  that  when  a  man  has  the  love  of  God  in  His 
heart,  there  and  then  he  is  fit  for  the  inheritance.  Christian  people  make  vast 
mistakes  sometimes  in  talking  about  "  being  made  meet  for  the  inheritance  of  the 
saints  in  light,"  about  being  "  ripe  for  glory,"  and  the  like.  It  is  not  the  discipline 
that  fits,  it  only  develops  the  fitness.  "  God  hath  made  us  meet."  That  is  a  past 
act.  The  preparedness  for  heaven  comes  at  the  moment— if  it  be  a  momentary 
act — when  a  man  turns  to  Christ.  The  one  may  be  dispensed  with,  the  other 
cannot.  A  Christian  at  any  period  of  his  Christian  experience,  if  it  please  God  to 
take  him,  is  fit  for  the  kingdom ;  yet  in  His  mercy  He  is  leaving  you  here,  training 
you,  disciplining  you ;  and  that  all  the  glowing  furnaces  of  fiery  trial,  and  all  the 
cold  waters  of  aflfliction,  are  but  the  preparation  through  which  the  rough  iron  is  to 
he  passed  before  it  becomes  tempered  steel,  a  shaft  in  the  Master's  hand.  And  so 
learn  to  look  upon  all  trial  as  being  at  once  the  seal  of  your  sonship,  and  the  means 
by  which  God  puts  it  within  your  power  to  win  a  loftier  throne,  a  nobler  crown,  a 
closer  fellowship  with  Him  "  who  hath  suffered,  being  tempted,"  and  who  will 
receive  into  His  own  blessedness  and  rest  them  that  are  tempted.     III.    That 

INHERITANCE  IS  THE  NECESSARY  RESULT  OF  THE  SUFFERING  THAT  HAS  GONE  BEFORE. 

The  ground  of  mere  compensation  is  a  low  one  on  which  to  rest  the  certainty  of 
future  bliss.  But  the  inheritance  is  sure,  because  the  one  cause — union  with  the 
Lord — produces  both  the  present  result  of  fellowship  in  His  sorrows,  and  the  future 
result  of  joy  in  His  joy,  of  possession  in  His  possessions.  The  inheritance  is  sure, 
because  earth's  sorrows  not  merely  require  to  be  repaid  by  its  peace,  but  because 
they  fit  us  for  it,  and  it  would  be  destructive  to  aU  faith  in  God's  wisdom  not  to 
believe  that  what  He  has  wrought  for  us  will  be  given  to  us.  Trials  have  no  mean- 
ing, unless  they  are  means  to  an  end.  The  end  is  the  inheritance ;  and  sorrows 
here,  as  well  as  the  Spirit's  work  here,  are  the  earnest  of  the  inheritance.  Measure 
the  greatness  of  the  glory  by  what  has  preceded  it.  If  a  fair  measure  of  the  great- 
ness of  any  result  be  the  length  of  time  taken  for  getting  it  ready,  we  can  dimly 
conceive  what  that  joy  must  be  for  which  seventy  years  of  strife  and  sorrow  are 
but  a  momentary  preparation  ;  and  what  must  be  the  weight  of  that  glory  which  is 
the  counterpoise  and  consequence  to  the  afflictions  of  this  lower  world.  The 
further  the  pendulum  swings  on  the  one  side,  the  further  it  goes  up  on  the  other. 
The  deeper  God  plunges  the  comet  into  the  darkness,  the  closer  does  it  come  to  the 
sun  at  its  nearest  distance,  and  the  longer  does  it  stand  glowing  iu  the  full  blaze  of 
the  glory  from  the  central  orb.  So  in  our  revolution,  the  measure  of  the  distance 
from  the  farthest  point  of  our  darkest  earthly  sorrow  to  the  throne  may  help  us  to 
the  measure  of  the  closeness  of  the  glory  above  when  we  are  on  the  throne  :  for  if 
fio  be  that  we  are  sons,  we  must  suffer  with  Him ;  if  so  be  that  we  suffer,  we  must 
be  glorified  together  I     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Sharing  with  Chritst: — I.  What 

BECOMES  OF  GOOD  MEN  IN  THE  FUTURE?  They  are  "glorified  with  Christ."  We 
have  here — 1.  A  positive  conception  of  the  blessedness  of  heaven.  Elsewhere  we 
are  told  what  heaven  is  not,  rather  than  what  it  is.  We  seem  more  frequently  to 
have  promised  to  us  relief  from  sufferings — no  more  sickness,  night,  curse,  nor 
death — all  of  which  we  shrink  from  as  if  their  absence  was  enough  to  make  our 
bliss.  But  here  heaven  is  presented  as  "  glorification  with  Christ."  2.  A  striking 
contrast  to  those  carnal  views  which  unspiritual  men  hold  upon  this  subject.  3. 
A  heaven  already  realised — in  the  person  of  our  Lord.  He  is  already  glorified.  In 
the  glorifyiug  of  Christ,  our  glorifying  is  involved.  4.  A  most  consolatory  and 
satisfactory  prospect  therefore.  It  is  the  fellowship,  not  the  place,  that  makes  up 
our  happiness.  With  Christ  fully  revealed  to  us  we  could  be  happy  anywhere.  II. 
What  precedes  this  blessedness  ?  "  Suffering  with  Him."  *'  To  suffer  with  "  is 
to  sympathise  (1  Cor.  xii.).  1.  Christ's  sufferings  were — (1)  Voluntary.  (2)  Caused 
bf  sin.  (3)  The  result  of  the  contrariety  of  His  pure  nature  to  the  depravity  of 
men  amongst  whom  He  came  to  live.  2.  We  partake  of  them — (1)  Beneficially. 
"There  is  a  sense  iu  which  this  is  the  only  way  whereby  we  can  be  partaken  of  lUg 


6^1  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  na 

suffering — in  which,  therefore,  He  is  alone  in  suffering  (Isa.  Ixiii.  3) .  (2)  In  con- 
sequence of  our  contact  with  the  world.  "  As  He  was,  so  are  we  in  this  world." 
They  who  are  Uke  Christ  must  expect  to  have  His  sorrows  and  ELis  treatment 
repeated.  (3)  Non-meritorious.  Suffering  for  Christ  as  martyrs  do  is  really  suffer- 
ing with  Him,  and  finds  its  joy  in  the  suffering  itself.  Only  such  minds  could 
suffer  with  Him,  and  the  having  such  a  mind  is  itself  the  blessed  thing.  (P.  Strutt.) 
Suffering  in  relation  to  sonship : — The  apostle  does  not  affirm  the  absolute  necessity 
of  much  suffering  in  order  to  our  reaching  heaven ;  for  there  are  souls  whose  course 
on  earth  is  short  and  happy ;  still  less  that  there  is  any  merit  in  our  suffering  ;  for 
nothing  is  plainer  than  that  such  a  doctrine  would  be  flatly  opposed  to  the  whole 
argument  of  this  Epistle.  I.  Suffering  is  a  common  condition  of  sonship.  Christ 
never  promised  His  followers  in  this  world  anything  else  but  tribulation,  save  only 
that  in  the  midst  of  it  all  they  should  enjoy  His  peace  and  His  Father's  protection; 
and  all  the  apostles  speak  of  suffering  as  the  common  lot  of  the  saints  (1  Pet.  iv. 
12,  13,  16 ;  1  Thess.  i.  6,  ii.  14,  iii.  4  ;  Heb.  xii.).  In  all  these  passages  the  same 
principle  is  involved  which  is  contained  in  the  text.  The  cause  of  our  sufferings  as 
Christians  is  found  in  the  simple  fact  that  we  are  Christians.  II.  This  affobds  a 
TEST  OF  ouB  SONSHIP — 1.  In  the  way  of  its  infliction.  If  the  world  persecute  us  for 
Christ's  sake,  if  it  deem  us  worthy  of  such  distinction,  it  must  be  because  it  is  con- 
vinced that  we  are  Christians,  and  therefore  we  may  be  comforted  by  the  very 
maUce  of  our  enemies.  "  The  villain's  censure  is  the  good  man's  praise."  2.  In 
the  manner  in  which  we  endure  it.  It  is  only  the  true  saint  who  can  bear  reproach 
with  meekness,  take  joyfully  the  spoiling  of  his  goods,  refuse  to  avenge  himself, 
love  his  enemies,  and  yield  the  peaceable  fruits  of  righteousness.  III.  The  nature 
OP  THE  believer's  SUFFERINGS.  1.  There  are  many  which  are  not  associated  with 
Christ,  and  which  do  not  result  from  sympathy  with  Him.  The  ungodly  are  not 
without  their  sufferings — the  results  of  sinful  folly  and  excess,  or  visitations  of 
Divine  indignation,  and  issue  in  the  aggravated  impiety  of  those  who  endure  them. 
Beside  which,  how  many  of  our  trials  and  armoyances  do  we  bring  on  ourselves  by 
our  pride  and  self-will,  or  by  our  compliance  with  evil  temptation !  2.  Sufferings 
with  Christ  are  divisible  into  those  which  come  from  men  and  those  which  come 
from  God.  The  former  are  persecutions;  the  latter,  salutary  chastisements.  (1) 
Christ  was  persecuted,  even  unto  death,  and  He  has  warned  His  disciples  to  expect 
the  same  treatment  (Matt.  v.  12).  We  in  happy  England  are  exempt  from  the 
fiery  trial.  But  let  us  suppose  the  case  to  be  otherwise.  Could  we,  if  called  to  it, 
bear  imprisonment  and  torture,  and  final  execution,  for  the  Lord's  sake  ?  If  so, 
how  is  it  that  we  are  so  soon  offended  when  the  least  troubles  arise  in  connection 
with  our  Christian  profession  ?  And  yet  there  are  some  who  are  not  persecuted  for 
Christ's  sake.  There  are  tradesmen  who  lose  custom  because  they  will  be  faithful 
to  conscience.  There  are  artisans  who  are  injured  and  insulted  unceasingly  by 
their  fellow-workmen  for  the  same  reason.  There  are  wives  whose  piety  brings  on 
them  rudest  treatment  from  brutal  husbands.  But,  after  all,  how  light  and  little 
does  this  kind  of  trial  appear  in  comparison  with  what  our  predecessors  in  the  faith 
have  endured.  But,  such  as  it  is,  it  is  a  suffering  with  Christ,  and  should  be  met 
with  calmness  and  borne  with  patience,  fortitude,  and  hope.  (2)  The  other  class 
are  those  which  resemble  the  pangs  of  Jesus,  when  it  pleased  the  Father  to  put 
Him  to  grief.  "It  became  Him,"  &c.  But  there  are  important  points  of  difference. 
Both  have  relation  to  sin ;  but  while  ours  are  connected  with  our  own  sins.  His 
were  endured  for  the  sins  of  others.  His  sufferings  only  exert  an  expiating  efficacy. 
Yet  Christ  also  learned  obedience  by  the  things  which  He  suffered.  In  this  respect 
our  sufferings  may  resemble  His.  God  may  try  us,  as  He  tried  Him,  for  the  simple 
purpose  of  teaching  us  to  renounce  our  own  wish  and  will,  and  to  say,  with  Christ, 
"  Father,  not  my  will,  but  Thine  be  done."  IV.  If  we  suffer  with  Christ,  wk 
SHALL  also  be  GLORIFIED  TOGETHER.  Our  affiictious  are  not  for  naught.  They 
are  like  the  early  processes  of  the  garden,  when  the  soil  is  broken  up  and  weeded, 
in  order  that  fair  flowers  may  at  length  adorn  it.  They  are  the  quarrying  and  the 
chiselling  of  the  marble  before  the  living  statue  can  stand  out  in  symmetrical  pro- 
portions. They  are  the  tuning  of  the  instruments,  without  which  no  harmony  can 
be  secured  in  the  ultimate  concert.  They  are  the  medicine  of  our  convalescence, 
the  drudgery  of  our  education,  the  spring-pruning  of  our  vine  trees,  without  which 
we  can  never  be  healthy  or  happy,  fit  for  heaven,  or  qualified  to  bring  forth  fruit 
whereby  our  Father  may  be  glorified.  Wherefore  murmur  not  and  faint  not.  Thou 
canst  tread  no  path  of  hardship  which  Jesus  hath  not  hallowed  by  His  footsteps. 
(T,  O.  Rorton.)        Suffering  attend*  God's  children : — In  the  text  itself  there  are 


OHA».  Tin.]  ROMANS.  65 

two  general  parts  considerable — the  supposition  and  the  inference.     The  supposi- 
tion that  is  in  these  words,  "If  so  be  we  suffer  with  CJhrist."    First,  here  is  the 
condition  of  God's  children  considered  absolutely.    And  that  is,  that  it  is  a  state 
of  suiffering,  "If  so  be  that  we  suffer."    Many  are  the  troubles  of  the  righteous. 
Not  to  stand  upon  the  proof  of  that  by  testimony,  which  experience  does  so  fre- 
quently evidence,  we  may  take  some  account  of  it  in  these  particulars.    First, 
there  is  somewhat  for  it  in  their  nature,  which  they  have  in  common  with  other 
men  (Job  v.  7).    But,  secondly,  not  only  so,  but  more  particularly  which  is  founded 
in  grace,  and  that  holy  profession  which  they  bear  upon  them.    First,  I  say,  the 
malice  and  hatred  of  the  world.    Those  whom  men  hate,  they  will  aflflict  and  dis- 
turb, if  it  lies  in  their  power.     Secondly,  there  is  also  the  goodness  of  God,  and  His 
wise  providence  towards  His  servants,  which  has  an  influence  hereupon  likewise. 
God  will  have  His  people  here  in  this  world  to  suffer  for  divers  reasons.     As,  first, 
for  the  trial  and  exercise  of  their  graces.     Secondly,  God  orders  afflictions  to  His 
children,  thereby  to  wear  off  that  rust  which  is  in  them,  and  to  take  away  their 
defilements  from  them,  as  it  is  in  Isa.  xxvii,  9.     Thirdly,  to  wean  them  from  the 
world  and  an  inordinate  love  of  these  things  here  below,  and  to  make  them  more 
willing  to  be  gone  when  He  calls  for  them.    Lastly,  in  Fatherly  discipline,  to  keep 
His  children  regular  and  in  good  order,  and  to  prevent  them  from  worse  things  to 
come  (1  Cor.  xi.  32).     The  consideration  of  this  point  may  be  thus  far  useful  to  us. 
First,  as  it  serves  to  teach  us  patience  under  those  trials  which  God  at  any  time  in 
His  providence  exercises  us  withal.     Secondly,  we  learn  hence  also  to  expect  it  and 
to  prepare  for  it.     Thirdly,  we  learn  from  hence  also  to  take  heed  of  passing  rash 
censure  either  upon  ourselves  or  other  men,  occasionally  from  these  conditions. 
Now  the  second  is,  as  it  is  considerable  relatively  ;  and  that  is,  that  it  is  a  suffer- 
ing with  Christ.     "  If  we  suffer  with  Him."     This  they  are  called,  first,  from  that 
mystical  union  which  is  betwixt  Him  and  us.     As  by  virtue  of  this  union,  that 
which  is  His,  is  ours  ;  so,  by  virtue  of  the  same  union,  that  which  is  ours  is  also 
His.     Secondly,  by  way  of  sympathy  and  compassion,  we  suffer  with  Him,  and  He 
Buffers  with  us,  in  a  suitableness  and  correspondency  of  affection.     Thirdly,  the 
sufferings  of  God's  children  are  caUed  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  forasmuch  as  it  is 
He  that  strengthens  them  and  enables  them  for  to  suffer  them,  and  as  we  suffer  by 
Him.     With  Him  ;  that  is,  with  His  assistance  and  through  His  enablement,  and 
by  power  communicated  from  Him.    The  godly  have  a  supply  from  Christ  for  the 
enduring  of  that  which  they  endure.     And  their  sufferings  are  in  that  respect  His. 
Fourthly  and  lastly,  and  principally,  they  are  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  forasmuch 
as  they  are  in  Christ's  cause,  and  for  the  particular  things  which  He  suffered ; 
that  is,  indeed,  for   righteousness  sake,  and   the   doing   of   that  which  is  good 
(thus  Psa.  xxxviii.  20;    1  Pet.  iii.  17,  18;   Matt.  v.  11,  12).    This  teaches  also 
Christians  not  to  rest  themselves  contented  in   this,  that  they  suffer,  but  to 
observe  both  how  and  what  they  suffer  for.     What  they  suffer  for  as  to  the 
cause  of   their  suffering ;  and  how  they  suffer,  as  to  the  manner  and  carriage 
of  their  suffering — each  of  which  have  a  necessary  influence  upon  this  business 
of  suffering  with  Christ,  and  are  most  requisite  ingredients  to  the  making  and 
constituting  of  it.     The  second  is  the  inference  in  these  words,  "  That  we  may 
be  also  glorified  together."     First,  to  look  upon  this  passage  according  to  the 
exclusive  emphasis ;  and  so  I  say  there  is  this  in  it :  that  there  is  no  coming  to 
glory  but  by  suffering.     Suffering  it  is  the  beaten  path  to  glory,  and  that  common 
road  which  all  take  that  come  to  that  end.    Now  there  is  a  various  account  which 
may  be  given  hereof  unto  us.    First,  that  herein  we  may  be  conformable  to  Christ 
our  Head.     Secondly,  suffering  goes  before  glory,  thereby  to  set  a  greater  price  upon 
glory  itself,  and  to  make  it  so  much  the  more  glorious.    Thirdly,  that  so  by  this 
means  He  may  in  some  manner  fit  us  for  glory,  and  prepare  us  and  dispose  us 
thereunto  (Col.  i.  12).    But  against  this  may  be  haply  objected  that  there  are  divers 
of  the  children  of  God,  and  such  as  we  have  cause  to  hope  well  of,  who  yet  have  a 
very  quiet  and  comfortable  life,  wherein  they  meet  with  little  sorrow  or  trouble  at 
all.    And  how,  then,  is  this  so  generally  true  whereof  we  now  speak  ?    To  this  I 
answer,  that  the  providence  of  God  is  very  mysterious  in  this  particular  in  His 
different  carriage  to  different  of  His  servants  here  in  this  life.    And  that  with  some 
it  fareth  better  than  others  in  this  respect.    But  yet  there  are  none  but  in  some 
kind  or  other,  at  some  time  or  other,  in  some  sense  or  other,  have  the  experiment 
of  this  truth  upon  them.     Sometimes  the  servants  of  God  are  more  troubled  with 
inward  conflicts  than  with  outward  afflictions.      Sometimes,  again,  God  afflicts 
them  in  others,  though  not  immediately  in  their  own  persons,  which  yet,  notwith- 
TOL.  n.  5 


eS  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  no. 

standing,  according  as  they  improve  it,  proves  an  affliction  unto  them.  As  Esther 
mourning  for  her  people  and  kindred  while  she  was  herself  in  great  prosperity; 
and  Nehemiah,  for  his  brethren's  captivity,  when  himself  was  in  great  favour.  But 
then,  further,  this  is  that  which  all  God's  children  do  in  a  manner  prepare  for,  and 
so  dispose  themselves  as  to  make  account  of  it.  And  it  is  their  wisdom  so  to  do. 
As  a  man  that  takes  a  journey  by  sea,  he  may  chance  to  sail,  it  may  be,  without 
storms,  in  regard  of  the  event ;  but  yet  he  expects  them,  and  makes  account  of 
them,  as  incident  unto  him.  And  so  must  Christians  in  this  sea  of  the  world. 
Now  the  second  is  that  emphasis  which  is  inclusive.  "  If  we  suffer  with  Him,  we 
shall  be  also  glorified  together  " ;  that  is,  the  one  it  shall  certainly  follow  upon  the 
other.  Wherein,  again,  there  are  two  things  further  considerable.  The  one  is  the 
conjunction  of  conditions,  and  the  other  is  the  conjunction  of  persons,  in  reference 
to  those  conditions.  First,  here  is  the  conjunction  of  conditions  :  glory  joined  with 
suffering.  Christians  that  suffer  in  this  life,  tbey  shall  be  glorified  in  the  life  to 
come.  So  after  that  He  hath  called  them  to  suffering,  He  does  at  last  bring  them 
to  glory.  This  He  does  in  His  infinite  wisdom  and  goodness,  and  as  carrying  a 
special  comeliness  and  congruity  with  it  (as  2  Thess.  i.  6-8).  As  there  is  a  beauty 
in  all  the  works  and  ways  of  God  besides,  so  amongst  the  rest  also  in  this.  Look 
at  those  who  have  had  the  greatest  pleasure  and  delight  in  sin,  they  shall  hereafter 
have  the  greatest  punishment  and  vexation.  There  are  three  considerations  especially 
■which  are  matters  of  great  supportment  and  satisfaction  to  God's  children  in  suffer- 
ing. First,  the  comfort  which  they  have  in  it.  As  the  sufferings  of  Christ  abound 
in  us,  so  our  consolation  also  aboundeth  by  Christ.  God's  children  have  never 
more  embracings  and  cherishings  from  Him  than  at  such  time  as  they  are  under 
greatest  afflictions.  As  the  mother  tends  the  sick  child  especially,  and  is 
most  fond  of  that.  Secondly,  the  benefit  which  they  have  by  it  or  from  it ; 
that  is  another  thing  here  considerable.  Thirdly,  another  encouragement 
is  the  glory  which  comes  after  it  (Matt.  xix.  28 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  11,  12 ;  2  Cor. 
i.  7).  Where  still  we  must  observe  and  remember  this :  that  it  is  said,  "  If  we 
suffer  with  Him."  It  is  not  suffering  considered  indefinitely  that  does  entitle  to 
glory.  First,  not  mere  suffering  in  a  way  of  common  providence,  which  even  a 
natural  man  may  do.  Secondly,  not  suffering  in  a  way  of  public  justice,  which  an 
evil  man  may  do.  Thirdly,  not  suffering  neither  with  murmuring  and  repining. 
There  may  want  glory  as  to  either  of  these  things.  The  second  is  the  conjunction 
of  the  persons  in  reference  to  these  conditions.  Believers  are  joined  with  Christ, 
and  in  particular  joined  with  Him  in  glory.  This  phrase  of  "  together  with  Him  " 
does  imply  divers  things  in  it.  First,  conformity.  "  We  shall  be  glorified  with 
Him  "  ;  that  is,  we  shall  be  like  to  Him  in  glory  (thus  John  xvii.  22).  Secondly, 
concomitancy.  '•  We  shall  be  glorified  with  Him  " ;  that  is,  we  shall  be  joined  to 
Him  and  present  with  Him  in  glory  (John  xvii.  24 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  17).  A  con- 
comitancy both  of  fate  and  of  time,  there  and  then.  Thirdly,  conveyance  or 
derivation.  "  We  shall  be  glorified  with  Him  "  ;  that  is,  we  shall  be  glorified  from 
Him.  His  glory  shall  reflect  upon  us  and  be  transmitted  to  us.  We  shall  shine  in 
His  beams.  Affliction,  it  is  such  a  condition  as  is  irksome  to  fiesh  and  blood,  and 
we  all  by  nature  are  ready  to  shrink  at  it  and  at  the  thoughts  of  it ;  but  grace  is 
much  satisfied  about  it.  God  will  at  last  make  all  His  children  amends  for  any 
troubles  which  here  He  lays  upon  them.  Heaven,  it  will  swallow  up  all.  {Thomas 
Eorton,  D.D.)  The  reward  of  glory : — Samuel  Rutherford  used  to  say,  "I  wonder 
many  times  that  ever  a  child  of  God  should  have  a  sad  heart,  considering  what  the 
Lord  is  preparing  for  him."  *'  When  we  shall  come  home,  and  enter  into  the  pos- 
session of  our  Brother's  fair  kingdom,  and  when  our  heads  shall  find  the  weight  of 
the  eternal  crown  of  glory,  and  when  we  shall  look  back  to  pains  and  suffering, 
then  shall  we  see  life  and  sorrow  to  be  less  than  one  step  or  stride  from  a  prison  to 
glory,  and  that  our  little  inch  of  time-suffering  is  not  worthy  of  our  first  night's 
welcome  home  to  heaven." 

Yer.  18.  For  I  reckon  that  the  sufferings  of  this  present  time  are  not  worthy  to 
be  compared  with  the  glory. — A  sublime  comparison : — Men  exaggerate  the  import- 
ance of  what  is  close  at  hand,  and  diminish  tne  value  of  what  lies  in  the  far  future. 
Prudence  teaches  men  to  free  themselves  from  this  tendency.  And  religion 
summons  men  to  take  into  their  calculation  the  distant  but  not  uncertain  prospect. 
I.  The  suffebinos  of  tke  present  may  be  skvebe.  Every  human  being  has  many 
pains,  troubles,  anxieties,  to  bear.  And  every  Christian  has  his  own  especial 
Bufferings.     Nothing  is  gained  by  concealing  these  facts.    Let  every  reasonable 


OBAT.  TUX.]  ROMANS,  67 

being  "count  the  cost"  of  following  Christ,  II.  The  gloet  of  the  futuee  is 
EBVEALED.  We  need  no  revelation  to  make  ns  sensible  of  the  pressure  of  present 
pains.  But  experience  and  reason  fail  to  make  ua  know  the  glory  which  is  to  be. 
This  is  declared  to  us  by  inspiration,  viz.,  that  when  Christ,  who  is  our  life,  shall 
appear,  we  shall  appear  with  Him  in  glory.  That  glory  consists  in  the  knowledge, 
favour,  and  fellowship  of  the  Kedeemer.    III.  The  estimate  and  caicdlation  is 

THAT    THE    GLOKT    OF    THE    FtJTDEE    OUTWEIGHS    THE    SUFFEEINGS    OF    THE    PBESENT. 

1.  This  was  the  personal  conviction  of  the  apostle  himself.  He  was  a  reasonable 
man,  and  he  reckoned,  <feo.  He  acted  upon  his  persuasion,  and  througbout  bis  life 
accepted  hardships,  braved  dangers,  endured  persecution,  animated  by  the  blessed 
hope  of  victory  and  of  glory.  2.  This  has  been  the  principle  which  has  underlain 
the  endurances  which  have  always  characterised  the  Christian  life.  Who  would 
willingly  endure  the  self-denial  and  the  oppression,  the  insult,  the  privation  and 
the  martyrdom,  except  for  the  sake  of  the  approval  of  the  Divine  Master,  whose 
victory  and  whose  throne  it  is  promised  that  all  His  faithful  followers  shall  share  ? 
(Clerical  World.)  The  present  and  the  future : — I.  The  apostle's  estimate.  1.  Of 
this  world.  A  scene  of— (1)  Vanity.  (2)  Bondage.  (3)  Suffering.  2.  Of  the 
world  to  come.  (1)  Glory.  (2)  Liberty.  (3)  Happiness.  II.  The  effects  of 
THIS  estimate.  1.  Hope.  2.  Patience.  3.  Earnest  desire.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
Present  niffering  and  future  glory  :—I.  God's  sdffebinq  sons.  Sonship  does  not 
exempt  from  sufferings — sometimes  it  even  causes  them — as  when  we  are  called  to 
suffer  on  account  of  religion,  especially  in  times  of  persecution.  But  we  need  not 
look  for  "  some  great  thing  "  to  bring  the  text  into  conformity  with  daily  experience. 
No  Fufferings  are  small  that  have  power  to  affect  the  mind.  The  strife  of  tongues, 
the  petty  persecutions  of  home,  the  long  continuance  of  some  chronic  disease,  the 
anxiety  connected  with  our  occrpation,  may  be  doing  for  us  what  greater  trials  did 
for  the  martyrs.  We  may  be  sufferers  in  the  intensity  of  emotion,  even  when  the 
instruments  of  suffering  may  not  be  the  prison  and  the  stake.  The  gospel,  then, 
does  not  imply  immunity  from  suffering.  And  this  fact  teaches  that  suffering  to 
the  believer  is — 1.  Good  and  not  evil — like  medicine,  which  may  be  nauseous  to 
the  taste  but  healing  in  its  effects.  2.  Best  when  least  deserved.  '♦  I  could  have 
borne  it  had  I  merited  it,"  is  the  world's  word.  God's  Word  says,  "  If  the  will  of 
God  be  so,  it  is  better  to  suffer  for  well-doing  than  for  evil-doing."  To  do  wrong  is 
a  greater  evil  than  to  suffer  wrong.  3.  Confined  to  "  this  present  time."  II.  The 
COMPARISON  WITH  FtJTUEE  GLOEY.  "  I  rcckou  " — as  if  it  Were  a  calm  and  deliberate 
mental  process.  If  we  allow  our  feelings  to  predominate  we  shall  allow  our 
experience  of  pain  to  prevail  over  the  revelations  of  faith.  The  glory  is  yet  future 
— it  is  not  yet  felt — whilst  the  suffering  is  felt.  We  need  to  bring  into  the  com- 
parison, in  order  to  feel  alleviation,  those  vast  objects  in  the  presence  of  which  all 
temporal  sorrow  dwindles.  We  might  compare,  e.g.,  our  own  sufferings — 1.  With 
the  far  severer  sufferings  of  many  of  our  fellow-Christians  who  are  as  dear  to  God 
as  we  are.  2.  With  our  deserts  and  our  deep  sense  of  the  evil  of  sin.  8.  With 
our  mercies  and  alleviations,  and  be  ashamed  to  think  of  our  ingratitude  in  per- 
mitting one  sorrow  to  blind  us  to  a  thousand  joys.  4.  With  the  bitter  sufferings 
which  our  Lord  endured,  and  think  of  the  double  honour  which  is  given  us  on 
behalf  of  Christ,  not  only  to  believe  on  Him  but  to  suffer  for  His  sake.  5.  But 
the  apostle  brings  before  us  the  glory  that  shall  be  revealed  in  us,  as  if  he  would 
compare  the  poor  accommodation  of  the  roadside  inn  where  the  traveller  passes 
the  night,  with  the  enduring  blessedness  of  the  home.  One  day  in  heaven  will 
repay  all  the  sufferings  of  earth.  (P.  Strutt.)  Present  sufferings  and  future 
glory  : — I.  Counterbalancing  temporal  things  with  eteenal,  is  the  way  to  clear 
OUR  mistakes,  or  prevent  the  delusions  op  the  flesh.  The  ajpostle  observeth 
this  method  here  and  elsewhere  (2  Cor.  iv.  17,  18).  This  may  be  done  in  four  ways. 
Comparing — 1.  Temporal  good  things  with  eternal  good  things,  that  we  may  draw 
off  our  hearts  from  the  one  to  the  other,  and  so  check  the  delights  of  sense 
(Heb.  X.  34;  Psa.  xvi.  11;  John  v.  44).  2.  Temporal  bad  things  with  eternal 
bad  things ;  so  to  defeat  the  terrors  of  sense.  All  the  sufferings  of  the  world  are 
but  the  scratch  of  a  pin  to  that  tribulation  that  abideth  for  every  soul  that  doth 
evil  (Luke  xii.  4,  5).  3.  Temporal  good  for  eternal  evil  (Heb.  xi.  25).  4.  Temporal 
bad  things,  with  eternal  good  things  (2  Cor.  iv.  17).  (1)  Our  sufferings  come  from 
men,  but  our  glory  from  God  ;  now  as  the  agent  is,  so  is  the  effect ;  man  afflicts  as 
a  finite  creature,  but  God  rewards  as  an  infinite  being  ;  man  showeth  himself  in 
his  wrath,  and  God  in  His  love  (Isa.  li.  12).  (2)  Our  sufferings  are  earthly,  but 
our  glory  is  heavenly.    As  the  place  is,  so  is  the  estate  ;  here  both  the  good  and 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [ohap.  Tin.' 

evil  is  partial,  but  there  both  are  complete.  Here  we  have  the  earnest,  there  the 
whole  bargain ;  here  a  taste,  there  a  full  feast.  (3)  Our  sufferings  are  but  short, 
but  our  glory  eternal  (1  Pet.  i.  6,  v.  10).  (4)  As  they  are  short,  so  they  are  light 
(2  Cor.  iv.  17).  (5)  The  sufferings  are  in  our  mortal  bodies,  but  the  glory  is  both 
in  soul  and  body.  (6)  Sufferings  do  mostly  deprive  us  of  those  things  which  are 
without  a  man ;  but  this  is  a  glory  which  shall  be  revealed  in  us.  (7)  Our  suffer- 
ings dishonour  us  in  the  sight  of  the  world,  but  this  glory  maketh  us  amiable  in 
the  sight  of  God.  (8)  The  order  is  to  be  considered.  As  to  the  wicked,  God  will 
turn  their  glory  into  shame;  so  as  to  the  godly.  He  will  turn  their  shame  into 
glory  (John  xvi.  20).  II.  The  compabison,  though  it  be  bightlt  weighed,  will 
HAVE  NO  EFFICACY  UNLESS  WE  HAVE  FAITH,  or  a  deep  sensc  of  the  world  to  come.  It 
is  easy  to  show  how  much  eternal  things  exceed  temporal ;  but  this  taketh  no  hold 
of  the  heart,  till  there  be  a  firm  belief  of  the  glory  reserved  for  God's  people 
(Heb.  xi.  1 ;  2  Pet.  i.  9).  HI.  This  faith  must  be  often  exercised  by  bESiouB 
MEDITATIONS.  For  the  greatest  truths  work  not,  if  we  do  not  think  of  them. 
Faith  showeth  us  a  truth,  but  consideration  is  the  means  to  improve  it  (Luke 
xiv.  28-30).  IV.  There  is,  besides,  need  of  the  assistance  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Sense  is  too  strong  for  reason  without  faith;  and  faith  cannot  do  its  office 
without  the  Spirit.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Suffering  and  glory  to  be  revealed 
in  the  good: — First,  of  the  subject  or  antecedent:  "The  sufferings  of  this 
present  time."  By  sufferings  here  we  are  to  understand  the  sufferings  of  the 
servants  of  God  more  especially.  First,  to  look  upon  it  in  the  first  reference,  of 
the  time  in  order  to  suffering  ;  and  so,  I  say,  there  is  this  in  it,  that  the  present 
time  it  is  a  time  of  affliction.  Where  we  must  first  of  all  explain  what  is  here 
meant  by  this  present  time.  First,  the  state  of  this  world  it  is  expressed  by  the 
time  or  season,  6  x<^pic.  And  so,  indeed,  it  is.  It  is  a  time  of  great  opportunity, 
which  God  does  afford  unto  us.  Those  that  will  be  saved  hereafter,  they  must  be 
sanctified  now.  And  therefore  accordingly  does  it  concern  us  to  mind  this  time, 
and  to  be  sure  to  be  good  husbands  of  it ;  not  to  strive  or  squander  it  away  we  care 
not  how,  but  to  have  a  special  regard  hereunto.  That  is  the  first  term  of  emphasis, 
the  time,  or  season.  The  second  is,  that  it  is  called  the  present  time,  which  is  to 
be  taken  in  an  exclusive  sense,  as  that  which  shall  not  be  hereafter.  It  is  present, 
and  it  is  present  but  for  a  while.  It  has  a  disparagement  of  transitoriness  upon  it. 
The  second  is  of  suffering  in  order  to  the  time.  And  so  there  is  this  in  it,  that 
affliction  it  is  only  for  a  season.  The  suffering  of  this  present  time,  that  is,  as 
much  as  this  moment  any  suffering  ;  this  suffering,  which  is  but  of  short  continu- 
ance. Thus  we  shall  find  the  Scripture  to  express  it  (2  Cor.  iv.  17  ;  Heb.  x.  37 ; 
1  Pet.  i.  6,  v.  10).  These  and  the  like  are  the  expressions  whereby  the  shortness 
of  affliction  is  set  forth  unto  us.  This  it  serves,  first,  to  put  a  difference  betwixt  the 
children  of  God  and  other  men.  As  for  wicked  and  ungodly  persons,  their  suffer- 
ings are  not  only  for  time  present,  but  as  well  for  time  to  come,  and  for  that 
especially.  Therefore,  secondly,  it  should  keep  up  their  hearts  from  fainting  and 
sinking  under  them.  The  second  is  the  predicate,  or  consequent,  in  these  words, 
♦'  Are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory  that.sball  berevealed  in  us. "  Wherein 
we  have  the  state  of  God's  people  in  the  world  to  come  set  forth  under  a  threefold 
notion  or  description.  First,  from  the  nature  of  it ;  and  secondly,  from  the  order 
of  it ;  and  thirdly,  from  the  degree  of  it.  First,  here  is  a  description  of  the  future 
state  of  the  children  of  God,  from  the  nature  of  it ;  and  that  is  of  glory  to  be 
revealed  in  them.  First,  for  the  matter  of  it,  it  is  glory.  He  does  not  only  say  it 
is  rest,  as  He  does  in  another  place  (2  Thess.  i.  7).  Heaven  it  does  not  only  consist 
in  the  removal  of  former  evils,  but  in  the  addition  of  further  comforts.  And  mark 
here  what  this  comfort  is,  for  the  condition  and  quality  of  it,  while  it  is  expressed 
by  glory ;  wherein  the  Spirit  of  God  seems  to  labour  to  satisfy  us  and  to  uphold  us 
against  the  scorn  and  reproach  of  affliction.  If  here  now  it  shall  be  further 
demanded  what  this  glory  we  now  speak  of  is,  and  wherein  it  consists.  First,  in 
the  glorious  qualifications  which  both  soul  and  body  together  shall  be  endued 
withal.  The  body  raised  up  to  the  excelleucies  and  perfections  of  a  spirit — a 
spiritual  body — and  the  soul  endued  with  a  great  measure  of  knowledge  in  all 
particulars.  Secondly,  in  the  glorious  company  and  society  which  we  shall  there 
partake  of.  Thirdly,  in  the  glorious  actions  and  performances  which  we  shall 
then  be  employed  in  :  in  sitting  upon  thrones,  judging  the  world,  even  angels  them 
selves.  And  finally,  in  an  univers^al  freedom  from  whatsoever  might  cause  any 
annoyance.  Secondly,  we  may  here  take  notice  of  the  dispensation,  as  it  is  s-iid  to 
be  such  as  shall  be  revealed  in  us.      While  it  is  said  that  it  shall  be  revealed. 


CHAP.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  89 

there  are  two  things  implied  in  this  expression.  First,  its  present  secrecy.  It  shall 
be  revealed  ;  therefore  as  yet  it  is  hid,  and  so  it  is.  That  glory  which  a  Christian 
shall  one  day  partake  of  in  heaven  it  is  for  the  present  concealed  (1  John  iii.  2). 
The  second  is  the  future  discovery,  or  manifestation,  which  is  here  expressed.  It 
is  the  discovery  of  it  only  which  is  future  and  has  yet  to  come.  It  is  already  in 
being,  so  far  forth  as  it  is  prepared  for  us,  as  the  Scripture  assures  us.  Thia 
glory,  which  for  the  present  is  hid,  it  shall  hereafter  be  revealed  both  to  the 
children  of  God  and  other  men.  First,  it  shall  be  revealed  to  God's  children  for 
their  comfort  and  greater  reward.  God  will  now  at  last  make  them  amends  for  all 
their  long  expectations  and  dependencies  upon  Him.  Secondly,  to  wicked  men  it 
shall  be  revealed  also  for  their  shame  and  confusion.  There  is  one  word  more 
which  is  here  considerable  of  us,  and  that  is  the  subject  of  this  glory — ourselves. 
It  is  not  only  to  us,  but  in  us.  Glory  may  be  revealed  to  a  man,  which  himself  has 
no  interest  in.  But  the  glory  of  heaven  it  is  such  as  shall  be  revealed  in  us,  that 
is,  we  shall  partake  of  this  glory.  This  it  holds  a  proportion  to  our  capacity  and 
reception  of  grace.  Look  as  the  children  of  God.  The  second  is  taken  from  the 
order  of  it,  or  method  in  which  it  is  dispensed,  and  that  is,  in  succession  to 
affliction.  God's  children,  in  regard  of  that  state  which  happens  unto  them,  have 
their  best  still  at  last.  And  this  it  goes  before  that.  Look  as  it  was  with  Ciirist 
Himself,  even  so  it  is  also  with  the  members  of  Christ.  For  Christ  Himself — we 
know  how  it  was  with  Him — He  suffered  before  He  reigned.  The  harvest  is  after 
the  seed-time.  This  is  matter  of  great  encouragement  and  consolation  to  all  true 
believers  in  the  saddest  condition  that  befaUs  them.  It  may  be  that  for  the 
present  they  may  lie  under  very  grievous  afflictions.  Well,  but  here  is  that  which 
may  satisfy  them  :  that  there  is  the  greater  comfort  behind,  that  waits  upon  them. 
The  third  is  the  measure  or  degree  of  it ;  and  that  is,  glory  transcendent  to 
affliction.  Present  suffering  is  incomparable  to  future  happiness.  First,  to  show 
you  that  it  is  so.  There  must  needs  be  an  infinite  excellency  and  transcendency 
of  glory  above  suffering  upon  this  account.  First,  the  reason  and  argument  which 
God  uses  and  takes  from  glory  to  persuade  His  children  to  suffering.  That  can  by 
no  means  be  an  argument  which  is  not  itself  a  truth ;  at  least  such  an  argument 
as  the  God  of  truth  shall  vouchsafe  to  use.  Indeed  Satan  he  many  times  offers 
those  things  for  encouragements  which  have  no  substance  or  reality  in  them.  But 
the  Lord  He  does  not  do  so.  He  will  make  good  every  argument  which  He  presses 
for  the  doing  of  any  duty.  Secondly,  as  this  may  be  cleared  from  God's  own  argu- 
ments and  reasonings,  so  also  from  the  saints'  apprehensions  and  improvements 
of  those  arguments.  Thirdly,  this  may  be  also  evinced  unto  us,  even  from  the 
principles  of  superstition  itself.  We  may  see  what  future  glory  is,  in  regard  of 
present  sufferings,  from  the  voluntary  sufferings  which  many  people  lay  upon 
themselves.  Fourthly,  the  first-fruits  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  beginnings  of  glory 
here  in  this  present  life,  these  are  an  evidence  hereof  unto  us.  Now,  further, 
secondly,  we  are  to  consider  wherein  this  disparity  and  eminency  and  transcen- 
dency does  mainly  consist,  which  we  may  take  notice  of  according  to  these  follow- 
ing explications  of  it.  First,  in  weight ;  secondly,  in  number ;  and  thirdly,  in 
duration.  Now  the  second  is  the  apostle's  judgment,  or  determination  about  it,  in 
this  word,  I  reckon,  or  make  account.  The  word  in  the  Greek  signifies  properly  to 
reason,  or  cast  up  accounts.  And  so  it  is  a  metaphor  either  taken  from  logic  or 
from  arithmetic.  If  we  take  it  from  logic,  so  it  is  a  drawing  of  the  conclusion 
from  the  premises ;  if  we  take  it  from  arithmetic,  so  it  is  by  casting  up  the  account 
to  find  out  the  true  total  sum.  First,  take  it  from  logic;  I  reckon,  that  is,  I  con- 
clude ;  so  we  find  the  word  used  in  other  places,  as  in  Eom.  iii.  28 :  "  Therefore  we 
conclude  that  a  man  is  justified  by  faith,"  &c.  It  is  the  same  word  which  is  here  in 
the  text.  And  so  there  is  this  in  it,  that  a  good  Christian  has  the  best  and  perfectest 
reason.  And  therefore  let  all  proud  wits  stoop  and  veil  to  this.  But,  secondly,  it 
may  be  a  metaphor  taken  from  arithmetic ;  I  reckon,  that  is,  I  make  account. 
That  the  receipts  do  exceed  the  expenses ;  the  present  suffering  it  comes  short  of 
the  future  glory  by  infinite  degrees.  That  a  Christian  is  the  best  accountant. 
Especially  he  is  so  in  this  point  of  religion,  as  to  the  preferring  of  glory  to  suffer- 
ing. St.  Paul  had  a  very  great  advantage  of  many  others  in  this  particular. 
First,  he  had  skill ;  he  had  a  wit  and  understanding  for  this  purpose.  Every  one 
has  not  the  art  of  arithmetic,  especially  of  this  spiritual  arithmetic.  Secondly,  he 
had  experience.  He  had  the  trial  of  both  estates,  and  so  was  best  able  to  judge 
of  both  (2  Cor.  xi.  23,  xii.  4).  Thirdly,  he  had  the  advantage  also  of  practice. 
The  expedite  casting  up  of  accounts  it  is  a  matter  of  use,  and   the  facility  is 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tux. 

contracted  by  custom.  Now  St.  Paul  he  had  this  also,  he  was  used  hereunto,  and 
he  had  done  it  often  again  and  again.  As  a  man  that  will  be  sure  of  an  account, 
he  goes  over  it  the  second  time,  and  the  third,  and  if  it  still  proves  the  same,  then 
he  determines  it  and  sets  it  down  for  certain.  (Thomas  Horton,  D.D.)  Present 
sufferings  and  future  glory  : — In  Heb.  xi.  25,  26,  there  is  a  similar  course  of  reasoning. 
See  how  he  loads  the  scales.  On  the  world's  side,  "  pleasures  "  and  "  treasures  "  ; 
on  Christ's  side,  •'  reproaches  "  and  "  afflictions."  But  with  the  former  he  throws 
in  •'  for  a  season  " ;  with  the  latter  he  casts  in  "  with  the  people  of  God  "  ;  and  in 
a  moment  the  world  kicks  the  beam.  I.  The  principle  which  guided  the  apostle 
TO  his  conclusion  is  to  bbino  etebnity  into  every  calculation,  and  to  judge  of 
everything  as  it  affects  our  eternity.  Everything  has  in  it  an  eternity  of  con- 
sequence. There  is  not  a  pain,  nor  a  pleasure,  a  word,  nor  a  thought,  which,  either 
directly  or  indirectly,  does  not  reach  out  for  ever  and  ever.  Now,  to  an  immortal 
being,  the  rule  and  standard  of  measurement  must  be  eternity.  Ask  the  man  on 
the  eve  to  "depart,  and  be  with  Christ,"  what  he  thinks  of  the  affairs  of  this 
present  hfe  ?  and  he  wiU  answer  in  the  spirit  of  my  text.  II.  The  exact  point  of 
THE  COMPARISON  AS  IT  STOOD  IN  THE  apostle's  MIND.  It  would  havc  been  quite 
natural  to  have  spoken  of  "  the  glory  that  should  be  shown  to  us,"  as  of  the  object 
which  we  are  aU  reaching  to  in  heaven ;  but  it  was  a  far  higher  range  of  thought 
when  it  dwelt  on  "  the  glory  that  should  be  shown  in  heaven  in  us."  For  what  ia 
that  "  glory  "  which  is  to  make  heaven  ?  Unquestionably  the  same  to  which  David 
looked  (Psa.  xvii.  15).  Perfect  reflection  of  the  brightness  of  God  in  our  person — 
of  the  judgment  of  God  in  our  intellect — of  the  love  of  God  in  our  affections — of 
the  will  of  God  in  our  motives— of  the  unity  of  God  in  the  harmony  of  our  whole 
being.  Everything  is  "glorious"  as  it  respects  or  admits  Deity.  Now  every 
"  suffering  "  here,  of  body  or  of  mind,  has  reference  to,  and  affects  that  reflection 
of  "  glory."  We  Christians  are  passing  through  the  processes  which  are  essential 
to  our  final  condition ;  the  school-time,  which  is  preparatory  to  maturity,  or,  the 
furnace,  melting  the  material,  making  it  capable  of  receiving  the  impression  of  its 
influence.  And,  if  we  once  admit  that,  then  we  hold  a  chain  of  reasoning  which 
justifies,  nay,  reproves,  nay,  rejoices  in  every  sorrow ;  and  establishes  a  proportion 
between  the  degree  of  "the  sufferings,"  and  the  degree  of  "the  glory."  The 
height  of  the  glory  depends  upon  the  attainment  of  the  grace ;  and  the  attainment  uf 
the  grace  is  according  to  the  elevation  of  the  faith  ;  and  the  degree  of  the  faith  is  in 
proportion  to  its  exercise  ;  and  the  exercise  lays  among  afflictions.  And  surely  the 
thought  of  consummation  ought  to  be  sufficient  to  swallow  up  all  the  pain  of  this 
present  world.  What,  if  the  body ' '  groans,  being  burdened,"  when  it  is  all  "  but  for  a 
moment,"  and  eternity  will  be  spent  in  rapturous  ministrations.  (J.  VaugJian,  M.A.) 
The  important  calculation  : — I.  There  can  be  no  comparison  between  the  sufferings 
of  the  present  time,  and  the  consummated  glory  of  the  heavenly  world,  in  respect 
or  nature.  Without  some  resemblance  of  nature,  comparison  cannot  be  instituted  at 
aU.  We  may  compare  the  sun  with  the  moon,  or  with  a  star,  or  even  with  the 
flame  of  a  candle  ;  because,  however  much  smaller,  these  are  all  luminous  objects. 
But  we  cannot  very  well  compare  the  sun  to  a  tree  or  to  a  reptile,  because  of  the 
dissimilarity  of  nature.  So,  also,  we  may  institute  a  comparison,  however  remote, 
between  the  ocean  and  a  lake,  or  river,  or  fountain,  because  water  is  essential  in 
all ;  but  there  cannot  well  be  a  comparison  between  the  ocean  and  a  quadruped  or 
a  flower.  So,  as  there  is  no  sameness  of  nature  in  sufferings  and  glory,  they  cannot 
be  compared,  unless  to  point  out  their  dissimilarity  be  comparison.  II.  There  can 
be  no  comparison  between  present  sufferings  and  future  glory,  in  bespect  of  atten- 
dant circumstances.  1.  One  of  the  circumstances  frequently  attendant  on  the 
Bufferings  of  this  life  is  soUtude.  2.  It  is  another  circumstance  attendant  on  suffer- 
ing, that  we  cannot  always  see  the  good  which  is  designed.  3.  It  may  be  mentioned 
as  a  further  circumstance  attendant  on  suffering,  that  the  causes  of  grief  are  seldom 
single.  It  has  grown  into  a  proverb — Misfortunes  come  in  troops  1  4.  Let  us  now 
reflect,  that  in  the  time  of  that  "  glory  which  shall  be  revealed  in  us,"  this  array  of 
sorrow  will  be  for  ever  passed  away !  Instead  of  neglect  and  solitude,  will  be  the 
banquet  with  "  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  "  ;  "  the  in- 
numerable company  of  angels — the  general  assembly  and  church  of  the  first-born — 
the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect " ;  and  more  than  all,  the  beatific  vision  of  the 
immortal  God  1  Instead  of  the  doubt  and  obscurity  of  this  mortal  state,  will  be  the 
oright  result  of  things ;  the  visible  demonstration  how  these  light  and  momentary 
afflictions  work  out  "a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory,"  Instead 
of  the  thousand  forms  of  human  woe  which  crowd  the  span  of  life  wiUi  diversified 


OHAP.  vm.]  ROMANS.  71 

sorrow,  there  will  be  consummated  happiness ;  every  form  of  pleasure  which  holy 
and  exalted  souls  can  take  in.  III.  It  is  an  unworthy  comparison  between  the 
sufferings  of  the  present  life  and  the  glory  of  the  life  to  come,  in  bbferenob  to 
DEOBEB.  It  is  a  fact  in  the  constitution  of  man's  present  being,  that  he  cannot 
endure  suffering  of  any  kind  beyond  a  given  limit.  If  pushed  beyond  that  limit, 
suffering  relieves  itself.  Swooning,  and  even  death  itself  comes  in,  to  the  relief  of 
those  whose  burden  of  woe  is  too  great  to  be  borne  1  Nor  should  it  be  forgotten, 
that  in  our  present  being  we  can  no  more  bear  the  excess  of  joy  than  that  of  grief. 
Bat  in  the  glory  which  shall  be  revealed  in  us,  the  powers  of  man  shall  be,  beyond 
all  our  present  conception,  exalted  and  enlarged.  IV.  There  can  be  no  comparison 
between  the  sufferings  of  the  present  life  and  the  consummated  glory  of  the 
heavenly  world,  in  respect  of  duration.  Time  may  be  compared  with  time,  and 
one  finite  thing  with  another  thing  which  is  finite  ;  but  time  cannot  be  compared 
with  eternity,  a  thing  which  is  finite  with  one  that  is  infinite.  The  sufferings  of 
this  present  time  will  have  an  end.  Were  every  hour  of  every  day  crowded  with 
agony,  we  know  the  last  hour  will  soon  arrive,  and  the  sorrows  of  earth  be  no  more  1 
But  the  glory  to  be  revealed  in  us  has  no  end  1  The  crown  of  life  never  fades  :  the 
fountains  of  pure  delight  never  cease  to  flow.  After  this  illustration  of  the  apostle's 
doctrine,  we  are  justified  in  using  it  to  the  following  purposes — 1.  As  a  most  ur^'ent 
reason,  why  we  should  take  care  that  in  all  our  sorrows  we  suffer  as  Christians.  2.  The 
apostle's  doctrine  is  certainly  a  lesson  of  patience  and  submission,  under  those  afflic- 
tions it  may  please  Almighty  God  to  permit  to  come  upon  us.  3.  It  will  not  be  possible 
to  give  full  credit  to  the  apostle's  doctrine,  and  to  lay  it  seriously  to  heart,  without 
feeling  it  acall  to  live  ina  constant  reference  to  other  and  brighter  worlds.  (/.  Brumlei/.) 
Present  sufferings  contrasted  with  future  glory : — 1.  It  is  a  saying  as  ancient  as  the 
oldest  book  in  the  Bible  that  "  man  is  born  to  trouble."  And  Christians,  while 
they  are  exposed  to  various  afflictions  "common  to  man,"  have  trials,  often  pungent 
and  severe,  peculiar  to  themselves.  But  Christians  have,  also,  consolations  peculiar 
to  themselves,  and  proportioned  to  their  sorrows.  2.  In  the  text  the  apostle  re- 
presents himself  as  having  instituted  a  comparison  between  "  the  sufferings  of  this 
present  time,"  and  "  the  glory  that  shall  be  revealed,"  with  his  eye  on  their  respective 
magnitudes  ;  with  the  result  that  "  the  sufferings  are  not  worthy  to  be  regarded,  in 
comparison  with  the  glory."  3.  There  are  two  circumstances  which  confirm  aud 
commend  the  apostle's  authority  on  this  subject — (1)  The  large  experience  he  had 
received  of  present  afflictions  (2  Cor.  xi.).  We  are  accustomed  to  attach  weight  to 
the  opinions  of  those  who  have  had  much  experience  in  the  things  of  which  they 
speak.  Yet,  with  his  enlarged  experience,  Paul  declares  that  the  present  sufferings 
of  Christians  are  "  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  "  their  future  glory.  What  are 
our  sufferings  in  comparison  with  his  ?  If,  then,  those  greater  afflictions,  much 
more  our  smaller  trials,  vanish  in  such  a  contrast.  (2)  The  apostle  has  been  dis- 
tinguished, perhaps  above  all  other  men,  by  an  anticipated  experience  of  the  glory 
of  the  future  state  (2  Cor.  xii.  1-4).  And,  looking  at  both  worlds  with  this  connected 
and  enlarged  experience,  he  pronounces  the  judgment  stated  in  the  text.  4.  Observe, 
also,  the  force  of  "  the  glory  that  shall  be  revealed."  The  same  emphatic  expression 
is  used  by  Peter,  in  apparent  allusion  to  the  words  before  us  (1  Pet.  iv,  1).  A 
small  and  dim  reflection  of  that  glory  is  all  that  is  at  present  conveyed  by  Divine 
revelation ;  like  the  glimmering  of  those  distant  suns  that  irradiate  infinite  space ; 
an  infantine  perception  proportioned  to  our  infantine  faculties.  It  is  a  glory  that 
must  be  revealed  ;  that  can  be  discerned  only  by  its  own  splendour.  In  looking  at 
the  comparison,  therefore,  we  must  take  into  consideration  the  disadvantages  arising 
from  the  one  side  being  matter  of  experience  and  clearly  discernible,  while  the  other 
side  is  matter  of  faith,  and  placed  beyond  the  power  of  human  conception.  The 
things  that  are  temporal  are  seen  ;  the  sufferings  are  present :  but  the  things  that 
are  eternal  are  not  seen  ;  the  glory  is  to  be  reveaJed.  5.  There  are,  however,  certain 
alleviating  circumstances  connected  with  our  present  sufferings,  which  render  them 
unworthy  to  sustain  a  comparison  with  that  contrasted  glory  which  is  free  from  all 
deductions.  I.  They  seldom  proceed  ebom  the  highest  source  of  suffering,  and 
hence  they  are  never  sufferings  of  the  severest  nature.  The  sufferings  of  a  g;iod 
man  cannot  arise  from  the  horrors  of  a  guilty  conscience  that  sees  nothing  in  futurity 
but  an  angry  God  and  eternal  woe  I  We  can  measure  our  strength  in  the  cont>?m- 
plation  of  temporal  calamities,  but  not  in  the  prospect  of  eternal  ruin.  The  Christian, 
whatever  his  sufferings,  may  have  peace  in  his  conscience,  and  their  edge  is  effectually 
taken  off  in  his  experience.  They  are  thus  rendered  very  imperfect.  But  the  future 
glory  is  of  a  nature  to  fill  the  soul,  to  satisfy  its  highest  conceptions,  its  largest 


72  TRE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ym. 

capacities  of  good.  II.  Thbt  abb  subject  to  intebbitptions  and  intbbtals  of 
BEPOSE.  The  storms  of  adversity  do  not  prevail  through  the  whole  period  of  the 
most  afflicted  life ;  they  are  relieved  by  intervals  of  calm  and  sunshine  (Psalm  cxxv.). 
It  is  because  our  sufferings  are  thus  interrupted  that  they  become  the  more  con- 
spicuous. Health,  for  example,  is  the  ordinary  state  of  our  being ;  sickness  is  an 
interruption  of  that  state ;  hence  we  dwell  on  a  few  days  or  even  hoars  of  pain, 
while  we  let  years  of  ease  and  vigour  pass  unnoticed.  But  in  the  heavenly  world 
there  is  no  suspension  of  good,  no  intrusion  of  distress.  There  vnll  prevail  an 
unbroken  continuity  of  bliss.  Who,  then,  would  compare  the  occasional  sufferings 
of  this  present  time  with  the  enjoyment  of  undisturbed  felicity  ?  III.  Thet  abb 
ATTENDED  BY  MANY  AiiLEviATiNG  ciBcnMSTANCES.  None  touch  US  at  oncc  in  all  points 
atid  put  an  end  to  every  enjoyment.  God  attempers  His  chastisements  to  our  weak- 
ness ;  and,  in  general,  so  mingles  goodness  with  severity,  as  even,  amidst  our 
sorrows,  to  call  forth  our  thanksgivings.  If  our  health  and  ease  is  impaired  we  are 
often  attended  by  kind  friends,  and  we  have  all  the  assistance  which  the  physician's 
art  can  afford,  and,  for  the  support  of  our  hearts,  the  rich  promises  of  Scripture, 
and  the  influences  of  the  Divine  Comforter.  But  in  the  future  state  of  glory  there 
is  no  admixture  of  suSering ;  it  is  a  state  of  pure  fruition ;  a  scene  of  unimpaired 
beatitude.  With  the  perfect  nature  of  that  glory,  the  very  imperfect  nature  of  our 
present  sufferings,  as  modified  by  many  alleviating  circumstances,  renders  them 
not  worthy  to  be  compared.  IV.  Even  when  we  may  be  eeduoed  to  the  greatest 
POSSIBLE  DISTRESS,  STILL  WB  BETAiN  HOPE,  wMch  Operates  with  a  resisting  force 
against  the  assaults  of  adversity.  And  what  a  source  of  joy  does  this  principle 
open  to  the  Christian  1  (ver.  24;  Heb.  xi.  1).  But  in  the  happiness  of  heaven  there 
exists  no  disturbing  fear  to  correspond  with  the  hope  that  allays  the  sufferings  of 
time.  Once  admitted  to  that  bright  world,  we  shall  look  back  on  ' '  the  sufferings  of 
this  present  time,"  as  on  the  faint  recollection  of  a  vision  of  the  night :  they  will 
only  serve  to  enhance  our  beatitude,  to  swell  our  song  of  praise  !  V.  Present  suffer- 
ings ABE  PROPORTIONED  TO  OUR  PRESENT  POWERS  OP  ENDURING  ;    but  the   gloricS  of    the 

future  world,  to  another  state  of  faculties,  a  very  different  order  of  capacities.  At 
the  resurrection  there  will  take  place  a  great,  an  inconceivable  enlargement  of  our 
energies  in  mind  and  body,  our  capacities  of  action  and  enjoyment  (1  Cor.  xv.).  The 
body  will  be  "  raised  in  power,"  hke  that  of  angels  who  "  excel  in  strength."  The 
eye  wUl  be  strengthened  to  behold  those  beams  of  Divine  effulgence  which,  were  they 
to  be  manifested  to  us  now,  would  blind  us  with  their  blaze.  The  ear  will  be  fitted 
to  receive,  the  voice  to  respond,  those  eternal  hallelujahs  1  Every  cloud  will  be  dis- 
pelled from  the  mind,  every  imperfection  of  its  powers  removed.  What  are  oar 
limited  sufferings,  proportioned  as  they  are  to  our  present  Umited  powers,  placed  in 
comparison  with  that  ineffable  glory,  to  which  powers  of  a  different  order  are 
adapted?     VI.  And  note  the  immeasurable  disparity  between  the  duration  of 

TEMPORAL    AFFLICTIONS    AND    THE    DURATION    OF    CELESTIAL    GLORY.        If    they   extended 

through  the  whole  period  of  hfe,  and  that  period  were  protracted  to  antediluvian 
longevity,  still  they  would  be  lost  in  less  than  a  moment,  in  comparison  with 
eternal  glories :  weighed  against  that  "  exceeding  weight,"  these  light  afflictions 
would  appear  as  the  almost  invisible  motes  of  the  sunbeam.  Conclusion :  1.  Let 
Christians  derive  support  and  encouragement  under  their  various  afflictions.  When 
we  are  ready  to  be  cast  down  by  some  pressing  burden,  let  us  balance  it  against  an 
"  eternal  weight  of  glory."  2.  Let  others,  who  may  not  as  yet  have  turned  their 
attention  to  eternal  realities,  be  prevailed  upon  no  longer  to  neglect  the  great  sal- 
vation. Who  would  hesitate  between  a  few  years  of  doubtful  enjoyment,  invaded 
by  sufferings  "  common  to  man,"  and  inconceivable  happiness  prolonged  and  pro- 
gressive through  infinite  duration?  {Robert  Hall,  M. A.)  Present  suffering  and 
future  glory  in  contrast : — 1.  "Present  time"  may  mean  the  sufferings  of  any  one 
at  any  time,  or  of  any  one  during  his  whole  life,  or  of  all  persons  during  their  life ; 
or,  still  again,  of  all  persons  consolidated  in  their  experience  of  one  person.  2. 
"  Glory  "  is  splendour,  magnificence.  Then,  as  according  to  the  text,  suffering  is 
not  to  be  compared  with  the  glory.  They  must  be  placed  in  contrast,  as  to  their — 
I.  Origin — the  one  from  sin,  the  other  from  God.  II.  Natube.  All  suffering  is 
mixed ;  glory  is  unmixed.  HI.  Bealisation.  Suffering  comprehensible ;  glory 
incomprehensible,  IV.  Duration.  Suffering  ends  ;  glory  never — it  is  everlasting. 
To  be  like  Christ ;  to  be  with  Christ ;  to  be  equal  heirs  with  Christ — this  is  glory. 
And  yet  we  cannot  travel  to  the  end  of  such  infinite  glory.  Is  there  not  enough  in 
this  view  of  our  text  to  inspire  the  Christian  with  zeal  and  devotion,  and  to  send 
the  sinner  weeping  to  the  Cross?     (D.  Thomas,  D.  D.)        Present  sufferings  not  to  be 


CHAP.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  73 

compared  with  future  glory : — I.  What  abe  the  suFrEBiNOS  here  intended.  1. 
Those  of  "  this  present  time  "  in  the  present  disordered  and  fallen  state  of  things. 
While  man  was  a  stranger  to  sin,  he  was  also  a  stranger  to  suffering.  But  when 
sin  found  an  entrance  it  made  an  opening  for  suffering.  How  various  are  the  kinds 
and  degrees  of  suffering,  and  how  many  are  the  quarters  from  whence  it  arises  I 
What  faculty  of  mind,  what  sense  or  member  of  body,  what  possession,  connection, 
or  enjoyment  in  life,  may  not  become  a  source  of  sorrow?  We  may  suffer  through 
fires,  inundations,  earthquakes,  famines,  pestilences,  inclement  seasons.  And  what 
is  more  dreadful  than  any  of  them,  we  may  see  fields  of  battle  covered  with  the 
dead,  and  resounding  with  the  groans  of  the  dying.  Behold  the  widow,  orphan, 
prisoner,  slave.  We  may  "  return  and  consider  all  the  oppressions  done  under  the 
son  "  (Eccles.  iv.  1,  2),  all  introduced  by  sin,  that  pregnant  womb.  2.  Now,  even 
in  these  general  sufferings  the  people  of  God  have  more  or  less  their  share.  But, 
besides  these,  they  have  sufferings  peculiar  to  themselves.  They  mourn  in  Zion, 
sorrow  for  sins,  their  own  or  those  of  others :  they  "deny  themselves,"  and  "  take 
up  their  cross,"  "crucify  the  flesh,"  are  "reproached  for  the  name  of  Christ,"  and, 
in  various  ways,  are  made  partakers  of  Christ's  sufferings.  3.  But  the  apostle  spoke 
more  particularly  of  the  Church  in  that  age,  when  the  sufferings  of  its  members 
were  pecuharly  aggravated  (2  Cor.  iv.  8 ;  1  Cor.  iv.  9-13 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  4,  5 ;  Bom.  viii. 
35 ;  Heb.  x.  32-84,  xi.  36-38).  II.  What  is  the  globy  to  be  bevealed.  This 
cannot  be  at  present  fully  comprehended  (1  John  iii.  2).  It  implies,  liowever — 1. 
A  perfect  state  of  soul,  gloriously  enlightened  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12),  glorious  in  holiness 
(1  John  iii.  2 ;  Kev.  xxii.  4),  in  happiness  (Rev.  xxi.  3-6;  xxii.  1-5),  in  authority, 
power,  and  dominion  (Luke  xxii.  28-30;  James  i.  12;  Eev.  i.  6,  iii.  21).  2.  A 
perfect  and  glorious  state  of  body  (Phil.  iii.  21 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  20,  43,  49,  51 ;  Eph.  i, 
19,  20;  Col.  iii.  4  ;  1  John  iii.  2).  This  is  justly  termed  "  the  manifestation  of  the 
sons  of  God  "  (ver.  19),  and  "  the  adoption  "  (vers.  23,  29).  3.  The  being  placed 
in  a  world  of  glory,  which  will  far  exceed  this  world.  4.  The  being  admitted  into 
glorious  society,  even  that  of  patriarchs  and  prophets,  evangelists  and  apostles, 
saints  and  angels.  5.  The  having  free,  constant,  uninterrupted  communion  with 
the  Father  of  glory  through  the  Lord  of  glory,  and  by  the  glorious  Spirit.   III.  How 

IT   APPEABS  that  THE    SOFFEBINQS  ABE  NOT  TO  BE  COMPABED  TO  THE  GLOBY.       Compare 

— 1.  The  subjects  of  the  suffering  and  of  the  glory.  Our  powers  of  body  and  mind 
are  limited.  Any  great  weight  of  affliction  soon  crushes  the  frail  body,  and  causes 
it  to  seek  repose  in  death.  The  narrow  capacity  of  the  mind,  likewise,  cannot  admit 
at  once  a  very  large  measure  of  trouble  of  any  kind  ;  one  sorrow  is  wont  to  displace 
another.  2.  But  the  glory  to  be  revealed  in  us  will  be  the  glory  of  an  angel.  Our 
vessels  will  then  be  wonderfully  enlarged,  and  rendered  capable  of  containing  a  large 
measure  of  felicity  and  glory.  3.  Their  nature  and  design.  (1)  The  sufferings  are 
not  designed  to  be  a  proper  punishment  of  sin.  God  only  corrects  that  He  may 
reform  and  amend.  (2)  The  glory,  however,  will  be  a  reward  proper  for  an  infixiite 
Being  to  bestow  on  those  whom  He  acknowledges  to  be  His  children  (chap.  ix.  23 ; 
Heb.  xi.  16).  4.  The  degree  of  the  one  and  the  other.  The  sufferings  of  the  present 
time,  however  great,  are  not  without  any  mixture  of  consolation.  But  the  glory  to 
be  revealed  will  be  pure  glory  and  felicity,  unmixed  with  the  least  alloy  of  sorrow. 
5.  The  constancy  of  the  one  and  the  other.  The  sufferings  of  the  present  life  are 
seldom,  if  ever,  incessant,  but  the  glory  will  be  incessant,  without  change,  unless  for 
the  better.  6.  Their  duration.  The  sufferings  of  the  present  time  are  the  sufferings 
of  a  creature  of  a  day  (1  Cor.  vii.  29-31).  But  the  glory  is  that  of  an  inamortal  being; 
a  being  that  can  die  no  more  either  in  soul  or  body.  IV.  In  whom  this  globy  will  be 
BEVEALED ;  OB  WHO  HAVE  A  BIGHT  TO  EXPECT  IT?  1.  Not  in  mankind  in  general,  though 
all  be  redeemed  with  the  blood  of  Christ.  For  a  man  may  "  frustrate  the  grace  of  God  " 
(Gal.  ii.  21).  2.  Not  in  all  that  profess  Christianity.  For  a  man  may  "  profess  to 
know  God,  and  by  works  deny  Him. "  3.  Not  in  aU  that  are  outwardly  unblame- 
able.  For  a  man  may  "  have  a  name  to  live  and  be  dead."  4.  But  in  all  that  so 
believe  the  gospel  as  to  find  it  "  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation."  {J.  Benson.) 
The  higher  heroism — suffering  and  glory  : — There  was  an  ancient  sect  who  held  that 
the  highest  virtue  was  to  triumph  over  pain.  The  Stoics  aimed  high ;  but  the  road 
they  took  was  paved  with  crushed  desires,  with  petrified  affections,  and  strewn  with 
the  ashes  of  distinguished  loves.  But  Christianity  does  not  save  as  by  rendering  us 
incapable  of  sorrow,  but  through  sorrow,  it  leads  us  into  the  joy  of  God.  Note — I. 
The  bsceonino.  1.  It  is  a  reckoning,  not  a  full  realisation.  The  apostle  does  not 
say,  "  I  know,"  for  he  had  not  drained  the  cup  of  earthly  sorrow,  and  had  but  tasted 
the  cup  of  heavenly  joy.    Bat  neither  does  he  say,  "  I  think  or  conjecture,"  fot 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [cha».  no. 

although  he  knew  not  the  whole,  he  knew  a  good  deal  of  both.  What  be  doM  say 
lies  between  the  two.  "I  reckon"  is  the  language  of  faith,  which  accepts  its  present 
as  the  Bure  ground  of  a  larger  experience.  2.  It  is  a  reckoning  about  "present" 
suffering.  It  was  then  a  time  of  persecution ;  but  the  truth  of  our  text  is  not  to  be 
confined  to  such  a  time.  Are  we  not  apt  to  exaggerate  the  sufferings  of  a  time  of 
open  persecution,  as  compared  with  calmer  times  ?  Do  we  not  pass  people  every 
day  who  are  suffering  more  for  the  sake  of  principle  than  ever  martyr  did  ?  Their 
death  is  no  less  a  martyrdom  because  it  is  a  slow  death.  The  Christian  suffers  both 
as  a  man  and  a  Christian.  He  does  not  escape  through  faith  the  common  lot.  And 
besides,  the  spiritual  nature  has  sufferings  peculiar  to  itself.  It  begins  in  suffering. 
We  have  to  pass  Sinai,  and  see  the  terrors  of  the  Lord.  There  is  the  struggle  of 
conscience,  with  sin  and  unbelief,  and  the  pangs  of  the  new  birth.  Sanctification 
is  but  the  deepening  and  broadening  of  our  conversion,  and  it  is  carried  on  through 
suffering.  The  higher  a  nature  rises,  it  increases  in  tenderness  and  sympathy,  and 
while  it  has  to  maintain  a  conflict  with  evil,  the  heart  must  be  the  home  of  many 
great  griefs.  3.  It  is  a  reckoning  about  present  suffering  in  connection  with  future 
glory.  The  mere  mention  of  the  two  cannot  but  suggest  that  the  former  is  unworthy 
of  comparison  with  the  latter.  The  magnanimity  of  Paul  prevents  him  from  drag- 
ging his  afflictions  into  comparison  with  the  glory  of  God,  The  memory  of  past  hard- 
ships is  all  but  swallowed  up  in  the  enthusiasm  of  hope ;  and  in  this  he  follows  his 
Master,  "who,  for  the  joy  set  before  Him, endured  the  Cross,  despising  the  shame." 
II.  The  ground  of  the  beckoning.  1.  The  grace  of  God  in  the  heart,  since  it  so 
reveals  God  to  the  soul,  so  brings  down  heaven  to  earth,  that  the  possessor  of  it  can 
say  that  his  sufferings  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory  that  shall  be 
revealed  in  him.  2.  This  grace  is  the  root  both  of  the  sufferings  and  the  glory.  If 
the  two  things  were  really  opposed,  then  some  comparison  might  be  made;  but  this 
is  not  the  case.  Suffering  is  the  first-fruit  of  grace,  glory  the  last.  The  one  is  the 
fruit  of  grace  in  time,  the  other  its  fruit  in  eternity.  To  have  the  grace  of  God  in 
the  heart  is  to  have  a  principle  of  life  there  that  must  come  into  bitterest  conflict 
with  evil.  Jesus  Christ  must  needs  suffer  to  enter  into  His  glory.  As  He  was,  so 
are  we  in  this  world.  We  have  to  "  fill  up  that  which  is  behind  of  the  sufferings  of 
Christ."  Dwelling  in  the  believer  Christ  has  still  to  meet  the  temptations  of  the 
devil  and  the  contradictions  of  sinners.  3.  The  suffering  leads  to  the  glory.  Suffer- 
ing is  in  no  sense  the  purchase  of  the  glory.  The  sufferings  of  Christ  have  both 
paid  the  penalty  of  all  sin,  and  purchased  all  blessing;  and  it  would  not  accord  with 
justice  that  we  should  have  to  pay  the  same  penalty  over  again  in  oar  suffering. 
Certainly,  if  present  suffering  could  purchase  future  glory,  it  would  be  a  great 
bargain.  Willingly  might  we  undertake  a  pilgrimage  to  any  shrine — gladly  might 
we  give  our  bosom  to  the  knife,  if  the  gates  of  Paradise  would  thereby  open  to  us. 
But,  although  our  suffering  is  in  no  sense  the  foundation  or  price  of  the  glory,  the 
one,  nevertheless,  leads  to  the  other — is  a  condition  of,  or  contribution  to  the  other, 
as  is  stated  in  the  preceding  verse.  The  suffering,  then,  is  not  to  be  compared  with 
the  glory,  as  if  the  one  were  a  deduction  from  the  other ;  for  the  one  enhances  the 
other.  As  the  light  of  the  precious  stone  is  brought  out  by  cutting ;  as  the  veins  of 
the  marble  are  revealed  by  polishing ;  as  the  storms  that  fight  with  the  young  tree 
rock  it  into  sturdier  strength  ;  so  the  Christian  life  is  strengthened  and  beautified 
by  suffering.  Conclusion :  Should  any  one  standing  on  the  threshold  of  the  Christian 
life  hesitate  in  view  of  its  sufferings ;  or  having  put  his  hand  to  the  plough,  be  dis- 
posed to  look  back ;  let  him  know  that  he  is  not  fit  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
Those  difficulties  before  which  he  pauses  as  great  obstacles  to  his  setting  out  on  the 
way  to  glory  are  the  very  way  itself.  Who  can  show  us  a  way  to  glory  of  any  kind 
that  is  not  paved  with  suffering?  Is  the  glory  the  soldier  seeks  to  be  had  with  ease  ? 
Is  the  prize  of  fortune  the  merchant  seeks  to  be  had  with  folded  arms  ?  Are  the 
ends  on  which  the  student  is  bent  achieved  by  laying  his  head  on  a  soft  pillow  and 
dreaming  of  them  ?  One  is  apt  to  say  there  is  no  royal  road  to  the  glory  of  God ; 
but  that  would  be  a  great  mistake.  Suffering  is  the  royal  road,  for  by  it  the  King 
passed  into  His  glory.  {F.  Ferguson.)  Future  glory  an  encouragement  under 
present  sufferings  : — When  the  sailor  encounters  heavy  weather,  one  thought  cheers 
him — the  ship  may  roll  and  pitch  in  the  angry  sea,  the  cold  spray  may  drench  him, 
his  work  may  be  hard  and  perilous,  but  he  can  look  towards  the  shore ;  far  away 
over  the  vessel's  bow,  far  away  across  the  tumbling  waves  is  the  shore,  the  haven 
where  he  would  be,  and  for  the  sake  of  this,  by  remembering  this,  he  can  bear  hia 

E resent  troubles,  though  the  waves  of  the  sea  rage  hon-ibly.     It  was  this  feeling  of 
ope  which  oaiiiCvl  the  great  herot-s  and  discoverers  of  old  thjou^jh  all  their  triala* 


CHJ*.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  73 

When  Columbus  set  forth  to  discover  the  new  world  he  could  bear  the  hardabipa 
and  dangers  in  his  way  because  he  looked  towards  the  shore ;  and  at  last,  whe.  he 
beheld  the  broken  sea-weed  floating  past  his  ship,  and  the  birds  wheeling  round  him, 
he  knew  that  his  purpose  was  gained,  and  that  the  land  which  he  sought  to  win  lay 
before  him.  So  I  bid  you  to  do ;  when  the  waves  of  affliction  swell  and  roll  towards 
you,  when  strong  under-currents  of  temptation  catch  you  and  sweep  you  along,  when 
you  are  weary  and  faint  witli  buffeting  the  tide  of  sin,  and  sorrow,  and  frailty,  look 
to  the  shore,  look  past  the  sins  and  the  sorrow,  past  the  noise  of  the  whirlpool  of  life, 
past  the  high  tide  of  accumulated  trial,  and  the  low  water-mark  of  despondency  and 
despair — look  to  the  shore,  there  is  peace  there,  there  are  flowers  there,  there  is  rest 
there  remaining  for  the  people  of  God.  {H.  J.  W.  Buxton,  M.A.)  How  the  apostle 
lifts  himself  above  the  sufferings  of  time : — 1.  Little  souls,  superficial  minds,  reckon 
it  as  wisdom  to  argue  away  the  mass  of  sufferings,  or  at  least  to  belittle  them,  to 
conoetd  the  dark  shadows  with  rosy  veils,  and  to  place  opposite  a  longer  account  of 
pleasures.  But  the  truth  is  found  in  the  plaints  which  are  known  by  all,  and  which 
Job  expressed  (Job  rii.  1-3).  Our  apostle  likewise  gives  full  expression  to  the 
truth.  In  the  phrases,  "  earnest  expectation  "  (ver,  19),  and  "  from  the  bondage 
of  corruption  "  (ver.  21),  he  expresses  the  magnitude  of  the  afflictions,  and  in  the  oft- 
repeated  "  creature,"  "whole  creation  "  (ver.  22),  is  expressed  its  extent,  its  gene- 
rality, which  knows  of  no  exception.  2.  Neither  does  he  treat  the  origin  super- 
ficially. It  was  not  so  from  the  beginning,  neither  was  there  necessity  that  it  should 
be  so,  "  not  willingly  "  (ver.  20).  The  creature  was  made  subject  to  vanity.  It  is 
not  a  blind,  puzzling  game  of  chance  concerning  which  it  would  be  best  not 
to  investigate ;  but  the  apostle  knows  and  speaks  boldly  that  this  woe  has  a  reason- 
able, just,  and  Divine  cause,  "  by  reason  of  Him  who  hath  subjected  the  same  in 
hope,"  i.e.,  on  account  of  human  sin,  because  the  holy  God  desired  to  mark  sin  with 
the  unmistakable  mark  of  misery  and  enmity  to  God.  3.  But  the  apostle  likewise 
knows  that  from  the  beginning — i.e.,  in  the  will  of  God — this  is  no  unchangeable 
and  eternal  relation  or  condition  ("  in  hope,"  ver.  20).  Glory,  which  excludes  every 
woe,  is  the  certain  destiny  of  the  Christian,  so  that  the  sorrowful  condition  of  the 
present  world  appears  to  him  as  a  prophecy  of  this  destiny.  (Compare  the  "for" 
in  ver.  19).  Adoption  (ver.  23),  has  undoubtedly  ani  completely  taken  place  (ver. 
19,  "  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God  ").  Enjoyment  of  that  which  is  promised 
in  the  testament,  afterward  the  revealed  and  distributed  inheritance  (ver.  17).  Sepa- 
ration from  every  temporal  fetter,  also  of  the  mortal  body ;  hence  glorious  freedom 
(ver.  21,  and  "redemption  of  the  body,"  ver.  23),  is  the  destiny  of  those  who  belong 
to  Christ  ("  in  us,"  ver.  18,  is  explained  by  ver.  14) ;  in  which  destiny  all  creation 
shall  share  (ver.  22).  This  clear  aim  in  view,  guaranteed  by  the  "  possession  of 
the  first  fruits  of  the  Spirit  "  (ver.  23),  causes  the  present  sufferings  to  be  only  of 
momentary  consequence  (ver.  18) ;  the  Christian  longs  for  heaven  (ver.  23),  and 
this  homesickness  is  termed  the  blessedness  of  hope  (ver.  24).  (Prof.  Cosack.) 
The  prospect  of  future  glory : — 1.  This  was  the  reckoning  of  one  who  could  not 
mistake — for  the  text  is  not  merely  the  opinion  of  the  apostle,  but  as  the  declara- 
tion of  God  Himself,  for  the  eternal  comfort  of  His  Church.  2.  And  this  leads  us 
to  remember  how  very  little  is  said  in  Scripture  of  the  glories  of  the  world  to  come. 
It  seems  solemnly  determined  by  our  Master  that  His  Church  shall  walk  by  faith, 
not  by  sight  (2  Cor.  xii.  4).  Those  who  die  come  not  back  again.  Doubtless  they 
sometimes  wish  it  (Luke  xvi.  27-30),  but  it  is  a  vain  wish.  He  tells  us,  instead, 
much  about  the  sufferings  and  trials  which  await  us  in  this  life.  There  is  a  great 
deal  said  about  a  cross :  much  tribulation,  the  need  of  purity  of  heart,  and  self-denial. 
These  are  not  the  things  by  which  the  world  induces  us  to  love  and  serve  it.  The 
world  keeps  pain  in  the  background,  and  talks  of  pleasure.  Christ  keeps  pleasure 
in  the  background,  and  talks  of  pain.  And  it  is  not  hard  to  guess  why.  It  is  because 
the  world  has  so  little  pleasure  to  offer  as  a  bribe,  that  it  had  need  to  talk  much 
about  it ;  whereas  the  Lord  of  glory  has  so  huge  an  amount  of  blessedness  in  store 
for  those  who  love  Him  that  if  He  were  to  reveal  the  greatness  thereof  faith  would 
be  swallowed  up  in  present  certainty  nd  hope  in  present  enjoyment.  3.  And  yet 
the  solemn  silence  of  Scripture  conce  ning  heaven  is  now  and  then  all  but  broken. 
The  lips  are  sometimes  opened,  as  it  were,  to  speak ;  and,  though  closed  again 
immediately,  enough  has  escaped  to  fill  the  soul  with  wonder  and  to  make  the 
spirit  attentive.  The  apostle  in  the  text  does  not  describe  heaven ;  but  he  tells  us 
that  something  wonderful  might  be  told.  Something  of  the  same  kind  is  found  in 
2  Cor.  iv.  17,  18,  and  1  Cor.  ii.  9.  W  may  think  as  we  will,  and  what  we  wiU ;  and 
Ve  shall  still  be  far,  far  behind  I    To  see  patriarch,  prophets,  apostles,  the  early 


9S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ym. 

Churches,  will  be  much,  to  be  sure ;  yet  will  it  be  as  nothing  compared  to  what  shall 
bel  So  again  (and  oh,  the  unspeakably  higher  privilege!) — so  again,  the  beholding 
of  the  face  of  the  Son  of  Man.  Or  again,  to  be  shown  the  providences  which 
watched  over  our  lives ;  to  recognise  the  hand  of  Love  in  every  blow  which  overtook 
us,  every  disappointment  which  afflicted  us ;  yea,  to  be  restored,  and  that  eternally, 
to  everything  we  had  ever  loved  and  lost — these  things  and  more,  told  over  ten 
thousand  times,  convey  but  a  feeble  picture,  a  faint  image  of  the  blessedness  of 
Heaven  I  To  conclude.  The  use  of  these  declarations  is  clearly  this — to  reconcile 
good  men  to  present  sorrow.  There  is  a  bright  prospect  beyond.  {Dean  Burgon.) 
Confident  expectation  of  a  perfect  kingdom  of  God : — I  know  the  obstacles,  but  I 
know  as  well  the  power  behind  1  I  do  not  see  success  as  yet,  but  I  know  that  it  is 
coming.  So  I  do  not  see  the  cathedral  as  yet,  when  I  go  into  the  confused  quarry- 
yard  and  see  there  the  half -wrought  stones,  the  clumsy  blocks  that  are  by  and  by 
to  be  decorated  capitals.  But  when  at  last  they  are  finished  in  form  and  brought 
together,  the  mighty  building  rises  in  the  air,  an  ever-during  psalm  in  rock.  I  do 
not  see  the  picture  yet,  when  I  look  upon  the  palette  with  its  blotches  and  stains 
and  lumps  of  colour.  By  and  by,  when  the  skilful  brush  of  the  painter  has  dis- 
tributed those  colours,  I  see  the  radiant  beauty  of  the  Madonna,  the  pathos  of  the 
Magdalene ;  I  see  the  beauty  of  the  landscape  spread  out  upon  the  canvas,  with 
meadow  and  hill  and  winding  stream,  and  the  splendours  of  the  sunset  crowning 
the  whole.  I  do  not  see  yet  the  perfect  kingdom  of  God  upon  earth,  but  I  see  the 
colours  which  are  to  blend  in  it.  I  see  the  already  half -chiselled  rock  out  of  which 
it  shall  be  wrought ;  and  I  am  not  going  to  despond  now,  when  so  much  already  has 
been  accomplished.     {R.  S.  Starrs.) 

Vers.  19-23.  For  the  earnest  expectation  of  the  creature  vralteth  for  the  mani- 
festation of  the  sons  of  God. — The  expectation  of  the  creature: — The  Greek  for 
"  expectation  "  is  one  of  those  admirable  words  which  that  language  easily  forms. 
It  is  composed  of  three  elements :  Kapa,  the  head  ;  Sokew,  Sokoo},  doKiui,  to  wait  for, 
espy ;  and  oltto,  from,  from  afar ;  so  "  to  wait  with  the  head  raised  and  the  eye 
fixed  on  that  point  of  the  horizon  from  which  the  expected  object  is  to  come." 
What  a  plastic  representation  I  An  artist  might  make  a  statue  of  hope  out  of  this 
term.  The  verb  "  longeth  for  "  is  not  less  remarkable ;  it  is  composed  of  the  simple 
verb  Sixoiiai,  to  receive,  and  !«,  out  of  the  hands  of,  uTro,  from,  from  afar  ;  so  "  to 
receive  something  from  the  hands  of  One  who  extends  it  to  you  from  afar."  The 
substantive  and  the  verb  together  vividly  describe  the  attitude  of  the  suffering 
creation,  which  in  its  entirety  turns,  as  it  were,  an  impatient  look  to  the  expected 
future.  {Prof.  Godet.)  The  expectation  of  the  creature  : — There  is  a  sort  of  vague, 
undefinable  impression,  we  think,  upon  all  spirits,  of  some  great  evolution  of  the 
present  system  under  which  we  live — some  looking  towards,  as  well  as  longing  after 
immortality— some  mysterious  but  yet  powerful  sense  within  every  heart  of  the 
present  as  a  state  of  confinement  and  thraldom ;  and  that  yet  a  day  of  light  and 
largeness  and  liberty  is  coming.  We  cannot  imagine  of  unbehevers  that  they  have 
any  very  precise  or  perhaps  confident  anticipation  on  the  subject  any  more  than 
the  world  at  large  had  of  the  advent  of  our  Messiah — though  a  very  general 
expectation  was  abroad  of  the  approaching  arrival  of  some  great  personage  upon 
earth.  And,  in  like  manner,  there  is  abroad  even  now  the  dim  and  the  distant 
vision  of  another  advent,  of  a  brighter  period  that  is  now  obscurely  seen  or 
guessed  at  through  the  gloom  by  which  humanity  is  encompassed — a  kind  of 
floating  anticipation,  suggested  perhaps  by  the  experimental  feeling  that  there  is 
now  the  straitness  of  an  oppressed  and  [limited  condition ;  and  that  we  are  still 
among  the  toils,  and  the  difficulties,  and  the  struggles  of  an  embryo  state  of 
existence.  It  is  altogether  worthy  of  remark,  and  illustrative  of  our  text,  that,  in 
like  manner  as  through  the  various  countries  of  the  world,  there  is  a  very  wide 
impression  of  a  primeval  condition  of  virtue  and  blessedness  from  which  we  have 
fallen,  so  there  seems  a  very  wide  expectation  of  the  species  being  at  length 
restored  to  the  same  health  and  harmony  and  loveliness  as  before.  The  vision  of 
a  golden  age  at  some  remote  period  of  antiquity  is  not  unaccompanied  with  the 
Tlsion  of  a  yet  splendid  and  general  revival  of  all  things.  Even  apart  from  reve- 
lation, there  floats  before  the  world's  eye  the  brilhant  perspective  of  this  earth 
being  at  length  covered  with  a  righteous  and  regenerated  family.  This  is  a  topic  on 
which  even  philosophy  has  its  fascinating  dreams ;  and  there  are  philanthropists  in 
car  day  who  disown  Christianity,  yet  are  urged  forward  to  enterprise  by  the  power 
and  the  pleasure  of  an  anticipation  so  beautiful.    They  do  not  think  of  death. 


CEAP.  vm.]  ROMANS.  7? 

They  only  think  of  the  moral  and  political  glories  of  a  renovated  world,  and  of  these 
glories  as  unfading.  It  is  an  immortality  after  all  that  they  are  picturing.  While 
they  look  on  that  gospel  which  brought  life  and  immortahty  to  light  as  a  fable, 
still  they  find  that  the  whole  capacity  of  their  spirits  is  not  filled  unless  they  can 
regale  them  with  the  prospect  of  an  immortality  of  their  own.  Nothing  short  of 
this  will  satisfy  them ;  and  whether  you  look  to  those  who  speculate  on  the  per- 
fectibility of  mankind,  or  those  who  think  in  economic  theories  that  they  are  laying 
the  basis  on  which  might  be  reared  the  permanent  happiness  of  nations — you  see 
but  the  creature  spurning  at  the  narrowness  of  its  present  condition,  and  waiting 
in  earnest  expectancy  for  the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God.  (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.) 
The  longing  of  the  creature  for  perfection  : — First,  the  creature.  This  is  to  be  taken 
not  in  a  hmited  sense,  as  sometimes  it  is  taken  in  other  places,  for  the  human 
reasonable  creature — that  is,  for  mankind  (Mark  xvi.  16) — but  in  an  extended  sense. 
For  aU  these  outward  and  visible  things  which  are  in  the  wurld  besides  ourselves — 
the  heavens,  and  the  earth,  and  the  sea,  and  all  that  is  in  them.  The  whole  frame 
and  body  of  the  creation,  as  the  original  word  carries  it  here  in  the  text,  the  creation 
itself.  And  so  the  Syriac  and  Arabic  interpreters  translate  it"  every  creature,"  or 
the  "  whole  creation."  The  second  thing  is,  the  earnest  expectation  of  the  creature 
waiting.  The  word  which  is  here  translated  "  earnest  expectation,"  is  in  the  Greek 
very  emphatic,  and  signifies  properly  the  stretching  or  putting  out  of  the  head  with 
vehement  intention,  as  one  that  looks  out  for  some  special  friend,  whom  he  expects 
and  desires  should  come  unto  him.  According  to  that  which  is  expressed  of  the 
mother  of  Sisera,  waiting  for  the  return  of  her  son  (Judg.  v.  28) :  she  looked  out  at 
the  window  for  him,  and  cried  through  the  lattice.  Now  in  the  third  place,  by  the 
manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God,  we  are  to  understand  the  day  of  Christ's  second 
coming  as  the  proper  time  and  season  wherein  the  sons  of  God  shall  be  made 
manifest.  We  begin.  The  party  expecting:  the  creature.  It  is  usual  with  the 
Spirit  of  God  in  Scripture  to  fasten  upon  the  unreasonable  creatures  those  ex- 
pressions which  do  properly  belong  to  reasonable  men.  As  for  example  Psa. 
xcvi.  11,  xcviii.  7,8  ;  Hab.  ii.  11 ;  Gen.  iv.  10  ;  James  v.  4.  And  so  here  now  the 
creature  is  to  expect  and  to  wait  earnestly.  That  the  whole  course  and  frame  of  the 
creation  is  so  ordered  and  disposed  of  by  God,  as  that  it  carries  in  it  a  vehement 
desire  and  longing  for  the  future  estate  of  God's  children.  There  are  three  things 
in  this  passage  which  are  ascribed  to  the  creature,  which  are  accordingly  observable 
of  us.  There  is  expectation,  desire,  and  patience.  First,  I  say,  it  expects  or  looks 
for  it.  This  is  spoken  metaphorically.  First,  it  is  in  a  state  of  defectiveness, 
and  80  looks  to  be  supplied.  The  creature  hath  lost  very  much  of  that  beauty 
and  vigour  and  strength  which  it  had  in  its  first  beginning,  and  which  God  at  first 
did  bestow  upon  it.  The  present  imperfection  of  the  creature  shows  that  it  waits  for 
such  a  time  as  this  is,  because  every  defect  calls  for  some  kind  of  supply  and 
making  of  it  up.  Secondly,  it  is  in  a  state  of  motion,  and  so  looks  to  be  fixed. 
When  we  see  a  man  going  up  and  down,  and  running  from  one  place  to  another, 
now  in  this  corner  and  then  in  that,  and  afterwards  again  in  another,  and  never  at 
rest,  we  conclude  that  certainly  there  is  somewhat  which  he  looks  after  that  he 
has  not  yet  obtained.  Even  so  is  it  also  here  with  the  creatures.  Thus  we  see  how 
the  creature  is  expressed  under  a  great  deal  of  inconstancy  ;  which  shows  that  it 
hath  not  yet  attained  to  its  consistent  condition  which  it  expects  to  come  unto.  As 
the  needle  in  the  mariner's  compass,  which  is  touched  with  the  loadstone,  it  is 
never  quiet,  but  hovers  up  and  down  tiU  it  be  fastened  upon  the  north,  which  is  the 
place  of  its  proper  rest.  The  second  is  the  creature's  longing  for  the  time  of  this 
manifestation  also,  as  that  which  it  desires  may  be.  This  is  also  signified  in  the 
text,  in  this  earnest  expectation,  which  does  not  only  denote  a  mere  wishing,  but 
an  express  desire  and  vehement  seeking.  When  we  see  the  earth  sometimes  to  be 
dried,  we  say  it  thirsts  and  longs  for  rain ;  not  that  it  hath  such  desires  in  it,  which 
we  ourselves  are  capable  of,  but  because  it  is  in  such  a  condition  as  does  occasion 
Buch  desires  in  us.  It  earnestly  longs  for  the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God  in 
another  world.  But  why  or  whence  does  it  come  to  do  so  ?  What  has  the  creature 
to  do  with  that?  The  dumb  and  unreasonable  creature,  with  the  glorious  per- 
fection of  the  saints  ?  Yes,  it  is  very  much  concerned  in  it ;  and  that  upon  a  three- 
fold account.  First,  by  way  of  sympathy  and  suitableness  of  affection  to  us,  as  in 
some  sort  dehghting  and  rejoicing  in  the  good  of  God's  people ;  for  as  the  creatures 
were  made  for  us,  so  they  do  in  some  manner  ake  part  with  us,  and  have  impres- 
Bions  upon  themselves  answerable  to  those  thin  s  which  happen  unto  us.  That  the 
ereatore  hath  some  sympathy  with  us  in  such  things  as  befall  as.    And  amongst 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tin» 

the  rest,  especially  in  this — for  the  perfection  and  consummation  of  our  happiness. 
Secondly,  and  further.  Out  of  respect  to  itself,  for  its  own  consummation  likewise. 
For  God  in  His  wisdom  and  Providence  hath  so  ordered  things  that  the  good  of 
His  own  children  shaU  be  the  good  of  everything  else.  Thirdly,  out  of  respect  to 
the  honour  and  glory  of  God  Himself,  which  is  concerned  in  it.  The  third  is  the 
creature's  tarrying  or  staying ;  as  that  which  it  is  content  with  till  it  be.  The 
creature,  although  for  the  present  under  manifold  evUs,  yet  notwithstanding  is 
patient  under  this  condition.  Though  it  groans,  yet  it  does  not  complain ;  but 
keeps  within  its  own  bounds  and  limits  for  all  that.  All  the  creatures,  they  still 
keep  their  course ;  they  are  not  sullen,  but  do  that  work  which  is  proper  to  them. 
And  thus  have  we  seen  this  passage  made  good  in  this  particular — in  looking,  in 
longing,  in  staying.  Now  the  use  of  all  to  ourselves  comes  to  this  :  First,  as  a  shame 
and  reproach  to  all  carnal  and  worldly  persons.  We  see  here  how  far  they  are 
inferior  and  below  the  very  creatures  themselves.  Those  which  are  below 
them  in  regard  of  creation,  yet  they  are  above  them  in  regard  of  afifection. 
These  look  and  long  for  the  second  coming  and  appearance  of  Christ,  which 
the  others  do  not.  Secondly,  this  serves  to  strengthen  and  confirm  the  faith 
of  Christians  themselves.  If  the  creature  doth  thus  wait  for  the  time  of  the 
second  coming  of  Christ,  why  then  certainly  such  a  thing  as  this  there  is  to  be 
expected  and  looked  for  by  us,  forasmuch  as  this  is  put  into  them  by  God  Him- 
self. And  the  earth  is  not  only  to  feed  us,  but  also  to  teach  us;  and  a  gracious  and 
spiritual  heart  will  be  careful  accordingly  to  improve  it.  Thirdly,  here  is  an 
argument  also  for  patience  under  present  sufferings,  in  hope  of  future  deliverance. 
"While  the  creatures  are  patient  in  their  condition,  as  making  account  to  be  one  day 
freed  from  it,  how  much  more  should  we  be  so  in  ours,  and  do  that  from  the 
lirinciples  of  piety,  which  they  do  only  from  the  instincts  of  nature?  The  sum  of 
all  comes  to  this  :  All  the  creatures  wait  for  their  perfection  ;  and  why  should  not 
we?  No  creature  does  as  yet  attain  its  end ;  why  should  we  seek  for  happiness  here 
below  ?  The  second  is  the  thing  expected  in  these.  The  manifestation  of  the  sons 
of  God,  that  is,  by  taking  it  passively  ;  the  time  when  as  the  sons  of  God  shall  be 
manifested.  For  the  better  opening  of  this  present  point,  we  must  know  that  the 
manifestation  of  God's  children  is  considerable  in  a  threefold  distribution.  First, 
as  to  their  persons.  They  shall  be  revealed  and  manifested  here  ;  who  are  so,  and 
who  are  not.  Here  in  this  present  world  there  is  a  mixture  of  one  with  another ; 
of  tares  and  wheat  together ;  but  then  there  shall  be  a  plain  separation  and  dis- 
tinction of  either.  God  will  put  a  difference  betwixt  His  jewels  and  other  stones. 
There  is  a  threefold  manifestation  of  God's  children  again  in  reference  to  their 
persons.  First,  a  manifestation  of  them  to  themselves.  Secondly,  a  manifestation 
of  them  to  one  another.  Thirdly,  to  wicked  men.  Thus  shall  there  be  a  mani- 
festation of  the  children  of  God  in  their  persons,  which  is  the  first  explication. 
Secondly,  in  their  actions.  They  shall  be  manifested  in  these  likewise.  "  Every  man's 
work  shall  be  made  manifest"  (1  Cor.iii.13).  As  the  Lord  knows  their  works  Himself, 
BO  He  wiU  cause  others  to  know  them  also.  And  secondly,  it  is  also  an  encourage- 
ment to  us  in  secret  goodness  and  the  present  concealment  of  worth,  or  questioning 
of  it.  And  so  as  for  the  actions  which  men  do,  so  also  the  cause  and  interest 
which  they  own  ;  they  shaU  be  manifested  here  also.  There  is  a  double  party  and 
side  in  the  world — God's  and  Satan's.  Now  it  shall  one  day  be  manifested  who  has 
taken  the  better  part,  and  owned  the  juster  cause,  and  been  on  the  strongest  side, 
as  Christ  will  then  be  sure  to  manifest  and  discover  all  his  enemies,  and  those  that 
would  not  that  He  should  reign  over  them.  Thirdly  and  lastly,  in  their  condition. 
They  shall  be  manifested  so  also.  And  that  especially  as  a  condition  of  glory. 
The  consideration  of  all  these  things  laid  together — that  there  is  such  a  time  to 
come  wherein  the  children  of  God  shall  be  made  manifest,  and  withal  that  the 
creature  itself  does  earnestly  hope  and  wait  for  this  time,  when  it  shall  be  so 
indeed ;  it  should  have  this  practical  influence  upon  us,  even  to  raise  our  hearts 
and  affections  to  it.  It  was  the  co  mendation  given  to  old  Simeon,  that  he  waited 
for  the  consolation  of  Israel.  And  to  Joseph  of  Arimathea,  that  he  waited  for  the 
kingdom  of  God.  Let  us  take  in  these  directions  with  us.  First,  be  well  settled  in 
our  judgments,  that  there  is  such  a  state  indeed  as  this  is.  For  that  which  we  do 
not  believe  we  cannot  desire.  Secondly,  let  us  be  much  in  the  thoughts  and 
meditations  of  it.  Contemplation,  it  raises  affection.  We  see  how  it  does  so  in 
other  things,  and  how  much  more  then  in  this?  Thirdly,  let  us  get  our  hearts  weaned 
and  taken  off  from  the  world  and  t  e  things  of  it ;  so  long  as  we  do  anjrthing  more 
than  ordinary  admire  earth,  we  cannot  very  much  desire  heaven.     The  worse  in 


flOAP.  Tm-l  ROMANS.  79 

sach  a  case  as  this  will  make  us  to  neglect  the  better.  Fourthly,  let  us  labour  to 
be  purged  and  freed  from  sin,  both  as  to  the  guilt  of  it  and  also  to  the  power  of  it. 
And,  lastly,  to  all  the  rest  and  fruitfulness  and  activity  in  goodness.  Those  who 
are  much  in  arrear,  they  do  not  care  to  come  to  an  account.  (Thomas Horton,  D.D.) 
The  expectancy  of  creation : — As  we  read  these  words  there  rises  before  us  a  vast, 
majestic  vision,  the  imagery  of  a  whole  universe — fields,  trees,  rivers,  clouds  and 
stars,  endless  crowds  of  immortal  beings,  numberless  hosts  of  creatures  without 
Boulfl — all  standing  with  the  head  thrust  forward,  and  silently,  eagerly,  gazing 
far  away  for  something  hoped  and  longed  for,  something  that  is  slow,  indeed,  in 
comitg,  but  that  is  sure  to  come  at  last.  The  teaching  of  the  entire  passage  is — 
I.  That  all  cbeation  is  in  some  sense  fallen.  1.  Of  course  only  inteUigent  and 
responsible  man  is  capable  of  falUng  in  the  sense  which  involves  guilt ;  and  what- 
ever other  creatures  may  suffer,  cannot  be  regarded  as  the  punishment  of  their  sin. 
But  who  does  not  know  what  suffering  man's  sin,  cruelty,  and  thoughtlessness,  inflict 
day  by  day  upon  dumb  animals  ?  And  even  that  conduct  which  we  call  vice  is 
always  the  result  of  some  wrong  conduct  upon  man's  part.  There  would  be  no 
such  thing  as  a  vicious  horse  if  there  had  not  previously  been  a  cruel  or  injudicious 
man.  2.  But  to  go  into  the  general  question — (1)  Think  what  millions  of 
innocent  lives  were  cut  short  by  the  waters  of  the  Deluge,  and  what  hosts  of 
guiltless  creatures  have  yielded  up  their  Uves  as  sacrifices  of  sin  !  Now,  we  know 
God  cares  for  oxen.  Bely  upon  it,  it  was  a  thought  to  God  when  almost  all  the 
brute  creation  perished  at  the  Flood.  Eely  upon  it.  He  did  not  overlook  the 
Buffering  of  the  beasts  with  whose  blood  under  the  law  "  almost  all  things  were 
purged."  (2)  As  for  the  inanimate  creation,  of  course,  it  cannot  suffer  consciously. 
Man  can  both  sin  and  suffer.  The  inferior  animals  can  suffer  but  not  sin.  And 
as  for  the  inanimate  universe,  it  can  neither  sin  nor  suffer.  But  it  is  a  mistake  to 
fancy  that  a  thing  is  perverted  from  the  end  contemplated  by  the  Creator  only 
when  it  knows  the  fact  and  suffers  from  it.  The  inanimate  creation  is  involved  in 
man's  fall,  according  to  its  nature.  You  would  almost  think  that  Nature  is  obliged, 
by  man's  sin,  unwillingly  to  do  many  things  which  she  would  not  do  if  she  could 
help  it.  The  atmosphere  is  constrained  to  carry  words  which  are  false,  impure, 
profane.  Surely  that  beautiful  liquid  ether  was  never  made  for  that  1  Food  is 
constrained  to  strengthen  for  sinful  deeds.  Is  it  not  hard,  so  to  speak,  upon  the 
innocent  grain,  upon  the  generous  grape,  that  they  should  be  compelled  to  yield 
their  energy  to  the  arm  of  the  murderer  as  readily  as  to  the  hand  that  does  the 
deed  of  mercy  ?  And  since  the  days  of  the  friar,  who  stumbled  upon  that  com- 
bination of  materials,  separately  innocuous,  which  hides  the  battlefield  with  its 
sulphureous  clouds  ;  think  how  great  a  share  of  human  ingenuity  has  been  directly 
given  to  wresting  from  Nature  that  which  shall  quench  or  torture  human  Mfe. 
Look  at  a  ship  of  war  1  What  a  grand  and  imposing  spectacle  it  is  1  But  is  it  not 
one  great  proof  that  man  is  fallen?  Think  of  the  costly  material,  skill  and 
industry,  that  have  gone  to  make  that — a  grand  weapon  of  destruction  :  and  say 
if  the  consequences  of  man's  fall  do  not  reach  to  the  oak  in  the  forest,  the  iron  in 
the  mine,  the  flax  in  the  field,  the  very  air  and  water  1  And,  not  lingering  on 
instances  of  noble  material  agencies  perverted  to  evil  by  man — such,  for  instance, 
as  the  printing-press ;  think  how  the  whole  landscape  is  often  darkened  by  the 
brooding  cloud  of  sin.  11.  Nature  is  waiting  fob  betteb  days.  All  things  are 
unconsciously  looking  forward.  There  is  a  vague,  dumb  sense,  that  surely  better 
things  are  coming.  All  conscious  things  live  in  an  undefined  hope.  And  where- 
fore ?  Simply  from  some  vague,  general  belief  that  surely  evil  will  one  day  die,  and 
the  reign  of  good  begin  1  Why  does  the  man  who  has  got  more  money  than  he  can 
ever  spend,  and  no  one  to  leave  it  to,  still  save  as  before :  why,  but  from  some 
shadowy  looking-forward,  which  he  does  not  care  to  define.  Why  do  most  men, 
when  they  begin  any  task,  feel  eager  to  get  through  with  it,  but  for  that  onward 
bent  that  is  in  all  "  the  creature  "  ?  And  we  can  discern  traces  of  the  same  feeling 
in  inferior  natures.  Why  does  the  poor  hack  lean  to  his  collar  so  eagerly,  and  toil 
tip  the  steep  street  overburdened,  but  from  some  vague,  dull,  confused  hope  that 
surely  all  this  will  end.  Goethe  has  recorded  that  he  could  never  look  on  a 
beautiful  summer  landscape  without  feehng  as  if  it  were  waiting  for  something, 
asking  for  something,  which  was  not  there.  III.  What  is  the  end  fob  which  all 
creation  is  80  EABNESTLT  WAITING  ?  Tou  who  fccl  a  constaut  craving,  believe  it,  it 
Is  no  earthly  end  that  will  satisfy  the  longing  of  your  nature  I  Whenever  you  have 
attained  one  end  you  see  another,  and  caimot  be  content  till  you  have  reached 
4hat:  And,  that  reached,  yoo  will  see  before  you  another  still.    The  poor  man 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tm. 

wishes  to  be  rich ;  the  rich  man  longs  for  a  recognised  position  in  society;  the  man 
who  has  got  that  thinks  how  pleased  he  would  be  could  he  obtain  a  title,  fame, 
nobility.  Ah,  there  is  no  end  of  it  I  Yes,  there  is  more  in  this  than  the  mere 
morbid  feeling  of  restless  discontent :  it  is  "  the  earnest  expectation  of  the  creature 
waiting  for  the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God  !  "  That  is  the  only  end  in  the 
universe  that  shall  absolutely  satisfy  the  great  craving  which  is  in  the  centre  of 
man's  nature — that  is  the  only  summit  on  reaching  which  you  wiU  see  no  farther 
summit  stretching  away  beyond.  What  a  blessing  it  is  to  be  told  what  it  is  we 
really  need !  But  the  Christian  only  knows  what  shall  fully  satisfy  that  long- 
ing ;  we  know  that  "  man's  chief  end  is  to  glorify  God,  and  enjoy  Him 
for  ever."  "Thou  madest  us  for  Thyself,"  said  Augustine,  "and  our  souls 
are  restless  till  they  find  rest  in  Theel"      {A.   E.  H.  Boyd,  D.D.)  The 

hopes  and  aspirations  of  the  new  creature : — I.  The  object  of  the  creature's 
EARNEST  expectation.  1.  Its  own  "  manifestation  "  in  its  true  character.  It  ia 
now  "the  creature"  subject  to  vanity,  laden  with  sorrow  and  corruption.  This 
creature  is  to  be  developed.  It  does  not  now  appear  what  it  is  in  reality.  Soma 
marks  of  his  destination  are  upon  the  Christian  :  he  enjoys  some  foretastes  of  his 
inheritance,  but  nothing  in  comparison  with  the  glory  that  shall  be  revealed  in  us. 

2.  A  glorious  liberty — in  opposition  to  vanity,  corruption,  and  affliction.  3. 
Bodily  resurrection.  U.  The  present  condition  op  the  creature.  1.  It  is 
subject  to  vanity,  "  When  a  thing  neither  fills  that  which  contains  it,  nor  sup- 
ports that  which  leans  upon  it,  nor  yields  fruit  to  him  that  labours  in  it,  it  is  a 
vanity."  2.  In  the  bondage  of  corruption.  The  phrase  chiefly  refers  to  the  cor- 
ruption which  must  actually  take  possession  of  the  body  in  the  grave ;  but  it  may 
not  inaptly  describe  the  state  of  Christians  themselves  in  the  present  world. 
Though  the  commanding  power  of  sin  is  destroyed  in  conversion,  yet  its  relics 
exist,  and  impede  the  child  of  God,  so  that  he  cannot  do  the  things  that  he  would. 

3.  This  is  an  unwilling  subjection.  The  desires,  affections,  and  purposes  of  the 
renewed  nature,  all  rebel  against  the  yoke  of  sin,  and  contend  for  their  perfect 
freedom.  III.  The  temper  op  mind  which  the  creature  exhibits  in  the  mean- 
time. 1.  Earnest  expectation.  Let  the  ungodly  tremble  at  the  thought  of  Christ's 
approach ;  but  to  the  saints  it  will  be  a  day  of  glory,  as  well  as  to  their  Master  :  to 
them  the  consummation  of  their  brightest  hopes,  to  Him  the  pubUc  display  of 
His  victories.  The  proper  state  of  mind,  therefore,  in  which  it  should  be  contem- 
plated is  that  of  expectation  and  desire.  We  ought  so  to  live  that  when  we  shall 
be  summoned  to  meet  Him  we  may  be  able  to  lift  up  our  heads  and  say,  "  Even 
so  come,  Lord  Jesus  1  "  2.  This  earnest  expectation  is  associated  with  patient 
waiting  for  the  event ;  the  principal  ground  of  which  is  that  God  Himself  has  sub- 
jected us  to  the  same  in  hope.  A  wilUng  acquiescence  in  His  wise  arrangements  is 
one  of  the  best  proofs  of  our  filial  spirit.  No  doubt  it  would  be  far  better  to  wear  the 
crown  than  to  carry  the  cross ;  but  so  long  as  there  is  a  work  for  us  to  perform  on  earth, 
and  scope  is  given  to  glorify  God  by  resignation  under  toil  and  suffering,  we  must  be 
satisfied  to  endure  temptation ;  knowing  that  patient  continuance  in  well-doing  leads 
to  glory,  honour,  and  immortaUty.  3.  It  is  impossible  that  these  strong  affections  of 
the  new  creature  should  be  unproductive  of  practical  results.  Do  you  hope  to  be  ac- 
knowledged as  sons  of  God  then  ?  Show  us  the  evidences  of  your  adoption  now.  What 
traces  of  your  heavenly  birth  and  destination  should  be  visible  in  your  dispositions 
and  lives  1  Christian  patience  is  not  a  sluggish  grace.  It  has  a  work  to  do,  a  steward- 
ship to  occupy,  while  it  is  waiting  for  the  Master's  coming.  (D.  Eatterns.)  Creation') 
waiting : — St.  Paul  is  primarily  thinking  only  of  the  little  Church  at  Bome,  and 
giving  them  rules  for  their  duty.  And  yet,  with  the  mind  of  a  great  philosopher — 
or,  rather,  with  the  vision  of  a  great  prophet — he  is  swept  beyond  the  special  case 
before  him  into  the  general  principle  which  it  involves,  and  in  giving  rules  to 
Bome  he  is  led  to  survey  the  method  of  the  universe.  I.  The  apostle's  doctrinb. 
1.  This  whole  creation  is  not  a  dead,  but  a  living  thing.  Its  movement  is  not  the 
movement  of  machinery,  but  of  life.  Instead  of  a  bUnd,  mechanical  process,  this 
man  sees  a  universe  with  a  desire  of  its  own,  bringing  forth  at  last,  through  the 
pains  which  we  now  call  the  struggle  for  existence,  the  state  of  things  we  see. 
Instead  of  a  world-factory  grinding  out  with  indifference  its  tides  and  storms,  its 
plants  and  animals,  and  the  emotions  and  ideals  of  men,  he  sees  a  universe  work- 
ing out  with  expectancy  a  divinely  appointed  end.  Thus  he  simply  anticipates  the 
philosophers  and  poets  who  have  seen  in  Nature  a  living  and  purposeful  process, 
manifesting  at  each  step  the  presence  of  one  comprehensive  will.  2.  Having 
reached  its  present  point,  for  what  does  creation  now  waitf    The  "  revealing  of 


CHAT.  Tin.l  ROMANS.  61 

the  sons  of  God."  Withoat  them  the  oniversal  evolation  pauses.  The  movement 
of  the  universe  goes  its  way  from  the  beginning  to  a  certain  point  under  mechanical 
laws,  fit  for  material  things.  But  at  a  certain  point  the  elements  of  evolution 
become  changed.  The  problem  of  the  universe  is  no  longer  to  mould  and  harden 
a  world — it  is  to  unfold  and  quicken  the  higher  faculties  of  man  ;  and  for  this  new 
work  of  God  a  new  necessity  appears — the  help  of  man.  God's  ends  are  reached, 
not  by  such  laws  as  could  create  or  maintain  the  world,  but  through  His  sons.  Up 
to  a  certain  point,  things  go  toward  making  man  what  he  is ;  but  at  that  point 
man  takes  these  things  which  have  moulded  him  and  shapes  them  to  their  higher 
nses.  For  this  reaction  of  character  on  circumstance  the  whole  creation  waits. 
Until  this  occurs,  the  process  that  God  would  fulfil  toward  the  world  is  retarded. 
Here  is  a  vessel  eager  to  reach  her  port,  and  God's  winds  invite  her  to  move  on. 
But  not  the  fairest  wind  can  bring  her  on  her  way  unless  man  does  his  part.  The 
earnest  expectation  of  the  vessel  waits  until  the  captain  spreads  her  sails ;  and 
then,  man  working  with  God,  the  creation  which  lay  dead  and  lonely  on  the  sea 
becomes  a  thing  of  life  and  motion.  So  it  is  with  all  the  higher  movements  of 
God's  creation.  God  may  create  the  best  of  circumstances,  but  the  whole  creation 
simply  groans  and  labours,  hke  a  vessel  labouring  in  a  sea,  until  man  spreads  her 
sails  to  catch  God's  favouring  breeze.  The  patient  expectation  of  the  vessel  waits 
for  the  manifestation  of  the  captain's  will.    JI.  Let  us  take  this  pbinciple,  and 

BET  IT  BY  THE  SIDE  OF  SOME  OF  THE  PROBLEMS  AND  MOVEMENTS  OF  THE  MODERN  WORLD. 

1.  Take  the  forces  of  Nature.  Here,  e.g.,  is  electricity.  It  is  a  creation  of  God. 
The  force  was  always  there,  eager  to  serve  the  wants  of  man ;  but  God's  purposes 
through  it  could  only  be  worked  out  by  the  sons  of  God.  Finally,  after  ages  of  a 
patient  creation,  the  inventor  thinks  God's  thoughts  after  Him,  the  sons  of  God 
are  revealed  in  their  relation  to  Nature,  and  then  the  creation  moves  on  into  its 
higher  uses,  and  lights,  moves,  warms  us.  And  it  is  awful  to  consider  how  many 
other  powers  we  dwell  among  without  any  discernment  of  their  significance  and 
end,  while  the  creation  waits  for  the  revealing  in  its  midst  of  the  sons  of  God.  2. 
Now  turn  to  the  nearer  creations — the  institutions  and  affairs  of  men.  Look,  e.g. , 
at — (1)  The  simplest  form  of  human  institutions — the  life  of  the  family  and  the 
home.  Here,  in  this  smallest  group  of  human  beings,  has  been  the  beginning  of 
all  social  evolution.  In  the  family,  civilisation  begins.  And  its  beginnings  were 
natural,  inevitable,  mechanical.  The  family  group  became  permanent  because  it 
was  the  group  fittest  to  survive.  But  is  this  the  end  of  the  evolution  of  the  home  7 
No  I  A  new  possibility  opens  before  this  primitive  institution.  It  becomes  the 
best  symbol  of  the  relation  of  God  to  us,  and  of  ourselves  to  Him.  Now,  what 
brings  the  home  into  these  higher  stages  of  its  evolution  ?  Nothing  but  the  reveal- 
ing in  it  of  the  sons  of  God.  Walk  along  any  street  to-day,  with  its  row  of  houses. 
How  far  has  the  evolution  of  each  home  proceeded  ?  Within  one  door  the  sons  of 
God  have  revealed  themselves,  and  domestic  life  is  moving  straight  on  to  be  the 
complete  image  of  the  heavenly  world.  Here,  at  the  very  next  door,  the  evolution 
has  been  arrested,  and  the  whole  creation  groans  and  travails  with  the  pains  of  a 
disordered  home.  The  two  houses  are  alike  in  outward  form,  but  the  one  is  a  home 
and  the  other  a  shelter ;  the  one  is  a  school  for  immortal  souls  and  the  other  a  pen 
for  domestic  animals.  Turn  to  your  own  home  with  this  thought  of  its  higher 
intention,  and  you  see  with  a  new  clearness  your  place  in  it,  and  its  place  in  the 
world.  You  have  not  been  thrown  into  this  place  by  accident.  Tou  are  the  heir 
through  it  of  the  whole  history  of  man.  And  now  the  question  lies  before  you 
whether  that  history  shall  proceed  or  wait.  (2)  The  larger  world  of  human  society. 
There  never  was  a  time  when  so  many  minds  were  so  busy  with  thoughts  of  a 
healthier  and  happier  social  state.  Dreamers  and  agitators,  working  men  and 
scholars,  poor  women  and  prosperous  women — all  are  looking  for  some  golden  age, 
when  there  shall  be  a  more  even  distribution  of  the  good  things  of  life.  But 
suppose  the  fortunes  of  the  rich  laid  low,  and  the  poverty  of  the  poor  turned  to  a 
competency  ;  suppose  all  the  mechanical  diflSculties  of  such  a  revolution  overcome. 
Would  the  evolution  of  society  be  complete  ?  Would  its  new  relations  work  with- 
out friction  or  check  ?  No  1  We  should  be  at  precisely  the  point  where  this  whole 
industrial  creation  would  show  itself  a  waiting  creation  for  the  revealing  of  the  song 
of  God.  We  should  be  like  people  who  had  created  the  most  delicate  of  engines, 
and  then  had  only  unskilled  mechanics  to  set  it  at  work.  People  seem  to  think 
that  if  they  can  only  reconstruct  the  machinery  of  society,  it  will  run  itself.  They 
see  Ihat  in  the  lower  stages  of  social  evolution  machinery  does  a  great  deal.  They 
Bee  the  State  preserving  itself  by  legislation ;  they  see  some  evils  checked  and  soma 
VOL.  n.  6 


B2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tm. 

gain  made  by  law.  Bat  the  fact  is,  that  at  a  certain  point  the  movement  of  society 
becomes  not  mechanical,  but  moral.  It  is  not  a  question  of  controlling  men,  but 
of  calling  forth  the  best  in  men ;  and  at  that  point  the  movement  waits,  not  for 
new  economic  laws  or  social  schemes,  but  for  better  souls,  for  higher  impulses,  for 
the  revealing  of  the  sons  of  God.  You  devise  the  most  ingenious  system  for  making 
all  work  for  the  good  of  all,  but  you  can  perpetuate  such  a  system  only  by  making 
men  love  one  another.  Given  a  competing  race  of  men,  and  no  device  of  legisla- 
tion can  aboUsh  competition.  Given  a  regenerated  race  of  men,  and  a  new  social 
state  of  common  life  and  ownership  might  be  maintained ;  but  one  must  also  say, 
given  a  regenerated  race  and  a  new  social  state  would  seem  to  be  superfluous.  lU. 
Its  pebsonaIj  lesson  and  law.  Why  should  any  one  of  us  try  so  hard  to  make  the 
most  of  himself  ?  Why  not  abandon  himself  to  passion  or  indolence  ?  1.  There 
are  various  answers  to  this  question.  (1)  "Because  the  higher  path  is  the  path  of 
happiness."  True.  But  with  the  happiness  come  the  conflict  and  pain  ;  with  the 
new  ideals  the  disappointments ;  and  always  there  is  tbe  puU  of  animal  pleasures 
dragging  one  down  to  other  ways  of  happiness.  The  search  for  happiness  will  not 
reveal  the  sons  of  God.  (2)  "  Because  you  are  here  to  save  your  soul."  True 
again.  For  what  is  a  saved  soul  ?  It  is  a  healthy,  a  developed  soul — a  soul  grown 
op  into  the  stature  of  Christ,  revealed  to  itself  as  a  son  of  God.  But,  after  all,  this, 
as  a  supreme  motive  of  life,  is  mere  self-interest,  mere  self-culture.  2.  Contrast 
these  personal  considerations  with  the  reason  which  St.  Paul  lays  down,  and  see 
the  tremendous  chasm  which  lies  between  it  and  the  desire  for  happiness,  or  even 
for  salvation  itself.  What  the  apostle  says  is,  "Here  is  God  working  out  through 
the  long  ages  His  purpose  toward  the  world.  He  comes  to  a  certain  point,  and 
there,  by  the  very  necessity  of  things.  His  work  passes  out  of  the  region  of  natural 
law  and  self-acting  methods,  and  has  to  be  done  through  human  beings.  Now, 
suppose  any  soul  fails  of  its  higher  capacities  and  remains  stunted  and  unrevealed : 
is  that  merely  a  personal  loss  of  happiness  or  of  salvation  ?  On  the  contrary,  it  is 
a  loss  so  vast  as  to  make  every  personal  motive  shrink  into  insignificance.  It  is 
simply  so  far  the  retarding  of  the  perfect  and  universal  work  of  God."  To  be 
sinning,  not  against  one's  self,  but  against  the  universe  ;  to  be  a  hinderer  of  God's 
great  ends  in  the  world — that  is  what  gives  awfulness  to  every  thought  of  sin.  It 
is,  again,  some  great  factory  where  the  looms  go  weaving  with  their  leaping  shuttles 
the  millions  of  yards  of  cloth,  and  then  of  a  sudden  one  thread  breaks,  and  the 
loom  stops  short  in  its  progress,  lest  the  whole  intricate  work  be  marred.  And 
then  to  turn  the  matter  round,  think  how  this  thought  affects  every  desire  for  good. 
A  man  looks  at  his  life,  and  it  is  a  poor,  feeble,  insignificant  thing.  He  says  to 
himself,  "  Of  what  earthly  importance  is  it  that  I  should  struggle  thus  against  the 
Btream  of  my  tendency  and  taste  ?  "  That  is  the  unconscious  defence  of  many  a 
ruined  Ufe.  For  one  man  who  errs  by  thinking  too  much  of  himself,  ten  fail  by 
not  thinking  enough  of  themselves.  But  now  comes  the  apostle  into  the  midst  of 
this  spurious  modesty,  and  says,  "  Yes,  taken  by  itself  your  life  is  certainly  a  very 
insignificant  affair ;  but  placed  in  the  universe  which  God  has  made,  your  life 
becomes  of  infinite  importance.  For  God  has  chosen  to  work  out  His  designs,  not 
in  spite  of  you,  but  through  you;  and  where  you  fail.  He  halts.  God  needs  you." 
It  is  as  though  you  were  a  lighthouse-keeper.  Can  any  life  be  more  unpraised  or 
insignificant?  Why  sit  through  weary  nights  to  keep  your  flame  alive  ?  Because 
it  is  not  your  light — that  is  the  point.  You  are  not  its  owner  ;  you  are  its  keeper. 
The  great  design  of  the  Power  you  serve  takes  you  thus  out  of  your  insignificance, 
and  while  you  sit  there  in  the  shadow  of  your  lonely  tower,  ship  after  ship  is  look- 
ing to  you  across  the  sea,  and  many  a  man  thanks  God  that,  while  lights  which 
burn  for  themselves  go  out,  your  light  will  be  surely  burning.  The  earnest  expec- 
tation of  many  a  storm-tossed  sailor  waits  for  the  revealing  of  your  friendly  gleam. 
The  safety  of  many  a  life  that  passes  by  you  in  the  dark  is  trusted  from  night  to 
night  to  you.  {Prof.  F.  G.  Peabody.)  The  manifestation  of  true  men  the  stipreme 
want  of  the  world : — I.  True  men  ake  the  "  sons  of  God."  What  constitutes  men 
such?  1.  Negatively.  (1)  Not  that  they  are  mere  productions  of  God.  All  crea- 
tures are  His  productions.  (2)  Not  that  they  resemble  the  Divine  nature.  Man  is 
spiritual,  reflective,  free,  but  so  are  devils.  2.  Positively.  (1)  Moral  resemblance ; 
similarity  of  governing  disposition.  Love  is  the  ruling  element  in  God.  AH  thus 
ruled  resemble  Him,  whether  men  or  archangels.  (2)  Filial  devotion.  A  man 
may  have  six  male  offspring,  and  not  one  true  son.  The  grand  purpose  of  the 
gospel  is  to  give  men  the  disposition  of  true  children.  II.  These  sons  of  God  abb 
XO  BiVic  A  OLOSious  UAKiFESTATioM  OM  THIS  EABXB.     "  Waiting  for  the  manifesta- 


CBAP.  vm.]  ROMANS.  88 

tion."  GloriouB — 1.  In  the  perfection  of  their  character.  The  best  of  God'a 
"  sons  "  on  the  earth  to-day  are  not  perfect.  2.  In  the  vastness  of  their  nambers. 
These  imperfect  "  sons  of  God  "  are  comparatively  few.  But  the  manifestation 
will  be  one  of  countless  multitudes,  each  perfect.  They  are  the  coming  men.  III. 
This  glorious  "  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God "  is  the  supbemb  want  of  a 
BDFFERiNO  WORLD.  They  are  the  objects  of  the  "  earnest  expectation  "  of  suffering 
humanity.  What  is  the  great  want  of  the  teeming  millions  to-day?  1.  More 
churches?  Some  think  so,  and  ecclesiastical  edifices  are  being  multiplied.  But 
the  people  do  not  want  them,  and  they  are  half  empty  ahnost  everywhere.  2.  More 
converts  to  conventional  Christianity  ?  This  does  not  make  true  men,  but  formalists 
and  hypocrites.  3.  More  official  preachers?  Preaching  there  should  be,  but  it 
Bhould  be  the  preaching  of  the  living  man,  not  of  the  professional  pulpiteer.  4, 
More  religious  organisations  ?  No ;  they  with  their  committees  and  vested  interests 
are  drag-chains  on  the  wheels  of  spiritual  independency  and  true  progress.  6. 
More  Bibles?  No,  there  are  millions  lying  unread  and  uncared  for.  What  the 
Buffering  world  profoundly  longs  for  is  the  advent  of  true  men,  "  sons  of  God." 
Such  men  will  be  living  Bibles,  editions  of  Him  who  went  about  doing  good. 
{David  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God: — I.  The  sons  of 
God  are  now  hidden.  1.  How?  (1)  As  to  their  persons  (1  John  iii.  1).  It  is  not 
exactly  known  in  the  winter,  when  the  roots  lie  in  the  earth,  what  will  appear  in 
the  spring.  (2)  As  to  their  hfe  (Col.  iii.  3).  They  are  hidden  not  only  in  point  of 
security,  as  maintained  by  an  invisible  power ;  but  in  point  of  obscurity.  Because 
the  spiritual  life  is  hidden  under — (a)  The  veil  of  the  natural  life ;  it  is  a  life  within 
a  life  {Gal.  ii.  20).  (b)  The  veil  of  afflictions,  outward  meanness,  and  abasement 
(Heb.  xi.  37,  38).  (c)  The  veil  of  reproaches  and  calumnies  (1  Pet.  iv.  6).  They 
are  presented  in  the  world  as  a  company  of  hypocrites  (2  Cor.  vi.  8).  {d)  The  veil 
of  infirmities,  by  which  they  often  obscure  the  glory  of  that  hfe  which  they  have. 
(3)  As  to  Uieir  privileges,  and  the  glory  of  their  estate.  There  must  be  a  distinc- 
tion between  earth  and  heaven.  For  the  present,  our  glory  is — (a)  Spiritual,  and 
maketh  no  fair  show  in  the  flesh,  as  the  image  of  God  is  an  internal  thing 
(Psa.  xlv.  13).  (b)  Future.  The  time  of  our  perfection  and  blessedness  is  not  yet 
come,  and  we  cannot  for  the  present  judge  of  it,  nor  the  world  imaRine  what  it 
shall  be.  2.  From  whom  ?  Not  from  God  (2  Tim.  ii.  19) ;  not  from  Christ  (John 
X.  14) ;  not  from  angels  (Heb.  i.  14) ;  but— (1)  From  the  world,  as  colours  from  a 
blind  man  (1  Cor.  ii.  14).  (2)  In  a  great  measure  from  ourselves.  What  with 
corruptions  within,  and  temptations  without,  we  have  much  ado  to  be  persuaded 
that  God  is  our  Father,  and  we  BUs  children ;  our  condition  being  so  unsuitable, 
and  our  conversations  so  much  beneath  our  rights  and  privileges ;  so  that  it  needeth 
to  be  cleared  by  the  Spirit  of  adoption  (ver.  16).  When  that  is  done,  yet  the  glory 
intended  to  be  revealed  in  us  is  not  sufficiently  known  (1  Cor.  ii.  9).  3.  Why  ? 
(1)  Because  now  is  the  time  of  trial,  hereafter  of  recompense.  Therefore  now  is 
the  hiding-time ;  hereafter  is  the  day  of  manifestation.  If  the  glory  were  too 
sensible,  there  were  no  trial,  neither  of  the  world,  nor  of  the  people  of  God.  (2) 
God  hath  chosen  this  way  to  advance  His  glory,  that  He  may  perfect  His  power  in 
our  weakness  (2  Cor.  xii.  9).  (3)  To  wean  us  from  things  present  to  things  to 
come  (2  Cor.  iv.  18).  II.  They  shall  be  manifested.  1.  Their  persons  shall  be 
known  and  owned  (Kev.  iii.  5).  No  more  doubt  when  owned,  not  by  character,  but 
by  name.  2.  They  shaU  be  manifested  to  themselves,  and  their  glory  also  revealed 
to  the  world  by  the  visible  marks  of  favour  Christ  will  put  upon  them,  when  others 
are  rejected  (Isa.  IxvL  5 ;   2  These.   1.  10).     HI.    This   manifestation   ooght 

■ABNE8TLY    TO    BE    DESIRED    AND    EXPECTED    BY    US.        1.     To    this    end    the    apOStlO 

mentions  the  earnest  expectation  of  the  creature,  and  the  day  principally  con- 
cerns us  (Cant.  viii.  14;  Rev.  xxii.  20).  The  saints  look  for  Christ's  coming 
(Titus  ii.  13)  by  faith  and  hope;  and  long  for  His  coming  (2  Tim.  iv.  8)  in 
a  way  of  love.  2.  Now  His  coming  must  be  desired  by  us  with — (1)  Earnestness 
(2  Cor.  V.  2).  (2)  Constancy.  (3)  Patience  (1  Thess.  i.  10).  (T.  Manton,  D.D.) 
The  hope  of  a  fallen  world : — We  are  told  that  in  those  countries  where  the  night 
lasts  for  many  months  the  inhabitants,  when  they  conclude  that  the  dayspring  is 
at  hand,  climb  the  loftiest  mountains,  and  there  wait  and  watch  the  first  streak  of 
returning  day.  That  streak  is  the  signal  for  gladness  and  melody.  Such  was  the 
attitude  of  those  who  "waited  for  the  consolation  of  Israel"  before  the  Son  of  God 
came,  and  such  ought  to  be  our  attitude  who  look  for  Christ's  second  coming. 
Note — I.  The  MotrBNrtrL  condition  of  creation  since  the  fall.  1.  It  is  in  the 
"bondage  of  corruption  "  through  the  iniquity  of  its  inhabitant  man.  The  mansion 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

has  been  spotted  and  stained  bj  the  leprosy  of  him  that  dwells  in  it.    Before  man 
fell  tbe  whole  creation,  as  it  came  from  God,  was  "very  good";  but  when  man 
became  corrupt  and  turned  the  good  creatures  of  God  into  occasions  of  sin  and 
idolatry,  the  whole  creation,  in  a  sense,  became  partaker  of  the  defilement  of  its 
rational  inhabitants.    Drunkenness  and  debauchery  have  been  made  to  find  their 
fuel  and  their  food  in  the  good  things  that  God  had  made  for  man's  good  and  for 
His  own  glory.    2.  And,  being  thus  enthralled  by  corruption,  it  is  made  "  subject 
to  vanity."  It  is  a  peculiarity  in  the  Divine  government  that  things  should  partake 
in  each  other's  weal  or  woe.    "A  fruitful  land  maketh  He  barren,  because  of  the 
wickedness  of  them  that  dwell  therein."    Think  of  Sodom  and  Palestine.    And 
what  God  has  thus,  in  a  smaller  measure,  done  in  individual  instances.  He  has,  in 
the  grand  scale,  in  creation.    God  brought  vanity  on  His  beautiful  works,  and- 
marred,  though  He  did  not  wholly  deface,  the  lovely  structure  He  had  built  and 
furnished.     3.  To  complete  the  dark  picture,  "  the  whole  creation  travaileth  and 
groaneth  in  pain  together  until  now."    What  a  grandeur  there  is  in  this  personifi- 
cation of  the  whole  visible  universe  !     The  Psalmist  thus  made  all  nature,  animate 
and  vocal,  to  praise  her  Creator,  and  await  her  Deliverer's  coming,  and  it  is  by  a 
similar  bold  flight  of  imagination  that  the  apostle  personifies  all  creation  as  wearied 
with  the  bondage  of  corruption,  mourning  through  the  continual  vanity,  waiting 
for  the  wondrous  transformation  that  is  in  store  for  her,  and  striving  after  it  as  a 
woman  drawing  near  to  her  delivery  longeth  for  the  hour  when  it  shall  be  said, 
"  a  man  is  born  into  the  world."    And  it  is  not  mere  fancy  that  we  may  seem  at 
times  to  hear,  in  the  moaning  of  the  tempest,  the  roar  of  the  storm,  the  dashing  of 
the  billows,  the  sounds  and  the  sighings  that  we  may  often  hearken  to  from 
troubled,  tempest-tossed  nature,  to  construe  these  into  the  "  groaning  and  travail- 
ing of  creation,"  after  that  great  redemption  and  deliverance  that  the  Eedeemer 
hath  in  store  for  her.    4.  Must  we  not  be  arrested  with  the  lesson  thus  taught  us  ? 
What  a  fearful  thing  is  sin,  that  it  casts  its  dark  shadow  over  the  whole  universe  of 
God !     When  we  make  light  of  sin,  let  us  look  around  us,  as  well  as  look  within  us, 
that  we  may  be  humbled,  and  cry,  "  God  be  mericiful  to  me  a  siimer  1  "    II.  Thb 
HOPE  THAT  ANIMATES  CREATION  in  her  moumful  and  fallen  state  (ver.  19).     1.  Thai 
is  the  great  epoch  to  which  creation  turns  her  anxious  eye,  anticipating  her  glorioua 
deliverance.  For  we  are  hid ;  " our  life  is  now  hid  with  Christ  in  God."    The  world 
knoweth  us  not,  and  we  sometimes  know  not  one  another.     But  a  day  of  manifes- 
tation Cometh — a  day  of  public  adoption  in  the  presence  of  the  whole  intelligent 
universe,  a  day  of  adoption  in  the  day  of  "  the  redemption  of  the  body,"  when, 
invested  with  the  similitude  of  their  glorious  Head,  they  shall  stand  forth,  confessed 
of  all  to  be  the  sons  of  God.     Then  creation  shall  find  her  glorious  deliverance. 
This  is  that  bright  epoch  foretold  by  the  prophets,  the  time  of  the  restitution  of  all 
things,  when  the  Creator  shall  say,  "Behold,  I  make  aU  things  new."    2.  Behold 
the  hope  of  the  creature.     It  shall  be  "  delivered  out  of  the  bondage  of  corruption 
into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God  I  "    This  cannot  be  annihilation.   Would 
it  be  deliverance  to  creation,  any  compensation  for  its  involuntary  suffering,  to  be 
blotted  out  ?     The  very  fact  that  creation  has  suffered  with  man  is  in  itself  strong 
presumption  that  it  shall  triumph  and  be  exalted  with  man.     And  so  we  look  for 
"  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness."    The  whole 
visible  creation  is  anticipating  this  blessed  hope,  when,  with  in  its  renewed  inhabi- 
tants, it  shall  undergo  renovation,  and  shall  receive  perfection.      Conclusion:  1. 
The  subject  is  fitted  to  alarm  every  one  who  is  making  earth  his  portion.    They 
that  corrupt  the  creature  and  defile  themselves  therewith  shall  never  know  the 
creature's  promised  bliss.    2.  For  those  that  profess  to  be  waiting  for  Christ's 
coming,  this  contemplation  is  fitted  to  impart  exalted  hope.     "  Eye  hath  not  seen," 
&o.   (Canon  Stowell.)      The  final  deliverance  of  believers : — I.  The  period  when  this 

STATE  of  degradation  AND  SUFFERING  SHALL  GIVE  PLACE  TO  THE  FULL  HOPE  WHICH  THB 

GOSPEL  NOW  SETS  BEFORE  THEM.  The  day  of  the  second  advent  of  Christ.  This, 
indeed,  will  be,  in  some  most  important  respects,  a  day  of  "manifestation" — the 
manifestation  of  Him  whom  the  heavens  have  received,  of  judgment,  of  the  long- 
delaved  punishment  of  sinners.  But  it  shall  be  also  the  day  of  "  the  manifestation 
of  tbe  sons  of  God."  1.  Of  their  number,  which  now  we  possess  no  mean  of  calcu- 
lating. 2.  Of  persons  whom,  perhaps,  we  never  anticipated— for  many  that  are 
last  shall  be  first,  and  the  first  last.  3.  Of  their  virtues,  which  the  world  slandered. 
4.  Of  that  glory  with  which  they  shall  be  eternally  invested.  II.  The  characters 
UNDER  which  THIS  HOPE  IS  PRESENTED.  1.  "Deliverance  from  the  bondage  of  cor- 
ruption."    See  this  bondage— (1)  In  the  weakness  of  the  body.     It  has  lost  its 


CHAP.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  85 

strength  and  perfection.    (2)  In  the  diseases  of  the  body.     (3)  In  that  moral 
corruption  to  which  the  natural  corruption  ministers.     (4)  In  the  manner  in  which 
this  law  sports  with  every  feeling,  care,  interest.     2.  The  contrast  to  this  is  "  the 
glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God  " — (1)  From  the  bondage  itself,  as  resulting 
from  the  lapse  of  Adam.     (2)  From  the  grave,  for  Christ  opens,  and  no  man  shuts. 
(3)  From  the  grossness  of  the  body,  for  that  which  is  sown  a  natural  is  raised  a 
spiritual  body.    (4)  From  irregular  appetites,  implying  perfect  liberty  from  sin. 
(5)  From  affliction  and  suffering,  for  there  shall  be  no  more  pain,  no  more  chasten- 
ing.   (6)  From  death.   III.  The  manner  in  which  the  whole  subject  is  heightened. 
The  apostle  refers — 1.  To  the  groans  and  expectations  of  the  creature,  i.e.,  the 
whole  race  of  fallen  and  unrecovered  men.    The  apostle  sees  before  him  the  multi- 
tudes of  mankind.     He  marks  their  miseries,  groans,  struggles  against  their  lot, 
their  aspirations  after  a  something  unattained.     As  a  powerful  intellect  at  its  first 
dawn  aspires  after  a  knowledge  of  which  as  yet  it  has  no  conception ;  as  an  ambi- 
tious spirit  tends  upwards  to  a  height  beyond  its  gaze ;  as  a  heathen  in  his  ignorance 
feels  after  a  God  unknown — so  will  the  soul  of  fallen  man  wrestle  with  its  bondage 
and  strive  for  deliverance.    It  is  a  mighty  power,  though  bound,  and  it  sighs,  and 
heaves,  and  tends,  though  blindly,  to  the  good  which  it  has  forfeited.   How  elevated, 
then,  the  Christian's  hope  I    It  is  the  hope  of  mankind.    But  let  us  attend  to  soma 
instances  by  which  this  truth  may  be  illustrated.     (1)  Man  feels  his  miseries  more 
sensibly  than  any  other  creature — not  only  because  he  reflects,  which  is  itself  a 
heightening  of  his  distress,  but  because  he  has  a  consciousness  that  he  possesses 
a  capacity  of  perfect  bliss.    The  very  poignancy  of  his  misery  is  in  proof  of  his 
aspirations  after  unmingled  felicity.    (2)  Man  carries  his  desires  beyond  the  limits 
of  any  present  enjoyment.  Winged  with  desire,  he  hastens  to  an  object ;  he  obtains 
it ;  he  stops ;  he  finds  it  not  sufficient,  and  hastens  on  to  another.     Onward,  and 
onward  still,  beyond  all  that  earth  can  supply.    What,  then,  is  the  true  philosophy 
of  this?   A  distant,  though  unapprehended,  good  attracts  us.    (3)  Man  is  displacent 
at  the  very  vices  which  he  indulges.    And  how  are  we  to  account  for  this  ?    Why, 
but  because  the  soul  aspires  for  liberty  from  its  moral  corruption.   (4)  Man  struggles 
against  disease  and  death.    Life  is  the  object  of  most  passionate  desire,  and  death 
of  equally  strong  aversion.    What  is  this  but  a  tendency  to  a  state  like  that  which 
shall  be  enjoyed  at  "  the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God."     2.  To  the  revealed 
hope  of  the  believer,  to  which  all  his  longings  are  directed  (ver.  23),     "  They  have 
the  first-fruits  of  the  Spirit."    Even  this  exempts  not  from  the  miseries  of  life,  nor 
is  there  in  them,  however  glorious  they  are,  anything  which  can  satisfy  the  vast 
desire  of  glory.     (1)  True,  the  soul  is  reconciled  to  God,  but  the  bondage  of  cor- 
ruption still  places  them  in  circumstances  of  temptation.     They  may  sin  against 
God,  and  they  long  for  the  deliverance  which  shall  make  sin  no  longer  possible. 
(2)  True,  the  manifested  presence  of  God  is  the  delight  of  the  soul ;  but  even  this, 
in  its  full  extent,  is  veiled  and  hidden.     (3)  True,  there  is  the  glorious  attainment 
of  a  regenerate  nature,  but  how  many  imperfections  yet  remain  I     (4)  True,  there 
is  the  presence  of  heavenly  graces,  but  these  are  like  exotic  plants,  and  an  unfit 
soil  prevents  their  full  expansion,  their  fragrancy,  and  fruitfulness.   (5)  True,  there 
is  heavenly  knowledge  and  sacred  converse  with  God,  but  the  wants  of  the  body 
demand  supply,  and  hence  numberless  cares  and  anxieties.     (6)  True,  there  is  the 
communion  of  saints,  but  to  what  interruptions  is  not  this  exposed  by  human  mor- 
tality I    (7)  True,  religion  strengthens  your  social  affections  and  heightens  domestic 
enjoyment,  but  from  those  whom  you  love  you  have  been,  or  you  must  be,  severed. 
(8)  True,  you  are  saved  from  the  fear  of  death,  but  stUl  there  is  death,  the  last 
enemy,  and  the  struggle  with  him.    Thus  do  we  "  groan  within  ourselves,"  even 
though  we  have  the  hope  which  alone  prevents  our  sinking  in  despair.    But,  wbUe 
groaning  under  the  pressure  of  life's  burdens,  we  are  "  waiting  for  the  adoption,'' 
the  glorification  of  the  body,  and  its  establishment  in  the  perfect  and  everlasting 
joys  of  heaven.     {R.  Watson.)       For  the  creature  was  made  subject  to  vanity,  not 
willingly,  hut  by  reason  of  Him  who  hath  subjected  the  same  in  hope. — The 
vanity  of  the  present   state   consistent  with   God's  perfections : — I.    The   gospeii 

GIVES  us   ASSURANCE  OF   A    MOST  EXCELLENT  AND  HAPPY  STATE   RESERVED  FOR   GOOD  M1SN 

IN  ANOTHER  LIFE,  described  in  the  text  by  these  two  characters ;  of  its  being  the 
manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God,  and  a  state  of  the  most  glorious  liberty.  1.  Let 
as  consider  this  future  happy  state  which  the  gospel  describes  as  the  manifestation 
of  the  sons  of  God.  Good  men  are  the  sons  of  God  upon  a  double  account,  viz.,  of 
their  nature,  and  of  their  state  ;  each  of  which  is  becoming  that  high  title  of  the 
children  of  God.    In  respect  of  that  new  nature  of  which  they  are  partakers,  they 


^  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOB.  [chap,  vm 

are  jaetly  styled  the  children  of  God ;  He  being  both  the  Author  and  the  Pattern  of 
it.  Are  they  regenerate  or  born  again  ?  it  is  of  God  (1  John  v.  1 ;  1  Pet.  i.  23 ; 
John  iii.  5).  2.  It  is  farther  represented  as  a  state  of  glorious  liberty.  This  most 
desirable  freedom  is  indeed  begun  in  the  present  life  ;  for  where  the  spirit  of  the 
Lord  is,  there  is  liberty :  but  then,  as  long  as  men  continue  in  this  world  it  is  only 
begun.  (1)  Since  the  future  state  of  good  men  will  be  so  glorious,  what  reason 
have  they  to  bear  all  the  sufferings  of  the  present  time  with  a  contented  mind.  (2) 
Since  such  is  the  glory  of  that  future  state,  in  which  there  shall  be  a  manifestation 
of  the  sons  of  God,  it  should  be  a  powerful  motive  with  them  to  hasten  more  towards 
it  in  their  desires  and  preparations.  (3)  Since  such  is  the  honour  and  privilege 
of  all  good  men  who  are  now  the  sons  of  God,  and  since  such  will  be  their  happiness 
when  the  time  is  come  for  their  fuller  manifestation,  would  not  one  think  that  all 
should  be  desirous  of  this  character,  and  resolve  to  do  everything  which  may  entitle 
them  to  it?  Would  not  one  think  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  should  suffer 
violence,  and  that  all  who  hear  of  such  a  state  should  be  hastening  into  it  in 
crowds  ?  II.  The  present  state  of  mankind  is  a  state  of  vanity,  and  bondage  to 
CORRUPTION.  1.  In  the  present  life,  mankind  are  subject  to  many  fruitless  desires 
and  expectations.  2.  The  present  is  a  state  of  suffering.  "  Man  is  born  to  trouble 
as  the  sparks  fly  upwards."  Who  can  pretend  to  reckon  up  the  several  sorts  of 
pains  and  diseases  to  which  the  body  of  man  is  liable  ?  or  the  many  disagreeable 
accidents  and  mournful  events  to  which  we  are  continually  exposed,  and  wlaich  so 
often  befall  us  in  the  course  of  life  ?  3.  The  present  is  a  state  of  great  moral  weak- 
ness and  disorder.  The  fall  has  introduced  a  sort  of  anarchy  into  the  human  frame : 
the  passions  are  broke  loose,  and  the  mind  has  not  that  command  over  the  appetites 
and  inclinations  of  the  animal  part  which  it  were  to  be  wished,  and  which  we 
believe  the  mind  enjoyed  in  the  state  of  innocence.  4.  This  is  a  state  which 
quickly  passes  away,  or,  which  is  the  same,  out  of  which  we  quickly  pass  by  death 
into  another,  in  every  respect  almost  exceedingly  different  from  the  present.    III. 

To  THIS  VAIN  AND  CORRUPTIBLE  STATE,  MANKIND  WERE  ORIGINALLY  BROUGHT  INTO  SUB- 
JECTION, NOT  BY  THEMSELVES,  BUT  BY  ANOTHER.  By  him  who  Subjected  the  creature 
to  vanity,  may  be  meant  either  the  first  man  by  his  transgression,  or  God  for  the 
sin  of  man  ;  I  rather  incline  to  the  latter,  though  the  difference  is  not  very  material. 
Such  honour  had  man  in  his  creation,  that  God  subjected  to  him,  or  put  under  his 
feet,  all  other  things.  Such  was  the  unhappy  consequence  of  man's  offending  God, 
that  from  henceforth  man  himself  becomes  subject  to  vanity.  But  how  shall  we 
vindicate  this  dispensation  of  Divine  providence?  1.  As  to  the  justice  of  God,  the 
case  to  any  one  who  rightly  considers  it  is  attended  with  no  difficulty  at  all.  This 
dominion  of  God,  or  right  to  take  away  what  He  has  given,  or  to  withhold  from 
some  of  His  creatures  what  He  gives  to  others,  is  as  unquestionable  as  in  the 
exercise  it  is  uncontrollable.  And  as  the  dominion  of  God  or  His  right  to  put  man- 
kind into  what  state  or  circumstances  He  pleases  is  indisputable,  so  He  never 
exercises  this  supreme  dominion  of  His  without  good  reason.  2.  To  vindicate  the 
wisdom  and  goodness  of  God  in  this  dispensation.  (1)  In  respect  of  the  chief  con- 
sequences of  the  faU,  God  does  little  more  than  leave  things  to  produce  their  natural 
effects.  (2)  Supposing  God  had  interposed  in  a  supernatural  way,  directing  and 
overruling  the  course  of  things,  so  that  the  posterity  of  Adam  should  suffer  no  in- 
convenience by  his  fall;  yet  in  that  case  it  cannot  be  imagined  their  condition 
would  have  been  fixed  without  their  having  first  gone  through  a  state  of  probation, 
which  must  have  been  suited  to  the  nature  and  advantages  they  would  then  have 
enjoyed.  There  might  have  been  no  room  for  repentance  after  they  had  sinned, 
and  the  reward  of  their  obedience,  if  they  had  persevered  to  the  end,  might  not 
have  been  so  great,  as  the  reward  of  the  virtuous  now  will  be.  Which  being  con- 
sidered, it  may  be  justly  questioned  whether,  on  this  supposition,  the  circumstances 
of  mankind  upon  the  whole  would  have  very  much  exceeded  those  in  which  they 
now  are,  if  at  all.  (3)  If  it  has  pleased  God  to  subject  the  race  of  mankind  to  a 
state  of  vanity  and  corruption,  it  does,  in  many  respects,  better  answer  the  ends  of 
a  state  of  trial.  Every  virtue,  both  active  and  passive,  such  as  self-denial,  fortitude, 
benevolence,  charity,  compassion,  and  the  like,  have  now  room  for  exercise,  which 
they  would  not  in  a  state  of  perfect  ease  and  tranquilUty.  (4)  God  suits  His  govern- 
ment of  man  and  dealings  with  him  to  the  state  he  is  now  in.  If  he  has  given  less 
to  the  posterity  of  fallen  man  than  he  did  to  their  first  parents,  He  requires  less  of 
them.  Are  we  weak?  He  knows  it,  and  expects  no  more  from  us  than  He  hath 
given  us,  or,  upon  our  humble  application  to  Him,  will  give  us  strength  to  perform. 
(5)  There  is  this  advantage  in  the  present  state  as  a  state  of  vanity  and  corruption, 


CHAP.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  8? 

that  it  carries  in  it  a  continual  admonition  to  turn  our  thoughts  and  affections 
towards  a  better  state,  and  to  be  more  diligent  in  our  preparations  for  it.  (6)  Wa 
may  reasonably  conceive  God  has  the  rather  chosen  the  present  scheme  of  things, 
because  hereby  He  has  an  opportunity  of  dispensing  His  justice  and  bounty  in  two 
most  remarkable  acts  of  providence  which  occur  in  His  dealings  with  mankind : 
His  justice  in  punishing  the  sin  of  the  first  Adam  and  all  his  descendants ;  His 
bounty  in  rewarding  the  obedience  unto  death  of  the  second  Adam.     IV.  In  this 

STATE  OF  VANITY,  UNDEK  WHICH  THE  WHOLE  MOKiL  CREATION  OR  WORLD  OF  MANKIND 
GROANETH  AND  TRAVAILETH  IN  PAIN  TOGETHER,  THE  HUMAN  RACE  HAS  AN  EARNEST  EX- 
PECTATION  OR   DESIRE    OF  A   CONDITION    MORE    PERFECT    AND   HAPPY.         1.    All  CrcatureS 

naturally  tend  to  their  perfection,  so  does  the  race  of  mankind  in  particular ;  and 
the  future  state  of  the  saints  in  the  text,  styled  the  "  manifestation  of  the  sons  of 
God,"  importing  the  highest  perfection  to  which  the  nature  of  man  can  be  advanced ; 
with  the  greatest  propriety,  men  who  are  reasonable  creatures  and  breathe  after 
immortality  may  be  said  to  wait  for  such  a  state,  though  they  are  far  from  having 
a  distinct  idea  of  it.  2.  In  proportion  as  any  of  the  sons  of  men  have  improved 
their  rational  faculties,  and  lived  up  to  the  light  they  have  enjoyed,  this  desire  of 
perfection  and  happiness  has  been  more  ardent  and  more  explicit.    V.  Men  have 

NOT  BEEN  WITHOUT  THE  HOPE  OF  SUCH   A   HAPPY  ALTERATION  IN  THEIR  STATE,  WHICH    IN 

THE  TEXT  13  EXPRESSLY  ASSERTED  AND  PROMISED.  1.  Mankind  havc  always  been 
possessed  with  the  hope  of  a  better  state  of  things  than  the  present.  They  have 
not  only  desired  it,  but  hoped  for  it.  Now  hope  impUes  some  degree  of  belief  that 
the  thing  desired  will  come  to  pass.  And  such  a  beUef  has  obtained  in  all  ages. 
2.  God  has  given  men  some  ground  for  this  hope,  though  He  was  pleased  to  permit 
sin,  suffering,  imperfection.  To  this  effect  was  the  very  first  promise  after  the  fall. 
But  besides  this  first  promise,  God,  as  the  God  of  nature,  the  Author  of  reason,  and 
the  Governor  of  the  world  by  His  universal  providence,  has  encouraged  men  to  hope 
they  shall,  some  time  or  other,  be  freed  from  that  vanity  and  corruption  to  which, 
in  this  mortal  state,  they  are  subjected.  By  the  large  capacities  and  faculties  of 
the  human  soul,  to  which  the  things  of  this  world  bear  no  manner  of  proportion, 
and  which,  in  our  present  circumstance,  have  not  an  opportunity  to  unfold  and 
show  themselves,  God  plainly  points  us  to  another  life,  where  all  who  behave  well 
in  the  state  of  trial  shall  attain  to  much  higher  degrees  of  perfection  and  happi- 
ness. 3.  This  hope  is  raised  into  assurance  by  the  Christian  revelation.  Applica- 
tion :  1.  Let  this  lead  us  into  proper  reflections  on  the  nature  of  man,  and  of  his 
present  condition,  and  excite  in  us  affections  and  purposes  suitable  to  such  reflec- 
tions. 2.  Let  what  we  have  heard  raise  our  value  for  the  gospel  of  Christ.  We 
are  to  be  thankful  for  our  natural  hopes,  but  especially  for  those  which  we  derive 
from  the  gospel  revelation,  which  are  at  once  the  strongest,  the  most  extensive,  and 
the  most  satisfying.  (H.  Grove,  M.A.)  Subjected — in  hope: — See  how  all 
things  testify  to  the  Christian's  hope.  I.  See  the  creation  itself  restless  with 
an  otherwise  inexplicable  longing.  It  is  not  often  that  we  have  indications 
in  Paul's  writings  either  of  a  painter's  eye  or  a  poet's  fancy.  We  rather  con- 
ceive of  him  as  one  to  whom  scenery  and  history,  time  and  space  were  something 
less  than  indifferent.  Here,  however,  we  see  that  he  has  observed  nature — yes,  as 
only  poets  read  her.  Paul  has  seen  nature's  imploring  look,  and  heard  her  com- 
plaining voice,  and  felt  her  yearning  thought,  and  sympathised  with  her  confession 
— of  waste,  as  she  brings  one  seed  and  one  blossom  to  perfection  out  of  ten  thousand 
— of  discord,  as  she  is  made  to  launch  her  thunderbolts,  and  to  hft  her  waves,  and 
to  let  loose  her  hurricanes — of  cruelty,  in  her  ruthless  laws  of  consequence,  and 
which  take  no  account  of  innocence  or  penitence.  St.  Paul  is  not  satisfied  with 
lovely  landscapes.  He  is  no  tourist  of  pleasure  or  fancy.  He  looks  within  and 
beneath,  and  feels  that  beauty  might  be  more  beautiful,  and  Ufe  more  vital,  and 
strength  yet  more  robust,  and  that  in  all  actual  being  there  is  a  possible  being  more 
satisfactory ;  so  that  he  must  write  nature  an  expectant,  not  an  inheritor — he  must 
claim  her  testimony  as  on  the  side  of  that  gospel  which  makes  hope,  not  content- 
ment, the  attribute  of  God's  creature.  1,  See  the  very  face  of  nature  scarred  with 
tokens  of  conflict.  How  unmelodious  and  often  barbarous  are  the  agencies  of 
nature  as  she  heaves  in  elemental  agonies.  Is  this  quite  the  scene  which  God 
pronounced  to  be  very  good  ?  Hear  the  cry  of  the  brute  world,  itself  the  prey  of 
man,  and,  in  turn,  its  own  tyrant  and  murderer.  2.  Mark  the  unrest  of  a  humanity 
which  prides  itself  upon  its  position  at  the  top  of  God's  handiwork,  as  it  pours  the 
waters  of  an  inexhaustible  ambition  into  the  sieve  of  a  perpetual  disappointmen' . 
Listen  to  that  sigh  of  thankless  satiety  which  echoes  from  the  pampered  chil.l    r 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

fashion  to  that  other  sigh  from  the  heart  of  the  sorrow-laden.    See  that  fever- 
stricken  village,  that  battlefield.     Is  not  the  creation  making  confession,  in  all 
these  manifold  utterances,  of  a  condition  neither  original  nor  final?     Is  not  the 
creation  travailing  as  in  birth-pangs  with  a  mysterious  and  compensating  future  ? 
Can  it  be  that  God,  the  good  and  the  great  One,  can  suffer  these  blots  and  stains 
upon  His  own  work  to  continue  thus  for  ever  ?    If  God  be,  and  be  God,  every 
symptom  of  ruin  is  a  prophecy  of  reconstruction.    Very  mysterious,  this  subjection 
of  the  creature  to  vanity,  to  the  dominion  of  disappointment,  of  dissolution,  of 
decay  1    The  word  and  the  thought  fills  one  book  of  the  Old  Testament,  as  it  is 
here  summarised  in  one  chapter  of  the  New.    And  you  will  see,  if  you  study  that 
Book  of  Ecclesiastes,  how  comprehensive  is  the  word  here  before  us.     It  is  the 
perpetual  filling  of  that  which  is  never  full,  the  ceaseless  round  of  a  monotony 
which  has  no  harmony  and  no  melody.     St.  Paul  instructs  us  how  to  deduce  a 
positive  from  all  these  negatives.    He  claims  this  vanity  as  an  evidence  for  hope — 
as  a  witness  to  the  necessity  of  the  reconstruction  which  Christ  promises  to  us  in 
His  gospel.     II.  He  who  thus  read  "  vanity  "  as  the  legend  of  nature ;  he  who  saw 
even  here  the  record  of  a  fall  mysteriously  interwoven  with  the  condition  of  a 
creation  incapable  of  sinning,  now  calls  as  his  involuntary  witness  to  the  Christian 
expectation  the  life  of  sian  as  lived  outside  Christianitt.     1.  It  was  with  a  pity- 
ing and  compassionate  eye  that  St.  Paul  looked  upon  humanity.     Could  he  gaze 
unmoved  upon  this  great,  swarming  population  "  looking  for  so  much,  bringing  in 
BO  little,"  earning  its  wages  only  "  to  put  them  into  a  bag  with  holes  "  ?     St.  Paul 
saw  this  great  busy  earth  subjected  to  vanity  by  reason  of  sin ;  he  saw  how  each 
generation,  each  life,  sets  out,  as  though  it  were  the  only  one,  full  of  confidence, 
full  of  conceit,  on  its  little  race  of  ambition,  passion,  interest,  only  to  say  at  even- 
ing, "  Vanity  of  vanities."     "  Not  willingly,"  he  says.     It  would  not  have  it  so. 
Not  of  its  free  will  does  it  find  every  effort  defeated,  or  the  successful  effort  turned 
into  bitterness.     2.  St.  Paul  calls  this  vanity  as  a  witness  to  the  hope.    He  says. 
Could  these  things  be  if  there  were  no  hereafter  ?    Is  not  this  nothingness,  this 
bondage  of  corruption,  proof  enough  of  the  true  character  of  this  present  as  a  mere 
birth-pang  of  the  true,  the  satisfying,  the  everlasting?     Is  there  not,  indeed,  in  all 
men,  an  inward  witness  to  this  hope  ?    Who  does  not  wish  to  leave  something, 
some  one  behind  him?   Who  has  not  some  vision  of  a  perfection,  if  not  for  himself, 
then  for  the  race  ?    Who  that  is  engaged  in  business,  or  philanthropy,  who  that 
has  framed  for  himself  any  idea  of  a  religion,  of  a  God,  has  not  done  so  in  an 
expectation  ?    These  experiences  of  vanity  are  the  birth-pangs  of  glory,     God  has 
written  vanity  upon  the  present  that  every  eye  may  be  directed  towards  a  dawn,  of 
which  the  only  visible  streak  is  the  instinct  of  the  longing.     Cherish  that  longing, 
for  it  is  your  hope.    Base  and  dastardly  is  that  contentment  which  would  call  dark- 
ness light  and  shadow  substance.    This  is  the  great  lie,  against  which  God  in 
nature,  in  providence,  in  conscience  is  waging  perpetual  warfare.     Say  to  yourself 
till  you  feel  it,  "  I  am  here,  subject  to  vanity ;  if  I  pitch  my  tent  here,  if  I  choose 
the  thing  that  is  seen,  then  I  am  a  part  of  the  vanity."    Let  me  be  true  at  all  risks 
— true  to  the  inward  voice  which  says,  "Be  thou  a  stranger  and  a  sojourner  here, 
and  then  thou  hast  a  home,  and  a  city,  and  an  immortality  beyond."    How  mag- 
nificent the  thought — "The  creature  itself  also  shall  be  emancipated."    "I  saw 
new  heavens  and  a  new  earth."    "  Times  of  refreshing  shall  come."    The  Spirit  of 
God  shall  move  again  upon  the  face  of  a  second  chaos,  and  shape  a  new  universe  out 
of  the  confusion  of  this  subjugation.   Let  us  not  refuse  a  hope  for  which  every  voice 
within,  around,  and  above  us  cries  aloud.   III.  There  is  A  part,  even  of  the  Cheistun, 
which  St.  Paul  places  side  by  side  with  nature  and  humanity  as  a  witness.    "  We 
groan  within  ourselves,  waiting."     There  is  a  redeemed  part  within  us,  and  there 
is  an  unredeemed.     •'  The  Spirit  of  life  in  Jesus  Christ  hath  made  me  free  from  the 
law  of  sin  and  death."    But  what  then?     That  very  emancipation  makes  the  re- 
maining fetter  gall  and  fret  and  wound  more  than  before.     The  body,  which  is  the 
outlet  and  the  inlet  of  all  temptation,  is  still  unrenewed,  over-ruled,  consecrated,  but 
not  yet  transformed.     Therefore  I,  as  a  Christian  man,  am  a  witness  to  the  great 
hope.    I  could  not  live  thus  for  ever.     I  could  not  go  to  heaven  thus.     Nay, 
the  more  I  know  of  the  spiritual  life,  and  the  more  sensitive  I  become  to  the 
thing  which  God  hates,  and  the  more   I  acquire    the    mastery  over   sin  and 
corruption,  so  much  the  more  do  I  become  aware  of  the  burden  which  I  carry 
everywhere  in  this  body.     So  much  the  more  am  I  a  witness  to  the  necessity  of  a 
death  and  a  resurrection.     So  much  the  more  do  I,  in  this  body,  groan  being 
'  urdened,  having  a  desire  for  the  heaven  of  God's  saints.     {Dean  Vaughan.) 


CHAP.  Tin.]  ROMANS. 


The  vanity  of  tTie  creature  : — I.  Its  evidences.  Creation. — 1.  Has  lost  its  original 
charm,  beauty,  durability,  harmony,  perfection.  2.  Is  corrupted  by  much  that  is 
pernicious  or  useless.  3.  Has  been  subjected  to  abuse.  II.  Its  causes.  1.  Man's 
sin.  2.  God's  purpose.  3.  The  hope  of  restoration  and  development.  (J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  Man  made  subject  to  vanity  : — I.  Man  is  made  subject  to  vanity.  1.  In 
the  frailty  of  his  body  and  its  sulijection  to  death,  and  in  the  precariousness  of  his 
life  (Gen.  ii.  17).  2.  In  the  unsatisfactoriness  and  uncertainty  of  his  pursuits.  11. 
Man  dndeeooes  this  subjection  unwillinglt.  It  was  not  a  pleasant  change  from 
a  body  preserved  in  independent  vigour  and  immortality  by  the  efficacy  of  the  Tree 
of  Life  to  a  mortal  body ;  from  gardening  in  Paradise  to  ploughing  a  stubborn  and 
comparatively  barren  soil.  So  reluctant  was  Adam  to  the  change  that  compulsion 
was  necessary — "  So  He  drove  out  the  man."  III.  This  subjection  was  a  con- 
sequence OF  the  Divine  perfection.  It  was  rendered  necessary  by  Divine  justice 
and  wisdom,  and  executed  by  Divine  power.  IV.  This  subjection  is  alleviated  by 
hope.  Bedemption  by  Christ  was  the  hope  of  the  fathers,  founded  on  God's 
promise — "  The  seed  of  the  woman,"  &o.  It  is  our  hope  now.  1.  It  is  a  hope  of 
deliverance  from  vanity  to  a  state  answerable  to  the  rank  of  "the  sons  of  God."  This 
deliverance  is  "the  redemption  of  the  body  "  and  "  the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of 
God."  2.  It  is  strengthened  by  the  spiritual  renovation  which  is  the  pledge  of  its 
fulfilment.  Learn — 1.  The  folly  and  wickedness  of  a  worldly  mind.  2.  The  reason- 
ableness of  patience.  3.  The  duty  of  yielding  to  that  Spirit  who  is  working  out  our 
deliverance.     (C.   Wills,  M.A.)  The  creature  subjected  to  and  delivered  from 

vanity  : — Two  wrong  ways  of  regarding  the  visible  creation  around  us — 1.  Making 
an  idol  of  it.  2.  Professing  to  despise  it.  Scripture  teaches  that  nature  is  not  our 
master,  but  our  fellow-servant.  The  passage  before  us  teaches  its  connection  with 
us,  past  and  present,  its  actual  condition,  and  its  future  destiny.  I.  Nature  is  in 
sympathy  with  fallen  man. — "  Whole  creation  groaneth,"  <fec.  1.  Subjected  by, 
and  for,  some  one:  "By  reason  of  Him."  Whom?  God,  not  Adam,  as  some 
think.  (1)  He  subjected  it.  (2)  And  "  in  hope."  (3)  See  Gen.  iii.  17.  2.  As  to 
the  manner  of  subjection,  two  views — (1)  A  part  reserved.  Paradise  ;  and  the  outside 
world  then  what  it  is  now.  (2)  A  mighty  shock  passed  upon  the  world,  previously 
paradisaical.  Either  admissible.  Perhaps,  in  a  measure,  both.  3.  As  to  the 
nature  of  the  subjection.  (1)  To  vanity  (see  Eph.  iv.  17 ;  1  Pet.  i.  18 ;  Eccles.  i. 
2,  14  ;  Psa.  Ixii.  9,  xxxix.  5).  Expressive  of  inefficacy,  aimlessness.  (2)  To  bondage 
of  corruption.  Deeper:  outcome  and  result  of  vanity.  Sickness,  pain,  death, 
restraiut,  bondage.  H.  The  subjection  of  nature  not  hopeless.  1.  Groaneth 
and  travaileth — not  willingly  subjected.  Evidences  of  this  in  nature.  Decay, 
discord,  pain.  2.  This  longing  verified  by  Scripture.  Subjected  in  hope.  "  Earnest 
expectation  "  in  creature.  3.  In  sympathy  with  regenerate  man:  "We  ourselves 
groan,"  &q.  III.  This  hope  will  be  realised.  "  The  creature  also  shall  be 
delivered,"  Ac.  1.  General  truth  of  this  asserted  in  Scripture  (Isa.  xi.  6,  Ixv.  17 ;  Acts 
iii.  21 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  13,  <fec.).  2.  More  particularly  in  this  passage.  From  bondage 
of  corruption  to  liberty  of  glory.  Just  as  Christ  was  raised  to  the  glory  of  the  Father, 
and  the  sons  of  God  to  the  glory  of  Christ,  so  will  be  the  redeemed  creation  to  the 
glory  of  the  sons  of  God.  3.  At  or  after  the  second  advent.  "  Behold,  I  make  all 
things  new."  Different  opinions  as  to  time  and  manner.  As  regards  the  thing  itself, 
a  truth  of  revelation.  A  subject  of  deep  interest  to  all  Christians.  {Preb.  Clark.) 
Life  a  prophecy  : — It  seems  to  me  that  many  reasons  justify  us  in  regarding  our 
time  upon  this  earth  as  a  season  full  of  prophesyings  of  better  things  to  come. 
First:  Our  own  being  is  prophetic.  We  are  organised  for  something  more  and 
better  than  as  yet  appears.  We  are  inspired  with  the  thought  of  the  unseen  and 
eternal.  Each  man  of  us  has  a  prophecy  of  future  rewards  and  punishments 
written  in  his  own  conscience.  And  does  not  human  love  have  always  hidden  it  in 
heart  a  prophetic  hope  of  the  future  and  its  completions?  Listen  to  your  own 
soul.  Make  silence  within,  and  listen  to  your  own  better  self.  You  are  that 
prophet  whom  you  seek.  You  are  chosen  from  your  birth  and  called  of  God  to  be 
a  witness  to  the  higher  order  of  spirit,  and  to  live  as  an  heir  of  the  kingdom  of  God. 
Secondly,  our  human  relations  are  prophetic.  Accept  your  family  relations  and 
your  human  friendships  as  gifts  of  God — nay,  as  revelations  to  you  of  what  God  in 
Uis  Fatherhood,  and  the  Son  of  God  in  His  brotherhood  is — and  then  all  these 
human  relations  through  which  God  Himself  comes  near  to  bless  you,  will  grow 
doubly  sacred  to  you.  There  is  a  presence  of  God  also  in  them.  They  are  of  holy 
worth.  Any  sin  against  them,  any  violation  of  these  sacred  human  relations, 
tonohes  something  Divine.  Obserre  further  in  this  connection  how  broken,  pati:-.', 


90  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  nn, 

and  tragic,  often,  these  human  relations  and  friendships  seem  in  this  world  to  be. 
They  all  of  them  suggest  something  which  should  be  complete,  holy,  perfect ;  and 
then  they  break  off,  and  in  the  poor  actuality  of  the  present  remain  but  suggestions 
of  what  should  be.  There  is  evidently  eternal  worth  in  such  relations  of  life,  but 
just  as  we  begin  to  find  it,  we  lose  it.  Those  who  made  each  other's  lives  so  com- 
plete are  no  longer  dwellers  in  the  same  world  together.  Love  here  has  too  often 
only  the  beginning  of  its  good — the  precious,  yet  too  quickly  broken  fragment  of  its 
own  blessing.  Put  then  together  in  your  thoughts  these  two  facts — the  self-evident 
worth  of  these  human  relations  and  friendships,  and  their  present  incompleteness 
— and  do  you  not  see  how  through  their  partial  good  the  prophecy  of  the  Lord  of 
life  begins  to  come  into  our  lives  ?  The  earthly  fragment  which  love  has  received 
was  given  as  a  promise  of  the  Lord ;  it  was  never  meant  as  a  completed  thing.  The 
present,  broken  good  is  a  Divine  suggestion  to  us  of  the  perfect  life  in  which  all  that 
is  now  fragmentary  shall  be  made  complete.  I  have  not  yet  in  these  statements 
led  you  to  lay  hold,  as  one  may,  of  the  strong  principle  of  reason  underlying  this 
prophetic  interpretation  of  our  present  human  relations.  These  statements  rest 
upon  the  prophetic  principle  which  we  find  in  nature  pervading  all  growth,  and 
pointing  ever  on  from  partial  good,  and  lower  types,  towards  the  better  things  to 
come.  The  only  difference  is  that  when  the  geologist  or  the  biologist  reads  the 
record  of  progress  and  ascent  of  life  upon  this  earth,  he  can  now  read  the  Scripture 
of  nature  backwards,  and  having  before  him  in  man's  present  form  and  brain  a 
fulfilled  prophecy  of  nature,  he  can  easily  interpret,  reading  backwards,  the  lower 
prophetic  forms  and  types.     What  from  the  beginning  upwards  was  one  constant 

Jirophecy  of  man's  coming  is  now  our  history.  But  the  Christian,  when  he  now 
ooks  forward  and  thinks  of  the  coming  of  the  second  man,  even  the  Lord  from 
heaven,  has  still  to  read  the  present  prophetic  signs  and  tendencies  of  things  forwards 
by  faith.  Nevertheless,  we  proceed  upon  the  same  principle  of  reason  whether  we 
read  the  creation  backward  or  forward ;  that  which  is  good,  but  which  is  in  part, 
is  always  a  sign  and  herald  of  that  which  is  perfect,  which  is  to  come.  All  partial 
good  is  prophetic.  That  is  a  first  principle  of  nature.  This  is  also  a  great  principle 
of  faith.  It  is  a  profound  principle,  reaching,  I  must  believe,  to  the  bottom  of  all 
natural  evolution,  and  yet  simple  as  the  hope  which  will  not  die  in  the  heart  of 
human  sorrow.  It  is  a  principle  of  life  so  true,  and  so  strong  to  bear  our  faith,  that 
you  will  allow  me  once  more  to  endeavour  to  render  this  present  deeply  prophetic 
significance  of  human  nature  intelligible.  There  is  a  third  prophetic  element  in 
this  present  life  to  which  I  should  now  allude.  We  have  thus  far  considered  the 
fact  that  man  himself  in  his  own  being  is  essentially  a  prophet  of  the  Lord  upon 
this  earth,  and  also  the  truth  that  our  human  relations  in  their  eternal  worth,  but 
present  incompleteness,  all  bear  witness  of  something  diviner  to  come  in  which  they 
shall  be  made  perfect.  A  further  prophetic  aspect  of  our  life  here  we  may  find  in 
the  present  relation  of  our  spirits  to  outward  things.  Our  present  embodiment  in 
nature  is  a  good,  but  it  is  not  a  complete  and  permanent  good.  It  is  the  best  thing 
on  this  earth  ;  there  is  nothing  among  all  material  things  more  wonderful  than  the 
brain  of  man.  The  stars  in  their  courses,  the  infinite  network  of  attractions  which 
constitute  the  order  of  the  heavens,  excite  our  wonder  and  awe ;  but  are  they  so 
marvellous  manifestations  of  creative  wisdom  and  power  as  the  living  centres  and 
constellations  of  nerve-cells,  and  the  balanced  forces  and  ethereal  fineness  and  com- 
plexity of  the  processes  which  the  spirit  that  is  in  man  finds  given  him  in  the 
organism  and  harmonies  of  his  brain,  for  the  purposes  of  recording  and  comparing 
his  thoughts,  and  executing  his  free  volitions?  Man  himself  in  his  present  embodi- 
ment is  the  consummation  of  nature,  and  the  last  wonder  of  the  creation.  But, 
nevertheless,  this  body  is  not  enough  for  the  spirit  of  man.  Our  present  embodi- 
ment, in  other  words,  is  prophetic — wonderfully  and  profoundly  prophetic  of  what 
shall  be.  Yes,  in  these  bodies  so  wonderfully  made,  yet  so  incomplete,  we  have 
nature's  prophecy  of  the  resurrection,  and  the  earthly  preparation  for  the  perfect, 
spiritual  body  which  shall  be.  In  these  mortal  bodies,  in  which  we  begin  to  live 
and  to  be  formed  for  immortality,  the  earnest  expectation  of  the  creation  waiteth 
for  the  revealing  of  the  sons  of  God.  I  hold  that  the  earnest  expectation  of  the 
whole  creation  from  the  first  organic  cell  up  to  the  brain  of  man  waits  for  the  reveal- 
ing of  the  sons  of  God ;  I  would  claim  that  the  Christian  doctrine  of  the  resurrection 
and  the  consummation  of  nature,  as  laid  down  in  St.  Paul's  chapter  of  inspired 
interpretation  of  God's  thought,  is  in  accordance  with  the  present  prophetic  natnra 
of  things,  and  that  we  can  and  should  believe  in  the  Word  of  God,  which  confirma 
(he  whole  op-look  and  on-look  of  the  creation ;  and  w  may  wait,  therefor*,  in  tk* 


«HA».  vm.]  ROMANS.  91 

patience  of  hope  for  the  glory  which  the  heart  of  man  indeed  cannot  conceive,  but 
which  shaU  be  known  in  us  who  are  risen  in  Christ,  when  that  which  is  perfect 
shall  come.  {N.  Smyth,  D.D.)  St.  Paul's  account  of  the  creation  : — I,  St.  Paul 
says  that  *'  the  creation  is  subject  to  vanity,"  and  is  under  "  the  bondaoe  of 
coBROPTioN."  He  sees  in  the  creation  a  good  deal  of  effort  that  comes  to  nothing, 
a  waste  of  power,  general  imperfection,  universal  decay.  1.  The  apostle's  descrip- 
tion ia  confirmed  by  facts.  There  is  an  ideal  form  of  beauty  for  the  leaf  and 
blossom  of  every  plant ;  but  no  leaf  or  blossom  is  quite  true  to  its  ideal.  The 
human  eye  is  a  very  wonderful  organ  ;  but  it  is  said  that  there  are  most  curious 
faults  in  it.  Man  is  not  the  only  creature  whose  growth  is  often  stunted,  powers 
repressed,  and  glory  obscured.  Birds  and  beasts  die  of  famine  and  in  cruel  conflict 
with  each  other.  They  are  sometimes  blind,  deaf  and  lame.  Epidemics  sweep 
them  away.  They  are  tormented  by  diseases  precisely  analogous  to  our  own. 
Flowers,  plants,  and  trees,  spring  up  in  soil  which  gives  them  no  food,  and  they  die 
of  starvation.  They  perish  from  want  of  rain.  They  are  burnt  up  by  heat.  Their 
fruit  fails  to  ripen  for  want  of  sun.  They,  too,  are  liable  to  diseases,  which  are 
curiously  similar  to  ours.  What  makes  sJl  these  facts  the  more  appalling  is  that 
this  apparent  waste  and  suffering  have  been  going  on  for  millions  of  years.  St. 
Paul  might  have  read  one  of  Mr.  Darwin's  books,  for  this  is  what  Mr.  Darwin  has 
made  certain  :  "  The  whole  creation  groaneth  and  travaileth  together  in  pain  until 
now."  2.  But  is  not  the  creation  God's  own  workmanship  ?  Do  not  the  heavens 
declare  His  glory,  and  all  His  works  praise  Him  ?  Did  not  St.  Paul  say  that  "  the 
invisible  things  of  God,"  Ac.  ?  Yes;  and  it  may  be  true  that  there  has  been  more 
of  happiness  than  of  pain.  There  is  "  vanity  "  and  "  the  bondage  of  corruption  " 
everywhere  ;  and  yet  Nature  is  fairer  than  the  poets  have  ever  sung ;  there  are 
intricacies  of  skill  which  transcend  all  that  genius  has  ever  yet  discovered ;  and 
there  is  an  infinite  wealth  of  goodness,  in  the  presence  of  which  our  most  fervent 
gratitude  is  cold.  3.  You  have  listened  to  the  work  of  a  great  master  when  it  has 
been  imperfectly  rendered.  The  chorus  just  missed  a  sudden  leap  of  exulting 
triumph,  or  they  did  not  sink  to  the  soft  hush  of  harmony,  or  their  voices  were  too 
coarse,  or  the  instruments  were  not  quite  in  tune,  or  the  band  and  the  voices  parted 
company.  And  yet  the  genius  of  the  composer  shone  through  it  all.  Sometimes, 
too,  you  have  seen  on  the  walls  of  a  church  the  work  of  a  great  artist.  The  frescoes 
are  falling  away  from  the  wall ;  the  canvas  is  rotting.  And  yet  there  are  hnes  and 
colours  which  reveal  the  skill  of  the  immortal  painter.  These  illustrations  fail  to 
touch  the  mystery  of  the  imperfection  and  pain  of  the  universe ;  and  yet  they  may 
suggest  the  blended  dissatisfaction  and  rapture  with  which  St.  Paul  thought  of  the 
works  of  God.  The  things  that  God  has  made  reveal  His  eternal  power  and  God- 
head ;  but  the  creation  is  subject  to  vanity  by  the  will  of  the  Creator,  and  the 
bondage  of  corruption  is  upon  all  things.    II.  But  St.  Paul  did  not  believb  that 

THE  imperfection  OP  CREATION  18  TO  CONTINUE  FOR  EVER.      It  WAS  MADE  SUBJECT  "  IN 

HOPE,"  AND  IT  wiLi,  BE  "  DELIVERED,"  &c.  1.  As  thosc  that  are  in  Christ  are  to 
inherit  eternal  glory,  so  all  created  things  are  to  pass  into  new  and  higher  forms  of 
existence.  Speculation,  indeed,  on  this  subject  has  no  materials  to  work  upon. 
*'  We  know  not  what  we  shall  be  "  ;  still  less  do  we  know  what  the  glorified  creation 
will  be.  We  may  dream  of  sweeter  music,  fairer  flowers,  and  nobler  fruits,  &c.,  in  the 
new  creation  than  in  the  old.  But  all  these  are  dreams.  All  that  we  can  say  is, 
that  we  have  not  seen  the  last  and  consummate  manifestations  of  the  power  and 
wisdom  of  the  Creator.  The  great  "  hope  "  of  the  creation  has  yet  to  be  fulfilled. 
"  Now  is  the  winter  of  its  discontent "  ;  its  spring  has  not  yet  come ;  the  splendour 
of  its  summer  is  stUl  far  off.  2.  The  birth-throes  of  which  the  apostle  speaks  aoe 
an  effort  of  imagination  which  closely  touches  some  of  the  theories  which  we  are 
asked  to  receive  on  the  authority  of  scientific  proof.  We  are  told  that  the  fierce 
struggle  for  existence  is  the  condition  of  the  development  of  higher  and  yet  higher 
forms  of  life.  By  a  law  which  could  not  be  resisted,  the  feebler  and  the  less  perfect 
forms  of  life  have  been  crushed  whenever  they  have  come  in  collision  with  the 
nobler  and  the  more  vigorous.  The  birth-throes  of  nature  have  extended  through 
all  time,  and  they  are  not  yet  over.  Through  how  many  more  ages  the  suffering 
will  last,  whether  it  will  ever  cease,  are  questions  upon  which  there  is  no  general 
consent  of  scientific  opinion.  (1)  M.  Benan  dreams  that  through  the  operation  of 
this  law  of  development  there  will  at  last  arise  an  intellectual  aristocracy  which  will 
have  absolute  command  of  all  the  resources  of  the  world ;  that  in  every  country 
ihere  may  be  a  dozen  or  a  score  of  men  as  superior  in  their  intellectual  force  to  the 
-rest  of  the  nation  as  men  are  now  to  brutes ;  and  that,  perhaps,  eventually  the 


99  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  vm. 

whole  force  of  the  world,  all  its  knowledge,  and  therefore  all  its  power,  may  even  be 
concentrated  in  the  hands  of  a  solitary  individual,  who  will  have  absolute  control 
over  the  life  and  fortunes  of  the  race — a  god  that  the  human  race  had  developed  for 
itself.     (2)  There  are  others  who  tell  us  that  the  great  movement  must  be  at  last 
arrested.    The  play  of  the  mighty  forces  which  sustain  it  will  cease.     There  will  be 
equilibrium.     The  anguish  wiU  be  over,  and  with  the  anguish  life,  in  all  its  forms, 
will  be  no  more.    (3)  Paul  believed  that  the  creation  has  a  glorious  future.    Christ, 
"  the  brightness  of  the  Father's  glory,"  has  become  man,  and  has  brought  all  the 
regenerate  members  of  the  race  into  immortal  unity  with  Himself,  so  that  His  glory 
is  certain  to  become  theirs.    Man,  however,  belongs  to  the  visible  creation.    From 
the  earth  we  sprang ;  and  we  are  the  children  of  the  earth,  though  we  have  been 
made  the  children  of  God.     As  we  are  to  share  the  glory  of  Christ  because  of  our 
union  with  Him,  the  earth  is  to  share  our  glory  because  of  its  union  with  us.    3. 
You  see,  therefore,  at  what  points  St.  Paul  is  in  agreement  with  the  results  of 
scientific  observation,  and  where  he  is  hostile  to  philosophical  theories  which  have 
been  hastily  erected  on  a  scientific  basis.     (1)  If  the  man  of  science  maintains  that 
he  discovers  signs  of  imperfection  in  every  living  organisation  ;  that  the  organs  of 
sense  are  imperfect ;  that  in  the  lower  types  of  life  there  are  the  mere  rudiments  of 
limbs  which  are  found  in  a  useful  and  complete  form  only  in  the  higher ;  that  in 
the  higher  there  are  survivals  of  elementary  forms  of  structure  which  were  useful 
only  in  the  lower ;  that  there  is  a  universal  waste  of  life  ;  that  there  is  an  appalling 
amount  of  suffering — St.  Paul  is  ready  -to  accept  all  these  facts.     The  creation  is 
subject  to  "  vanity  "  and  is  under  "  the  bondage  of  corruption."    But  if  the  man 
of  science  goes  on  to  argue  from  the  imperfections,  and  failures,  and  waste  in 
creation,  that  the  universe  had  no  intelligent  Creator,  St.  Paul  vehemently  persists 
that  with  all  the  imperfection,  failure,  and  waste,  there  are  transcendent  manifesta- 
tions of  the  Creator's  "  eternal  power  and  Godhead."    (2)  If  the  man  of  science 
maintains  that  all  created  things  have  gradually  been  developed  by  coniiict  and  pain 
from  lower  forms  of  life,  and  that  the  history  of  the  development  has  been  a  history 
of  protracted  anguish,  St.  Paul  wiU  find  in  the  facts  which  illustrate  this  doctrine 
the  most  startling  confirmation  of  his  own  statement  that "  the  creation  groan eth  and 
travaileth  together  till  now."    (3)  If  the  man  of  science  maintains  that  the  physical 
nature  of  man  is  the  result  of  the  same  development,  so  that  man  on  the  side  of  his 
inferior  life  belongs  to  the  inferior  universe,  St.  Paul  will  listen  with  an  open  mind, 
remembering  that  his  own  sacred  books  had  taught  him  that  the  physical  nature  of 
man  came  from  the  dust,  though  nothing  had  been  said  of  the  gradations  by  which 
the  dust  ascended  to  the  dignity  and  power  of  the  human  form.     But  if  the  man  of 
science  further  maintains  that  the  history  of  man's  physical  development  is  a 
complete  account  of  human  nature,  St.  Paul  will  again  protest  vehemeptly.     He 
will  affirm — and  the  consciousness  of  the  human  race  supports  him — that  there  is 
a  mysterious  power  in  man  which  cannot  be  explained  by  this  process  of  develop- 
ment.   The  ascending  movement  of  physical  life — if  science  can  establish  the  reality 
of  the  movement — was  met  by  the  descent  of  the  power  of  God,  and  the  living 
creatures  whose  organisation  had  become  capable  of  receiving  inspiration  from  God 
received  it.     (4)  If,  again,  the  man  of  science  argues  that  the  groaning  and  travail- 
ing of  creation  are  to  end  in  stagnation  and  despair,  St.  Paul  protests  again  and 
exults  in  the  certainty  of  the  hope  that  the  creation  will  be  delivered  at  last  from 
the  bondage  of  corruption  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God.     (R.  W. 
Dale,  D.D.)        The  groaning  creation  : — 1.  The  word  translated  "  creation  "  has  a 
variety  of  significations  in  the  New  Testament.     It  sometimes  means  the  act  of 
creation  (chap.  i.  20) ;  sometimes  finite  existence  generally  (Matt.  x.  6 ;  2  Pet.  v. 
4 ;  Rom.  i.  25,  viii.  39) ;  sometimes  the  human  race  exclusively  (Mark  xvi.   16 ; 
Col.  i.  23 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  13) ;  and  sometimes  the  class  of  regenerated  men  (Col.  i.  16  ; 
Bom.  iii.  14  ;  2  Cor.  v.  17 ;  Gal.  vi.  15 ;  Eph.  ii.  10).    2.  That  the  meaning  we 
attach  to  it  here  should  agree  with  the  scope  of  the  context  and  the  aim  of  the 
writer.     The  aim  of  the  apostle  is  evidently  to  exhibit  the  subUme  privileges  of  the 
Christian  amidst  all  the  trials  of  this  life.     3.  That  whatever  meaning  we  attach  to 
the  word,  it  should  be  the  meaning  that  the  word  will  carry  through  the  whole 
passage.     Attending  to  these  three  things  we  have  been  compelled  to  regard  the 
word  "  creation  "  as  intended  to  designate  regenerated  humanity.     Substitute  the 
word,  regenerated  humanity,  for  "  creation  "  throughout  the  whole  passage,  and  you 
will  give  it  a  consistency  both  with  itself  and  the  aim  of  the  writer.     Our  subject  is 
"  The  Groaning  Creation ;  or,  the  ApostoUc  estimate  of  the  life  of  Eegenerated 
Men.**    This  estimate— I.  Has  bespeot  to  two  worlds — iW  present  and  the  future. 


OBAP.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  98 

As  the  average  conduct  of  a  man  should  be  taken  into  account  in  order  to  estimate 
his  character,  so  the  entire  life  of  a  man,  future  as  well  as  past  and  present,  must 
be  taken  into  account  in  order  to  estimate  the  balance  of  his  joys  or  sorrows  as  a 
whole.    Let  us  look  at  Paul's  view  of — 1.  The  present  life  of  the  good.    He  describes 

it (1)  A.8  a  scene  of  vanity.    (2)  As  a  scene  of  slavery.     "  Bondage  of  corruption." 

(3)  As  a  scene  of  suffering.    All  good  men  from  the  beginning  have  been  "  groan- 
ing."   It  is  our  happiness,  however,  to  know  that  all  our  sufferings  are  parturitional ; 
they  are  all  travailing  together ;  they  will  give  birth  to  a  higher  order  of  things  that 
will  be  more  than  a  compensation  for  the  throes.     2.  The  future  life  of  the  good. 
(1)  It  is  a  scene  of  spiritual  glory.     "  Glory  that  shall  be  revealed  in  us,"    The 
glory  of  wordly  men  is  outside ;  the  glory  of  the  good  is  within.     (2)  It  is  a  scene 
of  triumphant  freedom.    '•  The  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God."    (3)  It  is 
a  scene  devoutly  anticipated.     "  They  are  waiting  for  the  manifestation  of  the  sons 
of  Cod."    "  When  He  who  is  our  life  shall  appear,"  &o.     II,  Is  most  salutary  in 
ITS  EFFECT,     "  We  are  saved  by  hope."   Such  a  hope  saves  us — 1.  From  scepticism. 
Did  we  not  take  into  account  the  life  of  future  blessedness  that  awaits  us,  our  present 
trials  and  afflictions  would  shake  our  faith  in  the  vdsdom  and  love  of  God's  govern- 
ment of  the  world.     2.  From  murmurings.    Did  we  not  keep  the  future  blessedness 
in  view,  we  should  be  likely  to  complain  and  repine  under  our  present  afflictions ;  but 
looking  at  the  glorious  things  awaiting  us,  we  say  with  Paul,  "  Our  light  afflictions, 
which  are  but  for  a  moment,"  &c.     3.  From  indolence.     How  the  blessed  prospect 
stimulates  to  activity  1   How  the  racer  kindles  with  fresh  fire  as  he  glances  at  the  goal  1 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.)        The  vanity  of  the  creature: — We  begin  with  the  creature's 
condition,  in  these  words,  "  The  creature  was  made  subject  to  vanity."  That  all  the 
creatures  which  are  in  the  world,  or  ever  have  been  since  the  faU  of  man,  they  are  for 
the  present  in  a  vain  condition :  they  are  vain  and  subject  to  vanity.    First,  take  it  in 
its  insufficiency,  and  consider  it  there.   A  thing  is,  then,  said  to  be  vain  when  it  does 
not  reach  its  proper  end,  nor  does  that  for  which  it  was  intended.     The  creature,  in 
its  original  ordination  and  the  first  appointment  of  it,  was  ordained  for  two  ends. 
The  one  was  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  other  was  the  good  of  man.     Now  both  of 
these  ends  does  it  in  a  sort  very  much  come  short  of ;  yea,  is  opposite  unto  them. 
Secondly,  the  good  of  man.    It  also  fails  of  this,  and  is  perverted  in  this  particular 
likewise  ;  and  that,  again,  in  a  double  respect,  whether  temporal  or  spiritual.    His 
temporal  good,  for  the  preservation  of  his  body,  and  his  spiritual  good,  for  the 
edification  of  his  soul.     The  creature  has  a  vanity  upon  it,  so  far  as  it  is  opposite 
to  either,  in  the  improvement  of  it.     The  use  which  we  may  make  of  this  observa- 
tion to  ourselves  comes  to  this,  namely,  to  teach  us  to  labour  to  have  the  creature 
sanctified  to  us  ;  and  so  in  a  sort  reduced  to  that  estate  which  at  first  it  was  set  in. 
First,  the  creature  is  sanctified  on  God's  part  by  His  word ;  and  there  is  a  threefold 
word  of  His,  which  is  considerable  to  this  purpose.     First,  the  word  of  donation. 
Secondly,  the  word  of  benediction.     And  thirdly,  the  word  of  promise.     The  word 
of  donation,  whereby  He  bestows  the  creature  upon  us ;  the  word  of  benediction, 
whereby  He  blesses  the  creature  to  us  ;  the  word  of  promise,  whereby  He  makes  a 
tender  of  this  blessing.     But  prayer  helps  us  to  use  them  conscionably,  that  those 
things  which  in  themselves  are  lawful  may  not  become  through  our  improvement 
Binfol.     Secondly.    To  enjoy  them  comfortably  ;  for  without  God's  special  favour 
and  blessing,  though  we  partake  of  the  things  themselves,  yet  we  can  relish  no 
•weetness  in  them  at  all.    Now  prayer,  it  fetches  this  from  Him.    And  so  much 
may  suffice  to  have  spoken  of  the  first  piece  of  vanity  of  the  creature,  consisting  in 
its  insufficiency  and  failing  of  that  first  end  whereunto  it  was  ordained.     The 
second  is  in  regard  of  its  uncertainty,  its  transitoriness  and  shortness  of  continuance. 
The  creature  is  subject  to  vanity  in  this  regard  also.    And  so  the  Scripture  does 
overywhere  represent  it  to  us.     "  The  fashion  of  this  world  passeth  away  "  (1 
Cor.  vii.  31 ;  1  John  ii.  17).     This  is  the  nature  of  these  worldly  matters,  but 
M  a  show  and  pageant,  and  there  is  an  end.     This  it  hath  a  twofold  ground 
lor  it.     First,  the  sin  of  man  that  hath  deserved  it     The  heavens  and  earth 
*te  harmless,  yet,  because   they  were  made  for    man's    sake,  they  bear   the 
tokens  of  God's  wrath  against  man  for  his  sin  (Isa.  xxiv.  6).    Secondly,  God's 
enunsel  that  hath  so  ordained  it.     God  has  cursed  the  earth  for  man's  sake,  and 
thereby  brought  destruction  upon  it.     The  con.  ideration  of  this  point  is  thus  far 
ttneful  to  OB.    First,  it  teaches  us  from  hence  to  put  no  stress  or  confidence  in  the 
Ofeature.    "When  riches  increase,  set  not  your  heart  upon  them"  (Psa.  Ixii.  10). 
Sscondly,  is  ihe  creature  thus  subject  to  vanity  in  regard  to  the  transitoriness  of  it, 
tlien  let  as  hold  ourselves  so  much  more  to  the  Creator,  in  whom  is  no  vanity,  or 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tin. 

variableness,  or  shadow  of  turning.  And  so  now  I  have  done  with  the  first  general 
part  of  the  text,  which  is  the  creature's  condition  in  these  words :  "  For  the  creature 
was  made  subject  unto  vanity."  The  second  is  the  cause  or  occasion  of  this  condition, 
which  is  laid  down  two  manner  of  ways.  First,  negatively :  "  Not  willingly."  Secondly, 
affirmatively :  "  But  by  reason  of  Him  who  hath  subjected  the  same  in  hope."  First, 
take  it  in  the  negative,  '•  not  willingly  " — that  is,  not  of  its  own  proper  instinct  and 
inclination  ;  for  what  the  will  is  in  things  rational,  that  the  inclination  is  in  things 
natural,  and  the  one  is  by  a  borrowed  speech  transferred  to  the  other  here  in  this 
place.  The  creature  of  its  own  accord  is  not  subject  to  vanity,  forasmuch  as  every 
thing  naturally  desires  the  preservation  of  itself.  So  that  this  is  that  which  is  here 
observable  of  us,  that  the  vanity  of  the  creature,  it  is  accidental  and  preternatural 
to  it;  and  therefore  is  afterwards  in  this  chapter  called  "  bondage,"  which  is  an 
unwilling  subjection.  First,  in  the  failing  of  its  first  end,  for  which  it  was  made. 
This  is  preternatural  to  it.  The  creature  in  its  first  institution  was  made  in 
reference  and  subordination  to  man,  and  so  naturally  does  delight  to  be  useful  and 
serviceable  to  him  for  his  good,  and  especially,  and  above  all  things,  for  the  good 
and  welfare  of  his  soul.  But  now  for  to  be  a  slave  to  his  lust  and  instrumental  to 
his  execution  of  wickedness,  as  sometimes  it  proves  to  be  through  man's  corruption, 
this  is  a  thing  which  is  directly  contrary  to  its  nature  and  disposition.  It  is  so 
likewise  in  regard  of  the  uncertainty  and  transitoriness  of  it.  It  is  subject  to 
vanity  thus,  not  willingly,  or  of  its  own  accord  neither.  There  was  an  enmity 
and  kind  of  reluctancy  in  their  entirest  being,  and  by  the  law  of  their  first  creation 
they  were  subject  to  change  and  alteration,  so  that  this  transitoriness  of  them  is 
thus  far  as  it  were  natural  to  them  ;  but  in  this  sense  it  is  said  to  be  preternatural, 
80  far  forth  as  they  do  naturally  desire  the  preservation  of  themselves.  If  the 
creature  be  not  willingly  subject  to  vanity  in  reference  to  naturals,  what  a  shame  is 
it  for  men  and  women  to  be  so  in  reference  to  morals  I  Never  were  people  more 
vain  and  willingly  subject  to  vanity  than  now  they  are.  Vanity  in  all  kinds,  and 
in  aU  expressions  of  vanity — vanity  in  our  speeches  and  discourse,  vanity  in  our 
pastimes  and  recreations,  vanity  in  our  garments  and  attire,  vanity  in  our  houses, 
and  especially  vanity  in  our  hearts ;  we  cannot  look  aside  but  we  behold  vanity,  and 
love  to  do  so.  The  creatures  groan  under  their  vanity,  but  we  laugh  and  sing  under 
ours,  which  is  the  highest  degree  of  madness  and  distemper  that  can  possibly  be 
thought  of.  And  so  much  may  be  spoken  of  that  particular :  the  account  of  this 
condition  in  the  negative,  "not  willingly."  The  second  is  in  the  affirmative :  "But  by 
reason  of  Him  who  hath  subjected  the  same  in  hope  " — that  is,  by  reason  of  God  the 
Creator,  who  for  the  sin  of  man  cursing  the  creature  hath  subjected  it  to  vanity  and 
to  corruption.  In  hope,  that  is,  not  irrecoverably,  but  reserving  to  it  a  possibility  of 
returning  to  its  former  estate.  There  are  two  particulars  which  are  here  observable 
of  us.  First,  for  the  dispensation  itself,  that  is,  the  subjecting  of  the  creature  to 
vanity,  which  is  here  intimated  and  implied  to  be  done  by  God  Himself.  The 
creature,  it  is  subjected  to  vanity  for  man's  sin.  And  as  this  holds  good  in  general, 
eo  to  some  persons  more  especially  in  particular  who  do  more  fully  and  directly 
partake  of  the  vanity  of  the  creature  in  this  particular  which  God  threatens  to 
them  for  their  sin.  There's  a  curse  which  belongs  to  everything  which  they  deal 
withal,  or  have  interest  in,  a  curse  upon  their  estates.  The  ground  of  this  dispensation 
does  proceed  from  that  near  relation  which  is  betwixt  man  and  the  creature.  It  may 
seem  a  very  strange  matter  that  the  creature  which  has  done  no  hurt  at  all  should 
be  thus  punished  for  the  sin  of  man.  "We  know  how  it  is  sometimes  in  the  affairs 
and  businesses  of  men  ;  that  some  kind  of  malefactors  they  are  punished  not  only 
in  their  persons,  but  in  their  relations,  to  put  the  greater  terror  upon  their  mis- 
carriages, and  to  make  them  more  odious.  The  proper  use  and  improvement  of 
this  point  to  be  made  by  ourselves  comes  to  this :  First,  to  inform  and  convince 
us  of  the  great  misery  which  is  in  sin.  Secondly,  we  see  here  whom  to  blame  and 
to  find  fault  withal  in  the  miscarriages  of  the  creatures,  and  in  our  own  disap- 
pointments from  them.  When  they  do  not  prove  so  serviceable  to  us  in  some 
cases  and  at  some  times  as  we  expect  and  desire  they  should.  And  that  is  even 
our  own  selves,  who  are  indeed  the  proper  causes  of  it.  Thirdly,  here's  matter  of 
just  abasement  and  mourning  and  humiUation  when  we  shall  consider  the  great 
mischief  which  we  contract  by  our  sins,  not  only  to  ourselves,  but  to  others. 
Fourthly,  we  should  from  hence  take  heed  that  we  do  not  willingly  wrong  the  poor 
creatures  or  do  injury  to  them.  Lastly,  as  the  creatures  serve  men  in  their  sins, 
contrary  to  their  natural  inclination,  even  so  should  men  serve  God  in  welldoing 
against  the  bent  of  their  natural  corruption.    The  second  is  the  additional  qaalifioa- 


CHAP,  vra.]  ROMANS.  95 

tion  of  this  dispensation  in  these  words,  "  in  hope,"  where  the  apostle  still  speaks  of 
the  creature  as  of  a  rational  person,  as  he  did  in  the  words  before.  When  we  speak 
of  hope,  it  is  considerable  two  manner  of  ways  :  either  in  the  subject  of  it,  or  in  the 
ground  of  it ;  either  in  the  person,  or  in  the  condition.  Then  any  are  said  to  be  in 
hope  when  they  are  in  a  hopeful  way,  or  estate  ;  or  then  any  are  said  to  be  in  hope 
when  they  do  hopefully  conceive  of  themselves  in  that  estate.  Now  it  is  not  so 
much  the  latter  as  tbe  former  which  seems  to  be  here  intended.  First,  because 
this  vanity,  which  is  now  upon  it,  is  only  accidental  and  occasional.  It  is  not 
from  any  demerit  in  itself,  but  only  from  the  sin  of  man,  as  we  have  formerly 
shown.  Now  that  vanity,  which  was  only  accidental,  is  not  likely  to  be  perpetual. 
Secondly,  the  sins  of  men,  for  whose  sake  this  vanity  is  inflicted,  and  from  whom 
it  is  decreed,  they  shall  some  of  them  be  delivered  from  that  vanity  which  is  upon 
them,  therefore  there  is  great  cause  to  believe  that  the  creatures  shall  also  some  of 
them  partake  of  the  like  proportionable  deliverance.  And,  therefore,  thirdly,  as 
another  ground  of  it,  we  have  the  promise  and  Word  of  God  Himself  making 
for  it.  This  may  discover  to  us  the  different  nature  of  that  curse  which  is 
inflicted  upon  the  creature,  and  that  judgment  which  does  belong  to  incor- 
rigible and  reprobate  persons.  We  see  here  the  different  condition  of  fallen 
men  and  of  fallen  angels  and  devils.  The  one  is  a  condition  irrecoverable, 
while  the  other  is  a  condition  of  hope.  This  should  accordingly  teach  us  to  lay 
hold  upon  this  hope  which  is  set  before  us.  Let  us  take  heed  of  sinning 
wilfully  after  we  have  received  tbe  knowledge  of  the  truth.  If  any  time  we 
miscarry,  let  it  be  unawares,  and  against  our  minds.  {Thomas  Ilorton,  D.D.) 
Becanse  the  creature  Itself  also  shall  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  corruption 
Into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God. — The  bondage  of  corruption : — 
Nature  is  prevented  from  putting  forth  its  powers,  from  manifesting  its  real 
grandeur,  and  from  attaining  its  original  destiny.  It  is  therefore  bound.  And  its 
bondage  is  caused  by  the  necessary  decay  of  its  products.  All  that  nature  brings 
forth  is  doomed  to  die.  And  nature  is  compelled  to  slay  its  own  offspring.  The 
lightning  flash  destroys  the  stately  oak.  The  winter's  cold  kills  the  songsters  of 
the  summer.  Animals  devour  other  animals  to  maintain  life.  And  this  universal 
destruction  limits  the  achievements  of  nature.  Instead  of  constant  growth, 
nature's  beauty  and  strength  fade  away.  The  powers  of  the  material  creation  are 
bound  by  fetters  of  decay,  (Prof.  Beet.)  Glorious  liberty : — Nothing  is  more 
prized  than  liberty :  indeed  he  deserves  not  the  name  of  a  man  who  can  ever  be 
reconciled  to  slavery.  But  while  civil  liberty  is  so  desirable,  the  liberty  in  our  text 
is  of  a  still  more  important  character.  This  liberty  we  may  consider  as  gracious, 
and  so  enjoyed  by  believers  even  now  ;  or  as  glorious,  and  so  enjoyed  in  the  life  to 
come.  It  is  of  the  latter  the  apostle  speaks.  Let  us  examine — I.  The  excellenct 
OF  THIS  LIBERTY.  You  will  uot  cxpcct  a  full  development  of  it.  "Eye  hath  not 
seen,"  &c.  "  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be."  The  believer's  experience 
is  "  a  glory  to  be  revealed."  It  may  well  be  called  glorious  if  we  consider — 1.  Its 
price.  Many  things  are  estimated  according  to  their  price.  The  chief  captain 
obtained  his  freedom  with  a  great  sum  (Acts  xxii.  28) ;  but  our  freedom  was 
obtained  at  a  much  greater  cost  (1  Pet.  i.  18 ;  Acts  xx.  28).  2.  Its  immunities. 
Only  think  from  what  evils  it  will  free  us.     (1)  From  the  powers  of  darkness. 

(2)  From  a  world  lying  in  wickedness.  (3)  From  indwelling  sin.  (4)  From  the 
blindness  of  our  understanding;  from  perplexity,  and  doubt,  and  uncertainty. 
(5)  From  anxiety,  trouble,  and  exhausting  toil.  (6)  From  the  body  of  this  death, 
this  vile  body,  this  prison.  3.  Its  accesses.  (1)  To  what  a  place  will  it  give  us 
access  1 — the  palace  of  the  King  of  kings.  (2)  To  what  society  I— our  own  beloved 
connections,    patriarchs,   apostles,    just  men  made  perfect,  angels,   and    Jesus. 

(3)  To  what  entertainment ! — to  rivers  of  delight ;  to  the  marriage  supper  of  the 
Lamb  ;  to  fulness  of  joy,  and  pleasures  for  evermore.  4.  Its  anticipations.  What 
God  does  for  His  people  here  is  but  little  to  what  He  designs  to  do.  5.  Ita 
duration.  Immortality  will  extend  to  the  body  as  well  as  the  soul.  II.  Who  abb 
THE  HEiEs  TO  THIS  LiBEBTT ?  "The  children  of  God."  1.  By  adoption,  by 
which  God  admits  us  into  His  favour,  and  we  are  made  the  sons  and  daughters 
of  the  Lord  Almighty.  2.  By  regeneration ;  for  every  Christian  is  a  new  creature, 
not  only  as  to  his  state,  but  as  to  his  nature.  A  new  condition  requires  new  and 
suitable  qualities.  So  God  makes  us  "  meet  for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in 
Ught."  3.  By  imitation.  Christians  are  obedient  children,  not  fashioning  them- 
selves accordirig  to  their  former  lusts  in  their  ignorance,  but  as  He  who  has  called 
them  is  holy,  so  are  they  holy.     III.  How  this  olobious  libebtt  belongs  to 


96  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat,  vitfc 

THBSB  CHiLBBEN.     It  bcloDgs  to  them — 1.  Only :  "  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he 
cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God, "    2.  Universally.     It  belongs  to  all  of  them  with- 
out exception.  There  is  no  difference  here  with  regard  to  condition  or  circumstances. 
3.  Assuredly — as  sure  as  the  promise  of  God  ;  the  purchase  of  the  Redeemer ;  the 
indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit  can  make  it.     4.  Freely  and  without  desert.    Conclu- 
sion :  1.  Let  us  adore  and  praise  the  goodness  of  God  in  remembering  us  in  our  low 
estate,  and  in  providing  for  us  such  a  glorious  liberty.    2.  Seek  after  and  ascertain 
your  title  to  this  glorious  liberty.    3.  Rejoice  in  the  hope  of  this  glorious  liberty.    4. 
Walk  worthy  of  vocation.    5.  Be  concerned  for  those  who  are  strangers  to  all  this. 
( W.  Jay.)      The  coming  deliverance  of  the  creature  : — We  begin  with  the  future  estate 
and  condition  of  believers,  which  is  supposed  in  these  words,  "  The  glorious  liberty 
of  the  children  of  God."    First,  their  bodies  shall  be  free  from  those  evils  and 
infirmities  which  they  are  here  subject  unto.     Here  we  see  how  many  sicknesses 
(2  Cor.  XV.  45).     This  may  serve  very  much  to  satisfy  them  in  all  the  present 
inconveniences  and  disparagements  which  may  now  fall  upon  them.     Secondly, 
as  there  shall  be  a  liberty  of  the  body  at  that  time,  so  of  the  soul  likewise.    First, 
from  those  natural  defects  which  are  now  adherent  to  it,  as  ignorance,  forgetful- 
ness,  indiscretion,  weakness  of  imagination.     And  secondly,  from  spiritual  dis- 
tempers and  inordinacy  of  passion,  &c.     And  this  is  another  sweet  encouragement 
likewise  to  all  the  servants  of  God,  especially  such  as  groan  under  their  present 
weaknesses  and  imperfections  and  the  bondage  of  a  distracted  spirit,  which  cannot 
perform  holy  duties  with  that  freedom  and  enlargement  as  they  desire.     Thirdly, 
for  their  whole  persons  ;  there  shall  be  a  liberty  of  them  also.     They  shall  be  free 
in  their  names  from  those  reproaches  which  are  here  cast  upon  them.     The  use 
which  we  are  to  make  of  it  is,  that  seeing  there  is  such  a  blessed  estate  as  this  is 
to  be  expected,  that  therefore  we  would  for  our  parts  labour  to  have  a  share  in  it. 
Those  who  do  not  partake  of  a  gracious  liberty  in  this  world,  they  shall  never  be 
partakers  of  a  glorious  liberty  in  the  world  to  come.     The  second,  which  is  the 
principal,  is  the  correspondency  of  the  creature  to  this  condition,  as  that  which  is 
declared,  that  the  "  creature  itself  shall  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  corruption  " 
into  this  glorious  liberty  of  God's  children.     In  what  manner  this  is  to  be  done, 
and  how  this  deliverance  of  the  creature  here  spoken  of  is  to  be  accomplished.    Now 
it  may  be  reduced  to  two  opinions.     The  first  opinion  is  this — that  this  deliverance 
of  the  creature  from  the  bondage  of  corruption  shall  be  by  abolition  or  annihila- 
tion.     The  second  opinion  is  this — that  this  dehverance  of  the  creature  from 
corruption  shall  not  be  by  way  of  annihilation,  but  only  by  way  of  alteration  ;  that 
they  shall  not  be  destroyed,  but  changed  and  become  new  ;  not  for  substance,  but 
only  for  quality.     The  former  is  repugnant,  and  will  not  hold  good  upon  these 
following  grounds.    First,  because  this  future  estate  of  the  creature,  which  is  here 
mentioned  in  the  text,  it  is  expressed  to  be  such   as  is  earnestly  desired  by  the 
creature ;    but  now  there  is  no  creature  whatsoever  which  doth  naturally  desire 
the  extinction  of  itself,  but  rather  the  contrary.      Nature,  it  does  abhor  nonentity, 
and  chooses  the  preservation  of  itself  oftentimes,  even  in  the  greatest  extremity. 
Secondly,  that  which  shall  befal  the  creature  at  the  day  of  judgment  is  here  in  the 
text  expressly  called  the  dehverance  of  it.    Now  a  deliverance  does  necessarily 
suppose  the  being  and  existence  of  that  subject  which  is  delivered.     Thirdly,  it  is 
said  here  also  in  the  text,  that  the  creatures  shall  be  delivered  into  the  liberty  of 
the  children  of  God  ;  that  is,  that  they  shaU  be  delivered  in  like  manner  as  God's 
children  are  dehvered.    But  God's  children  are  not  delivered  by  annihilation.   And 
so  again,  "Who  shall  change  our  vile  body,  that  it  may  be  made  like  to  His 
glorious  body,"  &c.  (Phil.  iii.  21).     It  is  not  annihilated,  but  changed.     And  so  it 
shall  be  also  with  the  other  creatures.    Fourthly,  it  is  not  probable  neither  that 
such  a  special  monument  of  God's  power  as  the  heavens  and  earth  indeed  are 
should  be  absolutely  and  totally  abolished,  and  turned  into  nothing  ;  but  rather  that 
they  should  still  remain  as  so  many  pillars  of  His  greatness  and  goodness  to  all 
eternity,  as  they  prove  to  be  in  their  excellent  variety.     The  second  opinion  is  that 
which  makes  this  deliverance  of  the  creature  to  consist,  not  in  abolition,  but  in 
alteration  ;  not  in  destroying  of  the  substance  of  it,  but  only  in  changing  of  the 
qualities.     The  Scripture  itself  does  expressly  call  it  a  restoration  (Acts  iii.  22). 
In  fine,  to  sum  up  all,  and  to  close  up  this  present  passage  of  the  text  before  us : 
*'  Of  the  creatures  being  delivered  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God." 
This  expression  may  be  taken  three  manner  of  ways.      Contemporancively,  as 
denoting  the  time  of  this  deliverance.     Causally,  as  denoting  the  occasion  of  this 
deliverance.    Terminatively,  as  denoting  the  thing  itself.    We  see  here  the  great 


CHAP,  nn.]  ROMANS.  97 

benefit  which  we  have  by  Jesaa  Christ,  and  oar  redemption  through  Him.  In  that 
He  hath  taken  away  all  the  evil  and  misohief  which  oar  sins  have  done  onto  os. 
{ThoTnas  Eorton,  D.D.)  Spiritual  liberty: — The  liberty  of — 1.  A  child's  access 
to  Ood.  2.  A  child's  idea  of  his  father's  government.  3.  A  parified  conscience. 
4.  Well  grounded  and  confident  hope.  Liberty  is  not  lawlessness.  The  first  con- 
dition of  liberty  is  harmony  with  the  infinite  will.  How  is  that  will  made  known  ? 
By  the  life  and  work  of  the  revealed  God — Jesus  Christ.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Our 
present  attainment  not  the  end  of  God's  design  : — We  are  quite  certain  that  what  we 
are  cannot  be  the  end  of  God's  design.  When  I  see  a  block  of  marble  half 
chiselled,  with  just,  perhaps,  a  hand  peeping  out  from  the  rock,  no  man  can  make 
me  believe  that  that  is  what  the  artist  meant  it  should  be.  And  I  know  I  am  not 
what  God  would  have  me  to  be,  because  I  feel  yearnings  and  lougings  within  myself 
to  be  infinitely  better,  infinitely  holier  and  purer,  than  I  am  now.  And  so  it  is 
with  you  :  you  are  not  what  God  means  you  to  be ;  you  have  only  just  begun  to  be 
what  He  wants  you  to  be.  He  will  go  on  with  His  chisel  of  affliction,  using  wisdom 
and  the  graving  tool  together,  till  by  and  by  it  shall  appear  what  you  shall  be  ;  for 
you  shall  be  like  Him,  and  you  shall  see  Him  as  He  is.  Oh,  what  comfort  this  is 
for  our  faith,  that  from  the  fact  of  our  vitality,  and  the  fact  that  God  is  at  work 
with  us,  it  is  clear  and  true  and  certain  that  our  latter  end  shall  be  increased.  I 
do  not  think  that  any  man  yet  has  even  got  an  idea  of  what  man  is  to  be.  We  are 
only  the  chalk  crayon,  rough  drawings  of  men ;  yet  when  we  come  to  be  filled  up  in 
eternity  we  shall  be  marvellous  pictures,  and  our  latter  end,  indeed,  shall  be  greatly 
increased.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  chrysalis  state  of  man  : — In  truth,  we  are 
like  the  chrysalis,  if  we  suppose  it  to  be  gifted  with  a  conscious  intelligence.  Faint 
motions  come  to  it  within  its  sleeping  frame ;  its  limbs,  its  wings,  strive  dimly  to 
extend  themselves ;  dreams  come  to  it,  through  fts  physical  changes,  of  another 
life,  dim  suggestions  of  some  wonderful  new  birth ;  yearnings  after  something 
which  it  calls  freedom,  and  light,  and  beauty,  and  movement.  They  deepen,  and 
at  last  one  day  the  shelly  case  falls  off,  the  insect  queen  appears,  and  in  the  opened 
wings,  and  the  swift  flight,  and  the  flowery  food,  and  the  blue  sunlight  in  which  it 
moves  with  joy,  all  the  problems  which  disturbed  but  enkindled  it  are  lost  in  the 
splendour  of  their  answer.  [Stopford  A.  Brooke.)  Divine  Sonship : — I.  Therb 
AKE  SOME  MEN  WHO  ARE  ACTCALLT  AFFILIATED  TO  GoD.  *'  They  are  the  sons  of  God." 
What  does  this  mean?  1.  Not  mere  creatureship.  All  things,  mountains  and 
valleys,  suns  and  stars,  are  the  creatures  of  God ;  but  we  do  not  caU  them  His 
children.  2.  Not  mere  resemblance.  Moral  spirits  everywhere  are  in  some  humble 
measure  like  God ;  yet  we  do  not  call  devils  His  children.  It  means  the  possession 
of  the  true  filial  spirit.     To  give  this  is  the  great  end  of  Christianity.    II.  This 

AFFILIATION  IS  CONNECTED  WITH  "  GLORIOUS   LIBERTY."      1.    It  is    the    pUIchaSO    of   an 

immense  cost.  The  struggle  of  the  slaves,  the  sacrifices  of  the  patriot  give  value 
liberty.  But  this  liberty  has  cost  infinitely  more.  "  Ye  are  not  redeemed  with 
corruptible  things,"  &o.  2.  It  involves  the  entire  freedom  of  man.  Some  men 
are  free  in  some  respects  and  slaves  in  others.  The  Umbs  may  be  free,  the  passions 
may  be  free,  the  intellect  may  be  free,  and  yet  the  moral  heart  may  be  in  chains. 
This  is  the  freedom  of  the  entire  man  in  all  his  faculties  and  relations.  3.  It  is 
in  harmony  with  the  rights  of  the  universe  and  the  glory  of  God.  There  is  a 
liberty  which  implies  the  slavery  of  others.  But  not  this.  4.  It  will  never  find 
a  termination.  The  powers,  the  sphere,  and  the  facilities,  of  this  liberty  will 
be  ever  increasing  with  the  ages.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Nature  perfected 
through  man : — 1.  To  those  who  believe  in  free  wUl,  the  difficulties  attaching 
to  the  problem  of  human  suffering  are  not  formidable.  If  we  take  away  all 
the  vnretchedness  that  springs  from  depraved  hearts,  it  is  a  very  small  minimunl 
indeed  that  ie  left  behind.  And  then  assuming  immortality,  there  are  surpassing 
compensations.  But  these  principles  are  scarcely  applicable  to  the  lower  creation. 
Much  of  the  earth  is  desert,  and  the  most  fertUe  lands  produce  what  is  noxious 
more  freely  than  what  is  good.  And  then  animate  nature  is  a  pandemonium  of 
internecine  war  and  hunger  and  pain.  And  the  explanations  that  help  us  some- 
what in  the  enigma  of  human  suffering  scarcely  serve  us  here.  2.  But  the  Bible 
anticipates  this  difficulty,  and  foreshadows  a  conclusive  answer  in  the  text.  Nature 
is  linked  with  man.  Its  imperfections  are  explained  by  his.  It  falls  and  rises  again 
with  the  fall  and  rise  of  man.  Just  as  the  law  gives  to  the  parent  the  custody  of 
his  own  child,  so  God  gives  to  man  power  over  the  world  to  modify  it  for  good  or 
evil  at  his  will.  Man  stands  in  relation  to  the  inferior  creation  as  the  Divine 
Mediator  does  to  all  mankind,  and  by  the  revelation  of  the  glory  of  God's  sons  the 
VOL.  n.  7 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

whole  creation  will  be  lifted  at  last  to  higher  beneficence  and  more  perfect  majesty. 
J.  S.  Mill  said  that  "  the  facts  of  the  universe  suggested  to  his  mind,  not  so  much 
the  idea  of  a  beneficent  and  all-wise  Creator,  as  that  of  a  demiurge  dealing  with  an 
intractable  material,  over  which  he  had  not  acquired  complete  mastery."  The  true 
demiurge  is  man.  God  has  given  him  an  all  but  unlimited  stewardship  over  nature, 
and  we  should  not  go  to  her  anarchic  realms  to  find  out  what  God  is,  but  rather 
to  find  out  what  man  is.  The  kingdom  suffers  through  the  misconduct  of  an 
ill-regulated  king.  A  slave  may  be  virtuous  and  kindly  in  character,  but  if  his 
master  be  evil,  he  will  have  to  be  the  instrument  of  many  an  unholy  behest. 
However  benign  the  qualities  latent  in  nature,  it  will  necessarily  exhibit  at  times 
the  sinister  character  of  the  lord  it  is  compelled  to  obey.  3.  The  savage  believes 
that  every  part  of  the  creation  is  animate ;  and  the  truth  in  fetichism  is  that 
the  spirit  of  man  reflects  itself  in  nature.  His  identical  soul  does  not  pass  into  it, 
but  the  shadow  of  what  he  is  always  rests  upon  it.  It  seems  to  echo  the  groans  of 
his  more  conscious  pain.  It  is  feeling  towards  deliverance  from  the  bondage  into 
which  he  has  brought  it.  4.  If  we  do  not  get  our  fuU  share  of  nature's  gifts,  we 
are  apt  to  charge  upon  it,  and  its  Divine  Author,  things  that  in  no  proper  sense 
belong  to  them.  The  street  Arab  will  not  think  very  gratefully  of  the  kindliness 
of  nature,  even  if  he  should  be  taken  for  a  day  into  the  country,  and  see  the  ripe 
cornfield,  or  fruit  orchard,  or  vinery.  Nature's  hand  may  be  lavish,  and  her  heart 
large  ;  but  the  famishing  millions  of  Asia  will  not  be  very  profoundly  impressed  by 
her  kindliness,  although  they  may  hear  that  in  Western  America  wheat  is  so 
abundant  and  so  cheap  that  the  farmers  have  had  to  burn  it  for  fuel.  To  these 
poor  wretches  Nature  will  be  tormentor  rather  than  friend.  Some  time  ago  a 
political  speaker  gave  utterance  to  an  aphorism  that  would  form  an  admirable 
comment  upon  the  text.  "  The  laws  of  nature,"  said  he,  "  preside  over  the  creation 
of  wealth,  but  the  heart  of  man  over  its  distribution,  in  sympathy,  justice,  brother- 
hood." That  defines  the  whole  question.  Nature,  after  all,  is  only  truly  beneficent 
to  the  subjects  of  her  kingdom  when  she  is  helped  by  the  intelligence,  the  justice, 
and  the  kindliness  of  man.  I.  God  distributes  the  bread  He  is  ever  multi- 
plying   BY    NATURAL    PROCESSES,   AFTER    THE    PATTERN   OF   THE   SYMBOLIC   MIRACLE   IN 

Galilee.  He  commits  it  into  the  hands  of  servants,  who  are  to  be  the  channels  of 
His  bounty.  Suppose  for  a  moment  that  the  sordid  elements  hidden  in  some  of  the 
disciples  had  come  to  the  surface  in  connection  with  that  miracle.  Judas  slips  into 
his  capacious  bag  the  food  he  should  have  distributed  to  a  hungry  woman  and  her 
babes.  Thomas,  dreading  the  privations  that  may  come,  keeps  back  that  which 
should  have  been  given  to  decrepit  old  men.  If  we  could  listen  to  the  speech  of 
weary  men  and  fainting  women  as  they  creep  to  their  homes,  we  might  possibly 
hear  some  reflections  upon  the  character  of  the  Wonder-worker  which  would  be 
very  wide  of  the  mark.  Whatever  failure  there  is  in  nature  arises  not  from  any 
lack  of  generosity  in  the  Power  that  multiplies  the  bread,  but  from  the  selfish, 
partial,  short-sighted  distribution  of  the  disciples.  Nature  provides  for  the  needs 
of  all,  but  man  robs  her  of  her  rightful  reputation  to  beneficence.  He  projects  upon 
her  kind  and  radiant  visage  the  shadow  of  his  own  tyranny  and  gi-eed.  Nature 
waits  for  the  coming  of  a  higher  Ufe.  She  can  only  find  that  life  through  the 
regeneration  of  man.  II.  Nature  has  fertile  fields  ready  for  her  sons  thai 
THE  foot  of  MAN  RARELY  TREADS.  Evcry  pauper  in  our  unions  might  be  a  lord 
of  wide  acres  without  confiscating  any  one's  property.  Thousands  of  artisans 
prefer  starvation  wages  to  the  life  of  the  health-giving  prairie.  In  the  swarming 
lands  of  the  East  millions  cling  to  the  soil  on  which  they  were  born,  and  risk 
death  by  famine  every  decade,  rather  than  move  to  unoccupied  lands  that  can 
be  reached  without  crossing  the  sea.  How  is  it  that  the  beneficence  of  nature 
throughout  these  vast  virgin  territories  is  wasted  ?  She  shares  man's  boudage. 
She  cries  out :  *'  Emigrate  your  destitute.  I  am  ready  to  clothe,  feed,  and  shelter 
them."  Nature's  challenge  is  not  accepted,  and  why  1  We  insist  upon  dealing 
with  chronic  pauperism  by  pittances  and  palliatives.  And  the  selfish  capitalist 
cries  out  too  :  "  We  can  have  no  emigration  schemes.  The  labour  market  wiil  be 
depleted.  When  prosperity  returns  we  shall  not  be  able  to  get  suflBcient  hands. " 
And  starving  people  themselves  are  reluctant  to  cut  the  tie  that  holds  them  to 
fatherland.  The  man  pressed  to  emigrate  thinks  he  might  be  taken  in  by  the 
land-jobbers,  or  fail  to  find  in  his  new  neighbours  the  helpfulness  he  can  always 
find  in  his  own  kith  and  kin.  He  will  stand  at  bay  in  the  presence  of  famine 
rather  than  run  that  risk.  Nature  has  spread  a  table  for  the  needs  of  every  man. 
Bat  in  the  craft,  selfishness,  and  vices  of  man,  a  file  of  demon-terrors  have  been 


CHAP,  nn.]  ROMANS.  99 

planted  about  the  table,  that  effectually  ward  off  the  famished  crowds.  Nature 
cannot  rise  above  the  moral  level  of  those  to  whom  she  is  placed  in  subjection.  In 
his  fall  and  in  his  rise  alike  man  carries  with  him  the  creation  of  which  he  is  the 
head.     III.  "  The  laws  of  nature  preside  over  the  creation  of  wealth,"  but  "  thb 

HBABT    OF     MAN  "     ITSELP     OFTEN     PRESIDES     OVER     THE     LAWS     OF    NATURE.       ScCptiCS 

point  to  the  fact  that  a  great  proportion  of  the  earth  is  occupied  by  desert,  and  they 
suppose  that  they  have  disproved  the  idea  of  benevolent  design.  But  may  not  the 
very  desert  be  Nature's  benign  call  to  labour  ?  Some  of  the  most  fruitful  soils  were 
once  bog  and  rock  and  sand,  and  have  become  what  they  now  are  by  human  labour. 
The  time  wasted  in  a  generation  by  the  idle  and  dissolute  would  be  suflicient  to 
turn  the  Sahara  into  a  fruitful  field.  There  are  very  few  deserts  that  could  not  be 
fertihsed  if  the  capital  were  forthcoming,  and  the  difficulty  nowadays  is  never  to 
find  capital,  but  to  find  men  honest  enough  to  direct  and  control  it.  The  old 
prophecies  about  the  blossoming  deserts  are  meant  to  teach  the  lesson  that  the  life  of 
regenerate  man  will  connect  itself  with  the  regeneration  of  nature.  IV.  When  we 
JUDGE  God  by  His  work  in   nature,  we  must   look  at  the  ideal  capability 

HIDDEN    IN    it,    RATHER   THAN  AT    THB    ATTAINMENT.       "  The    heart    of    man,"    nO    IcSS 

than  "  the  laws  of  nature,"  presides  over  the  creation  of  all  kinds  of  wealth.  God 
created  the  life  beneath  us,  with  "a  seed  in  itself,"  "put  man  into  the  garden, 
to  dress  it  and  keep  it."  These  inspired  traditions  contain  the  important  truth 
which  will  solve  not  a  few  of  our  difficulties,  that  God  never  meant  nature  to  be 
looked  at  apart  from  its  relation  to  man.  Do  not  look  to  the  berry  of  the  hedgerow, 
or  the  dwarf  flower  of  the  bleak  hiU-top,  for  the  gauge  of  God's  beneficent  work. 
Look  at  what  fruit  and  flower  may  become  under  the  most  skilful  culture.  Judge 
God's  work  in  man  by  all  that  man  may  be  trained  to,  and  judge  God's  work  in 
nature  by  the  potential  excellence  that  sleeps  in  its  mysterious  depths.  If  some 
exquisite  porcelain  painting  had  been  spoiled  in  the  after-firing,  you  would  not 
judge  the  artist  by  the  blunder  of  a  drunken  furnace-man.  Do  not  judge  God's 
work  by  the  blurred  lines  you  see  in  nature  to-day.  It  has  been  put  in  subjection 
to  man,  and  can  only  be  all  that  for  which  God  has  fitted  it  with  the  redemption  of 
man.  V.  Almost  all  the  forces  of  nature  wait  to  receive  the  moral  impress 
THEY  are  to  beak  FROM  THE  CHARACTER  OF  MAN.  If  he  is  of  the  temper  of  Cain, 
or  driven  by  the  evil  of  others  to  the  defence  of  life  or  home,  he  takes  the  iron 
furnished  to  h^m  by  the  hills,  and  puts  on  it  the  broad-arrow  mark  of  murder, 
welding  it  into  death-dealing  scimitar  or  assegai,  mortar  or  mitrailleuse.  In  the 
hands  of  renovated  man  the  metal  shall  lend  itself  to  peaceful  industry  and 
navigation  and  travel.  Unrenewed  man  takes  the  chemical  forces  of  nature  and 
manipulates  them  into  charges  which  shall  create  a  chaos  of  carnage  and  flame. 
These  forces  in  the  hands  of  man  renewed  in  the  image  of  God's  gentleness  shall 
be  used  only  to  tunnel  the  separating  mountains  and  make  canals  and  highways  to 
bring  near  to  each  other  the  different  fragments  of  the  human  family.  Nature 
sometimes  seems  malignant  in  not  only  producing  thorns  and  thistles,  but  plants 
infinitely  more  dangerous.  But  the  very  poison  plants  borrow  their  terror  either 
from  our  ignorance  or  from  the  character  with  which  the  secret  murderer  has 
clothed  them ;  and  with  the  renewal  of  the  human  race  in  knowledge  and  humanity 
they  shall  be  known  only  as  healing  herbs.  If  Nature  sometimes  seems  cruel,  it  is 
because  man  has  made  her  so.  Nature  can  only  be  "  very  good,"  as  at  first,  with 
man's  full  redemption.  VI.  Man's  sovereignty  over  animate  nature  is  not  so 
obvious  as  his  power  over  inanimate  nature.     And  yet  there  is  proof  that  the 

DIFFERENT  CIRCLES   OF   LIFE   IN   SEA  AND  FOREST  AND  AIR  RISE   AND   FALL   IN   HIS   RISE 

AND  FALL.  We  may  set  aside  the  poetic  but  not  Mosaic  idea  that  just  as  soon  as 
Adam  sinned  snakes  suddenly  developed  poison  bags,  and  wolves  suddenly  dis- 
covered a  taste  for  blood,  &o.  And  yet  there  is  an  inverted  truth  in  the  grotesque 
conception.  It  can  be  proved  that  the  animal  world  has  been  inoculated  with  the 
virulence  of  man's  worst  passions.  The  temper  of  a  dog  or  a  horse  is  influenced  by 
the  temper  of  its  master,  and  the  dispositions  of  all  domesticated  animals  may  be 
modified  by  selective  processes.  Some  of  the  most  powerful  denizens  of  the  forest 
will  never  attack  unless  first  attacked.  Is  not  the  domestication  of  animals  a 
problem  to  which  Paul  had  better  clues  than  the  modem  naturalist  ?  Is  this  the 
fragment  of  a  lost  empire,  or  the  first  conquest  of  a  new  empire  that  shall  one  day 
be  completely  won  and  harmonised  by  man's  kindness  and  skill?  "  They  shall  not 
hurt  nor  destroy  in  all  My  holy  mountain. "  John  teaches  that  as  well  as  Paul. 
The  four  living  creatures  placed  round  about  the  throne  are  the  symbols  of  the 
powers  of  nature.    Conclusion :  Yon  are  perhaps  ready  to  say,  "  It  will  be  little 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tio, 

compensation  to  the  dumb  creatures  that  have  suffered,  even  if  their  far-off 
descendants  should  be  brought  at  last  into  a  kindlier  world  by  the  regeneration 
of  man."  Now  I  am  not  going  to  extenuate  the  cruelties  practised  upon  dumb 
creatures.  Our  descendants  will  be  almost  as  much  ashamed  of  some  of  oar  cruelties 
as  we  are  ashamed  of  the  cannibalism  of  our  ancestors.  But  are  the  sufferings  of 
the  brute  creatures  as  great  as  we  think  ?  Imagination  adds  nine-tenths  of  the 
terror  with  which  human  suffering  is  invested.  Unimaginative  races  suffer 
comparatively  little  under  appalling  mutilations.  Brute  creatures  possess  imagina- 
tion  in  a  very  inferior  degree,  if  they  possess  it  at  all.  That  may  be  accounted  as 
an  anodyne  to  soothe  their  pain.  But  is  there  to  be  no  compensation  ?  Some  have 
held  a  resurrection  of  animals.  There  are  perhaps  only  two  objections  to  that  view. 
Our  interest  in  the  animal  world  is  so  slight  that  it  scarcely  seems  worth  while. 
And  in  animal  life  we  detect  no  forecast  of  immortality.  Possibly  in  some  of  the 
lower  spheres  of  life  the  doctrine  of  the  transmigration  of  souls  may  be  truer  than 
we  think.  Some  modern  naturalists  hold,  and  with  a  fair  show  of  reason,  that 
whilst  human  consciousness  centres  in  the  individual,  animal  consciousness  tends 
to  centre  itself  in  the  species.  If  that  be  the  case,  the  suffering  individual  may  be 
compensated  in  the  improved  and  perfected  life  of  the  species.  We  may  leave  the 
"how"  to  the  unseen  Hand  that  will  not  fail  to  redress  the  disturbed  balance  in 
the  minutest  life.  The  whole  creation  falls  in  man,  and  is  to  rise  again  in  his 
moral  uplifting.  That  is  the  great  lesson  for  us.  (T.  G.  Selby.)  For  we 
know  that  the  whole  creation  groaneth  and  travalleth  In  pain  together  until 
now. — The  travail  of  the  creature  : — First,  to  speak  of  the  creature's  passion. 
It  groaneth  and  travaileth  in  pain.  We  have  a  very  full  expression  of  the 
creature's  estate  in  the  time  of  this  present  world,  which  is  full  of  misery, 
and  perplexity,  and  distraction.  And  this  they  may  be  conceived  to  do  in 
sundry  respects.  As  first,  from  that  hard  labour  which  they  are  put  to  for  the 
use  of  man.  The  ox,  and  the  ass,  and  the  horse,  and  such  as  these,  they  groan 
under  the  pains  and  travails  which  they  undergo  for  our  accommodation.  Secondly, 
when  they  are  made  instruments  to  man  for  his  sinning,  as  sometimes  they  are ; 
there  are  divers  creatures  in  the  world  which  people  choose  to  the  fulfilliug  of 
their  lusts,  their  pride,  and  luxury,  and  malice.  Now  in  this  respect,  amongst 
others,  they  cannot  but  be  subject  to  a  great  deal  of  trouble  and  vexation.  And 
then  thirdly,  as  in  their  service  of  us,  so  likewise,  which  we  may  take  in  with  it, 
their  dying  for  our  use  likewise.  Lastly,  the  great  disorder  and  confusion  of  all 
things  here  below ;  it  does  speak  this  much  unto  us,  "  The  whole  creation  travails  and 
groans  " ;  that  is,  the  whole  frame  and  composure  of  the  world,  being  a  world  of 
trouble.  And  this  groaning,  it  does  not  so  rest  in  itself,  but  it  is  carried  to  a 
further  end,  namely,  to  make  the  creature  desirous  of  a  better  and  happier  condi. 
tion,  when  it  shall  be  freed  from  its  present  bondage.  Therefore  there  is  added  to 
it  another  word,  which  signifies  travail.  The  main  use  which  we  are  to  make  of 
this  groaning  which  at  present  lies  upon  the  creature,  is  still  to  make  us  sensible 
and  apprehensi\'e  of  the  heavy  burden  and  grievousness  of  sin.  Again,  it  teaches 
us  also  to  take  notice  of  God's  hand,  when  it  is  at  any  time  upon  ourselves,  and 
accordingly  to  be  affected  with  it.  And  so  much  may  sufiBce  of  the  first  thing 
considerable  of  us  here  in  this  verse,  which  is  the  creature's  passion.  The  second  is 
its  compassion.  It  groans  and  travails  in  pain  together.  Whereby  is  sii^nified  to 
us  the  sympathising  affection  of  the  creatures  which  they  do  sustain  in  this  present 
condition.  First,  the  creatures  do  groan  and  travail  in  pain  together ;  that  is,  they 
do  so  with  us,  who  have  the  lordship  and  dominion  over  them.  First,  the  creature 
groans  and  travails  together  under  our  sin.  Take  notice  of  that,  the  very  unreason- 
able creature  itself,  it  does  in  a  sort  lament  and  bewail  the  sin  of  man.  This  ia 
expressed  unto  us  in  Jer.  xii.  4.  Again,  as  this  sympathising  of  the  creature 
with  us  in  sin  teaches  us  to  lament  and  bewail  sin  in  ourselves,  so  it  teaches 
ns  also  proportionably  to  bewail  sin  in  others,  and  to  have  the  same  affections  for 
them  in  their  sins,  as  the  creatures  have  for  us  in  ours.  The  second  is  their 
sympathy  with  us  in  our  misery,  and  not  only  with  us,  but  with  one  another  ;  we 
will  here  join  them  both  together.  The  creatures,  they  are  not  only  sensible  of 
their  own  particular  bondage,  but  also  of  the  bondage  of  each  other,  and  of  us  to 
ourselves.  Of  the  bondage  of  one  another  (Hos.  ii.  21).  The  heavens  hear  the 
complaints  of  the  earth,  and  the  earth  hears  the  complaints  of  the  corn,  and  wine, 
and  oil,  &c.,  of  the  bondage  and  misery  of  us  men.  Thus  the  sun  was  darkened  by 
way  of  svmpathy  at  the  passion  of  Christ  (Joel  i.  18).  This,  it  serves  to  shame  the 
senselessness  and  hard-heartedness  of  many  men  and  Christians  in  this  particular, 


CHAP,  vm.]  ROMANS.  101 

as  wanting  this  fellow-feeling  of  the  miseries  of  their  brethren.  The  second  is  the 
extent  of  it,  "  until  now  "  ;  that  is,  from  the  first  fall  of  man  to  this  present  day. 
This  shows  us  the  long  continuance  of  this  vanity  and  misery  upon  the  creature. 
This  misery  which  the  creature  does  thus  groan  and  travail  under  hath  been  a  long 
time  upon  it.  This,  it  serves  to  satisfy  and  compose  our  minds  in  all  the  evils 
which  here  in  this  world  we  are  exposed  unto,  as  no  new  or  strange  matter. 
The  third  and  last  thing  is  the  discovery  of  it,  in  these  words,  We  know  it.  Know 
it  ?  How  ?  First,  by  the  Word  of  God,  even  by  Divine  revelation.  Secondly,  by 
common  sense,  and  daily  and  frequent  observation.  Thirdly,  which  is  the  worst 
knowledge  of  all,  we  know  it  by  wof  ul  experience.  "  And  not  only  they,  but,"  &c. 
(ver.  23).  These  are  a  further  argument  which  the  Apostle  Paul  here  brings  to  the 
Romans  to  confirm  the  former  conclusion ;  to  wit,  that  there  is  a  future  glory  to  be 
revealed  hereafter  in  the  saints.  This  he  had  proved  already  from  the  earnest 
desire  and  expectation  of  the  creature.  But  here  now  he  does  further  confirm  it, 
from  that  desire  which  is  in  believers  themselves.  And  not  only  they  but  we, 
who  have  the  first-fruits  of  the  spirit,  even  we  ourselves,  &c.  First,  the  persons 
mentioned.  First,  all  true  Christians  whatsoever,  they  have  more  or  less  received 
the  Spirit ;  not  the  Spirit  in  the  miraculous  gifts  of  it,  but  the  Spirit  in  the 
sanctifying,  which  is  that  which  is  here  intended.  A  Christian  is  described  not 
80  much  from  his  gifts  as  from  his  graces,  which  are  most  essential  to  him. 
This  the  children  of  God  come  to  be  partakers  of  upon  a  twofold  account.  First, 
by  virtue  of  God's  covenant  made  with  them  in  Christ.  Secondly,  by  virtue  of 
that  union  which  they  have  to  Christ.  Th  tmay  therefore  serve  as  a  trial  of  our 
state.  We  may  see  what  we  are,  according  jothis  character  now  before  us,  as  it  is 
imprinted  upon  us.  All  true  Christians  whatsoever,  they  have  more  or  less  received 
the  Spirit.  The  second  point  is  this,  that  the  Spirit  of  God  in  believers  is  in  them 
in  the  nature  of  first-fruits.  The  first-fruits  of  the  Spirit  as  it  is  here  expressed. 
This  it  is  both  in  regard  of  the  graces  of  it,  and  also  in  regard  of  the  comforts  ;  and 
according  to  each  of  them,  in  divers  and  sundry  resemblances,  as  pertinent  there- 
unto. First,  in  regard  of  the  order,  and  beginning,  and  first  appearance  of  them. 
The  first-fruits  of  the  earth  are  those  fruits  which  the  earth  first  of  all  produces 
(Deut.  xxvi.  2).  We  have  not  the  following  accomplishments  of  glory  till  we  have 
received  the  first  fruits  of  grace.  These  must  go  before  the  other,  and  first  of  all 
show  themselves  in  us.  There  must  be  holiness  before  there  can  be  happiness. 
There  must  be  grace  before  there  can  be  glory.  The  first-fruits  are  here  in  this 
life.  Secondly  in  regard  of  their  quantity  ;  that  is,  their  smallness  and  imperfection ; 
we  know  how  the  first-fruits  under  the  law,  they  were  but  a  handful  in  comparison 
of  the  whole,  but  a  small  and  little  portion.  Even  so  it  is  here  in  these  things, 
which  we  now  speak  of :  grace,  it  is  here  but  a  little,  and  comfort  here,  it  is  buf 
small.  We  have  not  these  things  in  the  fullest  measure,  but  sparingly  communi- 
cated to  us.  Therefore  we  should  not  be  discouraged  when  we  reflect  upon  ourselves 
or  others,  which  are  near  unto  us  in  this  particular ;  God  will  not  cast  away  the 
first-fruits  which  Himself  hath  wrought  in  us.  Though  grace  be  but  small,  yet  it 
is  grace  for  all  that,  and  a  fruit  of  His  own  blessed  Spirit,  which  He  will  not  refuse, 
but  rather  make  much  of.  This  is  not  so  to  be  understood  as  if  we  should  rest  our- 
selves  satisfied  with  these.  We  must  not  be  always  in  our  first  elements  and 
1  eginnings  of  goodness.  No  ;  but  we  must  labour  to  come  up  to  perfection,  and  to 
proceed  from  one  measure  and  degree  of  grace  to  another.  We  must  not  be  always 
in  our  entrances,  but  go  forward,  and  make  a  further  progress  in  the  ways  of 
religion.  Beginnings  are  well  for  beginners,  but  not  for  such  as  are  long  standers 
in  Christianity.  Thirdly,  in  regard  of  their  signification.  The  graces  and  comforts 
of  the  Spirit  of  God  here  in  this  life.  They  are  pledges  to  us  of  that  eternal  glory 
which  we  shall  one  day  more  fully  partake  of  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Fourthly, 
in  regard  of  their  quaUty.  The  first-fruits  tbey  are  commonly  and  for  the  most 
part  the  best  and  choicest,  so  are  the  graces  and  comforts  of  the  Spirit  above  any- 
thing else — above  parts,  above  gifts,  above  riches,  above  all  outward  excellency 
(Prov.  iii.  14,  15).  Fifthly,  in  regard  of  their  influence.  The  first-fruits,  they 
sanctified  the  rest  as  in  (chap.  xi.  16).  If  the  first-fruits  be  holy,  the  lump  is  also 
holy.  Even  so  does  grace  make  everything  else  which  at  any  time  comes  from  us.  It 
puts  an  excellency  and  loveliness  upon  it.  Men's  parts,  and  estates,  and  employ- 
ments ;  all  they  are,  and  all  they  have,  and  all  they  do — it  is  all  sanctified  by 
grace,  and  made  well-pleasing  and  acceptable  to  God.  Lastly,  in  regard  to  their 
dedication.  The  first-fruits  were  consecrated  to  God,  and  given  to  Him  ;  so  should 
all  the  gifts  and  graces  of  God's  Spirit  which  He  bestows  upon  us,  we  should  devote 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA».  vm, 

them,  and  consecrate  them,  and  improve  to  Hia  honour  and  glory.  And  that  is 
the  second  part  here  observable,  that  the  Spirit  of  God  in  believers  is  in  them,  in 
the  nature  of  first-fruits.  The  third  and  last  is  this,  that  those  who  have  received 
the  first-fruits  of  the  Spirit  they  do  long  and  wait  for  more,  even  the  fall  accomplish- 
ment of  that  which  is  begun  in  them.  First,  these  first-fruits  of  the  Spirit,  they 
do  not  stay  their  longing  and  satisfy  them.  That  the  children  of  God,  they  are  not 
satisfied  with  their  beginnings  of  heaven  here,  though  it  be  a  mercy.  The  reason  of 
it  is  this,  because  they  are  but  small  and  imperfect.  Look  as  there  is  a  great  deal  of 
difference  between  the  first-fruits  and  the  full  vintage,  between  the  gleanin-gs  and  the 
full  harvest.  These  first-fruits  they  do  not  stay  their  longing.  The  second  is,  that 
they  do  further  increase,  and  make  them  more  eager.  The  more  that  Christians  do 
partake  of  the  comforts  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  this  world,  the  more  earnestly  do  they 
desire  the  accomplishments  of  glory  in  the  world  to  come.  And  there  is  a  double 
reason  for  it.  First,  because  the  things  themselves  have  so  much  sweetness  and 
delightfulness  in  them.  If  the  first-fruits  be  thus  comfortable,  what  then  are  the 
fuller  enjoyments  ?  Secondly,  their  appetite  itself  is  from  hence  so  much  the  more 
increased,  and  thereby  more  enabled  to  favour  and  relish  these  heavenly  delights. 
Their  mouths  are  hereby  put  in  taste,  as  I  may  so  express  it.  This,  it  serves  to 
give  us  an  account  therefore  of  the  temper  of  men's  spirits  in  this  particular.  We 
Bee  whence  it  is  that  many  people  are  no  more  enlarged  in  themselves  with  such 
desires  as  these.  It  is  because  they  have  no  morepre-apprehensions  of  these  things 
in  themselves  ;  which  if  they  had,  they  would  be  otherwise  affected.  Men's  desires 
are  conformable  to  their  dispositions,  and  employments,  and  exercises,  and  such 
things  as  they  are  most  occupied  about.  The  second  is,  the  actions  attributed  to 
those  persons,  "  Groan  within  ourselves,  waiting,"  <fec.  (Thomas  Horton,  D.D.)  The 
whole  creation  groaneth  under  the  burden  of  our  sins: — I.  What  is  this  groaning? 
1.  There  are  two  causes  of  groaning  in  sensitive  creatures — (1)  Labour  and  motion. 
So  we  may  say  the  creature  is  worn  out  with  hard  labour  to  serve  the  uses  of  man ; 
because  it  is  in  continual  motion  (Eccles.  i.  5;  Job  xxxvii.  11).  The  earth  is 
digged,  rent,  and  deprived  of  its  sabbaths.  The  rivers  flow,  and  the  sea  hath  its 
ebbs  and  tides  ;  all  things  in  the  lower  world  are  fuU  of  labour ;  and  so  the  creature 
is  wearied  and  worn  out  to  serve  man.  (2)  That  which  answereth  to  pain,  is  their 
passing  away  by  corruption.  The  four  elements  being  contrary  one  to  another,  are 
still  wasting  one  another  till  all  fail ;  heat  against  cold,  and  moisture  against  dry- 
ness. And  besides,  the  creature  is  often  blasted  in  its  greatest  glory  and  beauty. 
Look,  as  in  a  fruitful  season  the  valleys  are  said  to  laugh  with  fatness  (Psa.  Ixv.  12, 
13);  so  on  the  other  hand  it  doth,  as  it  were,  mourn  (Jer.  xii.  4,  xxiii.  10; 
Isa.  xxiv.  4,  xxxiii.  9;  Joel  i.  10).  Now  this  may  come  to  pass,  partly,  by  external 
drought  (1  Kings  xviii.  5) ;  by  storm  and  tempest  (Prov.  xxviii.  3) ;  by  vermin 
(Joel  i.  4) ;  by  the  irruption  and  invasion  of  an  enemy  (Isa.  i.  7) ;  by  pestilential 
diseases  (Amos  iv.  10).  2.  These  things  premised,  we  may  see  in  what  sense  the 
creature  is  said  to  groan.  (1)  In  a  way  of  supposition.  If  they  had  reason,  they 
would  be  thus  affected.  If  God  should  open  the  mouth  of  the  creature,  as  he  did 
that  of  Balaam's  ass,  it  would  groan  under  its  hard  servitude  (2  Pet.  ii.  16).  (2)  By 
analogy.  There  is  something  in  them  which  is  a  shadow  and  resemblance  of 
reason.  The  grass  groweth  as  if  it  knew  how  to  grow ;  a  stone  in  descending, 
faJleth  by  a  straight  line  as  if  it  had  reason  to  pick  it  out ;  so  that  they  do  in  their 
kind  groan  under  their  present  burden,  till  they  be  delivered  from  it.  II.  How  abb 
WE  CONCERNED  IN  THESE  GROANS?  1.  They  are  upbraiding  groans.  We  that  have 
reason  are  more  senseless  than  the  creatures  :  the  creature  groaneth,  and  we  are 
unaffected  with  our  sin  or  misery  (Jer.  xii.  14).  "For  swearing,  and  lying,  and 
stealing,  and  adultery,  the  land  mourneth  "  (Hos.  iv.  2,  3) ;  but  doth  the  swearer 
or  the  adulterer  mourn?  "The  vines  howl,  and  the  fig  tree  languisheth" 
(Isa.  xxiv.  7) ;  but  doth  the  drunkard  mourn,  because  God  is  provoked  by  his 
excess  ?  It  is  very  observable  that  the  prophets  often  turn  from  men  and  speak  to 
creatures  (Lam.  ii.  18  ;  Micah  vi.  1,  2  ;  Jer.  xxii.  29  :  Jer.  xxii.  29).  2.  Awakening 
groans.  The  creatures  speak  by  our  tlxoughts,  and  groan  by  our  affections ;  namely, 
as  they  excite  us  to  sigh  and  long  for  a  better  estate.  3.  Instructive  groans.  They 
teach  us  (1)  the  vanity  of  the  creature,  which  is  now  often  changed,  and  must  at 
length  be  dissolved.  (2)  The  evil  of  sin  ;  it  is  the  burden  of  the  whole  creation,  of 
which  it  would  fain  be  eased.  (3)  Patience.  We  live  in  a  groaning  world,  and 
must  expect  to  bear  our  share  in  the  common  concert.  (4)  Long-suffering.  The 
continuance  of  the  universe  is  much  longer  than  the  continuance  of  bur  lives; 
therefore  let  us  not  repine  at  so  short  a  time,  for  the  creature   hath  been  in 


CHAP.  Tia.]  ROMANS.  103 

a  groaning  condition  these  six  thousand  years.  (5)  Hope  in  long  sorrow.  We 
should  keep  up  hope  and  expectation  ;  the  creature  groanethtill  now  ;  yea,  but  still 
it  expecteth  its  final  deliverance  (John  xvL  21,  22).  The  throes  of  our  sorrow  may 
be  sharp ;  but  the  birth  will  occasion  joy  enough  to  countervail  the  tediousness  of 
it.  4.  Complaining,  accusing  groans.  Because  of  the  slavery  we  put  them  into 
they  groan  for  vengeance  (Hab.  ii.  11).  III.  How  we  know  it?  For  who  ever 
heard  the  groaning  of  the  whole  creation  ?  1.  By  sensible  experience  we  know  the 
vanity  of  the  creature  (Psa.  cxix.  96).  2.  The  word  affinneth — (1)  That  this  came  in 
by  man's  sin  ;  and  the  common  apprehension  of  mankind  attesteth  it,  that  wicked 
men  are  unprofitable  burdens  of  the  earth,  and  bring  a  judgment  on  the  place  where 
they  live.  (2)  That  God  having  repaired  the  world  by  Christ,  there  is  a  better 
estate  appointed  for  man  ;  and  so  by  consequence  for  the  creatures,  which  are  an 
appendage  to  him  (Isa.  xi.  6-9).  3.  The  Spirit  improveth  it,  both  the  vanity  of  the 
creature,  and  our  mortality,  and  the  hopes  of  restoration  (Psa.  xc.  12 ;  Deut.  xxix.  2-4 ; 
Eph.  ii.  8).  Conclusion.  From  the  whole  take  these  corollaries :  1.  That  sinful 
man  is  an  enemy  to  all  the  creatures,  as  well  as  to  himself.  The  creation  was 
a  well-tuned  instrument,  upon  which  man  might  make  music  to  the  praise 
and  honour  of  God ;  but  the  strings  of  the  harp  are  broken ;  and  there  is 
nothing  but  jarring  instead  of  harmony,  and  groans  for  praise.  2.  That  every 
particular  land  fareth  the  worse  for  wicked  men  (Prov.  xi.  10,  11).  3.  That 
we  must  not  ascribe  the  alterations  and  changes  of  the  creature  to  chance  or 
fortune,  but  to  God's  providence  punishing  man's  sin.  4.  Why  a  righteous  man 
should  be  merciful  to  his  beast  (Prov.  xii.  10).  There  is  burden  enough  upon 
the  creature  under  which  he  groans.  5.  The  wonderful  dulness  of  man  in  the 
case  of  sin  and  misery  ;  so  that  the  creatures  are  fain  to  supply  our  room.  6.  Our 
great  need  to  draw  our  hearts  from  the  inordinate  love  of  the  creature,  and  to  lay 
ap  treasure  in  heaven.  What  can  we  expect  from  a  groaning  creature  ?  7.  How 
nnsuitable  sensual  rejoicing  is  unto  the  state  which  we  are  now  in.  It  is  a  groaning 
world,  and  here  we  seek  our  pleasures  and  contentments.  {T.  Manton,  D.Di) 
Creation  groans : — In  the  text  we  have — I.  The  pabty  whose  uneasiness  is  taken 
NOTICE  OF.  "  The  whole  creation."  Yet  this  phrase  is  not  so  universal  but  that  it 
admits  of  some  exceptions.  1.  The  angels,  for  as  they  were  not  made  for  man,  so 
they  are  already  perfectly  happy.  2.  The  devils.  The  creature  here  is  subjected 
in  hope  (ver.  20),  but  the  case  of  devils  is  hopeless.  3.  The  reprobate.  Their 
groans  shall  never  have  an  end.  4,  The  elect.  Some  of  them  are  in  heaven,  and 
groan  no  more,  and  those  on  earth  must  also  be  excepted  (ver.  23).  Now,  these 
being  excepted,  it  remains  that  by  the  whole  creation  we  understand  the  creatures 
made  for  the  use  of  man.  They  are  all  uneasy.  The  visible  heavens  were  made 
the  roof  of  his  house,  the  earth  his  floor ;  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  were  made  to 
be  his  lights,  the  air  to  breathe  in,  the  wind  to  refresh  him ;  the  various  produce  of 
the  earth  to  afford  him  necessaries,  conveniences,  and  delights.  He  was  lord  of 
Bea  and  land.  Fishes,  fowls,  and  beasts  of  the  earth,  were  all  at  his  command. 
While  he  stood  they  were  all  of  them  most  easy  in  his  service.  But  now  that 
matters  are  reversed  with  him  their  situation  is  also  reversed.  II.  The  agony 
THAT  THE  WHOLE  CBEATioN  IS  IN.  1.  They  groan.  This  is  a  metaphor  taken  from 
a  man  with  a  heavy  burden  on  his  back,  which  so  straitens  him  that  he  cannot 
freely  draw  his  breath,  and  when  he  gets  it  it  is  a  groan.  2.  They  "travail  in 
pain."  A  metaphor  taken  from  a  woman  bringing  forth  a  child.  III.  The  mourn- 
ful CONCERT  THEY  MAKE.  They  groan  and  travail  together.  Before  sin  entered 
into  the  world  they  all  looked  blythe,  and  as  it  were  sung  together ;  but  now  they 
have  changed  their  tune  and  groan  together.  IV.  How  long  they  have  sung  to 
THE  melancholy  TUNE.  "  Until  now."  And  how  long  it  may  be  to  their  delivery 
we  know  not.  But  one  thing  we  know,  it  will  never  be  till  the  world  end.  V.  The 
AUDITORY  THAT  LISTENS  TO  THE  MOURNFUL  CONCERT.  "  We,"  believers",  hear  the 
mournful  ditty.  Can  the  shepherd  not  observe  when  the  whole  flock  is  crying 
together  ?  Were  all  the  men  of  a  city  groaning,  and  all  the  women  travailing,  that 
person  must  be  deaf  that  would  not  hear  the  sound,  and  he  must  have  an  heart  of 
adamant  that  would  not  be  affected.  But  the  whole  creation,  above  us  and  about 
us,  are  groaning  and  travailing  together,  and  that  for  our  sakes ;  yet  a  sinful 
generation  has  no  ears  to  hear,  no  heart  to  be  affected  with  it,  and  with  sin  which 
is  the  cause.  But  serious  Christians,  awake  to  it,  cannot  miss  to  hear,  and  their 
ears  affect  their  hearts.      (T.  Boston,  D.D.)  Creation's  groans : — I.  In  what 

EESPECTs  THE  CREATURES  ARK  SAID  TO  GROAN,  for  many  of  them  are  properly  in- 
capable of  groaning.    1.  The  sensible  part  of  creation  really  groans,  each  after  iti 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  TOfc 

kind  (Joel  i.  18).    2.  The  whole  creation  appears  in  a  monmfal  mood  and  groaning 
posture.    The  son,  the  eje  of  the  world,  has  often  a  veil  drawn  over  it  for  many 
days,  and  he  with  the  rest  of  the  lights  of  heaven  are  covered  with  blackness,  like 
mourners.    The  earth,  trees,  and  plants  upon  it,  lay  aside  their  ornaments,  and 
every  head  among  them  is  bald.   3.  The  whole  creation,  if  they  could,  would  groan, 
for  they  have  good  reason  (Luke  x.  40).    And  it  is  well  for  man  that  the  creatures 
cannot  represent  their  misery  as  it  deserves,  otherwise  they  would  deafen  him  with 
their  complaints,  and  make  him  continually  uneasy  with  their  groans.     4.  The 
Spirit  of  God  is  grieved,  and  groaneth  (so  to  speak)  in  the  creatures  (Amos  ii.  13). 
God  is  everywhere  present,  quickening,  influencing,  preserving,  and  governing  aJl 
the  creatures,  according  to  their  several  natures  (Acts  xvii.  25  ;  Heb.  i.  3).    Hence 
it  is  evident  that  the  abuse  done  to  the  creatures  riseth  to  God  Himself.    5.  Serious 
Christians  groan  in  behalf  of  the  creatures.     II.  What  distkesses  the  ceeattjbes 
80  MUCH  THAT  THEY  GROAN  ?    Why,  truly,  they  got  a  large  share  of  the  curse  to  bear 
for  man's  sake  (Gen.  iii.  17).     1.  The  whole  creation,  by  man's  sin,  has  fallen  far 
short  of  its  beneficial  and  nutritive  quality  in  comparison  of  what  it  originally  was 
at  its  creation  (Psa.  evil.  34).    2.  The  whole  creation,  by  man's  sin,  has  come  far 
short  of  its  ultimate  end,  the  glory  of  God.     The  whole  creation  was  made  to  be  a 
book,  wherein  men  might  read  the  name  of  God  ;  a  stringed  instrument,  by  which 
men  were  to  praise  Him  ;  a  looking-glass  in  which  to  behold  His  glory  (Rom.  i.  20). 
The  book  is  as  it  were  sealed.     They  have  lost  the  art  of  praising,  hence  the  instru- 
ment is  hung  by,  being  to  little  purpose  in  the  possession  of  such  persons.     They 
care  not  for  beholding  His  glory,  therefore  the  looking-glass  is  overlooked,  and  very 
little  use  is  made  of  it.     Under  this  vanity  they  groan  also.    3.  The  nature  of  the 
whole  creation  is  in  some  sort  altered.    When  God  looked  on  His  creatures  He  saw 
that  they  were  very  good  (Gen.  i.  31).     Where  is  the  creature  that  has  no  evil 
about  it  now  ?     The  sun  sometimes  scorches  man  and  the  fruits  of  the  ground ;  at 
other  times  his  absence  makes  the  earth  as  iron  that  he  cannot  stand  before  the 
cold.     The  air  often  sickens  and  kills  him.    The  distempered  winds  often  sink  him 
in  the  sea.     Out  of  the  earth,  where  he  is  to  get  his  meat,  sometimes  he  meets  with 
poisonous  herbs.     4.  The  creature  has  fallen  into  the  hands  of  God's  enemies,  and 
is  forced  to  serve  them.    When  man  left  God,  all  the  creatures  would  have  left  him 
if  God  had  not  subjected  them  anew  to  him  (ver.  20).    We  see  how  far  some  of 
them  have  gone  in  renouncing  their  service  to  him  (Job  xxxix.  7,  8).    5.  They  are 
nsed  by  sinners  to  ends  for  which  God  never  made  them.    Never  did  a  beast  speak 
but  once  (Num.  xxii.  28,  30),  and  that  was  a  complaint  on  man  for  abusing  it  to  an 
end  for  which  God  never  made  it.     And,  could  the  creature  speak  to  us,  we  would 
hear  many  complaints  that  way.     There  are  two  things  which  make  hard  service — 
(1)  Continual  toil  without  profit.     The  creatures  have  no  intermission  in  their 
service  (Eccles.  i.  5,  8).   But  oh,  where  is  the  profit  of  it  all  ?    The  sun  never  rests. 
But,  alas !  men  see  to  sin  more  by  it.  The  night  waits  on  us  in  its  turn,  and  the  thief 
and  adulterer  get  their  lusts  fulfilled  with  it.     The  air  waits  about  us  continually, 
and  the  swearer  gets  sworn  by  it,  the  liar  lied  by  it.    The  earth  and  sea  wait  on  us 
with  their  produce,  and   people  get  their  sensuality  and  pride  nourished  by  it. 
What  wonder  they  groan  to  be  brought  to  this  pass  ?    (2)  Hard  labour,  and  much 
loss  by  it  (Hab.  ii.  13).    The  creatures  not  only  toil  for  vanity,  but  as  it  were  in  the 
fire,  where  they  smart  for  their  pains.     The  covetous  oppressor's  money  groans 
(James  v.  4).    The  oppressor  builds  his  house  by  blood  and  oppression,  and  the 
very  stones  and  timber  cry  out  (Hab  ii.  11).     6.  The  creatures  partake  with  man  in 
his  miseries.     They  that  have  life  live  groaning  with  him  ;  they  are  liable  to  sick- 
ness, pains,  and  sores  as  well  as  he ;  and  they  die  groaning  with  him.    In  the 
deluge,  in  Sodom,  in  Egypt  they  were   destroyed  with   him.      The  inanimate 
creatures  suSer  with  him  also  (Deut.  xxviii  23 ;  Job  xxxvii.  10  ;  Hosea  ii.  21). 

III.    How,    AND    BY  WHAT   BIGHT,  CAN    THE    HARMLESS    CREATaRES   BE   MADE    TO   GROAN 

FOR  OUR  BAKES  ?  1.  Because  of  their  relation  to  sinful  man,  who  has  a  subordinate 
interest  in  them,  and  that  by  the  same  justice  that  the  whole  which  a  malefactor 
has  smarts  with  him  (Josh.  vii.  24).  The  sun  is  a  light  to  him,  therefore  it  is 
overclouded ;  it  nourishes  his  ground,  therefore  its  influences  are  restrained.  His 
flocks  furnish  him  with  conveniences,  therefore  they  suffer.  2.  Because  of  their 
usefulness  to  him,  by  the  same  right  that,  in  war,  one  takes  from  his  enemy  what- 
ever may  be  of  use  to  him.  Pharaoh  will  not  let  Israel  go,  and  the  cattle,  and  the 
very  trees  and  water  of  Egypt,  smart  (see  also  Hosea  iv.  3  ;  Hagg.  i.  4-11).  3.  By 
the  same  right  one  takes  a  sword  from  a  man  wherewith  he  is  running  at  him. 
The  creatures  are  idols  of  jealousy  often  to  provoke  God,  and  therefore  He  strikes 


effAP.  vra.]  E0MAN8.  106 

them  down.  Often,  and  most  justly,  does  God  punish  sinners  in  that  wherein  they 
have  sinned.  4.  By  the  same  right  one  takes  back  his  loan  when  he  gets  no  thanks 
for  it,  but,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  improved  against  himself  (Hosea  ii.  8,  9).  5.  By 
the  same  right  a  prince  levies  a  fine  on  a  man  when  he  might  take  his  life.  It  is  a 
mercy  God  deals  not  with  ourselves  as  with  the  creatures  for  our  sake  (Lam.  iii.  22), 
IV.  The  mPROVEMENT  op  this  doctrine.  The  creatures  groan  out  these  lessons 
to  us :  1.  That  God  is  angry  with  us  (Hab.  iii.  8).  2.  That  sin  is  a  heavy  burden 
which  none  are  able  to  bear  up  under.  3.  That  God  is  a  jealous  and  just  God, 
who  will  not  suffer  sin  to  go  unpunished.  4.  That  creatures  are  ever  weak 
pillars  to  lean  to  (Eccles.  i.  2).  5.  That  the  service  of  the  creatures  to  sinful 
man  is  an  imposition  on  them  (ver.  20).  6.  That  the  creatures  are  wearied  of  the 
world  lying  in  wickedness,  and  would  fain  have  it  brought  to  an  end  (ver.  19). 
(Tbid.)      The  creation  groans  for  deliverance : — Apply  the  text  to — I.  The  ungodly. 

1.  The  assertion  will  sound  strangely  to  many  ears,  and  there  are  certain  outward 
appearances  at  variance  with  it.  (1)  There  are,  for  instance,  those  who  fix 
their  hearts  on  coarse  enjoyments.  Are  they  not  happy  ?  Now,  even  if  we  granted 
that  the  drunkard  or  the  impure  had  so  effectually  unstamped  themselves  of  the 
image  of  God  as  to  rejoice  in  the  likeness  of  brutes,  I  should  count  them  of  all  men 
the  most  miserable.  I  should  be  ready  to  weep  for  their  dreadful  delusion,  as  for  a 
madman  who  fancies  himself  a  king.  But  I  need  not  grant  so  much  as  this.  No 
Buch  men  are  happy — their  Maker  has  taken  good  care  of  that.  There  is  con- 
science, a  troublesome  guest  whom  they  cannot  expel.  I  care  not  for  their  snatches 
of  merriment,  for  that  intoxication  of  the  senses  which  every  now  and  then  makes 
the  brain  whirl  and  puts  the  blood  on  fire.  I  would  tear  the  bosom  open  and  look 
upon  the  heart,  and  at  the  bottom  of  that  I  see  wretchedness.  And,  at  all  events, 
even  if  you  would  allow  that  all  this  was  delightful,  yet  the  end  of  it  must  come. 
What  is  there  to  uphold  these  pleasure-seekers  in  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death? 
"  Then,  indeed,  all  is  turned  into  groaning  and  travailing  1  "  (2)  There  is  the 
same  lack  of  peace  and  real  joy  in  the  world's  vanities.  I  speak  of  squandering 
away  noble  capacities  in  baubles  and  playthings,  which  is  just  as  absurd  as  giving 
pearls  and  diamonds  for  feathers  or  stones.  That  constant  idle  flutter  of  life,  with 
no  aims  worthy  of  a  rational  being,  not  to  say  a  never-dying  soul,  is  not  only  the 
most  contemptible,  but  the  most  miserable  of  existences  I  And  it  has  its  end ; 
when  the  poor  soul  which  has  lived  on  shadows  finds  itself  in  the  presence  of 
realities  more  terrible  than  it  has  ever  dreamed  of,  and  God  and  eternity,  and 
heaven  and  hell,  supply  for  ever  the  place  of  the  childish  delights  of  vanity  and 
the  laughter  of  fools.     Then  to  it  comes  the  groaning  and  the  travailing  with  pain. 

2.  When  we  have  disposed  of  these  two  classes,  we  have  removed  the  only  excep- 
tions to  the  sad  statement  in  the  text.  (1)  I  need  say  little  of  those  who  wear  out 
heart  and  soul  in  the  pursuit  of  wealth,  which  the  moth  consumes  and  the  rust 
corrupts,  and  which,  some  time  or  other,  will  turn  into  fire  and  burn  into  their  very 
souls.  If  the  earth  were  forced  to  render  up  all  its  treasures  it  could  neither  feed 
the  soul  nor  satisfy  one  single  noble  desire  or  real  want  of  the  heart.  And  then, 
naked  we  came  into  the  world,  and  naked  we  must  go  out  of  it.  The  pursuit  of 
gain,  like  that  of  pleasure,  is  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit.  (2)  So  with  those  few 
nobler  things  on  which  men  set  their  hearts,  the  pursuit  of  power  and  influence 
over  our  fellow  creatures,  and  the  cultivation  of  knowledge.  God  forbid  that  I 
should  undervalue  this,  but  it  has  no  remedy  for  our  real  evils.  We  have  affections, 
and  it  does  not  touch  them — we  have  souls  with  boundless  longings  for  an  eternal 
resting-place,  and  it  cannot  supply  it ;  we  have  sin,  it  cannot  make  us  holy ;  we  are 
subject  to  death,  and  it  cannot  strip  it  of  its  sting.  And  as  for  greatness,  if  you 
think  that  you  would  be  better  off  because  you  might  hide  your  heart-ache  in  a 
palace,  why  then  thus  much  it  can  give,  but  no  more  (Eccles.  i.  1, 12,  16,  &c.). 
Out  of  this  mighty  kingly  heart,  the  most  capacious  of  wisdom  and  satiated  with 
all  which  the  heart  could  give,  power,  wisdom,  pleasure,  comes  the  same  sad  cry 
which  gives  an  articulate  voice  to  the  universal  sorrow.  (3)  So  with  youth.  With 
what  a  sad  pleasure  we  look  at  the  light  and  buoyant  hopefulness,  unchastised  as 
yet  by  failure.  All  this  is  beautiful,  and  if  a  thing  would  last  for  ever  because  it 
was  lovely,  this  would  certainly.  But  then  comes  sorrow  and  disappointment,  and 
hopes  prove  dreams  that  lie  and  disappear  when  one  awakes,  and  the  joy  of  youth 
departs,  and  nothing  remains  but  the  profound  conviction  that  though  aU  that  was 
BO  pure  and  beautiful  has  a  home  somewhere,  yet  certainly  it  is  not  to  be  found 
npon  earth,  which  is  a  place  of  sighing  and  earnest  longings  for  deliverance.  II, 
Thb  baintb  ot  God.    £te  we  to  suppose  that  they  too  are  groaning  under  the  same 


106  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  vm. 

load,  and  that  joy  and  gladness  are  not  to  be  found  with  her,  all  whose  ways  are 
ways  of  pleasantness,  and  all  her  paths  are  peace  ?  Yes,  to  a  certain  extent. 
"  We  ourselves  groan  within  ourselves."  True,  they  are  reconciled  to  God.  True 
it  is  that  peace  and  joy  in  beheving  always  accompany  the  reception  of  Christ. 
But — 1.  They  live  by  faith  and  not  by  sight — they  have  not  received  their  reward, 
they  have  not  entered  into  their  inheritance.  Surely  they  may  be  excused  for 
longing  and  sighing  after  this.  2.  They  have  indeed  their  earthly  consolations, 
and  take  sweet  counsel  together  with  them  who  are  heirs  of  the  same  hope ;  but 
what  is  this  to  that  Divine  company  wherein  is  no  sinner,  nor  so  much  as  one  soul 
which  is  not  a-flame  with  the  love  of  God.  Surely  they  may  be  excused  for  sighing 
after  this.  3.  They,  even  now,  see  dimly,  yet  surely,  reflected  on  the  face  of  nature 
the  image  of  the  Creator.  But  what  is  this  to  the  temple  where  there  is  neither 
day  nor  night,  but  the  unveiled  God  is  in  the  midst  of  it,  and  the  Lamb  is  the  light 
thereof.  4.  Their  hearts  are  fixed  on  the  things  which  eye  hath  not  seen  nor  ear 
heard,  &o.  Surely  it  is  but  natural  that  they  should  mourn  over  all  which  detains 
them  from  this  unutterable  glory.  5.  Their  happiness  is  dashed  by  all  the  common 
sorrows  of  humanity  ;  but  more  than  this,  they  have  a  sorrow  of  which  the  men  of 
this  world  know  nothing.  (1)  They  mourn  over  sin  in  themselves,  subdued  as 
indeed  it  is.  (2)  They  mourn  over  it  in  others.  It  makes  their  hearts  die  within 
them,  and  their  eyes  fountains  of  tears  to  look  at  a  perishing  world.  (J.  Garbett,  M.A.) 
Groam  of  unrenewed  and  renewed  nature. — Highest  and  lowest  are  bound  in  one  in 
Christ.  God  is  One,  and  that  oneness  He  impressed  on  His  creation.  Before  the 
angels'  fall  all  things  in  heaven  were  one.  Before  man's  fall  things  on  earth  were 
one  ;  one,  by  reflecting  His  image  who  is  One,  by  fulfilling  His  will.  And  when 
disunion  was  brought  in,  God  willed  to  knit  all  things  again  in  one  in  His  Son. 
Our  text  applies.  I.  To  the  infebior  obeation.  1.  The  very  lowest  have  in 
some  way  suffered  by  man's  fall,  and  they,  too,  shall  in  his  restoration  gain  in 
glory.  Mysterious  power  of  sin,  that  it  should  so  defile  the  very  creation  which 
itself  partakes  not  of  it  1  Mysterious  efficacy  of  our  Lord's  atonement,  that  all 
things  which  shut  not  out  God  shall  partake  of  the  glory  which  He  hath  pur- 
chased !  2.  "  The  creature  was  made  subject  to  vanity,  not  willingly."  "  Vanity  of 
vanities,  saith  the  preacher,  all  is  vanity."  Nothing  comes  to  any  perfection; 
nothing  continues  at  one  stay;  things  subsist  but  by  renewal  and  decay:  all 
things  by  change  foretell  their  own  destruction  (Eccles.  i.  5-8).  3.  But  more ! 
It  was  all  formed  "  very  good,"  to  its  Maker's  praise ;  and  now,  through  which  hath 
not  He  been  dishonoured  ?  If  beautiful,  man  loves  and  admires  it,  without  or 
more  than  God,  or  worships  it  instead  of  Him.  If  any  brings  outward  evil,  man, 
on  occasion  of  it,  murmurs  against  its  Maker.  "  Jeshurun  waxed  fat  and  kicked." 
"  She  did  not  know  that  I  gave  her  corn  and  wine  and  oil,  and  multiplied  her 
silver  and  gold,  which  they  prepared  for  Baal."  What  even  now  is  not,  even  by 
Christians,  offered  to  some  Baal  of  pride,  or  luxury,  or  "  covetousness,  which  is 
idolatry  "  ?  Of  what  sins  are  the  daily  supplies  of  our  daily  food,  the  occasion  1 
"  Whose  god  is  their  belly."  In  unthankfuhiess  or  luxury,  or  daintiness,  or  hard- 
ness of  heart,  if  we  have  much ;  if  little,  through  sin  in  procuring  it.  All  "  good  things 
of  this  life  "  serve  to  pride  when  men  have  them,  to  covetousness  if  they  have  them 
not.  And  therefore,  as  God  elsewhere  saith  that  the  whole  earth  is  oppressed  and 
loatheth  and  "  vomiteth  forth  her  inhabitants,  through  whom  she  is  defiled,"  so  now 
that  regenerate  man  panteth  after  his  heavenly  home,  "  all  creation  groaneth  and 
travaileth  together "  with  him,  that  having,  with  him  and  for  his  sake,  been 
"  made  subject  to  vanity  "  and  corruption,  it  may,  with  him,  be  made  partaker  of 
incorruption  and  of  glory.  4.  Things  animate  and  inanimate,  as  being  the  works 
of  God,  bear  in  themselves  some  likeness  to  their  Maker  and  traces  of  His  hands. 
Things  seen  speak  of  things  unseen.  And  yet  all  around  us  and  in  us  bear  also  sad 
tokens  of  the  fall.  As  then  to  as  death  is  to  be  the  gate  of  immortality  and  glorr, 
80  in  some  way  to  them.  Whence  Holy  Scripture  says,  "  the  earth  shall  wax  old 
like  a  garment,  and  they  that  dwell  therein  shall  die  in  like  manner."  We  are 
to  die  "  in  like  manner  "  with  the  earth.  As  then  we,  so  many  as  are  in  Christ, 
perish  not  utterly,  but  put  off  only  corruption,  to  be,  by  a  new  and  immortal  birth, 
clothed  with  incorruption,  so  also  they.  Again,  as  Holy  Scripture  says  of  us, 
"  the  dead  shall  be  raised  incorruptible,  and  we  shall  be  changed,"  so  in  their 
measure  of  them;  "as  a  vesture  shalt  Thou  change  them,  and  they  shall  be 
changed."  The  fire  which  bums  up  heaven  and  earth  shall  but  free  them  from 
the  wrongs  which  they  endure  at  our  hands,  the  bondage  in  which  they  have  been 
held  to  corruption  and  vanity,  and  cleansing  them  from  the  stains  of  oar  sins, 


CHIP,  vra.]  EOMANS.  lOT 

shall  yield  them  pare,  "  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth,"  so  that  as  our  dwelling- 
place  has  as  yet  been  marred  by  our  sin,  then  should  the  love  of  God  for  us  over- 
flow upon  it,  and  the  glory  of  His  presence,  which  shaU  be  our  joy,  shall  array  it 
too  with  a  glad  brightness,  in  harmonious  sympathy  with  our  joy  (Psa.  xcvi. 
12,  13  ;  Isa.  xliv.  23).  II.  The  holy  angels.  Not  as  though  they  can  be  thought 
to  have  pain  and  grief  I  Yet,  as  God  is  said  to  "grieve  and  repent  of  the  evil," 
when  He  doeth  that  which  we  should  do  out  of  our  imperfect  feelings,  much  more 
may  the  holy  angels  be  said  to  groan  and  travail  in  birth-pain  together  with  us, 
while  they  long  for  our  immortal  birth,  which  is  yet  delayed  by  our  sins.  •*  They," 
says  a  Father,  "  who  rejoice  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth,  must  in  a  manner 
mourn  over  the  sorrows  of  so  many  sinners."  HI.  Odb  nature.  For  in  some 
sense  all  are  "  made  subject  to  vanity,  not  willingly."  Willingly  man  sinned, 
against  his  will  he  is  punished.  Willingly  he  binds  himself  with  the  cords  of  his 
sins  ;  unwiUingly  often  does  he  remain  in  them,  galled  by  the  bondage  which  he 
cannot  break,  or,  with  a  maimed  will,  wishing  that  he  could  in  earnest  will.  And 
so  the  heathen  world  yearns  at  times  to  be  freed,  and  even,  by  its  mute  wretched- 
ness, utters  a  speechless  groan  that  it  is  an  outcast  from  its  God.  And  think  you 
not  that  here,  at  your  very  doors,  in  the  heart-sickening  desolation  of  this  wilder- 
ness of  souls,  there  are  those  sick  at  heart  at  their  estrangement  from  their  God, 
and  will  ye  be  deaf  to  the  common  cry  ?  Will  ye  by  petty  ineffectual  efforts  and 
cold  prayers  or  heartless  apathy,  still,  year  by  year,  delay  the  time  of  their  redemp- 
tion ?  IV.  The  saikts.  1.  More  do  God's  faithful  ones  mourn  than  all  things 
around,  because  that  for  which  they  mourn,  their  remaining  imperfect  state,  the 
strife  of  flesh  and  spirit,  is  their  own.  They  mourn  more  because  they  know  in 
some  degree  the  blessedness  for  which  they  pant,  God,  for  whom  they  long. 
Angels  know,  in  part  at  least,  the  bliss  reserved  for  us ;  yet  they  know  not  the 
weariness  of  our  strife.  Some  who  know  the  misery  of  strife  and  defeat,  know  not 
the  object  of  their  longing,  who  "  have  the  flrst-fruits  of  the  Spirit."  2.  Weary 
indeed  were  an  eternity  of  such  a  life  as  this  I  Imagine  the  fulness  of  all  outward 
things,  "the  kingdoms  of  the  world  and  the  glory  of  them,"  all  delights,  all 
knowledge,  all  power,  all  honour,  all  possessed  for  ever.  What  weariness  were  it 
all,  with  our  imperfections  ;  what  a  void,  without  the  face  of  God  I  All  things  by 
turn  fatigue,  as  if  to  teach  us  that  none  of  all  is  our  rest.  The  more  we  would  find 
rest  in  any,  the  more  they  weary.  What  so  wearisome  as  continual  amusement, 
or  lengthened  rest,  or  too  long  refreshment.  Less  painful  are  watchings  and 
fastings,  though  these,  if  too  lengthened,  would  wear  out  the  frame.  Yet,  in 
itself,  what  vanity  is  this  very  variety  with  which  God  has  tempered  our  weariness. 
To  fill  the  body,  lest  it  fail ;  to  make  it  hunger,  unless  it  be  oppressed  with  food ; 
to  rest  it,  lest  it  be  exhausted  by  labour;  to  labour,  lest  it  be  weary  through 
repose ;  to  sleep,  lest  it  be  worn  with  watching  ;  to  wake,  lest  it  be  listless  through 
rest :  what  were  life  so  lengthened  out  but  a  long  disease  ?  3.  But  much  more  weary, 
even  if  victorious,  our  strife,  sweetened  though  it  be  by  hope.  What  to  have  that 
within  still  rising  though  still  subdued,  at  variance  with  the  perfect  law  of  God  t 
This,  then,  is  chiefly  the  groaning  whereof  St.  Paul  speaks.  The  taste  of  heavenly 
things  kindles  but  the  more  burning  thirst.  If  such  be  the  first-fruits,  what  the 
whole  ?  If  such  it  be,  to  "  have  tasted  the  good  word  of  life,  and  the  powers  of 
the  world  to  come  1 "  what  must  it  be  to  be  for  ever  blessed  through  the  bliss  of  God ! 
And  then  what  "  bondage  of  corruption  "  again  to  sink  down  to  earth  1  What 
weariness  to  those  who  love,  to  be  absent  from  Him  they  love ;  to  dwell  in  banish- 
ment by  the  streams  of  Babylon,  while  they  remember  the  heavenly  Jerusalem, 
Conclusion.  How  is  it  then  that  we  have  so  little  of  these  heavenly  longings  ? 
Why  have  we  so  little  of  the  apostle's  desire  to  be  loosed  from  his  bonds,  to  be 
dissolved  and  be  with  Christ?  Weary  we  all  must  be,  sooner  or  later,  of  this 
world's  vanities.  How  can  we  exchange  mere  weariness  of  the  world  for  hopes  of 
future  rest  in  God  ?  First,  unlearn  the  love  of  self  and  of  the  world ;  secondly, 
contemplate  God,  His  loving-kindness  and  His  promised  rewards.  The  eye  of  the 
soul  must  be  made  clean,  else  it  cannot  "  see  God."  We  cannot  long  for  things 
unseen  while  we  are  so  taken  up  with  things  of  time  and  sense.  We  cannot  love 
God  while  we  love  the  world.     {E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D,).  Creation's  travail  and 

delivery  : — I.  When  this  deliveby  of  the  cbeattjkes  is  come  to  pass.  God,  that 
has  appointed  a  set  time  for  everything,  has  also  appointed  the  time  for  this, 
viz.,  at  the  end  of  the  world  (vers.  19,  21 ;  Kev.  xx.  11 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  10,  13).  II. 
What  deliveet  the  world  shall  then  get.  The  creature  conceived  vanity  and 
misery  from  the  time  of  Adam's  sin,  then  they  shall  be  delivered  of  that  burden 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTEATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

(vers.  20,  21).  1.  They  shall  fully  answer  their  end,  viz.,  God's  glory  ;  and  if  He 
design  any  benefit  to  man  by  them  they  shall  not  be  plagued  by  vanity  therein, 
(ver.  20 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  13).  2.  They  shall  be  freed  from  all  that  evil  that  cleaves  to 
their  nature  now  by  reason  of  man's  sin.  For  now  they  have  undergone  a  sad 
alteration,  but  then  they  shall  undergo  another  (Psa.  cii.  26 ;  Eev.  xxi.  1).  3.  They 
shall  no  more  be  abused  by  sinners  (vers.  21).  4.  They  shall  serve  God's  enemies 
no  longer.  Their  long  captivity  shall  then  be  at  an  end  (ver.  21).  Then  they  shall 
bid  an  eternal  farewell  to  the  masters  they  served  so  long  against  their  will.  5. 
All  their  misery,  brought  on  them  by  man's  sin,  shall  then  be  at  an  end.  They 
have  shared  long  with  man  in  his  plagues,  but  then  they  will  get  the  burden  off 
their  back  (ver.  21).  As  to  the  way  this  shall  be  brought  to  pass  the  Scriptures  are 
clear — (1)  That  the  world  shall  go  all  up  in  flames  at  the  last  day  (2  Pet.  iii.  7). 
(2)  That  upon  the  back  of  this  conflagration  there  shall  be  new  heavens  and  a  new 
earth,  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness  (2  Pet.  iii.  13 ;  Eev.  xxi.  1).  The  fire  shall 
not  annihilate,  but  only  purge  the  metal  from  dross.  III.  Confiem  the  doctrinb 
OF  THB  creatures'  DELIVERY.  As  to  this,  considcr  :  1.  That  the  great  day  is  the 
day  of  the  restitution  of  all  things  (Acts  iii.  21).  2.  That  our  Lord  Jesus  is  the 
heir  of  all  things  (Heb.  i.  2).  God  gave  Adam  the  great  estate  of  the  world.  But, 
rebelling  against  God,  his  estate  was  forfeited,  because  it  depended  on  his  good 
behaviour.  The  Second  Adam  coming  in  his  room,  the  forfeited  estate  is  made 
over  to  him  (Psa.  viii.  5-7 ;  Heb.  ii.  6-9).  As  Jesus  Christ  has  a  right  to  all 
the  elect,  though  some  of  them  are  yet  under  the  power  of  sin,  but  Christ  at  that 
day  will  recover  them  ;  so  the  creatures  yet  in  the  hand  of  His  enemies.  He  will 
then  restore,  seeing  they  are  all  His  by  His  Father's  gift  (Acts  iii.  21).  3.  That 
all  the  effects  of  the  curse  are  to  be  gathered  together,  and  confined  for  ever  with 
the  wicked  in  the  lake  (Rev.  xx.  14,  15).  The  creatures'  share  of  them,  which 
makes  them  groan  now,  shall  then  be  taken  off,  and  they  for  ever  made  free.  IV. 
Improvement.  1.  In  a  use  of  information.  This  teaches  us — (1)  That  every 
wicked  man  shall  at  length  get  all  his  own  burden  to  bear  himself  alone.  Many 
a  one  takes  a  light  lift  because  there  are  bo  many  to  bear  a  share  of  it.  But 
remember,  0  impenitent  sinner,  the  day  is  coming  when  the  creature  shall  escape, 
and  leave  thee  in  the  lurch  for  all.  (2)  That  people  had  need  to  take  heed  how 
they  use  the  creatures  while  they  have  them.  The  day  of  their  freedom  is 
approaching.  Let  us  not  abuse  them  to  the  service  of  our  lusts,  lest  they  witness 
against  us  at  last.  (3)  That  this  world,  and  what  is  therein,  passeth  away  (1  John 
ii.  17).  What  marvel  is  it  that  man  dies,  seeing  he  lives  by  deaths ;  but  this  bon- 
dage of  the  creatures  will  not  continue,  and  God  will  support  the  life  of  man 
another  way  in  eternity.  (4)  What  glorious  things  will  be  the  new  heaven  and 
the  new  earth  I  If  they  be  so  glorious,  even  while  so  far  unmade  by  sin,  how 
great  must  their  glory  be  when  they  are  again  new  made  I  (5)  However  large  a 
share  the  wicked  may  have  here,  they  will  have  neither  part  nor  lot  in  them  (2  Pet. 
iii.  13).  2.  On  use  of  terror  to  the  wicked.  (1)  The  misery  that  lies  on  any 
creature  for  thy  sake,  shall  be  taken  off  it,  and  laid  on  thee  thyself.  (2)  As 
thou  wilt  be  deserted  of  God,  so  thou  wilt  be  deserted  of  the  creatures  in  thy 
misery  (Isa.  viii.  21,  22).  3.  On  use  of  comfort  to  the  serious  and  godly,  who 
notice  the  groans  of  the  creatures  under  sin,  and  join  their  own  groanings  with 
theirs.  (1)  The  mournful  spectacle  of  the  creatures  which  you  see  to-day,  if 
that  day  were  come,  ye  shall  see  no  more  for  ever.  The  day  is  coming  when  they 
will  groan  no  more ;  nor  shall  you  need  to  groan  for  them.  (2)  If  that  day  were 
come  ye  shall  also  be  delivered.  You  shall  groan  no  more  under  your  own 
burdens  (John  xvi.  20;  1  John  iii.  2).  (T.  Boston,  D.D.)  TJie  universal 
travail : — To  all  seers  this  truth  has  unveiled  itself.  They  seemed  to  catch  the 
voice  of  a  groaning.  The  deep  sadness  of  the  Homeric  poems  is  plain.  Trage- 
dies, or  sadder  comedies,  are  the  masterpieces  of  the  golden  age  of  Athenian 
literature.  The  interest  of  Greek  philosophy  centres  round  a  cell  where  an  old  man 
lies  cheering  his  friends  with  the  hope  of  the  welcome  which  awaits  him  "  in  some 
happy  state,"  while  the  poison  steals  up  to  his  heart.  The  wisest  seer  in  Rome, 
weary  of  the  rout  of  Olympus  as  the  groundwork  of  the  order  of  the  universe, 
thought  that  a  wild  concourse  of  atoms,  by  some  dull  chance,  shaping  themselves 
into  an  order,  might  be  the  key  to  the  mystery  of  life ;  but  he  left  life  sadder  than 
he  found  it.  Next  came  Christianity  to  guide  men  through  new  depths  of  pain  to 
the  issue  in  which  the  travail  of  man  and  nature  shall  ultimately  fruit.  In  the 
Bagas  the  bright  God  dies  under  the  stroke  of  destiny,  and  twilight  settles  over 
aU,    To  Goe^e  Nature  seemed  "  like  a  dumb  captive  sighing  to  be  delivered,"  and 


CHAP,  viii.]  ROMANS.  109 

art  was  to  be  the  minister  of  her  redemption.  And  now  the  struggle  for  existence 
is  the  key  to  the  order  and  progress  of  life.  I.  Let  08  survey  this  travail.  1.  It 
begins  very  low  down  in  the  scale  of  creation.  The  very  molecules  are  in  ceaseless 
conflict,  defeat,  and  victory,  and  yet  everywhere  an  order  and  progress  slowly 
evolve  themselves  out  of  all.  2.  But  as  we  pass  up,  the  struggle  becomes  more 
intense  and  dire.  Each  particle  of  rock  has  as  hard  a  fight  for  its  place  as  the 
molecules  of  air  and  water.  See  how  the  mountains  have  writhed  in  their  agony. 
Enter  the  gates  of  the  hills  and  pass  up  to  their  wilder  altitudes  ;  trees  are  there, 
lonely,  scattered,  fighting  sternly  with  rock  and  avalanche.  A  flower  is  there 
lifting  up  its  delicate  bell,  pallid  with  its  struggle,  through  a  gap  in  the  ghastly 
snowdrift.  Nature  grows  more  stern  and  bavage  daily  unless  mastcitd  by  man. 
The  seeds  of  lovely  and  goodly  things  in  her  perish  by  millions.  How  rare  a  perfect 
crystal,  frond  or  tiower.  And  yet  a  gleam  of  beauty  lies  upon  it  all,  prophetic  of  the 
glory  in  which  all  the  gloaming  shall  issue  at  last.  3.  As  we  ascend  to  the  higher 
region  of  animate  creation  the  struggle  becomes  apparently  more  dire  and  destructive 
Btill.  The  race  is  to  the  swift  and  the  spoil  to  the  strong  everywhere.  For  one 
living  thing  that  survives  and  brings  forth  a  progeny  myriads  perish.  Each 
organism  has  its  parasite  that  preys  on  it  inwardly,  and  its  natural  foe  that  is 
born  to  pursue  it.  But  this  ceaseless  struggle  is  the  method  by  which  the  Creator 
wills  that  stronger,  nobler  forms  shall  constantly  be  brought  forth.  The  terror  and 
anguish  are  largely  in  our  imagination.  There  plays  every  where  the  light  of  a  glad 
and  victorious  life.  Even  the  prey  of  the  carnivora  seems  emancipated  from  the 
terror  ;  the  pain  is  of  the  moment,  while  life  on  the  whole  is  good  to  them  and  glad. 

4.  But  the  groaning  becomes  articulate  and  is  burdened  with  anguish  when  we  rise 
to  the  human  world.  The  stains  that  redden  the  track  of  civilisation,  the  masses 
of  victims  who  lie  crushed  under  the  chariot  wheels  of  progress,  the  anguish 'that 
writes  its  record  on  the  faces  of  the  myriads  who,  too  weak  for  life's  struggle,  fall 
out  of  the  ranks  of  the  advancing  army,  struggle  awhile  painfully  in  the  rear,  and 
then  drop  in  broken-hearted  despair,  are  appalling.  When  we  read  of  heroic  achieve- 
ments otir  eye  flashes,  our  blood  fires.  We  have  no  thoughts  for  breaking  hearts 
and  desolated  homes.  But  it  is  well  to  survey  the  wreck.  Caesar  at  the  cost  of  a 
million  men  brought  that  country  which  has  been  one  of  the  morning  stars  of  pro. 
gress  within  the  field  of  civilisation  and  ultimately  of  the  gospel.  Read  the  history 
of  the  tremendous  wars  by  which  the  Reformation  finally  upheld  itself  against  Rome. 
And  now  in  this  nineteenth  century  the  largest  hosts  which  Caesar  could  have 
put  upon  the  field  would  have  been  swept  like  straws  before  the  armies  whose 
••  blood  and  iron  "  have  cemented  the  edifice  of  German  unity.  This  thing  for 
which  millions  of  earnest  hearts  were  pining  seems  to  have  been  possible  only 
through  agony  and  blood.  II.  It  is  essential  that  we  should  understand  that  ali. 
THIS  IS  TRAVAIL.  And  this  truth  casts  a  glorious  lustre  over  all.  Out  of  all  the 
struggle  and  wreck  nobler  and  more  beautiful  things  and  beings  are  continually 
being  born.  1.  We  have  but  to  compare  the  huge  saurian  monsters  with  the  finer, 
compacter  creatures  which  have  taken  their  place  to  measure  the  enormous  advance. 
2,  Out  of  tl)is  tremendous  struggle  man  somehow,  somewhere  appears ;  and  with 
man  a  host  of  nobler  forms,  while  the  grosser  fauna  and  flora  rot  into  coal,  or 
petrify  into  rock,  to  bear  up  the  structure,  and  to  minister  to  the  life  of  the  human 
world.  3.  As  man  coumiences  his  career  of  development,  we  find  him  in  a  vision 
of  a  serene  and  holy  order  of  life  in  which  the  dire  confusion  of  the  struggle  shall 
be  end^'d,  and  heart  shall  be  knit  to  heart,  and  hand  to  hand  in  fellowship  and  love. 
He  surveys  the  struggle,  and  the  idea  shapes  itself  within  him  that  he  is  born  to  end 
it,  and  that  in  him  the  travailing  creation  is  to  see  "  the  beginning  of  peace."  Men 
have  prayed  for  the  realisation  of  this  vision,  fought,  suffered,  and  died  for  it.  4. 
The  dream  is  realised  in  Christ's  "  kingdom  of  heaven  "  ;  where  the  healing,  help- 
ing, saving  ministries  are  strong,  where  the  weak  have  a  stay,  the  poor  a  shield,  the 
gentle  honour  and  the  good  power,  where  all  that  is  precious  grows  and  flourishes. 

5.  We  beheve  in  development.  We  only  ask  our  philosophers  to  help  us  to  complete  it. 
First  the  natural,  then  the  spiritual,  is  the  Divine  order.  The  creature  at  its  highest, 
by  a  last  and  crowning  effort,  brings  forth  the  human  form  ;  man  at  his  highest,  by 
the  supreme  act  of  travail,  in  and  through  God,  brings  forth  the  new  man.  We  yield 
ourselves  to  the  force  that  draws  us  upward,  and  gain  new  and  larger  thoughts  of 
the  future  developments  of  being  as  we  rise.  And  then  cometh  the  crowning  triumph. 
"  This  corruptible  shall  put  on  incorruption."  (J.  Baldiein  Brown,  B.A.)  The 
toUdarity  of  man  and  nature  : — The  physiologist  is  forced  to  see  in  the  human  body 
the  intended  goal  and  masterpiece  of  animal  organisation  which  appears  as  nothing 


110  THE  BIBUCAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tin. 

else  than  a  long  effort  to  reach  this  consammation.  As  the  breaking  of  the  bad 
renders  sterile  the  branch  which  bore  it,  so  the  fall  of  man  involved  that  of  the 
world.  As  Schelling  said,  "  Nature,  with  its  melancholy  charm,  resembles  a  bride 
who,  at  the  very  moment  when  she  was  fully  attired  for  marriage,  saw  the  bride- 
groom to  whom  she  was  to  be  united  die  on  the  very  day  fixed  for  the  wedding.  She 
still  stands  with  her  fresh  crown  and  in  her  bridal  dress,  but  her  eyes  are  full  of 
tears."  The  soul  of  the  poet  philosopher  here  meets  that  of  the  apostle.  The 
ancient  thinkers  spoke  much  of  a  soul  of  the  world.  The  idea  was  not  a  vain  dream. 
The  soul  of  the  world  is  man.  The  whole  Bible  and  this  important  passage  rest 
on  this  profound  idea.  (Prof.  Godet.)  The  connection  between  man  and  nature : — 
Just  as  the  infectious  disease  in  the  dying  sufferer  contaminates  the  garments  which 
he  wore  and  the  house  which  he  inhabited,  and  throws  its  mysterious  virus,  and 
hence  the  seeds  of  death,  into  the  atmosphere  on  all  sides,  so  by  the  judgment  of 
God  the  sin  of  the  tenant  has  infected  the  whole  of  this  creation,  and  cast  in  some 
sort  and  degree  its  seed  of  vanity  and  corruption  everywhere.  The  disorder  and 
rebellion  in  which  the  great  usurper  revels  have  obtained  everywhere  in  the  world 
which  he  won  by  his  first  temptation,  and  the  peace  and  order  of  the  rightful  King 
have  passed  away  before  them.  (C.  J.  P.  Eyre,  M.A.)  The  upbuilding  of  the 
race : — The  unfolding  of  the  race,  taken  as  a  whole,  is  like  the  building  of  an  organ. 
There  is  no  single  pipe  in  an  organ  that  is  not  made  in  the  shop.  Every  Uttle  flute- 
stop,  each  particular  note,  is  made  and  perfected  there,  and  is  tried  on  a  machine 
kept  for  the  purpose,  to  see  how  it  sounds.  And  when  all  the  various  mechanical 
parts  have  been  constructed  and  tested,  they  are  carried  to  their  destination  and  set 
up.  There  are  things  in  an  organ  of  which  you  have  no  conception.  To  you,  when 
you  look  at  it,  there  is  a  case  outside.  That  is  about  what  men  see  when  they  look 
at  an  organ.  But  to  one  who  knows  how  it  was  built,  it  is  a  multitudinous  mass 
of  stops.  When  this  organ  was  set  up,  all  these  stops  could  not  be  put  in  at  once. 
Stop  by  stop,  department  by  department,  was  put  in  separately.  There  are  three 
or  four  organs  in  this  organ.  They  took  one  of  them  and  began  with  one  stop  or 
department  of  pipes,  and  put  each  in  its  place,  and  tried  to  see  how  it  sounded 
relative  to  itself.  Then  they  put  in  another  stop,  and  tried  to  see  how  it  sounded 
relative  to  itself.  Thus  they  put  in  the  different  stops,  and  each  one  had  to  be  in 
accord  with  itself.  Not  only  that,  but  each  stop  had  to  be  in  accord  with  every 
other  stop  that  was  added.  And  there  was  a  great  deal  of  tinkering,  of  opening 
and  shutting,  of  fixing  of  the  reeds.  Little  by  little  each  stop  was  put  in  accord 
with  itself,  and  with  its  neighbours ;  and  at  last  the  complex  whole  stood  complete. 
But  the  amount  of  groaning,  and  whining,  and  screaming,  the  amount  of  tapping, 
and  cutting,  and  driving  up,  and  driving  down,  that  was  required  before  we  got  this 
noble  organ  in  tune,  no  man  could  imagine  who  did  not  make  the  instrument,  or 
who  did  not  stand  by  and  see  the  process  by  which  it  was  brought  into  harmonisa- 
tion.  The  whole  creation  groans  and  travails  in  pain  until  now.  You  are  not  the 
whole  of  it.  You  are  single  pipes  in  one  stop — in  a  family.  You  are  to  be  attuned, 
each  in  himself — voiced ;  and  you  are  to  be  attuned  with  each  other.  Yen  are  to 
be  brought  into  accord  with  your  neighbours.  They,  again,  are  to  be  brought  into 
accord  with  the  whole  state.  The  state  is  to  be  brought  into  accord  with  the  neigh- 
bouring states.  The  globe  is  yet  to  be  touched  by  the  hand  of  God ;  and  every  pipe 
in  the  vast  multitude  is  to  stand  out  with  beautiful  voice,  and  in  absolute  harmony 
with  every  other  voice.    We  are  in  that  process  of  upbuilding.    {H.  W.  Beecher.) 

Ver.  23.  OoTselves  also,  which  have  the  flrst&mlts  of  the  Spirit  .  .  .  groan 
within  ourselves,  waiting  for  the  adoption,  to  wit,  the  redemption  of  our  body. — 

The firstfruits  of  the  Spirit: — I.  What  thet  xnclude.  1.  Pardon.  2.  Begenera- 
tion.  3.  Communion  with  God.  II.  What  they  inspibe.  1.  Hope.  2.  Aspira- 
tion. 3.  Patience.  III.  What  they  pbomise.  1.  Final  adoption  into  the  family 
of  heaven.  2.  The  glorification  of  the  body.  3.  The  beatific  vision.  {J.Lyth,  D.D.) 
The  groaning  believer : — If  our  action  upon  and  relation  to  the  creature  cause  the 
creature  to  be  subject  to  bo  much  travail  and  pain,  so,  in  return,  the  creature  acts 
npon  UB,  causing  us  to  groan  under  a  burden  which  it  is  hard  to  bear.  The  action  is 
reciprocal,  and  our  present  life  appears,  for  the  time,  to  be  a  life  of  vanity  and  vexa- 
tion of  spirit,  and  is  only  partially  mitigated  by  the  prospect  of  the  final  redemption. 
Here,  then,  we  have  just  the  counterpart  of  the  picture  presented  in  ver.  22.  I.  A 
DESCKn'TiON  OF  BELiEVEBS.  We  who  have  the  Spirit  as  *'  the  firstfruits,"  or  "  the 
earnest "  of  our  inheritance.  Take  man  as  man ;  compare  his  rich  endowments 
with  the  shortness  of  his  existence  smd  the  vanity  of  his  occupation.     And  if  we 


CHAP.  Till.]  ROMANS.  Ill 

pass  to  the  Christian  man  endowed  with  the  fruits  of  redemption,  what  we  see  of 
his  present  life  only  still  more  impresses  us  with  a  feeling  of  its  vanity.  For  only 
look — 1.  At  the  endowments  he  possesses — the  firstfruits  of  the  Spirit.  Not  merely 
high  mental  powers,  but  the  rudiments  of  a  Divine  nature  fitting  for  communion 
with  a  holy  God  and  fellowship  with  the  pure  intelligences  of  heaven.  2.  At  the 
expenditure  by  which  these  endowments  have  been  secured.  The  wisdom  of  God, 
the  work  of  Christ,  and  the  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  are  all  involved  in  lifting 
any  one  up  from  the  level  of  mere  humanity  to  that  of  the  family  of  God.  3.  At  the 
consciousness  of  the  endowment  as  already  possessed  by  us — awakening  within  us 
aspirations  to  do  the  work  that  angels  do,  having  a  desire  to  depart  and  be  with 
Jesus — a  training  that  seems  to  unfit  for  the  low  occupations  of  earthly  life.  Who 
has  not  wished  always  to  be  employed  in  some  heavenly  service  when  he  has  found 
himself  tied  down  by  the  necessity  of  labouring  for  the  bread  that  perisheth.  II. 
Theib  present  sorrowful  condition — "  QROAN  WITHIN  OURSELVES."  1.  There  seema 
here  a  kind  of  retributive  action.  We  have  to  do  with  earthly  things,  and  as  we 
have  abused  them  so  they  seem  to  press  upon  us,  and  so  to  resent  the  wrong  we 
have  done  them.  There  are  sins  that  God  has  forgiven,  but  the  effects  upon  our 
temporal  condition  can  never  be  repaired.  2.  The  discrepancy  that  seems  to  exist 
between  the  endowment  and  the  service  to  which  it  is  here  devoted.  John  Howe 
speaks  of  a  man  clothed  in  scarlet  being  set  to  feed  swine  to  express  such  dis- 
crepancy. And,  no  doubt,  if  such  were  the  will  of  God,  a  loving  servant  would 
yield,  but  then  scarlet  is  not  the  proper  livery  for  such  a  service.  It  may  be  a  dis- 
cipline for  the  servant,  though  it  spoil  his  clothes.  3.  It  arises  from  the  actual 
Bufferings  to  be  endured,  and  no  afiliction  for  the  present  seemeth  to  be  joyous,  but 
grievous.  We  are  not  Stoics,  nor  does  God  wish  us  to  be.  4.  There  is  the  liability 
to  temptation  and  sin.  We  may,  after  all,  be  overtaken  by  a  fault,  and  whilst  we 
are  so  exposed  we  may  well  groan.  5.  There  is  our  proximity  to  the  evil  around  us. 
Righteous  Lot  vexed  his  soul  with  the  filthy  conversation  of  the  wicked.  HI.  Their 
coiiiNO  deliverance.  1.  This  is  called  the  adoption,  because  it  will  be,  not  the 
initiation  into  the  family,  but  the  public  inauguration  of  the  heir,  on  reaching  his 
majority,  into  the  inheritance.  2.  It  is  called  the  redemption  of  the  body.  Redemp- 
tion is,  in  Christ,  already  complete.  But  in  us  it  is  progressive — (1)  "  There  is, 
therefore,  now  no  condemnation."  (2)  Death,  when  the  soul  is  emancipated  from 
all  pollution.  (3)  The  resurrection,  when  the  body  itself  shall  be  emancipated 
(Phil.  iii.  21).  The  subject  teaches  a  lesson — 1.  Of  patience.  It  is  God's  order. 
"Ye  have  need  of  patience,  that  after  ye  have  suffered  the  will  of  God."  2.  Of 
hope.  Look  on.  "  Seek  not  your  rest  here."  (P.  Strutt.)  Theinward  groaning  of 
the  saints  : — Note — I.  Whereunto  the  saints  have  attained.  1.  "  We  have," 
not  "  we  hope  sometimes  we  have,"  nor  yet  "possibly  we  may  have,"  nor  we  shall 
have,  but  "  we  have."  True,  many  things  are  yet  in  the  future,  but  we  have  already 
a  heritage  which  is  the  beginning  of  our  eternal  portion — "  the  firstfruits  of  the 
Spirit,"  i.e.,  the  first  works  of  the  Spirit  in  our  souls — repentance,  faith,  love.  These 
are  called  the  firstfruits  because — (1)  They  come  first.  As  the  wave-sheaf  was  the 
first  of  the  harvest,  so  the  graces  which  adorn  the  spiritual  life  are  the  first  gifts  of 
>be  Spirit  of  God  in  our  souls.  (2)  They  were  the  pledge  of  the  harvest.  As  soon 
as  the  Israelite  had  plucked  the  first  handful  of  ripe  ears,  they  were  to  him  so  many 
proofs  that  the  harvest  was  already  come.  So,  when  God  gives  us  '*  Faith,  hope, 
charity,"  "  whatsoever  things  are  pure,  lovely,"  &c.,  these  are  to  us  the  prog- 
nostics of  the  coming  glory.  (3)  They  were  always  holy  to  the  Lord.  The  first 
ears  of  corn  were  offered  to  the  Most  High,  and  surely  our  new  nature,  with  all  its 
powers,  must  be  regarded  by  us  as  a  consecrated  thing.  (4)  They  were  not  the 
harvest.  No  Jew  was  ever  content  with  them.  So,  when  we  get  the  first  works  of 
the  Spirit  of  God,  we  are  not  to  say, "  I  have  attained,  I  am  already  perfect."  Nay, 
they  should  but  excite  an  insatiable  thirst  after  more.  2.  What  the  saint  has 
attained  will  help  us  to  understand  why  it  is  that  he  groans.  Having  reaped  handfuls, 
we  long  for  sheaves.  For  the  reason  that  we  are  saved,  we  groan  for  something 
beyond.  Did  you  hear  that  groan  ?  It  is  a  traveller  lost  in  the  deep  snow  on  the 
mountain  pass.  Hear  another.  The  traveller  has  reached  the  hospice,  is  per- 
fectly safe,  and  is  exceedingly  grateful  to  think  that  he  has  been  rescued  ;  but  yet 
I  hear  him  groan  because  he  has  a  wife  and  children  down  in  yonder  plain,  and  the 
snow  is  lying  so  deep  that  he  cannot  pursue  his  journey.  Now,  the  first  groan  was 
deep  and  dreadful ;  that  is  the  groan  of  the  ungodly  man  as  he  perishes ;  but  the 
second  is  more  the  note  of  desire  than  of  distress.  Such  is  the  groan  of  the  believer, 
<who,  though  rescued  and  brought  into  the  hospice  of  Divine  mercy,  is  longing  to  see 


lia  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  VIH. 

his  Father's  face.  II.  Wherein  are  believers  deficient  ?  In  those  things  for 
which  we  groan  and  wait.  1.  This  body  of  ours  is  not  deUvered.  As  soon  as  a 
man  believes  in  Christ,  his  soul  is  translated  from  death  unto  life,  and  the  body 
indeed  becomes  a  temple  for  the  Holy  Ghost ;  but  the  grace  of  God  makes  no 
change  in  the  body  in  other  respects.  The  greatest  piety  cannot  preserve  a  man 
from  growing  old,  nor  deliver  his  body  from  corruption,  weakness,  and  dishonour. 
Nor  is  this  little,  for  the  body  has  a  depressing  effect  upon  the  soul,  and  its  appetites 
have  a  natural  affinity  to  that  which  is  sinful.  The  body  is  redeemed  by  price,  but 
it  has  not  yet  been  redeemed  by  power.  Now  this  is  the  cause  of  our  groaning. 
The  soul  is  so  married  to  the  body  that  when  it  is  itself  delivered,  it  sighs  to  think 
that  its  poor  friend  should  still  be  under  the  yoke.  If  you  were  a  free  man,  and 
your  wife  a  slave,  the  more  you  enjoyed  the  sweets  of  freedom,  the  more  would  you 
pine  that  she  should  still  be  in  slavery.  And  so,  again,  with  the  saints  in  heaven. 
They  are  free  from  sin,  but  a  disembodied  spirit  never  can  be  perfect  until  it 
is  reunited  to  its  body.  They  do  not  groan,  but  they  long  with  greater  intensity 
than  you  and  I  for  the  "  adoption,  to  wit,  the  redemption  of  the  body."  2.  Our 
adoption  is  not  manifested  (c/.  ver.  19).  Among  the  Eomans  a  man  might  adopt  a 
child  privately  ;  but  there  was  a  second  adoption,  when  the  child  was  brought  before 
the  authoritif  s,  and  its  ordinary  garments  were  taken  off,  and  the  father  put  on 
garments  suitable  to  the  condition  of  life  in  which  it  was  to  live.  "  Now  are  we  the 
sons  of  God,  and  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be  ;  but  we  know  that  when 
He  shall  appear  we  shall  be  like  Him  "  ;  that  is,  God  will  dress  us  all  as  He  dresses 
His  eldest  Son.  Cannot  you  imagine  a  child  taken  from  the  lowest  ranks  of  society 
and  adopted  by  a  Koman  senator,  saying  to  himself,  "  I  wish  the  day  were  come 
when  I  sball  be  publicly  revealed,  and  be  robed  as  becomes  my  rank."  Happy  in 
what  he  has  received,  for  that  very  reason  he  groans  to  get  the  fulness  of  what  is 
promised  him.  So  it  Ib  with  us.  3.  Our  liberty  is  incomplete.  As  to  our  spirits, 
we  have  liberty  to  soar  to  the  heavenly  places  with  Jesus  Christ ;  but  as  for  our 
bodies,  we  can  only  roam  about  this  narrow  cell  of  earth.  4.  Our  glory  is  not  yet 
revealed,  and  that  is  another  subject  for  sighing.  "  The  glorious  liberty  "  may  be 
translated,  "  The  liberty  of  glory."  We  are  like  warriors  fighting  for  the  victory  ; 
we  share  not  as  yet  in  the  shout  of  them  that  triumph.  Even  up  in  heaven  they 
have  not  their  full  reward.  They  are  waiting  till  their  Lord  shall  descend  from 
heaven,  and  the  whole  of  the  blood-washed  host,  wearing  their  white  robes,  and 
bearing  their  palms  of  victory,  shall  march  up  to  their  thrones.  After  this  consum- 
mation the  believing  heart  is  groaning.  Let  me  show  you  again  the  difference 
between  a  groan  and  a  groan.  Go  into  yonder  house  :  there  is  a  deep,  hollow,  awful 
groan.  Go  to  the  next  house,  and  there  is  another  much  more  painful  than  the 
first.  How  are  we  to  judge  between  them  ?  We  will  come  again  in  a  few  days  :  as 
we  are  entering  the  first  house  we  see  weeping  faces,  a  coffin,  and  a  hearse.  In  the 
next  there  is  a  smiling  cherub,  and  a  mother  who  joys  that  a  man  is  born  into  the 
world.  There  is  all  the  difference  between  the  groan  of  death  and  the  groan  of  life. 
It  is  not  the  pain  of  death  we  feel,  but  the  pain  of  life.  We  are  thankful  to  have 
such  a  groaning.  The  other  night  two  men  working  very  late  were  groaning  in  two 
very  different  ways,  one  of  them  saying,  "  Ah,  there's  a  poor  Christmas  day  in  store 
for  me."  He  had  been  a  drunkard,  a  spendthrift.  Now,  his  fellow  workman  also 
groaned.  On  being  asked  why,  he  said,  "  I  want  to  get  home  to  my  dear  wife  and 
children.  I  have  such  a  happy  house,  I  do  not  hke  to  be  out  of  it."  So  the  Chris- 
tian has  a  good  Father,  a  blessed  home,  and  groans  to  get  to  it,  and  there  is  more 
joy  in  the  groan  of  a  Christian  than  in  all  the  mirth  of  the  ungodly.  III.  What 
OOR  STATE  OF  MIND  IS.  A  Christian's  experience  is  like  the  rainbow,  made  up  of 
drops  of  the  griefs  of  earth,  and  beams  of  the  bliss  of  heaven.  1.  "  We  gi-oan 
within  ourselves."  It  is  not  the  hypocrite's  groan,  who  wants  people  to  believe  that 
he  is  a  saint  because  he  is  wretched.  Our  sighs  are  sacred  things.  We  keep  our 
longings  to  our  Lord.  2.  We  are  "  waiting,"  by  which  I  understand  that  we  are  not 
to  be  petulant,  like  Jonah  or  Elijah,  when  they  said,  "  Let  me  die,"  nor  are  we  to 
sit  still  and  look  for  the  end  of  the  day  because  we  are  tired  of  work.  We  are  to 
groan  after  perfection,  but  we  are  to  wait  patiently  for  it,  knowing  that  what 
the  Lord  appoints  is  best.  Waiting  implies  being  ready.  We  are  to  stand  at 
the  door  expecting  the  Beloved  to  open  it  and  take  us  away  to  Himself.  3. 
We  are  hoping  (ver.  24).  Conclusion :  Here  is  a  test  for  us  all.  You  may 
judge  of  a  man  by  what  he  groans  after.  Some  men  groan  after  wealth, 
some  because  of  their  great  losses  or  sufferings.  But  the  man  that  yearns 
after  more  holiness,  that  is  the  man  who  is  blessed  indeed.    (C  H.  Sjpurgeon.) 


CHAP,  vm.]  ROMANS.  118 

Christian  experience  and  aspiration  : — That  this  passage  is  a  magnificent  one  few 
would  deny.  The  complaint  we  are  likely  to  make  of  it  is  that  it  is  too  magnificent ; 
that  it  transports  us  into  an  atmosphere  which  scarcely  any  one  but  a  saint  or 
apostle  can  be  expected  to  breathe.  We  need,  we  think,  not  grand  anticipations  of 
a  future,  but  some  help  in  combating  the  petty  temptations  of  each  day.  But  if  we 
look  at  these  words  again  we  perceive  that  the  man  who  wrote  them  must  have  been 
more,  not  less,  conversant  than  we  are  with  the  sufferings  which  common  men  are 
experiencing.  He  had  shut  himself  in  no  cloister.  He  hears  arising  from  all  crea- 
tion a  groan  coming  from  the  sense  of  actual  misery ;  and  the  clearest,  fullest 
interpretation  of  these  words  may  be  found  in  our  daily  walks.  The  streets  of 
London  can  tell  us  more  about  the  sense  of  them  than  all  the  folios  of  commenta- 
tors. I.  St.  Paul  tells  the  Eoman  Church  that  he  and  they  weke  waiting  for  theib 
ADOPTION,  or  their  full  recognition  as  sons  of  God.  There  has  been  a  proclamation 
to  men  that  God  has  claimed  them,  without  respect  of  race  or  circumstances,  as 
His  children  in  His  only-begotten  Son.  And  any  message  less  than  this  has  been 
powerless  to  satisfy  the  necessities  of  men,  and  has  produced  no  permanent  moral 
effect  upon  them.  If  we  use  all  arguments  of  fear,  all  arts  of  rhetoric  to  convince 
men  that  they  ought  to  take  care  of  their  souls,  a  few  may  be  startled  out  of  a  sleep 
to  which  they  wiU  return  again.  But  the  more  part  will  feel  that  you  are  bidding 
them  forget  the  real  earth  for  the  sake  of  a  heaven  which  they  can  only  dream  of. 
But  if  we  will  recur  to  the  old  and  simple  scriptural  phraseology  of  the  hearth  and 
home — if  we  will  bear  witness  to  men  of  a  Father  who  has  sent  the  elder  Brother 
of  the  household  to  bring  them  into  it,  to  endow  them  with  the  highest  rights  of 
children,  we  shall  find  that  it  can  bring  forth  as  clear  a  response  from  the  men  of 
the  nineteenth  century  as  from  the  men  of  the  first.  H.  The  question  how  this  con- 
dition  OF   BONSHIP   is   consistent  WITH   BORROW  COULD  BE  ANSWERED  BY  THOSE  WHO 

BELIEVED  THE  SoN  OF  GoD  TO  BE  THE  Man  OF  SORROWS.  In  the  light  of  Christ's 
passion  all  suffering  became  transfigured.  It  was  the  filial  token  (Heb.  xiii.  8). 
But  St.  Paul  did  not  intend  that  they  should  hug  pain  and  sickness,  because  a  deep 
truth  might  be  learnt  from  them.  He  admits  them  in  themselves  to  be  discords 
and  anomalies.  He  could  not  bear  to  contemplate  it,  if  he  were  not  sure  that  they 
were  no  parts  of  its  original  order  ;  and  that  not  being  parts  of  it  they  were  to  cease. 
The  revelation  of  the  Son  of  God  in  weakness  and  pain  and  death,  had  vindicated 
the  title  of  sons  of  God  for  creatures  enduring  weakness,  pain,  and  death.  The 
revelation  of  the  Son  of  God  in  the  glory  of  His  Father  would  reveal  them  in  the 
glory  for  which  they  had  been  created.    III.  But  the  soffebings  of  this  present 

TIME  ARE  NOT  WORTHY  TO  BE  COMPARED  WITH  THE  GLORY  THAT  SHALL  BE  REVEALED  IN  US. 

Not  simply  that  no  sufferings  are  worthy  to  be  compared  with  final  rewards.  The 
Bufferings  of  the  present  time  are  those  of  the  whole  creation,  of  which  man  is  the 
head,  to  be  excluded  from  which  would  be  to  be  excluded  from  human  sympathy, 
from  fellowship  with  the  great  Sufferer.  So  far  from  being  exempt  from  them, 
Paul  knew  more  of  them  than  any,  but  the  blessing  of  the  firstfruits  of  the  Spirit 
is  the  possession  of  a  clearer,  stronger  hope  than  others.  Yet  that  hope  is  not  a 
hope  for  himself,  but  for  his  kind.    IV.  "  For  the  creature  was  made  subject  to 

VANITT,  NOT  WILLINGLY,  BUT  BY  REASON  OF  HiM  WHO  SUBJECTED  THE    SAME."      Here   iS 

the  apostle's  explanation  of  the  puzzle  which  has  tormented  men  ever  since  evil 
entered  into  the  universe.  That  the  guilty  will  be  punished  is  reasonable,  in  this 
our  consciences  acquiesce.  But  there  is  a  guiltless  part  of  creation  which  endures 
misery.  How  can  that  be  just  ?  St.  Paul  feels  the  difficulty,  and  this  is  the  refuge. 
The  creation  has  been  made  subject  to  vanity;  a  very  fitting  phrase  to  express  the 
apparent  frustration  of  the  end  for  which  it  has  been  called  into  existence.  He 
frankly  admits  that  the  bondage  which  the  mere  animal  undergoes  is  not  its  own 
fault,  and  that  it  has  a  Divine  origin.  But  in  doing  so  he  affirms  two  mighty  pro- 
positions— 1.  That  the  innocent,  involuntary  creature  is  made  the  victim  of  vanity 
and  death  for  the  sake  of  that  higher  being  who  has  broken  loose  from  that  will 
which  he  was  created  to  serve.  2.  That  this  subjection  is  temporary,  and  contains 
the  promise  of  a  future  emancipation,  when  the  end  for  which  it  was  ordained  has 
been  accomplished.  Less  than  this  such  language  (vers.  20,  21)  cannot  mean — that 
all  the  sufferings  to  which  the  earth  and  those  that  inhabit  it  are  liable,  are  per- 
mitted and  designed  for  the  education  of  those  who  bear  the  nature  which  the  Son 
of  God  bore ;  and  that  no  suffering  which  contributes  to  this  end  is,  in  the  judg- 
ment of  the  All-good  and  the  All-wise,  excessive  or  wasted,  not  even  the  sufferings 
and  death  of  the  Innocent,  the  Holy  One.  But  this  end  being  attained,  all  the  forms 
of  physical  evil  will  also  be  overcome ;  the  involuntary  creation  will  be  delivered 
VOL.    II.  8 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

from  its  fetters  and  its  shame ;  the  whole  regenerated  world,  in  its  primal  order 
and  harmony,  will  offer  up  its  sacrifices,  through  its  High  Priest  and  Restorer,  to 
His  Father.  V.  His  teaching,  taken  fully  and  literally,  involves  a  benewal  of  the 
WHOi-E  ANIMAL  CEEATioN.  If  there  is  to  be  a  restitution  of  all  things,  such  as  God, 
who  cannot  lie,  promised  by  His  holy  prophets  since  the  world  began,  I  cannot 
understand  how  that  element  should  be  wanting  to  it.  Must  the  creatures  which 
have  ministered  to  man's  wants  and  delights  be  shut  out  from  the  renovation  of  our 
race,  by  whose  degeneracy  they  are  so  deeply  affected  ?  From  these  thoughts  others 
are  nearly  inseparable.  The  idea  of  a  redemption  of  nature  as  consequent  upon  a 
redemption  of  man  has  often  dawned  upon  the  man  of  science  and  upon  the  artist. 
The  one  has  seen  that  the  laws  of  the  universe  can  only  be  fuUy  vindicated  when 
the  self-will  which  has  set  those  laws  at  defiance  has  been  extirpated  ;  the  other, 
from  his  deep  sense  of  the  sympathy  between  man  and  the  forms  which  he  contem- 
plates, has  been  certain  that  such  a  revelation  of  loveliness  awaits  the  purified 
vision  as  the  highest  prophet  has  only  guessed  of.  VI.  The  redemption  of  the 
BODY  which  St.  Paul  waited  for,  must  include  the  eemovai  of  whatever  hinders 

the  senses  from  receiving  CLEAR  AND  SATISFACTORY   IMPRESSIONS  OF  THE  WORLD  with 

which  they  are  intended  to  converse.  But  there  is  a  more  obvious  force  in  the 
expression.  The  body  is  enslaved  to  disease  and  pain.  These  are  the  signs  that 
Death  has  rights  over  the  body,  and  that  he  will  assert  his  rights.  St.  Paul  says 
that  there  is  another  who  has  an  elder,  stronger  right  over  it ;  that  Christ  by  going 
into  the  grave  and  rising  out  of  it  has  asserted  and  made  good  His  right ;  that  He 
will  fuUy  exert  it.  This  redemption  St.  Paul  felt  that  he  was  sent  to  proclaim  to 
men  because  he  was  sent  to  proclaim  their  sonship  to  God.  And  so  his  teaching 
assumed  a  profoundly  practical  character.  Fully  believing  in  this  redemption  men 
are  never  to  confess  Death  as  a  master.  Our  homage  to  Christ,  our  faith  in  our 
Divine  sonship,  implies  that  we  expect  a  victory  for  the  body ;  that  it  was  not  made 
so  fearfully  and  wonderfully  for  nothing  ;  that  it  shaU  at  last  be  made  like  to  the 
glorious  body  of  Him  who  will  subdue  all  to  Himself.  {F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.) 
The  aspirations  of  a  Christian  soul : — It  is  impossible  to  deny  the  splendour  of  the 
idea  contained  in  this  passage.  But  we  are  tempted  to  question  the  possibility  of 
ever  realising  it.  We  fancy  that  such  lofty  yearnings  rise  too  far  above  the  common 
highways  to  give  us  any  strength  in  meeting  the  temptations  and  work  of  the  every- 
day world.  Such  aspirations  might  thrill  the  spirit  of  an  apostle  or  a  lonely  saint, 
but  they  are  too  unearthly  to  be  realised  by  us.  We  need  some  more  homely  teach- 
ing to  enable  us  to  meet  the  temptations  of  their  career.  But  Paul  was  no  solitary 
saint,  and  the  men  to  whom  he  wrote  were  surrounded  by  earthly  temptations 
of  the  fiercest  kind.  And  yet  this  practical  apostle  tells  those  tempted  men  that 
both  they  and  he  were  praying  for  the  redemption  of  the  body,  And  in  our  day 
Buch  aspirations,  instead  of  being  too  lofty  for  our  common  life,  are  the  only  safe- 
guards against  its  prevalent  snares.  Note — I.  Their  nature.  In  illustrating  this 
we  must  dwell  on  the  two  phrases  on  which  this  nature  depends.  "  Firstfruits" 
manifestly  refers  to  the  Jewish  custom  of  presenting  to  God  the  earliest  ears  of  corn 
or  fruit  as  a  thanksgiving  and  a  prayer.  The  influences  of  the  Spirit  therefore  are 
not  merely  a  promise  of  the  future,  they  are  the  actual  commencements  of  the  golden 
harvest  of  eternal  glory.  The  other  phrase,  "  groaning  for  the  adoption,  even  so  far 
as  unto  the  redemption  of  the  body,"  means  that  we  are  adopted  now,  but  that  the 
body  in  the  bondage  of  corruption  stands  in  the  way  of  the  full  realisation  of  our 
sonship,  and  therefore  "  the  firstfruits  of  the  Spirit  "  are  a  cry  for  its  perfect 
deliverance.  Note  then — 1.  That  the  "  firstfruits  of  the  Spirit"  are  a  prayer  for 
perfect  adoption.  We  know  that  "now  we  are  sons  of  God";  but  the  more  we 
realise  that  fact,  the  more  profoundly  do  we  feel  that  the  full  manifestation  has  not 
yet  come.  Let  us  illustrate  this  by  looking  at  three  great "  firstfruits  of  the  Spirit," 
experimentally.  The  Spirit  reveals  to  us  our  adoption — (1)  By  revealing  the  love 
of  God.  There  are  times  when  we  feel  that  He  loves  us  ;  and  this  feeling  clothes 
life  in  splendour,  and  brings  into  the  heart  the  balm  and  music  of  heaven,  making 
poverty,  toil,  sorrow,  endurable  things.  But  is  not  that  always  a  longing,  a  prayer? 
The  very  greatness  of  that  love — the  very  feebleness  of  our  emotion  in  responding 
to  it,  make  us  pray  to  feel  it  more.  (2)  By  the  gift  of  spiritual  power.  The  sign  of 
a  son  of  God  is  that  he  is  no  more  in  bondage  to  the  passions  and  habits  of  the  old 
life.  But  are  we  ever  kings  over  ourselves  as  supremely  as  we  would  be  ?  And 
there,  again,  "  the  firstfruits  of  the  Spirit "  are  a  longing  for  a  perfected  ad  option. 
(3)  By  the  gift  of  Divine  peace.  But  because  that  so  soon  fades,  who  does  not  long 
for  the  sabbath  of  eternity  t    2.  We  can  now  see  how  these  aspirations  rise,  as 


CBAP.  vm.]  ROMANS.  Ill 

Paul  says,  into  a  prayer  for  the  redemption  of  the  body.  Our  present  body  is  the 
grand  hindrance  to  the  attainment  of  perfect  sonship:  thought  wears  out  its 
energies  ;  deep  emotion  exhausts  its  vigour ;  its  infirmities,  sicknesses,  decays, 
hinder  the  prayers  and  aspirations  of  the  soul.  And  then,  above  all,  the  power  of 
the  body  to  perpetuate  the  influences  of  past  sin  renders  it  a  hindrance  to  the  mqn 
who  feels  the  firstfruits  of  the  Spirit.  And  thus  it  is  that  we  who  have  the  "  first- 
fruits  "  must  cry  for  the  redemption  of  the  body,  because  we  know  that  until  then 
we  can  never  reach  the  love,  power,  and  blessedness,  which  belong  to  us  as  sons  of 
God.  II.  Their  prophetic  hopes.  We  hope — 1.  For  the  redeemed  body  ;  not  for 
the  departure  of  the  present  body,  but  for  its  redemption.  We  pray  not  for  the 
death  of  our  present  powers  of  sight  and  hearing,  but  for  their  purified  and  intensi- 
fied life.  And  now  mark  the  prophetic  cries  which  lie  hid  in  that  hope.  Because 
it  is  a  firstfruit  of  the  Spirit,  it  foretells  that  every  bodily  power  shall  come  forth, 
not  crushed,  but  made  stronger  and  brighter  from  the  touch  of  death.  2.  For  the 
redeemed  world.  This  world  with  all  its  beauty  is  fitted  rather  for  a  school  of 
discipline  than  a  home  of  purified  spirits,  and  hence  we  hope  for  another  and  purer 
world  for  our  final  abode.  Now  mark  again  how  this  hope  is  prophetic  of  what 
shall  be.  Paul,  in  the  context,  afiSrms  that  the  pain  and  death  of  the  creature  form 
one  loud  prophetic  wail  for  redemption,  i.e.,  the  whole  creation  joins  the  Christian 
cry  for  a  world  in  which  suffering  and  evil  shall  have  vanished.  III.  Their  present 
LESSONS.  1.  We  need  them  all.  Let  a  man  lower  his  hopes  and  limit  his  aspirings, 
and  he  wiU  easily  decline  into  a  low  spiritual  life  in  which  he  will  be  "  like  a  reed 
shaken  by  the  wind,"  before  temptation.  Only  he  who  daily  claims  the  whole  eternity 
of  hope  as  his  own  is  guarded  against  the  snares  and  pollutions  of  the  world.  2.  We 
must  live  them  all.  [E.  L.  Hull,  B. A.)  Christian  privileges  and  prospects  : — 
I.  The  description  which  is  given  of  Christians  by  their  present  privileges.  In 
this  chapter  we  have  a  remarkable  distinction  of  character.  Those  in  a  state  of 
nature  are  described  as  in  the  flesh,  as  carnally  minded,  &c.  Those  in  a  state  of 
grace  are  said  to  be  of  the  Spirit,  to  mind  the  things  of  the  Spirit,  to  be  spiritually- 
minded,  to  be  led  by  and  to  walk  in  the  Spirit.  1.  Their  character,  therefore,  is 
formed  by  the  influences  of  the  Spirit  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  26,  271.  Our  Saviour  stated 
the  necessity  of  being  born  of  the  Spirit,  and  he  told  His  disciples  that  He  would 
send  them  the  Spirit  of  truth,  &o.  The  apostle  says  that  we  are  to  "  be  washed  by 
the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  &c.  By  this  the  earthliness  of  the  affections  is 
refined,  and  the  whole  soul  is  changed  into  the  image  of  God.  "  If  any  man  have 
not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  His."  2.  Those  who  have  the  Spirit  are 
placed  in  a  high  and  beautiful  relationship.  They  have  adoption  into  the  family 
of  God  (ver.  14-16;  Gal.  iv.  4-6:  1  John  iv.  1,  2).  The  heir  of  God  has  to 
remember  that  much  of  his  good  is  future,  and  he  must  sketch  out  to  himself  those 
prospects  where  faith  will  be  lost  in  sight,  and  hope  in  endless  praise.  •'  We  have 
the  firstfruits  of  the  Spirit."  Whatever  blessings  the  Spirit  has  bestowed,  or  what- 
ever characters  He  has  impressed,  are  pledges  of  the  future  possession.  Has  the 
Spirit  destroyed  the  love  of  sin,  induced  a  desire  for  purity — inspired  faith,  hope, 
love  ?  These  are  all  to  be  regarded  as  pledges  of  what  you  shall  be  in  the  future ; 
your  heaven  begun  upon  earth.  These  are  the  seeds  of  the  harvest  of  glory ;  the 
roots  of  the  future  tree  of  blessedness  ;  the  embryo  of  the  perfect  man ;  the  outline 
of  the  picture  which  shall  be  finished  in  eternity ;  the  first  streaks  of  light ;  the 
first  gleams  of  that  dawn  which  shall  brighten  into  the  splendour  of  meridian  glory. 
XL  The  state  of  mind  in  which  they  are  confessed  to  exist.  "  We  groan  within 
ourselves,"  &c.  These  emotions  are  to  be  considered  in  connection  with  similar 
emotions  through  the  creation.  The  whole  creation  is  represented  as  longing  for 
the  glorious  period  when  all  its  misery  shall  be  over,  as  if  in  the  throes  of  a  new 
birth.  Yes !  and  man  and  brute,  hills  and  valleys,  earth  and  ocean,  times  and 
seasons,  are  passing  onwards  to  a  glorious  deliverance.  Yes  1  and  every  cloud  that 
darkens,  and  every  affliction  that  troubles,  and  every  injury  which  brute  sustains 
from  brute,  and  the  rolling  of  the  storm,  and  the  belchings  of  the  volcano,  and  the 
commotions  of  the  deep,  and  the  tremblings  of  the  earthquake,  are  to  be  all  con- 
sidered as  the  pangs  of  nature  passing  onwards  to  that  end.  Oh,  when  shall  these 
pangs  cease  !  Then  the  apostle  speaks  of  the  children  of  God,  and  he  declares  that 
they  are  not  in  a  higher  sphere.  We  are  all  in  this  respect  in  one  mass,  "  we  also 
groan,"  &o.  1.  Our  state  of  mind  is  one  which  involves — (1)  Pungent  sorrow  on 
account  of  present  imperfection,  (a)  Sorrow  on  account  of  what  we  see  in  the  world 
around  ns.  I  look  on  the  world  around  me ;  it  came  from  the  hand  of  God ;  it 
abounds  with  beautiful  views  ;  bat  still  it  affords  cause  for  mourning.    Look  at  its 


il6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

sinfulness.  It  is  a  worid  of  wickedness.  See  its  misery.  Because  there  is  sin  there 
is  sorrow.  We  witness  the  groanings  of  poverty,  the  wasting  of  disease,  the  scorn  of 
contumely,  the  oppressions  of  power,  &c.  (b)  Sorrow  when  we  consider  our  own 
characters,  and  our  individual  experience.  Who  can  say,  "  I  have  made  my  heart 
clean,  I  am  free  from  sin  "  ?  Who  has  not  cause  to  exclaim  with  Paul,  •'  I  delight 
in  the  law  of  God,  after  the  inward  man  ;  but  I  see  another  law  in  my  members," 
&c.  Again,  we  are  not  only  sinners  but  sufferers.  We  have  much  to  enjoy,  but  we 
have  also  much  to  endure  ;  and  who  among  you  is  not  ready  to  say,  "  we  ourselves 
groan  within  ourselves,"  and  long  for  wings,  "  that  we  might  flee  away  and  be  at 
rest "  t  (2)  Earnest  desire  as  to  the  future.  "  We  wait  for  the  adoption,"  &c. 
Civil  adoption  was  private  and  public.  Now  every  child  of  God  is  adopted  privately 
at  the  time  of  conversion ;  but  there  is  a  day  appointed  for  his  public  adoption  when 
he  will  be  declared  as  a  son  of  God.  We  as  Christians  wait  for  this.  The  time 
when  this  shall  be  is  not  revealed.  But  the  time  shall  come  when  all  the  redeemed 
shall  appear  with  Christ  in  glory.  2.  The  emotion  in  reference  to  this  fact,  "  we 
wait  for  it."  We  stand  like  men  on  the  summit  of  a  lofty  mountain,  taking  a 
transient  view  of  the  intermediate  landscape  and  looking  to  the  distant  horizon  for 
our  intended  dwelling.  We  wait  for  it,  our  minds  are  fixed  upon  it,  our  desires  are 
influenced  by  it.  Prove  that  you  wait  for  it — (1)  By  avoiding  the  pollutions  of  the 
world.  (2)  By  refusing  to  place  your  affections  on  the  world.  '•  If  ye  then  be  risen 
with  Christ,"  &c.  (3)  By  showing  in  constant  and  active  exertion  all  the  principles 
of  the  vocation  by  which  you  are  called.  Are  you  called  to  love  ?  then  love  ;  are 
you  called  to  vigilance?  then  be  vigilant;  to  zeal?  then  be  zealous.  (4)  By 
anticipating  with  joy  the  time  of  your  departure  from  the  world.  (J.  Parsons.) 
The  yearning  of  the  good  for  deliverance  : — 1.  That  is  groaning,  which  is  here 
again  considerable  two  manner  of  ways.  (1)  For  the  simple  passion  :  we  groan. 
Where  that  which  we  may  observe  from  it  is  this,  that  even  the  children  of 
God  themselves  do  groan  while  they  abide  here  in  the  world.  (2)  There  are 
two  things  especially  which  are  the  ground  and  occasion  of  this  groaning, 
whereof  we  now  speak,  in  the  children  of  God  ;  and  that  is,  first,  the  burden 
of  sin.  The  stain  and  defilement  of  sin.  The  proneness  and  inclination  to  evil 
which  is  in  the  heart.  As  proneness  to  evil,  so  on  the  other  side  indisposed- 
ness  to  good.  Distraction  in  duty  and  weakness  and  imperfection  of  performance. 
The  sins  of  daily  incursion,  as  we  commonly  call  them  for  distinction  sake,  in  oppo- 
sition to  greater  miscarriages  ;  these  slips  and  failings  which  we  fall  into  before  we 
are  aware  in  every  business.  2.  Seeing  God's  children  do  thus  groan  under  their 
sins,  let  then  all  men  take  heed  how  they  do  at  any  time  upbraid  them  with  them.  This 
serves  to  confute  that  opinion  which  prevails  with  some  kind  of  people,  as  if  a 
justified  person  were  exempted  from  all  grief  for  sin.  But  secondly,  as  the  servants 
of  God  groan  under  sin  in  the  stain  of  it,  and  so  far  forth  as  it  defiles,  so  likewise 
under  the  guilt  of  it,  and  so  far  forth  as  it  exposes  to  punishment.  The  second  is 
taken  from  misery  and  the  afiiiction  which  they  meet  with  here  likewise.  This  pro- 
ceeds, first,  from  the  consideration  of  their  common  nature.  Secondly,  it  proceeds 
also  from  grace,  forasmuch  as  they  have  a  real  appreheasion  of  deliverance  which 
belongs  unto  them.  This  is  that  which  puts  them  upon  groaning  to  be  delivered, 
because  by  faith  they  know  that  there  is  One  that  hears  their  groans  and  takes 
notice  of  them.  Thirdly,  it  is  sometimes  also  from  weakness  and  want  of  faith, 
especially  there  where  it  is  in  the  excess  and  extremity  of  it.  This  teaches  them 
accordingly  what  to  expect  while  they  live  here  below.  This  world  is  a  vale  of 
tears,  wherein  the  best  that  are  are  subject  to  fighting  and  groaning.  The  second 
is  in  the  additional  illustration.  And  that  is  in  ourselves.  Under  which  phrase 
and  manner  of  expression  we  have  divers  things  intimated  to  us  as  concerning 
this  sighing  and  groaning  of  the  children  of  God,  three  things  especially.  First, 
that  it  is  secret  and  hidden,  it  is  not  always  discerned ;  we  groan  in  ourselves,  that 
is  we  groan  to  ourselves.  This  groaning,  it  is  such  as  all  men  are  not  sensible  or 
apprehensive  of  nor  do  take  notice  of  it.  That  which  is  done  within  a  man,  it  is 
done  without  the  privacy  of  another,  because  no  man  knows  the  things  of  a  man 
save  the  spirit  of  a  man  which  is  within  hiru.  This  is  the  dispensation  of  God's 
children  to  be  mourning  and  humbling  of  themselves  for  the  sins  and  miscarriages 
tff  others,  while  the  parties  themselves  that  occasion  it  are  little  sensible  or  appre- 
hensive of  it.  Thus  does  many  a  godly  parent  groan  for  the  miscarriages  of  his 
children.  This,  it  proceeds  from  a  kind  of  modesty  in  them,  as  in  all  tliir.gs  else 
as  suitable  to  the  principles  of  religion.  They  pray  in  secret,  and  give  in  secret, 
and  grieve  in  secret.     The  second  is  hearty  and  serious.    In  ourselves,  that  is  from 


CHAP,  vm.]  ROMANS.  117 

ourselves.  The  groanings  of  God's  children  they  are  not  slight,  or  perfunctory,  of 
superficial ;  but  such  as  proceed  from  a  deep  sense  and  apprehension  of  their  misery, 
and  the  condition  in  which  they  are.  The  third  thing  implied  in  this  expression  ia 
the  propriety  or  pecuharity  of  their  grief.  In  ourselves,  that  is  by  ourselves.  We 
groan  within  ourselves  ;  that  is  within  our  own  compass  and  in  our  own  capacity. 
We  groan  not  only  as  beasts  do,  which  are  acted  only  by  common  sense  ;  nor 
we  do  not  groan  only  as  men  do,  which  are  acted  only  by  natural  reason ;  but  we 
groan  moreover  as  Christians,  which  are  acted  by  religion  and  grace,  and  so  have  a 
grief  in  that  respect  which  is  proper  unto  them.  This  peculiarity  of  grief,  and  so 
consequently  of  groaning  in  God's  children,  is  founded  in  these  considerations. 
First,  their  peculiarity  of  employment ;  they  have  such  businesses  wherein  they  are 
exercised,  as  none  have  but  they.  Peculiar  employments  breed  peculiar  distractions 
and  cumbrances  which  are  attendant  upon  them,  because  they  have  still  some  mis- 
carriage which  these  are  hable  unto,  and  miscarriage  is  a  cause  of  grief.  Now 
God's  cbildren  they  have  other  businesses  and  employments  than  other  men  Lave, 
and  which  they  seriously  give  themselves  to.  Secondly,  peculiarity  of  contentment ; 
every  difl'erent  comfort  has  a  dififerent  grief  annexed  unto  it,  either  in  the  deprival  or 
straitening  of  it.  The  more  delights  that  any  man  has  in  any  condition,  the  more 
crosses  is  he  likewise  subject  unto  from  that  condition  when  these  delights  shall  be 
suspended.  The  cbildren  of  God  they  therefore  grieve  by  themselves  because 
indeed  they  joy  by  themselves.  Thirdly,  peculiarity  of  design ;  they  have  proper 
and  peculiar  ends  and  aims  which  they  propound  to  themselves.  Look,  as  any 
men's  desires  are,  the  more  oftentimes  are  their  griefs,  because  desire  and  hope 
disappointed  it  makes  the  heart  sad.  Now  God's  children  they  have  their  peculiar 
desires  and  aims  and  ends :  as  the  glory  of  God,  the  good  of  the  Church.  The 
crossing  of  which  unto  them  is  an  occasion  of  greater  grief  in  them.  Not  so  neither. 
For,  first  of  all,  as  a  Christian  has  peculiar  grief,  so  he  has  peculiar  joy  and  comfoii; 
which  attends  it.  Secondly,  this  proper  grief  of  a  Christian  is  a  cause  of  greater 
comfort  to  him.  His  joy  is  not  only  joined  with  his  sorrow,  but  flows  from  it, 
according  to  that  of  the  apostle  (2  Cor.  7-10).  And  so  now  I  have  done  with  the 
first  action  attributed  to  believers  in  this  text,  audthat  is  groaning,  with  the  ampU- 
fication  of  it ;  "  We  ourselves  groan  within  ourselves."  The  second  thing  here 
attributed  to  the  godly  and  true  Christians  is  waiting,  in  these  words,  "  waiting  for 
the  adoption,  to  wit,  the  redemption  of  the  body."  Where  we  have  two  things 
exhibited  to  us.  First,  it  is  an  expression  of  their  patience.  They  wait,  that  is, 
they  stay  (2  Cor.  iv.  8).  The  ground  hereof  is  first  of  all  this  in  the  text,  because 
they  have  received  the  firstfruits  of  the  Spirit,  which  though  they  do  not  altogether 
satisfy  them,  yet  they  do  at  least  very  much  qualify  them,  and  occasion  this 
patience  to  them.  Secondly,  because  they  have  a  spirit  of  faith  whereby  they  see 
all  those  things  which  do  at  present  befall  them  working  good  unto  them.  The 
second  is  earnest  expectation.  God's  children  they  do  wait  for  their  redemption, 
that  is  they  do  look  and  long  for  it  (thus  Tit.  ii.  13).  First,  their  present  evils 
and  afflictions.  They  wait  because  they  groan,  as  it  is  said  before  of  the  creature 
in  vers.  19,  20  of  this  chapter.  Secondly,  their  present  feelings  and  pre-apprehen- 
sions.  They  have  received  the  firstfruits  of  the  Spirit,  and  these  beginnings  do  so 
much  the  more  increase  these  desires  in  them.  Thirdly,  love  to  Christ.  They 
desire  it  and  long  for  it  as  a  bride  does  for  the  coming  of  her  beloved.  Lastly,  from 
the  condition  of  a  believer  in  regard  of  gi-ace,  which  is  here  very  weak  and  imperfect. 
This  waiting  of  the  saints  thus  declared,  it  is  useful  to  sundry  purposes  to  us :  First, 
for  the  intent  to  which  it  is  brought  here  in  the  text,  and  that  it  is  to  assure  us  thai 
there  is  such  a  thing  indeed  as  this  is,  namely,  a  time  for  Christian  redemption 
from  their  present  bondage,  and  enjoyment  of  a  glorious  liberty  which  shall  be 
bestowed  upon  them.  This  it  does  appear  from  hence  because  the  children  of 
God  themselves  do  desire  it.  Secondly,  here  is  a  discovery  of  men's  conditions 
what  they  are.  Those  who  are  indeed  God's  children,  they  do  not  only  groan,  but 
wait ;  not  only  mourn  under  present  misery,  but  also  pant  after  future  glory,  (fee. 
A  worldling  is  all  for  the  present  and  to  have  his  contentments  here  ;  but  a  Chris- 
tian is  not  so  satisfied.  Thirdly,  Let  this  quicken  us  to  this  groaning  and  heavenly 
disposition,  and  make  us  labour  to  find  it  in  ourselves.  Fhst,  for  the  object  pro- 
pounded, and  that  is  adoption.  Adoption  in  Scripture-language  is  of  a  various 
consideration,  and  is  taken  three  manner  of  ways.  First,  for  the  adoption  of 
election,  whereby  God,  before  ever  the  foundations  of  the  world  were  laid,  did  appoint 
us,  and  set  us  out  to  be  in  the  number  of  His  sons  and  daughters  The  second  is 
the  adoption  of  vocation,  whereby  we  being  effectually  called  by  the  preaching  of 


118  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat,  ntu 

the  gospel,  and  justified  by  faith,  are  by  the  spirit  of  adoption  incorporattid  into 
Jesus  Christ  and  confirmed  in  the  inheritance  of  sons.  The  third  is  the  adoption 
of  glory,  whereby  we  shall  fully  at  last  obtain  the  glorious  inheritance  of  children 
together  with  Christ.  The  second  is  the  particular  exposition,  to  wit,  the  redemp- 
tion of  our  body.  The  redemption.  This  likewise,  as  well  as  that  other  term  of 
adoption,  does  admit  of  a  different  signification,  either  namely,  as  taken  for  the 
paying  and  laying  down  of  the  price,  or  else  for  the  receiving  of  the  thing  itself  for 
which  the  price  is  paid.  Of  our  body.  This  is  expressed,  rather  than  of  our  souls. 
First,  because  our  souls  are  in  their  actual  redemption  already  before  that  time. 
Secondly,  it  is  here  said  of  the  body,  because  all  miseries  and  aflSictions  in  this 
life  are  conveyed  to  the  whole  man  by  the  body,  so  that  the  redemption  of  the  body 
is  in  effect  the  redemption  of  the  whole  person.  That  which  we  may  more 
particularly  observe  here  is  this,  that  there  is  a  day  coming  wherein  the  bodies  of 
all  the  saints  as  weU  as  their  souls  shall  be  freed  from  bondage  and  corruption. 
Thus  it  follows  upon  these  special  considerations :  First,  as  they  are  the  instru- 
ments of  a  sanctified  and  regenerate  soul,  whereunto  also  they  have  been  com- 
panions in  duty.  Secondly,  as  members  of  Christ,  who  is  the  Head  and  redeemed 
before  them ;  "  Christ  is  risen  from  the  dead,  and  become  the  firstf  ruits  of  them  that 
slept  "  (1  Cor.  XV.  20).  Thirdly,  as  they  are  the  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  still 
abides  and  dwells  in  them  as  His  own,  and  accordingly  will  raise  them  (Rom.  viii. 
11).  Lastly,  as  together  with  the  soul  they  do  make  up  the  whole  person  which 
God  hath  taken  into  court  with  Himself  {Matt.  xxii.  32).  The  consideration  of  this 
truth  is  very  comfortable  to  the  servants  of  God.  First,  in  all  corporal  infirmities 
and  disparagements  which  are  incident  to  the  body  here  in  this  life,  of  sictness  and 
distempers,  and  restraint  and  persecution,  and  the  like.  Secondly,  as  to  the  horror  of 
the  grave,  and  the  dreadful  apprehensions  of  that  from  rottenness  and  putrefaction, 
our  bodies  shall  at  last  be  freed  from  aU  corruption  (Hos.  xiii.  14).  (Thomas  Horton, 
D.D.)  Adoption  still  future  : — 1.  As  embracing  the  whole  man.  2.  As  consisting  in 
absolute  deliverance  from  bondage.  3.  As  including  manifestation  and  public 
acknowledgment.  4.  As  belonging  not  merely  to  individuals,  but  to  the  Church  as 
a  body.  (T.  Eobinson,  D.D.)  The  redemption  of  the  body  : — I.  The  Christian 
IS  A  MAN  GATHERING  "  FiRSTFRUiTS. "  The  harvest  is  not  come.  He  looks  out  upon 
tl  e  beauty  of  nature,  and  he  sees  a  "  firstfruit "  of  a  renewed  and  perfect  creation. 
He  has  a  happy  thought,  it  is  a  "  firstfruit "  of  an  endless  and  universal  joy.  He 
tastes  the  delights  of  a  pure  affection,  it  is  the  "  firstfruit  "of  a  world  where  all  is 
love.  He  catches  a  glimpse  of  Christ,  it  is  a  "  firstfruit "  of  an  eternal  presence.  He 
plucks  from  the  tree  of  truth  a  holy  feeling,  it  is  the  "  firstfruit "  of  the  rich  abund- 
ance of  a  matured  saintliness.  To  him,  everything  is  a  "  firstfruit."  If  it  is  not 
the  full  glow  of  summer  yet,  it  is  not  winter,  "  If  the  early  grapes  be  so  sweet,  what 
shall  the  vintage  be  ?  "    II.  A  man  untaught  might  sat,  "  Surely  those  who  gatheb 

FtRSTFRUrrS  AT   LEAST   WILL  HAVE  AN   IMMUNITV  FROM  SORROW."      St.  Paul  Said,  "We 

which  have  the  firstfruits  of  the  Spirit  groan  within  ourselves."  I  do  not  find  that 
the  Church  has  less  suffering  than  the  world  without,  only  I  find  it  more  "  inward." 
This  "  inward  groaning,"  what  is  it,  and  whence  ?  As  soon  as  a  man  really  receives 
one  of  the  "  firstfruits  "  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  immediately  a  very  great  change  takea 
place  in  that  soul.  But  how  with  the  body  ?  Is  it  altered  ?  Some  little  degree  ot 
physical  refinement  may  grow  out  of  the  spiritual  change ;  but  in  the  main  the  body 
is  the  same.  It  prompts  the  same  desires,  it  leads  on  to  the  same  sins.  Sometimes 
it  inflames  us,  sometimes  it  drags  us.  And  so  it  will  be  to  death,  the  changed  sfHil 
in  the  unchanged  body,  the  redeemed  in  the  unredeemed.  Now  here  is  all  the  con- 
flict. Of  all  our  misery  this  is  the  painful  element,  the  inability  of  the  body  to 
carry  out  the  higher  aspirations  of  the  soul.  Other  things  may  bring  the  sigh,  the 
tear,  but  this  brings  the  groan,  "  When  shall  I  be  holy  ?  When  will  the  contest 
cease  ?  "  "0  wretched  man  that  I  am,"  &c.  So — IH.  Because  we  have  the  first- 
fruits  of  the  Spirit,  "we  groan  within  ourselves  waiting  for  the  adoption,  to  wit, 
THE  redemption  OF  OUR  BODY."  The  moment  of  death  comes,  the  body  and  the  soul 
are  parted  for  a  while.  From  that  date  the  redemption  of  the  body  begins.  It 
dies,  it  dissolves,  it  lies  hidden,  God  works  in  it  as  He  pleases.  Presently,  it  comes 
forth  ;  it  is  another,  and  yet  the  same,  identical  to  be  known,  to  be  loved,  to  be 
embraced,  and  yet  how  changed  I  It  is  in  sweetest  harmony  with  the  soul ;  it  is 
not  a  whit  less  spiritual  and  heavenly  than  that  which  once  it  thwarted.  It  has 
taken  the  image  of  God  ;  it  perfectly  reflects  Christ.  And  then,  and  not  till 
then,  its  redemption  is  complete.  Here  is  the  great  result  of  the  travail  of 
the  behever.     Conclusion  :  1.  All  you  have  to  do  now  with  the  body  is  to  hold  it 


CHAP.  Ym.]  ROMANS.  119 

down  and  keep  it  under.  And  that  effort  will  be  your  "  groaning."  But  only  "  till 
He  comes."  His  second  advent  will  perfect  the  reformation  of  your  body,  as  His 
first  did  your  soul.  2.  There  is  probably  a  very  close  analogy  between  the  redemp- 
tion of  the  soul  and  that  of  the  body.  The  seed  of  life  sown  in  death,  the  loug 
hidden  process,  the  dying  first  before  there  is  life  indeed,  the  maintenance  of  the 
original  character,  where,  nevertheless,  all  is  new,  the  Ukeness  to  Christ  in  both,  the 
intention  of  all  to  serve,  in  all  the  perfect  sovereignty  of  God.  3.  The  focus  of 
faith  and  hope  to  all  is  the  coming  of  Christ.  The  groaning  soul  of  the  believer, 
carrying  the  burden  of  the  flesh,  looks  there.  The  emancipated  spirits  of  the 
departed  "  longing  to  be  clothed  upon  with  their  house  which  is  from  heaven,"  look 
there.  Even  while  they  wait  in  paradise  the  redemption  of  that  body,  still  perfect, 
is  going  on,  and  they  stretch  on  with  ardent  desire  for  the  moment  when  He  shall 
bring  forth  the  whole  man  in  the  integrity  of  his  being.  And  in  those  at  this 
moment  who  he  in  the  grave,  out  of  our  sight,  it  is  that  holy,  blessed  work  which 
is  going  on.  For  that  reason  we  gave  them  up.  *'  We  ourselves  groan  within  our- 
selves" till  we  see  them  again.  But  we  shall  see  them  lovelier  than  before,  but 
still  the  same,  more  ours,  more  His,  the  needful  absence  for  the  needful  work  done, 
no  absence  more,  all  ours  and  all  one  for  ever.  Wait  on  ;  He  hears  the  groans  of  the 
waiting.  {J.Vaughan,  M.A.)  Insufficiencies  accessories  of  beauty  : — Heaven  does  not 
take  perfect  beings  and  make  them  more  perfect.  It  takes  fallible  and  incomplete 
ones,  and  glorifies  them.  Even  time  and  the  discipUne  of  pain  are  beforehand  in  this, 
turning  the  very  defects  of  Christians  into  graces.  It  is  a  paradox  of  art  that  our 
glassmakers  can  only  reproduce  now  the  perfection  of  the  ancient  "  stained  glass  " 
by  reproducing  its  imperfections  : — "  Singularly  enough,  examinations  made  of  the 
painted  windows,  so  celebrated  as  works  of  artistic  genius  and  skill,  of  the  old 
cathedrals  of  England  and  continental  Europe,  show  that  their  superiority  really 
consists  in  the  inferiority  of  the  glass,  its  richness  in  the  poverty  of  its  constituents, 
in  the  very  perfection  of  its  uneven  thickness,  and  in  the  imperfections  of  its  surface 
and  its  body,  all  covered,  as  they  are,  by  the  accumulating  dust  of  ages,  and  honey- 
combed by  the  corroding  effect  of  time.  Like  the  facets  of  a  diamond  or  ruby,  each 
little  wave  and  thread  and  blister  becomes,  by  interference,  refraction  and  reflection 
of  the  light  which  plays  upon  it,  a  new  source  of  the  gem-like  brilliance,  harmony, 
and  beauty  which  distinguish  the  painted  glass  of  former  centuries."  So  the 
inferiorities  and  insufficiencies  of  God's  children  become  accessories  of  beauty  when 
the  rays  of  His  heavenly  glory  play  upon  them.  The  culture  of  eternity  must  com- 
plement the  trial  and  wear  of  this  lifetime  to  bring  out  every  charm  that  here  lay 
in  disguise. 

Vers.  24,  25.  For  we  are  saved  by  hope. — Saved  in  hope : — According  to  our 
version  "  we  are  saved  by  hope,"  but  that  is  scarcely  in  accordance  wuu  other 
parts  of  Holy  Scripture.  Everywhere  we  are  told  that  we  are  saved  by  faith  (chap. 
V.  1).  The  original  should  be  rendered  "  in  hope. "  Believers  are  saved  by  faith 
and  in  hope.  At  this  present  moment  believers  are  saved,  and  in  a  sense  com- 
pletely. They  are  entirely  saved  from  the  guilt  of  sin,  from  its  defilement,  its 
reigning  power,  and  its  penalty.  Yet  we  are  conscious  that  there  is  something 
more  than  this  to  be  had.  There  is  salvation  in  a  larger  sense,  which  as  yet  we 
see  not ;  for  at  the  present  moment  we  find  ourselves  in  this  tabernacle,  groaning 
because  we  are  burdened.  We  have  not  yet  attained,  but  are  pressing  on.  I.  The 
OBJECT  OP  THIS  HOPE.  1.  Our  own  absolute  perfection.  We  have  set  our  faces 
towards  hoUness,  and  by  God's  grace  we  wiU  never  rest  till  we  attain  it.  2.  The 
redemption  of  the  body  (vers.  10,  11),  to  consort  with  our  purified  spirit.  3.  Our 
eternal  inheritance  (ver.  17).  4.  The  glory  which  shall  be  revealed  in  us  (ver.  18) 
tells  us  which  is  "  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory."  5.  "  The 
glorious  hberty  of  the  children  of  God."  6.  "  The  manifestation  of  the  sons  of 
God."  Here  we  are  hidden  away  in  Christ  as  gems  in  a  casket ;  by  and  by  we  are 
to  be  revealed  as  jewels  in  a  crown.  II.  The  nature  of  this  hope.  1.  It  con- 
sists of  three  things.  (1)  Our  hope  of  being  deUvered  from  sin  as  to  our  soul,  and 
infirmity  as  to  our  body,  arises  out  of  a  solemn  assurance  that  it  shall  be  so.  This 
is  our  beUef  because  Christ  is  risen  and  glorified,  and  we  are  one  with  Him.  (2) 
This  also  we  desire  at  all  times,  but  especially  when  we  get  a  glimpse  of  Christ. 
(3)  This  desire  is  accompanied  with  confident  expectation.  Thus  our  hope  is  not 
a  hazy,  groundless  wish  that  things  may  turn  out  all  right.  2.  It  is  grounded 
npon  the  Word  of  God,  the  faithfulness  of  God,  and  His  power  to  carry  out  His 
own  promise,  and  therefore  it  is  a  hope  most  sure  and  steadfast,  which  maketh  no 


120  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

man  ashamed  who  hath  it.  3.  It  is  wrought  in  us  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  Ungodly 
men  have  no  such  hope.  4.  It  operates  in  us  in  a  holy  manner.  "  He  that  hath 
this  hope  in  Him  purifieth  himself."  It  makes  us  feel  that  it  is  a  shame  for 
princes  of  the  blood  imperial  of  the  skies  to  dabble  in  the  mire  like  children  of  the 
gutter.  III.  The  anticipatobt  poweb  of  this  hope.  We  obtained  the  first  part 
of  salvation  by  faith.  But,  besides  this,  we  have  in  hope  the  fuller  range  of 
salvation.  How  is  this?  1.  Hope  saw  it  all  secured  by  the  promise  of  grace. 
Knowing  that  the  whole  of  the  promise  is  of  equal  certainty,  hope  expected  the 
future  mercy  as  surely  as  faith  enjoyed  the  present  blessing.  2.  Hope  saw  the  full 
harvest  in  the  firstfruits.  When  the  Holy  Spirit  came  to  dwell  in  the  body,  hope 
concluded  that  the  body  would  be  delivered  as  surely  as  the  soul.  3.  Hope  is  so 
sure  about  this  coming  favour  that  she  reckons  it  as  obtained.  You  get  an  advice 
from  a  merchant  beyond  sea :  he  says,  "  I  have  procured  the  goods  you  have 
ordered,  and  will  send  them  by  the  next  vessel."  The  deed  is  done  that  makes 
them  yours.  So  it  is  with  heaven.  I  have  advices  from  One  whom  I  cannot  doubt 
that  He  has  gone  to  heaven  to  prepare  a  place  for  me,  and  that  He  wUl  come  again 
and  receive  me  to  Himself.  The  apostle  is  so  sure  of  it  that  he  even  triumphs  in 
it  (ver.  87).  IV.  The  proper  sphere  op  hope.  "  Hope  that  is  seen  is  not  hope, 
for  what  a  man  seeth  why  doth  he  yet  hope  for  ?  "  1.  A  Christian's  real  possession 
is  not  what  he  sees.  Suppose  God  prospers  him  and  he  has  riches :  let  him  be 
grateful,  but  let  him  confess  that  these  are  not  his  treasures.  One  hour  with  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  will  bring  more  satisfaction  to  the  believer  than  the  largest 
measure  of  wealth.  2.  But  it  is  clear  that  we  do  not  at  present  enjoy  these 
glorious  things  for  which  we  hope.  The  worldling  cries,  "  Where  is  your  hope?  " 
and  we  confess  that  we  do  not  see  the  objects  of  our  hope.  For  instance,  we  could 
not  claim  to  be  altogether  perfect,  but  we  believe  that  we  shall  be  perfected.  By 
no  means  is  our  body  free  from  infirmity,  yet  our  firm  conviction  is  that  we  shaU 
bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly.  3.  Away,  then,  with  judging  by  what  you  do,  or 
see,  or  feel,  or  are.  Else  into  the  sphere  of  the  things  which  shall  be.  When 
there  is  no  joy  in  the  present,  there  is  an  infinite  joy  in  the  future.  V.  The  effect 
OP  this  hope.  "  Then  do  we  with  patience  wait  for  it."  We  wait,  but  not  aa 
criminals  for  execution,  but  as  a  bride  for  the  wedding.  The  joy  is  sure  to  come, 
therefore  do  not  complain  and  murmur,  as  though  God  had  missed  His  appoint- 
ment. (G.  H.  Spiirgeon.)  Salvation  hy  hope: — Hope  saves  inasmuch  as — I.  It 
REVIVES.  1.  While  despondency  benumbs,  hope  sends  a  thrill  of  hfe  through  every 
fibre  of  our  being.  If,  e.g. ,  you  tell  a  sick  man  that  he  has  no  chance  of  recovery, 
how  rapidly  he  sinks ;  but  if  you  tell  him  there  is  hope,  he  revives,  the  blood 
circulates  through  his  veins  with  a  vigour  which  all  the  medicines  in  the  world 
cannot  inspire.  Take  the  case  of  Hezekiah  (Isa.  xxxviii.).  2.  Transfer  this  to 
the  spiritual.  Look  at  a  man  who  is  struggling  with  evil  around  and  within  him. 
If  you  make  him  beheve  that  it  can  never  be  subdued,  paraljsis  and  death  settle 
upon  his  energies.  But  if,  in  moments  of  depression,  you  meet  him  with  instances 
of  success,  and  show  him  that  the  work  must  succeed,  you  inspire  him  with  hfe. 
How  often  hope  revived  St.  Paul  we  knov?.  The  hope  of  his  calling,  the  hope  of 
salvation,  the  hope  of  Israel,  the  hope  of  the  glory  of  God,  the  hope  that  his  work 
would  yet  bear  fruit,  that  blessed  hope,  the  glorious  reappearing  of  Christ,  in  his 
moments  of  depression,  came  to  him  like  inspirations  from  heaven.  Had  they  had 
no  power,  the  world  would  have  borne  a  very  different  look.  It  is  the  same  with 
ourselves.  Take  the  hope  of  forgiveness,  the  hope  of  heaven  breathes  life  into  the 
dullest.  And  when  sorrowing  for  those  we  have  lost,  that  which  reconciles  us  to 
the  will  of  God  and  sends  us  back  to  duty  is  the  hope  that  they  are  as  the  angels. 
II.  It  sustains.  It  is  the  principal  cause  of  success.  In  those  who  watch  by  the 
sick  this  is  evident.  How  it  sustains  through  long  nights  of  weary  watching,  and 
enables  them  to  make  sacrifice  after  sacrifice  1  Without  hope,  again,  who  could 
endure  the  myriad  anxieties  of  life  ?  Or  look  at  tbe  advocates  of  an  unpopular 
cause.  How  hope  sustains  them  !  That  of  St.  Paul  and  his  companions  is  a  case 
in  point.  To  their  heart  and  hand  hope  gave  courage,  labour,  patience.  III.  It 
INCITES  TO  ACTIVE  ENDEAVOUR.  If  WO  wish  to  incite  children  to  diligence,  we  use 
hope.  It  incites  the  student,  the  workman,  the  merchant,  the  soldier,  the  sailor, 
the  artist,  the  statesman.  Hope,  in  fact,  is  the  great  mover  of  the  human  mind. 
The  hope  of  doing  good  is  the  inspiration  of  our  noblest  deeds.  The  hope  of 
subduing  our  evils,  and  of  being  transformed  into  the  image  of  Christ,  incites  us  to 
struggle  against  them.  IV.  It  purifies.  "Every  man  that  hath  this  hope 
purifies  himself  even  as  He  is  pure."    Conclusion :  1.  This  hope  is  Divine.     God 


CHAP,  vm.]  ROMANS.  121 

is  the  God  of  hope — its  object,  its  source.  The  hopes  by  which  men  are  revived, 
sustained,  or  incited,  are  not  their  own.  They  are  inspired  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 
And  what  sohdity  is  here  given  to  our  hopes  as  believers,  as  citizens  of  heaven  I 
Their  mere  existence  is  a  pledge  of  their  reality  and  truth.  2.  The  gospel  of  Christ 
is  a  gospel  of  hope.  It  does  not  contradict  the  soul.  Men  have  always  believed 
that  their  parentage  is  Divine.  The  gospel  confirms  this :  "  Beloved,  now  are  we 
the  sons  of  God."  They  have  always  believed  in  immortality.  The  gospel  says, 
"In  My  Father's  house  are  many  mansions."  They  have  always  believed  in  the 
Divine  nearness.  The  message  of  the  gospel  is,  **  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway."  3. 
See  the  necessity  for  preaching  it.  Tell  men  they  are  the  children  of  the  devil, 
and  you  do  the  best  you  can  to  make  them  such.  But  tell  them  they  are  the 
children  of  God,  and  you  give  them  hope.  (W.  M.  Metcalfe.)  Salvation 
by  hope: — The  gospel,  as  the  term  denotes,  is  glad  tidings  to  all,  not  excepting 
the  chiefest  of  sinners.  It  is  a  Divine  dispensation  of  encouragement.  Its 
salvation  is  a  salvation  "  by  hope."  To  undei-stand  this  doctrine,  it  will  be 
necessary  to  begin  by  considering  generally  what  mankind  stand  most  in  need  of  as 
a  motive  and  means  to  that  change  of  heart  and  life  on  which  salvation  depends. 
And,  first,  in  case  of  hardened  and  abandoned  sinners.  With  respect  to  such  men, 
at  least,  I  beUeve  the  impression  is  almost  universal,  that  what  they  stand  most  in 
need  of  is,  to  be  thoroughly  alarmed  by  the  terrors  of  the  law,  by  vivid  pictures  of 
the  judgment  to  come  if  they  die  impenitent.  The  argument  is,  that  as  bad  men, 
through  the  indurating  effects  of  sin,  have  become  insensible  to  higher  and  better 
motives,  they  must  be  moved,  if  moved  at  all,  by  a  fear  of  God's  indignation  and 
wrath.  Sin  hardens  men,  I  admit,  against  a  sense  of  duty  and  a  sense  of  shame  ; 
but  it  hardens  them,  if  possible,  still  more  against  a  sense  of  any  spiritual  dangers. 
Howard  and  Elizabeth  Fry,  with  the  men  and  women  who  have  followed  them  in 
their  mission  to  carry  the  gospel  into  prisons,  are  found  to  have  trusted  almost 
exclusively  to  the  power  of  Christian  sympathy,  aided  by  a  gentle  and  kind  manner, 
as  a  means  of  subduing  those  who  feared  neither  God  nor  man,  neither  death  nor 
hell.  But  if  this  is  true  of  abandoned  sinners,  how  much  more  so  of  all  such  as  still 
have  their  relentings,  whose  sin  consists,  for  the  most  part,  in  halting  between  two 
opinions,  having  determined  that  they  will  become  religious  at  some  future  day,  but 
not  yet.  They  think  it  would  be  barder  work  for  them  to  be  Christians  than  for 
most  men  ;  that  it  is  beyond  their  reach,  at  least  for  the  present ;  that  it  would  be 
vanity  or  presumption  in  them  to  make  the  attempt.  Now,  I  ask,  how  are  these 
obstacles,  all  consisting  radically  in  a  want  of  confidence,  most  likely  to  be  over- 
come ?  Clearly  as  the  gospel  aims  to  do  it— by  inspiring  new  confidence,  by  hold- 
ing out  the  promise  of  sympathy  and  help  ;  by  a  Divinely  authenticated  dispensa- 
tion of  encouragement.  "  We  are  saved  by  hope."  But  if  I  were  to  stop  here,  half 
of  my  purpose  would  be  left  unaccomplished.  All  will  agree,  I  doubt  not,  that  life 
without  hope  from  any  quarter  would  be  insupportable.  Still,  some  may  ask,  why 
look  to  religion,  why  look  to  Christianity  for  this  hope  ?  1.  In  the  first  place,  the 
Christian  hope  is  not  limited  and  bounded,  Uke  all  worldly,  irreligious,  infidel  hopes, 
by  what  men  can  do.  Unless  we  recognise  the  being,  and  trust  in  the  presence  and 
agency  of  a  Higher  Power,  the  hour  is  coming  when  the  soul  will  be  without  hope. 
Despair  will  take  the  place  of  hope.  Here  also  it  is  of  importance  to  observe  that, 
with  persons  of  reflection  and  forethought,  whatever  is  seen  to  end  in  despair,  begins 
in  despair.  2,  Another  distinction  of  the  Christian  hope  consists  in  its  not  being 
limited  and  bounded,  as  all  worldly,  irreligious,  and  infidel  hopes  must  be,  by  the 
present  life.  Almost  the  entire  language  of  condolence  under  grief,  hardship,  and 
oppression  is  borrowed  from  the  Bible,  and  owes  its  force  to  the  Christian  doctrine 
that  "  the  sufferings  of  this  present  time  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the 
glory  which  shall  be  revealed  in  us."  3.  A  third  circumstance  distinguishing  the 
Christian  hope  is  that,  unhke  all  worldly,  irreligious,  infidel  hopes,  it  does  not  pro- 
fess to  measure  itself  by  the  real  or  supposed  deserts  of  the  individual,  but  by  the 
boundless  goodness  and  mercy  of  the  Supreme  Disposer.  Under  the  Christian  dis- 
pensation it  is  impiety  to  despair  of  God's  mercy  on  account  of  our  past  sins:  for 
this  would  be  to  suppose  these  sins  to  be  greater  than  His  mercy.  Of  course,  when 
we  compare  what  we  are  and  what  we  can  do  with  what  we  hope  to  receive,  we 
cannot  fail  to  be  struck  with  the  infinite  disparity ;  but  neither  is  this  just  ground 
for  misgivings.  What  is  promised  is  to  be  regarded,  not  as  being  of  the  nature  of 
wages  for  work  done,  but  as  being  of  the  nature  of  a  gift  on  condition  of  obedience; 
and  in  this  character  as  a  gift,  it  takes  its  proportions,  not  from  our  poor  earnings, 
bat  from  the  munificence  of  the  Giver.    4.  Who,  it  may  be  asked  in  conclusion, 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vin, 

does  not  feel  his  need  of  this  hope  ?  5.  Again,  who  would  not  cultivate  this  hope  f 
As  religious  dispositions  are  not  of  this  world  they  are  not  likely  to  spring  up  spon- 
taneously under  worldly  appliances  amidst  worldly  avocations.  Religion,  religion 
at  least  in  its  highest  forms,  is  a  delicate  exotic,  which  must  not  be  expected  to 
grow  wild  in  the  fields ;  it  must  be  nurtured  with  effort  and  care ;  it  must  be 
sheltered  from  all  ungenial  influences,  and  surrounded,  as  far  as  may  be,  with  the 
atmosphere,  so  to  speak,  of  its  native  heaven.  6.  Finally,  who  would  knowingly 
and  willingly  disappoint  or  frustrate  this  hope?  Because  a  man  has  hope  in  Chiist 
it  does  not  follow  that  this  hope  is  well  founded  in  his  case.  Our  very  hope  may 
perish  ;  nay,  it  will  do  so,  unless  we  establish  it  in  righteousness,  and  unless  "  we 
show  the  same  diligence  to  the  full  assurance  of  hope  unto  the  end.  {Jag.  Walker.) 
Salvation  by  hope : — I.  We  can  trace  soue  ilujstbation  of  this  gbeat  qenebal  law 
IN  our  own  lives.  "  Saved  by  hope."  Upon  how  many  Uves,  how  many  works, 
might  that  be  written  1  1.  One  man  is  saved  by  hope  from  indolence :  a  poor  form 
of  hope  it  may  have  been,  but  it  kept  the  hfe  in  him  till  the  worthier  motive  claimed 
him.  2.  Another  is  saved  by  hope  from  the  insanity  of  self-satisfaction :  hope 
startled  him  with  the  challenge  of  a  hero's  life  or  the  pathos  of  a  hero's  death,  and 
the  snare  was  broken  and  he  was  delivered.  3.  Another  may  have  been  drifting 
towards  the  utter  loss  of  self-respect :  drunkenness  or  impurity  may  have  been 
quenching  aU  the  light  out  of  his  soul,  but  hope  came  to  him — the  hope  of  a  noble 
love — and  his  chains  fell  off.  Yes,  hope  is  the  spur  of  every  effort — the  strength  of 
every  enterprise — the  stay  of  all  endurance.  As  one  may  go  round  a  garden  after 
winter  and  there  mark  the  signs  of  lingering  life,  and  say,  "  Ah  I  that  may  come 
right  after  all " :  so  may  God  look  into  unnumbered  hearts,  wintry  and  dull  as 
death  itself,  and  see  the  half-conscious  germ  of  hope,  and  know  that  there  is  that 
whereby  they  may  be  saved.  Aye,  and  as  in  the  individual  life,  so  also  in  the 
whole  race  of  man,  hope  wields  its  saving  energy.  It  is  the  great  impulse  of  all 
onward  movement :  the  mainspring  of  progressive  civilisation :  the  instinct  of 
mankind  towards  the  amendment  of  every  circumstance  of  life.  Any  hope  that  is 
not  sinful  is  better  than  no  hope  at  all.  St.  Paul  puts  terribly  near  to  one  another 
"  having  no  hope  "  and  "  without  God  in  the  world."  Even  a  hope  which  could 
never  call  out  all  the  power  that  is  in  a  man  may  yet  serve  to  keep  his  head  above 
water  till  better  help  comes.  II.  If  hope  is  to  have  its  perfect  work,  then  it 
MUST  fulfil  ax  LEAST  TWO  CONDITIONS — it  must  rest  on  a  sufficient  ground,  and  it 
must  point  to  a  sufficient  object.  1.  The  hope  that  leads  us  on  must  not  be  like  a 
will-o'-the-wisp,  hovering  over  dangerous  ground,  and  vanishing  altogether  where 
we  thought  we  must  come  up  with  it.  Many  such  hopes  there  are:  e.g.,  of  a 
startling  career,  of  briUiant  originality,  of  large  but  vague  philanthropy ;  hopes, 
hazy  and  delusive,  corresponding  to  no  solid  reality,  marking  out  for  us  no  clear 
course.  2.  Other  hopes  there  are  which  will  direct  us  definitely  enough  :  the  hope 
of  money,  of  success,  of  power ;  we  may  follow  them  with  confidence,  but  it  is  like 
walking  down  a  street  that  leads  us  nowhere  ;  we  may  reach  the  end,  but  only  to 
find  it  as  dull  and  disappointing  as  a  blank  waU.  In  regard  to  one  such  hope,  the 
commonest  perhaps  of  all,  the  hope  of  wealth,  a  working-man  said  to  me  once,  "  I 
suppose  no  one  is  rich  tUl  the  day  when  he's  got  a  little  more  than  he  has."  His 
paradox  exactly  told  the  truth  :  the  clearest  of  worldly  hopes  are  at  the  same  time 
most  disappointing.  3.  The  hope  that  really  saves,  and  maketh  not  ashamed,  is  a 
hope  which  points  with  clearness  to  an  aim  which  cannot  prove  inadequate;  a 
hope  which  will  not  halt  till  every  power  and  energy  of  our  life  has  found  its  rest, 
its  joy,  its  perfect  and  unwearied  work.  To  such  a  hope  hath  God  begotten  ua 
by  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  It  is  an  infinite  enrichment  of  all  human  life  that 
we  commemorate  at  Easter ;  even  the  gift  of  one  steadfast,  serious,  sufficient  hope. 
HI.  There  is  no  department  of  life   which  mat  not  be   liberated  and  up- 

UFTED  BY  THE  HOPE  WHICH  THE  RISEN   LoRD   REVEALS.      SomC   SCCm   tO  shrink  from 

laying  stress  upon  the  future  life  lest  it  should  be  used  to  disparage  or  obscure  the 
duties  of  the  present.  But  was  it  so  when  the  living  hope  was  freshest  and 
strongest  ?  Who,  for  instance,  in  those  first  Christian  days,  reaJly  made  the  most 
of  the  great  trust  of  this  life?  The  heathen  poet,  laughing  at  ihe  idea  of  being 
serious  when  you  have  but  a  few  years  in  which  to  enjoy  yourself  ?  The 
philosopher,  inculcating  suicide  whenever  the  pains  of  life  outweighed  its  plea- 
sures? The  heathen  emperor,  saving  the  vast  duties  of  his  position  to  plunge 
more  freely  into  every  phase  of  vice  ?  Or  Paul,  the  slave  of  Christ  ?  In  all  the 
change  that  came  with  the  faith  f  Christ  few  things  are  more  remarkable  than  the 
advancement  of  hope  from  the  pi  ce  of  a  weakness  to  the  power  of  a  great  motiva 


OBAP.  vm.]  BOMANS.  123 

for  a  good  life.  And  we  need  never  fear  that  a  man  will  grow  careless  or  half- 
hearted about  the  concerns  of  time,  because  in  and  through  them  all  he  seeks  those 
things  which  are  above.  Much  rather  does  the  saving  hope  that  firmly  rests  on 
Christ's  resurrection  avail,  as  nothing  else  avails,  to  give  steadiness  and  calmness 
Bnd  confidence  to  every  worldly  hope  which  can  be  pursued  in  this  life.  1.  What  a 
change,  e.g.,  passes  over  the  hope  of  the  student  when,  beside  the  empty  tomb,  he 
begins  to  discern  the  true  vocation  of  the  intellect,  the  range,  the  use  it  may  here- 
after have.  In  Christ  the  human  intellect  has  passed  to  the  sphere  of  its  perfect 
and  unending  exercise.  2.  But  what  shall  we  say  about  that  other  sphere  of  effort 
where  the  real  crisis  of  our  life  must  find  its  issue ;  how  can  we  measure  the  moral 
life  the  saving  power  of  the  Easter  hope  ?  Here  we  renew  the  experience  of  the 
Psalmist,  "  I  should  utterly  have  fainted ;  but  that  I  beUeve  verily  to  see  the  goodness 
of  the  Lord  in  the  land  of  the  living."  3.  Let  us  see  whether  the  words  have  not  a 
bearing  also  upon  the  life  of  nations.  Is  it  not  to  be  feared  that  many  cherish 
less  reverently  than  of  old  the  salutary  grace  of  a  true  hope  ?  Hope,  as  we  have 
Been,  is  essential  to  the  vigour,  the  harmony,  the  welfare  and  happiness  of  each 
separate  human  life.  If  we  were  to  give  up  hoping,  how  would  for  us  the  sun  be 
darkened,  and  desire  would  fail  and  purpose  falter,  and  all  joy  and  courage  and  help- 
fulness fade  out  of  our  life.  Must  it  not  be  so,  in  some  degree,  if  the  temper,  the 
character,  the  current  literature  of  a  nation  begins  to  discard  or  trifle  with  the  duty 
and  the  strength  of  hope  ?  Oh  I  if  this  be  so,  then  there  are  two  things  at  least 
that  we  can  do  for  England  now.  Let  us  see  to  it  that,  by  the  grace  of  God,  we 
stand  sure  and  steadfast  in  that  only  hope  which  maketh  not  ashamed,  which  is 
nothing  else  than  faith  in  the  omnipotence  and  in  the  love  of  God.  And  then  let 
us  humbly  and  constantly  pray  to  Him  who  spanned  with  an  unfailing  hope  the 
interval  of  earth  and  heaven  that  He  may  renew  and  purify  with  the  knowledge  of  His 
truth  the  heart  and  thought  of  England.  {Dean  Paget.)  A  saving  hope  : — We  begin 
with  the  first  of  these  parts,  viz.,  the  general  proposition,  •'  We  are  saved  by  hope." 
The  present  salvation  of  a  Christian  lies  not  so  much  in  possession  as  it  does  in 
expectation.  The  word  "  hope"  in  Scripture  does  admit  of  a  double  signification, 
either  as  it  denotes  the  grace  or  else  the  object  of  hope.  Now,  here  in  the  text 
it  seems  specially  to  be  understood  of  the  latter.  First,  seeing  we  are  saved  by 
hope,  it  concerns  us  to  strengthen  ourselves  in  the  hope  of  Christianity  in  general, 
.  namely,  that  there  are  such  things  indeed  as  a  Christian  doth  hope  for.  Thus  St. 
I  Paul  speaking  of  himself  (Acts  xxiv.  15).  This  hath  divers  grounds  whereupon  it 
is  raised.  First,  the  promise  and  covenant  of  God  (Isa.  Iv.  3).  Secondly,  the  oath 
of  God  (Heb.  vi.  18).  Thirdly,  Christ  Himself  in  the  performance  of  all  His  offices. 
That  is  another  ground  of  our  hope.  Christ,  He  is  called  the  hope  of  glory  (Col. 
i.  27).  Lastly,  the  firstfruits  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  beginnings  of  glory  here  in  this 
world,  which  Christians  have  in  their  own  hearts  and  consciences,  they  are  great 
assurances  of  this  hope  unto  them.  But  secondly,  not  only  so,  but  further,  we  are 
to  strengthen  ourselves  in  our  own  hope  for  our  particular  condition.  That  as 
there  is  such  a  hope  as  this  is  for  the  thing  itself,  so  that  we  also  have  hope  of 
this  hope.  Forasmuch  as  we  are  saved  by  hope,  it  concerns  us  very  much  to 
keep  up  hope  alive  in  ourselves,  not  only  to  have  it  in  the  ground  of  it,  but  also  in 
the  discovery.  How  may  we  come  to  do  so?  First,  by  conscionable  walking  and 
watchfulness  over  ourselves.  The  more  holiness,  still  the  more  hope.  These 
things  they  run  in  a  circle.  Hope,  it  provokes  to  holiness,  and  makes  as  to  walk 
more  warily ;  and  holiness,  it  encourages  hope,  and  makes  us  to  walk  more  com- 
fortably (Prov.  xiv.  32).  To  this  I  may  add  sincerity,  and  uprightness,  and  fruit- 
fulness,  in  our  places.  "  The  hope  of  the  hypocrite  shall  perish  "  (Job  viii.  13). 
Thirdly,  by  meditation  on  the  promises,  and  often  looking  over  our  evidences  and 
grounds  of  hope.  And  lastly,  by  frequent  prayer.  The  more  that  we  are 
acquainted  with  God,  the  more  shall  we  hope  from  Him  (Psa.  Ixii.  8).  Thus 
should  we  confirm  our  hope  for  our  own  particular.  Yea,  further,  we  should  not 
only  nourish  and  strengthen  this  hope  in  ourselves,  but  be  ready  likewise  to  give  a 
reason  and  an  account  of  it  to  others  (1  Pet.  iii.  15).  Lastly,  seeing  we  are  saved 
by  hope,  as  is  here  in  this  present  Scripture  declared  unto  us.  This  serves  for  the 
just  reproof  of  three  sorts  of  persons :  First,  desperate,  which  do  exclude  them- 
selves from  all  hope  at  all.  Secondly,  presumptuous,  which  do  hope  there  where 
there  is  no  ground  of  hope  for  them.  Thirdly,  carnal,  which  do  place  their  hope 
in  things  of  the  world.  First,  such  persons  do  plainly  offend  against  this  doctrine 
who  are  absolutely  desperate  and  hopeless.  Forasmuch  as  we  are  saved  by  hope, 
'in  what  a  sad  condition  are  they  which  do  cast  themselves  out  of  hope,  and  do  shut 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vrn. 

up  the  grace  of  God  against  themselves  1  We  see  from  hence  the  great  aggrava- 
tion of  the  sin  of  despair.  It  is  a  trespassing  upon  the  blood  of  Christ,  who  hath 
purchased  salvation  for  us ;  and  it  is  also  a  disparagement  to  the  Holy  Ghost, 
whose  office  is  to  comfort  and  to  persuade  us  to  come  up  to  Christ's  terms  and 
conditions.  In  a  word,  we  overthrow  the  whole  scope  and  tenour  of  the  gospel, 
and  the  rule  of  God's  gi-ace  in  it.  Secondly,  presumptuous  persons,  they  are  also 
from  hence  condemned,  because  we  are  saved  by  hope  ;  for  as  despair  is  a  trespass 
upon  hope  on  one  hand,  so  is  presumption  likewise  on  another.  Those  therefore 
that  take  up  a  hope  of  their  own  making,  who,  though  they  walk  in  sinful  courses, 
yet  hope  for  all  that  they  may  come  to  heaven,  do  exceedingly  deceive  themselves. 
Presumption  is  one  thing,  and  hope  is  another.  Thirdly,  carnal  and  worldly 
persons,  they  come  under  this  censure  likewise,  from  the  consideration  of  this 
point  in  hand,  that  we  are  saved  by  hope,  which  is  not  such  a  hope  as  is  founded 
in  the  things  of  the  world,  but  in  matters  of  a  higher  nature  (1  Pet.  i.  3  ;  Col.  i.  5). 
It  is  the  condition  of  many  people  "  that  their  portion  is  only  in  this  world,"  as 
the  Psalmist  speaks  of  them  (Psa.  xvii.  14).  All  their  happiness  it  lies  here 
below,  and  they  rest  themselves  satisfied  with  it.  Give  them  but  their  desires 
here,  and  take  heaven  who  wiU.  For  hope,  &c.  The  second  is  the  particular 
description  of  this  hope,  what  it  is  ;  which  is  laid  down  negatively,  by  denying  it 
to  be  of  such  things  as  are  seen ;  but  does  include  the  affirmative  also  in  it  as 
being  of  such  things  as  are  not  seen.  The  hope  of  a  believer,  it  is  the  constant 
expectation  of  good  things  to  come.  Let  us  take  notice  of  that.  It  is  not  of 
things  visible,  but  of  things  invisible  (2  Cor.  iv.  18 ;  Heb.  xi.  1 ;  2  Cor.  v.  7 ;  Col. 
iii.  3 ;  1  John  iii.  2).  The  ground  hereof  is  not  only  the  nature  of  hope  itself, 
which  is  so  in  all  other  things,  as  looking  at  things  which  are  future  for  the  object 
of  it;  but  when  we  speak  of  Divine  hope,  as  it  is  considered  under  the  notion  of  a 
grace,  and  proper  to  a  Christian,  so  there  is  a  further  reason  why  it  should  be  (to 
choose)  of  things  not  seen.  And  that  is  that  by  this  means  it  may  bring  the 
greater  glory  to  God  by  trusting  Him  on  His  bare  word.  Thus  do  we  by  hoping 
for  things  invisible.  We  honour  Him  so  much  the  more  in  His  power,  goodness, 
and  aU  His  attributes.  And  so  likewise  it  shows  us  the  reason  why  God's  children 
are  so  much  scorned  and  contemned  by  men  of  the  world.  It  is  because  they  are 
such  persons  as  have  their  good  things  only  in  reversion.  Lastly,  seeing  hope  is  of 
things  which  are  not  seen.  We  may  here,  by  the  way,  take  notice  of  the  difference 
of  these  two  saving  graces — faith  and  hope.  While  the  former  is  of  those  things 
which  are  present,  the  latter  of  those  things  which  are  to  come ;  and  though  the 
same  things  happen  to  be  the  object  of  each,  yet  under  a  different  notion  and 
consideration.  As,  for  example,  eternal  life :  hope  looks  upon  it  as  a  thing  which 
is  future,  in  regard  to  its  remoteness ;  but  faith  looks  upon  it  as  a  thing  which  is 
present,  in  regard  to  its  sureness.  The  third  and  last  is  the  adjunct  and  con- 
comitant of  this  hope,  which  follows  in  these  words,  "But  if  we  hope  for,"  &c., 
where  we  may  observe  and  note  thus  much,  that  true  and  right  hope  indeed,  it  is 
accompanied  still  with  patience,  and  waiting,  and  quiet  resting,  and  dependence 
upon  God  for  the  things  hoped  for  (Heb.  x.  36).  Hope,  if  it  be  such  as  it  should 
be,  it  hath  stiU  patience  annexed  unto  it.  This  is  requisite  upon  divers  grounds. 
First,  the  ground  which  is  intimated  here  in  the  text,  because  we  hope  for  that 
which  we  see  not.  Forasmuch  as  the  object  of  hope  is  invisible,  the  companion 
of  hope  must  be  patience.  Especially  if  we  shall  add,  moreover,  that  they  are 
things  of  special  worth,  and  which  do  move  the  appetite  to  them.  Here,  now, 
there  is  required  patience  so  much  the  more,  for  men  to  be  some  time  without 
those  things  which  they  have  no  need  of,  nor  no  great  desire  towards  them,  this  is 
no  patience  or  forbearance  at  all.  Secondly,  this  hope  of  a  Christian  had  need 
have  patience  to  be  joined  with  it,  not  only  from  the  distance  of  the  object,  not 
only  for  that  the  time  is  long,  but  also  for  that  the  way  is  troublesome  and 
dangerous  and  full  of  annoyance.  If  a  man  have  never  so  brave  a  palace  or 
stately  dwelling  which  he  is  to  come  unto,  yet  if  he  have  a  great  way  before  he 
comes  thither,  his  patience  will  be  exercised  about  it.  But  now,  further,  if  as  the 
way  is  long,  so  it  be  as)  dirty  and  subject  to  thieves,  here  the  life  will  be  still  so 
much  the  worse,  and  the  greater  patience  required  in  it  (Acts  xiv.  22).  Thirdly, 
things  contrary  to  our  hope,  these  likewise  do  call  for  our  patience.  And  those 
are  our  own  corruptions,  and  the  assaults  and  temptations  of  Satan,  whereby  he 
labours  to  discourage  us.  Soldiers  had  need  of  patience,  that  they  may  go  through 
those  several  hardships  and  encounters  which  they  shall  meet  withal.  The 
eontradiotions  of  sinners  and  the  discouragements  which  arise  from  wicked  men. 


CHA».  vm.]  ROMANS.  125 

These  made  np  another  consideration  for  the  necessity  of  this  patience  likewise. 
LMtly,  patience  is  very  justly  and  properly  required  as  an  attendant  upon  hope, 
because  hope  in  the  nature  of  it  breeds  patience.  The  more  we  hope,  the  more 
patient  we  either  are,  or  at  least  have  cause  to  be,  in  that  regard.  Those  that 
have  nothing  to  sustain  them,  it  is  no  wonder  that  they  should  be  impatient  (Heb. 
vi.  19).  Now,  the  application  of  this  point  to  ourselves  may  be  reduced  to  these 
two  improvements  :  First,  as  a  just  censure  of  many  people  for  their  defect  in  this 
particular,  who  are  many  times  out  of  patience  wLen  any  evil  does  at  any  time 
befal  them,  or  that  anything  does  fall  cross  to  them,  from  whence  they  are  ready 
to  complain  and  murmur  even  against  God  Himself.  This  impatience  of  Chris- 
tians not  walking  worthy  of  their  hope  does  discover  itself  upon  sundry  occasions. 
First,  in  case  of  wants,  when  they  have  not  presently  that  which  others  have  or 
which  themselves  have  a  mind  to.  Secondly,  in  case  of  delays  and  procrastina- 
tions. Thirdly,  in  case  of  distress  or  any  particular  trouble  and  affliction.  This 
is  another  discovery  of  this  impatience.  This  impatience,  besides  that  disparage- 
ment which  it  casts  upon  our  Christian  hope  and  profession,  is  very  prejudicial  to 
ns  in  sundry  regards.  First,  it  increases  our  misery  and  adds  to  the  affliction 
which  is  upon  us.  This  it  does  two  manner  of  ways.  In  respect  of  the  condition 
itself,  as  it  provokes  God  oftentimes  to  multiply  afflictions  upon  us.  Impatience 
under  loss  provokes  God  to  the  sending  of  greater.  A  burden  in  our  condition 
from  the  affliction,  and  a  burden  upon  our  spirit  from  the  distemper,  and  both 
together  do  very  much  press  upon  us.  Secondly,  impatience,  it  puts  men  upon 
the  taking  of  indirect  courses  and  the  use  of  unlawful  means.  Thirdly,  this 
impatience  it  does  disturb  all  good  perfoimances  in  any  way  or  kind  whatsoever. 
No  man  can  serve  God  so  cheerfully  who  has  this  distemper  prevailing  upon  him. 
Therefore,  for  a  second  use  of  this  point,  let  this  serve  to  stir  us  up,  as  a  proof  of 
our  faith,  and  the  hope  which  is  in  us,  to  labour  for  this  spirit  of  patience,  which 
is  here  commended  unto  us.  First,  for  the  encouragements,  take  notice  of  them,  as, 
namely,  first  of  all,  that  here  in  the  text,  "  The  earnest  expectation  of  the  creature, 
waiting,"  Ac.  The  creature,  though  it  groans,  yet  it  waits;  let  not  us  be  worse 
than  that.  Secondly,  the  practice  of  the  saints,  and  of  such  persons  as  have 
received  the  firstfruits  of  the  spirit,  who  are  said  here  also  to  practise  this  patience 
(James  v.  10).  Thirdly,  the  practice  of  all  other  men  besides  in  other  things  as 
to  their  particular  concernments :  the  merchant  in  his  way,  the  soldier  in  his,  the 
husbandman  in  his,  as  it  is  also  there  expressed  in  James  v.  7.  Fourthly,  the 
practice  of  God  Himself.  How  patient  is  He  towards  us,  and  waiting  for  us  I 
These  and  the  like  are  arguments,  and  encouragements,  and  inducements  for  it. 
There  are  also  helps  and  conducements  to  it  for  the  obtaining  of  it.  As — First, 
prayer  and  supplication.  Secondly,  study  the  promises,  and  dwell  more  upon  the 
attributes  of  God.  Thirdly,  reflect  upon  former  experiences.  "Experience  breeds 
patience"  (Rom.  v.  4).  Fourthly,  let  us  set  before  us  future  glory,  and  therein 
imitate  Christ  Himself  upon  the  like  occasions  (Heb.  xii.  2).  {Thomas  Horton,  D.D.y 
Salvation  by  hope : — 1.  This  is  a  very  strong  expression.  But  not  more  so  than 
some  others.  It  is  described  as  one  of  three  cardinal  virtues  of  the  Christian 
character  (1  Cor.  xiii.  13) ;  as  the  great  object  of  God's  gift  to  us  of  His  Holy  Word 
(chap.  xiv.  4) ;  as  an  attribute  to  God  Himself  as  its  Author,  and  as  the  end  of 
prayer  for  other  graces  (chap.  xv.  13).  2.  Such  is  the  place  of  hope  in  the  Christian 
system.  Its  real  place  in  ours  is  one  widely  different.  Who  ever  speaks  or  thinks 
of  the  duty  of  hope  ?  Who  ever  prays  for  hope  as  a  necessary  part  of  the  Christian 
character  7  Who  is  ever  ashamed  of  being  without  hope  ?  To  be  desponding,  to 
be  filled  with  religious  fears  and  doubtings,  is  by  some  regarded  as  almost  a  sign 
of  grace.  And  by  most  Christians  hope  is  regarded  rather  as  one  of  those  late  and 
precarious  attainments,  or  even  as  a  matter  of  temperament,  which  belongs  only  to 
those  to  whom  it  comes  naturally.  I.  What  is  hope  ?  1.  In  general  it  is  the 
anticipation  of  a  pleasant  future.  (1)  It  admits  of  degrees.  Like  fear,  its  opposite, 
like  faith,  its  next  of  kin,  hope  is  capable  of  every  shade  of  variety,  from  the  first 
faint  glimmering  of  a  possibility,  to  fulness  of  persuasion  and  conviction.  (2)  It  is 
progressive.  The  cherishing  of  the  thought  that  a  certain  thing  is  possible, 
tends  to  form  the  idea  that  the  possible  is  probable,  and  that  the  probable  is  certain, 
2.  And  now  what  is  Christian  hope  ?  It,  too,  is  the  expectation  of  a  pleasant 
future.  But  the  Christian's  pleasant  future  has  to  do  mainly  with  things  inward, 
and  with  the  time  after  death.  But  do  not  suppose  that  it  is  therefore  less  real, 
less  sensible,  or  less  practical.  Nothing  surely  is  so  real  as  that  which  is  absolutely 
imperishable.    Nothing  is  so  sensible  as  to  see  things  as  they  are,  refusing  to  be 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  vra. 

pat  off  with  things  as  they  seem.  Nothing  is  so  practical  as  the  making  a  vigoroaa 
daily  effort  to  be  that  which  we  shall  certainly  one  day  rejoice  to  be,  or  else  vainly 
wish  that  we  had  been.  The  pleasant  future  of  the  Christian  is  a  time  when  he 
will  be  quite  holy,  when  he  will  so  have  the  mastery  over  his  own  rebellious  will, 
as  to  be  entirely  in  harmony  with  the  will  of  God.  No  more  struggles  therefore, 
but  quietness,  peace,  and  rest  for  him  in  God,  with  Christ,  with  all  the  good,  for 
ever.  This  is  a  faint  glimpse  of  his  far  future.  And  his  near  future  is  like  it ; 
pleasant  in  proportion  as  it  is  like  it.  II.  Its  DirincruLTiES.  1.  One  of  these 
arises  from  the  observation  of  the  world  around  us.  The  Christian  sees  vast  tracks 
of  land  still  heathen  or  Mahometan ;  worst  of  all,  some  in  which  Christ  was  once 
known,  but  which  have  relapsed  into  darkness.  He  sees,  too,  that  superstition 
has  laid  its  hand  upon  a  large  portion  of  Christendom  itself,  and  that  even  a 
perfectly  pure  faith  is  no  safeguard  against  a  predominantly  worldly  or  sinful  life. 
Now  all  this  is  deeply  discouraging.  2.  Then  he  turns  within.  Alas,  there  chiefly 
he  finds  hope  difficult.  His  individual  Ufe  is  by  no  means  all  sunshine.  How 
often  does  he  pray,  and  no  answer  seems  to  come  1  Nay,  how  often  does  he  pray 
without  praying,  striving  in  vain  to  summon  his  own  heart  to  the  oflBces  of  praise 
and  devotion  1  How  often,  yet  again,  has  he  heartily  prayed,  and  risen  from  it 
refreshed  and  hopeful,  and  then,  almost  before  the  heavenly  radiance  has  faded 
from  his  heart  and  brow,  some  little  trifling  temptation  comes  across  him,  and  he 
has  fallen  1  These  things  sadly  overcloud  hope.  III.  Its  encouragements.  In 
general  it  must  rest  entirely  on  God ;  His  character,  His  revealed  intentions  and 
relations.  Some  of  the  most  elementary  of  all  His  revelations  are  felt  in  times  of 
despondency  to  be  the  most  available.  Such  is  the  thought  of — 1.  His  holiness ; 
a  holy  God  must  desire  that  we  should  be  holy ;  aod  that  is  what  we  wish  to  be, 
though  so  far  from  it.  2.  His  power ;  what  the  holiness  of  God  desires  His  power 
can  effect.  3.  His  mercy ;  a  God  of  love  cannot  but,  if  holiness  and  happiness  be 
one,  design  to  help  through  their  difficulties,  and  save  from  their  sins,  those  who 
in  His  name  and  strength  are  facing  them  like  men.  4.  Creation.  Do  we  suppose 
that  a  God  of  infinite  knowledge  created  and  endowed  man  with  such  gifts  only  to 
discard  him?  IV.  Its  uses.  1.  It  stimulates  exertion.  I  know  nothing  in  the 
world  so  indolent  as  despondency,  nothing  so  paralysing  as  discouragement.  But 
what  can  we  not  do  with  a  prize  in  view  ?  One  victory,  ever  so  small,  gained  over 
self  contains  within  it  the  germ  not  of  a  second  victory  only,  but  of  all  victory. 
"  Experience  worketh  hope,  and  hope  maketh  not  ashamed."  2.  It  inspires 
charity.  "  Charity  hopeth  all  things."  He  who  hopes  for  himself,  in  spite  of 
many  discouragements  about  himself,  may  well  hope  also  for  another,  in  spite  of 
many  discouragements  about  another.  He  who  knows  in  detail  what  God's  for- 
bearance and  longsuffering  have  been  towards  himself,  will  not  limit  God's  for- 
bearance and  longsuffering  in  cases  of  which  he  knows  not  the  details.  We  hope, 
and  therefore  we  labour.  Conclusion  :  1.  Hope  itself  has  limits.  We  are  in  a  day 
of  grace  ;  but  every  day  has  its  night.  When  that  night  comes  hope  ends ;  either 
perfected  in  enjoyment,  or  aimihilated  in  despair.  2.  The  way  to  hope  is  through 
hunulity.  It  does  not  come  from  ignorance  of  ourselves,  but  from  that  deep  self- 
knowledge  which  drives  us  for  refuge  to  God  only.  3.  It  has  Christ  Himself,  not 
only  for  its  basis,  but  for  its  object.  "  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  our  hope." 
{Dean  Vaughan.)  Salvation  by  hope  : — 1.  Hope  is  not  simple  foresight  or 
expectation,  because  the  foresight  and  the  expectation  may  be  of  mischief.  We 
never  hope  for  misery,  for  mistakes,  but  for  victory,  coronation,  love,  and  joy.  So 
hope  has  this  peculiarity,  that  it  is  sweet-minded  and  sweet-eyed.  It  draws 
pictures.  It  fills  the  future  with  delights.  And  then,  having  created  them,  it 
brings  them  near,  and  appropriates  them.  The  greatest  and  most  needed  architect 
is  Hope ;  and  it  builds  with  the  flimsiest  material — the  fancy.  2.  The  Christian 
rehgion  stands  contrasted  with  all  others  by  the  hope  that  is  in  it.  He  who  repre- 
sents the  Christian  faith  in  any  other  light  than  that  of  joyous  hopefulness,  mis- 
represents it.  In  the  Old  Testament  day  there  was  a  certain  element  of  hope  ;  but 
it  was  undeveloped.  The  Jews  lived  mostly  in  the  present.  They  said,  "  This  do, 
and  live."  They  pointed  to  the  round  of  duties  which  belonged  to  each  day,  saying, 
"  Perform  these,  and  God  shall  be  well  pleased."  The  Christian  faith  is  for  ever 
looking  forward,  and  cheering  men,  by  the  perpetual  vision  of  the  future.  The 
contrast  of  the  Christian  faith  with  the  faiths  of  the  heathen  is  still  greater.  They 
were  mostly  reUgions  of  fear.  3.  Hope  is  a  distinct  and  peculiar  faculty,  and 
exists  in  different  degrees  in  different  persons.  Some  live  by  the  power  of  conscience. 
Duty  is  their  watchword.    Some  Uve  by  the  power  of  caution,  constant  anxiety. 


CHAP.  Tin.]  BOMANS.  127 

Others  are  cheerful  and  expectant.  There  are  many  who,  if  you  bend  them  down 
to  the  ground,  break  short  off  at  the  stump.  There  are  others  who,  like  the  young 
hickory,  the  moment  the  pressure  is  removed,  spring  back  attain.  Yesterday  was 
disastrous  ;  but  to-day  has  come.  To-day  is  dark  ;  but  it  will  clear  off  before  to- 
morrow. This  has  miscarried  ;  but  no  matter,  begin  again.  Hope  is  a  charming 
trait  in  men.  There  is  something  very  admirable  in  conscientiousness;  in  the 
acceptance  of  unwelcome  duty  which  it  carries  with  it.  There  is  also  in  fear  much 
that  is  to  be  admired.  It  carries  with  it  great  activity  and  intense  provocation. 
But,  after  all,  commend  me  to  the  sweetness  aud  the  inspiration  of  hope.  4.  Hope  has 
its  own  peculiar  dangers.  (1)  The  whole  generation  of  what  are  called  schemers 
are  children  of  hope.  They  are  not  balanced  by  suitable  caution,  but  they  are 
pioneers  of  success.  If  you  are  starting  in  an  unknown  channel,  you  are  not  glad 
of  any  mishap  to  him  that  goes  ahead  of  you ;  but  if  he  run  upon  a  sandbank  he  is 
a  buoy  for  you,  and  you  do  not  go  there.  The  men  who  go  ahead,  however,  often 
scheme,  laying  the  foundation  for  valuable  results,  though  they  do  not  reap  them. 
The  inventor,  in  his  day,  received  nothing  from  his  invention  ;  but  that  invention 
bore  fruit  in  another  man's  hand  a  little  later.  Let  me,  therefore,  speak  an 
encouraging  word  for  the  men  who  drift  through  society,  and  are  said  to  be  "  rolling 
stones  that  gather  no  moss."  Fortunate  are  we  in  the  hoppfulness  of  these  pre- 
cursors of  society.  Blessed  is  the  society  that  is  full  of  hopeful  men.  (2)  But 
there  is  a  disease  of  hope ;  there  is  such  a  thing  as  perverted  hopefulness.  It  is 
hope,  in  one  or  other  of  its  perverted  forms,  that  leads  men  into  all  manner  of 
gambling.     Unperverted   hopefulness  is  specially  needed — I.  By  all  those   who 

ENDEAVOUR    TO   CREATE    THE    FABRIC    OF    ClIRISTLVN    CHARACTER.        YoU    are    Called,    UOt 

to  a  toilsome  and  burdensome  life,  unalleviated  by  promise  or  cheer.  You  are 
called  to  a  higher  manhood,  to  a  nobler  spiritual  ideal,  and  you  find  your  way  beset 
and  obstructed  on  every  side — hope.  But  God  will  wait  for  you,  and  be  gentle  with 
you.  Ply,  therefore,  every  instrumentality,  and  do  not  give  up  in  despair,  saying, 
«'  There  is  no  use  in  attempting  to  be  a  Christian."  II.  By  those  who  are  appointed 
to  POVERTY.  When  a  man  is  poor,  having  been  rich,  or  without  having  tasted  of 
riches,  and  finds  himself  perpetually  at  variance  with  his  circumstances,  he  needs 
indeed  the  light  of  hope.  Now,  in  ten  thousand  ways,  if  men  have  paverty,  they 
may  rise  above  it  by  the  sense  of  hope.  You  are  not  poor,  except  among  men.  Is 
not  your  Father  infinitely  rich  ?  This  is  not  your  home.  Do  you  suppose  a 
traveller  at  a  caravansary  thinks  the  cold,  desolate  building  in  which  he  rests  is 
his  home?  III.  By  those  who  are  in  the  struggles  of  daily  duty.  Tbis  man 
is  thrown  out  of  business.  Sickness  befalls  another  man,  and  destroys  his  prospects. 
What  to  do  they  do  not  know.  Some  are  overthrown  by  their  own  mistakes  ;  but 
they  are  quite  as  likely  to  be  overthrown  by  their  connection  with  friends  and 
neighbours.  But,  whatever  the  cause,  if  it  comes  to  them  in  mid-life,  or  late  in 
life,  it  is  most  unfortunate,  unless  they  are  versatile,  fruitful  of  resources,  and 
hopeful  in  disposition.  If  despondency  be  superinduced  upon  disaster,  in  the  case 
of  any  man,  woe  be  to  that  man  I  When  you  are  checked  in  your  career,  begin 
again.  Do  not  let  go  of  manhood  and  courage.  The  inward  man  is  better  than 
the  outward  man.  Hold  on.  Many  and  many  a  man  carries  himself  over  the 
critical  point  by  hopefulness.  But  do  you  say,  "  I  am  too  old  to  hope  "  ?  Do  you 
Gay,  •'  I  have,  constitutionally,  too  little  hope  "  ?  Then  open  your  heart  to  God. 
Draw  near  to  Him  in  His  great  providential  relations.  "  I  will  not  let  a  sparrow 
fall  to  the  ground  without  My  notice,  and  are  not  you  of  much  more  value  than 
many  sparrows  ?  If  you,  being  evil,  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  to  your  children," 
Ac.  IV.  By  those  whose  mind  becomes  gloomy  through  morbid  conditions  op 
THE  body;  as  where  men  find  themselves  entirely  shut  up  from  all  the  sources  of 
ordinary  enjoyment.  While  there  are  kinds  of  sickness  that  are  quite  compatible 
with  the  exercise  of  Christian  feeling,  there  are  other  kinds  which  carry  such  dis- 
temperature  that  it  is  very  difficult  for  a  man  under  their  influence  to  maintain 
hopefulness.  But  whatever  your  condition  may  be,  do  the  best  you  can  ;  and  do 
not  think  that  it  is  a  part  of  the  prerogative  of  sickness  to  bemoan  one's  state,  and 
pity  one's  self.  As  much  as  possible,  look  away  from  yourself  toward  God.  I  have 
never  seen  insects  that,  if  they  fell  into  the  water,  did  not  attempt  to  fly  out  again 
as  soon  as  possible.  V.  By  the  aged.  It  is  a  very  painful  thing  to  see  a  matron 
who  has  lived  in  toil  go  back  over  her  experience.  One  has  died  ;  another  has 
died  ;  another  remains.  Would  to  God  he  had  died  also !  Poverty  comes  in,  with 
disappointment.  She  is  seventy.  This  woman,  whose  life  has  been  a  heroism, 
goes,  it  may  be,  to  the  poor-house.     And  it  is  sad  enough.     Bat  cheer  up.    It  may 


128  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

be  that  yoo  have  laid  up  more  than  yon  think.  Yon  have  bnilt  no  house ;  there 
are  thousands  of  things  that  men  rejoice  in  here  that  you  have  not ;  but  you  do  not 
know  how  many  comfortable  words  you  have  dropped  as  you  have  gone  along  ;  how 
your  kindness  has  thrown  radiance  on  the  paths  of  others ;  how  much  good  you 
have  done  with  your  faith ;  how  much  you  have  hghtened  the  burdens  of  your 
fellow-men  by  the  example  of  your  life.  When  you  go  hence,  one,  and  another, 
and  another,  whom  you  have  directly  or  indirectly  helped  in  their  trouble,  will 
throng  the  gate  of  heaven  with  gratitude.  You  will  be  surprised  to  learn  how 
many  know  you  that  you  do  not  know.  There  is  a  life  not  far  beyond  where  the 
silver  cords  broken  here  shall  be  brought  together  again.  (H.  W.  Beecher.) 
Hope: — Let  us  look  at  hope.  I.  In  its  eelation  to  home  and  pbessinq  woek. 
1.  The  nurse  and  loving  friend  who  watch  by  the  sick  say,  "  While  there  is  life 
there  is  hope."  It  is  curious  to  see  how  God,  who  puts  us  here  as  mere  strangers 
and  pilgrims,  mere  grubs,  about  to  burst  into  the  beauty  of  the  heavenly  life,  should 
implant  in  us  a  keen  and  obstinate  love  of  life  such  as  we  see  it  here.  But  so  it  is. 
We  cannot  bear  the  idea  of  being  dead,  and  fly  for  medical  help  directly  there  is 
danger  to  health.  No  doubt  this  is  right.  Jesus  raised  bodies  to  toil  a  few  years 
more,  to  die  a  few  years  later.  2.  But  God  reverses  the  saw  of  the  nurse  and  says, 
"  While  there  is  hope  there  is  life."  When  we  can  look  onward  in  our  work,  and 
believe  in  progress,  then  we  work  with  life.  Even  the  sluggard  is  inspired  by 
results.  Thorwaldsen  was  once  found  deeply  dejected,  if  not  in  tears.  On  being 
asked  why,  he  confessed  that  he  was  satisfied  with  the  work  he  had  in  hand  ;  that 
he  accepted  this  satisfaction,  which  he  had  never  felt  before,  as  a  sign  that  his 
powers  were  decreasing,  that  he  had  no  higher  aim,  that  the  turning  moment  of 
his  dechne  had  come.  So  it  is  in  the  commonest  handicraft.  He  who  hopes  to  see 
shoes  made  better  wiU  always  work  with  a  reserve  of  energy  and  enjoyment.  But 
the  moment  a  man  loses  heart,  i.e.,  hope,  his  value  is  diminished  in  the  labour 
market ;  he  is  merely  writhing  in  the  clutch  of  death,  and  unless  rekindled  by  the 
fire  of  God,  wiU  before  long  disappear  vanquished.  Hope  is  the  sun,  and  when  it 
sets  the  night  creeps  on  from  place  to  place  in  the  soul.  II.  In  its  higheb  aspects. 
The  constant  looking  forward  to  victory  is  the  secret  of  the  Christian  life.  1. 
Life  in  the  Psalms  is  the  confidence  of  help.  David  rises  before  us  inspired,  irre- 
sistible, when  he  looks  beyond  the  years  of  guilt  and  persecution.  When  he  had 
eaten  and  was  full,  when  his  course  was  nearly  done,  there  was  much  in  his  history 
we  do  not  Uke  to  dwell  on.  2.  When  we  turn  to  the  New  Testament  our  eyes  are 
drawn  at  once  to  Jesus.  In  the  judgment  hall  He  looks  beyond  the  mob,  the 
scourge,  the  shame,  and  thinks  aloud,  "  Hereafter  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  Man 
sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God."  More  or  less  this  spirit  inspires  all  true  disciples. 
Hope  is  the  true  eUxir  which  confers  perpetual  renovation.  III.  A  mysteeious 
INCOMING  Spibit  IB  THE  GivEB  OP  THIS  HOPE.  "We  have  received  the  firstfruita 
of  the  Spirit  ...  for  we  are  saved  by  hope."  Have  we  realised  the  existence  of 
Buch  a  Spirit  ?  or  do  we  look  for  mere  spiritual  luxuries  which  will  help  us  to  say  a 
"  Nunc  dimittis  "  7  Do  we  look  merely  to  a  calm,  comfortable  ending  of  all  desires, 
or  to  a  growing  power  to  takR  in  the  things  of  God?  {Harry  Jones,  M.A.)  Hope  is 
evidenced — 1.  Bythe  motlic  r  of  it — faith.  2.  By  the  daughter  of  it — patience.  3.  By 
the  companion  of  it — love.  (Elnatlian  Parr,  B.D. )  Hope  or  sunshine  : — You  have  all 
experienced  the  difference  between  a  sunny  and  a  foggy  morning.  When  you  have 
risen  and  beheld  the  sun  shining  in  its  strength,  have  you  not  felt  an  irrepressible 
emotion  of  joy  ?  But  when  the  fog  has  begloomed  your  atmosphere  a  shadow  has 
been  cast  over  your  very  mercies.  1.  There  is  a  foggy  side  morally  over  which 
broods  "blackness  of  darkness";  where  hope  refuses  to  take  root;  where  all 
happiness  is  evanescent  or  imaginary.  This  foggy  side  is  owing  to  sin.  Upon  it, 
we  admit,  there  are  clouds  which  promise  much,  but  they  have  no  water ;  trees,  but 
they  bear  no  fruit — "  having  no  hope,  and  without  God  in  the  world. "  2.  From 
this  fog  there  is  a  way  of  escape.  Just  as  your  lungs  were  not  framed  for  fogs^ 
BO  your  spirits  were  not  framed  for  moral  gloom.  God  is  Ught,  and  coming  to  Him, 
instead  of  darkness  earth  shall  smile  with  the  foretastes  of  heaven.  3.  Let  us, 
then,  turn  to  the  sunny  side.  The  hope  of  the  Christian  respects— I.  That  which 
IS  GOOD.  And  this  in  common  with  the  world.  No  man  hopes  for  sickness, 
failure,  misery,  death,  but  the  opposite.  All  men  hope  good  for  themselves,  even 
the  worst,  which  shows  that  God  has  lodged  in  the  common  heart  a  buoyant  hope. 
Hence  hope  is  opposed  to  fear.  But  all  hope  and  no  fear  would  not  do.  We  fear 
evil  while  we  hope  for  good.  Noah  feared  as  well  as  hoped  when  he  built  the  ark. 
Nevertheless,  excessive  fear  kills  hope,  and  unfits  man  for  duty.     How  delightful 


OHAP.  Tm.]  ROMANS,  139 

to  feel  that  we  hope  for  nothing  but  good  for  ourselves  and  others  1  This  is  to  be 
in  sympathy  with  the  mind  of  God.  II.  That  which  is  fotcbb.  "  Hope  that  is 
seen  is  not  hope."  Here  is  a  vast  difference  between  the  good  and  the  godless 
man,  who  is  all  for  the  present.  Well  may  our  hope  respect  the  future  when  we 
consider  the  promises  relating  thereto.  There  may  be  hope  in  heaven.  How  do 
we  know  that  God  will  not  give  us  another  revelation  and  roll  of  promises,  and 
enter  more  fully  into  the  details  of  eternity.  Anyhow,  if  we  have  hope  only  in  this 
Ufe,  if  it  do  not  carry  us  beyond,  we  are  of  all  men  the  most  miserable.  HI.  That 
WHICH  18  POSSIBLE.  Woildlings  often  hope  for  the  impossible — without  any  founda- 
tion for  what  they  wish.  Hence  their  "  expectation  is  cut  off."  But  the  Christian 
says,  "  All  things  are  possible  to  God,"  and  therefore  to  him  that  believeth  in  God. 
If  God  has  said  a  thing  we  may  confidently  expect  it.  IV.  Trials  and  triumphs. 
Every  grace  is  tried  in  this  world  of  trials  ;  so  hope.  David,  looking  at  the  foggy 
side,  said,  "  I  shall  one  day  perish."  Looking  on  the  sunny  side  he  exclaimed, 
*'  Hope  thou  in  God,  for  I  shaU  yet  praise  Him."  So  Abraham,  "  in  hope  believed 
against  hope,  and  became  the  father  of  many  nations."  "  Experience  worketh 
hope,"  for  having  gone  through  six  trials  we  may  confidently  expect  victory  in  the 
seventh.  Consequently  "  hope  maketh  not  ashamed."  The  worldling  is  often 
ashamed  because  of  the  failure  of  his  hopes ;  but  the  Christian's  hope  moderated 
by  the  Divine  promises  cannot  fail.  V.  The  supply  of  all  temporal  needs: 
light  in  darkness,  strength  in  weakness,  sufi&ciency  in  indigence,  ballast  in  pros- 
perity. VI.  A  GLORIOUS  RESURRECTION.  When  the  wicked  man  comes  to  die  there 
is  an  end  of  all  his  hopes,  but  "  the  righteous  hath  hope  in  his  death,"  because 
Christ  hath  abolished  death,  &o.  Hence,  when  bereaved,  "  we  sorrow  not  as  those 
who  have  no  hope."  VH.  Everlasting  lite.  {Mortlock  Daniell.)  Hope,  iU 
power  and  usefulness : — We  are  saved  by  means  of  faith,  and  on  the  principle  of 
hope.  The  land  we  are  to  possess  is  chiefly  one  of  promise.  We  have  a  wilderness 
to  pass  through  with  its  trials,  dangers,  and  temptations.  Salvation  on  the  condi- 
tion  of  hope  is  advantageous.  A  state  of  waiting  is  one  of  moral  worth,  and  helpful 
in  the  spiritual  hfe.  It  tends  to  produce  and  develop  the  active  qualities  of 
endurance  and  fortitude,  and  the  passive  qualities  of  patience  and  resignation  ;  and 
it  also  fits  us  to  appreciate  and  form  a  right  estimate  of  the  blessings  in  prospect. 
In  daily  life  we  see  that  the  prize  in  the  future  frequently  makes  a  man  what  he  is ; 
and  when  his  wishes  are  realised,  and  his  ambition  satisfied — in  fact,  when  hope 
has  found  its  accomplishment  and  ceased  to  exist — the  same  individual  has  not 
been  unknown  to  deteriorate.  The  knowledge  that  the  reward  is  ours  at  the  end  of 
the  course,  and  would  be  forfeited  or  lessened  by  failure  on  our  part,  tends  to  call 
out  our  latent  powers,  stimulate  our  efforts,  and  produce  states  and  habits  of  the 
soul  which  otherwise,  without  a  miracle,  could  hardly  exist.  (C.  Neil,  M.A.) 
Hope  and  faith  ; — Hope  is  closely  allied  to,  but  is  distinct  from  faith.  By  faith  we 
beheve  the  promises  made  to  us  by  God ;  by  hope  we  expect  to  receive  the  good 
things  which  God  has  promised :  so  that  faith  hath  properly  for  its  object  the 
promise,  and  hope  for  its  object  the  thing  promised,  and  the  execution  of  the 
promise.  Faith  regards  its  object  as  present,  but  hope  regards  it  as  future.  Faith 
precedes  hope,  and  is  its  jundation.  We  hope  for  life  eternal,  because  we  believe 
the  promises  which  God  has  made  respecting  it ;  and  if  we  believe  these  promises, 
we  must  expect  their  effect.  Hope  looks  to  eternal  life  as  that  which  is  future  in 
regard  to  its  remoteness ;  but  in  regard  to  its  certainty,  faith  looks  to  it  as  a  thing 
that  is  present.  "  Hope,"  says  the  apostle,  "  maketh  not  ashamed " ;  and  he 
delares  that  "  we  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God."  Thus  he  ascribes  to  it  the 
same  certainty  as  to  faith ;  and  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  he  speaks  of  "  the 
full  assurance  of  hope."  Faith  and  hope  are  virtues  of  this  life,  which  will  have  no 
place  in  the  life  that  is  to  come.  "  Now  abideth  faith,  hope,  and  love."  Faith  and 
hope  will  cease ;  and  in  this  respect  love  is  the  greatest,  as  love  will  abide  for  ever. 
(R.  Haldane. )  Hope's  outlook  : — A  captain  in  a  prayer-meeting  recently,  by  way 
of  testimony,  said  that  when,  many  years  since,  he  crossed  the  old  ocean,  he  was  much 
in  the  habit,  from  day  to  day,  of  looking  over  the  ship's  side,  particularly  near  the 
prow,  and  watching  the  staunch  and  noble  vessel  as  she  steadily  and  irresistibly 
ploughed  her  way  through  the  waves.  Just  under  the  bowsprit,  and  serving  the 
purpose  of  a  figure-head,  was  the  image  of  a  human  face.  This  face  to  him  came 
to  be  invested  with  a  wondrous  interest.  Whatever  the  hour,  whether  by  night  or 
by  day;  whatever  the  weather,  whether  in  sunshine  or  in  storm,  that  face  seemed 
ever  steaJfastly  looking  forward  to  port.  Sometimes  fearful  tempests  would 
prevail.  Great  surges  would  rise,  and,  for  a  time,  completely  submerge  the  face  of 
VOL.   u.  9 


ISO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA*.  vm. 

his  friend.  But  as  soon  as  the  wrathful  billow  subsided,  and  the  vessel  recovered 
from  its  lurch,  on  looking  again  over  the  ship's  side,  there,  notwithstanding  the 
fearful  shock  sustained,  the  placid  face  of  his  friend  was  to  be  seen  still,  as  hereto- 
fore, faithfully,  steadfastly  looking  out  for  port.  "  And  so,"  he  exclaimed,  his 
countenance  meantime  radiant  with  the  light  of  the  Christian's  hope,  and  of 
spiritual  joy,  •'  and  so  I  humbly  trust  it  is  in  my  own  case.  Yea,  whatever  the 
trials  of  the  past,  notwithstanding  all  the  toils  and  disappointments  of  the  present, 
by  the  grace  of  God  I  am  still  looking  out  for  port,  and  n/'c  long  hence  I  am  antici- 
pating a  joyful,  triumphant,  abundant  entrance  therein."  Hope  the  boon  of 
man : — Oh,  blessed  hope  1  sole  boon  of  man,  whereby  on  his  strait  prison  walls 
are  painted  beautiful,  far-stretching  landscapes,  and  into  the  night  of  very  death 
itsefl  is  shed  holiest  dawn.  Thou  art  to  all  an  indefeasible  condition  and  possession 
in  this  God's  world.  To  the  wise,  a  sacred  Constantine's  banner,  written  on  the 
eternal  skies,  under  which  they  shall  conquer,  for  the  battle  itself  is  victory !  To 
the  foolish  some  secular  mirage  or  shadow  of  still  waters  painted  on  the  parched 
earth,  whereby,  at  least,  their  dusky  pilgrimage,  if  devious,  becomes  cheerfuUer, 
becomes  possible  I  (Thomas  Carlyle.)  Christian  hope: — I.  The  objects  rr 
CONTEMPLATES.  1.  The  raised  body.  2.  A  perfectly  holy  nature.  3.  Blessed 
society.  4.  The  vision  of  God.  II.  From  what  it  saves  us.  1.  Immoderate 
sorrow  in  affliction.  2.  Earthly-mindedness.  3.  Slothfulness.  III.  By  what  it 
IS  SUSTAINED.  1.  Meditation  on  God.  2.  Communion  with  Him.  3.  Union  with 
Christ.    4.  The  exercise  of  itself.     (J.  Leifchild,  D.D.) 

Yers.  26,  27.  Likewise  the  Spirit  also  helpeth  our  Infirmities ;  for  we  know  not 
what  we  should  pray  for  as  we  ought. — God^s  sympathies  with  viands  infirmities  : — 
I.  What  is  meant  by  infirmities.  There  is  a  wide  difference  between  an  infirmity 
and  a  sin.  Sin  is  tbe  deliberate  choice  of  wrong.  A  man's  failure  to  comply  with 
a  Divine  command  is  not  always  a  sin.  The  failure  may  arise  from  inherent 
weakness  or  ignorance.  1.  Men  and  women  come  into  life  with  physical  infirmities. 
Some  are  born  blind,  some  deaf,  some  consumptive,  and  it  is  impossible  for  them 
to  wholly  overcome  their  physical  defects.  They  may  do  something  in  this  direc- 
tion, but  they  will  never  be  the  men  and  women  they  would  have  been  had  they 
been  better  born.  2.  Some  are  born  with  mental  infirmities ;  some  with  less  or 
poorer  brain  than  others.  Go  into  a  public  school  and  look  at  the  heads  and  faces 
of  the  children.  It  does  not  follow  that  the  scholar  at  the  foot  of  the  class  is  less 
industrious  or  less  ambitious  than  the  one  at  the  head.  3.  So  people  come  into 
life  with  moral  infirmities,  and  they  are  no  more  responsible  for  being  born  with 
these  than  for  being  born  with  physical  or  mental  infirmities.  "  The  creature," 
Paul  says,  "  was  made  subject  to  vanity,  not  willingly."  It  is  as  though  we  came 
into  life  with  a  protest  against  our  nature  and  surroundings.  There  are  hereditary 
moral  diseases  as  well  as  physical.  It  is  their  infirmity,  and  not  their  sin.  Some 
are  not  only  badly  born,  but  born  under  conditions  that  are  not  favourable  to 
growth  in  goodness.  Man's  physical  nature  demands  certain  conditions  for  its  full 
perfect  development.  He  will  never  grow  to  man's  stature  unless  he  has  appropriate 
food,  warmth,  clothing,  exercise,  &c.  As  the  foot  of  the  Chinese  girl  is  cramped 
by  circumstances  over  which  she  has  no  control,  and  as  the  flat-headed  Indian's 
child  has  its  head  flattened  by  the  board  put  on  it  by  its  ignorant  parents,  so  the 
moral  nature  of  millions  is  dwarfed  and  starved  because  they  are  born  and  reared 
tinder  adverse  influences.  Here  is  a  little  one  beginning  life  in  a  den  of  vice.  By 
precept  and  example  it  is  taught  the  decalogue  of  tbe  devil.  Its  first  steps  in  life 
are  on  the  burning  pavement  of  hell.  It  grows  up  through  the  formative  periods 
of  childhood  under  immoral  influences.  Thousands  are  thus  born  and  reared.  Is 
their  immoraUty  their  sin  ?  I  say  it  is  their  infirmity.  You  might  as  well  blame 
the  bruised  reed  for  bending  before  the  hurricane,  as  to  blame  these  people  for 
falling  under  the  sweeping  tides  of  temptation.  There  are  thousands  of  fallen  men 
and  women  who  have  done  what  they  never  intended  to  do.  They  were  deceived. 
They  were  "  overtaken  in  a  fault."  II.  What  are  the  feelings  and  attitude  or 
God  toward  this  infirm  mass?  There  are  a  multitude  of  passages  wbich  clearly 
reveal  God's  sympathies  with  man's  infirmities  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  36 ;  ciii.  13,  14).  I 
would  not  preach  so  as  to  lead  men  to  excuse  themselves  for  their  wrong-doing,  or 
lessen  their  sense  of  responsibiUty.  The  knowledge  of  the  sympathy  of  the  Divine 
Spirit  for  you  should  quicken  you  to  seek  a  higher,  hoUer,  nobler  life.  There  may 
be  much  against  you.  The  conditions  of  your  birth,  early  education,  or  habits, 
may  be  against  yoo.    But  do  not  forget  that  God  is  for  you.    And  if  God  be  for 


CBAt.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  Ul 

yon,  who  or  what  can  be  against  you  ?    III.  We  must  take  advantage  of  thb 

BTMPATHT  AND  HELP  OP  GoD  TO  REMEDY  THBIE  MORAL  DEFECTS  AND   INFIRMITIES.      The 

fact  that  a  man  has  been  born  morally  infirm  is  no  excuse  for  remaining  so,  any 
more  than  being  born  poor  is  an  excuse  for  continuing  in  poverty.  Men  born  with 
physical  defects  seek,  by  the  aid  of  medical  science  and  skill,  to  remedy  these 
defects.  We  overcome  the  obstructions  of  Nature.  We  convert  the  forest  into  a 
fruitful  field  and  make  even  the  desert  blossom  as  the  rose.  What  we  do  in  the 
physical  realm  we  may  do  in  the  moral.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  we  all  begin  life  at 
zero.  The  child  in  its  mother's  arms  is  nothing  more  than  "  a  little  bundle  of 
possibilities."  It  has  no  original  mathematics,  philosophy,  poetry,  or  anything 
else.  It  has  undeveloped  capacities  for  knowledge,  but  that  is  all.  They  are 
latent,  and  must  be  exercised  and  trained.  So  it  is  with  our  moral  and  spiritual 
faculties.  They  are  there  in  embryo,  and  must  be  developed  by  exercise.  By  the 
grace  of  God  you  may  overcome  all  natural  inherent  weaknesses,  and  attain  unto 
the  stature  of  a  perfect  man  in  Christ  Jesus.  Moses  in  his  early  life  was  rash, 
hot-tempered,  and  violent,  but  by  the  grace  of  God  he  became  the  meekest  among 
men.  Peter,  by  nature,  was  impulsive,  vacillating,  but  by  the  grace  of  Christ  he 
developed  self-control,  and  became  as  steadfast  as  a  rock.  The  heart  of  Mary 
Magdalene  was  once  the  home  of  seven  devils,  but  by  the  love  of  Christ  it  was 
cleansed,  and  became  the  home  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Saul  of  Tarsus  was  brought 
up  in  the  narrowest  school  of  the  narrowest  sect  of  religionists,  but  by  the  grace 
and  truth  of  Christ  he  became  a  leader  in  liberal  Christian  theology.  Such 
transformations  of  character  are  possible  to-day.  There  is  a  gospel  for  all  of  us  in 
this  short  text,  **  The  Spirit  also  helpeth  our  infirmities."  There  is  encourage- 
ment for  the  worst  man  to  go  to  God  for  help.  The  Divine  Spirit  can  enlighten 
the  darkest  soul,  cleanse  the  foulest  heart,  ennoble  the  lowest  life.  (J.  B.  Silcox.) 
The  sympathy  of  the  Divine  Spirit : — 1.  Everybody  loves  to  see  a  great  nature  that 
devotes  itself  to  those  beneath  him.  We  expect  that  those  who  are  drawn  together 
by  aflBnity  will  be  devoted  to  each  other.  We  should  expect  that  if  one  Lord  Bacon 
were  in  conference  with  another,  they  would  sit  together  and  commune  all  through 
the  live- long  night.  But  to  see  a  man  whose  head  is  a  vital  encyclopaedia,  take 
care,  not  of  children  that  reward  his  pains,  but  of  children  that  are  dullards — to 
see  him  patiently  continuing  this  labour  of  love  from  week  to  week,  working  the 
child  along,  until  he  succeeds  in  getting  something  into  him,  is  divine.  2.  "  Like- 
wise the  Spirit  also  helpeth  our" — what?  Our  high  aspirations?  Our  noblest 
dreams  ?  Our  grandest  purposes  ?  Yes  ;  but  that  is  not  it.  "  The  Spirit  helpeth 
our  infirmities."  3.  What  do  we  understand  by  infirmity  here  ?  Feebleness  of  the 
whole  economy  by  which  we  are  to  come  into  knowledge,  and  through  knowledge 
into  virtue,  and  through  virtue  into  vital  godliness — this  is  the  general  meaning  of 
infirmity.  The  attempt  to  maintain  a  spiritual  life  in  this  world  is  an  attempt 
against  great  adversarial  powers.  It  is  no  small  thing  for  a  man  borne  into  a 
fleshly  body,  connected  with  the  material  world,  and  beat  in  upon  by  ten  thousand 
biasing  and  sympathising  influences  which  come  from  the  body  of  human  society, 
to  lift  himself  out  from  all  that  is  low  and  carnal  into  an  atmosphere  where  he  can 
see  clearly,  and  understand,  and  maintain  vigilance,  persevering  unto  the  end. 
And  God  is  not  indifferent  to  the  task  and  tax  which  one  undertakes  when,  with  so 
many  obstacles  to  contend  against,  he  endeavours  to  live  a  life  of  obedience.  He 
sympathises  with  the  poor  and  the  feeble.  Let  us  specialise  some  of  the  spheres  of 
sympathy  in  which  the  Spirit  of  God  acts  with  reference  to  us.    I.  All  odb  bodily 

WEAKNESSES  AND  SICKNESSES,  AND  THE  INFELICITIES  THAT  AEiaE  FROM  THEM — mOU  who 

are  in  health,  are  very  hard  and  uncharitable  about.  Many  with  whom  you  have 
to  do  disappoint  you.  Many  let  fly  casual  words  which  irritate  you.  But  if  you 
knew  out  of  what  utter  weakness  these  things  often  come,  methinks  it  would  excite 
in  you,  as  doubtless  it  does  in  God,  a  spirit  of  pity,  rather  than  of  blame.  God  has 
sympathy  for  those  who  suffer  from  over-exertion,  hunger,  thirst,  cold,  and  various 
wants,  or  who  in  despondency  are  led  to  do  wrong.  Society  may  disregard  them, 
but  there  is  one  Heart  that  never  ceases  to  compassionate  them.    II.  All  thb 

fABES  OR  TRIALS  WHICH  ARISE   FROM   OUR   CONDITION   OF   TEMPORAL  LIFE   haVC  alSO  the 

sympathy  of  the  Spirit.  Men  feel  that  when  they  go  into  business  they  go  away 
from  religion.  But  God  made  the  secular  experiences  of  life  to  be  a  means  of 
grace.  God  made  us  merchants,  and  mechanics,  and  toilers  in  every  way.  To 
work  is  not  the  curse.  To  drudge  is.  To  work  is  a  part  of  the  blessing  of  our 
organisation,  and  of  the  organisation  of  society.  Intellectual,  social,  and  moral 
ediieation  inheres  in  that.    And  our  religion  is  to  go  with  it.    And  so  all  the 


132  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vm, 

bordens  which  make  men  so  tired  of  life  are  infirmities.  They  are  a  part  of  that 
oonstitution  of  things  which  God  recognises,  and  which  draws  the  heart  of  God 
continually  toward  men  in  all  helpfulness,  in.  God  also  sympathises  with  us  in 
ALL  ouB  DOMESTIC  INFIRMITIES.  I  have  uotlced  that  if  two  violinists  play  together, 
although  before  they  came  upon  the  platform  they  tuned  their  instruments,  no 
sooner  do  they  get  ready  to  strike  oflf  than  they  try  their  instruments  again.  And 
by  the  time  they  have  played  one  or  two  pieces  there  is  such  divergence  between 
the  instruments  that  they  require  to  be  again  tuned.  But  the  violin  of  the  musician 
has  not  one-fifth  as  many  strings  as  the  human  viohn  has,  and  it  is  not  half  as 
sensitive  to  the  changes  of  the  weather,  and  does  not  need  to  be  screwed  up  or  down 
half  so  often.  And  you  cannot  keep  this  little  mechanical  instrument  in  tune 
except  with  great  pains.  And  do  you  suppose  you  can  take  two  instruments,  each 
having  fifty  strings,  more  susceptible  even  than  those  of  a  violin,  and  have  them  in 
tune  one  with  another,  in  the  midst  of  the  many  and  powerful  influences  which  are 
constantly  tending  to  produce  discord  between  them?  A  man  that  knows  how  to 
take  his  mind  with  all  its  sensibilities,  and  bring  it  into  tune  with  Divine  love,  and 
who  knows  how  to  carry  it  harmoniously  through  all  the  hours  of  the  day,  so  that 
it  shall  all  the  time  be  in  tune  with  other  minds,  has  very  little  to  learn  before  it 
goes  to  heaven.  Now,  our  business  in  life  is  to  try  to  keep  this  fiddle  of  ours  so 
that  it  shall  be  at  peace,  first  with  its  own  self,  and  then  with  others.  The  hardest 
thing  for  us  to  do  is  first  to  hve  right  within  ourselves,  and  then  to  hve  right  with 
each  other.  Now,  in  this  great  confiict,  where  is  so  much  rasping,  it  is  a  comfort 
to  me  to  hear  God  say,  by  His  brooding  Spirit,  "  I  help  in  those  respects  your 
infirmities."  IV.  The  sympathy  of  God  is  with  the  hidden  and  sdperiob  trials  of 
IHE  NOBLER  PARTS  OF  ODR  SOULS.  1.  There  are  a  great  many  poetic  natures  who  are 
subject  to  extreme  variations ;  who  are  all  flush  and  hopeful  in  one  hour,  and  all 
drooping  and  empty  in  another.  God  sympathises  with  our  moods,  with  the  ever- 
shifting  shades  of  transient  and  poetic  feeling — which  are  said  to  be  "  imaginary," 
as  if  the  imagination  were  not  a  fact  as  much  as  any  other  fact  in  life.  2.  Then 
there  are  those  who  are  living  in  a  perpetual  discontent  of  this  life.  They  cannot 
cease  to  take  an  interest  in  it.  But  there  are  times  when  there  comes  to  them  such 
a  sense  of  its  littleness  that  they  seem  to  be  as  so  many  ants  or  worms.  The  whole 
economy  of  life  oftentimes  seems  to  be  one  of  such  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit 
that  a  man  is  almost  willing  to  lay  down  his  burden.  One  is  tempted,  under  such 
circumstances,  to  doubt  himself,  to  doubt  his  friends,  to  doubt  everybody  and 
everything.  And  where  this  feeling  of  contempt  for  one's  fellow-men  is  accompanied 
by  a  sense  of  one's  own  worthlessness,  the  whole  world  is  good  for  nothing.  In 
such  moods  a  man  is  ashamed  of  himself.  Nevertheless,  there  is  a  Spirit  that  helps 
our  infirmity ;  and  that  by  love  brings  us  back  to  reason,  and  to  charity,  and  to 
peace.  3.  Then  there  are  moods  in  which  annihilation  reigns.  There  are  times 
when  men  of  a  sensitive  nature  seem  to  lose  their  hold  on  life.  They  fall  off  from 
the  interest  of  the  human  race,  and  from  everything.  And  these  arid,  desert 
experiences  God  understands,  pities,  and  helps.  4.  Then  there  are  those  moments 
of  intense  yearning  which  turn  all  common  feelings  pale — those  fears  lest  truth 
shall  have  been  a  fable — those  hours  of  unspeakable  anguish  in  which  men  seem 
to  be  letting  go  of  all  that  is  most  sacred  in  the  past.  They  are  afraid  to  express 
their  doubts,  because  there  is  nothing  less  sympathised  with  than  doubt ;  but  they 
may  be  in  a  state  in  which  God  is  preparing  them,  by  suffering,  to  lead  men  out  of 
their  troubles.  God  broods  over  them  still.  So  do  not  let  go  of  faith  and  trust. 
Keep  the  avenue  open  between  you  and  God.  Conclusion  :  In  view  of  the  truths 
thus  opened,  I  remark — 1.  That  the  administrative  power  of  the  moral  world  is 
love — not  power,  and  not  penalty.  2.  That  cases  of  the  longest  delayed  repentance 
are  not  without  hope.  The  man  that  has  been  the  worst  in  life  has  encouragement 
to  repent  and  turn  to  God.  3.  That  this  sympathy  of  God  is  not  given  as  a  reward 
of  man's  own  well-doing  or  of  his  victory  in  the  struggles  which  he  has  been  called 
to  wage.  There  is  an  impression  that  Christ  is  a  premium  giver,  and  that  He  says, 
"If  you  will  work  and  acquire  a  capital,  then  I  wiU  help  you."  No ;  there  is  given 
you  a  capital  to  begin  with.  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation  .  ,  .  for  it  is  God 
which  worketh  in  you."     {H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  transformation  of  hope  : — 1. 

There  is  none  in  heaven  or  earth  nearer  to  us  than  the  Holy  Spirit ;  yet  there  is 
none  whose  presence  is  more  deeply  hidden.  Most  mysterious  is  the  manner  of 
His  Eternal  Being.  Fatherhood  and  Sonship  we  may  in  some  measure  realise  ;  but 
no  earthly  relation  symbolises  the  procession  of  the  Holy  Gl.ost.  And  not  less 
inscrutable  is  the  manner  of  His  presence  and  work  in  the  human  soul.     Unseen 


CSAP.  vm.]  ROMANS.  188 

because  He  is  so  near,  anrecognised  for  very  intimacy,  there  is  no  depth  of 
personality  whither  He  will  not  come  ;  and  even  the  soul  which  He  purifies  and 
strengthens  may  only  discern  Him  in  its  own  new  purity  and  strength.  The 
bodily  eye  can  never  see  in  its  simplicity  the  light  whereby  it  sees  all  else ;  and  the 
Spirit  of  Truth  is  Himself  hidden  from  the  soul  which  owes  its  sight  to  His 
illumination.  2,  But  though  He  be  hidden,  though  we  cannot  tell  whence  He 
Cometh  and  whither  He  goeth,  we  may  watch  and  forward  and  pray  for  His  work, 
in  others  and  in  ourselves ;  we  may  discover  and  estimate  the  unearthly  impulses 
and  attractions  which  He  exercises,  as  astronomers  can  be  sure  of  the  presence  and 
influence  of  some  unseen  star,  by  the  new  force  which  breaks  in  on  the  order  of  the 
heavens.  3.  Already  the  Spirit  itself  beareth  witness  with  our  spirit  that  we  are 
the  children  of  God.  Yet  this  is  but  the  beginning — it  doth  not  yet  appear  what 
we  shall  be.  For  if  we  be  children,  then  are  we  heirs :  heirs  of  God,  and  joint 
heirs  with  Christ,  with  whom  we  shall  be  also  glorified  together.  On  this  con- 
Bummation  the  apostle's  gaze  is  now  fixed ;  and  from  this  there  streams  back  a 
light  which  changes  the  whole  aspect  of  the  present  life.  How  shall  we  direct  the 
course  whose  end  we  cannot  see  ?  What  shall  we  long  for,  when  we  see  nothing 
which  can  satisfy  us  ?  "  We  know  not  what  we  should  pray  for  as  we  ought."  We 
know  not,  for  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be.  Not  from  the  blunders  of 
men,  but  from  the  inconceivable  height  of  their  destiny  does  the  apostle  learn  how 
hard  it  is  to  pray  aright ;  and  bis  solution  of  the  difficulty  is  proportionally 
different.  There  is  a  grace  which  takes  the  place  of  knowledge,  and  brings  the  will 
and  the  aspirations  of  men  into  a  mysterious  harmony  with  the  unseen  :  a  grace 
which  lifts  the  desires  of  the  human  heart  above  all  that  this  fragment  of  the 
universe  can  offer,  and  orders  its  impulses  according  to  a  truly  universal  law ;  a 
grace  which  leads  us  on  when  knowledge  falters,  and  will  lead  when  knowledge 
shall  vanish  away  ;  a  grace  which  is  His  gift  alone — the  grace  of  hope.  4.  By  hope 
we  were  saved ;  and  prayer  is  the  voice  of  hope.  That  same  Spirit  whose  presence 
disturbs  the  completeness  of  this  life  by  the  revelation  and  earnest  of  eternity,  is 
ever  ready  to  guide  the  vague  craving  of  our  hearts  towards  His  home  and  ours. 
Prisoners  we  must  be  for  a  while  ;  but  by  His  help  we  may  be  prisoners  of  hope. 
He,  who  comes  from  the  very  heart  of  heaven.  He  who  brings  that  flush  and 
warmth  of  Divine  joy  which  can  make  even  the  summer  of  this  world  seem  faint 
and  poor.  He  can  take  our  restless,  bewildered  hearts  back  along  the  path  which 
He  has  traversed,  to  His  throne,  who  made  us  for  Himself,  in  whom  alone  we  can 
rest.  Not  by  timid  hints  of  prudent  caution,  but  by  the  unflagging  impulse  of  an 
insatiable  hope  does  He  teach  us  what  we  should  pray  for  as  we  ought.  Then  only 
are  we  in  true  accord  with  the  world  around  us,  when  we,  like  it,  are  pressing 
towards  an  unseen  end,  chafing  in  hope  under  the  bondage  of  corruption,  judging 
the  present  and  the  visible  in  the  light  of  the  glory  which  shall  be  revealed.  Then 
only  are  we  living  with  the  whole  energy  of  our  manhood  when  we  rise  in  obedience 
to  the  hope  that  is  in  us,  and  trust  the  guidance  of  our  prayers  to  the  mind  of  the 
Spirit.  There  is  a  melody  in  our  life,  but  we  shall  never  catch  its  rhythm,  or  enter 
into  its  subtle  harmonies,  till  we  learn  to  listen  for  those  higher  notes  which  are 
the  complement  of  its  imperfection,  the  resolution  of  its  discords.  5.  Therefore 
let  us  ever  glorify  Him  who  came  to  help  our  infirmities  by  raising  our  weary  and 
uncertain  desires  to  the  only  source  and  end  of  hope.  And  let  us  pray  Him  never 
to  leave  us,  but  evermore  to  point  our  gaze  and  guide  our  prayers  towards  the  glory 
of  our  unseen  goal.  May  He  help  us  to  pray  for  the  world,  that  through  all  its 
changes  and  losses  and  strife  it  may  be  brought  to  the  attainment  of  its  earnest 
expectation,  the  fulfilment  of  His  purpose  who  created  it  in  love :  for  the  Church, 
that  when  all  hope  is  fulfilled  by  the  glorious  appearing  of  her  Saviour  Christ,  she 
may  be  arrayed  in  the  righteousness  of  saints,  and  the  Spirit  and  the  Bride  say, 
*'  Come."  And  lastly,  let  us  watch  and  strive  and  pray  for  ourselves,  that  no 
deceitfulness  of  sin,  disappointment,  failure,  dulness,  may  break  the  courage  which 
God  gives  us,  or  drag  down  to  earth  the  effort  which  His  Holy  Spirit  stirs  and 
guides.  In  proportion  to  the  saviug  power  of  hope  are  the  forces  which  assail  it. 
Every  year  we  live,  the  grasp  of  custom  grows  firmer  upon  us,  and  we  find  it  harder 
to  move  with  freedom  among  the  thickening  hindrances  of  social  life ;  every  year 
we  are  tempted  afresh  to  take  the  ordinary  expectation  of  our  fellow-men  as  the 
guide  of  our  aspirations,  and  to  think  that  we  may  wisely  rest  when  we  have  found 
a  pleasant  background  for  a  life  not  painfully  laborious.  There  is  none  in  whom 
the  grace  of  hope  is  not  beset  by  the  easy  hopelessness  of  self-satisfaction.  But  to 
some  there  come  fiercer  trials  than  these:  the  open  invitation  of  sin  which  ia 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHiP  TJll. 

common  enough  to  call  itself  general ;  the  lying  whispers  of  temptation.  TheM 
are  antagonists  of  hope  from  which  only  the  strength  of  the  Holy  Ghost  can  rescue 
our  hindered  souls.  He  can,  He  will  so  rescue  and  sustain  all  who  seek  His 
presence  and  listen  for  His  voice;  and  none  can  utterly  faint  who  look  for  the 
goodness  of  the  Lord  in  the  land  of  the  living ;  for  if  we  hope  for  that  we 
see  not,  then  do  we  with  patience  wait  for  it.  {Bean  Paget.)  Divine  help 
for  spiritual  infirmities  : — First,  the  patient  with  his  disease,  and  that  is 
Christians  under  infirmities.  Secondly,  the  physician  with  his  care,  and  that 
is,  the  Spirit  helping  these  infirmities.  First,  to  speak  of  the  former,  here's 
the  patient  with  his  disease  :  St.  Paul  and  the  rest  of  believers  lying  under 
infirmities.  The  best  Christians  have  their  infinnities  and  weaknesses.  This  is 
true  according  to  a  double  sense  and  notion  of  the  word,  whether  we  take  it  in  a 
moral  sense,  or  a  physical.  Now,  in  both  of  these  considerations  are  the  best  of 
Christians  subject  to  infirmities.  First,  for  spiritual  or  moral  infirmities;  the 
infirmities  of  sin  and  of  soul,  God's  children  they  have  their  infirmities  here. 
First,  in  matter  of  judgment ;  a  great  deal  of  weakness  here.  The  best  of  God'a 
servants,  they  have  been  sometimes  under  great  mistakes,  and  fallen  into  strange 
kind  of  errors  and  fond  conceits.  There  s  hardly  any  great  wit,  but  it  hath 
some  kind  of  extravagancy  with  it.  Secondly,  in  point  of  affection.  A  great 
deal  of  weakness  here  also ;  weakness  of  mind  in  strength  of  passion,  and  that 
in  all  the  kinds  and  varieties  of  it.  Thirdly,  in  point  of  practice  and  daily 
converse.  A  great  deal  of  weakness  and  infirmity  is  there  here  also,  discovering  of 
itself  in  them  upon  several  occasions,  invincible  infirmities,  and  such  as  they  do 
not  easily  quit  or  free  themselves  from.  Infirmities  of  age  and  sickness ;  infirmities 
of  sex  and  condition ;  infirmities  of  temper  and  natural  constitution ;  infirmities  of 
custom  and  use,  and  the  hke.  First,  whence  it  is  so  for  the  thing  itself.  And  here 
there  is  this  brief  account  which  may  be  given  of  it :  First,  the  general  corruption 
of  nature,  which  is  in  part  remaining  still  even  in  the  servants  of  God  themselves. 
Infirmities  are  nothing  else  but  branches  of  the  first  sin  that  was  committed  in  the 
world.  Secondly,  as  from  the  corruption  of  nature,  so  likewise  from  the  imperfec- 
tion of  grace.  Thirdly,  the  assaults  of  Satan  ;  conflicts  with  them.  To  which  we 
may  justly  add,  sometimes  Christians  own  neglect  of  themselves.  Now  further, 
secondly,  for  the  ground  of  it  on  God's  part,  as  to  His  permission  of  it,  we  may 
take  it  thus  :  First,  hereby  to  humble  them  and  to  keep  down  pride  in  them,  to 
show  them  what  they  are  of  themselves,  and  what  need  they  have  of  continual 
succour  and  supply  from  Him,  and  to  be  dependant  upon  His  free  grace.  Secondly, 
as  to  prevent  pride  in  themselves,  so  to  prevent  also  in  others  an  over-willing 
opinion  of  them,  at  least  that  tbey  may  not  idolise  them  and  set  too  high  a  price 
upon  them,  and  so  have  the  faith  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  respect  of  persons. 
Thirdly,  Gud  suffers  infirmities  in  His  children  for  the  greater  manifestation  of  His 
own  power  and  strength  in  those  infirmities.  Lastly,  God  orders  these  His 
infirmities  to  His  servants  as  matters  of  trial  and  exercise  to  them  in  their 
Christian  course.  The  consideration  of  this  point  may  be  variously  improved  by 
us.  First,  as  a  very  good  direction  for  the  regulating  of  our  Christian  converse  and 
communion  with  one  another  in  the  world.  Namely,  with  a  great  deal  of  tenderness 
and  condescension  and  meekness  of  spirit.  Secondly,  it  teaches  us  also  to  take 
heed  of  addicting  ourselves  absolutely  to  any  men's  practice  or  example.  But  yet 
thirdly,  this  is  no  ground  of  excuse  to  any  persons  in  their  wilful  miscarriages. 
First,  they  are  much  distinguished  in  the  matter  and  nature  of  them  for  the  things 
themselves.  Iniquities,  they  are  grosser  abominations,  whereas  infirmities  are 
lighter  miscarriages.  Secondly,  they  are  distinguished  from  the  person  and 
principle  from  whence  they  proceed.  The  former,  they  are  the  results  of  the 
strength  of  corruption ;  the  latter,  they  are  the  effects  only  of  the  weakness  and 
imperfection  of  grace.  Thirdly,  they  are  distinguished  from  the  carriage  of  them, 
and  manner  of  acting.  Infirmities,  they  proceed  with  much  reluctancy  and 
opposition  against  them.  The  second  is,  as  they  may  be  taken  physically  for  the 
infirmities  of  mind  and  body  together,  and  referring  to  affliction.  Their  bodies  are 
houses  of  clay,  and  their  spirits  they  have  a  vanity  upon  them,  and  therefore  it 
cannot  be  strange  that  themselves  should  be  weak  and  infirm.  And  then  again,  as 
they  have  frail  bodies  for  the  matter  of  them,  so  they  have  sinful  souls  for  the 
demerit.  And  it  is  these  which  do  deserve  and  occasion  these  evils  to  them.  The 
weakness  of  corruption  will  breed  the  weakness  of  afiliction,  and  sinful  boflies  will 
be  diseased.  This  should  teach  us  not  to  be  offended  when  these  things  fall  out  so 
to  be,  nor  to  be  dismayed  at  them.    And  so  now  I  have  done  with  the  first  branch 


.  vm.]  ROMANS.  185 

of  this  proposition  before  us :  and  that  is,  the  patient,  together  with  the  disease. 
Christians  under  infirmities,  our  infirmities.  The  second  is  the  physician  together 
with  the  cure,  and  that  is  the  Spirit  helping  our  infirmities.  The  spirit  may  be 
taken  two  manner  of  ways,  as  it  is  elsewhere  in  Scripture ;  either  first,  for  our  own 
spirit,  the  spirit  of  man.  Or  secondly,  for  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Spirit  of  God,  Now 
it  is  true  in  some  sense  of  either,  that  it  does  help  our  infirmities.  First.it  is  true 
in  some  sense  of  our  own  spirit,  according  to  that  of  Solomon,  "  The  spirit  of  man 
will  sustain  his  infirmities"  (Prov.  xviii.  14).  "A  merry  heart  does  good  like  a 
medicine  "  (Prov.  xvii.  22).  And  a  man's  reason,  it  does  sometimes  help  his  passion 
But  secondly,  not  to  trouble  you  with  impertinencies.  This  is  not  that  which  is  to 
be  understood  here  in  this  place.  The  Spirit  here  in  the  text  is  not  our  own  spirit, 
but  the  Spirit  of  God,  who  is  here  by  a  special  emphasis  called  the  Spirit.  The 
word  here  also  which  is  translated  "  help  "  is  likewise  very  emphatical,  which  is  an 
expression  taken  from  two  persons  or  more,  which  are  to  lift  up  some  heavy  burden 
and  do  mutually  help  one  another  by  standing  at  each  end  of  the  burden,  one  over 
against  the  other.  Or  if  ye  will,  from  nurses  which,  attending  sick  persons,  do 
stay  them  and  lift  them  up  in  their  beds,  being  ready  of  themselves  to  fail  and  faint 
away.  Even  thus  does  the  Spirit  of  God  with  His  servants  in  their  manifold 
infirmities ;  He  does  co-operate  and  concur  with  them,  and  sustain  them,  and  hold 
them  up.  Whilst  it  is  said  here  in  this  place  that  the  Spirit  helpeth  our  infirmities, 
we  are  to  take  those  infirmities  in  the  full  latitude  and  extent  of  them.  First,  we 
may  take  it  of  moral  and  sinful  infirmities.  The  Spirit  of  God  helps  us  here,  not 
to  them — take  heed  of  that — but  in  them,  and  from  them,  and  about  themj  and  in 
reference  to  them.  And  so  His  help  to  this  purpose  may  be  ranked  into  two  sorts  : 
First,  that  help  which  He  gives  us  against  corruptions,  for  the  avoiding  of  them. 
First,  the  Spirit  helps  our  infirmities ;  that  is,  He  overawes  our  temptations  and 
removes  our  corruptions  from  us.  Grace,  it  corrects  nature  and  takes  away  the 
distempers  of  it.  The  Spirit  of  God,  wherever  He  comes.  He  makes  a  change  in 
that  soul  and  fits  it  for  His  own  residence  and  abode  in  it.  The  consideration 
hereof  should  teach  us  to  give  up  ourselves  to  His  gracious  guidance  and  govern- 
ance of  us,  and  influence  upon  us.  Secondly,  He  helps  us  also  in  our  infirmities 
by  giving  ns  strength  unto  duty.  So  that  the  Spirit  helps  our  infirmities  so  far 
forth  as  He  assists  our  prayers.  First,  by  His  gracious  acceptance.  The  Spirit 
helps  our  infirmities  thus  by  bearing  with  us  in  what  is  done  by  us,  notwittistanding 
the  infirmities  which  are  in  us.  Acceptance  of  endeavour  is  a  great  help  of 
infirmity.  As  David  says  of  himself,  "  The  Lord  hath  heard  my  supplication ; 
the  Lord  will  accept  my  prayer  "  (Psa.  vi.  9).  Thus  does  He  help  our  infirmities 
in  reference  to  His  gracious  acceptance.  Secondly,  by  His  gracious  assistance.  He 
helps  them  here  also.  "When  I  am  weak,  then  am  I  strong,"  (2  Cor.  xii,  10). 
"  Aiid  I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  that  strengthens  us  "  (Phil.  iv.  10). 
There's  a  double  weakness  or  infirmity  upon  us  which  is  considerable  in  us  in  point 
of  duty.  First,  in  our  indispositions  to  duty,  by  provoking  us  and  exciting  us 
hereunto,  and  putting  us  upon  it.  But  secondly,  in  our  insufficiency  in  duty,  the 
Spirit  helps  our  infirmities  here  likewise ;  where  we  flag  and  are  apt  to  fail  in  the 
performance.  He  does  there  strengthen  us  in  it.  This,  for  the  use  of  it,  serves  first 
of  all  as  a  matter  of  great  comfort  and  encouragement  to  the  servants  of  God  in 
those  duties  which  are  undertaken  by  them,  that  they  have  so  strong  and  able  an 
helper  as  this  to  go  along  with  them.  In  great  difficulties  men  love  to  have  great 
assistance.  Secondly,  it  serves  by  way  of  direction.  The  Spirit  helpeth  our 
infirmities,  that  is,  it  is  His  work  and  office  to  do  it,  though  for  such  a  particular 
time  and  season  He  may  suspend  the  actual  performance,  which  is  to  be  inquired 
into  by  us.  And  we  are  to  be  humbled  in  ourselves  for  His  occasional  withdrawings 
from  us.  Thirdly,  it  teaches  us  not  to  go  forth  in  our  own  strength  in  any  duty 
which  we  take  in  hand,  but  to  fetch  strength  and  power  from  the  Spirit,  and  to 
depend  upon  Him  for  His  assistance.  Lastly,  in  all  our  performances  where  we 
find  ourselves  to  be  at  any  time  anything  more  enlarged  than  other,  let  us 
acknowledge  this  work  of  the  Spirit  in  His  assistance  of  us,  and  be  thankful  to 
Him  for  it.  "Not  unto  us,  0  Lord,  not  unto  us,  but  unto  Thy  name  we  give  the 
praise."  Now,  secondly,  it  holds  good  also  as  to  the  infirmities  of  trouble  and 
affliction.  The  Spirit  of  God  does  help  the  children  of  God  even  in  those  infirmities 
likewise.  Thus  Psa,  Ixxxxiv,  17,  18,  Now  the  Spirit  of  God  is  active  in  us  to  this 
purpose,  upon  a  various  account.  First,  by  virtue  of  His  office,  and  that  work  which 
does  more  properly  and  peculiarly  belong  unto  Him  (John,  xiv,  26  ;  2  Cor.  vii.  6 ; 
Bom.  15, 5),  Secondly,  His  promise,  by  virtue  of  that  also.  Thirdly,  from  His  nature. 


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat,  vra. 

He  helps  us  because  He  pities  us.  Lastly,  taking  this  Spirit  more  particularly  for 
the  Spirit  of  Christ,  from  the  similitude  and  likeness  of  condition.  He  helps  our 
infirmities  as  having  taken  our  infirmities  upon  Him.  Now,  if  it  shall  be  further 
demanded  by  what  ways  and  in  what  manner  this  is  done,  we  may  take  it  briefly  in 
these  following  particulars.  First,  by  His  counsel,  directing  us  what  to  do  and  how 
to  carry  ourselves  in  such  conditions.  Secondly,  as  the  Spirit  helps  by  His  counsel, 
so  also  by  His  comfort.  Thirdly,  the  Spirit  helps  by  His  assistance  and  particular 
relief  in  our  particular  condition.  Lastly,  the  Spirit  helps  our  infirmities  by  His 
intercession  which  He  makes  in  our  hearts,  as  it  is  here  expressed  in  the  text. 
First,  seeing  the  Spirit  helps  our  infirmities,  it  concerns  us  therefore  to  be  very 
careful  how  we  carry  ourselves  towards  this  Spirit,  and  in  a  special  manner  to  take 
heed  of  grieving  of  Him-  Secondly,  where  we  are  at  any  time  enabled,  or  see  any 
others  enabled  before  us,  to  endure  any  afflictions  whatsoever  without  fainting  and 
sinking  under  it.  Let  us  see  here  to  whom  to  acknowledge  it  and  to  give  the  glory 
of  it ;  and  that  is  to  the  Spirit  of  God  alone,  who  alone  is  herein  helpful  to  us. 
Thirdly,  we  see  here  the  advantage  and  privilege  of  the  servants  of  God  in  all  the  in- 
firmities which  are  incident  to  them,  whether  moral  or  natural.  {Thomas  Eorton, 
D.D.)  Prayer  aided  by  the  Divine  Spirit : — We  begin  with  the  first  of  these  parts, 
viz.,  the  defect  or  infirmity—  "  We  know  not  what  to  pray  for,"  &c.  Now,  there  is  a 
threefold  impotency  or  defect.  First,  in  reference  to  the  very  performance  itself. 
God's  people  are  sometimes  in  that  condition,  as  they  cannot  set  themselves  seriously 
to  such  a  duty  as  this  is,  but  are  very  indisposed  hereunto.  And  there  are  divers 
causes  of  this  obstruction  to  them.  As,  first,  distempers  of  body,  and  the  infirmities 
which  arise  from  that.  When  the  body  is  out  of  frame,  it  puts  the  soul  out  of 
frame  also,  and  indisposes  it  to  that  which  is  good.  Secondly,  from  distraction  of 
mind  and  perplexity  of  spirit.  This  does  likewise  very  much  disturb  them  in  this 
particular.  Thirdly,  from  some  special  corruption  and  inordinate  passion  which 
surprises  them.  This  does  very  much  hinder  them  likewise.  Lastly,  too  much 
interest  and  involution  in  worldly  affairs.  This,  if  it  be  not  the  better  heeded  and 
more  carefully  looked  into,  it  will  very  much  take  off  the  mind  from  such  a  business 
as  this  is.  It  will  take  up  the  time  as  to  the  undertaking  of  the  performance,  and 
it  will  take  off  the  heart  as  to  the  managing  of  it.  If  Christians  were  more  careful 
to  pray  when  they  might,  they  would  be  more  able  to  pray  when  they  should  ;  but 
when  they  willingly  or  carelessly  withdraw  from  it,  they  are  sometimes  unwillingly 
and  against  their  minds  obstructed  in  it.  Secondly,  where  it  is  at  any  time  thus 
with  us,  we  should  accordingly  be  affected  in  it.  First,  to  be  humbled  for  it. 
Secondly,  to  inquire  into  the  cause  and  occasion  of  it,  and  to  examine  from  whence 
it  proceeds.  Thirdly,  not  to  lie  down  under  them,  but  to  strive  to  overcome  them 
all  we  can.  As  we  are  required  sometimes  to  eat  against  stomach,  for  the  better 
strengthening  of  nature,  so  we  are  required  to  pray  against  stomach  also,  for  the 
strengthening  of  grace.  The  second  is  of  ignorance,  in  reference  to  the  matter  of 
it.  •*  We  know  not  what  we  should  pray  for."  First,  in  asking  things  which  are 
absolutely  sinful  and  unlawful.  They  know  not  what  they  should  pray  for  in  this. 
Secondly,  in  asking  things  which  are  unseasonable.  There  is  a  miscarriage  in  this 
also.  There  are  some  things  which  do  well  at  one  time  which  do  not  so  well  at 
another.  Everything  is  beneficial  at  its  season.  Thirdly,  in  asking  things  which 
are  unsuitable  and  inconvenient  for  us ;  at  least  which  are  very  uncertain  and 
under  very  much  hazard.  We  know  not  oftentimes  what  to  ask,  because  we  know 
not  many  times  what  it  is  which  is  worth  the  asking.  For  that  which  we  may 
judge  to  be  very  desirable,  it  may  in  conclusion  prove  the  quite  contrary.  The 
consideration  of  this  point  may  be  thus  far  useful  to  us.  First,  as  from  hence  to 
satisfy  us  in  the  denial  of  those  petitions  which  are  sometimes  made  by  us. 
Secondly,  forasmuch  as  of  ourselves,  we  know  not  what  to  pray  for,  we  should 
therefore  beg  of  God  to  direct  us,  and  to  suggest  such  things  unto  us  as  are  fittest 
to  be  prayed  for  by  us.  It  is  a  great  matter  to  know  what  to  pray  for,  and  that 
which  is  exceeding  profitable  and  beneficial  to  us.  Thirdly,  this  teaches  us  to  ask 
nothing  absolutely,  but  with  submission  to  the  will  of  God.  Forasmuch  as  we  may 
mistake.  The  third  is  in  the  manner  or  carriage  of  it ;  how,  and  as  we  ought. 
This  is  another  thing  which  Christians  are  sometimes  apt  to  fail  in.  And  so  now  I 
have  done  with  the  fiist  part  of  the  text,  which  is  the  defect  or  infiimity  itself  here 
mentioned  in  these  words,  *'  For  we  know  not  what  we  should  pray  for  as  we  ought." 
The  second  is  the  happy  supply  of  this  defect  in  these  words,  "  But  the  Spirit  itself 
maketh  intercession  for  us,  with  groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered."  First,  for 
the  assistance  itself.    "  The  Spirit  maketh  intercession  for  us."    There  is  a  two- 


CHAP,  vm.]  ROMANS.  187 


fold  intercession  for  us  which  we  read  of  in  Scripture.  The  one  is  the  intercession 
of  Christ  Himself ;  and  the  other  is  the  intercession  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  The 
former  of  these  we  read  of  in  ver.  34,  speaking  of  Christ,  who  also  maketh 
intercession  for  us.  The  latter  we  have  here  in  this  verse  which  we  have  now  in 
hand.  The  one  is  an  intercession  for  us,  as  it  is  a  speaking  in  our  behalf ; 
and  the  other  is  an  intercession  in  us,  as  it  is  an  enabling  of  us  to  speak 
ourselves.  The  Holy  Ghost  Himself  makes  intercession  for  us,  so  far  forth  as  He 
helps  us  to  pray  (Matt.  z.  20  ;  Zech.  xii.  10;  Oal.  iv.  6).  In  these  and  the  like 
places  of  Scripture,  is  the  Holy  Ghost  set  forth  unto  us  as  the  helper  and  promoter 
of  our  prayers,  and  as  one  that  makes  intercession  for  us.  Now,  this  we  may 
conceive  Him  to  do  by  divers  operations.  First,  by  sanctifying  of  our  persons  and 
putting  us  into  such  a  capacity,  as  from  whence  we  may  with  boldness  draw  nigh 
to  the  throne  of  grace.  The  wise  man  tells  us,  "  That  the  sacrifice  of  the  wicked 
is  an  abomination  to  the  Lord,  and  that  the  prayer  of  the  upright  [only]  is  His 
delight "  (Prov.  xv.  8).  Secondly,  by  putting  our  hearts  into  a  praying  and  begging 
frame.  For  though  a  man  may  be  a  true  child  of  God,  yet  he  may  not  be  always 
in  a  praying  temper.  Therefore  the  Holy  Ghost  prepares  the  heart  for  this 
performance  (Psa.  x.  17).  Thirdly,  by  suggesting  to  us  what  at  any  time  we  shall 
pray  for.  Fourthly,  by  stirring  up  such  graces  in  us  as  are  requisite  to  the 
performance  of  prayer  in  a  right  and  holy  manner.  This  may  serve  to  teach  ua 
how  to  make  our  addresses  to  God  in  prayer  upon  all  occasions,  namely,  so  as 
desiring  the  help  of  His  Spirit  in  those  performances.  "Praying  always,  with  all 
prayer  and  supplication  in  the  Spirit,"  as  it  is  in  Eph.  vi.  18.  And  again,  •'  Praying 
in  the  Holy  Ghost,"  as  it  is  in  the  Epistle  of  Jude  and  ver.  20.  And  so  much  may 
suffice  to  have  spoken  of  the  first  particular  in  this  passage,  which  is  the  help  or 
assistance  itself,  which  is  here  vouchsafed,  "  The  Spirit  itself  making  intercession 
for  us."  The  second  is  the  conveyances  of  it  to  us,  or  the  manner  wherein  it  is 
effected.  And  that  is  in  these  words,  •'  With  groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered." 
By  groanings,  here  in  this  place,  we  are  not  only,  as  I  conceive,  to  understand 
secret  complaints  which  do  proceed  from  bitterness  of  Spirit  in  us,  although  these 
principally  and  especially  ;  but  by  groanings  we  are  here  as  well  to  understand  any 
other  secret  workings  of  the  heart  towards  God  in  converse  and  communion 
with  Him.  That  which  we  may  observe  from  hence  is  this,  that  there  may  be 
prayer  sometimes,  there  where  yet  there  is  not  speech  or  vocal  expression.  A  man 
may  cry  mightily  to  God  even  there  where  sometimes  he  utters,  as  to  the  outward 
hearing  of  it,  never  a  word.  This,  for  the  use  of  it,  is  first  of  all  a  very  great 
comfort  to  aU  the  true  children  of  God  as  concerns  their  communion  with  Him, 
where  they  are  hindered  or  at  any  time  denied  the  opportunity  of  outward  expres- 
sion. First,  it  is  very  satisfactory  in  a  weakness  and  defect  of  parts,  and  such  and 
such  gifts.  Secondly,  it  is  also  comfortable  in  all  afflictions  and  distresses.  Last 
of  all,  in  the  multitude  of  business  and  variety  of  occasions  in  the  day,  which  take 
men  up,  that  still  they  may  have  converse  with  the  Lord  in  these  frequent 
ejaculations  towards  Him.  But  yet  this  must  also  be  warily  and  cautiously  taken 
by  us.  That  we  abuse  not  such  a  point  as  this  is  to  sluggishness  and  neglect. 
Though  this  working  of  the  heart  in  groans  and  sighs  ia  some  cases  may  be  prayer, 
yet  we  are  not  to  content  ourselves  with  this  alone  where  we  have  further  ability 
and  opportunity  afforded  unto  us.  Prayer  is  another  kind  of  business  than  the 
world  thinks  it,  or  takes  it  to  be.  It  is  one  thing  to  talk  to  God,  and  it  is  another 
thing  to  pray  to  Him,  which  is  here  in  the  text  expressed  by  "groaning  which 
cannot  be  uttered. "  Where  again  we  must  further  take  heed  that  we  be  not  mistaken 
neither.  There  is  a  double  groaning  or  sighing  which  a  man  is  capable  of  in 
prayer ;  the  one  as  a  work  of  nature,  and  the  other  as  a  work  of  grace.  (Ibid.) 
Our  infirmities  helped : — I.  The  pbedomdjant  chabacteristio  of  the  Chbistian  is 
PBATEB.  This  is  clear  from  the  preceding  context,  and  from  the  nature  of  the 
case.  What  is  past  is  for  rest  and  praise — not  for  prayer  and  on-reaching.  1.  All 
true  believers  are  praying  men.  This  is  and  must  be  a  universal  characteristic.  2. 
Prayer  must  be  essentially  our  own.  Another  man's  hunger  is  not  my  hunger, 
even  when  both  of  us  are  hungry  alike.  And  so  another  man's  prayer  or  yearning 
are  not  mine.  n.  The  buccess  of  prayeb  is  hikdebed  by  ocb  imfibmiiieb. 
Everything  that  deadens  hope  or  that  makes  as  contented  to  be  as  we  are,  will 
hinder  prayer.  1.  Infirmities  of  flesh.  "  The  spirit  indeed  is  willing,  but  the 
flesh  is  weak."  2.  Infirmities  of  our  faith.  "  0  thou  of  little  faith,  wherefore  didst 
thou  doubt  ?  "  (Psa,  Ixxvii.  10).  3.  Infirmities  of  conscience.  These  arise  from 
the  spirit  of  bondage  and  lead  to  timidity  and  superstition.    4.  Infirmities  of  judg- 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tih 

ment.  The  judgments  we  form  of  Divine  truth  will  exert  a  considerable  influence 
over  our  character.  And  it  is  here  that  our  weakness  often  appears.  5.  Infirmities 
of  temper.  We  all  know  how  irascibility  interferes  with  the  calmness  of  prayer  and 
spoils  our  devotion.  III.  The  Spieit  is  our  great  helper,  both  in  the  offering 
OF  PRATER  AND  IN  THE  SUCCESS  OF  IT.  1.  Our  longings  are  often  of  a  vague  and 
indefinite  character.  Our  reUgious  feelings  are  often  earnest  and  real,  yet  shapeless 
and  indeterminate;  and  so  our  prayers,  which  are  but  our  endeavours  to  utter  what 
we  feel,  are  often  nothing  better  than  a  groan.  We  want  clear  light.  Is  not  this 
the  case  supposed  in  our  text  ?  2.  There  is  One  concerned  in  this  endeavour  of 
ours.  In  this  wordless  and  unutterable  longing  of  the  soul  there  is  One  who  is 
helping  us.  3.  Though  we  do  not  understand,  yet  He  that  searcheth  the  heart 
does.  We  ask  for  what,  if  suddenly  given,  would  surprise  us,  but  the  Spirit  means 
all  that.  When  I  ask  "  to  be  what  God  would  have  me  be,"  should  I  become  so  at 
once,  how  wonderful  would  be  the  reality — beyond  what  I  thought  when  I  prayed  I 
And  so  "  Thy  kingdom  come."  Truly  I  mean  it ;  but  have  I  a  conception  of  its 
meaning  and  compass?  The  Spirit  means  it,  and  "he  that,"  &c.  (P.  Striitt.) 
The  Spirit  helping  our  infirmities : — I.  The  Christian  infirmities  in  prayer.  The 
word  means  weakness,  sickness,  and  intimates  debility  in  our  moral  constitution. 
The  diseases  of  our  nature  once  produced  moral  death.  In  the  process  of  regene- 
ration our  recovery  commences ;  but  the  condition  of  the  patient  is  that  of  great 
infirmity ;  this  is  seen  especially  in  the  duty  of  prayer.  His  spirit  is  faint,  his 
desires  are  languid,  his  efforts  are  feeble.  This  infirmity  appears — 1.  In  our 
ignorance  of  the  proper  subject  of  prayer.  "We  know  not  what  to  pray  for." 
"  Lord,  teach  us  to  pray."  This  appears  in  our  supplication — (1)  For  the  blessings 
of  providence.  We  are  mercifully  permitted  to  make  these  the  subject  of  prayer 
(Phil.  iv.  6).  But  who  knoweth  what  is  good  for  man  ?  The  events  of  Providence 
form  a  system  of  moral  discipline  by  which  God  would  train  us  for  His  service  on 
earth,  and  prepare  us  for  the  enjoyment  of  His  presence  in  heaven.  Now  in  what 
danger  are  we,  by  our  prayers,  of  interfering  with  God's  plans,  and  of  asking  what 
may  be  injurious  to  us,  and  deprecating  what  may  be  good  to  us.  God  gave  Israel 
their  desire,  but  He  sent  leanness  into  their  souls.  St.  Paul,  smarting  under  the 
anguish  of  the  thorn  in  the  flesh,  prayed  thrice  that  it  might  depart  from  him  ;  but 
God  knew  better  than  His  servant  did  what  was  good  for  him.  (2)  Spiritual 
blessings.  The  Word  of  God  presents  us  with  an  almost  infinite  variety  of  topics 
for  prayer.  But  how  often  none  of  these  are  present  to  the  mind  ;  how  often  the 
thoughts  are  distracted  I  2.  Our  want  of  the  proper  spirit  of  prayer.  "  We  know 
not  what  to  pray  for  as  we  ought."  We  ought  to  pray — (1)  With  the  profoundest 
reverence.  But  how  often  we  come  under  the  influence  of  feelings,  light,  careless, 
undevout  1  (2)  With  the  deepest  humility.  But  how  often  do  we  pray  with  a 
heart  cold — aye,  proud,  impenitent,  insensible.  (3)  With  the  greatest  importunity ; 
for  the  blessings  we  seek  are  of  great  magnitude — the  evils  we  deprecate  are  of  the 
greatest  duration.  But  how  often  do  our  feelings  almost  expire  through  our 
weakness  I  (4)  In  faith,  for  "  he  that  cometh  to  God  must  believe  that  He  is,"  &o., 
and  in  the  power  of,  and  in  reliance  on,  Christ.  But  how  often  do  we  question 
these,  and  thus  expect  but  seldom  the  blessings  we  supplicate  !  (5)  With  infinite 
perseverance,  knowing  that  it  will  come,  though  the  blessing  be  delayed.  But  how 
often  do  we  grow  weary  and  faint  in  our  minds  !  11.  The  gracious  succours,  which, 

IN  THE   performance   OF  THIS  DUTY,  THE  CHRISTIAN  DERIVES  FROM  THE  AGENCY  OF  THE 

Holy  Spirit.  He  "  helpeth  our  infirmities,"  He  bears  them  with  us.  He  does  not 
intend  to  supersede  human  agency,  but  to  excite,  invigorate,  encourage.  He  will 
not  work  without  you,  you  cannot  work  without  Him  ;  but  you  are  to  be  co-workers. 
He  "  maketh  intercession  for  us,"  by  helping  us  to  make  intercession  for  ourselves 
(ver.  15 ;  cf.  Gal.  iv.  6).  The  Spirit  helpeth  our  infirmities  by — 1.  Exciting  us  to 
prayer.  Subduing  our  natural  repugnance,  convincing  us  of  the  advantages  and 
efficacy  of  prayer,  and  implanting  within  us  those  affections  which  dispose  us  to 
pray.  2.  Lnpressing  us  in  prayer  with  an  affecting  consciousness  of  our  wants. 
Our  fervour  will  be  in  proportion  to  our  sense  of  want.  It  is  part  of  the  Spirit's 
office  to  produce  an  urgent  conviction  of  want.  If  evils  are  concealed,  the  Spirit 
shows  man  to  himself,  and  places  before  him  attractive  in  array  those  blessings 
adapted  to  the  supply  of  his  wants.  3.  Imparting  to  us  importunity  iu  prayer 
"with  groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered."  It  was  thus  that  the  cruelties 
endured  by  the  Israelites  could  not  be  told  in  words,  but  it  is  said  their 
groanings  reached  the  ears  and  pierced  the  heart  of  God.  It  was  thus  that 
David  said,  "Lord  .  .  .  my  groaning  is  not  hid  from  Thee,"  and  that  Christ 


CHAP,  vra.]  ROMANS.  18» 

"groaned  in  spirit,  and  was  troubled."  So  the  whole  creation  is  represented 
as  groaning.  And  Christians  "  groan  within  themselves,"  "  groan  being  bur- 
dened," till  mortality  is  swallowed  up  of  life.  The  Christian's  life  is  a  conflict ; 
and  often  his  sorrows  and  desires  are  too  big  for  utterance;  there  is  a  feeling, 
deep,  complicated,  unutterable,  which  God  only  can  understand.  And  He  under- 
standeth  it,  because  He  knoweth  the  mind  of  that  Spirit,  which  maketh  inter- 
cession for  the  saints  with  groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered.  4.  Presenting  to 
the  mind  encouraging  views  of  the  mediation  of  Christ  in  prayer.  He  helps  our 
infirmities  by  enabling  us  to  plead  the  blood,  and  to  rely  on  the  sacrifice  of  the 
Son  of  God.  5.  Inspiring  us  with  confidence  in  the  Divine  promises.  6.  Making 
the  duty  exceedingly  delightful  to  us.  When  we  pray  without  the  Spirit  our 
prayers  are  formal,  lifeless,  insipid,  a  drudgery.  But  if  we  pray  under  Hia 
direction,  we  engage  in  the  most  delightful  exercise.  The  scene  of  prayer  becomes 
the  gate  of  heaven.  7.  Securing  the  success  of  our  prayers.  There  is  an  insepa- 
rable oneness  between  the  mind  of  the  Spirit  and  the  will  of  the  Father.  If 
you  pray  for  things  which  are  not  according  to  the  will  of  God,  the  Holy  Spirit  does 
not  authorise  it,  because  God  cannot  deny  Himself.  But  if  you  are  under  Hia 
agency,  you  are  sure  to  attain  what  you  pray  for.  {J.  Bowers.)  The  Spirit 
lielping  our  infirmities : — I.  The  Holy  Spirit  strengthens  and  bears  us  up  in  oub 

WEAKNESSES   AND    TROUBLES,    THAT   WE    MAY    NOT   FAINT  UNDER  THEM.       1.    It  iS  a  great 

infirmity  if  a  Christian  should  faint  in  the  day  of  trouble  (Prov.  xxiv.  10).  Partly 
because  there  is  so  little  reason  for  a  Christian's  fainting.  Who  should  be  more 
undisturbed  than  he  who  hath  God  for  his  God,  Christ  for  his  Saviour,  and  the 
Spirit  for  his  Comforter,  and  heaven  for  his  portion  ?  Partly  because  there  is  so 
much  help  from  God  (Psa.  cxxxviii.  3) ;  and  partly  because  of  the  mischiefs  which 
follow  this  fainting.  There  is  a  twofold  fainting.  (1)  That  which  causeth  great 
trouble  and  dejection  of  spirit  (Heb.  xii.  3).  Now  this  is  a  great  evil  in  a  child 
of  God  ;  for  the  spirit  of  a  man,  or  natural  courage,  will  go  far  as  to  the  sustaining 
of  foreign  evils  (Prov.  xviii.  14).  Therefore  a  Christian,  with  all  his  faith  and  hope, 
should  strive  against  it  (Psa.  Ixxvii,  7-10).  (2)  That  which  causeth  dejection  and 
falling  oflf  from  God.  This  worse  becometh  the  children  of  God  (Rev.  ii.  3  ;  Gal. 
vi.  9).  2.  In  this  weakness,  if  we  are  left  to  ourselves,  we  cannot  support  ourselves. 
This  appeareth  partly  because  they  that  have  but  a  light  tincture  of  the  Spirit 
give  up  at  the  first  assault  (Matt.  xiii.  21),  and  partly  because  the  most  resolved,  if 
not  duly  possessed  with  a  sense  of  their  own  weakness,  soon  miscarry,  if  not  in 
whole,  yet  in  part ;  witness  Peter  (Matt.  xxvi.  33-35).  3.  When  we  cannot  support 
ourselves  through  our  weakness,  the  Spirit  helpeth  us  (Eph.  iii.  16;  1  Pet.  i. 
5 ;  1  Cor.  x.  13).  4.  They  that  rouse  themselves,  and  use  all  means,  are  in  a 
nearer  capacity  to  receive  influences  from  the  Spirit  than  others  (Psa.  xxvii.  14 ; 
xxxi.  24).  II.  Prayer  is  one  special  means  by  which  the  Holy  Spirit  helpeth 
God's  children  in  their  troubles.  1.  Troubles  are  sent,  not  to  drive  us  from  God, 
but  to  draw  us  to  Him  (Psa.  1.  15).  2.  Prayer  is  a  special  means  to  ease  the  heart 
of  our  burdensome  cares  and  fears  (Phil.  iv.  6).  3.  It  is  a  special  means  of  acknow- 
ledging God — (1)  As  the  fountain  of  our  strength  and  support  (1  Pet.  v.  10).  (2) 
As  the  author  of  our  deliverance  (2  Tim.  iv.  18).  HI.  The  prayers  of  the  oodli 
COME  FROM  God's  Spirit.  Note — 1.  The  manner  in  which  the  Spirit  concurreth  to 
the  prayers  of  the  faithful.  First,  there  is  the  spirit  of  a  man,  for  the  Holy  Ghost 
makes  use  of  our  understandings  for  the  actuating  of  our  will  and  affections ;  He 
bloweth  up  the  fire,  though  it  be  our  hearts  that  burn  within  us.  Secondly,  the 
new  nature  in  a  Christian  is  more  immediately  and  vigorously  operative  in  prayer 
than  in  most  other  duties ;  and  the  exercise  of  faith,  love,  and  hope  in  prayer 
doth  flow  from  the  renewed  soul  as  the  proper  inward  and  vital  principle  of  these 
actions ;  so  that  we,  and  not  the  Spirit  of  God,  are  said  to  repent,  believe,  and 
pray.  More  distinctly  the  Holy  Ghost — (1)  Directs  and  orders  our  requests  so  as 
they  may  suit  with  our  great  end,  which  is  the  enjoyment  of  God.  (2)  He  quickens 
our  desires  in  prayers.  (3)  He  encourages  us  to  come  to  God  as  a  Father  (chap, 
viii.  15 ;  Gal.  iv.  6).  (a)  Childlike  confidence  (Luke  xi.  13.  {b)  ChUdlike  reve- 
ronce  (Mai.  i.  6  ;  1  Pet.  i.  17).  2.  The  necessity  of  this  help.  (1)  The  order  and 
economy  of  the  Divine  persons  showeth  it.  God  is  our  reconciled  God  and  Father, 
to  whom  we  come ;  Christ  the  Mediator,  through  whom  we  come,  and  the  Spirit 
our  Guide,  by  whom  we  come  (Eph.  ii.  18).  (2)  That  prayer  may  carry  proportion 
with  other  duties.  (3)  Because  of  our  impotency  (Cor.  xii.  3).  (4)  With  respect  to 
acceptance  (ver.  27).  3.  Cautions  against  some  abuses  and  mistakes  in  prayer. 
(1)  This  is  not  so  to  be  understood  as  if  the  matter  of  prayer  were  immediately  to 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vin. 

be  Id  spired  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  (2)  Nor  as  if  we  should  never  pray  till  the 
Spirit  moveth  ns.  (3)  Nor  as  if  because  we  have  not  such  freedom  of  words  as 
may  give  vent  to  spiritual  affections,  we  have  not  the  spirit  of  prayer.  There 
may  be  a  great  extravagance  of  words,  without  faith,  or  feeling,  or  spiritual 
affections.  (4)  Nor  as  if  all  that  pray  graciously  had  the  Spirit  in  a  like 
measure,  or  the  same  persons  always  in  the  same  measure  (John  iii.  7).  (5) 
Gifts  are  more  necessary  when  we  join  with  others,  and  are  their  mouth  to 
God;  but  the  spirit  of  prayer  is  of  most  use  when  we  are  alone.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.) 
The  Spirit's  help  in  prayer : — Whatever  of  good  is  found  in  us  is  the  result  of  a 
Divine  influence.  So  our  Bibles  teach  us  ;  but  the  same  truth  has  been  affirmed  by 
men  who  never  saw  the  Bible.  "  Never  did  man  attain  to  true  greatness,"  writes 
Cicero,  in  one  place,  "  without  being  the  subject  of  a  Divine  inspiration,"  whilst 
another  of  the  ancient  philosophers  says,  *'  There  is  a  holy  Spirit  which  dwelleth 
within  us — as  we  treat  Him,  so  He  treateth  us,  and  He  it  is  from  whom  every  good 
man  receiveth  both  honourable  and  upright  purposes."  How  these  heathens  came 
by  this  knowledge,  except  as  part  of  some  traditional  and  half-preserved  revelation, 
it  seems  hard  to  explain.  Consider — I.  The  infirmities  which  the  text  speaks  of 
AS  BEING  so  geeat  A  HINDRANCE  TO  PRAYER.  The  word  describes  a  sickness  or 
positive  disease  in  the  moral  system,  incapacitating  ns  for  the  employments  which, 
in  a  healthy  frame  of  spirit,  would  be  our  privilege  and  dehght.  1.  Ignorance, 
unskilledness  in  not  knowing  how  to  order  our  prayer  before  God,  or  to  bring  our 
spirit  to  an  adequate  appreciation  of  the  work  in  which  we  are  about  to  engage. 
The  Divine  Being  must  be  felt  to  be  present  as  an  actual  personal  subsistence — a 
power  willing  to  be  sought,  incUned  to  hearken,  able  to  relieve,  mighty  to  save. 
The  formalist  is  at  no  effort  to  conceive  of  the  presence  of  such  a  being  while  he  is 
praying.  The  terminating  object  of  his  prayer  is  the  prayer  itself,  and  he  does  not 
look  behind  it.  But  the  moment  feelings  of  needed  help  and  desired  peace  enter 
into  our  prayer,  those  perfunctory  performances  no  longer  satisfy  us,  we  must  be 
brought  into  near  converse  with  God.  That  this  difficulty  discourages  many  in 
their  first  attempt  at  prayer  will  be  readily  admitted.  "  Teach  us  what  we  shall 
say  unto  God,"  says  Elihu,  "for  we  cannot  order  our  speech  by  reason  of  darkness." 
Whilst  Job  himself  exclaims,  "  0  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  Him,"  &c. 
Indeed ,  we  may  not  hesitate  to  include  a  regard  to  this  form  of  infirmity  as  being 
among  the  contemplated  ends  of  our  Divine  Lord's  incarnation.  2.  Mistaken 
desires,  hurtful  and  unwise  choices  in  regard  to  what  will  make  for  our  true 
happiness.  Sometimes  we  pray  for  things  positively  hurtful  to  us,  as  when 
the  Israelites  prayed  for  meat  in  the  wilderness ;  sometimes  for  things  not 
wrong  in  themselves,  but  yet  wrong  because  in  an  unsubmissive  spirit,  as  when 
Bebecca  said,  "  God,  give  me  children,  or  else  I  die."  We  ask  for  medicines  to  be 
taken  away  which  are  working  heaven's  kindest  cures,  and  we  desire  change  in  our 
outward  lot  which  can  only  encompass  us  with  new  dangers  and  snares.  3.  Unfixed 
and  unworthy  thoughts.  The  apostle  prayed  for  the  Corinthians — "That  we 
may  attend  on  the  Lord  without  distraction,"  which  describes  a  mind  divided  and 
rent  by  a  multitude  of  contending  thoughts,  each  demanding  our  fixed  and  earnest 
heed,  all  attended  to  in  turn,  but  none  appeased.  And  the  apostle's  prayer  is,  that 
God's  footstool  may  never  be  made  the  place  of  such  unseemly  strife,  but  in  that 
awful  presence  the  heart  may  be  at  unity  in  itself,  having  one  care  to  absorb,  one 
errand  to  fulfil,  one  presence  to  realise,  one  voice  to  hear.    II.  In  what  way  the 

INTLUENCB    OF    THE    HoLY    SPIRIT    MAT  BE  SAID  TO    HELP   US  AGAINST  THEM.       1.    He 

"helpeth,"  an  expression  which  describes  the  joint  bearing  with  the  person  helped, 
of  a  burden  pressing  upon  both.  The  burden  is  not  taken  off,  but  there  is  a 
sustaining  hand  underneath  which  lightens  the  grievance  of  the  pressure.  The 
text  therefore  promises  not  a  removed  burden,  but  an  ability  to  bear;  not  the 
supersession  of  your  own  exertions  and  means,  but  a  gracious  throwing  in  of  the 
Holy  Spirit's  succours  to  make  those  means  effectual.  2.  He  "  maketh  intercession 
for  as."  He  is  said  to  do  that  which  He  enables  us  to  do.  He  is  the  source,  and 
strength,  and  food  of  our  whole  devotional  life.  He  moulds  us  into  the  praying  frame ; 
He  suggests  to  us  praying  thoughts ;  He  forms  in  us  the  praying  habit.  3.  He  ♦'  maketh 
intercession  for  us  with  groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered."  {D.  Moore,  M.A.)  The 
help  of  the  Spirit: — I.  An  equality  of  ignorance.  "We  know  not."  There  are 
many  questions  that  bring  people  to  this  equality.  A  child  may  ask  a  question  that 
a  philosopher  cannot  answer.  So  Paul  was  sometimes  as  ignorant  of  the  will  of 
God  concerning  him  as  the  weakest  disciple.  II.  Am  equality  of  help.  Our 
infirmities.     Literally,  the  Spirit  lifts  "with  "  as,  not  for  as  ;  oar  weak  effort  it 


'chat,  vm.]  ROMANS.  141 

made  available  by  His  might.  A  boy  is  trying  to  row  a  heavy  boat :  he  is  powerless 
to  lift  the  oars,  his  father  comes  behind,  and  lays  one  hand  on  each  oar,  and  rows 
with  him.  HI.  A  common  medium  by  which  our  desires  are  put  in  harmony  with 
the  will  of  God.  "  Groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered."  The  cry  of  the  infant 
is  interpreted  by  its  mother,  the  sigh  of  the  sick  man  is  as  good  as  words 
to  the  nurse,  so  the  groaning  (Psa.  cii.  5)  and  the  weeping  (Psa.  vi.  8)  are  voices 
in  the  ear  of  God.  (W.  Harris).  Our  ignorance  as  to  legitimate  subjects  for 
prayer: — Pythagoras  forbade  his  disciples  to  pray  for  themselves,  because  they 
knew  not  what  was  expedient.  Socrates  more  wisely  taught  his  disciples  to  pray 
eimply  for  good  things,  the  gods  knowing  best  what  sort  of  things  are  good.  But 
better  illustiMtions  are  found  in  Paul's  own  CNpression  (Phil.  i.  22,3)  ;  and  in  that 
of  our  Lord  (John  xii.  27,  28).  (Archdeacon  Gifford.)  Prayer— for  help  to  pray : 
— In  Dr.  Kyland's  memoir  of  Andrew  Fuller  is  the  folL)wing  anecdote.  At  a 
conference  at  Soham,  a  friend  of  slender  abilities  being  asked  to  pray,  knelt  down, 
and  Mr.  Fuller  and  the  company  with  him,  when  he  found  himself  so  embarrassed, 
that,  whispeiing  to  Mr.  Fuller,  he  said,  "  I  do  not  know  how  to  go  on."  Mr.  Fuller 
replied  in  a  whisper,  *'  Tell  the  Lord  so."  The  ?est  of  the  company  did  not  hear 
what  passed  between  them,  but  the  man,  taking  Mr.  Fuller's  advice,  began  to  confess 
his  not  knowing  how  to  pray  as  he  ought  to  pray,  begging  to  be  taught  to  pray,  and 
BO  proceeded  in  prayer  to  the  satisfaction  of  all  the  company,  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  help  of  the  Divine  Spirit : — I  go  into  the  studio  of  my  friend  the  artist,  and  he 
makes  the  outline.  I  recognise  the  likeness  to  some  extent  as  my  friend's,  but  it  is 
not  perfect.  He  takes  his  pencil,  and,  as  he  gazes  upon  the  countenance  he  wishes 
to  express,  he  applies  the  pencil,  and  by  degrees,  by  touch  after  touch,  the  likeness 
comes  out,  until  at  last,  when  finished,  it  is  perfected  so  far  as  it  may  be  perfected, 
and  I  say  it  is  the  perfect  likeness  of  my  friend.  So  the  Holy  Spirit  has  been 
sitting  on  your  hearts,  and,  I  humbly  trust,  on  mine.  There  is  Jesus,  the  great 
example.  Here  is  my  heart.  The  rude  outlines  have  been  already  formed.  I  have 
been  adopted  into  the  family.  I  bear  a  family  likeness ;  I  can  be  recognised  as 
something  like  the  blessed  Saviour,  be  it  ever  so  little,  but  the  Holy  Spirit  is 
changing,  transforming,  touching  this  part  and  that,  making  me  a  little  more 
loving  and  more  meek,  more  self-denying,  more  active,  until  by  and  by  I  shall  bo 
brought  into  His  likeness ;  it  shall  be  saici :  *'  It  is  enough  " ;  and  then,  released  from 
mortality,  I  shall  mount  up  as  on  wings  of  eagles  ;  I  shall  see  Him  in  glory. 
(H.  W.  Beecher.)  Encouragements  to  prayer  for  the  weak  and  oppressed : — 
Consider — I.  The  mscotiBAGEMENTS  that  weak  believers  experience  in  tueib 
ATTEMPTS  TO  PRAY.  We  do  HOt  uow  refer  to  the  many  external  discouragements. 
A  devotional  spirit  may  be  restrained  and  destroyed  from  worldly  associations, 
a  multiplicity  of  engagements,  but  the  apostle  calls  on  us  to  notice  those  internal 
discouragements  that  arise  from  "our  infirmities."  Even  the  apostles  were  not 
exempt  from  the  infirmities  which  are  found — 1.  In  the  matter  of  our  prayers, 
"  We  know  not  what  to  pray  for."  This  arises — (1)  From  ignorance.  (2)  From 
a  moral  destitution.  (3)  From  a  want  of  suitable  dispositions  of  mind.  2.  In  the 
manner  of  our  prayers.  We  know  not  how  to  pray  as  we  ought.  So  confused, 
unconnected,  and  incoherent,  are  our  prayers.  If  our  petitions  are  not 
immediately  answered,  we  are  unwilling  to  wait  any  longer.  "We  knock  at 
mercy's  door  and  run  away."  There  is  oftentimes  much  pride  and  selfishness 
mixed  with  our  prayers.  Sometimes  the  desire  of  a  present  indulgence  makes  ua 
forgetful  of  duties,  an  attention  to  which  would  yield  us  more  solid  and  lasting 
enjoyment.  Sometimes  the  dread  of  a  present  evil  leads  to  the  use  of  arguments 
and  expressions  unsuited  to  our  true  character  and  condition.    11.  The  encodbage- 

MENT  WE  HAVE  TO  SEEK  DiVINE  ASSISTANCE  IN  THIS  IMPORTANT  DUTY.      In    reference  tO 

this  promise  of  the  Spirit's  intercession  and  help.  Observe — 1.  That  it  does  not 
render  the  exercise  of  the  mind  unnecessary  (1  Cor.  xiv.  15).  We  are  not  dealt  with 
as  automatons  in  religion.  2.  Neither  does  it  render  nugatory  the  intercession  of 
Christ  (ver.  34).  Both  are  necessary.  There  is  a  material  difference  in  their 
intercession.  Christ  pleads  and  procures  our  reconciliation  and  pardon,  without 
US ;  the  Spirit  co-operates  to  the  same  end  by  His  gracious  influences  within  us. 
Christ  by  His  all-sufficient  merits  intercedes  for  His  people  now  in  heaven ;  the 
Spirit  is  engaged  in  applying  the  benefits  of  His  death  to  our  hearts  here  on  earth. 
8.  But  the  promise  is  designed  to  teach  us  that  the  agency  of  the  Spirit  in  prayer 
is  indispensable.  It  is  called  the  Spirit  of  grace  and  supplication,  and  we  are 
exhorted  to  pray  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  our  Saviour  shows  that  we  oannot  rightly 
perform  the  duty  without  it  (Luke  zL  10-13).     IH.  The  use  we  should  uass  or 


142  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viil. 

THIS  SUBJECT.  It  should  scrve — 1.  To  qaicken  the  indolent.  2.  To  encourage  the 
timid.  3.  To  alarm  the  presumptuous.  (Essex  Congregational  Remembrancer.) 
But  the  Spirit  itself  maketh  intercession  for  us  with  groanings  that  cannot  be 
uttered. — The  intercession  of  the  Spirit  in  prayer: — "We  know  not."  This 
ignorance  is  twofold — 1.  Of  the  gifts  to  be  asked  for.  (1)  If  we  knew  what  we 
needed  our  great  necessity  for  prayer  would  pass  away.  How  many  of  our  prayers 
are  produced  by  a  consciousness  of  deadness  of  emotion  in  which  we  are  tempted  to 
feel  that  we  are  "  rich  .  .  .  and  have  need  of  nothing."  And  because  we  know 
this  to  be  a  delusion  we  are  driven  to  cry  to  God  to  show  us  our  poverty.  (2)  Our 
ignorance  of  our  souls  is  sufficient  proof  of  our  ignorance  of  the  gifts  to  be  sought 
from  God.  For  before  we  ask  absolutely  for  any  temporal  gift  we  should  know 
what  influence  as  a  new  temptation  it  would  have  on  us.  What  appear  the  safest 
requests  have  a  peril  of  their  own.  Like  Agur  we  may  ask  for  neither  poverty  nor 
riches,  but  the  blessing  asked  for  contains  a  temptation  to  fancy  oneself  free  from 
the  sins  of  both  states.  Who  has  not  sometimes  found  it  to  be  a  great  blessing  that 
his  prayers  have  remained  unanswered  ?  (3)  The  awful  fact  of  human  influence 
seems,  when  realised,  to  be  an  effective  barrier  to  absolute  praying.  Who,  not 
knowing  what  result  it  might  produce,  dare  ask  for  one  gift,  seeing  that  if  he  fails, 
he  may  drag  a  brother  down  with  him  in  his  fall.  (4)  Pass  on  to  petitions  for 
spiritual  blessings.  It  may  be  said  that  we  can  rightly  ask  for  such  ;  and  so  we 
can  when  God's  Spirit  teaches  us,  but  not  till  then.  The  strange  responses  which 
our  prayers  often  receive  seem  to  indicate  that.  We  cry  for  faith,  and  are  met  with 
darker  doubt ;  for  peace,  and  are  called  upon  to  maintain  a  fiercer  conflict;  for 
happiness,  and  meet  with  sorrow.  2.  Of  the  way  to  ask  for  them.  To  ask  rightly 
— (1)  We  must  realise  the  solemnity  of  asking.  Many  prayers  are  offered  from 
a  sense  of  duty,  or  force  of  habit,  to  some  Being,  we  scarcely  dare  ask  who. 
Hence  we  fail  to  "  take  hold  on  God."  But  when  touched  by  the  Divine  Spirit  we 
rouse  all  the  powers  of  being  to  realise  the  Divine  presence  as  an  overwhelming 
reality — we  feel  the  solemnity  of  asking.  And  if  we  further  realise  that  by  Hia 
Spirit  He  is  specially  near  the  praying  soul — that  the  Divine  breath  is  quickening 
the  prayer,  while  the  Great  Spirit  waits  to  catch  the  voice— that  prayer  is  the 
prayer  of  His  child,  and  the  Father  amid  the  grandeur  of  His  universe,  listens  to 
its  call.  Under  such  circumstances  mechanical  or  formal  prayer  is  impossible. 
(2)  We  must  be  in  the  right  state  of  mind.  We  must  be  free  from  the  distractions 
of  passion.  The  wUd  impulses  of  the  heart  beat  back  the  upsoaring  of  the  spirit. 
Who  but  the  Spirit  of  God  can  calm  the  turmoils  of  the  earthly  temper  ?  (3)  We 
must  ask  with  persevering  earnestness.  We  ought  always  to  pray  and  not 
faint.  II.  The  mannbb  of  the  Spikix's  intercession.  The  awakening  of  an 
inexpressible  emotion.  All  deep  feelings  are  too  large  for  language.  In  the 
profoundest  sense  when  the  soid  is  touched  by  the  Spirit  emotions  are  awakened 
which  break  out  in  unutterable  aspiration.  HI.  The  cebtaintt  of  the  Divine 
BESPONSK  (ver.  27).  There  are  two  kinds  of  prayer — that  of  the  Baal  worshipper 
hoping  to  avert  his  wrath  and  change  his  purpose  ;  and  that  of  a  Christian  crying 
for  the  Spirit  which  is  in  harmony  with  God's  will.  Note  the  beautiful  thought 
— the  strong  Eternal  Spirit  breathing  through  the  frail  child  of  time  for  His 
own  fuller  descent.  On  the  rock  of  God's  truthfulness  prayer  stands  firm  and 
sure.  Our  ignorance  and  feebleness  becomes  wise  and  bold.  We  dare  not 
ask  absolutely  for  any  particular  blessing,  but  the  Spirit  inspires  the  cry 
"  Thy  will  be  done  " ;  and  the  right  blessings  are  given.  {E.  L.  Hull,  B.A.) 
The  intercession  of  the  Spirit : — I.  What  is  to  be  understood  by  praying  abioht  ? 
1.  Negatively.  (1)  Not  praying  aright  in  a  legal  sense,  without  any  imperfection 
in  the  eye  of  the  law.  The  best  prayers  of  the  best  saints  have  always  been 
attended  with  blemishes  (Isa.  Ixiv.  6).  (2)  Not  praying  aright  in  a  moral  sense, 
wherein  the  most  rigid  hearer  can  discern  nothing  contrary  to  the  precepts  of 
morality.  A  prayer  may  be  so  far  right  as  no  unlawful  thing  may  be  prayed  for  in 
it,  and  yet  may  be  naught  (Luke  xviiL  11).  The  matter  may  be  very  good  where 
the  manner  of  praying  spoils  all.  (3)  Not  praying  aright  in  a  rhetorical  sense. 
Words,  voice  and  gesture  are  of  little  moment  before  God  (1  Sam.  zvi.  7 ;  1  Cor. 
ii.  4).  It  may  be  a  right  prayer  where  the  sentences  are  broken  (Psa.  vi.  3),  and 
where  there  is  not  a  wrong  word  t  ere  may  not  be  one  right  affection.  2.  Posi- 
tively, it  is  praying  aright  in  an  evangelical  sense.  This  implies — (1)  Sincerity  in 
prayer  (1  Chron.  xxix.  17),  in  opposition  to  formality  and  hypocrisy  (2  Tim.  iii.  5 ; 
Psa.  xvii.  1).  (2)  A  perfection  of  parts  in  prayer,  though  not  of  degrees,  i.e.,  (o) 
Praying  for  things  agreeable  to  God's  will  revealed  in  His  word  of  command  or 


CHAP,  vni.]  ROMANS.  143 

promise  (1  John  v.  14).  (b)  Praying  in  a  right  manner  (Jer.  xxziz.  13).  Hereunto 
are  required  praying  graces  and  affections  in  exercise,  as  faith,  fervency,  humility, 
reverence,  and  the  like.  Where  these  are  wanting  the  duty  will  be  reckoned  but 
bodily  exercise  (1  Tim.  iv.  8).  Such  praying  is  right  in  so  far  as  it  is  acceptable 
in  the  sight  of  God,  i.e.,  capable  of  being  accepted  according  to  the  rule  of  the 
Rospel.  It  is  a  sacrifice  fit  to  be  laid  on  God's  altar,  a  prayer  which  may  be  put  in 
the  Mediator's  hand,  that  through  His  intercession  it  may  be  actually  accepted. 
II.  All  oub  prating  aright  is  done  by  the  help  op  the  Spirit.  It  is  done  by 
the  help  of  the  Spirit  dwelling  in  us  and  actually  influencing  us  (GaL  iv.  6).  This 
is  clear — 1.  From  Scripture  testimony.  The  Spirit  is  the  Author  of  our  whole 
sanctification,  whereof  praying  aright  is  a  part  (2  Thess.  ii.  13  ;  Phil.  iii.  3).  It 
is  by  Him  we  have  access  to  God  in  worship  (Eph.  ii.  18,  vi.  18).  2.  We  are 
spiritually  dead  without  the  Spirit  indwelling,  and  spiritually  asleep  without  the 
Spirit  influencing  (Eph.  ii.  1 ;  Cant.  v.  2).  Neither  a  dead  man  nor  a  sleeping 
man  is  fit  to  present  a  supplication  to  the  king.  3.  There  is  no  praying  aright 
without  sanctifying  grace,  nor  without  that  grace  in  exercise  (John  ix.  31 ;  Cant. 
iii.  1).  Where  grace  is  not  in  exercise  there  is  incense  indeed,  but  no  pillar  of 
smoke  ascending  from  it  to  heaven  ;  spikenard  indeed,  but  no  smell  thereof.  4.  To 
praying  aright  is  required  a  light  of  the  mind  and  warmth  of  affections,  the  former 
for  the  matter,  the  latter  for  the  manner.  And  it  is  a  false  light  and  warmth  that 
makes  some  natural  men  think  that  sometimes  they  pray  aright  (Isa.  Iviii.  2).  But 
all  genuine  light  and  vital  warmth  comes  from  the  Spirit  (Eph.  i.  17,  18 ;  2  Tim.  i. 
7).  ni.  In  what  respects  odb  prayinq  aright  is  so  fab  done  by  the  help  of 
THE  Spirit  that  it  is  justly  beckoned  His  work.  1.  All  that  is  right  in  our 
prayers  is  from  the  Spirit,  and  all  that  is  wrong  in  them  from  ourselves  (1  Cor.  xii. 
11 ;  1  Pet.  1.  22  ;  with  2  Cor.  iii.  5).  In  tbe  incense  of  our  prayers  there  is  smoke 
that  goes  up  towards  heaven,  ashes  that  remain  behind  on  the  earth.  It  is  the  fire 
from  the  altar  that  sends  up  the  smoke ;  it  is  the  earthly  nature  of  the  incense  that 
occasions  the  ashes.  2.  None  pray  aright  but  as  they  are  members  of  Christ  and 
children  of  God  (Gal.  iv.  6 ;  Kom.  viii.  15  ;  John  xv.  5).  Now  it  is  the  Holy  Spirit 
of  the  Head  that  dwells  in  and  actuates  all  the  members  acting  as  members  (1  Cor. 
xii.  11,  12).  3.  The  Spirit  is  the  principal  cause  of  our  praying  aright ;  we  are  but 
the  instrumental  causes  of  it  (James  v.  16).  As  the  sound  of  the  horn  ceases  as 
soon  as  one  ceases  to  wind  it,  so  does  our  praying  aright  on  the  withdrawing  of  the 
Spirit  (2  Cor.  iii.  5).  4.  All  our  praying  graces,  as  all  others,  are  in  their  exercise 
the  product  of  the  Spirit  and  His  work  in  us  (Gal.  v.  22,  23).  In  prayer  these  are 
brought  forth  into  exercise — the  man  acts  faith,  love,  &c. — and  therein  the  soul  of 
prayer  lies ;  but  look  on  them  as  they  are  so  brought  forth  from  the  stock,  and  they 
are  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  though  the  believer  is  the  tree  they  hang  on  (Isa.  xliv. 
3,  4).  IV.  The  Spirit's  work  in  oob  praying  aright,  or  what  His  intercession 
FOR  us  IS.  Note — 1.  The  difference  betwixt  Christ's  intercession  and  the  Spirit's. 
(1)  Christ  intercedes  for  us  in  heaven  at  the  Father's  right  hand  (ver.  34) ; 
the  Spirit  intercedes  in  our  hearts  upon  earth  (Gal.  iv.  6).  (2)  Christ's  is  a  media- 
tory intercession  between  God  and  us  (1  Tim.  ii.  5),  bat  the  Spirit's  is  an  auxiliary 
intercession  to  us,  whereby  He  helps  us  to  go  to  God.  (3)  The  Spirit's  intercession 
is  the  fruit  of  Christ's,  and  what  is  done  by  the  sinner  through  the  Spirit's  inter- 
cession is  accepted  of  God  through  the  intercession  of  Christ.  In  a  word,  the 
difference  is  such  as  is  between  one  who  draws  a  poor  man's  petition  for  him,  and 
another  who  presents  it  to  the  king  and  gets  it  granted.  2.  The  help  of  the  Spirit 
in  prayer.  (1)  More  generally.  He  acts  in  it — (a)  As  a  teaching  Spirit  (John  xiv.  26). 
It  is  our  infirmity  that  "we  know  not  what  we  should  pray  for  as  we  ought."  He 
ielps  our  ignorance  (1  John  ii.  27).  (b)  As  a  quickening  Spirit  fPsa.  Ixxx.  18).  "  He 
maketh  intercession  with  groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered,'  setting  the  gracious 
heart  working  towards  God  with  the  utmost  earnestness.  (2)  More  particularly,  (a) 
He  excites  us  to  pray  (ver.  15)  He  impresses  our  spirits  with  a  sense  of  a  Divine 
call  to  it,  and  so  binds  it  on  our  consciences  as  duty  to  God ;  then  He  inclines  us 
to  the  duty,  that  we  willingly  comply  with  it  (Psa.  xxvii.  8).  (6)  He  gives  us  a 
view  of  God  as  a  gracious  and  merciful  Father  in  Christ  (Gal.  iv.  6) ;  and  hereby 
He  works  in  ns  a  holy  reverence  in  God  (Heb.  xii.  28),  and  a  holy  confidence  in 
Him  (Eph.  iii.  12).  This  confidence  respects  both  His  ability  and  willingness  to 
help  us  (Matt.  vii.  11).  Without  this  there  can  be  no  acceptable  prayer  (Heb.  xi. 
6 ;  James  i.  6).  This  is  it  that  makes  prayer  an  ease  to  a  troubled  heart.  Hence 
the  soul,  though  not  presently  eased,  draws  these  conclusions.  He  designs  my 
good  by  all  the  hardships  I  am  under  (ver.  28) ;  He  pities  me  under  them  (Psa.  ciii. 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vtb. 

13) ;  He  knows  the  best  time  for  removing  them,  and  will  do  it  when  that  comes 
(1  Sam.  ii.  3).  (c)  He  gives  us  a  view  of  ourselves  in  our  own  sinfulness  and 
unworthiness  (John  xvi.  8  ;  Isa,  vL  5).  Hereby  He  works  in  us— humiliation  of 
heart  before  the  Lord  (Gen.  xviii.  27 ;  Luke  xviii.  13 ;  Ezek.  xxxvi.  31) ;  cordial 
confession  (Psa.  Ixii.  8);  hearty  thanksgiving  for  mercies  received  (Psa.  cxvi.  11, 
12) ;  a  high  value  for  the  Mediator  and  His  righteousness  (PhU.  iii.  9).  {d)  He 
gives  us  a  view  of  our  wants  and  the  need  we  have  of  the  supply  of  them  (Luke 
XV.  17).  This  may  be  seen,  comparing  the  Pharisee's  and  publican's  prayers  (Luke 
xviii.  11-13).  Here  He  acts  as  an  euhghtener,  opening  the  eyes  of  the  mind  to 
discern  the  wants  and  needs  we  are  compassed  with  (Eph.  i.  17,  18) ;  as  a  remem- 
brancer (John  xiv.  26) ;  as  a  forewarner  of  what  we  may  need  (John  xvi.  13). 
(e)  He  gives  us  a  view  of  the  grace  and  promises  of  the  covenant  (Psa.  xxv.  14 ; 
John  xiv.  26).  And  here  the  Spirit  brings  to  remembrance  the  grace  and  promises 
suited  to  our  case  (Gen.  xxxii.  11,  12),  and  unfolds  that  grace  and  these  promises, 
causing  to  understand  them  in  a  spiritual  and  saving  manner  (1  Cor.  ii.  12). 
Hereby  the  Spirit  teaches  what  to  pray  for,  according  to  the  will  of  God,  and  in  what 
terms  to  pray  for  it,  the  terms  of  the  promise  agreeable  to  the  grace  of  the  covenant. 
Hereby,  too,  He  fills  our  mouths  with  arguments,  helping  us  to  plead  and  pray  (Job 
xxiii.  3,  4),  and  stirs  up  in  us  a  faith  of  particular  confidence  as  to  the  thing  prayed 
for,  so  that  we  are  helped  to  pray  believingly  (Matt.  xxi.  22  ;  Mark  xi.  24  ;  1  Tim. 
ii.  8;  James  i.  6;  cf.  2  Cor.  iv,  13),  and  works  in  us  a  holy  boldness  in  prayer  (Eph. 
iii.  12).  (/)  He  raiseth  in  us  holy  desires  for  the  supply  of  our  wants,  "groaninga 
which  cannot  be  uttered."  Thus  we  are  made  to  pray  fervently  (James  v.  16; 
Eom.  xii.  11).  (.g)  He  gives  us  a  view  of  the  merit  and  intercession  of  the  Mediator 
(Eph.  i.  17).  Hereby  He  points  ns  to  the  only  way  of  acceptance  of  our  prayera 
(John  xiv.  6),  lays  before  us  a  firm  foundation  of  confidence  before  the  Lord  (1  John 
ii.  1 ;  Eph.  iii.  12),  and  furnishes  us  with  an  answer  to  all  objections  that  an 
unbelieving  heart  and  a  subtle  devil  can  muster  up  against  us,  in  prayer  (vers.  33, 
34).  (h)  He  manages  the  heart  and  spirit  in  prayer,  which  every  serious  soul 
will  own  to  be  a  hard  task  (Jer,  x.  23) ;  He  composes  it  for  prayer  (Psa.  Ixxxvi. 
11) ;  He  fixes  it  in  prayer,  that  it  wander  not  away  in  the  duty  (Ezek.  xxxvi. 
27);  and  reduces  it  from  its  wanderings  (Psa.  xxiii.  3).  {i)  The  Spirit  causes 
us  to  continue  in  prayer  from  time  to  time  till  we  obtain  a  gracious  answer, 
and  so  makes  us  pray  perseveringly  (Eph.  vi.  18),  by  accounting  for  the  delay 
of  our  answer  in  a  way  consistent  with  God's  honour  and  our  good,  and  so 
satisfying  us  in  that  point  (Psa.  xxii.  2,  3);  by  strengthening  faith  and  hope, 
which  have  the  battle  to  fight  in  this  case  (Eph.  iii.  16) ;  and  by  continuing  and 
reviving  on  our  spirits  the  sense  of  our  need,  which,  pinching  us  anew,  obliges  to 
renew  our  suit  for  relief  until  the  time  we  get  it  (2  Cor.  xii.  8).  (T.  Boston,  D.D.) 
The  Holy  Spirit  an  internal  intercessor: — The  text  speaks  of — I.  Cebtain  infibmi- 
TTES  INCIDENT  TO  CHRISTIAN  BELIEVEB3.  Thesc  infirmities  are  immediately  connected 
with  the  exercise  of  spiritual  prayer,  and  they  are — 1.  Ignorance  as  to  matter. 
"  We  know  not  what  we  should  pray  for  as  we  ought."  That  there  are  times  when 
believers  are  so  beset  with  temptations,  or  so  greatly  harassed  by  the  internal  con- 
flict, as  not  to  know  what  they  most  need.  2.  But,  again,  the  infirmities  of  which 
the  apostle  makes  mention,  include  inefficiency  as  to  the  manner  of  prayer.  "  We 
know  not  what  we  should  pray  for  as  we  ought."  The  soul's  groanings  indicate 
infirmity.  Were  there  no  infirmity  there  would  be  no  groaning ;  all  would  then  be 
liberty  and  satisfaction.  He  who  knows  not  what  to  ask  for  as  he  ought,  is 
restrained  in  expressing  himself.      II.    The    assistance  which    believebs   abe 

PBIVILEQED    TO    BECEIVE    FEOM    THE    HOLT    SPIBIT,   IN    CONNECTION   WITH    THEIB   INITB- 

MiTiES  IN  PBAYEB.  "  The  Spirit  helpeth  our  infirmities."  "  The  Spirit  maketh 
intercession  for  us."  Observe  here,  the  Spirit  is  not  said  to  supersede  our  infirmi- 
ties, but  only  to  help  them,  and  His  help  comes  in  the  form  of  intercession.  The 
infirmity  remains,  and  is  sanctified  by  the  influence  which  reaches  it.  The  groan- 
ings are  not  hushed,  but  they  are  made  a  vehicle  into  which  the  Comforter  throws 
His  interceding  voice  in  its  passage  to  the  skies.     IH.  The  blessed  consequences 

OF   HAVINO  THE   ASSISTANCE  OF   THE    HoLY  SprRIT   AS   AN   INTEBNAL   InTERCESSOB.       We 

are  told,  in  effect,  that  the  Spirit's  pleading,  although  it  be  embodied  in  unutter- 
able groanings,  cannot  fail  to  draw  down  upon  the  contrite  soul  the  blessings  of 
covenanted  grace.  The  Holy  Spirit,  the  Son,  and  the  Father  are  the  contracting 
parties  in  the  scheme  of  human  redemption;  and  each  party  must  needs  take 
cognizance  cl  every  branch  of  the  work  appropriated  by  the  other  parties.  Here, 
however,  it  most  be  remembered  that  blessings  imparted  are  not  always  blesaingi 


OHAP.  vni.)  ROMANS.  14S 

apprehended.  The  showers  of  heaven  are  not  the  less  fertilising  because  they  fall 
at  midnight ;  neither  are  the  communications  of  grace  the  less  real  or  the  less  bene- 
ficial in  their  results  because  they  reach  the  soul  during  seasons  of  spiritual  gloom. 
He  may  continue  to  groan.  The  visitation  itself  may  be  nnperceived  by  him,  while 
it  is  working  its  blessed  effects  in  the  hidden  recesses  of  a  disconsolate  heart.  In 
God's  time,  however,  its  results  will  be  made  manifest.  It  is  in  consistency  with 
the  analogy  of  the  Divine  proceedings  to  connect  great  blessings  with  severe  trials. 
rV.  Some  words  of  improvement  and  application.  1.  First,  in  the  way  of  caution, 
I  would  say,  Beware  of  judging  of  the  excellency  or  of  the  eflBcacy  of  prayer  by  the 
medium  through  which  it  passes.  It  is  the  spirit  that  prompts,  not  the  language 
that  embodies,  to  which  the  Holy  One  gives  heed.  The  true  beauty  of  prayer, 
whether  as  to  import  or  expression,  is  simplicity.  2.  This  passage  furnishes  some 
salutary  hints  and  some  important  inferences  as  to  the  variations  which  charac- 
terise the  Christian  experience.  The  clearest  stream  may  be  muddled  by  an 
incidental  disturbance,  and  the  brightest  sky  may  be  overshadowed  by  a  passing 
cloud.  Therefore  draw  no  wrong  conclusions  respecting  your  spiritual  state  from 
the  mere  circumstance  of  your  enjoyments  being  at  times  interrupted  or  suspended. 
3.  The  text  gives  great  encouragement  to  those  Christians,  whatever  may  be  their 
standing  in  the  church  of  the  regenerate,  or  whatever  may  be  the  peculiar  cast  or 
character  of  their  experience,  who  want  language  in  which  to  embody  their  feelings 
at  the  throne  of  the  heavenly  grace.  (W.  Knight,  M.A.)  The  Holy  Spirit's  interces' 
sion : — I.  The  help  which  the  Holy  Ghost  gives.  If  in  time  of  trouble  a  man  can 
pray.  Lis  burden  loses  its  weight.  But  sometimes  we  are  in  such  confusion  of  mind 
that  we  know  not  what  we  should  pray  for  as  we  ought.  We  see  the  disease,  but  the 
name  of  the  medicine  is  not  known  to  us.  When  we  know  the  matter  of  prayer,  we 
yet  fail  to  pray  in  a  right  manner.  Coming  to  our  aid  in  our  bewilderment — 1.  He 
instructs  us.  "  He  shall  teach  you  all  things."  He  instructs  us  as  to  our  need,  and  as 
to  the  promises  of  God  which  refer  to  that  need.  2.  He  often  directs  the  mind  to  the 
special  subject  of  prayer.  We  sometimes  find  our  minds  carried  as  by  a  strong 
under-current  into  a  particular  line  of  prayer  for  some  one  definite  object.  It  is  not 
merely  that  our  judgment  leads  us  in  that  direction,  though  usually  the  Spirit  of 
God  acts  upon  us  by  enlightening  our  judgment,  but  we  often  feel  an  unaccountable 
and  irresistible  desire  rising  again  and  again  within  our  heart.  3.  He  Himself 
•'  maketh  intercession  for  us"  ;  not  that  He  ever  groans  or  personally  prays,  but 
He  excites  intense  desire  and  unutterable  groanlngs  in  us,  and  these  are  ascribed 
to  Him  ;  even  as  Solomon  built  the  temple  because  he  superintended  and  ordained 
all.  4.  He  strengthens  the  faith  of  beUevers.  That  faith  is  at  first  of  His  creating, 
and  afterwards  it  is  of  His  sustaining  and  increasing.  5.  In  this  whole  matter  the 
Spirit  acts — (1)  As  a  prompter  to  a  reciter.  (2)  As  an  advocate  to  one  in  peril  at  law. 
(3)  As  a  father  aiding  his  boy.  II.  The  prayer  which  the  Holy  Spirit  inspires. 
The  prayers  which  are  indited  in  us  by  the  Spirit  of  God  are — 1.  Those  which  arise 
from  our  inmost  soul.  A  man's  heart  is  moved  when  he  groans.  2.  Such  prayers 
will  rise  within  us  when  the  mind  is  far  too  troubled  to  let  us  speak.  We  know  not 
what  we  should  pray  for  as  we  ought,  and  then  it  is  that  we  groan.  Hezekiah  said, 
"  Like  a  crane  or  a  swallow  did  I  chatter."  The  Psalmist  said,  "  I  am  so  troubled 
that  I  cannot  speak."  3.  They  sometimes  concern  such  great  things  that  they 
cannot  be  spoken.  If  it  were  some  little  thing,  my  narrow  capacity  could  compre- 
hend and  describe  it,  but  I  need  all  covenant  blessings.  But  it  may  be  that  we 
groan  because  we  are  conscious  of  the  littleness  of  our  desire  and  the  narrowness 
of  our  faith.  The  trial,  too,  may  seem  too  mean  to  pray  about.  4.  They  are 
prayers  of  knowledge.  Notice,  our  difficulty  is  that  we  know  not  what  we  should 
pray  for ;  but  the  Holy  Spirit  does  know,  and  therefore  He  helps  us  by  enabling  us 
to  pray  intelligently,  knowing  what  we  are  asking  for.  The  text  speaks  of  the 
"  mind  of  the  Spirit."  What  a  mind  that  must  be  1  And  it  is  seen  in  our  inter- 
cessions when  under  His  sacred  influence  we  order  our  case  before  the  Lord,  and 
plead  with  holy  wisdom  for  things  convenient  and  necessary.  5.  They  are  prayers 
offered  in  a  proper  manner.  The  Spirit  works  in  us  humility,  earnestness,  intensity, 
importunity,  faith,  and  resignation,  and  all  else  that  is  acceptable  to  God  in  our 
supplications.  We  know  not  how  to  mingle  these  sacred  spices  in  the  incense  of 
prayer.  If  left  to  ourselves,  we  get  too  much  of  one  ingredient  or  another  and 
spoil  the  sacred  compound,  hut  the  Holy  Spirit's  intercessions  have  in  them  such 
a  blessed  blending  of  all  that  is  good  that  they  come  up  as  a  sweet  perfume  before 
the  Lord.  6.  They  are  only  in  the  saints.  III.  The  sure  success  of  all  such 
pr.AYKUs.  1.  Tiiere  is  a  meaning  in  them  which  God  reads  and  approves.  When 
VOL.   IL  10 


14<l  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  mu 


the  Spirit  of  God  writes  a  prayer  upon  a  man's  heart,  the  man  himself  may  be  in 
such  a  state  of  mind  that  he  does  not  altogether  know  what  it  is.  His  interpreta- 
tion of  it  is  a  groan,  and  that  is  all.  Yet  our  heavenly  Father,  who  looks  imme- 
diately upon  the  heart,  reads  what  the  Spirit  of  God  has  indited  there.  "  He 
knoweth  what  is  the  mind  of  the  Spirit."  Did  not  Jesus  say,  "  Your  heavenly 
Father  knoweth  that  you  have  need  of  these  things  before  you  ask  them  "  ?  2. 
They  are  '  *  the  mind  of  the  Spirit. "  God  is  one,  and  therefore  it  cannot  be  conceived 
without  profanity,  that  anything  could  be  the  mind  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  not  be  the 
mind  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son.  If,  therefore,  the  Holy  Spirit  move  you  to  any 
desire,  then  His  mind  is  in  your  prayer,  and  it  is  not  possible  that  the  eternal  Father 
should  reject  your  petitions.  3.  They  are  according  to  the  will  or  mind  of  God,  for 
He  never  maketh  intercession  in  us  other  than  is  consistent  with  the  Divine  will. 
(C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Divine  aid  in  prayer  : — First  the  Person  mentioned — God — He 
eearcheth  the  heart.  The  Lord  knoweth  the  heart  in  all  the  turnings  and  windings  of 
it.  And  this  is  a  point  which  the  Scripture  does  abundantly  make  good  to  us  in  sundry 
places  (thus  Jer.  xvii.  10  ;  Acts  i.  24  ;  1  Chron.  xxviii.  9).  This  must  needs  be  so 
upon  a  various  account.  First,  in  regard  of  His  omniscience.  He  knows  all  things, 
therefore  amongst  the  rest  He  must  know  the  heart  of  man  (John  xxi.  17 ;  Jer. 
xxxii.  19  ;  Heb.  iv.  13).  Secondly,  the  Lord  must  needs  know  the  heart,  because 
it  is  He  only  tbat  made  it.  Who  does  know  any  piece  of  workmanship  better  tban 
He  that  is  the  artificer  of  it  (Psa.  xciv.  9,  10)  ?  Thirdly,  it  is  the  Lord  which  does 
guide  it  and  order  it,  and  has  the  disposing  of  it.  Lastly,  the  Lord  must  needs 
know  the  heart,  because  He  shall  judge  every  one,  and  that  according  to  his  heart, 
as  Christ  tells  the  Church  of  Thyatira  (Rev.  ii.  28).  This  is  the  property  of  the 
Almighty  :  to  be  the  searcher  of  the  heart,  not  only  simply,  but  exclusively,  making 
it  to  be  such  a  description  of  the  Divine  Majesty,  as  wherein  none  but  Himself  is 
included.  First,  it  is  true  of  God  originally.  He  searches  and  knows  the  heart 
alone  by  the  power  of  His  own  nature,  and  an  immediate  excellency  which  is  in 
Himself,  though  others  may  in  some  sense  also  know  it  by  participation  and  deriva- 
tion from  Him.  The  prophets,  as  Samuel  to  Saul,  "  I  will  tell  thee  all  that  is  in 
thine  heart "  (1  Sam.  ix.  9).  So  Elisha  likewise  to  Gehazi,  "  Went  not  my  heart 
with  thee,"  <fec.  The  apostles,  as  Peter  of  Ananias  (Acts  v.  3).  Secondly,  it  is  true 
of  God  universally.  The  Lord  He  so  knows  the  heart  as  that  He  knows  all  the 
windings  and  turnings  of  it ;  man  knows  only  some  particulars  (Psa.  cxxxix.  4). 
Thirdly,  it  is  true  of  God  infallibly,  whereas  men — yea,  even  devils  themselves — 
they  know  it  but  conjecturaUy,  and  so,  indeed,  do  not  properly  know  it.  The  con- 
sideration of  this  point  is  useful  to  us,  first,  in  a  way  of  counsel.  Those  who  think 
they  shall  at  any  time  be  searched,  they  are  commonly  more  careful  of  themselves; 
and  so  it  should  be  with  us  in  this  particular,  and  that  in  divers  respects.  First, 
in  matter  of  duty,  that  our  heart  be  right  here.  The  Lord  observes  not  only  men's 
actions,  but  likewise  their  affections.  Thus,  for  hearing  of  the  Word  He  observes 
what  it  is  which  brings  men  to  such  places.  And  so  as  for  the  manner  of  duty,  so 
likewise  for  the  undertaking  of  it.  It  is  useful  to  us  here,  to  put  us  upon  it,  and  to 
keep  us  from  shifting  it  off  upon  pretence  of  want  of  ability  or  opportunity  for  it. 
Secondly,  in  matter  of  sin  and  that  which  is  forbidden  to  us.  It  is  very  useful 
here  also,  seeing  the  Lord  searches  the  heart,  we  should  therefore  make  conscience 
of  our  thoughts  and  such  sins  as  go  no  further  than  them.  Seeing  the  heart  is 
deceitful  above  all  things,  therefore  above  aU  things  go  to  Him  who  is  the  searcher 
and  discerner  of  the  heart.  Now  further,  secondly,  it  is  improvable  also  in  a  way 
of  comfort,  and  that  in  divers  particulars.  First,  in  a  way  of  opportunity  for  the 
doing  of  that  good  which  we  desire.  The  Lord  knows  their  hearts  and  minds  in 
it  (2  Chron.  vi.  8 ;  2  Cor.  viii.  12).  Secondly,  as  this  is  a  comfort  to  God's  children 
in  the  straitness  of  their  own  opportunities,  so  likewise  in  the  censures  and  miscon- 
Btructions  of  other  men  (1  Cor.  iv.  3-5) ;  to  light  the  hidden  things  of  darkness, 
and  manifest  the  counsels  of  the  heart.  And  so  Job,  "  My  witness  is  in  heaven,  and 
my  record  is  on  high  "  (chap.  xvi.  19).  This  is  a  comfort  in  secret  goodness,  and  such 
as  the  world  takes  no  notice  of.  That  it  shall  not  be  altogether  unrewarded  by 
God,  who  searches  the  very  heart,  and  the  secrets  and  recesses  of  it.  Again,  in 
the  temptations  of  Satan,  who  is  called  the  accuser  of  the  brethren,  and  is  said 
to  accuse  them  before  our  God  day  and  night  (Rev.  xii.  10).  What  a  great  comfort 
is  it  that  God  searcheth  the  heart  1  And  so  for  ourselves,  when  we  do  not  always 
eo  clearly  discern  our  own  estate  and  condition  in  grace ;  yet  to  say,  ••  Lord,  Thoa 
Beest  how  it  is  with  me,"  as  Peter  sometimes  to  Christ.  God  sometimes  sees  that 
good  in  His  children  which  they  at  present  do  not  discern  in  themselves.    The 


081P.  vni.|  ROMANS.  U7 

■econd  is  the  action  attributed  anto  this  Person  in  these  words  :  "  Elnoweth  what 
is  the  mind  of  the  Spirit,  because  He  maketh  intercession  for  the  saints,  according," 
&o. ;  wherein,  again,  we  have  two  branches  more.  First,  to  speak  of  the  action 
itself,  "Knoweth,"  &c.  And  this  again  it  may  be  taken  two  ways.  First,  take  it 
notionally  and  by  way  of  apprehension.  The  Lord,  who  is  the  searcher  of  hearts, 
knoweth — that  is,  understandeth — what  is  the  mind  and  meaning  of  the  Spirit  in 
those  imperfect  sighs  and  groans  which  do  at  any  time  come  from  us.  And  this  is 
very  fitly  brought  in  by  way  of  opposition  to  that  which  went  before  in  the  former 
verse.  "  We  biow  not,"  says  the  apostle,  "  what  we  should  pray  for  as  we  ought  " 
in  such  and  such  conditions.  Secondly,  take  it  affectionately  and  by  way  of  appro- 
bation. The  Lord  knows — that  is,  approves — of  the  graces  and  good  affections  of 
His  people  in  the  midst  of  those  manifold  weaknesses  and  imperfections  which 
are  mingled  withal  in  them.  He  knows  them  so  as  to  accept  them.  But  here 
a  question  may  be  made  what  Spirit  it  is  which  is  here  meant  when  it  is  said  that 
"  God  knoweth  the  mind  of  the  Spirit,"  whether  our  own  spirit  or  the  Spirit  of 
God.  We  are  hereby  to  understand  directly  the  Spirit  of  God,  yet  with  reference 
also  to  our  own  spirit,  which  is  involved  in  it  and  with  it.  God  knows  what  is 
spirit  and  grace  in  us,  distinct  from  what  is  flesh  and  corruption,  in  those  prayers 
which  we  put  up  unto  Him.  This  is  a  point  which  may  be  laid  forth  to  us  according 
to  sundry  instances  and  explications  of  it,  as — First,  in  difficulty  of  utterance,  and 
restraint  of  words,  and  outward  expressions.  The  saints  and  servants  of  God  may 
not  have  that  gift  and  faculty  of  so  freely  expressing  themselves  in  speech  and 
language.  Now  what  does  the  Lord  in  this  case — reject  their  prayer  for  this  defect 
which  is  in  them?  No ;  He  knows  the  mind  of  the  Spirit  notwithstanding.  Secondly, 
as  in  difficulty  of  utterance,  so  also  in  distraction  of  spirit,  which  is  mainly  here 
intended  in  this  Scripture.  But  God  is  still  a  gracious  God  in  the  meantime,  and 
knows  the  mind  of  the  Spirit  in  His  children.  Thirdly,  in  case  of  forgetfulness, 
where  somewhat  is  left  out  of  the  prayer  which  was  intended  to  be  put  into  it. 
The  Lord  knows  the  mind  of  the  Spirit  in  this  respect  also.  Fourthly  and  lastly, 
in  the  mistake  of  our  prayers,  for  the  subject  and  matter  of  them,  and  the  things 
which  we  desire  in  them.  God  knows  the  mind  of  the  Spirit  in  this  sense  also. 
This  is  another  piece  of  that  comfort  and  encouragement  which  does  belong  to 
God's  children  :  that  the  Lord  passes  over  that  which  is  flesh  in  them,  and  looks 
only  at  that  which  is  spirit.  And  so  much  may  suffice  to  have  spoken  of  the  first 
particular  in  this  second  general,  to  wit,  the  action  itself  in  these  words:  "Knoweth 
what  is  the  mind  of  the  Spirit."  The  second  is  the  reason  or  object  which  this 
action  is  conversant  about,  and  that  is  in  these  words,  because,  or  that  He  makes 
intercession  for  the  saints,  <fec.  We  begin  with  the  first,  viz.,  the  qualification  of 
the  persons — the  saints.  The  apostle  in  the  verse  before  had  said,  "  for  us  " ;  now 
he  adds,  "for  the  saints,"  that  so  he  might  show  under  what  motion  and  upon 
what  account  the  intercession  mentioned  becomes  available  to  us.  And  it  affords 
us  this  observation  which  arises  out  of  it  :  that  none  can  pray  truly  and  effectually 
but  only  the  saints  (thus  Psa.  xxxii.  6  ;  Prov.  xv.  8 ;  Psa.  cxlv.  19).  And  there  is 
this  ground  for  it :  First,  because  such  as  these  only  are  accepted  and  beloved  of 
God.  The  granting  of  requests  and  petitions  is  a  matter  of  special  favour  to  those 
to  whom  it  is  vouchsafed  ;  every  one  is  not  fit  to  obtain  it.  Secondly,  as  such  only 
are  accepted,  so  such  only  are  fit  subjects  and  instruments  for  the  Holy  Spirit  to 
work  in  to  this  purpose.  Thirdly,  none  but  saints  have  an  interest  in  the  blood  of 
Christ,  as  more  particularly  applied  unto  them,  and  His  intercession  working  for 
them.  The  consideration  of  this  point  should  therefore  teach  us  to  prize  holiness 
both  in  ourselves  and  in  others.  This  should  further  teach  the  saints  to  improve 
that  interest  which  they  have  in  God  upon  all  occasions.  Again,  from  this  passage 
here  before  us  we  may  collect  the  true  nature  of  prayer,  which  lies  not  so  much  in 
gifts  as  in  graces,  and  is  a  work  of  the  Spirit  in  the  sanctifying  operations  of  it. 
The  second  is  the  manner  of  the  performance,  according  to  God,  which  we  translate, 
according  to  His  will.  This  point,  from  hence,  is  this :  that  then,  and  then  alone, 
are  our  prayers  likely  to  be  successful,  when  they  are  made  according  to  God. 
This  praying  according  to  the  will  of  God  does  include  divers  things  in  it.  First, 
the  matter  of  our  prayers,  that  it  be  of  such  things  as  are  lawful  and  warrantable. 
Secondly,  for  the  manner  of  them,  that  they  be  carried  with  that  spirit  and  affection 
which  He  does  allow  of,  and  especially  in  the  Name  and  confidence  of  Christ  the 
Mediator  (John  xvi.  23).  Thirdly,  for  the  end  of  them,  and  that  which  we  propound 
to  ourselves  in  them,  which  is  the  glory  of  God  (James  iv.  3).  Thus  it  first  of  all 
cashiers  all  such  prayers  as  do  swerve  from  this  will  of  God.    Secondly,  seeing  those 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

prayers  alone  are  acceptable  which  are  made  according  to  the  will  of  God,  it  does 
from  hence  nearly  concern  us  to  be  well  instructed  in  this  will,  and  to  know  what  it 
is  (chap.  xii.  2  ;  Eph.  v.  17).  Thirdly,  this  gives  us  an  account  of  it,  whence  our 
prayers  sometimes  are  not  heard,  because  not  according  to  this  wiU.  {Thomas  Horton, 
D.D).  The  intercession  of  the  Spirit : — I.  Thk  fact  of  this  intebcession.  The  word 
translated  "Comforter,"  which  occurs  in  John  xiv.-xvi. ,  means  "Advocate"  (1  John 
ii.  1).  We  have  two  advocates,  one  of  them  in  heaven  and  the  other  on  earth — one  of 
them  being  always  with  us,  and  the  other  being  always  at  the  Father's  right  hand. 
II.  Its  natube.  There  are  two  things  which  an  advocate  does  or  may  do  for  his  cUent 
— he  speaks  for  him  and  he  tells  him  what  to  say.  There  are  stages  sometimes  in 
the  course  of  a  trial  when  the  voice  of  the  advocate  is  not  enough,  and  when  the 
client  himself  must  break  silence.  The  advocate's  function,  then,  is  to  instruct  his 
chent  to  speak  in  the  way  that  will  be  best  for  his  interests.  Where  there  is  but 
one  advocate  both  functions  must  devolve  upon  him ;  but  where  there  are  two, 
the  functions  may  be  divided.  So  Christ  speaks  for  us,  and  the  Spirit  tells  us  what 
to  say.  The  intercessions  of  Christ  are  in  Christ's  own  prayers ;  the  intercessions 
of  the  Spirit  are  in  the  prayers  of  believers.  All  of  true  prayer  is  the  result  of  the 
working  of  the  Spirit  within  us  (Eph.  vi.  18 ;  Jude  20).  1.  The  Spirit  enlightens 
the  mind,  and  gives  the  necessary  knowledge.  It  is  a  function  of  the  Spirit's 
office  to  teach.  He  teaches  through  the  Word,  which  was  given  by  His  inspiration ; 
and  through  the  capacity  which  He  restores  to  the  soul  for  conceiving  of  the  things 
of  God.  He  is  the  Spirit  of  truth,  because  He  inspired  the  penmen  of  Holy  Writ; 
He  is  the  Spirit  of  knowledge,  because  His  influence  disposes  and  enables  the  soul 
to  apprehend  Divine  truth.  By  the  knowledge  which  the  Spirit  imparts  we  learn 
— (1)  What  to  ask  for.  "  We  know  not  what  we  should  pray  for."  In  this  respect 
•«  The  Spirit  helpeth  our  infirmities."  Through  Him  we  discover — (a)  Our  need. 
If  we  do  not  know  what  we  need  we  do  not  know  what  to  ask  for.  He  shows  us 
our  need  of  wisdom,  and  righteousness,  and  sanctification,  and  redemption.  (6) 
God  and  His  grace,  Christ  and  His  salvation ;  and  these  discoveries  are  gladsome. 
(2)  What  plea  to  use  when  we  pray.  In  prayer  there  should  be  arguments  as  well 
as  petitions.  Our  requests  may  be  all  right,  but  more  is  necessary.  The  text  says, 
not  only  that  we  know  not  what  to  pray  for,  but  "  as  we  ought."  The  knowledge 
of  this  is  supplied  by  the  Spirit.  In  glorifying  Christ,  He  shows  us  the  excellency 
and  power  of  Christ's  name,  and  that  name  comprehends  arguments  that  are  sure 
to  prevail.  2.  The  Spirit  excites  holy,  spiritual  desire.  Mere  knowledge  will  not 
suffice  for  the  production  of  prayer.  There  may  be  knowledge  without  prayer. 
There  must  be  desire  to  possess  the  blessings,  as  well  as  knowledge  of  what  the 
blessings  are.  Now,  it  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  kindle  within  us  the 
necessary  desire.  He  takes  away  the  stony  heart,  which  is  incapable  of  this 
desire,  and  He  gives  us  the  heart  of  flesh,  which  quivers  with  Divine  emotions. 
Through  His  quickenings  we  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness,  and  we  not  only 
know,  but  have  an  urgent  sense  of,  our  need  of  grace  and  strength.  3.  He  gives 
as  faith  in  the  promises  in  which  God  engages  to  be  a  Father  to  us,  and  to  keep  us 
as  His  children.  He  gives  us  faith  in  Christ's  name,  and  helps  us  to  rely  upon  it. 
There  may  be  knowledge,  and  there  may  be  strong  desire  ;  but,  without  faith,  the 
voice  of  prayer  will  sink  into  the  wail  of  despondency,  and  die  away!  Faith 
inspires  us  with  the  confidence  of  children  ;  and  then  the  winged  words  go  upwards, 
Abba,  Father  1  and  our  prayers  ascend  along  with  them  1  III.  Its  excellency.  A 
first-rate  pleader  will  signalise  him?elf  by  the  matter  and  the  manner  of  his 
addresses.  The  matter  will  be  judicious,  and  to  the  point.  The  manner  will  be 
earnest,  affecting,  eloquent  and  powerful.  1.  With  respect  to  the  matter  of  His 
intercession,  it  is  "  according  to  the  will  of  God."  It  is  impossible  for  our  cause  to 
be  mismanaged  from  unacquaintance,  on  His  part,  with  God's  wiU.  He  never  asks 
what  God  is  not  ready  to  grant,  or  fails  to  ask  what  God  is  willing  to  bestow  ;  and 
He  always  urges  those  arguments  and  considerations  to  which  God  is  sure  to  pay 
regard.  2.  As  to  the  manner  it  is  characterised  by  earnestness  and  power — "  with 
groanings  that  cannot  be  uttered."  Much  of  the  Spirit's  intercession  is  unspoken. 
Much  of  it  consists  in  feelings  that  cannot  be  expressed.  But  the  intercession  of 
the  Spirit  is  not  the  less  powerful  for  these  things.  The  groanings  are  proofs  of 
its  energy,  and  God  understands  them  right  well.  "  He  that  searcheth  the  hearts 
knoweth  what  is  the  mind  of  the  Spirit."  IV.  Its  success.  We  have  an  advocate 
above,  as  well  as  an  advocate  below.  Were  there  any  disagreement  between  the 
t«o  it  would  frustrate  everything.  But  between  these  two  advocates  there  can  be 
no  discord.     The  Spirit's  intercession  is  an  effect  of  Christ's,  and  flows  out  of  it. 


CHAP,  viu.]  ROMANS,  149 

Christ  deputes  the  Spirit  to  intercede  on  earth,  while  He  Himself  intercedes  in 
heaven.  Oar  text  says,  "  He  that  searcheth  the  hearts  knowetb,"  &o.  It  is  not 
mere  knowledge  that  is  afiSmied,  but  knowledge  carrying  approval  along  with  it — the 
approval  being  founded  on  the  statement  that  the  Spirit's  intercession  is  according 
to  the  will  of  God.     (A.  Gray.)         The  intercession  of  the  Spirit: — I.  The  diffeb- 

KNCE  BETWEEN  THE  INTERCESSION  OP  THE  SpIRIT  AND  THAT  OF  ChRIST  is  that  the  latter 

is  a  fact  revealed  to  faith  ;  the  former  a  fact  known  by  experience.  Indeed,  Christ 
Himself  is  God  revealed  to  us  ;  the  Spirit  is  God  revealed  in  us.  •'  We  are  all  the 
children  of  God  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus  ";  but  by  the  Spirit  of  adoption  we  cry, 
"  Abba,  Father."  "  Kemission  of  sins  in  Christ's  name"  is  "  preached  among  all 
nations  "  ;  "  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  makes  us  free,"  con- 
sciously free,  "  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death."  One  or  two  illustrations  wiU  set 
before  us  the  twofold  intercession.  1.  An  elder  sister  will,  in  two  ways,  intercede 
on  behalf  of  an  undutiful  httle  one.  She  will  plead  with  her  parents  for  his  for- 
giveness; but  she  will  also  plead  with  the  disobedient  child  himself,  and  bringing 
him  repentant  will  reconcile  child  and  parents  once  more.  The  intercession  of 
Christians  for  one  another  is  of  this  twofold  character.  James  tells  us  to  "  pray 
one  for  another,"  and  to  "  confess  our  faults  one  to  another."  Now  humanity,  in 
all  its  sinfulness,  has  an  advocate  with  God  in  Christ ;  the  Holy  Ghost  within  us 
awakens  the  desire  for  forgiveness,  moves  us  tu  penitence,  prompts  us  to  confession, 
and  so  makes  intercession  here.  2.  The  inleicession  for  pardon  is  an  illustration 
of  our  text.  So,  too,  is  the  intercession  for  grace.  Christ  is  touched  with  a  feeling 
of  our  infirmities  and  pleads,  "Father,  Thy  children  are  weak  and  trembling; 
succour  them. "  The  Holy  Spirit  teaches  us  our  infirmities,  and  leads  us  to  cry, 
"Father,  we  are  weak  and  trembling;  succour  us."  II.  We  must  connect  the 
OBOANiNGS  OF  THE  TEXT  WITH  THOSE  OF  VERS.  22,  23.  Paul  tclls  US  that  there  is  the 
same  unutterable  feeling,  the  same  vague  quenchless  yearning  in  "  ourselves  also, 
which  have  the  first-fruits  of  the  Spirit."  1.  We  have  all  been  conscious  of  a  deep 
feeling  of  something  wrong  in  us  that  no  words  can  express.  We  feel  more  than 
we  know  about  the  ruin  of  our  sinfulness ;  we  hope  for  a  blessedness  that  we  see 
not  and  cannot  utter.  If,  then,  we  have  tried  to  pray  as  we  have  been  feeling,  we 
must  have  struggled  as  men  oppressed  with  infirmity,  "  we  know  not  what  to  pray 
for  as  we  ought."  But  yet,  in  going  thus  to  God,  we  have  been  helped ;  we  have 
been  calmed  as  our  spirits  have  mutely  breathed  towards  GoJ.  2.  The  longing  for 
communion  with  God  is  often  unutterable.  There  is  a  power  in  prayer  when  we 
offer  definite  petitions  ;  when  love  prompts  supplication  for  a  particular  person,  or 
penitence  draws  nigh  to  confess  some  remembered  fault.  But  there  is  a  yet 
mightier  energy  of  prayer  when  we  are  led  to  God,  not  to  ask  for  any  special  bless- 
ing, but  only  that  we  may  call  Him  Father.  We  want  God  Himself :  "  My  soul 
thirsteth  for  God,  for  the  Uving  God."  We  ask  for  no  blessing,  for  we  are  fully 
blessed  ;  but  "  our  soul  breaketh  for  the  longing  "  it  hath  unto  God.  In  silence  we 
look  up  to  Him,  peaceful  in  His  presence.  3.  The  longing  for  submission  to  God 
is  also  at  times  unutterable.  It  may  be  so  because  of  a  conflict  of  feeling.  Some 
of  you  know  what  it  is  to  say  with  Christ,  "  Father,  save  me  from  this  hour  "  ;  to 
kneel  with  Him  in  Gethsemane.  But  against  the  pleading  weakness  of  the  flesh 
the  spirit  utters  its  protest ;  you  know  the  conflict,  the  "  agony  "  of  prayer.  As  yet 
you  cannot  say,  "For  this  cause  came  I  unto  this  hour,"  Ac. ;  "  Not  my  will,  but  Thine 
be  done."  This  is  what  the  inner  spirit  longs  for;  but  the  longing  to  submit  can 
only  show  itself  in  "  groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered."  4.  Or  it  may  be  that  we 
may  have  very  definite  desires,  and  yet  not  know  what  to  pray  for  "  as  we  ought." 
We  may  be  asking  for  the  removal  of  a  chastisement  from  a  family  or  a  nation ; 
and  yet  so  strong  is  our  conviction  of  the  righteousness  and  wisdom  of  God  that 
we  dare  not  ask  its  removal  with  absolute  and  importunate  supplication.  There 
are  times  when,  if  feelings  alone  prompted  our  prayers,  we  would  wrestle  with  God ; 
but  knowing  our  ignorance,  we  fear  that  the  answer  to  our  petitions  may  be  more  a 
curse  than  a  blessing.  Desire  is  strong,  but  faith  in  the  unknown  will  of  God  is 
stronger.  We  can  but  bow  and  trust  "  with  groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered." 
in.  Let  me  now  call  your  attention  to  the  docteine  which  the  text  unfolds. 
Note — 1.  The  reahty  of  the  prayer  which  consists  only  of  unutterable  longings. 
Some  may  be  inclined  to  treat  all  this  as  mere  transcendentalism  and  mystio 
dreaming.  Now,  I  might  remind  you  that  in  ordinary  life,  feehng  is  often  truer, 
as  well  as  deeper,  than  thought,  and  that  our  profoundest,  most  powerful  feelings 
cannot  be  uttered.  Friends  may  find  an  intense  joy  in  each  other's  society  without 
a  word  being  spoken  :  the  members  of  a  united  family  often  yearn  over  one  another 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHAJ.  nn. 

with  inexpressible  love  and  longing.     The  aspirations  of   an  ardent  heart,  the 
desires  of  a  youth  for  distinction  and  service,  often  so  vaguely,  blindly  put ;  but 
we  expect  far  more  from  such  than  from  one  who  can  most  clearly  tell  us  all  that 
is  in  his  heart.    But  I  content  myself  with  saying  that  this  is  part  of  the  Christian 
revelation.    Paul  knew  of  what  he  was  speaking,  and  was  sure  the  Romans  would 
know  it  too.     It  was  for  no  circle  of  enthusiasts  he  was  writing  here ;  but  the  busy, 
active  society  of  Rome  is  bidden  mark  the  care  God  takes  to  help  the  infirmities, 
and  educate  the  spirit  of  His  children.     In  feeling  and  desire,  as  well  as  in  thought 
and  purpose,  God  can  recognise  the  spirit  of  the  worshipper.    2.  Its  Divine  origin. 
As  there  are  some  who,  never  having  known  feelings  too  deep  for  words,  would 
treat  an  unspeakable  prayer  with  scorn ;  so  there  may  be  others  who,  being  con- 
scious of  such  desires,  seek  to  suppress  them  as  the  offspring  of  a  diseased  fancy. 
Consider  the  solemn  blessedness  of  these  words,  "  The  Spirit  helpeth  our  infirm- 
ities."   Perhaps  we  never  feel  our  infirmity  more  than  when  in  prayer.    We  cannot 
apprehend  what  prayer  is;  that  the  gift  might  be  to  us  ruin,  or  eternal  blessedness; 
that  God  takes  note  of  the  defects  of  our  supplication  ;  without  feeling  that  we  hold 
tremendous  issues  in  our  hands.     Such  a  thought  would  check  prayer  altogether 
had  we  not  the  assurance  of  being  helped  to  pray.    We  need  not  only  the  assurance 
of  a  higher  wisdom,  a  fidelity  that  can  withhold  as  well  as  grant,  and  an  affectionate 
sympathy  that  can  read  the  spirit  rather  than  the  letter  of  our  requests ;  but  also 
that  our  spirits  be  brought  into  fellowship  with  God's  Spirit,  that  our  wills  be  made 
accordant  with  His.    We  must  be  enabled  to  pray  aright,  if  we  are  to  continue  to 
pray  at  aU.     3.    Its  intelligibility  to  God.     Often  what  to  cold  bystanders  seem 
merely  odd  antics,  to  the  sympathising  father  are  full  of  deep  and  beautiful  signifi- 
cance.    The  boisterousness  of  a  boy  just  back  from  school,  which  a  stranger  might 
wish  to  suppress,  the  parent  sees  to  be  the  expression  of  a  gladness  in  his  home  too 
full  to  be  kept  down.    In  the  moody  restlessness  of  a  girl,  who  sees  her  parents 
burdened  by  an  anxiety  she  cannot  understand,  they  recognise  a  desire  to  share  the 
burden.     The  blundering  efforts  of  a  child  in  a  busy  household,  which  often  only 
increase  confusion,  are  more  than  mere  blunders;  they  show  that  the  little  one 
desires  to  help,  and  the  loving  wish  is  gratefully  perceived  by  the  parental  spirit. 
So  does  our  heavenly  Father  search  our  hearts.     In  the  heavy  moanings  of  the 
spirit,  that  even  after  forgiveness  is  dissatisfied  with  itself.  He  sees  the  longing  to 
be  "  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  corruption,"  &c.     In  the  unutterable  cry  for 
God,  He  reads  a  desire  for  communion  with  Him  fuller  than  has  yet  been  satisfied. 
In  the  struggle  of  the  soul  that  knows  not  "  what  to  pray  for  as  we  ought,"  He 
recognises  the  passion  for  submission,  however  hard  it  may  be  to  submit.    Our  text, 
moreover,  speaks  of  *'  the  mind,"  or  intent  "  of  the  Spirit."    There  is  a  purpose  in 
these  apparently  purposeless  "groanings,"  an  end  after  which  this  dim  feeling  is 
groping.     God  sees  a  meaning  in  that  which  to  us  has  as  yet  no  meaning.     He 
sees  the  petitions  to  which  the  Spirit  is  prompting,  although  to  us  as  yet  they  have 
not  taken  the  form  of  petitions.    Let  us  not  say  there  is  no  reality  in  feelings  too 
deep  for  us  to  set  out  in  language ;  they  are  to  God  full  of  reality ;  these  are  the 
prayers  which  are  surest  of  response.     "He  that  searcheth  the  hearts,"  &c. 
(A.  Mackennal,  D.D. )        Prayer  written  in  the  heart  by  the  Holy  Spirit : — The 
feeblest  prayer,  if  it  be  sincere,  is  written  by  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  the  heart,  and 
God  will  always  own  the  handwriting  of  the  Holy  Spirit.    Frequently  certain  kind 
friends  from  Scotland  send  me  for  the  Orphanage  some  portions  of  what  one  of 
them  called  the  other  day  "  filthy  lucre," — namely,  dirty  £1  notes.     Now  these  £1 
notes  certainly  look  as  if  they  were  of  small  value.     Still,  they  bear  the  proper 
signature,  and  they  pass  well  enough,  and  I  am  very  grateful  for  them.     Many  a 
prayer  that  is  written  on  the  heart  by  the  Holy  Spirit  seems  written  with  faint  ink, 
and,  moreover,  it  appears  to  be  blotted  and  defiled  by  our  imperfection;  but  the 
Holy  Spirit  can  always  read  His  own  handwriting.     He  knows  His  own  notes,  and 
when  He  has  issued  a  prayer  He  will  not  disown  it.    Therefore,  the  breathing 
which  the  Holy  Ghost  works  in  us  will  be  acceptable  with  God.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  intercession  of  the  Spirit : — When  the  Spirit  maketh  intercession  for  us,  it  is 
not  by  any  direct  supplication  from  Himself  to  God;  but  it  is  by  becoming  the 
Spirit  of  grace  and  supphcation  in  us.      The  man  whom  He  prays  for  is  the  organ 
of  His  prayer.    The  prayer  passes,  as  it  were,  from  the  Spirit  through  Him  who  is 
the  object  of  it.     Those  groanings  of  the  Spirit  which  cannot  be  uttered,  are  those 
desires  wherewith  the  heart  of  a  seeker  after  Zion  is  charged;  and  which,  in  defect 
of  language,  and  even  clear  conceptions,  can  only  find  vent  in  the  ardent  but 
unspeakable  breathings.    Now  these  are  called  here  the  groanings  of  the  Spirit, 


can.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  ISl 

beeanse  it  is  He  who  hath  awakened  them  in  the  spirit  of  man.  It  is  not  that 
there  is  any  want  either  of  light  or  of  utterance  about  Him ;  but  He  doeth  His 
work  gradually  upon  us,  and  often  infuses  a  desirousness  into  our  hearts  before  He 
reveals  the  truth  with  distinctness  to  our  understandings.  He  walketh  by  pro- 
gressive footsteps,  in  accomplishing  the  creation  of  a  new  moral  world — even  as  He 
did  when  employed  in  the  creation  of  the  old.  He  then  moved  upon  the  face  of 
the  waters,  before  He  said,  "Let  there  be  light."  The  dark  and  muddy  element  was 
first  put  into  agitation,  and  the  very  turbulence  into  which  it  was  thrown  may  have 
just  thickened  at  the  first  that  very  chaos  out  of  which  it  was  emerging  ;  and  so  it 
often  is  when  the  Spirit  begins  to  move  upon  the  soul.  There  is  labour  without 
light — a  busy  fermentation  of  sbadowy  and  floating  desires  and  indistinct  feelings, 
whether  of  a  present  misery  or  a  future  and  somehow  attainable  enlargement. 
There  is  perfect  light  and  liberty  with  Him.  But  when  He  comes  into  contact, 
and  especially  at  the  first,  with  a  soul  before  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins — when, 
instead  of  doing  the  work  separately  and  by  Himself,  He  does  it  through  the  opaque 
medium  of  a  corrupt  human  soul — we  should  not  marvel,  though  the  prayers  that 
even  He  hath  originated,  be  tinged  with  the  obscurity  of  that  dull  aud  distorted 
medium  through  which  they  have  to  pass.  We  know  that  to  the  sun  in  the  firma- 
ment we  should  ascribe  not  merely  the  splendour  of  the  risen  day,  but  even  the 
faintest  streaks  of  twilight.  It  is  because  of  the  gross  and  intervening  earth  that, 
though  something  be  seen  at  the  earliest  dawn,  it  is  yet  seen  so  dimly,  and  the  eye 
is  still  bewildered  among  visionary  and  unsettled  forms,  while  it  wanders  over  the 
landscape.  And,  in  like  manner,  it  is  the  Spirit  to  whom  we  shall  owe  at  last  the 
effulgence  of  a  complete  manifestation  ;  and  to  whom  also  we  owe  at  present  even 
the  misty  and  troubled  light  that  hath  excited  us  to  seek,  but  is  scarcely  able  to 
guide  us  in  our  inquiries.  And  this  imperfection  is  not  because  of  Himself,  in 
whom  there  is  perfect  and  unclouded  splendour.  It  is  only  because  of  the  gross 
and  terrestrial  mind  upon  which  He  operates.  There  is  the  conflict  of  two  ingre- 
dients, even  the  light  that  is  in  Him  and  the  darkness  that  is  in  us ;  and  the  result 
of  the  conflict  is  prayer,  but  prayer  mixed  with  much  remaining  ignorance.  It  is 
the  mixture  of  His  intercession  with  our  unutterable  groanings — an  obscure  day 
that  precedes  the  daylight  of  the  soul — a  lustre  that  cometh  from  Him,  but  tarnished 
with  the  soil  and  broken  with  the  turbulence  of  our  own  nature.  And,  therefore, 
to  comfort  all  who  are  labouring  among  the  disquietudes  of  such  a  condition,  we 
affirm  that  the  heavenly  visitant  may  have  made  His  entrance,  and  have  begun  the 
process  of  a  glorious  transformation  on  the  materials  of  their  inward  chaos.  The 
spiritual  twilight  may  now  be  breaking  out  as  the  harbinger  of  a  coming  glory,  as 
the  dim  flickerings  of  that  light  which  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day. 
There  is  an  example  remarkably  analogous  to  this  in  the  old  prophets.  They  spake 
only  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  though  He,  of  course,  knew  the 
meaning  of  all  that  He  had  inspired  Himself,  yet  they  knew  but  httle  or  nothing  of 
the  sense  that  lay  under  them.  And,  accordingly,  they  are  described  as  prying 
into  the  sense  of  their  own  prophecies  (1  Pet.  i.  10-12).  So  holy  men  of  the  present 
day,  and  more  especially  at  the  outset  of  their  holiness,  might  feel  the  inspiration 
of  a  strong  desirousness  from  above,  and  yet  be  ignorant  of  the  whole  force  and  mean- 
ing of  their  own  prayers.  But  this  state  of  darkness  is  not  a  desirable  one  to  be  per- 
sisted in.  One  would  not  choose  to  live  always  in  twilight.  Labour  after  distinct 
and  satisfying  apprehensions  of  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  Seek  to  know  your 
disease ;  and  seek  to  know  the  powers  and  the  properties  of  that  medicine  which 
is  set  forth  in  the  gospel.  Study  and  search  with  diUgence,  and  by  a  careful  perusal 
of  Holy  Writ,  in  the  economy  of  a  man's  restoration.  Even  in  this  work,  too,  you 
must  have  the  Spirit  to  help  your  infirmities.  For  He  is  the  Spirit  of  wisdom,  as 
well  as  of  prayer,  and  gives  yon  revelation  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ.  You 
increase  by  Him  in  acquaintance  with  God ;  and  though  at  the  beginning  of  His 
work,  and  perhaps  for  some  time  afterwards,  there  may  be  a  sore  conflict  of  doubts 
and  desires  and  difficulties — yet  such  is  the  process  of  this  work,  that  you  will  at 
length  come  to  experience  that  where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is,  there  is  light — 
where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is,  there  is  liberty.     (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.) 

Ver.  28.  And  we  know  that  all  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love 
CrOd.  —All  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God: — I.  Ix  is  abundantly 

OBVIOUS  OF  MANY  A  8INGLB  ADVEKSITY — THAT  A  GREAT   AND  PERMANENT   GOOD    MAT  COMB 

OUT  OP  IT.    This  is  often  verified,  as  when  the  disease  brought  on  by  intemperance 
has  germinated ;  and  the  loss  by  a  daring  speculation  has  checked  the  adventurer. 


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oh4P.  vm. 

;  and  turned  him  into  the  way  of  safe  though  moderate  prosperity.  Apart  from 
Christianity,  man  has  often  found  that  it  was  good  for  him  to  have  been  afflicted — 
that,  under  the  severe  but  salutary  discipline,  wisdom  has  been  increased,  and 
character  strengthened,  and  the  rough  independence  of  human  wilfulness  tamed, 
and  many  asperities  of  temper  have  been  worn  away.  And  so  of  many  an  infliction 
on  the  man  who  is  a  candidate  for  the  world  above.  The  overthrow  of  his  fortune 
i  has  given  him  a  strong  practical  set  for  eternity  ;  the  death  of  his  child  has  weaned 
I  him  from  all  idolatry  ;  the  tempests  of  life  have  fastened  him  more  steadfastly  to 
I  the  hold  of  religious  principle.  He  is  made  perfect  by  sufferings.  II.  These 
ADVERSE  VISITATIONS  DO  NOT  ALWAYS  COME  siNOLT.  The  apostlc  Bupposes  the  Con- 
currence of  two  or  more  events,  all  verging  towards  the  good  of  him  to  whom  they 
have  befallen.  It  has  often  been  said  that  misfortunes  seldom  come  by  themselves; 
and  it  is  the  compounding  of  one  evil  thing  with  another  that  aggravates  so  much 
the  distress  of  each  of  them.  And  when  we  are  lost  in  the  bewilderments  of  a 
history  that  we  cannot  scan,  and  entangled  among  the  mazes  of  a  labyrinth  that 
we  cannot  unravel,  it  is  well  to  be  told  that  all  is  ordered  and  that  all  woiketh  for 
good.  III.  Important  consequences  emanate  from  one  event  which  in  itself  is 
INSIGNIFICANT,  iusomuch  that  the  colour  and  direction  of  your  whole  futurity  have 
turned  on  what,  apart  from  this  mighty  bearing,  would  have  been  the  veriest  trifle 
in  the  world.  It  is  thus  that  the  great  drama  of  a  nation's  politics  may  hinge  on 
the  veriest  bagatelle.  The  pursuers  of  Mahomet  were  turned  away  from  the  mouth 
of  the  cave  in  which  he  had  the  moment  before  taken  shelter  by  the  flight  of  a  bird 
from  one  of  the  shrubs  that  grew  at  its  entry.  This  bird  changed  the  destiny  of 
the  world.  And  therefore  it  is  weU  that  all  things  are  under  the  control  of  God 
who  maketh  all  things  work  together  for  good  unto  those  who  love  Him.  Is  not  the 
fact  that  what  is  most  minute  often  gives  rise  to  what  is  most  momentous,  an 
argument  for  the  doctrine  of  a  providence  that  reaches  even  to  the  least  ?  Should 
God  let  go  one  small  ligament  in  the  vast  and  complicated  machinery  of  the  world, 
it  might  all  run  into  utter  divergency  from  the  purpose  of  the  mind  that  formed  it. 

IV.    How  AM  I  TO  BE  ASSURED  OF  MY  INTEREST  IN  THE  DECLARATION  OF  THE  TEXT  ?    1.  The 

promise  here  is  not  unto  all  in  the  general,  but  to  those  who  love  God.  Now  I  may 
not  be  sure  that  I  love  Him.  I  may  desire  to  love  Him ;  but  to  desire  is  one  thing 
and  to  do  is  another.  Now  it  does  not  follow  that  you  are  altogether  destitute  of 
love  to  God  because  it  stirs  so  languidly  within  you  that  you  are  not  able  very 
distinctly  or  decidedly  to  recognise  it.  Your  very  desire  to  love  Him  is  a  good 
symptom  ;  your  very  grief  that  you  love  Him  not  bodes  favourably  for  you.  Where 
there  is  an  honest  wish  for  affection,  there  is  in  fact  the  embryo  of  affection  itself, 
struggling  for  a  growth  and  an  establishment  in  the  aspiring  bosom.  Meanwhile 
it  is  most  desirable  that  the  germ  should  expand.  And  the  question  is,  How  shall 
this  be  brought  about?  Never  by  looking  to  oneself,  but  by  looking  unto  the  Saviour. 
2.  They  who  love  God  are  described  by  another  characteristic.  They  are  the 
"  called  " — i.e.,  those  who  have  felt  the  power  of  the  call  upon  their  hearts,  and 
have  complied  with  it  accordingly.  It  is  only  upon  our  entertaining  the  call  of  the 
gospel  and  consenting  thereunto  that  there  ensues  a  transition  of  the  heart  to  the 
love  of  God.  Anterior  to  this,  the  thought  of  God  stood  associated  with  feelings  of 
jealousy  and  insecurity  and  alarm.  A  sense  of  guilt  has  alienated  us  from  God.  It 
is  this  which  stands  as  a  wall  of  iron  between  heaven  and  earth.  And  the  only 
way  by  which  this  else  impregnable  barrier  can  be  scaled,  and  we  can  draw  nigh  in 
affection  to  the  Father,  is  by  accepting  the  only  authentic  offer  that  He  ever  held 
out  to  us  of  reconciliation.  It  is  by  beholding  Him  in  the  face  of  Christ.  (T. 
Chalmers,  D.D.)  All  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God  : — • 

I.  The  end  to  be  accomplished.  The  "  good  "  here  spoken  of  does  not  apply  to  our 
!  health,  ease,  or  fortune,  but  to  our  eternal  interest.  Who  does  not  see  that 
1  afflictions  have  a  beneficial  tendency  ?    They  bring  us  to  reflection  ;  they  quicken 

prayer;  they  wean  us  from  the  world,  &c.  But  even  spiritual  good  is  not  the 
highest  reference.     "  Good  "  looks  to  heaven  and  points  to  eternity  (2  Cor.  iv.  17). 

II.  The  means  which  are  to  accomplish  this  end.  "All  things,"  as  the  subject-matter 
in  hand,  and  by  the  context.  The  apostle  is  here  speaking  of  afflictions :  and  of 
those  that  will  ultimately  be  beneficial  are — 1.  The  trials  of  those  who  are  called 
to  bear  the  cross  for  Christ's  sake.  Those  losses  that  you  may  now  be  called  to 
endure  for  the  sake  of  religious  priociple  will  inevitably  enrich  the  inheritance 
which  grace  has  prepared  for  you  above  all  things.  If  you  suffer  with  Christ,  you 
shall  reign  with  Him.  2.  The  ordinary  calamities  which  we  are  all  more  or  less 
called  to  endure.    The  painful  sickness,  borne  with  unmurmuring  resignation  ;  the 


CHAP,  vin.]  ROMANS.  158 

loss  of  property,  submitted  to  with  the  knowledge  that  we  have  a  higher  treasure  ; 
the  departure  of  friends,  whom  we  have  given  up  without  rebellion  to  the  will  of 
Him  who  had  a  better  right  to  them  than  ourselves — all  the  trials  of  life  enter 
within  the  compass  of  this  delightful  expression.  3.  But  observe  the  words,  "work 
together."  The  believer's  history  is  not  an  unconnected  series  of  events;  they  form 
a  perfect  scheme.  His  life,  death,  infancy,  old  age,  all  enter  into  the  one  grand  scheme 
which  Providence  is  causing  to  produce  his  spiritual  benefit.  How  many  influences 
strive,  even  in  reference  to  our  temporal  comforts,  to  promote  our  enjoyment  in 
this  world.  The  sun,  the  moon,  the  stars,  the  elements ;  food,  raiment,  habitation, 
<fec.  And  so  it  is  with  respect  to  our  spiritual  welfare.  How  many  aids,  instruments, 
influences,  are  perpetually  provided  to  promote  our  spiritual  welfare  ?  The  Deity — 
Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost ;  angels,  patriarchs,  &c.  ;  the  Bible,  the  Sabbath,  the 
fellowship  of  the  saints — all  concurring  to  promote  our  spiritual  welfare.  The 
believer,  looking  at  the  scheme  of  providence,  is  not  unlike  an  individual  surveying 
some  complicated  piece  of  machinery,  where  the  manufacturer  himself  stands  by 
holding  in  his  hand  the  articles  which  this  mechanism  has  produced,  and  saying 
to  the  spectator,  "  See  these  apparently  contradictory  movements  ;  hear  this  noise 
and  confusion  :  you  cannot  tell  the  design,  perhaps,  of  one  of  the  wheels,  much  less 
enter  into  the  combination  of  the  whole ;  but  I  can,  and  here  are  the  results  of  these 
various  movements."  So  does  God  speak  to  His  people,  surveying  the  mechanism 
of  providence,  the  wheels  of  which  are  so  varied,  and  in  some  of  its  movements  so 
apparently  contradictory.  III.  The  oertaintt  wrrn  which  we  may  calculate  upon 
THE  PRODUCTION  OF  THIS  END  BY  THESE  MEANS.  "  We  kuow."  It  is  uot  a  mere  con- 
jecture ;  an  opinion  ;  it  is  a  declaration  of  absolute  certainty.  We  have  the  promise 
of  a  God  that  cannot  lie ;  and  we  have  the  power  of  a  God  who  can  do  all  things 
that  He  wills  to  accomplish  His  promise.  IV.  The  inferences  from  this  subject. 
1.  What  is  true  in  reference  to  the  individual  Christian  must,  of  course,  be  true  in 
reference  to  the  Church  at  large.  "  Christ  is  exalted  to  be  head  over  all  things  to 
His  Church."  The  rise  and  fall  of  empires,  the  setting  up  and  the  pulling  down  of 
monarchies,  the  progress  of  arms,  of  commerce,  of  arts,  the  collision  of  human 
passions  and  human  interests  that  is  perpetually  going  forward — all  these  things 
are  working  together  for  good  to  the  Church.  2.  The  unspeakable  value  of  that 
sacred  volume  which  contains  such  a  discovery  as  this.  Who  could  have  made  it 
but  God  Himself  ?  Who  that  looks  abroad  upon  the  chequered  scene  of  human 
affairs  can  presume  to  tell  whether  good  or  evil  preponderates  ?  And  even  if  they 
could  advance  so  far  as  to  pronounce  a  decision,  that  good  now  preponderates,  yet 
who,  without  some  infallible  oracle  to  determine  the  question,  can  declare  whether 
ultimately  good  or  evil  will  prevail  ?  But  the  Bible  comes  in,  and  sets  the  matter 
at  rest,  and  tells  us  that  "  all  things  work  together  for  good,"  &e.  Nay,  without 
the  Bible  who  can  tell  us  what  good  is,  or  how  it  is  to  be  obtained  ?  3.  The  necessity 
of  faith,  to  rise  to  the  standard  of  our  privileges,  and  receive  that  abundance  of 
consolation  which  God  has  provided  for  as.  (J.  Angell  James.)  All  things 
working  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God  : — I.  The  explanation  of  the  text. 
1.  The  nature  of  the  privilege.  (1)  The  extent — "  All  things,"  as  limited  by  the 
context,  which  speaketh  of  the  afiQictions  of  the  saints,  (a)  All  manner  of  trials  for 
righteousness'  sake.  Stripes  are  painful  to  flesh,  but  occasion  greater  joy  to  the 
soul  (Acts  xvi.).  Spoiling  of  goods  stirreth  up  serious  reflections  on  a  more 
enduring  substance  (Heb.  x.  34).  So  banishment ;  every  place  is  alike  near  to  heaven, 
and  the  whole  earth  is  the  Lord's  (Eev.  i.  9).  Death  doth  but  hasten  our  glory  (2 
Cor.  V.  1).  (b)  Ordinary  afflictions.  Many  times  we  are  best  when  we  are  weakest, 
and  the  pains  of  the  body  invigorate  the  inward  man  (2  Cor.  iv.  16).  In  heaven 
you  shall  have  everlasting  ease,  (c)  Though  prosperity  be  not  formally  expressed 
in  this  place,  yet  it  is  virtually  included.  For  God  keepeth  off,  or  bringeth  on  the 
cross  as  it  worketh  for  our  good  (Cant.  iv.  6).  It  is  a  threatening  to  them  that  do 
not  love  God  that  their  prosperity  tendeth  to  their  hurt  (Psa.  Ixix.  22).  The 
sanctifying  of  their  prosperity  is  included  in  a  Christian's  charter  (1  Cor.  iii.  21-23). 

(2)  The  manner  of  bringing  it  about—"  They  work  together."  Take  anything  single 
and  apart,  and  it  seemeth  to  be  against  us.  We  cannot  understand  God's  providence 
till  He  hath  done  His  work  ;  He  is  an  impatient  spectator  that  cannot  tarry  till  the 
last  act,  wherein  all  errors  are  reconciled  (John  xiii.  6,  7).  God  knoweth  what  He 
Ib  a-doing  with  you,  when  you  know  not  (Jer.  xxix.  11).  When  we  apprehend 
nothing  but  ruin,  God  may  be  designing  to  us  the  choicest  mercies  (Psa.  xxxi.  22). 

(3)  The  end  and  issue — "  For  good."  (a)  Sometimes  to  good  temporal,  or  our  better 
preservation  daring  oar  service  (Gen.  1.  20).    Many  of  us,  whose  hearts  are  set  upon 


154  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOB.  [chap   Tm. 

some  worldly  thing,  have  cause  to  say  we  had  suffered  more  if  we  had  suffered  less. 
In  the  story  of  Joseph  there  is  a  notable  scheme  of  Providence,  {b)  Spiritual  good. 
So  all  affliction  is  made  up  and  recompensed  to  the  soul ;  it  afflicts  the  body,  but 
bettereth  the  heart  (Psa.  cxix.  71).  We  lose  nothing  but  our  rust  by  scouring, 
(c)  Eternal  good.  Heaven  will  make  us  complete  amends  for  all  that  we  suffer  here 
(2  Cor.  iv.  17).  2.  The  certainty  of  this — "  We  know."  Not  by  an  uncertain  and 
fallible  conjecture,  but  upon  sure  grounds.  What  are  they  ?  (1)  The  promise  of 
God,  by  which  He  Lath  secured  the  salvation  of  His  people,  nolwithstanding  their 
troubles  (Heb.  vi.  17,  18).  (2)  The  experiences  of  the  saints,  who  have  found  it  so 
(Psa.  cxix.  67  ;  Phil.  i.  19).  (3)  From  the  nature  of  the  thing.  Two  considerations 
enforce  it — (a)  All  things  are  at  God's  disposal,  and  force  to  serve  Him.  (b)  His 
special  care  over  His  people  (Isa.  xlix.  15 ;  Zech.  ii.  8  ;  1  Cor.  x.  13).  IL 
A  MORE  GENERAL  STATE  OF  THE  CASE.  1.  This  good  Is  not  to  be  determined 
by  our  fancies  and  conceits,  but  by  the  wisdom  of  God ;  for  God  knoweth 
what  is  better  for  us  than  we  do  for  ourselves.  Should  the  shepherd  or  the 
sheep  choose  his  pastures  ?  the  child  be  governed  by  his  own  fancy  or  the  father's 
discretion?  the  sick  man  by  his  own  appetite  or  the  physician's  skill?  It  is 
necessary  sometimes  that  God  should  displease  His  people  for  their  advantage 
(John  xvi.  6,  7).  Peter  said,  "  Master,  it  is  good  for  us  to  be  here  " ;  but  little 
thought  what  work  God  had  to  do  by  him  elsewhere.  2.  Good  is  to  be  determined 
by  its  respect  to  the  chief  good  or  true  happiness  which  consists  not  in  outward 
comforts,  but  our  acceptance  with  God ;  other  things  are  but  appendages  to  our 
felicity  (Matt.  vi.  33).  3.  This  good  is  not  always  the  good  of  the  body,  or  of  out- 
ward prosperity  ;  and  therefore  our  condition  is  not  to  be  determined  by  the  interest 
of  the  flesh,  but  the  welfare  of  our  soul.  4.  It  is  not  good  presently  enjoyed  and 
felt,  but  waited  for ;  and  therefore  our  condition  must  not  be  determined  by  sense,  but 
faith  (Heb.  xii.  11).  5.  A  particular  good  must  give  way  to  a  general  good,  and  our 
personal  benefit  to  the  glory  of  God  and  the  advancement  of  Christ's  kingdom  (Phil. 
i.  24).  6.  In  bringing  about  this  good  we  must  not  be  idle  spectators,  but  assist  under 
God.  7.  If  it  be  true  of  particular  persons,  it  is  much  more  true  of  the  Church ;  all 
is  for  good  (Psa.  Ixxvi.  10).  {T.  Manton,  D.D.)  The  co-working  of  Providence  : — 
We  begin  with  the  first  of  these  parts,  viz.,  the  proposition  itself,  "All  things  work 
together  for  good,"  &c.,  wherein  again  we  have  two  branches  more.  For  the  first, 
the  subject,  it  is  "  all  things  " ;  all  things  whatsoever  they  be,  they  do  work  together 
)  for  the  good  of  God's  people.  All  things  indefinitely.  It  is  a  very  large  and  com- 
(  prehensive  word,  and  so  makes  for  the  greater  comfort  and  encouragement  of  all 
believers.  First,  "  all  things  "  in  an  universality  of  subsistence,  and  within  the 
compass  of  being.  There's  nothing  which  can  be  said  to  be,  but  what  it  is  it  is  one 
way  or  other  advantageous  to  those  which  are  God's  people.  First,  for  God  Him- 
self, who  is  the  Being  of  beings,  the  uncreated  being.  There  is  nothing  of  Him  but 
it  makes  for  the  good  of  His  children.  All  the  attributes  of  God,  all  the  offices  of 
Christ,  all  the  gifts  and  graces  of  the  Spirit,  they  still  make  for  the  good  of  them 
that  belong  to  Him.  Secondly,  for  created  being,  that  is  all  of  it  for  our  good  like- 
wise. There  is  not  any  of  all  the  creatures  but  they  are  in  their  several  kinds  and 
capacities  subservient  to  the  good  of  the  Church  and  of  every  member  of  it.  Bot 
secondly,  "  all  things  "  in  an  universality  of  dispensation  aad  under  the  notion  of 
working.  All  occurrences,  and  events,  and  stations,  and  conditions,  whether  good, 
or  bad,  or  indifferent,  whatever  is  done  and  disposed  in  the  world.  The  second 
branch  of  the  proposition  is  the  predicate  or  consequent  in  these  words,  "  Work 
together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God."  Wherein,  again,  we  have  three  particulars 
more.  For  the  first,  the  improvement  itself,  it  is  this  :  that  they  "  work  together." 
Where  there  are  two  things  distinctly  and  separately  considerable  of  us— first,  their 
simple  operation.  Secondly,  their  additional  co-operation.  First,  I  say,  here  is 
their  operation  :  all  things,  whatsoever  they  be,  they  do  work  for  the  good  of  God's 
children.  It  is  not  said,  That  all  things  are  good,  for  they  are  not.  Besides  many 
sins  and  temptations,  there  are  many  crosses  and  afflictions  which  God's  children 
are  sometimes  exercised  withal,  that  in  their  own  nature  are  evil,  and  so  to  be 
accounted.  But  work  to  good  that  they  do.  And  there  is  good  which  oomes  out 
of  them,  even  then  where  there  is  not  good  in  them,  as  immediate  unto  them.  "  No 
affliction  is  joyous,  but  grievous,"  &c.  (Heb.  xii.  11).  Again,  they  '•  work  for  good  "; 
here  is  a  further  note  of  their  activity :  it  had  been  weU  if  it  had  been  said,  They 
turn  to  good,  they  are  ordered  and  disposed  to  good,  and  the  like.  But  the  Holy 
Ghost  does  not  content  Himself  with  so  narrow  an  expression  as  that  is,  but  carries 
it  a  little  further.    If  He  had  said,  They  prove  to  be  good,  that  had  been  a  word  of 


vni.]  ROMANS.  156 

casualty,  and  might  have  seemed  to  make  it  a  mere  accident  and  matter  of  chance. 
If  He  had  said  they  are  wrought  to  good :  that  had  been  a  word  of  compulsion,  and 
might  have  implied  some  kind  of  enforcement  and  constraint  hereunto.  But  now 
He  sayo  rather  they  "  work  to  good,"  which  is  an  expression  of  freeness,  and  for- 
wardness and  spontaneity  and  does  denote  that  particular  aptitude  and  disposition 
and  inclination  which  is  to  be  found  in  every  creature  as  subordinate  to  the  good 
of  the  Church.  The  second  is  their  additional  conjunction  and  co-operation — "  they 
work  together."  And  here  again  there  are  three  things  especially  observable.  First, 
their  efficacy  in  working :  things  which  work  together,  they  work  with  a  great  deal 
of  strength ;  and  that  which  is  defective  in  one,  it  is  supplied  and  made  up  by  the 
other.  Weak  things,  when  they  are  joined  together,  they  are  enabled  to  do  great 
matters.  The  second  is  their  unity  in  working :  things  that  work  together  they 
work  with  a  great  deal  of  cheerfulness  and  alacrity  and  agreement  in  their  perform- 
ance. Co-operation,  it  implies  conspiration.  The  third  is  their  concomitancy 
and  connection,  and  subordination  in  working.  And  this  again,  it  may  be  taken 
three  manner  of  ways.  There  is  a  threefold  co-operation  or  working  together  of 
all  things  for  the  good  of  God's  children,  which  is  here  pertinently  considerable  of 
as — First,  they  work  together  with  God.  Secondly,  they  work  together  with  us. 
Thirdly,  they  work  together  one  with  another.  This  is  done  especially  according 
to  these  following  observations — First,  by  labouring  for  a  clear  and  upright  con- 
science. Secondly,  by  prayer  and  calling  upon  God  (1  Tim.  iv.  4 ;  2  Cor.  i.  H). 
Thirdly,  by  studying  the  providence  of  God  and  observing  Him  in  all  His  dealings 
with  us,  we  should  take  notice  of  the  things  themselves,  and  take  notice  of  our  own 
hearts  in  them,  how  far  forth  they  are  affected  with  them,  that  so  we  may  receive 
good  and  benefit  from  them.  God  has  made  to  such  and  such  conditions ;  this  will 
suck  and  draw  virtue  out  of  them,  and  make  a  happy  improvement  of  them ;  and 
all  things  work  together  for  us  so  they  work  together  with  us.  And  that's  the 
second  co-operation.  Thirdly,  they  work  together  ;  that  is,  they  work  together  one 
with  another.  If  we  take  any  passage  of  Providence  singly  and  alone  by  itself,  per- 
haps we  may  not  so  easily  see  how  it  does  indeed  work  for  our  good.  But  take  it 
now  in  its  complication  and  connection  with  many  more,  and  then  we  shall  see  it 
abundantly.  The  second  is  the  effect  or  end  of  this  improvement,  and  that  is  here 
expressed  to  be  for  good.  Here  is  no  good  set  down,  so  as  to  declare  what  it  is, 
only  indefinitely  and  in  the  general.  First,  for  temporal  good ;  God  sometimes  does 
His  servants  good  in  this,  by  those  things  which  at  the  first  appearance  seem  oppo- 
site and  contrary  hereunto.  As  Joseph  when  his  brethren  sold  him  into  Egypt. 
Secondly,  for  spiritual  good,  so  all  things  work  for  good  to  them  however.  Every 
passage  of  providence  to  those  who  are  the  children  of  God,  it  serves  to  draw  them 
nearer  to  God,  and  to  perfect  their  communion  with  Him.  Thirdly,  for  eternal 
good  which  is  the  main  good  of  all.  That's  the  second  thing  here  considerable,  to 
wit,  the  end  or  effect  of  this  improvement,  and  that  is  good.  The  third  and  last  is 
the  persons  who  are  more  especially  interested  in  it,  and  they  are  the  children  of 
God,  who  are  here  described  from  a  double  qualification.  The  one  of  their  Chris- 
tian affection, "  to  them  that  love  God,"  and  the  other  of  their  effectual  vocation,  "  to 
them  which  are  the  called  according  to  His  purpose."  And  so  there  is  this  in  it, 
that  God's  children,  and  they  alone,  have  all  things  working  to  them  for  their  good. 
There  is  none  that  have  interest  in  the  privilege  but  those  only  that  do  partake  of 
the  condition.  As  for  other  people,  they  are  so  far  from  having  all  things  to  work 
for  their  good  as  that  they  rather  work  the  quite  contrary,  for  their  greatest  evil. 
God  Himself  being  an  enemy  to  them,  everything  else  is  an  enemy  with  Him,  and 
all  the  creatures  are  ready  to  rise  up  in  arms  against  them.  The  Word  of  God  is  a 
savour  of  death  to  them,  the  sacraments  they  are  occasions  of  judgment.  Prayer  it 
becomes  an  abomination ;  there  is  a  snare,  and  a  trap,  and  a  stumbling-block  in  all 
their  comforts.  Everything  is  the  worse  for  them,  £md  they  for  it.  The  second  is 
the  manner  of  enunciation,  or  declaration  of  this  proposition  in  these  words,  "  we 
know  it,"  which  is  an  expression  of  great  confirmation  ;  it  is  not  a  matter  of  guess 
only,  or  conjecture,  but  of  certainty  and  assurance.  This  knowledge  of  a  believer, 
it  may  be  reduced  to  a  threefold  head  of  conveyance — first,  we  know  it  by  revelation. 
Secondly,  we  know  it  by  reason  ;  and  thirdly,  we  know  it  by  experience.  There  is 
very  great  reason  for  it.  First,  that  which  we  have  here  in  the  text,  the  eternal 
purpose  of  God  Himself.  Whatsoever  is  done  in  the  world,  it  is  subservient  to  God's 
decree,  and  tends  to  the  filling  of  that.  Now,  this  is  that  which  God  hath  purposed, 
and  ordained,  and  appointed  aforehand,  even  to  bring  His  children  to  perfect 
happiness  and  salvation  at  last.    Secondly,  God's  affection  and  the  love  which  H« 


156  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  vm. 

bears  to  believers,  this  makes  for  it  also.  Especially,  if  we  shall  further  add  His 
omnipotence  and  almighty  power,  that  He  does  whatsoever  He  pleases  both  in 
heaven  and  earth.  Thirdly,  the  covenant  of  grace,  that  does  likewise  make  much 
for  this  purpose.  Fourthly,  the  mystical  union  which  is  betwixt  Christ  and  every 
true  believer.  And  now  for  the  improvement  and  application  of  all  this  to  ourselves. 
First,  here's  ground  of  patience  and  contentment  in  every  condition.  Again,  as 
this  makes  for  patience  in  the  present  condition,  so  also  for  hope  for  time  to  come. 
Again  further,  we  may  carry  on  this  truth  not  only  to  the  comfort  of  such  and  such 
Christians  in  particular,  but  also  of  the  whole  Chnrch  in  general,  by  taking  the 
words  in  the  text,  not  distributively  only,  but  collectively.  But  secondly,  it  may 
serve  further  to  rectify  us  and  to  set  us  right  in  our  judgments  and  opinions,  and 
that  especially  in  three  particulars — First,  of  God  Himself.  Secondly,  of  the  chil- 
dren of  God.  Thirdly,  of  religion  and  Christianity.  First,  it  may  teach  us  to  have 
good  conceits  of  God  Himself,  and  to  think  rightly  and  soberly  of  Him.  Whilst 
God  has  good  thoughts  for  us,  we  should  have  good  thoughts  of  Him,  and  justify 
Him  in  His  proceedings  in  the  world.  There  are  certain  intricacies  and  perplexities 
in  providence  which  are  not  presently  discerned  or  apprehended ;  there  are  the 
wheels  moving  within  the  wheels,  as  it  is  in  Ezekiel,  and  we  must  be  content  to 
stay  God's  leisure  for  the  opening  and  unfolding  of  them  to  us.  Secondly,  to  have 
good  thoughts  also  of  the  children  of  God,  and  to  think  rightly  of  them  ;  here  is  that 
which  may  make  us  in  love  with  the  state  of  God's  people,  and  to  set  a  high  price 
upon  them  :  "  Happy  art  thou,  0  Israel :  who  is  like  unto  thee,  0  people  saved  by  the 
Lord  "  (Deut.  xxxiii.  29).  Thirdly,  it  should  make  us  to  think  well  of  religion  and 
Christianity  itself,  which  does  carry  so  much  comfort  and  consolation  in  the  bowels 
of  it,  and  more  than  any  other  mystery  or  profession  whatsoever  besides ;  there  is 
no  such  sweetness  to  be  found  anywhere  as  in  the  principles  of  Christianity 
improved  and  lived  up  to  in  the  power  of  them.  {Thomas  Horton,  D.D.)  All  things 
working  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God^ — A  lighted  taper  inserted  into  a 
phial  of  one  kind  of  gas  will  burn  with  the  utmost  brilliancy  and  beauty ;  in 
another  phial,  charged  with  a  different  kind  of  gas,  that  same  taper  will  become 
extinguished  in  offensive  smoke,  and  in  a  third  it  would  produce  an  instantaneous 
and  violent  explosion.  So  the  same  calamity — sickness,  bereavement,  commercial 
disaster — will  awaken  in  one  man  a  slumbering  conscience,  will  drive  another  to 
distraction,  and  a  third  it  will  draw  nearer  to  God  than  ever  ;  so  that,  whilst  it  is 
literally  and  undeniably  true  that  the  same  calamities  come  alike  upon  the  good  and 
evil,  it  is  a  transparent  fallacy  to  infer  that  the  same  ulterior  results  will  follow  in 
both  cases.  It  is  a  fallacy  to  maintain  that  a  curse  may  not  remain  a  curse,  or  be 
transformed  into  a  blessing,  according  as  it  is  accepted  as  a  salutary  disciplioe  or 
rebelled  against  as  an  arbitrary  infliction.  It  is  on  the  temper  of  the  recipient  that 
the  result  depends,  and  whether  or  not  all  things,  good  or  ill,  concur  to  his  advan- 
tage. Does  it  not  depend  upon  the  use  you  make  of  anything,  whether  it  becomes 
to  you  a  blessing  or  a  curse  ?  Beneath  the  petals  of  a  graceful  and  familiar  flower 
is  secreted  a  sedative  poison,  of  such  quality  that  it  will  frequently  steep  a  man  in 
such  a  slumber  as  only  the  last  trumpet  can  awake  him  from.  This  you  at  once 
recognise  as  opium.  You  cannot  cause  water  to  boil  for  the  most  ordinary  culinary 
purpose,  but  you  disengage  an  element  most  formidable,  the  most  irresistible  power 
of  expansion.  This  is  steam.  No  summer  passes  over  you,  but  you  see  the  light- 
ning tear  the  sky  across  as  if  it  were  a  scroll  of  paper.  This  is  electricity.  These 
three  agents,  electricity,  steam,  and  poison,  to  the  mind  of  an  untutored  savage, 
are  nothing  but  instruments  of  death.  But  a  man  of  science  in  that  deadly  narcotic 
detects  the  principle  of  morphine ;  he  compounds  it  with  suitable  ingredients,  and 
converts  it  into  one  of  the  most  inestimable  and  indispensable  preparations  in  the 
pharmacopoeia.  From  death  he  extracts  life.  In  steam  he  snatches,  as  it  were, 
from  the  hand  of  Nature  one  of  her  most  gigantic  powers,  and  compels  it  to  become 
the  most  obedient  and  the  most  versatile  of  his  servants.  Nay,  the  very  lightning 
he  enlists  and  disciplines  into  an  obedient  recruit.  And  in  such  wise  is  all  this  true 
of  all  these  forces  and  many  more,  that  while  to  the  uncultured  savage  they  are 
agents  of  death  and  objects  of  terror,  they  are  working  togetlier  for  the  comfort  and 
benefit  of  him  who  has  learned  how  to  use  them.  Such  is  a  faint  illustration  of 
the  way  in  which  the  same  occurrence  may  act  with  diametrically  opposite  results 
upon  the  practical  Christian  and  npon  the  man  who  lives  without  God  in  the 
world.  In  the  godless  exciting  rebellion  and  hardness  of  heart,  and  in  the 
Christian  pointing  to  fiUal  submission,  confiding  holiness,  and  life  eternal ;  foras- 
much  as  all  things — all  things — work  together  for  the  good  of  them  that  are 


CHAP,  vm.]  ROMANS.  157 

trne  to  God.  (W.  H.  Brookfield,  M.A.)  The  affection  and  vocation  of  the 
godly  : — We  begin  with  the  first  of  these  branches,  viz.,  of  that  description 
•which  is  here  made  of  the  children  of  God,  as  taken  from  their  Christian  affec- 
tion, of  those  that  love  God.  In  these,  and  many  like  places,  are  God's  children 
described  by  this  character  of  their  special  love  and  affection  to  God.  The 
reason  of  it  is  this — First,  because  this  is  the  most  excellent  qualification  of  all 
others.  It  is  that  which  the  Scripture  prefers  above  aU  other  graces  ;  though  they 
all  have  their  dignity  in  them,  yet  love  it  goes  beyond  them  all,  being  such  as  shall 
last  and  continue,  whilst  the  other  ceases  in  regard  of  the  exercise  and  authority  of 
them.  Secondly,  it  is  an  affection  of  the  greatest  influence  and  extent.  It  is  that 
which,  wherever  it  is,  sets  the  wheels  of  the  soul  agoing  for  the  doing  of  other 
things.  He  that  loves  God,  he  will  stick  at  nothing  else  which  God  commands  or 
requires  at  his  hands  (1  John  v.  3).  Thirdly,  it  is  that  also  whereby  we  most 
resemble  God  Himself  and  become  likest  to  Him.  This  the  apostle  John  signifies 
in  1  John  iv,  16.  Lastly,  it  is  that  which  is  most  proper  to  all  those  relations 
wherein  the  faithful  stand  unto  God  as  the  friends  of  Christ,  as  the  members  of 
Christ,  as  the  spouse  of  Christ.  For  the  better  opening  of  this  point  it  may  not  be 
amiss  for  us  to  consider  wherein  this  our  love  of  God  does  consist,  and  what  is  the 
nature  and  working  of  it.  Now  for  this  it  does  especially  consist  in  these  three 
particulars — First,  in  our  estimation  of  Him,  a  high  prizing  and  valuing  of  those 
excellencies  and  perfections  which  are  in  Him.  And  this  prizing  and  esteeming  of 
Him,  it  does  show  itself  farther  in  such  effects  as  flow  from  it.  First,  in  parting 
with  anything  for  Him  ;  love,  it  is  a  self-denying  affection.  Secondly,  in  zeal  for 
Him,  and  maintaining  and  defending  of  Him  upon  all  occasions.  Love  it  is  a  vin- 
dictive affection,  and  is  ready  upon  all  occasions  to  take  the  part  of  the  party 
beloved.  Thirdly,  this  prizing  of  God  as  a  testimony  of  our  love  to  Him  wiU  show 
itself  in  a  proportionable  estimation  both  of  ourselves  and  of  every  oue  else  in 
reference  to  Him.  Secondly,  in  a  special  longing  and  desire  of  soul  after  Him : 
love  it  is  a  desire  of  union.  Thirdly,  in  special  delight  and  complacency,  and  con- 
tentment in  Him ;  where  there  is  love,  this  is  a  great  deal  of  satisfaction  from  the 
company  and  fellowship  and  society  one  of  another  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  25).  Seeing  God's 
children  are  thus  described  from  their  loving  of  God,  we  see  what  cause  we  all  of 
UB  have  to  make  good  this  character  in  ourselves,  and  to  be  provoked  to  this 
heavenly  affection.  First,  as  to  arguments  for  it  take  notice  of  these — First,  good- 
ness, that  is  one  incentive  to  love ;  it  is  the  ground  of  all  that  love  which  we  bear 
to  the  creature  because  we  apprehend  some  special  good  and  excellency  in  it. 
Secondly,  beauty,  that  is  another  thing  in  the  object  of  love.  It  must  have  some 
kind  of  attractiveness  and  enticing  with  it,  now  this  is  also  in  God.  Thirdly,  pro- 
pinquity and  nearness  of  relation,  that  also  calls  for  love.  It  is  so  betwixt  man  and 
man,  or  at  least  should  be  so.  Lastly,  His  love  to  us ;  love  it  begets  love  again 
(Psa.  cxvi.  1 ;  xviii.  1,  2).  Now  further,  for  the  directions  and  helps  to  it,  take 
notice  of  these — First,  to  beg  it  of  God,  there  is  none  that  can  love  God  truly  but 
such  persons  as  He  enables  to  do  so.  Secondly,  get  our  hearts  weaned  from  a 
loving  and  admiring  of  the  world.  Thirdly,  labour  to  be  like  God,  and  to  have  His 
image  stamped  upon  us  ;  love,  it  is  founded  in  likeness,  there  is  somewhat  suitable 
which  draws  the  affection.  And  so  now  I  have  done  with  the  first  branch  of  the 
description  of  God's  children,  and  of  such  persons  as  have  an  interest  in  the  privi- 
lege above  mentioned,  of  all  things  working  to  their  good,  as  taken  from  their 
Christian  affection  in  these  words,  "  To  them  that  love  God."  The  second  is  from 
their  effectual  vocation,  in  these  words,  "  To  them  that  are  the  called  according  to 
His  purpose."  Wherein  again  we  have  two  branches  more.  We  begin  with  the 
first,  their  condition,  such  as  are  called — those  who  "  are  God's  children  "  are  such 
persons  as  are  effectually  called,  take  notice  of  that.  First,  for  the  calling  itself  to 
show  you  what  it  is.  Now  this  it  may  be  briefly  thus  described  and  declared  unto 
ns :  calling,  it  is  a  work  of  God's  Spirit,  whereby,  in  the  use  of  the  means.  He  does 
effectually  draw  the  elect  from  ignorance  and  unbelief,  to  true  knowledge  and  faith 
in  Christ,  this  is  the  calling  which  is  here  spoken  of.  There  is  a  double  calling 
which  is  mentioned  in  Scripture :  the  one  is  general  in  the  publishing  of  the  gospel ; 
the  other  is  special,  which  belongs  only  to  th  elect.  And  this  latter  is  that  which 
we  have  here  in  this  text,  which  are  "  called  ccording  to  His  purpose."  First,  as 
to  the  former,  the  parts  whereof  this  special  and  peculiar  calling  does  consist,  they 
are  again  twofold — First,  God's  invitation.  And  secondly,  man's  acceptation.  The 
second  thing  considerable  to  this  calling  is  (as  the  parts  whereof  it  consists  so)  the 
terms  from  which  and  to  which  it  does  proceed.     And  these  according  to  th« 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

language  of  Scripture  are  sin  and  grace :  from  that  miserable  and  wretched  condition 
in  which  all  men  are  by  nature  to  the  happy  estate  and  condition  of  the  children  of 
God  (Acts  xxvi.  18).  The  consideration  of  this  point  is  thus  far  useful  to  us,  as  it 
serves  to  set  forth  the  excellency  and  all-sufficiency  of  the  grace  of  God  in  conver- 
sion. And  so  as  an  argument  of  greater  power,  so  also  of  greater  favour  and  good- 
ness in  God  towards  us.  The  second  is  the  person  calling,  and  that  is  God  Himself; 
it  is  He  to  whom  this  work  does  properly  and  principally  belong.  "  No  man  cometh 
unto  Me,"  says  Christ,  "  except  the  Father  which  hath  sent  Me  diaw  him  "  (John 
vl.  44 ;  so  Acts  ii.  39).  This  it  serves,  first  of  all  to  inform  us,  that  religion  is  not 
a  mere  imagination,  or  a  business  of  man's  devising.  No,  but  that  it  is  such  as  God 
Himself  has  invited  and  called  us  to.  It  is  also  very  comfortable  as  to  the  perfec- 
tion and  consummation  of  grace  in  us,  "that  He  who  hath  begun  a  good  work  in  us 
will  perfect  it,"  &c.,  as  it  is  in  Phil.  i.  6.  Lastly,  seeing  it  is  God  that  caUs  us,  we 
should  therefore  be  careful  to  lead  a  godly  and  holy  life  and  conversation,  answer- 
able to  the  nature  of  Him  who  hath  thus  called  us.  The  third  is  the  manner,  and 
means,  and  time  of  calling,  both  how  and  when  it  is  performed.  First,  for  the 
manner  how,  or  the  means  by  which,  this  is  in  an  ordinary  course  by  the  preaching 
and  publishing  of  the  gospel  (chap.  x.  17).  Therefore  this  teaches  us  accordingly 
to  honour  this  ordinance  of  God  and  to  set  highly  by  it.  Another  thing  consider- 
able as  to  this  calling  is  the  time  and  season  of  it  when  it  is  that  men  are  made 
partakers  of  this  blessing ;  now  for  this  we  find  it  to  be  a  thing  unlimited  and 
undetermined,  there  is  no  set  or  appointed  time  for  it,  but  some  are  called  at  one 
time,  and  some  are  called  at  another,  as  it  pleases  God  in  His  providence  to  dispose 
it.  Beloved,  it  is  a  dangerous  thing  to  neglect  the  present  seasons  of  grace  and 
effectual  vocation,  because  if  we  do  so  we  know  not  whether  we  may  ever  enjoy 
them  again.  The  fourth  and  last  thing  here  considerable  is  the  persons  who  are 
the  subjects  of  this  call.  Therefore  let  none  either  engross  this  mercy  or  despair  of 
it.  Let  none  engross  it  to  themselves  as  if  it  belonged  to  none  but  unto  them  ;  nor 
let  none  despair  of  it  for  themselves  as  if  it  did  not  belong  to  them  at  all.  Those 
who  are  themselves  effectually  called  they  will  have  a  high  esteem  and  account 
both  of  their  calling  itself,  as  also  of  all  other  persons  who  are  partakers  of  the 
same  calling  with  them.  The  second  is  the  ground  of  this  condition,  as  also  of  the 
privilege  annexed  unto  it,  and  that  is  the  purpose  and  good  pleasure  and  decree 
of  God  "  according  to  His  purpose."  First,  this  calling  here  spoken  of  it  is  abso- 
lute and  independent.  It  is  according  to  God's  purpose,  not  according  to  our 
desert,  thus  2  Tim.  i.  9.  This  must  needs  be  so ;  because  we  see  by  plain  experi- 
ence that  those  who  might  be  thought  most  of  all  to  deserve  it  are  many  times 
excluded  from  it,  whilst  others  are  taken  in.  The  publicans  and  harlots  went  into 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  before  the  Pharisees  (Matt.  xxi.  31).  Therefore  let  us  from 
hence  learn  to  abhor  aU  doctrine  of  merit.  Let  us  give  God  the  whole  glory  of  all. 
Our  calling  is  absolute.  Secondly,  it  is  also  unchangeable  as  the  purpose  itself, 
from  whence  it  proceeds;  the  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  without  repentance. 
Lastly,  we  see  here  the  ground  of  the  universal  happiness  of  God's  children,  and  in 
particular  the  certainty  of  the  privilege  above  mentioned  of  "  all  things  working 
to  their  good."  {Thomas  Horton,  D.D.)  All  things  work  together  for  good: — 
1.  With  what  ease  the  writers  of  the  Bible  give  expression  to  the  mightiest  and 
most  astonishing  statements  I  Not,  however,  because  the  apparent  impossibilities 
which  stand  in  the  very  teeth  of  their  verification — are  either  ignored  or  over- 
looked. "  The  sufferings  of  this  present  time  "  ;  "  the  subjection  of  the  creature 
to  the  bondage  of  corruption"  ;  "  the  groaning  and  travailing  in  pain  of  the  whole 
creation " ;  the  anguish  of  man's  inner  and  deeper  experience ;  are  all  painfully 
vivid  to  the  apostle's  eye.  Nevertheless,  in  the  midst  of  "  tribulation,  distress, 
persecution,  famine,  nakedness,  peril,  and  sword,"  he  is  bold  to  assert,  "We  know 
that  all  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God."  2.  Who  of  us  can 
join  in  this  language  in  the  face  of  the  world's  sin  and  woe  ?  Some  there  may  be 
who  are  able  contentedly  to  meet  the  dark  mysteries  of  Providence  with  "  whatever 
is  best" — a  conviction,  perhaps,  that  grew  up  out  of  the  reverent  trust  and 
experience  of  their  childhood.  But  this  is  seldom  left  undisturbed  ;  and,  once  dis- 
turbed, we  may  regain  confidence;  but  it  will  be  as  different  from  our  early 
confidence  as  Joseph's,  when  he  stood  before  his  brethren  in  Egypt,  was  different 
from  that  he  enjoyed  when  he  wore  his  coat  of  many  colours.  3.  This  certitude  of 
the  apostle  was  the  rational  conviction,  confirmed  by  an  ample  experience,  estab- 
lished by  a  faith  in  the  Christian  verities,  and  made  immovable  by  the  visions  of  a 
heart  disciplined  by  trial,  and  purified  by  affliction  ?    And  this  is  a  certitude  open 


CHAP,  vm.]  ROMANS.  169 

to  ns  all,  if  we  seek  it.  Let  us  contemplate  the  source  of  its  light,  that  our  reason 
be  not  confounded  at  the  confidence  of  our  heart.  I.  All  things  are  at  work,  and 
SUBJECT  to  constant  CHANGE.  Our  hcdges  and  fields  retain  not  their  beauty,  and 
our  summer's  light  and  heat  decline.  The  very  earth  grows  old,  and  the  heavens 
are  not  what  they  were.  And  among  the  sons  of  men  there  is  no  one  abiding.  And 
what  are  the  records  of  history  but  the  chronicle  of  the  successive  ages  of  the 
world's  experience.  And  within  the  little  sphere  of  our  own  existence,  incessant 
change  allows  no  rest  to  either  thought,  affection,  or  will.  And  what  an  air  of  sad- 
ness all  this  gives  to  our  life  I  It  begets  our  earliest  sorrows.  And,  as  years  wear 
on,  a  feeling  of  insecurity  steals  over  us  which  denies  us  peace.  But  the  heart 
refuses  life  without  hope,  and  this  ceaseless  change  arouses  the  mind  to  the  dis- 
covery of  some  other  ground  of  confidence.  And  our  text  speaks  of  this  restless 
action,  not  only  as  a  constant  working,  but  as  a  working  together.  Let  us  see  what 
difference  this  makes.  IL  All  things  work  together.  The  addition  of  this  one 
word  alters  everything.  It  introduces  design  where  all  seemed  aimless ;  order 
where  all  seemed  chaos.  For  instance,  winter  is  seen  to  have  a  necessary  place  and 
work  in  relation  to  summer;  night  to  day;  deserts  to  fruitful  fields  ;  the  mountains 
to  the  valleys.  In  short,  the  earth  is  one,  and  made  up  of  contradictory  elements. 
The  year  is  one,  and  requires  all  the  seasons.  The  day  is  one,  and  composed  of 
nrorning,  noon,  and  evening.  In  like  manner,  the  course  of  history  is  made  up  of 
all  the  forms  of  human  life  and  every  variety  of  experience,  so  that  conflicting 
events,  and  the  most  incongruous  elements,  are  made  to  work  together  in  subordin- 
ation to  the  one  purpose.  And  so  with  the  little  circle  of  our  personal  experience. 
And  these  three — nature,  history,  and  individual  experience — are  one.  Theyare  but 
spheres  of  co-operative  agencies  carrying  out  the  one  purpose  which  runs  through 
all  ages.  III.  To  what  purpose,  to  what  end  do  all  things  work  together? 
"For  good."  This  is  a  necessary  deduction.  If  all  things  "  work  together,"  then 
good  must  be  the  result.  Evil  elements  cannot  be  combined ;  they  are  antagonistic 
to  each  other.  When  wicked  men  combine,  it  is  found  necessary  to  set  up  the 
principles  of  goodness.  There  must  be  "  honesty  among  thieves,"  truth  among 
liars,  or  their  devices  have  no  chance.  The  principles  recognised  among  them  as 
necessary  for  their  co-operation  are  antagonistic  to  the  ends  for  which  they  com- 
bine. The  hght  by  which  they  go  astray  is  light  from  heaven.  And  it  is  the  power 
of  this  admitted  but  opposed  light  which  explodes  every  plot  and  makes  it  simply 
impossible  for  a  course  of  combined  wickedness  to  perpetuate  itself.  But  the  work- 
ing together  of  all  things  implies  nothing  less  than  the  presence  of  infinite  goodness, 
in  the  very  elements  of  things  as  well  as  in  their  embodied  purpose  ;  wisdom,  which, 
as  the  eye  of  goodness,  sees  the  end  from  the  beginnii  g  and  knows  how  to  reach  it; 
and  power,  the  moral  energy  of  both  goodness  and  wisdom,  which  subordinates 
everything  to  the  one  purpose.  This  preordained  purpose  will  only  be  fully  revealed 
in  the  end  ;  in  the  way  there  will  be  much  of  human  arbitrariness,  which  will  tend 
to  hide  it.  The  way,  however,  of  goodness  carries  its  security,  for  the  attainment 
of  its  end,  in  its  own  moral  power.  This  co-operation  of  aU  things  for  God's  pur- 
pose is  a  Divine  chemistry.  For  as  in  a  mixture  of  chemical  elements,  while  the 
process  of  combination  is  going  on,  you  may  be  utterly  at  a  loss  to  know  what  the 
result  will  be,  until,  the  last  element  being  added,  it  is  made  manifest ;  so  is  it 
vdth  the  providence  of  God.  Let  us  habituate  ourselves,  however,  to  regard  pro- 
vidence as  carried  on  by  the  personal  power  of  God's  presence,  a  power,  therefore, 
of  quickening  as  well  as  of  combining  elements ;  of  intensifung  as  well  as  of  moder- 
ating their  action ;  a  power  of  new  beginnings  as  well  as  of  terminating  forces  and 
agencies  long  in  exercise.  It  is  what,  and  more  than  what,  tbe  will  of  man  is  to  his 
whole  body  as  well  as  to  every  separate  part.  God  is  not  an  exhausted  Deity, 
neither  is  He  under  bondage  to  the  forces  which  He  has  conferred  upon  His 
creatures.  With  Him  there  ever  remains  an  infinite  reserve  of  ways  and  means  by 
which  to  "  do  according  to  His  will."  IV.  But,  if  all  things  work  together  fob 
GOOD,  then  also  FOR  THE  BEST.  God's  mind  can  only  purpose  the  best  in  relation 
to  the  creature  concerned.  And  to  reach  His  end,  He  has  but  one  way,  and  that  is 
the  best.  That  one  absolutely  perfect,  highest,  and  best  end  is  seen  in  His  only- 
begotten  Son,  who  is  at  once  Son  of  man  and  Son  of  God ;  "  of  whom,  through 
whom,  and  to  whom,  are  all  things,"  and  for  whose  central  glory  man's  redemp- 
tion was  purposed  from  eternity,  but  reserved  for  accomplishment  till,  "  the  fulness 
of  time,"  that  He  might  "  gather  up  all  things  in  One,"  and  in  that  One  for  ever 
unite  His  glory  and  our  salvation.  V.  But  for  whom  will  this  co-operation  of  all 
THmas  WORK  OUT  ITS  highest  GOOD?     "  For  those  who  love  God."    The  highest 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tia 

good  can  only  be  received  by  rightly  directed  affections.  As  it  proceeds  from  tbs 
love  of  the  Creator,  it  can  only  be  received  by  the  love  of  the  creature.  For,  just 
as  a  piece  of  mechanism,  cunningly  devised  to  weave  a  pattern  of  marvellous  beauty, 
may  require  a  thread  of  a  given  quality  and  texture  to  receive  its  design,  so  the 
highest  purpose  of  the  Divine  love,  to  be  wrought  out  by  the  co-operation  of  all 
things,  can  only  be  taken  up  by,  and  embodied  in,  the  affections  of  His  children. 
For,  as  His  purpose  is  spiritual,  it  requires  spiritual  embodiment  ;  as  it  ia 
holy,  it  requires  holiness ;  as  it  is  free,  it  requires  to  be  chosen  ;  as  it  is  merciful, 
it  requires  vessels  of  mercy  ;  as  it  is  personal,  it  requires  personality ;  tis 
it  is  social,  it  requires  a  society  of  individuals  ;  as  it  is  not  only  from,  but 
of  God,  it  requires  godliness ;  and,  as  it  is  an  all-embracing  unity — a  rich, 
full,  and  lasting  oneness  of  Being — to  which  God  freely  gives  Himself,  it  requires 
in  those  who  partake  of  it  the  exercise  of  the  love.  (W.  Pulsford,  D.D.) 
All  things  working  together  for  good  : — I.  "All  things."  For  there  is  a  sense  in 
which  a  human  being  is  related  to  everything.  He  is  related  supremely  to  God, 
and  by  that  relationship  he  touches  the  whole  universe.  But,  probably,  the  "  all 
things  "  here  meant  are  those  which  more  nearly  and  constantly  affect  men.  Now 
there  is  a  very  great  difference  in  the  number,  variety,  and  importance  of  these 
things  in  different  individual  cases.  "  All  things"  that  can  enter  into  an  infant's 
little  life  are  few  and  simple  compared  with  those  of  a  man.  The  affairs  of 
a  savage  are  few  compared  with  those  of  a  civilised  man.  H.  "All  things  wohk." 
"  All  things  are  full  of  labour."  The  ceaseless  movement  of  all  things,  from  stars 
to  atoms,  would,  if  we  could  really  see  it  aU,  be  perfectly  appalling.  On  the  stillest 
day,  and  in  the  most  sequestered  scene,  streams  of  life  are  rushing  on  through 
their  courses.  Not  only  the  earth,  the  waters,  the  air,  bat  the  very  rocks  are 
alive.  What  is  thus  true  in  nature  is  just  as  true  in  human  life ;  not  only  when 
man's  thought  is  busy  about  them,  and  his  own  hand  upon  them,  but  often  almost 
as  much  when  the  man  rests  and  sleeps.  We  speak  of  busy  time.  It  is  not  time 
that  is  busy.  'Tis  men  who  live,  and  move,  and  have  being.  'Tis  "  things  "  that 
"work."  Thought,  and  impulse,  and  act,  and  habit,  and  plan,  and  purpose — 
these  are  the  great  worldng  powers.  They  all  work  :  and  always.  We  divide  life 
into  active  and  passive,  into  busy  and  quiet.  But  things  are  working  as  rapidly, 
and  to  effects  as  certain  in  the  one  time  as  the  other.  Things  are  troubled  and 
perplexed  at  night :  you  can  make  nothing  of  them.  Yon  go  to  sleep,  and  in  the 
morning  they  are  clearer.  It  is  just  the  same  as  if  you  had  been  thinking  of  them, 
and  unravelling  them  all  the  night.  They  have  been  "  working"  while  you  have 
b]pen  sleeping.  The  same  kind  of  process  takes  place  through  a  series  of  days  some- 
times. Gradually  a  dark  prospect  clears,  or  a  bright  one  darkens.  The  crooked 
becomes  straight,  or  the  straight  becomes  crooked.  Nor  can  you  tell  any  sufficient 
reason  for  the  change.  III.  "  All  things  work  together."  That  explains  the 
changes  that  take  place,  and  the  progress  that  is  sometimes  made  very  quickly. 
Yon  have  seen  horses  pulling  a  heavy  load  up  a  hiU,  and  suddenly  brought  to  a 
stand,  and  then  moving  on  again,  simply  by  the  addition  of  an  animal  to  the  team. 
So  a  man  is  overmatched  sometimes  by  the  weight  and  pressure  of  the  things  he 
has  to  do,  when — a  new  circumstance,  a  new  "thing"  is  bom,  and  as  it  were 
instantly  yokes  itself  into  harness  with  the  rest,  and  the  object  is  attained.  But 
the  working  together  of  things  is  yet  more  than  this.  In  some  chemical  experiments 
it  happens  that  each  separate  substance  becomes  something  else,  and  all  a  com- 
pound— a  new  thing,  which  has  mysteriously  composed  itself  out  of  the  whole. 
The  bosom  of  rrovidence  is  the  great  moral  crucible  in  which  things  work  together. 
The  innumerable  things  that  mingle  in  that  crucible,  if  taken  separately,  would  be 
seen  working  to  diverse  results  ;  but  the  one  master-influence  now  rules  the  whole 
process,  and  so  combines  the  specific  elements  as  to  perpetuate  and  increase  its 
own  sway.  '•  All  things  work  together,"  not  in  an  aimless  and  capricious  manner, 
as  though  a  stream  should  one  day  flow  seawards,  and  the  next  back  towards  its 
foantain,  but  in  one  volume,  along  one  channel,  in  one  direction,  towards  one  end. 
This  gives  life  an  awful  character.  The  sum  of  the  influences  tend  to  good,  or  to 
evil.  Life  in  some  instances  may  seem  an  equipoise,  but  it  is  not.  Only  a  practised 
eye  can  tell  which  way  a  sluggish  stream  in  a  meadow  is  flowing,  yet  no  one  who 
has  seen  the  stream  enter  the  meadow,  or  leave  it,  can  doubt  that  it  is  in  motion  there. 
Not  for  long  does  any  human  life  flow  as  through  meadow  land.  IV.  Now,  the 
greatest  qnestion  is  this,  "  Of  what  character  is  the  supreme  influence  of  all  the 
things  that  work  together  in  my  life  ?  "  The  question  is  not  difficult  to  answer, 
it  only  the  right  method  be  taken.    Mast,  then,  a  man  analyse,  weigh,  and  deBcribe 


CHAP,  vin.]  ROMANS.  161 

all  the  "  things  "  which  make  for  him  the  one  grand  life-inflnence  I  Must  he  search 
the  bosom  of  Providence  ?  How  utterly  vain  were  the  effort  I  But,  happily,  there  is 
no  need  to  make  it.  The  true  test  is  far  simpler  and  easier.  It  is  this.  Is  there  love 
to  God  ?  All  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  lovb  God.  The  question 
is  not,  "  Am  I  strong  enough  to  vanquish  the  forces  of  life  ?  "  because  no  man  will 
ever  be.  To  all  there  is  at  last  the  grand  defeat.  Nor  is  it,  "  Am  I  wise  and  politio 
enough  to  foresee  and  prepare  ?  "  because  every  man  is  overmatched,  at  one  time 
or  other.  Nor,  of  course,  ••Am  I  good  enough  to  change  everything  into  good?" — 
for,  still,  alas !  when  He  who  alone  is  good  looks  down,  there  is  but  the  old  sad 
case,  that  '•none  doeth  good."  But  the  question  is  this  and  none  other,  "Do 
I  love  God,  whose  whole  delight  is  to  overcome  evil  with  good  ?  "  What,  or  rather 
whom  we  love,  and  how  much,  will  tell  far  more  regarding  our  real  character 
than  anything  else ;  will,  therefore,  also  tell  what  moral  position  we  occupy  in 
relation  to  all  outward  things.  If  we  love  God,  "  all  things  work  togetber  for 
our  good."  Quite  clearly,  then,  the  one  grand  solicitude  with  us  should  be 
the  cultivation  of  this  Divine  affection  of  love  to  God.  If  this  be  in  perpetual 
action,  how  need  we  give  place  and  time  and  thought  to  other  cares?  All  ia 
well.  Those  working  '•  things,"  the  strength  and  pressure  of  which  we  never 
could  resist,  the  mystery  of  which  we  never  could  fathom — let  them  work  together 
and  enter  into  all  possible  combinations,  they  can  produce  nothing  but  good  to  us. 
Does  the  storm  blow  ?  Love  Him  who  •'  maketh  the  storm  a  calm,"  and  who,  in 
storm  and  calm  alike,  will  keep  you  safely  within  the  sure  haven  of  His  care.  Is  it 
night  ?  Love  Him  to  whom  "  the  darkness  and  the  light  are  both  alike,"  but  who, 
knowing  well  that  they  are  not  alike  to  us,  has  promised  that  weeping  and  night 
shall  pass  away  together,  and  that  joy  shall  come  in  the  morning.  Are  yon  in 
pain?  Love  Him  who,  although  He  is  "  the  ever-blessed  God,"  suffered  once  for 
us,  and  still  has  the  touch  of  all  our  pain  on  the  nerve  of  His  own  infinite  sympathy, 
and  who  writes  over  the  portals  of  the  happy  gates,  **  There  shall  be  no  more  pain." 
Are  you  poor  ?  Love  Him  who,  to  sanctify  poverty,  was  bom  among  the  beasts, 
lived  with  the  poor.  Can  you  go  up  and  stand  beside  Him,  and  complain  that  He 
has  left  you  poor?  {A,  Raleigh,  D.Dj)  All  things  working  for  good: — I.  Thb 
believeb's  chabacteb.  1.  Love  to  God  is  his  grand  distinctive  feature.  The 
creeds  of  Christians  may  differ  in  minor  shades,  their  ecclesiastical  relations  may 
vary — yet  in  this  one  particular  there  is  an  essential  unity.  They  love  one  God 
and  Father  ;  and  this  truth — like  those  sundered  rays  of  light  returning  to  the  sun, 
approximate  to  each  other — forms  the  great  assimilating  principle  by  which  all 
harmonise.  The  regeneration  through  which  they  have  passed  has  effected  this 
great  change.  Once  they  were  at  enmity  with  God.  But  now  they  love  Him.  (1) 
As  revealed  in  Christ.  Who,  as  he  has  realised  the  precionsness  of  the  Saviour, 
has  not  felt  the  kindling  of  a  fervent  love  to  Him  who,  when  He  had  no  greater 
gift,  commended  His  love  to  us  by  the  gift  of  His  dear  Son  ?  (2)  In  His  paternal 
character.  The  Spirit  of  adoption  takes  captive  their  hearts,  and  they  love  God 
with  a  child's  fervent,  adoring,  confiding  affection.  (3)  For  all  His  conduct,  for  the 
wisdom,  faithfulness,  holiness  of  His  procedure — for  what  He  withholds  as  for  what 
He  grants.  Of  the  source  of  this  feeling  let  us  not  lose  sight,  •  *  We  love  Him  because 
He  first  loved  us."  2.  •'  Who  are  the  called  according  to  His  purpose  "  (chap.  i.  6,  7). 
What  a  glorious  vocation  is  this  I  To  have  heard  the  Holy  Spirit's  voice,  to  have  felt 
the  Saviour's  love,  to  have  listened  to  a  Father's  persuasive  assurance,  called  to  be 
God's  holy  ones — sons  ;  this  were  a  vocation  worthy  indeed  of  God,  and  demanding 
in  return  our  supremest,  deepest  affection  I  The  principle  upon  which  this  call 
proceeds  is  said  to  be,  "  according  to  His  purpose."  It  excludes  all  idea  of  merit  on 
the  part  of  the  called  (2  Tim.  i.  9).  Has  this  call  reached  you  ?  Ministers,  the 
gospel,  providences,  conscience  have  called  you,  but  has  the  Spirit  called  you  with 
an  inward  and  effectual  vocation  from  death  to  life,  from  sin  to  holiness,  from  the 
world  to  Christ,  from  self  to  God  ?  II.  The  PEivrLEOE  which  appebtains  to  this 
CHABACTEB.  1.  •'All  things"  under  the  righteous  government  of  God  must 
necessarily  be  a  working  out  of  good.  "  Thou  art  good,  and  doest  good."  In 
Him  there  is  no  evil,  and  consequently  nothing  can  proceed  from  Him  that  tendeth 
to  evil.  The  passage  supposes  something  antagonistio  to  the  well-being  of  the 
believer  in  God's  conduct  at  times.  And  yet,  to  no  single  truth  does  the  Church 
bear  a  stronger  testimony  than  to  this,  that  the  darkest  epochs  of  her  history  have 
ever  been  those  from  which  her  brightest  lustre  has  arisen.  But  let  us  pass  to 
individuals.  Shall  we  take  the  most  painful  circumstances  in  the  history  of  the 
child  of  God  ?  The  Word  declares  that  these  circumstances  are  all  conspiring,  and 
VOL.  n.  11 


162  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cms.  vm 

all  working  together,  for  his  good.  Take  tribulation  as  the  starting-point  (chap.  v. 
3-5).  The  Bible  is  rich  in  illustrations  of  this.  Take,  e.g.  the  cases  of  Jacob 
(Gen.  xUi.  36),  and  Joseph  (Gen.  1.  20).  2.  Observe  the  unity  of  operation.  They 
"  work  together."  Seldom  does  affliction  come  alone.  Storm  rises  upon  storm, 
cloud  on  cloud.  Trace  the  wisdom  and  love  of  God  in  ordaining  your  path  to 
heaven  through  •'  much  tribulation."  Single,  the  good  they  are  charged  to  convey 
were  but  partially  accomplished.  It  is  the  compounding  of  the  ingredients  in  the 
recipe  that  constitutes  its  sanative  power.  Extract  any  one  ingredient,  and  you 
impair  the  others  and  destroy  the  whole.  It  is  the  combination  of  sound,  the 
harmony  of  many,  and  often  discordant  notes,  that  constitute  music.  Oh,  how 
imperfectly  are  we  aware  of  a  plurality  of  trial,  to  wake  from  our  lips  the  sweetest 
anthem  of  thanksgiving  to  God  1  Thus  it  is  that  the  most  deeply  tried  believers 
are  the  most  skilful  and  the  most  melodious  choristers  in  God's  Church.  They  sing 
the  sweetest  on  earth,  and  they  sing  the  loudest  in  heaven,  who  are  passing  through, 
and  who  have  come  out  of  "great  tribulation."  3.  It  is  a  present  working.  It 
says  not  that  all  things  have  worked  or  shall  work,  though  this  is  certain.  But  it 
says  that  all  things  do  now  work  together  for  good.  The  operation  may  be  as 
invisible  and  noiseless  as  the  leaven  fomenting  in  the  meal,  and  yet  not  less 
certain  and  effectual.  And  whether  the  good  be  immediate  or  remote,  it  matters 
little ;  sooner  or  later  it  will  accomplish  its  benign  and  heaven-sent  mission.  4. 
Its  certainty.  We  know  it,  because  God  has  said  it,  because  others  have  testified 
to  it,  best  of  all,  because  we  have  experienced  it  ourselves.  The  shape  it  may 
assume,  the  end  to  which  it  may  be  subservient,  we  cannot  tell.  God's  glory  is 
secured  by  it,  and  that  end  accomplished,  we  are  sure  it  must  be  good.  Will  it  not 
be  a  good,  if  your  present  adversity  results  in  the  dethronement  of  some  worshipped 
idol — in  the  endearing  of  Christ  to  your  soul — in  the  closer  conformity  of  your 
mind  to  God's  image — in  the  purification  of  your  heart — in  your  more  thorough 
meetness  for  heaven?  (0.  Winslow,  D.D.)  All  things  working  for  good  : — All 
things,  whether  in  nature,  providence,  or  grace,  work  together  for  good  to  God's 
people.  I.  The  pebsons.  1.  Those  who  love  God.  By  those  who  hate  God,  even 
blessings  are  turned  into  a  curse.  2.  "  Who  are  the  called  according  to  His  purpose." 
II.  The  object.  1.  To  purify  from  sin  (Mai.  iii.  3).  2.  To  promote  growth  in 
grace.  3.  To  prepare  for  heaven.  III.  The  means.  1.  Afflictions.  2.  Chastise- 
ments (Heb.  xii.  6).  Job  was  chastised  in  love  and  elevated  in  character  to  a  height 
he  had  never  otherwise  attained.  3.  Persecutions.  These  drive  the  soul  nearer 
to  God.  They  show  who  are  the  genuine  professors.  Joseph  was  persecuted,  but 
great  good  was  accomplished  thereby  (Gen.  1.  20).  4.  Special  providences.  These 
are  the  turning-points  in  our  lives.  How  wonderful  that  I  am  here  rather  than 
elsewhere !  There  is  all  the  world  to  choose  from  ;  and  yet  Peoria  is  my  home  both 
by  invitation  and  selection.  Paul,  on  his  journey  from  Iconinm  to  Troas,  was 
minded  to  labour  in  the  regions  of  Bithynia,  but  "  the  Spirit  suffered "  him 
not,  for  He  had  other  work  for  him  to  do  in  the  greater  centres  of  the  world's 
civilisation  (Acts  xvi.  7).  IV.  The  time.  1.  This  is  present.  God's  children 
do  not  have  to  wait  for  the  blessing.  Loving  God,  aU  things  are  received 
from  His  hand  as  means  to  an  end ;  and  enjoying  His  love,  afflictions  are 
tempered,  and  blessings  are  not  misapplied.  Many  misquote  this  text  and  read  it 
in  the  future,  as  if  it  were  only  » '  will  work  together. "  2.  The  future  (2  Cor.  iv.  17). 
v.  Encouragements.  1.  To  courage  (Heb.  xii.  13).  2.  To  faith  (2  Cor.  iv.  18). 
8.  To  hope  (Heb.  vi.  18-20).  4.  To  love  (Bum.  viii.  35-39).  It  is  the  love  of  God 
(both  His  love  to  us  and  our  love  to  Him)  that  changes  all  things,  whether  good  or 
untoward,  into  blessings.  Oh,  the  bountiful  alchemy  of  love  1  {Homiletic  Review.) 
All  things  working  together  for  good  : — I.  The  fact,  "  We  know,"  &c.  Note — 1.  The 
good  determined  :  being  "  conformed  to  the  image  of  God's  Son."  Each  beheving 
man  is  as  a  block  of  marble,  hewn  out  of  the  great  quarry  of  unregenerated 
humanity,  and  appointed  to  be  dressed  and  formed  according  to  the  Divine  ideal. 
The  image  of  the  living  Christ,  as  portrayed  in  the  holy  Gospels,  suppUes  the 
model.  And  the  work  to  be  accomplished  is  that  of  breaking  off  unshapely  angles, 
poUshing  down  aU  rough  projections,  chiselling  out  the  life-like  features,  and 
cleansing  away  all  obscuring  dust,  till  the  human  subject,  "  changed  into  the  same 
image,  from  glory  to  glory,"  stands  out  at  last,  a  living  likeness  of  the  living  Lord. 
No  doubt  the  final  result  wiU  be  blessedness,  lordship,  and  glory.  But  the  work 
which  has  now  to  be  effected  is  that  of  securing  in  us  a  likeness  to  the  Lord.  In 
the  external  manifestations  of  our  life  we  must  be  brought  to  be  like  Jesu's,  who 
went  about  doing  good;  and  therefore  are  we  said  to  be  the  "workmanship"  of 


CHAP,  vin.]  BOMANS.  16S 

God  (Eph.  ii.  10).  But  the  work  of  new  creation  penetrates  below  the  surface,  and 
enters  into  the  very  spirit  and  life  of  the  man  (Eph.  iv.  22-24).  2.  The  workers 
employed  by  the  Divine  Artist.  "  All  things,"  i.e.,  all  the  influences  of  present  lot; 
all  the  influences  of — (1)  The  objective  creation.  (2)  The  perpetually  changing 
events  of  Providence,  both  prosperous  and  adverse,  whether  as  specially  affecting 
only  the  individual,  or  also  the  family,  the  Church,  the  nation,  or  the  world. 
(3)  Which  proceed  from  good  and  from  wicked  men.  (4)  The  invisible  world, 
which  come  streaming  down  from  glorified  saints,  angelic  hosts,  and  from  the  ever- 
blessed  God.  (5)  The  world  beneath.  There  is  nothing  neutral  in  the  mighty 
process  ;  and  nothing  but  whose  influence,  blended  with  all  others,  is  made  to  con- 
tribute something  towards  the  accomplishment  of  the  predestinated  result.  3.  On 
whose  behalf  the  "  good  "  is  being  wrought.  Those  only  who  "love  God,  who  are 
the  called  according  to  His  purpose  "  ;  namely,  to  justify,  sanctify,  and  glorify  all 
them  who  believe  in  Christ.  For  the  called  ones  are  those  who  have  adopted  the 
Christian  vocation  as  their  own,  and  have  therefore  become  not  only  called,  but 
also  chosen  and  faithful.  For  them  the  call  has  become  effectual.  They  have 
fallen  into  the  line  of  the  Divine  purpose,  and  are  therefore  being  helped  along  that 
line  by  all  these  harmonised  converging  forces.  The  action  of  the  external  forces 
themselves  would  never  produce  the  desired  result.  Their  influence  upon  others 
does  but  serve  to  make  moral  scars  and  deformity.  Just  as  the  deadly  nightshade 
concocts  its  poison  from  the  very  same  soil  and  atmosphere  from  which  the  wheat- 
plant  provides  us  bread,  and  other  plants  our  honey.  4.  The  ultimately  resulting 
good  is  the  consequent,  not  of  any  single  influence,  but  of  all  the  influences 
together.  This  does  not,  indeed,  denote  that  they  work  either  simultaneously  or  in 
perfect  and  understood  agreement  amongst  themselves.  They  are  oftentimes  all 
unconscious  of  the  service  which  they  render.  First  one  and  then  another  comes 
near  and  does  the  work  for  which  he  is  specially  adapted.  Or  perchance  a  whole 
host  of  the  workers  are  busily  engaged  at  once,  so  as  to  become  simultaneous 
helpers.  So,  too,  it  is  in  other  departments  of  God's  works.  How  many  and 
complicated  the  forces  and  influences  which  must  contribute  to  the  growth  and 
perfection  of  the  plant  or  animal!  And  how  innumerable  and  varied  those  by 
which  the  infant  is  developed  to  manhood  1  And  yet  every  one  produces  some 
lasting  impression,  and  supplies  its  contribution,  with  all  the  others,  towards  the 
final  product.  And  thus  it  is  in  the  formation  of  Christian  character.  II.  The 
GROUND  OF  THE  FACT,  AND  OF  OUR  KNOWLEDGE  OF  IT.  " For  {i.e.,  bccause  that)  whom 
He  did  foreknow,"  <fec.  Observe — 1.  That  God  Himself  predestinated  this  result; 
namely,  that  those  who  were  foreknown  as  believing  the  gospel,  and  as  becoming 
obedient  to  its  call,  should  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  His  Son.  2.  That  He 
who  predetermined  this  result  has  also  provided  the  means  for  its  accomplishment. 
3.  That  which  He  can  He  will  do  to  bring  the  pre-ordained  result  to  its  con- 
summation. It  is  not  only  that  the  "  purpose  "  is  "  His  own,"  formed  "  according 
to  His  own  good  pleasure,"  and  "  given  us  in  Christ  Jesus  before  the  world  began  " 
(Eph.  i.  9,  10,  iii.  8-12 ;  2  Tim.  i.  9) ;  and  therefore  a  thing  never  to  be  abandoned ; 
but  one,  in  respect  to  the  working  out  of  which  He  has  given  the  strongest  assur- 
ance. For  its  aceomphshment  "  He  spai"ed  not  His  own  Son,"  &c.  Nay;  in  and 
with  Christ,  those  "all  things"  have  been  already  given  (1  Cor.  iii.  21-23).  And, 
therefore,  the  apostle,  projecting  himself  forward  to  the  time  when  the  great  work 
of  redeeming  love  shall  have  been  completed,  and  giving  that  which  is  its  history 
in  every  individual  case,  afSrms  that  "  whom  He  did  predestinate,  them  He  also 
,  .  .  glorified."  Conclusion :  Learn  a  lesson  of — 1.  Earnest  diligence  in  the  cultiva- 
tion of  the  inner  spiritual  life.  This  is  the  true  philosopher's  stone,  by  whose 
alchemic  power  everything  may  be  transmuted  into  gold.  Power  over  our  own  out- 
ward worldly  condition  we  have  but  very  little  (Jer.  x.  23).  Evil  may  come,  and, 
if  our  hearts  are  not  right  with  God,  all  things  will  but  serve  to  intensify  our 
selfishness,  impatience,  &c.,  making  us  to  become  more  than  ever  vessels  of  wrath 
fitted  for  destruction.  But,  if  we  love  God,  we  shall  find  a  helping  hand  in  every- 
thing. 2.  Patient  submission  to  God's  arrangements.  Let  us  remember  ever  that 
His  providence  has  to  do  with  all  things.  Did  He  choose  to  do  so.  He  could  make 
our  course  of  life,  in  all  respects,  prosperous  and  pleasant.  But  if  ti'ials,  perplex- 
ities, and  sufferings  come,  it  must  be  because  that  these  things  are  needed  and 
good  (James  i.  2-4).  3.  Joyful  and  triumphant  confidence  in  God.  This  is  that 
which  is  specially  indicated'by  the  apostle  (vers.  31-39).  {W.  Tyson.)  All  things 
working  for  good: — You  have  probably  seen  a  large  and  complicated  piece  of 
machinery  in  full  play.     The  parts,  as  you  noticed,  were  very  various — various  in 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  nxfc 

size  and  shape,  various  in  the  material  of  which  they  were  made.  There  were 
wood  and  leather,  and  iron  and  brass ;  there  were  cranks  and  levers,  and  pistons 
and  pulleys,  and  wheels  great  and  small,  with  other  instruments  of  which  both  the 
construction  and  the  use  were  strange  to  you.  And  besides  the  difference  of 
material,  you  observed  a  difference  of  movement  among  the  parts.  There  was 
contrariety  and  opposition.  The  wheels  whirled  round  in  opposite  directions ; 
the  chains  seemed  placed  on  purpose  to  resist  each  other.  Checking  and  counter- 
checking,  strain  and  counter-strain,  were  to  be  seen  everywhere.  And  you  felt 
confused  as  you  stood  contemplating  the  ceaseless  and  unintelligible  whirl  that  was 
going  on  around  yoa ;  yet  you  perceived  that  all  the  parts  of  the  machinery,  how- 
ever  diverse  in  themselves  or  in  their  mode  of  operation,  were  working  together  to 
produce  a  certain  result — somehow  or  other  their  combined  action  led  up  to  a 
certain  definite  point,  and  amidst  all  the  apparent  confusion,  this  point  was 
invariably  reached.  (G.  Calthrop,  M.A.)  All  things  working  for  good  : — Storra 
was  a  student  at  Andover  Theological  Seminary  with  young  Gordon  Hall.  On  a 
certain  Saturday,  towards  the  end  of  their  course,  Hall  was  preparing  to  go  to 
Braintree  to  preach  upon  the  following  Sabbath,  having  some  expectation  that  the 
invitation  so  to  do  would  grow  into  a  call.  In  the  act  of  splitting  some  wood,  how- 
ever, his  hat  fell  from  his  head  beneath  the  axe,  and  was  cut  in  twain  and  ruined. 
The  circumstances  were  such  that  to  replace  it  was  impossible  just  then ;  and  Hall, 
compelled  to  vacate  his  engagement  at  Braintree,  arranged  with  Storrs  to  go  in  his 
place.  Storrs  went.  His  preaching  pleased.  He  was  invited  to  come  again.  And 
the  result  was  that  Hall  was  quite  forgotten,  a  call  was  presently  extended  to  Storrs, 
it  was  accepted,  and  he  was  in  due  time  settled,  remaining  the  minister  of  that 
parish  until  his  dying  day,  a  period  of  more  than  half  a  century.  Hall,  dis- 
appointed, one  might  naturally  suppose  at  this  thwarting  of  his  hopes,  had  his 
mind  turned  to  the  foreign  mission  field,  and  became  Gordon  Hall,  the  first 
missionary  of  the  American  Board,  whose  name  is  for  ever  linked  with  the  early 
enterprise  of  that  eminent  organisation.  No  one  who  has  any  belief  in  Divine 
providence  will  for  a  moment  doubt  that  God  stationed  Storrs  at  Braintree  and 
sent  Hall  to  India ;  but  does  it  not  also  seem  as  if  He  effected  that  arrangement 
by  means  of  the  accident  to  the  hat?  And  this  is  the  obvious  lesson  of  the 
incident :  that  there  is  really  no  such  thing  as  accident  in  this  world ;  that  "  all 
things  work  together  "  in  the  execution  of  God's  purposes,  and  '•  for  good  to  them 
that  love  Him  " ;  that  the  most  trivial  occurrence  should  be  contemplated  in  the 
light  of  the  possibilities  which  may  flow  from  it ;  and  that  our  least  concerns,  as 
well  as  our  greatest,  are  under  the  supervision  and  control  of  the  heavenly  Father. 
Good  to  the  good,  the  rule  of  God's  precedure  with  man  : — I.  Who  abe  the  good  ? 
"  Them  that  love  God."  What  love  ?  1.  That  type  which  God  has  predestined. 
"  His  purpose."  2.  That  type  to  which  God  has  called  His  creatures.  How  has 
He  "called"  them?  By  the  revelation  of  His  moral  loveliness  as  revealed  in 
nature,  in  conscience,  in  Christ.  This  love  is — (1)  Paramount.  Love  as  a  passing 
subsidiary  emotion  is  not  religious  love.  (2)  Practical.  Love  that  goes  off  in 
words  or  occasional  acts  is  not  religious  love.  It  must  be  a  ruling,  practical  force. 
(3)  Permanent.  It  must  be  in  everything  and  for  ever.  II.  What  is  the  good  fob 
THEM?  It  is  good  from  all  things.  What  good  ?  1.  There  is  nothing  good  that 
does  not  promote  moral  goodness  in  the  soul.  Wealth,  social  position,  power, 
health  itself,  are  not  only  worthless  but  pernicious  if  they  accomplish  not  this. 
2.  Whatever  promotes  moral  goodness  in  the  soul  is  good.  Personal  suffering, 
personal  bereavement,  social  losses,  &c.,  when  they  do  this,  are  good.  "  Tribula- 
tion worketh  patience,"  &c.  "  Our  light  afflictions."  There  is  a  glorious  optimism 
in  the  history  of  the  good.  Conclusion  :  This  subject — 1.  Corrects  a  popular  error: 
that  religion  is  to  a  man's  disadvantage  in  this  world.  No  such  thing.  Pauperism 
with  piety  is  infinitely  better  than  a  princedom  with  ungodliness.  2.  This  subject 
affords  comfort  to  afflicted  saints.  The  good  can  turn  all  to  good.  (D.  Thomas, 
D.D.)  Trials  good  to  the  good: — The  afflictions   of   life  are  variously  con- 

templated. Stoicism  says,  '•  Submit  to  fate."  Some  are  icy  negatives  in  life. 
They  stand  amidst  the  problems  and  woes  of  humanity,  calm  and  passive  and 
scornful.  Epicureanism  says,  "  Make  thyself  insensible  bv  indulgence  in  pleasure." 
Many  mean  to  take  life  cosily  and  sweetly.  The  whole  creation  groaneth  and 
travaileth  together  in  pain ;  but  its  groans  shall  not  disturb  the  music  of  their  life, 
nor  its  travail  cloud  the  brightness  of  their  little  day.  In  contrast  to  this  Pagan 
temper  the  Christian  method  is  to  look  elements  in  the  face,  and  see  in  them  the 
promise  of   blessing.     Christianity  does  not  simply  declare  the  inevitablenoss  ol 


CHAP.  Tin.]  BOMANS.  16» 

sorrow,  or  merely  lay  down  rules  for  lessening  its  bitterness.  It  discover*  a  wise 
and  loving  God  directing  all  the  mixed  processes  of  life  to  a  beneficient  issue. 
And  thus  it  soothes  the  heart  into  patience,  lifts  it  into  hope,  and  floods  it  with 
courage.  I.  Thb  cikcomstancks  which  bbino  butfebino  into  lifk.  1.  Inherited 
moral  defection.  The  passions,  habits,  weaknesses  of  one  generation  are  trans- 
mitted. In  consequence  of  this  law,  multitudes  are  born  with  the  religious  side  of 
their  nature  so  cramped  and  feeble  that  it  is  diflQcult  to  win  them  to  goodness ;  and 
even  when  won,  how  slow  is  their  growth  in  grace,  how  dwarfed  their  spiritual 
stature.  2.  The  universal  condition  of  toil.  Idleness  is  misery ;  congenial  labour 
is  gladness;  but  how  much  is  congenial?  How  often  the  fierce  competition 
harasses  like  a  fever.  3.  Contact  with  our  fellow-men.  You  meet  them  in 
municipal  councils,  in  business,  &o. ;  and  very  often,  the  closer  the  intimacy  the 
greater  the  recoil  from  the  unlovely  traits  which  are  disclosed.  There  are  men  like 
the  fox,  like  the  tiger,  like  the  serpent.  4.  The  sorrows  that  spring  from  our 
friendship.  In  having  another  united  to  you  by  the  sacred  chain  of  love,  your 
liability  to  suffering  is  increased,  according  to  the  degree  of  your  affection.  If 
their  hearts  ache,  so  do  ours.  5.  Disappointment,  in  relation  to  the  Divine  and 
sacred  ideals  of  the  soul.  6.  The  triumph  of  policy  over  right ;  weakness  crushed 
by  strength ;  worth  left  to  perish  in  obscurity ;  vice  climbing  into  power ;  wrong 
slow  to  die ;  right  slow  to  prevail.    II.  Now  hb  who  loves  God  possesses,  as  it 

WEBE,  A  OBAND    SPIBITOAL   ALCHEMT  BY  WHICH  THESE  DABK  THINGS   01"   LIFE    ABE    MADE 

SACRAMENTAL.  Sickucss,  disappointment,  calumny,  the  discrepancy  between  the 
ideal  and  the  actual,  Ac,  are  transformed  into  means  of  grace.  Good  comes  to  him 
from  every  source.  The  whole  universe  works  in  his  behalf.  As  yet  our  knowledge 
of  the  way  in  which  trial  is  promotive  of  good  is  necessarily  imperfect.  We  can 
only  see  as  through  a  glass  darkly.  Still,  we  have  that  degree  of  vision.  1.  One 
form  of  good  that  is  realised  is  the  closer  union  of  the  soul  with  God.  The  natural 
instinct  of  the  human  heart  in  troubles  is  to  betake  itself  to  one  able  to  sympathise 
and  help.    And  to  those  who  love  Him,  God  is  known  as  the  God  of  comfort. 

2.  Trial  also  serves  to  develop  the  qualities  which  constitute  true  manhood.  The 
right  regulation  of  the  character  and  conduct  is  inseparable  from  love  to  God. 
Now,  as  a  man  under  irritation  strives  to  be  calm,  he  \vill  grow  in  the  mastery  of 
his  feelings;  if  under  losses  and  perplexities  he  strives  to  be  patient,  he  will  grow 
in  patience ;  if  while  smarting  under  a  sense  of  injustice  he  steadily  sets  himself 
to  preserve  a  heart  of  charity,  he  will  grow  in  love;  if,  as  pleasure  calls,  he 
resolutely  endeavours  to  be  faithful,  he  will  grow  in  fidelity.  And  herein  lies  the 
contrast  between  the  godly  and  the  godless  man  :  under  the  afflictive  discipline  of 
Ufe,  the  one  is  soured,  the  other  is  sweetened ;  the  one  is  cursed,  the  other  is 
blessed.  Put  a  piece  of  clay  to  the  lapidary's  wheel :  it  is  ground  to  a  heap  of 
dust.     But  put  a  diamond  on  the  wheel:   the  friction  brings  out  its  beauty. 

3.  And  now,  taking  a  more  general  view,  what  is  to  be  the  outcome  of  all  the 
clash  and  discord  and  imperfection  that  has  been  going  on  since  time  began  ? 
This :  the  triumph  of  God.  The  prayer  "  Thy  kingdom  come "  will  be 
exchanged  for  '♦  The  Lord  reigneth."  That  final  triumph  in  some  measure 
belongs  to  the  destiny  of  the  godly  man.  It  is  the  victory  of  those 
principles  for  which  he  lived  and  prayed  and  worked.  {T.  Hammond.)  The 
chief  good : — About  50  B.C.  a  cultivated  Roman  represents  himself  as  discoursing 
pleasantly  with  his  friends  about  the  supreme  good.  He  explains  the  views  of  the 
rival  philosophers ;  but  after  surveying  the  whole  field,  he  concludes  without  a  word 
to  indicate  in  which  direction  his  own  preference  lay.  In  this,  perhaps,  he  repre- 
sented the  majority  of  the  thoughtful  men  of  his  time.  To  them  life  was  a  problem 
without  any  sure  key  to  its  solution.  About  60  a.d.  there  were  living  in  Rome  a 
community  of  men  who  had  arrived  at  the  most  astonishing  conclusions  on  this 
very  point.  Though  they  were  few  and  insignificant,  they  were  persuaded  that  all 
the  varied  experiences  of  life  worked  out  the  highest  blessedness.  The  explanation 
of  the  phenomenon  was  not  to  be  found  in  any  revolution,  for  things  had  perhaps 
changed  for  the  worse.  But  something  had  happened  in  the  interval  which  had 
set  them  in  a  new  relation  to  all  these  things  :  and  this  was  that  the  love  of  God, 
revealed  in  Christ,  had  been  shed  abroad  in  their  hearts.     I.  The  qood  towabds 

WHICH    EVEBTTHINQ    18   HEBE    DECLABED   TO    CO-OPERATE.      The  SUprCmC  gOod  for  man 

can  never  consist  in  anything  external,  for  all  such  things  are  in  their  very  nature 
inferior  to  Him,  and  are  intended  to  serve  as  stepping-stones  to  something  higher. 
Happiness  consists  in  what  we  are  and  not  in  what  we  have.  But  what  we  are  is 
precisely  that  which  hinders  our  happiness.     And  the  question  is.  How  are  we  to 


166  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  vm. 

compose  our  inward  evila?  To  answer  this  we  must  find  some  one  who  has 
succeeded  in  being  what  it  will  be  our  blessedness  to  become,  and  who  can  help  us 
to  become  Uke  himself.  Now  Christ  is  God's  conception  of  manhood  realised.  In 
Him  was  reached  that  complete  equilibrium  and  repose  of  all  our  frailties  in  which 
true  blessedness  consists.  In  Him  there  was  no  inward  contradiction,  no  want 
which  filled  His  heart  with  a  continual  ache.  To  be  truly  blessed,  therefore,  is  to 
be  like  Him  (ver.  29).  II.  All  things  combine  to  peodtjce  in  Christians  con- 
formity TO  Christ.  Life  with  Christians,  so  far  as  its  outward  framework  is  con- 
cerned, remains  exactly  as  before.  It  develops  anxiety,  sorrow,  disappointment. 
But  Christianity  shows  all  these  things  subjected  to  a  Divine  will  and  purpose. 
The  order  in  which  they  come,  their  duration,  the  weight  and  the  angle  of  tlieir 
incidence,  are  wisely  and  unerringly  adjusted.  Each  contributes  in  its  own  imper- 
ceptible, it  may  be,  but  effectual  way  to  the  desired  result.  And  it  is  just  because 
we  lose  sight  of  this  result  we  often  find  the  text  so  hard  to  believe.  When  some 
sudden  catastrophe  swallows  up  a  man's  fortune  we  are  apt  to  ask  with  incredulous 
lips  how  that  can  be  for  good.  When  sickness  comes  or  death  plucks  our  sweetest 
flowers,  is  it  possible  to  accept  the  stroke  as  a  blessing  in  disguise?  Without  a 
struggle  certainly  not,  and  not  even  thus  always  at  first.  "No  affliction  for  the 
present  seemeth  to  be  joyous,"  &c.  Men  are  not  made  of  cast-iron,  and  when  they 
become  Christians  they  do  not  cease  to  be  men.  Christ  Himself  once,  at  all  events, 
submitted  with  strong  cryings  and  tears.  But  if  we  only  embrace  the  end  of  God's 
discipline  we  shall  see  that  these  very  things  which  we  think  work  nothing  but  evil 
and  woe,  bring  about  precisely  the  opposite  effects.  Had  Christ  no  trials  ?  And 
did  they  work  anything  but  good?  Is  He  less  glorious  because  His  brow  was 
crowned  with  thorns  ?  And  so  as  there  was  nothing  in  the  life  of  our  Lord  but 
ultimately  ministered  to  His  glory,  and  that  hfe  embraced  all  the  experience  of 
humanity,  so  there  will  be  nothing  in  your  life  that  will  not  make  you  liker  to  Him, 
if  only  you  I'eceive  it  in  His  spirit.  Listen  to  that  flood  of  music  that  at  the  touch 
of  a  single  hand  roUs  from  a  hundred  pipes.  It  may  at  first  confuse,  overwhelm, 
astonish  you.  But  amid  all  the  apparently  conflicting  sounds,  a  practised  ear  can 
detect  the  expression  of  one  tumultuous  emotion,  or  it  may  be  the  melody  of  a 
simple  air,  that,  divested  of  its  manifold  accompaniments,  might  be  played  upon  an 
oaten  stop.  And  in  like  manner  if  you  suffer  your  life  to  be  controlled  by  God, 
there  will  run  through  it  the  harmony  of  a  Divine  purpose,  conforming  you  to  the 
image  of  His  Son.  III.  The  condition  on  which  this  working  together  of  all 
THINGS  for  good  IS  BASED.  That  we  love  God.  1.  It  is  plain  that  all  things  do 
not  work  together  for  good  because  of  any  peculiar  virtue  in  the  things  themselves, 
nor  simply  because  of  the  time  and  manner  of  their  occurrence.  Heat  and  moisture, 
light  and  air,  are  all  necessary  for  the  maturing  of  the  crops ;  but  if  the  soil  be  poor 
and  insuGScient,  or  foul  with  weeds,  the  harvest  will  be  thin  and  disappointing,  if 
it  does  not  utterly  fail.  So  the  discipline  of  life  may  be  all  administered  with  the 
most  beneficent  design ;  but  if  there  be  no  corresponding  receptivity  in  us,  it  will 
do  us  no  good.  The  skill,  patience,  and  methods  of  the  teacher  may  be  unim- 
peachable ;  but  if  the  pupil  is  lazy  and  disobedient  these  will  not  in  themselves 
make  him  a  scholar.  He  must  to  some  extent  make  the  aim  of  his  teacher  his 
own,  and  co-operate  with  him,  in  order  to  receive  the  fuU  benefit  of  his  tuition. 
Hence,  St.  Paul  says  we  must  love  God  if  God's  providence  is  to  conform  us  to 
Christ,  that  is,  we  must  be  at  one  with  Him  in  seeking  the  fulfilment  of  His 
purpose.  4.  But  loving  God  also  describes  that  clinging  to  God  as  a  child  clings 
to  his  father,  especially  at  the  approach  of  peril,  and  which,  even  at  the  time  of 
chastisement,  never  dreams  of  questioning  His  love.  And  there  is  much  need  of 
this.  For  though  we  may  know  the  fact  we  often  cannot  understand  the  fashion, 
in  which  aU  things  are  to  work  together  for  our  good.  We  cannot  discern  the  per- 
spective of  life  or  see  clearly  the  relation  in  which  each  part  stands  to  the  whole. 
And  hence  we  must  take  much  on  trust.  We  must  cling  to  God  in  the  dark, 
remembering  that  He  "  leads  the  blind  by  a  way  that  they  know  not,"  and  yet  that 
this  way  is  sure  to  be  the  right  one.  3.  And  lest  at  any  time  you  should  be  shaken 
in  your  conviction  of  the  blessed  end  of  God's  dealing,  by  the  fear  that  you  do  not 
satisfy  the  condition  of  loving  Him,  then  remember  that  this  love  is  not  so  much  a 
feeling  as  a  posture  or  habit  of  the  soul.  4.  Then  remember  that  the  essence  of 
love  is  obedience  :  "  This  is  love,  that  we  walk  after  His  commandments."  And 
be  assured  that  if  you  are  willing  to  be  fashioned  after  the  image  of  Christ,  He  will 
make  good  His  word  to  you,  and  perfect  that  which  concerneth  you.  (C.  3Ioinet.) 
The  good  in  relation: — I.  To  the  bpibit  of  theib  life.     "  They  love  God."    This 


CHAP.  Tm.]  ROMANS.  167 

is  not  a  passing  sentiment  sach  as  exists  in  the  hearts  of  most,  but  a  permanently 
predominating  force.  It  is — 1.  The  love  of  gratitude,  awakened  by  the  contempla- 
tion of  God's  wonderful  favours.  2.  The  love  of  esteem,  awakened  by  the  view  of 
His  moral  excellencies.  3.  The  love  of  benevolence,  awakened  by  a  belief  in  the 
universal  goodness  of  His  purposes.  In  relation  to  man  these  may  exist  separately. 
We  may  feel  gratitude  where  we  cannot  esteem,  &c.  But  in  relation  to  God  it  takes 
these  three  forms.  His  favours  are  infinite,  His  character  perfect,  His  purposes 
only  good,  therefore  these  forms  are  supreme.  Love  thanks  Him  for  what  He  has 
done,  adores  Him  for  what  He  is,  wishes  Him  well  for  what  He  is  pursuing.  II, 
To  THE  coNDDCT  OF  GoD.  1.  He  has  called  them  to  love — not  by  force.  Love 
cannot  come  by  commands  and  penalties.  He  calls  men  to  love  by  exhibiting  the 
lovable  in  Himself — His  mercies,  perfection,  benevolence ;  to  awaken  gratitude, 
esteem  and  goodwill.  This  He  does — (1)  In  the  phenomena  of  nature.  How 
lovable  God  appears  in  the  forms  and  operations  of  the  universe.  (2)  In  the  dis- 
pensations of  life.  In  all  temporal  events  from  the  cradle  to  the  grave  God  com- 
mands our  affections.  (3)  In  the  life  of  Christ.  Here  we  have  His  kindness, 
perfections,  benevolent  designs.  2.  He  has  called  them  to  love  according  to  His 
purpose.  God  does  not  act  fitfully,  or  by  caprice.  From  the  beginning  He  pur- 
posed that  His  intelligent  creatures  should  love  Him.  All  the  arrangements  of 
nature,  the  machinery  of  His  government,  the  revelations  of  Himself  show  this. 
The  gospel  is  his  especial  call  to  man  as  a  sinner  to  love  Him :  and  how  exquisitely 
adapted  it  is  to  generate  affection  in  depraved  souls.  III.  To  the  wobkings  of 
Pbovidence.  1.  All  things — (1)  Work.  (2)  Harmoniously,  (3)  For  good,  (4) 
For  the  good  of  the  good.  2.  This  "  we  know  " — (1)  From  a  priori  reasoning. 
On  the  assumption  that  the  Creator  is  benevolent,  we  are  bound  to  conclude  that 
He  will  direct  all  to  the  happiness  of  them  that  love  Him.  It  is  ever  the  instinct 
of  His  creatures  to  seek  the  happiness  of  those  that  love  them.  (2)  From  the 
arrangement  of  the  universe.  Does  not  the  exquisite  adaptation  of  outward  nature 
to  minister  to  our  animal  senses,  physical  wants,  desire  for  knowledge,  and  love  of 
the  beautiful  show  that  the  Creator  intended  to  make  His  moral  creatures  happy  ? 
(3)  From  the  special  provisions  of  the  gospel.  Here  is  pardon,  purity,  knowledge, 
consolation,  holy  fellowship,  and  a  blessed  paradise.  (4)  From  the  operation  of 
the  affections.  Love  to  God — (a)  Put  the  soul  into  harmony  with  the  universe. 
The  soul  destitute  of  love  to  God  is  in  antagonism  to  the  whole  system  of  nature. 
{b)  Enables  the  soul  happily  to  appropriate  the  universe,  (5)  From  the  biography 
of  the  good.  Joseph,  David,  Daniel,  Paul.  (6)  From  the  assurances  of  God's 
Word.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  beneficial  operation  of  all  things  for  the  good  of 
the  Christian : — I.  What  a  different  thing  this  world  is  to  those  "  that  love 
God,"  and  those  who  do  not,  1,  The  circumstances  of  the  world,  the  general 
order  of  nature  and  providence,  the  mingled  distribution  of  health,  sickness,  and 
accidents,  are  the  same  to  both.  They  both  share  in  great  pubhc  benefits  and 
calamities,  and  in  this  more  favoured  part  of  the  world  the  Divine  revelation  shines 
on  both  classes  alike.  This  fact  would  be  a  most  mysterious  thing  without  a  light 
cast  upon  it  from  heaven,  as  was  painfully  felt  by  thoughtful  men,  even  under  the 
light  of  the  earUer  revelation.  2.  To  us  is  granted  a  light  that  pierces  deeper 
through  this  sameness  on  the  surface  of  things.  And  then,  what  an  immense 
difference  !  The  good  things  in  man's  condition — what  do  they  do  for  the  enemies 
of  God  ?  What  to  them  is  the  effect  of  all  nature,  with  its  beauties,  its  vicissitudes, 
its  productions  ?  What  to  them  the  bounties  of  providence  ?  Or  what  to  them 
the  share  of  general  calamities  ?  What  are  all  these  in  effect  to  men  who  continue 
still  irreligious,  thoughtless,  unthankful  ?  The  other  class,  however,  is  so  disposed 
that  all  things  operate  towards  it  beneficially.  And  that  one  state  of  the  soul 
should  thus  repel  the  essential,  spiritual  good  of  all  things,  and  that  an  opposite 
one  should  attract  it  is  not  strange,  if  we  consider  the  principle  that  is  present  or 
absent— the  love  of  God.  That  being  wanting,  how  should  the  soul  derive  the  good 
of  things?  The  perception,  the  discriminating  faculty,  the  transmuting  power,  the 
principle  to  repel  the  evil  is  wanting ;  nay,  the  very  will  to  obtain  the  good  is  want- 
ing. The  happy  adaptation  belongs  only  to  "them  that  love  God,  who  are  the 
called  according  to  His  purpose."  3.  The  latter  part  of  the  sentence  explains  how 
they  come  to  love  God — "  not  that  they  first  loved  Him,  but  that  He  loved  them." 
They  were  the  objects  of  His  gracious  "  purpose."  No  one  that  knows  anything  of 
the  alienated  state  of  our  nature  can  believe  that  a  condition  of  the  soul  in  which 
the  love  of  God  should  prevail,  can  be  created  by  any  less  cause  than  the  sovereign 
operation  of  the  Divine  Spirit ;  i.e.,  by  an  effectual  "  calling."    But,  then,  neither 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILL  USTRATOB.  (OHAP.  TIM. 

ean  he  imagine  that  this  operation  should  be  as  if  from  a  sadden  and  incidental 
thought  of  the  Ahnighty.  This,  then,  is  the  sacred  process ;  the  ancient  "  pur- 
pose," fulfilled  at  length  in  "  the  calling  according  to  that  purpose  " ;  and  this 
"  calling  "  being  an  inspiration  of  "  the  love  of  God  "  into  the  renewed  soul.  And 
this  places  the  soul  in  a  new  system  of  relations  with  the  world  and  its  events,  and 
that  the  most  advantageous  one  that  is  possible.  The  indwelling  of  the  love  of  God 
constitutes  a  radical  change,  so  that "  the  working  together  "  of  things  upon  the 
mind  shall  be,  mainly  and  predominantly,  "  for  good  " ;  and  progressively  more  so, 
in  proportion  as  that  sacred  principle  more  fully  prevails.  For  the  love  of  God 
makes  the  soul  quick  to  perceive,  to  dislike,  and  to  repel  all  that  is  evil ;  makes  it 
solicitous,  vigilant,  and  active  to  apprehend  and  obtain  all  the  most  essential  good. 
II.  But,  then,  beyond  all  this  the  supreme  security  is  that  God  will  have  it  so. 
He  will  make  "  all  things  work,"  &c.  They  are  the  most  valued  objects  He  has  in 
the  world ;  and  it  may  well  be  believed  that  they  shall  not  be  left  to  chances  for 
their  welfare.  For  their  sake  He  has  given  something  incomparably  more  valuable 
than  all  things  here,  even  His  beloved  Son,  who  is  constituted  "  to  the  Church, 
head  over  all  things."  And  this  cannot  be  less  than  a  security  that  "  all  things" 
shall  be  made  to  minister  to  them.  Strangers  and  enemies  to  God  are  very  little 
aware  of  all  this.  They  look  on  the  good  in  the  system,  in  its  mere  natural, 
material  character  of  good,  but  little  aware  that  this  is  made  to  impart  a  far 
higher,  nobler  kind  of  good  to  "  them  that  love  God."  And  they  regard  the  evil  as 
simply  evil ;  hardly  sensible  that  even  this  is  turned  to  infinite  advantage  to  the 
children  of  God.  The  proud  and  mighty  ones  of  the  earth  are  exerting  their  utmost 
power  and  devices  to  make  "  all  things  "  serve  their  interests,  never  dreaming  that 
the  Almighty  Potentate  is  making  "all  things,"  and  them  among  the  rest,  co- 
operate for  the  advantage  of  His  friends.  And  when  they  are  working  with  all 
their  might  against  one  another,  little  do  they  suspect  that  they  are  all  the  while 
co-operating  for  the  benefit  of  another  class  1  Would  not  that,  if  it  could  suddenly 
come  on  their  perception,  pacify  them  at  once?  "Whatl  working  with  all  this 
strife  and  cost  for  the  advantage  of  those  people  they  call  saints  1 "  The  very  pride 
that  raised  the  contest  would  still  it  1  III.  Under  this  Divine  supebintendencb 
ALL  things  work  TOGETHER  FOR  GOOD.  A  large  assertioD  1  but  where  is  the  impossi- 
bility of  its  being  true  ?  A  man  whose  soul  is  animated  and  sanctified  by  the  love 
of  God,  what  can  he  see,  or  hear,  or  encounter,  from  which,  under  the  aid  of  the 
Divine  Spirit,  he  absolutely  cannot  extract  any  good  ?  1.  With  this  holy  affection 
glowing  in  his  soul,  suppose  him  placed  in  the  very  centre  of  a  scene  of  excessive 
iniquity — might  he  not  draw  from  every  point  of  the  circuit  something  salutary  1 
Might  he  not  be  struck  with  a  religious  horror  lest  himself  should  fall  into  sin  ? 
Or,  inspired  with  fervent  thankfulness  for  having  been  saved  or  redeemed  from  it, 
might  he  not  feel  an  emotion  to  implore  the  interference  of  Almighty  Power? 
Thus  he  might,  in  the  very  worst  field,  reap  invaluable  spiritual  advantage.  2. 
There  are  the  temporal  good  things.  Now  it  is  a  mighty  thing  to  say  of  any 
mortal  that  these  shall  absolutely  work  for  his  good.  But  the  prevalent  love  of 
God  will  make  them  do  so ;  will  excite  thankful  admiration  of  the  Divine  bounty, 
stimulate  a  zeal  to  serve  God,  more  benevolent  compassion  for  those  who  are 
suffering  the  contrary  of  this  temporal  good,  and  excite  to  active  charity.  3.  But 
the  most  animating  light  of  this  truth  falls  on  the  darker  side  of  human  life.  But 
temporal  misfortunes  may  be  made  the  means  far  more  effectually  to  convince 
them  that  "  this  is  not  their  rest  " ;  that  this  world  will  not  do  for  them ;  to  pro- 
mote their  submissive  adoration  of  an  all-governing,  wise,  though  mysterious 
Providence,  and  to  inspire  an  energy  of  desire  and  effort  toward  a  better  country. 
4.  And  even  the  evils  of  a  spiritual  kind ;  the  pains  of  conscience,  fears  of  the 
Divine  wrath,  temptation,  perplexities  concerning  religious  truth;  through  these, 
as  a  severe  discipline,  many  minds  have  been  drawn  and  exercised  to  the  attain- 
ment of  a  happy  elevation  of  Christian  sanctity  and  peace.  (John  Foster.) 
The  purpose,  calling,  and  love  of  God : — 1.  The  law  of  motion  is  impressed  on 
everything.  2.  What  is  the  "  good."  In  general  the  union  of  ourselves  with  God, 
the  studying,  loving,  enjoying  Him,  and  furthering  His  purpose  for  ever.  3.  The 
apostle  connects  man  here  with  three  things — I.  The  purpose  of  God.  His  purpose 
is — 1.  Essentially  one.  He  has  a  series  of  purposes  harmonised  into  one,  but  one 
all-embracing  idea.  We  call  this  idea  providence  when  governing  the  wo 'Id,  and 
decree  when  saving  the  world.  2.  Good.  The  purpose  of  God  must  be  like  God. 
He  is  good,  and  so  is  His  purpose.  Whatever  form  the  good  may  assume,  whether 
we  call  it  instinct,  rationality,  volition,  moral  excellency,  jrace,  perfection,  if  we 


OBAP.  Tjn.]  ROMANS,  16S 

trace  the  stream  baok  into  its  origin,  we  shall  look  into  the  depth  of  the  Divine 
decree.  8.  FrogressiTe.  God  is  better  known  now  than  He  ever  was  before,  and 
will  for  ever  and  ever  spread  Himself  before  the  faith,  and  love,  and  intelligence  of 
His  creation.  Look  at  all  the  dispensations  of  time  till  now,  and  how  many  are 
continually  unfolded.  What  is  the  administration  of  time  but  the  unfolding  of 
God's  one  everlasting  purpose?  II.  The  calling  of  God.  God  in  Scripture  ia 
represented  as  calling  men  by  His  providence,  His  truth,  conscience ;  and  those 
who  answer  are  "  the  called."  God  decreed — 1.  That  you  should  have  an  intelli- 
gent, responsible,  undying  nature.  2.  That  the  offer  of  salvation  should  be  made 
to  fallen  man.  3.  That  the  refusal  of  His  offer  should  be  punished.  4.  That  those 
who  trust  in  His  mercy  shall  be  saved.  IIL  The  lovb  of  God.  1.  God's  dispen- 
sations towards  man  reveal  His  love.  The  apostle  mentions  five  things  in  reference 
to  this  love — (1)  Foreknowledge.  (2)  Predestination — a  beautiful  word,  giving  a 
destiny  beforehand.  He  brought  out  the  sun,  and  said,  "Your  destiny  is  to  illu- 
mine and  warm  these  worlds."  He  said,  "  Move  on,"  and  the  sun  has  done  it.  Is 
it  natural  to  suppose  that  God  gave  no  destiny  to  man  f  God  did  not  throw  out 
souls  for  no  purpose.  (3)  Calling.  There  is  the  man,  and  God  knows  what  he  is 
for,  and  says,  Man,  keep  up  to  thy  destiny ;  leave  earth,  selfishness,  sin,  hell  down 
beneath  thy  feet,  and  come  up.  (4)  Justification.  When  the  man  hears  the  call, 
and  obeys  it  according  to  the  great  fixed  plan,  of  which  Jesus  and  His  death  is  the 
great  centre,  he  is  justified,  made  right.  (6)  Glorification — that  is,  reaching  the 
destiny.  "All  things  work  together."  Do  not  attempt  to  take  one  link  from  the 
chain.  2.  The  work  of  Christ  also  reveals  His  love.  Look  to  Bethlehem,  to  Calvary, 
to  the  grave  of  Joseph,  the  Mount  of  Olives,  and  the  right  hand  of  God.  What  is 
He  doing  ?  "  Making  intercession  for  us."  Do  you  see  anything  that  is  not  en- 
couraging? "Who  can  separate  ns  from  the  love  of  Christ?"  (Caleb  Blorris.) 
The  secret  of  the  Divine  ways : — 1.  How  many  among  you  have  felt,  at  the  reading 
of  my  text,  an  involuntary  doubt  cross  their  mind  1  And,  beyond  the  circle  of 
beUevers,  with  what  a  smile  of  pity  or  of  indignation  is  it  greeted  I  2.  Moreover, 
the  manner  in  which  this  truth  is  often  presented  revolts  generous  hearts.  When 
I  see  a  Christian  overwhelmed  by  trials,  yet  not  doubting  the  Divine  goodness, 
blessing  the  hand  which  afflicts,  I  recognise  both  the  tone  of  Paul  and  the  spirit 
which  animated  him.  But  when,  in  the  midst  of  a  tame  and  easy  existence  of 
selfish  happiness,  I  see  a  Christian  delight  in  the  thought  that  his  lot  is  privileged 
above  others,  I  can  understand  the  sceptic's  smile  and  indignation.  Under  this 
narrow  aspect  the  great  thought  of  God's  intervention  is  often  presented.  Here  is 
an  epidemic ;  a  believer  who  is  spared  pretends  to  see  in  this  fact  the  mark  of  the 
special  preference  of  God.  Another  is  the  only  one  who  escapes  from  a  shipwreck ; 
he  lets  it  be  understood  that  God  had  cares  and  tenderness  only  for  him.  The 
atheist  Diagoras,  disembarking  at  Samothracia,  went  to  the  temple,  where  they 
showed  him  the  offerings  of  voyagers  rescued  from  shipwreck.  "  Canst  thou  deny 
the  providence  of  the  gods,"  they  said  to  him,  "when  thoa  seest  all  those  testi- 
monies of  their  intervention  ?  "  "  Ah  I  "  replied  Diagoras,  "  we  should  also  hear  the 
testimony  of  those  who  rest  buried  beneath  the  waves ! "  If  we  must  recognise 
with  pleasure  that  God  acts  in  preserving  us  from  danger  or  Buffering,  we  must  also 
repel  the  theory  of  a  special  preference.  God  loves  those  unfortunate  victims  of 
epidemic  or  shipwreck  as  much  as  He  loves  us,  and  more  perhaps.  I  cannot  tell 
what  I  experience  when  I  see  Christians  interpreting  God's  dispensations  in  the 
sense  which  corresponds  to  their  narrow  hearts,  fii  vain  has  the  Book  of  Job 
condemned  that  error ;  in  vain  the  Master  has  declared  that  the  Gahleans  upon 
whom  the  tower  of  Siloam  fell  were  not  guiltier  than  others.  We  hear  such 
explaining  the  ways  of  the  Lord  with  a  cold  and  axiomatic  tone.  A  child  is  taken 
away ;  they  ask  if  it  was  not  made  an  idol  of.  A  humiliating  misfortune  overtakes 
one  of  their  neighbours  ;  they  conclude  that  it  was  undoubtedly  necessary — an  idea 
directly  opposed  to  that  of  St.  Paul,  who  affirms  that  all  things  work  together  for 
good  to  them  that  love  God.  3.  Now  this  error  manifests  itself  under  forms  which 
are  singularly  hurtful  to  Christian  beliefs.  There  are  men  who  can  see  Divine 
intervention  only  in  what  is  extraordinary.  There  are  Christians  who  do  not 
perceive  God  acting  in  the  uniform  laws  by  which  He  governs  the  world.  A  cure, 
for  example,  in  which  human  science  has  taken  no  part,  seems  to  them,  shonld  be 
attributed  directly  to  God ;  if  the  physician  had  interfered,  in  their  eyes  he  would 
have  relegated  God  to  the  background.  Thence  proceeds  a  consequence  which 
unbelief  does  not  fail  to  draw.  "  Ignorance  is  the  mother  of  faith.  In  a  dark 
century  sach  an  event  is  attributed  to  God ;  but  to-morrow  a  more  enMghtened 


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vin. 

generation  will  know  the  law  thereof."  Now  that  is  what  we  ought  to  fight  against. 
God  does  not  manifest  Himself  to  us  in  that  alone  which  astonishes  and  disconcerts 
us.  All  things  work  together  for  His  plans.  Let  us  now  penetrate  to  the  real 
centre  of  the  apostle's  thought.  I.  All  things  tend  towabds  one  end.  That 
thought  was  born  the  day  when  Jesus  taught  His  disciples  to  say,  "  Thy  kingdom 
come."  Reason  alone  would  conclude  in  an  opposite  sense.  How  can  we  recognise 
a  Divine  plan  in  that  bloody  play  which  is  called  history,  in  those  ancient  civilisa- 
tions which  have  so  thoroughly  disappeared,  in  those  insolent  triumphs  cf  force 
or  cunning,  in  those  miscarriages  of  the  best  causes  ?  A  deep  thinker  sums  up  hia 
science  on  this  point  by  saying  that  "  humanity,  like  a  wheel,  describes  a  fatal 
circle."  And  yet  one  would  not  dare  to  repeat  this  to-day.  Progress  is  believed 
in;  men  have  taken  from  Christianity  their  belief  in  the  final  triumph  of  justice 
and  truth.  Well  1  that  belief  belongs  to  us  ;  we  have  given  it  to  the  world  ;  do  not 
let  the  world  turn  it  against  us.  I  see  Christians  confounded  at  the  sight  of  this 
world,  despairing  of  the  future.  Let  that  cowardly  attitude  be  far  from  us  1  All 
serves  to  erect  that  eternal  temple  where  God  shall  be  adored  by  all  His  creatures  ; 
each  generation  which  passes  lays  its  stone  there,  and  the  building  rises.  II.  To 
believe  in  that  general  plan  by  which  all  things  work  together  for  the  glory  of  God 
is  not  enough.  I  want  to  know  what  His  plan  is  with  regard  to  me.  But  how 
shall  we  show  this  without  dashing  against  objections?  1.  Our  belief  is  taxed  with 
pride.  "  What  presumption  to  believe  ourselves  objects  of  the  vigilant  care  of 
God  1  "  So  then,  when  you  see  your  little  child  relating  his  faults  to  God,  and 
asking  Him  to  make  him  better,  is  that  a  teaching  of  pride?  But  you  will  answer, 
Have  aU  Christians  the  admirable  simplicity  of  that  child  ?  No.  But  that  proves 
that  they  are  men  and  sinners — nothing  more.  The  ideal  for  them  (the  gospel 
declares  it)  would  be  to  become  children  again.  You  insist  on  our  insignificance. 
But  if  we  are  great  enough  to  believe  in  God,  to  love  Him,  what  pride  is  there  in 
believing  that  God  responds  to  that  desire  which  He  has  Himself  inspired  ?  Would 
you  charge  with  pride  the  feeble  plant  which,  each  day  at  sunrise,  holds  up  its  head 
and  half  opens  to  inhale  its  vivifying  heat  ?  God,  you  say,  is  too  great  to  make  all 
things  work  together  for  our  good.  What  1 — that  God  who  has  poured  forth  on  the 
meanest  of  His  creatures  treasures  of  wisdom,  of  foresight;  that  God  who  decks  the 
birds  of  the  air  and  the  flowers  of  the  field  would  be  too  great  to  count  our  sorrows 
and  our  prayers  1  You  accuse  us  of  pride  ?  But  suffer  me,  in  turn,  to  distrust  your 
humility.  A  thousand  times  I  have  seen  the  rebel  creature  escape  from  God  under 
pretext  of  his  insignificance,  and  shelter  his  revolt  under  the  veil  of  bumility. 
Where  is  pride  if  not  in  that  attitude  of  a  feeble  and  sinful  being  who  says,  "  Let 
others  call  upon  Thee  ;  I  can  do  without  Thee  "  ?  2.  Our  modern  stoics  accuse  us 
of  obeying  an  interested  sentiment.  To  hear  them,  man  ought  never  to  seek  hia 
own  good.  He  ought  to  obey  duty — that  is  all.  But  we  may  well  remark  that  the 
gospel  has  said  all  that  with  an  incomparable  power.  Never  has  the  mercenary 
spirit  been  more  mercilessly  condemned  than  by  Jesus  Christ.  But  because  I  ought 
to  serve  God  without  calculation,  does  it  foUow  that  I  ought  to  reject,  in  the  name 
of  my  dignity,  that  Providence  which  makes  all  things  work  together  for  my  good  7 
No,  certainly,  for  that  would  be  to  lie  to  my  nature.  3.  "  Why  pretend  that  God 
occupies  Himself  with  each  of  His  creatures,  since  He  governs  the  world  by  inva- 
riable laws  ?  "  So  then,  in  a  well-ordered  state,  because  the  sovereign  has  made 
and  observes  the  laws,  he  cannot  testify  his  benevolence  to  any  of  his  subjects,  and 
the  order  which  he  has  made  to  prevail  wiU  hinder  him  from  ever  manifesting  his 
love.  To  be  logical,  we  must  go  further,  and  say  that  God  is  chained  by  the  laws 
He  has  made,  that  there  is  no  other  God  than  those  laws,  and  return  to  the  inexo- 
rable fatality  of  the  heathen.  4.  Appeal  is  made  to  experienae.  ' '  Are  you  spared 
more  than  others,  you  who  pray?  And  when  you  would  escape  from  the  evils 
which  threaten  you,  are  you  not,  Uke  us,  obliged  to  resort  to  the  human  means 
which  experience  points  out?  "  But  have  the  objectors  reflected  that  they  confound 
the  good  of  believers  with  their  visible  happiness,  a  confusion  which  the  Bible  never 
makes  ?  Distinguish  those  two  things,  and  light  already  begins  to  come.  What 
God  calls  our  good  is  not  what  we  call  our  happiness.  Happiness  for  us  is  success, 
health,  glory,  fortune,  the  affection  of  mankind,  pleasure ;  in  the  sight  of  God  the 
good  for  us  is  holiness,  is  salvation.  God  does  not  to-day  attach  happiness  to  faith, 
and  success  to  piety ;  if  He  did  so,  we  should  obey  Him  in  order  to  be  happy,  and 
God  would  be  served  only  by  mercenaries.  But  it  is  true  only  in  appearance  that 
all  men  suffer  alike.  Question  believers,  and  they  will  tell  you  that  in  the  severest 
trials  they  have  discovered  signs  of  the  Divine  goodness.  Now,  even  when  oatwardl/ 


CHAP,  vin,]  ROMANS.  171 

all  seems  to  be  identical  in  the  life  of  him  who  loves  God  and  of  him  who  does  not, 
we  must  admit  that  events  will  work  upon  men  according  to  the  mind  with  which  they 
are  accepted.  Behold  in  nature  those  forces  which  frighten  us  by  their  power  of 
destructiveness.  In  the  plant,  beneath  a  lovely  flower,  is  a  subtle  poison  ;  in  the 
atmosphere  is  the  hurricane  and  the  electricity.  Put  the  savage  in  presence  of 
those  forces,  he  will  find  only  suffering  and  death.  But  the  scientist  extracts  that 
poison,  and  finds  in  it  a  remedy  for  his  ills ;  to  the  breath  of  the  wind  he  spreads 
the  sails  of  his  mills  or  of  his  ships ;  he  lays  hold  of  the  lightning,  and  upon  an 
imperceptible  thread  cast  into  the  depths  of  the  ocean  he  commands  it  to  carry  hia 
thoughts  to  the  ends  of  the  world.  Well,  this  is  a  faithful  picture  of  the  manner 
in  which  the  believing  soul  can  turn  to  his  good  all  the  events  of  life,  all  the  evils 
which  overwhelm  it.  Here  is  failure,  mourning,  suffering  alighting  on  a  Christian 
soul.  Well,  you  will  see  that  soul  seizing  those  terrible  forces  which  might  crush 
it  under  their  strokes,  humbling  itself,  praying,  blessing,  and  drawing  from  what 
might  be  its  death  the  secret  of  true  greatness,  of  spiritual  triumph  and  of  holiness. 
(E.  Bersier,  D.D.)  The  Christian  conception  of  the  universe  : — I.  The  universal 
LAW — "  all  things  work."  Work  is  not  blind  and  aimless  labour,  but  power  directed 
by  knowledge  to  the  attainment  of  some  definite  end.  There  is  a  prodigious  amount 
of  energy  in  operation  which  has  the  appearance  of  agitation  only,  without  plan  or 
project.  But  there  is  an  unseen  and  beneficent  Hand  that  wields  and  fashions  the 
issues  of  all.  1.  The  inanimate  creation  is  not  exempted  from  tbe  law  of  work. 
The  viewless  gases  are  never  idle ;  the  particles  of  dust  beneath  our  feet  have  run 
successive  careers  of  varied  labour;  the  world  itself  is  a  colossal  work,  and  its 
motion  is  a  ceaseless  flight.  The  sun  never  halts,  every  star  is  crowned  for  illus- 
trious toil,  and  every  atom  as  certainly  shares  the  common  lot.  2,  In  the  lowest 
levels  of  animated  existence  there  are  the  tokens  of  work.  Life  reveals  itself  in 
activity.  The  springing  grass,  the  rising  corn,  the  budding  forest,  are  models  of 
industry.  3.  Work  pervades  the  human  and  animal  economy.  A  single  drop  of 
water  is  an  ocean  capable  of  holding  millions  of  inhabitants  ;  a  vegetable  crevice  of 
like  dimensions  is  a  populous  world.  Vast  masses  of  rock  are  the  tombs  of  micro- 
scopic animalcules  in  countless  myriads  that  toiled  in  bygone  time.  What  million- 
fold  animation  gleams  and  murmurs  in  the  summer  air!  What  vital  energies 
centre  in  man  I  Every  particle  in  his  body  is  a  separate  worker.  Work  is  demanded 
of  everyone  who  approaches  the  path  of  progress.  Even  "sin  "is  evil  "work," 
and  "  death  "  is  "  the  wages  "  of  its  ill  desert.  4.  Angels  and  demons  work.  Little 
is  said  of  angels,  but  names  are  applied  to  them  taken  from  our  highest  ideas  of 
might  and  dignity  (Col.  i.  16).  For  what  are  they  raised  to  this  height  ?  •*  Are 
they  not  all  ministering  spirits  ?  "  Angels  which  have  forfeited  celestial  splendour 
retain  all  their  native  might,  and  exert  it  to  the  full  (Eph.  vL  12 ;  1  Pet.  v.  8).  5. 
The  Godhead  works  (John  v.  17 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  8).  The  whole  scheme  of  nature  is  the 
*'  works  "  of  God.  God  never  leaves  off  working  (Isa.  xl.  28).  "  Virtue  "  never 
ceases  to  "  go  out "  of  Him.  II.  The  universal  method — "  all  things  work  to- 
gether." What  unlike  things  subsist  in  the  realm  of  creation  I  How  difficult  to 
imagine  their  concordant  activity  1  Each  wheel  in  the  subtle  and  complicated 
mechanism  revolves  on  its  separate  axle,  yet  all  are  cogged  in  some  transcendent 
unity,  and  move  towards  one  common  and  sublime  destination.  1.  The  inferior 
objects  of  nature  "  work  together."  Gases  are  rarely  found  alone.  Their  native 
affinities  present  them  in  combination.  Matter  does  not  exist  in  ultimate  granules, 
but  in  cohering  masses.  World  balauaes  world.  The  star  shining  far  away  is 
working  with  every  grain  of  sand  upon  our  shores.  The  fragile  insect,  a  mere  speck 
of  animated  light,  pipes  its  feeble  song  in  harmony  with  "the  music  of  the  spheres," 
and  poises  its  wings  of  gauze  for  flight  in  consonance  with  the  universal  law  and 
order  of  the  great  creation.  2.  Men  "work  together."  All  that  we  mean  by  civili- 
sation is  due  to  this.  Multitudes,  without  knowing  it,  think  the  thoughts  of  Plato 
and  Aristotle,  Bacon  and  Newton.  It  is  the  same  in  the  moral  sphere.  Abraham, 
Moses,  David,  Isaiah,  Paul,  and  John  operate  upon  us  every  moment.  Why  are  we 
here  to-day  ?  Because  Jesus  died  eighteen  hundred  years  ago  I  How  the  remote 
ages  work  together !  So  is  it  in  evil.  Notwithstanding  the  lapse  of  all  the  centuries 
the  hand  of  Adam  is  on  us  still.  3.  Men  "  work  together  "  with  nature.  The  two 
were  made  for  each  other.  There  is  nothing  that  does  not  co-operate  with  our 
intelligence  and  taste.  A  star  that  shone  milUons  of  years  ago,  and  many  millions 
of  miles  away,  blends  with  my  reason,  and  nourishes  my  sensibility.  The  venerable 
geological  records  are  among  the  most  influential  facts  of  our  life.  4.  Men  and 
Angela  "  work  together."    They  are  oar  "  fellow-servants,"  and  are  "  sent  forth  to 


172  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOR.  [chap.  Tin. 

minister  for  them  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation."  We  pray  daily  to  be  lifted 
nearer  to  their  ministry  (Matt.  vi.  10).  With  the  fallen  hosts  men  labour  and 
combine.  Whoever  is  disloyal  to  the  Great  King  belongs  to  the  ranks  of  the  wicked 
one.  5.  Men  "  work  together  "  with  God.  That  the  righteous  do  so  needs  no  proof. 
But  what  of  the  wicked  ?  In  all  their  evil  He  interworks  and  counterworks,  and 
causes  their  "  wrath  "  to  "  praise  "  Him  (Psa.  Ixxvi.  10).  Pharaoh  refused  to  work 
with  God,  but  his  wilful  hardness  of  heart  exhibited  the  Divine  power  and  glory. 
Balaam  would  not  work  with  God,  but  his  very  sins  became  the  executors  of  the 
Divine  righteousness.  Herod,  Pilate,  &c.,  resolved  not  to  work  with  God,  yet  they 
did  "  whatsoever  God's  hand  and  counsel  determined  before  to  be  done."  6.  All 
things,  principles,  and  beings  "  work  together,"  and  God  moves  amidst  and  works 
through  them  all.  III.  The  univeesal  destination — "  to  them  that  love  God." 
1.  Why  to  them  that  love  God  ?  Not  to  love  God,  who  is  the  centre  and  source  of 
all  Divine  moral  loveUness,  is  to  be  incapable  of  good.  2.  "  All  for  good."  The 
whole  material  system  is  a  ministry  "  for  good  "  to  you.  A  Father's  tenderness 
shines  down  from  every  star,  and  smiles  from  every  common  flower.  All  the  ages 
are  linked  together,  and  men  of  all  time  take  hands  to  bless  thee.  "  For  good  "  to 
you  Egypt  reared  its  pyramids  and  Nineveh  its  palaces,  Phoenicia  traded,  Greece 
speculated,  and  Eome  conquered.  "  For  good  "  to  you  Adam  fell,  Abraham  believed, 
David  sung,  Isaiah  soared,  Jesus  wept,  agonised,  and  died.  Are  you  not  constrained 
to  read  all  your  own  life  with  the  same  clue  to  its  meaning  ?  How  all  the  course 
of  your  past  life,  without  your  design,  has  conspired  to  fit  you  to  bear  the  burden 
and  fulfil  the  vocation  of  this  present  hour !  At  an  early  stage  of  your  course,  it 
may  be,  you  encountered  a  bitter  disappointment.  But  you  have  long  since  seen 
that  the  discipline  was  necessary.  You  remember  a  time  when  you  lay  low.  But 
you  have  many  a  time  confessed,  ••  It  is  good  for  me  that  I  have  been  afflicted." 
You  have  sad  and  sorrowful  bereavements  in  your  recollection.  But  you  have  not 
a  sensibility  at  the  present  hour  that  death  has  not  softened,  and  the  clouds,  so 
black  at  noon,  now  your  sun  is  setting,  are  bathed  in  rosy  light  on  the  calm  horizon 
of  the  better  land.  Are  you  crushed  by  some  recent  grief?  Be  patient,  and  "good  " 
shall  not  fail  to  be  worked.  And  what  shall  we  say  of  your  mistakes,  follies,  and 
sins?  Peter  arrived  at  courage  through  cowardice,  and  attained  to  fortitude  through 
failure.  While  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil  tempt,  the  Father  sympathises, 
the  Lord  Jesus  intercedes,  the  Holy  Spirit  waits  to  "  guide  into  all  the  truth,"  angels 
minister,  and  "  all  things  work  together  for  good."  Conclusion  :  1.  If  this  be  so,  what 
should  be  our  great  concern?  Manifestly,  to  "love  God."  2.  The  love  of  God  in  the 
heart  is  the  secret  of  all  spiritual  rest  and  peace.  3.  "  All  things  work  together  for  " 
ill  "to  them  that  love  "  not  "  God.  That  "  the  stars  in  their  courses  fought  against 
Sisera  "  is  the  symbol  of  a  universe  in  league  against  the  sinner.  (H.  Batchelor.) 
All  things  working  together  for  good : — I.  Thb  chabacteb.  It  consists  of  two  parti- 
culars. 1.  The  person  loves  God.  And,  that  we  may  arrive  satisfactorily  at  this 
conclusion,  let  us  go  by  several  successive  steps.  (1)  First,  am  I  sure  that  I  do  not 
hate  Him?  "  The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God."  (2)  Do  I  think  of  God ? 
Have  I  satisfaction  in  thinking  of  Him  ?  (3)  Have  you  received  Christ  and  the 
reconciUation  and  peace  which  are  by  Him  ?  No  man  cometh  to  the  Father  but  by 
Christ.  Are  you  a  suppliant  for  mercy,  peace,  and  eternal  life,  through  Christ 
Jesus  ?  If  80,  you  are  a  lover  of  God.  I  suppose  the  love  of  God  to  consist  in  these 
simple  elements — (a)  First,  delight  in  His  excellence,  complacency  in  His  perfec- 
tions, mental  apprehension  of  His  surpassing  and  uncreated  loveliness,  (b)  The 
second  element  is  goodwill  to  God,  and  to  His  plans  and  purposes ;  consciousness 
of  an  interest  in  them,  and  admiration  of  their  wisdom,  holiness,  and  power,  (c) 
There  will  be  gratitude  for  the  benefits  we  have  received,  (d)  Love  to  God  supposes 
resignation  to  His  will,  and  acquiescence  in  its  decisions,  without  resentment  or 
murmuring.  2.  The  next  point  is,  the  calling  according  to  God's  purpose.  Let  us 
not  forget  that  the  purpose  is  not  by  reason  of  the  love  in  us,  but  that  the  love  is  in 
UB  by  reason  of  the  purpose.  It  is  this  antecedent  purpose  which  is  the  cause  (A 
our  love.  Therefore  give  diligence  to  make  your  calling  and  election  sure.  II.  Tna 
PBiTiLBOK.  To  these  persons  all  things  shall  work  together  for  good.  1.  We  take 
first,  all  Divine  perfections ;  all  the  attributes  and  prerogatives  of  God's  nature. 
For  who,  I  pray  you,  is  the  greatest  worker  in  this  universe  T  "  My  Father  worketh 
hitherto,  and  I  work."  2.  There  is,  secondly,  the  course  and  constitution  of  natural 
things,  as  they  subsist  around  us  in  their  harmony  and  concurrence  of  operation. 
Seedtime  and  harvest,  day  and  night,  summer  and  winter,  do  not  fail.  Surely  thia 
is  not  mainly  and  chiefly  that  lions  may  roar,  horses  be  fed,  insects  oreep,  And 


CHAP.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  173 

eagles  soar.  All  these  things  are  subordinate ;  the  higher  purpose  is  the  preserva- 
tion and  happiness  of  man.  And  we  further  inquire,  what  man  or  what  men  ?  The 
primary  and  the  higher  purpose  is,  that  the  just  may  live ;  that  their  excellenciea 
may  be  revealed,  and  their  character  consummated  ;  that  the  love  of  God  naay  shine 
in  them  ;  and  that  they  may  accompHsh  the  great  end  of  their  being,  which  is,  to 
glorify  God,  and  to  enjoy  Him  for  ever.  3.  All  the  means  of  grace  work  for  their 
good.  4.  Fourthly  and  mainly ;  all  the  dispensations  of  providence  are  intended  to 
work  for  good.  It  is  for  good.  Did  you  ever  read  the  maxim,  "  I  had  perished  if 
I  had  not  perished  "  ?  That  is,  I  had  been  lost  as  to  my  soul,  if  I  had  not  lost  my 
estate.  The  affliction  may  be  nearer.  It  may  touch  the  bone  and  the  flesh.  There 
may  be  strong  pain,  or  fever,  or  need  of  surgical  operation.  Must  we  siy,  It  is  for 
good  ?  If  we  love  God,  it  is  for  good.  All  the  countless  strokes  of  the  chisel  on  the 
block  of  marble  contribute  to  form  the  statue  which  almost  breathes.  The  printing- 
press  is  filled  with  all  its  types ;  and  forth  comes  the  paper  without  a  word  deficient. 
All  the  medicines  are  mixed  by  the  science  of  the  physician  ;  and  from  the  mixture 
the  healing  result  is  realised.  All  the  reapers  in  the  field  assist  to  bring  the  harvest 
home.  And  after  the  same  manner  as  these  emblems  and  illustrations  represent, 
all  things  in  Providence  concur  for  the  final  salvation  of  those  who  love  God,  and 
are  the  called  according  to  His  purpose.  III.  The  certainty  of  all  this.  "  We 
know."  St.  Paul  knew  it  by  inspiration.  The  rabbins  tell  us  concerning  a  certain 
Jew,  that,  whenever  a  calamity  occurred,  he  was  accustomed  to  say,  "  This  also  is 
good  " ;  and  they  changed  tlie  man's  name  from  Nahum  to  "Gamzu,"  which  means 
in  Hebrew,  "This  also."  Blessed  is  that  man  in  whose  mind  this  principle  is 
fixed,  in  all  its  light,  and  power,  and  consolation :  come  what  will,  it  is  good, 
for  I  am  a  lover  of  God,  and  called  accordmg  to  His  purpose.  (J.  Straiten.) 
Divine  providence  : — I.  God  deals  with  His  children  after  a  fixed  and  definite 
PLAN.  Were  a  person  altogether  unacquainted  with  architecture  to  visit  some 
splendid  temple  in  the  process  of  erection,  and  observe  the  huge,  rough  stones,  and 
boards,  and  timbers,  iron-castings,  bricks,  lime,  mortar,  lying  scattered  in  confusion 
all  around :  were  he  to  see  one  group  of  workmen  cutting  up  material  here,  another 
digging  trenches  there,  he  might  truly  say  that  he  could  see  no  plan  or  system  in 
the  business.  But  let  the  observer  set  himself  to  watch  from  day  to  day  the  busy 
work  as  it  goes  on  ;  let  him  patiently  examine,  not  only  the  minutest  details,  but 
also  try  to  obtain  a  view  of  the  general  scope  of  the  whole,  and  he  will  not  be 
long  in  finding  out  that  some  superior  mind  regulates  all,  and  that  every  stroke  of 
every  workman  is  conducive  to  the  same  ultimate  effect.  God  is  building  up  the 
Christian  in  accordance  with  a  perfect  plan  into  a  majestic  temple  for  the  decoration 
of  the  eternal  city.  II.  God  not  only  carries  on  His  great  designs  by  a  pre-estab- 
lished plan ;  but  the  vert  minutest  concerns  of  human  life  are  also  comprehended 
IN  IT.  The  piercing  eye  of  God  strikes  through  the  deepest  shades  of  night  and  see» 
with  keenest  sense  each  individual  atom  which  makes  up  this  grand,  material 
nniverse.  He  perceives  and  clearly  understands  the  constitution,  use  and  properties, 
the  bearing  and  the  end  of  every  organ,  system,  instrument,  which  forms  this  wide, 
mysterious  world  of  animated  nature  that  surrounds  us.  A  single  spark  of  fire  may 
sink  a  city  into  ruins  and  seal  the  destiny  of  an  empire ;  and  so  in  God's  moral 
government  the  greatest  and  remotest  ends  are  often  brought  about  by  the  minutest 
means  conceivable  ;  a  "word,"  a  "  silent  thought,"  has  saved  a  soul;  and  through 
that  soul,  ten  thousand  other  souls,  from  ruin.  The  combination  of  the  elements 
is  as  perfect  in  a  particle  of  water  as  in  a  diamond.  Is  not  the  plan  of  God  as 
visible  in  the  one  as  in  the  other  ?  III.  But  God  has  a  plan ;  that  plan  extends  to 
the  minutest  circumstances  in  the  Christian's  life  ;  and  by  that  plan  God  makes 
BVERTTHiNa  WORK  TOGETHER  FOR  HIS  GOOD !  Do  you  tell  me  God  never  bends  the 
laws  of  nature  to  save  or  favour  those  that  love  Him  ?  I  admit  it.  But  He  brings 
those  that  love  Him  into  such  relation  to  the  laws  that  they  turn,  as  ten  thousand 
rays  of  light  from  objects  round  you  to  the  pupil  of  your  eye,  unto  his  benefit.  A 
ray  of  light  is  bent  by  the  same  angle  for  the  Christian  as  the  sinner ;  but  the 
difference  is  this :  the  one  sees  God  in  it,  the  other  sees  himself,  or  nothing  in  it. 
The  Christian's  heart  is  a  "golden  bowl "  turned  up  towards  heaven,  and  into  it 
God  is  ever  pouring  benefactions.  The  Christian  does  not  always  think  them  so ; 
but  in  they  come,  pure  "  benefactions."  1.  Then  let  me  say,  if  God  be  working  so 
for  us,  we  ought  not  to  be  too  soUcitous  about  results.  God  is  working  over  us ;  let 
us  leave  the  consequence  to  Him.  2.  Let  us  also  suppress  our  murmurings  at  the 
allotments  of  Providence.  If  God  is  guided  by  a  plan  ;  if  that  plan  reaches  down 
to  the  minutest  details  of  daily  life,  what  need  have  we  to  murmur.    3.  And  if  all 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tih. 

things  are  working  together  for  our  good,  what  reason  have  we  to  envj  the  wicked 
in  their  riches  and  prosperity  ?  If  a  man  be  standing  firmly  on  a  river's  bank  and 
sees  another  gliding  gaily  but  inevitably  down  to  a  tremendous  precipice  below,  shall 
he  be  envious  of  the  pleasant  sail  that  intervenes  before  the  dread  catastrophe  ?  4. 
And  if  all  things  be  working  together  for  good,  let  us  cast  away  our  fears  and  press 
onward.  5.  But  while  all  things  work  together  for  good  to  those  that  love  the  Lord, 
we  are  told  upon  the  same  authority,  "  the  way  of  the  ungodly  shall  perish  I " 
{Eliot  Nason.)  The  Christianas  delivery  from  the  tyranny  of  circumstance : — 
I.  There  is  a  side  on  which  this  statement  is  unlimited.  All  things  work  for  oar 
good.  The  apostle,  in  this  tremendously  sweeping  statement,  is  speaking  about 
things  external  to  us,  and  not  what  transpires  within  a  man's  own  breast.  Augus- 
tine, commenting  on  this  passage,  included  under  it  even  sin  itself.  EUs  own 
experience  helped  him  to  see  that  where  sin  abounded,  grace  did  much  more  abound. 
What  Paul  does  say,  however,  is  that  everything  external  to  us  is  working  for  our 
good.  The  stars  in  their  courses  fight  for  the  Israel  of  God.  A  Pagan  view  of  life 
would  tell  us  that  we  are  placed  in  a  world  where  law  and  necessity  reign.  Stern, 
hard-and-fast  laws,  like  a  huge  machine,  are  grinding  out  their  unalterable  decrees. 
They  may  work  out  ill,  but  all  we  can  do  is  to  resign  ourselves  to  the  inevitable. 
That  is  not  the  Christian  view  of  God's  creation.  One  of  the  laws  of  God,  one  of 
the  things  that  on  this  earth  very  nearly  constitute  a  necessity,  is — "  If  man  does 
not  work,  neither  shall  he  eat."  Men  have  often  fretted  at  such  a  law.  The  Chris- 
tian accepts  this  law,  and  acknowledges  that  God's  law  of  work  is  part  of  the  great 
discipline  of  life.  He  would  not  have  it  otherwise,  even  though  he  could.  It  may 
need  an  exercise  of  faith  to  see  that  all  these  laws,  which  we  call  laws  of  nature, 
are  working  for  our  good ;  that  the  universe,  with  its  great  forces  ;  the  earth,  with 
its  lightnings ;  the  sea,  with  its  storms  and  shipwrecks,  can  do  us  no  harm.  Yet, 
when  once  we  get  a  Christian  view  of  the  world,  that  is  a  certainty.  These  laws 
constitute  the  will  of  our  heavenly  Father.  Let  us  now  take  a  step  further.  Christ 
has  helped  us  to  see  even  in  adversity  a  power  working  for  good.  Lastly,  we  may 
Bay  that  that  which  has  been  reckoned  the  great  enemy  of  man — Death  itself — is 
among  the  things  that  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God.  It  is  death 
that  does  for  us  the  great  service  of  perfecting  our  Ufe.  This  Christian  reading  of 
life  has  been  the  death  of  death.  Are  we  not  now  in  a  position  to  answer  the  ques- 
tion— "  Do  all  things  work  for  our  good  ?  "  If  our  hfe  is  set  upon  mere  physical 
happiness,  then  all  things  do  not  work  for  what  we  think  our  good.  That  is  not 
the  good  for  which  things  are  working.  But  it  we  go  deeper,  and  interpret  by  the 
good,  the  larger  life,  the  maturer  spirit,  the  holier  existence,  then  there  is  a  con- 
spiracy in  aU  things  without  to  help  us.  II.  Thebe  is  an  aspect  in  which  this 
6TATEMENT  IS  LIMITED.  It  is  limited  as  regards  persons — "  to  them  that  love  God." 
Is  there  any  need  why  this  broad  and  general  statement  of  Paul's  should  have  any 
limitations  whatsoever  ?  Could  we  not  say  in  the  fullest  sense  that  all  things  are 
working  for  good  to  all  the  children  of  men.  There  is  nothing  vindictive  in  God. 
"He  maketh  His  sun,"  &c.  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons.  "Are  not  My  ways 
equal,"  saith  the  Lord.  May  not  the  explanation  of  the  mighty  difference  in  God's 
providence  to  those  who  love  Him  lie  within  the  heart  and  not  without  ?  The  laws 
of  the  Infinite  are  abiding  and  eternal.  The  manner  in  which  they  fall  upon 
different  men  lies  with  the  individual  soul.  The  laws  of  God's  universe  are  such 
tliat  if  a  man  is  out  of  sympathy  with  God,  all  things  seem  to  work  against  him. 
The  further  he  is  away  from  God,  the  more  he  is  made  to  suffer.  The  selfish  man 
who  has  been  all  his  life  long  absorbed  in  schemes  of  self -aggrandisement ;  who  has 
trampled  on  the  rights  of  others,  and  been  careless  of  their  feelings,  is  at  last  met 
by  such  a  body -of  adverse  opinion  that  he  is  crushed.  He  set  himself  against 
God's  law  of  true  usefulness,  and  so  in  trying  to  save  his  life  he  loses  it.  A  good 
sailor,  with  his  hand  on  the  hehn,  can  pilot  his  little  boat  amid  rough  waters,  and 
never  ship  a  sea.  The  man  who  has  no  skill  or  knowledge  has  his  boat  struck  by 
every  wave,  and  ships  sea  after  sea,  until  at  last  he  suffers  shipwreck.  So  do  men 
by  unwisdom,  amid  favourable  enough  conditions,  make  shipwreck  of  their  souls. 
On  the  other  hand,  if  we  hearken  to  God,  all  God's  creation  will  hearken  to  us.  If 
we  love  God,  we  are  in  harmony  with  the  whole  working  of  God's  universe.  "  For 
the  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness  thereof."  It  is  a  hopeless  struggle  to  fight 
against  God,  and  the  man  who  is  on  the  side  of  the  Almighty  is  not  engaged  in  it. 
(D.  Woodside,  B.I).)         In  what  respects  afflictions  are  for  our  advantage: — I.  The 

SCFFEBINGS    OF    THOSE    WHO   LOVE    GoD    HAVE   OF   THEMSELVES   A    PEOPEK   TENDENCY   TO 

PBOMOTE  THEiB  SPIRITUAL  AND  SUPREME  GOOD.     I  shall  considcT  the  tendency  which 


CHAP,  vin.]  ROMANS.  175 

the  snfferings  of  those  that  love  Ood  have  to  promote  their  true  interest,  in  the 
following  respects.  1.  As  they  are  proper  to  make  us  reflect  on  our  past  conduct. 
2.  To  humble  our  pride  and  vanity.  3.  To  make  us  more  sensible  of  our  depend- 
ence on  God.  4.  To  discover  to  us  the  sincerity  of  our  love  to  God,  and — 5.  To 
raise  our  thoughts  to  the  contemplation  of  a  future  and  more  perfect  state  of  hap- 
piness. II.  God  is  pleased  to  further  this  natural  tendency  of  them  by  special 
ACTS  OF  His  providence  and  grace.  1.  Our  aflaictions  not  springing  out  of  the  dust, 
but  coming  from  the  hand  of  God,  and  being  wisely  designed  by  Him  for  some  good 
end  to  us,  we  may  comfortably  assure  ourselves  that  He  will  wisely  dispose  all  events 
in  such  manner  as  may  most  effectually  conduce  to  that  end.  2.  When  He  appoints 
us  to  the  combat,  He  proportions  His  assistance  to  the  nature  and  difficulties  of  the 
service  :  He  does  not  leave  us  to  fight  it  out  with  our  own  forces.  God,  therefore, 
who  knows  the  frailty  of  our  nature,  is  always  pleased  to  send  His  staff  with  Hia 
rod,  and  to  grant  us  such  strength  and  protection  as  may  support  us  in  all  dangera 
and  carry  us  through  all  adversities.  Conclusion  :  1.  If  afflictions  have  both  in 
their  own  nature  a  tendency  to  promote  our  good,  and  be  designed  by  God  to  this 
end,  then  we  have  great  reason  to  be  patient  and  resigned  under  them.  As  in  other 
cases,  the  prospect  of  any  great  and  certain  advantage  will  make  us  cheerfully 
undergo  many  difficulties,  and  even  expose  ourselves  to  many  visible  and  imminent 
dangers.  2.  If  God  design  afflictions  for  our  good,  then  if  we  would  not  oppress  or 
frustrate  His  design  in  them,  we  must  endeavour  to  profit  by  them  ;  for,  like  all 
other  means  of  piety,  they  do  not  operate  of  themselves  to  our  advantage  witLout 
our  own  concurrence.  3.  If  afflictions  have  so  proper  a  tendency  to  promote  our 
spiritual  good,  it  will  concern  us  by  reasonable  acts  of  mortification  and  self-denial 
frequently  to  afflict  ourselves.  4.  If  God  means  afflictions  to  us  for  good,  under 
which  I  all  along  compreheud  disappointments,  then  there  is  no  forming  any 
certain  judgment  of  the  wisdom  or  folly,  of  the  virtuous  or  vicious  state  of 
men,  from  all  that  goes  before  them.  I  do  not  say  that  the  weak  reasons  of  a 
man's  conduct  never  appear  to  us  in  his  disappointments,  for  they  often  do  ;  but 
we  must  see  at  the  same  time  very  particularly  what  way  he  took,  what  circum- 
stances he  was  in,  and  upon  what  motives  he  acted.  For  it  sometimes  happens 
that  a  man  is  obliged  in  reason  and  justice  to  do  those  things  which  appear  to 
others  the  most  unreasonable.  If  there  be  any  true  judgment  to  be  made  of 
men,  with  respect  to  their  spiritual  condition,  from  their  circumstances  of  life,  we 
ought  rather  to  judge  in  favour  of  the  afflicted  and  unhappy,  for  there  are  several 
things  spoken  very  much  to  their  advantage  in  Scripture.  (R.  Fiddes,  D.D.i 
The  operations  of  Divine  Providence  are — I.  Unlimited  in  their  sweep.  "All 
things."  This  is  a  bold  assertion.  We  can  understand  how  many  things  work 
together  for  good.  Critical  epochs  in  the  world's  history,  important  reforms  in 
national  life,  occasional  afflictions  in  the  domestic  circle,  but  are  there  not  innumer- 
able petty  details  in  life  that  are  beneath  God's  notice?  No;  "  all  things,"  near 
and  remote,  great  and  small ;  all  substances  necessary  for  the  growth  of  the  body, 
all  forces  necessary  for  the  development  of  the  mind,  all  influences  necessary  for 
the  perfection  of  our  spiritual  nature.  1.  AU  the  provisions  of  nature  are  destined 
for  the  good  of  God's  children.  God  made  the  world  for  our  abode,  and  furnished 
it  for  our  accommodation.  For  us  the  sun  shines,  the  wind  blows,  the  birds  carol. 
2.  All  the  provisions  of  grace.  The  Sabbath,  the  sanctuary,  the  Scriptures.  God 
the  Father,  who  created  us,  watches  over  our  steps  ;  God  the  Son,  who  redeemed 
us,  lives  to  intercede  for  us  ;  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  dwells  with  us,  enlightens 
and  sanctifies  us.  IL  Harmonious  in  their  design.  "  Work  together."  1.  Changes 
in  the  history  of  nations  work  together  for  good.  The  devout  student  has  no  diffi- 
culty in  recognising  the  hand  of  God  in  the  past.  He  regards  the  bondage  of  Israel, 
the  crucifixion  of  Christ,  the  fall  of  the  Boman  Empire,  and  the  dark  periods  of  the 
world's  history  as  necessary  links  in  the  chain  of  God's  providential  dealings.  The 
future  is  as  surely  in  God's  hand  as  the  past.  Light  shall  triumph  over  darkness, 
and  good  over  evil.  God's  hand  is  upon  the  wheel  of  providence  ;  and  when  His 
work  is  complete,  we  shall  say,  "He  hath  done  all  things  well."  2.  Changes  in 
the  history  of  individuals.  There  is  a  special  as  well  as  a  general  supervision  of 
human  affairs.  Look  at  the  life  of  Moses,  and  Joseph,  and  David.  Little  events 
are  the  hinges  upon  which  great  events  turn.  The  steps  of  a  good  man  are  ordered 
of  the  Lord.  III.  Benevolent  in  theib  aim.  "  For  good,"  not  for  our  prosperity. 
Prosperity  may,  or  may  not,  be  a  good  thing.  Not  for  our  happiness.  Happiness 
is  not  the  highest  attainment  in  the  Christian  life.  God's  aim  is  the  perfection  of 
oar  spiritual  nature.    The  discipline  through  which  God  leads  as  may  be  dark  and 


176  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHAP.  vxn, 

inexplicable,  but  it  is  always  for  the  best.  As  winter  prepares  the  way  for  spring, 
and  spring  opens  the  door  for  summer,  and  summer  ripens  the  golden  harvest,  so 
the  darkest  and  most  trying  dispensations  of  God's  providence  are  working  together 
for  good  to  them  that  love  God.  1.  Sickness  is  often  designed  for  our  good.  The 
mind  may  become  dark,  and  need  enlightening ;  the  heart  hard,  and  need  soften- 
ing ;  the  life  barren,  and  need  pruning.  2.  Bereavement.  It  is  good  for  those  who 
are  taken  to  be  •'  present  with  the  Lord."  It  is  good  for  those  who  remain  if  it 
solemnises  their  thoughts  and  sanctifies  their  souL  God  will  be  a  friend  to  the 
friendless,  and  a  husband  to  the  widow.  IV.  Discriminating  in  their  application. 
The  promise  is  not  to  the  wise,  or  the  strong,  or  the  courageous,  but  to  "  them  that 
love  God."  Providence  is  for  the  righteous ;  it  is  against  the  wicked.  Love  mani- 
fests  itself — 1.  In  practical  service.  The  loving  heart  makes  the  diligent  hand. 
2.  In  a  submissive  spirit.  When  adversity  comes,  a  man  who  loves  God  says, 
"  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away,"  &c.  When  affliction  overtakes 
him,  he  says,  "  I  have  learned,  in  whatsoever  state  I  am,  therewith  to  be  content." 
When  persecution  arises,  he  says,  "  Not  my  will,  but  Thine  be  done."  The  more 
perfectly  we  know  God,  the  more  implicitly  we  shall  trust  Him.  God  is  wise,  and 
cannot  err;  He  is  good,  and  will  not.  V.  Manifest  in  their  results.  The 
apostle  does  not  say,  "  I  hope,"  or  "  I  think,"  but  "  we  know."  This  assurance  is 
in  perfect  harmony — 1.  With  the  promises  of  God's  Word.  David  says,  "  No  good 
thing  will  He  withhold  from  them  that  walk  uprightly."  Moses  says,  "And  as  thy 
day,  so  shall  thy  strength  be."  Christ  says,  "  Lo  1  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto 
the  end."  God  says,  "  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee."  2.  With  the  experiences 
of  God's  children.  It  was  a  dark  day  in  the  experience  of  Moses  when  his  mother 
could  no  longer  hide  him ;  but  God  watched  over  him,  and  preserved  him  from 
harm.  It  was  a  dark  day  in  the  experience  of  Joseph  when  his  brethren  cast  him 
into  a  pit ;  but  God  was  "  with  Joseph,"  and  led  him  from  prison  to  a  throne.  It 
was  a  dark  day  in  the  experience  of  the  disciples  when  Christ  was  crucified ;  but 
His  sufferings  were  the  purchase  of  their  salvation.  {J.  T.  Woodhouse.)  Christian 
security  : — In  this  world  of  doubt  and  conjecture  it  is  refreshing  to  find  a  man  who 
declares  that  he  knows  what  he  says  is  true.  Still  more  refreshing  to  find  that 
what  he  says  he  knows  is  just  that  about  which  we  have  been  much  in  doubt. 
From  the  text  I  learn  that  "all  things"  act — I.  Energetically.  They  "work." 
From  this  our  word  "  energy  "  is  derived.  Used  here  to  denote  the  most  intense, 
tireless  activity.  The  universe  is  all  alive  under  the  Divine  hand.  II.  Har- 
moniously. They  "  work  together."  In  the  mechanism  of  Divine  providence  theM 
are  no  loose  pullies  on  which  idle  belts  career.  •'  All  thinks  work,"  not  frictionally, 
or  at  random,  but  "together."  We  see  that  "things  work,"  but  we  cannot  see 
how  they  "  work  together."  How  could  we  see  so  much?  III.  Beneficently. 
"For  good."  They  all  play  into  one  grand  purpose—"  for  good,"  literally  "  into 
good."  In  the  light  of  this  text  the  Christian  loses  his  insignificance,  and  looms 
up  before  us  in  an  attitude  of  importance  and  grandeur.  God,  not  man,  is  to  decide 
what  this  "  good  "  is  to  be.  Spiritually  considered,  when  we  talk  about  profit  and 
loss,  success  or  failure,  very  often  we  know  not  what  we  say.  We  are  like  children 
prattling  about  the  affairs  of  nations.  We  may  spell  a  word  "  defeat,"  but  God 
may  pronounce  it  "victory."  We  may  pronounce  a  word  "gain,"  but  God  may 
call  it  "loss."  Men  are  sometimes  congratulated  when  they  ought  to  be  pitied, 
and  the  reverse.  IV.  Specifically — to  "  them  that  love  God."  Those  who  do  not 
love  God  have  no  right  to  its  blessed  comfort.  To  remain  in  sin  is  to  antagonise 
the  anangements  of  infinite  beneficence,  and  means  danger,  and  folly,  and  suicide, 
and  damnation.  The  great  question  that  shall  shape  your  eternity  and  mine  is. 
Do  we  love  God  ?  We  must  not  forget  that  the  Holy  Ghost  gives  us  the  tense  of 
this  verb,  "  work."  The  text  does  not  say  all  things  will,  or  may,  work  for  good; 
but  "  all  things  "  are  now  working  '•  for  good."  To  honour  God  and  be  strong,  our 
love  also  must  be  in  the  present  tense.  {T.  Kelly.)  The  purpose  of  God's  afflictive 
providences : — I  once  went  with  my  brother  to  extract  a  crystal  from  the  rock.  With 
a  mighty  sledge-hammer  he  vigorously  dealt  blow  after  blow  upon  the  rock,  and 
ehipped  off  piece  after  piece.  At  last  the  top  of  the  crystal  appeared.  Then  one 
might  see  what  he  was  after,  for  it  had  not  shown  upon  the  outer  surface  of  the 
rock.  When  the  crystal  appeared,  then  the  whole  strife  became  how  so  to  break 
the  rock  away  from  it,  and  how  so  to  strike  the  rock  as  to  extract  the  crystal. 
The  rock  was  good  for  nothing ;  the  crystal  was  everything.  The  soul  is  man's 
crystal,  and  the  body  is  but  the  incasing  rock  that  holds  it.  God's  providences  are 
■miting  apou  the  rock,  and  breaking  and  catting  it  away,  and  extracting  the  pre- 


CHAP.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  177 

oioQS  crystal,  which  is  worth  incomparably  more  than  its  setting  in  the  rock.  I 
stood  once  in  Paris,  where  the  stone  is  soft,  and  where  the  building  blocks  are  out, 
not  on  the  ground,  but  in  their  places  on  the  tops  of  the  doors,  and  about  the 
windows  ;  and  I  saw  the  chiselling  done.  I  saw  the  work  going  forward  on  some 
of  the  pubho  buildings,  where  lions,  and  eagles,  and  wreaths  of  flowers  were  being 
carved.  Men  stood  with  Uttle  chisels  and  mallets,  cutting,  and  cutting,  and  cutting 
the  stone,  here  and  there.  Suppose  one  of  these  blocks  of  stone,  when  it  first  mounts 
into  its  place,  is  told  that  it  is  to  be  a  royal  lion,  and  it  is  to  decorate  a  magnificent 
structure.  The  workman  commences,  and  after  working  one  day  the  head  is  rudely 
shaped,  but  you  can  barely  tell  what  it  is.  The  next  day  he  brings  out  one  ear. 
The  third  day  he  opens  one  eye.  And  so,  day  after  day,  some  new  part  is  added. 
The  stone  complains,  and  asks  if  the  operation  is  to  be  an  everlasting  one  ;  but  the 
work  goes  on.  And  you  cannot  get  anything  out  of  stone  except  by  myriads  of 
blows  continued  until  the  work  is  done.  I  hear  people  say,  "Why  am  I  afflicted?" 
For  your  good.  "  How  long  shall  I  be  afflicted  ?  "  Until  you  cease  to  ask  how 
long.  Until  God's  work  is  done  in  you.  God  will  go  on  chiselling  as  long  as  it  is 
necessary,  in  order  to  elaborate  first  one  feature  and  then  another,  and  then 
another.  The  work  ought  to  go  on  until  it  is  completed.  And  every  true  heart 
ought  to  say,  "  Lord,  do  not  stay  Thy  hand  ;  cut  away  until  I  am  brought  out  into 
the  fair  lines  and  lineaments  of  the  image  of  God."  Troubles  and  afflictions  and 
blows  that  are  sent  are  useless  unless  they  make  you  patient  to  your  fellows  and 
submissive  to  your  lot.  But  rest  assured  that  if  you  love  God  all  things  will  work 
together  for  your  good.  And  now  join  and  work  with  them.  Help  God  to  work  for 
you.  The  security  of  believers : — The  argument  for  this  is  fivefold.  I.  The  Divinh 
SUPREMACY.  1.  This  co-operatlou  among  all  things  for  the  believer's  good  is  not  the 
result  of  the  conscious  aim  of  the  things  themselves,  but  by  virtue  of  an  extrinsic  force. 
2.  This  force,  which  makes  "  all  things  work  together,"  must  be  a  supreme  force.  3. 
This  supreme  force  is  God.  (1)  Because  He  alone  is  supreme.  (2)  Because  the  con- 
trolling power  is  exercised  in  behalf  of  the  objects  of  His  love,  who  also  are  His 
"  called  "  ones,  (a)  To  love  God  is  the  only  true  evidence  of  being  His  '•  called  " 
ones,  (b)  To  be  His  "called  "  ones  is  to  secure  the  co-operation  of  all  things  for 
our  good.  II.  The  Divine  purpose  (vers.  29-31).  1.  This  foreknowledge  is  more 
than  prescience  ;  it  implies  personal,  loving  approval.  (1)  Otberwise  there  could 
be  no  discrimination,  for  God  is  prescient,  knows,  intellectually,  all.  (2)  Other- 
wise Universalism  has  in  these  words  the  strongest  possible  foundation.  (3)  The 
conditions  of  this  Divine  approval  must  be  conceived  of  in  harmony  with  the  nature 
of  Him  who  does  the  approving.  (4)  Being  the  moral  approval  of  One  who  is  holy 
and  just,  as  well  as  loving,  and  who  has  predestined  salvation  only  through  the 
death  and  resurrection  of  His  Son,  it  is  easy  to  understand  the  plan  of  electing 
grace.  2.  Far-reaching  and  all-loving  purpose  for  the  highest  good  of  believers. 
(1)  The  ineffable  good  of  conformity  to  the  image  of  God's  Son.  (2)  Of  con- 
tributing by  Divine  grace  to  the  glory  of  Christ.  (3)  Of  being  called  by  the  Holy 
Spirit,  justified  by  the  Father,  and  glorified  with  Christ  for  ever.  3.  The  good  of 
a  righteousness  unchallengeable  to  all  eternity  (ver.  31).  HI.  The  Divine  sacbificb 
an  argument  for  the  believer's  security  (ver.  32).  1.  This  form  of  statement 
undeniably  implies  a  real  sacrifice  on  the  part  of  the  Father  in  giving  up  His  Son. 

2.  Such  a  sacrifice  as  this  implies  the  withholding  of  no  good  from  those  who 
accept  Christ.  (1)  This  argument  is  as  self-evident  as  it  is  wonderful.  (2)  The 
reality  of  the  substitutionary  character  of  Christ's  work  is  unavoidable,  according 
to  these  words.  IV.  Divine  election  (vers.  33,  34).  1.  The  elect  of  God  are  His 
justified  ones  (ver.  33).  (1)  The  condition  of  justification  and  prerogatives  of  the 
justified  are  laid  down  in  many  parts  of  Scripture,  (a)  Condition  of  justification 
(chap.  v.  1 ;  Gal.  ii.  16).  (6)  Prerogatives  of  the  justified — peace,  blessedness,  pardon, 
salvation  (chap.  v.  1 ;  iv.  6-8).  2.  Divine  justification  rests  on  a  solid  foundation.  (1) 
Death,  resurrection,  session  at  God's  right  hand,  and  intercession  of  Christ  (ver.  34). 

3.  The  security  of  the  justified  believer  is  as  safe  as  the  foundation  on  which  it 
rests  (vers.  33,  34).  V.  The  enduring  nature  of  the  Divine  love.  1.  The  love 
here  mentioned  is  the  Divine  love  (vers.  35-39).  2.  Consider  the  list  of  forces 
which  seek  to  wrest  the  believer  from  its  gracious  grasp  (vers.  35-39).  3.  The 
sublime  assurance  of  the  apostle  (vers.  38,  39).  (1)  The  foundation  of  the  assur- 
ance— the  Lord  Jesus.  (2)  Its  far-reaching  character — •*  Nor  things  to  come." 
Conclusion :  Let  us  never  forget — 1.  The  glorious  assurance  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
of  promise  (ver.  28).  2.  The  glorious  purpose  for  which  believers  are  called 
— "To    be    conformed   to   the   image  of   Hia  Son,"      Everything  contrary  to 

VOL.   II.  12 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHAP.  vm. 

holiness  in  the  life  of  the  believer  is  a  frustration  of  the  Divine  purpose.  3. 
Let  us  never  forget  the  unchangeableness  of  God's  love.  (D.  C.  Hughes,  A.M.) 
The  true  Christian's  blessedness  : — We  have  here — I.  The  description  of  a  trub 
Christian,  and  a  declaration  of  his  blessedness.  1.  "  Them  that  love  God." 
Now,  there  are  many  things  in  which  the  worldly  and  the  godly  do  agree  ;  but  on 
this  point  there  is  a  vital  difference.  No  ungodly  man  loves  God  in  the  Bible 
sense  of  the  term.  An  unconverted  man  may  love  a  God,  as,  for  instance,  the  God 
of  nature,  and  the  God  of  the  imagination  ;  but  the  God  of  revelation  no  man  can 
love,  unless  grace  turn  him  from  his  natural  enmity  towards  God.  And  there  may 
be  many  differences  between  godly  men ;  they  may  belong  to  different  sects,  hold 
very  opposite  opinions,  but  all  agree  in  this,  that  they  love  God.  (1)  As  their 
Father  ;  they  have  "  the  Spirit  of  adoption,  whereby  they  cry  Abba  Father."  (2) 
As  their  King  ;  they  are  wilUng  to  obey  Him.  (3)  As  their  Portion,  for  God  is 
their  all.  (4)  As  their  future  inheritance.  2.  "  The  called  according  to  His  pur- 
pose," by  which  He  means,  that  all  who  love  God  love  Him — (1)  Because  He  called 
them  to  love  Him.  AH  men  are  called  by  the  miuistry,  by  the  Word,  by  daily 
providence,  to  love  God ;  the  great  bell  of  the  gospel  rings  a  universal  welcome  to 
every  living  soul,  yet  there  was  never  an  instance  of  any  man  having  been  brought 
to  God  simply  by  that  sound.  (2)  Because  they  have  had  a  supernatural  call.  II. 
Take  the  words  one  by  one.  1.  "  Work."  Look  around,  above,  beneath,  and  all 
things  work — (1)  In  opposition  to  idleness.  The  idle  man  is  an  exception  to  God's 
rule.  There  is  not  a  star  which  doth  not  travel  its  myriads  of  miles  and  work. 
There  is  not  a  silent  nook  within  the  deepest  Jorest  glade  where  work  is  not  going 
on.  Nothing  is  idle.  The  world  is  a  great  machine,  but  it  is  never  standing  still. 
(2)  In  opposition  to  play.  They  are  ceaselessly  active  for  a  purpose.  The  world 
hath  an  object  in  its  wildest  movement.  Avalanche,  hurricane,  earthquake,  are  but 
order  in  an  unusual  form  ;  destruction  and  death  are  but  progress  in  veiled  attire. 
The  great  machine  is  not  only  in  motion,  but  there  is  something  weaving  in  it,  viz., 
good  for  God's  people.  (3)  In  opposition  to  Sabbath.  Since  the  day  when  Adam 
fell  all  things  have  had  to  labour.  Let  us  not  wonder  if  we  have  to  work  too.  If 
all  things  are  working,  let  us  "work  while  it  is  called  to-day,  for  the  night  cometh 
when  no  man  can  work."  2.  "  Together."  (1)  In  opposition  to  their  apparent 
confliction.  Looking  with  the  mere  eye  of  sense,  we  say,  "  Yes,  all  things  work, 
but  they  work  contrary  to  one  another.  The  world  is  always  active,  but  it  is  with 
the  activity  of  the  battle-field."  Be  not  deceived.  There  is  no  opposition  in  God's 
providence ;  the  raven-wing  of  war  is  co-worker  with  the  dove  of  peace.  The 
tempest  strives  not  with  the  peaceful  calm — they  work  together.  Look  at  our 
history.  The  strifes  of  barons  and  Idngs  might  have  been  thought  to  be  likely  to 
tread  out  the  last  spark  of  British  Uberty ;  but  they  did  rather  kindle  the  pile.  The 
Leavings  of  society,  the  strife  of  anarchy,  the  tumults  of  war— all  these  things,  over- 
ruled by  God,  have  but  made  the  chariot  of  the  Church  progress  more  mightily. 
The  charioteers  of  theEoman  circus  might  with  much  cleverness  and  art,  with  glowing 
wheels,  avoid  each  other ;  but  God  guides  the  fiery  coursers  of  man's  passion,  yokes 
the  storm,  bits  the  tempest,  and  keeping  each  clear  of  the  other  from  seeming  evil 
BliU  enduceth  good,  and  better  still ;  and  better  stiU  in  infinite  progression.  (2) 
None  of  them  work  separately.  The  physician  prescribes  medicine  ;  you  go  to  the 
chemist,  and  he  makes  it  up  ;  there  is  something  taken  from  this  drawer,  something 
from  that  phial,  something  from  that  shelf :  any  one  of  those  ingredients,  it  is  very 
possible,  would  be  a  deadly  poison  if  you  should  take  it  separately ;  but  he  puts 
them  into  the  mortar,  and  when  he  has  worked  them  all  up,  and  has  made  a  com- 
pound, he  gives  them  all  to  you  as  a  whole,  and  together  they  work  for  your  good. 
Too  much  joy  would  intoxicate  us,  too  much  misery  would  drive  us  to  despair :  but 
the  joy  and  the  misery,  the  battle  and  the  victory,  the  storm  and  the  calm,  all  these 
compounded  make  that  sacred  elixir  whereby  God  maketh  all  His  people  perfect. 
3.  For  good.  (1)  There  is  the  worldling's  good,  the  good  of  the  moment.  Now  God 
has  never  promised  that  "  all  things  shall  work  together  "  for  such  good  as  that  to 
His  people.  Expect  not  that  all  things  will  work  together  to  make  thee  rich  ;  it  is 
just  possible  they  may  all  work  to  make  thee  poor.  (2)  The  Christian  understands 
by  the  word  spiritual  good.  "Ah  I  "  saith  he,  "  I  do  not  call  gold  good,  but  faith  ! 
I  do  not  think  it  always  for  my  good  to  increase  in  treasure,  but  I  know  it  is  good 
to  grow  in  grace."  (3)  Good  eternal.  AU  work  to  bring  the  Christian  to  Paradise. 
(4)  Sometimes  all  things  work  together  for  the  Christian's  temporal  good,  as  in  the 
case  of  Jacob.  4.  I  return  to  the  word  "  work  " — to  notice  the  tense  of  it.  It  does 
not  say  that  they  shall  work,  or  that  they  have  worked ;  both  of  these  aie  implied, 


CHAT,  vm.]  ROMANS.  179 

bat  that  they  do  work  now.  I  find  it  easy  to  believe  that  all  things  have  worked 
together  for  my  good.  I  can  look  back  at  the  past,  and  wonder  at  all  the  way 
whereby  the  Lord  hath  led  me.  And  I  have  an  equal  faith  for  the  future,  that 
all  things  will  in  the  end  work  for  good.  The  pinch  of  faith  always  lies  in  the 
present  tense.  However  troubled,  downcast,  depressed,  and  despairing  the  Chris- 
tian may  be,  all  things  are  working  now  for  his  good.  5.  Paul  does  not  say, "  I  am 
persuaded  " ;  "  I  believe"  ;  but  "  We  (I  have  many  witnesses)  "  know."  The  apostle 
hfts  his  hand  to  where  the  white-robed  hosts  are  praising  God  for  ever.  "  These," 
Bays  he,  "  passed  through  great  tribulation,  and  washed  their  robes  and  made  them 
white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  :  ask  them  1  "  And  with  united  breath  they  reply, 
"  We  know  that  all  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God."  Heputa 
his  hand  upon  his  poor  distressed  brethren— he  looks  at  his  companions  and  he 
Bays,  "  We  t "  •'  We  know  it.  Not  only  does  faith  believe  it,  but  our  own  history 
convinces  us  of  the  truth  of  it."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  blessedness  of  believers  : — 
This  text  is  a  tonic.  It  is  clear  mountain  air.  Protracted  conflicts  with  self,  Satan, 
the  world,  adversities  and  sorrows,  often  leave  us  discouraged.  Then  we  need  this 
invigorating  truth.  It  changes  the  aspect  of  every  conflict  of  life.  We  shall  not  be 
injured,  but  benefited  ;  shall  not  lose,  but  gain ;  shall  not  be  defeated,  but  conquer. 
This  conviction  inspires  courage,  kindles  enthusiasm,  and  girds  with  strength.  I, 
The  promise  is  only  to  them  that  love  God.  1.  Obedience  is  the  infallible  test 
of  this  love.  To  belong  to  the  Church ;  to  be  baptized  ;  to  be  confirmed ;  to  say 
prayers,  is  no  proof  that  we  love  God,  unless  we  keep  His  commandments ;  and 
those  who  do  keep  the  commandments  are  known  by  their  fruits.  It  is  not  doubtful 
what  the  trees  are  when  they  are  in  blossom.  That  pure  white  blossom  is  the 
cherry ;  that  pink  and  white  one  is  the  apple.  But  when  we  eat  the  fruit  we  know 
the  tree.  That  peach  never  grew  on  a  crab-apple.  But,  granting  that  we  may  be 
mistaken,  God  infallibly  knows  them  that  love  Him.  2.  This  special  graciousnesa 
to  them  that  love  Him  is  open  to  all,  but  a  righteous  ruler  must  limit  moral  benefits 
to  moral  obedience.  If  God  made  "  all  things  work  together  for  good  "  to  bad  and 
good  alike,  there  would  be  no  moral  principle  in  His  government.  Nay !  such 
Divine  co-operation  would  sanction  the  wickedness  of  men.  His  moral  government 
must  be  consistent  with  His  hohness.  3.  As  He  loves  His  own  eternal  purposes  of 
truth  and  righteousness.  He  must  especially  love  and  honour  them  who  are  fulfilling 
those  holy  purposes.  God  simply  assures  His  obedient  children  that  their  obedience 
shall  have  its  reward.  Providence  is  in  league  with  holiness.  II.  Maek  the 
WEALTH  OF  THE  PROMISE  I  "Allthiugs."  1.  Light  is  bcautiful,  but  light  alono  caunot 
form  the  picture.  Shadows  must  lie  there — a  dark  background  on  which  the  light 
can  pencil  its  beauty.  God  cannot  form  the  beautiful  rainbow  until  He  has 
unbraided  a  beam  of  white  Ught  into  the  sevenfold  colours  of  the  prism,  which 
borrow  from  and  lend  to  each  other  enhancing  loveliness.  Thus  also  He  knows  how 
to  blend  the  bright  and  dark  things  in  human  life  to  produce  the  most  holy 
characters.  Be  patient  and  trustful,  for  He  is  making  you  after  a  beautiful  pattern, 
even  the  image  of  the  Only  Begotten.  The  cutting  and  polishing  of  diamonds  is 
done  by  friction.  God  puts  His  jewels  on  the  friction -wheels  only  to  polish  them. 
He  knows  how  to  bring  out  the  beauty  of  holiness.  "  For  whom  the  Lord  loveth 
He  chasteneth."  The  darkness  that  comes  across  our  sky  is  often  but  the  shadow 
of  a  great  blessing  coming  from  heaven  and  passing  between  us  and  the  sun.  The 
thunderbolt  that  prostrates  some  sheltering  tree  lets  heaven  shine  on  a  spot  of  earth 
where  it  never  shone  before.  The  banishment  of  John  to  Patmos  seemed  cruelty  ; 
but  when  there  God  revealed  to  him  the  visions  of  the  Book  of  Eevelation.  2. 
There  is  great  force  in  the  original  verb,  "work  together."  I  once  visited  a  great 
carpet  factory.  I  saw  the  wool  seized  by  iron  teeth,  combed  and  carded,  pre  ssed 
under  huge  iron  rollers  and  condensed  into  rolls,  spun  into  yam,  dipped  here  in  blue, 
there  in  black,  yonder  in  crimson,  there  in  orange,  till  vast  piles  of  bobbins  of  every 
colour  of  yarn  met  my  eye.  But  I  could  not  see  how  these  piles  of  coloured  yarns 
could  be  woven  into  a  carpet  of  such  exquisite  pattern.  All  seemed  confusio  n  and 
without  intelligent  design.  Then  the  superintendent  took  me  to  the  next  floor, 
where  he  showed  me  a  diagram  of  perforated  cardboards,  the  exact  pattern  of  the 
carpet  des  gned — a  plan  unseen  by  the  weavers  below,  but  a  plan  connected  with  the 
looms  and  controlling  aU  the  shuttles  of  varied  hues,  thus  guiding  the  weaving  of 
all  the  threads  into  a  web  of  beauty.  This  world  is  a  vast  factory  ;  the  events  and 
experl<  nees  of  life  are  crude  materials  seized  by  the  iron  teeth  of  trial,  combed  and 
carded,  pressed  under  heavy  rollers  of  sorrow,  spun  into  warp  and  woof  by  the 
whirling  spindles  of  duty,  dipped  here  in  the  bright  dyes  of  joy  and  prosperity,  there 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  Yin; 

in  the  dark  hues  of  suffering  and  aflfliction.  Confusion  and  mystery  seemed  every- 
where. Then  the  Master  took  me  up  into  the  sanctuary  and  showed  me  the  beautiful 
plan  of  the  text,  by  which,  unseen  by  the  weavers  below,  the  apparently  random 
shuttles  of  life  were  weaving  all  the  threads  into  a  glorious  robe  of  righteousness 
for  "  them  that  love  God."  IIL  The  doctrine  is  not  a  pleasing  fancy,  a  beautiful 
dream,  BUT  a  gloriods  certainty:  •' For  we  know."  How?  1.  We  know  the  fact 
(not  the  philosophy)  because  it  is  the  declared  purpose  and  promise  of  God.  Heaven 
and  earth  shall  pass  away ;  but  not  one  syllable  of  His  Word  shall  fail.  2.  Bv  the 
experience  of  them  that  love  God.  The  breaking  up  of  the  family  circle  on  earth  has 
often  been  the  means  of  re-uniting  all  the  loved  ones  in  heaven.  The  treachery  of 
earthly  friends  has  often  driven  us  to  closer  communion  with  the  faithful  and  true 
Friend  in  heaven.  The  wreck  of  mortal  hopes  has  often  enriched  our  immortal 
hopes.  The  vanity  of  this  world  has  led  us  to  seek  more  earnestly  the  solid  realities 
of  the  world  to  come.  3.  By  the  recorded  testimony  of  good  men.  "Before  I  was 
afflicted  I  went  astray ;  but  now  have  I  kept  Thy  word."  Take  the  experience  of 
Paul  in  this  chapter.  (J.  0.  Peck,  D.D.)  The  great  dome  of  God's  ■providence : — 
In  the  baptistery  of  the  cathedral  at  Pisa  is  a  wonderful  dome.  Spacious,  sym- 
metrical, composed  of  the  choicest  marble,  it  is  a  delight  to  stand  beneath  and  gaze 
upon  its  beauties.  Thus  I  stood  one  sunny  April  day,  when  suddenly  the  air  became 
instinct  with  melody.  The  great  dome  seemed  full  of  harmony.  The  waves  of 
music  vibrated  to  and  fro,  loudly  beating  against  the  walls,  swelling  into  full  chords 
like  the  roll  of  a  grand  organ,  and  then  dying  away  into  soft,  long-drawn,  far- 
receding  echoes,  melting  in  the  distance  into  silence.  It  was  only  my  guide,  who, 
lingering  behind  me  a  moment,  had  softly  murmured  a  triple  chord.  But  beneath 
that  magic  roof  every  sound  resolved  into  a  symphony.  No  discord  can  reach  the 
summit  of  that  dome  and  live.  Every  noise  made  in  the  building,  the  slamming  of 
the  seats,  the  tramping  of  feet,  all  the  murmur  and  bustle  of  the  crowd,  are  caught 
up,  softened,  harmonised,  blended  and  echoed  back  in  music.  So  it  seems  to  me 
that  over  our  life  hangs  the  great  dome  of  God's  providence.  Standing  as  we  do, 
beneath  it,  no  act  in  the  Divine  administration  towards  us,  no  affliction,  no  grief, 
no  loss  which  our  heavenly  Father  sends,  however  hard  to  bear  it  may  be,  but  will 
come  back  at  last  softened  and  blended  into  harmony,  with  the  overarching  dome 
of  His  wisdom,  mercy,  and  power,  till  to  our  corrected  sense  it  shall  be  the  sweetest 
music  of  heaven.  {J.  D.  Steele.)  The  seasons  of  our  education : — We  cannot  skip 
the  seasons  of  our  education.  We  cannot  hasten  the  ripeness  and  the  sweetness  of 
a  single  day,  nor  dispense  with  one  night's  nipping  frost,  nor  one  week's  blighting 
east  wind.  (F.  W.  Robertson.)  The  guidance  of  our  Pilot : — A  landsman  at  sea 
understands  little  how  a  vessel  is  worked  ;  he  sees  her  often  heading  almost  back 
from  her  course,  making  strange  and  contrary  traverses — sometimes  stripped  of  her 
canvas  when  to  him  all  seems  fair ;  sometimes  strong  sails  set  upon  her  when  the 
storm  is  driving  fiercely  ;  yet  he  trusts  in  the  presiding  skill,  nor  would  he  dare  to 
give,  much  less  countermand,  an  order  ;  for  in  the  extremity  of  his  own  ignorance 
he  has  the  comfort  of  knowing  that  the  pilot  knows.  So,  in  the  hour  of  gloom,  let 
us  trust  in  God,  for  to  Him  the  night  shineth  as  the  day ;  and  what  to  us  appears 
adverse,  to  Him  is  the  guidance  of  our  prosperity.  All  things  for  good : — Only  a  few 
years  afterwards,  Jeremiah  was  reduced  to  comparative  poverty.  The  bulk  of  his  pro- 
perty had  been  invested  in  the  stock  of  the  bank,  which  failed,  unable  to  pay  a  shilling 
in  the  pound.  Thus  compelled  to  dispose  of  his  expensive  establishment,  change  his 
style  of  living  altogether,  and,  with  his  wife  and  four  children,  take  to  "  short  com- 
mons," his  spirits  did  not  desert  him.  Said  Jerry,  "Never  mind  1 " — two  words  which 
he  never  failed  to  throw  at  the  teeth  of  every  mishap  he  encountered.  "  Never  mind  1 
I  like  variety.  I  am  tired  of  riding  in  a  carriage ;  I  once  broke  my  leg  in  one.  Walking 
is  an  exercise  that  I  need  very  much.  Come,  come,  this  is  not  so  bad  an  affair  after 
all.  It  will  test  the  value  of  my  friends.  Besides,  now  I  can  earn  the  bread  wa  eat. 
Ah  I  it  will  be  a  labour  of  love,  and  that  enriches  the  soul  1  I  can  almost  say  I  am 
glad  this  accident  has  happened  ;  I  can  indeed  !  "  (E.  Paxton  Hood.)  Man^s 
mistakes  rectified  by  God  : — I  sometimes  think  of  it  as  of  a  child  sitting  in  a  boat. 
The  child  does  not  know  the  coast,  and  it  very  little  understands  how  to  row.  If 
the  child  were  left  to  itself,  pulling  upon  the  oars,  its  right  hand  being  a  little 
Btronger  than  the  other,  it  would  be  all  the  time  veering  the  boat  to  the  right,  and  the 
boat  would  be  constantly  turning  round  and  round.  The  child  would,  perhaps,  make 
its  way  out  of  the  harbour  and  into  the  ocean,  and  be  carried  away  and  lost,  if 
there  were  no  guiding  power  in  the  boat  but  its  own.  But  therein  the  stern  sits  the 
filiier.     The  uneven  strokes  of  the  c  ild  would  carry  the  boat  this  way  or  that  out 


CHAP.  Tiu.]  ROMANS.  181 

of  its  course  ;  but  the  steady  hand  of  the  father  overcomes  those  uneven  strokes  ; 
and  all  the  mistakes  with  the  oars  are  rectified  by  the  rudder,  and  the  boat  keeps  its 
right  coarse.  So  that  the  force  exerted  by  the  child,  though  misdirected,  all  works 
for  good  when  the  father  guides,    (if.  W.  Beecher.) 

Ver.  29.  For  whom  He  did  foreknow,  He  also  did  predestinate  to  be  conformed 
to  the  Image  of  His  Son. — Foreknowledge  and  predestination : — The  •'  for  "  bears 
on  the  previous  verse.  All  things  must  turn  to  the  good  of  them  that  are  called 
according  to  God's  eternal  plan,  because,  once  foreknown,  He  has  determined  to 
bring  them  to  the  glorious  cou  summation  of  perfect  likeness  to  His  Son.  The 
decree  of  predestination  is  founded  on  the  act  of  foreknowledge.  In  what  respect 
did  God  foreknow  them?  Obviously  not  as  being  one  day  to  exist.  For  the  fore- 
knowledge in  that  case  would  apply  to  all  men,  and  the  apostle  would  not  have  said 
•' tc Aom  He  foreknew. "  Neither  is  it  as  future  saved  and  glorified  ones  that  He 
foreknew  them  ;  for  this  is  the  object  of  the  decree  of  predestination  of  which  Paul 
goes  on  to  speak ;  and  this  object  cannot  at  the  same  time  be  that  of  the  fore- 
knowledge. There  is  but  one  answer :  foreknown  as  sure  to  fulfil  the  condition  of 
salvation,  viz.,  faith ;  so :  foreknown  as  His  by  faith.  The  act  of  knowing,  like 
that  of  seeing,  supposes  an  object  perceived.  It  is  not  the  act  that  creates  the 
object,  but  the  object  which  determines  the  act.  And  the  same  is  the  case  with 
Divine  prevision  or  foreknowledge :  for  in  the  case  of  God  who  lives  above  time 
foreseeing  is  seeing  ;  knowing  what  shall  be  is  knowing  what  to  Him  already  is. 
And  therefore  it  is  the  believer's  faith  which,  as  a  future  act,  but  in  His  sight 
already  existing,  which  determines  His  foreknowledge.  This  faith  does  not  exist 
because  God  sees  it ;  He  sees  it  because  it  will  come  into  being  at  a  given  moment, 
in  time.  We  thus  get  at  the  thought  of  the  apostle  :  whom  God  knew  beforehand 
as  certain  to  believe,  whose  faith  He  beheld  eternally.  He  designated,  predestinated, 
as  the  objects  of  a  grand  decree,  to  wit,  that  He  will  not  abandon  them  till  He  has 
brought  them  to  the  perfect  likeness  of  His  own  Son.  Will  in  God  is  neither 
arbitrary  nor  blind;  it  is  based  on  a  principle  of  light,  on  knowledge.  In  relation 
to  the  man  whose  faith  God  foresees.  He  decrees  salvation  and  glory.  The  pre- 
destination of  which  Paul  speaks  is  not  a  predestination  to  faith,  but  a  predestina- 
tion to  glory,  founded  on  the  prevision  of  faith.  Faith  is  in  a  sense  the  work  of 
God ;  but  it  contains  a  factor,  in  virtue  of  which  it  reacts  on  God,  as  an  object 
reacts  on  the  mind  which  takes  cognizance  of  it ;  this  is  the  free  adherence  of  man 
to  the  solicitation  of  God.  Here  is  the  element  which  distinguishes  the  act  of  fore- 
knowledge from  that  of  predestination,  and  because  of  which  the  former  logically 
precedes  the  latter.  {Prof.  Godet.)  The  believer's  conformity  to  Christ : — There  is  a 
threefold  conformity  which  a  believer  is  said  to  have  to  Christ — of  holiness,  of  suffer- 
ing, of  glory.  First,  of  holiness  and  sanctification.  Every  true  child  of  God  he  is  pre-' 
destinated  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  Christ,  that  is,  to  be  holy  as  He  was  holy. 
And  this  again  to  a  double  purpose.  First,  in  affection  and  disposition,  to  be  carried 
by  the  same  spirit.  *'  Let  the  same  mind  be  in  you  which  was  in  Chri>t  Jesus  "  (Phil. 
ii.  5  ;  Eom.  viii.  9).  Again,  secondly,  in  life  and  conversation ;  we  must  be  like  to  Him 
in  this  also  (1  John  ii.  6).  When  we  say  that  we  are  to  be  like  Christ,  and  to  do  that 
which  He  did,  this  is  rightly  to  be  understood  by  us,  and  in  that  sense  wherein  it 
is  spoken ;  namely,  as  to  those  kind  of  actions  alone  which  are  imitable  by  us,  and 
which  it  lies  in  our  way  to  follow,  and  to  conform  unto,  and  to  take  Him  for  our 
ensample.  There  are  three  sorts  of  actions  of  Christ's  which  are  mentioned  in 
Scripture.  First,  His  work  of  mediation.  Secondly,  His  working  of  miracles. 
And  thirdly,  His  works  of  obedience,  and  conformity  to  the  law  of  God  in  all 
those  moral  actions  which  came  from  Him.  The  two  former  of  these  they  are 
wholly  beyond  our  imitation.  God  will  Himself  one  day  make  a  serious  search  and 
inquiry  hereinto.  He  will  ask  concerning  every  man  whose  image  and  superscrip- 
tion he  hath  upon  him,  whether  the  image  of  Christ,  or  the  image  of  Satan.  And 
according  as  it  is  in  this  respect  with  him,  so  shall  be  also  his  future  condition. 
Men  may  possibly  sometimes  herein  deceive  others,  and  oftentimes  do  so.  While 
it  is  said  here,  that  we  are  predestinated  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  Christ ; 
and  that  this  in  one  sense  is  meant  of  holiness  ;  then  we  see  here  what  I  formerly 
hinted,  that  our  sanctification  is  a  special  fruit  and  effect  of  our  election,  and  that 
which  the  Lord  does  mainly  and  chiefly  intend  to  us  in  His  choosing  of  us.  The 
second  conformity,  in  which  believers  stand  to  Christ,  is  a  conformity  of  suffei  ing 
and  of  affliction.  This  was  another  image  of  His  whereby  He  was  made  known  to 
the  world.    And  this  in  all  the  particular  explications  of  it ;  as,  first,  in  the  caus9 


183  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOB.  [chap,  im, 

of  sufferiog,  we  are  conformable  in  this,  for  as  Christ  suffered  for  righteoasness 
sake  (1  Pet.  ii.  21,  22).  Secondly,  as  in  the  cause  of  suffering,  so  also  in  the  kind 
of  suffering,  there  is  a  conformity  to  Christ's  image  in  this  also.  Kind  for  kind, 
reproach,  disgrace,  hatred,  outward  violence,  and  death  itself  in  the  worst  circum- 
stances of  it.  Thirdly,  in  the  manner  of  suffering.  There  is  in  Christians,  and  so 
ought  to  be  likewise  a  conformity  to  Christ  in  this  also.  To  suffer  with  the  same 
spirit  as  we  find  Him  to  have  done.  The  consideration  of  this  point  may  be  thus 
far  useful  to  us.  First,  as  it  may  serve  to  inform  us  of  the  state  and  condition  of  a 
Christian  what  it  is.  Therefore  secondly,  this  teaches  us  all  to  prepare  and  to  pro- 
vide for  suffering.  Thirdly,  we  have  hence  also  a  ground  of  patience  and  comfort 
in  afiQictions,  which  do  at  any  time  fall  upon  us,  that  they  are  not  such  things  as 
do  come  to  us  by  chance,  but  by  special  order  and  dispensation  from  God,  The 
third  and  last,  is  a  conformity  in  glory.  This  is  another  kind  of  correspondency 
which  the  Scripture  does  sometimes  intimate  and  declare  unto  us,  that  we  shall  ba 
changed  into  the  same  image  with  Christ  from  glory  to  glory  (2  Cor.  iii.  18).  "  And 
as  we  have  born  the  image  of  the  earthly,  so  we  shall  also  bear  the  image  of  the 
heavenly  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  49).  It  is  said  in  John  xvii.  22,  "  The  glory  which  Thou  hast 
given  Me,  I  have  given  them."  This  is  grounded,  first  of  all  upon  the  f  orementioned 
union  which  believers  have  with  Christ ;  as  from  thence  they  conform  to  Him  in  Hia 
Bufferings,  so  also  in  His  glory.  Secondly,  we  have  the  praise  of  Christ  to  this 
purpose,  "  Ye  which  have  been  with  Me  in  My  temptations,  ye  shall  be  with  Me  in 
My  kingdom  "  (Luke  xxii.  30).  Thirdly,  we  have  for  this  also  the  prayer  of  Christ 
(John  xvii.  24).  As  the  promise  of  Christ  is  most  infaUible,  so  the  prayer  of  Christ 
is  most  effectual ;  and  as  Christ  is  sure  to  perform  whatever  He  hath  made  tender 
of  to  us,  so  He  is  sure  also  to  obtain  whatever  He  hath  requested  for  us.  God  the 
Father  will  hear  His  Son  in  all  His  petitions  ;  "I  know,"  says  He,  "that  Thou 
hearest  Me  always  "  (John  xi.  42).  Aiid  so  in  this  petition  especially,  amongst 
and  above  all  the  rest.  The  use  of  this  point  to  ourselves  comes  to  this — First,  as 
matter  of  comfort  and  satisfaction  to  us  in  all  those  troubles  and  afflictions  which 
do  at  any  time  befall  us,  and  our  conformity  to  Christ  in  suffering.  Secondly,  this 
may  serve  also  to  put  a  lustre  and  splendour  upon  the  saints  and  servants  of  God 
in  the  midst  of  all  those  disparagements  and  contempts  which  are  cast  upon  them. 
Thirdly,  we  should  also  hence  labour  to  be  fitted  for  this  glorious  condition  of  con- 
formity to  Christ  in  glory.  The  third  and  last  is  the  limitation  of  this  conformity 
here  mentioned,  and  that  is  in  these  words,  "  That  He  might  be  the  first-born  among 
many  brethren."  First,  to  take  notice  of  their  relation ;  the  saints,  and  such  as  are 
true  Christians,  they  are  all  of  them  brethren.  First,  brethren  to  Christ ;  they 
are  His  brethren,  thus  in  Heb.  ii.  11,  12.  First,  as  partaking  of  the  same  nature. 
Secondly,  as  partaking  of  the  same  Father.  Thirdly,  as  partaking  of  the  same 
Spirit,  &o.  Secondly,  they  are  brethren  also,  as  being  so  one  to  another  (1  Thess. 
v.  26,  27 ;  1  John  iii.  16).  This  they  are  said  to  be  upon  a  various  account.  First, 
as  of  the  same  profession  and  of  the  same  heavenly  calling.  Secondly,  of  the 
same  family  and  household;  the  family  of  heaven,  the  household  of  faith. 
Thirdly,  having  the  same  inheritance  allotted  unto  them.  The  third  and  last 
particular  is  their  order ;  to  wit,  in  reference  to  Christ,  and  that  is,  tbey  are 
younger  brethren,  that  He  might  be  the  first-born  amongst  them ;  and  herein 
especially  does  consist  the  limitation  of  the  saints  for  their  conformity  to  Christ's 
image.  It  is  still  with  this  reservation,  that  He  is  the  chief  and  principal.  Christ 
He  is  the  first-bom  amongst  many  brethren,  take  notice  of  that.  Christ  is  the 
first-born ;  that  is,  the  Chief.  First,  in  point  of  holiness ;  He  is  the  first-born  in 
this  explication,  and  that  in  a  twofold  respect.  First,  in  regard  of  capacity,  as  He 
hath  a  greater  measure  of  holiness  in  Himself  than  any  of  His  brethren.  Secondly, 
in  regard  of  conveyance,  as  He  is  the  spring  and  fountain,  and  deriver  of  hoUness 
unto  them.  Secondly,  in  point  of  suffering.  It  holds  there  also  that  Christ  hath 
the  precedency  and  priority  afore  any  other  besides.  This  seems  in  a  special 
manner  to  be  here  intended.  That  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  they  were  greater  than 
all  the  sufferings  of  any  of  the  saints.  First,  they  were  greater  subjective,  in  regard 
of  the  eminency  of  the  person  that  did  undergo  them,  as  being  no  other  than  the 
Son  of  God  Himself,  the  Lord  of  glory.  Secondly,  those  sufferings  of  Christ,  they 
were  greater,  also  extensive,  in  regard  of  things  which  He  suffered  in,  as  to  all  kinds 
and  particulars  ;  not  only  in  His  body,  in  all  the  parts  and  members  thereof,  but  also 
in  His  soul,  as  to  all  the  powers  and  faculties  thereof.  Thirdly,  greater  intensive  in 
regard  of  the  exquisiteness  of  the  pains  and  torments  themselves  which  He  suffered  ; 
it  is  said,  "  It  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise  Him  "  (Isa.  Uii.  10).    The  third  and  last  is 


CHAP,  vm.]  ROMANS.  188 

in  point  of  glory ;  Christ  has  the  pre-eminence  here  likewise.  We  are  predestinated 
to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  the  Son  of  God  in  this  particular  amongst  the 
rest ;  bat  yet  still  so  as  we  must  give  Him  leave  to  go  before  us,  and  to  have  the 
precedency  of  us ;  upon  which  account  He  is  called  not  only  the  Author,  but  also 
the  Captain  of  their  salvation  (Heb.  ii.  10).  First,  Christ  as  the  Head  of  the 
Church  hath  the  pre-eminence  of  dignity  and  power,  and  of  all  here  in  this  life. 
The  first-born  in  ancient  time  had  the  precedency  in  this  particular.  The 
excellency  of  dignity,  and  the  excellency  of  power,  as  it  is  in  Gen.  xlix.  3.  They  were 
princes  and  priests  in  their  famihes.  Secondly,  for  the  life  to  come ;  Christ  He 
hath  the  pre-eminence  of  the  saints  here  also,  being  the  great  Heir  of  eternal 
glory.  It  is  true  they  are  made  conformable  to  His  image  in  glory  ;  but  it  is  to  the 
truth  of  His  image,  not  to  the  transceadency ;  they  are  partakers  with  Him  of  the 
same  glory  in  kind,  but  not  of  the  same  glory  in  degree.  Therefore  accordingly 
it  should  teach  us  to  give  all  honour  and  glory  onto  Him,  as  standing  in  this 
relation  to  us,  and  we  to  Him,  as  members  under  this  Head,  as  subjects  under  this 
Lord,  as  younger  brethren  under  this  First-born.  {Thomas  Horton,  D.D.)  The 
object  of  predestination — conformity  to  Christ : — It  is  a  sad  circumstance  that  a 
large  number  of  professing  Christians  completely  overlook  that  in  which  our  salva- 
tion chiefly  consists.  Those  of  whom  we  speak  say,  "  To  be  forgiven  is  to  be  saved 
— to  be  justified  is  to  be  saved."  But  to  be  forgiven  is  only  a  part  of  salvation, 
to  be  justified  is  only  a  part  of  salvation.  God  teaches  us  that  redemption 
consists,  not  merely  in  being  accounted  righteous,  but  in  being  made  righteous. 
We  are  told  by  the  Apostle  Paul  that  Christians  are  predestinated  to  be  conformed 
to  the  image  of  God's  Son.  God's  provision  for  renewing  man  contemplates  like- 
ness to  Christ.  This  provision  consists  of  the  atonement  and  the  ministrations  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  Christian  truth  has  its  centre  and  substance  in  Christ ;  and  ttie 
Holy  Ghost  in  His  revelations  to  us,  reveal  chiefly  Christ.  Such  contact  must 
produce  correspondence  and  hkeness.  No  nobler  pattern  could  be  present  to  God. 
Look,  for  a  moment,  simply  at  the  human  nature  of  Christ.  There,  in  that  human 
nature,  all  is  goodness.  We  will  carry  these  remarks  a  little  further,  aud  say  that 
conformity  to  a  less  perfect  pattern  would  not  exhaust  those  capacities  of  the  human 
soul  which  God  gave  to  that  soul  when  He  created  it,  or  satisfy  the  thirsts  awakened 
in  the  human  spirit,  when  that  spirit  is  reconciled  to  God.  The  heart  of  man  is 
capable  of  being  made  a  complete  likeness  of  God.  Oh,  how  you  sin  against  your- 
selves when  you  degrade  yourselves — when  you  act  as  though  you  were  sent  iuto 
this  world  simply  to  eat,  and  drink,  and  put  on  raiment  I  We  remark,  further, 
that  all  under  the  Christian  dispensation,  who  seek  renewal  into  God's  image, 
make  Christ  their  Example.  Now,  in  this  real  human  life  Christ  sets  us  an 
example.  He  hereby  shows  what  humanity  in  close  connection  with  God  can  be. 
The  end  and  tendency  of  all  Divine  dispensations,  since  the  Fall,  have  been  to  fix 
the  attention  of  mankind  on  Christ.  Now,  while  the  thoughts  of  renewed  men  are 
frequently  occupied  vrith  their  Saviour,  their  hearts  are  warm  towards  Him.  Cold 
metal  will  not  take  the  mould;  you  may  try  to  drive  it  into  the  mould,  but  you 
cannot ;  or,  if  you  get  it  into  the  mould  by  powerful  hammers,  it  will  not  take  the 
form  of  the  mould  even  then  ;  it  will  come  out  as  an  unshapen  lump  ;  but  metal 
liquified  will  run  into  any  shape.  Just  so  the  soul  of  man  in  contact  with  Christ. 
When  that  soul  is  fused  by  the  power  of  love,  it  immediately  takes  the  likeness  of 
the  Saviour.  If  we  could  only  raise  our  eyes  above  the  level  of  the  Church,  and  fix 
them  upon  the  Saviour,  there  would  be  an  improvement  in  our  character,  and  in 
our  style  of  hfe  immediately.  The  image  becomes  an  esseutial  part  of  the  indi- 
vidual. It  is  in  the  core  of  his  nature.  It  is  a  substantial  likeness  wrought  into 
the  material  of  the  inner  self.  Now  let  as,  for  a  moment,  dwell  on  the  fact  that 
this  likeness  is  visible.  God,  of  course,  sees  it.  The  angels  see  it — renewed  men 
Bee  it,  the  ungodly  sometimes  see  it.  All  may  see  it.  Not  if  you  take  your  micro- 
scope and  magnify  a  mote  until  it  seem  a  beam,  and  a  beam  so  large  that  nought 
beside  is  visible  ! — you  will  not  see  it  then.  If  you  apply  your  microscope  to  some 
one  of  your  faults,  you  will  not  then  see  the  likeness  of  Christ.  You  must  look  at 
yourselves  as  a  whole,  if  you  would  judge  of  that  which  is  being  done  for  you.  Or, 
to  use  another  illustration,  you  will  not  see  the  likeness  of  Christ,  if  you  take  your 
dissecting  knife,  and,  cutting  out  some  plague  spot  of  the  flesh,  examine  it  as 
though  that  dull,  foul  lump  were  the  whole  body — of  course,  you  will  not  see  the 
Divine  workmanship  in  your  character  then.  Nor  will  you  be  able  to  see  it  if  you 
look  for  the  stature  and  strength  of  manhood,  where  you  can  expect  to  find  only 
the  form  and  the  feebleness  of  infancy  ?    But  if  you  know  what  to  look  for,  whera 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  mu 

to  look  for  it,  and  when,  then  the  image  of  God,  in  the  regenerated  man,  may  be 
seen  by  you  ;  seen,  if  you  be  regenerated,  in  your  own  heart,  and  seen  in  others,  if 
they  too  be  born  again.  Let  me  remind  you  that  the  delineation  of  God's  image  is 
progressive.  "  We  all  with  open  face,  beholding,  as  in  a  glass,  the  glory  of  the 
Lord,  are  changed  into  the  same  image,  from  glory  to  glory,  even  as  by  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord."  They  are  born  again  to  possess  this  image,  and  as 
they  grow  up  into  it,  it  expands  and  becomes  perfected.  {S.  Martin.)  Pre- 
destination : — The  apostle  is  not  here  describing  a  chain  of  causes  and  effects,  but 
simply  showing  the  method  in  which  God  works ;  the  order  in  which  the  several 
branches  of  salvation  constantly  follow  each  other.  This  will  be  clear  if  we  survey 
the  work  of  God  in  the  salvation  of  men — I.  Fobward.  1.  God  foreknew  all  who 
would  believe — i.e.,  speaking  after  the  manner  of  men,  for  properly  there  is  neither 
fore  or  after  knowledge  in  God.  All  time,  or  rather  aU  eternity,  is  present  to  Him 
at  once.  But  we  must  not  think  that  things  are  because  He  knows  them,  any  more 
than  the  sun  shines  because  I  see  it.  Men  are  as  free  in  believing  or  not  believing 
as  if  God  did  not  know  it  at  all.  2.  Whom  God  foreknew  He  "  predestinated,"  &c. 
— i.e.,  God  decrees  from  everlasting  that  all  who  believe  in  the  Son  of  His  love  shall 
be  conformed  to  His  image.  Accordingly  all  who  believe  in  Christ  receive  "  the 
end  of  their  faith,  the  salvation  of  their  souls,"  and  this  in  virtue  of  the  unchange- 
able decree,  "  He  that  beUeveth  shall  be  saved,"  &c.  3.  Whom  He  predestinated 
He  also  called — outwardly  by  His  Word,  inwardly  by  His  Spirit.  4.  Whom  He 
called  He  justified — i.e.,  here,  made  just.  He  executed  the  decree,  "conforming 
them  to  the  image  of  His  Son,"  or  sanctified  them.  5.  Whom  He  justified  He 
glorified.  "  Having  made  them  meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the 
saints,"  He  "gives  them  the  kingdom  prepared  for  them."  H.  Backward. 
1.  Take  your  stand  with  "  the  multitude  which  no  man  can  number,"  and  you  will 
find  none  who  was  not  sanctified  before  he  was  glorified.  2.  Take  a  view  of  the 
sanctified  on  earth  and  you  will  find  all  were  first  called.  3.  Who  are  they  that 
are  thus  called  but  those  whom  God  had  predestinated  to  be  conformed  to  the 
image  of  Clirist,  "  for  God  calls  none,  but  according  to  the  counsel  of  His  will." 
4.  All  God  predestinated  He  foreknew.  He  saw  them  as  believers,  and  as  such 
predestinated  them  to  salvation  according  to  the  eternal  decree.  "  He  that  believeth 
shall  be  saved."  Conclusion  :  God  sees  and  knows  from  everlasting  to  everlasting 
through  one  eternal  now.  Yet  in  condescension  to  our  weakness  He  speaks  after 
the  manner  of  men  of  His  purpose,  counsel,  plan,  foreknowledge.  {John  Wesley, 
M.A.)  Predestination: — L  In  relation  to  man.  What  is  the  design  of  God  in 
predestination?  "Conformity  to  the  image  of  His  Son."  To  make  a  little  Jesus 
Christ  of  a  man — that  is  what  God  does.  What  God  predestines  to  do  for  man  is 
what  man,  left  to  himself,  does  not  and  never  will  wish  for.  No  unconverted  man, 
no  lost  soul,  no  devil  wishes  to  be  like  Christ.  To  wish  to  be  good  is  itself  a  kind 
of  goodness,  and  to  wish  to  be  like  Jesus  Christ  is  in  some  degree  to  resemble  Him. 
Observe — 1.  There  is  nothing  here  about  a  predestination  of  men  to  eternal  misery. 
Our  text  speaks  of  nothing  but  good  for  man.  2.  Predestination  has  reference  to 
character  rather  than  condition.  It  is  not  a  plan  by  which  men  are  to  be  made 
happy  hereafter  irrespectively  of  their  inward  nature  and  disposition.  3.  The 
predestination  of  God  includes  all  the  laws,  processes,  means,  and  instruments  by 
which  the  result  is  secured,  as  adapted  to  the  constitution  of  the  mind,  the  will, 
and  the  affections,  to  be  renewed  and  sanctified.  In  His  providential  dealings  the 
plan  of  God  includes  not  only  the  end,  but  the  means.  The  man  who  only  takes 
a  part  of  God's  plan  might  sit  down  in  the  corner  of  the  field,  and  there  reason, 
"  If  a  crop  of  corn  is  to  grow  here,  it  will  grow  ;  therefore  I  will  lie  down  and 
leave  the  matter  to  God."  But  the  man  who  has  a  firmer  faith  in  predestination 
will  say,  "  If  a  crop  of  corn  is  to  grow  here,  I  must  labour  because  labour  is  compre- 
hended in  God's  scheme."  Therefore  the  man  who  contents  himself  with  saying, 
"If  I  am  to  be  saved  I  shall  be  saved,"  is  only  half  a  believer  in  predestination. 
The  thorough  believer  in  it  will  "give  all  diligence  to  make  his  calling  and  election 
Bure,  and  work  out  his  own  salvation,  because  it  is  God  that  worketh  in  him." 
4.  The  only  evidence  of  personal  predestination  is  in  the  attainment  of  the  end 
proclaimed — Conformity  to  Christ.  You  may  hold  the  doctrine  of  election  and  yet 
be  none  of  the  elect.  You  may  be  a  drunkard,  <fec.,  and  that  is  no  part  of  God's 
purpose.  You  may  even  reject  the  doctrine,  and  yet  be  yourself  an  exemplification 
of  it — God's  wo'kmanship.  II.  In  relation  to  God.  1.  It  is  God  who  works 
salvation  in  those  who  are  saved.  It  is  not  that  we  have  nothing  ti  do  and  are  to 
abandon  ourselves  to  the  current  of  events,  but  that  the  first  and  efficient  Author 


CHAP  vm.]  ROMANS.  185 

of  our  salvation  is  God.  2.  What  God  works  in  time  is  the  effect  of  His  eternal 
purpose.  As  the  act  of  election  is  the  act  of  God,  so  it  is  not  done  without  fore- 
thought and  design.  The  whole  universe  is  formed,  and  all  its  parts  organised 
after  the  purpose  of  God,  planned  by  infinite  wisdom  and  regulated  by  infinite 
power.  Now,  if  this  be  so  in  regard  to  the  fall  of  a  sparrow,  the  numbering  of  the 
hairs  of  our  head,  &c.,  how  much  more  in  the  building  of  the  spiritual  kingdom 
and  temple  of  God  1  If  the  framework  of  the  scaffold  has  been  so  wisely  formed, 
how  much  more  the  palace  to  which  it  is  subordinate  1  What  it  was  right  for  Him 
to  do,  it  was  right  for  Him  to  purpose  to  do.  Conclusion  :  The  Divine  predestina- 
tion— 1.  Wears  towards  men  only  an  aspect  of  love.  Its  sole  object  is  to  make 
men  like  Christ  2.  Eespects  the  accomplishment  of  a  work  of  grace,  which 
without  would  never  be  accomplished  at  all.  3.  The  only  satisfactory  mark 
of  our  interest  in  it  is  our  conformity  to  Christ.  4.  In  the  experience  of  salvation 
let  this  doctrine  have  its  proper  place.  There  is  predestination  in  the  entire 
process.  But  the  use  of  means  comes  before  attainment  of  the  end.  The  first 
appeal  of  God  to  us  is  to  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Let  us  begin 
with  that.  Leave  out  for  the  present  the  perplexing  question,  "  Am  I  one  of 
the  elect?"  Our  election  must  manifest  itself  by  our  growing  conformity  to 
Christ.  The  purpose  of  God  is  to  be  read  in  the  work  of  God.  And  if  this 
evidence  appear,  let  it  humble  and  awaken  gratitude  in  you.  (P.  Strutt.) 
Predestination  is  to  mark  out  beforehand  especially  in  one's  mind.  Only  in  Eph. 
i.  5,  11 ;  Acts  iv.  28;  1  Cor.  ii.  7.  It  is  more  definite  than  "purpose."  A  parent 
who  before  his  child  is  old  enough  for  a  trade,  chooses  a  trade  for  him,  predestines 
the  boy.  He  marks  out  beforehand  a  path  iu  which  he  designs  him  to  go.  So 
God  from  eternity  resolved  that  believers  should  be  made  like  His  Son.  Fore- 
ordination  is  simply  a  purpose,  and  by  no  means  implies  the  inevitable  accomplish- 
ment of  the  purpose.  The  boy  marked  out  for  one  trade  may  enter  another.  But 
it  might  be  thought  that  what  God  foreordained  must  in  every  case  be  realised. 
But  God  has  thought  fit  that  the  accomplishment  of  His  own  purposes  shall 
depend  upon  man's  faith.  Hence  Paul  solemnly  warns  his  readers  that,  unless 
they  continue  in  faith,  they  will,  although  foreordained  to  glory,  be  cut  off  (chap, 
xi.  21,  22).  So  in  Jer.  xviii.  7-12,  God  expressly  declares  that  the  accomplishment 
of  His  purpose  of  blessing  to  Israel  depends  upon  Israel's  conduct.  The  doctrine 
of  predestination  is  thus  consistent  with  the  teaching  that  salvation  depends  upon 
each  man's  own  faith  (chaps,  ix.  32,  xi.  22f) ;  with  the  teaching  that  God  is  using 
means  to  lead  all  men  to  repentance  (chap.  ii.  4) ;  and  with  the  universality  of  the 
purpose  of  redemption  (chap.  v.  18).     (Prof.  Beet.)        Glorious  predestination: — 

I.    OtJB  CONFORMITY   TO    ChRIST   IS   THE    SACRED    OBJECT   OP   PREDESTINATION.       Wo  are 

to  be  conformed  to  Him — 1.  As  to  nature.  It  is  not  possible  for  us  to  be  Divine, 
yet  we  are  made  "  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature."  We  cannot  be  precisely  as 
God  is,  yet  as  we  have  borne  the  image  of  the  earthy  we  shall  also  bear  the  image 
of  the  heavenly.  The  new  birth  as  surely  stamps  us  with  the  image  of  Christ  as 
our  first  birth  impressed  us  with  a  resemblance  to  the  fathers  of  our  flesh.  2.  As  to 
relationship.  Our  Lord  is  the  Son  of  God  ;  and  truly  now  are  we  the  sons  of  God. 
As  Christ's  Sonship  was  attested  at  His  baptism  by  the  voice  from  heaven  and  the 
Holy  Ghost,  so  the  voice  of  God  in  the  Word  has  testified  to  us  our  Heavenly 
Father's  love  ;  and  the  Holy  Spirit  has  borne  witness  with  our  spirits  that  we  are 
the  children  of  God.  3.  In  our  actions.  As  a  Son  Christ  served  His  Father,  and 
you  could  see  the  nature  of  God  in  His  sympathy  with  and  exact  imitation  of  God ; 
and  so  we  are  to  speak  the  truth, for  God  is  true;  love,  for  God  is  love.  Moreover, 
Christ  wrought  miracles  of  mercy  towards  men,  which  proved  Him  to  be  the  Son 
of  God.  And  our  Lord  has  told  us  that  greater  works  than  His  own  shall  we  do. 
4.  In  our  experience.  (1)  Of  suffering.  "  Though  He  were  a  Son,  yet  learned  He 
obedience  by  the  things  which  He  suffered."  And  if  we  "  be  without  chastisement 
then  are  we  bastards,  and  not  sons."  (2)  In  relation  to  men.  "  He  came  unto  Hia 
own,  and  His  own  received  Him  not,"  and  so  we  have  to  *'  go  forth  unto  Him  with- 
out the  camp,  bearing  His  reproach."  (3)  With  regard  to  Satan.  You  know  how 
thrice  he  assailed  Him  with  those  temptations  which  are  most  likely  to  be  attrac- 
tive to  poor  humanity,  but  Jesus  overcame  them  all.  We  are  predestinated  to  ba 
conformed  to  Christ  in  that  respect.  (4)  As  to  all  evil,  our  Lord's  entire  life  was 
one  perpetual  battle.  And  we  are  to  be  holy,  harmless,  undefiled  and  separate 
from  sinners.  5.  As  to  character.  He  was  consecrated  to  God  ;  so  are  we  to  be. 
He  went  about  His  Father's  business ;  so  should  we  ever  be  occupied.  Towards 
man  He  was  all  love ;  it  becomes  as  to  be  the  same.    6.  As  to  our  inheritance,  for 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vnx. 

He  is  heir  of  all  things,  and  what  less  are  we  heirs  of,  since  all  things  are  ours  ? 
II.  Predestination  is  the  impelling  force  towards  this  conformity.  1.  It  is  the 
will  of  God  that  conforms  as  to  Christ's  image  rather  than  our  own  will.  It  is  our 
will  now,  but  it  was  God's  will  when  it  was  not  our  will,  and  it  only  became  accord- 
ing to  our  win  when  God  made  us  willing  in  the  day  of  its  power.  2.  It  is  rather 
God's  work  than  our  work.  We  are  to  work  with  God  in  the  matter  of  our  becoming 
like  to  Christ.  We  are  not  to  be  passive  like  wood  or  marble ;  we  are  to  be  prayer- 
ful, watchful,  fervent,  &c.,  but  still  the  work  is  God's.  3.  Therefore  all  the  glory 
must  be  unto  God  and  not  to  us.  It  is  a  great  honour  to  any  man  to  be  like  Christ  *, 
and  we  must  lay  all  our  honours  at  His  dear  feet,  who  hath,  according  to  His 
abundant  mercy,  predestinated  us  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  His  Son.  III. 
The  ultimate  end  op  all  this  is  Christ.     *'  That  He  might  be  the  first-born." 

1.  God  predestinates  us  to  be  like  Jesus  that  He  might  be  the  first  of  a  new  order 
of  beings,  nearer  to  God  than  any  other.  There  is  no  kinship  between  Jesus  and 
angels.  2.  The  object  of  grace  is  that  there  may  be  some  in  heaven  with  whom 
Christ  can  hold  brotherly  converse.  "  Many  brethren  " — not  that  He  might  be  the 
firstborn  among  many,  but  among  "  many  brethren,"  who  should  be  like  Himself. 
No  doubt,  however,  the  text  means  that  these  will  for  ever  love  and  honour  Christ 
Himself.  We  love  Jesus  now,  and  how  will  we,  when  we  get  to  heaven,  love  and 
adore  Him  as  our  dear  Elder  Brother  with  whom  we  shall  be  on  terms  of  the  closest 
familiarity  and  most  reverent  obedience.  3.  God  was  so  well  pleased  with  His 
Son,  and  saw  such  beauties  in  Him,  that  He  determined  to  multiply  His  image. 
The  face  of  Jesus  is  more  lovely  to  God  than  all  the  worlds ;  therefore  doth  the 
Father  will  to  have  His  Son's  beauty  reflected  in  ten  thousand  mirrors  in  saints 
made  like  to  Him.  Conclusion  :  Keep  your  model  before  you.  You  see  what  you 
are  predestinated  to  be ;  aim  at  it  every  day.  Above  all,  commune  much  with 
Christ.  Communion  is  the  fountain  of  conformity.  They  said  of  Achilles,  that 
when  he  was  a  child  they  fed  him  upon  lion's  marrow,  and  so  made  him  brave ; 
and  of  Nero,  that  he  was  suckled  by  a  woman  of  a  ferocious  nature.  If  we  take  our 
nutriment  from  the  world,  we  shall  be  worldly ;  but,  if  we  live  upon  Christ  and 
dwell  in  Him,  our  conformity  with  Him  shall  be  accomplished,  and  we  shall  be 
recognised  as  brethren  of  that  blessed  family  of  which  Jesus  Christ  is  the  firstborn. 
(G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Conformity  to  Christ  predestinated: — ^I.  The  nature  of  this 
CONFORMITY  with  respcct  to — 1.  His  sonship.  2.  His  moral  character.  3.  His 
ofiQces.  4.  His  suffering  and  humiliation.  6.  His  glory.  U.  The  act  of  God  i» 
ruRSUANCE  OF  THAT  END.    Predestination  is  an  act  agreeable — 1.  To  God's  nature. 

2.  To  the  analogy  of  nature.  3.  To  the  conduct  of  His  providence  in  Christ. 
Conclusion :  Predestination — 1.  Affords  no  comfort  to  those  who  are  not  conformed 
to  Christ.  2.  Does  not  destroy  the  voluntary  character  of  human  actions,  nor 
involve  force  or  compulsion.  {Biblical  Museum.)  Conformity  to  Christ : — I. 
Wherein  this  conformity  consists.  1.  In  afflictions  (Isa.  liii.  3).  This  must  be 
expected  by  us  (John  xv.  20).  He  calls  us  to  no  harder  lot  than  He  Himself 
endured.  2.  In  righteousness  and  holiness  (Phil.  ii.  5  ;  Matt.  zi.  29).  (1)  This  is 
the  end  of  conformity  to  Him  in  our  afflictions  (Heb.  xii.  10).  (2)  This  is  the  way 
to  conformity  to  Him  in  glory  (2  Cor.  iii.  18).  (3)  This  is  a  sign  of  our  communion 
with  Christ  (1  John  ii.  6).  (4)  This  vdll  give  us  boldness  in  the  judgment  (1  John 
Iv.  17).  3.  In  felicity  and  glory.  Conformity  to  Christ  showeth  us  not  only  what 
we  should  do,  but  what  we  may  expect.  As  to — (1)  The  body  (Phil.  iii.  21).  (2)  The 
Boul  (1  Cor.  XV.  4 ;  1  John  iii.  2 ;  Psa.  xvii.  15).  II.  Why  this  is  the  distinction 
between  the  elect  and  others.  1.  This  suiteth  with  God's  design  of  recovering 
man  out  of  his  lapsed  estate,  by  setting  up  a  pattern  of  holiness  and  happiness  in 
our  nature.  (1)  Our  primitive  glory  was  God's  image  (Gen.  i.  26).  (2)  When  this 
glory  was  lost  none  was  fit  to  restore  it  bat  the  Son  of  God  made  man ;  for  thereby 
the  glory  of  the  Father  was  again  visible  in  Him  in  our  nature  (Col.  i.  18  ;  Heb. 
L  3).  Therefore  all  the  heirs  of  promise  are  predestinated  to  be  conformed  to  the 
image  of  His  Son,  or  to  God  appearing  in  their  nature.  2.  Because  they  are  all 
called  after  Christ's  name — Christians.  Now  all  that  are  called  after  Christ's 
name  should  be  framed  after  His  image,  otherwise  they  will  be  called  Christians  to 
the  disgrace  of  Christ.  Surely,  then,  we  ought  to  live  as  if  another  Christ  were 
come  into  the  world  (2  Tim.  ii.  19).  3.  Because  all  that  are  elected  by  God  and 
redeemed  by  Christ  are  sealed  by  the  Spirit  (Epb.  i.  16,  iv.  30 ;  2  Cor.  i.  22). 
What  is  this  but  the  image  of  Christ  impressed  upon  the  soul  by  His  Spirit  ?  4. 
Because  Christ  was  an  example.  It  is  a  great  advantage  not  only  to  have  a  rule, 
bat  •  pattern,  because  man  is  so  prone  to  imitate.      (1)  By  thia  example  out 


CHAP,  vm.]  ROMANS.  187 

pattern  is  the  more  complete.  There  are  some  graces  wherein  we  cannot  be  said 
to  resemble  God,  as  in  humility,  patience,  obedience.  But  in  these  we  have  patt(>rn 
from  Christ  (Matt.  xi.  29  ;  Heb.  v.  8 ;  1  Pet.  i.  2l|.  (2)  It  shows  that  a  holy  life 
is  possible  to  those  who  are  renewed  by  grace.  (3)  It  shows  what  wUl  be  the  issue 
and  success  of  a  life  spent  in  patience  and  holiness  (1  Pet.  i.  21).  Conclusion : 
The  use  is — 1.  For  information.  (1)  What  little  hopes  they  have  to  get  to  heaven 
who  are  not  like  Christ,  (a)  In  holiness,  [b)  In  patience  and  courage  under 
Bufferings.  (2)  How  we  should  know  whether  we  have  the  true  holiness,  viz.,  when 
we  are  such  as  Christ  was  in  the  world.  Some  content  themselves  that  they  are 
not  as  other  men  (Luke  xviii.  11).  It  is  a  sorry  plea,  when  we  have  nothing  to 
bear  up  our  confidence  but  the  badness  of  others.  Others  look  no  higher  than  the 
people  who  are  in  reputation  for  goodness  among  whom  they  live;  whereas  we  are  to 
be  "  holy  as  He  is  holy  "  (1  Pet.  i.  15 ;  1  John  iii.  3).  2.  For  direction.  Now  for 
directions.  (1)  The  foundation  is  laid  in  the  new  birth.  The  Son  of  God  was 
conceived  by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  so  are  we  born  of  water  and  the 
Spirit.  (2)  When  we  are  dedicated  to  God,  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  same  to  Christians 
that  He  was  to  Christ,  a  guide  and  comforter.  (3)  There  is  a  conformity  of  life 
necessary,  that  we  be  such  as  Christ  was — (a)  To  God,  seeking  His  glory  (John 
viii.  50) ;  pleasing  God  (ver.  29) ;  obeying  His  will  (John  vi.  38)  ;  delight- 
ing in  converse  with  Him.  {b)  To  man,  subject  to  His  natural  parents 
(Luke  ii.  51)  ;  to  rulers  (Matt.  xvii.  27) ;  good  to  all  (Acts  x.  38) ;  kumble 
to  inferiors  (John  xiii.  3,  4).  (4)  Eye  your  pattern  much  (Heb.  ai.  2). 
Examine  what  proportion  there  is  between  the  copy  and  the  transcript.  (5) 
Shame  yourselves  for  coming  short  (Heb.  iii.  12-14).  (6)  Use  the  means 
of  communion  with  Him,  especially  the  Lord's  Supper.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.) 
Conformity  to  Christ : — I.  What  is  that  image  of  His  Son  to  which  God  designs 
His  people  shall  be  conformed  ?  His  moral  image ;  it  being  impossible  that  any 
creature,  however  exalted,  can  ever  possess  His  natural  perfections.  "  God  created 
man  in  His  own  image."  But,  alas  i  by  his  fall  he  lost  the  image  of  his  Maker. 
But  it  is  the  purpose  of  God  to  restore  His  people  to  their  original  rectitude ;  and  iu 
the  character  of  the  man  Christ  Jesus  we  behold  the  perfect  pattern  after  which  they 
shall  be  formed — viz.,  love  to  God,  benevolence  toward  man,  holiness,  &c.  Perfect 
conformity,  of  course,  is  not  attainable  in  this  world.  It  is  the  object  of  every  good 
man's  pursuit,  but  none  reach  it  till  they  see  the  Saviour  as  He  is.  There  are  two 
things  especially  which  the  Holy  Spirit  does  in  those  who  are  conformed  to  the 
likeness  of  Christ.  1.  He  enlightens  the  understanding  to  discern  the  beauties  and 
excellences  of  the  Saviour.  Ancient  philosophers  used  to  say  that  if  virtue  was 
embodied  every  one  would  be  in  love  with  her.  But  every  excellence  adorned  the 
character  of  our  Lord,  yet  He  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men.  But  under  the 
Spirit's  illumination  we  shall  readily  admit  that  "  He  is  fairer  than  the  children  of 
men,"  "chief  among  ten  thousand  and  altogether  lovely."  2.  He  produces  love  to 
those  excellences  in  Christ,  which  He  discovers  to  the  mind.  And  "  beholding  the 
glory  of  Christ,  we  are  changed  into  the  same  image,  from  glory  to  glory,  as  by  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord."  II.  By  what  means  is  conformitt  to  Christ  promoted  ? 
1.  The  Scriptures,  which  portray  Christ's  image.  2.  Gospel  ordinances,  such  aa 
preaching  and  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  private  duties,  such  as  self-examination, 
prayer,  &o.  3.  The  constant  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  4.  Sanctified  afflictions. 
in.  What  ends  has  God  in  view  in  effecting  this  transformation  ?  1.  To  manifest 
the  power  and  riches  of  His  grace.  2.  The  honour  of  Christ.  The  purchase  of  His 
blood  shall  be  presented  before  the  throne,  "  not  having  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any 
aach  thing."  3.  The  happiness  of  the  saved.  {Essex  Congregational  Remembrancer.) 
True  conformity  : — By  the  "  Image  of  Christ,"  is  here  meant  the  moral  character  of 
Christ.  And  what  a  character  was  that  1  Goethe  says,  "  I  esteem  the  four  Gospels 
to  be  thoroughly  genuine,  for  there  shines  forth  from  them  the  reflected  splendour 
of  a  sublimity  proceeding  from  the  person  of  Christ,  and  of  as  Divine  a  kind  as  was 
ever  manifest  upon  earth  I  "  Bousseau  confesses,  "  If  the  life  and  death  of  Socrates 
are  those  of  a  sage,  the  life  and  death  of  Jesus  are  those  of  a  God."  And,  to  quote 
only  the  words  of  J.  S.  Mill,  "  Whatever  else  may  be  taken  from  us  by  rational 
criticism,  Christ  is  still  left  a  unique  figure,  not  more  unlike  all  His  precursors  than 
all  His  followers :  a  Divine  person,  a  standard  of  excellence  and  a  model  for  imita- 
tion ;  available  even  to  the  absolute  unbeliever,  and  can  never  be  lost  to  humanity." 
In  the  entire  conformity  to  the  character  of  Christ,  there  is — I.  The  complexb 
BATisFACTioN  OP  THE  HUMAN  BocL.  In  all  moral  existences  there  is  an  ideal 
character.     The  cause  of  moral  misery  is  discordance  with  this  ideal.     Tho 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap.  Tin. 

character  of  Christ  is  this  ideal.  Souls  can  conceive  and  desire  nothing  higher. 
Only  as  men  approximate  to  it  they  grow  in  power,  rise  in  dignity,  and  abound  in 
Batisf action.  II.  Harmont  with  the  human  race.  The  human  race  is  sadly  divided  ; 
it  is  severed  into  numerous  contending  sections.  The  human  house  is  divided 
against  itself  and  cannot  stand.  The  human  body  has  not  only  its  limbs  amputated, 
but  they  are  rattling  one  against  the  other,  and  all  against  itself.  It  writhes  with 
anguish.  A  re-union  is  essential  to  its  health,  and  peace,  and  vigour.  But  what 
can  unite  men  together  ?  Universal  conformity  to  rituals  or  doctrines  V  Such 
conformity  would  be  no  union.  Universal  conformity  to  the  image  of  Christ  would 
unite  the  race.  Let  all  men  be  Christ-like,  and  all  men  will  love  one  another. 
When  aU  men  become  Christ-like,  and  not  before  then,  will  all  contentions  cease, 
all  men  embrace  each  other  as  brethren  and  be  "  gathered  together  "  in  Christ  aB 
members  to  one  body  directed  by  one  will.  If  you  would  divide  men,  preach 
doctrines,  and  policies,  and  ceremonies.  If  you  would  unite  them,  preach  Christ. 
III.  The  grand  purpose  of  the  gospel.  What  is  this?  To  give  men  theological 
knowledge  and  material  civilisation  ?  It  does  this,  but  does  something  infinitely 
grander  :  it  gives  men  the  character  of  Christ.  It  is  to  create  us  anew  in  Christ 
Jesus  in  good  works,  and  to  inspire  us  with  the  spirit  of  Christ,  without  which  we 
are  none  of  His.  Where  Christ's  gospel  does  not  do  this,  it  does  nothing.  The 
testing  question  is — Are  we  hke  Christ  ?  IV.  The  supreme  duty  of  life.  This,  the 
grandest,  is  also  the  most  practical.  1.  We  are  made  by  imitation.  2.  Christ  is  the 
most  imitable  of  all  examples — the  most — (1)  Admirable ;  (2)  Transparent ;  (3) 
Unchanging ;  (4)  Intimate.  He  is  always  with  us.  {D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Portraits 
of  Christ : — There  is  no  surer  sign  of  littleness  than  slavish  imitation ;  yet  this 
is  not  the  case  when  the  models  are  perfect.  No  artist  is  accused  of  a  want 
of  originality  because  he  studies  Greek  sculpture  or  the  works  of  Michael  Angelo  or 
of  Raphael.  It  is  even  so  with  the  imitation  of  Christ.  To  imitate  other  men  is 
weakness  ;  to  copy  Christ  is  strength.  He  who  should  imitate  Him  the  most  nearly, 
would  be  the  most  original  man  upon  earth.  If  I  should  exhort  you  to  imitate  any 
one  else,  I  should  have  a  difficult  task  with  sensible  meu.  There  is  not  a  single 
biography  about  which  you  could  say,  "  I  will  re-live  this  man's  life  precisely  as  he 
lived."  There  is  but  one  model  which  a  man  can  accept  as  his  copy  in  every  jot 
and  tittle.  I.  In  what  sense  is  a  believer  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of 
Christ  ?  1.  Negatively.  (1)  Not  as  a  penny  bears  the  superscription  of  the  Queen. 
There  is  something  more  required  of  us  than  having  in  some  dark  corner  the  name 
of  Jesus  tattooed  into  the  skin  of  our  profession.  (2)  Nor  is  a  cold  morality 
conformity  to  the  image  of  Christ.  A  statue  may  present  the  very  image  of  a  states- 
man or  warrior,  but  it  is  dumb,  and  blind,  and  motionless.  We  are  not  to  be  mere 
dead  pictures  of  Christ ;  we  are  to  be  like  Him  as  living  men.  (3)  Nor  is  it  enough 
to  act  publicly  as  Christ  would  have  acted.  Some  are  ever  asking,  "  Would  Christ 
have  done  this  "  or  "  that  ?  "  And  then  they  answer  it  according  to  their  own 
fancies.  They  see  some  Christian  man  who  is  not  bound  by  the  "  touch  not,  taste 
not,  handle  not,"  of  the  old  Mosaic  spirit,  and  they  cry  over  him,  "  Would  Christ 
have  done  such  a  thing?  "  If  he  laughs  or  keeps  a  carriage,  "  Ah,"  they  say,  "  did 
Christ  ever  do  so  ?  "  And  so  they  think  that  by  putting  on  a  face  that  is  more  marred 
than  that  of  any  man,  they  shall  become  the  very  image  of  Christ  Jesus.  You  might 
put  on  a  garment  without  seam,  put  sandals  on  your  feet,  and  you  might  even  ride 
through  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  upon  "  a  colt  the  foal  of  an  ass  "  ;  but  this  imita- 
tion is  not  to  be  in  mere  externals.  2.  Positively.  We  are  to  be  conformed  to  the 
image  of  Christ.  (1)  In  character,  (a)  In  humility  :"  though  He  was  rich,  yet  for 
our  sakes  became  poor."  (b)  In  diligence  :  in  the  Father's  business,  (c)  In  love, 
(d)  In  devotion  and  prayerfulness.  But  who  can  describe  the  whole  ?  We  can  but 
Bay  that  whereas  one  man  is  admirable  for  his  faith,  another  for  his  patience, 
another  for  his  courage,  and  another  for  his  affection,  He  is  altogether  lovely  I  (2) 
In  suffering.  If  we  are  ever  conformed  to  Christ,  we  must  bear  His  cross.  (3)  In 
glory.  If  we  be  cross  bearers  we  shall  be  crown  wearers.  JI.  Why  should  wb  bb 
iRANSFORMED  AS  UNTO  THE  IMAGE  OF  Christ  ?  Well  may  wc  desirc  to  bear  the  image 
of  Christ,  because — 1.  It  is  that  which  we  lost  in  Eden.  If  Eden  were  a  sorrowful 
loss,  and  if  it  be  desirable  to  obtain  its  paradise  again,  surely  the  image  of  God  mast 
be  desirable  first  and  foremost  of  aU.  2.  It  is  the  ultimate  end  of  God's  decree. 
I  do  not  read  that  the  saints  are  predestinated  to  paradise,  but  to  be  conformed  to 
the  image  of  His  dear  Son,  that  He  may  be  the  first-born  among  many  brethren. 
8.  It  is  the  Spirit's  great  work  in  us.  When  we  are  regenerated,  the  new  man  is 
pat  into  ns;  and  the  new  man  is  renewed  in  the  image  of  Christ  Jesus.    Tha 


OHAf.  Tm.]  ROMANS.  189 

moment  that  a  sinner  believes,  there  is  put  into  him  the  first  germ  of  a  perfect 
Christ ;  it  needs  but  that  it  should  be  nourished  by  the  Spirit,  and  it  will  grow  into 
the  perfect  stature  of  a  man  in  Christ.  4.  It  is  our  highest  glory  on  earth,  and  our 
crowning  privilege  above.  What  more  glorious  for  a  man  than  to  be  like  Christ  ? 
in.  Is  IT  POSSIBLE  ?  "I  have  tried,"  says  one,  "  to  make  myself  like  Christ,  and  I 
cannot."  Indeed,  thou  canst  not.  This  is  art  which  excels  all  art.  Why,  the 
most  wondrous  painters,  who  have  never  failed  before,  always  fail  in  the  portrait 
of  Christ.  They  cannot  paint  the  chief  among  ten  thousand,  the  altogether  lovely. 
Orators,  before  whose  eloquence  men  have  been  swayed  as  the  waves  are  tossed  by 
the  wind,  have  confessed  their  inability  to  reach  the  excellences  of  Christ.  Divinest 
poets  have  been  compelled  to  lay  down  their  harps,  and  relinquish  all  hope  ever  to 
sing  the  song  of  songs  concerning  this  fairest  Solomon.  And  must  it  not  be  a  vastly 
harder  task  for  a  man  to  be  made  like  Christ  ?  Indeed,  if  this  were  our  work,  it 
were  impracticable,  and  we  might  dissuade  you  from  the  task.  But  it  is  not  your 
work,  it  is  God's  work.  It  was  God  who  predestined  us  to  be  conformed  to  the 
image  of  His  Son;  and  God  who  made  the  decree  will  fulfil  it  Himself.  But 
wherein  lies  the  hardness  of  our  being  made  like  Christ?  It  lies — 1.  In  the 
material  to  be  worked  upon.  "  Oh,"  saith  one,  "  there  is  never  a  possibiUty  of  making 
an  image  of  Christ  out  of  me.  I  am  but  a  rough  hewn  stone  of  the  quarry  ;  friable, 
unworkable;  the  chisel  will  only  blunt  its  edge  upon  me."  But  what  matters  the 
material  when  you  know  the  great  artificer  ?  To  Him  all  things  are  possible.  2. 
In  the  world  we  live  in.  "  How  can  I  be  like  Christ  ?  "  saith  another.  "  If  you 
would  build  a  monastery,  and  let  us  all  live  as  Christian  brethren  together,  it  might 
be  possible  ;  but  I  have  to  mix  with  men  that  blaspheme ;  and  my  business  is  s  > 
trying  to  the  temper.  And  then  our  trade  has  so  many  temptations  in  it.  We  get 
one  touch,  as  it  were,  put  into  the  picture  on  a  Sunday,  and  we  think  we  shall  be 
like  Christ  one  day  ;  but  the  devil  puts  six  black  touches  in  during  the  week,  and 
spoils  the  whole  ;  it  is  not  possible  we  should  ever  be  like  Christ."  But  God  says 
it  shall  be  done.  Of  couijse  Satan  will  do  his  best  to  stay  God's  decrees  ;  but  what 
shall  become  of  anything  that  stands  in  the  way  of  God's  decree?  3.  In  the 
perfection  of  the  image.  "If  it  were  to  be  hke  David,  Josiah,  or  some  of  the 
ancient  saints,  I  might  think  it  possible  ;  but  to  be  like  Christ,  who  is  without  spot 
or  blemish,  I  cannot  hope  it.  It  were  presumption  for  such  a  fallen  worm  as  I,  to 
hope  to  be  like  Christ."  And  did  you  know  it,  that  while  you  were  thus  speaking, 
you  were  really  getting  the  thing  you  thought  to  be  impossible  ?  When  you  bowed 
before  that  image  overawed,  do  you  know  it  was  because  you  began  to  be  made  like 
it  ?  When  I  come  to  love  the  image  of  Christ,  it  is  because  I  have  some  measure 
of  likeness  to  it.  And  if  you  as  believers  will  look  much  at  Christ,  you  will  grow 
like  Him.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Conformity  to  Christ : — The  Christian  life  is  the 
only  life  that  will  ever  be  completed.  Apart  from  Christ  the  life  of  man  is  a 
broken  pillar,  the  race  of  men  an  unfinished  pyramid.  One  by  one  in  sight  of 
eternity  all  human  ideals  fall  short,  one  by  one  before  the  open  grave  all  human 
hopes  dissolve.  The  Laureate  sees  a  moment's  light  in  Natore'g  jealousy  for  the 
Type ;  bat  that,  too,  vanishes. 

*•  So  careful  of  the  type,"  but  no 

From  scarified  cUff  and  quarried  stone 
She  cries,  "  A  thousand  types  are  gone; 
I  oare  for  nothing,  all  shall  go." 

AU  shall  go?  No;  one  Type  remains.  "Whom  He  did  foreknow  He  also  did 
predestinate  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  His  Son."  And  "  when  Christ  who 
M  oar  life  shall  appear,  then  shall  ye  also  appear  with  Him  in  glory."  (H. 
Drummond.)  The  glorious  exemplar  : — A  celebrated  philosopher  of  antiquity, 
who  was  nearly  contemporary  with  Christ,  but  who  could  have  known  nothing  of 
what  was  going  on  in  Judaea,  and  who,  alas  1  did  not  always  "  reck  his  own  rede  " — 
wrote  thus  to  a  younger  friend,  as  a  precept  for  a  worthy  life :  •'  Some  good  man 
must  be  singled  out  and  kept  ever  before  our  eyes,  that  we  may  live  as  if  he  were 
looking  on,  and  do  everything  as  if  he  could  see  it."  Let  us  borrow  the  spirit,  if 
not  the  exact  letter,  of  that  precept,  and  address  it  to  oar  young  men.  Keep  ever 
in  your  mind  and  before  your  mind's  eye  the  loftiest  standard  of  character.  Ton 
have  it,  we  need  not  say,  supremely  and  unapproachably,  in  Him  who  spake  as  never 
young  man  spake,  and  lived  as  never  man  lived,  and  who  died  tor  the  sins  of  the 
world     That  character  stands  apart  and  alone.     The  iv.age  of  Christ : — It  has  been 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [Ohaj.  vm. 

said  by  some  one,  suppose  the  sun  in  the  heavens,  which  enlightens,  warms,  and 
fructifies  everything,  were  a  rational  being  that  could  see  everything  within  the 
reach  of  its  beams,  it  would  then  behold  its  own  image  in  every  sea,  in  every  river, 
in  every  lake,  and  in  every  brook — nay,  it  would  even  see  itself  reflected  on  the 
loftiest  mountains  of  ice;  and  would  it  not,  in  the  abundance  of  its  joy  at  such 
glorious  radiance,  forgetting  itself,  embrace  all  these  oceans,  seas,  and  rivers,  nay, 
the  very  glaciers,  in  its  arms,  and  delight  over  them  ?  Thus  Jesus  Christ,  the  Sun 
of  Eighteousness,  beholds  His  image  and  Divine  work  in  every  renewed  soul  as  in 
a  polished  mirror.  (J.  Krummacher.)  Likeness  to  Christ : — Upon  the  occasion  o£ 
Voltaire's  visit  to  England  in  the  last  century  he  became  acquainted  with  the 
saintly  life  and  devoted  labours  of  Fletcher  of  Madeley,  of  whom  he  remarked, 
"  This  is  the  true  likeness  and  character  of  Jesus  Christ."  God's  means  of  con- 
forming us  to  Christ: — A  Christian  friend  calling  upon  a  poor  old  woman  in 
Scotland  expressed  sorrow  at  seeing  her  suffer  so  much  pain.  "  Oh,"  said  Jeanie, 
"  its  just  an  answer  to  prayer.  Ye  see,  I've  long  prayed  to  be  conformed  to  the 
image  of  Christ ;  and,  since  this  is  the  means,  I've  naething  to  do  wi'  the  choosin' 
o'  tbem.  Thai's  the  end  I  seek.  It  is  ours  to  aim  at  meetnesa  for  His  presence, 
and  to  l»ave  it  to  His  wisdom  to  take  His  ain  way  wi'  us.  I  would  rather  suffer 
than  sin  any  day."  "  Developing  "  the  image : — I  was  in  the  photogi-apher's  dark 
little  closet.  He  had  in  his  hand  the  little  plate  of  glass  that  in  the  camera  had 
been  exposed  to  the  light  and  had  caught  upon  its  sensitive  surface  an  image. 
But  there  was  no  appearance  of  an  image.  There  was  nothing  but  a  cloudy  surface. 
•'  If  there's  an  image  there  ?  "  said  the  photographer,  half  inquiringly.  But  it  must 
be  "  developed,"  he  told  me.  He  poured  upon  a  glass  the  chemical  solution,  and 
in  a  moment  what  a  weird  change  I  Out  of  the  cloud  I  saw  the  outlines  of  a  face 
stealing,  breaking  its  way  through  all  obscuring  shadows,  growing  clearer  and 
clearer,  till  in  a  moment  the  artist  took  the  plate  to  a  window,  and  there  it  was 
most  plainly,  the  picture  of  a  face.  Developing  the  image  !  I  have  often  thought 
of  it  in  its  spiritual  significance.  God's  work  in  human  souls  will  vary.  In  all  Hia 
children  there  is  the  same  positive  fact  of  the  receiving  of  Christ's  image  upon  the 
sensitive  surface  of  their  hearts.  In  some  that  likeness  comes  at  once  to  the  front 
of  a  man's  life.  You  see  it  in  the  very  look.  You  hear  it  in  the  voice.  Yoa 
almost  feel  it  in  the  grasp  of  the  hand,  so  warm,  true,  and  sympathising.  Best  of 
all  you  see  it  in  his  life,  a  life  flaming  in  its  consecration  from  the  very  start.  There 
is  Christ,  you  say.  To-day  I  plead  for  the  souls  where  a  work  of  grace  has  begun, 
and  yet  it  may  be  very  imperfect.  You  believe  something  is  there,  and  yet  faith 
may  be  perplexed  at  times  when  it  would  afiirm  that  work.  There  are  incon- 
sistencies in  the  life,  and  you  sometinaes  doubt  if  the  Lord's  mark  is  upon  the 
soul.  Still  you  can  but  feel  that  the  person  has  come  in  contact  with  Christ,  has 
caught  His  image,  and,  though  that  image  is  under  a  cloud,  it  only  needs  to  be 
developed.  I  plead  for  these  souls.  I  ask  for  patience  in  their  behalf.  Let  us  be 
willing  to  wait,  just  as  God  waits  for  the  first  faint  tint  of  dawn  to  kindle  into  the 
flaming  glory  of  sunrise,  for  a  seed  to  expand  into  a  shoot,  for  yonr  soul  and  mine, 
BO  wayward  and  capricious,  to  slowly,  slowly  come  round  to  a  place  at  His  feet. 
Thomas  Erskine  said,  "If  we  are  faithful  and  patient,  we  shall  have  the  life  God 
taught  to  us  and  nourished  in  ns.  But  we  are  in  such  a  hurry ;  we  think 
something  must  be  done  immediately."  We  may  apply  these  wise  words  to  our 
dealings  with  others,  and  so  have  patience  with  their  imperfections.  {R.  A.  Rand.) 
The  model  and  the  facsimile : — I.  The  tkanscendent  model.  The  Word  of  God 
declares  that  all  His  reconciled  children  are  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  His 
Son.  The  life  of  Jesus  was  a  plan  of  God.  A  sculpture  once,  on  being  asked  why 
he  smiled  on  a  rough  block  of  marble  which  was  taken  into  his  studio,  replied, 
"Because  I  see  an  angel  in  it  and  I  am  going  to  liberate  her."  Well,  when  God 
looked  upon  us,  though  we  were  ugly  with  sin,  yet  in  the  fulness  of  His  love  He 
saw  in  us  the  image  of  His  Son.  Men  sometimes  despair  of  human  nature,  but  our 
Heavenly  Father  keeps  on  working,  and  in  due  time  His  reconciled  children  shall 
be  conformed  to  the  transcendent  Model.  The  strokes  of  the  spiritual  chisel  may 
cut  deep  at  times,  but  it  is  a  part  of  the  plan  to  make  you  perfect.  We  are  not  told 
the  features  of  God's  Son,  but  of  this  we  may  feel  assured,  that  the  face  of  Jesua 
was  lovely.  Attracted  by  the  love  which  shone  in  His  face,  little  children  climbed  His 
knee,  and  fallen  men  and  erring  women  gave  up  their  sins  wnd  became  Hia  disciples. 
We  are  not,  however,  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  His  face  ;  but  to  be  trans- 
formed to  the  spirit  of  His  life.  The  same  rudder  that  directed  the  spirit  which 
made  His  life  Divine  is  also  to  directs  ours.     Consider — 1.  His  perfect  life.    We 


CHAP,  vni.]  ROMANS.  191 


cannot  suggest  the  least  improvement  in  it,  and  there  are  no  flaws  or  stains  to  wish 
to  be  taken  away.  2.  His  submission  to  the  will  of  God.  3.  His  true  worship  of 
God.  His  life  was  one  psalm  of  the  love  of  God.  4.  His  consecration  to  God.  5. 
His  unselfishness.  Though  He  was  rich,  for  our  sakes  He  became  poor.  6.  His 
cross.  We  have  never  heard  of  any  but  Jesus  who  was  willing  not  only  to  bear 
the  penalty  of  others,  but  the  guilt  of  their  sins?  II.  The  inestimable  privilege 
OF  BEING  CONFORMED  TO  THE  IMAGE  OF  Chbist.  When  He  was  transfigured,  He  was  so 
surpassingly  beautiful  that  the  disciples  cried,  "  Master,  it  is  good  for  us  to  be  here !  " 
When  the  sun  goes  down  on  a  dark  and  duU  evening,  it  sometimes  lights  up  the 
clouds  just  above  your  head,  and  makes  them  golden  with  beauty.  It  is  like  the 
time  when  Stephen  the  martyr  was  being  stoned  to  death.  While  he  knelt  on  the 
ground,  he  looked  up  into  the  heavens  and  cried,  "I  see  Jesus  standing  on  the 
right  hand  of  God."  And  the  light  from  heaven  shone  with  such  splendour  upon 
his  face  that  it  was  like  that  of  an  angel.  And  when  we  see  Jesus,  we  shall  be 
like  Him.  We  shall  not  be  made  into  His  image  like — 1.  A  picture,  which  a  painter 
desires  above  all  things  be  placed  in  a  right  light.  Some  people  can  only  exhibit 
holy  charity  in  the  house  of  prayer;  but  the  reconciled  children  of  God  are  to  be 
conformed  to  the  image  of  Jesus  on  the  Exchange,  in  the  factory,  and  the  street. 
We  do  not  need  to  be  put  into  a  particular  light.  2.  A  statue.  When  we  look  at 
the  figure  of  Wellington,  who  can  imagine  that  grim  statue  ever  crying,  "Up 
Guards,  and  at  'em  "  ?  We  are  to  have  life  and  vigour.  3.  An  actor,  when  he  ia 
on  the  stage,  feels  for  the  moment  that  he  is  really  the  man  he  is  representing  ;  but 
eventually  goes  home  a  common  man.  But  the  true  Christian  does  not  wear  a 
Beamless  robe  and  sandals;  he  is  a  living  embodiment  of  Christ.  (IF.  Birch.) 
The  true  ideal  of  manhood : — I.  Christ  is  the  grand  ideal  of  manhood.  "  The  image 
of  His  Son."  Not  the  corporeal  nor  the  mental  image,  but  the  moral  character. 
This  is — 1.  A  perfect  ideal.  (1)  He  was  without  blemish.  "  He  did  no  sin."  His 
judge  could  find  no  fault  in  Him  ;  and  He  challenged  His  enemies  to  convince  Him 
of  sin.  (2)  He  possessed  every  virtue,  grace,  lofty  aspiration.  There  have  been 
men  who  have  had  many  virtues,  but  they  have  been  associated  with  many  salient 
imperfections.  Socrates,  a  model  in  some  respects,  was  so  inconsistent  that,  having 
epent  his  life  in  exposing  popular  superstitions,  his  last  request  was  that  a  bird 
might  be  sacrificed  to  Esculapius.  Cicero  and  Seneca  had  many  virtues  ;  but  the 
one  was  infected  with  vanity,  and  the  other  was  mean-spirited  and  greedy  to  a  fault. 
So  with  the  best  of  the  old  Hebrew  men  ;  and  even  apostles  had  their  faults.  But 
you  cannot  put  your  hand  on  a  single  flaw  in  Christ's  character,  nor  point  to  an 
excellence  that  did  not  dwell  in  Him.  (3)  Not  only  had  He  all  virtues,  but  all  Hia 
virtues  were  harmonious.  There  is  in  Him  an  exquisite  balancing  of  the  passive 
and  the  active,  the  masculine  and  the  feminine  virtues.  He  is  indignant,  but 
never  boisterous;  tender,  but  never  weak;  resolute,  but  never  obstinate;  con- 
descending, but  never  familiar.  2.  It  is  a  soul-approving  Ideal.  By  the  laws  of 
man's  moral  constitution  he  is  bound  to  approve  of  this  Ideal.  A  man  wants 
a  mansion ;  the  architect  gives  him  a  plan  so  accordant  with  his  own  taste 
that  he  is  bound  to  accept  it.  Another  man  wants  something  cut  in  marble  ;  the 
sculptor  presents  an  object  that  comes  up  to  his  loftiest  ideas,  and  be  is  bound  to 
accept  it.  So  man  wants  a  model  character;  and  God  gives  him  an  Ideal  that 
meets  his  highest  conceptions  of  the  morally  beautiful,  and  he  is  bound  to  accept 
Him,  And  aU  men  alike.  There  are  ideals  in  architecture,  painting,  poetry, 
costume,  which  some  may  admire,  but  others  loathe.  But  here  is  an  Ideal  that 
commends  itself  to  the  deepest  soul  of  every  man.  It  fits  every  soul — no  soul  too 
email  for  it,  no  one  too  large.  It  is  literally  "  the  Desire  of  all  nations,"  that  for 
which  humanity  has  been  hungering  through  all  ages  and  lands.  3.  It  is  a 
universally  attainable  Ideal.  A  man  may  give  an  ideal  of  painting,  and  to 
practical  men,  and  they  may  say  it  is  too  diflQcult  to  work  out ;  but  not  so  with 
this  Ideal  of  character.  The  most  imitable  character  is  that  which  is — (1)  The 
most  admirable.  We  imitate  only  what  we  admire.  (2)  The  most  transparent. 
There  are  characters  so  misty  that  you  cannot  discern  the  principles  that  rule 
them  ;  these  you  cannot  imitate.  (3)  The  most  unchangeable.  A  fickle  character 
would  be  beyond  your  imitation.  Christ  answers  in  the  highest  degree  all  these 
conditions.  II.  Man's  conformity  to  this  Ideal  is  God's  predestination.  Whom  did 
He  foreknow  ?  Not  some  men,  but  aU  men ;  not  some  things,  but  all  things.  The 
idea  is,  that  all  the  men  He  foreknew  He  ordained  to  have  one  grand  Ideal  of 
character  to  aim  at  and  to  conform  to.  God  has  predestinated  that  all  men,  to  have 
health,  must  attend  to  certain  conditions;  that  all  men  shall  commence  theis 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nn. 

existence  in  infancj,  shall  go  on  through  the  varions  stages,  and  in  the  end  go  back 
to  dust.  And  likewise  God  has  foreordained  that  all  men  shall  form  their  character 
after  the  Ideal  of  excellence  embodied  in  Christ.  This  is  the  grand  purpose  of  God 
in  relation  to  humanity.  Conclusion :  Learn  from  this — 1.  The  transcendent  value 
of  the  four  Gospels.  In  other  parts  of  the  Bible  you  are  brought  into  the  presence 
of  legislators,  historians,  prophets,  apostles.  But  here  you  are  brought  into  the 
presence  of  Christ  Himself.  Elsewhere  you  have  scattered  star-beams ;  but  here 
you  have  the  Sun  Himself.  2.  The  grand  work  of  the  Christian  preacher.  To 
exhibit  Christ,  who  is  the  Chief  among  ten  thousand,  and  the  altogether  lovely, 
and  to  urge  men  to  love  Him.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  God,  in  the  moral  restoration 
of  man: — This  passage  has  been  the  battleground  of  Calvinism  and  Arminianism. 
The  best  way  to  get  a  clear  idea  of  such  controverted  passages,  is  to  ignore  the 
conflicting  opinions  that  they  have  started,  and  study  them  in  the  light  of  common 
sense,  the  light  of  their  context,  the  light  of  the  general  scope  of  biblical  teaching, 
and  in  humble  dependence  upon  the  Spirit  for  help.  If  we  look  at  these  verses  in 
this  way  we  shall  see  nothing  that  is  not  found  in  connection  with  every  other 
Divine  operation.  Any  ^ork  which  an  intelligent  being  has  accomplished — whether 
it  be  in  husbandry,  architecture,  legislation,  or  science — always  implies  an  executive 
agency,  a  presiding  plan,  and  a  previous  knowledge  on  which  the  plan  is  based. 
These  three  things  we  have  in  the  text  concerning  God,  in  the  work  of  man'a 
restoration.  The  result  comes  out  of  the  agency  ;  the  agency  comes  out  of  the  plan ; 
the  plan  comes  out  of  a  previous  knowledge.  We  infer — I.  That  man's  bestobation 
IS  THE  BEsuLT  OF  God's  AGENCY.  God — 1.  Calls — ^1)  By  the  admonitions  of  con- 
ecience ;  (2)  By  the  events  of  history ;  (.S)  By  the  mmistry  of  His  word ;  (4)  By  the 
strivings  of  His  Spirit.  He  calls  sometimes  through  the  thundering  voice  of  law,  and 
sometimes  through  the  melting  accents  of  love.  2.  Justifies.  Justification  is  a 
forensic  term,  but  it  does  not  convey  forensic  ideas.  An  accused  person  in  the  court 
of  human  judicature  is  justified  when  the  verdict  of  "  Not  guilty  "  is  returned ;  and 
he  may  be  pronounced  "  Not  guilty  "  on  three  different  grounds — (1)  Actual  innocence. 

(2)  Regretted  accident.    He  might  have  committed  the  act,  but  contrary  to  wish. 

(3)  Judicial  ignorance,  or  failure  on  the  part  of  the  judge  and  jury  to  get  at  all  the 
evidence.  But  no  man,  before  God,  could  be  pronounced  "  Not  guilty  "  on  any  of 
these  grounds.  All  that  evangelical  justification  means  is,  that  God  treats  the 
guilty  as  if  they  had  never  sinned — overlooking  the  past.  3.  Glorifies.  Man's 
body,  intellect,  character,  and  condition,  are  now  inglorious.  God  will  glorify  the 
whole.  "We  shall  belike  Him."  H.  That  God's  agencyis  governed  by  a  plan.  Some 
beings  act  from  instinct,  impulse,  habit ;  but  God  acts  from  plan.  1.  What  is  this 
plan  ?  It  is  to  save  men.  (1)  By  assimilating  them  to  the  image  of  Christ.  "  He 
also  did  predestinate,"  &c. ;  that  they  should  be  governed  by  the  same  principles 
that  govern  Him ;  animated  by  His  Spirit ;  consecrated  to  the  same  great  cause 
for  which  He  gave  His  life.  (2)  By  subjugating  them  to  the  authority  of  Christ. 
'•  That  He  might  be  the  first-bom  among  many  brethren  1  "  2.  Now,  Paul  would 
have  referred  God's  agency  in  any  other  department  to  an  eternal  plan.  As  a  pious 
man,  he  would  refer  everything  that  was  good  to  God  ;  and  as  an  intelligent  man,  he 
womd  refer  everything  to  the  plan  of  God.  Had  he  been  writing  on  agriculture, 
he  would  have  traced  every  blade  and  flower  and  plant  that  grew  to  the  predestina- 
tion of  God.  But  he  was  writing  of  man's  salvation,  and  it  was  only  to  his  purpose 
to  refer  it  to  predestination  in  connection  with  that.  Predestination  is  not  a  dream 
of  the  schoolmen,  or  a  dogma  of  Calvin,  but  an  eternal  law  of  the  universe.  IH. 
That  God'b  plan  is  founded  on  a  thobough  foeeknowledge  of  the  saved.  "  Whom 
He  did  foreknow  "  does  not  refer  to  all  creatures,  although  God  does  foreknow 
all  creatures.  Nor  does  it  refer  to  mankind  in  general,  although  God  does  foreknow 
all  that  shall  happen  to  all  men.  But  it  refers  to  those  spoken  of  in  the  preceding 
verse,  and  the  whole  chapter,  as  loving  Him,  as  being  His  sons,  &o.  Note,  in 
relation  to  this  foreknowledge — (1)  That  it  does  not  interfere  with  the  free  agency 
of  the  good.  A.  might  have  such  a  thorough  knowledge  of  B.'s  temperament  and 
tendencies,  that  he  might  predict  with  certainty  that  B.  would,  under  certain  cir- 
cumstances, adopt  a  certain  line  of  action ;  yet  if  B.  knew  not  the  knowledge  of  A., 
he  oould  not  by  any  possibility  have  any  influence  upon  his  conduct.  The 
fact,  in  like  manner,  that  Qod  knows  all  about  me,  all  that  I  shall  eyer 
do,  has  no  necessary  influence  upon  my  line  of  action.  The  conduct  of 
the  Jews  at  the  crucifixion  of  Christ  is  an  illustration.  (2)  That  it  is  a  ground 
of  security  for  the  good.  We  often  form  plans  from  partial  knowledge,  and 
no  sooner  endeavour  to  earry  them  out  than  circumstanceB,  never  foreBeexi« 


«HAP.  vni.]  BOMANS.  193 

baffle  as;  so  that  we  are  obliged  to  abandon  onr  projects.     Bat  not  so  with 
God.  His  plan  is  based  upon  a  thoroagh  knowledge  of  all  f  utare  contingencies.  {Ibid.) 

Ver.  30.  Moreover,  whom  He  did  predestinate,  them  He  also  called. — The  golden 
chain : — This  consists  of  several  links.  The  middle  portion  of  it  hangs  down  to 
earth,  and  comes  into  the  view  of  men  ;  bat  the  ends  of  it  are  fastened  to  the  two 
eternities  and  are  both  hidden.  Note  : — I.  Thb  unbeoken  succession  of  steps  in 
THE  ACCOMPLISHMENT  OF  THB  OBioiNAit  PT7BP0SE  OF  GoD.  Calling  and  JHstification 
are  the  principal  links,  bat  not  all  the  links  ;  they  are  sufficient,  however,  to  show 
that  between  the  eternity  of  purpose  and  the  eternity  of  glorification  there  is  no 
flaw  or  fracture.  We  gather  from  this  view  of  the  subject  that  to  get  possession  of 
any  one  link  is  to  get  all  the  links — the  unseen  as  well  as  the  seen — and  con- 
sequently  the  whole  chain.  "  Calling  "  carries  with  it  "  justification  "  and  glorifica- 
tion on  the  one  hand,  and  predestination  on  the  otber.  II.  The  co-extensive 
UNiFOBMiTT  OF  ITS  soccESSivE  BEALisATioNg.  Every  link  of  the  chain  is  equally 
comprehensive  in  the  space  it  covers.  The  same  subjects  are  handed  over  at  every 
stage  of  the  progress  to  the  stage  that  follows.  There  is  no  reduction  of  the  number 
as  the  process  goes  on ;  and  if  we  leave  out  all  intermediate  steps,  we  may  say, 
"  Whom  He  did  foreknow,  them  He  also  glorified."  Any  two  terms  of  the  series  may 
be  brought  into  an  equation,  and  if  we  wish  to  satisfy  ourselves  of  our  predestina- 
tion, or  of  our  salvation  hereafter,  then  we  have  only  to  be  clear  about  our  interest 
in  the  calling,  or  in  the  justification.  The  unknown  quantity  may  thus  be 
determined  by  the  known,  because  they  are  equivalents.  Observe  that  "  glorified," 
like  all  the  other  expressions,  is  in  the  past  tense.  And  this  is  used  to  express  the 
certain  and  inseparable  connection  between  the  different  progressive  steps  in  the 
enumeration,  or  because  what  God  has  determined  to  do  may  be  said  to  be  done 
already.  There  is  no  tense  to  express  the  activity  of  God,  with  whom  past,  present, 
and  future  are  an  eternal  now.  But  besides  this,  in  Christ  our  salvation  is  always 
complete  (Eph.  ii.  5,  6).  III.  How  entirely  fbom  beginning  to  end  the  wholb 
woBK  IS  atteebuted  TO  GoD  1  Man  acts  no  part.  He  is  merely  the  subject.  If  we 
turn,  however,  to  chap.  x.  14,  we  have  another  chain  which  also  begins  with  God 
smd  ends  in  glory ;  but  there  the  aspect  is  human.  Both  are  important.  God 
works  by  instruments,  but  the  success  of  the  instruments  are  in  His  hands.  Both 
these  passages  require  to  be  taken  together,  in  order  to  furnish  a  complete  account 
of  the  process  of  salvation.  Conclusion :  Do  not  permit  yourselves  to  be 
bewildered  by  the  deep  things  of  God's  eternal  purpose  and  decrees.  Bather  seek 
to  strike  into  the  line  of  salvation  at  the  calling  of  God.  God  calls  you  to  believe 
on  Christ,  and  if  "  you  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  you  shall  be  saved,"  and 
only  as  you  make  your  calling  sure  do  you  make  your  election  sure.  (P.  Strutt). 
Predestination  and  calling : — The  book  of  God's  decrees  is  closed  against  the 
curiosity  of  man.  "  The  lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  •  only '  hath  prevailed  to  open 
the  book  and  break  the  seven  seals  thereof."  How  then  am  I  to  know  whether  I 
am  predestinated  or  no  ?  Until  this  question  be  answered  my  heart  cannot  rest.  The 
answer  is  that  God  has  published  that  page  of  the  sacred  decree  whereon  the 
character  of  the  predestinated  is  recorded  in  His  Word :  "  Whom  He  did  pre- 
destinate, them  He  also  called,"  And  if  thou  be  called,  it  follows  as  a  natural 
inference  thou  art  predestinated.  There  are  two  kinds  of  callings.  The  first  is  the 
general  call,  which  is  given  to  every  one  that  heareth  the  Word  (Matt. ;  Isa.  Iv.  1 ; 
Prov.  viii.  4) ;  but  the  call  of  the  text  is  personal.  It  is  one  that  is  heard  and 
obeyed.  Note : — I.  Illdstkations  of  the  call.  1.  It  is  precisely  similar  to  the 
case  of  Lazarus.  The  sinner  is  dead  in  sin.  Sovereign  mercy  comes  and  cries, 
"  Come  forth  !  "  and  that  man  lives.  "  Well,"  cries  one,  "  but  what  are  the  words 
which  Christ  uses  when  He  calls  a  sinner  from  death  ?  "  Why,  any  words.  There 
came  unto  this  hall  a  man  to  whom  the  simple  reading  of  the  hymn,  "  Jesus,  lover 
of  my  soul,"  was  the  means  of  his  quickening.  He  said  within  himself,  "  Does 
Jesus  love  me  ?  then  I  must  love  Him."  2.  While  the  sinner  is  dead  in  sin,  he  is 
alive  enough  to  oppose  God,  as  we  see  in  the  case  of  Saul  of  Tarsus.  Let  Peter  say, 
"  Saul,  why  dost  thou  oppose  Christ?  The  time  shall  come  when  thou  shalt  yet 
be  His  disciple,"  and  Saul  would  laugh  him  to  scorn.  But  when  Christ  dealt  with 
him,  he  fell  to  the  ground,  and  in  a  few  days  the  persecutor  becomes  the  preacher. 
3.  The  effectual  call  may  be  illustrated  in  its  sovereignty  by  the  case  of  Zaccheus. 
There  were  many  better  men  in  the  city  than  he.  Why  call  him  ?  Simply  because 
the  call  of  God  comes  to  unworthy  sinners,  4.  To  illustrate  this  call  in  its  eflects, 
Jake  the  case  of  Abraham.     What  a  trial  to  Abraham's  faith  when  he  had  to  leave 

VOL.  n.  18 


194  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vm. 

all  that  was  so  dear  to  him,  and  go  he  knew  not  whither !  And  yet  God  had  % 
goodly  land  for  him,  and  intended  greatly  to  bless  him.  6.  "When  effectual  calling 
comes  to  a  man,  at  first  he  may  not  know  it.  You  remember  the  case  of  Samuel, 
who  mistook  God's  voice  for  Eli's.  II.  And  now  as  a  matter  of  examination  let 
each  man  judge  himself  by  certain  characteristics  of  the  calling.  It  is — 1.  A  holy 
calling  (2  Tim.  i.  9).  If  you  are  Uving  in  sin,  you  are  not  called.  2.  A  high  calling 
(Phil.  iii.  13, 14).  Has  then  your  calling  lifted  up  your  heart  and  set  it  upon  things 
above  ?  3.  A  heavenly  calUug  (Heb.  iii.  1).  Is  thy  calling  a  call  to  heaven  as  weU 
as  from  heaven  ?  4.  A  caU,  not  to  the  righteous,  but  to  sinners.  5.  A  call  out 
of  darkness  into  God's  marvellous  light  (1  Pet.  ii.  9).  6.  A  call  to  liberty  (Gal.  v. 
15).  7.  A  call  to  the  fellowship  of  Christ  (1  Cor.  i.  9).  III.  Consolation.  1.  If  I 
am  called,  then  I  am  predestinated,  there  is  no  doubt  about  it.  The  scheme  of 
salvation  is  like  the  chain  which  we  see  at  horse-ferries,  fixed  into  one  staple  on 
this  side  of  the  river,  and  into  another  at  the  other  side,  but  the  greater  part  of  the 
chain  is  under  water.  You  only  see  it  as  the  boat  moves  on,  and  as  the  chain  is 
drawn  out  of  the  water  by  the  force  that  propels  the  boat.  I  can  see  that  part  of 
the  chain,  which  is  named  "  calling,"  but  blessed  be  God,  that  is  joined  to  the  side 
that  is  called  "  election,"  and  to  the  side  called  "  glorification."  2.  If  a  man  be 
called,  he  will  certainly  be  saved  at  last  (chap.  xi.  29).  (C.  H.  Spurgeon). 
Called  of  God : — I.  The  nature  of  this  calling.  There  are  two  calls  of  God, 
1.  The  outward  call  of  the  gospel.  "  Many  are  called,  but  few  are  chosen."  To 
know  how  ineffectual  this  often  is,  I  need  only  look  around  me.  How  many  sat 
here  ten,  twenty,  forty  years  ago,  and  here  they  still  sit,  quite  unaffected  (Ezek. 
xxxiii.  31,  32).  2.  An  inward  and  effectual  call.  By  this  call  the  sinner's  heart 
becomes  softened,  his  mind  enlightened,  his  will  subdued.  While  others  play  about 
the  net  of  the  gospel,  he  enters  into  it,  and  is  saved  thereby.  The  outward  call 
often  brings  men  into  the  profession  of  Christ ;  the  inward  call  always  brings  men 
into  the  possession  of  Christ.  It  is  a  call — (1)  From  sin  to  holiness.  (2)  From  the 
world  to  Christ.  (3)  From  danger  to  glory.  U.  The  means  by  which  this  is 
EFFECTED.  1.  The  Operations  of  God's  providence.  (1)  Everything  in  nature  God 
makes  to  sptak ;  the  heavens  declare  His  glory,  the  firmament  showeth  forth  His 
handiwork.  (2)  Then  there  is  the  voice  of  conscience,  and  God  makes  this  a  means 
of  effectual  calling,  by  making  it  speak  so  loud  that  the  man  cannot  resist.  (3) 
Sometimes  He  employs  the  voice  of  affliction.  "Hear  ye  the  rod,  and  Him  that 
hath  appointed  it."  2.  The  preaching  of  the  gospel.  3.  The  influences  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  Ministers  knock  at  the  door  of  men's  hearts,  but  the  Spirit  keeps  the  key; 
and  He  unlocks  the  door  and  enters  in.  III.  The  pkopekties  of  this  calling.  1. 
It  is  a  powerful  call.  The  Turkish  ambassador  wished  to  see  Mahomet  the  second's 
scimitar,  by  which  it  was  said  he  had  accomplished  such  wonderful  exploits  ;  when 
he  showed  it  to  him,  he  said,  "  I  don't  see  anything  different  in  it  from  others." 
And  he  immediately  replied,  •'  The  virtue  of  the  weapon  depends  upon  the  strength 
of  my  arm,  and  the  wisdom  and  the  power  with  which  I  have  used  it."  It  is 
precisely  so  with  the  gospel.  In  this  call  nothing  less  than  "  the  arm  of  the  Lord  " 
will  do.  Must  not  that  be  mighty  which  conquers  the  proud  heart,  subdues  the 
stubborn  will,  and  enlightens  the  dark  understanding  ?  2.  A  heavenly  call  (Heb. 
iii.  1).  8.  "  A  high  calling  "  (Phil.  iii.  14).  4.  An  immutable  calling  (chap.  xi.  29). 
Conclusion:  Admire  and  magnify — 1.  The  exceeding  grace  of  God  towards  you 
in — (1)  The  freeness  of  this  call.  (2)  The  honour  of  this  call.  2.  Take  pains 
clearly  to  ascertain  your  calling.  Two  things  certify  it.  He  who  is  called  of  God 
— (1)  Eesponds  to  God's  call.  (2)  Is  deaf  to  other  calls.  And  further,  shall  I  not 
say,  pity  such  as  are  uncalled  ?  3.  Those  who  feel  you  are  stiU  uncalled,  see  the 
misery  of  your  condition.  It  is  said  that  the  cure  is  half  effected  when  the 
physician  or  the  patient  knows  what  causes  the  disease.  (1)  Put  yourselves  in  the 
way  to  be  called.  The  same  feet  that  carry  you  to  the  theatre,  and  to  places  of 
wretchedness,  can  bring  you  to  the  house  of  God.  (2)  Beg  of  God  to  call  you 
effectually.  ({J.  Sherman.)  The  folly  of  exclusively  regarding  predestination : — 
Did  you  ever  hear  of  a  certain  Ludovic,  an  Italian  philosopher,  who  had  imbibed 
the  idea  of  predestination  to  the  exclusion  of  every  other  truth?  He  could  see 
nothing  but  fate,  and  thought  religious  activity  useless.  A  physician  who  attended 
him  during  his  sickness,  a  godly  man,  desiring  to  convince  him  of  his  error,  said 
to  him  as  he  stood  by  his  bedside,  "  I  shall  not  send  you  any  medicine,  I  shall  no* 
attend  to  you ;  in  fact,  I  shall  not  call  any  more,  because  if  you  are  to  live  you  will 
live,  and  LE  you  are  to  die  yon  will  die  ;  and  therefore  it  is  of  no  use  iny  attending 
to  you."  He  went  his  way,  but  in  the  watches  of  the  night,  Ludovic,  who  had  been 


eHAT.  nn.]  ROMANS.  195 

the  slave  of  a  notion,  tamed  it  over  and  saw  the  folly  of  it :  he  saw  that  there 
were  other  truths  besides  predestination,  and  he  acted  like  a  sane  man.  As  God 
accomplishes  the  healing  of  the  sick  by  the  use  of  medicines,  He  usually 
accomplishes  also  the  saving  of  souls  by  the  means  of  grace ;  and  as  I,  not  knowing 
whether  I  am  elected  to  be  healed  or  not,  yet  go  to  the  physician,  so  I,  not  knowing 
whether  I  am  elect  to  be  saved  or  not,  yet  will  go  to  Jesus  as  He  bids  me  go,  and 
pat  my  trust  in  Him,  and  I  hope  I  shall  be  accepted  in  Him.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Seeking  and  election  go  together: — There  was  wit  and  wisdom,  and  a  whole  volume 
of  thought  in  the  old  negro's  reply  to  Governor  Vance,  who  asked  him,  "  Well,  now, 
Joe,  do  you  really  believe  in  this  election  of  God  that  you  speak  of  ?  "  "  Indeed  I  do, 
Massa  Vance,"  was  the  serious  reply.  '•  Well,  do  you  think  I  am  elected  to  be  saved?  " 
••  Scasly  know,  Massa ;  but  I  never  heard  of  any  one  being  'lected  who  wasn't  a  candi- 
date." And  there  is  the  point — humble  seeking  and  election  to  grace  go  together. 
Whom  He  called,  them  He  also  justified. — Of  the  benefits  of  effectual  calling  : — I.  In 
THIS  LIFE.  1.  There  are  three  leading  benefits  which  Christians  partake  of  here. 
(1)  They  are  all  justified  (chap.  viii.  1).  (2)  They  are  all  adopted  children  of  God 
(Eph.  i.  5).  They  are  brought  out  of  the  devil's  family,  and  made  members  of  the 
blood-royal  of  heaven  (Eph.  iii.  15).  (3)  They  are  all  sanctified  (1  Cor.  i.  30 ; 
1  Thess.  iv.  7).  2.  There  are  other  benefits  which  accompany  or  flow  from  these. 
For  these  come  not  alone,  but  each  of  them  is  the  opening  of  a  treasure  to  the 
called,  the  striking  up  of  a  fountain,  that  runs  out  in  many  streams  (Eph.  i.  8). 
(1)  Reconciliation  with  God  (Rom.  v.  1).  (2)  Access  to  God,  as  children  to  a 
Father  (Eph.  iii.  12).  The  war  being  ended,  and  peace  concluded,  the  communica- 
tion betwixt  heaven  and  earth  is  opened.  (3)  Freedom  from  the  slavery  of  sin  and 
Satan  (John  viii.  32).  (4)  A  right  to  eternal  life  (Rom.  viii.  17  ;  Acts  xx.  32 ;  2  Cor. 
v.  1).  II.  In  the  life  to  come.  These  are  comprehended  in  one  word,  "  glorifica- 
tion." At  death  the  converted  soul  is  received  into  heaven ;  at  the  last  day  his 
body  will  be  gloriously  raised,  and  both  soul  and  body  made  perfectly  happy  for 
ever  (2  Thess.  ii.  14).  III.  Uses.  1.  Of  information.  This  doctrine  lets  us  see— 
(1)  That  the  gospel  is  the  best  news  that  ever  was  heard  in  the  world,  and  the  most 
excellent  offer  that  ever  was  made  to  poor  sinners  (Eph.  iii.  8).  (2)  That  God  deals 
very  liberally  and  kindly  with  His  people  that  answer  His  call.  They  get  much  in 
hand,  and  yet  far  more  in  hope  (Psa.  Ixxxiv.  11),  and  they  can  never  be  shaken  out 
of  their  privileges  (Rom.  xi.  29  ;  Heb.  xii.  28).  (3)  Whatever  men  lose  by  complying 
with  and  following  the  gospel-call,  they  are  gainers  (Phil.  iii.  8).  He  was  a  wise 
merchant  that  sold  aU  to  buy  the  pearl  of  great  price.  2.  Of  exhortation.  (1)  To 
unconverted  sinners.  Comply  with  the  gospel-call,  (a)  While  ye  do  not,  ye  have 
no  part  or  lot  in  these  benefits.  Ye  are  not  justified  ;  the  sentence  of  condemnation 
is  standing  in  force  against  you  (Gal.  iii.  10;  John  iii.).  Ye  are  none  of  God's 
children,  but  of  the  devil's  (John  viii.  44).  Ye  are  not  sanctified.  A  form  of 
godliness  ye  may  have,  but  the  power  of  it  ye  are  strangers  to.  (6)  If  ye  will  coma 
to  Christ  on  His  call,  ye  shall  partake  of  all  these  benefits.  If  your  sins  were  never 
so  great  and  many,  they  shall  be  pardoned  (Isa.  Iv.  7).  Ye  shall  be  the  children  of 
God  through  Jesus  Christ  (John  i.  12).  Ye  shall  be  made  holy  (1  Cor.  vi.  11).  (2) 
To  converted  sinners  that  have  answered  the  call.  Labour  to  know  your  great 
privileges  for  time  and  eternity  (2  Pet.  i.  10).  2.  Be  thankful  for  these  privileges 
(1  John  iii.  1).  3.  Walk  worthy  of  the  vocation,  that  is,  humbly,  holily,  heavenly, 
contentedly,  patiently,  and  cheerfully,  in  hopes  of  the  glory  that  is  to  be  revealed, 
(r.  Boston,  D.D.)  Whom  He  justified,  them  He  also  glorified. — Justification  and 
glory : — I.  Justification  is — 1.  An  act  of  God  passed  upon  a  person  needing  it, 
consequently  upon  a  person  who  could  not  justify  himself.  The  guiltless  need  no 
justification ;  they  have  it  already.  "  He  justifies."  2.  The  result  of  sovereign 
grace.  "  By  the  works  of  the  law  shall  no  flesh  living  be  justified."  I  cannot 
earn  justification.  3.  Has  for  its  matter  and  means  the  righteousness  of  Jesus 
Christ,  set  forth  in  His  vicarious  obedience,  both  in  life  and  death.  Obedience 
alone  can  justify,  and  where  can  we  have  it  but  in  Jesus  our  substitute  ?  4.  The 
practical  way  of  its  application  is  by  faith.  It  is  not  by  repenting  that  we  are 
justified,  but  by  believing.  5.  An  instantaneous  act.  Sanctification  needs  a  whole 
life,  justification  needs  no  appreciable  time.  The  sinner  looks  to  Christ,  his  sin  is 
gone  fn  a  moment.  Sanctification,  moreover,  progresses  or  declines ;  but  justifica- 
tion is  complete.  6.  An  infallible  act.  "  It  is  God  that  justifieth  " ;  where,  then, 
can  there  be  a  mistake  ?  7.  An  irreversible  act.  Once  justified  you  shall  never  be 
condemned.  8.  It  is  generally  attended  with  such  a  flood  of  joy,  that  I  think  you 
must  know  it.   Bunyan's  pilgrim  did  not  lose  the  burden  off  his  back  and  not  kno^ 


196  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  viij.' 

it;  but  as  soon  as  it  was  gone,  he  gave  three  great  leaps  for  joy,  and  went  on  his 
way  singing.  II.  Globt.  How  that  golden  word  has  been  debased  in  the  coinage 
of  human  speech.  It  has  come  to  mean  the  glitter  of  war's  helmet,  and  the  noise 
of  the  crowd's  hurrahs.  "  Whom  He  j  ustified,  them  He  also  glorified."  They  follow 
close  together.  A  little  stream  divides  them,  but  the  apostle  says  nothing  about  it, 
so  we  will  not  say  anything.  Death  is  not  worth  thinking  of,  it  is  swallowed  ap  in 
victory.  There  is — 1.  The  glory  which  disembodied  spirits  are  enjoying  now.  The 
moment  that  the  soul  leaves  the  body,  the  justified  soul  is  in  glory.  Bomanism 
holds  that  some  of  the  best  saints  go  to  heaven  when  they  die ;  but  that  the  great 
mass  of  inferior  saints  must  undergo  purgation.  But  the  dying  thief  was  no 
eminent  saint.  The  only  good  deed  that  we  ever  read  of  his  doing  was  when  he 
claimed  Christ  as  Lord,  and  rebuked  his  fellow-thief  for  slandering  the  Saviour. 
Yet,  hear  the  words,  "  To-day  shalt  thou  be  with  Me  in  paradise."  Nor  is  this  the 
only  instance.  We  find,  when  Lazarus  died,  that  he  was  carried  by  angels  into 
Abraham's  bosom.  Stephen  expected  the  Lord  Jesus  to  receive  his  spirit,  and  the 
apostle  Paul  was  in  a  strait  betwixt  two,  being  willing  "  to  depart  and  to  be  with 
Christ."  In  Eph.  iii.  15,  the  apostle  mentions  the  whole  family  as  being  in  heaven 
and  earth,  but  he  speaks  of  none  of  the  Lord's  people  being  in  limbo.  Those  whom 
we  are  bidden  to  follow,  in  Heb.  vi.  12,  are  now  inheriting  the  promises.  Let  the 
voice  of  God  decide  the  case  for  ever  (Rev.  xiv.  13).  The  glory  of  paradise  was 
that  God  walked  there  in  the  cool  of  the  evening  with  His  creatures ;  and  the  glory 
of  heaven  is,  that  "  they  need  no  candle,  neither  light  of  the  sun,  for  the  Lord  God 
giveth  them  light,"  and  the  days  of  their  mourning  shall  be  ended.  2.  The 
resurrection  glory  which  they  will  enjoy  when  soul  and  body  shall  be  reunited. 
This  will  be  a  joyful  meeting.  Soul  and  body  often  quarrel  here ;  but  they  are 
always  loath  to  part,  which  proves  how  true  is  the  wedlock  between  them ;  but  what 
a  happy  meeting  it  will  be  when  there  will  be  no  more  jars  between  this  husband 
and  wife,  when  the  soul  and  body  shall  be  merged  together  in  the  perfection  of 
union.  Then,  whatever  may  be  the  splendour  of  Christ  will  be  the  splendour  of 
His  people.  III.  The  connection  between  justification  and  glory.  1.  A  justified 
person  has  in  him  the  bud  of  glory.  What  is  glory  ?  (1)  It  is  a  state  of  perfect 
peace.  "  Therefore,  being  justified,  we  have  peace  with  God  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord."  (2)  It  is  a  state  of  rest.  "We,  which  have  believed,  do  enter  into 
rest."  (3)  It  is  a  state  of  safety.  When  sin  is  pardoned,  I  am  secure.  (4)  It  is  a 
state  of  nearness  to  God ;  He  hath  made  us  nigh  by  the  blood  of  His  Son.  (5)  It 
is  communion  with  Christ.  But  we  have  already  boldness  and  access  through 
Jesus.  Inside  the  acorn  there  is  the  whole  oak,  and  within  justification  there  is 
heaven,  with  all  its  light,  life,  love,  joy,  and  security.  Glory  is  begun  below.  2. 
Justification  is  a  claim  to  glorification.  He  that  is  right  in  the  eye  of  the  law,  has 
a  claim  to  the  protection  and  smile  of  the  law.  3.  Justification  would  be  but  a 
very  sorry  gift  of  God,  if  it  did  not  involve  glory.     (C7.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  31.  What  shall  we  then  say  to  these  things  1  If  God  be  for  as,  who 
can  be  against  us? — If  God  he  for  us  none  can  be  effectually  against  xis: — First, 
here's  the  supposition  "If  God  be  for  us."  This  "if"  is  not  an  if  of  doubting 
or  ambiguity,  but  rather  of  certainty  and  assurance.  That  God  is,  indeed,  for 
all  true  believers,  cannot  be  denied  (Psa.  xlvi.  7,  cxxiv.  1,  cxviii.  6,  7).  There  are 
two  manner  of  ways  especially  wherein  God  may  be  said  to  be  for  His  servants: 
First,  by  way  of  allowance,  God  is  so  far  said  to  be  with  His  people,  as  He  does 
own  them  and  approve  of  them.  And  this  again  extends  itself  to  three  particulars 
more,  wherein  it  is  considerable :  First,  the  persons  of  His  servants,  God  is  for 
them  (Psa.  cxlvii.  10,  11 ;  Mai.  iii.  16).  Secondly,  He  is  for  them  in  their  prin- 
ciples ;  the  doctrines,  and  truths,  and  graces  which  are  eminent  in  them,  and 
whereby  they  are  acted  and  moved.  These  God  does  own  them  in  and  approve 
them  for ;  whatever  is  of  God's  planting,  it  is  of  God's  owning  ;  He  will  maintain 
His  own  work.  Thirdly,  He  is  for  them  also  in  their  practices  and  actions.  The 
ways  of  good  men  as  good,  and  as  living  in  the  power  of  religion,  are  so  far  forth 
allowed  of  by  God.  He  that  in  these  things  serveth  Christ  is  acceptable  to  God 
and  approved  of  men,  as  the  apostle  speaks  in  chap.  xiv.  18.  Secondly,  God  is  for 
all  true  believers,  not  only  by  way  of  allowance,  but  also  by  way  of  assistance ;  not 
only  to  own  them,  but  to  help  them,  and  to  be  useful  to  them  for  their  greatest 
advantage.  The  ground  hereof  is  laid  in  two  particulars :  First,  in  regard  of  Hia 
interest  which  He  has  in  them,  as  they  do  belong  unto  Him ;  interest  it  does 
engage  affection,  and  so  consequently  endeavour  and  assistance.    Secondly,  there  ia 


CHAP,  vin.]  ROMANS,  197 


not  only  his  relation,  but  also  His  covenant ;  persons  who  are  confederates,  they 
are  assistant  one  to  another.    For  answer  hereunto  we  must  say  thus  much,  tha« 
God  is  indeed  with  His  servants,  but  with  these  quaUfications : — First,  in  His  own 
time.     Secondly,  in  His  own  manner.     Thirdly,  upon  His  own  terms  and  condi- 
tions  we  must  take  in  that  also.     And  that  is  of  faith,  and  repentance,  and  new 
obedience,  and  close  walking  with  Him,  as  we  may  see  (2  Chron.  xv.  2).     It  holda 
also  as  to  engagement ;  if  God  be  with  us  it  concerns  us  to  be  with  Him,  and  to 
carry  ourselves  answerably  towards  Him  we  should  own  Him,  and  all  that  is  His; 
it  is  that  which  He  both  requires  and  expects  from  us.     There  are  two  things 
in  the  world  which  God  is  especially  interested  in,  and  whatever  is   done  for 
them  He  counts  as  done  to  Himself,  His  truth,  and  His  children ;  goodness  itself, 
and  those  who  are  good.     Now,  therefore,  when  we  own  these,  and  are  for  thera, 
we  own  Him,  and  shall  have  the  reward  of  it  bestowed  upon  us.    The  second  is  the 
inference,  or  that  which  is  deduced  from  it,  in  these  words,  "Who  can  be  against 
as?"    Who  can  be  against  us ?    What  a  strange  question  is  this?     Who  rather 
cannot  be  against  ?    There's  none  who  are  so  likely  or  ready  to  have  any  against 
them  than  those  who  are  most  for  God,  or  God  for  them.    Let  any  men  look  after 
religion,  and  they  shall  be  sure  to  have  enough  against  them.    First,  who  can  be 
against  us?  That  is,  whocan  be  rationally  against  us?  It  is  not  so  much  what  any  are 
de  facto,  but  what  they  are  dejure,  not  what  they  are  in  the  thing  itself,  but  what 
they  ought  to  be,  and  what  is  fitting  for  them.     Secondly,  who  can  be  against  us  ? 
That  is,  who  can  be  against  us  effectually.    All  the  enmity  of  men,  it  is  a  limited 
and  confined  enmity,  because  their  hearts,  and  hands,  and  affections,  and  endea- 
vours, are  all  at  God's  disposing.    First,  Satan,  the  great  and  grand  enemy  of  all, 
he  shall  not  prevail  against  us.    Secondly,  evil  men  who  are  subservient  and  instru- 
mental to  Satan,  they  shall  not  prevail  neither  in  all  their  attempts  and  endea- 
vours in  the  Church.    Now  there  is  a  threefold  ground  whereupon  this  truth  doea 
proceed  and  may  be  made  good  to  us  :  First,  from  God's  omnipotency.     Secondly, 
from  God's  immutabihty ;  therefore  those  whom  God  is  for  can  have  none  to 
prevail  against  them,  because  those  whom  He  is  truly  for  He  is  for  them  for  ever. 
Thirdly,  from   God's  eternity;   He  is   one  who   ever  continues,  therefore  those 
whom  He  is  for,  they  are  sure  to  have  none  against  them.    The  third  and  last  may 
be  this.  Who  can  be  against  us  ?    That  is,  who  can  be  safely  against  us  ?  who  can 
be  against  us  with  any  convenience,  or  peace,  or  comfort,  or  contentment  to  them- 
selves. (Thos.Hort(m,B.D.)     God  for  us: — "These  things."  The  only  question  as  to 
the  meaning  of  this  expression  is,  whether  it  covers  the  whole  Epistle,  or  is  to  be 
confined  to  this  chapter  or  to  the  immediately  preceding  verses.     In  any  case  the 
emphasis  of  the  appeal  must  be  chiefly  on  the  last — things  which  are  so  much 
above  the  reach  of  the  carnal  mind,  and  so  likely  to  produce  a  feeling  of  wonder  or 
revolt.     There  the  things  are ;  they  cannot  be  reasoned  away.   "  We  can  do  nothing 
against  the  truth,  but  for  the  truth.    I.  The  Fact.    The  world  will  have  much  to 
say  against  the  doctrines  of  grace.     "  But  if  God  be  for  us,"  then  we  can  afford  to 
have  the  world  against  us.     The  plan  of  mercy  which  determines  the  way  of  salva- 
tion may  surpass  all  human  wisdom  and  experience,  but  if  it  be  God's  plan  it  will 
take  effect.     The  method  of  grace  by  which  the  sinner's  heart  is  renewed  may 
surpass  the  carnal  judgment.    Yet  if  it  be  God's  method  it  will  work  His  purpose 
in  spite  of  man's  ridicule  and  unbelief.     The  subserviency  of  Providence  to  the 
purposes  of  redemption  will  work  itself  out,  though  men  may  be  blind  to  the 
issue.     Now  let  us  apply  this  to  our — 1.  Doctrinal  opinions.     God  is  for  us  when 
our  views  are  in  accordance  with  the  Scripture.     Eeason,  experience,  received 
opinions,  learning  and  wisdom,  may  seem  to  be  against  us,  but  God  is  more  than 
all.     "  Let  God  be  true  and  every  man  a  liar."     2.  The  interest  and  safety  of 
attainments  and  privileges  of  the  believer's  state.      The  world  has  much  to 
say  upon  the  subject  of  the  work  of  grace.    There  are  some  who  resolve  the  facta 
of  Christian  experience  into  disease  or  deception.    According  to  our  view  this  work 
of  grace  is  God's  most  beautiful  and  costly  work.    Now,  if  we  are  indeed  God's 
workmanship,  if  what  we  call  the  work  of  grace  be  indeed  the  work  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  then  we  may  say  in  the  view  of  the  world's  contumely  and  scorn,  "  If  God 
be  for  us,  who  then  can  be  against  us  ?  "    3.   The  believer's  safety.    The  text 
does  not  imply  the  absence  of  danger  and  opposition.    Both  Scripture  and  ex- 
perience teach  us  the  contrary.    The  meaning  is  that  nothing  shall  prevail  against 
us  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  7,  8).    4.  The  interest  which  believers  have  in  the  plan  of 
Providence.     According  to  the  teaching  of  the  apostle,  the  entire  administration 
of  this  present  world  is  determined  in  the  interest  of  Christ  and  His  Church.    Yet 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHAJ.  TUfc 

how  strangaly  does  it  appear  to  be  contradicted  by  the  facts  around  us.  How  often 
is  the  cause  of  slavery  and  tyranny  seen  to  triumph  over  the  cause  of  freedom  or 
piety  1  Bat  faith,  when  asked,  What  shall  we  say  to  these  things  ?  is  still  ready  with 
its  reply,  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ?  "  IL  Its  influence.  It  will 
produce — 1.  An  independence,  in  matters  of  conscience  and  religion,  of  human 
authority.  Independence  of  man  is  necessary  to  a  thorough  dependence  on  God 
(Acts  iv.  19).  Thus  Luther,  "Here  I  stand,  I  cannot  recant ;  I  rest  on  the  Word 
of  God.  Let  God  see  to  it."  2.  A  spirit  of  patience  under  the  pressure  of  trial. 
If  God  is  with  us,  on  our  side,  why  should  we  faint  in  our  minds  ?  3.  Confidence 
of  the  final  triumph  of  the  Christian's  interest,  and  the  clearing  up  of  all  the  dark 
clouds  that  rest  upon  the  ways  of  God.  Iniquity  shall  not  always  prevail. 
(P.  Strutt.)  God  is  for  us : — I.  The  question  supposes  the  existence  of  a  com- 
bined AND  POWERFUL  HOSTILITY  TO  THE  CHRISTIAN.  The  Bible  declarcs  this,  obser- 
vation confirms  it,  and  experience  demonstrates  it.  The  believer  may  be  compares 
to  an  individual  who  has  thrown  off  allegiance  to  his  king,  has  disowned  his 
country,  and  refuses  obedience  to  its  laws,  yet  continues  to  dwell  in  the  land  he  had 
renounced,  and  hard  by  the  sovereign  he  has  foresworn.  1.  Satan  is  against  us. 
All  his  force,  malice,  subtlety,  and  skill,  and  all  his  myrmidons  are  marshalled  in 
opposition  to  the  interests  of  the  child  of  God.  2.  The  world,  too,  is  against  us. 
It  will  never  forgive  the  act  by  which  we  broke  from  it.  Nor  can  it  forget  that  the 
Ufa  of  the  Christian  is  a  constant  and  solemn  rebuke  of  it  (John  xv.  18,  19).  3. 
Our  own  heart  is  against  us.  II.  But  God  is  fob  us.  It  was  this  assurance  that 
calmed  the  fears  and  strengthened  the  faith  of  Abraham  (Gen.  xv.  1) ;  Isaac  (Gen. 
xxvi.  24) ;  Elisha's  servant  (2  Kings  vi.  15,  16) ;  David  (Psa.  xxvii.  1) ;  Jeremiah 
(Jer.  i.  17-19) ;  and  Paul  (Acts  xviii.  9, 10).  And  Christ's  last  words  were,  "  Lo,  I  am 
with  you  alway ;  even  unto  the  end."  1.  God  must  be  on  the  side  of  His  people 
since  He  has,  in  an  everlasting  covenant,  made  Himself  over  to  be  their  God.  There 
is  nothing  in  God,  in  His  dealings,  or  in  His  providences,  but  what  is  on  the  side 
of  His  people.  2.  Not  the  Father  only,  but  the  Son  of  God  is  also  on  our  side. 
Has  He  not  amply  proved  it  ?  Who,  when  there  was  no  eye  to  pity,  and  no  arm  to 
save,  undertook  our  cause,  and  embarked  all  His  grace  and  glory  in  our  salvation? 
3.  And  so  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Who  quickened  us  when  we  were  dead ;  taught  us 
when  we  were  ignorant,  comforted  us  when  we  were  distressed  7  III.  It  may  then 
well  be  asked,  •'  Who  can  be  against  us  ?  "  The  law  cannot,  for  the  Law-f ulfiller 
has  magnified  and  made  it  honourable.  Justice  cannot,  for  Jesus  has  met  ita 
demands,  and  His  resurrection  is  a  full  discharge  of  all  its  claims ;  nor  sin,  nor 
Satan,  nor  men,  nor  suffering,  nor  death,  since  the  condemnation  of  sin  is 
removed,  and  Satan  is  vanquished,  and  the  ungodly  are  restrained,  and  suffering 
works  for  good,  and  the  sting  of  death  is  taken  away.  We  will  fear  nothing, 
therefore,  but  the  disobedience  that  grieves  and  the  sin  that  offends  God.  Fear- 
ing this,  we  need  fear  nothing  else  (Isa.  xli.  10).  Conclusion :  1.  The  subject,  if 
most  consolatory  to  the  Christian,  is,  in  its  converse,  a  solemn  one  to  the  unre- 
generate.  It  is  an  awful  thing  not  to  have  God  for  us.  And  if  God  is  not  for  ua 
there  is  no  neutral  course — He  must  be  against  us.  2.  Would  we  always  have  God 
for  us  ?  then  let  us  aim  to  be  for  God.  God  deals  with  us  His  creatures  by  an 
equitable  rule  (Lev.  xxvi.  27,  28).  (0.  Winslow,  D.D.)  God  for  us  : — I.  How  God 
is  fob  us.  1.  Because  He  hath  predestinated  His  people  to  be  conformed  to  the 
image  of  His  own  dear  Son.  "  No  weapon  which  is  formed  against  thee  shall 
prosper,"  &o.  2.  He  has  called  us.  When  Abraham  left  the  land  of  his  fore- 
fathers and  went  forth,  not  knowing  whither  he  went,  he  was  quite  safe,  because 
God  had  called  him.  3.  He  has  justified  us.  All  the  people  of  God  are  wiapped 
about  with  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  and  God  regards  them  with  the  same 
affection  as  that  wherewith  He  loves  His  only-begotten  Son.  4.  He  hath  also 
glorified  us,  "for  He  hath  raised  us  up  together,  and  made  us  sit  together  in 
heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus."  He  will  also  glorify  us,  for  He  hath  prepared  a 
kingdom  for  us  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.  But  though  this  brings  in  the 
context,  I  cannot  bring  out  the  depth  of  the  meaning  of  how  God  is  for  ua.  He  was 
for  us  before  the  worlds ;  He  was  for  us,  or  else  He  would  never  have  given  His  Son. 
He  has  been  for  us  in  many  struggles — how  could  we  have  held  on  until  now  had 
it  not  been  so?  He  is  for  us  with  all  the  omnipotence  of  His  love  and  with  all  His 
boundless  wisdom.  II.  Who  abb  against  us?  1.  Man.  How  man  has  struggled 
against  man  1  We  do  not  in  this  age  feel  the  cruelty  of  man  to  the  same  extent  as  the 
Reformers  did,  but  in  many  cases  we  are  misrepresented,  slandered,  abused,  ridi- 
culed for  truth's  sake.    Well  did  Jesus  say,  "Beware  of  men."     "Behold  I  send 


flHAJ.  vin.]  ROMANS.  199 

you  forth  as  sheep  in  the  midst  of  wolves."  But  what  are  they  all  ?  Suppose 
every  man  were  against  you,  you  might  say,  as  Athanasius  did,  "  I  have  truth  on 
my  fiido,  and  therefore  against  the  world  I  stand."  Of  what  use  was  the  malice  of 
men  against  Martin  Luther?  Men  are  only  puppets  moved  by  Goil's  hand  ;  there- 
fore be  not  afraid  of  them.  Latimer  greatly  displeased  Henry  VIII.  by  his  bold- 
ness in  a  sermon,  and  was  ordered  to  make  an  apology  on  the  following  Sabbath. 
After  reading  his  text  he  began  : — "Hugh  Latimer,  dost  thou  know  before  whom 
thou  art  this  day  to  speak  ?  To  the  king's  most  excellent  majesty,  who  can  take 
away  thy  life  ;  therefore,  take  heed  that  thou  speakest  not  a  word  that  may  dis- 
please ;  but  then  consider  well,  Hugh,  from  whence  thou  comest ;  upon  whose 
message  thou  art  sent  1  Even  by  the  mighty  God  I  who  is  all-present,  and  who 
beholdeth  all  thy  ways,  and  who  is  able  to  cast  thy  soul  into  hell  1  Therefore, 
take  care  that  thou  deUverest  thy  message  faithfully."  He  then  proceeded  with 
the  same  sermon,  but  with  more  energy.  Such  courage  should  all  God's  children 
show  when  they  have  to  do  with  man.  Modesty  is  very  becoming,  but  an  am'ias- 
sador  of  God  must  recollect  there  are  other  virtues  besides  modesty.  2.  The 
world.  This  world  is  like  a  great  field  covered  with  brambles  and  thorns  and 
thistles,  and  the  Christian  is  continually  in  danger  of  rending  his  garments  or 
cutting  his  feet.  Luther  used  to  say  there  was  no  love  lost  between  him  and  the 
world,  for  the  world  hated  him  and  he  hated  it  no  less.  Care  little  for  this  world, 
but  think  much  of  the  world  to  come.  This  poor  quicksand,  get  off  it  lest  it 
swallow  thee  up ;  but  yonder  rock  of  ages,  build  thou  on  it,  and  thou  shalt  never 
suffer  loss.  3.  The  flesh,  the  worst  of  the  three.  We  should  never  need  to  fear 
man  nor  the  world  if  we  had  not  this  to  contend  with.  Some  have  an  irritable 
temper,  others  a  covetous  disposition.  Some  have  to  fight  against  levity,  others 
against  pride  or  despondency.  But  despite  all  this  we  shall  one  day  be  found 
without  fault  before  the  throne  of  God.  4.  The  devil.  He  knows  our  weak  points, 
he  understands  how  to  cover  up  the  hook  with  the  bait ;  and  how  to  take  one  this  way 
and  the  other  the  opposite.  But  what  matters  the  devil  when  we  have  this  text. 
The  devil  is  mighty,  but  God  is  almighty.  IH.  Who  are  not  against  us.  1.  God 
the  Father.  He  cannot  be  against  His  own  children.  2.  God  the  Son.  How 
sweetly  He  has  been  for  us  1  The  Cross  says,  "  Christ  is  for  you,"  and  to-day  the 
tenor  of  His  plea  before  the  throne  is,  "  I  am  for  you."  Wiien  He  shall  come  a 
second  time  the  trumpet  will  ring  out,  "Christ  is  for  you."  3.  The  Holy  Spirit  as 
the  Comforter,  the  Illuminator,  the  giver  of  life.  4.  The  holy  angels,  who  are  our 
ministers.    5.  The  law  of  God,  once  our  enemy,  is  now  our  friend.     Conclusion  : — 

1.  There  is  an  opposite  to  all  this.  If  God  be  against  you,  who  can  be  for 
you  ?  2.  But  if  God  be  for  you,  you  ought  to  be  for  God.  If  God  has  espoused 
your  cause,  ougbt  you  not  to  espouse  His?  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  With  God 
enough : — The  inscription  on  the  front  of  Downing  Hall,  North  Wales, 
translated,  runs  thus,  "Without  God,  without  all;  with  God,  enough," 
Tlie  apostle^s  challenge : — I.  Its  strength.  This  consists  in  the  grounds  on  which 
it  rests.  1.  The  all-sufficiency  of  God.  2.  The  covenant  relationship  of  God  to 
His  people.  "  If  God  be  for  us."  3.  The  demonstrations  of  love  which  God  has 
already  given  (ver.  32).  4.  God's  acquittal  and  acceptance  of  His  people,  as  the  moral 
Governor  of  men  (ver.  33).  5.  The  completeness  of  Christ's  mediatorial  work  (ver, 
34).  II.  Itsspibit.  This  will  be  illustrated  if  we  contemplate — 1.  The  circumstances 
under  which  the  words  are  uttered.  This  is  the  language  of  a  man  who  says,  "  For 
thy  sake  we  are  killed  all  the  day  long ;  we  are  accounted  as  sheep  for  the  slaughter, " 

2.  The  boldness  of  his  defiance  (vers,  38,  39),  3.  The  objects  of  his  defiance. 
Death,  life,  angels,  &c.  4.  The  influence  it  exerts. — It  leads  to  patience  in  suffering, 
and  cheerfulness  in  doing,  the  will  of  God.  {T.  Ely.)  The  safety  of  the  saints : — 
There  are  two  ways  in  which  a  man  may  be  deprived,  against  his  will,  of  hia 
privileges  and  possessions — by  the  lawless  violence  of  the  oppressor,  or  by  legal 
forfeiture  for  his  offences.  And,  if  these  two  ways  are  effectually  provided  against, 
there  is  nothing  to  fear.  Our  apostle  seems  to  have  an  eye  to  this,  and  shows  us 
that  the  child  of  God  has  nothing  to  fear  from — I.  Violence.  Let  us  look  at — 1. 
The  premises  of  his  argument.  From  which  we  gather — (1)  T^^God  is  a  Friend. 
"If  God  be  for  us."  It  is  something  to  have  a  friend  at  sS^Te.  one  who  would 
help  us  if  he  could  :  but  the  believer's  friend  is  the  mighty  God.  (2)  WTiat  sort  of 
a  friend  God  has  been.  "  He  spared  not  His  own  Son,"  &c.  See  what  a  length 
His  friendship  carried  Him  1  (3)  What  sort  of  a  friend  God  will  be.  The  future 
may  be  judged  of  from  the  past.  "  He  spared  not  His  own  Son ;  how  then  shall 
He  not  with  Him  also  freely  give  as  all  things  1  "     i.  The  conclusion — '*  Who  can 


200  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  via 

be  against  us?"    But  here  occurs  a  difficulty.    "God  is  for  us."    Most  true. 
"None  can  be  against  us."     Is  that  a  necessary  consequence?     Then,  again,  a 
conclusion,  though  illogical,  might  yet  be  a  truth.     Is  that  the  case  here?     "None 
can  be  against  us."    Why,  our  apostle  himself  speaks  of  "  many  adversaries."    The 
seeming  difficulty  is  unreal.     (1)  The  true  idea  is  that  the  friendship  of  God  shall 
so  completely  protect  us  from  all  our  enemies,  that  our  interests  shall  be  as  secure 
as  if  our  enemies  had  no  eicistence.    You  know  what  desperate  attempts  were  made 
by  Satan  to  ruin  Job  ;  but  God  was  for  Job,  and  he  was  not  ruined.    For  the  same 
reason  he  was  foiled  in  the  case  of  Peter,  and  his  messenger  in  the  case  of  Paul. 
(2)  But  sometimes  the  mere  tone  of  a  denial  implies  an  affirmation  of  the  contrary. 
Had  we  heard  the  apostle,  his  exulting  tone  would  have  conveyed  the  meaning  (ver. 
28).     "  Who  can  help  being  for  us,  when  God  is  for  us  ?  "    God  was  for  Joseph, 
and  so  were  his  unnatural  brethren.     God  was  for  the  Church ;  and  so  were  the 
princes  of  the  world  when  they  slew  the  Lord  of  glory  I     God  is  for  the  believer ; 
and  so  is  Satan,  who  but  tries  lus  faith.     God  is  for  the  dying  saint ;  and  so  is 
death,  which  hastens  his  translation  to  Paradise.    II.  Leoal  pbocess  befobe  thb 
BAB  OF  God.     1.  The  first  step  in  a  legal  process  is  to  produce  a  charge ;  and  so 
the  apostle  inquires,  "  Who  shall  lay  anything,"  &c.    What  I  have  not  many  things, 
in  all  ages,  been  alleged  against  the  righteous  ?     No  doubt.     But — (1)  Irrelevant 
charges  will  not  do.     Sometimes,  e.g.,  the  accusation  has  been  that  they  have  kept 
God's  laws  and  proclaimed  His  truth.     But  such  charges  are  irrelevant.    They 
make  that  an  offence  which  is  a  duty.    (2)  Nor  will  false  charges  do.    Elijah  was 
called  a  troubler  of  Israel.    But  the  troubler  of  Israel  was  the  prophet's  accuser. 
Drunkenness  was  imputed  to  the  apostles,  when  they  were  under  the  influence  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.    Disloyalty  and  section  are  hackneyed  imputations.    And  so  is 
hypocrisy.     Such  charges  may  be  safely  despised  by  the  Christian.      They  are 
relevant,  indeed ;  but  they  are  false,  and  God  will  not  listen  to  them.    (3)  Has  the 
child  of  God,  then,  no  sins  ?     Ah,  he  will  never  deny  it.     What  then  becomes  of 
the  text  ?    Stay ;  it  asks,  "  Who "  is  to  bring  the  charge  ?    Is  a  fellow-sinner 
competent  to  undertake  the  task  ?    No.     There  must  be  clean  hands,  in  the  first 
place,   and  a  commission  and  warrant,  in  the  second ;   and  a  fellow-sinner  has 
neither  the  one  nor  the  other.    None  but  God  can  do  it,  and  He  never  will ;  for 
they  are  God's  elect.    Their  names  would  not  have  been  written  in  heaven  if  God 
was  going  to  appear  against  them.     2.  The  next  stage  is  that  of  the  verdict — 
Guilty,  or  not  guilty.     The  apostle  has  already  shown  that  there  can  be  no  charge ; 
but,  it  there  were  one,  the  believer  will  not  be  convicted  of  it    "  It  is  God  that 
justifieth :  who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?  "  &o.     "  There  is  no  condemnation  to  them 
that  are  in  Christ  Jesus."     (1)  They  cannot  be  condemned,  when  nothing  is  laid  to 
their  charge.      But  then  God  is  just,  and  justice  demands  the  punishment  of  sin. 
The  charge  was  made,  but  Christ  bore  it.    For  God  made  Him  to  be  sin  for  us  who 
knew  no  sin,  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him.     (2)  But 
what  if  no  punishment  followed?    Was  God  to  turn  His  wrath  upon  His  own 
Son  ?    Yes,  "  it  is  Christ  that  died  " — died  in  thy  room  to  expiate  thy  sins.     (3) 
But  was  the  punishment  adequate — the  expiation  complete  ?    If  not,  the  believer 
may  tremble  still — he  is  not  beyond  the  reach  of  condemnation.    Christ  "  is  risen 
again."    But  He  would  not  be  risen  if  He  had  not  given  justice  every  jot  and  tittle 
of  its  due.     (4)  But  can  we  be  sure  that  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  was  accepted?    The 
circumstance  that  the  Son  acted  by  the  Father's  commandment,  shows  that  the 
sacrifice,  if  in  itself  complete  and  sufficient,  must  have  been  well-pleasing  and 
acceptable  ;  and  to  prove  it  beyond  all  doubt,  Paul  says,  "  Who  is  even  at  the  right 
hand  of  God."    (5)  But  we  have  not  yet  reached  the  end  of  the  believer's  guarantees. 
"  Who  also  maketh  intercession  for  us."    We  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment- 
seat  of  Christ.    And  if  we  are  ever  condemned,  it  is  Christ  that  will  do  it.     But  an 
advocate  never  condemns  his  own  clients.      And  the  apostle  announces  the  happy 
issue  of  his  advocacy  when  he  tells  us,  "  It  is  God  that  justifieth."     3.  When  a 
criminal  process  succeeds  there  is  execution.      Suppose  the  believer  condemned, 
all  that  remained  would  be  to  inflict  the  punishment.     Yes :  but  there  would  be  an 
insurmountable  obstacle.     "  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ  ?  "    The 
believer's  confidence  has  no  cause  to  be  shaken,  unless  he  can  be  separated  from 
Christ's  love.     In  order  to  this— (1)  You  must  prove  that  love  to  be  nothing  but  a 
dream.    But  surely  Christ's  death  is  sufficient  to  prove  its  reality.    (2)  That  love 
must  be  made  to  cease.     It  is  not  uncommon  for  the  human  love  to  fade.     But 
Christ's  love  is  everlasting.    "  Can  a  woman  forget  her  sucking  child,"  &a     (3) 
One  way  remains.    Who  shall  prevail  against  the  believer  in  spite  of  Clurist's  love  7 


OHir.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  SOI 

Love  can  do  little,  however  great  it  may  be  in  itself,  if  it  has  not  corresponding 
power  at  its  back.  But  the  love  of  Christ  has  omnipotence  at  its  command. 
"  Shall  tribulation,  or  distress,"  &c.,  separate?  Nay.  For  (a)  They  are  temporary 
evils,  (b)  The  worst  they  can  do  is  to  separate  the  body  from  the  soul  for  a  season  ; 
but  that  is  the  indispensable  and  immediate  preliminary  to  the  full  enjoying  of  the 
benefits  of  Christ's  love,  and  therefore  not  a  step  towards  our  separation  from  it ! 
Like  the  puny  insects  which  mutilate  themselves  by  striking  with  their  stings,  they 
•re  incapable  of  hurting  us  again,  (c)  The  whole  action  and  influence  of  these 
evils  will  be  overruled  for  our  good.  Therefore,  "  in  all  these  things  we  are  more 
than  conquerors,  through  Him  that  loved  us."  {Andrew  Gray.)  The  presence 
of  God  a  source  of  courage :  — Why  should  I  fear  ?  Is  man  stronger  than  God  ?  I 
go  up  to  the  Soudan  alone,  with  an  infinite  Almighty  God  to  direct  and  guide  me, 
and  am  glad  to  so  trust  Him  as  to  fear  nothing ;  and  indeed  to  feel  sure  of  success. 
{General  Gordon.)  Christian  courage: — Chrysostom  before  the  Boman  emperor 
was  a  beautiful  example  of  Christian  courage.  The  emperor  threatened  him  with 
banishment  if  he  still  remained  a  Christian.  Chrysostom  replied,  "  Thou  canst 
not,  for  the  world  is  my  Father's  house ;  thou  canst  not  banish  me.''  "  But  I  will 
slay  thee,"  said  the  emperor.  "  Nay,  but  thou  canst  not,"  said  the  noble 
champion  of  the  faith  again;  "for  my  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God."  "I  will 
take  away  thy  treasures."  "Nay,  but  thou  canst  not,"  was  the  retort;  "  for,  in 
the  first  place,  I  have  none  that  thou  knowest  of.  My  treasure  is  in  heaven,  and 
my  heart  is  there."  "  But  I  will  drive  thee  away  from  man,  and  thou  shalt  have 
no  friend  left."  "Nay,  and  that  thou  canst  not,"  once  more  said  the  faithful 
witness  ;  "  for  I  have  a  Friend  in  heaven,  from  whom  thou  canst  not  separate  me. 
I  defy  thee ;  there  is  nothing  thou  canst  do  to  hurt  me."  The  mightiness  of 
God : — When  the  army  of  Antigonus  went  into  battle  his  soldiers  were  very  much 
discouraged,  and  they  rushed  up  to  the  general  and  said  to  him,  "  Don't  you  see  we 
have  few  forces,  and  they  have  so  many  more  ?  "  and  the  soldiers  were  affrighted 
at  the  smallness  of  their  number  and  the  greatness  of  the  enemy.  Antigonus,  their 
commander,  straightened  himself  up  and  said  with  indignation  and  vehemence, 
"  How  many  do  you  reckon  me  to  be  1 "  And  when  we  see  the  vast  armies  arrayed 
against  the  cause  of  sobriety,  it  may  sometimes  be  very  discouraging,  but  I  ask  you, 
in  making  up  your  estimate  of  the  farces  of  righteousness,  I  ask  you  how  many  do 
you  reckon  the  Lord  God  Almighty  to  be  ?  He  is  our  Commander.  The  Lord  of 
Hosts  is  His  name.  I  have  the  best  authority  for  saying  that  the  chariots  of  God 
are  twenty  thousand,  and  the  mountains  are  full  of  them. 

Ver.  32.  He  that  spared  not  His  own  Son. — God'»  great  gift  the  tecurity  for  Hi* 
other  gifts: — Note  that — L  God  hath  albeadt  given  the  vert  greatest  thing 
TO  BET  mr  SALVATION  AooiNo,  viz.,  what  every  parent  who  had  but  one  beloved  son 
would  surely  feel  the  greatest  of  his  treasures.  In  human  transactions  the  pledge 
is  but  a  minute  proportion  of  the  complete  performance,  and  yet  there  is  a  distinct 
hope  awakened  of  the  entire  fulfilment,  from  the  token  that  has  thus  been  put  into 
your  hands.  But  in  this  transaction  the  pledge  is  more  valuable  to  the  Giver  than 
all  that  He  hath  pledged  Himself  for.  We  may,  indeed,  feel  that  the  joys  of  eternity 
maybe  of  greater  value  than  all  the  firstfruits  and  tokens  in  the  shape  of  grace  and 
growing  meetness,  here.  But  God  feels  that  He  has  already  given  what  to  Himself 
was  of  the  greatest  value.    II.  The  deep  and  mtsterious  softbrinq  incurred  at 

THIS   FIRST  AND   GREATEST    STEP   IN    OCR  SALVATION   IS    NOW    OYEB.        The    travail    Of 

Christ's  soul  hath  already  gone  by ;  and  now  He  has  only  to  see  of  the  fruit  of  this 
travail  and  be  satisfied.  When  He  set  forth  from  glory  on  our  world's  restoration. 
He  had  persecution  and  cruel  martyrdom  before  Him  ;  but  what  He  thus  originated 
with  pain,  He  has  only  now  to  prosecute  in  peace  and  triumph  to  its  consummation. 
Will  the  Father  who  spared  not  His  own  Son  a  deep  humiliation  to  commence  the 
enterprise  of  our  recovery  now  refuse  to  magnify  Him,  and  bring  the  enter- 
prise of  Him  who  is  the  Captain  of  this  glorious  warfare  to  its  most  honourable 
termination?  III.  All  which  God  hath  done  in  the  work  op  our  redemption 
HAS  BEEN  done  ENTIRELY  OF  FREE  WILL.  It  was  not  because  He  owed  it  to  us, 
y  but  because  His  own  heart  was  set  upon  it.  This  makes  it  a  wholly  different 
case  from  that  of  a  debtor  who,  after  having  made  payment  of  so  much,  would  like 
to  get  off  from  his  obligation  for  the  remainder.  There  is  nought  of  this  kind  to 
stint  the  liberality  of  God.  When  He  did  give  up  His  Son,  it  was  bef^ause  He  so 
loved  the  world.  It  was  because  of  God's  longing  desire  after  the  world  that  He 
gave  up  Hia  Son  unto  the  sacrifice ;  and,  after  the  sacrifice  has  been  gone  through, 


202  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  fm. 

He  will  not  turn  round  upon  His  own  favourite  object,  and  recede  from  the  world 
which  He  has  done  so  much  to  save.  That  force  of  affection  which  bore  down  the 
obstacle  that  stood  in  its  way  will  now  bear  onward  with  accelerated  speed  to  the 
accomplishment  of  all  the  good  that  it  is  set  upon.  To  do  otherwise  would  be 
throwing  away  the  purchase  after  the  purchase-money  had  been  given  for  it ;  and 
well  may  we  be  assured  that  after  God  has  freely  given  such  a  price  for  our  salva- 
tion, He  will  freely  give  all  things  necessary  to  make  good  that  salvation.  IV. 
When  He  gave  dp  Hra  Son,  it  was  on  behalf  of  sinners  with  whom  at  thb 
TIME  He  was  at  vaeiance.  It  was  at  the  period  when  a  blow  had  been  inflicted  on 
the  dignity  of  His  government,  and  a  sore  outrage  laid  on  Heaven's  high  thrcne  by 
the  defiance  of  creatures  whom  its  power  could  annihilate  or  sweep  away.  Now 
the  state  of  matters  is  altered.  The  breach  has  been  healed.  The  debt  has  been 
paid.  And  if  God  in  the  season  of  guilt  gave  up  His  Son,  will  He  cease  from  giving 
now  in  the  season  of  atonement?  If,  when  nought  ascended  from  the  world  but  a 
smoke  of  abomination,  the  price  of  its  redemption  was  freely  surrendered,  will 
there  be  no  movement  of  grace  now  that  there  arises  the  incense  of  a  sweet- smelling 
savour  ?  And  if  in  our  state  of  condemnation,  then,  He  delivered  Him  up  for  us 
all,  is  not  the  assurance  doubly  sure  that,  in  our  state  of  acceptance  now,  He  will 
with  Him  freely  give  us  all  things?     V.  He  gave  up  His  Son  at  a  time  when 

MERCY  WAS   CLOSED  IN    AS   IT  WERE    BY  THE    OTHER   ATTRIBUTES    OF  HiS    NATURE wheU 

it  had  not  yet  found  a  way  through  justice  and  holiness  of  truth,  and  when  it  had 
to  struggle  against  an  obstacle  high  as  the  dignity  of  Heaven's  throne.  It  was  in 
fact  on  very  purpose  to  open  an  avenue  through  this  else  impassable  barrier  that 
Christ  went  forth.  And  is  not  the  inference  as  resistless  as  it  is  animating — that 
the  same  mercy  which  forced  a  passage  for  itself  through  all  those  difficulties  will, 
now  that  they  are  cleared  away,  burst  forth  in  freest  exuberance  among  all  those 
for  whom  it  scaled  the  mountain  of  separation.  He  who  gave  His  Son  while  Justice 
was  yet  unappeased,  will  freely  give  all  things  now  that  Justice  is  satisfied.  Con- 
clusion :  But  this  subject  is  inexhaustible.  It  is  not  the  preciousness  of  Christ  as 
being  Himself  a  gift  that  the  text  leads  me  to  expatiate  on.  It  is  the  goodness  of  it  as  a 

/pledge  of  other  gifts.  There  are  other  securities  for  this  than  those  on  which  I  have 
insisted  that  might  well  cause  the  believer  to  rejoice  in  it  as  in  a  treasure  the  whole 
value  of  which  is  inestimable.  For  will  God  stamp  dishonour  on  this  His  own  great 
enterprise,  and  leave  unfinished  that  which  He  hath  so  laboriously  begun?  Will 
He  hold  forth  the  economy  of  grace  as  an  impotent  abortion  to  the  scorn  of  His 
enemies?  Never  was  foundation  more  surely  laid,  nor  can  we  tell  how  many  those 
unshaken  props  are  by  which  it  upholds  the  confidence  of  a  believer.  ( T.  Chalmers, 
D.D.)  The  logic  of  redeeming  love: — First,  to  speak  as  it  is  expressed  in  the  negative, 
"He  spared  not  His  own  Son."  First,  take  it  in  the  first  notion,  asa  word  of  bounty  in 
reference  to  us  ;  He  did  not  spare  Him,  that  is,  He  did  not  withhold  Him ;  He  was  not 
unwilling  to  part  with  Him,  or  sparing  to  give  Him.  Now,  for  the  better  amplifying 
of  this  great  gift  to  us,  and  the  great  love  of  God  to  us  in  it.  We  may  take  notise 
of  it  briefly  in  the  several  gradations  of  it,  wherein  it  is  considerable  of  us.  First, 
for  the  kind  of  it.  It  was  a  Son :  He  spared  not  Him.  There  is  many  an  one  in  the 
world  that  would  be  loth  to  part  with  a  servant,  such  as  he  might  be,  but  a  son, 
that  is  somewhat  more.  There  are  a  great  many  who  could  be  content  sometimea 
to  spare  many  other  things  besides,  so  that  you  will  be  content  to  spare  their 
children,  or  to  let  them  to  spare  themselves.  You  know  how  it  was  with  old  Jacob, 
how  loth  he  was  to  part  with  his  son  Benjamin.  Secondly,  for  the  propriety  of  it. 
As  it  was  His  Son  which  He  did  not  spare,  so  it  was  His  own  Son  too.  He  spared 
not  Him.  We  see  how  all  men  are  generally  very  indulgent  of  what  belongs  to 
themselves.  Nurses  and  guardians  and  overseers  are  very  often  remiss  and  careless 
enough  of  other  men's  children  which  are  committed  to  them,  but  their  own  are  more 
indulged  by  them.  His  own  Son — how  so?  Namely,  by  eternal  and  inexpressible 
generation,  being  of  the  same  "  substance  with  the  Father,  begotten  of  Him  before  all 
worlds."  Thirdly,  it  was  His  only  Son  Ukewise  ;  it  was  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father 
(John  L  14).  This  is  a  farther  amplification  of  it  to  us,  where  there  is  store  and 
choice  and  variety ;  it  is  not  so  hard  or  difficult  a  matter  as  otherwise  to  part  with 
some  one,  but  to  part  with  an  only  son,  that  is  a  great  matter  indeed.  Lastly,  it  was 
His  dear  Son,  the  Son  of  His  love,  as  He  is  called  in  Col.  i.  13.  Now  what  does  all 
this  teach  us  but  to  labour  to  work  ourselves  to  the  like  disposition  of  spirit  to  God 
again  ?  That  we  from  henceforth  should  think  nothing  too  good  or  too  dear  for 
Hun.  What  can  they  spare  for  God  that  cannot  spare  Him  a  little  time  and 
opportonity  for  serring  Hun?    It  is  a  word  of  severity,  and  refers  to  Chiist.    He 


OHAP.  nn.]  ROMANS.  SOS 

did  not  spare  Him,  that  is,  He  did  not  favonr  Him;  He  did  not  spare  to 
punish  or  to  afflict  Him.  First,  in  His  body.  He  did  not  spare  Him.  Secondly, 
in  His  name,  He  did  not  spare  Him.  Thirdly,  in  His  soul.  He  did  not  spare 
Him.  The  reason  of  it  was  this,  because  He  did  not  look  upon  Him  in  His 
person,  but  rather  in  His  office,  so  far  forth  as  He  bare  the  burthen  of  our 
sins  and  transgressions  upon  Him.  Therefore  let  us  own  this  perfect  satisfaction 
of  Christ  to  the  justice  of  His  Father,  and  His  Father's  general  and  universal 
punishing  of  Him,  and  not  sparing  Him  at  all.  First,  as  it  is  a  word  of  bounty,  He 
did  not  spare  to  give  Him.  And  secondly,  as  it  is  a  word  of  severity,  He  did  not 
spare  to  punish  Him.  Now  the  second  is  laid  down  in  the  affirmative  or  positive 
expression,  which  is  in  a  sort  included  in  the  former  :  "  But  delivered  Him  up  for 
us  all."  First,  for  the  action  itself — "  He  delivered  Him  up  "  (chap.  iv.  25).  There 
were  three  sorts  of  persons  which  had  a  hand  in  the  delivering  up  of  Christ. 
First,  God  delivered  up  His  Son.  Secondly,  Christ  delivered  up  Himself.  Thirdly, 
Judas  delivered  up  his  Master.  Now  that  which  we  have  here  exhibited  to  us  is 
the  former  of  these  deliverings,  to  wit,  God's  delivering  up  of  His  Son — "  He  spared 
Him  not,  but  delivered  Him  up."  This  He  might  be  said  to  do  two  manner  of  ways 
especially.  First,  in  regard  of  His  eternal  purpose  and  counsel.  Secondly,  in 
regard  of  His  ordering  and  disposing  of  it  in  the  fulness  of  time.  But  what  did  God 
deliver  up  this  His  Son  unto  ?  To  the  treachery  of  Judas,  to  the  injustice  of  Pilate, 
to  the  malice  of  the  Jews,  to  reproaches,  and  what  not  ?  The  second  is  the  persons 
it  refers  to,  and  who  are  more  particularly  concerned  in  it — "For  us  all."  The  second 
is  the  inference  or  improvement  of  this  premised  propitiation,  in  these  words, 
"  How  shall  He  not  with  Him  also  freely  give  us  all  things  ?  "  First,  take  it  simply 
and  absolutely,  as  it  lies  in  itself,  and  so  there  is  this  in  it,  that  God  will  with  Christ 
give  aJl  things  freely  to  those  who  are  true  believers.  There  is  here  laid  down  a 
special  privilege  which  does  belong  to  the  children  of  God.  Wherein  again  there 
are  three  distinct  particulars  considerable.  First,  for  the  gift  it-self.  This  is  here 
expressed  to  be  all  things  (Psa.  Ixxxiv.  11).  The  second  is  the  foundation  of  this 
gift,  and  that  is,  Christ  with  Him,  while  it  is  said  here,  "with  Him."  This  may  be 
taken  three  manner  of  ways.  First,  by  way  of  eminency :  "All  things  with  Him," 
that  is,  all  things  in  Him,  as  involved  and  implied.  Secondly,  by  way  of  concomi- 
tancy:  "All  things  with  Him,"  that  is,  all  things  to  Him,  as  added  and  subjoined. 
Thirdly,  by  way  of  conveyance:  "All  things  with  Him,"  that  is,  all  things  by  Him, 
and  through  Him,  and  for  Him,  as  dispensed  and  transmitted.  The  third  is  the 
manner  or  circumstance  of  donation ;  and  that  in  our  English  translation  is  here 
expressed  to  be  freely,  "  He  will  freely  give  us  all  things."  This  is  somewhat,  but 
yet  not  all,  which  is  intended  here  in  the  text ;  the  Greek  word  signifies  two 
things  especially,  not  only  to  give  freely,  but  also  to  give  favourably.  First, 
He  gives  us  all  things  freely;  to  take  it  as  it  is  here  in  our  translation,  as  God 
gives  us  Christ  Himself,  so  He  gives  us  all  things  else  freely  with  Christ.  And 
when  it  ia  said  freely,  we  are  to  take  it  in  the  full  extent  of  freeness,  freely  without 
our  desire,  and  freely  without  our  desert ;  of  His  own  accord,  and  upon  His  mere 
grace.  But  then  if  we  take  freely  in  the  latitude  of  our  English  idiom  and  pro- 
priety,  so  there  is  stiU  somewhat  more  in  it.  Freely,  that  is,  largely  and  plentifully, 
without  diminution.  "He  giveth  us  all  things  richly  to  enjoy"  (1  Tim.  vi.  17). 
And  freely,  that  is,  readily  and  cheerfully,  without  restraint,  not  grud  i  g,  not 
repenting,  not  upbraiding.  He  gives  us  all  things  gratuitously.  But  then 
secondly.  He  gives  to  beUevers  all  things  graciously,  that  is  also,  I  say,  here 
implied  in  the  word  in  the  text.  When  we  say  that  God  gives  aU  things  to  His 
children  favourably  or  graciously,  there  are  two  things  in  it ;  first,  favourably, 
as  to  the  principle.  He  gives  them  favourably,  as  to  the  principle,  by  intending 
favour  to  them  in  them,  and  giving  them  for  that  end.  And  He  gives  them 
favourably  as  to  the  effect,  by  making  them  favours,  and  doing  them  real  good 
by  them.  Now  further,  secondly,  we  may  look  upon  it  in  its  connection 
and  argumentatively,  as  inferred  by  rational  consequence  from  that  which  went 
before.  If  God  hath  not  spared  His  Son,  but  delivered  Him  up  for  us,  we  may  well 
conclude  that  He  will  bestow  all  things  else  freely  upon  us.  This  is  the  main  scope 
of  the  text,  and  the  argument  holds  good  upon  a  twofold  ground.  First,  from  the 
quality  and  condition  of  the  persons,  by  comparing  of  them.  If  God  had  so  much 
favour  for  us  when  we  were  enemies,  how  much  more  has  He  now  that  we  are 
friends?  Secondly,  from  the  nature  and  condition  of  the  gift  itself.  He  that 
would  give  His  Son  will  not  stick  to  give  anything  else,  because  He  that  would  give 
the  greater  will  not  stick  to  give  the  less.    First,  to  make  sure  of  the  ground  and 


204  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOB,  [chap.  nn. 

conclusion  itself,  seeing  our  having  of  all  things  else  does  thus  depend  upon  our 
having  of  Christ,  and  in  a  manner  follows  from  it.     Secondly,  as  we  should  make 
sure  of  the  ground,  so  we  should  be  also  careful  to  make  the  improvement,  and  thus 
to  reason  and  argue  within  ourselves,  as  the  Apostle  Paul  here  sets  us  an  example. 
Here  is  that  which  may  convince  them  of  that  diffidence  and  distrustf  ulness  which 
is  in  them,  and  make  them  to  be  ashamed,  as  it  were,  of  it.     What,  has  God  given 
thee  the  greater,  and  dost  thou  think  that  He  will  deny  thee  the  less  ?     Has  He 
given  thee  heaven,  and  dost  thou  think  that  He  will  deny  thee  the  earth  ?    Has  He 
given  thee  eternal  things,  and  dost  thou  think  that  He  will  deny  thee  temporal  ? 
(Thomas  Horton,  D.D.)        God's  great  and  best  gift  to  the  world : — I.  The  puepoet 
OF  THE  apostle's  asseetion.     It  includcs  three  capital  points  of  Christian  theology, 
viz. — 1.  That  we  are  obnoxious  to  the  punishment  of  death.  "  He  deUvered  Him  for 
us  "  ;  so  then  we  ought  to  have  been  delivered  up,  that  is,  to  penal  suffering.   This 
penalty  pre-supposes  transgression.     2.  That  "the  kindness  and  love  of  God  our 
Saviour  toward  man  has  appeared  "  in  the  provision  of  a  Divine  Substitute.     •*  So 
God  loved  the  world  that  He  gave  His  only  begotten  Son,"  &c.     And  having  "  given 
Him  "  for  this  purpose,  He  "  spared  Him  not  "  from  suffering.     Not  by  any  means 
that  our  Saviour  suffered  the  identical  punishment  due  to  us ;  but  its  equivalent, 
inasmuch  as  the  divinity  of  the  sufferer  stamped  the  suffering  with  infinite  magni- 
tude.    He  made  "  a  full  perfect  and  sufficient  sacrifice,  oblation  and  satisfaction 
for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world,"  in  virtue  of  which  avenging  justice  can  now  no 
longer  pursue,  and  redeeming  mercy  may  honourably  pardon  the  penitent  sinner. 
3.  That  the  efficacy  of  the  sin-offering  is  co-extensive  with  the  range  or  influence  of 
the  sin.    "  For  us  all."    There  is  no  limitation  in  the  grace  of  God,  nor  of  the 
expiatory  effect  of  the  Saviour's  sufferings,  to  any  particular  number  of  persons, 
any  more  than  to  any  particular  number  or  description  of  sins.     If  Christ  died  only 
for  all  believers,  then  sin  has  only  affected  all  believers.    No  man's  sins  are  more 
atoned  for  than  another  man's.     The  atonement  in  itself  saves  no  man,  and  Christ 
by  His  death  laid  God's  way  open  to  save  everybody  ;  but  it  did  not  necessitate  the 
salvation  of  anybody ;  it  must  be  apprehended  by  faith,  or  else  no  salvation  will 
follow.    Fear  not,  thou  vilest  of  the  vile  1  thou  art  as  much  an  object  of  God's  love 
and  of  Christ's  redemption  as  was  St.  Paul.     Look  unto  Him  and  be  saved,  even 
from  the  "  ends  of  the  earth."    IL  The  objects  of  His  anticipation.     Why  limit 
His  meaning  here  again  ?    He  means  literally  what  He  says — "  all  things."   There 
is  nothing  to  prevent  God's  bestowing  all  things  we  need  or  can  receive.     1.  Not 
strictly  all  temporal  gratifications.     Many  of  them  are  unessential,  and  some  of 
them  prejudicial.    But  whatever  of  this  world's  good  shall  subserve  our  convenience, 
and  comport  with  that  providential  discipline  by  which  our  Heavenly  Father  is 
training  us,  we  are  entitled  to  expect.     "No  good  thing  will  He  withhold,"  &c. 
••  GodUness  is  profitable  for  aU  things,"  even  in  regard  to  the  present  life,  and  shall 
give  us  the  true  enjoyment  and  use  of  all  the  good  things  which  the  providence  of 
God  bestows.    We  shall  make  more  of  them,  we  shall  get  more  out  of  them ;  a 
religious  poor  man  enjoys  a  great  deal  more  than  an  irreligious  rich  man.     2.  If 
these  earthly  blessings  abound,  they  shall  be  a  thousandfold  enhanced,  and  if  they 
are  scanty,  their  absence  shall  be  ten  thousand  times  supplied  to  us  by  the  better 
gifts  of  God's  grace — reconciliation,  adoption,  communion  with  a  reconciled  God, 
power  over  sin,  heavenly  dignity,  peace  in  tribulation,  composure  in  death.     3.  The 
blessings  of  immortaUty — including  the  resurrection  and  glorification  of  the  body, 
a  crown,  a  kingdom,  a  joyous  reunion  with  our  old  companions,  and,  above  all,  a 
view  of  the  Lamb  in  His  own  light,  and  an  eternity  spent  in  His  praise.     4.  All  this 
is  ours,  "freely."     (1)  Without  reluctance,  as  to  the  disposition  with  which  the 
boon  originates.     (2)  Without  restriction,  as  to  the  persons  on  whom  it  is  conferred. 
(3)  Without  recompense,  or  purchase,  or  desert.    lU.  The  fobce  of  the  abou- 
MENT.     "  With  Him."    It  seems  to  refer  to  the  gift  of  Christ— 1.  As  the  signal  and 
practical  intimation  of  God's  perfect  preparedness  to  "  give  us  all  things."    "  God 
is  love,"  and  no  sooner  had  He  called  into  existence  objects  on  which  He  could 
exercise  His  affections,  than  the  gushings  of  His  heart  flowed  forth  in  streams  of 
beneficence.    But  sin,  alas  1  interposed ;  and  if  He  had  so  pleased,  sin  might  irre- 
mediably  have  cut  off  all  desirable  communication.     But  He  "  willed  to  have 
mercy"  ;  and  reached  out  His  arms  so  far  as  to  remove  the  obstruction.    "Christ 
pnt  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself  "  on  the  Cross,  so  that  it  no  longer  after 
that  necessitated  the  exclusion  of  any  creature  from  God's  blessing.    2.  As  Himself 
intrinsically  beyond  all  comparison  more  valuable  than  all  things  else.    Having 
conferred  the  greater  blessing,  can  He  withhold  the  less?  What  "good  thing "  is  sc 


CHAP,  fin.]  ROMANS.  805 

good  in  our  estimation  as  that  we  dare  not  now  claim  it  in  the  view  of  Christ  I  Has 
He  given  His  Son  ?  why  should  He  not  give  His  Spirit  ?  why  should  He  not  com- 
municate Himself  to  our  souls  ?  3.  As  the  intentional  procuring  cause  of  "  all 
things."  Christ  has  "  obtained  eternal  redemption  for  us,"  with  all  its  rich  and 
varied  benefits.  Then  not  only  may  we,  but  we  ought  to  expect  them.  We  dis- 
honour Christ  by  mistrust  of  the  power  of  His  saving  merit.  We  forget  how  ^ 
solemnly  the  Father  is  bound  to  the  Son  by  covenant  faithfulness  ;  we  forget  how  iX 
dear  His  own  Son  is  to  Him,  and  that  even  had  He  no  interest  in  our  welfare,  yet 
He  is  sure  to  look  favourably  upon  those  who  are  interested  in  His  Son.  Conclu- 
sion :  Learn — 1.  That  the  love  of  God  the  Father  should  be  recognised  as  the 
source  of  our  salvation  aud  all  our  blessings.  2.  That  we  cannot  present  a  more 
effectual  or  successful  plea  to  God  in  prayer,  than  an  appeal  to  His  past  mercies 
in  Christ.  3.  That  Christ,  especially  in  His  atoning  character,  is  "  all  in  all." 
Sinner !  embrace  His  atonement ;  for  without  it  you  can  receive  nothing. 
Believer  I  cleave  to  it ;  for  with  it  you  may  receive  "  all  things."  {W.  M.  Bunting.) 
The  gift  that  brings  all  gifts  : — We  have  here  an  allusion  to  the  narrative  of  Abra- 
ham's offering  up  of  Isaac.  The  same  word  which  is  employed  in  the  Septuagint 
for  "  withheld  "  is  employed  here.  Consider — I.  This  mtsteeious  act  of  Divine 
BDBRENDEB.  The  analogy  seems  to  suggest  to  us  that  something  corresponding  to 
the  pain  find  loss  that  shadowed  the  patriarch's  heart  flitted  across  the  Divine 
mind  when  the  Father  sent  the  Son  to  be  the  Saviour  of  the  woild.  Not  merely 
to  give,  but  to  give  up,  is  the  highest  crown  and  glory  of  love.  And  notice — 1.  How 
the  reality  of  the  surrender  is  emphasised  by  the  closeness  of  the  bond  which  knits 
together  the  Father  and  the  Son.  As  of  Abraham,  so  in  this  lofty  example  the  Son 
is  the  only  Son.  This  cannot  be  any  mere  equivalent  for  a  Messiah,  or  for  a  man 
who  was  like  God  in  purity  of  nature.  For  the  force  of  the  analogy  and  the  emphasis 
of  that  word  "  His  own  "  point  to  a  uniqueness  of  relation  aud  unparalleled  closeness 
of  intimacy.  "Having  one  Son,  His  well-beloved,  He  sent  Him."  2.  How  the 
greatness  of  the  surrender  is  made  more  emphatic  by  the  negative  and  the  positive. 
'•He  spared  not,  but  delivered  Him  up."  3.  How  the  tenderness  and  the  bene- 
ficence that  were  the  sole  motive  of  the  surrender  are  lifted  into  light  in  "  for  na 
aU."  One  great  throb  of  love  to  the  whole  of  humanity  led  to  that  transcendent 
surrender  of  God's  unspeakable  gift.  4.  How  this  mysterious  act  is  grasped  by  the 
apostle  as  the  illuminating  fact  as  to  the  whole  Divine  nature.  We  are  accustomed 
to  speak  of  Christ's  life  of  unselfishness  and  His  death  of  beneficence  as  being  the 
revelation  of  the  love  of  God  as  well  as  of  Christ,  because  we  believe  that  ' '  God 
was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world,"  and  that  "  He  that  hath  seen  Christ  hath  seen 
the  Father."  But  my  text  bids  us  see  the  great  demonstration  of  God's  love 
because  the  Father's  will,  conceived  of  as  distinct  fiom,  and  yet  harmonious  with, 
the  will  of  the  Son,  gives  Him  up  for  us.  II.  The  poweb  of  this  Divine  surbendeb 
TO  BRING  WITH  IT  ALL  OTHER  GIFTS.  1.  The  questioH  rcquires  for  its  answer  only  the 
belief  in  the  unchangeableness  of  the  Divine  heart,  and  the  uniformity  of  the 
,  Divine  purpose.  These  recognised  the  conclusion  follows.  *'With  Him  Ha 
/  will  freely  give  ns  aU  things."  Because— (1)  The  greater  gift  impUes  the 
/  less.  We  do  not  expect  that  a  man  t'lat  hands  over  £1,000,000  to  another 
to  help  him,  will  stick  at  a  farthing  afterwards.  If  you  give  a  diamond  you 
may  well  give  a  box  to  keep  it  in.  There  is  a  beautiful  contrast  between  the 
manners  of  giving.  The  expression  "  freely  give  "  implies  a  grace  and  a  pleasant- 
ness in  the  act.  God  gives  in  Christ  what  we  may  reverently  say  it  was 
something  like  pain  to  give.  WiU  He  not  give  the  lesser  which  it  is  His  joy  to 
communicate  ?  (2)  The  purpose  of  the  greater  gift  cannot  be  attained  without  the 
bestowment  of  the  lesser.  He  does  not  miscalculate  His  resources.  Men  build 
palaces  and  are  bankrupt  before  the  roof  is  on.  God  lays  His  plans  with  the 
knowledge  of  His  powers,  and  having  bestowed  this  large  gift,  is  not  going  to  have 
it  bestowed  in  vain  for  want  of  some  smaller  ones  to  foUow  it  up.  Christ  puts  the 
same  argument  to  ns,  beginning  only  at  the  other  end  of  the  process.  ••  It  is  your 
Father's  good  pleasure  to  give  you  the  kingdom  Do  you  think  He  will  not  give 
you  bread  and  water  on  the  road  to  it  ?  "  That  is  not  God's  way.  He  that  hath 
begun  a  good  work  will  also  perfect  the  same,  and  when  He  gave  us  His  Son,  He 
bound  Himself  to  give  as  every  blessing  which  •«  as  needed  to  make  that  Son's  work 
complete.  (3)  Everything  is  included  and  possessed  in  Christ  when  we  receive 
Him.  "  With  Him  "  Christ  is  as  it  were  a  gieat  cornucopia,  out  of  which  will 
pour  with  magic  affluence  aU  manner  of  suppl  es  according  as  we  require.  This 
fountain  flows  with  milk,  wine,  and  water,  as  men  need.     Everything  is  given  oil 


206  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vra. 

when  Christ  is  given  to  ns,  because  Christ  is  the  Heir  of  all  things,  and  we  possess 
all  things  in  Him ;  as  some  poor  village  maiden  married  to  a  prince  in  disguise, 
who  on  the  morrow  of  her  wedding  finds  that  she  is  mistress  of  a  kingdom.  2. 
And  so  just  as  that  great  gift  is  the  illuminating  fact  in  reference  to  the  Divine 
heart,  so  is  it  the  interpreting  fact  in  reference  to  the  Divine  dealings.  Only  when 
we  keep  firm  hold  of  Christ  as  the  gift  of  God  and  the  Explainer  of  all  that  God 
does,  can  we  face  the  darkness,  the  perplexities,  the  torturing  questions  that  harasses 
men's  minds  as  they  look  upon  the  mysteries  of  human  misery.  That  gift  makes 
anything  believable  rather  than  that  He  should  spare  not  His  own  Son,  and  then 
counterwork  His  own  act  by  sending  the  world  anything  but  good.     IH.  Some 

PBACTICAIi  ISSUES  FBOM  THESE  THOUGHTS,  IN  BEFERENCE  TO  OUB  OWN  BELIEF  AND  CON- 
DUCT. 1.  Let  us  correct  our  estimates  of  the  relative  importance  of  the  two  sets  of 
gifts.  On  the  one  side  stands  the  solitary  Christ ;  on  the  other  side  all  the  things 
that  vulgar  estimation  recognises  to  be  good"  are  lumped  together  into  an  "  also. " 
They  are  but  the  golden  dust  that  may  be  filed  off  from  the  great  ingot.  They  are 
secondary ;  He  is  the  primary.  What  an  inversion  of  our  notions  of  good  1  Do 
you  degrade  all  the  world's  wealth,  pleasantness,  <fec. ,  into  an  "also"?  Do  you 
live  as  if  you  did  ?  Which  do  you  hunger  for  most,  and  labour  for  hardest  ?  '*  Seek 
ye  first  the  kingdom,"  and  the  King,  and  all  "  these  things  shall  be  added  unto  you," 
2.  Let  these  thoughts  teach  us  that  sorrow  too  is  one  of  the  gifts  of  the  Christ. 
"  Tribulation,  distress,"  Ac,  are  some  of  the  "all  things."  And  looking  upon  all, 
Paul  says,  •'  They  all  work  together  for  good  " ;  and  in  them  all  we  may  be  more 
than  conquerors.  It  would  be  a  poor,  shabby  issue  of  such  a  great  gift  if  it  were  ,^ 
only  to  be  followed  by  the  sweetnesses  and  prosperity  of  this  world.  But  the  point  /" 
here  is,  inasmuch  as  He  gives  us  all  things,  let  us  take  all  the  things  that  come  to 
us  as  being  as  distinctly  the  gifts  of  His  love,  as  is  the  gift  of  Christ  Himself.  The 
diurnal  revolution  of  the  earth  brings  the  joyful  sunrise  and  the  pathetic  sunset. 
The  annual  revolution  whirls  us  through  the  balmy  summer  and  the  biting  winter. 
God's  purpose  is  one.  His  methods  vary.  The  road  goes  straight  to  its  goal ;  but 
it  sometimes  runs  in  tunnels,  and  sometimes  by  sunny  glades.  God's  purpose  is 
always  love.  His  withdrawals  are  gifts.  And  sorrow  is  not  the  least  of  the  benefits 
which  come  to  us  through  the  Man  of  Sorrows.  3.  Let  these  thoughts  teach  us  to  / 
live  by  a  very  quiet  and  peaceful  faith.  We  find  it  a  great  deal  easier  to  trust  God  Y 
for  heaven  than  for  earth.  Many  a  man  will  venture  his  soul  into  God's  hands, 
who  would  hesitate  to  venture  to-morrow's  food  there.  Why  ?  Is  it  not  because 
we  want  the  less  more  really  than  we  want  the  greater ;  that  we  can  put  ourselves 
off  with  faith  for  the  one,  and  desire  something  more  solid  to  grasp  for  the  other  ? 
Live  in  the  calm  confidence  that  God  gives  all  things ;  and  gives  us  for  to-morrow 
as  for  eternity ;  for  earth  as  for  heaven.  4.  Make  you  quite  sure  that  you  have 
taken  the  great  gift  of  God.  He  gives  it  to  aU  the  world,  but  they  only  have  it 
who  accept  it  by  faith.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  unspeakable  gift : — Fear 
naturally  follows  guilt.  When  a  breach  has  taken  place  the  hardest  to  be  won  is 
always  the  offender.  It  is  hard  to  believe  that  he  whom  I  have  provoked  will  for- 
give me,  but  how  much  harder  is  it  to  believe  that  he  will  be  my  greatest  friend  1 
JFor  friendship  does  not  necessarily  succeed  reconciliation,  nor  munificence  forgive- 
ness. It  is  no  easy  thing  for  a  sinner  to  place  his  "  faith  and  hope  in  God."  But — 
1.  It  is  necessary.  We  shall  never  go  to  Him  till  we  can  see  that  "  He  is  ready  to 
forgive."  2.  It  is  attainable.  He  has  caused  His  goodness  to  pass  before  us,  and 
the  despairing  soul  reasons  itself  into  light  and  comfort  from  the  text.  Note — I.  A 
WONDERFUL  FACT.  There  are  marvellous  displays  of  God's  power,  wisdom,  truth, 
holiness  ;  but  the  miracle  before  us  is  a  miracle  of  love.  To  magnify  this  goodness 
observe — 1.  The  boon  He  did  not  withhold.  He"  spared  not  His  own  Son."  How  / 
many  things  could  you  resign  before  you  spared  a  child  !  How  unwilling  was  Jacob  y 
to  spare  Benjamin  though  he  had  many  children  ;  how  unwilling  David  to  give  up 
even  a  rebellious  Absalom  1  History  mentions  a  poor  family  in  Germany  who  were 
ready  to  perish  in  the  time  of  famine.  The  husband  proposed  to  the  wife  to  sell 
one  of  their  children  for  bread.  At  length  she  consents.  But  which  of  them  shall 
it  be  ?  The  eldest  was  named,  but  he  was  the  beginning  of  their  strength.  The 
second  was  the  living  image  of  his  father.  In  the  third  the  features  of  the  mother 
breathed.  The  last  was  the  child  of  their  old  age.  And  so  they  consented  to  starve 
together  rather  than  sacrifice  one.  What  was  the  severest  trial  of  Abraham's 
regard  for  God  ?  ' '  Now  I  know  that  thou  fearest  Me,  see  that  thou  hast  not  with- 
held thy  son,  thine  only  son  from  Me."  How  dignified  was  God's  Lon  (Heb.  i.  5,6). 
How  dear  was  God's  Son  I    The  Son  of  His  love  ;  who  always  did  the  things  that 


CHAP,  vm.]  ROMANS.  207 

pleased  Him  ;  in  Him  His  soul  delighted  I  Yet  He  "  spared  not  His  own  Son."  2. 
The  state  into  which  He  surrendered  Him.  He  "delivered  Him  up."  To  what? 
To  a  world  that  disowned  Him.  To  a  people  that  abhorred  Him,  though  prepared  by 
miracles,  and  ordinances,  and  prophecies,  to  receive  Him  (John  i.  11).  To  obscurity 
and  indigence.  He  was  born  in  a  stable,  and  through  life  "  He  had  not  where  to 
lay  His  head."  To  infamy  and  scorn.  To  pain  and  anguish.  To  be  betrayed  by 
Judas ;  to  be  denied  by  Peter ;  to  be  forsaken  of  all.  To  Caiaphas  and  Herod — who 
set  Him  at  nought ;  to  Pilate — who  condemned  Him  ;  to  the  Romans — who  crucified 
Him.  Surely  here  is  love  for  which  we  want  a  name  1  Especially  when  we  con- 
sider— 3.  Those  for  whose  advantage  He  was  given.  Not  angels  ;  but  men.  Not 
men  only ;  but  sinners.  Not  sinners  humbled  under  a  sense  of  our  misery,  and 
applying  for  mercy ;  but  sinners  regardless  of  their  deliverance,  and  abusing  the 
Divine  goodness.  To  love  parents,  children,  friends,  is  just  and  natural.  To  do 
good  to  strangers  is  humane.  To  relieve  the  poor  and  needy  is  kind  and 
generous.  But  to  love  our  enemies  is  Divine.  And  not  for  a  few  of  these 
rebels,  but  for  "  all."  II.  The  iNrEBENCE.  1.  The  way  in  which  He  com- 
municates His  favours — "freely."  If  the  blessings  are  great,  they  are  equally 
gracious  :  and  we  are  invited  to  come  and  "  take  of  the  water  of  Ufe  freely."  2.  The 
extent  of  His  liberality — "  all  things  " — pardon,  to  remove  our  guilt ;  strength,  to 
aid  us  in  duty ;  consolation  in  distress  ;  guidance  in  perplexity ;  heaven,  and  sup- 
plies for  the  wilderness  on  this  side  of  it.  The  grant  has  only  one  limitation — the 
goodness  of  the  things  conferred  ;  of  this  God  only  is  the  Judge,  and  therefore  with 
Him  the  determination  must  be  left.  3.  The  reasonableness  of  our  most  enlarged 
expectation.  "  How  shall  He  not  with  Him."  (1)  He  was  designed  to  prepare  the  way 
for  the  communication  of  all  the  blessings  we  need.  Sin  had  stopped  the  effusion 
of  the  Divine  goodness,  but  He  came  to  remove  every  obstruction,  and  to  render  the 
exercise  of  Divine  favour  consistent  with  the  honour  of  Divine  government.  And 
now,  if  we  go  to  God  there  is  nothing  to  hinder  His  mercy.  (2)  He  is  superior  to 
every  other  blessing.  You  are  sometimes  dismayed  at  the  thought  of  your  demerit ; 
but  if  your  demerit  restrained  the  Divine  goodness,  the  Saviour  would  never  have 
appeared.  You  are  sometimes  dismayed  at  the  greatness  of  the  blessing  you  ask ; 
but  if  the  greatness  of  the  blessing  restrained  the  Divine  goodness.  He  would  have 
denied  giving  His  own  Son.  What  God  has  already  given  is  infinitely  more  precious 
than  anything  we  can  in  future  implore.  (3)  Yea,  He  is  in  reality  every  other 
blessing ;  and  we  have  all  with  Him.  Conclusion  :  The  subject  should — 1.  Inspire 
you  with  encouragement.  Never  entertain  any  harsh  and  gloomy  notions  of  God. 
2.  Impose  upon  you  submission.  Is  anything  denied  you  that  seems  desirable  ? 
He  distinguishes  between  your  welfare  and  your  wishes.  The  blessing  is  not  with- 
held from  a  want  of  power  or  love.  3.  Inflame  you  with  gratitude.  "  What  shall 
I  render  ?  "  <fec.  (W.  Jay.)  Our  Father^s  beneficence  : — The  text  is  an  epitome  of 
Christianity.  It  is  history  declaring  the  most  glorious  fact,  and  logic  deducing  the 
most  precious  assurance.  The  history  and  the  logic  are  alike  Divine,  for  the 
writer  "  spake  as  he  was  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  1,  God  is  a  benefactor.  He 
made  everything  and  pronounced  it  good ;  He  manages  everything,  and  His 
management  is  good.  He  gives  us  aU  things  richly  to  enjoy.  2.  Believers 
are  His  special  beneficiaries.  His  tender  mercy  is  over  all  His  works,  but 
His  delights  are  with  those  who  know  and  love  Him.  Here  the  Father  speaks 
to  His  family  only,  that  with  faith  they  may  adhere  to  Him  more  closely; 
that  with  hope  they  may  rejoice  iu  Him  more  ardently;  and  that  with  love 
they  may  serve  Him  more  adequately.  The  text  teaches  ns  that  God's  bene- 
ficence is — I.  Perfect.  The  gifts  of  God  are  twofold — the  gift  of  His  Son  and 
the  gift  of  all  things ;  and  this  beneficence  is  perfect  because  it  is  most  ample  and 
comprehensive.  The  first  of  these  gifts  is  unmistakable ;  bot  the  other  is  not  thus 
definite.  It  is  not  to  be  taken  absolutely,  because  God  does  not  endow  His  children 
equally  and  absolutely.  And  yet  there  is  a  most  important  sense  in  which  God 
bestows  all  things  on  His  people.  1.  About  all  things  spiritual  there  can  be  no 
controversy.  God  gives  all  these  to  all  His  children  alike.  He  feeds  them  all  with 
the  same  milk  of  the  Word  and  the  same  strong  meat  of  truth.  He  pours  upon  them 
all  the  same  Spirit,  kindles  and  maintains  in  them  all  the  same  Divine  life,  leads 
them  in  the  same  way,  to  the  same  heaven.  If  we  have  not,  it  is  either  becanse 
we  ask  not  or  becanse  we  ask  amiss.  All  things  are  for  ns,  and  it  is  our  own  taxdi 
if  we  do  not  possess  them — mercy  to  pardon  us,  grace  to  help  ns,  Ac.  2.  All  things 
secular  are  to  be  understood  in  consonance  with  all  things  spiritual.  The  secolari- 
ties  that  subserve  oxu  spiritual  life  our  Heavenly  Father  bestows ;  all  else  H«  with- 


^ 


208  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vnfc 

holds  or  takes  away.  '*  No  good  thing  will  He  withhold  from  them  that  walk 
uprightly. "  Good  is  a  relative  term.  What  is  good  for  one  man  may  not  be  good 
for  another,  or  for  the  same  man  in  different  circumstances.  We  must  leave  the 
interpretation  of  the  text  in  specific  cases  to  its  Author.  He  alone  can  justly 
determine  what  is  good.  II.  Certain.  The  gift  of  God's  Son  assures  us  of  the 
gift  of  all  things,  because  of — 1.  Their  comparative  magnitude.  The  gifts  of  God 
vary,  but  one  among  all  stands  pre-eminent.  This  is  an  infinite  gift,  because  the 
Son  of  God  is  an  infinite  being ;  and  it  is  the  greatest  of  all  possible  gifts  because  it 
is  God  Himself.  This  gift  throws  every  other  gift  into  shade.  When  the  sun  rises  *^ 
he  casts  the  stars  into  oblivion.  And  can  such  a  gift  be  conferred,  and  minor  ones  u 
denied?  May  we  call  the  ocean  ours,  and  yet  be  forbidden  to  drink  of  the  brook  by 
the  way  ?  2.  Their  close  connection.  The  gift  is  related  to  the  gifts — (1)  as  means 
to  ends.  The  gift  of  God's  Son  is  the  beneficence  of  sacrifice,  the  gift  of  all  things 
is  the  beneficence  of  sufficiency,  and  the  former  is  the  means  of  the  latter.  (2)  As 
co.essential  means.  The  gift  of  God's  Son  is  the  means  of  salvation  ;  but  salvation 
itself  is  a  means,  it  is  the  means  of  God's  glory  and  of  eternal  life.  The  holy  is  a 
means  of  the  holiest,  the  life  below  is  a  means  of  the  life  above.  The  gift  and  each 
and  all  of  the  gifts  are  links  of  the  golden  chain  that  draws  us  up  to  the  throne  of 
God.  3.  The  Giver's  motive  and  manner.  To  give  freely  is  to  give  lovingly  and 
readily,  or  from  a  loving  motive  and  in  a  ready  manner.  (J".  G.  Manly.)  All 
with  Christ : — In  order  to  grasp  the  argument  we  must  understand  that  Paul  is 
speaking  to  believers  in  the  midst  of  a  groaning  world  whose  hope  needed  to  be 
sustained  by  the  strongest  evidence.  It  was  not  enough  to  speak  of  God's  purpose, 
and  promise,  so  a  more  triumphant  argument  was  used.  God  has  already  done  so 
much  that  all  that  remains  to  be  done  is  nothing  in  comparison.  As  a  pledge  to  us 
that  the  great  scheme  of  redemption  shall  not  be  defeated,  God  has  Himself 
embarked  in  it  so  vast  an  investment  that  failure  would  not  only  be  disastrous  to 
us,  but  would  involve  a  Divine  bankruptcy — omnipotence  baffled,  external  purpose 
defeated,  an  infinite  outlay  of  Divine  love  thrown  away.      Let  us  look — I.  At  oub 

PEESENT  STANDING  PLACE  BETWEEN  THE  PAST    AND    THE    FUTURE.       1.    The    past — "  God 

hath  not  spared  His  own  Son,  but  given  Him  up  for  us  all."  "  For  us  all  "  suggests 
a  collective  interest,  and  not  merely  an  individual  share  in  the  great  transaction. 
If  at  times  the  soundness  of  redemption  is  felt  to  arise  from  a  personal  appropria- 
tion of  its  benefits,  yet  there  is  peculiar  consolation  in  the  view  of  it  which  embraces 
the  entire  Church  of  the  firstborn.  2.  That  which  is  to  come  is  the  gift  of  "  all 
things"  which  are  to  "work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God"  (see  also 
1  Cor.  ii.  21).  Not  only  shall  existing  agencies,  however  adverse,  be  pressed  into 
the  service  of  redemption ;  but  fresh  agencies  shall  be  brought  forward  at  their 
appointed  time  to  complete  the  work.  We  may  therefore  hail  every  fresh  discovery 
in  science,  &o.,  as  only  another  helper  of  God's  work.  "The  earth  shall  help  the 
woman,"  and  all  the  wealth  of  nations  shall  flow  into  the  city  of  God.  3.  Our 
position  on  this  line  of  redemption  is  between  the  past  and  the  future.  The  one 
gift  is  ours,  the  second  gift  not  yet.  The  extent  of  our  realisations  as  compared 
with  the  extent  of  our  hopes  leaves  much  to  be  accomplished.  II.  The  pledge 
WHICH  IS  THUS  furnished.  We  are  not  left  to  the  bare  power  or  willingness  or 
promise  of  God  to  finish  the  work ;  we  have  in  the  past  gift  an  advanced  security 
as  to  the  triumphant  result.  I  know  of  no  text  that  is  better  adapted  to  give  a 
material  guarantee  of  the  final  emancipation  of  the  sons  of  God.  As  we  contem- 
plate the  Cross  of  Christ  we  may  adopt  the  sentiment  of  Manoah's  wife  (Judges 
xiii.  23).  In  arguing  from  the  past  to  the  future  we  mark — 1.  That,  as  a  Divine 
work,  the  greatest  thing  is  done  already.  In  looking  along  the  line  of  redemption 
we  see  that  the  crisis  o\  it  is  past.  To  us  the  benefits  of  salvation  widen  and  grow 
in  value,  but  to  God  the  most  valuable  thing  has  been  introduced  into  the  process. 
2.  The  sufferings  of  Christ.  He  was  not  spared.  And  now  God  hath  exalted  Him 
to  His  own  right  hand  to  perfect  the  work.  And  we  may  observe — (1)  That  one 
part  of  His  mediatorial  work  cost  Him  much  more  than  the  other.  "  We  are 
reconciled  by  His  death,  and  we  are  saved  by  His  life."  One  part  cost  Him  tears, 
agony,  and  blood ;  the  other  is  carried  on  amidst  the  joy  of  His  exaltation.  (2) 
That  the  most  costly  part  is  that  which  is  past  and  finished,  and  the  less  costly  part 
of  it  is  that  which  is  to  come.  (3)  That  the  connection  between  the  two  is  that  the 
finishing  of  the  salvation  is  the  very  fruit  of  all  He  endured.  If  God  spared  Him 
not,  shaU  He  not  let  Him  see  of  the  travail  of  His  soul  and  be  satisfied?  3.  The 
grace  which  pervades  the  entire  plan  of  redemption.  It  was  not  because  He  owed 
it  to  us,  but  because  His  own  heart  was  set  upon  it.    And  shall  the  love  which  gave 


«nu».  vin.]  ROMANS.  209 

DB  Christ  begin  to  measure  oat  niggard  besto^mients  when  the  greatest  triumph  is 
about  to  be  realised  in  peopling  heaven  with  redeemed  souls?  4.  The  objects  of 
Divine  mercy.  What  has  been  done  in  the  past  was  done  whilst  we  were  yet 
enemies.  But  we  are  now  sons.  Shall  God  do  so  much  for  His  enemies,  and  then 
begin  to  withhold  His  hand  ?  In  conclusion :  Our  subject — 1.  Affords  the  strongest 
possible  assurance  of  the  completion  of  God's  great  plans.  The  Cross  and  the 
empty  grave  are  pledges  that  the  issue  shall  be  triumphant,  and  that  all  things 
shall  serve  that  end.  2.  Shows  who  they  are  who  are  the  real  beneficiaries  of  God, 
whom  all  things  serve.  "With  Christ,  not  without  Him,  are  all  things  ours.  (P.  Strutt.) 
All  things  with  Christ: — I.  The  impobtant  fact  assebted.  1.  "  He  spared  not  His 
own  Son,"  Ac.  Man,  made  upright,  lost  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  then 
became  corrupt  and  could  not  extricate  himself.  God's  mercy  found  remedy — He 
determined  to  give  His  Son.  "  Spare  "  has  two  senses.  (1)  He  did  not  keep  Him 
back ;  there  was  no  obligation  in  God  thus  to  give  us  Jesus.  Herein  is  love,  &c. 
(2)  He  did  not  excuse  Him  from  suffering.  The  Divine  nature  could  not  suffer, 
but  gave  efficacy.  2,  It  was  God  that  delivered  Him  up  ;  whatever  was  done  by 
Judas  or  Pilate  was  done  by  permission.  3.  '•  For  us" — not  our  remote  advantage 
merely,  as  in  resurrection,  but  in  our  stead — that  we  might  not  perish  (Isa.  liii.). 
4.  "For  us  all."  Not  some  men  of  all  countries,  but  "for  every  man."  II.  The 
INFERENCE  DEDUCED  FBOM  IT.  "  All  things  "  nccessary  and  salutary.  1.  All  the 
comforts  of  this  life  which  it  is  safe  and  proper  we  should  enjoy.  God  has  the 
prerogative  of  knowing  what  is  best  for  us.  He  can  best  cater  for  us.  Be  thankful 
that  He  deigns  to  do  this.  Connect  even  our  temporal  blessings  with  the  atonement 
of  the  Lord  Jesus.  2.  Chiefly  spiritual  blessings.  The  interrogation  here  is  an 
assertion ;  to  suppose  the  contrary  would  be  ridiculous.  Three  positions  may 
support  this  inference.  (1)  If  He  gave  His  Son  to  enemies  what  will  He  give  to  us 
who  have  thrown  our  arms  away  (chap,  v.)  ?  (2)  He  gave  Him  unsought,  and 
even  undesired.  The  first  step  to  man's  recovery  was  taken  in  God.  (3)  He  gave 
us  His  best  gift.  His  own  Son — a  Divine  person.  If  a  creature,  the  apostle  would 
have  magnified  the  greatness  of  the  purchase  with  the  small  price.  He  has  no 
such  other  gift.  Omnipotence  is  limited  here ;  we  can  ask  no  blessing  adequate 
to  this :  hence  what  is  the  pardon  of  sins  to  God  ?  Nay,  He  delights  in  it.  Why, 
then,  should  He  withhold  inferior  blessings?  We  are  warranted  to  ask  till  we 
think  of  some  gift  greater  than  Jesus.  3.  He  will  freely  give  us  aU  things.  No 
regard  to  merit  or  worthiness  in  the  receiver.  As  He  had  no  such  regard  when  He 
gave  His  Son,  so  He  yet  acts  freely — pardons,  sanctifies,  saves  to  heaven  freely. 
(J.  Summerfield,  A.M.)  All  things  with  Christ : — It  is  a  joint  gift,  so  to  speak,  to 
which  God  has  pledged  Himself  through  the  scheme  of  redemption — the  gift  of  all 
things  with  Christ,  but  of  nothing  without  Christ.  If  you  will  take  Christ  you  may 
be  sure  of  everything  besides ;  but  if  you  refuse  Christ  there  is  no  promise  of 
anything.  There  is  perhaps  no  passage  of  Scripture  which  sets  before  you  the  love 
of  God  more  overpoweringly  than  it  is  set  in  our  text ;  not  one  which  grounds  on 
this  love  a  more  powerful  argument  why  we  should  expect  large  things  from  the 
benevolence  of  our  Maker  ;  and  yet  is  this  very  passage  so  constructed  as  to  force 
on  our  attention  that  God  has  no  mercy  whatsoever  for  the  sinful  except  through 
His  Son.  And  this  peculiarity  in  the  text  ought  also  to  furnish  a  rule  as  to  what 
may  be  lawful  in  Christian  desires,  and  the  subject  of  the  Christian's  prayers.  Is 
the  thing  one  with  which  Christ  may  be  joined  ?  The  promise  is  that  God  will 
give  me  all  things  with  Christ ;  but  such  a  promise  excludes  whatsoever  is  not 
in  harmony  with  Christ.  Who  can  fail  to  see  how  chastening  an  influence  would 
be  exerted  on  our  wishes  and  prayers  if  the  exclusiveness  ^s  well  as  the  compre- 
hensiveness of  a  promise  were  borne  diligently  in  mind  ?  Tell  me  that  all  things 
are  promised,  and  I  might  ask  for  riches,  and  pleasures,  and  honours ;  but  tell  me 
that  all  things  are  promised  with  Christ,  and  I  shall  be  ashamed  to  solicit  what  would 
not  combine  well  with  Christ.  But  note  yet  again  that  God  gives  nothing  to  His 
people  with  which  He  does  not  at  the  same  time  give  Christ.  He  may  give  riches, 
but  He  gives  Christ  with  the  riches,  so  that,  sanctified  by  the  Eedeemer,  they  shall 
be  employed  to  His  glory.  He  may  give  sources  of  earthly  happiness,  but  He  gives 
Christ  with  them  to  make  them  doubly  sweet,  and  yet  to  prevent  their  drawing  oflf 
the  affections  from  heavenly  joys.  He  may  give  trouble,  but  He  gives  Christ  to 
enlighten  darkness,  to  hush  disquietude.  The  Christian  shall  find  nothing  precious 
in  which  he  does  not  find  Christ.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  All  things  with  Christ  :— 
If  you  were  in  prison,  and  the  clemency  of  legal  authority  should  pronounce  your 
pardou,  and  the  messenger  who  brought  it  to  your  cell  should  find  you  a  cripple, 
VOL.   II.  14 


210  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

would  you  not  expect  that  the  same  clemency  would  also  reach  its  aid  to  the 
crippled  limbs  ?  If  it  would  furnish  no  such  aid  as  you  lifted  your  hopeless  eye  to 
the  opened  door,  you  would  execrate  the  misnamed  mercy  that  had  pardoned  you  t 
You  would  ask,  Why  torment  me  with  an  offer  impossible  for  me  to  accept  ?  There 
is  a  Holy  Spirit  for  you  as  well  as  a  crucified  Christ.  If  you  were  an  undutiful  sort 
whose  profligacy  had  plunged  you  into  misery,  and  the  fatherly  affection  which  yoa 
had  abused  should  follow  you  still,  and  not  only  send  you  a  message  of  forgiveness^ 
but  sacrifice  the  most  valuable  of  bis  possessions  that  you  might  be  free  to  return, 
could  you  have  any  thought  that  the  same  affection,  when  you  had  worked  your 
way  back  to  the  door  of  the  paternal  mansion  and  stood  there  in  want,  would  refuse 
a  morsel  of  bread  to  your  hungry  lips  ?      (I.  S.  Spencer,  D.D.)  All  things  with 

Christ : — The  greater  ever  includes  the  less.  If  an  estate  is  bequeathed  to  me  aud 
becomes  my  own,  I  have  complete  possession  alike  of  the  whole  and  of  its  parts. 
I  can  thin  the  timber,  or  fell  it  and  reaHse  the  gain.  I  can  dig  out  the  minerals 
and  sell  them,  or  build  with  them,  or  smelt  them  as  I  please.  He  who  transfers  to 
me  his  garden,  conveys  to  me  not  only  the  plot  of  ground  encircled  by  the  fence, 
but  its  fruit-trees,  shrubs,  and  flowers.  He  who  spares  not  his  own  purse,  but 
delivers  it  up  for  me,  a  free  and  loving  gift,  how  shall  he  not  with  it  freely  give 
therewith  the  gold  that  it  contains?  But  this  is  what  I  read  concerning  my 
Saviour :  "  It  hath  pleased  the  Father  that  in  Him  should  all  fulness  dwell." 
Then  •'  all  the  fulness  "  describes  the  extent  of  my  resources,  and  Jesus  says,  "  My 
joy  shall  remain  in  you,  and  your  joy  shall  be  full."  I  read  of  my  Saviour,  given 
for  me,  that  "  the  Father  hath  committed  all  things  into  His  hand  "  ;  then  these, 
too,  are  mine ;  and  Paul  positively  says  so  in  as  many  words — "  all  things  are 
yours,  for  ye  are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's ;  having  nothing,  and  yet  possessing 
all  things."  I  read  of  Him  that  "all  power  is  given  unto  Me  in  heaven  and  in 
earth."  And  I  read  also  that  "  He  giveth  strength  "  to  His  people,  and  that  we 
are  to  be  "  strong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the  power  of  His  might."  No  wonder  with 
such  omnipotent  resources  that  Paul  says,  "  I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ 
strengthening  me."  No  wonder  that  with  the  Lord  for  his  Shepherd,  David  says, 
"  I  shall  not  want."  Do  not  minify  the  lot  of  your  inberitance.  Cultivate  large 
views  as  to  the  extent  of  your  resources.  Live  near  to  God,  strong  in  your  loyalty 
to  Jesus,  and  boldly  draw  even  in  the  hardest  times  on  the  Bank  of  Faith.  That 
can  never  fail,  however  great  the  run  upon  it ;  as  long  as  God's  exchequer  endures 
your  cheques  will  never  be  returned ;  your  allowances  during  the  days  of  your 
earthly  minority  shall  be  on  a  scale  commensurate  with  the  royal  wealth  of  the 
King,  your  Father,  and  when  the  shadow  of  death  on  time's  dial  announces  the 
attainment  of  your  majority,  then  shall  you  come  into  full  possessioii  of  your 
estate,  the  inheritance  of  those  who  are  heirs  of  God  and  joint  heirs  with  Jesus 
Christ.  God  "  spared  not  His  own  Son,"  but  that  did  not  lesson  His  resources. 
Human  resources  grow  less  and  less  in  proportion  as  the  outgoings  from  them  are 
more  and  more.  But  it  is  far  otherwise  with  the  resources  of  the  Christian  whose 
whole  fortune  is  invested  in  the  love  of  God.  He  gave  Himself,  and  yet  hath  all 
to  give.  The  glorious  sun,  how  little  it  feels  the  mighty  drain  on  its  resources  t 
What  oceans  of  glowing  light  it  hath  poured  forth  since  the  day  when  God  said, 
•'  Let  light  be "  I  What  a  vast  and  wide  succession  of  autumn  fields  he  has 
nursed  and  ripened  into  rich  and  golden  corn ;  what  mountains  of  ice  he  has 
thawed;  what  untold  snows  he  has  melted  into  beneficent  and  fertile  streams; 
what  generations  of  luscious  fruits  and  blooming  flowers  he  hath  matured  and 
painted  in  fair  colours ;  what  magical  changes  he  hath  wrought  in  the  blue  heavens 
above  and  on  the  green  earth  beneath  since  the  day  when  God  first  hung  His 
brilliant  lamp  among  the  stars  and  charged  His  mighty  reservoir  with  glorious 
power!  And  yet  His  glowing  furnace  has  never  cooled,  neither  is  His  natural 
strength  abated  ;  and  to-day  it  shines  abroad  in  pristine  glory,  true  symbol  of  the 
exhaustless  bounty  of  its  God.  So  is  it  with  the  Sun  of  Righteousness.  He  who 
spared  not  HlmseJi,  but  delivered  Himself  up  to  pour  out  His  whole  Divine  soul  to 
kindle  life  and  light,  to  conquer  death  and  darkness  and  open  heaven  to  the  human 
race,  how  shall  He  not,  how  can  He  help,  impelled  for  ever  by  the  same  love,  lifting 
up  my  soul,  lightening  my  burden,  succouring  my  spirit,  soothing  my  sorrows, 
cheering  my  heart,  and  drying  my  tears  7  He  must  and  will.  "  His  love  is  as 
great  as  His  power,  and  neither  knows  measure  nor  end.  (J.  Jackson  Wray.} 
The  death  of  Christ  and  its  consequencet : — I.  How  the  death  of  Christ  is  hkbb 
BxrBESSED.  1.  Negatively — "  He  spared  not  His  own  Son."  (1)  God's  act.  There 
is  a  twofold  not-sparing,    (a)  In  a  way  of  impartial  justice  (2  Pet.  ii.  i,  5).    No 


CHAT.  Tin.]  E0MAN8,  211 

clemency,  bat  deserved  punishment.  So  God  spared  not  Christ  when  He  took  npon 
Him  to  satisfy  for  our  sins  (Zeoh.  xiii.  7).  (b)  In  a  way  of  eminent  and  free 
bounty.  We  are  sparing  of  those  things  which  are  most  precious  to  us ;  but  upon 
great  occasions  we  part  with  them  (John  iii.  16).  (2)  The  object — "  His  own  Son  " ; 
not  an  adopted  son,  but  only-begotteru  What  dearer  to  parents  than  their  children  ? 
But  God's  love  to  Christ  is  not  to  be  measured  by  an  ordinary  standard.  Let  us 
consider  what  might  have  moved  God  to  spare  His  Son.  (a)  The  incomparable 
worth  and  excellency  of  His  person  (Phil.  ii.  6).  (b)  The  singular  and  infinite  love 
between  God  and  Christ  (CoL  i.  13).  The  Father  loved  Him  dearly ;  and  we  are 
chary  of  what  we  tenderly  love  (John  i.  18 ;  Prov.  viii.  30).  (c)  No  equal  or  advan- 
tageous exchange.  What  could  God  gain  that  might  be  an  equal  recompense  for 
the  death  of  Christ  ?  Now  no  man  doth  give  much  for  what  is  but  little  esteemed ; 
but  God  gave  His  own  Son  to  recover  the  perishing  world.  2.  Positively—"  But 
delivered  Him  up  for  us  all."  Mark — (1)  The  person  who — "  GoJ."  This  word  is 
used  of  several  agents  :  Judas  (John  xix.  11),  Pilate  (John  xix.  16),  the  high-priests 
(Matt,  xxvii.  2),  the  people  (Matt.  xx.  19) ;  yea,  Christ  delivered  up  Himself  (Rom. 
iv.  25)  ;  here,  "  God  delivered  Him."  One  word  is  used,  but  the  act  proceeded  from 
several  causes  ;  the  people  delivered  Him  out  of  ignorance  and  incousiderate  zeal, 
Judas  out  of  covetousness  and  treachery,  the  high-priests  out  of  malice  and  envy, 
Pilate  out  of  a  faulty  compliance  with  the  humours  of  the  people,  Christ  out  of 
obedience  to  God,  God  Himself  to  show  His  infinite  love  for  us.  It  is  for  our 
comfort  to  observe  that  it  is  God's  act.  The  law  which  condemneth  us  is  the  law 
of  God ;  the  wrath  and  punishment  which  we  fear  is  the  wrath  of  God ;  and  the 
fountain  of  all  the  blessings  we  expect  is  the  favour  of  God ;  and  God  delivered 
Christ  up  for  us  all,  to  assure  our  comfort,  peace,  and  hope.  (2)  The  act — "  He 
delivered  Him  up,"  not  only  to  be  made  flesh  for  us  (John  i.  14),  which  was  a 
state  at  the  greatest  distance  from  His  nature,  who  was  a  pure  spirit.  But  God, 
who  is  a  spirit,  was  made  flesh  that  He  might  be  nearer  to  us,  and  took  a  mother 
upon  earth  that  we  might  have  a  Father  in  heaven.  But  also  made  sin  for  us 
(2  Cor.  V.  21 ;  Rom.  viii.  3)  and  a  curse  for  us  (Gal.  iii.  13).  (3)  The  persons  for 
whom — for  the  cursed  race  of  fallen  Adam,  who  had  no  strength  to  do  anything  for 
themselves.  II.  God  having  laid  this  foundation,  let  us  see  what  a  supeestbuctdee 
OF  OEAOB  IS  BUILT  THEBEON,  and  He  doth  "  freely  give  us  all  things."  1.  All  good 
things  are  the  gift  of  God  (James  i.  17) ;  and  whatever  God  giveth.  He  giveth  freely, 
for  there  can  be  no  pre-obligation  upon  Him  (chap.  xi.  35).  But  here  the  chief 
thing  considerable  is  the  largeness  of  the  gift.  Both  the  creature  and  the  Creator, 
from  God  to  the  poorest  thing  in  the  world,  through  Jesus  Christ  all  is  ours  (Rev. 
xxi.  7).  2.  This  "  all  things  "  reacheth  to  heaven  and  earth  (1  Tim.  iv.  8).  3.  This 
"  all  things  "  concerneth  the  whole  man — (1)  The  body  (Matt.  vi.  33).  He  that 
hath  any  place  or  office  hath  the  perquisites  of  the  place  or  office.  (2)  The  soul 
(2  Pet.  i.  2).  4,  All  things  that  are  for  our  real  advantage,  of  what  nature  soever 
they  be  (1  Cor.  iii.  21;  Psa.  Ixxxiv.  11).  III.  The  steength  and  the  tobce  of 
THE  iNFEBENCE.  This  bioad  and  ample  foundation  will  support  the  building. 
1.  The  giving  of  Christ  is  a  sign  and  pledge  of  His  great  love  to  us.  And  what 
will  not  love,  and  great  love,  do  for  those  whom  it  loveth  (John  iii.  16  ;  1  John  iv. 
10)  ?  2.  Christ  is  the  greatest  and  most  precious  gift ;  and  surely  God,  that  hath 
given  so  great  a  benefit,  will  He  stick  at  lesser  things?  He  that  hath  given  a 
pound,  will  He  not  give  a  farthing  ?  Hath  He  given  Christ,  and  will  He  not  give 
pardon  to  cancel  our  defects,  and  grace  to  do  our  duty  ?  comfort  to  support  us  in 
our  afflictions?  suppUes  to  maintain  and  protect  us  during  our  services?  and 
finally,  will  He  not  reward  us  after  we  have  served  Him  ?  Reconciliation  by  His 
death  is  propounded  as  a  more  difficult  thing  than  salvation  by  His  life  (chap.  v. 
10).  3.  It  is  a  gift  in  order  to  other  things ;  and  therefore  He  will  complete  that 
gift.  Christ  came  to  purchase  all  manner  of  benefits — the  favour,  the  image,  the 
everlasting  fruition  of  the  glory  of  God.  Now,  will  God  by  an  antecedent  bounty 
lay  the  foundation  so  deep,  and  withhold  the  consequent  bounty  ?  Shall  so  great  a 
price  be  paid  and  we  obtain  nothing  ?  4.  The  giving  of  Christ  showeth  how  freely 
God  will  give  all  things  to  us :  He  gave  Christ  unasked,  and  unsought  too.  IV. 
Who  have  an  inteeest  in  Chbist,  and  mat  beason  thus  within  themselves — 
"  Shall  He  not  also  together  with  Him  give  us  all  things  ?  "  1.  Those  to  whom 
God  giveth  Christ.  We  read  sometimes  of  Christ  given  for  us,  and  sometimes  of 
Christ  given  to  us.  The  one  speaketh  the  love  of  God  to  lost  man,  the  other  God's 
love  to  us  in  particular  (Gal.  i.  10  ;  Rev.  i.  5).  The  first  gift  is  Christ  (John  v.  12 ; 
Heb.  iii  14 ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  5).    We  do  not  hve  in  the  body  till  we  be  united  to  the 


212  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vm, 

bead ;  nor  till  we  have  Christ,  do  we  receive  the  saving  effects  of  His  grace ;  clear 
that  once,  and  shall  He  not  with  Him  give  us  all  things  ?  God  offereth  Him  to  all, 
but  He  giveth  Him  to  you  when  you  believe.  2.  Those  that  give  up  themselves  to 
Christ  (1  Cor.  iii.  22).  If  you  be  to  Christ  what  Christ  was  to  God,  a  dedicated 
servant,  ever  to  do  the  things  that  please  Him ;  when  you  enter  into  covenant  with 
Him,  and  devote  yourselves  to  His  use  and  service.  If  you  be  sincere  and  hearty 
in  this,  you  need  not  doubt  a  plentiful  allowance.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  On  the 
passion : — I.  Thb  pebson  DELrvERED.  "  His  own  Son."  This,  though  we  make  it 
the  first  step,  yet  indeed  is  the  top  of  the  ladder,  from  which  the  light  of  Hia 
countenance  shineth  upon  us,  and  showeth  that  He  loved  us  as  His  own  Son  ;  nay, 
more.  In  this  manifestation  of  His  love  He  appeareth  rather  a  Father  to  us  than 
to  Him.  He  will  rob  Himself  to  enrich  us ;  and,  to  make  us  His  children,  deliver 
up  His  owu  Son.  1.  A  strange  contemplation  it  is.  Can  God  delight  to  make  Hia 
own  Son  a  sacrifice  who  would  not  suffer  Abraham  to  offer  up  his?  Or  might  He 
not  have  taken  an  angel  for  His  Son,  as  He  did  a  ram  for  Isaac  ?  It  was  His  will 
to  deUver  Him ;  and  this  cleareth  all  doubts.  If  God  will  do  anything,  we  have 
but  one  word  left  us  for  answer,  "  Amen  1"  "  Let  it  be  done  1 "  He  might  not 
have  done  it.  He  might,  without  impairing  of  His  justice,  have  kept  Him  stUl  iu 
His  bosom ;  but  as  "  of  His  own  will  He  begat  us  with  the  word  of  truth  "  (Jamea 
i.  18),  so  "  He  dehvered  up  His  own  Son  because  He  would."  For  as  in  the  crea- 
tion God  might  have  made  man  by  Hia  "  word  "  alone,  yet  wrought  him  out  of  the 
earth ;  so,  in  the  great  work  of  our  redemption.  He  did  not  send  a  Moses  or  an 
angel,  but  "delivered  up  His  own  Son,"  and  so  gave  a  price  infinitely  above  that 
wluch  He  bought.  He  was  pleased  to  pay  dear  for  His  affection  to  us.  How 
should  this  flame  of  God's  love  kindle  love  in  us  !  That  benefit  is  great  which  pre- 
venteth  our  prayers  ;  that  is  greater  which  is  above  our  hope ;  that  is  yet  greater 
that  exceedeth  our  desires  :  but  how  great  is  that  which  over-runneth  our  opinion, 
yea,  swalloweth  it  up  !  Certainly,  had  not  God  revealed  His  will,  we  could  not  have 
desired  it,  but  our  prayers  would  have  been  blasphemy;  our  hope,  madness;  our 
wish,  sacrilege  ;  and  our  opinion,  impiety.  2.  And  now  if  any  ask,  "  What  moved 
His  will  ?  "  surely  no  loveliness  in  the  object.  In  it  there  was  nothing  but  loath- 
someness, and  such  enmity  as  might  make  Him  rather  send  down  fire  and  brim- 
stone than  His  Son.  That  which  moved  Him  was  in  Himself,  His  compassion.  He 
loved  us  "  in  our  blood  "  ;  and  loving  us.  He  bid  us  "  live  "  (Ezek.  xvi.  6) ;  and, 
that  we  might  live,  "  delivered  up  His  own  Son  "  to  death.  Mercy  is  aU  our  plea, 
and  it  was  all  His  motive ;  and  wrought  in  Him  a  will,  a  cheerful  will.  II.  The 
DELIVERY.  Delivered  He  was — 1.  Into  the  virgin's  womb.  That  was  a  strange 
descent;  and  even  then,  at  His  birth,  began  His  passion.  Here  He  was  made  an 
object  for  the  malice  of  men  and  the  rage  of  the  devil  to  work  on.  2.  Being  born, 
what  was  His  whole  lifo  but  delivery  from  sorrow  to  sorrow  ?  What  creature  was 
there  to  whom  He  was  not  delivered  ?  Delivered  He  was  to  the  angels  ;  "  to  keep 
Him,"  you  will  say,  "in  all  His  ways  "  (Psa.  xci.  11).  But  what  need  had  He  of 
angels  who  was  Lord  of  the  angels  ?  He  was  delivered  to  Joseph  and  Mary,  to 
whom  "He  was  subject"  and  obedient  (Luke  ii.  51).  Delivered  He  was  to  an 
occupation  and  trade.  He  was  delivered  from  Annas  to  Caiaphas,  from  Caiaphaa 
to  Pilate,  from  Pilate  to  Herod,  and  from  Herod  to  Pilate  again,  and  from  Pilate  to 
the  Cross.  He  was  delivered  to  the  devil  himself,  and  to  the  power  of  darkness. 
He  was  dehvered  in  His  body,  and  in  His  soul.  Delivered  He  was  to  envy, 
which  delivered  Him  (Matt,  xxvii.  18) ;  to  treachery,  which  betrayed  Him ; 
to  malice,  which  scourged  Him ;  to  pride,  which  scorned  Him ;  to  contempt, 
which  spat  upon  Him ;  to  all  those  furious  passions  which  turn  men  into  devils. 
3.  He  was  delivered  not  only  to  their  passions,  but  to  His  own  also,  which  as  man 
He  carried  about  with  Him  (John  xii.  27 ;  Luke  xsii.  44 ;  Matt.  xxvi.  37,  38). 
Trouble,  vexation,  agony,  heaviness,  and  sorrow  were  the  bitter  ingredients  which 
filled  up  His  cup  so  full  that  He  made  it  His  prayer  to  have  it  taken  out  of  His 
hand  (Mark  xiv.  36).  He  who  as  God  could  have  commanded  a  legion  of  angels,  as 
man  had  need  of  one  to  comfort  Him.  4.  Can  the  Son  of  God  be  delivered 
further  ?  Delivered  He  was — not  to  despair,  for  that  was  impossible  ;  nor  to  the 
torments  of  hell,  which  could  never  seize  on  His  innocent  soul;  but  to  the  wrath 
of  God  (Psa.  cii.  3,  4  ;  xxii.  15),  the  terriblest  thing  in  the  world  ;  the  sting  of  sin, 
which  is  the  sting  of  death.  It  were  impiety  to  think  that  the  blessed  martyrs  were 
more  patient  than  Christ.  Yet  who  of  all  that  noble  army  ever  cried  out  they  wer« 
forsaken  ?  Their  torture  was  their  triumph  ;  their  afflictions  were  their  iDelody. 
But  v.hat  speak  we  of  martyrs  ?    Divers  sinners  ho ?e  been  delivered  up  t'j  afflio- 


«HAP.  vm.]  ROMANS.  fl5 

tions  and  crosses,  nay,  to  the  anger  of  God ;  but  never  yet  any  so  delivered  as 
Christ.  God,  in  His  approaches  of  justice  toward  the  sinner  to  correct  him,  may 
seem  to  go,  like  the  consuls  of  Borne,  with  His  rods  and  His  axes  carried  before 
Him.  Many  sinners  have  felt  His  rods.  But  Christ  was  struck,  as  it  were,  with 
His  axe.  Others  have  trembled  under  His  wrath,  but  Christ  was  even  "  consumed 
by  the  stroke  of  His  hand"  (Psa.  xxxix.  10).  I  mention  not  the  shame  or  the 
torment  of  the  Cross  ;  for  the  thieves  endured  the  same.  But  His  soul  was  crucified 
more  than  His  body,  and  His  heart  had  sharper  nails  to  pierce  it  than  His  hands  or 
His  feet.  5.  But  to  rise  one  step  more.  "  He  delivered,  and  in  a  manner  forsook 
Him  " ;  denied  relief,  withdrew  comfort,  stood,  as  it  were,  afar  off,  and  let  him  fight 
it  out  unto  death  (Isa.  Ixiii.  5 ;  Psa.  xviii,  41 ;  Matt,  xxvii.  46).  (1)  There  now 
hangeth  His  sacred  body  on  the  Cross,  not  so  much  afflicted  with  His  passion  aa 
His  soul  was  wounded  with  compassion  ;  with  compassion  on  His  mother,  on  His 
disciples,  on  the  Jews,  on  the  temple,  on  all  mankind  ;  bearing  the  burden  of  all ; 
delivered  to  a  sense  of  their  sins  who  feel  them  not,  and  to  a  sense  of  theirs  who 
groan  under  them  ;  delivered  up  to  all  the  sorrows  which  all  men  have  felt,  or  shall 
feel  to  the  time  He  shall  come  again  in  glory.  (2)  The  last  delivery  was  of  His 
Boul  into  His  Father's  hands.  Who  can  fathom  this  depth  ?  No  tongue,  neither 
of  men  nor  angels,  is  able  to  express  it.  The  most  powerful  eloquence  is  the 
threnody  of  a  broken  heart ;  for  there  Christ's  death  speaketh  itself,  and  the  virtue 
and  power  of  it  reflecteth  back  again  upon  Him,  and  reacheth  Him  at  the  right 
hand  of  God,  where  His  wounds  are  open,  His  merits  vocal,  interceding  for  us  to 
the  end  of  the  world.  III.  The  persons  fob  whom.  1.  '•  For  us."  A  contempla- 
tion full  of  comfort,  but  not  so  easy  to  digest.  Why  for  us  ?  And  we  must  go 
out  of  the  world  to  find  the  reason.  It  was  '*  the  love  "  of  God  "  to  mankind  " 
(Titus  iii.  4).  And  what  was  in  mankind  but  enmity,  sin,  and  deformity  ?  which 
are  no  proper  motives  to  draw  on  love.  "For  us"  men,  then,  and  "for  us" 
sinners,  was  Christ  delivered  (Isa.  liii.  5).  So  that  He  was  deUvered  up  not  only  to 
the  Cross  and  shame,  but  to  our  sins,  which  nailed  Him  to  the  Cross.  Our  treachery 
was  the  Judas  which  betrayed  Him  ;  our  malice,  the  Jews  which  accused  Him  ;  our 
perjury,  the  false  witness  against  Him  ;  our  injustice,  the  Pilate  that  condemned 
Him.  Our  pride  scorned  Him ;  our  envy  grinned  at  Him ;  our  luxury  spat  upon 
Him;  our  covetousness  sold  Him.  "He  delivered  Him  up  for  us  "sinners.  No 
sin  there  is  which  His  blood  will  not  wash  away,  but  final  impenitency ;  which  is 
not  so  much  a  sin  as  the  sealing  up  of  the  body  of  sin  when  the  measure  is  fuU. 
2.  "For  us  aU";  for  "all  have  sinned"  (chap.  v.  12).  The  blood  of  Christ  is 
sufficient  to  wash  away  the  sins  of  the  world,  nay,  of  a  thousand  worlds.  Christ 
paid  down  a  ransom  of  so  infinite  a  value  that  it  might  redeem  aU  that  are,  or 
possibly  might  be,  under  captivity.  But  none  are  actually  redeemed  but  they  who 
do  as  He  commandeth,  that  is,  believe  and  repent.  InfideUty  and  impenitency 
only  limit  a  proposition  so  general,  and  bound  so  saving  and  universal,  and  con- 
tract all  into  a  few.  IV.  The  end  of  all.  That  we  may  have  all  things.  God 
cannot  but  give  when  we  are  fit  to  receive ;  and  in  Christ  we  are  made  capable. 
When  He  is  given,  all  things  are  given  with  Him — more  than  we  can  desire,  more 
than  we  can  conceive.  {A.  Farindon,  B.D.)  The  great  fact  and  the  just 
inference : — It  may  assist  us  in  understanding  the  text  if  we  take  a  brief  view  of  the 
inventory  of  a  believer's  privileges  in  this  chapter.  1.  Their  free  and  full  justifica- 
tion by  faith  in  Christ  (ver.  1).  2.  Their  regeneration  by  the  indwelling  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  (vers.  8-10).  3.  The  knowledge  which  they  have  of  the  relation  to  God 
as  His  children  by  the  testimony  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (vers.  15,  16).  4.  Their  right 
to  eternal  life  (ver.  17).  5.  Their  title  to  such  helps  of  providence  and  grace  as 
may  be  necessary  to  prepare  them  fully  for  that  inheritance  and  to  conduct  them 
safely  to  it  (vers.  26,  28).  It  is  after  this  review  that  the  apostle  exclaims,  "  What 
shall  we  then  say  to  these  things  ?  "  &c.  Consider — I.  The  fact  asserted  in  the 
TEXT.  This  fact  supposes  the  guilty,  fallen,  helpless  condition  of  man  without 
Christ.  Now  it  wag  when  the  whole  race  was  in  this  condition  that — 1.  God 
"  spared  not  His  own  Son,"  i.e.,  (1)  He  did  not  withhold  Him  when  the  necessities 
of  our  condition  required  such  a  gift.  This  implies  that  God  might  have  spared 
Him ;  He  was  under  no  obligation  or  compulsion  of  justice.  (2)  He  did  not  exempt 
Him^  from  the  sufferings  subsequent  upon  His  undertaking  the  mediatorial  and 
atoning  office.  The  innocent  infirmity  of  our  Saviour's  human  nature  wished  to 
have  been  spared.  But  He  could  not  be  spared  (as  the  fact  proved)  and  we  spared 
too.  Had  it  been  possible,  in  any  other  way,  in  answer  to  the  prayer  of  such  a 
Son,  that  other  way  would  have  been  preferred.    But  He  who  saved  others  couli^ 


214  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  fcHAP.  Tm. 

not,  in  consistency  with  the  engagement  into  which  He  had  entered,  and  with  tha 
claims  of  God  on  the  Redeemer,  save  Himself  from  death.  2.  He  "  delivered  Him 
up."  (1)  It  was  the  permissive  providence  of  God  which  delivered  Him  to  the 
malice  of  the  chief  priests,  &o.,  &o.  (2)  He  was  thus  delivered  up  for  us.  And 
this  does  not  mean  that  He  died  in  a  general  sense  for  our  ultimate  benefit,  by  any 
circuitous  process,  but  instead  of  us.  And  this  is  the  great  doctrine  of  vicarious 
atonement  and  expiation,  on  which  hang  all  our  hopes,  and  from  which  flow  all  our 
legitimate  comforts.  H.  The  inference  from  this  fact.  By  a  very  common  mode 
of  speech  this  interrogatory  is  equivalent  to  the  strongest  possible  affirmation. 
1.  The  "  all  things  "  are,  of  course,  only  all  things  conducive  to  the  great  purpose  of 
our  being,  and  especially  to  the  great  purpose  of  our  redemption.  (1)  It  may, 
doubtless,  include  all  such  comforts  and  blessings  of  the  present  life  as  God  sees  to 
be  safe  and  fitting  for  us  to  possess.  More  than  this  no  man  in  his  senses  would 
wish  to  have.  Who  would  wish  to  have  more  worldly  good  of  any  kind  than  God 
sees  to  be  safe  and  proper  for  him  ?  Nor  have  we  any  right  to  complain  that  God 
has  reserved  to  Himself  the  power  of  deciding  how  much  of  worldly  good  will  be 
consistent  with  our  highest  welfare.  Has  anybody  with  common  understanding, 
who  has  lived  twenty  years,  not  made  the  humbling  discovery  that,  if  he  were  left 
to  choose  his  own  lot,  he  would  very  often  choose  amiss  ?  "  Who  knoweth  what  is 
good  for  man  in  this  life,  all  the  days  of  his  vain  life  which  he  spendeth  as  a 
shadow?  "  "  How  often,"  as  an  old  Puritan  remarked,  "if  we  were  left  to  carve 
our  own  portion,  should  we  cut  our  own  fingers?  "  None  but  God  thoroughly 
understands  the  bearing  of  one  thing  on  another ;  none  but  He  so  accurately  sees 
the  end  from  the  beginning ;  none  but  He  is  so  intimately  acquainted  with  the 
peculiarities  of  every  man's  moral  and  mental  constitution  as  to  be  able  to  see  what 
will  certainly  be  best  for  each  individual.  (2)  By  "  all  things "  especially  are 
meant  things  spiritual  and  eternal  catalogued  in  this  chapter.  "  He  that  spared 
not  His  own  Son,  but  delivered  Him  up  for  us  aU,  how  shall  He  not  with  Him  freely 
give  us" — the  pardon  of  our  sins,  and  the  justification  of  our  persons  ;  His  Holy 
Spirit  to  renew  our  natures;  tbe  witness  of  our  adoption,  &c.,  Ac.  2.  Now  con- 
sider, in  support  of  the  view  which  the  apostle  here  takes  of  the  "  all  things  "  that 
in  giving  us  His  own  Son — (1)  God  bestowed  a  boon  upon  His  enemies.  What 
blessings,  then,  would  He  refuse  to  His  friends,  to  His  children  ?  This  is  the 
apostle's  own  argument  in  chap.  v.  (2)  God  bestowed  a  boon  which  was  in  the 
fijst  instance  unasked,  unsought,  undesired.  If  the  heart  of  God  had  never  moved 
towards  us,  not  the  heart  of  any  one  human  being  would  ever  have  moved  towards 
God.  If  God  had  not  taken  this  first  step,  not  one  of  you  would  ever  have  had  the 
smallest  inclination  to  take  one  step  towards  God  and  goodness.  Well,  then,  if  the 
boon  was  unsought,  what  will  not  God  give  to  His  own  elect  who  day  and  night 
cry  unto  Him — what  will  not  God  give  in  answer  to  the  inwrought  prayer  which 
His  own  Spirit  inspires?  (3)  God  gave  His  greatest  and  best  gift.  The  stress  lies 
here :  His  own  Son — His  proper  Son — His  only  Son.  Were  He  to  ransack  Hia 
universe  He  could  not  find  such  another  boon  to  confer.  You  think  it  a  great 
thing  that  God  should  give  you  pardon  for  your  innumerable  sins.  But  though  so 
great  a  thing,  it  is  comparatively  a  little  thing  on  the  part  of  God ;  it  implies  no 
sacrifice ;  His  justice  is  not  compromised,  for  Christ  has  removed  all  barriers  by 
His  atonement.  But  when  God  gave  His  Son  there  was  great  sacrifice.  He  who 
finds  it  quite  easy  to  do  everything  just  because  He  wills  it;  He  who  finds  it 
perfectly  easy  to  make  a  world  when  He  chooses  to  make  one  ;  He  who  has  only  to 
say,  "  Let  there  be  hght,"  and  hght  is,  is  represented  as  obliged  to  use  expedients 
and  counsel,  to  make  one  thing  fit  another,  when  He  wants  to  save  a  sinner.  In 
doing  this,  then,  in  giving  His  own  Son,  He  went  to  the  utmost  length  to  which 
even  Divine  compassion  can  go.  Whatever  God  gives  you  after  this.  He  gives  you 
a  less  blessing  than  when  He  gave  Christ.  You  think  it  a  great  thing  that  God 
should  give  you  a  place  in  heaven.  But  why  not  ?  That  is  nothing  to  what  He 
did  long  before  you  were  born,  when  He  "  spared  not  His  own  Son,  but  delivered 
Him  up  for  us  all."  3.  The  same  arguments  go  to  show  that  God  will  freely  give 
these  things.  In  the  language  of  Scripture,  a  thing  is  said  to  be  given  "  freely  " 
which  is  given  without  reference  to  the  worthiness  of  the  party.  Now  nothing  can 
be  more  free  than  the  gift  of  Christ ;  none  of  us  can  pretend,  on  good  grounds,  to 
have  deserved  amjthing  at  the  hand  of  God.  God  looked  just  at  man's  necessities, 
and  at  nothing  else,  when  He  gave  a  Saviour ;  and  He  acts,  we  are  told,  in  the 
same  way  in  the  dispen-^ation  of  the  blessings  which  are  purchased  by  the  death  of 
Christ.     Conclusion  :  We  learn  from  the  text — 1.  The  close  cormection  bei  .een  the 


CHAP,  vm.]  ROMANS.  SIS 

great  doctrines  of  the  gospel  and  the  comfort  and  stability  of  Christian  experience 
and  practice.  2.  With  what  sentiments  and  views  you  ought  to  approach  God  the 
Father.  (Jabez  Bunting,  D.D.)  The  wants  of  men,  and  the  supplies  of  God : — 
I.  Man  beqoikes  immense  supplies  from  God  to  secure  tor  him  a  happy  destiny. 

1.  The  ordinary.  All  creatures  must  be  dependent  upon  communications  from  their 
Creator  for  being  and  well-being.  The  wants  of  intelligent  beings  increase  as  they 
advance.  The  wants  of  a  man  are  greater  than  those  of  an  infant.  The  wants  of 
civilised  nations  are  greater  than  those  of  savage  tribes.  As  an  intelligent  being 
advances,  his  need  multiplies,  hia  capacities  expand.  The  greater  the  creature  the 
more  deeply  does  he  feel  his  dependence.  What  oceans  of  blessings  will  one 
soUtary  spirit  require  from  God  to  make  it  happy  through  the  endless  ages  of  its 
history  I  2.  The  extraordinary.  He  needs  the  pardon  of  his  sin— the  rectification 
of  all  the  errors  connected  with  his  intellect,  conscience,  and  heart — supplies  of 
moral  power  to  vanquish  his  spiritual  foes,  to  resist  the  evil  and  to  pursue  the 
good.  Thus  he  requires  from  his  Maker  infinitely  more  than  an  unfallen  spirit. 
II.  The  great  God  has  already  bestowed  on  man  a  gift  of  unutterable  \yorth 
FOR  THIS  purpose.  Who  can  express  the  infinite  value  of  the  gift  in  language  more 
simple  and  significant  than  that  of  the  text?  1.  "He  spared  not  His  own." 
What?  Worlds,  systems,  universe ?  These  are  toys  in  the  comparison.  His  own 
Son.  He  did  not  keep  Him  back,  as  He  might  have  done,  when  the  miseries  of 
humanity  cried  for  Him.  2.  " But  delivered  Him  up."  To  what?  To  the  heart  of 
friendship — to  the  seat  of  honour  ?  No ;  to  the  wrath  of  His  enemies,  to  ignominy 
to  unutterable  anguish,  to  the  hottest  rage  of  hell.  3.  "  For  us  all,"  HI.  This  gift 
IS  A  certain  pledge  to  the  Christian  that  whatever  else  is  necessary  shall 
FOLLOW.  The  argument  is  from  the  greater  to  the  less,  and  may  be  illustrated  as 
follows : — That  this  greatest  gift — 1.  Is  of  more  worth  than  any  amount  of  blessing 
that  a  Christian  can  possibly  require  through  the  interminable  future  of  his  being. 

2.  Was  bestowed  for  the  same  end  as  that  for  which  every  other  blessing  will  be 
needed,  viz.,  to  complete  our  happiness.  Is  it  not  certain  that  the  Being  who  gave 
the  greatest,  and  whose  love  and  capacity  are  as  great  as  ever,  will  give  all  the 
smaller  blessings  that  are  necessary  ?  3.  Has  not  in  the  slightest  degree  lessened 
either  the  love  or  the  capacity  of  the  Giver.  The  gift  is  infinite,  but  the  heart  of  the 
Giver  is  as  benevolent  as  ever,  and  His  means  as  ample.  He  is  able  "  to  do  exceeding 
abundantly,"  (fee.  4.  Was  bestowed  when  Christians  were  not  in  a  position  to 
appreciate  the  favour.  Universal  man  was  at  enmity  with  God  when  He  gave 
Christ.  But  Christians  can,  to  some  extent,  value  all  other  forces  required. 
5.  Was  bestowed  without  asking — Christians  are  praying  for  what  else  is  necessary. 
And  God  has  pledged  answers  to  prayer.  •'  Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive."  Take  heart, 
then.  Christian.  Don't  be  anxious.  He  that  "  spared  not  His  own  Son,"  &c. 
(P.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Vers.  33, 34.  Who  shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  7 — Thejitstijica- 
tion  of  the  elect  : — First,  to  take  it  emphatically,  God  does  indeed  justify  His  elect. 
This  is  that  which  we  have  declared  in  ver.  30  of  this  chapter.  The  second  is  as  it  may 
be  taken  exclusively,  "  It  is  God  that  justifies,"  that  is,  there  is  none  that  justifies 
besides  God  ;  none  have  anything  to  do  to  absolve  and  acquit  a  sinner  from  guilt  but 
God  alone,  thus  chap.  iii.  26.  And  the  reason  of  it  is  clear,  because  it  is  God  alone 
against  whom  the  sin  is  committed ;  namely,  in  reference  to  future  condemnation, 
and  the  judgment  of  another  world,  it  is  God  alone  that  condemns,  and  therefore  it 
is  God  alone  that  justifies.  Again,  it  is  God  only  that  knows  the  heart  and 
understands  what  is  in  man,  and  so  alone  can  forgive  ;  yea,  it  is  He  alone  who  is 
without  sin  Himself,  and  so  alone  can  discharge  us  of  it.  First,  it  is  done 
freely,  without  anything  in  us  as  meritorious  or  deserving  of  it.  "  Being  justi- 
fied freely  by  His  grace  "  (chap.  iii.  24).  Secondly,  it  is  God  that  justifies,  there- 
fore we  are  justified  fully  —  fully  without  imperfection,  and  fully  without 
reservation  ;  all  the  works  of  God  are  perfect.  No;  while  it  is  God  that  justifies, 
we  are  justified  from  all  things  (Act.  xiii.  39).  Thirdly,  it  is  God  that  justifies, 
therefore  we  are  justified  truly,  and  so  as  we  may  rest  satisfied  and  quieted  in  this 
justification.  If  our  justifying  were  from  anything  of  our  own,  we  could  not  have 
that  assurance  of  it  in  re jard  of  our  weakness  and  imperfection.  But,  secondly, 
there  is  a  use  which  may  be  also  made  of  it  by  us  as  taking  it  exclusively,  and 
that  is,  as  to  the  removing  of  all  other  persons  besides  from  it.     As — First,  it  is 

?od  that  justifies,  and  therefore  not  we  ourselves.    It  is  laid  to  the  charge  of  the 
harisees  that  they  were  such  as   justified   themselves  (Luke  xvi.  15;   x.   29). 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [OHAJ.  vm. 


Secondly,  it  is  God  that  justifies,  therefore  not  friends  or  Christian  acquaintance. 
Thirdly,  it  is  God  that  justifies,  therefore  not  ministers  or  pastors  of  the  Church. 
The  ministers  have  a  commission  for  the  laying  open  of  the  sweet  promises  of  the 
gospel,  and  the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ,  to  all  such  persons  as  are  willing  to  leave 
their  sins.     In  brief,  this  is  the  advantage  which  is  considerable  in  ministerial 
absolution,  that  where  a  minister  does  upon  good  grounds  declare  such  a  person  to 
be  pardoned  and  justified  in  the  sight  of  God,  this  action  of  his  shall  be  so  far 
forth  effectual  to  such  a  person  as  to  the  settling  and  quieting  of  his  conscience, 
which  before  could  have  no  rest  in  itself.    And  in  this  sense  is  not  only  declarative 
but  likewise  operative ;  not  to  the  forgiveness  of  sins  absolutely,  but  as  to  the 
evidences  of  it,  and  in  that  regard  of  greater  use  and  availment  than  is  always 
apprehended  as  being  the  ordinance  of  God  which  He  has  sanctified  and  allowed  of 
for  such  a  purpose  as  that  is.    The  second  is  the  conclusion  which  is  enforced  from 
it,  and  that,  to  make  it  more  significant,  is  propounded  by  way  of  question,  "  Who 
shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?  "    First,  ••  Who  shall  lay  anything 
to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?  "    That  is,  who  can  do  it  ?    It  is  impossible ;  it  is  im- 
possible that  God's  elect,  who  are  justified  by  God,  should  have  any  charge  laid 
unto  them.     First,  there  is  nothing  to  accuse  them  of,  there  is  no  ground  or  matter 
of  accusation  in  the  elect  and  justified  of  God.    There  is  enough  to  be  found  in 
them,  but  tl    'o  is  nothing  to  be  charged  upon  them.     Secondly,  there  is  nobody  to 
accuse  the  ■   t  ,  or  to  receive  any  accusation  against  them  :  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who 
can  be  agaiubt  us  ?  "    And  so,  if  God  justify  us,  who  can  accuse  us,  as  having  a  fit 
person  to  lay  the  charge  before  (thus  Isa.  1.  8,  9).     There  is  no  higher  court  of 
justice  than  the  tribunal  and  judgment  of  God  Himself,  We  see  in  the  affairs  of 
men  that  that  which  is  done  in  a  higher  court  it  cannot  be  nullified  in  a  lower. 
Thirdly,  there  is  nobody  to  make  or  frame  the  accusation,  that  is,  who  can  do  it 
with  any  success  or  hope  to  prevail  in  it.     Secondly,  Who  shall?  that  is,  Who  may  ? 
It  is  that  which  is  unwarrantable,  and  there  are  two  things  also  in  this.    First,  it  ia 
a  pragmatical  business  for  any  to  accuse  those  whom  God  does  acquit,  they  meddle 
with  that  which  they  have  nothing  to  do  withal,  for  God  He  is  both  the  Creditor 
and  the  Judge,  and  so  where  He  does  justify  what  has  any  to  do  to  condemn?    But 
then  also,  secondly,  it  is  injurious  for  any  to  accuse  any  man  whom  the  law  has 
already  absolved ;  it  is  in  itself  matter  of  accusation  and  is  liable  to  exception. 
Thirdly  and  lastly.  Who  shall  ?  that  is,  Who  dare  ?    It  is  unsafe  and  dangerous. 
And  so  there  is  a  great  deal  of  rashness  and  presumption  in  it.    For  a  man  to  lay 
any  false  accusation  upon  the  meanest  subject  in  a  kingdom,  it  were  that  which  he 
were  answerable  for.     They  accuse  God's  elect,  who  are  His  choice  and  peculiar 
people.  His  favourites,  and  such  as  He  esteems  of,  and  therefore  it  concerns  them 
to  take  heed  herein  what  they  do.    We  know  how  God  took  up  Aaron  and  Miriam 
for  their  charging  and  accusing  of  Moses  and  speaking  reproachfully  of  him.   "  How 
were  ye  not  afraid  (says  He)  to  speak  against  My  servant  Moses  "  (Num.  xii.  8). 
{Thomas  Horton,  D.D.j       Elect,  God's  vindication  of  His  .-—Who?   The  devil  will 
try,  but  will  he  succeed  ?    Methinks  that  at  the  last  assize  of  the  world  the  Great 
Judge  of  all  will  ask  the  question,  and  methinks  I  can  see  Satan  come  forward  to 
give  his  evidence  against  them,  which  at  the  outset  appears  strong  and  overwhelm- 
ing.    But  I  see  the  Great  Advocate  for  the  defence,  whose  name  is  "  Wonderful, 
Counsellor,  the  Mighty  God,"  begin  to    cross-examine    him: — "What    is    your 
name ?  "     "  Satan."     "  Yes,  but  you  have  a  few  aliases,  have  you  not  ?  "     "  Yes." 
"What  are  they?"     "The  Serpent."     "Again?"     "The    Devil."    ''Again?" 
«« Accuser  of  the  brethren."     "  So  it  seems.     Where  do  you  dwell  ?  "     "  Hell  is  the 

centre  of  my  operations."     "  And  what   is    your    occupation  ?  "     "  Well, " 

"  Speak  out  that  heaven  and  earth  may  hear  1  "  "  Walking  about  in  the  earth, 
seeking  whom  I  may  devour."  "  So  it  appears.  Were  you  ever  in  heaven  ? " 
"Yes;  there  I  commenced  my  existence."  "Yes;  and  were  you  driven  out  for 
pride,  ambition,  and  rebellion  against  the  Supreme  authority,  for  lying  and  other 
evils?"  "Those  were  the  charges  against  me."  "And  provefl,  I  believe?" 
"Yes,  I  suppose."  "  So  it  seems.  Have  you  not  done  all  you  can.  against  God's 
elect,  and  do  you  not  bear  them  the  greatest  animosity?  "  "  Well,  I  cannot  deny 
that."  "That  is  my  case,  my  Lord,"  says  the  Great  Advocate."  "Justified!" 
exclaims  the  Great  Judge.  "  Who  shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ? 
The  devil  will  try,  but  he  will  never  succeed.  He  is  a  biassed  witness  with  a 
broken  character  whose  word  has  no  weight  in  the  court  of  heaven."  (E.  Willianis.) 
Elect,  ftoir  chosen  : — "  The  elect  are  whosoever  will,"  Beecher  once  said  ;  "  the  non- 
eleot  are  whosoever  won't."     Election :  how  to  be  regarded  and  determined .-  -Let  voir 


CHAP.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  817 

'first  act  be  an  act  of  reliance  upon  Christ  for  pardon ;  let  this  act  be  so  repeated  by 
you  daj  after  day,  as  to  ripen  into  a  habit  of  reliance,  and  then  shall  we  confidently 
look  for  the  marks  and  evidences  of  your  regeneration.  And  these  marks  may 
at  length  so  multiply  upon  you — they  might  so  brighten  that  you  shall  begin  to 
Buspect,  nay,  further,  to  guess,  nay,  further  still,  to  be  assured,  and  to  read  the  full 
assurance  that  you  are  indeed  one  of  the  elect  of  God.  If  you  are  wise  you  do  not 
meddle  with  the  doctrine  of  election  at  the  outset,  whatever  comfort  or  establish- 
ment of  heart  you  may  draw  from  it  in  the  ulterior  stages  of  your  spiritual 
progress.  When  you  go  forth  on  the  career  of  Christianity  you  look  at  the  free 
offer  of  the  gospel.  You  perceive  it  to  be  addressed  to  you,  as  well  as  to  others. 
You  yield  a  compliance  therewith.  You  enter  into  peace  with  God  in  obedience  to 
His  own  call,  whereby  He  now  beseeches  you  to  be  reconciled  to  Him.  It  were 
great  presumption  indeed  for  you  to  start  with  the  assurance  that  your  name  is  in 
the  book  of  God's  decrees,  which  He  keeps  beside  Himself  in  heaven ;  but  no 
presumption  at  all  to  set  out  with  the  assurance  that  you  are  spoken  to  in  that 
book  of  God's  declarations,  which  He  circulates  through  the  world.  The  "  look 
unto  Me  all "  and  the  "  come  unto  Me  all "  and  the  "  whosoever  will  let  him  come  " 
— these  are  sayings  in  which  one  and  all  of  the  human  family  have  most  obvious 
interest.  You  presume  nothing  when  you  presume  upon  the  honesty  of  these 
sayings.  And  if,  furthermore,  you  proceed  upon  them,  and  forthwith  enter  upon 
that  walk  by  which  they  who  receive  Christ,  and  receive  along  with  Him  power  to 
become  the  children  of  God,  separate  themselves  from  the  world ;  and  pray  for 
grace  that  you  may  be  upheld  and  carried  forward  therein,  and  combine  a  life  of 
activity  with  a  life  of  prayer,  then,  and  after  perhaps  many  months  of  successful 
perseverance,  you  may  talk  of  your  election,  because  now  jou  can  read  it,  not  in  the 
book  of  Ufe  that  is  in  heaven,  but  in  the  book  of  your  own  history  upon  earth. 
Even  the  apostle  went  no  higher  than  this  when  judging  of  the  state  of  his  own 
converts.  Their  election  was  to  him  not  a  thing  of  presumption,  but  a  thing  of 
inference — drawn,  not  from  what  he  guessed,  but  from  what  he  saw — brought,  not 
from  those  third  heavens  which  he  had  at  one  time  visited,  but  lying  palpably 
before  him  {1  Thess.  i.  4-7).  (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  It  is  God  that  Justifieth.— 
Justification  : — I.  What  is  justification  ?  It  consists — 1.  In  the  pardon  of  all  our 
sins  (chap.  iv.  6,  7).  God,  in  justifying  His  people  against  the  imputations  of  the 
world,  doth  bring  forth  their  righteousness  as  the  noon-day  ;  but  in  justifying  them 
against  the  accusations  brought  before  His  own  tribunal,  doth  not  vindicate  our 
innocency,  but  show  His  own  mercy  in  a  free  discharge  of  all  our  sins.  2.  In 
accepting  us  as  righteous  in  Christ,  who  died  for  our  sins  to  reconcile  us  unto  God ; 
and  therefore  sometimes  He  is  said  to  be  "  made  righteousness  to  us  "  (1  Cor.  i.  30), 
and  we  are  said  to  be  "  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him  "  (2  Cor.  v.  21).  II. 
How  MANT  WATS  DOTH  GoD  JUSTIFY?  By  way  of — 1.  Constitution,  i.e.  by  his 
gospel-grant,  or  the  new  covenant  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  by  which  we  know  whom, 
and  upon  what  terms,  God  will  pardon  and  justify — namely,  all  such  as  repent  and 
beheve  the  gospel.  We  may  know  the  true  way  of  justification  by  its  opposition  to 
the  false  way  (Acts  xiii.  38,  39).  2.  Estimation,  whereby  God  doth  account  them 
righteous  who  fulfil  the  terms  of  the  gospel,  and  actually  convey  to  them  the  fruits 
of  Christ's  death  (1  Cor.  vi.  11).  3.  Sentence.  This  is  in  part  done  here,  when 
God  interpreteth  our  righteousness  and  sincerity  (Job.  xxxiii.  23,  24) ;  but  more 
Bolenmly  at  the  last  day  (Acts  iii.  10 ;  Matt.  xii.  36,  37).  4.  Execution.  This  is  in 
part  done  here,  as  God  taketh  off  the  penalties  and  fruits  of  sin,  and  giveth  us 
many  blessings  as  the  pledge  of  His  love,  and  above  all,  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
whereby  He  sanctifieth  us.  But  more  fuUy  at  the  last  day,  when  we  enter  into 
everlasting  glory  (Matt.  xxv.  46).  III.  How  it  can  stand  with  the  wisdom,  justice, 
AND  holiness  OF  GoD,  TO  JUSTIFY  A  BiNNEB.  It  is  a  great  crime  to  take  the  un- 
righteous to  be  righteous,  and  against  the  word  of  God  (Prov.  zxiv.  24 ;  xvii.  15). 
1.  Christ's  ransom  maketh  it  reconcilable  with  God's  justice,  and  the  honour  of 
His  law  and  government  (Job  xxxiij.  24  ;  Bom.  iii.  25).  There  is  full  satisfaction 
given  to  God's  wronged  justice.  2.  His  covenant  reconcileth  it  with  His  wisdom. 
God  is  not  mistaken  in  judging  us  righteous  when  we  are  not ;  for  we  are  consti- 
tuted righteous,  and  then  deemed  and  pronounced  so  (chap.  v.  19).  8.  Conversion 
reconcileth  it  with  His  holiness ;  for  a  sinner  as  a  sinner  is  not  justified,  but  a 
penitent  behever.  IV.  Why  no  chabge  ob  accusation  can  lib  against  thsu  whoh 
God  justifieth.  1.  Because  God  is  the  supreme  law-giver,  to  appoint  the  terms 
and  conditions  upon  which  we  shall  be  justijfied,  and  when  He  hath  stated  them, 
and  declared  His  will,  who  shall  reverse  it  or  rebuke  it  ?  (Heb.  vi.  17, 18).    2. 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tm. 

Because  the  promise  of  justification  is  built  upon  Christ's  everlasting  merit  and 
satisfaction,  and  therefore  it  will  hold  good  for  ever  (Heb.  x.  14).  3.  Because  it 
is  conveyed  by  the  solemnity  of  a  covenant  (1  John  i.  9  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  8).  4.  When 
we  believe,  God,  as  the  supreme  judge,  actually  determineth  our  right,  so  that  a 
believer  is  rectus  in  curia,  hath  his  quietus  est  (chap.  v.  1).  And,  then,  who  can  lay 
anything  to  our  charge  to  reverse  God's  grant?  5.  The  Lord,  as  the  sovereign 
disposer  of  man's  felicity,  doth  many  times  uncontrollably  give  us  the  comfort  of  it 
in  our  own  consciences  (Job  zzxiv.  29).  None  can  obstruct  the  peace  which  He 
giveth.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Justification:  its  comfort: — There  is  one  aspect  of 
justification  that  is  peculiarly  fitted  to  comfort  the  heart  of  a  believer,  viz.  that  it  is 
the  personal  act  of  God.  "  It  is  God  that  justifieth."  It  is  He  to  whom  he  was 
liable,  declaring  that  all  was  fully  paid.  It  is  He  who  alone  was  entitled  to  make 
the  charge  against  us,  declaring  how  amply  we  stood  discharged.  It  is  He  who 
before  was  our  offended  Lawgiver,  Himself  undertaking  oar  cause  and  pronouncing 
upon  the  goodness  of  it.  It  is  the  God  from  whom  at  one  time  we  have  nought  to 
apprehend  but  condemnation,  pleading  our  cause,  and  protesting  how  completely 
He  is  satisfied.  It  is  our  vindication  coming  from  the  very  quarter  whence  our 
vengeance  was  looked  for ;  and  that  Being  who  alone  had  the  right  to  accuse,  not 
merely  acquitting,  but  regarding  us  as  entitled  to  all  the  positive  regard  that  is  due 
to  righteousness.  It  is  He  who  might  have  wreaked  upon  us  of  His  sorest  dis- 
pleasure, now  telling  how  much  He  is  pleased  with  us,  and  how  rightfully  we  are 
privileged  to  obtain  from  Him  the  rewards  of  a  happy  and  honourable  eternity.  It 
is  He  whom  we  might  well  have  dreaded,  that  when  the  arm  of  His  justice  was 
lifted  up  it  would  be  lifted  up  to  destroy — it  is  Himself  saying  that  this  very  justice 
demanded  not  only  our  exoneration  from  all  penalty  but  our  preferment  to  the 
glories  that  are  due  to  righteousness.  They  who  have  felt  the  terrors  of  the  law — 
they  who  have  been  stung  with  the  arrows  of  self-reproach  and  have  shrunk  from 
the  dreaded  eye  of  a  judge  and  an  avenger,  as  it  took  cognizance  of  all  their 
ungodliness — they  can  report  how  blessed  the  emancipation  is  when  all  is  clear 
with  God,  who  now  can  at  once  be  a  just  God  and  a  Saviour — can  be  just 
while  the  justifier  of  those  who  believe  in  Jesus.  (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.) 
Justification  by  God : — Justification  is  specially  referred  to  God  because — I.  The 
WISDOM  OF  THE  Fatheb  PLANNED  IT.  His  Sovereign  will  must  have  the  alone  right 
to  dictate  the  terms  upon  which  He  will  take  us  back  to  favour.  The  Father, 
therefore,  appoints  the  way,  and  plans  the  means,  and  even  subordinates  the  dignity 
of  His  Son,  as  it  were,  in  order  that  He  may  put  an  end  to  transgression,  and 
bring  in  an  everlasting  righteousness.  II.  The  love  of  the  Son  accomplished  it. 
What  God  purposes,  Jesus  executes.  The  Father  desired  a  missionary  from  heaven 
to  our  guilty  world  to  proclaim  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord.  The  eternal  Son 
of  God  was  heard  to  say,  "  Lo,  here  am  I ;  send  Me."  The  Father  desired  a  victim 
who  should  bear  the  iniquities  of  man ;  and  the  voice  of  the  same  Son  was  heard 
again,  "  Lo,  I  come."  The  Father  desired  a  justifier,  one  who  should  put  an  end  to 
sin ;  and  again  the  voice  of  the  same  Son  is  heard,  not  in  heaven,  but  in  earth, 
•'  I  have  finished  the  work  which  Thou  gavest  Me  to  do."  Thus  the  part  which 
Christ,  the  eternal  Son,  hath  in  human  justification,  is  to  pay  His  people's  debts, 
to  magnify  His  Father's  law,  to  clear  up  and  vindicate  the  righteous  procedure  of 
Heaven ;  to  weave  that  spotless  robe  of  righteousness,  which  might  boldly  challenge 
the  purity  of  heaven,  and  gather  in  its  ample  folds  the  sins  of  all  mankind.  HI.  The 
powEB  OF  God  the  Sfibit  applies  and  enfobces  and  seals  it.  He  shows  the 
heart  its  wickedness,  the  will  its  stubbornness,  the  mind  its  blindness;  and 
then,  by  penitence  and  faith,  leads  us  to  the  feet  of  Him  who  "  of  God  is  made 
unto  us  wisdom  and  righteousness  and  sanctification  and  redemption."  It  is 
this  Spirit,  then,  that  performs  the  last  best  office  for  our  souls.  He  shows  to 
us,  in  aU  its  spirituality  and  breadth,  that  law  which  we  have  broken,  sets  before  us 
the  dangers  that  we  are  in,  and  points  us  to  "  the  Lamb  of  God,  that  taketh  away 
the  sins  of  the  world."  Thus  the  Spirit  is  the  preacher  of  righteousness.  The 
Spirit  it  is  that  instructs  us  in  the  necessity  of  justification,  that  explains  to  us  its 
way  and  manner,  that  seals  our  souls  with  a  comforting  assurance  of  God's  favour ; 
and  being  "  justified  by  faith,  we  have  had  peace  with  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ."  (D.  Moore,  M.A.)  Who  Is  he  that  condenmeth  7 — The  believer's  con- 
fidence : — I.  Some  thebb  abe  that  would  condemn  ds,  1.  Satan  (Rev.  xii.  10 ; 
Job  i.  9,  ii.  4,  5).  2.  The  law  (John  v.  45  ;  Gal.  iii.  10).  3.  Conscience  (1  John 
n.  Against  those  who  are  in  Christ  there  can  be  no  condemnation 
To  which  is  required — 1.  Faith  in  Him  (John  iii.  16).     2.  Union  to  Him 


(ii.  20). 
(ver,  1), 


CHAP.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  219 

by  that  faith  (John  xvii.  21,  22 ;  2  Cor.  ▼.  17 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  17  ;  John  xv.  1-3).    III. 

HeBB   ABE   FOUB  BEASONS   WHT  THEY   CANNOT   BE   CONDEMNED.      1.    "  It   is  Christ  that 

died."  (1)  Christ  died  for  our  sins  (Isa.  liii.  6,  6  ;  1  John  ii.  2).  (2)  Believers  died 
in  Him.  (3)  Hence  they  cannot  be  condemned,  because  He  hath  maile  satisfaction 
for  their  debts.  2.  "  Yea,  rather,  that  is  risen  again."  (1)  Christ  did  really  rise 
(Luke  xxiv.  6).  (2)  His  rising  shows  that  He  hath  completed  our  redemption  and 
satisfied  for  our  sins  (Acts  iL  24).  (3)  He  rose  as  He  died,  the  Head  of  the  Church 
(chap.  It.  25).  (4)  All  believers,  tnerefore,  rose  with  Him  (Col.  iii.  1).  Hence 
there  can  be  no  condemnation  to  them,  because,  by  His  resurrection,  He  and  they 
in  Him  were  acquitted  (ver.  1 ;  Heb.  v.  9).  3.  "  Who  is  even  at  the  right 
hand  of  God,"  which  betokens — (1)  His  houour  (Heb.  i.  3,  viii  1).  (2)  His 
happiness  (Fsa.  xvi.  11).  (3)  His  power  (Mark  xiv.  62 ;  Fsa.  ex.  1),  by  which  He 
will  destroy— (a)  Satan  (Heb.  ii.  14).  (b)  Sin  (1  John  iii.  8).  (c)  Death  (1  Cor. 
XV.  26,  55,  56  ;  Hos.  xiii.  14).  Hence  they  cannot  be  condemned  (1  John  ii.  1).  4. 
"  Who  also  maketh  intercession  for  us,"  which  He  doth  by — (1)  Appearing  for  us 
before  God  (Heb.  ix.  24).  (2)  His  sacrifice  (Heb.  x.  12,  14).  (3)  Pleading  our  cause 
(1  John  ii.  1).  (4)  The  Father's  always  hearing  FUm  (John  xi.  42  ;  Matt.  xvii.  5). 
Conclusion  :  1.  Consider — (1)  That  you  are  guilty  (Gal.  iii.  22  ;  Bom.  iii.  19),  and 
condemned  (John  iii.  18).  (2)  That  there  is  no  way  of  acquittal  but  by  Christ 
(.\cts  iv.  12),  (3)  That  none  come  to  God  by  Him  but  may  be  saved  (Heb.  vii.  25). 
(4)  That  consequently  if  you  come  by  faith  to  Him,  there  can  be  no  condemnation 
to  you  (Matt.  xi.  28,  29).  2.  Meditate  often  on  the  death,  resurrection,  <&o.,  of 
Christ.  3.  Be  thankful  to  God  for  sending  Christ  (chap.  xi.  33),  and  for 
making  Christ  known  to  you  (Matt.  xi.  25).  4.  Be  not  dismayed  at  spiritual 
enemies,  but  triumph  over  them  (vers.  34-37).  {Bp.  Beveridge.)  A  challenge 
and  a  shield : — We  should  have  but  one  hope  of  salvation.  As  long  as  we 
have  half  a  dozen,  Ua  have  half  a  dozen  doubtful  ones.  When  Charles  V. 
went  to  war  with  Francis  I.,  he  sent  a  herald  declaring  war  in  the  name  of  the 
Emperor  of  Germany,  King  of  Castille,  Eiog  of  Aragon,  (&c.,  &c.,  &o.,  giving  his 
sovereign  all  the  honours  that  were  his  due.  The  herald  of  Francis,  not  to  be  out- 
done  in  the  list  of  honours,  said,  "  I  take  up  the  challenge  in  the  name  of  Francis 
the  First,  King  of  France ;  Francis  the  First,  King  of  France ;  repeating  his 
master's  name  and  office  as  many  times  as  the  other  had  titles.  So  it  is  a  grand 
thing,  whenever  Satan  accuses,  just  to  say,  "  Christ  has  died,  Christ  has  died."  If 
any  confront  you  with  other  confidences,  stiU  keep  to  this  almighty  plea.  If  one 
says,  "  I  was  christened,  and  confirmed,"  answer  him  by  saying,  "  Christ  has 
died."  Should  another  say,  "  I  was  baptized  as  an  adult,"  let  your  confidence 
remain  the  same.  When  another  says,  "I  am  a  sound,  orthodox  Presbyterian, " 
you  stick  to  this  solid  ground,  "  Christ  has  died."  There  is  enough  in  that  one 
truth  to  include  all  that  is  excellent  in  the  others,  and  to  answer  all  the  accusations 
that  may  be  brought  against  you.  Here  is — I.  A  cHiLLENOE  to  all  comebs.  The 
encounter  is  not  to  be  a  mere  tilt  in  a  tournament,  but  a  battle  for  life  or  death. 
Who  enters  the  lists  against  the  believer  ?  1.  Satan.  It  is  his  business  to  be  the 
accuser  of  the  brethren.  He  knows  enough  of  our  conduct  to  be  able  to  bring  to 
memory  much  that  might  condemn  us.  When  this  fails,  the  father  of  lies  will 
accuse  us  of  things  of  which  we  are  not  guilty,  or  will  exaggerate  our  guilt,  in  order 
to  drive  us  to  despair.  Up  with  your  shield,  then,  and  say,  "  Yes,  it  is  all  true,  or  it 
might  have  been ;  but  •  It  is  Christ  that  died.' "  2.  The  world.  As  long  as  you  go 
with  evil  companions  they  will  applaud  you ;  but  when  you  give  up  their  society 
they  will  sneer  at  you,  and  bring  up  all  your  past  life  against  you.  Tell  the  world, 
once  for  all,  that  it  may  condemn  you,  and  that  it  is  right  that  they  should  condemn 
you ;  but  tell  them  also  that  Christ  died.  If  they  say  that  Christ's  death  does  not 
repair  the  injury  you  have  done  to  your  fellow-men,  tell  them  that,  as  far  as  you 
can,  you  mean  to  make  restitution  to  them ;  and  that  your  Master  has  done  it  more 
good  than  you  ever  did  it  harm.  3.  Your  own  conscience.  When  David  had  cut 
off  Saul's  skirt,  his  "heart  smote  him."  It  is  an  ugly  knock  that  a  man's  heart 
gives  when  it  smites  him.  Thunderbolts  and  tornadoes  are  nothing  in  force  com- 
pared with  the  charges  of  a  guilty  conscience.  But  when  a  man  condemns  himself 
let  him  tell  conscience,  as  he  told  his  former  opponents,  "  it  is  Christ  that  died," 
and  it  will  be  perfectly  satisfied,  and  will  use  its  voice  for  other  purposes.  4.  The 
law  of  God,  which  must  (fondemn  sin.  But  when  it  has  done  its  worst,  say  to  it, 
I  am  "  not  under  thee,  but  under  grace."  My  Substitute  has  kept  the  law  on  my 
behalf.  He  has  borne  the  penalty  and  I  am  clear.  IL  A  beuedt  fob  all  bin.  1. 
"  Look,"  says  one,  "  there  is  sin."    True,  but  yonder  is  the  Saviour.    2..  "  Yes,  bat 


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap,  tdl 

you  have  been  specially  guilty ;  there  is  great  sin  against  a  great  God."    True,  but 
there  is  a  great  sacrifice.     3.  •'  But  God  must  punish  sin."    It  is  even  so ;  but  sin 
has  been  punished,  for  "  Christ  has  died."     Not  only  is  our  sin  punished,  but  the 
Bin  is  gone.     If  my  friend  has  paid  my  debt,  it  is  gone.    And  that  my  sins  are 
gone  is  further  clear,  for  He  rose  again  from  the  dead.   If  He  had  not  paid  the  debt, 
He  would  have  remained  in  the  prison  of  the  grave :  and  we  have  still  another 
assurance  that  it  is  all  gone,  for  Christ  "  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God."    He 
would  not  be  there  if  He  were  a  debtor.    And  as  to  our  infirmities,  He  is  there  to 
plead  for  His  people :  ••  Who  also  maketh  intercession  for  us."    III.  An  answer  to 
EVERY  ACCUSATION  WHICH  MAY  ARISE  FROM  SIN.     Sometimes  the  accusing  whisper 
comes — 1.  "  You  have  sinned  against  a  great  God."    I  will  make  no  answer  but 
this :  "  It  is  Christ  that  died."     Christ  is  able  to  stand  between  me  and  God.    It  is 
true  that  God  is  great,  but  He  cannot  ask  for  more  than  Divine  righteousness,  and 
in  Christ  I  present  that.    2.  "  You  have  robbed  God  of  His  glory."    I  know  it,  but 
"  Christ  has  died,"  and  has  brought  all  the  glory  back  again.     3.  "But  you  have 
sinned  wilfully  1 "    True,  but  then  Jesus  willingly  died  for  me,  the  wilful  sinner.  4. 
"  But  you  sinned  against  hght  and  knowledge."    Yes  ;  but  Christ  brings  a  sacrifice 
offered  with  His  own  full  knowledge  of  all  that  it  involved.   5.  "  But  you  have  siimed 
with  dehght."    Ah  1  it  is  so ;  but  then  my  Lord  delighted  to  come  to  be  my  Saviour. 
6.  "  But  you  have  sinned  in  spirit  "  ;  but  then  Christ  suffered  in  His  spirit.    The 
Bufferings  of  His  soul  were  the  very  soul  of  His  sufferings.   7.  "  But  you  have  afore- 
time refused  Christ."    Yes;  but  I  set  over  against  that  the  fact  that  He  always 
would  have  me.    7.  "But  you  have  trusted  in  others,   and  turned  away  from 
Christ ";  but  Christ  never  turns  us  away  because  we  only  come  to  Him  when  others 
fail  us.     (G.  H.  Spurgeon.)        The  four  pillars  of  the  Christian  faith : — The  protest 
of  an  innocent  man  against  the  charge  of  an  accuser  may  well  be  vehement.    But 
here  we  have  the  protest  of  a  justified  sinner,  that  his  character  is  clear  through  the 
perfect  mediation  of  Christ,  which  gives  him  this  amazing  confidence.    We  have 
before  us  the  four  pillars  upon  which  the  Christian  rests  his  hope.    Because  of  our 
unbelief  and  the  attacks  our  faith  has  to  endure,  God  has  given  us  four  strong 
consolations,  with  which  we  may  fortify  our  hearts  whenever  the  sky  is  overcast,  or 
the  hurricane  is  coming  forth  from  its  place.  It  reminds  me  of  what  I  have  sometimes 
heard  of  the  ropes  that  are  used  in  mining.     It  is  said  that  every  strand  of  them 
would  bear  the  entire  tonnage,  and  consequently,  if  each  strand  bears  the  full 
weight  that  will  ever  be  put  upon  the  whole,  there  is  an  absolute  certainty  of  safety 
given  to  the  whole  when  twisted  together.    Now  each  of  these  four  articles  of  our 
faith  is  sufficient  to  bear  the  weight  of  the  sins  of  the  whole  world.     What  must  be 
the  strength  when  the  whole  four  are  intertwisted,  and  become  the  support  of  the 
believer  ?    The  Christian  never  can  be  condemned  because — I.  Christ  hath  deed. 
In  the  death  of  Christ  there  was  a  full  penalty  paid  to  Divine  justice  for  his  sins. 
If  we  shelter  ourselves  beneath  the  tree  of  Calvary  we  are  safe.    One  cries,  "  Thou 
hast  been  a  blasphemer."    Yes,  but  Christ  died  for  blasphemers.     "  But  thou  hast 
stained  thyself  vrith  lust."    Yes,  but  Christ  died  for  the  lascivious.    "  The  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ,  God's  Son,  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."     II.  Christ  has  risen  again. 
••  Yea  rather  I  "    As  much  as  to  say,  it  is  a  powerful  argument  for  our  salvation 
that  Christ  died ;  but  it  is  a  still  more  cogent  proof  that  Christ  rose.     Christ  by  His 
death  paid  to  His  Father  the  full  price  of  what  we  owed  to  Him.    StiU  the  bond 
was  not  cancelled  until  the  day  when  Christ  rose.    Death  was  the  payment  of  the 
debt,  but  resurrection  was  the  public  acknowledgment  that  the  debt  was  paid.     On 
the  Cross  I  see  Jesus  dying  for  my  sins  as  an  expiating  sacrifice  ;  but  in  the  resur- 
rection I  see  God  accepting  what  He  has  done  for  my  indisputable  justification. 
His  death  was  the  digging  of  the  well  of  salvation ;  but  the  resurrection  was  the 
springing  up  of  the  water.    Christ  was  in  His  death  the  hostage  of  the  people  of 
God.    Now,  as  long  as  He  was  in  prison,  although  there  might  be  ground  of  hope, 
it  was  but  as  light  sown  for  the  righteous  ;  but  when  the  hostage  came  out,  then 
every  child  of  God  was  released  from  durance  vile  no  more  to  die.    IH.  "  Who  is 
KTEN  AT  THE  BioHT  HAND  OF  GoD."    Is  there  not  any  word  of  special  commendation 
to  this?    The  last  one  had,  "  Yea  rather  "  (see  chap.  v.  10).    Here  is  an  argument 
which  hath  much  more  power  than  even  Christ's  death.    In  other  passages  Christ 
is  said  to  have  sat  down  for  ever  at  the  right  hand  of  God.    Now,  He  never  would 
if  the  work  were  not  fully  done.    There  were  no  seats  provided  for  the  priests  in 
the  Jewish  tabernacle.    Every  priest  stood  daily  ministering.    But  the  great  High 
Priest  of  our  profession  hath  taken  His  seat  at  the  right  hand  of  the  majesty  on 
high,  because  now  the  sacrifice  is  complete.    "  Sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God  " 


CHAP.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  221 

means — (1)  That  Christ  is  now  in  the  honourable  position  of  an  accepted  one.  TLe 
right  hand  of  God  is  the  place  of  majesty  and  favour.  Now,  Christ  is  His  people's 
representative.  When  He  died  for  them  they  had  rest ;  when  He  rose  again  for 
them  they  had  liberty  ;  when  He  sat  at  His  own  right  hand,  then  they  had  favour, 
and  honour,  and  dignity.  (2)  The  place  of  power.  Christ  at  the  right  hand  of  God 
signifies  that  all  power  is  given  unto  Him  in  heaven  and  in  earth.  Now,  who  is 
He  that  condemns  the  people  that  have  such  a  head  as  this?  IV.  "Who  also 
MAKETH  intercession  FOR  18."  Our  apostle,  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  puts  a 
strongen  comium  upon  this  sentence.  In  the  first  he  said,  "Yea  rather";  The 
second,  "  Much  more  " ;  but  now  "  He  is  able  also  to  save  them  unto  the  uttermost 
that  come  unto  God  by  Him,"  cfco.  If  I  had  to  intercede  for  my  brother  with  my 
father,  I  should  feel  I  had  got  a  safe  case  in  hand.  This  is  just  what  Jesus 
has  to  do.      (Ibid.)  The   completeness   of  redemption  : — The    privilege    itself 

which  is  here  mentioned,  the  believer's  freedom  from  condemnation  propounded  for 
greater  emphasis  in  the  form  of  a  question.  Who  shall  condemn  ?  which  hath  two 
things  considerable  in  it.  First,  We  will  look  upon  these  words,  as  they  do  present 
to  us  the  state  of  a  Christian  in  the  matter  and  substance  of  them ;  who  shall  con- 
demn ?  that  is,  none  shall  condemn.  The  second  is,  as  it  expresses  to  us  the  spirit 
of  a  Christian,  and  that  is  a  spirit  of  triumph  and  exultation  ;  who  shall  condemn 
him  ?  as  defying  any  that  should  undertake  it,  or  go  about  it.  The  second  is  the 
confirmation  of  this  privilege  from  the  several  arguments  which  are  brought  to 
enforce  it ;  and  they  are,  I  say,  taken  from  four  articles  of  our  Christian  faith.  We 
will  view  them  in  their  several  order  as  they  lie  before  us.  The  first  is,  The  death 
of  Christ ;  "  It  is  Christ  that  died."  Christ's  dying  for  believers  does  infer  their 
freedom  from  condemnation.  Now  the  strength  of  this  argument  it  does  depend 
upon  a  threefold  consideration.  First,  The  death  of  Christ  does  free  God's 
children  from  condemnation,  upon  account  of  the  nature  and  quality  of  it,  con- 
sidered in  itself  as  most  sufficient  to  such  a  purpose  as  this  is.  "This  it  is  again  in 
a  twofold  respect.  First,  The  dignity  of  His  person  ;  it  is  Christ.  If  it  had  been 
any  other  person  who  had  undertaken  to  reconcile  us  to  God  and  to  free  us  from 
condemnation,  we  might  have  notwithstanding  doubted  of  it,  and  called  it  into 
question.  The  second  is,  The  fulness  of  His  satisfaction.  Those  for  whom  Christ 
hath  died  they  cannot  be  condemned,  because  Christ  by  dying  for  them  hath  taken 
away  all  manner  of  guilt  and  condemnation  from  them.  The  third  is.  The  interest 
and  propriety  which  all  believers  have  in  this  death,  in  these  words.  First,  In  the 
intention  of  Christ ;  He  hath  designed  His  death  to  be  effectual  to  all  His  elect,  and 
did  with  a  special  respect  unto  them  lay  down  His  life.  Secondly,  As  to  their  own 
improvement  and  application;  they  have  laid  hold  on  this  death  of  C",  list,  and  so 
made  it  their  own,  and  the  virtue  and  efficacy  of  it.  The  third  and  last  is.  The 
justice  of  God  Himself  in  reference  to  both.  It  is  satisfied  in  the  surety,  and 
therefore  it  cannot  in  justice  be  required  of  the  principal  debtor  ;  the  Judge  of  all 
the  world  must  needs  do  right.  And  so  much  for  that,  namely,  the  first  argument 
to  prove  God's  children  free  from  condemnation,  taken  from  the  death  of  Christ. 
The  second  is  taken  from  His  resurrection  ;  "  yea  rather,"  that  is  risen  again.  Firsts 
In  reference  to  the  mystery  and  thing  itself,  as  a  more  excellent  and  transcendent 
dispensation.  For  Christ  to  be  risen  again,  this  is  such  a  glorious  mystery,  as 
dazzles  the  most  curious  eyes,  and  affects  all  men  that  behold  it  even  with 
admiration.  Secondly,  In  reference  to  Christ  Himself,  rather  as  risen  again,  as 
that  which  is  the  greater  honour  and  dignity  to  Him  ;  for  hereby  was  there  a  dis- 
covery of  His  Godhead  and  Divine  nature.  "Thirdly,  In  reference  to  ourselves,  as  of 
greatest  use  and  improvement  to  us.  For  Christ's  resurrection  it  is  the  ground  and 
foundation  of  ours ;  and  so  of  all  other  comfort  which  belongs  unto  us.  This  is 
the  sum  of  the  business :  That  Christ  sits  at  God's  right  hand  as  a  testimony  of 
the  fulness  of  His  redemption  and  the  completeness  of  His  sacrifice  for  us.  This 
intercession  of  Christ  does  not  consist  in  a  formal  prostrating  of  the  body  of  Christ, 
but  especially  in  these  following  particulars.  First,  In  His  appearing  and  presenting 
of  Himself  for  us  to  His  Father  in  both  His  natures  (Heb.  ix.  24).  Secondly,  As  Christ 
does  appear  in  heaven  for  us,  so  He  does  likewise  further  urge  and  present  to  God  the 
Father  the  rigour  and  merit  and  efficacy  of  that  sacrifice  which  He  once  made  on 
earth  for  us.  Thirdly,  He  does  also  actually  apply  this  His  death  and  merit  and 
satisfaction  to  believers  themselves.  As  Paul  in  the  behalf  of  Onesimus,  "  Set  this 
upon  my  account."  Fourthly  and  lastly,  Christ  is  said  to  intercede  for  as  in  all  those 
particular  suits  and  requests  which  He  puts  up  in  our  behalf.  (Thomas Horton,  D.D.) 
It  iM  Christ  that  died.— TAe  death  of  Christ  .—I.  Who  dikd  ?    Christ— ».«.,  th« 


222  THE  BIBLICAL  LLLUSTRATOB.  [chip.  Tin. 

Anointed  of  God.  1.  Persons  onder  the  law,  who  were  set  apart  to  important 
offices,  as  prophets,  priests,  kings,  were  anointed  with  the  holy  oil,  which  was 
typical  of  the  anointing  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  So  we  read  about  our  Lord  (Luke 
It.  18).  As  oil  insinuates  itself  into  the  minutest  pores  of  the  substance  which  it 
touches,  so  the  Divine  nature  wholly  possessed  the  human  form  called  Jesas ;  and 
there  was  that  perfect  union  of  God  and  man  which  we  call  Christ.  Thus,  though 
He  be  God  and  man,  He  is  not  two,  but  one  Christ.  But  He  was  "  anointed  above 
His  fellows."  Thus,  for  instance,  Aaron  was  anointed  high  priest,  Saul  king, 
and  Elisha  prophet ;  Melchisedek  was  king  and  priest,  Moses  priest  and  prophet ; 
yet  none  but  Christ  was  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King.  2.  And  as  He  was  anointed 
with  the  Holy  Spirit  without  measure,  so  He  communicates  that  unction  to  Hia 
people  as  they  require ;  and  as  the  oil  which  was  poured  upon  Aaron  was  so  copious 
as  to  run  down  to  the  skirts  of  his  clothing,  so  the  unction  of  the  Holy  One  was  so 
abundant  on  Christ,  as  the  Head  of  His  Church,  that  it  ever  has,  and  ever  will, 
run  down  to  the  meanest  and  the  weakest  of  believers.  H.  Why  did  He  dir  ?  1. 
To  deliver  us  from  condemnation.  2.  To  testify  God's  love  to  a  lo£t  world  (1  John 
iv.  10).  3.  For  the  fulfilment  of  Scripture  (Matt.  xxvi.  52-54;  Luke  xxiv.  27).  4. 
Not  only  to  satisfy  God,  but  thus  to  save  sinners.  And  looking  at  the  Person  who 
died,  it  secures  the  salvation  of  all  the  elect,  for  Christ  is  the  emphatic  word  in  all 
the  sentence.  Who  died  ?  Christ.  You  need  no  more.  Nothing  can  be  added  to 
strengthen  it.  "  Who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?  "  Christ  has  died.  It  shuts  up  aU. 
in.  The  efficacy  of  His  death.  God  can  now  be  "  just,  and  the  Justifier  of  him 
that  believeth  in  Jesus '' ;  but  in  no  other  way  that  we  are  told  of  but  by  Christ's 
death.  And  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  was  once  for  all.  It  need  not  be  repeated. 
There  is  no  more,  no  other  sacrifice  for  sin  (Heb.  i.  12,  14).  (J.  W.  Reeve,  M.A.) 
The  death  of  Christ : — All  the  world  has  sung  the  praise  of  the  Princess  Alice.  One 
child  having  died  of  a  contagious  disease,  she  was  in  the  room  where  another  was 
dying,  and  the  Court  physician  said  to  her,  "You  must  not  breathe  the  breath  of 
this  child,  or  you  yourself  will  die."  But  seeing  the  child  mourning,  she  in 
sympathy  kissed  the  little  one,  caught  the  disease,  and  perished.  All  the  world 
sings  of  her  heroism  and  self-sacrifice  ;  but  I  have  to  tell  you  that  when  our  race 
was  dying,  the  Lord  Jesus  stooped  down  and  gave  us  the  kiss  of  His  everlasting 
love,  and  died  that  we  might  live."  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  Yea  rather, 
that  la  risen  again. — Christ't  resurrection  a  higher  fact  than  His  death  : — This — I. 
Supposes  the  fact  of  His  death.  His  death  is  not  to  be  disparaged ;  none  can 
appreciate  it  too  highly.  It  is  the  highest  expression  of  love  the  universe  ever 
witnessed — the  highest  homage  to  truth,  rectitude,  and  order  that  the  Divine 
government  ever  received.  It  was  a  death-blow  to  all  past  dispensations ;  it  rang 
in  the  new  era  of  eternal  mercy.  But  great  as  is  His  death,  the  great  tbing  is 
implied  in  His  resurrection.  There  could  not  have  been  a  real  resurrection  had 
there  not  been  a  real  death.  II.  Demonstrates  the  woNDEBFnLNESs  of  His  death. 
1.  Its  absolute  voluntariness.  He  who  could  rise  from  the  dead  by  His  own  power 
could  have  avoided  death.  His  rising  proved  that  He  had  power  to  lay  down  Hia 
Life  and  take  it  up  again.  2.  Its  supernatural  character.  Only  a  few  of  the  mil- 
lions that  have  died  have  ever  been  raised  to  life ;  only  One  ever  rose  by  His  own 
power,  and  that  was  Christ.  The  supernatural  resurrection  shows  the  supernatural 
death.  It  is  the  resurrection,  therefore,  that  gives  a  meaning  to  Christ's  death. 
3.  The  moral  purpose  of  His  death.  The  great  end  of  His  death  was  to  give  spiritual 
life  to  humanity,  and  this  Hia  resurrection  ensures.  He  is  alive,  to  carry  on  by 
His  gospel  and  His  Spirit  the  great  work  of  man's  spiritual  restoration.  Conclu- 
sion :  Let  us  think  rather  of  the  risen  than  of  the  dead  Christ.  Alas,  the  modem 
Church  generally  lives  rather  on  the  gloomy  Saturday,  when  Christ  is  in  His  grave, 
than  on  the  bright  Sunday  when  He  appeared  to  His  disciples — the  blessed  Easter 
of  the  world.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  WHo  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God. — 

On  Christ's  being  at  the  right  hand  of  God : — It  imports — 1.  The  advancement  of 
Christ,  in  our  nature,  to  the  highest  honour  and  glory.  He  is  not  only  possessed 
of  the  glory  which  He  had  with  the  Father  before  the  world  was,  and  of  which  He 
was  pleased,  for  a  time,  to  empty  Himself;  but  having  taken  our  nature  into  heaven 
with  Him,  there  is  a  most  glorious  beauty  and  lustre  put  upon  it,  of  which  the 
disciples  that  were  with  TTim  on  the  mount  of  transfiguration  had  a  lively  emblem, 
and  of  which  Stephen  and  Paul,  and  John  the  divine,  had  visions.  2.  Christ's 
being  at  the  right  hand  of  God  implies  the  sovereignty,  power,  and  dominion  with 
which  He  is  invested.  3.  Hia  being  at  the  right  hand  of  God  expresses  not  only 
His  honour  and  power,  but  also  His  blessedness  and  joy.   He  for  ever  drinks  in  tha 


CBAP.  viu.]  ROMANS.  223 

highest  pleasures  from  the  indwelling  Godhead,  from  His  matchless  nearness  to, 
and  communion  with  the  Father,  and  from  the  review  of  His  own  finished  work, 
and  the  glorious  things  which  He  accomphshed.  Being  thus  exalted.  He  can  carry 
on  and  finish,  by  power,  the  redemption  He  has  purchased  by  price  ;  can  give  gifts 
to  men,  give  repentance  and  remission  of  sins.  (T.  Feme,  M.  A.)  The  right  hand 
of  Ood : — We  honour  the  right  hand  more  than  we  do  the  left.  If  in  accident  or 
battle  we  must  lose  one  hand,  let  it  be  the  left.  The  left  hand  being  nearer  the 
heart,  we  may  not  do  much  of  the  violent  work  of  life  with  that  hand  without 
physical  damage  ;  but  he  who  has  the  right  arm  in  full  play  has  the  mightiest  of 
all  earthly  weapons.  In  all  ages,  and  in  all  languages,  the  right  hand  is  the  symbol 
of  strength,  and  power,  and  honour.  Hiram  sat  at  the  right  band  of  Solomon. 
Then  we  have  the  term, "  He  is  a  right-hand  man,"  and  Lafayette  was  Washington's 
right-hand  man.  Marshal  Ney  was  Napoleon's  right-hand  man;  and  now  you  have 
the  meaning  of  Paul  when  he  speaks  of  Christ,  who  is  at  the  right  hand  of  God. 
That  means  He  is  the  first  Guest  of  heaven.  He  has  a  right  to  sit  there.  The 
Hero  of  the  universe.  Count  His  wounds — in  the  feet,  in  the  hands,  in  the  side,  in 
the  temples.  If  a  hero  comes  back  from  battle,  and  he  takes  oS  his  hat,  or  rolls 
ap  his  sleeve  and  shows  you  the  scar  of  a  wound,  you  stand  in  admiration  at  his 
heroism  and  patriotism ;  but  Christ  makes  conspicuous  the  wounds  gotten  on 
Calvary,  that  Waterloo  of  all  the  ages.  Wounded  all  over,  let  Him  sit  on  the  right 
hand  of  God.  He  has  a  right  to  sit  there.  By  the  request  of  God  the  Father,  and 
the  unanimous  suffrages  of  all  heaven,  let  Him  sit  there.  In  the  grand  review, 
when  the  redeemed  pass  by  in  cohorts  of  splendour,  they  will  look  at  Him 
and  shout  "  Victory  1  "  The  oldest  inhabitant  of  heaven  never  saw  a  grander 
day  than  the  one  when  Christ  took  the  right  hand  of  God.  (T.  De  Witt 
Talmage,  D.D.)  The  ascension  :  mysteria  in  religion  : — The  ascension  is  ever 
to  be  commemorated  with  thanksgiving.  As  the  Jewish  high  priest,  on  the 
great  day  of  atonement,  went  into  the  holy  of  holies  with  the  blood  of 
the  victim,  and  sprinkled  it  upon  the  mercy-seat,  so  Christ  has  entered 
into  heaven  itself,  to  present  His  pierced  hands  and  wounded  side,  in  token 
of  the  atonement  which  He  has  effected  for  the  sins  of  the  world.  Wonder  and 
awe  must  always  mingle  with  the  thankfulness  which  the  revealed  dispensation  of 
mercy  raises  in  our  minds.  And  this,  indeed,  is  an  additional  cause  of  thankful- 
ness, that  Almighty  God  has  disclosed  to  us  enough  to  raise  such  feelings.  Had 
He  merely  told  us  that  He  had  pardoned  ns,  we  should  have  had  overabundant 
cause  for  blessing  Him  ;  but  in  showing  us  somewhat  of  the  means.  He  has 
enlarged  our  gratitude,  yet  sobered  it  with  fear.  We  are  allowed  with  the  angels 
to  obtain  a  glimpse  of  the  mysteries  of  heaven,  "  to  rejoice  with  trembling."  I. 
Chbisi's  ascension  to  the  biqht  hand  of  God  is  a  token  that  heaven  is  a  place, 
Ain>  not  a  mere  state.  The  bodily  presence  of  the  Saviour  is  in  heaven.  This 
contradicts  the  notions  of  cultivated  and  speculative  minds,  and  humbles  the 
reason.  Philosophy  considers  it  more  rational  to  suppose  that  God  is  in  no  one 
place  more  than  another.  It  would  teach,  if  it  dare,  that  heaven  is  a  mere  state  of 
blessedness ;  but,  to  be  consistent,  it  ought  to  maintain  that  Christ's  presence  on 
earth  was  a  mere  vision ;  for  certain  it  is.  He  who  appeared  on  earth  went  up  from 
the  earth.  And  here  again  a  difiSculty  occurs.  Whither  did  He  go  ?  Beyond  the 
sun  and  stars  ?  Again,  what  is  meant  by  ascending  t  Philosophers  will  say  there 
is  no  difference  between  down  and  up  as  regards  the  sky.  And  thus  we  are  led  on 
to  consider  how  different  are  the  character  and  effect  of  the  Scripture  notices  of  the 
structure  of  the  physical  world  from  those  which  philosophers  deliver.  And  when 
we  find  the  two  apparently  discordant,  the  feehng  we  ought  to  have  is  not  an  im- 
patience to  do  what  is  beyond  our  powers,  to  arbitrate  between  the  two  voices  of 
God,  but  a  sense  of  the  utter  nothingness  of  worms  such  as  we  are  ;  of  our  inca> 
paoity  to  contemplate  things  as  they  really  are ;  a  conviction  that  what  is  put 
before  us,  in  nature  or  in  grace,  though  true  in  such  a  sense  that  we  dare  not 
tamper  with  it,  yet  is  but  an  intimation  useful  for  particular  purposes,  "  until  the 
day  break  and  the  shadows  flee  away."  And  thus,  while  we  use  the  language  of 
science  for  scientific  purposes,  we  may  reprove  its  upholders  should  they  attempt 
to  "  stretch  it  beyond  its  measure."  It  may  stand  as  a  proselyte  under  the  shadow 
of  the  temple ;  but  it  must  not  dare  profane  the  inner  courts,  in  which  the  ladder 
of  angels  reached  to  the  throne  of  God,  and  "Jesus  standing  on  the  right  hand  of 
God."  Note,  too,  that  our  Lord  is  to  come  from  heaven  "  in  like  manner  "  as  He 
went.  Attempt  to  solve  this  prediction,  according  to  the  received  theories  of  science, 
And  70a  will  discover  their  shallowness.    They  ue  unequal  to  the  depth  of  the 


224  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vm, 

problem.  II.  Chbist  has  oonb  up  on  high  **  lo  pbbssnt  Himself  befobe  the  facb 
OF  God  fob  us  "  (Heb.  ix.  12,  24,  25 ;  vii.  24,  25 ;  viii.  1,  2).  These  passages  refer 
us  to  the  rites  of  the  Jewish  law.  The  high  priest  entering  with  the  atoning  blood 
into  the  holiest  was  a  representation  of  Christ's  gracious  deed  in  our  behalf.  How 
does  He  fulfil  the  rite  of  intercession  ?  Instead  of  explaining,  Scripture  does  bat 
continue  to  answer  us  in  the  language  of  the  type ;  even  to  the  last  it  veils  His  deed 
under  the  ancient  figure  (Eev.  viii.  3,  4).  Shall  we  therefore  explain  away  its  lan- 
guage as  merely  figurative  ?  Far  from  it.  Christ  is  within  the  veil.  We  must  not 
search  curiously  what  is  His  present  office.  And,  since  we  do  not  know,  we  will 
studiously  keep  to  the  figure  given  us  in  Scripture.  We  will  not  neglect  it  because 
we  do  not  understand  it.  We  will  hold  it  as  a  mystery,  or  a  truth  sacramental ; 
that  is,  a  high  invisible  grace  lodged  in  an  outward  form.  Thus  much  we  see  in  it, 
the  pledge  of  a  doctrine  which  reason  cannot  understand — viz.,  of  the  infiuence 
of  the  prayer  of  faith  upon  the  Divine  counsels.  The  Intercessor  directs  or  stays 
the  hand  of  the  Unchangeable  and  Sovereign  Governor  of  the  world,  being  at 
once  the  meritorious  cause  and  the  earnest  of  the  intercessory  power  of  His  brethren. 

III.  CONSIDEB  ODB  SaVIOOB'S  WORDS — "  It  IS  EXPEDIENT  FOE  YOU  THAT  I  GO  AWAY  : 
FOB   IF  I  GO  NOT  AWAY,  THE   CoMFOETER  WILL  NOT  COME."      He  doeS  UOt  tell  US  why 

it  was  that  His  absence  was  the  condition  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  presence.  "  I  wiU 
pray  the  Father,  and  He  shall  give  you  another  Comforter."  To  the  same  purpose 
are  John  xiv.  12,  28 ;  xx.  17.  Now,  proud  and  curious  reason  might  seek  to  know 
why  He  could  not  "pray  the  Father  "  without  going  to  Him  ;  why  He  must  depart 
in  order  to  send  the  Spirit.  But  faith  muses  over  the  wonderful  system  of  Provi- 
dence, which  is  ever  connecting  events,  between  which  man  sees  no  necessary  bond. 
The  whole  system  of  cause  and  effect  is  one  of  mystery ;  and  this  instance,  if  it 
may  be  called  one,  supplies  abundant  matter  of  praise  and  adoration  to  a  pious 
mind.  It  suggests  to  us,  again,  how  very  much  our  knowledge  of  God's  ways  is 
but  on  the  surface,  and  also  leads  our  minds  with  great  comfort  to  the  thought  of 
many  lower  dispensations  of  Providence  towards  us.  He  who,  according  to  His 
inscrutable  will,  sent  first  His  Son,  and  then  His  Spirit,  acts  with  deep  counsel, 
which  we  may  surely  trust,  when  He  sends  from  place  to  place  those  earthly  instru- 
ments which  carry  on  His  purposes.  This  is  a  thought  which  is  particularly  sooth- 
ing as  regards  the  loss  of  friends ;  or  of  especially  gifted  men,  who  seem  in  their 
day  the  earthly  support  of  the  Church.  For  what  we  know,  their  removal  hence  is 
as  necessary  for  the  furtherance  of  the  very  objects  we  have  at  heart,  as  was  the 
departure  of  our  Saviour.  Their  gifts  are  not  lost  to  us.  Yea,  doubtless,  they  are 
keeping  up  the  perpetual  chant  in  the  shrine  above,  praying  and  praising  God  day 
and  night  in  His  temple,  like  Moses  upon  the  mount,  while  Joshua  and  his  host 
fight  with  Amalek  (Eev.  vi.  10  ;  xi.  17,  18  ;  xv.  3,  4).  Conclusion :  What  has  been 
said  about  the  ascension  comes  to  this— that  we  are  in  a  world  of  mystery,  with 
one  bright  Light  before  us,  sufficient  for  our  proceeding  forward  through  aU  diffi- 
culties. Take  away  this  Light,  and  we  are  utterly  wretched.  But  with  it  we  have 
all  and  abound.  Not  to  mention  the  duty  and  wisdom  of  implicit  faith,  what  is 
nobler  than  the  generosity  of  heart  which  risks  everything  on  God's  word,  dares  the 
powers  of  evil  to  their  worst  efforts,  and  repels  the  illusions  of  sense  and  the 
artifices  of  reason,  by  confidence  in  the  truth  of  Him  who  has  ascended  to  the  right 
hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high  ?  We  will  not  wish  for  sight.  It  is  enough  that  our 
Eedeemer  liveth  ;  that  He  has  been  on  earth,  and  will  come  again.  (J.  H.  New- 
man, D.D.)  Who  also  maketh  Intercession  for  us. — The  intercession  of  Christ: 
— I.  Its  njtuee.  1.  As  it  implies  a  distance  between  the  Father  with  whom 
Christ  intercedes  and  those  for  whom  He  intercedes,  so  its  aim  and  design  is  to 
remove  this  distance  (1  John  ii.  1 ;  John  xvii.  20-24).  2.  In  order  to  the  attaining 
these  ends,  it  consists  primarily  in  Christ  presenting  continually  before  God  that  sac- 
rifice He  made  of  Himself  on  earth  (Heb.  ix.  24-26  ;  Kev.  v.  6  ;  Heb.  ix.  12 ;  xii.  24). 
3.  Yet  it  may  be  reasonably  presumed  to  comprehend  some  direct  signification  of 
His  mind  and  will  to  the  Father,  in  a  manner  worthy  of  Himself,  concerning  those 
for  whom  He  intercedes.  We  are  naturally  led  to  conceive  thus  of  Christ's  inter- 
cession from  the  word  itself,  which  properly  signifies  pleading.  His  work  in  heaven 
is  also  sometimes  represented  under  the  notion  of  His  asking  and  praying  to  the 
Father  (Psa.  ii.  8  ;  John  xiv.  16 ;  xvi.  26).  But  this  is  very  different  from  that  of 
all  others,  or  even  His  own,  in  the  days  of  His  humiliation.  The  style  of  His 
intercession  is  majestic,  as  of  One  who  has  authority  to  challenge  what  He  signifies 
His  desire  and  will  about  (John  xvii.  24).  4.  One  branch  of  it  is  to  take  care  of 
the  prayers  of  the  saints  on  earth,  to  commend  and  present  them  to  God,  and  to 


«HAP.  vin.]  ROMANS.  224 

secure  acceptance  for  them  (1  Pet.  i.  5;  Rev.  viii.  3;  Heb.  iv.  14-16;  x.  21,22; 
xiii.  15;  Col.  iii.  17).  II.  Its  properties,  1.  It  is  just  and  right.  (1)  li,  is  tha 
intercession  of  One  who  Himself  is  holy,  and  ever  stood  right  with  the  law  of 
God.  (2)  It  is  also  right  in  itself  ;  not  a  mere  suit  for  mercy,  but  a  plea  addressed 
to  justice,  for  what  He  has  first  purchased.  (3)  It  is  also  carried  on  in  a  perfectly 
holy  manner,  and  according  to  the  will  of  God.  Thus  is  our  Advocate,  in  all 
respects,  Jesus  Christ  the  Righteous  (1  John  ii.  2).  2.  It  is  in  common  for  the 
whole  household  of  God,  yet  distinct  and  particular  for  every  member ;  and  in 
order  to  this,  it  is  qualified  with  His  perfect  knowledge  of  what  concerns  them 
all.  3.  It  is  conducted  with  consummate  skill  and  prudence,  and  to  the  best 
advantage.  We  often  ask  and  have  not,  because  we  ask  amiss ;  but  as  Christ 
understands  thoroughly  the  cause  of  His  clients,  He  varies  and  disposes  Hia 
pleas  according  to  the  nature  and  exigency  of  every  case.  4.  It  is  most  affec- 
tionate and  earnest.  All  His  people's  conflicts  and  complaints  are  not  only 
before  Him,  but  within  Him  {Heb.  iv.  15;  ii.  18).  5.  It  is  constant  and  per- 
petual as  long  as  there  is  any  saint  left  to  be  brought  to  glory  (Heb.  vii.  25). 
6.  It  is  ever  prevalent  and  successful.  The  interest  of  all  is  wrapt  together ;  the 
Advocate  is  a  dutiful  Son  to  the  Father,  a  loving  Brother  to  the  client,  and  God  is 
a  tender  Father  to  them  both.  Christ  knew  in  the  days  of  His  flesh  that  the 
Father  always  heard  Him.  And  can  the  success  of  His  prayers,  or  His  confidence 
of  their  success,  be  less  now  He  has  the  price  and  pledge  of  all  He  asks  for  in  His 
hands  ?  III.  Its  ukes.  1.  It  manifests  God's  glory.  Is  it  not  congruous,  while 
the  sins  of  those  whom  God  will  save  are  continually  pleading  on  earth  against  the 
favours  He  is  doing  and  designing  for  them,  that  the  blood  of  perfect  atonement 
should  be  alway  pleaded  in  heaven  against  the  crying  guilt  of  thee  sins,  and  pro- 
duced as  a  just  ground  of  all  the  ample  largesses  of  His  grace  to  those  who  are 
daily  making  themselves  unworthy  of  them?  Does  it  not  make  it  visible  all  over 
heaven  with  what  strict  regards  to  His  holiness  and  justice  He  proceeds  in  dis- 
pensing the  fruits  of  His  grace  ?  2.  It  promotes  Christ's  own  glory.  As  He 
glorifies  the  Father  in  the  continual  discharge  of  this  office,  so  no  less  does  the 
Father  glorify  Him  in  advancing  Him  to  it  (Heb.  v.  4,  5).  3.  It  undoubtedly 
answers  many  unknown  uses  in  respect  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  invisible  world. 
Saints  aud  angels  behold  the  whole  transaction.  And  who  can  tell  how  large  a 
part  of  their  happiness  may  arise  from  tbe  sight  of  Christ's  performing  His  temple 
service  in  the  midst  of  them?  Application  :  The  subject — 1.  Teaches  the  humility 
and  reverence  which  becomes  us  toward  God  at  all  times  and  in  all  our  addresses 
to  Him.  2.  Inspires  hope  in  God's  mercy  and  grace  for  our  salvation,  together 
with  frequent  and  cheerful  addresses  to  the  throne  of  grace  (Heb.  iv.  14-16 ; 
X.  19-22).  8.  Comforts  the  saints  under  all  the  difficulties,  dangers,  and 
troubles  of  the  present  state.  As  long  as  Christ  preserves  His  interest 
in  heaven,  He  can  never  fail  of  an  interest  on  earth.  4.  Naturally  and 
powerfully  suggests  our  loving,  cleaving,  and  living  to  Christ  (Heb.  iv.  14  ; 
X.  21-23).  5.  Attracts  the  hearts  of  Christians  from  earth  to  heaven,  and 
points  their  supreme  views  and  desires  thither  (Col.  iii.  1,  2).  (-7.  Hubbard.) 
Christ's  heavenly  intercession : — Christ  Jesus  does  not  lead  a  life  merely  of  blessed- 
ness in  heaven,  but  a  life  of  office.  He  hath  an  unchangeable  and  everlasting 
priesthood.  The  one  part  of  His  priesthood  He  finished  here  on  earth,  when  he 
offered  up  Himself  to  God  a  sacrifice  ;  and  the  other,  the  interceding  work  of  His 
priesthood.  He  still  carries  on  in  heaven.  Intercession,  in  general,  signifies  a 
pleading  and  entreating  with  one  person  in  behalf  of  another.  We  being  unworthy 
of  access  to  God  in  our  own  name,  Christ  Jesus  is  our  intercessor  to  plead  our  cause 
with  the  Father,  and  to  procure  and  dispense  to  us  the  blessings  of  His  purchase. 
He  virtually  makes  continual  intercession  for  us,  by  appearing  in  our  nature  and 
name,  presenting  Himself  in  that  body  in  which  He  suffered  on  earth,  standing  in 
the  midst  of  the  throne  as  the  Lamb  that  had  been  slain.  His  intercession  is 
f onnd'  d  on  His  atonement.  By  this  intercession  of  Jesus  Christ  God  is  glorified. 
It  is  a  striking  testimony  to  God's  awful  majesty  and  infinite  purity  that  He  has 
appointed  a  standing  Mediator  between  Him  and  us,  and  will  confer  no  grace  upon 
us  but  through  Him  ;  and  it  is,  at  the  same  time,  an  eminent  instance  of  His  love 
and  grace,  that  He  has  appointed  such  a  glorious  Intercessor  to  plead  our  cause  in 
heaven,  even  His  own  Son.  By  this  also  Christ  Himself  is  highly  honoured.  His 
saving  power  is  demonstrated  :  "  He  is  able  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost  that  come 
urto  God  by  Him,  seeing  He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them."  The 
efficacy  of  Plis  sacrifice.  His  love  to  His  people,  and  the  great  influence  and  interest 
VOL.    II,  15 


226  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vut 

He  has  in  heaven,  are  continually  shown  forth.  This  doctrine  of  Christ's  intercession 
tends  to  excite  in  us  a  due  mixture  of  reverence  and  confidence  towards  God.  Should 
it  not  support  the  awakened  sinner  under  a  sense  of  guilt,  prevent  his  despairing  cf 
mercy,  and  encourage  him  to  come  to  the  Father  by  the  Son  of  His  love  f  ( T. 
Ferme,  M.A.)  Christ's  intercession: — I.  The  nature  of  Chkist's  intercession, 
or  the  manner  in  which  it  is  performed.  1.  The  intercession  of  Christ,  in  His  state 
of  exaltation,  consists  in  His  personal  appearance  in  heaven  before  God.  It  is  from 
Him  that  blessings  are  to  be  obtained  ;  and,  as  the  advocate  requires  to  come  into 
the  presence  of  the  judge  by  whom  the  law  is  to  be  administered,  and  the  case  of 
his  client  determined,  so  it  is  a  part  of  the  Divine  constitution,  in  the  scheme  of 
redemption,  that  the  representative  or  advocate  of  sinners  should  not  stand  afar  off, 
but  come  into  the  immediate  presence  of  the  Eternal.  2.  But  the  intercession  of 
Christ  consists  not  in  a  simple  appearance  before  God  in  His  human  nature,  but  in 
His  official  presentation  of  Himself  as  the  sacrifice  offered  for  sinners.  His  suffer- 
ings alone  could  give  Him  a  title  to  become  an  intercessor  ;  and  when  He  appeared 
in  heaven  as  such,  He  behoved  to  come  with  His  proofs  and  credentials  of  Hi9 
previous  qualification  for  the  office,  by  "  suffering  unto  death."  As  the  high  priest 
entered  with  the  blood  obtained  from  the  previous  sacrifice,  so  Christ  entered  heaven 
with  the  blood  of  His  sacrifice.  It  was  known  in  the  heaven  above  that  His  work 
was  completed,  and  His  very  resurrection  was  a  proof  of  it.  3.  But  besides  this 
there  seems  farther  to  be  included  in  Christ's  work  of  intercession,  the  audible 
expression  of  His  desires  in  behalf  of  His  people.  This  is  the  case  in  the  several 
examples  recorded  of  His  intercessions  on  earth.  IL  The  persons  fob  whom 
Christ  intercedes.  III.  The  subjects  to  which  Christ's  intercession  refers,  or 
the  things  for  which  He  intercedes  in  behalf  of  His  people.  1.  Christ  intercedes  for 
those  whom  God  has  given  Him,  that  they  may  be  made  His  actually  by  believing 
on  His  name.  2.  Christ  intercedes  for  the  preservation  of  His  people  from  evil, 
and  for  their  progressive  advancement  in  hoUness.  The  Saviour,  who  knows  a 
world's  temptations,  is  busy  within  the  veU,  and,  as  in  the  days  of  His  flesh,  is  His 
prayer  ascending — "  Holy  Father,  keep  those  whom  Thou  hast  given  Me  from  the 
evil  that  is  in  the  world,"  3.  Christ,  by  His  intercession,  obtains  the  pardon  of  the 
sins  which  believers  daily  commit,  and  thus  averts  the  wrath  of  God,  and  maintains 
their  peace  with  heaven.  "  If  any  man  sin,  we  have  an  Advocate  with  the  Father, 
Jesus  Christ  the  righteous,  and  He  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins. "  What  a  source 
of  consolation  does  this  open  up  to  the  frail,  the  offending  Christian  I  4.  Christ  inter- 
cedes  for  His  people  that  they  may  be  brought  to  heaven,  to  enjoy  His  blessedness,  and 
to  see  His  glory.     (.7.  Clason.)  The  intercession  of  Christ :  its  method : — It  was 

when  the  high  priest  entered  with  the  blood  and  incense  within  the  veil  before  the 
mercy-seat  that  he  made  intercession  for  the  people.  The  very  presenting  of  the 
blood  and  incense  was  an  act  of  intercession,  whether  words  were  used  or  not.  It 
was  done  in  behalf  of  Israel  for  the  purpose  of  averting  the  displeasure  and  con- 
ciHating  the  favour  of  Jehovah.  With  reference  to  this,  Jesus  is  represented  as 
fulfilling  in  heaven  this  part  of  the  priestly  functions.  In  what  precise  manner 
His  intercession  is  carried  on,  it  may  not  be  easy  for  us  with  certainty  to  determine. 
It  is  evident,  from  the  type  just  alluded  to,  that  there  may  be  intercession  in  action 
as  well  as  in  words.  If  a  general  who  had  fought  the  battles  of  his  country,  and 
had  received  many  a  wound,  were  presenting  a  petition  to  his  sovereign  on  behalf 
of  any  of  his  offending  subjects,  what  could  be  a  more  effective  intercession  than 
the  silent  baring  of  his  bosom  and  pointing  to  his  scars?  {R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.) 
A  personal  advocate : — An  old  legionary  asked  Augustus  to  assist  him  in  a  cause 
which  was  about  to  be  tried.  Augustus  deputed  one  of  his  friends  to  speak  for  the 
veteran,  who,  however,  repudiated  the  vicarious  patron,  saying,  "  It  was  not  by 
proxy  that  I  fought  for  you  at  Actium."  Augustus  acknowledged  the  obligation, 
and  pleaded  the  cause  in  person.  (C.  E.  Little.)  Christ  our  Advocate : — There 
are  some  subjects  that  soon  weary  us.  But  it  is  not  so  with  Christ.  Like  the  sun, 
and  the  dew,  and  the  rain,  and  the  fleecy  snow.  He  is  always  full  of  freshness  and 
beauty.  Let  us  now  think  of  Him  as  our  Advocate  and  Intercessor.  I.  Thb 
advocate's  work.  It  is — 1.  To  study  the  prisoner's  case,  and  understand  it 
thoroughly.  2.  To  feel  deeply  interested  in  it.  3.  To  stand  and  plead  his  cause. 
6.  To  obtain  his  deliverance.  Christ  does  all  this.  H.  His  plea.  Somt^times  an 
advocate  pleads  that  the  prisoner — 1.  Is  innocent.  2.  Or  ignorant.  3.  Or  insane. 
4,  Or  that  he  was  quite  justified  in  the  act.  But  Christ  pleads  that  He  died  in  oar 
stead  (Heb.  is.  11, 12^.  m.  His  bxwabd.  Christ  is  doing  this  work  "for  ns." 
What  shall  we  give  Hun  for  this  great  service  ?    He  asks  but  one  thing,  "  My  son, 


..  Tin.]  ROMANS.  227 

give  Me  thine  heart. "  To  do  thia  is  right,  jnst,  blessed.  Who  will  do  this  to-day? 
The  advocacy  of  Christ : — There  is  only  one  Advocate  in  all  the  universe  that  can 
plead  our  cause  in  the  last  judgment.  Sometimes  in  earthly  courts  attorneys  have 
specialities,  and  one  man  succeeds  better  in  patent  cases,  another  in  insurance 
cases,  another  in  criminal  cases,  another  in  land  cases,  another  in  will  cases,  and 
his  success  generally  depends  upon  his  sticking  to  that  speciality.  I  have  to  tell 
you  that  Christ  can  do  many  things ;  but  it  seems  to  me  that  His  speciality  is  to 
take  the  bad  case  of  the  sinner,  and  plead  it  before  God  until  He  gets  eternal 
acquittal.  But  what  plea  can  He  make  ?  Sometimes  an  attorney  in  court  will 
plead  the  innocence  of  the  prisoner.  That  would  be  inappropriate  for  us ;  we  are 
all  guilty.  Sometimes  he  tries  to  prove  an  alibi.  Such  a  plea  will  not  do  in  our 
case.  The  Lord  found  us  in  all  our  sins,  and  in  the  very  place  of  our  iniquity. 
Sometimes  an  attorney  he  will  plead  the  insanity  of  the  prisoner,  and  say 
he  is  irresponsible  on  that  account.  That  plea  will  never  do  in  our  case. 
We  sinned  against  light,  knowledge,  and  the  dictates  of  our  own  consciences. 
What,  then,  shall  the  plea  be  ?  Christ  will  say,  "  Look  at  all  these  wounds.  By 
all  these  sufferings,  I  demand  the  rescue  of  this  man  from  sin  and  death  and  hell. 
Constable,  knock  off  the  shackles— let  the  prisoner  go  free."  "Who  is  he  that 
condemneth  ?  "  &o.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  Christ  a  pleader  ;— Catherine 
Brettage  once,  after  a  great  conflict  with  Satan,  said,  "Eeason  not  with  me,  I  am 
but  a  weak  woman ;  if  thou  hast  anything  to  say,  say  it  to  my  Christ ;  He  is  my 
Advocate,  my  Strength,  and  my  Redeemer,  and  He  shall  plead  for  me."  Christ's 
intercession : — Christ's  love  did  not  cease  at  the  hour  of  death.  We  write  in  our 
letters,  "  Your  friend  till  death  " ;  but  Christ  wrote  in  another  style — "  Your  friend 
after  death  I  "  Christ  died  once,  but  loves  ever.  He  is  now  testifying  His  affection 
to  us ;  He  is  interceding  for  us ;  He  appears  in  the  court  as  the  Advocate  for  the 
client.  When  He  hath  done  dying,  yet  He  hath  not  done  loving.  What  a 
stupendous  love  was  here !  Who  can  meditate  upon  this  and  not  be  in  an  ecstacy  ? 
Well  may  the  apostle  call  it  '*  a  love  that  passeth  knowledge."    {T.  Watson.) 

Vers.  35-39.  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ  ? — Dangers  which 
cannot  separate  the  believer  from  the  love  of  God : — We  begin  with  the  general 
proposition,  "Who  shall  separate  us?"  &c.  And  for  the  love  of  Christ  it  may 
be  taken  either  actively  or  passively ;  actively  for  our  love  of  Him,  or  passively 
for  His  love  of  us,  which  latter  acceptation  of  it  seems  to  be  that  which  is  here 
chiefly  intended.  First  of  all,  let  us  look  upon  it  in  the  thing  itself.  Who  or  what 
shall  take  off  the  love  of  Christ  from  us  ?  That  is,  indeed,  nothing  at  all.  First, 
no  persons  shall  be  able  to  do  it,  whether  Satan  or  wicked  men.  These  they  do 
now  and  then  attempt  it :  as  they  are  out  of  God's  love  themselves,  so  they  would 
fain  make  others  so  too.  First,  not  by  means  of  accusation :  accusation  is  an 
expedient  way  to  take  off  affection.  It  was  the  course  which  Ziba  took  with 
Mephibosheth,  the  son  of  Jonathan,  in  reference  to  David.  And  it  is  the  course 
which  the  devil  and  his  instruments  take  with  those  which  are  faithful  in  reference 
to  God.  Satan  he  is  the  accuser  of  the  brethren.  Secondly,  as  not  by  accusation, 
80  neither  by  temptation.  Again,  as  no  enemy  or  person,  so  further  no  state  or 
condition.  That  there  is  no  condition,  though  never  so  forlorn,  that  can  make  God 
to  forsake  His  people.  Now  there  is  a  various  account  which  may  be  given  hereof 
onto  us.  Ye  may  take  it  in  these  following  particulars : — First,  from  God's 
unchangeableness,  and  the  immutability  of  His  own  nature  considered  in  Himself 
(2  Tim.  ii.  13 ;  James  i.  17 ;  John  xiii.  1 ;  Jer.  xxxi.  3  ;  Isa.  liv.  8).  Secondly, 
there  is  nothing  which  can  separate  the  love  of  God  from  His  children,  or 
which  can  separate  His  children  from  His  love,  because  this  love  of  His  it  la 
not  founded  in  anything  in  themselves.  If  the  Lord  did  therefore  love  His 
people  because  they  were  thus  and  thus  accommodated  with  riches,  or  honours, 
or  strength,  or  any  such  accomplishment.  He  would  then  also  cease  to  love 
them  when  that  these  were  taken  away  from  them.  Thirdly,  God's  love  is 
immovable  as  to  anything  which  may  happen  unto  us,  because  it  was  pitched 
upon  us  before  we  were,  or  had  any  being.  That  love  which  is  from  eternity 
in  its  original.  Fourthly  and  lastly,  there  is  no  removal  or  taking  off  of  the 
love  of  God  from  His  people,  in  regard  of  the  conveyance  of  it  to  them  and  the 
person  in  whom  it  is  laid;  and  that  is  in  His  Son  Jesus  Christ — "Who  shall 
separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ  ?  "  The  love  which  God  bears  to  a  Christian  it 
is  s  love  of  covenant ;  and  this  covenant  made  in  Christ.  The  second  is  as  to  the 
discovery  or  manifestation  of  this  His  love — "  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love 


228  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  mfc 

,/  of  Christ?  " — that  is,  what  shall  be  a  sufBcient  argument  to  persaade  us  that  Christ 
does  not  love  uT?  The  afflictions  of  God's  children  are  no  arguments  for  the 
separation  of  God's  love.  First,  because  they  are  all  dispensed  out  of  the  principles 
of  love ;  that  cannot  be  an  argument  to  prove  the  want  of  love  which  is  an  argu- 
ment rather  to  prove  the  truth  of  love,  His  love  unto  them.  "  As  many  as  I  love, 
I  rebuke,"  &c.  Secondly,  it  cannot  be  that  affliction  should  be  a  withdrawing  of 
God's  affection,  because  He  never  shows  more  affection  than  He  does  in  such  a 
condition.  Thirdly,  these  outward  afflictions  are  no  good  argument  for  the 
separation  of  God's  love,  because  the  love  of  God  reaches  farther  than  these  things 
vj,  here  below.     It  is  not  limited  or  confined  to  this  present  life.    Times  of  separation 

in  other  respects,  yet  they  cannot  be  separating  in  this.    They  may  separate  a 
minister  from  his  people ;  they  may  separate  a  husband  from  his  wife;  they  may 
^  .separate  a  father  from  his  children ;  they  may  separate  the  soul  from  its  body. 

ji  ^^'  Oh,  but  they  cannot  separate  a  Christian  or  true  believer  from  Christ,  nor  from 

•v-^   the  love  of  God  to  him  in  Christ.    And  so  now  I  have  done  with  the  first  general 
^       part  of  the  text  which  is  this  question  or  challenge,  as  it  is  considerable  in  the 
^^  general  proposition, "  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ  ?  "    The  second  i 

■-  is  the  particular  specification  of  evils  themselves,  which  are  seven  in  number : 

y       .;^''  "  ShaJl  tribulation  or  distress  ?"  &c.    The  first  which  is  here  presented  is  tribulation. 
!j/"*^       The  word  in  the  Greek  signifies  to  press,  or  pinch,  or  vex ;  and  the  word  in  the 
\  Latin  signifies  a  threshing  instrument  or  flail,  wherewith  the  com  uses  to  be 
^       ^X,*  broken  or  beaten  out ;  both  of  them  do  serve  to  set  forth  to  us  the  nature  of  this 
Q       present  evil.    First,  I  say,  this  evil  of  tribulation,  it  is  such  as  is  incident  even  to 
C^     the  saints  and  servants  of  God  ;  they  are  such  as  are  liable  to  great  pains  and  griefs 
■\^  of  body.     St.  Paul  he  had  his  tribulation,  his  thorn  in  the  flesh,  &c.    And  so  it  ia 

"^  with  many  others,  &c.  The  apostle  here  instances  in  this  as  a  principal  evil,  as  that 

whi^h  is  more  general  and  which  few  escape.    As  for  some  other  particulars  which 
,^  we  find  here  mentioned  in  the  text,  they  are  such  as  all  do  not  taste  of.     But  yet 

Ji^  even  this  in  the  next  place  shall  not  separate  them  from  the  love  of  God  in  Christ ; 
CiX  a  child  of  God  is  most  dear  to  Him,  even  under  tribulation  itself.  The  second 
^  particular  evil  is  distress:  shall  distress?  The  Greek  word  signifies  properly 
V  ^  ■  straitness  of  place,  when  iTman  is  so  hampered  as  that  he  knows  not  which  way  to 
'  p  move,  as  it  is  with  those  who  are  shut  up  in  some  close  and  strait  prison,  or  are  in 
^  ^^'<^'  some  violent  throng  and  crowd.  Now,  this  is  another  evil  which  God's  people  are 
■^  J  also  liable  unto,  as  to  great  and  strong  pressures  of  body,  so  to  be  in  many  sad 
*  ^  distractions  of  spirit,  to  be  in  distress.  It  has  been  the  lot  sometimes  of  those  who 
have  been  the  dearest  servants  of  God.  This  is  an  evil  somewhat  further  and 
heavier  than  the  former,  which  we  spake  of  before ;  anguish  of  spirit  is  somewhat 
more  than  pressure  of  body,  and  which  many  times  has  a  great  influence  upon  it. 
A  Christian  is  never  brought  into  those  exigencies  and  straits  and  extremities  but 
he  has  still  a  God  to  go  to,  into  whose  bosom  he  may  comfortably  empty  and 
unload  himself,  and  find  satisfaction  in  all  his  distresses.  The  third  is  persecution : 
shall  persecution?  which  signifies  properly  a  driving  from  place  to  place.  When 
men  are  forced  and  constrained  to  leave  their  home  and  proper  habitations,  and 
to  fly  into  other  places  and  countries.  It  may  separate  us  from  our  houses,  these 
poor  cottages  of  clay,  but  it  cannot  separate  us  from  God,  who  is  our  abode  and 
dwelling-place  in  all  generations,  nor  deprive  us  of  our  everlasting  habitation.  The 
fourth  thing  here  instanced  in  is  famine.  This  is  another  great  affliction  which 
God's  people  are  subject  unto  here  in  this  life.  It  is  a  wonderful  thing  to  consider 
what  strange  kind  of  ways  and  means  God  has  been  pleased  to  provide  for  His 
servants  in  this  particular.  The  fifth  particular  evil  is  nakedness.  This  is  another 
trial  of  the  saints,  and  the  evil  of  it  consists  in  two  particulars.  The  one  is  as  it  is 
matter  of  shame,  and  the  other  as  it  is  matter  of  danger,  and  hazard  of  life  itself. 
Well,  but  this  nakedness  or  stripping  of  apparel  cannot  strip  the  children  of  God 
of  His  love  and  favour  in  Christ,  which  shall  still  compass  them  about  as  a 
garment.  The  sixth  here  instanced  in  is  peril,  whereby  we  are  to  understand  any 
danger  or  hazard  of  life  in  any  kind  whatsoever.  Danger  and  fear  of  evil  is  many , 
times  a  greater  evil  than  the  evil  itself;  and  we  know  what  difficulties  and 
adventures  it  has  sometimes  put  men  upon.  There  are  seasons  and  times  of  peril 
which  God's  children  are  exposed  unto ;  but  God  does  not  leave  them  at  such 
times,  nor  withdraw  His  love  from  them ;  in  the  world  sometimes  it  is  otherwise. 
There  are  many  that  will  own  their  friends  in  times  of  safety,  which  yet  will  not 
know  them  in  times  of  danger.  The  seventh  and  last  is  sword,  whereby  we  are  to 
understand  all  kind  of  violent  death  whatsoever.   (Thomas~Hortmi,  D.D.)      Christ'$ 


CHAP,  vm.]  ROMANS.  229 

love  to  US : — An  aged  man  over  ninety  years  of  age  was  asked  by  his  pastor  this 
question :  "  My  dear  aged  friend,  do  you  love  Jesus  ?  "  His  deeply-furrowed  face  .  J\ 
was  lit  up  with  a  smile  that  sixty-seven  years  of  discipleship  had  imparted,  and, 
grasping  my  hand  with  both  of  his,  said :  "  Oh  I  I  can  tell  you  something  better 
than  that."  I  asked  him,  "What  is  that  ?  *♦  "  Oh,  sir  I  "  he  said, "  He  loves  me." 
The  Christian's  security: — There  is  a  well-known  little  shell-fish  which  has  its 
dwelling  on  the  rocks.  To  these  it  clings  with  such  surprising  tenacity,  that 
almost  all  attempts  to  dislodge  it  are  vain.  It  takes  alarm  at  the  slightest  touch ; 
resists  the  more,  the  more  it  is  assailed ;  and  maintains  its  persistency  to  such  a 
degree,  that  itwiU  sooner  submit  to  be  crushed  than  to  be  removed.  .  .  .  Christian, 
learn  of  this  little  animal  the  secret  of  your  strength  and  security  in  times  of 
trouble.  Your  "  place  of  defence  is  the  munitions  of  rocks."  Let  nothing  draw  or 
drive  you  from  your  stronghold.  The  Christian  rejoicing  in  Christ's  unchangeable 
love : — I.  The  love  op  God  as  the  ground  of  the  Christian's  security.  This 
love  in  ver.  39  he  terms  "  the  love  of  God  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord." 
This  is  consonant  with  the  general  testimony  of  Scripture.  "  In  Him  dwelleth  all 
the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  "  ;  and  if  the  fulness,  then  the  love.  So  that  it  is  useless 
to  seek  God's  love  out  of  Christ — there  is  none  out  of  Christ.  Now  to  make  this 
love  our  confidence,  we  must  bear  in  mind  two  things — 1.  It  has  been  the  spring  of 
all  that  has  been  done  for  our  salvation.  (1)  We  speak  of  God  as  acting  in  this 
with  a  view  to  His  own  glory.  True,  but  this  is  what  we  might  almost  venture  to 
call  an  incidental  circumstance.  The  sun  manifests  his  glory  as  he  rises  day  by 
day,  but  it  is  not  the  brightness  of  the  sun  that  causes  him  to  arise ;  we  must  look 
elsewhere  for  the  source  of  that.  So,  if  we  would  find  the  spring  and  origin  of  our 
salvation,  we  must  look  for  it,  not  in  the  glory  of  the  Godhead,  but  in  the  love  of 
the  Divine  mind.  Wisdom,  justice,  faithfulness,  power,  all  shine  forth  here  and 
are  glorified ;  but  how  ?  As  love's  instruments.  But  what  set  love  in  action  ? 
We  can  give  no  answer ;  there  is  none  to  give  ;  we  are  come  to  the  fountain-head; 
we  can  go  no  farther.  (2)  The  same  as  to  Christ.  Various  motives  are  assigned  in 
Scripture  for  all  He  did  and  suffered  for  us ;  the  hope  of  reward — "  for  the  joy  that 
was  set  before  Him  He  endured  the  Cross  " ;  obedience  to  His  Father — "  He  became 
obedient  unto  death  " ;  but  without  setting  these  things  aside,  we  may  still  say, 
*♦  He  loved  us  and  gave  Himself  for  us."  He  looked  upwards — there  was  His  Father 
whom  He  deUghted  to  obey;  He  looked  forwards — there  was  the  glory  He  was 
soon  to  inherit ;  but  no  matter  where  He  looked.  His  heart  was  with  us.  2.  The 
same  love  that  was  the  spring  of  all  that  has  been  done  for  our  salvation,  still  exists 
in  God  unimpaired  and  unchanged.  The  apostle,  you  observe,  does  not  speak  of  it 
as  something  passed  and  gone.  Many  of  the  great  things  it  has  already  done,  it 
is  not  necessary  it  should  do  again.  If  Christ  has  once  died  for  my  soul,  His 
"  one  oblation  of  Himself  once  offered  "  fully  atones  for  all  my  sins ;  if  God  has  once 
justified  me,  no  other  justification  do  I  need  ;  if  He  has  built  for  me  one  heaven,  I 
cannot  want  another ;  but  so  much  does  He  love  me  now,  that  if  my  Saviour  had 
not  died,  if  my  guilty  soul  had  not  been  justified,  &c.,  my  God  would  do  for  me 
just  what  He  has  already  done.  For  six  thousand  years  the  sun  has  shone  without 
suspension,  but  there  wiU  come  a  day  when  he  will  shine  no  more.  But  the  love  of 
God  existed  for  a  boundless  period  before  that  sun,  and  it  will  exist  for  as  boundless 
a  period  after  Him.  It  is  not  something  God  has  created  ;  it  is  a  part  of  His  own 
nature.  II.  The  confidence  we  mat  feel,  if  we  have  an  interest  in  this  love, 
that  nothing  can  ever  separate  d8  from  it.  1.  There  is  a  love  of  God  in  which 
we  are  all  interested,  for  we  are  all  partakers  of  it.  It  keeps  us  in  being,  it  gives  us 
innumerable  comforts,  it  makes  to  us  in  the  gospel  the  most  gracious  offers  of 
salvation ;  but  if  we  trample  on  these  offers  or  neglect  them,  there  comes  a  time 
when  this  love  turns  away  from  us.  It  would  go  farther  with  us,  but  it  cannot. 
The  question  is,  then.  Are  you  the  objects  of  God's  peculiar,  saving  love  ?  And  the 
way  to  answer  it  is  to  ask,  Have  you  ever  sought  to  become  the  objects  of  it?  Most 
men  hold  the  love  of  God  cheaper  by  far  than  they  hold  one  another's  love.  Do 
you  feel  that  it  is  dearer  to  your  soul  than  all  other  love  ?  2.  There  are  two  ways 
in  which  we  can  conceive  it  possible  for  a  separation  to  be  made  between  us  and  //^ 
God's  love.  One  is,  for  Him  to  withdraw  His  love  from  us  ;  the  other,  for  us  to 
withdraw  ourselves  from  that.  The  uniting  cord,  we  may  say,  may  break  at  either 
end,  either  at  its  higher  end  with  God,  or  at  its  lower  end  with  us.  (1)  As  to  the 
former  of  these  cases,  we  need  scarcely  say  a  word.  The  very  supposition  seems  a 
dishonour  to  Jehovah.  He  abandon  me  after  having  once  freely  loved  me,  and 
brought  me  to  love  and  trust  Him  ?     I  can  feel,  with  Paul,  that  the  whole  universe 


230  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  vm. 

oould  not  prevail  on  Him  to  do  it,  were  the  whole  universe  to  try  (ver.  38).  Other 
love  will  often  cool  and  wither  away  of  itself;  here  is  a  love  which  nothing 
can  wear  away.  (2)  But  let  us  turn  to  the  other  case — the  drawing  of  us  away 
from  our  love  to  Christ.  This,  the  apostle  expresses  his  firm  conviction, 
is  also  impossible;  and  this  conviction,  he  states,  is  the  result  of  his  own 
experience.  There  may  now  and  then,  he  intimates,  be  struggling  and  conflict ;  we 
may  have  to  put  forth  our  strength,  and  a  strength  greater  than  ours,  against 
these  things,  the  force  and  pressure  of  them,  but  the  struggle  is  sure  to  end  in 
one  way — we  overcome.  He  has  made  to  us  new  discoveries  of  His  love  in  it,  and 
these  have  made  us  more  determined  to  love  and  adhere  to  Him.  (C.  Bradley,  M.A.) 
Separated  from  Christ : — 1.  The  apostle  had  passed  through  experiences  varied  and 
trying  enough  to  entitle  him  to  make  this  inquiry.  He  knew  what  he  was  talking 
about.  It  is  not  the  unchastened  enthusiasm  of  a  recruit,  but  the  sober  declara- 
tion of  a  veteran  that  is  before  us — a  No  which  has  an  unconquerable  human  soul 
in  it !  History  has  sufficiently  answered  this  inquiry  from  one  side  of  Christian 
experience.  Set  it  down  as  a  fact  that  terror  has  failed.  The  scaffold,  the  rack, 
the  stake,  the  dungeon,  have  fairly  been  worsted  in  this  great  fight.  Enemies  have 
kiUed  the  body,  but  the  principle  of  truth  lives ;  they  have  slain  Christians,  but 
Christianity  is  conqueror.  2.  But  has  the  apostle  covered  the  whole  ground?  Does 
he  exhaust  the  whole  possibility  of  Christian  trial  ?  I  think  not.  It  is  instructive 
to  mark  the  development  of  the  antagonisms  to  Christianity.  In  the  text  we  have 
-...jiothing  but  the  roughest  and  vulgarest  of  opposition,  yet  the  most  natural.  The 
fist,  the  thumb-screw,  the  scourge,  are  what  we  think  of  at  the  beginning :  first, 
that  which  is  natural,  afterwards  that  which  is  spiritual.  The  opposition  does  not 
end  where  the  cruelty  ends.  We  have  thought  that  now  the  day  of  persecution  has 
gone.  I  propose  to  substitute,  "  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ  ? 
shall  flattery,  or  ease,  or  luxury?  shall  selfishness  or  gentility,  or  the  praise  of 
men  ?  "  The  apostles  were  not  tried  upon  these  points.  They  were  only  out  in 
the  rough  weather ;  they  knew  not  the  warmth  of  flattery  or  the  power  of  the  soft 
tongue.  They  fought  their  battle  to  the  point  of  triumph ;  how  are  we  going  to 
fight  ours?  They  conquered  the  stake:  can  we  throw  off  the  silken  cords?  3. 
Paul  himself  gave  an  answer  to  the  inquiry  at  a  later  date  :  "  Demas  hath  forsaken 
me,  having  loved  this  present  world."  When  he  wrote  this  epistle  no  answer 
came  back  upon  him.  But  when  he  became  an  older  man  he  saw  further  into 
the  subtle  play  of  the  devil,  and  lived  to  see  that  love  of  tbe  present  world 
had  done  what  tribulation,  distress,  &c.,  had  failed  to  do  I  See  the  beginning 
of  the  mischief  1  Demas  was  separated  from  his  nominal  love  of  Christ,  not 
by  the  sword,  but  by  a  bribe.  "  If  any  man  love  the  world  the  love  of  the 
Father  is  not  in  him."  "No  man  can  serve  two  masters."  "Ye  cannot 
serve  God  and  Mammon  1 "  Yet  men  are  still  tempted  to  believe  that  somehow, 
having  two  hands,  they  can  carry  two  worlds,  and  having  two  feet,  they  can  walk 
upon  two  paths.  Go  to  a  Christian  man  and  say,  "If  you  do  not  surrender 
your  religious  convictions  you  shall  be  burnt  in  the  public  market-place  as  a 
common  felon,"  and  if  there  is  one  spark  of  real  manhood  in  his  nature  he  will 
say,  "  So  be  it  1  in  the  sufficiency  of  Divine  grace  I  am  ready."  Go  to  that  self- 
same man  in  a  neighbourly  way  and  show  him  how  a  certain  thing  in  trade  can 
be  done  so  as  to  put  him  into  the  possession  of  considerable  resources — with  which 
he  can  afterwards  do  good.  Possibly  you  may  succeed  1  When  you  threatened 
him  with  the  stake,  he  spat  upon  your  fire;  when  yon  tempted  him  with  a  bribe, 
he  said,  "  I  will  think  about  it."  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ  ? 
Not  Nero ;  but  "  a  friend  in  the  trade  1  "  Men  are  separated  from  the  love  of 
Christ  in  the  name  of  wife  and  children.  If  thou  wast  a  single  man,  and  thy 
universe  bounded  by  a  carpet-bag,  how  virtuous  and  honourable  thou  wouldst  be  I 
You  say  to  God  in  efifect,  "  The  woman  that  Thou  gavest  to  be  with  me,  and  the 
children  of  whom  I  am  the  father — these  are  my  tempters."  Has  it  come  to  this, 
that  a  man  may  not  slay  himself  alone,  but  that  he  must  do  it  in  the  name  which 
should  be  dearest  to  him,  and  make  his  very  children  a  weight  about  his  neck  that 
shall  drag  him  to  the  depths  of  perdition?  If  you  go  to  a  Christian  preacher 
and  say  to  him,  "  If  you  don't  cease  to  preach  you  shall  be  thrown  to  the  hons,"  if 
he  has  one  spark  of  manhood  left  in  him,  he  will  declare  his  readiness  to  suffer  in 
the  name  of  Christ.  The  best  memories  will  crowd  upon  him  ;  he  will  think  of 
that  wondrous  climax — "  Who  through  faith  .  .  .  stopped  the  mouths  of  hons, 
quenched  the  violence  of  fire,"  &o.  When  is  the  apostle  going  to  finish  that,  and 
Bay,  "  Bef  used  the  bribe ;  and  as  utterly  defied  the  subtlety  as  the  violence  of  th« 


CHAP,  vin.]  ROMANS.  281 

enemy  "  ?  The  apostle  exclaimed  to  Timothy,  "  Endure  aflGlictions  I  "  What  have 
we  to  say  to  young  preachers  now  ?  Endure  prosperity  I  It  never  occurred  to 
Paul  to  say  to  Timothy,  "  Now  be  on  thy  guard  against  flattery  and  merely  outward 
success."  When  he  charged  those  who  were  following  him  in  the  good  cause,  he 
said,  "  Fight  the  good  fight,  endure  hardness."  AU  his  talk  ran  along  the  line  of 
his  own  experience,  as  if  it  never  occurred  to  him  that  in  the  ages  to  come  all  the 
violent  attacks  would  be  laid  aside  and  the  enemy  would  betake  himself  to  a  more 
subtle  course  of  assault  upon  the  citadel  of  faith  I  4.  Turning  this  matter  over 
carefully,  I  have  seen  how  possible  it  might  be  for  certain  constitutions  and 
temperaments  really  to  be  terrified  from  the  open  and  distinct  avowal  of  faith ;  yet 
right  down  in  their  hearts  really  to  be  loving  Jesus  all  the  time.  But  a  man  led 
away  from  the  truth  by  a  bribe,  a  soul  to  whom  prosperity  was  shown  as  a  lure — 
that  is  the  meanest,  basest  cowardice !  If  the  man  who  shrank  from  martyrdom 
may  escape,  what  escape  can  there  be  for  the  man  who  took  forbidden  fruit,  did 
things  in  secret  which  he  was  ashamed  of  in  public,  and  who  was  separated  from 
the  love  of  Christ,  not  nominally  and  professionally,  but  who  had  his  heart  eaten 
out  of  him  by  some  invisible  and  voracious  foe?  Separated  from  the  love  of 
Christ !  What  by  ?  By  the  stroke  of  a  feather  1  by  a  whispered  temptation  1  by  a 
mouthful  of  poisoned  honey  1  The  apostles  gave  the  right  answers  to  violence — 
what  reply  shaU  we  make  to  subtlety  ?  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  indissoluble 
bond : — Who  ?  No  one  who  cannot  do  one  of  three  things.  I.  Annihilate  the 
l<0VED  ONES.  The  being  who  could  blot  out  of  existence  those  whom  Christ  loved 
might  effect  the  object,  but  who  could  do  this  ?  No  creature  in  the  heavens  or  on 
the  earth.  No  one  but  the  Absolute.  II.  Blot  the  loved  ones  feom  the 
MEMOBY  or  THE  LOVEB.  The  being  who  could  cause  Christ  to  forget  His  disciples 
would  succeed.  For  those  whom  we  cease  to  remember  we  cease  to  love.  But 
who  can  do  this  ?  He  is  omniscient,  the  past,  present,  and  the  future  are  all  alike 
to  Him.  Duration  is  aU  a  now  to  Him.  He  is  "  the  same  yesterday."  III.  Give 
NEW  iNFOEMATioN  OF  THE  LOVED  ONES  TO  THE  LOVEB.  Were  it  posslble  for  a  being 
to  inform  Christ  of  some  bad  qualities  and  some  enormous  crimes  connected  with 
the  loved  ones  of  which  He  was  ignorant,  His  love  might  be  extinguished.  But 
who  could  do  this  7  No  one  in  heaven  or  on  earth.  He  knew  from  eternity  all 
concerning  the  objects  of  His  love.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  two  states : — Is  this 
he  who  so  lately  cried  out,  "0  wretched  man  that  I  am  1  Who  shall  deliver  me  "  ? 
who  now  triumphs  ?  0  happy  man  1  •♦  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of 
God  ?  "  Yes,  it  is  the  same.  Pained  then  with  the  thoughts  of  that  miserable 
conjunction  with  a  body  of  death,  and  so  crying  out  for  a  deliverer ;  now  he  hath 
found  a  deUverer  to  do  that  for  him  to  whom  he  is  for  ever  united.  {Abp.  Leighton.) 
A3  It  is  written,  For  Thy  sake  we  are  killed  all  the  daylong. — Killing  the  saints : — 
First,  we  will  take  notice  of  the  affliction,  and  that  is  killing.  "  We  are  killed." 
We  see  here  what  is  the  lot  of  the  saints  and  servants  of  God.  First  of  aU,  in 
regard  of  the  enemies.  What  is  the  matter  with  them,  that  in  their  dealings  with 
the  people  of  God  nothing  will  serve  their  turn  but  killing  and  slaying  and  taking 
away  their  lives  ?  Surely  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at ;  there  is  very  good  reason 
for  it,  which  may  be  given  in  these  considerations :  First,  look  upon  them  in  their 
brood  and  generation  and  the  stock  they  come  of.  Whose  children  are  they  ?  and 
from  whom  do  they  proceed  ?  Children  take  after  their  parents.  "  Ye  are  of 
your  father  the  devil,  and  the  lusts  of  your  father  ye  will  do  "  (John  viii.  44). 
Therefore,  in  the  second  place,  their  dispositions  carry  them  hereunto,  and  that  in 
a  twofold  respect.  First,  it  proceeds  from  their  malice ;  they  hate  them  and  can- 
not abide  them,  therefore  they  kill  them.  Hatred,  when  it  comes  to  the  height  of 
it,  very  easily  proceeds  to  murder.  The  second  is  their  jealousy  and  fear.  As 
they  kill  them  because  they  hate  them,  so  they  kill  them  because  they  fear  them. 
Herod  feared  John,  and  therefore  beheaded  him.  The  second  is  how  it  comes 
about  in  regard  of  the  saints  themselves,  whence  they  come  to  suffer  it,  and  for 
what  reason  God  Himself  permits  it.  Why  does  He  so  ?  First,  for  the  honour 
of  religion  and  for  the  evidence  of  their  faith  itself,  that  the  world  from  hence  may 
be  convinced  of  their  sincerity  and  universal  obedience  to  the  will  of  God. 
Secondly,  which  is  peitinent  hereunto,  for  the  multiplying  and  increasing  of  their 
number  and  the  drawing  on  of  more  unto  them.  Thirdly,  as  the  signification  and 
evidence  of  future  judgment  and  the  dispensations  of  another  world,  the  slaying 
and  killing  of  the  saints,  it  tells  us  what  shall  be  done  to  the  enemies,  and  how  it 
is  likely  hereafter  to  go  with  the  servants  of  God.  Therefore  it  teaches  us  both 
to  expect  and  prepare  for  the  like,  to  provide  for  killing,  and  to  be  content  to  pro. 


232  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vill. 

fess  Christianity,  even  at  so  dear  a  rate  as  this.  It  will  be  worth  it  when  all  ia 
done.  "  For  Thy  sake  we  are  killed."  But  if  they  were  indeed  killed,  how  could 
they  say  they  were  killed,  and  tell  us  so  in  so  many  terms  ?  Killing,  it  takes  away 
complaining,  and  makes  the  parties  which  are  so  dealt  with  incapable  of  suying 
what  they  are.  First,  as  an  expression  of  impatience,  and  making  the  worst  of 
their  evil  and  affliction  that  possibly  they  could.  This  we  shall  find  sometimes 
to  be  the  disposition  of  sorrow,  to  aggravate  itself  and  make  it  seem  greater  than 
it  is.  But  secondly,  in  the  reality  of  the  thing,  the  desperateness  of  their 
condition.  They  call  it  killing  because  it  tended  thereunto,  and  was  in  a  manner 
death  itself.  Thirdly,  from  the  preparation  of  their  minds,  and  disposition  which 
was  in  them  hereunto,  as  occasion  might  require.  The  people  of  God  in  this 
Scripture  count  themselves  killed,  because  they  were  ready  to  be  so  if  God  should 
please  to  call  them  unto  it.  Killing,  it  is  not  to  be  interpreted  in  this  place 
according  to  the  event,  but  according  to  the  intention  and  purpose.  They  that  go 
out  in  a  wrong  cause,  they  kill  where  they  do  not  hit,  because  they  go  out  upon 
killing  and  murdering  principles.  Lastly,  the  people  of  God  might  here  say  they 
were  killed  while  they  lived,  by  way  of  sympathy  and  participation.  They  were 
killed  forasmuch  as  others  were  killed  which  they  were  interested  in.  And  thus 
much  now  also  of  the  first  thing  which  I  propounded  to  be  considered  in  this 
complaint :  the  affliction  itself,  "  We  are  killed,  or  put  to  death."  The  second  ia 
the  occasion  or  ground  of  it,  "  We  are  killed  for  Thy  sake,"  which  may  admit  of 
divers  constructions.  First,  as  the  pretence  of  the  enemies.  ••  They  kill  us  for 
Thy  sake,"  that  is,  they  deal  thus  cruelly  with  us,  and  make  the  world  in  the 
meantime  believe  as  if  herein  they  had  respect  unto  Thee.  Secondly,  "  For  Thy 
sake,"  that  is,  for  our  reference  to  Thee,  because  we  are  Thy  people,  and  worship 
Thy  name,  and  profess  Thy  triith,  and  havo  Thy  ordinances  amongst  as.  Thirdly, 
it  appears  that  God's  cause  is  the  thing  which  the  enemies  aim  at  in  their  killing 
of  God's  people,  from  a  consideration  of  the  means  and  ways  whereby  they  labour 
to  effect  it,  and  that  is  by  such  as  are  most  effectual  to  the  extirpation  of  religion 
itself.  Thirdly,  "  For  Thy  sake."  We  may  carry  it  a  little  further  than  so,  not 
only  as  a  complaint,  but  a  confession.  Not  so  much  for  a  complaint  of  their 
enemies,  as  indeed  a  complaint  of  themselves.  "  We  are  killed  for  Thy  sake," 
that  is,  in  satisfaction  to  Thy  justice,  "  Who  art  a  just  and  righteous  God,  and  wilt 
not  suffer  sin  to  be  unpunished."  Our  enemies  have  nothing  against  us  them- 
selves, but  they  kill  us  for  Thy  sake,  that  is,  to  accomplish  Thy  holy  decrees,  to 
bring  about  Thy  wise  providence,  to  fulfil  Thy  righteous  judgments,  to  visit  and 
avenge  the  quarrel  of  Thy  covenant.  And  so  much  of  these  words,  as  they  may 
be  taken  under  the  emphasis  of  complaint.  The  second  is  under  the  emphasis  of 
triumph,  in  the  words  of  the  apostle,  and  so  we  have  this  from  it,  that  the  main 
ground  of  rejoicing  in  suffering  is  the  cause  we  suffer  for.  Then  we  have  cause 
of  quiet  and  comfort,  when  we  can  say,  " 'Tis  for  Thy  sake."  There  are  two 
things  which  are  principally  to  be  looked  at  in  suffering — the  one  is  a  good 
conscience,  and  the  other  is  a  good  cause.  This  it  serves  as  a  distinction 
between  martyrs    and    malefactors.      {Thomas  Horton,   D.D.)  Sujffering    in 

God's  cause : — First,  we  will  take  it  emphatically,  and  consider  it  so.  There 
is  that  in  the  cause  of  God  which  is  able  to  keep  the  heart  up  in  the 
greatest  sufferings.  To  be  killed  for  God's  cause,  it  is  a  matter  of  special 
triumph.  Secondly,  it  is  a  matter  of  rejoicii:g  to  suffer  for  God's  sake, 
because  herein  we  are  made  conformable  to  Christ  Himself.  Thirdly,  we 
hereby  come  to  partake  of  greater  glory  hereafter;  suffering  in  a  good  cause 
has  the  promise  of  a  good  reward,  and  has  amends  made  it  for  time  to  come  in 
another  place  (Matt.  v.  11,  12).  And  thus  it  is  true  emphatically.  That  suffering 
for  God's  sake  is  a  matter  of  joy  and  rejoicing,  we  are  killed :  therefore  glory  in 
this  our  tribulation.  Secondly,  we  may  take  it  exclusively.  "  For  Thy  sake  we 
are  killed,"  and  that  is  for  Thy  cause  and  nothing  else.  From  whence  we  have 
this  observable,  that  there  is  not  anything  in  suffering  which  can  comfort  the  heart 
for  itself  except  it  be  for  God's  cause.  It  is  not  the  punishment,  but  the  cause, 
which  makes  the  martyr.  Again,  further,  as  out  of  this  there  is  no  comfort  in 
Buffering,  so  indeed  there  is  a  great  deal  of  discontent  when  a  man  shall  reflect 
and  enter  into  his  conscience,  and  find  that  he  does  not  suffer  for  God's  cause  ;  he 
will  have  a  very  sad  reckoning  to  make  of  it  when  he  shall  give  up  his  accounts 
to  God.  There  are  three  particular  considerations  which  do  make  our  sufferings 
and  persecutions  to  be  said  to  be  for  God's  sake.  First,  the  intent  of  the  enemies 
which  we  suffer  from.    We  then  suffer  in  this  sense  for  God's  sake  when  thej 


ema.  viu,]  ROMANS.  233 

shall  impose  snoh  evils  and  snfFerings  apon  ns  in  reference  to  God,  because  we  are 
professors  of  religion  and  maintain  the  cause  of  God.  It  is  thus  far  a  suffering 
for  God's  sake  because  the  enemy  he  looks  at  God  in  it.  But,  secondly, 
we  may  be  said  to  suffer  for  God's  sake  from  the  nature  of  the  thing  itself 
which  we  suffer  for.  This  now,  it  comes  a  little  nearer,  a  man  suffers  for 
God's  sake  when  he  suffers  for  well-doing,  not  only  in  the  apprehension 
of  the  enemy,  but  likewise  in  the  thing  itself.  First,  when  it  is  sinful  in 
itself.  He  that  suffers  thus  does  not  suffer  for  God's  sake,  let  an  enemy  be 
never  so  violent.  Again,  secondly,  as  when  it  is  sinful  in  the  thing.  So  like- 
wise, when  it  is  mingled  and  involved  with  any  sinful  circumstances,  we  do  not 
properly  suffer  for  God  except  we  suffer  every  way  for  God.  Thirdly,  we  are  said 
to  suffer  for  God's  sake  according  to  the  disposition  of  the  spirit  we  suffer  with, 
that  is,  when  we  have  a  pure  respect  to  God's  glory  in  our  suffering.  And  this  is 
the  second  particular,  the  ground  or  occasion  of  these  sufferings,  "  For  Thy  sake." 
The  third  particular  in  these  words  is  the  extent  and  continuance  of  the  persecu- 
tion, "  All  the  day  long."  First,  I  say,  but  for  a  day.  It  pleases  the  Spirit  of  God 
to  set  forth  to  us  the  Church's  persecution  under  an  expression  of  short  continuance ; 
it  is  not  a  week,  or  a  month,  or  a  year,  but  only  a  day  ;  it  is  but  one  day  and  we 
have  done.  When  evils  are  at  any  time  upon  us,  as  we  see  they  are  now  at  this 
present,  we  think  they  will  never  be  gone,  through  our  impatient  disposition ;  but 
we  should  learn  in  this  case  to  submit  to  the  providence  of  God  in  the  humbling 
of  ourselves  for  our  sins.  The  second  is  the  extent  of  its  continuance.  As  it  is 
but  a  day,  so  it  is  a  whole  day,  all  the  day  long.  We  must  take  notice  of  that. 
And  under  this  expression  we  have  three  things  intimated  unto  us.  First,  the 
continuance  of  the  afifliction,  "An  whole  day."  This  it  does  denote  unto  us  thus 
much,  how  that  the  afflictions  of  the  people  of  God  they  do  stay  and  abide  upon 
them  their  appointed  time.  The  second  is  the  unweariedness  of  the  enemy,  "All 
the  day  long."  It  is  a  sign  that  they  are  not  spent  nor  tired  out  in  this  execution. 
They  kill,  and  take  no  respite  between.  First,  because  it  is  natural  to  them.  It  is  a 
business  which  they  are  carried  unto  by  their  proper  inclinations.  Actions  which  are 
natural  are  unwearied.  The  eye  it  is  not  weary  of  seeing,  nor  the  ear  is  not  weary 
of  hearing,  nor  the  pulse  is  not  weary  of  beating,  because  all  these  are  natural  to 
them.  Secondly,  it  is  delightful  to  them.  That  is  another  account  of  it.  Those 
things  which  are  pleasing  are  unwearied.  Thirdly,  they  are  unwearied  in  this 
business,  because  they  have  very  good  help  and  assistance  to  further  them  in  it. 
Many  hands  they  use  to  make  hght  work.  Where  the  burden  lies  all  upon  one,  or 
some  few,  it  is  easy  to  be  weary.  Well,  this  teaches  us  what  to  do  in  this 
condition.  If  they  kill  all  the  day  long,  we  should  pray  all  the  day  long. 
The  third  is  the  patience  of  the  saints,  "  Killed  all  the  day  long."  Who 
could  ever  endure  that?  Yes,  there  where  God  gives  help  and  strength  to 
bear  it  men  may  be  able  to  do  it.  And  so  was  the  Church  here;  she  did  not 
faint  under  continual  tribulations.  Here  is  now  the  great  faith  and  constancy 
and  patience  of  the  saints.  {Ibid.)  The  world  seeking  to  destroy  the  good : — 
First,  by  way  of  designation,  they  have  determined  and  appointed  us  hereunto. 
Thus  it  is  with  those  who  are  enemies  to  the  saints  and  people  of  God ;  they 
resolve,  if  they  can,  to  destroy  them.  First,  I  say,  they  look  upon  them  as  un- 
profitable, as  a  people  of  whom  there  is  no  use  or  good  comes  at  all.  Creatures 
which  are  unprofitable,  you  know,  we  use  to  dispatch  and  destroy.  But,  secondly, 
as  they  look  upon  them  as  unprofitable,  and  so  destroy  them  for  that,  so  withal 
they  look  upon  them  as  troublesome  and  pernicious,  and  destroy  them  for  that. 
It  is  ordinary  and  familiar  with  them  to  impute  all  the  mischief  that  falls  out  to 
them  as  the  causes.  Secondly,  by  way  of  expectation.  "  They  count  us  as  sheep 
for  the  slaughter  " — that  is,  they  make  sure  of  our  destruction  ;  they  do  verily  and 
fully  make  account  to  see  us  destroyed.  The  reason  of  it  is  this  :  First,  because 
they  would  very  fain  have  it  so.  That  which  men  desire  they  believe.  And  then, 
secondly,  because  most  commonly  they  judge  according  to  outward  appearance. 
And  then,  thirdly,  the  Lord  does  also  infatuate  them  and  give  them  up  to  their 
own  imaginations  and  vain  conceits  many  times.  That  is  the  second  thing,  by 
way,  namely,  of  expectation,  "They  count  us  as  sheep,"  &c.,  that  is,  they  make 
■are  of  our  destruction.  Thirdly  and  lastly,  which  I  conceive  is  principally 
intended  in  a  way  of  scorn  and  contempt,  "They  count  us  as  sheep  for  the 
slaughter,*'  that  is,  they  make  no  reckoning  of  our  destruction.  They  make  no 
more  of  killing  us  than  a  butcher  would  do  of  killing  a  sheep.  First,  I  say,  tbeir 
readiness  to  procure  it.    That  which  men  have  any  esteem  or  account  of  thev  are 


2S4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vm 

yery  chary  how  they  set  themselves  about  it.  These  enemies  they  do  it  readily ; 
they  are  not  long  ere  they  set  themselves  about  it.  That  is  one  thing  whereby 
they  discover  how  cheap  such  men's  deaths  are  with  them.  Secondly,  their 
onmercifalness  in  the  doing  of  it.  These  and  the  like  considerations  do  manifest 
this  truth  unto  us,  how  cheap  the  death  of  God's  people  is  in  the  esteem  and 
account  of  God's  enemies.  Well,  let  it  be  as  cheap  as  it  will  be  with  such  graceless 
persons  as  these  are,  yet  we  know  there  is  One  which  sets  a  price  and  valuation 
upon  it.  "  Precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  is  the  death  of  His  saints."  The 
second  is  the  form  of  allegation,  "As  it  is  written."  Therefore  let  us  be  persuaded 
to  the  exercising  of  ourselves  in  this  book  with  all  kind  of  diligence,  to  be  acquainted 
with  the  Word  of  God  and  the  principal  passages  of  it,  so  as  it  may  be  no  strange 
or  unheard-of  thing  to  us.  Ye  see  here  how  the  apostle  alleges  it  here  in  this 
place,  •'  As  it  is  written  " ;  no  more,  but  so.  He  does  not  tell  them  where,  nor  in 
what  place,  as  taking  it  for  granted  that  they  knew  it.  We  should  be  so  cunning 
and  skilled  in  the  Scripture  that  we  should  be  able  to  know  when  it  is  Scripture 
which  is  alleged  to  us  and  when  it  is  not  from  our  acquaintance  and  conversation 
in  it.  Now,  secondly,  for  that  which  is  intimated  and  signified  from  it.  And  that 
is  this,  as  the  consent  of  Scripture  with  Scripture,  so  the  consent  of  times  with 
times,  and  the  conditions  of  the  people  of  God  in  all  ages  of  the  Church.  We  seo 
here  that  it  is  no  new  business  for  God's  people  to  be  under  affliction ;  we  have  it 
here  upon  writing  and  record  as  that  which  has  been  long  ago.  First,  there  are 
the  same  grounds  of  persecution  in  God's  people  themselves.  Secondly,  there  is 
the  same  disposition  in  their  enemies  as  has  been  in  times  past.  Thirdly,  there  is 
the  same  wisdom  and  power  in  God  Himself:  wisdom  to  know  how  to  impose 
them,  and  power  how  to  moderate  that  they  exceed  not  and  go  beyond  bounds  and 
their  due  proper  limits.  (Ibid.)  Nay,  in  all  these  things  we  are  more  than 
conquerors. — More  than  conquerors  : — I.  The  Chbistian  is  "  conquebob."  The 
battle  consists  of  a  moral  conflict,  with  inward  and  outward  enemies  all  leagued  in 
terrible  force  against  the  soul.  To  this  is  added — what,  indeed,  was  most  peculiar 
to  the  early  Church — a  war  of  external  suffering,  of  penury,  persecution,  and 
martyrdom.  Now  the  way  Christ  provides  for  the  holy  warrior's  passage  through 
this  fiery  contest  is  not  by  shunning,  but  by  facing  the  foe.  The  Captain  of  their 
salvation  might  have  withdrawn  His  people  from  the  field  and  conducted  them  to 
heaven  without  the  hazard  of  a  conflict.  But  not  so.  He  will  lead  them  to 
glory,  but  it  shall  be  by  the  path  of  glory.  They  shall  carve  their  way  to  the  crown 
by  the  achievements  of  the  sword.  But  in  what  sense  are  we  conquerors?  Just 
in  that  sense  in  which  the  Holy  Ghost  obtains  the  victory.  It  is  not  the  believer 
himself  who  conquers ;  it  is  the  Divine  Spirit  within.  No  movement  is  seen,  no 
tactics  are  observed,  no  war-cry  is  heard,  and  yet  there  is  passing  within  the  soul 
a  more  important  battle,  and  there  is  secured  a  more  brilliant  victory,  than  ever 
the  pen  of  the  historian  recorded.  There  is  the  conquest  of — 1.  Faith  (Heb.  xi.  1 ; 
John  V.  4).  Faith  in  the  truth  of  God's  word,  in  the  veracity  of  God's  character, 
in  the  might,  and  skill,  and  wisdom  of  our  Commander ;  faith,  eyeing  the  prize, 
gives  the  victory  to  the  Christian  combatant,  and  secures  the  glory  to  the  Captain 
of  his  salvation.  2.  Patience  (Heb.  vi.  12,  15).  Is  it  no  real  victory  when  beneath 
the  pressure  of  great  affliction  the  Christian  is  enabled  to  say,  "  Though  He  slay  me 
yet  will  I  trust  in  Him  "  ?  3.  Joy  (1  Thess.  i.  6 ;  James  i.  2 ;  John  xvi.  20).  And 
who  but  Jesus  can  turn  our  sorrow  into  joy? — not  only  assuaging  our  griefs  and 
tempering  the  flame,  but  actually  making  our  sorrows  the  occasion  of  thanksgiving. 
Confide  your  gria^^toJesRS,  and  He  will  cause  it  sweetly  to  sing  (Psa.  xxx.  11,  12 ; 
2  Cor.  vii.  4).  II.  He  is  moee  than  a  conquebob.  The  same  word  as  "  a  far 
more  and  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory."  So  we  are  "  far  more  exceeding 
conquerors."  It  is  more  than  a  mere  victory  which  the  believer  gains.  A  battle 
may  be  won  at  a  great  loss  to  the  conqueror.  A  great  leader  may  fall  at  the  head 
of  his  troops.  The  flower  of  an  army  may  be  destroyed,  and  the  best  blood  of  a 
nation's  pride  may  be  shed.  But  the  Christian  conquers  with  no  such  loss. 
Nothing  whatever  essential  to  his  well-being  is  perilled.  His  armour,  riveted 
upon  his  soul  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  he  cannot  lose.  His  life,  hid  with  Christ  in  God, 
cannot  be  endangered.  There  is  not  a  grace  in  his  soul  but  shall  come  out  purer 
and  brighter  for  the  conflict.  Losing  nothing,  he  gains  everything!  All  hia 
resources  are  augmented  by  the  result.  His  armour  is  brighter,  his  sword  is 
keener,  his  courage  is  more  dauntless,  for  the  conflict.  Faith  is  strengthened — 
love  is  expanded — experience  is  deepened — knowledge  is  increased.  III.  "  Thbouoh 
Biu  THAT  LOVED  US."    Here  is  the  great  secret  of  our  victory,  the  source  of  oar 


OBAP.  vm.]  ROMANS.  235 

triumph.  "  Thanks  be  to  God  which  giveth  as  the  victory  through  oar  Lord  Jesas 
Christ."  Through  the  conquest  which  He  Himself  obtained,  through  the  grace 
which  He  imparts,  through  the  strength  which  He  inspires,  through  the  inter- 
cession which  He  presents,  in  all  our  "  tribulation,  distress,  persecution,"  &o.,  we 
are  "  more  than  conquerors."  Fear  not,  then,  the  darkest  cloud,  nor  the  proudest 
waves,  nor  the  deepest  wants — in  these  verj  things  you  shall,  through  Christ, 
prove  triumphant.  Nor  shrink  from  the  battle  with  the  "  last  enemy."  He 
stands  at  your  side  a  crownless  king,  and  waving  a  broken  sceptre.  (0.  Winslow, 
D.D.)  More  tlian  eonqiurort : — I.  The  viOTORrES  albbaet  won  by  those  who  • 
have  been  possessed  by  the  love  of  Jesus.  1.  "  Tribulation,"  in  the  Latin, 
signifies  threshing,  and  Gk>d's  people  are  often  beaten  with  the  heavy  fiiail  of 
trouble;  but  they  are  more  than  conquerors,  since  they  lose  nothing  but  their 
straw  and  chaS.  The  Greek,  however,  suggests  pressure  from  without.  It  is  used 
in  the  case  of  persons  who  are  bearing  heavy  burden^,  and  are  heavily  pressed 
upon.  Now,  there  are  very  few  who  do  not  meet  with  outward  pressure,  either 
from  sickness,  poverty,  or  bereavement ;  but  under  all  believers  have  been 
sustained.  It  is  said  of  the  palm-tree  that  the  more  weights  they  hang  upon  it 
the  more  straight  and  lofty  it  is  ;  and  it  is  so  with  the  Christian.  2.  "  Distress." 
The  Greek  refers  to  mental  grief.  "  Straitness  of  place  "  is  something  Uke  the 
word.  We  sometimes  get  into  a  position  in  which  we  feel  as  if  we  could  not  move ; 
the  way  is  shut  up ;  and  our  mind  is  distracted  ;  we  cannot  calm  and  steady  our- 
selves. Well,  now,  if  you  are  a  genuine  Christian,  yon  will  be  more  than  a 
oonqueror  over  mental  distress.  Jesus  shall  say,  as  He  walks  the  tempest  of  your 
soul,  "It  is  I,  be  not  afraid."  3.  "  Persecution."  This  in  all  its  forms  has  fallen 
apon  the  Church,  and  up  to  this  moment  it  has  never  achieved  a  triumph,  but  it 
has  cleared  it  of  hypocrisy  ;  when  cast  into  the  fire  the  pure  gold  lost  nothing  but 
its  dross,  which  it  might  well  be  glad  to  lose.  4.  "Famine."  We  are  not  so 
exposed  to  this  as  they  were  in  Paul's  time,  who  suffered  the  loss  of  all  their 
goods,  and  consequently  did  not  know  where  to  find  food  for  their  bodies.  No 
doubt  there  are  some  now  who  by  their  conscientious  convictions  are  reduced  to 
famine.  But  Christians  bear  even  this  sooner  than  sell  their  conscience  and  stain  their 
love  to  Christ.  5.  "  Nakedness."  Another  terrible  form  of  poverty.  6.  "  Peril " — 
i.e.,  constant  exposure  to  sudden  death.  7.  "The  sword" — one  cruel  form  of  death 
as  a  picture  of  the  whole.  The  noble  army  of  martyrs  have  given  their  necks  to 
the  sword  as  cheerfully  as  the  bride  upon  the  marriage  day  gives  her  hand  to  the 
bridegroom.  At  this  day  you  are  not,  the  most  of  you,  called  to  all  this,  but  if  ye 
were,  my  Lord  would  give  you  grace  to  bear  the  test.  Your  danger  is  lest  you 
grow  rich,  become  proud,  and  conform  to  the  world,  and  lose  your  faith.  If  you 
cannot  be  torn  in  pieces  by  the  roaring  lion,  you  may  be  hugged  to  death  by  the 
bear.  I  fear  that  the  Church  is  far  more  likely  to  lose  her  integrity  in  these  soft 
and  silken  days  than  she  was  in  those  rough  times.  Are  there  not  professors 
whose  methods  of  trade  are  just  as  vicious  as  those  of  the  most  tricky  ?  II.  Thb 
LAUKELS  OF  THE  FIGHT.  The  words  "  more  than  conquerors  "  might  be  rendered 
"  more  exceeding  conquerors."  The  Vulgate  has  a  word  which  means  "  over  over- 
comers,"  over  and  above  conquering.  For  a  Christian  to  be  a  conqueror  is  a  great 
thing :  how  can  he  be  more  than  a  oonqueror?  Because — 1.  The  power  by  which 
he  overcomes  is  nobler  far.  Here  is  a  champion  just  come  from  the  Greek  games. 
Why  I  the  man's  muscles  are  like  steel,  and  you  say  to  him,  "  I  do  not  wonder  that 
you  beat  and  bruised  your  foe ;  if  I  had  set  up  a  machine  made  of  steel  it  could 
have  done  the  same.''  Where  is  the  glory  ?  One  big  brute  has  beaten  another  big 
brute,  that  is  all.  Dogs  and  bulls  and  game-cocks  have  endured  as  much,  and 
perhaps  more.  Now,  see  the  Christian  champion.  He  is  a  simple,  unlettered 
person,  who  just  knows  that  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners ;  yet  he  has 
won  the  victory  over  philosophers.  He  has  been  tempted  and  tried ;  he  was  very 
weak,  yet  somehow  he  has  conquered.  This  is  victory  indeed  when  the  base  things 
of  this  world  overthrow  the  mighty.  2.  The  conqueror  fights  with  some  selfish 
motive,  even  when  the  motive  is  patriotism.  But  the  Christian  fights  neither  for 
any  set  of  men  nor  for  himself :  in  contending  for  truth  he  contends  for  all  men, 
but  especially  for  God ;  and  in  suffering  for  the  right  he  suffers  with  no  prospect 
of  earthly  gain.  3.  The  Christian  loses  nothing  even  by  the  fight  itself.  In  most 
wars  the  gain  seldom  makes  any  recompense  for  the  effusion  of  blood ;  but  the 
Christian's  faith,  when  tried,  grows  stronger ;  his  patience,  when  tempted,  becomes 
more  patient.  4.  Most  conquerors  have  to  struggle  and  agonise  to  win  the 
eonquest.    Sat  Christians,  when  theix  love  to  Cbxist  is  strong,  hare  found  it 


236  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  Tin. 

even  easj  to  overcome  suffering  for  the  Lord.  Look  at  Blandina,  enveloped  in  a 
net,  tossed  npon  the  horns  of  bulls,  and  then  made  to  sit  in  a  red  hot  iron  chair  to 
die,  and  yet  unconquered  to  the  close.  Indeed,  the  tormentors  were  tormented  to 
think  they  could  not  conquer  timid  women  and  children.  I  saw  upon  the  lake  of 
Orta,  in  northern  Italy,  on  some  Roman  holy  day,  a  number  of  boats  coming  from 
all  quarters  of  the  lake  towards  the  church  upon  the  central  islet  of  the  lake,  and 
it  was  beautiful  to  hear  the  plash  of  the  oars  and  the  sound  of  song;  and  the  rowers 
never  missed  a  stroke  because  they  sang,  neither  was  the  song  marred  because  of 
the  plash  of  the  oars,  but  on  they  came,  singing  and  rowing :  and  so  has  it  been 
with  the  Church  of  God.  That  oar  of  obedience,  and  that  other  oar  of  suffering 
— the  Church  has  learned  to  ply  both  of  these,  and  to  sing  as  she  rows,  "  Thanks 
be  unto  God,  who  always  maketh  us  to  triumph  in  every  place  !  "  5.  They  have 
conquered  their  enemies  by  doing  them  good.  "The  Church  has  been  the  anvil, 
but  she  has  broken  many  hammers."  Ail  true  believers  are  far  more  glorious  than 
the  Roman  conqueror.  What  flowers  are  they  which  angels  strew  in  the  path  of 
the  blessed  ?  What  songs  are  those  which  rise  from  yonder  halls  of  Zion,  con- 
jubilant  with  song  as  the  saints  pass  along  to  their  everlasting  habitations  ?  III. 
The  persons  that  have  conquered.  Men  who  believed  in  Christ's  love  to  them, 
and  who  were  possessed  with  love  to  Christ.  This  is  their  sole  distinction.  The 
poorest  have  been  as  brave  as  the  wealthy ;  the  learned  have  died  gloriously,  but 
the  unlearned  have  almost  stolen  the  palm.  There  is  room  for  all  who  love  the 
Lord  in  this  tight,  and  there  are  crowns  for  each.  IV.  The  power  which  sustained 
THESE  more  than  CONQUERORS.  It  was  "through  Him  that  loved  us."  Much 
depends  upon  the  leader.  Christ  showed  them  how  to  conquer  by  enduring  and 
conquering  as  their  example.  They  triumphed  through  Christ  as  their  Teacher, 
for  His  doctrines  strengthened  their  minds,  but,  above  all,  because  Christ  was 
with  them.  The  name  by  which  the  apostle  called  our  Lord  is  the  key  to 
the  text,  "  Through  Him  that  loved  us."  They  knew  that  He  loved  them,  and 
that  if  they  suffered  for  His  sake,  it  was  His  love  which  let  them  suffer 
for  their  ultimate  gain,  and  for  His  permanent  honour.  (<7.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
More  than  conquerors  : — They  not  only  resist,  but  prevail ;  and  not  only  prevail, 
but  triumph.  They  not  only  refuse  to  succumb  and  submit  to  their  enemies,  but 
they  make  those  enemies  submit  to  them.  They  lead  captivity  captive;  they 
take  the  spoils  of  death  and  heU.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  so  conquering  in 
battle  as  to  suffer  as  much  loss  as  a  defeat  would  have  cost.  Or  an  army  may 
merely  repulse  a  foe,  and  maintain  its  ground.  Some  commanders,  who  are  too 
stubborn  to  be  beaten,  are  yet  totally  unable  to  follow  up  a  victory,  or  make  any 
adequate  use  of  it.  It  is  not  so  with  the  Christian.  He  can  keep  his  ground ;  he 
can  repel  his  enemies.  He  can  do  much  more  than  that.  He  can  win  from  them, 
as  it  were,  honour,  riches,  territory,  and  renown.  He  can  make  them  defray  the 
cost  of  the  campaign.  He  can  extort  from  them  the  materials  of  the  reward  of 
his  triumph.  He  can  bind  them  to  his  chariot  wheels,  and  like  the  old  Roman 
generals,  when  a  public  triumph  was  awarded  them,  he  can  make  his  vanquished 
foes  serve  his  interests,  and  heighten  the  glory  of  his  renown.  All  this,  however, 
is  not  by  any  might  or  prowess  of  his  own,  but  it  is  •'  through  Him  that  loved  us." 
Of  Christ  it  is  affirmed  that  His  foes  are  made  His  footstool ;  and  from  their  backs, 
prostrate  in  the  dust,  He  leaps  up  to  His  throne.  And  Christ's  victory  is  our 
victory  too.  "  If  we  suffer  with  Him,  we  shall  also  reign  with  Him."  {T.G,  Horton.) 
More  than  a  conqueror : — I.  The  spiritual  lite  op  man  on  earth  is  a  battle.  This 
is  true  of  all  men,  whether  godly  or  ungodly.  There  are  two  powers  in  every  man's 
soul  eternally  antagonistic — the  spiritual  and  the  carnal ;  the  former  struggling  ever 
for  the  absolute  right,  and  the  other  for  the  personally  gratifying.  In  the  case  of 
the  ungodly,  of  course  the  spiritual  is  the  weaker.  Selfishness  and  passions 
struggle  to  keep  the  conscience  down;  whereas,  in  the  case  of  the  godly,  the 
Bpiritual  is  the  stronger,  and  the  struggle  of  the  higher  nature  is,  to  bring  the 
dictates  of  self  and  the  flesh  into  absolute  subjection.  The  prece  ling  chapter  is 
a  moral  history  of  this  conflict.  H.  A  conqueror  in  this  battle  is  a  glorious 
characteb.  He  who  conquers  his  passions,  and  subdues  all  the  evil  tendencies  of 
his  nature,  is  a  hero  in  the  highest  sense.  1.  He  has  developed  some  of  the  noblest 
attributes — as  courage,  self-sacrifice,  perseverance.  It  requires  a  far  higher  courage 
to  battle  on  the  unobserved  arena  of  the  soul,  against  the  favourite  lusts  and  gods 
of  the  depraved  nature,  than  to  face  an  army  in  the  open  field.  2.  He  has  pursued 
a  course  absolutely  right.  The  course  of  a  warrior  admits  of  many  solemn  ques- 
tions as  to  its  rectitude ;  but  be  who  battles  against  the  wrong  in  his  own  heart  i* 


CHAP,  vm.]  ROMANS.  237 

engaged  in  a  struggle  of  andoabted  righteousness.  3.  He  has  achieved  a  result 
entirely  benevolent.  Even  the  most  useful  of  the  mere  material  wars  have  been 
mixed  with  immense  evils;  but  in  the  case  of  this  moral  victory,  nothing  is 
destroyed  but  the  destroyer,  &o.  HI.  Thb  Chkistian  is  mobe  than  a.  oonquerob. 
A  man  is  a  conqueror  when  he  overcomes  his  enemy ;  he  is  more  than  this  when 
he  is  a  gainer  by  the  conquest.  1.  He  has  lost  nothing  in  the  conquest.  He 
might  have  been  a  conqueror  and  yet  have  lost  much  by  his  battles.  Indeed,  most 
material  conquerors  have  suffered  great  losses ;  if  not  a  loss  of  property,  a  loss  of 
friends ;  a  loss,  perhaps,  of  health ;  a  loss  of  peace  of  mind.  But  a  Christian 
conqueror  has  lost  nothing,  2.  He  has  gained  much  by  his  conquest.  (1)  Power. 
There  is  a  tribe  of  savages  whose  warriors  have  the  idea  that  the  strengta  of  the 
men  they  have  killed  flows  into  them  by  the  fatal  stroke.  This  has  a  reality  in  the 
moral  conflict.  Every  moral  enemy  slain  gives  the  slayer  strength,  (2)  Dominion. 
In  material  warfare  a  man  may  conquer,  often  does,  and  not  become  a  king.  Not 
so  in  this  conflict ;  the  Christian  conqueror  becomes  the  monarch  of  his  own  soul. 
(3)  InvincibiUty.  In  physical  campaigns,  conquerors  have  been  conquered  over 
again.  Not  so  in  this  spiritual  victory ;  the  man  who  once  conquers  sin,  becomes 
unconquerable  for  ever — he  is  kept  by  the  power  of  God,  &c.  IV.  The  Christian  is 
MORE  THAN  CONQUEROR  THROUGH  Christ.  1.  Christ  revealcd  the  terribleness  of  the 
enemy.  The  soul  would  not  have  known  how  terrible  her  spiritual  enemies  were, 
had  it  not  been  for  the  revelation  of  Christ.  He  has  shown  what  siu  is.  2.  Christ 
furnished  the  armour  for  the  battle  (Eph.  vi.  14-18).  3.  Christ  gave  the  inspira- 
tion for  the  engagement.  His  love  kindled  the  martial  spirit  in  the  sinner's  soul, 
and  roused  him  to  the  conflict.  4.  Christ  gave  them  the  conquering  power.  He 
made  His  strength  perfect  in  their  weakness.  Thus  their  victory  is  through 
Christ,  and  the  songs  of  eternity  ascribe  all  spiritual  conquests  to  His  love 
(Rev.  V.  9,  12,  13).  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  More  than  conquerors : — A  hetero- 
geneous mass  the  apostle  here  brigades  together  as  an  antagonistic  army. 
There  is  no  attempt  at  an  exhaustive  enumeration,  or  at  classiflcation.  I. 
Thb  impotent  enemies  op  love.  There  is  contempt  in  the  careless  mass- 
ing together  of  the  foes  which  the  apostle  enumerates.  He  begins  with  the 
widest  word  that  covers  everything — affliction.  Then  he  specifies  various  forms 
of  it.  "Distress,"  straitening,  as  the  word  might  be  rendered.  Then  he  comes  to 
evils  inflicted  for  Christ's  sake  by  hostile  men,  "persecution."  Then  he  passes 
purely  physical  evils,  "hunger"  and  "nakedness."  Then  he  harks  back  again  to 
man's  antagonism,  "peril,"  and  "sword."  And  thus  carelessly,  and  without  an 
effort  at  logical  order,  he  lumps  together,  as  specimens  of  their  class,  these  salient 
points,  as  it  were,  and  crests  of  the  great  sea,  whose  billows  threaten  to  roll  over  us ; 
and  he  laughs  at  them  all,  as  impotent  and  naught,  when  compared  with  the  love 
of  Christ,  which  shields  us  from  them  all.  There  is  no  need,  in  order  to  rise  to  the 
full  height  of  the  Christian  contempt  for  calamity,  to  deny  any  of  its  terrible  power. 
These  things  can  separate  us  from  much.  They  can  separate  us  from  joy,  from 
hope,  from  almost  all  that  makes  life  desirable.  They  can  strip  us  to  the  very  quick, 
but  the  quick  they  cannot  touch.  The  frost  comes  and  kills  the  flowers,  burns  the 
leaves,  cuts  oflf  the  stems,  binds  the  sweet  music  of  the  flowing  rivers  in  silent 
chains,  casts  mists  and  darkness  over  the  face  of  the  solitary  grey  world,  but  it  does 
not  touch  the  life  that  is  in  the  root.  You  need  not  be  very  much  afraid  of  anything 
being  taken  from  you  as  long  as  Christ  is  left  you.  You  wiU  not  be  altogether  hope- 
less so  long  as  you  feel  the  sweet  and  all-pervading  consciousness  of  the  changeless 
love  of  Christ.  U.  The  abundant  victory  of  love.  Mark  how  the  apostle,  in  his 
enthusiastic  way,  is  not  content  here  with  simply  saying  that  he  and  his  fellows 
conquer.  There  must  be  something  more  than  that  to  correspond  to  the  power  of 
the  victorious  Christ  that  is  in  us.  Note,  then,  further,  that  not  only  is  this  victory 
more  than  bare  victory,  being  the  conversion  of  the  enemy  into  allies,  but  that  it  is 
a  victory  which  is  won  even  whilst  we  are  in  the  midst  of  the  strife.  No  ultimate 
victory,  in  some  far-off  and  blessed  heaven,  will  be  ours  unless  moment  by  moment, 
here,  to-day,  "we  are  more  than  conquerors  through  Him  that  loved  us."  So,  then, 
aboat  this  abundant  victory  there  are  these  things  to  say — ^You  conquer  the  world 
only  then  when  you  make  it  contribute  to  your  conscious  possession  of  the  love  of 
Christ.  Has  the  world  helped  me  to  lay  hold  on  Christ  ?  Then  I  have  conquered 
it.  Has  the  world  loosened  my  grasp  upon  Him?  Then  it  has  conquered  ma. 
Note,  then,  further,  that  this  abundant  victory  depends  on  how  we  deal  with  the 
changes  of  our  outward  lives,  our  sorrows  or  our  joys.  The  set  of  your  sails,  and 
the  fiimneBS  of  your  grasp  upon  the  tiUer,  determine  whether  the  wind  shall 


238  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rai. 

carry  you  to  the  haven  or  shall  blow  you  oat,  a  wandering  waif,  npon  a  shorelesi 
and  melancholy  sea.  The  worst  of  all  afflictions  is  a  wasted  affliction,  and  they 
are  all  wasted  unless  they  teach  us  more  of  the  reality  and  the  blessedness  of  the 
love  of  Jesus  Christ.  lU.  The  love  which  Mi^ES  us  conqdebobs.  The  apostle, 
with  a  wonderful  instinctive  sense  of  fitness,  names  Christ  here  by  a  name  congruous 
to  the  thoughts  which  occupy  his  mind,  when  he  speaks  of  Him  that  loved  us.  His 
question  has  been,  Can  anything  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ  ?  And  his 
answer  is,  So  far  from  that  being  the  case,  that  very  love,  by  occasion  of  sorrows 
and  afflictions,  tightens  its  grasp  upon  us,  and,  by  the  communication  of  itself  to 
us,  makes  us  more  than  conquerors.  This  great  love  of  Jesus  Christ,  from  which 
nothing  can  separate  us,  will  use  the  very  things  that  seem  to  threaten  our  separa- 
tion  as  a  means  of  coming  nearer  to  us  in  its  depth  and  in  its  preciousness.  The 
apostle  says,  "  Him  who  loved  us,"  and  the  words  in  the  original  distinctly  point  to 
some  one  fact  as  being  the  great  instance  of  love.  That  is  to  say  they  point  to  Hia 
death.  And  so  we  may  say  Christ's  love  helps  to  conquer  because  in  His  death  He 
interprets  for  us  all  possible  sorrows.  The  Cross  is  the  key  to  all  tribulation,  and 
declares  it  to  be  a  token  and  an  instrument  of  an  unchanging  love.  Further,  that 
great  love  of  Christ  helps  us  to  conquer,  because  in  His  sufferings  and  death  He 
becomes  the  companion  of  all  the  weary.  The  rough,  dark,  lonely  road  changes  its 
look  when  we  see  His  footprints  there,  not  without  specks  of  blood  in  them,  where 
the  thorns  tore  His  feet.  And,  lastly,  this  dying  lover  of  our  souls  communicates 
to  us  aU,  if  we  will,  the  strength  whereby  we  may  coerce  all  outward  things  into 
being  helps  to  the  fuller  participation  of  His  perfect  love.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Conquerors  through  Christ : — There  are  two  points  of  consideration  before  us — I. 
The  thinos  in  which  we  aee  victobious.  "  In  all  these  things,"  says  the  apostle. 
We  may  classify  these — 1.  The  condemning  power  of  the  law  and  sin.  "  Who  ia 
He  that  condemneth  ?  "  The  Christian  never  loses  sight  of  the  fact  that  he  has 
been,  and  still  is,  a  guilty  sinner.  The  power  of  sin  to  visit  judgment  through  the 
law  is  a  fearful  thing  to  an  unforgiven  sinner ;  but  before  it  all,  the  believer  can 
stand  in  serene  triumph  and  feel  himself  safe.  Looking  up,  around,  and  beneath, 
he  can  see  none  that  can  enforce  condemnation  against  him.  The  law  cannot — for 
its  honour  and  claims  have  been  satisfied  in  atoning  blood.  2.  Further,  a  whole 
group  of  trials  is  found  in  the  hindering  powers  of  the  world  and  Satan.  Look  at 
the  array  of  troubles  of  which  the  apostle  speaks — "  Tribulations,  distress,  perseoa- 
tion,"  &o.  In  our  day,  the  form  and  manner  of  opposition,  temptation  and  danger 
are  somewhat  different,  but  they  are  just  as  real  and  almost  as  numerous.  Till 
Satan  and  the  world  cease  to  be  what  they  are,  our  Christian  life  must  lie  through 
temptations,  opposing  powers,  influences  that  imperil  and  destroy.  The  forces  of 
sin  sometimes  charge  on  men  in  violent  assault — a  fierce  assailment  in  an  open 
crisis  battle,  for  supremacy  in  the  soul.  We  all  have  our  moral  Sedans,  where  we 
are  put  to  the  alternative  of  winning  or  losing  the  crown  of  Christian  character. 
Such  times  of  mighty  peril  are  more  frequent  than  most  persons  suspect.  For  the 
battles  are  not  always  open  in  their  meaning.  Men  are  on  trial  for  life  or  death, 
often,  when  they  know  it  not.  It  is  often  a  decisive  battle  between  the  powers  of 
darkness  and  Ught  for  the  soul  of  the  young,  when  they  are  to  decide  their  calling  "T 
in  life,  between  a  business  safe  and  pure,  and  one  full  of  temptation.  Sometimes 
the  temptation  is  insidious  and  gradual  in  its  approaches  and  power.  Fabius'  mode 
of  warfare  was  that  of  ever  hanging  about  his  enemy  and  weakening  him  little  by 
little,  inflicting  small  but  continual  injuries.  This  is  the  commonest  way  of  the 
warfare  of  the  world  and  sin  on  the  Christian.  A  continual  pricking  of  a  polished 
surface  with  needle-points  will  ultimately  tarnish  it.  A  continual  dropping  will 
wear  away  the  solid  rock ;  and  the  most  perilous  trials  of  Christians  may  be  suffered 
from  quiet  but  continuous  touches  of  evil  from  the  world  and  sin.  It  may  be  an 
incipient  development  of  a  worldly  spirit,  filling  your  heart  with  the  love  of  money 
and  moving  you  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  edge  of  some  moral  precipice.  It  may  be 
the  growth  of  a  temper  of  neglect  for  known  duty,  till  the  spirit  of  duty  is  eaten  all 
out  of  your  heart,  or  the  plants  of  grace  are  all  smothered  to  feebleness  or  death. 
So  it  is,  too,  as  to  afflictions,  more  generally  so-called — the  things  that  form  distresses 
to  be  borne  rather  than  temptations  to  sin.  In  the  trials  of  the  apostle,  there  was 
"  a  great  fight  of  afflictions."  And  it  is  while  burdened  with  trouble  and  struggling 
against  sorrows  that  every  beUever  has  his  victory  to  reach.  But  here  again,  in 
view  of  it  all,  God  throws  down  on  you  the  light  and  cheer  of  this  experience  of  the 
apostle  :  "  In  all  these  things  we  are  more  than  conquerors."  II.  How  wx  abe  uaoh 
conqttebobs.  This  is  a  point  of  grand  importance  to  as.  Aa  the  Israelites,  imperilled 


CHAP,  vm.]  ROMANS.  239 

by  Pharaoh's  pursuing  army,  were  concerned  to  see  how  to  go  forward  in  safety,  we 
are  concerned  to  know  the  way  to  overcome  the  oppositions  and  trials  in  our  onward 
Christian  way.  How  conquerors  ?  "  Through  Him  that  hath  loved  us."  1.  Not, 
therefore,  in  and  of  ourselves.  Dependence  on  self  alone  is  a  broken  reed  that  here 
plunges  into  defeat.  However  much  extolled,  and  really  grand  a  thing  self-reliance 
is,  in  some  relations  in  this  spiritual  work  it  is  inadequate.  The  fetters  of  depravity 
and  condemning  sin  are  too  strong  for  human  strength  alone  to  wrest  off.  The 
power  of  temptation  is  too  mighty  to  be  withstood  without  aid.  2.  But  '*  through 
Christ  that  loved  us,"  we  are  conquerors.  It  is  surely  only  by  Him  that  we  triumph 
against  the  threatening  curse  of  sin,  in  the  matter  of  justification.  And  in  the 
matter  of  temptation  and  trials,  our  victory  is  in  Him.  With  Christ  on  our  sidb, 
"  they  are  more  that  are  for  us  than  they  tiiat  are  against  us."  It  is  often  surprising 
how  Christ  and  Christ's  love  give  strength  to  the  feeble.  ••  There  were  giants  in 
those  days."  In  a  better  sense,  there  are  giants  in  all  days — Christians  made 
mightier  than  all  the  powers  of  evil.  They  have  locks  of  triumphant  strength 
against  all  the  Philistines  of  temptation,  sin,  and  harassment  that  may  be  upon 
them.  3.  But  though  through  Christ,  it  is  not  without  our  own  eljfort.  Christ 
keeps  us  by  enabhng  us  to  keep  ourselves.  We  are  strong,  not  effortless,  but  by 
and  in  effort.  Every  iota  of  the  might  by  which  the  victory  is  given  us  must  run 
along  spiritual  nerves  within  us — must  come  into  our  hearts,  go  into  the  will,  and 
flo(v  out  into  the  hands  and  feet  of  personal  activity  and  steadfastness.  Divine 
strength  is  always  ready  for  the  needy  Christian,  but  he  must  use  it.  How  do  you 
overcome  the  perilous  temptation  of  love  of  the  world  ?  It  is  by  so  receiving  the 
grace  of  Christ  as  to  crucify  your  affection  for  its  follies  and  sins.  How  do  Christians 
in  general  prove  safe  against  the  incessant  temptations  to  evil  about  them  ?  It  is 
by  storing  their  own  minds  and  hearts  with  the  light,  truth,  counsel,  and  quickening 
force  of  God's  Word.  All  evils  will  be  powerless  against  you,  if,  like  the  tree  that 
grows  strong  against  storms  by  receiving  the  strength  that  comes  up  from  every 
root,  pours  through  every  vein  into  every  branch,  and  hardens  into  firmness  and 
might  by  the  air  and  sunbeams,  you  take  up  into  the  fibre  and  nerve  of  your  own 
Christian  Ufe  the  invigorating  influence  of  all  God's  grace  furnished  you,  and  you 
grow  strong  and  compact  as  a  tree  of  righteousness,  Christ  living  and  acting  in  you. 
4.  But  observe — the  assurance  goes  fuither.  With  beautiful  force  it  says  :  "  We 
are  more  than  conquerors."  Our  victories,  in  which  we  remain  safe,  are  a  means 
of  increasing  our  faith,  our  love,  our  power.  Trials  are  turned  into  occasions  of 
development  and  power.  The  mind  brightens  by  its  use.  The  heart  is  enriched 
by  the  exercise  of  its  virtues.  Idleness  and  ease  enfeeble.  The  Church  is  often 
too  indolent  and  peaceful  for  its  proper  development  and  high  glory.  There  is 
nothing  like  war  to  make  soldiers.  It  is  by  wrestling  with  the  angels  of  trial, 
affliction,  and  labour,  that  yoo  become  a  "  prince  with  God."  How  blessed  is  the 
Christian — the  victory  given  him  here,  the  crown  hereafter.  It  is  for  us  to  know 
whether  we  are  conquering,  daily — defeating  Satan,  subduing  sin,  proving  suc- 
cessful in  doing  good,  in  the  face  of  everything  that  opposes.  (M.  Valentine, 
D.D.)  More   than    conqueror  : — Ignatius,    who   was  martyred   in  the    year 

107,  said,  "  Let  fire  and  the  cross,  let  wUd  beasts,  let  all  the  malice  of  the 
devil  come  upon  me ;  only  may  I  enjoy  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  better  for  me  to  die  for 
Christ,  than  to  reign  over  the  ends  of  the  earth.  Stand  firm,"  he  added,  "  as  an 
anvil  when  it  is  beaten  upon.  It  is  part  of  a  brave  combatant  to  be  wounded,  and 
yet  to  overcome."  In  losing  life  he  found  it.  The  Christian  more  than  conqueror 
through  Christ : — It  is  a  rough  sort  of  Ufe  that  most  resolute  Christians  lead.  I  do 
Dot  speak  of  commonplace  professors,  many  of  whom  shufQe  through  easily  enough. 
But  those,  of  whom  the  apostle  himself  was  one,  have  a  severe  and  sifting  ordeal 
to  pass.  "  As  it  is  written,  For  Thy  sake  we  are  killed  all  the  day  long ;  we  are 
accounted  as  sheep  for  the  slaughter."  It  was  thus  that  Immanuel  Himself  was 
treated.  It  was  a  doomed  life  He  led  on  earth.  The  rudest  language  and  the 
harshest  treatment  were  reckoned  good  enough  for  Him.  It  is  enough  for  the 
servant  to  be  as  his  Lord.  But  just  as  Jesus  conquered  it  all,  so  each  disciple  will 
overcome  it  too.  Like  the  little  boat  that  follows  in  the  great  ship's  wake,  which 
receives  the  blast  somewhat  abated  by  the  stateUer  form  ahead,  but  in  other 
respects  backs  the  same  billows  and  plunges  down  into  the  same  sea-trough ;  so  the 
believer  follows  the  Forerunner,  encountering  in  mitigated  fury  the  head-wind 
which  opposed  His  course,  but  riding  the  same  billows  of  tribulation,  distress,  and 
peril  which  He  breasted  on  His  path  to  glory.  But,  Hke  the  cord  which  connects 
4he  little  boat  and  the  great  ship  together,  there  is  that  which  joins  the  Saviour  and 


240  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  vm. 


the  believing  soul  to  one  another.  Tribulation,  distress,  persecution  cannot  sever 
them,  and  in  the  same  haven  of  security,  the  same  sea  of  glass,  where  the  mightier 
sail  is  already  furled,  and  Immanuel's  own  anchor  is  already  dropped,  the  fragile 
little  bark  which  follows  will  soon  come  to  its  quiet  mooring,  "  more  than  conqueror 
through  Him  "  who  went  before  it.  (J.  Hamilton,  D.D.)  The  Christian  con- 
queror : — L  Christians  abe  conqueboes.  1.  At  their  first  conversion,  when  through 
grace  they  obtain  deliverance  from  the  power  of  darkness  and  unbelief.  2.  When 
grace  gains  the  ascendancy,  and  particular  corruptions  are  weakened  and  subdued. 
Growing  Christians  are  going  on  conquering  and  to  conquer.  Partial  advantages 
give  assurance  of  a  final  conquest.  3.  At  a  throne  of  grace.  God  fulfils  their 
requests,  and  often  exceeds  them,  as  He  did  those  of  Solomon.  4.  Over  the  afiQic- 
tions  and  trials  of  the  present  life,  and  such  as  they  are  called  especially  to  endure 
for  Christ's  sake.  6.  In  a  dying  hour.  The  victory  then  obtained  is  great  and 
glorious,  complete  and  everlasting  (1  Cor.  xv.  54-57).  II.  Christians  are  mobb 
THAN  conquerors.  1.  They  conquer  those  enemies  which  none  besides  can  conquer, 
and  which  to  aU  others  would  be  invincible.  They  overcome  those  powers  of 
darkness  which  have  overcome  the  world.  Those  who  have  obtained  the  greatest 
victories  are  often  the  slaves  of  the  basest  lusts.  But  the  Christian  triumphs  over 
himself ;  and  while  he  is  waging  war  with  the  corruptions  that  are  in  the  world,  he 
is  no  less  successful  in  his  opposition  to  that  depravity  which  reigns  within.  They 
conquer  that  by  which  all  are  conquered,  even  death ;  thus  they  lead  captivity 
captive.  2.  The  means  by  which  they  overcome  are  such  as  enhance  the  glory  of 
their  conquests.  When  kings  go  forth  to  battle,  they  muster  the  host,  calculate 
their  numbers,  and  oppose  force  to  force.  But  in  the  Christian  warfare,  "  it  is  not 
by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  My  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  "  I  can  do  all 
things,"  said  Paul,  "  through  Christ  who  strengtheneth  me "  (Psa.  xviii.  29 ; 
Isa.  XXX.  1 ;  1  Cor.  xii.  9,  10 ;  Eev.  xii.  11).  3.  The  manner  in  which  they  over- 
come makes  them  more  than  conquerors.  They  are  sure  of  success  •beforehand, 
which  no  other  combatants  are.  They  also  conquer  in  a  little  time.  The  soimd  ol 
an  alarm  is  quickly  followed  by  the  sound  of  triumph.  The  conflict  may  continue 
as  long  as  life;  but  what  is  our  life?  It  is  but  a  vapour.  Besides,  continued 
resistance  will  weaken  the  hands  of  our  enemies  and  strengthen  ours,  so  that  the 
conquest  shall  be  easy,  and  obtained  with  httle  loss.  A  victory  is  often  dearly 
purchased ;  but  the  Christian  loses  nothing  that  is  worth  retaining ;  he  gains  by 
every  battle.  4.  The  victory  obtained  is  over  and  above  measure,  as  the  word 
signifies.  The  victory  is  exceedingly  great  and  glorious,  far  beyond  what  is 
accomplished  in  any  other  warfare.  It  is  not  like  a  drawn  battle,  in  which  both 
sides  may  claim  the  advantage ;  the  defeat  is  total,  and  the  enemy  is  "  swallowed 
up  in  victory. "  We  must  remember,  however,  that  all  our  successes  are  owing  to 
Him  that  hath  loved  us  (Psa.  xii.  4  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  7  ;  1  John  iv.  4).  Improvement. 
1.  Let  not  beUevers  be  dismayed  at  any  opposition  they  may  meet  with  (Psa.  xxvii, 
1-3).  2.  The  most  successful  Christian  should  take  heed  of  pride  and  self- 
sufficiency.  Let  him  say  with  the  apostle,  "  Not  I,  but  Christ  who  dwelleth  in  me." 
{B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  The  gain  of  the  Christian  conqueror: — To  be  simply  a 
conqueror  is  barely  to  overcome  an  enemy — to  be  more  than  conqueror  is  to  derive 
absolute  gain  from  the  contest.  Those  Eoman  Christians  were  engaged  in  a 
struggle  so  severe  that  it  would  often  seem  doubtful  to  them  whether  they  could  be 
conquerors  at  aU.  They  saw  corruption  reigning  unbridled  in  power,  and  regal  in 
success,  whUe  they  were  subject  to  hunger,  nakedness,  and  perU.  It  is  a  difficult 
thing  to  maintain  firm  belief  in  a  truth  when  aU  circumstances  seem  to  oppose  it, 
and  proclaim  it  untrue.  And  still  more,  their  danger  through  the  deepening  hatred 
of  the  populace  must  have  tempted  them,  daUy,  to  save  themselves  by  denying 
their  Lord.  Amid  the  long,  hard  struggle  they  would  doubtless  think  it  a  great 
achievement  if  they  could  only  hold  fast  till  the  close,  and  barely  overcoming, 
enter  heaven.  Paul  tells  them  they  would  do  more.  That  phrase,  "  more  than 
conquerors,"  &c.,  was  a  power  to  nerve  those  Roman  men  to  stand  fast  in  the  evil 
day,  until  death  found  them  steadfast  still.  But  although  the  peculiar  energy  of 
the  troubles  of  that  day  must  have  clothed  these  words  with  marvellous  force,  they 
still  present  a  truth  which  every  Christian  needs  to  learn.  For  every  man  has  his 
own  temptation  to  overcome,  and  his  own  battle  to  fight,  which  no  other  can  fight 
for  him.  But,  if  we  conquer,  it  is  better  for  us  to  have  fought  a  hard  fight,  than  to 
have  been  without  one  ;  our  struggles  become  our  possessions,  crowning  us  with 
glory.  Our  subject  becomes — the  gain  of  the  Christian  conqueror.  I.  Its  nature. 
"  More  than  conquerors."    But  at  the  outset  we  must  guard  against  a  perversion 


CHAP,  vin.]  ROMANS.  941 

of  the  truth.  It  is  not  true  to  say  that  by  every  struggle  a  man  becomes  better 
than  it  he  had  had  no  struggle,  for  if  he  allow  himself  consciously  to  slide  into  sin 
and  then  afterwards  resist  it,  he  is  not  nobler  for  that  resistance  than  if  he  had  not 
sinned  at  all.  It  has  been  said  that  a  man's  sins  are  aids  to  progress,  because  by 
falling  under  temptation  and  then  overcoming  it  he  is  stronger  than  if  he  had  never 
fallen.  We  are  told  that  "  young  men  must  be  young  men  " ;  that  by  a  few 
outbursts  of  wild  immoral  life  at  first,  they  give  vent  to  the  fierce  impulses  of  evil 
— which  must  come  forth — and  then  settle  down  into  a  calmer  and  stronger  man- 
hood. Now,  every  form  of  that  doctrine  which  makes  sin  a  culture  is  false,  and 
utterly  different  from  Paul's  assertion.  Every  temptation  that  conquers  us  blinds 
that  fine  spiritual  preception  by  which  we  distinguish  the  right  from  the  wrong. 
Every  sin  leaves  a  ghastly  scar  on  the  immortal  soul  that  impedes  it  from  soaring 
upwards  to  God.  Paul  is  speaking  of  temptations  resisted  ;  and  he  affirms  that  he 
who  conquers  thus  is  greater  than  if  he  had  never  been  tried.  Let  us  proceed  now 
to  see  how  this  is  so — "  Through  Him  that  loved  us."  1.  Every  conquered  tempta- 
tion deepens  our  love  to  Christ,  and  thus  we  are  more  than  conquerors.  We  come 
here  on  the  track  of  that  great  law,  that  the  trial  of  principle  is  its  true  strengthen, 
ing.  Just  as  the  virtue  that  stands  temptation  becomes  stronger  than  the  frail 
thing  that  has  never  been  tested,  so  the  love  of  Christ  ripens  to  its  manhood 
through  temptations,  and  therefore  our  temptations  become  our  possessions,  and 
we  are  more  than  conquerors.  .  .  .  But  to  show  this  clearly,  note  that  all  great 
emotions  render  impediments  aids  to  their  own  growth.  Passion  catches  fire  by 
antagonisms.  Men  speak  of  the  power  of  circumstances  to  hinder  a  Christian  life  ; 
of  course  they  have  a  power,  but  it  is  none  the  less  true  that  a  strong  love  makes  the 
most  adverse  circumstances  the  grandest  aid  to  its  own  progress.  Thus,  the  man 
of  passionate  temperament  wrestles  down  the  fiery  impulse  of  a  great  passion,  and 
when  the  battle-storm  is  over,  he  finds  in  his  heart  a  deep,  calm  love,  which  renders 
the  next  cftnquest  easier — therefore  he  is  "  more  than  conqueror."  The  lonely 
student  in  his  chamber  fights  through  the  midnight  hours  with  a  subtle  doubt 
which  is  driving  him  to  unbelief,  but  when  the  victory  is  won,  his  faith  is  aU  the 
deeper  for  the  struggle,  and  that  struggle  is  henceforth  a  possession,  rendering  him 
"  more  than  conqueror."  2.  The  love  of  Christ  to  us  is  a  pledge  that  our  conquests 
will  become  our  gains.  Paul  evidently  had  this  thought  when  he  said,  "  Who  is 
he  that  condemneth?  It  is  Christ  that  died,"  <fec.  The  living  Christ  is  watching 
the  temptation,  and  He  will  take  care  that  its  issue  is  a  greater  glory  than  that 
which  could  have  come  from  a  life  of  perpetual  repose.  We  may  see,  in  fact,  how 
this  is  so.  Temptations  enlarge  our  capacity  of  sympathy  with  the  Saviour.  In 
conflict,  under  slander,  in  sorrow,  we  get  nearer  to  the  Christ  of  the  wilderness, 
the  judgment-hall,  and  the  garden ;  and  that  deeper  sympathy  is  its  own  great 
reward.  .  .  .  God  will  open  hereafter  the  marvellous  book  of  the  human  soul,  and 
show  how  each  struggle  left  its  eternal  inscription  of  glory  there.  II.  Its  attain- 
ment. How  shall  we  know  that  we  are  becoming  ♦'  more  than  conquerors "  ? 
When  the  love  of  Christ  is — 1.  The  strongest  power  in  life.  2.  A  progressive 
power.      {E.  L.  Hull,  B.A.)  The  Christian  conquest  : — We  begin  with  a 

Christian's  success.  First,  to  speak  of  the  positive  supposition,  "  We  are 
conquerors."  But  whom  or  what  is  a  Christian  conqueror  of  ?  First,  he 
is  a  conqueror  even  of  God  Himself.  First,  from  the  reflection  of  their 
graces,  and  that  loveliness  which  is  put  upon  their  purposes.  Secondly,  the 
children  of  God  they  do  conquer  Him  by  the  efficacy  of  their  prayers. 
Prayer,  it  is  wonderful  victorious.  This  victory  in  prevailing  with  God,  it 
is  the  ground  and  foundation  of  aU  other  victories  besides.  They  which  can 
conquer  Him,  they  may  conquer  everything  else.  Secondly,  they  are  their  own 
conquerors  ;  they  conquer  and  overcome  themselves.  He  that  cannot  conquer  his 
affections  will  never  conquer  his  afflictions  ;  whereas  he  that  can  do  that,  he  will 
find  these  by  little  and  little  yielding  unto  him.  Take  a  carnal  man,  and  he  is  a 
captive  to  every  temptation  :  he  is  like  a  city  without  walls,  which  is  easily  taken ; 
but  a  good  Christian  he  is  otherwise  affected.  But  thirdly  (which  is  most  agree- 
able to  the  scope  of  the  text),  in  regard  of  all  their  enemies.  First,  the  children 
of  God  are  conquerors  over  their  personal  enemies ;  and  in  particular  evil  men, 
they  have  a  great  deal  the  better  of  them.  First,  a  Christian  conquers  his  enemies 
by  doing  of  that  which  is  good.  Secondly,  by  suffering  of  that  which  is  evil ;  a 
Christian  conquers  thus  also.  Thus  the  martyrs  in  ancient  times  overcame  their 
very  tormentors  by  their  patience  and  constancy.  A  Christian,  he  is  above  all  the 
evils  wliich  in  this  world  are  incident  unto  him;  and  that  in  three  respects 
VOL.  n.  16 


242  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viu. 

especially.  First,  by  prevention  of  them.  Secondly,  by  cheerfulness  under  them. 
And  thirdly,  by  profiting  by  them.  And  so  much  may  suffice  to  have  spoken  of 
the  success  of  a  Christian,  as  it  is  here  laid  down  in  the  first  notion  and  proposal 
of  it,  namely,  in  its  positive  supposition,  and  that  is,  "We  are  conquerors."  The 
second  is  in  its  comparative  amplification,  we  are  so,  and  somewhat  besides — we  are 
conquerors,  yea,  more  than  conquerors.  It  is  a  very  emphatical  word,  and  such  as 
our  English  language  does  not  easily  reach  to — over-overcome.  First,  as  to  the 
thing  itself,  being  Christians,  we  are  more  than  conquerors  here,  and  that  again  in 
two  particulars.  First,  as  to  the  disabling  of  our  enemies.  A  man  may  conquer 
his  enemy  for  the  present,  but  yet  he  may  recover  again.  All  the  enemies  of  a 
Christian  shall  be  at  last  perfectly  subdued  unto  him,  and  so  as  they  shall  not  be 
able  any  more  to  rise  up  against  him.  Secondly,  "  We  are  more  than  conquerors," 
BO  far  forth  as  we  hereby  benefit  ourselves.  A  Christian  does  not  only  destroy  his 
enemy,  but  he  does  likewise  divide  the  spoil.  Now  secondly,  are  we  so  likewise  as 
to  the  manners  of  the  victory,  and  that  in  sundry  circumstances  in  which  it  may 
be  made  good  unto  us.  First,  we  do  more  than  conquer,  because  we  conquer  with 
a  little  strength.  They  conquer  many  times  by  very  weak  and  feeble  means.  It  is 
all  one  with  God  to  conquer  by  many  or  few.  Secondly,  they  do  more  than  conquer, 
because  they  conquer  in  a  little  time.  Thirdly,  they  do  more  than  conquer,  because 
they  conquer  with  a  Uttle  loss.  Fourthly,  they  do  more  than  conquer,  because  they 
conquer  where  they  do  not  fight.  Stand  still,  says  Moses  to  the  Israelites,  and  ye 
shall  see  the  salvation  of  the  Lord.  Lastly,  God's  servants  do  more  than  conquer, 
because  they  conquer  when  they  are  conquered  themselves.  The  consideration  of 
this  point  may  be  thus  far  useful  to  us,  namely,  as  to  show  us  the  dignity  and 
excellency  of  all  true  Christians  and  believers.  The  world,  for  the  most  part, 
looks  upon  God's  children  as  a  contemptible  generation,  as  those  who  of  all  others 
are  the  most  easily  conquered  and  overcome.  The  second  is  the  account  or  ground 
of  this  success  unto  him,  that  is  laid  down  in  these  words,  *'  Through  Him  that 
loved  us."  First,  to  take  notice  of  his  affection,  in  his  great  care  for  the  shunning 
of  pride  and  ostentation,  and  vainglory  in  himself.  He  had  said  in  the  words 
before  of  himself,  and  the  rest  of  believers,  "  That  in  all  these  things  we  are  more 
than  conquerors."  This  was  a  big  and  great  word,  and  it  might  seem  to  carry  a 
price  of  too  much  self-confidence  in  it.  Now,  therefore,  does  he  here  seasonably 
correct  it,  and  quaUfy  it,  "  Through  Him  that  loved  us."  So,  likewise,  Phil.  iv.  13, 
a  place  much  like  to  this  at  present,  there  he  says,  "  He  can  do  all  things."  He 
can  want  and  abound,  and  everything ;  well,  but  how  ?  "  Through  Christ  that 
strengthens  me."  Still  he  is  careful  of  this,  not  to  give  way  to  a  spirit  of  presump- 
tion. First,  it  is  a  thing  which  is  easy,  if  men  do  not  the  better  look  to  themselves. 
But  then  secondly,  it  is  again  very  dangerous,  and  it  is  that  which  the  children  of 
God  smart  for,  where  they  are  guilty  of  it.  Pride  and  presumption  in  assurance  is 
the  next  way  to  lose  assurance.  Now  in  the  next  place  we  may  take  notice  of  his 
expression,  in  the  substance  of  the  words  themselves,  "  Through  Him  that  loved 
us."  ' '  Through  Him  that  loved  us  "  !  Who  is  that  ?  namely,  Jesus  Christ.  And 
there  are  two  things  again  which  are  here  considerable  of  us.  First,  for  the 
description  of  Christ.  It  is  by  this  periphrasis,  of  ••  Him  that  loved  us,"  as  that 
indeed  whereby  He  is  best  of  all  known  unto  us ;  and  as  if  there  were  none  that 
loved  us  but  He  alone.  "  Who  loved  me,  and  gave  Himself  for  me  "  (Gal.  ii.  20). 
"  Who  loved  us,  and  washed  us  in  His  blood  "  (Rev.  i.  5).  "  Christ  loved  His  Church, 
and  gave  Himself  for  it,"  &c.  (Eph.  v.  25).  This  love  of  Christ  unto  us,  it  was 
manifested  in  sundry  particulars ;  that  wherein  it  first  showed  and  discovered 
itself  unto  us,  was  in  the  business  of  His  incarnation,  and  taking  of  our  nature 
upon  Him.  Especially  if  we  shall  further  consider  upon  what  terms,  and  in  what 
circumstances  He  took  it.  And  so  the  acts  of  His  mediatorship,  which  were  con- 
sequent  and  dependent  hereupon ;  they  were  the  expressions  of  the  same  love. 
There  are  two  reasons  especially  why  he  makes  use  of  this  expression  in  the  text, 
rather  than  of  any  other  besides.  First,  it  was  most  comprehensive ;  when  he  said, 
*•  He  that  loved  us,"  he  said  in  effect  everything  else.  He  that  was  born  for  us, 
that  died  for  us,  that  redeemed  us,  that  saved  us  ;  all  is  comprehended  in  Him  that 
loved  US,  because  that  all  these  things  were  the  effects  of  His  love.  Secondly,  &? 
it  was  the  most  comprehensive  expression,  it  was  also  the  most  proper  expression, 
and  pertinent  to  the  business  in  hand ;  for  he  had  made  mention  before  of  afiUc- 
tions  and  persecutions,  and  such  things  as  those  as  unable  to  separate  behevers 
from  the  love  of  Christ.  The  second  is  the  account,  or  cause,  of  victory  to  a 
Christian,  and  that  is  through  the  help  of  this  Person  thus  described.     Now  there 


OBAP.  Tin.)  ROMANS.  243 

are  three  ways  especially  whereby  Christ  does  accomplish  this  victory  for  us, 
and  help  us  to  be  partakers  of  it.  First,  I  say,  in  that  the  Spirit  of  Christ 
works  the  graces  and  abilities  themselves.  There  are  divers  graces  of  this 
natare  ;  as  to  instance  in  one  or  two  of  them.  First,  the  grace  of  faith, 
that  is  a  conquering  grace  (1  John  v.  4).  Secondly,  another  grace  is  self-denial; 
that  is  another  victorious  accomplishment.  The  best  way  for  any  man  to  get 
victory  over  his  aflflictions,  is  by  a  restrained  affection  to  his  comforts.  Thirdly, 
the  grace  of  humility.  As  there  is  nothing  which  is  nearer  ruin  than  pride,  so 
there  is  nothing  which  is  nearer  victory  than  humility.  God  Himself  resists  the 
proud,  pitches  battle  against  them  ;  but  He  gives  grace  to  the  humble,  and  succesa 
with  it.  Lastly,  the  grace  of  patience.  This  grapples  with  the  greatest  evils. 
Now  further,  He  does  also  upon  occasion  actuate  those  graces  in  us ;  and  thus  He 
helps  us  to  conquer  by  His  power.  Secondly,  as  by  His  Spirit,  so  by  His  example 
(1  Pet.  ii.  21).  Thirdly,  by  His  Word.  In  this  Christ  goes  forth  conquering  and 
to  conquer.  It  is  His  chariot  of  triumph  (2  Cor.  ii.  14).  "  Ye  are  strong,  and  the 
Word  of  God  abides  in  you  "  (1  John  ii.  14).  One  thing  more,  and  so  I  have  done . 
"Through  Him  that  loved  us."  These  words  may  be  taken  not  only  simply,  but 
reflexively,  and  by  way  of  reduplication ;  as  intimating  unto  us  whence  it  is  that 
Christ  does  enable  us  to  be  such  conquerors,  and  that  is  from  His  unspeakable  love. 
It  is  from  Him  that  loved  us ;  and  from  Him  so  far  forth  as  He  loved  us.  When 
it  is  said  here  from  His  love  ;  this  does  not  exclude  His  power,  but  supposes,  and 
it  takes  it  in ;  therefore  as  in  this  place  it  is  said,  "  Through  Christ  that  loves  us." 
So  again  in  another  place  it  is  said,  "Through  Christ  that  strengthens  us"; 
because  indeed  they  are  both  concomi  ant.  There  is  nothing  whatsoever  we  enjoy, 
if  we  be  true  believers,  but  we  enjoy  il  a ;  a  fruit  of  Christ's  love.  It  is  from  the 
love  of  Christ  that  He  afflicts  us,  and  it  is  from  the  love  of  Christ  a^^o  that  He 
strengthens  us  and  enables  us  to  endure  affliction.  It  is  not  from  common  provi- 
dence, but  from  special  favour ;  it  is  not  from  the  power  of  nature,  but  from  the 
privileges    and    prerogatives   of    grace.      (Thomas    Horton,    D.D.)  Christian 

heroes : — Conquerors,  although  victorious,  are  often  all  but  defeated.      The  battlo 
of  Waterloo  was  won  by  a  hair's  breadth.    Napoleon  said,  on  the  morning  of  the 
day  of  Waterloo,  "  We  have  ninety  out  of  a  hundred  chances."     The  conquering 
army  had  nothing  to  spare.     The  believer  in  Christ  has  many  foes  and  fiercer  to 
war  against,  but  he  has  no  doubt  as  to  the  result ;  and  when  the  battle  is  over  he 
has  a  surplus  of  force  by  which  he  could  conquer  still  worse  and  more  numerous 
enemies.    He  is  more  than  a  conqueror.     God  is  with  him,  and  he  cannot  fail. 
His  last  enemy  is  death,  to  which,  as  he  looks  it  in  the  face,  he  triumphantly , 
exclaims,  "  0  death,  where  is  thy  sting?    Thanks  be  unto  God  which  giveth  me 
the  victory  1 "        Through  trials  to  victory  : — When   Garibaldi  was  thrown  into 
prison  he  said,  "  Let  fifty  Garibaldis  be  thrown  into  prison,  but  let  Kome  be  free." 
This  spirit  set  Italy  on  fire.    When  he  went  before  a  crowd  of  young  men  to  appeal  , 
for  recruits,  they  asked  what  he  had  to  offer  as  inducements.    The  old  man  rephed,  I 
"  Poverty,  hardship,  battles,  wounds,  and — victory."    They  caught  his  enthusiasm, ' 
threw  their  hats  into  the  air,  and  enlisted  on  the  spot. 

Vers.  38,  39.  For  I  am  persuaded  that  neither  death  nor  life  .  .  .  shall  be  able 
to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God  wMch  is  in  Christ  Jesus.— The  best  persuasion : — 
A  visitor  said  to  a  poor  wounded  soldier,  who  lay  dying  in  the  hospital,  "  What 
Church  are  you  of?"  "Of  the  Church  of  Christ,"  he  replied.  "I  mean,  what 
persuasion  are  you  of  ?  "  "  Persuasion  !  "  said  the  dying  man,  as  he  looked  heaven- 
ward, beaming  with  love  to  the  Saviour,  "  I  am  persuaded,  that  neither  death,  nor 
life,  nor  angel;^,  nor  principalities,  nor  powers,  nor  things  present,  nor  things  to 
come,  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus." 
Love's  triumph: — These  rapturous  words  are  the  climax  of  the  apostle's  long 
demonstration  that  the  gospel  is  "  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation."  His  argu- 
ment started  with  sombre,  sad  words  about  man's  sinfulness ;  like  some  stream 
rising  among  black  and  barren  cliffs,  or  melancholy  moorlands,  and  foaming  through 
narrow  rifts  in  gloomy  ravines,  it  reaches  at  last  fertile  lands,  and  flows  calm,  the 
sunlight  dancing  on  its  broad  surface,  till  it  loses  itself  at  last  in  the  unfathomable 
ocean  of  the  love  of  God.  We  are  told  that  the  biblical  view  of  human  nature  is  too 
dark.  Well,  the  important  question  is  not  whether  it  be  dark,  but  whether  it  be 
true.  Certainly,  a  part  of  it  is  very  dark.  The  picture  of  what  men  are,  painted  at 
the  beginning  of  this  Epistle,  is  black  like  a  canvas  of  Eembrandt's.  But  to  get  the 
whole  doctrine,  we  have  to  see  what  men  may  become.     Christianity  begins  indeed 


244  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vni. 

with,  "  There  is  none  that  doeth  good,  no,  not  one,"  but  it  ends  with  this  victoriona 
psean,  which  tella  us  that  the  love  of  God  is — I.  Unaffected  by  the  extbemest 
CHANGES  OP  OTJK  CONDITION.  1.  The  apostle  begins  his  catalogue  of  vanquished 
foes  by  a  pair  of  opposites,  "  neither  death  nor  life,"  which  cover  the  whole  ground, 
and  represent  the  extremes  of  change  which  can  befaU  us.  K  these  two  stations, 
so  far  from  each  other,  are  equally  near  to  God's  love,  then  no  intermediate  point 
can  be  far  from  it.  "  Whether  we  live,  we  live  unto  the  Lord  ;  and  whether  we 
die,  we  die  unto  the  Lord."  His  love  to  us  makes  no  account  of  that  mightiest  of 
changes.  How  should  it  be  affected  by  slighter  ones  ?  The  distance  of  a  star  is 
measured  by  the  apparent  change  in  its  position,  as  seen  from  different  points  of 
the  earth's  surface  or  orbit.  But  this  great  light  stands  steadfast  in  our  heaven, 
nor  moves  a  hair's  breadth,  nor  pours  a  feebler  ray  on  us,  whether  we  look  up  to  it 
from  the  midsummer  of  busy  life,  or  from  the  midwinter  of  death.  2.  Of  course 
the  confidence  of  immortality  is  implied  in  this  thought.  Death  does  not  affect 
the  essential  vitality  of  the  soul ;  so  it  does  not  affect  the  outflow  of  God's  love  to 
that  souL  It  is  a  change  of  condition  and  circumstance,  and  no  more.  3.  How 
this  thought  contrasts  with  the  saddest  aspect  of  the  power  of  death  1  Death 
unclasps  our  hands  from  the  closest,  dearest  grasp,  parts  soul  and  body,  loosens 
every  bond  of  society ;  but  there  is  one  bond  which  his  "  abhorred  shears  "  cannot 
cut.  Their  edge  is  turned  on  it.  One  Hand  holds  us  in  a  grasp  which  the  flesh- 
less  fingers  of  death  in  vain  strive  to  loosen.  The  separator  becomes  the  uniter ; 
he  rends  us  apart  from  the  world  that  he  may  "  bring  us  to  God."  The  love 
filtered  by  drops  on  us  in  life  is  poured  upon  us  in  a  flood  in  death  I  H.  Undivebted 
FBOM  ns  BY  ANY  OTHER  OEDEB  OF  BEINGS.  "  Nor  angcls,  nor  principalities,  nor 
powers."  The  supposition  which  is,  in'leed,  an  impossible  one,  that  these  minis- 
tering spirits  should  so  forget  their  mission  and  contradict  their  nature  as  to  seek 
to  bar  us  out  from  the  love  which  it  is  their  chiefest  joy  to  bring  to  us  ;  and  its 
very  impossibility  gives  energy  to  his  conclusion  (see  also  Gal.  i.  8),  preaching 
another  gospel  than  that  which  he  had  preached  to  them.  The  general  thought 
implies — 1.  The  utter  powerlessness  of  any  third  party  in  regard  to  the  relations 
between  our  souls  and  God.  We  have  to  do  with  Him  alone.  These  two,  God 
and  the  soul,  have  to  "  transact,"  as  if  there  were  no  other  beings  in  the  universe. 
(1)  Angels,  principalities,  &c.,  may  behold  with  sympathetic  joy,  and  minister 
blessing  in  many  ways ;  but  the  decisive  act  of  union  between  God  and  the  soul  they 
can  neither  effect  nor  prevent.  (2)  And  as  for  them,  so  for  men  around  us  ;  the 
limits  of  their  power  to  harm  us  are  soon  set.  They  may  shut  us  out  from  human 
love  by  calumnies,  and  annoy  us  in  a  thousand  ways  ;  they  may  build  a  wall  around 
us,  and  imprison  us  from  many  a  joy  and  fair  prospect :  but  they  cannot  put  a  roof 
on  it  to  keep  out  the  sweet  influences  from  above,  or  hinder  us  from  looking  up  to 
the  heavens.  Nobody  can  come  between  us  and  God  but  ourselves.  2.  These 
blessed  spirits  do  not  absorb  and  intercept  His  love.  The  planet  nearest  the  sun  is 
saturated  with  fiery  brightness,  but  the  rays  pass  on  to  each  of  the  sister  spheres 
in  its  turn,  and  travel  away  outwards  to  where  the  remotest  of  them  all  rolls  in  its 
far-off  orbit.  Like  that  poor  woman  who  could  lay  her  fingers  on  the  hem  of 
Christ's  garment,  notwithstanding  the  thronging  multitude,  we  can  reach  our  hands 
through  all  the  crowd,  or  rather  He  reaches  His  strong  hnnd  to  us  and  heals  and 
blesses  us.  All  the  guests  are  fed  full  at  that  great  table.  One's  gain  is  not 
another's  loss.  The  multitudes  sit  on  the  green  grass,  and  the  last  man  of  the 
last  fifty  gets  as  much  as  the  first ;  and  more  remains  than  fed  them  all.  This 
healing  fountain  is  not  exhausted  of  its  curative  power  by  the  early  comers.  III. 
Eaised  above  the  POWER  OF  TIME.  "  Nor  things  present,  nor  things  to  come." 
We  had  first  a  pair  of  opposites,  and  then  a  triplet ;  now  again  a  pair  of  opposites, 
again  followed  by  a  triplet.  The  effect  of  this  is  to  divide  tbe  whole  into  two,  and 
to  throw  the  first  and  second  classes  more  closely  together,  as  also  the  third  and 
fourth.  Time  and  space,  these  two  mysterious  ideas,  which  work  so  fatally  on  all 
human  love,  are  powerless  here.  1.  The  great  revelation  of  God,  on  which  the 
whole  of  Judaism  was  built,  was  that  made  to  Moses  of  the  name  '•  I  am  that  I 
am."  And  parallel  was  that  symbol  of  the  bush,  which  signified  not  the  continu- 
ance of  Israel,  unharmed  by  the  fiery  furnace  of  persecution,  but  tbe  eternity  of 
Israel's  God.  Both  proclaimed  the  same  great  truth  of  self-derived,  self-determined, 
timeless,  undecaying  being.  2.  And  this  eternity  of  being  is  no  mere  metaphysical 
abstraction.  It  is  eternity  of  love,  for  God  is  love.  We  know  of  earthly  loves 
which  cannot  die,  and  we  have  to  thank  God  for  such  instances  of  love  stroiiKer 
than  death,  which  make  it  easier  for  us  to  believe  in  the  unchanging  duration 


OEAP.  Tm.]  ROMANS.  S45 

of  His.  But  we  know,  too,  of  love  that  can  change,  and  we  know  that  all  love 
must  part.  How  blessed  then  to  know  of  a  love  which  cannot  change  or  die  1  The 
past,  the  present  and  the  future  are  all  the  same  to  Him.  The  whole  of  what  He 
has  been  to  any  past,  He  is  to  us  to-day.  3.  So  we  may  bring  the  blessedness  of 
all  the  past  into  the  present,  and  calmly  face  the  misty  future,  sure  that  it  cannot 
rob  us  of  His  love.  Looking  on  all  the  flow  of  ceaseless  change  of  earthly  affection, 
we  can  lift  up  with  gladness,  heightened  by  the  contrast,  the  triumphant  song  of 
the  ancient  Church,  "  Oh,  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord :  for  He  is  good :  because 
His  mercy  endureth  for  ever  I "  IV.  Present  everywhere.  The  apostle  ends 
with,  "  nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any  other  creature,"  as  if  he  had  gut  impatient 
of  the  enumeration  of  impotencies,  and  having  named  the  outside  boundaries  in 
space,  flings,  as  it  were,  with  one  rapid  toss,  into  that  large  room  the  whole  that  it 
can  contain,  and  triumphs  over  it  all.  As  the  former  clause  proclaimed  the  power- 
lessness  of  time,  so  this  proclaims  the  powerlessness  of  that  other  great  mystery  of 
creatural  life  which  we  call  space.  Height  or  depth,  it  matters  not.  That  diffusive 
love  diffuses  itself  equally  in  all  directions.  The  distance  from  the  centre  is  equal 
to  Zenith  or  to  Nadir.  Here  we  have  the  same  process  applied  to  that  idea  of 
omnipresence  as  was  applied  in  the  former  clause  to  the  idea  of  eternity.  That 
thought,  so  hard  to  grasp  with  vividness,  and  not  altogether  a  glad  one  to  a  sinful 
Boul,  is  all  softened  and  glorified,  as  some  solemn  Alpine  cliff  of  bare  rock  is  when 
the  tender  morning  light  glows  en  it,  when  it  is  thought  of  as  the  omnipresence  of 
love.  "  Thou,  God,  seest  me,"  may  be  a  stem  word,  if  the  God  who  sees  be  but  a 
mighty  Maker  or  a  righteous  Judge.  But  how  different  it  all  is  when  we  can  cast 
over  the  marble  whiteness  of  that  solemn  thought  the  warm  hue  of  life.  In  that 
great  ocean  of  the  Divine  love  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being,  floating  in  it 
like  some  sea  flower  which  spreads  its  filmy  beauty  and  waves  its  long  tressea  in 
the  depths  of  mid-ocean.  The  sound  of  its  waters  is  ever  in  our  ears,  and  above, 
beneath,  around  us,  its  mighty  currents  run  evermore.  We  need  not  fear  the 
omnipresence  of  love,  nor  the  omniscience  which  knows  us  altogether,  and  loves 
us  even  as  it  knows.  Bather  we  shall  be  glad  that  we  are  ever  in  His  presence. 
Conclusion :  1.  The  recognition  of  this  triumphant  sovereignty  of  love  over  all 
these  real  and  supposed  antagonists  makes  us,  too,  lords  over  them,  and 
dehvers  us  from  the  temptations  which  some  of  them  present  us  to  separate  our- 
selves from  the  love  of  God.  They  all  become  our  servants  and  helpers,  uniting  ua 
to  that  love.  So  we  are  set  free  from  the  dread  of  death  and  from  the  distractions 
incident  to  life.  So  we  are  delivered  from  superstitious  dread  of  an  unseen  world, 
and  from  craven  fear  of  men.  So  we  are  emancipated  from  absorption  in  the 
present  and  from  careful  thought  for  the  future.  So  we  are  at  home  everywhere, 
and  every  corner  of  the  universe  is  to  us  one  of  the  many  mansions  of  our  Father's 
house.  "All  things  are  yours,  .  .  .  and  ye  are  Christ's;  and  Christ  is  God's." 
2.  But  remember  that  this  love  of  God  is  "in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord."  Love 
illimitable,  all-pervasive,  eternal ;  yes,  but  a  love  which  has  a  channel  and 
a  course,  love  which  has  a  method  and  a  process  by  which  it  pours  itself 
over  the  world.  In  Christ  the  love  of  God  is  all  centred  and  embodied,  that 
it  may  be  imparted  to  all  sinful  and  hungry  hearts,  even  as  burning  coals 
are  gathered  on  a  hearth  that  they  may  give  warmth  to  all  that  are  in  the 
house.      (A.  Maclaren,   D.D.)  Persuaded    of   the    constancy  of   the  Divine 

love: — We  begin  with  the  form  of  protestation,  "I  am  persuaded,"  where  the 
apostle,  while  he  speaks  of  the  state  of  a  true  believer  in  reference  to  grace  and 
salvation,  speaks  Of  it  as  a  matter  of  certainty  and  full  persuasion.  There  are  two 
mEumer  of  ways  especially,  whereby  we  come  to  be  assured  of  our  salvation.  1.  By 
the  inward  persuasion  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  our  own  consciences.  2.  We  come  to  be 
assured  of  our  condition,  from  the  reflection  of  conscience  itself,  our  rejoicing  is 
this  (2  Cor.  i.  12  ;  1  John  iii.  21).  The  second  is  the  matter  of  it,  or  thing  itself 
protested ;  and  that  is  much  one  with  that  which  he  had  before  harped  upon, 
"  That  nothing  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God  in  Christ."  Now 
this  again  is  here  laid  down  in  these  two  verses  together,  two  manner  of  ways. 
First,  by  an  enumeration  or  induction  of  the  several  particulars ;  and  secondly,  by 
a  winding-up  of  all  together  in  one  general  conclusion.  First,  death  shall  not  do 
it ;  death,  it  makes  a  great  separation,  it  separates  the  soul  from  the  body,  two 
friends  which  have  been  a  great  while  joined  together,  and  it  separates  a  man  from 
the  world.  Oh  1  but  for  aJl  this  it  does  not  separate  a  beUever  from  Christ.  First, 
for  the  sools  of  God's  children  ;  these  are  not  separated  from  Him  by  death.  Not 
separated  ?    Nay,  they  are  so  much  the  more  conjoined.     St.  Paul  desired  to  be 


246  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tm. 

dissolved,  that  he  might  be  with  Christ  (Phil.  i.  23 ;  2  Cor.  v.  6,  8).    And  so  like- 
wise for  the  bodies  of  Christians ;  these  they  are  not  separated  from  Christ  neither, 
even  when  they  lie  in  the  grave,  they  are  very  accountable  in  the  eyes  of  God,  and 
He  has  a  special  care  of  them  and  regard  unto  them.    The  very  dust  of  God's 
people  is  precious,  and  their  very  bones  are  numbered  by  Him.    No,  nor  secondly 
again  by  life;  that  is  another  part  of  this  link.    Life,  it  shall  not  prove  hurtful  or 
prejudicial  to  the  people  of  God.    First,  not  the  good  of  life — I  mean  the  out-ward 
good,  and  comfortableness  of  it.    There  is  a  great  deal  of  hazard  and  danger  in 
this.     First,  as  it  is  an  occasion  to  make  men  to  be  so  much  the  more  in  love  with 
the  world.    But  God's  children  are  delivered  from  it,  as  having  their  affections 
weaned  in  them.     A  second  evil  of  life  in  the  prosperous  part  of  it  is,  that  it  makes 
a  man  to  defer  his  repentance  and  conversion  to  God.     Thirdly,  life  is  thus  far 
dangerous,  as  it  keeps  a  man  from  suffering  for  Christ ;  the  more  that  any  man  has 
to  lose,  the  less  commonly  is  he  willing  to  it.     So  again,  as  to  the  evils  of  life,  ye 
may  take  it  there  also,  that  life  in  this  sense  is  not  prejudicial  to  God's  servants, 
but  sanctified  to  them.    First,  as  it  is  a  time  of  sinning,  for  so  this  present  life  ifl, 
and  therein  irksome  to  God's  children.     Secondly,  as  it  is  a  time  of  misery.    And 
thirdly,  as  the  time  of  deferring  of  their  reward ;  as  long  as  God's  children  live 
they  are  kept  out  of  their  inheritance.     Thus  we  see  how  God's  children  have  an 
interest  in  life  and  death  both,  as  making  for  their  advantage,  and  it  does  belong 
unto  them,  as  it  is  elsewhere  expressed  (Rom.  xiv.  8).    The  second  is,  "  Nor  angels, 
nor  principalities,  nor  powers."    First,  not  the  good  angels.     Why  ?  Whoever  sus- 
pected them  ?  What  need  was  there  for  the  apostle  to  put  in  that  ?    I  answer  upon  a 
double  account.    First,  by  way  of  supposition.     The  apostle  seems  to  argue  here, 
as  he  does  also  in  another  place,   "  Though  we,  or  an  angel  from  heaven,"  &c. 
(Gal.  i.  8).    Not  as  if  they  were  likely  to  endeavour  it,  but  if  they  should  do  it,  it 
would  be  to  no  purpose,  for  they  should  never  effect  it.     The  good  angels  may  be 
conceived  to  be  possibly  prejudicial  to  the  saints  and  servants  of  God  ministerially, 
and  in  reference  to  their  office  ;  and  that  is,  by  the  withdrawing  of  their  help  to  us, 
or  as  being  instruments  of  inflicting  punishment  and  vengeance  upon  us ;  but  thus 
now  they  are  not  to  God's  elect,  for  they  are  still  active  for  them  to  good  upon  all 
occasions.     We  may  understand  it  of , the  devils.     Thus  (Eev.  xii.  8)  it  is  said  that 
Michael  and  his  angels  fought,  and  the  dragon  and  his  angels.    It  is  most  certain 
that  the  devU,  that  is,  the  chief  and  principal  of  them,  hath  very  great  power  for  a 
while  permitted  unto  him,  as  to  the  trouble  of  God's  servants.    I  will  instance  in 
one  particular  amongst  the  rest,  and  that  is  his  casting  of  evil  and  troublesome 
fancies  and  conceits  into  the  mind,  and  that  sometimes  with  that  force  and 
violence,  as  that  the  mind  shall  not  be  able  to  resist  them  or  keep  them  out. 
These  are  those  kind  of  thoughts  wherewith  the  devil  does  oftentimes  disturb  and 
perplex  the  minds  of  Christians;  but  that  these  are  no  way  prejudicial  to  them  in 
matter  of  guilt,  or  arguments  for  the  questions  of  God's  love,  or  real  ground  of 
disquieting  to  them,  will  appear  unto  us  upon  these  considerations.     First,  from 
their  manner  of  acting  and  proceeding  in  the  soul  itself,  wherein  there  is  neither 
assent  nor  consent  given  onto  them,  but  only  a  bare  apprehension  of  them. 
Secondly,  this  may  also  appear  from  the  suddenness  and  quickness  of  them ;  for 
they  are  commonly  darted  into  the  mind  without  any  connection  or  dependence, 
whereas  a  man's  own  proper  thoughts  are  with  more  leisure,  and  deliberation,  and 
subordination  of  one  thing  to  another.    Thirdly,  from  the  frequency  and  multi- 
plicity of  them,  together  with  their  unseasonableness ;  for  they  may  be  a  thousand 
times  in  a  day  passing  as  lightning  into  an  house  from  one  end  of  it  to  another, 
and  in  continual  motion.    Fourthly,  from  the  quaUty  and  condition  of  them,  aa 
being  contrary  to  the  very  light  of  nature,  and  the  habitual  frame  and  disposition 
of  the  soul,  which  of  itself  is  considerable  in  it.     The  main  ground  and  foundation 
of  this  restrainedness  of  Satan's  power  is  intimated  to  us  in  the  text,  and  that  is  in 
reference  to  Christ ;  it  is  the  love  of  God  in  Him,  and  therefore  Satan  cannot 
separate  us  from  it ;  and  Christ  is  considerable  of  us  under  a  double  notion,  of  an 
head,  and  of  an  advocate.     The  third  is  neither  things  present  nor  things  to  come. 
These  shall  not  be  able  neither  to  separate  us  from  God's  love  in  Christ.    First, 
not  things  present ;  they  shall  not  be  able  to  do  it,  whether  we  take  it  in  good 
things  or  in  evil.    This  is  a  point  very  satisfactory  in  the  worst  times  that  are.    No, 
nor  yet,  secondly,  "  Things  to  come."    These  shall  not  do  it  neither.     "  Things 
to  come  " — they  are  such  things  as  are  hid  from  men's  discerning,  and  they  know 
not  what  to  make  of  them  ;  yea,  but  thus  far  they  are  certain,  as  they  shall  make 
for  the  good  of  God's  people ;  and  therefore  in  the  place  before  cited  (1  Cor.  iii. 


OBAP.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  247 

M),  as  things  present  are  made  a  part  of  their  portion,  and  said  to  be  theirs ; 
80  are  things  to  come  likewise.  And  so  indeed  upon  the  point,  all  things  in  the 
full  latitude  and  extent  of  being.  If  we  speak  of  things  to  come,  but  as  to  this 
life,  and  as  taken  under  the  notion  of  uncertainty,  God's  children  are  not  at  a  loss 
here,  but  upon  very  good  terms ;  but  then  if  we  speak  of  things  to  come  as  to  the 
life  following,  and  as  under  the  notion  of  certainty,  here  they  are  infinitely  and  tran- 
scendently  glorious.  "Things  to  come  " — these  are  the  greatest  interest  and  concern- 
ment of  believers,  and  such  as  above  all  others  they  do  most  reckon  and  depend  upon. 
It  is  the  great  disadvantage  and  prejudices  of  men  of  the  world  that  their  happiness 
it  is  con&ied  to  things  present.  (Thomas  Horton,  D.  D.)  The  triumphant  hope 
of  the  Christian: — Who  can  look  upon  the  sun  setting  in  the  west  and  not  be 
silent  with  wonder  ?  One  who  sees  Mont  Blanc  from  the  Lake  of  Geneva  for  the 
first  time,  lifting  itself  in  awful  splendour  and  glory,  does  not  break  forth  into 
words,  but  gazes  silently.  So  there  are  texts  which,  like  the  one  before  us,  subdue 
as  to  silence.  I.  This  cbownino  love  op  God  is  made  known  to  us  in  the  Bible. 
The  sea  swelling  with  its  tides,  this  great  earth  revolving  on  its  axis,  and  rushing 
forward  in  its  orbit  the  systems  of  worlds,  all  speak  of  the  power  of  God.  That  He 
is  a  God  of  beauty  we  read  in  the  leaf,  the  flower,  the  sea  shell.  Bat  we  do  not 
find  out  from  nature  that  God  loves.  When  we  understand  this  love  of  God,  then 
are  we  ready  to  understand  redemption.  II.  This  love  fastens  itself  upon  human 
BEIN03.  Compared  with  the  mighty  forces  of  nature,  how  weak  we  are  ;  compared 
with  eternity,  how  brief  is  life.  What  is  man  that  God  should  observe  him,  and, 
much  less,  love  him  ?  Then  we  are  so  severed  from  God  in  capacity  of  mind,  and  so 
impure.  We  can  readily  believe  that  God  loves  the  Church,  or  this  and  that  eminent 
Christian,  or  the  martyrs,  but  we  doubt  concerning  ourselves.  So  many  a  Christian 
walks  this  world  with  timid  apprehensions  instead  of  the  assurance  of  one  who 
walks  a  world  he  knows  his  Father  rules.  If  he  realised  that  God  loved  him,  then 
would  he  be  joyous  and  triumphant — be  strong  for  any  service.  III.  The  eteknity 
OF  this  love.  We  feel  at  times  that  God  loves  us.  But  is  this  love  eternal  or 
fleeting?  Is  it  fastened  upon  our  personaUty,  or  upon  our  changing  disposition? 
If  we  have  been  deceived  in  the  character  of  one  we  love,  or  if  that  character  has 
undergone  a  change,  our  love  changes.  Now  if  there  is  a  radical  cbange  or  degra- 
dation of  character,  God's  love  may  change;  but  aside  from  such  change,  it  is  not 
pDssible  that  anything  can  produce  a  change  in  the  love  of  God.  The  assurance  of 
this  is  the  wine  of  life,  poured  from  the  chalice  in  God's  hand,  into  our  fainting 
hearts.  1.  Death  cannot  separate  from  the  love  of  God.  We  go  with  a  friend  up 
to  the  last  moment  on  earth.  We  see  the  mind  still  active,  the  memory  clear,  the 
noble  impulses  of  the  soul  still  predominant.  Do  you  suppose  that  he  who  built 
the  cathedral  is  ended  while  the  work  of  his  hand  calls  forth  the  admiration  of 
mankind  ?  We  have  the  assurance  in  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  that  death  does 
not  destroy  the  soul.  Eather  it  sets  the  soul  free  from  the  lassitude  and  iuactive- 
ness  of  the  body.  The  body  hampers  and  manacles  the  soul.  Now,  can  you  conceive 
that  death,  which  so  adds  to  the  spirit,  can  separate  from  the  love  of  God  ?  Death 
does  not  affect  our  love  for  our  departed  friends,  save  to  augment  it.  How  much 
more  will  it  but  augment  the  love  of  God.  2.  But  may  not  life  ?  Life  may  reach 
its  fourscore  years  and  work  many  changes.  The  vigour  is  gone,  and  the  beauty  ; 
decrepitude  has  come.  But  what  is  hfe  to  eternity  ?  A  dewdrop  to  the  ocean ; 
less  than  a  single  modest  daisy  to  the  innumerable  worlds  above.  Shall  the 
decrepitude  of  this  brief  life  stand  against  an  eternity  without  decrepitude  ?  No 
changes  wrought  in  the  circumstances  of  life  can  affect  the  love  of  God.  These  are 
as  nothing  to  the  God  of  infinite  resources.  To  Him,  what  matters  it  whether  we 
dwell  in  a  palace  or  a  cottage  ?  The  favour  is  rather  on  the  side  of  those  who  are 
in  adverse  circumstances.  We  love  those  who  struggle  more  than  those  who  enjoj  ; 
those  who  suffer  patiently  more  than  those  who  reign  in  royal  splendour.  Christ, 
when  in  the  world,  did  not  take  His  apostles  from  among  the  rulers  ;  He  made  His 
abode  with  the  poor  rather  than  the  rich.  Nr  ;  life  cannot  bring  from  the  love  of 
God,  but  rather  brings  us  nearer  because  of  its  iriale  temctations,  and  weaknesses. 
3.  But  may  not  other  powers  ?  There  are  mighty  oneb  ab?^^.  May  not  these 
absorb  the  love  of  God  ?  No  ;  He  takes  care  of  the  least  as  oi  the  greatest.  No 
star  staggers  in  its  course  and  halts  to  be  caught  in  the  grasp  of  God  and  held  in 
its  place.  All  the  universe  goes  on  evenly,  quietly,  surely.  His  love  estrmt  be 
exhausted  any  more  than  His  power.  Weakness  makes  more  certain  thii  love. 
He  sees  us  struggling  against  teraptation  which  angels  cannot  experience.  Nay 
more,  this  love  came  to  us  through  Jesus,  His  only  Son.     4.  May  not  time  produca 


248  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  vm. 


this  separation  ?  In  the  unrolling  cycles,  may  not  changes  be  wrought,  powers 
developed,  &c. ?  No;  here  come  in  the  unchantjing  nature  and  the  eternity  of 
God.  The  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.  Yesterday  just  gone,  to-day  which 
is  here,  and  for  ever — oh,  what  a  launch  of  thought  1  5.  May  not  space  cause  this 
separation?  When  we  think  of  the  vast  distances  in  the  universe;  that  the 
diameter  of  this  system  is  seven  hundred  million  miles  ;  that  astronomers,  by  an 
approximate  parallax,  show  us  that  yonder  star  is  so  far  away  that  it  would  take 
its  light,  travelling  twelve  millions  of  miles  a  minute,  seventy-two  years  to  reach  ns ; 
that  the  unresolved  nebula  is  so  far  away  that  its  light  would  not  reach  us  for 
seven  hundred  thousand  years.  When  we  think  of  these  vast  spaces,  have  we  not 
reason  to  be  fearful  that  there  may  be  something  in  them  that  can  separate  us 
from  God's  love  ?  No,  God  is  everywhere  Master.  Conclusion :  1.  What  a  terrifio 
power  is  sin,  since  it  can  separate  us  from  this  love  of  God!  More  powerful 
than  life  or  death,  than  all  the  universe.  2.  What  a  privilege  is  this  of 
the  Christian  to  be  safe  in  the  love  of  God  beyond  all  power  of  harm,  to 
have  a  portion  with  God  for  ever.  {R.  S.  Storrs,  D.D.)  Things  that  cannot 
separate  from  the  love  of  God : — First,  neither  the  height  of  worldly  advancement 
nor  the  depth  of  worldly  abasement.  First,  honour  and  advancement,  dignity  a<id 
height  of  place  or  preferment,  that  shall  not  do  it.  It  is  that  which  it  sometimes 
does  to  some  kind  of  persons,  when  they  are  not  more  watchful  of  themselves ; 
high-standing  it  is  apt  to  make  men  giddy,  especially  when  they  shall  look  down 
upon  others  which  are  far  inferior  to  them.  And  there  are  great  temptations  which 
are  now  and  then  attending  thereupon,  of  pride,  and  scornfulness,  and  security, 
and  self-confidence,  and  the  like.  A  child  of  God  he  shall  not  be  afraid  of  that 
which  is  high,  as  we  find  the  phrase  used  in  another  sense,  and  upon  another 
occasion,  in  Eccles.  xii.  5.  And  so  for  abasement  and  lowness  of  condition  ;  ho 
does  not  suffer  from  that  neither,  as  St.  Paul  says  of  himself  in  another  place  :  "Ha 
knows  how  to  abound,  and  he  knows  to  be  abased  ;  to  be  full,  and  to  be  hungry ;  to 
abound,  and  to  suffer  need."  There  is  a  depth  of  affliction  as  well  as  an  height  of 
prosperity.  And  so  for  all  other  kinds  and  conditions  of  abasements  of  reproach, 
and  contempt,  and  ignominy,  which  is  cast  upon  them ;  these  things  they  are 
digested  by  them.  He  that  is  low  in  his  own  eyes  he  can  be  content  to  be  low  in 
another's.  Secondly,  not  the  height  of  spiritual  enlargement,  nor  the  depth  of 
spiritual  desertions.  Spiritual  enlargement,  it  is  an  height,  and  a  very  great  one. 
Neither  is  the  doctrine  of  assurance  a  doctrine  of  pride ;  neither  is  the  state  of 
assurance  a  state  of  pride.  So  again,  as  to  spiritual  desertions  ;  the  depth  of  that 
shall  not  hinder  neither.  This  in  Scripture  is  sometimes  called  a  depth,  as  in 
Psa.  cxxx.  1.  Thirdly,  take  this  height  and  depth  here  spoken  of,  as  to  the 
mysteries,  whether  of  faith  or  providence,  and  ye  shall  find  that  neither  these  shall 
prove  any  disparagement  to  God's  servants.  Lastly,  neither  height  nor  depth ; 
that  is,  neither  things  above  nor  things  below.  It  is  *a  large  and  comprehensive 
expression  which  the  Scripture  uses  in  suchlike  oases,  when  it  will  take  in  all,  and 
so  speak  of  anything,  as  to  leave  nothing  out.  Yet  if  we  will  take  it  more 
restrainedly  and  particularly,  we  may  take  it  thus.  First,  take  it  as  to  the  influ- 
ences of  Heaven.  These  are  such  as  many  people,  especially  now  at  this  time,  have 
a  great  regard  unto,  and  that  a  great  deal  more  than  to  other  things  which  are  more 
to  be  regarded.  But  those  which  are  the  servants  of  God  are  above  all  these  heights. 
Those  who  are  the  children  of  God,  and  careful  to  walk  in  His  fear,  they  shall 
not  need  to  be  "  dismayed  at  the  signs  of  heaven  "  (Jer.  x.  2).  And  so  likewise  we 
may  take  it  as  to  the  earth  and  the  depths  thereof.  How  many  dangers  are  we 
here  incident  to,  and  yet  graciously  preserved  from  them  ?  Now  while  the  apostle 
is  thus  curious  in  this  exact  enumeration  of  particulars,  and  such  as  are  so  full  and 
comprehensive,  there  are  two  things  which  we  may  gather  from  it :  First,  the 
weakness  of  our  faith,  especially  in  times  of  temptation,  which  the  Spirit  of  God  is 
fain  to  provide  for,  by  such  a  complete  dealing  with  us.  Secondly,  it  shows  the 
certainty  of  our  own  salvation.  Seeing  none  of  these  things  fore-mentioned  are 
able  to  hinder  us,  we  may  from  hence  take  notice  of  the  sureness  of  the  thing 
itself  against  all  opposition.  The  second  is,  the  general  conclusion  or  main  doctrine 
itself,  and  that  is,  "  that  nothing  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God 
in  Christ  Jesus. "  Wherein  again  we  have  two  branches  more  :  First,  the  firmness 
or  immovableness  of  God's  affection.  That  nothing  whatsoever  shall  be  able  to 
separate  aa  from  it.  This  is  agreeable  to  the  whole  current  of  Scripture  (Psa. 
cxxv.  1 ;  Heb.  xii.  28).  Now  the  firmness  and  stability  of  God's  people,  in  regard 
of  their  spiritual  estate,  may  be  thus  surrendered  :  First,  from  the  promise  of  God ; 


OHAP.  vm.]  SOMAN S.  249 

h  is  a  part  of  His  gracious  ooveiuuit  with  them.  Secondly,  the  strength  and  power 
of  Christ,  that  does  likewise  lay  a  ground  for  this  truth ;  there  His  ability  joined 
to  God's  faithfulness,  and  the  power  of  God  joined  to  the  truth  of  God  (Heb.  vii. 
26).  Thirdly,  it  may  be  further  evinced  from  the  nature  of  saving  grace  itself,  and 
the  work  of  regeneration,  which  is  a  constant  and  abiding  principle,  and  so  is 
signified  to  as  to  be  in  1  John  iii.  9.  Take  anything  else  in  the  world,  besides  true 
grace  indeed,  and  ye  shall  find  an  uncertainty  in  it ;  let  it  be  education,  or  custom, 
or  natural  conscience,  or  the  credit  of  religion ;  none  of  these  things  are  sure  to 
hold  or  to  continue  long.  But  now  for  the  power  of  godliness,  and  a  true  gracious 
heart  in  good  earnest,  it  is  such  as  is  lasting  and  remaining.  Fourthly,  a  Chris- 
tian's unmovableness  is  confirmed  from  the  intercession  of  Christ.  Whatever  it 
is  that  Christ  asks  in  the  behalf  of  believers,  it  is  most  undoubtedly  granted  unto 
them.  Fifthly,  from  the  nature  of  election,  which  is  a  firm,  and  unchangeable 
decree ;  thus  in  ver.  33  of  this  present  chapter,  ' '  Who  shall  lay  anything  to  the 
charge  of  God's  elect  ?  "  And  so  much  may  suffice  to  have  spoken  of  the  first 
particular  in  this  second  general,  which  is  the  firmness  or  immovableness  of  God's 
affection  considered  in  itself  ;  that  nothing  is  able  to  separate  true  Christians  and 
believers  from  His  love.  The  second  is  the  ground  or  conveyance  of  this  affection, 
and  that  is  expressed  in  these  words — "  Which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord."  First, 
He  is  the  conveyance  of  His  Father's  love  unto  us,  by  virtue  of  that  near  union  and 
relation  which  we  have  to  Him ;  forasmuch  as  we  are  very  members  incorporate 
into  Him,  and  made  one  with  Him.  Secondly,  Christ  is  also  the  conveyance  of 
the  Father's  love  to  us  meritoriously,  and  by  way  of  procurement;  Christ  has 
obtained  of  God  the  Father  to  love  us  together  with  Himself.  (Thomas  Horton, 
D.D.)  Faith' s  final  poean : — We  seem  to  have  been  climbing  up  Jacob's  ladder, 
all  through  this  magnificent  dissertation,  and  now  we  have  reached  its  summit. 
The  base  was  on  earth,  and  there  we  found  peace  with  God  through  our  Lord  Jesna 
Christ ;  the  summit  is  the  skies,  and  here  the  song  which  we  sing  is  one  of  enrap- 
tured triumph.  Christ  is  the  first  and  the  last  in  the  scale  of  the  Christian's 
boasting  and  joy.  It  is  through  Him  that  we  have.no  condemnation  ;  and  now  it 
is  in  Him  that  we  have  confidence  of  happiness  for  ever.  In  the  matter  of  our 
redemption  He  is  all  and  in  aU,  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega,  the  author  and  the 
finisher  of  our  faith.  I.  The  constancy  of  the  i,ove  op  God  to  them  that  abe 
IN  Christ  Jesus.  1.  We  are  the  objects  of  God's  love.  Now,  it  is  the  very  nature 
of  love,  in  its  truer  and  more  noble  forms,  to  be  constant.  "  Love  is  strong  as 
death.  Many  waters  cannot  quench  love,"  &a.  Love  is  not  mere  transient  senti- 
ment ;  it  is  a  passion  which  moves  with  innate  energy ;  of  all  moral  forces  the 
strongest.  You  may  torture  and  slay  a  man,  but  you  carmot  coerce  his  affections. 
Formidable  difficulties  may  oppose  his  love  in  its  course,  but  love  will  surmount 
them  or  perish  in  the  attempt.  There  may  be  un worthiness  on  the  part  of  its 
objects,  but  even  then  how  often  have  we  seen  a  mother's,  a  wife's,  a  daughter's 
love  burn  as  brightly  as  ever.  Love  can  accomplish  what  no  mechanical  or 
physical  force  can.  There  is  truth  in  the  quaint  old  fable,  which  represents  a 
traveller  pursuing  his  way  with  a  mantle  round  his  shoulders.  The  sun  and  the 
wind  contested  as  to  which  was  strong  enough  to  compel  the  wayfarer  to  abandon 
his  cherished  covering.  First,  Boreas  blew  his  fiercest  blast,  but  the  harder  he 
blew,  the  faster  did  the  traveller  bind  and  clasp  his  cloak.  Then  Sol  began  to  pour 
upon  his  head  his  melting  beams.  In  a  little  while  our  hero  freely  surrendered ; 
the  oppressive  garment  was  unwrapped,  and  loosened,  and  thrown  open,  and  finally 
flung  away  altogether.  The  wind  represents  physical  force,  and  the  sun  the  energy 
of  love.  Well,  now,  God  loves  us  ;  and  we  may  at  least  be  sure  of  this,  that  God's 
love  is  a  nobler  affection  than  any  human  love  whatever  (Isa.  xlix.  15 ;  Jer.  xxxi.3). 
2.  This  love  is  God's  love.  If  it  were  the  love  of  a  creature,  mighty  and  good,  we 
might  fairly  put  confidence  in  its  stability ;  but  now  we  see  it  to  be  that  of  the 
Creator,  ii  He  loves  us,  who  can  separate  us  from  His  love  ?  Look  at — (1)  The 
power  of  the  Almighty.  There  may  be  angels,  men,  heights,  depths,  things  present 
and  things  to  come ;  but  all  are  equally  powerless  against  the  Omnipotent.  None 
can  injure  whom  He  defends  ;  none  can  impoverish  whom  He  enriches.  (2)  The 
sovereignty  of  His  will  (Mai.  iii.  6).  God  knew  everything  about  as  before  He  set 
His  love  upon  us.  He  has  nothing  further  to  learn  concerning  as.  We  cannot 
surprise  Him  by  new  revelations  of  character.  He  elected  us  as  objects  of  His  love 
while  we  were  yet  sinners.  All  being  known  to  Him,  and  all  being  in  His  hands, 
surely  it  is  impossible  that  if  He  once  resolved  to  love  us,  He  could  ever  be  moved 
from  that  love.    8.  Qod's  love  is  in  Christ  Jesus  oar  Lord.     In  other  words,  it  Ib  a 


250  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  icaxe.  vm. 

love  whose  ontfiow  and  development  are  based  apon  the  redeeming  work  of  Christ, 
and  whose  constancy,  therefore,  is  guaranteed  and  assured  by  all  the  value  and 
validity  which  attach  to  that  work.    n.  The  cbeatxires  pbbsdmablt  hostilb  to 
THE  SAINTS.    1.  "  Death,"  whether  natural  or  by  violence,  may  sever  us  from  many 
comforts  and  companions,  but  not  from  Jesus  or  His  love.    On  the  contrary,  death 
brings  us  nearer  to  Christ  than  we  were  before.    When  we  die,  we  go  to  be  with 
Jesus,  which  is  far  better.    Death,  then,  is  an  enemy  converted  into  a  friend.    2. 
*'  Life."    It  is  often  a  more  perilous  thing  to  live  than  to  die.    But  let  us  not  fear 
life.     If  for  UB  to  die  would  be  gain,  for  us  to  live  is  Christ.     3.  "  Angels,  nor 
principalities,  nor  powers."    We  conceive  of  the  angels  as  divided  into  ranks; 
some  being  higher  and  more  powerful  than  the  rest.    But  whether  they  are  the 
ordinary  angels,  or  whether  they  be  the  captains  and  chieftains,  subordinate  or 
supreme,  of  the  angelic  creation,  all  alike  are  powerless  to  intercept  God's  love. 
But  suppose  it  possible  that  all  the  angels,  good  and  bad  together,  were  to  be  in 
J       league  against  us ;  suppose  that  the  malice  of  the  one  class  were  to  be  combined 
V       with  the  majesty  of  the  other,  we  should  still  be  secure,  invulnerable,  inviolable, 
and  nothing  they  could  do  should  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God.     4.  "  Things 
present."    Things  visible  are  all  our  present  surroundings  of  diflSculty  and  circum- 
stances of  trial.     These  are  enumerated,  in  some  measure,  in  the  former  verses ; 
but  God  loves  us  through  them  all.    He  will  not  suffer  us  to  be  tempted  beyond 
our  power  of  endurance,  but  does  with  every  exigency  open  a  door  for  our  escape. 
6.  "  Things  to  come."    We  often  forebode  evil,  and  dread  the  future.    But  things 
to  come  are  known  to  God ;  and  whatever  may  betide.  He  will  stand  by  us  to  the 
last.    As  our  days, our  strength  shall  be.    6.  "Height"  and  " depth."    Whatever 
high  thing  there  is,  or  whatever  low  thing,  it  need  not  alarm,  as  it  cannot  over- 
power us.    It  may  be  worldly  honour  or  abasement,  but  still  we  need  not  fear 
them.    Neither  the  luxurious  blandishments  of  affluence,  nor  the  humiliating 
straitnesses  of  penury,  shall  separate  us  from  God  or  destroy  our  interest  in  His 
love.    7.  "  Any  other  creature."     There,  I  have  mentioned  everything  I  could 
think  of,  and  if  I  have  omitted  anything  there  is  nothing  to  fear.     (T.  G.  Horton.) 
Assurance,  not  presumption  : — From  this  passage  you  see  how  safe  and  scriptural  a 
full  assurance  is.    By  assurance  I  mean  a  firm,  unfaltering  trust  in  the  declara- 
tions and  promises  of  God.    By  personal  assurance  I  mean  a  firm,  unfaltering 
trust    in  the    promises  of  God,  as  made    to    me  from   the  moment   that  by 
believing  in  Jesus  I  make  these  promises  my  own.    The  apostle  first  of  all  believed 
in  Jesus,  and  then  as  a  believer  in  Jesus  he  was  sure  that  he  would  go  to  heaven. 
He  cast  his  helpless,  guilty  soul  on  Christ,  and  from  that  moment  he  was  persuaded 
that  he  was  the  object  of  God's  love,  and  was  persuaded  that  nothing  could  ever 
separate  him  from  that  love.    And  he  was  anxious  to  bring  his  Eoman  friends  to 
the  same  persuasion.    For  the  sake  of  their  salvation  he  wished  them  to  repose 
entirely  on  the  finished  work  of  Christ,  but  for  the  sake  of  their  comfort  and 
eminent  sanctification,  he  wished  them,  having  done  this,  to  rejoice  in  hope  of 
glory.     Some  tender-hearted  Christians  almost  deprecate  personal  assurance,  and 
probably  the  reason  is  that  they  have  seen  some  profess  assurance  whose  hope 
was  evident  presumption.    But  no  two  things  can  be  more  distinct.     Presumption 
is  Satan's  lie;   assurance  is  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.     Presumption  is  hope 
without  foundation  ;  assurance  is  founded  on  the  Word  of  God  without,  and  the 
work  of  the  Spirit  within.    Presumption  makes  a  man  proud  and  hard-hearted, 
censorious  and  flippant,  reckless  and  undevout.    Assurance  makes  a  man  stoop  in 
humility  lower  and  lower,  the  more  he  is  persuaded  of  his  heavenly  Father's  love. 
And  it  gives  him  a  panting  after  the  living  God.      And  it  makes  him  tender- 
hearted—makes him  like  his  Master,  who  does  not  despise  the  day  of  small  things, 
who,  when  a  bruised  reed  is  put  into  His  hand,  does  not  snap  it  asunder  and  fling 
the  fragments  from  Him  ;  who,  when  a  smoking  flax  is  put  upon  His  altar,  does 
not  sweep  it  off  because  it  is  flax,  nor  extinguish  it  because  it  is  only  smoking,  but 
cherishes  and  fans  that  smouldering  tow,  till  it  burst  inflames  and  fire  the  living 
sacrifice ;  and  who  shows  His  power  and  Divine  compassion  by  taking  the  drooping 
shattered  reed,  and  making  it  the  rod  of  His  might,  a  staff  of  strength  in  His  hand. 
Even  so  real  assurance  is  considerate  and  tender-hearted,  does  not  scowl  disdain  on 
the  smoky  beginnings  of  grace  in  any  heart,  but  finds  a  godlike  pleasure  in  foster- 
ing it  into  a  flame.    Presumption  is  an  intoxicating  poison,  and  sends  the  self- 
deceiver    reeling   forward    in    a    merry  delusion,    neglecting   known    duty    and 
perpetrating  known  sin  from  day  to  day,  and  yet  fancying  that  the  Spirit  of  Christ 
is  in  him ;  assurance  enlightens  the  eyes,  and  whether  sedate  or  ecstatic,  is  always 


flHiP.  a.]  ROMANS.  861 

a  cautious  and  circumspect  thing,  abhorring  the  garment  spotted  with  the  flesh.  Pre- 
sumption is  impudent ;  assurance  is  filial  and  affectionate.  Presumption  talks  about 
crosses ;  assurance  carries  them.  Presumption  is  bustling  and  loquacious ;  assur- 
ance is  full  of  zeal,  but  is  often  doing  much  when  it  says  nothing.  Presumption  is 
heady  and  high-minded ;  assurance  is  sober,  and  vaunteth  not  itself.  Presumption 
is  self-indulgent;  assurance  is  self-denied.  Presumption,  like  an  eastern  nabob, 
would  shut  his  eyes,  and  fold  his  hands,  and  nestle  his  cheek  upon  some  balmy 
pillow,  and  then  without  any  trouble  to  himself  be  wafted  to  heaven  in  a  silken 
palanquin ;  whilst  assurance,  like  a  primitive  disciple,  is  content  to  strap  on  the 
pilgrim's  sandals,  and  shoulder  the  weighty  cross,  and  foot  it  all  the  way  to  glory 
in  the  steps  of  the  great  Forerunner.  Presumption  is  a  vile  fleshly  counterfeit ; 
assurance  is  a  holy  and  sanctifying  grace,  because  the  gift  of  the  holy  and  sancti- 
fying  Spirit.  (J.  Hamilton,  D.D.)  Christian  confidence : — The  account  given  of 
the  death  of  Mr.  Robert  Bruce  of  Kinnaird  is  very  beautiful  in  its  simplicity: 
"  That  morning  before  the  Lord  called  him  to  his  rest  he  came  to  breakfast  at  his 
table.  After  he  had  eaten,  as  his  use  was,  a  single  egg,  he  said  to  his  daughter,  '  I 
think  I  am  yet  hungry  ;  you  may  bring  me  another  egg,'  and  instantly  fell  silent ; 
and,  after  having  mused  a  little,  he  said,  '  Hold,  daughter,  hold  ;  my  Master  calleth 
me.'  With  these  words  his  sight  failed  him,  and  he  called  for  the  Bible ;  but 
finding  he  was  not  able  to  read,  he  said,  '  Cast  me  up  the  eighth  chapter  to  the 
Romans,  verses  twenty-eight  to  thirty-nine,'  much  of  which  he  repeated,  par- 
ticularly '  I  am  persuaded,  that  neither  death,  nor  life  shall  be  able  to  separate  me 
from  the  love  of  God,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord,'  and  caused  his  finger  to 
be  put  upon  them,  which  was  done.  '  Now,'  said  he,  '  is  my  finger  upon  them  T  ' 
They  told  him  it  was.  Then  he  said,  '  God  be  with  you,  my  children ;  I  have 
breakfasted  with  you,  and  shall  sup  with  my  Lord  Jesus  Christ  this  night,'  and 
straightway  gave  up  the  ghost  without  one  groan  or  shiver."  Security  : — A  lady 
■^as  riding  in  her  carriage,  when,  spying  a  beautiful  flower  by  the  side  o£  a  large 
rock,  she  alighted  to  take  it  up,  that  she  might  remove  it  to  her  conservatory,  but 
found  that,  delicate  as  it  appeared,  it  resisted  all  her  efforts,  because  the  root  ran 
under  the  rock.  Ah,  thought  she,  this  is  an  illustration  of  the  safety  of  the  Chris- 
tian, whose  life  of  beauty  is  under  the  shelter  of  the  Bock,  and  whose  root  of 
strength  runs  far  beneath  it. 


CHAPTEB  IX. 

Vebs.  1-5.  I  say  the  trnth  In  Christ,  I  lie  not,  my  conscience  also  bearing  me 

witness  in  the  Holy  Ghost. — The  truth : — I.  Should  be  sfoe£n  always,  and  under 
all  oiroumstances.  II.  Should  be  sfoeem  in  Chbist.  1.  As  a  Christian  duty.  2. 
As  in  Christ's  presence.  3.  In  Christ's  Spirit.  4.  For  Christ's  honour.  IIL 
Should  be  attended  by  conscience.  1.  Enlightened.  2.  Influenced.  3.  Approved 
by  the  Holy  Spirit.  IV.  May  only  be  confibmed  by  direct  appeal  to  God  under 
very  solemn  and  extraordinary  circumstances.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Christ  the  sphere  of 
$piritual  being : — "  In  Christ."  This  was  one  of  the  apostle's  favourite  expressions. 
All  Christians  according  to  him  are  "in  Christ."  They  have  been  "baptized  in 
Christ"  (chap.  vi.  3),  i.e.,  they  have  been  united  to  Christ  by  the  baptism  of  the 
Spirit  (1  Cor.  xii.  13) ;  so  that  they  are  in  Christ  as  if  they  were  parts  of  His  person, 
members  of  His  body.  When  the  apostle  thinks  of  this  union,  he  sometimes  allows 
the  relations  of  time  past  and  time  future  to  interpenetrate,  so  that  to  his  eye 
believers  have  not  only  been  crucified  with  Christ  (Gal.  ii.  20)  and  buried  with  Him 
(chap,  vi  4),  but  also  raised  with  Him  (Col.  11. 12  ;  ill.  1),  and  glorified  with  Him  in 
heavenly  places  (Eph.  ii.  6).  Christians  have  their  Christian  being  in  Christ. 
They  are  justified  (GaL  ii.  17),  sanctified  (1  Cor.  1,  2),  triumph  (2  Cor.  ii.  14),  speak 
in  Christ  (  2  Cor.  ii.  17 ;  xii.  19).  The  personaUty  of  Christ  had,  to  his  transfigur- 
ing conception,  become  the  sphere  of  his  spiritual  being  and  activity,  so  that  what 
he  did,  in  the  express  consciousness  of  his  Christian  state,  he  did  in  the  realised 
presence  of  Christ,  and  thus  all  the  nobler  elements  of  his  spiritual  being  were 
intensified  and  exalted.  In  such  a  mood  how  could  he  stoop  to  wilful  misrepre- 
sentation ?  Realising  that  he  was,  so  to  speak,  "  interred  "  in  Christ,  he  felt  that  in 
ilia  ethical  acts  he  was  dominated  by  the  power  that  ensphered  him.     {J.  Morison, 


259  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tx. 


D.D.)  Conscience  and  the  Spirit : — 1.  St.  Paul  does  here  a  most  difficult  thing. 
He  distinguishes  two  voices  within,  and  his  own  voice  from  either.  Conscience — 
the  Holy  Ghost — bearing  me  witness.  These  distinctions  are  important.  Some 
confuse  conscience  and  the  Spirit,  others  leave  the  Spirit  altogether  out,  and  con- 
science alone  recognised  as  the  guide  of  man.  2.  Conscience — which  is,  literally, 
co-knowledge — is  a  natural  faculty.  Like  intellect,  affection,  or  any  other  depart- 
ment of  the  man,  conscience  is  rather  a  state  than  an  ingredient  of  the  person. 
We  introduce  confusion  when  we  speak  of  the  unit  being  as  split  into  parts. 
Memory,  will,  conscience,  and  the  rest,  are,  in  reaUty,  only  so  many  conditions  or 
moods  of  the  one  man.  3.  Conscience  is  that  state  of  the  man  in  which  he  reviews 
and  judges  his  own  actions.  It  is  natural  to  every  man  to  ask  of  himself.  Of  what 
complexion  is  this  thing  which  I  have  thought,  spoken,  or  done,  in  regard  to  right 
and  wrong  ?  We  cannot  help  it — it  is  a  sign,  therefore,  neither  of  good  nor  evil — 
we  must  sit  in  judgment  upon  ourselves.  Who  is  so  happy  as  never  to  have  passed 
an  unquiet  night  in  the  remembrance  of  word  spoken  or  deed  done  during  the  day  ? 
And  yet  there  was  no  one  to  reproach  him  I  The  thing  itself  was  unknown  to  the 
world.  No  matter  1  He  was  his  own  accuser,  witness,  judge,  and  executioner. 
But  conscience  also  exercises  a  legislative  as  well  as  a  judicial  function.  It  says. 
This  is  right,  do  it — this  is  wrong,  shun  it — as  well  as.  This  was  wrong,  and  thou 
hast  done  it,  &c.  4.  This  conscience  was  without  the  gospel,  and  is  still  with  it. 
See  the  case  of  Paul  (Acts  xxiii.  1,  cf.  xxiv.  16 ;  2  Tim.  i.  3,  cf.  1  Tim  i.  19).  As 
much  towards  man's  nature,  as  towards  the  law,  Christ's  office  was  to  elevate,  to 
deepen,  to  perfect,  not  to  abolish.  Just  as  Christ  took  the  instinct  of  patriotism, 
and  turned  it  into  a  world-wide  benevolence,  or  the  love  of  those  that  love  us  (Matt. 
V.  46),  and  consecrated  it  into  a  universal  charity  ;  so  He  took  the  natural  instinct 
■which  we  call  conscience,  and  both  instructed  it  in  the  Divine  law  of  which  before 
it  had  but  the  dimmest  conception,  and  also  enabled  it  with  that  preventing  grace 
which  is  the  presence  of  the  indwelling  Spirit.  6.  It  is  a  great  thing  to  be  conscien- 
tious, but  it  does  not  make  a  man  a  Christian.  St.  Paul  was  conscientious,  so  were 
some  Pharisees,  and  in  these  days  of  grace  and  the  gospel  there  are  conscientious 
lives  which  are  both  un-Christian  and  anti-Christian.  But  I  am  well  assured  of 
this,  that  for  one  man  who  lives  a  good  life  out  of  Christ,  a  hundred  thousand  are 
wallowing  in  the  sty  of  sin  for  lack  of  Him.  Even  in  those  men  who  think  them- 
selves able  to  dispense  with  Him  I  can  always  notice  some  damaging  deficiency, 
self-conceit,  coldness,  exclusiveness,  or  uselessness.  All  this  makes  me  understand 
why  St.  Paul  and  the  Master  should  make  so  much  oi "  that  superadded  gift,  which 
is  the  presence  of  God's  Holy  Spirit.  There  are  those  amongst  us  who  have  bitterly 
felt  the  powerlessness  of  conscience.  They  have  suffen  d,  resolved,  hoped,  struggled, 
but  again  and  again  they  have  found  themselves  no  match  for  the  strong  man 
armed.  We  may  blame,  but  the  weak  by  nature  may  b  » made  strong  by  grace.  A 
man  whose  conscience  has  failed  to  give  him  the  victory  may  find  victory  in  Christ. 
It  win  be  hard  work  for  him ;  but  prayer  can  prevail  where  resolution  has  faltered ; 
the  man  whose  conscience  has  been  blunted  may  have  it  set  again  and  edged  and  made 
powerful  by  grace ;  he  who  knows  what  it  is  to  have  stifled  and  all  but  silenced  the 
inward  voice,  may  yet  hear  it  again  in  new  tones,  but  with  new  powers  also,  speak- 
ing of  Christ  crucified  and  the  love  of  the  Spirit.  6.  The  Church  and  the  Church's 
Lord  can  compassionate  the  feebleness  which  man  never  pities.  The  Physician 
came  not  for  the  whole  but  for  the  sick.  This  it  is  which  makes  His  gospel  so 
inestimably  precious,  and  makes  us  weep  for  surprise  and  joy  when  we  find  Jesus 
sitting  at  meat  with  publicans  and  sinners,  bidding  welcome  to  sinful  women, 
and  drawing  His  loveUest  parables  from  the  history  of  prodigals,  &c.  Cry  out 
to  Him  for  the  Spirit  of  adoption  —  and  where  nature  fails,  and  conscience, 
prayer  and  the  Spirit  shall  prevail  and  conquer  yet  1  Most  of  all  do  I  commend 
this  to  those  who  have  sunk  the  deepest.  But  the  gospel  is  a  voice  for  all  men.  It 
addresses  the  moral  man  as  well  as  the  sitmer.  It  says  to  him,  St.  Paui  was  no 
libertine ;  yet  even  he  found  his  righteousness  of  no  avail  in  the  day  of  his  trial. 
In  the  brightness  of  heaven's  light  his  fabric  of  self-assertion  melted  like  snow.  He 
oast  away  all  trust  in  himself,  and  began  to  build  quite  afresh  upon  the  one  foanda- 
tion  which  is  Jesus  Christ.  How  should  it  be  otherwise  with  you  ?  7.  Let  so  many 
of  ns  as  have  risen  into  this  higher  life  of  grace  and  the  Spirit  see  that  we  seek  therein 
a  liberty,  not  of  sin,  but  of  God.  St.  Paul  himself  exercised  himself  day  by  day  to 
have  always  a  conscience  void  of  ofFence.  Conscience  in  him  was  still  the  law ; 
only  it  was  a  conscience  not  bounded  by  law,  but  enlarged  and  illuminated  by  the 
Spirit.    When  he  described  himself,  for  a  moment,  as  without  law,  he  yet  WM 


eaip.  n.]  ROMANS,  S5S 

earefol  to  add,  lest  any  should  misinterpret  him,  being  not  without  law  to  God,  but 
under  the  law  to  Christ.  {Dean  Vaughan.)  Conscience,  consciousness,  and  the 
Spirit : — In  order  to  do  justice  to  the  Greek  idea  it  is  necessary  to  cord  together 
mentally  the  two  words  "  conscience  "  and  "  consciousness."  In  the  usage  of  New 
Testament  and  Stoic  philosophy  the  term  almost  always  throws  out  into  relief  its 
moral  import.  Hence  we  read  of  a  good  and  pure,  and  also  of  an  evil,  defiled  and 
seared  conscience,  of  a  conscience  toward  God,  and  one  void  of  offence.  The  moral 
character  of  the  conscience  in  this  acceptation  of  the  term  is  strikingly  represented 
by  the  derivation  "  conscientiousness."  In  Heb.  x.  2  the  psychological  idea  of 
conscience  is  predominant,  and  is  strong  in  2  Cor.  i.  12.  Here  it  must  not  be  lost 
sight  of,  but  tlje  moral  idea  is  predominant.  The  conscientious  principle  within 
the  apostle  attested  the  veracity  of  his  utterance  when  he  said,  "  I  am  not  lying." 
It  is  worthy  of  note  that  the  apostle  allows  himself  the  use  of  a  popular  representa- 
tion of  the  conscience — viz.,  as  if  it  were  distinct  from  himself — reminding  us  of 
Adam  Smith's  phrase,  "the  man  within  the  breast."  Paul  makes  his  appeal  to 
this  "  man."  He  had  referred  simply  to  himself  when  he  said  "  I  lie  not."  That 
was  his  own  proper  testimony  concerning  himself.  But  either  deliberately  or 
instinctively  realising  that  men  often  falsify  even  when  they  say  "  We  lie  not,"  he 
tarns  to  the  "  man  within,"  and  listens  till  he  hears  him  say,  •'  True,  thou  liest 
not."  Of  course  the  Eomans  could  not  look  within  the  apostle's  breast  and  verify 
the  concurrent  testimony.  There  was  but  one  person  in  the  witness  box,  the 
apostle  himself.  But  the  apostle  had  not  merely  to  satisfy  the  Eomans ;  that 
might  or  might  not  be  possible.  He  had  to  satisfy  himself  ;  and  that  was  possible 
if  he  was  honest.  Thus  it  is  that  after  his  outward  affirmation  he  turns  in,  and 
receiving  inward  confirmation,  he,  as  it  were,  reaffirms.  To  all  who  know  the  man, 
such  a  solemn  reaffirmation  would  render  "assurance,"  if  that  were  possible, 
" doubly  sure, "  Once  more,  the  apostle's  conscience  bore  witness  "in  the  Holy 
Spirit."  Like  the  rest  he  "  was  a  man  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  so  that  at  every 
point  of  his  spiritual  being  he  was  touched  and  energised  by  the  heavenly  influence. 
There  was  still,  it  is  true,  the  unimpaired  principle  of  moral  freedom  in  the  centre 
of  his  being,  in  virtue  of  which  it  devolved  on  himself,  as  a  real  self-contained 
person,  to  welcome  and  cherish  the  hallowing  influence.  The  man's  individual 
manhood  was  not  absorbed  into  the  inflnite  essence.  Neither  was  his  moral 
accountability  merged  or  superseded.  But  he  in  his  freedom  bad  made  his  choice. 
*•  To  him  to  live  was  Christ."  And  hence  all  the  avenues  to  the  very  centre  of  hia 
being  were  habitually  left  open  to  the  ingress  of  the  Holy  Spirit  whom  he  neither 
resisted  nor  grieved.  And  when,  therefore,  his  inward  conscience  bore  concurrent 
testimony  with  his  outward  declaration,  there  was  more  than  itself  in  the  voice  of 
that  conscience.  There  was  the  echo  of  the  voice  of  God's  Sinrit.  {J.  Morisony 
D.D.)  ■  That  I  have  great  heaviness. — Paul's  concern  for  Israel: — I.  Its  cha- 
BACTEB.  1-  Sincere.  2.  Divinely  inspired.  U.  Its  intensity.  1.  Great.  2.  Con- 
tinual.    3.  Self-sacrificing.    lU.  Its  special  qbounds.     1.  Their  high  privileges. 

2.  National  affinity  with  Christ.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Concern  for  other  men's  souls: 
— I.  The  peksons  about  whom  Paul  felt  this  ANnETT.  1.  His  worst  enemies.  If 
any  of  you  in  following  Christ  should  meet  with  opposition,  avenge  it  in  the  same 
way.  Love  most  the  man  who  treats  you  worst.  2.  His  kinsfolk  according  to  the 
flesh.  Charity  must  begin  at  home.  He  who  does  not  desire  the  salvation  of  those 
who  are  his  own  kith  and  kin,  "  how  dwelleth  the  love  of  God  in  him?  "  Is  thy 
husband  unsaved  ?  Love  him  to  Christ  1  Next  to  your  homes  let  your  own  neigh- 
hours  be  first  of  all  considered,  and  then  your  country,  for  all  Englishmen  are  akin. 

3.  Persona  of  great  privileges.  (1)  They  had  privileges  by  birth — "  Who  are 
laraelitea."  Many  of  you  have  the  privilege  of  being  bom  in  the  midst  of  gracious 
influences.  Those  poor  gutter  children  start  in  the  race  of  life  under  terrible  dis- 
advantages. And  some  of  you  have  had  everything  in  your  favour  ;  yet  we  tremble 
for  you,  lest  you  should  be  cast  out,  while  many  come  from  the  east  and  from  the 
west  and  sit  down  at  the  banquet  of  grace.  (2)  They  had  the  adoption,  and 
enjoyed  national  advantages;  and  God  has  been  pleased  to  adopt  this  nation, 
giving  it  special  liberty,  an  open  Bible,  and  the  free  proclamation  of  the  gospel. 
(3)  They  had  the  glory,  i.«.,  God  had  revealed  Himself  in  their  midst  from  the 
mercy-seat  in  the  bright  light  of  the  Shekinah.  And  in  this  very  house  of  prayer 
the  Lord  haa  manifested  His  glory  very  wonderfully.  Many  hundreds  have  been 
turned  from  darkness  to  light  in  this  place !  (4)  They  had  the  first  hold  of  all 
spiritual  gifts.  They  bad  seen  God  revealing  His  Son  to  them  by  types ;  but  Christ 
is  not  so  well  seen  in  bleeding  bullocks  and  rams  and  hyssop,  t&o.,  as  He  is  seen  in 


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  a. 

the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  4.  Tet  Paul  had  a  great  solicitude  for  these  people 
because  he  saw  them  living  in  the  commission  of  great  sin.  Although  many  of 
them  were  exceedingly  moral  and  religious.  The  greatest  of  sins  is  to  be  at  enmity 
with  God,  The  most  damning  of  iniquities  is  to  refuse  Christ.  So  many  now 
value  their  external ,  religiousness  above  faith  in  Jesus.  II.  The  natubb  of  this 
ANXiETT.  It  was — 1.  Very  truthful.  There  was  no  sham  about  it,  "  I  say  the  truth 
in  Christ."  He  did  not  fancy  that  be  felt,  but  he  really  felt.  He  did  not  some- 
times get  up  into  that  condition  or  down  into  it,  but  he  lived  in  it.  •'  I  lie  not,"  he 
says.  "  I  do  not  exaggerate."  For  fear  he  should  not  be  believed  he  asseverates 
as  strongly  as  is  allowed  to  a  Christian  man.  Do  we  feel  the  same,  or  is  it  only  a 
little  excitement  at  a  revival  meeting  ?  You  must  feel  deeply  for  the  souls  of  men 
if  you  are  to  bless  them.  2.  Very  gracious.  It  was  not  an  animal  feeling,  or  a 
natural  feeling ;  it  was  "  in  Christ."  When  he  was  nearest  to  his  Lord,  then  he 
felt  that  he  did  mourn  over  men's  souls.  It  was  truth  in  Christ  that  he  was 
expressing,  because  he  was  one  with  Christ.  It  is  of  no  use  to  try  to  get  this  feeling 
by  reading  books,  or  to  pump  yourself  up  to  it  in  private ;  it  is  the  work  of  God. 
3.  Spiritual.  The  Holy  Spirit  bore  witness  with  his  conscience.  I  am  sometimes 
afraid  that  our  zeal  for  conversion  would  not  stand  the  test  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Perhaps  we  want  to  increase  our  denomination,  or  enlarge  our  church  for  our  own 
honour,  or  get  credit  for  doing  good.  None  of  these  motives  can  be  tolerated  ;  our 
concern  for  souls  must  be  wrought  in  us  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  4.  Most  deep  and 
depressing  he  had  great  heaviness,  and  he  tells  us  that  this  did  not  come  on  him 
at  times,  but  that  he  always  felt  it  whenever  his  thoughts  turned  that  way :  I  have 
•*  continual  sorrow  in  my  heart."  In  his  very  heart,  for  it  was  not  a  superficial 
desire  ;  a  continual  sorrow,  for  it  was  no  fitful  emotion.  5.  Most  intense  (ver.  3). 
Of  course  the  apostle  never  thought  of  wishing  that  he  could  be  an  enemy  to  Christ, 
but  he  did  sometimes  look  at  the  misery  which  comes  upon  those  who  are  separated 
from  Christ,  untU  he  felt  that  if  he  could  save  his  kinsmen  by  his  own  destruction, 
ay,  by  himself  enduring  their  heavy  punishment,  he  could  wish  to  stand  in  their 
stead.  He  did  not  say  that  he  ever  did  wish  it,  but  he  felt  as  if  he  could  wish  it 
when  his  heart  was  warm.  His  case  was  parallel  with  that  of  Moses  when  he 
prayed  the  Lord  to  spare  the  people  and  said,  "  If  not,  blot  my  name  out  of  the 
Book  of  Life."  When  the  heart  is  full  of  love  even  the  boldest  hyperboles  are 
simple  truths.  Extravagances  are  the  natural  expression  of  warm  hearts  even  in 
ordinary  things.  What  the  cool  doctrinalist  pulls  to  pieces,  and  the  critic  of  words 
regards  as  altogether  absurd,  true  zeal  nevertheless  feels.  Christ  "  saved  others,, 
Himself  He  could  not  save."  Men  are  extravagantly  prudent,  dubious,  profane;, 
they  may  therefore  well  permit  the  minister  of  Christ  to  be  extravagant  in  his  love 
for  others.  Such  a  text  as  this  must  be  fired  off  red  hot ;  it  spoils  if  it  cools.  It  is 
a  heart,  not  a  head  business.  The  apostle  means  us  to  understand  that  there  was 
nothing  which  he  would  not  suffer  if  he  might  save  his  kindred  according  to  the 
flesh.  III.  Its  excellences.  What  would  be  the  result  if  we  felt  as  Paul  did  ? 
1.  It  would  make  us  like  Christ.  After  that  manner  he  loved.  He  became  a  curse 
for  us.  He  did  what  Paul  could  wish,  but  could  not  do.  I  want  you  to  feel  that 
you  would  pass  under  poverty,  sickness,  or  death,  if  you  could  save  those  dear  to 
you.  I  heard  of  a  dear  girl  the  other  day  who  said  to  her  pastor,  "  I  could  never 
bring  my  father  to  hear  you,  but  I  have  prayed  for  him  long,  and  God  will  answer 
my  request.  Now  you  will  bury  me,  won't  you  ?  My  father  must  come  and  hear 
you  speak  at  my  grave.  Do  speak  to  him.  God  will  bless  him."  And  he  did,  and 
her  father  was  converted.  2.  It  will  save  us  from  selfishness.  The  first  instinct 
of  a  saved  soul  is  a  longing  to  bring  others  to  Christ.  Yet,  lest  there  should  grow  up 
in  your  spirit  any  of  that  Pharisaic  selfishness  which  was  seen  in  the  elder  brother, 
ask  to  feel  a  heaviness  for  your  prodigal  younger  brother,  who  is  still  feeding  swine. 
3.  It  will  save  you  from  any  difficulty  about  forgiving  other  people.  Love  man> 
kind  with  all  your  soul,  and  you  will  feel  no  difficulty  in  exercising  patience, 
forbearance,  and  forgiveness.  4.  It  vsill  keep  you  from  very  many  other 
griefs.  You  will  be  deUvered  from  petty  worries  if  you  are  concerned  about 
the  souls  of  men.  5.  It  will  put  you  much  upon  prayer.  That  is  the  right 
style  of  praying — when  a  man  prays  because  he  has  an  awful  weight  upon 
him,  and  pray  he  must.     {C    H.    Spurgeon.)  Concern  Jor  kindred: — I.  Its 

TRUE  EXPRESSION.  1.  Heartfelt  compassion.  2.  Earnest  prayer.  3.  Self-sacrific- 
ing zeal.  II.  Its  powerful  motives.  1.  Our  brethren.  2.  Specially  privileged. 
3.  Dear  to  Christ.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Home  and  foreign  missions : — The  fervency 
of  affection  professed  by  Paul  in  this  passage  is  all  in  behalf  of  his  own  couutrymeni 


CHAP.  IX.]  ROMANS.  265 

and  yet  none  more  zealous  than  he  in  the  labours  of  a  Christian  miseionarj  among 
the  distant  countries  of  the  world.  What  gives  more  importance  to  this  remark  is 
the  tendency  in  our  own  day  to  place  these  two  causes  in  opposition  to  each  other. 
It  might  serve  as  a  useful  corrective  to  louk  at  Paul  and  at  the  one  comprehensive 
affection  which  actuated  his  bosom,  cleaving  with  all  the  devotedness  of  a  thorough 
patriot  to  the  families  of  his  own  land ;  and  yet  carrying  him  beyond  the  limits  of 
a  contracted  patriotism  among  all  the  families  of  the  earth.  The  truth  is,  that 
home  and  foreign  Christianity,  instead  of  acting  upon  the  heart  like  two  forces  in 
opposite  directions,  draw  both  the  same  way,  so  that  he  who  has  been  carried  for- 
ward to  the  largest  sacrifices  in  behalf  of  the  one,  is  the  readiest  for  like  sacrifices 
in  behalf  of  the  other.  The  friends  of  the  near  being  also,  as  they  have  opportunity, 
the  most  prompt  and  liberal  in  their  friendship  to  the  distant  enterprise  ;  recognis- 
ing in  man,  wherever  he  is  to  be  found,  the  same  wandering  outcast  from  the  light 
and  love  of  heaven,  and  the  same  befitting  subject  for  the  offers  of  a  free  salvation. 
We  cannot  therefore  sympathise  with  those  who  affect  an  indifference  to  the  Chris- 
tianisation  of  the  heathen  till  the  work  of  Christianisation  shall  have  been  completed 
at  our  own  door.  Let  them  be  careful,  lest  there  do  not  lurk  within  them  a  like 
indifference  to  both,  lest  the  feelings  and  the  principles  of  all  true  philanthropy 
lie  asleep  in  their  bosoms  ;  and  they,  unlike  to  Paul,  who  found  room  for  the  utmost 
affection  towards  the  spiritual  well- being  of  his  own  kinsfolk  and  the  utmost  activity 
among  the  aliens  and  idolaters  of  far  distant  lands,  shall  be  convicted  of  deep 
insensibility  to  the  concerns  of  the  soul,  of  utter  blindness  to  the  worth  of  eternity. 
(r.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  Earnestness  in  promoting  the  salvation  of  others  : — We  were 
going  from  Camden  to  Philadelphia  some  years  ago  very  late  at  night  after  a  meet- 
ing. It  was  a  cold  winter  night,  and  we  stood  on  the  deck  of  the  ferry-boat, 
impatient  to  get  ashore.  Before  the  boat  came  to  the  wharf,  a  man  who  stood  on 
the  outside  of  the  chains  slipped  and  dropped  into  the  water.  It  is  the  only  man 
that  we  ever  saw  overboard.  It  was  a  fearful  night.  The  icicles  had  frozen  on  the 
wharf,  and  they  had  frozen  on  the  steamer.  The  question  was  how  to  get  the  man 
up.  The  ropes  were  lowered,  and  we  all  stood  with  feverish  anxiety  lest  the  man 
should  not  be  able  to  grasp  the  ropes,  and  when  he  grasped  it  and  was  pulled  up  on 
to  the  deck,  and  we  saw  he  was  safe,  although  we  had  never  seen  him  before,  how 
we  congratulated  him  I  A  Ufe  saved  1  Have  we  the  same  earnestness  about  getting 
men  out  of  spiritual  peril  J  Do  we  not  go  up  and  down  in  our  prayer-meetings,  and 
our  Christian  work,  coldly  saying,  "  Yes,  there  is  a  great  deal  of  sin  in  the  world  ; 
men  ought  to  do  better,  I  wish  the  people  would  become  Christians.  I  think  it  ia 
high  time  that  men  attended  to  their  eternal  interests  "  ;  and  five  minutes  after  we 
put  oar  head  on  the  pillow  we  are  sound  asleep,  or  from  that  consideration  we  pass 
out  in  five  minutes  into  the  utmost  mirthfulness,  and  have  forgotten  it  all.  Mean- 
while there  is  a  wbole  race  overboard.  How  few  hands  are  stretched  out  to  lift 
men  out  of  the  flood  1  how  few  prayers  offered  1  how  earnest  opportunities !  how 
little  earnest  Christian  work  I    (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 

Yer.  8.  For  I  could  wish  that  myself  were  accursed  from  Christ  for  my  brethren. 
—St.  Paul's  wish : — A  considerable  group  of  expositors  have  regarded  the  first  moiety 
of  this  verse  as  parenthetical,  "  I  have  great  heaviness  and  sorrow  of  heart  (for  I 
myself  used  to  wish  to  be  accursed  from  the  Messiah)  for  my  brethren,"  &o.  The 
apostle  is  supposed  to  be  referring  to  his  own  infatuation  during  the  time  of  his 
antagonism  to  Christ  and  Christianity,  for  the  purpose  of  obliquely  depicting,  from 
the  standpoint  of  his  own  experience,  the  lamentable  condition  of  his  countrymen, 
and  of  thus  accounting  for  the  overwhelming  sorrow  under  which  he  was  suffering. 
Others,  without  the  mechanical  parenthetical  expedient,  give  substantially  the  same 
interpretation,  "I  was  wishing,  viz.,  at  a  former  period,  not  now."  But  it  ia 
impossible  that  the  apostle  was  speaking  historically.  The  expression  is  a  Greek 
idiom  meaning,  "  I  could  pray  or  wish  to  God" — an  idiom  which  grew  out  of  the 
imperfect  or  incomplete  tense,  '*  I  was  praying."  If  it  were  wished  to  represent  the 
act  as  completed  some  other  tense  would  be  required.  Take  another  instance 
(Gal.  iv.  20).  '•  I  could  wish  [for  reasons  obvious  enough,  and  if  my  other  engage- 
ments did  not  forbid]  to  be  once  more  in  the  midst  of  yon."  Or  (Acts  zzv.  22) 
"  Agrippa  said  to  Festus,  I  also  could  wish  to  hear  the  man  myself  "  (viz.,  if  it  were 
not,  0  Festus,  trespassing  too  far  on  your  indulgence).  So  in  the  case  before  as 
••  I  ooald  wish  to  God  to  be  vicariously  an  anathema  for  my  kinsmen,  if  my  con- 
eeptions  of  my  daty  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  G^d's  wisdom  and  will  on  the  other, 
^oold  allow  me  to  carry  forth  into  completion  such  a  desire  and  such  a  prayer. 


256  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cms.  tx. 

The  apostle  did  not  actually  desire  to  be  an  anathema.  He  knew  that  saoh  a 
desire  would  never  be  Divinely  fulfilled,  and  hence  he  did  not  cherish  it.  A  wise 
man  keeps  his  desires  under  control.  A  pious  man  takes  God's  desires  and  purposes 
into  account,  and  does  not  entertain  any  desire  which  he  knows  to  be  at  variance 
with  the  Divine  will,  or  with  the  arrangements  that  are  dependent  on  the  Divine 
will.  Hence  it  is  that  the  apostle  does  not  say,  •'  I  desire,"  but  only  "  I  could 
desire."  So  far  as  he  was  concerned,  he  was  ready  for  the  self-sacrifice,  provided 
it  was  legitimate,  and  could  be  efiicacious.  It  would  not,  however,  have  been  of 
avail,  and  hence  the  wish  was  never  fully  formed.  The  potential  did  not  pass  into 
the  actual.  It  is  true  that  the  potential  translation  of  the  verb,  though  doubtless 
the  only  correct  one  under  the  circumstances,  is  nevertheless  an  imperfect  reflection 
of  the  original  "  imperfect  "  tense.  The  tense  is  a  time,  not  a  potency ;  but  it  is  a 
past  tense  incomplete.  Hence  the  real  idea  of  the  word  is  "  I  was  desiring."  The 
desire  rose  up  in  the  apostle's  heart,  and  to  a  certain  extent  he  allowed  it,  yet  only 
to  a  certain  extent,  for  a  higher  desire  struck  in  and  controlled  it — the  desire  to  be 
in  perfect  accord  with  God's  desire  and  will.  Hence  it  hung  suspended,  and 
remained  imperfect.  It  was  conditional,  and  the  condition  that  would  have  brought 
it  to  maturity  was  never  forthcoming.  Thus  the  embryo  desire  was  in  reality  but 
a  potency.  It  may  now  be  further  noticed  that  the  word  means  properly  "  I  could 
pray."  The  word  is  so  rendered  in  2  Cor.  xiii.  7;  James  v.  16,  and  has  really  that 
meaning  in  2  Cor.  xiii.  9  ;  3  John  2  ;  Acts  xxvii.  29.  In  the  last  text  they  lifted  up 
their  desires  to  their  gods  and  prayed  for  the  break  of  day.  The  word  only  occurs 
elsewhere  in  Acts  xxvi.  29.  "  If  I  might  venture  to  use  the  liberty  of  openly  express- 
ing the  fulness  of  my  feeling,  I  would  audibly  lift  up  my  prayer  to  God."  Hence 
our  text  is  admirably  expressed  in  our  idiomatic  "  I  could  wish  to  God."  It  is 
impossible  to  believe  that  St.  Paul  ever  presented  such  a  prayer.  The  utmost 
stretch  of  conceivability  extends  no  farther  than  this — that  the  apostle  felt,  time 
after  time,  the  incompleted  uprising  of  an  impulse  to  pray  that  if  it  were  compatible 
with  all  great  interests,  permission  might  be  given  him  to  be,  by  the  sacrifice  of  his 
own  happiness,  the  means  of  rescuing  his  infatuated  countrymen  from  their  doom. 
Such  sacrifice  he  would  gladly  make,  if  it  were  among  the  moral  possibilities.  {J. 
Morison,  D.D.)  Paul's  wish  : — The  word  "  accursed  "  often  signifies  no  more 
than  being  devoted  to  temporal  death,  or  being  made  a  sacrifice  of  (Deut.  xxi.  23, 
cf.  Gal.  iii.  16),  and  the  words  "  from  Christ "  may  signify  "  after  Christ,"  i.e.,  after 
His  example  (2  Tim.  i.  3).  The  verse  then  would  read  thus  :  *'  I  could  be  content, 
nay,  I  should  rejoice  to  be  made  a  sacrifice  myself,  as  Christ  has  been  before  me, 
for  my  brethren."  (D.  Waterland,  D.D.)  Accursed  from  Christ  .-—The  solutions 
that  have  been  offered  of  this  difficult  text  group  themselves  under  one  or  other  of 
the  three  following  alternatives.  L  If  his  Jewish  kinsmen  could  only  thereby  bb 
BAVED,  Paul  could  himself  sublimely  consent  to  be  finally  damned.  Many  have 
BO  understood  him,  and  applauded  the  sentiment  as  the  climax  of  the  morally 
sublime,  as  exhibiting  "  a  love  stronger  than  death,"  because  stronger  than  even 
hell.  But  is  this  a  Christ-like  love  ?  When  did  Christ  consent  to  be  made  a  curse 
in  a  sense  so  vile,  or  incur  a  doom  so  final  ?  For  me  to  wish  myself  accursed  from 
Christ  for  any  end  whatever,  would  be  to  wish  not  only  doom,  but  sin.  So  far 
from  glorifying  God,  it  would  but  dishonour  and  contradict  Him,  for  it  would  be  to 
choose  as  a  means  of  good  what  God  brands  as  the  very  quintessence  of  evil.  II. 
A  qualified  and  softened  sense  that  falls  short  of  final  doom.  1.  Some  have 
taken  the  phrase,  "  accursed  from  Christ,"  to  mean  temporal  death,  in  proof  of 
which  appeal  is  made  to  the  prayer  of  Moses  in  Exod.  xxxii.  32.  But  Moses' 
expression  for  temporal  death  presents  no  parallelism  whatever  to  the  apostle's 
expression.  Moreover,  if  Paul  meant  temporal  death,  what  could  he  mean  by 
"  from  Christ  "  ?  Temporal  death,  so  far  from  separating  the  believer  from  Christ, 
cuts  short  all  seeming  separation.  Anathema  originally  denoted  the  act  of  deposi- 
ting gifts  in  temples,  and  also  the  votive  offerings  themselves.  These  were  of  course 
sacred  and  irrevocable.  When  the  gift  was  a  living  creature,  beast  or  man,  the  life 
was  devoted  in  sacrifice.  Hence  "  devoted  "  stands  for  "  doomed."  In  the  spiritual 
sphere  the  doom  thus  expressed  was  utter  and  final  As  "  anathema  from  Christ  " 
the  life,  what  less  could  it  be  ?  This  we  find  to  be  its  intensity  of  meaning  in  all 
the  other  places  in  which  the  word  occurs  in  the  New  Testament  (Acts  xiiii.  14 ; 
1  Cor.  xii.  3,  xvi.  22 ;  Gal.  i.  8,  9).  Thus  the  words  "  accursed  from  Christ " 
refuse  to  be  softened  down.  Whatever  final  damnation  may  mean,  all  that  they 
mean.  Nor  will  it  in  the  least  help  the  matter  to  resort  to  the  forms  of  Jewish 
exoommanication,  for  in  its  milder  form  of  expulsion  from  the  synagogue,  the  phrase 


CMAP.  IX.]  ROMANS.  857 

before  as  is  far  too  strong,  and  is  never  once  so  employed ;  while  in  its  direr  form 
of  thorough  Jewish  malediction,  it  embraced  all  the  terrors  of  "eternal  judgment." 
2.  Turn  we  now  to  the  opening  expression  "I  could  wish."  The  tense  in  the 
original  is  the  imperfect :  and  the  explanation  given  is  '•  I  was  wishing,  only  it  was 
no  use."  But  if  Paul  wished,  in  any  degree  and  for  any  reason,  to  be  "  accursed 
from  Christ,"  he  wished  what  was  wrong.  If  he  wished,  or  professed  to  wish,  an 
acknowledged  impossibility,  he  simply  trifled  with  his  readers,  and  with  his  tragic 
theme.  Aiid  if  he  did  not  really  wish  at  all,  then  his  words  reduce  themselves  at 
best  to  a  simple  extravagance.  That  be  far  from  our  apostle  (see  ver.  1).  III.  The 
HISTORICAL  INTERPRETATION  REMAINS.  1.  The  tcuse  uscd  is  the  impcrfcct,  and  the 
most  literal  rendering  would  be,  "  I  wished."  In  Gal.  i.  13  the  same  tense  occurs, 
and  that,  too,  in  an  afi&rmation  very  parallel  to  the  one  before  us.  Had  our  trans- 
lators rendered  that  imperfect  tense  there  as  they  have  done  here  we  should  have 
had,  "  I  could  persecute."  2.  Again  note  that  the  word  "  myself  "  stands  connected 
with  the  word  "  wished."  "For  I  myself  used  to  wish  to  be  accursed  from  Christ." 
This  makes  it  clear  that  he  takes  us  back  to  his  unconverted  past.  It  is  as  if  he 
had  said,  "  I  myself  used  to  hurl  those  curses  which  you  are  now  launching  at  the 
Nazarene.  I,  even  I,  once  dared  the  doom  you  now  defy,  and  it  is  because  I  once 
did  so,  and  now  see  the  terrible  doom  I  incurred,  that  I  feel  such  sorrow  for  my 
kinsmen."  3.  But  how  Paul  could  be  said  to  wish  this  dreadful  anathema  for  his 
brethren's  sake  ?  Granting  that  the  connection  is  the  true  one  the  answer  would 
be,  Paul  did  all  this  as  a  zealous  Jew,  devotedly  attached  to  his  nation,  and  think- 
ing that  he  was  doing  them,  as  well  as  God,  service  by  those  dreadful  maledictions. 
But  the  clause  is  clearly  parenthetical.  The  sorrow,  not  the  wish,  is  for  his 
brethren.  4.  But  if  the  words  "  accursed  from  Christ "  mean  nothing  less  than 
final  doom,  how,  even  in  his  unconverted  state,  could  Paul  have  wished  that  ?  The 
answer  is  that  the  Jewish  anathema  was  double-edged.  It  might  be  launched 
directly  at  Jesus,  and  doubtless  it  often  was  by  Paul  amid  his  breathings  of 
"  threatening  and  slaughter."  But  it  might  also  take  the  more  indirect  form  of 
imprecating  direst  anathemas  upon  himself  if  he  espoused  the  cause  of  the  Naza- 
rene. 5.  But  while  recalling  the  past  he  cannot  forget  the  present.  To  his 
unbelieving  sense  the  anathemas  at  that  past  period  meant  one  thing.  To  his  now 
Christianised  sense  they  are  seen  to  have  meant  infinitely  direr  things  than  be  then 
conceived.  He  now  saw  that  the  Nazarene  was  no  false  Messiah,  but  the  true ; 
hence  the  significant  use  of  the  article  in  the  original,  "  accursed  from  the  Christ." 
He  wished,  and  willed,  that  rejection  of  Christ  which  leads  to  the  curse  of  utter 
and  irremediable  woe.  IV.  Conclusion.  1.  Let  the  reckless  dealer  in  common 
oaths  beware.  His  lightly  uttered  blasphemies  may  have  more  momentum  than  he 
thinks.  Your  oaths  may  fasten  on  your  soul  a  lasting  curse.  2.  Be  not  hasty  in 
your  conclusions.  Paul  once  allowed  himself  to  be  borne  away  by  the  current.  He 
had  need  to  "  save  himself  from  that  untoward  generation."  So  have  we  from  ours. 
We  may  have  to  breast  the  current  that  would  else  float  us  past  Christ,  and  drift  us 
to  ruin.  3.  See  how  remote  Christianity  is  from  Pharisaism.  The  Pharisees 
scowled  on  Jesus  because  He  was  the  friend  of  sinners.  They  cared  for  no  man's 
soul.  Now,  if  we  want  a  picture  the  very  opposite  of  that,  we  may  behold  it  here 
in  Paul.  But  that  same  Paul  was  himself  once  a  Pharisee.  And  lo  1  here  he  stands 
stripped  of  the  last  shred  of  his  Pharisaic  cloak,  and  dissolved  in  tender  tears  for 
the  souls  of  his  fellows  I  4.  We  have  here  a  splendid  example  of  love  to  our  deadly 
foes.  This  word  "  anathema  "  may  remind  us  of  what  dire  anathemas  those  very 
Jews  pronounced  over  this  same  Paul  (Acts  xxiii.  14).  And  how  does  he  repay 
them  ?  By  returning  blessing.  So  well  had  he  caught  the  spirit  and  conned  the 
lesson  of  his  Master  (Matt.  v.  44,  45).  5.  We  have  also  here  a  spirit-stirring 
example  of  love  to  souls  as  souls.  It  was  the  spiritual  condition  and  prospects  of 
his  Jewish  kinsmen  that  wrung  his  heart ;  but  Gentiles  drew  forth  this  tender  con- 
cern no  less  than  Jews.  6.  How  solemn  is  human  life  !  How  tragic  is  human  ruin  I 
How  saddening  to  reflect  that  such  tragedies  are  hourly  enacting  themselves  under 
all  the  sheet-lightning  play  of  laughter  and  shallow  merry-makings  of  the  world ! 
•'  Life  is  real,  life  is  earnest."  7.  How  vitally  indispensable  is  the  gospel ;  for  is  it 
not  implied  in  our  apostle's  statement  that  there  is  life  only  in  Christ  ?  Separa- 
tion from  Christ  is  here  assumed  to  be  separation  from  bliss,  and  to  be  identical 
with  curse.  8.  And  how  free  is  that  gospel  1  No  reprobating  decree ;  else  thc.-e 
tears  of  Paul,  if  tears  of  sympathy  for  men  were  tears  of  antipathy  and  even 
treachery'  ii^  relation  to  God.  The  grace  of  God  that  hath  appeared  "  briigs  salva- 
tion unto  ail  men."  It  is  brought  to  our  very  door.  It  is  pressed  upon  us,  but  not 
VOL.  IL  17 


268  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ffHAP.  ij. 

forced.  The  issue  rests  with  our  own  free  will.  Paul  the  persecutor  acted  out  hia 
"  wish,"  or  choice ;  and  so  with  equal  freedom  did  Paul  the  preacher  (Deut.  xxx. 
19,  20).  {J.  Guthrie,  M.  A.)  Anathema: — The  word  was  originally  employed  to 
denote  what  was  by  way  of  consecration  put  up  in  a  temple.  The  "  anathema  " 
might  be  an  offering  of  gratitude  for  deliverance  or  some  other  blessing  ;  or  it  might 
be,  in  the  ages  of  spiritual  darkness,  a  kind  of  sacred  bribe  presented  to  the  deity. 
But  whatever  it  was  it  would,  if  of  convenient  shape  and  bulk,  be  hung  up  on  a 
pillar,  or  suspended  on  the  wall  of  the  shrine.  It  thenceforward  belonged  to  the 
god,  and  it  would  have  been  not  only  theft  but  sacrilege  for  any  one,  even  a  priest, 
to  have  appropriated  it.  When  the  term  was  adopted  by  the  Greek-speaking 
Hebrews  it  was  used  in  exchange  for  the  Hebrew  cherem,  which  had  for  its  radical 
import  the  idea  of  severance.  Whatever  was  by  Divine  arrangement  utterly  "  cut 
off  "  from  any  man's  enjoyment  was  cherem  to  that  man.  God  reserved  its  use. 
It  was  His  cherem.  If  it  were  a  thing  that  still  continued  fit  for  human  use,  God 
might  assign  it  to  His  peculiar  servants  for  their  benefit  (Levit.  xxvii.  21 ;  Numb, 
xviii.  14  ;  Ezek.  xliv.  29),  or  if  that  were  not  desirable  He  might  put  it  entirely  out 
of  the  way,  or  doom  it  to  destruction  (1  Kings  xx.  42).  Such  devotement  to 
destruction  is  often  desirable  in  a  world  such  as  ours,  so  polluted,  perverted,  abused. 
There  are  things  which  cannot  be  turned  to  better  account  than  to  be  utterly 
destroyed.  There  are  moral  nuisances  which  can  only  be  swept  away  by  "  the 
besom  of  destruction,"  Among  these  moral  nuisances  are  morally  leprous  and 
festering  men,  who  "  will  not  "  be  healed  of  their  contagious  sores.  These  and  their 
infected  rookeries  must  be  swept  away.  The  sooner  the  better  for  society  at  large. 
God  will  be  glorified  in  the  work  of  destruction.  Hence  "  anathema,"  which  at 
first  meant  something  valuable  devoted  to  a  god,  came,  when  applied  within  the 
sphere  of  the  moral  government  of  the  living  and  true  God,  to  denote  objects  which 
had  become  irreclaimably  corrupt,  and  which  consequently  He  wisely  doomed  to  be 
destroyed.  The  apostle  disintegrating  one  particular  line  of  Hebrew  thought  from 
amid  the  complexity  of  ideas  that  were  woven  around  the  word  felt  at  times  that, 
if  the  ethical  element  were  eliminated  from  the  case,  he  could  submit  to  be  himself 
destroyed,  even  from  "the  presence  of  bis  Lord,"  if  thereby  his  kinsmen  could  be 
constituted  heirs  of  everlasting  life  and  bliss.  The  destruction  of  which  he  thought 
was  thus  the  annihilation,  not  of  his  being,  but  of  substantial  elements  and  factors 
of  well-being.  {J.  Morison,  D.D.)  Aiuithema  from  Christ: — St.  Paul  closes  the 
previous  chapter  with  the  triumphant  confidence  that  "  neither  death  nor  life,"  &c., 
should  be  able  to  "  separate  him  "  from  the  love  of  God  which  is  in  Christ."  The 
inventory  of  possible  separating  forces  is  comprehensive  enough,  but  it  is  not 
exhaustive.  The  apostle  omitted  one  potentiality  which,  alas !  is  constantly  separa- 
ting men  from  the  love  of  Christ— self.  The  citadel  which  can  resist  any  combina- 
tion of  external  adversaries  may  fall  through  the  voluntary  act  of  the  garrison 
within.  The  gate  which  cannot  be  battered  down  can  be  opened.  Men  cannot  be 
driven  from  Christ,  but  they  can  "  go  away."  But  in  his  rush  of  inspired  feeling 
St.  Paul  would  not  entertain  the  thought  of  himself  as  withdrawing  from  the  love 
of  Christ,  and  naturally  so.  He  knew  himself  too  well  to  admit  for  one  moment 
the  likelihood  of  a  guilty  abandonment  of  One  who  was  his  "  life."  There  was  no 
possibility  of  spiritual  murder,  nor  probability  of  spiritual  suicide.  But  the  rush 
of  feeling  over  he  now  in  cool  thought  recollects  that  separation  from  Christ  and 
His  love  was  not  only  conceivable  and  possible,  but,  in  certain  circumstances,  even 
desirable  ;  and  not  from  a  sinfully  selfish  motive,  but  for  one  Divinely  philanthropic. 
His  "  heart's  desire  and  prayer  to  God  for  Israel  is  that  they  might  be  saved  " 
(chap.  X.  1).  How  much  depended  upon  the  gratification  of  that  desire  in  rela- 
tion to  the  Jews  themselves,  to  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  and  Christ  Himself,  he  goes 
on  to  show.  How  was  this  devoutly  wished  for  consummation  to  be  reached?  He 
had  used  every  means  within  his  power,  and  had  sacrificed  every  interest  but  one 
— his  interest  in  Christ.  Could  the  salvation  of  his  countrymen  be  accomplished 
by  the  sacrifice  of  this?  Would  a  self-devotion  paralleled  only  by  that  which 
extorted  the  "  My  God,  My  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me  ?  "  suffice  ?  If  so  he 
asked  to  drink  of  the  same  cup,  and  be  baptized  with  the  same  baptism — knowing, 
unlike  the  sons  of  Zebedee,  what  he  asked.  To  secure  the  world's  redemption  the 
Master  did  not  shrink  from  the  Divine  abandonment ;  to  secure  the  effectual  applica- 
tion of  that  redemption  to  his  kinsmen  the  servant  would  not  shrink  from  the 
abandonment  of  his  Master.  The  greatness  of  the  issue  overshadowed  the  magni- 
tude of  the  personal  sacrifice.  Let  us  ponder — I.  The  woNDERFuii  wish.  What 
^d  it  mean  ?    1.  Dismissal  from  the  work  of  Christ.    This  was  the  apostle's  joy, 


cmr.  IT.]  ROMANS.  259 

and  not  all  the  persecations  of  this  world  nor  all  the  allnrements  of  the  next"could 
tempt  him  even  to  wish  that  he  could  abandon  it.  Yet  anathema  from  Christ 
meant  dismissal  after  all  he  had  accomplished,  and  prohibition  against  attempting 
any  more.  The  labourer  was  willing  to  set  aside  that  another  might  continue  and 
reap  the  fruits  of  his  labour ;  the  warrior  was  willing  to  resign  the  weapons  of  the 
warfare  and  the  laurels  of  the  victory  to  other  hands.  2.  Alienation  from  the 
friendship  of  Christ.  What  the  friendship  of  Christ  was  to  the  apostle  may  be 
gathered  from  what  he  gave  to  win  it,  what  he  did  to  cherish  it,  his  own  testimony 
to  its  surpassing  worth  and  the  recorded  instances  of  its  tenderness  and  power. 
This  was  the  effectual  consolation  of  the  lonely  man  in  the  strange  city,  in  the 
presence  of  raging  mobs  amidst  the  perils  of  shipwreck,  and  at  last  in  the  Eoman 
dungeon.  Measure  then  what  it  must  have  been  for  Paul  to  perfect  it.  3.  Dissolu- 
tion of  anion  with  Christ.  Review  his  own  illustrations  of  what  this  oneness  was  ; 
that  between  head  and  body,  husband  and  wife,  tree  and  branches,  foundation  and 
building,  &c.  Christ  and  Paul  were  one  in  life,  one  in  mind,  one  in  heart.  Yet 
Paul  was  willing  to  be  anathema  from  all  this.  4.  Eternal  abandonment  by  Christ. 
Life  would  have  been  unendurable  but  for  Christ,  yet  Paul  did  not  shrink  from  the 
prospect  of  eternity  without  Him.  II.  The  wonderful  wish  viewed  in  the  light 
OF  its  ultimate  purpose.  Many  have  become  anathema  from  Christ,  abandoned 
His  work,  renounced  His  friendship,  sundered  the  union  between  them  and  gone 
away  into  everlasting  destruction  from  His  presence,  for  the  lowest  and  most  selfish 
motives.  The  labour  has  been  felt  to  be  too  hard,  the  friendship  too  exacting,  the 
union  so  self-crucifying,  and  the  heaven  so  holy  and  so  far  away.  Or  association 
wth  Christ  has  barred  the  way  of  pleasure,  riches,  advancement,  and  renown.  In 
Paul's  case  self  was  absolutely  annihilated.  Christ  was  all  to  him,  he  was  willing 
to  renounce  that  all  if  by  that  means  others  might  have  it.  He  was  only  one,  his 
kindred  were  many.  He  was  content  that  he,  the  unit,  should  be  sacrificed  so  tbat 
the  multitude  might  be  blessed.  His  wish  in  this  view  of  it  was — 1.  That  his 
beloved  work  in  other  hands  might  be  more  successful.  Hitherto  he  had  only 
aroused  the  hatred  of  his  kinsmen  to  his  Lord.  He  vdshed,  therefore,  to  stand 
aside  if  another  agency  could  win  their  love.  2.  That  by  his  exclusion  from  it 
the  circle  of  Christ's  friends  might  be  indefinitely  enlarged.  If  mere  prejudice 
against  himself  were  keeping  his  brethren  away,  he  would  gladly  forego  all  the 
blessed  privileges  connected  with  Christ's  companionship,  if  his  brethren  would 
only  come  and  accept  them  instead.  He  would,  if  possible,  view  with  gratitude  from 
a  distance  the  unceasing  spread  of  Christ's  influence,  and  the  constantly  augmenting 
number  of  Christ's  friends.  3.  Tbat  the  whole  race  of  which  he  was  but  a  solitary 
member  might  become  one  with  Christ  at  his  expense.  He  saw  what  this  would 
mean  for  the  world.  A  Christianised  Judaism  as  a  moral  force  would  be  irresistible. 
He,  then,  would  not  stand  in  the  way  of  this.  4.  That  heaven  might  be  now  richly 
peopled  by  his  exclusion.  The  thought  of  the  great  body  of  his  kinsmen  anathema 
from  Christ  for  ever  was  so  terrible  that,  if  lawful,  he  would  renounce  his  heavenly 
hopes  that  they,  instead  of  himself,  might  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord.  Conclusion  : 
1.  The  wish  marks  the  advance  of  Christianity  beyond  all  the  world's  conceptions 
of  philanthropy.  Many  sublime  sacrifices  had  been  made,  but  where  is  the  record 
of  such  a  wish  as  this  ?  Read  it  in  the  light  of  chap.  v.  7,  8.  2.  The  wish  could 
not  be  gratified.  Paul  could  have  devoted  himself  without  sin ;  but  Christ  could 
not  have  consented.  Even  such  an  end  could  not  justify  such  a  means.  Christ 
loves  the  world,  but  He  loves  the  individual,  and  such  an  individual  as  Paul  could 
not  be  sacrificed  for  the  world  without  the  sacrifice  of  Christ's  own  love  and  equity 
as  well.  3.  The  carrying  out  of  the  wish  is  unthinkable.  Anathema  from  Christ 
from  such  a  motive  would  necessarily  bind  more  closely  to  Him.  The  means  of 
repulsion  are  the  very  means  of  attraction.  Paul's  wish  is  the  very  spirit  of  Christ ; 
and  for  Christ  to  have  allowed  it  would  have  been  for  Christ  to  deny  Himself.  (J. 
W.  Burn.)  The  vicariousness  of  gospel  philanthropy  : — I.  Its  strong  substitu- 
TiONABY  CBAViNo.  Paul  wlsbes  here  to  suffer  for  the  sake  of  his  brethren .  All  love  ia 
in  a  sense  substitutionary.  It  suffers  for  others.  The  more  love  a  being  has  in  a 
world  of  suffering,  the  more  vicarious  agony  he  must  endure.  Love  loads  us  with 
the  infirmities  and  sorrows  of  all  around.  Christ  came  here  with  an  infinite  love 
for  the  whole  world  ;  and  by  an  eternal  law  of  sympathy  He  suffered  for  the  world. 
But  there  is,  moreover,  a  craving  in  love  to  suffer  instead  of  its  object.  Does  not 
the  mother  desire  to  suffer  instead  of  the  bibe  that  lies  on  the  bed  of  anguish  ? 
Substitution  of  this  kind  is  the  law  of  love.  II  Its  self-sacrificing  power.  The 
apostle  not  only  desired  to  suffer  instead  of  his  brethren,  but  to  suffer  the  greatest 


260  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat,  ix* 


evil,  to  sacrifice  his  all  for  them.    He  desired  to  be  anathema  from  Christ.    What 
does  this  involve  ?    "  Terrible  enough,"  says  Dean  Plumptre,  "  would  have  been 
that  word  "  anathema  "  if  it  had  brought  with  it  only  the  thoughts  which  a  Jewish 
reader  would  have  associated  with  it.    To  come  under  all  the  curses,  dark  and 
dread,  which  were  written  in  the  book  of  the  law ;  to  be  cursed  in  waking  and 
sleeping,  going  out  and  coming  in,  in  buying  and  selling,  in  the  city  and  in  the  field  ; 
to  be  shunned,  hated  as  a  Samaritan  was  hated,  shut  out  from  fellowship  with  all 
human  society  that  had  been  most  prized,  from  all  kindly  greeting  of  friends  and 
neighbours.    This  was  what  he  would  have  connected  with  the  words  as  their  least 
and  lowest  meaning.    The  Christian  reader,  possibly  the  Jewish  also,  would  have 
gone  yet  further.    The  apostle's  own  words  would  have  taught  him  to  see  more. 
To  be  •  delivered  unto  Satan  for  the  destruction  of  the  flesh ' ;  to  come  under  sharp 
pain  of  body,  supernaturaUy  inflicted,  and  to  feel  that  that  excruciating  agony  or 
loathsome  plague  was  the  deserved  chastisement  of  a  sin  against  truth  and  light, 
and  to  be  shut  out  from  all  visible  fellowship  with  the  body  of  Christ,  and  therefore 
from  all  communication  with  Christ  Himself  ;  to  be  as  in  the  outer  darkness  while 
the  guests  were  feasting  in  the  illumined  chamber,  here  too  to  be  shunned  by  those 
who  had  been  friends  and  brothers.    This  would  have  been  the  Christian's  thoughts 
as  to  excommunication  in  the  apostolic  age.    But  beyond  all  this  the  apostle  found  a 
deeper  gulf  and  a  more  terrible  sentence.    To  be  anathema  from  Christ,  cut  off  for 
ever  from  that  eternal  life  which  he  had  known  as  the  truest  and  highest  blessed- 
ness, sentenced  for  ever  to  that  outer  darkness,  the  wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth, 
this  was  what  he  prayed  for  if  it  might  have  for  its  result  the  salvation  of  his 
brethren."    Gospel  love  involves  self-abnegation.     Self  sinks  as  love  rises.     Christ 
is  the  highest  example.    He  loved  us,  and  He  gave  Himself  for  us.     Here  is  the 
cause  and  the  effect.    Love  is  the  high  priest  of  the  soul ;  it  offers  the  whole  self, 
in.  Its  soul-saving  aim.     Why  did  Paul  wish  to  sacrifice  himself  ?    What  was  the 
grand  object  he  had  in  view?     The  spiritual  salvation  of  his  countrymen.     The 
vicarious  love  of  the  gospel  endures  and  craves  sufferings,  not  merely  or  mainly  to 
serve  men  materially  and  temporarily,  but  chiefly  spirituallyand  eternally  ;  to  save 
their  souls.    It  counts  no  perils  too  great,  no  sufferings  too  distressing,  no  sacrifices 
too  exacting,  in  order  to  redeem  immortal  spirits  from  ignorance,  selfishness,  world- 
liness,  guilt,  misery,  hell.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)        The  extravagance  of  holy  love  ;-— 
One  of  my  hearers  used  to  keep  puzzling  himself  fearfully  with  that  passage  in 
Scripture  about  Jesus  weeping  over  Jerusalem.     He  went  and  looked  at  Dr.  Gill 
about  it,  he  went  to  Thomas  Scott  about  it,  and  he  went  to  Matthew  Henry  about 
it ;  and  these  good  divines  all  puzzled  him  as  much  as  they  could,  but  they  did  not 
seem  to  clear  up  the  matter.     The  good  man  could  not  understand  how  Jesus  Christ 
could  say  as  He  did,  "  How  often  would  I  have  gathered  thee,  but  thou  wouldst 
not ! "    One  day  he  received  more  grace,  and  got  to  have  a  love  for  souls,  and  then 
the  old  skin  of  narrowmindedness  which  had  been  large  enough  for  him  once  began 
to  crack  and  break,  and  he  went  to  the  passage  then,  and  said,  "I  can  understand 
it  now ;  I  do  not  know  how  it  is  consistent  with  such  and  such  a  doctrine,  but  it  is 
very  consistent  with  what  I  feel  in  my  heart."    And  I  feel  just  the  same.    I  used 
to  be  puzzled  by  that  passage  where  Paul  says  that  he  conld  wish  himself  accursed 
from  God  for  his  brethren's  sake.    Why,  I  have  often  felt  the  same,  and  now  I 
understand  how  a  man  can  say  in  the  exuberance  of  his  love  to  others,  that  he 
would  be  willing  to  perish  himself  if  he  might  save  them.     Of  course  it  never  could 
be  done,  but  such  is  the  extravagance  of  a  holy  love  for  souls  that  it  breaks  through 
reason,  and  knows  no  bounds.     Get  the  heart  right  and  you  get  right  upon  many 
difficult  points.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        Heroic  devotion: — For  an  example  of  heroic 
devotion  let  us  go,  not  to  our  own  sacred  book,  but  to  a  heathen  story  in  the 
"  Mahabharat."    Have  you  read  of  Yodhishtera,  the  stainless  king,  who,  on  account 
of  his  pure  life  and  tender  pity  for  all  that  lives,  is  allowed  to  enter  heaven  without 
tasting  death  ?    But,  arrived  in  the  presence  of  the  immortal  gods,  he  misses  the 
faces  of  brothers  and  friends  whom  he  had  loved  and  lost,  and  bliss  is  not  blissful 
to  him,  and  he  cries,  "  Show  me  those  souls  ;  I  cannot  tarry  where  I  have  them  not. 
Heaven  is  there  where  love  and  faith  make  heaven  ;  let  me  go.     I  do  desire,"  ha 
said,  "  that  region,  be  it  of  the  blest,  as  this,  or  of  the  sorrowful,  some  other  v  here, 
where  idv  dear  brothers  are.     So  where  they  have  gone  there  will  I  surely  go."    He 
quits  tie  heaven  he  has  gained,  and  hellwards  turns.     But  while  he  traverses  the 
place  of  dread,  again  the  angels  invite  his  return.     He  answers,  "  Go  to  tho-e  thou 
servest,  tell  them  I  come  not  tbither ;  say  I  stand  here,  in  the  throat  of  holl,  and 
here  will  abide,  nay,  even  perish,  if  my  well-beloved  may  win  ease  and  peace  by  auy 


«BAP.  n.]  ROMANS.  «81 

pain  of  mine."  Are  we  going  backward?  Have  we  no  passion  for  saving ?— no 
sympathy  with  the  "  them  also  I  mast  bring  "  ? 

"  Heaven  is  not  heaven  to  one  alone  ; 
Save  thou  one  soul,  and  thou  may  est  save  thine  own." 

{Mrs.  E.  Campagnae.) 

A  passion  for  souls : — All  the  great  revivalists  of  the  Church  have  had  what  has  been 
called  a  passion  for  souls .  John  Smith,  the  mighty  Wesleyan  preacher,  used  to  say, 
"  I  am  a  broken-hearted  man ;  not  for  myself,  but  on  account  of  others.  God  has 
given  me  such  a  sight  of  the  value  of  precious  souls,  that  I  cannot  live  if  souls  are 
not  saved.     Oh,  give  me  souls,  or  else  I  die  1 " 

Vers.  4,  5,  Who  are  Israelites. — The  literal  and  the  true  Israelites: — I.  The 
literal  enjoyed  the  adoption  as  God's  people  among  whom  God  revealed  Himself 
gloriously — the  true  enjoy  the  adoption  of  sons  and  the  glorious  indwelling  of  the 
Spirit.  II.  The  literal  were  privileged  with  the  patbiarchal  covenants  and  thb 
orviNO  OF  THE  LAW — the  true  are  privileged  with  the  New  Testament  covenant,  and 
the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit.  III.  The  literal  rejoiced  in  the  Levitical  service, 
AND  the  promises  of  better  things  to  come — the  true  worship  God  in  the  Spirit,  and 
rejoice  in  the  hope  of  eternal  life.  IV.  The  literal  could  boast  of  the  fathers 
and  anticipate  the  Messiah — the  true  have  their  apostles,  martyrs,  and  confessors, 
and  look  for  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God  and  our  Saviour.  (J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  The  Israelites  and  their  privileges: — The  name  Israelites  was  a  most 
honourable  one,  and  dear  to  them  all.  The  relationship  which  it  signalised  was 
fitted  to  remind  them  that  by  the  condescension  of  the  Omnipotent  One,  there  was 
something  "  princely  "  within  their  reach  (Gen.  xxxii.  28 ;  Hos.  xii.  3).  I.  Thb 
ADOPTION.  Under  the  Old  Testament  the  Divine  adoption  realised  itself  specifically 
in  the  collective  theocratic  people  as  a  people  (Exod.  iv.  22  ;  cf.  Jer.  xxxi.  9  ;  Hos. 
xi.  1).  The  collective  people  were  for  great  theocratic  purposes  adopted  into  a 
relation  of  Divine  sonship,  and  thus  into  a  relation  of  peculiar  Divine  privilege  , 
not,  however,  because  of  a  feeling  of  partiality  in  the  heart  of  God  toward  a  section 
of  His  human  family,  but  because  His  benignant  Messianic  purposes,  widespread- 
ing  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  required  some  arrangement  of  the  kind.  Such  was 
the  Divine  plan  in  Old  Testament  ages.  The  Israelites  were  God's  "son," 
"  daughter,"  or  "  daughter  of  His  people."  At  times  the  representation  tended 
anticipatively  toward  the  grander  principle  of  personal  individuality ;  as  when  it 
is  said,  "  I  have  nourished  and  brought  up  children,  and  they  have  rebelled  against 
Me."  But  it  was  reserved  for  the  New  Testament  age  to  give  emphasis  to  the  idea 
of  personal  individualism  in  relation  to  the  Divine  adoption  (John  i.  12 ;  Gal.  iii. 
26;  1  John  iii.  1).  II.  The  glory.  The  reference  is  to  that  peculiar  symbol  of 
the  Divine  presence  which  guided  the  Israelites  out  of  Egypt  and  through  the 
wilderness,  overshadowing  them  by  day  and  illuminating  them  by  night  (Exod. 
xiii.  21,  22,  xlv.  19).  This  was  in  some  external  respects  God's  glory  par  excellence 
(Exod.  xxiv.  16).  It  was  a  magnificent  symbol  of  Divine  guidance  and  protection, 
and  was  denominated  "  the  Shekinah."  Wherever  it  was  to  be  found,  there  God 
was  to  be  found;  not  indeed  as  in  His  palace-home,  the  "house  not  made  by 
hands,"  but  as  in  His  temporary  tent  beside  His  tented  people  in  the  period  of 
their  pilgrimage — a  very  present  Helper  and  Defence.  HI.  The  covenants.  These 
were  engagements  on  the  part  of  God  to  confer  distinguishing  privileges  on  the 
patriarchs  and  the  Israelites  in  general,  on  condition  of  responsive  appreciation  on 
their  part,  and  the  observance,  in  all  the  affairs  of  life,  of  His  regulative  will  (Gen. 
XV.  1-6,  xvii.  1-8,  15-19 ;  Exod.  xix.  1-9).  But  these  engagements,  while  thus 
involving,  as  is  suggested  by  the  Hebrew  term  Berith,  a  certain  ineradicable  condi- 
tionality,  were  at  the  same  time  in  accordance  with  the  Greek  suntheke,  spon- 
taneous and  unencumbered  dispositions  of  goods  and  distributions  of  benefits,  just 
as  if  they  had  been  actually  "willed"  to  them  by  testamentary  deed.  God  "dis- 
posed "  of  certain  portions  of  His  means  and  goods  for  the  benefit  of  His  national 
son,  though  it  was  impossible  that  He  could  alienate  the  goods  from  Himself,  or 
ahenate  Himself  from  both  His  present  usufruct  and  His  perpetual  right  of  pro- 
perty. IV.  The  orviNO  of  the  Law,  i.e.,  the  Divine  legislative  enactments  pub- 
lished from  Sinai,  and  constituting  in  their  sum  the  code  which  is  known  as  the 
"  moral  law."  It  is  incomparably  the  best  of  all  bases  for  the  innumerable  details 
of  practical  jurisprudence.     It  goes  back,  indeed,  in  its  form  to  that  primitive  era 


262  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  nt 

•when  duty  was,  to  a  most  preponderating  extent,  identified  with  moral  self-restraint. 
Hence  its  injunctions  are  wisely  set  forth  in  negations.  But  when  the  detailed 
expanse  of  the  decalogue  is  condensed  into  the  summation  of  the  duologue,  the 
phase  of  representation  is  become  affirmative ;  and  nothing  can  excel  the  duological 
enactments  in  comprehensiveness,  completeness,  simplicity,  and  direct  authority 
over  the  reason  and  the  conscience.  V.  The  service,  i.e.,  the  temple  service — a 
grand  ritual,  here  regarded  as  a  Divine  appointment  or  grant  of  grace.  Being  in 
its  many  and  varied  details  instinct  with  practical  significance,  it  was  fitted  to 
recall  to  the  minds  of  the  worshippers  what  was  due  to  God  on  the  one  hand,  and 
how  much  was  graciously  provided  by  Him  on  the  other.  VI.  The  peomises — 
announcements  of  coming  favours — avant-couriers  of  the  favours  themselves,  and 
sent  forth  to  stimulate  expectation  and  support  the  heart.  All  the  Old  Testament 
dispensations  were  replete  with  Messianic  promises.  His  coming  was  "  the 
promise " — the  one  running  promise  made  to  the  fathers  (Acts  xiii.  32),  and 
involved  all  other  Messianic  blessings,  such  as  the  atonement,  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  the  reign  to  be  continued  "  as  long  as  the  sun,"  the  "  new  earth,"  the 
"  inheritance  of  the  world  "  (chap.  iv.  13,  14).  It  involved  peace,  joy,  hope,  all  of 
them  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory  (chap.  v.  1-11).  VII.  The  fathers — the 
patriarch  fathers,  the  band  of  whom  Abraham  was  the  leader  and  typical  repre- 
sentative. They  were  far  indeed  from  being  men  without  blemish.  But  perhaps 
most  of  the  sinister  bars  in  their  escutcheon  were  parcels  of  the  heritage  which 
they  had  received  from  their  ancestors.  But  notwithstanding  their  blemishes  they 
were  at  once  childlike  in  faith  and  reverential  in  spirit.  Their  thoughts  rose  up 
on  high.  They  "  sought  a  heavenly  country  and  looked  for  a  city  whose  builder 
and  architect  was  God"  (Heb.  xi.  10-14).  It  was  no  little  advantage  to  be 
descended  from  such  sires.  VIII.  The  Christ.  The  Messiah  emerged  from 
among  the  Hebrews,  and  thus  "  salvation  was  of  the  Jews."  It  was  their  crowning 
prerogative.  Jesus  was  a  Jew.  But  His  own  people  knew  not  their  privilege,  and 
they  perceived  not  that  it  was  the  time  of  tide  in  the  day  of  their  merciful  visita- 
tion (John  i.  11 ;  cf.  Matt.  xxi.  39).  When  the  apostle  said  "  so  far  as  His  human 
nature  was  concerned,"  his  mind  was  already  mounting  the  infinite  height  which 
rose  beyond.  "  Who  is  over  all,  God,  to  be  blessed  for  ever."  {J.  Morison,  D.D.) 
Israelites  and  their  privileges  : — To  no  nation  under  the  sun  does  there  belong  so 
proud,  so  magnificent  a  heraldry.  No  minstrel  of  a  country's  fame  was  ever 
furnished  so  richly  with  topics ;  and  the  heart  and  fancy  of  our  apostle  seem  to 
kindle  at  the  enumeration  of  them.  They  were  first  Israelites,  or  descendants  of  a 
venerable  patriarch — then,  selected  from  among  all  the  families  of  the  earth,  they 
were  the  adopted  children  of  God,  and  to  them  belonged  the  glory  of  this  high  and 
heavenly  relationship  ;  and  with  their  ancestors  were  those  covenants  made  which 
enveloped  the  great  spiritual  destinies  of  the  human  race  ;  and  the  dispensation  of 
the  Law  from  that  mountain  which  smoked  at  the  touch  of  the  Divinity  was  theirs; 
and  that  solemn  temple  service  where  alone  the  true  worship  of  the  Eternal  was 
kept  up  for  ages  was  theirs ;  and  as  their  history  was  noble  from  its  commencement 
by  the  fathers  from  whom  they  sprung,  so  at  its  close  did  it  gather  upon  it  a 
nobility  more  wondrous  stiU  by  the  mighty  and  mysterious  descendant  in  whom  it 
may  be  said  to  have  terminated — even  Him  who  at  once  is  the  root  and  the  offspring 
of  David,  and  with  the  mention  of  whose  name  our  apostle  finishes  this  stately 
climax  of  their  honours — "  of  whom  as  concerning  the  fiesh  Christ  came,  who  is 
over  all  God  blessed  for  ever.  Amen. "  They  are  far  the  most  illustrious  people  on 
the  face  of  the  world.  There  shines  upon  them  a  transcendental  glory  from  on  high ; 
and  all  that  the  history  whether  of  classical  or  heroic  ages  hath  enrolled  of  other 
nations  are  but  as  the  lesser  lights  of  the  firmament  before  it.  (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.) 
The  covenants. — I.  The  term  itself  bears  a  special  Messianic  meaning,  as  alwayp 
haviug  in  view  the  fidelity  of  God  to  the  design  of  human  redemption  through  the 
sacrifice  of  His  Son.  The  Hebrew  Berith  almost  always  translated  in  the  LXX.  by 
diatheke,  signifies,  not  a  compact  as  between  man  and  man,  but  the  disposition  or 
arrangement  assumed  by  the  one  supreme  purpose  of  grace.  Unlike  human  com- 
pacts it  is  invariably  connected  with  sacrifice.  The  Hebrew  contains  an  allusion 
to  the  custom  of  cutting  and  passing  between  the  parts  of  a  divided  animal  on  the 
ratification  of  a  covenant.  The  first  express  revelation  of  the  covenant  to  Abra- 
ham (Gen.  XV.  18)  gives  the  key  to  all  its  history.  There  all  is  based  on  a  free 
Divine  promise.  The  animals  divided  denoted  the  two  parties  to  the  great  trans- 
action ;  and  the  flame  passing  through  was  God,  in  His  future  Son,  the  Shekinah, 
uniting  the  parties  alone,  and  thus  ratifying  His  own  covenant.    The  New  Tests- 


OHAP.  ES.]  EOMANS.  26S 

ment  term  diatheke  does  not  preserve  the  original  allusion ;  but  it  is  never  discon- 
nected from  the  idea.  The  one  covenant  of  grace  has  been  ratified  by  an  eternal 
sacrifice ;  which  is  at  the  same  time  the  death  of  the  Testator,  who  disposes  the 
promise  of  eternal  inheritance  according  to  the  counsel  of  His  own  will.     II.  Thb 

COVENANT  OF  REDEMPTION,  OR  OF  GRACE,  HAS  AliWATS  BEEN  CONNECTED  WITH  ChRIST,  ITS 

TTNREVEALED  MEDIATOR.  As  its  Mediator  He  is  the  medium  through  whom,  or 
rather  in  whom,  all  its  blessings  are  conveyed :  that  grace  which  is  the  one  name 
and  blessing  of  the  covenant,  the  free  bestowment  of  favour  on  sinful  man,  or  "  the 
grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  "  (2  Cor.  xiii.  14).  Therefore  the  term,  which  has  a 
wider  meaning  than  its  relation  to  a  compact,  may  be  applied  to  Christ  as  the  yet 
unknown  Redeemer  who  was  at  once  the  ground  of  the  covenant,  and  its  promise, 
and  its  virtual  administrator.  After  He  came  and  was  revealed,  it  is  the  term 
surety  that  more  precisely  expresses  His  mediatorship  in  the  order  of  grace :  in  His 
Divine-human  atoning  personahty,  He  is  the  Pledge  to  man  of  the  bestowment  by 
God  of  all  blessings  procured  through  His  atoning  work,  and  the  Pledge  to  God  on 
behalf  of  mankind  of  compliance  with  all  the  conditions  of  the  covenant.  In  the 
Old  Testament  the  future  Redeemer  is  not  termed  either  the  Mediator  or  the 
Surety;  though  He  was  in  the  profoundest  sense  both  as  the  Angel  or  "  Messenger 
of  the  covenant"  (Mai.  iii.  1),  and  Himself  the  embodied  Covenant  reserved  for  the 
future  (Isa.  xlix.  8).  What  was  thus  given  to  Him  by  promise  becomes  the  heritage 
of  His  people  through  faith,  who  as  "  Christ's  are  heirs  according  to  the  promise  " 
(Gal.  iii.  18,  19,  29).  III.  This  onk  covenant  has  taken  three  forms  in  the 
history  of  revelation.  1.  As  entered  into  with  mankind,  represented  by  Adam,  its 
revelation  began  with  the  Fall,  was  ratified  for  the  world  with  Noah,  and  was  con- 
firmed to  Abraham  as  the  representative  of  all  believers  to  the  end  of  time.  2.  But 
the  covenant  with  Abraham  for  the  world  in  all  ages  also  introduced  the  special 
compact  with  bis  descendants  after  the  flesh.  The  latter  was  established  through 
Moses,  its  mediator  ;  and  blended  the  covenant  of  grace  with  a  covenant  of  works. 
The  law  was  given  by  Moses  ;  and  as  an  appended  form  or  condition  of  the  original 
institute  of  grace,  perpetually  convicted  the  people  of  their  sin  and  impotence,  drove 
them  to  take  refuge  in  the  hope  of  a  future  grace,  the  ground  of  which  was  kept 
before  them  in  the  institute  of  sacrifice.  3.  Finally  the  new  covenant,  established 
on  better  promises  (Heb.  viii.  6),  was  ratified  in  the  death  of  Christ.  It  was  at  once 
the  abrogation  of  the  Mosaic,  or  later  old  covenant,  so  far  as  concerns  its  national 
relation  and  its  legal  condition,  and  the  renewal  unto  perfection  of  the  more  ancient 
covenant,  always  in  force  and  never  superseded,  with  mankind.  (W.  B.  Pope,  D.D.) 
The  giving  of  the  law. — 1.  The  act  as  described  (Exod.  xx.  18  ;  Deut.  iv.  32,  &c.). 
2.  The  law  itself.  System  of  laws  given  (Deut.  iv.  5-8 ;  Psa.  cxlvii.  19,  20)  .  A 
distinction  exalting  Israel  above  every  other  nation,  served — (1)  For  instruction. 
(2)  For  restraint.  (3)  For  conviction.  Prepared  the  way  for  the  promised  Saviour 
(Gal.  iii.  21).  Its  observance  brought  national  blessings  in  its  train.  (T.  Robinson, 
D.D.)  The  service  of  God. — A  technical  term  for  Divine  worship.  The  apostle 
is  detailing  the  privileges  which  constituted  Israel  a  peculiar  people.  This  was  one 
of  the  most  conspicuous.  For  the  service  of  Jehovah  was  distinguished  from  all 
heathen  cults  : — I.  In  its  origin.  This  was  Divine.  God  Himself  arranged  the 
whole  Hebrew  ritual  down  to  its  minutest  details.  Man  was  not  left  to  his  own 
blind  instincts  as  to  the  manner  in  which  his  Maker  was  to  be  approached.  No 
doubt  all  worship  was  Divine  in  its  origin,  and  were  we  able  to  thread  the  labyrinths 
of  heathen  devotion  we  should  arrive  ultimately  at  a  primitive  revelation.  But  this 
is  impossible ;  and  the  great  mass  of  heathen  worship  is  the  offspring  of  irrational 
superstition  when  it  was  not  the  device  of  a  fraudulent  priesthood.  II.  In  its 
NATURE.  1.  It  was  spiritual.  The  forms  were  materialistic  as  all  forms  must 
necessarily  be;  but  it  was  not  mere  form  as  heathen  worship  was.  Time  after 
time  it  was  carefully  explained  that  the  sacrifices,  &c.,  were  symbolic,  and  that 
without  the  corresponding  spiritual  reality  they  were  an  abomination  to  Deity.  To 
what  an  extent  this  was  realised  by  the  best  spirits  of  the  nation,  the  Psalms  and 
prophets  abundantly  testify.  2.  It  was  intelligent.  The  heathen  worshipped 
"  they  knew  not  what."  To  worship  all  the  objects  presented  to  their  devotion 
was  an  impossibility,  and  had  it  been  possible,  ineffectual,  for  prayers  offered  to 
one  God  would  have  been  neutralised  by  those  offered  to  another.  And  the 
intelligent  heathen,  while  he  conformed  to  the  superstitions  of  his  fellow-country- 
men, knew  the  host  of  Olympus  to  be  a  myth.  The  Hebrews  knew  whom  they 
worshipped.  The  Shekinah  glory  was  a  standing  evidence  of  the  Divine  existence 
and  presence,  and  the  revelations  of  His  character  from  time  to  time  exhibited  Him 


264  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

as  worthy  of  the  homage  of  rational  beings.  III.  In  its  effects.  These  were — 1. 
Humbling.  The  whole  system  was  calculated  to  reveal  the  Dirine  greatness  and 
holiness  on  the  one  hand  and  human  insignificance  and  sinfulness  on  the  other, 
and  thus  was  discouraging  to  pride  and  self-confidence.  It  was  not  the  fault  of  the 
system  if  men  thanked  God  that  they  were  not  as  other  men  were.  Heathen 
worship  encouraged  no  such  notions  of  God  or  man,  and  hence  humility  was  never 
a  heathen  virtue.  2.  Joyful.  God  was  served  with  gladness ;  and  the  joy  of  the 
Lord  was  the  people's  strength  for  services.  The  great  festivals  are  proofs  of  this. 
Heathenism  had  plenty  of  hilarity,  but  little  joy.  How  could  it  have  had  when 
their  worship  brought  no  manifestation  of  the  Divine  presence  and  no  consciousness 
of  the  Divine  favour  ?  3.  Moral.  Holiness  unto  the  Lord  was  the  legitimate  and 
only  issue  of  the  Mosaic  system  :  whereas  we  know  that  many  heathen  gods  were 
served  with  obscene  rites,  and  that  the  whole  tendency  of  idolatry  was  degrading  to 
intellect,  heart  and  life.  Conclusion  :  The  comparative  value  of  heathen  and 
Hebrew  worship  may  be  seen  in  their  devotional  manuals.  To  estimate  this  let 
the  Book  of  Psalms  be  read  side  by  side  with  the  Vedas,  Shasters,  <fec.  {J.  W. 
Burn.)  The  promises. — 1.  Of  blessings  in  general  (Levit.  xxvi.  48;  Deut.  xxviii. 
1-14).  2.  Of  the  Messiah  in  particular.  Given  various  times  and  in  various 
ways  (Heb.  i.  1 ;  Eom.  i.  2).  Some  already  fulfilled  in  Christ's  first  coming  (Acts 
iii.  18,  22-26).  Others  yet  to  be  fulfilled  in  Israel's  experience  (Ezek.  xxxvii ;  Isa. 
Ixvi.).  All  the  promises  of  God,  yea  and  amen  in  Christ  (2  Cor.  i.  20).  Gentiles 
by  faith  made  fellow-heirs  of  the  promises  (Eph.  iii.  6  ;  Gal.  iii.  29).  promises  all 
fulfilled  at  Christ's  second  appearing  (chap.  xi.  26 ;  Acts  i.  6,  iii.  19-21). 
Mentioned  last  as  the  transition  to  Christ  Himself.  {T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Whose 
are  the  fathers,  and  of  whom,  as  concerning  the  flesh,  Christ  came,  who  is  over  all, 
God  blessed  for  ever. — The  fact  of  facts  in  human  history : — Here  is— I.  Thb 
CEOWKiNG  FACT  IN  Jewish  HISTORY.  "  Of  whom  as  conccming  the  flesh  Christ 
came."  In  the  preceding  verses  the  apostle  points  to  the  most  illustrious  facts  in 
the  history,  facts  in  which  the  Jews  passionately  gloried.  They  were  "  Israelites." 
No  national  appellation  in  their  estimation  was  so  distinguished  as  this ;  Greek  and 
Eoman  were  contemptible  by  its  side.  Theirs  was  the  '•  adoption."  To  them 
pertained  the  "  glory."  They  had  the  "  covenants."  The  covenants  with  Abraham, 
with  Jacob,  and  with  Moses,  were  with  them.  To  them  pertained  the  "  giving  of 
the  law."  The  best  commentary  on  these  words  is  to  be  found  by  Moses  himself 
(Deut.  iv.  32-36).  To  them  also  pertained  the  "  service  of  God."  He  mentions 
these  in  order  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  announcement  of  a  fact  before  whose 
splendour  all  others  pale  their  lustre,  and  that  is  this  :  "  Of  whom,  as  concerning 
the  flesh,  Christ  came."  This  was  the  crowning  fact  of  their  history.  He  does 
not  disparage  the  other  facts ;  on  the  contrary,  he  is  patriotically  proud  of  them. 
When  will  the  Jew  come  to  see  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  is  the  glory  of  Israelitish 
history  ?  Here  is — H.  The  greatest  fact  in  human  history.  1.  There  are  many 
great  facts  in  the  history  of  the  world.  (1)  Physical,  such  as  deluges,  earthquakes, 
wars,  pestilences,  &c.  (2)  Political,  such  as  the  rise  and  fall  of  empires.  (3)  Social, 
such  as  discoveries  in  science,  inventions  in  art,  reformations  in  customs  and 
manners.  (4)  Eeligious,  such  as  the  birth,  growth,  and  decay  of  theological 
systems  and  ceremonial  observances.  2.  But  of  all  facts  there  is  not  one 
approaching  the  great  one  in  the  text,  viz.,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world. 
(1)  No  fact  is  better  attested.  (2)  No  fact  is  so  central  in  the  world's  history  aa 
this.  (3)  No  fact  involves  such  vital  influence  to  tbe  world  as  this.  (D.  Thomas, 
D.D.)  Christ  is — I.  God.  1.  Supreme.  2.  Infinite.  8.  Eternal.  II.  Over 
ALL.     1.  Nature.    2.  The  world.    3.  Heaven.    III.  Ever  blessed.    1.  Self-sufficient. 

2.  Holy.  3.  Good;  hence — 4.  Happy.  IV.  Acknowledged.  1.  Conscience.  2. 
Gratitude.  3.  Hope — say,  Amen.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Christ  over  all : — I.  In  thb 
BOBLiMiTY  OF  His  ORIGIN.  All  others  came  into  existence  in  the  natural  order  of 
generation,  received  a  bias  to  wrong  from  their  parents,  and  never  in  the  case  of 
the  best  quite  lost  their  earthliness.  On  the  contrary,  Christ  came  down  from  the 
pare  heavens  of  God.  He  had  a  pre-incarnate  existence  (Prov.  viii. ;  John  i.  1-2). 
He  was  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  and  while  there  was  morally  over  all.  II.  In 
the  CHARACTER  OF  His  DOCTRINES.  Thcsc  Were — 1.  Bealities  of  which  He  Himself 
was  conscious.  They  were  not  matters  of  speculation.  All  the  forms  and  voices 
of  eternal  truth  were  matters  of  consciousness  to  Him.  2.  Moral  in  their  influence. 
They  are  so  congruous  with  man's  sense  of  right,  consciousness  of  need,  feeling  of 
God,  desire  for  immortality,  that  the  believing  soul  sees  them  as  Divine  reality. 

3.  Pre-eminently  Divine.     They  concerned  God  Himself,  His  words,  thoughts. 


OHAI-.  ix.]  ROMANS.  266 

feelings,  purposes.  Christ  does  not  teach  what  men  call  sciencee;  but  God 
Himself,  the  root,  centre  and  circumference  of  all  truth.  III.  In  the  atfection  of 
THE  Fatheb.  1.  No  one  shared  the  Divine  love  so  much  as  He.  God  loves  all. 
He  is  love.  But  Christ  is  His  "  well-beloved,"  and  as  such  He  loves  Him  with 
infinite  complacency.  2.  None  ever  deserved  it  as  Christ  did.  He  never  offended 
the  Father  in  His  conduct,  or  misrepresented  Him  in  His  teaching.  He  always  did 
those  things  which  pleased  Him.  3.  None  ever  had  such  demonstrations  of  it. 
"All  power  is  given  unto  Me."  TV.  In  the  extent  of  His  endowment.  "God 
giveth  not  His  Spirit  by  measure  unto  Him."  '•  It  pleased  the  Father  that  in  Him 
should  all  fulness  dwell."  V.  In  the  necessity  of  His  mission.  Faith  in  Him  is 
essential  to  man's  eternal  well-being.  (D.  Thomas,  B.J).)  Christ  over  all,  God 
blessed  for  ever  .-—Let  us  in  imagination  pass  the  angel  guardians  of  those  gates 
where  no  error  enters,  and,  entering  that  upper  sanctuary  wLich  no  discord  divides, 
no  heresy  disturbs,  let  us  find  out  who  worship  and  who  are  worshipped  there. 
The  law,  "  Thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  Him  only  shalt  thou  serve," 
extends  to  heaven  as  well  as  to  earth  ;  so  that  if  our  Lord  is  only  the  highest  of  all 
creatures,  we  shall  find  Him  on  His  knees — not  the  worshipped,  but  a  worshipper  ; 
and  from  His  lofty  pinnacle,  and  lonely,  and  to  other  creatures  unapproachable 
pinnacle,  looking  up  to  God,  as  does  the  highest  of  the  snow-crowned  Alps  to  the 
sun,  that,  shining  above  it,  bathes  its  head  in  light.  We  have  sought  Him,  I  shall 
suppose,  in  that  group  where  His  mother  sits  with  the  other  Marys,  sought  Him 
among  the  twelve  apostles,  or  where  the  chief  of  the  apostles  reasons  with  angels 
over  things  profound,  or  where  David,  royal  leader  of  the  heavenly  choir,  strikes 
his  harp,  or  where  the  beggar,  enjoying  the  repose  of  Abraham's  bosom,  forgets  his 
wrongs,  or  where  martyrs  and  confessors  and  they  which  have  come  out  of  great 
tribulation,  with  robes  of  white  and  crowns  of  glory,  swell  the  song  of  salvation  to 
our  God  which  sitteth  on  the  throne.  He  is  not  there.  Eising  upwards,  we  seek 
Him  where  angels  hover  on  wingg  of  light,  or,  with  feet  and  faces  veiled,  bend 
before  a  throne  of  dazzling  glory.  Nor  is  He  there.  He  does  not  belong  to  their 
company.  Verily  He  took  not  on  Him  the  nature  of  angels.  Eighteen  hundred 
years  ago  Mary  is  rushing  through  the  streets  of  Jerusalem,  speed  in  her  steps, 
wild  anxiety  in  her  look,  one  question  to  all  on  her  eager  lips,  "  Have  you  seen  my 
Son  ?  "  Eighteen  hundred  years  ago  on  those  same  streets,  some  Greeks  accosted 
a  Galilean  fisherman,  saying,  "  Sir,  we  would  see  Jesus."  Now,  were  we  bent,  Uke 
His  mother  on  finding  Him,  like  those  Greeks  on  seeing  Him,  to  stay  a  passing 
angel,  and  accost  him  in  the  words,  "  Sir,  we  would  see  Jesus,"  what  would  he  do? 
How  would  his  arm  rise,  and  his  finger  point  upward  to  tbe  throne  as  he  fell  down 
to  worship,  and  worshipping  to  swell  that  flood  of  song  which  in  this  one  full 
stream  mingles  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son — Blessing  and  honour  and 
glory  and  power  be  unto  Him  that  sitteth  on  the  throne,  and  unto  the  Lamb  for 
ever.  Such  a  glorious  vision,  such  worship,  the  voices  that  sounded  on  John's  ear 
as  the  voice  of  many  waters,  the  distant  roar  of  the  ocean,  are  in  perfect  harmony 
with  the  exalted  honour  and  Divine  dignity  which  Paul  assigns  to  Him  who  is 
"over  all,  God  blessed  for  ever."  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  Christ's  supremacy  : — I. 
OvEB  SPIRITS  (Matt.  viii.  16).  11.  Oveb  natube  (ver.  26 ;  xvii.  27).  III.  Oveb 
MAN  (John  ii.  14-16  ;  xviii.  6).  (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Christ's  supremacy  : — I.  Oveb 
WHAT.  Over — 1.  The  sublimest  created  inteUigences  (Heb.  i.).  2.  The  greatest 
human  potentates  (Rev.  xix.  16 ;  Psa.  ex.  1.  cf.  Matt.  xxii.  43,  xi.  42).  3.  The 
most  glorious  of  material  edifices  (Matt.  xii.  46).  4.  The  universe  of  matter  as  its 
Creator  (John  i.  3).  5.  The  universe  of  mind  as  its  Ruler  and  Judge  (Matt,  xxviii. 
18  ;  John  v.  22,  25).  6.  His  Church  as  its  Redeemer,  Legislator,  Sovereign  (Col.  i. 
18, 19).  7.  In  a  word— all  things  (Col.  i.  16,  17  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  27).  II.  Whv?  Can 
there  be  any  other  answer  but  that  in  the  text  ?— because  He  is  God.  (J.  W.  Burn.) 
The  Divine  supremacy  of  Christ : — Various  constructions  have  been  put  on  these 
words  in  order  to  set  aside  so  clear  an  assertion  of  the  Godhead  of  Jesus;  but 
most  of  the  highest  authorities  agree  in  regarding  the  present  construction  as  most 
true  to  the  original :  and,  if  so,  a  more  full  and  unmistakable  declaration  of  Christ's 
Divinity  it  is  almost  impossible  to  conceive.  Were  it  our  intention  to  argue  the 
point  of  our  Redeemer's  Godhead,  we  would  look  upon  the  question — 1.  In  the  light 
of  general  history,  and  develop  three  facts.  (1)  That  the  system  of  Jesus  has 
become  one  of  the  most  mighty  powers  in  the  human  world,  and  is  evidently 
tending  to  universal  dominion.  The  Anglo-Saxon  race  is,  in  its  literature,  laws, 
customs,  institutions  and  spirit,  mightily  influenced  by  it,  and  that  race  is  rapidly 
advancing  to  the  throne  of  the  world.    (2)  That  there  was  a  period  in  the  history 


266  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  O. 

of  the  world  when  this  mighty  creed  had  no  existence.  When  Homer  sang,  and 
Socrates  reasoned ;  when  Alexander  fought  his  campaigns,  and  Demosthenes  hmrled 
his  fulmiuations  over  Greece,  Christianity  was  not.  (3)  There  was  everything  ia 
the  external  history  of  the  Founder  of  Christianity,  as  well  as  in  the  spiritual  purity 
of  its  doctrines  and  precepts,  to  have  led  one  antecedently  to  suppose  that  it  would 
never  make  any  way  in  the  world.  Christ  was  born  of  a  despised  people  ;  lived  in 
the  most  obscure  part  of  their  country ;  and  came  of  humble  parents ;  and  so 
thoroughly  did  His  doctrines  clash  with  the  feelings,  and  prejudices,  and  habits  of 
the  people,  that  the  proclamation  of  them  ended  in  His  being  executed  as  a 
malefactor.  These  facts  show  that  the  power  which  Christianity  has  gained  in  the 
world  is  a  phenomenon  which  cannot  be  explained  on  the  hypothesis  of  His  being 
nothing  more  than  a  mere  man ;  and  that  gives  a  strong  presumption  in  favour  of 
His  Divinity.     2.  In  the  light  of  Divine  revelation,  we  would  also  state  three  facts. 

(1)  That  whoever  created  the  universe  is  our  God,  by  whatever  name  you  call  the 
great  originating  agent.    We  cannot  form  an  idea  of  a  higher  being  than  a  Creator. 

(2)  That  the  Bible  unquestionably  refers  the  work  of  creation  to  Christ  (John  i.  3  ; 
Col.  i.  16).  (3)  As  a  necessary  conclusion,  that  unless  the  Bible  is  false,  Christ  is 
God.  But  our  object  is  to  offer  a  few  remarks  concerning  Christ's  Divine  supremacy, 
which  is — I.  Co-extensive  with  the  xjniveese.  "Over  alL"  How  much  is 
included  in  this  "  alll  "  The  visible  and  invisible,  the  proximate  and  remote,  the 
minute  and  vast,  the  material  and  the  spiritual.  The  subjects  of  His  dominion 
may  be  divided  into  four  classes.  Those  which  He  governs — 1.  Without  a  will ; 
all  inanimate  matter  and  vegetable  life.  Plants  germinate,  grow,  and  die ;  oceans 
ebb  and  flow  ;  stars  and  systems  revolve  by  His  will  entirely.     They  have  no  will. 

2.  With  their  will.  All  irrational  existences  have  volition.  By  this  they  move. 
They  cannot  move  contrary  to  their  instinct.  Whether  they  roam  in  the  forest, 
wing  the  air,  or  sport  in  mighty  oceans,  they  move  with  their  will,  and  He  controls 
them  thus.  3.  By  their  will.  Holy  intelligences  He  governs  thus.  He  gives  them 
laws,  and  supplies  them  with  motive,  and  leaves  them  free.  They  move  by  their 
will,  yet  He  governs  them.  4.  Against  their  will.  These  are  wicked  men  and 
devils.  He  makes  their  "wrath  to  praise  Him."  He  is  "  over  aU  "  these.  Jl. 
Exercised  with  perfect  happiness.  "  Blessed  for  ever.  He  is  the  blessed  and 
only  Potentate."  Christ  is  happy  on  the  throne.  If  so,  we  infer — 1.  That  He  can 
have  no  doubt  of  His  capacity  to  meet  every  conceivable  emergency.  The  sovereign 
who  doubts  his  power  can  never  be  happy.  How  many  monarchs,  like  Herod,  are 
miserable  from  fear  ?  "  Uneasy  lies  the  head  that  wears  a  crown."  Christ  has 
"  all  power."  He  is  not  afraid  of  insurrections  or  rebellions.  2.  That  He  can 
have  no  misgivings  as  to  the  rectitude  of  His  position.  The  monarch  who  has  got 
power  by  fraud  or  violence,  by  treading  on  the  rights  of  others  if  he  has  conscience, 
can  never  be  happy  on  his  throne.  But  Christ  has  a  consciousness  that  He  has  a 
right  to  the  power  He  wields.     His  subjects  are  His  creatures.  His  property,  <fcc. 

3.  That  He  must  be  ever  under  the  sway  of  benevolent  affections.  Envy,  anger, 
revenge,  ambition,  are  all  the  fruits  of  selfishness,  and  are  elements  of  misery ;  and 
they  cannot  co-exist  with  benevolence.  4.  That  happiness  is  the  law  of  the 
universe.  He  that  is  happy  ever  seeks  to  make  others  so.  Misery  is  an  accident; 
happiness  is  a  necessity ;  for  Christ's  being  is  a  necessity.  Misery  had  a  beginning ; 
happiness  is  eternal  Misery  is  local ;  happiness  is  universal.  The  misery  of  the 
universe,  as  compared  with  the  happiness,  is  only  as  one  blighted  leaf  in  an 
immeasurable  forest.  IH.  Heabtily  acquiesced  in  by  the  qood.  "  Amen  " ;  i.e.. 
So  be  it — I  would  have  it  so.  1.  Conscience  says  amen  to  Christ's  supremacy.  2. 
Gratitude.  What  has  He  done  for  us  I  Recount  His  victories — His  mercies.  3. 
Hope.  What  higher  security  can  we  have,  either  for  the  future  well-being  of  our 
race  or  selves  than  this?  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  Deity  of  Christ: — In 
defence  of   the   received   version  of   our  text,  we  have  to  urge — I.   That  it  is 

IN     STRICT     CONFORMITY     WITH     EVERY     PRINCIPLE      OP     JUST     INTERPRETATION.         It 

violates  no  rule  of  construction;  it  infringes  on  no  idiom  of  the  Greek 
language ;  it  deviates  from  no  general  usage  of  the  sacred  writers.  There  ia 
no  rude  disjointure  of  the  passage ;  no  referring  of  the  terms  "  who  is "  to  a 
person  afterwards  to  be  named,  instead  of  the  person  named  before  ;  no  mutilation 
of  the  passage ;  no  addition ;  but — so  far  as  the  English  language  will  admit  of  it 
— the  very  order  is  preserved  in  which  the  passage  stands  in  the  original.  II. 
The  qualification  of  the  statement,  that  the  Messiah  was  of  the  IsRAELiTEfl 

ONLY    "  ACCOBDINO    TO    THE   FLESH,"    STRONGLY   COUNTENANCES,    NOT   TO   SAY    BKNDEBS 

NBOSflBABT,  THIS  BEADING ;  involving,  as  it  does,  the  supposition  that  there  wai 


CHAP.  IX.]  ROMANS.  267 

something  else,  according  to  which  He  was  not  of  them  ;  and  at  least  justifying 
the  conclusion  that  if  anything  else  be  named  before  the  final  olosing  of  the 
sentence  by  which  the  contrast  can  be  completed,  and  according  to  which  the 
Messiah  was  not  of  the  Jews,  it  was  intended  to  be  so  taken  and  applied.  Now,  in 
our  text  that  something  else  is  clearly  pointed  out — namely.  His  Deity.  According 
to  the  flesh,  He  is  of  the  Israelites ;  according  to  another,  and  a  Divine  nature. 
He  is  over  all,  God  blessed  for  ever.  Thus  the  contrast  is  complete ;  both  parts 
of  the  antithesis  are  supplied,  and  our  Emmanuel  is  seen  to  be  precisely  as  St. 
John  represented  Him — truly  man,  and  truly  God.  III.  That  this  is  the  proper 
rendering  of  the  text  we  argue  fbom  the  existing  ancient  versions  of  this  epistle. 
The  most  ancient  of  the  versions  of  the  New  Testament,  and  that  which  stands 
highest  in  critical  authority,  is  the  Old  Syriac,  made,  some  suppose,  before  the 
death  of  the  apostle  John,  but  certainly  at  the  close  of  the  first  century,  or  the 
beginning  of  the  second.  This  ancient  version  thus  renders  the  passage  : — •'  And 
from  them  was  manifested  Messiah  in  the  flesh,  who  is  God  that  is  over  all ;  whose 
are  praises  and  blessings  to  the  ages  of  ages.  Amen."  Nothing  can  be  more 
clear  than  this ;  nothing  more  express.  The  version  which  stands  next  to  the 
Syriac,  and  which  may  be  said  almost  to  rival  it,  is  the  Old  Latin,  denominated 
the  Italic.  This  was  executed,  as  is  supposed,  at  the  beginning  of  the  second 
century,  and  is  of  no  small  importance  in  Biblical  criticism.  It  renders  our  text 
thus  : — "  From  whom  is  Christ  according  to  the  flesh,  who  is  over  all  things,  God 
blessed  for  ever.  Amen."  The  Ethiopic,  translated  in  the  fourth  century,  omits 
the  words  "  over  all,"  and  reads — "  Of  whom  is  Christ  according  to  the  flesh,  who 
is  God  blessed  for  ever.  Amen."  And  the  Armenian,  translated  at  the  end  of  the 
fourth  or  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  century,  reads — "  Of  whom  the  Christ  came 
according  to  the  flesh  ;  who  is  also  over  all  things,  God  blessed  for  ever.  Amen." 
IV.  All  the  ancient  Christian  writers  who  have  either  professedly  cited  or 

TRANSLATED  THE  PASSAGE,  OB  WHO  HAVE  REFERRED  TO  THE  APOSTLE'S  DESIGN  IN 
WRITINQ  IT,  HAVE  GIVEN  THE  CONSTRUCTION  FOR  WHICH  WE  ABE  CONTENDING.      IienaaUS, 

who  flourished  in  the  second  century,  and  who  was  the  disciple  of  Polycarp,  who 
had  been  personally  acquainted  with  the  apostle  John,  speaking  of  the  generation 
of  Jesus  Christ,  says  — "  He  is  called  God  with  us,  lest  by  any  means  one  should 
conceive  that  He  was  only  a  man ;  for  the  Word  was  made  flesh,  not  by  the  will 
of  man,  hut  by  the  will  of  God  ;  nor  should  we,  indeed,  surmise  Jesus  to  have  been 
another,  but  know  Him  to  be  one  and  the  same  God.  This  very  thing  St.  Paul  has 
interpreted.  Writing  to  the  Eomans,  he  said — '  Whose  are  the  fathers,  and  of 
whom  Christ  came  according  to  the  flesh,  who  is  over  all,  God  blessed  for  ever.'  " 
Tertullian,  about  the  year  211,  writes  thus : — "  I  will  follow  the  apostle ;  so  that 
if  I  have  occasion  to  mention  the  Father  and  the  Son  together,  I  will  use  the 
appellations  God  the  Father,  and  Jesus  Christ  the  Lord.  But  when  I  am  speaking 
of  Christ  alone,  I  will  call  Him  God  ;  as  the  apostle  says,  '  of  whom  is  Christ,  who 
is,'  saith  he,  'God  over  all  things,  blessed  for  ever.'"  And  in  another  passage 
Tertullian  states  : — ' '  Paul  also  hath  called  Christ  very  God :  •  Whose  are  the 
fathers,  and  of  whom  Christ  came  according  to  the  flesh,  who  is  over  all,  God 
blessed  for  ever.'  "  Cyprian,  who  wrote  about  the  year  240,  thus  cites  the  passage, 
in  a  work  written  to  prove  that  Christ  is  God : — "  Of  whom  are  the  fathers,  and  of 
whom  as  concerning  the  flesh  Christ  came,  who  is  God  over  all,  blessed  for  ever. " 
Novatian,  about  the  year  251,  thus  expostulated  with  the  opposers  of  the  Saviour'a 
Godhead: — "But  if,  when  it  belongs  to  God  alone  to  know  the  secrets  of  the 
heart,  Christ  looks  into  the  secrets  of  the  heart ;  but  if,  when  it  belongs  to  God 
alone  to  forgive  sins,  Christ  forgives  sins  ;  but  if,  when  it  is  not  the  possible  act 
of  any  man  to  come  down  from  heaven,  Christ  in  His  advent  descended  from 
heaven  ;  but  if,  when  no  man  can  utter  this  sentence,  •  I  and  my  Father  are  one,' 
Christ  alone,  from  a  consciousness  of  His  Divinity,  declared,  '  I,'  &c. ;  but  if  the 
apostle  Paul,  too,  in  his  writings  says, '  Whose  are  the  fathers,  and  of  whom  is 
Christ  according  to  the  flesh,  who  is  over  all,  God  blessed  for  ever,'  it  follows  that 
Christ  is  God."  Athanasius,  about  the  year  326,  states: — "Paul  thus  writes  in 
his  Epistle  to  the  Romans :  '  Of  whom  are  the  fathers,  and  of  whom  Christ  came 
according  to  the  flesh,  who  is  over  all,  God.' "  Here,  by  not  adding  the  doxology, 
"  blessed  for  ever,"  Athanasius  has  incontrovertibly  proved  that  he  understood  the 
words  as  applying  to  Christ.  Theodoret,  Epiphanius,  and  Gregory  of  Nyssa  have 
quoted  them  in  the  same  manner.  Hilary,  who  wrote  a.d.  324,  has  left  the 
following  testimony : — "  Paul  was  not  ignorant  that  Christ  is  God,  saying,  '  Of 
whom  we  the  fathers,  and  of  whom  aa  oonoeming  the  fleah  Christ  came,  who  is 


268  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

over  all  things,  God.'  "  And,  now,  what  shall  we  say  to  this  ?  If  the  consent  of 
the  whole  professing  Christian  world — with  the  exception  of  a  few  individuals 
within  the  last  three  centuries — be  not  sufficient  to  prove  the  proper  coustruction 
of  a  passage  like  this,  on  what  authority  are  we  to  depend?  But  if  it  be  sufficient, 
then  an  inspired  apostle  has  assuredly  written  that  "  Christ  is  over  all,  God  blessed 
for  ever."  (Thos.  Alli7i.)  Blending  of  the  human  and  Divine  in  Christ: — 
The  picture  produced  in  the  stereopticon  is  fuUer,  rounder,  and  more  natural 
than  the  same  picture  seen  without  the  use  of  that  instrument.  But  to 
produce  the  stereoscopic  picture  there  must  be  two  pictures  blended  into  one  by 
the  use  of  the  stereopticon,  and  both  the  eyes  of  the  observer  are  brought  into 
requisition  at  the  same  time,  looking  each  through  a  separate  lens.  Thus  Christ  is 
only  seen  in  His  true  and  proper  light  when  the  record  of  His  human  nature  and 
the  statement  of  His  Divine  are  blended.  It  is  a  flat,  unfinished  Christ  with  either 
left  out.  But  it  is  as  seen  in  the  Word,  with  the  moral  and  mental  powers  of  our 
being  both  engaged  in  the  consideration,  and  thus  only,  that  we  get  the  full  and 
true  result.  Pre-eminence  of  Christ : — We  have  seen  in  mountain  lands  one  majestic 
peak  soaring  above  aU  the  rest  of  the  hiUs  which  cut  the  azure  of  the  horizon  with 
their  noble  outline,  burning  with  hues  of  richest  gold  in  the  light  of  the  morning  sun  ; 
and  so  should  the  doctrine  of  Christ  incarnate,  crucified,  risen,  and  reigning,  be  pre- 
eminent above  the  whole  chain  of  fact,  doctrine,  and  sentiment  which  make  up  the 
sublime  landscape — the  magnificent  panorama — which  the  Christian  preacher  (or 
teacher)  unfolds,  and  makes  to  pass  in  clear  form  and  brilliant  colour  before  the 
eyes  of  his  people's  faith.  (Evangelical  Magazine.)  ChrisVs  Divine  human 
personality  : — I.  Christ's  humanity.  1.  Eeal  flesh.  2.  Of  the  seed  of  Abraham. 
3.  Compassed  about  with  infirmities.  II.  Christ's  divimitx.  1.  Supreme.  2. 
Eternal.    3.  Blessed  for  ever.    Amen.    {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 

Ver.  6-13.  Not  as  though  the  Word  of  God  hath  taken  none  effect. — God's  faith- 
fulness vindicated  : — The  apostle's  language  is  abrupt  and  broken,  and  fitly  repre- 
sents his  feelings.  He  had  felt  his  spirit  d;-awn  onward  and  upward  as  he  proceeded 
with  his  enumeration  of  the  high  prerogatives  of  his  countrymen,  till  at  length  he 
found  himself  climbing  the  ladder  which  Jacob  saw,  and  which  leads  directly  to 
"  glory,  honour,  and  immoi-tality."  He  was,  as  it  were,  "  caught  up  "  in  a  rapture, 
and  carried  "  off  and  away."  Ere  he  was  let  down  again,  he  had  exclaimed,  with 
fulness  of  heart,  "  Amen."  But,  unable  for  the  present  to  proceed  farther  in  that 
sublime  rapture,  he  as  it  were  recalls  himself,  and  returns  to  the  melancholy  fact 
which  is  bewailed  in  vers.  2  and  3.  The  fact,  however,  as  a  fact  is  not  expressly 
stated.  The  statement  is  semi-smothered  under  the  intensity  of  the  writer's 
feelings.  Yet  the  enumeration  of  theocratic  prerogatives  finds  a  place  in  the 
writer's  record  just  because  there  was  oppressively  present  to  his  mind  and  heart 
the  fact  that  his  countrymen  in  general  had,  through  their  rejection  of  Jesus  the 
Messiah,  ousted  themselves  from  the  privileges  of  "  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  They 
were  refusing  to  be  "Israelites  indeed,"  and  were  virtually  passing  on  themselves 
sentence  of  spiritual  expatriation.  Confronting  that  fact,  he  says,  is  a  spirit  of 
recoil.  I.  The  case  is  not  such  as  that  the  Word  of  God  has  fallen  out  of 
ITS  DUE  FULFILMENT.  The  mclancholy  fact  referred  to  might  and  would  occasion 
much  embarrassment  to  multitudes  of  men,  but  it  would  and  could  not  embarrass 
the  Divine  Moral  Governor,  nor  frustrate  His  promises  even  in  relation  to  Israel. 
Jewish  disbelief  and  self-deposition,  melancholy  as  they  were,  were  yet  within  the 
sphere  of  the  full  overrulement  of  God.  1.  The  apostle  specifies  the  Word  of  God, 
i.e.,  the  Word  spoken  by  God  through  His  prophets  to  Israel,  and  in  substance 
preserved  in  "  the  volume  of  the  book."  On  the  one  side  it  was  simply  predictive, 
on  the  other  it  was  distinctly  promissory  ;  but  in  both  respects  a  distinguished  and 
distinguishing  share  of  blessing  was  held  out  to  the  "  peculiar  people."  2.  The 
Word  of  God  has  not  failed  of  fulfilment,  literally,  has  not  fallen  out.  The  idea  is 
transfigured  from  a  heavenly  occurrence,  as  when  from  the  back  of  some  burden- 
bearer  an  article  falls  and  is  lost.  U.  Fob  not  all  who  abe  of  Israel  are  Israel. 
The  apostle  lays  down  a  far-reaching  principle.  God  had  an  ideal  in  view  when 
He  made  choice  of  Israel  to  be  His  peculiar  people.  He  had  grand  aims  for  fatore 
ages — aims  that  are  yet  to  be  realised  in  all  peoples  (Gen.  xii.  3,  <&c.).  The  selected 
people  could  not  all  at  once  grasp  the  grand  idea.  It  was  not  to  be  wondered  at. 
Neither  would  God  be  exacting.  Still,  His  idea  mast  not  be  pushed  aside  or 
reversed,  like  an  inverted  pyramid ;  still  less  mast  it  be  trampled  under  foot.  For 
Ood  was  not  shut  np  to  Israel.    If  needfal.  He  could  find  in  the  evolution  of  th« 


CHAP,  nt.]  ROMANS.  269 

agea  an  Israel  beyond  Israel,  or  an  Israel  within  Israel.  As  regards  the  old  Israel, 
if  it  should  persist  in  misunderstanding  its  position  and  mission,  fancying  itself  to 
be  the  indispensable  centre  of  the  whole  human  circle,  it  could  be  told,  in  that 
language  of  events  which  makes  epochs  in  history,  that  its  candlesticli  was  remov- 
able, and  would  be  removed  for  a  lamp  that  would  actually  give  light.  There  were 
Israelites  and  Israelites.  There  were  those  in  full  possession  of  the  name,  but 
entirely  without  the  inward  ideal  that  gave  it  significance,  and  there  could  be  those 
without  the  name,  but  with  the  inward  ideal,  though  yet  only  struggling  like  a  star 
through  the  mists  of  ignorance  and  imperfection  (chap.  ii.  29).  In  this  verse  the 
two  kinds  of  Israel  are  brought  into  juxtaposition.  Not  all  who  are  the  progeny 
of  the  patriarch  Israel  are  tiulyand  ideally  the  Israel  "  to  whom  peitaincth  the 
adoption."  God,  therefore,  will  not  break  His  promise,  though  He  refuse  to  fulfil 
it  to  those  yiho  have  forfeited,  by  their  unbelief,  all  right  and  title  to  an  illustrious 
position  and  name.  He  is  free  to  oust  those  who  have  persistently  abused  their 
high  prerogative,  and  to  introduce  in  their  room  a  people  who  would  seek  to  rise 
to  the  level  of  their  high  calling.  (J.  Morison,  D.D.)  The  work  of  God's 
Word : — God  is  the  first  cause  of  all  things — sin  excepted.  All  things  were 
created  by  Him  and  for  Him ;  but  that  which  is  effect  to  God,  is  often 
cause  in  other  relations  and  connections.  You  Christians  are  God's  work- 
manship, but  at  the  same  time  you  are  causes.  Oh,  do  not  underrate  your 
influence  as  Christians.  You  can  scarcely  rise  to  a  correct  estimate  of  it,  so 
immense  is  it.  Well,  we  Fay  that  the  gospel,  so  far  as  its  authorship  is  concerned, 
is  an  effect ;  but  so  far  as  its  power  in  the  world  is  concerned,  it  is  a  causae,  and  a 
glorious  cause.  1.  We  may  expect  it  to  be  a  mighty  cause  if  we  look  at  its  nature. 
"  The  Word  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel "  is  a  direct  revelation  from  God  of  a 
wonderful  provision  which  He  has  made  by  His  Son,  and  through  the  Holy  Ghost 
for  the  salvation  of  men.  It  is  like  the  planting  of  a  new  sun  of  twofold  power  in 
cur  firmament.  2.  We  may  expect  the  gospel  to  be  a  miglity  cause  if  we  look  at 
the  commission  issued  respecting  the  preaching  of  it :  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world 
and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature."  The  preachers  are  mocked,  cruelly 
mocked,  by  this  commission,  and  the  world  is  cruelly  mocked  by  the  preaching,  if  it 
be  intended  that  the  word  of  God's  grace  should  take  none  effect.  3.  We  may  expect 
the  gospel  to  be  a  mighty  cause  if  we  connect  with  the  promise  of  our  Saviour's 
presence  with  the  preachers,  the  extraordinary  ministry  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Why 
is  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  to  reprove  the  word  of  sin  ?  And  why  did  the  Son  of  God 
promise  to  be  with  the  first  preachers  always,  if  this  word  is  to  be  of  none  eSect  ? 
4.  We  may  expect  the  gospel  to  be  a  powerful  cause  if  we  consider  the  representa- 
tions which  are  given  concerning  it.  It  is  said  to  be  glorious  and  everlasting,  and 
the  power  of  God  unto  salvation.  It  is  called  incorruptible  seed,  and  t!ie  sword  of 
the  Spirit.  5.  And  we  may  expect  the  gospel  to  continue  to  be  a  powerful  cause  if 
we  notice  its  first  effects  as  recorded  in  our  New  Testament,  and  its  subsequent 
effects  as  chronicled  in  uninspired  writings ;  or  if  we  look  at  all  which  the  gospel 
is  doing  now,  and  remember  that  the  nature  of  the  gospel  is  such  that  the  appli- 
cation of  it  does  not  exhaust  it,  and  that  time  does  not  impair  it.  We  would  direct 
every  Christian  to  his  own  condition  as  a  saved  man,  and  upon  this  ground  would 
plead  with  you  never  to  think,  or  feel,  or  speak,  or  act  as  though  the  Word 
of  God  had  taken  none  effect.  One  soul  saved  is  a  marvellous  effect — an 
effect  in  some  respects  more  wonderful  than  even  creation  itself.  Now  trace 
the  effect  of  the  word  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel  upon  a  man's  mind.  What  is 
it  like  ?  It  is  like  opening  eyes  which  had  always  been  blind.  The  effect  of  the 
word  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel  is  like  unstopping  deaf  ears.  The  man  hears  that 
which  he  had  never  heard  before.  He  hears  God  speaking  to  him.  The  effect  of 
the  Word  of  God  upon  him  who  believes  it  is  to  loose  the  dumb  tongue.  The  man 
has  spoken  before,  but  never  to  God,  or,  if  before  to  God,  then  as  Cain  spake  to 
Him,  and  not  as  a  child  speaks  to  a  father,  that  is,  to  a  good  father.  The  man 
now  confesses  his  sin  to  God,  as  he  feels  the  burden  of  his  sin  to  be  unbearable. 
The  effect  of  the  word  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel  upon  a  man — still  keeping  to  this 
illustration — is  to  strengthen  the  arms,  so  that  work  and  conflict  which  appeared 
impossible  are  now  undertaken  as  an  easy  ta'^k.  The  word  of  the  truth  of  the 
gospel  cleanses  the  hands— yes,  the  hands  of  the  murderer  from  blood,  and  the 
hands  of  the  thief  from  dishonesty,  and  the  hands  of  the  slothful  from  indolence, 
and  the  hands  of  the  covetous  from  the  rust  and  the  canker  of  hoarded  gold  and 
silver.  The  Word  of  God  effects  that  which  is  like  restoring  sensation  and  motion 
to  withered  and  exhausted  nerves.     It  quickens  and  arouses  aU  the  sensibilities 


270  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

and  powers  of  soul  and  spirit — calling  into  life  and  activity  godly  love  and  godly 
hope,  ajid  godly  joy,  and  all  the  moral  and  religious  sensibilities — so  that  he  who 
was  as  dead  is  now  alive  again,  and  God  speaks  to  him  as  alive  again.  The  Word 
of  God — and  perhaps  we  should  have  remarked  this  first — also  changes  the  heart. 
Oh,  brethren,  do  not  think  of  the  Word  of  God  as  though  it  had  none  effect ;  or  if 
you  be  discouraged,  just  open  your  eyes,  and  see  whether  the  ground  of  discourage- 
ment is  not  often  to  be  found  in  the  simple  fact,  that  when  Christians  present  the 
gospel  to  their  feUow  men  they  do  not  present  it  as  God  presents  it.  {S. 
Martin^)  The    election    of  grace: — I.     Is    independent    of    exteknai.    pre- 

febenc|es  and  human  mebit.  1.  The  phrase — (1)  Implies  the  eternal  purpose 
of  God  to  save  them  that  believe;  (2)  proceeds  from  free  grace;  (3)  is 
determined  by  the  reception  or  non-reception  of  the  truth,  which  is  an  act 
of  free-will.  2.  The  proof  supplied  by  the  history  of  the  elect  people.  (1)  By 
the  difference  in  the  moral  condition  of  the  Israelites  (ver.  6 ;  chap.  ii.  28,  29). 
(2)  By  the  different  relations  in  which  the  immediate  descendants  of  Abraham 
stood  to  God  (ver.  7,  8  ;  cf.  Matt.  iii.  9;  John  viii.  39).  The  same  difference  obtains 
in  the  Christian  Church.  II.  Is  dependent  upon  Divine  peomise.  1,  The  whole 
work  of  grace  is  matter  of  promise,  and  affords  hope  of  a  better  life.  2.  This  is 
shown  by  the  examples  quoted  (vers.  9,  13).  3.  Hence  it  follows  that  we  can  only 
be  partakers  of  the  promise  by  a  believing  reception  of  it.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The 
freedom  of  God^s  election: — They  had  been  so  highly  privileged,  and  were  yet  cast 
out.  ' '  Oh,  what  a  fall  was  there !  "  But  God's  promise  had  not  come  to  naught, 
for  as  the  history  of  their  ancestry  showed,  the  purposed  working  out  of  God's 
plans  for  the  salvation  of  the  world — for  which  alone  Israel  had  been  chosen — was 
not  committed  rigidly  to  all  Israel,  but  only  to  such  of  them  as  God  should  choose. 
And  in  this  matter  of  choosing  God  was  perfectly  free.  Note — I.  God's  pubpose 
roR  THE  WOBLD.  A  Creator's  love  mnst  embrace  His  whole  creation ;  a  Father's, 
all  His  children.  God  is  the  Father  of  mankind,  even  though  all  have  fallen  from 
Him.  Any  purpose  of  salvation  must  therefore  comprehend  all  men  in  its  wide 
scope,  and  only  the  wilfulness  of  man  can  prevent  the  accomplishment  of  its 
purpose.  God  has  purposed  the  redemption  of  the  world  in  Christ  (Eph.  iii.  11), 
but  by  reason  of  man's  debasement  the  accomplishment  of  the  purpose  must  needs 
be  gradual.  One  great  central  work  shall  be  wrought — God's  work  through  Christ ; 
but  up  towards  this  the  preparatory  work  must  lead,  and  away  from  this  the  fulfil- 
ment must  conduct.  An  education  of  the  world ;  a  great  power  of  salvation ;  a 
world-wide  application  of  the  power.  II.  An  elect  people.  The  election  dealt  with 
in  these  chapters,  which  has  no  reference  to  the  election  of  individuals  to  eternal 
salvation,  was  the  election  of  a  people  who  should  conduct  the  world  toward  Christ 
by  way  of  preparation,  and  afterwards  conduct  Christ's  power  to  the  world  by  way 
of  application.  In  the  matter  of  preparation  the  exclusion  of  this  people  from 
others  was  needful  first,  because  of  the  abounding  corruptions  of  the  world. 
Sometimes  this  is  the  only  safety :  "  Come  out  and  be  separate  I  "  But  a  scattering 
was  needful  afterwards.  So  the  captivities,  overruled  by  God ;  so  the  dispersion 
in  later  times.  For  the  subsequent  evangelisation  there  must  be  concentration  first, 
that  the  new  power  of  life  might  be  fully  realised ;  a  scattering  afterwards,  that 
the  new  power  might  touch  the  uttermost  ends  of  the  earth  (Acts  viii.  4).  IH.  Ths 
freedom  of  the  election.  In  such  work  God's  hands  cannot  be  tied,  and  surely 
He  may  choose  whom  He  will ;  and  the  history  of  the  past  abundantly  illustrates 
the  freedom  with  which  God  has  worked.  First,  God  chose  Abraham.  The  Jews 
would  not  complain  of  the  freedom  of  election  here.  Again,  of  Abraham's  sons 
He  chose  the  later-born,  showing  that  the  matter  of  priority  of  natural  claims 
could  not  weigh  with  Him ;  and  of  Isaac's  twin  sons  before  their  birth  He  chose 
the  later-born,  showing  that  nothing  done  by  the  elected  one  constituted  a  claim 
on  His  electing  grace.  Neither  Ishmaelites  nor  Edomites  were  rejected  of  God 
from  personal  salvation,  but  as  regarded  taking  a  special  part  in  the  work  of  the 
world's  salvation,  they  were  reprobate.  So,  then,  God  had  acted  freely  in  the 
choice  of  Abraham,  and  in  narrowing  down  the  election  among  Abraham's  seed. 
Was  it  to  be  wondered  at  that  in  the  fulness  of  time  He  should  act  freely  still,  and 
elect  only  a  remnant  of  the  people  to  the  work  of  evangelisation  of  the  world,  this 
work  so  soon  to  be  entrusted  also  to  Gentile  workers  themselves?  The  same 
principle  still  holds  good.  God  elects  us  according  to  His  sovereign  will  for  work 
in  His  kingdom.  Let  us  learn,  as  a  first  lesson,  absolute  submission — nay,  the 
unquestioning  fealty  of  love.  {T.  F,  Lochjer,  B.A.)  The  Word  of  Ood  taking 
^ect : — I  weU  remember  a  time  when  this  truth  was  brought  home  to  me  by  the 


CHAP.  IX.]  ROMANS.  271 

case  of  one  to  whom  I  was  permitted  to  minister  during  the  closing  days  of  hia 
life.  He  was  one  who  had  stood  foremo'fet  among  the  thoughtful  and  wise  of  this 
world  ;  but  he  did  not  feel  the  full  power  of  the  Word  of  life.  I  felt  considerable 
anxiety.  I  thought  that  much  depended  on  the  way  in  which,  in  these  closing 
scenes  of  life,  I  presented  to  him  the  vital  and  saving  truths  of  Christianity.  I£ 
presented  in  any  over-confident  way  by  one  whom,  perhaps,  he  would  have  con- 
sidered less  cultivated  than  himself,  I  felt — and  I  remember  the  anxiety  with  which 
I  fslt  it— all  ministrations  might  have  done  harm.  I  humbly  conferred  with  my 
own  poor  heart,  and  I  thus  reasoned  with  my  anxiety ;  "  Let  me  read  from  God's 
Word  some  more  than  usually  appropriate  portion  in  such  a  case.  But  let  me 
read  God's  Word  alone,  and  leave  that  Word  to  work  in  this  heart.  My  words,  I 
am  confident,  will  be  as  nothing.  I  will  read  alone  the  Word  of  Life."  The  portion 
I  chose  was  that  contained  in  the  last  seven  or  eight  chapters  of  St.  John's  Gospel. 
I  read  perhaps  about  twenty  verses  at  a  time — not  more  ;  and  I  added  only  the 
very  simplest  comments  where  comments  seemed  to  be  necessary ;  and  I  remember 
well — it  is  a  memory  ever  pleasant  with  me  and  that  often  encourages  me — how 
the  words  seemed  to  find  their  way  into  the  sick  man's  heart ;  how  I  saw  shadows 
on  the  brow  passing  slowly  away;  how  often  the  common  human  eye  could  observe 
the  mystery  of  God's  Word  finding  its  way  to  the  heart.  I  remember  once  or  twice 
humbly  testing  whether  it  was  so  by  staying  away  almost  purposely,  and  found,  on 
my  return,  that  not  I,  but  the  reading  of  the  Word  of  Life,  had  been  sadly  missed. 
I  read  onward  and  onward,  and  I  am  confident — I  am  speaking  now  with  carefully 
chosen  words — that  those  words  of  life  brought  that  soul  very  close  to  our  saving 
Lord.  The  incident  produced  a  very  great  effect  upon  me  ;  and  I  never  hear  any 
one  speak  lightly  of  what  is  called  "  the  mere  reading  of  the  Word  of  God"  without 
having  this  as  a  proof  that  there  is  in  this  blessed  Book  alone,  without  word  or 
comment,  a  power  and  a  force  that  no  human  language  can  describe.  (Bp.  Ellicott.) 
The  Word  of  God  taking  no  effect : — I.  In  some  the  Word  of  God  takes  no  effect. 
1.  They  do  not  repent.  2.  Do  not  believe.  3.  Are  not  saved.  II.  Their  unbelief 
cannot  impugn  the  efficiency  of  God's  Word.  1.  It  takes  effect  on  others.  2. 
Would  in  them,  but  for  their  unbelief.  3.  Must  ultimately  take  effect  in  their  final 
condemnation.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  For  they  are  not  all  Israel  which  are  of  Israel 
— Here  is — I.  A  solemn  fact — not  all  Israel,  &c.  Some  possess  the  name,  the  form, 
but  deny  the  power.  II.  The  reason  of  it — not  that  the  Word  of  God  is  without 
effect.  Some  realise  its  power,  but  others  believe  not,  and  to  them  the  arm 
of  the  Lord  is  not  revealed.  {Ibid.)  The  distinction  between  the  external 
and  the  true  Church : — I.  Its  origin  (ver.  6).  1.  Not  in  the  purpose  of  God, 
for  His  promise  respects  all  (2  Pet.  iii.  19).  2.  But  in  the  conduct  of  men, 
who  hold  fast  the  form,  and  deny  the  power.  II.  Its  nature  (ver.  7-13).  1.  The 
external  depends  upon  parentage,  education,  prejudice,  &c. ;  the  true  upon  the 
promise  of  God.  2.  The  external  rests  in  works ;  the  true  in  the  grace  of  God.  (Ibid.) 
Keither  because  they  are  the  seed  of  Abraham  are  they  all  children ;  but  in  Isaac 
shall  thy  seed  he  called. — The  true  seed  of  Abraham  is  called — 1.  Not  in  Ishmael, 
but  in  Isaac.  2.  Not  by  a  natural,  but  by  a  spiritual  birth.  3.  Not  by  the  will  of 
n'.an,  but  by  the  purpose  of  God  in  Christ.  (Ibid.)      The  true  children  of  Abraham  : — 

1.  Not  by  a  natural,  but  by  a  spiritual  birth.      1.  The  example  of  Abraham. 

2.  Its  application — natural  advantages  avail  nothing,  but  a  new  birth  in  Christ  the 
true  seed  of  promise.  II.  Not  of  works,  but  of  grace.  1.  The  case  of  Esau  and 
Jacob.  2.  Election  determined  not  by  merit,  but  grace,  and  suspended  on  faith. 
(Ibid.)  The  true  heirs  of  grace : — I.  Exemplified.  Not  all  the  children  of 
Abraham.  1.  Ishmael  the  child  of  nature,  Isaac  the  child  of  promise.  2.  Ishmael 
rejected,  Isaac  appointed  heir.  II.  Defined.  1.  Those  who  are  bom  of  the  flesh 
are  not  the  children  of  God,  but  those  who  are  born  of  the  Spirit.  2.  According  to 
the  promise  made  in  Christ.  These  are  the  true  heirs  of  salvation.  (Ibid. )  That 
is,  they  which  are  the  children  of  the  flesh,  these  are  not  the  children  of  God ;  but 
the  cUldren  of  the  promise. — Children: — I.  Of  the  flesh.  Children  by  mere 
natural  generation,  viz. — 1.  Ishmael  and  his  descendants.  2.  Abraham's  sons  by 
Keturah,  and  their  posterity.  3.  The  natural  descendants  of  Abraham  in  general. 
Unbelieving  Jews  were  children  of  the  flesh  as  truly  as  was  Ishmael.  II.  Of  thb 
promise.  Bom  entirely  in  virtue  of  a  promise,  viz. — 1.  Isaac.  2.  Believers  whether 
Jews  or  Gentiles  (chap.  iv.  11,  16,  17;  Gal.  iii.  29).  3.  Isaac  a  type  of  believers — 
(1)  As  bom  according  to  Divine  promise.  (2)  By  supernatural  power  (Gen.  xvii.  5  ; 
Isa.  liii.  10-12;  John  i.  13,  v.  25,  vi.  44,  45,  65).  III.  Of  God.  1.  Children  in 
God's  esteem,  and  by  God's  appointment.    2.  Those  to  whom  He  wiU  be  a  God  as 


272  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

He  was  to  Abraham  (Gen.  xvii.  7).  Children  of  the  flesh  distinguished  from  the 
children  of  God  (John  i.  13).  (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Children  of  the  flesh  and  of 
the  promise  : — Within  the  family  circle  of  Abraham  there  were  children  who  should 
never  have  been.  They  were  not  really  wanted  in  the  world.  Their  existence  was 
attributable  to  the  unrefined  manners  of  the  age.  Hence  they  might  be  called 
"  children  of  the  flesh."  The  designation  was  sufficiently  exphcit,  and  could  stand 
appropriate  antithesis  to  that  of  "  the  children  of  promise,"  and  thus  the  Messianic 
children  of  God.  Such  were  Isaac  and  then  Jacob,  and  their  legitimate  descendants. 
God  promised  these  to  Abraham,  and  they  were  at  once  children  of  the  promise,  and 
the  Messianic  children  of  God.  To  the  exclusion  of  aU  other  descendants  they  were 
reckoned  for  the  Messianic  offspring  by  God.  He  had  sovereign  right  to  choose, 
and  He  exercised  His  right.  The  phrase  "  children  of  God  "  is  susceptible  of  varied 
applications.  All  men  are  His  offspring  (Acts  xvii.  28),  and  thus  His  children.  The 
pure,  the  benevolent,  and  the  unrevengeful,  these  in  particular  are  His  children 
(Matt.  v.  45).  And  if  from  among  the  lapsed  any  rise  up  and  earnestly  urge  their 
way  toward  purity,  &c.,  then  all  these  are  emphatically  "the  children  of  God  by 
faith  in  Christ  Jesus  "  (Gal.  iii.  26).  Having  received  Christ  they  have  "  power  to 
become  the  sons  of  God"  (John  i.  12).  Jesus  Himself  is  the  Son  of  God  in  the 
highest  sense.  But  in  the  passage  before  us  the  designation  is  restricted  to  those 
who  were  His  Messianic  children.  Viewed  in  unity,  they  are  His  national  sons.  His 
firstborn  (Exod.  iv.  22).  Viewed  in  individuality  they  are  His  theocratic  sons  and 
daughters.  {J.  Morison,  D.D.)  The  children  of  the  promise: — St.  Paul  as  a 
Christian  patriot  was  ready  to  sacrifice  his  everlasting  fellowship  with  Christ  if  it 
could  ensure  the  salvation  of  his  fellow  countrymen.  But,  alas !  the  fact  of  the 
rejection  of  Jesus  and  His  gospel  by  many  of  the  Jews  must  be  accepted.  And  when 
the  apostle  turns  to  history,  he  finds  that  there  has  been  no  wholesale  salvation  of 
either  the  descendants  of  Abraham  and  Israel,  but  a  certain  proportion  only  became 
chiltlren  of  promise.  How  can  these  facts  be  dealt  with  under  the  Divine  govern- 
ment ?     It  is  to  this  the  apostle  devotes  himself  in  the  present  passage.     I.  God's 

JDDGILENT    UPON    ANT    MAN     IS    NOT    DETERMINED     BY     THE    QUALITIES    OF    HIS     NATtJBAL 

DISPOSITION.  1.  God  did  not  elect  to  privilege  either  all  the  children  of  the  patri- 
archs, or  even  those  whom  we  would  incline  to  elect.  Abraham  had  eight  chUdren 
(Gen.  XXV.  2),  yet  only  one  became  the  "child  of  promise."  Isaac  had  two,  bat 
only  the  younger  became  the  child  of  promise.  Moreover,  when  we  consider  Ishmael 
and  Esau,  we  are  inclined  to  consider  them  the  more  manly  and  noble.  They  may 
have  become  "  sons  of  the  desert,"  but  there  is  something  in  them  that  commands 
our  admiration.  Of  course  we  see  in  them  purely  natural  endowments.  They  live 
lives  of  sense  rather  than  of  faith,  and  are  what  we  call  now  worldly  men.  Their 
natures  are  as  interesting  as  pure  worldliness  of  spirit  will  allow.  2.  Now  let  us 
suppose  that  God's  electing  love  had  laid  hold  on  these  well-made  "  noblemen  of 
nature,"  and  had  passed  by  their  feebler  brothers,  the  mediative  Isaac,  the  cowardly 
Jacob ;  would  not  an  outciy  have  resulted  against  a  God  who  professed  to  be  a 
Father,  and  yet  could  favour  the  strong  and  pass  by  the  weak?  But,  as  Dr. 
Leonard  W.  Bacon  says,  "  God  does  not  cast  out  His  crippled  and  deformed  children 
to  perish.  He  holds  to  a  stricter  and  sterner  responsibility  the  sons  that  are  nobly 
endowed.  He  is  not  the  gentleman's  God,  nor  the  Kedeemer  of  persons  of  fine 
culture  and  instincts,  but  the  Saviour  of  the  lost.  And  by  many  a  story  as  strange 
as  this  of  Jacob  and  Esau  He  has  shown  to  the  generous  and  highminded  that  there 
is  a  possible  way  of  ruin  for  them  ;  and  to  those  who  know  in  their  own  sorrowful 
consciences,  and  by  the  scorn  of  others,  that  they  are  not  of  noble  strain,  that  there 
is  a  way  by  which  they  may  find  salvation."     II.  The  children  of  the  pbomisr 

HAVE   been   led    TO   PRIZE    IT    AND  TO   TRUST   IN   THE  FAITHFUL  PrOMISER.      Both  IsaaO 

and  Jacob  were  children  of  the  promise  in  this  sense,  that  their  mothers  would  never 
have  borne  them  had  not  God  sustained  their  hope  of  children  by  the  promise  of  a 
seed.  But  Esau  was  included  in  this  promise  as  well  as  Jacob.  There  was,  how- 
ever, another  and  better  promise,  about  all  the  families  of  the  earth  being  blessed 
through  a  particular  seed.  In  other  words,  the  promise  of  a  Messiah  was  held 
before  them  as  their  highest  hope.  Now  Ishmael  and  Esau  despised  this  arrange* 
ment ;  they  did  not  feel  indebted  to  posterity,  as  many  a  worldly  mind  thinks  still. 
But  Isaac  and  Jacob  got  interested  in  the  promised  blessing,  and  were  led  to  trust 
Him  who  uttered  it.  Their  very  weakness  led  them  to  lean  on  One  mighty  to  save, 
and  they  were  pardoned,  accepted,  and  in  due  season  sanctified.  God's  electing  love 
thus  moves  aloug  lines  where  there  is  the  likelihood  that  poor,  crippled,  crushed 
souls  will  learn  to  trust  God  who  is  mighty  to  save.    It  is  harder  for  a  rich  man, 


OHAP.  IX.]  ROMANS.  278 

e.g.,  to  trust  God  than  for  a  poor  man ;  hence  God  has  "chosen  the  poor,  rich  in 
faith,"  (fee.  (James  ii.  5).  It  is  harder  to  get  able-bodied,  healthy  men  to  trust  God 
than  the  sick  and  sorrowing ;  and  hence  we  find  that  the  Jobs  and  Asaphs  are  made, 
by  God's  grace,  to  show  to  the  unbelieving  world  that  they  can  serve  God  for  nought, 
&o.  (Job  i.  9,  xiii.  15  ;  Psa.  lixiii.).  And  so,  as  Dr.  Bacon  again  says,  "  Be  of  good 
comfort.  You  shall  be  saved  not  only  in  spite  of  your  faults  and  infirmities,  but 
from  them.  Faith  in  God  is  the  vital  air  of  all  true  nobleness.  In  this  air  the 
stunted  germs  of  human  virtue  unfold  and  blossom.  Without  faith  their  fairest 
growths  tend  to  shrivel  and  decay.  For  lack  of  faith  in  God,  the  noble  gifts  of  Esau 
are  of  no  avail.  He  shuts  himself  out  a  willing  stranger  to  the  covenants  of  pro- 
mise, having  no  hope,  without  God  in  the  world.  He  moves,  a  wandering  star,  in 
a  track  without  a  centre,  on  towards  blackness  of  darkness.  By  faith  the  low  nature 
of  that  "  worm  Jacob  "  is  by  and  by  redeemed  from  the  power  of  evil,  and,  trans- 
formed in  character  and  name,  becomes  the  prince  that  hath  power  with  God."  III. 
God's  electinq  love  and  reprobating  hate  cannot  be  charged  with  injustice. 
In  analysing  God's  love  for  the  children  of  promise  Paul  traces  their  election  to 
God's  good  pleasure  (ver.  15).  And  if  mercy  be  undeserved  favour,  then  He  may 
justly  give  it  to  whomsoever  He  pleaseth.  On  the  other  hand,  those  who  are  passed 
by,  having  no  claim  to  better  treatment,  simply  receive  the  reward  of  their  deeds. 
And  here  it  may  be  well  to  guard  against  a  false  view  of  God's  hatred  of  Esau.  It 
is  not  to  be  inferred  that  God  hated  Esau  before  he  was  bom  and  had  any  oppor- 
tunity of  doing  evil.  When  we  consult  the  passage  (Mai.  i.  2)  here  quoted  by  Paul  we 
find  it  refers  to  the  judgment  of  Edom  in  the  time  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  996  years  later. 
Without  being  blessed  like  his  brother,  Esau  received  his  home  "  in  the  fastness  of 
the  earth,  and  of  the  dew  of  heaven."  His  indifference  had  cost  him  his  right  of  pri- 
mogeniture, and  he  could  no  more  receive  it  back  (Gen.  xxv.  32,  xxvii.  33-37 ;  Heb.  xii. 
16,  17) ;  yet  the  law  prescribed  "  Thou  shalt  not  have  the  Idumean  in  abomination, 
for  he  is  thy  brother,"  and  God  endured  ten  centuries  of  hardness  of  heart  before 
He  said  "  I  have  hated  Esau."  That  is  to  say,  God's  reprobation  of  Esau  is  not  to 
be  confounded  with  Hie  election  of  Jacob.  The  opposite  of  election  is  not  reproba- 
tion, but  non-election  ;  and  no  human  being  has  any  evidence  that  he  is  not  elected. 
The  opposite  of  reprobation  is  approbation,  and  we  are  all  reprobated  by  God  so 
long  as  we  do  not  accept  Christ.  Election  rests  on  the  good  pleasure  of  God ; 
reprobation  on  His  holiness,  which  leads  Him  to  antagonise  what  is  unholy.  (R. 
M.  Edgar,  D.D.)  Election  not  the  ground  of  our  faith : — We  are  not  to  make 
election  a  ground  for  our  faith,  but  our  faith  and  calling  a  medium  or  argument  to 
prove  our  election.  Election,  indeed,  is  first  in  the  order  of  Divine  acting — God 
chooseth  before  we  believe — yet  faith  is  first  in  our  acting — we  must  believe  before 
we  can  know  we  are  elected ;  yea,  by  believing  we  know  it.  The  husbandman 
knows  it  is  spring  by  the  sprouting  of  the  grass,  though  he  hath  no  astrology  to  know 
the  position  of  the  heavens :  thou  mayest  know  thou  art  elect,  as  surely  by  a  work 
of  grace  in  thee,  as  if  thou  hadst  stood  by  God's  elbow  when  He  wrote  thy  name  in 
the  Book  of  Life.  (TF.  Gurnall.)  For  this  is  the  word  of  promise.— Go«i'«  word  of 
promise : — 1.  Is  unmerited  and  free.  2.  Surpasses  human  thought.  3.  Removes 
every  difficulty.     4.  Is  suspended  on  faith.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 

Vers.  10-12.  And  not  only  this ;  hut  when  Rebecca  also  had  conceived  by  .  .  . 
our  Father  Isaac. — The  election  of  Jacob  and  the  rejection  of  Esau  : — 1.  Not  per- 
sonal, but  national.  2.  Not  to  eternal  salvation,  but  to  earthly  privileges.  3.  Not 
determined  by  works,  but  by  grace.  4.  Not  intended  to  establish  the  doctrine  of 
unconditional  election  to  eternal  life  and  the  predestination  of  others  to  eternal 
damnation,  but  the  unconditional  election  of  the  Gentiles  to  the  benefits  of  the 
gospel  and  the  national  rejection  of  the  Jews.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Lessons  from 

the  case  of  Esau  and  Jacob  : — 1.  As  in  Eebecca's  womb  there  was  a  striving  between 
Esau  and  Jacob,  so  in  every  true  Christian  there  is  a  combating  between  corruption 
and  grace;  and  as  Esau  is  the  elder,  so  is  corruption.  2.  As  in  Isaac's  family 
there  was  a  profane  Esau  as  well  as  a  godly  Jacob,  so  is  the  visible  Church  a  mixed 
company,  as  our  Saviour  teaches  by  divers  parables.  Examine  how  thou  standest 
in  the  Church,  whether  as  an  Esau  or  as  a  Jacob.  3.  Esau  is  Isaac's  eldest  son, 
yet  rejected.  Birth,  degrees,  and  blood  are  to  be  regarded,  and  are  especial  favours 
of  God,  yet  they  further  not  election.  As  it  was  rather  a  disgrace  for  Esau  to  coma 
of  virtuous  parents,  because  he  was  no  better,  so  do  thou  account  of  thyself ;  then 
is  the  'olo;>d  of  ihy  famous  ancestors  thy  credit  when  thou  art  like  them  in  virtue. 
LeUer  the  honour  of  our  families  should  begin  than  end  in  us.  4.  Esau  is  disin- 
VOL.    II.  13 


274  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tx. 

herited,  and  yet  God  gave  a  law  that  the  firstborn  should  not  be  deprived  of  his 
birthright,  namely,  without  just  and  weighty  cause.  (Elnathan  Parr,  B.D.) 
For  the  children  being  not  yet  bom,  neither  having  done  any  good  or  evil,  that 
the  purpose  of  God  according  to  election  might  stand  not  of  vrorka,  but  of  Him 
that  calleth. — God's  sovereignty  : — 1.  He  has  the  indisputable  right  to  determine 
the  conditions  of  individual  life.  2.  Exercises  the  right  freely  without  reference  to 
future  conduct.  3.  Does  not  thereby  interfere  with  the  possibility  of  personal 
salvation,  bat  provides  for  it.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Election  :  how  to  be  regarded  : — 
The  doctrine  ought  never  to  be  a  stumbling-block  in  the  way  of  your  entertaining  the 
overtures  of  the  gospel.  Leave  it  to  God  Himself  to  harmonise  those  everlasting 
decrees,  by  which  He  hath  distinguished  between  the  elect  and  the  reprobate,  with  His 
present  declarations  of  goodwill  to  one  and  to  all  of  the  human  family.  Your  busi- 
ness is  to  let  the  decrees  alone,  and  to  cast  your  joyful  confidence  upon  the  declara- 
tions. Should  an  earthly  monarch  send  a  message  of  friendship  to  your  door, 
must  you  reject  it  either  as  unintelligible  or  unreal  because  you  have  not  been 
instructed  in  all  the  mysteries  of  his  government  ?  Because  you  cannot  compre- 
hend the  policy  of  his  empire,  must  you  therefore  not  receive  the  offered  kindness 
which  has  come  from  him  to  your  own  dwelling-place  ?  And  ere  you  can  appre- 
ciate the  gift  which  he  holds  out  for  your  single  and  specific  acceptance,  must  you 
first  be  able  to  trace  all  the  workings  and  all  the  ways  of  the  vast,  the  varied, 
superintendence  which  belongs  to  him  ?  It  is  truly  so  with  God,  who,  although 
presiding  over  a  management  which  embraces  all  worlds  and  reaches  from  ever- 
lasting to  everlasting,  has  nevertheless  sent  to  each  individual  amongst  us  the 
special  intimation  of  His  perfect  willingness  to  admit  us  into  favour ;  and  must  we, 
I  ask,  suspend  our  comfort  and  our  confidence  therein  till  we,  the  occupiers  of  one 
of  the  humblest  tenements  in  creation,  and  only  the  creatures  but  of  yesterday — till 
we  shall  have  mastered  the  economy  of  this  wondrous  universe  and  scanned  the 
counsels  of  eternity?     (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  The  means  and  end  of  predestina- 

tion  : — Upon  the  principles  of  Christian  predestination,  you  are  still  not  less  incon- 
sistent ;  because  you  go  about  to  separate  two  things  which'are  inseparably  joined 
together,  viz. ,  the  end  and  the  means  which  lead  to  it ;  and  then  you  fly  to  the  old 
threadbare  objection  of  Papists,  Quakers,  and  Arminians — "if  I  am  elected,  I 
shall  be  saved,  do  what  I  will ;  if  I  am  not  elected,  I  must  be  damned,  do  what  I 
can."  Now,  this  is  the  abuse  of  the  doctrine,  but  by  no  means  the  doctrine  itself, 
holiness  of  heart  and  life  being  the  middle  link  of  that  chain  which  connects  God's 
eternal  decree  with  the  execution  of  that  decree  in  the  salvation  of  all  His  elect. 
And  if  you  can  cast  your  eyes  upon  the  Christian  world  in  general,  you  will  find 
that  real  practical  religion  is  more  to  be  found  among  those  who  adopt  the  Scrip- 
ture plan  of  predestination  than  among  those  who  reject  it.  But  let  us  have 
recourse  to  a  familiar  illustration  of  the  point  in  hand.  When  Archbishop 
Chicheley  founded  AU  Souls'  College,  in  Oxford,  he  made  a  decree  that  they  who  in 
future  times  were  founder's  kin  should  succeed  to  the  fellowship  of  that  college,  in 
preference  to  all  others.  This  decree  is  inviolable  in  the  choice  of  the  candidates  ; 
but  I  never  heard  of  one  that  intended  offering  himself  who  reasoned  after  this 
manner  :  "  If  I  am  founder's  kin,  I  must  succeed,  do  what  I  will,  or  even  whether 
I  offer  myself  or  not."  No;  but  they  all  go  about  to  prove  their  pedigree  and 
relationship  to  the  founder,  and  for  this  purpose  they  anxiously  search  the  old  book 
entitled  "Stemmata  Chiciliana,"  and  apply  themselves  diligently  to  their  probation 
exercises,  in  order  that  no  requisite  may  be  wanting  on  their  parts.     Now,  my  dear 

,  produce  your  pedigree,  and  learn  your  exercise,  and  the  thing  is  done.     Take 

but  the  same  pains  (though  surely  you  ought  to  take  more)  to  prove  your  relation- 
ship to  the  great  Founder  of  the  universe,  whose  decree  is  that  none  shall  partake 
of  His  spiritual  blessings  but  those  who  bear  a  relationship  to  Him  through  faith 
in  Jesus  Christ ;  apply  yourself  to  the  study  of  that  old  book  the  Bible,  from  which 
alone  you  can  trace  your  descent,  and  study  your  exercise  as  becomes  a  candidate 
for  a  heavenly  fellowship  with  God  and  glorified  spirits.  Set  about  this  in  earnest, 
and  I  will  venture  my  own  soul  upon  the  safety  of  yours  ;  for  though  I  cannot 
climb  up  into  heaven  to  read  God's  decree,  yet  I  shall  be  very  certain,  from  that 
middle  link  of  the  chain  which  is  let  down  upon  earth,  that  it  is  in  your  favour. 
{Sir  Richard  Hill,  M.A.,  letter  to  a  friend.)  The  Divine  call: — The  word 

••calleth,"  when  applied  to  moral  agents,  assumes  the  possession  of  free  will.  They 
are  *•  called,"  not  compelled  or  necessitated.  According  to  the  nature  of  the  case, 
a  '•  call "  may  assume  the  form  either  of  a  summons  or  an  invitation.  It  may 
■ometiiaea  be  allied  to  a  commandment,  sometimes  to  an  entreaty.    In  the  case 


CHAP,  n.]  BOMANS.  m 

before  ns,  where  reference  is  to  prerogative,  which  in  its  inner  ethical  content  may 
be  either  welcomed  and  prized,  or  spurned  and  stamped  under  foot,  the  call  may  be 
essentially  of  the  nature  of  a  Divine  invitation.  Some  of  God's  greatest  blessings 
He  simply  provides  and  confers  without  sending  forth  an  invitation.  To  the  enjoy- 
ment of  others,  He  gives  invitation,  and,  as  it  were,  says,  "  Ho,  every  one  1  come 
ye."  Some  such  invitation  is  addressed  to  persons,  some  such  to  peoples.  And  in 
both  cases  invitation  may  pave  the  way  for  further  and  ulterior  invitation.  They 
who  "  have,"  in  the  sense  of  accepting  what  has  been  profiferred,  and  of  keeping  and 
prizing  what  they  have  got,  to  them  shall  be  given,  and  they  shall  "  have  "  more 
abundantly.  Invitation  to  them  will  follow  invitation,  till  the  highest  blessing  is 
reached  ;  and  they  find  in  their  delightful  experience  that  blessed  are  they  who  are 
God's  invited  guests  to  the  everlasting  banquet  of  bliss.  To  all  the  highest  bless- 
ings there  is  a  Divine  "  call  "  or  "  invitation."  "  For  whom  He  did  foreknow,  .  .  , 
them  He  also  glorifies  "  (chap.  viii.  29,  30).     (J.  Morison,  D.D.) 

Ver.  13.  Jacob  have  I  loved,  but  Esau  have  I  hated. — Jacob  loved,  hut  Esau 
hated : — It  is  evident  that  to  the  writer  it  was  a  mystery  why  God  should  "  love  " 
Jacob  more  than  Esau.  He  even  goes  so  far  as  to  imply  that,  at  first  sight,  it  has 
the  character  of  "unrighteousness  "  in  God.  But  he  instantly  crushes  the  thought 
(ver.  14).  St.  Paul  makes  it  the  basis  of  some  thoughts  about  "  election."  It 
would  be  impossible  that  there  should  be  a  God  of  infinite  knowledge  and  no 
"  election."  But  there  are  only  two  right  uses  of  it — viz.,  to  hnmble  and  leave 
God  in  His  unapproachable  greatness,  and  to  comfort  the  tried  and  harassed 
believer.  I.  To  a  mere  superficial  reader,  it  seems  vert  strange  that  God 
BHOTJLD  love  Jacob  AND  HATE  EsAU.  1.  Esau's  picturc  is  well  drawn.  He  "  was 
a  clever  hunter,  a  man  of  the  field  " — what  we  should  call  "  a  man  of  the  world." 
He  loved  pleasure,  and  had  a  clear  eye  for  any  present  advantage.  We  could  not 
call  him  immoral,  and,  by  the  side  of  Jacob,  he  stands  up  the  better  man.  He 
was  far  more  sinned  against  than  sinning.  He  had  some  fine  traits.  He 
was  irritable,  even  to  the  point  of  saying  that  he  would  kill  his  brother! 
But  he  was  forgiving,  and  his  passion  quite  passed  away.  He  bought  what 
he  might,  probably,  have  taken  by  force.  He  never  once  deceived  his  father 
and  mother.  He  spoke  to  his  father  respectfully  and  reverently.  If  he  thought 
lightly  of  "  the  birthright "  at  one  time,  he  was  very  earnest  about  it  at  another. 
He  showed  consideration  at  least  the  second  time,  in  the  selection  of  his  wives 
(Gen.  xxviii.  8,  9).  And  Esau  was  most  generous  afterwards,  at  Peniel,  e.g.,  even 
at  the  moment  when  Jacob  was  treating  him  with  suspicion,  fear,  and  cunning 
(Gen.  xxxiii.)  He  was  unwilling  to  take  anything  at  Jacob's  hand,  but,  with  great 
delicacy,  when  Jacob  urged  him  to  take  it,  he  took  it,  and  added,  "  Let  us  go,  and 
I  will  go  before  thee."  And  when  Jacob  declined  it,  he  said,  "  Let  me  now  leave 
with  thee  some  of  the  folk  that  are  with  me."  And  the  last  thing  we  read  of  him 
is  an  act  of  modest  thoughtfulness  (Gen.  xxxvi.  7).  2.  The  patient  life  of  Jacob  is 
a  sad  contrast.  His  besetting  sin  is  deceitfulness.  He  takes  advantage  of  his 
brother's  hunger,  and  gets  "the  birthright"  by  what  was  almost  cheating.  To  his 
apparently  dying  father,  he  tells,  acts,  asserts,  and  re-asserts  a  lie  1  And  before  he 
goes  away  he  makes  no  confession  or  apology.  He  deceives  his  master  and-  father- 
in-law,  Laban,  and  runs  away  and  outrages  his  feelings.  And  even  to  his  generous 
brother  he  acts  trickily.  II.  Where,  then,  is  the  solution  of  the  verdict, 
"  Jacob  have  I  loved,"  &c.  ?  We  go  down  into  the  sanctuary  of  a  man's  real  life. 
1.  Esau  seems  to  have  never  cared  for  God  at  all.  He  had  no  crime  ;  but  he  cer- 
tainly had  no  grace.  There  is  not  a  prayer,  nor  any  recognition  of  the  fatherhood 
or  the  sovereignty  of  the  Almighty.  His  •*  birthright  "  is  little  or  nothing  to  him ; 
and  a  present  gratification  comes  before  any  future  advantage.  He  tries,  even  with 
♦'  tears,"  to  change  his  father's  resolve  that  Jacob  should  have  the  property.  But 
there  is  no  repentance.  The  "  birthright "  is  valuable  to  him  in  a  secular  point  of 
view;  but  he  is  utterly  indifferent  to  its  spiritual  nature.  2.  Jacob  seeks  the 
blessing  by  wrong  means ;  but  he  values  it.  He  makes  his  peace  with  God  the  very 
night  after.  His  life  at  Syria  is  such  that  Laban  was  constrained  to  say,  "  I  have 
learned  by  experience  that  the  Lord  hath  blessed  me  for  thy  sake."  He  traces 
everything  he  had  to  God.  He  wrestles  all  night  in  prayer.  He  goes  up  to  Bethel, 
and  renews  his  covenant  when  God  bids  him.  He  puts  away  all  his  wives'  strange 
gods  before  he  goes  there.  He  secures  God's  permission  and  blessing  before  he 
ventures  to  go  down  into  Egypt.  He  is  careful  when  there  to  separate  his  family 
from  idolators,  and  he  makes  good  confession  before  Pharaoh.    In  his  last  act  he 


276  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  ix. 

talks  to  his  children  with  grandeur,  and  most  piously,  and  shows  his  faith  by 
charging  his  sons  to  bury  him  in  the  land  of  promise.  Conclusion  :  1.  Jacob  had 
great  sins,  but  they  were  falls  1  He  rose  ;  he  repented ;  and  he  was  forgiven.  The 
child  of  God  comes  out,  and  grace  prevails.  2.  Esau  was,  in  a  worldly  sense, 
moral,  but  godless.  Not  very  wrong  with  man,  but  never  right  with  God.  3. 
Suppose  you  had  two  sons.  The  one  lived  a  perfectly  correct  life ;  but  you  were 
nothing  to  him.  The  other  often  grieved  you ;  but  he  loved  you,  and  was  sorry 
when  he  hurt  you.  Which  would  be  the  one  you  loved  ?  4.  What  shall  we  say 
then?  Is  there  unrighteousness  with  God?  God  forbid.  Then  how  is  it  with 
ourselves?  The  world  is  very  much  made  up  of  "  Esaus  "  and  "  Jacobs."  Some 
lead  very  correct  lives.  What  is  God?  A  cypher.  Where  is  God?  Nowhere. 
Others  are  really  religious.  They  love  God.  But  they  do  many,  many  inconsistent 
and  very  bad  things.  They  repent ;  they  are  forgiven.  And  the  correct,  moral 
people  of  the  world  see  the  sins  of  the  religious  people,  and  suspect  and  despise 
them.  And  the  religious  people  scarcely  remember  how  very  inferior  they  are  in 
many  things  to  the  world.  6.  Then  what  will  be  to  the  Jacobs  ?  They  will  be 
punished,  as  Jacob  was,  by  a  retributive  justice.  They  will  go  through  several 
ordeals  of  purification.  They  will  suffer  even  to  the  fire  1  But  they  will  be  saved  I 
And  what  to  the  Esaus  who  live  and  die  Esaus?  A  retributive  justice  too.  No  God 
in  them  ;  then  no  God  for  them  1  No  birthright  1  No  blessing  !  No  repeutance  1 
(J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Jacob  loved  and  Esau  hated: — I.  In  what  sense.  1.  Com- 
paratively, not  absolutely.  2.  As  representatives  of  a  race,  not  as  individuals.  3. 
In  reference  to  earthly,  not  heavenly  privileges.  II.  How  is  God's  justice  and 
MERCY  VINDICATED  IN  THIS  ORDINATION  ?  He  is  the  Supreme  Sovereign,  who  specially 
privileges  some,  but  blesses  all.  HI.  What  has  this  example  to  do  with  the 
QUESTION  OF  INDIVIDUAL  SALVATION  ?  1.  Nothing  as  to  its  possibiUty,  for  all  may 
be  saved.  2.  Nothing  as  to  its  conditions,  for  all  must  be  saved  by  grace  through 
faith.  3.  Yet  much  as  to  special  privilege  and  increased  responsibility.  (J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  Esau  hated  and  Jacob  loved: — Some  hght  is  thrown  on  the  stroug  verb 
"  hated  "  by  other  passages  in  which  it  is  employed  (Matt.  vi.  24 ;  Luke  xiv.  26  ; 
John  xii.  25).  In  these  statements  there  is  certainly  no  intention  of  conveying  an 
idea  of  malice.  There  is  in  them,  just  as  in  the  Saviour's  remark  regarding  the 
camel  and  the  needle's  eye,  something  of  bold  hyperbolism.  Such  hyperbolisms 
are  common  and  rife  enough,  in  the  language  both  of  literature  and  every-day  life. 
They  give  piquancy  to  speech,  and  are  reUshed  by  "  all  the  world."  So  "  Esau  I 
hated  "  is  comparative,  not  absolute  ;  and  there  is  really  more  in  the  representation 
than  in  the  reality,  just  because  a  phraseological  foil  was  wanted.  The  idea  is, 
that  in  the  treatment  accorded  to  the  Edomites  there  was  a  conspicuous  absence  of 
that  favour  which  distinguished  the  Divine  treatment  of  the  Hebrews  and  vindi- 
cated the  expression,  "Jacob  I  loved."  In  truth,  there  was  now  no  room  for 
national  forgiveness  to  Edom.  The  cup  of  their  iniquity  they  had  filled  to  the  brim, 
and  it  was  now  time  that  they  should  be  compelled  to  drain  to  its  dregs  the  cup  of 
merited  retribution.  It  was  otherwise  with  Jacob  in  the  days  of  Malachi  (chap.  i.). 
God,  although  greatly  provoked,  had  not  dealt  with  that  people  according  to  their 
desert.  In  wrath.  He  had  remembered  mercy.  Through  the  influence  of  Ezra  and 
Nehemiah  over  the  kings  of  Babylon,  many  families  were  encouraged  to  return  to 
the  desolated  city.  The  streets  were  restored.  The  walls  were  rebuilt.  The  temple 
was  reconstructed,  and  an  appreciable  amount  of  prosperity  once  more  rolled  over 
the  land.  •'  God  loved  Jacob  " ;  for  with  all  the  waywardness  and  faithlessness  of 
the  peculiar  people,  they  were  still,  in  virtue  of  their  Messianic  destination,  like  a 
peculiar  treasure  to  God.  They  were  the  casket  which  contained  the  heavenly 
jewel ;  and,  for  the  jewel's  sake,  the  casket  was  carefully  kept  and  guarded.  It  was 
otherwise  with  Edom.  Like  many  surrounding  peoples,  they  had  a  time  of  merciful 
visitation.  Their  local  habitation  had  many  advantages ;  they  were  blessed  in 
"  the  fatness  of  the  earth  and  the  dew  of  heaven,"  and  were  sheltered  within  the 
munition  of  rocks ;  and,  had  they  been  willing  to  be  good,  they  might  have  had  a 
constant  flow  of  prosperity.  But  they  became  highminded,  aggressive,  selfish, 
morally  rank  to  heaven  with  rottenness,  and  were  involved  at  last  in  the  overflow  of 
Babylonian  devastation  (Mai.  i.  4,  cf.  in  contrast  the  case  of  Israel,  ver.  5).  We 
have  additional  evidence  in  these  statements  of  the  prophet's  reference  to  peoples 
as  distinguished  from  individuals  in  the  plural  "we,"  "ye,"  &c.  The  apostle's 
argument  is  irrefragable.  Pure  patriarchal  descent  on  the  part  of  Israel 
was  insufficient  to  ensure  everlasting  Messianic  blessings;  for  it  was  utteily 
insufficient  on  the  part   of   Edom  to  secure  those  temporal  advantages   which 


CHAP,  ix.]  ROMANS.  877 

were    conferred    on    the    Hebrews     till    the   fulness     of    time.       {J.    Morison, 
D.D.)  Esau    hated  and  Jacob  loved: — Note  that — 1.  In  speaking   of  Jacob 

or  Esau,  either  as  men   or  as   nations,  neither  Genesis   nor   Malachi  nor   St. 
Paul  have  eternal  salvation  in  view;   the  matter  in   question  is  the  part  they 
play  regarded  from   the  theocratic   standpoint,  as  is  proved  by  the  words   *'  to 
serve."      2.   Esau,  though  deprived  of  the  promise  and  the  inheritance,  never- 
theless obtained  a  blessing  and   an   inheritance  for  his   descendants.     3,  The 
national  character  inherited  from  the  father  of  the  race  is  not  so  impressed  on  his 
descendants  that  they  cannot  escape  it.    As  there  were  in  Israel  many  Edomites, 
profane  hearts,  there  may  also  have  been  many  Israelites,  spiritual  hearts  in  Edom. 
Compare  what  is  said  of  the  wise  men  of  Teman  (Jer.  xlix.  7),  and  the  very  respect- 
able  personage  Eliphaz  (notwithstanding  his  error)  in  the  book  of  Job.     {Prof. 
Godet.)        Jacob  loved: — This  is  seen  all  through  his  history.     1.  In  the  promise 
made  before  his  birth.    2.  The  vision  of  Bethel  (Gen.  xxviii.   12,  &q.).     3.  The 
blessing  in  Padanaram  (Gen.  xxxi.  5,  9).     4.  The  vision  there  (ver.  11-13).     5. 
The  command  given  to  Laban  concerning  him  (ver.  24).     6.  The  blessing  given 
him  at  Peniel  (Gen.  xxxii.  28,  29).    7.  The  command  to  go  to  Bethel  and  the 
vision  there  (Gen.  xxxv.  1,  9,  11).     (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)       Jacob  and  Esau  : — Why 
was  it  that  God  loved  Jacob  and  hated  Esau?     I.  This  is  a  fact.     Ask  an 
Arminian  about  election,  and  at  once  he  begins  to  sharpen  the  knife  of  controversy. 
But  say  to  him,  "  Ah,  brother  1  was  it  not  Divine  grace  that  made  you  to  differ? 
Was  it  not  the  Lord  who  called  you  out  of  your  natural  state  and  made  you  what 
you  are?    "  Oh,  yes,"  he  says,  "  I  quite  agree  with  you  there."     Well,  then,  why  is 
it  that  one  man  has  been  converted,  and  not  another  ?     "  Oh,  the  Spirit  of  God 
has  been  at  work  in  this  man,"  that  God  does  treat  one  man  better  than  another 
is  not  very  wonderful.     It  is  a  fact  we  recognise  every  day.     There  is  a  man  that, 
work  as  hard  as  he  hkes,  he  cannot  earn  more  than  fifteen  shillings  a  week ;  and 
here  is  another  that  gets  a  thousand  a  year  ?    One  is  bom  in  a  palace,  while  another 
draws  his  first  breath  in  a  hovel.     Here  is  a  man  whose  head  cannot  hold  two 
thoughts  together ;  here  is  another  who  can  dive  into  the  deepest  of  questions ; 
what  is  the  reason  of  it  ?    God  has  done  it.     He  has  made  some  eagles,  and  some 
worms;  some  He  has  made  lions,  and  some  creeping  lizards  ;  He  has  made  some 
men  kings,  and  some  are  born  beggars.   Do  you  murmur  at  God  for  it  ?   No.   What  is 
the  use  of  kicking  against  facts  ?     God  does  in  matters  of  religion  give  to  one  man 
more  than  to  another.     He  gives  to  me  opportunities  of  hearing  the  Word  which  He 
does  not  give  to  the  Hottentot.     He  gives  to  me  parents  who  trained  me  in  the  fear 
of  the  Lord.     He  does  not  give  that  to  many  of  you.     He  places  me  afterwards  in 
situations  where  I  am  restrained  from  sin.     Other  men  are  cast  into  places  where 
their  sinful  passions  are  developed.     Again,  He  brings  one  man  under  the  sound 
of  a  powerful  ministry,  while  another  sits  and  listens  to  a  preacher  whose  drowsi- 
ness is  only  exceeded  by  that  of  his  hearers.    And  even  when  they  are  hearing  the 
goi^pel  the  fact  is  God  works  in  one  heart  when  He  does  not  in  another.     1.  Look 
at  Jacob's  life.    You  are  compelled  to  say  that  from  the  first  hour  that  he  left  his 
father's  house  God  loved  him.      Why,  he  has  not  gone  far  before  he  has  the 
Bethel  experience.    Laban  tries  to  cheat  him  and  God  suffers  it  not,  but  multiplies 
the  cattle  that  Laban  gives  him.     When  he  fled  God  charges  Laban  not  to  speak  to 
Jacob  either  good  or  bad.     When  his  sons  had  committed  murder  in  Shechem,  and 
Jacob  is  afraid  that  he  will  be  destroyed,  God  puts  a  fear  upon  the  people,  and  sayf 
to  them,  "  Touch  not  Mine  anointed,  and  do  My  prophet  no  harm."    And  when  a 
famine  comes  over  the  land,  God  has  sent  Joseph  into  Egypt  to  provide  for  him 
and  his  brethren.    And  see  the  happy  end  of  Jacob.     It  was  that  of  *'  a  man  that 
God  loved."     2.  On  the  other  hand,  God  did  not  love  Esau.     He  permitted  him  to 
become  the  father  of  princes,  but  He  had  not  blessed  his  generatio;i.     WTiere  is  the 
house  of  Esau  now  ?    Edom  has  perished.    II.  Wht  is  this  ?     1.  Why  did  God 
love  Jacob  ?    There  was  nothing  in  Jacob  that  could  make  God  love  him,  but  much 
that  might  have  made  God  hate  him.     It  was  because  God  was  infinitely  gracious, 
and  because  He  was  sovereign  in  His  dispensation  of  this  grace.    Let  us  look  at 
Jacob's  character.     As  a  natural  man  he  was  always  a  bargain-maker.    Read  what 
he  says  after  the  glorious  experience  and  promise  at  Betliel  (Gen.  xxviii.  20,  22). 
While  he  lived  with  Laban  what  miserable  work  it  was  !     He  had  got  into  the  hands 
of  a  man  of  the  world,  and  whenever  a  covetous  Christian  gets  into  such  company, 
a  terrible  scene  ensues.     The  whole  way  through  we  are  ashamed  of  Jacob ;  we  can- 
not help  it.    Now,  if  the  character  of  Jacob  be  all  this  there  could  have  t  een 
nothing  in  him  that  made  God  love  him,  and  the  only  reason  why  God  loved  him 


278  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CEAP.  ix. 

must  hare  been  because  "  He  will  have  mercy  on  whom  He  will  have  mercy."  2, 
Why  did  God  hate  Esau  ?  The  two  questions  are  entirely  distinct,  so  one  answer 
will  not  do  for  both.  Why  does  God  hate  any  man  ?  Because  that  man  deserves 
it;  no  reply  but  that  can  ever  be  true.  There  are  some  who  answer  Divine 
sovereignty ;  but  I  challenge  them  to  look  that  doctrine  in  the  face.  Do  you  believe 
that  God  created  man  and  arbitrarily,  and  for  no  other  reason  than  that  of  destroy- 
ing him  for  ever  ?  Well,  if  you  can  believe  it,  I  pity  you  that  you  should  think  so 
meanly  of  God,  whose  mercy  endureth  for  ever.  Sovereignty  holds  the  scale  of 
love,  it  is  justice  holds  the  other  scale.  Who  can  put  that  into  the  hand  of 
sovereignty  ?  That  were  to  libel  God.  Did  Esau  deserve  that  God  should  cast  him 
away?  Yes,  what  we  know  of  Esau's  character  clearly  proves  it.  Esau  lost  his 
birthright ;  but  he  sold  it  himself  and  for  a  mess  of  pottage.  Oh,  Esau,  it  is  in 
vain  for  thee  to  say,  "  I  lost  my  birthright  by  decree."  God  is  not  the  author  of 
sin.  And  the  doctrine  is  that  every  man  who  loses  heaven  gives  it  up  himself. 
God  denies  it  not  to  him.  He  will  not  come  that  he  may  have  life.  But,  says  one, 
"  Esau  repented."  Yes,  but  what  sort  of  a  repentance  was  it  ?  As  soon  as  he 
found  that  his  brother  had  got  the  birthright  he  sought  it  again  with  tears,  but  he 
did  not  get  it  back.  He  sold  it  for  a  mess  of  pottage,  and  he  thought  he 
would  buy  it  back  by  giving  his  father  a  mess  of  pottage.  So  sinners  say,  "  I 
have  lost  heaven  by  my  evil  works  ;  I  will  easily  get  it  again  by  reforming."  No, 
you  may  sell  heaven  for  carnal  pleasures,  but  you  cannot  buy  heaven  by  merely 
giving  them  up.  You  can  get  heaven  only  on  another  ground,  viz  :  the  ground  of 
free  grace.  You  think  that  Esau  was  a  sincere  penitent ;  but  when  he  failed  to  get 
the  blessing,  what  did  he  say ?  "I  will  slay  my  brother  Jacob."  That  is  not  the 
repentance  that  comes  from  the  Holy  Spirit.  But  there  are  some  men  like  that. 
They  say  they  are  very  sorry  and  then  they  go  and  do  the  same  that  they  did 
before.  On  this  whole  matter  read  ver.  22.  Observe  that  God  had  nothing  to  do 
with  fitting  men  for  destruction.  They  do  that.  God  only  fits  men  for  salvation. 
At  the  last  day  the  righteous  shall  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  them  ;  but  the 
wicked  shall  go  "  into  everlasting  fire,  prepared  " — not  for  you  but — "  for  the  devil 
and  his  angels."  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  mystery  of  God's  love  : — A  gentleman 
who  thought  Christianity  was  merely  a  heap  of  puzzling  problems,  said  to  an  old 
minister,  "  That  is  a  very  strange  statement '  Jacob  have  I  loved,  but  Esau  have  I 
hated.'  "  "  Very  strange  "  replied  the  minister ;  "  but  what  is  it  that  you  see  most 
Strang©  about  it?  "  "  Oh,  that  part  of  course  about  hating  Esau."  '*  Well,  sir," 
said  the  minister,  "  how  wonderfully  are  we  made  and  how  differently  constituted. 
The  strangest  part  of  all  to  me  is  that  He  could  ever  have  loved  Jacob.  There  is 
no  mystery  so  glorious  as  the  mystery  of  God's  love."  (N.  T.  Anecdotes.)  What 
shall  we  say  then?  Is  there  \mrlghteousness  with  God?  Ood  forbid. — The 
unimpeachable  righteousness  of  God  in  the  dispensations  of  His  mercy  and  justice: 
— I.  He  acts  on  immutable  pmnciples.  1.  These  principles  are  fixed  fver.  15). 
2.  Are  independent  of  human  will  and  action  (ver.  16).  3.  Respect  botn  mercy 
and  justice  (ver.  17).  4.  Are  the  same  in  application  to  all.  He  has  mercy  on  the 
penitent,  withdraws  His  Spirit  from  the  unpenitent  (ver.  18).    II.  He  has  a  perfect 

RIGHT   TO   determine    THOSE    PRINCIPLES   AND    DIRECT    THE    APPLICATION   OP    THEM.       1. 

Men  are  apt  to  complain  (ver.  19).  2.  But  unreasonably,  because  God  is  the 
Supreme  Sovereign  (ver.  20).  He  can  mould  as  He  pleases,  whether  to  honour  or 
dishonour.  III.  These  principles  are  always  applied  in  mercy,  1.  Even 
vessels  fitted  for  wrath  are  endured  with  much  long-suffering,  affording  ample  room 
for  repentance.  2.  While  the  riches  of  His  glory  are  displayed  in  the  vessels  of 
mercy.  3.  And  there  is  no  difference  between  Jew  and  Gentile,  for  the  righteous- 
ness of  faith  is  unto  and  upon  all  that  believe.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Unrighteous- 
ness with  God  is  a  thing — I.  Abhorrent  to  human  sense.  1.  We  could  then 
have  no  confidence  in  Him.  2.  There  would  be  no  security  for  moral  order  and 
happiness,  3.  No  hope  in  the  future.  II.  Inconceivabue.  Because  opposed  to 
all  our  notions  of  Divine  perfection,  whether  derived  from  revelation,  conscience, 
or  reason.  III.  Impossible.  1.  Either  in  the  dispensations  of  His  mercy  or 
justice.  2.  Because  contrary  to  His  nature.  3,  Hence  seeming  injustice,  where- 
ever  it  occurs,  must  be  referred  to  human  ignorance.  {Ibid.)  Righteousness  of  the 
Divine  administration : — All  the  unutterable  woes  of  the  depraved  residuums  of  our 
great  cities  are  taking  place  under  the  administration  of  a  God  of  kindness  and 
lovp.  There  is  provision  in  New  York  for  food  and  raiment,  and  thousands  there 
are  that  wander  through  the  streets  hungry  and  naked.  There  is  provision  in  New 
York  for  health  and  strength,  and  thousands  there  are  that  writhe  in  anguish  on 


CHAP,  n.]  ROMANS.  279 

beds  of  sickness.  There  is  provision  also  in  the  heart  of  God  for  every  miserable 
creature  that  has  erred,  and  thousands  there  are  that  curse  and  blaspheme  with 
remorse  in  hospitals  or  in  lazar-houses,  or  in  the  midst  of  the  vermin  and  filth  at 
the  bottom  of  society.  All  that  takes  place,  though  God,  who  is  God  of  love  and 
benevolence  sees  it ;  all  this  takes  place  though  nature  is  ordained  to  promote 
happiness ;  all  this  takes  place,  though  the  structure  of  society  and  the  structure 
of  individual  men  are  designed  to  promote  happiness ;  all  this  takes  place, 
though  God's  government  is  for  the  promotion  of  happiness ;  all  this  takes 
place,  though  the  interior  nature  of  God  and  His  everlasting  decree  aim  at 
happiness.  And  yet,  men  are  found  who,  with  these  facts  staring  them  in  the 
face,  rise  up  and  say,  "  God  is  too  good  to  punish  men  1 "  Why,  there  never  was 
an  assertion  so  flung  in  the  face  of  facts.  The  administration  of  God  is  full  of 
goodness  ;  but  goodness  in  the  Divine  administration  is  employed  according  to  law. 
{H.  W.  Beecher.)  God  righteous  in  all  His  ways : — Going  up  among  the  White 
Mountains  some  years  ago,  I  thought  of  that  passage  in  the  Bible  that  speaks  of 
God  as  weighing  mountains  in  a  balance.  As  I  looked  at  those  great  mountains,  I 
thought :  Can  it  be  possible  that  God  can  put  those  great  mountains  in  scales  ?  It 
was  an  idea  to%  great  for  me  to  grasp ;  but  when  I  saw  a  bluebell  down  by  the 
mule's  foot  on  my  way  up  Mount  Washington,  then  I  understood  the  kindness  and 
goodness  of  God.  It  is  not  so  much  of  God  in  great  things  I  can  understand,  but 
of  God  in  little  things.  Here  is  a  man  who  says :  "  That  doctrine  cannot  be  true, 
oecause  things  do  go  so  very  wrong."  I  reply  :  "  It  is  no  inconsistency  on  the  part 
of  God,  but  a  lack  of  understanding  on  our  part."  I  hear  that  men  are  making 
very  fine  shawls  in  some  factory.  I  go  in  on  the  first  floor  and  see  only  the  raw 
material,  and  I  ask:  "Are  these  the  shawls  I  hear  about?"  "No,"  says  the 
manufacturer,  "  go  up  to  the  next  floor  " ;  and  I  go  up,  and  there  I  begin  to  see 
the  design.  But  the  man  says :  "  Do  not  stop  here,  go  to  the  top  floor  of  the 
factory,  and  you  will  see  the  idea  fully  carried  out."  I  do  so,  and  having  come  to 
the  top,  see  the  complete  pattern  of  an  exquisite  shawl.  So  in  our  life,  standing 
down  on  a  low  level  of  Christian  experience,  we  do  not  understand  God's  dealings. 
He  tells  us  to  go  up  higher  if  we  would  know.  We  go  up  higher  and  higher  until 
we  begin  to  understand  the  Divine  meaning  with  respect  to  us.  God  says,  Go  up 
higher,  and  we  advance  until  we  stand  at  the  very  gate  of  heaven,  and  there  see 
God's  idea  all  wrought  out — a  perfect  idea  of  mercy,  of  love,  of  kindness,  and  we 
say  :  "  Just  and  true  are  all  Thy  ways."  It  is  all  right  at  the  top ;  all  right  at  the 
bottom.  Eemember,  there  is  no  inconsistency  on  the  part  of  God,  but  it  is  only 
our  mental  and  spiritual  incapacity.  {T.  De  Witt  Talviage.)  For  He  salth  to  Moses, 
I  will  have  mercy  on  whom  I  will  have  mercy. — Moses  and  Pharaoh : — I.  Moses  an 
example  of  God's  mercy  and  grace.  II.  Pharaoh  an  example  of  God's  justice.  III. 
Both  examples  of  God's  righteousness.     {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)        Mercy  is — I.  An  act 

OP  SOVEREIGN  WILL.  H.  A  mSPLAT  OF  UNMERITED  GRACE.  III.  CONSISTS  WITH 
INFINITE    JUSTICE.       IV.    Is   DISPENSED  WITH  CONSUMMATE  WISDOM,         (Ibid. )  Mercy 

abused: — To  sin  because  mercy  abounds  is  the  devil's  logic.  He  that  sins  because 
of  mercy  is  like  one  that  wounds  his  head  because  he  hath  a  plaster  :  he  that  sins 
because  of  God's  mercy  shall  have  judgment  without  mercy.  Mercy  abused  turns 
to  fury.  Nothing  sweeter  than  mercy  when  it  is  improved,  nothing  fiercer  when  it 
is  abused  ;  nothing  colder  than  lead  when  it  is  taken  out  of  the  mine,  nothing  more 
scalding  than  lead  when  it  is  heated;  nothing  blunter  than  iron,  nothing  sharper 
when  it  is  whetted.  "The  mercy  of  the  Lord  is  upon  them  that  fear  Him." 
Mercy  is  not  for  them  that  sin,  and  fear  not ;  but  for  them  that  fear,  and  sin  not. 
(T.  Watson.)  Mercy,  alternative  of : — When  the  Romans  attacked  a  city  it  was 
sometimes  their  custom  to  set  up  a  white  flag  at  the  city  gate.  If  the  garrison 
surrendered  while  the  white  flag  was  up,  their  lives  were  spared ;  after  that  the 
black  flag  was  run  up,  and  every  man  was  put  to  the  sword.  Sinner,  to-day  the 
white  flag  of  mercy  is  out.  Surrender  to  Christ  and  live  before  the  black  flag  of 
death  and  doom  takes  its  place.  Mercy,  importance  of : — Mercy  is  in  the  air  we 
breathe,  the  daily  light  which  shines  upon  us,  the  gracious  rain  of  God's  inherit- 
ftnce.  It  is  the  public  spring  for  all  the  thirsty,  the  common  hospital  for  all  the 
needy.  It  is  mercy  that  takes  us  out  of  the  womb,  feeds  us  in  the  days  of  our 
pilgrimage,  furnishes  us  with  spiritual  provision,  closes  our  eyes  in  peace,  and 
translates  us  to  a  secure  resting-place.  It  is  the  first  petitioner's  suit,  and  the  first 
believer's  article,  the  contemplation  of  Enoch,  the  confidence  of  Abraham,  the 
burden  of  the  prophetic  songs,  and  the  glory  of  all  the  apostles,  the  plea  of  the 
penitent,  the  ecstasies  of  the  reconciled,  the  believer's  hosanna,  the  angel's  halle« 


280  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

lujah.  Ordinances,  oracles,  altars,  pulpits,  the  gates  of  the  grave,  and  the  gates  of 
heaven,  do  all  depend  upon  mercy.  It  is  the  load-star  of  the  wandering,  the 
ransom  of  the  captive,  the  antidote  of  the  tempted,  the  prophet  of  the  living,  and 
the  effectual  comfort  of  the  dying :  there  would  not  be  one  regenerate  saint  upon 
earth,  nor  one  glorified  saint  in  heaven,  if  it  were  not  for  mercy.  (J.  Hamilton, 
D.D.)  Mercy,  manifold  : — As  John  Bunyan  says,  all  the  flowers  in  God's  garden 
are  double ;  there  is  no  single  mercy :  nay,  they  are  not  only  double  flowers,  but 
they  are  manifold  flowers.  There  are  many  flowers  upon  one  stalk,  and  many 
flowers  in  one  flower.  You  shall  think  you  have  but  one  mercy ;  but  you  shall  find 
it  to  be  a  whole  flock  of  mercies.  Our  beloved  is  unto  us  a  bundle  of  myrrh,  a 
fluster  of  camphor.  When  you  lay  hold  upon  one  golden  link  of  the  chain  of  grace, 
you  pull,  pull,  pull ;  but  lo  !  as  long  as  your  hand  can  draw  there  are  fresh  "  linked 
swettnesses  "  of  love  still  to  come.  Manifold  mercies  !  Like  the  drops  of  a  lustre, 
which  reflect  a  rainbow  of  colours  when  the  sun  is  glittering  upon  them,  and  each 
one,  when  turned  in  different  ways,  from  its  prismatic  form  shows  »11  the  varieties 
of  colour  ;  so  the  mercy  of  God  is  one  and  yet  many  ;  the  same,  yet  ever  changing ; 
a  combination  of  all  the  beauties  of  love  blended  harmoniously  together.  (07.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The  sovereignty  of  Divine  mercy  : — Observe — I.  The  text  does  not 
MEAN  that  God  is  not  merciful  to  all — 1.  Favours  some  to  the  disadvantage  o£ 
others.  2.  Is  not  disposed  to  save  all.  3.  Distributes  His  favours  capriciously. 
4,  Saves  any  without  the  co-operation  of  their  own  will.  II.  It  means  tnat  God's 
purpose  in  redemption  is  independent  of  man.  1.  That  its  conditions  are  fixed 
without  the  will  of  man.  2.  That  the  will  or  efforts  of  man  cannot  supersede  these 
conditions.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  Divine  sovereignty: — When  it  is  affirmed 
that  the  sovereignty  of  God  is  absolute,  it  is  simply  meant  that  He  is  a  Being  who 
can  do  whatever  He  pleases.  "  None  can  stay  His  hand,  or  say  to  Him,  what 
doest  Thou  ?  "  He  is  not  accountable  for  His  deeds  to  any  superior.  "  He  giveth 
not  account  of  any  of  His  matters  "  But  as  He  can  do  whatever  He  pleases,  so  He 
will  fulfil  His  pleasure.  He  "  does  according  to  His  will  in  the  army  of  heaven," 
(fee.  "  My  counsel  shall  stand,"  &0.  But  whUe  God  is  thus  absolute  sovereign, 
this  absolute  sovereignty  does  not  determine  for  Him  what  it  is  right  that  He 
should  please  to  do.  Something  else  is  indispensable,  viz.,  His  peculiar  intelli- 
gence. In  it,  and  in  it  alone,  does  God  find  the  idea  of  right,  an  idea  without 
which  there  could  be  no  ethical  imperative  uttering  itself  in  the  affirmative  "  I 
ought."  It  is  the  highest  glory  of  God,  that  He  should,  and  that  He  always  does 
please,  to  do  only  what  is  right.  In  Him  is  no  darkness  at  alL  He  exercises  Hia 
sovereignty  in  doing  only  what  is  "  holy  and  just  and  good."  His  sovereignty  is 
itself  "  holy  and  just  and  good."  The  apostle's  adduction  of  the  oracle  addressed 
to  Moses  is  a  decided  argumentative  success.  Men,  without  exception,  are  the 
subjects  of  God's  sovereign  sway.  It  cannot  be  disputed.  So  therefore  are  the 
Jews  in  particular  ;  universally  so.  And  yet  "  all  have  come  short  of  the  glory  of 
God  "  ;  so  that  there  is  unless  there  supervene  some  great  change  or  new  creation, 
overhanging  all,  both  Gentiles  and  Jews,  a  lurid  thundercloud  of  doom.  Is  there 
room  for  hope?  The  asseverations,  "I  shall  have  mercy,"  &c.,  seem  to  assume 
that  there  is  forgiveness  with  God,  that  He  may  be  had  in  reverence  (Psa.  cxxx.  4). 
But  there  are  limits  to  His  pardoning  grace.  He  "  keeps  mercy  indeed  for  thou- 
sands "  (Exod.  xxxiv.  7),  but  He  will  by  no  means  clear  those  whose  guilt  has 
deepened  into  impenitence.  There  is  a  sin  that  never  hath  forgiveness  (Mark  iii. 
29).  Who  then  shall  be  pardoned  ?  Just  those  whom  it  pleases  God  to  pardon 
— "  He  wiU  have  pardoning  mercy  on  whomsoever,"  &c.  And  who  are  these  ? 
Under  the  Old  Testament  the  category  of  thfl  pardonable  was  not  clearly  revealed. 
Under  the  new  none  need  walk  in  uncertainty.  Those  who  put  their  trust  in  Christ 
shall  be  pardoned.  And  as  regards  those  who  are  destitute  of  this  revelation,  see 
chap.  ii.  13-15.  Their  responsibility  is  measured  by  their  opportunity.  And  it 
lies  entirely  with  God's  sovereignty  to  determine  who  shall  be  the  recipients  of  Hia 
bounty.  In  the  statements  "  On  whomsoever  I  have,"  or  am  having,  "  mercy," 
&c.,  there  seems  to  be  the  conveyance  of  the  idea  that  God  was  already  in  absolute 
spontaneity  at  work  forgiving  iniquity,  transgression,  and  sin.  The  favourite  work 
of  Divine  grace,  however,  is  so  great,  august,  and  far-reaching  in  its  ethical 
influence  that  none  but  the  Highest  could  reasonably  undertake  it,  or  carry  it 
through.  "  There  is  none  who  can  forgive  sins  but  God  only."  There  is  hence, 
on  the  part  of  God,  the  well-grounded  assumption  of  a  very  lofty  prerogative,  which 
is  tantamount  to  an  assertion  that  He  will  not  suffer  any  one,  not  even  Moses,  to 
interfere  with  the  adnrr.'stvition  of  His  bounty.    He  is  resolved  to  dispense- Hia 


CHAP,  n.]  ROMANS.  281 

bonnty  to  whomsoever  He  pleases.  {J.  Morison,  D.D.)  The  Divine  sovereignty : 
its  infinite  graciousness  : — As  God's  throne  is  a  throne  of  holiness,  so  it  is  a  throne 
of  grace  (Heb.  iv.  16).  A  throne  encircled  with  a  rainbow,  "  in  sight,  like  an 
emerald  "  (Eev.  iv.  3) ;  an  emblem  of  the  covenant,  betokening  mercy.  Though 
His  nature  be  infinitely  excellent  above  us,  and  His  power  infinitely  transcendent 
over  us,  yet  the  majesty  of  His  government  is  tempered  with  an  unspeakable  good- 
ness. He  acts  not  so  much  as  an  absolute  lord  as  a  gracious  sovereign  and 
obliging  benefactor.  He  delights  not  to  make  His  subjects  slaves ;  exacts  not  of 
them  any  servile  or  fearful,  but  a  generous  and  cheerful  obedience.  He  requires 
them  not  to  fear  or  worship  Him  so  much  for  His  power  as  His  goodness.  He 
requires  not  of  a  rational  creature  anything  repugnant  to  the  honour,  dignity,  and 
principles  of  such  a  nature  ;  nor  anything  that  may  make  it  weary  of  its  own  being, 
or  of  the  service  it  owes  its  sovereign.  He  draws  it  by  the  cords  of  a  man  ;  His 
goodness  renders  His  laws  as  sweet  as  honey  and  the  honeycomb  to  an  unvitiated 
palate  and  a  renewed  mind.  And  though  it  be  granted  He  hath  full  disposal  of  His 
creature  as  the  potter  of  His  vessel,  yet  His  goodness  will  never  permit  Him  to  use 
this  sovereign  right  to  the  hurt  of  a  creature  that  deserves  it  not.  As  not  to  punish 
the  sinner  would  be  a  denial  of  His  justice,  so  to  torment  the  innocent  would  be  a 
denial  of  His  goodness.  It  is  as  much  against  the  nature  of  God  to  punish  one 
eternally  who  hath  not  deserved  it  as  it  is  to  deny  Himself  and  act  anything 
foolishly,  and  unbecoming  His  other  perfections  which  render  Him  majestical  and 
adorable.  (S.  Charnock,  B.D.)  The  Divine  sovereignty  :  real  and  merciful : — 
Conspiracies  have  at  various  times  sprung  up  to  deprive  the  Supreme  of  this  pecu- 
liar glory — to  deny  Him  a  will.  Men  would  fain  substitute  a  law  of  nature  for  the 
living  God.  They  conceive  of  an  unthinkable  principle  like  gravitation  ;  they 
think  of  a  power  ]lke  the  sea,  lashing  itself  and  raging  and  advancing  without  a 
purpose  or  a  plan,  floating  a  ship  and  sinking  a  stone  with  equal  indifference,  and 
continuing  afterwards  its  unmeaning  roar.  I  love  this  chapter ;  it  is  a  sublime 
protest  against  an  atheistic  human  philosophy.  I  can  have  no  communion  with  a 
mere  mechanical  omnipotence — a  sort  of  infinite  ocean  that  heaves  eternally  by 
laws  to  which  it  is  subject ;  saving  me  if  I  continue  to  make  myself  sufficiently 
buoyant  before  I  am  cast  on  its  cold,  uncaring  bosom ;  and  swallowing  me  up  with 
the  same  relentless  regularity  if  I  make  the  leap  before  I  be  light  enough.  This 
omnipotent  principle  is  not  my  Saviour  ;  I  need  as  my  Saviour  the  living  God  who 
loves  me,  and  whom  I  may  love  in  return — the  God  who  looked  on  me  when  I  was 
lost,  and  loved  me  when  I  was  worthless — who  saved  me  from  hell  and  made  me 
His  child.  I  need  fiom  my  God  not  merely  a  general  aspect  of  benevolence 
towards  the  world,  under  which  some  of  the  most  vigorous  agonisers  may  struggle 
into  heaven ;  I  need  not  only  permission  to  save  myself,  but  a  hope  that  the 
Infinite  sees  me,  knows  me,  pities  me,  loves  me,  grasps  me,  and  holds  me  in  the 
hollow  of  His  hand,  safe  against  all  dangers,  until  He  bring  me  safe  to  His  eternal 
rest.  (W.  Ariiot,  D.D.)  Justification  by  free  grace  vindicated: — "For  He 
saith  to  Moses,  I  will,"  &c.  As  if  He  should  have  said,  "  My  doctrine  of  justifica- 
tion, by  the  free  grace  and  pleasure  of  God  through  believing,  is  so  far  from  ren- 
dering Him  unrighteous,  that  Himself  plainly  asserteth  the  substance  of  it  in  saying 
thus  unto  Moses.  Meaning  that  inasmuch  as  all  men  having  sinned  are  become 
obnoxious  unto  Me,  I  am  resolved  to  use  my  prerogative,  and  to  show  mercy  unto 
whom  I  please,  not  upon  such  who  shall  be  obtruded  upon  Me  by  men,  or  who  shall 
judge  themselves  worthy.  The  repetitions  are  very  emphatical,  and  import  in  the 
highest  degree  a  resolvedness  in  God  to  dispense  His  favour  according  to  His  own 
pleasure,  and  not  according  to  the  thoughts  of  men.  When  the  clouds  pour  out 
rain  in  abundance  it  is  a  sign  they  were  full  of  water.  In  like  manner,  when  a 
man  reiterates  any  purpose,  it  argueth  a  fulness  of  that  which  is  thus  uttered,  and 
that  the  heart  could  not  discharge  itself  by  one  expression.  Now  we  know  who 
those  are  on  whom  God  is  everlastingly  resolved  to  show  mercy,  viz.,  those  who 
believe  in  His  Son  (2  Cor.  i.  19,  20).  And  upon  this  account  the  gospel,  which 
asserteth  this  purpose  of  God,  is  termed  the  everlasting  gospel  (Rev.  xiv.  6),  i.e., 
one  the  tenor  and  contents  whereof  shall  never  be  altered.  Here  God  fully 
declares  who  they  are  on  whom  He  will  have  mercy,  viz.,  believers.  Neither  are 
all  the  angels  in  heaven  nor  men  upon  earth  able  to  take  Him  off  from  this  Hia 

Eorpose.  For  that  is  to  be  considered  by  the  way  that  the  apostle  clearly  speaketh 
ere  of  that  grace  or  mercy  of  God  which  relateth  to  the  salvation  of  men.  Bat 
whereas  the  Scripture  speaks  of  two  sorts  or  d<  grees  of  grace,  one  which  precedes 
faith,  and  oonsists  partly  in  the  ^t  of  His  Son,  partly  in  calling  them  by  tha 


282  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  ix. 

gospel,  and  vouchsafing  means  and  opportunities  unto  them  for  repenting  and 
believing ;  and  another,  which  is  subsequent.  The  question  may  be,  of  which  the 
apostle  speaks.  I  answer  of  the  latter.  1.  God  makes  no  such  difference  or  dis- 
tinction of  men  in  His  preventing  grace  as  the  words  before  us  manifestly  imply 
(Heb,  ii,  9 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  6  ;  Acts  xvii.  30 ;  Matt.  xx.  16,  Ac).  2.  The  whole  dis- 
course  of  the  apostle  in  the  context  is  not  concerning  preventing  grace  or  mercy, 
but  subsequent,  as,  viz.,  concerning  justification,  adoption,  &q.  3.  And  evident  it 
is  that  the  apostle's  intent  is  to  declare  the  Jews  to  be  excluded  from  that  grace 
and  mercy,  as  in  telling  them  that  the  children  of  the  flesh  are  not  the  children  of 
God,  but  the  children  of  the  promise  (ver.  8),  that  "  the  elder  should  serve  the 
younger,"  and  that  the  *'  purpose  of  God  stands  not  of  works,"  Ac.  Certain  it  is 
that  these  Jews  were  not  excluded  from  preventing  grace,  for  they  were  called  of 
God  by  the  apostles,  yea,  and  by  CJhrist  Himself,  and  this  by  means  so  efficacious 
that  our  Saviour  affirmeth  that  even  the  men  of  Tyre  and  Sidon  might  or  would 
have  been  converted  by  them  (Matt.  xi.  21).  Therefore  the  grace  or  mercy  spoken 
of  in  the  words  in  hand  must  needs  be  subsequent.  And  if  so  it  cannot  be  under- 
stood of  any  such  mercy  in  God  towards  men  by  which  men,  yet  unregenerate,  are 
enabled,  much  less  necessitated,  to  repent  or  believe,  but  of  that  mercy  which  is 
vouchsafed  unto  them  who  do  now  repent  and  believe.  So  that  the  meaning  of  the 
words,  "  I  will  have  mercy  on  whom,"  &c.,  is  as  if  God  should  have  said,  I  will 
justify,  adopt,  and  glorify  persons  under  what  qualifications  soever  I  Myself  please, 
and  will  not  be  ordered  or  taught  by  men  what  I  have  to  do,  or  what  becometh  Me 
to  do,  in  this  kind.  As  regards  what  God  actually  said  to  Moses  (Exod.  xxxiii.  19), 
it  appears  that  Moses  (Exod.  xxxiii.  13,  16)  had  desired  of  God  that  He  would 
consider  that  the  Jews  were  His  people,  and  that  He  would  please  lead  them  that 
so  it  might  be  known  in  the  world  that  both  he  and  his  people  had  found  grace  in 
His  sight.  This  God  grants.  Upon  this  Moses  makes  a  further  request,  viz.,  that 
God  would  show  him  His  glory  (Exod.  xxxiii.  18).  To  this  God  answers,  "  I  will 
make  all  My  goodness  pass  before  thee,"  Ac,  giving  the  reason  hereof  in  the  words 
cited  by  the  apostle,  "  Let  no  man  take  offence  that  I  should  do  that  in  a  way  of 
favour  for  thee,  which  I  neither  shall  do  to  any  of  the  people  besides,  nor  ever  did 
to  any  of  thy  fathers,  nor  to  any  man  after  thee ;  nor  do  thou  imagine  that  I  am 
anyways  a  debtor  unto  thee  of  that  grace  which  I  deny  unto  others,  for  I  am  a 
debtor  unto  no  man,  and  will  dispense  My  favours,  and  so  My  mercies,  only  unto 
such  peasons  as  I  please."  Now  many  of  those  whom  God  decreed  upon  their 
believing  from  eternity  to  justify,  and  adopt,  apostatise  from,  and  make  shipwreck 
of  their  faith  (as  the  Scripture  in  many  places  testifieth),  from  whom  He  hath 
peremptorily  threatened  to  take  away  the  grace  of  justification  which  before  He  had 
conferred  upon  them.  Therefore  the  emphatical  import  of  the  apostle's  expression, 
"  I  will  have  mercy  on  whom  I  have  "  (now  or  at  present)  "mercy,"  respects  the 
same  species,  not  the  same  persons  of  men ;  being  as  if  He  had  said.  To  that  sort 
or  kind  of  men  to  whom  at  this  day  I  show  mercy  (viz.,  in  pardoning  their  sin  and 
justifying  their  persons,  meaning  believers),  I  will  show  the  like  mercy  at  all  times 
hereafter  to  the  world's  end.  Or  rather  thus,  "  I  will  have  mercy  on  whom  I  have 
mercy,"  i.e.,  I  will  not  be  taken  off  by  men  or  by  angels  from  showing  the  grace  or 
mercy  of  justification  and  adoption  unto  those  {i.e.,  that  kind  of  men)  to  whom  I  at 
this  day  show  this  grace  or  mercy,  and  these  are  such  who  believe.  (John  Good- 
win.) Arrogance  of  arraigning  God : — They  say  the  head  of  the  great  river 
Nilns  could  never  yet  be  found.  It  has  been  sought  for,  and  many  have  travelled 
possibly  some  thousands  of  miles,  but  yet  it  cannot  be  found.  But  the  head  of 
Nilus  will  be  found  before  men  find  any  cause  of  Divine  love  beyond  the  Divine 
will.  It  speaketh  a  wonderful  arrogance  in  men  to  make  God  accountable  for  His 
acts  of  Divine  grace ;  what  greater  arrogance  and  vanity  can  be  imagined  than 
this  ?  When  a  poor  creature  will  not  himself  be  brought  to  an  account  why  he 
gives  one  beggar  money  and  not  another,  or  why  he  giveth  to  one  child  a  greater 
portion  than  to  another  (though  they  both  be  the  acknowledged  fruit  of  his  body), 
that  yet  this  worm  should  dream  that  God  must  be  accountable  to  his  reason,  why 
He  showeth  mercy  to  this  man  and  not  to  another,  when  they  are  both  the  work 
of  His  hands.  It  is  certainly  enough  to  say,  "  He  will  have  mercy  on  whom  He 
will  have  mercy ;  and  extend  compassion  to  whom  He  will  extend  compassion." 
"What  pride,  what  arrogance  is  this,  not  to  allow  to  God,  whom  we  confess  to  be 
the  supreme  and  most  free  agent,  the  liberty  which  we  will  yet  claim  and  chal- 
lenge for  another!  This  is  flat  rebellion  against  the  Lord  of  all,  whose  sove- 
reignty it  dares  to  question.     {John  Collinges^        So  then  it  Is  not  of  lilm  that 


CHAP.  IX.]  ROMANS.  fSS 

wllleth,  nor  of  him  that  runneth,  but  of  God  that  showeth  mercy. — Not  of 
him  that  willeth,  nor  of  him  that  runneth : — For  ages  this  chapter  has  been  a 
battle-ground  for  theological  dispute.  Doctrines  have  been  raised  here  most 
degrading  to  man — most  derogatory  to  God.  The  first  thing,  therefore,  is  to  brush 
away  the  clouds  of  false  opinions  with  which  theological  polemics  have  enveloped 
it.  The  verse  is  not  meant  to  express  the  idea — 1.  That  the  Great  Father  does  not 
show  mercy  to  all  mankind.  This  would  be  contrary  to  facts.  Keason,  conscious- 
ness, and  the  Bible  unite  in  declaring  that  it  is  "  of  the  Lord's  mercy  that  we  have 
not  been  consumed."  Man's  existence  is  to  be  traced  to  the  fact  that  he  lives  every 
moment  by  merer,  and  mercy  bears  him  up  from  hell.  2.  That  God  gives  to  some 
men  favours  that  He  withholds  from  others,  which  is  a  truth  too  obvious  for 
debate.  You  see  this  unequal  distribution  of  the  Divine  favour — (1)  In  natural 
endowments.  No  two  men  are  alike  in  natural  endowment.  (2)  In  our  secular 
condition.  (3)  In  the  means  of  spiritual  improvement.  Some  are  born  heathens, 
(fee.  So  that  however  humbling  to  our  pride  it  may  be,  yet  God  does  bestow  favours 
oa  some  which  He  withholds  from  others.  But  here  Paul  would  not  argue  a  point 
so  palpable  to  his  opponents.  3.  That  the  Infinite  Father  is  not  disposed  to  save 
all.  This  is  opposed  to  His  own  most  positive  and  frequent  declarations.  "I 
have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  a  sinner."  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,"  &o. 
This  is  also  contrary  to  the  universality  of  His  remedial  provisions.  "  God  so  loved 
the  world,"  &c.  "  He  is  a  propitiation  ...  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world."  4. 
That  the  Infinite  Father  distributes  His  favours  capriciously.  We  are  unable  to 
discover  tliem,  but  that  He  has  the  highest  reasons  for  His  conduct  we  are  bound 
to  believe.  The  Infinite  intellect  never  acts  without  reason,  and  Infinite  love  never 
acts  unkindly.  His  mighty  operations  are  under  the  sway  of  intellect ;  His  intel- 
lect is  under  the  sway  of  love.  5.  Tbat  willing  and  running,  or  human  efforts,  are 
not  essential  to  salvation.  (1)  There  are  blessings  bestowed  upon  us  independent 
of  our  willing  and  running.  This  is  the  case,  e.g.,  with  natural  endowments.  If 
we  have  inferior  powers  the  blame  is  not  with  us ;  if  we  are  above  the  average 
the  credit  is  not  ours.  It  is  sometimes  the  case  too  with  our  temporal  con- 
dition. Sometimes  riches  come  to  a  man  without  any  effort  or  will  of  his  own, 
and  with  poverty  the  same,  but  not  always.  (2)  It  is  ever  true,  however,  of  mental 
and  moral  excellence.  We  do  not  say  that  God  cannot  make  a  man  intelligent  and 
virtuous  irrespective  of  his  own  conduct,  but  we  have  never  heard  of  such  cases. 
God's  regular  method  to  enlighten  the  ignorant,  to  reform  the  depraved,  &c.,  is  by 
the  earnest  use  of  their  own  faculties.  The  Bible  gives  us  to  understand — (a)  That 
without  my  willing  and  running  I  cannot  be  saved.  The  work  of  a  man  in  obtain- 
ing his  salvation  is  compared  to  husbandry,  building,  battle,  racing;  all  laborious 
occupations.  In  one  word,  so  far  from  willing  and  running  not  being  required,  we 
must  agonise  to  enter  in.  (6)  That  when  there  are  the  right  running  and  willing, 
salvation  is  sure  to  be  obtained.  *•  Seek  and  ye  shall  find,  knock  and  it  shall  be 
opened."  "  He  that  cometh  to  Him  He  will  on  no  account  cast  out."  Bunning  and 
willing  therefore  cannot  be  dispensed  with.  What  then  does  it  mean  ?  Simply 
this — that  the  original  reason  of  salvation  is  in  God  and  not  in  man.  A  truth  this 
which  is  no  sooner  propounded  than  adopted  by  universal  intelligence  as  an  axiom. 
If  there  be  a  God  He  must  be  the  primordial  cause  not  only  of  all  existence,  but  of 
all  good  throughout  His  vast  and  ever-extending  universe.  Then  "  It  is  not  of  him 
that  willeth,  nor  of  him  that  runneth  " — I.  That  God's  dbtermination  to  save 
MANKIND  CAME.  Humau  effort  had  nothing  to  do  in  starting  the  eternal  idea. 
•'  Who  being  His  counsellor  hath  taught  Him?  "  God's  ideas  are  as  old  as  Him- 
self. There  is  no  succession  of  thought  in  the  Eternal  Mind.  One  all-seeing,  all- 
embracing,  infinite  thought  is  His.  •'  Known  unto  God  are  all  His  works,  redemp- 
tion included,  from  the  beginning  of  the  world."  We  are  saved,  then,  ''not 
according  to  our  works,  but  according  to  His  own  purpose  and  grace,"  &c. 
Had  He  not  determined  to  save  humanity  we  never  could  have  been  saved, 
and  His  determination  is  entirely  independent  of  all  "  willing  and  running."  II. 
That  God's  condition  of  salvation  was  fobued.  1.  It  is  God's  plan  to  work  by 
means.  The  principle  of  mediation  fills  and  rules  the  nniverse.  (1)  It  is  so  in 
the  material  world.  God  acts  upon  one  thing  through  the  instrumentality  of 
another.  One  body  is  moved,  one  life  is  produced,  one  creature  is  supported  by 
another.  (2)  It  is  so  in  the  mental  woild.  One  mind  guides,  educates,  moulds 
another.  (3J  In  the  moral  world  God's  method  hero  is  to  save  the  world  by  Christ, 
fie  is  in  Christ  "  reconciling  the  world  onto  Himself."  "  Gt>d  so  loved  the  world, 
that  He  gave  His  only-begotten  Son,"  &o.    "What  the  l»w  could  not  do,"  «ko. 


284  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  a. 

This  is  a  settled  condition.  *•  There  is  no  other  name,"  Ac.  2.  Now  what  has 
human  "willing  or  running"  to  do  with  this  plan  of  salvation?  Nothing.  (1) 
The  plan  is  eternal,  and  therefore  no  creature  could  have  had  an  influence  in  its 
formation.  "The  Lamb  was  slain  before  the  foundation  of  the  world."  (2)  The 
plan  transcends  all  finite  thought.  It  could  not  have  "  entered  into  the  heart. of 
man  to  conceive  "  of  such  a  thing.  III.  To  supersede  God's  establisked  method 
OF  SALVATION.  Perhaps  this  passage  especially  refers  to  the  Jew,  who  had  an  idea 
that  he  should  be  saved  on  the  ground  of  patriarchal  descent.  And  Paul  wishes  to 
impress  him  with  the  fact  that  no  amount  of  effort  on  that  condition  would  save 
him.  He  might  will  and  run  intensely  and  for  ever,  but  it  would  be  of  no  service. 
There  is  a  Divine  way  to  reach  Divine  results.  There  is  a  Divine  way  to  cultivate 
the  soil,  to  navigate  the  ocean,  to  build  houses,  to  get  a  well-informed  and  well- 
disciplined  intellect,  and  if  these  are  not  observed  labour  will  be  lost.  It  is  so  in 
man's  salvation.  There  is  a  Divine  way,  which,  if  not  observed,  all  the  willing  and 
the  running  will  go  for  nothing.  The  heathen,  the  Mahometan,  the  Jew,  the 
Deist,  may  will  and  run,  but  their  labour  must  prove  futile,  since  they  observe  not 
the  way.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Not  of  him  that  willeth,  nor  of  him  that  runneth : 
— Abraham  willed  that  the  blessing  should  be  given  to  Ishmael ;  Isaac  willed 
that  it  should  be  given  to  Esau ;  and  Esau  ran  to  hunt  for  venison  that 
it  might  be  regularly  conveyed  to  him.  But  they  were  all  disappointed ; 
for  it  was  God's  wiU  that  it  should  be  given  to  I.'-aac  and  Jacob.  (B.  Meld.) 
God's  will  and  man's  will  (Text  and  Eev.  xxii.  17) : — 1.  The  great  controversy 
which  has  divided  the  Church  upon  the  question  of  "  the  will "  has  been  fraught 
with  incalculable  usefulness,  for  it  has  thrust  forward  the  two  great  doctrines  of 
human  responsibility  and  Divine  sovereignty.  2.  In  this  controversy,  however, 
mistakes  have  arisen  from  two  reasons.  Some  have  altogether  forgotten  one  order 
of  truths.  Like  Nelson  they  have  put  the  telescope  to  the  blind  eye,  and  then 
protested  that  they  could  not  see.  On  the  other  hand,  others  have  pushed  a  truth 
too  far.  You  know  how  often  things  are  injured  by  over-praise ;  how  a  good 
medicine  comes  to  be  despised  because  a  quack  has  advertised  it  as  an  universal 
cure.  So  puffery  in  doctrine  leads  to  its  dishonour.  You  have  seen  those  crystal 
globes,  in  which,  as  you  walk  up  to  them,  your  head  is  ten  times  as  large  as  youir 
body,  and  in  another  position  your  feet  are  monstrous  and  the  rest  of  your  body 
small.  Many  go  to  work  with  God's  truth  upon  the  model  of  this  toy ;  they  magnify 
one  capital  truth  till  it  becomes  monstrous ;  they  minify  another  till  it  becomes 
forgotten.  Let  us  note  that — I.  Salvation  hinges  upon  the  will  of  God,  ai^^d 
HOT  UPON  THE  WILL  OF  MAN.  "  It  is  uot  of  him  that  willeth,"  &c.  1.  This  may 
be  argued  from  analogy.  There  is  a  certain  likeness  between  all  God's  works.  If 
a  painter  shall  paint  three  pictures,  or  an  author  write  three  books,  there  will  be 
certain  qualities  running  thiough  the  whole  which  will  lead  you  to  see  that  they 
are  the  same  man's  "work."  Now  turn  your  thoughts — (1)  To  the  works  of 
creation.  There  was  a  time  when  these  works  had  no  existence.  With  whom  did 
God  then  take  counsel  ?  Did  it  not  rest  with  His  own  will  whether  He  would 
make  or  not?  And  when  He  willed  to  create,  did  He  not  still  use  His  own 
discretion  as  to  what  and  how  He  would  make  ?  You  see  running  through  creation, 
from  the  tiny  animalculae  up  to  the  tall  archangel,  this  working  of  God's  own  will. 
Well,  then,  does  He  reign  in  creation  and  not  in  grace  ?  (2)  The  works  of  Providence 
(Dan.  iv.  35).  From  the  first  moment  of  human  history  to  the  last  God's  will  shall 
be  done.  And  as  surely  as  God's  will  is  the  axle  of  the  universe  and  the  great 
heart  of  Providence,  so  in  grace,  despite  man's  hardness  of  heart,  His  own  purposes 
will  be  fulfilled.  2.  The  difficulties  which  surround  the  opposite  theory  are 
tremendous.  The  theory  that  salvation  depends  upon  our  own  will — (1)  Makes  the 
purpose  of  God  contingent.  Christ  may  die,  but  it  is  not  certain  that  He  will 
redeem  any,  since  the  efficacy  of  the  redemption  rests  not  in  its  own  intrinsic 
power,  but  in  the  will  of  man  accepting  it.  (2)  Makes  man,  practically,  the 
supreme  being.  The  Lord  intends  good,  but  He  must  wait  on  His  own  creature  to 
know  what  his  intention  is.  3.  Ponder  the  known  condition  of  man.  On  the 
theory  that  man  comes  to  Christ  of  his  own  will,  what  do  you  with  texts  which  si.y 
that  he  is  dead  ?  4.  It  is  consistent  with  the  universal  experience  of  all  God's 
people  that  salvation  is  of  God's  wUl.  I  have  never  yet  met  with  a  man  even 
professing  to  be  a  Christian  who  ever  said  that  his  coming  to  God  was  the  result  of 
his  unassisted  nature.  Universally  the  people  of  God  will  say  it  was  the  Holy 
Spirit  that  made  them  what  they  are.  5.  To  the  law  and  to  the  testimony.  Each 
part  of  the  whole  process  of  salvation  is  attributed   to  God's  will.     (1)   The 


CHAP,  n.]  ROMANS.  285 

preparation  (Eph.  i.  3,  9, 11).  (2)  Begeneration  (John  i.  13 ;  James  i.  18).  (3) 
Sanctification  (1  Thess.  iv.  3).  (4)  Preservation,  perseverance,  resurrection, 
and  eternal  glory  (John  vi.  39).  II.  Man's  will  has  its  pbopeb  plaob  vx 
THE  UATTEB  OF  SALVATION  (Rev.  xxii.  17).  1.  Acoording  to  this  and  many  other 
texts  it  is  clear  that  men  are  not  saved  by  compulsion.  When  a  man  receives 
the  grace  of  Christ  he  does  not  receive  it  against  his  will.  2.  Nor  is  the  will 
taken  away,  for  God  does  not  come  and  convert  the  intelligent  free-agent  into 
a  machine.  We  are  as  free  under  grace  as  ever  we  were  under  sin ;  nay,  we 
were  slaves  when  we  were  under  sin,  and  when  the  Son  makes  us  free  we  are 
free  indeed.  3.  But  though  the  will  of  man  is  not  ignored,  the  work  of  the  Spirit, 
which  is  the  effect  of  the  will  of  God,  is  to  change  the  human  will,  and  so  make 
men  wUling  in  the  day  of  God's  power,  working  in  them  to  will  and  to  do  of  His 
own  good  pleasure.  The  work  of  the  Spirit  is  consistent  with  the  original  laws  and 
constitution  of  human  nature.  Now,  how  is  the  heart  changed  in  any  matter? 
Generally  by  persuasion.  A  friend  sets  before  us  a  certain  truth  in  a  new  light, 
pleads  with  us,  and  our  hearts  are  changed  towards  it.  So  the  Spirit  makes  a 
revelation  of  truth  to  the  soul,  whereby  it  seeth  things  in  a  different  light,  and  then 
the  will  cheerfully  bows  that  neck  which  once  was  stiff  as  iron.  4.  This  gives  the 
renewed  soul  a  most  blessed  sign  of  grace.  If  thou  art  willing,  depend  upon  it  that 
God  is  wiUing.  5.  Then,  when  a  man  has  any  willingness  given  to  him,  he  has  a 
special  promise.  Before  he  had  that  willingness  he  had  an  invitation.  My  text  is 
a  special  call  to  some  of  you.  Are  you  willing  to  be  saved  ?  Then  the  Lord  says 
to  you,  "  Whosoever  will,  let  him  come."  You  cannot  say  this  does  not  mean  yoa. 
You  are  willing,  then  come  and  take  the  water  of  life  freely.  "  Had  not  I  better 
pray  ?  "  It  does  not  say  so  ;  it  says,  take  the  water  of  life.  ^'  But  had  not  I  better 
go  home  and  get  better  ?  "  No,  take  the  water  of  life,  and  take  it  now.  God  says, 
"  Here  is  a  special  invitation  for  you;  you  are  willing;  come  and  drink."  Don't 
Bay,  "I  must  go  home  and  wash  my  pitcher."  No  preparation  is  wanted.  When 
the  crusaders  heard  Peter  the  hermit,  they  cried  out  at  once,  "£>««  vult  I  "  and 
every  man  plucked  his  sword  from  its  scabbard,  and  set  out  to  reach  the  holy 
sepulchre.    So  come  and  drink,  sinner ;  God  wills  it.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  17, 18.  For  the  Scripture  salth  unto  Pharaoh,  Even  for  this  same  purpose  have 
I  raised  thee  up. — Pharaoh : — 1.  How  can  we  reconcile  it  with  the  Divine  justice 
and  mercy  that  a  man  should  be  brought  upon  the  stage  of  life  to  illustrate  the 
powerlessness  of  the  creature  who  presumes  to  measure  himself  against  the  will  of 
the  Creator  ?  The  truth  is,  that  such  passages  of  Holy  Scripture  state  only  one 
side  of  the  complete  truth,  viz.,  God's  sovereignty.  They  do  not  notice,  as  other 
passages,  man's  persistent  free-will  and  entire  responsibility.  God  raises  up  men 
like  Pharaoh  to  be  what  he  became  by  their  own  resolve  and  rejection  of  the  light 
which  might  have  saved  them.  2.  Pharaoh  was  not  without  means  of  shrewdly 
suspecting  something  of  the  true  character  and  mission  of  Israel.  His  bearing 
before  Moses  implies  this,  and  it  may  be  gathered  from  independent  considerations. 
The  earliest  religion  of  Egypt  had  behef  in  one  supreme  power,  and  this  had  only 
become  degraded  into  idolatry  in  the  course  of  long  ages.  The  secret  of  the 
ancient  truth  was  still  preserved  by  the  priestly  colleges  attached  to  the  temples, 
and  each  monarch  could,  if  he  wished,  be  initiated  into  it.  This  was  the  wisdom 
of  the  Egyptians  in  which  Moses  was  learned.  Then  in  the  dynasty  which 
immediately  preceded,  the  king  had  actually  endeavoured  to  restore  the  worship  of 
one  God  under  the  crude  form  of  devotion  to  the  sun's  disc.  When  Moses  stood 
before  Pharaoh,  he  therefore  touched  a  chord,  if  not  of  sympathy,  at  least  of 
apprehension,  in  the  conscience  of  his  ro;  xl  hearer,  and  the  conduct  of  Pharaoh 
was  of  a  man  who  wishes  not  only  to  awe  an  opponent,  but  to  crush  his  personal 
misgiving.  Thus  it  was  that  he  was  by  turns  obdurate  and  yielding,  until  at  last 
he  engaged  in  the  enterprise  which  led  to  the  t  iumph  of  IsraeL  The  event,  indeed, 
is  not  mentioned  in  the  inscriptions  on  the  monuments — no  national  disasters  evei 
are,  but  its  effects  are  written  on  the  face  of  history,  and  Pharaoh's  name  is 
remembered  as  that  of  one  whose  destiny  it  was  to  show  forth  the  power  of  Him 
whose  will  he  resisted.    Note : — L  The  pathetic  and  awtdi,  spectacle  of  the 

OBOWTB  OF  A  HUMAN  BEINO  INTO  AN  ATTITUDE  OF  FIXED  OPPOSITION  TO  THE  ALL- 
BOLT  AND  ALinoHTT  GoD.  1.  No  man  becomes  utterly  evil  all  at  once ;  he  is  only, 
perhaps,  half  conscious  of  the  change  which  is  slowly  but  surely  going  on  within 
him.  There  was  a  time,  no  doubt,  when  Pharaoh  was  a  bright,  thoughtless  boy, 
with  a  kind  mother,  and,  as  he  grew  up,  he  was  probably,  at  first,  and  generally, 


888  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

well-meaning  according  to  his  lights,  and  his  actions  might  have  been  at  any  rate 
first  shaped  in  part  by  the  traditions  of  his  family,  or  the  necessities  of  his  position. 
But  these  were  not  irresistible,  and  at  last  the  work  of  hardening  was  complete,  and 
by  a  well-known  licence  of  language  God  is  said  to  have  done  that  which  He 
permitted — to  have  hardened  Pharaoh's  heart.  2.  Throughout  the  ages  of  Jewish 
history  no  name  more  represents  emphatic  hostility  to  the  honour  of  God,  or  the 
discomfiture  which,  sooner  or  later,  awaits  that  hostility,  than  that  of  Pharaoh.  Aa 
the  Jew  passed  in  review  the  names  of  the  enemies  of  his  people,  none  seemed  to 
loom  so  large.  And  as  the  Christian  looks  back,  he,  too,  sees  in  the  enemies  of 
God's  people  that  which  the  Jews  saw.  But  with  his  clearer  faith  he  knows  that 
they  are  dark  shadows  on  earth  of  that  invisible  spirit  who  can  mould  man  into 
being  his  instrument.  Isaiah's  description  of  the  descent  of  the  King  of  Babylon 
into  the  world  of  the  dead  melts  insensibly  into  the  more  awful  picture  of  the  fall 
of  Satan.  "  How  art  thou  fallen  from  heaven,  0  Lucifer,  son  of  the  morning  1  " 
And  in  the  same  way  the  words  which  Moses  addressed  to  Pharaoh  are  less  true  of 
mortal  man  than  the  fallen  archangel.  Satan  had  his  time  of  trial,  he  was  not 
forced  to  be  the  Prince  of  Evil,  he  became  it  in  the  abuse  of  his  free  will.  But 
having  chosen  to  be  the  first-born  of  rebellion,  he  was  not  simply  a  disturbing 
force  :  the  evil  which  God  could  not  have  created  He  might  control ;  in  the  vast 
universe  there  was  a  function  assigned  to  the  apostle  of  universal  revolt.  "  For 
that  cause  have  I  raised  thee  up,  that  I  might  show  My  power  in  thee,"  &c.,  a 
power  exhibited  when  our  Lord  by  His  Cross  spoiled  principalities  and  powers,  and 
destroyed  him  that  had  the  power  of  death.  3.  And  Satan  is  only  an  instance  of 
that  which  takes  place  in  human  experience.  And  the  gradual  growth  of  the  spirit 
of  resistance  culminates  at  last,  not  in  the  triumph  of  the  rebel,  but  in  his  being 
assigned  an  awful  place  in  the  plans  of  the  Divine  providence,  in  which  he  is  to 
illustrate  the  justice  of  the  Omnipotent.     II.  Some  good  natural  qualities  may 

EXIST   IN   A   MAN    WHO,    NEVERTHELESS,    PERHAPS,    DIES    AS    AN    OPPONENT   TO    THE    WILL 

OF  God.  1.  There  is  a  bust  of  Pharaoh  in  the  museum  at  Cairo,  and  as  we  stand 
before  the  grave,  but  by  no  means  unkindly  Coptic  face,  it  is  difficult  to  think  that 
it  represents  a  human  being  to  whom  these  stern  words  were  addressed  in  the 
name  of  the  All-Merciful.  And  yet  that  this  is  possible  is  a  matter  of  experience. 
A  man  may  be  respectable,  and  even  interesting,  and  yet  throughout  his  life 
opposed  to  God  through  some  warp  in  the  wiU  or  lack  of  sensitiveness  in  the 
conscience.  And  this  is  much  more  dreadful  than  when  a  thoroughly  bad  man  is 
opposed  to  God.  That  Nero  should  burn  the  Christians  in  order  to  amuse  the 
Roman  populace  and  divert  public  attention  from  his  own  wrong-doing,  seems  to 
be  quite  natural,  considering  who  Nero  was.  But  contrast  Nero  with  JuUan. 
Julian  was  a  man  whom  to  know  was  to  respect.  It  is  true  that  he  had  advantages 
which  were  unknown  to  Nero ;  he  knew  what  the  Christian  life  was,  and  what  it 
could  be,  and  yet  he  devoted  his  great  powers  to  uprooting  Christianity  and 
restoring  Paganism.  But  he  died,  owning  that  the  Galilean  had  been  too  strong 
for  him.  If  he  had  been  an  idle,  profligate  sensuahst,  his  case  would  have  been 
less  pathetic.  Julian  seems  like  Pharaoh  to  have  been  raised  up,  that  the  crucified 
and  risen  Eedeemer  might  show  in  him  His  power,  and  His  name  might  be  declared 
in  all  the  earth.  2.  These  examples  apply  on  a  smaller  scale.  Good  natural 
qualities — industry,  justice,  temperance,  kindliness,  &c.— are  consistent  with  a 
general  drift  of  life  which  is  opposed  to  God's  will ;  they  are  no  guarantee  that  a 
man  has  that  tenderness  and  sensitiveness  of  conscience  which  will  enable  him  to 
see  the  line  of  duty  in  difficult  circumstances,  which  will  save  him  from  the  misery 
of  finding  himself  at  the  last  among  those  who  have  fought  against  God.  Have  we 
not,  perhaps,  reason  to  fear  lest  we  ourselves  should  be  of  the  number  of  petty 
Pharaohs  who  will  illustrate  God's  power  rather  than  His  mercy  on  the  Day  of 
Judgment  ?    III.  How  easily  those  who  abe  in  superior  and  engrossing  positions 

MAY   BE    FATALLY   BLINDED    TO   THE     HIGHEST     AND     BEST     INTERESTS     OF     OTHERS    RHO 

ABE  DEPENDENT  UPON  THEM.  Pharaoh,  no  doubt,  had  his  head  and  hands  full  of 
great  affairs  of  state— too  full,  he  may  have  thought,  to  give  much  time  to  the 
complaints  of  a  troublesome  tribe  of  Asiatic  bondsmen.  He  closed  his  eyes,  ears, 
and  heart  when  he  ought  to  have  kept  them  wide  open  to  all  the  indications  of 
God's  will  and  human  needs  round  him,  and  so  he  drifted  on  to  his  ruin.  May  not 
something  of  the  same  kind  occur  to  any  who  are  entrusted  by  Providence  with 
the  care  of  others — not  only  the  rulers  of  nations  and  churches,  but  the  great 
employers  of  labour,  and  the  heads  of  educational  institutions,  and  the  fathers  and 
mothers  of  families  ?    An  Israel  may  be  close  round  them,  to  whose  real  wants  they 


CHAP,  rx.]  ROMANS.  287 

are  insensible,  but  of  which  they  have  had  ample  warning,  and  meanwhile  time  ia 
passing,  and  they  are  approaching  some  catastrophe  :  the  ruin  of  families,  societies, 
institutions  may  be  due  to  some  fatal  insensibility  on  the  part  of  those  who  direct 
them,  some  inability  to  enter  into  their  moral  and  spiritual  requirements.     IV. 

ThEBE  IB  HERE  GREAT  COMFORT  FOB  THOSE  WHO  DESIRE  TO  SERVE  GOD  IN  THB 
CONVICTION   THAT    IN   THE    END   He  WILL  TRIUMPH    OVER   ALL   HIS    OPPONENTS,  HOWEVER 

LONG  THE  TRIUMPH  BE  DELAYED.  Pharaoh  was  sitting  on  his  throne  in  all  the 
pride  of  the  Egyptian  monarchy's  brightest  days  when  Moses  dared  to  tell  him  that 
he  was  raised  up  to  set  forth  the  power  of  God.  God  allows  much  evil  to  exist. 
This  is  a  distress  and  perplexity  to  His  servants.  Wait,  and  you  will  see.  If  God 
is  patient,  it  is  because  He  is  eternal.  Pharaoh  for  a  while  was  borne  with, 
remonstrated  with,  before  the  Eed  Sea  closed  upon  him  and  his  army.  Still  more 
sure  of  this  should  we  Christians  be  who  can  gaze  into  the  empty  sepulchre,  and 
who  know  that  He  who  has  left  it  holds  the  keys  of  hell  and  of  death.  Sin  may 
Btill  be  strong,  death  may  still  be  terrible,  Satan  still  a  standing  menace,  but  these 
enemies  will  only  illustrate  our  Redeemer's  power.  {Canon  Liddon.)  The  case 
of  Pharaoh  : — The  subject  in  question  is  not  the  wicked  disposition  which  animates 
Pharaoh,  but  the  entire  situation  in  which  he  finds  himself  providentially  placed. 
God  might  have  caused  Pharaoh  to  be  born  in  a  cabin,  where  his  proud  obstinacy 
would  have  been  displayed  with  no  less  self-will,  but  without  any  notable  historical 
consequence ;  on  the  other  hand.  He  might  have  placed  on  the  throne  of  Egypt  at 
that  time  a  weak,  easy-going  man,  who  would  have  yielded  at  the  first  shock. 
What  would  have  happened  ?  Pharaoh  in  his  obscure  position  would  not  have 
been  less  arrogant  and  perverse ;  but  Israel  would  have  gone  forth  from  Egypt 
without  iclat.  No  plagues  one  upon  another,  no  Red  Sea  miraculously  crossed,  no 
Egyptian  army  destroyed ;  nothing  of  all  that  made  so  deep  a  furrow  in  the 
Israelitish  conscience,  and  which  remained  for  the  elect  people  the  immovable 
foundation  of  their  relation  to  Jehovah.  And  thereafter  also  no  influence  pro- 
nounced on  the  surrounding  nations.  The  entire  history  would  have  taken  another 
direction.  God  did  not  therefore  create  the  indomitable  pride  of  Pharaoh,  as  it 
were,  to  gain  a  point  of  resistance  and  reflect  His  glory ;  He  was  content  to  use  it 
for  this  purpose.  This  is  what  is  expressed  by  the  following  words :  "  that  thus," 
not  simply  "  that "  (c/.  Exod.  xv.  14,  15  ;  Josh.  ii.  9,  10,  ix.  9).  What  is  meant  by 
the  term  "  hardening,"  and  what  leads  the  apostle  to  use  the  expression  in  ver.  18  ? 
It  signifies  to  take  from  a  man  the  sense  of  the  true,  the  just,  and  even  the  useful, 
BO  that  he  is  no  longer  open  to  the  wise  admonitions  and  significant  circumstances 
which  should  turn  him  aside  from  the  evil  way  on  which  he  has  entered.  The 
word  cannot  signify  in  Exod.  iv.-xiv.  anything  else,  as  God's  act,  than  it  signifies  as 
the  act  of  Pharaoh,  when  it  is  said  that  he  hardened  himself.  Note  carefully  that 
Pharaoh's  hardening  was  at  first  his  own  act.  Five  times  it  is  said  of  him  that  he 
himself  hardened  or  made  heavy  his  heart  (vii.  13,  14,  22,  viii.  32,  ix.  7  ;  we  do 
not  speak  here  of  iv.  21  and  vii.  3,  which  are  a  prophecy),  before  the  time  when  it 
is  at  last  said  that  God  hardened  him  (ix.  12) ;  and  even  after  that,  as  if  a  remnant 
of  liberty  still  remained  to  him,  it  is  said  for  a  last  time  that  he  hardened  himself 
(ix.  34,  35).  It  was  a  parallel  act  to  that  of  Judas  closing  his  heart  to  the  last 
ippeal.  Then,  at  length,  as  if  by  way  of  a  terrible  retribution,  God  hardened  him 
five  times  (x.  1  and  20,  x.  27,  xi.  10,  and  xiv.).  Thus  he  at  first  closed  his  heart 
obstinately  against  the  influence  exercised  on  him  by  the  summonses  of  Moses  and 
the  first  chastisements  which  overtook  him ;  that  was  his  sin.  And  thereafter,  but 
still  within  limits,  God  rendered  him  deaf  not  merely  to  the  voice  of  justice,  but  to 
that  of  sound  sense  and  simple  prudence :  that  was  his  punishment.  Far,  then, 
from  its  having  been  God  who  urged  him  to  evil,  God  punished  him  with  the  most 
terrible  chastisements  for  the  evil  to  which  he  voluntarily  gave  himself  up.  In  this 
expression  we  find  the  same  idea  as  in  wapaMovai  (God  gave  them  up),  by  which 
the  apostle  expressed  God's  judgment  on  the  Gentiles  for  their  refusal  to  welcome 
the  revelation  which  He  gave  of  Himself  in  nature  and  conscience  (i.  24,  26,  28). 
When  man  has  wilfully  quenched  the  light  he  has  received  and  the  first  rebukes  of 
Divine  mercy,  and  when  he  persists  in  giving  himself  up  to  his  evil  instincts,  there 
comes  a  time  when  God  withdraws  from  him  the  beneficent  actions  of  His  grace. 
Then  man  becomes  insensible  even  to  the  counsels  of  prudence.  He  is  thenceforth 
like  a  horse  with  the  bit  in  his  teeth,  running  blindly  to  his  destruction.  He  has 
rejected  salvation  for  himself ;  he  was  free  to  do  so  ;  bat  he  cannot  prevent  God 
from  DOW  making  use  of  him  and  of  his  ruin  to  advance  the  salvation  of  others. 
From  being  an  end,  he  is  degraded  to  the  rank  of  meant.    Sach  was  the  lot  of 


288  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  h. 

Pharaoh.  Everybody  in  Egypt  saw  clearly  whither  hia  mad  resistance  tended. 
His  magicians  told  him,  "  This  is  the  finger  of  God  "  (Exod.  viii.  19).  His  servanta 
told  him,  "  Let  these  people  go  "  (Exod.  x.  7).  He  himself,  after  every  plague,  felt 
his  heart  relent.  He  once  went  the  length  of  crying  out,  "  I  have  sinned  this  time ; 
the  Lord  is  righteous  "  (ix.  27).  Now  waa  the  decisive  instant;  for  the  last  time, 
after  his  moment  of  softening,  he  hardened  himself  (ix.  33).  Then  the  righteous- 
ness of  God  took  hold  of  him.  He  had  refused  to  glorify  God  actively,  he  must 
glorify  Him  passively.  The  Jews  did  not  at  all  disapprove  of  this  conduct  on  God's 
part  as  long  as  it  concerned  only  Pharaoh  or  the  Gentiles ;  but  what  they  afi&rmed, 
in  virtue  of  their  Divine  election,  was,  that  never,  and  on  no  condition,  could  they 
themselves  be  the  objects  of  such  a  judgment.  They  restricted  the  liberty  of 
Divine  judgment  on  themselves,  as  they  restricted  the  liberty  of  grace  toward  the 
Gentiles.  Paul  in  our  verse  re-establishes  both  liberties,  vindicating  God's  sole 
right  to  judge  whether  this  or  that  man  possesses  the  conditions  on  which  He  will 
think  fit  to  show  him  favour,  or  those  which  will  make  it  suitable  for  Him  to  punish 
by  hardening  him.  Thus  understood — and  we  do  not  think  that  either  the  context  of 
the  apostle  or  that  of  Exodus  allows  it  to  be  understood  otherwise — it  offers  nothing  to 
shock  the  conscience;  it  is  entirely  to  thegloryof  the  Divine  character.  (Prof.  Godet.) 
The  case  of  Pharaoh  : — Note  the  present  tense,  •'  the  Scripture  says."  It  is  not  a  thing 
of  the  past ;  there  is  an  element  of  timelessness  in  the  utterance.  It  the  Scripture 
ever  spoke  at  aU,  it  continues  to  speak.  It  speaks  to  the  autocrat  of  Egypt  in  no 
faltering  tone.  Greater  than  He  was  at  work,  who  indeed  had  raised  him  up — not 
merely  to  the  throne  of  Egypt,  nor  from  the  sickness  of  boils  and  blains  ;  for  no  men- 
tion is  made  of  illness  but  (see  also  Zech.  xi.  16 ;  Matt.  xi.  11 ;  John  vii.  52)  in  the 
sense  of  among  men,  on  the  stage  of  the  world.  God  said,  "  Let  him  be,  and  he 
was."  He  became  a  man  and  a  monarch.  He  had  a  place  in  the  Divine  plan — to 
display  the  Divine  power.  In  those  idolatrous  days  the  minds  of  thoughtful  men 
were  perplexed  by  the  "  gods  many  "  whose  reality  was  assumed  by  less  considerate 
minds.  Pharaoh  scorned  the  authority  of  the  God  of  the  Hebrews  (Exod,  v.  2), 
who  now  appealed  to  various  demonstrations  of  His  peerless  power — a  kind  of  proof 
readiest  for  argument,  and  most  adapted  to  the  spirit  of  the  age  and  that  of  the 
tyrant.  It  requires,  in  some  measure,  a  wise  mind  or  a  benevolent  heart  to 
appreciate  exhibitions  of  wisdom  or  benevolence ;  but  it  requires  little  more  than  a 
capacity  for  terror  to  appreciate  exhibitions  of  power.  Pharaoh  was  compelled 
time  after  time  to  pause  and  reflect,  but  continued  unsubdued,  and  the  voice  of 
retribution  is  first  heard  in  the  words,  "  that  I  may  display,"  &c.,  pointing  ultimately 
to  the  catastrophe  of  the  Eed  Sea  (Exod.  xv.  9-11).  But  the  Hebrew  says,  "  That 
I  might  show  thee  " — conveying  the  idea  of  mercifulness  which  goes  before  retribu- 
tion which  is  to  be  reluctantly  resorted  to  only  in  the  sad  event  of  mercy  being 
spurned.  The  LXX.,  however,  "  show  in  thee,"  uses  a  liberty  in  harmony  with 
the  acknowledged  principles  of  the  Divine  government,  and  so  Paul  held  himself 
justified  in  adopting  it.  The  display  of  peerless  power  was  in  the  first  place  for 
the  instruction  of  Pharaoh  ;  and  it  was  only  when  that  was  repelled  that  the  Lord 
turned  to  the  dread  alternative  which  runs  onward,  *'  and  that  My  name  might  be 
published  in  all  the  earth,"  i.e.,  "  failiug  thy  repentance."  The  intervenience 
of  latent  conditional  clauses  is  common  in  both  promises  and  threatenings — e.g., 
in  •'  BeUeve  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved,"  there  is  a  latent 
condition,  "and  if  thou  persevere  in  thy  faith."  In  the  reverse  threat,  "He  that 
believeth  not  shall  be  condemned,"  there  is  a  corresponding  intervenience,  "  and 
persisteth  in  his  unbelief."  Jonah's  message  to  the  Ninevites  is  a  case  in  point  x^ 
and  on  this  principle  we  are  to  interpret  this  solemn  warning  to  Pharaoh.  "  I 
raised  thee  up  that  I  might  show  thee  (Heb.)  My  power,  and  failing  thine  improve- 
ment of  this  instruction  that  by  thy  overthrow  My  name  may  be  magnified,  all 
the  world  over,  above  all  the  gods."  (J".  Morison,  D.D.)  The  character  and 
history  of  Pharaoh : — However  clearly  we  may  perceive  the  correctness  and  force 
of  any  abstract  truth,  it  will  usually  make  a  more  deep  and  definite  impression 
when  illustrated  by  some  example.  We  are  assured,  for  instance,  of  the  omnipotence 
of  God ;  but  who  does  not  find  his  own  conceptions  of  it  more  definite  and  impres- 
Bive  when  he  turns  to  its  illustrations  in  hia  own  frame  or  in  the  wonders  of 
creation?  It  is  as  adapted  to  this  tendency  that  the  Scriptures  supply  us  with  so 
many  illustrative  examples  of  their  sentiments  and  requirements.  This  observa- 
tion will  be  found  applicable  to  the  present  subject— the  sovereignty  of  God  in 
dispensing  the  blessings  of  His  saving  grace.  He  tells  us  that  He  will  have  mercy 
on  whom  He  will  have  mercy,  and  He  illustrates  this  by  the  cases  of  Saul  of 


OiUP.  IX.]  ROMANS.  389 

Tarsus  and  the  dying  thief.  He  tells  as  that  "  whom  He  will  He  hardeneth,"  and 
illastrates  it  in  the  case  of  the  proud  Egyptian  monarch.    Note — I.  Somb  or  thh 

HOST    FBOMINBNT    AND     INSTBUOnVE     POINTS   CONN£CTBD   WITH   FhABAOH'S  OHABAOTBB 

AND  HisTOBT.  1.  His  bold  and  impious  defiance  of  Divine  authority.  "  Who  il 
the  Lord,  that  I  should  obey  His  voice,  to  let  Israel  go  ?  "  This  spirit  is  too  often 
evinced  still  in  those  who  meet  the  appeals  of  God  with,  "  What  is  the  Almighty 
that  we  should  serve  Him  ?  "  "  Our  lips  are  our  own :  who  is  Lord  over  us  ?  " 
2.  The  severe  and  repeated  discipline  to  which  he  was  subjected  in  order  to  humble 
and  subdue  this  feeling.  It  is  needless  to  repeat  the  ten  plagues.  These  were  not 
only  most  afflictive  in  themselves,  but  marked  in  the  mode  of  their  occurrence,  a 
line  of  separation  being  so  strikingly  drawn  between  the  Israelites  and  the  Egyptians. 
How  frequent  are  the  instances  in  which  God,  to  humble  the  sinner's  pride,  subjects 
bim  to  providential  visitation  !  3.  The  powerful  but  still  defective  impressions  of 
which  he  was  the  subject.  Of  this  the  narrative  supplies  repeated  evidence  in  the 
various  compromises  into  which  he  seeks  to  enter,  which  were  revoked  as  soon  as 
the  visitation  was  withdrawn.  And  so  sinners,  while  Divine  judgments  press  upon 
them,  what  sorrow  will  they  express,  and  what  salutary  purposes  they  will  form ; 
and  though,  like  Herod,  they  would  do  many  things,  yet,  like  him,  they  refuse 
compliance  on  some,  and  fail  to  give  up  the  heart  to  God.  4.  The  persevering 
hostility  he  continued  to  discover.  If  his  heart  somewhat  relented  under  suffering, 
it  seemed  in  every  quiet  interval  to  become  increasingly  determined  (Exod.  x.  10-28). 
All  this  does  but  illustrate  what  is  still  going  on  in  many  a  sinner,  who  having  been 
for  a  time  alarmed,  discovers,  as  the  sense  of  danger  gradually  subsides,  a  mind 
rendered  only  the  more  callous.  5.  The  striking  but  awful  visitation  by  which 
Pharaoh  was  at  last  overthrown.  None  hath  hardened  himself  against  God  and 
prospered.  II.  The  vindication  of  the  Divine  conduct  towakd  Phasaoh.  1. 
God  placed  him  in  a  situation  adapted  to  develop  the  peculiar  tendency  of  hia 
sinful  disposition,  which  appears  to  have  been  proud  superiority.  God  afforded 
scope  for  the  special  display  of  this  feeling  by  placing  him  on  a  despotic  throne. 
God  may  still  act  toward  some  on  the  same  principle,  but  it  should  be  remembered 
that  the  very  circumstances  which  expose  to  greater  danger  will  only  render 
superiority  to  them  the  more  striking  and  honourable  :  and  that  where,  as  in  the 
case  of  Pharaoh,  an  individual  fails,  he  does  so  by  his  own  act.  2.  God  afforded 
to  him  the  most  ample  evidence  of  the  folly  and  danger  of  his  continued  resis- 
tance. (1)  He  had  the  plainest  proof  that  Moses  and  Aaron  were  the  accredited 
messengers  of  God.  (2)  The  displays  of  the  Divine  power  were  such  as  must 
have  forced  on  his  mind  the  consciousness  of  his  own  impotence.  (3)  He  was 
made  to  perceive  how  plainly  all  these  exercises  of  Divine  wrath  were  entirely 
and  only  in  consequence  of  his  own  determined  obduracy.  3.  God  designed 
in  this  case  to  exhibit  an  impressible  example  of  the  fearful  danger  of  a  proud 
and  impious  defiance  of  Divine  authority.  Conclusion:  1.  How  proper  and 
important  the  prayer  which  Christ  has  taught  us — "  Lead  us  not  into  temptation." 
2.  How  fatally  defective  and  delusive  those  religious  impressions  and  purposes 
which  are  founded  on  present  alarming  apprehensions  of  danger,  while  the  heart 
remains  unhumbled  and  in  love  with  sin.  3.  How  vain  and  hopeless  ultimate 
resistance  to  Divine  authority.  4.  How  earnestly  should  we  deprecate  the 
thought  of  being  abandoned  to  a  hardened  state  of  mind.  5.  Let  no  humble  and 
penitent  sinner  be  discouraged  by  this  illustration  of  God's  righteous  justice. 
{H,  Bromley.)  Lessont  from  the  case  of  Pharaoh : — I.  The  sovebeiontt  of  God 
IS  A  GBEAT  FACT.  Deity  is  the  one  primal  cause,  of  which  all  secondary  causes  are 
but  effects.  All  things  owe  their  existence  to  Him.  What  are  called  laws  of 
nature,  are  but  the  modes  by  which  God  works.  Not  a  sparrow  can  fall  to  the 
ground  without  His  permission.  God  rules  among  men  as  certainly  as  among 
suns  and  stars.  The  destinies  of  nations  as  surely  obey  His  will  as  the  revolutions 
of  planets.  H.  God's  decrees  abe  ibrespective  op  the  actions  of  men  (vers. 
10-13).  The  strong  Hebraistic  expression  means,  Jacob  have  I  chosen,  and  Esau 
have  I  rejected,  which  was  contrary  to  the  usual  law  of  primogeniture.  There  is 
no  injustice  in  this.  Our  Lord  has  told  us  that  "  Offences  must  needs  come,  but 
woe  to  the  man  by  whom  they  come."  The  crucifixion  of  Christ  was  "  by  the 
determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge  of  God,"  brought  about:  yet  it  was  "by 
wicked  hands  "  that  Christ  was  "  crucified  and  slain."  Happy  are  we  if  we  do  God'a 
wiU ;  but  the  work  wiU  be  done  whether  we  do  it  or  not.  God  is  independent  of 
human  agency,  though  He  employs  it  to  accomplish  His  purposes.    III.  Gon'i 

DOINGS     UD8T     ALWAYS     BE     CHARACTERISED    BT     JUSTICE,     TBUTH,     MEECT,     AND     LOVE. 

VOL.  n,  19 


290  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOE.  [chap.  ix. 

If  Pharaoh  was  created  only  to  be  damned,  and  if  God  all  along  intended  he  should 
not  let  the  people  go,  such  conduct  would  be — 1.  Unjust  and  cruel  on  the  part  of 
God.  To  turn  the  heart  of  any  one  to  hate  is  a  dreadful  act,  even  in  a  man,  where 
the  influence  may  be  resisted.  How  much  more  so  where  an  Omnipotent  Being  is 
operating  1  Upon  this  principle  all  the  plagues  of  Egypt  were  shocking  cruelties. 
The  doctrine  that  some  men  are  predestinated  to  eternal  hfe  and  others  to  damna- 
tion, regardless  of  the  actions  of  either,  is  monstrously  unjust.  2.  Not  in  harmony 
with  His  truth.  For  upon  this  principle  God  deliberately  deceived  the  Egyptians. 
The  message  was,  "Let  My  people  go,"  &c.  On  the  Calvinistic  theory,  Moses  was 
either  aware  of  God's  purpose  or  he  was  not.  If  he  knew  that  Pharaoh  was 
Becretly  influenced  by  God,  so  that  he  could  not  let  the  Israelites  go,  then  the  whole 
thing  is  a  solemn  mockery,  the  leading  characteristic  of  which  is  deception.  But 
if  he  did  not  know,  then  he  was  himself  deceived  by  God,  an  idea  which  is  too 
shocking  to  be  thought  of.  A  God  of  truth  could  not  thus  act.  3.  Opposed  to 
God's  mercy  and  love.  "  The  Lord  is  good  to  all,  and  His  mercy  is  over  all  His 
works."     Here,  however,  we  should  have  a  terrible  exception.     IV.  In  election 

AND     THE     HARDENING     OF     MEN's     HEARTS     GOD     DOES   NOT    DESTKOT   THEIR    FREEDOM. 

This  hardening  is  of  different  kinds,  and  has  reference  to  various  subjects.  1.  Great 
national  events.  The  whole  of  this  chapter  refers  to  the  state  of  the  Jews.  Paul 
expresses  great  sorrow  for  his  people,  that  they  were  in  danger  of  being  cut  o3 
from  their  long  enjoyed  blessings.  He  then  goes  on  to  show  that  their  privileges 
no  longer  specially  appertained  to  them.  God  had  now  determined  to  elect  a 
Church  for  Himself  out  of  all  nations.  The  Jews  prided  themselves  greatly  on 
being  the  seed  of  Abraham.  Paul  shows  them  from  their  own  history  that  only  a 
portion  of  that  seed  had  enjoyed  the  boasted  privileges  (vers.  6,  7,  10,  &c.).  And 
even  in  the  case  of  these  all  had  not  equally  shared  the  blessing.  "  For  they  are 
not  all  Israel  which  are  of  Israel."  A  great  part  of  the  ten  tribes  who  had  been 
carried  into  captivity  had  never  returned.  There  are  therefore  three  exclusions, 
and  the  argument  is  that  there  might  be  yet  another.  The  whole  affair  is  one  o£ 
peoples,  not  individuals.  The  election  of  Isaac  and  Jacob  and  the  rejection  of 
Ishmael  and  Esau  had  nothing  to  do  personally  with  any  one  of  them.  A 
reference,  in  the  case  of  the  elder  serving  the  younger,  is  made  to  Gen.  xxv.  23, 
but  Esau  never  did  serve  Jacob  personally.  The  other  quotation  is  from  Mai.  i.  2,  3, 
and  certainly  refers  to  the  Edomites.  Was  there  then  unrighteousness,  i.e., 
unfaithfulness,  with  God  ?  By  no  means,  because  it  was  a  general  principle  laid 
down  in  the  Mosaic  law,  and  one  which  consequently  they  were  bound  to  acknow- 
ledge, "  I  will  have  mercy,"  &c.  These  words  are  from  Exod.  xxxiii.  19,  a 
reference  to  which  will  show  that  they  have  no  relation  whatever  to  the  pardon 
of  sin,  but  applying  to  the  granting  of  special  privileges.  And  how  true  they  are  ! 
In  our  time  we  see  one  nation  or  people  favoured  with  blessings  which  are  denied 
to  another.  "  So  then  it  is  not  of  him  that  willeth,"  &c.  2.  The  position  of 
individuals  in  society.  God  gives  to  us  all  different  places  and  work.  One  man 
rolls  in  wealth,  another  has  to  struggle  with  poverty.  This  man  is  endowed  with 
a  genius  which  shall  cause  his  name  to  ride  down  the  ages ;  and  that,  just  the 
necessary  brain  power  to  play  his  lowly  part  on  life's  stage.  In  this  there  is  no 
injustice.  God  dispenses  His  favours  as  He  will.  Our  business  is  to  play  the 
part  allotted  to  us,  consistently,  conscientiously,  and  energetically.  3.  Life  and 
death.  These  also  are  in  the  hands  of  the  Lord.  The  infant  dies  almost  before 
it  has  begun  to  live.  The  youth  full  of  promise  passes  away  in  "  life's  green 
spring."  Men  die  in  the  prime  of  life,  and  in  the  decrepitude  of  age.  Is  this 
unjust?  No.  Death  is  no  respecter  of  persons  or  of  ages.  And  He  who  was 
dead  and  liveth  for  evermore,  holds  the  keys  of  Hades  and  of  death.  We  shall 
each  live  our  appointed  time,  and  then  no  power  on  earth  can  save  us.  4.  Salvation. 
In  some  places  it  is  said  that  Pharaoh  hardened  his  own  heart,  and  in  others  that 
God  hardened  it.  Both  are  strictly  correct.  The  rejection  of  truth  and  the  abuse 
of  our  privileges  ever  tend  to  harden  the  heart.  This  is  a  spiritual  law  as  certain 
in  its  operation  as  the  law  of  gravitation.  As  soon  as  Pharaoh  saw  a  respite  from 
his  afflictions,  his  heart  was  hardened.  And  how  often  do  men  make  all  kinds  of 
promises,  but  no  sooner  does  relief  come  than  we  fall  back  again  into  a  state  worse 
than  the  first.  "  The  sun,"  says  Theodoret,  "  by  the  force  of  its  heat,  moistens 
the  wax  and  dries  the  clay,  softening  the  one  and  hardening  the  other ;  and  aa 
this  produces  opposite  effects  by  the  same  power,  so  through  the  long-suffering  of 
God,  which  reaches  to  aU,  some  receive  good  and  others  evil;  some  are  softened 
aud  others  hardened."    V.  Man  la  iherefobe  responsible,  and  is  left  without 


CHAY.  ».]  ROMANS.  291 

EXCUSE.  The  freedom  of  the  will  is  a  fact  testified  to  by  the  consciousness  of  every 
man.  When,  in  accordance  with  this  freedom,  we  depart  from  God,  the  fact  is  a 
terrible  one.  And  the  diflSculty  of  returning  becomes  greater  day  by  day.  The 
remorse  that  we  experience  testifies  to  the  fact  that  we  feel  our  responsibility. 
Necessitarians  at  every  moment  of  their  lives  give  the  lie  to  their  faith.  As  we  are 
free,  then,  our  business  is  to  use  our  freedom  aright.  Our  duty  is  to  love  God  and 
keep  His  commandments.  "  Father  Eternal  I  Thine  is  to  decree ;  mine,  both  in 
heaven  and  earth,  to  do  Thy  will."  (G.  Sexton,  LL.D.)  Pharaoh  no  unconditional 
reprobate : — I.  The  benefit  or  indulgence  offered  bt  God  unto  Pharaoh  time 
after  time,  upon  condition  of  his  repentance  and  dismission  of  his  people,  as, 
viz.,  his  immunity  from  further  plagues  or  judgments  from  God,  show  that  the 

MEANS    VOUCHSAFED     WERE     EFFECTUAL,    AND     SUFFICIENT     TO     HAVE    WROUGHT    HIM    TO 

BEPENTANCE.  The  proffcr  or  promise  of  a  benefit  upon  the  performance  of  such  or 
such  a  condition  supposeth  a  sufiSciency  of  power  to  perform  this  condition. 
To  promise  anything  upon  other  terms  is  rather  an  insultation  over  the  weakness 
of  him  to  whom  the  promise  is  made,  than  any  matter  of  kindness  which  the 
nature  of  a  promise  still  imports.  The  promise  of  a  reward  of  a  thousand  pounds 
made  unto  a  cripple  upon  condition  he  will  run  twenty  miles  within  an  hour's  space, 
is  merely  to  deride  such  a  man  in  his  misery.  Therefore  certainly  Pharaoh,  God 
by  many  promissory  intimations  signifying  that  upon  his  repentance  the  judgments 
threatened  should  not  come  upon  him,  is  hereby  shown  to  have  had  power  to  fulfil 
the  condition.  II.  Pharaoh,  bv  the  means  vouchsafed,  did  several  times  truly 
REPENT  of  his  obstinancy,  and  gave  order  for  the  dismission  of  the  people 
(Exod.  X.  16,  17 ;  xii.  31,  32,  &c.).  Therefore  he  was — questionless — in  a  sufficient 
capacity  to  have  repented  and  dismissed  the  people.  That  afterwards  he  repented 
of  this  repentance,  and  returned  to  his  former  obdurateness,  is  no  argument  that 
his  former  repentance  was  not  true.  Yea,  if  this  repentance  had  been  hollow  or 
counterfeit,  his  repenting  of  it  had  been  no  sin.  And  besides,  if  the  tree — as  our 
Saviour  saith — be  known  by  the  fruit,  that  repentance  of  Pharaoh,  which  produced — 
1.  Confession  of  sin  committed  both  against  God  and  men  (Exod.  X.  16).  2.  Applica- 
tion by  way  of  entreaty  unto  the  saints  to  pray  unto  God  for  him  (Exod.  x.  16). 
8.  An  express  order  with  encouragement  unto  Moses  and  Aarou,  to  expedite  the 
departure  of  their  people  according  to  the  commandment  of  God,  and  this  in  as 
ample  manner  as  themselves  desired  it  (Exod.  xii.  31,  32) ;  that  repentance  must 
needs  be  conceived  to  have  been  a  true  repentance.  And,  doubtless,  had  Pharaoh 
persisted  in  that  repentance,  and  not  relapsed  into  his  former  provocation — which 
he  was  no  ways  necessitated  unto — he  had  escaped  that  dreadful  stroke  from 
Heaven,  which  he  met  with  in  the  Bed  Sea.  (John  Ooodwin.)  An  impenitent 
si7iner  in  relation  to  God's  mercy : — Powerfully  does  Paul,  in  this  chapter,  argue 
down  the  narrow  predestinarianism  of  the  Jews.  They  concluded  that,  being  the 
lineal  descendants  of  Abraham,  they  were  predestinated  to  the  mercy  of  God. 
The  apostle's  method  of  combating  this  dogma  may  be  briefly  stated  : — 1.  He 
assures  them  of  the  deep  interest  he  felt  in  them,  and  of  the  high  estimation  which 
he  had  formed  of  their  privileges.  2.  He  affirms  that  God  did  not  dispense  His 
mercy  on  the  principle  of  patriarchal  descent  3.  That  God's  mercy  is  ever 
bestowed  on  the  principle  of  sovereignty  alone.  This  he  illustrates — (1)  By  God's 
declaration  to  Moses  (ver.  15).  This  language  does  not  mean — (a)  That  He  does  not 
show  mercy  to  all  men ;  this  would  be  contrary  to  fact,  (b)  Nor  that  He  gives  to 
some  favours  which  He  does  not  bestow  on  others.  This  is  true,  but  this  is  not 
the  truth  here,  (c)  Nor  that  He  bestows  all  His  mercies  irrespective  of  conduct. 
This  is  always  true  of  existence,  with  all  its  native  attributes  and  talents,  sometimes 
true  of  temporal  circumstances,  but  never  true  of  mental  and  spiritual  excellence. 
(d)  Nor  that  He  is  not  disposed  to  save  all.  This  would  be  contrary  both  to 
His  positive  assurances  and  remedial  measures,  (e)  But  it  means  simply  that  the 
reason  of  mercy  is  ever  in  Himself,  and  not  in  the  creature  (ver.  16).  (2)  By  God's 
declaration  to  Pharaoh.  The  passage  leads  us  to  consider  an  impenitent  sinner : — 
I.  As  raised  up  from  affliction  by  the  MERCY  OF  GoD.  Pharaoh  and  his  people 
had  just  been  visited  with  the  distressing  plague  of  "  the  boils."  Jehovah 
condescends  to  restore  the  monarch  to  health.  It  is  in  relation  to  this  recovery 
that  these  words  were  spoken.  It  was  mercy  that  was  dealing  with  this  man. 
Why  else  was  his  probationary  day  lengthened  out  after  the  first  warning  had 
been  delivered  ?  Why  else  were  there  so  many  and  varied  influences  employed  to 
subdue  his  rebeUious  will?  With  one  volition  of  the  Almighty  mind  he  would 
have  ceased  to  be.    What  hindered  that  voUtion  ?    Nothing  but  meroy.    This  is 


292  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  ix.' 

bat  a  striking  example  of  God's  ordinary  dealing  with  all  sinners  here.  Mercy 
afflicts  and  restores.  This  fact  is  testified — (1)  By  the  Scriptures.  (2)  By  every 
sinner's  consciousness.  II.  As  moballt  impbessed  by  ths  meboy  or  God.  There 
are  two  kinds  of  power — physical  and  moral.  These  differ  not  in  source ;  each 
has  its  source  in  mind.  But  their  objects  differ:  the  one  acts  on  matter,  and  the 
other  on  intelligent  natures.  Which  did  Jehovah  purpose  showing  forth  in 
Pharaoh  ?  Undoubtedly  the  moral.  His  physical  power  could  be  seen  far  more 
gloriously  in  earthquakes  and  storms,  <&c.,  than  in  alternately  afSicting  and 
restoring  the  body  of  Pharaoh,  or  in  any  of  the  plagues.  Besides,  a  man  does  not 
require  a  higher  manifestation  of  physical  power  than  he  has  everywhere  around 
him.  It  was  moral  power — power  over  the  monarch's  mind  and  heart — that  the 
Almighty  sought  now  to  exercise.  "  In  thee."  It  was  everywhere  out  of  him. 
But  why  show  this  power  in  him  7  It  must  have  been  either  to  promote  holiness 
in  him,  or  sin,  and  who  will  dare  say  it  was  the  latter  ?  It  was  to  turn  Pharaoh 
from  the  error  of  his  ways  that  this  power  was  employed ;  and  this  is  ever  God's 
aim  with  the  impenitent  sinner.  There  were  two  things  connected  with  this 
power  in  Pharaoh  which  always  characterise  its  operations — (1)  It  was  sin- 
convicting.  Several  times,  when  this  power  was  working  in  him,  did  he  exclaim, 
"  I  have  sinned  this  time  :  the  Lord  is  righteous,  and  I  and  my  people  are  wicked." 
Cain,  Belshazzar,  Felix,  Judas,  and  others,  have  felt  the  same.  The  great  aim 
of  God  in  thus  making  His  power  bear  on  the  sinful  world  is  to  "  convince  it  of 
sin,  of  righteousness,"  &o.  (2)  It  was  resistible.  Pharaoh  resisted  it :  it  would 
not  be  moral,  and  man  would  not  be  responsible  were  it  otherwise.  We  cannot 
resist  the  physical  power  of  God,  but  we  can  His  moral.  The  Jews  did  always 
resist  the  Holy  Ghost.  III.  As  strikingly  manifesting  the  mercy  of  God. 
"  That  My  name  might  be  declared,"  (fee.  The  name  of  God  is  frequently  employed 
as  expressive  of  His  goodness.  God's  dealing  with  Pharaoh  declares  throughout 
all  times  that  it  is — 1.  Longsuffering.  How  long  the  Almighty  condescended  to  strive 
with  this  man  1  2.  Earnest.  See  how  numerous  and  varied  the  means  employed, 
3.  Terminable,  Mercy  at  last  took  her  wing,  delivered  him  up  to  justice,  and 
you  know  his  fate.  I  know  no  more  impressive  commentary  than  God's  dealing 
with  Pharaoh  on  "  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  a 
sinner,"  &c.  IV,  As  incidentally  hardened  by  the  mercy  of  God.  Ver.  18 
is  Paul's  conclusion  from  God's  declaration.  It  is  nothing  more  than  a  strong 
method  of  reasserting  the  principle  that  the  reason  of  mercy  is  not  in  the  creature, 
but  in  the  Creator.  How  did  God  harden  Pharaoh's  heart  ?  1,  Not  by  intention. 
This  is  contrary  to  the  purpose  stated,  which  was  to  "show  "  His  sin-convicting 
and  Boul-saving  power  in  him ;  and  this,  too,  is  repugnant  to  all  our  highest  and  most 
truthful  notions  of  God's  purity  and  benevolence.  2.  Not  by  fitness  of  instrumentality. 
Examine  the  means  employed,  and  you  will  discover  a  wonderful  adaptation  to  an 
opposite  end.  3.  Not  by  any  positive  agency  for  the  purpose.  This  is  unnecessary. 
The  sinner  is  hardened,  and  harder  he  will  become,  if  he  be  left  alone.  Divine 
agency  is  required  not  to  harden,  but  refine — not  to  destroy,  but  to  save.  4.  How, 
then  ?  In  the  same  way  as  He  hardens  the  heart  of  that  man  who  year  after  year 
listens  to  the  most  powerful  sermons,  and  still  remains  in  his  sin.  Pharaoh's 
hardening  is  a  typal  fact.  The  ministry  of  the  prophets  had  its  Pharaohs ;  so 
had  that  of  Christ,  and  of  the  apostles.  The  gospel  proves  the  savour  of  death 
unto  death,  as  well  as  of  life  unto  life.  Conclusion :  This  solemn  fact  is  sugges- 
tive of  two  things  :  1.  The  native  energy  of  soul.  It  can  get  good  out  of  evil,  and 
evil  out  of  good ;  transmute  food  into  poison,  and  poison  into  food.  It  is  made 
to  be  not  the  servant,  but  the  sovereign  of  circumstances.  2.  The  moral  perverse- 
ness  of  soul.  Instead  of  using  this  power  to  subordinate  evil  to  good,  it  does  so  to 
subordinate  good  to  evil — makes  mercy  a  destroyer.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Divine 
tovereignty  and  human  responsibility  : — First  to  the  right,  then  to  the  left,  the 
road  was  ever  ascending  but  always  twisting,  and  thus,  by  easy  marches,  we 
were  able  to  reach  the  suEomit  of  the  pass ;  a  straight  line  would  have  been  shorter 
for  the  eagle's  wing,  but  no  human  foot  could  have  followed  it.  Nobody  called  us 
inconsistent  for  thus  facing  about ;  we  kept  the  road,  and  no  one  could  complain.  If 
we  honestly  desire  to  gain  the  heights  of  Divine  truth,  we  shall  find  many  zigzags 
in  the  road  :  here  our  face  will  front  Divine  sovereignty  with  all  its  lofty  grandeur, 
and  anon  we  shall  turn  in  the  opposite  direction,  towards  the  frowning  peaiis  of 
human  responsibility.  What  matters  it  if  we  appear  to  be  inconsistent,  so  long 
as  we  koep  the  highway  of  Scripture,  which  is  our  only  safe  road  to  knov- 
ledge  1    Angels  may,  perhaps,  be  systematic  divines ;  for  men  it  should  be  enough 


CHAP.  IX.]  ROMANS.  298 

to  follow  the  Word  of  God,  let  Its  teachings  wind  as  they  may.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Therefore  hath  He  mercy  on  whom  He  win  have  mercy,  and  whom  He  will  Ha 
hardeneth. — God's  sovereignty : — I.  Its  display  in  the  exercise  of — 1.  Mercy.  2. 
Justice.  II.  Its  hasmony  with  the  doctbikb  of  fbeb  obaoe.  III.  Its  vbh.  1.  For 
conviction  and  conversion.  2.  He  might  have  hardened  you — may  yet  do  it  if  yoa 
repent  not.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Pardon  or  harden: — Since  God  is  not  baffled  by 
men's  infatuation,  but  can  turn  to  account  even  obdurate  Pharaohs,  we  may  rest 
assured  that  He  will  either  pardon  or  harden.  The  English  "  on  whom  He  will " 
is  fitted  to  bring  out  a  volitional  idea,  but  this  is  not  quite  so  prominent  in  the 
Greek.  It  is  "  wish  "  rather  than  "  will "  that  is  expressed  (see  2  Cor.  xi.  12, 32,  xii.  6  ; 
Gal.  iv.  9,  vi.  12,  iv.  20).  God  has  mercy  on  whom  He  "  desires  "  to  have  (vers. 
15,  16)  pardoning  mercy.  The  great  alternative  is  "  and  whom  He  desires  He 
hardens."  There  is  a  sphere  of  things  in  which  God  does  not  desire  to  have  any 
recourse  to  this  dread  alternative  (1  Tim.  ii.  4 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  9).  In  that  sphere 
judgment  is  "His  strange  act,"  but  there  are  assuredly  circumstances  which  make 
it  right  for  God  to  desire  to  brand  with  His  hardest  stigma  persisted-in  iniquity. 
Paul  speaks  of  "  hardness  "  manifestly  because  his  mind  had  been  brooding  over 
the  career  of  Pharaoh.  Hardness  when  predicated  of  the  neck  denotes  unyielding, 
ness,  but  when  predicated  of  the  heart,  as  here,  insensibility.  This  insensibility 
might  be  predicated  either  in  respect  of  the  duty  of  permitting  Israel  to  depart ;  or 
in  respect  of  the  danger  that  was  impending  over  him  in  case  of  his  refusal ;  or  of 
an  interblending  of  both.  Which  is  the  insensibility  affirmed  of  Pharaoh  ?  Before 
determining  the  answer  it  may  be  noted  that  whichever  it  was  there  can  be  no  real 
difficulty  as  to  God's  action  on  the  monarch's  heart.  It  is  psychologically  impos- 
sible that  such  determined  impenitence  as  his  can  be  cherished,  and  yet  produce  no 
effect  on  the  sensibilities  of  the  heart.  Faith  and  penitence  always  work ;  so  do 
anbelief  and  disbelief.  In  such  necessary  working  God's  hand  must  needs  be 
imminent,  but  all  the  blame  must  be  attached  to  the  man  himself.  He  alone  fur- 
nished the  reason  why  God  hardened  him,  and  hence  he  is  sometimes  said  to  have 
hardened  his  own  heart,  just  as  believers  are  said  to  purify  theirs.  Whether  the 
induration,  then,  was  such  a  penal  condition  as  consisted  of  insensibility  to  duty,  or 
to  danger,  or  to  the  two  intertwined  there  is  no  difficulty  in  supposing  it  to  be  by 
the  hand  of  God.  1.  But  there  is  a  critical  reason  why  we  give  the  preference  to 
insensibility  to  danger.  There  are  three  words  in  Hebrew  employed  in  this  case. 
One  is  employed  twice  (Exod.  vii.  3  ;  xiii.  15),  another  seven  times  (Exod.  viii.  15, 
32  [28],  ix.  7,  34,  x.  1 ;  1  Sam.  xi.  6  ;  see  also  Exod.  vii.  14).  The  third  occurs  twelve 
times  (Exod.  iv,  21 ;  vii.  13,  22  ;  viii.  19 ;  ix.  12,  35 ;  x.  20,  27  ;  xi.  10 ;  xiv.  4,  8, 17). 
Now  the  latter  is  a  term  that  naturally  suggests  insensibility  to  danger,  for  in  its  in- 
transitive form  it  properly  means  to  be  strong,  and  is  translated  (Josh,  xxiii.  6  ;  2 
Sam.  X.  12,  xiii.  28  ;  1  Chron.  xix.  13 ;  Ezra  x.  4  ;  Psa.  xxvii.  14,  xxxi.  24  [25] ;  Isa. 
xli.  6)  to  be  of  good  courage,  to  be  courageous ;  while  in  its  transitive  form,  it  properly 
means  to  make  strong,  and  is  actually  translated  (Deut.  i.  38,  iii.  28 ;  2  Sam.  xi.  25; 
2  Chron.  xxxv.  2  ;  Psa.  Ixiv.  5  [6] ;  Isa.  xli.  7)  to  encourage.  When  such  a  term 
is  used  to  denote  penal  induration,  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  the  hardness  will 
be  somewhat  allied  to  a  spirit  of  courage,  and  consequently  that  it  will  consist  of  a 
kind  of  dreadnaught  spirit.  There  will  be  something  of  hardiness  in  it ;  indeed 
some  strong  accentuation  of  foolhardiness.  2.  Exegesis  warrants  the  same  con- 
clusion. The  passages  which  deal  with  the  monarch's  obduracy  are  more  easily 
explicable  on  the  hypothesis  that  his  hardness  was  infatuated  hardness  and  insensi- 
bility to  danger.  Look,  e.g.,  at  Exod.  xiv.  2-9,  16,  17.  Pharaoh  was  intoxicated 
with  his  own  high  sufficiency.  A  penal  blight  had  fallen  on  his  reason.  Rushing 
onward  in  daring  recklessness,  he  and  his  chivalry  were  penally  swept  into  destruc- 
tion. And  thus  the  Lord,  by  inflicting  on  them,  first  the  most  insensitive  obduracy, 
and  secondly  the  most  tragical  termination  of  their  career,  got  Him  honour  upon 
Pharaoh  and  upon  all  his  host.  "Pharaoh,"  says  Fry,  "had  not,  in  immediate 
consequence  of  his  hardiness,  any  more  sinfulness  in  his  heart  than  he  had  pre- 
viously ;  but  he  dared  to  do  more."  In  selecting  the  word  "  hardens  "  the  apostle 
suggests  a  parallel  between  Pharaoh  and  the  Israelites.  There  was  something 
ominously  Pharaonic  in  the  spirit  of  the  unbelieving  Jews.  {J.  Morison,  D.D.) 
St.  Paul's  theology  (text,  vers.  19-21,  and  chap.  v.  5-8) : — 1.  The  former  of  these 
two  passages  read  by  itself,  without  anything  to  qualify  it,  sounds  like  a  naked 
assertion  of  the  sovereignty  of  God  ;  and  as  based  on  mere  power.  It  seems  as  if 
St.  Paul  were  saying  that  the  might  of  God  is  the  measure  of  His  right ;  that, 
having  made  us,  He  is  perfectly  at  liberty  to  do  what  He  pleases  with  us.    I  say, 


294  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  n. 

"It  eeems  bo";  because  we  know  that  St.  Paul  cannot  mean  to  assert  this,  for 
otherwise  he  must  have  forgotten  what  he  had  written  in  our  second  text.  2.  In  a 
passage  hke  this  a  great  deal  depends  upon  the  tone  which  one  reads  into  it,  and 
the  feeling  with  which  one  reads  it.  Now  this  ninth  chapter  must  not  be  separated 
from  the  tenth  and  the  eleventh,  which  together  form  one  indivisible  section,  and 
ought  to  be,  and  must  be  read  together,  if  we  are  to  understand  them  at  all.  The 
tone  of  the  whole  is  then  easily  discoverable  from  its  commencement  in  cliap.  ix. 
1-5,  and  from  its  conclusion  in  chap.  xi.  30-33.  3,  The  commentators  seem  gene- 
rally to  take  it  for  granted  that,  in  my  first  text,  St.  Paul  is  arguing  with  captious 
objectors  and  presumptuous  cavillers,  whom  he  is  putting  down  with  a  high  hand. 
But  it  is,  to  say  the  least,  worth  our  while  to  consider  whether  St.  Paul  is  not 
stating  frankly  his  own  difficulties  and  solving  them  as  best  he  can,  and  really 
working  his  own  way,  painfully  and  laboriously,  through  the  darkness  into  the  light. 
"Viewed  in  this  aspect  the  passage  becomes  infinitely  more  interesting,  instructive, 
and  pathetic.  We  should  be  sorry  to  think  that  St.  Paul  had  set  an  example  of  that 
high-handed  dealing  with  doubts  and  difficulties  which  has  always  proved  so  dis- 
astrous. But  if  he  knew,  as  he  seems  to  have  known,  what  it  was  not  to  stifle,  but 
to  face  and  fight,  his  doubts ;  then  his  example  may  be  of  the  greatest  possible  ser- 
vice to  us,  even  though  his  difficulties  were  not  ours.  4.  Yet  are  they  not  ours  ? 
If  God's  will  acts  in  this  sovereign,  arbitrary  way — hardening  this  heart,  softening 
that,  as  chance  or  caprice  may  direct — what  then  ?  Is  not  the  ground  of  human 
responsibility  cut  from  beneath  us  ?  What  room  is  there,  then,  for  moral  disap- 
proval, and  for  retributive  justice  ?  Nor  do  we  evade  the  difficulty  by  throwing  the 
difficulty  back  one  step,  and  saying,  "  It  is  by  the  operation  of  a  law  of  man's 
nature  as  God  created  it,  that  he  who  will  not  turn  at  last  cannot.  And  God,  who 
established  that  law  of  man's  nature,  is  said  in  Scripture  to  do  that  which  occurs 
under  it,  or  results  from  it.  He  has  framed  at  His  pleasure  the  moral  constitution 
of  man,  according  to  which  the  rebellious  sinner  is  at  last  obdurate."  This  is  the 
old,  old  puzzle,  which  has  haunted  men's  minds  from  the  very  first — now  by  one 
name,  now  by  another :  liberty  and  necessity.  The  moment  we  begin  to  reason 
upon  this  problem,  we  are  lost  in  perplexity.  The  interplay  of  the  Divine  will  and 
the  human  can  never  have  its  path  determined  by  any  calculus  yet  discovered.  As 
Boon  as  it  is  attempted,  one  or  other  of  the  two  forces  is  sure  to  be  omitted  from  the 
calculation,  and  to  disappear  altogether.  We  are  left  either  with  a  naked  sovereignty 
on  the  Divine  side,  accompanied  by  an  absolute  bondage  on  the  human  side ;  or 
else  we  are  left  with  a  Divine  will  which  is  no  will  at  all.  5.  At  this  point  we  feel 
what  a  difference  it  makes  in  our  text,  whether  we  regard  it  as  an  endeavour  to  put 
down  objectors,  or  whether  we  regard  it  as  a  debate  in  Paul's  mind  with  doubts  and 
difficulties.  In  the  first  case  we  can  all  see  that  it  only  removes  the  difficulty  to  a 
point  at  which  it  ceases  to  press  against  the  reason  only  to  press  more  vehemently 
against  the  conscience  and  the  moral  sense.  For  it  may  well  be  asked,  "  Is,  then, 
man,  with  all  his  capacity  of  suffering,  and  his  sense  of  right  and  wrong,  merely  as 
the  passionless  clay  in  the  potter's  hand.  If  so,  what  are  we  to  think  of  the  Creator? 
Does  the  fact  of  creation  invest  the  Creator  with  unlimited  rights,  unaccompanied 
by  any  corresponding  responsibilities  ?  Or  does  it  answer  most  nearly  to  that  earthly 
relation  of  parent  and  child  which,  whilst  establishing  the  parents'  claim  to  the 
obedience  of  the  child,  establishes  also  the  child's  claim  to  the  love  and  care  of  the 
parents  ?  "  St.  Paul's  reply  is  very  different,  if  we  regard  it  as  a  caution,  addressed 
to  himself,  as  he  goes  sounding  on  his  dim  and  perilous  way,  through  problems 
which  human  reason  is  all  incompetent  to  solve.  It  is,  then,  tantamount  to  saying, 
"  What  am  I,  that  I  should  dare  to  exercise  my  speculation  upon  such  a  theme  as 
this — I,  who  am  but  a  finite  being  in  the  hands  of  Infinite  power?  "  6.  Now,  this 
attitude  of  mind  is  the  true  philosophic  attitude,  for  "  The  foundation  of  all  true 
philosophy  is  humility."  And  this  is  the  attitude  which  St.  Paul  is  most  careful  to 
inculcate  elsewhere,  e.g.,  "  Now  we  see  through  a  mirror  "  ;  the  reflection  only,  not 
the  object  itself — "  darkly" ;  more  exactly,  •'  in  a  riddle  " — "  but  then,  face  to  face." 
And  this  is  the  attitude  which  our  Lord  inculcates,  bidding  us  "  humble  ourselves, 
and  become  as  little  children."  And  this,  indeed,  is  the  attitude  which,  the  more 
earnestly  and  seriously  we  inquire  into  questions  of  all  kinds,  the  more  do  we  find 
ourselves  compelled  to  adopt.  The  more  the  circle  of  our  knowledge  enlarges,  the 
larger  becomes  the  circumference,  at  every  point  of  which  we  feel  our  ignorance, 
and  have  the  sense  of  vastness  and  mystery  forced  upon  us.  7.  St.  Paul,  however, 
does  not  leave  the  matter  so.  We  can  leave  many  problems  unsolved — this  of  the 
relation  of  the  human  will  to  the  Divine  amongst  others — when  we  have  settled 


CHAP.  IX.J  ROMANS.  295 

it  clearly  in  our  own  minds,  how  we  shall  think  of  God — of  His  character,  of  His 
purpose  and  feeling  towards  his  human  creation :  not  till  then.  As  we  read  chaps, 
ix.-xi, ,  carefully  and  as  a  whole,  we  feel  that  St.  Paul  makes  little  or  no  progress 
towards  a  solution  of  his  doubts,  until  we  reach  xi.  32,  33.  He  rises  above  his  own 
efforts  to  reason  the  thing  out,  iu  the  strength  of  a  fresh  perception  of  that  unsearch- 
able glory  of  God,  which  may  be  safely  trusted  to  do  nothing  but  what  is  wise,  just, 
and  loving.  This  perception  does  not  come  through  any  process  of  reasoning,  but 
breaks  upon  his  soul  like  light.  He  escapes  at  one  bound  from  the  trammels  of  hia 
own  logic,  in  the  sense  of  that  grace  and  love  of  God  in  Christ,  of  which  he  writes 
in  our  second  text.  8.  Very  few  of  us  will  be  able  to  follow  the  course  of  St.  Paul's 
argument  in  these  three  chapters.  But  all  of  us  can  seize  that  point  of  view  of  his, 
which  enables  him  to  trust  the  future  of  his  beloved  Israel — to  the  unsearchable 
grace  and  wisdom  of  God.  Where  had  he  learned  that  trust  ?  Not  at  the  feet  of 
Gamaliel ;  not  through  all  his  vast  stores  of  Greek  and  Eabbinical  learning ;  not 
through  any  exercise  of  his  own  quick  intelligence  and  acute  reasoning  powers  ;  but 
at  the  foot  of  the  Cross.  It  was  there  and  thence  that  he  had  learned  the  boundless 
charity  of  God ;  had  learned  to  trust  himself  to  that  charity  ;  had  learned  (harder 
lesson  !)  to  trust  his  loved  ones  to  that  charity.     (Dean  Vaughan. ) 

Vers.  19, 20.  Thou  wilt  say  then  unto  me,  why  doth  He  yet  find  fiiult  7 — The  proper 
attitude  of  man  towards  Divine  mysteries  : — The  full  spirit  of  this  part  of  Paul's  reply 
may  be  brought  out  by  considering  it  as  addressed  to  the  objector — I.  As  a  man.  Con- 
sidering the  appeal  in  this  light,  it  impresses  a  lesson  of  great  practical  importance, 
namely,  to  beware  of  arraigning,  with  irreverent  rashness  and  self-sufficiency,  the  pro- 
cedure of  the  Divine  Being,  as  represented  to  us  by  Himself.  Nothing,  surely,  can 
be  more  unbecoming  in  any  creature.  Nothing  can  more  strikingly  display  the  sad 
predominance  in  the  human  heart  of  that  aspirmg  pride  which  was  originally  infused 
by  the  tempting  assurance,  "  Ye  shall  be  as  God,  knowing  good  and  evil."  The 
folly,  indeed,  of  refusing  to  admit  whatever  does  not  come  within  the  limit  of  our 
comprehension,  can  be  equalled  only  by  its  impiety.  There  must  be  parts  of  the 
Divine  procedure  whose  principles  and  reasons  are  beyond  the  depth  of  even  arch- 
angelic  intellects.  It  is  a  maxim  of  essential  importance,  on  all  such  subjects, 
that  we  should  not  allow  that  which  we  do  know  to  be  displaced  from  our 
confidence  by  that  which  we  do  not  know.  We  have  the  fullest  assurance  of  the 
righteousness  of  the  Supreme  Euler.  Surely,  then,  we  ought  not  to  allow  our- 
selves to  be  startled  into  scepticism  because,  in  His  revealed  procedure,  we  may 
find  particulars,  the  secret  of  which  we  are  unable  fully  to  penetrate.  Shall  we, 
then,  on  the  one  hand,  question  the  prescience  of  God,  because  we  may  be  at  a 
loss  fully  to  discern  its  consistency  with  the  freedom  and  accountableness  of  man  ? 
— or,  on  the  other  hand,  shall  we  loose  men  from  their  moral  responsibility,  and 
convert  them  into  mere  irresponsible  pieces  of  machinery,  because  we  may  not 
perfectly  discern  the  link  of  harmony  between  man's  accountableness  and  God's 
foreknowledge  ?  And  especially  when  we  recollect  that  the  mystery  of  mysteries 
is  not  a  doctrine,  but  a  fact — not  a  discovery  of  revelation,  but  an  event  independent 
of  revelation  altogether — which  revelation  does  not  originate,  but  which  it  finds,  and 
on  which  it  proceeds — the  existence  of  moral  evil  itself  under  the  government  of 
the  infinitely  Holy  and  Good  1  There  is  no  denying  the  fact ;  but  the  mystery  of 
the  fact  has  baffled  the  wits  of  the  wisest  from  the  beginning  ttU  now.  Shall  we, 
then,  refuse  the  remedy,  because  we  cannot  fully  explain  why  the  evil  itself  was 
permitted  to  exist  ?  II.  As  a  sinner.  "  Who  art  thou  ?  " — not  only  a  creature, 
short-sighted,  and  ignorant,  but  a  guilty,  condemned  creature.  How  unspeakably 
unreasonable  and  presumptuous  is  the  language  of  the  objector  when  regarded  in 
this  light  ?  And  here  we  might  introduce  anew,  with  augmented  force,  the  proper 
terms  for  such  a  creature  in  presenting  himself  before  "  the  God  with  whom  he  has 
to  do."  Of  whom  ought  he,  then,  to  think  ?  Should  it  not  be  of  himself  ?  Of 
what  ought  he  to  think  ?  Should  it  not  be  of  his  own  transgressions  and  his  own 
deserts  ?  He  has  an  account  of  his  own — what  to  him  are  the  accounts  of  others  ? 
Is  he  to  stand  out  against  the  justice  of  God  in  his  own  sentence,  till  he  sees 
whether  God  deals  vnth  others  exactly  as  He  does  with  him  ?  What  has  he  to  do 
with  others  ?  As  a  sinner,  he  stands  at  the  bar  of  heaven,  charged  with  his  own 
guilt,  and  has  to  answer  for  himself.  If  there  be  any  ground  on  which  he  can 
impeach  the  righteousness  of  the  Judge  in  his  own  sentence,  let  him  advance  hia 
plea.  But  if  he  himself,  as  a  sinner,  is  justly  condemned,  is  not  the  posture  that 
becomes  him  that  of  a  suppliant  for  mercy?    Oh,  if  instead  of  "replying  against 


296  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cms.  ij. 

God,"  by  presuming  to  pick  faults  in  Hia  general  administration,  each  sinner 
would  but  "  look  to  himself  " — ponder  his  own  guilt — and  in  the  name  of  the  one 
Divine  Mediator,  cast  himself  at  the  feet  of  his  Judge  with  the  brief  petition  of  the 
publican,  all  then  would  be  well.  He  should  find  mercj,  as  sure  as  God 
"  delighteth  in  it " ;  and,  because  He  delighteth  in  it,  has  provided  for  its  honour- 
able exercise.  (B.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  Truth  not  to  be  tampered  taith  : — No  man 
has  any  right  to  make  that  which  he  believes  to  be  the  truth  of  Cbd  any  less 
exacting,  less  sharp  or  clear,  because  he  thinks  his  fellow-men  will  not  accept  it  it 
he  states  it  in  its  blankest  and  baldest  form.  I  read  an  incident  in  a  newspaper 
the  other  day  that  seems  to  illustrate  this  point.  A  tired  and  dusty  traveller  was 
leaning  against  a  lamp-post  in  the  city  of  Rochester,  and  he  turned  and  looked 
around  him  and  said,  "How  far  is  it  to  Farmington?"  and  a  boy  in  the  crowd 
said,  "Eight  miles."  "Do  you  think  it  is  so  far  as  that?"  said  the  poor  tired 
traveller.  "  Well,  seeing  that  you  are  so  tired,  I  will  call  it  seven  miles."  The  boy, 
with  his  heart  overflowing  with  the  milk  of  human  kindness,  pitied  the  exhausted 
traveller,  and  chose  to  call  it  seven  miles.  I  know  that  I  have  seen  statements  of 
the  truth  that  have  dictated  the  same  answer.  Never  make  the  road  from 
Rochester  to  Farmington  seven  miles  when  you  know  it  is  eight.  Do  not  do  a 
wrong  to  truth  out  of  regard  for  men.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Nay  but,  0  mac,  who 
art  thou  that  repllest  against  God  7 — Presumption  rebuked : — Observe — I.  The 
TEMERITY  OP  MAN.  He  arraigns — 1.  God's  perfections.  2.  Procedure.  3.  Govern- 
ment, n.  Its  merited  reproof.  Such  conduct  is — 1.  Impertinent.  2.  Wicked. 
3.  Foolish.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Pride — in  dictating  to  God: — The  petty  sovereign 
of  an  insignificant  tribe  in  North  America  every  morning  stalks  out  of  his  hovel, 
bids  the  sun  good-morrow,  and  points  out  to  him  with  his  finger  the  course  he  is  to 
take  for  the  day.  Is  this  arrogance  more  contemptible  than  ours  when  we  would 
dictate  to  God  the  course  of  His  providence,  and  summon  Him  to  our  bar  for  His 
dealings  with  us?  How  ridiculous  does  man  appear  when  he  attempts  to  argue  with 
his  God!  ((7.  H.  Spurgeon.)  God  does  not  reason: — A  gentleman  examining 
some  deaf  and  dumb  children  wrote  up  the  question,  "  Does  God  reason?  "  One  of 
the  children  immediately  wrote  underneath.  '•  God  knows  and  sees  everything. 
Reasoning  implies  doubt  and  uncertainty  ;  therefore  God  does  not  reason." 

Vers.  21-23.  Hath  not  the  potter  power  over  the  clay? — The  potter  and  the 
clay : — I.  The  material  of  which  humanity  is  composed.  Represented  by  clay. 
1.  Mean.  2.  Powerless.  3.  Plastic.  U.  The  sovereign  right  op  God  to  mould 
IT  TO  His  will.  A  vessel  to — 1.  Honour.  2.  Dishonour.  III.  The  consistency 
OP  this  doctrine  with  human  free  agency.  1.  God  determines  our  physical 
and  temporal  conditions.  2.  Not  our  eternal  doom.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  potter 
and  his  clay  : — "  Hath  he  not  power  ?  "  Yes,  he  has,  is  the  answer  the  apostle 
expects,  and  he  is  right,  and  God  the  Almighty  Potter  has  unchallengeable  power 
over  His  clay.  Let  it  be  noticed — I.  That  Paul  does  not  refer  to  physical 
FORCE,  i.e.,  that  God,  in  virtue  of  His  almightiness,  is  able  out  of  the  same  lump 
to  make  one  vessel  to  honour  and  another  to  dishonour.  The  word  is  not,  Svvafug — 
ability  to  do,  but  i^ovaia — authority,  prerogative  right.  God  is  not  under  any 
obligation  to  confer  equal  honour  or  dishonour  upon  all.  He  will  be  doing  no 
wrong,  although  He  make  a  difference.  11.  We  are  not  to  look  upon  God's 
PREROGATIVE  AS  UNCONDITIONAL.  1.  True,  the  prerogative  of  the  literal  potter  is 
absolute.  He  may  do  «ith  his  clay  what  he  pleases,  although  it  may  be  ridiculous, 
and  ultimately  ruinous  to  him.  He  may  add  inappropriate  ingredients  and  spoil 
hia  clay:  stupidly  attempt  to  make  fine  vessels  out  of  coarse  clay  ;  he  may  mis- 
shape his  vessels,  mar  them,  or  when  the  whole  batch  is  fashioned  take  an  iron 
rod  and  dash  them  into  shivers.  If  the  clay,  wheel,  time,  rod,  be  his  own,  he  may 
act  as  absurdly  as  he  pleases.  2.  But  then  this  absolute  right  will  not  shield  him 
from  the  criticism  of  his  fellows.  They  may  not  say  "  No,  this  won't  be  permitted  ; 
you  are  ill-using  your  clay."  But  they  will  be  at  perfect  liberty  to  say  what 
Jonathan  Edwards  said  of  the  devil,  "  that  he  is  one  of  the  greatest  fools  and 
blockheads  in  the  world."  3.  Again,  men  are  not  like  clay  in  oW  respects,  e.^.,  they 
are  possessed  of  rights.  Man  has  a  right  to  be  treated  with  justice ;  to  be  fur- 
nished with  ability  to  do  his  duty,  if  he  is  to  be  held  responsible  for  not  doing  it ; 
to  have  the  gate  of  heaven  opened  to  him  if  he  is  to  be  blamed  for  not  entering  in. 
Man  must  have  some  power  of  formative  self-control  "  unto  honour,"  if  he  is  to  be 
blamed  for  being  fashioned  into  a  vessel  "  unto  dishonour."  4.  All  this  being  the  case, 
God's  power  over  the  human  clay  is  not  utterly  unconditional.    His  right  to  do 


CHAP,  n.]  ROMANS.  297 

with  it  as  He  pleases  is,  by  His  own  benevolent  arrangement,  modified  by  rights 
which  He  has  conferred  on  His  creatures.  He  has  not  reserved  the  right  to  do 
wrong.  It  cannot  be  the  case,  then,  that  God  has  reserved  the  right  to  deal 
tyrannically  with  His  poor  human  creatures.  If  they  are  held  responsible  to  Him 
for  the  shape  their  character  assumes,  then  something  is  due  to  them  as  the  basis  of 
their  accountability.  III.  The  statement  cannot  be  quoted  in  favour  of  uncon- 
ditional REPROBATION.  There  are,  indeed,  beings  who  deserve  universal  reproba- 
tion, and,  therefore.  Divine ;  and  there  is  future  reprobation ;  but  is  it  right  to 
80  magnify  the  Divine  sovereignty  as  to  exclude  from  the  circle  of  Divinity,  justice, 
righteousness,  goodness,  wisdom,  mercy,  and  love  ?  Such  inversion  of  theology 
would  be  akin  in  monstrosity  to  the  wild  political  aphorism  that  monarchs  reign 
by  Divine  right  and  can  do  no  wrong.  IV.  What,  then,  was  the  apostle's  aim  in 
PROPOUNDING  HIS  QUERY  ?  Why  should  he  be  solicitous  to  show  that  God  has  a 
right  to  turn  some  of  the  race  into  a  condition  of  dishonour,  and  others  into  a 
Btate  of  glory  ?  The  reason  is  that  in  chaps,  ix.-xi.  he  is  discussing  the  relation 
of  his  countrymen  to  the  gospel.  Alas  1  the  great  mass  were  unbelieving.  What 
then  ?  Would  they,  notwithstanding,  be  all  turned  on  the  Divine  wheel  into 
vessels  of  honour?  The  Jews  contended  that  they  would.  It  was  the  Gentiles 
only  who  were  to  be  fashioned  into  vessels  unto  dishonour.  "  No,"  says  the 
apostle,  "  you  are  wrong,  my  countrymen.  It  is  with  intensest  sorrow  that  I  say 
it.  It  is  the  penitent  and  believing  only  who  shall  be  saved.  And  the  Almighty 
Potter,  who  has  us  all  on  His  wheel,  has  right,  out  of  the  same  lump  of  Jews  and 
Gentiles,  to  turn  one  man,  even  though  he  be  a  Gentile,  provided  he  be  penitent 
and  believing,  into  a  vessel  of  glory,  and  vice  versa."  The  apostle  had  evidently 
the  representation  of  Jer.  xviiL  in  bis  eye.  If  a  vessel  becomes  marred  in  the 
hands  of  the  potter,  then,  instead  of  proceeding  with  it,  he  crushes  the  clay 
together  and  fashions  it  into  another  kind  of  vessel.  God  desired  to  fashion 
the  Jews  into  a  glorious  vessel,  when,  lo !  it  became  marred  in  His  hand,  and 
He  had  to  make  it  into  another — unto  dishonour.  The  vessel  was  marred,  not 
because  of  any  imperfection  in  the  Potter's  manipulation,  for  He  is  not  liable 
to  mistakes.  Some  bad  and  coarse  ingredient  had  been  by  some  enemy  flung 
in,  so  that  only  a  coarser  vessel  than  what  was  desired  could  be  made  of  it. 
Application :  God  is  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  i.e.,  He  does  not  wish  to 
have  any  vessels  fashioned  unto  dishonour.  He  would  have  all  to  be  beautiful  and 
honourably  serviceable,  i.e.,  all  men  to  be  saved  and  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
truth.  Jesus,  speaking  to  the  impenitent,  says,  "  I  would,  but  ye  would  not,"  and 
just  because  men  will  not  they  spoil  the  clay  that  is  in  the  Almighty  Potter's 
hand.     (<7.  Morison,  D.D.)        The  potter  and  the  clay : — I.  The  question  proposed. 

1.  A  seemingly  needless  one.  2.  Proposed  as  an  argument  for  conviction.  II. 
The  answer  implied.  That  God  is — 1.  The  Creator  of  all  things.  2.  The 
arbitrator  of  the  destiny  of  everything.  3.  That  He  has,  as  such,  a  right  to  create 
and  plan  out  as  He  thinks  fit.    Application  :  1.  Do  not  question  God's  authority. 

2.  Submit  to  all  His  decrees  with  humility.  {J.  H.  Tasson.)  The  potter 
and  the  clay : — Against  the  hard  absolutism  of  the  parable  of  the  potter  and 
the  clay  the  righteous  instincts  of  the  heart  have  often  protested.  Eesponsi- 
bility  without  freedom  strikes  us  as  despotic  and  unjust.  If  we  are  whirled  about 
on  the  potter's  wheel  of  an  inflexible  fate,  it  seems  intolerable  that  we  should  be 
denounced  for  taking  the  shape  it  has  given  us.  And  what  maddens  us  the  more 
is  that  not  being  free,  we  should  yet  be  called  into  account  and  held  responsible. 
No  effort  of  ours,  it  seems,  can  alter  our  destiny  ;  yet  the  stain  of  demerit  clings 
to  us  if  we  fail  to  shape  it.  It  is  like  charging  the  rivers  with  guilt  for  their  inability 
to  run  up  a  hill  when  God's  decree  of  gravitation  forbids  it.  All  this  we  find,  or 
think  we  find,  in  the  image  of  the  potter  and  the  clay.  And  no  doubt,  read  in  its 
connection  with  the  rest  of  the  passage,  it  seems  a  vindication  of  the  right  of 
God  to  do  what  He  likes — of  His  right  to  be  arbitrary,  to  make  selections  on  prin- 
ciples of  favouritism.  An  image  or  argument,  however,  that  lends  us  in  such  a 
conclusion — that  issues  in  a  disproof  of  the  righteousness  of  God,  carries  in  it  its 
own  condemnation.  As  the  impersonation  of  eternal  justice,  He  must  choose  and 
do  what  is  fair — what  commends  itself  to  our  pure  moral  instincts.  He  must 
reverence  the  laws  He  has  stamped  on  our  nature.  He  must  live  oat  from  the 
perceptions  of  the  right  He  has  given  us  to  live  by.  The  image  of  the  potter  and 
the  clay,  of  the  vessels  made  to  honour  and  the  vessels  made  to  dishonour,  are 
emblematic  of  certain  inequalities  that  prevail  among  laen.  You  have  these  two 
inequalities  :  first,  as  to  our  sphere  in  life  ;  seconclly,  as  to  our  moral  constitution. 


298  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XX. 

Now,  let  us  look  at  this  question  a  little  more  closely.  First,  one  man's  lot  la 
favourable  to  the  cultivation  of  the  Christian  temper,  while  another's  is  not.  That, 
I  suppose,  is  inevitable.  As  there  are  some  races  who  seem  to  exist  only  to  be  the 
serfs  of  the  world,  delvers  in  the  field,  toilers  in  the  mine,  so  there  are  individuals 
elected  by  Divine  decree,  fashioned  of  dull  and  lethargic  temper,  to  whom  all  Ufa 
in  the  higher  human  interests  has  been  denied.  They  cannot  rise  to  the  far 
empyrean,  fanned  by  the  wing  of  the  albatross  and  the  eagle  ;  but  must  be  content 
to  skim  with  heavy  flight  near  the  earth's  surface.  Well,  if  the  Potter  has  made 
them  so,  let  them  so  accept  the  destiny  and  the  doom  assigned.  Let  them  do  that 
in  the  strong  conviction  that  the  great  Judge  will  take  into  account  the  conditions 
of  life  in  which  He  placed  them,  and  ask  only  if  their  achievements  were  equal  to 
their  opportunities.  To  them,  little  having  been  committed,  from  them  little  shall 
be  required.  Your  sphere,  your  work  in  life,  then,  is  the  element  given  you  in 
which  to  work  out  whatever  greatness  of  character  is  possible  within  it.  It  defines 
your  opportunities.  These  may  be  few,  narrow,  unpoetic.  Bu*:  there  they  are : 
and  faithfulness  within  them  will  secure  for  you  the  same  cordial  greeting  given  by 
God  to  him  who,  having  ten  times  your  chances,  gives  back  to  the  great  House- 
holder no  more  in  proportion  than  you.  Secondly,  there  are  diversities  of  nature 
among  men.  You  have  one  man  with  a  sweet  nature  in  him,  perfectly  and  rightly 
disposed  towards  goodness  and  God.  You  have  another,  with  whom  life  is  a 
ceaseless  struggle,  who  cannot  put  the  victor's  foot  on  his  frailties,  and  who  at  the 
end  will  die,  having  redeemed  little  of  the  wilderness  within  from  its  waste  and 
wildness  to  the  peaceful  fruitfulness  of  the  garden  of  God.  It  strikes  you  as 
unfair  to  ask  these  men  to  live  in  equal  nearness  to  God.  It  is  like  asking  the 
vessel  made  of  common  earth  to  have  the  glitter  and  beauty  of  Etruscan  ware. 
Now,  what  are  we  to  say  to  those  hapless  souls  to  whom  fate  has  denied  the  moral 
materials  of  which  the  saintly  character  is  formed — whom  the  Potter  has  made  of 
common  clay  ?  That  they  will  be  condemned  for  not  being  the  richest  porcelain  ? 
for  not  attaining  the  moral  beauty  which  the  rigorous  necessity  of  destiny  and 
providence  forbid  ?  Surely  not  ?  A  fine  nature  is  a  communicated  blessing.  It 
is  not  the  acquisition  of  one's  own  will — not  the  fruit  of  one's  own  endeavour.  No 
merit  is  ascribed  to  a  man  who  is  what  he  is  because  of  something  given  him,  not 
acquired  by  him.  If  much  has  been  given  in  a  man's  moral  endowments,  much 
will  be  required  of  him ;  but  to  whom  little  has  been  given,  of  him  little  shall  be 
asked.  The  ideal  man  of  angel  temper  is  different  from  the  ideal  man  of  a  dull 
and  sluggish  soul.  Both  may  be  perfect  after  their  kind.  The  injustice  will  not 
come  in  tUl  God  expects  from  both  vessels  the  same  finish  and  beauty.  The  clay 
vessel  may  be  perfect  as  a  bit  of  delf ;  it  has  its  own  perfection :  the  vessel  made 
to  be  a  bit  of  alabaster  or  Etruscan  ware  cannot  have  more.  In  conclusion,  then, 
our  lot  and  our  nature — ^whatever  these  are,  tractable  or  intractable — are  given  ua 
as  the  element  and  the  materials  out  of  which  we  are  to  evolve  a  certain  ideal 
character.  The  lot  and  the  nature  are  our  fate — for  them  we  are  not  responsible. 
The  character  is  the  product  of  our  own  freewill — for  it  we  shall  answer. 
{Jos.  Forfar.)  To  make  one  vessel  imto  honour  and  another  unto  dis- 
honour.— Honour  and  dishonour;  or,  the  work  of  the  sinner  and  the  work 
of  God : — Note — I.  That  all  men  are  madk  of  one  common  nature.  "  We," 
as  the  old  prophet  has  it,  "are  the  clay,  and  Thou  our  Potter,  and  we 
are  all  the  work  of  Thy  hand."  Notwithstanding  the  vast  variety  in  colour, 
conformation,  habit,  &c.,  there  is  such  a  correspondence,  both  in  the  physical 
and  spiritual  structure  of  all  the  races  as  to  corroborate  the  declaration  that 
God  "  hath  made  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  men."  Let  us  not  be  satisfied  in  ad- 
mitting the  truth  of  this  doctrine,  but — 1.  Eeverence  the  rights  of  all.  Nothing  can 
justify  us  in  offering  the  slightest  indignity  to  that  right  which  belongs  to  man  as 
man.  2.  Sympathise  with  the  woes  of  all.  If  we  love  not  our  brother  "  whom 
we  have  seen,  how  can  we  love  God  whom  we  have  not  seen  ?  "  3.  Diffuse  that 
gospel  which  is  the  great  want  of  all.  Man,  the  world  over,  is  a  brother ;  out  from 
the  deeps  of  his  heart  there  rises  a  cry  for  the  help  the  gospel  offers.     II.  That 

OF   MEN   MADE   OF  THE   SAME   NATURE,    PART    IS     BEDJO    "  FITTED     FOB    DESTRUCTION," 

AND  PART  FOB  QLORY.  The  word  destruction  does  not  refer  to  existence,  but 
to  happiness.  It  is  here  put  it  antithesis  to  glory,  i.e. ,  all  that  is  blissful  in  being. 
Now,  it  is  here  implied  that  there  are  certain  men  being  framed  for  the  destruction 
of  all  happiness,  and  others  for  all  that  is  glorious.  There  are  three  things  which 
show  the  tenth  of  this.  1.  The  inevitable  tendency  of  the  two  great  principles  that 
rale  mankipd — selfishness  and  love,  or  sin  and  holiness.    The  one  tends  to  th« 


CHAP.  «.]  ROMANS.  S99 

decrease  of  happiness,  and  the  other  to  its  increase ;  the  one  fits  for  destruction, 
and  the  other  prepares  for  glory.  A  man  under  the  influence  of  selfishness  is  one 
whose  nature  is  undergoing  a  rapid  process  of  deterioration.  There  is  a  blight  in 
his  atmosphere  that  shall  leave  his  spiritual  territory  barren.  There  is  a  disease 
in  his  system  that  shall  bring  on  death.  2.  The  actual  experience  of  mankind. 
Take  two  men  as  types.  (1)  One  shall  be  Saul.  He  had,  undoubtedly,  a  good 
mental,  as  well  as  a  "  goodly  "  corporeal  constitution,  and  on  him  the  "  Spirit 
of  the  Lord  "  once  moved.  But  the  man  was  selfish;  and  this  selfishness  continued 
to  fit  him  for  "  destruction,"  until,  in  the  cave  of  Endor,  he  exclaims,  "  God  is 
departed  from  me."  (2)  The  other  shall  be  David.  He  was  but  a  shepherd  boy, 
having  nothing  peculiarly  great  either  in  bodily  or  mental  make,  but  his  soul 
developed  itself  under  the  reign  of  Divine  love,  which  led  him  to  "  serve  his 
generation."  And  you  see  this  youth,  in  almost  every  step  of  his  life,  getting  into 
new  power  and  rising  into  new  glory.  Now,  all  this  is  abundantly  confirmed  by 
Scripture,  which  represents  all  men  as  pursuing  two  paths,  the  one  to  destruction, 
and  the  other  to  glory — some  sowing  to  the  flesh,  and  reaping  corruption,  and  some 
to  the  Spirit,  and  reaping  everlasting  life.  III.  That  whilst  God  could  havis 
"fitted"  men  fob  destruction.  His  work  is  to  "  prepare"  them  for  glory. 
We  are  not  ignorant  of  the  objection  that  God  is  repre-ented  as  blinding  men's 
eyes,  making  their  hearts  fat,  and  their  ears  heavy,  and  as  hardening  the  heart  of 
Pharaoh.  True.  But  when  such  works  are  referred  to  God  they  must  be  referred 
to  Him  in  an  occasional,  not  in  a  causal — an  incidental,  not  an  intentional— a 
permissive,  not  a  predestinating  sense.  Otherwise,  indeed,  moral  evil  is  a  Divine 
institution.  Observe — 1.  That  the  apostle  does  not  aflSrm  that  God  has  ever  fitted 
any  being  for  destruction ;  and  there  are  reasons  to  believe  that  He  has  never  done 
so.  (1)  There  is  analogy.  Ask  the  astronomer  or  the  microscopist  if  they  have  found 
one  living  thing  formed  for  dishonour,  or  made  for  torture  ?  (2)  There  is  the 
human  constitution.  Whether  you  look  at  it — (a)  Physically,  with  its  varied  members 
and  organs,  so  exquisitely  formed  and  put  tugether,  walking  erectly,  fronting  the 
world  with  eyes  on  heaven,  and  lord  of  all  that  lives  beneath  the  stars,  or — (b)  Psycho- 
logically, with  an  intellect  to  reduce  the  universe  to  truth,  and  bear  it  along 
triumphantly  in  its  path  of  thought,  and  a  soul  to  mingle  in  the  worship  of 
seraphs,  and  delight  in  God," — can  you  affirm  that  man  was  made  for  dishonour  ? 
(3)  There  is  the  conscience.  Does  the  conscience  ever  testify  to  the  ruined  sinner 
that  he  was  made  for  destruction?  No.  Were  this  the  case  there  could  be  no 
remorse — no  moral  hell.  "  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  God,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the 
death  of  the  wicked."  2.  The  apostle  does  affirm  that  God  prepares  men  for  glory  ; 
and  there  are  abundant  reasons  to  believe  the  fact.  (1)  There  is  the  spiritual 
influence  of  nature.  This  influence  you  may  call  beauty  in  the  flowery  fields, 
sublimity  in  the  surging  main,  glory  in  the  "  terrible  crystal,"  or  divinity  in  all ; 
but  whatever  you  call  it,  there  is  nothing  in  it  to  fit  "for  destruction,"  but  every- 
thing to  prepare  for  glory.  I  often  wonder  how  men  can  sin  abroad,  in  the  bright 
fields  of  holy  nature.  (2)  There  is  the  special  system  of  mediation,  including  the 
communications  of  God  to  humanity  during  the  first  four  thousand  years,  the 
mission  of  Christ,  the  ministry  of  the  gospel,  and  the  agency  of  the  Spirit.  In 
view  of  all  this,  who  can  maintain,  for  a  moment,  the  notion  that  God  fits  men  for 
destruction  ?  IV.  That  the  history  of  aIiL  men,  whatever  their  destiny, 
illustrates  the  character  of  God.  In  relation  to  the  destroyed,  there  is  the 
manifestation  of  "long-suffering,"  "power,"  "wrath";  and  in  relation  to  the 
saved,  there  is  the  manifestation  of  the  "  riches  of  His  glory."  Conclusion :  Learn — 
1.  That  the  most  solemn  attribute  of  thy  nature  is  the  power  to  misappropriate 
the  blessings  of  God.  Yonder  are  two  plants  side  by  side,  rooted  in  the  same  soil, 
visited  by  the  same  showers,  and  shone  on  by  the  same  sun  ;  the  one  trans- 
mutes all  into  what  will  poison  life,  and  the  other  into  that  which  will  sustain  it. 
So  the  very  elements  that  are  preparing  the  men  by  thy  side  for  glory — by  Ihe 
perverse  use  of  thy  moral  freedom — may  be  fitting  thee  for  destruction.  2.  That 
the  most  momentous  work  in  the  world  is  the  formation  of  character.  It  is  either 
a  soul-saving  or  a  soul-destroying  process.  What  wouldst  thou  think  of  a  man 
who  stood  casting  portions  of  his  property  into  the  bosom  of  the  rolling  river  ? 
But  if  thou  art  forming  an  ungodly  character,  thou  art  doing  worse  folly  than  this, 
thou  art  wasting  thy  spiritual  self.  That  vessel  which  the  architect,  either  from 
recklessness  or  ignorance,  is  constructing  on  a  principle  which  necessarily  unfits 
her  to  stand  the  swelling  surges  and  the  hostile  gale,  you  would  say,  is  "  fitted  for 
destruction,"  so,  in  very  truth,  is  thy  character  if  built  on  the  principle  of  selfish. 


800  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ix 

ness.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Vessels  of  honour  and  dishonour  : — Who  can  say  ol 
himself,  or  of  his  fellow,  whether  his  is  a  life  of  honour  or  of  dishonour  ?  I  have 
Been  side  by  side,  amid  the  heirlooms  of  a  great  historic  English  house,  a  goblet  of 
massive  gold,  rich  with  costly  gems,  and  beside  it  a  common  earthern  vessel,  with 
broken  handle  and  with  battered  edge.  Which  of  these  is  a  vessel  made  unto 
honour,  and  which  to  dishonour?  The  one  has  stood  amid  the  blaze  of  light  and 
the  flash  of  jewels,  filled  with  rare  wine,  at  the  banquet  table  of  a  king,  where 
mistresses  laughed,  and  where  libertines  blasphemed ;  and  the  other  has  borne 
water  to  the  parched  lips  of  dying  soldiers,  amid  the  smoke  and  dust  of  battle.  Which, 
now,  is  the  vessel  made  to  honour,  and  which  to  dishonour?  (T.  T.  Shore,  M.A.) 
What  If  God,  wlUing  to  show  His  wrath  .  .  .  endured  .  .  .  vessels  of  wrath  .  .  . 
and  that  He  might  make  known  the  riches  of  His  glory  on  the  vessels  of  mercy. — 
Vessels  of  wrath  and  vessels  of  mercy  : — The  sentence  is  elliptical.  Supposing  God 
to  have  done  so,  and  for  certain  ends — what  then  ?  The  apostle  does  not  fill  up 
the  sentence  himself,  but  leaves  it  to  be  fiUed  up  by  his  readers  agreeably  to  the 
principles  he  had  been  laying  down.  Would  there  be  unrighteousness  with  God  ? 
I.  The  parties  spoken  of.  1.  "The  vessels  of  wrath,"  i.e.,  the  "vessels  to  dis- 
honour "  of  ver.  21.  (1)  The  wrath  of  God  is  invariably  pointed  against  sin 
(chap.  i.  18  ;  Eph.  ii.  1-3).  It  is  judicial,  not  personal ;  righteousness  demanding 
the  punishment  of  iniquity — "  angry  with  the  wicked,"  and  insisting  on  the  execu- 
tion of  the  law.  Sovereign  wrath  is  a  contradiction.  Sovereign  mercy  is  not.  It 
expresses  the  unalienable  right  of  the  Supreme  Euler  to  show  favour  freely  to  the 
undeserving.  The  very  word  "  mercy  "  implies  "  desert  of  evil "  in  its  objects.  But 
from  the  idea  of  the  right  of  God  to  inflict  suffering  on  the  undeserving,  we  shrink 
with  horror,  for  it  would  ascribe  to  God  the  right  to  do  wrong.  All  punitive  infliction 
presupposes  desert.  The  bestowment  of  good  does  not.  The  latter,  then,  belongs 
to  sovereignty ;  the  former,  to  equity.  (2)  The  sins  of  men  are  freely  committed. 
They  are  done  with  the  choice  of  tiieir  wills.  Otherwise  there  could  be  no  such 
thing  as  sin.  If  a  man  were  used  as  a  mere  machine,  he  could  not  be  a  sinner. 
Every  sinner  is  sensible  that  neither,  on  the  one  hand,  is  he  constrained  to  evil,  nor, 
on  the  other,  restrained  from  good.  To  say  that  man  cannot  will  what  is  good  is  to 
employ  terms  most  inconsiderate  and  misleading.  What  hinders  him  from  willing  ? 
Only  the  absence  of  right  dispositions.  But  the  indisposition  is  just  the  want  of 
will ;  and,  there  being  no  other  inability  in  man  than  this,  to  say  he  cannot  will 
resolves  itself  ultimately  into  the  will  not  to  will ;  inasmuch  as  he  is  kept  from  willing 
good  by  nothing  but  his  aversion  to  good.  (3)  These  are  truths  sufficiently  plain, 
and  they  serve  to  show  the  meaning  of  the  expression  "  fitted  to  destruction."  (a) 
More  is  meant  than  mere  destination  or  appointment.  "  Fitted  "  includes  particu- 
larly the  idea  of  congruity  between  the  character  and  the  destruction.  The  question, 
then,  comes  to  be — how  are  they  thus  "  fitted  "  and  by  whom  ?  In  finding  an 
answer  to  this  question,  observe  the  marked  difference  between  the  expressions  on 
both  sides  of  the  alternative.  God  fits  the  "  vessels  of  mercy,"  but  the  vessels  of 
wrath  are  only  fitted  for  destruction,"  i.e.,  self-fitted,  fitted  by  their  impenitent  and 
obdurate  sinfulness.  The  blessed  God  cannot  be  regarded  as  directly  "  fitting  men 
for  destruction  "  by  any  influence  from  Him  (James  i.  13-16  ;  Ezek.  xv.  6-8).  (b) 
And,  as  God  cannot  make  men  wicked,  neither  should  He  be  considered  as 
appointing  men  to  sin — unless  it  be  in  the  simple  sense  of  leaving  them,  in  punitive 
abandonment,  to  the  hardening  influence  of  its  wilful  perpetration  ( Jude  4).  2. "  The 
vessels  of  mercy."  (1)  The  very  idea  of  mercy  excludes  all  desert  on  their  part, 
and  all  obligation  on  the  part  of  God.  "  Vessels  of  mercy  "  implies  that  whatever 
there  may  be  of  good  in  them,  that  good  is  something  which  they  do  not  deserve, 
and  which  God  is,  in  no  respect,  bound  to  bestow.  (2)  This  being  the  case,  their 
previous  "preparation  to  glory"  is  an  act  of  pure  sovereignty.  "Making  them 
meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light  "  (Eph.  ii  1-10).  II. 
The  condcot  of  God  towabds  theu.  1.  It  is  the  same  to  both.  The  expression 
"  Enduring  them  with  much  long-suffering"  is  used,  it  is  true,  only  in  reference  to 
the  former ;  bat  it  is  necessary,  to  complete  the  sense,  that  it  be,  as  it  were,  carried 
forward,  and  considered  as  if  repeated,  in  regard  to  the  latter.  2.  The  long-suffering 
of  God  is  one  of  the  most  wonderful  facts  in  the  history  of  our  apostate  race.  It 
was  manifested  in  His  dealings  with  the  antediluvian  world,  and  in  the  whole  coarse 
of  His  procedure  toward  the  Jewish  people.  It  has  been  manifested  all  along,  and 
continues  to  be,  in  the  experience  of  the  race  at  large,  and  in  the  Ufe  of  every 
individual.  Who  is  there,  of  all  the  children  of  men,  that  is  not  the  subject  of  ii  ? 
8.  The  idea  implies  the  existence  of  a  tendency  in   a  contrary  direction.    Th« 


CHIP.  IX.]  ROMANS.  801 

holiness  of  God  is  infinitely  opposed  to  all  sin,  and  while  His  holiness  abhors  it, 
His  justice  calls  for  its  punishment.  In  proportion,  then,  to  the  strength  of  these 
principles  of  the  Divine  character,  is  the  difiSoulty  of  forbearance  with  the  workers 
of  iniquity.  4.  By  this  long-suffering,  the  great  majority  of  men,  alas  I  are  only 
encouraged  in  evil  (Eccles.  viii.  11).  They  thus  criminally,  because  wilfully,  abuse 
the  Divine  goodness ;  and  thus  "  fit  themselves  for  destruction  "  (chap.  ii.  4,  5). 
But  others  dealt  with  in  the  same  "  long-suffering,"  after  very  protracted  and 
obstinate  resistance  of  the  means  of  grace,  relent,  believe,  and  are  saved.  Toward 
both  there  has  been  shown  "  much  long-suffering."  To  many  a  believer — especially 
to  such  as  have  been  converted  later  in  life  than  others— might  I  make  an  appeal 
for  the  truth  of  this.  III.  The  design  or  object  of  this  conduct  here  supposed  by 
the  apostle.  Suppose  God  does  as  the  potter  does  :  "  what  if "  this  were  the  case  ? 
It  is  evident  that  the  question  is  intended  to  involve  another  question  :  Would  there 
be  any  ground  of  complaint?  Who,  with  any  just  cause,  could  say  a  single  word 
against  the  procedure  ?  Kemember  that  men  are  not  here  spoken  of  as  creatures, 
but  as  sinners — guilty  subjects  of  God's  moral  government,  breakers  of  His  law — 
all  alike  obnoxious  to  the  visitation  of  His  punitive  justice.  The  general  principle, 
then,  is  this — that  God,  the  Supreme  Ruler,  so  orders  His  rectoral  procedure  towards 
Binful  men,  as  that  He  may  most  effectually  secure  the  glory  of  His  own  character 
and  government.  Let  us  look  at  both  sides  of  the  alternative.  1.  In  Go  I's  long- 
Buffeiing  towards  those  who  ultimately  perish,  what  is  His  course?  He  lengthens 
out  their  period  of  trial.  He  applies  every  mode  of  treatment,  in  itself,  as  a  moral 
means,  fitted  to  bring  them  to  repentance.  In  doing  this.  He  provides  for  a  satis- 
factory display  of  righteousness  in  their  final  condemnation ;  so  that  none  can  say 
that  they  perished  unwarned,  untried,  uninvited.  In  the  forbearance  of  God,  they 
have  found  opportunity  for  repentance,  and  they  have  guiltily  misimproved 
it;  converting  it  into  an  opportunity  of  further  and  further  showing  the  evil 
principles  and  dispositions  by  which  they  are  actuated,  and  which  are  the 
grounds  of  their  sentence  of  death  in  the  judgment.  As  an  exemplification  of 
our  meaning,  take  the  case  of  the  flood  (c/.  1  Pet.  iii.  19,  20 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  9). 
And  as  it  was  with  the  antediluvian  sinners,  so  was  it  with  the  Jews.  God's 
judgments  on  them  were  not  only  deserved,  but  by  His  whole  procedure  toward 
them  shown  to  be  deserved  ere  they  were  inflicted.  Their  "  mouths  were 
stopped."  And  thus  it  will  beat  last.  God  the  Judge  has  determined  that  He 
will  not  only  be  just  in  His  sentences  of  condemnation,  but  show  Himself  just. 
Who  will  venture  to  find  fault  with  this  ?  2.  Of  the  other  side  of  the  alternative 
the  import  is  sufficiently  obvious.  The  "  riches  of  His  glory  "  evidently  signifies 
here  "  His  glorious  riches  " — and  that  means,  as  evidently,  the  riches  of  His  mercy. 
The  glorious  riches  of  God's  mercy  are  made  known  by  salvation  in  general  having 
been  provided  ;  by  the  means  of  its  provision ;  and  by  every  individual  instance  of 
salvation  bestowed.  But  "  the  riches  of  His  mercy  "  are  more  signally  displayed 
in  some  cases  of  salvation  than  in  otherc.  In  particular  cases,  by  His  "  forbearance 
and  long-suffering,"  He  prepares  wopderful  exemplifications  of  the  exuberant 
abundance  and  untrammelled  freeness  of  this  gi'ace.  Let  this  apostle  himself  tell 
us  of  his  own  case,  as  an  instance  in  point  (1  Tim.  i.  12-16).  Conclusion  :  1.  There 
is  a  tendency  at  present  to  dwell  too  exclusively  on  the  Divine  love,  and  to  make 
too  little  of  the  other  attributes  of  the  Divine  character.  Because  the  atonement  is 
universal,  and  the  gift  of  Christ  is  the  highest  expression  of  love,  therefore  Divine 
love  must  be  love  without  distinctiona.  As  if,  because  the  atonement  has  been 
made  for  all,  in  order  to  there  being  a  consistent  ground  on  which  all  might  be 
invited  to  pardon,  therefore  there  can  be  and  must  be  no  distinctions  in  the  saving 
application  of  the  atonement.  God  cftys,  "  A  new  heart  also  will  I  give  you,"  &c. 
Does  He  do  this  alike  to  all?  2.  Wh'lfl  it  is  right  for  us  to  look  at  both  sides  of  the 
alternative,  it  is  especially  delightf'il  for  us  to  contemplate  Him  ♦'  preparing  for 
glory  the  vessels  of  mercy."  His  time  of  preparing  them  is  very  various.  He  can 
fit  them  in  a  moment :  while  sometimes  the  preparation  extends  through  many  a 
year.  He  spares  them  sometimes  as  instruments  for  His  use  in  preparing  ottier 
"  vessels  of  mercy  "  for  the  same  glory  with  themselves.  And  then,  when  He  takes 
them  to  the  inheritance  of  the  glo'-y  for  which  He  has  prepared  them,  and  which  He 
has  prepared  for  them — how  deliq;}>tful  our  emotions  in  looking  after  them.  He 
has  taken  these  vessels  where  He  "nay  put  them  to  uses  more  glorifying  to  Him,  and 
more  honourable  to  themselvee  than  any  use  He  could  make  of  them  in  their 
imperfect  state  below  1  {R.  W<\rJ.law,  D.D. )  Vessels  of  wrath  and  vessels  of 
mercy  : — ^L  Vessels  of  wbaih.       .  Whom  does  this  phrase  describe  ?    Not  persona 


802  TRE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rx. 


pre-ordained  to  wrath,  but  deserving  of  wrath.  2.  How  are  they  fitted  for  destruc- 
tion ?  Not  by  Divine  operation,  but  by  their  own  wilful  impertinence.  3.  How  does 
God  use  them  ?  For  the  display  of  His  justice  and  power.  4.  How  is  the  righteous- 
ness of  the  Divine  procedure  vindicated?  (1)  By  His  patient  forbearance.  (2)  By 
the  opportunity  afforded  for  repentance.  (3)  By  the  offers  of  His  grace.  II.  Vessels 
OF  MEKCT.  1.  Their  determination.  (1)  Not  by  unconditional  election.  (2)  But  by 
the  reception  of  mercy  and  belief  of  the  truth.  2.  Their  preparation — (1)  In  life. 
(2)  By  grace.  (3)  Through  the  sanctification  of  the  Spirit.  3.  Their  use.  To 
display  the  riches  of  God's  glory — His  wisdom,  love  and  power  in  their  salvation. 
4.  Their  destiny — glory.  (1)  In  the  perfection  of  their  nature  and  happiness.  (2) 
In  the  presence  of  God.  (3)  For  ever.  5.  The  foundation  of  all  their  happiness. 
The  sovereign  grace  of  God  in  Christ.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Vessels  of  wrath  and 
vessels  of  mercy  : — A  certain  minister,  having  changed  his  views  on  certain  points 
of  Divine  Truth,  was  waited  upon  by  an  old  acquaintance,  who  wished  to  reclaim 
him  to  bis  former  creed.  Finding  he  could  not  succeed  in  his  object,  he  became 
warm,  and  told  his  friend  that  God  had  "  given  him  up  to  strong  delusion,"  and 
that  he  was  "  a  vessel  of  wrath  fitted  to  destruction."  "I  think,  brother,"  was  the 
response,  "  you  have  mistaken  the  sense  of  the  passage  you  last  referred  to. 
Vessels  are  denominated  according  to  their  contents.  A  chemist,  in  conducting  a 
stranger  through  his  laboratory  would  say,  '  This  is  a  vessel  of  turpentine,  that  of 
vitriol,'  &c.,  always  giving  to  the  vessel  the  name  of  the  article  it  contains.  Now 
when  I  see  a  man  full  of  the  holy  and  lovely  spirit  of  Christ,  devoted  to  His  service 
and  imitating  His  example,  I  say  that  man  is  a  vessel  of  mercy,  whom  God  hath 
aforetime  prepared  unto  glory ;  but  when  I  see  a  man  full  of  everything  but  the  spirit 
of  the  Bible — opposed  to  God's  moral  government,  seeking  his  own  things  rather 
than  the  things  of  Christ,  and  filled  with  malice,  wrath,  and  all  uncharitableness,  I 
am  compelled  to  consider  him  '  a  vessel  of  wrath  fitted  to  destruction.' "  {Biblical 
Museum.)  The  vessels  of  wrath  : — The  doctrine  of  reprobation  is  a  malicious  libel 
on  mercy.  It  is  an  attempt  of  Satan  to  graft  his  own  character  upon  the  Lord  ;  and 
to  make  Him  whose  name  is  "  Love  "  like  him  whose  nature  is  hatred.  Consider — 
I.  The  characters  here  described.  1.  Wrath  means  far  more  than  anger — and  it 
becomes  a  stronger  word  as  the  capacity  for  wTath  increases.  "  The  king's  wrath  ia 
as  the  roaring  of  a  lion."  (1)  Now  measuring  upwards  in  this  way,  what  must 
God's  wrath  be,  whose  every  attribute  is  illimitable  ?  and  the  very  infinitude  of  His 
mercy  proves  what  must  be  the  extent  of  His  wrath.  (2)  And  are  there  any 
creatures  exposed  to  this?  Yes,  it  must  be  so  where  sin  is.  It  is  far  more 
anomalous  to  suppose  moral  guilt  existing  and  God  not  angry,  than  it  is  to  imagine 
rebels  and  a  king  unmoved,  or  children  fiends  in  human  shape  and  the  father 
indifferent.  The  wrath  of  God  must  come,  in  the  very  nature  of  things,  upon  the 
children  of  disobedience.  He  that  committeth  sin  must  be  a  vessel  of  wrath  by 
nature,  and  if  that  nature  be  not  changed,  a  double  portion  of  wrath  abideth  on 
him.  2.  Mark  the  term  which  expresses  the  reception  of  this  anger — "  vessels  "  ; 
not  leaves,  which  hold  the  storm-drop  for  an  instant  and  then  allow  it  to  trickle  off, 
but  vessels  retaining  it.  You  may  say,  "  Such  a  load  as  God's  wrath  must  crush 
me  " ;  and  in  one  sense  it  will ;  but  in  another  it  will  not ;  you  will  have  powers  of 
endurance  as  great  as  the  saint's  power  of  enjoyment.  Hard  and  impenitent 
hearts  are  "  treasuring  up  wrath  against  the  day  of  the  wrath."  Wrath  shall  come 
upon  them,  as  Paul  says,  "  to  the  uttermost."  3.  And  moreover  the  sinner  is  a 
vessel  "  fitted  for  destruction."  What  by?  Sin.  He  who  wills  not  the  death  of 
the  sinner  is  not  likely  to  fit  him  for  dying.  We  prepare  ourselves  for  destruction  ; 
"  Oh,  Israel,  thou  hast  destroyed  thyself."  II.  God'b  conduct  towards  them.  He 
endures  them  with  much  long-suffering.  How  much  let  your  unnumbered  sins  declare. 
Why  1  any  forbearance  in  your  case  were  much  long-suffering.  All  the  day  long  has 
God  been  stretching  forth  His  hand  to  "  a  disobedient  and  gainsaying  people."  He 
gives  you  mercies,  and  you  take  them  as  your  right :  He  gives  you  privileges,  and 
you  abuse  them  ;  He  gives  you  a  Saviour,  and  you  "  crucify  Him  afresh  "  ;  He  offers 
you  His  Spirit,  and  you  •'  do  despite  to  that  Spirit  of  grace."  Now  is  not  a  moment's 
forbearance,  in  such  a  case,  long-suffering  ?  III.  The  reasons  fob  such  conduct. 
1.  "  To  show  His  wrath."  Yet  how  could  He  show  His  wrath  by  long-suffering 
towards  sinners  ?  It  appears  that  such  a  course  would  hide  and  not  show  it.  Now 
the  word  translated  "  show,"  means  to  point  out  as  with  the  finger;  and  in  this  way 
God  throws  into  the  strongest  relief  His  wrath.  (1)  He  develops  His  own  character 
of  love  ;  He  opens  out  His  plans  of  mercy  for  years.  Well !  some  may  say,  "  This 
tolerance  of  gaUt  speaks  an  indifference  to  it."    You  are  wrong  ;  the  Lord's  long- 


CHAP.  IX.]  ROMANS.  803 

BQffering  is  but  a  bine  sky  on  which  you  see  in  fearful  and  distinct  outline  the 
massive  storm-cloud  as  it  rolls  over  the  sinner's  head  and  then  bursts  ;  it  is  but  the 
Bweet  and  natural  beamings  of  the  Lord's  countenance  which  gives  His  frown  a 
doubly  appalling  blackness ;  it  does  not  lessen  His  anger;  it  does  not  qualify  His 
abhorrence  of  sin ;  it  does  not  subtract  from,  but  it  adds  to,  the  final  display  of  His 
just  indignation.  (2)  And  in  another  sense  it  shows  it,  for  it  clearly  explains  its  real 
character.  It  is  not  the  wrath  of  man,  or  he  had  struck  at  once.  But  the  Lord  is 
"  slow  to  anger  "  ;  He  wills  not  the  death  of  the  sinner  ;  and  when  at  last  His  wrath 
is  seen,  it  is  that  of  a  Judge  who  punishes,  not  "  con  amore  "  but "  ex  officio."  The 
Lord  delights  in  mercy,  not  in  punishment.  Wrath  must  come  at  last,  but  it  comes 
with  a  slow  foot.  Mercy  flies ;  anger  creeps.  Patience  lingers  and  lingers  at  the 
threshold,  keeping  punishment  knocking  at  the  door.  God's  endurance  is  indeed 
the  interpreter  of  His  wrath  ;  it  shows  that  His  final  destruction  of  "  the  vessels  of 
vn-ath  "  is  not  that  of  an  enemy  gloating  over  the  fall  and  death  of  his  foe,  but  it  is 
that  of  a  father  slowly,  solemnly,  and  necessarily  banishing  a  base  and  incon-igilile 
son  for  ever  from  His  presence.  2.  "  To  make  known  His  power."  But  how  can 
power  be  made  known  by  a  refusal  to  exert  that  power  ?  Forbearance  is  often  a 
more  splendid  achievement  than  all  the  labours  of  Hercules  put  together.  "  He 
that  is  slow  to  anger  is  better  than  the  mighty  ;  and  he  that  ruleth  his  spirit  than 
he  that  taketh  a  city."  The  Lord's  endurance  is  one  of  the  most  signal  displays  of 
His  omnipotence.  When  I  gaze  upon  the  scene  around  Calvary,  I  look  upon  a 
more  stupendous  proof  of  power  than  when  I  behold  the  hundred  and  eighty-five 
thousand  corpses  of  Assyrian  warriors,  all  smitten  by  the  angel  of  the  Lord  in  one 
night.  And  when  I  look  around  upon  this  congregation,  and  necessarily  think  of 
many  among  you  as  vessels  of  wrath  endured,  enemies  of  God  treated  with  much 
long-suffering,  I  see  in  each  one  of  you  a  monument  of  the  Lord's  power  as  notable 
as  in  the  case  of  that  weeping,  wailing,  and  lost  soul.  But,  lastly,  God's  long- 
suffering  makes  known  His  power,  by  giving  greater  prominence  at  last  to  His  power 
of  punishing.  It  is  like  the  stillness  before  a  storm :  you  may  hear  a  whisper  ;  the 
rustle  of  a  leaf  is  noticed  ;  and  when  the  first  roll  of  thunder  comes  pealing  through- 
out the  hushed  air,  making  the  ground  shake  and  the  rocks  resound,  its  fearful 
voice  is  the  better  articulated  owing  to  the  previous  stillness  ;  the  thunder,  like  God's 
power,  is  made  known  by  the  calm  which  preceded.  And  what  is  the  conclusion  of 
the  whole  matter  ?  First  of  all,  by  the  light  of  God's  Word,  and  by  the  aid  of 
prayer,  inquire  whether  you  are  vessels  of  wrath  or  vessels  of  mercy  ?  Are  you 
united  to  Christ  by  a  living  faith,  or  alienated  from  God  by  wicked  works  T  And  if 
the  result  of  this  inquiry  be  a  conviction  that  you  are  still  a  vessel  of  wrath,  oh  ! 
tremble  over  the  fact.  That  vessel  becomes  more  capacious  every  day ;  every  mercy 
and  long-suffering  despised  is  an  enlargement.  What  will  it  hold  at  last  if  you  go 
on  and  on  increasing  its  size,  and  making  it  fitter  and  fitter  to  hold  more  of  that 
wrath  which  shall  fill  but  never  burst  it.  Stop  and  pray  for  grace  to  arrest  this 
self-fitting  for  destruction.  Pray  that  the  Lord's  Spirit  may  transform  you  from  a 
vessel  of  wrath  into  a  vessel  of  mercy.  Pray  that  His  much  long-suffering  may  melt 
your  hard  heart,  and  make  you  long  to  have  His  love  instead  of  His  wrath  shed 
abroad  in  your  soul.  Pray  that  the  blood  of  Christ  may,  as  it  were,  rinse  out  the 
polluted  vessel,  wash  away  all  the  wrath,  and  fill  to  the  brim  with  mercy — fill  it 
now ;  and  for  ever  and  ever  fill  it,  as  throughout  eternity  that  vessel  grows  larger.  (D. 
F.  Jarman,  B.A.)  Vessels  of  mercy : — I.  The  vessels.  1.  They  are  made  of  the  same 
lump  as  the  vessels  of  wrath.  Thou  who  hast  hope  of  heaven  look  back  to  the  miry 
clay  whence  thou  wast  drawn  1  There  was  nothing  in  thee  by  nature  better  than  that 
which  is  found  in  any  other  man.  Had  He  left  thee  to  thyself,  thou  hadst  been  as 
base  and  vile  as  others.  If  there  be  a  difference  in  thee,  the  difference  is  of  grace  and 
not  of  nature.  2.  They  are  as  much  as  any  other  portion  of  the  clay,  entirely  in  the 
potter's  hand.  Had  the  potter  willed  to  leave  that  mass  of  clay  alone,  we  should 
have  been  vessels  of  wrath  most  surely.  Hell's  thistles  grow  self-sown,  but  God'a 
•wheat  needs  a  husbandman.  Vessels  of  mercy  fit  themselves  for  destruction,  but 
grace  alone  can  prepare  a  soul  for  glory.  If  the  Lord  had  permitted  the  whole 
human  race  to  perish  He  would  have  been  infinitely  just.  If  He  had  chosen  to 
Bpare  a  few,  that  would  have  been  an  act  of  surprising  mercy.  Inasmuch,  however, 
as  He  hath  taken  so  much  of  the  clayey  mass,  as  to  make  vessels  of  mercy  innumer- 
able as  the  stars  of  heaven,  unto  His  name  be  all  the  glory.  3.  God's  chosen  ones 
are — (1)  "Vessels."  A  vessel  is  not  a  fountain,  not  a  creator  of  the  water,  but  a 
container.  So  the  redeemed  are  not  fountains  by  nature,  out  of  whom  there 
epringeth  ap  anything  that  ia  good.    At  one  time  they  are  fall  of  themselves,  bat 


804  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  TZ, 

grace  empties  them,  and  then  as  empty  vessels  they  are  set  in  the  way  of  God'a 
goodness,  God  fills  them  to  the  brim  with  His  loving-kindness,  and  so  are  they 
proved  to  be  the  vessels  of  His  mercy.  Eemember  all  that  God  asks  of  thee  in 
order  to  thy  salvation  is,  not  to  do  anything,  but  tc  hold  out  thine  empty  hand  and 
take  all  thou  wantest.  The  elect  of  God  are  vessels  only.  They  may  afterwards 
give  out  to  others,  but  they  can  only  give  out  what  God  has  put  in  them.  They 
may  run  over  with  gratitude,  but  it  is  only  because  God  has  filled  them  with  grace; 
they  may  stream  forth  with  holiness,  but  it  is  only  because  the  Lord  keeps  the 
supply  overflowing.  (2)  "  Vessels  of  mercy."  In  order  that  they  may  be  such  it  is 
necessary  that  they  should  be  sinful  and  miserable.  Pity  may  be  given  to  the 
miserable,  but  mercy  must  be  bestowed  upon  the  sinful.  For  a  judge  to  talk  of 
mercy  to  the  innocent  would  be  to  insult  them  ;  and  for  the  philanthropist  to  offer 
pity  to  the  happy  would  be  but  to  mock  them.  The  redeemed  are  not  vessels  of 
merit  but  vessels  of  mercy.  H.  The  pottek  at  his  wokk.  When  a  potter  is  about 
to  make  a  vessel  he  does  not  take  up  the  clay  and  put  it  on  the  wheel  and  then 
leave  it  to  chance.  No — 1.  He  has  his  plan.  So  it  is  with  our  Divine  Potter.  He 
takes  the  poor  sinner  ;  He  puts  him  on  the  wheel,  and  as  that  wheel  revolves  the 
potter  looks  and  sees  in  that  clay  a  future  something  which  does  not  appear  to  the 
vessel.  "  It  does  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be  " ;  but  the  Potter  knows, "  He  will 
present  us  without  spot  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing."  2.  He  makes  the  outlines 
in  the  clay.  Yoa  may  have  seen  the  man  at  work.  Perhaps  at  the  very  first 
moment  you  may  form  a  rough  guess  of  what  the  whole  thing  is  to  be,  though  the 
elaboration  you  cannot  yet  discover.  Certain  it  is,  that  the  moment  a  man  begins 
to  be  separated  for  heaven  by  the  grace  of  God  in  his  soul,  you  may  see  the  outlinea 
of  what  he  is  to  be.  There  is— (1)  Faith  in  Christ.  (2)  Love  to  Christ.  (3)  A 
hope  that  maketh  not  ashamed,  and  a  joy  which  makes  glad  his  countenance.  It 
is  but  the  bare  outhne,  for  the  glory  which  excelleth  is  not  there.  The  vase  is  only 
in  its  embryo,  but  yet  sufiQciently  developed  to  give  a  prophecy  of  its  finished  form. 
S.  The  gradual  completion  of  the  article.  There  will  not  always  be  in  you  the  bare 
outline,  but  as  time  goes  on  there  will  be  some  of  the  beautiful  lines  and  filling-up. 
The  Christian  will  be  getting  more  and  more  like  his  Master.  And  if  we  can  see 
here  on  earth  vessels  getting  ready  for  perfection,  and  if  those  vessels  have  so  much 
beauty  in  them,  what  must  they  be  when  at  last  they  shall  be  finished.  If  this 
world  be  fair,  how  much  fairer  shall  the  new  world  be.  III.  The  potteb's  mabk 
UPON  HIS  VESSELS.  In  all  manufactories  there  is  always  some  trade-mark  which  is 
not  to  be  imitated,  and  without  which  no  vessel  is  the  genuine  production  of  the 
professed  maker.  Tou  may  know  to-day  whether  you  are  a  vessel  of  mercy  by  the 
Master's  mark  upon  you.  1.  That  mark  is — calling.  Has  Divine  grace  called  yoa 
out  of  darkness  into  marvellous  light  ?  for  if  so,  it  is  not  a  matter  of  question  as  to 
whether  you  are  ordained  to  eternal  life.  2.  That  is  a  mark  which  no  man  can  put 
upon  you.  The  earnest  minister  may  cry  aloud  and  spare  not,  but  it  is  in  vain 
calling  to  deaf  ears.  The  Lord  alone  can  so  speak,  that  the  deaf,  nay,  the  dead, 
must  hear.  Hast  thou  ever,  then,  felt  a  calling  which  is  not  of  man,  neither  by 
man  ?  Has  the  voice  of  mercy  so  said,  "  Come  to  Jesus,"  that  thy  heart  has  said, 
"  Thy  face.  Lord,  will  I  seek  "  ?  Has  He  said  to  thee,  "  Mary,"  and  hast  thou  said, 
"Eaboni"?  Has  He  cried  to  thee,  "  Zaccheus  make  haste  and  come  down,"  and 
hast  thou  come  down  and  received  Him  in  thine  house.  Hast  thou  had  that  call, 
for  if  so,  thou  hast  the  mark  of  the  Potter  upon  thee.  3.  As  this  is  a  mark  which 
no  man  can  put  upon  you,  so  it  is  one  which  no  man  can  take  away  from  you. 
(C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Vessels  of  mercy  : — I.  Wht  believees  abe  compabed  to  vessels. 
The  figure  suggests  the  idea  of — 1.  Capacity.  Capable  of  being  filled.  Their  value  is 
in  their  emptiness  (2  Kings  iv.  3-6).  Sense  of  need.  2.  Eeception.  The  first  thing 
needed,  when  emptied,  is  to  receive.  Mercy  (Rom.  ix.  23  ;  1  Tim.  i.  16).  Pardon 
(Acts  xxvi.  18).  The  engrafted  word  (Jas.  i.  21).  Christ  (Col.  ii.  6).  Power  (Acts 
i.  8).  3.  Possession.  To  hold  what  is  put  into  them.  The  Word  of  God  (Col.  iii. 
16 ;  John  xv.  7).  Not  leaky  (Heb.  ii.  1).  II.  The  honottb  confebbed  on  thesk 
VESSELS.  1.  They  bear  God's  Name  (Acts  ix.  15).  Character  (Deot.  xxviii.  10). 
Service  (Dent.  x.  8).  2.  They  contain  God's  treasure  (2  Cor.  iv.  7).  The  vessel — 
frail  and  worthless.  The  treasure — all  powerful  and  priceless.  3.  They  are  used 
in  God's  service  (2  Tim.  ii.  21).  Their  meetness  consists  in  being  set  apart — 
cleansed — filled.  (E.  H.  Hopkint.)  Vessels  of  mercy  : — They  are  such  in  their — L 
FoBMATiON.  II.  Position.  HI.  Condition.  Mercy — 1.  Pervades  their  thoughts.  3.  If 
uttered  in  their  words.  8.  Is  expressed  in  their  actions.  4.  Beams  in  their  looks.  6. 
Glows  in  their  prayers.    lY.  Pboobebsion.    Y.  Pbbsbbt^tiom.    YL  OLOBmoAHOa. 


CHAP,  rx.]  ROMANS.  805 

Application :  1.  If  thou  be  a  vessel  of  mercy,  let  love  and  gratitude  prompt  thee 
to  commend  that  mercy  to  others  which  thou  hast  received.  2.  If  a  vessel  of  wrath, 
let  nothing  divert  you  from  earnestly  seeking  mercy  at  the  Cross  of  Christ. 
{Evangelical  Preacher.)  The  my»tery  of  God  in  human  history  : — I.  His  desion. 
To  display  His— 1.  Glory.  2.  Power.  3.  Mercy.  4.  Wrath.  II.  His  pbocedorb. 
1.  He  endures  patiently  with  sinners.  2.  Allows  them  to  work  out  their  own  ruin. 
3.  Confers  the  riches  of  His  grace  on  them  that  believe.  4.  Prepares  them  for 
glory,  in.  His  eiohteousness.  1.  He  calls  all  men  to  repentance.  2.  Offers 
them  His  mercy  in  Christ.  3.  Both  Jews  and  Gentiles.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Even 
ua  whom  He  hath  called. — The  called  : — I.  Who  abe  called.  1.  Not  the 
righteous.  2.  But  sinners — both  of  the  Jews  and  the  Gentiles.  H.  How  ake  they 
CALLED.  1.  By  the  gospel.  2.  By  the  ministration  of  the  Word.  3.  By  the  Spirit 
of  God.  III.  Unto  what  akb  thbv  called  ?  To  the  enjoyment  of — I.  Pardon.  2. 
HoUness.    3.  Heaven.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  25-33.  As  He  saith  also  In  Osee,  I  will  call  them  My  people,  which  were 
not  My  people. — The  calling  of  the  Gentiles : — I.  Theib  roRiiEB  condition. 
1.  Not  My  people.  2.  Not  beloved.  II.  Theib  gbacious  call — an  act  of — 
1.  Sovereign  will.  2.  Unmerited.  3.  Effected  by  the  gospel.  HI.  Theib  loftt 
PEiviLEQE— called  to  be  the  sons  of  the  living  God — 1.  Through  faith.  2.  In 
Jesus  Christ.  [J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  A  people  who  were  no  people  (text  and  Hos. 
ii.  23) : — 1.  We  accept  the  supreme  authority  of  Holy  Scripture :  every  word  of  it 
is  truth  to  us.  2.  Yet  we  attach  special  weight  to  words  which  are  the  personal 
utterances  of  the  Lord,  as  here.  3.  Still  more  are  we  impressed  when  a  Divine 
message  is  repeated,  as  here.  4.  "  God  saith  "  stUl  what  He  said  long  ago.  Come, 
then,  anxious  souls,  and  hear  the  story  of  God's  grace  to  His  chosen,  in  the  hope 
that  He  may  do  the  like  for  you.  Observe  concerning  the  Lord's  people — 1.  Theib 
original  state.  1.  They  not  only  were  not  "  beloved,"  but  they  were  expressly 
disowned.  Their  claim,  if  they  made  any,  was  negatived.  This  is  the  worst  case 
that  can  be  ;  worse  than  to  be  left  alone.  This  conscience,  providence,  and  God's 
Word  all  appear  to  say  to  men  who  persist  in  sin.  2.  They  had  no  approval  of 
God.  They  were  not  numbered  with  His  people,  and  were  not  "  beloved  "  in  the 
sense  of  complacency.  3.  They  had  not  in  the  highest  sense  obtained  mercy. 
For — (1)  They  were  under  providential  judgment.  (2)  That  judgment  had  not 
become  a  blessing  to  them.  (3)  They  had  not  even  sought  for  mercy.  4.  They 
were  types  of  a  people  who  as  yet  have — (1)  Felt  no  application  of  the  blood  of 
Jesus.  (2)  Known  no  renewing  work  of  the  Spirit.  (3)  Obtained  no  relief  by 
prayer ;  perhaps  have  not  prayed.  (4)  Enjoyed  no  comfort  of  the  promises.  (5) 
Known  no  communion  with  God.  (6)  No  hope  of  heaven  or  preparation  for  it.  It 
is  a  terrible  description,  including  all  the  unsaved.  It  is  concerning  such  that 
the  promise  is  made — "  I  will  call  them  My  people."  Who  these  are  shall  be  seen 
in  due  time  by  their  repentance  and  faith,  which  shall  be  wrought  in  them  by  the 
Spirit  of  God.  There  are  such  people,  and  this  fact  is  our  encouragement  in 
preaching  the  gospel,  for  we  perceive  that  our  labour  will  not  be  in  vain.  II. 
Theib  new  condition.  1.  Mercy  is  promised.  2.  A  Divine  revelation  is  pro- 
nounced. "  I  will  say,  Thou  art  My  people."  This  is — (1)  Done  by  the  Spirit  of 
God  in  the  heart,  (2)  Supported  by  gracious  dealings  in  the  life.  3.  A  hearty 
response  shall  be  given.  "  They  shall  say,  Thou  art  my  God."  The  Spirit  will 
lead  them  to  this  free  acceptance.  (1)  As  a  whole,  they  wOl  say  this  with  one  voice. 
(2)  Each  individual  will  say  it  for  himself  in  the  singular.  "  Thou."  4.  A 
declaration  of  love  shall  be  made.  "  I  will  call  her  beloved,"  &c.  Love  shall  be 
enjoyed.  6.  This  shall  be  perceived  by  others.  "  They  shall  be  called,"  &o.  Their 
likeness  to  God  shall  make  them  to  be  called  the  children  of  God,  even  as  the  peace- 
makers in  Matt.  v.  9.  Thus  every  blessing  shall  be  theirs,  surely,  personally,  ever- 
lastingly. Eeflections :  1.  We  must  give  up  none  as  hopeless ;  even  though  they 
be  marked  out  by  terrible  evidence  to  be  not  the  people  of  God.  2.  None  may  give 
up  themselves  in  despair.  3.  Sovereign  grace  is  the  ultimate  hope  of  the  fallen. 
Let  them  trust  in  a  God  so  freely  gracious,  so  mighty  to  save,  so  determined  to 
bring  in  those  whom  it  seemed  that  even  He  Himself  had  disowned,  whom  every- 
body had  abandoned  as  not  the  people  of  God.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  A  great 
reversal : — Whether  the  original  reference  of  the  prophet  is  to  the  ten  tribes  or  to 
the  Gentile  world  is  immaterial,  since  St.  Paul  employs  the  quotation  to  illustrate 
his  contention  that  it  is  the  purpose  of  Him  who  is  Eternal  Wisdom  and  Un- 
changing Eighteousnessto  transfer  privilege  and  blessing  from  those  who  pretended 
VOL.  II.  20 


80e  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ouap.  ix. 

to  an  ancestral  claim  to  them,  unto  those  who  had  usually  been  regarded  as  aliens 
and  reprobates — even  the  "  sinners  of  the  Gentiles."  If  this  phase  of  Divine  action 
has  to  some  extent  lost  its  interest,  the  principle  it  illustrates  is  ever  important. 

I.   The   HIQHIiY  FAVOURED   MAY  ABUSE  THEIB  ADVANTAGES  AND   LOSE   THEM.      Consider 

the  case  of  the  Hebrews.  1.  Their  special  prerogatives  in  religious  knowledge  and 
means  of  s],  ivitual  improvement.  2.  Their  rebellion  and  apostasy  in  yielding  to 
idolatry.  3.  Their  frequent  chastisements,  especially  in  the  captivity,  and  their 
subsequent  humiliations.  4.  The  repetition  of  their  insensibiUty  and  disobedience 
in  the  rejection  of  the  Christ.  5.  The  final  catastrophe  which  overtook  the  nation 
in  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  the  final  dispersion.  II.  The  less  favoured 
MAT  be,  in  God's  pbovidence,  exalted  to  peivileqe.  Consider  the  case  of  the 
Gentiles.  1.  The  pubUcation  of  the  gospel  to  them  by  Paul  upon  its  rejection  by 
the  Jews.  2.  The  acceptance  by  many  of  the  glad  tidings  intended  for  the 
enhghtenment  and  salvation  of  men.  3.  The  position  taken  by  Gentile  converts  in 
the  diffusion  of  Christianity.  4.  The  subsequent  conversion  of  the  Roman  empire. 
6.  The  course  of  Christian  history  which  may  all  be  traced  to  the  operation  of  this 
wonderful  principle.  Application  :  1.  They  act  foolishly  who  rely  on  their  privi- 
leges. 2.  They  are  wise  who,  grateful  for  their  privileges,  are  concerned  so  to  use 
them  that  they  may  become  the  vehicles  of  the  highest  blessing  to  themselves,  and 
to  those  over  whom  their  influence  may  extend.  3.  They  who  are  cast  down 
because  their  circumstances  seem  unfavourable  should  not  forget  that  those  who 
were  "not  God's  people"  became  "  His  people,"  "His  beloved,"  "the  children  of 
God."  (Prof,  Thomson.)  The  character  and  privileges  of  the  saints : — I.  Whai 
THEY  WERE.  1.  "  Not  My  people."  Who's  then  ?  Men  do  not  occupy  neutral 
territory,  nor  are  they  an  independent  republic.  God's  people  own  and  serve  Him 
as  their  Sovereign  and  Master — dread  alternative  then,  those  who  throw  off  this 
allegiance  become  the  slaves  and  subjects  of  the  prince  of  this  world,  doing  homage 
to  him  in  their  sentiments,  and  serving  Him  in  their  Uves.  And  such  were  some 
of  you.  2.  "Not  beloved."  (1)  Because  unlovely  and  unloving.  "Ahenatedaud 
enemies  in  their  minds  by  wicked  works. "  How  could  God  love  in  the  sense  here 
mentioned  those  who  defied  His  authority,  broke  His  commandments,  and  made  bad 
that  which  He  pronounced  "very  good."  (2)  Therefore — (a)  The  wrath  of  God 
abideth  on  them — rests  as  long  as  the  provoking  cause  remams.  (&)  The  coming 
wrath  menaces  them.  II.  What  they  are.  1.  "  My  people."  (1)  They  belong 
to  God.  He  has  bought  them  ;  He  has  taken  them  to  be  His  peculiar  possession ; 
they  gladly  acquiesce  in  the  Divine  proprietorship.  How  safe  and  happy  this 
makes  them  I  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us?  "  (2)  They  are  God's 
people,  (a)  A  homogeneous  people.  They  are  not  His  as  so  many  scattered  units, 
hut  His  as  a  body,  a  Church.  United  to  Him  they  are  bound  to  one  another  for 
mutual  protection,  edification,  comfort  and  general  usefulness,  (b)  A  royal  people. 
A  kingdom.  The  Church  is  not  a  mere  school  of  thought,  but  a  kmgdom  of  priests 
unto  God.  God's  people  are  royal  in  their  birth,  bearing,  privileges,  duties,  and 
hopes,  (c)  A  people  with  a  destiny.  While  some  peoples  have  fulfilled  their 
destiny,  and  others  have  theirs  trembling  in  the  balance,  and  others  yet  again  all 
uncertain  of  theirs  that  of  the  people  of  God  is  sure.  They  and  only  they  are  to 
inherit  the  earth.  That  destiny  is  being  fulfilled  every  day,  and  will  be  perfectly 
fulfilled  when  "  Jesus  shall  reign  where'er  the  sun,"  &c.  2.  "  Beloved."  (1)  God's 
anger  is  passed  away  from  them.  What  then  ?  What  happens  when  the  clouds 
roll  away  at  noon-day?  So  when  the  clouds  of  our  rebellion  and  sinfulness  pass 
away  from  before  His  countenance  we  bask  in  His  smile.  So — (2)  They  are  the 
objects  of  His  complacency.  He  sees  in  them  that  which  fills  Him  with  delight — 
His  beloved  Son's  purchase  and  image.  Hence — (3)  They  are  the  subjects  of  His 
special  care  (chap.  viii.  39).  And — (4)  They  await  the  highest  manifestations  of 
His  favour.  3.  "Children  of  God."  (1)  They  are  born  from  above,  and  become 
partakers  of  the  Divine  nature.  (2)  They  are  adopted  into  the  Divine  family. 
(3)  They  are  heirs  of  Divine  possessions.     III.  How  they  become  what  they  abe. 

1.  By  sovereign  grace.  There  was  no  merit  in  them,  but  every  demerit.  Had  not  God 
chosen  them  they  had  never  chosen  God.  2.  By  compliance  with  the  conditions 
laid  down  by  sovereign  grace.  Repentance  and  faith.  (/.  fV.  Burn.)  And  it  shall 
come  to  pass,  that  in  the  place  where  it  was  said  unto  them.  Ye  are  not  My  people. — 
Hope  for  the  outcasts : — I.  Their  condition — "  Not  My  people."     1.  Without  God. 

2.  Without  knowledge  of  the  truth.  3.  Without  hope.  II.  Their  happy  change. 
1.  Adopted.  2.  Transformed.  3.  Admitted  to  fellowship  with  God — the  true 
Bource  of  life  and  happiness.     (<7.  Lyth,  D.D.)        The  sovereignty  of  God: — I.  Thh 


CHAP,  n.]  ROMANS.  807 

MISERABLB   CONDITION   OF   "THIS   PEOPLE"   AT   THE  FIEST — "  Not  My  people."      What 

an  awful  position  is  that  of  nations,  families,  or  men  where  they  are  not  God'a 
people.  What  privileges  they  lose  I  What  anticipations  they  are  without  I  How 
empty  their  existence  1  How  fearful  their  prospects  1  It  is  evident  that  nations 
have  been  under  this  denomination.  There  was  not  a  country,  except  the  Jewish, 
in  ancient  times  that  knew  anything  about  the  living  God.  And  at  the  present  day 
there  are  those  nations  which  revel  in  their  ignorance  of  Divine  truth.  Besides 
which,  even  in  Christian  lands,  only  a  small  proportion  truly  serve  the  Lord  God. 
II.  The  blessed  condition  of  '*  this  people  "  at  the  last.  There  is  a  remark- 
able contrast.  They  are  the  same  people.  But  their  condition  is  clianged.  They 
are  to  become  not  only  God's  people,  but  God's  children,  not  only  His  servants,  but 
His  heirs.  The  change  is  a  remarkable  one,  for  it — 1.  Involves  a  change  of 
nature,  disposition,  heart,  character,  and  it  manifests  the  power  of  Divine  grace 
which  can  so  transform  "stones"  into  children.  2.  Alters  the  condition  and 
future  of  those  who  are  its  subjects.  They  look  forward  to  a  period  of  blessed- 
ness in  a  Father's  house.  (J.  J.  S.  Bird,  M.A.)  Though  the  number 
of  .  .  .  Israel  be  a^  the  sand  of  the  sea,  a  remnant  shall  be  saved.  —  The 
axample  of  Israel  a  warning  to  the  world: — I.  Judgment  begins  at  the  house 
OF  God.  II.  Cannot  be  abrebted  by  numbers  or  force.  III.  Is  exceed- 
ingly terrible — only  a  remnant  saved.      IV.  Will  be   complete.      V.   Will 

BE    executed   in    RIGHTEOUSNESS.        VI.    WiLL   BE    SUDDEN   AND    SUMMARY.       {J.    Lytk, 

D.D.)  The  rejection  of  the  Jews  : — I.  Predicted.  II.  National.  III.  Judicial 
— in  righteousness,  IV,  Terribly  fulfilled — only  a  remnant  saved.  V,  Mixed 
WITH  MERCY.  VI.  ALLEVIATED  BY  HOPE — a  Seed  left.  (Ibid.)  The  remnant 
saved : — Our  text  is  a  quotation  from  Isaiah,  and  is  intended  to  show  the  great 
disparity,  in  point  of  number,  between  the  believing  and  the  unbelieving  Israelites. 

1.  Though  multitudes  appear  to  be  the  people  of  God,  yet  those  who  are  so 
IN  REALITY  ABE  COMPARATIVELY  FEW.  1.  The  children  of  Israel  according  to  the 
flesh  were  numerous  "as  the  sand  of  the  sea."  The  promise  of  Gen.  xxii.  17  was 
in  great  measure  fulfilled  in  Moses's  time  (Numb,  xxiii.  9,  10).  When  they  went 
down  into  Egypt  they  were  only  seventy -five  persons  ;  but  when  they  came  out  from 
thence,  all  told,  they  probably  amounted  to  three  or  four  millions,  let  they  are  not 
all  Israel  (1  Cor.  x.  1-11 ;  Heb.  iv,  1, 2, 11),  The  Jews  also  in  our  Lord's  time  were 
very  numerous ;  but  the  greater  part  of  them  perished  in  their  unbelief,  and  were 
at  length  dispersed  and  ruined  as  a  nation  (Matt,  xxiii.  34-39 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  15,  16). 

2.  Those  also  who  profess  religion  have  in  all  ages  been  very  numerous,  yet  the 
number  of  the  truly  pious  is  very  small.  (1)  How  many  who  are  called  Christians 
are  entirely  ignorant  of  the  fundamental  truths  of  Christianity  (Isa.  xxix.  11,  12), 
(2)  How  many  rest  in  outward  privileges  and  performances.  (3)  How  many  selfish 
worldlings  there  are  who  follow  Christ  for  the  loaves  and  fishes.  (4)  What  shall 
we  say  of  those  heartless  and  barren  professors,  who  bring  forth  no  fruit ;  or  if  any, 
it  is  to  themselves,  and  not  to  God,  II,  They  are  called  a  remnant,  "a  remnant 
THAT  SHALL  BE  SAVED,"  With  respcct  to  the  Jews  in  the  apostles'  time,  only  a 
small  part  of  them  were  brought  to  believe  in  Christ ;  and  though  some  thousands 
were  converted  in  one  day,  the  far  greater  number  continued  in  obstinate  unbelief. 
Instances  of  conversion  since  that  time  have  been  very  rare.  We  are  assured,  how- 
ever, that  at  the  appointed  time  the  Kedeemer  will  come,  and  turn  away  ungodliness 
from  Jacob,  And  with  respect  to  the  Gentiles,  there  has  ever  been  and  will  be, 
even  in  times  of  the  grossest  darkness  and  corruption,  a  remnant  according  to  the 
election  of  grace.  1.  There  is  and  shall  be  a  remainder,  a  part  reserved  out  of  the 
whole,  as  the  word  generally  signifies  (Isa.  x.  12 :  Kev.  xii.  17).  This  implies — 
(1)  Paucity  or  fewness.  Christ's  Church  is  a  little  city,  and  few  men  in  it.  A  Uttle 
flock,  under  the  care  of  the  great  and  good  Shepherd  ;  small  when  compared  with 
the  rest  of  the  world,  and  with  what  it  will  be  hereafter  (Rev.  vii.  9).  But  in  any 
one  age,  and  especially  in  any  one  place,  the  Church  of  Christ  is  comparatively 
small ;  and  if  the  chaff  were  separated  from  the  wheat,  it  would  be  smaller  still 
(Matt.  XX.  16).  (2)  Choice  or  separation,  God's  remnant  is  a  chosen  remnant, 
according  to  the  election  of  grace ;  and  this  alone  it  is  that  secures  its  existence 
(Rom,  viii,  29),  2.  This  remnant  shall  be  saved,  not  only  from  the  wrath  to  come, 
but  also  from  innumerable  evils  in  the  present  life  (Isa.  xxvi.  20  ;  Ezek.  ix.  4).  But 
eternal  salvation  is  chiefly  intended,  which  includes — (1)  A  deliverance  from  all 
evil  and  the  fear  of  evil  (Rev.  xxi.  4).  (2)  The  possession  of  all  good;  perfect 
knowledge,  holiness,  peace;  the  true  enjoyment  of  ourselves,  and  the  most  intimate 
communion  with  God.    3.  The  salvation  of  this  remnant  is  certain,  both  from  the 


308  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  tx. 

promises  of  God  and  the  engagements  of  the  Redeemer.  Christ  must  reign.  Con- 
clusion: If  we  have  hitherto  been  indifferent  about  this  salvation,  let  us  take 
warning.  If  we  have  immortal  souls,  surely  their  interest  demands  our  chief 
attention.  Are  we  only  nominal  Christians,  let  us  remember  that  an  empty  name 
will  be  of  no  avail  hereafter  ;  but  if  we  are  Israelites  indeed,  how  delightful  are  our 
prospects  1  (B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  For  He  will  finish  the  work,  and  cut  It  short  in 
righteousness. — Judgment — I.  Is  the  wobk  of  God.  n.  Must  be  severely  exe- 
cuted UPON  siNNEES — when  God  arises  His  procedure  is  rapid,  righteous,  complete. 
(J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Some  points  in  the  Divine  procedure : — Irrespective  of  the  par- 
ticular application  of  this  prophecy  by  Paul  there  are  certain  fundamental  and 
abiding  principles  that  are  worth  attention.  I.  Completeness.  "  As  for  GoJ,  His 
way,  His  method  of  operation,"  is  perfect.  From  the  atom  to  the  sun  there  is  no 
flaw  in  His  handiwork.  It  will  be  found  to  be  the  same  when  we  review  the  course 
of  history  from  the  standpoint  of  eternity.  Things  are  fragmentary  now,  but  the 
very  fragments  are  complete,  and  when  fitted  into  each  other  as  a  compacted  whole 
we  shall  say,  "  Thou  hast  done  all  things  well."  "  He  will  finish  the  work  " — 1. 
Why  ?  Because — (1)  His  calculations  are  infallible  who  sees  the  end  from  the 
beginning.  (2)  His  resources  are  inexhaustible  who  has  all  power  in  heaven  and 
earth.  (3)  His  determinations  must  take  effect  who  "  doth  according  to  His  will  in 
the  armies  of  heaven,"  &o.  Men  fail  because  they  neglect  to  take  all  the  factors 
into  account ;  because  their  resources  are  limited,  or  because  they  are  irre8olut& 
But  there  can  be  no  failure  when  we  take  into  account  God's  omniscience,  power, 
and  sovereign  will.  2.  In  spite  of  what  ?  (1)  The  cunning,  malice,  strergth,  and 
determination  of  His  enemies.  These  are  many,  and  to  any  other  than  God  would 
be  formidable.  (2)  The  ignorance,  feebleness,  apathy,  and  irresoluteness  of  Hi3 
professed  friends.  These  would  lead  any  other  than  God  to  give  up  in  despair. 
3.  What  in  ?     (1)  Creation,  which  when  "  finished  "  was  pronounced  very  good. 

(2)  Providence.  This  is  now  in  progress,  but  when  "  finished  "  no  flaw  will  be 
detected  in  its  procedure.  (3)  Redemption.  Redemption  by  price  was  "  finished" 
on  the  Cross  ;  redemption  by  power  when  heaven's  courts  shall  echo  with  "It  is 
done."  (4)  Judgment.  No  one  shall  be  missing  from  the  great  assize,  and  nothing 
will  mar  the  completeness  of  the  final  awards.  II.  Promptness.  "  Cut  it  short." 
In  creation,  where  God  had  only  to  deal  with  inert  matter,  this  finds  a  perfect 
illustration.  •'  He  said,  and  it  was  done."  In  dealing  with  men  it  is  somewhat 
different,  yet  the  same  in  the  end.  God  is  patient,  is  willing,  and  can  afford  to 
wait ;  but  when  the  hour  of  destiny  is  struck  His  action  is  decisive  and  irrevocable. 
This  is  seen  in — 1.  The  history  of  redemption.  "  When  the  fulness  of  the  time 
was  come,"  when  the  preparatory  work  was  "  finished,"  God  sent  His  Son. 
"  Down  from  the  shining  seats  ...  He  /ed."  What  a  "  short  work,"  too,  the 
redeeming  ministry  was,  and  the  expiating  act.  2.  The  history  of  nations.  The 
method  of  the  Divine  procedure  with  the  antediluvians,  the  Canaanites,  Babylon, 
Israel,  and  the  Roman  empire  was  first  long-suffering,  forbearance  (chap.  ii.  4 ; 
2  Pet.  iii.);  and  then,  when  the  cup  of  their  iniquities  was  full,  how  suddenly  was 
it  emptied  and  destroyed.  8.  The  history  of  men — (1)  In  ordinary  life.  How  long 
matters  often  are  in  coming  to  a  climax,  but  how  sharp  and  short  is  the  decisive 
hour  which  determines  temporal  destiny.  (2)  In  salvation.  The  preparatory 
process  may  be  protracted,  but  the  soul  passes  from  death  into  life  in  a  moment. 

(3)  As  regards  the  future.  We  may  slumber  in  the  dust  for  ages,  but  "in  a 
moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,"  we  shall  awake.  III.  Righteousness.  With- 
out this  the  other  two  methods  might  fill  us  with  terror.  But  it  reassures  us  to 
know  that  in  His  providential  government  of  the  world,  or  in  the  salvation  or  judg- 
ment of  men,  God  always  acts — 1.  From  a  right  motive.  2.  In  a  right  way.  3. 
At  the  right  time.  4.  With  right  results.  (J.  W.  Burn.)  Except  the  Lord  of 
Sahaoth  had  left  us  a  seed,  we  had  been  as  Sodoma. — The  Lord  of  Sahaoth : — 
I.  The  mbanino  of  the  teem.  Lord  of  hosts — of — 1.  The  whole  universe,  with  its 
hosts  of  things  animate  and  inanimate.  2.  The  hosts  of  the  heavens.  3.  The 
hosts  of  hell.  II.  Why  God  is  termed  Lord  of  Sabaoth.  1.  Because  He  is 
supreme  Ruler  of  all.  2.  To  oppose  the  prevailing  worship  of  the  heavenly  bodies. 
3.  To  give  us  some  idea  of  His  almighty  power  and  grandeur.  (M.  Thomson.) 
The  Divine  considerateness  : — Sodom  and  Gomorrha  were  utterly  wiped  out.  No 
human  being  remained  to  perpetuate  the  progeny  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  plain. 
It  might  have  been  so,  and  deservedly,  with  Israel ;  but  it  was  not  so,  and 
graciously.  A  remnant  was,  and  always  has  been  left,  notwithstanding  the  most 
frightful   devastations — a  seed  to  propagate  the   race.      So  in   God's  procedure 


CHAP,  a.]  ROMANS.  809 

generally,  where  meo  and  nations  have  not  sinned  past  recovery.  A  seed  of  some 
sort  is  left,  which,  by  sedulous  cultivation,  may  result  in  future  harvests.  This 
principle  may  be  illustrated  in — I.  The  histobt  of  humanity  at  large.  1.  After 
the  fall  the  human  race  might  have  been  as  Sodoma,  but  in  wrath  God  remembered 
mercy.  He  left  man  not  only  life,  but  a  promise  which  kept  human  hope  from 
utter  extinction ;  some  relics,  too,  of  the  Divine  image  on  which  the  Eedeemer 
could  take  hold  in  fashioning  the  new  man.  2.  After  the  flood  the  family  of  Noah 
was  left,  not  only  to  preserve  the  species,  but  to  hand  on  the  hope.  The  covenant 
with  the  Patriarch  was  but  the  first  of  a  series  which  culminated  in  the  fulfilment 
of  the  covenant  of  redemption.  A  second  time  the  Lord  of  Sabaoth  left  a  seed. 
3.  In  the  fulness  of  time,  when  the  world  was  ripe  for  destruction,  the  gift  of  the 
seed  saved  it.  The  state  of  things  depicted  in  chaps,  i.  and  ii.  could  not  have  gone 
on  much  longer  but  for  the  Divine  interposition,  which  has  at  last  changed  the 
condition  of  the  world.  But  for  this  it  must  have  perished  ;  as  it  is  it  lives,  and 
has  in  it  the  germs  of  a  total  regeneration.  II.  The  history  of  nations.  1.  Some- 
times a  few  good  men  are  left  whose  prayers,  efforts,  and  influence  save  the  nation 
from  decay.  Who  can  tell  but  that  the  preservation  of  the  seven  thousand  who 
had  not  bowed  the  knee  to  Baal  postponed  the  catastrophe  of  the  Hebrew  nation. 
What  a  different  history  France  would  have  had  but  for  the  expulsion  of  the 
Huguenots.  It  is  impossible  to  teU  what  would  have  become  of  England  but  for 
the  godly  few  who  remained  to  perpetuate  the  Puritan  revival  through  the  reigns  of 
Charles  II.  and  James  II.  2.  Sometimes  the  seed  presents  itself  in  the  form  of  a 
gracious  opportunity.  (1)  The  Eeformation  was  such  a  seed.  Contrast  the 
destinies  of  the  nations  which  accepted  it  with  those  that  rejected  it.  (2)  The 
missionary  impulse  of  the  close  of  the  last  century  was  another.  Great  Britain  and 
America  yielded  to  it,  and  the  material  and  moral  prosperity  of  both  has  never 
since  looked  back.  IH.  The  histoby  of  the  individual.  Here  history  repeats 
itself  on  a  small  scale.  1.  Home  reminiscences  have  often  been  as  a  seed  per- 
petuating the  life  and  moral  character  of  a  man.  In  temptation  the  remembrance 
of  prayers  offered  or  words  uttered  have  made  many  a  man  stop  short  on  the  brink 
of  ruin  and  retrace  his  steps  into  a  nobler  and  better  life.  2.  The  Word  read  or 
preached  in  myriads  of  instances  has  been  such  a  seed.  3.  So  has  some  great 
aflfliction.  4.  And  some  special  summons  to  duty.  (J.  W.  Bum.)  God's  judg- 
ments are — I.  Bichly  deserved.  Our  sins  are — 1.  Multiplied.  2.  Aggravated. 
3.  Obstinately  persisted  in — like  Sodom,  &c.  H.  Mercifully  alleviated.  1.  A 
remnant  is  spared.  2.  As  a  seed  of  promise.  3.  Through  sovereign  grace. 
(J.  Lyth,  D.  D.) 

Vers.  80-33.  The  Gentiles  which  followed  not  after  righteousness  have  attained 
to  righteousness  .  .  .  but  Israel  which  followed  after  the  law  of  righteousness 
hath  not  attained. — The  gospel  for  the  Gentiles : — I.  They  needed  it.  1.  Were 
without  righteousness.  2.  Without  the  knowledge  of  it.  3.  Without  the  desire 
for  it.  II.  It  is  adapted  to  their  case.  It  reveals — 1.  The  righteousness  of 
God.  2.  Without  works.  3,  By  faith.  4.  In  Christ.  III.  It  has  been  attained 
BY  MANT.  1.  As  the  free  gift  of  God.  2.  As  the  source  of  unspeakable  happiness. 
3.  May  be  attained  by  all.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  righteousness  of  the  gospel  :-~ 

I.  It  is  designed  for  sinners.  II.  Offered  to  faith.  III.  Impossible  by  works. 
IV.  Because  the  self-righteous  stumble  at  the  Cross.  V.  But  the  sinner  is  saved 
BY  faith.  [lUd.)  The  folly  of  rejecting  the  gospel : — Now  you  may  reject  the  gospel 
if  yon  please,  but  wherein  will  your  condition  be  improved  ?  If  on  a  ship  where 
some  pestilence  is  raging,  the  crew  and  the  passengers  throw  the  doctor  and  the 
medicine  chest  overboard,  and  keep  the  pestilence  with  them,  how  much  better  are 
they  off?  Many  there  are  who  are  bent  on  casting  Christianity  overboard,  on 
getting  rid  of  the  Church  and  priest  and  theology,  and  who  are  bent  on  keeping 
their  sin  and  all  its  multitudinous  train  of  mischief  and  evils.  If  men  bad  become 
pure  of  heart,  then  there  might  be  some  reason  in  dispensing  with  these  superflous 
ministrations ;  but,  thus  far,  scepticism  and  the  rejection  of  Christianity  is  only  to 
make  darkness  darker  and  sickness  more  fatal  and  distress  more  painful.  [H.  IV. 
Beecher.)  Christ  rejected  by  Jews  and  accepted  by  Gentiles  : — I.  The  fact  here 
STATED  was — 1.  Plain  and  undeniable.  2.  A  verification  of  prophecy.  II.  The 
instruction  to  be  gathered  from  it.  1.  That  however  earnest  we  may  be  after 
salvation,  we  shall  never  attain  it  if  we  seek  it  in  a  self-righteous  way.  2.  That 
however  regardless  we  have  been  about  salvation  hitherto,  we  shall  attain  to  it  the 
instant  we  believe  in  Christ.     3.  That  however  calumniated  this  way  of  salvation 


310  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHA*.  ix. 

is,  the  very  caJamnies  that  are  raised  against  it  attest  it$  trath.  (C.  Simeon,  M.A.) 
S.S.:  or  the  tinner  saved: — Paul  had  two  facts  before  him;  the  first  was,  that 
wherever  he  went  preaching  Christ  certain  Gentiles  believed  the  doctrine,  receiving 
at  once  forgiveness  of  sin  and  a  change  of  heart ;  and  although  he  had  usually  com- 
menced his  ministry  in  the  synagogues,  yet  the  Jews  had  almost  everywhere  rejected 
the  Messiah,  and  at  the  same  time  missed  the  righteousness  which  they  conceived 
they  had  obtained.  Note — I.  A  wonder  of  grace.  1.  Certain  men  had  attained 
to  righteousness.  Now  that  alone  is  a  great  wonder,  for  we  are  all  sinners  both  by 
nature  and  by  practice.  2.  The  wonder  grows  when  we  consider  that  these  persons 
had  attained  to  righteousness  under  great  disadvantages  ;  for  they  were  Gentiles, 
considered  by  the  Jews  to  be  offcasts  and  outcasts  given  up  to  idolatry  or  to  atheism 
and  lusts.  There  are  virtues  for  which  the  heathen  had  no  name ;  and  they 
practised  vices  for  which,  thank  God,  you  have  no  name.  They  were  ignorant 
withal  of  the  requirements  of  the  law,  the  light  of  which  alone  shone  upon  the  seed 
of  Israel.  The  strange  thing  is  that  such  originally  were  those  men  who  attained 
unto  righteousness.  Having  no  righteousness  of  their  own,  and  being  convinced 
that  they  needed  one,  they  fled  at  once  to  the  righteousness  which  God  has  prepared 
for  all  who  believe  in  Christ.  Are  there  not  persons  here  whose  condition  is  some- 
what similar?  You  are  not  religious;  but  why  should  not  you  also  attain  to 
righteousness  by  faith  ?  Wonders  of  grace  are  things  which  God  delights  in  ;  why 
should  He  not  work  such  wonders  in  you  ?  3.  The  marvel  of  grace  was  all  the 
greater  because,  "  They  followed  not  after  righteousness."  Some  of  them  were 
thoughtful,  just,  and  generous  towards  men,  but  righteousness  towards  God  was  not 
a  matter  after  which  they  laboured.  Gold  or  glory,  power  or  pleasure,  were  the 
objects  for  which  they  ran.  Yet  when  the  gospel  burst  in  upon  the  midnight 
of  their  souls  they  received  its  light  with  joy.  They  had  not  sought  the  Shepherd, 
but  He  had  sought  them,  and,  laying  them  on  His  shoulders,  He  brought  them  to 
His  fold.  They  were  like  that  Indian  who,  passing  up  the  mountain-side  pursuing 
game,  grasped  a  shrub  to  prevent  his  slipping,  and  as  its  roots  gave  way  they 
uncovered  masses  of  silver.  These  Gentiles  discovered  in  Christ  the  righteousness 
which  they  needed,  but  which  they  had  never  dreamed  of  finding.  4.  These 
unlikely  persons  did  really  believe,  and  so  attain  to  righteousness.  They  did  not 
want  hammering  at  so  long  as  some  of  you  do.  At  the  first  summons  many 
of  them  surrendered.  They  rose  at  a  bound  from  depths  of  sin  to  heights  of 
righteousness.  The  apostle  asks  us,  "What  shall  we  say  then?"  (1)  Herein  is 
seen  the  sovereign  appointment  of  the  Lord.  He  wiU  have  mercy  on  whom  He  will 
have  mercy.  He  will  fulfil  His  promise  to  His  Son,  "Behold,  Thou  shalt  call 
a  nation  that  Thou  knowest  not,"  &c.  (2)  This  also  is  according  to  Divine 
prophecy.  "  I  will  call  them  My  people,  which  were  not  My  people,"  &c.  3.  This 
is,  in  fact,  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God.  That  God  smiles  upon  worthy  people  and 
rewards  their  goodness  is  not  the  gospel.  The  gospel  is  that  God  hath  mercy  upon 
the  guilty  and  undeserving.  II.  A  marvel  of  folly  :  "Israel,"  &c.  These  people 
— l.Were  very  advantageously  placed.  They  were  of  the  chosen  race,  born  within 
the  visible  Church,  and  circumcised,  and  brought  up  to  know  the  law  of  Moses, 
and  yet  they  had  never  attained  to  righteousness.  There  are  those  present  who 
were  nursed  in  the  lap  of  piety ;  they  have  scarcely  been  a  single  Sabbath  absent 
from  the  Lord's  house.  Now  that  they  have  reached  riper  years  they  are  still 
hovering  around  the  gates  of  mercy,  but  they  have  not  entered  upon  the  waj 
of  life.  I  tremble  for  you  who  are  so  good  and  yet  are  not  regenerate.  2.  Were 
earnest  and  zealous  in  following  after  the  law  of  righteousness.  Alas  !  many  who 
have  never  forgotten  a  single  outward  rite  are  nevertheless  quite  dead  as  to  spiritual 
things.  Nobody  could  put  a  finger  upon  an  open  fault  in  you,  and  yet  you,  at  least, 
have  a  shrewd  suspicion  that  all  is  not  right  between  you  and  God.  It  is  concerning 
such  as  you  that  Paul  had  great  heaviness  and  continual  sorrow  of  heart.  You  may 
be  earnestly  seeking  righteousness  in  the  wrong  way,  and  this  is  a  terrible  thing.  3. 
Made  a  mistake  at  the  very  beginning.  Israel  did  not  follow  after  righteousness, 
but  after  "  the  law  of  righteousness."  They  missed  the  spirit  and  followed  after 
the  mere  letter  of  the  law.  They  looked  at  "  Thou  shalt  not  kill,"  "  Thou  shalt  not 
commit  adultery,"  &c.;  but  to  love  God  with  all  their  heart  was  not  thought  of. 
They  thought  of  what  a  man  does,  but  they  forgot  the  importance  of  what  a  man  ii. 
Escape  from  this  error ;  be  not  so  eager  for  the  shell  as  to  lose  the  kernel,  so 
zealous  for  the  form  of  godliness  as  to  deny  the  power  thereof  !  4.  Went  upon  a 
wrong  principle — viz.,  that  of  works.  This  principle  is  wrong  for — (1)  It  exalts  man. 
(2)  It  ignores  the  great  fact  tbat  you  have  sinned  already.    Are  you  going  to  be 


CHAP,  dl]  ROMANS.  811 

saved  by  yonr  works  ?  What  about  the  past  ?  If  I  am  going  to  pay  my  way  for 
the  future,  this  will  not  discharge  my  old  debts.  (3)  It  makes  nothing  of  God.  It 
shuts  out  both  His  justice  and  His  mercy.  (4)  It  is  impossible  to  you.  You 
cannot  perfectly  keep  the  law  of  God,  for  you  are  sold  under  sin.  Who  can  get 
clean  water  from  a  polluted  spring  ?  "  There  is  not  a  just  man  upon  earth  that 
doeth  good  and  sinneth  not."  But  suppose  you  could  outwardly  keep  the  law 
of  God  out  of  a  sense  of  obligation  to  do  so,  yet  the  work  is  not  done  unless  you 
yourself  are  made  right  with  God.  Tour  heart  must  love  God  as  well  as  your 
hands  serve  Him.  5.  Fully  developed  their  unrighteousness  when  they  stumbled 
at  Christ.  Jesus  Christ  came  among  them,  and  became  to  them  a  rock  of  offence. 
They  seemed  to  stand  upright  until  then ;  but  when  He  came  among  them,  down 
they  went  into  actual  rebellion  against  the  Lord  and  His  Anointed.  Yes,  your 
moralists  are  the  great  enemies  of  the  Cross.  They  do  not  want  an  atonement ; 
they  can  hardly  endure  the  doctrine.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Divine  vuthod  of 

salvation: — I.  Its  appakent  contradictions  (vers.  30,  31).  1.  According  to  human 
judgment  those  who  most  earnestly  seek  after  righteousness  should  be  the  first  to 
attain  it.  2.  But  the  Gentiles  who  sought  it  not  have  obtained  the  righteousness 
of  faith.  3.  While  the  Jews  who  followed  after  the  law  of  righteousness  utterly 
failed.  II.  Its  secret  harmonies  (vers.  32,  33).  1.  The  righteousness  is  only  by 
faith.  2.  The  Jews,  who  sought  it  by  works,  took  offence  at  the  Cross.  3.  But  the 
Gentile,  conscious  of  his  demerit,  believed  and  was  saved.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The 
reasonableness  of  God's  working  : — The  question  hitherto  has  been — How  can  God 
set  aside  an  elect  people  ?  And  the  answer — God  chooses  whom  He  will  for  the 
carrying  on  His  saving  work.  But  now  a  reason  is  adduced.  For  although  God 
does  what  He  will,  we  may  be  sure  He  never  wills  what  is  not  right.  And  here  the 
great  reason  for  the  rejection  of  Israel  and  the  choice  of  the  Gentiles  is  this,  that 
the  former  have  failed  to  apprehend  the  nature  of  salvation,  whereas  the  latter  have 
received  the  proffered  gift.  Needs  it  any  arguing  that  they  are  better  fitted  to  work 
for  God  than  the  others?  I.  The  Gentiles.  1.  Their  previous  history,  from  a 
religious  point  of  view,  is  that  they  "  followed  not  after  righteousness,"  i.e.,  they 
sought  not  justification  with  God.  For  a  subjective  righteousness  they  did  seek — 
witness  Socrates,  Plato,  Aristotle,  and  poets  and  historians  who  sought  to  set  forth 
the  principles  of  right.  But  as  to  an  objective  righteousness,  a  being  right  with 
God,  this  was  not  in  all  their  thoughts.  They  regarded  God  as  not  much  troubUng 
Himself  with  human  conduct,  and  sin  itself  as  rather  a  defect  than  guilt.  2.  Yet 
they  '*  attained  to  righteousness."  The  dormant  conscience  awoke  ;  the  weakness 
of  their  ethical  systems  was  revealed ;  the  guilt  of  sin  and  the  love  of  God  was  set 
forth  in  the  Cross,  and  being  stricken  to  the  heart,  and  crying  "  What  must  I  do 
to  be  saved  ?  "  they  were  eager  to  respond  to  the  command  "  Believe  on  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,"  &c. ;  and  accepting  salvation  they  "  attained  to  righteousness." 
II.  Jews.  1.  Their  history  is  stated  by  way  of  contrast.  The  wording  is  most 
accurate.  They  "  followed  a  law  "  which  was  designed  by  God  to  teach  them 
sin,  and  lead  them  to  look  to  His  free  grace  in  Christ  for  pardon ;  but  it 
was  not  this  "  end  of  the  law  "  which  they  followed,  but  the  law  itself.  They 
made  an  end  of  the  means,  and  thus  subverted  its  design  ;  for  instead  of 
learning  from  the  law  their  sin,  they  sought  by  a  supposed  fulfilment  of  its 
precepts  to  make  themselves  just  before  God.  So  instead  of  learning  to  be 
poor  in  spirit  they  learned  an  arrogant  self-complacency ;  instead  of  coming 
to  God's  grace  for  pardon,  they  thanked  God  they  were  not  as  other  men,  and 
stood  self-justified.  2.  What  was  the  result  ?  They  "  did  not  arrive  at  that  law  "  ; 
not  at  its  true  purport,  its  ultimate  design.  So  the  real  law  of  justification,  salva- 
tion through  faith,  was  hidden  from  their  eyes.  To  them  the  Rock  of  Ages  was 
"  a  stone  of  stumbling,"  <fec.  Leam,  then,  from  the  history  of  the  past  that  there 
is  only  shame  for  us  if  we  seek  to  make  ourselves  just  before  God.  By  accepting 
freely  the  grace  that  is  freely  given,  we  shall  "not  be  put  to  shame."  (T.  F. 
Lockyer,  B.A.)  Seeking  after  righteousness : — They  also  gave  to  the  world,  by 
their  ancient  economy,  a  religion  whose  genius  was  the  development  of  mankind. 
In  other  words,  they  gave  to  the  world  an  ethical  rehgion,  as  distinguished  from  a 
worshipping  and  superstitious  religion.  Although  the  Jew  made  manifest  every 
office  of  devotion  and  reverence,  and  although  you  might  select  from  the  Jewish 
writers  saints  as  eminent  in  observances  as  any  others,  yet  the  distinctive 
peculiarity  of  religion  among  the  Israelites  was  that  it  had  a  practical  drift  as 
regards  the  conduct  of  men.  It  did  not  expend  itself  in  lyrics  and  prayers  of 
irorship.    It  descended  to  the  character  of  men,  and  sought  first,  and  above  all 


812  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tx. 

other  faiths  of  that  age,  to  develop  manhood.  For  the  whole  flow  of  that  word 
••  righteousness "  in  the  Old  Testament  is  the  equivalent  of  our  word  "  man- 
hood "  in  modem  phrase,  and  seeking  after  righteousness  was  the  distinctive 
peculiarity  of  the  Hebrew  religion.  It  bred  a  race  of  men  who  put  into  the 
building  of  themselves  the  attributes  of  truth,  of  justice,  of  humanity,  of  morality, 
of  gentleness,  and  of  humility.  It  reared  men  who  had  no  equals,  and  with  whom 
there  was  nothing  that  could  compare  in  their  own  time.  The  Greeks  built  better 
temples  than  the  Hebrews  ;  but  though  the  Hebrew  hand  never  carved  a  marble,  it 
did  better — it  carved  men.  Such  was  the  very  drift  of  their  religion.  And  the 
apostle,  having  received  the  culture  of  Greece  at  the  feet  of  his  great  teacher,  and 
knowing  what  it  meant,  declared  that  his  brethren  sought  after  righteousness,  but 
that  they  did  not  well  understand  what  were  the  instruments  by  which  the  higher 
development  of  manhood  was  to  be  attained.  They  sought  to  develop  righteous- 
ness by  institutions ;  but  Paul  says  that  no  race  of  people  ever  did  or  ever  will, 
merely  by  institutions,  develop  the  highest  form  of  character.  That  must  be  done 
by  following  a  living  example  under  a  heroic  inspiration.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  No 
righteousness  by  the  law : — I.  Man's  need  of  bighteousness.  H.  His  unavatlino 
EFFOBTS  AFTEB  IT.  Example  of  the  Jew.  III.  The  cause  of  his  faildbe.  He  seeks 
it  not  by  faith,  but  by  works,  consequently  stumbles  at  Christ.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The 
unsuccessful  seeker: — I.  What  he  seeks.  II.  How  he  seeks  it.  III.  The  disap- 
pointing BESULT.  IV.  Because  he  stumbles  at  Chbist.  {Ibid.)  Wherefore  ? 
Because  they  sought  it  not  by  faith. — This  verse  plainly  teaches  that  the  reason  why 
one  man  is  unsaved  while  others  are  sailed  is  not  in  God,  but  in  himself.  So  always 
(chap.  X.  3,  xi.  22/;  Matt,  xxiii.  37).  This  by  no  means  contradicts  ver.  18,  but 
looks  at  the  same  subject  from  another  point.  The  reason  why  any  one  criminal 
is  put  to  death  is,  if  justice  be  done,  entirely  in  himself.  But  the  question  whether 
any  criminals  are  to  be  put  to  death  rests  entirely  with  the  legislature.  Those  who 
oppose  capital  punishment  may  leave  out  of  sight  the  conduct  of  the  criminal,  and 
speak  only  of  what  it  is  expedient  for  the  government  to  do.  And  the  moralist  may 
leave  out  of  sight  the  expediency  of  capital  punishment,  and  speak  only  of  the 
consequences  of  sin.  Or  again,  the  motion  of  the  withered  leaves  of  autumn  is  due 
entirely  to  the  wind.  They  do  not  in  the  least  degree  even  co-operate  to  produce 
their  own  motion.  But  the  stones  on  the  wayside  remain  unmoved.  The  difference 
arises,  not  from  a  difference  of  the  influence  brought  to  bear  on  them,  but  simply 
from  this,  that  while  the  leaves  yield  to,  the  stones  resist,  the  influence  which  both 
aUke  experience.  So  with  us.  That  believers  are  justified  at  all  springs  entirely 
from  the  undeserved  mercy  of  God,  and  every  step  towards  salvation  is  entirely 
God's  work  in  them.  But  the  reason  why  when  some  are  justified  others  are  not, 
is  that  they  put  themselves  by  unbelief  outside  the  number  of  those  whom  God  has 
determined  to  save.  When  Paul  repUed  to  the  objection  that  the  gospel  is  incon- 
sistent with  the  justice  of  God,  he  said  that  salvation  is  not  a  manner  of  justice  at 
all,  and  that  God  bestows  it  on  whom  He  will.  But  when  explaining  why  the  Jews 
have  not  obtained  salvation,  he  says  that  the  reason  is  in  themselves.  Observe  also 
that  their  position  is  attributed  not  to  their  sin,  but  to  their  unbelief.  {Prof.  Beet.) 
Behold,  I  lay  in  Slon  a  stumblingstone  and  rock  of  offence.— It  seems  strange  that 
Jesus  the  Saviour  of  men  should  be  set  before  us  in  this  way ;  but  the  great  object 
is  to  cause  us  to  consider  what  our  own  attitude  is  toward  Christ.  Am  I  clinging 
to  Him  as  my  Rock  of  Safety,  or  am  I  being  repelled  from  Him  as  from  a  rock  of 
offence  ?    Jesus  Himself  alluded  to  the  same  idea  (Matt.  xxi.  42-44).    I.  Thebb 

ARE   SOME    THINGS  IN  ChRIST'S   LIFE    AND  WOBK   AT  WHICH  MEN  STUMBLE.       1.    The  Way 

He  came  into  the  world  (Matt.  xii.  54-57).  The  people  stumbled  at  the  difficulty 
of  His  lowly  parentage.  Yet  why?  for  it  was  all  predicted,  and  ought  rather  to 
confirm  faith.  2.  The  surroundings  of  His  daily  life.  It  was  with  the  poor  that 
He  chiefly  mingled.  Here,  however,  is  a  proof  that  Christ  was  Divine.  God  is  no 
respecter  of  persons.  Had  Christ  been  a  mere  man  with  an  ambition  to  found  a 
kingdom.  He  would  have  sought  very  different  society.  The  persons  He  chose 
for  His  ambassadors  were  themselves  a  proof  that  their  religion  was  Divine. 
Without  rank  or  riches  or  worldly  influence,  and  only  by  the  power  of  their  words, 
they  founded  a  religion  which  will  one  day  conquer  the  world.  3.  His  death. 
This  was  to  the  Jews  a  stumbling  block,  and  to  the  Greeks  foolishness.  And  now 
men,  while  willing  to  regard  Christ  as  the  greatest  of  teachers  and  sublimest  of 
examples,  stumble  at  His  atonement.  Yet  it  is  this  only  that  gives  meaning  to 
the  Old  Testament,  and  without  it  Christ's  own  teaching  is  inexplicable,  and  to 
stumble  at  it  is  to  find  a  difficulty  in  the  most  convincing  proof  of  God's  love. 


CHAP,  nt.]  ROMANS.  813 

Instead  of  stumbling  at  it  they  should  find  it  as  Paul  did  "the  power  of  God," 
II.  Thebe  are  some  things  in  themselves  which  cause  men  to  stumble  at  Christ. 
Christ  is  a  stumbling  stone — 1.  To  human  pride.  If  we  are  to  be  saved  by  Jesus 
we  must  as  guilty  sinners  lay  aside  all  trust  in  our  own  merits.  God's  way  of 
salvation  is  too  simple.  If  He  would  bid  us  do  or  suffer  some  great  thing  we  would 
gladly  do  it.  But  is  not  this  again  unreasonable  ?  If  I  will  not  take  God's  way  of 
getting  to  heaven,  how  can  I  expect  to  get  there  by  any  other  ?  2.  To  human  sins. 
Many  would  like  to  get  to  heaven,  but  do  not  like  to  give  up  their  sins.  But  how 
unreasonable.  3.  To  human  selfishness.  "Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon." 
(C.  H.  Irwin,  M.A.)  Christ  a  stumbling  stone  and  rock  of  collision  : — 1.  These 
are  astounding  words.  Who  is  the  speaker  ?  Not  Paul,  for  he  quotes  Isaiah  :  not 
Isaiah,  for  in  both  passages  (chap,  xxviii.  16 ;  viii.  11,  13-16)  he  ascribes  them  to 
Jehovah — one  therefore  who  has  a  right  to  speak  great  and  terrible  things.  What, 
or  rather  who,  is  referred  to  ?  It  is  none  else  than  Jehovah  Jesus.  2.  When  He, 
then,  is  represented  under  the  alternative  figure  of  a  refuge  and  a  stone  of  stumbling 
it  is  implied  that  men  need  a  refuge.  Why  ?  Because  men  are  everywhere 
pursued — pursued  by  penal  evils,  and  that  because  they  are  themselves  pursuing 
after  evils  of  another  kind.  They  love  "  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eye,  or 
the  pride  of  life,"  and  are  keenly  pursuing  them.  One  man  is  making  life  subordi- 
nate to  the  ignoble  pursuit  of  sensual  indulgence,  others  to  fame  and  power, 
myriads  more  to  wealth.  But  the  earth  on  which  men  live  belongs  to  God,  and  He 
has  therefore  a  right  to  rule  in  it  and  over  it,  and  having  this  right  and  being  holy 
His  malediction  is  lying  on  every  form  of  sinful  gratification.  Hence  every  nation 
is  pursued  by  a  host  of  evils,  and  is  time  after  time  driven  to  Divine  means  to 
stave  them  off  for  a  season.  In  vain.  3.  But,  what,  then,  is  to  become  of  each 
mortal  man,  of  nations,  of  the  great  world  ?  Let  us  hear  the  voice  of  God. 
"  Behold  I  lay,"  Ac.  Everyman's  refuge  is  in  Jehovah  Jesus.  "There  is  none 
other  name,"  &c.  Never  till  the  world  takes  refuge  on  or  in  Him  will  it  be  happy, 
and  as  the  world  is  but  a  world  full  of  individuals,  never  will  individual  men  be 
happy  until  they  flee  to  Him.  4.  But  why,  then,  is  He  called  "  a  stumbling  stone 
and  a  rock  of  collision  "  ?  Is  a  stumbhng  stone  a  refuge  ?  Is  a  rock  of  coUision  an 
asylum  ?  Undoubtedly.  It  is  just  according  as  Christ  is  made  use  of  as  that  He 
will  be  found  to  be  one  or  the  other.  That  which  is  our  greatest  boon  when  rightly 
used  may  become  our  utter  ruin  when  abused.  Fire  and  water  are  among  our 
greatest  blessings,  but  if  a  man  will  leap  into  a  blazing  furnace,  or  into  a  seething 
flood  it  will  be  his  destruction.  Look  how  steam  engines  have  multiplied  the 
comforts  of  life  I  But  if  a  man  will  rush  into  machinery  in  full  motion,  all  the 
world's  comforts  will  in  one  moment  cease  to  be  comforts  available  to  him.  The 
same  principle  holds  good  in  the  relation  of  Jehovah  Jesus  to  men.  If  they  use 
Him  aright  He  will  prove  a  sanctuary,  but  if  they  insist  on  going  on  as  if  He  were 
not  in  existence  at  all  then  He  will  be  a  rock  of  dreadful  collision,  and  they 
will  rush  upon  Him  and  be  broken  and  ruined.  The  Divine  idea  is  this:  if 
men  will  have  none  of  Jesus,  and  run  on  in  their  way  without  deiguing  to  look 
BO  low  as  to  see  Jesus,  the  interests  they  pursue  must  come  into  terrific 
collision  with  the  interests  He  pursues;  and  whensoever  the  collision  comes, 
they  and  they  only,  will  suffer.  They  will  be  like  fugitives  from  a  flood,  who 
dash  with  all  their  highest  pressure  of  force  full  on,  upon  a  jagged  rock.  The 
rock  will  remain  uninjured ;  but  they  will  fall  and  be  broken,  and  the  flood  will 
overtake  and  overwhelm  them.  But  there  is  the  sweet  addition  to  the  potentous 
threatening  "  Whosoever  believeth  on  Him,"  the  Rock  of  Ages,  "  shall  not  be 
ashamed,"  His  security  is  certain.  The  rain  may  descend,  &c.,  but  his  hopes 
will  not  fail  because  they  are  founded  upon  the  Rock.  {J.  Morison,  D.D.)  Un- 
believers stumbling ;  believers  r^oicing  : — Our  apostle  was  inspired,  and  yet  he  was 
moved  to  quote  the  Old  Testament,  and  thus  he  sets  us  an  example  of  searching 
the  Scriptures.  The  passage  is  composed  of  two  Scriptures  woven  into  one.  A 
part  is  found  in  Isaiah  xxviii.  16  ;  of  which  the  apostle  gives  us  rather  the  sense 
than  the  words,  and  another  part  in  Isaiah  viii.  14.  In  the  latter  of  these  passages 
we  have  a  striking  proof  of  Christ's  divinity.  Observe  ver,  13,  "  Sanctify  the  Lord 
of  Hosts  Himself  .  ,  .  and  He  shall  be  for  a  sanctuary  "  to  believers  ;  "  but  a  stone 
of  stumbling,"  <ftc.  Isaiah  utters  a  prophecy  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  Paul  quotes  it 
in  reference  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  plainly  intending  us  to  infer  that  Christ  is  no  other 
than  Jehovah.  In  his  quotation  from  the  former  the  apostle  has  omitted  the 
words  "for  a  foundation,"  and  has  inserted  the  words  of  the  other  passage,  "a 
Btumbling  stone,  a  rock  of  offence."    But  the  original  prophecy  serves  to  show  that 


314  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 


God's  real  object  in  laying  Christ  in  Zion  was  not  that  men  might  stumble  at  Him, 
but  that  He  might  be  a  foundation  for  their  hopes  ;  but  the  result  has  been  that  to 
one  set  of  men  Christ  has  become  a  sanctuary  and  a  stone  of  dependence  ;  and  to 
others  a  stumbling  stone.  Note — I.  That  many  stumble  at  Christ.  1.  No 
sooner  did  He  commence  His  ministry  than  men  began  to  stumble  at  Him.  "  Is 
not  this  the  carpenter's  son  ?  "  was  the  question  of  those  who  looked  for  worldly 
pomp.  "  His  father  and  His  mother,  we  know,"  was  the  whispered  objection  of 
His  own  townsmen.  In  His  own  country  the  greatest  of  all  prophets  had  no 
honour.  The  Pharisee  stumbled  at  Him,  because  He  did  not  wash  His  hands 
before  He  ate,  nor  make  broad  His  phylactery.  He  healed  the  sick  upon  the 
Sabbath ;  He  had  no  respect  for  traditions,  and  befriended  publicans  and  sinners. 
The  Saddncee,  on  the  other  hand,  detested  Jesus,  because  His  teaching  had  in  it 
very  much  of  the  supernatural  element.  All  His  life  long,  in  the  high  courts  of 
Herod  or  of  Pilate,  or  in  the  lowest  rank  of  the  mob  of  Judaea,  Christ  was  despised 
and  rejected  of  men.  But  the  Jew  was  not  alone  in  his  offence  at  the  Cross.  The 
polished  Greeks,  when  they  heard  Paul  preach,  they  saw  nothing  flattering  to  their 
philosophy,  and  therefore  they  openly  mocked.  In  every  age  Christ  has  been 
rejected  by  the  very  men  whom  He  came  to  bless.  "  He  came  unto  His  own,  and 
His  own  received  Him  not."  2.  However,  we  have  very  little  to  do  with  these  past 
ages.  There  are  amongst  us  some  who  stumble  at  Christ  because  of — (1)  His 
holiness.  He  is  too  strict  for  them.  Christ  offends  men  because  His  gospel  is 
intolerant  of  sin.  (2)  His  plan  of  salvation  by  faith.  They  say,  ' '  What,  are  our 
good  works  to  go  for  nothing  ? "  This  is  too  humbling.  (3)  The  doctrine  He 
preaches,  more  especially  the  doctrines  of  grace.  If  we  preach  virtue  some  will 
say,  "I  enjoyed  that  discourse";  but  if  we  preach  Christ,  and  begin  to  talk  about 
the  deep  doctrines  which  lie  underneath  the  gospel,  straightway  they  are  angry. 
Ah !  Christ  will  not  shape  His  doctrine  to  suit  thy  carnal  taste.  (4)  His  people 
and  their  inconsistencies.  As  though  it  is  an  excuse  for  going  to  hell  because 
others  do  not  walk  straight  to  heaven.  What  if  David  falls  and  is  restored,  is  this 
any  reason  why  thou  shouldst  fall  and  never  be  restored  ?  The  shipwrecks  of 
others  should  only  make  thee  sail  more  carefully.  (5)  The  real  objection,  how- 
ever, is  Christ  Himself.  You  wiU  not  have  this  man  to  reign  over  you.  K  thou 
hast  no  objection  to  Christ,  accept  Him.  3.  Now  let  me  reason  with  those  who 
have  made  Christ  a  stumbling  stone.  (1)  Hast  thou  ever  considered  how  much  thou 
insultest  God  the  Father  by  rejecting  Christ  ?  Would  it  not  bring  the  blood  into 
thy  face  if  thou  shouldst  give  thine  only  son  to  fight  for  thy  country,  and  they  to 
whom  he  was  given  should  despise  thee  and  thy  gift  ?  (2)  What  a  proof  is  hereol 
thy  sinfulness,  and  how  readilywilt  thou  be  condemned  at  the  last  when  this  sin  is 
written  on  thy  forehead.  There  will  be  no  reason  to  bring  up  any  other  sins 
against  thee.  Thou  hast  objected  to  God's  dear  Son,  why  need  we  any  other 
witness  ?  (8)  How  will  this  increase  thy  misery  ?  Dost  thou  think  God  will  bo 
tender  over  thee  when  thou  hast  not  been  tender  with  His  Son  ?  How  can  you 
escape  if  yon  neglect  so  great  salvation  ?  You  have  broken  down  the  only  bridge 
which  could  have  led  you  into  safety.  11.  Whosoever  believeth  on  Him  bhalIi 
not  be  ashamed.  Notice — 1.  When  those  who  trust  Christ  might  be  ashamed  of 
having  trusted  Him.  (1)  Well  might  they  be  ashamed  if  Christ  should  ever  leave 
them.  (2)  If  Christ  should  fail  them  either  as  to  providence  or  grace  in  times  of 
trial  and  temptation.  (3)  If  Christ's  promises  were  not  fulfilled.  (4)  If  when  he 
came  to  die  he  should  find  no  support.  But  have  ye  ever  heard  of  a  Christian  who 
was  ashamed  in  his  dying  hour  ?  2.  Why  they  might  be  ashamed  if  such  things 
were  to  come.  (1)  We  have  ventured  our  all  upon  Christ.  The  world  says  you 
should  never  put  all  your  eggs  in  one  basket,  and  the  world  is  quite  right  in 
human  things.  But  here  are  we,  we  are  depending  everything  upon  one  man.  If 
He  can  fail  us,  we  are  of  all  men  most  miserable.  (2)  We  have  given  up  this  life 
for  the  next.  The  world's  proverb  is,  "A  bird  in  the  hand  is  worth  two  in  the 
bush,"  but  we,  on  the  other  hand,  have  said  that  the  bird  in  the  hand  is  nothing  at 
all,  that  the  bird  in  the  bush  is  everything.  Now,  if  things  should  turn  out  wrong, 
and  we  have  believed  in  vain,  then  we  shall  be  ashamed  of  our  hope,  but  not  till 
then,  and  that  shall  be  never.  (3)  We  began  boasting  before  we  had  ended  the 
battle.  You  have  boasted  in  Christ ;  you  have  said  that  He  is  a  sure  foundation, 
but  if  He  should  fail  you,  why  then  you  would  be  in  the  position  of  a  man  who 
boasted  before  the  time.  But  we  shall  never  be  ashamed.  (4)  We  have  actually 
rlivided  the  spoil ;  and  oh  1  if  the  battle  should  be  lost,  then  we  should  be  ashamed. 
The  French  once,  before  the  battle  began,  oommenced  selling  the  English  captives. 


CHAP.  ix.J  ROMANS.  816 


but  then,  fortanately,  they  never  (gained  the  victory.     But  you  and  I  have  already 

entered  into  our  rest ;  and  if  it  should  be  a  delusion  we  should  be  ashamed,  but  not 

till  then.     (5)  Men  are  ashamed  when  they  have  made  a  bad  speculation,  because 

they  have  induced  others  to  enter  into  it.    You  and  I  have  been  inducing  others  to 

embark  in  this  great  venture.    Oh,  sweet  assurance,    we    have    not  preached 

cunningly  devised  fables,  and  shall  never  be  ashamed.     3.  Who  are  they  who  shall 

never  be  ashamed  ?     "  Whosoever  believeth  " — that  is,  any  man  who  ever  lived,  or 

ever  shall  live,  who  believes  in  Christ,  shall  never  be  ashamed.    Whether  he  has 

been  a  gross  sinner  or  a  moralist ;  whether  he  be  a  prince  or  a  beggar,  it  matters 

not.    4.  The  text  means  more  than  it  says,  viz.,  the  believers  shall  be  glorified 

and  full  of  honour.     If  thou  trustest  Christ  to-day,  it  will  bring  shame  from  men, 

it  will  ensure  trials,  but  it  will  also  ensure  honour  in  the  sight  of  God's  holy  angels 

and  glory  at  the  last  in  the  sight  of  the  assembled  universe.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

A  common  stumbling  tZocfc:— A  preacher  of  the  gospel  had  gone  down  into  a  coal 

mine  during  the  noon  hour  to  tell  the  miners  of  that  grace  and  truth  which  came 

by  Jesus  Christ.    After  telling  them  the  simple  story  of  God's  love  to  lost  sinners 

— man's  state  and  God's  remedy,  a  full  and  free  salvation  offered,  the  time  came 

for  the  men  to  resume  work,  and  the  preacher  came  back  to  the  shaft  to  ascend  to 

the  world  again.     Meeting  the  foreman,  he  asked  him  what  he  thought  of  God's 

way  of  salvation.     The  man  replied,  "  Oh,  it  is  too  cheap :  I  cannot  believe  in  such 

a  religion  as  that  1  "    Without  an  immediate  answer  to  his  remark,  the  preacher 

asked  :  "  How  do  you  get  out  of  this  place  ?  "    •'  Simply  by  getting  into  the  cage," 

was  the  reply.     "  And  does  it  take  long  to  get  to  the  top  ?  "    "  Oh,  no  ;  only  a  few 

seconds !  "     "  Well,  that  certainly  is  very  easy  and  simple.    But  do  you  not  need 

to  help  raise  yourself  ?  "  said  the  preacher.     "  Of  course  not  I  "  replied  the  miner. 

*'  As  I  have  said,  you  have  nothing  to  do  but  get  into  the  cage."     "But  what  about 

the  people  who  sunk  the  shaft,  and  perfected  all  this  arrangement?    Was  there 

much  labour  or   expense  about  it?"    "Indeed,  yes;  that  was  a  laborious  and 

expensive  work.    The  shaft  is  eighteen  hundred  feet  deep,  and  it  was  sunk  at  great 

cost  to  the  proprietor ;  but  it  is  our  only  way  out,  and  without  it  we  should  never 

be  able  to  get  to  the  surface."     "  Just  so.    And  when  God's  Word  tells  you  that 

whosoever  believeth  on  the  Son  of  God  hath  everlasting  life,  you  at  once  say,  '  Too 

cheap  I ' — '  Too  cheap  I '  forgetting  that  God's  work  to  bring  you  and  others  out  of 

the  pit  of  destruction  and  death  was  accomplished  at  a  vast  cost,  the  price  being  the 

death  of  His  own  Son."    Men  talk  about  the  "  help  of  Christ "  in  their  salvation — 

that  if  they  do  their  part,  Christ  will  do  His,  forgetting,  or  not  seeing,  that  the 

Lord  Jesus  Christ  by  Himself  purged  our  sins,  and  that  our  part  is  but  to  accept 

what  has  been  done.        A  reliable  salvation  : — My  friends,  I  do  not  want  to  make 

an  experiment  about  my  own  soul.    I  cannot  afford  to  do  it.    I  have  but  one  soul 

to  be  saved  or  lost,  and  if  you  can  show  to  me  that  this  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  is 

an  experiment,  I  want  nothing  to  do  with  it.     I  do  not  want  to  go  on  a  trial  trip. 

Some  years  ago,  in  the  Canadas,  there  was  a  bridge  built  over  an  awful  chasm. 

Far  down  beneath  the  waters  rushed  very  violently.    After  this  costly  and  beautiful 

bridge  was  done,  the  day  for  opening  it  came.    Thousands  of  people  assembled. 

Flags  were  flying,  guns  were  sounding.    There  was  a  large  coach  drawn  by  six 

horses,  a  coach  loaded  with  passengers,  and  at  just  the  advertised  moment,  the 

architect  of  the  bridge,  to  show  that  the  structure  was  what  it  pretended  to  be, 

mounted  the  box  of  this  coach,  took  the  reins  in  his  hands,  and  started,  amid  the 

huzzas  of  thousands  and  thousands  of  people.    He  drove  on  until  he  came  to  the 

centre  of  the  bridge,  when  the  timbers  cracked,  and  all  went  down — some  dashed 

against  the  abutments,  some  whelmed  in  the  stream.    Tou  tell  me  that  there  is  a 

bridge  built  for  my  soul  over  sin,  and  death,  and  hell,  and  you  ask  me  to  go  on  it, 

and  ask  me  to  take  all  these  people  on  it.    No  ;  unless  I  am  sure  it  is  a  safe  bridge. 

But  this  is  no  experiment.      We  are  not  the  first  to  go  over  it.      Scores,  and 

hundreds,  and  thousands  have  gone  over  it.     "  A  great  multitude  that  no  man  can 

number,"  have  gone  over  it.    That  bridge  is  buttressed  at  one  end  with  the  "  Rock 

of  Ages,"  and  at  the  other  with  the  throne  of  the  Lord  God  Almighty,  and  I  am  not 

afraid  to  trust  it.    Will  you  go  with  me  to-day?    Venture  on  Him.     Venture 

wholly.    No  experiment  about  it.    If  it  had  been  an  unsafe  salvation,  your  fathers 

and  mothers  would  long  ago  have  found  it  out.    Oh,  what  a  glorious  salvation 

from  sin,  and  death,  and  heU !    Peter  preached  it  at  the  Pentecost,  and  there  went 

tip  the  shout  of  three  thousand  delivered  captives.    Paul  preached  it  in  official 

oiroles,  and  the  knees  of  Felix  knocked  together.    Bobert  McCheyne  preached  it  in 

Dundee  until  all  Scotland  was  in  a  blaze.    Bichard  Baxter  preached  it  untU  Lord 


816  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

Jeffries  trembled  on  the  judicial  bench,  and  James  II.  turned  pale  on  his  iniqnitoaa 
throne,  and  hundreds  of  souls  started  from  Kidderminster  for  the  saints'  everlasting 
test.    It  has  dried  op  rivers  of  tears.    (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 


CHAPTER  X. 

Vebb.  1-13.  Brethren,  my  heart's  desire  and  prayer  to  God  for  Israelis,  that  they 
might  be  saved. — Paul's  desire  and  prayer : — I.  Peedestination  should  bb  no 
BAEBiER  IN  THE  WAT  OF  PBATEB.  The  text  derives  a  special  interest  from  the  very 
position  which  it  occupies.  He  who  saw  the  farthest  into  the  counsels  of  the  Divinity 
above,  saw  nothing  there  which  should  affect  either  the  diligence  or  the  devotions 
of  any  humble  worshipper  below.  However  indelibly  the  ultimate  futurities  of 
man  are  written  in  the  book  of  heaven,  this  should  not  foreclose  but  rather 
stimulate  his  prayers.  Let  us  quit  arduous  speculation,  and  keep  by  obvious  duty 
— taking  our  lesson  from  Paul,  who,  though  just  alighted  from  the  daring  ascents 
among  the  past  ordinations  of  the  Godhead,  forthwith  busies  himself  among  the 
plain  and  the  present  duties  of  the  humble  Christian.  Theology  has  its  altitudes 
shooting  upwardly  to  heaven  till  lost  in  the  cloudy  envelopment  which  surrounds 
them.  Yet  there  is  a  clear  path  which  winds  around  its  basement,  and  by  which 
the  lowliest  of  Zion's  travellers  may  find  an  ascending  way  that  will  land  him  in  a 
place  of  purest  transparency,  where  he  shall  know  even  as  he  is  known.     II.  Unless 

THE  DESIKE  OF  THE  HEART  GOES  BEFORE  IT,  IT  IS  NO  PRAYER  AT  ALL.        The  virtue  doeS 

not  lie  in  the  articulation,  but  altogether  in  the  wish  which  prompts  it.  It  is  thus 
that  we  can  pray  without  ceasing.  In  the  case  of  prayer,  God  has  committed 
Himself  to  the  amplest  promises  of  fulfilment ;  but  He  is  not  pledged  to  the  accom- 
plishment of  any  prayer  where  the  desire  of  the  heart  does  not  originate  the  utter- 
ance of  the  mouth.  The  want  of  such  desire  nullifies  the  prayer ;  and  to  imagine 
otherwise  would  be  to  countenance  the  superstition  that  a  religious  service  consists 
in  mere  ceremonial.  Be  assured  of  this  and  of  every  other  ordinance  of  Christianity, 
that,  unless  impregnated  with  life  and  meaning,  it  is  but  a  body  without  a  soul — a 
mere  service  which  the  hand  can  perform,  but  which  the  heart  with  all  its  high 
functions  has  no  share  in.  It  stands  in  the  same  relation  of  inferiority  to  genuine 
religion  that  the  drudgery  of  an  animal  does  to  the  devotion  of  a  seraph.  In  one 
word,  if  in  the  doing  of  any  ordinance  there  be  not  the  intercourse  of  mind  with 
mind,  there  substantially  is  nothing ;  and  yet  we  fear  it  to  be  just  such  a  nothing- 
ness as  is  yielded  by  many  who  are  regular  in  prayer,  and  who  walk  with  decency 
and  order  through  the  rounds  of  a  sacrament.  III.  The  subject  of  the  praveb. 
•'  That  Israel  might  be  saved."  1.  It  is  not  all  desire  that  will  meet  with  accep- 
tance in  heaven,  for  the  same  Scripture  which  holds  out  the  promise  of  "  ask,  and 
ye  shall  receive,"  has  also  held  out  the  warning  that  many  ask  and  receive  not 
"because  they  ask  amiss."  2.  Still,  Scripture  does  furnish  the  principles  by 
which  to  discriminate  the  warrantable  from  the  unwarrantable,  and  so  clasi-ifies 
the  topics  of  prayer.  It  is  written  "  that  if  we  ask  any  thing  according  to  His  will 
He  heareth  us. "  This  does  not  confer  a  sanction  upon  every  suit,  but  certainly 
npon  a  vast  number  of  them.  Thus,  surely,  every  petition  in  the  Lord's  Prayer 
may  be  preferred  with  utmost  confidence;  and  so  it  is  that  while  we  have  no 
warrant  to  pray  for  this  world's  riches,  we  have  a  perfect  warrant  to  pray  for  daily 
bread.  The  same  principle  of  agreeableness  to  the  will  of  God  sustains  our  faitb, 
when  praying  for  the  salvation  of  ourselves  or  others,  being  expressly  told  that  God 
willeth  such  intercessions  to  be  made  for  all  men,  and  on  this  ground  too  that  He 
willeth  all  men  to  be  saved.  3.  So  near  does  God  bring  salvation  to  us  that  there 
is  no  obstacle  between  our  sincere  wish  for  it  and  our  secure  poscession  of  it.  At 
least  there  is  but  one  stepping-stone  between  them ;  and  that  is  prayer.  And  so 
let  us  ask  till  we  receive — let  us  seek  tiU  we  find — let  us  knock  till  the  door  of 
salvation  is  opened  to  us.  IV.  The  whole  extent  and  import  of  the  term  salva- 
tion. 1.  Its  common  acceptance  is  a  deliverance  from  the  penalty  of  sin.  Whereas, 
additionally  to  this,  it  signifies  deliverance  from  sin  itself,  "  He  shall  be  called 
Jesus,  for  He  shall  save  His  people  from  their  sins  " — save  them  from  a  great  deal 
more  than  the  torment  of  sin's  penalty,  even  from  the  tyranny  of  sin's  power. 
The  first  secures  for  the  sinner  a  change  of  place,  the  second  a  change  of  principle. 


CHAP.  X.]  ROMANS.  817 

This  last  is  the  constituting  essence  of  salvation  ;  the  other  more  the  accompani- 
ment. The  one  takes  place  after  death.  The  other  takes  place  now.  2.  The 
legitimate  desire,  then,  which  should  animate  the  heart  when  the  mouth  utters  a 
prayer  for  salvation  is  for  a  future  happiness,  but  also  for  a  present  holiness.  Man 
might  like  to  be  put  into  a  state  of  happiness  without  holiness ;  but  God  does  not 
like  that  such  a  happiness  shall  be  conferred  upon  him.  It  is  most  assuredly  not 
God's  will  that  heaven  should  be  peopled  with  any  but  those  who  are  of  the  same 
family  likeness  with  Himself.  He  loves  the  happiness  of  His  creatures,  but  He 
loves  their  virtue  more.  And  so  from  Paradise  all  that  offendeth  shall  be  rooted 
out.  Now  remember  that  in  praying  to  be  saved,  you  just  pray  that  such  a  heaven 
may  be  the  place  of  your  settlement  tlirongh  all  eternity.  Else  there  is  no  signifi- 
cancy  in  your  prayer.  It  is  not  enough  that  you  seize  by  faith  on  a  deed  of  justifi- 
cation. You  must  enter  forthwith  on  a  busy  process  of  sanctification.  Now  that  a 
way  for  the  ransomed  of  the  Lord  is  open,  let  us  forget  not  that  it  is  a  way  of 
holiness.  There  is  a  work  of  salvation  going  on  in  heaven,  and  by  which  Jesus 
Christ  is  there  employed  in  preparing  a  place  for  us.  But  there  is  also  a  work  of 
salvation  going  on  in  earth,  and  by  which  Jesus  Christ  through  His  Word  and 
Spirit  is  here  employed  in  preparing  us  for  the  place.  And  our  distinct 
business  is  to  be  ever  practising  and  ever  improving  ourselves  in  the  virtues 
of  this  preparation.  This  desire  for  salvation,  then,  if  rightly  understood,  is 
desire  for  a  present  holiness.  V.  But  this  is  an  inteecessory  prater,  and 
suggests  what  we  ought  to  do  for  the  salvation  of  those  who  are  dear  to  us. 
Paul  had  made  many  a  vain  effort  for  the  salvation  of  his  countrymen ; 
but  after  every  effort  failed,  still  he  had  recourse  to  prayer.  The  desire  of  his 
heart  was  not  extinguished  by  the  disappointment  he  met  with.  1.  This  might 
serve  as  admonition  to  those  whose  hearts  are  set  on  the  salvation  of  relatives  or 
friends — to  the  mother  who  has  watched  and  laboured  for  years  that  the  good  seed 
might  have  fixture  in  the  hearts  of  her  children,  but  does  not  find  that  this 
precious  deposit  has  yet  settled  or  had  occupation  there,  &c.,  Ac.  Let  them  never 
forget,  that  what  has  heretofore  been  impracticable  to  performance  may  not  be 
impracticable  to  prayer.  With  man  it  may  be  impossible  ;  but  with  God  all 
things  are  possible.  That  cause  which  has  so  oft  been  defeated  and  is  now  hopeless 
on  the  field  of  exertion,  may  on  the  field  of  prayer  and  of  faith  be  triumphant. 
God  willeth  intercessions  to  be  made  for  all  men,  and  He  willeth  all  men  to  be 
saved.  These  declarations  place  you  on  firm  and  high  vantage-ground  in  praying 
for  souls.  This,  however,  is  a  matter  on  which  parents  may  delude  themselves. 
They  may  be  glad  to  stand  exonerated  from  the  fatigues  of  performance,  and  take 
refuge  in  the  formalities  of  prayer.  That  prayer  never  can  avail  which  is  not  the 
prayer  of  honesty,  and  it  is  not  the  prayer  of  honesty  if,  even  though  you  pray  to  the 
uttermost  for  the  religion  of  others,  you  do  not  also  perform  to  the  uttermost.  (T. 
Chalmers,  D.D.)  Paul's  desire  and  prayer: — Notice  here — I.  The  apostle.  Observe 
— 1.  That  ministers  are  not  only  to  preach  against  wicked  persons,  and  to  exhort  their 
people  to  obedience,  but  also  to  pray  for  them,  as  Samuel  and  Jeremiah  did  (1  Sam. 
xii.  23  ;  Jer.  xiii.  17).  2.  When  ministers  are  to  speak  of  a  matter  that  may  distaste, 
they  must  vf  isely  prevent  all  offence  by  preparing  the  minds  of  the  hearers,  and  show- 
ing that  they  speak  out  of  love,  and  a  desire  of  their  salvation.  As  physicians  pre- 
pare, and  nurses  sometimes  still  their  little  ones  with  singing,  so  also  must  ministers 
attempt  every  way  which  may  profit  their  people.  3.  Paul  loves  the  Jews,  but  tells 
them  plainly  of  their  faults  ;  so  must  ministers  do.  The  way  to  get  peace  among  men 
is  not  to  reprove,  but  this  is  the  way  to  lose  the  peace  of  God.  4.  The  condition 
of  ministers  is  painful.  The  care  to  save  souls  that  we  may  give  up  a  good  account 
is  infinite.  But  our  joy  is  in  the  conscionable  discharge  of  our  duty,  and  for  such  as 
receive  the  Word  with  reverence  we  praise  God  for  the  joy  wherewith  we  rejoice  on 
their  behalf  (1  Thess.  iii.  9).  II.  The  Christun.  Observe — 1.  Though  the  Jews 
seek  Paul's  hfe,  yet  he  loves  them.  We  are  Pharisees  by  nature,  loving  our  friends 
and  hating  our  foes,  but  we  are  Christians  by  grace,  and  therefore  must  love  our 
enemies  and  pray  for  them,  as  our  Saviour  taught  and  practised.  Every  man  can 
love  his  friend,  but  only  a  godly  man  can  love  his  enemy ;  and  in  this  doing  we  do 
ourselves  more  good  than  our  enemies.  If,  then,  thou  canst  so  rule  thine  affection 
as  to  love  thine  enemy  and  pray  for  him,  it  will  be  a  sweet  comfort  to  thy  breast. 
2.  Paul's  love  was  hearty  ;  so  let  thine  be.  Some,  after  a  controversy  is  ended, 
vill  promise  friendship,  but  vnth  a  reservation  of  revenge.  Judas  kissed  Christ, 
and  betrayed  Him ;  and  Joab  saluted  Amasa  courteously  and  slew  him.  £emember 
thou  to  mean  the  truth  thou  makest  show  of.     3.  Let  thy  love  appear  in  kind 


818  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHAT.  X. 

words  and  salatations,  as  Paal  calls  the  Jews  brethren,  which  condemns  the 
practice  of  some,  who,  if  they  be  offended,  show  that  they  are  possessed  either 
with  a  dumb  devil — they  will  not  speak  ;  or  with  arailing  devil — if  they  speak  it  shall 
be  with  taunts  and  reproaches.  4.  Pray  for  them  thou  lovest.  Thou  shalt  never 
have  any  comfort  of  his  friendship  for  whom  thou  dost  not  pray.  {Elnathan  Parr, 
B.D.)  Paul's  chief  desire  for  his  countrymen : — I.  A  title  which  should  never  bb 
FORGOTTEN.  "  Brethren  "  has  in  its  surroundings  here  more  than  one  lesson  for  us. 
Did  we  remember  this  in  the  world,  what  a  very  much  better  world  it  would  be  ; 
how  much  more  and  truer  interest  we  would  take  in  each  other ;  how  much  less 
selfishness,  how  much  more  sympathy  there  would  be  felt  and  manifested.  And, 
then,  if  we  remembered  it  in  the  church,  how  much  liker  Christ  the  Church  and 
Christians  would  be.  II.  A  marriage  which  none  should  divoece.  "  My  heart's 
desire  and  prayer  to  God."  Let  these  two  always  be  united.  Then  our  heart's 
desires  shall  be  right,  and  our  prayers  real ;  and  then  too  our  heart's  desires  shall 
be  granted,  our  prayers  answered.  View  the  phrase  for  a  moment  from  both  sides. 
First,  as  it  stands.  Whatever  is  our  heart's  desire,  let  us  make  it  our  prayer  to 
God.  For  several  reasons  we  should  do  so;  but  to  mention  only  two,  one  is, 
should  our  heart's  desire  be  wrong,  we  shall  find  ourselves  unable  to  pray  for  it ;  or 
in  the  very  praying  for  it  we  shall  discover  its  wrongness ;  and  so  praying  against  it 
we  shall  get  rid  of  it,  and  rid  too  of  the  distraction  which  it  causes.  And  the 
second  is,  if  on  the  other  hand  our  heart's  desire  be  right,  prayer  to  God  is  the  true 
way  and  the  sure  way  to  secure  it.  Turn  also  the  phrase  about,  and  learn  from  it 
another  lesson.  Our  prayer  to  God  should  be,  and  ever,  our  heart's  desire,  and  we 
do  not  pray  really  until  or  unless  it  is  so.  III.  A  patriotism  above  suspicion  : 
♦'  for  Israel."  Not  all  so-called  patriotism  is  above  suspicion.  Sometimes  it  ia 
simply  partyism,  and  the  interests  of  a  section  are  sought,  not  of  the  nation  as  a 
whole.  Sometimes,  again,  patriotism  is  but  personalism ;  apparently  zealous  for 
the  country  or  for  the  party,  some  are  simply  seeking  through  the  party  to  serve 
and  secure  their  own  individual  interests.  Such  patriotism  bears  the  name,  but  it 
is  not  the  thing.  The  patriotism,  however,  here  exemplified,  is  of  another  stamp. 
It  is  patriotism  of  the  highest  kind  and  type.  IV.  A  need  which  is  the  most 
imperative.  "That  they  might  be  saved."  Paul  tells  us  elsewhere  that  he  felt 
this  need  the  most  imperative  for  himself.  He  says,  "  I  count  all  things  but  loss," 
&c.  (Phil.  iii.  8,  9).  And  so  here  he  speaks  of  it  in  the  same  way  for  others.  And 
is  it  not  so  ?  Is  this  not  the  principal  thing  ?  What  about  health  ;  what  about 
wealth ;  what  about  all  the  gratification  of  earthly  pleasures,  the  carrying  out  of 
earthly  plans,  the  establishing  of  earthly  prospects  in  comparison,  or  rather  in  con- 
trast, \rith  this  ?  We  need  to  be  saved  because  we  have  sinned,  and  because  we  are 
already  under  sentence,  and  because  we  are  utterly  unable  to  remove  or  to  escape 
that  sentence  by  any  merits  or  by  any  efforts  of  our  own.  And  let  us  rejoice  that 
we  may  be  saved.  God  is  not  willing  that  any  should  perish.  V.  An  earnestness 
WHICH  mat  be  an  error.  " Fot  I  bear  them  record,"  he  continues,  "that  they 
have  a  zeal  of  God,  but  not  according  to  knowledge."  This  may  be  said  too  about 
many  of  our  countrymen.  They  put  us  to  shame  by  the  attention  they  pay  to 
religious  rights  and  duties.  It  might  be  said  too  about  some  amongst  ourselves. 
But  let  us  remember  religiousness  is  not  always  religion.  To  be  saved,  we  must 
come  to  a  knowledge  of  the  truth.     Mere  earnestness,  mere  sincerity  will  not  avail. 

VI.  An  ignorance  which  is  quite  inexcusable.  "  For  they  being  ignorant  of 
God's  righteousness."  God's  righteousness  means  here,  God's  method  of  justifica- 
tion ;  and  this  phrase  suggesting  the  question,  what  is  that  method?  may  I  not 
characterise  ignorance  of  it  as  quite  inexcusable.  God  has  so  plainly,  and  fully, 
and  repeatedly  revealed  it  in  His  Word,  *'  that  a  wayfaring  man,  though  a  fool, 
need  not  err  therein."    See  the  succeeding  verses  here  from  the  5th  to  the  10th. 

VII.  An  effort  which  must  always  be  a  failure.  "  And  going  about  to  establish 
their  own  righteousness."  Many  would  like  to  be  saved,  but  they  do  not  like  to  be 
beholden  to  Christ  for  salvation ;  or  at  all  events  they  do  not  like  to  be  beholden  to 
Him  entirely.  And  so  they  "go  about  to  establish  their  own  righteousness," 
wearying  themselves  for  very  vanity.  The  apostles  idea  or  image  here  would  seem 
to  be  as  if  men  in  this  attempt  were  trying  continuously  to  set  up  upon  its  feet  that 
which  had  no  feet  to  stand  upon ;  or  as  if  they  were  persevering  with  stones 
unsquared,  and  mortar  untempered  to  raise  up,  upon  an  insecure  foundation,  a  wall 
which,  ever  as  they  raised  it,  tottered  and  toppled  down  again.  Vin.  An 
OBSTINACY  which  MUST  END  IN  RUIN.  That  is,  it  must  do  so  if  we  continue  it.  If 
we  will  not  submit  ourselves  to  the  righteousness  of  God ;  if,  in  other  words,  wa 


CHAP.  X.]  ROMANS.  819 

will  not  consent  to-be  saved  through  the  redemption  and  righteousness  of  Christ; 
then  we  utterly  shut  the  door  of  hope  against  ourselves,  and  leave  God  no  alterna- 
tive but  to  pronounce  our  doom.  Christ  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  all  that 
come  unto  God  through  Him ;  but  there  is  no  salvation  in  any  other.  IX.  A 
DiEECTioN  WHICH  18  SIMPLE  AND  CERTAIN.  "  For  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for 
righteousness  to  every  one  that  believeth."  In  order  to  salvation  men  can  do 
nothing ;  but  Christ  has  done  all ;  He  "  has  made  an  end  of  sin  and  brought  in 
everlasting  righteousness."  X.  A  sine  qua  non  of  salvation.  Many  forget  or  fail 
to  realise  this :  and  therefore  look  for  salvation  to  mercy  alone.  They  do  not  take 
into  account  that  if  the  siuner  is  to  be  saved,  he  cannot  under  the  administration 
of  God  the  righteous  judge  be  so  by  any  suspension  of  law,  or  setting  aside  of  it  ; 
or  by  any  failure  to  meet  its  just  demands  either  of  precept  or  punishment.  In  the 
salvation  of  the  sinner,  in  other  words,  truth  and  mercy  must  meet  together;  and 
righteousness  and  peace  embrace  each  other :  and  these  can  only  meet,  can  only 
embrace  in  "  Jesus  Christ  and  Him  crucified."  XI.  An  opportunity  abundantly 
OPEN  TO  ALL.  "  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that 
believeth."  XH.  A  means  sublimely  simple  to  a  salvation  sublimely  sure  and 
GLORIOUS.  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that 
believeth.  (Z).  Jamison,  B.A.)  A  eomprehennve  desire : — Paul  had  just  spoken  with 
apparent  severity  of  his  brethren.  To  them  his  doctrines  wei  e  peculiarly  offensive. 
They  must  have  regaxded  him  as  a  traitor.  Still  he  loved  his  kindred,  and  Lis  loving 
heart  gushes  forth  in  this  comprehensive  desire.  It  is — I.  Heartfelt.  "  My  heart's 
desire."  Not  all  who  are  interested  in  the  salvation  of  men  are  influenced  by  this 
desire.  There  may  be — 1.  A  professional  desire.  The  evangelist,  the  teaclier,  the 
pastor  may  have  it.  2.  A  duteous  desire.  Better  this  than  none.  3.  An  intellectual 
desire.  Paul's  intellect  was  active,  but  it  was  sweetly  submissive  to  Christ.  All 
this  gave  him  power.  It  gives  power  to-day.  This  is  true  of  music,  of  art,  of 
poetry.  No  heart,  no  power.  Love  evokes  love.  Heart  responds  to  heart.  II. 
Prayerful.  Genuine  desire  must  voice  itself  in  prayer.  Our  heart's  desire  is  our 
prayer.  The  heart  that  goes  out  to  men  must  go  up  to  God.  Often  the  shortest 
and  surest  way  to  reach  men  is  by  way  of  God's  throne.  III.  Fraternal.  Paul 
was  a  cosmopolitan  man ;  still  he  was  a  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews.  The  Christian 
is  the  true  Jew.  Judaism  is  the  root ;  Christianity  is  the  flower  and  the  fruit. 
Judaism  the  dawn  ;  Christianity  is  the  splendour  of  noon.  When  Paul  became  a 
Christian  he  found  that  for  which  he  always  sought.  Now  he  longs  for  his  brethren. 
So  ought  we.  There  is  a  sanctified  patriotism.  IV.  Evangelical.  "  That  they 
might  be  saved."  This  was  Christlike.  Nothing  short  of  this  could  satisfy  the 
apostle.  Not  enough  for  them  to  be  saved  from  national  disaster  ;  not  enough  from 
earthly  sorrow.  They  must  be  saved  from  sin  here,  and  death  hereafter.  Are  you 
saved  ?  Then  make  Paul's  comprehensive  desire  yours.  (R.  S.  Mac  Arthur,  D.D.) 
Apostolic  patriotism : — St.  Paul  was  not  more  distinguished  as  a  saint  and  an 
apostle  than  as  a  patriot.  His  patriotism  had  a  philosophy  which  discovered  the 
cause  of  his  country's  evils,  and  a  policy  exquisitely  fitted  to  remove  them.  With- 
out ignoring  its  temporal  interests,  his  main  endeavour  was  to  raise  its  benighted 
intellect  to  hght,  and  turn  the  current  of  its  moral  sympathies  into  the  channel  of 
truth  and  holiness.  It  was  not  an  occasional  sentiment  passing  off  in  chanting 
national  airs  or  delivering  florid  speeches  ;  it  was  with  him  a  "  heart's  desire  and 
prayer  to  God."  It  was  consistent  with,  and  a  development  of,  true  philanthropy. 
The  passion  that  inspires  men  to  ruin  other  countries  in  order  to  aggrandise  their 
own,  has  no  affinity  with  the  apostle's  passion.  The  statesmen,  warriors,  kings, 
who  violate  the  eternal  rights  of  man,  bring  a  ruinous  retribution  upon  their 
country.  "  With  what  measure  ye  mete,  it  shall  be  measured  to  you  again."  The 
apostle's  patriotism — I.  Sought  the  highest  good  of  his  country.  What  was 
that  ?  Augmented  wealth,  extended  dominion,  a  higher  state  of  intellectual 
culture?  No,  salvation.  Salvation  is  the  master-theme  of  the  Bible,  the  great 
want  of  the  race.  It  implies  deliverance  from  all  evil,  and  a  right  state  of  soul  in 
which  every  thought  shall  be  true,  every  emotion  felicitous,  every  act  holy,  and 
every  scene  gleaming  with  the  smiles  of  an  approving  God,  This  "  heart's  desire  " 
impUea  a  conviction — 1.  That  his  countrymen  needed  salvation.  Their  physical 
blessings  were  great ;  his  brethren  "  according  to  the  flesh  "  lived  in  a  beautiful 
country.  "  It  was  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey."  His  countrymen  had 
also  the  oracles  of  God,  &0.  Yet  in  spite  of  all  tliis  the  apostle  regarded  his 
brethren  as  lost.  He  looked  into  the  moral  heart  of  his  country,  and  he  found 
that  the  soul  was  dead  and  dark  under  sin  and  condemnation ;  hence  he  sought 


320  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cmr.X 

their  salvation.  Whatever  else  a  country  has,  if  it  has  not  true  religion  it  is  lost. 
This  is  its  great  want.  Give  it  this,  and  every  other  good  will  come.  All  political 
and  social  evils  grow  out  of  moral  causes,  and  godliness  alone  can  remove  these. 
It  is  profitable  therefore  unto  all  things.  2.  A  conviction  that  the  salvation  of  his 
countrymen  requires  the  interposition  of  God.  Why  else  did  he  pray?  The 
apostle  believed  in  the  adaptation  of  the  gospel  to  effect  the  spiritual  restoration 
•)f  mankind.  His  triumphs  he  ever  gratef  ally  ascribed  to  the  agency  of  God,  and 
the  co-operation  of  that  agency  was  the  grand  invocation  of  his  most  earnest 
prayers.  "I  have  planted,  Apollos  watered,"  &c.  "  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power, 
but  by  My  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord."  3.  A  conviction  that  this  interposition  of  God 
is  to  be  obtained  by  intercessory  prayer.  Hence  he  prays  for  others ;  hence  he 
calls  for  others  to  pray  for  him  and  his  apostolic  coadjutors.  I  know  not  how 
prayer  influences  the  Almighty,  nor  why  it  should  ;  but  I  know  that  it  does,  and 
that  it  must  be  employed  if  human  labour  in  His  cause  is  ever  to  be  crowned  with 
efficiency.  The  true  patriot  is  a  man  of  prayer.  Never  did  David  act  more  truly 
a  patriot's  part  than  when  he  breathed  this  prayer  to  heaven  : — "  Let  the  people 
praise  Thee,  0  God,"  &c.  H.  Recognised  the  characteristic  evils  of  his  country. 
1.  Corrupt  zealotism  (ver.  2).  He  himself  had  been  a  Jewish  zealot,  and  was 
therefore  qualified  to  pronounce  a  judgment  upon  it.  Zeal  is  an  important  element 
in  every  undertaking.  There  is  not  much  success  where  it  is  not.  But  when  it  is 
dissociated  from  intelligence  it  is  fraught  with  evils.  Zeal  when  directed  to  wrong 
objects,  when  directed  to  right  objects  in  wrong  proportions,  and  when  it  cannot 
assign  an  intelligent  reason  for  its  action,  is  "  zeal  without  knowledge."  This  zeal 
was  one  of  the  cardinal  evils  amongst  the  Jews.  Knowledge  and  zeal  should  always 
be  associated.  The  former  without  the  latter  is  a  well-equipped  vessel  on  a  placid 
sea  without  the  propulsion  of  steam,  billow,  or  breeze.  The  latter  without  the 
former  is  like  a  bark  on  the  billows  with  propulsion  and  no  rudder.  Both  com- 
bined is  like  a  goodly  ship  trading  from  port  to  port  at  will,  steering  clear  of 
dangers,  coping  gallantly  with  hostile  elements,  and  fulfilling  the  mission  of  its 
masters.  2.  Ignorance  of  Christianity  (ver.  3).  By  "  God's  righteousness,"  here, 
we  understand  not  His  personal  rectitude,  but  that  merciful  method  by  which  He 
makes  corrupt  men  right  (chap.  viii.  2,  3).  Of  this  method  the  Jews  were 
"  ignorant."  Men  perish  for  the  lack  of  this  knowledge.  In  the  case  of  the  Jew 
it  was  not  only  ruinous,  but  culpable.  They  had  the  means  of  knowledge.  3. 
Self-righteousness  (ver.  2).  They  considered  their  own  righteousness  to  consist  in 
their  patriarchal  descent,  and  their  conformity  to  the  letter  of  the  law.  In  this 
they  gloried  as  that  which  distinguished  them  from  all  the  nations  of  the  earth, 
and  which  met  the  righteous  claims  of  Heaven.  The  apostle  himself  once  felt  this 
to  be  his  glory  (Phil.  iii.).  The  Pharisee  in  the  temple  was  a  type  of  the  leading 
religious  sect,  and  his  language  is  expressive  of  its  spirit.  4.  Gospel  rejection. 
"Have  not  submitted,"  &c.  This  is  the  grand  result  of  all  other  evils,  and  the 
crowning  sin  of  all.  They  refused  the  only  Physician  who  could  heal  their  diseases  j 
the  only  Liberator  that  could  break  their  fetters,  the  only  Priest  whose  sacrifice 
could  atone  for  their  guilt.  Such  are  some  of  the  evils  which  Paul  as  a  patriot  dis- 
covered and  deplored  in  his  country.  He  is  no  patriot  who  shuts  his  eyes  to  his 
country's  crimes,  and  pours  into  her  ears  the  most  fulsome  eulogies.  Call  not  this 
patriotism  ;  call  it  moral  obliquity.  HI.  Proposed  the  right  method  for  bavino 
HIS  country  (ver.  4).  Note — 1.  That  righteousness  is  essential  to  the  well-being  of 
the  people.  There  is  no  true  happiness  without  righteousness.  All  the  social, 
political,  religious,  moral  evils  under  which  all  men  and  nations  groan,  spring  from 
the  want  of  righteousness.  As  no  individual  can  be  happy  until  he  has  been 
made  thoroughly  right  in  heart,  so  no  people  or  country  can.  This  rectitude  is  the 
only  element  that  can  work  off  all  the  evils  that  afflict  mankind,  and  give  them  the 
tone  and  blessedness  of  a  vigorous  health.  This  is  the  only  key-note  that  can  set 
the  discordant  elements  of  the  world  to  music.  The  righteousness  which  ia 
essentisJ  to  the  salvation  of  a  soul,  is  that  which  alone  "  ezalteth  a  nation."  3. 
That  the  grand  aim  of  the  moral  law  is  to  promote  righteousness.  Bighteoasness 
is  the  end  of  the  law.  The  law  was  holy,  just,  and  good.  Conformity  to  it  is 
righteousness  in  the  creature  (ver.  5).  3.  That  the  righteousness  which  ihe  law 
aimed  to  promote  is  to  be  obtained  by  faith  in  Christ  (ver.  4).  Christ  did  not 
abolish  law,  on  the  contrary  He  fulfilled  it.  He  wrought  out  its  principles  m 
a  grand  life;  He  demonstrated  its  majesty  in  a  wonderful  death.  Instead  of 
releasing  His  disciples  from  obligation  to  the  law,  He  brings  the  law  to  them 
with  a  mightier  aspect  and  a  greater  force  of  motive.    And  the  apostle's  method 


COit.  X.]  ROMANS.  621 

of  making  the  sinner  righteous  ia  by  faith  in  Chriat.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
PauV$  concern  for  his  people : — Its  object — their  salvation.  II.  The  cause  of  it 
(chap.  ix.  32).  III.  Its  intbnsitt.  1.  Heartfelt.  2.  Inspired  by  the  Spirit  of 
God  and  belief  of  the  troth.  IV.  Its  expression.  1.  Prayer  to  God.  2.  Effort. 
(J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  salvation  of  Israel: — I.  Contemplate  the  histoby  o» 

THE  Hebrew  people,  and  judge  whether  it  deserves  our  respect  and  veneration. 
And  first,  reflect  on  its  antiquity.  Before  the  empire  of  Persia  was  founded, 
when  Greece  was  overrun  by  a  few  barbarian  hordes,  and  Italy  was  an  un- 
peopled  wilderness,  the  race  of  Abraham  was  chosen  by  the  Divine  Founder 
of  all  empires  as  one  distinct  and  peculiar  people ;  incorporated  by  an  inviol- 
able charter  from  the  Supreme  Monarch  of  the  universe,  no  human  power 
has  been  able,  for  four  thousand  years,  to  dissolve  its  union,  or  shake  its 
stability.  But  if  this  nation  is  venerable,  as  the  grand  depository  of  historical 
truth  and  ancient  wisdom,  much  more  is  it  distinguished  and  consecrated  as 
the  chosen  instrument  which  the  Divinity  has  employed  for  the  religions 
instruction  of  mankind,  the  guardians  and  witnesses  of  every  sacred  truth; 
the  hallowed  fount  which,  springing  from  the  sanctuary  of  God,  has  poured  forth 
in  unceasing  and  abundant  profusion  its  healing  and  holy  waters,  to  purify  and 
bless  the  surrounding  regions  of  the  earth.  But,  beyond  all  this,  in  considering 
the  blessings  derived  to  us  and  all  mankind  from  the  Jewish  law  and  the  Jewish 
people,  we  never  should  forget  the  clearness  and  solemnity  with  which  the  great 
rules  of  moral  conduct  are  promulgated  in  the  Decalogue,  and  the  two  grand 
principles  of  love  to  God  and  love  to  our  neighbour  inculcated  by  the  Jewish  law. 
What  a  powerful  claim  to  the  respect,  the  gratitude  of  every  man  who  values  virtue 
or  reveres  religion  must  such  a  people  possess,  if  we  consider  them  merely  as  tbe 
depositaries  and  guardian  of  natural  theology,  the  preservers  and  teachers  of 
moral  principle ;  but  they  are  connected  with  us  by  ties  much  closer, 
they  possess  claims  on  our  regard  far  more  sacred:  they  were  the  in  strum  enta 
employed  by  God  to  prepare  for  the  dominion  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.     II.  Let  us 

NEXT    PROCEED   TO    ENQUIRE     HOW     HAVE     CHRISTIANS     ANSWERED     ALL     THESE     CLAIMS, 

how  have  they  repaid  this  debt  of  gratitude  ?  Alas,  almost  incredible  to  tell,  the'r 
conduct  towards  this  chosen  nation  has  been  one  almost  uninterrupted  series  c3 
cruelty  and  calumny,  of  oppression  and  persecution.  I  do  not  mean  to  say  that 
such  cruelty  and  persecution  were  unprovoked  and  gratuitous ;  but  I  contend  that 
however  great  the  provocation,  such  cruelty  and  persecution  were  unjust  and 
criminal.  Would  we  vindicate  our  holy  religion  from  the  foulest  reproach  that 
ever  stained  its  character,  we  will  atone  for  the  past  oppressions  heaped  upon  this 
ancient  though  unhappy  race,  by  straining  every  nerve  to  promote  from  hencefor- 
ward their  happiness  both  temporal  and  eternal.    HI.  But  what,  you  ask,  are  thb 

SIGNS   OF   THE    TIMES   WHICH   ENCOURAGE    US   NOW   TO   HOPE    FOR  SUCCESS  in  attempting 

the  conversion  of  the  Jews  rather  than  at  any  preceding  period  of  the  world. 
{Dean  Graves.)  How  to  promote  the  salvation  of  others: — I.  Our  hearts  must 
BE  IN  THE  WORK.  It  must  be — 1.  Our  most  earnest  desire.  2.  Our  constant  prayer. 
II.  We  must  CORRECTLY  ESTIMATE  THEIR  STATE  AND  CONDITION.  1.  Appreciating  what 
is  good.  2.  Discriminating  what  is  defective.  IH.  We  must  guard  them  against — 
1.  Error.  2.  Ignorance.  3.  Self-righteousness.  4.  Unbelief.  IV.  We  must 
POINT  them  to  Christ.  1.  The  end  of  the  law.  2.  Through  faith.  (Ibid.) 
Zeal  for  the  salvation  of  sinners : — True  religion  consists  chiefly  in  love  to  God 
and  love  to  man ;  and  wherever  one  of  these  is  found,  there  is  the  other  also. 
Observe — I.  That  serious  Christians  plainly  perceive  the  dangerous  state  of 
UNCONVERTED  SINNERS  ABOUND  THEM.  This  statc  appears  from — 1.  Their  openly 
living  in  sin.  2.  Their  carelessness  about  religion.  3.  Their  formality  in  religion. 
4.  Their  reception  for  truth  of  great  and  fundamental  errors  as  to  the  doctrines 
of  religion.     II.  That  serious  Christians  earnestly  and  sincerely  desire  the 

SALVATION  OF  THEIR   NEIGHBOURS,  WHOM  THEY  THUS  PERCEIVE   TO  BE   IN  A  DANGEROUS 

STATE.  1.  We  tremble  to  think  of  their  future  misery  (chap.  i.  18).  2.  As  we  wish 
to  prevent  their  future  destruction,  so  we  earnestly  desire  that  they  may  share  with 
us  in  the  joys  and  glories  of  the  heavenly  world.  8.  We  wish  them  to  know  and 
enjoy  the  present  pleasures  of  true  religion.  4.  We  wish  the  salvation  of  others 
on  account  of  tbe  glory  of  God,  for  which  we  feel  ourselves  concerned,  and  which 
will  be  promoted  thereby.  5.  Beside  all,  we  have  some  view  to  our  own  peace  and 
happiness.  The  conversion  of  a  soul  is  the  greatest  honour  and  happiness,  next  to 
our  own  salvation,  that  we  can  enjoy.  III.  In  what  manner  this  desif.e  ought  to  bb 
KxrR;-:ssEij.  1.  By  prayer.  2.  By  urging  our  friends  to  come  and  hear  the  gospeL 
VOL.    II.  21 


822  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

3.  By  the  Christian  education  of  children — our  own  and  our  neighbour's.  4.  By 
personal  exhortation.  5.  By  a  holy  Ufe.  {G.  Burder.)  Zeal  for  the  conversion 
of  relatives : — "  I  can't  die  tiU  I  see  my  brother  converted."  So  said  a  very  aged 
Karen  chief  to  Mr.  Mason.  He  had  just  returned  from  a  last  visit  to  this  brother, 
vrho  lived  a  long  day's  journey  from  him.  Too  feeble  to  walk,  he  had  made  the 
journey  on  the  back  of  a  grandson,  a  fine  intelligent  Christian,  whose  willingness 
to  perform  the  laborious  service  was  worthy  of  the  zeal  with  which  the  old  man 
forgot  his  aching  bones  in  the  delight  he  felt  at  having  once  more  exhorted  his 
brother,  and  seen  in  him  some  evidences  of  Divine  grace.  {3Irs.  McLeod  Wylie.) 
Israel  a  lamentable  example  of  the  blindness  of  unbelief : — I.  Their  zeal  fob  the 
LAW.  1.  Pitiable  (ver.  1).  2.  Ignorant  (vers.  2,  3).  3.  Ruinous,  because  misguided 
(ver.  4).  II.  Their  rejection  of  Christ.  1.  Relying  on  their  own  unavailing 
effort  (vers.  5-7).  2.  Refusing  the  word  of  faith  (vers.  8-9).  3.  Denying  the 
salvation  of  the  gospel.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  0?i  zeal : — The  conversion  of  Paul 
did  not  cool  the  ardour  of  his  affection  for  his  countrymen.  Fidelity  impelled 
him  to  expose  their  errors,  but  charity  inclined  him  to  notice  what  was  commend- 
able. They  were  honest  in  their  zeal ;  but  honesty  can  mu.ze  no  atonement  for 
dangerous  errors  or  perverse  abuses.  They  were  ignorant,  but  they  shut  their  eyes 
to  the  light.  I.  The  apostle  here  ascribes  to  the  Jews  an  essential  and  most 
valuable  property  of  the  Christian,  and  more  especially  of  the  ministebial 
chabacteb.  Two  things  seemed  to  be  included  under  it — ardour,  as  opposed  to 
lukewarm  ness,  and  activity,  as  opposed  to  remissness.  It  implies  that  the  object 
which  has  called  it  forth  is  held  in  the  highest  estimation  by  us ;  that  our  hearts, 
engaged  in  the  love  and  animated  by  the  desire  of  it,  prompt  us  to  make  every 
effort  to  secure  its  attainment.  Christian  zeal  consists  in  the  warm  exercise  of 
the  graces  of  the  Spirit,  issuing  in  the  decided  and  growing  production  of  the  fruits 
of  the  Spirit.  It  is  founded  on  an  enhghtened  and  firmly-rooted  conviction  of  the 
truth  of  the  gospel.  In  its  exercise,  zeal,  like  charity,  must  begin  at  home.  The 
man  who  searches  abroad  for  evils  to  remedy,  and  overlooks  those  which  attach  to 
himself,  is  either  a  hypocrite  or  a  fool,  or  both.  But  zeal,  though  it  begins,  does 
not  terminate  with  ourselves.  It  feels  for  the  honour  of  God  and  the  souls  of  men, 
and  endeavours  to  advance  the  one  and  save  the  other.  When  this  principle  is 
wanting,  religion  is  an  empty  name,  a  Ufeless  carcass.  But  though  there  cannot 
be  religion  without  zeal,  there  may  be  zeal  without  religion.  Note  some  of  the 
defects  of  that  zeal  which  the  apostle  condemns.  1.  It  was  exerted  in  contending 
for  matters  of  inferior  moment,  and  neglected  those  which  were  of  supreme  im- 
portance. The  Jews  expended  the  strength  of  their  zeal  on  points  of  form  and 
ceremony,  and  overlooked  the  weightier  matters  of  the  law.  Those  who  are  most 
ignorant  or  indifferent  in  regard  to  what  is  essential  are  invariably  the  most  violent 
and  tenacious  in  regard  to  what  is  circumstantial  Liberality,  it  is  true,  may  be 
carried  to  a  dangerous  extreme,  but  so  may  intolerance,  and  it  is  better  to  err  on 
the  side  of  charity  than  to  incur  the  imputation  of  bigotry.  The  object  of  zeal  is 
to  make  converts,  not  proselytes;  to  briug  accessions  to  the  Church  from  the  world, 
not  to  transfer  the  members  of  one  religious  denomination  to  another.  2.  It  was 
ostentatious  and  presuming.  They  wore  broad  phylacteries,  said  long  prayers  at 
the  corners  of  the  streets,  &c.  Our  Lord  saw  through  the  disguise  of  their  fair 
professions  and  their  hollow  sanctity,  and  inculcated  a  course  of  couduct  quite  the 
reverse  of  theirs.  The  zeal  of  which  He  approves  is  not  that  wbich  assumes  use- 
less singularities,  and  is  ever  urging  its  claims  to  pubhc  admiration.  It  is  not  the 
men  that  make  the  most  noise  that  do  the  greatest  good.  3.  It  was  overbearing 
and  uncharitable.  They  excluded  from  the  pale  of  the  Church  all  who  did  not 
think  as  they  thought  and  do  as  they  did.  It  would  have  been  well  had  the 
intolerant  spirit  of  the  Jews  died  with  themselves ;  but  it  has,  in  this  enlightened 
age,  made  its  appearance  in  a  most  offensive  and  injurious  form.  When  we  see 
individuals  setting  themselves  up  as  the  only  true  Christians  on  earth,  denouncing 
the  rehgion  of  the  whole  world,  except  their  own,  we  know  not  whether  most  to  pity 
or  to  blame.    As  perfection  is  not  attainable  here,  neither  probably  is  uniformity. 

II.    FbOM  THEIB  defects  let  us  NOW  LEARN  WHAT  OUGHT  TO  BE  THE  DISTINGUISHING 

peatubeb  of  zeal  in  us.  To  escape  the  charge  which  the  Jews  deservedly  incurred, 
oars  must  be — 1.  An  enlightened  zeal  formed  and  regulated  by  clear,  comprehensive, 
and  correct  views  of  truth  and  duty.  Without  this,  zeal  is  a  most  dangerous 
principle.  There  are  no  extravagances  which  it  will  not  practise ;  there  are  no 
craeltieg  which  it  will  not  perpetrate.  Before  his  conversion  Paul  had  zeal,  but  it 
was  not  aooording  to  knowledge  (Phil.  iii.).     2.  Pure  zeal ;  a  zeal  influenced  bj 


flBAT.  X.]  ROMANS.  823 

gospel  motives  and  animated  by  Christ's  Spirit.  Jehu  boasted  of  his  zeal  for  the 
Lord ;  but  he  had  no  higher  aim  than  the  gratification  of  his  own  ambition.  In 
requesting  our  Lord  to  command  fire  from  heaven  for  the  destruction  of  the 
Samaritans,  the  disciples  discovered  an  impure  zeal,  and  spake  under  the  influence 
of  national  prejudices  and  irritated  feelings.  3.  Prudent  zeal :  guarding  against 
every  avoidable  occasion  of  offence  to  others;  displaying  all  the  wisdom  of  the 
serpent  in  selecting  means  and  opportunities  of  doing  good,  and  employing  them 
•with  a  tender  regard  to  the  feelings  and  prejudices  of  others.  Destitute  of  this 
property,  zeal  is  calculated  to  do  far  more  harm  than  good,  and  awakens  aversion 
where  it  should  conciliate  love.  4.  Peaceable ;  calm  in  its  exercise  ;  prompting  to 
no  foolish  extravagances ;  disposed  to  put  the  most  favourable  construction  on 
others,  and  discovering  a  sincere  regard  for  their  welfare.  6.  Decided  zeal ;  above 
the  meanness  of  all  temporising  accommodations ;  disregarding  the  fear  of  man ; 
determined  to  pursue  the  path  of  duty ;  prepared  to  stand  by  the  consequences. 
6.  Fruitful;  not  evaporating  in  words,  but  abounding  in  deeds  of  usefulness.  (J. 
Barr,  D.D.)  For  I  bear  them  record  that  they  have  a  zeal  for  God,  but  not  accord- 
ing to  knowledge. — Zealous,  but  wrong  : — We  ought  to  have  an  intense  longing  for 
the  salvation  of  aU  sorts  of  men,  and  especially  for  those  that  treat  us  badly.  We 
shall  see  more  conversions  when  more  people  pray  for  conversions.  We  should 
earnestly  pray  for  the  conversion  of  the  kind  of  people  who  are  here  described : 
«eJ/-righteons  people,  people  that  have  done  no  ill,  but,  on  the  contrary,  have 
laboured  to  do  a  great  deal  of  good.  I.  Why  abe  we  specially  concerned  fob 
THESE  PEOPLE?  Bccause — 1.  They  are  so  zealous.  Tou  see  plenty  of  zeal  where 
politics,  fashion,  art,  &c.,  are  concerned;  but  we  are  not  overdone  with  it  in 
religion.  If  anybody  is  a  little  zealous  above  others,  great  efforts  are  made  to  put 
him  down.  Therefore,  when  we  do  meet  with  zealous  people,  we  take  an  interest  in 
them,  however  mistaken  their  zeal  may  be.  We  like  to  associate  with  people  who 
have  hearts,  not  dry  leather  bottles.  It  does  seem  a  pity  that  any  zeal  should  be 
wasted,  and  that  any  one  full  of  zeal  should  yet  miss  his  way.  And  when  we  meet 
with  any  who  are  zealous  in  a  wrong  cause,  they  become  peculiarly  the  object  of  a 
Christian's  prayers.  2.  They  may  go  so  very  wrong,  and  may  do  so  much  mischief 
to  others.  Those  who  have  no  life  nor  energy  may  easily  ruin  themselves,  but  tbey 
are  not  likely  to  harm  others ;  whereas  a  mistaken  zealot  is  like  a  madman  with  a 
firebrand  in  his  hand.  What  did  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  in  Christ's  day  ?  And 
Saul  afterwards?  Take  heed  that  none  of  you  fall  into  a  persecuting  spirit  through 
your  zeal  for  the  gospel,  like  zealous  mistresses  who  will  not  have  a  servant  in  their 
house  who  does  not  go  to  their  place  of  worship,  and  zealous  landlords  who  turn 
every  Dissenter  out  of  their  cottages.  3.  They  would  be  so  useful.  The  man  that 
is  desperately  earnest  in  a  wrong  way  will  be  just  as  earnest  in  the  right.  See 
what  Paul  himself  was.  4.  It  is  so  difficult  to  convert  them.  It  requires  the  power 
of  God  to  convert  anybody ;  but  there  seems  to  be  a  double  manifestation  of  power 
in  the  conversion  of  a  downright  bigot.  II.  What  these  people  are  according  to 
CUE  TEXT.  They  are — 1.  Ignorant.  "For  they,  being  ignorant  of  God's  righteous- 
ness," &c.  You  may  be  brought  up  under  the  shadow  of  a  church,  you  may  hear  the 
gospel  till  you  know  every  phrase  by  heart,  and  yet  be  ignorant  of  the  righteousness 
of  God,  There  are  many  who  are  ignorant  as  to — (1)  The  natural  righteousness 
of  God's  character,  and  those  who  are  satisfied  with  their  own  holiness  are  ignorant 
of  this,  (2)  The  righteousness  of  the  law.  Tou  may  hear  the  ten  commandments 
read  every  Sabbath-day,  but  you  will  not  know  anything  about  them  by  merely 
hearing  or  reading  them.  There  is  a  depth  of  meaning  in  those  commandments 
of  which  self-righteous  persons  are  ignorant.  For  instance,  "  Thou  shalt  not 
commit  adultery  " — even  a  lascivious  look  breaks  that.  Let  me  stretch  out  the  line 
before  you  for  a  moment.  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart," 
&c.  Who  among  us  has  ever  done  that  ?  (3)  God's  righteous  requirements,  viz., 
not  only  that  thou  shouldst  do,  but  that  thou  shouldst  think,  love,  and  be  that 
which  is  right.  He  desires  truth  in  the  inward  parts.  (4)  That  God  has  prepared 
a  better  righteousness  for  us  in  Christ.  III.  What  they  do.  They  go  about  to 
establish  their  own  righteousness,  but,  like  a  statue  badly  constructed,  it  tumbles 
down.  They  use  all  manner  of  schemes  to  set  up  their  righteousness  upon  its 
legs,  but  to  no  purpose.  Or  they  have  bad  foundations  for  a  house,  and  bad 
materials,  and  bad  mortar,  and  they  are  by  no  means  good  workmen;  and  when 
they  have  built  up  enough  wall  to  shelter  themselves,  it  tumbles  down.  They  are 
determined,  somehow  or  other,  to  build  up  a  righteousness  of  their  own,  which  is 
worthless  when  it  is  buUt.     At  first  the  man  says,  "  I  shall  be  saved,  for  I  have 


824  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

kept  the  law.  What  lack  I  yet  ?  "  Now,  a  very  small  hole  will  let  enough  light 
into  the  man's  heart  to  force  him  to  see  that  this  pretence  will  not  answer.  No  one 
of  ns  has  kept  the  law.  When  driven  from  this  fooUsh  hope,  the  man  readily  seta 
up  another.  If  he  cannot  work,  then  he  tries  to  feel.  Or  else  he  cries,  "I  must 
join  a  bit  of  religion  to  my  pure  morals.  I  will  pray  regularly,  &c.  And  when  I 
have  done  all  this,  do  you  not  think  it  will  come  pretty  square?"  If  a  man's 
conscience  is  awake,  it  will  not  come  square,  and  the  man  wUl  say,  "  No,  I  do  not 
feel  righteous  after  all !  There  is  something  amiss."  Conscience  begins  to  call 
out,  "  It  will  not  do."  Peradventure  the  man  is  taken  ill.  He  thinks  that  he  ia 
going  to  die,  and  he  must  keep  his  wretched  pretence  afloat  somehow  ;  and  so  ha 
cries,  if  he  is  rich,  "  I  will  endow  an  almshouse."  According  to  the  church  to 
which  he  belongs,  the  zealous  person  becomes  a  determined  partisan  of  his  sect. 
Now  suppose  that  you  were  to  get  to  heaven  in  your  way,  what  would  happen  ? 
You  will  throw  up  your  cap,  and  say,  "  I  have  managed  it  after  all  1 "  You  will 
glorify  yourself,  and  depend  upon  it  sinners  saved  by  grace  will  glorify  Christ. 
But  our  Lord  is  not  going  to  have  any  discord  in  heaven ;  you  shall  all  sing  Hia 
praises  there,  or  never  sing  at  all.  IV.  What  they  will  not  do.  "  They  have 
not  submitted  themselves  unto  the  righteousness  of  God."  1.  Why,  there  are  soma 
that  have  not  submitted  even  to  hear  it !  Our  law  does  not  judge  any  man  before 
it  hears  him,  but  these  people  both  judge  and  condemn  the  gospel  without  giving 
A  an  hour's  attention.  Are  they  not  good  enough  of  themselves  ?  What  can  you 
tell  them  better  than  they  know  already  ?  But  it  is  always  a  pity  not  to  know  even 
that  which  we  most  despise.  It  will  not  hurt  you  to  know.  And  yet  there  is  such 
prejudice  in  the  mind  of  some  that  they  refuse  to  acquaint  themselves  with  the 
verities  which  God  has  revealed.  "  Sinners  saved  by  grace  1  It  is  all  very  well  for 
the  commonalty ;  but  we  were  always  so  good."  Very  well,  then ;  there  is  a  heaven 
for  the  commonalty,  and  it  is  highly  probable  that  you  ladies  and  gentlemen  are 
too  good  to  go  there.  Where  will  you  go  ?  There  is  but  one  way  to  heaven,  and 
that  way  is  closed  against  the  proud.  2.  And  then  there  are  others  who,  when 
they  hear  it,  will  not  admit  that  they  need  it.  •'  What,  sir  1  Must  I  go  down  on 
my  knees  and  plead  guilty  ?  "  Yes,  you  must,  or  else  you  will  never  be  saved. 
"  They  that  are  whole  have  no  need  of  a  physician,  but  they  that  are  sick."  3. 
There  are  others  who  will  not  submit  to  the  spirit  of  it,  to  the  influence  of  it,  for 
the  spirit  of  free  grace  is  this  :  if  God  saves  me  for  nothing,  then  I  belong  to  Him 
for  ever  and  ever.  If  He  forgives  me  every  sin  simply  because  I  believe  in 
Jesus,  then  I  will  hate  every  sin,  and  flee  from  it.  I  will  love  Him  with  all 
my  heart,  and  for  the  love  I  bear  Him  I  will  lead  a  holy  hfe.  The  virtue  I 
aimed  at  before,  in  my  own  strength,  I  will  now  ask  for  from  His  Holy  Spirit. 
Many  will  not  submit  to  that ;  yet  they  can  never  be  saved  from  sin  unless  they 
yield  themselves  as  the  blood-bought  servants  of  Christ.  {G.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Blind  zeal : — As  all  zeal  without  discretion  is  as  an  offering  without  eyes, 
which  was  by  God  forbidden,  so  likewise  all  blind  zeal  is  a  blind  offering, 
which  God  will  never  accept.  (Cawdray.)  Zeal,  cautious: — As  Minerva  is  said 
to  have  put  a  golden  bridle  upon  Pegasus,  that  he  should  not  fly  too  fast,  so  our 
Christian  discretion  must  put  a  golden  bridle  upon  our  Pegasus — that  is,  our  zeal 
— lest,  if  it  be  unbridled,  it  make  us  run  out  of  course.  {Ibid.)  Zeal,  false  : — 
There  is  a  sort  of  men  who  seem  to  be  mighty  zealous  for  religion  ;  but  their  heart 
breaks  out  wholly  in  this  way :  that  they  fill  the  place  wherever  they  are  with  noise  aud 
clamour,  with  dust  and  smoke.  Nothing  can  be  said  in  their  presence,  but  instantly 
a  controversy  is  started,  scarcely  anything  is  orthodox  enough  for  them  ;  for  they 
spin  so  fine  a  thread,  and  have  such  a  cobweb  divinity,  that  the  least  brush  against 
it  is  not  to  be  endured,  and  yet  withal  they  are  as  positive  and  decretal  in  their 
assertions  that  the  Pope  himself  is  nobody  to  them.  One  would  think  they  were 
privy  counsellors  of  heaven.  They  define  with  so  great  confidence  what  will  and 
what  will  not  please  God.  (J.  Goodman.)  Zeal,  misguided : — I.  Its  features.  It 
errs  in — 1.  Its  motives.  2.  Its  objects.  3.  Its  means.  II.  Its  pbevalence.  1. 
In  the  world.  2.  In  the  Church.  III.  Its  mischievous  tendency.  It  breeds — 1. 
Delusion.  2.  Disorder.  3.  Hatred.  4.  Contention.  5.  Euin,  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
The  proper  regulation  of  religious  zeal : — I.  It  must  be  founded  upon  knowledge 

OF  AND  JUDGMENT  about  THE  MATTER  WHICH  ENGAGES  OUR  ZEAL.      It  is  for  Wanting  this 

that  the  apostle  blames  the  zeal  of  the  Jews.  The  necessity  of  such  knowledge  is, 
one  would  think,  obvious,  for  without  it  our  zeal  may,  for  aught  we  kn'W',  be 
engaged  in  a  bad  cause.  The  man  who,  designing  to  make  great  haste,  either  sh'its 
his  eyes  or  takes  no  notice  whither  he  goes,  is  the  likeliest  to  stumble  or  go  a^ilray. 


CHAF.  X  ]  ROMANS.  825 

Let  as,  then,  take  care  that,  before  we  suffer  our  zeal  to  grow  warm  for  or  against 
any  cause,  we  get  as  thorough  a  knowledge  of  it  as  we  can.  And  yet,  as  history 
shows,  most  of  those  in  every  age  who  have  shown  the  warmest  zeal  have  discovered 
the  greatest  ignorance,  and  where  there  has  been  most  knowledge  there  has  been 
most  candour  and  forbearance  towards  those  of  a  different  opinion.    IL  Must  bb 

FBEE    FROU   PBEJUDICE    AND   PABTY    VI£WS,   and   PROCEED    FBOIit    A    SINCERE    BEOABD   TO 

TRUTH  AND  VIRTUE.  It  is  not  my  being  thoroughly  acquainted  with  a  cause  that 
will  justify  my  zeal  in  it.  If,  knowing  a  thing  to  be  false  or  unlawful,  I  strenuously 
insist  upon  it,  all  the  zeal  I  express  is  faulty.  Nay,  though  it  be  truth  or  duty,  if 
my  zeal  is  occasioned  by  prejudice,  it  is  not  of  the  right  kind.  We  ought  therefore 
to  be  very  careful  about  the  springs  from  whence  our  zeal  flows.  When  the  heart 
glows  with  an  ardent  love  to  God  and  for  the  cause  of  truth  and  virtue,  there  will 
be  very  little  danger  of  running  into  extremes.    III.  Must  always  be  proportioned 

TO  THE   MOMENT  OF  THE  THINGS  ABOUT  WHICH  IT  IS  ENGAGED.      The  mOre  important 

the  thing  is,  the  warmer  may  our  zeal  be,  either  for  or  against  it ;  and  the  less 
important,  the  less  need  is  there  of  being  much  concerned  about  it.  That  zeal  is 
very  irregular  which  is  equally  warm  upon  every  occasion.  It  would  be  endless  to 
tell  you  what  trifling  matters  have  given  occasion  to  the  most  furious  contests  iu 
the  Christian  Church.  1.  Since  it  is  of  vastly  greater  importance  to  as  that  we 
should  judge  right  in  matters  of  doctrine  and  behave  well  in  matters  of  practice 
ourselves  than  that  others  should  do  so,  it  follows  that  our  zeal  ought  principally 
to  be  employed  this  way.  Nothing  is  more  common  than  to  see  the  same  men  who 
express  a  great  concern  that  others  should  think  and  act  just  as  they  do  in  matters 
of  religion  shamelessly  careless  in  their  own  searches  after  truth,  and  in  regulating 
their  own  conduct.  2.  Plain  duties  are  of  more  importance  than  matters  of 
speculation,  and  therefore  regular  zeal  will  be  more  solicitous  about  the  former 
than  about  the  latter.  And  yet,  as  if  mankind  were  resolved  to  act  preposterously, 
they  have  generally  acted  from  the  opposite  principle.  Observe  how  contentedly 
some  of  the  warmest  zealots  can  let  a  drunkard,  a  swearer,  &c.,  live  peaceably 
by  them,  and  yet  take  fire  immediately  on  the  utterance  of  a  contrary  opinion. 
But  will  not  God  much  more  easily  pardon  an  error  in  judgment  than  badness  of 
life?  3.  Peace  and  love  among  Christians  are  of  unspeakably  more  importance 
than  any  particular  form  of  church  government  or  any  religious  rites,  and  therefore 
if  our  zeal  be  regular,  we  shall  be  much  less  concerned  about  imposing  these  than 
for  the  securing  peace  and  love  among  all  good  men.  IV.  Must  be  attended  with 
Christian  charity,  and  must  never  break  in  upon  those  rights  which  all  claim  in 
common  as  men  and  Christians.  Nothing  has  been  more  common  than  for  intem- 
perate zeal  to  do  the  greatest  mischiefs  and  commit  the  most  bare-faced  violations 
of  justice  and  humanity,  under  the  pretence  of  charity  to  men's  souls  and  a  hearty 
concern  for  their  everlasting  welfare.  V.  Must  be  under  the  conduct  op  Christian 
PRUDENCE,  by  which  I  mean  the  prudence  that  will  direct  to  the  choice,  and  in  the  use 
of  the  properest  methods,  and  the  fittest  seasons  for  promoting  these  good  ends.  (W. 
Smyth.)  Zeal,  true  : — True  zeal  is  a  loving  thing,  and  makes  us  always  active  to 
edification,  and  not  to  destruction.  If  we  keep  the  fire  of  zeal  within  the  chimney, 
in  its  own  proper  place,  it  never  doth  any  hurt ;  it  only  warmeth,  quickeneth,  and 
enliveneth  us ;  but  if  once  we  let  it  break  out,  and  catch  hold  of  the  thatch  of  our 
flesh,  and  kindle  our  corrupt  nature,  and  set  the  house  of  our  body  on  fire,  it  is  no 
longer  zeal — heavenly  fire,  but  a  most  destructive  and  devouring  thing.  True  zeal 
is  an  ignis  lambens,  a  soft  and  gentle  flame  that  will  not  scorch  our  hand  ;  it  is  no 
predatory  or  voracious  thing ;  but  carnal  and  fleshly  zeal  is  like  the  spirit  of  gun- 
powder set  on  fire,  that  tears  and  blows  up  all  that  stands  before  it.  True  zeal  is  like 
the  vital  heat  in  us  that  we  live  upon,  which  we  never  feel  to  be  angry  or  troublesome ; 
but  though  it  gently  feed  upon  the  radical  oil  within  us,  that  sweet  balsam  of  our 
natural  moisture,  yet  it  lives  lovingly  with  it,  and  maintains  that  by  which  it  is 
fed ;  but  that  other  furious  and  distempered  zeal  is  nothing  else  but  a  fever  in 
the  soul.  To  conclude,  we  may  learn  what  kind  of  zeal  it  is  that  we  should  use 
in  promoting  the  gospel  by  an  emblem  of  God's  own — those  fiery  tongues  that 
on  the  Day  of  Pentecost  sat  upon  the  apostles;  which  sure,  were  harmless 
flames,  for  we  cannot  read  that  they  did  any  hurt,  or  that  they  did  so  much  as 
singe  a  hair  of  their  heads.  {R.  Cudworth.)  Zeal,  true  and  false : — Andrew 
Melville,  Professor  of  Divinity  at  St.  Andrews  in  the  reign  of  James  VI.,  was  a  very 
bold  and  zealous  man  for  the  cause  of  God  and  truth.  When  some  of  his  more 
moderate  brethren  blamed  him  for  being  too  hot  and  fiery,  he  was  wont  to  reply; 
"If  you  see  my  fire  go  downwards,  set  your  foot  upon  it  and  put  it  out ;  but  if  i* 


326  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [amr.  j, 

go  upwards,  let  it  return  to  its  own  place."  (J.  Whitecross.)  Zeal  without  know- 
ledge : — I.   ThB    qualifications    and    PROPEBTIES    of   a  zeal  ♦'  ACCOBDING  TO   KNOW- 

liEDGE."  1.  That  our  zeal  be  right  in  respect  of  its  object;  viz.,  that  those  things 
which  we  are  zealous  for  be  certainly  good,  and  that  those  things  which  we  are 
zealous  against  be  certainly  evil.  Otherwise  it  is  not  a  heavenly  fire,  but  like  the 
fire  of  hell,  heat  without  light.  2.  That  the  measure  and  degree  of  it  must  be  pro- 
portioned to  the  good  or  evil  of  things  about  which  it  is  conversant.  That  is  an 
ignorant  zeal  which  is  conversant  about  lesser  things  and  unconcerned  for  greater. 
A  zealous  strictness  about  external  rites  and  matters  of  difference,  where  there  is  a 
visible  neglect  of  the  substantial  duties  of  religion,  is  either  a  gross  ignorance  of 
the  true  nature  of  religion,  or  a  fulsome  hypocrisy.  3.  That  we  pursue  it  by  lawful 
means  and  ways.  No  zeal  for  God  and  His  glory,  for  His  true  Church  and  religion, 
will  justify  the  doing  of  that  which  is  morally  evil.     H.  By  what  mabks  we  mat 

KNOW    THE  ZEAL   WHICH   IS    "  NOT   ACCOBDING   TO    KNOWLEDGE."        It  is  a   Zeal  without 

knowledge — 1.  That  is  mistaken  in  the  proper  object  of  it ;  that  calls  good  evil, 
and  evil  good.  2.  That  is  manifestly  disproportioned  to  the  good  or  evil  of  things 
about  which  it  is  conversant,  when  there  is  in  men  a  greater  and  fiercer  zeal  for  the 
externals  of  religion  than  for  the  vital  and  essential  parts  of  it.  3.  That  is  prose- 
cuted by  unlawful  and  unwarrantable  means,  that,  e.g.,  which  warrants  the  doing 
of  evil  that  good  may  come.  4.  That  is  uncharitable,  and  is  an  enemy  to  peace 
and  order,  and  thinks  itself  sufiiciently  warranted  to  break  the  peace  of  the  Church 
upon  every  scruple.  5.  That  is  furious  and  cruel,  that  which  St.  James  tells  us 
tends  to  "  confusion  and  every  evil  work."  6.  A  zeal  for  ignorance.  This  is  a  zeal 
peculiar  to  the  Church  of  Rome,  which  forbids  people  the  use  of  the  Holy  Scriptures 
in  a  known  tongue.  III.  Inferences.  1.  If  it  be  so  necessary  that  our  zeal  be 
directed  by  knowledge,  this  shows  us  how  dangerous  a  thing  zeal  is  in  the  weak 
and  ignorant.  Zeal  is  an  edge-tool,  which  children  in  understanding  should  not 
meddle  withal.  Zeal  is  only  fit  for  wise  men,  but  it  is  chiefly  in  fashion  among 
fools.  Nay,  it  is  dangerous  in  the  hands  of  wise  men,  and  to  be  kept  in  with  a 
strict  rein,  otherwise  it  will  transport  them  to  the  doing  of  undue  and  irregular 
things.  Moses  in  a  fit  of  zeal  let  fall  the  two  tables  of  the  law  which  he  had  but 
just  received  from  God.  A  true  emblem  of  an  ungovemed  zeal,  in  the  transport 
whereof  even  good  men  are  apt  to  forget  the  laws  of  God.  2.  From  hence  we 
plainly  see  that  men  may  do  the  worst  and  wickedest  things  out  of  a  zeal  for  God 
and  rehgion.  Thus  it  was  among  the  Jews,  who  engrossed  salvation  to  themselves, 
and  denied  the  possibility  of  it  to  all  the  world  besides,  and  the  Church  of  Eome 
have  taken  copy  by  them.  3.  Zeal  for  God  and  religion  does  not  alter  the  nature 
of  actions  done  upon  that  account.  Persecution  and  murder  are  damnable  sins, 
and  no  zeal  for  God  and  religion  can  excuse  them.  {Abp.  Tillotson.)  Zeal 
and  knowledge : — There  are  two  sorts  of  men  hereby  to  be  apprehended.  1.  They 
which  have  a  defect  not  of  zeal,  but  of  knowledge  for  the  ground  of  their  zeal.  2. 
They  which  have  a  defect  not  of  knowledge,  but  of  zeal  answerable  to  their  know- 
ledge. Of  the  first  of  these  may  be  verified  the  proverb,  they  set  the  cart  before 
the  horse.  The  second  may  be  likened  to  Pharaoh's  chariots  when  the  wheels  were 
off,  so  slowly  do  they  express  their  knowledge  in  their  lives.  The  first  are  like  a 
little  ship  without  ballast  and  freight,  but  with  a  great  many  sails,  which  is  soon 
either  dashed  against  the  rocks  or  toppled  over.  The  second  are  like  a  goodly 
great  ship,  well  ballasted  and  richly  freighted,  but  without  any  sails,  which 
tjuickly  falleth  into  the  hands  of  pirates  because  it  can  make  no  speed,  sooner 
making  a  prey  for  them  than  a  good  voyage  for  the  merchant.  Separate  zeal  and 
knowledge,  and  they  become  both  unprofitable,  but  wisely  join  them,  and  they 
perfect  a  Christian,  being  Uke  a  precious  diamond  in  a  ring  of  gold.  Let  not  zeal 
outrun  knowledge  or  lag  behind  it,  but  let  it  ad  equale  agree,  going  hand  in  hand 
with  the  same.  For  even  as  in  an  instrument  of  music  there  is  a  proportion  of 
sound  wherein  is  the  harmony,  beyond  which,  if  any  string  be  strained,  it  makes  a 
squeaking  noise ;  and  if  it  be  not  strained  enough  it  yields  a  clagging.  dull,  and 
unpleasant  sound.  So  is  it  in  our  zeal  if  it  be  either  more  or  less  than  our  know- 
ledge. (ElnatJmn  Parr,  B.D.)  Zeal,  uncontrolled  : — Phaeton  took  upon  him 
to  drive  the  chariot  of  the  sun ;  but  through  his  rashness  set  the  world  in 
combustion.  What  a  horse  is  without  a  rider,  or  a  ship  without  a  rudder, 
such  is  zeal  without  knowledge.  St.  Bernard  hits  full  on  this  point. 
Discretion  without  zeal  is  slow-paced,  and  zeal  without  discretion  is  strong- 
headed;  let,  therefore,  zeal  spur  on  discretion,  and  discretion  rein  in  zeaL 
{J.   Spencer.)        Zeal  without    knowledge : — The  first  good  use   of  some   texts 


OHA».  X.]  ROMANS.  827 

is,  to  endeavour  to  prevent  a  bad  one.  I.  The  text  has  often  been  cited  for 
THE  PURPOSE  OF  DEPRECiATiNO  GENUINE  ZEAL.  Think  on  how  many  excellent 
designs  it  has  been  quoted  against,  and  what  would  have  become  of  home  and 
foreign  missionary  enterprise  had  certain  interpretations  ruled  I  With  men  of 
indififerent,  frozen  temperament,  the  text  has  been  a  great  favourite.  So  it  has 
with  timid,  cowardly  men,  with  the  parsimonious,  with  idolaters  of  custom,  and 
of  everything  established,  and  with  that  class  which  is  content  with  mere  specu- 
lation, regarding  scarcely  anything  as  worth  attempting.  With  most  of  these, 
however,  it  is  not  zeal  itself  that  is  contemned,  for  "  none  would  be  more  zealous 
than  they — on  a  proper  occasion."  But  when  can  that  occasion  come  ?  Is  it  to  be 
expressly  brought  on  by  Providence  to  enable  them  to  show  this  virtue  ?  Or  is  it 
to  be  when  all  things  are  mended,  so  that  there  shall  be  less  to  be  done  ?  But  who, 
then,  is  to  do  all  this  in  the  meantime  ?  II.  But  still  there  is  in  the  world  an 
ILL-JUDGING  AND  UNWARRANTABLE  ZEAL.  1.  Indeed,  if  WB  take  it  in  its  general  sense, 
persevering  ardour  in  prosecution  of  a  purpose,  it  has  been,  in  its  depraved  opera- 
tion, the  animating  demon  of  every  active  evil.  And,  many  that  are  comparatively 
harmless,  let  but  this  fire  be  kindled  by  a  torch  from  hell  applied  to  the  brimstone 
that  lies  cold  and  quiet  in  their  nature — and  we  should  see.  2.  But  not  to  dwell 
on  these  terrible  operations  of  zeal,  we  see  its  effect  in  numberless  things  of  a  more 
diminutive  order,  e.g.,  long  and  earnest  exertions  for  excellence  in  some  most  trifling 
attainment ;  unremitting  efforts  in  prosecution  of  inquiry  into  something  not  worth 
any  cost  to  know ;  an  intense  devotion  to  add  particle  after  particle  to  the  little 
sum  of  worldly  possession ;  the  earnest  vying  in  little  points  of  appearance,  conse- 
quence, precedence.  Zeal  is  an  element  that  will  combine  with  any  active  prin- 
ciple in  man  ;  it  is  like  fire,  that  will  smoulder  in  garbage,  and  will  lighten  in 
the  heavens.  III.  Zeal  thus  has  its  operation  in  all  the  active  interests  of  men. 
But  it  is  MOST  USUALLY  SPOKEN  OP  AS  BELONGING  TO  RELIGION,  and  it  is  in  this 
relation  that  we  have  here  to  consider  it.  '•  Zeal  of  God."  1.  And  who  can  help 
wishing  that  there  were  a  thousand  times  more  zeal  directed  this  way  ?  Of  the 
whole  measure  that  there  is  being  constantly  expended  what  proportion  might  well 
be  spared,  nay,  destroyed,  to  advantage  ?  Nine  parts  in  ten  ?  Perhaps  more. 
Now  think,  if  one  or  more  of  these  portions  misapplied  could  be  devoted  to  God  1 
Look  at  an  ambitious  man's  zeal ;  an  avaricious  man's  zeal ;  an  indefatigable  intel- 
lectual trifler's  zeal  I  nine  parts  in  ten  misapplied ;  wasted  at  the  best ;  a  large  portion 
worse  than  wasted  I  So  it  is  going — while  there  is  here  what  deserves  it  aU — like 
clouds,  heavy  with  rain,  passing  away  from  gardens  and  fields  languishing  under 
drought,  to  be  discharged  on  mere  deserts  or  marshes  or  sea.  Or  suppose  a  great 
city  on  fire  in  a  severe  winter  ;  what  a  blessing  so  much  fire  would  be  if  distributed 
into  ail  the  abodes  of  shivering  poverty  and  sickness  1  2.  After  such  a  view  of  the 
immense  proportion  of  zeal  altogether  lost  to  God,  we  are  reluctant  to  consider  that 
a  share  even  of  the  zeal  that  is  directed  to  God  may  be  "not  according  to  know- 
ledge." The  necessity  of  knowledge  to  religious  zeal  is  fearfully  illustrated  by — 
(1)  The  mighty  empires  of  superstition — Pagan,  Mohammedan,  Popish.  It  is  true 
that  many  go  no  further  than  a  stupid,  slavish  acquiescence ;  and  that  some  are 
sceptics,  only  preserving  appearances  ;  but  countless  legions  of  them  are  burning 
with  fanatic  zeal — they  know  no  better.  (2)  The  direful  history  of  persecution. 
For,  though  some  persecutors  have  only  been  politic,  infernal  hypocrites,  yet  the 
mighty  host  of  them  have  really  believed  that  they  did  God  service.  (3)  The  wild 
novelties  of  fanaticism  that  have  occasionally  sprung  up  in  the  Christian  com- 
munity. In  view  of  all  this  the  good  man  has  still  to  exclaim,  "  Oh  for  know- 
ledge 1  for  knowledge  1 "  IV.  Turn  now  to  the  ordinary  forms  in  which  religious 
ZEAL  IS  devoid  OF  KNOWLEDGE.  1.  That  which  the  apostle  here  speaks  of,  namely, 
men's  zealously  maintaining  the  sufficiency  of  a  righteousness  of  their  own,  which 
God  will  not  accept  (ver.  3).  Fatal  ignorance  in  zeal !  Knowledge  here  would 
reveal  to  them  the  holiness,  justice,  and  law  of  God  ;  would  reveal  themselves  to 
them ;  and  then  their  zeal  would  go  another  way,  as  when  a  convinced  pagan  per- 
ceives his  god  to  be  a  worthless  idol.  2.  Zeal  when  accompanied  by  no  desire  of 
knowledge,  rather  aversion  to  it.  Horror  of  free  reasoning.  A  notion  that  all 
religious  speculation  is  necessarily  destructive  to  religious  feeling,  insomuch  that 
the  very  reasons  for  being  zealous  are  not  to  be  clearly  defined.  Whatever  the 
strong  impulse  may  be,  it  plainly  is  not  "  zeal  according  to  knowledge  "  when  a 
man  does  not  know  why  he  is  zealous.  3.  A  capricious  and  fluctuating  zeal,  and 
what  we  have  just  described  is  likely  to  be  such.  It  shall  blaze  at  one  time  and 
seem  sank  under  the  ashes  at  another,  varying  with  the  changeable  mood  of  the 


328  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  X. 

man's  mind.  It  is  true  that  there  will  be  in  most  minds  considerable  variations 
of  feeling,  of  which  zeal  will  in  a  measure  partake.  But  a  most  important  coun- 
teracting and  sustaining  principle  is  a  clear,  decided  knowledge  of  the  object  and 
reasons  of  the  zeal.  4.  The  zeal  which  consists  in  a  considerable  degree  of  mere  temper, 
where  a  man's  irritability  or  impetuousness  and  restlessness  goes  into  the  zeal  for 
the  object,  and  is  mistaken  by  him  as  all  pure  zeal  respecting  the  object  itself.  So 
that,  in  this  one  point  especially,  it  is  not  ♦'  according  to  knowledge,"  for  he  knows 
not  himself.  "  Ye  know  not  what  manner  of  spirit  ye  are  of."  5.  That  zeal  which 
is  less  concerned  about  the  object  itself  than  about  the  man  himself.  Jehu's  zeal 
was,  in  mere  point  of  fact,  for  the  "  Lord  of  hosts,"  but  he  did  not  really  care  much 
for  that  sacred  cause  itself.  It  was  a  fine  thing  that  he  should  be  exhibited  as  a 
conspicuous  vindicator  in  the  ranks  of  the  Lord's  "  hosts."  6.  A  great  zeal  for 
comparatively  little  things  in  religion.  Now  knowledge  gives  the  scale  of  the 
greater  and  the  less.  There  are  minor  points  of  doctrine,  form,  and  observance. 
Thepe  have  often  been  magnified  and  enforced  as  if  they  were  the  very  life  and 
essence  of  Christianity.  7.  Zeal  for  great  things  for  little  reasons.  Thus  Chris- 
tianity has  been  zealously  advocated  just  on  the  ground  that  it  is  conducive  to  the 
temporal  weU-being  of  a  state !  By  innumerable  persons  some  one  model  of  Chris- 
tian faith  is  zealously  maintained,  chiefly  because  it  has  been  maintained  by  their 
ancestors.  We  have  known  persons  zealously  holding  some  important  doctrine 
because  it  has  happened  to  coincide  with  some  particular  fancy  or  impression  of 
the  person's  mind  ;  not  from  a  consideration  of  its  own  great  evidences.  This  is  a 
gross  desertion  of  the  rule — that  zeal  should  be  "  according  to  knowledge."  8.  A 
zeal  for  single  points  in  religion,  especially  the  most  controverted  ones,  as  if  the 
whole  importance  of  religion  converged  to  these,  as  we  see  in  the  most  strenuous 
Calvinists  and  Aiminians.  Such  zeal  miserably  impoverishes  the  Interest  for 
religion  as  a  grand  comprehensive  whole,  and  for  all  the  parts  of  it  but  the  one. 
And  thus  the  very  "  knowledge  "  itself  will  dwindle  from  taking  account  of  the 
whole.  9.  The  excessive  zeal  for  a  religious  sect  or  party,  a  mere  worldly  spirit  of 
competition  and  jealousy.  This  indeed  is '•  according  to  knowledge,"  the  "wis- 
dom "  that  James  describes  as  coming  from  below.  10.  The  zeal  which  is  expended 
in  some  one  way  of  attempting  to  serve  religion  when  it  might  be  applied  to  better 
purpose  in  another.  Thus  able  men  have  exhausted  their  talents  and  labours  upon 
comparative  trifles  when,  with  the  same  exertion,  they  might  have  served  the 
greatest  interests.  And  ordinary  Christians  have  been  invincibly  set  on  serving 
God  in  ways  foreign  to  their  attainments  and  situations  when  there  were  plainly 
before  them  other  ways  of  certain  usefulness.  11.  That  zeal  which,  in  attempting 
to  do  good,  takes  no  account  of  the  fitness  of  season  and  occasion.  Knowledge 
would  show  the  adaptation  of  means  to  ends — the  laws  and  working  of  human 
minds — the  favourable  conjuncture.  Knowledge,  too,  would  point  to  consequences. 
And  zeal  should  not  fancy  itself  the  more  noble  and  heroic  for  setting  all  conse- 
quences at  defiance.  12.  That  zeal  which  seems  willing  to  let  its  activity  in  public 
plans  and  exertions  to  serve  religion  be  a  substitute  for  personal  religion.  In  such 
zeal  where  is  the  man's  knowledge  if  it  does  not  strike  him  with  irresistible  convic- 
tion how  indispensable  is  religion  to  his  own  self  ?  (John  Foster.)  Zeal  with- 
out knowledge : — I.  The  Isbaelites  had  one  good  quality  while  they  wanted 
another,  and  the  apostle  makes  their  possession  of  this  the  reason  op  his 
PBAYER — "  For  I  bear  them  record  that  they  have  a  zeal  of  God."  One  would  think 
that,  if  they  wanted  both,  they  would  stand  in  greater  need  of  his  prayers ;  and  the 
mystery  is,  how  their  having  something  good  should  be  the  moving  cause  why  Paul 
should  pray  for  their  salvation,  an  intimation  that  if  they  had  not  been  in  the 
possession  at  least  of  this  he  would  not  have  prayed  for  them.  1.  The  explanation 
is  this.  It  is  only  the  prayer  of  faith  that  availeth,  and  in  proportion  as  this  faith 
is  staggered  or  weakened  prayer  loses  its  efficacy — e.g.,  you  have  not  the  same 
heart  in  praying  for  some  unlikelihood  as  in  praying  for  what  is  agreeable 
to  the  will  of  God.  You  cannot  pray  so  hopefully  for  a  confirmed  reprobate 
as  for  a  man  in  whom  you  perceive  some  lurking  remainders  of  good. 
Paul  was  not  yet  discouraged  about  the  Jews.  He  still  observed  one  good 
point,  even  that  very  zeal  which  once  actuated  himself.  And  so  he  still  could 
hope  and  pray  for  them.  2.  From  such  an  argument  there  may  be  constructed 
a  powerful  appeal  to  arrest  the  headlong  way  of  that  moral  desperado,  who, 
hastening  on  from  one  enormity  to  another,  is  fast  losing  all  the  deUcacies  of 
conscience,  and  whom  the  Spirit,  tired  and  provoked  by  stubborn  resistance,  is  on 
the  eve  perhaps  of  abandoning.     Know,  then,  that  your  friends  behold  the  progress 


eniP.  X.]  ROMANS.  829 

of  this  impenitency,  and  snpplioate  HeaTen  on  your  account.    But  the  time  may 
arrive  when  your  impiety  shall  look  so  desperate  that  to  supplicate  in  faith  is 
beyond  them.    And  is  it  not  time  to  retrace  your  footsteps,  unknowing  as  you  are 
how  soon  the  very  parents  who  gave  you  birth  may  weep  but  cannot  pray  for  you ! 
II.  That  must  have  been  a  valuable  property,  in  virtue  of  which  the  Jews  could 
still  be  prayed  for.    But  that  must  have  been  a  most  impobtant  property  from 
THE  WANT  OF  WHICH  THEY  EVENTUALLY  PERISHED.    Had  they  added  knowledge  to 
their  zeal  they  would  still  have  remained  the  favourites  of  Heaven.   1.  From  their 
actual  history  we  may  learn  what  a  serious  want  this  is.    That  day  of  their  visita- 
tion, in  the  prospect  of  which  our  Saviour  shed  tears,  came  upon  them  just  because 
they  "  knew  not  the  things  which  belonged  to  their  peace."     It  is  true  that  the 
extermination  came  upon  them  because  they  had  killed  the  Prince  of  Life.     But  it 
was,  as  Peter  and  John  testify,  through  ignorance  that  they  did  it,  and  had  they 
known,  Paul  says,  they  would  not  have  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory.    Let  us  not, 
then,  underrate  the  importance  of  knowledge  in  religion,  nor  be  under  the  imagina- 
tion that  ignorance  is  not  a  responsible  or  not  a  punishable  offence.     2.  But  in 
addition  to  the  historical  proofs  of  the  importance  of  religious  knowledge,  there 
is  abundance  of  still  more  direct  proof.    The  knowledge  of  God  and  of  Jesus  Christ 
is  said  to  be  eternal  life,  and  many  are  said  to  perish  for  lack  of  knowledge.    Christ 
shall  come  "to  take  vengeance  on  those  that  know  not  God."    Knowledge  and 
ignorance  in  fact  are  dealt  with,  even  as  righteousness  and  sin  are  dealt  with.     3. 
Now  the  question  is,  ought  this  in  moral  fairness  to  be  ?    The  difficulty  is  to  con- 
ceive on  what  ground  the  views  of  the  understanding  should  be  made  the  subjects 
of  reckoning.     Man  is  held  to  be  responsible  for  his  doings,  which  he  can  help  ;  but 
not  for  his  doctrines,  which  they  say  he  cannot  help.     But  we  affirm  that  his  beUef 
in  certain  circumstances  (and  Christianity  is  in  these  circumstances)  is  that  which 
he  can  help.    It  is  by  an  act  of  the  will  that  you  set  yourself  to  the  acquisition  of 
knowledge.    It  is  by  a  continued  act  of  the  will  that  you  continue  a  prolonged 
examination  into  the  grounds  of  an  opinion.     It  is  at  the  bidding  of  the  will,  not 
that  you  believe  without  evidence,  but  that  you  investigate  the  evidence  on  which 
you  might  beheve.    It  is  in  no  way  your  fault  that  you  do  not  see  when  it  is  dark. 
But  it  is  in  every  way  your  fault  that  you  do  not  look  when  either  the  light  of 
heaven  or  of   heaven's  revelation  is  around  you.    It  is  thus  that  the  will  has 
virtually  to  do  with  the  ultimate  belief,  just  because  it  has  to  do  with  the  various 
steps  of  that  process  which  goes  before  it.    Where  there  is  candour,  which  is  a 
moral  property,  the  due  attention  will  be  given ;  when  there  is  the  opposite  of 
candour — moral  unfairness — the  due  attention  will  be  refused,  and  the  man  will  be 
landed  in  the  state  of  being  wrong  intellectually,  but  just  because  he  is  wrong 
morally.     4.  You  find  a  most  impressive  exemplification  of  this  in  the  history  of 
those  very  Jews.     During  the  whole  of  our  Saviour's  ministry  upon  earth  they  were 
plied  with  evidences  which,  if  they  had  but  attended  to,  would  have  carried  their 
belief  in  the  vahdity  of  His  claims.    But  the  belief  was  painful  to  them,  and  at  all 
hazards  they  resolved  to  bar  the  avenues  of  their  minds  against  the  admittance  of 
it.     Theirs  was  not  the  darkness  of  men  whom  no  light  had  visited,  but  of  men 
who  obstinately  shut  their  eyes.    6.  And  this  for  our  admonition.     In  this  our  day 
the  want  of  faith  is  still  due  to  the  want  of  a  thorough  moral  earnestness.     (T. 
Chalmers,  D.D.)      Zealotry  : — The  worst  of  madmen  is  a  saint  run  mad.     {Pope.) 
To  be  furious  in  religion  is  to  be  irrehgiously  religious.     {W.  Penn.)        The  way 
of  salvation : — I.  Man's  way.      1.  Consists  in  zeal  for  God  ignorantly  directed. 
2.  Terminates  in  self-righteousness  and  unbelief.    3.  Utterly  fails,  because  Christ 
is  the  end  of  the  law,  and  the  law  requires  absolute  obedience  (vers.  2-5).    H. 
God's  way.    1.  Requires — (1)  Despair  of  our  own  efforts.   ^2)  A  humble  reception  of 
the  gospel.     (3)  Confession  and  faith.    2.  Terminates  in  salvation.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
For  they  being  Ignorant  of  God's  righteousness,  and  going  about  to  establish  their 
own  .  .  .  have  not  submitted  .  .  .  onto  the  righteousness  of  God.  — Ignorance  of 
God's  righteoxuness,  the  guilt  of: — The  ignorance  here  spoken  of  is  something 
more  than  the  mere  passive  blindness  of  those  who  cannot  help  themselves  because 
of  the  total  darkness  by  which  they  are  encompassed.    It  was  very  much  the  igno- 
rance of  those  who  would  not  open  their  eyes.     There  was  an  activity,  a  will  in  it, 
as  much  as  there  was  in  the  other  things  ascribed  to  them  in  the  "  going  about " 
to  establish  a  different  righteousness  from  that  which  they  would  not  submit  to. 
This  forms  the  true  principle  on  which  the  condemnation  of  unbelief  rests.    "  They 
love  the  darkness  rather  than  the  light."    Even  as  the  Gentiles  "liked  not  to 
retain  God  in  their  knowledge" — even  so  the  Jews  liked  not  in  this  instance  to 


830  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

admit  Ood  into  their  knowledge,  or  give  entertainment  in  their  minds  to  that  way 
of  salvation  which  He  had  devised  for  the  recovery  of  a  guilty  world.  It  is  th« 
part  which  the  will  has  in  it  that  makes  ignorance  the  proper  object  of  retribution  ; 
and  so,  when  Christ  cometh,  He  will  take  vengeance  "  on  those  who  know  not  God 
and  obey  not  the  gospel."  {T,  Chalmers,  D.D.)  Human  righteousness  only  attain- 
able  by  submitting  to  "  the  righteousness  of  God  " ; — 1.  '•  The  righteousness  of  God  " 
is  His  truth,  justice,  holiness,  wisdom,  and  love  blended  in  eternal  perfection,  and 
embraces  infinite  hatred  to  sin  with  infinite  love  to  the  sinner.  It  is  at  once  the 
terror  of  every  guilty  conscience,  and  the  hope  of  every  true  penitent.  2.  The  world 
before  and  since  the  days  of  Luther  has  been  making  the  same  mistake  as  he  at 
first  made.  It  has  bo  felt  the  need  of  righteousness  as  to  make  desperate  efforts  to 
attain  unto  it,  now  soaring  to  inaccessible  heights,  and  then  delving  to  unknown 
depths,  while  the  blessing  itself  has  been  ever  within  reach.    I,  Men,  until  thet 

COME    TO    THE    KNOWLEDGE    OF    ChRIST,    ABE    EVERTWHEEB    VAINLY    ENDEAVODRINO    TO 

ESTABLISH  THEtB  OWN  RIGHTEOUSNESS.  1.  If  it  had  been  possible  for  any  man  to 
succeed,  surely  it  had  been  Paul.  Constancy,  conscientiousness,  self-denial,  lofty 
motives,  a  blameless  life,  &c. ;  and  yet,  when  viewed  in  relation  to  the  object 
sought,  how  utterly  vain !  Solomon's  experiment  ought  to  have  been  sufficient  to 
satisfy  all  voluptuaries  of  the  vanity  of  earthly  things,  and  Paul's  failure  ought  to 
convince  all  self-righteous  moralists  that  righteousness  is  not  attainable  by  "  the 
deeds  of  the  law."  2.  But  the  truth  can  only  be  known,  or  wisdom  taught,  by 
experience.  And  so  Paul's  experiment,  in  all  its  essential  features,  has  been  made 
again  and  again.  Luther  in  his  way  repeated  the  experiment  with  the  same  result. 
These  men  remind  one  of  the  old  alchemists,  who,  vary  their  experiments  as  they 
might,  and  imitate  the  colour  of  gold  as  they  did,  yet  the  base  metal  remained  base 
metal  after  all.  3.  And  yet  multitudes  continue  to  "  go  about  to  establish  their  own 
righteousness."  It  is  impossible  to  avoid  a  feeling  of  mingled  respect  and  pity 
for  them.  This  feeling  filled  Paul's  heart  (ver.  1).  "  Going  about  to "  is  old 
English  for  "  trying  at."  They  were  eager,  restless,  painstaking,  ready  to  employ 
every  means  in  order  to  secure  it.  But  an  April  day  might  sooner  establish  its 
character  for  constancy,  and  the  wide  ocean  its  character  as  a  refuge ;  the  raven 
with  its  croak,  and  the  owl  with  its  hooting,  establish  theirs  for  melody;  the 
farthing  rushlight  its  right  to  rule  the  day;  every  little  pool  its  claim  to  be 
considered  a  fountain  ;  the  bramble  its  pretensions  to  be  king  over  the  forest,  than 
these  misguided  souls  succeed  in  establishing  their  own  righteousness.  They  are 
endeavouring  to  forge  a  key  to  unlock  the  grave,  to  build  a  lifeboat  to  swim  in  a  sea 
of  fire,  to  construct  a  ladder  to  scale  the  skies,  to  hush  the  thunders  of  Sinai  by 
filling  their  ears  with  wool,  to  stop  the  lightning  of  God's  wrath  by  gossamer 
threads  of  human  goodness,  to  arrest  the  course  of  Divine  justice  by  piling  up  little 
heaps  of  atones  in  their  path.  God  pronounces  "  our  righteousness  " — not  our 
wickedness — to  be  "  filthy  rags."  4.  No  man  ever  established  his  "  own  righteous- 
ness" to  his  own  satisfaction.  This  sky  was  never  without  a  cloud,  this  sun  without 
a  spot,  this  life  without  a  defect.  It  was  the  consciousness  of  this  that  quickened 
the  steps  of  Saul  of  Tarsus  in  his  persecution  of  the  early  disciples,  and  prompted 
him  to  a  deadlier  revenge.  In  proportion  to  a  soul's  consciousness  of  what  sin  is 
will  be  its  misery  at  the  sight  of  it.  God  has  set  our  sins  "  in  the  light  of  His 
countenance  "  ;  and  when  we  remember  that  there  may  be  impurity  in  a  look,  and 
murder  in  a  desire,  the  very  thought  of  "establishing  our  own  righteousness"  ia 
the  wildest  of  fancies,  the  wickedest  of  delusions  !  5.  And  men  thus  court  failure, 
because  they  are  "  ignorant  of  God's  righteousness,"  both  of  what  it  is  and  what 
it  requires.  The  whiteness  of  the  snow,  the  morning  Hght,  the  blue  heavens,  are 
figures  that  inadequately  represent  the  righteousness  of  God.  "  The  heavens  are 
not  clean  in  His  sight."  God  is  so  "glorious  in  holiness"  that  the  angels  cover 
their  faces  and  their  feet  with  their  wings.  Being  thus  essentially  and  absolutely 
righteous,  what  mere  outward  propriety  or  thin  crust  of  goodness  could  satisfy 
Him?  Motives  as  pure  as  the  light,  and  ways  as  straight  as  a  mathematical  line, 
do  but  indicate  what  God  requires  of  men  if  He  enter  into  judgment  with  them. 
This  they  do  not  understand  nor  realise,  nor  that  if  God's  love  is  holy,  His  right- 
eousness is  tender,  merciful,  long-suffering  to  the  vilest  offender.  If  men  knew  that 
they  had  only  to  ask  of  Him,  and  He  would  cover  them  with  the  robe  of  His 
righteousness,  they  would  desist  from  all  their  vain  efforts  to  "  establish  their  own 
righteousness."  His  righteousness  is  unknown  by  men,  and  hence — II.  Theib 
INSANE  REFUSAL  TO  SUBMIT  UNTO  THE  RIGHTEOUSNESS  OF  GoD— 1.  For  the  Very  reasoH, 
in  most  Instances,  that  "  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  every 


CHAT,  z.]  ROMANS.  831 

one  that  believeth."  And  yet  this  glorious  fact  is  the  very  essence  of  saving  truth. 
Salvation  by  faith  in  Christ  is  taught  in  type,  prophecy,  history,  promise,  and 
doctrine.  The  same  God  "  who  Ughts  one  world  by  another,  and  sustains  one  life 
by  another,"  purposes  to  save  all  who  truly  repent  and  believe  by  Christ's  obedi- 
ence, death,  resurrection,  and  intercession.  And  yet  infidels  stigmatise  the  doctrine 
of  salvation  by  Jesus  Christ  as  absurd,  cruel,  immoral,  and  many  professedly 
Christian  teachers  speak  of  justification  by  the  righteousness  of  another  in  dis- 
paraging terms.  And  if  it  were  true  that  men  might  be  saved  by  faith  in  Christ 
vithout  a  change  of  heart  and  life;  if  the  caricature  of  this  doctrine  of  justificatioa 
set  forth  by  its  enemies  were  correct,  then  nothing  more  monstrous  could  be  con- 
ceived. 2.  Let,  however,  the  apostles  term  rebuke  their  ignorant  presumption. 
Men  have  to  "  submit  themselves  to  the  righteousness  of  God."  Is  God  or  man  to 
be  supreme?  When  man  submits  to  God  the  cause  of  difference  is  removed,  the 
moral  distance  between  man  and  God  is  annihilated.  A  revolution  has  taken  place. 
Repentance,  justification,  regeneration,  conversion,  reconciliation,  adoption,  sancti- 
fication  are  words  which  represent  the  various  aspects  of  the  one  great  reality,  and 
do  not  exaggerate  the  greatness  of  the  change  that  is  experienced.  The  under- 
standing is  enlightened,  the  conscience  rejoices  in  God's  righteousness  in  condemning 
sin  and  sinners,  the  will  returns  to  its  true  allegiance,  and  the  heart  casts  away  its 
idols  and  loathes  its  sin.  3.  It  should  not  be  lost  sight  of  that  it  is  to  the  righteous- 
ness of  God  that  men  have  to  submit — not  to  His  caprice,  nor  to  His  will,  divorced 
from  purity  and  goodness.  And  so  in  the  very  act  of  submission  man  acquires  a 
nobleness  which  in  his  condition  of  wilful  independence  had  been  impossible.  It 
never  can  be  degrading  or  injurious  to  submit  to  righteousness.  As  righteousness 
is  the  glory  of  God,  when  man  submits  to  it  it  becomes  his  also.  4.  As  Christ  was 
hated  by  Scribes  and  Pharisees  on  account  of  His  goodness  and  purity,  and  as  the 
Jews  who  searched  the  Scriptures  for  eternal  life  had  no  sooner  discovered  that  it 
centred  in  Christ  than  they  refused  to  come  to  Him  that  they  might  have  life,  so 
submission  to  the  righteousness  of  God  seems  more  difficult  because  it  involves  an 
acknowledgment  of  and  delight  in  the  fact  that  "  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for 
righteousness  to  every  one  that  believeth."  Yet  this  exactly  meets  man's  case  as  a 
sinner.  Christ  has  satisfied  every  requirement.  God's  righteousness  is  established. 
His  vindication  is  complete,  and  in  the  act  of  showing  mercy  "  His  truth  and  justice 
receive  their  brightest  manifestation."  6.  The  blessing  which  is  received  is  also 
retained  by  faith.  Faith  first  joins  us  to  Christ,  and  by  faith  the  union  is  per- 
petuated. We  set  no  limits  to  God's  power,  but  the  eternal  inheritance  is  reserved 
for  those  who  are  kept  by  it  through  faith.  "  The  just  shall  live  by  faith."  The 
righteousness  of  Christ  is  not  only  appropriated  and  rptained  by  faith,  but  it  must 
also  be  attested,  shown,  illustrated.  And  thus,  while  sinners  become  righteous 
through  the  righteousness  of  another,  yet,  as  the  Apostle  John  says,  "He  that  doeth 
righteousness  is  righteous."  This,  by  His  indwelling  Spirit,  He  enables  believers  to 
do.  (F.  W.  Bourne,  D.D.)  Reasons  why  men  reject  the  righteousness  of  God  : — 
1.  The  position  of  the  apostle  was  a  very  affecting  one.  He  was  in  plenary 
possession  of  the  great  saving  truth.  He  had  submitted  to  the  righteousness  of 
God,  and  was  persuaded  that  nothing  could  separate  him  from  the  love  of  God. 
But  to  an  unselfish  mind  personal  security  is  not  always  perfect  felicity.  Suppose 
that  a  man  has  found  refuge  in  a  fortress  on  the  alarm  of  a  sadden  invasion,  but 
has  not  succeeded  in  carrying  all  his  kindred  with  him,  the  first  emotion,  as  ho 
realises  the  commanding  position  of  the  castle,  will  likely  be  assurance,  exultation, 
gratitude.  But,  alas  I  out  on  the  open  plain  he  descries  a  brother  who  has  thus 
far  escaped,  but  who,  by  some  infatuation,  is  running  past  the  castle  gate  in  quest 
of  some  other  inlet.  In  such  a  case  the  brother  saved  would  only  eye  with  tbe 
more  lacerating  anguish  the  wilfulness  of  that  brother  who  was  fleeing  from  the 
door  of  safety.  This  was  the  apostle's  situation.  He  had  found  the  refuge.  He 
was  looking  over  the  ramparts  of  salvation — so  far,  a  happy  man.  "\it  there,  in 
the  open  field  of  danger,  were  his  kinsmen  according  to  the  fiesh.  Sc^me  blindness 
had  happened  to  them,  for  scarcely  one  of  them  made  for  the  door  of  hope ;  and 
though,  in  the  fulness  of  his  fraternal  affection,  he  had  lifted  op  his  voice  and 
directed  them  to  the  open  door,  scarce  one  believed  his  report.  2.  The  reason  given 
in  this  chapter  for  his  sorrow  was  not  merely  his  patriotic  love  of  his  countrymen, 
bat  his  respect  for  the  motives  and  character  of  many  among  them.  They  were 
not  atheists ;  they  had  a  zeal  of  God.  They  were  not  infidels,  reprobates,  or  liber- 
tines, for  they  had  a  great  regard  for  the  law,  and  a  real  anxiety  to  establish  a 
righteousness  for  themselves.    3.  Unhappily,  tite  very  same  thing  which  wrung 


833  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

the  apostle's  heart  is  still  going  on  in  the  world.  Multitudes  of  per.ple,  the  fac- 
similes of  these  zealous  Jews,  are  falling  short  of  heaven  for  the  same  reasona 
which  proved  so  fatal  in  the  days  of  Paul.  Let  us  consider  these  reasons : — I.  Igno- 
BANCE  OF  God's  bighteousness.  1.  It  is  the  glory  of  heaven  that  there  is  nothing 
unholy  there.  A  perfect  righteousness  is  the  only  passport  into  the  presence  of  a 
holy  God.  2.  But  in  this  world  of  ours  there  is  no  sucn  thing  as  a  spotless  soul. 
The  only  real  righteousness  on  earth  is  a  righteousness  which  came  down  from 
heaven.  The  Word  was  made  flesh.  He  bare  our  sins,  and  in  His  own  body  on 
the  tree  made  ample  satisfaction  for  them.  His  blood  cleanseth  from  all  sin.  But 
it  is  not  enough  that  the  guilt  be  cancelled.  The  rebel's  attainder  may  be  removed, 
but  he  may  not  be  restored  to  his  place  beside  the  sovereign's  person,  nor  put  anew 
in  his  patrimonial  possessions.  A  creature  may  be  cleansed  from  the  pollution  of 
actual  sin,  and  remain  in  all  the  insipidity  of  no  positive  righteousness.  Now 
herein  consists  the  completeness  of  the  great  redemption.  During  the  thirty  years 
which  preceded  His  directly  expiatory  work  the  sinner's  Representative  was  living 
a  life  of  vicarious  obedience.  Year  by  year  He  was  accumulating  that  merit  which 
He  needed  not  for  Himself,  but  which  was  needful  for  every  one  that  would  enter 
heaven.  Now  observe  these  two  things  go  tofrether  ;  the  neutralising  and  the  posi- 
tive ingredients  make  up  one  righteousness — the  sin-cancelling  atonement  and  the 
heaven-claiming  merit — the  sufferings  which  shut  the  sinner's  hell  and  the  obedi- 
ence which  opened  the  ransomed  sinner's  heaven.  But  Christ  was  God.  His 
obedience  had  a  Divine  virtue  in  it,  and  His  sufferings  had  a  Divine  virtue  in  them. 
And  therefore  His  obedience  and  satisfaction  are  called  "  the  righteousness  of  God." 
3.  Now  many  are  ignorant  of  the  existence  of  such  a  righteousness.  This  righteous- 
ness is  so  hid  in  its  notoriety,  so  puzzling  in  its  plainness,  so  overlooked  in  its 
studious  obviousness,  that  people  who,  in  their  anxiety  after  acceptance  with  God, 
would  give  all  that  they  had  for  the  least  scrap  of  unquestionable  merit,  never 
dream  that  the  righteousness  of  God — neither  Adam's  righteousness,  nor  an  angel's 
righteousness,  but  God's  own  righteousness — was  that  which  they  might  appropriate 
as  their  own.  We  have  heard  of  scholars  who  could  speak  many  tongues,  but  who 
did  not  know  the  meaning  of  Jehovah  Tsidkenu.  We  have  known  chronologists 
who  could  tell  most  of  the  remarkable  events  of  history,  but  who  could  not  tell  the 
year  which  "  brought  in  everlasting  righteousness."  And  we  have  listened  to  acute 
reasoners  and  metaphysicians  who  could  discourse  eloquently  on  the  powers  of 
human  nature,  and  high-souled  morahsts  who  described  the  beauty  of  true  virtue, 
and  divines  full  of  zeal  for  God,  but  who  never  adverted  to  that  righteousness 
which  alone  the  apostle  deemed  worthy  of  the  name.    II.  Some  are  awake  that 

BUCH  A   bighteousness  EXISTS   WHO  DO    NOT  KNOW    HOW  THEY  ABE  TO  BENEFIT  BY  IT. 

1.  They  say  in  their  heart,  "  Who  shall  ascend  into  heaven  ?  By  what  process  of 
self -elevation  shall  I  render  myself  worthy  of  this  righteousness  ?  Or  who  shall 
descend  into  the  deep  ?  How  humbled  must  I  become  before  I  be  in  a  fit  state  for 
God  to  impart  this  righteousness  ?  "  Now  the  righteousness  of  God  is  brought  so 
near  that  nothing  which  the  sinner  can  do  can  bring  it  nearer.  2.  The  Lord  Jesus 
did  not  purchase  pardon  and  then  deposit  it  in  some  far  island  of  the  sea,  bo  that 
it  would  be  needful  to  undertake  a  tedious  and  hazardous  voyage  in  order  to  arrive 
at  it.  Nor  did  He  perch  it  on  some  cloud  of  the  upper  firmament,  so  as  to  rack  the 
anxious  invention  in  finding  out  the  aerostation  which  would  soar  up  to  it,  or  the 
Bpell  which  would  charm  it  down.  And  yet  the  intricacy  of  system  has  conveyed 
some  such  idea  to  many  minds.  You  may  perfectly  perceive  that  the  righteousness 
of  Jesus  is  the  righteousness  of  God,  but  you  may  fancy  that  faith  is  the  ship  which 
you  need  to  float  you  over  this  abyss,  or  the  wings  you  need  to  waft  you  up  to  the 
airy  elevation  where  this  righteousness  dwells.  But  the  righteousness  is  not  only 
wrought  out,  but  brought  so  near  that  not  a  moment  of  time  nor  a  point  of  space 
intervenes  between  you  and  its  present  possession.  If  you  have  such  affection  for 
the  Lord  Jesus  as  to  confess  Him  before  men — and  this  you  will  have  if  you  really 
believe  that  God  has  raised  Him  from  the  dead  as  your  Eedeemer — '•*  thou  shalt  be 
saved."  3.  A  welcome  from  the  King  (as  our  Lord  taught  in  the  parable)  depends 
entirely  on  having  on  "a  wedding  robe,"  and  none  who  is  willing  need  want  it,  for 
it  is  gratuitously  given  to  all.  That  robe  is  righteousness — not  man's,  but  Jehovah's 
(Phil.  ill.  8,  9).  Be  persuaded — put  ye  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Ye  poor  and 
blind  t  step  in  to  the  feast — ye  halt  and  maimed  I  creep  in.  When  at  heaven's 
gate  they  ask  in  whose  right  yoa  come,  make  mention  of  Jesus'  righteousness,  and 
the  everlasting  doors  will  open  to  receive  you.  The  word  is  nigh  thee,  even  in  thy 
mouth ;  speak  it  oat.    Avow  year  faith  in  Him  by  the  life  and  language  of  dis- 


CBiT.  X.]  ROMANS.  838 

oipleship.  The  Lord  has  not  bid  you  do  some  great  thing,  not  even  sent  yon  to 
wash  in  Jordan  seven  times.  III.  Some  reject  God's  righteousness  in  theib 
ANXIETY  "  TO  ESTABLISH  THEiE  OWN."  1.  "  I  have  broken  God's  law  times  without 
number,  but  I  see  that  it  is  good,  and  it  would  be  a  real  satisfaction  to  myself  if  I 
could  do  anything  to  atone  for  my  transgressions ;  and  if  you  could  only  prescribe 
what  I  should  do — if  it  were  only  revealed  from  heaven  how  many  prayers  I  should 
offer,  how  many  fasts  I  should  keep,  Ac,  I  would  grudge  no  sacrifice."  When  to  a 
Boul  80  convinced  of  sin  you  say,  "  Believe  and  live — accept  the  righteousness  of 
God  and  nothing  more  is  needed,"  the  simplicity  of  the  prescription  is  almost 
provoking.  The  soul  wants  to  do  some  great  thing.  Bent  on  establishing  a 
righteousness  of  its  own,  it  is  not  easy  to  "  submit  to  the  righteonsness  of  God." 
2.  In  this  state  of  mind  there  is  a  just  feeling,  and  there  is  also  a  strong  delusion. 
It  is  a  just  feeling  that  the  law  shoul  I  be  vindicated,  and  that  sin  shculd  receive  its 
commensurate  punishment.  But  it  is  a  delusion  to  imagine  that  a  sinner  can  atone 
for  sin.  But  the  greatest  delusion  of  all  is  that  you  think  yourself  wiser  than  God 
when  you  prefer  your  plan  to  His,  and  mightier  than  Immanuel  if  you  consider 
your  work  more  perfect  than  His.  Believe  in  Christ,  who  is  the  end  of  the  law, 
and  you  are  righteous  in  Him.  IV.  You  fear  lest  so  free  and  prompt  a  forgive- 
ness SHOULD  be  fatal  TO  FUTURE  OBEDIENCE.  You  find,  by  experience  among  men, 
that  a  pardon  too  easily  obtained  is  apt  to  be  abused,  and  you  fear  lest  this  scheme 
should  encourage  men  to  sin  because  grace  is  so  abundant.  1.  Kemark,  however, 
that  the  gospel  pardon,  though  so  prompt  and  free  to  tbe  sinner,  is  not  a  cheap  nor 
easy  pardon  to  Him  who  first  of  all  procured  it ;  owing  to  the  darkness  of  the 
human  understanding  and  the  perversity  of  the  human  will,  it  is  seldom  too  sud- 
denly or  lightly  attained  by  the  sinner,  who  eventually  finds  it  his  own.  And  I 
think  it  might  be  commended  to  reason  that  real  obedience  begins  only  where 
slavish  terror  ends,  and  that  the  principle  most  prolific  of  loyalty  and  unwearied 
services  is  love.  2.  But  the  gospel  puts  the  matter  beyond  all  question  by  its 
express  declarations.  It  assures  us  that  the  faith  which  receives  the  Saviour  is  the 
first  step  of  new  obedience — that  the  moment  when  God's  righteousness  is  accepted 
is  the  moment  when  morality  begins.  V.  Some  earnest  seekers  miss  salvation 
BECAUSE  THEY  GO  TOO  FAR  TO  FIND  IT.  There  was  a  small  colony  planted  on  a  creek 
of  a  vast  continent.  Their  soil  was  very  fertile,  but  its  limits  were  somewhat  narrow. 
On  the  landward  side  it  was  enclosed  by  rocky  mountains,  on  the  other  it  looked 
out  on  the  immeasurable  main.  A  pestilence  broke  out,  which  made  fearful  havoc 
all  through  the  population,  and  the  doctors  declared  that  it  was  beyond  their  skill. 
Just  at  the  time  the  plague  was  raging  worst  a  stranger  appeared  and  told  them 
of  a  plant  which  healed  this  disorder,  and  left  a  paper  in  which,  he  said,  they  would 
find  a  full  description  of  it  and  directions  how  to  find  it.  The  tidings  diffused 
considerable  activity.  A  plant  of  such  efiBcacy  deserved  the  most  diligent  search. 
Almost  all  agreed  that  it  must  be  far  away,  but  a  discussion  arose  whether  it  lay 
beyond  the  cliffs  or  across  the  sea.  Most  thought  the  latter,  and  a  ship  was 
launched,  which  they  christened  Ecclesia,  and  sent  in  search  of  the  famous  plant, 
and  all  who  wished  to  escape  the  plague  were  invited  to  take  passages  in  this  good 
ship.  A  few  others,  however,  thought  that  they  would  have  better  success  by  trying 
to  get  over  the  cliffs.  This  was  an  arduous  enterprise,  for  the  precipices  were 
steep  and  extremely  high.  A  few  attempts  were  made,  and,  after  many  weariful 
efforts,  the  climbers  either  grew  dizzy  and  fell  back,  or  allowed  themselves  to  slide 
down  again.  But  others,  more  inventive,  busied  themselves  constructing  artificial 
wings  and  aerial  engines  of  various  kinds,  Imitatio  Christi,  asceticism,  penitential 
prayers,  and  such  hke ;  and  some  of  them  answered  exceedingly  well  for  a  little, 
and  rose  so  high  that  their  neighbours  really  thought  they  would  reach  the  top ; 
but,  after  getting  a  certain  height,  they  uniformly  found  themselves  again  on  the 
spot  from  which  they  first  ascended.  A  long  time  had  now  passed  on,  and  multi- 
tudes had  died  of  the  plague,  when  a  poor  sufferer  who  had  already  gone  a  fruitless 
expedition  in  the  ship,  and  from  the  severity  of  his  anguish  was  eager  in  trying 
every  scheme,  lay  tossing  on  his  bed.  He  got  hold  of  a  large  paper  roll  which  lay 
on  a  shelf  beside  him.  It  was  very  dirty,  and  the  ink  was  faded.  He  at  once  sus- 
pected that  it  was  the  book  which  the  stranger  had  left.  It  gave  a  full  description 
of  the  Plant  of  Benown,  and  as  he  advanced  in  his  feverish  earnestness,  hoping  that 
it  would  tell  him  the  very  spot  where  he  should  look  for  it,  he  found  the  plant  itself  1 
There  it  lay  in  the  heart  of  the  long-neglected  volume,  and  Luther's  eye  glistened  as 
he  read  "  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that  beheveth." 
"  But  where  is  Christ  to  be  found  ?    Must  I  ascend  the  itfi^^of  doeoaftd  into  the 


,»  V 


,»>   -»'■ 


* 


l\ 


834  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

deep  ?  Oh,  no  I  Christ  is  here — nigh  me — God'a  present  gift  to  me  conveyed  in 
the  Tolume  of  this  book.  I  accept  Him.  I  believe."  The  apologue  has  prematurely 
betrayed  itself,  but  no  matter.  The  cure  for  a  plague-stricken,  dying  world  was 
long  concealed  in  the  Bible,  till,  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  Luther  found  it  there. 
You  have  only  to  go  where  Luther  went.  (James  Hamilton.)  Man's  tendency  to 
trust  in  his  own  righteousness : — I.  Man  feels  that  he  is  under  law  to  God.  He  knows 
that  there  is  a  power  above  him  to  which  he  is  subject.  He  may  try  to  deUver 
himself  and  claim  independence,  but  ever  and  anon  he  is  made  to  see  that  there  is 
a  moral  law  commanding  him  to  do  this  and  avoid  that.  He  may  refuse  to  obey 
only  to  find  that  it  imposes  a  penalty  in  the  shape  of  a  reproach  of  conscience, 
or  thwarting  of  his  plans,  &c.  He  may  drown  it  in  folly,  but  it  will  take  its  revenge 
when  the  hour  of  reflection  comes.  Under  this  feeling  every  man  is  made  to  realise 
that  he  "  must  give  an  account  of  himself  to  God."  H.  There  is  a  fear  in  every 
one  that  his  conduct  cannot  stand  a  sifting  inspection.  So  he  has  an  apprehen- 
sion at  times  that  the  power  above  him  may  be  hostile.  Our  own  consciences 
condemn  us,  and  we  cannot  but  see  that  God,  who  is  purer  than  our  conscience, 
must  also  condemn  us.  So  we  shrink  from  the  law  which  we  have  broken  and  from 
the  lawgiver.  "  "When  I  remembered  God,  I  was  troubled."  We  are  troubled,  as 
the  boy  is  by  the  presence  of  his  father  whose  command  he  has  just  disobeyed. 
We  strive  to  press  down  the  thought,  but  it  is  unsuppressible.  So,  in  consequence 
of  the  pressure  of  these  two  feelings  on  each  other,  a  third  feeling  is  brought  forth. 
This  may  be  one  or  other  of  two  sorts.  III.  We  mat  banish  God  and  His  law  from 
OUR  thoughts.  This  may  be  our  first  impulse.  We  act  as  the  disobedient  child 
who  flees  from  his  father.  It  was  thus  with  Cain  and  Jonah.  True,  there  will  be 
times  when  God  appears  to  aUure  or  warn,  but  sinners  do  not  wish  to  be  disturbed, 
and  they  pray  to  Him,  as  the  Gadarenes  did  when  Jesus  visited  them,  to  "  depart 
out  of  their  coasts  " ;  and  He  left  them,  never  to  return.  IV.  Another  class  act  in 
an  equally  unworthy  manner.  They  go  about  to  establish  their  own  righteousness. 
They  know  that  God  requires  His  intelligent  and  responsible  creatures  to  give  obe- 
dience to  His  royal  law  of  love.  According  to  the  first  covenant  every  man  was  to 
work  out  a  righteousness  for  himself.  But  man  has  failed  in  this  ;  he  is  not  able 
to  present  a  perfect  obedience.  He  has  only  to  search  himself  to  discover  that  he 
has  sinned.  But  then  he  would  in  future  make  amends  for  the  past.  See  the  self- 
righteous  man  as  he  goes  about  so  diligently  in  working  out  a  righteousness  of  his 
own.  Listen  to  him  as  he  talks  to  himself  in  the  chamber  of  his  thoughts.  When 
he  does  a  smart  act,  he,  as  it  were,  says,  "  How  clever  I  am  !  "  He  relieves  dis- 
tress, and  it  is  followed  by  the  thought,  "  How  tender-hearted  I  am !  "  He  engages 
in  a  religious  service,  and  then  feels  that  he  is  bo  pious.  This  self-righteousness  is 
all  along  offensive  to  God,  and  apt  to  be  offensive  to  our  fellow-men.  It  shows 
itself  in  a  haughty  manner,  and  in  the  perpetual  narratives  of  our  ability  and 
prowess.  A  ploughman,  whom  Hervey  once  addressed  to  the  effect  that  it  was  our 
first  duty  at  once  to  abandon  our  sins,  answered,  "  There  is  a  prior  duty,  and  that 
Is  to  abandon  the  trust  in  our  own  righteousness."  There  was  true  philosophy  in 
this.  As  long  as  we  are  trusting  in  our  own  righteousness  we  have  little  motive  to 
search  out  our  sins  and  destroy  them.  Let  a  man  feel  that  his  deeds  are  as  filthy 
rags  before  God,  and  then  he  will  be  disposed  to  give  them  up  and  seek  for  a  better 
clothing.  This  self-righteous  spirit  is  that  of  the  Pharisees,  so  severely  condemned 
by  our  Lord.  It  is  embodied  in  the  prayer,  "Lord,  I  thank  Thee,"  &o.  It  was  the 
spirit  of  the  Stoics  which  seized  on  some  of  the  highest  minds  in  Greece  and  Eome. 
The  meditations  of  Marcus  Aurelius  contain  very  lofty  moral  precepts,  but  his  ethics 
are  self-righteous  throughout ;  the  good  man  stands  before  God  in  the  strength  of 
his  own  merits.  This  being  so,  we  can  understand  how  the  philosophers  of  this 
school  should  have  been  unwilling  to  submit  to  the  humbling  doctrines  of  the  Cross, 
which  require  us  to  trust  in  the  righteousness  of  another.  What  a  humiliation 
must  it  have  been  to  Saul  of  Tarsus  when  he  was  arrested  on  the  road  to  Damascus, 
when  not  only  his  person  but  his  pride  were  cast  down  to  the  ground  I  But  his 
humiliation  was  a  step  necessary  in  order  to  his  exaltation.  He  gave  up  trusting  in 
his  own  righteousness,  and  went  forward  in  the  strength  of  Him  who  there  and 
then  conquered  him,  and  thereby  enabled  him  to  conquer  himself,  and  sent  him 
forth  to  proclaim  a  doctrine  which  conquered  the  Roman  world.  Every  man  needs 
to  pass  through  such  a  crisis.  As  long  as  the  man  is  cherishing  a  self-righteous 
spirit  he  feels  himself  restrained  on  all  hands.  He  cherishes  a  sense  of  merit,  and 
yet  is  not  satisfied.  He  makes  new  and  greater  exertions,  only  to  find  that  they  do 
not  come  up  to  the  full  requirements  of  the  law.    And  the  uiiforgiven  sin  will  ever 


CHAP.  X.]  ROMANS.  835 

trouble  the  einner  till  it  is  forgiyen.  Better  at  once  submit,  and  instead  of  the 
prayer  of  the  Pharisee  put  up  the  prayer  of  the  publican.  When  the  ground  is  as  it 
is  in  winter,  we  naight  try  to  soften  the  hardness  and  remove  the  cold  by  shovelling 
away  the  frost  and  snow.  Bat  there  is  a  better  way.  Let  us  have  the  returning 
Bun  of  spring,  and  the  coldness  will  disappear,  and  the  earth  will  array  itself  in 
the  loveliest  green.  So  when  we  feel  our  hearts  to  be  chilled  and  hardened, 
let  us  seek  that  the  light  of  God's  countenance  shine  upon  us,  and  the  hardness 
will  be  dissolved,  and  the  graces  of  peace  and  love  will  flow  forth  as  the  streams  do 
in  spring.  (J.  McCosh,D.D.)  Self-righteousness — ruin  of  many: — "A  gentleman 
in  our  late  civil  wars,"  says  Cowley,  "when  his  quarters  were  beaten  up  by  the 
enemy,  was  taken  prisoner,  and  lost  his  life  afterwards  only  by  staying  to  put 
on  a  band  and  adjust  his  periwig  ;  he  would  escape  like  a  person  of  quality,  or  not 
at  all,  and  died  the  noble  martyr  of  ceremony  and  gentility."  Poor  fool  I 
and  yet  he  is  as  bad  who  waits  till  he  is  dressed  in  the  rags  of  his  own  fancied 
fitness  before  he  will  come  to  Jesus.  He  will  die  a  martyr  to  pride  and  self- 
righteousness.  {C.H.  Spurgeon.)  Phariseeism : — Concerning  the  Jews,  consider — 
L  What  they  did.  1.  They  trusted  to  their  self -righteousness.  2.  They  sought  to 
establish  it.  3.  They  laboured  diligently  to  do  this.  11.  What  they  did  not  do. 
They  did  not — 1.  Accept  God's  righteousness.  2.  Realise  its  extent.  3.  Bow 
down  to  it.  III.  The  cause  op  their  SELr-RiGHTEOCB  ignorance,  which  was — 1. 
Wilful,      2.  Persistent.     3.  Destructive.      (J.  Bums,  D.D.)  Barriers  broken 

down : — The  text  sets  forth  three  difiSculties  in  the  way  of  a  man's  salvation.  I. 
Ignorance.  1.  Ignorance  is  the  "mother  of  devotion,"  according  to  the  Church 
of  Rome  ;  "  the  mother  of  error,"  according  to  the  Word  of  God.  (1)  Men  do  not 
know  what  that  righteousness  is  which  God  requires.  It  you  want  to  be  saved  by 
your  own  righteousness,  know  that  it  must  be  perfect.  If  you  have  committed  but  one 
sin,  your  hope  of  perfect  righteousness  is  gone.  "  He  that  ofifendeth  in  one  point 
is  guilty  of  all."  If  I  break  one  link  in  a  chain  of  twenty  I  have  broken  the  chain. 
Suppose  that  I  should  have  to  give  a  perfect  vase  of  crystal  as  a  present  to  the 
Queen.  But  it  has  got  chipped  a  little.  What  is  to  be  done  ?  I  may  cement  the 
little  pieces  in  their  places  ;  but  if  it  must  be  perfect  before  royalty  can  accept  it  I 
must  get  another  vase.  Now,  while  I  am  talking  about  a  chip  here  and  a  chip 
there  in  your  Ufe,  you  may  be  saying,  '*  But  we  are  smashed  right  up ;  and  as  to 
broken  links,  why,  we  have  fairly  melted  the  chain."  I  am  glad  to  hear  it.  If  you 
have  no  righteousness  of  your  own,  you  have  got  to  the  half-way  house  of  salvation. 
When  you  strip  a  man  you  are  partly  on  the  way  to  clothing  him.  (2)  Men  do  not 
know  that  God  has  provided  a  righteousness.  God  came  here  in  human  form,  and 
became  "  obedient  to  His  own  law,  even  to  the  death  of  the  cross."  And  His 
obedience  is  ours,  if  we  believe.  Christ  was  "  made  sin  for  us,  who  knew  no  sin, 
that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him."  Alas  I  how  many  there 
are  who  do  not  know  that  God  justifieth  the  ungodly ;  that  sinners  can  be  regarded 
as  just,  through  what  Christ  has  done  and  suffered.  (3)  Many  are  ignorant  as  to 
how  they  are  to  receive  this  righteousness.  The  current  notion  is,  '•  I  must  pray 
BO  much ;  I  must  weep  so  much ;  I  must  feel  so  much."  Ah !  this  is  the  common 
ignorance;  whereas  men  should  know  that  "there  is  life  for  a  look  at  the  Crucified 
One."  (4)  The  worst  of  this  terrible  ignorance  is,  that  the  mass  of  mankind  do  not 
know  Him  who  is  our  righteousness.  "  Who  hath  believed  our  report  ?  and  to 
whom  is  the  arm  of  the  Lord  revealed?"  2.  This  ignorance — (1)  Is  of  the  facts 
of  the  truth.  You  do  not  know  that  in  the  very  midst  and  heart  of  London  there 
are  tens  of  thousands  who  do  not  know  the  name  of  Christ.  (2)  Of  the  excellence 
of  the  gospel.  They  do  not  know  the  peace,  the  joy,  the  rest  it  brings.  (3)  With 
many  is  wilful.  Nobody  is  so  blind  as  the  man  that  does  not  want  to  see ; 
nobody  so  deaf  as  the  man  that  does  not  wish  to  hear.  (4)  Some  are  ignorant 
despairingly.  The  devil  tells  men,  first,  that  they  can  be  saved  any  day  they  Uke  ; 
so  they  may  put  it  off.  Then  he  says,  "  Salvation  is  not  for  such  as  you."  But 
Christ  says  that  whoever  comes  to  Him  He  will  in  no  wise  cast  out.  II.  Selp- 
wiLL.  Men,  ignorant  of  God's  righteousness,  "  go  about  to  establish  their  own." 
1.  They  set  up  the  poor  idol  of  their  own  righteousness.  There  is  a  treasure  of 
gold,  and  the  man  says,  "  No,  I  will  not  have  that.  I  think  that  I  could  make  a 
sovereign  at  home  out  of  a  bit  of  brass."  If  I  were  at  heaven's  gate,  and  a  voice 
should  say,  "  Enter  freely,"  and  I  replied,  "  No,  I  think  I  prefer  the  Surrey  hills, 
or  a  place  down  by  the  seaside."  what  a  fool  I  should  be  I  A  human  thing  at  best, 
how  shall  that  match  the  Divine  righteousness  ?  An  imperfect  thing  at  best,  how  shall 
I  compare  that  with  the  perfect  righteoasness  of  Chnst?    A  fadmg,  fleeting  thing, 


836  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [can.  x. 

always  apl  to  be  damaged  by  the  next  moment's  temptation,  how  can  I  be  so 
foolish  7  2.  In  what  vain  efforts  they  spend  their  time  and  strength  1  Ton  wil] 
better  understand  the  text  if  I  read  it :  "  They  go  about  to  set  up  their  own  right- 
eousness." It  is  a  dead  thing.  The  corpse  of  our  own  righteousness  has  a 
tendency  to  fall,  and  down  it  goes  1  "  It  wants  something  inside  "  ;  for  until  there 
is  life  within,  it  will  not  stand.  It  is  like  a  man  trying  to  patch  up  an  old  house 
which  has  not  been  repaired  for  fifty  years.  So  he  puts  in  a  beam  there,  and  a 
strut  there,  and  another  timber  there  ;  and,  by  the  time  he  has  spent  as  much  aa 
would  have  built  a  house,  he  has  got  a  very  handsome  ruin  left,  and  nothing  more. 
Charles  the  First  used  to  swear,  "  God  mend  me."  Somebody  said  it  would  be  an 
easier  job  to  make  a  new  one  of  him.  "When  men  say,  "  God  mend  me,"  they  had 
better  say  "  God  make  me  new."  3.  They  "go  about "  to  do  this.  (1)  They  set 
about  it  with  great  zeal.  When  a  man  says,  "I  am  going  about  a  thing," he  means 
that  he  is  going  to  take  his  coat  off.  I  recollect  how  I  set  to  work  in  my  shirt- 
sleeves to  make  a  righteousness  of  my  own ;  and  I  did  very  nicely  indeed  while  it 
was  dark.  But  when  a  little  light  from  the  Cross  broke  in  I  began  to  see  the 
filthiness  of  it.  (2)  They  have  various  ways  of  doing  it.  I  have  talked  with  a 
person,  and  said,  "  Can  you  trust  in  your  own  works  ?  "  •'  Oh,  no."  "  Well,  can 
you  come  to  Christ,  and  take  the  righteousness  of  God  ?  "  •'  Well,  no ;  I  do  not 
feel  enough  my  own  emptiness."  Each  time  yon  drive  him  out  of  his  refuge  of 
lies  he  hastens  back  to  the  old  ground  again — something  of  himself.  There  is  a 
ship  out  at  sea,  and  one  of  the  crew  says, ' '  I  know  that  we  shall  not  drift  far  out  of 
our  course."  "  Why  ?  "  "  Because  we  have  such  a  big  anchor  on  board."  Why, 
an  anchor  on  board  is  no  good  to  anybody  I  It  is  when  you  "  let  go  "  the  anchor, 
and  lose  sight  of  it,  that  it  is  good  for  something.  So  you  want  to  have  your 
anchor  on  board.  You  do  not  like  it  to  "  enter  into  that  which  is  within  the  veil." 
Yo«  want  to  feel  something,  to  have  something  of  your  own.  0  self-will  1  God 
will  have  salvation  to  be  all  of  grace,  and  man  will  have  it  of  debt.  4.  These  efforts 
of  men  for  their  own  salvation  are  deadly  efforts.  God  will  save  them  one  way,  and 
they  want  to  be  saved  another.  God  says,  "  There  is  medicine ;  take  it."  Man 
says,  "  No,  I  will  compound  my  own  physic."  Can  he  ever  get  well  in  such  a  way 
as  that?  God  says,  "I  will  forgive."  Man  says,  "I  will  try  and  deserve  to  be 
forgiven  " — as  if  that  could  be  possible.  III.  Flat  rebellion.  "  They  have  not 
submitted  themselves  unto  the  righteousness  of  God."  This  is— 1.  A  strange  word. 
Here  ia  a  criminal  who  will  not  submit  to  be  pardoned ;  a  sick  man  who  will  not 
submit  to  be  made  well ;  a  poor  beggar  who  will  not  submit  to  be  made  into  a 
gentleman.  2.  A  searching  word.  Do  I  stick  out?  Am  I  such  a  self-willed  fool 
that  I  will  not  submit  before  my  Maker — will  not  yield  even  to  have  salvation  for 
nothing  ?  3.  A  true  word.  There  is  many  a  sinner  who  has  nothing  to  be  proud 
of,  and  yet  he  is  as  proud  as  Lucifer.  A  dustman  can  be  as  proud  as  my  Lord 
Mayor.  The  worse  the  man,  the  harder  he  is  to  bow  before  the  righteousness  of 
God.  4.  A  suggestive  word.  They  will  not  own  that  God  is  King.  When  a  man 
denies  the  rights  of  the  magistrate  to  condemn  him,  how  can  he  be  pardoned  ?  You 
must  yield.  Submit  to  the  fact  that  God  is  God,  or  else  you  will  not  submit  to 
God's  righteousness.  5.  A  very  word.  All  I  have  to  do  is  to  submit  myself. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Yer.  4.  For  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that 
belleveth. — Christ  the  end  of  the  law  : — L  In  what  sense  ?  1.  As  its  great  antitype. 
2.  Its  only  sacrifice.  3.  The  source  of  its  moral  power.  II.  Fob  what  end  ?  To 
secure — 1.  Pardon  of  sin.  2.  Holiness  of  life.  III.  Unto  whom  ?  1.  Every  one. 
2.  That  believeth.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Christ  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousnest : — 
I.  The  end  of  all  law  is  bighteousness — the  production  of  the  most  perfect 
results.  1.  In  the  natural  world  the  use  of  the  law  is  to  perpetuate  results  essential 
to  its  well-being,  e.g.,  the  circulation  of  the  atmosphere,  ebb  and  flow  of  tide, 
alteration  of  seasons,  motions  and  influence  of  planets,  do.  2.  The  great  aim  of 
law  in  the  moral  world  is  to  regulate  conduct  so  as  to  produce  a  righteous  character. 
The  aim  of  the  law  of  Moses  was  to  lead  to  a  higher  life  (chap.  vii.  10).  (1)  The 
ethical  element  in  the  Mosaic  law  discovered  to  man  the  havoc  made  by  sin  (chap, 
vii.  7,  11,  13).  (2)  The  ceremonial  element  shadowed  forth  the  remedy.  The 
sacrifices  and  festivals  were  intended  to  show  the  necessity  for  the  expiation  of  sin, 
by  the  atonement  of  Christ.  II.  In  Chbist  we  have  the  oband  end  of  both  thb 
ethical  and  ceeemonial  law — righteousness  and  holiness.  Law  depends  for  its 
authority  upon  the  personal  character  of  the  lawgiver.    The  character  of  Christ 


CHAP,  t]  ROMANS.  83T 

was  like  His  law — holy,  jast,  and  good.  1.  Prom  Christ  proceeds  the  moral  law  by 
which  sin  is  discovered  to  us.  His  character  is  a  constant  reproof  to  as.  Hia 
words  bring  home  the  consciousness  of  violated  law.  2.  In  Christ  is  the  only 
remedy  for  sin.  The  arrangements  of  the  ceremonial  law  terminated  in  Him — the 
shadow  retired  when  the  substance  appeared.  In  His  life  and  death  He  fulfilled 
the  duties  and  endured  the  penalties  of  the  law,  thus  vindicating  the  righteousness 
of  God  and  providing  a  complete  righteousness  for  sinful  man.  III.  Faith  in 
Christ  is  accepted  as  a  pebtect  obedience  to  the  law.  Law  is  powerless  punitively 
when  the  end  for  which  it  exists  is  attained.  We  disarm  the  law  by  obeying  it. 
All  our  unaided  efforts  to  obey  law — while  in  a  state  of  lawless  unnature — are 
futile.  It  is  like  running  alongside  a  parallel  pathway  into  which  we  are  vainly 
trying  to  turn  ourselves.  Faith,  and  faith  only,  is  the  means  of  junction.  This 
puts  us  into  the  position  in  which  law  would  place  us.  The  end  of  all  law  being 
the  production  of  the  most  perfect  results,  this  very  end  is  answered  when  we 
believe  in  Jesus.  For  Christ,  and  all  He  has,  becomes  our  own.  "  He  is  made 
onto  us,  of  God,  wisdom  and  righteousness,  and  sanctification  and  redemption." 
*'  The  law  and  the  gospel  are  evidenced  in  man's  moral  nature.  The  law  the  ideal 
of  its  life,  the  gospel  the  life  of  its  ideal."  Lessons  :  1.  It  is  hopeless  to  attempt 
to  attain  righteousness  by  law,  because  of  our  moral  inability  to  obey  all  its 
requirements.  2.  Faith  in  Christ  is  the  only  and  universal  way  of  obedience. 
{J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Christ  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness: — I.  What  is 
lUPLiED  IN  THESE  WORDS.  1.  That  the  law  of  God  has  been  universally  broken 
(chap.  iii.  10-12).  2.  That,  therefore,  every  man  is  under  the  curse  of  that  law 
(Gal.  iii.  13 ;  Rom.  ii.  8-11).  3.  That,  in  order  to  be  saved,  this  curse  must  be 
removed  and  sins  remitted.  4.  That  no  man  of  himself  can  remove  this  curse  or 
obtain  this  remission  of  his  sins.  5.  That  notwithstanding  God  cannot  recede 
from  His  claims,  nor  abate  one  jot  or  tittle  of  what  His  holy  law  demands,  either  in 
penalty  or  precept.  6.  That  every  person  who  would  obtain  salvation  must  look 
out  for  such  a  righteousness  as  shall  be  answerable  to  all  the  claims  of  the  law,  be 
perfectly  satisfactory  to  God,  and  therefore  available  for  his  justification  and  peace. 
II.  In  what  WAT  IS  "  Christ  the  end  op  the  law  fob  bighteou6nes8  to  every  one 
THAT  BELiEVETH  "  ?  Consider — 1.  The  general  purport  of  Christ's  coming  (Psa.  xl. 
6-10  ;  Heb.  x.  1-14 ;  Isa.  xlii.  6,  7,  21 ;  Dan.  ix.  24  ;  Jer.  xxiii.  5, 6 ;  xxxiii.  15, 16 ; 
Isa.  liii.  6,  c/.  1  Pet.  ii.  24 ;  2  Cor.  v.  21).  2.  The  special  character  of  His 
mediation.  We  must  consider  it  as  substitutional.  We  must  behold  Him  rendering 
unto  God,  for  those  whom  He  represented,  a  perfect  obedience  to  the  law  which 
they  have  broken,  and  suffering  to  its  full  and  utmost  extent  the  curse  which  they 
have  incurred.  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness — not  by  abrogating 
its  authority,  or  lowering  its  requisitions,  to  meet  the  exigencies  of  our  lapsed 
condition — but  rather  by  asserting  its  full  obligation  and  satisfying  all  its  equitable 
claims.  This  is  the  great  glory  of  the  gospel — that  God  can  be  just — in  exacting 
every  claim  of  the  law  and  in  punishing  every  sin  of  those  whom  He  saves  to  its 
full  desert — and  yet  the  justifier  of  them  that  believe  in  Jesus.     III.  To  whom  is 

THIS     provision    AVAILABLE,     OR     WHO    ABE    BENEFITED    THEREBY.       "  EvCry    OnC    that 

believeth,"  and  no  more.  But  we  must  ascertain — 1.  The  testimony  given  in 
Scripture  to  this  truth.  We  are  again  and  again  told  that  faith  alone  is  the  means 
appointed  by  God  for  granting  the  efificacy  of  this  provision  to  the  souls  of  men. 

2.  Why  we  can  be  benefited  in  this  way  of  faith,  and  in  no  other?  It  is  enough 
to  say  that  God  hath  declared  it.  But  we  need  not  let  the  subject  rest  here.  Man 
is  utterly  lost,  helpless,  and  undone.  Nothing  that  we  can  do  can  avail  for  our 
salvation.  Our  help  and  hope  are  based  upon  One,  who  only  is  mighty  to  save.  It 
is  therefore  evident  that  the  only  way  in  which  we  can  be  benefited  by  what 
another  has  done  for  our  salvation,  must  be  by  believing  in  Him  for  the  execution 
of  such  an  interposition,  and  for  the  advantage  of  the  blessing  procured  thereby. 

3.  What  is  the  nature  of  that  faith  by  which  we  become  interested  in  this 
righteousness.  It  is  the  act  of  a  soul  made  willing  in  the  day  of  God's  power, 
under  a  clear  discovery  of  its  lost  condition,  and  a  clear  perception  of  the  mediation 
of  Jesus,  by  which  it  is  brought  to  rely  on  that  mediation,  and  to  plead  that 
righteousness  with  God  for  its  pardon  and  peace  (chap.  x.  10  ;  Heb.  xi.  1).  4.  To 
what  extent  is  this  truth  to  be  carried  in  the  justification  of  the  sinner  before  God? 
To  the  full  extent  for  which  it  is  designed  for  that  purpose.  It  takes  in  the  sinner's 
whole  case — sins,  guilt,  condemnation,  and  deserved  wrath.  It  brings  him  a  full 
and  complete  deliverance  and  justification  from  all.  Nay,  more,  it  invests  him  with 
the  perfect  righteousness  of  Christ,  as  a  perfect  fulfilment  of  the  law  by  which  ha 

VOL.    IT.  22 


838  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  x 

stands  accepted  with  God.  IV.  What  are  the  importance  and  advantages  arisino 
THEREFROM.  Hereby — 1.  The  law  is  established  in  all  its  authority,  obligations, 
and  claims.  2.  God  is  honoured  and  exalted  in  the  possession  and  exercise  of  all 
His  perfections.  3.  A  sure  and  certain  way  of  life  and  salvation,  of  .pardon  and 
peace,  is  opened  for  guilty  men.  4.  A  sure  provision  is  made  for  a  loving,  devoted, 
and  dehghtful  obedience  to  the  will  of  God.  5.  There  is  afforded  to  the  soul  a  ^re 
rock  for  its  present  safety  and  a  firm  foundation  for  its  future  security,  even  for 
ever.  6.  The  Church  of  God  is  provided  with  an  unerring  test  by  which  to  try 
every  doctrine  proposed  for  her  acceptance,  and  an  indomitable  weapon  by  which 
to  conquer  every  antichristian  foe.  {R.  Shittler.)  Christ  the  end  of  the  law  for 
righteousness: — I.  The  proposition.  " Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law."  The  end  of 
a  thing  is  either  mathematical  or  moral.  The  mathematical  end  is  the  utmost  part 
of  a  thing,  in  which  the  length  or  continuance  is  determined ;  as  a  point  is  the  end 
of  a  line,  death  the  end  of  life,  the  day  of  judgment  the  end  of  this  world.  The 
moral  end  of  a  thing  is  the  scope  and  perfection  of  it.  Now  Christ  is  the  end  of 
the  law  both  ways.  1.  The  mathematical  end  of  the  ceremonial  and  moral.  Of 
the  ceremonial  by  a  direct  signification,  of  the  moral  by  an  accidental  direction. 
The  ceremonies  signified  Christ  and  ended  at  Him.  Properly,  the  moral  law  leads 
sinners  to  the  curse,  but  by  account  to  Christ,  as  the  disease  leads  to  the  medicine 
or  physician.  2.  He  is  also  the  moral  end  of  both.  For  He  is  the  body  of  those 
ceremonies  and  shadows,  and  He  perfectly  fulfilled  the  Decalogue  for  us,  and  that 
three  ways.  (1)  In  His  pure  conception.  (2)  In  His  godly  life.  (3)  In  His  holy  and 
obedient  sufferings,  and  all  for  us.  For  whatsoever  the  law  required  that  we  should 
be,  do,  or  suffer,  He  hath  performed  in  our  behalf.  Therefore  one  wittily  saith 
that  Christ  is  Telos,  the  end,  or  tribute,  and  we,  by  His  payment,  Ateleis,  tribute- 
free,  we  are  discharged  by  Him  before  God.  Christ  is  both  these  ends,  but 
principally  the  last  is  here  understood.  II.  The  amplification  "  for  righteousness." 
"When  thou  art  come  to  Christ  thou  must  not  cast  away  the  law,  but  use  it  still  to 
make  thee  more  to  cling  unto  Christ  and  as  a  rule  of  righteous  living.  Christ  is 
the  end  of  the  law,  nrt  the  killing,  but  fulfilling  end  ;  not  to  end,  but  to  urge  thy 
obedience.  When  the  merchant  is  come  aboard  his  ship  by  boat,  he  drowns  not 
his  boat,  but  hoists  it  up  into  his  ship ;  he  may  have  use  of  it  another  time.  Or 
as  a  nobleman  neglects  not  his  schoolmaster  when  he  is  come  to  his  lands,  but 
prefers  him.  So  certainly,  if  the  law  (though  sharp)  hath  brought  thee  to  Christ, 
thou  canst  not  but  love  it  for  this  ofiSce ;  if  thou  doest  not,  thou  hast  not  Christ. 
Yea,  it  will  be  the  delight  of  a  man  to  be  then  doing,  when  Christ  is  with  him,  as 
Peter  then  wiUicgly  and  with  success  cast  out  his  net.  Without  Christ  the  law  is  an 
^  uncomfortable  study;  but  with  Him,  nothing  more  delightful.  {Elnathan  Parr,  B.D.) 
A  Christ  the  end  of  the  law  : — Consider — I.  Christ  in  connection  with  the  law.  The 
law  is  that  which  we  have  cause  to  dread;  for  the  sting  of  death  is  sin,  and  the 
strength  of  sin  is  the  law.  "  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things 
that  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them."  Yet,  like  the  fascination  which 
attracts  the  gnat  to  the  candle,  men  by  nature  fly  to  the  law  for  salvation.  Now, 
what  has  our  Lord  to  do  with  the  law?  1.  He  is  its  purpose  and  object.  The  law 
is  our  schoolmaster,  or  rather  our  attendant  to  conduct  us  to  the  school  of  Jesus ; 
the  great  net  in  which  the  fish  are  enclosed  that  they  may  be  drawn  out  of  the  ele- 
ment of  sin  ;  the  stormy  wind  which  drives  souls  into  the  harbour  of  refuge  ;  the 
sheriff's  officer  to  shut  men  up  in  prison  for  their  sin,  concluding  them  all  under 
condemnation  in  order  that  they  may  look  to  the  free  grace  of  God  alone  for 
deliverance.  It  empties  that  grace  may  fill,  wounds  that  mercy  may  heaL  Had 
man  never  fallen,  the  law  would  have  been  most  helpful  to  show  him  the  way  in 
which  he  should  walk:  and  by  keeping  it  he  would  have  lived  (ver.  5).  But  since 
man  has  fallen,  a  way  of  salvation  by  works  has  become  impossible.  The  law  is 
meant  to  lead  the  sinner  to  faith  in  Christ,  by  showing  the  impossibility  of  any 
other  way.  It  is  the  dog  to  fetch  the  sheep  to  the  shepherd,  the  burning  heat  which 
drives  the  traveller  to  the  shadow  of  the  great  rook  in  a  weary  land.  The  law  is 
adapted  to  this ;  for — (1)  It  shows  man  his  sin.  Who  can  lay  his  own  character 
side  by  side  with  it  withont  seeing  how  far  he  has  fallen  short  of  the  standard  ? 
When  the  law  comes  home  to  the  soul  it  is  like  light  in  a  dark  room  revealing  the 
dust  and  the  dirt  which  else  had  been  unperceived.  It  is  the  test  which  detects  the 
presence  of  the  poison  of  sin  in  the  soul.  A  true  balance  discovers  short  weight,  and 
such  is  the  first  effect  of  the  law  upon  the  conscience  of  man.  (2)  It  shows  the 
result  and  mischief  of  sin.  The  types  were  intended  to  lead  men  to  Christ  by  making 
them  see  their  unclean  condition  and  their  need  of  such  cleansing  as  only  He  can 


CHAP.  X.]  ROMANS.  839 

give.  Men  put  apart  because  of  disease  or  onclearmess  were  made  to  see  how  sin 
Beparated  them  from  God ;  and  when  they  were  brought  back  and  purified  with 
mystic  rites,  they  were  made  to  see  how  they  can  only  be  restored  by  Christ,  the 
great  High  Priest.  "  Without  sheilding  of  blood  is  no  remission."  (3)  It  teaches 
men  their  utter  helplessness.  Such  holiness  as  the  law  demands  no  man  can  reach 
of  himself.  "  Thy  commandment  is  exceeding  broad."  "  Who  can  bring  a  clean 
thing  out  of  an  unclean  ?  Not  one."  **  How  can  he  be  clean  that  is  born  of  a 
woman  ?  "  In  grace  there  is  hope,  but  as  a  matter  of  debt  there  is  none,  for  we  do 
not  merit  anything  but  wrath.  The  law  tells  us  this,  and  the  sooner  we  know  it  to 
be  so  the  better,  for  the  sooner  we  shall  fly  to  Christ.  (4)  It  shows  us  our  great 
need.  The  law  is  the  surgeon's  knife  which  cuts  out  the  proud  flesh  that  the  wound 
may  lieal.  The  law  by  itself  only  sweeps  and  raises  the  dust,  but  the  gospel  sprinkles 
clean  water  upon  the  dust.  The  law  kills,  the  gospel  makes  aUve ;  the  law  strips, 
and  then  Jesus  Christ  robes  the  soul  in  beauty.  2.  Christ  is  the  law's  fulfilment. 
(1)  God  by  immutable  necessity  demands  righteousness  of  His  creatures,  and  the 
law  is  not  compelled  to  lower  its  terms,  as  though  it  had  originally  asked  too  much ; 
but  Christ  gives  the  law  all  it  requires.  The  law  claims  complete  obedience,  and 
Christ  has  brought  in  such  a  righteousness  as  that,  and  gives  it  to  His  people. 
Only  as  righteous  ones  can  we  be  saved,  but  Christ  makes  us  righteous,  and  there- 
fore we  are  saved.  (2)  Jesus  has  thus  fulfilled  the  original  demands  of  the  law, 
but  since  we  have  broken  it  there  are  other  demands.  God  "  will  by  no  means  clear 
the  guilty,"  but  every  transgression  shall  have  its  just  punishment.  Here,  then, 
Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  as  to  penalty.  The  claims  of  the  law  both  as  broken 
and  unbroken  Christ  has  met :  both  the  positive  and  the  penal  demands  are  satis- 
fied in  Him.  (3)  Not  only  has  the  penalty  been  paid,  but  Christ  has  put  great  honour 
upon  the  law  in  so  doing.  If  the  whole  race  had  kept  the  law  it  would  not  stand 
in  so  splendid  a  position  as  it  does  now  that  the  Son  of  God  has  paid  obeisance  to 
it.  Who  shall  say  a  word  against  the  law  to  which  the  Lawgiver  Himself  submits  ? 
(4)  The  law's  stability  also  has  been  secured  by  Christ.  That  alone  can  remain 
which  is  proved  to  be  just,  and  Jesus  has  proved  the  law  to  be  so,  maguifying  it  and 
making  it  honourable.  He  says,  "  I  am  not  come  to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil."  As  to 
the  settlement  of  the  eternal  principles  of  right  and  wrong,  Christ's  life  and  death 
have  achieved  this  for  ever.  "  We  establish  the  law,  we  do  not  make  void  the  law 
through  faith."  3.  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  in  that  He  is  the  termination  of  it 
in  two  senses.  (1)  His  people  are  not  under  it  as  a  covenant  of  life.  "  We  are  not 
under  the  law,  but  under  grace."  (2)  We  are  no  longer  under  its  curse.  Jesus  has 
given  us  all  the  righteousness  it  demands,  and  the  law  is  bound  to  bless.  "  Blessed 
is  he  whose  transgression  is  forgiven,  whose  sin  is  covered."  II.  Oubselves  in  con- 
nection WITH  Christ — for  "to  every  one  that  believeth."  To  believe  is  not  merely 
to  accept  a  set  of  doctrines  but  to  trust,  to  confide,  to  rest  in.  Dost  thou  believe 
that  Christ  stood  in  the  sinner's  stead  and  suffered  the  just  for  the  unjust,  and  that 
He  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  ?  And  dost  thou  therefore  lay  the  whole  weight 
of  thy  soul's  salvation  upon  Him  alone  ?  Then  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for 
rkhteousnessjio.thge,  and  thouarLlighte^]^.  It  is  of  no  use  to  bring  forward  any- 
tnihg"  else  if~you  arenot  bellevTng,  for  nofEIng  will  avail — sacraments,  prayers,  Ac. 
Observe — 1.  There  is  no  question  raised  about  the  previous  character,  for  it  is  writ- 
ten, "  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that  believeth." 
But,  Lord,  this  man  before  he  beUeved  was  a  persecutor  and  injurious.  Yes,  and 
that  is  the  very  man  who  wrote  these  words.  So  if  I  address  one  who  is  defiled 
with  every  sin,  yet  I  say  if  thou  believest  thine  iniquities  are  blotted  out,  for  the 
blood  of  Christ  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin.  2.  There  is  nothing  said  by  way  of  quali- 
fication as  to  the  strength  of  the  faith.  He  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness 
to  every  one  that  believeth,  whether  he  is  Little  Faith  or  Greatheart.  The 
link  may  be  very  like  a  film,  a  spider's  line  of  trembling  faith,  but,  if  it  runs  all  the 
way  from  the  heart  to  Christ,  Divine  grace  can  and  wiU  flow  along  the  most  slender 
thread.  It  is  marvellous  how  fine  the  wire  may  be  that  will  carry  the  electric  flash. 
If  thy  faith  be  of  the  mustard-seed  kind,  if  it  be  only  such  as  tremblingly  touches 
the  garment's  hem,  if  it  be  but  the  faith  of  sinking  Peter,  or  weeping  Mary,  yet 
Christ  will  be  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  thee  as  well  as  to  the  chief  of 
the  apostles.  3.  If  this  be  so  then  all  of  us  who  believe  are  righteous.  We  are  not 
completely  sanctified,  but  still,  in  the  sight  of  God,  we  are  righteous,  and  being 
justified  by  faith  we  have  peace  with  Him.  4.  The  connection  of  our  text  assures 
as  that  being  righteous  we  are  saved  (ver.  9).  Conclusion :  1.  If  any  one  thinks  he 
can  save  himself,  and  that  his  own  righteousness  will  suffice  before  God,  I  would 


840  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  & 

ask,  if  your  righteousness  sufficeth,  why  did  Christ  come  here  to  work  one  out  ?  2. 
For  any  to  reject  the  righteousness  of  Christ  must  be  to  perish  everlastingly, 
because  it  cannot  be  that  God  will  accept  you  or  your  pretended  righteousness  when 
you  have  refused  the  real  and  Divine  righteousness  which  He  sets  before  you  in  His 
Son.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Christ  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  : — I.  What  that 
BiGHTEODSNESs  IS,  SPOKEN  OF  IN  THE  TEXT.  Evidently  that  which  is  necessary  in  order 
to  eternal  life,  and  which  infallibly  leads  to  it  (chap.  v.  17,  21).  It  is  termed  "  The 
righteousness  of  God  "  (ver.  3  ;  chap.  i.  17),  and  said  to  be  by  faith  (chap.  iii.  21,  22  ; 
Phil.  iii.  9).  It  implies — 1.  Justification  (chap.  iii.  24  ;  Tit.  iii.  7) ;  without  which, 
as  guilty  condemned  sinners,  we  can  have  no  title  to  eternal  life.  2.  Begeneration 
or  sanctification  (see  Phil.  iii.  9) ;  spoken  of  Eph.  iv.  17-24 ;  Tit.  iii.  5,  6 ;  John 
iii.  5,  6 ;  without  which  we  are  not  in  Christ  (2  Cor.  v.  17;  Gal.  vi.  15),  and  have 
no  fitness  for  heaven.  3.  Practical  obedience  (Eph.  ii.  10) ;  the  grand  evidence 
that  we  are  righteous  (Luke  L  6  ;  1  John  iii.  7).  As  to  the  necessity  of  this,  see 
chap.  ii.  6,  7  ;  Rev.  xxii.  14 ;  and  especially  Matt.  vii.  20,  21.  U.  Whebe  and  how 
THIS  righteousness  IS  TO  BE  FOUND.  1.  Not  in,  or  by,  the  law.  (1)  The  moral  law 
(chap.  viii.  8)  which  requires  perfect  obedience.  This  we  have  not  paid,  do  not,  and 
cannot  in  future,  pay.  Hence  it  finds  us  guilty,  and  has  no  pardon  to  give  us ;  it 
finds  us  depraved,  and  has  no  new  nature  for  us  ;  it  finds  us  helpless,  and  has  no 
supernatural  aid  to  impart.  (2)  The  ceremonial  law.  Its  sacrifices  could  not  re- 
move sin  (Heb.  ix.  23 ;  x.  4).  Its  purifications  could  only  impart  a  ceremonial 
cleanness,  or  remove  "  the  filth  of  the  flesh  "  (Heb.  ix.  13 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  21).  Its 
institutions  respecting  meats,  days,  &c.  As  they  did  not  make  the  tree  good,  of 
course  the  fruit  could  not  be  good  (Matt.  xii.  16-19).  2.  But  wherefore,  then,  serveth 
the  law?  In  Christ  was  the  end  for  which  the  law  was  instituted  ;  the  moral  law 
being  chiefly  to  convince  men  of  sin  (chap.  iii.  19,  20 ;  vii.  7,  8),  and  thus  to  be  a 
"  schoolmaster  to  bring  them  to  Christ  "  (Gal.  iii.  19-24),  and  the  ceremonial  law 
to  shadow  forth  His  sacrifice  and  grace.  The  end  may  mean — (1)  The  scope  ;  the 
law  continually  points  to  Christ ;  the  moral  law  directs  the  sinner  to  Him  who  ful- 
filled and  removed  the  curse  of  it,  for  that  justification  which  itself  cannot  give; 
and  the  ceremonial  law  directs  him  to  look  from  its  sacrifices  and  purifications  to 
the  atonement  and  Spirit  of  Christ.  (2)  The  perfection,  or  completion  (1  Tim.  i. 
5).  Christ  fulfilled  the  moral  law  in  fully  explaining  its  meaning,  and  freeing  it 
from  the  glosses  of  the  Scribes ;  in  obeying  it,  in  suffering  its  penalty,  and  in  pro- 
viding that  it  may  be  written  in  our  hearts ;  He  also  answered  in  His  person  all  the 
types  and  shadows  of  the  ceremonial  law.  (3)  The  period  or  termination  (chap, 
vi.  21).  Thus  the  whole  Mosaic  dispensation  gives  way  to  the  gospel  (2  Cor.  iii.  11), 
and  its  ceremonies  are  taken  out  of  the  way  by  Christ  (Col.  ii.  14).  3.  "  Christ  is 
the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness."  (1)  For  justification,  or  righteousness  im- 
puted, is  only  to  be  found  in  His  obedience  unto  death  (chap,  iii,  24 ;  1  Cor.  i.  30  ; 
2  Cor.  V.  21).  (2)  Begeneration,  a  new  creation,  and  entire  sanctification  are  only 
to  be  found  in  Christ,  by  His  Spirit  and  grace,  who  is  made  of  God  to  us  sanctifi- 
cation (John  i.  14,  16  ;  2  Cor.  v.  17 ;  1  Cor.  i.  30).  (3)  Practical  righteousness  is 
likewise  to  be  had  in  Him ;  His  laws  direct  us  how  to  walk ;  His  promises  and 
threatenings  enforce  His  laws ;  His  example  allures  us  ;  and  His  grace  enables  us 
to  walk  in  His  ways  (2  Cor.  xii.  9  ;  Heb.  iv.  14-16).  III.  By  whom  this  righteous- 
ness IS  TO  BE  FOUND.  By  "  eveiy  one  that  beUeveth  "  (vers.  5-10).  1.  Its  object  ia 
that  God  hath  raised  Christ  from  the  dead.  This — (1)  Demonstrated  Him  to  be 
the  Son  of  God  (chap.  L  3,  4),  and,  therefore,  the  only  Saviour  able  and  willing  to 
save  to  the  uttermost.  Of  this  faith  is  persuaded,  and,  therefore,  trusts  in  Him  for 
salvation.  (2)  Was  the  broad  seal  of  heaven  set  to  His  doctrine,  of  which  faith  ia 
BO  thoroughly  persuaded  as  to  lay  it  to  heart  and  walk  according  to  it.  (3)  Was  to 
show  that  His  atonement  was  sufficient  and  accepted ;  of  this  faith  is  also  per- 
suaded and,  therefore,  relies  solely  on  the  propitiation  in  His  blood  for  justification 
(chap.  iii.  23,  &c. ;  Gal.  ii.  16-20).  (4)  Was  that  He  might  ascend,  and  intercede, 
and  receive  for  us  "  the  promise  of  the  Father,"  for  which  faith  thirsts  and  comes 
to  Him  (John  vii.  37,  38).  (5)  He  rose  and  ascended  as  our  Forerunner.  This 
faith  believes,  and,  consequently,  anticipates  immortality  and  glory.  He  rose  to 
give  evidence  that  He  will  judge  all  mankind  (Acts  xvii.  31).  Faith  is  persuaded  of 
this,  and  prepares  to  meet  Him.  2.  Our  faith,  in  these  respects,  must  be  such  as 
wiU  enable  us  to  "  make  confession  with  our  mouth,"  therefore  it  must  be  "  with 
the  heart  man  believeth  unto  righteousness  "  (ver.  10).  As  to  the  faith  that  does 
not  ]>art  with  sin,  and  give  up  everything  that  stands  in  competition  with  Christ, 
it  is  dead  (James  ii.  20-26).     3.  As  to  the  origin  of  this  faith  (see  vera.  11-17).     It 


CHAT.  X.]  ROMANS.  841 

arises  from  the  Word  and  Spirit  of  God  (Acta  xvi.  14 ;  Eph.  iL  8,  9 ;  Col.  ii.  12). 
Therefore,  hearing,  reading,  and  prayer,  are  the  important  means.  And  in  the 
exercise  of  that  measure  of  faith  we  have  received,  hovrever  small,  it  will  be 
increased.  (Joseph  Benson.)  Christ  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  : — I.  The 
IMMUTABILITY  OF  THE  LAW  IS  A  FUNDAMENTAL  TRUTH.  This  rcsts  On  its  naturc  and  the 
immutability  of  God.  The  evidence  is  found  in  nature  and  conscience,  1.  This  the 
Jews  believed,  and  it  lay  at  the  foundation  of  their  error,  which  was  twofold.  (1) 
That  the  law  was  to  be  fulfilled  by  their  own  righteousness.  (2)  TLat  the  form  in 
which  the  law  was  immutable  was  Mosaism.  2.  This  error  led — (1)  To  the  effort 
to  establish  their  own  righteousness.  (2)  To  their  making  righteousness  consist  in 
ceremonial  obedience.  3.  Paul  taught — (1)  That  the  law  is  immutable.  (2)  That 
it  cannot  be  satisfied  by  our  righteousness,  but  only  by  the  righteousness  of  God, 

(3)  That  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that  believeth. 

(4)  Consequently  the  immutability  of  the  law  is  consistent  with  its  abrogation, 
because  its  abrogation  is  effected  by  its  fulfilment.  The  law  is  immutable  so  far  as 
it  demands  righteousness  as  an  indispensable  condition  of  justification.  But  it  is 
abrogated  so  far  as  it  says,  •'  Do  this  and  live,"  i.e.,  so  far  as  it  requires  our  own 
righteousness.  II.  In  what  sense  is  Chbist  the  end  of  the  law.  1.  Not  in  the 
sense  of  its  completion.  Telos  never  occurs  in  the  sense  of  pleroma,  2.  But  in  the 
sense  of  having  made  an  end  of  it,  abolished  it.  This  He  has  done — (1)  In  so 
satisfying  its  demands  that  it  ceases  to  require  our  own  personal  righteousness  as  a 
condition  of  justification.  (2)  In  putting  an  end  to  the  Mosaic  institutions,  so  that 
obedience  to  that  law  is  no  longer  necessary  to  salvation.  8.  In  the  sense  of  being 
its  aim  or  object.  This  means  either — (1)  That  the  end  of  the  law  is  righteousness. 
Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  because  He  is  our  righteousness ;  its  design  is  secured 
in  Him.  So  that  it  is  by  faith,  not  works,  that  the  end  of  the  law  is  to  be  attained. 
(2)  Or,  Christ  is  the  object  aimed  at  in  the  law.  It  was  designed  to  bring  us  to 
Christ.  III.  Consequences.  1.  Out  of  Christ  we  are  exposed — (1)  To  the  inexor- 
able demands  of  the  law.  (2)  To  its  awful  curse.  (3)  To  its  slavish  spirit.  2.  In 
Him  we  are  righteous.  (1)  We  meet  all  the  demands  of  the  law  by  pleading  what 
He  has  done.  (2)  We  are  free  from  its  curse  as  He  was  made  a  curse  for  us.  (3) 
We  are  delivered  from  the  spirit  of  bondage  again  to  fear  and  are  filled  with  the 
Spirit  of  adoption.  Conclusion :  As  a  result  of  faith  in  Christ  our  righteousness  we 
have — 1.  Peace  with  God,  and  peace  of  conscience.  2.  Assurance  of  eternal  life, 
as  no  one  can  condemn  those  whom  God  justifies.  3.  A  principle  of  obedience,  for 
until  we  are  reconciled  there  can  be  no  holiness.  4.  All  the  benefits  of  Christ's 
triumph.  Having  obeyed  and  suffered  for  us  as  our  representative,  we  share  in  all 
the  blessings  promised  as  His  reward.  (C.  Hodge,  D.D.)  Christ  the  end  of  the 
law : — Christ  was  revealed  to  abrogate,  to  annihilate,  utterly  to  abolish  sin.  Now, 
we  all  know  what  it  is  to  have  a  thing  abrogated.  Certain  laws  have  held  good  up 
to  the  first  of  January  of  this  year  with  regard  to  the  hiring  of  public  carriages,  but 
now  are  under  a  new  law.  Suppose  a  driver  complies  with  the  new  law,  gets  his 
license,  puts  up  his  flag,  gives  the  passenger  his  card  of  prices,  and  afterwards  the 
passenger  summons  him  before  the  magistrate  for  asking  a  fare  not  authorised  by 
the  old  law  ;  the  magistrate  would  say,  "  You  are  out  of  court,  there  is  no  such  law. 
You  cannot  bring  the  man  here,  he  has  not  broken  the  old  law,  for  he  is  not  under  it. 
He  has  complied  with  the  requisition  of  the  new  law,  by  which  he  declares  himself  no 
longer  under  the  old  rules,  and  I  have  no  power  over  him."  So  he  that  believeth  in 
Christ  Jesus  may  be  summoned  by  conscience  when  misinformed  before  the  bar  of 
God,  but  the  answer  of  peace  to  his  conscience  is,  "Ye  are  not  under  the  law,  but 
under  grace."  "  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that 
believeth."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  relation  of  the  law  to  the  gospel  (text  and  1 
Tim.  i.  5) : — The  law  of  God  may  be  viewed  in  a  twofold  aspect,  to  distinguish 
between  which  is  to  prove  a  safeguard  against  both  the  errors  of  legality  and  the 
errors  of  antinomianism.  We  must  regard  the  law — I.  In  relation  to  the  righteous- 
ness WHICH  constitutes  THE  TITLE  TO  ITS  HEWARD3,  1.  When  wc  strive  to  make 
this  out  by  our  own  obedience,  the  aim  is  to  possess  ourselves  of  a  legal  right  to 
heaven.  We  proceed  on  the  imagination  of  a  contract  between  God  and  man — 
whereof  the  counterpart  terms  are  a  fulfilment  of  the  law's  requisitions  upon  the 
one  side,  and  a  bestowment  of  the  law's  rewards  upon  the  other.  The  one  is  the 
purchase-money — the  other  is  the  payment.  They  stand  related  to  each  other,  as 
work  does  to  wages.  Now  this  spirit  of  legality,  as  it  is  called,  is  nearly  the  uni- 
versal spirit  of  humanity.  They  are  not  the  Israelites  only  who  go  about  to  estab^ 
lish  a  righteousness  of  their  own.   There  is,  in  fact,  a  legal  disposition  in  the  heart. 


842  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHAJ.  j. 

and,  long  after  the  utter  shortness  of  hnman  virtue  has  been  demonstrated,  yet  will 
man,  as  if  by  the  bias  of  a  constitutional  necessity,  recur  to  the  old  legal  imagina- 
tion, of  this  virtue  being  a  thing  of  desert,  and  of  heaven  being  the  reward  which  is 
due  to  it.  2.  Now,  for  man  to  establish  a  right  by  his  righteousness,  is  in  the  face 
of  all  jurisprudence.  Both  the  law  and  the  gospel  alike  disown  man's  legal  right 
to  the  rewards  of  eternity  ;  and  if  he  be  too  proud  to  disown  it  himself,  he  remains 
both  a  victim  of  condemnation  by  the  one,  and  a  helpless,  hopeless  outcast  from  the 
mercy  of  the  other.  If  man  will  persist  in  seeking  to  make  out  a  title-deed  to 
heaven  by  his  own  obedience,  then  that  obedience  must  be  perfect.  Even  if  he  have 
but  committed  one  sin — there  is  the  barrier  of  a  moral  necessity  in  his  way,  which 
it  is  impossible  to  force.  The  God  who  cannot  lie,  cannot  recall  His  curse  upon 
every  one  who  continueth  not  in  aU  the  words  of  the  book  of  His  law  to  do  them. 
And  one  of  two  things  must  happen.  Either,  with  a  just  conception  of  the  standard 
of  the  law,  he  will  sink  into  despair  ;  or,  with  a  low  conception  of  that  standard, 
he,  though  but  grovelling  among  the  mere  decencies  of  civil  life  or  the  barren 
formalities  of  religious  service,  will  aspire  no  farther  and  yet  count  himself  safe.  3. 
Now  herein  lies  the  grand  peculiarity  of  the  gospel.  It  pronounces  on  the  utter 
insignificance  of  all  that  man  can  do  for  the  establishment  of  his  right  to  the  king- 
dom of  heaven  ;  and  yet,  he  must  be  somehow  or  other  provided  with  such  a  right, 
ere  that  he  can  find  admittance  there.  It  is  not  by  an  act  of  mercy  alone  that  the 
gate  of  heaven  is  opened  to  the  sinner.  He  must  be  furnished  with  a  plea  which 
he  can  state  at  the  bar  of  justice — not  the  plea  of  his  own  deservings,  which  the 
gospel  holds  no  terms  with  ;  and  therefore  with  a  plea  founded  exclusively  on  the 
deservings  of  another.  Now  what  we  reckon  to  be  the  very  essence  of  the  gogpel  is 
the  report  which  it  brings  to  a  sinful  world  of  a  solid  and  satisfying  plea  ;  and  that 
every  sinner  is  welcome  to  the  use  of  it.  In  defect  of  his  own  righteousness,  which 
he  is  required  to  disown,  he  is  told  of  an  everlasting  righteousness  which  another 
has  brought  in ;  and  which  he  is  invited,  nay  commanded,  to  make  mention  of.  It 
is  thus  that  Christ  becomes  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness.     II.  As  holding 

OUT  A  METHOD  BY  WHICH  WE  MIGHT  ACQUIRE  A  BIGHTNES8  OF  CHAKACTER  IN  THE  CULTI- 
VATION AND  THE  EXERCISE  OP  ITS  BIDDEN  VIRTUES.  The  legal  right  which  obedience 
confers  is  one  thing.  The  personal  rightness  which  obedience  confers  is  another. 
Obedience  for  a  legal  right  is  eveiywhere  denounced  in  the  New  Testament,  but 
obedience  for  a  personal  rightness  is  everywhere  urged.  For  the  one  end,  the  law 
has  altogether  lost  its  efficacy ;  and  we,  in  our  own  utter  inability  to  substantiate  its 
claims,  must  seek  to  be  justified  only  by  the  righteousness  of  Christ.  For  the  other 
end,  the  law  retains  its  office  as  a  perfect  guide  and  exemplar  of  all  virtue ;  and  we, 
empowered  by  strength  from  on  high  to  follow  its  dictates,  must  seek  to  be  sancti- 
fied by  the  transference  of  its  bidden  uprightness  upon  our  own  characters.  It  is 
no  longer  the  purchase-money  by  which  to  buy  your  right  of  entry  to  the  marriage 
supper  of  the  Lamb  ;  but  it  is  the  wedding  garment,  without  which  you  will  never 
be  seated  among  the  beatitudes  of  that  festival.  To  be  meet  in  law,  and  without 
violence  done  to  the  jurisprudence  of  heaven,  we  must  be  invested  by  faith  with  the 
righteousness  of  Christ.  To  be  meet  in  character,  and  without  offence  or  violence 
to  the  spirit  or  the  taste  of  heaven's  society,  we  must  be  invested  with  the  graces  of 
our  own  personal  righteousness.     {T.  Chalmers,  D.D.) 

Vers.  5-11.  For  Moses  describeth  the  righteousness  of  the  law. — The  righteous- 
ness of  the  law  : — I.  Kequibes  absolute  obedience — 1.  In  every  point.  2.  In  the 
spirit  as  in  the  letter.  3.  In  the  past  as  in  the  future.  II.  Is  utterly  impossible 
to  man,  because— 1.  He  is  sinful.  2.  Has  actually  sinned.  III.  Is  described  by 
Moses  to  prepare  us  for  Christ,  and  it  discovers  our — 1.  Misery.  2.  Helpless- 
ness.    3.  Danger.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)        The  righteousness  of  the  law  and  of  faith  : — 

1.  The  righteousness  of  the  law  requires — 1.  A  sinless  nature.  2.  A  perfect 
obedience.  II.  The  righteousness  or  faith  requires — 1.  No  impossible  achieve- 
ments. 2.  But  a  believing  reception  of  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  {Ibid.)  The 
righteousness  of  the  law  and  of  faith: — The  apostle  does  not  here  oppose  the 
covenant  given  by  Moses  to  that  given  by  Christ,  for  the  latter  as  well  as  the  former 
words  were  spoken  by  Moses  concerning  the  covenant  that  then  was  (Deut.  xxx. 
11-14).  But  it  is  the  covenant  of  grace,  which  God  through  Christ  has  established 
with  men  in  all  ages  that  is  here  opposed  to  the  covenant  of  works  made  with 
Adam  in  Paradise.  I.  The  righteousness  which  is  of  the  law  required — 1.  That 
man  should  fulfil  all  righteousness  inward  and  outward,  negative  and  positive. 

2.  That  this  righteousness  should  be  perfect  in  degree.    No  allowance  could  he 


CHAP.  X.]  ROMANS.  843 

made  for  falling  short  in  any  particular.  3.  That  it  should  be  perfectly  unlnter- 
rapted.  II.  The  riohteousness  which  is  of  faith.  1.  By  this  is  meant  that 
condition  of  justification  which  was  given  by  God  to  fallen  man  through  the  media- 
tion of  Christ  (Gen.  iii.  15).  It  was  a  little  more  clearly  revealed  to  Abraham 
(Gen.  xxii.  16,  18),  and  more  fully  made  known  to  Moses  and  the  prophets;  but  it 
was  not  fully  brought  to  light  until  Christ  came.  2.  This  covenant  saith  not  to 
sinful  man,  "  Perform  unsinning  obedience  and  live,"  or  he  would  have  no  more 
benefit  through  Christ  than  if  he  were  required  to  "  ascend  into  heaven,"  &c. 
This  were  to  mock  human  weakness.  Strictly  speaking,  the  covenant  of  grace  doth 
not  require  us  to  do  anything,  but  only  to  believe  (Gen.  xv.  6  ;  Eom.  iv.  11,  23-25). 
3.  What,  then,  saith  this  covenant  of  forgiveness  ?  "  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  In  the  day  that  thou  believest  thou  shalt  surely 
live.  4.  Now  "  this  word  is  nigh  thee."  The  condition  of  life  is  plain,  easy, 
always  at  hand.  The  moment  that  thou  believest  thou  shalt  be  saved.  III.  The 
DIFFERENCE  BETWEEN  THE  TWO.  1.  The  OHO  supposcs  him  to  whom  it  is  given  to  be 
already  happy  and  holy,  and  prescribes  the  condition  wherein  he  may  continue  so  ; 
the  other  supposes  him  to  be  unholy  and  unhappy,  and  prescribes  the  condition 
wherein  he  may  regain  what  he  has  lost.  2.  The  first  in  order  to  man's  continu- 
ance in  God's  favour  prescribed  a  perfect  obedience;  the  second  in  order  to  man's 
recovery  of  God's  favour  prescribes  only  faith.  3.  The  one  required  of  Adam  and 
his  posterity  to  pay  the  price  themselves,  in  consideration  of  which  they  were  to 
receive  God's  blessing;  in  the  other,  seeing  that  we  have  nothing  to  pay,  God 
"  frankly  forgives  us  all,"  provided  only  we  believe  in  Him  who  hath  paid  the  price 
for  us.  The  first  required  what  is  now  afar  off,  the  second  what  is  nigh  at  hand. 
IV.    The  folly  of  trdstinq  in   "the  righteousness  which  is   of  the  law." 

1.  Those  who  do  this  set  out  wrong ;  their  first  step  is  a  fundamental  mistake ;  for 
before  they  can  claim  any  blessing  on  the  terms  of  this  covenant  they  must  suppose 
themselves  in  his  state  with  whom  it  was  made.  And  how  foolish  to  forget  that  it 
was  not  given  to  man  when  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,"  but  when  he  was  alive 
to  God,  and  that  it  was  never  designed  for  the  recovery  of  God's  favour,  but  only 
for  the  continuance  thereof.  2.  They  do  not  consider  what  manner  of  obedience 
the  law  requires,  nor  their  inability  to  perform  it.  What  folly  to  offer  our  poor 
doings,  mixed  as  they  are  with  many  sins,  to  Him  who  is  strict  to  mark  what  is 
done  amiss,  and  in  whose  sight  no  flesh  living  is  justified.     V.  The  wisdom  of 

SUBMITTING   TO   THE    "RIGHTEOUSNESS   WHICH    18    OF    GoD    BY    FAITH."      This  appears 

from  three  considerations.  1.  That  it  is  acting  according  to  truth  and  to  the  real 
nature  of  things.  For  what  is  it  more  than  to  acknowledge  our  sinfulness  and 
helplessness.  2.  That  it  is  the  righteousness  of  God — the  method  chosen  by  God 
Himself.  Now  as  it  is  not  meet  for  man  to  say  unto  God,  "What  doest  Thou  ?  "  so 
it  is  true  wisdom  to  acquiesce  in  whatever  He  has  chosen.  3.  That  as  it  was  of 
mere  grace  and  undeserved  mercy  that  God  has  vouchsafed  to  sinful  man  any  way 
of  reconciliation  with  Himself,  whatever  method  He  is  pleased  to  appoint  it  is  doubtless 
our  wisdom  to  thankfully  accept.  4.  That  it  is  wisdom  to  aim  at  the  best  end  by 
the  best  means.  Now  the  best  end  a  fallen  creature  can  pursue  is  happiness  in 
God.  But  the  best,  nay  the  only,  means  of  attaining  this  is  submitting  to  the 
righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  faith.  Conclusion :  Then  do  not  say  in  thy 
heart — 1.  "  I  must  first  do  this ;  conquer  sin,  go  to  church,"  <fec.,  but  first  believe. 

2.  "  I  am  not  good  enough."  Thou  never  wilt  be  till  thou  believe.  3.  "  I  am  not 
sensible  enough  of  my  sins."  It  may  be  that  God  will  make  thee  so  by  believing. 
{John  Wesley,  M.A.)  The  two  ways  of  salvation  : — Two  ways  to  eternal  life  are 
here  contrasted.  The  one  is  by  doing;  the  other  is  by  believing.  The  one  by 
doing  a  fuU  and  finished  righteousuess  for  ourselves ;  the  other  by  believing  that 
Christ  has  done  a  full  and  sufficient  righteousness  for  us.  There  are  two  places  at 
which  these  respective  ways  may  be  compared  with  each  other.  I.  At  the 
ENTRANCE  OF  THE  TWO  WAYS — wheu  man,  under  the  first  effectual  visitation  of 
earnestness,  resolves  to  go  forth  in  busy  search  after  the  good  of  his  eternity. 
1.  And  here  a  consideration  meets  us  at  the  very  outset  of  the  way  of  doing. 
(1)  It  is  he  who  doeth  aU  things  that  shall  live.  Have  we  hitherto  done  all  things  7 
It  is  not  enough  that  there  be  the  purpose  of  obedience  in  all  time  coming.  Can 
we  appeal  to  every  hour  of  our  bygone  history,  and  confidently  speak  of  each, 
having,  without  one  flaw,  been  pervaded  by  those  duteous  conformities  of  a  heart 
ever  glowing  with  affection,  and  a  hand  ever  glowing  with  activity,  which  the 
creature  owes  to  the  Creator  who  gave  him  birth  ?  Should  there  be  one  single  deed 
either  of  sin  or  of  deficiency  to  soil  the  retrospect,  it  nullifies  the  enterprise. 


344  THE  BIBLICAL  ILI USTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

(2)  If  the  conscience  be  at  all  enlightened,  this  will  be  felt  as  a  difficulty.  Th« 
sense  of  a  debt  which  no  effort  of  ours  can  possibly  lessen — of  a  guilt  that  by  our- 
selves is  wholly  inexpiable — will  paralyse  the  movements  of  a  conscious  sinner ; 
and  just  because  they  paralyse  his  hopes.  The  likest  thing  to  it  in  human 
experience  is,  when  a  decree  of  bankruptcy  without  a  discharge  has  come  forth  on 
the  man  who  has  long  struggled  with  his  difficulties,  and  is  now  irrecoverably  sunk 
under  the  weight  of  them.  There  is  an  effectual  drag  laid  upon  this  man's  activity. 
The  spirit  of  industry  dies  within  him  when  he  finds  that  he  can  neither  make 
aught  for  himself,  nor,  from  the  enormous  mass  of  his  obligations,  make  any 
sensible  advances  towards  his  liberation  ;  and  he  either  breaks  forth  into  reckless- 
ness or  is  chilled  into  inactivity  by  despair.  2.  From  all  this  there  is  no  release 
to  the  spiritual  bankrupt,  till  the  gospel  puts  its  discharge  into  his  hands.  By  this 
gospel  there  is  a  deed  of  amnesity  made  known,  to  which  all  are  welcome.  There 
is  revealed  to  us  a  Surety  who  hath  taken  the  whole  of  our  debt  upon  Himself. 
And  whereas  in  the  way  of  doing,  the  very  entrance  was  impracticably  closed 
against  us — this  initial  obstruction  is  entirely  moved  aside  from  the  way  of 
believing.  Like  the  emancipated  debtor  to  whom  the  fruits  of  all  his  future  toil 
and  diligence  are  now  fully  assured  to  him,  a  weight  is  taken  off  from  the  activities 
of  nature.  Our  labour  is  no  longer  in  vain — because  now  it  is  labour  in  the 
Lord ;  and  every  effort  becomes  a  step  in  advance  towards  heaven.  II.  Attee  a 
MAN  HAS  SET  FORTH  IN  THE  PURSUIT  OF  THIS  BIQHTE0D3NE83,  and  has  made  the  wcary 
struggle  it  may  be  of  months  or  of  years  in  order  to  attain  it.  1.  A  thousand 
punctualities  may  be  rendered,  with  the  view  to  estabhsh  a  merit  in  the  eye  of 
heaven's  Lawgiver,  which  never  can  be  effectually  done  without  a  full  and  faultless 
adherence  to  Heaven's  law.  Now,  if  conscience  feel  as  it  ought,  there  will  through- 
out this  whole  process  be  an  inappeasable  disquietude — a  self-dissatisfaction  which 
no  doings  or  deserts  of  our  own  can  terminate.  For,  let  it  be  observed,  that,  reach 
what  elevation  of  virtue  we  may,  the  higher  we  proceed,  we  shall  command  a 
farther  view  of  the  spaces  which  stiU  lie  before  us  ;  or,  in  other  words,  we  shall  be 
more  filled  with  a  sense  of  the  magnitude  of  our  own  shortcomings.  The  con- 
science, in  fact,  grows  in  sensibility,  just  as  the  conduct  is  more  the  object  of  our 
strict  and  scrupulous  regulation.  The  presumptuous  imagination  of  our  sufficiency 
comes  down  when  we  thus  bring  it  to  the  trial ;  and  that  impotency  of  which  we 
were  not  aware  at  the  outset,  we  are  made  to  know  and  to  feel  experimentally. 
Meanwhile  that  is  a  sore  drudgery  in  which  we  are  implicated ;  and  all  the  more 
fatiguing  that  it  is  so  utterly  fruitless.  This  is  the  grand  failure.  The  hand  can 
labour ;  but  the  heart  cannot  love.  And  after  wasting  and  wearying  ourselves  with 
the  operose  drudgeries  of  a  manifold  observation,  we  still  find  that  we  are  helpless 
defaulters  from  the  first  and  the  greatest  commandment.  2.  Now,  it  is  when  thus 
harassed,  that  the  very  outlet  required  is  opened.  The  righteousness,  which  the 
sinner  has  so  ineffectually  tried  to  make  out  in  his  own  person,  has  been  already 
made  out  for  him  by  another;  and  now  lies  for  his  acceptance.  The  sin,  which 
hitherto  has  so  hardened  him  with  despondency  and  remorse,  is  now  washed  away 
by  the  blood  of  a  satisfying  expiation.  What  a  mighty  enlargement  when  the  title- 
deed  to  heaven,  for  which  he  had  been  stretching  forward  with  many  long  and 
laborious  efforts,  till  he  at  last  sunk  down  into  exhaustion  and  despair,  is  put  into 
his  hand.  He  passes  from  death  unto  life.  And  when  delivered  from  the  burden 
of  this  felt  impossibility,  man  breaks  forth  on  a  scene  of  enlargement ;  and  with 
all  the  alacrity  of  an  emancipated  creature  whose  bonds  have  been  loosed,  he 
proceeds  to  offer  the  sacrifices  of  thanksgiving,  and  to  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lori 
3.  And  let  us  not  be  afraid  lest  this  judicial  salvation  should  not  bring  a  moral  salva- 
tion in  its  train.  The  great  author  of  that  economy  under  which  we  live  will 
sanctify  as  well  as  justify ;  and  if  we  but  trust  in  Christ,  we  shall  be  sealed  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  of  promise,  who  will  superadd  the  personal  to  the  judicial 
righteousness,  and  make  us  meet  in  character  as  well  as  meet  in  law  for  that 
heaven,  the  door  whereof  Christ  hath  opened  to  us.  (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  The 
four  witnesses : — I.  What  Moseb  saith  (ver.  6).  If  you  wish  to  be  saved  by  the 
law  you  must  do  its  commands  and  you  shall  live.  The  law  is  written  in  the  ten 
commandments ;  you  know  them  ;  and  if  you  desire  to  Uve  by  them  you  must  keep 
them.  "For  not  the  hearers  of  the  law  are  just  before  God,  but  the  doers  of  the 
law  shall  be  justified."  Moses  does  not  tone  down  the  law  to  suit  our  fallen  state, 
or  talk  of  our  doing  our  best  and  God's  being  satisfied  with  our  imperfect  obedience. 
If  the  law  is  once  broken  it  is  all  over  with  you  as  to  salvation  thereby.  You  that 
hope  to  be  saved  by  your  works  are  indulging  in  a  forlorn  hope ;  whatever  you  may 


CHAP.  X.]  SOMAN S.  S45 

do  or  be  in  the  future,  the  past  has  already  ruined  you.    If  you  were  to  be  saved 
by  the  law  you  should  have  begun  without  sin,  continued  without  sin,  and  then  it 
would  be  needful  to  end  without  sin.     This  is  what  Moses  saith ;  hear  it  and  be 
humbled.    II.  What  the  gospel  saith  (vets.  6-9).     1.  The  gospel  claims  to  be 
like  the  law  in  its  clearness.     Moses  claimed  for  the  law  that  it  was  within  the 
range  of  their  knowledge  and  understanding  (Deut.  xxx.  11).     The  gospel  says, 
"Believe  and  live,"  quite  as  distinctly  as  Moses  said,  "Do  and  live."    No  man 
doubts  that  if  he  had  performed  the  law  God  would  give  him  life  ;  but  it  is  equally 
certain  tbat  if  we  have  believed  in  Christ  we  have  eternal  life.     2.  It  forbids  the 
questions  of  despair.     "  Say  not  in  thine  heart.  Who  shall  ascend,"  &o.     When  a 
man  is  awakened  to  a  sense  of  sin  he  cries,  "  Sirs,  what  must  I  do  to  be  saved? 
Surely  it  would  need  that  I  mount  to  heaven  to  own  my  sin,  or  dive  to  hell  to  bear 
my  punishment.     How  is  it  possible  that  I  can  be  saved  ?  "    This  wail  of  despair 
takes  many  forms :  one  man  puts  it  thus,  "  What  doings  can  I  perform  by  which  I 
can  be  saved  ?  "    Another,  despairing  of  deliverance  by  his  doings,  rims  upon  his 
feelings.     Now,  the  gospel  forbids  us  to  dream  in  this  fashion.     Say  not  even  in 
thy  heart  that  anything  is  wanted  as  to  doings  or  feelings  in  order  to  complete  the 
righteousness  which  is  wrought  out  by  Jesus.     Ah,  then  the  heart  foolishly  cries, 
"  I  must  know  a  great  deal ;  as  much  as  if  I  had  been  to  heaven,  or  as  if  I  had 
dived  into  the  depths."    No,  you  must  not:  the  gospel  is  simple;  easy  as  the 
A  B  C  of  your  childhood.     Say  not  in  thine  heart  that  thou  must  be  made  into  a 
scholar.     No,  trust  in  the  sinner's  Saviour,  and  you  are  saved.     Another  says, 
•'  I  must  undergo  a  singular  experience  of  heavenly  delight,  or  hellish  despair." 
No,  the  righteousness  of  faith  lies  only  in  rehance  upon  the  work  of  Jesus  finished 
for  you.    3.  The  gospel  translates  these  questions,  and  then  answers  them.    A 
voice  cries,  "  Who  shall  ascend  into  heaven  ?  "     The  gospel  replies,  if  you  did 
what  would  you  do  there,  without  the  Saviour  ?    You  say,  "  Who  shall  descend  into 
the  deep  ?  "    Listen.     If  you  were  to  descend  there,  what  would  you  do  without 
Him  whom  God  has  anointed  to  save  ?    If  you  find  Him  it  will  not  much  matter 
where  you  find  Him,  in  heaven  or  in  the  deep,  for  He  must  be  almighty  everywhere. 
Thou  sayest,  "  Who  shall  ascend  into  heaven  ?  "    Why  ?    "  To  bring  Christ  down  ?  " 
Hear  this  1   Jesus  has  come  down — to  the  manger,  the  Cross,  the  grave.   And  our  salva- 
tion lies  not  in  our  descending,  but  in  Christ's  descending.    You  need  not  "  bring 
np  Christ  again  from  the  dead,"  for  the  Lord  has  risen  indeed.    And  your  hope  lies 
wholly  in  what  this  Son  of  God  did  in  His  descent  and  ascent.     Now,  soul,  thou 
hast  nothing  to  do  with  asking  vain  questions ;  thou  hast  to  accept  the  result  of  the 
Saviour's  actual  performances.     4.  The  gospel  declares  this  word  of  life  by  faith  in 
the  risen  Christ  to  be  near  us.    As  your  next  door  neighbour's  house  is  not  hard  to 
get  at,  so  neither  is  salvation  by  the  gospel.    IH.  What  the  Scripture  saith 
(ver.  11).     1.  That  "  whosoever  "  in  all  the  world,  throughout  all  the  ages,  shall 
trust  on  Christ  shall  never  be  ashamed  of   having  done  so  ;  he  shall  never  turn 
round  on  his  dying  bed,  and  cry,  "  I  made  a  mistake  in  trusting  Christ."    Cardinal 
Bellarmine  thought  that  we  might  trust  in  oar  works ;  but  admitted  that  inasmuch 
as  no  man  could  be  sure  that  he  had  done  enough,  it  was  safest  to  trust  altogether 
to  the  merits  of  Jesus.     I  have  always  felt  obliged  to  the  Cardinal  for  that  admis- 
sion ;  because  the  best  is  good  enough  for  me.     2.  That  no  man  is  forbidden  to 
believe  (ver.  12).    There  never  was  a  sinner  yet  to  whom  God  said,  "  You  must 
not  trust  My  Son  " ;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  written,  "  Him  that  cometh  to  Me  I  will 
in  no  wise  cast  out."    3.  That  though  your  faith  should  only  be  strong  enough  to 
lead  you  to  pray,  yet  it  shall  save  you  (ver.  13).    IV.  What  expebience  baith. 
1.  That  it  is  the  grandest  way  of  hving  in  the  world.     (1)  In  times  of  doubt, 
distress  and  sinfulness.    (2)  In  times  of  jubilation  and  success.    When  God  gives  you 
growth  in  grace  and  iruitf  ulness  in  good  works  it  will  be  your  safety  to  trust  in  nothing 
but  the  work  of  the  Lord.     2.   That  it  enables  men  to  face  death  with  courage. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)     But  the  righteousness  which  is  of  £aith  speaketh  on  this  wise. — 
The  righteousness  of  faith  is — I.  Relative.     1.  The  gift  of  God.     2.  Through  Christ. 
n.  Easy  of  attainment.     1.  You  have  no  great  thing  to  do.     2.  But  simply  beUeve. 
III.  Is  stJBE.     Thou  shalt  be  saved.     {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)       The  righteousness  of  faith : 
—The  apostle  employs  a  strong  personification,  investing  "the  righteousness  which 
is  of  faith  "  with  powers  of  speech  in  general,  and  of  discriminative  and  persuasive 
speech  in  particular.     The  personified  object  is  represented  as  "  of,"  ».c.,  "  from," 
faith.    Not  that  it  originates  "  in  "  or  is  identical  "  with  "  faith.     It  is  conveyed  to 
the  soul  of  the  recipient  "  by  "  faith,  and  as  elsewhere  represented  is  from  God  to 
be  enjoyed  by  man  on  the  condition  of  faith.    If  it  were  gifted  with  speech  it  would 


346  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  x. 

say  to  each  man,  "  Say  not  in  thy  heart,"  &c.  No  such  effort  is  required.  Men 
who  have  fallen  into  unrighteousness  can  be  lifted  up  again.  It  is  a  great  work. 
But  it  is  not  to  be  effected  by  some  supernatural  effort  on  the  part  of  men  them- 
selves. They  do  not  need,  e.g.,  to  soar  aloft  to  find  Christ  and  induce  Him  to  come 
down  to  save.  The  indispensable  supernatural  forthputting  of  energy  has  already 
been  put  forth  by  one  who  is  "mighty  to  save  to  the  uttermost."  The  apostle 
weaves  the  woof  of  the  utterances  of  his  personified  pleader  into  the  warp  of  some 
grand  oratorical  pleading  addressed  by  Moses  to  the  Israelites  on  the  eve  of  his  dis- 
appearance within  the  veil  (Deut.  xxx.  11-14).  In  ver.  7  an  alternative  ia  oratori- 
caUy  introduced,  not  identical  with  that  laid  down  by  Moses,  but  substantially 
parallel.  Moses  spoke  of  "going  over  the  sea."  But  the  apostle,  for  his  peculiar 
purpose,  modifies  and  intensifies  the  representation.  He  desired  to  make  the  way 
plain  for  introducing  a  reference  to  Christ's  resurrection  ;  and  hence  he  speaks  of 
the  world  of  the  deceased,  representing  it,  in  one  of  its  awesome  aspects,  as  an 
abyss.  Will  it  be  needful  to  go  down  into  that  dismal  region,  which,  as  "  bottom- 
less,"  has  never  been  explored.  "  Say  not  Who  shall  make  that  terrible  descent?  " 
The  personified  righteousness  continues  to  speak,  and  as  it  speaks  it  draws  atten- 
tion to  "  the  word  "  in  which  it  is  conveyed  to  the  soul.  In  Deuteronomy  it  is  not 
righteousness  that  speaks,  but  Moses  in  God's  name.  Hence  there  is  no  rhetorical 
personification,  but  the  living  personaUty  of  the  lawgiver.  And  it  is  with  his  own 
living  voice  that  he  specifies  "  the  commandment  which  God  commanded,"  and  says, 
•'  It  is  not  hidden,  nor  afar  off,  but  nigh  .  .  .  that  thou  mayest  doit."  "  The  word  " 
referred  to  is  the  commandment  exhibiting  the  duty  devolving  on  the  Israelites. 
The  apostle's  reference  is  different.  The  "  word "  with  him  is  the  gospel — "the 
word  of  faith,"  so  called  because  it  is  the  object  towards  which  faith  points  and  in 
which  it  terminates.  The  gospel  is  •'  a  word,"  though  not  necessarily  or  generally 
a  mere  vocable.  As  there  may  be  several  vocables  in  a  word  of  exhortation,  so  in 
the  proclamation  of  the  word  of  faith  harmonious  groups  of  vocables  may  be 
requisite.  Sometimes,  indeed,  it  may  be  condensed  into  a  single  one  such  as  '•  Jesus," 
"  Christ,"  "  propitiation,"  &c.  But  more  frequently  it  expands  itself  into  some 
such  worded  utterance  as  "  God  so  loved  the  world,"  Ac.  Let  a  man  study  till  he 
understands  this  word  ;  or  let  him  master  the  vocables  referred  to,  and  a  great  light 
will  dawn  on  his  spirit.  The  personified  pleader  says  of  the  word,  "  It  is  near  thee, 
in  thy  mouth,  and  in  thy  heart."  It  has  been  brought  near  by  proclamation,  or 
conversation,  or  by  some  kindred  modification  of  instrumentality,  or  by  some 
more  subtle  influence  still.  Men  heedlessly  utter  gospel  words  with  their  mouths  ; 
and  both  before  and  after  utterance,  the  words  are  in  the  heart  or  mind.  Like  other 
words,  however,  they  have  both  a  kernel  and  a  husk ;  and  too  often  is  the  attention 
occupied  with  the  exterior  to  the  neglect  of  the  interior.  (J.  Morisan,  D.D.) 
What  saith  the  righteousness  of  faith  ? — Seek — I.  Not  ik  heaven.  Christ  is  here. 
II.  Not  in  the  grave.  Christ  is  risen.  III.  Not  afab  off.  Christ  is  nigh  thee. 
IV.  In  ttiv  mouth,  in  thy  heart,  if  thou  canst  but  believe.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
The  cry  of  the  soul  and  the  answer  of  the  gospel : — A  man  of  poetic  genius  has  ever 
a  strong  tendency  to  personifications.  He  gives  life  to  dead  things,  thought  and 
feeling  to  unconscious  objects,  and  makes  even  dumb  matter  speak.  Hence  the 
apostle  here  personifies  Christianity ;  he  makes  her  speak  to  the  men  who  are 
looking  out  in  the  distance  for  the  good  which  stood  in  all  its  plenitude  by  their 
side.  His  description  of  Christianity  here  is  simple,  compendious,  and  expressive. 
He  calls  it  the  righteousness  which  is  of  faith,  which  means  the  system  which  is  to 
make  men  right  by  believing  in  the  heart  A  heart-belief  in  the  gospel  makes  men 
right — right  in  their  spirit,  motives,  lives,  relations.  Note  here — I.  The  cry  or 
the  80X71,.  "  Say  not  in  thine  heart,"  Ac.  1.  The  spirit  of  this  cry  is  identical 
throughout  the  race.  What  is  it  ?  It  ia  a  heart  craving  for  some  good  in  the 
external,  the  distant,  and  the  supematuraL  This  craving  explains  much  of  the 
history  of  the  ages.  2.  The  objects  of  this  cry  are  various  throughout  the  race. 
Whilst  all  cry  for  good,  all  do  not  cry  for  the  same  kind  of  good.  The  suvimum 
honum  varies  with  different  men.  The  text  implies  that  the  men  addressed  are 
seeking  the  Messianic  good,  and  crying  out  for  Gbrist.  This  was  the  grand  wish 
of  the  Jewish  world.  Christ  is  the  desire  of  nations.  If  we  analyse  the  cry  we 
shall  find  that  it  includes — (1)  A  deep  consciousness  of  want.  Man  is  a  needy 
creature,  and  the  deepest  need  of  man,  as  a  sinner,  is  a  "  Christ, "  some  Divinely- 
anointed  one  who  shall  make  right  his  soul.  (2)  Belief  in  the  existence  of  a  pro- 
vision. Man's  primitive  notions  of  a  God,  and  his  experience  of  the  fitness  of  the 
-world  to  his  physical  needs,  give  him  the  conviction,  that,  wherever  there  is  a  deep 


CHAP.  X.]  ROMANS.  347 

want,  there  mast  be  somewhere  a  Divine  provision.  (3)  A  felt  necessity  of  some 
agency  to  bring  the  provision  near.  Who  shall  ascend  ?  The  good  is  somewhere, 
who  shall  bring  it  near  ?  What  priest  ?  What  sage  ?  What  measures  ?  What 
men  ?  II.  The  answer  of  the  gospel.  1.  The  answer  discourages  this  tendency. 
♦'  Say  not  in  thine  heart."  Christianity  discourages  the  tendency  in  man  to  look 
for  good  outside,  far  off,  and  in  the  miraculous  ;  it  bids  him  to  look  within,  enjoy 
the  near  and  the  natural.  2.  The  answer  reveals  the  provision.  "  The  word  is 
nigh  thee,"  &o.  The  good,  to  satisfy  the  deepest  cravings  of  the  human  soul,  is  to 
be  found  in  that  Word  which  was  made  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us.  Christ  meets 
all  the  exigencies  and  aspirations  of  the  soul,  and  He  is  near  to  every  one  who  has 
the  revelation.  Near — (1)  In  the  Scriptures.  The  Scriptures  are  not  far  off  from 
thee ;  not  in  distant  lands,  distant  libraries,  or  churches,  but  in  thy  house,  thy 
home,  &c.  They  are  they  that  testify  of  Him.  (2)  In  thy  memory.  Thou  hast 
been  taught  the  biography  of  Christ,  &o.  Thoughts  of  Him  are  constantly  coming 
up  to  thee,  "Nay,  it  is  even  in  thy  heart."  Much  of  thy  speech  is  shaped  by  senti- 
ments concerning  Him.  Even  in  thy  "  heart."  He  has  often  stirred  thy  emotions. 
The  preaching  of  Him  has  often  evoked  the  tenderest  sympathies  of  thy  nature. 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.)        The  cry  of  humanity  and  the  response  of  the  gospel : — I.  Man 

CRIE8    FOR   THE    8DPERNATCBAL    (vcr.    6).       II.    CHRISTIANITY    RESPONDS   TO    MAN'b    CRY 

(ver.  8).  III.  The  practical  acceptance  of  the  response  is  salvation  (ver.  9). 
{Homilist.)  Important  questioru  answered : — The  questions  asked  may  be  through 
unbelief,  or  embarrassment,  or  anxiety,  or  possibly  through  all  three  combined. 
The  anxious  follower  after  righteousness  is  not  disappointed  by  an  impracticable 
code,  nor  mocked  by  an  unintelligible  revelation  :  the  word  is  near  him,  therefore 
accessible  ;  plain  and  simple,  and  therefore  apprehensible  ;  and,  we  may  fairly  add, 
deals  with  definite  historical  fact,  and  therefore  certain  ;  so  that  his  salvation  is  not 
contingent  on  an  amount  of  performance  which  is  beyond  him,  and  therefore 
inaccessible ;  irrational,  and  therefore  inapprehensible ;  undefined,  and  therefore 
involved  in  uncertainty.  (Dean  Alford.)  The  present  blessing  : — Your  salvation 
is  in  Christ,  and  that  salvation  is  marked — I.  By  clearness.  •'  Who  shall  ascend 
into  heaven  ?  "  &c.,  is  the  language  of  one  bewildered.  Salvation  is  felt  as  a  difficult 
and  perplexing  problem.  The  apostle  reminds  us  that  it  is  plain  and  intelligible. 
In  ver.  9  you  have  the  Apostle's  Creed.  1.  It  is  a  definite  creed.  A  dying  German 
metaphysician  exclaimed,  "  Only  one  man  in  Germany  understands  my  philosophy, 
and  he  doesn't  understand  it."  But  we  are  not  called  upon  to  struggle  with  incom- 
prehensible speculations,  but  to  receive  simple,  historical  facts.  To  believe  in  the 
Christ :  His  incarnation.  His  atoning  death.  His  resurrection,  His  reign  at  the 
right  hand  of  God,  dispensing  grace  and  joy  to  aU  who  trust  in  Him.  2.  It  is  a 
simple  creed.  But  you  say,  "It  is  full  of  mysteries."  True,  but  you  are  called 
upon  to  rest  in  the  facts,  not  to  understand  the  mysteries.  "  With  the  heart  man 
believeth  unto  righteousness."  Thousands  of  men  enjoy  the  sunshine  who  know 
nothing  of  astronomy ;  admire  the  rainbow  knowing  nothing  of  optics.  God  will 
some  day  reveal  more  fully  the  philosophy  of  redemption,  but  to-day  I  am  to  take 
God  at  His  word,  and  leave  the  mysteries.  Believe  that  in  your  lost  estate  God 
loved  you,  that  He  worked  out  your  salvation  in  Christ,  that  if  you  only  rest  in 
Christ  God  will  not  cast  you  out.  "  If  thou  shalt  believe,"  &c.  3.  It  is  a  short 
creed.  Dr.  Person  declared  he  should  require  fifty  years  to  satisfy  himself  on  all 
points  of  divinity,  but  in  five  hours  you  may  grasp  the  truth  which  saves  the  soul 
There  is  no  intellectual  impossibility.  It  is  not  as  difficult  to  become  a  saint  as  t 
become  a  Homer  or  Newton.  We  cannot  write  an  •'  Hiad"  or  a  "  Principia,"  bu 
we  can  believe  that  God  loves  us,  and  that  He  for  Christ's  sake  blots  out  our  sir 
n.  By  nearness.  "  The  word  is  nigh  thee,"  &o.  It  is  not  in  the  heights  or  depths 
Our  poet  says,  "  A  man's  best  things  lie  nearest  him,  lie  close  about  his  feet."  It 
is  so  in  daUy  life,  and  also  in  spiritual  things.  1.  All  we  need  for  the  healing  of 
our  nature  is  here.  Some  maintain  that  we  need  never  have  recourse  to  foreign 
drugs,  that  God  has  planted  in  each  locality  the  very  plants  which  can  cure  the 
diseases  of  that  locality.  ••  God  put  such  and  such  a  plant  that  heals  sore  throats 
by  the  riverside,"  they  tell  us,  "  because  where  the  bane  is,  the  antidote  ia."  How- 
ever this  may  be,  it  is  a  grand  thing  to  know  that  the  Plant  of  Benown,  the  Tree  of 
Life  whose  leaves  are  for  the  healing  of  the  nations,  is  close  to  us.  2.  All  we  need 
for  the  perfecting  of  our  life  is  here.  In  the  third  verse  we  read  of  Israel  "going 
about  to  establish  their  own  righteousness."  A  plant  has  not  to  go  about  looking 
for  the  sunshine,  the  dew,  the  rain ;  all  that  it  has  to  do  is  to  bare  its  heart  and 
lake  in  the  precious  influences  which  wait  upon  it.  So  the  truth  which  saves,  the  love 


848  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

which  purifies,  the  faith  which  npHfts,  the  power  which  perfects,  are  all  about  us, 
waiting  only  the  opening  of  our  heart  to  take  them  in.  By  this  time  a  great  number 
of  our  rich  countrymen  have  left  us  for  milder  climes;  but  the  poor  and  busy 
amongst  us  cannot  take  our  flight  to  find  health  and  life  beyond  the  sea — we  must 
stay  where  we  are,  and  die,  it  may  be,  under  the  rigours  of  an  English  winter.  But, 
thank  God,  the  poorest  of  us  for  our  spiritual  health  and  salvation  need  not  to  cross 
the  sea.  "  Say  not  who  shall  ascend  into  heaven,  or  go  beyond  the  sea."  The 
world  of  health  and  blessing  is  about  us  already.  Men  are  seeking  for  truth  and 
power  as  if  they  were  up  in  the  sky,  down  in  the  depths  ;  but  the  saving  truth  has 
been  in  our  hps,  the  saving  grace  in  our  heart  from  childhood,  and  all  we  have  to 
do  is  to  realise  that  language,  to  exercise  that  grace.  The  Redeemer  is  not  distant 
geographically,  nor  historically.  The  difiSculty  is  not  to  find  Christ,  but  to  avoid 
Him.  The  word  of  salvation  is  in  thy  mouth,  the  power  in  thine  heart — believe  it, 
use  it,  and  you  shall  know  your  Saviour  nigh  at  hand  and  not  afar  off.  III.  By 
FBEENESS.  '*  Who  shall  ascend,"  &c.  Some  impossible  task  is  contemplated. 
But  the  argument  is,  all  has  been  done  already ;  all  we  have  to  do  is  gratefully  to 
accept  what  is  pressed  upon  us.  Justification  and  eternal  hfe  are  free  gifts.  I 
know  that  men  do  not  like  to  think  so ;  they  fancy  they  can  work  up  to  them, 
but  this  is  in  strict  consistency  with  God's  method  of  action  in  the  intellectual 
world.  Men  may  work  day  and  night,  know  well  the  theory  of  their  art,  strictly 
observe  rule  and  order,  but  it  is  all  to  little  purpose  if  they  are  not  originally  gifted 
men.  Did  the  poor  ploughman  Robert  Burns  "  learn  "  to  make  poetry  ?  Did  that 
tinker  of  Bedford  "  learn  "  to  dream  ?  No  ;  they  were  gifted,  and  it  was  easy  to 
them  to  sing,  to  write,  to  paint  the  very  grandest  things  the  world  has  ever  seen.  So 
it  is  with  true  righteousness.  Genius,  however,  is  to  the  few,  but  the  same  Lord  over 
all  is  rich  in  grace  to  all  who  call  upon  Him.  Some  of  you  have  long  sought  to 
fulfil  the  law,  and  you  have  miserably  failed.  You  could  not  climb  the  sky  of  moral 
perfection,  you  could  not  penetrate  its  depths ;  but  find  in  Christ  abundance  of 
grace  and  the  gift  of  righteousness,  and  you  shall  delightfully  fulfil  the  command- 
ment in  all  its  heights  and  depths.  [W.  L.  Watkinson.)  But  what  saith  It? 
The  word  la  nigh  thee. — The  importance  of  simple  faith  in  the  Word: — To  bring 
Christ  down  from  above,  or  to  bring  Him  up  from  the  dead,  would  be  to  make  Him 
an  object  of  sight.  A  current  aphorism  is,  that  seeing  is  believing ;  yet  Scripture 
distinguishes  between  the  two.  "  Faith  is  the  assurance  of  things  not  seen,"  and 
belief  through  the  medium  of  the  senses  is  far  less  valued  than  a  belief  in  a  testi- 
mony (Luke  xxiv.  25 ;  Mark  xvi.  14 ;  1  Pet.  i.  7,  8 ;  Rom.  iv.  21).  But  there  is  a 
third  way  in  which  an  absent  thing  might  be  viewed  by  us — viz.,  as  an  object  of 
conception,  an  act  often  conjoined  with  faith,  yet  perfectly  distinct  from  it.  One 
might  conceive  a  thing  without  any  belief  in  its  reality  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand, 
though  one  can  scarcely  believe  without  some  conception  of  the  object  of  faith — yet 
may  that  conception  be  so  dull  as  almost  to  justify  the  expression  of  our  believing 
in  the  dark.  You  might  believe  in  the  existence  of  an  absent  friend,  and  in  his 
affection  for  yourself ;  and  this  belief  might  or  might  not  be  as  strong  to-morrow 
as  it  is  to-day.  His  whole  countenance,  manner,  and  voice,  bespeaking  the  utmost 
cordiality — these  may  all  tell  more  vividly  on  the  imagination  at  one  time  than 
another.  This  conception  flits  and  fluctuates,  as  if  dependent  on  the  ever  varying 
mood  of  the  spirit — at  one  time  gleaming  forth  towards  the  vivacity  of  sense,  »nd 
at  another  fading  almost  to  extinction.  But  the  remarkable  thing  is  that,  under 
all  these  varieties  of  conception,  the  faith  might  remain  invariable.  There  may  be 
a  dimness  in  the  contemplation,  without  the  slightest  mixture  of  a  doubt  in  the  object 
contemplated.  "What  is  true  of  an  earthly  friend  is  true  of  our  Friend  in  heaven. 
He  is  far  removed  out  of  sight,  but  may  become  the  object  of  faith  through  the 
word  that  is  nigh  unto  us.  And  He  may  also  become  the  object  of  conception, 
Khich  is  a  sort  of  substitute  for  sight.  But  let  us  never  forget  that  as  faith  without 
eight  is  all  the  more  pleasing  to  God  in  that  it  subsists  on  its  own  unborrowed 
strength  without  the  aid  of  the  senses — so  might  faith  be  in  the  absence  of  any  lucid 
or  enlivening  conception,  having  nothing  to  sustain  it  but  the  simple  credit  which  it 
gives  to  the  word  of  the  testimony.  Yet  while  we  hold  these  bright  and  exhilara- 
ting views  of  the  Saviour  to  be  unspeakably  precious  (John  xiv.  21),  we  should  dis- 
tinguish between  the  conception  and  the  faith — because  while  the  one  may  be  a 
minister  of  sensible  comfort,  it  is  the  other  which  is  the  guarantee  of  our  salvation. 
The  man  who,  to  repair  the  insufiSciency  of  the  word,  would  bring  down  Christ  from 
heaven,  but  exemphfies  the  man  who,  as  if  to  make  up  for  the  same  insufficiency, 
strains  but  ineffectually  to  frame  some  picturesque  idea  of  Him  there.    The  danget 


CHAP.  X.]  ROMANS.  849 

is  that  he  may  compass  himself  about  with  sparks  ot  his  own  kindling,  or  walk  in 
the  light  of  his  own  fancy  or  his  own  fire.  Let  him  keep,  then,  determinedly  by  the 
■word  which  is  nigh,  rather  than  by  the  imagery  wherewith  he  peoples  the  distinct 
and  lofty  places  which  are  away  from  him.  He  who  has  conception  but  not  faith, 
will  at  length  lie  down  in  sorrow.  He  who  has  faith,  but  from  the  want  of  concep- 
tion walketh  in  darkness,  and  has  no  light,  is  still  bidden  trust  in  the  name  of  God 
and  stay  upon  His  word.  He  who  conceiveth  may  have  sensible  comfort ;  but,  with 
or  without  this,  he  who  believeth  is  safe  (Isa.l.  10, 11).  (T.  Chalmers, D.D,)  The  appa- 
ratus of  salvation  nigh : — Once  in  the  city  of  Eome,  giving  a  gentleman  of  the  place  an 
account  of  a  sermon  I  had  heard  a  friar  preach  in  the  Coloseum,  I  said  that  though 
many  things  in  it  pleased  me,  one  did  not :  he  never  gave  the  people  to  understand  that 
they  might  go  for  absolution  direct  to  God  without  the  offices  of  a  priest.  That  intelli- 
gent and  noble  man  leaned  across  the  table,  and,  with  an  eager  look,  said,  "Do  you 
believe  that  a  man  can  obtain  absolution  without  the  intermediation  of  a  priest  ?  " 
Of  course,  I  replied  that  our  view  of  the  place  and  work  of  the  minister  of  the  gospel 
was  directly  the  opposite  of  that.  Instead  of  his  being  a  power  between  God  and 
the  sinner,  we  hold  that  his  happiest  work  is  to  make  the  sinner  feel  that  there  is 
no  power,  visible  or  invisible,  between  him  and  the  Saviour,  and  so  to  encourage 
him  and  lead  him  direct  to  the  one  Mediator.  He  then  put  some  question  which 
seemed  to  say,  "  What,  then,  is  the  apparatus  of  absolution  ?  "  This,  he  was  told, 
was  settled  by  a  few  words  of  St.  Paul.  "  The  word  is  nigh  you  "  (chap.  x.  6-10). 
Here  the  whole  apparatus  is  "  nigh  "  the  man,  in  his  own  person — his  heart  to  trust 
in  the  Saviour,  his  mouth  to  call  upon  Him  ;  that  is  all  the  apparatus.  Wherever 
a  man  stands  feeling  his  need  of  salvation,  there  are  all  things  now  ready — the  loving 
Saviour,  the  free  pardon,  the  blood  that  speaketh  peace,  the  heart  to  believe,  the 
mouth  to  call  upon  the  Lord.  When  the  Koman  heard  this  he  looked  up  and  said, 
"  How  grand  that  is  1  why,  that  could  be  done  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour."  Yes,  it 
may  be  done  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour ;  for  this  salvation  is  a  free  gift  (Matt.  vii.  7,  8). 
(W.  Arthur,  M. A.)  Salvation  near: — It  is  said  that  some  years  ago  a  vessel 
saiUng  on  the  northern  coast  of  the  South  American  continent  was  observed  to 
make  signals  of  distress.  When  hailed  by  another  vessel,  they  reported  themselves  as 
"  dying  for  water  1 "  "  Dip  it  up,  then,"  was  the  response,  "  you  are  in  the  mouth 
of  the  Amazon  river,"  There  was  fresh  water  all  around  them,  they  had  nothing 
to  do  but  to  dip  it  up,  and  yet  they  were  dying  of  thirst,  because  they  thought  them- 
selves to  be  surrounded  by  the  salt  sea.  How  often  are  men  ignorant  of  their 
mercies  I  How  sad  that  they  should  perish  for  lack  of  knowledge !  Jesus  is  near 
the  seeker  even  when  he  is  tossed  upon  oceans  of  doubt.  The  sinner  has  but  to 
stoop  down  and  drink  and  live  ;  and  yet  he  is  ready  to  perish,  as  if  salvation  were 
hard  to  find.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Even  In  thy  mouth  and  in  thy  heart. — In  the 
heart  for  our  personal  salvation  ;  in  the  mouth  for  God's  glory  and  the  salvation  of 
others.  In  the  heart  and  not  in  the  mouth  is  cowardice  ;  in  the  mouth  and  not  in 
the  heart  is  hypocrisy.  The  gospel  believed  is  a  fountain  in  the  heart ;  the  gospel 
possessed  is  the  streams  through  the  mouth.  (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  That  is,  the 
word  of  faith  which  we  preach. — The  word  of  faith  : — I.  Its  nature.  1.  It  teaches 
faith.  2.  Is  offered  to  faith.  3.  Inspires  faith.  II.  Its  dispensation.  1.  We  are  but 
dispensers.  2.  Divinely  commissioned.  3.  To  all  who  v?ill  receive  it.  (J.  Lyth,D.D.) 
Faith  is  desire : — Faith  is  desire.  Never  in  the  history  of  the  world  has  it  been,  or 
can  it  be,  that  a  longing  towards  Christ  shall  be  a  longing  thrown  back  unsatisfied 
upon  itself.  You  have  but  to  trust,  and  you  possess.  We  open  the  door  for  the 
entrance  of  Christ  by  the  simple  act  of  faith  ;  and,  blessed  be  His  name.  He  can 
squeeze  Himself  through  a  little  chink,  and  He  does  not  require  the  gates  should 
be  flung  wide  open  in  order  that,  with  some  of  His  blessings,  He  may  come  in. 
(A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  True  preaching  : — Preaching  is  not  the  communication  of 
information,  the  transfer  of  a  dead  sum  or  capital  of  facts  or  theories  from  one 
mind  to  another,  but  the  opening  of  living  fountains  within  the  heart,  the  scattering 
of  sparks  which  shall  kindle  where  they  fall ;  the  planting  of  seeds  of  truth  which 
shall  take  root  in  the  new  soil  where  they  are  cast,  and  striking  their  roots  downward 
and  sending  their  branches  upward  shall  grow  into  goodly  trees.  {Abp.  Trench.) 
That  if  thou  shalt  confess  with  thy  mouth  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  shalt  believe  in 
thine  heart  that  God  has  raised  Him  from  the  dead,  thou  shalt  he  saved. — Mouth 
and  heart : — Paul's  great  work  was  saving  souls.  This  is  one  of  the  reasons  why 
he  so  often  gives  us  weighty  condensations  of  the  gospel.  He  prepared  them  for 
his  brethren,  as  one  provides  for  travellers  portable  meats.  A  compact  sentence  of 
this  sort  is  a  little  Bible,  a  miniature  Body  of  Divinity,  and  he  who  composes 


350  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  l. 

such  may  be  working  as  effectively  for  the   salvation  of  men  as  another  who 
preaches.      Notice — I.  That  the   gospel  is  a  gospel  of  faith,  and  this  gospel 
13  EVIDENTLY  INTENDED  FOB  LOST  MEN.     1.  The  law  continucs  life  to  thosG  who 
have  already  life  enough  to  do  good  work  (ver.  5) ;  but  the  gospel  saith  not  only 
that  we  shall  live  by  it,  but  that  we  shall  be  saved  by  it,  which  implies  that  we  are 
lost  and  ruined.     2.  Jesus  comes  to  bring  salvation.     (1)  From  the  punishment  of 
sin.     (2)  From  sin  itself.     (3)  From  the   power  of  sin.     II,  That  saving  faith 
coNCEKNS  ITSELF  ONLY  ABODT  Jesds  Himself.    Head  veis.  6-9.     1.  Unbelief  saith, 
"Who  shall  ascend  into  heaven?     Who  shall  descend  into  the  abyss?"     Un- 
belief is  always  starting  questions.    Faith  is  of  another  kind  :  she  takes  her  stand 
where  Christ  is,  and  she  says,  "  If  salvation  is  anywhere  it  is  in  Him."    2.  Unbelief 
dreams  of  skies  and  seas,  and  all  immeasurable  things.     "  Who  shall  ascend  into 
heaven  ? "      Imagination    beholds    her    mighty  merits    scaling    the    everlasting 
ramparts.    At  another  time,  when  she  is  heavy,  her  dream  is  of  a  wretched  diver 
into  the  deep  seas  of  anguish,  plunging  down  into  the  abyss  to  find  the  pearl  of 
peace.     Faith  has  done  with  dreams,  for  she  has  done  with  Sinai.    With  open  eye 
faith  reads  facts.     She  reflects  that  Christ  died,  rose  again,  and  is  gone  into  glory. 
3.  Unbelief  puts  a  sad  slur  upon  Christ.     She  talks  about  going  up  to  heaven  :  but 
that  would  imply  that  Jesus  had  never  come  down.      She  talks  of  descending 
into  the  abyss,  as  if  Christ  had  never  come  np  from  the  dead.    The  fact  is,  all  that 
can  be  done  has  been  done.    Why  do  you  want  to  do  what  is  already  done? 
III.  That  saving  faith  has  a  confession  to  make.    Observe — 1.  This  confession 
is  put  first.     (1)  Because  Paul  was  quoting  from  Deuteronomy,  and  had,  of  course, 
to  place  the  words  as  there  arranged.   Yet  there  must  be  other  reasons.   (2)  Because 
it  is  most  likely  to  be  forgotten.     We  have  plenty  of  preaching  of  "  Believe  and 
live."     Christ  said,  "He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved."    Now, 
baptism  is  the  confession  of  our  faith.     The  faith  to  which  salvation  is  promised 
is  never  a  dumb  faith ;  it  is  a  faith  which  owns  the  Lord  even  in  the  teeth  of 
adversaries.     (3)  Because  it  is  first  as  far  as  our  fellow-creatures  are  concerned. 
How  can  I  know  what  you  believe  in  your  heart  ?    I  must  first  hear  what  you  con- 
fess with  your  mouth.     "  Speak,  that  I  may  see  you."     (4)  Because  in  a  certain 
sense  it  is  actually  first.     Many  persons  never  receive  comfort  because  they  have 
never  confessed.     The  Lord  will  not  give  to  you  the  warmth  of  faith  unless  you  are 
willing  to  yield  the  obedience  of  faith  by  taking  up  your  cross  and  confessing  Him. 
2.  What  it  is  that  is  to  be  confessed :   "  The  Lord  Jesus."     (1)  The  Deity  of 
Christ.    He  who  denies  this  puts  himself  out  of  court,  for  he  rejects  that  part  of 
the  Redeemer's  character  which  is  essential  to  His  being  a  Saviour.     (2)  That 
Jesus  is  Lord  ;  i.e.,  Ruler  and  Master.    You  must  cheerfully  become  His  disciple, 
follower,  and  servant.     (3)  Jesus,  i.e..  Saviour.    3.  This  confession  is  very  definite. 
It  is  not  to  be  an  inference  drawn  in  silence  from  your  life,  but  a  declared  state- 
ment of  the  mouth.    If  the  apostle  meant  that  we  were  merely  to  obey  Christ,  he 
would  have  said  so.     Why  is  this?    Because  confession  with  the  mouth  is — (1)  A 
sort  of  breaking  away  from  the  world.     When  a  man  says,  "I  believe  in  Christ," 
it  is  as  good  as  saying  to  the  world,  "I  have  done  with  you."    (2)  A  way  of 
forming  a  visible  union  with  Jesus.    When  a  man  confesses  Christ  he  takes  sides 
with  Him  and  His  cause.     (3)  Useful  to  the  outside  world  as  a  witness  reproving 
their  ungodliness,  and  inviting  them  to  a  better  mind.     The  confessions  of  the 
saved  are  often  the  means  of  saving  others.     This  is  a  hard  saying  to  some  of  you. 
You  have  good  points  about  you,  but  you  do  not  let  your  light  shine  before  men. 
Your  candle  is  under  a  bushel :  it  cannot  burn  weU  in  so  confined  a  space.     If  it  is 
God's  own  fire,  and  you  put  it  under  a  bed  to  hide  it,  it  will  soon  set  the  bed  on  a 
blaze.    Mischief  comes  of  suppressed  truth.     IV.  That  faith  has  a  great  comfort 
TO  ENJOY.     1.  She  has  truth  of  which  she  must  speak  with  her  mouth ;  but  she 
has  also  facts  which  she  ponders  in  her  heart.     "  With  thy  heart  believe  that  God 
hath  raised  Him  from  the  dead  " — does  not  only  mean  that  you  believe  the  fact, 
but  so  believe  it  that  it  warms  and  comforts  our  heart.    2.  Why  is  salvation  pro- 
mised especially  to  this  ?    Because — (1)  All  the  rest  of  Christ's  history  is  implied 
and  included  in  it.    If  He  was  raised  from  the  dead,  then  He  must  have  died.     If 
He  died,  then  He  must  have  been  a  man,  and  have  been  born.     (2)  It  is  confir- 
matory of  the  whole.     By  raising  Him  the  Father  set  His  seal  upon  His  person  aa 
Divine,  upon  His  office  as  commissioned  of  God,  upon  His  life  as  weU-pleasing,  and 
upon  His  death  as  being  accepted  of  God  for  full  atonement.     (3)  It  is  the  source 
of  the  heart's  best  comfort.  We  shall  rise  to  glory  because  He  rose  to  glory.   Ho^ 
this  ought  to  cheer  those  who  are  near  despair  I    How  it  should  encourage  those 


CHAP.  X.]  ROMANS.  851 

who  lie  at  death's  door  I  V.  That  faith  has  a  sure  promise  to  best  upon.  "  II 
thou  believest  .  .  .  thou  shalt  be  saved."  1.  The  singular  pronoun,  "  thou,"  seta 
its  mark  upon  you.  Put  thine  ear  to  this  telephone;  a  voice  speaks  to  thee. 
2.  Observe  the  absence  of  "  ifs  "  and  "  buts."  It  is  not  "  thou  mayest  be  saved," 
but  "  thou  shalt  be  saved."  3.  There  is  a  sort  of  passiveness  about  the  expression 
"  be  saved."  The  text  does  not  speak  about  what  you  are  going  to  do,  but  about 
something  that  is  to  be  done  for  and  in  you.  4.  There  never  was,  and  there  never 
will  be,  a  man  that  with  his  mouth  confessed  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  with  his  heart' 
believed  that  God  raised  Him  from  the  dead,  that  was  not  saved.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Faith  and  confession : — Distinguished  by  this  text  of  belief,  and  confession  of  that 
belief,  men  are  divided  into  four  classes.  There  are  those  (1)  who  neither  make 
confession  of  any  such  belief  with  the  mouth,  nor  believe  these  truths  in  their 
hearts.  (2)  Those  who  believe  indeed  in  the  heart,  but  who  fear  to  confess  their 
belief  in  Christ  before  men,  or  who  even  do  as  Peter  did,  when  in  the  time  of  trial 
he  denied  that  he  knew  the  Lord  (Matt  xxvi.  72 ;  cf.  Mark  viii.  38).  (3)  Those  who 
confess  with  their  hps  the  truths  revealed  by  God,  but  who  do  not  believe  in  Him 
with  their  hearts  ;  who  profess  that  they  know  God,  but  in  works  they  deny  Him, 
being  abominable,  and  disobedient,  and  unto  every  good  work  reprobate  (Titus  i. 
16  ;  cf.  Matt.  xv.  7,  8).  (4)  Those  who  confess  Him  with  their  mouth  before  men, 
and  who  believe  in  Him  with  their  hearts.  To  these  is  the  promise  made  that  they 
shall   be  saved.       {W.  Denton,  M.A.)  Faith  and  confession: — There  is   no 

Christian  faith  without  Christian  confession,  and  vice  versa.  Confession  is  just 
faith  turned  from  its  obverse  side  to  its  reverse.  The  two  sides  of  the  pi  ecioua 
unity  are  inseparable  and  mutually  indispensable.  When  faith  comes  forth  in 
silence  to  announce  itself,  and  to  proclaim  the  glory  and  grace  of  the  Lord,  its 
voice  is  confession.  (J.  Morison,  D.D.)  Confession  of  faith  : — Paul  is  making  an 
earnest  effort  to  show  how  simple  for  both  Jew  and  Gentile  the  way  of  salvation  is. 
It  is  heart-faith  in  Jesus.  It  is  Ufe-devotion  to  His  honour.  Three  principles  are 
laid  down  with  the  utmost  assurance.  I.  A  man  should  have  a  heart-faith  in 
Christ  to  confess.  Profession  without  such  heart-life  is  self-delusion  or  hypocrisy, 
and  has  most  pernicious  influence  on  the  man.  The  heart-life  is  something 
between  Christ  and  the  soul.  None  may  intermeddle  with  it.  But  it  has  its  tests, 
which  discover  it  to  others.  Heart-faith  is — 1.  Sincere  and  loving.  2.  In  Christ : 
Christ  risen :  Christ  raised  by  God.  3.  Tones  the  life  with  righteousness.  Can 
these  tests  be  applied  now  by  men  to  themselves  ?  Can  these  tests  be  applied  now 
by  men  to  their  fellow  men  ?  Show  they  can.  The  sincere  response  to  these  is  the 
abiding  confidence  of  godly  men.  II.  A  man  should  find  out  the  best  way  in 
WHICH  to  confess  SUCH  HEART-LIFE.  It  is  duc  to  Christ  that  he  should.  It  ia 
needful  for  himself  that  he  should.  Life  repressed  is  imperilled.  Illustration. 
Archimedes  running  into  the  street,  saying,  "  Eureka.  I  have  found  it,"  when  hia 
problem  was  solved.  And  what  is  the  best  way  in  which  to  confess  ?  1.  A  life  on  all  of 
which  lies  the  Christly  stamp.  2.  Association  with  those  who  stand  out  as  manifestly 
Christ's.  3.  Obedience  to  Christ  in  any  public  symbolic  act — as  Lord's  Supper. 
Illustration.  How  these  would  come  home  to  timid  secret  disciples  among 
Romans.      In  these  Christian  times  such  confession  is  still  demanded.     III.  A 

MAN  WILL  SURELY  FIND  THAT  God'S  BLESSING  RESTS  ON  FULL  OBEDIENCE  :  in  heart- 
belief,  and  lip,  and  life  confession.  Remember  Christ's  words — "  Ashamed  of  Me 
before  men."  Blessing  comes— 1.  To  the  man  himself — in  fixity  of  mind  and  of 
life.  2.  To  others — in  the  example  of  His  firmness,  and  in  the  work  which  con- 
fessed disciples  undertake.  Conclusion  :  Public  confession  of  Christ  must  not  be 
delayed  until  either— (1)  An  adequate  knowledge  is  gained;  (2)  or  model  experience 
reached.  When  may  the  Eunuch  confess  Christ  ?  When  may  Lydia — or  the 
jailer  ?  When  may  we  ?  When  with  the  heart  we  receive  the  risen  Saviour  as  our 
Saviour,  and  begin  to  live  in  the  rule  of  Christ,  our  saving  Lord.  {Weekly  Pulpit.) 
Confession  of  faith,  public : — There  was  one  Victorinus,  famous  in  Rome  as  a 
teacher  of  rhetoric,  who  in  his  old  age  was  converted  to  Christianity,  and  came  to 
SimpUcianus,  who  was  an  eminent  man,  whispering  softly  in  his  ears,  "  I  am  a 
Christian."  But  the  holy  man  answered,  "  I  wiU  not  believe  it,  nor  count  thee  so, 
till  I  see  thee  among  the  Christians  in  the  church."  At  which  he  laughed,  saying, 
"  Do  these  walls  make  a  Christian  ?  Cannot  I  be  such  unless  I  openly  profess  it, 
and  let  the  world  know  the  same  ?  "  A  while  after  being  more  confirmed  in  the 
faith,  and  considering  that,  if  he  should  thus  continue  ashamed  of  Christ,  Christ 
'would  be  ashamed  of  him  in  the  last  day,  he  changed  his  language,  and  came  ta 
SimpUcianus,  saying,  "  Let  us  go  to  the  chutth :  I  will  now  in  earnest  be  • 


352  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  ^ 

Christian."     And  there,  though  a  private  confession  of  his  faith  might  have  heen 
Bufficient,  yet  he  chose  to  make  it  open,  saying,  "  That  he  had  openly  professed 
rhetoric,  which  was  not  a  matter  of  salvation,  and  should  he  be  afraid  to  own  the 
Word  of  God  in  the  congregation  of  the  faithful  ?     {Biblical  Museum.)        Confes- 
sion of  faith  the  glory  of  Christians : — As  the  emperor  always  wears  the  diadem 
upon  his  head,  so  let  us  everywhere  carry  about  the  confession  of  our  heart.     The 
crown  cannot  so  adorn  the  emperor  as  confession    and   faith   the    Christian. 
(Ghrysostom.)        Confessing  the  Lord  Jesus  : — This  is  a  short  chain  to  reach  from 
earth  to  heaven.     And  God  meant  it  to  be  easy.    But  its  ease  is  its  difficulty.    Can 
this  be  really  all  ?     I.  As  to  faith—"  If  thou  shalt  believe,"  &c.     1.  All  real  faith 
"lies  in  the  heart,  not  in  the  understanding ;  it  is  not  the  result  of  reasoning  ;  no 
education  will  give  it.    I  have  to  feel — in  the  closest  personality — that  Jesus 
died  for  me.     If  your  faith  has  been  inoperative,  may  not  the  reason  be  that  it  has 
not  yet  been  heart  work  ?     2.  But  why  does  God  say,  "  Believe  that  God  raised  Him 
from  the  dead  "  instead  of  "  that  He  died  for  you  "  ?     (1)  The  resurrection  is  the 
seal  of  all.     By  •'  raising  Him  from  the  dead  "  the  Father  showed  that  He  accepted 
the  ransom  Christ  had  paid.     (2)  That  resurrection  is  our  resurrection.     We  rise 
in  Him ;  now,  to  a  newness  of  life ;  presently,  to  a  life  in  glory.     II.  As  to  con- 
fession.    What  is  "the  confession  of  the  mouth"?     1.  It  may  be  that  general 
acknowledgment  of  Christ,  and  the  great  doctrines  of  His  religion,  which  ought  to 
characterise  our  daily  conversation.     And  here  most  of  us  must  plead  guilty  to  the 
charge  that  we  do  not  show  "  whose  we  are,  and  whom  we  serve,"  by  speaking  of 
Christ  and  the  great  truths  of  the  Christian  religion.    And  yet  if  all  we  profess  to 
believe  of  Christ  be  really  true — if  we  owe  to  Him  every  comfort  and  every  hope — 
if  He  is  really  my  Brother,  my  Friend,  my  Saviour,  my  King,  "  out  of  the  abun- 
dance of  the  heart  "  would  not  "  the  mouth  speak  "  ?    We  read,  •'  They  that  feared 
the  Lord  spake  often  one  to  another."    To  talk  in  generalities  about  religion 
requires  no  effort,  and  brings  no  shame.     The  world  likes  it.     But  to  talk  of  Christ 
requires  an  effort,  and  offends  people.     And  yet  it  is  a  very  solemn  thought  that 
Christ  has  said,  "  Whosoever  shall  confess  Me,"  &c.     Therefore  it  is  no  mean  test 
of  a  believer,  and  we  cannot  wonder  that  it  is  made  one  of  the  conditions  of 
salvation.     2.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that,  from  the  first,  all  Christians  were 
required  to  make,  at  some  time,  a  public  declaration  of  their  faith.     It  is  of  this 
that  St.  Paul  says  to  Timothy — "  Thou  hast  professed  a  good  profession  before 
many  witnesses."     (1)  This  was  evidently  a  part  of  adult  baptism,  which  would,  of 
course,  be  the  most  frequent  in  the  early  church.     (2)  Now  that  infant  baptism  has 
become,  and  rightly,  the  almost  universal  custom  of  the  Church,  the  public  confes- 
sion has  been  transferred  to  Confirmation,  which  is  an  act  by  which  a  person  who 
has  come  to  years  of  discretion  accepts  and  ratifies  the  covenant  of  his  baptism 
renews  the  dedication  of  himself  to  God,  and  declares  his  faith  in  the  promises 
and  privileges  into  which  his  baptism  has  admitted  him.     (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 
Confessing  Christ : — I.  What  abe  we  to  confess  ?     1.  That  Christ  is  risen.    The 
resurrection  of  Jesus  was  the  decision  of  all  controversies  between  Him  and  His 
enemies.     They  had  invented  stories  to  discredit  it.    To  confess  Christ,  therefore, 
was  to  declare  for  Christ  against  the  Jewish  rulers.    And  as  the  Gentile  philoso- 
phers scorned  the  resurrection,  to  confess  Christ  was  to  brave  this  scorn.     2. 
Christ's  official  character  as  the  Messiah,  which  He  suspended  on  His  resurrec- 
tion.    3.  His  personal  dignity,  as  proved  by  the  fact  (Eom.  i.  3,  4).     4.  The  suffi- 
ciency and  the  exclusive  efficacy  of  his  righteousness  and  atonement.    To  confess 
His  resurrection  is  to  glory  in  His  cross  and  passion.     5.  His  sole  and  supreme 
authority.    We  must  acknowledge  Him  as  the  only  Lord  of  the  conscience,  and  if 
we  do  this  we  shall  follow  His  will,  let  the  world  say  what  they  may.    This  prac- 
tical confession  is  indispensable.    In  the  confession  of  the  lips  without  it  there  is 
no  sincerity.    The  apostle  speaks  of  some  who  professed  that  they  knew  God, 
while  in  works  they  denied  Him.     The  practical  denial  was  the  true  testimony.    6. 
His  title  to  Divine  worship  and  adoration.    This  is  suggested  by  vers.  11-13.   In  all 
this  the  avowal  must  be  sincere  and  open,  no  silent  reserve,  no  ashamed  conceal- 
ment, no  disguising  and  palliating  of  the  truth,  no  trimming  and  artful  evasion, 
n.  Why  abb  we  to  confess  ?     Because — 1.  Jesus  is  well  entitled  to  it,  both  for 
what  He  is  and  what  He  hath  done  (John  i.  1-3;  2  Cor.  viii.  9).    Away  with 
ingratitude  so  base  that  would  disown  or  shrink  from  acknowledging  sach  a  friend ! 
2.  It  is  one  of  the  required  and  reasonable  evidences  of  faith.    There  is  no  faith 
where  there  is  no  confession.    And  this  evidence  is  of  the  utmost  importance  and 
Tftlae.    Evidence  of  personal  interest  in  Christ  must  be  added  to  the  evidence  of 


OHAP.  X.]  ROMANS.  853 

the  truth  itself  to  give  stability  to  personal  hope  and  confidence  (1  John  iii.  19 ; 
2  Cor.  xiii.  5).  3.  It  is  intimately  connected  with  salvation.  The  terms  express- 
ing this  connection  are  equally  explicit  with  those  which  express  the  connection 
of  faith  with  justification.  If  you  do  not  make  confession  you  do  not  believe,  you 
are  not  justified,  and  cannot  be  saved.  4.  It  distinguishes  the  believer  from  the 
world,  and  is  opposed  to  everything  like  neutrality.  A  man  must  be  on  one  side 
or  on  the  other.  There  must  be  no  "  halting  between  two  opinions,"  and  compro- 
mising with  the  so-called  Christian  world,  any  more  than  with  the  world  of  the 
avowedly  unbelieving  and  ungodly.  (R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  Confessing  Christ : — I. 
What  does  it  embrace  ?  1.  A  hearty  reception  of  Christ  (Luke  viii.  40 ;  John 
XX.  28  ;  1  Pet.  i.  8,  9).  (1)  Of  Himself  (John  xiv.  6,  x.  9 ;  Eph.  ii.  18).  (2)  Of  His 
work  (Eph.  i.  7  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  3 ;  Gal.  iii.  13 ;  2  Cor.  v.  21 ;  Rom.  iii.  24,  25),  2. 
An  acknowledgment  of  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  (1)  To  renew  (Titus  iii.  5-7; 
John  iii.  7).  (2)  To  sustain  (Eph.  i.  19 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  9 ;  ix.  8;  Jude  24). 
Giving  all  glory  and  praise  for  our  salvation  unto  God,  through  Jesus  Christ 
(1  Cor.  i.  30,  31 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  5 ;  Gal.  i,  4, 5).  3.  A  public  acknowledgment.  (1)  By 
union  with  His  visible  Church  (1  Cor.  xii.  27  ;  Eph.  i.  22,  23  ;  Rom.  x.  9,  10).  (2) 
By  everywhere  acknowledging  Christ's  claim  upon  you  and  yours  (1  Cor.  vi.  19,20; 
Matt.  xvi.  24).  II.  Excuses  men  offeb  fob  not  confessino  Chbist.  1.  Personal  un- 
worthiness.  2.  Moral  weakness ;  fear  of  inconsistency ;  will  not  hold  out ;  bondage 
to  sin.  3.  Have  not  sufiScient  knowledge — (1)  Of  the  Word.  (2)  Of  the  doc- 
trines of  the  Church.  4.  Will  defer  it  for  the  present.  III.  Reasons  given  in  the 
ScRiPTUBES  WHY  MEN  DO  NOT  CONFESS  Christ,  Because  of — 1.  Unbelief  (John  v.  38, 40 ; 
viii.  24 ;  1  John  v.  10,  11 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  14).  2.  Insincerity  (Jer.  xvii.  9 ;  xxix.  13). 
3.  Fear  of  man  ;  sensitiveness  to  ridicule  ;  ashamed  of  Christ  (John  vii.  13  ;  xii.  42 ; 
Mark  viii.  38).  4.  Love  of  the  world  (Jas.  iv.  4 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  3,  4 ;  1  John 
ii.  15,  16 ;  Prov.  i.  24-32).  IV.  Reasons  why  all  should  confess  Christ  (Heb. 
iii.  12,  13  ;  1  John  iv.  15  ;  Rom.  ii.  4,  5  ;  Prov.  xxvii.  1 ;  John  iii.  36).  "  What 
shall  the  end  be  of  them  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  God?"  (1  Pet.  iv.  17; 
Isa.  Iv.  7).      (IF.   H.    Van  Doren.)  Confessing   Christ: — I.  Confession   is — 

— 1.  To  say  the  same  thing  with  others ;  to  agree  with.  2.  To  promise.  3.  To 
acknowledge,  to  declare  a  person  or  thing  to  be  what  he  or  it  really  is.  II.  To 
CONFESS  Chbist,  therefore,  is  to  acknowledoe  Him  to  be  what  He  really  is 
AND  DECLABES  HiMSELP  TO  BE — 1.  The  Sou  of  God.  2.  God  manifest  in  the 
flesh.  3.  The  Saviour  of  the  world.  4.  The  Lord.  III.  The  nature  of  this 
confession.  1.  It  is  not  enough  that  we  cherish  the  conviction  in  our  hearts,  or 
confess  it  to  ourselves,  to  friends  who  agree  with  us,  or  to  God.  2.  It  must  be  done 
publicly,  or  before  men — foes  as  well  as  friends,  amid  good  and  evil  report,  when  it 
brings  reproach  and  danger  as  well  as  when  it  incurs  no  risk.  3.  It  must  be  with 
the  mouth.  It  is  not  enough  that  men  may  infer  from  our  conduct  that  we  are 
Christians,  we  must  audibly  declare  it.  4.  This  must  be  done — (1)  In  our  ordi- 
nary intercourse.  (2)  In  the  way  of  God's  appointment,  i.e.,  by  baptism  and  the 
Lord's  Supper.  5.  It  must  be  sincere.  "  Not  every  one  that  saith,  Lord,  Lord, 
shall  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  It  is  only  when  the  outward  act  is  a  revela- 
tion of  the  heart  that  it  has  any  value.  IV.  Its  advantages.  1.  It  strengthens 
faith.  2.  It  is  a  proof  of  regeneration,  because  it  supposes  the  apprehension  of 
the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ.  3.  It  is  an  indispensable  condition  of 
salvation  because — (1)  God  requires  it.  (2)  Not  to  confess  is  to  deny.  (3)  Denial 
implies  want  of  faith  or  devotion.  V.  Its  obligation.  1.  It  is  not  merely  a 
commandment.  2.  It  is  the  highest  moral  duty  to  acknowledge  the  truth,  and 
especially  to  acknowledge  God  to  be  God.  3.  It  is  the  most  direct  means  we  can 
take  to  honour  Christ,  and  to  bring  others  to  acknowledge  Him.  Conclusion. 
Read  Matt.  x.  32 ;  Luke  xii.  8 ;  Mark  viii.  38 ;  2  Tim.  ii,  12 ;  1  John  iv.  2,  15. 
{G.  Hodge,  D.D.)  Confessing  Christ,  ashamed  of: — A  minister  in  Brooklyn  was 
recently  called  upon  by  a  business  man,  who  said,  "  I  come,  sir,  to  inquire  if  Jesua 
Christ  wiU  take  me  into  the  concern  as  a  silent  partner."  "  Why  do  you  ask  ?" 
said  the  minister.  "  Because  I  wish  to  be  a  member  of  the  firm,  and  do  not  wish 
anybody  to  know  it,"  said  the  man.  The  reply  was,  "  Christ  takes  no  silent 
partners.  The  firm  must  be,  'Jesus  Christ  &  Co.,'  and  the  names  of  the  'Co,,' 
though  they  may  occupy  a  subordinate  place,  must  all  be  written  out  on  the  sign- 
board." Confessing  Christ:  decisive: — A  young  seaman,  who  had  only  a  few 
nights  before  bef-n  converted,  laying  a  blank  card  before  a  friend,  requested  him  to 
write  a  few  .vords  upon  it,  because,  as  he  said,  "You  will  do  it  more  plainly  than 
I  can."  "What  must  I  write?"  said  my  friend.  "Write  these  words,  sir,  'I 
VOL,  II.  23 


354  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  x; 

love  Jesus — do  you?'"    After  he  had  written  them  my  friend  said,  "Now  you 
must  tell  me  what  you  are  going  to  do  with  the  card."    He  replied,  "  I  am  going  to 
sea  to-morrow,  and  I  am  afraid  if  I  do  not  take  a  stand  at  once  I  may  begin  to  be 
ashamed  of  my  religion,  and  let  myself  be  laughed  out  of  it  altogether.    Now  as 
soon  as  I  go  on  board  I  shall  walk  straight  to  my  bunk  and  nail  up  this  card  upon 
it,  that  every  one  may  know  that  I  am  a  Christian,  and  may  give  up  all  hope  of 
making  me  either  ashamed  or  afraid  of  adhering  to  the  Lord."     {Clerical  Lihranj.) 
Confessing  Christ,  from  gratitude : — At  the  battle  of  Williamsburg  a  soldier,  who 
had  the  artery  of  his  arm  severed  by  a  fragment  of  a  shell,  and  was  fast  bleeding 
to  death,  saw  a  surgeon  going  to  the  front  for  orders,  and,  lifting  his  bleeding 
member,  cried,  "  Doctor,  please  1 "    The  surgeon  dismounted,  bound  up  the  vessel, 
and  gave  all  possible  relief.    As  he  started  on,  the  man  said,  "Doctor,  what  is 
your  name?"    The  reply  was,  "No  matter."     "  But,  doctor,"  said  the  wouaded 
man,  "  I  want  to  tell  my  wife  and  children  who  saved  me."     Confessing  Christ 
inevitable  : — It  is  impossible  to  believe  with  the  heart  and  not  confess  with  the 
mouth — this  were  to  have  a  fire  which  did  not  burn,  a  light  which  did  not  illumi- 
nate, a  principle  which  did  not  actuate,  a  hope  which  did  not  stimulate.     Genuine 
Christians  are  temples  of  the  living  God  ;  but  think  ye  to  be  temples,  and  yet  that 
no  voice  shall  go  forth  from  the  secret  shrine?    Not  so.     There  must  issue  a  sound 
from  the  recesses  of  the  sanctuary,  the  sound  as  of  a  presiding  deity,  eloquent  to 
all  around  of  the  power  and  authority  of  tLa  Being  that  dwelleth  within.     There- 
fore, whilst  we  admit  that  it  is  faith  which  is  the  instrument  of  justification,  we 
can  understand  why  confession  should  also  be  given  as  that  which  issues  in  salva- 
tion ;  even  as  we  can  understand  why  works  should  be  spoken  of  as  procuring  us 
immortality.     Confession  is  but  the  necessary  result  of  belief — the  demonstration 
and  exhibition.     It  is  but  faith  showing  itself  in  speech,  even  as  works  are  but 
belief  showing  itself  in  action.     Speech  is  one  of  the  most  distinguishing  proper- 
ties of  man.     Ought,  then,  the  hand,  the  ear,  the  eye,  to  be  pressed  into  the  service 
of  religion,  and  is  the  tongue  to  be  exempt  ?    Nay,  tliis  best  member  must  do  its 
part,  otherwise  is  the  whole  man  in  rebellion  against  his   Maker.     {H.  Melvill, 
B.D.)        Confessing  Christ:  its  necessity  : — I.  Confession  is  the  necessabt  ex- 
PBESSiON  OP  FAITH   IN  Christ.     1.  Lively  emotions  usually  find  expression.     2. 
Especially  those  which  decjily  affect  the  whole  life.     3.  If,  then,  faith  really  saves, 
confession  cannot  be  found  wanting.    II,  Courageoos  confession  is  the  touch- 
stone OF  FAITH.     1.  While  faith  is  hidden  its  operation  is  hidden,    2,  Weak  faith, 
by  its  want  of  confession,  shows  its  defectiveness.     It  has  not  yet  attained  to  the 
assurance  of  salvation,     (J,  Lyth,  D.D.)         The  faith  that  makes  men  righteous : — 
The  late  Professor  C.   S.  Harrington,  held  in   such  high   esteem  for  his  deep 
spiritual    attainments,    as   well    as    for    his    thorough   scholarship,  wrote    near 
the   close  of    life : — "  The   faith   that  makes   men  righteous   is   the   faith   that 
fastens  simply  and  trustingly  on  the  Lord  Jesus   Christ  as  the  only,  all-suffi- 
cient,  atoning  Saviour.      It  is  that   faith    in  Jesus  that   blots  our   transgres- 
sions, makes   our   record   clear.      It   is   Jesus   that  gives   spiritual   life.     It  is 
He  that  continues  it.     This  faith  merges  the  believer's  life  into  the  life  of  Christ. 
It  dares  not,  it  wishes  not,  a  moment's  separation.    It  knows  no  historic  past ;  it 
deals  only  in  present  tenses.    It  echoes  Paul's  prayer,  '  Let  me  be  found  in  Him,' 
I  cannot  tell  the  process ;  I  cannot  explain  the  power  by  which  the  black  coal  is 
transformed  into  the  gleaming  diamond ;  how  much  less  can  I  tell  how,  by  the 
mystery  of   the  new   birth,  the  lost,  dead  soul  lives  by  the  merit  of   Jesus  I     I 
cannot  tell  how  the  living  tree  gets  its  flower  and  fruit  from  the  dead  substance  in 
which  it  is  rooted,  and  on  which  it  feeds ;  how  much  less  can  I  tell  how  the 
wounds,  the  blood,  the  death  of  Christ  gives  life  to  the  soul  dead  in  trespasses  and 
sins,  and  clothes  it  with  the  fruitage  of  holiness !    Or  how  can  I  tell  the  end  of  this 
Divine  work,  when  the  Giver  of  spiritual  life  shall  crown  it  with  life  eternal?  when 
dust  and  ashes,  this  body,  shall  spring  from  its  sepulchre  and  appear  in  the 
glorified  body  of  the  resurrection  ?    But  it  shall  be  done  '  according  to  the  working 
of  the  power  whereby  He  is  able  to  subdue  all  things  unto  Himself, '     Enough  for 
me  that  this  is  God's  way,  and  the  work  is  worthy  of  God."      Trusting  Christ: — 
If  a  king  should  give  to  one  of  his  subjects  a  ring,  and  say  to  him,  "  When  you 
are  in  distress  or  disgrace,  simply  send  me  that  ring,  and  I  will  do  all  for  you  that 
is  needful,"  if  that  man  should  wilfully  refuse  to  send  it,  but  purchase  presents,  or 
go  about  to  do  some  singular  feats  of  valour  in  order  to  win  his  monarch's  favour, 
yoa  would  say,  "  What  a  fool  he  is !    Here  is  a  simple  way,  but  he  will  not  avail 
himself  of  it,  he  wastes  his  wits  in  inventing  new  devices,  and  toils  away  his  life  in 


OBAP.  z.]  ROMANS.  855 

following  out  plans  that  must  end  in  disappointment."  Is  not  this  the  case  with 
all  those  who  refuse  to  trust  Christ  ?  The  Lord  has  assured  them  that  if  they  trust 
Jesus  they  shall  be  saved ;  but  they  go  about  after  ten  thousand  imaginings,  and 
let  their  God,  their  Saviour,  go.  Believing  with  the  heart  : — You  have  only  to 
observe  the  character  of  the  truths  which  revelation  unfolds,  and  you  may  see 
clearly  that  belief  presupposes  the  possession,  or  requires  the  exercise  of  those 
virtues  whose  seat  must  be  the  heart.  There  must  be  humility  in  him  who 
believes,  for  he  must  cordially  confess  himself  unclean  and  undone.  There  must 
be  submission  of  the  understanding  to  God,  for  much  which  has  to  be  received  is 
not  explained.  There  must  be  willingness  to  suffer,  for  Christianity  summons  to 
tribulation.  There  must  be  wiUingness  to  labour,  for  Christianity  sets  man  about 
the  most  arduous  of  duties.  What  then?  Is  faith  nothing  more  than  an  in- 
voluntary act,  depending  simply  on  the  quantity  of  evidence,  and  therefore  wholly 
unworthy  of  being  exalted  into  a  condition  for  the  bestowment  of  blessings  ?  Is  it 
nothing  that  in  him  who  believes  there  must  be  candour  and  freedom  from  preju- 
dice, sincerity  of  purpose,  an  abandonment  of  all  good  opinion  of  himself,  an 
entire  resignation  of  his  judgment  to  God,  a  willingness  to  submit  to  insult,  a 
determination  to  enter  into  combat  with  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil  ?  Are 
we  to  be  told  that  though  there  must  indeed  be  this  great  combination  in  every 
man  who  cordially  believes  in  revelation,  it  is,  nevertheless,  a  surprising  thing  that 
faith  should  be  so  dignified  in  the  Bible,  that  it  should  be  used  as  the  test  of 
admission  into  the  privileges  of  the  gospel  ?  For  our  own  part,  when  we 
consider  what  faith  presupposes,  what  obstacles  there  are  in  the  constitu- 
tion of  man  to  the  belief  of  Christian  truths,  we  can  only  feel  that  if  God 
did  not  work  on  the  human  heart  the  whole  world  would  be  infidel.  We  do 
not  know  any  achievement  so  remarkable,  so  little  to  have  been  expected, 
from  a  proud,  prejudiced,  and  depraved  creature  such  as  man  naturally  is, 
as  the  believing  in  a  record  so  humiliating,  so  condemnatory  of  lust,  so  rigid 
in  enjoining  difficult  duties  as  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 
Redemptive  faith : — I.  The  faith  by  which  man  is  made  righteous  and  saved  is  the 
FAITH  OF  the  HEART.  Faith  in  general  is  conviction  arising  from  evidence.  1.  The 
faith  of  the  intellect  is  based  on  the  evidence  of  the  senses,  or  on  the  results  of 
reasoning.  Mathematical  reasoning,  with  its  definitions,  postulates,  axioms,  Ac, 
metaphysical  proofs  of  the  existence  of  God,  the  external  evidences  of  Divine  reve- 
lation, appeal  to  the  mind  as  distinguished  from  the  heart.  Education,  prejudice, 
circumstances,  and  associations  frequently  determine  the  mind  to  a  languid  acquies- 
cence in  various  doctrines.  2.  The  faith  of  the  heart  supposes  the  assent  of  the 
understanding,  the  approval  of  the  judgment,  the  submission  and  choice  of  the  will. 
(1)  It  springs  from  the  heart.  It  is  the  confidence  of  love.  The  heart  trusts  when 
the  mind  cannot  explain.  It  is  the  heart  that  trusts  in  character.  FeeUng  quickens 
and  strengthens  the  faith  of  the  mind.  The  emotions  of  penitence  prepare  the  heart 
of  man  to  trust  in  the  heart  of  the  Saviour.  "  Our  eyes  were  made  to  weep,  but  also 
made  to  see.  Our  hearts  were  made  to  suffer,  but  also  to  believe  "  (V.  Hugo).  (2) 
It  carries  the  heart  with  it.  Many  of  our  intellectual  beUefs  are  inoperative. 
Many  men  are  firmly  convinced  of  the  duty  and  advantages  of  early  rising,  but  still 
caress  the  sluggard's  pillow.  What  the  heart  believes,  puts  the  whole  man  in  move- 
ment. (3)  It  reacts  upon  the  heart.  Sufficient  evidence  enables  the  mind  to  dispel 
doubt.  The  faculties  are  at  rest.  So  when  the  heart  trusts  in  God,  the  affections 
are  at  peace.  The  disquietudes  of  spiritual  anxiety  are  allayed,  and  the  agitation 
of  fear  subsides.  "  I  know  whom  I  have  beUeved,"  &c.  "  Thou  wilt  keep  him  in 
perfect  peace,"  Ac.  II.  The  object  of  this  faith  is  the  resurrection  of  the  Lord 
Jesds  from  the  dead  by  the  power  of  God.  The  Resurrection  is  presented — 1.  As 
the  object  of  our  faith,  rather  than  His  death.  (1)  Because  this  beUef  is  distinctive 
of  a  Christian.  Pagans  and  infidels  will  easily  admit  that  Christ  was  born,  lived, 
and  died,  but  they  deny  His  resurrection.  Pharisees  and  philosophers  deny  the 
fact  (Acts  xvii.  32) ;  Sadducees  denied  its  possibility.  Hence,  belief  in  it  was  a 
capital  article  of  faith  in  those  days.  (2)  All  that  Christ  did  and  suffered  would 
have  profited  us  little,  unless  He  had  risen  agam.  By  His  resurrection  He 
triumphed  over  death  and  hell,  and  was  enabled  to  ascend  to  His  throne.  (3)  The 
Resurrection  pre-supposes  all  the  other  facts  of  Christ's  life,  such  as  His  incarnation, 
sacrifice  and  exaltation.  2.  In  a  special  point  of  view,  viz.,  as  having  been  accom- 
plished by  the  power  of  God.  In  other  passages  Christ's  resurrection  is  ascribed  to 
His  own  power,  or  to  the  energy  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  As  an  act  of  the  Father,  it  ii 
designed — (1)  To  recognise  and  vindicate  the  claims  of  Christ  to  be  the  Son  and  the 


356  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chai>.  X. 

sent  of  God.  (2)  To  confirm  His  teachings.  (3)  To  declare  His  acceptance  of  His 
atonement.  (4)  To  fulfil  His  promise  to  Christ.  "  Thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul  in 
hell,"  &o.  in.  Open  confession  of  the  Lobd  Jesus  is  an  indispensable  accompani- 
iiENT  OF  THIS  FAITH.  1.  What  is  to  be  confcsscd  ?  Jesus,  as — (1)  Lord.  (2)  The 
Lord.  (8)  Our  Lord.  2.  Why  is  this  confession  enjoined  ?  It  is  required — (1)  By 
Christ.  "  Whosoever  shall  confess  Me,"  &c  (2)  By  the  interests  of  Christ's  cause. 
"  Ye  are  My  witnesses."  (3)  By  gratitude.  The  instructor  to  whom  you  owe  your 
career,  the  lawyer  who  has  saved  your  property,  the  physician  who  has  saved  youi 
life,  will  you  not  thankfully  speak  of  them  ?  How  much  more  should  you  speak  of 
the  great  Physician,  Teacher,  Advocate.  How  is  it  to  be  made  ?  Avow  your  prin- 
ciples. Join  His  Church.  Confess  Him  boldly,  sincerely,  wisely,  meekly,  reveren- 
tially. Conclusion  :  1.  The  way  of  salvation  is — (1)  Not  so  easy  as  often  represented. 
The  exercise  of  faith  is  often  found  difficult ;  to  confess  Christ  before  men  requires 
moral  courage.  (2)  Nor  so  difficult ;  the  gospel  is  easy  to  be  understood  ;  the  terms 
of  salvation  are  simple,  &c.  2.  A  profession  of  rehgion  is  necessary.  Christ  de- 
mands it,  and  we  are  not  His  disciples,  and  compromise  our  salvation  if  we  disobey. 
"  With  the  mouth  confession  is  made  unto  salvation."  3.  Faith  must  be  attended 
by  confession,  and  confession  by  faith.  {W.  C.  St.  Freare.)  Salvation  assured  to 
all  believers  whether  weak  or  strong : — In  crossing  the  sea  I  will  suppose  that  there 
shall  be  a  good  stiff  wind,  and  that  the  vessel  may  be  driven  out  of  her  course,  and 
be  in  danger.  As  I  walk  the  deck,  I  see  a  poor  girl  on  board ;  she  is  very  weak  and 
ill,  quite  a  contrast  to  that  fine,  strong,  burly  passenger  who  is  standing  beside  her, 
apparently  enjoying  the  salt  spray  and  the  rough  wind.  Now  suppose  a  storm 
should  come  on,  which  of  these  two  is  the  more  safe  ?  Well,  I  cannot  see  any 
difference,  beoause  if  the  ship  goes  to  the  bottom,  they  will  both  go,  and  if  the  ship 
gets  to  the  other  side  of  the  channel  they  will  both  land  in  security.  The  safety  is 
equal  when  the  thing  upon  which  it  depends  is  the  same.  So,  if  the  weakest  Chris- 
tian is  in  the  boat  of  salvation — that  is,  if  he  trusts  Christ — he  is  as  safe  as  the 
strongest  Christian  ;  because  if  Christ  failed  the  weak  one.  He  would  fail  the  strong 
one  too.  If  the  least  Christian  who  believes  in  Jesus  does  not  get  to  heaven,  then 
Peter  himself  will  not  get  to  heaven.  If  the  smallest  star  which  Christ  ever  kindled 
does  not  blaze  in  eternity,  neither  will  the  brightest  star.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Sal- 
vation:— I.  Its  impoet.  Deliverance— 1.  From  sin.  2.  From  its  consequences. 
II.  Its  conditions.  1.  Confession  of  Christ  as  our  only  Saviour  and  Lord.  2.  Faith 
in  His  resurrection.  HI.  Its  pkocess.  1.  Faith  brings  righteousness.  2.  Righteous- 
ness prompts  confession.  3.  Faithful  confession  ensures  salvation.  IV.  Its 
security.  1.  The  word  and  promise  of  God.  2.  Which  may  be  trusted.  3.  With- 
out fear  of  disappointment.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Salvation  is — I.  A  personal  matter. 
1.  All  need  it.  2.  It  is  offered  to  all  in  Christ.  3.  We  preach  it  to  you.  II. 
Suspended  on  human  condcct.  "If  thou  shalt" — 1.  Confess.  2.  Believe.  III. 
Secured  by  the  promise  and  purpose  of  God.  {Ibid.)  The  gospel  of  the  resur- 
rection : — I.  The  gospel  meets  the  general  necessities  of  man,  and  by  the  fact 
of  Christ's  resurrection  this  may  be  proved.  1.  Man  is  ignorant,  and  needs 
authoritative  instruction.  Not  of  arts,  government,  and  sciences ;  they  affect  not  the 
eternal  welfare  of  man.  That  only  is  true  wisdom  which  is  suited  to  our  highest 
nature  and  eternal  destiny.  Man,  by  nature,  knows  not,  nor  enjoys  God.  '•  The 
world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God."  But  the  gospel  meets  the  case.  Jesus  Christ 
taught  every  truth  necessary  to  enlighten  the  understanding,  and  direct  the  con- 
science, and  God  raised  Him  from  the  dead  as  His  great  confirmatory  seal  to  the  truth 
of  His  doctrines.  2.  Man  is  guilty  and  needs  an  acceptable  propitiation.  Now  Christ 
was  raised  from  the  dead  ;  therefore  His  death  is  an  available  atonement.  8.  Man 
is  depraved,  and  needs  entire  renewal.  The  gospel  meets  tbis  case.  Christ  declares 
that  man  must  be  the  subject  of  a  supernatural  change,  and  promises  to  send  forth 
the  Spirit  for  this  purpose.  But  the  Promiser  died,  but  rose  again  ;  and  "  therefosB, 
being  by  the  right  hand  of  God  exalted,  He  received  of  the  Father  the  promise  of 
the  Spirit."  4.  Man  is  supine,  and  needs  powerful  motives.  And  the  gospel  presents 
motives  to  rouse  the  most  supine — motives  fetched  from  eternityc  Christ  declares, 
"  he  that  believeth  not,  shall  be  damned  " — "  he  that  believeth  not,  is  condemned 
already."  His  strongest  motives  are  derived  from  His  doctrine  of  the  day  of  judg- 
ment. But  all  His  doctrines  are  founded  on  the  Eesurrection,  as  the  grand  proof 
of  His  Messiahship.  And  "  God  now  commandeth  all  men  everywhere  to  repent  " 
(Acts  xvii.  30,  31).  6.  Man  is  unbelieving,  and  needs  strong  evidence.  And  what 
evidence  can  be  stronger  than  that  He  rose  from  the  dead  according  to  His  own 
prediction.    II.  The  gospel  has  a  special  provision  for  a  sinner's  justificatioMi 


CHAP.  X.]  EOMANS.  857 

AND  THE  EESUBRECTION  OF  ChBIST  IS  A  GRAND  OBJECT  OF  HIS  FAITH.      Let  UB  HOtice 1. 

The  pre-reqnisites  of  faith.  "  If  thou  sbalt  confess  with  thy  mouth  the  Lord  Jesus  " 
— that  is,  acknowledge  Jesus  Christ  as  thy  only  Saviour.  This  is  one  of  the  most 
difiBcult  tasks  to  human  nature.  We  cleave  to  our  own  performances  and  attach 
merit  to  them.  "  I  must  first  reform — weep  more — bring  a  softer  heart — pray 
more,"  is  not  "  confessing  the  Lord  Jesus."  2.  The  object  of  faith.  "  That  God 
hath  raised  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead."  In  Scripture  a  part  is  often  put  for  the 
whole  :  so  here,  the  resurrection  of  Christ  is  put  for  the  whole  of  His  mediatorial 
work,  because  by  that  miracle  God  gave  assurance  that  Christ  was  His  Son — that 
His  sacrifice  was  acceptable  and  efficacious ;  and  that  His  laws  were  binding.  His 
doctrines  true,  and  EQs  promises  sure.  3.  The  exercise  of  faith.  •'  Believi^  with 
thine  heart."  We  sometimes  u.se  the  term,  "faith  in  the  head";  by  whl  h  we 
mean  an  instinctive,  rational  conviction.  This  is  not  shut  out ;  but  it  is  only  the 
casket  of  the  jewel — a  shell  of  the  fruit.  The  righteousness  of  faith  is  by  the  heart. 
The  affections  have  now  more  to  do  than  the  intellect.  In  this  exercise  of  faith 
thou  art  called  upon  cordially  to  approve  of  God's  way  of  saving  sinners ;  not  to 
understand  how  the  death  of  Christ  avails  for  thee  I  4.  The  encouragement  of 
faith  (vers.  12,  13).     (J.  A.  West.) 

Ver.  10.  With  the  heart  man  bellevetb  onto  righteousness ;  and  with  the  mouth 
confession  Is  made  unto  salvation. — Observe  the  harmonious  relation  between — 1. 
The  heart  and  the  mouth.  2.  Faith  and  confession.  3.  Bighteousness  and  salva- 
tion.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Faith,  and  the  confession  of  faith  : — 1.  It  was  a  saying  of 
Dr.  Johnson,  that  "classical  quotation  was  the  parole  of  literary  men,"  and  we  can 
understand  h  '-^-  a  sympathy  similar  to  that  existing  among  scholars  would  obtain 
between  Paul  and  the  Jews  to  whom  he  wrote,  and  they  found  him  adapting  the 
words  of  the  law  in  his  exposition  of  the  gospel.  A  comparison  of  vers.  6-8  with 
Deut.  XXX.  11-14  will  show  clearly  that  they  are  adapted  rather  than  quoted.  2. 
In  ver.  9,  confession  comes  before  believing,  there  being  a  play  upon  the  words 
quoted  in  ver.  8;  but  in  ver.  10  we  have,  more  logically,  belief  coming  before  confes- 
sion. I.  "  With  the  heabt  man  believeth  unto  righteousness."  1.  Nature  of 
evangelical  faith.  (1)  It  is  not  a  mere  intellectual  faith,  as  when  men  believe  in 
Caesar  or  Napoleon,  for  this  the  devils  have  when  they  "  believe  and  tremble  " 
(James,  ii.  19).  (2)  In  belief  of  the  heart,  the  mind  as  well  as  the  affections  is  implied, 
for  the  heart,  in  scriptural  language,  is  said  to  reason  (Mark  ii.  6),  to  meditate  (Luke 
iii.  15),  and  to  understand  (Matt.  xiii.  15).  2.  This  faith  is  to  be  in  the  resurrec- 
tion of  Christ.  (1)  Now  by  this  the  Divinity  of  Christ's  teaching  was  demonstrated 
(chap.  i.  4).  (2)  Again,  Christ  was  the  "  outshining  of  the  Father's  glory,  and  the 
express  image  of  His  person  "  (Heb.  i.  3).  In  Him  we  see  incarnate  the  Divine 
perfections.  (3)  True  faith,  therefore,  in  the  resurrection  of  Christ  implies  a  belief 
in  the  whole  mediatorial  scheme,  and  such  a  realising  sense  of  God  as  will  lead  to 
holy  service.  3.  Hence  it  is  a  belief  "unto  righteousness  ;  "  i.e.,  (1)  The  forensic 
righteousness  by  which  the  objective  difficulty  to  man's  approach  to  his  heavenly 
Father  was  taken  away  (context  and  chap.  iii.  22).  (2)  And  also  the  righteousness 
wrought  in  us  (subjective)  as  we  imitate  Christ's  holy  life  (1  John  ii.  29  ;  iii.  7,  10). 
(3)  Justification  by  faith  is  "  the  article  of  a  standing  or  falling  Church,"  but  the 
faith  that  justifies  is  the  "  faith  which  worketh  by  love  "  (Gal.  v.  6).  H.  "  With  the 
MOUTH  CONFESSION  IS  MADE  UNTO  SAiiVATioN."  1.  This  has  bccu  supposed  to  have 
reference  to  the  primitive  confession  of  faith  in  baptism.  If  so,  the  text  will 
correspond  to  Mark  xvi.  16.  2.  We  may,  consistently  with  what  has  been  said 
under  I.  3,  take  the  "  confession  "  to  stand  for  practical  Christianity,  since  confess- 
ing Christ  with  the  mouth  is  but  one  of  the  "  works  "  wrought  by  loving  faith.  (1) 
There  is  a  confession  with  the  mouth  to  which  God  calls  us.  If  our  hearts  be  full 
of  Christ,  we  must  needs  confess  Him  (Matt.  xii.  34 ;  x.  32 ;  see  also  John  xii.  42 
and  1  John  iv.  15).  (2)  But  "  the  Word  is  nigh  us,  that  we  may  do  it  "  (Deut.  xxx. 
14).  (a)  The  man  of  the  world  finds  it  hard  to  understand  how  professing  Chris- 
tians can  believe  while  their  actions  remain  unaffected  by  their  belief.  In 
commerce,  a  belief  in  the  dishonesty  of  any  one  with  whom  he  has  to  do,  leads  him 
to  guard  and  protect  himself  against  possible  wrong.  The  mariner,  again,  whose 
charts  disclose  rocks  and  shoals,  keeps  his  ship  at  a  safe  distance  from  them — he 
makes  use  of  his  knowledge.  (6)  But  the  true  Christian  must  act.  His  faith 
brings  before  him  the  "  things  unseen  "  (Heb.  xi.  1),  and  he  no  longer  walks  under 
the  influence  of  the  things  of  sight,  like  the  children  of  this  world  (2  Cor.  v.  7). 
As  spiritual  health  increases,  old  ways  of  sin  are  thrown  off,  the  heart  is  cleansed 


858  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHA>.  & 

and  purified,  and  the  man's  daily  life  has  a  heavenly  fragrance  which  blesses  his 
fellow-men.  Conclusion  :  The  secret  of  men's  unbelief  lies  for  the  most  part,  not 
in  the  mind,  but  in  the  affections.  They  cannot  bring  themselves  to  forsake  their 
worldliness  and  sin,  and  therefore  come  to  the  consideration  of  the  gospel  message, 
if  they  consider  it  at  all,  with  prejudiced  minds.  (J.  C.  Pilkington,  M.A.)  Faith 
and  confession  the  subjective  condition  of  salvation ; — I.  "  With  the  heart  man 
BELiEVETH  UNTO  EiGHTEOUSNESS."  1.  Belief  and  faith  are  one.  In  respect  to  mun- 
dane matters,  we  receive  the  testimony  of  men  ;  while  in  the  matters  pertaining  to 
the  unseen  world,  we  receive  the  testimony  of  God.  Faith  in  man  sustains  the 
whole  fabric  of  our  secular  and  scientific  knowledge,  and  faith  in  God  is  the  support 
of  our  spiritual  and  religious  knowledge.  If,  in  order  to  secure  the  salvation  of  our 
souls,  we  must  have  the  latter  faith,  even  so,  in  order  to  the  preservation  and  com- 
fort of  our  bodies,  we  must  have  the  former.  "  Without  faith  it  is  impossible  to 
please  God  "  ;  and  without  faith,  belief,  it  is  impossible  to  enjoy  the  advantages  of 
civilised  life.  And  whether  it  has  respect  to  man  or  God,  faith  is  belief  in  testi- 
mony (1  John  v.  9-11).  2.  The  apostle  clearly  intends  by  "  the  heart"  the  inner, 
as  contrasted  with  the  external  man ;  and  not  the  emotional,  as  opposed  to  the 
intelligent  man.  For  the  contrast  is  not  between  heart  and  head,  but  between  heart 
and  mouth.  The  sacred  authors  often  spoke  of  bodily  organs  as  if  they  projected 
mental  values  into  them.  With  them  the  "  heart "  did  not  specially  denote  the 
affections  as  distinguished  from  the  understanding  (Deut.  xxix.  4  ;  1  Kings  iii.  9, 
12  ;  Mark  vii.  21,  ii.  6  ;  Acts  xi.  23  ;  Prov.  xvi.  21).  The  heart  stood  for  the  very 
centre  of  the  person,  where  thought  had  its  fountain,  intelligenne  its  post  of 
observation,  and  the  stores  of  knowledge  and  experience  were  treasured  up.  3.  The 
testimony  to  be  believed  is  here  spoken  of  as  a  "  report "  ;  i.e.,  the  thing  announced 
by  the  witnesses  and  heard  by  those  to  whom  it  was  spoken.  It  was  a  report  con- 
cerning the  Saviour,  and  being  given  by  competent  and  faithful  witnesses,  and  con- 
firmed by  the  attesting  seal  of  God,  there  was  no  need  for  any  man  to  go  out  of  or 
beyond  himself  for  Christ.  For  the  word  was  nigh  him.  4.  But  why  specially 
believe  that  God  hath  raised  Christ  from  the  dead  ?  Because  the  testimony  is  that 
He  died  for  our  sins,  and  His  resurrection  is  the  proof  that  the  sin  is  purged  ;  for 
our  Substitute  has  been  discharged  and  restored  to  deathless  life.  Therefore  a 
sure  belief  that  God  hath  raised  Him  from  the  dead  carries  with  it  a  sure 
belief  that  our  everlasting  life  is  made  certain.  5.  But  though  faith,  considered 
in  itself,  is  simply  belief  in  testimony,  it  nevertheless  serves  to  awaken  various 
emotions  of  the  heart  in  accordance  with  the  character  of  the  testimony  believed, 
and  the  kind  and  amount  of  personal  interest  involved.  If  we  have  no  conscious 
interest  in  that  which  is  the  subject  of  testimony,  then  no  emotion  will  result  from 
its  belief.  But  if  we  have,  then  the  belief  will  give  rise  to  joy  or  sorrow,  hope  or 
fear,  triumph  or  dread,  as  the  case  may  be.  Tidings  come  of  a  terrible  hurricane 
in  the  mid-Atlantic,  in  which  numbers  of  ships  have  foundered,  and  belief  of  the 
tidings  instantly  fills  many  a  hitherto  bright  and  happy  home  with  the  gloom  of 
despair  and  death.  But  let  them  presently  have  the  assurance  that  the  particular 
ships  which  contained  their  hopes  have  escaped  and  have  safely  arrived  in  port, 
and,  believing  this,  how  instantly  they  find  their  sorrow  and  despair  give  place  to 
gratitude  and  joy !  And  here  is  a  poor  guilty  wanderer,  who  has  long  and  griev- 
ously offended  against  his  heavenly  Father.  He  has  come  to  realise  the  fearfulness 
of  his  danger.  Can  any  one  wonder  that  he  should  "roar"  because  of  the  dis- 
quietude of  his  spirit  ?  But  let  him  now  hear  and  believe  that  "  Christ  Jesus  came 
into  tbe  world  to  save  sinners,"  and  that  '*  whosoever  believeth  in  Him  shall  not 
perish,  but  have  everlasting  life,"  and  of  what  a  change  from  the  terrors  of 
despair  to  the  joy  of  salvation  is  he  at  once  conscious  !  II.  "  With  the  mouth 
CONFESSION  IS  MADE  UNTO  SALVATION."  1.  The  "  salvatioD  "  spokeH  of  is  not  already 
attained,  but  one  for  which,  or  in  order  to  which,  confession  is  made.  It  is  there- 
fore something  which  is  yet  future.  Though  a  Christian  man  is  saved  here  and 
now,  yet  this  present  salvation  is  but  a  thing  begun,  not  completed  (1  Cor.  xv.  2  ; 
Phil.  ii.  12;  1  Thess.  v.  8;  Eom.  viii.  24  ;  Heb.  i.  14;  Bom.  xiii.  11;  1.  Pet.  i.  5  ; 
Heb.  ix.  28).  2.  Now  it  is  in  respect  to  this  continued  and  ultimately  completed 
redemption  that  confession  is  made  with  the  mouth  unto  salvation.  "  The  righte- 
ousness obtained  by  faith  would,  forsooth,  fall  to  the  ground  again,  and  would  not 
be  attended  by  salvation,  if  faith  had  not  the  vital  force  to  produce  confession  of 
the  mouth,  which  speaks  out  of  the  fulness  of  the  heart."  For  the  confession  indi- 
cated is  not  that  merely  of  the  lip,  but  true  and  bold  acknowledgment  of  Chris* 
both  in  deed  and  word.    Jesus  Christ  "  before  Pontius  Pilate  witnessed  a  good  oon< 


CHAP.  X.J  ROMANS.  859 

fession  "  (1  Tim.  vi.  13) — one  that  cost  Him  His  life  ;  and  any  anion  with  Him 
which  has  not  in  it  the  spirit  of  devoted  loyalty  to  Him,  even  unto  death,  if  needful, 
is  vaiu  (Matt.  x.  28-33  ;  Eev.  xxi.  8;  Heb.  xi.  33),  {W.  Tyson.)  Believing  with 
the  heart : — I.  The  object  of  faith  (ver.  9).  There  are  many  who  for  many  a 
weary  month  question  whether  they  have  the  right  sort  of  faith  ;  whereas  they 
would  do  better  if  they  looked  to  see  whether  their  faith  rested  upon  a  right  founda- 
tion. Now,  soul-saving  faith  rests  upon  Christ — 1.  As  incarnate.  2.  In  His  life. 
Faith  perceives  that  He  is  perfect  in  obedience,  sanctified  wholly  to  His  work,  and 
although  "  tempted  in  all  points  like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin."  3.  But  chiefly  in 
His  death.  Faith  hears  the  expiring  sin-bearer  cry  with  a  loud  voice,  •'  It  is 
finished,"  and  adds  a  glad  Amen,  "  It  is  finished  1  "  4.  In  His  resurrection.  Inas- 
much as  Christ  was  put  into  the  prison  of  the  tomb  as  a  hostage  and  bail  for  Hia 
people,  faith  knows  that  He  never  could  have  come  out  again  if  God  had  not  been 
completely  satisfied  with  His  substitutionary  work.  "  He  ne'er  had  been  at  freedom 
set."  Faith,  therefore,  perceives  that  if  Christ  is  risen  the  soul  is  justified.  5.  In 
His  ascension.  Faith  beholds  Him  in  His  session  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  sees 
Him  pleading  as  the  great  High  Priest,  and  expecting  until  His  enemies  are  made 
His  footstool.  Mark,  not  so  much  as  a  hair's  breadth  of  faith's  foundation  is  to  be 
found  out  of  Christ.  Faith  does  not  build  on  its  own  experience,  on  any  know- 
ledge which  it  has  obtained  by  research,  or  on  merit  which  it  fancies  it  has  procured 
by  long  and  ardent  service.  II.  The  nature  of  faith.  "With  the  heart  man 
believeth. "  1.  We  generally  attribute  the  act  of  faith  to  the  mind,  but  our  text 
makes  it  to  be  a  work  of  the  affections.  (1)  In  order  merely  to  state  that  faith 
must  be  sincere  we  must  heartily  believe  it.  It  must  not  be  a  notional  faith 
which  a  man  possesses,  because  his  mother  was  of  the  same  persuasion,  or  because 
he  would  be  singular  if  he  were  to  be  an  infidel.  (2)  To  make  a  distinction  between 
doctrinal  faith  and  the  faith  which  accepts  Christ.  I  know  scores  who  are  well 
read  in  divinity,  who  are  orthodox  to  the  last  turn  of  the  scale,  and  who  fight  like 
tigers  for  but  one  hair  of  the  head  of  a  creed,  and  yet,  they  will  never  be  saved  by 
their  faith,  because  it  is  merely  a  belief  of  certain  abstract  propositions  which  never 
affected  their  nature.  2.  What  is  this  believing  with  the  heart  ?  (1)  The  first  work 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  man  is  not  to  teach  him  doctrines,  but  to  make  him  feel  a  great 
hungering  and  thirsting  after  a  something,  he  scarcely  knows  what.  His  heart, 
hke  the  needle,  touched  with  the  magnet,  cannot  rest,  because  it  has  not  found  its 
pole.  Now,  when  Christ  is  set  forth  as  a  complete  Saviour,  able  to  give  salvation 
now,  then  the  heart  says,  "  Why,  that  is  just  what  I  have  been  wanting."  Just  as 
the  flowers  which  have  been  shut  up  all  night,  as  soon  as  the  sun  is  up,  open  their 
cups  as  if  they  felt — •'  There !  that  is  what  we  were  wanting  !  "  The  heart  stretches 
out  its  arm  to  Christ,  and  Christ  comes  into  that  heart,  and  the  heart  presses  Him 
close  to  itself.  Believing  with  the  heart  is  the  heart's  own  conviction  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  just  what  it  wants.  Many  of  you  have  a  true  faith  in  Christ  and  yet  you 
have  never  read  "  Paley's  Evidences,"  nor  "  Butler's  Analogy."  You  hardly  know 
upon  what  ground  the  Bible  is  accepted  as  true,  and  hence,  cunning  infidels  give 
you  a  good  shaking  when  they  get  hold  of  you  upon  that  point.  But  there  is  one 
thing  upon  which  you  can  never  be  shaken,  you  feel  the  gospel  must  be  true, 
because  it  just  suits  the  wants  of  your  heart.  If  any  man  should  say  to  you  when 
you  are  thirsty,  "  Water  is  not  good,"  by  a  process  stronger  than  logic,  you  could 
prove  that  water  is  good  because  it  quenches  your  thirst.  When  you  are  hungry, 
if  a  philosopher  should  say  to  you,  *'  You  do  not  understand  the  ground  upon  which 
bread  nourishes  the  human  frame,"  you  would  say,  "  One  thing  I  know,  bread  is 
good  to  eat  if  I  am  hungry,  and  I  will  show  you."  So  the  believing  heart  is  hungry, 
therefore  feeds  upon  Jesus;  is  thirsty,  therefore  drinks  the  living  wat^r.  (2) 
Again,  is  it  not  man's  heart  which  is  led  to  perceive  the  difficulty  of  reconciling  the 
Divine  attributes  ?  Do  you  not  remember  when  your  heart  said,  "  God  is  just ;  it  is 
right  He  should  be.  Yet  I  know  He  is  merciful,  but  I  cannot  understand  how  He 
can  be  both,  for  if  He  is  just,  He  has  sworn  to  punish,  and  if  He  is  gracious,  He 
will  forgive."  You  came  up  to  the  sanctuary  when  your  heart  was  thus  perplexed, 
but  you  heard  the  preacher  sho|v  clearly  that  Christ  became  the  substitute  for  man, 
you  understood  how  God  had  all  His  justice  satisfied  in  the  death  of  His  beloved 
Son,  and  your  heart  said,  "  There,  this  is  the  very  answer  I  have  been  wanting." 
Now,  "I  see  how  righteousness  and  peace  have  kissed  each  other."  Oh!  the  joy 
and  gladness  with  which  your  heart  laid  hold  upon  a  crucified  Redeemer,  saying, 
"  It  is  enough,  my  trouble  iq  removed."  (3)  Believing  with  the  heart  implies  % 
love  to  the  plan  of  salvation.    As  you  are  thinking  it  over,  something  wbaspers. 


360  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  X. 

•«  Why,  such  a  plan  as  that  must  be  true."    Then,  the  sweet  promise  flashes  across 
your  mind,  "  Whosoever  believeth  on  Him  shall  not  be  ashamed"  ;  and  your  heart 
says,  ' '  Then,  I  will  believe  on  Him ;  that  plan  so  magnificent  in  its  liberality  is 
worthy  of  my  loving  acceptance."    3.  What  is  true  of  us  when  we  commence  our 
spiritual  career  is  true  all  our  lives  long.     Soul-saving  faith  is  always  the  belief  of 
the  heart.     I  think  I  see  some  grey-headed  man  rise  up  and  say,  "  In  my  young 
days  I  gave  my  heart  to  Christ,  and  I  had  a  peace  and  joy  such  as  I  had  never 
known  before.     Since  that  time,  this  brow  has  been  furrowed  with  many  cares,  but 
the  Lord  has  been  my  heart's  stay  and  confidence.    When  trouble  has  come  in 
upon  me,  I  have  been  able  to  sustain  it.     4.  This  is  the  right  way  to  believe  in 
Jesus,  because  this  is  the  way  in  which  you  can  believe  in  Him  when  you  come  to 
die.    You  have  heard  of  the  renowned  bishop  on  his  dying  bed.    His  friends  said 
to  him,  "  Do  not  you  know  us  ?  "    There  was  a  shake  of  the  head.    Next,  the 
children  beg  him  to  remember  them.    But  he  shakes  his  head.    Last,  came  hia 
wife,  and  he  had  forgotten  her.    At  last,  one  said  in  his  ear,  "  Do  you  know  Jesus  ?  " 
The  response  was  instantaneous.     "  Know  Him  ?  "  said  he,  "  yes.  He  is  all  my 
salvation  and  all  my  desire."    Though  the  heart  may  know  the  wife  and  the  child, 
yet  never  can  the  heart  know  the  dearest  earthly  object  as  it  knows  Christ.    He 
that  believeth  with  his  heart  hath  Christ  in  him,  not  on  him,  the  hope  of  glory.     5. 
It  is  a  very  blessed  thing  that  "  with  the  heart  man  believeth  "  ;  because  some  of 
you  might  say,  "  I  have  not  head  enough  to  be  a  Christian."    Even  fools  may  still 
believe.     "The  wayfaring  man,  though  a  fool,  shall  not  err  therein."    HI.  Thk 
BESULT  OF  FAITH.     "  Uuto  rightcousness. "     The  man  who  believes  in  Christ  is 
righteous ;  he  is  righteous  at  once,  in  a  moment ;  he  is  righteous  in  the  germ. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)    Believing  with  the  heart : — The  seat  of  faith,  it  deserves  to  be 
observed,  is  not  in  the  brain,  but  the  heart ;  not  that  I  wish  to  enter  into  any  dispute 
concerning  the  part  of  the  body  which  is  the  seat  of  faith,  but  since  the  word  "heart " 
generally  means  a  serious,  sincere,  ardent  affection,  I  am  desirous  to  show  the  con- 
fidence of  faith  to  be  a  firm,  efficacious,  and  operative  principle  in  all  the  emotions 
and  feelings  of  the  soul,  not  a  mere  naked  notion  of  the  head.  (J.  Calvin.)      Heart 
.judgment : — 1.  The  popular  impression  is  that  argument  produces  belief,  and  that 
no  justly  founded  belief  can  be  entertained  unless  the  man  has  had  clear  intellectual 
reasons  for  that  belief.     2.    Life  contradicts  this  view  by  the  wholesale.     Men 
believe  thousands  of  things  of  which  they  have  had  no  demonstration,  and  there 
are  multitudes  of  things  which  men  can  demonstrate  that  they  do  not  believe. 
What  is  evidence  ?     It  is  that  which  satisfies  intellect,  conscience,  taste,  and  the 
emotions.     Some  men  want  evidence  that  touches  the  intellect ;  some  evidence 
that  touches  the  imagination  ;  some  evidence  that  touches  the  taste  ;  some  evidence 
that  strikes  the  moral  sense.    The  evidence  that  convinces  one  man  has  no  effect 
upon  another.      3.  Now,   in  regard  to  evidence,  belief  has  a   wide  range.      In 
things  material,  a  man  believes  upon  sense-evidence.    But  in  regard  to  scientific 
things,  there  are  no  evidences  that  are  less  reliable  than  the  obvious  operations  of 
what  are  called  the  five  senses.    That  Huxley  and  Tyndall  will  tell  you.     Here  a 
trained  intellect  is  the  master  of  evidence.     An  impassioned  investigator  is  carried 
away.     Men  insist  upon  it  that  you  must  discharge  all  feeling,  lay  aside  all  pre-con- 
ceived  notions,  and  come  with  your  mind  as  transparent  as  crystal  to  the  investiga- 
tion.   4.  But  the  range  of  truth  that  is  thus  brought  within  the  scope  of  our 
investigation  is  relatively  small.     The  truths  that  work  to  manhood,  to  character, 
and  conduct,  are  innumerable  and  immensely  more  impoitant.     The  great  bulk  of 
the  questions  about  which  men  are  to  believe  or  not  have  reference  to  a  kind  of 
truth  that  you  can  never  judge  by  pure  cold  intellect.     All  social  and  moral  truths 
depend  upon  the  affections.    A  man  who  carries  a  purely  mathematical  mind  to 
the  reading  of  Milton  is  a  fool.    A  man  who  should  read  Tennyson  as  a  micro- 
scopist  would  examine  an  insect,  how  preposterous  his  conduct  would  be  !     In  the 
largest  department,  then,  belief  depends  upon  the  feelings.    I  do  not  mean  that  it 
excludes  the  intellect,  but  that  the  investigating  intellect  is  obliged  to  be  in  harmony 
with  the  feelings  that  dominate  the  department  where  the  truth  lies.     Truths  of 
beauty — and  that  takes  in  the  whole  realm  of  art — cannot  be  conceived  of  by  a 
purely  speculative  intellect.     The  intellect  must  be  struck  through  and  through 
with  the  elements  of  the  beautiful  in  order  to  appreciate  it.     There  is  a  great  deal 
of  mathematics  in  the  science  of  music  ;  yet  music  itself  cannot  be  appreciated  by 
the  mere  man  of  science  without  the  sense  or  faculty  of  music  in  him.    5.  The 
great  religious  truths  which  determine  conduct  and  character  cannot  be  under- 
stood except  through  the  state  of  the  heart.    The  baser  animal  passions  indulged 


CHAP,  X.]  ROMANS.  86\ 

in  60  cloud  the  moral  feeling  and  the  intellect  as  to  preclude  the  truth  and  inves- 
tigation of  it.  The  natural  man  cannot  discern  the  things  of  the  Spirit.  A  man  in 
a  rage  cannot  understand  the  emotions  of  peace.  A  man  that  is  grasping  and 
unfair  is  not  in  a  state  to  consider  justice  and  equity.  How  can  a  man  who  is 
puffed  up  with  self-conceit  have  any  adequate  comparison  within  himself  of  hia 
moral  states  ?  Selfishness  so  distorts  and  disturbs  the  light  of  the  reason  that  it 
cannot  form  a  just  judgment  of  truths  nor  understand  them  even  when  they  are 
expoimded  by  others.  Recently,  at  Cornell  University,  a  professor  said,  "  I  hope 
they  will  never  establish  an  observatory  here. "  "Why?"  "Because  the  locality 
is  utterly  unfit  for  celestial  observations.  Cayuga  Lake  every  night  fills  the 
atmosphere  with  so  much  vapour  that  it  is  not  until  late  in  tbe  day  ihat  you  can 
get  a  clear  view  of  the  sky,  and  hardly  three  nights  in  the  whole  year  have  been  fit 
for  a  critical  observation  of  the  heavens."  The  clouds  that  go  up  around  the 
human  observatory  prevent  men  from  seeing  clearly.  They  cannot  make  observa- 
tions of  celestial  things.  6.  Notice  how  careful  men  are  in  forming  their  beliefs  on 
scientific  subjects.  Although  the  truths  of  science  are  material,  largely,  yet  men 
feel  the  necessity  of  good  health,  of  a  clear  eye,  and  of  all  conditions  which  render 
them  secure  from  various  adverse  interruptions.  So  far  is  this  carried  that  men  do 
not  trust  themselves;  there  is  what  is  called  a  "personal  equation"  among  them. 
When  a  star  in  transit  passes  a  given  line,  and  a  man  records  the  time  exactly  of 
its  striking  the  line,  it  will  happen  that  a  dull  brain  did  not  see  it  for  a  measurable 
period  of  time  after  a  sensitive  and  quick  brain ;  and  the  astronomer  has  a  personal 
equation  of  bis  own  peculiarities  of  quickness  or  slowness,  according  to  rules  that 
have  been  established,  so  that  in  making  the  additions  or  subtractions,  he  always 
takes  it  into  account  as  a  part  of  his  calculations.  This  is  for  the  sake  of  physical 
observations.  Whoever  thought  of  making  a  personal  equation  in  the  judgment  of 
men  on  great  moral  questions?  Look  at  the  way  in  which  a  judge  feels  himself 
bound  to  come  to  the  consideration  of  facts,  law,  and  reasoning.  If  he  is  a  naturally 
obstinate  man,  and  has  the  shadow  of  a  previous  idea  in  the  case,  it  will  take  twice 
as  much  evidence  and  coercive  logic  to  dislodge  him  from  his  prejudices.  An 
honourable  man  would  refuse  to  sit  on  any  case  in  which  he  was  conscious  that  he 
had  a  foregoing  disqualification.  Now,  see  how  in  regard  to  justice,  science,  and 
every  department,  men  are  conscious  of  the  disturbing  forces  felt  in  one  way  or 
another ;  and  see  how  they  prepare  themselves  to  arrive  at  right  judgments  and  to 
correct  them  as  much  as  possible  by  review  and  restatement.  But  compare  the 
way  in  which  men  approach  these  tremendous  themes  of  religion  and  sit  in  judg- 
ment upon  Divine  equity,  and  upon  questions  of  right  and  questions  of  duty.  See 
how  young  men,  being  somewhat  unsettled  from  their  old  foundations,  plunge  into 
unbelief.  They  read  their  evidence  in  the  newspaper,  going  from  their  house  to 
their  business.  "  Oh,  I  have  read  on  that  subject;  I  know  all  about  it."  How 
little  have  men  read,  how  little  have  they  pondered,  how  little  have  they  ever  had 
the  slightest  idea  that  their  judgments  have  been  influenced  by  their  dispositions, 
by  their  conduct,  by  their  wishes  and  longings,  by  their  self-indulgence — how  httle 
have  they  come  to  form  a  judgment  against  the  pulling-down  influences  that  act 
upon  them  !  7.  Now,  it  is  often  the  case  that  a  true-hearted,  simple-minded  man, 
believing  the  gospels  without  a  particle  of  intellectual  evidence,  but  with  a  hungry 
heart  and  with  a  real  love  of  things  that  are  spiritual,  is  led  to  believe,  I  had 
almost  said,  without  the  operation  of  his  reason  ai  all.  He  is  not  able  to  give  a 
reason  for  the  faith  that  is  in  him  any  more  than  an  artist  is  able  to  give  the  reason 
why  he  puts  in  a  bit  of  red  there,  except  that  his  eye  was  hungry  for  it.  It  is  pos- 
sible for  a  man  pure  in  heart  to  come  to  a  just  conclusion  in  regard  to  mighty 
truths,  that  involve  time  and  eternity,  in  such  a  way  that  he  will  be  the  laughing 
stock  and  the  derision  of  eminent  philosophers,  or  even  eminent  theologians.  But 
such  simple  men  believe  with  their  heart.  The  temperature  of  the  heart  was  such 
that  it  inclined  them  to  accept  these  things,  and,  accepting  them,  they  believed  in 
God  and  felt  good.  8.  See  how  this  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Bible.  Take,  e.g.,  John 
i.  1-5,  "  The  light  shineth  in  darkness ;  and  the  darkness  comprehended  it  not." 
Turn  to  chap.  i.  20-25.  Our  Saviour  bears  testimony  again  and  again  in  St.  John's 
Gospel,  which  records  His  controversies  with  the  conceited,  scholarly  men  of  tha 
temple,  when  He  declared  to  them  that  He  made  known  to  them  the  invisible 
truths  of  God,  which  ought  to  be  appreciated  by  moral  sensibility,  but  that  they 
could  not  see  them,  and  even  denied  them,  on  account  of  the  condition  of  their 
hearts.  This  is  the  Scripture  testimony,  and  it  corroborates  the  experience  of  men. 
In  seoular  life  men  have  come  to  understand  that  they  must  prepare  themselves 


362  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  «. 


before  they  come  to  a  judgment  or  appreciate  a  thing  accurately.  But  in  religion 
men  are  still  asking  for  intellectual  proof  that  shall  come  like  a  mathematical 
demonstration.  They  are  believing  this  and  disbelieving  that,  on  evidence  which 
does  not  belong  to  the  subject  at  all.  "  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart ;  they  shall 
see  God."  Men  of  distempered  heart,  unclean  and  impure,  shall  never  see  Him. 
Beware,  then,  of  the  disturbance  of  your  own  hearts.  Beware  of  all 
those  judgments  that  are  merely  abstract,  or  factual,  as  in  science.  Accept 
those  judgments  that  come  to  you  from  the  heart,  and  report  themselves 
to  you  irresistibly  as  true,  springing  from  the  highest  moral  conditions, 
from    conscience,    reason,    hope,    faith,   love.    (H.    W.  Beecher.)  Belief   of 

the  heart  necessary  for  righteousness : — Since  the  end  of  religion  is  obedience, 
the  heart  is  wanted.  To  know  what  we  ought  to  do  and  to  do  it  are  two  very 
different  things.  For  the  first,  perhaps,  the  mind  is  adequate  ;  for  the  second  we 
have  need  of  the  heart.  "  I  see  the  better  and  I  take  the  worse  way,"  said  one  of 
the  ancients.  Why  ?  Because  there  was  no  force  strong  enough  to  impel  him  to 
the  better  way.  This  is  what  we  all  want.  What  the  philosophers  call  the  dynamic 
force — to  constrain  us  to  obey  what  we  see  we  should.  Most  of  us  have  got  know- 
ledge enough  of  the  right  way  ;  what  we  lack  is  the  impulse  to  walk  therein.  The 
body  is  like  a  delicate  piece  of  machinery  worked  by  the  heart,  which  sends  the 
blood  pulsating  through  every  vein  and  artery.  Without  that  all  would  be  in  vain. 
What  the  heart  is  to  the  body  the  emotions  are  to  the  soul — the  impelling  force. 
But,  it  may  be  said,  the  heart  is,  of  all  parts  of  our  complex  nature,  the  least  under 
our  control.  Faith  springs  up  spontaneously,  or  not  at  all.  To  bid  men  believe  or 
love  is  a  waste  of  breath.  God  therefore  makes  Himself  visible  in  His  Son  Jesus 
Christ,  and  when  thus  we  really  see  Him,  faith  must  spring  up  in  our  hearts,  as 
surely  as  admiration  does  in  the  heart  of  a  beholder  of  a  glowing  sunset,  or  the 
hearer  of  noble  music,  or  the  spectator  of  some  heroic  deed.  A  child  is  sinking  in 
a  stream ;  you  see  a  man  at  the  risk  of  his  life  leap  in  to  save  the  precious  hfe.  It 
needs  no  command  to  make  your  heart  glow  with  gratitude  to  such  a  deliverer.^  It 
leaps  up  at  the  sight.  To  look  at  Jesus  Christ  touches  the  heart  so  that  it  is 
constrained  by  the  love  of  Christ,  so  as  to  live,  not  for  itself  but  for  Him.  (W.  G. 
Harder.)  The  faith  of  the  heart: — We  remember  to  have  heard  a  preacher 
describe  this  act  of  faith  as  follows  :— "  Look  at  that  drowning  man,  hurried  dowp 
the  stream  by  the  furious  torrent  with  which  he  is  convulsively  struggling.  His 
looks  and  cries  bespeak  the  agony  he  feels.  By  and  by  his  attention  is  directed  to 
a  life  preserver,  \\hich  his  friends  are  placing  in  the  most  favourable  position 
possible.  He  at  ouce  sees  that  if  he  is  saved  at  all,  it  must  be  by  that  instrument; 
and  here  is  the  exercise  of  his  understanding.  But  it  is  very  questionable  whether 
he  shall  be  able  to  reach  it.  The  current  seems  to  carry  him  in  another  direction ; 
yet  there  is  hope ;  it  is  taking  another  turn.  He  is  gradually  approaching  the 
instrument  of  his  safety  ;  and  now  there  is  hope,  mingled  with  his  agony  ;  he  comes 
nearer  and  nearer  :  his  friends  cry  '  courage,'  and  see  with  what  energy  he  seizes 
the  preserver  of  his  life.  There  was  heart  in  that  grasp.  But  not  more  so  than 
when  the  poor  trembling  sinner  lays  hold  of  Christ.  He  is  pointed  to  the  Cross, 
but  the  current  of  his  feelings  drives  him  past  it.  He  weeps  and  mourns,  he  groans 
and  prays  ;  his  friends  reason  and  encourage ;  the  spirit  operates  ;  hope  springa 
up ;  immediately  the  direction  of  the  stream  is  changed ;  he  gets  nearer  every 
moment ;  he  looks,  weeps,  cries,  '  Save,  for  Thy  name's  sake  ';  and  in  an  agony — 
with  all  his  heart — and  with  all  the  affections  and  powers  of  his  soul,  he  grasps  the 
Saviour."  (Handbook  to  Scripture  Doctrines.)  Faith  and  righteousness  .-—Look 
at  certain  doctrines,  and  see  what  they  must  produce  when  believed  with  the  heart. 
It  is  a  portion  of  Scripture  revelation  that  God  is  omniscient  and  omnipotent,  that 
He  is  ever  at  hand,  to  note  down  human  actions,  and  register  them  for  judgment. 
Can  this  really  be  believed,  and  yet  the  believer  fail  to  be  intensely  earnest  to 
approve  himself  in  God's  sight  ?  Bather,  will  not  his  faith  produce  a  holy  reverence 
of  the  Almighty,  and  make  him  walk  circumspectly,  because  walking  side  by  side 
with  his  Maker  and  his  Judge?  The  Bible  tells  him,  moreover,  of  an  amazing 
scheme  of  rescue  planned  and  executed  by  God  on  behalf  of  himself  and  his  fellow- 
men.  It  sets  God  before  Him  as  giving  His  own  Son,  and  that  Son  as  giving  Him- 
self to  ignominy  and  shame  that  pardon  might  be  placed  within  reach  of  the  sinful. 
Can  this  be  believed,  and  yet  the  believer  not  glow  with  intense  love  towards  so 
gracious  a  God  ;  yea,  and  towards  his  fellow-men,  seeing  that  they  are  objects  of 
the  same  mercy,  and  therefore  equally  precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Creator  ?  But 
jet  further.    Along  with  the  revelation  of  this  scheme  of  mercy  the  Bible  sets  forth 


CHAP.  X.]  ROMANS.  868 

conditions  apart  from  which  we  can  have  no  share  in  the  blessings  of  Christ's  death, 
imposing  duties  on  the  performance  of  which  our  future  portion  is  made  to  depend, 
and  annexing  threatenings  and  promises  just  as  though  we  were  to  be  judged  by 
our  works  irrespective  of  the  blood  of  the  Kedeemer.  It  tells  us  of  heaven ;  it  tella 
us  of  hell;  and,  dealing  with  us  as  with  accountable  creatures,  it  conjures  us  by  the 
joys  of  the  one  state  and  the  terrors  of  the  other  to  "  live  soberly,  righteously,  and 
godly  in  the  world."  Now  tell  me  who  believes  this?  The  man  who  lives  as 
though  there  were  no  heaven,  or  no  hell,  doing  the  very  things,  obeying  the  very 
passions,  neglecting  the  very  duties,  which  are  forbidden  or  commanded,  to 
all  who  would  escape  wrath  and  find  mercy  hereafter  ?  Impossible.  These  things 
cannot  be  believed  by  the  sensual  man,  the  covetous,  the  proud,  or  the  ambitious. 
Faith  in  these  things  must  lead  to  effort,  to  obedience,  to  self-denial.  (H.  Melvill, 
B.D.)  Confession  of  faith  : — The  Diyike  order  op  salvation.  1.  Faith.  2. 
Confession.  11.  The  result  of  this  order.  1.  Kighteousness.  2.  Salvation. 
III.  Inferences.  1.  These  requisites  are  a  matter  of  present  duty.  2.  Unbelief 
and  silence  are  sinful.  (W.  W.  Wythe.)  Confession  with  the  mouth: — 1.  There 
must  be  no  confession  where  there  is  not  a  believing.  To  profess  what  you  have 
not,  is  to  make  yourself  a  deceptive  trader,  who  pretends  to  be  carrying  on  a  very 
large  business,  while  he  has  no  stock  and  no  capital.  To  make  a  profession,  with- 
out having  a  possession,  is  to  be  a  cloud  without  rain — a  river-bed  without  water, 
a  mere  play-actor,  a  rotten  tree,  green  on  the  outside,  but  inwardly,  as  Bunyan  puts 
it,  "only  fit  to  be  tinder  for  the  devil's  tinder-box."  2.  True  faith,  however, 
produces  works  ;  and,  among  the  rest,  confession  of  Christ.  Faith,  without  works, 
is  a  dead  root,  yielding  no  fruit ;  a  well  filled  with  deadly  vapour ;  a  tree  twice 
dead,  plucked  up  by  the  roots,  like  some  of  those  forest  monsters  which  block  up 
the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi,  upon  which  many  a  goodly  vessel  has  been 
wrecked.  As  you  are  to  flee  from  profession  without  faith,  so  equally  flee  from  a 
faith  which  does  not  bring  forth  a  good  profession.    I.  To  confess  Christ  with  the 

MOUTH    EMBRACES    THE    WHOLE     LIFE-WORK    OF    THE    CHRISTIAN.         It     COUsistS    in — 1. 

Uniting  in  acts  of  public  worship.  As  soon  almost  as  the  two  distinct  seeds  of  the 
woman  and  of  the  serpent  were  discernible,  "  Then  began  men  to  call  upon  the 
name  of  the  Lord,"  while  those  who  feared  not  God  went  away  to  their  various 
occupations.  When  Jeroboam  set  up  the  calves  at  Bethel,  the  act  of  standing  with 
the  multitude  around  the  courts  of  the  temple  was  a  distinct  confession  of  allegiance 
to  Jehovah.  In  the  apostolic  times,  those  who  believed  were  constant  in  the 
apostle's  doctrine,  and  in  breaking  of  bread,  and  in  prayer.  In  the  early  Christian 
days,  you  may  see  a  picture  something  hke  this :  There  is  a  low  arch,  like  the 
opening  of  a  sewer.  Yonder  comes  a  maiden,  who  stnops  beneath  and  emerges 
into  one  of  the  catacombs  of  Eome.  A  torch  renders  darkness  visible,  and  some 
watchful  brother  observes  her ;  asks  for  her  pass-word.  Her  being  there  proves 
her  a  Christian.  She  would  not  have  been  there  to  worship  God  among  those 
pariahs  of  society  if  she  had  not  loved  the  Lord.  Very  much  so  was  it  in  later 
times.  When  the  Lollard  preached  to  the  handful  in  some  remote  farmhouse,  with 
a  watcher  outside ;  or  in  the  days  of  the  Covenant,  while  the  dragoons  of  Claver- 
house  were  scenting  out  their  prey,  you  might  be  clear  that  they  were  for  the  Lord 
of  Hosts,  who  met  at  peril  of  their  lives.  To-day  it  is  so  to  very  few.  There  are 
Bome,  perhaps,  whose  husband's  last  words  were,  "If  you  go  to  church  you  will 
never  enter  my  house  again  "  ;  but  it  is  not  so  with  nine  hundred  and  ninety-nine 
out  of  a  thousand.  We  mingle  together  saint  and  sinner.  And  if  this  were  the 
only  profession,  it  would  not  fulfil  the  intention  of  my  text.  In  persecuting  times 
it  would ;  but  now  it  is  little  or  no  confession  to  most  of  us  to  sit  comfortably  in 
oar  seats  and  listen  to  the  preacher,  and  then  go  our  way.  2.  A  dutiful  attention 
to  those  two  ordinances  which  are  intended  by  Christ  to  be  the  distinctive  badge  of 
believers.  Under  the  old  Mosaic  dispensation,  ordinances  were  only  for  Israelites. 
And  under  the  Christian  dispensation  there  are  no  ordinances  for  aliens.  The 
Ethiopian  travelled  all  the  way  from  the  realm  of  Candace,  in  order  that  he  might 
be  present  at  the  distinctive  worship  of  the  Jew.  You  remember  how  carefully  the 
heads  of  the  Jewish  houses  were  that  they  and  all  their  children  were  present  at 
the  passover.  (1)  Baptism  is  the  mark  of  distinction  between  the  Church  and  the 
world.  It  is  the  crossing  of  the  Rubicon.  (2)  The  Lord's  Supper  sets  forth  the 
distinction  of  the  believer  from  the  world  in  his  life  and  that  by  which  his  life  is 
nourished.  (3)  Both  these  ordinances  bring  a  cross  with  them  to  some  degree, 
especially  the  first.  3.  An  association  with  the  Lord's  people.  It  was  so  in  the 
olden  times.    Moses  maj,  if  he  wills,  live  in  the  coort  of  Pharaoh,  but  he  counts 


364  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSIHATOR.  [chap.  z. 

the  reproach  of  Christ  greater  riches  than  the  treasures  of  Egypt.  What  a  touching 
illustration  of  this  point  we  have  in  Euth  i.  16,  17.     We  find  in  the  early  Churchy 
that  as  soon  as  a  man  became  a  Christian,  he  went  to  his  own  company.     Paul  was 
not  content  with  being  baptized  ;  and  wherever  there  were  people  of  God,  they  were 
always  formed  into  a  Church.     Those  who  speak  lightly  of  Church  fellowship  do 
mischief.     Suppose,  instead  of  the  compact  phalanx  of  this  one  Church,  we  were 
broken  into  individual  Christians,  some  of  the  warmest-hearted  among  you  would 
grow  cold  ;  the  little  ones  among  us  would  be  subjected  to  false  doctrine ;  while 
even  the  strongest  here  would  feel  it  to  be  a  most  solemn  bereavement.     4.  The 
taking  up  of  the  cross  in  the  family.     It  may  be  you  are  the  first  one  converted. 
Tou  pray,  and  there  is  a  ringing  laugh  within  the  walls.     Persevere  !  for  now  it  is 
that  you  are  to  make  confession  unto  salvation.    Your  faith  cannot  save  you  unless 
you  say,  "  I  cannot  love  father  or  mother  more  than  Christ."     This  is  hard;  but 
remember  the  example  of  your  Lord,  for  whom  you  do  it.    5.  Bearing  witness  in 
time  of  temptation.  Young  Joseph's  answer  was,  "  How  can  I  do  this  great  wicked- 
ness, and  sin  against  God?  "   The  case  of  Nehemiah  is  equally  to  the  point.    "  Can 
such  a  man  as  I  flee  ?  "    Christian,  some  dirty  trick  in  business  comes  in  your  way. 
Now,  play  the  man,  and  say,  "  I  would  rather  starve  than  do  it."    On  a  Sabbath 
morning,  when  you  are  invited  to  waste  its  holy  hours,  say,  "No,  I  am  a  Christian." 
6.  Testifying  whenever  we  are  called  into  trial  for  Christ's  sake.    Eemember  the 
three  Hebrew  children,  Daniel,  Peter,  and  John.   I  have  noticed  that  whenever  men 
are  likely  to  lose  anything  for  Christ,  that  the  most  timid  generally  come  out  at  that 
time.     You  do  not  hear  of  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  while  Jesus  lives.    But  when 
Christ's  body  is  on  the  Cross  he  begs  His  body.     Aud  who  shall  help  to  wrap  Him 
in  spices  ?     Why,  Nicodemus,  that  came  to  Jesus  Christ  by  night.     The  stag  flies 
before  the  hounds,  but  when  it  comes  to  bay,  fights  with  the  bravery  of  desperation. 
Erasmus  said  he  was  not  made  of  the  right  stuff  to  be  a  martyr.     So  the  papists 
picture  him  as  hanging  somewhere  between  heaven  and  hell.     He  had  knowledge 
of  the  truth,  but  he  had  not  the  courage  to  avow  it ;  while  Luther  smote  the  triple 
crown  upon  the  Pope's  brow.    "If  the  Lord  be  God,  follow  Him,"  &c.    7.  Thegoing\ 
out  of  one's  way  at  times  to  bear  testimony.     "  Who  is  on  the  Lord's  side?  let  him 
come  unto  me."    Every  now  and  then  we  shall  not  be  able  to  confess  Christ,  unless 
we  do  something  that  shall  seem  harsh  and  strange.     Surely,  God's  Elijahs  cannot 
be  silent  while  thousands  of  Baal's  priests  are  kindling  their  fires.    We  shall  find 
it  needful  to  intrude  upon  the  dainties  of  etiquette,  and,  hke  the  prophet  who  came 
to  Bethel,  we  shall  have  to  cry  against  altars  at  which  others'  pay  their  vows.     8. 
The  using  of  our  position  as  a  method  of  confession.   Joshua  is  the  head  of  a  house- 
hold.    He  uses  that  position :  "  As  for  me  and  my  house,  we  will  serve  the  Lord." 
Let  the  family  altar  be  reared.     You  have  influence,  perhaps,  where  you  can  help 
Christ's  Church.    Esther  came  to  the  kingdom  "for  such  a  time  as  this."   Some  of 
you  are  large  employers,  or  members  of  Parliament.    All  that  influence  is  so  much 
money  given  to  you  to  put  out  to  interest  for  your  Lord.    9.  Preaching.    There  are 
some  of  you  who  have  ability  to  speak.    You  can  talk  upon  politics  and  science  ; 
but  if  you  love  Jesus,  are  you  going  to  give  all  your  attention  to  these  inferior 
themes?    You  tell  me  you  are  nervous.     Nevermind.     If  you  break  down  half  a 
dozen  times,  try  again  ;  you  shall  find  your  talents  increase.     This  confession, 
then,  is  a  life-work.     The  Christian  man  is  to  be  something  like  a  physician. 
There  is  a  brass  plate  on  his  door  and  a  big  bell.    How  else  does  he  profess  to  be  a 
physician?    You  do  not  see  a  box  of  lancets  hanging  at  his  side,  nor  see  him  dress 
in  a  peculiar  costume.     His  profession  is  carried  on  by  his  practice.     This  is  how 
a  Christian's  profession  is  to  be  carried  on.    When  we  went  to  school  we  drew 
houses,  horses,  and  trees,  and  used  to  write  "house"  under  the  house,  Ac,  for 
some  persons  might  have  thought  the  horse  was  a  house.    So  there  are  some  people 
who  need  to  wear  a  label  round  their  necks  to  show  they  are  Christians,  or  else  we 
might  mistake  them  for  sinners.     Avoid  that.    Let  your  profession  be  manifest  by 
your  practice.   IL  Do  not  excuse  toukself  fkom  this,  fob  no  excuse  will  be  valid. 
You  will  lose  your  business  I    Lose  it,  and  gain  your   soul,  and   you   will   be 
unfashionable !    What  is  it  to  be  fashionable  ?    You  will  be  despised  by  those  who 
love  you  I    Do  you  love  husband  or  wife  more  than  Christ  ?    If  so,  you  are  not 
worthy  of  Him.     But  you  are  so  timid  I     Mind  you  are  not  so  timid  as  to  be  lost  at 
last,  for  the  fearful  and  unbelieving  shall  have  their  portion  in  the  lake  that 
burneth.     In  the  silence  of  the  sick  or  dying  hour,  no  excuse,  however  specious  it 
may  appear  to-day,  will  answer  your  conscience :  and  if  so  answer  your  conscience, 
depend  upon  it  it  will  not  satisfy  God.  Condasion :  1.  Remember  how  dishoooorabl* 


CHAP.  1.]  ROMANS.  866 

it  is  to  say  yon  believe,  and  yet  not  to  niakj  confession.  You  are  like  a  rat  behind 
the  wainscot,  coming  out 'just  now  aud  then  when  no'>  )dy  is  looking,  and  then 
running  behind  again.  What  1  is  Christ  to  be  treated  as  if  His  name  were  a  thing 
to  be  avowed  in  holes  and  comers  ?  No,  in  the  face  of  the  sun  let  it  be  said,  "  I  do 
love  Jesus,  who  gave  Himself  for  me."  He  died  in  the  face  of  the  sun,  with 
mockers  round  about  Him ;  and  with  mockers  round  about  us  let  us  declare  our 
faith  in  Him.  2.  How  honourable  will  the  confession  be  to  you.  If  I  had  to  join 
an  army,  and  found  for  my  comrades  the  scrapings  of  the  street,  I  do  not  think  I 
should  like  to  be  a  soldier ;  but  if  I  found  my  colonel  a  great  conqueror,  and  that  I 
had  for  compeers  men  who  had  won  renown,  I  should  feel  honoured  by  being 
allowed  to  be  a  drummer-boy.  So  when  I  read  the  list,  and  find  Abraham,  Isaac, 
Jacob,  Moses,  David,  Daniel,  Isaac,  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  the  apostles,  Luther, 
Calvin,  &c.,  I  count  it  an  honour  if  my  name  shall  be  found  written  with  theirs,  as 
the  humblest  soldier  in  the  army.  3.  I  urge  this  upon  you,  because  it  will  make 
you  useful.  A  secret  Christian  is  a  candle  under  a  bushel,  salt  without  savour. 
4.  Grace  is  sufGcient.  If  grace  put  you  upon  a  pinnacle  of  the  temple,  depend 
upon  it,  grace  wiU  keep  you  there.  5.  The  reward  is  splendid.  "  He  that  con- 
fesseth  lie  before  men,  him  will  I  confess  before  My  Father  which  is  in  heaven." 
There  was  once  a  prince  who  journeyed  into  a  distant  part  of  the  king's  dominions, 
where  he  was  little  known  and  cared  for.  The  people  said,  '*  This  is  the  heir  ;  let 
us  insult  him."  Others  said  he  was  no  heir  at  all.  And  they  agreed  to  set  him  in 
the  pillory.  As  he  stood  there  they  said,  "  Who  dare  acknowledge,  and  stand  by 
him  ?  "  One  from  the  crowd,  who  said,  "  I  dare  I  "  they  set  side  by  side  with  the 
prince  ;  and  when  they  threw  their  filth  on  or  spoke  hard  words  of  the  prince  and 
him,  he  stood  there,  smiling,  and  received  it  all.  Years  went  by,  the  king  came 
into  those  dominions  and  subdued  them  ;  and  there  came  a  day  of  triumph.  The 
prince  came  to  the  gates,  and  the  traitors  all  bound  in  chains  stooi  before  him 
trembling.  He  singled  out  from  among  the  crowd  one  man  only,  and  he  said  to 
the  traitors,  "  Know  ye  this  man  ?  He  stood  with  me  in  that  day  when  ye  treated 
me  with  scorn.  He  shall  stand  with  me  in  the  day  of  my  glory.  Come  up  hither !  " 
And  the  poor,  despised  citizen  of  that  rebellious  city  rode  through  the  streets  side 
by  side  with  his  king.  This  is  the  parable.  Live  it  out!  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Confession  of  Christ  indispensable : — It  is  sometimes  said  that  piety  should  b» 
retiring,  and  unseen.  But  why  ?  There  is  nothing  of  it  in  the  Bible.  Hypocrisy 
is  rebuked  ;  but  I  ask  for  a  single  passage  where  the  manifestation  of  pure  religion 
is  rebuked.  "  Let  your  light  shine  before  men,"  "  He  that  is  ashamed  of  me,"  &c. 
Eeligion  is  supposed  to  be  manifest,  if  it  exists  at  all.  It  is  to  constitute  the 
character  and  to  distinguish  the  man.  I  point  you  to  the  example  of  Christ. 
Religion  is  everything  in  His  life.  I  point  you  to  the  example  of  Paul.  You  see 
nothing  else  in  his  life  but  his  religion.  I  point  you  to  David,  and  Isaiah,  and 
John,  and  the  holy  martyrs.  The  men  were  modest  men  ;  but  their  religion  was 
open  and  bold.  And  thus  it  is  in  all  the  works  and  doings  of  God.  Does  the  sun 
hide  his  noontide  beams  under  the  plea  that  pure  light  should  not  be  ostentatious  ? 
Is  the  moon — that,  hke  the  Christian,  shines  by  reflected  light — or  the  stars 
ashamed  to  send  their  rays  on  a  darkened  world  ?  Light  shines  not  indeed  for 
display,  but  for  use  ;  not  for  its  own  glory,  but  like  the  light  that  should  radiate 
from  the  Christian's  life,  to  illustrate  the  glory  of  the  great  Creator.  The  ocean 
that  He  has  made  is  not  ashamed  to  roll,  the  hghtning  of  heaven  to  play,  the  oak 
to  spread  out  its  boughs,  the  flower  to  bloom.  The  humblest  violet  is  not  ashamed 
to  exhibit  its  beauty,  and  display  its  Maker's  praise.  And  if  Christian  light  does 
not  shine  forth  in  the  life,  we  have  the  highest  evidence  that  it  has  never  been 
enkindled  in  the  bosom.  (A.  Barnes,  D.D.)  Confession  of  Christ  indispensable : — 
During  a  series  of  evangelistic  services  in  Ireland  a  young  man  found  peace  with 
God,  but  three  nights  after  I  found  him  again  in  the  inquiry  room.  "  What's 
wrong  ?  "  I  said.  "  I  was  too  precipitate  the  other  night ;  there  is  no  change  in 
me."  ••  No,  sir,  that  is  not  the  reason.  You  have  not  confessed  Christ."  He 
almost  jumped  up  in  amazement.  "How  do  you  know?  Who  told  you?" 
"  Nobody  told  me,  or  needed  to  tell  me.  When  a  man  goes  away  trusting  one 
night,  and  comes  back  doubting  the  next,  it  is  an  infallible  sign  that  he  has  not 
confessed  Christ."  He  then  said,  "  You  are  quite  right ;  I  live  alone  with  my 
mother,  who  is  a  Christian.  I  thought  as  I  walked  home  that  I  would  tell  her,  but 
my  heart  failed.  I  then  said  to  myself,  *  I'll  tell  her  to-morrow  morning,'  but  the 
next  day  it  seemed  more  difficult  instead  of  less,  and  it  occurred  to  me  that  she 
would  say, '  Why  did  you  not  tell  me  last  night  ? '    Then  the  thought  arose, '  If 


366  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

you  had  found  a  five-pound  note,  you  would  have  told  her  fast  enough.  Yet  here 
yon  have  found  Christ  and  eternal  life,  and  you  utter  not  a  sound  :  why  it  is  all  a 
delusion.'  And  I  said  to  myself,  '  I'm  not  saved  at  all.  If  I  had  been,  I  could  not 
have  helped  confessing  it.'"  I  said,  "  Yes,  my  friend ;  instead  of  the  devil  tempting 
you,  you  tempted  the  devil,  and  he  began  his  old  game  of  making  you  distrust  God's 
Word."  He  gave  his  heart  anew  to  the  Saviour,  and  went  away  to  teU  his  mother. 
Next  night  I  found  him  in  the  inquiry  room,  pointing  a  soul  to  Christ.  I  touched 
him  in  passing,  and  said,  "  How  is  it  with  you  now  ?  "  He  looked  up  with  a  bright 
smile,  and  said,  "  I  told  my  mother  1"  (D.  L.  Moody.)  Necessity  of  confession : — 
Lieutenant  Watson,  once  a  gay  young  aristocrat,  was  awakened  and  converted  by 
means  of  a  few  earnest  words  spoken  by  a  brother  officer  (Captain  Hawtry),  when 
he  was  preparing  for  a  ball.  Growing  rapidly  in  grace,  and  confessing  Christ  from 
the  first  and  constantly,  he  was  soon  led,  while  serving  in  the  Peninsula,  under 
Wellington,  to  hold  meetings  in  his  own  quarters  for  the  soldiers,  who  were  spiritu- 
ally in  a  very  destitute  condition.  Many  of  these  were  converted,  but  the  oificers 
generally  mocked,  calling  Lieut.  Watson  "  Coachie,"  saying  he  drove  the  mail 
coach  to  heaven,  and  crying  after  him,  '*  Any  room  for  passengers  inside  or  outside 
to-night  ?  "  One  officer,  however,  Lieut.  Whitley,  a  man  of  refined  and  scientific 
mind,  behaved  differently,  and  although  he  reasoned  with  Watson,  he  always 
behaved  as  a  gentleman.  The  result  of  quiet  conversations  was  that  he  became 
seriously  interested  in  the  gospel.  "  One  day,"  says  Mr.  Watson,  "  on  his  repeat- 
ing the  question,  'How  am  I  to  get  the  Spirit?  '  I  replied,  '  The  Lord  said,  "  Ask, 
and  ye  shall  receive." '  He  said, '  I  hope  I  have  asked,  though  feebly.'  I  remarked, 
'  Jesus  said  again,  "  If  a  man  will  be  My  disciple,  he  must  deny  himself,  and  take 
up  his  cross,  and  follow  Me." '  'What  did  He  mean  by  that?  '  he  said.  I  told 
him,  ♦  You  can  now  have  a  practical  proof.  You  know  we  have  a  public  meeting. 
Will  you  take  up  your  cross  and  come  to-night?  '  'Anything  but  that,'  he  said. 
'  But  you  must  remember  the  words  of  Jesus,'  I  told  him,  '  "  Whosoever  shall  be 
ashamed  of  Me  and  My  doctrine  in  this  sinful  generation,  of  him  will  I  be  ashamed 
when  I  come  in  My  glory."  '  '  Oh,'  he  exclaimed,  '  I  will  go.'  And  he  went  under 
great  exercise  of  mind."  Of  course  the  going  was  greatly  blessed  to  him,  and  soon 
after  "  the  Lord  filled  him  with  joy  and  peace  in  believing.  He  now  became  most 
valiant  for  the  truth,  and  ceased  not,  wherever  he  was,  to  speak  of  Jesus."  Power 
of  confession : — In  relating  his  experience  during  the  Peninsular  War,  Captain 
Watson  says,  "  I  was  nominated  to  sit  on  a  garrison  court-martial.  A  number  of 
officers  of  different  ranks  and  regiments  were  present  on  the  occasion,  and  before 
the  proceedings  commenced,  some  of  them  indulged  in  loose  and  sceptical  observa- 
tions. '  Alas,'  thought  I, '  here  are  many  not  ashamed  to  speak  openly  for  their 
master,  and  shall  I  hold  my  peace  and  refrain  when  the  honour  and  cause  of  Him 
who  has  had  mercy  on  me  are  called  in  question  ?  '  I  looked  for  wisdom  and  assis- 
tance from  on  high,  and  I  was  enabled  to  apeak  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  in  a  way 
that  astonished  my  hearers  and  myself.  The  Lord  was  pleased  to  give  what  I  said 
a  favourable  reception,  and  not  another  improper  word  was  uttered  by  them  during 
my  stay  in  that  room." 

Vers.  11-13.  Whosoever  belleveth  on  Him  shall  not  be  ashamed  (see  chap, 
ix.  33). — The  believer  not  ashamed : — That  is  either — I.  Shall  not  be  ashamed  by 

THE  NON-FULFILMENT  OF  THAT  WHICH  IS  THE  OBJECT  OF  THEIB  CONFIDENT  EXPECTATION. 

It  is  a  confidence  which  they  might  well  cherish  and  avow — secure  as  they  are  from 
the  mockery  of  any  failure  or  disappointment  in  their  hopes.  All  the  promises  of 
God  in  Christ  Jesus  are  yea  and  amen;  and  it  is  because  of  their  certain  and 
punctual  accomplishment,  that  the  hope  which  they  inspire  is  a  hope  which 
"maketh  not  ashamed."  When  the  verse  is  thus  regarded,  its  reference  is  to  the 
future,  when  the  promises  will  all  be  made  good.  Then  will  the  believer  lift  up  his 
head  and  rejoice.  Otherwise,  ashamed  of  the  vain  and  illusory  imagination  on 
which  he  had  before  rested,  he  would  sink  into  despair.     II.  Or  shall  not  bb 

ASHAMED  NOW   WHEN    THE   PROMISES   ABE    ONLY   AS   TET   BELIEVED.       EvCH  at  this  Stage 

might  faith  have  a  present  and  powerful  effect  in  repressing  shame,  and  more 
especially  the  shame  of  making  the  avowal  of  itself,  and  so  of  testifyiug  for  Christ. 
Like  every  other  principle  of  strong  and  felt  urgency  within,  it  may  delight  in  the 
vent  and  forthgoing  of  its  own  utterance,  and  in  bearing  down  the  restraints 
whether  of  shame  or  of  fear,  which  might  have  otherwise  intercepted  the  expression 
of  it  (Psa.  cxvi.  10,  xxxix.  8 ;  Matt.  xii.  34).  The  apostle  was  not  ashamed,  because 
of  ihe  certainty  he  felt  in  Him  whom  he  believed,  and  the  firm  persuasion  he  had 


CHAP.  X.]  ROMANS.  867 

of  His  ability  to  save  him.  And  so  he  bids  Timothy  not  be  ashamed  of  the 
testimony  of  our  Lord,  who  Himself  tells  us  that  whosoever  shall  be  ashamed  of 
Him  and  of  His  words,  of  him  also  shall  the  Son  of  Man  be  ashamed.  We  like 
this  view  of  the  text.  It  binds  so  together  the  beUef  of  its  first  clause  with  the 
confession  of  its  second,  and  harmonises  the  saying  that  "  confession  is  unto 
salvation  "  with  the  saying  that  "  the  end  of  our  faith  is  the  salvation  of  our  souls." 
III.  Fbom  the  proposition  of  this  verse  a  certain  converse  proposition  might  be 
DRAWN  that  might  well  be  used  as  a  criterion  by  which  to  test  and  to  ascertain  the 
reality  of  our  faith.  If  it  be  true  that  whosoever  beheveth  on  Him  is  not  ashamed, 
then  it  should  be  true  that  whosoever  is  ashamed  of  Him  doth  not  believe.  Or, 
whosoever  maketh  not  confession  of  Him  with  the  mouth,  believeth  Him  not  with 
the  heart.  How  comes  it,  then,  that  Christ  and  all  which  is  expressly  Christian 
are  so  systematically  excluded  from  society  as  topics  of  conversation  ?  The  general 
emigration  of  a  whole  neighbourhood  from  one  country  to  another  in  this  world 
would  be  the  constant  talk  of  all  its  parties.  How  is  it  that  we  meet  with  nothing 
like  this  on  the  subject  of  that  universal  emigration  from  one  world  to  another? 
Is  it  because  there  are  no  outfits,  no  preparations,  and  therefore  no  prospects  to  talk 
o.bout? — these  having  no  place  in  the  converse  just  because  they  have  no  place  in 
the  business  or  in  the  hearts  of  men  ?  They  are  seldom  or  never  the  subjects  of 
speech,  just  because  they  are  seldom  or  never  the  subjects  of  thought.  Or  if  there 
be  any  who  think  of  them,  but  are  ashamed  to  speak  of  them — such  we  say  is  the 
overbearing  magnitude  of  the  interest  at  stake  that  it  needs  but  a  realising  sense  of 
them  to  put  to  flight  both  the  fear  and  the  shame  of  this  world.  (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.) 
The  Christian  not  ashamed  :—I.  Of  Christ  (2  Tim.  i.  12 ;  Mark  viii.  38).  II.  Of 
THE  GOSPEL  (chap.  i.  16).  III.  At  Christ's  coming  (1  John  ii.  28).  IV.  Of  Gon'g 
PEOPLE  (Ruth  i.  16  ;  Phil.  v.  16).    V.  Of  God's  revelation  (Psa.  cxix.  6,  31,  46,  80). 

VI.  To  SUFFER  AS  A  CHRISTIAN  (1  Pet.  iv.   16).       VII.  To  OWN  his  former  STATE  (Eph. 

ii.  1-5).  Vin,  To  BEAR  THE  REPROACH  OF  Christ  (2  Tim.  i.  8,  16).  IX.  In  the 
liAST  GREAT  DAT  (Dan.  xii.  1-3).  X.  Of  "nothing"  (Phil.  i.  20).  "They  shall 
not  be  ashamed  that  wait  for  Thee."  (Homiletic  Monthly.)  The  believer  not 
ashamed : — I.  Whosoever  trust  in  anything  but  in  Christ  shall  be  ashamed. 
The  Jews  of  their  confidence  in  the  law.  They  also  which,  with  King  Asa, 
trust  in  the  physicians  and  not  in  God  in  the  day  of  sickness,  so  they  which 
trust  in  their  riches  contrary  to  the  commandment  of  the  Spirit,  whom  Christ 
calls  fools.  These  also  who  seek  in  losses  to  wizards  and  not  to  God.  Many 
trust  in  outward  things  without  God,  but  there  are  few  who  trust  in  God 
without  outward  things.  II.  There  is  much  fear  and  doubting  where  faith 
IS,  but  in  the  end  believers  shall  not  be  ashamed.  This  makes  them  confident 
against  the  reproach  cast  upon  them  by  the  world.  Though  the  gospel  be  spoken 
against  in  every  place,  yet  Paul  will  not  be  ashamed  of  it.  This  also  comforts 
against  the  guiltiness  of  sin,  which  is  the  true  cause  of  shame.  Faith  obtains 
psirdon,  and  therefore  we  shall  never  be  put  to  shame,  and  the  more  we  beUeve  the 
less  do  we  fear  shame.  Peter  walked  upon  the  water  and  shamed  himself,  for  he 
began  to  sink.  What  was  the  cause  ?  Not  the  wind  or  waves,  but  the  defect  of 
faith.  Make  precious  account  therefore  of  thy  faith,  and  labour  to  increase  it.  A 
certain  captain,  being  in  a  hot  skirmish,  was  stricken  down,  and  taken  up  for  dead. 
As  soon  as  he  came  to  himself  he  first  asked  if  his  target  were  safe,  being  loth  his 
enemies  should  get  that.  So  look  to  thy  faith,  for  the  devil,  thy  enemy,  will  look 
to  it,  and  thou  shalt  not  be  ashamed.  III.  Wicked  men  and  unbelievers  are 
MISERABLE  BECAUSE  OF  THE  SHAME  WHICH  FOLLOWS  THEM.  There  Can  be  almost  no 
stronger  argument  against  sin  than  to  say  it  will  make  ashamed.  Some,  like 
shameless  beasts,  glory  in  their  shame,  making  a  pastime  of  that  with  Solomon's 
fool  (Prov.  X.  23),  which  they  should  bewail  with  tears  of  blood.  It  is  a  face  of 
brass  that  is  not  ashamed  of  blasphemy,  drunkenness,  adultery,  and  pride.  Though 
many  of  these  things  be  not  now  ashamed,  yet  at  the  day  of  death  or  judgment  they 
shall  be  put  to  shame,  and  then  there  shall  be  no  covering  for  their  shame.  If  thou 
be  one  of  these  and  couldst  blush,  there  were  hope  of  thee.  When  a  thief  is  taken 
how  doth  he  hang  down  his  head  before  men.  Alas  1  if  thou  beUevest  not,  nor 
repentest,  how  shalt  thou  be  able  to  look  Christ  in  the  face  when  He  comes  to 
judgment  ?  Let  us  therefore  so  live  that  when  He  shall  appear  we  may  be  bold, 
and  not  be  ashamed  before  Him  at  His  coming.  {Elnathan  Parr,  B.D.)  The 
believer  not  ashamed: — Faith  is  a  frequent  source  of  shame.  How  often  has 
unfonnded  trust  in  ourselves  or  others  brought  disgrace  and  disappointment  ?  In 
4>ne  direction,  and  in  one  direction  only,  can  we  with  anlimited  confidence  say  that 


368  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m, 

whosoever  believeth  shall  not  be  ashamed.     I.  The  believes  might  be  ashamed. 

1.  Of  Christ,  were  He — (1)  Ignoble — were,  e.g.,  He  proved  to  be  merely  the  Nazarene 
and  not  the  Word  made  flesh ;  the  Son  of  Mary  and  not  the  Son  of  God.  (2) 
Morally  imperfect.  Were  He,  who  declared  Himself  sinless,  shown  to  be  overtaken 
in  a  fault.  2.  Of  His  service.  Could  it  be  demonstrated  to  be — (1)  Ignominious, 
involving  baseness  and  servility  ;  (2)  Wicked,  and  against  conscience  ;  (3)  Grievous 
and  impracticable — then  might  the  believer  be  ashamed  of  his  credulous  com- 
pliance. 8.  Of  His  teaching.  Were  it — (1)  Frivolous  and  unworthy  of  intelligent 
study.  (2)  Immoral  and  offensive  to  the  moral  sense.  (3)  Impracticable  and 
unsuited  to  everyday  life.  4.  Of  His  influence,  if  it  were— (1)  Inoperative;  (2) 
Transient;  or  (3)  Not  for  good.  5.  Of  His  promised  rewards,  if  they  were — (1) 
Baseless,  or  (2)  Worthless.  Tried  by  these  tests,  who  could  come  out  scatheless? 
Mention  one  of  whom  in  all  these  regards  it  could  be  said  that  he  that  believeth  in 
him  shall  not  be  ashamed  ?  Is  Christ  an  exception  ?  Yes.  II.  The  believes 
CANNOT  BE  ASHAMED — 1.  Of  Christ.  Consider — (1)  The  dignity  of  His  person.  "  The 
brightness  of  God's  glory,"  &c.  (2)  The  perfection  of  His  character.  "He  did  no 
sin."  "  He  went  about  doing  good."  2.  Of  His  service.  (1)  It  is  of  the  noblest, 
as  is  shown  from— (a)  Its  character ;  (^b)  Those  who  have  engaged  in  it.  (2)  It  ia 
of  the  holiest.  Its  animating  motive  is  perfect  love  to  God  and  man.  (3)  It  is  the 
most  blessed — perfect  freedom  and  fulness  of  joy.  3.  Of  His  teaching,  which  is — 
(1)  The  most  profound.  The  combined  labour  of  the  greatest  intellects  have  failed 
to  exhaust  its  meaning.  (2)  The  only  instruction  which  meets  with  the  perfect 
approval  of  the  unbiassed  conscience.  (3)  Perfectly  practicable.  "  If  ye  know 
these  things,  happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  them."  "Ye  are  My  friends  if  ye  do,"  &c.  4.  Of 
His  influence.  How  can  one  be  ashamed  of  that  which  everywhere  makes  for 
righteousness.  We  are  ashamed  of  much  that  we  did  before  we  came  under  His 
influence ;  but  we  are  ashamed  now  only  that  we  did  not  come  under  it  before. 
6.  Of  His  promised  rewards.  These  are — (1)  Pure.  We  know  this  because  we  have 
already  received  the  earnest.  (2)  Of  the  highest  and  of  endless  value.  "  In  Thy 
presence  is  fulness  of  joy,"  &c.  III.  Then  do  not  be  ashamed — 1.  To  confess 
Christ.  He  is  worthy.  2.  To  engage  in  His  service,  and  that  with  the  utmost 
earnestness.  3.  To  study  and  practise  His  teaching.  It  will  live  when  the  wisdom 
of  this  world  is  forgotten.  4.  To  yield  utterly  to  His  influence.  5.  To  fulfil  the 
conditions  upon  which  He  has  promised  His  rewards.  "Be  thou  faithful  unto 
death,"  &c.  (J.  W.  Burn.)  For  there  is  no  difference  between  the  Jew  and  the 
Greek. — True  eqtiality  : — There  is  no  difference,  for — 1.  There  is  the  same  Lord. 

2.  He  is  rich  to  all.  The  Jews  need  not  grudge  the  coming  in  of  the  Gentiles ;  they 
shall  not  have  the  less,  for  God  is  able  to  enrich  all.  As  the  sun,  though  it  every 
day  give  his  light  to  everybody,  yet  neither  hath  it  or  we  the  less,  so  though 
thousands  from  one  end  of  the  earth  to  the  other  flock  to  the  receiving  of  mercy 
yet  God  hath  store,  and  the  fountain  is  above  our  thirst.  3.  An  equal  condition 
propounded  to  all,  "  If  they  call  on  Him,"  which,  if  the  Geni'le  do,  the  gate  of 
mercy  was  open  and  free  to  him  as  to  the  Jew.  The  favours  of  God  concerning 
justification  and  salvation  are  dispensed,  without  any  respect  of  persons,  to  them 
which  believe  and  call  upon  Him  (Act  x.  34 ;  Kom.  iii.  29,  30 ;  Gal.  iii.  28).  I.  In 
this  world,  for  the  most  part,  the  poor  are  contemned.  If  there  be  any  favour 
it  falls  into  the  rich  man's  mouth.  If  there  be  any  danger  the  rich  man  gets 
through,  when  the  poor  is  taken  in  the  net  of  the  law.  The  poor  is  scanted  in  the 
things  of  this  earth,  but  in  the  favour  of  God  and  heavenly  things  he  shareth  with 
the  best.  The  rich  cannot  bribe  for  these.  God  respected  the  low  estate  of  Mary 
His  handmaiden ;  yea,  Lazarus  went  to  heaven  when  Dives  went  to  hell.  11.  If 
THOU  BE  RICH  BE  HDMBLE.  Do  Dot  disdainfully  overlook  thy  poor  neighbour. 
He  ia  heir  of  the  same  grace,  serves  the  same  Master,  and,  it  may  be,  in  as  great 
favour  with  Him  as  thyself.  The  rich  and  poor  are  all  one  by  creation ;  there  ia 
the  same  entrance  into  the  world  and  the  sanae  way  to  depart  to  them  both,  unless 
the  rich  roan's  fuhiess  open  more  doors  of  death  than  the  emptiness  of  the  poor 
man.  In  the  worst  things,  as  sin  and  corruption,  the  richest  is  equal  with  the 
poorest.  In  the  best  things,  as  justification  and  eternal  life,  the  poorest  is  equal 
with  the  richest.  III.  There  is  no  dieference  between  the  rich  and  the  poor  in 
SPIRITUAL  THINGS.  In  civil  there  is  great  difference,  even  by  God's  ordinance.  For 
the  gospel  abolisheth  not  order.  We  must  honour  our  superiors.  We  may  not 
say.  Wherein  is  he  better  than  I  ?  We  all  come  of  Adam.  When  the  counters  are 
put  up  into  the  bag  there  is  no  difference  between  them,  but  while  the  account  ia 
casting  there  is  great  difference.    One  stands  for  a  pound,  another  for  a  penny. 


UHAP.  X.]  ROMANS.  869 

So  at  the  day  of  judgment  and  in  Christ  there  is  no  difference ;  but  while  we  here 
live  there  is  difference,  and  it  is  to  be  acknowledged.  IV.  Be  at  unity,  for  thebe 
IS  THE  SAME  LoRD.  Wc  are  all  servants  to  one  Master ;  He  will  prefer  us  all ;  we 
need  not  envy  one  another.  We  are  all  of  a  family,  and  wear  all  one  livery,  and 
the  badge  is  love.  Will  any  man  endure  that  his  servants  or  children  shall  be 
quarrelling?  Indeed,  if  we  served  divers  masters  there  might  sometimes  naked 
swords  be  seen,  but  now  contentions  must  needs  be  odious.  A  Church  in  division 
is  like  a  house  on  fire.  Quench  and  increase  not  this  flame  by  thy  brainless 
opinions.  V.  The  way  to  be  rich  in  all  grace  is  to  ask  it.  Ask,  and  you  shall 
have ;  He  is  rich  to  all  that  call  upon  Him.  He  gives  bountifully,  and  casts  no 
man  in  the  teeth.  Plead  not  thine  own  deservings,  thou  must  sue  in  forma  pauperis. 
Beggars  obtain ;  the  rich  are  sent  empty  away.  VL  Every  man  desires  to  serve  a 
liberal  master,  that  he  may  be  preferred.  Serve  God  and  thou  shalt  be  made 
rich.  Why  dost  thou  by  swearing,  lying,  &c.,  serve  that  beggarly  master  the 
devil,  that  hath  nothing  to  give  his  followers  but  hell  ?  If  God  be  thy  Master  thou 
art  made  for  ever.  No  marvel  that  Paul  breaks  out  into  such  pathetical  thanks- 
givings because  God  entertained  him  into  His  service.  Get  into  God's  service,  and, 
when  thou  art  in,  keep  thee  there.  There  are  two  things  to  be  done  that  we  may  keep 
our  service.  1.  To  know  our  Master  well.  2.  To  do  it.  And  then  as  God  was  rich 
to  Abraham  for  his  faith,  to  David  for  his  zeal,  to  Stephen  for  his  constancy,  so  will 
He  be  rich  to  thee.  As  God  is  rich  in  mercy  to  the  good,  so  in  judgments,  plagues, 
woes,  curses,  is  He  rich  to  all  ungodly  and  wicked  men.  (Elnathan  Parr,  B.D.) 
The  universality  of  the  gospel : — The  gospel  is  admirably  adapted  to  meet  the  wants 
of  man.  At  whatever  time,  in  whatever  place,  and  under  whatever  circumstances,  it 
satisfies  his  inquiries  respecting  salvation  and  a  future  world.  It  recognises  no 
differences — I.  Of  a  national  kind.  The  Jew  and  the  Greek  are  on  perfect  equality 
as  regards  the  gospel.  Our  Saviour  says,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,"  &c.  Thus 
the  gospel  cuts  at  the  root  of  all  national  selfishness  and  animosity,  and  extends  its 
blessings  to  all ;  for  "  God  hath  made  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  the  earth  "  ;  and 
the  redeemed  sing,  "  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  .  .  .  who  hath  redeemed  us  out  of  aU 
nations."  II.  Of  a  social  kind.  Great  as  are  the  differences  of  social  condition 
amongst  men,  the  gospel  recognises  none.  The  gospel  says  to  the  prince,  *'  Believe," 
and  if  he  believes  he  is  saved ;  but  if  he  does  not  he  is  damned,  though  he  be  a 
prince.  It  just  says  the  same  to  the  slave.  The  rich  and  the  poor,  the  master  and 
servant,  must  partake  of  salvation  by  the  same  faith  in  the  Son  of  God.  III.  Of 
A  denominational  kind.  The  Independent  and  the  Baptist,  the  Churchman  and  the 
Dissenter,  each  and  all  through  Christ  can  be  saved.  The  bigot  in  religion  erects 
his  little  barrier,  and  having  enclosed  all  within  it  who  agree  with  him,  excludes 
all  others  and  regards  them  as  outside  the  pale  of  salvation.  The  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  knocks  down  all  such  barriers,  and  standing  on  their  ruins,  proclaims 
salvation  to  each  and  to  all  who  believe  in  His  name.  IV.  Of  a  mental  kind. 
The  refined  scholar,  and  the  untutored  boor ;  the  man  of  acute  intellect,  and  the 
one  of  dull  apprehension,  each  and  all  through  Jesus  Christ  can  be  saved.  Paul 
was  debtor  both  to  the  wise  and  to  the  unwise.  Let  not  the  wise  man  glory  in  his 
wisdom,  nor  let  the  uninstructed  despair.  Christ  offers  the  riches  of  His  grace  to 
all.  V.  Of  a  moral  kind.  None  are  shut  out  from  the  blessings  of  the  gospel  on 
account  of  their  bad  character.  (C.  Hargreaves.)  The  gospel  and  its  publica- 
tion : — I.  The  salvation  revealed  in  the  qcspel.  It  consists  in  a  deliverance 
from  the  punishment  and  power  of  sin,  and  is  effected  by  the  death  of 
Jesus  Christ.  Notice — 1,  The  richness  of  its  blessings.  According  to  the 
necessities  of  the  sinner,  so  are  the  blessings  presented  in  the  gospel.  Is  he 
bowed  down  under  a  sense  of  the  guilt  of  his  transgressic  as  ?  The  gospel  tells  him, 
"  God  so  loved  the  world,"  &c.  Is  he  sensible  of  the  deep  pollution  of  his  soul? 
He  learns  that  "  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanses  from  all  sin."  Does  he  feel  his 
inability  to  honour  God,  by  keeping  the  whole  law  ?  The  gospel  shows  him  that 
"  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that  believeth,"  &c. 
Is  the  soul  harassed  by  the  power  of  temptation,  and  ready  to  despair  ?  The  gospel 
reveals  the  promises  of  deliverance  and  support.  Does  he  shudder  at  the  approach 
of  death  as  the  king  of  terrors  ?  The  gospel  says,  "  Christ  came  to  deliver  those 
who,  from  fear  of  death,  were  subject  to  bondage,"  &c.  Does  Satan  excite  doubts 
and  fears  as  to  the  final  result  ?  The  gospel  reveals  God  as  swearing  to  him  by  two 
Immutable  thinps,  &c.,  that  he  might  have  strong  consolation.  2.  The  extensive- 
ncss  of  its  efiicienoy.  Its  blessings  are  confined  to  no  particular  nation,  but  are 
suited  to  all,  in  every  place  (ver.  12).  3.  The  means  by  which  its  blessings  are  to 
VOL.  n.  2J: 


370  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chai.  X. 

be  secured.  We  must  "  call  upon  God."  But  this  must  be  much  more  than  tha 
address  of  the  lips,  which  in  many  is  only  the  result  of  education  and  example. 
The  calling  upon  God  here  spoken  of,  is  the  result  of  heartfelt  convictions  of  the 
truth  of  the  gospel,  and  the  importance  of  salvation.  There  can  be  no  repentance 
without  a  discovery  of  the  awful  nature  of  sin,  and  without  right  views  of  the 
hohness  of  God.  It  is  only  in  proportion  as  we  see  the  blessings  of  salvation  to 
be  suitable  and  necessary  that  we  shall  call  upon  God  for  them.     II.  The  necessity 

OF  PUBLISHING  THE  GOSPEL  THROUGHOUT  THE  WHOLE    EAETH.       This  neCBSSity  is  great, 

and  it  is  heightened — 1.  By  the  natural  state  of  the  human  mind.  Reason  brought 
out  great  results  in  arts  and  sciences,  &c. ;  it  has  enabled  man  to  trace  out  the  being 
and  attributes  of  Jehovah  (chap.  i.  19,  20).    By  this  also  the  knowledge  of  sin  is 
attainable  (chap.  ii.  14,  15).    But,  great  as  are  the  powers  of  the  human  mind,  they 
fail  to  reveal  the  way  in  which  the  wrath  of  God  may  be  appeased,  the  way  in  which 
man  must  be  just  with  God  (Micah  vi.  6,  7).     Man  is  conscious  of  guilt,  of  merited 
punishment :  self-preservation  induces  a  wish  to  escape,  but  whither  he  knows  not. 
Christ  is  set  forth  as  a  propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the  world — through  faith  in  Him 
alone  pardon  and  salvation  are  to  be  obtained ;  but  millions  of  our  fellow-creatures 
have  never  heard  of  Him,  and  therefore  how  shall  they  believe  in  Him  ?    Hence 
the  necessity  of  publishing  it  to  them.     2.  By  the  Divine  appointment  of  Jehovah. 
We  are  blessed  with  the  Ught  of  Divine  truth ;  the  spirit  of  true  Christian  bene- 
volence, therefore,  should  prompt  us  to  diffuse  it.     The  gospel  is  designed  both  for 
Jews  and  Gentiles.    This  doctrine  is  to  be  found  in  the  Old  Testament  as  well  as 
in  the  New.    In  the  accomplishment  of  his  designs,  however,  God  works  by  means. 
He  has  appointed  the  preaching  of  His  gospel.     "Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and 
preach,"  &c.     Salvation  is  by  faith;  and  if  faith  be  essential  to  salvation,  it  is 
necessary  to  hear;  for  "faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  Word  of 
God."    And  we  may  well  ask,  "  How  shall  they  hear  without  a  preacher?  "  (fee 
Conclusion  :  Let  us  learn  from  this  subject — 1.  The  unspeakable  privilege  of  those 
who  profess  the  gospel.    2.  The  duties  which  attach  themselves  to  the  possessors 
of  these  privileges.     (J.  C.  Williams. )        For  the  same  Lord  over  all  is  rich  unto 
all  that  call  upon  Him. — The  Lordship  of  Christ: — I.  Chkist  is  Lord.     1.  The 
word  is  frequently  an  equivalent  for  Jehovah.     Whether  it  is  so  here  or  not,  the 
apostle  recognised  Christ's  oneness  with  God  even  as  Christ  professed  the  same. 
Upon  tbis  is  rooted  our  Lord's  claim  to  the  homage  of  the  race.     2.  The  least  that 
the  word  can  mean  is  Sovereign.   Christ  is  the  King  of  men.   This  office  is  in  danger 
of  being  overlooked  in  favour  of  His  priestly  and  prophetic  offices.     It  is  more 
agreeable  to  be  saved  by  His  sacrifice  and  to  listen  to  His  gracious  words  than 
to  fight  His  battles  and  to  do  His  will.      Yet  what  honour  to  be  the  subjects 
of  such  a  King ;   what  safety  to  be  under   His  protection  ;   what   honour  must 
come  from   obedience  to  His   rule.      II.  Christ  is  Lord  over  all.      1.  There 
is  but   one  Lord — "  The   same   Lord."      Heathenism  had   lords   many,   which 
entailed   religious   confusion.     Hence  moral   confusion   and   unrest.      Christ   is 
the    only    authoritative    and    perfectly    self-consistent    moral    ruler.      2.  He    is 
over    aU,    without    distinction.       His   rights   are    based    on—  (1)  Creation ;    (2) 
Preservation ;   (3)   Eedemption.     He  who  created,  who  preserves,  and  who  re- 
deemed all,  must  be  Lord   of   all.      The  inference  is  the  essential  equahty  of 
the  race.    Differences  of  rank,  &c. ,  are  accidental  and  will  pass  away.    That  rich 
and  poor,  &c.,  are  common  subjects  of  the  same  King  will  never  pass  away.    Let 
this  soften  racial,  social,  and  sectarian  asperities.     III.  Christ,  being  Lord  over 
all,  IS  rich  unto  all.    Eich  Himself,  He  does  not  use  His  wealth  for  Himself. 
"  For  our  sakes  He  "  once  "  became  poor  "  ;  but  now,  being  again  highly  exalted, 
He  gives  gifts  to  men.     1.  This  is  to  be  understood  in  the  widest  sense.    His  pro- 
vidential riches  are  distributed  universally.     Good  and  bad,  enemies  and  friends, 
are  partakers  of  His  bounty.    2.  This  is  to  be  understood  in  a  more  limited  sense. 
His  choicest  favours  are  indeed  offered  to  all,  and  the  condition  of  their  acceptance 
is  possible  to  all ;  but  they  are  confined  to  those  who  "  call  upon  Him."     (1)  Those 
who  acknowledge  His  Lordship.    All  can  do  this,  but  it  is  only  reasonable  that  those 
VTfao  do  do  it  should  receive  the  benefit.    A  monarch  may  extend  the  benefit  of  his 
government  to  all  his  subjects,  but  he  will  scarcely  confer  his  court  favours  on  the 
disloyal.     (2)  Those  who  ask  for  them.     What  can  be  more  reasonable  and  easy 
than  this.    To  ask  implies  to  want,  and  can  we  expect  Christ  to  lavish  the  riches  of 
His  grace  on  those  that  will  not  appreciate  them  ?    (J.  W.Burn.)        God's  riches : — 
The  word  "  rich  "  is  here  used  in  its  ethical  import,  as  equivalent  to  liberal  or 
bountiful.     Hence  the  remarkable  expression  "  rich  unto."     In  the  sphere  of 


CHA».  X.]  ROMANS.  871 

ordinary  life,  when  men  become  rich,  they  are  in  general  simply  said  to  be  rich — 
at  times  it  may  be  said  that  they  are  rich  in  this  world's  possessions,  or  that  they 
are  rich  in  the  possession  of  devoted  friends,  or  rich  ift  genius,  but  God  is  here 
represented  as  "  rich  unto  " — i.e.,  He  is  abundant  in  goodness.      (J.  Morison,  D.D.) 
If  men  are  not  saved  the  fault  is  their  own  because — I.  God  is  willing  to  save  all. 
1.  He  makes  no  difference.     2.  Is  rich  unto  all.    3.  Offers  salvation  to  all  who  call 
upon  Him.    II.  God  provides  means  for  all,     1.  He  sends  His  gospel  to  aU  (vers. 
14,  15).     2.  Convinces  men  of  unbelief  (ver.  16).     3.  Makes  His  word  effective  in 
producing  faith   (ver.    17).      III.   Men   rob   themselves  of   their  salvation  bt 
THEIR  UNBELIEF.     1.  They  do  not  improve  the  means  (ver.  18).     2.  Are  often  more 
unfaithful  than  others  less  favoured  (vers.  19,  20).     3.  Make  the  purpose  of  God  of 
no  effect  through  their  disobedience.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)        For  whosoever  shall  call 
on  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  saved. — The  inclusive  "whosoever  " : — John 
Berridge  once  said,  after  having  given  out  these  words  as  his  text,  •'  I  would  much 
rather  it  be  written,  '  Whosoever  shall  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be 
saved ' — than  '  If  John  Berridge  shall  call  out  the  name  of  the  Lord  he  shall  be 
saved  ' ;  because  "  said  he,  "  how  do  I  know  that  there  might  not  be  another  John 
Berridge  in  the  world  to  whom  those  words  were  addressed?    But  when  I  read, 
'Whosoever  shall  call,'&c.,  I  know  I  must  be  included."        Salvation: — 1.  Its 
import.   2.  Its  conditions.     3.  Its  universal  offer.     {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)      Salvation: — 
This  is  the  substance  of  the  grand  gospel.    It  implies — 1.  That  we  are  not  saved 
by  our  opinions,   theories.  Churches,  or  ordinances.      2.  That  we  are  saved  by 
Christ.     3.  That  application   to  Him  for  salvation  must  be  made.     4.  That  in 
granting  salvation  Christ  is  no  respecter  of  persons.    How  thankful  should  we  be 
for  this  simple,  comprehensive  declaration.    How  instant  and  earnest  should  be  our 
application.     How  hopeful  and  assured  of  a  favourable  reply.     {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Salvation  is — I.  Needed  by  all.     II.  Is  intended  fob  all.    III.  Is  within  thb 
BEACH  OF  all.   IV.  May  BE  secdbed  BY  ALL.     {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)      Salvation,  its  AuthoT 
and  condition  : — Paul  opened  this  chapter  with  an  expression  of  heartfelt  desire  for 
the  salvation  of  Israel ;  but  the  mass  of  the  nation  were  acting  in  direct  antagonism 
to  the  only  method  of  salvation.     In  his  estimation,  their  rejection  of  the  Divine 
plan  of  saving  men  was  a  crime  which  admitted  of  no  palliation.     There  were  no 
physical  difficulties  in  the  way  (vers.  6, 7).     There  were  no  intellectual  difficulties  in 
the  way  (ver.  8).     There  were  no  moral  difficulties  in  the  way,  save  in  their  own 
voluntary  ignorance  and  unbelief.     Hell  is  self-chosen,  both  by  Jew  and  Gentile. 
"  For  whosoever  shall  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  saved."    I.  Man 
WANTS  salvation — 1.  From  present  evil.     "The  whole  world  is  guilty  before  God." 
2.  From  future  evil.     Living  to  sin,  the  tendency  of  his  soul  is  downwards,  and  no 
plumb-line  can  fathom  the  depths  to  which  he  may  descend.     Perish  is  the  dark 
dissyllable  used  to  describe  the  final  state  of  the  impenitent.     II.  The  salvation  man 
WANTS  IS  ATTAINABLE.   "  Shall  be  savcd."  Salvation  includes — 1.  Deliverance  from  the 
great  moral  evils  of  the  present.     2.  Fitness  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  great  realities 
of  the  future.     The  saving  power  creates  a  heaven  in  the  heart,  ere  it  introduces 
a  heaven  to  the  eye.      III.  The   salvation  man   wants  is  attainable  only  by 
Christ.     1.  He  procured  it  as  the  world's  Saviour.     "  He  redeemed  us  to  God  with 
His  blood."     He  could  have  destroyed ;  but  while  we  were  yet  sinners  He  died  for 
us.     2.  He  bestows  salvation  as  the  world's  Sovereign.    IV.  The  salvation  man 
wants,  and  IS  attainable   only  by  Christ,   is  suspended   on   the  condition  of 
PRAYER.     1.  This  condition  embodies  aU  that  is  instrumentally  necessary  to  man's 
salvation.     It  implies — (1)  Self-condemnation.     (2)  Confession  of  sin  to  God.     (3) 
Faith.     The  prayer  of  the  publican  blended  these  elements.     There  was  self-con- 
demnation.     Smiting   upon   his  burdened  conscience,  he  exclaimed,    "  God  be 
merciful  to  me,"  .  .  .  There  was  a  confession  of  sin  to  God:  "  God  be  merciful 
to  "  .  .  .  "a  sinner."    There  was  faith.    2.  This  condition  is  strikingly  simple 
compared  with  the  great  results  of  its  exercise.     "  Whosoever  shall  call  .  .  .  shall 
be  saved."     We  have  not  to  traverse  sandy  deserts,  and  climb  rugged  steeps  with 
the  Mohammedan,  nor  to  endure  maceration  with  the  papist,  in  order  to  obtain 
salvation.    We  have  no  work  of  supposed  merit  to  perform ;  not  to  purchase,  not 
to  suffer,  but  to  beg.    3.  This  condition  is  bound  up  with  a  name  that  renders 
salvation  the  certain  result  of  its  exercise.      The  condition  is,  that  we  pray  to 
Christ.      Complying  with  this   condition,  the  name  of  Christ  is  a  guarantee  of 
success.    4.  This  condition  may  be  exercised  with  success  by  any  one  of  the  race. 
"Whosoever  shall,"  &c.  Christianity  invites  the  confidence  of  the  world.  Catholicity 
appears — (1)  In  all  the  Saviour  has  done  for  man.   (2)  In  the  calls  and  offers  of  the 


372  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  s, 

gospel.  "Whosoever"  ia  a  word  utterly  neutralising  the  attempts  which  men  have 
rashly  made  to  limit  the  compassion  of  God,  and  obstruct  the  way  of  the  sinner's 
approach  to  the  mercy-seat.  Conclusion  :  The  subject  reminds  us — 1.  That  only 
one  method  of  salvation  exists.    "  There  is  none  other  name  given  among  men,"  &c. 

2.  To  perish  with  a  knowledge  of  this,  man  must  commit  soul-suicide.  (G.  Wallis.) 
Free  salvation: — I.  The  blessing.     Salvation  from — 1  The  guilt.     2.  The  power. 

3.  The  results  of  sin.  II.  The  duty.  To  call — 1.  Upon  God.  2.  Through  the 
mediation  of  Christ.  3.  By  the  aid  of  the  Spirit.  4.  With  a  disposition  to  be 
saved.     III.    The  fbomise.      To  all — 1.    Nations.     2.    Banks.     3.    Conditions. 

4.  Characters.  (W.  W.  Wythe.)  The  glad  tidings : — I.  Theib  natube.  II.  Dis- 
pensation. III.  Beception.  IV.  Effect.  {Ibid.)  Calling  on  the  name  of  the 
Lord  : — To  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  implies — I.  Bight  fa^th,  to  call  upon 
Him  as  He  is.  II.  Eight  tbust  in  Him,  leaning  upon  Him.  III.  ^..jut  devotion, 
calling  upon  Him,  as  He  has  appointed.  IV.  Eight  lite,  ourselves  who  call  upon 
Him  being,  or  becoming,  by  His  grace,  what  He  wills.  They  call  not  upon  the 
Lord,  but  upon  some  idol  of  their  own  imagining,  who  call  upon  Him  as  other  than 
He  has  revealed  Himself,  or  remaining  themselves  other  than  those  whom  He  has 
declared  that  He  will  hear.     {E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)        Calling  in  earnest : — I.  This 

call  DOES  NOT  ALWATS  EXPRESS   ITSELF  IN   WORDS,  BUT  IS   THE   SPEECH   OF  THE   SPIRIT, 

and  is  well  understood  by  the  heavenly  Father,  who  seeks  to  hear  those  who 
worship  Him  in  spirit  and  in  truth.  II.  It  is  not  an  artificial  call.  The  mere 
saying  of  prayers  is  an  act  of  gross  superstition  ;  the  form  is  useless  unless  your 
heart  feels  and  prompts  the  expression.  III.  It  is  not  a  call  for  form's  sake,  but 
A  dying  cry  fob  HELP.  A  Frenchman  going  to  the  chapel  to  pray,  found  that 
workmen  were  in  the  chapel,  and  the  altar  covered  up  with  a  dirty  cloth.  So 
walking  quietly  up  the  centre  of  the  cliapel  and  making  a  courteous  bow,  he  placed 
his  card  upon  the  altar  and  retired.  But  there  was  also  in  the  place  a  poor  woman, 
who  had  been  led,  perhaps  by  poverty  and  cruel  temptation,  into  sin.  Crouching 
upon  the  floor,  her  tears  fell  upon  the  sawdust,  and  her  soul  cried  to  God.  In  the 
one  case  it  was  a  matter  of  form,  in  the  other  it  was  an  earnest  desire  for  the  for- 
giveness and  peace  of  God.  IV.  It  is  a  call  that  is  intensely  earnest.  The  call 
that  shall  move  God  to  save  us  is  not  a  mere  chaunted  prayer,  but  the  cry  within 
the  heart,  "  God,  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  V.  It  is  the  call  of  the  helpless 
ONE,  who  is  broken  down  under  the  load  of  sin.  VI.  It  is  the  call  op  the  easily 
tempted.  VII.  It  is  the  call  of  a  captive.  VIII.  It  is  a  call  of  the  despairing 
SOUL.  {W.  Birch.)  A  simple  sermon  for  seeking  souls : — 1.  Inasmuch  as  our  text 
talks  of  men  being  saved,  it  implies  that  men  need  saving  ;  hut  if  men  had  been  as 
God  created  them,  they  would  have  needed  no  saving.  We  must  not,  however, 
throw  the  blame  on  Adam;  no  man  was  ever  yet  damned  for  Adam's  sin  alone. 
Children  dying  in  infancy  are,  without  doubt,  saved  through  the  atonement.  But 
we  are  not  children.  We  need  not  talk  just  now  of  Adam's  sins.  We  have  our 
own  to  account  for.  2.  Salvation  means  our  escaping  from  the  punishment  of  sin, 
and  also  from  the  habit  of  sin.  3.  How  may  men  be  saved  ?  The  answer  is  in 
the  text.  I.  Explanation.  What  is  meant  by  calling  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  ? 
1.  Worship.  "  When  men  began  to  multiply  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  then 
began  men  to  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord,"  i.e.,  they  builded  altars  in  His 
name,  offered  sacrifice,  bowed  their  knee,  and  lifted  their  voice.  Now,  whosoever 
is  enabled  by  grace  to  worship  God,  in  God's  way,  shall  be  saved.  2,  Prayer. 
Elijah,  when  the  prophets  of  Baal  sought  to  get  rain  from  their  false  god,  said,  "  I 
wiU  call  upon  God,"  i.e.,  "  I  will  pray  to  God,  that  He  may  send  the  rain."  Now, 
whosoever  prayeth  to  God  through  Christ,  with  sincere  prayer,  shall  be  saved. 
Thou  canst  not  pray  and  perish.  It  may  be  a  groan,  a  tear,  or  a  prayer  in  broken 
English;   but  if  it  be  a  prayer  from  the  inmost  heart,  thou   .'•halt  be  saved. 

3.  Trust.  A  man  cannot  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord,  unless  he  trusts  in  that 
name,  and  he  that  trusteth  in  Christ,   calling  on  His  name,  shall   be  saved. 

4.  Professing  His  name.  Ananias  said  to  Saul,  "  Arise  and  be  baptized,  and  wash 
away  thy  sins,  calling  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord."  Now  some  of  you  say,  "  We 
will  believe  and  be  secret  Christians."  Hear  this,  then — "  If  any  man  be  ashamed 
of  Me,"  <feo.  What  would  Her  Majesty  think  of  her  soldiers,  if  they  should  prefer 
not  to  wear  an>  thing  that  would  mark  them  as  being  soldiers?  II.  Eefotation. 
There  are  some  popular  errors  which  need  to  be  cured  by  refutation.,  viz. — 1.  That  a 
priest  or  a  minister  is  absolutely  necessaiy  to  assist  rnen  in  salvation.  The 
necessity  of  a  preacher  lies  in  telling  what  the  way  of  salvation  is  ;  but  his  ofBce 
goes  no  fui'ther.    Neither  Paul,  nor  an  angel  from  Leaven,  can  help  you  in  salva- 


aaAP.  x.]  EOMANS.  373 

tion.  Wo  must  each  of  us  go  to  the  fountain-head,  pleading  this  promise.  2.  That 
a  good  dream  is  a  most  splendid  thing  in  order  to  save  people.  Kowland  Hill,  when 
a  woman  pleadtd  that  she  was  saved  because  she  dreamed,  said,  "  Well,  it  ia  very 
nice  to  have  good  dreams  when  you  are  asleep ;  but  I  want  to  see  how  you  act  when 
you  are  awake ;  for  if  your  conduct  is  not  consistent  in  religion  when  you  are  awake, 
I  will  not  give  a  snap  of  the  finger  for  your  dreams."  Some  people  have  been 
alarmed  by  dreams  ;  but  to  trust  to  them  is  to  trust  to  a  shadow.  3.  That  a  certain 
kind  of  feeling  must  be  experienced  in  order  to  salvation.  Now,  the  only  feeling  I 
want  is  that  1  am  a  sinner  and  that  Christ  is  my  Saviour.  You  may  keep  your 
ecstasies  and  raptures  to  yourselves  ;  the  only  feeling  necessary  is  deep  repentance 
and  humble  faith  ;  and  if  you  have  got  that  you  are  saved.  4.  That  somehow  or 
other  salvation  is  connected  with  learning.  Now,  I  would  advise  you  to  know  as 
much  as  ever  you  can  ;  but  in  regard  to  going  to  heaven,  the  way  is  so  plain,  that 
♦'  the  wayfaring  man,  though  a  fool,  shall  not  err  therein."  All  you  want  to  know 
ia,  the  two  things  that  begin  with  S— Sin  and  Saviour.  III.  Exhortation.  Believe 
the  message.  Does  it  seem  hard  to  believe  ?  Nothing  is  too  hard  for  the  Most  High. 
I  will  use  a  few  reasons  to  induce  you  to  believe  this  truth.  If  thou  callest  on  Christ's 
name  thou  wilt  be  saved.  1.  Because  thou  art  elect.  That  doctrine  which  puzzles 
many  and  frightens  more,  never  need  do  so.  If  you  call  on  the  name  of  Christ 
you  are  elect.  2.  Because  thou  art  redeemed.  Christ  has  bought  thee,  and  paid 
for  thee.  3.  Because  Christ  says,  "  In  My  Father's  house  there  are  many  mansions," 
and  there  is  one  there  for  you.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Tlie  obligation  of  Christian 
missiom : — I.  The  gospel  is  designed  fob  the  woeld  (ver.  13).  II.  The  world 
NEEDS  IT  (ver.  14).  III.  The  Church  IS  COMMISSIONED  TO  DISPENSE  IT.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
Steps  essential  to  faith  : — I.  Faith  is  essential  to  worship  (ver.  13).  "  He  that 
cometh  to  God  must  believe  that  He  is,"  Ac.  Acceptable  worship  is  not  speech, 
ritual,  or  bodily  service,  but  the  devotions  of  a  soul  quickened  by  a  living  faith. 

1.  Not  a  corporate  faith,  the  current  faith  of  a  community  to  which  we  belong. 

2.  Not  a  traditional  faith.  3.  But  an  individual  faith  which  has  been  reached  by 
our  own  examination  of  facts  and  evidence,  and  which  has  become  a  living  power 
within  us.  II.  Information  is  essential  to  faith  (ver.  14).  Faith  implies  objects 
known  to  us.  We  cannot  believe  in  something,  however  true,  that  is  unknown. 
Men  know  nothing  of  God  until  they  are  informed.  The  knowledge  does  not  come 
either  as  an  intuition,  or  as  a  truth  conveyed  by  nature.  "  The  world  by  wisdom 
knew  not  God."  There  must  come  a  special  revelation.  III.  Preaching  is 
essential  to  knowledge.  "How  shall  they  hear  without  a  preacher?  "  Let  the 
word  "preacher"  stand  for  all  who  convey  from  God  necessary  information — 
prophets,  apostles,  and  all  true  modern  expositors  of  the  blessed  Book.  Had  not 
such  messengers  appeared  whom  God  made  organs  of  communications  to  men,  what 
should  we  have  known  of  Him?  Wb at  to  produce  a  living  faith?  The  publica- 
tion of  the  gospel  by  preaching  is  God's  established  instrumentality  for  giving  the 
world  a  knowledge  of  the  great  things  of  faith.  IV.  Divine  commission  is  essential 
to  preaching.  "  How  shall  they  preach  except  they  be  sent  ?  "  The  men  who 
give  the  true  knowledge  are  the  men  only  whom  God  sends.  There  are  many 
i.nsent  preachers  proclaiming  their  notions.  Who  are  the  sent  ones  ?  What  are 
the  criteria  by  which  to  determine  the  point — volubility,  animal  warmth,  popularity? 
Not  necessarily  so.  He  is  the  sent  who  is  divinely  qualified  by  having  the  right 
conceptions,  the  right  sympathies,  the  right  speech.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Links 
in  the  souVs  redemptive  chain  : — I.  Prayer.  "How  then  shall  they  call  on  Him ? " 
&o.  This  implies — 1.  Consciousness  of  dependence  upon  Him.  2.  An  earnest 
desire  after  Him.  II.  Faith.  "  How  then  shall  they  call  on  Him  in  whom  they 
have  not  believed  ?  "  Faith  in — 1.  His  personal  existence.  2.  The  entreatability 
of  His  nature.  III.  Knowledge.  "  How  shall  they  believe  in  Him  of  whom  they 
have  not  heard?  "  Faith  is  at  the  basis  of  all  knowledge — soul  redemptive  faith 
requires  knowledge,  not  of  the  creative,  sustaining  God,  but  of  the  redeeming  God, 
God  in  Christ.  IV.  Preaching,  The  redeeming  God  has  been  made  knowu  to  man 
by  preaching.  Enoch,  Noah,  Moses,  the  prophets,  the  apostles,  and  Christ  all 
preached.  And  the  subject  of  all  their  preaching  was  the  redeeming  God.  No  one 
can  preach  this  properly  unless  be  be  sent.  {Ibid.)  God's  readiness  to  forgive  : — 
Macaulay  speaks  of  James  II.  as  being  hard  and  as  glorying  in  the  opportunity  of 
crushing  another.  One  of  the  most  affecting  pictures  in  the  Royal  Academy  of  this 
year  depicts  the  king  in  the  act  of  crushing  the  poor  defeated  Duke  of  Monmouth. 
In  a  room  hung  with  tapestry  the  king  stands  erect,  lank,  sickly,  and  contemptuous. 
The  poor  duke  whose  rebellion  had  roused  the  hatred  of  the  king,  thought  to  move 


374  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  x, 

him  to  pity.  His  arms  were  ••  bound  behind  him  with  a  silken  cord,  and  thug 
secured  he  was  ushered  into  the  presence  of  the  implacable  kinsman  whom  he  had 
wronged.  Then  Monmouth  threw  himself  on  the  ground  and  crawled  to  the  Mng'a 
feet."  The  artist  represents  him  with  face  on  the  smooth  floor,  eyes  swollei  with 
weeping  and  watching,  striving  to  move  the  king  to  pity.  It  was  in  vain.  The 
king  only  crushed  with  hardness  and  contempt.  No  wonder  that  the  historian  says 
strongly,  '•  To  see  him,  and  not  to  spare  him,  was  an  outrage  on  humanity  and 
decency."  How  many  such  outrages  are  committed  in  a  day  by  those  of  lower  rank ! 
Those  who  feel  that  they  have  sinned  and  who  come  imploringly  to  the  feet  of 
Divine  mercy,  have  no  need  to  fear  that  they  will  be  treated  with  hardness.  God 
"will  not  break  the  bruised  reed,"  He  is  gentle  towards  us.  He  forgives,  uplifts, 
strengthens,  and  saves.  (Mother^s  Treasury.)  Crying  for  salvation : — Some 
years  ago  a  vessel  struck  on  the  rocks.  They  had  only  one  lifeboat.  In  that  life- 
boat the  passengers  and  crew  were  getting  ashore.  The  vessel  had  foundered,  and 
was  sinking  deeper  and  deeper,  and  that  one  boat  could  not  take  the  passenger3 
very  swiftly.  A  little  girl  stood  on  the  deck  waiting  for  her  turn  to  get  into  the 
boat.  The  boat  came  and  went,  came  and  went,  but  her  turn  did  not  seem  to  come. 
After  awhile  she  could  wait  no  longer,  and  she  leaped  on  the  taffrail  and  then 
sprang  into  the  sea,  crying  to  the  boatman,  "  Save  me  next  1  Save  me  next  1 " 
Oh,  how  many  have  gone  ashore  into  God's  mercy,  and  yet  you  are  clinging  to  the 
wreck  of  sin !  Others  have  accepted  the  pardon  of  Christ,  but  you  are  in  peril. 
Why  not,  this  moment,  make  a  rush  for  your  immortal  rescue,  crying  until  Jesus 
shall  hear  you,  and  heaven  and  earth  ring  with  the  cry,  "  Save  me  next  1  Save  me 
next " ? 

Vers.  14, 15.  How  then  shall  they  call  on  Him  In  whom  they  have  not  believed  ? — 

Salvation  preacJied  : — I.  Salvation  bv  grace.  1,  We  all  hope  to  be  saved.  Sal- 
vation cannot  be  of  merit  for  anybody  that  you  or  I  have  ever  known.  It  must  be 
of  grace,  if  grace  be  possible  :  there  is  no  other  way.  And  there  is  this  way — an  old 
way,  an  eternal  way — prepared  and  opened  far  back  behind  all  time,  when  the 
Lamb  was  slain.  This  takes  us  back  into  mysterious  and  awful  depths.  But 
revelation  leads  the  way.  Surely  we  narrow  God,  unless  we  think  of  Him  as 
Triune.  Surely  we  slander  God,  unless  we  make  atonement  as  much  the  work  of 
the  Father  and  the  Spirit,  as  of  the  Son.  2.  How  to  be  square  and  clean,  how  to 
be  considerate  and  generous,  how  not  to  be  selfish  and  self-willed ;  how  not  to  be 
afraid  or  ashamed  to  die  :  this  is  the  great  problem  of  life.  Tell  me  how  to  do  this 
and  you  will  tell  me  how  to  be  saved.  Grace  tramples  down  no  law.  Salvation  by 
grace  is  through  faith,  working  by  love,  which,  like  fire,  cleanses  the  heart  and 
cleanses  the  life.  3.  The  salvation  of  society,  menaced  now,  menaced  always,  by 
human  appetite  and  passions  in  their  disorganising  play,  must  come  by  the  same 
road.  No  one  form  of  government  rather  than  another,  no  mere  selfish  forces,  is 
the  thing  required.  Till  society  shall  have  become  unselfish  it  has  not  been 
saved,  nor  can  it  be.  And  to  become  unselfish,  it  must  learn,  not  of 
socialistic  reformers,  who  pronounce  unselfishness  impossible,  but  of  Him  who  was 
unselfishness  incarnate.  II.  This  salvation  must  be  preached.  1.  Christianity  is 
one  of  the  great  Book-Eeligions,  of  which  there  are  pre-eminently  three — Judaism 
and  Mohammedanism  being  the  other  two.  This  word  "  Book-Keligion  "  means  a 
great  deal.  (1)  It  means,  that  we  have  something  definite  and  immutable  by 
which  to  measure  whatever  calls  itself  Christian,  holding  it  to  the  rule.  (2)  It 
means  that  the  poor,  swearing,  shipwrecked  sailor  that  floats  ashore  on  his  chest, 
if  he  has  in  that  chest  the  Bible  his  mother  gave  him,  and  dries  its  leaves  in  the 
sun,  and  reads  the  third  chapter  of  John's  Gospel,  with  streaming  eyes,  and  break- 
ing, believing  heart,  may  be  saved  all  alone  there  on  the  sandy  beach  of  the  desert 
island.  And  if  he  dies  there  all  alone,  no  ship  sailing  that  way  to  see  his  signal  of 
distress,  he  will  go  as  straight  to  heaven  as  Whitefield  himself  went  from  the 
sermon  he  preached  in  Exeter.  2.  And  yet  Christianity  did  not  start  as  a  volume, 
but  as  a  voice.  Christ  Himself  probably  wrote  nothing,  not  a  line.  Meanwhile, 
the  kingdom  of  Christ  has  been  marching  and  conquering,  north  and  south,  towards 
the  rising  and  towards  the  setting  sun.  Its  snow-white  banners,  chasing  the  Eoman 
eagles,  had  outflown  those  eagles  beyond  the  Danube,  the  Euphrates,  and  the  Indus. 
What  wrought  that  triumph  ?  The  foolishness  of  preaching  wrought  it.  Christ  is  no 
Confucius,  or  Socrates,  or  Solon,  but  God  Incarnate.  He  that  saves  us  spake, 
and  as  never  man  spake.  So  the  sacred  message  ran,  and  runs,  from  lip  to  lip. 
It  is  in  the  air  all  the  time.     3.  A  Bible  in  every  human  habitation  is  some 


CHAT.  X.]  ROMANS.  876 

thing  well  worth  trying  to  achieve.      But   I   can   tell  you   of   something  better 
BtiU.    It  is  Christ  Himself,  in  any  one  of  the  humblest  of  His  disciples,  casting 
His    shadow  on   the   wall.     Breathing  men,  not  breathless   books,   must  carry 
salvation  round  the  globe.      It  must  be  preached;    preached  by  men  who  have 
had  it  preached  to  them  ;   preached  to  sinners  by  men  who  have  sinned  them- 
selves;   by  dying  men  to  dying  men.     III.  The  preachers   must  be   sent.      1. 
Our  text  does  not  say  by  whom,  but  the  context  makes  it  plain  enough.     God 
must  send  them.     2.  Whom  God  sends  to  preach.  He  first  converts.    And  then 
He  kindles  in   him,  beyond   the   average,  what  we   have  been   in   the   habit   of 
calling  a  love  for  souls  ;  call  it,  if  you  please,  enthusiasm,  a  great,  good  heart, 
quick  sympathy  with  men  as  men,  and  with  the  daily  wants  and  ways  of  men. 
3.  In  the  apostolic  and  early  Church,  which  wrought   such  wonders,  preaching 
was   not  exclusively   an   official   prerogative.      Strictly  speaking,  there   was   no 
order    of   preachers.      Anybody  might  preach  who  had   anything   to    say  worth 
Baying.     Not  till  near  the  close  of  the  fourth  century  were  laymen  forbidden  to 
preach.    And  then  the  Church  had  got  far  along  in  the  bad  way.     I  confess  I 
do  not  see  how  Christianity  is  ever  to  carry  the  day,  unless   the  great  bulk  of 
our  Church  membership  becomes  also  a  ministry.     A    Grecian    army,   with   or 
without  leaders,  might  possibly  have  stood  its  ground  all  the  same  at  Marathon, 
saving  Greece,  and  saving  the  civilisation  of  the  Occident.    But  Miltiades  alone 
there,  with  his  handful  of  officers,  would  not  have   stayed   for   a   moment  the 
Persian  march  on  Athens.     (R.  D.  Hitchcock,  D.D.)         The  necessity  of  reve- 
lation   to  faith : — Belief   is   impossible,  where  it  is   impossible   to    convey  any 
knowledge  of  the  subjects  of   belief;   the  body  cannot  digest  without  nutriment 
to   engage  its  digestive  functions;   the  mind  cannot  believe  without  facts  and 
propositions  to  occupy  its  beUeving  faculty   (ver.  17).     The   voice  of  God,  the 
hearing  of  man,  the  consequent  belief,  are  the  three  necessarily  successive  links  in 
the  golden  chain  of  revealed  salvation.     Sever  the  continuity  of  any  two,  and  tbe 
electric  spark  cannot  be  transferred  across  the  interval.     {W.  Archer  Butler,  M.A.) 
How  shall  they  hear  without  a  preacher? — Preaching: — I.  Its  advantages.     1. 
Economy  of  exertion.    How  much  is  done  with  comparatively  little  speaking.     2. 
Many  receive  religious  instruction  who  would  otherwise  have  none.     3.  Religion  is 
kept  a  conspicuous  thing.    4.  All  are  made  witnesses  to  all  they  have  heard.     5. 
There  is  something  in  it  for  popular  opinion  to  lean  upon.     6.  It  tends  to  secure 
for  religion  deep  study,  at  least  in  some  parts  of  the  community.    II.  Its  requisites. 
1.  Power  of  thought.  2.  Facility  of  expression.  3.  Knowledge  of  the  Scriptures.  (John 
Foster. )      The  usefulness  and  authority  of  an  established  ministry  : — I.  The  necessity 
OP  A  ministry  to  officiate  in  the  Church  of  God.     1.  The  settling  and  preserving 
a  ministry  to  officiate  in  the  Church  is  an  instance  of  our  respect  to  Almighty 
God.     God  is  the  God  of  order,  not  of  confusion,  and  expects  that  His  service 
should  be  performed  after  a  regular  and   decent  manner,  free   from  negligence 
on  the  one  hand  and  foppery  on  the  other;  especially  He  requires  that  acts  of 
public  adoration  should  be  accompanied  with  a  reverence  and  solemnity  suitable 
to  the  majesty  of  such  a  presence.      Now  this   cannot   reasonably  be   supposed 
to   be   so   exactly  performable   by  those  who   are   frequently  embroiled   in   the 
affairs  of  the  world,  and  by  that  means  have  their  thoughts  and  affections  the 
more  estranged  from  heavenly  contemplations.     It  has  therefore  been  the  uni- 
versal  practice  of    all  nations  to  appoint  some  peculiar  persons  to  attend  upon 
God's   service   more   immediately,  who,  by  continually  applying   themselves  to 
such  things  as  were  acceptable  to  Him,  were  supposed  to  have  some  interest  in 
Him,  to  be  qualified  to  understand  His  will,  and  to  be  authorised   to  reveal   it 
to   others.     Now   as   this   was   done   by   the   common   consent    of   all   heathen 
nations  in  relation  to  their   false   divinities,  so  was   it   more   eminently  put   in 
practice  by  those  who  had  a  clearer  notion   of   the  true   Deity ;    one   tribe  in 
twelve  being  set  apart  by  the  Jews  and  consecrated  to  the  service  of  God  and 
His   Temple,  no   worldly  concerns   being    suffered   to   interfere,  but   the   whole 
employment  and  business  of  their  lives  being  to  study  His  will  and  the  methods 
of   His  worship.      2.  I  proceed,  next,  to    enforce  the  necessity  of  a  ministry  to 
officiate  in  the  Church  of  God  from  the  great   advantages   accruing   thereby  to 
the  other  members  of  Christ's  body.      (1)    Consider  it  in  relation  to  prayers  or 
intercessions  for  the   obtaining   of   mercies  or   diverting    of    judgments.      (2)    A 
second  advantage  which  accrues  to   the  whole   Church   from    the    office   of   the 
ministry  is  that   of   instruction   and   reprehension,   the   impartial   declaring   of 
their  duty  to  them  and  seasonably  reproving  them  for  the  neglect   of   it.     U. 


37«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  X. 

The  authoritt  bt  which  they  act.  "  How  shall  they  preach  except  they  bo 
sent  ? "  Our  blessed  Saviour,  in  order  to  carry  on  the  universal  design  of  our 
redemption,  thought  fit  to  select  a  certain  number  of  men  to  be  His  missionaries 
or  apostles,  investing  them  with  some  part  of  ffis  own  authority  (Mark  iii.  141. 
From  Him,  then,  "  who  is  a  Priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchisedec  "  is 
derived  to  His  ministers  a  plenitude  of  power  proportionable  to  the  majesty  of 
so  augnst  a  Founder.  We  have  His  own  Word  for  it,  who  cannot  lie  (John 
xvii.  18).  Since,  therefore,  the  Author  and  Finisher  of  our  faith  has  thus 
expressly  testified  in  relation  to  His  ministers  that  as  He  was  sent  even  so  did 
He  send,  the  questioning  that  authority  by  which  they  act  will  cast  an  impu- 
tation  upon  Christ  Himself,  and  a  doubting  the  validness  of  their  mission  will 
unhappily  glance  and  reflect  upon  His.  I  shall  now  close  up  all  that  has  been 
said  with  a  word  or  two  of  application.  Can  they  not  hear  without  a  preacher  ? 
Is  the  necessity  and  advantage  of  an  established  ministry  so  very  great?  Let 
us,  then,  most  heartily  pray  the  great  Lord  of  the  harvest  that  He  will  still 
continue  to  send  forth  able  labourers  into  His  harvest.  Let  us  also  consider 
how  many  miserable  souls  are  deprived  of  those  benefits  which  we  possess. 
And  let  this  consideration  cause  in  us  gratitude  and  thanksgiving  for  the  happy 
enjoyment  of  such  inestimable  blessings.  Can  they  not  preach  except  they  be 
sent  ?  Can  they  not  officiate  except  their  calling  be  from  above  ?  Then  it 
extremely  stands  them  upon  to  make  good  their  mission.  And  the  surest  way 
of  proving  that  to  be  undeniably  true  is  by  accommodating  their  doctrine  to 
the  Word  of  God  and  squaring  their  lives  according  to  their  doctrine.  But 
farther — Is  their  commission  so  full  and  their  authority  so  large?  This,  then, 
should  oblige  us  to  put  some  distinction  between  those  who  come  so  duly 
authorised  and  others  who  intrude  into  the  same  employment.  {N.  Brady.) 
Hearing  versux  reading  : — You  take  up  a  book  and  read  a  poem.  Slowly, 
carefully  you  distil  the  meaning,  admire  it,  appropriate  it.  "Very  likely  you 
imagine  that  you  have  obtained  the  author's  full  significance,  and  extracted 
therefrom  all  the  enjoyment  and  profit  possible.  But  let  some  friend  recite  it, 
enunciating  clearly,  articulating  sympathetically,  giving  to  each  line  its  appropriate 
expression,  and  the  probability  is  that  you  will  see  and  feel  more  than  you  did 
previously.  An  experienced  and  able  missionary  has  remarked,  "  I  have  never 
seen  a  Chinaman  weep  over  a  book ;  but  I  have  seen  a  Chinaman  weep  under  a 
sermon.  I  have  myself  many  times  made  a  Chinaman  weep  by  the  proclamation 
of  the  gosp&l."  We  have  the  sermons  of  George  Whitfield  and  the  orations  of 
Edward  Irving,  and  what  is  the  first  experience  of  those  who  peruse  them?  In 
the  majority  of  cases  it  is  disappointment.  "  Can  this  be  the  renowned  man  who 
moved  so  mightily  the  spirits  of  his  contemporaries  ?  "  Such  is  our  astonished 
question.  Yes,  it  is  the  renowned  man  ;  but  cannot  you  see  how  it  is  that  you  are 
not  affected  by  his  discourses  as  others  were  ?  It  is  because  they  heard,  whereas 
you  only  read.  Wisely,  then,  is  it  ordained  that  the  gospel  shall  be  preached. 
(T.  R.  Stevenson.)  Preaching  :  its  necessity  : — 1.  Preaching  is  God's  ordained 
method  of  communicating  Divine  knowledge.  2.  Without  Divine  knowledge  men 
cannot  believe.  3.  Without  faith  men  cannot  call  upon  God.  4.  Without  calling 
upon  God  they  cannot  be  saved.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Missionary  obligation: — The 
gospel  should  be  preached  to  every  creature — it  being  a  universal  message  from 
heaven  to  earth.  A  commission  thus  universal  should  have  had  at  our  hands  a 
universal  fulfilment;  but  we  have  only  to  open  our  eyes  and  see  how  palpably 
short  it  has  come  of  this.  And  yet  we  affect  to  wonder  that  the  blessings  of 
Christianity  are  limited  to  so  small  a  portion  of  the  human  family.  But  surely  it 
is  not  time  to  charge  the  Almighty,  or  to  arraign  the  methods  of  His  administration 
— till  we  have  inquired  in  how  far  this  precept  has  been  carried  into  operation ; 
and  then  what  the  instances  are  in  which,  when  the  precept  was  fully  acted  up  to, 
this  promise  has  ever  been  withheld.  Verses  14,  15  give  the  first  and  readiest 
answer  to  the  question — How  is  it  that  the  whole  earth  is  not  Christianised?  God 
could,  by  an  act  of  sovereignty,  achieve  this  result  at  the  instant  bidding  of  His 
voice — even  as  He  said  Let  there  be  light,  and  there  was  light.  But  God  hath,  in 
the  exercise  of  a  wisdom,  in  perfect  analogy  with  the  many  processes  of  nature  and 
providence,  chosen  to  ordain  an  instrumentality  for  the  diffusion  of  the  Christian 
religion  over  the  world.  Now  it  so  happens  that  men  are  the  chief  parts  of  this 
instrumentality ;  and  we  should  first  inquire  how  they  have  done  their  part — so  aa 
to  ascertain  whether  it  be  not  we  the  men  who  are  in  fault,  before  daring  to  lay  the 
fault  upon  God.     It  is  a  sound  doctrinal  theology  which  acknowledges,  amid  the 


CHAP,  X.]  ROMANS.  877 

countless  diversity  of  operations  around  us,  that  it  is  God  who  worketh  all  in  all. 
But  God  worketh  by  means  ;  and  when  a  certain  prescribed  human  agency  enters 
into  that  system  of  means  which  He  hath  instituted,  it  is  a  sound  practical  theology 
to  labour  as  assiduously  in  the  bidden  way  as  if  man  worked  all.  God  could  have 
worked  a  saving  faith  in  the  heart  of  Cornelius  by  an  immediate  suggestion  from 
His  own  Spirit,  or  through  the  mouth  of  an  angel.  And  He  did  send  an  angel  to 
Cornelius,  not  however  that  he  might  preach  the  gospel  to  him,  but  that  he  might 
bid  him  send  for  Peter,  and  receive  that  gospel  at  the  lips  of  a  fellow-mortal.  And 
God  also  sent  to  Peter  a  communication  from  heaven  to  prepare  him  for  the  message 
— thus  doubling  as  it  were  the  amount  of  miraculous  agency,  in  order  that  the 
gospel  might  be  heard  by  a  yet  unconverted  child  of  Adam,  not  throuL;h  the  medium 
of  a  supernatural  and  angelic,  but  through  the  medium  of  a  natural  and  a  human 
utterance.  Yet  not  so  as  that  the  natural  should  supersede  or  displace  the  super- 
natural— for  while  Peter  spake,  the  Holy  Ghost  fell  on  all  them  who  heard.  The 
function  of  Peter  was  the  same  with  that  of  a  minister  or  missionary  in  the  present 
day — it  was  to  tell  Cornelius  the  words  by  which  he  and  all  his  hoase  should  be 
saved.  And  the  function  of  the  Holy  Ghost  for  the  purpose  of  giving  demonstra- 
tion and  efficiency  to  the  word,  is  the  same  now  as  ever — He  falls  on  us  still  even 
as  He  did  on  them  at  the  beginning.  Let  no  man  put  asunder  the  things  which 
God  hath  joined.  The  application  of  all  this  to  the  question  of  missions,  whether 
home  or  foreign,  is  quite  obvious.  Let  these  be  multiplied  to  the  uttermost,  yet  all 
will  be  useless  and  effete,  il  unblest  or  unaccompanied  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  Some 
there  are,  m^n  of  devotion,  who  have  a  contempt  for  machinery,  and  who  think  to 
succeed  by  prayer  alone  for  the  extension  of  our  Eedeemer's  kingdom.  Others 
there  are,  meu  of  bustle  and  enterprise,  who  think  to  succeed  by  the  busy  prosecu- 
tion of  schemes  and  societies.  Both  must  be  conjoined,  and  it  is  to  this  prolific 
union  of  devout  and  desirous  hearts  with  busy  hands,  that  the  Church  of  Christ 
stands  indebted  for  all  its  prosperity.  (T.  Clialniers,  D.D.)  And  how  shall  they 
preach  except  they  be  sent? — The  necessity  of  a  proper  commission  for  a  minister: — 
It  is  not  a  man's  skill  in  state  affairs  that  makes  him  an  ambassador,  nor  ability 
in  the  law  that  makes  him  a  magistrate,  but  the  call  to  these  places :  neither  do 
gifts  make  a  man  a  minister,  but  his  mission.  (W.Garnall.)  How  beautiful  are 
the  feet  of  them  that  preach  the  gospel  of  peace ! — This  is  a  picture  on  the  canvas 
of  the  imagination.  In  a  time  of  intense  anxiety  and  imminent  peril,  many  are 
the  earnest  and  wistful  looks  that  are  directed  to  the  mountain  pass  m  the  distance. 
At  length  when  hope  deferred  was  turning  into  despair,  the  messenger  is  descried. 
He  is  striding  in  haste,  waving  a  token  of  the  glad  tidings  he  is  commissioned  to 
communicate.  The  feet,  which  bear  him  rapidly  along,  are  beautiful  to  behold — 
beautiful  to  the  eyes  of  the  hopeful.  (J.  Morison,  D.D.)  The  preacher's  feet 
beautiful : — Three  things  make  them  so  :  1.  The  preciousness  of  his  message.  2. 
The  ardour  of  his  zeal  and  love.  3.  The  holy  consistency  of  his  life.  ( T.  Robinson, 
D.D.)  The  messenger  of  mercy  : — I.  His  commission.  1.  From  God.  2.  From 
the  Church.  II.  His  messaqe.  1.  Glad  tidings.  2.  Of  peace.  3.  Of  good  things. 
III.  His  WELCOME.  1.  By  the  perishing  world.  2.  By  the  penitent  sinner.  (J. 
Lyth,  D.D.)        The  Christian  missionary : — I.  How  necessary  his  mission  I    II. 

How  WELCOME  HIS  COMING  I      IH.    HoW  GLORIOUS  HIS  MESSAGE  !       IV.    HoW  BEADTIEUL 

HIS  TRACK  I  (Ibid.)  The  gospel  of  peace : — I.  The  general  import  of  the  gospel. 
Good  news,  or  glad  tidings.  A  message  which  bears  this  designation — 1.  Must 
relate  to  something  that  is  really  and  substantially  good.  Bad  news  may  find  the 
ear  open,  but  the  heart  will  be  shut.  Now  the  gospel  unfolds  what  is  truly  good 
for  our  immortal  souls.  Its  promises  and  provisions  are  inestimably  precious.  It 
lays  pipes  close  to  the  fountain  of  goodness,  and  through  them  pours  a  profusion 
of  blessings.  2.  Must  relate  to  a  good  that  immediately  concerns  us.  To  tell  a 
man  in  penury,  of  abundance;  or  a  man  in  sickness,  of  healing;  or  a  man  in 
danger,  of  deUverance,  which  is  placed  utterly  beyond  his  reach,  is  but  to  aggra- 
vate his  distress.  But  the  religion  of  Jesus  supplies  healing  and  help  and  adequate 
reUef.  3.  Must  be  true  and  certain.  What  avail  great  and  good  things,  held  out 
to  U8  in  a  precarious  manner  ?  The  good  news,  which  we  publish,  is  well  authen- 
ticated.    Omnipotence  has  confirmed  and  ratified  it.    II.  Some  reasons  why  the 

BACHED   word  IB   EMPHATICALLY  CALLED   THE   GOSPEL   OF  PEACE.      PeaCe  Is  a  blcssiug 

of  the  highest  value.  In  our  text  it  is  used  in  its  most  comprehensive  acceptation, 
M  denoting — 1.  Peace  with  God,  or  reconciliation  (Col.  i.  19-21).  The  terms  of 
this  reoon<^ation  are  set  forth  in  chap.  v.  1-3.  2.  Peace  with  ourselves,  or  peace 
of  conscience.    "  There  is  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked."    They  try  a 


378  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  X 

variety  of  expedients,  whicb  all  utterly  fail  of  success.     It  is  necessary  that  the 
gospel  be  actually  received,  to  tranquillise  the  heart  (Heb.  x.  19).     3.  Peace  with 
our  brethren,  or  the  peace  of  amity.     Christianity  is  a  religion  of  peace.     It  allays 
the  fury  of  those  passions  which  are  the  springs  of  strife  and  bitterness.      Its 
doctrines  and  principles  of  Christianity  breathe  a  spirit  of  universal  benevolence. 
(Essex  Congregational  Remembrancer.)        The  gospel  of  peace  : — 1.  The  effect  of 
the  preaching  of  the  gospel  is  joy  in  them  which  hear  it.     So  at  Antioch  there  was 
great  joy  ;  so  in  Galatia,  and  elsewhere.     2.  This  effect  is  set  forth  under  a  com- 
parison of  the  less ;  for  Isaiah  (lii.  7)  speaks  of  the  royal  receiving  of  the  messengers 
of  Israel's  deliverance  from  the  captivity  of  Babylon.     If,  then,  the  tidings  of  such 
temporal  deliverance  was  so  welcome,  much  more  must  be  welcome  the  glad  tidings 
of  the  gospel :  and  as  those  messengers  were  from  God,  so  much  more  these.     In 
these  words  are  two  things.     I.  A  commendation  of  the  gospel.     "  How  beau- 
tiful " — as  if  he  were  not  able  to  express  such  beauty — *•  are  the  feet  I  "    Some  take 
feet  for  men  ;  some  for  the  affections,  being  that  to  the  soul  which  feet  are  to  the 
body :    these  affections  appearing  in  the  apostles,  by  their  sweet   delivery  and 
utterance ;  some  for  the  velocity  of  the  apostles  in  converting  the  world ;  some 
their  constancy  and  courage.     Some  take  beauty  for  the  holiness  of  the  apostles ; 
some  for  a  fleshly  beauty  by  ornaments,  as  slippers  embroidered  with  gold  and 
pearl ;  as  this  Scripture  is  abused  to  the  consecrating  of  the  Pope's  toe.     But  the 
plain  meaning  is  that  the  coming  of  the  apostles  with  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation 
was  acceptable :  he  saith  feet  because  they  are  the  instruments  of  going ;  as  we 
fanailiarly  say  of  poor  men,  they  get  their  living  by  their  fingers'  ends,  which  are 
the  instruments  of  their  labour.    Beautiful.     The  Hebrew  word  may  signify  to  be 
desired  and  longed  for,  or  beautiful  and  welcome.     The  beauty  of  a  thing  causeth 
it  to  ba  desired,  as  the  beauty  of  Christ  makes  the  Church  sick  of  love.     The  Greek 
term  comes  of  a  root  which  signifies — 1.  Time.    Generally  time,  or  seasonable 
time  :  and  so  some  read  it,  "  How  seasonable  1 "    A  word  spoken  in  season  is  beau- 
tiful.    Everything  is  beautiful  in  his  season.     Many  of  our  daintiest  meats  are 
not,  but  the  gospel  is  always  in  season  ;  in  the  winter  of  adversity,  in  the  summer 
of  prosperity,  in  the  spring  of  youth,  and  autumn  of  age.    2.  The  spring :  and 
therefore  some  have  compared  the  coming  of  the  preachers  of  the  gospel  to  the 
spring.    For  as  the  fields  in  the  spring  begin  to  be  adorned  with  flowers,  in  which 
all  creatures  rejoice,  so  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  turns  our  winter-like  barren- 
ness into  fruitfuLness,  making  us  to  flourish  with  heavenly  graces  and  virtues.     8. 
Ripeness,   and  so  some  have  likened  the  coming  of  the  apostles  to  ripe  fruit. 
Unripe  fruit  is  dangerous,  and  not  so  well  coloured,  but  that  which  is  ripe  is  both 
well  tasted  and  well  coloured.    No  dainty-coloured  fruit  so  beautiful  and  whole- 
some as  the  gospel.     4.  Comeliness ;  that  which  we  call  the  pride  and  flowers  of 
life ;  also  youth,  wherein  is  that  mixture  of  white  and  red  which  is  called  beauty. 
As  Christ  is  said  to  be  fairer,  so  also  is  the  gospel.     II.  A  season.    Because  it  is 
the  gospel  of  peace  and  glad  tidings  of  good  things.     This  redundance  serves  to 
make  us  the  more  to  esteem  of  it.    It  is  the  Ghost's  spell,  a  comforting  and  soul- 
saving  word.    1.  Peace.     We  are  by  corruption  of  nature  enemies  to  God;  the 
gospel  reveals  a  threefold  peace — with  God,  with  ourselves,  with  men ;  according 
to  the  song  of  the  angels  at  the  birth  of  Christ.     2.  Good  things.     Yea,  the  best  in 
the  superlative  degree,  celestial  good  things :  a  freedom  from  all  evil  of  sin,  of 
punishment.     Conclusion :  Nothing  should  be  so  welcome  as  the  preaching  and 
preachers  of  the  gospel.     That  Christ  came  to  save  siimers  is  a  faithful  saying, 
and  worthy  of  the  best  welcome  (1  Tim.  i.  15).     It  is  called  the  word  of  life,  of 
salvation,  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom.     Even  the  key  of  heaven ;   for  life  and 
immortality  are  brought  to  light  by  the  gospel  (2  Tim.  1.  12).     1.  The  essential 
duty  of  a  minister  is  to  preach  the  gospel.     The  law  is  to  be  preached  also,  both 
as  an  introduction  to  the  gospel,  and  for  a  direction  how  to  lead  our  lives  when  we 
have  received  the  gospel,  because  sin  breaks  God's  peace  ;  but  chiefly  we  are  sent 
to  preach  the  gospel.     2.  Not  riches,  nor  dignities,  but  to  preach  the  gospel  is  the 
chief  honour  and  beauty  of  a  minister,  who,  though  highly  advanced,  if  he  preach 
not  the  gospel,  shall  be  despised.     3.  Some  love  their  ministers  because  they  keep 
hospitality,  which  is  commendable;  some  because  they  gain  by  them,  which  ia 
carnal ;   some  because  they  never  preach,  which  is  abominable ;   some  because 
themselves  would  be  well  accounted  of,  which  is  hypocritical.     But  to  love  them 
for  their  work's  sake  is  conscionable,  and  according  to  the  commandment  (1  Thess. 
V.  13).     It  is  an  argument  of  great  corruption  to  esteem  meanly  a  preacher;  when 
he  that  brings  tidings  of  a  good  bargain,  or  is  an  instrument  of  our  pleasurea. 


CHAP.  X.]  ROMANS.  879 

shall  be  highly  welcomed  and  rewarded.  4.  If  the  minister  have  weak  gifts,  yet 
if  he  preach  the  gospel  thou  must  account  his  feet  beautiful.  It  is  not  the  gifts  of 
men,  but  the  Word  of  God  which  works  the  feat  in  our  conversion.  5.  If  it  be  the 
gospel  of  peace,  the  professors  are  to  be  peaceable.  (Elnathan  Parr,  B.D.)  The 
music  of  the  gospel : — What  music  is  there  ever  heard  in  this  world  to  be  compared 
with  the  music  of  the  gospel  ?  It  goes  to  the  heart  of  universal  humanity.  It  is 
richer  in  its  tones  than  all  the  voices  of  men.  It  is  more  thrilling  far  than  all  the 
symphonies  of  Handel  and  Mozart,  of  Beethoven,  Mendelssohn,  Rossini,  and  of  all 
the  mighty  masters  of  song.  It  is  softer  than  the  murmur  of  the  evening  breeze  ; 
more  soothing  than  the  sound  of  the  distant  waterfall.  It  is  sweeter  than  the 
warblings  of  summer  birds;  more  harmonious  than  the  chorus  of  the  forest's 
rustling  leaves.  It  is  grander  than  the  hallelujahs  of  the  waves  of  the  ocean ; 
more  ovei-powering  than  the  organ  roll  of  the  reverberating  thunder.  Aye,  and 
more  melting  and  delicious  than  the  harping  of  those  heavenly  intelligences  whom 
God  designates  as  the  "  morning  stars."  The  gospel  steals  over  the  bosom  of  the 
desolate  and  inexpressibly  sad.  It  drops  its  assuaging  balm  on  the  ear  of  the 
broken  and  the  weary,  the  forsaken,  the  bereaved,  the  solitary.  It  charms  away 
the  despondency  of  the  labouring  and  the  heavy-laden.  Its  minstrelsy  penetrates 
within  the  prison  bars  of  the  captive,  and  floats  to  the  ear  of  tyranny's  fettered 
victim  in  the  subterranean  dungeon.  Its  solace  cheers  those  who  sit  in  ashes, 
who  are  clad  in  the  vestments  of  mourning,  and  are  swooning  under  the  spirit  of 
heaviness.  It  comes  with  resistless  force  to  the  bankrupt,  the  ruined  and  undone, 
to  the  guilty,  the  betrayed,  the  despairing,  the  polluted,  and  the  lost.  When  all 
other  voices  are  still,  with  gentler  than  a  mother's  accents,  it  breathes  out  hope 
and  retrieval  for  the  fallen  and  the  outcast.  No  fabled  Orpheus  ever  so  affected 
rocks,  trees,  and  wild  beasts,  by  harp  and  song,  as  Christ  by  the  music  of  the 
gospel  has  drawn  after  Him,  in  blissful  captivity,  the  dullest,  rudest,  and  most 
savage  of  mankind,  constraining  them  to  leave  their  carnal  instincts,  their  habits 
of  depravity,  their  ways  of  sin,  so  that,  forsaking  all  besides,  o'er  all  the  world 
they  follow  Him.  {J.  Somerville.)  The  gospel  of  peace : — It  is  a  great  mercy  to 
enjoy  the  "  gospel  of  peace,"  but  a  still  greater  to  enjoy  the  peace  of  the  gospel. 
{J.  Dyer.)  The  gospel  indifferent  to  the  means  of  its  conveyance  : — The  meanness 
of  the  earthen  vessel,  which  conveys  to  others  the  gospel  treasure,  takes  nothing 
from  the  value  of  the  treasure.  A  dying  hand  may  sign  a  deed  of  gift  of  incal- 
culable value.  A  shepherd's  boy  may  point  out  the  way  to  a  philosopher.  A 
beggar  may  be  the  bearer  of  an  invaluable  present.     (W.  Cecil,  M.A.) 

Ver.  16.  But  they  have  not  all  obeyed  the  gospel.  For  Esaias  salth,  Lord,  who 
hath  believed  our  report  7 — Obedience  to  the  gospel : — 1.  Paul  prevents  an  objec- 
tion to  that  which  was  said  concerning  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  to  the  Gentiles, 
that  it  was  of  God.  As  if  some  Jew  should  say.  No,  Paul,  God  never  sent  you  to 
preach  to  them,  for  if  He  had  He  would  have  sent  you  first  to  us,  and  have  blessed 
your  labours  ;  but  the  greater  part  obey  you  not,  either  of  Jews  or  Gentiles.  This  Paul 
answers  by  a  concession,  with  a  correction  annexed,  as  if  he  should  say,  Indeed  all 
do  not  obey  the  gospel,  yet  you  Jews  are  not  to  be  offended,  because,  as  our  sending 
was  foretold,  so  your  and  their  incredulity;  and  the  small  fruit  and  effect  was 
foretold  also.  2.  All  have  not  obeyed,  i.e.,  believed.  So  called  because  obedience 
is  an  inseparable  effect  of  faith.  So  we  say  of  the  trees  in  our  orchards,  this  is  a 
pear,  that  a  plum,  when  they  are  the  trees  that  bear  such  fruit ;  so  faith  is  the  tree 
that  bears  the  fruit  of  obedience.  The  obedience  of  faith  is  twofold.  First,  of 
reason,  when  it  gives  place  and  way  to  the  gospel,  though  it  conceive  it  not.  For 
the  gospel  goes  beyond  reason,  as  in  the  point  of  the  Trinity,  incarnation  of  Christ, 
justification  of  a  sinner  before  God,  resurrection,  &c.  Abraham  beUeved  (2  Cor. 
z.  5)  above  or  against  reason,  and  the  gospel  is  said  to  bring  into  subjection  our 
reason.  That  of  works  is  when  we  observe  the  law,  for  faith  worketh  by  love  (Gal. 
V.  6),  and  is  to  be  shown  by  our  works.  3.  When  the  gospel  is  preached  all  are  not 
converted  by  it  and  believe  it  (John  iii.  32,  xii.  37;  Matt.  xx.  16;  2  Thess.  iii.  2). 
I.  Faith  is  called  obedience.  Obey  thou  in  life,  and  make  thy  reason  obey. 
No  man  standing  on  his  own  reason  ever  believed ;  an  unsanctified  wit  is  a  great 
hindrance  of  faith.  The  greatest  philosophers  (Acts  xvii.  18)  most  resisted  Paul, 
as  our  greatest  politicians  most  scoff  at  preaching  of  the  Word.    II.  Allabe  bound 

TO    HEAB,   AND  NOTHINO   SO  WOBTHT  TO    BE    HEABD  AS    THE   OOSPBIj.        Let    US    Bay    of 

hearing,  as  Paul  speaks  of  knowing  it,  viz.,  that  he  esteemed  to  know  nothing 
besides  (1  Cor.  ii.  2).   The  nurse's  song  doth  not  so  quiet  the  babe  as  the  pr«aching 


880  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chai>.  x 

of  the  gospel  the  conscience.  It  is  the  hand  of  God  offering  us  forgiveness  of  sins. 
He,  therefore,  who  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear.  If  thou  wilt  not  now  hear 
that  which  may  profit  thee,  thou  shalt  hear  one  day  that  which  will  make  thy  heart 
to  ache,  even  fhis,  *'  Go,  you  cursed,"  &c.     III.  Ministers  must  be  affected  and 

GEIEVB    WHEN   THEY    SEE    THE    COMPANY    OF    KEVEPENT    HEAEERS   80  THIN,    AND   THEIB 

LABOURS  SO  FRUITLESS.  The  prophct  here  complains  of  this  ;  so  Christ  groans  for 
the  hardness  of  the  people's  hearts,  and  weeps  over  the  stubbornness  of  Jerusalem. 
The  shrewdest  turn  to  be  done  to  a  minister  is  to  deprive  him  of  the  joy  of  his 
labours,  and  the  way  to  rejoice  them  is  to  embrace  the  gospel  they  preach,  IV. 
Isaiah  and  Paul  gave  not  over,  though  thet  had  cause  to  complain.  As  the 
physician  omits  no  point  of  his  art,  though  the  recovery  of  his  patient  be  desperate, 
so,  though  we  preach  to  many  desperate  and  scoffing  hearers,  we  must  not  give 
over,  but  rather  use  the  more  diligence.     V.  Although  faith  cannot  be  without 

PREACHING   GOING    BEFORE   IT,  YET   PREACHING  MAY    BE   WITHOUT  FAITH   FOLLOWING    IT. 

As  tbat  which  is  to  be  known  may  be  without  the  knowledge  of  it.  There  are  two 
things  required  to  faith :  the  determination  of  that  which  is  to  be  believed,  and  the 
inclination  and  persuasion  of  the  heart  to  believe.  Preaching  determines,  but  it  is 
God  who  persuades  by  preaching.  God  can  do  it  without  preaching,  but  preaching 
cannot  do  it  without  God.  Our  voice  can  say  repent,  but  it  is  God  only  that  gives 
repentance.  Paul  preacheth  to  Lydia's  care,  but  God  hath  the  key  of  her  heart. 
(Elnathan  Parr,  B.D.)  Disobedience  to  the  gospel: — 1.  Man  is  the  same  dis- 
obedient creature  under  all  dispensations.  We  bemoan  his  rejection  of  the  gospel, 
and  so  did  Isaiah,  who  spoke  in  the  name  of  the  whole  company  of  the  prophets. 
2.  It  is  one  of  the  greatest  proofs  of  the  depravity  of  man's  heart  that  he  will  no 
more  obey  the  gospel  than  the  law,  but  disobeys  his  God,  whether  He  speaks  to 
him  in  love  or  in  law.  Men  will  sooner  be  lost  than  trust  their  God.  3,  When  any 
receive  the  gospel  it  is  a  work  of  grace — "  the  arm  of  the  Lord  is  revealed  "  ;  but 
when  they  refuse  it  it  is  their  own  sin — "  they  have  not  obeyed  the  gospel."   I.  The 

GOSPEL   COMES  TO   MEN  WITH  THE   FORCE    OF  A  COMMAND.       It  is  UOt  Optional  tO  men  tO 

accept  or  refuse  it  at  pleasure  (Acts  xvii.  30  ;  Mark  i.  6).  To  refuse  to  believe  is  to 
incur  great  sin  (John  xvi.  8).  There  is  a  death  penalty  attached  to  disobedience 
(Mark  xvi.  16).  It  is  so  put — 1.  To  secure  the  honour  of  God.  It  is  not  the  offer 
of  an  equal  to  an  equal,  but  of  the  great  God  to  a  condemned  sinner.  2,  To 
embolden  the  proclaimer  of  it.  The  minister  now  speaks  boldly  with  his  Master's 
authority.  3.  To  remind  him  of  his  obligations.  Bepentance  and  faith  are 
natural  duties  from  which  the  gospel  does  not  exonerate  a  man,  although  it  blesses 
him  by  bestowing  them  upon  him.  4.  To  encourage  the  hnmble  seeker.  He  must 
be  at  full  Uberty  to  believe  in  Jesus,  since  he  is  commanded  to  do  so,  and  threatened 
if  he  does  not  do  so.  5.  To  suggest  to  men  the  urgent  duty  of  seeing  to  their  soul's 
welfare.  Suicide,  whether  of  the  body  or  of  the  soul,  is  always  a  great  crime.  To 
neglect  the  great  salvation  is  a  grave  offence.  The  gospel  is  set  forth  as  a  feast,  to 
which  men  are  bound  to  come,  under  penalty  of  the  King's  displeasure  (Matt.  xxii. 
1-7).  The  prodigal  was  right  in  returning  to  his  father ;  and  if  he  was  right  in 
doing  so,  so  would  each  one  of  us  be  in  doing  the  same.  II.  What,  then,  are  the 
CLAIMS  OF  THE  GOSPEL  TO  OBEDIENCE?  1.  The  authority  of  the  sender.  Whatever 
God  commands,  man  is  under  bonds  to  do.  2.  The  motive  of  the  sender.  Love 
shines  in  the  gospel  command,  and  no  man  should  slight  infinite  love.  To  refuse 
to  obey  the  gospel  of  salvation  is  an  insult  to  Divine  love.  3.  The  great  gift  of  the 
sender  :  He  has  given  us  His  only  begotten  Son.  To  refuse  Jesus  is  a  high  affront 
to  measureless  love.  4.  The  reasonableness  of  the  demand  of  the  sender.  Should 
not  men  believe  their  God  and  trust  their  Saviour?  5.  The  earnestness  of  the 
sender.  His  whole  heart  is  in  the  gospel.  Note  the  high  position  which  the  scheme 
of  salvation  occupies  in  the  esteem  of  God.  Shall  we  not  obey  an  appeal  put  before 
us  with  such  energy  of  compassion  ?  Ask  your  own  consciences  whether  you  do 
right  to  refuse  or  neglect  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God.  Ask  those  who  are  now 
saved  what  they  think  of  their  long  unbelief.  Do  not  incur  a  world  of  regrets  in 
after  years  by  long  delays.  Do  not  jeopardise  your  souls  by  refusing  the  gospel. 
III.  What  ib  the  obedience  required  by  the  gospel  ?  Not  mere  hearing,  credit- 
ing, liking,  professing,  or  proclaiming ;  but  a  hearty  obedience  to  its  commands. 
It  claims — 1.  Faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  2.  Renunciation  of  self-righteous- 
nesB  and  confession  of  guilt.  3.  Bepentance  and  practical  quittance  of  sin.  4. 
Disoipleship  under  the  Lord  Jesus ;  and  this  means  obedience  both  to  His  teach- 
ing and  His  example.  5.  Public  confession  of  His  name,  in  His  own  way, 
namelj,    by   baptism.      Conclusion :    If   yon   refuse    to    obey  the   gospel    your 


CHAP,  x.]  ROMANS.  881 

hearts  will  harden  to  a  deeper  unbelief.  Others  will  obtain  the  blessing  which 
you  refuse ;  and  this  will  deepen  your  own  condemnation  (chap.  x.  19).  You 
will  die  in  your  sins,  with  your  blood  on  your  own  heads.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
An  incredible  rumour : — About  700  b.c.  there  was  a  great  revival  in  Israel.  The 
songs  of  pure  worship  were  heard  again  in  the  temple,  and  the  people  bowed  at  the 
altars  of  Jehovah.  This  return  to  truth  and  righteousness  was,  however,  merely 
temporary.  It  was  as  the  flashing  of  Northern  Lights  :  the  returning  darkness  was 
deeper  than  ever.  King  and  people  went  back  to  their  abominations,  and  the 
prophet  disappeared  in  the  gloom  of  the  gathering  night,  uttering  this  sad  lament, 
"  Who  hath  believed  our  report  ?  and  to  whom  is  the  arm  of  the  Lord  revealed?  " 
Seven  hundred  years  went  by,  and  around  the  spur  of  Mount  Olivet  passed  a  pro- 
cession on  its  way  to  the  Holy  City.  "  Hosanna  !  Hosanna  to  the  Son  of  David  I  " 
cried  those  that  went  before  and  those  that  followed  after.  Jesus  entered  the  temple, 
and  from  the  porch  where  Isaiah  had  vainly  besought  the  people  to  repent  and 
believe  He  preached  the  glorious  gospel.  But  in  Him  there  was  no  form  nor  come- 
liness that  men  should  desire  Him.  The  heart  of  the  people  was  in  no  wise  changed, 
as  Esaias  had  written,  "Who  hath  believed  our  report?  and  to  whom  is  God's  arm 
revealed  ?  "  When  all  was  over  and  the  glorious  work  had  been  verified  by  the 
Saviour's  triumph  over  death,  Paul,  writing  to  the  people  of  Kome,  bids  them  believe 
that  their  salvation  is  near;  he  would  have  them  rejoice  in  the  good  news  of 
deliverance  from  sin.  Yet  still  the  message  was  rejected,  and  the  apostle  finds 
utterance  for  his  disappointment  in  the  prophet's  words,  "  Who  hath  believed  our 
report?  and  to  whom  is  the  arm  of  the  Lord  revealed?  "  And  here  am  I,  eighteen 
hundred  years  after,  preaching  the  same  gospel.  Has  human  nature  changed  in 
the  meantime?  There  are  multitudes  who  still  reject  the  offer  of  redemption  in 
Jesus  Christ.  What  is  this  report  which  the  people  so  persistently  reject?  It  is 
the  story  of  God's  intervention  in  behalf  of  our  ruined  race.  The  greatest  blunder 
that  a  human  soul  can  ever  make  is  to  refuse  the  proffer  of  salvation  in  Jesus  Christ. 
And  pride  is  at  the  bottom  of  it.  I.  Pride  of  intellect.  We  all  know  something, 
and  none  knows  over-much.  "  A  httle  learning  is  a  dangerous  thing."  The  temp- 
tation is  to  reject  everything  which  does  not  fall  within  the  grasp  of  reason .  Obser  v  z 
some  of  the  fundamental  facts  of  the  gospel  over  which  we  stumble  because  they 
baffle  us.  1.  The  manger.  Not  for  a  moment  must  it  be  supposed  that  a  finite 
mind  can  comprehend  the  mystery  of  the  Incarnation.  That,  however,  is  absolutely 
no  reason  at  all  why  we  should  reject  it.  2,  The  Cross.  How  can  the  innocent 
suffer  for  the  guilty  ?  How  can  the  Infinite  God  bear  the  sins  of  His  creatures  ? 
How  can  justice  be  satisfied  by  vicarious  pain?  But  the  mystery  of  God's  vicarious 
death  in  our  behalf  is  really  no  more  incredible  than  the  lower  but  like  mystery  of  a 
mother's  love.  And  a  mother's  love  is  the  commonest  thing  in  the  world.  3.  The 
open  sepulchre.  He  that  was  dead  is  alive  again.  This  also  is  repugnant  to  our 
reason.  And  yet  life  out  of  death,  the  mystery  of  mysteries,  is  all  around  us  and 
ever  forcing  itself  upon  us.  II.  Mokal  pride.  The  worst  of  us  thinks  moderately 
well  of  himself.  1.  The  suggestion  of  sin  is  abhorrent  to  us.  It  disturbs  our 
equanimity ;  it  troubles  our  sleep.  Christ  tears  away  the  turf  from  our  assumption 
of  virtue  and  exposes  a  graveful  of  "  dead  men's  bones  and  uncleanness."  Little 
wonder  that  a  sinner  will  have  none  of  it.  2.  We  do  not  like  the  notion  of 
repentance.  We  aU  would  kUl  John  the  Baptist  could  we  catch  him.  3.  The 
doctrine  of  free  grace  is  repugnant  to  us.  We  would  cheerfully  pay  ;  but  Crcesus 
himself  could  not,  with  all  his  generous  possessions,  buy  one  of  the  clusters  from 
the  king's  vineyard .  We  would  be  glad  to  suffer  if  suffering  could  expiate  the  mis- 
lived  past ;  but  we  cannot.  Christ  has  suffered  once  for  all.  What  then  remains  ? 
How  shall  a  sinner  be  saved  ?  By  simply  accepting  the  proffer  of  pardon  and  life. 
He  that  believeth  shall  be  saved.  Is  this  all  ?  Ay ;  and  it  is  the  slightness  of  it 
that  offends  us.  We  must  become  nothing  in  the  presence  of  Christ,  to  the  end 
that  Christ  may  become  everything  to  us.  There  are  two  concluding  thoughts.  (1) 
The  report  that  God  has  loved  us  and  given  Himself  for  us  is  true.  This  is  the 
news,  the  god-spel,  the  glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  God.  (2)  And  if  it  were  not 
true,  stiU  let  us  cherish  it.  If  it  be  only  a  fond  delusion,  let  as  in  any  case  con- 
tinue in  it.  If  bat  a  dream,  let  no  rude  hand  or  unkind  voice  awake  as.  If  there 
is  no  God,  no  Almighty  Friend  to  care  for  this  world  and  its  suffering  creatures,  still 
let  us  dream  of  a  kind  Providence  and  mnrmur  in  our  sleep,  •*  Abba  Father."  But 
the  gospel  is  true.  We  speak  that  we  do  know  and  testify  that  we  have  seen.  God's 
arm  hath  been  made  bare  for  us.  (D.  J.  Burrell,  D.D.)  The  gospelreport ; — I.  The 
sosPKL  IS  A  BEPOBT.    1.  It  is  uot  a  uew  report.    It  is  that  which  was  first  heard  by 


382  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  X. 

our  first  parents,  "  Thou  shalt  bruise  his  head."    It  is  the  same  which  was  received 
by  the  patriarchs  and  prophets,  of  whom  it  is  said,  "  These  all  died  in  faith."    It 
is  the  same  which  began  to  be  made  by  Christ,  when  in  the  fulness  of  time  He 
brought  life  and  immortality  to  light  by  the  gospel.     Novelty  is  sometimes  pleaded 
against  the  preachers  of  the  gospel.    There  is,  indeed,  a  sense  in  which  it  is  new ; 
its  excellence  can  be  known  only  by  experience.     2.  But,  if  it  be  not  new,  it  is  full 
of  truth.    Your  attention  might  perhaps  be  excited  by  a  report  that  is  not  true,  as 
some  of  yon  may  have  been  excited  by  the  mimicry  of  the  stage,  or  as  others  may 
have  poured  tears  of  sensibility  over  a  romance.    But  all  is  truth,  all  is  reality  here. 
3.  But  supposing  it  to  be  true,  is  it  interesting?    Is  this  report  an  important  one? 
Yes,  it  is  as  good  as  it  is  true,  as  true  as  it  is  good.    There  is  something  striking 
in  the  scheme  of  the  gospel.    Infinite  wisdom  is  displayed  in  it,  infinite  grace  is 
manifested  in  it;   it  is  infinitely  glorious  in  its  effects.     Drop  it  in  a  town,  in 
a  village,  in  a  family,  its  influence  will  be  soon  felt.    It  does  more  than  all  the 
wisdom  of    the  senate — than  all    the    maxims    of    philosophers — than   all    the 
power  of  armies.     II.  This  repobt  is  connected  with  faith.    Else  it  is  made 
in  vain.     The  complaint  is,  "  Who  hath  believed  our  report  ?  "    I  do  not  mean 
a  family  faith,  for  the  exercise  of  which   a  man   can   assign  no  other  reason 
than  that  his  father  believed  so  before  him.      Nor  do  I  mean  a  geographical 
faith,  by  which   a  man  makes  a  profession  of  Christianity  merely  because  he 
lives  in  a  Christian  country.    I  speak  of  genuine  faith.     This  is  a  Divine  prin- 
ciple, and  it  produces  Divine  effects.    It  is  of  the  operation  of  the  Spirit,  and  it  is 
always  accompanied  by  proper  fruits.     Wherever  the  gospel  report  is  carried,  it 
carries  the  obligation  to  believe  it,  for  there  is — 1.  Sufficiency  of  object.    Christ, 
who  was  "  made  sin  for  us,  though  He  knew  no  sin,"  and  who  is  as  willing  as  He 
is  able,  and  as  able  as  He  is  willing,  "to  save  to  the  uttermost."    2.  A  sufficiency 
of  authority  to  warrant  all  that  the  sinner  expects.     The  Saviour  came  to  seek  and 
to  save  sinners.    And  is  not  this  your  character  ?     3.  A  sufficiency  of  invitation. 
The  language  of  this  report  is,  "  Come."     The  Old  Testament  says  "  Come  " — 
"  Come,  and  let  us  reason  together,"  &c.      "  Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth,"  <fec. 
The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  says,  "Come" — "If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  to  Me 
and  drink" — "Come  unto  Me,  all  that  labour,"  &c.      "And  the  Spirit  and  the 
Bride  say,  Come,"  &c.     (W.  Mann,  A.M.)        Man's  treatment  of  the  gospel: — I. 
This  quotation  is  regarded  by  Dean  Vaughan  as  the  citing  of  a  paeallel  cask. 
"  The  gospel  is  sent  to  all ;  but "  (it  may  be  objected)  "  not  all  obey.     It  is  true. 
That  complaint  is  as  old  as  Isaiah's  time :  who  believed  ?    This  failure  did  not  stop 
Isaiah's  utterance,  nor  is  the  same  experience  any  argument  against  the  universal 
proclamation  of  God's  message  now."     II.   Dr.  Hodge  considers  it  as  a  peoof. 
"  The  complaint  of  the  prophet  was  not  confined  to  the  men  of  his  generation.    It 
had  reference  mainly  to  the  general  rejection  of  the  gospel,  especially  by  the  theo- 
cratical  people.      'Christ  came  unto  His  own,  and  His  own  received  Him  not.' 
And  this  was  predicted  of  old."        Hearing  and  hearkening: — I.  You  have  all 
HEABD.      These  are  the   days  in  which  knowledge  is  increased  in   the    earth, 
and  many  run  to  and  fro.     The   Maories  of  New  Zealand  have  heard  of  a 
Saviour's  love,   and  many  of  them  have  rejoiced  in  it  believingly.      Through- 
out the  world  the  gospel  is  winning  its  widening  way,  and  on  the  wings   of 
mighty  love   it   flies,   scattering   its   treasures  in  its  flight.      But,   apart    alto- 
gether from  the  condition  of  the  heathen  world,  the  fact  remains  that  all  of  you 
have  heard  the  gospel.    I  talk  to  one  who,  though  he  sits  in  darkness  still,  cannot 
plead  that  no  day-star  has  arisen.     You  remember,  doubtless,  the  touching  story  of 
the  dying  gipsy  boy  who,  being  visited  by  a  lady  who  told  him  of  Jesus,  the  Saviour 
of  sinners,  poured  this  doleful  lament  into  the  missionary's  ears,  "  Nobody  ever  told 
me  1    Nobody  ever  told  me !  "    He  died,  muttering  words  which  to  his  mother  were 
altogether  unintelligible,  but  which  the  good  lady  understood;  for,  as  his  spirit 
passed  away,  he  shook  his  head  and  wept  bitter  tears,  saying,  "  Nobody  ever  told 
me  I  "    My  friends,  you  cannot  make  that  excuse  before  the  throne  of  God,  for  you 
have  all  heard  the  gospel.     II.  Let  me  try  to  show  you  the  differencb  between 
heabing  and  obeyino.   The  fact  that  the  apostle  laments  that  they  did  not  all  obey, 
implies  that  some  did.     Wherever  the  gospel  is  preached  some  will  receive  the 
truth  in  the  love  of  it.    But,  alas,  I  must  confess  that  in  New  Zealand,  as  well  as 
in  Old  England,  there  are  many  who,  though  they  hear  it,  do  not  hearken  to  it.    I 
will  try  to  show  you  the  difference,    We  have  in  the  Colonies  a  custom  in  connection 
with  the  Fire  Brigade  which  will  illustrate  my  point.     The  city  is  divided  into 
numbered  wards,  and  when  the  alarm  has  been  sounded,  the  bell  toUs  out  the 


CHAi.  X.]  ROMANS.  888 

number  of  the  ward  in  which  the  conflagration  has  occurred.  By  this  arrangement 
those  who  are  from  home,  attending  a  service  or  visiting  their  friends,  are  informed 
of  the  locality  of  the  fire.     Suppose  the  system  could  be  amplified,  so  that  every 
street  and  house  were  indicated  ;  what  eager  listening  there  would  be  I     When  the 
bell  had  finished  clanging  its  alarm,  would  not  every  householder  count  the  strokes  ? 
and  he  who  heard  the  number  of  his  house  sounded  out,  would  have  wings  to  his 
heels  immediately,  and  rush  away  to  save  his  children  and  his  goods  from  the  fiery 
element.     Now,  it  is  when  the  gospel  comes  home  to  a  man  like  that — when  he 
hears  his  number  rung  out,  and  feels  that  his  soul  is  in  danger  of  eternal  burning 
— when  the  finger  of  God  points  at  him  as  Nathan's  did  at  David,  and  a  stern  voice 
declares  "Thou  art  the  man" — then  it  is  that  he  has  given  up  hearing  for  hearken- 
ing, and  hearkening  becomes  equivalent  to  obeying.      Then  he  hastens  to  the 
Saviour,  saying,  "  I  flee  unto  Thee  to  hide  me."    Perhaps  another  illustration  will 
make  this  clearer  still.     There  is  a  large  crowd  in  the  street,  and  I  hear  the  bell- 
man's ringing,  and  his  stentorian  voice  crying  out,  "  Oh  yes!  oh  yesl  oh  yes!"    He 
proceeds  to  announce  that  as  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  are  perishing  for  lack  of 
bread,  and  shivering  for  want  of  clothing,  certain  friends  have  opened  a  soup  kitchen 
yonder,  and  others  in  another  place  are  giving  blankets  and  clothes  away.     The 
starving,  shivering  people  listen  with  all-eager  interest.     Oh,  what  glad  tidings  it 
is  to  them — bread  enough  and  to  spare  I     "  Oh,"  they  say,  "  this  is  just  the  thing 
for  us."     No,  they  do  not  stop  to  say  that.     Away  they  go,  without  comment,  to 
receive  the  bounty.     They  listen  first,  and  then  tbey  hearken.     They  no  sooner 
hear  than  they  obey.    But,  while  the  crowd  was  listening  to  the  bellman,  a  fine 
lady  in  a  grand  carriage  said  to  the  coachman,  "  John,  whnt  is  the  matter  there? 
Just  pull  up  a  minute.   I  would  like  to  see  what  is  wrong."  Thereupon  the  splendid 
equipage  neared  the  crowd,  but  did  not  remain,  for  her  lady.^hip  was  disgusted  as 
soon  as  she  saw  so  many  poor,  hungry,  ill-clothed  folk,  and  said,  peevishly,  "Drive 
on,  John  ;  drive  home."     She  did  not  want  any  soup  and  blankets — not  she.     She 
could  readily  have  spared  half  of  hers  for  the  poor  and  needy,  so  of  course  she  does 
not  obey  the  bellman.     I  am  persuaded  that  the  great  reason  why  there  are  so  few 
hearkeners  among  so  many  hearers  of  the  glad  tidings  is  that  they  do  not  realise 
their  necessities.     III.  Now,  lastly,  let  me  urge  you  to  obey.    You  have  heard  the 
tidings.   You  cannot  doubt  that  it  is  glad  tidings.    Procrastinate  no  longer.    Accept 
the  joyful  tidings  and  the  Saviour  of  whom  the  tidings  speak.     Why  do  so  many 
remain  disobedient  to  this  heavenly  vision?    Either  they  do  not  realise  their  need, 
or  else  they  do  not  recognise  the  richness  of  the  supply.     It  must  be  one  or  the 
other.     Stretch  yourselves  in  imagination  on  a  couch.     You  are  lying  half  asleep 
in  a  room  on  the  wall  of  which  is  a  simple  picture.    At  a  cottage  door  a  poor  way- 
farer sits  upon  a  fallen  log.    He  looks  hungry  and  tired  ;  and  just  in  the  porchway 
there  stands  a  kind-looking  country  woman  with  a  baby  in  her  arms,  and  a  little 
child  beside  her  with  a  basin  of  porridge  or  of  soup  in  its  hands.    The  little  one  is 
being  taught  by  its  mother  to  be  good  and  kind  to  the  poor.    How  is  it  that  want 
«nd  weariness  do  not  eagerly  accept  kindness  and  refreshment?    The  answer  is 
found  in  the  fact  that  it  is  not  real  life  at  all ;  it  is  only  a  picture.    The  man  has 
no  real  needs,  he  is  not  actually  hungry,  nor  is  it  a  basin  of  porridge  at  all,  and  the 
smile  on  the  woman's  face  is  only  pictured.     There  is  nothing  real  in  all  of  it,  or 
the  dinner  would  soon  be  demolished,  the  famished  fed,  and  the  giver  gratified. 
There  are  some  who  do  not  accept  the  offered  mercy  because  its  glorious  reality 
has  never  dawned   upon  them;   nor  are  they  aware    of   the    reality  of    their 
need,   though  they  may  have  a  dreamy  sense  of  the  fact  that  something  is 
wanting.      {Thos.   Spurgeon.)         Man's   treatment  of   the  gospel,   indifference: — 
How  many  hear  the  gospel  with  unconcern  1    A  telegram  on  the  Exchange — they 
read  it  with  both  their  eyes — will  there  be  a  rise  or  fall  of  stocks  ?    An  article  from 
which  they  may  judge  of  the  general  current  of  trade — how  they  devour  it  with 
their  minds,  they  suck  in  the  meaning,  and  then  go  and  practise  what  they  have 
gathered  from  it.    A  sermon  heard,  and  lo,  the  minister  is  judged  as  to  how  he 
preached  it — as  if  a  man  reading  a  telegram  should  say  the  capital  letter  was  not 
well  inked  on  the  press,  or  the  dot  to  the  "  i  "  had  dropped  off  the  letter ;  or  as  if 
a  man  reading  an  article  of  business  should  simply  criticise  the  style  of  the  article 
instead  of  seeking  to  get  at  its  meaning,  and  act  upon  its  advice.    Oh,  how  men 
will  hear  and  think  it  to  be  right,  to  be  the  height  of  perfection  to  say  they  liked  or 
disapproved  of  the  sermon  !     As  if  the  God-sent  preacher  cared  one  doit  whether 
you  did  or  did  not  like  his  sermon,  his  business  being  not  to  please  your  tastes,  bat 
^  save  your  souls ;  not  to  win  your  approbation,  bat  to  win  yoar  hearts  for  Jesos, 


384  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  x 

and  bring  you  to  be  reconciled  to  God.  (C.  H.  Sturgeon.)  Indifference:  the 
cause  of  discouragement : — "  Why  do  I  sit  as  if  I  were  asleep  when  I  play  ?  "  said 
Bubinstein,  in  reply  to  a  question.  "  I  will  gladly  tell  you  how  that  is.  Some  five 
years  ago  I  gave  a  concert  in  London.  My  audience  seemed  very  interested,  and  I 
myself  was  well  disposed.  As  I  was  playing  Beethoven's  '  Appassionata,'  without 
thinking  I  looked  around,  and  there,  at  the  other  end  of  the  piano,  I  saw  a  lady 
gossiping  as  fast  as  possible !  It  was  like  a  douche  of  ice-water.  I  cl  sed  my  eyes 
at  once,  and  since  then  I  have  never  dared  to  even  cast  a  glance  at  an  audience." 
Indifference  no  reason  for  despair: — A  minister  with  a  large  congregation  came 
home  one  day  in  great  trouble  and  told  his  wife  that  he  was  almost  out  of  heart, 
and  felt  very  much  like  resigning  his  place  and  giving  up  his  work.  "  And  what 
makes  you  feel  that  way?"  responded  his  wife.  "Well,"  said  the  minister, 
•'  everything  seems  to  be  going  wrong.  It  is  so  difiBcult  to  keep  people  interested 
in  religion,  and  so  many  seem  to  be  almost  wholly  indifferent."  "  So  you  would 
like  to  have  everybody  and  everything  just  right,  would  you  ?  "  said  his  wife. 
"  That  is  it."  "  Very  weU,"  continued  the  wife,  "  then  you  could  resign  ;  then 
your  work  would  not  be  needed.  But  as  things  are  you  should  hold  firmly  your 
place,  for  the  reason  you  have  given  is  just  why  you  should  work  on."  Indiffe- 
rence: its  prevalence: — Is  earnest  faith  declining?  The  tendency  seems  to  be 
decidedly  in  this  direction.  Even  in  secular  affairs,  The  Times  teUs  us,  "  Nothing 
is  more  remarkable  than  the  complete  extinction  of  that  keen  interest,  that  intense 
faith,  and  that  eager  hope,  which  manifestly  inspired  the  politicians  of  half  a 
century  ago,  and  made  their  influence  felt  among  all  classes  of  the  community." 
In  religious  circles  it  is  common  to  hear  comments  on  the  indifference  of  a  large 
number  of  persons  who  go  to  church,  the  absence  from  their  minds  of  anything  like 
powerful  convictions,  and  the  e  sy  nonchalance  with  which  they  pass  by  great  and 
solemn  inquiries,  the  importance  of  which  used  to  be  felt  by  nearly  all.  Ministers 
of  the  gospel,  therefore,  who  have  the  responsibility  of  guiding  the  Church,  have 
need  to  remember  that  if  they  would  see  an  earnest  faith  on  the  part  of  their 
people,  nothing  is  more  necessary  than  that  their  own  hearts  be  pervaded  by  it, 
and  if  they  would  see  that  faith  controlling  other  men's  lives  it  must  very  really 
control  their  own.  (A.  M.  Fairbairn,  D.D.)  Indifference:  the  prevalent :— The 
grossest  form  of  indifference  is  cynicism.  When  one  hears  certain  men  talk  of 
Christ  and  His  religion  with  a  half- patronising  tone,  or  reads  their  writings  in 
which  His  character  and  works  are  subjected  to  a  criticism  that  is  simply  insolent, 
one  is  appalled  by  such  flagrant  indecency.  This  is  an  indifference  that  is  not 
common,  however,  but  yet  its  infection  may  quickly  spread  if  ever  the  poison  of  a 
profane  irreverence  has  prepared  any  section  of  society  for  its  reception.  The 
indifference  that  is  fashionable  is  formalist.  There  are  thousands  to  whom  religion 
is  merely  the  adaptation  of  a  certain  conventional  habit  of  respectable  observance. 
They  are  Christians  because  they  live  in  Christendom  ;  Protestants  because  they 
live  in  England ;  Church  people  because  their  parents  were  so.  In  church  there 
is  an  indifference  about  the  service,  the  prayers,  the  sermon.  It  is  a  ceremony 
performed,  not  for  God's  glory,  but  for  custom's  sake,  as  "  the  right  thing  to  do," 
not  because  it  is  a  privilege  and  a  joy.  And  from  one  Sunday  to  the  next,  unless 
there  is  a  custom  of  family  prayers,  the  question  of  religion  simply  never  once 
strikes  them  as  forming  any  part  of  every-day  life.  The  service,  the  preacher,  the 
doctrine,  the  style,  may  be  occasionally  discussed  in  intervals  between  other  topics 
of  the  day — politics,  amusements,  the  weather — but  that  is  all.  About  the  things 
of  Christ  and  of  God  there  is  the  most  supreme  indifference.  Across  the  smooth 
Burface  of  that  mental  and  spiritual  unconcern  not  a  ripple  is  ever  stirred  by  any 
breath  of  Ufe  from  above,  or  any  blast  of  terror  from  beneath.     {R.  F.  L.  Blunt.) 

Ver.  17.  So  then  faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  Word  of  God. — 
How  can  I  obtain  faith .» — If  I  am  thirsty,  how  shall  I  quench  my  thirst  ?  By  a 
draught  of  water.  But  in  what  way  can  I  obtain  water  ?  It  is  enough  to  tell  me 
to  go  to  the  tap  or  the  fountain.  There  is  no  need  to  explain  that  the  water  is 
supplied  by  a  reservoir,  having  been  first  drawn  from  the  river,  which  received 
it  from  the  clouds.  To  the  thirsty  all  you  want  to  say  is,  "  There's  the  water, 
drink."  A  man  is  hungry,  and  he  asks  you,  "  How  can  I  get  bread?  "  "  Go  to 
the  baker's,"  you  say.  If  he  wants  to  know  how  bread  is  obtained,  we  can  give  it 
to  him  at  another  time.  And  when  you  are  dealing  with  an  anxious  person,  it 
will  sufl5ce  to  say,  "  Faith  cometh  by  hearing " ;  further  information  can  be 
supplied  under  happier  circumstances.    L  The  wat  by  which  faith  comes  to 


CHAP,  X.]  ROMANS.  88S 

MEN.  "By  hearing."  1.  Negatively.  It  does  not  come — (1)  By  hereditary  descent. 
The  heirs  of  salvation  are  born,  "  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  but  of 
God."  That  which  is  bom  of  the  flesh  is  flesh,  and  nothing  more.  (2)  By  sacraments. 
Is  not  faith  a  concomitant  of  regeneration  ?  and  what  is  that  regeneration  worth 
which  leaves  a  person  an  unbeliever  ?  Faith  cannot  be  sprinkled  upon  us,  nor 
can  we  be  immersed  in  it.  It  is  not  to  be  poured  into  us  from  a  chalice,  nor 
generated  in  us  by  consecrated  bread.  (3)  By  feeling.  Till  certain  men  kave 
felt  what  they  have  heard  described  in  religious  biography  they  cannot  believe. 
You  may  get  the  best  feeling  from  faith,  but  you  will  be  long  before  you  will  find 
any  faith  worth  having  from  frames  and  feelings.  (4)  By  dreams  and  visions. 
The  notion  is  still  current  that  if  you  dream  of  seeing  Jesus,  or  if  a  passage  of 
Scripture  strikes  you,  or  if  you  imagine  that  you  hear  a  voice  speaking  to  you,  you 
are  then  a  believer.  Now,  though  you  should  see  all  the  angels  in  heaven,  it 
would  not  prove  that  you  would  go  to  heaven,  any  more  than  my  having  seen  the 
Pope's  bodyguard  would  be  a  proof  that  I  shall  be  made  a  Cardinal.  Moreover, 
men  saw  Christ,  and  yet  blasphemed  Him.  (5)  Through  the  eloquence,  earnest- 
ness, or  any  other  good  quality  of  the  preacher.  If  so,  being  born  of  the  power  of 
the  flesh,  it  will  die,  and  so  prove  itself  unlike  the  faith  which  springs  from  the 
incorruptible  word  of  God,  for  that  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever.  2.  Positively  : 
"Faith  cometh  by  hearing,"  Sometimes  faith  has  come  into  men's  minds  by 
hearing — (1)  The  simple  statement  of  the  gospel.  All  some  have  wanted  has  been 
merely  to  be  informed  of  the  way  of  salvation.  (2)  Of  the  suitability  of  the  gospel 
to  the  individual  case.  While  some  have  heard  it  preached  as  a  gospel  for  sinners, 
they  have  felt  that  they  were  certainly  among  that  class.  (3)  Of  the  condescending 
pity  and  the  melting  love  of  Jesus.  When  such  texts  have  been  preached  on — 
"  This  Man  receiveth  sinners,"  "  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour,"  &c.,  that  strain 
has  touched  the  heart,  and  led  the  most  hardened  to  believe  in  a  Saviour  so  kind 
to  the  undeserving.  (4)  Of  its  authority.  There  are  persons  who,  when  they  have 
heard  the  gospel,  have  not  at  first  believed  it,  but  if  the  minister  has  been  led  to 
show  that  God  has  set  His  sanction  upon  it,  they  have  yielded  and  given  over  all 
further  question.  (5)  Of  the  veracity  of  the  sacred  writers.  (6)  The  explanation 
of  the  gospel.  When  the  preacher  takes  up  one  by  one  the  soul  difficulties  which 
ktep  a  man  from  looking  to  Christ,  and  when  a  man  shows  that  all  his  help  for 
salvation  is  laid  upon  one  that  is  mighty,  it  has  often  happened  that  faith  has 
come  through  the  hearing  of  such  an  explanatory  word.  (7)  The  gospel  preached 
with  peculiar  soul-revealing  pointedness.  Eemember  the  Samaritan  woman. 
(8)  The  experience  of  those  who  have  tasted  the  word  of  life  ;  when  the  preacher 
tells  how  he  trusted  in  Jesus,  and  found  peace  ;  when  he  is  able  to  point  to  others 
who  have  felt  the  same,  then  conviction  and  faith  are  wrought  in  the  mind.  To 
set  the  whole  matter  clearly:  Suppose  you  are  labouring  under  a  very  serious 
disease,  and  a  physician  professes  to  heal  you,  how  would  you  get  faith  in  him  ? 
By  hearing.  You  hear  him  speak,  and  you  perceive  that  he  understands  your  case, 
for  he  describes  exactly  all  your  symptoms.  He  next  describes  to  you  as  much  of 
the  method  of  cure  as  you  can  comprehend.  Then  you  inquire  as  to  the  man's 
character ;  you  find  that  he  is  a  skilful  practitioner.  Moreover,  suppose  that  he 
does  everything  gratis,  moved  only  by  a  kind  desire  to  remove  pain  and  save 
life.  But  if,  in  addition,  he  shows  you  his  case-book,  and  bids  you  read  case  after 
case  similar  to  your  own  in  which  he  has  effected  perfect  cure,  and  if  some  of 
these  are  your  own  acquaintances,  you  will  not  insult  him  by  saying,  "  I  wish  I 
could  beheve  you."  In  the  same  way  faith  in  Christ  comes.  II.  The  obsteuctions 
WHICH  OFTEN  BLOCK  UP  THIS  WAT.  1.  A  want  of  intention.  Many  persons  come 
to  hear,  but  they  have  no  wish  to  be  led  into  faith.  Like  the  butterflies  which  flit 
from  flower  to  flower,  they  extract  no  honey  because  they  come  not  for  such  a 
purpose  ;  while  the  bees  dive  into  the  cups  and  bells  of  the  flowers,  and  come  up 
loaded  with  their  luscious  food.  2.  A  want  of  attention.  Sleepy  hearers  are  not 
likely  to  be  led  to  faith.  Wandering  hearts  lose  the  benefit  of  the  truth,  and  vain 
minds  trifle  away  the  privilege  of  a  gospel  ministry.  3.  A  want  of  candour.  If  a 
man  hears  with  a  prejudiced  heart  he  is  not  likely  to  be  convinced.  4.  The  want  of 
after  meditation.  The  juryman  who  is  most  likely  to  get  at  the  truth  of  a  given 
case  will  be  the  man  who,  having  heard  attentively,  takes  the  notes  of  the  evidence, 
weighs  it,  and  endeavours  to  sift  out  the  truth.  So  when  you  hear  us  preach,  sift 
the  sermon  afterwards,  pick  holes  in  it  if  you  Uke,  but  do  search  into  the  truth, 
and  be  not  content  till  you  find  it.  Here  is  a  bag,  and  I  drop  into  it  pound  after 
pound,  but  I  find  that  the  bag  is  just  as  empty  as  before;  the  reason  is,  there  ave 
VOL.  II.  26 


886  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap.  X. 

holes  in  it,  and  the  money  drops  through.  Too  many  hearers  are  as  a  bag  full  of 
holes,  and  golden  sermons  will  not  bless  them  because  they  wilfully  forget  all. 
in.  The  impobtance  that  faith  should  come  to  us  by  this  wat.  If  you  have 
been  a  hearer  and  faith  has  not  come  to  you,  you  are,  this  moment,  in  the  gall  of 
bitterness  and  in  the  bonds  of  iniquity.  The  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  you.  {G.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The  faith  hearing  the  word  of  God  : — I.  What  is  faith  ?  1.  An 
historical  (James  ii  19).  2.  A  dogmatical  (Acts  viii.  13,  33;  Luke  iv.  41).  3.  A 
temporary  (Luke  viii.  13 ;  John  v.  35).  4.  A  faith  of  miracles  (Luke  xvii.  6  , 
1  Cor.  xiii.  2).  5.  A  saving  faith  (chap.  x.  10;  Acts  xvi.  31;  1  Pet.  ii.  6). 
II.  What  is  the  wobd  by  the  heaeing  whereof  faith  comes?  1.  Not  the 
word  of  men.  2.  Not  of  angels  (Gal.  i.  8).  3.  But  of  God.  III.  What  is  meant 
BT  hearing  this  wobd  ?  Hearing  it — 1.  Bead.  2.  Expounded.  3.  Preached. 
IV.  How  IS  FAITH  WROUGHT  BY  THE  WOBD?  Not  as  by  the  principal,  but  only 
instrumental  cause.  Thus — 1.  The  minister  commissioned  by  God  speaks  it  to 
the  ear,  sometimes  of  God's  mercy,  sometimes  of  man's  duty   (2  Tim.  iv.  2). 

2.  The  ears  of  the  hearer  take  in  what  the  preacher  speaks,  and  convey  it  to 
the  understanding.  But  that  cannot  receive  it  (1  Cor.  ii.  14),  therefore — 3.  The 
Spirit  goes  along  with  the  word,  and  enables  the  understanding  to  receive  it. 
4.  The  Spirit  having  done  so  inclines  the  heart  to  embrace  it  (Phil.  ii.  18 ; 
Bom.  vii.  15 ;  Heb.  iv.  12).  V.  Use  of  eeprehension.  1.  To  those  who  think 
themselves  above  ordinances.  2.  To  those  who  will  not  come  up  to  them.  This 
doctrine  meets,  as  the  angel  did  Balaam,  with  a  drawn  sword — (1)  Such  as  will 
not  so  much  as  come  to  hear.  (2)  Such  as  will  come,  but  not  to  h(  ar,  but  out  of 
custom,  or  to  stop  the  mouth  of  a  brawling  conscience.  (3)  Such  as  wUl  come  to 
hear,  but  will  not  hear  when  they  are  come  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  31).  They  come  and 
bring  their  ears  too,  but  they  are  either  stopped  (Psa.  Iviii.  4,  5),  dull  (Matt.  xiii.  15), 
or  itching  (2  Tim.  iv.  3,  4).  (4)  Such  as  will  hear  when  they  come,  but  do  not  mind 
or  understand  what  they  hear  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  32  ;  Acts  ix.  7  ;  cf.  xxii.  9).  (5)  Such 
as  mind  what  they  hear,  but  will  not  believe  what  they  mind.  (6)  Such  as  do 
believe  what  they  mind,  but  will  not  resolve  to  practise  what  they  believe 
(Ezek.  xxxiii.).  (7)  Such  as  wUl  resolve  to  practise  what  they  believe,  but  will 
never  practise  what  they  resolve  (James  i.  23,  24).  VI.  Motives.  Consider — 
1.  Whose  word  it  is.    2.  What  a  word  it  is  (Psa.  xix.  7 ;  Bom.  i.  16  ;  James  i.  21). 

3.  What  thou  mayest  get  by  coming  to  it ;  what  thou  mayest  lose  by  staying  from 
it.  4.  The  time  will  come  when  tbou  wilt  curse  thyself  for  every  opportunity  lost, 
or  bless  God  for  every  one  embraced  (Matt,  xxiii.  39).  VII.  Directions.  1.  Before 
hearing — (1)  Consider  what  thou  art  going  about  and  whom  thou  art  going  before. 
(2)  Set  aside  all  worldly  thoughts,  as  Abrabam  his  servants,  and  Nehemiah 
(xiii.  19,  20),  especially  sins  (James  i.  21).  (3)  If  thou  wouldst  have  God  pour 
forth  His  blessings  upon  thee  in  preaching,  do  thou  pour  out  thy  spirit  before 
Him  in  prayer  (Psa.  x.  17 ;  Ixv.  2).  (a)  For  the  minister  (Bom.  xv.  20).  (b)  For 
yourselves,  that  God  would  assist  the  word  (Isa.  viii.  11).  (4)  Come — (a)  with 
an  appetite  (Matt.  v.  6 ;  Job  xxix.  23).  (6)  With  large  expectations,  (c)  With 
strong  resolutions  to  practise.  2.  In  hearing.  Hear — (1)  Beverently.  (2)  Diligently, 
with  hearts  as  well  as  ears.  (3)  Meekly  (James  i.  21).  (4)  With  faith  (Heb.  iv.  2). 
(5)  With  self-application  (Job.  v.  27).  3.  After  hearing — (1)  Meditate  (1  Tim.  iv,  15). 
(2)  Confer  with  others.  (3)  Square  thyself  according  to  it,  that  thy  life  may  be  a 
comment  on  the  sermon  (James  i.  22 ;  Matt.  vii.  24,  25).  {Bp.  Beveridge.)  The 
two  great  instruments  appointed  for  the  propagation  of  the  gospel;  and  the 
duty  of  the  Christian  public  to  keep  them  both  in  vigorous  oprration: — I. 
The  general  lesson  of  the  text.  1.  As  all  is  suspended  upon  God,  and  as 
He  reigns  with  as  supreme  a  dominion  in  the  heart  of  man  as  in  the  world 
around  us,  all  relating  to  the  salvation  of  the  soul  is  His  work.  But  on  the 
other  hand,  it  is  evident  that  though  it  be  God  alone  that  worketh,  yet  Ho 
worketh  by  instruments.  None  were  more  impressed  than  Paul  with  the 
pious  sentiment  that  all  depends  upon  God ;  yet  he  says  "  Faith  cometh  by 
hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  word  of  God."  If,  in  that  extraordinary  age,  when 
the  Author  of  nature  broke  in  upon  the  constancy  of  its  operations  by  miracles, 
one  of  His  own  inspired  messengers  does  not  overlook  the  use  of  instruments, 
it  would  ill  become  us  to  overlook  them.  2.  Now  observe  that  the  operatiou  of  the 
two  instruments  laid  before  us  in  the  text  is  somewhat  different  at  present  from 
what  it  was  in  the  days  of  the  apostles.  Those  were  the  days  of  inspiration ; 
and  faith  came  by  the  hearing  of  inspired  teachers  ;  and  hearing  came  by  the 
Word  of  God — for  the  apostles  spake  only  as  God  put  the  word  into  their  mouth. 


CHAP.  X.]  ROMANS.  887 

Bat  whatever  is  capable  of  being  spoken  is  capable  of  being  written  also ;  and 
it  was  not  long  before  the  Christian  teachers  committed  to  writing  the  doctrine 
of  salvation  ;  and  if  you  read  what  they  wrote  with  the  impression  that  it  is 
the  genuine  production  of  inspired  men,  you  are  in  circumstances  likely  for 
receiving  faith.  Now,  however,  there  is  a  change  in  one  of  the  instruments. 
Instead  of  the  messenger  delivering  the  message  in  person,  you  have  the 
substance  of  it  in  a  written  communication.  And  now  faith  comes  by  reading,  and 
reading  by  the  Word  of  God.  3.  We  are  not  to  suppose,  however,  that  reading  is 
substituted  for  hearing.  True  you  can  no  longer  hear  the  immediate  messengers 
of  heaven ;  but  you  can  hear  the  descendants  of  these  messengers.  And  although 
you  have  the  inspired  documents,  heaven  still  gives  a  saving  influence  to  the  living 
energy  of  a  human  voice.  4.  In  no  age  of  the  Church,  indeed,  does  it  appear 
that  the  one  instrument  ever  superseded  the  other.  Nehemiah  not  only  "  read 
in  the  book  of  the  law  of  God  distinctly,  but  gave  the  sense,  and  caused  the 
people  to  understand  the  reading."  And  this  reading  and  expounding  of  the  law 
from  the  days  of  Ezra  formed  a  permanent  institution  among  the  Jews.  We  meet 
with  traces  of  its  existence  in  the  New  Testament  (Acts  xiii.  14,  &c.;  Lukeiv.  16,  &c.). 
And  it  has  descended,  without  interruption,  through  all  the  ages  of  Christian 
worship.  The  apostles  deemed  it  necessary  to  leave  something  more  than  the 
written  volume  of  inspiration  behind  them.  They  left  teachers  and  overseers ; 
and  to  this  very  day,  the  readings,  and  the  explanations,  and  the  sermons  of 
Christian  pastors,  art^  superadded  to  the  silent  reading  of  Christian  people  ;  and 
both  are  found  to  be  instruments  of  mighty  operation,  for  the  edifying  of  the  body 
of  Christ.  5.  Neither  instrument  is  to  be  dispensed  with.  (1)  If  you  have  hearing 
without  reading,  you  lay  the  Church  open  to  all  the  corruptions  of  Popery.  You 
have  priests,  but  you  have  no  Bibles.  You  take  your  lesson  from  the  wisdom  of 
man,  and  throw  away  from  you  all  the  light  and  benefit  of  revelation.  Keep  fast, 
then,  by  your  Bible.  Let  not  your  faith  come  by  hearing  alone ;  but  let  your 
hearing  be  tried  by  the  Word  of  God.  Let  it  not  be  said  that  what  you 
believe  is  what  you  have  heard  merely.  (2)  But  if  you  have  reading  without 
hearing,  you  throw  away  the  benefit  of  a  public  ministry — an  institution  sanctioned 
by  the  Bible.  Though  you  have  no  knowledge  to  receive,  you  have  memories  to 
be  refreshed;  minds  which,  however  pure,  need  to  be  stirred  up  by  way  of 
remembrance.  II.  Its  application  to  the  evangelisation  of  the  world.  The 
propagation  of  the  gospel  is  a  cause  the  maintenance  of  which  consists  of  the 
proviing  of  Bibles,  and  the  providing  of  human  agents.  The  latter,  by  teaching 
them  to  read,  teaches  unlettered  people  to  use  one  of  the  instruments  of  the  text ; 
and  to  the  latter  belongs  the  exclusive  office  of  bringing  the  other  instrument  to 
bear  upon  them— the  instrument  of  hearing.  The  society  whose  office  it  is  to 
provide  the  former  is  the  Bible  Society.  The  society  whose  office  it  is  to  provide 
the  latter  instrument  is  the  Missionary  Society.  It  is  the  duty  of  a  Christian  public 
to  keep  both  instruments  in  vigorous  operation.  Each  of  these  societies  has 
mighty  claims  upon  you.  The  two  go  hand  in  hand.  The  one  ploughs  while  the 
other  sows ;  and  let  no  opposition  be  instituted  betwixt  their  claims  on  the 
generosity  of  the  public.  (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  Hear  and  live: — A  poor  man 
being  on  his  death-bed,  asked  that  the  fifty-fifth  chapter  of  Isaiah  should  be  read 
to  him.  Though  weak  and  faint,  and  full  of  pain,  yet  when  he  heard  the  words, 
"  Incline  your  ear  and  come  unto  Me  ;  hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live,"  he  gathered 
up  his  strength  to  say,  "  What  a  mercy,  sir,  that  it  is  not  '  Bead,  and  your  soul 
shall  live,'  for  if  it  had  been  I  could  not  have  been  saved,  for  you  know  I  am 
no  scholar.  But,  blessed  be  God,  it  is  '  Hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live.'  I  have 
heard  and  believed,  and  trust  I  shall  be  saved."  Poicer  to  hear,  a  blessing : — It  is 
said  that  a  beautiful  countess  of  one  of  the  Orkney  Islands  was  a  deaf  mute.  One 
day,  when  her  firstborn  child  was  a  few  months  old,  as  it  was  sleeping  in  its  cradle, 
she  softly  approached  its  side,  to  the  terror  of  the  nurse,  with  a  large  stone  in  her 
hands,  and  dropped  it  on  the  floor,  eagerly  watching  the  face  of  the  babe  to  see  the 
effect  of  the  noise.  To  the  inexpressible  joy  of  the  fond  mother's  heart  the  child 
started  and  awoke,  so  that  she  knew  it  had  the  sense  of  hearing.  She  embraced 
both  child  and  nurse,  and  wept  tears  of  gratitude  to  God  that  her  own  sad  affliction 
was  not  transmitted  to  her  offspring. 

Vers.  18-21.  But  I  say,  Have  they  not  heard?  Yes,  verily,  their  sonnd 
went  Into  all  tlie  earth. — Observe — I.  The  obiginal  application  of  these 
WOBDS — voices  in  nature.     IL   Thb  apostolic  tjsk  of  xbbm — the  multitude  of 


8S8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cnkf.  t,' 

the    preachers.      III.    The    analogy    established    between    the    natueal   and 
THE  8PIBITUAL — the  Universality  of   God's  revelation   in  nature  is  the  promise 
of  the   universal   spread   of  the  gospel.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)         Apostolic   labours 
an  evidence  of  Christian  truth : — The  general  scope  of  the  apostle  is  suflBciently 
plain.      The  Jew  is  taught  his  responsibilities  in  presence  of   the  advancing 
gospel  from  the  pages  of  his  Hebrew  Bible.     He  learns  to  contrast  the  religion 
of  the  synagogue  with  that  of  the  Church,  when  viewed  in  its  spirit,  method, 
and  end.   And  this,  not  from  the  lips  of  evangelists,  but  from  the  books  of  Leviticus 
and  Deuteronomy  (Bom.  x.  5;   Lev.  xviii.  5;   Rom.  x.  6;   Deut.  xxx.  12-14). 
Prophets  like  Isaiah  and  Joel  successively  announce  to  him  the  reward  of  faith  in 
Christ,  and  the  intimate  and  beneficent  nearness  of  the  Lord  of  all  to  all  His  true 
worshippers  (Eom.  x.  11 ;  Isa.  xxviii.  16 ;  Horn.  x.  13 ;  Joel  ii.  32),  and  by  conse- 
quence, the  abolition  of  the  Judaic  nationalism,  and  the  Catholicity  of  the  religion 
which  was  succeeding  it.    And  when  the  question  is  asked  how  there  can  be  such 
true  worship  without  faith  in  its  object,  or  faith  without  a  religious  education,  or 
this  again  without  a  message  from  heaven,  and  an  authoritative  commission  to 
proclaim  it,  the  reply  is  given  in  the  words  of  the  evangelical  prophet  {Isa.  lii.  7), 
for  whose  entranced  soul  the  intervening  centuries  have  neither  force  nor  meaning, 
and  the  distant  and  contingent  future  is  a  realised  and  present  fact.    Along  with 
the  messengers  who  announce  to  captive  Israel  the  speedy  return  of  peace  and 
freedom,  there  mingle,  in  the  prophet's  vision,  other  forms  of  apostolic  mien  and 
greatness,  and  their  footsteps  fall  on  all  the  mountains  of  the  world,  as  they  carry 
forward  the  message  which  emancipates  mankind,  and  which  proclaims  an  alliance 
between  earth  and  heaven.    Yet  more,  this  greatest  of  the  prophets  foresees  the 
partial  acceptance  of  the  gospel  as  accurately  as  he  foretells  its  universal  promulga- 
tion (Eom.  X.  16 ;  Isa.  liii.  1) :  and  prophecy  closes  around  the  Jew,  who  refuses 
belief  to  the  report  of  the  apostles,  by  describing  not  merely  the  truth  which  con- 
fronts him,  but  his  own  attitude  towards  it.     That  there  may  be  no  mistake  as  to 
the  weight  and  pressure  of  the  Jew's  responsibihty,  the  apostle  asks  in  the  text 
somewhat  abruptly,  whether  the  men  of  Israel  have  not  heard  the  gospel-message. 
And  he  answers  not  by  pointing  to  the  literal  fact,  that  already  the  messengers  of 
Christ  had  penetrated  far  and  wide  into  either  of  the  great  branches  of  the  Dispersion, 
while  Jerusalem  itself  was  the  home  and  focus  of  Christian  doctrine ;  he  quotes  a 
p=almist  who  is  singing  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  and  who  tells  how  they  speak  for 
the  glorious  Creator  in  terms  which  all  can  understand,  while  from  day  to  day  and 
age  to  age  they  hand  on  their  mighty  tradition  of  the  truth,  which  all  the  languages 
of  man  confess,  and  all  the  climes  and  regions  of  the  earth  have  heard.   The  apostle 
reads  the  history  of  the  Church  in  the  light  of  his  Master's  words :  "  Go,  teach  all 
nations."    The  intervening  centuries  count  for  nothing ;  just  as  when  we  gaze  at 
the  fixed  star,  we  do  not  ordinarily  reflect  upon  that  scintillation  of  the  rays  of  its  light 
through  almost  measureless  space  which  science  yet  reveals  to  us  in  all  its  wonder 
with  minute  precision.     And  the  apostle  sees  all  at  a  single  glance  :  he  ignores  the 
alternation  of  ebb  and  flow — the  constant  play  of  light  and  shade — which  meet  us 
in  the  actual  history  of  the  Church  ;  we  forget,  as  we  read  his  words,  that  struggle 
for  life,  maintained  for  centuries, — maintained  against  overwhelming  forces.     We 
seem  to  be  watching  a  process  which  has  all  the  beauty  and  ease  of  a  natural  move- 
ment ;  we  have  before  us  what  is  less  the  history  of  an  accomplished  and  hard-won 
triumph  than  it  is  the  spectacle  of  a  beneficent  provision  or  law  of  the  universe,  in 
which  there  is  no  struggle,  no  effort,  no  resistance,  and  in  which  the  Heavenly 
"Wisdom  already  reaches  from  one  end  to  another  mightily,  and  smoothly  and 
sweetly  ordereth  aU  things.     "  Their  sound  is  gone  out  into  all  lands,  and  their 
words  unto  the  ends  of  the  world."    And  here  are  two  points  that  demand  our  con- 
sideration.    1.  OuE  Loed's  command  and  the  pkophecy  of  His  apostle  imply  fiest 

OF  ALL  that  the  GOSPEL  WOULD  STAND  THE  TEST  OF  TIME.       Of    all  formS  of  pOWCr,  aS 

of  all  forms  of  thought  that  are  merely  human,  time  is  the  great  enemy.  No  sooner 
has  a  doctrine  or  a  system  taken  its  place  in  the  arena  of  human  thought,  than,  like 
the  ocean  which  imperceptibly  fritters  away  the  base  of  a  mountain  cliff,  time  forth- 
with begins  its  relentless  work  of  progressive  demolition.  Attain,  time  brings  with 
it  what  we  tenn  in  our  ignorance  chance ;  it  brings  combinations  of  circumstances, 
and  of  agencies  to  bear,  upon  which  no  genius  can  calculate,  and  against  which  no 
prudence  can  take  its  measures.  Once  more,  the  lapse  of  time  involves  the  liability 
to  internal  decay :  those  who  have  reached  power,  betake  themselves  to  its  enjoy- 
ment: those  who  believe  that  they  are  securely  masters  of  the  world  of  thought,  arc 
not  alive  to  the  decomposition  which  a-vaits  or  preys  upon  their  stagnant  system. 


CHAP.  X.]  ROMANS.  889 

And,  lastly,  as  the  years  pass  over  a  doctrine  or  a  system,  they  inevitably  subject 
it  to  the  decisive  test  of  opposition.  And  this  not  necessarily  because  it  has  faults 
and  failings,  but  because  it  exists,  and  by  its  existence  invites  hostile  criticism,  since 
it  drains  away  something,  however  Utile,  of  the  attention,  and  labour,  and  substance, 
which  would  but  for  the  fact  of  its  existence  be  bestowed  elsewhere,  ^^eed  I  say 
tbat  He  who  came  from  heaven  to  redeem  and  save  us  knew  what  was  before  Him. 
He  foresaw  the  coolness  which  would  succeed  to  a  first  fervour  of  welcome  to  Hia 
truth ;  He  allowed  for  the  unfavourable  conjunctions  of  circumstance,  and  for  the 
intimidation  and  the  errors  of  those  who  might  represent  Him,  and  for  the  opposition 
which  a  gospel  such  as  His  (making,  as  it  did,  no  terms  with  any  human  feeling  or 
conviction  that  was  inconsistent  with  the  rights  of  God),  could  not  but  encounter 
in  the  passions  of  man.  He  predicted  a  time  when  the  love  of  many  would  wax 
cold,  &c.  (Matt.  xxiv.  9,  11,  12,  24).  He  accepted.  He  set  forth  the  idea  of  the 
intense  hatred  which  His  gospel  must  perforce  encounter  in  the  world,  so  energeti- 
cally, that  He,  the  Prince  of  Peace,  described  Himself  as  sending  not  peace,  but  a 
Bword.  Yet  foreseeing  these  elements  of  destruction  gathering  around  Him,  He  ia 
calmly  certain  of  the  perpetuity  of  His  doctrine  (Mark  xiii.  31).  Surely  the  event 
has  not  falsified  the  prediction.  Since  the  Incarnation,  all  else  has  changed;  new 
races,  new  moulds  of  thought,  new  languages,  new  institutions,  political  and  social, 
supplant  others  which  once  seemed  destined  to  exist  for  ever,  and  which  have  passed 
ftway.  But,  reigning  amid  the  ruins  of  the  past,  reigning  amid  the  progress  of  the 
present  towards  the  future,  Jesus  Christ  is  here.  You  may  contend  that  here  and 
there  His  work  is  marred  or  broken ;  you  may  insist  on  the  desolating  spread  of 
the  great  heresies  of  the  first  ages,  or  on  the  loss  of  the  Churches  of  the  East  and 
of  the  Church  of  Cyprian  and  of  Augustine — trampled  as  these  are  beneath  the  feet 
of  the  infidel.  Now,  as  of  old.  He  is  crucified  in  weakness,  while  He  reigns  in 
power :  He  is,  by  the  very  pressure  and  fierceness  of  His  foes,  uniting  friends  who 
have  long  been  sundered ;  His  vast  providences  enlist  the  services  even  of  men  who 
know  but  fragments  of  His  truth ;  He  has  more  loyal  hearts  who  trust  and  worship 
Him  than  in  any  previous  age.  For  observe,  that  He  does  not  merely  hold  His 
ground :  He  is  extending  His  Empire.  He  is  again  laying  siege  to  those  citadels  of 
superstitious  yet  of  philosophical  idolatry — the  oriental  reUgions — which  have  so 
long  resisted  Him  ;  He  is  bidding  the  islands  of  the  sea  wait  on  His  advancing  foot- 
steps, n.  Observe  a  second  feature  of  the  predicted  missionary  energy  of  thb 
Church,  which,  no  less  than  that  already  mentioned,  would  seem  to  possess  an 
EVIDENTIAL  VALUE.  For  our  Lord  did  not  merely  insure  His  religion  against  the 
triumph  of  those  causes  which,  in  the  case  of  human  institutions  or  opinions,  must 
ultimately  produce  decay  and  dissolution.  The  stone  which  you  throw  loses  force 
aaid  swiftness  as  it  obeys  the  impulse  you  gave  to  it ;  it  buries  itself,  we  will  suppose, 
beneath  the  waters  of  a  still  lake,  and  again  the  ripple  which  radiates  from  the 
point  of  disturbance,  becomes,  moment  by  moment,  less  clear  to  the  eye,  as  on  this 
side  and  on  that  its  widening  circles  approach  the  shore.  So  it  is  with  human 
religions  :  they  spend  themselves  while  they  gain  the  prestige  of  antiquity ;  and 
our  Lord,  as  we  have  seen,  reversed  this  law  of  exhaustion,  in  the  case  of  Hia 
gospeL  But  He  did  more  :  He  presumed  upon,  He  appealed  to,  because  He  knew 
Himself  able  to  create  and  command,  an  ever-youthful  and  active  enthusiasm, 
which  in  the  last  ages  of  the  faith,  no  less  than  in  the  first,  would  carry  forward 
His  doctrine  into  all  the  regions  of  the  earth,  and,  at  whatever  risk,  would  press  it 
closely  in  its  perfectness  and  its  power  on  the  consciences  of  men.  Look  at  the 
other  great  religions  which  have  ruled,  or  which  still  rule,  the  thought  or  the  heart 
of  the  human  race.  Where  have  ancient  priesthoods,  like  the  Egyptian,  been 
missionary  agencies?  Where  have  philosophical  speculations,  like  those  of  the 
Schools  of  Greece,  been  more  than  the  luxury  and  the  pride  of  the  selfish  few — 
where  and  when  have  they  shown  any  capacity  of  becoming  the  inheritance  of  the 
heart  and  thought  of  the  struggling  many  ?  Surely  it  were  not  unreasonable  to 
surmise  that  if  the  Infinite  and  the  Eternal  God  has  spoken  in  very  deed  to  us  His 
creatures,  He  can  only  so  have  spoken,  as  at  the  first  He  can  only  have  given  us 
being,  out  of  the  free  and  pure  love  which  He  bare  towards  us.  And  thus  along 
with  the  gift  of  truth  would  come  the  accompanying  gift  of  love ;  and  we  should 
anticipate  what  is  in  fact  the  case,  tbat  He,  our  Incarnate  Lord,  whom  we  worship 
as  the  highest  and  absolute  Truth,  is  also  the  most  tender  and  indeed  boundless 
Charity.  It  is  by  combining  in  Himself  truth  and  love  so  perfectly  that  Jesus, 
from  age  to  age,  commands  the  most  intelligent  and  the  most  heroic  devotion  of 
which  man  has  ever  been  capable.    Think  not  that  true  devotion  to  Christ  our 


390  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  X. 

Lord  is  a  luxury  of  the  Primitive  Church,  which  can  find  no  lasting  home  in  'the 
midst  of  our  modern  civilisation.  It  may  be  true  that  mutilated  creeds  cannot  pro  ■ 
voke,  and  that  coward  hearts  cannot  understand,  such  devotion.  But  wherever 
the  truth  is  taught  in  its  integrity  to  hearts  that  are  "honest  and  good,"  the 
same  phenomena  of  absolute  self-devotion  will  be  found  to  repeat  themselves  which 
illustrated  so  gloriously  the  first  ages  and  children  of  the  faith.  He  has  indeed 
made  men  love  Himseli  ;  for  around  Him  and  His  work  there  mantles  such  a  robo 
of  unfailing  and  ever-youthful  beauty,  that  in  His  Divine  Person,  His  human  form, 
His  words.  His  world-redeeming  sacrifice.  His  ceaseless  intercession,  His  gift 
of  the  Blessed  Spirit,  His  oneness  with  His  people  through  the  sacraments  of 
His  Church,  the  soul  finds  that  which  answers  to  its  highest  imaginings  no 
less  than  to  its  deepest  needs.  It  finds  in  Him,  as  in  none  else,  its  rest. 
(Canon  Liddon.)  The  spread  of  the  gospel : — In  the  psalm  he  speaks  of  works, 
here  of  the  Word.  1.  Some  say  that  Paul  argues  from  the  less.  If  God  teach  aU 
by  the  great  volume  of  the  heavens,  much  more  will  He  teach  all  by  the  heavenly 
doctrine  of  the  gospel.  2.  I  think  that  there  is  here  hid  a  prophecy  of  the  preaching 
of  the  gospel,  because  the  latter  part  of  the  psalm  speaks  much  in  the  commenda- 
tion of  it ;  and  Paul  here  so  apphes  it.  And,  indeed,  there  is  a  most  sweet  analogy 
between  the  heavens  found  and  the  goppel.  The  heavens  are  the  work  of  God's 
hand  ;  so  is  the  gospel  revealed  by  God.  The  heavens  show  the  work  of  God  :  so 
the  gospel,  that  we  are  justified  by  the  work  of  God,  which  is  faith,  not  by  the  works 
of  man.  The  doctrine  of  the  gospel  is  pure  and  lightsome  as  are  the  heavens. 
The  influence  of  the  heavens  comforteth  and  cherisheth  inferior  things  :  so  doth  the 
gospel  the  conscience.  The  diversity  of  nations  and  languages  is  manifold  which 
understand  not  one  another ;  yet  all  understand  the  excellency  of  the  heavens,  and 
the  wonderful  work  of  God  in  them.  So  God  enabled  the  apostles  to  teach  all 
nations  in  their  own  tongues  the  wonderful  works  of  God  (Mark  xvi.  20  ;  Acts  i.  8  ; 
Col.   i.  6).    I.   That  is  the  true  religion  which  agrees  with  that  which  was 

PREACHED    IN    ALL    THE    WORLD    BY    THE    APOSTLES.       II.    It    WAS    A    MIRACLE    THAT    THB 

GOSPEL,  a  doctrine  teaching  the  denial  of  ourselves  and  bearing  of  the  Cross,  carried 
by  poor  and  mean  persons,  oppressed  by  mighty  emperors  and  kings,  should  in 
despite  of  men  and  devils,  within  the  space  of  forty  years,  be  so  published  in  all 
THE  WORLD.  Let  all  enemies  cease  to  oppose  it  by  the  remembrance  hereof.  Ill; 
Obey  the  gospel,  lest  He  which  sent  it  take  it  away,  and  remove  our  candlestick 
for  our  unbehef  and  contempt  of  it.  For  this  cause  Turcism  and  Papism  possess 
many  places,  which  have  been  heretofore  famous  for  the  gospel.  Hath  the  grace  of 
God  shined  to  thee  ?  Make  much  of  this  light,  and  wa^  in  it.  Hast  thou  heard 
the  sound  of  it  ?  Why  dost  thou  live  in  lewd  practices,  as  if  thou  hadst  never 
heard  any  inkling  of  it  ?  Where  sin  bears  rule,  there  is  not  the  gospel  received. 
(Elnathan  Parr,  B.D.)  The  voice  of  truth: — I.  Is  heard — 1.  In  nature.  2.  lu 
the  Word  of  God.  3.  In  the  gospel.  II.  Diffuses  itself — 1.  Like  waves  of 
sound.  2.  Through  time.  3.  Through  the  world.  III.  Demands  universal  atten- 
tion. (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  world  convicted  of  unbelief : — I.  To  whom  do  thesb 
words  apply?  To  the  unbeheving — 1.  Jews.  2.  Gentiles.  II.  What  do  they 
IMPLY  ?  The  sufficiency  of  revelation  as  respects — 1.  Its  clearness.  2.  Its  diffusion. 
III.  What  must  we  infer.  1.  The  inexcusable  guilt  of  man.  2.  Tbe  justice  of  God. 
(Ibid.)  God's  dealings  with  His  ancient  people  : — I.  His  communications  to  them. 
1.  Clear.  2.  Kepeated.  3.  Everywhere  heard.  II.  His  warnings  of  rejection.  1. 
By  Moses.  2.  By  Isaiah.  III.  His  patient  forbearance.  1.  Kindly  entreating 
them.  2.  During  the  long  period  of  Old  Testament  history.  3.  Spite  of  dis- 
obedience. IV.  The  final  transfer  of  His  favour  to  the  Gentiles.  [Ibid.)  But 
I  say,  Did  not  Israel  know? — Observe — I.  How  God  disciplines  a  rebellious 
people.  He — 1.  Instructs.  2.  Warns.  3.  Bears  patiently.  4  At  length  transfers 
His  favour  to  others,  whom  they  despise.  II.  How  this  applies  to  us.  We  have 
been — 1.  Equally  privileged.  2.  Equally  rebellious.  3.  If  Israel  could  not  escape, 
how  shall  we  ?  {Ihid.)  Israel's — 1.  Privilege.  2.  Warning.  3.  Persistent 
disobedience.  4.  Punishment.  (Ibid.)  Gospel  chimes  : — I  tarried  two  or  three 
days  near  the  tower  of  Antwerp.  Every  fifteen  minutes  the  b  lis  of  that  tower 
chime — so  sweetly  that  it  seems  as  if  the  angels  of  God  flying  past  have  alighted  in 
the  tower.  But  when  the  full  hour  comes,  then  the  clock,  with  heavy  t .ngue, 
strikes  the  hour,  adding  impressiveness  and  solemnity  to  the  chime  of  bells.  So 
this  great  gospel  tower  chimes  every  fifteen  minutes — nay,  every  moment.  Tones 
of  mercy.  Tones  of  love.  Tones  of  compassion.  Tones  of  pardon.  And  occasion- 
ally, to  let  you  know  that   the  weights  are  running  down,  and   that   the   time 


CHAP.  X.]  ROMANS.  391 

is  going  past,  the  heavy  tongue  of  this  bell  comes  down  with  an  emphasis, 
Baying,  "  How  shall  we  escape  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation  ? "  "  Now 
ia  the  accepted  time — now  is  the  day  of  salvation!"  (C.  H,  Spurgeon.) 
But  Esaias  Is  very  bold, — Consider  the  words — I.  In  theib  peophetic  import 
as  accomplished — 1.  In  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles.  2.  The  rejection  of 
the  Jews.  II.  As  descriptive  of  God's  actual  procedure.  1,  He  receives 
sinners   and  outcasts.      2.    But  the    children    of    the    kingdom    are    cast    out. 

III.    As    tLLUSTRATINO    THE    WHOLE    ECONOMY    OF    THE    GOSPEL.       1.    It    iS  a   System  of 

unmerited  grace.  2.  Those  who  do  not  participate  in  it  have  themselves  wholly  to 
blame.  {Ibid. )  I  was  found  of  them  that  sought  Iff*  not. — God  found  unsought : — 
It  is  a«ingular  thing  to  find  one  inspired  writer  calling  another  "  bold."  But  we 
are  not  to  understand  that  the  apostle  doubted  what  the  prophet  said,  nor  that  he 
feared  some  would  think  Isaiah  had  hazarded  a  perilous  statement.  He  merely 
recalled  two  exceedingly  commonplace,  but  most  important  considerations  con- 
cerning the  time  in  which  Isaiah  lived.  Then  it  was  a  bold  thing  to  say  that  God 
had  rejected  the  Jews  and  chosen  the  Gentiles ;  there  being  then  really  no  signs  of 
a  revolution  like  that.  Moreover,  such  a  statement  would  anger  that  entire  nation, 
and  thus  imperil  the  popularity  of  the  prophet,  as  well  as  his  life.  But  Isaiah  did 
say  it,  and  Paul  here  repeats  it.  The  text  is  an  announcement  of  a  fact  in  the 
government  of  God  ;  namely,  that  there  is  a  sovereign  love  of  God  which  goes  out 
after  a  human  soul  before  that  soul  has  even  so  far  started  out  for  God  as  to  wish 
for  Him.  I.  God  has  never  yet  relinquished  His  hold  upon  the  entire  human 
EACE.  Sin  entered  the  world  and  ruined  the  race.  But  the  Almighty  has  not  given 
it  away  to  destruction,  and  is  going  to  repossess  His  own.  II.  God  even  now 
asserts  His  full  right  to  a  special  people  of  His  own  in  the  midst  of  earthly 
REBELLION  AND  DisowNMENT  OF  His  SoN.  His  Call  is,  Who  is  OH  the  Loid's  side? 
and  asserts  authority  in  a  land,  without  consulting  the  poor  magnates  at  the  head 
of  it.  He  commissioned  Jonah  to  go  to  Nineveh,  He  sent  Moses  into  Egypt  with 
orders  to  Pharaoh  to  dismiss  a  miUion  of  his  subjects  for  ever  on  a  night's  notice. 
It  made  no  difference  whatever  that  the  king  said  he  did  not  know  who  this  Jehovah 
was ;  the  Maker  of  the  universe  assumed  that  it  was  the  business  of  all  His  intelli- 
gent creatures  to  understand  the  authority  which  belonged  to  a  monarch  like  Him. 
He  assumes  that  same  pre-eminence  now.  The  only  question  that  can  arise  is  one 
of  individual  bearing,  who  shall  rally  first  around  His  standard,  and  serve  Him  ? 
And  this  He  decides  Himself  (vers.  11-13).  Nor  does  He  leave  this  choice  to  a 
mere  chance  acceptance.  Does  He  need  a  king  ?  Then  the  ruddy-cheeked  sou  of 
Jesse  is  anointed.  Does  He  need  a  priest  1  He  summoned  Melchizedek.  Does  He 
need  a  prophet  ?  Then  shall  the  unwilling  lips  of  Balaam  be  turned  from  cursing 
into  blessing.  Thus  does  He  gather  His  agents  at  His  own  sovereign  will,  often 
unexpectedly  to  themselves,  as  well  as  surprisingly  to  others.  Literally,  "  He  is 
found  of  those  who  sought  Him  not,"  &c.     III.   The  all-wise  God  has  originated 

AND  ANNOUNCED  A  PLAN  BY  WHICH    He    MAY   BRING    HiS    PEOPLE    TO    HlMSKLF    WITHOUT 

ANY  FAILURE.  1.  God  assumcs  at  the  start  that  men  are  utterly  lost  ?  We  are 
condemned  already.  The  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  every  one  of  us.  2.  That  God 
prefers  to  save  the  transgressor  rather  than  punish  him.  God  says  He  takes  no 
pleasure  in  the  infliction  of  penalty.  He  has  proffered  a  way  of  escape  (ver.  4). 
And  this  is  the  only  way  3.  That  the  human  will  is  stubborn,  and  always  refuses 
free  grace.  Just  here  enters  the  greatest  mystery  of  the  gospel.  A  certain  spiritual 
pressure  is  exerted  by  God  Himself.  The  Holy  Ghost  constrains  the  surrender  of 
the  disobedient  heart.     IV.  In  the  carrying  out  of  His  plan  God   sometimes 

STRIVES   DIRECTLY   WITH    IMPENITENT    MEN,    WITHOUT    THEIR   EXPECTING    IT,    AND     EVEN 

WITHOUT  THEIR  UNDERSTANDING  IT.  Thus  it  is  that  He  is  oftcu  "  fouud  of  those  who 
sought  Him  not."  He  has  a  right  to  everybody,  and  when  He  desires  a  man  He 
sends  for  him.  No  actual  force  is  employed,  but  certain  processes  of  His  are  put 
into  operation.  The  sinner  does  not  always  know  precisely  what  all  this  means,  but 
he  feels  a  surprising  impelling  power,  active  in  the  very  centre  of  his  being.  He  is 
awakened  to  see  his  own  needs.  He  is  constrained  to  reflect  upon  the  issaes  of 
another  life.  Now  it  is  God  in  person  who  is  making  Himself  to  be  found,  even 
when  the  man  is  not  seeking  after  Him.  And  He  acts  very  genily.  There  are,  in 
every-day  life,  two  ways  of  waking  a  man  out  of  dangerous  slumber.  You  may  shout 
in  his  ear,  or  rudely  shake  his  person  ;  or  bring  a  lamp  into  the  room,  and  leave  it 
burning.  The  latter  is  the  way  in  which  God  works.  Furthermore,  Providence 
sometimes  works  in  with  grace.  An  adversity  or  a  blessing  is  used  as  an  instrument 
in  the  awakening  of  the  soul.     But  He  aims  only  to  lead  men  to  the  beginning  of 


392  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  J. 

their  work ;  He  does  not  propose  to  do  it  for  them.  He  says  to  those  who  seek  Him 
not,  Seek  Me.  He  calls  to  the  prayerless,  Pray — to  the  thoughtless,  Think.  V. 
This  moment,  in  which  the  Spirit  of  God  is  stbiving,  is  the  moment  above  all 
OTHERS  IN  which  TO  YIELD  TO  His  CALL.  For  now,  if  nover  before,  a  man  has  a 
chance.  If  God  is  sincere,  He  offers  personal  pardon  now.  ((7.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.) 
Sovereign  grace  and  man^s  responsibility : — Doubtless  these  words  primarily  refer  to 
the  casting  away  of  the  Jews,  and  to  the  choosing  of  the  Gentiles.  Yet  this  is  but 
a  type  of  a  universal  fact.  The  system  of  truth  is  not  one  straight  line,  but  two. 
No  man  will  ever  get  a  right  view  of  the  gospel  until  he  knows  how  to  look  at  the 
two  lines  at  once.  I  am  taught  that  what  I  sow  I  shall  reap :  I  am  also  taught 
that  "  it  is  not  of  him  that  willeth  nor  of  him  that  runneth,  but  of  God  that 
showeth  mercy."  I  see  in  one  place,  God  presiding  over  all  in  providence;  and 
jet  I  see  that  man  acts  as  he  pleases,  and  two  truths  cannot  be  contradictory  to 
each  other.  Note  then — I.  Divine  sovereignty.  If  any  man  be  saved,  he  is  saved 
by  Divine  grace  alone.  Now,  in  speaking  of  God's  gracious  acts  of  salvation, 
notice — 1.  That  they  are  entirely  unmerited.  The  people  here  mentioned  certainly 
did  not  merit  God's  grace.  They  found  Him,  but  they  never  sought  for  Him ;  He 
was  made  manifest  to  them,  but  they  never  asked  for  Him.  2.  Sovereign,  i.e.,  God 
has  an  absolute  right  to  give  grace  where  He  chooses,  and  to  withhold  it  when  He 
pleases.  It  is  mercy,  indeed,  when  God  saves  a  seeker;  but  how  much  greater 
mercy  when  He  seeks  the  lost  Himself  I  Mark  the  parable  of  the  lost  sheep.  How 
was  it  you  came  to  seek  God  ?  "  Why,  because  He  led  you  to  do  it."  Nature  can 
never  rise  above  itself.  You  put  water  into  a  reservoir,  and  it  will  rise  as  high  as 
that,  but  no  higher  if  let  alone.  So  there  must  be  an  extraordinary  pressure  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  put  upon  the  heart  to  lead  us  first  to  ask  for  mercy.  II.  Man's 
responsibility  (ver,  21).  Now,  these  people  whom  God  had  cast  away  had  been 
sought,  had  been  entreated  to  be  saved  ;  but  they  would  not,  and  inasmuch  as  they 
were  not  saved,  it  was  the  effect  of  their  disobedience  and  their  gainsaying.  Notice 
the  wooing  of  God  and  of  what  sort  it  is.  1.  Most  affectionate.  God  says  He 
stretched  out  His  hands.  You  that  are  not  saved  to-day  are  without  excuse,  for 
God  stretched  out  His  hands  to  you,  and  He  said,  "  Come,  come."  2.  Very  frequent. 
"  All  the  day  long,"  may  be  translated  "  daily."  From  the  first  dawn  of  your  life 
He  wooed  you  through  your  mother.  And  in  your  boyhood  how  your  Sunday-school 
teacher  endeavoured  to  bring  you  to  the  Saviour  1  And  you  have  not  yet  surely 
forgotten  how  many  Sabbaths  you  have  spent,  and  how  many  times  you  have  been 
warned.  It  is  probable  that  God  will  keep  on  stretching  out  His  hands  to  you  until 
your  hairs  grow  grey,  still  continually  inviting  you :  and  perhaps  when  you  are 
Hearing  death  He  will  still  say,  "  Come  unto  Me,  come  unto  Me."  But  if  still  you 
reject  Christ,  let  nothing  make  you  imagine  that  you  shall  go  unpunished.  "How 
can  you  escape,  if  you  neglect  so  gi-eat  salvation  ?  "  No  one  will  be  responsible  for 
your  damnation  but  yourself,  at  the  last  great  day.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  God 
found  icithout  seeking  : — That  was  an  odd  voice,  surely  the  oddest  I  ever  heard  of, 
which  came  a  little  time  ago  in  an  Italian  town  to  one  of  God's  elect  ones  there. 
He  was  so  depraved  that  he  actually  fell  to  worshipping  the  devil  rather  than  God. 
It  chanced  one  day  that  a  rumour  went  through  the  city  that  a  Protestant  was 
coming  there  to  preach.  The  priest,  alarmed  for  his  religion,  told  the  people  from 
the  altar  that  Protestants  worshipped  the  devil,  and  he  charged  them  not  to  go  near 
the  meeting-room.  The  news,  as  you  may  judge,  excited  no  horror  in  the  devil- 
worshipper's  mind.  "  Ay,"  thought  he,  "  then  I  shall  meet  with  brethren,"  and 
so  he  went  to  hear  our  beloved  missionary  who  is  now  labouring  in  Kome.  Nothing 
else  would  have  drawn  the  poor  wretch  to  hear  the  good  word,  but  this  lie  of  the 
priest's  was  overruled  to  that  end.  He  went  and  heard,  not  of  the  devil,  but  of  the 
devil's  Conqueror,  and  before  long  he  was  found  at  Jesus'  feet,  a  sinner  saved. 
(Ibid.)  All  the  day  long  I  have  stretched  forth  My  hands. — God's  conduct  and 
man's: — I.  God's  conduct  towaefb  men.  1.  Kind.  2.  Earnest.  3.  Forbearing. 
4.  Patient.  II.  Man's  conduct  towards  God.  1.  Ungrateful.  2.  Vv'^icked.  3. 
Obstinate.  4.  Insulting.  (J  Lyth,  D.D.)  God's  entreaties: — Nothing  can  be 
more  wonderful.  That  man  should  stretch  out  his  hands  to  God — the  dependent 
and  sinful  creature  supplicating  the  supremely  righteous  and  holy  Creator — this  is 
as  it  ought  to  be.  But  here — the  Creator  stretches  out  His  hands  to  the  creature; 
God  entreats  man ;  the  offended  Sovereign  beseeches  the  offending  subject !  But 
is  there  not  something  still  more  wonderful,  that  He  should  have  to  complain  of 
want  of  success  ?  Yet  such  was  the  mournful  fact !  God's  entreaties  were — I. 
CoNDESCBNDiNQ,    When  a  father  entreats  a  child,  a  master  a  servant,  a  monarch  a 


BHAP.  X.]  ROMANS.  893 

Bubject,  there  is  condescension.  But  what  is  all  the  condescension  of  creature  to 
creature? — of  creature  the  most  exalted  to  creature  the  most  insignificant  and 
mean?  But  what  is  the  difference  between  any  one  creature  and  any  other, 
compared  with  the  difference  between  the  Eternal  God  and  the  highest  of  them  all  ? 
II.  FoBBEABiNG — for  there  was  a  principle  in  the  Divine  nature,  that  drew  powerfully 
in  the  opposite  direction — God's  infinite  hatred  of  sin.  His  whole  conduct  was 
but  a  practical  utterance  of  the  pathetic  pleading—"  How  shall  I  give  thee  up." 
(Hosea  xi.  8,  9).    HI.  Eabnest.     The  posture  or  attitude   expresses  this.     IV. 

PEBSEVEBINGLY  IMPORTUNATE.       "  All  day  lOHg,"  &C.      V.  DISINTERESTED.       When  We 

bear  of  "  calling  "  and  "  stretching  out  the  hands  "  to  another,  we  naturally  think 
of  some  deep-felt  want,  or  some  suffered  or  dreaded  evil ;  of  which  the  supply  is 
earnestly  desired,  or  the  endurance  deprecated.  A  starving  man  stretches  out  his 
hand  for  food  ;  the  oppressed  for  deliverance ;  the  slave  for  freedom  ;  the  criminal 
for  pardon ;  the  victim  of  assassination  for  life.  But  does  God  need  anything  from 
His  creatures?  They  needed  Him ;  not  He  them.  The  danger  was  on  their  part, 
not  on  His  ;  the  damage  resulting  from  their  refusal  to  hear  Him,  all  their  own. 
The  sum  of  His  entreaties  is,  "  Do  thyself  no  harm,"  and  His  kind  assurance,  in 
beseeching  them  to  obey  His  voice — "  I  will  do  you  no  hurt."  Far  was  it  from 
His  heart  to  do  them  hurt.  Judgment  was  His  strange  work.  His  threatenings 
and  His  solicitations  were  alike  in  mercy.  (R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  Deafness  to 
God's  appeals  : — God  offers  not  only  a  truce,  but  a  peace,  and  has  been  most  active 
in  urging  a  reconciliation.  Can  He  manifest  His  wiUingness  in  clearer  methods 
than  that  of  sending  His  Son  to  reconcile  the  world  to  Himself  ?  Can  He  evidence 
more  sincerity  than  by  His  repeated  and  reiterated  pressing  of  our  souls  to  the 
acceptance  of  Him  ?  God  knocks  at  our  hearts,  and  we  are  deaf  to  Him ;  He 
thunders  in  our  ears,  and  we  regard  Him  not ;  He  waits  upon  us  for  our  acceptance 
of  His  love,  and  we  grow  more  mad  against  Him ;  He  beseecheth  us,  and  we 
ungratefully  and  proudly  reject  Him  ;  He  opens  His  bosom,  and  we  turn  our  backs ; 
He  offers  us  His  pearls,  and  we  tread  them  under  our  feet ;  He  would  clothe  us  with 
pure  linen,  but  we  would  still  wear  our  foul  rags ;  He  would  give  us  angels'  bread, 
and  we  feed  on  husks  with  swine.  The  wisdom  of  God  shines  upon  us,  and  we 
account  it  foolishness ;  the  infinite  kindness  of  God  courts  us,  and  we  refuse  it,  as 
if  it  were  the  greatest  cruelty.  Christ  calls  and  begs,  and  we  will  not  hear  Him 
either  commanding  or  entreating.  To  love  God  is  our  privilege,  and  though  it  be 
our  indispensable  duty,  yet  it  had  been  a  presumption  in  us  to  aspire  so  high  as  to 
think  the  casting  our  earthly  affections  upon  so  transcendent  an  object,  should  be 
dear  to  Him,  had  He  not  authorised  it  by  His  command,  and  encouraged  it  by  His 
acceptance.  But  it  is  strange  that  God  should  court  us  by  such  varieties  of  kind- 
ness to  that,  wherein  not  His  happiness,  but  our  affection  does  consist ;  and  much 
stranger,  that  such  pieces  of  earth  and  clay  should  turn  their  backs  upon  so 
admirable  an  object,  and  be  enemies  to  Him,  who  displays  himself  in  so  many 
allurements  to  their  souls,  and  fix  their  hatred  upon  that  tender  God  who  sues  for 
their  affections.  {S.  Charnock.)  Disregarding  God : — I  know  a  mother  who  has 
an  idiot  child.  For  it  she  gave  up  all  society,  almost  everything,  and  devoted  her 
whole  life  to  it.  "  And  now,"  said  she,  "for  fourteen  years  I  have  tended  it,  and 
loved  it,  and  it  does  not  even  know  me.  Oh,  it  is  breaking  my  heart !  "  Oh,  how 
the  Lord  might  say  this  of  hundreds  here,  Jesus  comes  here,  and  goes  from  one  to 
another,  asking  if  there  is  a  place  for  Him.  Oh,  will  not  some  of  you  take  Him 
into  your  hearts?  (D.  L.  Moody.)  Irresponsive  to  God: — A  man  cannot  get 
these  Divine  blessings  if  he  does  not  want  them.  You  take  a  hermetically  sealed 
bottle  and  put  it  into  the  sea,  it  may  float  about  in  mid-ocean  for  a  century, 
surrounded  by  a  shoreless  ocean,  and  it  will  be  as  dry  and  empty  inside  at  the  end 
as  it  was  at  the  beginning.  So  you  and  I  float,  live,  move,  and  have  our  being  in 
that  great  ocean  of  the  Divine  love  in  Christ,  but  yon  can  cork  up  your  hearts  and 
wax  them  over  with  an  impenetrable  cover,  through  which  that  grace  does  not  come. 
And  yoa  do  do  it,  some  of  yon.    [A.  Maclaren.) 


894  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  h. 


CHAPTER  XI. 

Vbbs.  1-10.  God  hath  not  cast  away  Hia  people. — God  fiath  not  cast  of  His 

people : — This  is  proved  by — I.  The  known  facts  of  theib  histoby — Paul  and  his 
companions  in  the  faith.  II.  The  secbet  opehations  of  the  Spirit  of  God — as 
exemplified  in  the  case  of  Elias.  III.  The  besults  to  be  achieved  in  the 
NATIONAL  rejection  OF  IsRAEL.  1.  The  convcrsioH  of  the  Gentiles.  2.  The 
consequent  conversion  of  the  Jews.  3.  The  completion  of  the  redeeming  purpose 
on  earth.  IV.  The  ultimate  purpose  of  God's  judgments — the  demonstration 
of  His  own  glory.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  remnant,  the  admonition,  and  the  hope  : — 
1.  Distressed  though  the  apostle  was  that  anything  should  have  caused  the 
exclusion  of  his  kinsmen  from  the  benefits  of  Messiah's  kingdom,  yet  the  fact  was 
patent  that  it  was  because  of  their  unbelief,  and  that  it  had  been  predicted. 
Henceforth  they  should  no  longer  be,  as  a  people,  the  people  of  God.  Even  when 
admitted  into  the  kingdom  of  God,  which  they  still  might  be  by  "  the  obedience  of 
faith,"  they  should  have  no  pre-eminence  over  their  beUevlng  Gentile  brethren 
(John  X.  16).  2.  Now  all  this  might  well  fill  the  heart  of  the  patriotic  Jew  with 
thoughtful  sadness.  For  he  had  been  accustomed  to  give  to  the  glowing  predictions 
of  Israel's  prospective  glory  an  altogether  national  and  literal  interpretation.  How 
sadly  disappointing,  then,  to  be  now  assured  that  the  Israel  there  spoken  of  was, 
not  Israel  after  the  fiesh,  but  after  the  spirit  1  He  would  ask,  "  How  am  I  to 
understand  the  matter?  Hath  God  cast  away  His  people?"  "God  forbid!" 
exclaims  the  apostle.  "As  a  nation,  and  because  that  they  have  rejected  the 
Lord's  Christ,  He  has  rejected  them,  but  this  only  so  far,  and  so  long,  as  they 
reject  Him. "  Therefore — I.  He  has  not  cast  them  away  indiscriminately  ;  they 
have  not  all  been  rejected ;  there  is  still  a  foreknown  remnant.  1.  Such  a  total 
rejection  the  apostle  had  never  aflSrmed.  Should  any  one  assert  that  so  he  had 
taught,  let  him  reflect  that  he  also  was  "  an  Israelite,"  <fec.  But  he  was  not 
therefore  excluded  from  the  benefit  of  Christ's  salvation.  No ;  not  even  though 
he  had  once  been  a  "  blasphemer,"  &c.  (1  Tim.  i.  16).  2.  Nor  had  the  apostle 
alone  from  amongst  the  Jews  obtained  mercy  (Acts  xxi.  20).  Nor  could  he  have 
anything  like  an  adequate  conception  of  the  number  of  Jewish  believers.  These 
whom  God  had  foreknown  He  had  by  no  means  cast  away.  Though  perhaps 
unknown  of  men,  they  were  "  known  of  God  "  (Rev.  vii.  1-8).  Such  secret  ones  the 
Lord  has  always  had  (vers.  2-5 ;  cf.  1  Kings  xix.  9-18  ;  Isa.  i.  9,  and  x.  22).  3. 
This  remnant  had  obtained  that  salvation  (chap.  ix.  27),  which  the  rest  refused  to 
accept  on  the  stipulated  terms  ;  while  that  rest,  because  of  their  self-righteous  and 
obstinate  unbeUef,  had  been  judicially  blinded  and  hardened  (Deut.  xxix.  4 ; 
Psa.  Ixix.  22,  23).  Thus  it  is  that  God  always  deals  with  incorrigible  sinners. 
They  persist  in  loving  darkness,  and  hating  hght,  and  He  blinds  them.  They 
reject  the  sure  foundation,  and  it  becomes  a  stone  of  stumbling.  Thus  He  dealt 
with  Pharaoh  and  his  hosts,  with  the  unbelieving  Israelites  in  the  times  of  Moses, 
David,  Solomon,  and  Isaiah.  And  thus  He  deals  with  them  still  (Acts  xiii.  40,  41 ; 
Hab.  i.  5).  These  unbelieving  Jews  are  the  cast  away  ;  but  the  believing  Jews  (a 
foreknown  remnant)  are  elected  and  saved.  But  now — II.  With  respect  to  those 
WHO  HAVE  been  "CAST  AWAY  "  ;  havo  they  "stumbled"  to  a  hopeless  "fall"? 
Had  God  ordained  that  it  should  be  so  ?  "  God  forbid  1  "  is  the  vigorous  reply.  1. 
God  did  not  purpose  less  mercy  for  them,  but  He  did  intend  more  for  the  Gentiles. 
Indeed,  it  was  this  very  opening  the  door  of  faith  to  the  Gentiles  that  chiefly  caused 
the  offence  of  the  Jews.  But  by  this,  which  occasioned  their  fall,  salvation  is  come 
unto  the  Gentiles,  for  to  provoke  them  to  jealousy.  2.  And  now  the  apostle  turns 
to  the  Gentile  Christians  to  admonish  them  against  a  spirit  of  exultation  over  the 
fallen  and  rejected  Jews.  The  admonition  was  probably  needed,  the  persecuting 
spirit  of  the  Jews  being  calculated  to  provoke  retaliation.  It  was  still  more  needed 
Ln  after  times,  when  Christian  rulers  and  Churches  then  acted  towards  that  scattered 
people  as  though  they  had  been  deprived  of  all  the  rights  of  common  humanity. 
But  the  God  of  Israel  had  given  no  right  to  any  to  add  one  stripe  to  their  chastise- 
ment. His  severity  was  intended  not  for  destruction,  but  salvation ;  and  how 
much  more  desirable  the  latter  than  the  former  result  I  (vers.  12-15).  3.  And  that 
their  salvation  is  even  yet  possible  is  further  evident  (ver.  16).  The  "firstling" 
of  the  "  dough  "  and  "  the  root "  of  the  tree — figures  to  designate  the  great 
progenitors  of  the  whole  Jewish  nation — having  believed  in  God,  had  obtained 
salvation,  and  had  become  holy  to  the  Lord.    Nay,  Jehovah  had  ao  presented  them 


CHAP.  XI.]  ROMANS.  895 

to  Himself  that  their  descendants  also  were  to  be  accounted  a  "  holy  nation." 
True,  this  did  not  insure  their  unconditional  salvation.  It  had  not  prevented 
great  numbers  from  forsaking  the  God  of  Israel  (Isa.  i.  4) ;  but  for  their  fathers' 
Bakes  He  would  spare  no  pains  to  "renew  them  again  unto  repentance,"  and  to 
give  them  hearty  welcome  on  their  return  (Isa.  liv.  6-8).  Many  individual  Jews 
had  already  believed  and  been  saved.  These,  therefore,  might  be  regarded  as,  in 
a  secondary  sense,  the  first-fruits  unto  God,  and  served  to  prove  that,  on  like  terms, 
all  Israel  might  be  saved.  4.  Nay,  further,  the  apostle  maintains  that  the  Jews 
occupied  a  position  more  favourable  to  their  salvation.  If  the  Church  be 
symbolised  by  the  olive-tree  the  Jews  were  the  natural  branches  as  related  to 
Abraham,  the  father  of  the  faithful,  and,  as  by  solemn  covenant,  separated  to  the 
service  of  Jehovah.  Compared  with  them,  the  heathen  are  indeed  but  branches  of 
the  wild  and  uncultured  tree  (Eph.  ii.  11,  12).  And  be  it  that  "some  of  the 
branches  were  broken  off,"  and  that  many  from  the  wild  olive  have  been  grafted 
into  the  true  olive,  let  them  remember  that  this  has  been  effected  "  contrary  to 
nature,"  and  therefore  not  exult  over  the  off-broken  branches :  forasmuch  as  the 
state  of  neither  the  off-broken  nor  engrafted  branches  is  irreversible.  If  the 
believing  Gentile  suffers  the  spirit  of  pride  to  displace  that  of  humble  trust  in  the 
Saviour,  he,  too,  shall  not  be  spared.  And  if  the  now  reprobated  Jew  shall  receive 
Him,  then  shall  he  also  be  re-engrafted  into  the  ancient  stock.  *'  Behold  therefore 
the  goodness  and  severity  of  God  "  (vers.  22-24).  5.  And  not  only  so,  but  however 
improbable  it  might  seem,  the  time  would  arrive  when  all  Israel  should  acknow- 
ledge Christ  as  Lord,  and  be  thereupon  welcomed  back  into  His  fold  (vers.  25-27). 
In  the  meantime,  and  as  far  *•  as  concerns  the  gospel,  they  are  enemies  for  your 
Bakes."  And  that  which  has  brought  them  into  this  position  is  the  free  grace  of 
God,  which  resolved  to  include  you  also.  But  as  touching  "  the  election,"  the 
believing  remnant,  which  continues  from  age  to  age  (vers.  5,  6),  "  are  beloved  for 
the  fathers'  sakes."  For  God  Himself  has  given  a  sure  word  of  promise  that, 
whithersoever  they  may  be  dispersed,  when  they  shall  make  confession  of  their 
iniquity,  then  will  He  remember  His  covenant  (Lev.  xxvi.  40-45).  "  For  the  gifts 
and  calling  of  God  are  without  repentance."  All  alike  are  "  by  nature  "  unbelieving 
and  disobedient.  To  the  consciousness  of  this  fact  it  is  that  God  shuts  them  up, 
and  that  in  order  that  they  may  be  induced  to  seek  and  to  secure  salvation. 
{W.  Tyson.)  The  rejection  of  Israel: — I.  Not  absolute.  1.  A  remnant  saved. 
2.  Exemplified  in  Paul  and  many  known  Jewish  converts.  3.  Confirmed  by 
the  history  of  Elijah.  4.  This  remnant  is  of  grace  (ver.  6).  II.  Not  arbi- 
trary. 1.  The  rest  were  blinded.  2.  Because  of  their  disobedience.  3.  By 
the  just  visitation  of  God.  4.  As  announced  beforehand  by  their  own  prophets. 
{J.   Lyth,  D.D.)  God's  people : — I.  Cannot  fail  on  earth.      1.  Individuals 

are  still  converted  (ver.  1).  2.  The  purpose  of  God  is  unchangeable  (ver.  2). 
n.  Is  STILL  SMALL.  1.  But  not  SO  Small  that  we  should  be  discouraged. 
2.  Great  enough  to  occasion  joy  and  gratitude.  IH.  Consists  of  all  tbuh 
BELIEVERS  who — 1.  Repudiate  all  human  merit.  2.  Receive  God's  mercy  as  a  free 
gift.  3.  Do  not  harden  themselves  against  the  truth.  [Ibid.)  God's  Church 
under  than  man's  : — I.  The  conspicuooslt  good  are  the  few — not  the  many. 
The  many  are  the  called  ;  the  few  are  the  chosen  who  accept  the  call.  God  had 
not  wholly  cast  away  His  people  (ver.  1).  It  was  then  as  it  had  been  in  the  time 
of  Elijah  (ver.  4).  And  how  is  it  now  ?  Let  us  beware  of  uncharitable  judgments. 
Nothing  is  easier  than  sweeping  censures.  God  is  tender  in  His  judgments  of 
men,  often  justifying  many  whom  we  in  our  severity  should  condemn.  Still, 
would  Christ  acknowledge  the  majority  in  the  churches,  or  would  He  have  to  turn 
to  the  minority  ?  Certainly  to  only  a  small  minority,  whose  faith  is  proved  by 
their  character  and  works.  For,  strip  away  from  the  profession  of  Christianity  its 
accidental  accompaniments,  and  what  do  you  find  ?  Nothing  that  is  perfect,  even 
in  the  loftiest ;  and  nothing  of  unmixed  evil  in  the  meanest.  But  yon  will  find  in 
the  few,  in  spite  of  great  faults,  a  faith  in  Christ  so  genuine  as  to  give  a  sure  pledge 
that  the  goodness  of  the  man  will  assuredly  conquer  the  badness  in  the  end.  The 
man  in  whom  the  love  of  truth  is  a  passion,  in  whom  justice  is  a  matter  of  greater 
concern  than  the  falling  of  the  heavens,  and  who  burns  with  shame  at  the  thought 
of  an  impure  deed,  and  who  has  courage  enough  to  suffer  in  the  righteous  cause 
like  his  Great  Master ; — why,  that  man  forms  part  of  God's  elect  remnant,  who  put 
to  shame  the  majority  of  those  who  cry  aloud  the  name  of  Christ,  but  who  do  not 
His  deeds.  II.  Some  of  these  few  are  not  found  within  the  boundaries  of 
THB  BEOooNiSED  Chuboh.    They  are  in  Christ's  Church,  bat  not  in  man'a.    And 


396  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

that  is  a  cause  of  jealousy  and  anger  to  many  of  us.  When  Paul  told  the  Jews 
that  God  was  founding  a  Church  outside  their  own  nation,  he  knew  that  he  was 
wounding  their  prejudices  to  the  quick.  So  strongly  did  he  feel  this  that  he  had 
^0  fortify  himself  by  an  appeal  to  Moses  (chap.  z.  19).  But  though  fact  and 
prophecy  supported  his  statement,  they  would  not  admit  that  God  was  working 
upon  lines  outside  their  own.  And  yet  the  apostle  insists  upon  it  as  the  great 
revealed  mystery  which  was  to  crush  their  pride  and  to  precipitate  their  fall 
(ver.  25).  And  so  now  God  is  wider  in  His  plans  than  our  pride  and  prejudice 
think.  We  find  it  almost  as  hard  to  believe  as  the  Jew  did,  that  God  has  a  Church 
outside  the  Church.  And  yet,  are  we  not  confronted  by  facts?  I  believe  the 
Church  is  our  right  and  natural  place,  and  that  it  is  its  natural  work  to  be  foremost 
in  doing  whatever  contributes  to  the  highest  welfare  of  men.  But  has  it  not  been, 
and  is  it  not  so  still,  that  God  has  other  sheep  which  are  not  of  this  fold  ?  Some 
of  these  have  maintained  an  outward  connection  with  the  Cffurch,  though  the 
Church  has  not  identified  itself  with  them.  They  have  worked  alongside  the 
Church  rather  than  with  it.  Wilberforce  and  Clarkson  did  not  get  the  sympathy 
and  support  of  the  Church  till  their  cause  was  triumphant.  Who  are  the  true 
prophets  of  this  generation  ?  For  the  most  part  men  upon  whom  the  Church 
looks  askance.  When  we  get  to  heaven  we  shall  find  men  there  whom  we  never 
expected  to  see,  and  miss  others  perhaps  whom  we  expected  to  find  in  the  foremost 
places.  III.  This  outer  Chokch  of  the  Gentiles  was  to  pkovoke  the  Jews  to 
JEALOUSY  AND  EMULATION.  The  Jcws  fell  that  the  Gentiles  might  rise,  and  the 
Gentiles  had  risen  that  they  might  stimulate  the  Jews  to  rise  too.  The  Church  is 
evermore  in  need  of  this  constant  renewal  and  reconstruction.  At  the  time  of  the 
Beformation  Christian  truth  had  to  be  rediscovered,  and  a  new  Church  formed 
outside  the  lines  of  the  old  Church.  But  the  fundamental  principle  of  the 
Beformation  did  not  long  preserve  its  supremacy — the  right  of  every  man  to 
exercise  his  own  judgment — for  the  Protestants  soon  began,  to  persecute  men  like 
the  Catholics.  There  is  a  great  cry  in  our  day  that  religion  is  in  danger,  and  that 
the  churches  are  failing  ;  such  a  cry  as  must  have  gone  forth  among  the  Jews  when 
Paul  first  preached.  But  has  the  cry  any  greater  warrant  now  than  it  had  then  ? 
Was  not  religion  then  really  rooting  itself  in  a  richer  soil,  and  preparing  to  bring 
forth  better  fruit?  The  devout  Catholic  thought  that  the  Reformers  were  devils, 
and  prophesied  the  overthrow  of  all  religion.  But  was  it  not  rather  a  fresh  plough- 
ing and  sowing  of  the  human  soul,  and  a  new  opening  of  the  heavens  ?  And  as  to 
the  cry  in  our  day,  if  the  Christianity  depended  on  the  Eoman  Syllabus,  the 
Thirty -Nine  Articles,  the  Westminster  Confession,  then  we  might  tremble,  but  God 
forbid  that  we  should  be  overcome  by  such  an  ignoble  fear.  We  believe  in  the 
rehgion  of  Christ,  and  we  can  see  before  it  a  nobler  future.  As  the  Jews  had  to 
learn  from  the  Gentiles  in  order  to  their  recovery,  so  we  have  some  things  to  learn 
from  the  outer  boundaries  of  God's  Church.  (C.  Short,  M.A.)  God  hath  not 
cast  away  His  people. — The  glory  which  will  redound  to  God  from  the  conversion  of 
the  Jews : — I.  Theib  national  peesebvation  theough  so  long  a  tbact  of  time 
WILL  furnish  a  wonderful  ILLUSTRATION  OF  THE  DiviNE  POWER.  1.  They  Can 
look  back  along  a  line  of  ancestry  compared  with  which  that  of  the  Norman  and 
the  Saxon  are  but  of  yesterday.  Nations  which  did  not  exist  till  long  after  the 
Jew  had  acquired  a  history,  have  long  ago  run  their  course  ;  but  he  is  unchanged. 
2.  Nor  wiU  any  of  the  ordinary  means  of  national  preservation  account  for  their 
continuance.  (1)  They  have  not,  like  the  Chinese,  been  stationary,  and  built  in 
from  the  rest  of  the  human  family.  From  about  b.c.  740,  till  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem,  they  suffered  as  many  dispersions,  partial  or  entire,  as  there  were 
centuries.  (2)  Foreign  alliances  will  not  explain  it.  For,  besides  the  fiercest 
commotions  within,  they  have  sustained  a  quick  succession  of  the  most  sanguinary 
invasions  from  without.  (3)  Arms,  climate,  genius,  politics,  equally  fail  to  explain 
it.  For  they  have  been  crumbled  and  scattered  over  the  face  of  the  earth ;  and 
yet  they  exist.  Old  empires  which  oppressed  them  have  fallen  ;  but  the  Jew  has 
lived  on  amidst  their  ruins.  Young  nations  have  started  into  being,  and  he  has 
been  present  to  mingle  with  their  elements,  but  never  uniting.  And,  as  if  to 
complete  the  wonder,  their  number  at  this  moment  is  very  nearly  the  same  as  it 
was  on  their  leaving  Egypt.  3.  Now,  the  only  way  to  account  for  their  preserva- 
tion is  the  scriptural  one,  viz.,  to  ascribe  it  to  Divine  power.  "  I  am  God,  I  change 
not;  therefore,  ye  sons  of  Jacob  are  not  consumed."  When,  then,  they  shall  be 
tamed  to  the  Lord,  with  what  new  emphasis  and  enlarged  meaning  will  they  have 
to  sing  Psa.  cxxiv.    II.  God  shall  be  glorified  when  it  shall  be  seen  that  this 


CHAP.  XL]  ROMANS.  897 

PREBEBVATION    HAB    NOT    BEEN    EFFECTED    BY   MERE    POWER,    BUT    THAT,    FROM    FIRST   TO 

LAST,  THAT  POWER  WAS  UNDER  THE  GUIDANCE  OP  WISDOM,  or  was  excrciscd  accord- 
ing to  a  plan.  A  new  light  is  dawning  on  the  mind  of  men  respecting  this  plan. 
1.  Formerly  the  historian  only  recorded  facts.  But  now  it  has  occurred  to  him  that 
all  the  facts  of  history  are  connected  ;  that  could  the  principles  of  this  conuection 
be  traced  history  would  form  one  organic  whole ;  and  hence,  to  trace  and  to 
expound  these  principles  is  now  the  highest  office  of  the  historian — the  philosophy 
of  history.  2.  Every  lover  of  the  Bible,  however,  should  remember  that  its 
histories  were  never  written  in  any  other  way.  It  both  states  the  facts,  and  the 
principles  which  unite  them.  True,  after  sketching  the  early  history  of  the  race, 
it  confines  its  history  to  the  Jews.  But  in  that  you  have,  in  effect,  a  tvpe  of  the 
whole.  And  more;  in  that,  you  frequently  catch  glimpses  of  the  others  at  the  most 
eventful  moments  of  their  existence.  And  more  still ;  the  Bible  is  prophetic  as 
well  as  historic.  Before  Herodotus  had  begun  to  amass  his  materials,  Isaiah  had 
Bung  the  glory  of  the  latter  day ;  and  Daniel  had  foretold  the  kingdoms  which 
would  arise  to  the  end  of  time.  3.  The  Bible  never  speaks  of  the  course  of  human 
events  but  as  conducted  on  a  great  plan.  And  with  this  peculiarity,  that  from  the 
time  of  the  promise  to  Abraham,  the  entire  plan  was  regulated  in  relation  to  hia 
posterity.  Nay,  ages  earlier  than  that  the  plan  began  to  evolve  (Deut.  xxxii.  7,  8). 
The  great  principle  on  which  the  habitable  part  of  the  globe  was  mapped  out  was 
a  principle  of  relation  to  the  chosen  people.  And,  as  the  great  drama  of  Providence 
unfolded,  the  civilised  world  invariably  found  itself  involved  with  that  people. 
Bead  Psalms  78th,  105th,  and  106th,  and  do  yon  not  hear  Jehovah,  as  He  leads 
them  through  the  nations,  saying,  "Touch  not  Mine  anointed,  and  do  My 
prophets  no  harm"?  Are  they  invaded  and  oppressed?  "Who  delivered  up 
Jacob  to  be  a  spoil,  and  Israel  to  the  plunderers  ?  Was  it  not  Jehovah  ?  "  Does 
the  Assyrian  afflict  Israel?  "  The  Assyrian,  saith  God,  is  the  rod  of  My  hand." 
Does  the  Persian  deliver  Israel  ?  God  calls  Cyrus  by  name.  Did  nations  change 
hands  in  consequence  of  the  Persian  movement  ?  "I  have  given  Egypt  for  thy 
ransom;  Cush  and  Sheba  for  thee."  Have  the  ancient  persecutors  of  Israel 
perished?  Their  destruction  was  foretold  1  And  when,  at  length,  "  the  time  shall 
have  come,  yea,  the  set  time  to  favour  Zion,"  what  ground  will  there  be  for  saying, 
"  Ye  know  .  .  .  that  not  one  thing  has  failed  of  all  that  the  Lord  your  God  spake 
concerning  you  "  1    III.  God's  glory  shall  be  enhanced  when  it  shall  appear  that 

THE  ENTIRE  PLAN  OF  HiS  CONDUCT  TOWARDS  ISRAEL  HAS  DIRECTLY  TENDED  TO  PRO- 
MOTE   THEIR   HIGHEST  WELFARE  BY  ILLUSTRATING  THE  GREAT  PRINCIPLES  OF  HiS  MORAL 

GOVERNMENT.  1.  The  principle  of  mediation — of  making  the  conduct  or  relation- 
phip  of  one  a  reason  for  blessing  others.  "God  hath  not  cast  away  His  people," 
They  are  still  beloved  "  for  the  fathers'  sakes,"  and  their  conversion  will,  at  length, 
establish  this  fact.  It  will  show  them  that  they  have  never  been  absolutely 
renounced,  and  why  Abraham  himself  was  beloved,  and  that  there  never  was  but 
"  one  Mediator  between  God  and  man,"  the  day  of  whose  coming  Abraham  saw 
and  was  glad.  2.  Justice  (ver.  22).  Looking  back  on  their  history  they  will  heboid 
it  covered  with  the  memorials  of  the  Divine  displeasure  against  sin,  and  learn  that 
every  stroke  of  His  fatherly  chastisement  was  intended  to  bring  them  in  penitence 
to  His  feet.  3.  The  bringing  of  good  out  of  evil.  It  will  be  seen  that  God  has 
made  the  mutual  jealousy  of  the  Jew  and  Gentile  an  occasion  of  good  to  each.  The 
apostacy  of  the  human  race  was  the  occasion  of  Israel's  election  at  the  first.  And 
when,  after  repeated  apostacies,  Israel  was  abandoned,  that  became  the  occasion  of 
salvation  to  the  Gentiles  (ver.  15).  Their  slavery  in  Egypt  was  a  time  of  merciful 
visitation  for  that  country.  Their  seventy  years'  captivity  in  Babylon  were 
calculated  to  enhghten  and  to  bless  the  people  of  that  empire.  And  at  their 
conversion  they  wiU  see  with  amazement  that  the  very  act  which  completed  their 
guilt — the  crucifixion  of  Christ — has  become  the  means  of  their  own  salvation.  4. 
The  timing  and  distribution  of  God's  judgments  and  mercies  so  as  to  make  us  feel 
our  entire  dependence  on  Him.  Would  you  know,  e.g. ,  why  it  was  that  Israel, 
when  brought  out  of  Egypt,  was  not  led  straight  to  Canaan  ?  (Deut.  viii.  2,  3). 
Would  you  know  why  it  was  that  the  coming  of  Christ  was  so  long  delayed ;  and 
why  the  conversion  of  the  Jews  did  not  take  place  at  the  commencement  of  the 
Christian  dispensation?  (ver.  32).  God  waited  for  the  Gentiles  till  they  had 
proved  that  the  world  by  wisdom  would  never  know  God.  And  He  is  now  waiting 
for  the  Jews  till  it  shall  be  evident  that  all  ground  for  self-dependence  has  utterly 
perished.  IV.  But  what  ip  this  great  system  of  discipline  should  leave  thbm 
woBsa  THAN  IT  FOUND  THEM  t    Would  not  their  conversion  redound,  to  a  degree 


398  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

inconceivable,  to  the  glory  of  God?  The  strength  of  a  mechanical  power  is 
estimated  by  the  resistance  which  it  overcomes.  And  the  honour  which  will  accrue 
to  the  grace  of  God  in  the  conversion  of  the  Jews  is  to  be  estimated  partly  by  the 
amount  and  the  duration  of  their  previous  resistance  to  that  grace.  1.  Viewed  in 
this  light  their  conversion  will  reflect  transcendent  honour  on  the  power  of  the 
grace  which  effects  it.  For  we  are  not  now  speaking  of  the  conversion  of  a  people 
who  had  never  before  enjoyed  the  light  of  revelation,  but  of  a  people  who,  in  this 
sense,  have  never  been  in  darkness.  Nor  are  we  speaking  of  a  people  who  were 
merely  indifferent  to  Christianity,  but  of  a  people  who  have  ever  been  actively  hostile 
to  all  spiritual  religion.  Nor  are  we  speaking  of  this  people  as  nominally  converted 
merely,  as  many  of  the  European  nations  were.  To  exchange  the  form  of  godliness 
for  the  power  proclaims  the  presence  of  a  Divine  agent ;  but  to  worship  the  very 
Being  on  whom  the  heart  had  hitherto  vented  its  bitterest  execrations,  implies  a 
change  so  great  that  it  might  almost  excuse  unbelief  for  saying,  "  If  the  Lord 
would  open  windows  in  heaven,  might  this  thing  be  ?  "  But  unbelief  itself  is  silenced 
by  the  declaration,  "  I  will  pour  My  Spirit  upon  thy  seed,  and  My  blessing  upon 
thine  offspring."  2.  Associated  with  this  display  of  omnipotent  energy  there  will 
be  the  exercise  of  unlimited  grace  in  forgiveness.  When  it  is  remembered  that  the 
Jews  of  that  future  day  will  be  the  descendants  and  approvers  of  those  who  shouted, 
"  Away  with  Him  ;  crucify  Him ;  His  blood  be  upon  us  and  upon  our  children  1  ' 
and  that,  by  their  persevering  unbelief,  generation  after  generation  have  virtually 
ciiicified  the  Son  of  God  afresh,  and  put  Him  to  an  open  shame,  how  amazing 
appears  that  exercise  of  mercy  which  is  to  cancel  such  an  accumulation  of  guilt  1 
When  they  shall  see  that  they  owe  their  forgiveness  to  that  blood  which  they 
invoked  in  guilty  imprecations  on  their  own  heads,  what  all-subduing  views  will 
they  obtain  of  the  prevalence  of  His  intercession,  of  the  unchangeableness  and 
riches  of  His  grace !  3.  This  change  will  take  place  at  such  a  period  as  shall  still 
further  redound  to  the  glory  of  God.  There  is  a  fulness  of  time  for  it.  As  the 
coming  of  Christ  took  place  at  a  crisis  when  the  state  of  the  world  demonstrated 
the  necessity  for  it,  and  displayed  its  grace,  so  doubtless  will  be  His  coming  in  the 
conversion  of  the  Jews.  Probably  they  will  have  reached  the  last  stage  of  guilty 
unbelief ;  or  they  will  be  sorely  pressed  by  evils  from  without ;  or,  abandoning  all 
expectation  of  ever  beholding  their  Messiah,  they  will  have  given  themselves  up  to 
despair ;  or  all  these  forms  of  evil  will  have  combined  in  one.  This  we  know,  that 
the  design  of  the  whole  gospel  constitution  is  that  no  flesh  should  glory  in  His 
presence  ;  that  the  inscription  on  the  topstone  of  the  fabric  will  be, "  To  the  praise 
of  the  glory  of  His  grace."  4.  In  harmony  with  the  spiritual  and  Divine  character 
of  this  event  will  be  the  means  or  manner  of  its  accomplishment.  Not  that  all 
means  will  be  dispensed  with.  But  these  shall  be  of  so  humble  a  character,  and 
their  success  shall  so  far  exceed  all  human  calculation  as  to  furnish  the  most 
glorious  exposition  of  the  words,  "  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  My  Spirit, 
saith  the  Lord."  V.  Another  element  of  the  glory  which  will  redound  to  God  will 
be  found  in  the  ncmbee  of  the  convebted.  A  few  here  and  there  will  doubtless 
be  renewed,  from  time  to  time,  prior  to  that  period.  But  then  the  change  will  be  so 
general  as  to  satisfy  the  large  prediction  that  "all  Israel  shall  be  saved."  They 
shall  come  from  the  east  and  from  the  west,  &c.,  to  swear  allegiance  to  the  Cross 
of  Christ.  And  what  joy  will  seize  the  Gentile  Church  when  it  shall  be  announced, 
•'  Then  hath  God  also  to  the  Jews  granted  repentance  unto  life  "  !  And  if  there  is 
joy  in  heaven  among  the  angels  of  God  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth,  who  can 
conceive  the  rapture  when  it  shall  be  there  proclaimed,  "  All  Israel  is  saved  I  "  VI. 
This  reminds  us  of  the  further  accession  of  glory  to  God  from  the  conversion  of 
the  Jews,  resulting  from  the  effects  of  the  event  upon  othebs.  1.  For  what 
an  unsurpassable  proof  will  it  furnish  of  the  Divinity  of  the  whole  scheme  of 
revelation  I  As  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  at  Pentecost  was  reserved  by  God  for 
the  crowning  proof  of  the  new  economy,  so  the  greater  effusion  of  the  same  Spirit, 
upon  the  same  people,  is  reserved  to  complete  the  proof  of  its  claims  as  it  draws 
towards  a  close.  2.  What  an  unsurpassable  proof  will  that  event  display  of  the 
all-sufi&ciency  of  the  grace  of  God  I  At  the  opening  of  the  Christian  economy  in 
the  conversion  of  Saul  Christ  showed  forth  all  long-suffering  for  a  pattern,  Ac.  In 
a  similar  manner  God  appears  to  be  reserving  the  richest  display  of  His  saving 
grace  till  towards  the  last.  3.  What  an  impulse,  too,  will  be  given  to  the  piety  of 
every  part  of  the  Christian  Church !  (ver.  12).  The  newly-converted  Jews  will 
probably  exhibit  a  measure  of  self-denying  zeal  for  the  glory  of  God,  which  the 
Church  had  come  to  consider  absolutely  impracticable.    For  "he  that  is  feeble 


CHAP.  XI.]  ROMANS.  899 

among  thsm  at  that  day  shall  be  as  David;  and  the  house  of  David  shall  be  as 
God,  as  the  angel  of  the  Lord  before  them."  4.  How  eminently  will  this  increase 
of  the  Church  tend  to  the  anion  of  all  its  parts  1  That  most  ancient  of  all  schisms 
between  Jew  and  Gentile  shall  then  be  healed.  Every  minor  distinction  in  the 
Church  shall  cease.  And  thus  it  will  be  seen  that  an  important  step  has  been 
gained  towards  the  attainment  of  that  "  which  God  hath  purposed  in  Himself,  that 
in  the  dispensation  of  the  fulness  of  times  He  might  gather  together  in  one  all 
things  in  Christ."  5.  And  will  not — must  not  all  this  inconceivably  augment  the 
joy  of  the  Church?  (J.  Harris,  D.D.)  God's  remainder: — 1,  We  are  living  in 
a  time  when  the  reigning  influences  of  society  tempt  or  drive  from  integrity  and 
purity ;  and  some  who  were  venerated  shock  the  confidence  reposed  in  them  by 
grievous  falls.  There  are  dangers  in  such  times  that  touch  conscience  and  try 
faith.  But  God  is  not  changed ;  moral  virtue  is  not  unreal ;  there  are  still  men 
good  and  true.  God  hath  not  cast  away  His  people.  There  are  seven  thousand 
reserved  amid  the  general  degeneracy.  2.  Baal  was  the  idea  of  prolific  reproduc- 
tion in  nature.  His  was  a  popular  worship  ever,  and  set  up  its  accursed  altars  in 
the  Holy  Land.  Pouring  light  upon  the  faith  of  the  new  kingdom  of  redeeming 
grace  from  ancient  history,  as  was  his  wont,  Paul  goes  back  to  that  dark  spot.  He 
is  showing  that  no  matter  how  many  fall  away  faith  lives  on.  The  times  are  never 
so  bad  that  they  can  corrupt  utterly  the  immortal  grace  that  lies  hidden  in  the 
heart  of  the  Church.  Mammon  may  establish  its  worship,  but  there  is  still  a  holy 
place,  and  an  ark  of  the  covenant,  sacraments  and  ministry,  and  heavenly  grace. 
God  does  not  cast  away  His  people.  3.  The  apostle  recalls  the  old  prophet  Elijah, 
and  makes  a  strong  case.  Matters  in  Church  and  State  had  come  to  the  worst. 
Two  tottering  thrones,  on  soil  soaked  with  family  blood,  frowned  at  one  another  in 
anger,  but  upheld  no  just  law  and  protected  no  personal  rights.  Over  one  of  the 
fragments  of  the  schism  ruled  a  tyrant — Ahab — consistent  in  cruelty  and  persevering 
in  appetite,  with  Jezebel,  who  made  royalty  contemptible  and  womanhood  shameful. 
Ahab  and  Jezebel  are  names  of  vices  almost  as  much  as  of  persons,  and  have  been 
for  nearly  three  thousand  years.  After  his  victory  at  Carmel,  Elijah's  splendid 
dream  of  the  reformation  of  God's  kingdom  was  broken.  When  men  animated  by 
great  purposes  fail,  they  seem  smaller  to  themselves  than  ever.  It  was  like  the 
hiding  of  the  face  of  God.  But  now  there  comes  a  magnificent  revelation  which 
shows  that  true  greatness  does  not  stand  in  great  results  that  can  be  seen.  Success 
does  not  lie  in  the  numbers  counted.  Power  is  stored  up  in  hidden  places  and  in 
lonely  consciences.  Have  done  with  measuring  God's  power  with  your  geometry, 
or  estimating  His  army  by  arithmetic.  Do  the  duty  that  lies  nearest  thee.  It 
scatters  doubt ;  overcomes  opposition ;  breaks  up  despair.  The  Almighty  takes 
care  of  His  reserves.  We  want  the  inspiration  of  this  better  faith.  Consider  two 
facts — I.  The  inroads  of  a  subtle  and  popular  worldly-mindedness,  weajcenino 
THE  Church  deplorably  in  its  conscience  and  its  heart.  There  is  a  power 
attacking  Christianity  from  without,  and  corrupting  it  within.  What  are  the 
foremost  among  the  objects  of  the  people  in  business  and  social  life  ?  Duty  and 
righteousness  ?  Do  the  young  enter  social  life  to  carry  there  the  influence  of  Christ  ? 
What  spirit  is  in  the  ascendant  in  our  populations?  Is  there  not  here  "the  man 
of  sin  "  who  is  "  anti-Christ "  ?  Worldliness  is  a  false  god  ;  lying,  because  it  makes 
promises  which  are  never  kept ;  cruel,  because  it  kills  the  better  life ;  impious, 
because  it  defeats  the  glorious  end  for  which  God  put  His  image  in  every  man. 
This  impious  secularism  creeps  into  the  Church.  It  is  charged  that  its  converts 
do  not  come  up  to  its  standard,  and  that  concessions  are  made  of  principle,  and 
mercenary  treacheries  adopted  to  crowd  its  seats.  Retribution  cannot  but  follow  if 
these  things  be  true.  But  spiritual  power  is  not  to  be  judged  by  outward  achieve- 
ments. Granted  that  the  world  is  as  worldly,  unbelief  as  prevalent,  inconsistency 
as  widespread,  the  Church  as  timid  and  supple  as  prophets  fear  or  sceptics  declare. 
"What  saith  the  answer  of  God?  I  have  reserved,"  &c.  This  opens  to  us  the 
opposite  fact — II.  The   immortal  survival  of  the  secret  life  of  the  Church 

AND     OF     personal     PIETT,    ALTHOUGH    IT   18   IN   A   MINORITY,   AND    COMETH     NOT    WITH 

observation.  God  makes  much  out  of  little,  and  saves  by  a  handful  of  heroes, 
calling  up  His  reserves  out  of  obscurity,  and  never  letting  His  altar  fires  die  out. 
Seven  thousand  a  slight  proportion.  They  were  out  of  sight,  scattered  saints 
crouching  in  comers.  EHjah  was  looking  on  things  on  their  earthly  side.  Not 
BO  the  All-seeing.  There  was  an  unreckoned  hope  in  obscure  men  and  women 
Elijah  did  not  know.  Always  a  light  left  burning  in  Switzerland,  in  Germany, 
in  England,  in  Scotland.    The  gates  of  hell  do  not  prevail.    III.  Hebe  is,  then, 


iOO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  xi. 

A  LAW  FOB  PBACTiCAL  USE.  What  God  requires  of  us  is  personal  fidelity,  or  the 
earnest  training  of  private  Christian  character  in  each  one  by  himself,  irrespective 
of  any  visible  results  or  any  possible  discouragements.  For  this  there  are  the 
clearest  grounds.  1.  It  foUows  straight  on  in  the  way  of  the  beginnings  of  the 
Church  under  the  hand  of  the  Lord.  Get  one  man  brave  enough  to  do  right 
against  any  maxims  of  a  majority ;  one  woman  brave  enough  to  lift  others  into 
her  own  pathway  of  light,  and  you  are  working  precisely  in  the  line  of  Him  who 
knows  what  is  in  man,  and  redeems  the  race.  2.  The  doctrine  is  strong  in  that  it 
is  practicable.  Every  individual  has  one  realm  all  his  own — his  conscience. 
Disappointed,  baffled,  elsewhere,  he  can  make  that  all  Christian.  Pagan  pleasures 
may  allure  others.  You  may  not  know  where  others — helpers — are.  But  your 
own  place  is  in  "  the  munitions  of  rocks."  And  the  Master  will  always  be  there 
with  you.  3.  This  sphere  of  personal  Christian  character  touches  others  wonderfully, 
but  never  depends  upon  them  so  as  to  surrender  to  them  if  they  go  over  to  Baal. 
Tour  knees  are  your  own  to  bend  to  whom  you  will.  The  apostles  called  no  con- 
vention. Great  reforms  are  in  single  souls  before  they  are  in  parliaments,  synods, 
or  constitutions.  God's  harvests  spring  from  single,  solitary  seeds.  It  is  not 
miracle  but  law.  The  patient  power  of  the  Lord  reserves  His  remnant  of  faithful 
hearts.  His  work  is  done  first  by  single,  then  by  united  hands.  Character, 
steadfast,  pure,  holy,  is  at  once  its  force  and  its  fruit.  {Bp.  Huntington.)  Wot 
ye  not  what  the  Scripture  saith  of  Ellas  ? — The  Old  Testament  Scriptures — I. 
Abe  not  superseded.  II.  Ought  to  be  caeefdlly  studied.  IIL  Illustbate  the 
PEiNCiPLES  OF  the  New.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  prophet's  complaint  and  God's 
answer  : — I.  The  complaint  of  the  peophet.  1,  Hasty.  2.  Erring.  3.  Despond- 
ing. II.  The  answeb  of  God.  1.  Exact.  2.  Eeproving.  3.  Inspiring.  {Ibid.) 
Mistakes  concerning  the  number  of  the  righteous  : — Sometimes  we  make  them  from — 
I.  The  pecdliae  state  of  oub  own  minds.  This  seems  to  have  been  the  condition 
of  Elijah.  His  language  betrays — 1.  Severity.  2.  Petulance.  3.  Despair.  II. 
Obsebving  multiplied  instances  of  false  peofession.  The  apostacy  of  one  pre- 
tender excites  more  attention  than  the  lives  of  soUd,  steady  Christians.  III.  Thb 
biqhteous  themselves.  Because  of — 1.  The  obscurity  of  their  stations.  2.  The 
diffidence  of  their  dispositions.  3.  The  manner  of  their  conversion.  4.  The 
diversity  of  their  opinions.  5.  The  imperfection  of  their  character.  Application  : 
1.  The  use  which  the  apostle  makes  of  his  subject.  2.  Are  you  among  the  number 
of  the  saved  ?  3.  Let  all  true  Christians  consider  the  Author  and  end  of  their  sal- 
vation. 4.  Kemember  also  for  whom  you  have  been  saved.  (W.  Jay.)  Despon- 
dency : — I.  Looks  at  the  things  which  abe  seen.  II.  Oveblooks  those  which  aee 
UNSEEN.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  But  what  saith  the  answer  of  God? — The  answer  of 
God  to  Elijah  : — I.  All  doubts  in  mattebs  of  beligion  abe  to  be  decided  by  the 
WoBD  OF  God  (John  v.  39  ;  Mark  xii.  24).  Elijah  erred  because  he  spake  without 
his  book.  Eemember  this — 1.  In  all  matters  controverted.  When  it  is  questioned 
whether  images  are  to  be  worshipped,  angels  and  saints  prayed  to,  <fec.,  who  shall 
resolve  us  ?  We  are  to  take  no  man's  word,  not  even  the  word  of  Elijah  for  a  matter 
of  faith.  What  saith  the  Scripture  ?  Men  may  err,  but  the  answer  of  God  is 
according  to  truth.  2.  In  matters  of  practice.  If  it  be  questioned  whether  thoa 
shalt  break  the  Sabbath,  deceive  thy  neighbour,  <fec.  Thy  companions,  it  may  be, 
and  thine  own  heart  will  entice  thee  to  do  such  things,  but  what  saith  the  Scrip- 
ture? They  which  do  such  things  shall  be  damned.  II.  The  Chubch  of  God 
shall  nevee  be  beought  to  such  an  exigent  in  the  most  difficult  times,  but 
that  these  shall  be  many  thousands  which  shall  wobship  God  in  bpibit  and 
tbuth.  1.  The  best  on  earth  do  err,  as  Elijah  who  erred  by  a  passion  of  anger  and 
fear.  Order  your  passions  by  the  law  of  grace,  for  if  they  be  ungovemed  they  blind 
the  mind,  and  as  unruly  horses  draw  the  chariot  of  our  judgment  into  the  bye-paths 
of  error.  2.  Elijah  erred  in  his  censure  concerning  true  worshippers ;  be  not,  then,  rash 
in  censuring,  It  is  rashness  to  censure  particular  men,  much  more  whole  Churches 
to  be  antichristian.  How  darest  thou  refuse  communion  with  them  who  have  com- 
munion with  Christ  ?  3.  Neither  multitude  nor  visibility  are  certain  notes  of  the 
true  Church,  for  then  there  had  been  no  Church  in  Elijah's  time,  for  the  multitude 
was  with  Ahab  and  Jezebel,  and  Elijah  could  not  discern  one  beside  himself.  The 
Papists  say  the  Church  was  always  visible,  but  the  creed  confuteth  them,  for  wa 
believe  in  the  holy  Catholic  Church.  But  holiness  is  invisible  and  so  is  Catholioitj. 
We  may  grant  that  particular  Churches  are  visible,  and  yet  here  some  cautions  are 
to  be  remembered.  They  may  be  invisible  in  respect — (1^  Of  place.  As  the  son  is 
alwftji  Tiaiblfii  boi  to  xu  only  when  il  ariseth  in  oar  hemisphere.    So  %i  Jemsalsa 


CHAP.  XI.]  ROMANS.  401 

the  Church  was  not  to  be  seen  when  it  removed  to  Pella.  (2)  Of  the  time,  as  in 
Elijah's  and  Queen  Mary's  days.  As  the  sun  behind  a  cloud  in  some  respect  is  in. 
visible,  so  may  it  be  said  of  a  Church.  (3)  Of  persons  which  should  discern  it.  A 
Church  is  sometimes  invisible  through  the  fault  of  men's  eyes,  which  are  either 
weak  as  of  Elijah,  or  blind  as  of  them  which  hate  the  Church.    III.  Thosb  who  in 

DANOBROCS  TIMES  ARE  PRESERVED  IN  GRACE  ARE   SO   PRESERVED   MERELY   BY  THB  POWER 

AND  oooDNEBS  OF  GoD  (1  Sam.  XXV.  39 ;  2  Thess.  v.  23  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  18 ;  Jude  24). 
1.  Though  Jezebel  search  every  corner  of  the  land,  yet  God  reserve th  seven  thou- 
sand which  bow  not  the  knees  to  Baal.  God  can  keep  us  from  our  enemies ;  let 
persecutors  cease  their  malicious  practices,  and  let  us  serve  God  without  fear.  2. 
In  regard  to  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  these  are  golden  days,  but  in  regard  of  the 
overflowing  of  iniquity  these  are  perilous  times.  Art  thou  preserved  ?  glorify  God. 
It  is  not  thy  goodness  that  thou  dost  not  as  others,  but  the  goodness  of  God.  3. 
Be  admonished  of  two  things.  (1)  Presume  not  of  thine  own  strength.  Peter 
bragged  of  his  courage,  and  yet  played  the  coward.  Hazael  thought  great  scorn  ever 
to  do  as  Elisha  foretold  to  him,  and  yet  afterwards  he  did  such  things.  (2)  Be  not 
secure  and  careless.  God  reserveth  some,  but  those  which  use  the  means  to  perse- 
vere in  well  doing.    (Elnathan  Parr,  B.D.) 

Vers.  6-10.  And  If  by  grace,  then  is  It  no  more  of  works ;  otherwise  grace  is  no 
more  grace.  —The  Christian  doctrine  of  DiviTie  grace : — I.  Man  is  the  object  oi" 
GRACE.  1.  The  present  dispensation  is  only  the  perfection  of  many,  and  grace  is  the 
characteristic  of  all.  But  the  gospel  is  emphatically  "  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of 
God."  The  Father  is  "  the  God  of  all  grace."  '*  Te  know  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ."  The  Spirit  is  the  "  Spirit  of  grace."  This  grace  is  uniformly  stated  as 
the  cause  of  the  electing  purpose — the  reason  of  our  personal  justification — the  germ 
of  the  renovating  process— the  potent  motive  to  all  piety,  as  it  is  the  prolific  source 
of  all  favour.  2.  The  atonement  is  the  effect  of  Divine  grace.  Jehovah  is  not 
merciful  because  Christ  has  died,  but  Christ  has  died  because  Jehovah  was  merciful. 

3.  "  The  grace  which  bringeth  salvation,"  is,  in  no  sense,  impaired  by  any  arrange- 
ments which  had  a  reference  to  ourselves.  Antecedent  questions  of  justice  and 
satisfaction  could  not  injure  the  display  of  that  love  which  was  equally  in  the 
Father  and  the  Son ;  which  was  equally  evinced  in  inflicting  and  enduring  death. 

4.  The  death  of  the  Cross  is  only  a  means  to  the  most  benevolent  end.  A  benefac- 
tion is  not  commonly  reduced  in  its  value  by  its  cost,  nor  a  deliverance  by  its  peril. 
Is  the  grace  of  God  the  greater,  or  the  less,  when  encountering  no  difiQculty,  or 
when  encountering  it  to  overcome  it  ?  Is  the  grace  of  God  more  brightlv,  or  more 
faintly  glorious,  when  associated  with  moral  principles,  or  when  disregarding  them? 
6.  The  gospel,  while  it  upholds  the  claims  of  the  Divine  law,  has  an  exclusive  bear- 
ing upon  us  as  sinners.  Let  the  awful  negotiations  between  the  Father  and  the 
Son — who  are  one — be  whatever  they  were — the  sinner  has  no  righteousness  or 
claim.  Salvation  is  a  question  not  of  justice  but  of  grace.  6.  No  blessing  of  the 
gospel  is  in  any  legitimate  sense  the  subject  of  purchase.  Christians  are  "  the  pur- 
chased possession  "  ;  they  are  "  bought  with  a  price."  But  the  "  sure  mercies  "  of 
the  covenant  are  free  gifts.  God  was  ready  to  forgive,  but  there  was  an  impediment. 
The  atonement  removed  that  impediment  and  "  the  fulness  of  the  blessing  of  the 
gospel  of  Christ,"  now  flows  without  check  or  restriction.  "By  the  righteousness 
of  one  the  free  gift  came  upon  aU  men."    II.  The  grace,  which  is  so  pre-eminent, 

CANNOT  BE  CONFOUNDED  WITH  ANY  INFERIOR  OR  INCONGRUOUS  PRINCIPLE.     Let  US  define 

— 1.  Grace  is  free  favour ;  it  can  be  related  to  no  right,  and  contained  in  no  law. 
Whenever  bestowed,  it  depends  upon  the  mere  wiU  of  him  who  exercises  it.  If  there 
is  any  necessity  for  it,  it  "  is  no  more  grace."  2.  Work  is  individual  action  or  con- 
duct,  and  implies  those  particular  qualities  which  provoke  praise  or  condemnation. 
This  course  of  accountable  behaviour  is  properly — (1)  Personal.  We  all  feel  pos- 
sessed of  a  something  which  we  cannot  transfer.  Whatever  we  have  taken  part  in 
still  attaches  to  us.  We  reap  what  we  have  sown.  (2)  Work  must  be  voluntary  to 
be  accountable.  If  I  am  compelled  to  do  what  I  disapprove,  the  hand  is  mine,  but 
that  hand  is  only  a  mechanical  instrument  of  another's  wiU.  (3)  Work,  therefore, 
goes  to  form  the  general  character  of  the  moral  agent.  A  succession  of  works  forms 
a  habit,  a  variety  of  habits  mould  a  character.  Such  has  merit  or  demerit.  3.  But 
if  this  be  the  just  delineation  of  work,  it  cannot  be  employed  indiscriminately  with 
grace.  Grace  is  opposed  to  work  as  it — (1)  Is  extrinsic  of  the  person.  It  reaches 
us  from  another  source.  Personal  qualities  it  may  inspire — but  its  origin  is  supernal 
and  Divine.  (2)  Is  independent  of  the  volition.  Man  had  no  desire  to  be  saved  in 
VOL.  u  26 


402  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xi 

this^manner  ;  it  is  the  "  kindness  of  God  our  Saviour,"  •'  who  doeth  as  it  pleaseth 
Him."  (3)  Most  jealously  and  tenaciously  challenges  that  merit  and  honour  which 
virtuous  and  sinless  obedience  claims,  and  the  Divine  code  awards.  "  To  him  that 
worketh,  the  reward  is  reckoned  not  of  grace  but  cf  debt."    III.  Gbaoe  and  work 

ABE  OFTEN  VIOLENTLY  TOETCEED  INTO   AN   UNNATUEAL  ALLIANCE.      That  System  Cannot 

ceconcile  itself  to  the  idea  of  grace,  which — 1.  Proceeds  upon  the  merits  of  human 
ronduct.  Merit  is  a  relation  of  justice,  and  not  of  favour.  2.  Easts  human  accep- 
tance on  a  foreknowledge  of  some  attractive  qualities  of  character.  For  whence  di> 
these  originate  ?  Foreknowledge  is  not  potential.  Who  has  smitten  the  rock,  and 
melted  it  into  streams  of  grief  ?  Who  has  turned  the  "  wilderness  into  the  fruitful 
field  "  ?  3.  Beckons  on  the  self-determining  power  of  the  human  wiU.  How  is  it, 
in  conversion,  that  the  will,  which  is  but  the  bias  of  our  tainted  nature,  elects  the 
part  of  good,  but  by  the  grace  of  Him  from  whom  all  good  proceeds  ?  4.  Accounts 
the  gospel  as  a  provision  of  simple  facility  to  man  to  save  himself.  By  this  view  we 
are  never  to  invoke  Christ's  righteousness  and  expiation,  but  when,  after  our  most 
strenuous  self-justifying  efforts,  we  feel  that  a  little  more  may  be  required  to  give 
our  case  its  perfect  recommendation.  5.  Varies  the  universal  freeness  of  the  gospel 
by  moral  differences  in  man.  Without  distorting  or  forcing  into  one  another  the 
things  which  differ,  Christianity  surveys  all  men  in  their  equal  need  of  salvation, 
and  in  their  ruin  without  it.  6.  Founds  our  duty  upon  a  bestowment  of  grace.  IV. 
The  effects  of  these  opposing  peinciples.  1.  How  differently  they  explain 
Christianity  1  If  work  predominate  over  grace,  the  gospel  is  the  republished  law, 
and  if  the  unabated  law,  is  a  message  of  despair  ;  or  if  the  extenuated  law  changes 
that  glory  into  whatever  is  short-sighted  and  inconsistent ;  and  in  the  prostration 
of  that  law,  sinks  the  standard  of  our  good,  falls  the  pattern  of  our  dignity.  But 
let  grace  have  the  pre-eminence.  What  a  change  comes  over  the  "  great  salvation"  I 
It  is  pardon  to  the  guilty,  restoration  to  the  undone.  It  never  pauses  until  it  has 
found  out  "  our  low  estate,"  and  never  relaxes  its  effort  until  it  has  hfted  us  from 
it.  2.  How  oppositely  they  affect  the  mission  of  Christ !  We  honour  grace  in  the 
degree  to  which  we  honour  the  mediation  of  Christ.  But  "if  it  be  of  works,"  at 
once  the  Saviour's  mediation  is  degraded.  For  what  did  He  "  pour  out  His  soul 
unto  death  "?  According  to  this  unworthy  calculation — to  follow  in  the  train  of 
the  sinner  who  strives  to  save  himself,  ready  to  lend  His  aid,  should  occasion 
require  it.  3.  How  inversely  they  influence  the  human  mind.  (1)  Which  of  these 
two  principles  is  the  better  fitlvid  to  inspire  that  humility  of  dependence  which 
every  relation  of  the  creature,  and  much  more  every  adjunct  of  the  sinner,  dictate  ? 
There  is  all  the  difference  of  claim  and  supphance.  "  God,  I  thank  Thee  that  I  am 
not  as  other  men  are  "  I  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner  "  1  The  gospel  repeats 
"  By  grace  ye  are  saved  "  ;  it  adds  the  reason,  "  Not  of  works,  lest  any  man  should 
boast."  (2)  But  the  spirit  of  grace,  in  contradistinction  to  work,  is  also  the  spirit  of 
obedience.  {R.  W.  Hamilton,  D.D.)  Salvation  by  grace: — Some  are  all  their 
days  laying  the  foundation,  and  are  never  able  to  build  upon  it  to  any  comfort  to 
themselves  or  usefulness  to  others.  And  the  reason  is  because  they  will  be  mixing 
with  the  foundation  stones  that  are  only  fit  for  the  building.  They  will  be  bringing 
their  obedience,  duties,  mortification  of  sin  and  the  like,  into  the  foundation.  These 
are  precious  stones  to  build  with,  but  unmeet  to  be  first  laid  to  bear  upon  them  the 
whole  weight  of  the  building.  The  foundation  is  to  be  laid  in  mere  grace,  mercy, 
pardon  in  the  blood  of  Christ ;  this  the  soul  is  to  accept  of  and  rest  in  merely  as  it 
is  grace,  without  the  consideration  of  anything  in  itself,  but  that  it  is  sinful  and 
obnoxious  to  ruin.  This  it  finds  a  difficulty  in,  and  would  gladly  have  something 
of  its  own  to  mix  with  it ;  it  cannot  tell  how  to  fix  these  foundation  stones  without 
some  cement  of  its  own  endeavours  and  duty ;  and  because  these  things  will  not 
mix,  they  spend  fruitless  efforts  about  it  all  their  days.  But  if  the  foundation  be 
of  grace,  it  is  not  at  all  of  works  ;  otherwise  grace  is  no  more  grace.  If  anything 
of  our  own  be  mixed  with  grace  in  this  matter,  it  utterly  destroys  the  nature  of 
grace,  which,  if  it  be  not  alone,  is  not  at  all.  (J.  Owen,  D.D.)  What  then? 
Israel  hath  not  obtained  that  which  he  seeketh  for. — The  judgment  upon  Israel  is — 
I.  Pabtial.  II.  Self-occasioned  (cf.  chap.  ix.  31,  32).  III.  A  fulfilment  of 
PROPHECY  uttered — 1.  By  Isaiah.  2.  By  David.  IV.  Is  a  waening  to  tjs.  (J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  Israel's  failure  : — I.  What  he  sought — righteousness.  II.  How  he  sought 
IT.  Not  by  faith,  but  by  works.  III.  What  was  the  besult  ?  1.  The  elect  obtained 
it  by  faith.  2.  The  rest  failed — were  blinded.  (Ibid.)  Seeking  and  obtaining 
salvation  : — So  many  seek  salvation  and  are  not  saved  because  they  seek  amiss.  To 
■eek  that  we  may  find,  three  things  are  to  be  observed.    I.  The  time.     "  Seek  first 


CHAP.  XI.]  BOMANS.  403 

the  kingdom  of  God."  If  thou  seekest  it  not  first  bat  at  leisure,  it  is  a  thousand  to 
one  thou  shalt  never  find  it.  Usually  men  postpone  this  to  their  age  :  in  their 
youth  nothing  but  pleasure ;  old  heads  must  not  be  set  on  young  shoulders ;  but 
when  they  lie  upon  their  death  bed  then  send  for  the  minister.  Is  this  enough  ?  I 
should  marvel  if  God  should  be  content  with  the  dregs  of  thy  life  when  the  devil 
Lath  had  the  flower.  There  is  an  old  saying — He  that  neglecteth  the  occasion,  the 
occasion  will  neglect  him,  as  it  appeareth  by  the  example  of  the  five  foolish  virgins. 
II.  The  place.  He  that  hath  lost  a  ring  and  seeks  a  mile  from  the  place  where  he 
lost  it  is  not  likely  to  find  it.  Seek  salvation  where  it  is  to  be  found :  that  is  in 
Christ,  in  whom  are  all  treasures.  The  Jews  sought  it  in  themselves  and  missed 
of  it.  But  where  is  Christ  to  be  found?  In  the  house  of  God;  not  in  an 
alehouse  and  the  meetings  of  profane  men.  III.  The  manneb.  1.  Seek  pain- 
fully, as  the  woman  for  her  groat.  The  mine  of  gold  lies  not  in  the  first  spade, 
it  lies  deeper,  it  is  well  if  after  all  pains  we  find  it  at  the  last.  2.  Continue  seeking ; 
he  that  continues  to  the  end  shall  be  saved ;  it  is  worth  all  our  pains  though  all 
should  seek  a  thousand  years,  give  not  over  till  thou  hast  found.  Israel  sought  for  sal- 
vation, in  the  obedience  of  the  law,  but  found  it  not ;  what  shall,  then,  become  of  the 
wicked  who  seek  not  at  all :  of  those  who  seek  only  vanities.  (Elnathan  Parr,  B.B.) 
God  hath  given  them  the  spirit  of  slumber. — The  spirit  of  slumber: — Blindness 
of  mind  and  hardness  is  a  spiritual  lethargy,  when  neither  the  thundering  noise  of 
the  law  nor  the  sweet  sound  of  the  gospel  can  awake  us.  1.  The  Greek  word  used 
by  Paul  from  the  Septuagint  signifies  pricking  and  compunction  (see  margin). 
This  meaning  may  well  be  retained,  dead  sleep  being  called  compunction  by  a 
figure ;  the  effect  being  put  for  the  cause  because  no  compunction  can  awake  it,  or 
the  cause  for  the  effect  because  compunction  is  the  cause  of  dead  sleep  in  the  mind. 

2.  There  is  a  double  compunction  :  one  coming  from  sorrow  for  sin  (Acts  ii.  37), 
another  from  envy  and  mahce,  which  was  in  the  Jews,  because  the  gospel  of  Christ, 
whom  they  crucified,  was  as  a  dagger  at  their  hearts.  This  compunction  is  the  cause 
of  such  a  deadness  of  mind  that,  as  a  man  in  a  dead  sleep  hears  and  understands 
nothing,  so  an  envious  mind  is  impatient  to  hear  or  conceive  anything  for  its  good. 
Excess  of  grief  brings  a  failing  of  the  mind,  and  envy  is  a  gnawing  of  the  heart 
against  our  neighbour.  When  Stephen  preached  the  Jews  gnashed  their  teeth  and 
stopped  their  ears.  And  when  Paul  preaches  at  Antioch  the  Jews  rail  and  contra- 
dict, so  that  a  man  had  as  good  speak  to  a  dead  man  as  unto  them.  Chrysostom 
expounds  it  as  a  nailing  to  their  passion,  whereby  they  are  unmovable  in  their 
perfidiousness.  Some  translate  it  ecstasy,  for  envy  makes  a  man  beside  himself, 
capable  of  no  good  instruction.  Cyprian  calls  it  transpunction,  as  a  vessel  having 
a  hole  stricken  through  the  bottom,  holds  not  the  liquor  put  in  it.  3.  The  text 
teaches  that  God  in  His  just  judgment  gives  over  such  as  are  enemies  to  the  gospel 
to  be  bhnded,  that  they  cannot  convert  (John  ix.  39;  2  Cor.  iv.  3).    I.  Many  in 

WOBLDLT    THINGS    ABE     OF     GBEAT    APPEEHENSION    AND    JUDGMENT,    AND    YET   AS    BLIND 

AS  BEETLES,  VEBY  BLOCKS  IN  BELiGioN.  Eyes  they  havc,  they  are  no  fools,  yet 
they  perceive  not  the  things  belonging  to  their  peace.  As  bats  and  owls  see  best  in 
the  night,  so  their  chiefest  understanding  is  of  worldly  matters.  As  a  mole  within 
the  ground  is  nimble  and  quick,  but  above  the  ground  can  make  little  shift,  so  talk 
or  deal  with  these  men  of  earthly  matters,  they  are  cunning,  but  speak  of  religion 
and  you  pose  them  as  with  a  strange  language.  Achitophel,  a  great  statesman, 
goes  home  in  a  dudgeon,  and  in  a  sullen  fit  hangs  himself ;  could  any  idiot  have 
done  more  foolishly  ?  Pray  that  thy  wit  may  be  sanctified,  otherwise  thou  mayest 
prove  an  enemy  and  be  besotted  with  the  worst  folly.  It  is  a  fearful  state  to  envy 
the  gospel :  such  are  given  over  to  the  devil  to  be  blinded,  and  what  will  not 
the  devil  bring  such  unto  ?  Needs  must  he  go  whom  the  devil  drives  :  as  he 
tumbled  the  swine  into  the  sea,  so  will  he  thrust  such  into  all  iniquity.  II.  To  have 
LYES  AND  NOT  TO  SEE,  to  kuow  the  truth  and  to  have  no  power  to  apply  it  to  our 
consciences,  is  feaeful.  It  is  uncomfortable  to  be  bom  bodily  bUnd,  much  more  is 
spiritual  bhndness  uncomfortable.  When  Christ  came  nigh  Jerusalem  He  wept 
over  it  for  the  blindness  of  the  Jews.  When  He  raised  Lazarus  He  groaned  in  the 
spirit  for  the  hardness  of  their  hearts.  A  grievous  plague  must  blindness  of  mind 
be  when  Christ  so  wept  and  groaned  for  them  which  were  stricken  with  it,  when 
He  never  cried  Oh !  for  all  His  own  bitter  passions.  Kepent  of  thy  malice  to  the 
Word  that  thou  mayest  see.  (Ibid.)  The  hardened  sinner: — I.  His  moeaIi 
CONDITION.  1.  Insensible.  2.  BUnd.  3.  Prejudiced.  II.  The  cause.  1.  Resistance 
of  grace.    2.  Retributive  justice.    III.  The  consequences.     1.  Misery.     2.  Despair. 

3.  Death,  unless  God  interpose  in  aovereign  mercy.      (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)         Xhe 


404  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xi,' 

present  coTidition  of  the  Jewi : — I.  Thb  besult  of  lono-oontinukd  disobediknck. 
n.  A  LiTEBAL  FULFILMENT  OF  PBOPHEOT.  Instance — 1.  Their  moral  insensibility, 
blindness,  and  prejudice.  2.  Their  exposure  to  plunder  and  misfortune.  3.  Their 
intellectual  deterioration.  4.  Their  servility  and  subjection  to  oppression.  III.  A 
LESSON  TO  THE  WORLD.      (Ibid.)  Spiritual  blindness : — "  My  blindness  came  on 

very  gradually.  I  first  began  to  notice  that  I  could  not  see  so  far  as  I  used  to  do, 
and  one  morning  when  looking  from  the  window  I  could  only  see  across  the  road. 
As  time  went  on  I  could  see  no  further  than  the  mantelpiece,  and  at  length  I  had 
to  grope  my  way  about  the  room ;  and  now  no  oue  knows  what  that  darkness 
means  but  one  who  has  experienced  the  same."  As  she  concluded  her  sad  story, 
I  thought  that  was  just  like  spiritual  blindness.  Some  sin  comes,  and  gradually 
obscures  the  light  of  God  in  the  soul.  By  and  by  the  darkness  deepens,  until  at 
length  it  is  darkness  which  may  be  felt.  Only  the  removal  of  the  cause  of  darkness 
will  secure  a  return  of  light ;  and  only  when  sin  is  forgiven  and  abandoned  is 
it  possible  to  walk  in  the  light  of  God's  countenance.  Let  their  table  be  made  a 
snare. — Abuse  of  privileges : — David  is  speaking  both  as  a  prophet  and  as  a  type 
of  the  Messiah  (Fsa.  Ixix.  22,  23).  His  words  are  quoted  and  applied  to  Jesus 
(chap.  XV.  3  ;  John  ii.  17  ;  xix.  28,  29),  and  applied  to  Judas  (Acts  i.  20).  Similar 
denunciations  are  to  be  similarly  interpreted.  They  are  not  the  utterances  of 
personal  or  vindictive  feeling,  but  the  denunciations  and  predictions  of  God's  Spirit. 
I.  Table.  What  would  otherwise  have  been  for  good.  1.  Daily  and  common 
mercies.  2.  Spiritual  privileges.  Sin  brings  a  curse  which  converts  food  into 
poison  (Mai.  iL  2).  "  Their  table."  A  believer's  table  is  spread  for  him  by  God 
(Psa.  xxiii.  5) ;  the  table  of  the  unbeliever  is  regarded  as  his  own.  II.  Snare. 
Cause  of  unexpected  destruction.  Their  very  mercies  are  an  occasion  of  sin  and 
misery.  To  faith  the  means  of  grace  are  salvation  ;  to  unbelief,  a  snare.  Table  a 
snare.  When  the  gospel  proves  a  savour  of  death  unto  death.  The  gospel  table 
was  spread  first  for  the  Jews  (Matt.  xxii.  28) ;  the  preaching  of  forgiveness  began 
at  Jerusalem  (Luke  xxiv.  47),  and  being  rejected  proved  a  snare.  III.  Trap — 
a  capture.  The  sinner  caught  in  Satan's  trap  when  he  rejects  the  Saviour.  Note 
the  gradation — a  snare  for  the  foot,  a  trap  for  the  whole  body.  The  Old  Testament 
falsely  interpreted  confirms  the  Jews  in  unbelief ;  the  New  Testament  disbelieved 
becomes  the  occasion  of  deeper  sin.  In  opposing  the  gospel  the  Jews  filled  up  their 
sins  (1  Thess.  ii.  16).  In  this  sin  the  wrath  of  God  came  upon  them  to  the  uttermost. 
Their  passover-table  was  made  their  trap.  Multitudes  thus  caught  in  the  siege  of 
Jerusalem  perished.  IV.  Stumbling-block — that  which  causes  to  fall  into  a  snare 
or  trap.  The  gospel  when  believed  raises  men  to  heaven ;  rejected  it  trips  them 
into  the  bottomless  pit.  Christ  a  foundation  to  some,  a  stumbling-block  to  others 
(chap.  ix.  32,  33).     (T.  Robinson,  D.D.) 

Vers.  11-22.  I  say  then.  Have  they  stumbled  that  they  should  fall?— r?!« 
rejection  of  Israel : — I.  How  occasioned.  1.  They  stumbled  at  Christ.  2.  Were 
rejected  because  of  their  unbelief.  II.  How  overruled.  1.  For  the  benefit  of  the 
Gentiles.  2.  Indirectly  for  their  own.  Ill,  How  finally  compensated.  1.  By 
their  fulness.    2.  By  enlarged  blessing  upon  the  world.      (<7.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The 

fall  of  Israel  is — I.  Temporary  (vers.  11-16).  1.  It  was  overruled  for  the  benefit 
of  the  world,  because  in  consequence  of  their  unbelief  the  preachers  of  the  gospel 
turned  to  the  Gentiles  (Acts  xiii.  16).  2.  Their  fulness— (1)  Must  be  the  occasion 
of  still  greater  blessing  (vers.  12-15).  (2)  Must  be  the  reflex  effect  of  the  success 
of  the  gospel  among  the  Gentiles  (vers.  13,  14).  (3)  Is  guaranteed  by  the  firstfruits 
(vers.  15, 16).  II.  Admonitory.  1  We  should  not  despise  but  pity  them  (vers.  17, 
18).  2.  Their  fall— (1)  Is  a  warning  to  us  (vers.  19-21).  (2)  Should  excite  admira- 
tion of  the  goodness  and  severity  of  God  (ver.  22).  (3)  Should  awaken  hope  and 
efforts  for  their  recovery.  (Ibid.)  Now  if  the  fall  of  them  be  the  riches  of  the 
world,  .  .  .  how  much  more  their  fulness  ? — The  calling  of  the  Jews  the  enriching 
of  the  world : — Learn — I.  God  makes  all  mutations  of  states  to  serve  to  the  good 
OF  the  elect.  If  the  Jews  stand  it  is  good ;  so  is  it  if  they  fall,  and  shall  be 
in  their  rising  again.  The  prosperity  of  Egypt  shall  serve  the  good  of  Abraham ; 
the  destruction  of  Egypt  the  good  of  his  children.  "  All  His  ways  are  good  to  such 
as  keep  His  testimonies."  II.  The  conversion  op  the  Jews  shall  be  the  riches 
OF  the  world.  The  more  receive  of  the  treasures  of  God's  grace  the  greater 
is  every  one's  part.  So  is  it  not  in  the  treasure  of  princes.  If  the  king  bestow  a 
thousand  pounds  upon  one  man  it  is  a  great  gift ;  if  upon  two  it  is  the  less  to  each 
by  half ;  if  upon  a  thousand  it  is  but  a  small  matter  to  every  one.     But  in  God's 


CHAP,  n.]  BOMANS.  4U5 

treasures  mnltitades  of  partakers  diminish  not  but  increase  another's  part.  The 
more  drink  of  the  waters  of  life  the  more  floweth  the  fountain,  the  more  the 
merrier.  Where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together,  there  is  Christ,  but  where 
more,  there  He  is  the  more  graciously.  The  prayer  of  one  availeth  much,  how 
much  more  the  prayers  of  many  righteous  ?  Force  united  is  the  stronger.  Many 
streams  make  a  great  river,  many  drops  a  great  flood,  many  sparks  a  great  flame. 
How  might  we  prevail  with  God  if  our  whole  people  would  join  with  one  mind  and 
affection  in  the  service  of  God !  III.  Thb  gospel,  faith,  repentance,  Ac,  abb 
TBDE  RICHES.  Gold,  silver,  &c.,  but  shadows  to  these ;  therefore  the  man  that  had 
his  barns  full  and  his  conscience  empty,  not  being  rich  in  God,  is  called  fool.  Hast 
thou  silver  and  gold  ?  But  if  thou  hast  not  a  good  conscience,  the  poorest  man 
that  fearetb  God  will  not  change  states  with  thee.  IV.  The  conversion  of  thb 
Jews  shall  be  our  riches.  It  should  make  us  think  long  for  their  calling.  Gain 
is  pleasing  to  hear  of,  but  more  to  have  it.  Knowledge  shall  then  increase  upon  us 
as  the  waters  that  cover  the  sea ;  the  light  of  the  moon  shall  be  as  the  sun,  and  the 
light  of  the  sun  sevenfold.  Zeal  and  all  good  graces  shall  increase.  A  great  light 
is  now  risen,  but  a  greater  shall  arise.  Let  us  pray  and  long  for  the  revealing  of 
such  riches,  and  in  the  meantime  mourn  for  the  hardness  of  the  Jews,  and  cry 
unto  God,  "Visit  Thy  ancient  people  with  Thy  salvation."  V.  The  casting  off 
OP  THE  Jews  was  odb  calling  ;  but  the  calling  of  the  Jews  shall  not  be  our 
CASTING  off,  but  OUT  greater  enriching  in  grace,  and  that  two  ways :  1.  In  regard  of 
the  company  of  believers  when  the  thousands  of  Israel  shall  come  in,  which  shall 
doubtless  cause  many  Gentiles  which  now  he  in  ignorance,  error,  and  doubt  receive 
the  gospel  and  join  with  them.  The  world  shall  then  be  a  golden  world,  rich  in 
golden  men,  saith  Ambrose.  2.  In  respect  of  the  graces  which  shall  then  in  more 
abundance  be  rained  down  on  the  Church.  There  shall  be  more  good,  and  they 
shall  be  also  more  good.  (Elnatlian  Parr,  B.D.)  Inasmuch  as  I  am  the  apostle 
of  the  Gentiles,  I  magnify  mine  office. — Paul  magnifying  his  office: — I.  Paul's 
OFFICE.  The  apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  Specially — 1.  Commissioned.  2.  Qualified. 
3.  Successful.  H.  How  he  magnified  it.  1.  Not  by  boasting  of  it,  but  faithfully 
fulfilling  it.  2.  Not  by  confining  himself  to  the  Gentiles,  but  seeking  the  benefit  of 
all.  3.  Not  by  glorying  in  the  fall  of  Israel,  but  anticipating  the  blessings  as- 
sociated with  their  recovery.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Church  offices  and  magnifying 
them: — In  the  Church — I.  Every  man  has  his  own  office.  1.  Higher  or  lower. 
2.  Assigned  by  the  Great  Head.  3.  For  which  he  is  specially  qualified.  4.  There- 
fore responsible.  II.  Should  magnify  it.  1.  Not  by  glorying  in  it,  but  by  rightly 
appreciating  it.  2.  Not  by  assumption,  but  fidelity.  3.  Not  by  despising  others, 
but  encouraging  them.      (Ibid.)  Necessaries  of  the  ministerial  office : — To  be 

prepared  for  this  office  we  must — 1.  Seek  to  possess  ourselves  with  the  most  just 
and  influential  apprehensions  of  its  nature  and  high  designs.  2.  Cherish  a  devout 
persuasion  of  its  efficacy.  3.  Endeavour  to  imbibe  and  visibly  to  cultivate  the 
spirit  appropriate  to  its  discharge.  4.  Give  to  its  fulfilment  the  unreserved  and 
constant  dedication  of  our  highest  powers.  This  must  appear  under  the  form  of — 
(1)  Preparation.  (2)  Public  labour.  (3)  Private  assiduity.  5.  Continue  in  the 
course  thus  described — (1)  With  perseverance  and  watchfulness  unto  the  end.  (2) 
With  a  meek  endurance  of  every  trial  and  privation  to  which  it  may  expose  us. 
(3)  With  cheerful  making  of  every  sacrifice  necessary  to  its  fulfilment  6.  Cultivate 
habitual  and  solemn  anticipations  of  its  issues.  {R.  UTAH,  D.D.)  The  dignity 
of  the  Christian  ministry: — The  word  "magnify,"  employed  to  express  the 
qualities  of  an  object  or  pursuit,  conveys  the  idea  of  something  highly  esteemed, 
honourable,  glorious.  And  this  is  the  estimate  which  Paul  put  on  the  office  he  sus- 
tained as  a  minister  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  dignity  of  the  Christian  ministry  may 
be  seen  by  contemplating — I.  The  authority  by  which  it  acts.  That  the  Christian 
ministry  has  had  its  origin  in  an  appointment  directly  from  Heaven,  it  were  folly 
for  any  to  question  who  bow  to  the  teachings  of  revelation.  This  claim  has  been 
asserted  from  the  beginning,  and  in  not  a  single  instance  has  it  ever  been  modified 
or  relinquished.  I  say  not  that  the  ministry  of  the  New  Testament  is  in  all  respects 
identical  with  that  of  the  Old.  There  is  now  no  official  earthly  priesthood,  for  the 
one  great  Sacrifice  has  been  offered  "  once  for  all."  And  yet  I  do  say  that,  as  a 
Divinely  appointed  agency  to  meet  the  spiritual  wants  of  the  world,  the  ministry  is 
not  peculiar  to  the  Christian  dispensation.  The  ministry,  and,  in  its  most  important 
attributes,  the  Christian  ministry  too,  has  existed  under  every  revelation  of  the 
gospel  as  the  medium  of  spiritual  intercourse  between  Heaven  and  earth.  Cliange 
of  names,  or  of  forms,  or  of  outward  service,  does  nothing  to  disturb  what  is  strictly 


406  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  XI, 

essential  to  the  great  ministerial  function,  nor  to  mar  the  integrity  of  that  graciDUf 
system  in  which  it  has  ever  held  an  indispensable  place.  II.  The  objects  it  con- 
templates. In  all  the  departments  of  man's  social  condition  we  discover  ample 
proofs  of  the  salutary  influence  which  the  ministry  is  fitted  to  exert.  The  influence 
of  the  pulpit  upon  the  intellectual  condition  of  man  is  a  subject  worthy  the  pro- 
foundest  thought  of  all  who  are  lovers  of  their  kind.  There  is  no  agency  under 
heaven  that  can  bear  with  so  much  power  upon  the  convictions  and  motives  of 
humanity  as  the  ministry  of  the  gospel.  Compared  with  the  attainments  of  the 
human  mind  under  the  influence  of  Christianity,  all  its  achievements  amid  the 
most  favourable  auspices  of  paganism  are  light  and  trivial  It  was  reserved  for 
teachers  mightier  than  those  of  the  Academy  or  the  Lyceum  to  proclaim  to  the 
world  those  great  principles  upon  which  its  elevation,  purity,  and  glory  are  made 
to  rest.  In  like  manner  must  it  be  said  that  the  ministry  of  the  gospel  constitutes 
a  most  essential  element  in  the  progress  of  civihsation.  The  science  of  government, 
the  theory  of  civil  and  religious  liberty,  are  properly  understood  and  appreciated  only 
where  the  pulpit  is  true  to  its  glorious  mission.  But  to  the  ministry  of  the  gospel  apper- 
tains still  higher  honour.  The  gospel  has  to  do  pre-eminently  with  man's  spiritual 
nature,  and  has  a  direct  bearing  upon  interests  that  affect  his  eternal  destiny.  The 
ministry  goes  forth  on  its  benevolent  mission.  It  preaches  the  gospel — the  gospel 
as  a  source  of  light,  making  known  a  new  element  in  the  character  of  God — an 
element  of  mercy.  It  preaches  the  gospel  as  a  source  of  power,  by  which  the  bondage 
of  depravity  is  broken,  the  prey  is  taken  from  the  mighty,  and  the  captive  is  made 
free.  It  preaches  the  gospel  as  a  source  of  consolation,  by  which  the  spirit  is 
cheered  amid  all  the  trials  of  life,  till  Death  itself  falls  a  conquered  monster  at  his 
feet,  and  he  is  away  to  the  bosom  of  his  Father  and  his  God.  And  I  ask,  must  not 
the  instrumentality  that  stands  connected  with  such  glorious  results  as  these  be  of 
all  others  the  most  dignified  and  important  ?  III.  The  means  which  it  employs. 
Though  several  agencies  might  be  mentioned  having  a  concurrent  influence  in 
accomplishing  the  objects  of  the  ministry,  yet  there  is  one  that  holds  such  a  pre- 
eminence above  all  others,  that  we  shall  confine  our  attention  to  it  alone :  it  is 
truth—"  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus."  How  comprehensive  and  profound,  how 
noble  and  soul-stirring  the  themes  there  presented  for  investigation  !  IV.  The  aids 
THAT  ARE  PLEDGED  TO  IT.  Among  thcsc  wc  Specially  note  the  Spirit  and  Providence 
of  God.  Is  there  anything  the  mind  can  contemplate  more  truly  sublime  and 
beautiful  than  this  alliance  of  the  weakness  of  humanity  with  the  strength  of  Divinity? 
thus  constituting  the  ministry  associate  labourers  with  the  eternal  God  in  the 
regeneration  of  tibe  world !  But  the  Providence  of  God  is  also  pledged  to  aid  in  the 
same  great  enterprise.  Christ,  the  Author  of  the  gospel  and  the  Founder  of  the 
ministry,  is  "  Head  over  all  things  to  the  Church."  Not  only  by  Him  were  all 
things  created,  but  by  Him  also  are  they  sustained  and  controlled  and  made  sub- 
servient to  the  accomplishment  of  His  purposes  of  grace.  (D.  Kennedy,  D.D.)  The 
ministerial  office  not  an  easy  one  : — To  one  who  regretted  to  Dr.  Johnson  that  he  had 
not  been  a  clergyman  because  the  life  of  a  clergyman  was  an  easy  and  comfortable 
one,  the  Doctor  replied,  "  The  Ufe  of  a  conscientious  clergyman  is  not  easy.  I  have 
always  considered  a  clergyman  as  the  father  of  a  larger  family  than  he  is  able  to  main- 
tain. No,  sir,  I  do  not  envy  a  clergyman's  life  as  an  easy  life,  nor  do  I  envy  the  clergy- 
man who  makes  it  an  easy  life."  If  by  any  means  I  may  provoke  to  emulation 
them  which  are  my  flesh. — Provoking  to  emulation : — My  text  calls  us  to  consider — 
I.  The  heabt  of  man  in  a  state  of  indifference  towards  the  unspeakable  gift 
OF  God.  1.  The  Jew  was  satisfied  with  that  which  ought  not  to  have  satisfied 
him,  and  he  was  indifferent  towards  that  for  which  he  should  have  craved.  He 
had  sacrifices,  and  should  have  been  watching  for  the  Lamb  of  God.  He  had 
a  schoolmaster  whose  mission  it  was  to  lead  him  to  Christ,  but  he  was  satisfied  with 
the  pedagogue.  Toward  certain  national  blessings  he  was  anything  but  indifferent, 
but  for  the  incomparable  blessings  of  the  kingdom  he  had  no  heart.  2.  All  this  is 
not  so  mach  Jewish  as  human.  The  emulation  of  our  first  mother  was,  by  the 
primitive  temptation,  misdirected.  Abel  was  provoked  to  emulation  by  the  promise 
of  redemption,  but  Cain  was  excited  to  anger,  and  Adam's  immediate  posterity 
soon  became  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  Noah  was  moved  vrith  fear,  but  the 
world  was  immovable.  Abraham  was  inspired  to  become  a  wanderer,  but  his  near 
relatives  sought  a  continuing  city.  Israel  was  stirred  up  by  Moses  to  leave  Egypt, 
but  soon  they  preferred  to  return.  From  the  time  of  the  dedication  of  the  temple 
the  nation  began  to  decline,  and  then  (Isa.  i.  8 ;  Hos.  vii.  8 ;  viii.  9)  no  promise 
or  prophecy  provoked  them  to  emulation.    3.  In  the  fulness  of  time  the  Son  of  Man 


CHAP.  XI.]  ROMANS.  407 

came  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  is  lost.  But  His  generation  was  crooked  and 
perverse  toward  Him  ;  "  His  own  "  slew  Him,  and  His  disciples  were  slow  of  heart 
toward  Him.  An  inferior  being  would  not  have  been  slain.  Christ  was  too  good 
for  the  people.  Their  emulation  was  too  low  to  reach  such  an  object.  At  and  after 
the  day  of  Pentecost,  many  Jews  were  provoked  to  emulation,  but  this  emulation 
passed  away.  4.  No  sooner  had  the  Ught  of  the  world  begun  to  shine  than  a  cry 
arose  for  the  twilight  of  Judaism  and  for  the  night  of  Paganism,  Men  asked  and 
received,  they  sought  and  found.  And  the  history  of  the  Church  is  very  much  the 
sad  story  of  the  substitution  of  error  for  truth.  The  Reformation  provoked  to 
emulation,  and  subsequently  Wesley  and  Whitfield  ;  but  now  as  heretofore  we  seem 
to  hear  a  cry,  '•  Not  this  man,  but  Barabbas."  "  Not  Christ,  but  Antichrist."  We 
might  speak  of  millions  outside  Christendom  whose  emulation  carries  them  no 
higher  than  a  senseless  idol.  We  might  speak  of  Christendom  content  with  the 
human  where  nothing  should  satisfy  but  the  Divine.  5.  But  let  us  look  at  "  our 
own  flesh."  Multitudes  in  our  England  live  but  to  gratify  the  lowest  appetites;  their 
emulation  does  not  raise  them  to  the  level  of  the  beasts  that  perish.  Many,  free 
from  animal  lusts,  live  for  light  pleasure  and  for  small  enjoyments.  A  large 
majority  live  to  earn  and  to  eat  the  bread  that  perisheth.  Some  live  to  climb 
to  dizzy  heights  in  the  social  scale.  Now  that  which  is  good  among  these  varied 
objects  is  far  below  the  highest  good.  There  is  a  spirit  in  man  to  satisfy  as  well 
as  a  body.  There  is  Godlike  blessedness  within  reach  as  well  as  temporary 
pleasure,  bread  that  endureth  unto  everlasting  life,  honour  that  cometh  from  God, 
but  toward  these  things  the  multitude  in  this  nation  have  no  emulation.  6.  And 
among  those  who  profess  to  have  accepted  the  highest  good  we  often  observe  a  low 
emulation.  One  has  the  form  of  godliness  without  the  power.  Another  has 
a  zeal  of  God,  but  not  according  to  knowledge.  Others  limit  their  religion  to 
orthodox  opinions,  or  sensations,  or  correct  conduct.  The  godly  emulation  of  the 
people  is  low.  H.  Behold  One  who  has  Himself  received  the  unspeakable  gift, 
8TEIVINO  TO  EEMOVE  iNDHTEEENCE  FROM  OTHERS.  1.  There  was  much  in  Christ 
calculated  to  arouse.  He  baptized  with  fire.  He  brought  not  peace  only,  but 
a  sword.  The  spirit  of  His  ministry  was  the  spirit  of  expostulation  with  those 
who  were  satisfied  with  evil  called  good,  or  with  a  lower  kind  of  good  than  He 
offered.  He  spake  as  the  old  prophet  (Isa.  Iv.  2  ;  cf.  John  iv.  13,  14 ;  vi.  27).  2. 
John  Baptist  preached  in  harmony  with  this  spirit  of  Christ  Jesus.  The  axe  is  to 
be  laid  to  the  root  of  the  tree  ;  chaff  is  to  be  burned  with  unquenchable  fire.  And 
when  men  were  inclined  to  rest  in  him,  he  cried,  "  He  that  cometh  after  me 
is  mightier  than  I."  3.  The  manifest  tendency  of  the  teaching  of  Jesus  to  provoke 
to  emulation  led  in  part  to  His  crucifixion.  It  was  this  which  imprisoned  Peter, 
and  stoned  Stephen,  and  beheaded  James,  and  scourged  Paul  and  Silas.  4.  The 
life  and  example  of  Paul  wrought  upon  indifference.  He  provoked  the  indolent  by 
his  activity,  the  bigot  by  his  charity,  the  careless  by  his  consistency,  the  change- 
able by  his  belief,  the  half-hearted  by  his  zeal,  and  the  cold-hearted  by  the  heat 
of  his  enthusiasm  and  love.  Unbelievers  and  false  brethren  were  not  at  ease  in 
his  presence.  He  stirred  men  also  by  direct  endeavours  for  their  salvation.  "  If 
by  any  means  I  may  save  some."  "  Any  means  " — by  preaching  and  teaching, 
entreaty,  persuasion ;  wise  as  a  serpent,  harmless  as  a  dove,  all  things  to  all  men 
to  save  some.  5.  Oh  I  for  Paul-like  men  to  provoke  to  emulation  them  which  are 
our  flesh !  According  to  our  power  and  opportunity  let  us  try  and  do  it.  Our  fellow- 
citizens  are  near  us.  We  must  travel  sixteen  thousand  miles  to  stir  the  Japanese  and 
Chinese.  Our  own  flesh  are  always  with  us.  They  see  our  conduct,  and  under- 
stand our  language.  To  foreigners  we  may  be  unable,  individually,  to  set  a  good 
example ;  we  cannot  address  them,  but  we  have  opportunity  to  provoke  to  emulation 
our  own  people.  Suffer  the  example  of  Paul  to  provoke  you  to  this  good  work.  But 
I  have  something  better  to  present  than  the  example  of  Paul,  even  that  of  Christ. 
Is  this  pattern  too  perfect?  Then  for  the  present  follow  Paul,  and  let  him  be 
your  pedagogue  unto  Christ.    {S.Martin.)       Concern  for  kindred : — I.  0  or  kindred 

HAVE  SPECIAL  CLAIMS  UPON  OUB  CONSIDERATION.  II.  No  MEANS  SHOULD  BE  SPARED  TO 
AWAKEN  THEIR  RELIGIOUS  FEELING.  III.  NOTHING  SHORT  OF  THEIR  SALVATION  SHOULD 
SATISFY  US.     IV.  If  WE  CANNOT  SAVE  ALL,  AT  LEAST  LET  US  SAVE  SOME.     (J.  Lytll,  D.D.) 

For  if  the  casting  away  of  them  be  the  reconciling  of  the  world,  what  shall  the 
receiving  of  them  be,  but  life  from  the  dead  ? — The  conversion  of  the  Jews : — The 
rejection  of  the  Jews  deeply  affected  the  apostle.  But  there  were  three  things 
which  afforded  him  some  consolation  in  the  view  of  it.  They  were  not  aU  cast 
away ;  their  rejection  was  the  occasion  of  spreading  the  gospel  among  the  Gentiles  j 


408  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHiF.  XI. 


they  should  yet  be  called  in,  and  made  instrumental  of  enlarging  the  Church  of 
Christ.    I  shall  show — I.  That  the  Jews  will  be  called  in.     God  has  dispersed 
them,  and  therefore  His  calling  them  ia  must  imply  not  only  the  taking  away  of 
the  veil  from  their  hearts,  but  also  His  restoring  them  to  their  own  land.     These 
two  things  cannot  be  separated  any  more  than  cause  and  effect.    1.  This  event  is 
repeatedly  foretold  (Isa.  xxvii.  12,  13 ;  Ezek.  xi.  16-20 ;  Hos.  i.  10,  11 ;  Amos  ix. 
14,  15  ;  Zech.  xiv.  21).    2.  The  preservation  of  the  Jews  confirms  these  prediotiona. 
They  have  been  scattered  among  all  nations  for  two  thousand  years,  and  yet  remain 
distinct,  while  aU  other  conquered  nations  have  become  blended  with  their  conquerors. 
What  other  reason  can  be  assigned  for  this  but  the  Divine  purpose  of  restoring 
them  to  their  native  land  ?     In  this  view  they  have  been,  ever  since  their  disper- 
sion, a  standing  monument  of  the  truth  of  God  in  His  predictions,  and  of  the  faith- 
fulness of  God  in  His  promise  to  Abraham.     3.  This  is  further  confirmed  by  their 
peculiar  circumstances.    They  never  have  been  permitted  to  own  any  particular 
country,  or  to  establish  any  particular  government.     And  though  they  have  gener- 
ally enjoyed  temporal  prosperity,  yet  their  wealth  has  always  consisted  in  personal 
and  not  in  landed  property.     So  that  they  have  no  attachment  to  any  particular 
place  or  government,  but  constantly  stand  ready  to  march  whenever  the  promised 
Messiah  shall  lead  them  in  triumph  to  their  native  land.    II.  Some  of  the  happt 
EFFECTS  WHICH  WILL  FLOW  FROM  THIS  EVENT.     1.  It  will  greatly  coufirm  the  truth  of 
Divine  revelation.    There  are  more  particular  and  express  predictions  concerning 
the  restoration  of  the  Jews  than  conceming  any  other  event.    And  whenever  it 
shall  take  place  it  wiU  be  more  easy  to  discern  the  agreement  between  the  predic- 
tions and  their  accomplishment  than  it  has  been  in  any  other  case  whatever.     2. 
According  to  the  text  the  restoration  of  the  Jews  shall  have  a  greater  tendency  to 
convert  mankind  than  their  dispersion  had.     Their  dispersion  broke  down  the 
middle  wall  of  partition,  and  opened  the  way  for  spreading  the  gospel  among  the 
nations.     The  same  effect  in  a  greater  degree  shall  be  produced  by  their  restoration. 
And  this  may  be  greatly  owing  to  the  methods  God  may  employ  to  bring  it  about. 
It  is  supposed  by  many  that  He  will  convert  them  in  the  places  where  they  are 
dispersed  before  He  conducts  them  to  Jerusalem.     And  should  this  be  the  case  it 
will  have  a  powerful  tendency  to  awaken  the  attention  of  all  nations  to  the  gospel 
(Zech.  viii.  20).     3.  It  will  have  a  direct  and  happy  tendency  to  bring  on  the  latter- 
day  glory.     It  is  easy  to  see  how  it  will  in  many  ways  facilitate  the  universal  spread 
of  the  gospel.     And  there  is  no  doubt  they  will  be  as  much  engaged  to  spread  the 
gospel  as  they  ever  had  been  to  oppose  it.     Their  return,  therefore,  the  apostle 
represents  as  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  who  will  then  be  united  with  them,  and  so 
all  Israel  shall  be  saved ;  that  is,  the  whole  number  of  God's  elect  who  are  His 
spiritual  Israel.     IH.  Impbovement.     1.  It  appears  from  what  has  been  said  that 
there  is  a  growing  evidence  in  favour  of  the  Divine  inspiration  of  the  Scriptures  by 
the  fulfilling  of  prophecies.    The  evidence  of  miracles  has  ceased ;  but  the  evidence 
of  prophecy  has  been  continued  and  increased  from  the  day  that  God  foretold  that 
the  seed  of  the  woman  should  bruise  the  serpent's  head.     2.  The  sovereignty  of 
God  appears  plainly  from  His  conduct  towards  His  peculiar  people.    He  claims  a 
right  to  give  temporal  favours  to  one  and  not  to  another,  and  to  give  spiritual 
blessings  to  one  and  not  to  another.     He  promised  to  give  to  Abraham  and  to  his 
seed  such  temporal  and  spiritual  blessings  as  He  denied  to  mankind  in  general. 
And  though  for  a  long  time  past  He  has  scattered  them  through  the  world,  yet  He 
has  exercised  a  particular  providence  over  them  by  which  they  are  preparing  to 
stand  again  as  His  peculiar  people  at  the  head  of  the  religious  world.     3.  If  the 
restoration  of  the  Jews  shall  produce  such  effects  as  have  been  mentioned,  then  we 
may  safely  conclude  that  God  is  as  really  promoting  the  prosperity  of  the  Church 
in  general  at  one  time  as  at  another.     He  was  as  really  fulfilling  His  promise  to 
Abraham  while  his  seed  were  four  hundred  years  in  bondage  as  while  He  was 
pouring  down  His  blessings  upon  them  in  the  land  of  promise.     God  is  never  slack, 
as  men  count  slackness,  in  carrying  into  effect  the  great  purposes  of  His  grace. 
God  promotes  the  fruitfulness  of  the  earth  by  cold  as  well  as  by  heat,  by  darkness 
as  well  as  by  light ;  just  so  He  promotes  the  prosperity  of  the  Church  by  all  the 
opposition  made  to  its  growth  and  enlargement.     The  friends  of  Christ  have  no  just 
ground  to  despond  at  the  apparently  slow  movements  of  the  wheels  of  providence, 
nor  His  enemies  to  hope  and  triumph.    In  due  time  the  Jews  will  be  restored  and 
.  converted,  and  the  gospel  will  spread  and  prevail.     4.  If  the  Jews  shall  be  called  in, 
then  we  cannot  expect  any  long  settled  peace  among  the  nations  till  that  event  shaU 
take  plaoe.    It  cannot  be  brought  about  without  disturbing  the  harmony  of  all 


•HAP.  zi.]  ROMANS.  409 

nations  where  they  reside,  and  through  whom  they  must  make  their  way  to  Judaea, 
which  is  in  the  possession  of  tlie  Mohammedans.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that 
the  Mohammedans  can  be  conquered  without  spreading  war  among  the  whole 
Eastern  world.  And  should  a  general  war  break  out  there,  it  would  directly  or 
indirectly  affect  all  Europe,  if  not  America.  6.  It  appears  from  what  has  been 
said  that  we  have  as  much  reason  to  believe  the  Jews  wUl  be  eventually  restored  to 
their  native  country  as  they  had  to  believe  the  coming  of  Christ.  There  was  a 
multitude  of  plain  predictions  in  the  Old  Testament  concerning  Christ,  which  the 
Jews  ought  to  have  believed,  but  there  are  as  many  both  in  the  Old  and  New 
Testament  concerning  the  restoration  of  the  Jews.  And  there  are  no  more  apparent 
difficulties  in  the  way  of  their  returning  to  their  native  land  than  there  were  in  the 
way  of  Christ's  coming  into  the  world.  But  Christians  have  been  very  unbelieving 
in  respect  to  their  return,  and  this  has  led  Christian  nations  to  despise  and  abuse 
that  ancient  people.  6.  Since  God  has  plainly  told  us  that  He  intends  to  deliver 
them  we  ought  to  desire  and  do  all  we  can  to  bring  about  that  great  and  happy 
event.  We  have  received  unspeakable  benefits  from  their  being  for  a  while  cast 
away,  and  are  promised  still  greater  benefits  from  their  predicted  restoration.  There 
ifl  no  ground  to  expect  the  restoration  of  the  Jews  without  the  aid  of  the  Christian 
world.  It  is  time,  therefore,  for  Christians  to  be  alive  to  the  great  work  they  have 
to  do.  7.  This  subject  teaches  us  the  indispensable  obligation  we  are  under  to 
believe,  and  love,  and  obey  the  sacred  oracles  which  the  Jews  so  long  preserved,  and 
at  length  conveyed  to  us  Gentiles.  (N.  Emmons,  D.D.)  The  benefit  retulting 
from  the  conversion  of  the  Jews : — The  calling  of  the  Jews  shall  bring  such  an  addi- 
tion of  happiness  to  the  world  that  it  shall  have  more  life,  spirit,  vigour,  put  into 
it  both  in  regard  to  Jews  and  Gentiles.  The  world  is  now  like  a  man  taken  with 
the  palsy  on  the  one  side,  for  though  it  live  on  the  side  of  the  Gentile,  yet  it  is  dead 
on  the  side  of  the  Jew,  and  therefore  in  that  regard  their  calling  shall  be  as  life 
from  the  dead.  Also  on  the  side  of  the  Gentile,  many  that  are  now  seduced 
by  false  teachers  shall  then  embrace  the  gospel  in  truth.  And  partly  because 
those  that  do  believe  shall  so  be  confirmed  and  increased,  that  in  compari- 
son their  former  life  shall  not  come  into  remembrance.  They  shall  live  more. 
{Elnathan  Parr,  B.D.)  For  if  the  trstCruit  be  holy,  the  lump  is  also  holy. 
— The  holiness  of  the  firstfruit  and  the  lamp : — 1.  Concerning  these  firstfruits 
the  law  is  set  down  (Lev.  xxiii,),  where  the  people  may  not  put  sickle  into 
their  corn  till  they  have  offered  a  sheaf  to  the  Lord,  aud  then  it  was  lawful  for 
them  to  reap  it.  Hence  by  allusion  is  our  Saviour  called  the  firstfruits  of  them 
that  sleep,  because  our  resurrection  depends  upon  and  is  assured  by  His.  Also 
when  they  had  their  corn  in,  and  made  ready  of  it  for  their  use,  they  might  not  eat 
of  it  till  they  had  offered  two  loaves  to  the  Lord,  and  then  was  their  whole  lump 
made  lawful  for  them  to  eat.  2.  God  commanded  these  ceremonies  to  teach  the 
Jews  that  they  received  all  blessings  from  the  Lord.  So  that  as  princes  when  they 
bestow  manors  upon  deserving  servants  make  reservation  of  some  fealty,  service, 
rent,  or  such  like,  only  to  show  that  they  hold  of  them.  So  God  required  this  of 
the  Jews.  3.  The  sanctification  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  to  be  the  people  of 
God  sanctifieth  outwardly  all  their  posterity.  The  Jews  therefore  are  stiU  a  holy 
people,  which  appears  by  their  evidence  and  their  letters  patents,  the  tenor  of  the 
first  grant  (Gen.  xvii.  7 ;  Acts  ii,  38,  39,  iii.  25).  And  though  some  of  them  have 
forfeited  their  estate,  yet  some  cannot  forfeit  the  privilege  granted  to  the  whole 
nation.  But — (1)  The  nation  is  before  called  rebellious:  how  then  can  it  now 
be  called  holy?  There  is  a  double  holiness,  (a)  Of  regeneration,  (b)  Of  the 
covenant ;  in  regard  of  the  first  they  are  rebellious,  in  regard  of  the  second  they  are 
holy.  (2)  We  are  by  nature  the  children  of  wrath.  How  then  can  the  Jews  be 
holy  by  nature  or  birth  ?  The  former  definition  of  holiness  makes  it  plain.  In 
regard  of  the  first,  children  of  wrath  ;  in  regard  of  the  second,  holy  by  nature.  The 
first  cannot  be  conveyed  by  parents  to  posterity :  the  second  is,  as,  for  example,  a 
gentleman  is  chosen  to  some  great  office  whereby  he  is  a  great  lord ;  he  begets  a 
son,  this  son  is  a  gentleman  by  birth,  but  not  a  lord,  because  the  honour  of  his 
father  was  not  invested  in  his  blood,  but  a  special  grace  conferred  on  his  person. 
I.  The  childben  of  Chbistunb  abe  born  Christians  and  holt,  by  virtue  of  the 
covenant  having  right  to  the  initiating  seal — baptism,  which  right,  if  they  were  not 
bom  Christians,  they  could  not  have.  Before  baptism  our  children  are  either 
b«athen  or  Christians  ;  but  not  heathens,  for  then  they  might  not  be  baptized  till 
they  had  made  confession  of  Christ.  Therefore  they  are  born  Christians.  Baptism 
maketb  not  a  Christian,  but  signifieth.    As  there  are  Jews  by  nature,  so  Christiana. 


410  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xu 

If  any  allege  that  we  are  not  born  but  reborn  Christians,  the  answer  is  we  are  not 
born  regenerate  Christians,  but  to  be  regenerate.  We  beget  Christians,  not  believers. 
II.  The  ohildben  of  Chbistians  dying  before  baptism  die  as  Christians,  therefore 
they  have  hope,  and  their  parents  may  be  comforted  over  them.     III.  Thoo  shalt 

NEVER  have  comfort  THAT   THOU   ART   BOBN    A    ChBISTUN    TILL    THOD    BELIEVE8T  AS   A 

Christian  should  do.  He  that  is  freebom  and  will  use  his  freedom  must  obnerve 
some  ceremony,  and  receive  some  instrument  testifying  the  same  ;  so  though  we  be 
born  of  Christian  parents  we  must  believe  and  repent;  the  sin  of  the  father 
prejudiceth  not  the  believing,  nor  the  righteousness  of  the  father  saveth  the 
unbelieving  child.  It  is  a  credit  to  be  bom  of  religious  parents  if  we  be  religions. 
If  a  man  have  a  thousand  pound  land  a  year  left  him,  and  spend  it  all  in  riotous 
living,  what  credit  is  it  for  him  to  brag  that  his  friends  left  him  such  an  estate  ? 
nay,  it  is  a  shame  to  him.  He  is  truly  noble  that  is  good,  but  a  wicked  and  vicious 
man,  though  he  came  of  a  worthier  father  than  Abraham,  is  to  be  accounted  base. 
Walk  in  the  steps  of  thy  godly  parents,  and  if  they  were  not  godly  redeem  the 
baseness  of  thy  family  by  thy  holiness  and  virtues.  IV.  Art  thou  bobn  a  Chbih- 
TiAN  ?  Why  then  livest  thou  like  a  heathen  ?  If  thou  art  freebom  why  becomest 
thou  by  thy  wickedness  the  devil's  slave  ?  As  thou  bearest  the  name  of  Christ  so 
live  like  Him.     (Elnathan  Parr,  B.D.) 

Vers.  17-24.  And  if  some  of  the  branches  be  broken  off,  and  thon,  being  a  wild 
olive-tree,  wert  graffed  in. — The  olive-tree: — I.  Why  it  is  a  symbol.  1.  Of 
God's  faithful  witnesses  (Zech.  iv.  5 ;  Eev.  xi.  3).  2.  Of  the  Church,  as  the 
channel  of  grace  to  men.  H.  Why  it  was  chosen  by  Paul,  Because  of  1.  The 
holy  anointiag  oil  produced  by  it  (Exod.  xxv.  6).  2.  Its  beauty  (Hosea  xiv.  6).  3. 
Its  constant  greenness  (Psa.  lli.  8).  4.  Its  fruitfulness.  5.  Its  usefulness.  6.  Its 
long  duration.  (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  The  parable  of  the  olive: — This  teaches  us — 
1.  To  compassionate  the  outcasts  of  Israel.  2.  To  watch  lest  we  also  fall.  3.  To 
reverence  and  magnify  the  goodness  and  severity  of  God.  4.  To  look  for  the 
recovery  of  God's  ancient  people.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  parable  of  the  olive : — 
I.  We  were  before  oub  engrafting  wild  olives.  Without  God,  strangers  from 
the  commonwealth  of  Israel.  This  Paul  bids  us  remember,  that  we  may  praise  God 
for  His  mercy.  II.  Havinq  received  grace  let  us  carry  ourselves  without 
boasting  against  them  that  want  grace.  When  thou  seest  a  profane  man  dis- 
dain him  not,  but  pray  for  him,  remembering  thy  former  estate.  III.  Those 
which  partake  of  the  fatness  of  the  olive  are  engrafted.  This  fatness  is 
the  grace  given  to  the  root.  1.  The  grace  of  justification.  Oil  is  good  for  medi- 
cine— healing  wounds  and  assuaging  pain.  Also  it  makes  the  countenance  cheer- 
ful ;  so  the  grace  of  Christ,  which  is  called  the  oil  of  gladness,  maketh  the  righteous 
joyful.  2.  The  grace  of  sanctification.  This  may  be  known  by  its  effects,  which 
are — (1)  In  the  heart.  If  thou  art  engrafted  thou  hast  the  heart  of  Abraham : 
thou  lovest  goodness  and  hatest  evil.  The  wood  of  the  olive  will  not  rot.  This 
denotes  soundness.  The  nature  also  of  the  oil  is  not  to  be  mixed  with  other 
things.  You  may  as  soon  mix  light  and  darkness  as  grace  and  sin.  The  nature 
of  oil,  too,  is  to  keep  metal  from  rusting.  So  the  virtue  of  this  grace  preserves 
the  soul  from  sinning,  which  would  eat  in  and  perish  the  soul.  (2)  In  the  tongue. 
The  blossom  of  the  olive  is  wonderful  sweet ;  so  if  thou  art  of  this  tree  thy  speech 
wiU  be  gracious  to  the  hearers.  It  is  a  vain  thing  for  a  man  to  seem  religious  if  he 
refrain  not  his  tongue.  (3)  In  the  life  if  thou  art  engrafted  thou  wUt  bring  forth 
much  fruit,  for  the  olive  is  exceeding  fruitful,  (a)  For  God.  Oil  was  consecrated 
to  the  Lord,  was  used  in  sacrifice,  and  for  the  holy  lamps.  (&)  For  man.  It  is 
both  for  medicine  and  meat.  Our  lives  must  be  fruitful  and  profitable  to  the 
Church.  3.  Sanctification  may  also  be  known  by  its  properties.  (1)  The  olive  is 
a  quick  bearer  ;  so  we  must  bring  forth  fruit  quickly.  (2)  An  olive  branch  was  a 
token  of  peace.  If  you  pour  out  water  it  maketh  a  noise,  but  oil  falls  down  softly 
and  with  great  silence.  So  the  servants  of  God  must  be  peaceable.  (3)  The  olive 
is  always  green,  and  never  casts  the  leaves,  noting  the  constant  tenor  we  should 
keep  in  our  obedience  (Psa.  xcii.  14).  (4)  Our  obedience  must  be  cheerful  and 
free.  Anointing  with  oil  makes  us  nimble,  for  if  we  have  received  hereof  we  shall 
not  be  stiff  in  the  joints,  but  will  run  in  the  ways  of  the  commandments.  The 
olive  requires  no  great  cost  to  make  it  fruitful,  nor  a  man  truly  sanctified  great 
entreaty  to  persuade  him  to  do  good.     {Elnathan  Parr,  D.D.)  The  privilege 

and  duty  of  the  Oentile : — His — 1.  Past  condition.  2.  Gracious  acceptance.  3. 
Present  privilege.     4.  Consequent  duty.     (/.  Lyth,  D.D.)        Our  duty  to  th4 


CHAP.  XI.]  ROMANS.  411 

Jew : — I.  The  duty.  1.  Boast  not,  &o.  2.  Despise  not.  3.  Insult  not.  4.  But 
pity  and  pray  for  him.  II.  The  rkasonb.  Bemember — 1.  What  you  were.  (1) 
Wild.  (2)  Uncultivated.  (3)  Unfruitful.  2.  Your  calling.  (1)  Grafted  In. 
(2)  ThrDugh  grace  at  his  expense.  3.  Tour  privileges  ;  enjoying  the  bless- 
ings of  the  covenant.  4.  Your  dependence.  {Ibid.)  The  Gentiles  may  not 
despise  the  Jews : — They  which  are  advanced  by  grace  are  not  to  boast  against 
them  which  are  in  misery  (Psa.  xli.  1 ;  Exodus  iii.  9 ;  Deut.  x.  19,  1 ;  Cor.  xiii. 
4,  5).  The  Pharisee  disdained  the  pnblican,  but  the  publican  disdains  not  him, 
nor  is  disdained  of  God.  The  use  uf  this.  I.  In  bespecx  of  the  Jew.  Some 
are  broken  off,  not  all.  The  Church  of  the  Jews  was  never  cast  away,  only 
the  unbelievers.  The  olive-tree  is  pruned,  but  not  stocked  up.  The  body  and 
some  of  the  branches  remain,  among  whom  we  are  grafted.  We  are  grafted  in 
among  them,  and  receive  of  the  fatness  with  them.  The  Church  of  the  Jews, 
not  of  Kome,  is  our  mother  Church.  We  must  be  the  seed  of  Abraham  if 
we  will  have  the  promises,  and  therefore  believing  Gentiles  are  called  the 
children  of  Abraham,  not  naturally,  but  by  incision.  II.  In  regard  of  the 
Gentiles.  Thou  art  made  partaker  of  the  fatness.  The  same  fatness 
nourisheth  the  natural  and  ingrafted  branches.  The  Jew  is  saved  by  faith  in 
Christ,  so  are  we.  There  is  no  difference  between  the  way  of  salvation  in  the  Old 
and  New  Testament,  but  as  this,  in  grafting  tbere  is  clay  and  binding  about.  The 
Jew  is  bound  about  with  a  red  ligature  in  regard  of  circumcision,  we  with  a  white 
in  regard  of  baptism  and  the  white  garments  then  used.  Let  us  not  then  boast 
ourselves  against  the  branches,  for  though  they  deserve  contempt,  woe  be  to  them 
which  are  instruments  to  vex  them.  Let  us  love  them,  as  we  have  good  cause,  for 
the  root's  sake.  There  is  no  name  so  honourable  as  that  of  a  Jew ;  take  heed  thou 
use  it  not  in  contempt.  (Elnatfian  Parr,  B.D.)  Gentile  and  Jew : — I.  The 
exhortation.  Glory  not  with  supercilious  contempt.  Gentile  Christians  probably 
already  began  to  show — 1.  An  overbearing  disposition  towards  the  Jews.  2.  A 
policy  of  complacency  in  themselves.  Such  a  spirit  soon  and  long  manifested  by 
Gentile  Churches.  Faith  excludes  boasting  either  of  ourselves  or  over  others,  and 
charity  vaunteth  not  itself.  II.  The  reasons.  1.  Thou  bearest  not  the  root.  The 
Church  not  sprung  from  the  Gentiles,  and  the  Jews  owe  nothing  to  them.  2.  But 
the  root  thee.  Gentiles  owe  all  to  the  Jews.  Salvation  is  of  the  Jews  (John  iv.  22). 
Christ  Himself  was  a  Jew.  The  Jewish  Church  was  the  foundation ;  Gentiles 
were  built  upon  it  (Eph.  ii.  20).  The  true  Christian  and  Jewish  Church  but  one. 
(Z".  Robimon,  D.D.)  Gentile  and  Jew  : — The  Gentile — I.  Hah  no  ground  to 

EXDLT  OVER  THE  Jew.  1.  The  Jcw  fell  by  unbelief.  2.  Privileged  by  His  fall  the 
Gentile  only  stands  by  faith.  II.  But  much  more  ground  for  humility.  1.  God, 
who  spared  not  His  chosen  people.  2.  Will  not  spare  the  unbelieving  Gentile.  3. 
Therefore  be  not  highminded,  &o.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Boasting  : — Observe — 1. 
The  disposition  in  man  to  boast  of  his  privileges.  2.  The  folly  of  this.  3.  Its 
danger.  (Ibid).  Thou  wilt  say  then.  The  branches  were  broken  oflf,  that  I  might 
be  graifed  in. — The  natural  branches  broken,  and  the  sinner  for  whose  conversion 
things  are  working,  spared  a  time.  I.  A  fact  stated.  1.  These  branches  were  broken 
off.  2.  For  a  double  cause.  (1)  "  That  I  might  be  graffed  in."  (2)  Because  of 
unbelief.  II.  A  caution  given — against — 1.  Pride.  2.  Indifference  to  God.  3. 
Carelessness.  III.  An  awful  judgment  implied.  If  we  take  not  heed  we  too 
shall  be  broken  off.  Therefore,  serve  the  Lord,  and  fear  and  love  Him  now. 
{W.  P.  Taylor.)  Well;  because  of  unbelief  they  were  broken  off;  and  thou 
Btandest  by  faith. — Standing  by  faith: — I.  The  Jews  have  ever  fallen  through 
UNBELIEF.  1.  They  came  to  the  confines  of  the  "land  flowing  with  milk  and 
honey  "  ;  the  Anakims,  and  the  cities  fenced  and  walled  up  to  heaven,  stood  before 
them  for  their  prey.  They  measured  the  men  and  the  walls  accurately,  but  they 
did  not  measure  how  "  He  that  was  for  them  was  greater  than  all  that  was  against 
them,"  and  therefore  they  were  sent  back  to  wander  and  •'  perish  in  the  wilder- 
ness. "  2.  Presently  we  see  them  with  God  only  as  their  King,  but  they  could  not 
appreciate  an  invisible  King.  As  they  had  before  shown  no  "  faith  "  in  God's 
protection,  so  now  they  disbelieved  His  sovereignty.  "  He  gave  them  a  king  in 
His  anger,  and  He  took  him  away  in  His  wrath."  3.  In  the  midst  of  their  dis- 
tresses they  began  to  lean  on  idols  and  arms  of  flesh,  until  "unbelief,"  ripening 
into  apostasy,  they  were  carried  away  into  Babylon.  "  Because  of  unbelief  they 
were  broken  off."  4.  But  in  mercy  God  brought  them  back  again,  and  infinite  was 
their  privilege  and  opportunity  when  Christ  walked  their  streets.  But  "their  eyea 
were  blinded,"  the  Uving  Truth  was  before  their  eyes,  but  "  they  perceived  Him 


412  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

not."  The  Holy  Ghost  descended  upon  them,  they  witnessed  His  wonder-works, 
they  felt  the  drawings  of  His  grace,  but  they  denied  His  convictions  and  blas- 
phemed His  glory.  And  such  as  was  their  "  unbelief,"  so  is  their  punishment. 
They  were  "  broken  off,"  and  there  they  lie,  fruitless,  despised,  but  never  dead, 
till  they  shall  be  "  graffed  in  again."  II.  What  it  is  to  "stand  by  faith." 
"  Faith  "  is  simply  a  medium  to  transmit  pardon  and  grace.  But  every  saved 
man  finds  "  faith  "  the  actual  instrument  which  holds  him  up.  In  the  one  case 
it  is  as  the  wire  which  conveys  the  message  ;  in  the  other  it  is  the  invisible  chain 
which  holds  the  planet  in  its  course.  2.  There  is  an  inferior  sense  in  which  a 
man  "  stands  by  faith,"  since  confidence  is  always  the  secret  of  composure,  as 
composure  is  the  secret  of  power.  The  Uttle  child  wUl  walk,  and  what  is  much 
harder,  will  "  stand  "  as  soon  as  he  has  confidence  enough.  3.  But  in  its  truer 
signification  to  "  stand  by  faith  "  is — 1.  To  have  thrown  away  every  other 
dependence.  I  am  unable,  everything  in  the  universe  is  unable  to  keep  me,  "  Hold 
Thou  me  up  and  I  shall  stand."  2.  To  believe,  and  not  doubt,  that  you  are  in  a 
state  of  full  acceptance  with  God.  Without  this  there  never  will  be  firmness  of 
principle  enough  to  make  you  "  stand."  3.  To  be  in  continual  communication 
with  the  Unseen.  It  is  the  strength  of  secret  prayer.  It  is  to  feel  yourself  in 
the  deep  waters,  upheld  by  an  arm  that  will  never,  never  let  you  sink.  4.  To  have 
the  most  entire  conviction  that  the  work  is  God's  work,  and  that  He  wUl  complete 
it.  Conclusion  :  1.  Let  us  be  very  humble,  for  it  is  an  easy  thing  to  fall,  seeing  we 
only  "stand  by  faith,"  and  "  faith  "  is  a  fine,  deUcate  thing,  and  we  all  know  how 
hard  it  is  to  believe  at  all  times.  2.  Nevertheless,  let  us  have  a  holy  confidence, 
for  Christ  says,  "  I  have  prayed  for  you,  that  your  faith  fail  not."  3.  And  by  and 
by  the  Jews  wUl  "stand"  as  never  a  nation  stood,  and  then  that  word  will  be 
true  to  them  also,  "  thou  standest  by  faith."  To  help  along,  to  help  along  one  single 
child  of  Abraham  to  that  "  stand  of  faith  "  is  the  present  duty.  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 
Be  not  highmlnded,  but  fear. — Highmindedness : — 1.  At  every  turn  remember  this 
Baying,  Be  not  highminded.  Hath  God  given  thee  riches,  wit,  beauty,  &c.  ?  Let 
this  sentence  alway  sound  in  thine  ears.  Hearest  thou  any  say:  few  have  the 
knowledge  you  have,  or  can  speak  as  you  do  ?  Let  this  sentence  stand  sentinel  to 
keep  thee  from  pride.  2.  All  other  sinners  fly  from  God.  The  proud  man  resists 
Him  (Jas.  iv.  6).  God  gives  grace  to  the  lowly.  The  rain  stays  not  on  the  tops  of 
the  mountains,  but  the  valleys  are  watered  and  made  fruitful.  God  teacheth  the 
humble.  The  proud  man  is  empty.  Height  weakens  a  thing;  and  an  empty 
vessel  makes  the  loudest  sound.  They  which  brag  most  have  least  in  them.  The 
chaff  is  above  the  corn,  not  because  it  is  best,  but  because  it  is  lightest.     Observe — 

1.  The  signs  or  this  highmindedness.  1.  Impatience  of  admonition.  The 
Pharisees  take  it  in  great  scorn,  that  Christ  reproveth  them  of  blindness,  when 
indeed  they  were  beetle  blind.    Proud  Zedekiah  cannot  endure  Micah's  admonition. 

2.  Diminishing  the  gifts  of  others  while  boasting  of  our  own.  The  proud  Pharisee 
abased  the  publican  and  exalted  himself.  Dost  thou  impute  unto  others  coldness, 
covetousness,  &c.,  saying  thou  wouldest  be  ashamed  if  thou  wert  no  better  than 
they,  never  looking  at  thine  own  infidelity,  hypocrisy,  &c.  3.  Meddling  with 
things  above  us.  Many  presently  upon  their  supposed  conversion  enter  into  con- 
troversies and  censure  whole  Churches.  David  approved  his  humility  by  not 
meddling  with  things  which  were  too  high  for  him.  4.  Contention  (Prov.  xiii.  20). 
II.  The  bemedy.  1.  The  place  to  which  the  remedy  is  to  be  applied.  The  heart, 
as  Peter  adviseth, "  Deck  yourselves  inwardly  with  lowliness  of  mind."  There  may 
be  an  abatement  of  pride  outwardly,  and  none  within.  There  may  be  as  much 
pride  under  a  leather  jacket  as  under  a  velvet  gown :  who  seemed  more  humble  or 
was  more  proud  than  Diogenes  in  his  tub?  2.  The  remedy  itself — (1)  A  continual 
remembrance  of  this  and  the  like  Scriptures,  Draw  these  as  a  sword  to  take  down 
this  peacock.  (2)  Remember  the  example  and  monition  of  Christ :  Learn  of  Me 
(not  to  walk  upon  the  sea,  or  to  make  a  world),  but  to  be  humble  and  lowly  in 
spirit.  (3)  Consider  how  God  hath  judged  the  proud.  Pride  thrust  angels  out  of 
heaven  ;  our  first  parents  out  of  paradise ;  hanged  Haman  upon  his  own  gallows  ; 
made  Nebuchadnezzar  a  beast,  Ac.  (4)  Consider  that  if  thou  hast  any  excellency, 
it  is  the  gift  of  God  (1  Cor.  iv.  6,  7).  It  is  an  ass  that  wUl  be  proud  of  a  lion's 
Bkin,  which  is  not  his  own.  And  God  can  take  away  thy  knowledge,  and  make 
thee  an  idiot ;  and  if  thou  beest  rich.  He  can  make  thee  poor.  (5)  Doth  thy  heart 
tickle  thee  because  of  thy  knowledge,  faith,  patience,  &a.  ?  Cast  thy  account,  thoa 
Bhalt  find  that  thy  wants  are  more  than  thy  receipts.  For  one  thing  thou  knowest 
thoa  art  ignorant  of  ten.    If  thou  hast  one  good  thought,  thoa  hast  a  thousand  ill 


«HAP.  n.]  ROMANS.  413 

ones.  Pliny  records  a  secret  of  the  bee — that  in  a  storm  it  getteth  up  a  little  stone, 
by  the  weight  of  it  to  fly  the  more  steadily,  and  to  get  home  in  safety.  If  thou  be 
in  danger  to  be  blown  away  with  pride,  let  the  thoughts  of  thy  wants  be  to  thee  as 
this  little  stone.  3.  The  parties  that  stand  in  need  of  it.  All  men,  specially  those 
which  are  extraordinarily  graced  by  God.  All  other  sins  are  in  evil,  this  is  in  that 
which  is  good,  and  therefore  the  harder  to  be  avoided.  We  are  all  of  his  mind, 
who,  being  asked  what  song  he  delighted  most  to  hear,  said  that  wherein  hifl 
praises  were  set  forth.  Even  Paul  must  be  taken  down  with  the  buffetings  of 
Satan,  lest  he  be  proud.  Study  and  pray  for  humility,  the  honour  of  a  Christian. 
Moses'  face  shone  when  he  had  talked  with  God,  and  he  wist  not.  An  excellent 
degree  of  grace  is  it  to  be  excellent  ai  d  not  to  take  notice  of  it.  As  bout^hs  the 
more  laden  with  fruit  are  the  more  lowly,  and  as  when  the  sun  is  at  the  highest 
our  shadows  are  at  the  lowest,  so  the  more  grace  would  be  adorned  with  the  more 
humiUty.  The  devil  will  tempt  thee  to  all  viciousness ;  if  he  cannot  prevail  that 
way,  he  will  tempt  thee  to  be  proud  of  thy  goodness ;  yea,  to  be  proud  because 
thou  art  not  proud.  In  the  midst  of  grace  pray  for  a  humble  heart.  {Elnathan 
Parr,  B.D.)  Highmindedness  and  fear: — There  is  no  sin  so  heinous  as  self- 
satisfaction,  and  no  virtue  so  agreeable  to  God  as  humility.  These  words  are 
addressed  to  Christians,  so  highmindedness  is  not  confined  to  worldly  men. 
Notice — I.  The  paeticulars  of  the  tailikg.  It  includes — 1.  Presumiiig  on  our 
privileges.  The  Christian  has  many  privileges  above  the  world.  (1)  Liberty. 
But  he  must  not  presume  on  that  hberty  for  egotism.  (2)  Enlightenment.  But 
he  must  not  make  the  light  to  be  a  pretext  for  self-assertion.  (3)  Holiness.  This 
must  not  cause  him  to  think  more  highly  of  himself  than  he  ought  to  think.  2. 
Trusting  too  much  in  worldly  advantages.  (1)  Wealth  will  make  a  man  high- 
minded  if  not  properly  used.  (2)  Ancestry  and  pedigree.  (3)  Beauty  of  person, 
strength  of  Umb,  a  high  education,  even  personal  liberaHty  or  usefulness.  3. 
Haughtiness  towards  others.  The  man  who  thinks  highly  of  himself  will  act  it, 
and  treat  his  fellows  with  contempt.  Like  the  Pharisee.  II.  The  antidote.  In 
this  case  fear  indicates  self -mistrust,  dread  of  falling,  and  reverence  for  God.  1. 
Fear  is  a  restraining  power.  Dread  of  consequences  is  an  important  factor  in 
society.  Fear  of  God  is  not  a  slavish  torment,  but  awe  and  self-abuegation.  2. 
"But  fear."  It  is  the  picture  of  one  feeling  his  way  in  the  gloom,  knowing  his 
own  weakness  and  the  awful  consequences  of  a  fall,  and  so  taking  all  needful  pre- 
cautions. It  induces  therefore — (1)  Prudence.  (2)  Watchfulness.  (3)  Vigilance. 
III.  The  details  of  the  fear.  Fear  what?  1.  The  natural  pride  and  teaching  of 
the  human  heart.  2.  The  effects  of  self-righteousness.  "  Pride  goeth  before  a 
fall."  3.  The  danger  of  being  a  castaway.  4.  The  danger  of  perverting  truth. 
{Homilist.)  Haughtiness  of  viind  and  its  antidote: — I.  Be  not  highminded  is 
good  counsel.  Men  of  "  lofty  eyes  "  (Psa.  cxxxi.  1),  being  busy  in  the  pursuit  of 
things  out  of  reach,  oversee  those  more  necessary  things  which  are  at  hand.  The 
malady  here  aimed  at  is  an  overweening  conceit  of  our  own  worth,  in  respect  of 
either  knowledge  or  virtue.  A  disease  fatal  to  the  Jew,  and  to  which  the  Gentile 
was  most  obnoxious.  Men  raised  from  the  dung-hiU  to  great  fortunes  have  com- 
monly all  the  vices  of  rich  men,  and  more.  1.  The  cause  of  this  malady  is  not  in 
the  gospel,  or  in  the  riches  of  the  gospel ;  but  in  ourselves,  who  are  willing  to  be 
deceived ;  and  in  the  devil,  the  forger  of  all  error  and  deceit.  For  as  God,  whose 
very  essence  is  goodness,  doth  manifest  that  goodness  out  of  sin  itself,  so  the  devil 
abuseth  good  unto  evil ;  and  when  he  cannot  drive  us  to  despair  by  reason  of  our 
sin,  he  makes  us  presume  upon  conceit  of  our  righteousness.  And  all  this  proceeds 
from  our  own  wilful  error  :  for,  "  Pride  is  the  daughter  of  ignorance."  We  see  the 
gospel  ex  uno  situ,  but  on  one  side,  and  that  the  wrong  side.  We  behold  Christ  as 
a  Saviour,  not  as  a  Lord  as  well.  We  entertain  prerogatives  as  prerogatives,  and 
not  as  obligations  also.  We  contemplate  virtues  as  the  work  of  our  own  hands,  but 
are  blind  to  their  imperfections.  We  consider  ourselves  as  "  branches  grafted  in," 
but  cannot  see  that  we  may  "  be  cut  off  "  (ver.  22).  We  consider  our  strength,  not 
our  weakness.  2.  This  haughtiness  of  mind  hinders  the  very  continuance  of  good- 
ness :  it  doth  not  only  wither  the  branch,  but  it  also  outs  it  off.  The  Christian 
may  fall,  as  the  Jew ;  and,  if  he  "  continue  not  in  God's  goodness,  he  also  shall  be 
cut  off  "  (ver.  22).  When  we  have  gone  but  a  sabbath-day's  journey  with  the  Jew 
and  done  but  "  what  was  said  to  them  of  old,"  do  we  not  begin  to  canonise  our- 
selves? But  if  we  forgive  and  do  good  to  an  enemy ;  if  we  fast  a  day,  and  give  our 
provision  to  the  poor ;  then  straight,  with  Absalom,  we  raise  up  a  pillar  and  write 
upon  it,  "  We  shall  never  be  moved. "    A  cup  of  cold  water  shall  answer  for  ooi 


414  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xl 

oppression,  an  alms  at  our  door  for  the  fraud  in  our  shop,  our  frequenting  of 
sermons  for  our  neglect  of  prayer.  And  all  is  now  quiet  within  us ;  we  seem  to 
walk  on  the  pavement  of  heaven,  and  from  thence  to  behold  our  brethren  (who 
have  mora  piety,  with  less  noise)  as  nothing  in  respect  of  ourselves.  When  our 
hypocrisy  hath  edge  enough  to  cut  us  from  the  olive,  our  spiritual  pride  keepeth  us 
in.  But  one  day  they  will  find  it  true,  that  doubting  out  of  humility  may  find 
heaven-gates  wide  open,  when  bold  presumption  shall  be  shut  out  of  doors.  II. 
But  fkab.  Fear  and  hope  are  hewed  out  of  the  same  rock.  As  hope  is  an  expec- 
tation of  good  to  come,  so  fear  is  the  apprehension  of  some  approaching  evil.  And 
seldom  is  any  hope  so  strong  as  to  be  without  some  tincture  of  fear;  seldom  any 
fear  so  strong  as  to  admit  of  no  mixture  of  hope.  For  if  they  be  alone  and  in 
excessu,  they  lose  their  names.  Hope  without  fear  is  but  confidence  ;  and  fear 
without  hope  is  but  despair  (ver.  21).  Fear  of  being  cut  off,  if  St.  Paul's  reason  be 
good,  is  the  best  means  to  repress  in  us  all  proud  conceit.  1.  And  in  a  matter  so 
great  no  care  and  circumspection  can  be  enough.  And  the  reasons  are  plain.  For 
— (1)  There  is  an  over-easiness  to  persuade  ourselves  that  we  are  in  favour  with 
God.  Men  are  more  apt  to  presume  than  to  despair,  and  if  deppair  hath  killed  her 
thousands,  presumption  hath  killed  her  ten  thousands.  The  difference  between 
the  sicknesses  of  the  body  and  of  the  mind  is  that  in  the  one  we  are  sensible  of  our 
grief,  we  send  for  the  physician  ;  but  in  the  other  we  are  senseless,  and  are  more 
afraid  of  our  physic  than  of  our  disease.  We  admit  of  miserable  comforters,  that 
will  flatter  us  to  death  ;  and  rather  than  we  will  want  flatterers,  we  take  the  office 
on  ourselves.  (2)  There  is  the  uncertain  knowledge  we  have  of  the  quality  of  our 
works.  For  in  our  best  intentions  there  may  be  imperfections  which  we  know  not. 
My  devotion  may  be  irregular ;  my  patience,  stupidity ;  my  zeal,  rage.  With  what 
good  meaning  do  many  poor  souls  do  evil  I  •'  Who  can  tell  how  oft  he  offendeth  ?  " 
(Psa.  xix.  12) ;  therefore  let  us  "  work  out  our  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling." 
(3)  There  is  the  over-ripe  conceit  and  too  speedy  apprehension  of  our  sufficiency 
and  growth  in  the  duties  of  Christianity.  We  are  very  apt  to  flatter  ourselves  that, 
when  we  are  but  newly  set  forth,  we  are  at  our  journey's  end.  AU  excellency  we 
can  put  off  to  others  that  have  more  time  to  learn  it.  The  Jew  is  content  with  his 
ceremonies ;  and  the  Christian,  with  his  outward  profession,  but  less  significant 
than  they.  But  this  fear  is  most  requisite  in  respect  of  those  enemies  of  our  souls 
which  are  ever  in  readiness  to  surprise  us  (1  John  ii.  16).  Many  men  are  cut  off 
by  themselves  and  their  own  folly,  when  the  devil  beareth  the  blame.  2.  And, 
therefore,  to  keep  this  jealousy  awake  in  us,  the  apostle  awakes  one  fear  with 
another,  the  fear  of  circumspection  with  the  fear  of  "being  out  off."  For, 
naturally,  fear  of  evil  works  a  fear  of  circumspection  :  and  this  fear  ushers  in  that 
fear  by  which  we  may  call,  "  Abba,  Father "  (chap.  viii.  15).  For,  seeing  evil 
before  us  ready  to  seize  upon  us,  we  begin  to  advise  with  ourselves  how  to  avoid  it 
^Luke  xvi.  3;  xiv.  31).  Fear  is  the  mother  of  advice;  and  consultation  dies  with 
fear  (Luke  xvi.  4).  When  we  presume,  counsel  is  needless ;  and  when  we  despair, 
it  is  too  late.  The  best  preservative  of  a  branch  new-grafted  is  the  sight  and  fear 
of  that  knife  which  may  cut  him  off ;  and  for  want  of  it  many  branches  have  been 
cut  off  and  cast  away.  (A.  Farindon,  D.D.)  For  if  God  spared  not  the  natural 
branches,  take  heed  lest  He  also  spare  not  thee. — All  which  continue  not  in  grace 
shall  be  broken  off  (Luke  xiii.  3,  5 ;  Kev.  ii.) : — God  is  not  moved  with  outward 
privileges  to  tolerate  in  His  orchard  those  which  only  cumber  the  ground.  Thou 
art  planted  in  the  Church,  which  is  Paradise,  and  art  watered  with  those  rivers  of 
God,  the  Word  and  sacraments.  If  thou  bringest  forth  no  fruit,  though  Christ 
Himself  had  come  of  thy  stock,  thou  shalt  be  broken  off  and  thrown  away.  Here 
is  a  good  take-heed  for  many.  I.  For  England,  Germany,  all  reformed  Churches. 
The  Jews  were  the  famous  people  of  God,  and  yet  oast  away  for  their  faithlessness. 
Where  are  those  renowned  Churches  of  Asia,  of  Greece  ?  If  we  continue  not  to 
bring  forth  fruit  we  must  look  for  the  same  measure  which  God  hath  meted  out  to 
them.  II.  For  profane  persons.  If  judgment  begin  at  God's  own  house,  how 
shall  the  wicked  escape  7  If  an  Israelite  go  to  the  pot,  what  should  a  Canaanite, 
a  hypocrite,  a  rebel  look  for  ?  III.  For  the  children  of  God.  Art  thou  one  ? 
Walk  according  to  thy  profession ;  if  thoo  growest  cold  as  others,  take  heed.  Hast 
thou  faith  ?  keep  it.  Hast  thou  a  good  conscience  ?  better  the  peace  of  it  every 
day  by  righteous  living.  Hold  that  thou  hast.  Kemember  what  is  come  to  the 
Jews.  When  thou  seest  thy  neighbour's  house  on  fire,  it  is  time  to  provide  water 
to  save  thine  own.  When  two  ships  set  forth,  if  the  foremost  run  upon  a  rock  and 
split,  her  consort  will  be  warned.    Thou  seest  oovetousness  to  be  the  destruction  of 


CHAP.  XL]  ROMANS.  415 

this  man,  pride  of  that,  whoredom  of  another;  pray  thou  against  these  sins  and  all 
other,  and  be  careful.     (Elnathan  Parr,  B.D.)  The  rejection  of  the  Jews  a 

warning  to  Christians: — There  are  two  general  remarks  suggested  by  the 
language  of  the  text.  1.  The  principle  of  God's  displeasure  against  sin  and 
sinners  is  the  same,  whether  it  has  reference  to  nations  or  to  individuals.  Hence 
the  dismemberment  of  the  Jewish  community  is  adduced  as  a  warning  to  every 
professor  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.  2.  The  language  of  the  text  derives  force 
from  the  contrast  which  it  involves.  Compare  it  with  verse  24.  I.  It  is  a  cbead- 
ruii  THING  TO  ABUSE  spiBiTUAL  BLESsiNOS.  Ycs,  It  is  SO  drcadful  that,  in  the  instance 
referred  to,  Jehovah,  in  His  fiery  indignation,  turned  the  highest  favours  He  could 
impart  to  a  nation  into  a  tremendous  national  curse.  "  God  spared  not  the  natural 
branches."  He  spared  them  for  a  while,  'tis  true ;  just  as  He  spared  the  old  world 
in  the  days  of  Noah,  while  the  ark  was  a  preparing ;  but  in  the  end  He  destroyed 
them,  and  that  with  a  sore  destruction  1  The  pleading  voice  of  Christ  in  His  gospel, 
accompanied  as  I  believe  it  to  be  in  every  instance  with  some  degree  of  Divine 
visitation,  as  regards  the  conscience,  tends  either  to  raise  the  soul  to  glory,  and 
honour,  and  immortality,  or  to  sink  it  into  the  lowest  depths  of  misery  and  woe. 
Men  walk  in  gospel  pastures,  but  they  do  not  feed  upon  them.  The  broad  sunshine 
of  mercy  beams  around  them,  but  it  finds  no  avenue  to  the  recesses  of  their  hearts. 
They  approach  just  so  near  to  the  Saviour  as  to  receive  from  His  Spirit  an  influence, 
the  abuse  of  which  ripens  them  for  destruction,  and  prepares  them  as  fuel  to  feed 
the  hottest  flames  of  hell  I  II.  How  highly  it  behoves  all  those  who  aee  privi- 
leged TO  ENJOX  spiritual  BLESSINGS   TO  LOOK  DILIGENTLT  TO  THEMSELVES   LEST  THET 

SHOULD  FAIL  OF  THE  GRACE  OF  GoD.  1.  Bcware  of  procrastinatiou,  that  is  of  putting 
off  till  to-morrow  what  ought  to  be  done  to-day.  St.  Augustine  prayed  for  victory 
over  his  besetting  sin  ;  but  then  he  acknowledges  that  he  did  not  wish  his  prayer 
to  be  answered  just  then.  This  is  human  nature ;  conscience  and  passion  pleading 
against  each  other  ;  reason  warning  and  inclination  rebelling.  To  put  off  coming 
to  Christ  until  you  have  tasted  more  of  the  pleasures  of  the  world  is  to  create  a 
fearful  probability  that  you  will  never  come  to  Him  at  all.  If  God,  when  His 
justice  has  been  insulted,  and  His  patience  long  tried,  has  refused  to  spare  others, 
"  0  take  heed  lest  He  spare  not  thee."  2.  The  subject  says  to  us  all — Beware  of 
self -imposition.  In  other  words,  it  says — Beware  of  a  religion  which  is  unable  to 
protect  the  soul  in  an  hour  of  emergency.  3.  The  subject  says  to  each  of  us — 
Beware  of  trifling  or  tampering  with  conscience,  and  that  not  merely  in  reference 
to  delays,  but  in  reference  to  every  other  point.  One  will  give  up  everything  save 
a  single  prohibited  indulgence ;  and  another  wiU  give  up  everything  except  a  single 
unhallowed  pursuit ;  and  each  is  willing  to  balance  accounts  by  giving  an  over- 
measure  of  piety  in  some  other  point :  for  example — the  covetous  man  will  be 
scrupulously  honest,  and  the  licentious  man  will  be  profusely  liberal ;  but  neither 
will  yield,  to  the  claims  of  the  gospel,  his  besetting  sin.  Here  is  the  solitary  leak 
which  sinks  the  vessel  1  You  cannot  compromise  with  Heaven.  It  were  more  easy 
to  alter  the  laws  of  nature,  to  shiver  a  sunbeam,  or  to  wrench  a  planet  out  of  its 
orbit,  than  to  change  one  iota  of  the  Divine  purpose,  in  regard  to  the  terms  of  a 
sinner's  salvation.  (W.  Knight,  M.A.)  Behold  therefore  the  goodness  and 
aeverity  of  God. — The  goodness  and  severity  of  God : — I.  In  every  revelation 
WE  have  of  God  these  two  phases  appear.  Look  to — 1.  Nature.  2.  Providence. 
3,  The  Bible.  4.  The  Cross.  5.  The  Jewish  nation.  II.  The  display  of  these 
TWO  phases  is  necessary  to  man  in  THIS  WORLD.  1.  To  keep  the  mind  from 
extremes.  2.  To  induce  sinners  to  repent.  (T.  Levi.)  The  goodness  and  severity 
of  God : — Let  me  endeavour — I.  To  expose  the  parti  vlity,  and  therefore  the 
mischief,  of  two  different  views  which  might  be  taken  of  the  Godhead.  1. 
One  is  incidental  to  those  who  bear  a  single  respect  to  the  attribute  of  goodness. 
(1)  They  look  to  Him  as  a  God  of  tenderness  and  nothing  else,  and  ascribe  to  Him 
the  fondness  rather  than  the  authority  of  a  father.  They  would  admit  of  no  other 
aspect  for  religion  than  that  of  uniform  placidness ;  and  to  decorate  this  bland  and 
lieauteous  imagination  the  more,  they  would  appeal  to  all  that  looks  mild  and 
merciful  in  the  scenery  of  nature,  and  it  is  inferred  that  surely  He,  at  whose 
creative  touch  all  this  loveliness  hath  arisen,  must  Himself  be  placid  as  the  breeze, 
and  gentle  as  the  zephyr  which  He  causes  to  blow  over  it.  But  Nature  has  her 
hurricanes,  earthquakes,  and  thunder,  as  well  as  these  kindlier  exhibitions.  (2) 
This  beholding  of  the  goodness,  without  the  severity  of  God,  lulls  the  human  spirit 
into  a  fatal  complacency  to  its  own  state  and  prospects,  and  serves,  in  practice,  ta 
break  down  the  fence  between  obedience  and  sin,  and  to  nullify  all  moral  gOTem- 


416  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ss 

ment.  2,  But  there  is  also  a  mischief  in  looking  singly  to  the  sovereignty  of  God 
apart  from  His  goodness.  (1)  Theologians  who  have  thus  erred,  and  not  so  much 
by  the  views  they  have  given  forth  of  His  inviolable  sanctity ;  but  rather  by  the 
views  which  they  have  given  forth  of  such  a  dread  and  despotic  sovereignty,  as  to 
impress  the  conception  of  a  fatalism,  against  which  all  prayer  and  all  performance 
of  man  are  unavailing.  However  difiScult  it  may  be  to  adjust  the  metaphysics  of 
the  question,  there  is  one  thing  unquestionable,  and  that  is  an  amnesty,  offered 
to  all ;  a  propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world.  And,  therefore,  we  would 
not  that  so  much  as  one  individual  should  be  chiUed  into  hopelessness  by  the  dog- 
mata of  a  hard  or  unfeeling  theology,  against  returning  to  a  God  who  waiteth  to  be 
gracious.  (2)  But  independent  of  all  lofty  speculations,  there  is  abroad  an  impres- 
sion of  severity  to  which  much  of  this  world's  irreligion  is  owing,  and  it  is  a  fre- 
quent anomaly  that  they  who  at  times  can  take  comfort  in  sin  under  an  impression 
of  His  goodness  have  at  all  times  such  a  sense  of  His  severity  as  never  to  attain  a 
thorough  confidence  in  His  favour.  And  just  as  a  man  would  shut  bis  eyes  against 
a  spectacle  that  pains  them,  so  will  they  shrink  from  a  contemplation  that  only 
serves  to  put  dread  into  their  bosoms,  and  there  is  an  habitual  distance  kept  up 
between  the  spirits  of  all  flesh  and  Him  who  is  the  Father  of  them.  Just  as  you 
would  rather  avoid  than  encounter  the  man  with  whom  you  are  not  perfectly  at 
ease,  so  you  have  the  same  motive  for  shunning  God.  But  it  is  our  very  distance 
from  God  that  sheds  a  dimness  over  His  character  and  ways,  over  His  wrath,  as 
well  as  over  His  love.  II.  To  point  to  the  way  in  which  these  two  views  op  the 
Godhead  are  so  united  in  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Chbist,  as  to  form  one  fuuci 
AND  consistent  REPRESENTATION  OP  IT.  1.  There  is  a  severity.  There  is  a  law 
that  will  not  be  trampled  on,  a  lawgiver  that  will  not  be  insulted.  The  face  of 
God  is  unchangeably  set  against  evil.  (1)  We  cannot  light  upon  a  single  instance 
of  God  so  falling  back  from  the  severity  of  His  denunciations  against  sin,  as  at  all 
to  soften  the  expression  of  His  hatred  towards  it :  not  at  the  Fall,  not  at  the  Flood, 
not  at  the  promulgation  of  the  law  on  Mount  Sinai,  not  at  the  entrance  of  Israel 
into  the  Promised  Land,  not  in  the  subsequent  dealings  of  many  centuries  with  His 
own  perverse  and  stiff-necked  children,  and,  lastly,  not  at  that  terrible  period  when 
the  Jewish  economy  was  swept  away,  and  even  the  tears  of  a  compassionate  Saviour 
did  not  avert  the  approaching  overthrow.  In  all  this  there  is  an  admonition  to  us. 
(2)  There  is  an  immense  delusion  on  this  subject.  We  estimate  God  by  ourselves 
— His  antipathy  to  sin  by  our  own  slight  and  careless  imagination  of  Him.  Now 
if  we  measure  God  by  ourselves,  we  should  have  little  fear  indeed  of  severity  from 
His  hand  ;  for,  save  when  there  is  gross  and  monstrous  delinquency,  we  can  bear 
very  well,  both  with  our  own  transgressions  and  those  of  others.  No  man,  e.g., 
would  ever  think  of  vehemently  denouncing  another  just  because  he  thought  little 
of  God.  This  is  adverted  to  by  the  Psalmist,  "  Thou  thoughtest  I  was  altogether 
such  an  one  as  thyself,"  &o.  Not  therefore  to  you  who  are  disgraced  by  profligacy, 
but  even  to  you  who  live  in  a  state  of  total  and  practical  unconcern  about  another 
world,  would  we  ask,  "Behold  the  severity  of  God."  I  am  perfectly  aware  of 
many  who  look  upon  such  representations  as  these  to  be  too  strong.  They  can 
see,  and  be  impressed  by  it,  as  a  great  moral  delinquency,  when  an  earthly  parent 
is  thus  robbed  of  the  love  and  loyalty  of  his  own  offspring ;  but  how  then  can  you 
miss  the  more  emphatic  application  of  the  same  principle,  though  far  more  intense 
in  degree  to  our  Father  who  is  in  heaven  ?  You  know  how  to  feel  for  the  wounded 
feelings  of  the  parents ;  and  is  there  no  reply  to  the  complaining  voice  of  Him  who 
eaith  to  us  from  heaven,  "  Behold  I  stretch  out  My  hand,  but  no  man  regardeth  "  ? 
2.  But  along  with  this  severity  there  is  a  goodness,  and  they  meet  together  in  the 
fullest  harmony.  It  is  this,  in  fact,  which  constitutes  the  leading  peculiarity  of 
the  gospel.  When  God  is  severe  it  is  never  because  of  His  delight  in  the  sufferings 
of  His  creatures,  htft  iilvy:;Lys  bboauae  Of  Hisjusti66,  holiil638,'aTn:d  troth: — Could  a 
way  be  dtsviayd  by  WlItchTEese'mighf  "Be  ihscribelasTegrBIy  in'aTdeed' of  amnesty, 
then  we  may  be  assured  that  He  who  hath  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  His  children, 
but  who  hath  sworn  by  Himself  that  He  would  rather  that  they  should  all  live, 
cause  it  richly  to  flow  over  to  the  utmost  limits  of  this  sinful  creation.  Now  it  is 
precisely  this  which  distinguishes  the  evangelical  system.  The  gospel  is  a  mercy 
in  full  and  visible  conjunction  with  righteousness.  With  the  pardon  which  it  deals 
out  for  sin  it  makes  most  impressive  demonstration  of  the  evil  of  it,  the  mercy  of 
the  gospel  meets  with  the  truth  of  the  law,  and  God  can  at  once  be  a  just  God  and 
a  Saviour.  A  Saviour  has  been  born,  on  whom  God  did  lay  the  iniquities  of  us  aU. 
The  Holy  One  of  Israel  now  sitteth  upon  a  throne  of  grace.    The  onoompromising 


CHAP,  a]  ROMANS.  417 

doctrine  of  Scripture  is  this,  if  you  refuse  the  mercy  of  God  upon  this  footing, 
you  will  receive  it  upon  no  other.  "  No  man  cometh  unto  the  Father,  but  by 
the  Son " :  while  all  that  enter  into  His  presence  by  the  open  door  of  the  Son's 
mediatorship  shall  be  saved.  The  mighty  problem  was  resolved  by  God.  You 
will  meet  with  several  expressions  in  Scripture  on  that  subject :  '•  God  being 
just,  and  a  Saviour";  "  God  being  just,  and  the  justifier  of  them  that  believed  in 
Jesus  " ;  "  Mercy  and  truth  meet  each  other ;  righteousness  and  peace  kiss  each 
other."  III.  Application.  1.  Such  is  the  goodness  of  God,  now  that  this  good- 
ness has  been  harmonised  with  the  other  attributes  of  His  nature,  that  it  over- 
passes the  guilt  even  of  the  most  daring  and  stout-hearted  offender  among  you. 
2.  In  every  proportion  to  this  goodness  will  be  the  severity  of  God  on  those 
who  have  rejected  Him.  3.  None  truly  embrace  Christ  as  their  Saviour  who 
do  not  submit  to  Him  as  their  Master  and  Lord.  {T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  The 
goodness  and  severity  of  God : — I.  Goodness  and  bevebity  abb  elements  of  a 
PEEFECT  CHARACTEB  EVEN  AMONG  MEN.  1.  Without  gooduess,  the  character  repels 
instead  of  winning.  There  may  be  certain  qualities  which  command  our  respect 
in  a  Draco,  who  ordains  death  as  the  penalty  for  every  trifling  violation  of  the  law, 
or  in  a  Brutus,  who  with  tearless  eye  gives  orders,  in  the  way  of  duty,  for  the 
execution  of  his  sons ;  but  from  such  untempered  austerity  we  recoil.  2.  Without 
severity  goodness  degenerates  into  that  moral  pliancy  which,  under  the  name  of 
good-nature,  has  often  made  men  "  consent  "  to  the  enticement  of  sinners,  and  has 
given  them  nothing  in  return,  but  the  insipid  reputation  of  having  been  enemies 
to  none  but  themselves.  3.  In  a  perfect  character,  if  such  existed  among  men, 
you  would  see  the  counterbalancing  powers  of  goodness  and  severity  held  in  exact 
equilibrium.  And  such,  the  Word  of  God  assures  us,  is  the  character  of  Him  with 
whom  we  have  to  do.  11.  An  illostbation  of  this  twofold  element  of  the 
Divine  chabacteb  mat  be  dbawn  fbom  natube.  "  God  is  hght,"  says  the 
Scripture.  Now  light  is  compounded  of  seven  different  rays ;  but  it  has  two  main 
ingredients  :  the  sombre  rays  (blue,  indigo,  violet) ;  the  bright  rays  (orange,  red, 
yellow,  green).  Both  are  essential  to  the  deUcacy  and  purity  of  the  substance. 
Without  the  sombre  rays  hght  would  be  a  glare — the  eyebaU  would  ache  beneath 
it;  without  the  bright  rays  light  would  approximate  to  darkness,  and  lose  the 
gay  smile  which  lights  up  the  face  of  nature,  and  twinkles  on  the  sea.  Similarly, 
the  holiness,  justice,  and  truth  of  God  (attributes  which  wear  an  awful  aspect  to 
the  sinner),  are  an  element  of  His  nature  as  essential  to  its  perfectness,  as  mercy, 
love,  and  goodness.  Suppose  in  Him,  for  a  moment,  no  stern  defiance  against 
moral  evil,  but  an  allowance  and  admission  of  it,  and  you  degrade  Jehovah  to  the 
level  of  a  pagan  deity.  Suppose  in  Him,  on  the  other  hand,  an  absence  of  love, 
and  you  supplant  the  very  being  of  God,  for  "  God  is  love."  But  combine  both 
righteousness  and  love,  intensified  to  the  highest  conceivable  degree,  and  you  are 
then  possessed  of  the  Scriptural  idea  of  the  Most  High.  HI.  It  is  this  essential 
chabacteb  op  the  Divine  Being  which  fobms  the  basis  of  the  geeat  dootbine  op 
the  Atonement.  God  presents  us  in  this  with  the  highest  illustration  of  both 
His  attributes.  He  may  be  conceived  as  standing  by  the  Cross  and  pointing  to  it, 
saying,  "  Behold  therefore  the  goodness  and  severity  of  God."  (Dean  Goulburn.) 
Severity  and  goodness  : — Two  cases  are  here  set  before  us.  There  are  those  who 
have  fallen,  and  have  consequently  been  broken  off  from  the  olive-tree.  There  are 
those  too  who  continue  in  God's  goodness,  and  who  still  therefore  partake  of  the 
root  and  fatness  of  the  olive-tree.  These  are  the  present  most  opposite  conditions 
of  the  two  classes  of  persons  described.  It  is  added  that,  as  the  former  may  by 
God's  power  and  mercy  be  restored,  so  the  latter  must  take  heed  lest  they  also  be 
cut  off.  And,  finally,  as  one  great  means  of  keeping  themselves  in  their  steadfast- 
ness, they  are  counselled  to  dwell  earnestly  upon  the  thought  of  the  goodness  of 
God,  and  of  His  severity,  as  displayed  in  the  two  examples  brought  to  their  recol- 
lection. 1.  First,  then,  there  are  those  who  have  fallen,  and  have  consequently 
been  brokflT&lf  f rem  God's  olive-tree.  wn6  iii  6iiV  days  are  they  ?  St.  Paul,  in  his 
first  Epistle  to  Timothy,  makes  a  distinction  which  may  assist  us  here.  He  says, 
"  Some  men's  sins  are  open  beforehand,  going  before  to  judgment :  and  some  men 
they  follow  after."  There  are  some  whose  sins  are  so  manifest,  that  they  speak  for 
themselves,  and  almost  challenge  the  judgment  which  overtakes  them.  In  our  own 
days,  amidst  a  very  general  toleration  of  some  kinds  of  sin,  there  are  others  which  even 
the  world  calls  scandalous;  which  the  common  language  of  the  least  religious  con- 
deiiins  ;  and  which  are  visited  even  by  them  with  a  severity  which,  if  not  excessive 
in  itself,  is  at  least  most  inconsistent  with  their  estimate  of  the  criminality  of  other 
VOL.  II.  27 


418  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

transgressions.  Of  this  kind  are  acts  of  dishonesty  and  of  meanness,  of  cowardice  and 
open  falsehood.  One  who  has  thus  fallen  meets  with  no  tenderness.  His  sin  goes 
before  unto  judgment.  He  has  fallen  ;  and  even  by  the  world's  sentence  he  is  cut 
off  from  God's  olive-tree.  Now  what  in  such  a  case  says  the  infallible  Word  of 
God?  It  does  not  palliate  the  grievousness  of  this  man's  transgression.  It  echoea 
the  judgment  already  pronounced  upon  him  by  the  conscience  of  his  fellow-men  ; 
and  adds  to  it,  in  tones  yet  more  alarming,  "  The  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die." 
But  is  this  all  ?  Has  the  gospel  no  word  of  encouragement  for  the  fallen  sinner, 
none  of  special  warning  to  those  who  have  cast  him  out  ?  To  him  its  language  is, 
Thou  hast  fallen  by  thine  iniquity.  Thou  hast  lived  as  if  there  were  no  God,  no 
Christ ;  no  death,  no  judgment,  no  eternity.  Because  of  unbelief  therefore  thou 
hast  been  broken  off.  God  in  His  infinite  mercy — because  He  desires  not  the  death 
of  a  sinner,  but  rather  that  he  should  be  converted  and  live — has  cut  thee  off  for  a 
while  as  it  were  from  His  olive-tree.  He  has  brought  thee  to  shame  and  suffering 
in  this  life,  if  perhaps  thy  soul  may  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord.  And  know 
now  that,  if  thou  abide  not  still  in  unbelief :  if  thou  refuse  not  still  to  hear  the 
voice  of  Him  who  has  aflSicted  thee  ;  thy  fall  is  not  final :  thou  shalt  be  grafted  in : 
thou  shalt  be  restored  to  far  more  than  thou  hast  ever  yet  known  of  the  enjoyment 
of  the  grace  of  God.  0  Israel,  thou  hast  destroyed  thyself  :  but  in  Me  is  thy  help. 
And  then  of  warning  to  all  those  who  may  be  disposed  to  judge  harshly  of  one  who 
has  thus  openly  fallen.  To  them,  to  all  of  us,  the  gospel  says.  Behold  in  every 
such  example  the  severity  of  God.  If  for  you  this  particular  form  of  sin  seems  to 
have  no  attraction ;  if  you  cannot  even  conceive  yourself  to  have  been  tempted  to 
its  commission  ;  yet  consider,  to  whom  is  this  blessing  due  ?  Eemember  too  that, 
if  there  be  one  class  of  sins  which  goes  before  to  judgment,  which  outruns  as  it 
were  by  its  open  heinousness  the  adversary  who  is  haling  it  to  the  judge,  there  is 
yet  another  kind  which  ends  in  the  same  result  with  the  former,  however  much  in 
this  life  it  may  seem  to  differ  from  it.  Your  sins  may  be  more  secret ;  you  may 
fence  them  more  carefully  from  the  sight  and  the  hearing  of  men :  yet,  if  this  be 
all,  it  amounts  only  to  a  postponement  of  the  day  of  exposure :  at  last  it  will  come, 
and  will  not  tarry.  Or  even  if  your  sins  be  of  such  a  kind  that  their  disclosure  in 
the  world's  sight  would  bring  with  it  no  disgrace  or  punishment;  yet  a  day  is  before 
each  one  of  us,  which  will  rectify  these  erring  judgments,  and  in  which  even  they 
whose  only  crime  has  been  that  they  have  forgotten  God,  that  God  has  not  been  in 
all  their  thoughts,  will  awake  from  their  sleep  in  the  dust  of  the  earth  only  to  shame 
and  everlasting  contempt.  2.  But  we  must  turn  now,  in  conclusion,  to  the  other 
class  here  spoken  of ;  that  of  those  who,  continuing  in  God's  goodness,  are  par- 
taking day  by  day  of  the  root  and  fatness  of  the  olive-tree.  Who  amongst  us  are 
these  ?  What  is  it  to  continue  in  God's  goodness  ?  It  must  be  something  more 
than  merely  keeping  ourselves  from  gross  transgression;  something  more  than  par- 
taking week  by  week  in  the  ordinances  of  Christian  worship  ;  something  more  than 
the  merely  being  appended,  as  a  dead  or  fruitless  branch  may  be,  to  the  stock  of 
God's  Israel :  there  must  be  a  vitality  in  our  connection  with  the  olive-tree — a  com- 
munication ever  kept  up  with  its  root,  with  the  living  centre  of  all  its  growth  and 
vigour — to  give  us  any  place  amongst  those  who  are  truly  continuing  in  God's  good- 
ness. Are  we  daily  applying  to  Christ  Himself,  as  our  living  Saviour,  for  grace  and 
spiritual  life  ?  Do  we  return  to  Him  in  hearty  sorrow  when  we  have  sinned  ?  Do 
we  take  refuge  in  Him  when  we  feel  the  power  of  temptation  ?  Do  we  ask  strength 
from  Him  to  resist  sin  ?  Do  we  day  by  day  commit  the  keeping  of  our  souls  to  God 
through  Him  as  to  a  faithful  Creator  and  most  merciful  Kedeemer  ?  This  and  this 
only  is  the  life  of  one  who  continues  in  God's  goodness.  {Bean  Vaughan.) 
God's  character  : — I.  Ebboneous  views  of  god.  1.  AU  goodness.  2.  All  severity. 
II.  The  evil  besult  of  those  vtews.  1.  They  are  partial.  2.  The  one  leads  to 
presumption.  3.  The  other  to  despair.  III.  His  true  characteb.  1.  A  Sovereign. 
2.  A  Father.  {W.  W.  Wythe.)  And  they  also,  If  they  abide  not  still  in  unbelief; 
shall  be  graffed  in. — The  restoration  of  the  Jews  : — 1.  Is  a  matter  of  promise.  2.  Will 
be  effected  by  Divine  power.  3.  Is  suspended  on  their  reception  of  Christ.  {J, 
Lyth,  D.D.)  The  true  hope  of  Israel: — I.  Wherein  it  consists — the  prospect  of 
restoration  to  the  privileges  of  God's  people.  II.  Whebeon  it  depends.  1.  The 
power  of  promise  of  God.  2.  Suspended  in  faith.  III.  How  it  is  confirmed. 
1.  By  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles.  (1)  Once  not  a  people.  (2)  Now  raised  to 
loftier  privileges  than  the  Jews  ever  possessed.  2.  How  much  more,  (fee.  (ver.  24). 
IV.  What  rxELiNOS  this  hope  should  awaken  in  us.  Zeal  and  prayer  for  the  Jew 
that  he  may — 1.  BelinquiBh  his  false  hopes.      2.  Embrace    Christ  in   faith. 


CHIP,  n.]  ROMANS.  419 

8.  Become  united  with  the  living  Church  of  God.     {Ibid.)        Salvation  barred  by 
unbeliej  possible  to  faith : — I.  The  chief  bab  to  a  man's  salvation  is  an  unbelievino 
HEABT.     Our  Saviour  told  the  Pharisees,  who  exceeded  all  men  in  morality,  that 
publicans  and  harlots  should  go  before  them  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.     Why  ? 
Because  they  believed  not.     Morality  is  good,  but  not  good  enough  to  save  a  man. 
Faith  cannot  be  without  it,  but  it  may  be  without  faith.     Morality  without  faith  is 
like  a  goodly  picture,  which  is  fair  to  look  upon,  but  a  man  can  have  no  society 
with  because  it  wants  life.      Labour  therefore  for  faith,  which  is   the   soul   of 
obedience,  and  it  will  save  thy  soul.    II.  Hebe  is  a  bingdlab  comfobt  to  con- 
sciences DISTEE8SED  FOB  SINS.    It  is  a  comfort  to  a  sick  man  if  the  physician  tell 
him  his  disease,  though  dangerous,  is  yet  curable,  if  it  be  not  driven  too  long  before 
remedies  be  appointed.     So  God  is  able  to  save  thee  if  thou  deferrest  not  thy 
repentance.     If  we  look  only  to  ourselves  there  is  nothing  but  desperation  ;  but  if 
we  look  up  to  see  what  God  is  ready  to  do  (only  staying  for  our  believing  and 
repenting),  there  is  great  hope.    Even  thou,  Jew,  which  hast  crucified  Christ,  if 
thou  canst  cease  from  unbeUef,  thou  shalt  be  saved.     For  as  all  the  promises  in 
the  world,  so  the  threatnings  are  conditional  (Jonah  iii.  9).     Ill    Despair  not  op 
THE  salvation  OF  ANY,  neither  finally  censure  even  though  never  so  wicked,  for 
God  is  able  to  turn  the  heart  of  a  Jew.     He  that  converted  thee  can  convert  thy 
neighbour  also.     IV.  God  is  able  to  save,  so  He  is  able  to  destrot.     Let  His 
power  make  thee  wary  how  thou  livest.     Art  thou  stronger  than  He  that  thou 
shouldst  dare  by  thy  sins  daily  to  provoke  Him  ?     (Elnathan  Parr,  B.D.)        For 
If  thou  wert  cut  out  of  tlie  olive  which  Is  wild  by  nature  .  .  .  how  much  more 
.  .  .  the  natural  branches.     The  Gentiles  like  a  wild  olive-tree  : — I.  They  are  wild 
BY  natdbe.      1.  Nations  before  Christ  were  without  spiritual  culture.      2.  The 
Mosaic  law  was  confined  to  Israel.     3.  The  times  of  this  ignoraace  were  winked  at 
by  God.    II.  They  were  Christianised  contbaey  to  natuee.     Grafting  from  a 
different  kind  of  tree  not  natural.      1.  Gentilism  was  pervaded  with   idolatry. 
2.  Gentile  notions  and  practices  were  all  opposed  to  a  Divine  life.    3.  It  is  contrary 
to  every  man's  nature  to  be  a  Christian.     4.  This  contrariety  is  increased  by  sin, 
(r.  Robinson,  D.D.)         God's  grace  to  the  Gentile  an  argument  for  the  recovery  of 
the  Jews  : — I.  The  past  condition  of  the  Gentiles.    1.  Not  a  people.    2.  Strangers 
to  the  covenant  of  promise.     3.  Given  up  to  their  heart's  lusts.     II.  Theib  gospel 
PBrvELEGE.       1.  Brought  nigh.       2.  Accepted.      3.  Made  children  of  Abraham. 
4.  By  faith.     III.  The  consequent  hope  of  Israel.     1.  Still  heirs  of  the  covenant. 
2.  Beloved  for  their  fathers'  sake.      3.  How  much  more,  &c. ,  when  they  believe  ? 
(J.  Lyth,  D.D.)        The  prospects  of  Jew  and  Gentile  : — I.  It  is  peobable  the  Jews 
shall  be  called  (2  Sam.  vii.  24).     1.  A  tree  is  not  dead  because  it  buds  not  in 
winter.     This  is  the  Jews'  winter,  there  is  yet  hope  of  a  summer  wherein  they  mny 
yield  fruit.     The  Jew  is  oft  compared  to  a  fig-tree,  which  buds  first,  but  whose  fruit 
ripens  last.     The  Jews  budded  before  us,  the  time  of  their  ripe  fruit  is  at  hand. 
2.  Speak  honourably  of  a  Jew,  for  whatsoever  he  is  in  regard  of  his  unbelief,  yet 
Paul  calls  it  a  natural  branch.    3.  The  Church  is  called  the  Jews'  own  olive,  into 
whom  we  are  grafted  ;  but  when  they  shall  be  called  they  shall  not  be  grafted  into 
U8,  but  into  their  own  flock.    II.  The  Gentile  hath  not  so  gbeat  (though  so 
sube)  a  pbebooative  and  bight  to  the  peomise  as  the  Jew  (Acts  iii.  25 ;  Eom.  i. 
16,    ii.   10).      1.    Our  natural    condition  is   miserable.      We  should  have  been 
idolaters  or  savages  if  God  had  not  given  us  His  special  grace.    It  is  contrary  to 
our  nature  to  be  in  the  right  ohve,  to  be  worshippers  of  God,  to  please  Him.    We 
delight  in  good  as  a  fish  to  be  out  of  the  water,  we  are  out  of  our  element. 
2.  By  creation  goodness  was  natural  to  us,  as  now  evil,  and  goodness   super- 
natural.     We  delight  to  possess  the  inheritance  of  our  progenitors  in  us ;  let 
us  then  strive  to  recover  that  grace  which  our  first  parents  spent  in  the  subtilty 
of  the  devil.     3.  Our  conversion  is  contrary  to  our  present  nature.    God  will  invert 
the  nature  and  course  of  things  for  the  salvation  of  His  elect.     4.  The  state  of 
nature  and  grace  is  easily  discerned.     He  that  despiseth  the  gospel  and  liveth 
wickedly  is  natural,  but  to  believe  and  repent  is  gracious.     5.  Contrary  to  nature, 
keep  diligent  watch  over  thine  heart  or  else  Nature  wUl  soon  run  after  her  old 
course.     Bend  the  bough  of  a  tree  downward,  when  thou  lettest  it  go  it  will  strive 
upward  by  and  by.    Waterfowls  hatched  under  a  land  fowl  will  quickly  to  the 
water  by  nature.     So,  though  by  the  warmth  of  the  Spirit  we  be  hatched  under  the 
Word,  and  become  God's  chickens,  as  Christ  compared  us,  yet  we  will  be  drawing 
to  corruption  if  we  daily  mortify  it  not.     By  nature  boats  go  down  the  stream,  but 
by  the  force  of  wind  and  oars  th;y  be  got  up,  and  if  such  means  cease  they  go 


420  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  II. 

faster  downward  than  they  were  forced  upward ;  so  to  proceed  in  grace  is  against 
the  stream  of  nature.  If  God's  Spirit  like  a  good  wind  blow  not  a  prosperous 
gale  upon  us  and  we  labour  at  the  means,  we  are  easily  carried  down  the  stream 
of  our  corruption.    {Elnathan  Parr,  B.D.) 

Vers.  25-27.  For  I  would  not,  brethren,  that  ye  shonld  be  Ignorant  of  thla 

mystery. — The  mystery  of  the  conversion  of  the  Jews : — I.  To  what  mtsteby 
DOES  THE  APOSTLE  BEFEB  ?  1.  "  That  bliudness  has  happened  to  Israel." 
This  "blindness" — (1)  Is  national  blindness  (1  Cor.  iii.  14).  (2)  Is  in  no 
wise  a  contradiction  to  God's  dealings — for  God  foresaw  it,  and  predicted  it 
(Isa.  xxix.  10-14;  cf.  Eom.  xi.  7-10).  (3)  Is  but  partial  (ver.  6).  2.  This 
blindness  is  temporary.  (1)  What  led  to  it  (see  ver.  20 ;  cf.  Deut.  jcxviii.  15, 
29 ;  John  viii.  24).  (2)  What  followed  (ver.  11,  15)  ?  Blessings  came  from  the 
faU  of   the  Jew,  but  still  greater  blessings  would  come  from  his  restoration. 

(3)  Now  we  readily  gather  from  this,   that  God  is    not    unfaithful   (ver.   29). 

(4)  But  furthermore.     This  blindness  is  only  until  the  "  fulness  of  the  Gentile 
shall  come  in."    In  Luke  xxi.  24.  the  same  truth  is  laid  down.    Now  to  see  exactly 
what  this  "  time  "  is,  refer  to  Acts  xv.  13,  &c.    The  Lord  is  acting  with  the  whole 
Gentile  world  in  this  manner :  sending  His  gospel  for  a  witness.     Then  men  come 
out  of  the  world  and  are  a  people  elect — the  true  Church.   And  when  this  work  shall 
have  been  accomplished,  then  the  Lord  will  restore  Israel.     Therefore,  from  com- 
paring these  Scriptures  together,  we  may  draw  this  conclusion,  that  the  time  will 
come  when  the  Jews  shall  be  restored  (vers.  11,  23;  Jer.  xxxii.  37,  &c.).    Nor  is 
there  anything  improbable  in  this.     At  the  present  moment  there  are  materials 
which  have  only  to  be  put  together  to  form  cites  which  will  hold  ten,  or  twenty,  or 
thirty  thousand  inhabitants.    And  moreover,  the  thorns  and  briars  as  protecting 
them  from  decay  and  injury.     II.  What  is  said  of  "  this  mystery."    The  day  is 
gone  by  when  it  was  considered  absurd  to  speak  of  these  things  ;  but  still  there  are 
numbers  who  think  that  this  is  an  unnecessary  or  unimportant  study.    But  the 
apostle,  writing  to  the  Gentiles,  says,  "I  would  not  that  ye  should  be  ignorant  of 
it."     Why  ?      1.  Because  he  "  would  not,  that  you  should  be  ignorant "  of  the 
Bible  ;  for  many  passages  of  Scripture  convey  no  idea  whatever  till  we  understand 
that  Jerusalem  means  Jerusalem,  and  Israel  Israel.    2.  But  independently  of  this. 
If  God  has  mercy  in  store  for  these  people,  may  not  we  also  look  forward  to  God'a 
mercy,  backsliders  and  sinners  as  some  of  us  are?    And  where  do  we  find  this 
warranted  but  in  God's  own  Word.     III.  The  ground  of  his  anxiety.     "Lest  ye 
should  be  wise  in  your  own  conceits."    This  Epistle  was  addressed  to  the  Church 
of  Rome  ?    Now,  note  one  or  two  of  the  leading  features  of  this  Church.     1.  They 
keep  the  Scriptures  back  from  the  people.     And  what  is  the  consequence  of  that  ? 
Many  of  them  remain  in  perfect  blindness  as  regards  the  truth.    They  keep  the 
traditions  of  men,  and  therefore  believe  what  is  told  them  of  Eome's  power,  and  of 
no  one  but  those  connected  with  Eome  being  safe  for  heaven ;  whereas,  if  they  had 
only  the  Scriptures  before  them,  they  would  see  what  a  place  Rome  will  hold  in  the 
last  great  day.     2.  Eome  upholds  a  formal  religion.     How  many  externals  had  the 
Jew  !  and  what  did  the  externals  profit  him  ?     3.  Eome  is  completely  eaten  up,  as 
it  were,  with  its  own  conceit  (Rev.  xviii.  7).     And  therefore  the  apostle  says,  "  '  I 
would  not  .  .  .  lest  ye  should  be  wise  in  your  own  conceits  ' ;  for  you  may  indeed 
speak  of  your  greatness,  but  you  shall  fall,  while  Jerusalem  shall  stand  in  that  day." 
Conclusion:    1.   Beware— (1)    Of  trusting  to  external  privileges.      (2)    Of  giving 
countenance  to  any  unbelief  whatever.     It  was  unbelief  which  led  to  the  fall  of 
Israel.     2.  Encourage  yourselves  with  the  remembrance  that  the  time  is  very  short 
for  your  sojourning  in  this  world.     3.  Help  forward  this  blessed  work.     {Bishop 
Villiers.)         The  mystery  of  the  calling  of  tlie  Jews  : — I.  The  calling  of  the  jews 
IS  A  MYSTERY.     Seek  not  further  than  is  revealed,  and  believe  that.     If  thou  askest 
how,  and  when?  I  know  not,  because  I  find  not  revealed.   God  knows,  which  satisfies 
me.     He  that  too  earnestly  looks  upon  the  sun  comes  in  the  end  to  see  nothing, 
and  he  that  stands  too  near  fire  may  burn  himself  instead   of  warming  him. 
Secret  things  are  for  the  Lord,  but  things  revealed  for  us  and  our  children  for  ever. 
II.  The  end  of  the  world  shall  not  be  till  the  Jews  are  called,  and  how  long 
after  that  none  yet  can  teU.     1.  There  are  certain  foolish  prophecies  dispersed  that 
the  w-irld  shall  end  within  so  many  years.     In  Paul's  time  there  were  such,  and 
they  would  have  fathered  their  brainless  toys  upon  Paul  (2  Thess.  ii.  1,  2).    So  also 
from  Paul's  time  to  this  day — a  note  of  great  folly  and  rashness.     (1)  Because 
there  are  no  plain  Scriptures  for  it  but  against  it.     (2)  Becaube  the  grounds  of  theil 


CHAP,  n.]  BOMANS.  421 

conceit  are  uncertain,  idle  and  frivolous  :  as  from  Peter's  saying,  that  a  thousand 
years  is  but  as  a  day,  and  from  divers  mystical  numbers  in  Daniel  and  the 
Eevelation.  (3)  If  the  last  day  be  unknown  (as  aU  acknowledge),  then  the  day 
before  the  last,  and  so  by  consequence  the  last  week,  month,  year,  age.  (4)  All  the 
diviners  about  this  point  have  been  hitherto  shamed.  Such,  therefore,  that  shall 
yet  attempt  it  must  expect  the  same  as  a  just  recompense  of  their  madness.  2.  It 
is  not  possible  to  know  nor  lawful  to  inquire.  If  it  had  been  for  the  Church's 
profit  to  have  known  it  God  would  have  revealed  it.  3.  Whensoever  the  time 
comes  it  shall  come  well  for  God's  children ;  prepare  for  it  that  it  may  be  a  joyful 
and  not  a  dismal  time  unto  thee.  If  God  should  now  come  to  judgment,  how 
ready  art  thou  ?  III.  Till  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  be  come  in.  There 
is  an  emptiness  among  the  Gentiles,  both  in  regard  of  number  and  of  grace,  which 
last  is  a  great  impediment  to  the  calling  of  the  Jews.  The  idolatry  of 
some,  and  the  profaneness  of  others  are  a  stumbling-block  unto  them.  Let 
us  remove  it  that  we  may  make  a  passage  for  their  calling.  IV.  Come  in. 
Whitheb  ?  Into  the  Chukch.  All  they  which  believe  are  within  ;  without  are 
unbelievers.  It  is  our  Father's  house,  where  is  bread  enough  ;  without  is  nothing 
but  hog's  meat.  Examine  how  thou  art  within,  whether  as  Ham  in  the  ark,  as 
Judas  among  the  apostles,  as  chaff  in  flour ;  for  in  respect  of  their  bodies  many  are 
within,  who  in  respect  of  faith  and  obedience  are  without.  It  is  all  one  to  be 
without  and  to  deserve  to  be  without.  V.  Blindness  or  obstinacy  is  in  past 
come  to  Iskael,  but  in  the  end  all  Israel  shall  be  saved.  An  obstinate  man  is 
not  in  the  state  of  salvation.  Who  have  this  obstinate  heart  ?  The  Jews ;  but 
we  need  not  seek  a  Jew  to  find  it.  Concerning  which  note — 1.  The  misery  of  an 
obstinate  heart.  There  are  two  estates  of  the  heart  most  fearful :  to  feel  sin  too 
much ;  and  to  be  past  feeling.  The  soft  repenting  heart  is  a  heavenly  heart. 
2.  The  means  whereby  we  come  to  such  a  state.  (1)  Custom  in  sinning.  Even  as 
a  path  is  hardened  by  the  continual  trampling  of  the  passengers,  so  by  custom  in 
evil  is  the  conscience  by  little  and  little  crushed  and  made  insensible.  (2)  Neglect 
of  the  means  of  grace  offered.  This  shut  up  the  Jews  in  obstinacy ;  and  ordinarily 
for  this  is  this  judgment  of  God  inflicted  upon  men.  3.  Its  effects.  (1)  A 
departing  from  the  faith,  broaching  the  doctrines  of  devils,  denying  manifest  truth> 
and  holding  and  seeming  anything  to  obtain  our  own  ends  (1  Tim.  iv.  1-3 ;  Eph. 
iv.  18).  As  when  men  will  be  Papists,  Protestants,  neuters,  anything,  nothing,  as 
they  see  it  best  serve  their  politic  plots.  (2)  Committing  and  delighting  in  sin. 
4.  Its  signs.  (1)  When  no  judgment.  (2)  When  no  mercy  can  move  to  remorse. 
WTien  the  word,  which  is  a  hammer,  a  sword,  and  water  can  neither  by  the 
thundering  of  judgment,  bruise,  or  make  any  dent  into  our  hearts,  not  by  the 
pleasing  sound  of  mercy,  molify  us  and  make  us  relent ;  there  is  hardness  un- 
speakable. (Elnathan  Parr,  B.D.)  Why  do  we  hope  for  the  conversion  of  the 
Jewsf — I.  Because  it  is  predicted — 1.  By  Paul  (ver.  25).  Their  blindness  is 
partial  and  temporary.  2.  By  the  Old  Testament  prophets  (vers.  26,27).  They 
shall  acknowledge  Christ  and  share  in  the  promise  of  the  new  covenant. 
II.  Because  the  gifts  and  calling  op  God  are  without  repentance.  1.  Their 
exclusion  is  for  a  temporary  purpose.  2.  Their  election  permanent.  3.  The  pur- 
pose of  God  unalterable  (vers.  28,  29).  III.  Because  of  God's  plan  of  procedure 
with  the  Gentiles.  1.  Once  excluded  by  their  own  unbelief.  2.  Now 
accepted  through  the  unbelief  of  Israel.  3.  So  they  also  shall  obtain  mercy. 
4.  That  God  may  have  mercy  upon  all.  {J.  Lyth,  B.D.)  Our  duty  to 
the  Jew : — I.  How  we  should  regard  him.  1.  Not  with  contempt,  but  with 
respect.  2.  Not  as  cast  away,  but  blinded.  II.  What  we  should  hope  fob 
him.  1.  His  restoration  with  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles.  2.  Not  simply  the 
conversion  of  a  few,  but  of  the  nation.  HI.  How  we  should  treat  him.  We 
should— 1.  Hate  his  seLf-righteousness.  2.  Love  himself.  3.  Seek  his  salvation. 
(Ibid.)  The  fulness  of  the  Gentiles.— T/ie  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  and  the 
conversion  of  the  Jews  : — Take  as  an  illustration  the  case  of  a  river  bed  nearly  dry 
from  long-continued  drought.  What  water  there  is  flows  languidly,  and  produces 
DO  effect  on  an  islet  in  mid-stream.  Eain  comes  and  the  volume  of  water  is 
increased  and  the  flow  becomes  stronger  and  more  rapid.  In  proportion  to  the 
copiousness  of  the  rain,  and  therefore  to  the  power  of  the  current  the  islet  ia 
affected.  By  little  and  httle  its  banks  are  washed  away,  and  more  and  more  of  its 
surface  is  covered  by  the  victorious  waters  which  gradually  rise.  The  rain  becomes 
a  flood,  and  the  river  bed  now  full,  and  the  river  a  mighty  torrent,  the  islet,  after 
long  resistance,  ultimately  succumbs,  and  is  covered  or  washed  away.    So  the 


422  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR .  (.ohap.  XL 

conversion  of  the  Jews  will  be  proportionate  to  the  amount  of  missionarj  energy, 
fed  by  Divine  grace,  on  the  part  of  the  Gentile  Churches.  And  when  the  fulness  of 
grace  shall  fill  all  Christian  agencies  with  a  fulness  of  enthusiasm  we  may  expect 
Judaism  to  be  submerged.  Or  to  change  the  figure.  A  kiug  returns  from  his 
journey  into  a  far  country  and  finds  his  whole  kingdom  in  a  state  of  revolt.  He 
first  appeals  to  that  province  with  which  he  has  the  closest  and  tenderest  ties.  But 
his  claims  are  ignored  and  his  overtures  treated  with  contempt.  Collecting, 
however,  a  loyal  few,  he  marches  forth  to  subjugate  his  own  provinces.  The  work 
is  a  long  and  arduous  one,  and  the  fortunes  of  the  brave  band  are  varied.  Victory 
is  followed  by  defeat.  Here  a  subjugated  territory  maintains  its  allegiance,  there 
another  revolts  as  soon  as  the  army  is  withdrawn,  and  has  to  be  conquered  again. 
But  the  army  is  ever  increasing,  and  year  by  year  there  is  less  and  less  to  conquer, 
and  each  conquered  territory  sends  its  contingent  to  reduce  the  rest.  Eventually 
the  work  is  done,  and  the  whole  kingdom  brought  to  subjection  with  the  exception 
of  the  province  to  which  the  king  made  his  first  appeal.  All  through  the  campaign 
individual  citizens  have  come  over,  but  there  is  now  a  stubborn  residuum  left.  On 
this  the  whole  of  the  now  loyal  empire  concentrates  its  forces,  and  partly  perhaps 
from  a  sense  of  helplessness,  but,  mostly  from  a  sense  of  the  rectitude  of  the 
conqueror's  claims,  it  yields,  and  the  kingdom  is  once  more  united  under  one  rightful 
head.  So  Christ,  the  King  of  man,  made  His  first  appeal  to  the  Jews ;  but  rejected 
by  them,  His  kinsmen.  He  with  His  apostles  turned  to  the  Gentiles,  and  not  in 
vain,  as  the  history  of  the  bye-gone  centuries  with  all  their  vicissitudes  for  His 
cause  has  proved.  Much  yet  remains  to  be  done,  but  past  successes  are 
prophetic  of  future  triumphs,  and  Jesus  will  yet  have  the  heathen  for  His  inheritance, 
&c.     The  power  of  Christian  influence  will  then  be  irresistible  and  Israel  will  yield. 

1.  The  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  will  be  the  result  of  a  full  outpoubinq 
OF  THE  Holy  Spieit,  The  gift  of  Pentecost  was  only  the  earnest  of  a  larger 
blessing.  That  equipped  the  Church  for  her  warfare,  this  will  inaugurate  her 
triumph.  Special  manifestations  of  the  Spirit  have  been  vouchsafed  in  every  age, 
and  these  have  been  uniformly  followed  by  an  outburst  of  missionary  zeal.  It  is 
not,  then,  incredible  that  God  should  literally  pour  out  His  Spirit  on  all  flesh,  and 
thus  bring  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  in.  II.  The  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  will 
BE  the  full  Christianisation  of  the  Gentiles.  1.  As  yet  this  is  only  partial. 
Vast  tracts  lie  outside  Christian  influence,  but  these  are  being  narrowed  every  ytjar. 

2.  A  great  mass  of  Christianised  GentiUsm  is  only  nominal.  Multitudes  have  only 
the  form  without  the  power,  and  wear  a  name  they  only  disgrace.  3.  The  time  will 
come  when  both  in  name  and  reality  all  tribes  and  kingdoms  and  tongues  will 
become  Christians.  III.  The  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  will  have  an  iekesis- 
TiBLE  effect  ON  THE  Jews.  During  the  process  of  filling  this  effect  has  been 
more  or  less  marked,  and  will,  we  may  well  believe,  be  more  marked  still  as  the 
Galilean  goes  on  conquering  and  to  conquer.  But  when  the  Jew  looks  back  and 
sees  religion  after  religion  overthrown,  and  nation  after  nation  brought  into 
obedience  to  the  faith  of  Christ  and  His  rehgion,  and  his  nation  the  only  one  left — 
the  time  will  not  be  far  distant  when  overwhelming  external  pressure  will  combine 
with  overwhelming  internal  conviction  to  bring  Israel  to  the  feet  of  Christ. 
Conclusion:  1.  What  a  glorious  outlook  I  What  an  argument  for  Christian 
missions  I  (J.  W.  Burn.)  And  so  aJl  Israel  shall  be  saved. — The  mlvation  oj 
Israel : — ^I.  Theie  present  blindness.  1.  Awful  in  its  character.  2.  Partial  in 
extent.  3.  Fixed  in  its  period.  II.  Its  removal.  1.  Complete.  2.  General.  3. 
Certain.  Conclusion  :  Consider — 1.  Its  aspect  on  the  Jews.  2.  Its  proper 
effect  upon  your  own  kinds.  (C.  Simeon,  M.A.)  The  restoration  of  Israel  : — 
I.  The  event.  1.  All  Israel,  as  a  nation — 2.  Shall  be  saved,  deUvered  from 
the  curse  which  has  so  long  rested  upon  them.  U.  The  means  by  which  it 
SHALL  BE  accomplishel.  1.  The  deliverer,  Christ — 2.  Shall  come  out  of  Zion — 3. 
And  take  away  their  sin  (Isa.  hx.  17 — 21).  III.  The  certainty  of  it.  1.  The 
covenant — 2.  Of  salvation  (Jer.  xxxi.  31).  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  For  this  la  My 
covenant  with  them. — TJie  new  covenant: — I.  Unto  whom  sent.  1.  To  all  who 
believe.  2.  Not  ouly  Jews  but  Gentile.  IL  What  does  it  include.  1.  The 
promise  of  the  Spirit  (Isa.  lix.  21 ;  Jer.  xxxi.  31).  2.  Of  eternal  salvation  (Isa. 
Iv.  3).    lU.  How  IT  IS  SEALED.     In  the  pardon  of  sin.     {Ibid.) 

Vers.  28,  29.  As  concerning  the  gospel,  they  are  enemies  for  your  sakes. — 

Enemies  may  he  unconscious  helpers : — During  the  siege  of  Sebastopol  a  Russian 
ebell  bailed  itself  in  the  side  of  a  hill  without  the  city,  and  opened  a  spring     A 


CHAP.  XI.]  EOMANS.  428 

little  fountain  babbled  forth  where  the  cannon  shot  had  fallen,  and  during  the 
remainder  of  the  siege  afforded  to  the  thirsty  troops  who  were  stationed  in  that 
vicinity  an  abundant  supply  of  pure,  cold  water.  Thus  the  missile  of  death  from 
an  enemy,  under  the  direction  of  an  overruling  Providence,  proved  an  almoner  of 
mercy  to  the  parched  and  weary  soldiery  of  the  allies.  So  often  the  efforts  of  men 
against  God's  kingdom  have  been  overruled  to  its  furtherance.  Every  great  attack 
upon  the  Bible  has  opened  a  new  fountain  of  its  truth  to  supply  the  wants  of  God's 
people.  The  rel-ation  of  the  Jewish  nation  to  the  Gentiles : — I.  Prior  to  thb 
PROMULGATION  OF  THE  GOSPEL.  It  was  the  relation  of — 1.  Sole  depositories  of  the 
Word  of  God  (Psa.  Ixxvi. ;  Amos  iii.  2).  They  had  a  revelation  of  Jehovah,  while 
the  others  were  in  that  ignorance  at  which  the  apostle  declares  God  "  winked."  2. 
The  channels  for  the  transmission  of  the  promised  seed,  in  which  all  the  nations  of 
the  earth  were  to  be  blessed.  The  tribe  of  Judah  contained  within  it  a  sacred 
deposit,  the  God-man,  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  In  this  sense,  "  salvation  is 
of  the  Jews,"  the  world  was  preserved  for  their  sake.  3  The  main  spring  of  the 
pohtics  of  the  world.  Kings  and  empires  were  set  up  and  cast  down  for  their 
Bakes,  n.  Since  the  gospel.  This  must  be  regarded — 1.  As  it  respects  the 
remnant  of  the  Jewish  people  converted  to  the  Christian  faith,  according  to  the 
election  of  grace.  These  formed  the  stem  of  the  Christian  Church,  Jesus  Christ 
Himself,  the  founder  of  the  Christian  system,  being  a  Jew  according  to  the  flesh. 
They  were  the  first  to  be  taken  into  union  with  Him  ;  the  first  branches  from  Him 
the  living  stem ;  the  first  members  of  the  body  of  which  He  is  the  head.  They 
were  not  taken  into  fellowship  with  Gentiles,  but  Gentile  converts  were  taken  into 
fellowship  with  them  (Eph.  ii.  12-22 ;  iii.  10).  The  relation,  therefore,  is  that  of 
brethen  in  Christ  Jesus.  And  the  relation  which  the  Church,  thus  formed,  bears 
to  the  world  around  is  of  the  same  nature  as  that  which  the  Jews  once  bare  to  the 
Gentiles.  The  Christian  Church — (1)  Is  the  sole  depository  of  the  truth.  In  this 
Church  alone  is  Christ  to  be  found ;  and  in  the  Church  alone,  therefore,  can  God 
be  known.  (2)  Has  deposited  within  her  the  true  seed  which  is  to  become  a 
blessing  to  all  the  earth.  (3)  Is  the  main  spring  of  the  politics  of  the  world.  Can 
any  man  think  on  this  subject  with  the  Bible  before  him,  and  then  deny  thit  such 
men  as  Decius,  Julian,  Charlemagne,  Napoleon,  and  others,  were  raised  up  for  the 
promotion,  in  one  way  or  other,  of  the  interests  of  the  Church.  2.  As  it  respects 
the  Jews  as  a  nation.  "As  concerning  the  gospel,  they  are  enemies  for  your 
sakes  "  ;  not  the  remnant — they  are  converted — but  the  nation.  But  though  thus 
cast  off  for  our  sakes,  they  are  not  cast  off  beyond  the  reach  of  God ;  the  same  hand 
which  put  them  off  will  protect  and  preserve  them,  for  "  the  gift  and  calling  of  God 
are  vrithout  repentance."  But  they  are  "enemies  for  our  sakes":  they  bear  the 
relation  to  us  of  poor  outcasts — outcasts  to  make  room  for  us  ;  as  if  the  tree  could 
have  but  a  certain  number  of  branches,  as  if  the  body  could  have  but  a  certain 
number  of  members,  and  God  had  cast  off  some  of  the  branches,  and  removed  some 
of  the  members,  that  we  might  become  branches  in  Him  who  is  the  true  Vine,  and 
members  united  to  Him  who  is  the  only  head  1  IH.  After  the  restoration.  1. 
Metropolitan  pre-eminence  (Isa.  Ix. ;  Micah  iv.).  2.  Spiritual  blessing  (Psa.  Ixvii.). 
(H.  M.  McNeile,  D.D.)  The  mystery  of  God  in  relation  to  His  ancient  people  : — I. 
Its  nature.  1.  Enemies  for  your  sakes.  2.  Beloved  for  the  fathers' sakes.  II.  Its 
immutable  character.  1.  Depends  on  the  immutable  character  of  God.  2.  And 
His  unchangeable  purpose.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Beloved  for  the  fathers'  sakes. — C  od 
loves  when  compelled  to  punish,  and  His  affection  for  His  ancient  people  should 
teach  us  to  love  them  too.  "For  the  fathers'  sakes  "  is  God's  own  reason  for  His 
love  (Deut.  vii.  7,  8).  There  was  nothing  in  Israel  to  attract  it,  for  they  were 
obstinate  transgressors  from  the  womb  (Isa.  xlviii.  4,  8),  and  a  disobedient  and 
gainsaying  people  (chap.  x.  21).  So  God  loves  sinners  in  Christ  for  His  Son's  sake. 
God's  love  to  the  fathers  remembered  in  behalf  of  the  children  (Lev.  xxvi.  42). 
Blessing  of  godly  ancestors.  Children  loved  for  their  parents'  sakes.  How 
privileged  are  the  offspring  of  a  godly  stock ;  how  great  their  responsibility ;  how 
deep  should  be  their  gratitude  !  ( T.  Robinson,  D.D. )  For  the  gifts  and  calling  of 
Ood  are  without  repentance  —Without  change  of  mind  on  God's  part;  subject  to 
no  regret  or  change  of  purpose  (2  Cor.  vii.  10;  Heb.  xii.  17).  God  gives  without 
variableness  or  shadow  of  turning  (James  i.  17).  His  gift  to  Israel  only  suspended 
or  withdrawn  for  a  season.  He  has  not  repented  of  calling  Abraham  and  his  seed 
as  His  people,  nor  regretted  the  promises  made  to  the  fathers.  Man's  conduct  mwy 
change  God's  manner  but  not  His  mind.  God's  dealings  may  vary,  but  not  Hia 
determinings  ;  His  providence  may  alter,  but  not  His  purposes.    The  Strength  of 


424  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ch^^  «• 


Israel  will  not  lie  nor  repent  (1  Sam.  xv.  29).  God's  unchangeableness  the  ground 
of  Israel's  safety  (Mai.  iii.  6).  God  will  not  cast  away  His  people  (Deut.  iv,  31 ; 
1  Sam.  xii.  22).  Israel  is  not  to  be  permanently  deprived  of  what  God  has 
promised  them.  {Ibid.)  The  gifts  and  calling  of  God  without  repentance : — They 
are  so  in  respect  to  God  the  giver ;  He  never  repents  that  He  hath  called  His  people 
into  the  fellowship  of  His  Son  ;  and  they  are  so  on  the  believer's  part,  who  is  never 
sorry,  whatever  afterwards  he  meets  with,  that  he  is  brought  to  Christ.  {J.  Flavel.) 
The  immutability  of  God :  a  source  of  comfort : — It  is  a  source  of  comfort  to  the 
believer  to  reflect  that  that  on  which  he  puts  his  trust  is  established  and  immovable. 
Changes  take  place  above  and  around  the  fortress,  but  its  massive  buttresses  still 
stand  unmoved,  and  its  battlements  frown  defiance  at  the  strength  of  the  foe.  The 
clouds  above  are  fleeting  past,  it  may  be  in  silvery  brightness,  or  it  may  be  in  pall- 
like gloom ;  the  leaves  are  budding  or  fading,  according  to  their  seasons  upon  the 
earth  but  there  stands  the  fortress,  established  and  unchanged.  (P.  B.  Power, 
M.A.)  The  constancy  of  God : — It  has  been  supposed  that  the  doctrine  of  God's 
decrees  would  repel  men,  and  drive  them  into  infidelity.  On  the  contrary,  it  draws 
men.  God's  decrees  may  be  taught  so  as  to  make  men  feel  that  they  are  oppressive ; 
but  the  thought  that  the  decrees  of  God  run  through  time  and  eternity,  and  that 
He  is  true  to  them,  so  far  from  being  repulsive,  is  exceedingly  attractive.  Ton 
might  as  well  say  that  the  laws  of  nature  are  repulsive  as  to  say  that  God's  decrees 
are  so.  It  is  constancy  that  is  the  foundation  of  hope,  and  civilisation,  and  every- 
thing that  is  blessed  in  the  world.  Men  are  glad  that  light  is  always  light,  that 
electricity  is  always  electricity,  that  all  forces  of  nature  are  always  true  to  their  laws. 
Men  are  thankful  that  the  stars  revolve  perpetually  in  their  appointed  courses. 
Men  rejoice  in  the  fact  that  there  is  fixity  in  all  those  methods  by  which  the 
material  universe  is  controlled.  And  the  immutableness  of  God  in  the  great 
elements  of  His  character — truth,  justice,  goodness,  and  love — is  subject-matter 
for  profound  gratulation.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  God's  jpurpote  uninfluenced  by  diffi- 
culties : — A  man  undertakes  mining  operations  in  such-and-such  a  place,  he  says, 
"  I  shall  dig  for  iron."  Well,  he  meets  with  great  difficulties,  hard  rocks  to  bore 
through,  and  so  on.  He  comes  to  this  conclusion,  '*  If  I  had  known  of  this  labour, 
and  of  the  expense,  I  should  not  have  sought  for  the  metal  here."  But  suppose  the 
man  to  be  well  aware  of  everything,  and  that  he  meets  with  nothing  but  what  he 
foresaw,  then  you  may  depend  upon  it  that  the  man  means  business,  and  having 
commenced  operations,  he  will  continue  working  tiU  he  obtains  that  which  he 
seeks  after. 

Vers.  30-32.  For  as  ye  In  times  past  have  not  believed  God,  yet  have  now 
obtained  mercy.  —  The  memory  of  the  past  should — 1.  Promote  humility.  2. 
Awaken  gratitude.  3.  Soften  our  censures.  4.  Strengthen  our  hopes  of  others. 
(T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Mercy  for  the  Jew: — I.  We  have  beceived  mercy  —  1. 

Unmerited.  2.  Free.  3.  Through  the  unbelief  of  Israel.  II.  We  must  show 
MERCY — 1.  As  an  expression  of  gratitude.  2.  A  debt  of  justice.  3.  A  Christian 
duty.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  gospel  given  to  us  as  a  deposit  for  the  Jews : — 

Observe — I.  The  mysterious  way  in  which  God  has  dispensed  His  blessings 
TO  MANKIND — first  the  Jew,  then  the  Gentile ;  all  Israel,  then  the  fulness  of  the 
Gentiles.  The  mysteriousness  of  this  plan — ^ielay,  partial  bestowment,  transfer, 
final  restoration.  II.  The  design  of  it.  1.  To  provoke  the  Jews  to  jealousy.  2. 
To  provoke  the  Christian  world  to  love.     (Ibid.)  The  last  argument  to  prove 

the  conversion  and  general  calling  of  the  Jews :  —  The  argument  is  taken  from 
the  like  dealing  of  God  with  the  Gentiles.  The  impiety  of  the  Gentiles  was  no 
impediment  to  their  mercy,  neither  shall  the  infidelity  of  the  Jews  to  theirs.  I. 
The  Gentiles  were  infidels  (Eph.  ii.  12),  but  by  the  unbelief  of  the  jews  they 
ARE  received  to  MERCY.  1.  Forgct  Hot  what  thou  wert,  for  we  have  all  run  the 
race  of  the  prodigal  son.  It  is  God's  grace  if  it  be  otherwise  with  thee  now.  Be 
thankful.  How  if  God  had  taken  thee  away  in  thy  sins  ?  Let  this  bind  thee  to 
thy  good  behaviour  for  ever  (1  Tim.  i.  15 ;  cf.  Tit.  iii.  8).  2.  Faith  is  a  sweet 
mercy,  so  is  the  Word  of  God,  the  means  of  that  faith.  Alas  for  them  which, 
having  the  means  of  faith,  yet  contemn  the  same  !  3.  Sin  breeds  sorrow,  and  many 
times  sorrow  kills  the  sin  which  bred  it,  as  a  worm  breeding  in  timber  consumes  it. 
Bo  the  sin  of  the  Jews  works  to  the  good  of  the  Gentiles  by  the  goodness  of  God. 
Gregory  the  Great  calls  the  sin  of  Adam  happy,  because  it  was  the  occasion  of 
salvation ;  so  in  some  sort  may  we  say  of  the  unbeUef  of  the  Jews.  4.  God  forbid 
that  we  should  lightly  esteem  the  grace  God  offers  us,  it  coming  unto  us  at  so  dear 


CHAP.  XI.]  ROMANS  425 

a  rate  as  is  the  casting  off  of  His  people.  5.  When  we  were  infidels,  God  showed 
us  mercy  ;  much  more  will  He  be  merciful  to  us  now  we  believe.     H.  The  Jews 

ABE    NOW   IN   AN    ESTATE    OF   UNBELIEF,    BUT   THEY   SHALL   BE    RECEIVED   TO    MEBCY  (Isa. 

xlvi.  4  ;  Jer.  xxiv.  6,  7).  1.  There  is  yet  mercy  for  the  Jews,  by  the  example  of  the 
like  mercy  to  the  Gentiles.  But  it  is  now  sixteen  hundred  years  ago  since  they 
were  cast  oft ;  is  it  likely  that  after  so  long  time  they  should  be  called  ?  Yes  ;  for 
the  Gentiles  lay  longer  under  their  infidelities,  yet  at  last  received  grace.  2. 
Faith  is  not  in  the  power  of  man,  nor  can  any  means  effect  it  without  God's  bless- 
ing. One  would  think  that  this  long  affiiction  of  the  Jews  might  make  them  cry 
peccavi,  beside  other  means  God  hath  afforded  them.  In  trouble,  then,  pray  it 
may  be  sanctified  to  thy  profit.  Pray  also  for  a  blessing  on  the  Word,  else  it  will 
be  unprofitable,  though  the  preacher  were  a  son  of  thunder.  3.  Carry  thyself 
meekly  toward  a  Jew,  and  toward  unbelievers  among  ourselves,  considering  thyself, 
who  wert  in  the  same  condemnation.  Judge  not  thy  neighbour  for  damned ;  He 
that  converted  thee  can  in  His  good  time  convert  him  also.  Play  the  physician  to 
thy  neighbour's  soul;  show  him  of  the  mercy  thou  hast  received,  that  he  also  may 
be  stirred  up  to  seek  to  Him  who  is  merciful.  God  gave  Paul  consolation  in  dis- 
tress, that  he  might  comfort  others;  so  if  He  give  thee  knowledge,  faith,  &c.,  use 
them  in  like  manner.  4.  Who,  then,  is  the  better  for  thy  gifts  ?  The  Jew  com- 
passeth  sea  and  land  to  make  a  proselyte.  The  Jesuits  wind  themselves  like 
serpents  into  every  place  to  make  a  papist.  Drunkards  and  other  ungodly  persons 
seek  to  draw  others  to  their  practices.  5.  Let  the  Jew  follow  the  faith  of  the 
Gentile,  so  do  thou  the  example  of  good  Christians  among  whom  thou  hvest.  It  is 
a  great  furtherance  to  godliness  to  have  an  example  to  the  rule.  It  is  a  help  to  the 
scholar  to  have  a  copy  to  write  by,  but  a  greater  furtherance  to  his  profiting  to  see 
his  master  make  the  letters.  {Elnathan  Farr,  B.D.)  For  God  hath  concluded 
them  all  In  unhelief,  that  He  might  have  mercy  upon  all — All  are  shut  up  m 
unftette/;— I.  How?  1.  By  nature.  2.  By  providence— first  the  Gentile,  then  the 
Jew.    3.  By  the  appointment  of  eternal  justice.    II.  Why  ?     1.  That  God's  mercy. 

2.  To  all.  3.  Might  be  more  gloriously  manifested.  III.  In  what  way  this 
Divine  abeangement  contributes  to  such  a  result.  1.  By  convincing  man  of 
his  sinfulness  and  utter  helplessness.  2.  By  preparing  him  for  the  reception  of 
mercy.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Why  God  locked  up  (so  to  speak)  Gentiles  and  Jews  in 
the  prison  of  unbelief: — 1.  That  their  salvation  might  be  manifestly  seen  to  be  by 
grace.  2.  That  self-righteous  boasting  might  be  excluded.  3.  That  men  might 
duly  appreciate  the  blessings  of  His  redemptive  love.  4.  That  scope  might  be 
afforded  for  the  full  display  of  His  mercy.  (C.  Neil,  M.A.)  Man's  unbelief  and 
God's  mercy : — Here  is  an  elegant  similitude.  Men  unconverted  are  prisoners — 
God  the  Judge,  unbelief  the  prison,  the  devil  the  gaoler,  the  law  the  sergeant,  and 
natural  corruption  the  fetters.  I.  God  hath  shut  up  all  in  unbelief.  This  is 
the  common  condition  of  all  men  (chap.  iii.  9,  19,  23;  Gal.  iii.  22).  1.  Paul  hath 
in  the  passage  of  this  business  ten  times  told  us  of  our  miserable  condition  by 
nature.  Here  we  are  poor  sinners  ;  it  is  our  part  to  take  knowledge  of  our  corrupt 
nature.  2.  Great  is  the  misery  that  accompanies  imprisonment,  restraint  of 
liberty,  hunger,  cold,  shame,  chains,  but  no  dungeon  more  loathsome  than  an 
unbelieving  heart.  Oh  that  we  could  be  sensible  of  it,  that  we  might  sigh  to  God  for 
deliverance,  as  did  the  Israelites  in  Egypt.  When  a  man  is  arrested,  what  lament- 
ing among  his  friends  ;  but  our  very  souls  are  imprisoned  in  the  worst  of  prisons, 
under  the  worst  of  gaolers,  and  yet  we  are  merry,  as  though  it  were  but  a  trifle. 

3.  We  may  know  whether  we  be  yet  in  this  prison  by  two  things.  (1)  By  faith  in 
God.  Hast  thou  this  ?  If  not,  there  needs  no  jury  to  find  thee  guilty :  thou  art  in 
the  very  bottom  of  the  dungeon.  But  thou  sayest  there  is  a  God.  Thy  life  con- 
demns thee,  for  thou  actest  as  if  there  were  no  God.  (2)  By  fa\th  in  His  Word. 
The  Scripture  threatens  ungodly  men  with  the  plagues  of  God  and  promiseth 
eternal  life  to  the  godly.  Did  men  believe  this,  durst  they  ran  on  in  all  profane- 
ness?  II.  That  He  miqht  have  mercy  on  all  (Gal.  iii.  22).  1.  Our  salvation 
is  of  mere  mercy,  but  it  is  a  hard  thing  to  be  brought  to  acknowledge  it.  The 
Gentiles  were  2,000  years  before  they  could  learn  this  lesson,  and  the  Jews  have 
been  1,600  about  it,  and  yet  have  not  learned  it ;  yea,  there  are  many  amongst  ua 
that  cannot  say  this  lesson  right.  Most  men  hope  to  be  saved  by  their  prayers  and 
good  serving  God ;  we  are  loth  to  lose  the  commendation  of  our  own  goodness. 
2.  Jews  and  Gentiles  should  live  together,  seeing  they  are  both  in  one  prison  for 
one  end,  and  set  free  by  one  and  the  same  mercy.  3.  If  any  be  set  free,  it  is  by 
the  mercy  of  God,  who  hath  the  key  of  our  unbelieving  hearts,  doth  open  and  shut 


426  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ciiap.  xi. 

them  at  His  pleasure.  As  a  man  committed  by  the  king  can  be  set  free  by  none  but 
the  king,  so  God  committed  us,  and  none  can  set  us  free  but  Himself.  Cry,  there- 
fore, to  the  Lord  for  mercy.  4.  There  are  two  notes  whereby  we  may  discern 
whether  we  be  released  out  of  the  prison  or  no.  (1)  Our  joy.  A  liberated  prisoner 
leaps  and  dances,  so  as  no  ground  will  hold  him ;  so  birds  and  beasts  escaping 
from  their  restraint  scud  about,  as  sensible  of  the  sweetness  of  hbert^.  (2)  Our 
carefulness  not  to  commit  anything  that  may  bring  us  into  such  bondai|;e.  So  he 
that  believeth  the  pardon  of  sin  will  for  ever  hate  sin.  For  the  most  pari,,  prisoners 
are  of  wicked  behaviour ;  so  if  thy  conversation  be  lewd,  it  is  a  manifest  sign  thoa 
art  not  yet  delivered.    (JElnathan  Parr,  B.D.) 

Yer.  33.  0  the  depth  of  the  riches  both  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of 
God ! — Like  a  traveller  who  has  reached  the  summit  of  an  Alpine  ascent,  the  apostle 
turns  and  contemplates.  Depths  are  at  his  feet ;  but  waves  of  light  illumine  them, 
and  then  spreads  all  around  an  immense  horizon  which  his  eye  commands.  The 
plan  of  God  in  the  government  of  mankind  spreads  out  before  him,  and  he  expresses 
the  feeling  of  admiration  and  gratitude  with  which  the  prospect  fills  his  heart. 
{Prof.   Godet.)  The  depth  of   the  divine  wisdom : — As   a   man  wading  into 

the  sea,  when  he  comes  up  to  the  neck  and  feels  the  water  begin  to  heave 
him  up  and  his  feet  to  fail  him,  cries  out,  '•  0  the  depth !  "  and  goes  back, 
so  it  fares  with  Paul  in  this  place,  and  it  is  as  if  he  should  have  said  thus: 
*'  0  you  Eomans  and  my  countrymen  the  Jews,  I  have  writ  unto  you  these 
things  as  far  as  I  can  ;  for  the  rest  I  am  swallowed  up,  being  more  unable 
to  pass  farther  into  this  bottomless,  than  to  wade  through  the  depth  of  the 
sea.  Cease,  therefore,  to  put  more  questions,  and  admire  with  me  the  depth 
of  the  wisdom  of  God."  {Elnathan  Parr,  B.D.)  The  wisdom  and  knowledge  of 
God  : — The  true  distinction  between  knowledge  and  wisdom  is  indicated  by  Theo- 
doret.  "  He  foreknew  these  things  from  the  beginning,  and,  having  foreknown 
them.  He  arranged  them  wisely."  Bishop  Lightfoot  says,  "  While  gnosis  is  simply 
Intuitive,  sophia  is  ratiocinative  also.  While  '  gnosis  '  applies  chiefly  to  the  appre- 
hension of  truths,  '  sophia '  superadds  the  power  of  reasoning  about  them  and 
tracing  their  relations."  To  complete  the  distinction,  we  must  add  that,  while 
knowledge  is  theoretical,  wisdom  is  practical ;  and  while  knowledge  is  purely  intel- 
lectual, wisdom  is  also  moral ;  and  for  that  reason  is  both  the  most  perfect  of 
mental  gifts  (Aristotle,  "  Nic.  Eth."  vi.  10)  and  the  queen  of  all  the  virtues  (Cicero, 
"De  Off."  i.  43).  In  the  present  context,  "gnosis  "  seems  to  refer  especially  to 
God's  foreknowledge  of  the  free  determinations  of  man's  will,  both  in  individuals 
and  nations  ;  whUe  *'  sophia  "  denotes  the  admirable  skill  with  which  He  includes 
man's  free  actions  in  His  plan,  and  transforms  them  into  so  many  means  for  the 
accomplishment  of  His  good  purpose.     {Archdeacon  Gifford.)  The  depths  of  the 

Godhead : — I.  How  they  stand  revealed  befobe  us  in  His — 1.  Nature.  2.  Works. 
8.  Ways.  II.  How  we  stand  overwhelmed  before  them  in — 1.  Humility.  2. 
Faith.    S.Hope.     {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  depth  and  wealth  of  Divine  grace  : — I. 

Wisdom  conceived  the  purpose.  II.  Knowledge  devised  the  plan.  IH.  Judgments 
prepare  the  way.    IV.  Grace  achieves  the  result.     {Ibid.)  The  unfathomable 

depth  of  redeeming  love  : — I.  Wisdom  in  the  plan.  1.  In  the  gift  of  His  Son.  2. 
In  the  communication  of  His  righteousness.  3.  In  the  glory  of  the  issue.  II. 
Mystery  in  the  procedure.  1.  With  the  world  at  large.  2.  With  individual 
believers.     {Ibid.)  The  depths  of  salvation  : — I.  Christianity  is  a  system  o» 

WONDERS.  1.  The  very  proposal  of  salvation  for  sinners  is  a  matter  of  wonder. 
God  was  not  obliged  to  save.  Man  deserved  to  perish ;  and  God  could  have  filled 
his  place  instantly  with  better  beings.  Moreover,  man  is  the  solitary  object  of 
saving  mercy.  "V^en  sin  broke  out  in  heaven,  God  burled  the  thunderbolt  of  a 
just  vengeance.  Certainly  here  is  ground  for  amazement.  2.  The  incarnation  of 
Christ  was  a  miracle  beyond  any  other  miracle  of  God.  Deity  took  upon  Himself 
the  form  and  nature  of  humanity.  Among  all  God's  wonders,  you  can  find  no 
analogy  for  the  person  of  Christ.  3.  Our  ordinary  idea  of  the  proceedings  o£ 
justice  is  confounded  by  the  sufferings  of  Christ.  We  connect  suffering  with  sin  ; 
at  least,  we  consider  that  an  innocent  being  cannot  justly  be  treated  as  a  malefactor. 
Yet  the  sinless  Son  of  God  was  a  man  of  sorrows  and  died  as  a  culprit,  abandoned 
even  by  the  Father  whom  He  always  pleased.  Eeason  can  only  exclaim,  "  0  the 
depth  I  "  at  this.  4.  Amazement  rises  higher  at  the  Bible  representation  that  He 
Buffered  the  just  for  the  unjust,  that  He  might  bring  us  to  God.  How  could  justice 
be  satisfied  by  the  sufferings  of  an  innocent  One  ?    How  can  it  be  a  just  thing  that 


CHIP.  XI.]  ROMANS.  427 

they  should  be  accepted  as  a  propitiation  for  our  sins  ?  God  has  taught  ua  the  fact, 
and  hence  we  believe  it ;  but  the  fact  is  a  wonder.  These  are  only  examples. 
Things  of  the  same  marvellous  nature  ran  all  through  the  system  of  redemption. 
Infidelity  is  confounded  by  these  depths.  But  what  confounds  an  infidel  comforts 
a  Christian.  IL  Those  wondebs  are  reasons  tor  our  accepting  it  and  beino 
COMFORTED  BY  IT.  1.  They  constitute  a  feature  of  our  religion  which  comports 
with  our  experience  on  all  other  subjects.  The  facts  which  we  have  mentioned  are 
aU  plainly  revealed  facts.  There  is  no  darkness  or  depth  in  them.  The  depth  and 
darkness  meet  us  only  as  we  proceed  to  philosophise.  The  further  we  investigate 
the  things  of  God  anywhere  the  more  deep  and  wonderful  they  become.  (1)  The 
astronomer  finds  it  so.  His  wonder  grows  as  he  passes  the  known  suns  and  stars  ; 
and  now,  as  he  casts  his  keen  eye  out  upon  the  illimitable  space  beyond  him,  he  is 
compelled  to  feel  that  he  has  not  yet  passed  the  porch  of  the  temple  of  God.  AU 
he  can  say  is,  "0  the  depth  I"  (2)  So  in  the  ever-descending  field  of  micro- 
scopic study.  (3)  The  providences  of  God,  again,  are  full  of  wonders.  What  a 
marvel  is  human  history  1  2.  There  are  many  things  of  importance,  but  they  are 
not  all  of  equal  value.  Unorganised  matter  lies  below  the  organisms  of  life. 
Brute  life  is  of  a  lower  rank  than  human.  The  mental  kingdom,  while  superior  to 
the  vegetable  and  animal,  is  inferior  to  the  moral.  Now,  we  are  limited  creatures, 
and  cannot  have  an  equal  understanding  of  all  subjects,  and  must  expect  to  meet 
with  the  highest  wonders  in  the  highest  departments.  An  infidel  tells  us  he  meets 
with  the  most  wonders  in  Christianity.  For  that  reason  he  rejects  it,  and  for  that 
we  glory  in  it.  Consider  two  arguments  here.  (1)  God  is  glorious  in  everything, 
but  not  in  everything  of  equal  glory.  His  highest  glory  lies  in  His  saving  sinners. 
The  angels  knew  this  who  sung  over  Bethlehem,  "  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest." 
Well,  on  that  high  field  of  wonders,  where  God  is  more  glorious  than  anywhere 
else,  shall  we  not  expect  Him  to  be  more  amazing  than  anywhere  else?  (2) 
Consider  the  soul.  It  is  immortal,  and  its  capacities  will  expand  for  ever. 
It  is  to  be  saved  or  lost.  When  a  soul  is  perilled,  shall  God  for  its  salvation 
work  no  more  wonders  than  He  does  about  the  petty  interests  of  a  world  of 
matter  and  beasts,  and  threescore  years  and  ten  7  3.  It  is  in  these  deep 
things  of  God  only  that  we  find  provision  for  our  deepest  necessities.  Reason 
cannot  hope  except  before  the  amazing  depths  of  God's  wisdom  and  mercy. 
As  sinners,  we  need  God  to  do  for  us  just  the  wonders  He  has  wrought. 
Had  He  not  done  them,  we  must  have  despaired.     (I.  S.  Spencer,  D.D.)  Our 

proper  attitude  towards  the  deep  things  of  God : — It  remains  for  us  dutifully  and 
reverentially  to  adore  that  in  the  Divine  counsels  and  ways  which  we  do  not,  and, 
indeed,  cannot,  understaud.  There  is  no  government  that  hath  not  its  arcana ; 
and  it  would  be  very  foolish  for  us  to  imagine  that  there  should  be  no  secrets 
belonging  to  the  Divine  government.  {John  Uoxoe.)  The  cojitemplation  of  God's 
redeeming  purpose  should  prompt — I.  Admiration  of — 1.  His  wisdom.  2.  His 
knowledge.  II.  The  confession  of  His  unsearchableness  in  respect  of — 1.  His 
purpose  and  procedure.  2.  His  all-sufficiency.  IH.  The  praise  of  His  orach, 
which  is — 1.  Free.  2.  Undeserved.  IV.  The  increase  of  His  glory.  1.  He  is 
the  end  of  all  things.  2.  To  Him  be  glory  for  ever.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  God's 
conduct  in  the  salvation  of  mankind  : — This  is  the  conclusion  of  Paul's  argument 
on  this  subject.  He  seems  to  be  overwhelmed  with  the  sense  of  its  unsearchable- 
ness. The  depths  of  God's  wisdom  and  knowledge  appear  in — L  The  manifesta- 
tion OF  His  righteousness  in  the  restoration  of  rebels.  Human  monarcha 
have  shown  their  justice  in  crushing  rebels,  but  God  in  restoring  them.  IL  Thk 
destruction  of  the  spirit  of  rebellion  in  the  restoration  of  rebels.  Human 
monarchs  may  deliver  rebels,  bat  they  cannot  destroy  the  spirit  of  rebellion.  God 
does  this.  UI.  The  augmentation  of  the  force  of  uoral  government  in  the 
RESTORATION  OF  REBELS.  Human  monarchs  may  weaken  their  government  by 
saving  rebels,  but  God  strengthens  the  force  of  His  moral  administration  by  redeem- 
ing transgressors.  IV.  The  promotion  of  all  the  rights  of  His  subjects  in  the 
RESTORATION  OF  REBELS.  Human  mouarchs,  by  dehvering  rebels,  endanger  the 
rights  of  loyal  citizens ;  God,  in  the  restoration  of  rebels,  promotes  the  rights  of 
all.  V.  The  election  of  earth  instead  of  hell  as  the  scene  fob  the  restora- 
tion OF  REBELS.  (D.  Thomos,  D.D.)  God'i  praise: — I.  Its  theme.  1.  His 
wisdom.  2.  His  knowledge.  3.  His  judgments  and  procedure.  IL  Its  expres- 
sion. 1.  Wonder.  2.  Submission.  3.  Love.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Wisdom  of 
God  in  redemption : — No  one  can  be  said  to  meditate  aright  on  redemption  hj 
Christ  who  does  not  behold  God's  manifold  wisdom,  as  well  as  His  other  perfeo 


4aB  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xi." 

tions,  displayed  therein.  As  we  conclude  him  a  very  unskilful  observer  of  a  curious 
picture  or  statue  who  only  takes  notice  of  its  dimensions  in  general,  or  the  matter 
of  which  it  is  composed,  its  colouring,  or  framework,  without  considering  the 
symmetry  and  proportion  of  all  its  parts,  the  mind,  the  genius,  and  intelligence 
shown  in  its  design — so  it  is  unworthy  and  below  a  Christian  to  be  able  only  to  say 
that  Christ  is  a  Saviour,  or  to  have  a  general  idea  of  this  scheme  of  mercy,  without 
having  his  thoughts  suitably  affected  with  the  wonders  of  love  and  grace  which  it 
contains,  and  the  design  of  all,  and  the  adaptation  of  every  part,  to  set  forth  the 
glory  of  the  triune  Jehovah.     (H,  G.  Salter.)  Incomplete  presentations  of  the 

gospel : — My  best  presentations  of  the  gospel  to  you  are  so  incomplete  I  Some- 
times, when  I  am  alone,  I  have  such  sweet  and  rapturous  visions  of  the  love  of 
God  and  the  truths  of  His  Word,  that  I  think  if  I  could  speak  to  you  then  I  should 
move  your  hearts.  I  am  like  a  child  who,  walking  forth  some  sunny  morning,  sees 
grass  and  flowers  all  shining  with  drops  of  dew.  "  Oh,"  he  cries,  "  I'll  carry  these 
beautiful  things  to  my  mother  1  "  and,  eagerly  plucking  them,  the  dew  drops  into 
his  little  palm,  and  all  the  charm  is  gone.  There  is  but  grass  in  his  hand,  and 
no  longer  pearls.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Limitation  of  human  views  : — There  is  a 
striking  passage  in  which  a  great  philosopher,  the  famous  Bishop  Berkeley,  describes 
the  thought  which  occurred  to  him  of  the  inscrutable  schemes  of  Providence,  as  he 
saw,  in  St.  Paul's  Cathedral,  a  fly  moving  on  one  of  the  pillars.  "  It  requires,"  he 
says,  "  some  comprehension  in  the  eye  of  an  intelligent  spectator  to  take  in  at  one 
view  the  various  parts  of  the  building,  in  order  to  observe  their  harmony  and 
design.  But  to  the  fly,  whose  prospect  was  confined  to  a  little  part  of  one  of  the 
stones  of  a  single  pillar,  the  joint  beauty  of  the  whole,  or  the  distinct  use  of  its 
parts,  was  inconspicuous.  To  that  limited  view,  the  small  irregularities  on  the 
surface  of  the  hewn  stone  seemed  to  be  so  many  deformed  rocks  and  precipices." 
That  fly  on  the  pillar,  of  which  the  philosopher  spoke,  is  the  likeness  of  each 
human  being  as  he  creeps  along  the  vast  pillars  which  support  the  universe.  The 
sorrow  which  appears  to  us  nothing  but  a  yawning  chasm  or  hideous  preci- 
pice, may  turn  out  to  be  but  the  joining  or  cement  which  binds  together  the 
fragments  of  our  existence  into  a  solid  whole  1  That  dark  and  crooked  path,  in 
which  we  have  to  grope  our  way  in  doubt  and  fear,  may  be  but  the  curve  which,  in 
the  fuU  daylight  of  a  brighter  world,  will  appear  to  be  the  necessary  finish  of  some 
choice  ornament,  the  inevitable  span  of  some  majestic  arch.  (Dean  Stanley.)  How 
unsearchable  are  His  judgments,  and  His  ways  past  finding  out  I — The  unsearchable- 
1USS  of  Ood : — I.  When  we  cannot  dndbbstand  His  ways  it  is  enough  to  be  assured — 
1.  That  He  knows  what  He  does.  2.  That  He  needs  no  counsellor.  H.  There- 
fore OUGHT  WE  TO  RESIGN  OURSELVES  TO  His  WILL,  with — 1.  Eesiguation.  2. 
Obedience.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  unsearchahleness  of  God's  judgments : — These 
words  are  the  close  of  St.  Paul's  disputation  concerning  God's  providence  towards  His 
ancient  people,  in  rejecting  the  greatest  part  of  them,  on  their  refusal  to  embrace 
Christianity,  and  in  admitting  the  Gentiles  to  favour  on  their  compliance ;  in  which 
proceeding  the  Jews  could  not  discern  God's  hand,  nor  allow  such  a  dispensation 
to  be  worthy  of  Him.  The  apostle,  after  an  able  vindication  of  it,  winds  up  the 
contest  with  the  modest  intimation  that  in  this  and  all  such  cases,  for  entire 
satisfaction,  we  should  have  recourse  to  the  incomprehensible  wisdom  of  God,  who 
frequently  orders  things  in  methods  beyond  our  ability  to  trace.  Note — I.  Some 
CAUSES  AND  REASONS  OF  THAT  iNCOMPREHENsreiLiTT.  1.  As  the  dealings  of  veiy 
wise  men  sometimes  are  founded  on  maxims,  and  admit  justifications  not  obvious 
to  nor  penetrable  by  vulgar  conceit,  so  may  God's.  As  there  are  natural  modes  of 
being  and  operation — such  as  God's  necessary  subsistence.  His  eternity  without 
succession,  &c. — so  there  may  be  prudential  and  moral  rules  far  above  our  reach 
(Isa.  Iv.  9).  Some  of  these  we  may  be  incapable  of  knowing  on  account  of  our 
finite  nature ;  others  on  account  of  our  meanness  and  low  rank  among  created 
beings.  In  such  cases  the  absolute  will,  sovereign  authority,  and  pure  liberality 
of  God,  supply  the  place  of  reasons.  2.  As  the  standing  rules  of  God's  acting,  so 
the  occasional  grounds  thereof  are  commonly  placed  beyond  the  sphere  of  our 
apprehension.  God  is  obliged  to  prosecute  His  own  immutable  decrees  ;  "working 
all  things  according  to  the  counsel  of  His  own  wiU  "  :  which  how  can  we  anywise 
come  to  discover  ?  God  also  has  a  perfect  foresight  of  contingent  events.  He 
observes  in  what  relation  and  degrees  of  comparison  things  stand  towards  each 
other ;  whereas  we  cannot  tell  what  things  to  compare.  3.  We  are  also  incapable 
thoroughly  to  discern  the  ways  of  Providence,  from  our  moral  defects,  in  some 
measure  common  to  all  men ;  our  stupidity,  sloth,  temerity,  impatience,  impurity 


CHAT.  XI.]  ROMANS.  429 

of  heart,  &o.  4.  Again,  the  nature  of  those  instraments  \7hich  Divine  Providence 
ases  in  administration  of  human  affairs,  hinders  us  from  discerning  it.  The 
footsteps  of  Divine  wisdom  are  far  more  conspicuous  in  the  works  of  nature 
than  in  the  management  of  our  affairs,  and  while  the  one  has  confirmed 
faith,  the  other  has  bred  doubt.  5.  As  in  nature  the  influence  of  heaven  and 
of  inferior  causes,  so  in  the  production  of  special  events  among  men  Divine 
and  human  agency  are  so  combined,  that  it  is  not  easy  to  discriminate  what 
God  performs  by  natural  instruments,  and  what  by  superior  eflBcacy.  (1)  Not 
seeing  the  first,  we  are  prone  to  ascribe  too  much  to  the  last,  which  are  most 
obvious.  (2)  And  this  we  are  the  more  apt  to  do  because  the  manner  of 
Divine  agency  is  ever  soft  and  gentle.  God  so  fashions  the  hearts  of  men, 
60  manages  their  hands,  so  guides  their  steps,  that  even  they  who  are  most 
acted  on  by  Him  cannot  feel  the  touch.  6.  God,  in  His  progress  towards  the 
achievement  of  any  design,  is  not  wont  to  go  in  the  most  direct  and  compendious 
ways,  but  commonly  takes  a  large  compass,  enfolding  several  other  coincident 
purposes ;  which  moves  our  impatience,  Ac.  7.  Like  every  wise  aoient,  He  is 
wont  to  act  variously,  according  to  the  state  and  circumstances  of  things,  or  to 
the  dispositions  and  capacities  of  persons.  8.  There  are  different  ends  which 
Providence  pursues  in  various  ordor  and  measure,  which  we,  by  reason  of  our  dim 
insight  and  short  prospect,  cannot  descry.  (1)  God  permits  things,  bad  in  their 
own  nature,  having  regard  to  their  instrumental  use  and  tendency.  (2)  Also  the 
expediency  of  things  to  be  permitted  or  crossed,  frequently  consists,  not  in  them- 
selves singly  taken,  as  particular  acts  or  events,  but  in  their  conjunction  with  or 
\  reference  to  others,  with  which  they  may  become  subservient  to  a  common  end. 
9.  That  Providence  is  sometimes  obscure  and  intricate,  may  be  attributed  to  the 
will  of  God,  on  many  accounts  designing  it  so.  He  will  not  glare  forth  in 
discoveries  so  bright  as  to  dazzle  or  confound  our  weak  sight.  (1)  He  meaneth 
thereby  to  improve  and  exalt  our  faith.  (2)  It  is  fit  also  that  He  should  thus 
in  many  things  surpass  our  understanding,  that  He  may  appear  to  be  God  indeed. 
(3)  The  obscurity  of  Providence  conciliates  an  awful  reverence  towards  it,  as 
darkness  raises  a  dread  of  invisible  powers.  (4)  It  is  also  requisite  that  God 
should  dispose  many  occurrences,  cross  to  our  notions,  and  offensive  to  our  carnal 
sense,  that  we  may  thus  be  prompted  to  think  of  Him,  and  to  seek  Him.  (5)  It  is 
needful  that  the  present  course  of  Providence  should  not  be  perfectly  clear  and 
satisfactory,  that  we  may  be  well  assured  concerning  a  future  account,  and  forced 
in  our  thoughts  to  recur  thither  for  a  solution  of  our  doubts  and  difficulties. 
II.  Some  practical  applications  geounded  on  the  roREOoiNO  reasons.  1.  It 
should  render  us  modest  aud  sober  in  our  judgment  about  providential  occur- 
rences, since  it  is  plain  arrogance  or  imposture  to  assume  perfect  skill  in  what 
passeth  our  capacity  to  learn.  2.  It  should  make  us  cautious  in  passing  judgment 
or  censure  on  events,  since  it  is  temerity  to  give  sentence  on  what  is  incapable  of 
evidence.  3.  It  should  repress  wanton  curiosity,  which  would  only  make  us  lose 
our  time,  <fec.  4.  It  should  keep  us  from  conceit  and  confidence  in  our  own  wisdom. 
5.  It  shcjuld  preserve  us  from  infidelity,  and  despair  on  account  of  any  cross 
accidents.  6.  It  should  prevent  our  taking  offence  at  such.  7.  It  should  guard  us 
against  security,  or  presuming  on  impunity  for  our  miscarriages ;  for  seeing  that 
God  does  not  always  fully  discover  His  mind,  it  is  vain  to  suppose  that,  because 
He  is  now  patient.  He  wUl  always  be  so.  8.  It  should  quicken  our  industry  in 
observing  and  considering  the  works  of  Providence :  the  fainter  our  light  is,  the 
more  attentive  should  we  be  in  looking.  9.  It  should  oblige  us  to  be  circumspect 
and  wary  in  our  conversation.  10.  Also  constantly  to  seek  God,  and  to  depend 
on  Him  for  protection,  and  for  the  conduct  of  His  grace,  the  only  clue  in  this 
labyrinth.  11.  In  fine,  it  should  cause  us  humbly  to  admire  and  adore  that 
wisdom  which  governs  the  world  in  ways  no  less  great  and  wonderful  than  just 
and  holy.  (I.  Barrow,  D.D.)  Man's  inability  to  find  out  God's  judgments : — 
1.  That  which  first  brought  both  a  present  guilt,  and  entailed  a  future  curse  upon 
mankind,  was  an  inordinate  desire  of  knowle  ge.  And  from  the  fall  to  this  very 
day,  this  fatal  itch  has  stuck  so  close  to  ou  nature,  that  every  one  is  eager 
to  know  where  he  is  called  only  to  adore  and  obey.  2.  The  Scripture  is  in  nothing 
more  full  and  frequent  than  in  representing  the  transcendency  of  God's  ways 
above  all  created  intellectuals  (Psa.  cxxxix.  6 ;  xxxvi.  6 ;  xviii.  9 ;  Ixxvii.  19).  If 
we  consult  its  reports,  or  those  of  our  own  experience,  about  the  amazing  events 
of  Providence,  we  shall  find  the  result  of  our  most  exact  inquiries  in  the  text.  I 
shall  demonstrate  that  the  most  advanced  wisdom  of  man  is  incompetent  to 


480  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xi, 

judge  of — I.  The  beason  ob  cause  of  God's  ways.  The  causes  men  assign  of 
the  passages  of  Providence  are — 1.  For  the  most  part  false,  as  e.g.,  (1)  That  the 
prosperous  are  the  objects  of  God's  love ;  and  the  miserable  of  His  hatred.  And 
all  this  in  defiance  of  the  Spirit  of  God  Himself  who  (Eccles.  ix.  1)  assures  us  that 
*•  no  rcan  knows  either  love  or  hatred  by  all  that  is  before  him  "  ;  nor  consequently 
can  conclude  himself  in  or  out  of  favour  with  God  by  anything  befalling  him 
in  this  life.  Otherwise  Lazarus  would  have  been  in  flames,  and  the  rich  man  in 
Abraham's  bosom.  God  sometimes  curses  men  with  prosperity,  and  casts  His  Jobs 
upon  dunghills,  and  sells  His  beloved  Josephs  into  slavery.  (2)  That  the  good 
only  must  prosper  and  the  bad  suffer.  A  most  absurd  assertion,  for  how  is  it  that 
the  good  suffer  and  the  bad  prosper  ? — a  fact  which  staggered  Asaph  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  2), 
and  so  confounded  Jeremiah  (Jer.  xii.  1),  that  he  could  almost  have  offered  to 
dispute  the  point  with  God  Himself.  And  from  the  same  topic  it  was  that  Job's 
friends  argued,  until  they  were  confounded  by  God's  verdict  on  the  whole  matter. 
2.  Always  imperfect.  Who  would  assign  an  adequate  reason  of  anything  which 
God  does,  must  see  as  far  into  it  as  God  sees.  There  is  no  action  of  God  but  therft 
is  a  combiuation  of  impulsive  causes  concerned  in  it,  one  or  two  of  which  man 
may  light  upon,  but  the  weakness  of  his  discerning  powers  keeps  him  inevitably  a 
stranger  to  far  the  greater  part  of  them.  God,  by  one  and  the  same  numerical  lot 
of  providence,  may  intend  to  punish  one  nation,  to  advance  another  ;  to  plant  the 
gospel  in  a  third,  and  to  let  in  trade  into  a  fourth ;  likewise  to  make  way  for 
the  happiness  of  one  man's  prosperity,  and  for  the  extinction  of  another's ;  to 
reward  the  virtues  of  sober  and  industrious  people,  and  to  revenge  the  crimes  of 
a  vicious  and  rebellious  ;  and  we  are  no  more  able  to  search  into  these  than  we  are 
to  govern  the  world.  II.  The  issue  and  event  of  actions.  Men  usually 
prognosticate — 1.  According  to  the  measure  of  the  wisdom  of  second  agents.  And 
it  must  be  confessed  that  it  is  the  best  rule  were  it  not  controlled  by  two  better, 
viz.,  Scripture  and  experience.  The  former  of  which  brings  in  God  laughing  at 
the  wisdom  of  the  wise  ;  taking  and  circumventing  the  crafty  in  their  own  wiles 
(Job  v.  12,  13).  And  for  the  latter,  history  so  abounds  with  instances  of  the  most 
artificially-spun  contrivances  dashed  in  pieces  by  some  sudden  and  imforeseen 
accidents,  that  to  ascertain  the  event  of  the  most  promising  undertaking,  if  we 
trust  but  our  own  eyes,  we  shall  have  Uttle  cause  to  trust  another's  wisdom. 
2.  From  success  formerly  gained  under  the  same  or  less  probable  circumstances. 
But  remember  (1)  That  it  is  hard,  and  perhaps  scarce  possible  to  repeat  any  action 
under  perfectly  the  same  circumstances.  (2)  That  in  most  actions  there  are  still 
some  circumstances  not  observed,  which  may  have  a  surer  and  more  immediate 
influence  upon  the  event  than  those  which,  coming  more  into  view,  are  more 
depended  upon.  (3)  That  the  success  of  every  action  depends  more  upon  the 
secret  hand  of  God  than  upon  any  causes  or  instruments  visibly  engaged  in 
it.  3.  According  to  the  preparations  made  for  it,  and  the  power  employed  in  it. 
And  yet  we  find  that  it  is  not  always  the  bigger  weight,  but  sometimes  the  artificial 
iand  managing  the  balance  which  turns  the  scale.  And  in  like  manner,  when  we 
iave  raised  armies  and  manned  our  fleets,  we  are  still  in  the  hand  of  that  Providence 
which  sometimes  sets  the  crown  of  victory  upon  the  weak  and  the  few,  and  dis- 
appoints the  hopes  and  breaks  the  force  of  the  confident  and  numerous.  Could 
anything  look  more  invincible  than  the  Spanish  Armada  ?  But  we  find  that  there 
is  no  commanding  the  sea  without  being  able  to  command  the  winds  too.  And 
what  a  painful  defence  is  multitude  on  the  one  side,  where  Omnipotence  takes  the 
other  1  III.  The  use  and  improvement.  We  may  infer — 1.  The  vanity  of 
making  the  future  event,  or  presumed  success  of  any  enterprise,  the  rule  of  our 
present  actings  about  the  same.  2.  The  absolute  necessity  of  an  entire,  total, 
unreserved  dependence  upon  Providence  in  the  most  hopeful  and  promising 
condition  of  our  affairs.  3.  The  impossibility  of  a  rational  dependence  upon 
Providence  with  comfort,  but  in  the  way  of  lawful,  honest,  and  religious  courses. 
(R.  South,  D.D.)  Plans  of  God  not  fully  known  :—l  should  like  to  hear  any 
man  attempt  to  interpret  to  a  worm  what  it  is  going  to  be  when  it  is  a  butterfly. 
Where  is  there  a  foreshadowing  analogy,  or  anything  to  indicate  to  it  what  it  is 
coming  to  in  its  fuUer  form?  And  how  can  any  one  disclose  what  is  to  be 
evolved  when  God's  work  is  completed  in  this  life?  For,  although  we  may  know 
something,  our  knowledge  is  fragmentary  and  Umited,  And  it  is  a  glorious  consola- 
tion to  believe  that  sufferings  forgotten  are  not  less  causes  of  good  than  those  that 
are  remembered,  and  that  sufferings  which  apparently  leave  but  little  trace  are 
working  out  in  us  great  and  blessed  results  in  the  kingdom  to  which  we   are 


CHAP.  XI.]  BOMANS.  431 

hastening.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  God's  ways  inscrutable,  but  in  accordance  with  t?ie 
highest  reason  : — Natural  instincts,  and  even  moral  sense,  are  no  safe  guide  upon 
a  subject  which  soars  so  infinitely  above  our  limited  capacity.  We  are  children  ; 
and  in  considering  the  means  by  which  our  Heavenly  Father  will  save  us,  it  ia 
wisdom  to  accept  simply  His  own  instructions,  desperate  folly  and  presumption  to 
criticise  those  instructions  by  our  puerile  instincts.  E.g.,  a  father,  inured  to  life 
upon  the  Alpine  mountains,  is  under  the  necessity  of  crossing  a  very  perilous 
glacier  with  his  children.  The  children  are  of  such  an  age  that  the  direction, 
'■  Hold  this,  and  keep  at  as  great  a  distance  from  me  as  you  possibly  can,"  can  just 
bs  made  intelligible  to  them,  while  the  grounds  of  it,  viz.,  that  the  weight  of  the 
party  may  be  distributed,  and  not  bear  on  one  particular  spot,  which  might  thus 
give  way,  are,  it  may  be,  out  of  the  reach  of  a  child's  capacity.  Let  us  suppose 
that  the  children,  in  fright,  begin  to  reason  about  this  counsel,  and  to  judge  of  it 
by  their  natural  instincts;  conceive  that  one  of  them  should  think  and  say  as 
follows  "  Can  our  father,  who  loves  to  have  us  close  around  him,  say,  '  Come 
not  near  me,  child,  at  the  peril  of  thy  life '  ?  Say  it  he  may,  but  I  will  not  believe 
such  to  be  his  meaning,  for  it  conflicts  with  aU  my  natural  instincts,  which 
are  to  cling  round  him  in  the  moment  of  danger."  But  shortly  afterwards  night 
falls,  and  the  wearied  children  are  irresistibly  impelled  to  lie  down  without 
any  covering,  in  which  case  death  would  overtake  them.  The  father  burrows 
in  a  snowdrift,  and  proposes  that  in  the  cavities  so  made  the  children  shall  lie, 
the  cold  snow  piled  over  them,  and  only  the  smallest  possible  aperture  allowed 
for  the  passage  of  the  breath.  Adults,  of  course,  would  be  aware  that  this  would 
be  the  only  method  of  preserving  the  vital  heat  of  the  body ;  but  not  so  the 
children.  Snow,  appUed  only  to  parts  of  the  person,  and  not  as  a  general 
wrapper,  is  bitterly  cold ;  and  the  children,  unable  to  understand,  imagine  cruelty 
in  this  arrangement.  Now,  the  child  who  keeps  at  a  distance  from  his  father,  and 
buries  himself  in  the  snow,  is  a  wise  child,  because,  renouncing  the  guidance  of  his 
instincts,  he  places  faith  in  one  manifestly  his  superior  in  capacity.  The  child  who 
clings  round  his  father's  neck  upon  the  glacier  and  stretches  his  Umbs  beneath  the 
open  sky  in  distrust  of  his  parent's  directions  is  a  foolish  child  ;  for  what  is  greater 
folly  than  to  refuse  to  be  guided  by  a  recognised  superior  in  wisdom?  And  it 
cannot  be  too  strongly  insisted  upon,  that  one  who,  in  investigating  such  a  subject  as 
the  method  of  human  salvation,  follows  the  guidance  of  his  natural  instincts  in 
preference  to  that  of  Eevelation,  is  a  weak  person,  not  a  man  of  bold  and  courageous 
thought.  Simple  dependence  upon  God,  where  God  alone  can  teach,  is  the  truest 
independence  of  mind.  {Dean  Goulburn.)  Secrets  of  God  : — Be  not  curious  to 
search  into  the  secrets  of  God  ;  pick  not  the  lock  where  He  hath  allowed  no 
key.  He  that  will  be  sifting  every  cloud  may  be  smitten  with  a  thunderbolt ; 
and  he  that  will  be  too  familiar  with  God's  secrets  may  be  overwhelmed  in 
Bis  judgments,  Adam  would  curiously  increase  his  knowledge ;  therefore  Adam 
shamefully  lost  his  goodness  :  the  Bethshemites  would  needs  pry  into  the  ark  of 
God ;  therefore  the  hand  of  God  slew  about  fifty  thousand  of  them.  Therefore 
hover  not  about  this  flame,  lest  we  scorch  our  wings.  For  ray  part,  seeing  God  hath 
made  me  His  secretary,  I  will  carefully  improve  myself  by  what  He  has  revealed, 
and  not  curiously  inquire  into  or  after  what  He  hath  reserved.  (T.  Adams.) 
For  who  hath  known  the  mind  of  the  Lord  7  or  who  hath  been  His  connsellor  7 — 
God  all  in  all : — I.  The  challenge.  1.  To  human  intellect.  2.  To  human  merit. 
II.  The  assertion.  God  is — 1.  The  source  of  all.  2.  The  agent  in  all.  3.  The 
end  of  all.  III.  The  asceiption.  1.  To  Him  be  glory.  2.  On  earth.  3.  In 
heaven.  4  For  ever.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  God's  counsels  are: — I.  Deep.  1. 
Teaching  us  the  feebleness  of  our  understanding.  2.  Checking  our  daring  specula- 
tions. II.  Tbue.  1.  Inviting  our  confidence.  2.  Commanding  our  submission. 
ni.  Merciful.  1.  Soliciting  our  love.  2.  Inspiring  our  hope.  (Ibid.)  God's 
independence : — Philo,  the  Jew,  compares  the  great  God  to  a  tree,  and  all  creatures 
to  the  leaves  and  fruits,  which  are  all  in  the  tree ;  but  the  metaphor  is  not  com- 
plete, because  you  may  remove  fruit  from  the  tree,  but  there  can  be  no  creature  out 
of  the  power  and  will  of  God  by  which  alone  it  can  exist  at  all.  If  you  remove 
the  fruits  from  the  tree  the  tree  has  at  least  lost  something ;  but  if  all  creatures  were 
destroyed,  yet  still  the  Lord  would  be  as  infinitely  God  as  He  is  now ;  if  the  crea- 
tures were  multiplied,  God  were  no  more — and  if  diminished.  He  were  no  less. 
The  creatures,  may  be  likened  to  the  waves,  and  God  to  the  great  sea ;  the  wav«a 
cannot  exist  apart  from  the  sea,  nor  the  creatures  apart  from  God  :  but  no  earthly 
figure  of  the  Divine  can  be  complete,  for  the  waves  are  a  portion  of  the  sea,  but 


132  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [can.  x* 

the  creatures  are  not  God,  nor  do  they  contribute  to  His  essence  or  attributes. 
The  sea  would  be  diminished  if  the  waves  were  gone,  but  if  you  could  take  all 
creatures  away,  God  would  be  no  less  God,  nor  less  infinite  than  He  is  now.  (C  H. 
Spurgeon.)  For  of  Him,  and  through  Him,  and  to  Him,  are  all  things. — God 
all  in  all : — This  is  perhaps  the  most  comprehensive  account  of  the  Deity  in  His 
relation  to  His  works  that  is  anywhere  to  be  met  with.  All  things  are — I.  Of  Him, 
He  is  of  none.  They  originate  in  His  will,  and  but  for  Him  they  would  never 
have  been.  II.  By  Him.  He  creates  and  sustains  all.  III.  To  Him.  All  things 
are  intended  to  manifest  forth  His  glory,  and  will  ultimately  serve  His  purpose. 
He  has  made  all  things  for  Himself,  and  it  is  obviously  meet  that  it  should  be  so, 
that  His  will  should  be  the  law,  His  glory  the  end  of  the  nniverse  of  which  He  is 
the  Creator,  the  Supporter,  and  Proprietor.  {J.  Brown,  D.D.)  God  all  in  all : — 
Of  Him  all  things  are  as  their  Original  Author  and  Creator ;  through  Him,  as  the 
Giver  and  Conveyer  of  them  to  us  ;  to  Him,  to  His  honour,  for  His  use,  and  in  His 
disposal ;  and  no  further  or  longer  ours  than  He  is  pleased  in  mercy,  not  in  justice, 
as  a  free  gift,  and  not  as  a  debt,  to  dispense  them  to  us.  (Bp.  Sanderson.) 
God  must  be  all  in  all : — I.  Him  first.  II.  Him  last.  III.  Him  midst.  IV.  And 
without  end.  Amen.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  God  the  first  cause  and  last  end : — I. 
The  explication  op  the  terms.  1.  That  God  is  the  first  cause,  signifies — (1) 
Negatively,  that  He  had  no  cause,  and  is  independent  of  every  other  being, 
and  is  eternally  of  Himself.  (2)  Positively,  that  He  is  the  cause  and  sup- 
port  of  aU  things  besides  Himself  (John  i.  3).  2.  The  last  end;  i.e.,  that  all 
things  refer  to  Him ;  the  aim  of  all  things  is  the  illustration  of  His  glory,  and 
the  manifestation  of  His  perfections.      II.  The  confiemation  of  the  proposition. 

1.  By  natural  light.  (1)  The  notion  of  a  God  contains  in  it  all  possible  perfec- 
tion. Now  the  utmost  perfection  we  can  imagine  is  for  a  being  to  be  always 
of  itself,  and  to  be  the  cause  and  support  of  all  other  things.  From  hence  follows 
that  all  things  must  refer  to  Him  as  their  last  end.  For  every  wise  asent  acts  in 
order  to  an  end.  Now  the  end  which  is  most  worthy  the  attaining  is  the  manifes- 
tation of  God's  being  and  perfection,  which  is  called  God's  glory.  (2)  These  titles 
were  discovered  by  the  natural  light  of  the  heathens.  Aristotle  called  God  the  first 
being,  the  first  cause,  and  the  first  mover ;  and  Plato  calls  God  the  author  and 
parent  of  all  things,  the  architect  of  the  world,  and  of  all  creatures,  the  fountain 
and  original  of  all  things.  Porphyry  calls  Him  "  the  first,"  from  whence  he 
reasons  that  He  is  the  ultimate  end,  and  that  aU  things  move  towards  God;  that 
all  motions  centre  in  Him,  because,  saith  he,  it  is  most  proper  and  natural  for 
things  to  refer  to  their  original,  and  to  refer  all  to  Him  from  whom  they  receive 
all.  Antoninus,  speaking  of  nature  (which  with  the  Stoics  signifies  God),  had  these 
words,  "  Of  Thee  are  all  things,  in  Thee  are  all  things,  to  Thee  are  all  things." 

2.  From  Scripture,  (1)  Hither  belong  all  those  places  where  He  declares  Himself 
to  be  "  the  first  and  the  last "  (Isa.  xli.  4,  xliii.  10,  xliv.  6,  xlviii.  12,  13  ;  Eev.  i.  8). 
(2)  But  more  expressly,  see  1  Cor.  viii.  6 ;  Acts  xvii.  24.  (3)  Hither  we  may 
refer  those  texts  which  attribute  the  same  to  the  Second  Person  in  the  Trinity 
(John  1.  3,  10 ;  1  Cor.  viii.  6 ;  Eph.  iii.  9  ;  Col.  i.  16,  17  ;  Heb.  i.  2,  3).  III.  The 
application  op  the  doctrine.  1.  If  God  be  the  first  cause  of  all  things,  from 
hence  let  us  learn — (1)  With  humility  and  thankfulness  to  own,  admire,  and  bless 
God  as  the  author  of  our  being  and  of  all  the  blessings  we  enjoy  (Rev.  iv.  11 ; 
Psa.  ciii.  1-4).  With  patience  and  quietness  to  submit  to  all  events  that  come 
upon  us,  as  coming  from  Him  (1  Sam.  iii.  18  ;  Psa.  xxxix.  9).  2.  If  God  be  the 
last  end  of  all,  let  us  make  Him  our  last  end,  and  refer  all  our  actions  to  His  glory 
(Matt.  xxii.  37;  1  Cor.  i.  31).  (Abp.  Tillotson.)  The  Trinity:—!.  The 
Father's  love  and  purpose  the  origin  of  all  things.  2.  The  Son's  mediation  and 
rule  their  continuance  and  direction.  3.  The  Spirit's  agency  conducts  all  things 
to  the  end  designed.  All  things  of  the  Father,  through  the  Son,  by  the  Spirit 
(r.  Robiiison,  D.D.)  Laus  Deo : — My  text  consists  of  monosyllables,  but  it 
contains  the  loftiest  sublimities.  Our  great  God  alone  can  expound  this  verse,  for 
He  only  can  worthily  set  forth  His  own  perfections.  May  He  do  so  now  1  Con- 
sider— I.  The  doctrine.  All  things  are  of  Him  as  their  source,  through  Him  as 
their  means,  to  Him  as  their  end.  They  are  of  Him  in  the  plan,  through  Him  in 
the  working,  and  to  Him  in  the  glory  which  they  produce.  Taking  this  general 
principle,  you  will  find  it  apply  to  all  things.  1.  To  the  whole  range  of  God's 
works  in  creation  and  providence.  (1)  There  was  a  period  when  God  inhabited 
eternity  in  His  self-contained  and  solitary  greatness.  All  things  must  be  of  Him 
in  design,  for  there  was  no  one  with  whom  He  could  take  counsel,      Before  Hi* 


OHiP.  xn.]  ROMANS.  433 

works  of  old,  eternal  wisdom  brought  forth  the  perfect  plan  of  future  creations,  and 
every  line  must  have  been  of  the  Lord  alone.  He  might  have  made  a  different 
universe,  and  that  He  has  made  it  what  it  is  was  because  He  saw  fit  to  do  so.  (2) 
When  the  plan  was  all  laid  down  this  was  not  enough  ;  mere  arrangement  would 
not  create.  "  Through  Him  "  must  all  things  be.  There  was  no  raw  material 
ready,  and  there  was  none  to  help.  He  speaks,  and  the  heavens  leap  into  existence. 
He  speaks  again,  and  worlds  are  begotten  with  all  the  varied  forms  of  life  so 
fraught  with  Divine  wisdom  and  matchless  skill.  Through  Him  were  all  things, 
from  the  archangel  down  to  the  insect.  The  same  finger  paints  the  rainbow  and 
the  wing  of  the  butterfly.  He  who  dyes  the  garments  of  evening  in  all  the  colours 
of  heaven  has  covered  the  kingcup  with  gold,  and  lit  up  the  glowworm's  lamp. 
Nature  is  as  it  is  through  the  energy  of  the  present  God.  Out  upon  those  men  who 
think  that  God  has  wound  up  the  world  like  a  clock,  and  left  it  to  work  for  itself. 
Wherever  thou  art,  thou  art  in  God's  workshop,  where  every  wheel  is  turned  by 
His  hand.  (3)  But  the  great  glory  of  all  is  that  everything  is  to  Him.  God  must 
have  the  highest  motive,  and  there  can  be  no  higher  motive  than  His  own  glory. 
When  there  was  no  being  but  Himself  God  could  not  have  taken  as  a  motive  a 
creature  which  did  not  exist.  The  good  of  His  creatures  He  considereth  carefully, 
but  even  that  is  but  a  means  to  the  main  end.  And  the  day  shall  come  when  even 
the  fall  will  be  seen  not  to  have  marred  the  Divine  glory.  His  enemies  shall  bow 
their  necks,  whilst  His  people  shall  cheerfully  extol  Him.  2.  To  the  grand  work  of 
Divine  grace.  (1)  Here  everything  is  of  God.  The  plan  of  salvation  is  no  con- 
coction of  priests,  but  the  offspring  of  a  wisdom  no  less  than  Divine.  None  but 
Go>l  could  have  imagined  a  plan  so  just  to  God,  so  safe  to  man.  And  as  the  great 
plan  is  of  Him,  so  the  fillings  up  of  the  minutiss  are  of  Him.  God  ordained  the 
time  and  circumstances  of  the  first  promise,  and  the  hour  when  the  great  promise- 
keeper  should  come,  (&o.  Every  stitch  in  the  noble  tapestry  of  salvation  is  of  the 
Lord.  (2)  Through  Him.  Through  Him  the  Son  of  God  is  bom  of  the  Virgin  Mary 
by  the  power  of  the  Spirit.  In  the  great  redemption  God  alone  is  exalted.  And  as 
through  Him  the  atonement,  so  through  Him  the  application  of  the  atonement. 
By  the  power  of  the  Spirit  the  gospel  is  daily  preached,  and  through  Him  men  are 
called  and  saved.  (3)  All  is  to  Him ;  we  have  not  a  note  of  praise  to  spare  for 
another.  3.  To  the  case  of  every  individual  believer.  (1)  Of  whom  comes  my  salva- 
tion ?  That  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh.  (2)  Did  it  not  also  come  through  God ; 
through  faith,  which  was  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit  ?  And  what  didst  thou 
believe  in  but  in  Jesus  the  Lord  ?  (3)  Is  it  not  also  "  to  Him  "  ?  4.  To  Christian 
work.  (1)  The  power  comes  from  God.  (2)  The  success  comes  through  God.  (3) 
The  honour  is  to  God.  H.  Devotion.  "  To  whom  be  glory  for  ever,  Amen. "  This 
should  be — 1.  The  single  desire  of  the  Christian.  He  may  desire  prosperity  or  to 
attain  more  gifts  and  graces,  &c.,  but  it  should  only  be  that  "to  Him  may  be  glory 
for  ever."  2.  Our  constant  desire  at  our  work  behind  the  counter,  or  in  the 
exchange,  or  walking  in  the  fields,  &o.  3.  Our  earnest  desire.  Do  not  speak  of  God's 
glory  with  cold  words,  nor  think  of  it  with  chilly  heart.  4.  Our  growing  desire. 
You  blessed  Him  in  your  youth ;  do  not  be  content  with  such  praises  as  yoa 
gave  Him  then.  5.  Make  this  desire  practical.  Praise  God  by  your  patience 
in  pain,  your  perseverance  in  duty,  your  generosity  in  His  cause,  your  bold- 
ness in  testimony,  your  consecration  to  His  work.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  To 
whom  be  glory  for  ever.  Amen. — As  the  rivers  return  again  to  the  place 
whence  they  came,  they  all  come  from  the  sea,  and  they  all  run  into  the 
sea  again ;  so  all  our  store  as  it  issued  at  first  from  the  fountain  of  God's 
grace,  so  should  it  fall  at  last  into  the  ocean  of  His  gloiy.     (Bp.  Sanderson.) 


CHAPTER  xn. 

Vbb.  1.  I  beseecli  you. — A  les$on  to  ministers : — Ministers  of  the  gospel  should  be 
gentle,  tender,  and  affectionate.  They  should  be  kind  in  feeling,  and  courteous  in 
inanner — like  a  father  or  mother.  Nothing  is  ever  gained  by  a  sour,  harsh,  crabbed, 
dissatisfied  manner.  Sinners  are  never  scolded  either  into  duty  or  into  heaven. 
Flies  are  never  caught  with  vinegar.  No  man  is  a  better  or  more  faithful  preacher 
VOL.  n.  28 


434  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xrt 

because  he  is  rough  in  manner,  coarse,  or  harsh  in  his  expressions,  or  sour  in  his 
intercourse  with  mankind.     Not  thus  was  the  Master  or  Paul.     {A.  Barnes,  D.D.) 
Therefore. — The  connection  between  the  two  parts  of  the  Epistle  : — Religion  among  the 
ancients  was  service  {cultus),  and  cultus  had  for  its  centre  sacrifice.     The  Jewish 
service  counted  four  kinds  of  sacrifice  which  might  be  reduced  to  two :  the  first, 
comprising  the  sacrifices  offered  before  reconciliation  and  to  obtain  it  (sin  and 
trespass-offering)  ;  the  other  the  sacrifices  offered  after  reconciliation  and  serving 
to  celebrate  it  (whole  burnt-offering  and  peace-offering).     The  great  division  of  the 
Epistle  to  which  we  have  come  is  explained  by  this  contrast.     The  fundamental 
idea  of  Part  I.  (chaps,  i.-xi.),  was  that  of  the  sacrifice,  for  the  sin  of  mankind. 
Witness  the  central  passage  (iii.  25,  26).     These  are  the  mercies  of  God  to  which 
Paul  appeals  here,  and  the  development  of  which  has  filled  the  first  eleven  chapters. 
The  practical  part  which  we  are  beginning  corresponds  to  the  second  kind  of 
sacrifice,  which  was  the  symbol  of  consecration  after  pardon  had  been  received  (the 
i  halocaust,   in  which   the  victim   was  entirely  burned),  and  of   the  communion 
;  established  between  Jehovah  and  the  believer  (the  peace-offering,  followed  by  a 
.feast  in  the  court  of  the  temple).     The  sacrifice  of  expiation  offered  by  God  in  the 
person  of  His  Son  should  now  find  its  response  in  the  believer  in  the  sacrifice  of 
complete  consecration  and  intimate  communion.     {Prof,  Godet.)        Doctrine  and 
practice : — The  doctrinal  and  dispensational  portions  of  the  Epistle  being  ended,  the 
apostle,  as  a  wise  master-builder,  erects  the  superstructure  of  personal  religion  upon 
the  foundation  of   redemption,  which  he  has  laid  deep  and  substantial.     "No 
doctrine,"  remarks  H.  W.  Beecher,  "is  good  for  anything  that  does  not  leave 
behind  it  an  ethical  furrow,  ready  for  the  planting  of  seeds,  which  shall  spring  up 
and  bear  abundant  harvests."    The  connection  between  doctrine  and  exhortation  is 
quaintly  explained  by  Bishop  Hall :  "  Those  that  are  all  in  exhortation,  no  whit  in 
doctrine,  are  like  to  them  that  snuff  the  lamp,  but  pour  not  in  oil.    Again,  those 
that  are  all  in  doctrine,  nothing  in  exhortation,  drown  the  wick  in  oil,  but  light  it 
not;  making  it  fit  for  use  if  it  had  fire  put  to  it;  but  as  it  is,  neither  capable  of 
good  nor  profitable  for  the  present.    Doctrine  without  exhortation  makes  men  all 
brain,  no  heart ;  exhortation  without  doctrine  makes  the  heart  full,  but  leaves  the 
brain  empty.    Both  together  make  a  man,  one  makes  a  wise  man,  the  other  a  good ; 
one  serves  that  we  may  know  our  duty,  the  other  that  we  may  perform  it.     Men 
cannot  practise  unless  they  know,  and  they  know  in  vain  if  they  practise  not." 
(C.  Neil,  M.A.)         The  reUtion   between  doctrine  and   life:—!.  The  link  which 
unites  doctrine  and  duty  is  like  the  great  artery  that  joins  the  heart  to  the  members — 
the  channel  of  life  and  the  bond  of  union.     If  that  link  is  severed,  the  life  departs. 
If  doctrine  and  duty  are  not  united,  both  are  dead ;  there  remains  neither  the 
sound  creed  nor  the  holy  life.     2.  A  common  cry  is.  Give  charity,  but  no  dogma, 
i.e..  Give  us  fruit,  but  don't  bother  us  with  mysteries  about  roots.    We  join  heartily 
in  the  cry  for  more  fruit ;  but  we  are  not  content  to  tie  oranges  with  tape  on  dead 
branches.     This  may  serve  to  amuse  children ;  but  we  are  grown  men,  and  life  is 
earnest.     3.  In  the  transition  from  chap.  xi.  to  chap,  xii.,  the  knot  is  tied  that 
binds  together  doctrine  and  duty.  At  the  point  of  contact  Paul  defines  the  relations 
between  the  gifts  which  flow  from  God  to  men,  and  the  service  rendered  by  men  to 
God,    Christians  having  gotten  all  from  God  are  constrained  to  render  back  to  Him 
themselves  and  all  they  have.    Here  is  a  leaden  pipe  which,  rising  perpendicularly 
from  the  ground,  supplies  the  cistern  on  the  roof.     "  Water  flow  up?     Don't  mock 
us.    Water  flows  down,  not  up."    Place  your  ear  against  the  pipe.     Is  not  the 
water  rushing  upward?    "Yes."    The  reason  is  that  the  water  flowing  from  the 
fountain  on  the  mountain's  side  forces  the  water  up.    So  the  soul  is  constrained,  by 
the  pressure  of  Divine  mercy  flowing  through  Christ,  to  rise  in  responsive  love. 
The  word  "  therefore  "  is  the  link  of  connection  between  doctrine  and  life.     It 
unites  the  product  to  the  power.    I.  The  mercies  of  God  constitute  the  motive 
FORCE.     1.  Paul  is  a  scientific  operator — skilful  in  adapting  means  to  ends.    To 
provide  the  water-power  may  be  a  much  more  lengthened  and  laborious  process  than 
to  set  the  mill  agoing ;  but  without  the  reservoir  and  its  supply,  the  mill  would 
never  go  round  at  all.     So  Paul  takes  every  step  on  the  assumption  that  a  devoted 
and  charitable  life  cannot  be  attained  unless  the  person  and  work  of  Christ  be  made 
clear  to  the  understanding  and  accepted  with  the  heart.     2.  There  is  a  class  of  men 
pressing  to  the  front  whose  maxim  is,  "A  grain  of  charity  is  worth   a  ton  of 
dogma."    But,  as  I  have  seen  a  mechanic,  after  applying  the  rule  to  his  work, 
turning  the  rule  round  and  trying  it  the  other  way,  lest  some  mistake  should  occur, 
eo  it  may  be  of  ase  to  express  the  same  maxim  in  another  form :  "  A  small  stream 


CHAP,  xir.]  ROMANS.  435 

flowing  on  the  ground  ia  worth  acres  of  clouds  careering  in  the  sky."  In  this  form 
the  maxim  is  nonsense  ;  but  the  two  forms  express  an  identical  meaning.  Wanting 
clouds,  there  could  be  no  streams ;  bo,  wanting  dogma,  there  could  be  no  charity. 
The  Scriptures  present  the  case  of  a  man  who  was  as  free  of  dogma  as  the  most 
advanced  secularist  could  desire.  "  What  is  truth  ?  "  said  Pilate,  who  was  not 
burdened  with  even  an  ounce  of  dogma ;  yet  he  crucified  Christ,  confessing  Him 
innocent.  3.  Those  who  lead  the  crusade  against  dogma  are  forward  to  profess  the 
utmost  reverence  for  the  life  and  teaching  of  Jesus  Christ.  But  "  Thou  art  the 
Christ,  the  Son  of  the  Uving  God,"  was  a  dogma  He  received  with  approbation  and 
died  for  it.  Therefore,  if  He  be  not  the  true  God,  He  must  be  a  false  man.  Thus 
the  Scriptures  have  rendered  it  impossible  for  modem  secularists  to  reject  the  great 
dogma  of  the  gospel,  and  yet  retain  the  hfe  of  Jesus  as  the  highest  pattern  of 
human  character.  4.  The  word  '•  therefore "  is  like  the  steel  point  which 
constitutes  the  fulcrum  of  the  balance.  To  one  extremity  of  the  beam  is  fixed,  by 
a  long  Hue,  a  consecrated  life ;  but  that  life  lies  deep  down  in  the  dark,  a  possibility 
only  as  yet.  No  human  arm  has  power  to  bring  it  up.  Here  is  a  skilful  engineer, 
who  has  undertaken  the  task.  What  is  he  doing?  He  is  making  fast  to  the 
opposite  extremity  of  the  beam  some  immense  weight — nothing  less  than  the 
mercies  of  God  as  exhibited  in  Christ.  He  has  fastened  it  now,  and  he  stands  back 
— does  not  put  a  hand  to  the  work  in  its  second  stage.  What  follows?  They 
come  I  they  come !  the  deeds  of  charity.  5.  Ask  those  great  lovers  who  have  done 
and  suffered  most  for  men  what  motive  urged  them  on  and  held  them  up.  They 
will  answer  unanimously,  "  The  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us."  They  are  bought 
with  a  price,  and  therefore  they  glorify  God  in  their  lives.  6.  In  the  scheme  of 
doctrine  set  forth  in  the  first  half  of  the  Epistle,  we  behold  the  reservoir  where  the 
power  is  stored ;  and  in  the  opening  verses  of  the  second  section  the  engineer  opens 
the  sluice,  so  that  the  whole  force  of  the  treasured  waters  may  flow  out  on  human 
life,  and  impel  it  onward  in  active  benevolence.  II.  A  consecrated  life  is  the  - 
EXPECTED  result.  This  consists  of — 1.  Devotion  to  God,  the  constituents  of  which\ 
are — (1)  A  living  sacrifice — the  offerer's  pwn  body,  not  that  of  a  substitute  ;  and  J 
not  dead,  but  living.  It  is  not  a  carcass  laid  on  the  altar  to  be  burned ;  it  is  a  life  / 
devoted  to  God.  Love  is  the  fire  that  consumes  the  sacrifice  ;  and  in  this  case,  too,/ 
the  fire  came  down  from  heaven.  (2)  A  reasonable  service.  It  is  not  the  arbitrary 
though  loving  command  addressed  by  a  father  to  his  infant  son,  that  he  may  be 
trained  to  habits  of  unquestioning  obedience ;  it  is  rather  the  work  prescribed  by 
the  father  to  an  adult  son,  which  the  son  understands,  and  in  which  he  intelligently 
acquiesces.  2.  In  the  remaining  portion  of  the  Epistle  Paul  labours  to  stimulate 
practical  charity,  in  one  place  reducing  the  whole  law  to  one  precept,  to  one  word — 
love.  After  devoting  so  much  attention  to  the  roots,  he  will  not  neglect  to  gather 
the  fruit.  Conclusion  :  1.  We  must  look  well  to  our  helm  as  we  traverse  this 
ocean  of  life,  where  we  can  feel  no  bottom  and  see  no  shore,  lest  we  miss  our 
harbour.  But  we  must  also  look  to  the  hghts  of  heaven.  The  seaman  does  not 
look  to  the  stars  instead  of  handling  his  helm.  This  would  be  as  great  folly  as  to 
handle  his  helm  vigorously  and  never  look  to  the  stars.  So  we  must  not  turn 
to  the  contemplation  of  dogma  instead  of  labouring  in  the  works  of  charity ;  but 
look  to  the  truth  as  the  light  which  shows  us  the  way  of  life,  and  walking  in 
that  way  with  all  diligence.  2.  Want  of  faith  is  followed  by  want  of  goodness, 
as  a  blighting  of  the  root  destroys  the  stem  and  branches  of  a  tree.  But  does  the 
converse  also  hold  good?  Many  trees  when  cut  down  grow  again.  But  some 
species — pines,  for  example — die  outright  when  the  main  stem  is  severed.  Here 
lies  a  sharp  reproof  for  all  who  bear  Christ's  name.  True  it  is  also  that,  if  from  any 
cause  the  life  cease  to  act,  the  faith,  or  what  seemed  faith,  will  rot  away  underground 
(1  Tim.  1.  19).  While  faith,  by  drawing  from  the  fulness  of  Christ,  makes  a  fruitful 
life,  the  exercise  of  all  the  charities  mightily  increases  even  the  faith  from  which  they 
sprang.  While,  on  one  side,  the  necessity  of  the  day  is  to  maintain  the  faith  as  the 
fountain  and  root  of  practical  goodness  in  the  life ;  on  the  other  side,  the  necessity  of 
the  day  is  to  lead  and  exhibit  a  life  corresponding  to  the  faith  it  grows  upon.  (W. 
Arnot,  D.D.)  By  the  mercies  of  God  that  ye  present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice. — 
Wherein  our  Christian  sacrifice,  with  respect  to  the  body,  principally  consists;  and 
the  reasonableness  of  it : — I.  The  character  op  the  person  exhorting.  Whoever 
speaks  to  us  in  the  name  of  God,  or  by  a  special  commission  from  Him,  has  cer- 
tainly a  right  to  our  attention.  When  we  consider  that  the  generality  of  men  are 
more  governed  by  example  than  precept,  or  the  intrinsic  reason  of  things,  we  must 
acknowledge  it  adds  a  very  great  force  to  instructions  we  hear  from  any  person 


436  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xa, 

when  they  come  recommended  by  his  own  practice,  and  that  upon  two  accounts. 
1.  Because  the  actions  of  men  discover  most  evidently  to  us  the  secret  bent  and 
disposition  of  their  hearts.    2.  Because  a  good  example  is  a  more  moving  and 
sensible  argument  to  the  practice  of  piety  than  the  most  beautiful  images  whereby 
we  can  otherwise  represent  it.     II.  The  manner  of  the  apostlk's  exhortation. 
1.  ''Brethren  "  is  the  general  appellation  of  Christians  which  St.  Paul  uses  in  all 
his  Epistles.     2.  "  By  the  mercies  of  God,"  that  is,  from  the  consideration  of  those 
great  things  our  good  and  merciful  God  has  done  for  as.     3.  The  subject-matter  of 
the  apostle's  exhortation  in  the  following  words,  "  That  you  present  your  bodies  a 
living  sacrifice,  holy,  acceptable  to  God."     (1)  By  presenting  our  bodies  a  •'  living  " 
sacrifice  is  implied  that  we  perform  to  God  a  ready  and  cheerful  obedience,  that  no 
difficulties  or  discouragements  stop  us  in  the  course  of  our  Christian  progress.  ^  (a) 
"  Living  "  may  be  here  understood  as  it  is  opposed  to  those  sensual  lusts  and  passions 
which  have  their  source  from  the  body,  and  upon  the  account  of  which  the  apostle 
cries  out  (chap.  vii.  24).    By  indulging  our  sensual  appetites  we  vitiate  the  best 
constitution,  put  the  organs  of  the  body  out  of  tune,  and  by  degrees  perhaps  do 
render  it  a  sink  of  mortal  diseases.  All  which  disorders  must  necessarily  render  the 
I  ody  a  very  unfit  and  dull  companion  for  the  soul,  or  rather,  as  it  were,  a  dead 
weight  hanging  upon  it,  in  the  more  lively  exercises  of  reason  and  devotion.     And 
therefore  we  must  take  care  never  to  indulge  our  bodily  appetites  to  any  excess,  but 
rather  endeavour  to  mortify  our  members  which  are  upon  the  earth,  that  the 
soul  operate  with  its  full  force  and  activity  ;  which  it  is  impossible  we  should  do 
while  we  study  nothing  so  much  as  to  gratify  our  bodily  appetites.     (6)  ''Living," 
that  is,  a  continual  sacrifice.     Our  whole  Ufe  in  every  part  and  period  of  it  should 
be  consecrated  to  the  service  of  God.     Our  incense  must  burn  continually  before 
Him,  and  the  sacrifice  of  our  body,  while  we  are  in  the  body,  never  cease  to  be 
offered.    But  this  leads  me  to  consider — (2)  The  other  affection  of  this  sacrifice,  in 
order  to  render  it  acceptable  to  God,  and  that  is  "  holiness."    A  thing  is  said  to  be 
holy  that  is  set  apart  to  the  more  immediate  service  or  worship  of  God.    So  that  to 
present  our  bodies  holy,  is  to  keep  them  in  a  constant  preparation  for  the  dutit  s  of 
religion  ;  to  preserve  them  in  a  regular,  pious,  aud  composed  temper  ;  not  to  suffer 
our  imagination  to  be  defiled,  or  our  sensual  appetites  gratified  to  any  excess. 
And  in  particular  to  any  of  those  sinful  excesses  which  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  are 
termed  the  works  of  the  flesh,  and  which  are  so  contrary  to  the  purity  of  that 
Divine  Spirit  who  has  chosen  our  bodies  to  be  a  habitation  for  Himself.     HI.  The 
REASON  AND  GROUND  OF  THE  apostle's  EXHORTATION.    There  is  nothing  here  required 
of  us  but  what  is  proper  to  the  state  and  condition  of  human  nature ;  nothing  but 
what  is  fit  and  "reasonable"  to  be  done.     1.  God  being  the  Creator  and  absolute 
Governor  of  the  world,  has  power  to  lay  what  restraints  up  in  men  He  sees  fit,  not 
exceeding  the  benefits  of  their  creation.    2.  He  has  laid  no  restraints  upon  our 
natural  appetites  but  what  generally  tend  to  our  own  good  and  the  perfection  of  our 
reasonable  nature.     3.  We  think  it  no  injustice  in  secular  poti  ntates  to  restrain 
subjects  in  their  natural  rights  and  liberdes  when  such  libeities  are  found  incon- 
venient to  themselves,  or  others,  or  to  the  government  in  general.     4.  We  often, 
upon  a  prospect  of  a  future  and  greater  good,  are  willing  to  deny  ourselves  a  present 
pleasure  or  satisfaction.   Nothing  is  more  common  or  thought  more  reasonable.    5. 
The  restraints  which  are  complained  of  in  the  Christian  religion  are  no  more  than 
what  some  of  the  visest  moralists  and  teachers  of  natural  religion  have  laid  upon 
themselves  and  prescribed  to  others.     {R.  Fiddes,  D.D.)       Are  you  grateful  ? — In- 
gratitude is  one  of  the  meanest  of  vices.  You  know  the  old  fable  of  the  man  who  found 
H  frozen  viper  and  in  kindness  took  it  home  and  put  it  on  his  hearth-stone  to  be  re- 
vived ;  but  when  the  creature  felt  the  warmth  and  began  to  renew  its  life,  it  bit  its 
benefactor.    This  meanest  of  vices  is  often  seen  in  men,  but  scarcely  ever  in  a  dog. 
Perhaps  one  of  its  worst  forms  is  when  it  is  shown  towards  parents ;  and  children  who 
are  most  indulged  are  generally  the  most  ungrateful.    Note : — I.  The  compassions  of 
God.    1.  Was  it  not  compassionate  of  God  to  create  us  ?    There  might  have  been  so 
much  better  men  in  our  shoes  than  we  are.   How  shameful  then  that  some  of  us  are 
little  better  than  logs  in  a  stream  !     How  mean  that  some  of  us  should  wallow  in 
mire  like  swine,  and  then  say  we  cannot  help  it !   The  wonder  is  that  God  can  bear 
with  us;  but  having  in  mercy  created  us.  He  has  followed  it  up  with  infinite 
forbearance.     Many  people  are  like  the  Prodigal — they  do  not  care  about  God  until 
they  meet  with  disaster.     Yet  God,  in  His  compassion,  does  not  spurn  thcin.     2. 
God  shows  His  compassion  in  preparing  a  heavenly  life  for  us.     I  dare  say  that 
some  mother  here  has  taken  Ler  little  sen  to  market,  aud  when  he  be^jan  to  b« 


CHAP,  xu.]  ROMANS.  437 

fagged,  encouraged  him  by  saTing,  "  Now,  Johnny,  be  a  brave  lad,  and  when  we 
get  home  I'll  love  you  and  make  it  up  to  you  I  "  Then  the  little  feet  trot  on  more 
gaily.  My  weary  friend,  take  courage  1  God  will  make  it  up  to  you  in  the  other 
world.  3.  Then  what  compassion  to  redeem  us  and  to  save  us  from  our  sins ! 
II.  OuB  BEASONABLE  8EBVICK.  God  does  uot  cxpect  an  impossibility  from  us — only 
a  "  reasonable  service."  Men  are  ready  enough  to  profess  their  willingness  to  love 
God,  but  they  are  not  so  ready  to  show  their  love  to  Him  by  loving  one  another. 
Some  of  you  may  be  living  lonely  lives,  but,  if  you  will,  you  may  poople  the 
uninhabited  island  of  your  hfe.  You  long  for  sympathy.  WeU,  others  feel  just  tha 
same,  and  they  very  likely  think  you  are  cold  and  reserved.  Is  there  not  somebody 
to  whom  you  can  say  a  gentle  word,  or  to  whom  you  can  do  a  kind  act?  T)ii3  is 
your  "  reasonable  service."  Bejoice  with  those  who  rejoice,  and  weep  with  those 
who  weep.  Take  an  interest  in  the  joys  and  sorrows  of  your  fellow  creatures. 
Those  who  have  money  to  spare  should  enjoy  the  pleasure  of  dispensing  it  while 
they  live.  When  a  man  gives  his  money  while  he  lives  it  is  a  "  living  sacrifice  "  ; 
but  when  he  dies,  his  money  is  no  longer  his.  If  we  have  not  treasures  in  money, 
we  have  the  more  precious  treasures  of  love.  Some  people  are  like  the  picture  o? 
a  rose,  which  has  no  perfume.  Be  perfumed,  that  is,  living  Christians ;  be  fragrant  of 
good  deeds,  which  are  the  sweet  breath  of  heaven ;  and  thus  you  will  show  your  grati- 
tude to  God,  be  an  honour  to  the  gospel  of  Jesus  and  a  comfort  to  mankind.  (JF.  Birch.) 
True  life  a  priesthood : — The  life  of  every  man  should  be  that  of  a  priest.  The 
earth  should  be  trod,  not  as  a  garden,  a  playground,  or  a  market,  but  as  a  temple. 
The  text  indicates  that  true  priesthood  is  characterised  by: — I.  iNDrviDTJALiTT. 
"  Bodies  "  here  stand  for  the  whole  nature — man  himself.  In  this  priesthood — 
1.  Every  man  is  his  own  sacrifice.  The  wealth  of  the  world  would  not  be  a  sub- 
stitute for  himself.  What  does  this  imply  ?  (1)  Negatively ;  not— (a)  The  loss  of 
personality.  Man  does  not  lose  himself  by  consecrating  his  existence  to  the 
Eternal.  (&)  The  loss  of  free  agency.  Man  does  not  become  the  niere  tool  or 
machine  of  Omnipotence.  In  truth  he  only  secures  his  highest  liberty.  (2) 
Positively ;  it  includes— (a)  Yielding  to  God's  love  as  the  inspiration  of  our  being. 
(b)  Adopting  His  will  as  the  rule  of  our  activities.  2.  Every  man  is  his  own 
minister.  None  can  offer  the  sacrifice  for  him.  He  must  do  it  freely,  devoutly, 
manfully.  II.  DrviNiTT.  It  is  a  vital  connection  with  the  Great  God.  1.  God  is 
the  object  of  it  Men  are  sacrificing  themselves  everywhere  to  pleasure,  lucre, 
fame,  influence.  There  are  gods  many  in  England  at  whose  altars  men  are 
sacrificing  themselves.  2.  God  is  the  motive  of  it.  God's  "  mercies,"  which  are 
infinite  in  number  and  variety,  are  the  inciting  and  controlling  motives.  Ths 
true  priest  moves  evermore  from  God  to  God.  3.  God  is  the  approver  of  it. 
"Acceptable  unto  God."  He  approves  it  because  it  is — (1)  Eight  in  itself;  (2) 
Blessed  to  man.  HI.  Rationality.  Its  reasonableness  will  be  seen  if  you  consider 
what  it  really  means,  viz. — 1.  Cherishing  the  highest  gratitude  to  our  greatest 
Benefactor.  Reason  tells  us  that  we  ought  to  be  thankful  for  favours  generously 
bestowed  upon  us.  But  who  has  bestowed  such  favours  as  God  ?  2.  The  highest 
love  to  the  best  of  beings.  Reason  tells  that  we  should  only  love  a  being  in 
proportion  to  his  goodness.  God  is  infinitely  good,  therefore  He  should  be  loved 
with  all  our  hearts,  minds,  souls.  3.  That  we  should  render  our  entire  services  to  our 
exclusive  proprietor.  God  owns  as  ;  all  we  have  and  are  belong  to  Him.  If  this  is 
not  reasonable,  what  is  ?  In  truth  religion  is  the  only  reasonable  Uf e.  Conclusion  : 
Such  is  true  priesthood.  1.  All  other  priesthoods  are  shams,  mimicries,  and 
impieties.  2.  Christ's  priesthood  will  be  of  no  avail  to  us  unless  we  become  true 
priests  to  God  ourselves.  His  priesthood  is  at  once  the  model  and  the  means  of 
all  true  human  priesthood.  (D.  Thomas,  D.I).)  Gratitude  requires  expression: 
— President  Hopkins,  of  Williams  College,  used  to  tell  his  classes  that  if  our 
religious  feelings  have  no  appropriate  forms  of  expression,  the  feelings  themselves 
will  die  out.  H  we  do  not  take  a  reverential  attitude  in  prayer,  we  shall  lose  the 
spirit  of  prayer.  It  is  true  that  if  a  tree  is  stripped  ol  its  leaves,  and  kept  so,  it 
will  die.  If  we  do  not  express  our  gratitude  and  love  to  God,  we  shall  lose  what  we 
have ;  but  by  expressing  them  they  are  increased — hence  these  offerings.  Bodily 
consecration: — I.  The  pebsons  addeessed.  "You,  brethren,"  Church  members. 
Paul  regarded  conversion  as  an  initial  step,  which,  to  asnount  to  anything,  must  be 
followed  by  a  "going  on  to  know  the  Lord."  His  favourite  words  were  run,  strive, 
fight,  grow.  He  saw  the  potentialities  of  Christian  manhood  in  the  babe  inChrist. 
This  gave  him  weighty  convi' tions  as  to  the  importance  of  prompt  and  proper 
attention  to  the  nursing.    XL  The  duty  enjoined.     "  Present  your  bodiei.'     Tiif 


438  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m 

body,  as  well  aa  the  soul,  is  redeemed,  and  both  must  go  together  into  God's 
service.    It  is  man  yielding  his  members,  as  servants  of  iniquity,  that  gives  power 
to  the  kingdom  of  darkness.     So,  to  be  of  any  service  in  the  cause  of  God,  we  must 
yield,  not  our  sympathy  merely,  but  "  our  members  as  instruments  of  righteous- 
ness unto  God."    III.  The   state   ob  condition  of  the  offering.    "  A  living 
sacrifice."    Allusion  is  here  made  to  the  Jewish  sacrifices — which,  to  have  any 
Y  moral  value,  must  be  dead ;  the  Christian  sacrifice  must  be  presented  living.     Man 
is  a  priest  who  lays  upon  the  altar  his  own  living  body.    And  as  it  was  the 
business  of  the  Jewish  priest,  not  only  to  present  the  sacrifice,  but  to  keep  it  on  the 
altar  and  see  that  it  be  properly  offered,  so  the  Christian's   sacrifice  is  to  be — 
1.  "  Holy."     He  is  to  see  that  his  body  is  kept  from  all  contact  with  the  degiadint; 
or  sensual.     2.  Therefore,  "  acceptable  to  God."    Jewish  sacrifices  were  the  best  of 
their  kind  ;  and  man  must  consecrate  all  his  powers,  or  God  will  reject  his  offering  as 
a  mockery  and  a  sham.     3.  "  Eeasonable."    Nothing  more  reasonable  than  that 
the  creature  should  serve  the  Creator.     If  man  was  made  to  rule,  it  is  equally 
true  that  he  was  made  to  obey ;  and  in  obedience  is  his  greatest  pleasure  and 
profit.     IV.  The   motive  prompting  the  Sacrifice.      "  The    mercies    of    God." 
This    motive    is — 1.  Strange.     Other    religions    motive    their    devotees    by    the 
judgments  and  terror  of  their  gods.     None  but  Christianity  ever  thought  of  love 
as  the  motive  to  obedience.     2.  Winsome.     3.  Adequate.     (T.  Kelly.)        Entire 
consecration: — The  force  of  the  aorist  suggests  that  our  self-dedication  is  to  be 
entire,  for  once  and  for  all.     This  act  embraces  three  things — being,  doing,  and 
suffering.     We  must  be  willing  to  be,  to  do,  and  to  suffer,  all  that  God  requires. 
This  embraces  reputation,  friends,  property,  and  time.     It  covers  body,  mind,  and 
soul.    These  are  to  be  used  when,  where,  and  as  God  requires;  and  only  as  He 
requires.     Such   a    consecration    should    be   made — 1.  Deliberately ;   2.    For   all 
coming  time  ;  3.  Without  any  reserve  ;  and  4.  In  reliance  upon  Divine  strength. 
(C.  Neil,  M.A.)        Personal  consecration  for  Divine  service : — I.  This  is  a  summons 
to  a  service  of  worship.     1.  The  priestly  service  is  required  of  all  Christians 
without  distinction.    Every  believer  is  assumed  to  be  anointed,   to  have  passed 
through  the  preliminary  purification,  to  have  been  called  and  separated  (IPet.  ii.  9), 
and  to  have  passed  through  the  consecration  ritual  (Kev.  i.  5,  6).     Therefore  every 
one  of  them  has  "boldness  to  enter  into  the  holiest  (Heb.  x.  19;  Eph.  iii.  12). 
And  therefore  they  are  all  here  summoned  to  holy  service.   Clearly  the  act  of  worship 
is  to  be  continuous.    The  Jewish  priests  had  to  minister  day  by  day.     Morning 
and  evening  sacrifices  must  be  offered :  the  altar  fire  must  be  kept  burning ;  the 
lamps  must  be  lit,  and,  generally,  worship  must  be  offered  up  continually.    And 
these  all  symbolised  for  the  people  of  God  the  necessity  of  constant  service  (1  Cor. 
X.  31  ;  Heb.  xiii.  12-15).     2.  This  priestly  service  of  worship  is  to  be  one  of  sacri- 
fice— is  not  indeed  of  atonement,  for  the  one  offering  of  our  great  High  Priest  needs 
never  more  to  be  repeated.    But  now,  the  reconciliation  having  been  effected  by 
that  offering,  we  must  draw  near  to  God  for  holy  feUowsbip,  as  in  the  peace- 
offering;  to  praise,  as  in  the  thank-offering ;  and  for  perpetual  dedication,  as  in  the 
burnt-offering.     (1)  The  Christian  must  ip=€sent  his  own  body.     The  Jew  had  to 
present  the  body  of  an  animal :  the  Christian  must  offer  his  own.     Under  the  law 
the  priest  sacrificed  the  animal ;  the  Christian  must  offer  up  himself.     The  free, 
intelligent  soul  must  be  the  presenting  priest :  the  body,  animated  by  the  soul,  and 
serving  as  its  many-mannered  instrument,  must  be  the  ever-presented  offering 
(Eom.  vi.  13).     (2)  The  sacrifice  must  be  living.     The  servant  of  God  is  not  at 
liberty,  by  neglect  of  the  body,  to  put  an  end  to  its  life.   Eather  must  it  be  carefully 
preserved  that  its  providential  term  may  be  available  for  Divine  service.     For  this 
life  belongs  to  God  (Eom.  xiv.  7,  8).     (3)  This  sacrifice  must  be  holy.     This 
holiness    includes— (a)  Full    and    perpetual   dedication    to    Divine    service,     (b) 
Sanctification  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  or  it  will  become  "  anathema."     (c)  "  Sanctifi- 
cation  of  the  Spirit,"  so  that  all  the  appetites,  instincts,  and  members  of  the  body, 
and  all  the  powers  and  properties  of  the  infipiring  soul,  shall  be  brought  into  true 
harmony  with  the  will  of    God.    3.  This  priestly  service    of    sacrifice  shall  be 
acceptable  to  God.     It  is  at  once  worthy  of  the  priest,  the  temple,  and  God.     That 
could  not  be  said  of  the  ritual  service  of  the  Jewish  temple,  except  in  so  far  as  it 
was  type  of  better  things  (Isa.  i.  11-15).     II.  The  spuiit  in  which  these  priests 
ABE   REQUIRED  TO   PERFORM  THEIR  SERVICE  (vcr.  21).     1.    Negatively:    "Be    not 
conformed    to    this    world."     The    special    characteristics    of    worldliness    vary 
accoiding  to  the  variations  in  the  tendencies  of  thought  and  of  ethical  aim  and 
effort  at  different  periods,  in  different  countries,  and  amongst  different  peoples. 


CHAP,  xn.]  ROMANS.  439 

The  spirit  of  the  age  in  which  Moses  lived  was  the  spirit  of  gross,  senauoos 
idolatry.  Hence  the  prohibition  thereof  in  the  Decalogue.  The  spirit  of  the 
age  amongst  the  Jews,  in  the  time  of  the  apostles,  was  that  of  dependence 
upon  external  services  (Gal.  iv.  3,  9).  The  spirit  of  the  age  by  which  the 
Colossians  were  in  danger  of  being  contaminated  was  that  of  "philosophy  and 
vain  deceit"  (Col.  ii.  8-23).  There  is  in  almost  every  age  a  twofold  world-spirit, 
each  being  the  other's  opposite,  the  most  energetic  working  of  which  was  perhaps 
most  strikingly  manifested  in  the  early  ages  of  monasticism,  when  those  who 
became  earnestly  religious  sought  for  the  perfection  of  the  spiritual  life  in  seclusion 
and  asceticism.  Both  were  injurious  to  true  spiritual  religion,  and  the  remedy 
will  be  secured  by  attention  to  the  true  Christian  requirement.  "  Present  your 
bodies, "and  they  are  as  capable  of  true  spiritual  service  within  their  sphere  as  are 
your  spirits.  Therefore  "marriage  is  honourable  among  all  "  right-minded  men. 
Therefore  to  "  them  that  believe  and  know  the  truth,"  "  every  creature  of  God  is 
good "  (1  Tim.  iv.  3-5).  Therefore  all  the  honest  occupations  of  life  may  be 
pursued  in  a  truly  religious  spirit  (1  Cor.  vii.  29-31).  2.  Positively.  Observe— 
(1)  The  result  to  be  produced ;  a  transformation  into  something  the  very  opposite 
of  that  conformation  to  this  world,  which  is  produced  by  the  energy  of  merely 
secular  powers.  The  form  is  that  of  likeness  to  the  image  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord 
(2  Cor.  iii.  18).  (2)  This  result  is  to  be  produced  by  the  renewing  of  the  mind,  i.e., 
the  progressive  growth  and  ever-increasing  power  of  Christian  life,  bringing  the 
mind,  and  through  that  the  whole  person,  into  ever-increasiug  approximation  to 
the  perfect  likeness  of  the  Lord  (2  Cor.  iv.  16).  (3)  This  renewing  of  the  mind 
is  a  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (Titus  iii.  5)  carried  on  with  our  own  free  and  active 
concurrence.     Therefore  the  command  is  laid  upon  us.     III.  The  arguments  by 

WHICH  THE  PRIESTS  ARE  URGED  TO  ATTEND  DILIGENTLTTO  THIS  SERVICE.      1.   The  apOStlc's 

personal  influence.  He  himself  had  consecrated  all  to  the  service  of  God  (Phil.  ii. 
17).  And  therefore  with  great  urgency  of  moral  power  could  he  say,  "  I  beseech 
you."  2.  "  The  mercies  of  God,"  in  which  there  is  at  once  a  backward  reference 
to  the  foregoing  arguments  and  illustrations,  an  onward  reference  to  the  duties 
about  to  be  inculcated,  and  a  central  reference  to  the  consequential  link  which  binds 
on  the  one  to  the  other.  3.  That  ye  may  personally  prove  the  will  of  God — (1) 
The  thing  to  be  proved  is  that  which  God  wills,  ordains,  and  prescribes  as  the  rule 
and  end  of  our  whole  activity — "even  our  sanctification,"  (2)  The  metliod  of 
proving  this  will  is  the  practical  one  of  rendering  to  it  obedience  under  the  influence 
of  saving  grace.  "  If  any  man  will  do  His  will,  he  shall  know,"  &c.  (3)  This  will 
of  God  prescribes  only  that  which  is  good,  acceptable,  and  perfect.  This  is  to  be 
the  result  of  the  test  in  the  personal  experience,  (a)  He  will  prove  it  to  be  good, 
and  also  productive  of  good.  (6)  He  will  prove  it  to  be  acceptable  both  to  God  and 
man  (Kom.  xiv.  18  ;  2  Cor.  i.  12).  (c)  He  proves  that  the  course  prescribed  for  him 
by  the  will  of  God  is  perfect.  (IF.  Tyson.)  The  consecrated  body  : — The  body  is 
— I.  The  SEAT  OF  our  animal  propensities.  These  are  not  necessarily  criminal. 
They  are  only  so  when  they  cease  to  be  subordinate  to  God.  When  we  are  living 
in  His  power,  the  question  will  not  be.  Is  this  self-indulgence  right,  or  wrong  ?  but. 
Does  it  interfere  with  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  within  me,  and  the  fulfilment  of 
the  mind  of  God  in  my  life  ?  II.  The  seat  of  our  sensuous  experiences.  Is  the 
love  of  music  to  be  indulged,  or  may  we  take  long  journeys  for  pleasure  ?  Surely 
none  of  these  things  are  wrong  in  themselves  ;  but  with  the  child  of  God  the 
question  is  not,  How  shall  I  most  gratify  my  sensuous  propensity  ?  but,  How  most 
please  God  ?  IH.  The  beat  of  our  physical  sensibilities — those  which  are  acted 
upon  by  the  sense  of  pain,  pleasure,  lassitude,  <fec.  A  duty  has  to  be  done,  but  it  is 
a  hot  day,  and  we  have  some  approach  to  a  headache,  and  we  do  not  feel  disposed 
to  do  it.  What  is  it  will  enable  us  to  rise  above  that  ?  Why,  to  be  filled  with  the 
Spirit,  and  then  the  body  will  present  itself  to  God's  service  joyfully.  IV.  Our 
medium  op  communication  with  the  physical  world.  Now,  it  is  not  a  bad  thing 
that  we  should  have  to  do  with  the  physical  world  ;  but  what  effect  is  our  bodies 
producing  upon  this  world  ?  Is  it  the  better  for  us  ?  Is  "Holiness  to  the  Lord" 
written  upon  the  very  vessels  of  our  households  ?  If  we  are  filled  with  the  Spirit  of 
God,  our  bodies  will  be  the  medium  through  which  this  world  will  be  continually 
affected  by  Him,  &c.  V.  The  medium  through  which  we  hold  intercourse  with 
MANKIND.  Now,  what  is  the  nature  of  that  influence  ?  If  we  are  filled  with  the 
Holy  Spirit,  it  will  be  a  revelation  of  Christ.  In  these  bodies  we  should  carry 
about  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  tone  of  our  voice,  the  line  of  our 
conduct,  the  look  of  our  eye,  everything  about  us,  will  speak  of  Christ.    VL  The 


440  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  xix. 

VEIL  WHICH  CONCEALS  THK  THIN08  UNSEEN.  Strip  o£f  these  bodies,  and  in  a  moment 
we  are  landed  in  the  presence  of  invisible  realities.  There  is  only  this  between  me 
and  eternity,  between  me  and  God.  Now,  that  is  something  for  which  to  be 
thankful.  If  it  were  not  for  this  veil  it  would  be  impossible  for  me  to  fulfil  the 
work  of  my  probation.  At  the  same  time,  the  devil  employs  it  as  a  means 
of  deadening  our  spiritual  sensibilities.  When  the  Holy  Spirit  has  free  course 
within  our  being,  then  the  veil  becomes  almost  transparent.  There  are  times 
when  God  draws  so  near  to  as  that  it  seems  more  like  seeing  than  thinking, 
more  like  touching  than  simply  contemplating.  [W.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.) 
Consecrated  and  transformed : — The  key  of  this  chapter  is  found  in  the  preceding 
verse.  The  law  of  the  universe,  the  great  march  of  all  things  is  from  God,  through 
God,  to  God.  But  all  things  about  us  are  wrought  upon  by  a  great  compulsion. 
From  reason,  not  from  blind  necessity,  we  yield  ourselves  to  the  sweep  of  this  great 
law.  Yet  there  is  a  compulsion  even  for  us — nobler,  as  our  service  is  nobler,  viz., 
love:  "  by  the  mercies  of  God."  I.  The  entbeaty:  "  I  beseech  you."  But  we  object 
to  be  besought  to  do  a  reasonable  thing.  Show  us  that  a  thing  is  reasonable,  and 
at  once  and  of  course  we  do  it.  Think,  then,  that  for  our  highest  good  we  have 
to  be  besought !  For  God  alone  we  play  not  the  part  of  reasonable  men.  How 
amazing  that  we  should  have  to  be  urged  when  God  invites  us  to  give  ourselves  to 
Him  that  He  may  give  Himself  to  us  !  "That  ye  may  prove  what  is  that  good  .  .  . 
will  of  God."  The  ear  is  deaf  to  the  voice  of  God,  calling  us  to  Paradise  again. 
This  is  the  entreaty  of  a  man — 1.  Who  was  living  this  life  of  blessedness.  Of, 
through,  and  to  God,  was  the  rhythmic  flow  of  his  whole  being.  And  then,  in  all 
the  consciousness  of  this  blessed  life,  he  thinks  of  the  half-hearted,  of  those  who 
come  far  enough  out  of  the  far  country  to  lose  the  husks  of  the  swine,  but  not  far 
enough  to  get  the  bread  of  the  father's  house,  who,  like  the  fabled  coffin  of 
Mahomet,  Ue  suspended  between  earth  and  heaven,  unclaimed  by  either,  and  yet 
fretting  for  each.  To  these  the  apostle  cries,  "  I  beseech  you,"  &c.  2.  Who  had 
lingered  at  the  Cross  until  its  great  love  possessed  him.  He  had  seen  something 
of  God's  unspeakable  gift.  With  that  uiercy  kindling  his  soul  he  asks.  What 
acknowledgment  can  we  make  7  Only  ourselves.  The  power  that  prompts  and 
sustains  this  consecration  is  only  here — the  love  of  God  in  Jesus.  There  let 
us  seek  it.  II.  The  conseceation  to  which  we  abe  urged.  Turn  again  to  the 
great  law  of  all  things  and  trace  its  application.  1.  Nothing  in  God's  world  is  any 
good  until  it  is  given  up  to  that  which  is  above  it.  What  is  the  worth  of  the  land, 
however  fruitful,  and  whatever  title  we  may  have  to  it,  unless  we  can  do  something 
with  it  ?  The  soil  must  minister  to  us,  or  it  is  merely  waste  land.  The  seed  again 
and  all  its  products — what  should  we  give  for  them  if  we  could  do  nothing  with 
them?  And  what  use  are  cattle  and  sheep,  except  as  they  clothe  and  feed  us? 
And  what  are  we  for?  Here  lies  our  worth  and  our  good,  in  giving  ourselves  "  a 
living  sacrifice  "  to  Him,  of,  through,  and  to  whom  are  all  things.  2.  Every  thing 
by  sacrifice  not  lost,  but  turned  into  higher  life.  Very  beautiful  is  this  law  of 
transformation.  Listen  to  the  parable  of  the  earth.  "  Here  am  I,"  it  mutters, 
"  so  far  away  from  Him  who  made  me,  without  any  beauty  of  form,  or  richness  of 
colour,  or  sweetness  of  smell !  How  can  I  ever  be  turned  into  worth  and  beauty  ?  " 
And  now  there  comes  the  seed,  and  whispers,  "  Earth,  wilt  thou  give  me  thy 
strength  ?  "  "  No,  indeed,"  replies  the  earth,  "  it  is  all  I  have  got,  and  I  will  keep 
it  for  myself."  "  Then,"  saith  the  seed,  "thou  shalt  be  only  earth  for  ever.  But 
if  thou  wilt  give  me  thy  strength  thou  shalt  be  lifted  up  and  be  turned  into  worth 
and  beauty."  So  the  earth  yields,  and  the  seed  takes  hold  of  it.  It  rises  with 
wondrous  stem;  it  drinks  in  sunshine  and  rain  and  air,  mingling  them  with  the 
earth's  strength  and  changing  all  to  branch,  leaf,  flower,  and  fruit.  The  parable 
repeats  itself  in  the  case  of  the  seed.  It  has  a  kind  of  life,  but  all  unconscious.  It 
cannot  see,  or  hear,  or  move.  But  it  yields  itself  to  the  animal,  and  then  its 
strength  is  turned  into  part  of  the  seeing  eye,  the  hearing  ear,  the  subtle  nerve, 
the  beating  heart.  And  the  animal  gives  itself  in  turn  to  serve  man  ,and  is  exalted 
to  a  thousand  higher  purposes.  And  man  gives  himself  up  to  God,  and  is  trans- 
formed— into  what  ?  Ah  !  who  can  tell  of  that  wondrous  transformation  when  it 
"  is  completed?  Once  when  I  was  a  schoolboy  going  home  for  the  holidays,  I  em- 
barked at  Bristol  with  just  money  enough  to  pay  my  fare,  and  thought  in  my 
innocence  that  that  included  meals.  By  and  by  came  the  steward  with  his  bill. 
"I've  got  no  money,"  said  I.  "What  is  your  name  and  address?  "  I  told  him. 
"I  should  like  to  shake  hands  with  you,"  he  said  instantly,  with  a  smile.  Then 
came  the  explanation — how  that  some  years  before  some  little  kindness  had  been 


CHAT,  xn.]  ROMANS.  441 

shown  by  my  father  to  his  widowed  mother.  "  I  never  thought  the  chance  would 
come  for  me  to  repay  it,"  said  he,  pleasantly;  •'  but  I  am  glad  it  has."  I  told  my 
father  what  had  happened.  "Ah,"  said  he,  "see  how  a  bit  of  kindness  lives! 
Now  he  has  passed  it  on  to  you.  Remember,  if  ever  you  meet  anybody  that  needs 
a  friendly  hand,  you  must  pass  it  on  to  them."  Years  went  by,  and  I  had  forgotten 
it  all,  until  one  day  I  was  at  a  railway  station,  and  saw  a  little  lad  crying.  "  What 
is  the  matter,  my  lad  ?  "  I  asked.  "  If  you  please,  sir,  I  haven't  money  enough  to 
pay  my  fare.  I  have  all  I  want  but  a  few  pence ;  and  I  tell  the  clerk  if  he  will 
trust  me  I  will  be  sure  to  pay  him  again."  Instantly  flashed  the  forgotten  story  of 
long  ago.  Here,  then,  was  my  chance  of  passing  it  on.  I  gave  him  the  sum  he 
needed,  and  told  the  little  fellow  the  story  of  the  steward's  kindness  to  me.  "  Now, 
to-day,"  I  said,  "  I  pass  it  on  to  you ;  and  remember,  if  you  meet  with  any  one 
that  needs  a  kindly  hand,  you  must  pass  it  on  to  them."  My  story  is  the  illustra- 
tion of  the  law  of  God's  great  kindness  that  runs  through  aU  things.  Here  lies 
the  earth,  and  it  says ;  "  I  have  got  in  me  some  strength.  It  belongs  to  God." 
Then  it  whispers  to  the  seed,  "  I  will  pass  it  on  to  you."  Then  the  seed  passes  it 
on  to  the  animal,  and  the  animal  to  man,  who  completes  the  circle.  Think  how 
all  things  minister  to  him.  If  he  serves  not  God,  he  hinders  all  things,  and  diverts 
them.  III.  The  RESULT  OF  THIS  CONSECRATION.  "Be  not  conformed  to  this  world." 
How  great  a  drop  is  this  I  We  were  dreaming  of  heaven,  and  now  we  have  a  string 
of  moral  commonplaces.  Be  not  wise  in  your  own  conceits.  Be  given  to  hospitality. 
Be  not  slothful  in  business.  Live  peaceably  with  all  men.  But  that  this  should 
seem  a  coming  down  makes  the  lesson  all  the  more  needful.  Do  we  not  too  often 
think  that  our  way  upward  is  first  to  be  right  with  ourselves,  and  then  to  be  right 
with  the  world,  and  then  somewhere  far  off  we  may  some  day  come  to  be  right 
with  God  ?  No,  the  order  is  reversed.  First  right  with  God,  then,  and  then  only, 
right  with  all  things.  First  "  present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice  "  unto  God  ; 
then  the  world,  and  all  belonging  to  it,  is  put  in  its  right  place.  How  vain  are  all 
other  attempts  at  curing  conformity  to  the  world  1  There  never  was  a  time  when 
there  were  so  many  man-made,  church-made  Christians.  Who  does  not  know  the 
receipt  ?  Tie  up  the  hands  and  say,  "  You  must  not  do  that."  Tie  up  his  feet  and 
say,  "  You  mustn't  go  to  such  and  such  places — at  least,  when  yon  are  at  home." 
Cut  him  off  from  certain  things  at  which  society  is  shocked,  and  there  is  your 
Christian  :  a  creature  with  his  heart  hungering  for  the  world  as  fiercely  as  ever. 
To  "  present  our  bodies  a  living  sacrifice  "  to  the  opinions  of  religious  society  is  no 
cure  for  conformity  to  the  world.  This  is  the  only  way — a  glad,  whole-hearted 
giving  up  of  ourselves  to  God.  Then  comes  the  being  "  transformed  by  the  renew- 
ing "  of  the  "mind."  Transformed,  not  from  without,  but  from  within;  exactly 
as  the  earth  is  transformed  when  it  gives  itself  up  to  the  seed.  "  That  ye  may 
prove,"  &c.  The  renewed  mind  has  new  faculties  of  discernment — new  eyes  to  see 
the  will  of  God,  and  a  new  heart  to  do  it,  and  to  be  it.  We  cannot  know  God's  will 
until  we  are  given  up  to  it.  Once  as  I  meditated  on  these  words  I  heard  the 
children  pass  my  study  door.  "  I  sha'n't,"  rang  out  a  little  voice.  "  This  won't 
do,"  said  I,  gravely ;  "  you  must  stand  in  the  corner  until  you  come  to  a  better 
mind."  "  Think  now,"  said  I  to  myself,  "  if  she  should  say,  '  Well,  I  suppose  it  is 
my  father's  will,  and  I  must  submit  to  it,'  should  I  not  answer,  '  Nay,  it  is  dead 
against  your  father's  will?  Your  father's  will  is  that  you  should  be  in  the  garden 
playing  with  the  others,  but  you  have  gone  against  your  father's  will,  and  now 
your  father's  will  has  gone  against  you.'"  And  as  I  turned  it  over,  I  thought  I 
saw  where  all  the  crosses  come  from.  When  God's  will  goes  one  way  and  our  will 
goes  another,  there  is  the  cross.  When  God's  will  and  mine  are  one  the  cross  is 
lost.  Already  the  crown  is  ours — for  what  makes  heaven  ?  Not  white  robes,  not 
golden  streets,  not  harps  and  anthems,  but  this  only — the  eternal  harmony  of  wills ; 
and  we  can  have  that  down  here.  And  what  is  hell?  The  eternal  collision  of 
wills.  We  may  have  that  here,  and  this  it  is  that  makes  the  madness  of  many  a 
life.  Conclusion  :  And  now  here  is  a  thing  to  be  done.  It  shall  help  us  nothing 
to  know  all  this,  to  believe  it  all,  and  yet  to  stop  short  of  doing  it.  Will  you  do  it  ? 
{Mark  Owf  Pearse.)  How  it  the  body  to  become  a  sacrifice  f  Let  thine  eye  look 
upon  no  evil  thing,  and  it  hath  become  a  sacrifice ;  let  thy  tongue  speak  nothing 
filthy,  and  it  hath  become  an  offering ;  let  thy  hand  do  no  lawless  deed,  and  it  hath 
become  a  whole  burnt-offering.  But  this  is  not  enough,  we  must  have  good  works 
also.  Let  the  hand  do  alms,  the  mouth  bless  them  that  despitefully  use  us,  and 
the  ear  find  leisure  evermore  for  the  hearing  of  Scripture.  For  sacrifice  can  be 
made  only  of  that  which  is  clean  ;  sacrifice  is  a  firstf  ruit  of  other  actions.   Let  as, 


V 


442  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

then,  from  our  hands,  and  feet,  and  mouth,  and  all  our  other  members,  yield  a 
firstfruit  unto  God.  Such  a  sacrifice  is  well-pleasing,  and  not,  as  that  of  the 
Jews,  unclean,  for  "  their  sacrifices,"  says  the  Scripture,  "  shall  be  unto  them  as 
the  bread  of  mourners."  Not  so  ours.  Theirs  presented  the  thing  sacrificed  dead  ; 
ours  maketh  the  thing  sacrificed  to  be  alive.  For  when  we  have  mortified  our 
members,  then  we  shall  be  able  truly  to  live.  For  the  law  of  this  sacrifice  is  new, 
and  the  fire  of  a  marvellous  nature.  For  it  needeth  no  wood  under  it,  but  liveth  of 
itself,  and  doth  not  bum  up  the  victim,  but  rather  quickeneth  it.  This  was  the 
sacrifice  that  God  sought  of  old.  Wherefore  the  prophet  saith,  "  The  sacrifices  of 
God  are  a  broken  spirit."  And  the  three  children  offered  this  when  they  said,  "At 
this  time  there  is  neither  prince,  nor  prophet,  nor  leader,  nor  burnt-offering,  nor 
place  to  sacrifice  before  Thee,  and  to  find  mercy.  Nevertheless,  in  a  contrite  heart 
and  an  humble  spirit,  let  us  be  accepted."  (Chrysostom.)  A  living  sacrifice  : — 
Here  is — I.  Something  to  be  done.  Note — 1.  The  terms  of  the  text.  (1)  "Present" 
is  elsewhere  rendered  "yield"  (chap.  vi.  13,  16,  19),  a  word  commonly  used  for 
bringing  to  offer  in  sacrifice  (Luke  ii.  22).  (2)  '•  Bodies,"  a  part  of  human  nature, 
is  here  used  to  represent  the  whole.  Our  whole  nature  consists  of  body,  soul, 
and  spirit.  But  as  the  body  is  the  visible  part  of  our  nature,  the  organ  of  practical 
activity,  as  soul  and  spirit  cannot  now  be  devoted  to  God,  except  as  connected  with 
the  body,  nor  themselves  without  the  body,  and  as  the  body  cannot  be  presented 
as  a  sacrifice  separate  from  the  spirit ;  moreover,  as  the  allusion  to  the  ancient 
sacrifices  required  the  recognition  of  the  material  part  of  our  nature,  we  may  con- 
clude that  by  "  your  bodies  "  is  intended  "  yourselves."  (3)  The  animals  required 
by  the  law  were  brought  alive  to  the  altar,  and  in  offering  them  up  they  were  slain. 
So  soon  as  the  offering  was  made  they  were  dead  sacrifices.  Yield  yourselves  a 
sacrifice  in  life,  a  sacrifice  for  life,  a  sacrifice  rich  in  life.  (4)  "Holy,"  not 
nominally  but  really,  cleansed  from  guilt,  purified ;  passively  and  actively,  not 
ceremonially,  but  experimentally;  not  outwardly  only,  but  inwardly.  (5)  "Accept- 
able"; the  sacrifice  real,  the  bringing  of  the  offering  sincere  ;  the  Mediator  recog- 
nised in  the  offering,  therefore  acceptable,  i.e.,  well-pleasing  unto  God.  The 
sacrifices  under  the  law  were  pleasing  to  God  as  representing  certain  ideas  and 
facts,  and  as  expressing  certain  sentiments ;  but  the  sacrifice  before  us  is  in  itself 
an  object  of  Divine  complacency  (Psa.  cxlvii.  11 ;  Isa.  Ixii.  4,  5 ;  Mai.  iii.  16,  17). 
2.  That  which  is  here  required  is  not  "devotions,"  but  devotion.  Present  the 
offerings  of  true  worship,  but  above  all,  present  yourselves.  All  that  we  are  is 
required,  beside  that  which  we  have.  Bring  money,  time,  and  influence  as  offer- 
ings, but  above  this,  offer  yourselves,  your  natural  selves,  your  redeemed  selves, 
the  best  in  yourselves,  and  the  whole  of  yourselves.  (1)  That  you  may  be  what  He 
requires,  His  children,  servants,  witnesses,  and  as  such,  poor  or  rich,  least  or 
greatest,  according  to  His  will.  (2)  That  you  may  do  what  He  requires,  in 
obedience  as  a  son,  and  in  work  as  a  servant,  and  in  testimony  as  a  witness,  &c. 
(3)  That  you  may  suffer  and  submit  to  all  that  He  requires.  9.  Now  there  are 
three  things  necessary  to  this — (1)  Knowledge  of  God.  No  such  sacrifice  as  that 
described  in  my  text  was  ever  offered  to  an  unknown  God.  (2)  Eeconciliation  to 
God.  There  can  be  no  devotion  or  consecration  where  there  is  indifference  or 
alienation.  (3)  Love  to  God.  II.  A  stbonq  motive  power  by  which  to  do  it.  1. 
"  The  mercies  of  God,"  which  are  the  manifestations  of  His  goodness  recorded  in 
the  previous  part  of  this  Epistle  (see  chap.  ii.  4 ;  v.  8,  20,  21 ;  viii.  38,  39).  But 
there  are  mercies  which  Paul  does  not  mention,  and  which  the  Christian  shares 
with  all  men.  The  mercies  of  God  are  countless  in  number,  infinite  in  variety,  and 
inestimable  in  value.  Gratitude  is  a  strong  motive-power,  by  whose  aid  we  may 
present  our  bodies  an  offering  for  life,  holy  and  acceptable.  2.  And  is  there  not 
some  force  in  the  statement  that  this  offering  is  a  reasonable  service  ?  The  victims 
under  the  law  were  irrational.  This  yielding  ourselves  to  God  is  a  reasonable  service 
because — (1)  Worthy  of  our  nature  and  constitution  as  rational  beings.  (2) 
In  harmony  with  the  object  of  man's  creation.  (3)  The  natural  fruit  of  our  re- 
demption to  God.  (4)  A  meet  and  right  acknowledgment  of  our  obligations  to  God. 
(5)  It  commends  itself  to  our  judgment  and  conscience  and  heart.  (6)  While  in- 
volving thorough  enthusiasm,  it  is  far  from  all  fanaticism  and  superstition.  3.  And 
is  there  not  something  due  to  the  earnestness  of  Paul  in  this  matter ?  "I  beseech 
you."  This  man  knew  what  it  was  to  offer  himself  a  sacrifice  to  God,  and  did  what 
he  recommends,  by  powers  and  aids  within  reach  of  all  Christians.  Here  lies  the 
secret  of  his  power  (2  Cor.  xii.  9;  Phil.  iv.  13).  Conclusion  :  1.  Young  brethren, 
render  my  text  into  life.   In  the  school,  home,  place  of  business,  present  yoorselvea 


CHAT,  in.]  ROMANS.  443 

living  sacrifices.  The  religious  habits  you  now  form  are  of  immense  moment  to 
you.  Let  them  be  right  habits  even  from  the  beginning.  2.  Lukewarm  and  back- 
sliding brethren,  my  text  shows  you  what  you  ought  to  be,  and  indirectly  what  you 
are.  A  sacrifice  it  may  be,  but  to  self,  to  vanity,  covetousness,  pleasure,  &c.  3. 
False  brethren,  why  do  yon  creep  into  our  churches  ?  You  are  as  wood,  hay,  and 
stubble  in  our  spiritual  building,  You  are  a  cancerous  growth  on  the  body  of  Christ. 
Why  do  you  not  leave  Christians  alone  ?  If  you  be  an  infidel,  be  honest,  and  do 
not  profess  to  be  a  Christian.  Go  to  your  own  company,  but  know  that  there  is 
forgiveness  for  your  falseness  if  you  repent  and  turn  from  your  evil  ways.  4.  And 
let  the  Pharisees  of  doctrine  and  of  ritual  digest  my  text.  Theory  without  practice, 
doctrine  without  duty,  a  creed  without  spiritual  life,  will  avail  you  nothing.  (S. 
Martin.)  A  living  sacrifice  : — L  The  motive  of  the  sacrifice  :  •' the  mercies  of 
God" — the  most  cogent  motive  that  can  possibly  influence  a  Christian  soul.  IL 
The  method.  It  is  to  be  an  act  of  presentation.  "  Here  am  I ;  send  me." 
Make  whaf-  use  of  me  Thou  canst  and  wilt.  III.  The  subject.  "  Our 
bodies."  IV.  The  object.  "Acceptable  to  God."  {W.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.) 
A   living  sacrifice : — We  have  here — I.  A  highly  nauKATiVE  but  exceedingly 

SIGNIFICANT   REPRESENTATION    OP    PRACTICAL    AND    DATLY  VIRTUE.       It    is    given    Undef 

the  form  of  a  presentation.  1.  The  Romans  could  not  fail  to  be  alive  to  its  mean- 
ing. They  had  always  been  accustomed  to  sacrifice  and  splendid  ritualism.  They 
had  to  turn  away  from  this,  and  to  become  members  of  little  private  societies,  in 
which  there  was  nothing  of  the  kind.  And  I  can  imagine  that  they  would  almost 
feel  the  want  of  it ;  and  in  consequence  of  the  absence  of  it  to  the  heathen  they 
did  not  seem  to  have  any  God  or  religion  at  all.  But  the  Christian  convert  was 
now  taught  that  he  himself  was  a  priest  of  God,  that  everything  he  did  should  be 
presented  on  the  altar  of  a  religious  faith.  2.  By  the  term  "  bodies  "  we  are  to 
understand  the  whole  person.  Though  the  body  is  the  instrument,  yet  the  mind  is 
that  which  we  always  consider  as  acting.  Of  course  you  may  take  the  term  as  it 
stands.  You  are  to  present  your  hands  by  keeping  them  from  violence  and  fraud, 
and  putting  them  to  honest  work.  You  are  to  present  your  eyes  by  turning  them 
away  from  objects  which  may  excite  concupiscence,  or  fill  you  with  the  workinjjs 
of  unholy  passion.  The  senses  and  appetites  must  all  be  controlled  ;  and  the 
understanding  must  learn  to  cultivate  the  knowledge  of  truth.  II.  "  Be  not  con- 
formed TO  the  world,  but  be  ye  tramsfobmed."  1.  Here,  again,  the  primitive 
Christian  would  have  a  stronger  feeling  than  we  can  have.  The  Church  and  the 
world  were  things  very  distinct  then.  On  the  one  side  were  the  idolatry,  godless 
philosophy,  and  vicious  habits  of  heathen  society ;  on  the  other  a  little  flock,  bear- 
ing the  marks  of  that  holiness  which  the  Christian  faith  was  designed  to  produce. 
But  things  are  so  wonderfully  intermixed  now  that  we  do  not  know  where  the 
Church  ends  and  where  the  world  begins.  There  is  a  kind  of  border  land ;  and 
there  they  are,  going  to  and  fro.  Of  course  there  are  a  number  of  things  which 
the  Church  and  the  world  must  do  in  common,  and  in  many  cases  non-conformity 
to  the  world  consists,  not  so  much  in  doing  different  things  as  in  the  different  feel- 
ings that  underlie  what  we  do.  •'  Why,"  says  the  apostle,  "  if  you  are  not  to  come 
in  contact  with  certain  persons,  you  might  just  as  well  be  out  of  the  world."  If  an 
unbeliever  ask  you  to  dine  with  him,  and  you  are  disposed  to  do  so,  go;  only  bear 
in  mind  that  you  are  a  Christian,  and  that  whether  you  eat  or  drink,  or  whatsoever 
you  do,  you  are  to  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God.  Now  there  can  be  no  doubt  at  all 
about  one  thing.  If  anything  presents  itself  as  sinful  there  must  not  be  conformity. 
Well,  then,  if  you  are  really  wishing  to  be  a  Christian  ;  and  if  you  flnd  something 
which  is  injurious  to  you — you  are  not  to  enter  into  the  question  whether  it  is 
injurious  to  your  neighbour ;  if  you  find  it  injurious  to  you  do  not  be  conformed 
to  it.  You  may  be  conscious,  e.g.,  that  a  certain  kind  of  reading  or  music  is  a 
hindrance  to  your  religious  life.  Take  care,  then,  that  in  these  respects  you  "  be 
not  conformed  to  the  world."  So  with  respect  to  anything  that  is  doubtful  with 
regard  to  the  expenditure  of  time  or  money.  Let  me  here  whisper  to  you  young 
people — whenever  you  find  anything  condemned  by  your  intelligent  and  cultivated 
elders,  you  may  depend  upon  it  that  there  is  something  right  lying  at  the  bottom 
of  their  antipathy.  2.  But  besides  this  negative  abstinence  outwardly,  there  is  to 
be  a  positive  opening  and  development  of  the  mind  and  affections  towards  that 
brighter  world  of  Divine  truth  and  goodness,  to  which  it  becomes  us  to  be  con- 
formed. You  must  not  be  contented  with  outwardly  resisting  and  inwardly  long- 
ing. There  is  plenty  of  non-conformity  to  the  world  in  the  inside  of  a  jail.  But  is 
ihere  the  renewal  of  the  mind  ?    Unlike  the  man  coming  out  of  prison,  who  iimn^- 


444  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

diately  returns  from  the  force  of  the  life  that  is  within  him  to  the  things  from 
which  he  has  been  parted  for  a  season,  there  must  be  in  you  such  a  renewal  of  the 
soul  that  you  will  detest  the  things  which  have  been  given  up ;  you  must  feel  that 
you  have  meat  to  eat  which  the  world  knoweth  not  of.  You  will  then  have 
the  satisfaction  of  another  kind  of  Ufe  within  you.     III.  The  eesult  of  this  is 

THAT  TOU   MAY   KNOW  BY  A  POSITIVB,  SDBJECTrVE   EXPEBIENCE  THE  WILL  OF  GOD,  boW 

beautiful,  how  perfect,  how  good  it  is ;  how  it  is  just  the  thing  for  which  man  was 
evidently  made.  1.  There  have  been  men  of  great  genius  who  have  been  very 
immoral.  Well,  now,  let  us  suppose  such  a  man  to  have  studied  Divine  truth  until 
he  apprehends  it  just  as  he  might  apprehend  astronomy.  He  has  knowledge ;  he 
has  a  perception  of  the  beauty  of  the  system,  but  he  has  not  tasted  and  seen. 
There  it  is,  lying  above  the  intellect  just  as  the  stars  lie  above  the  sky ;  he  has  not 
within  him  the  sense  of  an  actual  loving  spirit,  instinct  with  the  spirit  of  truth, 
2.  Take  a  man  of  inferior  faculties — who,  having  some  little  to  begin  with — the 
lessons  of  his  father,  the  prayers  of  his  mother,  by  which  his  young  heart  was  eaily 
taught  to  love  holiness  and  to  hate  sin  ;  having  very  few  ideas,  and  those  not  well 
arranged,  but  still  daily  presenting  himself  as  a  living  sacrifice  unto  God,  and 
going  on  learning  the  truth  by  loving  it — oh,  what  different  feelings  will  such  a 
man  have,  as  the  whole  system  of  trutn  gradually  opens  and  reveals  itself  to  him, 
and  he  gets  more  and  more  an  apprehension  of  it  1  That  is  the  way  in  which  I 
want  you  to  come  to  a  knowledge  of  the  Christian  system.  IV.  This  saceifice  is 
A  very  beasonable  thing.  It  is  a  service  agreeable  to  your  rational  nature.  Take 
the  case  of  a  man  who  does  not  believe  in  God;  suppose  that  man  to  come  in 
contact  with  another  who  is  disgracing  humanity  by  drunkenness  or  licentious- 
ness. Can  you  not  conceive  him  saying,  "  Well,  now,  you  know  you  were  not 
made  for  that "  ?  Or  if  he  did  not  believe  man  to  have  been  made  at  all,  can  you 
not  imagine  him  saying,  "  However,  you  were  made,  considering  what  your  mind 
is,  and  what  society  is,  with  your  own  knowledge  of  what  is  becoming,  it  is  a  most 
irrational  thing  for  you  to  sink  down  into  such  a  low,  gross  existence"?  Ay,  and 
we  say  to  the  man  who  talks  thus,  "  Sir,  if  there's  a  God  that  made  him,  and  yon, 
and  me ;  and  if  the  relations  which  we  sustain  to  Him  as  reasonable  creatures  are 
far  more  important  than  our  relations  to  one  another,  then  is  it  not  required  by 
our  rational  nature  that  we  should  not  only  avoid  the  abominations  which  you 
have  denounced,  but  that,  by  the  culture  of  what  is  good  and  beautiful  and  pure, 
we  should  present  ourselves  to  God  "  as  a  living  sacrifice  ?  "  V.  The  exhoktation 
18  ENFOBCED  "  BY  THE  MEECiES  OF  GoD."  The  word  "  therefore  "  connects  the  exhor- 
tation with  the  preceding  argument  of  the  apostle,  and  without  referring  to  that 
you  cannot  understand  what  are  the  mercies  to  which  he  especially  refers.  That 
argument  bears  principally  on  two  points — the  mediation  of  Christ,  and  the  work 
of  the  Spirit.  These  are  the  two  pillars  on  which  the  mercies  of  God  are  inscribed. 
Yon  are  to  "  present  yourselves  a  living  sacrifice  "  ;  you  are  not  to  be  "  conformed 
to  the  world,"  but  to  be  "transformed  by  the  renewing  of  the  mind."  Hard 
sayings.  But  you  are  not  to  take  them  by  themselves.  There  is  a  provision  to 
meet  your  weakness.  (T.  Binney.)  A  living  sacrifice: — This  verse  makes  a 
transition  from  the  first  to  the  second  half  of  this  letter.  All  before  it  is  what  we 
call  doctrinal,  the  most  of  what  comes  after  it  is  practical.  There  are  many  men 
that  say,  "  Give  as  the  morality  of  the  New  Testament ;  never  mind  about  the 
theology."  But  you  cannot  get  the  morality  without  the  theology,  unless  you  Uke 
to  have  rootless  flowers  and  lamps  without  oil.  On  the  other  hand,  many  forget 
that  the  end  of  doctrine  is  life,  and  that  therefore  the  most  orthodox  orthodoxy, 
divorced  from  practice,  is  like  the  dried  flowers  which  botanists  put  between  sheets 
of  blotting-paper — the  skeletons  of  dead  beauty.  Let  us,  then,  always  remember 
this  Uttle  word  '*  therefore,"  that  binds  together  indissolubly  Christian  truth  and 
Christian  duty.  Note — I.  The  sum  of  Christian  service.  1.  Sacrifice  meana 
giving  up  everything  to  God.  That  is  the  true  sacrifice,  when  I  think  as  in  His 
sight,  and  will,  and  love,  and  act  as  in  obedience  to  Him.  And  this  sacrifice  will 
become  visible  in  the  sacrifice  of  the  body,  when  in  all  common  actions  we  have  a 
supreme  and  distinct  reference  to  His  will,  and  do,  or  refuse  to  do,  because  of  the 
fear  and  for  the  sake  of  the  Lord.  The  body  has  wants  and  appetites ;  you  have  to 
see  to  it  that  these  are  supplied  with  a  distinct  reference  to,  and  remembrance  of. 
Him,  and  so  made  ants  of  religious  worship.  The  excess  which  dulls  the  spirit  and 
makes  it  all  unapt  to  serve  Him,  the  absorbing  care  about  outward  things  which 
checks  all  the  nobihty  of  a  man's  life,  are  the  forms  in  which  the  body  comes  in 
the  waj  of  the  soul,  and  the  regulation  and  suppression  of  these  are  the  simplest 


CHAP,  xn.]  nOMANS.  445 

parts  of  the  offering.  There  is  no  need  in  this  generation  to  preach  against 
asceticism.  Better  John  the  Baptist's  garment  of  camel's  hair  and  his  meat — 
locusts  and  wild  honey,  if,  like  John  the  Baptist,  I  shall  see  the  heavens  opened, 
and  the  Spirit  of  God  descending  on  the  Son  of  Man,  than  this  full-fed  sensualism 
which  is  the  curse  and  the  crime  of  this  generation.  2.  This  offering  makes  a 
man  live  more  nobly  and  more  truly  than  anything  else.  Not  mutilation  but  con- 
secration is  the  true  sacrifice.  We  are  not  called  upon  to  crush  our  desires,  tastes, 
appetites,  or  to  refrain  from  actions ;  only  they  are  to  be  controlled  and  done  in 
obedience  to  God.  (1)  Now  and  then  circumstances  may  come  in  which  it  is 
Christian  duty  to  put  your  hand  down  there  on  the  block  and  take  an  axe  in  the 
other  and  chop  it  off.  But  that  is  second-best ;  and  if  the  man  had  always  conse- 
crated his  faculty  to  God,  he  would  never  have  had  need  to  cut  it  off.  To  harness 
and  tame  it,  to  yoke  it  to  the  cart,  and  make  it  work,  not  to  shoot  the  wild  beast, 
is  the  right  thing  to  do.  (2)  Thus  to  consecrate  one's  self  is  the  way  to  secure  a 
higher  and  a  nobler  life.  Just  as  when  you  take  a  flower  out  of  the  woods  and  put 
it  into  a  greenhouse  and  cultivate  it,  you  will  get  a  broader  leaf  and  a  finer  flower 
than  when  it  was  wild,  so  the  disciplined,  consecrated  man  is  the  man  whose  life 
is  the  richest  every  way.  K  you  want  to  go  all  to  rack  and  ruin  live  according  to 
your  own  fancy  and  taste.  3.  This  sacrifice  is  "your  reasonable  service."  The 
antithesis  is  with  the  material  sacrifices,  and  the  Revised  Version  gives  the  true 
meaning  in  its  marginal  rendering  "spiritual."  It  is  a  service  or  worship  rendered 
by  the  inner  man,  transacted  by  the  mind  or  reason,  and  thus,  as  indicating  the 
part  of  our  nature  which  performs  it,  is  reasonable.  Now  there  is  no  need  to 
depreciate  outward  forms  of  oral  worship.  But  still  we  have  all  need  to  be 
reminded  that  devout  daily  living  is  true  worship.  Where  the  common  food  is 
eaten  with  thankfulness  and  in  the  consciousness  of  His  presence,  it  is  holy  as  the 
Lord's  Supper.  The  same  authority  that  said  of  the  one,  "  This  do  in  remembrance 
of  Me,"  said  by  His  apostle  of  the  other,  "  Whether  ye  eat  or  drink,  do  aU  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  "To  work  is  to  pray,"  if  done  from  a  right  motive. 
The  bells  on  the  horses  may  bear  the  same  inscription  as  blazed  on  the  high 
priest's  mitre,  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord,"  and  the  shop-girl  behind  the  counter  may 
be  as  truly  offering  sacrifice  to  God  as  the  priest  by  the  altar.  The  mere  formal 
worship  is  abomination  without  this.  There  are  people  that  think  they  have  done 
a  meritorious  thing  in  coming  here  to  this  service,  and  whose  only  notion  of 
worship  is  a  weary  sitting  in  this  place  for  an  hour  and  a  half.  Do  you  think  that 
is  of  any  use?  The  sacrifice  of  praise  is  right,  "  but  to  do  good  and  to  communi- 
cate forget  not,  for  with  such  sacrifices  God  is  well  pleased."  IL  The  great 
MOTIVE  OF  Chbistian  SERVICE.  By  "the  mercies  of  God,"  the  apostle  means  the 
great  scheme  of  mercy  set  forth  in  the  previous  chapters.  The  diffused  and  wide- 
shining  mercies,  which  stream  from  the  Father's  heart,  are  all,  as  it  were,  focussed 
as  through  a  burning-glass  into  one  strong  beam,  which  can  kindle  the  greenest 
wood  and  melt  the  thick-ribbed  ice.  1,  Only  on  the  footing  of  Christ's  sacrifice 
can  we  offer  ours.  He  has  offered  the  one  sacrifice  of  His  death  in  order  that  we 
may  offer  the  sacrifice  of  our  Hfe.  He  has  offered  the  dying  sacrifice  which  is  pro* 
pitiation,  in  order  that,  on  the  footing  of  that,  we  may  offer  the  eucharistic  sacri- 
fice of  grateful  surrender  of  ourselves  to  Him.  2.  These  mercies  are  also  the  only 
motive  power  that  will  be  strong  enough  to  lead  to  this  consecration  of  ourselves  to 
Him.  The  fierce  wants,  passions,  and  appetites  that  rage  and  rule  in  men  will  be 
subdued  by  nothing  short  of  the  mighty  motive  drawn  from  the  great  love  of  God 
revealed  in  the  dying  love  of  Jesus.  There  is  one  magnet  strong  enough  to  draw 
reluctant  hearts  and  reluctant  limbs,  and  that  is  Jesus  lifted  up  on  the  Cross. 
Other  restraints  from  propriety,  prudence,  or  even  principle  will  reach  their  break- 
ing point  at  a  much  lower  strain  than  the  silken  bonds  of  Christ's  love.     IH.  The 

GENTLE  ENFORCEMENT  OF  THIS  GREAT  MOTIVE  FOR  CHRISTIAN  SERVICE.  LaW  Com- 
mands, the  gospel  entreats  I  "  Christ's  yoke  is  easy,"  not  because  His  precepts  let 
down  the  ideal  of  morality,  but  because  the  motive  is  love,  and  the  manner  of 
command  gentle  and  beseeching.  Hence  its  power ;  for  hearts,  like  flowers,  which 
could  not  be  burst  open  by  the  crow-bar  of  law,  may  be  wooed  open  by  the  sunshine 
of  love.  Surely  as  the  morning  sunrise  drew  a  note  from  the  stony  lips  of  the 
statue,  which  storm  and  thunder  could  not  awaken.  His  pleading  voice  will  bring 
an  answer  that  could  not  have  been  won  by  any  commandments,  however  rigid,  or 
by  any  threatenings,  however  severe.  {A.  Mnclaren,  D.D.)  A  living  sacrifice : — 
The  words  are  very  familiar,  or  they  certainly  would  strike  ns  powerfully.  None 
of  us  ever  saw  a  sacrifice  ;  but  the  readers  of  this  Epistle  knew  the  sight  well ;  and 


446  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 


whether  they  as  Gentiles  thonght  it  a  mere  ceremony,  or,  M  they  argued  about  it, 
as  the  Scriptures  almost  compelled  an  Israelite  to  argue,  they  must  have  been 
startled  at  Paul's  words.  "  Does  he  mean  us,"  they  may  have  said,  "  to  treat  our 
bodies  as  either  sinful  and  to  be  got  rid  of,  or  as  things  so  sacred,  that  to  offer  them 
in  self-devotion  will  have  power  to  make  peace  for  us  with  God  ?  "  A  little  reflec- 
tion would  show  them  that  neither  of  these  interpretations  could  be  the  right  one. 
St.  Paul  held  the  body  in  high  honour ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  there  was  no 
thought  in  his  heart,  when  he  spoke  of  the  body  as  a  sacrifice,  of  anything  meri- 
torious. We  shall  best  grasp  the  apostle's  meaning  if  we  consider — I.  The  terms 
USED.  St.  Paul  had  never  yet  visited  Eome,  and  could  not  say  as  he  said  to  the 
Thessalonians,  "  Eemember  ye  not  that  when  I  was  with  you  I  told  you  of  these 
things?"  And  therefore  he  has  gone  with  great  fulness  into  the  whole  system 
of  grace  and  redemption,  and  now  he  turns  to  the  practical  inference.  1.  He 
appeals  to  his  readers  *'  by  the  mercies  of  God."  They  for  whom  God  has  done  all 
these  great  things  had,  by  their  very  nature,  no  claim  whatever  to  the  love  of  God ; 
and  therefore  mercy,  "  kindness  to  the  undeserving,"  is  the  right  word  for  God's 
dealings  with  them  ;  and  if  mercy  is  to  be  indeed  a  blessing,  it  must  lead  to  some- 
thing in  the  heart  and  life,  responsive  and  corresponding  to  it.  2.  "  Your  bodies." 
St.  Paul  gave  no  encouragement  to  that  sort  of  religion  which  dreams  and  culti- 
vates beautiful  ideas  and  rapturous  feelings,  and  there  stops.  If  he  had  written 
"  minds  "  he  might  have  given  the  notion  of  an  intellectual  attainment ;  if  "souls" 
he  might  have  opened  the  door  to  a  languid  and  useless  existence,  such  as  hermits 
and  mystics  delight  in ;  but  when  he  says  "  bodies  "  he  strikes  at  the  root  of  all 
Buch  errors.  The  word  he  uses  is  not  "  carcase,"  but  "  living  body " ;  which 
includes  all  the  powers  of  intercourse  and  exertion.  3.  "  Present "  applies  to  the 
worshipper  who  places  his  victim  by  the  altar  and  to  the  priest  who  officially  makes 
the  presentation,  in  either  of  which  senses  the  word  would  be  suitable  here.  In 
the  one  sense  the  Christian  is  the  priest  of  his  own  sacrifice.  Scripture  speaks  of 
us  as  offering  up  "spiritual  sacrifices," as  being  ourselves  "a  royal  priesthood." 
In  the  other  sense  the  Christian  places  his  offering  by  the  altar  that  Christ  may 
offer  it  up  to  God,  and  so  make  it  acceptable.  There  is  no  conflict  between  the 
two ;  for,  if  the  Christian  is  God's  priest,  he  is  so  in  virtue  of  the  one  process  and 
the  one  sacrifice,  and  the  moment  he  would  officiate  independently  he  becomes  a 
priest  of  Baal.  4.  "  Sacrifice"  was  of  two  kinds.  (1)  Lev.  xvi.,  with  its  commen- 
tary in  Heb.  ix.,  x.,  is  the  great  study  of  "the  sin-offering."  There  we  find  how 
absolutely  this  is  restricted  to  the  work  done  on  Calvary.  It  would  be  blasphemous 
to  apply  the  term  to  a  human  being  as  meaning  atonement.  When  we  even  speak 
of  atoning  for  a  sinful  past  we  are  going  perilously  near  to  the  edge  of  this  preci- 
pice. (2)  But  though  the  sin-offering  is  absolutely  Christ's,  it  is  not  quite  thus 
with  "the  burnt-offering,"  the  essence  of  which  is  the  penetrating,  transfiguring 
fire,  the  emblem  of  the  sanctifying  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  "  sacrifice  "  here 
is  the  life  indwelt,  kindled,  inspired,  transformed  by  the  fire  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
II,  The  clause  as  a  whole.  1.  It  prepares  us  for  a  somewhat  painful  life. 
"Sacrifice"  implies  death,  "Look,  then,  upon  yourselves  as  men  who  have 
already  died  with  Christ,  and  who  are  now  being  burnt  upon  God's  altar."  The 
figure  sets  before  us  the  life  of  a  Christian  as  a  life  through  which  a  fire  is  passing, 
that  it  may  come  out  from  it  in  a  new  form,  the  sinful  having  become  pure,  the 
earthly  heavenly,  and  the  whole  man  "  meet  for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in 
light."  A  process  like  this  must  be  painful  if  the  holy  flame  is  really  alight,  if  the 
baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  fire  is  really  at  work  in  us,  consuming  our  base 
passions,  Ac.  2.  The  painful  life  is  also  a  glorious  life.  There  is  something  in 
the  word  to  which  all  but  hearts  of  earth  and  stone  are  responsive.  What  will  not 
ft  friend  sacrifice  for  his  friend  ?  Will  he  not  go  through  fire  and  water  may  he 
but  prove  his  love?  "Present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice."  Wherefore?  and 
for  what  ?  To  show  that  you  feel  what  God  has  done  for  you  in  Jesus.  If  Chris- 
tian ambition  were  just  a  refurbishing  and  regilding  of  this  poor  tarnished  thing 
which  sin  and  the  fall  has  made  us,  I  can  well  imagine  noble  hearts  saying,  "I 
will  none  of  it.  I  despise  your  decencies  and  decorum."  But  men  cannot  speak 
in  this  way  of  the  sacrifice  jf  the  body,  of  the  flame  kindled  at  the  cross-altar,  and 
kindling  the  creature  and  the  sinner  into  the  sufferer  and  into  a  doer  and  into  a 
darer.  Man  would  give  worlds  to  live  that  life  if  he  could.  He  cries  in  his  shame 
and  bitterness,  "  Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,  and  let  my  last  end  be  like 
his."  One  reason  why  there  aje  not  more  Christians  is  because  so  few  have 
entered  into  the  thought  of  the  inward  fire  which  alone  can  make  the  outward 


CHAP,  xn.]  ROMANS.  447 

surface  aught  but  a  delusion  or  a  hypocrisy.  {Dean  Vaughan.)  A  living  $acri- 
jice  : — These  words  breathe  the  fervour  of  a  heart  which  has  made  the  surrender  to 
which  it  would  constrain  others,  and  had  they  been  read  to  us  for  the  first  time 
without  context  we  might  have  pictured  the  apostle  not  dictating  a  letter,  but 
standing  as  he  does  in  the  cartoon  of  Raffaelle  with  uplifted  arms  pleading  with 
men.  We  have  here — I.  A  demand.  1.  The  living  sacrifice  stands  in  contrast 
with  the  animals  which  were  slain  in  order  to  be  presented  to  God,  and  the  holiness 
which  is  to  mark  it  has  reference  to  the  Mosaic  sacrifices  which  had  to  be  without 
spot  or  blemish.  Believers  as  a  royal  priesthood  are  here  exhorted  to  offer  that 
spiritual  sacrifice  prefigured  by  the  burnt-offering,  without  which  the  sacrifice  of 
praise  by  the  lips,  and  of  almsgiving  with  the  substance,  will  be  unacceptable  to 
God.  Remember  that  the  expiatory  sacrifice  has  gone  before,  and  by  virtue  of  it 
only  are  we  priests  unto  God  (Rev.  i.  5,  6).  When  the  Jewish  priests  were  conse- 
crated the  blood  of  the  sacrifice  was  applied  to  the  ear,  the  hand,  and  the  foot,  sig- 
nifying that  it  needs  a  blood-stained  ear  to  listen  to  the  Divine  commandments,  a 
blood-stained  hand  to  minister  before  God,  a  blood-stained  foot  to  tread  His  courts. 
So  being  now  consecrated  by  the  blood  of  the  atoning  sacrifice,  believers  are  to 
offer  the  eucharistic  sacrifice  of  the  text.  2.  The  body  does  not  signify  here  the 
whole  man.  True,  the  altar  on  which  this  victim  is  offered  is  the  heart,  but  the 
reference  to  the  body  is  not  to  be  frittered  away.  The  body  shared  largely  in 
the  fall,  and  is  to  share  largely  in  the  redemption.  It  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  an  instrument  in  Divine  service,  and  is  to  be  transformed  in  the  like- 
ness of  our  Lord's  glorious  body.  So,  then,  we  are  called  upon  to  present  our 
bodies  to  God  in  useful  service,  and  to  take  heed  that  it  is  not  withheld  or  impaired 
by  indolence,  allowance  of  evil  habit,  or  lack  of  self-discipline.  II.  This  demand 
IS  ENFORCED  BY  A  TWOFOLD  PLEA.  1.  It  is  our  reasonable  service,  which  has  been 
understood  to  point  a  contrast  between  the  Christian  sacrifice  and  those  made 
prior  to  the  Divine  command,  or  those  which  are  superstitious,  or  mechanical,  or 
carnal.  It  is  enough,  however,  that  the  service  is  dictated  by  reason  in  response  to 
a  reasonable  demand.  Granted  the  apostle's  premises,  no  one  can  deny  the  rationality 
of  this  his  conclusion.  Hence  sin  is  identified  with  folly,  and  wisdom  constantly 
defined  as  being  the  fear  of  God  and  the  keeping  of  His  commandments.  2.  The 
mercies  of  God.  Note  the  emphatic  "  therefore,"  one  of  many  which  constitute 
the  links  of  an  irresistible  argument  for  consecration  based  upon  the  mercy  of  God 
in  Christ.  It  would  be  enough  to  mention  God's  temporal  mercies,  but  in  Paul's 
view  these  sink  into  insignificance  compared  with  God's  redeeming  mercies,  which 
form  the  substance  of  the  Epistle.  {Canon  Miller.)  A  living  sacrifice  : — As  the 
smith  casts  the  iron  he  wishes  to  mould  into  shape  into  the  fire,  so  the  apostle  has 
been  smelting  the  minds  of  his  readers  in  the  fires  of  sacred  argument,  till  now 
they  are  prepared  to  receive  those  strokes  of  his  hammer  which  are  to  shape  them 
into  practical  Christians.  The  object  of  all  Christian  doctrine  is  to  fuse  the  life  of 
a  man  with  Divine  fire,  and  mould  it  into  a  Divine  form,  so  that  it  shall  not  be 
conformed  to  the  fashion  of  any  passing  age,  but  transfigured  by  the  renewal  of  the 
mind  with  the  life  and  beauty  of  God.  Note — I.  The  consecration  ok  one's  self 
TO  God.  1.  In  our  human  relations  we  know  the  nature  of  such  self-consecration 
and  what  it  involves.  When  two  human  beings  give  themselves  to  one  another 
they  swear  in  the  name  of  love  that  they  will  be  true  to  each  other  as  long  as  life 
shall  last.  If  the  surrender  be  really  entire  and  mutual,  then  marriage  is  really  a 
holy  sacrament,  consecrating  each  to  each  as  under  the  eye  of  God.  It  means  such 
&  oneness  of  life  henceforth  as  shall  not  tolerate  the  thought  of  division  ;  such 
mutual  devotion  that  each  shall  lose  himself  in  the  service  of  the  other — and  the 
anguish  of  the  thought  of  parting  at  death  is  consoled  by  the  confident  hope  of 
reunion  hereafter.  2.  Our  relations  to  God  being  spiritual  cannot  always  be 
realised  with  the  same  intensity  as  our  visible  relations.  But  some  things  help  to 
make  them  stronger  and  nobler.  (1)  Think  of  the  motives  that  constrain  our  con- 
secration. Love  is  the  only  guarantee  for  the  enduring  fellowship  of  souls,  whether 
Divine  or  human.  But  the  love  of  two  human  beings  may  not  endure  for  ever. 
But  if  we  have  come  to  know  God's  love  in  Christ,  a  love  that  does  not  depend  for 
its  existence  or  strength  upon  our  love  to  Him,  or  upon  the  continuance  of  our 
love,  but  has  its  origin  in  infinite  and  eternal  goodness,  we  have  a  motive  for  love 
and  consecration  which  transcends  all  others  that  can  aJGfect  the  heart.  Hence  the 
force  of  the  appeal  "by  the  mercies  of  God,"  Ac.  (2)  We  can  now  understand 
also  the  purpose  of  such  a  consecration.  Why  do  two  human  beings  give  them- 
selves to  one  another  7    What  does  love  mean  bj  the  sorrendex  of  self  ?    Identity, 


448  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xrt. 


BO  that  two  become  one  "  like  perfect  music  joined  to  noble  words."  And  this  is 
what  the  soul  means  when  it  gives  itself  unto  God,  that  we  may  become  one  with 
Him,  that  our  hearts  may  beat  in  sympathy  with  His,  that  our  wills  may  keep  time 
with  the  Divine  will,  that  we  may  help  in  the  accomplishment  of  His  plans.  II. 
The  manner  in  which  this  consecration  vow  is  fulfilled.  "  And  be  not  con- 
formed," &o.  1.  The  offering  of  ourselves,  and  the  carrying  out  of  the  vow,  are 
two  different  things.  The  one  act  is  the  work  of  a  moment,  the  other  is  the  work 
of  a  lifetime.  The  one  is  coming  to  God  under  the  constraint  of  His  love ;  the 
other  is  abiding  in  Him  and  growing  up  into  Christian  manhood.  When  a  young 
man  inflamed  with  the  passion  for  scholarship  is  sent  to  the  university,  he  enters 
his  name  upon  the  college  books,  and  becomes  pledged  to  the  life  of  a  student. 
But  he  is  not  yet  therefore  a  learned  man.  He  must  attend  classes,  scorn  delights, 
and  live  laborious  days.  If  he  can  learn  to  love  hard  work  and  stern  self-discipline 
he  shall  become  at  length  what  his  first  ambition  aimed  at.  When  a  soldier  takes 
the  oath  of  allegiance  it  is  but  the  first  step  of  a  soldier's  life.  He  will  have  to 
pass  through  much  monotonous  drill  before  he  is  fit  for  service  ;  and  if  ever  called 
into  the  field  of  battle  he  will  have  to  endure  fatiguing  marches  and  brave  death  itself. 
And  we  can  be  good  soldiers  of  Jesus  Christ  only  upon  the  same  conditions.  The 
case  sometimes  happens  that  a  profligate  man  is  smitten  with  the  love  of  a  pure 
woman,  and  swears  that  if  she  will  give  him  her  love  he  will  become  a  new  man. 
And  if  she  believes  his  promise  and  accepts  his  love,  and  he  earnestly  sets  himself 
to  redeem  his  vow,  do  you  think  he  is  able  to  become  a  new  man  in  a  day?  Yes, 
in  purpose,  but  not  in  achievement.  The  battle  with  former  habits  cannot  be  com- 
pletely fought  out  at  once,  but  the  victory  is  won  at  last  because  the  battle  has  been 
faithfully  fought  under  the  inspiration  of  a  love  that  has  been  stronger  than  all  his 
other  passions.  And  what  a  pure  earthly  love  is  able  to  accomplish  for  a  man, 
shall  not  the  love  of  God  in  Christ  accomplish  for  us?  2.  We  are  to  become 
transformed  by  the  renewing  of  the  thinking  faculty.  That  is,  instead  of  being 
occupied,  as  we  once  were,  in  thinking  and  planning  about  the  old  life  and  ways, 
we  are  to  busy  our  thoughts  with  the  new  life,  and  not  only  try  to  feel  right,  but  to 
think  right.  And  so  we  shall  cease  to  be  conformed  to  this  world,  and  become 
transformed  by  the  progressive  renewal  of  our  minds  till  we  learn  by  experience 
that  the  will  of  God  is  good,  and  acceptable,  and  perfect.  III.  Such  a  service  to 
God  is  in  the  highest  degree  reasonable.  1.  The  religion  of  Christ  appeals  to 
all  our  highest  faculties.  It  recognises  also  our  understanding  as  well  as  our  affec- 
tions, and  says  that  one  of  the  great  arguments  for  the  surrender  of  the  life  to  God 
is  that  it  is  eminently  a  right  and  reasonable  thing.  With  some  religion  is  all  feel- 
ing, all  sentiment ;  with  others  it  is  a  round  of  dull  proprieties,  or  a  scrupulous  and 
painful  performance  of  prescribed  duties  ;  with  others  it  is  cloistered  communion  ; 
with  others  it  is  all  a  matter  of  reason  and  argument.  Now  the  apostle  intimates 
that  faculties  the  widest  apart  are  to  be  brought  into  the  closest  alliance  in  the 
service  of  God.  Love  and  reason,  the  mercies  of  God,  and  the  judgment  of  man 
seem  to  be  things  far  asunder,  and  yet  here  they  are  united  in  the  apostle's  argu- 
ment. 2.  We  live  in  the  most  enlightened  age  the  world  has  seen  ;  when  all  claims 
are  brought  to  the  bar  of  reason.  Christianity  itself  cannot  escape  this  test.  But 
if  we  are  true  to  the  teaching  of  Christ,  and  insist  tbat  consecration  to  God  means 
the  highest  love  to  God  and  the  purest  love  to  men,  need  we  fear  that  the  most 
enlightened  sages  can  gainsay  that  doctrine  ?  For  is  not  such  love  the  richest 
outcome  of  the  nature  of  man  ?  Is  self-sacrifice  reasonable  or  unreasonable  ? 
Conclusion  :  The  two  things  most  needed  in  the  religion  of  our  day  are  a  greater 
spirit  of  consecration  to  God,  and  a  greater  conviction  of  its  reasonableness.  We 
need  greater  love  and  more  reason  in  our  religion.  A  love  that  shall  cast  out  sordid 
fear  and  low-minded  calculations  of  the  profit  and  loss  of  our  religion  ;  a  love  that 
can  render  greater  service  to  God  and  greater  service  to  the  needs  of  our  fellow-men : 
and  in  conjunction  with  this,  a  more  enlightened  reason  that  shall  teach  us  to  be  afraid 
of  no  foes  to  religion  but  falsehood,  indifference,  or  superstition.  (C.  Short,  M.A.) 
A  living  sacrifice  : — The  expression  may  include — I.  Active  service.  The  victims 
slain  could  do  no  further  service.  But  the  sacrifice  spoken  of  here  is  that  of  a 
living,  voluntary  agent,  presented,  not  by  others,  but  by  himself,  and  presented 
for  life  in  all  his  powers.  U.  Continued  devotedness.  The  victims  at  the  altar 
could  be  offered  but  once,  and  could  never  appear  at  the  altar  again.  But  the 
"  living  sacrifice  "  is  one  which  is  presented  anew  every  day  in  the  unremitting 
homage  of  the  life.  III.  As  the  apostle  is  addressing  himself  to  believers,  we  ought 
to  include  the  idea  of  the  new  life  as  distinguishing  them  from  the  world  and  from 


OKAP.  xn.]  ROMANS.  449 

their  former  selves  when  they  were  in  a  state  of  spiritual  death.   The  saorifioe  most 
not  possess  mere  animal  life,  bat  mast  be  instinct  with  the  new  life  of  holy  sensi* 
bilities  and  spiritual  principles  to  which  the  soal  is  "  bom  again  by  the  incorruptible 
seed  of  God's  Word  "  and  ihe  power  of  the  Spirit.  IV.  Although  it  is  a  living  sacri- 
fice, it  is  a  sacrifice  bbady  fob  death,  should  God  require  it.     The  life  is  to  be  so 
devoted  to  God  as  to  be  at  all  times  and  entirely  at  His  service,  and,  if  need  be, 
cheerfully  surrendered  for  His  glory.    It  includes,  in  a  word,  willingness  to  be,  to 
do,  or  to  suffer  whatever  He  may  see  fit  to  appoint.     (R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)        A 
living  sacrifice ;— Ellerthorpe,  the  hero  of  the  Humber,  who  had  rescued  many  from 
drowning,  was  at  his  duty  on  board  ship,  when  a  cry  was  raised,  "A  child  over- 
board I  "    In  an  instant  he  was  in  the  sea,  and  soon  both  were  again  on  deck. 
Next  day  the  mother  took  the  child  up  to  the  brave  man  and  said,  "  This  is  the 
gentleman  who  saved  you  from  the  sea ;  what  are  you  going  to  give  him  ?  "    For  a 
moment  the  child  was  speechless,  not  knowing  what  to  answer.    But  suddenly  she 
put  out  her  hands  and  said,  '•  If  you  please,  I  have  nothing  else,  but  I  will  give  you 
a  kiss."    The  rough  sailor  had  received  many  valuable  presents,  but  he  declared 
that  the  child's  kiss  was  more  to  him  than  all  beside.     Why  ?    Because  she  had 
given  all  she  had — her  love.    Such  is  what  Paul  here  asks  for  God.     Note — I. 
Paul's  eabnestmess.    "  I  beseech."    He   was  a  man  in  earnest,   and    nothing 
quenched  his  zeal ;  and  this  one  man's  zeal  sufficed  to  carry  the  standard  of  the 
Cross  in  all  directions.    It  is  the  earnest  man  who  wins,  as  is  shown  in  the  cases  of 
Luther  and  Wesley.    Bowland  Hill  once  said,  "  Because  I  am  in  earnest  men  call 
me  an  enthusiast.    When  I  first  came  into  this  part  of  the  country  I  saw  a  gravel 
pit  fall  in  and  bury  three  human  beings.    I  lifted  up  my  voice  for  help  so  loud  that 
I  was  heard  in  the  town  near  a  mile  away.   Help  came  and  rescued  two  of  the 
sufferers.    No  one  called  me  an  enthusiast  then ;  and  when  I  see  eternal  destruction 
fall  upon  poor  sinners  and  call  aloud  on  them  to  escape,  shall  I  be  called  an  enthu< 
Blast  now?  "     There  was  much  force  in  the  suggestion  of  a  Scotchman  when  they 
were  discussing  where  to  put  the  new  stove  in  the  church.     "  You  had  better  put  it 
in  the  pulpit,"  said  he,  "  for  it  is  awful  cold  up  there."    Yes,  put  fire  in  the  pulpit, 
but  the  best  way  of  getting  it  there  is  to  have  plenty  of  it  in  the  pews.    Consecrated 
earnestness  is  needed  in  Church  and  Sunday-school  work  and  by  seeking  sinners. 
n.  Odb  duty  to  God.    We  have  been  so  busy  in  talking  about  saving  souls  that  we 
have  left  no  time  to  think  about  the  body.    Christ  had  but  little  to  say  about  souls, 
but  much  about  bodies.     It  is  not  without  meaning  that  Paul  says,  ••  Present  your 
bodies."    This  sacrifice  must  be — 1.  Personal.    "  You,"  "  ye,"  "  your. "    We  may 
transact  business  by  proxy,  but  rehgion  is  a  personal  matter.    Earnest  efforts  may 
bring  blessings  upon  others,  but  a  man  must  repent  and  believe  for  himself.    A 
teacher  cannot  save  his  class,  nor  a  minister  his  congregation,  nor  a  mother  her 
child.    2.  Voluntary.    Present  yourselves.    There  is  no  compulsion.    Christ  made 
whips  and  drove  out  the  buyers  and  sellers  from  the  temple,  but  He  has  not  made 
scourges  to  drive  them  in.     The  driving  business  has  made  many  hypocrites,  but 
never  a  saint.    Christ  knocks  at  the  door,  but  the  door  has  to  be  opened  from 
within.    S.  Living.     God  wants  no  dead  or  formal  offering,  but  real  living  service. 
I  would  give  Him  the  best  buildings,  singers,  preachers,  but  unless  we  give  Him 
living  service  all  else  is  but  the  painted  flower.    A  road  surveyor,  who  was  just 
finishing  the  levelling  and  paving  of  a  long  stretch  of  street,  asked  me  in  an 
enthusiastic  tone  if  I  did  not  think  it  splendid.    "  You  see,"  he  added,  "  I  am 
trying  to  put  my  Christianity  into  the  streets  I  make."    That  is  just  it.    Drive 
your  engines,  maJ^e  your  coats  and  boots  and  chairs  for  Christ.  UI.  The  arqument 
BY  WHICH  Paul  enforces  all  this — a  threefold  cord  which  cannot  be  broken.     1. 
"  By  the  mercies  of  God."    2.  That  God  wiU  accept  us.    Without  this  encourage- 
ment we  might  expect  to  be  rejected,  for  we  are  rebels.    3.  It  is  our  reasonable 
service.     {C.  Leach,  D.D.)        The  living  sacrifice : — The  ivy,  twining  its  delicate 
stem  round  the  tree,  gradually  increases  in  size  and  strength  until  the  tree  is  over- 
lapped and  destroyed.    Likewise,  if  allowed  to  grow  up  round  the  spirit  of  man,  the 
selfish  nature  will  increase  in  power  until  his  life  is  as  a  stunted  tree  without  any 
branches  on  which  the  fruit  of  love  can  grow.    Christianity  gives  to  the  believer  a 
new  energy,  which  cuts  off  the  ivy  of  selfishness  and  enables  him  to  bring  forth  ever- 
lasting fruit.     Christ  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself,  and  we  are  besought 
to  follow  His  steps  and  to  copy  His  example.     I.  The  mercies  of  God  are — 1.  Ke- 
pentance — not  like  the  repentance  of  the  sailor  in  the  time  of  storm,  who  throws 
his  goods  overboard,  and  in  the  time  of  calm  wishes  he  had  them  back,  but  it  is  a 
repentance  unto  life  which  gets  rid  of  all  sin  and  joyfully  leaves  it  behind.    2.  The 
VOL.  II.  29 


460  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xa. 

remission  of  sins.    As  the  dying  Israelites  of  old  who,  when  they  looked  to  the 
serpent  of  brass,  were  saved,  so  we  have  looked  to  Christ  on  the  Cross,  and  as  we 
looked  we  believed,  and  we  have  received  life.    3.  Adoption  -into  the  family  of  God 
and  the  witness  of  the  Spirit.    When  the  prodigal  is  clasped  in  his  father's  arma 
the  passer  by  may  say,  "  I  do  not  believe  the  lad  knows  that  he  is  forgiven." 
Others  add,  "  I  do  not  believe  that  anybody  can  know  that  his  sins  are  forgiven  till 
he  dies."    But  that  prodigal  says,  "  My  beloved  father  is  mine  and  I  am  his."    IL 
Divine  mercies  prompt  the  Christian  to  become  a  sacrifice  unto  God.     1.  Living. 
In  the  olden  time  the  bullock  had  to  be  dragged  to  the  altar,  but  the  Christian 
comes  willingly.    After  the  bullock  had  been  dragged  to  the  altar  he  was  slain,  but 
the  real  Christian  sacrifices  while  he  lives,  and  does  not  put  oS  till  death,  as  soma 
do  when  they  bequeath  so  much  to  the  cause  of  God  because  they  cannot  hold  it 
any  longer.   2.  Holy.   If  Christianity  can  help  only  our  outer  life  we  can  do  without 
it.    But  it  enters  within  the  body,  cleanses  our  inner  nature.     God  makes  us  to  be 
temples  for  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit.    He  is  the  filter  in  the  muddy  heart 
making  to  spring  from  it  a  fountain  of  holiness.    3.  "  Acceptable  unto  God  "  is  not 
only  praising  God  in  the  church,  but  praising  Him  with  the  melody  of  our  daily 
words  and  actions,  helping  the  helpless,  and  keeping  ourselves  unspotted  from  the 
world.     (W.  Birch.)         The  living  sacrifice: — This   "therefore"   has  in  it  the 
accumulated  momentum  of  the  whole  preceding  portion  of  the  Epistle,  wherein  the 
apostle  has  established  the  doctrine  of  that  justification  which  is  open  to  every  one 
who  believeth,  and  which  is  inseparably  connected  with  sanctification  of  heart.     I. 
The  duty  which  Paul  here  lays  upon  us.     1.  There  were  two  kinds  of  offerings 
under  the  Law — the  one  of  expiation,  the  other  of  oblation ;  and  two  orders  of  priesta 
—the  high  priest  who  went  in  alone  every  year  into  the  holy  of  holies,  and  the 
ordinary  priests  who  ministered  daily  at  the  altar.     Under  the  new  economy  there 
ia  but  one  high  priest  and  one  sacrifice  of  expiation,  but  every  believer  is  consecrated 
for  the  daily  presentation  of  thank-offerings  to  God.     2.  So  Paul  says,  '•  Present 
your  bodies."    That,  of  course,  does  not  mean  that  we  are  to  do  with  ourselves  as 
Abraham  thought  to  do  with  Isaac,  but  neither  does  it  mean  that  we  are  to  give  the 
body  apart  from  the  soul,  which  would  be  formalism  and  hypocrisy.     Therefore 
many  would  take  "  your  bodies  "  as  equivalent  to ' '  yourselves. "   But  that  diminishes 
the  force  of  the  original.   Paul  is  anxious  to  impress  the  truth  that  the  transforma- 
tion of  the  soul  should  be  made  manifest  through  the  body,  either  because  the  body 
is  the  organ  of  practical  activity,  or  as  an  indication  that  sanctification  is  to  extend 
to  that  which  is  most  completely  under  the  bondage  of  sin.    Paul  found  many  dis- 
posed to  undervalue  the  body,  but  he  confronts  this  error  by  exhorting  his  readers 
to  consecrate  it  unto  the  Lord.     The  words  are  equivalent  to  "yourselves  in  the 
body."    As  it  is  through  the  body  that  the  evil  in  the  unrenewed  heart  comes  forth 
into  manifestation,  so  it  is  through  the  body  that  the  gracious  principles  and  affec- 
tions of  believers  reveal  themselves.     Note  the  singular  rite  of  consecration  (Exod. 
zxix.  20),  the  significance  of  which  clearly  was  that  the  priest's  ears,  hands,  and 
feet  were  sacred  to  Jehovah.     Similarly  each  member  of  the  body  is  to  be  held  by 
the  believer  as  specially  consecrated  to  God.   II.  The  qualities  that  this  sacrifice 
SHOULD  POSSESS.   1.  Life  in  contrast  with  the  dead  victim  which  could  do  no  farther 
good  in  the  world ;  but  the  Uving  body,  inhabited  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  to  be  con- 
stantly employed.    The  Jewish  victims  could  be  offered  only  once,  but  the  Christian 
sacrifice  continues  while  the  life  lasts.    Here  is  a  field  for  the  display  of  heroism. 
It  is  easier  to  die  for  Christ  than  it  is  to  Uve  for  Him.     2.  Holiness.     The  word 
literally  means  set  apart,  but  it  is  also  that  which  is  used  for  the  Hebrew  term 
aignifying  "  without  blemish  and  without  spot."    The  idea  is  that  it  should  be  free 
from  those  things  which  would  cause  it  to  be  rejected.   3.  Acceptableness  to  God.   Not 
only  such  as  God  can  accept,  but  offered  on  such  a  ground  as  shall  be  well-pleasing 
in  His  eyes.     Peter  supplements  Paul  when  he  says,  "Acceptable  to  God  by  Jesus 
Christ."    4.  Rationahty,  i.e.,  a  service  which  rests  on  rational  grounds,  or  one  in 
which  the  reason  is  engaged.     Our  sacrifice  is  mental  and  spiritual,  and  so  distin- 
guished from  those  which  were  merely  ceremonial  and  external.    It  requires  that 
the  thoughts  of  our  minds,  the  affections  of  our  hearts,  the  decisions  of  our  wills, 
and  the  admonitions  of  our  consciences  should  all  be  Christianised.    III.  The 
motive  by  WHICH  THE  OFFERiNa  IS  ENFORCED.     The  term  mercy  aa  generally  used 
denotes  kindness  shown,  irrespective  of  character,  but  in  the  New  Testament  it 
designates  favour  done  to  the  undeserving.     That  is  its  meaning  here,  for  the 
apostle  is  referring  not  to  the  ordinary  gifts  of  God's  providence,  but  to  justification, 
adoption,  sanctification,  and  glory.    Tracing  all  these  to  the  free  mercy  of  God,  ha 


OHA».  rn.]  ROMANS.  461 

ehows  ns  the  obligations  ander  which  we  are  thereby  laid  to  dedicate  ourselves  to 
God.    We  see,  thus,  how  false  the  assertion  is  that  the  preaching  of  justification 
by  faith  undermines  morality.   It  does  not  discourage  good  works ;  but,  instead  of  en- 
couraging the  sinner  to  purchase  his  salvation  by  his  deeds,  it  makes  good  works  the 
offering  of  the  grateful  heart  for  the  salvation  which  it  has  believingly  received.  Thus 
the  slave  becomes  the  child,  and  duty  is  transfigured  into  choice.  (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.) 
Living  sacrifices  : — God  always  must  be  served,  and  that  by  all.    Angels  refused  to 
serve  Him  in  heaven  and  were  cast  down  to  hell.   Man  refused  to  serve  Him  and  was 
driven  out  of  Paradise.    There  are  four  courses  open  to  us.     We  may  refuse  by 
attempting  to  oppose  and  overcome  God,  or  to  escape  Him,  or  to  endure  His  wrath ; 
or,  we  may  submit  and  serve  Him.    Which  of  these  shall  we  take  ?     We  cannot 
succeed  in  the  first,  the  second,  or  the  third ;  there  is  nothing  therefore  left  but  the 
fourth.      I.   What  youb  reasonable  service  is.      1.    The  sacrifice  to  be  offered 
mu?t  be — (1)  Holy.   But  how  can  we  dare  to  lay  any  such  sacrifices  upon  His  altar  ? 
And  if  we  dared,  how  could  He  accept  ?    Turn  aside  and  see  how  the  priests  used  to 
act.    Having  killed  the  animal,  they  cut  it  open,  and  took  out  all  that  was  unclean  ; 
and  then,  havinrr  washed  it,  they  consumed  it  on  the  altar  with  fire  before  the  Lord. 
So  our  Great  High  Priest  would  wash  us  externally  from  our  guilt  in  His  own 
blood,  and  then,  laying  us  open,  would  remove  all  that  is  corrupt  within  us  by  the 
washing  of  regeneration  and  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  thus  we  may  be 
laid  as  holy  sacrifices  upon  the  altar,  and  consumed  before  the  Lord.   (2)  Complete. 
Entire.     "Your  bodies  "means  yourselves.    When  the  lamb  was  brought  to  the 
altar,  the  body  was  brought,  and  all  that  it  contained.  Your  bodies  are  hke  precious 
caskets  containing  the  more  precious  jewels  of  your  souls  and  spirits.     Keep  back 
nothing.    Ye  are  not  your  own,  therefore  "glorify  God  in  your  bodies,"  &o.  If  you 
want  examples  read  Heb.  xi.,  or  take  the  case  of  Paul ;  or,  nobler  far,  look  at  Jesus, 
"  who  gave  Himself  for  us."     2.  The  manner  of  offering  it.     (1)  Freely  "  present." 
Do  not  wait  to  be  obliged,  but  come  of  your  own  accord.     The  principle  is  love.     If 
you  love  God,  you  will  present  yourselves  to  God.     Suppose  you  have  a  poor  friend 
who  asks  for  a  small  loan.    If  you  love  your  money  better  than  your  friend,  you  will 
keep  your  money.    If  you  love  your  money  as  much  as  your  friend,  you  will,  most 
likely,  waver,  and  at  last  give  it  grudgingly.  But  if  you  love  your  friend  better  than 
your  money,  you  will  give  the  money  freely.    3.  Daily.     When  a  lamb  was  brought 
to  be  offered,  it  was  first  cleansed,  then  bound,  and  then  burned.     Now  that  you 
may  be  living  sacrifices,  it  is  necessary  that  you  should  be  daily  cleansed,  bound, 
and  burned.     II.  Paul  "  beseeches  tod  by  the  mercies  of  God  "  to  perform  it. 
1.  It  is  an  appeal  from  the  altar  of  God,  from  one  who  was  himself,  through  the 
riches  of  the  grace  of  God,  a  living  sacrifice.    2.  Look  back  through  the  Epistle  for 
the  mercies  of  which  he  speaks.    Mark  how  he  points  out — (1)  Our  sin  and  ruin. 
(2)  The  mystery  of  our  salvation  through  the  riches  of  the  grace  of  God.     3.  If  you 
have  made  the  resolve  to  present  yourselves  to  God,  be  encouraged  to  do  so,  for  the 
text  declares  that  this  sacrifice  is  "  acceptable  to  God."  Yon  see  the  altar,  the  cords 
for  binding  the  sacrifice,  the  fire  for  burning  it,  the  sacrifice  laid  on  the  wood, 
bound  with  cords,  and  burned.     Now  look  to  Him  who  sits  upon  the  mercy-seat,  in 
the  most  holy  place,  accepting  it  1    And  that  you  may  understand  how  acceptable  it 
is,  remember  that  it  is  "bought  with  a  price" — a  "member  of  Christ" — and  a 
"  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost."    (H.  Grattan  Guinness.)     A  reasonable,  holy,  and  living 
sacrifice : — 1.  When  Christianity  dethroned  the  previous  religions  of  the  world,  it 
immediately  did  that  which  proved  its  sovereign  right  to  the  position  which  it  claimed. 
It  took  the  names,  institutions,  and  ideas  which  it  found,  and  gave  them  a  new  and 
better  meaning ;  or  even  if  it  destroyed  them,  it  immediately  planted  something  corre- 
sponding in  their  place.    Take,  e.g.,  its  treatment  of  sacrifice,  so  universal  in  the  old 
religions.    In  its  ancient  sense  Christianity  rejected  it  altogether ;  but  in  a  higher 
sense  Christianity  is,  above  all  others,  a  religion  of  sacrifice.    It  is  a  religion 
founded  on  the  greatest  of  all  sacrifices,  and  one  whose  whole  continuance  in  the 
world  depends  on  continual  sacrifice — the  sacrifice  of  the  heart  and  mind  in  thanks- 
giving (chap.  XV.  16 ;  Heb.  xiii.  15),  the  sacrifice  of  good  deeds  (Heb.  xiii.  16  ;  Psa. 
1.  23),  and  broken  hearts  and  contrite  spirits  (Psa.  li.  17),  the  sacrifice  of  the  whole 
man  in  the  dedication  of  himself  to  God  (Psa.  1.  23  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  5 ;  Eom.  xii.  1 ; 
Phil.  ii.  17).     2.  There  have  been  times  when  this  sacrificial  act  must  have  been 
true  to  the  very  letter.     In  the  ages  of  persecution.  Christians  must  have  felt  that 
they  were  indeed  presenting  themselves  victims  in  the  cause  of  God  and  truth. 
Soldiers,  too,  on  the  eve  of  some  great  battle,  must,  if  they  reasoned  at  all,  have  felt 
that  they  were  sacrificing  themselves  in  the  literal  sense  of  the  apostle's  words.  But 


452  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xn.' 

in  the  less  exciting  days  of  oar  ordinary  lives  we  can  enter  into  every  word  of  the 
apostle's  appeal.  We  many  of  us  feel  its  whole  meaning,  when  at  the  Lord's  table 
we  "  present  to  God  ourselves,  our  souls  and  bodies,  to  be  a  reasonable,  holy,  and 
lively  sacrifice  to  Him."  We  feel  it  with  an  especial  force  in  the  beginning  of  the 
uew  year,  when  new  hopes  and  new  resolutions  rise  within  us,  and  when  we  deter- 
mine to  enter  on  a  new  course  of  life.  We  feel  it  still  more  when  we  are  entering 
on  a  new  crisis,  career,  or  position,  which  to  be  worthily  fulfilled  requires  the  sacri- 
fice of  all  our  energies  to  this  one  purpose.  3.  Let  us  note  the  characteristics  of 
this  sacrifice.  It  is — I.  Reasonable.  It  is  a  dedication,  not  of  mere  impulse,  fancy, 
affection,  but  of  our  intellect ;  a  sacrifice  in  which  our  minds  go  along  with  our 
hearts.  How  is  this  to  be  done  ?  The  service,  which  the  God  of  reason  and  of 
truth  requires  of  us,  first  and  foremost — 1.  The  sacrifice  of  truth.  Not  to  authority, 
freedom,  popularity,  fear,  but  to  truth.  This  is,  no  doubt,  a  hard  sacrifice.  Custom, 
phrases  bound  up  with  some  of  our  best  affections,  respect  of  persons  or  acquiescence 
in  common  usage,  these  are  what  truth  compels  us  to  surrender.  Dear,  no  doubt, 
is  tradition,  the  long  familiar  recollection,  venerable  antiquity  on  the  one  hand  or 
bold  originality  on  the  other ;  but  dearer  than  any  of  these  things  is  truth.  2.  The 
preference  of  "  the  Word  of  God,"  as  it  appears  in  the  Bible,  is  above  all  human 
opinions.  This,  too,  is  a  sacrifice  often  hard  to  make.  To  search  the  Scriptures 
thoroughly,  to  make  out  their  true  sense,  and  not  force  our  opinions  on  them,  is  a 
task  which  may  involve  many  a  sacrifice  of  time  and  thought  and  ease.  The  Bible 
doubtless  contains  many  * '  things  hard  to  be  understood,  which  the  unlearned  and 
unstable  may  wrest  to  their  own  destruction."  But  take  it  with  all  its  difficulties 
and  all  the  imperfections  of  the  human  agencies  by  which  it  has  come  down  to  us, 
and  it  is  still  true  that  no  more  reasonable  service  can  be  offered  up  by  man  to  God 
than  the  study  of  the  Scriptures.  "  Thy  Word  is  tried  to  the  uttermost,"  tried  by 
the  investigations  of  science,  by  the  undue  claims  made  upon  it,  by  the  misunder- 
standing of  its  enemies,  by  the  exaggeration  of  its  friends ;  and  yet,  in  spite  of  all, 
'*  Thy  servant  loveth  it,"  because  he  knows  there  is  nothing  else  which  will  so  well 
repay  all  the  trouble  which  its  study  involves.  II.  Holt.  To  what  a  world  beyond 
ourselves  does  this  word  carry  us !  how  near  to  the  Great  White  Throne  1  how  far 
away  from  this  selfish,  sinful  world  I  How  easy  to  feel  its  meaning  1  how  difficult  to 
apply  it  1  A  life,  a  worship,  consecrated  from  the  low,  narrow,  impure  influences 
which  dry  up  our  better  thoughts ;  a  life  set  on  higher  aims,  a  life  which  has 
within  it  something  at  least  which  recalls  the  world  to  the  sense  of  the  saiutly,  the 
heroic,  the  heavenly,  the  Diviue  !  Where  shall  this  holiness  be  sought?  1.  The 
Bible  is  the  fountain  and  bulwark  of  truth;  it  is  no  less  the  fountain  and  the 
bulwark  of  holiness.  There  is  a  holiness  in  the  Bible  which  speaks  for  itself.  The 
spirit  which  breathes  through  it  is  indeed  the  spirit  of  the  saints.  To  live  in  that 
exalted  atmosphere  which  nursed  the  faith  of  Abraham,  and  the  unselfishness  of 
Moses,  and  the  courage  of  Joshua,  and  the  devotion  of  David,  and  the  hope  of 
Isaiah,  and  the  energy  of  Paul,  and  the  love  of  John,  is  better  than  any  rule  or  form 
which  scholastic  ingenuity  or  ascetic  piety  has  ever  devised.  Take  even  a  single 
Psalm.  Bead  over  Psa.  xv.,  li.,  or  ci. ;  or  even  a  single  verse  from  1  Cor.  xiii.,  or 
the  Sermon  on  the  Mount ;  act  upon  it  throughout  a  single  week,  make  it  the  rule 
of  a  single  family ;  what  a  holy  sacrifice,  salted  with  the  salt  of  God's  special  grace, 
would  then  be  offered  up  1  2.  And  if  we  ascend  from  the  Bible  to  Him  of  whom  the 
Bible  speaks,  what  a  lifting  up  of  our  hearts  above  the  toil,  and  dust,  and  turmoil, 
and  controversies,  and  doubts  of  the  world,  if  we  could  declare  that  we  embraced 
with  our  whole  souls  the  true  rehgion  of  Christ  1  Ask  spiritual  counsel  from  all 
quarters,  but  ask  it  especially  from  Him  who  must  be  above  every  other  religious 
teacher.  Ask  not  of  Him  questions  of  times  or  seasons,  or  this  world's  knowledge 
and  power,  which  He  refuses  to  answer  ;  but  ask  of  Him  the  questions  how  we  are 
to  please  God,  to  serve  our  brethren,  to  deal  with  sin  and  error,  and  assuredly  we 
shall  receive  an  answer,  not  of  this  world,  nor  of  this  age,  nor  of  the  will  of  man, 
nor  of  any  sect  or  party,  but  the  answer  of  the  eternal  mind  of  God  Himself,  the 
same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.  IH.  "  LrviNO."  There  have  been  those  who 
have  offered  to  God  a  reasonable  sacrifice,  but  one  cold,  hard,  philosophic,  without 
warmth,  sympathy,  or  action  ;  a  holy  sacrifice,  but  shut  up  within  books,  or  walls, 
the  dry  bones  of  religion.  Our  sacrifices  muat  not  be  like  the  dead  carcases  of  the 
ancient  victims,  thrown  away  to  perish  or  to  be  burned ;  they  must  be  living, 
walking,  speaking,  acting  in  the  face  of  day.  We  know  what  we  mean  when  we  say 
that  a  child  or  a  man  is  "full  of  life."  That  is  what  our  sacrifice  of  ourselvea 
should  be — happy  and  making  others  happy,  contented  and  making  others  cou* 


CHIP,  xn.]  ROMANS.  458 

tented,  active  and  making  others  active,  doing  good  and  making  others  do  good,  by 
our  vivid  vitality — filling  every  comer  of  our  own  souls  and  bodies,  and  every  corner 
of  the  circle  in  which  we  move,  with  the  fresh  life-blood  of  a  genial  Christian  heart. 
(Dean  Stanley.)  The  Christian'!  taerifice  :—l.  The  pdrpobt  of  thb  apostle's 
EXHOBTATioN.  Here  is — 1.  Something  to  be  presented  unto  God.  "Your  bodies."  Not 
that  Paul  was  unmindful  how  important  it  was  that  they  should  present  their  souls. 
He  had  already  acknowledged  that  they  had  "  obeyed  from  the  heart  that  form  of 
doctrine  which  had  been  delivered  "  unto  them  ;  but  he  probably  thought  there  was 
some  danger  lest  they  should  not  to  the  requisite  extent  "serve  of  righteousness." 
2.  The  purpose  for  which  this  presentation  must  be  made.  It  is  not  a  gift — some- 
thing which  we  have  a  right  to  present,  or  to  withhold  ;  nor  a  loan,  to  be  returned, 
nor  a  service  or  benefit  to  be  rewarded,  but  a  sacrifice;  i.e. — (1)  An  acknowledg- 
ment of  what  is  due  to  God.  (2)  An  entire  resignation  of  it  to  the  Divine  use  and 
disposal.  3.  The  manner  in  which  this  sacrifice  must  be  presented.  It  is  to  be — 
(1)  A  Uving  sacrifice,  i.e. — (a)  According  to  the  original  a  sacrifice  alive.  "  Present 
your  bodies  a  sacrifice  "  would  startle  those  who  associated  the  term  with  death  ; 
and  hence  the  necessity  of  the  assurance  that  it  was  life,  not  death,  that  God 
required.  We  are  neither  to  devote  ourselves  to  destruction,  as  many  of  the  heathen 
do,  to  satisfy  the  claims  of  their  idols,  nor  to  embitter  and  waste  our  lives  by 
austerities,  as  many  of  the  papists  do.  (6)  Or  the  apostle  may  have  meant  that  the 
"  sacrifice  "  was  not  to  be  a  soUtary  act,  nor  even  a  frequent  repetition  of  such  acts, 
but  the  prevailing  habit  of  our  Uves.  There  are  indeed  particular  seasons  when  the 
sacrifice  should  be  formally  presented ;  but  "  whether  we  eat  or  drink,  or  whatso- 
ever we  do,"  we  must  "  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God."  (2)  A  "  holy  "  sacrifice— i.e., 
solemnly  set  apart  for  the  Divine  service.  As  "  hving  "  implies  perpetuity,  '•  holy  " 
intimates  entireness.  Under  the  law  that  the  sacrifice  might  in  all  cases  be  entire, 
the  poor  were  permitted  to  present  "  a  pair  of  turtle-doves,  or  two  young  pigeons." 
So  we  are  not  to  appropriate  our  bodies  to  one  master  and  our  souls  to  another,  nor 
to  reserve  any  faculty  of  body  or  of  soul.  (3)  "Acceptable  unto  God."  Under  the 
law  the  mode  of  presentation  had  to  be  attended  to,  or  the  sacrifice  was  spurned  as 
an  abomination.  The  place  in  which  the  sacrifice  was  to  be  offered  was  defined, 
and  it  had  to  be  presented  through  the  priest.  And  so  we  must  take  care  that  our 
sacrifice  be  presented  at  the  proper  altar,  viz.,  Christ,  by  whom  alone  our  gifts  are 
sanctified.  And  by  Him,  as  our  High  Priest,  the  sacrifice  is  to  be  offered  to  God. 
II.  The  motive  by  which  the  apostle's  exhortation  is  urged.  He  might  have 
urged  terrific  motives,  viz.,  that,  should  they  fail  to  present  themselves,  God  would 
hereafter  seize  upon  them  for  a  prey.  Or  he  might  have  reminded  them  how  just 
and  right  it  was,  or  how  advantageous.  Instead  of  this  he  appeals  only  to  their 
gratitude.  Why  ?  1.  Considering  their  spiritual  state,  it  was  the  most  powerful 
motive  which  he  could  possibly  employ.  Had  he  been  writing  to  persons  who  were 
strangers  to  the  grace  of  God,  or  had  received  that  grace  in  vain,  it  might  have 
availed  but  little,  and  the  other  motives  might  have  availed  much.  But  "the 
mercies  of  God  "  strike  the  chord  of  a  Christian's  tenderest  and  best  affections,  and 
touch  the  mainspring  of  aU  his  conduct.  The  apostle  knew  this  from  his  own 
experience.  2.  This  is  the  motive  best  suited  to  the  character  and  intent  of  the 
sacrifice  required.  Had  the  apostle  been  exhorting  us  to  present  our  bodies  as  a 
sacrifice  for  guilt,  the  motives  would  have  been  drawn  from  the  Divine  justice.  As 
the  sacrifice  is  a  thank-offering,  the  apostle  presses  on  us  those  considerations 
which  may  tend  especially  to  animate  our  gratitude.  3.  They  only  who  have 
obtained  mercy  are  capable  of  the  sacrifice.  They  only  can  present — (1)  "  A  living 
sacrifice."  The  man  who  has  not  yet  obtained  mercy,  in  any  sense  in  which  he 
may  be  said  to  live  at  all,  lives  to  himself,  and  not  to  God.  Or  supposing  that,  by 
a  formal  "  service,"  he  presents  a  living  body,  yet  while  the  soul  continues  "  dead 
in  trespasses  and  sins,"  it  is  but  a  dead  sacrifice  he  offers.  (2)  A  holy  sacrifice. 
The  sin  which  reigns  in  that  man's  heart  who  is  a  stranger  to  grace  makes  hia 
sacrifice  abomination.  (3)  Acceptable  to  God.  In  order  to  this  the  sacrifice  must 
be  preceded  by  the  pardon  of  sin.  For  how  can  God  accept  an  offering  from  His 
enemies  with  whom  the  purity  of  His  own  nature  constrains  Him  to  be  angry  every 
day  7  (Jonathan  Crmcther.)  Christian  self-sacrifice  : — I.  Wherein  it  consists. 
1.  Not  in  particular  acts  of  self-denial,  or  in  undertaking  certain  painful  duties.  2. 
But  in  full  consecration  to  God,  and  in  the  maintenance  of  a  living,  holy,  and 
acceptable  walk  before  God.  II.  WniX  rr  beqoires.  1.  The  renunciation  of  the 
world,  2.  The  renewing  of  the  mind.  3.  The  practical  proof  of  the  perfect  wiU  of 
God.    (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)        Self -sacrifice : — Pousa,  the  Chinese  potter,  being  ordered 


454  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ;in. 

to  produce  some  great  work  for  the  Emperor,  tried  long  to  make  it,  but  in  vain.  At 
length,  driven  to  despair,  he  threw  himself  into  the  furnace,  and  the  effect  of  his 
self-immolation  was  such  that  it  came  out  the  most  beautiful  piece  of  porcelain  ever 
known.  So  in  Christian  labour  it  is  self-sacrifice  that  gives  the  last  touch  and 
excellence  and  glory  to  our  work.  (W.  Basendale.)  Personal  sacrifice : — I.  Thb 
LEADING  MOTIVE  OF  THE  GOSPEL.  1.  Not  Self -interest ;  not  the  reasonableness,  beauty, 
and  dignity  of  virtue.  2.  But  a  grateful  sense  of  God's  many  and  great  mercies. 
n.  The  sommabt  of  Christian  duty.  Self-dedication  to  God,  or  the  consecra- 
tion of  ourselves  to  do  His  holy  will.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Acceptable  to  God. — 
On  the  attributes  of  acceptable  worship: — I.  Notice    some    of    the    attbibutes 

OF  ACCEPTABLE  WORSHIP  IMPLIED  AND  EXPRESSED  IN  THE  TEXT.  11.  CoNSIDEH 
THB   ARGUMENTS   USED    BY   THE    APOSTLE   TO   ENFORCE   THIS   DUTY.       1.   Advert   tO    ths 

reasonableness  of  the  service.  It  has  been  thought  by  some  that  the  apostlo, 
in  this  phraseology,  has  an  allusion  to  the  irrational  animals  which  were  offered  in 
the  service  of  God  under  the  Levitical  law ;  but  that  His  service  is  much  more 
simple,  and  the  reasons  of  duty  much  more  obvious  to  the  understanding  of  the 
worshipper  under  the  present  than  they  were  under  the  former  economy.  This  is 
certainly  true  in  point  of  fact.  But  recollect  that,  however  various  the  sacrifices, 
and  however  complex  the  service  of  God  during  the  preceding  dispensations,  yet  Hi  a 
worship,  in  itself  considered,  ever  has  been,  and  ever  will  be,  "  a  reasonable  service." 
We  lie  under  peculiar  obligations,  however,  to  bless  the  Lord,  that  the  bondage  and 
comparative  darkness  of  the  preceding  economy  is  past,  and  the  true  hght  now 
shineth.  The  natural  imbecility  of  reason  in  a  fallen  creature  has  been  much 
overlooked ;  and  her  appropriate  province  in  revealed  religion  much  misunderstood 
by  many  of  the  disputers  of  this  age.  Christians  also  have  much  erred  on  the  same 
subject.  Instead  of  her  having  been  used  as  an  humble,  submissive  handmaid,  to 
sit  at  the  Saviour's  feet,  and  implicitly  receive  the  authoritative  dictates  of  heaven 
from  His  lips,  she  has  frequently  been  tricked  out  in  the  fantastic  drapery  of  infalh- 
bility,  and  that  also,  sometimes,  in  the  very  temple  of  God,  above  all  that  is  called 
God,  or  worshipped.  Now  recollect  it  is  one  leading  design  of  the  revelation  of 
mercy  to  humble  her  haughty  looks,  and  to  level  aU  her  lofty  pretensions  in  tho 
dust,  and  to  draw  her  deluded  votary  to  the  feet  of  the  Saviour,  as  an  eternal  debtor 
to  free  mercy,  for  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  and  complete  redemption 
(1  Cor  1.  4,  5,  30,  31).  Glad  should  we  be  if  sinners  were  but  prompted  to  reason 
justly  upon  their  immortal  interests  and  on  the  unqualified  claims  which  the  great 
salvation  has  upon  the  human  heart.  But  it  is  not  enough  that  our  reasoning 
powers  first  of  all  yield  unreservedly  to  God's  appointed  plan  of  redemption  for 
pardon  and  peace,  everlasting  consolation  and  good  hope  through  grace ;  they  are 
brought  into  the  school  of  Christ  to  be  tutored  for  eternity,  and  to  acquire  the  ele- 
ments of  implicit  submission  to  the  whole  council  of  God.  This  is  not  so  much  the 
duty  of  a  day  as  a  labour  for  life.  But,  reason  thus  tamed,  and  thus  taught — thus 
guided,  and  thus  governed — by  the  principles  of  pure  and  undefiled  religion  is  the 
decided  enemy  to  aU  error — the  sworn  foe  to  all  corruption — a  powerful  advocate  of 
the  honours  of  truth  and  righteousness — and  a  firm  friend  to  the  doctrine  of  the 
Cross,  and  all  the  social  ordinances  and  commandments  of  Christ.  Allow  me 
further  to  observe  that  a  weU-principled  mind  will  not  dare  to  reason  against  any 
part  of  the  revealed  will  of  God.  A  Christian,  living  under  the  vivid  impressions  of 
the  fear  of  God,  will  consider  that  every  part  of  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  demands 
and  deserves  personal  obedience,  for  its  own  and  its  Author's  sake;  and  he  will 
give  to  each  of  its  parts  that  degree  of  attention  which  its  relative  importance  in 
the  economy  of  redemption  properly  claims.  2.  We  shall  now  briefly  notice  our 
last,  though  not  least  powerful  argument,  used  to  enforce  the  duty  in  the  text :  "  I 
beseech  you,  therefore,  brethren,  by  the  mercies  of  God."  There  is  no  law  in  the 
universe  more  powerful  than  that  of  love.  What  heart  can  possibly  withstand  the 
tender  mercy  of  the  Most  High  1  It  is  firm  as  the  mountains — free  as  the  air — 
boundless  as  the  ocean — durable  as  the  pillars  of  heaven — and  efficacious  in  its 
operations,  as  the  sun  shining  in  the  greatness  of  his  strength.  II.  Applicatory 
REMARKS.  1.  The  absolute  necessity  of  a  renewed  mind  in  order  to  any  person 
serving  God  with  acceptance.  2.  The  importance  of  Christians  being  deeply 
embued  with  the  spirit  of  devotion  in  order  to  their  personal  comfort  and  pubho 
usefulness.  3.  A  Christian  Church  ought  to  give  a  fair  representation  of  the  spirit 
of  devotion — the  institutions  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ — the  principles  of  benevolence 
— and  the  standard  oi  morals  in  the  place  where  they  live.  {N.  M  icneil.)  An 
acceptable  present  (ChUdren'a    sermon) : — I.    Wiio    the    present    is    fob.     W« 


CHAP,  xn.]  ROMANS.  455 

read  of  all  kinds  of  presents  for  all  sorts  of  persons.     Jacob  brought  one  to 
Esau    (Gen.   xxxii.    13),   and  sent   one  to  Joseph   (Gen.   xliii.  11) ;   Abigail   to 
David  (1  Sam.  xxv.  18) ;   Naaman  to  Elisha  (2  Kings  v.   17) ;  Queen  of  Sheba 
to  Solomon  (1  Kings  x.  10).     Then  there  are  birthday  and  Christmas  presents, 
and  the  more  imposing  testimonials  given  to  men  and  women  for  special  work. 
But  the  present  we  speak  of  is  for  God.     Why  should  we  give  presents  to  every  one 
but  Him  ?    The  wise  men  brought  Him  presents  ;  why  should  not  we  ?    U.  VVht 
SHOULD  WE  GIVE  IT.     1.  We  givo  presents  to  those  whom  we  love — to  parents,  <fec., 
and  if  we  loved  God  we  should  bring  something  to  show  our  love.     Mary  brought  an 
alabaster  box  of  ointment,  worth  about  £9,  to  show  hers.     2.  We  give  to  those  who 
deserve  well  of  us — especially  if  they  have  done  or  sufifered  much  on  our  behalf. 
Masters  give  pensions  to  old  and  faithful  servants,  and  the  Queen  medals  to  her 
brave  soldiers.     If  some  one  were  to  save  you  from  drowning  or  fire  you  would  want 
to  give  something  to  show  your  gratitude.    How  much  has  God  done  for  us  I     3 . 
We  give  presents  to  those  who  we  think  will  be  pleased  to  receive  them.     We  know 
it  gives  them  pleasure  partly  because  of  the  value  of  the  present,  but  chiefly  because 
of  the  love  that  prompts  it.     So  with  God  (Isa.  xliii.  24).    HI.  What  should  we 
GIVE.     1.  Something  worth  giving.     What  costs  little  is  usually  worth  little.     The 
gift  is  valuable  according  to  its  vaJue  to  the  giver  as  Jesus  taught  in  the  parable  of 
Qie  widow's  mite.     God  complained  that  His  people  gave  Him  the  blind  and  lame. 
He  was  not  pleased  with  it  because  it  cost  them  nothing  (see  also  2  Cor.  xxiv.  24). 
What  we  bring  must  be  worth  something  to  us  or  it  will  be  worth  nothing  to  Him. 
2.  Something  God  will  care  to  receive.     We  avoid  what  our  friends  already  have, 
or  what  would  be  unacceptable,  and  find  out  what  they  would  like.     Money,  gold, 
jewellery,  land,  &c.,  are  of  no  value  to  God.     The  only  thing  we  can  give  is  our- 
selves— our  bodies,  including  our  souls  ;  and  God  will  be  pleased  with  nothing  else. 
But  how  ?    By  using  our  hands  to  work  for  Him,  our  tongues  to  speak  for  Him,  &c, 
A  missionary  tells  of  an  Indian  who  offered  his  blanket,  gun,  wigwam— but  got  no 
blessing  till  he  offered  himself.    IV.  Lessons.   1.  We  are  to  give,  not  lend.    Seneca 
says,  "  There  is  no  grace  in  a  benefit  that  sticks  to  our  fingers."    2.  We  should 
give  our  bodies  while  young  and  worth  giving.     (Homiletic  Magazine.)        Your 
reasonable  service. — Our  reasonable  service : — I.  The  SACRiricB.     We  bring  not 
slain  beasts,  but  living  souls  and  bodies.     II.  The  sanctuaby.     fis  not  of  this 
world,  but  the  Church  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.    HI.  The  priests.    Are  not  Levites, 
but  Christian  believers,  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  their  minds.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
Our  reasonable  service : — Yes ;  there  is  nothing  so  reasonable — nothing  that  gives, 
and  will  ever  give,  reason  its  full  powers,  but  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ.    Our 
intellects  are  destined  to  travel  much  further  into  the  moral  than  into  the  natural 
perfections  of  Jehovah ;  whence  we  see  that  those  who  spurn  the  religion  of  Jesus 
Christ  insult  their  intellects  as  well  as  their  hearts  ;  robbing  themselves  at  the  same 
time  of  the  sublimest  pleasures  God  Himself  has  to  confer  upon  any  of  His  crea- 
tures.  We  are  destined,  moreover,  to  be  more  intimately  acquainted  with  the  moral 
perfections  of  God  than  with  anything  else.    We  shall  know  more  of  God  a  great 
deal  than  we  shall  know  of  each  other.   Here  then  is  a  sublime  feast  for  the  human 
intellect  as  well  as  for  the  human  heart.    Worship,  then,  the  Lord  in  the  beauty 
of  holiness.    What  is  so  reasonable  ?    Is  there  anything  more  reasonable  than  that 
a  child  should  obey  the  father  on  whom  he  is  dependent  for  everything  ?    Indeed, 
communion  with  God  is  absolutely  necessary,  to  enable  us  to  extract  all  the  sweets 
of  learning  or  science.    We  must  learn  the  happy  art  of  leaving  everything  more 
and  more  with  Jehovah,  and  then  we  shall  be  led  by  Himself  into  Himself  in  every- 
thing, and  participate  throughout  the  revolving  ages  of  eternity  in  His  purity  and 
bliss.    Contrasting  what  I  am  now  telling  you  with  what  we  see  in  Scripture,  we 
shall  find  a  strong  reason  for  calling  sin  foUy.    There  is  nothing  so  opposed  to 
right  reason  as  sin.     God's  service  is  a  reasonable  service ;  the  slave  of  sin  and 
Satan  is  the  most  unreasonable  of  all  beings.    I.  The  obedience  of  faith  as  a  duty. 
It  is  due  to  God  from  every  being  who  hears  the  gospel  without  one  single  excep- 
tion.   All  beings  must  be,  and  for  ever  will  be,  indebted  to  God  for  three  reasons : — 
His  own  perfections — the  relationship  subsisting  between  Him  and  Bis  creatures — 
and  the  many  obligations  conferred  upon  them.    II.  The  obedience  of  faith  as 
A  privilege.    If  asked  which  is  the  most  glorious,  the  obedience  of  vision  above, 
or  the  obedience  of  faith  below,  I  should  be  obliged  to  say  I  cannot  tell.    I  can 
do  many  things  here  on  earth  in  the  service  of  God  and  my  fellow-creatures,  which 
I  could  not  possibly  do  if  body  and  soul  were  separated  from  each  other.    There  ia 
a  Bomething  which  involvea  in  it  the  glory  of  God  in  a  peculiar  degree  in  th« 


456  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  xb. 

triamph  of  faith  here  below.  But  there  is  another  thing  to  be  considered.  The 
principle  of  obedience  is,  indeed,  the  gift  and  creation  of  God — it  is  likewise  the 
purchase  of  One  who  is  God.  It  not  only  involves  the  power  of  Jehovah,  but  His 
worth.  It  is  in  these,  when  connected  together,  the  natural  and  moral  perfections  of 
Jehovah  shine  in  all  their  glory,  in  calling  into  existence,  and  preserving  in  existence, 
true  religion  in  the  human  heart  on  this  side  eternity.  The  believer  is  "  kept  by  the 
power  of  God  through  faith  unto  salvation  "  (1  Pet.  i.  5).  And  we  must  necessarily 
connect  our  obedience  here  below  with  the  obedience  of  the  Son  Himself  in  glory  at 
the  present  moment.  He  has  triumphed ;  and  the  body  He  wears  now  will,  in  its 
perfect  similitude,  be  worn  for  ever  and  ever  by  all  His  family.  My  brother,  revere 
thyself !  consider  whose  thou  art  1 — who  bought  thee  I — who  redeemed  thee  1 — thy 
high  parentage  I — thy  glorious  destiny  I  Consider,  too,  whose  representative  thoa 
art  intended  to  be,  so  long  as  thou  art  a  stranger  and  sojourner  here  on  earth  !  III. 
The  obedience  of  faith  in  its  adaptation  to  the  state  op  the  Chubch  uili- 
TANT.  The  dispensation  under  which  we  are  living  richly  blends  justice  with 
mercy  It  is  but  just  to  God  to  require  what  is  due  to  Himself.  In  His  mercy, 
however.  He  accepts  the  weakest  offering,  proceeding  from  a  contrite  heart ;  while, 
at  the  same  time,  the  blessing  of  perfection  is  reserved  for  His  family,  and  He  will 
assuredly  make  them  what  He  Himself  would  have  them  to  be  for  ever  and  ever. 
IV.  It  is  in  the  obedience  of  faith  alone  we  can  be  conscious  of  an  intebest 
IN  Christ.  Let  me  once  be  conscious  that  I  love  God  and  delight  in  Him,  I  have 
no  more  to  doubt  then.  Let  the  principle  of  obedience  be  sublimated,  as  it  may, 
nay,  must  be,  even  here,  and  I  shall  immediately  echo  the  language  of  Paul,  "  I 
know  whom  I  have  believed."  Lessons :  1.  The  obedience  of  faith  was  destined  to 
preserve  man  from  all  extremes — from  his  legality — from  his  licentiousness.  It  m 
in  this  obedience  we  are  preserved ;  and  obedience  is  salvation  on  this  side  eternity. 
2.  Are  there  any  here  strangers  to  Christ  ?  You  tell  me  you  cannot  come  to  Him. 
Invite  Him,  then,  to  come  to  you.  But  you  have  many  and  mighty  enemies.  He 
is  determined  to  overcome  every  enemy.  3.  Election  is  fuU  of  every  possible 
encouragement.  To  whom?  To  every  one  who  hears  the  gospel.  {W.  Uowels.) 
Beligion  a  reasonable  service  : — If  we  examine  our  own  nature,  everything  within, 
everything  around  us  indicates  that  religion  is  a  reasonable  service,  and  that  man 
was  intended  to  present  it.  First,  because  he  is  a  weak,  dependent  creature. 
Survey  him  in  infancy,  helpless,  needing  parental  fondness  1  Thus  the  first  feelings 
ot  nature  indicate  his  want  of  protection,  and  lead  him  to  seek  it  from  those  whom 
he  conceives  more  powerful  than  himself.  The  same  sentiment  is  evident  through 
the  whole  of  his  life.  Conscious  of  his  inability  to  guard  against  the  numberless 
dangers  that  surround  him,  conscious  of  his  insufficiency  to  procure  the  means  of 
happiness,  his  desire  of  protection  and  assistance  is  one  of  the  strongest  ties  that 
binds  him  to  political  society ;  and  for  the  sake  of  this  he  is  wilUng  to  sacrifice  a 
part  of  his  property,  and  in  many  cases  a  considerable  portion  of  his  natural  rights. 
Yet  after  all  he  is  liable  to  innumerable  evils  and  dangers,  from  which  no  care  of 
his  own,  and  no  protection  of  his  fellow-creatures  can  guard  him.  Even  in  the 
midst  of  the  gayest  scenes  of  pleasure  the  heart  feels  a  void,  and  a  very  slight  cir- 
cumstance is  sufficient  to  render  the  cup  of  worldly  bliss  tasteless.  But  will  the  fun 
of  prosperity  always  shine  unclouded  and  serene  ?  In  short,  in  whatever  view  you 
consider  man,  he  is  a  dependent  being  ;  he  feels  this  to  be  the  case,  and  naturally 
seeks  for  assistance  and  support.  The  misfortune  is,  that  he  applies  to  the  wrong 
object :  instead  of  trusting  to  the  Kock  of  Ages,  he  leans  on  a  feeble  reed  that  will 
break  under  him,  and  wound  the  hand  that  reclined  upon  it,  More  especially  will 
this  appear  when  we  consider  that  the  God  on  whom  we  depend  is  a  Being  inwLom 
every  perfection  centres  ;  whose  benevolence  inclines  Him  to  communicate  happi- 
ness, and  who  Las  given  us  a  rule  of  faith  and  conduct  which,  if  we  observe,  He 
has  solemnly  promised  that  He  wiU  make  all  things  to  work  together  for  our  ulti- 
mate and  greatest  good.  Is  not  religion  then  the  reasonable  service  of  a  dependent 
creature  hke  man  to  the  God  on  whom  he  absolutely  depends  ?  Religion  is  like- 
wise our.reasonable  service,  as  it  is  the  exercise  of  the  best  affections  of  the  heart, 
and  of  those  which  are  most  influential  on  the  moral  conduct.  In  the  habitual 
exercise  of  that  piety  and  devotion  which  religion  inspires,  we  contemplate  the  ever- 
living  source  of  all  perfection  and  happiness  ;  an  object  which  fills  the  mind  with 
pleasing  astonishment,  enlarges  our  views,  elevates  our  sentiments  and  excites  us 
to  an  imitation  of  that  which  we  cannot  but  admire.  That  reUgion  is  a  reasonable 
service  which  man  was  intended  to  present  will  further  appear  if  we  consider  that  the 
hopes  which  it  inspires  are  consonant  to  his  nature,  and  necessary  to  his,  happiness i 


CHAP,  in.)  ItOMANS.  467 

Of  all  the  creatures  that  inhabit  the  world,  man  alone  ia  the  child  of  hope.  But 
alas  I  every  expectation  which  has  this  world  for  its  object  must  inevitably  perish, 
and  man  were  the  most  wretched  of  creatures  if  all  his  hopes  were  confined  to  the 
present  life.  As  hope  is  thus  essentially  necessary  to  human  happiness,  how  excel- 
lently adapted  to  our  nature  is  the  religion  of  Jesus,  which  tends  to  improve,  exalt, 
and  direct  this  turn  of  the  affections  to  objects  more  durable,  sublime,  and  satis- 
factory, than  any  this  world  can  afford.  The  glorious  and  Divine  hope  of  life  and 
happiness  eternal,  which  is  brought  to  life  in  the  gospel,  is  the  only  true  source  of 
felicity  to  man.  Every  grateful  idea  which  cheers  the  mind,  together  with  every 
pleasing  sensation  that  warms  and  dilates  the  heart,  is  the  legitimate  offspring  of 
this  enlivening  principle.  The  mind  of  the  sincerely  pious  Christian,  inspired  by 
the  promises,  invigorated  by  the  principles,  and  supported  by  the  prospects  of  the 
gospel,  rises  superior  to  every  affliction.  Thus  is  religion  happily  suited  to  the 
nature  of  man,  as  a  dependent  creature,  as  a  moral  agent,  and  as  the  child  of  hope. 
To  enjoy  the  consolations  it  affords,  to  be  inspired  with  the  amiable  dispositions  it 
promotes,  to  be  animated  with  the  encouraging  hopes  it  suggests,  we  must  not  be 
satisfied  with  the  mere  profession,  but  must  diligently  cultivate  its  duties,  and 
endeavour  to  imbibe  its  principles.  (B.  C.  Sowden.)  Our  reasonable  service  : — 
1.  To  sacrifice  ourselves.  2.  To  renounce  the  world.  3.  To  regard  our- 
selves as  members  of  the  body  of  Christ.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Reasonahle  service  : — 
I.  Its  nature.  1.  The  word  rendered  "reasonable"  means  what  belongs  to 
the  reason,  as  distinct  from  the  belongings  of  the  body,  or  external  law.  Hence 
reasonable  service  means  the  service  of  mind.  2.  The  word  "  service  "  means 
worship ;  and  reasonable  service  will  therefore  mean  the  worship  of  mind.  3.  Con- 
sequently "  reasonable  service  "  stands  in  contrast  to  "  body."  What  you  present 
is  the  body,  but  it  is  the  worship  of  your  mind.  (1)  As  much  as  to  say  on  the  one 
hand,  that  no  act  done  by  the  body  is  worship,  is  acceptable  to  God  unless  accom- 
panied by  an  act  of  thought.  Every  thoughtful  mind  rises  above  being  satisfied 
with  external  rites.  Suppose  the  expression  of  our  love  to  our  dearest  friends  were 
a  simple  ceremony  not  representing  any  inward  feeling,  it  would  be  worthless.  If 
man  is  dissatisfied  with  empty  rites  how  much  more  God !  (2)  On  the  other  hand, 
the  words  imply  that  no  feeling  towards  God  is  adequate  worship.  There  must  be 
the  presentation  of  the  body  to  perfect  the  worship  of  the  mind.  There  must  be 
something  more  than  thinking  of  God,  than  admiring  the  greatness  of  God's  works, 
than  even  acknowledging  that  God  is  kind  ;  and  what  that  is  we  have  in  this  verse. 
4.  The  essence  of  worship  is  self-dedication;  the  perfec'ion  of  worship  is  entire 
self-sacrifice,  and  we  cannot  sacrifice  except  in  the  body.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
Himself  is  the  best  example  of  this  great  act  of  worship.  He  loved  us  from  eternity. 
There  was  no  sacrifice  in  His  love ;  because  there  was  no  sacrifice,  there  was  no 
merit;  because  there  was  no  merit  there  was  no  salvation.  Now  what  must  He  do 
in  order  that  His  love  may  take  the  form  of  self-sacrifice  ?  He  must  become  man, 
and  be  able  in  the  body  to  do  bodily  acts,  and  these  bodily  acts  of  suffering  and 
dying  will  enable  Him  to  sacrifice  Himself.  To  die  is  not  a  great  thing  externally. 
Little  children  do  it.  Creatures  who  have  no  souls  do  it.  Yes ;  but  in  that  small 
act  of  dying  on  the  Cross  the  infinite  Son  of  God  was  able  to  do  the  very  same 
thing  as  the  little  child  in  that  cottage.  He  was  able  in  that  simple  act  to  do  tha 
greatest  spiritual  self-sacrifice  that  was  ever  done  from  all  eternity.  He  created 
the  worlds  '  but  something  greater  than  creation  is  here.  He  died,  and  in  dying 
showed  how  the  infinitely  rich,  great,  powerful,  became  the  infinitely  poor,  small, 
weak,  and  how  He  who  is  the  Fountain  of  Life  sacrificed  His  own  life  for  others. 
Now  that  is  the  highest  act  of  worship.  II.  How  to  render  it.  This  verse  begins 
the  second  part  of  the  Epistle.  The  doctrine  of  the  previous  chapters  is  justifica- 
tion by  faith ;  what  is  the  connection  between  that  and  sacrifice  of  self  ?  Justifica- 
tion means — 1.  That  a  man  is  profoundly  convinced  that  he  is  a  sinner.  He  ia 
filled  with  shame  in  the  presence  of  God.  That  shame  is  the  beginning  of  self, 
sacrifice.  There  are  other  things,  plenty  of  them,  to  make  us  feel  small,  but  they 
do  not  create  self-sacrifice.  (1)  I  am  small  in  space ;  how  small  compared  with 
the  stars  I  Yet  I  do  not  see  that  I  ought  to  consecrate  my  whole  being  to  the  stars, 
for  I  can  weigh  them  in  my  scales.  I  can  count  them  on  my  fingers ;  they  cannot 
count  us  or  weigh  us.  We  are  greater  than  they.  (2)  Rise  to  the  higher  world. 
How  small  is  man  compared  with  the  great  truths  of  God's  intellect  1  Yet  there  is 
no  worship  of  trath.  Naked  truth,  mere  abstract  ideas,  will  never  create  love  and 
self-sacrifice.  No  man  ever  did  it,  not  even  Socrat^rs  at  his  best.  (3)  Rise  once 
more  to  the  moral  law,  greater  than  ideas,  commanding  me  to  submit  myself  to  its 


458  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

omnipotence,  telling  me  that  there  is  an  eternal  diJEference  between  being  good  and 
being  bad ;  that  there  is  a  greater  difference  between  goodness  and  evil  than  there 
is  between  the  greatest  and  tha  least  creatare  in  God's  oniverse.  And  now  in  the 
presence  of  this  awful  power  what  is  the  result  ?  Oh,  I  am  ashamed  of  myself 
before  God's  law.  I  wish  the  mountains  would  crush  me  out  of  my  very  being,  and 
that  is  the  beginning  of  self-sacrifice.  2.  Justification  by  faith  means  that  you  and 
I  realise  deeply  that  our  only  salvation  is  in  trusting  God.  Trust  not  works. 
Trust  not  your  own  struggles  for  eminence.  Simply  trust  in  the  unchanging  good- 
ness of  God.  Paul  realised  that  great  truth.  That  is  the  secret  of  this  man's 
apostleship.  It  is  the  explanation  of  his  spiritual  life.  He  felt  convinced  when 
he  was  conquering  himself  and  his  pride  and  the  world,  he  was  able  thus  to  conquer 
through  simple  trust.  It  is  in  that  that  I  see  the  possibility  and  the  progress  of 
self-sacrifice  and  self-consecration.  And  then,  oh  1  how  easy  it  is  to  say,  "  Tby 
will  be  done  "  I  That  is  worship.  Not  singing  hymns  with  a  loud  voice  and  a 
hardened  heart ;  not  uttering  words  of  prayer  with  wandering  thoughts ;  not  gesti- 
culations and  appearances  before  men,  but  a  profound,  calm,  deep  readiness  to  say, 
"  Thy  win  be  done."  (Principal  Edwards.)  Sanctified  reoion  ied^ches  \x% — 1.  How 
to  serve  God.  2.  How  to  use  the  world.  8.  How  to  estimate  ourselves.  {J.Lyth, 
D.D.) 

Yet.  2.  And  be  not  conformed  to  this  wotlA.— Conformation  and  transforma- 
tion:—  1.  "World"  has  various  meanings.  (1)  Time.  (2)  An  age  —  the 
Messianic,  e.g.,  as  contrasted  with  the  Jewish,  or  the  past  as  opposed  to  the 
present  or  coming  age.  (3)  A  state,  as  the  present  in  distinction  from  the 
future  in  antagonism  with  the  good.  (4)  '•  Worldliness,"  a  spirit  or  principle 
of  evil  pervading  the  world.  It  is  this  to  which  we  must  not  be  conformed. 
2.  It  is  well  to  define  the  term  in  order  to  avoid  two  extremes.  (1)  That  which 
regards  the  world  as  a  mere  abstraction,  something  incidental  to  those  early 
Christian  ages,  but  of  which  nobody  is  in  danger  now.  ^2)  That  exaggeration 
which  confounds  it  with  almost  every  transaction  of  our  hves.  3.  We  must  be 
vigilant  against  this  spirit  precisely  where  it  is  the  most  subtle  and  concealed,  e.g., 
(1)  We  may  say  that  delight  in  the  visible  world  is  legitimate.  "  Surely  this  is  not 
the  world  against  which  the  apostle  warns  us."  No ;  but  suppose  that  nature 
becomes  to  us  all  in  all,  and  cheats  us  into  the  belief  that  there  is  nothing  higher 
than  that  which  serves  our  senses.  (2)  We  say  indisputably  that  we  ought  to  love 
our  fellow-men ;  but  what  if  with  this  there  blends  an  influence  that  moves  us  to 
defer  to  their  customs,  and  live  merely  upon  the  level  of  their  ideals  !  (3)  Even 
our  religion  may  be  worldly  in  its  spirit.  The  objects  of  our  faith  in  another  state 
of  existence  may  be  sensuous,  and  the  grounds  of  our  obedience  to  God  mercenary. 
4.  "  The  world,"  then,  is  a  spirit,  that  is  everywhere  around  us  and  within,  and 
the  injunction  is  most  needed  precisely  where  this  spirit  is  most  likely  to  be  con- 
founded with  something  that  is  good  and  true.  Proceeding  upon  this  assumption, 
let  us  examine  the  forms  and  achievements  of  our  modern  civilisation.  I.  Much 
OF  ouB  MODEBN  civiLiaATioN  IS  A  FBOCESs  OF  coNFOBMATioN.  Man  is  not  the  master 
of  nature.  He  learns  to  control  its  forces  by  submitting  to  its  laws.  His  triumphs 
of  art  and  mechanism  are  simply  a  conformity  to  nature,  not  a  mastery  over  it. 
He  mitigates  pain  and  conquers  disease  by  conforming  to  the  laws  of  health.  Ha 
has  no  wand  of  miracle  to  supersede  law.  Civilisation  is  simply  the  adjustment  of 
man  to  the  conditions  in  which  he  is  placed.  Now,  precisely  here  we  may  detect 
an  evil  tendency.  There  is  danger  lest  this  habit  of  conformity  fasten  as  down  to 
a  mere  worldly  level,  and  saturate  all  our  desires  with  worldly  estimates.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  geeat  PKCDUAErrY  of  the  Cheistxan  method  is  tbansformation — 
not  simply  obedience  to  external  conditions,  but  a  renewing  of  the  mind.  It  is  a 
great  achievement  for  man  to  control  new  forces  without ;  it  is  a  greater  achieve- 
ment when  in  the  inmost  recesses  of  his  being  there  unfolds  a  law  which  forbids  all 
sin,  even  under  the  mask  of  the  most  splendid  gain ;  when  there  is  awakened  a 
vitality  of  conscience  which  inspires  him  to  make  only  a  beneficent  application  of 
mighty  instruments ;  when  there  settles  in  his  soul  a  sublime  patience  by  which  if 
he  cannot  conquer  pain  he  can  bear  it ;  and  when  in  the  midst  of  all  physical 
terrors  he  enjoys  a  spiritual  vision  which  pierces  through  calamity  and  looks  beyond 
death.    H.  Consideb  some  points  whebe  the  contbasts  between  the  Cbbistian 

USTBOD  AND  IHX  METHODS  OF  THIS  WOBLD  ABE  MOBE  ESPECIALLY  DISPLAYED.   1.  Obsorva 

how  largely  men  are  influenced  by  excitement.  There  is  a  vast  difference  between 
Um  nol^  steamship  that  holds  its  way,  trampling  the  waves  and  challenging;  th« 


OHAP.  xn.]  ROMANS.  459 

gale,  because  it  has  an  inward  force,  and  the  poor  vessel  whose  iron  heart  stands 
BtQl,  and  that  wallows  the  sport  and  victim  of  the  relentless  sea.  But  there  may 
be  a  difference  as  great  between  the  man  who  determines  his  action  by  reason  and 
conscience  and  the  man  who  is  perpetually  driven  by  the  excitements  of  time  and 
place.  How  many  people  depend  upon  excitements  as  the  aliment  of  their  very 
being  I  They  are  always  whirling  in  the  commotion  of  something  new.  And  thus 
people  lose  true  independence  of  thought  and  hfe.  Opinions  and  habits  go  with 
the  tide.  These  men  and  women  live  as  others  live,  think  as  others  think,  do  as 
others  do.  Nay,  even  religion  may  become  too  closely  identified  with  mere  excite- 
ment. The  method  of  Christianity  is  not  excitement,  bat  incitement.  That  man 
is  best  qualiiied  for  the  perils,  yet  not  disquaUfied  for  the  blessings  of  the  world 
around  him  who  is  moved,  not  by  pressure  from  without,  but  by  principle  from 
within,  who  in  the  midst  of  these  changing  tendencies  holds  a  purpose,  and  whose 
personality  does  not  dissolve  in  the  social  atmosphere  around  him,  but  who  preserves 
a  rocky  identity  of  faith  and  conviction,  a  moral  loyalty  to  his  own  ideal.  2.  The 
power  of  our  modern  civilisation  is  the  power  of  that  which  is  visible  and  tangible. 
Present  good,  immediate  success,  are  its  conspicuous  results.  What  vast  sovereignty, 
what  subtle  temptation,  in  this  possession  of  the  present,  in  that  visible  dollar  which 
I  make  by  my  compliance  compared  with  the  inward  blessing  which  follows  my 
sacrifice ;  in  the  concrete  fact  which  I  can  grasp  in  my  hand  compared  with  the 
abstraction  that  only  flits  in  transient  vision  before  my  inward  eye  1  Cancel  space, 
outstrip  time,  bridge  oceans  with  steam,  twitch  nations  together  with  electric 
arteries.  Now  no  instructed  Christian  undervalues  concrete  facts  and  interests. 
The  man  who  starts  from  great  principles  is  not  one  who  is  most  apt  to  overlook 
the  real  interests  of  the  world.  But  he  also  regards  a  higher  good.  He  believes 
that  for  the  real  purposes  of  this  hfe  we  need  something  besides  steam  and  tele- 
graph, and  currency  and  ballot-boxes.  We  need  that  which  delivers  man  from 
sensual  illusion  and  the  lust  of  immediate  attainment  by  fixing  his  eyes  upon  the 
glory  of  spiritual  rectitude,  the  victory  of  postponement,  and  the  gain  of  sacrifice. 
3.  Civilisation  produces  its  most  marked  effect  without.  The  best  thing  accom- 
plished by  it  is  adjustment  to  the  world.  Its  tests  and  fruits  are  better  outward 
conditions,  a  better  social  state,  better  houses,  lands,  and  means  of  communication. 
Nevertheless,  man's  real  life  is  not  in  outward  things.  It  cannot  be  changed 
merely  by  external  agents.  In  its  wants  and  capacities  it  is  the  same  as  it  was  six 
thousand  years  ago.  Strip  the  man  of  the  nineteenth  century  of  these  externals, 
and  bow  much  is  he  like  the  man  of  ages  since  1  With  the  telescope  we  see  farther, 
but  do  we  really  see  more  than  Abraham  at  the  door  of  his  tent,  or  Job  gazing  upon 
the  Pleiades  ?  If  we  do,  whatever  of  larger  vision  or  substantial  good  has  come  to 
us  has  come  within — in  more  comprehensive  truth,  in  more  consecrated  love,  in 
more  perfect  assurance  of  final  good.  And  wherever  these  results  are  wrought 
within  us  we  can  dispense  with  much  that  is  merely  outward  and  palpable.  The 
time  comes  when  the  world  to  us  will  be  as  nothing.  But  while  it  crumbles  we 
shall  not  fail.  We  shall  perish  with  no  perishing  thing,  being  "  not  conformed  to 
this  world,  but  transformed  by  the  renewing  of  the  mind."  {E.  H.  Chapin,  D.D.) 
Conformed  and  transformed : — I.  The  man  who  is  in  conformity  with  this  world 
is  not  the  man  who  understands  it  best,  or  who  admires  its  beauties  most ;  nor  can 
he  adapt  himself  best  to  all  its  circumstances.  He  is  too  much  a  slave  of  the 
things  he  sees  to  look  into  the  meaning  of  them ;  too  much  shut  up  in  the  habits 
of  the  society  into  which  he  is  thrown,  to  have  any  power  of  entering  into  what 
lies  beyond.  The  word  "  conformed "  implies  that  he  takes  his  form  from  the 
things  about  him,  that  they  are  the  mould  into  which  his  mind  is  cast.  Now  this 
St.  Paul  will  not  for  an  instant  admit  to  be  the  form  which  any  man  is  created  to 
bear.  Man  is  created  in  the  image  of  God  ;  and  the  form  of  his  mind  is  to  be 
derived  from  Him  and  not  from  the  things  which  are  put  in  subjection  under  Him. 
The  heathen  was  resisting  the  conscience  which  told  him  that  he  was  God's  off- 
spring, and  the  very  things  he  saw  which  testified  to  the  invisible  power  of  God  in 
worshipping  and  serving  the  creature  more  than  the  Creator.  But  we  who  have  been 
redeemed  out  of  this  worship  are  striving  far  more  directly  and  consciously  against 
this  spirit ;  we  are  choosing  a  false  way  when  we  admit  the  world  to  govern  and 
fashion  our  minds  according  to  its  pleasure,  when  we  submit  to  receive  its  image 
and  superscription.  That  image  and  superscription  will  vary  in  each  new  age,  in 
each  new  locality  ;  it  is  the  very  nature  of  the  world  to  be  continually  changing. 
That  is  the  reason  why  it  is  so  ignominious  a  thing  for  a  man  to  be  conformed  to 
it ;  he  must  become  merely  a  creature  of  to-day ;  be  must  be  fiuctuating,  oaprioioua, 


460  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

insincere — a  leaf  carried  about  by  every  gale,  floating  down  every  cnrrent.  How  i8 
it  possible  that  such  a  one  can  know  anything  of  the  will  of  God,  which  is  fixed 
and  eternal  ?  What  signifies  it  that  you  give  to  such  a  one  the  Bible  and  persuade 
him  it  is  a  Divine  book  ?  You  may  persuade  him  of  that  as  easily  as  of  anything 
else;  if  it  is  the  current  opinion  of  course  he  receives  it  until  the  fashion  altera, 
and  then  he  will  scoff  at  it.  But  while  he  embraces  it  what  does  he  gather  from 
it?  Just  what  his  worldly  spirit  wishes  to  gather  and  no  more.  II.  The  deliveb- 
ANCE  FROM  ALL  THIS  IS  TRANSFORMATION,  and  such  transformation,  instead  of  unfitting 
a  man  for  the  world,  is  that  which  alone  can  enable  him  to  live  in  it,  to  appreciate 
the  worth  of  it,  to  exercise  an  influence  over  it.  It  was  this  which  enabled  the 
prophet  to  see  the  trees  and  the  floods  breaking  forth  into  singing ;  which  enabled 
St.  Paul  to  become  all  things  to  all  men  ;  which  enabled  St.  John  to  see  the  kingdom 
of  God  and  of  His  Christ  emerging  out  of  the  kingdoms  of  this  world.  For  they 
beheld  all  things  in  God's  light,  not  in  the  false  lights  of  this  world.  They  saw  the 
world  as  He  had  made  it,  not  as  men  had  made  it  by  rebelling  against  Him.  They 
had  received  the  true  form  of  men,  they  could  therefore  use  the  forms  of  the  world, 
accommodating  themselves  readily  to  Jewish,  Greek,  Eoman  customs — never  being 
brought  into  bondage  by  any.  They  were  in  communion  with  the  eternal,  so  they 
could  contemplate  the  great  drama  of  history,  not  as  a  succession  of  shifting  scenes, 
but  as  a  series  of  events  tending  to  the  fulfilment  of  that  will  which  is  seeking  good 
and  good  only.  III.  The  process  of  this  transformation  is  the  renewing  of  the 
MIND.  Such  a  phrase  at  once  suggests  the  change  which  takes  place  when  the 
foliage  of  spring  covers  the  bare  boughs  of  winter.  The  substance  is  not  altered, 
but  it  is  quickened.  The  alteration  is  the  most  wonderful  that  can  be  conceived  of, 
but  it  all  passes  within.  The  power  once  given  works  secretly,  probably  amidst 
many  obstructions  from  sharp  winds  and  keen  frosts.  Still  that  beginning  contains 
in  it  the  sure  prophecy  of  final  accomplishment.  The  man  will  be  renewed  accord- 
ing to  the  image  of  his  Creator  and  Father,  because  the  Spirit  of  his  Creator  and 
Father  is  working  in  him.  (F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.)  Conformed  and  transformed : 
— If  we  pour  into  a  mould  a  quantity  of  heated  metal,  that  metal  as  it  becomes 
cool  takes  the  shape  of  that  mould.  If  we  soften  a  lump  of  wax,  and  then  press  a 
signet  upon  it,  on  its  surface  is  left  the  impression  of  the  seal.  Just  so  our  nature, 
susceptible  at  present  of  being  moulded  to  one  character  or  another,  is  now  under- 
going this  process.  According  to  the  tastes  we  cultivate,  the  acts  we  do,  the  society 
we  keep,  the  subjects  that  engross  our  interest,  we  are  becoming  conformed  to  the 
world  or  to  Christ;  we  are  being  made  into  "vessels  unto  dishonour,"  or  into 
"  vessels  meet  for  the  Master's  use."  The  process  may  be  very  gradual ;  but  it  is 
not  on  that  account  the  less  fatal  and  the  less  sure.  Like  that  insidious  disease 
consumption,  the  first  beginnings  of  it  are  hardly  perceptible  ;  but  though  it  only 
destroys  life  as  it  were  by  inches,  the  raging  fever  is  not  in  the  end  more  deadly. 
How  many  are  there  who,  because  they  are  not  raging  in  the  fever-fits  of  open  sin, 
never  dream  that  they  are  dying  of  worldly  conformity,  and  who  consider,  though 
the  Bible  and  their  consciences  sometimes  speak  to  the  contrary,  that  there  can  be 
no  great  harm  in  living  to  the  world  a  little,  provided  that  they  keep  within  bounds  1 
But  the  Word  of  God  says  plainly,  "  Be  not  conformed  to  this  world."  And  if  we 
would  fall  in  with  this  requirement  we  must  strive  to  be  "  transformed  by  the 
renewing  of  our  mind."  We  all  know  what  a  complete  change  is  signified  by  the 
word  "metamorphosis,"  which  is  the  one  here  used.  In  describing  this  process  we 
must  go  back  one  step  further  in  the  metaphors  than  in  the  case  to  which  we  before 
alluded.  We  must  suppose  the  metal  to  have  been  cast  into  some  faulty  shape  first, 
and  then  to  have  been  melted  down  and  re-cast.  Just  so  our  hearts,  our  wills,  our 
tastes,  in  short  our  whole  "mind  "  must  be  first  of  all  softened  by  God's  Spirit ; 
then  we  must  be  transformed  into  a  "  vessel  made  to  honour,"  and  finally  "  sealed 
unto  the  day  of  redemption."  In  vain  shall  we  seek  to  transform  ourselves ;  we 
may  give  up  this  or  that  worldly  pleasure  or  worldly  pursuit ;  but  unless  we  really, 
earnestly,  perseveringly  seek  by  prayer  the  power  of  God's  Spirit  we  never  shall  be 
"  transformed  by  the  renewing  of  our  minds."      (W.  H.  Etchers,  M.A.)  Con- 

formity to  the  world : — L  What  is  the  world  ?  The  mass  of  unrenewed  men  as 
distinguished  from  the  people  of  God.  It  is  Satan's  kingdom.  It  has  laws  and 
maxims.  Its  manners  and  customs  are  determined  by  its  reigning  spirit.  It  has 
its  consummation,  which  is  perdition.  II.  What  is  it  to  be  conformed  to  thb 
WORLD  ?  1.  To  be  inwardly  like  men  of  the  world  in  the  governing  principle  of  ont 
lives,  t.e.,  to  have  a  worldly  spirit,  a  spirit  occupied  with  worldly  things,  mercenary, 
earthly.    2.  To  be  so  ruled  by  the  world's  mayims  that  the  question  is  not  what  if 


•HAP.  xn.]  ROMANS.  461 

right  or  wrong,  bat  what  is  the  castom  of  society.  What  is  the  public  sentiment  7 
8.  To  be  indistinguishable  from  men  of  the  world  in  our — (1)  Objects.  (2)  Amuse- 
ments. (3)  General  conduct.  III.  The  consequences  op  this  confoemity.  1. 
The  destruction  of  all  spirituality.  It  is  impossible  to  live  near  to  God  and  jet  to 
be  conformed  to  the  world.  The  Spirit  is  grieved  and  quenched.  2.  The  oblitera- 
tion of  the  distinction  between  the  Church  and  the  world,  and  the  consequent 
enervation  of  the  former.  What  becomes  of  Christian  profession  when  Christians 
are  as  sordid,  gay,  and  unscrupulous  as  other  men  ?  3.  Identity  of  doom.  They 
who  choose  the  world  will  perish  with  it.  IV.  By  what  bulb  are  wb  to  determine 
WHAT  IS  AND  WHAT  IS  NOT  SINFUL  CONFORMITY.  This  is  morc  a  theoretical  than  a 
practical  diflBculty,  and  will  not  trouble  a  man  who  is  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  Christ 
and  devoted  to  His  service.  1.  We  must  avoid  sinful  things.  2.  With  regard  to 
things  indifferent.  (1)  One  man  should  not  judge  another,  but  determine  for  him- 
self what  is  and  is  not  injurious  to  his  spiritual  interests.  (2)  We  should  avoid 
things  which  are  injurious  to  others  though  harmless  to  ourselves.  (3)  We  should 
shun  things  innocent  in  themselves,  but  which  are  connected  in  fact,  or  in  the 
minds  of  men  with  evil,  as  cards,  dancing,  the  theatre,  &o.  (4)  The  same  rule  as 
to  dress  and  modes  of  living  does  not  apply  to  all  persons  and  places.  It 
depends  on  usage,  rank,  &c.  There  is  great  danger  of  becoming  pharisaical, 
and  making  religion  consist  in  externals.      (C.  Hodge,  D.D.)  Conformity 

to  the  world: — I.  Be  not  conformed  —  1.  To  its  selfishness.  2.  To  its  pre- 
sumption. 3.  To  its  superstition.  4.  To  its  carnal  poUoy.  5.  To  its  earthly- 
mindedness.  II.  This  Divine  requirement  is  presented  here — 1.  Negatively — 
•*  Be  not  conformed,"  <ftc.,  in — (1)  Affection.  (2)  Principles  or  maxims.  (3)  Con- 
dnct.  2.  Positively — "  But  be  ye  transformed,"  &c.  True  religion  does  not  consist 
in  simply  abstaining,  avoiding,  disliking,  &a. ;  but  also  in  being,  doing,  delighting, 
«feo.  We  cannot  be  unoonformed  to  the  world,  unless  we  are  in  spirit  conformed  to 
God.  Therefore  the  only  way  to  be  unworldly  is  to  become  converted  and  spiritual 
(Gal.  V.  16,  &c.).  The  Christian  is  not  simply  to  be  unlike  the  world;  he  is  to  be 
like  Christ.      (Homilist.)  Conformity   to  the  world : — I.  Its  nature.      1.  By 

*•  this  world  "  is  meant  everything  in  it  which  is  antagonistic  to  the  truth  or  to  the 
life  of  God  in  the  soul  of  man.  You  can  form  a  correct  estimate  of  a  man's 
character  by  his  ruling  principles.  So  you  can  the  spirit  of  "  this  world."  Here 
are  some  of  its  maxims — (1)  "Everyman  for  himseU";  there  is  the  selfishness 
that  draws  in  everything  to  itself,  and  keeps  firm  grip  of  all  it  has,  though  the 
needy  be  perishing  around  I  (2)  "  Quietness  is  best  "  :  there  is  the  cowardice,  the 
selfish  prudence  of  the  world  which  wiU  not  stand  forth  and  speak  a  word  for  God 
or  man,  lest  trouble  should  come  upon  it  I  (3)  "Honesty  is  the  best  policy."  The 
man  who  is  honest  just  because  it  is  the  best  policy  would  for  the  same  reason  have 
been  dishonest  I  2.  Conformity  to  this  world  means  the  adoption  of  principles 
such  as  these,  and  practices  founded  upon  them,  although  there  are  great  differ- 
ences among  men  in  respect  of  it.  II.  Its  causes.  Apart  from  its  first  and  great 
cause,  there  are  secondary  causes,  e.g., — 1.  The  proclivity  to  do  as  other  people  do. 
A  child  may  act  thus,  but  may  a  man  ?  If  so,  where  ii  his  independence  ?  In  the 
dust.  2.  The  fear  of  giving  offence.  There  are  people  who  are  so  dependent  upon 
the  good  opinion  of  others,  that  to  gain  it  they  will  forfeit  their  own  respect  by  doing 
things  which  otherwise  they  would  have  left  undone.  They  have  interests  of  their 
own,  but  they  are  laughed  or  frowned  out  of  them ;  they  have  opinions  of  their  own, 
but  they  modify  and  explain  them  away  I  Many  a  man  may  date  his  destruction 
from  the  day  he  began  to  be  afraid  of  losing  the  good  opinion  of  bad  men  1  3.  The 
inability  to  stand  alone.  When  any  public  question  is  debated,  the  question  is, 
"  What  side  are  the  respectable  people  on  ?  "  When  a  side  must  be  taken, "  Which 
is  likely  to  win  ?  "  The  "  expecfiency  "  men  are  many ;  the  "  principle  "  men  are 
few.  II.  Its  cure.  1.  The  realising  of  our  own  personality  and  responsibility, 
refusing  to  live  in  the  crowd,  resolving  that  by  God's  grace  we  shall  live  the  life  He 
calls  upon  us  to  Uve.  2.  The  withdrawing  of  ourselves  from  under  the  power  of 
that  tendency  within  us  which  prevails  with  us  to  disobey  this  command.  Some- 
times it  is  of  very  little  use  to  fight,  the  only  thing  is  to  get  away.  A  young  man  is 
beginning  to  acquire  a  taste  for  low  pursuits  and  company :  how  will  you  help  him  to 
get  above  them  ?  Not  surely  by  leaving  him  to  fight  it  out  with  them,  but  by  creating 
within  him  a  taste  for  higher  pleasures,  and  the  society  of  the  good.  If  we  would 
not  be  conformed  to  the  world,  we  must  rise  above  it.  3.  Transformation  by  the 
renewing  of  the  mind.  Thus  transformed,  you  will  not  be  conformed :  another 
model  will  be  realised  by  yoa  in  your  lives:   the  world  will  lose  its  hold  and 


462  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

Christ  will  be  all  in  all.  (P.Rutherford.)  Conformity  to  the  world : — I.  In  what 
IT  CONSISTS.  In  cultivating — 1.  Its  spirit  and  temper.  2.  Its  maxims  and  prin- 
ciples. 3.  Its  company  and  conduct.  II.  How  ix  must  bb  avoided.  1.  By  the 
renewing  of  our  minds.  2,  By  the  adoption  of  other — (1)  Principles.  (2)  Rules. 
(3)  Ends.  III.  Why  it  should  be  avoided.  Because  this  is — 1.  Good  in  itself. 
2.  Acceptable  to  God.     3.  Beneficial  to  man.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Conformity  to 

the  world :  its  folly  : — A  member  of  his  congregation  was  in  the  habit  of  going  to  the 
theatre.  Mr.  Hill  went  to  him  and  said,  "  This  will  never  do — a  member  of  my 
Church  in  the  habit  of  going  to  the  theatre  1 "  Mr.  So-and-so  replied  that  it  surely 
must  be  a  mistake,  as  he  was  not  in  the  habit  of  going  there,  although  it  was  true 
he  did  go  now  and  then  for  a  treat.  "  Oh  1 "  said  Eowland  Hill,  "  then  you  are  a 
worse  hypocrite  than  ever,  sir.  Suppose  any  one  spread  the  report  that  I  ate 
carrion,  and  I  answered,  •  Well,  there  is  no  wrong  in  that ;  I  don't  eat  carrion 
every  day  in  the  week,  but  I  have  a  dish  now  and  then  for  a  treat  I '  Why,  you 
would  say,  '  What  a  nasty,  foul,  and  filthy  appetite  Rowland  Hill  has,  to  have  to  go 
to  carrion  for  a  treat  1 '  Religion  is  the  Christian's  truest  treat,  Christ  is  his  enjoy- 
ment." Nonconformity  to  the  world: — 1.  There  is  no  command  in  Scripture  about 
which  there  is  more  debate  than  this.  Are  we  required  to  separate  ourselves  from 
all  who  are  not  Christians,  and  avoid  aU  employments  except  those  of  devotion? 
This  is  manifestly  impossible.  Are  we  then  to  abstain  from  those  practices  which 
are  common  among  irreligious  persons  ?  Then  the  question  arises,  What  practices? 
Where  shall  we  draw  the  line  ?  Many  draw  for  themselves  a  line  within  which  they 
keep ;  but  unfortunately  each  person  draws  it  differently.  To  some,  this  world 
means  profiigacy  and  sin  ;  to  others,  great  luxury ;  to  others,  certain  fashionable 
amusements,  or  dress ;  to  others,  the  use  of  secular  music,  or  the  reading  of  light 
literature.  Each  believes  himself  in  the  right,  and  blames  his  neighbours  for 
going  beyond  or  not  coming  up  to  the  line  he  has  drawn  for  himself.  Each  is 
alternately  accuser  and  accused  ;  while  the  ungodly  consequently  declare  that  it  is 
quite  impossible  to  say  what  is  and  what  is  not  worldly.  2.  Now  aU  this  arises 
from  overlooking  the  fact  that  the  precepts  of  the  gospel  are  addressed  to  our  new 
and  inner  nature  ;  that  they  supply  principles  and  motives  on  which  we  are  to  act 
always,  not  laws  applying  to  any  particular  act  or  set  of  acts.  "  Be  not  conformed 
to  the  world  "  is  defined  by  "  Be  ye  transformed,"  &c.  It  is  clear,  then,  that  that 
conformity  is  forbidden  which  interferes  with  our  being  transformed.  Now  that 
into  which  we  are  transformed  is  the  image  of  God  (2  Cor.  iii.  18).  3.  Now,  the 
rule  of  the  renewed  man  is  simple,  always  applicable — "  The  one  thing  I  am  to  seek 
is  conformity  to  God's  image,  and  in  order  to  that,  constant  communion  with  God  ; 
whatever,  then,  I  find  to  interfere  with  this,  however  good  it  may  seem,  is  the  world 
to  me."  Now  the  application  of  this  rule  is  matter  of  personal  experience,  and  it  is 
impossible  to  draw  a  line  ;  for  what  is  the  world  to  one  person  is  not  the  world  to 
another ;  and  the  question  is  not  so  much  where  you  are  as  what  you  are.  To  lay 
4own  a  rule  for  all  lives  is  as  difficult  as  to  prescribe  a  diet  for  all  constitutions. 
If  you  ask  us  whether  certain  food  will  agree  with  you,  we  answer — That  depends 
upon  your  constitution ;  we  can  only  give  you  the  broad  rule — eat  nothing  that  you 
find  to  disagree  with  you.  So  we  lay  down  the  broad  rule — whatever  disagrees 
with  your  soul's  health  you  must  avoid.  4.  This  is  a  rule  which  we  would  plead 
•with  worldly  people.  Christians  are  often  perplexed  when  asked — Why  do  you  not 
join  in  this  or  that  amusement  f  (1)  If  they  answer — Because  they  are  sinful,  they 
flay  what  they  cannot  prove.  Sin  is  the  transgression  of  a  law,  and  they  can  cite 
no  law  which  expressly  forbids  such  things.  And  then  if  we  call  them  sins,  we  may 
induce  others  to  consider  sins  as  not  much  worse  than  amusements.  (2)  If  they 
say,  we  object  to  these  things  because  they  are  worldly,  then  they  will  be  asked, 
What  is  the  essential  difference  between  the  amusement  in  question,  and  some 
other  which  they  hold  lawful  ?  (3)  Now  if  in  all  such  cases  the  Christian  would  be 
content  to  say — I  refrain  because  I  find  I  cannot  enjoy  it  and  afterwards  have  com- 
munion with  God,  he  would  give  an  answer  which,  if  not  understood,  could  certainly 
not  be  gainsaid.  To  ask  for  a  law  when  this  reason  is  given  would  be  as  unmeaning 
as  to  ask  for  a  law  of  the  land  forbidding  all  imprudence  in  our  diet,  or  exposure  to 
the  weather,  or  to  the  risk  of  infection.  We  cannot  prove  these  acts  to  be  crimes, 
but  they  are  dangerous,  and  all  come  under  the  general  principle  which  makes  it 
wrong  for  a  man  to  injure  himself.  5.  In  this  way  we  should  deal  with  all  cavillers 
on  this  subject.  Worldly  men  set  down  the  objections  of  ministers  to  prejudice  or 
envy.  "  Of  course,  clergymen  abuse  theatres,  &c.,  but  where  is  the  harm  ?  Where 
Ikre  they  forbidden  in  Scripture  ?  "  We  answer  this  question  by  another :  *<  What  is 


CHAP,  xn.]  BOMANS.  463 

the  state  of  yoar  soul  ?  Are  yon  the  possessor  of  a  spiritusJ  life  ?  If  not,  then  yoa 
cannot  possibly  understand  our  objection  ;  for  we  object  to  these  things  as  injurioua 
to  that  which  you  tell  us  yoa  have  not  got,  namely — life  in  the  soul.  To  under- 
stand a  spiritual  precept  you  must  be  spiritual  yourself.  6.  But  there  are  those  in 
whom  this  spiritual  life  is  as  the  tender  blade,  or  as  the  just  kindling  fire,  who  ask, 
anxiously.  What  is  the  danger  ?  To  show  this,  we  will  take — (1)  The  theatre.  If 
we  are  asked,  Is  there  any  sin  in  a  theatrical  representation  ?  We  answer — Thero 
is  no  more  sin  in  a  person  presenting  to  your  eyes  a  certain  character  than 
there  is  in  writing  a  description  or  painting  a  picture  of  it.  But  what  we 
have  to  consider  is,  not  the  abstract  idea  of  a  theatre,  but  what  it  practically  is. 
Now  not  to  enlarge  upon  the  evils  connected  with  the  stage,  to  which  you  give  your 
countenance  and  aid  by  attendance  and  payment  for  admission  :  we  will  admit  that 
these  are  not  essential  to  the  stage,  though  somehow  they  are  always  found  con- 
nected with  it.  We  are  willing  to  allow  all  that  can  be  said  for  it,  and  will  not  ask 
whether,  in  the  course  of  the  play,  vice  is  not  often  made  attractive,  and  whether  the 
recollection  of  the  pleasure  of  sin  does  not  outlast  the  impressions  made  by  the 
moral  at  the  end,  when  the  vicious  characters  meet  with  that  punishment  which  we 
so  rarely  see  them  visited  with  in  real  Ufe.  We  will  suppose  every  play  to  have  its 
moral,  and  the  audience  to  be  duly  impressed  with  it.  Yet  we  must  ask.  What  cha- 
racter would  you  be  conformed  to  if  you  followed  out  the  lessons  there  taught  ?  Would 
it  be  to  the  image  of  God  ?  Is  the  good  man  of  the  stage  the  good  man  of  Scripture  ? 
Who  would  venture  to  produce  upon  the  stage  one  in  whom  was  the  mind  of  Christ  ? 
Would  such  a  character  crowd  houses?  Men  would  throng  to  the  playhouse  to 
hear  sentiments  which  they  do  not  care  to  study  in  their  Bibles,  or  to  witness  a 
display  of  qualities  which,  in  real  Ufe,  they  hold  in  contempt.  Our  objection  to 
the  stage,  then,  is  this :  it  sets  up  a  false  and  worldly  standard  of  morality ;  and 
he  who  desires  to  be  transformed  to  the  image  of  God  will  find  here  another  image 
set  before  him.  (2)  The  card  table.  Is  there  any  sin  in  moving  about  pieces  of 
painted  pasteboard  ?  Certainly  not.  And  yet  it  becomes  a  cause  of  sin ;  because, 
however  small  the  stake,  it  excites,  in  however  slight  a  degree,  that  desire  of 
gain  which  is  of  this  world.  In  proof  of  this  note  the  greater  zest  with  which  men 
enjoy  the  game  when  some  small  stake  is  played  for,  "just  to  give  an  interest  to 
the  game."  And  by  indulging  in  this  we  hinder  that  renewing  of  our  mind  which 
we  should  cultivate  so  carefully.  (3)  The  ball-room.  Is  there  any  harm  in  the  act 
of  dancing?  No  more  tban  in  any  marching  to  the  sound  of  music.  But  is  there 
not  temptation  there  for  the  indulgence  of  vanity,  frivolity,  envy,  and  evil  speaking? 
We  ask  whether  one  renewed  in  the  image  of  God  would  fiud  himself  a  welcome 
guest  there  ? — whether  his  spiritual  life  would  be  strengthened,  and  his  conformity 
to  Christ  increased,  by  constant  attendance  ? — and  whether  the  guest  as  he  returns  is 
in  that  frame  of  mind  which  best  fits  him  for  communion  with  God  ?  In  short,  in  all 
these  matters  we  ask  you  simply  to  use  your  own  judgment.  Tryhonestlythe  effect  of 
these  amusements  upon  your  own  spiritual  life ;  and  if  you  be  really  renewed  in  the 
spirit  of  your  mind,  you  will  find  that  their  atmosphere  is  injurious  to  the  new  Ufe, 
which  you  desire  to  cherish.  7.  But  we  must  not  forget  that  the  principle  may  be 
applied  in  an  opposite  direction.  There  are  others  who  need  to  be  told  that  what 
is  forbidden  is  worldliness  of  heart;  viz.,  those  who  are  sure  they  do  not  conform 
to  the  world,  because  they  never  enter  a  theatre,  &c.  Their  idea  of  unworldlinesa 
is  the  abstaining  from  these  things,  and  a  few  others,  e.^.,  display  in  entertainments 
and  equipage.  Add  to  this,  becoming  members  of  religious  associations,  frequenting 
reUgious  society,  and  attending  a  gospel  ministry,  and  their  definition  of  unworldli- 
ness  is  complete.  Now  it  is  possible  to  do  all  this,  and  more,  and  yet  stUl  be  con- 
formed to  the  world.  Worldliness  can  no  more  be  excluded  by  a  fence  of  conventional 
rules  and  habits  than  a  fog  or  a  miasma  by  a  high  wall :  it  is  in  the  atmosphere. 
They  avoid  the  theatre,  and  eschew  fiction :  to  what  purpose,  if  they  are  daily  acting 
out  the  characters  they  wUl  not  see  represented,  or  read  depicted  ?  They  will  not  . 
gamble.  Are  they  the  better  for  this,  if  they  indulge  the  covetous  spirit  elsewhere  ? 
They  wiU  not  frequent  the  ball-room.  Are  they  any  gainers,  il  they  indulge  the 
same  spirit  of  display,  Ac,  in  a  quiet  party,  or  in  a  reUgious  meeting?  They  will 
not  wear  fashionable  dresses  ;  to  what  purpose,  if  they  are  secretly  as  proud  of  their 
plain  dress  ?  Conclusion  :  To  attack  at  once  tbe  worldliness  of  the  reUgious  and 
the  irreligion  of  the  world,  is  to  risk  the  displeasure  of  both.  But  the  world  and 
the  fashions  of  it  are  passing  fast  away  ;  a  few  short  years,  and  we  shall  all  be 
where  the  applause  or  censure  of  men  shall  be  alike  indifferent  to  us— upon  our 
djing  beds.     Then  the  question  to  be  decided  shaU  be,  not  how  far  may  I  go  in  m; 


464  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  cms.  to. 

enjoyment  of  the  world,  or  where  must  I  fix  a  limit  to  my  pleasures,  for  the  world 
can  be  enjoyed  no  longer,  and  death  is  fixing  the  last  limits  to  its  pleasures,  and 
there  remains  but  one  act  more  of  conformity  to  the  world — that  last  act  in  which 
all  flesh  conforms  itself  to  the  law  of  dissolution  ;  but  this  shall  be  the  great  ques- 
tion : — Am  I  fitted  for  that  world  which  I  am  about  to  enter  ?  Am  I,  or  am  I  not, 
"  transformed  in  the  renewing  of  my  mind  "  ?  Ask  yourselves  this  question  now, 
as  you  must  ask  it  then.  {A  bp.  Magee.)  Nonconformity  to  the  world  may  be 
seen — I.  In  the  tbansfokmation  of  the  worldly  vrRTUES.  There  are  graces 
which  are  sometimes  seen  more  in  the  world  than  in  the  Church,  and  here  we 
cannot  go  wrong  in  conforming  to  the  world.  Yet  it  is  possible  for  an  unworldly 
spirit  to  transfigure  them.  And  unless  occasionally  so  transfigured  they  would  be 
corrupted  and  lost.  One  high  heroic  instance  of  truth,  justice,  or  courage  is  worth 
a  hundred  lesser  cases — the  world  is  startled  by  it.  But  remember  in  proportion  to 
the  dignity  given  by  an  unworldly  spirit  to  a  worldly  virtue  is  the  mischief  wrought 
by  the  absence  of  worldly  virtues  in  those  who  call  themselves  unworldly.  They 
are  salt  which  has  lost  its  savour.  There  is  no  greater  stumbling-block  than  want 
of  candour,  justice,  and  generosity  in  those  who  profess  to  be  "not  of  the  world." 
But  the  soldier  who  is  more  brave  because  of  a  higher  than  earthly  courage ;  the 
judge  who  is  more  scrupulously  just  because  he  has  before  him  a  higher  than 
earthly  tribunal,  the  men  of  business  who  "  ply  their  daily  task  with  busier  feet, 
because  their  souls  a  holy  strain  repeat,"  are  instances  of  what  the  apostle  means 
by  being  "  transfigured  through  the  renewal  of  our  minds."    II.  In  the  exhibition 

OF    QUALITIES  WHICH   ABE    UNWOELDLY   IN    THEMSELVES.         1.     HumiMty.        In    pagaH 

times  there  was  no  name  for  this  grace.  The  very  word  is  a  new  creation  of  the 
gospel.  Nor  does  the  thing  now  exist  in  worldly  minds.  You  may  prove  this  by 
telling  an  average  man  of  his  faults  and  watching  the  result.  2.  Independence  of 
the  world's  opinion.  "  With  me  it  is  a  small  thing  to  be  judged  of  man's  judgment. 
He  that  judgeth  me  is  the  Lord  " — is  a  true  unworldly  maxim.  It  is  safe,  prudent, 
to  conform  to  the  fashion  of  the  world,  to  swim  with  the  stream,  to  desert  the 
sinking  vessel,  to  avoid  the  stricken  deer  or  howl  with  the  wolves.  That  is  the 
world's  way  ;  but  there  is  a  way  which  is  not  the  way  of  the  world.  The  old  Chris- 
tian virtue  of  chivalry  still  lingers  amongst  us — the  leaning  to  the  weaker  side 
because  it  is  weaker,  the  desire  to  protect  the  weak  and  repress  the  strong,  &c.,  may 
run  to  excess,  but  even  Quixotism  is  refreshing.  How  invigorating  to  see  men 
dependent  on  God,  though  independent  of  man,  stand  up  against  professional  clamour 
and  popular  prejudice,  to  see  men  resist  the  tyranny  of  public  opinion  which  will 
not  hear  the  other  side,  and  refuse  the  popular  and  give  the  unpopular  praise  I  3. 
Purity.  4.  Eesignation.  (Dean  Stanley.)  Nonconformity  to  the  world : — I. 
What  are  we  to  understand  bt  the  world  (1  John  ii.  16).  1.  The  lust  of  the 
flesh  (Tit.  ii.  12).  2.  The  lust  of  the  eye  (Eccles.  v.  11).  3.  The  pride  of  life 
(chap.  i.  30).  II.  What  is  it  not  to  be  conformed  to  it?  1.  Not  to  approve 
of  it  (1  John  ii.  15).  2.  Not  to  imitate  it  (1  Pet.  iv.  4).  3.  To  use  it  as  if  we  used 
it  not  (1  Cor.  vii.  30,  31).  III.  Why  should  we  not  be  conformed  ?  1.  We  are 
separated  from  the  world  to  God  (1  Pet.  ii.  9-12).  2.  We  have  put  on  Christ.  3. 
All  that  is  in  the  world  is  not  of  the  Father  (1  John  ii.  16),  and  is  contrary  to  the 
love  of  Him  (1  John  ii.  15).  4.  The  fashion  of  this  world  passeth  away  (1  Cor.  vii.  31). 
Conclusion :  Conform  not  to  this  world.  1.  You  have  higher  things  to  mind  (CoL 
iii.  1-3 ;  Phil.  iii.  20).  2.  This  world  cannot  satisfy  you  (Eccles.  i.  8).  3.  You  must 
give  an  account  of  what  you  do  here.  (Bp.  Beveridge.^  Nonconformity  to  the 
world: — I.  Its  nature.  1.  Not  ceremonial.  2.  Not  civil.  3.  But  moral.  Be  not 
conformed — (1)  To  the  spirit  of  the  world.  (2)  In  your  rules  of  Ufe.  (3)  In  your 
company.  (4)  In  your  practices.  II.  Some  reasons  for  its  prohibition.  1. 
Duty.  2.  Profession.  3.  Self-love.  4.  Love  of  your  neighbour.  5.  The  com- 
mands of  Scripture.  III.  How  it  may  be  prevented.  By — 1.  The  renovation  of 
your  natures.  2.  The  exercise  of  daily  prayer.  3.  Guarding  against  temptation.  4. 
A  constant  dependence  upon  God.  (Biblical  Museum.)  Nonconformity  to  the  world: — 
There  will  arise  in  the  Christian's  course,  from  time  to  time,  occasions  on  which  he 
will  be  in  doubt  as  to  some  points  of  his  duty  in  relation  to  social  interooarse  and 
amusements.  Well,  in  such  cases  he  turns  to  his  chart^n  that  chart  (his  Bible) 
though  he  find  not  every  rock  and  shoal  and  quicksand,  marked  down  by  name — 
he  finds  it  laid  down  plainly  and  decisively  that  the  whole  coast  is  dangerous,  i.e., 
he  finds  a  general  principle,  "  Be  not  conformed  to  this  world  " — "The  friendship 
of  the  world  is  enmity  with  God."  By  whom  is  the  amusement  patronised?  Ar» 
they  those  who  are  the  votaries  of  other  and  less  dubiooB  pleMores  ?    Axe  thej 


CHAP,  xn.]  ROMANS.  465 

those  who  wear  the  world's  badge  and  hare  its  mark  stamped  on  their  foreheads  ? 
Then  let  the  Christian  pause — let  him  fear  to  find  himself  snrroanded  by  crowds 
of  worldlings,  drinking  with  them  of  the  same  oup.  It  mast  be  at  best  but  a 
suspicious  cup  that  meets  tastes  which  should  be  opposite — it  must  be  at  best  a 
suspicious  path  in  which,  even  for  a  moment,  the  Christian  walks  hand  in  hand 
with  the  man  of  this  world.  Be  quite  sure  the  world  would  not  be  drinking  of  that 
cup,  if  it  were  not  in  some  way  spiced  to  their  taste.  Alas  1  it  is  far,  far  more 
likely  that  the  Christian  should  have  stepped  out  of  his  narrow  path,  than  that  the 
worldling  should  have  forsaken  his,  to  walk,  even  for  a  moment,  with  the  Christiaa 
And  remember  that  in  such  cases  there  is  great  need  that  you  watch  against  Belf. 
deception.  The  remark  of  Jeremy  Taylor  is  but  too  true :  "  Most  men  choose  the 
sin,  if  it  be  once  disputed  whether  it  be  a  sin  or  no."  Although  grace  teaches  and 
inclines  you  to  distaste  the  world,  yet  corruption  remains,  and  to  that  corruption 
sin  and  the  world  are  but  too  palatable.  See  to  it,  then,  that  while  you  are  profess- 
ing to  inquire  into  the  lawfulness  or  unlawfulness  of  such  an  action,  your  mind  is 
not  biased  beforehand,  and  you  have  not  a  secret  desire  to  find  the  Word  of  God 
on  your  side — a  secret  determination  to  make  it  out,  if  possible  to  be  so.  Beware, 
too,  of  that  religion  which  is  anxious  to  take  up  its  lodging  next  door  to  the  world. 
If  you  are  determined  to  go  as  far  as  you  can  you  are  not  safe — you  will  very  soon 
be  on  the  other  side  of  the  line.  And  if,  after  all,  a  given  case  seemed  doubtful, 
remember,  religion,  not  the  world,  is  to  have  the  benefit  of  the  doubt.  It  is  better 
to  abstain  from  mistaken  scrupulosity  from  a  hundred  lawful  things  than  to  run  the 
risk  of  one  unlawful  act  of  conformity  to  the  world,  or  of  throwing  one  stumbling- 
block  in  the  way  of  another.  (Canon  Miller.)  Nonconformity  to  the  world: — 
There  are  two  words  for  world,  aiiav  and  KoafioQ.  The  former  regards  time,  the  latter 
space.  Once  they  are  combined  (Eph.  ii.  2), "  in  accordance  with  the  time-state  of  this 
matter- world."  ,  .  .  The  direction,  therefore,  is, "  Be  not  like  the  men  of  this  world, 
whose  all  is  the  present.  Wear  not  the  garb  of  time :  live  for  eternity."  {Dean  Vaughan.) 
Nonconformity  to  the  world — inward  : — As  the  mother  of  pearl  fish  lives  in  the  sea 
without  receiving  a  drop  of  salt  water,  and  as  towards  the  Chelidonian  Islands 
springs  of  fresh  water  may  be  found  in  the  midst  of  the  sea,  and  as  the  fire-fiy 
passes  through  the  flames  without  burning  its  wings,  so  a  vigorous  and  resolute  soul 
may  live  in  the  world  without  being  infected  with  any  of  its  humours,  may  discover 
sweet  springs  of  piety  amidst  its  salt  waters,  and  fiy  among  the  flames  of  earthly 
concupiscence  without  burning  the  wings  of  the  holy  desires  of  a  devout  life. 
(Francis  de  Sales.)  Nonconformity  to  the  world — outward  : — The  bird  of  paradise, 
which  has  such  a  dower  of  exquisitely  beautiful  feathers,  cannot  fly  with  the  wind ; 
if  it  attempts  to  do  so,  the  current  being  much  swifter  than  its  flight,  so  ruffles  its 
plumage  as  to  impede  its  progress,  and  finally  to  terminate  it :  it  is,  therefore,  com- 
pelled to  fly  against  the  wind,  which  keeps  its  feathers  in  their  place,  and  thus  it 
gains  the  place  where  it  would  be.  So  the  Christian  must  not  attempt  to  go  with 
the  current  of  a  sinful  world :  if  he  does,  it  will  not  only  hinder,  but  end  his 
reUgious  progress ;  but  he  must  go  against  it,  and  then  every  effort  of  his  soul  will 
be  upward,  heavenward,  Godward.  (M.  Davies,  D.D.)  The  world  is  fallen  human 
nature  acting  itself  out  in  the  human  family  ;  moulding  and  fashioning  the  frame- 
work of  human  society  in  accordance  with  its  own  tendencies.  It  is  fallen  human 
nature  making  the  ongoings  of  human  thought,  feeling,  and  action  its  own.  It  is 
the  reign  or  kingdom  of  the  carnal  mind,  which  is  enmity  against  God.  Wherever 
that  mind  prevails,  there  is  the  world.  [R,  S.  Candlish,  D.D.)  The  world  an 
atmosphere : — It  is  like  the  dense  atmosphere  which  on  a  November  day  hangs  over 
your  vast  metropolis,  the  product  of  its  countless  homes  and  the  proof  of  its  vast 
industrial  efiorts ;  and  yet  the  veil  which  shuts  out  from  it  the  light  of  heaven, 
destroys  the  colour  on  its  works  of  art — the  dark  unwholesome  vapour  which  clogs 
vitahty  and  undermines  health,  and  from  which  a  Londoner  escapes  at  intervals 
with  a  light  heart,  that  he  may  see  the  sun,  and  the  trees,  and  the  face  of  nature  as 
God  made  them,  and  feel  for  a  few  months  what  it  is  to  live.  Even  thus  the  world 
hangs  Uke  a  deadly  atmosphere  over  every  single  human  soul,  brooding  over  it, 
flapping  its  wings  like  the  monstrous  evil  bird  in  the  fable,  or  penetrating  and 
entering  into  it  like  a  subtle  poison,  to  sap  the  springs  and  sources  of  its  vigour  and 
its  life.  (Canon  Liddon.)  The  world,  danger  of: — As  you  love  your  souls,  beware 
of  the  world :  it  has  slain  its  thousands  and  ten  thousands.  What  ruined  Lot's 
wife  ? — the  world.  What  ruined  Achan  ? — the  world.  What  ruined  Haman  ? — the 
world.  What  rained  Judas  ? — the  world.  What  ruined  Simon  Magus  ? — the 
world.  What  ruined  Demas  ? — the  world.  And  "  what  shall  it  profit  a  man,  if  ha 
YOU  u.  80 


466  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xil. 

shall  gain  the  whole  world  and  lose  his  own  soul  ?  "  The  world :  difficult  ta 
define  : — The  world  cannot  be  clearly  marked  out  as  il  it  were  a  kingdom  on  a 
map,  and  every  year  makes  it  more  difficult  to  draw  any  line  of  demarcation  or  to 
lay  down  any  hard  and  fast  lines  upon  the  subject,  because  society  is  being  leavened 
by  Christian  principles,  the  moral  conscience  of  the  nation  quickened,  and  a  public 
opinion,  on  the  whole  of  a  healthy  character,  making  itself  powerfully  felt.  And, 
further,  what  is  the  world  to  one  person  is  not  the  world  to  another.  The  fact  that 
the  world  cannot  be  defined  as  to  locality  is  an  advantage,  not  a  disadvantage :  for 
it  calls  forth  from  us  a  constant  spirit  of  inquiry  and  watchfulness  before  we  enter 
upon  our  pursuits,  form  our  connections,  or  enter  into  society.  The  believer  should 
at  all  times  test  every  relationship  into  which  he  is  brought,  to  see  whether  beneath 
its  possibly  plausible  and  pleasant  surface  there  may  not  lurk  the  lust  of  the  flesh, 
the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  pride  of  life.  The  Christian,  too,  should  examine  not 
only  what  is  without,  to  see  whether  the  place  he  is  entering  is  the  world,  but  also 
what  is  within  himself,  and  whether  he  is  not  converting  even  what  is  the  kingdom 
of  God  into  the  world  by  the  worldly  spirit  which  he  brings  with  him.  We  may 
infect  as  well  as  be  infected.  (C.  Neil,  M.A.)  The  world :  spirit  of: — The  spirit 
of  the  world  is  for  ever  altering,  impalpable ;  for  ever  eluding,  in  fresh  forms,  your 
attempts  to  seize  it.  In  the  days  of  Noah  the  spirit  of  the  world  was  violence.  In 
Elijah's  day  it  was  idolatry.  In  the  day  of  Christ  it  was  power,  concentrated  and 
condensed  in  the  government  of  Rome.  In  ours,  perhaps,  it  is  the  love  of  money. 
It  enters  in  different  proportions  into  different  bosoms  ;  it  is  found  in  a  different 
form  in  contiguous  towns,  in  the  fashionable  watering-places,  and  in  the  commercial 
city  ;  it  is  this  thing  at  Athens,  and  another  in  Corinth.  This  is  the  spirit  of  the 
world,  a  thing  in  my  heart  and  yours  to  be  struggled  against,  not  so  much  in  the 
case  of  others  as  in  the  silent  battle  done  within  our  own  souls.  {F.  W.  Robertson, 
M.A.)  Worldliness  :    its  spirit  permanent,  its  forms  changeful : — The  world 

in  our  days  is  not  a  heathen  world,  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  the  apostle ;  but 
it  is  not  a  whit  less  "  the  world  that  lieth  in  wickedness."  The  outward 
developments  are  different,  but  the  inward  character,  principles,  and  spirit 
are  the  very  same :  changing  a  few  of  the  mere  external  circumstances,  the 
apostle's  description  of  the  "  world  "  of  his  own  day  is  equally  applicable  to  the 
"world"  of  ours.  There  are  now,  indeed,  no  idolatrous  banquets,  no  savage 
gladiatorial  conflicts  in  the  blood-stained  arena  of  the  amphitheatre,  no  midnight 
orgies  to  some  disgraceful  deity.  The  world,  perhaps,  now,  at  least  the  world  of 
the  upper  classes  of  society,  is  not  quite  so  rough,  but  more  poUshed  in  its  sinful- 
ness ;  but  its  scenes  of  amusement,  its  theatres,  its  luxurious  tastes  and  habits,  its 
nightly  revels,  and  too  lavish  entertainments,  partake  as  essentially  of  the  elements 
of  worldliness  as  the  less  advanced  indulgences  of  a  ruder  age.  In  its  thirst  after 
wealth,  in  its  restless  strivings  after  fame  and  glory,  in  its  grasping  selfishness,  in 
its  love  of  splendour  and  show,  we  question  whether  the  world,  as  it  presents  itself 
to  th3  Christian  of  the  nineteenth  century  wears  any  materially  different  aspect  from 
that  of  the  world  of  the  apostle's  days.  But,  when  we  speak  of  worldliness,  either 
as  it  is  developed  in  business  or  pleasure,  let  it  not  be  for  a  moment  supposed  that 
worldliness  exists  only  in  these  developments :  these  are  only  indices  or  marks  of  an 
inward  and  rooted  principle,  innate  in  every  man  born  into  this  world,  and  dominant 
in  every  man,  without  exception,  who  has  not  been  "  bom  again  of  water  and  of 
the  Spirit."  (W.  H.  Etchers,  M.A.)  But  be  ye  transformed  by  the  renew- 
ing of  your  mind. — Transformation: — This  word  is  used  to  denote  the  Lord's 
transfiguration,  when  His  body  was  seen  invested  with  the  glory  in  which  He  is 
to  appear  at  His  second  coming.  You  will  then  see  Him  thus  transfigured,  and  the 
result  will  be  your  own  transfiguration  (Phil.  iii.  21).  For  He  is  to  "  change  your 
vile  bodies,"  <fec.  But  there  is  a  transfiguration  in  the  life  that  now  is  (2  Cor.  iii. 
18)  also  into  the  image  of  the  Lord  ;  and  therefore  it  is  a  transformation  into  glory, 
but  not  into  the  glory  that  was  seen  on  the  Mount,  but  what  was  seen  in  the  manger, 
in  the  wilderness,  in  Gethsemane,  and  on  the  Cross.  Note  : — I.  The  manneb  of  rr. 
Christ  was  transformed  by  becoming  man ;  you  are  to  be  transformed  by  becoming 
new  men  in  Him.  The  renewing  of  your  mind  is  your  being  brought  to  have  the 
same  mind  which  Christ  had.  "  I  come  to  do  Thy  will,  0  God,"  is  the  language  of 
the  Son  in  the  very  act  of  taking  the  new  nature  ;  the  renewing  of  your  mind  is 
your  making  that  language  your  own.  Note  the  closeness  of  the  analogy.  1.  The 
agency  is  the  same — the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  He  alone  who  can  make  the  Son  par- 
taker of  your  human  nature,  without  making  Him  to  be  as  fallen  man ;  it  is  He 
alone  who  can  make  yoo  partakers  of  the  Sou's  Divine  nature,  without  making  you 


AHA*,  in.1  ROMANS.  467 

to  be  as  God.  2.  These  two  operations  fit  into  one  another :  the  one  effecting  that 
supernatural  birth  by  which  the  Son  becomes  a  servant,  the  other  that  supernatural 
birth  by  which  the  servants  become  sons.  The  one  transformation  is  the  cause  of 
the  other :  not  only  as  being  that  without  which  the  other  could  not  have  been,  but 
also  as  being  the  means  of  the  other.  It  is  through  your  believing  and  appropriating 
His  transformation,  that  yon  are  yourselves  transformed.  For  the  transformation 
in  either  case  is  a  union.  His  being  transformed  is  His  being  united  by  a  new 
creation  with  you  ;  your  being  transformed  is  your  being  united  by  a  new  creation 
to  Him.  3.  To  the  Son  Himself  His  being  born  of  the  Spirit  brought  a  new  mind. 
It  was  a  new  thing  for  Him  to  have  the  mind  of  a  servant,  and  to  say,  "  I  come  to 
do  Thy  will,  0  God."  And  it  is  a  new  mind  in  you  when,  as  sons,  you  say  the  same. 
Naturally,  self-will  is  the  ruling  principle  of  your  mind.  Insubordination  to  God 
is  that  "  fashion  of  the  world  "  to  which  you  are  not  to  be  conformed.  4.  The  trans- 
formation effected  in  the  case  of  Christ,  when  He  humbled  Himself  to  do  the  will 
of  God,  was  voluntary  on  His  part ;  otherwise  His  humiliation  and  obedience  unto 
death  could  have  had  no  eflScacy.  Equally  voluntary  must  be  the  change  on  your 
part:  "  Be  ye."  You  must  say,  with  renewed  minds,  entering  into  His  mind,  "  I 
come  to  do  Thy  wiU,  0  my  God."  It  is  true,  that  in  order  to  your  thus  acting,  you 
must  be  acted  upon  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  But  you  are  not  acted  upon  as  inert 
matter  may  be  acted  upon.  5.  Note  two  practical  applications.  ^1)  If  the  trans- 
formation in  you  is  thus  like  the  transformation  in  Him — see  to  it  that  it  be  very 
complete.  It  was  so  in  the  case  of  Christ ;  it  must  be  in  yours.  He  emptied 
Himself.  Do  you  also  empty  yourselves.  He  laid  aside  His  natural  position  of 
equality  with  God.  Do  you  also  lay  aside  your  usurped  position  of  seeking  to  be 
equal  with  God.  (2)  That  you  may  be  thus  transformed  into  the  image  of  your 
Lord — appropriate  as  available  for  you  your  Lord's  transformation  into  your  image. 
Behold  Him  transformed  for  you  ;  and  be  you,  after  a  corresponding  manner,  trans- 
formed in  Him.  He  becomes  a  servant,  continuing  still  to  be  the  Son ;  you  become 
sons  in  Him,  feeling  yourselves  now,  for  the  first  time  really,  to  be  servants.  He, 
being  the  Son,  comes  to  do  the  will  of  God  as  a  servant ;  you,  being  servants,  come 
to  do  the  will  of  God  as  sons.  II.  The  end  of  this  transfoemation.  "  That  you 
may  prove,"  &c.  The  will  of  God  needs  to  be  proved.  It  can  be  known  only  by 
trial.  Essentially,  the  will  of  God  is  and  must  be  the  expression  of  His  nature. 
But  the  nature  of  God  far  transcends  the  comprehension  of  finite  minds;  and 
therefore  His  will  may  well  be  expected  to  be  incomprehensible  too.  But  in  that 
formal  aspect  of  it  as  the  assertion  of  the  authority  of  God,  let  His  will  be  put  to 
the  test  of  actual  trial,  and  then  will  its  real  character  as  the  expression  of  His 
nature  come  out ;  for  while  neither  God  Himself  nor  His  will  can  be  grasped  in  the 
speculative  understanding,  both  He  and  it  can  be  grasped  in  the  obedient  and 
loving  heart.  But  apart  from  any  inquiry  into  the  reason  of  it,  the  fact  is  pregnant 
with  important  consequences.  For  one  thing,  it  partly  explains  the  economy  of 
probation,  and  tends  to  show  how  trial  must  be  both  summary  and  decisive ; 
summary,  that  it  may  be  ascertained  once  for  all  whether  the  authority  of  God  is  to 
be  acknowledged  or  disowned ;  and  decisive,  for  if  His  will  is  acknowledged,  the 
way  is  opened  for  proving  it  as  the  expression  of  His  nature  to  be  "good  and 
acceptable,"  &c. ;  whereas,  if  disowned,  all  opportunity  of  knowing  its  real  character 
is  hopelessly  lost.  1.  The  probation  of  man  turns  upon  the  willingness  of  man  to 
put  the  will  of  God  to  the  proof.  The  will  of  God,  as  it  was  announced  in  paradise, 
was  not  such  as  to  command  either  approbation  or  consent  on  the  part  of  our  first 
parents.  The  command  not  to  eat  of  the  fruit  did  not  obviously  commend  itself  as 
"  good,"  Ac.  Doubtless,  if  they  had  kept  it,  they  would  have  found  by  experience 
— (1)  That  it  was  in  itself  "good"  as  the  seal  of  God's  covenant  of  life,  and  as 
the  preparation  for  the  unfolding  of  His  higher  providence.  (2)  Acceptable.  Suited 
to  their  case  and  circumstances,  deserving  of  their  acceptance,  sure  to  become 
more  and  more  well-pleasing  as  they  entered  more  and  more  into  its  spirit.  (3) 
Perfect.  That  thus  only  could  God's  perfection  be  vindicated— the  perfection  of 
His  sovereign  right  to  rule  ;  that  thus  only  could  the  perfection  of  the  creature  be 
wrought  out  in  an  onward  and  upward  path  of  loyalty  and  love.  All  this  our  first 
parents  would  have  learned  concerning  the  will  of  God,  if  only  they  had  consented 
to  prove  it ;  but  this  they  would  not  do  ;  they  passed  judgment  upon  it  unproved ; 
they  refused  to  give  it  a  fair  trial ;  they  chose  rather  to  make  the  opposite  experi- 
ment, and  they  have  left  this  experiment  as  their  sad  legacy  to  their  descendants, 
so  many  of  whom  are  now  occupied  in  proving,  trying,  how  they  may  be  best  con- 
formed to  the  world  so  as  to  make  the  most  of  it ;  proving,  in  short,  what  is  the  wiH 


468  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xrt, 

of  this  world  and  this  world's  prinoe.    2.  The  probation  of  Christ  proceeds  npon 
the  very  same  principle.    He  is  tried  as  the  first  Adam  was  tried,  and  upon  the 
same  issue,  namely,  His  willingness  to  prove  the  will  of  God ;  and  in  His  case  also 
the  will  of  God  may  be  so  presented  to  His  hnman  soul  as  to  appear  neither 
reasonable  nor  desirable.     In  saoh  a  light,  accordingly,  Satan  tries  to  put  it  before 
Him.  The  pain,  shame,  weariness,  and  blood  awaiting  Him,  the  tempter  ingeniously 
contrasts  with  the  shorter  road  to  glory  which  he  would  have  Him  to  take.    The 
Second  Adam  will  not,  like  the  first,  accept  Satan's  representation ;  He  will  prove 
it  for  Himself ;  and  so  He  "  leams  obedience  by  the  things  which  He  suffers."  But 
He  proved  it,  and  in  the  proving  of  it  He  found  it  to  be  "  good  and  acceptable  and 
perfect."    He  tasted  the  delight  of  obedience,  as  He  learned  it.    3.  It  is  into  this 
image  of  Jesus,  thus  "  proving  that  will  of  God,"  that  you  are  now  to  be  "  trans- 
formed," &o.    You  are  to  prove  God's  will — (1)  In  what  must  be  the  first  act  of 
your  obedience — namely,  your  believing  on  Him  whom  He  has  sent.     What  this 
will  of  God  is  as  an  expression  of  His  nature  you  cannot  know  until  you  prove  it. 
You  must  "  taste  and  see  "  how  good  the  Lord  is,  &o.    You  would  fain  have  all 
made  quite  clear  to  you  before  you  surrender  yourselves  to  the  gospel  call.    Nay, 
you  stand  aloof,  and  start  objections  and  difficulties.     You  do  not  see  how  this 
aspect  of  the  gospel  call  can  be  incompatible  with  that.  Nay,  try  this  dipping  in  the 
Jordan.     It  may  seem  to  you  an  unlikely  mode  of  cure ;  but  at  any  rate  try  it.     In 
the  embrace  of  Christ,  not  while  you  are  standing  out  in  the  attitude  of  rebellion, 
all  difficulties  vanish.     (2)  Then  ever  after,  following  on  the  path  of  your  new 
obedience,  you  are  to  be  proving  "  what  is  that  good,"  &o.    At  every  step  it  will  be 
a  trial  to  you.    It  may  be  very  hard  sometimes  to  believe  that  the  will  of  God  con- 
eerning  you  is  "good,  and  acceptable,"  &c.    But  give  it  a  full  and  fair  trial ;  and 
you  will  soon  find  that  in  the  very  "  keeping  of  God's  commandments  there  is  great 
reward."     Conclusion  :  Mark — 1.  How  opposite  are  the  two  habits,  namely,  being 
"conformed  to  this  world,"  and  being  "transformed,"  <fcc.     There  are  here  two 
types,  of  one  or  other  of  which  you  must  take  the  fashion.    To  be  conformed  to 
the  world  is  to  take  things  as  they  are  and  make  the  best  of  them.     The  opposite 
habit  is  to  try  things  as  they  should  be.    2.  How  complete  the  transformation  must 
be  if,  instead  of  being  conformed  to  this  world,  you  are  to  '•  prove,"  &o.     You  must 
make  full  proof  of  God's  will.     But  that  you  cannot  do  if  you  yield  a  forced  sub- 
mission.   A  son  yielding  obedience  to  his  father's  will  reluctantly,  never  can  be 
acquainted  with  its  true  character  and  blessedness ;  but  let  him  throw  himself  heart 
and  soul  into  the  doing  of  it,  then  will  he  prove  it  of  what  sort  it  is.     To  have  the 
mind  to  do  so  implies  a  great  change,  a  new  creation,  a  new  heart.    3.  Now,  so  long 
as  the  fashion  of  this  world  lasts,  so  long  as  that  second  transformation  which 
awaits  you  is  postponed,  this  proving  of  the  will  of  God  must  throughout  be  more 
or  less  an  effort.     But  take  courage,  0  child  of  God  !     "  The  fashion  of  this  world 
passeth  away."    You  "  look  for  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth."    The  fashion  of 
that  new  world  and  the  will  of  God  will  not  be  opposed  to  one  another.   The  proving 
of  the  will  of  God,  then,  vrith  your  whole  nature  changed  into  the  image  of  the 
heavenly,  what  a  joyous  exercise  of   liberty  and   love  will  it   be  1     4.  In  the 
meantime,  a  signal  encouragement  as  motive.     The  more  you  prove  the  fashion  of 
this  world,  the  less  you  feel  it  to  be  "  good,"  <fec.     It  looks  fair  at  the  first,  but  who 
that  has  ever  lived  long  but  re-echoes  the  wise  man's  complaint — "  All  is  vanity  "  ? 
The  will  of  God  looks  worse  at  the  beginning  ;  but  on,  on,  child  of  God,  and  you 
will  find  a  growing  light,  encouragement,  and  joy.     "  The  path  of  the  just  is  as  the 
shining  light,  &c. ;  and  in  the  trial  of  them  you  find  that  "  wisdom's  ways  are  ways 
of  pleasantness,  and  all  her  paths  are  peace. "     {R.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.)         Trans- 
formation : — I.  What  is  it  to  be  tkansfobmed  ?     To  be  new  creatures  (2  Cor.  v.  17). 
1.  In  our  judgment  concerning — (1)  God  (Matt.  xix.  17).     (2)  Christ  (Phil.  i.  21 ; 
iii.  8).     (3)  The  world  (Eccles.  i.  1,  2).    2.  Our  thoughts  (Psa.  i.  2).    3.  Consciences 
(Acts  xxiv.  16).     4.  Wills  (Lam.  iii.  24),     5.  Affections  (Col.  iii.  2).     (1)  Love  and 
hatred  (Matt.  xxii.  37).     (2)  Desire  and  abhorrence.     (3)  Joy  and  griei  (Psa.  xlii. 
1,  2).     (4)  Hope  and  fear  (Psa.  xxvii.  1).     (5)  Anger  and  meekness  (MaU.  xi.  29). 
6.  Words  (Matt.  xii.  36).    7.  Actions  (1  Pet.  i.  15,  16).     Towards  God  and  men 
(Acts  xxiv.  16).     II.  Why  abe  we  to  be  transformed.     Till  transformed — 1.  We 
are  altogether  sinful  (Prov.  xv.  8).     2.  We  can  enjoy  no  happiness  here  nor  be 
capable  of  happiness  hereafter  (Heb.  xiL  14 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  14).    III.  Examine  whether 
TOO  BE  transformed  OR  NO.     Look  to  your  heads  (2  Cor.  xiii.  6) ;   your  hearts 
(Prov.  iv.  23)  ;  your  Uves  (Matt.  xii.  33).     Note  the  reasons  for  this  examination. 
1.  Many  are  mistaken  about  it,  and  think  they  are  renewed,  because  turned — (1) 


OBAP.  zn.]  ROMANS.  469 

From  one  Bin  to  another.  (2)  From  one  sect  to  another.  (3)  From  debanohery  to 
mere  morality.  2.  This  is  the  most  dangerous  of  all  mistakes.  3.  If  yon  never 
examine  yourselyes,  you  have  the  more  cause  to  fear  your  condition.  lY.  Sionb  of 
ouB  BEiNO  TBANSFOBUKD.  All  our  actlous  proceed — 1.  From  new  principles.  (1) 
Obedience  to  God  (1  Sam.  xr.  22).  (2)  A  desire  to  please  Him  (1  Thess.  iv.  1 ; 
Heb.  xi.  6).  2.  After  a  new  manner.  (1)  Not  hypocritically  but  sincerely  (2  Cor. 
i,  12).  (2)  Not  proudly,  but  humbly  (Luke  xvii.  10).  (3)  Not  interruptedly,  but 
constantly  (Luke  i.  75).  3.  To  a  new  end  (1  Cor.  x.  31 ;  Matt.  v.  16).  V.  Means. 
1.  Bead  the  word  written  (James  i.  21).  2.  Hear  it  preached.  3.  Meditate  upou  it. 
4.  Pray  (Psa.  li.  10).  5.  Receive  the  sacrament.  Conclusion:  1.  By  renovation 
you  become  again  as  you  were  created  (Gen.  i.  26).  2.  God  Himself  will  change  to 
you.  (1)  His  anger  to  love  (Isa.  Ixvi.  2).  (2)  All  His  actions  to  your  good  (chap, 
viii.  28).  3.  If  now  transformed  from  the  world  to  God,  hereafter  you  shall  be 
transformed  from  misery  to  happiness.  (Bp.  Beveridge.)  The  Christian  life  a 
trarujiguration : — In  the  preceding  verse  the  apostle  gathers  the  whole  sum  of 
Christian  duty  into  one  word.  And  so  in  this.  As  all  is  to  be  sacrifice,  so  all  is  to 
be  transformation.  Mark  : — I.  Where  Paul  begins — with  an  inwabd  renewal. 
1.  He  goes  deep  down,  because  he  had  learned  in  His  school  who  said :  "  Make 
the  tree  good  and  the  fruit  good."  To  tinker  at  the  outside  with  a  host  of  red-tape 
restrictions,  and  prescriptions,  is  all  waste  time  and  effort.  You  may  wrap  a  man 
up  in  the  swaddling  bands  of  specific  precepts  until  you  can  scarcely  see  him,  and 
he  cannot  move,  and  you  have  not  done  a  bit  of  good.  The  inner  man  must  be 
dealt  with  first,  and  then  the  outward  will  come  right  in  due  time.  Many  of  the 
plans  for  the  social  and  moral  renovation  of  the  world  are  as  superficial  as  a  doctor's 
treatment  would  be,  who  would  direct  all  his  attention  to  curing  pimples  when 
the  patient  is  dying  of  consumption.  3.  There  has  to  be  a  radical  change  in  tbe 
middle.  "  Mind  "  seems  to  be  equivalent  to  the  thinking  faculty,  but,  possibly, 
includes  the  whole  inner  man.  The  inner  man  has  got  a  wrong  twist  somehow ;  it 
needs  to  be  moulded  over  again.  It  is  held  in  slavery  to  the  material ;  it  is  a  mass 
of  affections  fixed  upon  the  transient ;  a  predominant  self-regard  characterises  it 
and  its  actions.  3.  This  new  creation  of  the  inner  man  is  only  possible  as  the 
result  of  the  communication  of  a  life  from  without ;  the  Ufe  of  Jesus,  put  into  your 
heart,  on  condition  of  your  opening  the  door  of  your  heart  by  faith,  and  saying, 
"  Come  in,  Thou  blessed  of  the  Lord. "  And  He  comes  in,  bearing  in  His  hands  a 
germ  of  life  which  will  mould  and  shape  our  "  mind  "  after  His  own  blessed  pattern. 
4.  That  new  life,  when  given,  needs  to  be  fostered  and  cherished.  It  is  only  a  little 
spark  that  has  to  kindle  a  great  heap  of  green  wood,  and  to  turn  it  into  its  own  ruddy 
likeness.  We  have  to  keep  our  two  hands  round  it,  for  fear  it  should  be  blown  out 
by  the  rough  gusts  of  passion  and  of  circumstance.  It  is  only  a  little  seed  that  is 
sown  in  our  hearts  ;  we  have  to  cherish  and  cultivate  it,  to  water  it  by  our  prayers, 
and  to  watch  over  it,  lest  either  the  fowls  of  the  air  with  light  wings  should  carry  it 
away,  or  the  heavy  wains  of  the  world's  business  and  pleasures  should  crush  it  to 
death,  or  the  thorns  of  earthly  desires  should  spring  up  and  choke  it.  II.  What 
HE  EXPECTS  FROM  THE  INWABD  CHANGE — a  life  "  transfigured,"  the  same  word  as  is 
employed  in  the  account  of  our  Lord's  transfiguration.  In  that  event  our  Lord's 
indwelling  divinity  came  up  to  the  surface  and  became  visible.  1.  "  A  transfigured 
life "  suggests — (1)  That  the  inward  life  will  shape  the  outward  conduct  and 
character.  Just  as  truly  as  the  physical  life  moulds  the  infant's  limbs,  and  as  every 
periwinkle  shell  on  the  beach  is  shaped  into  the  convolutions  that  will  fit  the 
inhabitant,  by  the  power  of  the  life  that  lies  within,  so  the  renewed  mind  will 
make  a  fit  dwelling  for  itself.  Did  you  never  see  goodness  making  men  and  women 
beautiful  ?  Have  not  there  been  other  faces  besides  Moses'  that  shone  as  men 
came  down  from  the  Monnt  of  Communion  with  God?  Certain  weeds  that  lie  at 
the  bottom  of  the  sea,  when  their  flowering  time  comes,  elongate  their  stalks  and 
reach  the  light  and  float  upon  the  top,  and  then,  when  they  have  flowered,  they  sink 
again  into  the  depths.  Our  Christian  life  should  come  up  to  the  surface  and  open 
out  its  flowers  there.  Does  your  Christianity  do  that  ?  It  is  no  use  talking  about 
the  inward  change  unless  there  is  the  outward  transfiguration.  (2)  That  the  essential 
character  of  our  transfiguration  is  the  moulding  of  us  into  the  likeness  of  Christ. 
Christ's  life  is  in  you  if  you  are  in  Him.  And  just  as  every  leaf  that  you  take  off 
some  plants  and  stick  into  a  flower-pot  will  in  time  become  a  little  plant  exactly 
like  the  parent  from  which  it  was  taken,  so  the  Christ-Mfe  that  is  in  you  will  be 
growing  into  a  copy  of  its  source  and  origin.  The  least  speck  of  musk,  invisibly 
taken  from  a  cake  of  it,  and  carried  away  ever  so  far,  will  diffuse  the  same  fragrance 


470  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHIP.  xa. 

as  the  mass  from  which  it  came ;  and  the  little  slice  of  Christ's  life  that  is  in  yon 
and  me,  will  smell  as  sweet  if  not  as  strong  as  the  great  life  from  which  it  came. 
2.  But  as  with  the  inward  renewal  so  with  the  outward  transfiguration,  the  life 
within  wUl  not  work  up  to  the  surface  except  upon  condition  of  our  own  honest 
endeavour.  The  fact  that  God's  Spirit  is  given  to  as  is  not  a  reason  for  our 
indolence,  but  for  our  work,  because  it  gives  us  the  power  by  which  we  can  do  the 
thing  we  desire.  What  would  you  think  of  a  man  that  said,  ••  It  is  the  steam  that 
drives  the  spindles,  so  I  need  not  put  the  belting  on  "  ?  III.  The  ultimate  conse- 
quence WHICH  THE  APOSTLE  BEGABD3  AS  CERTAIN,  FROM  THIS  INWARD  CHANGE  ;   Unlikc- 

nes3  to  the  world  around.  "  Be  not  conformed,"  &c.  1.  The  more  we  get  like 
Jesus  Christ,  the  more  certainly  we  get  unlike  the  world.  For  the  two  theories  of 
life  are  clean  contrary — the  one  is  aU  limited  by  time,  the  other  lays  hold  on  the 
eternal.  The  one  is  all  for  self,  the  other  is  all  for  God.  So  that  likeness  and 
adherence  to  the  one  must  needs  be  dead  in  the  teeth  of  the  other.  2.  And  that 
contrariety  is  as  real  to-day  as  ever  it  was.  Paul's  "  world  "  was  a  grim,  heathen, 
persecuting  world ;  onr  •*  world  "  has  got  christened,  and  goes  to  church  and 
chapel,  like  a  respectable  gentleman.  But  for  all  that  it  is  the  world  still,  and  we 
have  to  shake  our  hands  free  of  it.     3.  How  is  the  commandment  to  be  obeyed  ? 

(1)  Well,  of  course  there  are  large  tracts  of  life  where  the  saint  and  the  sinner 
have  to  do  the  same  things,  feel  the  same  anxieties,  weep  the  same  tears,  and  smile 
the  same  smiles.  And  yet  "  there  shall  be  two  women  grinding  at  a  mill,"  the  one 
shall  be  a  Christian,  the  other  not.  They  push  the  handle  round,  and  the  push 
that  carries  the  handle  round  half  the  circumference  of  the  millstone  may  be  a  bit 
of  religious  worship,  and  the  push  that  carries  it  round  the  other  half  may  be  a  bit 
of  serving  the  world  and  the  flesh  and  the  devil.  Two  men  shall  be  sitting  at  the 
same  desk,  two  boys  at  the  same  bench  at  school,  two  servants  in  the  same  kitchen, 
and  the  one  shall  be  serving  God  and  glorifying  His  name,  and  the  other  shall  be 
serving  self  and  Satan,    Not  the  things  done,  but  the  motive,  makes  the  difference. 

(2)  And  there  are  a  great  many  things  in  which  not  to  be  "  conformed  to  the  world  " 
means  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  certain  acts  and  people.  Have  nothing  to  do 
with  things  which  in  themselves  are  unmistakably  wrong ;  nor  with  things  which 
have  got  evil  inextricably  mixed  up  with  them,  like  the  English  stage ;  nor  with 
things  which,  as  experience  shows  you,  are  bad  for  you.  This  generation  of  the 
Church  seems  to  be  trying  how  near  it  can  go  to  the  world.  It  is  a  dangerous 
game,  like  children  trying  how  far  they  can  stretch  out  of  the  nursery  window 
without  tumbling  into  the  street ;  you  will  go  over  some  day  when  you  miscalculate 
a  little  bit.  (3)  Bather  "  be  ye  transfigured,"  and  then  you  will  find  that  when  the 
inner  mind  is  changed,  many  of  the  things  that  attracted  tempt  no  more,  and  many 
of  the  people  that  wanted  to  have  you  do  not  care  to  have  you,  for  you  are  a  wet 
blanket  to  their  enjoyments.  The  great  means  of  becoming  unlike  the  world  is 
becoming  like  Him,  and  the  great  means  of  becoming  like  Him  is  Uving  near  Him 
and  drinking  in  His  life  and  Spirit.  4.  And  then,  "  as  we  have  borne  the  image  of 
the  earthly,  we  shall  also  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly."  But  we  must  begin  by 
opening  our  hearts  to  the  leaven  which  shall  work  onward  and  outwards  till  it 
has  changed  all.  The  sun  when  it  shines  upon  a  mu'ror  makes  the  mirror  shine 
like  a  little  sun.  "We  all  with  open  face,  reflecting  as  a  mirror  does  the 
glory  of  the  Lord,  shall  be  changed  into  the  same  image."  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Transfiguration : — One  master  word,  for  the  whole  Christian  life  is  sacrifice,  self- 
surrender,  and  that  to  God.  Paul  here  brackets,  with  that  great  conception  of  the 
Christian  life,  another  equally  dominant  and  comprehensive.  In  one  aspect,  it  is 
self-surrender;  in  another,  it  is  growing  transformation.  The  inner  man,  having 
been  consecrated  as  a  prince,  by  yielding  of  himself  to  God,  is  called  upon  to 
manifest  inward  consecration  by  outward  sacrifice;  an  inward  "renewing  of  the 
mind  "  is  regarded  as  the  necessary  antecedent  of  transformation  of  outward  life. 
I.  Note,  then,  that  the  foundation  of  all  transformation  of  character  and 
CONDUCT  is  laid  DEEP  IN  A  RENEWED  MIND.  Now  it  is  a  matter  of  world-wide 
experience,  verified  by  each  of  us  in  our  own  cases,  if  we  have  ever  been  honest 
in  the  attempt,  that  the  power  of  self-improvement  is  limited  by  very  narrow 
bounds.  Any  man  that  has  ever  tried  to  cure  himself  of  the  most  trivial  habit 
which  he  desires  to  get  rid  of,  or  to  alter  in  the  slightest  degree  the  set  of  some 
strong  taste  or  current  of  his  being,  knows  how  little  he  can  do,  even  by  the  most 
determined  toil.  The  problem  that  is  set  before  a  man  when  you  tell  him  to  effect 
self-improvement  is  something  like  tliat  which  confronted  that  poor  paralytic  lying 
in  the  porch  at  the  pool :  "  If  you  can  walk  you  will  be  able  to  get  to  the  pool  that 


CHAP,  xn.]  ROMANS.  471 

will  make  yon  able  to  walk.  Bat  you  have  got  to  be  cared  before  you  can  do  what 
you  need  to  do  in  order  to  be  cured."  Only  one  Christ  presents  itself,  not  as  a 
mere  republication  of  morality,  not  as  merely  a  new  stimulus  and  motive  to  do 
what  is  right,  but  as  an  actual  communication  to  men  of  a  new  power  to  work  in 
them.  It  is  a  new  gift  of  a  life  which  will  anfold  itself  after  its  own  nature,  as  the 
bud  into  flower,  and  the  flower  into  fruit ;  giving  new  desires,  tastes,  directions,  and 
renewing  the  whole  nature.  And  so,  says  Paul,  the  beginning  of  transformations 
of  character  is  the  renovation  in  the  very  centre  of  the  being.  Now,  I  suppose 
that  in  my  text  the  word  "  mind  "  is  not  so  much  employed  in  the  widest  sense, 
including  all  the  affections  and  will,  and  the  other  faculties  of  our  nature,  as  in  the 
narrower  sense  of  the  perceptive  power,  or  that  faculty  in  our  nature  by  which  we 
recognise,  and  make  our  own,  certain  truths.  "The  renewiug  of  the  mind," 
then,  is  only,  in  such  an  interpretation,  a  theological  way  of  putting  the  simpler 
English  thought,  a  change  of  estimates,  a  new  set  of  views ;  or,  if  that  word  be  too 
shallow,  as  indeed  it  is,  a  new  set  of  convictions.  It  is  profoundly  true  that  "  as 
a  man  thinketh,  so  is  he."  Our  characters  are  largely  made  by  our  estimates  of 
what  is  good  or  bad,  desirable  or  undesirable.  Why,  we  all  know  how  often  a 
whole  life  has  been  revolutionised  by  the  sudden  dawning  or  rising  in  its  sky  of 
some  starry  new  truth,  formerly  hidden  and  undreamed  of.  If  you  want  to  change 
your  characters — and  God  knows  they  all  need  it — change  the  deep  convictions  of 
^'our  mind ;  and  get  hold,  as  Living  realities,  of  the  great  truths  of  Christ's  gospel. 
If  you  and  I  really  beUeved  what  we  say  we  believe,  that  Jesus  Christ  has  died  for 
us,  and  lives  for  us,  and  is  ready  to  pour  out  upon  us  the  gift  of  His  Divine  Spirit, 
and  wills  that  we  should  be  like  Him,  and  holds  out  to  us  the  great  and  wonderful 
hopes  and  prospects  of  an  absolutely  eternal  life  of  supreme  and  serene  blessedness 
at  His  right  hand  should  we  be,  could  we  be,  the  sort  of  people  that  most  of  us 
are  ?  Truth  professed  has  no  transforming  power  ;  truth  received  and  fed  upon 
can  revolutionise  a  man's  whole  character.  Make  of  your  every  thought  an 
action ;  link  every  action  with  a  thought.  Or,  to  put  it  more  Christian-like,  let 
there  be  nothing  in  your  creed  which  is  not  in  your  commandments ;  and  let 
nothing  be  in  your  life  which  is  not  moulded  by  these.  The  beginning  of  all 
transformation  is  the  revolutionised  conviction  of  a  mind  that  has  accepted  the 
truths  of  the  gospel.  II.  Well  then,  secondly,  note  the  tbansfiqubed  life.  The 
life  is  to  he  transfigured.  Yet  it  remains  the  same,  not  only  in  the  consciousness 
of  personal  identity,  but  in  the  main  trend  and  drift  of  the  character.  There  is 
nothing  in  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  which  is  meant  to  obliterate  the  lines  of  the 
strongly  marked  individuality  which  each  of  us  receives  by  nature.  Bather  the 
gospel  is  meant  to  heighten  and  deepen  these,  and  to  make  each  man  more 
intensely  himself,  more  thoroughly  individual,  and  unlike  anybody  else.  But 
whilst  the  individuality  remains,  and  ought  to  be  heightened  by  Christian  con- 
secration, yet  a  change  should  pass  over  our  lives,  like  the  change  that  passes  over 
the  winter  landscape  when  the  summer  sun  draws  out  the  green  leaves  from  the 
hard  black  boughs,  and  flashes  a  fresh  colour  over  all  the  brown  pastures.  Christ 
in  us,  if  we  are  true  to  Him,  will  make  us  more  ourselves,  and  yet  new  creature* 
in  Christ  Jesus.  And  the  transformation  is  to  be  into  His  likeness  who  is  the 
pattern  of  all  perfection.  We  must  be  moulded  after  the  same  type.  There  are 
two  types  possible  for  us :  this  world  ;  Jesus  Christ.  We  have  to  make  our  choice. 
That  transformation  is  no  sadden  thing,  though  the  revolution  which  underlies 
it  may  be  instantaneous.  The  working  out  of  the  new  motives,  the  working  in  of 
the  new  power,  is  no  mere  work  of  a  moment.  It  is  a  lifelong  task  till  the  lump  be 
leavened.  And  remember,  this  transformation  is  no  magic  change  effected  whilst 
men  sleep.  It  is  a  commandment  which  we  have  to  brace  ourselves  to  perform. 
But  this  positive  commandment  is  only  one  side  of  the  transfiguration  that  is  to  be 
effected.  It  is  clear  enough  that  if  a  new  likeness  is  being  stamped  upon  a  man, 
the  process  may  be  looked  at  from  the  other  side ;  and  that  in  proportion  as  we 
become  liker  Jesus  Christ,  we  shall  become  more  unlike  the  old  type  to  which  we 
were  previously  conformed.  "  This  world  "  here,  in  my  text,  is  more  properly 
*'  this  age,"  which  means  substantially  the  same  thing  as  John's  favourite  word 
"  world,"  viz.,  the  sum  total  of  godless  men,  and  things  conceived  of  as  separated 
from  God.  Only  by  this  expression  the  essentially  fleeting  nature  of  that  type  ia 
more  distinctly  set  forth.  And  although  it  can  only  be  a  word,  I  want  to  put  in 
here  a  very  earnest  word  which  the  tendencies  of  this  generation  do  very  specially 
require.  It  seems  to  be  thought,  by  a  great  many  p^iple,  who  call  themselves 
Christians  nowadays,  that  the  nearer  they  can  come  in  life,  in  ways  of  looking  at 


479  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xok 

things,  in  estimates  of  literature,  for  instance,  in  customs  of  society.  In  politics,  in 
trade,  and  especially  in  amusements — the  nearer  they  can  come  to  the  anchristian 
world,  the  more  "  broad  "  and  "  superior  to  prejudice  "  they  are.  And  it  seems  to 
be  by  a  great  many  professing  Christians  thought  to  be  a  great  feat  to  walk  as  the 
mules  on  the  Alps  do,  with  one  foot  over  the  path  and  the  precipice  down  below. 
Keep  away  from  the  edge.  Yon  are  safer  there.  There  is  a  broad  gulf  between  the 
man  who  believes  in  Jesus  Christ  and  His  gospel  and  the  man  who  does  not.  And 
the  resulting  conducts  cannot  be  the  same  unless  the  Christian  man  is  insincere. 
III.  And  now,  lastly,  note  the  obeat  bewabo  and  cbown  or  this  tbansfioubsd 
LIFE.  The  issue  of  such  a  life  is,  to  put  it  into  plain  English,  an  increased  power 
of  perceiving,  instinctively  and  surely,  what  it  is  God's  will  that  we  should  do.  To 
know  beyond  doubt  what  I  ought  to  do,  and  knowing,  to  have  no  hesitation  ot 
reluctance  in  doing  it,  seems  to  me  to  be  heaven  upon  earth.  And  the  man  that 
has  it  needs  but  little  more.  This,  then,  is  the  reward.  Each  peak  we  cUmb 
opens  wider  and  clearer  prospects  into  the  untravelled  land  before  oa.     {Ibid,\ 

Yer.  3.  For  I  say  ...  to  every  man  . . .  not  to  think  of  himself  more  highly 
than  he  ought  to  think. — Needful  countel: — I.  We  must  not  think  too  highly 
op  OURSELVES,  especially  of — 1.  Our  knowledge  (Jer  ix.  23 ;  1  Cor.  viii.  1).  We 
know  little  either  in — (1)  Naturals,  of  which  we  know  but  few,  and  then  largely  by 
conjectures.  (2)  Spirituals.  We  know  but  little  of  God  (Hos.  iv.  1 ;  Jer.  ix.  3) ; 
of  Christ  (1  Cor.  ii.  2) ;  of  our  souls ;  of  our  estate  as  to  God  (2  Cor.  xiii.  5) ;  as  to 
the  world  to  come,  and  all  knowledge  we  owe  to  God  (Matt.  xi.  25).  2.  Our  gifts. 
(1)  None  can  perform  their  duty  aright  (Eccles.  vii.  20 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  5).  (2)  What 
gifts  we  have  we  are  bound  to  God  for  (1  Cor.  iv.  7).  (3)  We  can  do  no  good  with 
it  without  God  (John  xv.  6;  1  Cor.  iii.  6).  3.  Our  graces.  (1)  Few  have  all.  (2) 
Those  we  have  are  imperfect  (Phil.  iii.  11-13).  (a)  Love  to  God  (Matt.  xxii.  37). 
(b)  Faith  in  Christ  (Luke  xvii.  5).  (c)  Bepentance  of  sin  (2  Cor.  vii.  10).  (d) 
Justice  to  our  neighbour  (Matt.  vii.  12).  (e)  Charity  to  the  poor  (1  Cor.  xvi.  2 ;  2 
Cor.  ix.  6).  (3)  If  we  think  too  highly  of  them,  they  are  no  true  graces  (Matt.  xi. 
29  ;  1  Tim.  i.  15  ;  Kph.  iii.  8).  II.  What  cause,  then,  is  these  not  to  be  pboud 
— 1.  Of  strength  (Jer.  ix.  23).  (1)  Wherein  the  beasts  excel  us.  (2)  Wbereof  we 
may  any  moment  be  deprived  (Isa.  ii.  22).  2.  Of  riches.  (1)  Which  cannot  make 
us  happy.  (2)  But  keep  us  from  happiness  (Matt.  xix.  23,  26).  (3)  Which  we 
must  part  with  before  we  can  be  eternally  happy.  3.  Honours.  (1)  Wnich  depend 
on  the  thoughts  of  others.  (2)  May  deprive  us  of  true  honours  (John  xii.  43).  IH. 
Study  humilitt.  1.  Towards  God  (Micah  vi.  8;  Isa.  Ivii.  17;  Ixvi.  2).  Consider- 
ing— (1)  How  many  sins  you  are  guilty  of  (Psa.  xix.  12).  (2)  How  many  you  are 
defiled  with  (Isa.  i.  5,  6).  2.  Towards  men.  Consider — (1)  You  know  not  but  they 
are  better  and  more  dear  to  God  than  yourselves  (chap.  xiv.  3,  4 ;  Phil.  ii.  3).  (2) 
If  you  excel  them  in  some  things,  they  may  excel  you  in  others  (ver.  4).  (3)  The 
more  proud  you  are,  the  less  cause  have  yon  to  be  proud ;  pride  causing — (a) 
Division  among  men  (Prov.  xiii.  10).  (b)  Separation  from  God  (1  Pet.  v.  5). 
(Bp.  Bevei-idge.)  Church  membership  and  ministry  : — I.  In  the  wobk  or  mutoai, 

MINISTRY   within    THE    ChUBCH    THERE  IS  SOMETHING  FOR  EVERT  MEMBER  TO  PERFORM. 

The  appeal  is  "  to  every  man  that  is  among  you."  The  Church  is  "  one  body  in 
Christ,"  "  every  one  "  being  a  "  member  "  of  some  kind,  and  having  his  proper 
office.  Every  member,  organ,  nerve,  vein,  bone,  ligament  has  its  proper  function 
in  the  natural  body  ;  and  as  soon  as  any  one  fails,  there  ensues  that  disturbance  of 
the  harmonic  activity  which  we  call  disease.  In  the  Church,  Christ  is  the  Head, 
the  Centre  of  life,  intelligence,  and  authority,  and  His  Holy  Spirit  the  organic 
principle.  But  every  individual  believer  has  his  own  proper  sphere  of  influence 
and  activity  for  the  general  good  (Eph.  iv.  15,  16).  If  he  neglects  that  ministry, 
not  only  will  he  himself  suffer  damage  or  excision,  but  the  body  also  will  suffer  loss 
thereby.  II.  In  order  that  evert  man  mat  do  his  own  proper  work,  he  must 
FORM  A  sobeb,  PRACTICAL  ESTIMATE  OF  HIS  OWN  ABiLiTT.  The  work  must  be  thought- 
fully done.  But  the  thought,  to  be  productive,  must  be  sober.  The  worker  is 
admonished  "  not  to  be  high-minded  above  that  which  he  ought  to  be  minded,  but 
to  be  so  minded  as  to  be  sober-minded."  For — 1.  If  a  man  thinks  more  highly  of 
himself  than  he  ought  to  think,  he  will  probably  despise  the  service  to  which  the 
Master  has  called  him,  and  seek  to  undertake  work  for  which  he  has  not  the  adequate 
powers.  This  will,  in  all  likelihood,  be  marred,  and  himself  humiliated,  while  that 
wUl  fall  to  more  worthy  hands.  All  such  aspiring  persons  would  do  well  to  ponder 
the  warning  words  (Mark  x.  43-45).    In  Christ's  Church  the  surest  way  towards 


OBip.  m.]  BOMANS.  473 

honourable  promotion  is  that  of  prompt,  earnest,  humble  service  in  that  which  is 
close  at  hand.  2.  If  a  man  under-estimates  his  ability,  and  thinks  that  he  can  do 
nothing,  or  nothing  of  profit  to  the  Master,  then  he  will  do  nothing,  and  the  Church 
will  lose  his  service  and  he  will  lose  his  reward  (Matt.  xxv.  14-30 ;  Luke  xix.  12-27). 
Therefore — 3.  The  apostle  supplies  a  standard  for  the  measurement  of  thought  in 
the  work  of  self-estimation.  Let  every  man  "  think  soberly,  according  as  God  has 
dealt  to  every  man  the  measure  of  faith  " — i.e.,  the  confidence  which  a  man  has  in 
Christ,  and  in  himself  by  the  grace  of  Christ,  that  he  has  competent  ability  for 
service.  The  man  who  has  faith  in  himself  generally  succeeds ;  while  a  better  man, 
if  full  of  doubt  and  hesitation,  fails.  I  must  not  so  under-estimate  my  gifts  as  to 
decline  any  service ;  for  some  power  has  most  certainly  been  imparted.  But  I 
must  not  attempt  service  for  which  I  am  unfit  in  the  fanatical  confidence  that  I 
shall  obtain  supernatural  aid.  Nor  need  I  stand  in  doubt  as  to  whether  or  not  I 
have  a  Divine  call  to  the  work  ;  the  ability  and  opportunity  ought  to  be  sufficient. 
III.  The  sebvice,  and  the  spibit  and  manner  in  which  it  should  be  dischaeged 
(vers.  6-8).  1.  The  ministry  of  the  Word :  be  that  "  prophesieth,"  •'  teacheth," 
"  exhorteth. "  The  New  Testament  prophet  was  pre-eminently  the  preacher :  and 
he  must  preach  or  prophesy  accordiug  to  the  proportion  of  faith.  But  there  are 
those  who  are  not  called  to  this  ministry,  who  can  nevertheless  speak  words  of 
warning,  exhortation,  or  comfort,  either  in  the  intercourse  of  daily  Ufe,  the  prayer- 
meeting,  or  the  village  sanctuary ;  and  any  Church  which  does  not  encourage  these 
gifted  oues  is  sadly  defective.  There  are  others  again  who,  though  neither  apt  to 
exhort,  nor  able  to  preach,  have,  notwithstanding,  the  gift  of  teaching.  They  can 
instruct  in  the  Sabbath  school.  Let  none  of  these  neglect  the  gift  that  is  in  him. 
Let  none  ambitiously  aspire  to  an  office  for  which  he  is  not  equal ;  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  let  none  refuse  to  employ  his  one  talent  because  he  has  not  more  and  higher 
gifts.  2.  There  is  also  the  ministry  of  finance  and  benevolence.  That  the  apostle 
here  speaks  of  the  official  diaconate  is  morally  certain,  because  that  it  is  mentioned 
in  the  midst  of  other  offices  which  are  expressly  specified  as  such  (1  Cor.  xii.  28-30). 
To  them,  therefore,  would  fall  the  work  of  superintending  and  directing  the  active 
charities  of  the  Church.  He  who  gave  would  be,  not  the  disburser  of,  but  the  con- 
tributor to,  the  reUef  fund  ;  and  he  who  showed  mercy  might  be  either  a  person 
appointed  to  the  special  work  of  relieving  the  sick  and  poor,  or  one  who  engaged  in 
the  good  work  out  of  his  own  impulse.  These  ministries,  though  not  confined  to 
official  persons,  were  sanctioned  by  the  properly  appointed  officers.  Conclusion  : 
Warning  may  be  here  given  against  two  evils.  1.  That  of  those  who  render  very 
small,  if  any,  service  to  the  cause  of  Christ,  but  wbo  criticise  those  who  do.  This 
is  a  crying  evil,  and  a  Christian  ought  to  be  ashamed  of  it.  2.  That  of  over- 
estimating some  particular  department  of  service.  (IF.  Tyson.)  Measurements 
of  manhood  : — Wlien  persons  are  under  the  influence  of  wine,  they  often  entertain 
the  most  extravagant  notions  of  themselves,  of  which  they  are  heartily  ashamed 
when  they  come  to  their  sober  reason.  And  it  is  this  figure  latent  that  the  apostle 
employs.  Think  not  extravagantly  well  of  yourselves.  Form  an  estimate  that  is 
reasonable  and  in  accordance  with  fact.    I.  These  words  assume  that  men  should 

HAVE  SOME   OPINION   OV   IHEIB  OWN  CHABACTEB  AND  WOBTH,  BUT  THAT  THEY  ABE  LIABLE 

TO  FAULTT  ESTIMATES.  It  is  impossible  not  to  have  some  opinion  of  one's  self. 
And  the  only  question  is,  whether  it  shall  be  an  idea  shaped  according  to  good 
rales  and  through  right  influences,  or  whether  it  shall  be  casually  left  to  chance 
feeling.  1.  There  be  those  who  say  that  the  best  way  to  think  of  yourself  is  not  to 
think  at  all ;  and  there  is  a  sense  in  which  this  is  true.  Men  may  think  too  much 
of  themselves,  on  the  one  hand,  and  too  little  on  the  other.  But  these  dangers  do 
not  take  away  the  wisdom  of  attempting  a  correct  judgment  of  ourselves.  There 
is  a  duty  of  self-knowledge,  for  otherwise  how  shall  one  know  whether  he  be  follow- 
ing the  commands  of  his  Master,  or  simply  the  impulses  of  his  own  selfish  nature  ? 
How  shall  there  be  aspiration  ?  Is  it  needful  for  the  husbandman  to  know  the 
extent  of  his  territory,  and  which  part  is  rich  and  which  part  is  poor,  and  is 
spiritual  husbandry  to  be  founded  in  pretentious  ignorance  ?  You  are  commanded 
to  think  in  conformity  with  facts  and  things  as  they  exist.  Not  that  we  should 
oarry  self-consciousness  with  us  every  hour,  and  attempt  to  keep  our  hand  upon  the 
pulse  of  the  heart  or  of  the  life.  Tet  one  may  come  to  a  general  estimate  that  shall 
be  the  foundation  of  all  the  processes  of  moral  culture  which  he  is  to  follow  ouL 
2.  The  measurements  of  feeling  are  to  be  avoided ;  and  yet  those  are,  in  many 
instances,  the  only  estimates  which  men  make.  If  one  be  constitutionally  proud, 
he  thinks  a  hundred  times  better  of  himself  than  anybody  else  thinks  of  him.    It 


474  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xu, 

is  said  that  greatness  of  mind  is  inconsistent  with  vanitj;  bat  many  men  of 
eminent  genius  have  been  men  of  pre-eminent  vanity.  3.  The  estimate  of  those 
qualities  which  suit  our  cirele,  and  which  reflect  from  it  upon  ourselves,  is  a  false 
way  of  measuring.  This  is  not  having  any  knowledge  of  yourselves,  but  is  simply 
knowing  when  you  are  pleased,  without  any  regard  to  moral  condition.  4.  The 
measurement  of  ourselves  simply  in  executive  functions  famishes  a  very  imperfect 
knowledge  of  what  we  reaUy  are.  Men  may  have  the  most  exaggerated  ideas  of 
their  excellence  or  weakness  who  simply  think  of  themselves  as  factors  in  society, 
as  business  men,  <&c.  Skill  is  certainly  a  matter  which  a  man  ought  not  to  be 
ashamed  of,  and  which  a  man  may  sometimes  well  be  proud  of ;  but  judging  simply 
from  this  view  is  not  enough.  It  is  not  wrong  for  a  man  to  know  whether  he  is  a 
good  lawyer  or  not.  It  is  not  necessary  to  humility  that  a  man  who  stands  second 
to  none  at  the  bar  should  say  of  himself,  "  I  always  feel  myself  to  be  a  very  poor 
lawyer  I "  A  man  has  a  right,  and  it  is  his  duty,  to  think  of  himself  as  he  is. 
This  estimate  is  not  incompatible  with  true  humility.  Indeed,  it  is  indispensable 
to  true  humility.  If  God  has  given  a  man  great  power,  must  he  make  believe 
that  he  does  not  carry  power  ?  Must  Milton,  in  order  to  be  modest,  believe  that  he 
did  not  speak  in  immortal  numbers?  5.  Men  make  a  false  estimate  in  judging  of 
themselves  also  by  selecting  the  best  things  in  the  best  moods,  and  slurring  over 
the  rest.  We  select  those  excellencies  which  are  apparent,  and  we  usually  exaggerate 
them.  And  we  are  inclined  to  omit  co-ordinate  qualities.  If  a  man  be  strong, 
there  are  a  thousand  inflections  of  feeling  which  are  not  taken  account  of.  He 
may  be  strong,  but  not  gentle.  A  man  has  a  blunt  lip,  and  calls  it  honesty,  fidelity  to 
the  truth.  But  where  are  the  co-ordinate  qualities  of  meekness,  gentleness  and  love  ? 
The  virtues  which  we  have  not  we  do  not  usually  require  of  ourselves.  We  leave  out  of 
view,  too,  the  great  evil  tendencies  which  exist  in  us.  Our  characters  are  dressed 
for  inspection,  as  apples  are  when  they  are  sent  to  market.  There  are  all  sorts  in 
the  middle  of  the  barrel,  and  the  best  ones  are  put  on  the  top  to  face  oS  with. 
We  deceive  ourselves,  not  only  by  arranging  our  good  qualities  in  the  most  favour- 
able manner,  but  by  heightening  their  colour  a  httle.  You  have  seen  apple-women 
take  a  cloth  and  rub  their  apples  until  every  one  of  them  shines,  and  put  them  in 
the  most  tempting  aspects.  And  do  not  men  do  the  same  thing  with  their  good 
qualities  ?  II  there  is  a  speck,  that  is  turned  round  inside  ;  but  you  will  And  it  out 
after  you  have  bought  the  apple  and  cut  it.  I  do  not  say  that  a  man  should  make 
everything  put  on  its  worst  face.  I  say  simply  this  :  Let  every  man  think  of  him- 
self as  he  ought  to  think.  A  man  may  think  himself  to  be  far  better  than  he  is  by 
judicious  selection,  I  have  seen  my  garden  when  the  season  was  empty  of  flowers, 
and  yet,  by  a  skilful  gameriug  from  this  nook  and  that,  I  could  gather  a  handful  of 
flowers  that  would  lead  to  the  supposition  that  the  garden  was  in  its  summer  glory. 
A  man  may  select  good  qualities  in  himself  and  make  up  a  bouquet  of  his  fancy, 
which  shall  make  it  seem  as  though  it  were  a  paradise  there,  by  a  judicious  picking 
and  arranging.  But  the  great  mistake  which  men  make  is  that  of  selecting  only 
the  secondary  elements  of  their  character,  and  leaving  out  the  primary  ones.  A 
symmetrical  whole  is  very  seldom  thought  of  in  self-estimation.    II.  No  man  knows 

HOW   TO   MKASDBE    HIMSELF   WHO    HAS    FAILED   TO   UNDERSTAND  WHEKK   TEUK   MANHOOD 

IS — where  the  diameter  is — where  the  equator  is.  And  this  is  what  the  apostle 
gives  us :  "I  say  to  every  man  ...  to  think  soberly,  according  as  God  hath  dealt 
to  every  man  the  measure  of  faith."  1.  It  is  where  the  spiritual  elements  dwell  in 
man,  at  that  point  where  he  understands  and  touches  the  divine,  that  you  must 
measure  him.  You  must  measure,  not  your  animal-hood,  but  your  manhood.  Now, 
if  we  over-reach  our  fellow-men,  if  we  use  them  for  our  own  purposes,  we  think 
ourselves  strong  and  great  men.  But  the  feeling  is  malign  and  satanic.  That  only 
is  Divine  which  seeks  others'  happiness,  if  need  be  at  one's  own  expense.  He  who 
knows  what  conscience,  faith,  love,  patience,  and  gentleness  are,  knows  something 
about  himself.  And  everybody  is  ignorant  of  himself  who  has  not  an  estimate 
which  is  founded  upon  the  gauge  of  these  quaUties.  2.  Nor  should  we  leave  ont 
the  relation  of  man  to  the  world  to  come.  For  a  man  may  be  very  strong  as  regards 
this  life,  and  very  weak  as  regards  the  other  life.  And  as  we  are  here  to  prepare 
for  the  life  to  come,  he  misses  his  manhood  and  the  significance  of  it  who  only 
lives  for  a  time  and  is  unfit  to  live  for  the  spiritual  and  eternal.  It  is  painful  to 
think  how  much  the  grave  strains  out  of  that  which  men  do  and  earn  in  this  life. 
It  is  the  work  of  men's  hands  that  tbey  are  proud  of  mostly.  But  you  shall  take 
tbrongh  the  shadowy  door  nothing  but  what  is  spiritual ;  and  how  much  of  that 
iiave  yoa  to  take  through?    If  you  were  to  efiace  from  many  men  that  which  makes 


CHAP,  xu.]  ROMANS.  475 

them  great  in  induence  in  the  daj  in  which  they  live,  then  millionaires  might  come 
oat  paupers.  And  only  he  can  measure  himself  aright  who  knows  how  much  of 
himself  he  can  carry  through  and  beyond.  "  The  last  shall  be  first,  and  the  first 
last."  3.  Let  every  mau,  then,  measure  himself,  not  according  to  his  vanity,  but  as 
under  the  eye  of  God.  Let  one  think  of  himself  as  an  heir  of  immortality  ;  let  him 
believe  himself  to  be  a  son  of  God ;  and  then  let  him  apply  to  himself  the  measures 
which  belong  to  this  transcendent  conception  of  life  and  of  character.  Measuring 
yourselves  thus,  you  will  not  think  of  yourselves  more  highly  than  you  ought  to. 
This  is  true  humility.  It  is  humility  to  think,  not  that  you  are  less  than  somebody 
else,  but  that  you  are  less  than  you  ought  to  be.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  The 
notion  of  pride  stated,  and  the  pretensions  to  it  examined : — 1.  It  is  a  common 
observation  that  however  forward  men  may  be  to  repine  at  the  unequal  portion  which 
God  has  allotted  them  of  worldly  blessings,  yet  they  are  generally  well  satisfied  with 
their  share  of  inward  endowments :  it  being  as  hard  to  meet  with  a  person  who  humbly 
thinks  he  has  too  little  sense  and  merit,  as  it  is  to  find  one  who  fancies  he  has  too 
great  riches  and  honours.  What  makes  men  uneasy  in  their  circumstances  is  that 
they  are  continually  setting  to  view  the  bright  side  of  themselves  and  the  dark  side 
of  their  condition  in  life ;  the  first  to  find  out  their  own  grievances,  and  the  last  to 
discern  their  own  faults  and  follies.  Whereas  if  they  took  a  contrary  method  they 
would  perceive  that  God  had  been  kinder  to  the  worst  of  men  than  the  very  best 
of  men  could  deserve.  2.  Among  the  many  imputations  which  we  are  willing  to 
fasten  upon  those  whom  we  have  an  aversion  to,  that  of  pride  is,  I  think,  one  of 
the  most  common.  Now,  if  we  would  exEimine  the  innermost  recesses  of  the  mind, 
I  doubt  we  should  often  find  that  our  own  pride  is  the  cause  why  we  tax  others 
with  it.  Men  elate  with  the  thoughts  of  their  own  sufficiency  are  ever  imagining 
that  others  are  wanting  in  their  regard  to  them,  and  therefore  very  apt  to  conclude 
that  pride  must  be  the  cause  why  they  withhold  from  them  that  respect  which  they 
have  an  unquestioned  right  to  in  their  own  opinion.  I.  The  notion  of  pbide. 
Our  happiness,  as  well  as  knowledge,  arises  from  sensation  and  refection,  and 
may  be  reduced  to  these  two  articles,  viz.,  that  of  pleasing  sensations,  and  that  of 
agreeable  thoughts.  Now  as  to  a  desire  of  indulging  the  former  without  check  or 
control,  are  owing  lust,  drunkenness,  and  intemperance ;  so  from  a  desire  of 
indulging  the  latter  beyond  measure,  pride  takes  its  original.  It  does  not  consist 
in  the  bare  consciousness  that  we  have  some  accomplishments,  as,  for  instance, 
good  sense,  beauty,  great  abilities;  but  in  that  exultation  of  mind  which  is  frequent 
upon  that  consciousness,  unallayed  by  self-dissatisfaction  arising  from  a  survey 
of  our  sins  and  frailties.  The  difference  between  humility  and  pride  consists  in 
this,  that  the  humble  man,  whatever  talents  he  is  possessed  of,  considers  them  as 
BO  many  trusts  reposed  in  him  by  God,  which  are  so  far  from  raising  his  pride 
that  they  excite  his  caution ;  as  knowing*  that  to  "  whom  much  is  given,  of  him 
much  will  be  required  "  ;  whereas  the  proud  values  himself  as  if  he  were  not  only 
the  subject  but  the  author  of  the  good  qualities,  and  so  makes  an  idol  of  himself, 
instead  of  adoring  and  thanking  God  for  them.  Pride,  then,  is  the  thinking  too 
highly  of  ourselves.  To  obviate  mistakes  it  will  be  necessary  to  observe  that 
pride  is  not  merely  to  think  favourably  of  ourselves ;  for  then  indeed  pride,  as 
some  late  authors  have  maintained,  would  be  an  universal  vice,  everybody  being 
more  or  less  biassed  in  his  own  favour.  But  pride  is  to  think  so  favourably  of 
ourselves  as  to  exclude  a  modest  diffidence  of  ourselves,  and  a  salutary  sense  of  the 
number  of  human  frailties,  the  imperfection  of  our  virtues,  the  malignity  of  our 
crimes,  and  oar  dependence  on  God  for  everything  good  in  us  and  for  us.  U.  The 
UNREASONABLENESS  07  THIS  VICE.  Are  we  proud  of  riches  ?  Biches  cannot  alter 
the  nature  of  things,  they  cannot  make  a  man  worthy  that  is  worthless  in  himself ; 
they  may  command  an  insipid  complaisance,  a  formal  homage,  and  ceremonious 
professions  of  respect,  and  teach  a  servile  world  to  speak  a  language  foreign  to 
their  hearts;  but  where  a  largeness  of  soul  is  wanting  they  can  never  procure 
grateful  sentiments  and  an  undissembled  love,  the  willing  tribute  of  a  generous 
heart  to  merit  only.  Do  we  value  ourselves  upon  our  power  ?  No ;  what  is 
remarked  by  somebody  or  other  is  a  great  truth,  viz.,  that  there  is  no  good  in 
power,  but  merely  the  power  of  doing  good.  Upon  our  worldly  prudence  ?  Those 
who  are  acquainted  with  history  know  how  often  the  best-laid  designs  have  proved 
abortive.  Are  you  proud  of  your  distinguished  virtue?  He  who  is  proud  of 
distinguished  abilities,  learning,  and  wealth,  is  not  the  less  able,  learned,  and 
wealthy,  because  he  is  proud  of  them.  But  he  who  is  proud  of  distinguished 
virtue  oeaseth  to  be  virtaoas  by  his  being  go.    For  the  man  that  ig  pleased  vith 


476  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  Cohap.  ru. 

any  degree  of  virtue,  merely  because  it  is  uncommon,  would  be  sorry  if  what  he 
values  himself  upon  as  a  singular  mark  of  distinction  should  become  common,  and 
all  mankind  should  rise  to  the  same  eminence  as  himself  in  morality.  Now  this 
temper  argues  a  want  of  benevolence,  and  consequently  of  virtue.  But  if  human 
virtue  affords  no  just  grounds  for  pride,  much  less  does  human  knowledge,  which 
bears  no  proportion  to  our  ignorance.  The  greatest  and  the  least  objects  equally 
baffle  our  inquiries.  True  knowledge  is  one  of  the  strongest  fences  against  pride. 
When  good  sense  and  reason  speak,  they  come  like  their  great  Author,  God,  in 
"  the  still  small  voice,"  without  any  empty  voice  or  loquacity,  or  overbearing 
pretensions.  And  those  who  keep  the  best  sense  within  seldom  hang  out  the  sign 
of  knowledge.  Men  of  this  stamp  will  own  their  entire  ignorance  in  many  things 
and  their  imperfect  knowledge  in  all  the  rest.  Whereas  the  ignorant  are  some- 
times positive  in  matters  quite  above  their  sphere,  and,  like  some  creatures,  are 
the  bolder  for  being  blind.  In  a  word,  the  ingenuous  will  confess  the  weakness  of 
their  reason,  and  the  presumptuous  betray  it  by  their  being  so.  After  all,  what 
signifies  all  the  learning  in  the  world  without  a  just  discernment  and  penetration? 
And  what  is  the  result  of  our  penetration  but  that  we  see  through  the  littleness  of 
almost  everything,  and  our  own  especially  ?  That  we  discern,  and  are  disgusted 
with,  several  follies  and  absurdities  which  are  hid  from  persons  of  a  slower 
apprehension?  So  that  our  superior  sagacity  resembles  the  pretended  second- 
sightedness  of  some  people,  by  which  they  are  said  to  see  several  uncomfortable 
and  dismal  objects  which  escape  the  rest  of  the  world.  Some  may  perhaps  value 
themselves  upon  the  strength  of  their  genius,  the  largeness  of  their  heart,  even  as 
the  sand  upon  the  seashore,  and  the  brightness  of  their  parts.  Alas  1  the  strength 
of  the  passions,  and  the  quickness  of  the  appetites,  generally  keep  pace  with  the 
brightness  of  the  imagination.  And  hence  it  comes  to  pass  that  those  who  have, 
with  an  uncommon  compass  of  thought,  inculcated  excellent  rules  of  moraUty  in 
their  writings  have  sometimes  broke  through  them  all  in  their  practice:  the 
brightness  of  their  parts  enabling  them  to  lay  down  fine  precepts,  and  the  strength 
of  their  passions  templing  them  to  transgress  them.  To  a  man  of  strong  sensations 
every  delight  that  is  gentle  seems  dull,  and  everything  but  what  is  high  seasoned 
flat  and  tasteless.  The  consequence  of  which  is,  that,  disdaining  common  blessings, 
and  not  able  to  enjoy  himself  without  something  out  of  the  usual  road,  he  over- 
leaps these  bounds  which  confine  meaner  mortals,  and  precipitates  himself  into 
an  endless  train  of  inconveniences.  But  let  us  suppose,  what  is  not  a  very  common 
case,  that  a  brightness  of  imagination  and  a  weU-poised  judgment  are  happily 
united  in  the  same  person ;  yet  the  brightest  genius,  the  greatest  man  that  ever 
lived  may  say,  "  O  my  God  1  that  I  hve,  and  that  I  please,  if  ever  I  please,  is 
owing  to  Thee.  May  it  be,  then,  my  uppermost  view  to  do  Thy  pleasure,  from 
whom  I  have  the  ability  to  please."  Dost  thou  value  thyself  upon  popular  applause 
and  a  great  name  ?  Think  how  many  that  have  made  a  distinguished  figure  in 
the  world  are  dead  and  unregarded  as  if  they  never  had  been,  their  deaths 
anlamentcd,  their  vacancy  filled  up,  their  persons  missed  no  more  than  a  drop  of 
water  when  taken  from  the  whole  ocean.  And  is  it  worth  our  while  to  strive  to 
please  a  vain  fantastic  world  which  will  soon  disregard  us  and  think  itself  full  as 
well  without  us,  instead  of  laying  out  our  endeavours  to  please  that  Almighty  Being 
whose  inexhaustible  power  and  goodness  will  make  His  servants  happy  to  all 
eternity?  {J.  Seed,  M.A.)  Self-appreciation: — 1.  Whatever  is  important  is 
difficult.  And  it  is  exceedingly  important  and  difficult  to  every  man  to  take 
a  right  estimate  of  himself.  2.  The  cause  of  this  difficulty  is — (1)  That  a 
man's  mind  is  too  near  a  man's  mind  for  a  man's  mind  to  see  it  clearly. 
(2)  That  in  this  court  the  judge,  the  witness,  and  the  person  examined  are 
all  one  and  the  same.  Note — I.  Two  great  dangers.  1.  Of  over-estimating 
ourselves.  (1)  A  man  lives  so  much  with  himself  and  in  himself.  (2)  Or  is 
so  fond  of  comparing  himself  with  certain  persons  whom  he  likes  to  select  for 
that  purpose.  (3)  Or  is  so  apt  to  compare  himself  with  what  he  used  to  be.  (4) 
Or  is  always  seeing  himself  so  entirely  as  a  certain  little  loving  circle  sees  him.  (5) 
Or  takes  himself  at  the  measure  of  what  he  is  always  hoping  and  intending  to  be. 
(6)  Or  has  unworthy  standards  of  what  a  man  ought  to  be.  (7)  Or  is  always  so 
fixing  his  eyes  on  his  good  parts,  and  intentionally  turning  away  fiom  his  bad  ones. 
2.  Of  depreciating  ourselves.  Many,  no  doubt,  do  this  simply  in  affectation.  They 
"  think  "  proudly,  while  they  speak  humbly.  But  besides  these,  there  are  othen 
vho  "  think  of  themselves  "  in  a  way  that— (1)  Is  not  true.  (2)  Brings  with  it 
maob  depnesion  and  distress.    (8)  Often  incapacitates  them  tor  the  rery  work 


tHAP.  xn.]  ROMANS.  477 

which  God  sets  them  to  do.  (4)  This  darkens  the  grace  of  God  in  them,  and  His 
purposes  are  frustrated.  II.  The  text  steebs  ub  between  these  two  boces.  1. 
Before  God  we  are,  all  of  as,  utterly  bad.  There  is  nothing  in  us  that  comes  up  to 
His  standard.  The  memory  of  the  past  is  one  great  humiliation  ;  the  sense  of  tb« 
present  is  all  conscious  weakness ;  the  anticipation  of  the  future  is  overwhelming 
every  man  who  sees  only  himself.  2.  But  we  should  come  to  a  false  conclusion  if 
we  rested  here.  In  every  one  who  is  born  of  God  there  are  now  two  natures.  The 
old  one  is  there  to  abase  and  confound  all,  to  drive  all  to  Jesus  Christ.  In  this  new 
nature  there  are  numberless  degrees.  Either  God  has  been  pleased  by  His  sove- 
reignty to  give  to  one  man  more  than  He  has  seen  fit  to  give  to  another ;  or  some 
have  cultivated  them  more  than  others  have ;  and  so  it  comes  to  pass  that  there 
are  real  distinctions  between  man  and  man.  (1)  Now,  with  these  distinctions  God 
tells  us  that  it  is  so  far  from  being  a  proud  or  wrong  thing  that  one  man  should  be 
conscious  that  he  has  more  than  another,  that  no  man  can  take  a  true  view  of 
himself,  or  be  prepared  for  his  duties  in  life,  unless  he  takes  it ;  because  every  man 
is  to  •'  think  soberly  "—i.e.,  accurately — of  himself,  "according  as  God  hath  dealt 
to  every  man  the  measure  of  faith."  We  have  all  different  degrees  of  everything 
in  life.  We  have  different  degrees  of  stature,  beauty,  wealth,  and  intellectual  gifts; 
and  it  would  be  utterly  silly  if  a  clever  or  rich  man  pretended  to  be  ignorant  of  his 
superiority  in  these  respects.  Why  then  should  it  be  less  so  with  a  man's  spiritual 
possessions?  Is  not  one  man  greater  in  his  spiritual  possessions  than  another? 
And  are  they  not  all  equally  the  gifts  of  God  ?  (2)  And  here  I  must  put  in  a 
caution.  We  are  never  told  to  gauge  other  men's  states,  or  to  gauge  ourselves  in 
comparison  to  other  men's  states ;  but  to  gauge  ourselves.  Of  course,  it  is  impos- 
sible to  do  this  altogether  without  reference  to  our  fellow-creatures,  for  every  man 
in  this  world  is  what  he  is  comparatively  to  another ;  but  we  must  not  do  it  for  the 
sake  of  comparison  with  a  fellow-creature.  (3^  Every  man's  view  of  himself,  then, 
is  to  be  according  to  the  facts  of  the  case,  neither  degrading  himself  too  low  nor 
vaunting  himself  too  high  ;  but  "thinking  of  himself"  what  he  really  is,  and  just 
as  God  has  been  pleased  to  make  him.  E.g. — (1)  Your  mind,  perhaps,  has  been 
raising  the  question  whether  you  are  a  child  of  God.  Now  you  must  not  think 
there  is  any  virtue  in  saying,  "  Oh  I  I  am  so  bad  1  I  cannot  be  a  child  of  God  1 " 
You  should  examine  the  matter  with  a  calm  judgment.  When  you  find  some 
proofs  in  favour  of  one  view,  and  some  in  favour  of  the  other,  then  prayerfully, 
and  with  the  Bible  in  your  hand,  set  the  one  over  against  the  other,  and  make 
your  decision  just  as  you  would  deal  with  any  matter  of  business.  (2)  Or  you  want 
to  know  whether  you  are  entitled  to  a  particular  promise,  as,  e.g.,  "Blessed  are  the 
pure  in  heart,  for  they  shall  see  God."  Does  that  mean  a  person  absolutely  without 
any  evil  thoughts  or  passions  ?  Or  does  it  mean  one  who  is  under  the  purifying 
influence  of  grace,  who  strives  after  purity,  who  is  pure  in  Christ.  Then  how  is  it 
with  me  in  this?  Can  I  appropriate  it ?  (3)  Or  supposing  you  have  a  distinct 
opportunity  now  opening  to  you.  You  must  not  at  once  put  it  away  and  say,  "  Oh, 
no  I  I  am  not  called  to  that  work."  You  must  consider  with  yourself,  "  Is  this  a 
providential  opening?  What  degree  of  knowledge  and  what  degree  of  spiritual 
strength  will  it  take  ?  Have  I  so  much  ?  If  not,  can  I  obtain  it  ?  Has  God  been 
preparing  me  for  this  work,  and  this  work  for  me  ?  "  (4)  To  guide  you  in  such-hke 
investigations,  the  apostle  gives  one  rule — "  to  think  according  to  the  measure  of 
faith."  It  is  not,  "Judge  of  yourselves  according  to  your  attainments,"  but  "the 
measure  of  faith";  because  everything  that  is  good  in  a  man's  heart  is  "faith," 
and  every  other  good  thing,  being  proportioned  to  the  "  faith "  we  have,  is  the 
measure  of  everything  that  a  man  has  or  can  attain,  and  so  becomes  the  measure 
of  the  man— i.e.,  is  the  man.  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Presumption  and  am- 
bition:— I.  The  bfibit  op  peesumption  consists  in  thinking  ourselves  adorned 
with  accomplishments  which  we  have  not,  in  magnifying  those  which  we  have, 
and  in  preferring  ourselves  to  others  on  account  of  these  qualities,  real  or 
imaginary.  1.  The  first  character  of  presumption  is  to  imagine  ourselves 
endued  with  virtues  and  good  qualities,  of  which  we  have  not  the  substance,  but 
only  the  shadow  and  the  false  appearance.  Of  all  the  blessings  which  are  bestowed 
upon  the  good,  there  is  none  perhaps  more  expedient,  or  more  to  be  requested  of 
God,  than  a  spirit  of  impartiality  with  respect  to  ourselves,  together  with  that 
accurate  discernment,  that  care  to  distinguish  between  real  probity  and  the  false 
appearance  of  it,  and  that  caution  not  to  be  imposed  npon  by  hypocrisy  and 
disBimnlation,  which  we  usually  exert  when  we  scan  the  actions  and  th  »  pretensions 
of  other  people.     2.  The  second  character  of  presumption  is  the  magnifying  those 


478  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  zu. 

good  qualities  which  we  have.  And  here  presumption  is  the  more  dangerous, 
because  it  is  not  the  mere  effect  of  extravagant  fancy,  but  hath  some  foundation, 
something  real,  to  trust  to  and  to  build  upon.  It  is  a  common  observation  in  the 
learned  world,  that  a  man's  genius  and  skill  can  only  be  estimated  when  his 
thoughts  and  bis  inventions  are  laid  before  the  public ;  and  that  many  a  person 
who  hath  been  cried  up  beyond  measure  by  his  friends  and  dependents,  or  by  party 
zeal,  hath  fallen  short  of  expectation.  The  same  remark  holds  true  in  the  moral 
qualities  oi  the  heart  and  mind.  Hath  a  man  resolutely  exposed  himself  to 
dangers  in  a  just  cause?  He  is,  then,  a  man  of  coarage.  Hath  he  rejected  the 
tempting  opportunities  of  growing  great  and  rich  by  dishonest  methods?  He  is  a 
man  of  integrity.  Is  he  uniformly  just,  equitable,  charitable,  modest,  and  tem- 
perate ?  and  doth  he  behave  himself  to  others  as  his  relation  to  them,  his  station 
and  situation  require  ?  Then  may  it  be  truly  said  that  his  virtues  are  real.  3.  A 
third  character  of  presiunption  is  to  ascribe  to  the  qualities  which  we  possess  an 
eminence  and  an  excellence  that  belong  not  to  them.  In  general,  all  the  qualities 
of  mind  and  body,  and  all  the  external  advantages  which  are  commonly  called  gifts 
of  fortune,  all  these  are  so  far  valuable  as  they  are  useful  to  ourselves  and  others, 
and  no  farther  ;  bo  that,  by  being  misapplied,  they  become  pernicious.  II. 
Ambition  is  the  natural  effect  of  presumption,  and  may  be  called  "a  desire  to 
obtain  the  rewards,  which  we  think  to  be  due  to  us."  1.  The  first  object  of 
ambition  is  glory,  esteem,  reputation;  and,  in  the  desire  of  these  things,  there 
seems  to  be  nothing  irregular  and  vicious.  To  despise  them  may  be  a  kind  of 
stupid  brutality.    But  there  are  excellent  rules  to  be  observed  on  this  occasion. 

(1)  We  must  never  prefer  the  esteem  of  men  to  the  approbation  of  God.  (2)  Nothing 
is  truly  glorious  unless  it  be  truly  good  and  conformable  to  the  will  of  God.  Then, 
though  men  condemn  us,  our  conscience  supports  us.  But  if  God  condemns  us, 
human  applause  can  make  us  no  amends.  (3)  When  virtue  is  attended  with 
disgrace,  we  must  despise  such  contempt,  and  not  be  deterred  by  it  from  our  duty. 
(4)  We  must  not  love  virtue  for  the  bare  sake  of  reputation  and  human  esteem : 
"Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men,  that  they  may  see  your  good  works,  and 
glorify  your  Father  who  is  in  heaven."  2.  The  second  object  of  ambition  is  an 
honourable  rank  and  station,  and  places  of  power,  trust,  and  profit.  (1)  No  man 
should  set  his  heart  overmuch  upon  rising  and  bettering  his  condition,  because  it 
is  ten  times  more  probable  that  he  shall  be  disappointed  than  that  he  shall  succeed. 

(2)  No  man  should  highly  value  any  temporal  advantages,  because  they  are 
temporal,  and  because  there  are  higher  objects  which  demand  our  more  serious 
attention.  (3)  No  man  should  desire  emment  stations  without  comparing  his 
strength  with  the  burden,  and  having  reason  to  hope  that  he  shall  be  able  to 
acquit  himself  as  the  laws  of  God  and  man  require.  (4)  No  man  should  be  puffed 
up  with  power  and  prosperity,  because  it  is  a  dangerous  state  and  an  envied  state. 
{J.  Jortin,  D.D.)  A  true  ideal : — A  man  who  looks  up  all  the  time  ia  never 
A  great  man  to  himseU.  Are  you  a  poet?  Then  do  not  get  poetasters  to 
read  and  say,  "  I  write  better  poems  than  they  do,  and  therefore  I  am  a 
better  poet."  Bead  Milton,  read  Shakespeare,  read  Homer.  Go  to  the  old 
Englishmen  of  immortal  thought,  whose  drums  and  trumpets  have  sounded 
clear  down  through  the  ages  to  this  day.  Go  to  the  grandest  and  noblest  of  our 
thinkers  and  writers,  sit  in  council  with  them,  and  then  see  if  you  are  not  a  dwarf, 
a  pigmy.  It  will  make  you  humble  to  have  high  ideals.  But  a  man  who  for  ever 
measures  himself  by  pigmies  and  dwarfs,  and  thinks  he  is  better  than  they — what 
ia  he  but  a  mountebank  among  pigmies  and  dwarfs  ?  A  true  ideal  tends  to  cure 
the  conceit  of  men,  and  to  rank  them.  Says  the  apostle,  "  Let  every  man  think  of 
himself  as  he  ought  to  think,  soberly,  according  as  God  hath  dealt  to  every  man 
the  measure  of  faith."  The  measure  of  faith  ?  What  is  faith  ?  It  is  the  sight  of 
invisible  excellence.  It  is  the  sight  of  noble  qualities  unseen.  It  is  the  sight  of 
ideal  grandeur.  Let  every  man  measure  himself  by  that  conception,  and  then  think 
of  himself  as  he  ought  to  think ;  let  him  think  of  himself  as  lowly,  and  poor,  and 
needy ;  and  he  may  well  call  out  for  help  and  for  grace.  (If.  W.  Beecher.)  Odiout- 
futt  of  conceit : — Conceit  is  a  very  odious  quality.  It  loses  a  man  more  friende 
and  gains  him  more  enemies  than  any  other  foible,  perhaps  vice,  in  the  world. 
It  makes  him  harsh  to  his  inferiors  and  disrespectful  to  his  betters.  It 
causes  him  to  live  at  right  angles  with  the  world.  It  makes  him  believe 
that  he  alone  is  in  the  right;  it  warps  his  opinions  in  all  things,  makes 
him  viciously  sceptical,  and  robs  him  of  the  most  glorious  inheritance  of 
faith,  while  it  distorts  his  hope  and  totally  deskoys  his  charity.     {Qentle  Life.) 


CHAP,  xn.]  ROMANS.  479 

Conceit,  ignorance  of: — A  certain  worthy  of  our  acquaintance,  being  out  of  a 
situation,  made  application  to  a  friend  to  recommend  him  to  a  place,  and  remarked 
that  he  would  prefer  a  somewhat  superior  position,  "  for  you  know,  Tomkins,"  said 
he,  "  I  am  not  a  fool,  and  I  ain't  ignorant."  We  would  not  insinuate  that  the 
brother  was  mistaken  in  his  own  estimate,  but  the  remark  might  possibly  excite 
suspicion,  for  the  case  is  similar  to  that  of  a  timid  pedestrian  at  night  alone, 
hurrying  along  a  lonesome  laue,  when  a  gentleman  comes  out  of  the  hedge  just  at 
the  turning  by  Deadman's  Corner,  and  accosts  him  in  the  following  reassuring 
language,  "  I  ain't  a  garrotter,  and  I  never  crack  a  fellow's  head  with  this  here  life- 
preserver,"  The  outspoken  self-assertion  of  the  brother  quoted  above  is  but  the 
expression  of  the  thought  of  the  most,  if  not  all  of  us.  "  I  am  not  a  fool,  and  I 
ain't  ignorant,"  is  the  almost  universal  self-compliment,  which  is  never  out  of 
season ;  and  this  is  the  great  barrier  to  our  benefiting  by  good  advice,  which  we 
suppose  to  be  directed  to  the  foolish  and  ignorant  world  in  general,  but  not  to  our 
elevated  selves.  The  poet  did  not  say,  but  we  will  say  it  for  him,  "  All  men  think 
all  men  faulty  but  themselves."  It  would  be  a  great  gain  to  us  all  if  we  had  those 
elegant  quizzing  glasses  of  ours  silvered  at  the  back  so  that  the  next  time  we  stick 
them  in  our  eyes,  in  all  the  foppery  of  our  conceit,  we  may  be  edified  and,  let  us 
hope,  humbled,  by  seeing  ourselves.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Self-knowledge: — 1. 
Destroys  pride.  2.  Encourages  humility.  3.  Promotes  the  glory  of  God.  4.  Is 
only  acquired  through  grace.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Self-knowledge,  importance  of: — 
He  (Socrates)  did  occupy  himself  with  physics  early  in  his  career.  In  after  life  he 
regarded  such  speculations  as  trivial.  "  I  have  not  leisure  for  such  things,"  he  is 
made  to  say  by  Plato  ;  "  and  I  will  tell  you  the  reason :  I  am  not  yet  able,  according 
to  the  Delphic  inscription,  to  know  myself,  and  it  appears  to  me  very  ridiculous, 
while  ignorant  of  myself,  to  inquire  into  what  I  am  not  concerned  in.' 
Self-knowledge,  value  of: — To  know  one's  self  to  be  foolish  is  to  stand  upon 
the  doorstep  of  the  temple  of  wisdom:  to  understand  the  wrongness  of  any 
position  is  half-way  towards  amending  it ;  to  be  quite  sure  that  our  self-confidence 
is  a  heinous  sin  and  folly,  and  an  offence  against  God,  and  to  have  that  thought 
burned  into  us  by  God's  Holy  Spirit,  is  going  a  great  length  towards  the  absolute 
casting  our  self-confidence  away,  and  the  bringing  of  our  souls  in  practice,  as  well 
as  in  theory,  to  rely  wholly  upon  the  power  of  God's  Holy  Spirit.  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Pride,  the  result  of  ignorance : — The  prouder  a  man  is,  the  more  he  thinks  he 
deserves ;  and  the  more  he  thinks  he  deserves,  the  less  he  really  does  deserve.  A 
proud  man — the  whole  world  is  not  big  enough  to  serve  him.  The  little  he  gets  he 
looks  upon  with  contempt  because  it  is  little.  The  much  that  he  does  not  get  he 
regards  as  evidence  of  the  marvellous  inequality  of  things  in  human  life.  He 
walks  a  perpetual  self-adulator,  expecting  until  experience  has  taught  him  not  to 
expect,  and  then  he  goes  for  ever  murmuring  at  what  he  looks  upon  as  partiality  in 
God's  dealings  with  men.  Such  men  are  like  old  hulks  that  maike  no  voyages,  and 
leak  at  every  seam.  They  are  diseased  with  pride.  They  have  the  craving 
appetite  of  dyspepsia  in  their  disposition.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  But  to  think 
soberly. — Humility,  Christian: — I.  Its  natubb  includes — 1.  A  just  estimate  of 
ourselves.  2.  A  due  esteem  for  others.  3.  A  constant  recognition  of  Divine  grace. 
II.  Its  sodbcb.  Consciousness — 1.  Of  dependence  upon  others.  2.  That  our  gifts 
are  but  a  small  part  of  the  fulness  of  the  body  of  Christ.  III.  Its  evidence.  In 
the — 1.  Beady.  2.  Patient.  3.  Faithful  consecration  of  our  ability  to  the  service 
of  the  Church.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Humility  and  knowledge : — I  believe  the  first  test 
of  a  truly  great  man  is  his  humility.  I  do  not  mean  by  humility  doubt  of  his  own 
power  or  hesitation  of  speaking  his  opinions,  but  a  right  understanding  of  the 
relation  between  what  he  can  do  and  say  and  the  rest  of  the  world's  sayings  and 
doings.  All  great  men  not  only  know  their  business,  but  usually  know  that  they 
know  it,  and  are  not  only  right  in  their  main  opinions,  but  they  usually  know  that 
they  are  right  in  them,  only  they  do  not  think  much  of  themselves  on  that  account. 
Amolfo  knows  he  can  build  a  good  dome  at  Florence ;  Albert  Diirer  writes  calmly 
to  one  who  has  found  fault  with  his  work,  "  It  cannot  be  better  done  "  ;  Sir  Isaac 
NevTton  knows  that  he  has  worked  out  a  problem  or  two  that  would  have  puzzled 
anybody  else  ;  only  they  do  not  expect  their  fellow-men,  therefore,  to  fall  down  and 
worship  them.  They  have  a  curious  under-sense  of  powerlessness,  feeling  that  the 
greatness  is  not  in  them,  but  through  them ;  that  they  could  not  do  or  be  anything 
else  than  God  made  them ;  and  they  see  something  Divine  and  God-made  in  every 
other  man  they  meet,  and  are  endlessly,  foolishly,  incredibly  mereifol-  (J.  Ruskin.) 
Acoerdlag  at  God  hatli  dealt  to  every  man  the  measiire  of  faith. — The  measure  oj 


480  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  to. 

faith : — The  water  we  draw  from  a  well  depends  npon  the  Bxze  of  the  backet ;  GocI 
provides  us  with  the  bucket  as  well  as  the  water  in  the  well  of  salvation.  Or, 
again,  gifts  may  be  compared  to  the  air  we  breathe,  and  faith  to  the  lungs,  by  which 
we  inhale  and  exhale ;  then  the  strength  of  the  longs  would  be  represented  by  the 
measure  of  faith.     (C.  Neil,  M.A.) 

Vers.  4,  6.  For  as  we  have  many  members  In  one  body. — St.  PauVs  view  of  life : — 
How  comprehensively  he  surveys  the  whole  range  of  human  action  and  conduct  I 
He  starts  from  the  consideration  of  men  as  constituting  "  many  members  in  one 
body,"  and  he  proceeds  to  direct  them  in  their  various  oflSces.  He  passes  in  review 
the  private  and  public  duties  to  which  they  might  be  called — ministering,  teaching, 
exhorting,  giving,  ruling,  and  obeying ;  he  depicts  the  spirit  of  the  Christian  in 
business  and  in  rest,  in  joy  and  in  sorrow,  in  hope  and  in  tribulation,  towards 
friends  and  towards  enemies,  in  peace  and  in  wrath ;  and  he  lays  down  the 
Christian  principles  of  civil  government  and  obedience.  It  is  a  picture  of  life  in 
its  length  and  breadth,  and  even  in  all  its  lights  and  shadows,  transfigured  as  the 
landscape  by  the  sun,  under  the  renovating  influence  of  those  spiritual  rays  of  love 
which  illuminated  and  warmed  the  apostle's  soul.  (JT.  Wace,  D.D.)  Many 
■members :  one  body  : — 1.  The  early  Church,  like  the  latter,  seems  to  have  been 
deformed  by  many  dissensions.  Those  who  had  the  least  conspicuous  endowments 
envied  those  who  had  the  more,  in  place  of  using  such  gifts  as  they  had.  In  order 
to  show  the  unreasonableness  and  the  evil  of  this  state  of  things,  St.  Paul  often 
drew  his  illustrations  from  the  human  body,  the  parts  of  which  had  different 
offices  ;  but  no  part  of  which  could  be  dispensed  with  without  injury  lo  all  the  rest. 
So  the  Church  was  composed  of  many  members,  some  of  which  were,  comparatively, 
without  honour,  but  none  were  without  use ;  each  had  functions  essential  to  the 
general  well-being.  2.  Observe  what  close  links  there  are  between  the  several 
classes  in  the  community,  and  how  the  breaking  of  any  one  would  dislocate  the 
whole  social  system.  "  The  king  himself  is  served  by  the  field."  The  throne  is 
connected  with  the  soil ;  and  the  proud  occupant  of  the  one  is  dependent  on  the 
tiller  of  the  other.  When  you  look  on  a  community  like  our  own,  with  its  nobles, 
merchants,  teachers,  men  of  science,  artificers,  you  may  perhaps  think  little  of  the 
peasantry.  But  were  the  peasantry  to  cease  from  their  labours,  there  would  be  an 
immediate  arrest  on  the  pursuits  of  the  community,  and,  from  the  throne  down- 
ward, society  would  be  panic-stricken.  There,  can,  therefore,  be  no  more  pitiable 
spectacle  than  that  of  a  haughty  individual,  who  looks  superciliously  on  those  who 
occupy  stations  inferior  to  his  own.  And  it  would  be  a  just  method  of  rebuking  his 
arrogance  to  require  him  to  trace  the  production  and  progress  of  all  that  wealth  or 
rank  which  ministers  to  his  pride,  till  he  finds  it  originate  in  the  bone  and  muscle 
of  these  objects  of  his  scorn.  3.  "  That  the  poor  shall  never  cease  out  of  the 
land,"  is  one  of  those  wise  and  benevolent  arrangements  of  Providence  which  so 
eminently  distinguish  the  moral  government  of  this  world.  One  of  the  most  fatal 
and  common  tendencies  of  our  nature  is  to  selfishness — the  forgetting  others,  and 
the  caring  only  for  ourselves.  And  who  can  fail  to  see  that  the  having  amongst 
us  objects  which  continually  appeal  to  our  compassion  is  wonderfully  adapted  for 
counteracting  that  tendency.  It  may  be  perfectly  true  that  the  indigent  cannot  do 
without  the  benevolent ;  but  it  is  equally  true  that  the  benevolent  cannot  do  without 
the  indigent ;  and  whenever  you  give  ear  to  a  tale  of  distress,  and  you  contribute 
according  to  your  ability  to  the  relief  of  the  suppliant,  you  are  receiving  as  well  as 
conferring  a  benefit.  The  afflicted  being  whom  you  succour,  keeps,  by  his  appeal, 
the  charities  of  your  nature  from  growing  stagnant,  and  thus  may  be  said  to  requite 
the  obUgation.  4.  Observe  how  applicable  is  the  principle  of  our  text  to  the  several 
classes  of  society.  Of  what  avail  would  be  the  skill  and  courage  of  the  general 
who  had  no  troops  to  obey  his  command  ?  what  the  ingenuity  of  the  mechanic  if 
there  were  no  labourers  to  make  use  of  his  invention  ?  what  the  wisdom  of  the 
legislator  if  there  were  no  functionaries  to  carry  his  measures  into  force  ?  In  these 
and  a  thousand  instances,  the  hand  and  the  foot  would  be  but  of  little  ase  unless 
they  were  directed  by  the  eye  and  the  head ;  and  the  eye  and  the  head  would 
themselves  be  of  little  use  if  they  were  not  connected  with  the  hand  and  the  foot. 
So  true  is  it  that  we  are  "  every  one  members,  one  of  another."  6.  Tom  to  the 
Church,  a  community  knit  together  by  spiritual  ties.  And  here  the  interests  of  the 
various  classes  are  so  interwoven  that  it  can  only  be  through  wilful  ignorance  that 
any  suppose  themselves  independent  of  the  others.  It  may  be  true  that  ministers 
may  be  likened,  in  the  importance  of  their  office,  to  the  more  important  parts  of 


eHAF.  znO  ROMANS.  481 

body,  to  the  eye  or  the  head ;  bat  in  proseonting  their  hononrable  and  diffionlt 
employment,  they  are  dependent  on  the  very  lowest  of  their  people.  Beour  to  what 
we  said  about  the  humanising  power  of  the  appointed  admixture  of  the  poor  with 
the  rich.  If  the  actual  presence  of  suffering  be  the  great  antagonist  to  selfishness, 
then  the  poor  of  his  flock  must  be  the  clergyman's  best  auxiliaries,  seeing  that  they 
help  to  keep  the  rest  from  that  moral  hardness  which  would  make  them  impervious 
to  his  most  earnest  remonstrances.  You  are  to  add  to  this  that  there  is  a  worth  in 
the  prayers  of  the  very  meanest  of  Christians  impossible  to  overrate.  A  rich  man 
may  feel  attachment  to  his  minister ;  and  he  has  a  thousand  ways  in  which  he  may 
give  vent  to  his  feelings.  But  the  poor  man  has  little  to  offer  but  prayer,  and 
therefore  will  he  throw  all  the  vehemence  of  his  gratefulness  into  unwearied 
petitions  for  blessings  on  his  benefactor.  6.  On  this  great  principle  we  uphold 
the  dignity  of  the  poor  man,  and  the  beneficial  influence  which  he  exerts  in  the 
world.  Poverty  will  never  degrade  a  man — nothing  but  vice  can  do  that ;  poverty 
will  never  disable  a  man  from  usefulness,  seeing  that  it  cannot  change  his  office  in 
the  body,  and  there  is  no  office  but  what  is  material  to  the  general  health  and 
strength.  Why,  then,  are  not  our  honest  and  hardworking  poor  to  lift  np  their 
heads  in  the  midst  of  society,  in  all  the  consciousness  of  having  an  important  part 
to  perform,  and  in  all  the  satisfaction  of  feeling  that  they  perform  it  faithfully  and 
effectually  ?  7.  We  are  "  every  one  members,  one  of  another  " ;  and  forasmuch  as 
no  man  ever  hated  his  own  flesh,  let  it  be  seen  that  we  are  all  animated  with  the 
spirit  of  charity.  It  is  with  reference  to  this  principle  that  we  are  to  be  tried  at 
the  last.  If  we  are  all  members  of  one  body,  Christ  is  the  Head  of  that  body ;  and, 
consequently.  He  accounts  as  done  to  Himself  what  is  done  to  the  meanest  of  His 
members.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  Church  compared  to  the  body  : — I.  In  its 
DMiTT.  II.  In  the  FLUBAiiiTT  of  its  members.  III.  In  the  nnrEBsiTT  of  their 
functions.  IV.  In  their  hxttual  belation  and  dependence.  Y.  In  the  possession 
of  ONE  spmrr.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Christian  unity  and  diversity  : — I.  Diversitt 
UNSEBLTiNa  CNiTT.  1.  "  We  have  many  members  in  "  the  "  one  "  natural  "  body  " ; 
and  just  so  we,  being  diverse  Christian  members  of  His  redeemed  flock,  "  are  one  " 
mystical  "  body  in  Christ."  2.  In  the  natural  body  every  part  is  not  so  much  a 
distinct  unit  in  itself  as  a  fraction  of  one  great  whole;  and  so  in  the  Church  (John 
xvii.  20,  21),  not  the  individuality  of  the  member,  but  the  oneness  of  the  whole 
community,  is  to  demonstrate  the  truth  of  Christ's  mission.  3.  This  unity  can 
only  be  realised  by  having  a  governing  Head.  Only  as  we  abide  in  real  heart  and 
life  fellowship  with  Christ  do  we  form  a  body  that  is  •'  at  unity  in  itself."  If  not 
bound  together  in  the  "  unity  of  the  Spirit,"  the  body  must  decay  and  dissolve  into 
a  mass  of  lifeless,  separate  members.  II.  Diversitx  consistent  with  unity.  1. 
That  diversity  is  consistent  with  unity  is  shown  by  the  analogy  of  our  frame.  2. 
Diversity  of  vocation  and  function  is  consistent  in  Christians  (1  Cor.  xii.).  The 
Divine  will  is  that  each  member  should  have  a  special  function,  but  that  all  should 
work  together  for  mutual  help.  3.  Diversity  in  unity  is  the  foundation  of  all  true 
beauty  and  usefulness  (see  laws  of  nature,  waves  of  the  sea,  winds,  clouds,  human 
nature,  &c.).  Learn  in  conclusion — 1.  We  all  belong  to  one  another.  None  may 
say,  "  I  have  nothing  to  do  with  thee,"  nor  plead,  "Am  I  my  brother's  keeper?  " 
Therefore  every  Christian  should  try — (1)  To  help  bis  neighbour,  to  heal  differences, 
and  to  strengthen  the  life  and  work  of  all  Christ's  people.  (2)  To  refrain  from 
speaking  or  doing  anything  that  may  hurt  or  vex  any  member  of  the  body,  since 
the  Head  is  thereby  pained  (Acts  ix.  4)  and  the  whole  body  shocked  (1  Cor.  xii.  26). 
2.  We  are  all  necessary  to  each  other — the  rich  to  the  poor  and  the  poor  to  the 
rich ;  the  sick  to  the  hale  as  well  as  the  hale  to  the  sick.  All  can  derive  help  from 
others,  and  all  can  give  somewhat  to  others.  AH  depend  on  each  other  in  the 
wondrous  "  compacting  together  by  that  which  every  joint  supplieth."  (Homilist.) 
Every  one  has  his  place : — A  row  of  ricLly-gilded  pipes,  stately  and  massive, 
reaching  to  the  ceiling,  stares  majestically  down  upon  us  as  we  gather  in  our  place 
of  worship.  They  seem  to  say  all  the  melody  and  music  of  the  instrument  is 
gathered  within  us,  and  we  are  the  musical  genii  of  the  place,  and  when  the  keys 
are  swept  by  a  skilled  artist  how  rich  and  grand  are  the  tones  evolved  1  They  seem 
to  be  fairly  alive,  and  our  souls  are  stirred  to  the  depths  by  the  harmony.  Desiring 
to  know  their  relations  to  the  hidden  modest  reeds,  that  we  could  faintly  discern  in 
the  darkened  chamber  behind,  we  asked  our  organist  what  relation  did  they  bear  to 
their  unseen  companions,  and  what  was  their  relative  power  compared  with  the 
small  pipes.  His  reply  was :  "  All  front  pipes  speak  with  force  and  power,  but  they 
would  be  utteily  valueless,  so  far  as  music  was  concerned,  unlesa  backed  up  and 
VOL.  n.  31 


482  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

supported  by  the  delicate  reeds  that  are  hidden  within."  How  blessed  the  lesson 
taught  the  modest  Christian  workers  in  every  Church  I  They  look  upon  the  few 
who  occupy  a  prominent  position  as  leaders,  and  in  their  timidity  hide  themselves, 
not  allowing  their  own  power  to  be  felt,  forgetful  of  the  fact  that  all  disciples  are 
workers  together  with  the  Lord.  In  these  days,  when  a  few  leading  spirits  are 
marvellously  blessed  by  God,  we  must  remember  that  their  power  is  vastly  increased 
by  the  sympathy  and  prayers  of  those  whose  names  are  only  known  to  God.  Aa 
the  organ  is  incomplete  if  a  single  pipe  is  missing,  and  as  it  is  thrown  out  of  tune 
by  a  single  reed  not  acting  in  harmony,  so  the  Church  is  hindered  from  receiving  a 
blessing,  and  its  action  impeded,  if  a  single  disciple  is  negligent  of  his  or  her  duty. 
So  let  us  in  our  quiet  field  toil  on,  pray  on,  knowing  that  he  who  is  faithful  unto 
death  will  receive  the  crown.  Individuality  : — The  practical  aim  of  each  man 
should  be  to  perfect  his  own  variety,  not  ape  another's.  A  Luther  could  not  be  a 
Melanchthon.  By  no  process  could  an  Owen  be  made  into  a  Milton.  Individuality 
is  indestructible.  I  am  afraid  that  teachers  and  learners  are  often  at  fault  in 
overlooking  what  is  so  very  plain.  You  sometimes  have  ideal  characters  described 
and  put  before  you  for  imitation,  which  never  were  and  never  will  be  realised, 
because  they  combine  incompatibilities.  Qualities  are  taken  from  men  con- 
stitutionally different  from  each  other,  and  you  are  told  to  be  all  that  is  represented 
in  some  unnatural  amalgam.  But  God  requires  of  you  no  such  impossibility.  Be 
yourself — that  is  the  Divine  will.  Mature  and  perfect  by  His  grace  the  gifts  He 
has  bestowed.  Resist  all  easily  besetting  sins,  and  cultivate  all  possible  good.  Not 
excusing  yourself  for  only  doing  what  pleases  you ;  for  omitting  acts  of  self-denial ; 
for  being  one-sided,  self-indulgent,  and  peculiar ;  strive  to  be  as  comprehensive  in 
excellence  as  you  can,  without  attempting  to  obliterate  the  stamp  of  your  own 
individuality.  Bunyan  was  a  wise  man,  and  therefore  did  not  crush  all  imaginable 
good  qualities  into  his  Christian,  but  distributed  them  amongst  a  number  of 
individuals ;  painting  the  picture  of  different  pilgrims,  and  assigning  to  them  varied 
ofiBces  of  wisdom  and  love.  (J.  Stoughton,  D.D.)  Mutual  relations  in  life : — 
Consider — I.  The  belation  which  we  beab  to  one  another.  1.  Our  bond 
of  union.  2.  Our  mutual  dependence.  3.  Our  individual  interest.  II.  The 
DUTIES  arising  OUT  OF  THIS  RELATION.  Mutual — 1.  Love.  2.  Sympathy.  3. 
Help.  in.  The  manner  in  which  these  duties  should  be  performed. 
With — 1.  Care  and  diligence.  2.  Patience  and  perseverance.  2.  Love  and 
cheerfulness.       (J.    Lyth,    D.D.)  Spiritual    order: — There    arose    a    fierce 

contention  in  the  human  body;  every  member  sought  another  place  than  the 
one  it  found  itself  in,  and  was  fitted  for.  After  much  controversy  it  was  agreed  to 
refer  the  whole  matter  to  one  whose  name  was  Solomon  Wise-in-his-own-conceit. 
He  was  to  arrange  and  adjust  the  whole  business,  and  to  place  every  bone  in  its 
proper  position.  He  received  the  appointment  gladly,  and  was  filled  with  joy  and 
confidence.  He  commenced  with  finding  a  place  for  himself.  His  proper  post  was 
the  heel,  but  where  do  you  think  he  found  it?  He  must  needs  be  the  golden  bowl 
in  which  the  brains  are  deposited.  The  natural  consequences  followed.  The  coarse 
heel  bone  was  not  of  the  right  quality  nor  of  the  suitable  dimensions  to  contain 
the  brains,  nor  could  the  vessel  intended  for  that  purpose  form  a  useful  or  comely 
part  of  the  foot.  Disorder  ensued  in  foot,  head,  face,  legs,  and  arms.  By  the  time 
Solomon  Wise-in-his-own-conceit  had  reconstructed  the  body,  it  could  neither 
•walk,  nor  speak,  nor  hear,  nor  smell,  nor  see.  The  body  was,  moreover,  fiUed  with 
intolerable  agony,  and  could  find  no  rest,  every  bone  crying  for  restoration  to  its 
own  place — that  is  to  say,  every  one  but  the  heel  bone;  that  was  mightily 
pleased  to  be  in  the  head,  and  to  have  custody  of  the  brains.  {Christmas  Evans.) 
Church  fellowship :  its  privileges  and  duties : — I.  The  oneness  op  the  Church. 
1.  There  is  one  source  of  activity  and  life  in  every  human  body,  and  so  there  is 
in  the  Church.  There  are  various  spheres  in  which  we  Uve  and  act.  Those  who 
possess  naturr.l  and  intellectual  life  can  enjoy  the  beauties  of  nature,  the  endear- 
ments of  friendship,  the  activities  of  business,  the  quiet  of  home,  but  all  the  while 
they  may  have  no  sympathy  with  that  which  is  heavenly;  but  those  who  are 
possessed  of  spiritual  life  rise  to  a  higher  existence  in  which  love  prompts  to 
unwearied  activity  in  the  service  of  God;  and  the  source  of  this  life  is  Christ. 
But  our  Lord  came  not  only  that  we  might  have  life,  but  that  we  might  have  it 
more  abundantly;  and,  aware  of  the  influence  of  association  and  sympathy,  He 
gathers  together  His  followers  into  a  society  in  which  they  may  help  one  another. 
But,  just  as  with  the  individual,  so  with  the  Church.  It  is  not  the  most  scriptural 
4oeteiiM|  or  tha  most  apostolic  discipline,  or  the  most  impassioned  preaching,  ot 


CHAP,  xn.]  ROMANS.  4S8 

the  most  crowded  asseniblies  that  can  ensure  the  greatest  prosperity,  bat  the 
preseDce  of  Christ.  2,  la  this  one  body  there  must  be  harmony  of  character,  or 
it  would  resemble  the  image  of  Nebuchadnezzar.  There  will  be  differences  of  gifts 
because  there  are  differences  of  functions,  but  there  must  also  be  fitness  for  asso- 
ciation, and  to  form  a  secure  union  all  the  members  must  be  renewed  by  the  Holy 
Spirit,  be  joined  to  Christ  by  a  living  faith,  and  exhibit  the  beauties  of  a  consistent 
character.  3.  In  this  oneness  of  the  Church  there  is  identity  of  interest.  If  one 
member  of  the  body  suffer,  all  the  members  suffer  with  it ;  and  if  one  member  is 
in  health,  all  the  members  rejoice  with  it.  Suppose  a  kingdom  begins  generally  to 
decline,  and  there  should  be  one  profession  which,  for  a  time,  continues  prosperous, 
this  cannot  last  long.  And  so  in  the  Church.  If  discord  springs  up  between  those 
who  ought  to  be  bound  together  in  the  purest  love,  if  error  thrusts  aside  the  doc- 
trine of  the  Cross,  if  apathy  spread  over  the  people,  if  prayers  are  frozen  and 
heartless,  there  may  be  members  who  will  retain  their  spirituality  for  a  time,  but 
by  and  by  they  will  yield  to  the  general  influence.  But  if  peace  binds  Christians 
together — if  the  truth  is  maintained  in  its  integrity,  &c. — then  each  member  will 
enjoy  the  benefit  of  the  prosperity  of  the  whole,  and  will  find  how  blessed  it  is  for 
them  all  to  have  one  interest.  And  yet  how  frequently  Church  members  seem  to 
take  but  little  interest  in  one  another  1  They  will  see  the  declension  of  a  brother 
and  never  warn  him,  the  suffering  of  a  brother  and  never  sympathise  with  him, 
the  want  of  employment  of  the  gifts  of  a  brother  and  never  suggest  to  him  that  he 
should  employ  his  gifts.  And  where  there  is  this  want  of  reciprocal  benefit  a 
Church  rapidly  declines.  4.  The  Church  ought  to  have  one  aim.  The  body  is 
created  to  show  forth  the  glory  of  God.  You  see  His  glory  in  the  works  of  nature 
around,  in  His  word  of  truth,  but  chiefly  in  the  grand  work  of  redemption.  But 
then,  if  a  multitude  of  mankind  never  study  this  work  of  redemption,  they  cannot 
see  its  glory;  and,  for  the  most  part,  people  will  say,  "We  judge  of  the  value  of 
that  pystem  of  redemption  by  its  fruits  ** ;  and  therefore  ought  we  both  by  life  and 
lip  to  recommend  the  gospel,  II.  Each  ramviDUAL  member  has  his  appeopeiatk 
DUTIES  TO  PERFOBM.  It  is  by  divisiou  of  labour  that  so  much  can  be  done.  One 
seems  more  fitted  to  advise,  another  to  execute;  one  to  warn  and  terrify,  and 
another  to  cheer  and  comfort ;  and  so  all  are  called  upon  to  employ  their  powers 
for  some  useful  purpose.  1.  All  members  must  feel  that  they  have  joined  the 
Church  not  only  to  receive  good,  but  to  do  good.  2.  Each  member  should  strive 
to  concentrate  his  efforts  on  the  particular  Church  to  which  he  belongs.  Wherever 
there  is  diffusion  there  is  a  waste  of  power.  Concentration  is  strcDgth,  and  when 
God  points  out  in  His  providence  the  particular  Church  to  which  we  are  to  belong, 
He  thereby  points  out  the  particular  field  in  which  we  are  to  work.  3.  The  member 
who  is  doing  nothing  is  worse  than  useless.  When  a  limb  is  paralysed  it  only 
impedes  the  body.  And  let  every  person  in  Church  fellowship  remember  that  he 
cannot  be  simply  neutral.  If  he  is  not  doing  good  he  is  doing  harm.  His  coldness 
beuumbs,  his  example  discourages  others.  4.  Every  real  member  is  essential  to  the 
completeness  of  the  body.  Every  member  of  the  human  frame,  however  apparently 
insignificant,  is  essential.  We  are  sometimes  very  poor  judges  of  who  is  the  best 
member.  We  are  thankful  for  men  of  rank,  wealth,  influence,  and  talents,  but  we 
thauk  God  also  for  the  humblest  spiritual  Christian,  whom,  perhaps,  God  may  see 
to  be  doing  a  greater  work  than  those  who  seem  great  in  the  eye  of  the  world.  6. 
All  the  members  bear  a  close  spiritual  relationship  to  each  other.  Surely,  then, 
there  ought  to  be  great  sympathy  and  affection  between  them,  because,  when  we 
have  a  common  object  and  character,  we  generally  feel  sympathy  and  love.  6.  If 
we  are  members  one  of  another,  there  ought  to  be  the  absence  of  pride  and  of  all 
assumption.  God  has  ordained  the  different  ranks  in  society,  and  He  does  not  wish 
those  ranks  to  be  obhterated.  The  beheving  servant  is  not  to  show  want  of  respect 
to  the  believing  master,  and  the  beheving  master  is  not  to  oppress  the  believing 
servant.  But  as  members  of  the  same  Church  all  worldly  distinctions  disappear. 
We  are  all  one  in  Christ.  7.  As  members  one  of  another  we  ought  always  to  aim 
at  one  another's  benefit.  "  Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens,"  &c.  (J.  C.  Harrison.) 
Communion  of  saints  : — ^What  the  circulation  of  the  blood  is  to  the  human  body, 
that  the  Holy  Spirit  is  to  the  body  of  Christ  which  is  the  Church.  Now,  by  virtue 
of  the  one  life-blood,  every  limb  of  the  body  holds  fellowship  with  every  other,  and 
as  long  as  life  lasts  that  fellowship  is  inevitable.  If  the  hand  be  unwashed  the  eye 
cannot  refuse  communion  with  it  on  that  account;  if  the  finger  be  diseased  the 
hand  cannot,  by  binding  a  cord  around  it,  prevent  the  life-current  from  flowing. 
Nothing  but  death  can  break  up  the  fellowship ;  you  must  tear  away  the  member. 


484  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chip,  xn 

or  it  most  of  necessity  commune  with  the  rest  of  the  body.  It  is  even  thus  in  the 
body  of  Christ ;  no  laws  can  prevent  one  living  member  of  Christ  from  fellowship 
with  every  other ;  the  pulse  of  living  fellowship  sends  a  wave  through  the  whole 
mystical  frame ;  where  there  is  but  one  life,  fellowship  is  an  inevitable  consequence. 
Yet  some  talk  of  restricted  communion,  and  imagine  that  they  can  practise  it.  If 
they  be  alive  unto  God  they  may  in  mistaken  conscientiousness  deny  their  fellow 
Christians  the  outward  sign  of  communion,  but  communion  itself  falls  hot  under 
any  rule  or  regulation  of  theirs.  Tie  a  red  tape  round  your  thumb,  and  let  it 
decree  that  the  whole  body  is  out  of  fellowship  with  it ;  the  thumb's  decree  is  either 
ridiculously  inoperative,  or  else  it  proves  injurious  to  itself.  God  has  made  ua 
one,  one  Spirit  quickens  us,  and  truly  our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father  and  with 
His  Son  Jesus ;  to  deny  fellowship  with  any  believer  in  Jesus  is  to  refuse  what  you 
mufit  of  necessity  give,  and  to  deny  in  symbol  what  you  must  inevitably  render  in 
reality.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  6-8.  Having  then  gifts  differing  according  to  the  grace  that  Is  given  to 
us. — Gifts  oj  grace : — 1.  Their  common  source.  2.  Diverse  character.  3.  Liberal 
distribution.  4.  Faithful  exercise.  6.  Happy  influence.  (J.  Lyth  D.D.)  Gifts : 
their  Divine  source : — As  many  vapours,  rising  from  the  sea,  meet  together  in  one 
cloud,  and  that  cloud  falls  down  divided  into  many  drops,  and  those  drops  run 
together,  making  rills  of  water,  which  meet  in  channels,  and  those  channels  run 
into  brooks,  and  those  brooks  into  rivers,  and  those  rivers  into  the  sea ;  so  it  either 
is  or  should  be  with  the  gifts  and  graces  of  the  Church.  They  all  come  down  from 
God,  divided  severally  as  He  will  to  various  Christians.  They  should  flow  through 
the  channels  of  their  special  vocations  into  the  common  streams  of  public  use  for 
church  or  commonwealth,  and  ultimately  return  into  the  great  ocean  of  His  glory, 
from  whence  they  originally  came.  [Bp.  Hall.)  God's  gifts  to  the  Church  to  be 
used  for  His  service : — I.  Those  of  whom  the  apostle  speaks.  Members  of  Christ's 
body,  i.e.,  the  Church  (Eph.  i.  22,  23).  1.  But  what  is  the  Church?  Ask  Koman 
Catholics,  the  members  of  the  Greek  Church,  some  members  of  our  own  Church,  or 
the  various  sects,  they  would  claim  each  for  themselves  the  title  of  the  Church. 
Now  these  are  equally  wrong.  The  Church  here  spoken  of  is  no  particular  ecclesi- 
astical government  whatsoever,  but  the  spiritual  Church  of  God's  elect  throughout 
the  whole  world.  2.  Here  is  the  test  of  Church  membership — "  the  measure  of 
faith."  No  person  is  a  member  of  this  Church  but  a  true  believer,  nor  can  he 
exercise  the  gifts  here  spoken  of  except  he  has  "  the  gift  "  of  faith.  The  apostle's 
illustration  of  the  human  body  is  totally  inapplicable  to  the  nominal  Church.  No 
such  sympathy  can  be  exercised  unless  men  be  mentally  and  morally  conformed  to 
God.  Again,  the  string  of  spiritual  duties  inculcated  in  the  text  cannot  be  performed 
by  mere  nominal  Christians.  If  you  want  a  description  of  real  Church  members, 
read  the  opening  address  of  almost  every  Epistle.  II.  The  persons  of  whom  the 
APOSTLE  SPEAKS  ARE  ALL  POSSESSED  OF  GIFTS.  1.  The  time  would  fail  me  to  tell  of 
the  gifts  of  God  to  individual  members  of  His  Church — outward  gifts,  such  as 
station,  property,  influence,  talent ;  official  gifts,  gifts  of  prophecy,  of  instruction, 
or  those  more  directly  spiritual  gifts  accumulated  in  the  Church.  2.  But  the  point 
of  the  passage  is  its  reference  to  the  diversity  of  gifts.  Sometimes  they  almost 
appear  to  be  capricious ;  one  man  rich,  another  poor ;  one  richly  gifted,  another 
next  akin  to  idiotcy;  some  with  dispositions  very  amiable,  others  just  the  reverse. 
Spiritual  gifts  are  not  equally  given  to  all.  Some  have  such  views  of  truth,  such 
contemplations  of  heavenly  things,  that  they  seem  to  be  admitted  within  the  veil. 
Others  seem  just  the  reverse,  going  on  heavily,  and  oftentimes  cast  down.  So  it  is 
with  all  spiritual  knowledge  and  attainments.  This  point  is  illustrated  under  the 
figure  of  the  human  body.  What  harmony,  yet  what  diversity  there !  There  is 
the  head,  the  seat  of  wisdom  ;  the  countenance,  of  feeling  and  animation ;  then  the 
various  limbs  or  members  of  the  body,  more  or  less  honourable ;  yet  is  the  whole 
fitly  framed  together,  each  part  marvellously  adjusted  to  the  other,  and  all  mutually 
dependent.  3.  But  the  most  striking  thought  is  that  all  are  gifts  of  God.  Money 
we  may  have  earned  by  our  own  intelligence  and  diligence,  but  God  gave  us  that 
diligence  and  intelligence.  So  with  regard  to  our  station  in  life.  So  most  pre- 
eminently with  His  spiritual  gifts.  If  we  have  any  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures,  it 
is  revealed  to  us  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  4.  Mark  the  lessons.  (1)  The  least  of  God's 
gifts  are  talents  entrusted  to  us,  and  should  not  be  despised.  Do  not  despise  the 
day  of  small  things,  and  say,  "  I  have  nothing,"  or  "  I  can  do  nothing."  Perhaps, 
too,  there  is  a  greater  danger  of  our  despising  small  gifts  in  others.     (2)  These 


OHAP.  sn.]  BOMANS.  485 

talents  being  the  gift  of  God,  we  must  not  be  nnduly  elated  by  them  {yet.  3;  1  Cor. 
iv.  7).  How  humbling  the  thought  that  we  have  nothing  we  can  call  oar  own  1  ^3) 
The  lowest  gifts  are  as  much  Qod's  as  the  highest.  He  that  planted  the  son  in  the 
firmament  taught  the  little  glow-worm  to  shine  on  the  summer  bank.  He  that 
raises  up  the  most  talented  to  fill  with  honour  distinguished  situations  is  the  same 
God  that  puts  the  candle  in  the  cottage  and  bids  it  shine  there.  How  encouraging 
is  this  to  the  weakest,  the  poorest,  the  yoimgeat  I  III.  It  is  theib  duty  and  pbivi- 
iiXOE  TO  CONSECRATE  THOSE  GIFTS  TO  THE  SERVICE  ov  GoD.  As  mastcrs  and  servauts, 
parents  and  children,  brothers  and  sisters,  as  individual  members  of  Christ's 
universal  Church,  we  have  each  gifts  entrusted  to  us ;  and  whether  our  talents  be 
few  or  many,  feeble  or  strong,  they  are  the  gifts  of  God,  and  must  be  thrown  by  ua 
into  the  common  treasury  of  the  Church  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  salvation  of 
souls.  (Dean  Close.)  Varied  gifts : — There  is  not  greater  variety  of  colour  and 
qualities  in  plants  and  flowers,  with  which  the  earth,  like  a  carpet  of  needlework, 
is  variegated,  for  the  delight  and  service  of  man,  than  there  is  of  gifts  natural  and 
spiritual  in  the  minds  of  men,  to  render  them  useful  to  one  another,  both  in  civil 
society  and  Christian  fellowship.  (W.  Gtimall.)  Gifts,  diversity  of: — Every  man 
has  received  some  gift — no  man  has  all  gifts  ;  and  this,  rightly  considered,  would 
keep  all  in  a  more  even  temper ;  as,  in  nature,  nothiug  is  altogether  useless,  so 
nothing  is  self-sufficient.  This,  duly  considered,  would  keep  the  meanest  from 
repining  and  discontent,  even  him  that  hath  the  lowest  rank  in  most  respects ;  yet 
something  he  hath  received  that  is  not  only  a  good  to  himself,  but  rightly  improved, 
may  be  so  to  others  likewise.  And  this  will  curb  the  loftiness  of  the  most  advanced, 
and  teach  them  not  only  to  see  some  deficiencies  in  themselves,  and  some  gifts  in 
far  meaner  persons  which  they  want ;  but,  besides  the  simple  discovery  of  this,  it 
will  put  them  upon  the  use  of  lower  persons,  not  only  to  stoop  to  the  acknowledg- 
ment, but  even  withal  to  the  participation  and  benefit  of  it ;  not  to  trample  upon 
all  that  is  below  them,  but  to  take  up  and  use  things  useful,  though  lying  at  their 
feet.  Some  flowers  and  herbs  that  grow  very  low  are  of  a  very  fragrant  smell  and 
healthful  use.  {Abp.  Leighton.)  Unity  and  diversity  : — Diversity  without  unity 
is  disorder;  unity  without  diversity  is  death.  {J.  P.  Lange,  D.D.)  Unity  in 
diversity  : — The  spirit  resolves  the  variety  into  unity,  introduces  variety  into  the 
unity,  and  reconciles  unity  to  itself  through  variety.  {Baur.)  The  requirements 
of  true  religion : — I.  Faithfulness  in  the  Church.  Our  gifts  must  be  improved 
for  the  common  edification  (vers.  6-8).  II.  Love  to  the  brethren — it  must  ba 
faithful,  yet  kind.  III.  Consistency  in  the  world.  1.  Diligence.  2.  Fervour. 
3.  Cheerfulness.  4.  Patience.  5.  Prayer.  IV.  Kindness  to  all  men.  1.  To  the 
saints.  2.  To  enemies.  3.  To  all  according  to  their  need.  V.  Humility.  1.  In 
our  intercourse  with  others.  2.  In  our  aims.  3.  In  our  judgments.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
Usefulness,  th^  least  Christian  to  aim  at : — Many  true  saints  are  unable  to  render 
much  service  to  the  cause  of  God.  See,  then,  the  gardeners  going  down  to  the 
pond  and  dipping  in  their  watering-pots  to  carry  the  refreshing  liquid  to  the 
flowers.  A  child  comes  into  the  garden  and  wishes  to  help,  and  yonder  is  a  little 
watering-pot  for  him.  Note  well  the  little  water-pot,  though  it  does  not  hold  so 
much,  yet  carries  the  same  water  to  the  plants  ;  and  it  does  not  make  any  differ- 
ence to  the  flowers  which  receive  that  water,  whether  it  came  out  of  the  big  pot  or 
the  little  pot,  so  long  as  it  is  the  same  water,  and  they  get  it.  You  who  are  as 
little  children  in  God's  Church,  you  who  do  not  know  much,  but  try  to  tell  to 
others  what  little  you  know ;  if  it  be  the  same  gospel  truth,  and  be  blessed  by  the 
same  Spirit,  it  will  not  matter  to  the  souls  who  are  blessed  by  you  whether  they 
were  converted  or  comforted  under  a  man  of  one  or  ten  talents.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Let  us  prophesy  according  to  the  proportion  of  faith. — The  gift  of  prophecy : — I. 
Its  nature  and  requisites.  II.  Its  design.  1.  The  edification  of  the  Church. 
2.  The  spread  of  truth.  3.  Salvation  of  souls.  HI.  Its  use.  1.  According  to  the 
analogy  of  faith.  2.  In  faith.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  proportion  of  faith  : — 1. 
"  Prophet "  means  one  who  is  the  interpreter  of  another's  thought.  In  the  Hebrew 
word  there  is  involved  the  idea  of  a  fountain  bubbling  up  as  from  between  rocks, 
subjected  to  pressure  from  without.  The  prophet  often  declared  future  events;  but 
we  must  not  limit  his  function  to  the  prediction.  He  brought  messages  to  men  per- 
taining to  the  present  practical  duty  of  life.  2.  "  According  to  the  proportion  of  faith." 
The  sense  is  made  clearer  by  inserting  "  the  "  or  "  our  "  faith,  i.e.,  the  objective  system 
of  truth,  the  gospel.  It  is  a  vast,  vital,  co-ordinated  system,  built  up  a  unity,  like 
the  root,  the  stem,  and  branch,  or  the  wall,  the  tower,  and  spire  of  a  building. 
The  balance  of  every  part  with  every  other  part  is  hinted  at.    What  is  it  that  God's 


486  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xh 

Word  brings  ?  I.  Great  doctrines.  1.  The  eternal  personality  of  God — a  thoaght 
the  pagan  mind  did  not  grasp.  And  science  is  dwarfed  when  it  hides  this  pivotal 
thought.  2.  His  providential  goodness  and  redeeming  grace.  His  hand  is  in 
history.  The  history  of  the  race  is  the  history  of  redemption.  It  was  God  who 
led  Paul  to  Damascus,  Augustine  to  Eome,  Savonarola  to  Morence,  and  Luther  to 
Worms.  His  creative  power,  His  providence  and  grace,  like  the  mysterious  trinity 
of  Being  to  which  they  are  related,  fill  us  with  adoring  wonder.  The  Bible  lifts  the 
race,  exalting  its  intellectual  as  well  as  its  moral  capacity.  II.  The  law  of  God 
WHICH  IS  AS  GREAT  AS  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  GoD.  It  is  high  above  the  codes  of  un- 
inspired teachers.  Love  to  God  and  man  are  the  essential  elements.  Every 
element  of  life  is  reached  and  ruled  by  it.  As  one  sunshine  floods  the  breadth  of 
the  sea  and  the  face  of  the  smallest  flower,  so  the  law  touches  alike  the  mightiest 
and  the  meanest.  It  enters  into  the  whole  man.  Courtesy  in  manner  is  philan- 
thropy in  a  trait,  and  heroism  of  character  is  shown  in  the  patience  of  love.  In  a 
word,  the  law  is  matched  to  the  doctrine  in  its  supernal  character  and  reach.  HI. 
A  Saviour  as  great  as  either.  He  was  announced  by  angels ;  a  star  led  wor- 
shippers to  His  cradle ;  at  His  baptism  a  voice  proclaimed  Him  the  well-beloved  of 
the  Father.  He  laid  claims  on  man's  service — blasphemous  were  He  not  God. 
He  put  Himself  between  parent  and  child,  wife  and  husband ;  or,  rather,  above 
them  all,  in  supreme  authority.  By  His  pierced  hands,  Christ,  the  crucified  and 
risen  Redeemer,  has  been  guiding  the  course  of  empires,  and  is  bringing  in  millen- 
nial eras.  Beally,  though  often  unconsciously,  has  the  world  in  its  advancing 
civilisation  reflected  the  glory  of  this  majestic  Prince  of  Life.  He  shall  yet  see  of  the 
travail  of  His  soul  and  be  satisfied.     On  His  head  will  rest  "  many  crowns."    IV.  A 

UNIVERSAL     SPIRITUAL    KINGDOM    18    COINCIDENT     IN     MAJESTY    AND      MIGHT     WITH    THE 

FOREGOING  ELEMENTS.  The  idea  of  such  a  kingdom  is  unique  and  grand.  To  the 
Greeks  other  nations  were  but  barbarians.  Rome  made  other  peoples  her  captives, 
without  extinguishing  their  enmity  or  assimilating  their  life.  But  Christ  founded 
His  throne  in  the  love  of  His  redeemed  people.  All  genius  shall  be  developed,  and 
all  wealth  shall  be  consecrated  under  the  supremacy  of  Christ.  Christianity  shall 
be  the  glory  of  the  nations.  V.  Great  warnings.  "  How  shall  we  escape,  if  we 
neglect  so  great  salvation  ? "  Here  is,  then,  the  "  proportion  of  faith,"  the 
harmony  of  truth,  the  "  analogy  "  which  knits  all  together  in  a  definite  unity. 
These  are  the  substructural  truths  of  revelation,  which  are  to  be  studied  and 
proclaimed,  each  in  its  time,  place,  and  proportion.  Conclusion :  1.  As  we  infer 
the  genius  of  the  architect  from  the  grandeur  of  the  building,  the  genius  of  the  poet 
from  his  verse,  or  that  of  the  statesman  and  jurist  from  what  emanates  from  each, 
so  we  infer  the  sublime  greatness  of  God  from  this  revelation  of  truth.  Can  any 
one  say  that  the  Scriptures  are  the  product  of  the  Jewish  mind  ?  As  well  might 
we  say  that  the  Atlantic  came  from  the  upsetting  of  a  child's  breakfast-cup  I  2. 
Attacking  one  point  of  this  revelation  is  an  attack  on  the  whole.  If  one  part  be  in 
error  the  value  of  the  whole  is  vitiated,  the  entire  edifice  tumbles  to  pieces.  All 
these  facts  of  our  common  faith  stand  or  fall  together,  as  heart  and  brain  are 
united.  If  one  be  paralysed,  the  whole  suffers.  If  one  stone  be  plucked  from  the 
arch,  they  all  tumble  in  one  heap ;  but  in  their  entirety  they  reflect  the  Divine 
unity  and  eternity.  3.  We  rise  into  sympathy  with  God  as  we  come  into  fuller 
comprehension  of  His  truth.  How  unwise  it  is  for  one  to  try  to  banish  God's  Word 
from  his  thoughts  1  Here  is  the  romance  of  the  world.  The  imagination,  as  well 
as  the  conscience  of  the  race,  is  exalted  by  the  truth  of  God.  It  ennobles  the 
whole  man.  It  enriches  the  Ufe  that  is,  as  well  as  the  Ufe  that  is  to  come.  (R.  S. 
Storrs,  D.D.)  Right  proportions  of  truth  : — I.  What  is  "  faith  "  here  ?  1. 
If  we  are  to  understand  the  trust  of  the  heart  towards  God,  then  the  passage  will 
mean,  that  ••  if  any  man  prophesy,"  or  preach,  he  must  do  it  "  according  to  the 
spiritual  experience  which  God  has  given  him."  The  measure  of  the  faith  is  the 
measure  of  the  life ;  and  if  we  wish  to  raise  the  standard  of  our  life,  we  must  begin 
by  elevating  our  faith.  We  cannot  go  beyond  our  faith  ;  and  we  must  not  fall 
short  of  it.  The  great  business  of  life  is  to  square  our  words  and  actions  to  the 
faith  which  God  has  given  us.  2.  But  we  are  to  take  "faith"  here  rather  as 
signifying  not  the  beUef,  but  the  things  believed — our  creed — "  the  faith  once 
delivered  to  the  saints."  II.  We  must  keep  the  general  symmetry  of  thh 
whole  body  of  ''the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus."  1.  There  is  no  greater  danger 
than  disproportion — the  source  of  almost  all  error.  For  the  enemy  of  truth  to 
present  what  is  palpably  false  would  at  once  startle  and  offend  1  But  he  secures 
his  end  much  better,  by  putting  before  us  what  is  in  itself  perfectly  true,  but  which 


CHAP,  xa.]  ROMANS.  487 

becomes  faltse  when  not  balanced  by  another  and  equal  truth.  2.  God  has  been 
pleased  to  give  us  a  revelation;  but  He  has  given  us  also  common  sense.  The 
Bible  was  never  intended  to  be  out  up  into  isolated  texts.  No  book  would  bear  it. 
If  you  take  single  sentences  you  may  prove  Socinianism,  Popery,  anything.  What 
we  have  to  do  is  to  know  all ;  to  collate  all ;  and  to  gather,  from  the  Bible,  in  its 
integrity,  the  mind  of  God.  III.  One  ob  two  things  in  which  it  is  most  im- 
poKTANT  TO  KEEP  "THE  PKopoBTiON  OF  FAITH."  1,  Each  Person  in  the  Blessed 
Trinity  has  His  own  prerogative,  oflfice,  and  dispensation.  Some  persons'  religion 
is  all  of  the  Father,  others'  all  of  the  Son,  others'  all  of  the  Spirit.  See,  however, 
how  the  works  of  each  stand  related  to  each  other  in  the  proportion  of  faith.  The 
Father  loved  the  world,  and  gave  His  Son  to  save  it.  The  Son  wrought  out  for  us 
a  complete  salvation,  and  with  Him  we  have  union  by  faith.  That  union  is  our 
strength,  and  our  life.  That  union  once  made,  the  Holy  Spirit  flows  into  us  as  the 
blood  flows  into  a  member  of  the  body ;  or,  as  the  sap  flows  into  a  branch,  grafted 
into  the  tree.  So  that  it  is  impossible  to  say  to  which  we  owe  most.  2,  According 
to  "  the  proportion  of  faith,"  there  is  a  wide  distinction  between  the  process  of  our 
justiflcation  and  our  sanctiflcation.  We  are  justifled  at  once,  and  perfectly,  by  a 
single  act  of  faith  ;  but  we  are  sanctified  by  degrees  with  effort,  and  even  painful- 
ness.  (/.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  doctrine  of  proportion  : — Proportion  means 
things  in  their  right  place,  i.e.,  when  one  object  does  not  unduly  attract  our  atten- 
tion above  another.  A  well-proportioned  figure,  e.g.,  is  where  the  head  is  not  too 
large,  or  the  hands  and  feet  too  small  for  the  body.  A  well-proportioned  building 
is  that  in  which  notbing  is  out  of  place  or  too  large  or  small  for  its  place.  Apply 
this  doctrine  to — I.  Christian  practice.  1.  It  is  not  enough  to  ask  what  is  right 
in  itself,  but  what  is  right  under  the  circumstances.  It  is  a  gi'eat  thing  to  have 
right  men  in  right  places,  but  it  is  also  a  great  thing  to  have  the  right  man  doing 
the  right  thing  in  the  right  place,  in  the  right  way.  A  right  thing  done  in  a  wrong 
way  is  often  more  mischievous  than  a  thing  done  wrong  altogether.  A  saying 
most  true  loses  all  its  savour  if  said  at  a  wrong  time ;  and  it  is  no  defence  to  argue 
that  it  was  good  years  ago  or  miles  away.  Is  it  good  for  us  here  and  now  ?  2. 
Congruity,  fitness,  proportion,  are  the  graces  required  for  the  spiritual  as  well  as 
the  material  temple.  We  are  not  mere  isolated  blocks  of  stone,  but  "  living  stones, 
built  up  into  a  spiritual  house."  What  in  one  station  or  age  is  a  grace,  in  another 
is  a  deformity.  "  To  everything  there  is  a  season,"  &o.,  says  the  preacher  in  that 
ancient  discourse  on  the  doctrine  of  proportion.  How  many  good  plans  have  come 
to  nought,  not  from  wickedness  or  opposition,  but  because  men  have  exalted  a 
virtue  or  custom  out  of  proportion,  and  so  have  driven  men  into  an  equal  dispro- 
portion on  the  other  side — over  strictness  leading  to  over  laxity,  excessive  rashness 
to  excessive  caution,  &c.  3.  And  so  the  apostle  tells  us  to  act  "  according  to  the 
t^ifts  given  to  us."  He  that  is  endowed  with  the  gift  of  preaching  is  to  exercise  his 
gift  not  in  any  other  line,  but  in  that.  He  that  has  the  gift  of  practical  work  is  not 
to  rush  out  of  his  way  in  prophesying.  Each  has  his  own  special  calling  ;  let  us 
not  waste  our  time  or  mar  our  usefulness  by  intruding  into  provinces  dispropor- 
tioned  to  our  powers.  Any  one  faculty  indulged  in  excess  becomes  a  curse,  e.g., 
music,  study,  mechanical  pursuits.  How  fatal  to  Louis  XVI.,  who  in  the  crisis  of 
the  French  monarchy  devoted  himself  to  his  favourite  craft  rather  than  to  the  task 
of  saving  the  state ;  how  useful  to  Peter  the  Great,  who  made  it  the  means  of 
civilising  his  barbarian  empire  I  4.  In  the  defence  of  Lucknow  the  courage,  sub- 
ordination and  zeal  of  each  individual  was  sustained  by  the  consciousness  that  on 
him  rested  the  safety  of  the  whole — a  single  outpost  lost  would  be  the  loss  of  all. 
So  if  the  fortress  of  goodness  and  truth  is  to  be  saved,  it  must  be  by  every  one 
doing  at  his  own  post  the  work  that  belongs  to  him  alone.  What  discipline  effects 
in  the  army  is  effected  in  our  moral  duties  by  a  sense  of  the  apostolical  doctrine  of 
proportion.  Each  one  has  his  own  work  assigned  him  by  the  Captain  of  bis  salva- 
tion. Allow  in  others,  claim  for  yourselves  a  division  of  labour  and  responsibility. 
A  good  master,  servant,  soldier,  teacber,  is  made  in  no  otber  way  but  by  "  waiting  " 
on  his  place.  U.  Christian  method.  1.  "  He  that  giveth,  .  .  .  with  simplicity." 
How  greatly  the  value  of  a  gift  depends  on  the  manner  of  giving !  "  He  gives  twice 
who  gives  soon  "  ;  so  he  who  gives  with  simplicity,  i.e.,  with  singleness  of  purpose, 
gives  a  hundredfold  more  than  he  who  gives  grudgingly,  late,  or  ostentatiously.  A 
thousand  gifts  Ul  given  are  hardly  better  than  none.  2.  "  He  that  ruleth,  with 
diligence,"  He  that  has  charge  of  a  household,  school,  or  commonwealth,  may 
rule  imperiously,  and  so  that  the  institution  may  go  on  in  apparent  prosperity  ;  and 
yet  there  may  be  wanting  that  peculiar  method  which  will  give  life  and  subsUnco 


i88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [OHAI   ZH. 

to  the  whole.    What  is  wanted  is  that  he  should  rule  with  diligence,  i.e.,  with 
heart  and  soul.    This  is  the  true  secret  of  influence.    3.  "  He  that  showeth  mercy, 
with  cheerfulness."    How  easy  to  show  mercy  in  such  a  way  that  it  shall  be  no 
mercy  1    What  is  wanted  is  the  bright  smile,  the  playful  word.    IH.  Chbistian 
TBUTu.     1.  It  is  important  for  the  teacher  to  teach  according  to  the  proportion  of 
his  own  faith ;  not  to  assume  feelings  which  are  not  his  own,  not  to  urge  truths  of 
which  he  does  not  feel  the  value,  but  to  teach  according  to  his  own  knowledge  and 
experience.    2.  It  is  important  for  us  all  so  to  seek,  find,  and  teach  all  truth,  so  as 
not  to  forget  what  are  the  due  proportions  of  the  truth  itself.    Christian  truth  ii 
not  of  one  kind  only.    It  has  lights  and  shades,  foregrounds  and  distances,  lessons 
of  infinitely  various  significance.    Woe  be  to  us  if  instead  of  "  rightly  dividing  the 
word  of  truth,"  we  confound  all  its  parts  together.  We  may  believe  correctly  on  every 
single  point,  yet  il  we  view  these  points  out  of  their  proper  proportions  our  view  may 
be  as  completely  wrong  as  if  on  every  point  we  had  been  involved  in  error.     {Dean 
Stanley.)     The  danger  of  exaggerations  in  religion : — 1.  Lord  Bacon  compares  religion 
to  the  eun,  which  invigorates  and  cheers  Uve  animal  substances,  but  turns  the  dead 
to  corruption.     Similarly  religion  invigorates  a  sound  mind,  and  cheers  a  sound 
heart,  while  in  a  morbid  mind  it  breeds  superstitions,  scruples,  and  monstrous 
fancies.    We  have  only  to  survey  the  history  of  Christianity  to  see  how  just  their 
comparison  is.    What  follies,  superstitions,  licentious  doctrines,  have  been  founded 
on  the  Bible  1    This  has  arisen  from  a  certain  morbid  tendency  in  the  human  mind 
to  caricature  truths  presented  to  it.     I.  Eveby  bebest  has  been  a  oabioatube  or 
SOME  ONE  POINT  OF  Chbistian  TRUTH — an  exaggeration  by  which  the  fair  proportion 
of  the  faith  has  been  distorted.     1.  The  truth  upon  which  the  Quaker  founds  his 
system,  is  that  the  New  Dispensation  is  spiritual.    No  truth  can  well  be  more  vital, 
and  through  the  subtle  encroachments  of  formalism  it  is  necessary  for  all  of  us 
every  now  and  then  to  ask  ourselves  whether  we  are  properly  awake  to  the  fact  that 
the  law,  under  which  Christians  live,  is  "the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ 
Jesus,"  written  on  the  fleshy  table  of  the  heart,  and  that  God  is  a  Spirit,  and  there- 
fore to  be  worshipped  in  spirit  and  in  truth.    The  Quakers  would  have  deserved  the 
warmest  thanks  if  they  had  done  nothing  more  than  bring  these  truths  forward. 
But,  unhappily,  they  caricatured  them,  and  robbed  the  Church  of  her  sacraments. 
2.  The  fundamental  truth  of  our  religion  is  that  "  God  is  love,"  and  that  He  has 
shown  His  love  by  the  sacrifice  of  His  dear  Son.    Now  certain  divines  have 
perceived  this  truth  clearly,  and  it  is  impossible  to  perceive  it  too  clearly,  or  pro- 
claim it  too  loudly.    But  to  say  that  anger  is  inconsistent  with  love,  or  that  justice 
is  inconsistent  with  compassion,  and  to  acknowledge  no  relations  with  God  as  a 
Judge,  because  He  stands  to  us  in  the  relation  of  a  Father,  is  to  caricature  the  faith 
and  mar  its  fair  proportions.    God  loves  me  deeply,  but  He  hates  my  sin,  and  will 
never  consent  to  save  me  from  its  guilt  without  saving  me  from  its  power.    3.  And 
where  there  is  no  actual  heresy,  this  tendency  may  lead  to  a  vast  amount  of  un- 
suspected mischief.    In  many  spiritual  books  a  strain  is  put  upon  certain  precepts 
which  caricatures  them,  sets  them  at  issue  with  other  precepts,  and  cramps  the 
mind  which  should  strive  after  obedience  to  them.    Take  an  example.    When  St. 
Francis  of  Sales  was  dying,  he  said  to  one  of  his  attached  disciples,  "  Bishop,  God 
has  taught  me  a  great  secret,  and  I  will  tell  it  you,  if  you  will  put  your  head  closer." 
The  bishop  did  so,  anxious  to  know  what  Francis  considered  as  the  crowning 
lesson  of  a  life  of  holiness.     "  He  has  taught  me,"  said  the  dying  man,  who  was 
acutely  suffering,  "  to  ask  nothing,  and  to  refuse  nothing."    Now  at  this  a  senti- 
mental pietism  might  perhaps  whisper,  "  What  beautiful  resignation  I  "    But  is  it 
in  conformity  to  the  Word  of  God,  and  the  mind  of  Christ  ?    We  admit  that  we 
should  refuse  nothing  which  comes  from  cur  Father's  hand.    But  where  has  God 
taught  His  people  to  ask  nothing  ?    Did  not  our  Lord  pray,   "  Father,  if  it  be 
possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  Me  "  ?    Good  St.  Francis  erred  by  exaggeration,  and 
caricatured  the  grace  of  resignation.    Resignation  is  a  heavenly  and  Christ-like 
grace ;  but  if  you  will  push  it  to  every  length,  it  becomes  absolutely  mischievous. 
Thus  one  might  conceive  a  beggar  doing  nothing  to  improve  his  condition,  on  the 
plea  that  such  was  the  will  of  God,  and  that  mendicancy  was  the  state  of  life  to 
which  he  had  been  called ;  forgetting  that  there  is  a  maxim  which  says  that  "  if 
any  man  would  not  work,  neither  should  he  eat."    In  the  lives  of  the  Scriptural 
saints  nothing  is  so  remarkable  as  their  perfect  naturalness,  and  freedom  from  all 
overstrained  spirituality.     The  great  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  after  a  miraculous 
escape  from  shipwreck,  gathers  a  bundle  of  sticks,  and  puts  them  on  the  fire  (for 
St.  Paul  was  not  above  feeUng  cold  and  wet) ;  and  when  writing  under  the  afflatus 


OTAP.  xn-]  ROMANS.  489 

of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  bids  Timothy  bring  the  cloak  which  he  left  at  Troas  with 
Carpus,  in  anticipation  of  an  approaching  winter,  "  and  the  books,  but  especially 
the  parchments  " ;  for  what  studious  man  can  bear  to  be  without  his  books  and 
papers  ?  Among  the  early  disciples  you  would  have  seen  nothing  overcharged  in 
character  or  manner ;  nay,  you  would  have  seen  little  foibles,  of  temper,  of  super- 
stition, of  prejudice — yon  might  have  heard  sharp  words  passing  between  great 
apostles,  and  yon  might  have  seen  a  damsel,  recently  engaged  with  others  in  prayer, 
in  such  a  joyful  trepidation  of  nerves  when  the  answer  arrived,  that  she  opened  not 
the  gate  for  gladness.  II.  How,  then,  shall  the  devout  man  keep  his  mind  free 
FBOM  exaggerations  BOTH  IN  DOCTRINE  AND  PRACTICE  ?  By  an  impartial  study  of 
the  whole  of  Scripture.  Pray  for  the  Bereans'  nobleness  of  mind  who  brought 
even  the  doctrine  of  apostles  to  the  test  of  inspiration,  and  searched  the 
Scriptures  daily,  whether  these  things  were  so.  How  much  more,  when  men  are 
not  apostles,  must  their  doctrine  be  thus  searched  and  sifted  !  {Dean  Goulburn.) 
The  proportion  of  faith : — It  has  been  a  matter  of  controversy  whether  "  the 
faith"  is  to  be  understood  in  its  objective  or  subjective  sense,  in  other  words, 
whether  the  caution  is  intended  to  guard  the  preacher  against  violating  the  due 
relation  existing  between  one  and  another  of  the  truths  of  revelation ;  or  whether 
he  does  not  rather  use  the  word  "faith"  in  its  subjective  meaning,  and  bid  the 
Christian  who  is  to  exercise  the  prophetic  office  so  to  regulate  his  teaching  as  may 
be  in  accordance  with  the  measure  of  faith  attained  by  himself  or  his  hearers.  I 
can  myself  see  no  reason  why  we  should  not  use  the  words  in  both  applications. 
I.  First,  taking  the  text  in  its  OBJECTrvK  meaning,  what  shall  we  say  is  the  true 
proportion  which  is  to  guide  us  in  our  teaching?  Surely  in  the  first  instance  we 
must  go  to  the  Catholic  creeds  :  these,  surely,  in  the  first  place,  are  the  natural 
exponents  to  us  of  the  revelation  of  the  New  Testament.  The  great  truth  of  the 
incarnation  of  the  eternal  Son  lies,  as  we  all  should  admit,  at  the  root  of  all  sound 
teaching  connected  with  man's  relation  to  God.  It  is  the  one  great  central  truth 
round  which  a  theologian  would  group  all  the  subsidiary  truths,  which  we  connect 
with  the  words  "atonement,"  "reconciliation,"  "pardon,"  "  justification,"  and  the 
like.  A  number  of  other  points  of  teaching,  whether  we  count  them  matters  of  faith 
or  of  opinion,  flow  out  of  this  central  head.  A  clergyman — a  scribe  instructed  into  the 
kingdom  of  heaven — ought  to  see  this  relation  between  the  several  parts  of  revela- 
tion ;  but  every  clergyman  even  is  not  a  formal  theologian ;  and,  deep  as  is  the 
reverence  still  amongst  our  people  for  the  English  Bible,  St.  Paul's  Epistles  are 
mostly  read  for  other  purposes  than  for  that  of  tracing  the  interdependence  of 
religious  truth.  We  complain  sometimes,  and  not  without  reason,  of  the  way  in 
which  a  past  generation  so  magnified  one  particular  doctrine,  which  they  thought 
<o  be  embodied  in  St.  Paul's  writings,  as  to  obscure  altogether  collateral  and  com- 
plementary truths ;  so  as  to  give  a  thoroughly  distorted  image  of  the  apostle's 
teaching  concerning  the  doctrine  nearest  to  their  own  hearts.  Our  generation 
surely  is  not  altogether  clear  from  the  same  error.  II.  But  I  suggested  that  St. 
Paul's  words,  where  he  speaks  of  the  proportion  of  faith,  might  fairly  bear  the 
SUBJECTIVE  A8  WELL  AS  THE  OBJECTIVE  INTERPRETATION ;  in  other  words,  he  sccms  to 
imply  that  prophecy,  to  be  efifective  for  the  edification  of  the  Church,  must  be 
exercised  in  subordination,  not  only  to  the  analogy  of  the  faith  of  the  Church  itself, 
but  also  to  the  faith  of  the  preacher,  and  I  think  also  of  the  hearer.  Am  I  wrong 
in  sa3riDg  that  the  prophecy  of  our  days  has  not  been  always  mindful  of  this  rule  ? 
And  has  not  this  forgetfulness  been  one  fruitful  source  of  much  of  the  disappoint- 
ment which  has  waited  on  the  ministry  of  good  and  earnest  men  ?  And  we  hear  a 
great  deal  about  the  importance  of  defending  the  outworks  from  some  who  do  not 
seem  to  understand  altogether  what  is  the  citadel  which  they  suppose  these  out* 
works  to  defend.  I  do  not  at  all  mean  that  there  is  of  necessity  any  insincerity  in 
all  this,  brt  there  is,  I  think,  a  measure  of  unreality.  The  learner  is  not  attracted 
by  very  decided  statements  on  the  part  of  the  teacher,  so  long  as  there  is  a  certain 
secret  instinct  in  his  own  mind  that  the  conviction  of  the  speaker's  heart  is  not 
altogether  in  nnison  with  the  strength  of  his  language.  Out  of  the  abundance  of  the 
heart  the  month  speaketh — words  not  spoken  out  of  that  abundance  fall  dead  and 
powerless  even  upon  the  untaught  ear.  But  there  is  a  third,  and  a  different  aspect 
of  the  whole  question.    III.  The  pbopobtion  of  faith  which  we  have  to  take  into 

ACCOUNT  IB  THE  FAITH  OF  CUB  HEABEBS  AS  WELL  AS  THE  FAITH  OF  THE  ChUBCH  AT  LARGE, 

and  the  force  with  which  we  ourselves  have  apprehended  the  realities  with  which 
faith  deals.  The  days  in  which  we  live  are  days  of  excitement,  of  controversy ;  I 
must  add  also  days  of  failure  and  disappointment  to  those  who  have  the  cure  of 


490  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Xtt 

Bonis.    We  have  gone  ont,  many  of  us,  full  of  expectation,  and  we  have  returned 
full  of  diBappointment,  "  we  have  sown  much  and  we  have  brought  in  little."  and 
the  bright  lights  of  the  early  morning  have  ended  in  a  very  sober  grey.    Doubtless 
there  are  many  causes  working  up   to  this  result.     Our  expectation  has  been 
unreasonable,  and  it  has  been  good  for  us  that  "  tears,  prayers,  and  watchinga 
should  fail."    But  I  venture  to  think  that  there  has  been  also  a  great  forgetfuluess 
of  St.  Paul's  precept  among  us  clergy.    We  have  again  and  again  looked  ior  a 
sympathy  amongst  our  people,  which  we  had  no  right  to  expect ;  we  have  failed  to 
apprehend  the  very  wide  difference  between  their  standpoint  and  our  own :  we  h»v» 
expected  to  quicken  their  interest  in  religious  truth,  simply  because  our  own  has 
been  quickened :   and  that  new,  possibly  important,  phases  of   doctrine  should 
commend  themselves  to  the  spiritual  apprehension  of  our  people  because  they  have 
so  commended  themselves  to  our  own.     These  things  are  doubtless  in  a  measure 
inevitable.   I  suppose  every  clergyman,  in  reviewing  his  own  wo'  k  and  teaching,  has 
found  that  he  has  fallen  into  many  a  mistake  in  his  younger  days  from  attempting  to 
build  up  a  super-structure  where  there  was  no  sufficient  foundation  already  laid. 
Sympathy  with  the  spiritual  and  intellectual  condition  of  others  must  of  course  be 
the  result  of  experience.    In  a  word,  as  years  go  on,  I  believe  the  oldest  and  the 
simplest  standards  alike  of  faith,  and  of  devotion,  and  of  practice  satisfy  us  best. 
For  dogmatic  statements  about  the  sacraments  we  turn  to  the  catechism  of  oar 
childhood,  and  we  learn  to  see  that  all  the  refinements  of  more  elaborate  definition 
have  added  not  one  whit  to  the  clearness  of  our  apprehension  of  what  is  confessedly 
mystical.    In  like  manner  as  the  Lord's  prayer  becomes  to  us  the  most  complete 
and  satisfying  formula  of  communion  with  God,  each  petition  in  its  iteration 
becoming  more  and  more  formal,  but  ever  pregnant  with  fresh  meaning  and  with 
Dew  life,  so  also  do  the  Catholic  creeds  supply  us  with  all  that  we  want  as  a  standard 
of  faith.    Curious  and  intricate  questions  about  which  we  were  once  very  much 
inclined  to  speculate,  we  are  content  to  leave  where  the  creeds  leave  them,  implicitly 
contained  perhaps  in  their  statements  of  truth,  but  no  more.    It  is  in  them  that  we 
learn  the  true  balance,  the  real  proportion ;  and  alike  for  our  own  soul's  guidance 
and  for  the  teaching  of  our  people,  we  fall  back  upon  truths  learnt  at  our  mother's 
knee,  and  we  find  words  which  once  sounded  a  little  cold  and  formal  become  ever 
instinct  with  a  new  life  ;  for  that  indeed  they  contain  all  that  a  Christian  ought  to 
know  and  "  believe  to  his  soul's  health,"  the  love  of  the  Father,  the  Incarnation  of 
the  Son,  and  the  indwelling  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  {Arehdn.  Pott.)     Or  ministry, 
let  us  wait  on  our  ministering. — Waiting  on  our  ministering  needs  extra  grace  : — 
I  was  in  Cologne  on  a  very  rainy  day,  and  I  was  looking  out  for  similes  and 
metaphors,  as  I  generally  am ;  but  I  had  nothing  on  earth  to  look  at  in  the  square 
of  the  city  but  an  old  pump,  and  what  kind  of  a  simile  I  could  make  out  of  it  I 
could  not  tell.     All  traffic  seemed  suspended,  it  rained  so  hard ;  but  I  noticed  a 
woman  come  to  the  pump  with  a  bucket.    Presently  I  noticed  a  man  come  in  with 
a  bucket ;  nay,  he  came  with  a  yoke  and  two  buckets.    As  I  kept  on  writing  and 
looking  out  every  now  and  then,  I  saw  the  same  friend  with  the  often-buckets  and 
blue  blouse  coming  to  the  same  pump  again.    In  the  course  of  the  morning  I  think 
I  saw  him  a  dozen  times.     I  thought  to  myself,  "  Ah,  you  do  not  fetch  water  for 
your  own  house,  I  am  persuaded  :  you  are  a  water-carrier  ;  you  fetch  water  for  lots 
of  people,  and  that  is  why  you  come  oftener  than  anybody  else."    Now,  there  was 
a  meaning  in  that  at  once  to  my  soul,  that,  inasmuch  that  I  had  not  only  to  go  to 
Christ  for  myself,  but  had  been  made  a  water-carrier  to  carry  the  water  of  everlasting 
life  to  others,  I  must  come  a  great  deal  oftener  than  anybody  else.    {C.  H.  Spurgeon^ 
He  that  teachetb,  on  teaching;  or  he  that  exhorteth,  on  exhortation. — The  faculties 
of  teaching  and  exhorting  may  be  combined  in  the  same  individual ;  and  indeed  in 
these  days,  they  are  best  laid  upon  one  person,  the  ordinary  minister  of  a  congrega- 
tion.    Yet  the  two  faculties  are  so  far  separate,  as  in  other  times  to  have  given  rise 
to  separate  functions ;  and  accordingly,  in  the  machinery  of  more  churches  than 
one,  have  we  read  both  of  the  doctor  and  the  pastor  as  distinct  office-bearers.    The 
one  expounds  truth ;  the  other  applies  it,  and  presses  it  home  on  the  case  and 
conscience  of  every  individual.    The  didactic  and  the  hortatory  are  two  distinct 
things,  and  imply  distinct  powers — insomuch,  that,  on  the  one  hand,  a  luminous, 
logical,  and  masterly  didactic  maybe  a  feeble  and  unimpressive  hortatory  preacher; 
and,  on  the  other,  the  most  effective  of  our  hortatory  men  may,  when  they  attempt 
the  didactic,  prove  very  obscure  and  infelicitous  expounders  of  the  truth.    Both  are 
best ;  and  we  should  conform  more  to  the  way  of  that  Spirit  who  divideth  His 
gifts  severally  as  He  will,  did  we  multiply  and  divide  our  offices  so  as  to  meet  this 


CHAP,  zs.]  ROMANS.  491 

yariety.  It  were  more  consonant  both  to  philosophy  and  Scripture,  did  we  proceed 
more  on  the  subdivision  of  employment  in  things  ecclesiastical.  (T.  Chalmeri, 
D.D.)  Requisites  to  faithful  teaching: — L  Study — to  secure  right  material. 
U.  Method— or  the  right  way  of  communicating  the  truth.  III.  Diuoknck. 
IV.  Simplicity — or  a  right  aim.  V.  Above  all  faith — or  dependence  upon  Divine 
help  (/.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Duty  of  teachers  and  ministers  : — On  Egypt's  far-off  soil, 
away  from  friends  and  home,  just  as  the  morning  beams  lit  up  the  Eastern  sky,  an 
officer  lay  dying.  With  gallant  daring  he  had  led  his  followers  through  many  a 
devious  path,  guided  alone  by  the  pale  starlight  of  the  heavens,  until  at  last  they 
reached  the  enemy ;  and  uow  the  strife  is  over,  but  be  is  wounded,  mortally  I  As 
the  general,  his  cheeks  bedewed  with  tears,  gazed  down  with  sadness  on  his  face,  a 
sadden  radiancy  illumined  for  a  moment  the  youth's  countenance  as,  looking  up 
to  Wolseley,  he  exclaimed,  "General,  didn't  I  lead  them  BtraighL?"  and  so  he  died. 
"  Oh,  brothers,  when  o'er  our  eyes  there  steals  the  film  of  death,  and  when  the 
soul  fits  solemnly  from  time  into  eternity,  may  it  be  ours  to  say  in  truthful 
earnestness  to  Christ  concerning  those  committed  to  our  care,  "  We  led  the  people 
straight."  (H.  D.  Broion,  B.A.)  He  that  giveth,  let  him  do  it  with  simplicity. — 
The  triple  lesson: — What  is  the  great  object  of  humau  life?  1.  To  prepare  to 
die,  say  many,  an  answer  which  contains  a  small  modicum  of  right,  and  an  over- 
whelming  preponderance  of  wrong.  To  be  prepared  to  meet  death  is,  of  course,  a 
great  object,  but  it  is  not  itself  the  great  object  of  life.  If  it  were,  on  the  same 
principle  the  great  object  of  a  journey  would  be  to  get  home  again ;  and  of  getting 
up  in  the  morning  to  go  to  bed  again  at  night,  of  a  fire  to  consume  fuel,  and  of 
reading  a  book  to  get  through  its  pages.  These  absurdities  bring  out  the  truth  that 
the  fag  end  of  a  thing  is  not  always  the  chief  object  of  it.  2.  The  great  object  of 
life  is  to  live,  i.e.,  to  do  one's  duty  as  a  Christian.  And  wherever  this  object  is 
fairly  and  fully  followed  out,  the  last  stage  of  life  will  be  safe  and  easy.  What 
thought  is  there  so  disheartening  and  disturbing  as  the  thought  that  we  must  die, 
and  we  know  not  how  soon  ?  Lt  t  it  be  chased  away  with  the  reflection  that  it  is 
our  present  duty  to  live,  and  the  text  is  suited  exclusively  to  living  men ;  to  men 
who  will  one  day  have  to  die,  but  whose  business  now  is  to  live  and  do  their  duty. 
I.  To  arvB  "with  simplicitt."  The  word  simplicity  is  the  opposite  of  duplicity. 
Let  him  do  it  with  a  single  eye  and  heart,  and  without  any  second  or  double  mean- 
ing.  Let  there  be  no  undercurrent  of  unworthy  motive,  bat  one  pure  and  simple 
desire  of  benefiting  the  recipients  of  his  bounty  (Luke  vi.  35).  The  case  of  those 
who  never,  or  scarcely  ever,  give  anything,  is  not  mentioned.  Perhaps  the  apostle 
left  it  as  a  case  which  carried  its  own  condemnation  with  it,  and  therefore  required 
no  special  mention.  But  those  who  do  give  are  to  watch  the  motive  of  their  giving. 
They  have  been  "  bought  with  a  price,"  and  they  must  give  out  of  a  feeling  of 
gratitude  to  Him  who  hath  done  so  much  for  them.  Whatever  they  have  has  been 
given  to  them  by  God,  and  sooner  or  later  they  will  have  to  give  an  account  of  their 
stewardship.  That  they  may  do  so  with  joy  they  must  aim  at  "  simplicity  "  in  the 
exercise  of  their  trust.  II.  To  bdls  with  DiLiaENCE.  1.  Persons  in  authority  are 
too  apt  to  forget  or  shelve  their  responsibilities ;  and  there  are  numbers  who  re- 
pudiate the  idea  of  having  any  authority  at  all.  But  there  are  very  few  who  do  not 
exercise  some  influence.  Now  the  text  drops  a  word  of  warning  to  all,  from  the 
queen  downwards,  and  condemns  those  who  talk  awout  taking  it  easy,  and  leaving 
things  to  take  care  of  themselves.  2.  Buling  is  not  a  process  which  can  be  per- 
formed anyhow.  It  requires  care,  and  thought,  and  discretion.  And  if  parents, 
masters,  and  mistresses  will  not  take  the  trouble  to  look  after  their  dependents,  or 
lack  moral  courage  to  do  it,  we  may  be  sure  of  an  unsatisfactory  result  sooner  or 
later.  Wherever  habits  of  idleness  and  indulgence,  waste  and  extravagance, 
recklessness  and  imprudence,  of  unbecoming  finery  in  dress,  and  morbid  delicacy 
in  eating,  go  ancorreoted,  there  the  seed  of  a  fruitful  crop  of  social  evils  is  being 
sown  broadcast.  Such  habits  cling  tenaciously  to  young  people,  and  in  the  case  of 
servants,  the  humble  fare  of  whose  future  homes  may  present  a  painful  contrast  to 
the  profusion  of  domestic  service,  such  habits  make  them  poor  and  keep  them  so. 
m.  To  SHOW  HBBCT  WITH  cHEEBFDLNESs.  There  is  a  great  deal  in  the  way  in  which 
a  thing  is  done.  The  man  who  does  a  kind  action,  accompanying  it  with  kind  words 
&ad  looks,  doubles  the  favour  which  he  confers.  The  term  "  cheerfulness  "  refers 
particularly  to  looks.  What  a  beautiful  illustration  of  the  spirit  of  oar  religion, 
which  seeks  to  bring  our  whole  man,  body  as  well  as  soul,  our  very  looks  as  well  as 
our  words  and  actions,  into  captivity  to  the  obedience  of  Christ !  How  it  carries  us 
back  to  the  example  of  our  Master,  who  never  said  an  unkind  word,  or  gave  an 


49fl  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

unkind  look,  or  did  a  favour  grudgingly.  There  is  a  good  deal  of  kindness  in  the 
world,  but  the  kindness  we  experience  is  not  always  associated  with  "cheerfulness." 
Who  has  not  heard  of  the  poor  relation,  and  the  dependent  friend,  mourning  in 
secret,  not  always  over  unkind  actions,  but  over  kind  actions  unkindly  done? 
(J.  Mould,  M.A.)  Giving: — I.  Is  a  Christian  duty.  Because — 1.  An  acknow- 
ledgment of  our  stewardship.  2.  An  expression  of — (1)  Gratitude  to  God.  (2)  Self- 
denial.     (3)  GoodwUl  to  man.    II.  Should  be  pebfobmed  with  simplicity.     With 

1.   A  generous  heart.     2.   A  single  eye.    3.   A  clean  hand.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 

Criving  xoith  timplicity  is  giving  just  as  if  giving  were  so  natural  that  when  a  man 
gave  he  did  not  think  of  changing  his  countenance,  manners,  or  air  at  all ;  but 
did  it  quietly,  easily,  beautifully.  When  you  are  going  around  for  proper  help, 
some  men  give  so  that  you  are  angry  every  time  you  ask  them  to  contribute.  They 
give  80  that  their  gold  and  silver  shoot  you  like  a  bullet.  Others  give  with  such 
beauty  that  you  remember  it  as  long  as  you  live ;  and  you  say,  "  It  is  a  pleasure  to 
go  to  such  men."  There  are  some  men  that  give  as  springs  do.  Whether  you  go 
to  them  or  not  they  are  always  full,  and  your  part  is  merely  to  put  your  dish  under 
the  ever-flowing  stream.  Others  give  just  as  a  pump  does  where  the  well  is  dry 
and  the  pump  leaks  1  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Giving,  blessedness  of: — It  is  told  of 
John  Wesley  that  when  he  bestowed  a  gift  or  rendered  any  one  a  service  he  lifted 
his  hat  as  though  he  were  receiving  instead  of  conferring  an  obligation.  Giving, 
penalty  of  not : — A  lady  who  refused  to  give,  after  hearing  a  charity  sermon,  had 
her  pocket  picked  as  she  was  leaving  church.  On  making  the  discovery  she  said, 
"  The  parson  could  not  find  the  way  to  my  pocket,  but  the  devil  did."  Giving,  a 
sign  of  perfectness : — When  wheat  is  growing  it  holds  all  its  kernels  tight  in  its  own 
ear.  But  when  it  is  ripe  the  kernels  are  scattered  every  whither,  and  it  is  only 
the  straw  that  is  left.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  He  that  ruleth,  with  diligence. — Ruling 
with  diligence  : — I.  The  necessity  of  the  bdleb.  1.  In  the  world.  2.  In  the  Church. 
II.  The  functions  of  the  buleb.  1.  To  maintain  order.  2.  Protect  liberty.  3.  Secure 
the  common  weal.  III.  The  duty  of  the  buleb.  Diligence,  implying — 1.  Self-sacri- 
fice. 2.  Attention  to  aU.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  He  that  showeth  mercy,  with  cheerful- 
ness.— Showing  mercy  with  cheerfulness : — This  instruction  may  mean — 1,  That  we 
should  carry  sunshine  with  us  in  our  visits  to  the  sick  chamber  or  distressed  home. 
In  no  case  is  cheerfulness  or  brightness  so  needed  or  so  welcome.  2.  That  we 
should  perform  kind  ofiSces  to  the  sick  or  sorrowful,  not  of  constraint,  but  of  a 
ready  mind,  con  amore;  not  because  it  is  our  business  as  the  paid  or  voluntary  staff 
of  a  Church,  nor  as  a  matter  merely  of  principle  or  habit,  but  of  pleasure  and 
privilege.  That  manner  is  something  to  everybody,  and  everything  to  some,  is  a 
maxim  we  should  act  upon  when  consoling  those  claiming  our  compassion.  Besides, 
it  is  our  privilege  to  show  cheerfulness  in  soothing  the  sorrows  of  the  afiflicted, 
for  no  task  tends  more  than  this,  if  entered  upon  in  a  right  spirit,  to  banish 
gloom  and  discontent  from  our  own  minds,  and  to  enliven  our  own  souls. 
(C.  Neil,  M.A.) 

Yer.  9.  Let  love  be  without  dlsslmolation. — Christian  legislation: — Here  are 
laws  for — I.  Social  djtebcoubsb.  It  must  be — 1.  Honest.  2.  Pure.  3.  Kind. 
II.  Business  must  be — 1.  Diligent.  2.  Conducted  on  Christian  principles.  8.  In 
the  fear  of  God.  HI.  Tempeb.  1.  Cheerful.  2.  Patient.  3.  Prayerful.  IV. 
General  behavioub.  1.  Benevolent  to  all.  2.  Humble.  3.  Forbearing.  4. 
Peaceable.     {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Marks  of  the  Christian  character : — I.  Hateed  of 

EVIL.  "  Abhor  that  which  is  evil."  Hate — 1.  Trivial  sins  as  well  as  great.  2. 
Secret  as  well  as  public.  8.  Personal  as  well  as  social.  4.  In  thought  as  well  as  in 
act.    n.  Steadfast  GOODNESS.     "  Cleave  to  that  which  is  good. "    1.  In  temptation. 

2.  In  dishonour.  3.  In  persecution.  4.  In  suffering  loss  and  danger.  UI.  Mutual 
LOVB.  1.  There  is  something  to  love  in  the  worst  of  men.  2.  Piety  gives  much  to 
love  and  admire.  3.  We  must  be  stimulated  by  the  love  and  example  of  Christ. 
4.  We  ourselves  want  the  love  of  all  men.  5.  Humility.  IV.  Febvent  industby. 
1.  Activity.     2.  Piety.    3.  Zeal.    V.  SpnirruAL  dispositiom.    1.  Joy.    2.  Patience. 

3.  Prayer.  4.  Hospitality.  6.  Sympathy.  {Family  Churchman.)  Sincerity 
the  best  qualification  of  charity : — Sincerity  is  an  indispensable  ingredient  of 
goodness ;  it  stamps  a  valuable  character  upon  all  our  actions,  and  recommends 
them  to  the  favour  both  of  God  and  man.  It  is  an  evidence  of  that  respect  which 
we  pay  to  our  Creator,  who  is  the  great  Discemer  of  the  thoughts  of  our  hearts  ; 
and  an  instance  of  that  justice  which  we  owe  to  our  fellow-creatures,  who  delight  to 
eonveme  with  us  with  ^eedom  and  security.    Hypocrisy  on  the  other  tide  is  the 


OBAr.  xn.]  ROMANS,  498 

blackest  of  all  transgressions,  and  bears  the  badge  of  the  original  liar.  It  is  directly 
injurioas  to  the  Divine  nature,  by  pretending  to  elude  His  infinite  wisdom ;  and 
pernicious  to  human  society,  by  deceitfully  imposing  upon  their  finite  understanding. 
I.  Let  oim  LOTS  07  God  bb  without  nissiMiniATioM.  To  love  God  without  dis* 
simulation  is  to  love  Him  with  all  our  heart  and  mind  and  soul  and  strength  ;  to 
rejoice  in  His  presence,  to  be  constant  in  His  service ;  and  to  let  nothing  share  with 
Bim  in  oor  hearts,  so  as  to  stand  in  competition  with  the  duty  which  we  owe  Him. 
Now  there  are  two  qualifications  which  will  engage  us  to  be  thus  sincere  in  oar 
affection.  The  one  is  the  true  value  of  the  object  of  our  love,  and  the  other  an 
assurance  of  His  tenderness  for  us :  but  nowhere  can  we  find  these  two  strong 
inducements  in  so  eminent  a  degree  as  in  almighty  God ;  and  therefore  nowhere 
else  can  we  possibly  be  obliged  to  pay  so  hearty  an  affection  as  I  just  now  mentioned. 
n.  Let  oub  love  of  oub  neiohboub  bb  without  dissimulation.  III.  Let  oub 
LOVE  or  ouBSELVEs  BE  WITHOUT  DISSIMULATION.  To  lovc  oursclves  without  dlsslmu- 
lation  is  carefully  to  consult  our  truest  interest ;  to  endeavour  to  advance  by  all 
Boitable  means  the  real  happiness  both  of  our  souls  and  bodies ;  to  aim  at  the  most 
lasting  and  most  solid  enjoyments.  (N.  Brady.)  Religious  affections: — I. 
"  Let  love  be  without  dissimulation,"  i.e.  without  any  of  that  pretence 
which  goes  by  the  name  of  acting.  Actors  represent  characters  which  are  not 
their  own  without  intending  to  deceive;  but  in  proportion  to  the  excellence  of 
their  performance  is  the  degree  of  illusion  in  the  beholder.  Be  sure  that  you  are 
not  merely  acting  a  part  in  your  kindness  to  men  or  reverence  to  God.  Feel  what 
you  profess  to  feel.  Think  as  you  seem  to  think.  Else  is  your  life  little  other  than 
stage  play.  1.  How  do  men  commonly  express  their  love  of  God  ?  By  prayers, 
praises,  honouring  God's  Word  and  day  and  ordinances.  But  what  if  whUst  they 
do  all  these  things  outwardly  their  hearts  be  far  from  God  ?  2.  As  to  our  love 
towards  each  other :  what  can  be  more  like  acting  than  to  conceal  our  dislike  by 
words  of  overstrained  civility,  or  to  offer  a  kindness  which  we  wish  never  to  have 
to  do,  or  to  inflict  chastisement  on  the  plea  of  duty,  when  we  are  all  the  while  grati- 
lying  revenge  T  II.  "  Abhob  that  which  is  evil."  Here  we  see  what  Christians  are 
tdlowed  to  hate  and  how  far  they  may  carry  their  hatred.  1.  To  wish  that  we  might 
sin  safely,  to  go  as  near  to  sin  as  seems  anyhow  allowable,  and  to  envy  the  wicked 
in  their  prosperity,  and  when  out  of  fear  or  prudence  we  have  left  off  their  practices, 
how  far  is  this  from  abhorring  evil  ?  2.  Questions  often  arise  as  to  whether  it  ia 
fitting  for  a  Christian  to  partake  of  this  amusement,  to  engage  in  that  employment, 
or  to  enter  into  the  other  company.  In  such  discussions  many  ar^^ue  as  if  it  were 
desirable  to  take  all  the  liberty  they  can.  And  frequently  they  act  on  the  presump- 
tion that  what  is  easy  to  argue  is  safe  also  to  do.  But  how  dLSerent  would  be  their 
conclusion  if  they  would  but  bear  this  text  in  mind  1  The  mere  suspicion  that  any 
conduct  might  possibly  be  wrong,  should  be  quite  sufficient  ground  for  us  to  desist. 
And  where  duty  may  seem  to  put  us  in  temptation's  way,  we  should  at  least  take  all 
the  pains  in  our  power  to  make  it  as  little  tempting  to  us  as  possible.  We  inquire 
not,  when  we  hear  of  plague  or  famine,  of  battle  or  murder,  which  road  will  take  us 
most  into  the  way  of  them,  but  which  will  lead  us  altogether  farthest  off.  3.  To 
abhor  evil  in  our  food  is  to  abominate  excess ;  in  our  drinking,  to  detest  drunken- 
ness ;  in  our  dress,  to  feel  finery  as  great  a  burden  to  ourselves,  as  it  is  a  folly  in 
the  eyes  of  others;  in  our  thoughts,  to  recoil  from  uncharitable  suspicion  and 
unkind  intentions  towards  men,  and  from  unthankful  regards  to  God ;  in  our 
speech,  to  wish  rather  that  our  tongue  should  cleave  unto  our  mouth  than  utter  one 
word  of  bitterness  or  deceit ;  in  our  business,  to  hate  idleness,  and  yet  to  loathe  the 
very  notion  of  heaping  up  hoards  of  wealth ;  in  our  dealings,  to  shrink  with  anti- 
pathy from  dishonesty  or  oppression,  and  from  that  love  of  this  present  world  which 
IS  treason  to  our  Saviour  Christ.  4.  To  obhor  evil  is  not  merely  to  avoid  it  because 
it  is  discreditable,  not  merely  to  fear  to  du  it  lest  it  should  bring  as  into  trouble, 
bnt  to  hate  it  for  its  own  sake,  because  God  has  forbidden  it,  and  especially  because 
it  was  for  the  evil  of  our  sins  that  Christ  died  on  the  Cross.  III.  Cleave  to  that 
WHICH  IS  good.  1.  Whatsoever  our  Lord  has  revealed  to  be  believed,  commanded 
to  be  done,  given  to  be  obtained  on  earth,  or  promised  to  be  enjoyed  in  heaven,  this 
is  that  which  is  good ;  this  is  that  which  we  should  so  love  as  to  cleave  to  it  with 
the  most  fond  and  persevering  affection.  Constancy  is  the  highest  excellence  in 
love  (James  i.  8 ;  John  xiii.  1 ;  Matt.  xxiv.  13 ;  Bom.  ii.  7 ;  1  Pet.  v.  9).  2.  It  is 
easy  to  think  good  thoughts  for  short  seasons :  but  how  easy  to  do  evil  between 
whUes !  It  is  easy  to  mean  well ;  but  how  common  to  act  ill  I  It  is  easy  to  form 
forposes  of  amendment ;  but  how  seldom  do  these  lead  to  a  renewal  of  life  I    Let 


494  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nt. 

us,  then,  lay  to  heart  this  counsel  of  the  text.  When  once  we  have  hold  of  any  holy 
purpose  let  us  never  let  it  go.  This  is  the  only  safe  way  to  holiness  and  heaven. 
We  must  serve  God  through  Christ  continually.  (Canon  Girdlestone.)  Love 
vnthout  dissimulation : — I.  What  is  this  ?  Love  should — 1.  Proceed  from  tha 
heart.  2.  Be  expressed  in  the  actions.  11.  Why  should  we  thus  love  f  Other- 
wise it  is — 1.  Hypocrisy  before  God.  2.  A  deceiving  of  our  neighbour.  3.  No 
true  love.  Conclusion  :  Love  one  another.  1.  It  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law  (chap, 
xiii.  8-10).  2.  The  special  command  of  Christ  (John  jdii.  34).  3.  The  principal 
mark  of  a  true  Christian  (John  xiii.  35).  (Bp.  Beveridge.)  Love  without  dis- 
simulation is  sincere — I.  In  feelino  and  motive.  II.  In  expeession  and  deed  ;  it 
abhors  evil.  III.  In  its  choice  attachments  ;  it  cleaves  to  that  which  is  good 
{J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Dissimulating  love: — If  disinterestedness  is  anywhere  to  be 
looked  for,  it  is  in  love.  Many  of  our  faculties  are  known  to  be  venaL  But  one 
can  hardly  repress  astonishment  at  the  implication  that  this  most  princely  of  all 
the  soul's  attributes  is,  after  all,  bribable.  Yet  it  is  so ;  and  love  dissimulates 
whenever  it  expresses  more  than  it  feels,  and  for  an  interested  purpose.  This  we 
call  blandishment.  We  trace  this  in — I.  The  home.  The  gentle  and  unstudied 
ways  of  domestic  love  have  nothing  in  the  world  to  equal  them.  But  because  of 
that  they  are  counterfeited.  The  wife  would  fain  stay  the  anger  of  the  husband, 
and  she  throws  upon  him  an  affection  that  she  does  not  at  all  feel.  He  would  fain 
charm  away  her  jealousy  by  an  affectionateness  of  demeanour  that  has  only  a  pur- 
pose in  it,  and  not  a  heart.  She  would  subdue  his  obstinacy,  and  she  throws  round 
about  him  the  arms  of  sweet  caress,  for  the  sole  purpose  of  changing  his  will  and 
gaining  her  end.  Is  there  no  occasion,  then,  to  say,  "  Let  love  be  without  dissimula- 
tion "  ?  If  you  would  barter  anything,  let  it  not  be  the  heart  of  love  in  man.  I 
love  the  sturdy  honesty,  the  simplicity,  the  truthfulness  of  love  ;  and  I  abhor  the 
arts  and  wiles  and  gaieties  of  love,  that  are  mere  baits.  II.  The  cibcle  of  fbiend- 
SHIP.  Men  are  a  thousand  times  more  friendly  than  the  capital  of  friendship  will 
allow.  They  behave  to  each  other  in  a  manner  which  is  deceptive  even  where  it  is 
a  good-natured  habit ;  but  stiU  more  deceptive  where  it  has  an  end  in  view,  as 
constantly  it  has.  I  do  not  refer  to  that  general  kindness  which  we  ought  to 
express  toward  all.  I  do  not  criticise  that  etiquette,  that  kindly  way,  which  real 
high  breeding  inspires.  That  is  right.  The  host  should  be  glad  to  greet  every 
guest ;  but  what  if  he  should  impress  upon  every  man  the  feeling  that  he  had  the 
first  place  in  the  heart  of  his  host  ?  The  artful  addresses  which  are  continually 
made  to  the  weaknesses  of  man  as  if  they  were  virtues — the  flattery  of  silence,  of 
Burprise,  of  a  well-timed  start,  of  an  interjection,  of  title  and  terms,  is  not  honest. 
Although  there  may  be  a  half-consciousness  in  the  victim  that  all  this  is  feigned, 
yet  it  is  too  sweet  to  be  refused,  and  he  is  damaged  by  it  as  much  as  the  person 
that  uses  it.  III.  Coquetey.  The  dissembling  some  of  the  phases  of  love  is  a  lure 
which  both  men  and  women  employ  for  the  promotion  of  their  personal  pleasure 
and  self-love.  It  is  a  common  trick  to  inspire  those  about  you  with  an  inordinate 
opinion  of  their  worth  in  your  eyes.  To  all  coquettes  the  apostle's  injunction 
should  come  most  solemnly.  IV.  Social  life.  There  is  a  loathsome  parasite 
which  fastens  on  men  and  upon  families — viz.  the  toady.  It  is  the  business  of  such 
despicable  creatures  to  suck  out  their  own  living  by  assuming  all  the  airs  and  practis- 
ing all  the  blandishments  of  a  true  friendship.  They  praise  your  words.  They  take 
your  side  in  every  quarrel.  They  are  a  false  mirror  in  which  you  are  haudsomer 
than  you  are  really  by  nature.  Such  persons  stop  at  no  falseness.  They  wear  all 
the  habiliments  of  affection  only  to  soil  them.  They  are  the  bloodsuckers  of  the 
heart.  And  applied  to  such,  the  apostolic  injunction  is  terribly  pointed.  V.  Thb 
WOELD  OF  BUSINESS.  1.  See  the  cunning  confidential  clerk,  or  confidential  lawyer, 
that  nestles  under  the  wing  of  the  rich  principal.  See  how  in  everything  he  praises 
him ;  how  he  avoids  his  anger ;  how  he  cripples  every  element  of  manhood  that  he 
may  stUl  lie  close  to  the  favour  of  his  rich  patron — and  all  for  his  own  sake. 
Society  is  full  of  these  despicable  creatures.  2.  But  many  a  merchant  will  put  on 
all  the  airs  of  a  flatterer  in  order  that  he  may  manage  a  rebellious  creditor,  or  save 
a  large  debt,  or  prepare  the  way  for  a  great  success.  A  man  comes  down  to  the 
city  prepared  to  make  large  purchases.  The  one  who  gets  that  man  gets  a  plum  I 
And  straightway  is  anything  too  good  for  him  ?  What  are  his  vices  ?  The  clerk 
must  feed  them.  He  must  be  invited  home.  Your  noble-hearted  wife  resents  it. 
The  man's  character  is  questionable.  "  But,"  says  the  husband,  "  my  interest 
depends  upon  our  dining  him.  Mr.  A.  is  going  to  dine  him  to-morrow,  and  Mr. 
B.  next  day ;  and  he  must  come  to  our  houBe  to-day."    And  hospitality  has  to 


emr.  xn.]  ROMANS.  495 

be  bribed,  so  that  when  the  man  has  been  feasted  and  patted,  it  shall  be  easier  to 
drive  a  good  bargain  with  him.  And  when  the  whole  game  has  been  played,  the 
man  smiles,  and  says,  "  I  angled  for  him.  He  was  cautious,  but  rose  to  the  bait, 
and  I  landed  him  I  "  3,  On  what  a  large  scale  is  this  carried  out  I  It  is  organised. 
Boards  of  direction  carry  out,  as  a  part  of  their  schemes,  the  rites  of  hospitality. 
How  are  legislatures  dined  and  wined !  When  rich,  combined  capitalists  wish  to 
secure  some  great  contract,  or  interest,  how  do  they  put  on  all  the  guises  of  sym- 
pathy and  intense  consideration  I  How  do  they  spin  silver  and  golden  webs  upon 
men  that  they  laugh  at  behind  their  backs  1  And  do  men  think  that  is  wrong  ?  It 
is  said  that  "  When  a  man  is  in  Bome,  he  must  do  as  Romans  do."  And  when  a 
man  is  in  hell,  I  suppose,  he  must  do  as  hellions  do  1  Business  needs  to  hear  God 
saying  to  it,  "  Let  love  be  without  dissimulation."  VI.  Politics.  When  once  a 
man  is  bitten  with  the  incurable  fever  of  candidacy,  see  how  first  of  all  things  he 
begins  to  employ  the  language  of  strong  personal  regard  toward  every  man  that  has 
a  vote.  Before  an  election  "  condescension  to  men  of  low  estate  "  seems  to  men  to  be 
the  very  fulness  of  the  Bible.  A  vote  I  a  vote  I  Anything  for  a  vote.  But  as  soon 
as  the  vote  has  done  its  work,  and  the  ofl5ce  is  secured,  what  a  blessed  balm  of 
forgetfulneps  comes  over  him.  He  really  does  not  know  anybody  out  of  his  own 
set.  The  hypocrite  I  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Abhor  that  which  la  evlL — Abhorrence 
of  evil: — I.  What  evil.  1.  Sin  (1  John  iii.  4).  2.  Punishment  (Isa.  xlv.  7).  II. 
What  is  it  to  abhor  it  7  1.  Our  settled  judgment  that  it  is  evil.  2.  A  hatred  to 
it  for  its  own  sake  (Psa.  cxix.  113).  3.  An  aversion  from  it  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  11).  III. 
Why  should  we  abhob  it  7  1.  It  is  contrary  to  God's  nature.  2.  Eepngnant  to 
His  laws  (John  iii.  4).  3.  Destructive  to  our  souls.  IV.  Means  op  exciting  this 
ABHORRENCE.  1.  Always  remember  that  you  are  Christians.  2.  Avoid  the  occa- 
sions of  sin  (1  Thess.  v.  22).  3.  Often  think  whom  it  displeases — the  great  God 
(Gen.  xxxix.  9).  4.  Live  always  as  under  His  eye  (Psa.  cxxxix.  7).  5.  Eemember 
that  thou  must  answer  for  it  (Eccles.  xi.  9).  Conclusion  :  1.  Eepent  of  sins 
already  committed  ;  for  — (1)  By  them  you  have  incurred  God's  displeasure  (Psa. 
vii.  11).  (2)  Made  ourselves  liable  to  punishment  (chap.  vi.  23).  (8)  There  is  no 
way  to  avoid  either  but  by  repentance  (Luke  xiii.  3).  2.  Abhor  it  so  as  not  to 
commit  sin  hereafter.  Consider  it  is — (1)  the  greatest  folly  (Psa.  xiv.  4  ;  xciv.  8). 
(2)  Slavery  (chap.  vi.  20).  (3)  Defilement  (James  i.  21 ;  Matt.  xv.  20  ;  Job  xv.  16). 
(4)  Death  of  the  soul  (chap.  viii.  24  ;  Eph.  ii.  1).  3.  Unless  you  abhor  evil  God 
will  abhor  you,  and  you  will  abhor,  but  ineffectually,  evil  and  yourselves  too,  to  all 
eternity.  {Bp.  Beveridge.)  Abhorrence  of  evil : — It  is  the  peculiarity  of  Chris- 
tianity that  while  it  aims  to  exclude  all  sin  from  the  heart,  it  does  not  dismember 
the  soul  by  excluding  from  it  any  faculty  that  is  natural  to  it.  Of  these  hatred  is 
one — one  terribly  liable  to  abuse,  but  rightly  used  a  potent  instrument  in  the 
suppression  of  evil.  I.  What  is  evil  ?  It  is  twofold.  A  hidden  power  in  the  soul — 
1.  Like  the  poison  in  the  berry,  or  the  deadly  lightning  hid  in  the  thunder-cloud  ; 
and  as  it  assumes  a  concrete  form  in  evil  men,  books,  institutions,  &c.,  i.e.,  evil 
appears  in  character  and  conduct.  It  is  guilt  and  pollution.  2.  It  is  vice  and 
crime ;  the  one  personal,  the  other  social.  Crimes  sometimes  shock  us  too  much  ; 
vices  almost  always  too  Uttle.  II.  What  is  it  to  abhor  evil.  Abhorrence  is  the 
opposite  of  love.  Love  seeks  to  possess  the  object  loved,  and  then  to  perpetuate  it. 
Abhorrence  casts  the  evil  thing  out  of  our  heart,  and  then  seeks  to  chase  it  out  of 
the  wvsrld.  It  contains  the  ideas  of  separation  and  destruction.  III.  Why  wb 
should  abhor  evil.  1.  This  is  the  very  end  for  which  Christ  died — "  to  destroy 
the  works  of  the  devil."  2.  It  is  implied  in  sanctification  which  is  separation  to 
God,  and  therefore  separation  from  evil  in  thought,  affection,  purpose,  practice. 
3.  Your  personal  safety  lies  along  that  line, "  Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the 
Lord."  4.  God  employs  the  hatred  of  good  men  to  sin  as  an  instrument  for  its 
suppression  in  others.  6,  No  other  course  is  open  to  us.  We  must  not  com- 
promise with  evil,  we  cannot  utilise  it,  it  is  impossible  to  control  it ;  we  must  there- 
fore either  yield  to  it  or  cast  it  out.  IV.  Dlfficulties  and  dangers.  1.  Evil  is 
associated  with  fine  qualities.  Don  Juan  and  the  Hebrew  Lyrics  are  in  the  same 
Tolume.  There  are  paintings  in  the  first  style  of  art  which  would  be  best  seen  at 
midnight  without  a  Ught.  Burke  said,  "Vice  loses  half  its  evil  by  losing  all  its 
grossness."  2.  Spurious  charity.  Ignorance,  weakness  may  be  used  as  a  shield 
and  pleaded  as  an  excuse.  3.  Social  connections.  4.  Self-interest.  6.  Temperament. 
The  violent  and  hasty,  the  easy  and  indolent  are  ever  ready  to  extenuate  or  condona 
evil.  6.  Timidity  which  shrinks  from  the  consequences  of  active  strife  against  sin. 
7.  Familiarity  with  eviL   8.  Diverging  views.    9.  Our  innate  love  of  eviL    {W,  Bell.) 


4M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU8TRAT0B,  CoOAf.  xn. 

The  duty  of  abhorring  nil : — How  many  shon  evil  as  ineonyenient  who  do  not 
abhor  it  as  hateful ;  while  yet  the  abhorrence  of  evil  here  demanded  of  ns  impUea 
a  great  deal  more  than  that  shnnnlng  which  satisfies,  as  we  often  think,  every  claim 
which  can  be  made  upon  us.    This  vigorous  abhorrence  of  evil  has  been  the  mark 
of  God's  saints  and  servants  in  all  times,  and  from  the  very  beginning.    Let  me 
rapidly  gather  a  few  notable  proofs.     More  than  forty  years  had  elapsed  since  that 
treacherous  murder  of  the  Shechemites  by  Simeon  and  Levi ;  but  with  what  a  still 
lively  abhorrence,  as  though  it  had  been  the  crime  of  yesterday,  does  the  aged 
Israel,  on  his  death-bed,  disclaim  any  part  or  share  in  that  bloody  act,  and  detect 
and  denounce  it: — "0  my  soul,  come  not  thou  into  their  secret;  onto  their 
assembly,  mine  honour,  be  not  thou  united."  Then,  too,  in  a  life  which  made  many 
flaws,  I  mean  in  that  of  Lot,  the  most  honourable  testimony  which  is  anywhere 
borne  to  him  is  this,  that  he  was  "  vexed  with  the  filthy  conversation  of  the  wicked"  ; 
that  he  "  dwelling  among  them,  in  seeing  and  hearing,  vexed  his  righteous  soul  from 
day  to  day  with  their  unlawful  deeds."    Still  more  plainly  and  signally  does  this 
appear  in  David.    Hear  him,  as  he  is  speaking  before  a  heart-searching  God — "  I 
hate  the  works  of  them  that  turn  aside  " ;  "  Do  I  not  hate  them,  0  Lord,  that  hate 
Thee  ?  "  with  many  more  utterances  to  the  same  effect.    The  same  voice  finds  its 
utterance  in  other  Psalms,  which,  though  they  be  not  David's,  yet  breathe  the  spirit 
of  David.    "  How  often,  for  example,  and  how  strongly,  in  the  119th  Psalm — ••  I 
have  vain  thoughts  " ;  or,  again,  *'  I  beheld  the  transgressors  and  was  grieved  " ;  it 
was  not,  that  is,  a  thing  indiJSerent  to  him,  but  pain  and  grief  that  men  are  breaking 
God's  law.    And  as  with  these,  so  no  less  with  the  righteous  kings  of  Jndah  in  later 
times — the  Asas,  the  Hezekiahs,  the  Josiahs.     What  the  others  gave  utterance  to 
in  word,  these,  as  occasion  offered,  uttered  and  expressed  in  deed.    But  most 
signally  of  all  this  abhorrence  of  evil  comes  out  in  Him  of  whom  it  is  written* 
"  Thou  lovest  righteousness  and  hatest  wickedness ;  therefore  God,  thy  God,  hath 
anointed  Thee  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  thy  fellows."  That  "  Get  thee  behind 
Me,  Satan,"  uttered  once  to  the  adversary  in  the  wilderness,  was  the  voice  of  His 
heart  at  every  instant,  was  the  keynote  to  which  His  whole  life  was  set.    If  all  holy 
men  have  felt  this  abhorrence  of  evil,  it  may  be  well  worth  our  while  to  inquire 
whether  we  have  any  of  this  righteous  passion  in  our  hearts.    1.  And  first,  how 
fares  it  with  us  in  regard  of  our  temptations?    Do  we  parley  and  dally  with  them, 
and  to  have  thus,  as  by  a  certain  foretaste,  some  shadow  of  the  pleasure  of  the  sin 
without  the  guilt  of  it  ?    Do  we  plot  and  plan  how  near  to  the  edge  of  the  precipice 
we  may  go  without  falling  over  ?    Or  do  we  rise  up  against  temptations  so  soon 
as  once  they  present  themselves  to  us,  knowing  them  afar  off,  indignant  with  our- 
selves that  they  should  so  much  as  once  have  suggested  themselves  to  our  minds. 
2.  Again,  the  light  in  which  a  man  regards  the  old  sins  into  which  he  may  have 
been  betrayed  is  instinctive,  as  furnishing  an  answer  to  this  question.  Does  he 
really  abhor  what  is  evil  ?    8.  But  another  important  element  is  this  self-examina- 
tion, whether  we  be  abhorrers  of  evil  or  no,  is  this  :  In  what  language  are  we 
accustomed  to  talk  of  sin,  and  of  the  violations  of  God's  law  ?    Have  we  fallen 
into  the  world's  way,  taken  up  the  world's  language  in  speaking  about  all  this  ?    4. 
But,  once  more,  is  the  sin  which  is  in  the  world  around  us  a  burden  to  our  souls  and 
spirits  ?   Could  we  with  any  truth  take  up  that  language  of  the  Psalmist,  •'  I  beheld 
the  transgressors,  and  was  grieved  "  ?  or,  again,  "  Mine  eyes  run  over  with  tears, 
because  men  keep  not  Thy  law  "  ?  or  that  which  found  its  yet  higher  fulfilment  in 
the  Saviour  Himself,  "  The  reproaches  of  them  that  reproached  Thee  are  fallen 
upon  me  "  ?    Or  do  we  rather  feel  that  if  we  can  get  pretty  comfortably  through 
life,  and  if  other  men's  sins  do  not  inconvenience  or  damage  us,  they  are  no  great 
concern  of  ours,  nothing  which  it  is  any  business  of  ours  to  fight  against  ?  If  it  be 
thus  with  us,  we  have  not  yet  learned  the  meaning  of  these  words,  "Abhor  that 
which  is  evil."    One  or  two  practical  observations  in  conclusion.     Seeing  then,  that 
we  ought  to  have  this  lively  hatred  of  evil,  that,  tried  by  the  tests  that  have  been 
suggested,  there  are  probably  few,  if  any,  among  us  who  have  it  to  the  extent  we 
ought,  how,  we  may  very  fitly  inquire,  shall  we  obtain  it  ?    St.  Paul  teUs  us  how, 
when  in  the  same  breath  he  bids  us  to  "  abhor  that  which  is  evil,"  and  to  "cleave 
to  that  which  is  good."  It  b  only  in  nearer  fellowship  with  God,  and  by  the  inspira- 
tion of  His  Spirit,  that  we  can  learn  our  lesson  of  hating  evil.    It  is  in  His  light 
only  that  we  can  see  light  or  that  we  can  see  darkness.  It  is  holiness  that  condemns 
unholiness ;  it  is  only  love  which  rebukes  hate.    Here,  therefore,  is  the  secret  of 
abhorring  evil,  namely,  in  the  dwelling  with  or  near  the  Good,  and  Him  who  is 
the  Good.    From  Him  we  shall  obtain  weights  and  measures  of  the  sanctuary 


eair.  m.]  ROMANS.  497 

whereby  to  measure  in  jnst  balances  the  false  and  the  true ;  from  Him  the  straight 
rnle  or  canon  which  shall  tell  us  what  is  crooked  in  our  lives,  what  is  crooked  in 
the  lives  around  us.  {Archbp.  Trench.)  Abhorrence  of  evil : — I.  Evert  faoultt  has 
ts  rrsEur  a  constitutional  bepconanoe  to  that  which  to  it  is  evil.  1.  It  is  a  part  of 
its  health  that  it  should  have  this  power  of  rebound.  The  lowest  forms  of  this  feeling 
are  simply  those  of  dislike,  then  repugnance,  then  hatred,  and  then  abhorrence.  The 
very  word,  in  its  etymology,  signifies  that  kind  of  affright  which  causes  the  quill  or 
the  hair  of  an  animal  to  stand  on  end,  and  throws  it  into  a  violent  tremor,  and  puts 
it  into  the  attitude  either  of  self-defence  or  aggression,  so  that  every  part  of  it  is 
stirred  up  with  a  consuming  feeling.  2.  Is  it  not  a  dangerous  weapon  to  put  into  a 
man's  hands?  It  is  a  very  dangerous  weapon.  So  is  fire.  We  must  therefore  use 
it,  and  use  it  discreetly.  3.  You  must  learn  to  be  good  haters — but  not  of  men. 
Ah !  there  are  hundreds  of  men  that  know  how  to  hate  men,  where  there  is  one 
that  knows  how  to  love  a  man  and  hate  eviL  True,  evU  may  in  extreme  cases 
become  so  wrought  into  individual  persons  that  we  scarcely  can  distinguish  the  one 
from  tlie  other ;  but  ordinarily  it  is  not  so.  4.  We  are  to  hate  all  crimes  against 
society.  Whether  these  be  within  the  express  letter  of  the  law  or  not,  whether  they 
be  disreputable  in  the  greater  measure  or  in  the  less  is  quite  immaterial.  We  are 
also  to  hate  all  qualities  and  actions  which  corrupt  the  individual ;  which  injure 
manhood  in  man  ;  all  that  creates  sorrow  or  suffering,  or  tends  to  do  it.     II.  The 

WANT  OF  THIS  MORAL  REBOUND  WILL  BE  FOUND  TO   BE   RUINOUS.      It   destroyS   the   iudi- 

vidual  to  whom  it  is  lacking,  and  it  is  mischievous  to  the  community  in  which  it  is 
lacking.  1.  Hatred  of  evil  is  employed  by  God  as  one  of  those  penalties  by  which 
evil  is  made  to  suffer  in  such  a  way  that  it  is  intimidated  and  restrained.  It  makes 
evil  hazardous.  In  a  community  where  men  can  do  as  they  please,  wickedness  is 
bolder.  Selfishness  is  hateful;  and  if  men  express  their  hatred  of  it,  selfish  men 
are  afraid  to  be  as  selfish  as  they  want  to  be.  Corrupt  passions — the  lava  of  the 
soul,  which  overflows  with  desolating  power  at  times  in  communities — are  greatly 
restrained  by  intimidations,  by  the  threat  of  men's  faces,  and  by  the  thunder  of 
men's  souls.  2.  Abhorrence  is  indispensable  to  the  purity  of  a  man's  own  seU  who 
is  in  the  midst  of  a  "  perverse  and  crooked  generation."  Now,  the  expressions  of 
this  feeling  are  by  reaction  the  modes  in  which  moral  sense,  the  repugnance  to  evil 
is  strengthened.  And  if  you,  for  any  reason,  forbear  to  give  expression  to  the  feel- 
ing, it  goes  out  like  fire  that  is  smothered.  A  man  is  not  worthy  of  the  name  of 
man  who  has  no  power  of  indignation.  I  have  heard  it  said  of  men  that  they  died 
and  had  not  an  enemy.  Well,  they  ought  to  have  died  a  great  while  before  I  For 
a  true  man,  a  man  that  knows  how  to  rebuke  wickedness,  finds  enough  of  it  to  do 
in  this  world.  Has  a  man  lived  forty  or  fifty  or  sixty  years  and  never  rebuked  a 
wicked  man  enough  to  make  that  man  hate  him,  so  that  you  can  put  on  his  tomb, 
♦«  He  has  not  left  an  enemy  "  ?  Why,  I  could  put  that  on  a  cabbage  field.  III. 
The  lack  of  this  abhorrence  is  pitiably  seen — 1.  In  the  pulpit.  What  are  pulpits 
good  for  that  go  piping  music  over  the  heads  of  men  who  are  guilty  of  gigantic 
transgressions  ?  It  is  sad  to  see  pulpits  that  dare  not  call  things  by  their  right 
names.  A  man  had  better  be  a  John,  and  go  into  the  wilderness  clothed  in  camel's 
hair,  and  eating  locusts  and  wild  honey,  than  to  be  a  fat  minister  in  a  fat  pulpit, 
supporting  himself  luxuriously  by  betraying  God  and  playing  into  the  hands  of  the 
devU.  2.  In  public  sentiment  itself.  It  refuses  to  take  high  moral  ground,  and  to 
be  just  and  earnest.  To  a  certain  extent  the  evil  is  less  in  newspapers,  yet  it  is  seen 
very  glaringly  there  also.  We  are  not  deficient  in  newspapers,  which,  when  they 
are  angry,  avenge  their  prejudices  and  passions  with  great  violence.  But  to  be 
calm,  to  be  just,  and  then  without  fear  or  favour,  discriminatingly  but  intensely  to 
mark  and  brand  iniquity,  and  to  defend  righteousness — this  is  to  make  a  newspaper 
a  sublime  power  over  the  community.  Alas  I  that  there  should  be  so  few  such  news- 
papers. I  think  it  high  time  that  we  should  speak  more  frequently  on  this  subject. 
The  want  of  indignation  at  flagrant  wickedness  is  one  of  the  alarming  symptoms  of 
our  times.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Abhorrence  of  evil : — It  needs  no  special  medita- 
tion on  natural  history,  if  one  meets  a  bear,  a  wolf,  or  a  lion,  to  enable  him  to 
determine  what  he  shall  do.  There  is  no  time  for  raising  questions  of  fact.  Men 
do  not  stop  to  say,  "  After  all,  has  not  this  leopard,  that  is  so  beautiful,  been  rather 
misunderstood  ?  and  may  there  not  be  a  way  of  treating  him  which  shall  win  him 
to  beauty  within  as  fine  as  the  beauty  that  is  without  ?  "  Men  do  not  reason  so 
about  serpents,  or  scorpions,  or  tarantulas,  or  stinging  creatures  of  any  kind.  Men 
have  a  very  short  process  of  dealing  with  them ;  they  treat  them  to  the  foot  or  to 
the  hand  without  hesitation ;  and  they  must,  or  accept  annihilation,  or  else  fly 
VOL.  n.  82 


498  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

Men'are  instant,  uncompromising  in  their  action,  at  times,  because  there  ore  certain 
great  tendencies  that  stand  connected  with  a  man's  life  which,  it  has  entered  into 
the  common  sense  of  men,  are  so  dangerous  that  they  are  to  be  abhorred  instantly. 
If  one  wants  to  carry  a  tarantula  into  the  lecture-room  for  the  purpose  of  instruc- 
tion in  natural  history,  and  wants  to  subject  him  to  various  experiments,  that  is 
one  thing  ;  that  is  professional ;  but  for  common  life,  and  for  common  folk,  we  kill 
such  creatures,  {Ibid.)  Sin  should  be  hateful: — Let  me  illustrate  this  very 
simply.  Here  is  a  knife  with  a  richly-carved  ivory  handle,  a  knife  of  excellent  work- 
manship. Yonder  woman,  we  will  suppose,  has  had  a  dear  child  murdered  by  a  cruel 
enemy.  This  knife  is  hers,  she  is  pleased  with  it,  and  prizes  it  much.  How  can 
I  make  her  throw  that  knife  away  ?  I  can  do  it  easily,  for  that  is  the  knife  with 
which  her  child  was  killed.  Look  at  it ;  there  is  blood  still  upon  the  handle.  She 
drops  it  as  though  it  were  a  scorpion  ;  she  cannot  bear  it.  •'  Put  it  away,"  saith 
she,  "  it  killed  my  child  I  Oh,  hateful  thing  !  "  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Cleave  to 
that  which  is  good. — Cleaving  to  that  which  is  good : — I.  What  is  good.  That 
which  has  aU  things  required  to  its  perfection.  There  is — 1.  Transcendent  good, 
God  (Luke  xviii.  19).  2.  Natural  good,  perfect  in  its  nature  (Gen.  i.  31).  3. 
Moral  good,  conformity  to  right  reason  (1  Tim.  it  3).  IL  What  is  it  to  cleave  to 
THAT  which  is  GOOD.  1.  To  approve  of  it.  2.  To  desire  it.  3.  To  be  constant  in 
practising  good  works,  so  as  to  cleave  to  them  and  be  one  with  them.  HI.  Why 
ABE  WE  TO  CLEAVE  TO  THAT  WHICH  IS  GOOD.  Because — 1.  We  are  constantly  receiving 
good  from  God.  2.  We  are  commanded  to  be  always  doing  good  (Luke  i.  75 ;  Prov. 
xxiii.  17 ;  Psa.  cxix.  96).  3.  When  we  do  not  good  we  sin.  IV.  How  akb  wb 
ALWATS  TO  DO  GOOD.  To  this  is  required — 1.  Faith  in  Christ.  (1)  Nothing  is  in 
itself  good,  but  what  is  done  by  His  grace  (John  xv.  5).  (2)  Nothing  accepted  but 
by  His  merit  (Isa.  Ixiv.  6 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  5).  2.  It  must  be  agreeable  for  the  matter,  to 
the  Word  of  God  (Isa.  L  12).  3.  Done  in  obedience  to  that  Word  (1  Sam.  xv.  22). 
4.  Understandingly  (1  Cor.  xiv.  15).  5.  Willingly  (Psa.  ex.  3).  6.  Cheerfully  (Psa. 
xl.  8).  7.  With  the  utmost  of  our  power  (Eccles.  ix.  10).  8.  In  faith  (chap.  xiv. 
23).  9.  Humbly.  (1)  Not  vainly  thinking  that  good  works  come  from  thyself  (2 
Cor.  iii  5).  (2)  Nor  expecting  salvation  by  them.  10.  To  the  glory  of  God  (Matt. 
V.  16 ;  1  Cor.  x.  31).  V.  Cleave  to  that  which  is  good,  so  as  always  to  do  it. 
Consider:  1.  How  honourable  an  employment  it  is  (1  Sam.  iL  30).  The  work — (1) 
Of  angels  (Heb.  i.  14).  (2)  Of  Christ  (Acts  x.  38).  (3)  Of  God  (Gen.  i.).  2.  How 
pleasant.  (1)  Thy  conscience  will  hereby  be  void  of  offence  (Acts  xxiv.  16).  (2) 
Thy  heart  rejoicing  in  the  love  of  God  (Phil.  iv.  4).  3.  How  profitable.  Hereby 
thou  wilt  gain — (1)  Honour  to  thy  religion.  (2)  God's  favour  to  thyself  (Isa.  Ixvi. 
2).  (3)  An  assurance  of  thy  interest  in  Christ  (James  ii.  26).  (4)  The  concurrence 
of  all  things  to  thy  good  (chap.  viii.  28).  (6)  Eternal  happiness  (Matt.  xxv.  46). 
{Bp.  Beveridge.)  Cleaving  to  that  which  is  good : — We  all  know  how  the  ivy  clings 
to  the  wall  or  to  the  tree,  casts  out  innumerable  little  arms  and  tentacles  by  which 
it  attaches  and  fastens  itself  to  it,  seeking  to  become  one  with  it,  to  grow  to  it,  so 
that  only  by  main  force  the  two  can  be  torn  asunder.  It  is  something  of  this  kind 
which  is  meant  here,-  In  such  fashion  cleave  to  that  which  is  good;  and  if  "to 
that  which  is  good,"  then,  as  the  sole  condition  of  this,  to  Him  that  is  good,  who  is 
the  Good,  the  Holy,  the  Just  One.     {Abp.  Trench.) 

Ver.  10.  Be  kindly  affectioned  one  to  another  with  brotherly  loye.— -Duties  of 

Christians  to  each  other : — 1.  All  men  ought  to  love  each  other  as  men  because 
brethren  by  Adam.  The  world  is  one  common  family,  split  up  by  sin,  but  to  be 
united  again  by  Christian  love.  2.  All  Christians  ought  to  love  each  other,  because 
begotten  by  one  Spirit.  Grace  has  done  little  for  those  who  indulge  in  the  same 
feelings  as  unregenerate  worldlings.  3.  All  Christian  Churches  ought  to  love  each 
other  because  under  the  rule  of  the  same  King.  Alas,  how  little  do  we  see  of  this  I 
Paul  lays  down  three  rules  for  the  guidance  of  Christians  towards  each  other.  I.  Be 
kindly  atfectioned.  The  world's  morality  says,  Take  care  of  self.  Paul  teaches  the 
reverse.  Scoffers  say  that  many  moral  men  are  better  than  professors.  Not  better 
than  true  professors.  And  besides,  the  world  must  remember  that  it  is  indebted  to 
Christianity  for  its  high-toned  morality.  Christianity  has  developed  the  spirit  of 
disinterestedness  and  self-sacrifice  in  the  world.  The  affection  of  the  text  is  not  the 
sympathy,  assistance  and  respect  which  prevail  among  moral  men,  but  an  affection 
begotten  of  love  to  God.  II.  In  brotheely  love.  What  more  beautiful  than  a 
harmonious  family — defending  each  other's  characters,  and  caring  for  each  other's 
wants.    This-  only  purer,  brighter,  more  fervent — should  be  seen  in  the  Church. 


OBAr.  xn.]  ROMANS.  499 

Each  Christian  should  defend  his  brother,  help  the  weak,  and  regard  all  with 
nnbonnded  charity.  Brotherly  love  avoids  saying  or  doing  anything  that  would  offend 
the  modesty  or  honour  of  a  brother.  III.  In  honotjb  pbefebrino  one  anothkb.  In 
love  and  honour  outdoing  each  other.  Taking  the  lead,  showing  the  example  in 
giving  honour.  How  often  we  strive  to  outdo  each  other  in  getting  honour !  If  there 
must  be  contention,  let  it  be  an  honest  strife  who  shall  be  most  humble  and  useful. 
We  should  in  honour  prefer  one  another  because — 1.  We  know  ourselves  best.  We 
know  our  evil  hearts,  and  looking  into  them,  we  can  easily  believe  that  others  are 
better  and  more  deserving.  2.  It  would  curb  uncharitable  thought,  and  uncharitable 
speeob.  3.  It  would  tend  to  the  cultivation  of  the  grace  of  humility.  Lessons :  1. 
Cherish  no  evil  towards  a  brother.  No  Church  can  prosper  which  is  not  united  by 
the  love  of  God.  2.  Besentment  is  almost  sure  to  beget  resentment.  3.  He  that 
would  be  the  most  honoured  must  be  the  most  humble.  {J.  E.  Hargreaves.)  Kindly 
affection  and  brotherly  love  : — The  words  in  the  original  are  more  strong  and  specific 
than  in  our  translation.  The  being  kindly  affectioned  is  expressed  by  a  term  which 
means  the  love  of  kindred,  or  by  some  called  instinctive ;  and  which  is  far  more 
intense  than  the  general  good  liking  that  obtains  between  man  and  man  in  society, 
or  than  ordinary  friendship.  And,  to  stamp  upon  it  a  still  greater  peculiarity  and 
force,  "  brotherly  love  "  is  added  to  it — an  affection  the  distinction  of  which  from 
that  of  charity  is  clearly  brought  out  by  Peter  (i.  7),  •'  And  to  brotherly  kindness 
add  charity  " — the  same  with  brotherly  love  in  the  original ;  and  as  distinct  from 
general  love  or  charity  in  the  moral,  as  the  magnetic  attraction  is  from  the  general 
attraction  of  gravity  in  the  material  world.  This  more  special  aflSnity  which  binds 
together  the  members  of  the  same  family ;  and  even  of  wider  communities,  as  when 
it  establishes  a  sort  of  felt  brotherhood,  an  esprit  de  corps,  between  citizens  of  the 
same  town,  or  inhabitants  of  the  same  country,  or  members  of  the  same  profession, 
and  so  originates  the  several  ties  of  consanguinity  or  neighbourhood  or  patriotism 
—is  nowhere  exempUfied  in  greater  force  than  among  the  disciples  of  a  common 
Christianity,  if  theirs  be  indeed  the  genuine  faith  of  the  gospel.  It  is  in  fact  one  of 
the  tests  or  badges  of  a  real  discipleship  (1  John  iii.  14).  It  gives  rise  to  that  more 
special  benevolence  which  we  owe  to  the  "  household  of  faith  "  (Gal.  vi.  10),  as  dis- 
tinguished from  the  common  beneficence  which  we  owe  "  unto  all  men,"  and  which 
stood  so  visibly  forth  in  the  first  ages  among  the  fellow- worshippers  of  Jesus  as  to 
have  made  it  common  with  observers  to  say,  "Behold  how  these  Christians  love 
each  other."  (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  Kindly  affection  and  brotherly  love::—!. 
Wherein  abe  we  to  express  oub  atekction  to  one  another  ?  1.  In  desiring  one 
another's  good  (1  Tim.  ii.  1).  2.  In  rejoicing  in  one  another's  prosperity  (ver.  15). 
3.  In  pitying  one  another  s  misery  (ver.  15 ;  Isa.  Ixiii.  9).  4.  In  forgiving  one 
another's  injuries  (Matt,  vi,  14,  15).  6.  In  helping  one  another's  necessities  (I 
John  iii.  17,  18).  II.  Why  so  kindly  afeectioned.  1.  We  are  commanded  to  do 
it  (John  xiii.  34).  2.  No  other  command  can  be  performed  without  this  (chap.  xiii. 
10).  3.  Neither  can  we  love  God  without  it  (1  John  iii.  17).  4.  This  is  true 
religion  (James  i.  27).  5.  Because  we  are  all  brethren — (1)  In  Adam  as  to  the  flesh 
(Acts  xxii.  1).  (2)  In  Christ  as  to  the  Spirit  (1  Cor.  xv.  58 ;  Phil.  i.  14).  Con- 
clusion :  Be  kindly  affectioned  to  all  persons.  Objections :  1.  They  are  wicked. 
(1)  Thou  canst  not  say  that  they  are  more  wicked  than  thyself  (1  Tim.  i.  15).  (2) 
They  may  be  saved,  and  thou  lost  (Matt,  vii  1).  (3)  Thou  art  to  hate  their  sins, 
yet  love  them  (Psa.  xcix.  8).  2.  They  wronged  me.  (1)  Thou  knowest  not  but  their 
iniquity  was  thy  good,  as  in  Joseph's  brethren.  (2)  Thou  hast  injured  God  (Matt. 
vi.  14, 15).  (3)  Their  sins  cannot  absolve  thee  from  thy  duty.  3.  But  they  are  still 
my  enemies.  Then  thou  hast  a  special  command  to  love  them  (Matt.  v.  44,  46). 
(Bp.  Beveridge.)  Kindness,  words  of:  their  influence : — Good  words  do  more  than 
hard  speeches,  as  the  sunbeams,  without  any  noise,  will  make  the  traveller  cast  off 
his  cloak,  which  all  the  blustering  winds  could  not  do,  but  only  make  him  bind  it 
closer  to  him.  {Abp.  Leighton.)  Brotherly  love : — All  men  are  objects  of  God's 
compassion  ;  and  we  are  required  to  approve  ourselves  His  children  by  manifesting 
a  like  spirit  of  love  towards  all  men  (Lev.  xix.  18  ;  Luke  x.  25-37).  But  as  a  man, 
while  cherishing  affection  for  every  man,  is  required  also  to  have  special  affection 
or  his  country,  near  kindred,  and  very  specially  his  parents,  wife,  and  children  ;  so 
a  Christian  is  required  to  cultivate  a  peculiar  affection  towards  his  fellow-Christians. 
I.  The  ground  or  reason  of  this  special  brotherly  affection.  Their  common 
special  relationship  to  God  and  through  Him  to  each  other.  They  are  "  all  the 
children  of  God  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus."  The  model  for  this  love  is  the  example 
furnished  by  Him  who  is  "  the  Firstborn  among  many  brethren  "  (John  xv.  12, 13; 


500  TBE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohi».  xxu 

1  John  iii.  16;  Eph.  iv.  32,  v.  1,  2).  The  special  reasons  are — 1.  The  world's 
hatred  (John  zt.  18, 19  ;  Mark  z.  28-30).  It  was  doubtless  in  anticipation  of  the 
manifestation  of  this  affection.  2.  The  more  effectual  advancement  of  Christ's 
kingdom  in  the  world  (John  ziii.  31-35 ;  xvii.  11-21).  3.  That  the  mutual  over- 
sight and  care  necessary  to  promote  each  other's  spiritual  perfection  might  be 
ensured  (Phil.  ii.  4 ;  1  Thess.  v.  14;  Heb.  z.  24;  Col.  iii.  16;  Gal.  v.  13).  II. 
Its  special  characteristics.  1.  Kindly  or  family  affection.  The  word  ^iXoaropyoc 
expresses  properly  the  strong  natural  affection  between  parents  and  children.  Lova 
here  is  within  a  sacred  enclosure,  being  more  conscious  of  a  common  interest,  and 
more  profoundly  affected  by  the  joy  or  grief,  the  success  or  failure  of  any  one  within 
the  circle.  On  this  account  it  is  more  jealous  of  the  character  and  reputation  of  its 
objects,  because  of  the  consciousness  that  anything  disreputable  on  the  part  of  one 
brings  discredit  on  the  whole.  It  is  also  more  sensitive,  because  of  its  greater 
intensity,  being  painfully  alive  to  things  which  outside  that  sacred  circle  would  hardly 
be  considered  worthy  of  notice.  2.  Emulousness  to  take  the  lead  in  showing  respect 
to  the  brethren.  "  In  honour  preferring  one  another  "  (Phil,  ii,  3).  The  apostle'a 
meaning  is  not  that,  in  respect  to  honour,  we  are  to  strive  to  excel  or  to  anticipate 
each  other ;  although  of  course  there  is  a  sphere  for  legitimate  rivalry.  And  as 
every  one  may  lawfully  covet  earnestly  the  best  gifts,  so  every  one  ought  to 
endeavour  so  to  excel  in  all  goodness.  But  it  is  more  agreeable  to  the  context  to 
render,  "In  yielding,  or  giving  honour  to  each  other,  taking  the  lead,"  i.e.,  Let 
every  one  of  you  so  love  the  brethren  as  to  set  an  example  of  true  Christian 
courtesy.    {W.  Tyson.)       Brotherly  love : — I.  It  is  possiRiiB  to  be  in  bomb  mbasurb 

KINDLT  ATTECTIONED  ONE  TO   THE   OTHER,  WITHOUT  HAVINO   THAT  LOVE   OF  WHICH  THB 

apostle  speaks.  There  is  a  natural  affection  in  man's  heart — the  love  of  parents 
and  children,  brothers  and  sisters.  This  affection  may  often  be  seen  strongly  in 
those  who  are  strangers  to  true  religion.     II.  How  greatly  is  this  affectioh 

EXALTED  WHEN  GRAFTED  WITH  A  HIGHER  PRINCIPLE  OF  CHRISTIAN  LOVB.      The  grace  Of 

God  does  not  destroy  natural  affection,  but  increases  and  purifies.  1.  It  springs 
from  higher  and  purer  motives — from  love  to  God  and  a  sincere  endeavour  to  obey 
the  command  of  Christ,  that  "  we  should  love  one  another."  2.  It  aims  at  higher 
ends— the  glory  of  God,  and  the  spiritual  good  of  those  we  love.  3.  It  gives  more 
entire  confidence  one  with  another.  4.  It  is  more  certain,  more  steady.  5.  It 
spreads  wide.  While  it  seeks  first  the  happiness  of  those  most  near  and  dear,  it 
embraces  also  all  who  are  of  the  household  of  faith.  III.  The  wats  in  which  this 
AFFECTION  WILL  SHOW  ITSELF.  1.  In  the  honourable  preference  of  one  another ;  in  low- 
liness of  mind,  esteeming  others  better  than  ourselves.  2.  In  a  constant  kindness, 
obligingness,  and  courteousness ;  teaching  us  to  avoid  everything  which  is 
grating  and  painful  to  the  feelings  of  others.  3.  In  bearing  and  forbearing  much, 
and  in  readily  forgiving.  4.  In  giving  faithful  counsel,  and,  if  need  be,  faithful 
reproof  to  others.  5.  In  praying  for  others.  IV.  Scriptural  examples,  to  practise 
it.  1.  Joseph.  2.  Jonathan  for  David.  (E.  Blencowe,  M.A.)  In  honour  pre- 
ferring one  another. — I.  The  honour  done  to  others.  1.  An  acknowledgment  of 
what  is  excellent  in  others.  (1)  Authority  (1  Pet.  ii.  17).  (2)  Superiority.  (3) 
Virtue  (Prov.  xii.  26).  2.  Expressed  by  outward  signs  (Gen.  xlii.  6 ;  Acts  xxvi.  25). 
II.  How  are  we  to  prefer  ONE  BEFORE  ANOTHER  ?  1.  By  having  modest  thoughts 
of  ourselves  (Prov.  xxvi.  12).  2.  By  having  a  just  esteem  of  others'  excellencies  (1 
Pet.  ii.  17).  3.  By  accounting  all  others  better  than  ourselves  (PhiL  ii.  3;  Isa. 
Ixv.  5).  ni.  Why  should  we  do  so  ?  It  will — 1.  Preserve  peace.  2.  Avoid  con- 
fusion.    3.  Manifest  ourselves  Christians.     {Bp.  Beveridge.) 

Ver.  11.  Not  slothful  In  business. — I.  We  have  all  business  to  do.  1.  In  our 
particular  calling  and  station  in  the  world  (1  Thess.  iv.  11).  2.  In  our  general 
calling  (Phil.  ii.  12).  (1)  Repentance  (Luke  xiii.  3).  (2)  Faith  (Acts  xvi.  30,  31). 
(8)  To  get  our  sins  pardoned.  (4)  And  so  God  reconciled.  (5)  And  our  souls  in  a 
capacity  for  heaven  (Heb.  xii.  14).  II.  How  are  we  not  to  be  slothful  in 
BUSINESS?  1.  Not  to  live  as  if  we  had  nothing  to  do.  2.  Not  to  be  slothful  in 
doing  what  we  do  (Eccles.  ix.  10).  3.  Especially,  not  to  be  indifferent  as  to  the 
grand  affairs  of  our  souls  (Rev.  iii.  16).  Conclusion :  Consider — 1.  You  have  a 
great  deal  of  work  to  do.  2.  But  a  little  time  to  do  it  in  (James  iv.  13).  3.  Eternity 
depends  on  your  doing  your  work  here.  {Bp.  Beveridge.)  The  influence  of 
gnat  truths  on  little  things : — These  words  constitute  an  incomplete  quotation, 
and  I  use  them  only  as  representing  the  entire  passage  of  which  they  form 
an  organic  part.    The  whole  extends  from  the  third  verse  onwards  to  the  close 


CHAP.  xiL]  ROMANS.  001 

of  the  chapter,  and  contains  in  all  twenty-six  clauses,  expressive  negatively  or 
poflitiyely  of  twenty-three  graces  of  the  Christian  character.  I  invite  attention,  in 
the  first  place,  to  the  relation  in  which  they  all  stand  to  the  life  and  hope  of  the 
Christian.  The  connecting  word  with  which  the  chapter  opens — "  therefore  " — "  I 
beseech  yon,  therefore  " — looks  both  backwards  to  the  chapters  preceding  and 
forwards  to  the  verses  that  follow.  In  the  look  backwards  we  find  the  grand 
Christian  motive.  The  life  of  holiness  is  to  be  lived,  not  that  we  may  be  saved,  but 
because  we  are  saved.  Having  laid  down  this  obligation,  "  I  beseech  you,  there- 
fore, brethren,  by  the  mercies  of  God,"  the  apostle  next  expresses,  in  the  second 
verse,  the  grand  principle  of  all  holiness.  It  can  only  have  its  spring  in  a  total 
change  of  heart  and  life,  wrought  in  us  by  the  mighty  Spirit  of  God — in  the  gift  of 
a  new  nature  with  its  own  spiritual  senses  and  experiences.  And  then,  in  the 
remainder  of  the  chapter,  he  traces  this  great  chanf];e  into  its  details.  It  is  as  if 
we  watched  the  beginning  of  some  great  river  rising,  like  the  springs  of  the  Jordan, 
where  the  strong  clear  waters  rush  upwards  in  their  strength,  and  then  followed 
them  as  they  flowed  into  a  hundred  divergent  streams,  carrying  beauty  and  abun- 
dance through  the  smiling  land,  till  they  meet  again  to  flow  into  the  ocean.  With 
what  rich  abundance  the  apostle  heaps  grace  upon  grace  :  "  Not  slothful  in 
business ;  fervent  in  spirit ;  serving  the  Lord ;  rejoicing  in  hope ;  patient  in 
tribulation  ;  continuing  instant  in  prayer."  I.  We  may  learn  from  these  words  thb 

INn>UENCE  OF   GREAT   TBUTHS  ON   THE   DETAILS   OF   CHRISTIAN  PRACTICE.      The  truths, 

explained  in  the  previous  part  of  the  Epistle,  are  almost  the  grandest  that  can 
possibly  occupy  human  thought.  Not  only  does  the  apostle  explain  in  detail  the 
method  of  salvation,  but  in  doing  so  he  takes  in  the  full  breadth  of  the  Divine 
action.  But  I  think  we  must  be  conscious  of  a  danger  arising  from  the  very 
greatness  of  these  truths.  The  distance  between  them  and  the  apparently  trivial 
details  of  daily  life  and  conduct  is  so  immense  that  we  fail  to  bring  the  greatness 
of  the  one  into  contact  with  the  littleness  of  the  other.  We  get  as  far  as  the 
second  verse  of  the  chapter  ;  but  there  we  stop.  We  admit  that  a  Christian,  the 
object  of  such  a  love,  tainted  with  a  fatal  crime,  but  redeemed  by  such  a  price  as 
the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  made  inheritor  of  such  a  glory,  should  act  worthy  of 
his  calling,  and  that,  as  he  is  different  from  other  men  in  his  hopes,  so  he  ought  to 
differ  from  them  also  in  his  hfe  and  in  his  modes  of  thinking,  speaking,  and 
acting;  but  when  the  time  and  occasion  come  for  applying  this  to  practice  we  fail. 
We  have  not  faith  enough  to  link  the  grand  hope  to  the  little  actions.  It  seems  to 
me  that  the  whole  of  this  chapter,  and  the  energy  with  which  the  apostle  pre'ssea 
the  great  motive  into  the  details  of  the  life,  is  one  long  witness  against  it.  How 
minute  are  the  graces  enumerated  !  They  do  not  belong  to  the  few  grand  oppor- 
tunities which  occur  now  and  then,  but  to  the  practical  familiarities  which  enter 
into  the  daily  life  of  all.  The  constancy  of  little  occasions  is  an  incalculably 
greater  trial  of  faith  than  a  few  occasional  opportunities,  which,  as  it  were,  rally 
effort,  and  stimulate  by  their  greatness  the  courage  and  zeal  which  become  weary 
and  evaporate  amid  the  details  of  daily  obedience.  Nor  is  it  only  that  the  occasions 
are  small  in  themselves,  but  it  is  also  that  so  many  secondary  motives  and  influences 
become  mixed  up  with  them,  and  intervene  between  our  clear  sight  of  duty  and  the 
occasion  of  practising  it  as  to  throw  us  off  our  guard.  Just  as  in  a  piece  of 
machinery  the  moving  force  must  be  strong  in  proportion  to  the  distance  at  which 
it  needs  to  act,  so  the  smallest  occasions  that  lie,  as  it  were,  on  the  edge  and  outer 
confines  of  our  life  need  the  mightiest  of  motives  to  reach  them  and  keep  them  in 
motion.  U.  We  may  extend  the  same  truth  a  step  further,  and  learn  that  evert 
OKAOB  HAS  ITS  coRRESPONDiNO  TEMPTATION — the  shadow,  as  it  wcic,  thrown  by  it  on 
the  sunshine  of  the  other  world.  For  instance,  in  giving,  is  there  not  danger  of 
the  affectation  of  an  air  of  superiority  and  a  disposition  to  magnify  our  gift? 
Therefore  we  are  warned,  "  He  that  giveth,  let  him  do  it  with  simplicity."  When 
we  are  placed  in  a  position  of  authority  are  we  not  often  tempted  to  relax  eSoit  and 
yield  to  self-indulgence  ?  Therefore,  he  '•  that  ruleth  "  let  him  do  it  "  with  dili- 
gence." In  showing  mercy  is  there  not  a  danger  in  forgiving  unwillingly,  as  if  we 
reluctantly  yielded  to  the  duty  of  mercifulness  ?  Therefore,  "he  that  showeth 
mercy  "  let  him  do  it  "  with  cheerfulness."  In  cultivating  love  to  all  men  is  there 
not  danger  of  insincerity?  Therefore,  "  Let  love  be  without  dissimulation."  So, 
en  the  other  side,  "  be  not  slothful  in  business  " ;  for  such  I  still  believe  to  be  the 
true  meaning  of  the  words,  in  spite  of  criticism.  Is  there  not  danger  of  becoming 
absorbed  in  it?  Therefore,  "  be  fervent  in  spirit."  Yet,  may  not  an  enthusiastic 
energetic  temper  take  a  wrong  direction?    Therefore  let  it  be  "  serving  the  Lord." 


509  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chat.  zn. 

So  in  another  way,  "  rejoicing  in  hope,"  and  therefore,  because  a  bright  hope  shoald 
give  us  strength  to  bear  and  constancy  to  endure,  whereas  we  often  see  persons 
of  a  bright  and  buoyant  temperament  easily  depressed  in  sorrow,  "  be  patient  in 
tribulation."  Then,  as  this  twofold  grace  of  cheerfulness  and  patience  is  not  easy 
to  human  nature — though,  thank  God,  we  often  see  them  combined  in  the  saiats 
of  Christ — therefore  let  us  seek  strength  where  alone  it  can  be  had,  "  continuing 
instant  in  prayer."  Thus  there  is  a  strict  connection  everywhere,  and  we  need  to 
learn  from  it.  A  little  self-knowledge  will  convince  us  that,  even  when  we  do  the 
right  thing,  we  are  apt  to  do  it  in  the  wrong  way.  The  shadow  and  taint  of  oa« 
corrupt  nature  cling  to  us  everywhere,  and  nothing  but  the  most  generous  love  of 
God  sweeping  away  Httle  temptations,  as  the  strong  river  carries  the  fallen  leaves 
upon  its  surface,  will  enable  us  to  get  rid  of  it.  (Canon  Garbett.)  Diligence  in 
business  : — Every  Christian — I.  Should  have  some  business  to  do.  If  not  in  the  world 
— 1.  In  social  life.  2.  In  the  Church.  II.  Should  dischabge  it  with  diliqencb.  1. 
As  a  Christian  duty.  2.  As  a  part  of  his  moral  education.  3.  As  responsible  to  the 
great  Master  for  the  use  of  his  abiUty.  III.  Is  pbompted  to  this  coukse  by  thb 
HOST  iMFBESBiVE  C0N3IDEBATI0MS.  1.  Life  is  the  time  for  work.  2.  Is  soon  ended. 
3.  Is  followed  by  a  just  reward.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Business  and  godliness : — 
Christianity  addresses  itself  to  man  as  he  is — as  a  citizen  of  the  world,  having 
work  in  the  world  to  do.  But  as  he  belongs  to  another,  and  owes  duties  to  it — the 
perfection  in  obedience  consists  in  maintaining  a  just  equipoise  between  the  two. 
Beligion  is  a  discipline  for  the  whole  man.  The  workshop  may  be  made  as  good  a 
sanctuary  as  the  cloister.  I.  A  life  of  aciivs  usefulness  is  oblioaioby  upon  all 
OF  cs.  1.  Neither  rank  nor  wealth  can  confer  a  prerogative  to  be  idle.  All  God's 
gifts  to  us  are  for  some  beneficial  use,  and  we  dishonour  them  by  allowing  them  to 
He  idle.  Circumstances  may  determine  for  each  what  his  work  shall  be.  But  the 
command  to  work  is  universal,  and  came  in  with  the  Fall.  2.  And,  for  a  fallen 
being,  there  is  no  reason  but  to  believe  such  a  command  is  merciful  and  wise.  Con- 
tinual employment  keeps  the  soul  from  much  evU.  Active  engagements,  so  long  as 
they  are  not  so  engrossing  as  to  draw  our  hearts  away  from  better  things,  give  a 
healthy  tone  to  the  mind  and  strengthen  moral  energy.  Next  to  devotion  (and  a 
man  caimot  be  engaged  in  that  always),  there  is  no  relief  against  wearing  anxieties 
80  effectual  as  the  necessity  of  engrossing  work.  With  nothing  to  do  but  to  sit  still 
and  hear  the  enemy  of  souls  make  the  most  and  worst  of  our  troubles,  we  should 
Boon  get  to  think  ourselves  the  most  ill-used  people  in  the  world,  and  murmur 
in  secret  both  against  God  and  man.     II.  Thebe  is  nothing  in  the  busiest  life,  as 

such,  which   is   INCOUPATIBIiE  WITH  THE  CLAIMS  OF  PEBSONAL  BELIQION.      1.  ScripturO 

teems  with  examples  of  those  who,  while  laborious  in  the  duties  of  their  station, 
were  most  exact  in  the  duties  which  they  owed  to  God.  Leaving  the  greatest  of  all, 
look  at  Joseph,  Moses,  David  and  Daniel.  And  like  examples  the  Church  has  had 
in  all  ages.  Xavier  among  churchmen,  Sir  Matthew  Hale  among  judges,  Wilber- 
force  and  Buxton  among  statesmen,  Gardiner  and  Havelock  among  soldiers,  have 
all  left  records  that  prayer  never  spoiled  work,  and  that  work  must  never  interfere 
with  prayer.  2.  But  this  compatibihty  of  business  with  godliness  does  not  rest 
upon  specific  acts  or  examples,  though  Heb.  xi.  is  full  of  them.  BeUgion  consists 
not  so  much  in  the  super-addition  of  certain  acts  of  worship  to  the  duties  of  common 
life,  as  in  leavening  the  latter  with  the  spirit  of  the  former,  and  life's  common  work 
will  be  accepted  as  worship  if  we  set  about  it  in  a  religious  spirit.  The  husband- 
man when  be  tills  the  ground  with  a  thankful  heart,  the  merchant  when  for  all 
success  he  gives  God  the  glory,  the  servant  who  in  all  fidelity  discharges  the  duties 
of  his  trust,  each  offering  to  God  a  continual  sacrifice.    IIL  So  fab  fbom  the 

ACTIVE  DUTIES  OF  LIFE  PBESENTINO  ANT  BABRIEB  TO  OUB  PBOFICIENCT  IN  PEBSONAIi 
BBLiaiON,   THEY  ABE   THE   VEBY   FIELD  IN  WHICH  ITS   BIOHEB  OBAOES  ABE   TO   BE  EZEB- 

ciSED,  AND  ITS  NOBLEST  TBiuMPHs  ABE  TO  BE  ACHIEVED.  We  sometimes  repine  at  the 
spiritual  hindrances  connected  with  our  outward  lot :  but  the  hindrance  is  in  our- 
selves.  We  have  not  practised  ourselves  in  the  worship  of  God  in  the  world  ;  the 
religion  of  the  toiUng  hand  or  brain.  Yet  this  is  what  is  required  of  us,  and  that 
which  has  always  distinguished  the  hard-working  saints  of  God  from  the  common 
run  of  men.  Every  lot  in  life  will  serve  us  with  occasions  of  serving  God.  We 
may  be  diligent  in  business — even  more  dihgent  than  other  men — and  yet  the  world 
will  soon  be  able  to  take  note  of  us  that  we  have  been  with  Jesus.  Conclusion  : 
Wherefore  be  it  ours  to  find  out  the  golden  mean.  "  Be  not  righteous  over  much," 
as  if  saying  prayers  were  everything.  Be  not  careful  over  much,  as  if  bread  for 
the  body  were  everything.     We  cannot  neglect  either,  and  may  not  disparag* 


CHIP,  xn.]  BOMANS.  603 

either ;  and  therefore  that  which  God  hath  joined  together  let  no  man  put  asunder. 
(D.  Moore,  M.A.)  Business  and  religion  : — I,  It  is  a  false  opinion  which  would 
HAKs  LABOTJB  THE  CONSEQUENCE  OF  SIN.  1.  Labour  was  God's  Ordinance  whilst  man 
was  in  paradise.  The  curse  provoked  by  disobedience  was  not  work,  but  painful 
work.  2.  Employment  is  appointed  to  every  living  thing.  The  highest  of  heaven's 
angels  has  his  duties  to  ful^l ;  and  the  meanest  of  earth's  insects  must  be  busy  or 
perish.  It  is  the  running  water  which  keeps  fresh  ;  it  is  the  air  fanned  by  winds 
which  is  wholesome  ;  it  is  the  metal  that  is  in  use  that  does  not  rust.  3.  There  is 
wisdom  and  goodness  in  the  difference  placed  between  man  and  animals.  From 
man,  the  lord  of  this  lower  creation,  there  is  demanded  labour,  and  ingenuity, 
before  he  can  be  provided  with  the  common  necessaries  of  life.  Whatsoever  ia 
beautiful  in  art,  sublime  in  science,  or  refined  in  happiness,  is  virtually  due  to  the 
operation  of  that  law  of  labour,  against  which  so  many  are  tempted  to  murmur. 
The  unemployed  man  is  always  dissatisfied  and  restless.  II.  Whateveb  is  worth 
DoiNO  at  all  is  worth  DOING  WELL.  You  frequently  meet  with  persons  who  occasion- 
ally will  exert  much  diligence  to  produce  something  excellent,  but  who,  at  other 
times,  care  nothing,  so  long  as  a  duty  be  performed,  how  slovenly  may  be  the  per- 
formance. And  it  is  against  this  temper  that  our  text  directs  its  emphasis.  What 
a  man  is  in  one  thing,  that  in  the  main  will  he  be  in  another.  If  industrious  only 
by  fit""  and  starts  in  business,  he  will  be  industrious  only  by  fits  and  starts  in  religion 
— a  habit  injurious  to  both.  If  I  fritter  away  my  time  through  being  "  slothful  in 
business,"  fewer  hours  are  employed  than  I  might  have  had  for  providing  for 
eternity.  III.  There  cannot  be  a  greater  mistake  than  to  divide  employments 
INTO  BECULAB  AND  SPIRITUAL.  The  busincsses  of  Hfe  are  so  many  Divine  institutions, 
and,  if  prosecuted  in  a  right  spirit,  are  the  businesses  of  eternity,  through  which  the 
seal  grows  in  grace,  and  lasting  glory  is  secured.  If  men  are  but  "  fervent  in 
spirit,"  then  are  they  "  serving  the  Lord  "  through  their  very  diligence  in  busiuess. 
And  if  this  be  so,  then  is  diligence  in  business  to  be  urged  by  precisely  the  same 
motives  as  diligence  in  prayer,  in  the  study  of  the  Bible,  or  in  works  of  piety  and 
of  faith.  For  our  earthly  callings  are  the  appointments  of  God ;  and  are  therefore 
means  through  which  you  are  to  work  out  your  salvation  ;  and  consequently  the 
servant,  the  mechanic,  the  merchant,  and  the  scholar  must ' '  do  with  their  might 
whatsoever  their  hand  findeth  to  do."    IV.  But  theee  aee  duties  which  abb 

KOBE  WPENLT  CONNECTED  THAN  OTHEBS  WITH  THE  SAVING  OF  THE  SOUL.      It   is   UOt   the 

representation  of  Scripture  that  religion  is  an  easy  thing;  so  that  immortality  may 
be  secured  with  no  great  effort.  Admitting  that  we  are  justified  simply  through 
faith,  nevertheless  the  Christian  life  is  likened  to  a  battle,  a  race,  a  stewardship  ; 
BO  that  only  as  we  are  "  not  slothful  "  in  religion,  have  we  right  to  suppose  that  we 
have  entered  on  its  path.  Be  not  then  slothful  in  the  great  prime  business  of  all. 
Is  temptation  to  be  resisted — be  "  not  slothful "  in  resistance :  a  half -resistance 
courts  defeat.  Is  prayer  to  be  offered — be  "not  slothful  "  in  offering  it :  a  languid 
prayer  asks  to  be  unanswered.  Is  a  sacrifice  to  be  made — be  "  not  slothful "  in 
making  it :  a  tardy  surrender  is  next  akin  to  refusal.  Be  industrious  in  religion. 
We  can  tolerate  indolence  anywhere  rather  than  here,  where  an  eternity  is  at 
stake.  Work,  then,  "  with  your  might,"  give  all  diligence  to  make  "your  calling 
and  election  sure."  If,  by  industry  hereafter,  you  might  repair  the  effects  of 
indolence  here,  we  could  almost  forgive  you  for  being  "  slothful  in  business  " ;  but 
now  that  probation  is  altogether  limited  to  the  present  brief  existence,  and  that  the 
boundless  future  is  given  wholly  to  retribution,  what  are  ye,  if  ye  work  not  "  with 
all  your  might"?  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Business  and  religion: — I.  Business 
MEN  BEQuiBE  SYMPATHY.  We  oftcu  hear  that  '*  business  ia  business,"  as  if  it  were 
some  lonely  island  at  which  no  ship  of  religion  ever  called,  or  if  it  did  call  it  would 
find  but  scant  welcome.  This  morning,  however,  the  ship  calls  at  the  port,  and  the 
captam  asks  what  he  can  do  for  you.  You  are  now  face  to  face  with  one  who 
understands  you,  in  your  diflSculties,  disappointments,  and  temptations.  By  so 
much  I  would  claim  your  confidence.  When  you  therefore  come  up  out  of  the 
market-place  into  the  church,  what  do  you  want?  If  you  had  been  spending  the 
week  in  gathering  violets  and  in  cultivating  orchids,  I  should  address  you  in  a  very 
different  (oie ;  but  the  most  of  you  have  just  laid  down  your  tools,  you  have  not 
shaken  the  world  from  you  yet,  and  therefore  you  cannot  enter  into  high  specula- 
tion and  transcendental  imaginings,  or  even  into  fine  points  of  criticism.  You  want 
a  broad,  sjmipathetic  gospel,  standards  by  which  you  can  at  once  adjust  yourselves 
to  God's  claim  upon  you.  Therein  is  the  preacher's  great  difficulty.  He  is  not  an 
academic  lecturer  surrounded  by  persons  who  have  been  spending  six  days  in 


504  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xtt 


preparation  for  the  seventh.    Probably  there  are  not  eiz  men  in  this  house  who 
have  been  able  to  say  to  the  world  at  the  door  of  the  church,  "  Stand  thoo  here, 
whilst  I  go  up  and  worship  yonder,"  and  the  world  permitted  to  come  over  the 
threshold  remains  to  throw  a  veil  between  the  preacher  and  his  hearer,  to  excite 
prejudice  and  throw  the  music  of  revelation  into  discord.    What  a  weary  life  is 
that  of  the  man  of  business !    Always  beginning,  never  ending.    He  writes  a  letter 
that  is  to  form  a  conclusion,  and  behold  it  only  starts  a  more  voluminous  corre- 
spondence.    What  with  orders  half  completed,  money  half  paid  or  not  paid, 
responsibilities  ignored,  discoveries  of  untrustworthiness  on  the  part  of  the  most 
trusted,  the  wonder  is  that  business  men  can  live  at  alL    The  Christian  preacher, 
therefore,  must  recognise  their  difficulties,  and  not  regard  them  as  if  they  and  he 
had  been  living  all  the  week  in  a  great  cloud  full  of  angels,    n.  Business  has  rra 
BoUBDABiES.     You  are  limited  by  health,  time,  the  incapacity  of  others,  by  a 
thousand  necessities.    1.  Thank  God,  therefore,  if  Parliament  takes  hold  of  yon 
and  says,  "You  shall  rest  to-day."    It  is  your  commercial,  intellectual,  and  moral 
salvation.     You  recover  yourselves  within  those  f our-and-twenty  hours :  the  very 
act  of  closing  the  book  and  saying,  "  I  cannot  open  that  until  Monday  morning"  is 
itself  the  beginning  of  a  religious  blessing.    What  then  have  you  to  do?    You 
have  to  meet  that  from  the  other  side  by  sympathy,  by  joyful  acquiescence,  so  as  to 
get  the  most  and  the  best  out  of  the  arrangement.     2.  You  brought  nothing  into 
the  world,  and  it  is  certain  you  can  carry  nothing  out.     What  is  the  end,  therefore, 
of  all  this  anxiety  and  toil  and  sleeplessness?    Christ  says,  "Which  of  you  by 
multiplying  worry  and  fret  can  accomplish  anything  beyond  the  limits  that  God 
has  imposed  upon  you  ?  "    If  you  could  show  that  to-day's  anxiety  would  bring 
to-morrow's  success,  then  it  would  be  justified.    III.  BnsiNsss  is  a  great  science. 
No  business  man  can  be  an  uneducated  man.    He  may  never  have  been  at  school, 
but  we  do  not  get  our  education  at  school:  there  we  get  the  tools,  hints,  and 
suggestions  which  we  may  turn  to  profit  subsequently ;  but  our  education  we  get  in 
the  world,  in  social  collisions,  in  having  to  work  out  the  great  practical  problems  of 
life  and  time.     Why,  the  medical  man  tells  me,  after  I  have  read  all  my  books,  that 
I  must  go  to  the  bedside  to  learn  to  be  a  doctor.     And  the  navigator  teUs  me  that 
after  I  have  studied  all  the  mathematics  of  navigation  I  must  go  to  sea  in  order  to 
be  a  high  nautical  authority.    And  so  we  must  go  into  the  practical,  real  engage- 
ments of  life  in  order  to  be  truly  educated.     IV.  Business  success  depends  on 
DILIGENCE,  It  is  possiblc  for  a  man  of  the  very  finest  capacity  to  be  put  in  circum- 
stances which  overpower  him ;  to  pass  in  at  the  wrong  door,  and  not  get  back  again. 
Such  men  have  my  sympathy.    But  there  are  others  who  often  come  to  me  in 
distress,  whose  criticism  upon  life  would  be  comical  if  it  were  not  too  sad  in  its 
unreality  and  untruth.    Let  me  suppose  that  I  am  a  business  man  in  your  sense  of 
the  term.     I  plan,  scheme,  go  to  my  work,  upbraiding  the  light  for  being  so  long  in 
coming,  and  leave  it — upbraiding  the  light  for  going  away  so  soon.     I  succeed, 
retire,  and  am  a  rich  man.   What  does  the  individual  referred  to  say  ?    "  You  have 
been  very  fortunate."    Is  that  true  ?    What  did  he  do  ?    Went  to  business  at  nine 
with  his  hands  in  his  pockets,  looked  over  the  door,  came  back  and  gossiped  with 
the  first  person  that  was  fool  enough  to  waste  his  time  with  him — was  very  anxious 
to  know  from  the  papers  what  was  going  to  be  done  fifteen  thousand  miles  away 
from  his  place  of  business,  went  home  at  four  o'clock,  and  he  calls  me  a  fortunate 
man  I    Fortunate  ?    No — "  be  not  deceived  ;  God  is  not  mocked  j  whatsoever  a  man 
soweth  that  shall  he  also  reap."    The  men  who  like  their  work,  do  it  joyfully,  and 
when  it  is  done  are  proud  of  it,  and  those  who  engage  them  are  proud  of  them  and 
their  work  too — those  men  deserve  success,     V,  I  claim  business  men  fob  Cheist. 
Let  me  tell  you  why.    1,  Without  faith  you  could  not  conduct  your  business ;  you 
deal  with  men  whom  you  have  never  seen,  you  base  your  connection  upon  written 
authority ;  you  venture  and  incur  risk.     By  such  experiments  and  engagements  you 
enter  into  the  very  spirit  of  faith.    In  the  Christian  kingdom  we  walk  by  faith,  and 
not  by  sight ;  we  venture  upon  Christ — we  risk  it,     2.  You  know  what  preparation 
is.    You  have  apprenticeships,  you  say  that  a  certain  seed  sown  will  produce  a 
certain  result — but  not  to-morrow  :  you  have  to  wait  and  trust  in  the  outworking  of 
great  eternal  laws.     In  the  Christian  kingdom  we  have  to  do  just  the  same,     3.  I 
claim  you  business  men  for  Christ,  men  with  clear  understandings,  resolute  wills, 
and  ask  you  to  accept  the  great  mystery  of  this  Christian  kingdom.    It  will  go  with 
you  through  all  your  engagements,  it  will  turn  your  water  into  wine,  it  will  relieve 
your  perplexities,  and  be  the  solace  of  your  solitude.    Let  Christ  be  head  of  your 
firm.    The  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee  poweir  to  get  wealth — ^praise  God  from  whom 


CHAP,  xn.]  ROMANS.  60S 

all  blessings  flow.  Conolusion :  Diligent  in  basiness — not  absorbed  in,  einxioas 
abont,  overmastered  by  it.  Let  your  object  be  not  to  gain  the  mere  wealth,  bat  to 
gain  something  that  is  better — the  discipline,  patience,  solidity  of  character,  which 
snoh  engagements  of  yours  tend  to  work  oat.  He  who  comes  out  of  business  rich 
in  gold  only  will  soon  die.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Religion  and  businets  : — Diligence 
in  business  should  not  hinder  fervency  in  spirit.  Like  the  pure  mettled  sword,  that 
can  bend  this  way  and  that  way,  and  turns  to  its  straightneas  again,  and  stands  not 
bent,  that  heart  is  of  the  right  make  that  can  stoop  and  bend  to  the  lowest  action 
of  its  worldly  calling,  but  then  return  to  its  fitness  for  communion  with  God.  ( W. 
Oumall.)  Religion  and  bjisiness : — The  Christian  must  not  only  mind  heaven 
bat  attend  to  his  daily  calling.  Like  the  pilot  who,  while  his  eye  is  fixed  upon  the 
star,  keeps  his  hand  upon  the  helm.  (T.  Watson.)  The  relative  importance  of 
religion  and  btisiness : — The  common  practice  is  to  reverse  these  words.  Basiness 
is  the  chief  concern,  and  religion  only  secondary ;  whereas  the  text  teaches  us  that 
business  is  to  be  attended  to  as  well  as  the  duty  of  our  calling,  but  religion  is  to  be 
the  object  of  our  holy  enthusiasm.  There  is  a  vast  distinction  between  the  expres- 
sions ••  not  slothful "  and  '•  fervent."  The  one  simply  denotes  that  there  is  to  be 
no  loitering,  or  trifling,  but  a  steady  perseverance ;  the  other  denotes  that  there  is 
to  be  an  intensity  of  ardour.  And  if  we  give  either  a  greater  degree  of  attention 
to  business  than  "  not  to  be  slothful "  in  it,  or  a  less  degree  of  attention  to  religion 
than  to  be  "  fervent"  in  it,  neither  our  works  of  business  nor  our  works  of  religion 
are  a  "serving  the  Lord."  L  Thb  grace  inculcated,  "  fervour  inspirit."  The 
great  propriety  of  this  is  apparent,  if  we  call  to  mind — 1.  The  infinitely  important 
matters  with  which  it  has  to  do.  "It  is  not  a  light  thing,  but  it  is  your  life." 
"  One  thing  is  needful."  2.  The  regard  which  is  due  by  you  to  your  own  interest. 
Beligion  has  to  do  with  the  soul,  and  business  with  the  body,  and  therefore  religion 
is  just  as  much  more  important  than  business  as  the  soul  is  than  the  body.  8. 
That  this  is  the  great  end  for  which  you  were  sent  into  this  world.  The  primary 
object  of  God's  giving  you  being,  was  not  that  you  might  be  men  of  business.  You 
have  a  soul  to  save,  and  God  created  yon  that  you  might  show  forth  His  praise.  II. 
The  seculab  dctt  with  which  the  exercise  of  religion  is  connected.  Even  when 
man  was  innocent,  God  allowed  him  not  to  be  idle.  It  is  not  good,  therefore,  for 
man  to  be  unemployed,  and  it  is  more  advantageous  to  the  exercise  of  piety  that 
our  entire  time  is  not  to  be  given  to  religious  employments.  Be  this,  however,  as  it 
may,  the  command  is  explicit  that  we  be  not  slothful  in  business.  "  Six  days  shalt 
thou  labour  and  do  all  thy  work."  The  Book  of  Proverbs  contains  many  striking 
exhortations  on  the  will  of  God  in  tbis  matter.  "  Seest  thou  a  man  diligent  in  his 
business  ?  he  shall  stand  before  kings,"  &c.  The  apostle  also  gives  his  command 
that  we  "  study  to  be  quiet,  and  to  do  our  own  business."    IH.  The  necessitt  op 

THE  connection  BETWEEN  BEING  FERVENT  IN  SPIRIT   AND  NOT   SLOTHFUL  IN   BUSINESS. 

1.  For  the  purpose  of  bringing  down  God's  blessing  upon  our  secular  employments. 
"  Godliness  is  profitable  unto  all  things,"  &c.  2.  Because  activity  in  the  concerns 
of  business  tends  to  deaden  the  mind  to  the  claims  of  religion.  Worldly  objects  are 
good,  but  they  are  good  only  as  they  are  "  sanctified  by  the  Word  of  God,  and  by 
prayer  "  ;  and  he  who  spends  a  portion  of  his  time  in  prayer  shall  sooner  arrive  at 
the  attainment  of  his  object  than  he  who  has  been  the  most  diligent,  but  has 
neglected  prayer.  3.  Because  the  principles  of  the  gospel  are  intended  for  illustra- 
tion in  the  common  every-day  occurrences  of  life.  {J.  Garwood,  M.A.)  Religion 
and  business :  the  necessity  of  combining  them : — A  poor  barefooted  brother  once 
presented  himself  at  the  gate  of  a  convent,  and  finding  all  the  monks  at  work, 
gravely  shook  his  head  and  remarked  to  the  abbot,  "  Labour  not  for  the  meat  which 
perisheth."  "  Mary  hath  chosen  that  good  part."  "Very  well,"  said  the  abbot, 
with  undisturbed  composure,  and  ordered  the  devout  stranger  to  a  cell,  and  gave 
him  a  book  of  prayers  to  occupy  his  time.  The  monk  retired,  and  sat  hour 
after  hour,  until  day  had  passed,  wondering  that  no  one  offered  him  the  slightest 
refreshment.  Hungry  and  wearied  out,  he  left  his  cell  and  repaired  to  the  abbot. 
"  Father,"  said  he,  "  do  not  the  brethren  eat  to-day  ?  "  "  Oh,  yes,"  returned  the 
other,  with  a  quiet  smile  playing  over  his  aged  face,  '•  they  have  eaten  plentifully." 
"  Then,  how  is  it,  Father,  that  you  did  not  call  me  to  partake  with  them  ?  "  "For 
the  simple  reason,"  said  the  abbot,  "  that  you  are  a  spiritual  man,  and  have  no 
need  of  carnal  food.  For  our  part,  we  are  obliged  to  eat,  and  on  that  account  we 
work  ;  but  you,  brother,  who  have  chosen  '  the  good  part,'  you  sit  and  read  all  the 
day  long,  and  are  above  the  want  of  'the  meat  that  perisheth."*  •'Pardon  me. 
Father,"  said  the  mortified  and  confounded  stranger,  "  I  perceive  my  mistake."  {J, 


606  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

N.  Norton,  D.D.)  The  huty  man : — One  would  have  supposed  that  with  such  a  large 
and  rapidly  increasing  business,  George  Moore  would  have  had  little  time  to  attend 
to  the  organising  of  charitable  institutions.  But  it  was  with  him  as  with  many 
other  hardworking  men.  If  you  wish  to  have  any  good  work  well  done,  go  to  the 
busy  not  to  the  idle  man.  The  former  can  find  time  for  everything,  the  latter  for 
nothing.  WUl,  power,  perseverance,  and  industry  enable  a  man  not  only  to  pro- 
mote his  own  interests,  but  at  the  same  time  to  help  others  less  prosperous  than 
himself.  (S.  Smiles,  LL.D.)  A  cheerful  word  to  tired  people : — There  is  no  war 
between  Bibles  and  ledgers,  churches  and  counting-houses.  On  the  contrary, 
religion  accelerates  business.  To  the  judgment  it  gives  more  skilful  balancing ;  to 
the  will  more  strength ;  to  industry  more  muscle ;  to  enthusiasm  a  more  consecrated 
fire.  We  are  apt  to  speak  of  the  moil  and  tug  of  business  life  as  though  it  were  an 
inquisition  or  a  prison  into  which  a  man  is  thrown,  or  an  miequal  strife  where, 
half-armed,  he  goes  to  contend.  Hear  me  while  I  try  to  show  you  that  God  intended 
business  life  to  be — I.  A  school  of  Christian  eneegt.  After  our  young  people 
have  left  school  they  need  a  higher  education,  which  the  collision  of  every-day  life 
alone  can  give.  And  when  a  man  has  been  in  business  for  twenty  or  thirty  years, 
his  energy  can  no  longer  be  measured  by  weights,  plummets,  or  ladders.  Now  clo 
you  suppose  that  God  has  spent  aU  this  education  on  you  for  the  purpose  of  making 
you  merely  a  yard-stick  or  a  steelyard  ?  He  has  put  you  in  this  school  to  develop 
your  energy  for  His  cause.  There  is  enough  unemployed  talent  in  the  churches  to 
reform  all  empires  in  three  weeks.  II.  A  school  of  patience.  How  many  little 
things  there  are  in  one  day's  engagements  to  annoy.  Men  will  break  their  engage- 
ments ;  collecting  agents  will  come  back  emptyhanded ;  goods  will  fail  to  come, 
or  come  damaged ;  bad  debts  will  be  made  ;  and  under  all  this  friction  some  men 
break  down,  but  others  find  in  this  a  school  for  patience,  and  toughen  under  the 
exposure.  There  was  a  time  when  they  had  to  choke  down  their  wrath,  and  bite 
their  lip.  But  now  they  have  conquered  their  impatience.  This  grace  of  patience 
is  not  to  be  got  through  hearing  ministers  preach  about  it;  but  in  the  world. 
in.  A  SCHOOL  FOR  THE  ATTAINING  OF  KNOWLEDGE.  Merchants  do  not  read  many 
books,  nor  study  many  lexicons,  yet  through  the  force  of  circumstances  they  get 
intelligent  on  many  questions.  Business  is  a  hard  schoolmistress.  If  her  pupils 
will  not  learn,  she  smites  them  with  loss.  You  went  into  some  business  enterprise, 
and  lost  five  thousand  dollars.  Expensive  schooling,  but  it  was  worth  it.  Traders 
in  grain  must  know  about  foreign  harvests;  in  fruits  must  know  about  the  prospects 
of  tropical  production ;  in  imported  goods  must  know  about  the  tariff.  And  so 
every  bale  of  cotton,  and  raisin  cask,  and  tea  box,  becomes  a  literature  to  our 
business  men.  Now  do  you  suppose  tbat  God  gives  you  these  opportunities  of 
increasing  your  knowledge  merely  to  get  a  grander  business  ?  Can  it  be  that  you 
have  been  learning  about  foreign  lands,  and  yet  have  no  missionary  spirit  ?  about 
the  follies  and  trickeries  of  the  business  world,  and  yet  not  try  to  bring  to  bear  upon 
them  this  gospel  which  is  to  correct  all  abuses,  arrest  all  crime,  and  lift  up  all 
wretchedness?  Can  it  be  that,  notwithstanding  your  acquaintance  with  business, 
you  are  ignorant  of  those  things  which  will  last  the  soul  long  after  invoices  and 
rent  rolls  have  been  consumed  in  the  fires  of  a  judgment-day  ?  IV.  A  school  of 
Christian  integritt.  No  age  ever  offered  so  many  inducements  for  scoundrelism 
as  are  offered  now.  It  requires  more  grace  to  be  honest  now  than  it  did  in  the  days 
of  our  fathers.  How  rare  it  is  that  you  find  a  man  who  can  from  his  heart  say, 
"  I  never  cheated  in  trade  " ;  but  there  are  those  who  can  say  it,  who  are  as  pure 
and  Christian  to-day  as  on  the  day  when  they  sold  their  first  tierce  of  rice  or  their 
first  firkin  of  butter,  and  who  can  pray  without  being  haunted  with  the  chink  of 
dishonest  gold,  and  look  into  the  laughing  faces  of  their  children  without  thinking 
of  orphans  left  by  them  penniless.  (T.  De  Witt  Talviage,  D.D.)  The  Christian 
at  his  work  : — Every  Christian  ought  to  be  a  worker.  If  he  were  not  one  before  he 
became  a  Christian,  Christianity  should  have  made  him  one.  There  is  a  grievous 
heresy  wrapped  up  in  the  phrase,  '*  the  working  classes."  It  is  just  as  possible  to 
be  sycophantic  to  the  poor  as  to  the  rich.  The  term  properly  understood  includes 
many  besides  those  destined  to  the  drudgery  of  material  labour.  I.  The  Christian 
AT  his  work  may  feel  that  work  is  a  good  and  noble  thing.  Christianity 
greatly  honours  honest  industry.  Of  our  race  there  have  been  two  heads — the  one 
was  a  gardener  in  Paradise,  the  other  a  carpenter  in  Nazareth.  1.  There  is  a 
natural  voice  of  self-respect  whose  tones  Christianity  deepens  and  empowers.  It  is 
honourable  to  be  Independent.  There  is  no  disgrace  in  deriving  riches  and  renown 
from  ancestors,  but  there  is  virtue  and  glory  in  obtaining  them  from  ourselves,  and 


CHAP.  XII.]  BOMANS.  607 

that  religion  which  makes  everything  of  the  will  and  nothing  of  accidents,  which 
aims  ever  at  deepening  personal  interest  and  impressing  personal  responsibility, 
smiles  ineffably  at  the  Christian  at  his  work.  2.  Christianity  attaches  great 
importance  to  the  exercise  of  the  faculties.  The  value  of  daily  toil  is  that  it  pre- 
vents the  evils  of  stagnation,  the  wretched  results  of  indolence.  And  here  comes  in 
the  blessedness  of  the  law  that  to  eat  men  must  work.  The  merely  meditative  often 
go  wrong.  Many  have  fallen  into  wretched  theories  and  more  wretched  moods, 
because  their  thinking  powers  have  not  been  yoked  to  their  active  energies.  And, 
therefore,  Christianity,  which  seeks  the  maturity  and  wholesome  state  of  our 
nature,  looks  benignly  on  the  Christian  at  his  work.  3.  Christianity,  in  elevating 
man,  elevates  his  engagements.  It  cares  comparatively  little  for  the  sphere  and 
form  of  our  outward  life,  but  attaches  every  importance  to  its  spirit  and  its  power. 
It  is  the  "  good  man  "  that  makes  the  good,  the  great  man  that  makes  the  great, 
deed.  The  worker  is  more  than  the  work ;  and  it  is  as  he  is.  A  slave,  according 
to  Paul,  may  do  his  work  "  unto  the  Lord,"  and  make  a  divine  service  of  his  hard 
drudgery.  And  therefore  the  gospel,  which  makes  everything  of  what  a  man  is, 
and  raises  and  refines  him,  constituting  him  a  servant  and  a  child  of  God,  has  only 
words  of  impressive  approbation  for  the  Christian  at  his  work.     II.  The  Chkistian 

AT  HIS  WOBE   MAY   FEEL   THAT   HE   IS   FILLINO   THE  SPHERE  INTENDED  FOB  HIM.      1.   He 

is  not  only  doing  what,  in  general,  is  worth  doing,  but  he  is,  or  should  be,  able  to 
realise  the  appointment  of  God.  The  Bible  teaches  a  present  providence  as  well  as 
an  original  ordinance  in  reference  to  work.  But  providence  is  not  fatalism.  God's 
appointment  does  not  interfere  with  our  free  agency,  or  release  us  from  responsi- 
bihty.  "  Whatever  is,  is  right,"  so  far  as  it  is  done  by  God ;  but  it  may  be  wrong, 
BO  far  as  it  is  done  by  us.  It  is  true  that,  in  a  sense,  we  cannot  frustrate  God's 
purpose  ;  but  there  is  a  limit  to  our  right  of  inferring  our  duty  from  its  ordinations 
and  permissions.  Our  worldly  lot  may  be  a  matter  of  volition.  We  need  not  stay 
in  a  state  which  necessitates  transgression.  If  we  cannot  live  without  sinning,  it  is 
a  sin  to  live.  2.  It  is,  then,  our  duty  to  ascertain  the  will  of  God  in  reference  to 
our  worldly  pursuits.  That  which  is  presented  to  as  ;  that  which  we  are  fitted  for ; 
that  to  which  we  are  directed  by  circumstances ;  these  are  the  evidences,  inter- 
preted by  a  just  and  godly  spirit.  3.  Of  course,  the  calling  must  be  a  lawful  one. 
A  man  must  be  satisfied  of  this  before  he  can  take  comfort  from  the  thought  that 
he  is  ••  in  his  place."  As  a  general  rule,  it  is  not  difiScult  for  any  Christian  to 
distinguish  between  lawful  and  unlawful  callings.  He  who  wishes  to  be  right  may 
be  so.  If  a  man  cannot  pursue  his  calling  without  violating  the  law  of  God,  his 
coarse  is  plain.  If  others  do  wrong,  that  is  no  excuse  for  as.  Nor  is  it  any  excuse 
for  us  it  quite  as  much  wrong  will  be  done,  whether  we  do  it  or  not.  We  are 
accoontable  for  our  actions  in  themselves,  and  for  our  moral  example.  Nor  may  we 
ask  Cain's  question,  "  Am  I  my  brother's  keeper  ? "  4.  And  is  it  not  a  soul- 
inspiring  thought  for  any  toiler  in  this  hard  world,  that  he  is  doing  the  work  of  his 
heavenly  Father  ?  It  is  not  the  nature  of  the  service,  but  the  Being  that  is  served, 
that  gives  importance  to  it.  III.  Chbistianity  will  exebt  a  dieeot  and  poweeftjl 
INFLUENCE  ON  THE  CHRISTIAN  AT  HIS  WORK.  1,  It  will  regulate  it — especially  it 
will  make  work  subservient  to  godliness.  The  Christian  will  not  permit  himself  to 
be  80  engrossed  with  it  as  to  hinder  the  higher  work  of  eternal  redemption.  Work 
is  a  blessing ;  but  it  may  become  a  curse.  It  is  quite  necessary  that  even  lawful 
business  should  have  its  limits  and  intermissions.  Speaking  spiritually,  it  is  good 
only  with  something  else.  It  has  to  the  direct  means  of  spiritual  growth  the 
relations  of  exercise  to  food.  Exercise  is  healthy;  but  it  is  no  substitute  for 
nourishment.  (1)  In  this  light,  what  a  blessing  is  the  Sabbath  I  It  is,  to  take  the 
lowest  view,  the  drag-chain  on  the  wheels  of  the  soul  on  its  secular  incline.  It  is, 
to  take  the  highest  view,  the  replenishing  it  with  power  from  on  high.  (2)  Christi- 
anity should  make  us  endeavour  to  abridge  the  labouring  hours,  when  excessive,  of 
our  brethren  as  well  as  our  own.  The  excessive  toil  of  multitudes  is,  if  not  fatal  to 
religion,  a  terrific  obstacle  to  it.  One  thing  at  least  can  be  done — there  is  no 
earthly  need  why  the  thousands  who  serve  in  our  shops  should  not  be  earlier 
released  from  their  daily  drudgery.  2.  The  Christian  at  his  work  may  be  with  God. 
"Let  every  man  wherein  he  is  called  therein  abide  with  God."  There  is  no 
necessity  for  the  exclusion  of  religious  things  from  the  mind  during  secular 
engagements.  It  is  a  strange  occupation  which  has  no  moments  of  intermission ; 
and  to  fill  these  with  Christian  meditations  and  prayers  is  the  great  privilege  of  the 
saint.  A  mind  thus  kept  spiritual  will  be  able  to  make  some  use  of  work  for  the 
purposes  of  the  soul.    How  much  of  the  carnality  of  worldly  things,  which  wa 


508  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cbjlt.  xa. 

lament,  is  owing  to  oar  own  want  of  a  freeh  and  lively  grace  ?  How  many  water- 
pots  are  there  in  oar  earthly  life  which,  if  filled  by  as  with  water,  would  be  filled  by 
Christ  with  wine?  We  have  to  do  with — (1)  Men.  What  a  field  of  profitable 
thought  is  human  nature!  (2)  Things.  And  these  are  suggestive.  Objects, 
places,  times,  all  may  be  yoked  to  the  soul's  chariot.  He  who  has  put  his  lessons 
of  Divinest  wisdom  into  parables  taken  from  agriculture  and  commerce  has  taught 
ns  how  we  may  make  our  secular  labour  the  mirror  and  voice  of  most  spiritaal 
truth.  3.  God  may  be  with  him.  "  Acknowledge  Him  in  all  thy  ways,  and  He 
shall  direct  thy  steps."  And  if  the  guidance  of  God  may  be  had,  His  prospering 
blessing  may  be  had  also.  "  The  blessing  of  the  Lord,  it  maketh  rich,  and  He 
addeth  no  sorrow  with  it."  And  may  there  not  be  the  presiding  sense  of  the 
Divine  love,  "  the  love  of  God  shed  abroad  in  the  heart,"  whatever  the  coarse  of 
providential  events,  giving  strength  in  adversity,  and  infusing  a  nobler  joy  in 
prosperity?  {A.  J,  Morrit.)  A  consecrated  merchant: — When  a  certain  New 
England  merchant  waited  on  his  pastor  to  tell  him  of  his  earnest  desire  to  engage 
in  work  more  distinctively  religious,  the  pastor  heard  him  kindly.  The  merchant 
said,  "  My  heart  is  so  full  of  love  to  God  and  to  man  that  I  want  to  spend  all  my 
time  in  talking  with  men  about  these  things."  "  No,"  said  the  pastor;  "  go  back 
to  your  store,  and  be  a  Christian  over  your  counter.  Sell  goods  for  Christ,  and  let 
it  be  seen  that  a  man  can  be  a  Christian  in  trade."  Tears  afterwards  the  merchant 
rejoiced  that  he  had  followed  the  advice,  smd  the  pastor  rejoiced  also  in  a  broad- 
hearted  and  open-handed  brother  in  his  church,  who  was  awake  not  onlv  to  home 
interests,  but  to  those  great  enterprises  of  philanthropy  and  learning  which  are  an 
honour  to  our  age.  {Clerical  Library.)  Diligence  and  fervour  in  serving  the 
Lord : — 1.  The  word  rendered  "  business  "  is  rightly  rendered  *'  diligence  "  (ver.  8), 
**  haste "  (Mark  vi.  25),  "  care  "  (2  Cor.  vii.  12),  "  carefulness  "  (2  Cor.  vii.  11), 
"  earnest  care  "  (2  Cor.  viii.  16),  "  forwardness "  (2  Cor.  viii.  8).  It  properly 
denotes  promptness  in  action,  earnestness  in  effort,  and  zeal  in  execution.  Its 
special  reference  in  this  place  is  not  to  secular,  but  to  Christian  work.  2.  It  is 
quite  true  that  the  two  first  claases  express  the  manner  in  which  the  third  is  to  be 
obeyed ;  but  this  third  does  not  denote  a  distinct  service,  but  rather  requires  that 
all  service  shall  be  rendered  as  unto  the  Lord.    L  In  bespect  to  bvebt  kind  or 

BEBVICE,  TO  WHICH  AS   ChBISTIANS  YOU  ABE  CALLED,  LET  THEBE   BE   NO  8L0THFXTLNES8, 

BUT,  ON  THE  coNTBABT,  PB0MPTNE88  AND  ZEAL.    This  exhortatioD  will  apply  to 

1.  The  conduct  of  secular  business,  inasmuch  as  that  implicates  Christian  character 
and  duty  (1  Thess.  iv.  11,  12 ;  2  Thess.  iii.  7-12).  The  religion  of  Christ  gives  no 
countenance  to  an  idle  and  thriftless  spirit  (Prov.  vi.  6-^,  x.  4,  xxiv.  30-34).  Only 
it  wiU  have  a  man  to  attend  to  his  secular  business  in  another  than  a  secular  spirit. 

2.  To  the  work  of  our  own  religious  life.  This  will  no  more  survive  continued 
neglect  and  starvation  than  will  the  bodily  life.  There  is  for  us  the  work  of 
searching  the  Scriptures  for  spiritual  food ;  of  prayer  and  meditation  for  the 
assimilation  of  that  food;  of  securing  fresh  air  and  healthful  exercise  by  the 
"  work  of  faith  and  labour  of  love."  3.  To  the  manifestation  of  the  graces  of  the 
Christian  life.  ^  The  apostle  has  just  written  of  love  and  brotherly  kindness,  and 
he  presently  gives  examples  of  the  conditions  under  which  these  graces  mast 
be  exercised  with  special  care.  But  both  involve  active  service  (James  il.  15,  16 ; 
Prov.  iii.  27,  28).  4.  To  all  church  work.  In  whatever  department  of  spiritual 
ministry  you  may  find  your  appropriate  sphere  of  activity — whether  in  teaching, 
administration,  &c. — be  punctual,  resolute,  diligent.    II.  It  is  beqdibed  that  thb 

INNEE  DISPOSITION  SHALL  COKKESPOND  WITH   THB   O0TWABD  ACTIVITT.      As  tO  the  Spirit 

in  which  the  active  service  shall  be  rendered,  let  it  be  fervent.  Christ  was  "  clad 
with  zeal  as  with  a  cloak  "  (Isa.  lix.  17  ;  John  ii.  17 ;  Psa,  Ixix.  9).  ApoUos  "  being 
fervent  in  spirit,  he  taught  diligently  the  things  of  the  Lord  "  (Acts  xviii.  25).  And 
wherever  there  is  true  fervour  of  spirit,  there  will  certainly  be  diligence  in  service. 
But  there  may  be  diligence  without  fervour :  diligence  from  servility,  pride,  ambi- 
tion, selfishness  (Bev.  iii.  15,  16).  It  is  important  that  our  "  zeal  of  God  "  should 
be  "  according  to  knowledge  "  certainly,  but  still  more  important  that  zeal  there  should 
really  be  (Gal.  iv.  18).  III.  Be  thus  diligent  and  fervent  as  those  who  abb 
8ERVINQ  THE  LoBD.  It  is  our  boast  and  glory  that  we  are  the  servants  of  the  Lord 
Christ.  We  are  His  by  right,  by  consent,  and  by  open  avowal.  Even  in  our 
secular  work,  if  we  live  up  to  the  spirit  of  our  profession,  we  are  still  serving  Him 
(Eph.  vi.  5-8).  This  it  is  which  imparts  to  all  labour  its  true  dignity.  {W.  Tyson.) 
On  industry  : — Industry  denotes  the  steady  application  and  vigorous  exercise  of  our 
active  powers  in  the  pursuit  of  some  useful  object.    Our  minds,  indeed,  by  their 


OBAF.  xn.]  ROMANS,  609 

own  nature,  are  active  and  reetless ;  while  we  are  awake  they  are  never  wholly 
nnemployed — they  are  continually  thinking,  contriving,  and  imagining  even  in 
those  seasons  in  which  we  are  scarcely  conscious  of  their  operation.  But  there  ia 
a  negligent  state  of  mind  in  which  some  waste  a  great  proportion  of  their  time.  To 
this  negligence  industry  stands  directly  opposed.  I.  That  ii  yon  would  cultivate  the 
industry  which  Christianity  recommends  you  must  bblbot  fbopbb  objects  or 
PUBSurr.  1.  It  is  the  nature  of  the  objects  which  we  pursue  that  characterises 
our  industry  as  useful  or  frivolous,  as  virtuous  or  vicious.  The  wicked  sometimes 
discover  the  most  unwearied  activity  in  executing  their  schemes  of  guUt.  They 
who  are  most  negligent  of  their  own  affairs  are  often  officially  attentive  to  the 
affairs  of  their  neighbours.  There  is  a  frivolous  industry  which  others  display  in 
the  pursuit  of  vanity  and  folly.  They  fly  from  scene  to  scene,  seeking  in  every 
amusement  a  relief  from  that  languor  of  mind  with  which  indolence  is  always 
accompanied.  Such  persons  forget  that  amusement  ceases  to  be  innocent  when  it 
is  followed  as  the  business  of  life.  2.  The  things  which  are  innocent  and  useful  are 
the  only  proper  objects  of  that  industry  which  the  text  recommends.  What  are 
these  7  Religion  and  morality.  3.  But  as  our  minds  cannot  be  continually  fixed  on 
those  great  and  interesting  concerns ;  there  are  a  variety  of  inferior  objects  in  the 
pursuit  of  which  our  industry  may  be  usefully  exercised.  Our  worldly  affairs,  for 
example,  demands  a  portion  of  our  attention  and  care.  It  ia  surely  pitiful  in  saij 
person  who  is  capable  of  exertion  to  be  altogether  ignorant  of  his  own  concerns, 
and  to  acknowledge  himself  unworthy  of  the  station  which  he  fills  by  committing 
to  others  the  whole  arrangement  of  his  interests.  He  who  attends  not  to  his  own 
affairs  is  not  prepared  either  to  reward  the  services  of  the  faithful  or  to  check  the 
encroachments  of  the  dishonest ;  he  becomes  a  prey  to  the  indolence  of  one,  to  tho 
profusion  of  another,  and  the  rapacity  of  a  third :  his  wealth  is  dissipated  he  knows 
not  how.  Those  who  are  placed  in  stations  of  trust  will  find  in  the  discharge  of 
the  duties  which  more  particularly  belong  to  them  an  extensive  sphere  of  employ- 
ment, and  for  the  faithful  performance  of  these  every  person  to  whom  they  are 
committed  is  accountable  to  himself,  to  the  world,  and  to  his  Maker.  There  are 
also  works  of  general  utility  which,  though  not  immediately  connected  with  the 
duties  of  any  particular  station,  may  exercise  the  industry  of  the  higher  classes  of 
men,  and  which  their  extensive  influence  may  enable  them  to  forward.  To  them 
it  belongs  to  reform  public  abuses,  to  encourage  useful  arts,  and  to  establish  snch 
wise  regulations  as  may  contribute  to  maintain  the  order  and  advance  the  happi- 
ness of  society.  4.  Even  in  his  hours  of  relaxation  from  the  more  serious  concerns 
of  life  the  industrious  man  finds  a  variety  of  engagements  in  which  he  may  exert 
the  activity  of  his  mind,  II.  That  in  the  pursuit  even  of  such  objects  as  are 
innocent  and  useful  in  themselves  you  cannot  hope  to  be  successful  unless  yoa 
puBsni!  THEM  ACCOBDiNQ  TO  A  BEOtTLAB  PLAN.  1.  Among  the  objects  in  the  prose- 
cution of  which  our  industry  may  be  lawfully  exercised  there  are  some  which  claim 
our  first  attention,  and  there  are  others  to  which  only  a  secondary  regard  is  due. 
Beligion  first.  To  cultivate  useful  knowledge  is  also  a  proper  exercise  of  our 
powers.  But  we  value  knowledge  too  highly  if  we  suffer  the  love  of  it  so  completely 
to  fascinate  our  minds  as  to  leave  to  us  neither  leisure  nor  inclination  for  performing 
the  duties  of  active  benevolence ;  and  our  benevolence  itself  becomes  excessive 
when  we  indulge  it  beyond  the  limits  of  our  fortune,  so  as  to  involve  ourselves  in 
distress  or  bring  misery  and  ruin  on  those  who  are  more  immediately  committed  to 
our  care.  2.  K  you  wish,  then,  that  your  industry  may  be  successful,  let  it  be 
conducted  with  order  and  regularity.  Assign  to  every  duty  a  suitable  portion  of 
your  time.  Let  not  one  employment  encroach  on  tbe  season  allotted  for  another. 
Thus  shall  you  be  delivered  from  that  embarrassment  which  would  retard  your 
progress.  Your  minds,  when  fatigued  with  one  employment,  will  find  relief  in 
applying  themselves  to  another.  The  seasons  which  you  consecrate  to  devotion 
will  hallow  your  worldly  cares  ;  and  your  worldly  business,  in  its  turn,  will  prevent 
your  piety  from  degenerating  into  moroseness,  austerity,  or  enthusiasm.  III. 
Having  selected  proper  objects  of  pursuit  and  arranged  the  plan  according  to  which 
you  resolve  to  pursue  them,  it  will  be  necessary  that  you  act  on  this  plan  with 
ABDouB  ANn  PEBSEVEBANCE.  There  may,  indeed,  be  an  excess  of  ardour  in  the 
pursuit  even  of  the  most  valuable  objects.  Too  close  an  application  of  mind 
wastes  its  strength,  and  not  only  unfits  us  for  enjoying  the  fruits  of  our  industry, 
but  also  obstructs  our  success.  When  our  faculties  are  fatigued  and  blunted,  we 
are  no  longer  in  a  condition  to  make  advancement  in  any  pursuit.  IV.  I  proceed 
now  to  suggest  some  arguments,  with  a  view  to  becommend  the  dutt  which  I  have 


510  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

thus  endeavoored  to  explain.  1.  Consider  thai  industry  is  the  law  of  onr  condition. 
I^othing  is  given  ns  by  God  bat  as  the  prize  of  labour  and  toil.  The  precious 
treasures  of  the  earth  lie  hid  from  human  view,  and  we  must  dig  in  order  to  find 
them.  Our  food,  our  raiment,  our  habitations,  all  the  couTeniences  that  minister 
to  the  defence  and  the  comfort  of  our  lives,  are  the  fruits  of  those  numberless  arts 
which  exercise  the  ingenuity  of  mankind.  The  circumstances  in  which  we  are 
placed  declare  the  purpose  of  Heaven  with  regard  to  the  human  race,  and  admonish 
us  that  to  abandon  ourselves  to  sloth  is  to  forget  the  end  of  our  being.  2.  Nor  is 
industry  to  be  chosen  by  man  only  for  the  sake  of  the  many  advantages  which 
cannot  otherwise  be  attained.  It  is  itself  a  source  of  happiness.  The  mind 
delights  in  exercise.  The  comforts  which  industry  procures  have  a  relish  peculiar 
to  themselves.  Business  sweetens  pleasure  as  labour  sweetens  rest.  Kecreation 
supposes  employment;  and  the  indolent  are  incapable  of  tasting  the  happiness 
which  it  is  fitted  to  yield.  3.  Industry  contributes  to  the  virtue  no  less  than  to  the 
happiness  of  life.  The  man  whose  attention  is  fixed  on  any  useful  object  is  in  little 
danger  of  being  seduced  by  the  solicitations  of  sinful  pleasure ;  his  mind  is  pre- 
engaged,  and  temptation  courts  him  in  vain.  Among  the  lower  orders  of  men 
idleness  leads  directly  to  injustice.  It  first  reduces  them  to  poverty  and  then 
tempts  them  to  supply  their  wants  by  all  the  arts  of  dishonesty  and  baseness.  In 
the  higher  ranks  of  life  it  leads  to  dissipation  and  extravagance.  (W.  Moodie, 
D.D.)  The    happy   combination: — 1.    Business    made    an    act    of    religion. 

2.  Beligion  made  a  business.  3.  Both  sanctified  to  the  service  of  God.  {J. 
Lyth,  D.D.)  Industry  : — I.  This  pbecept  is  violated— 1.  By  those  who  have 
no  business  at  all.  You  may  have  seen  attached  to  an  inundated  reef  in  the  sea,  a 
creature  rooted  to  the  rock  as  a  plant  might  be,  and  twirling  its  long  tentacula  as 
an  animal  would  do.  This  plant-animal's  life  is  somewhat  monotonous,  for  it  has 
nothing  to  do  but  grow  and  twirl  its  feelers,  float  in  the  tide,  or  fold  itself  up  on  its 
foot-stalk  when  that  tide  has  receded,  for  months  and  years  together.  But  what 
greater  variety  marks  your  existence?  Does  not  one  day  float  over  you  like 
another,  just  as  the  tide  floats  over  it,  and  find  you  vegetating  still  ?  Are  you  more 
useful  ?  What  real  service  to  others  did  you  render  yesterday?  And  what  higher 
end  in  living  have  you  than  that  polypus  ?  You  go  through  certain  mechanical 
routines  of  rising,  dressing,  visiting,  dining,  and  going  to  sleep  again ;  and  are  a 
little  roused  by  the  arrival  of  a  friend,  or  the  effort  needed  to  write  some  note  of 
ceremony.  But  as  it  curtseys  in  the  waves,  and  vibrates  its  exploring  arms,  and 
gorges  some  dainty  medusa,  the  sea-anemone  goes  through  nearly  tbe  same  round. 
Is  this  a  life  for  a  rational  and  responsible  creature  to  lead  ?  2.  By  those  who  are 
diligent  in  trifles — whose  activity  is  a  busy  idleness.  Fancy  this  time  that  instead 
of  a  polypus  you  were  changed  into  a  swallow.  There  you  have  a  creature  abun- 
dantly busy.  Notice  how  he  pays  his  morning  visits,  alighting  elegantly  on  some 
house-top,  and  twittering  politely  to  the  swallow  by  his  side,  and  then  away  to  call 
for  his  fnend  at  the  castle.  And  now  he  is  gone  upon  his  travels,  gone  to  spend 
the  winter  at  Eome  or  Naples,  or  perform  some  more  recherchS  pilgrimage.  And 
when  he  comes  home  next  April,  sure  enough  he  has  been  abroad — charming 
climate — highly  delighted  with  the  cicadas  in  Italy,  and  the  bees  on  Hymettns — 
locusts  in  Africa  rather  scarce  this  season  ;  but  upon  the  whole  much  pleased  with 
his  trip,  and  returned  in  high  health  and  spiiits.  Now  this  is  a  very  proper  life  for 
a  swallow  ;  but  is  it  a  life  for  you  ?  Though  tbe  trifler  does  not  chronicle  his  own 
vain  words  and  wasted  hours,  they  are  noted  in  the  memory  of  God.  And  when 
he  looks  back  to  the  long  pilgrimage,  what  anguish  will  it  move  to  think  that  he 
has  gamboled  through  such  a  world  without  salvation  to  himself,  without  any  real 
benefit  to  bis  brethren.  3.  By  those  who  have  proper  business,  but — (1)  Are  sloth- 
ful in  it.  There  are  some  persons  of  a  dull  and  languid  turn.  They  trail  sluggishly 
through  life,  as  if  some  adhesive  slime  were  clogging  every  movement,  and  making 
their  snail-path  a  waste  of  their  very  substance.  They  do  nothing  with  healthy 
alacrity.  Having  no  wholesome  love  to  work,  they  do  everything  grudgingly, 
Buperficially,  and  at  the  latest  moment.  (2)  Others  there  are  who  are  a  sort  of 
perpetual  somnambulists :  not  able  to  find  their  work,  or  when  they  have  found  it, 
not  able  to  find  their  hands ;  too  late  for  everything,  taking  their  passage  when  the 
ship  has  sailed,  lock'ng  the  door  when  the  goods  are  stolen.  (3)  Besides  these 
there  is  the  day-dreamer.  "With  a  foot  on  either  side  of  the  fire,  with  his  chin  on 
his  bosom  and  the  wrong  end  of  the  book  turnfd  towards  him,  he  can  pursue  his 
eelf-complacent  musings  till  he  imagines  himself  a  traveller  in  unknown  lands  —the 
solver  of  all  the  unsolved  problems  in  science — the  author  of  something  so  stu- 


OBAP.  xn.]  BOMANS.  611 

pendoas  that  he  even  begins  to  qnail  at  bis  own  glory.  The  misery  is,  that  whilst 
nothing  is  done  towards  attaining  the  greatness,  his  luxorioas  imagination  takes  its 
possession  for  granted ;  and  a  still  greater  misery  is,  that  the  time  wasted  in 
unprofitable  musings,  if  spent  in  honest  application,  would  go  very  far  to  carry  him 
where  his  sublime  imagination  fain  would  be.  Some  of  the  finest  intellects  have 
exhaled  away  in  this  sluggish  evaporation,  and  left  no  vestige  except  the  dried  froth, 
the  obscure  film  which  survives  the  drivel  of  vanished  dreams ;  and  others  have 
done  just  enough  to  show  how  important  they  would  have  been  had  they  awaked 
sooner,  or  kept  longer  awake  at  once.  U.  To  avoid  this  ouilt  and  wbetchedness 
— 1.  llave  a  business  in  which  diligence  is  lawful  and  desirable.  The  favourite 
pursuit  of  ^ropus,  king  of  Macedonia,  was  to  make  lanterns.  And  if  your  work  be 
a  high  calling,  you  must  not  dissipate  your  energies  on  trifles  which,  lawful  in 
ttiemselves,  are  as  irrelevant  to  you  as  lamp-making  is  to  a  king.  Those  of  you 
who  do  not  need  to  toil  for  your  daily  bread,  your  very  leisure  is  a  hint  what  the 
Lord  would  have  you  to  do.  As  you  have  no  business  of  your  own.  He  would  have 
yon  devote  yourself  to  His  business.  2.  Having  made  a  wise  and  deUberate 
selection  of  a  business,  go  on  with  it,  go  through  with  it.  In  the  heathery  turf  you 
will  find  a  plant  chiefly  remarkable  for  its  peculiar  roots ;  from  the  main  stem 
down  to  the  minutest  fibre,  you  will  find  them  all  abruptly  terminate,  as  if  shorn  or 
bitten  off,  and  superstition  alleges  that  once  it  was  a  plant  for  healing  all  sorts  of 
maladies,  and  therefore  the  devil  bit  off  the  roots  in  which  its  virtues  resided.  This 
plant  is  a  good  emblem  of  many  well-meaning  but  little-effecting  people.  All  their 
good  works  terminate  abruptly.  The  devil  frustrates  their  eflScacy  by  cutting  off  their 
ends.  But  others  there  are  who  before  beginning  to  build  count  the  cost,  and  having 
collected  their  materials  and  laid  their  foundatio  is,  go  on  to  rear  their  structure, 
indifferent  to  more  tempting  schemes.  The  persevering  teacher  who  guides  one 
child  into  the  saving  knowledge  of  Christ  is  a  more  useful  man  than  his  friend  who 
gathers  in  a  roomful  of  ragged  children,  and  after  a  few  weeks  turns  them  all 
adrift  on  the  streets  again.  So  short  is  life  that  we  can  afford  to  lose  none  of  it  in 
abortive  undertakings  ;  and  once  we  have  begun  it  is  true  economy  to  finish.  {J. 
Hamilton,  D. D.)  Industry,  power  of : — There  is  no  art  nor  science  that  is  too  diffi- 
cult for  industry  to  attain  to :  it  is  the  power  of  the  tongue,  and  makes  a  man  under- 
stood all  over  the  world.  It  is  the  philosopher's  stone,  that  turns  aU  metals  and  even 
stones  into  gold,  and  suffers  no  want  to  break  into  its  dwelling.  It  is  the  north-west 
passage,  that  brings  the  merchant's  ships  to  him  by  a  nearer  and  shorter  path. 
In  a  word,  it  conquers  all  enemies,  and  gives  wings  to  blessings.  {A.  Farindon.) 
Labour  and  religion  : — "  Business  "  means  everything  which  occupies  our  attention, 
but  more  particularly  our  temporal  pursuits.  I.  Sloth  is  infamous.  It  draws 
after  it  a  multitude  of  vices  and  a  load  of  sorrows.  Man's  nature  proves  that  he  is 
made  for  action.  Without  being  employed,  his  faculties  are  spoilt  like  metals  eaten 
by  rust,  but  polished  by  use.  No  condition  is  exempt  from  labour.  The  mind  is  a 
fertile  soil,  and  it  not  cultivated  will  bring  forth  weeds.  God  brings  men  into 
judgment  for  neglecting  to  cultivate  mind,  body,  talents,  and  conveniences  of  life 
which  He  has  bestowed.  II.  Labour  is  profitable.  It  restrains  from  sin,  keeps 
from  temptation,  and  satisfies  cravings  which  could  only  otherwise  be  gratified  by 
dissipation.  III.  Piety  is  compatible  with  industry.  1.  The  fervent  spirit  is  one 
that  desires  to  please  God.  It  is  the  same  disposition  directed  to  higher  objects  aa 
actuate  those  who  are  in  love  with  any  earthly  object.  2.  Serving  the  Lord  meana 
doing  good.  Earthly  affairs  must  not  employ  all  our  time.  IV.  Arguments  to 
URGE  this.  1.  The  character  of  Him  we  serve.  2.  The  nature  of  the  service.  3. 
The  reward  which  ensues.  {J.  J.  S.  Bird,  B,A.)  Religion  in  common  life: — 1. 
To  combine  business  with  religion  is  one  of  the  most  difficult  parts  of  the  Christian's 
trial.  It  is  easy  to  be  religious  in  church,  but  not  so  easy  in  the  market-place ;  and 
passing  from  one  to  the  other  seems  often  like  transition  from  a  tropical  to  a  polar 
climate.  2.  So  great  is  this  difficulty  that  but  few  set  themselves  honestly  to  over- 
come it.  In  ancient  times  the  common  expedient  was  to  fly  the  world  altogether ; 
the  modem  expedient,  much  less  safe,  is  to  compromise  the  matter.  "  Everything 
in  its  place."  Prayers,  &c.,  for  Sundays,  practical  affairs  for  weekdays.  Like  an 
idler  in  a  crowded  thoroughfare,  religion  is  jostled  aside  in  the  daily  throng  of  life 
as  if  it  had  no  business  there.  But  the  text  affirms  that  the  two  things  are  com- 
patible ;  that  religion  is  not  so  much  a  duty  as  something  that  has  to  do  with  all 
duties,  not  for  one  day,  but  for  all  days ;  and  that,  like  breathing  and  the  circulation 
of  the  blood  and  growth,  it  may  be  going  on  simultaneously  with  all  our  actions.  3. 
Trae,  il  we  could  only  prepare  for  the  next  world  by  retirement  from  this,  no  OM 


6ia  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHAT.  m. 

sbonld  hesitate.  But  no  such  sacrifice  is  demanded.  As  in  the  material  world,  so 
in  the  moral,  there  are  no  conflicting  laws.  In  the  latter  there  is  a  law  of  labour, 
and  as  God  has  so  constituted  us  that  without  work  we  cannot  eat,  so  we  maj  con- 
elude  that  religion  is  not  inconsistent  with  hard  work.  The  weight  of  a  clock  seems 
a  heavy  drag  on  the  delicate  movements  of  its  machinery,  but  it  is  indispensable 
for  their  accuracy ;  and  there  is  an  analogous  action  of  the  weight  of  worldly  work 
on  the  finer  movements  of  man's  spiritual  being.  The  planets  have  a  twofold 
motion,  in  their  orbits  and  on  their  axes — the  one  motion  being  in  the  most  perfect 
harmony  with  the  other.  So  must  it  be  that  man's  twofold  activities  round  the 
heavenly  and  earthly  centres  jar  not  with  each  other.  And  that  it  is  so  will  be  seen 
from  the  following  considerations — I.  Beligion  is  a  bciencb  and  an  abt,  a  system 
of  doctrines  to  be  believed  and  a  system  of  duties  to  be  done.  1.  If  religious  truth 
were  like  many  kinds  of  secular  truth,  hard  and  intricate,  demanding  the  highest 
order  of  intellect  and  learned  leisure,  then  to  most  men  the  blending  of  religion 
with  the  necessary  avocations  of  life  would  be  impossible.  But  the  gospel  ia  no 
Buch  system.  The  salvation  it  offers  is  not  the  prize  of  the  lofty  intellect,  but  of 
the  lowly  heart.  Christianity  affords  scope  indeed  for  the  former,  but  its  essential 
principles  are  patent  to  the  simplest  mind.  2.  Behgion  as  an  art  differs  from  secular 
acts  in  that  it  may  be  practised  simultaneously  with  all  other  work.  A  medical 
man  cannot  practise  surgery  and  engineering  at  the  same  time,  but  Christianity  is 
an  all-embracing  profession — the  art  of  being  and  doing  good,  an  art,  therefore, 
that  all  can  practise.  It  matters  not  of  what  words  a  copy  set  a  child  learning  to 
write  is  composed ;  the  thiog  desired  is  that  he  should  learn  to  write  well.  Bo 
when  a  man  is  learning  to  be  a  Christian,  it  matters  not  what  his  particular  work 
in  life  may  be,  the  main  thing  is  that  he  learn  to  live  well.  True,  prayer,  medita- 
tion,  &c.,  are  necessary  to  religion,  but  they  are  but  steps  in  the  ladder  to  heaven, 
good  only  as  they  help  us  to  cHmb.  They  are  the  irrigation  and  enriching  of  the 
spiritual  soU — worse  than  useless  if  the  crop  become  not  more  abundant.  No  man 
can  become  a  good  sailor  who  has  never  been  to  sea,  nor  a  good  soldier  by  studying 
a  book  on  military  tactics  ;  so  a  man  by  study  may  become  a  theologian,  but  he 
can  never  become  a  reUgious  man  until  he  has  acquired  those  habits  of  self-denial, 
gentleness,  &o. ,  which  are  to  be  acquired  only  in  daily  contact  with  mankind.  U. 
Eeligion  consists  not  so  much  in  doing  sacred  acts  as  in  doing  becdlab  acts  feom 
A  baceed  motive.  There  is  a  tendency  to  classify  actions  according  to  their  outward 
form  rather  than  according  to  their  spirit.  We  arbitrarily  divide  literature  and 
history  into  sacred  and  profane ;  and  so  prayer,  Bible  reading,  public  worship,  &o. 
— and  buying,  selling,  &c. ,  are  separated  into  two  distinct  categories.  But  what 
God  hath  cleansed,  why  should  we  call  common  ?  Moral  qualities  reside  not  in 
actions,  but  in  the  agent  and  his  motive.  A  musical  instrument  may  discourse 
sacred  melodies  better  than  the  holiest  lips,  but  who  thinks  of  commending  it  for 
its  piety  ?  Just  as  there  is  no  spot  on  earth  but  a  holy  heart  may  hallow,  a  base 
one  desecrate ;  so  many  actions  materially  great  and  noble  may,  because  of  the 
spirit  that  pervades  them,  be  ignoble  and  mean,  and  vice  versa,  Herod  was  a  slave 
though  he  sat  on  a  throne,  but  what  kingly  work  was  done  in  the  carpenter's  shop 
at  Nazareth  !  A  life  spent  among  holy  things  may  be  intensely  secular,  and  a  life 
spent  in  the  throng  may  be  divine.  A  minister's  preachings  may  be  no  more  holy 
than  the  work  of  the  printer  who  prints  Bibles,  or  of  the  bookseller  who  sells  them, 
and  public  worship  may  be  degraded  into  work  most  worldly.  But  carry  holy 
principles  with  you  into  the  world,  and  the  world  will  become  hallowed  by 
their  presence.  A  Christlike  spirit  will  Christianise  all  it  touches.  Marble  or  clay, 
it  matters  not  with  which  the  artist  works,  the  touch  of  genius  transforms  the 
coarser  material  into  beauty,  and  lends  to  the  finer  a  value  it  never  had  before. 
Bude  or  refined  as  our  earthly  work  may  be,  it  will  become  to  a  holy  mind  only 
material  for  a  godlike  life.  Your  conversation  may  not  consist  of  formally  religious 
words,  but  if  it  be  pervaded  by  a  spirit  of  piety  it  will  be  Christian  nevertheless. 
To  promote  the  cause  of  Christ  by  furthering  every  religious  enterprise  is  your  duty, 
but  you  may  promote  it  as  effectually  in  the  family  and  society.  Bise  superior,  in 
Christ's  strength,  to  all  equivocal  practices  in  trade  ;  shrink  from  meanness,  and 
let  the  abiding  sense  of  Christ's  love  make  you  loving,  and  then,  while  your  secular 
life  will  be  spiritualised,  your  spiritual  Ufe  will  grow  more  fervent.  HI.  As  bearing 
on  the  same  topic,  note  the  mind's  power  of  acting  on  latent  principleb.  1.  In 
order  to  live  a  religious  life  every  action  must  be  governed  by  religious  motives. 
True,  we  cannot  always  be  consciously  thinking  of  religion,  yet  unconsciously  we 
may  be  always  acting  nnder  its  controt    As  I  do  not  think  of  gravitation  when  I 


OHAP.  zn.]  ROMANS,  £18 


more  my  limbs,  or  of  atmospherio  laws  when  I  breathe,  bo  with  religion  and  daily 
work.  There  are  nndercurrents  in  the  ocean  which  act  independently  of  the  move* 
ments  of  the  waters  on  the  surface :  so  there  may  dwell  the  abiding  peace  of  God 
beneath  the  restless  stir  of  yonr  worldly  business.  2.  Remember,  too,  that  many 
of  the  thoughts  and  motives  which  govern  our  actions  are  latent.  While  reading 
aloud,  e.g.,  we  are  often  carried  along  by  the  secret  impression  of  the  presence  of  a 
listener.  So  while  business  is  being  prosecuted  may  there  not  be  a  latent  impression 
of  the  presence  of  God  ?  3.  Have  we  not  all  felt  anticipated  happiness  blending  itself 
with  busy  work?  The  labourer's  evening  release  from  toil,  the  schoolboy's  coming 
holiday,  may  illustrate  that  rest  which  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God,  the  anticipa- 
tion of  which  intermits  not  but  gives  zest  to  faithful  service.  Conclusion:  1.  The 
true  idea  of  Christian  life  is  not  periodic  observances,  or  acts  of  heroism.  It  is  a 
great  thing  to  be  ready  to  die  for  Christ,  but  it  is  equally  great  to  live  for  Him.  2. 
All  who  wish  to  live  that  life  must — (1)  Devote  themselves  heartily  to  uo>d  through 
Christ.  Life  comes  before  growth.  The  soldier  must  enlist  before  he  can  serve.  (2) 
Continue  with  Christ.  Tou  cannot  live  for  Him  unless  yon  live  much  with  Him.  (3) 
Carry  religious  principle  into  everyday  life.  Then  wiU  your  life  be — (a)  Noble ;  (6) 
Useful ;  (c)  Permanent.  No  work  done  for  Christ  ever  perishes.  {J.  Caird,  D.D.) 
Religion  in  daily  life : — I.  The  gbeat  duties  of  daily  life  abe  indispensable  to 
THE  development  OF  THE  WHOLE  NATURE  OF  MAN.  The  prayer-meeting,  &c.,  were 
once  spoken  of  as  "  means  of  grace,"  and  they  are  such  when  they  produce  grace. 
But  it  would  seem  as  if  they  were  meant  to  exclude  common  occupations ;  whereas, 
everything  that  pertains  to  the  well-being  of  the  individual  and  the  community  is 
part  and  parcel  of  the  Divine  scheme.  Therefore  the  man  who  bends  over  his 
bench  may  be  as  really  worshipping  God  as  he  who  bends  over  the  altar.  Let  us 
look  at  a  few  points  which  are  needed  to  constitute  a  true  manhood.  1.  Order. 
How  will  yon  learn  that  ?  Not  by  hearing  sermons  about  it  or  thinking  of  it ;  but 
by  the  conduct  of  business.  Business  trains.  Punctuality  and  exactitude  are 
learned  in  life.  2.  Carefulness,  frugality,  benevolence,  also  spring  out  of  dealing 
with  practical  life.  If  you  shield  your  child  from  all  avocations,  he  may  learn  a 
small  round  of  such  things  in  the  family ;  but  no  such  education  does  he  receive  as 
one  that  is  pushed  out  into  life.  One  may  learn  boating  on  a  pond ;  but  a  man 
who  does  well  on  a  pond  may  do  poorly  on  the  Atlantic.  I  am  not  one  of  those 
who  revile  the  denizens  of  Wall  Street.  If  some  sink  nearly  to  the  bottom  of  the 
scale,  others  rise  nearly  to  the  top.  If  a  man  in  that  street  goes  steadily  on  with 
fidelity  and  trustworthiness,  I  think  he  reaches  about  as  high  a  mark  of  honesty  as 
any  man  on  the  globe.  On  the  other  hand,  there  may  be  many  who  are  virtuous 
in  the  farmhouse,  who,  when  they  are  brought  into  the  street  and  under  its 
influence,  have  been  destroyed.  They  have  not  been  drilled  in  street  operations. 
How  is  it  with  soldiers  ?  Eaw  recruits  are  easily  scattered.  Why  ?  Because  they 
have  not  had  drill.  So,  in  worldly  affairs,  a  man  cannot  be  trusted  who  has  not 
been  trained  in  the  school  of  those  affairs.  When  the  spiritual  disposition  goes 
with  diligence  in  business,  men  find  more  that  follows  manhood  in  its  essential 
elements  than  can  be  found  in  any  temple.  II.  Evebt  man  ought  to  find  his 
Cheistian  life  in  connection  with  that  which  God  has  made  his  daily  business. 
1.  There  be  many  with  whom  religion  is  a  kind  of  luxury,  and  business  a  necessary 
evil.  They  mean  to  be  religious,  therefore,  on  the  Sabbath  and  in  the  church. 
But  religion  is  right-acting  as  weU  as  right-thinking.  The  schoolboy's  religion 
must  lie  in  the  duties  of  the  schoolboy ;  the  sailor's  in  those  of  the  mariner ;  the 
merchant's  in  commercial  life.  Tou  have  no  business  to  touch  a  thing  which  it  is 
not  right  to  do  ;  and  whatever  it  is  right  to  do  is  compatible  with  fervency  of  spirit 
and  real  service  to  the  Lord.  2.  How  cold  and  cheerless  is  the  palace  where  there 
is  no  love ;  but  the  old  brown  house  where  you  were  brought  up,  and  the  old  fields 
ov»  whose  hills  you  have  climbed — homely  as  these  scenes  are,  is  there  anything 
BO  beautiful  when  you  go  back  to  them  ?  It  is  what  you  have  put  on  to  these  old 
things  that  makes  them  so  dear  to  you.  So  the  duties  of  life  become  more  agree 
able  by  their  association  with  that  which  is  dear  to  us.  The  service  of  a  mother 
to  a  child  is  invested  with  a  feeling  which  makes  it  to  the  mother  one  of  the  most 
delightful  of  occupations  ;  but  the  same  service  performed  by  any  other  would  be 
odious  to  her.  And  that  which  we  see  in  the  mother  extends  more  or  less  through 
every  part  of  life.  That  to  which  you  bring  diligence,  conscience,  taste,  and  glad- 
ness becomes  transformed.  A  noble-spirited  man  can  redeem  many  duties  which 
are  in  themselves  unattractive,  and  make  them  beautiful.  3.  There  is  no  placa 
where  God  puts  you  where  it  is  not  your  duty  to  say,  "  How  shall  I  perfume  this 
VOL.  a.  33 


614  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xn, 

place  and  make  it  beautiful  as  the  rose  ?  "    If  you  are  a  boy  in  school  you  are  to 
perform  the  duties  which  are  assigned  you  by  your  master,  by  reason  of  your 
allegiance  to  Christ.    You  are  working  in  a  joiner's  shop  ;  you  are  a  shoemaker,  a 
street-sweeper,  or  a  boot-black ;  but,  whatever  you  are,  unless  in  some  business 
that  you  know  is  wrong,  you  are  not  to  say,  *'  How  shall  I  get  out  of  this  occupa- 
tion in  order  that  I  may  be  made  a  Christian  ?  "  but,  "  How,  being  a  Christian, 
shall  I  work  grace  out  of  this  occupation  ?  "    4.  Exactitude,  trustworthiness,  where 
there  is  no  eye  but  God's  to  see.     These  things  constitute  taking  up  the  cross. 
Parents  say,  "  Now,  my  son,  if  you  won't  eat  any  sugar  or  butter  for  six  months  in 
order  that  you  may  give  to  the  missionaries,  that  will  be  taking  up  the  cross." 
But  there  are  enough  crosses  to  take  up  without  resorting  to  such  modes  as  that. 
When  a  boy  does  not  want  to  get  up  in  the  morning,  and  he  gets  up,  he  takes  up 
the  cross.    When  a  person  is  cross  before  breakfast,  that  is  a  good  time  for  him  to 
take  up  the  cross,  by  keeping  his  temper.    Where  one  does  not  hke  to  be  punctual, 
there  is  a  good  opportunity  for  him  to  take  up  the  cross.    It  is  better  to  take  up 
the  cross  in  things  that  mean  something.    Men  often  seek  artificial  crosses  to  take 
up ;  but  mostly  we  have  crosses  enough  to  take  up  in  subduing  the  recreancy  of 
our  selfish  nature  to  true  kindness,  and  noble  enterprise,  and  faithful  manhood. 
III.   Mask  the  strange  and  incongruous  ethics   which   men   introduce  into 
DIFFERENT  DEPARTMENTS  OF  THEIR  uvES.    Men  Say  that  you  Cannot  expect  one  to 
act  in  politics  as  he  does  in  private  life.    Why  not?    Are  there  ten  commandments 
for  politics  different  from  the  ten  commandments  for  the  rest  of  life  ?    Was  the 
Sermon  on  the  Mount  given  for  men  unknown  to  politics?    It  is  said  that  yoa 
cannot  expect  a  man  to  act  in  business  as  he  would  in  his  household.    Why  not  ? 
A  man  should  be  the  same  under  all  circumstances ;  and  that  which  is  true,  honest, 
fair  in  the  household,  is  true,  honest,  fair  in  the  store  and  in  the  state.    The 
scrupulousness  of  honour  ought  to  augment  in  proportion  to  the  enlargement  of  the 
sphere  in  which  one  acts.    You  cannot  be  a  man  of  honour,  though  you  tell  the 
truth  in  your  household  and  neighbourhood,  if  you  lie  without  scruple  in  public 
affairs.     IV.  Note  the  mistake  and  unreasonableness  op  those  who  propose  to 
LEAD  A  Christian  life  before  they  die,  but  who  think  they  cannot  for  the  present 
enter  upon  it  on  account  of  their  business.     If  religion  were  something  apart 
from  daily  life,  there  might  be  some  validity  in  this  excuse ;  but  if  religion  is  the 
right  conduct  of  a  man,  then  everything  is  religious  that  tends  to  build  up  men  in 
perfect  manhood.    Then  why  should  one  wait  ?    Religion  is  to  the  soul  what  health 
is  to  the  body.     One  does  not  say  in  respect  to  health,  "I  will  wait  till  I  have  per- 
fected this  or  that  before  I  recover."     On  the  contrary,  he  says,  "  In  order  that  I 
may  perfect  my  plans,  I  wiU  seek  health."     A  man's  capacity  to  do  business  is 
improved  by  religion.     There  is  nothing  that  one  is  called  to  do  in  life  that  he  will 
not  do  better  with  a  conscience  void  of  offence  and  a  heart  at  peace  with  God. 
{H.  W.  Beecher.)        A  royal  rule  of  life  : — I.  Character  comes  out  of  work.    It  is 
what  we  do  that  educates  us,  rather  than  what  we  read  or  speculate  about. 
Integrity  of  act  cultivates  integrity  of  heart ;  enthusiasm  in  effort  resupplies  the 
founts  of  enthusiasm  in  the  wiU,  and  sympathetic  activities  nourish  the  emotion 
out  of  which  they  flow.    As  the  roots  of  the  oak  reach  down  and  out  in  the  soil  to 
the  slenderest  end,  so  strength  of  character  is  found  in  those  unseen  acts  that  run 
through  the  moments  of  each  day.    II.  Daily  work  assists  us  to  larger  and 
CLEARER  VIEWS  OF  DivTNE  TRUTH.    The  crazy  fancies  that  have  shattered  or  darkened 
communities  came  not  from  artisan,  miner,  or  sailor,  but  from  recluses.     Work 
gives  strength  to  the  mind,  and  brings  it  to  that  point  to  which  the  gospel  makes 
its  appeal.    Leisure  has  a  charm,  and  inquiry  a  zest  after  toil.     The  best  scholars 
have  been  trained  in  cities.    In  the  country  there  is  something  of  languor,  but  in 
the  emulous  activities  of  metropolitan  life  we  make  our  faculties  more  acute  and 
our  inquisition  of  truth  is  more  successful.     III.  By  work  we  enable  ourselves  to 
influence  others  for  good.    In  society  every  one  affects  all.     There  is  indeed 
peril  in  this  fact.    An  unfaithful  workman  may  introduce  into  your  dwelling  disease 
and  death.    A  negligent  pilot  may  plunge  hundreds  into  sorrow.    A  bludgeon  is 
not  needed  to  destroy  the  eye,  or  a  hammer  to  ruin  a  watch.    A  grain  of  dirt  ia 
sufficient  in  either  case ;  and  so  it  is  with  secret  influences  at  work  in  society. 
Noble  work  will  bless  those  we  may  never  see,  and  give  progress  to  what  is  best  in 
human  life.     It  is  not  wealth  inherited  that  is  the  mightiest  lever,  but  that  which 
is  gained  by  work.     He  who  lays  aside  for  Christ  a  portion  of  his  daily  wage  of 
work,  preaches  to  the  world  and  thereby  advances  the  cause  of  the  Redeemer. 

IV.   If  we  ABE  OBEDIENT  TO  THIS  RULE  OF  LIFE,  WE  SHALL  GAIN  THE  CLEAREST  IMPRES- 


OHiP.  zn.]  ROMANS.  615 

noN  OF  lUMOBTALiTT.  It  is  not  in  dreams  that  we  oome  ander  the  full  power  of  the 
world  to  come ;  but  often  in  toil  we  feel  the  dignity  of  manhood  within  us  that  ia 
not  yet  revealed.  The  philosopher  may  doubt,  and  the  enthusiast  may  feel  that  he 
has  not  grasped  it ;  but  the  mother,  busied  with  her  humble  service,  does  feel  that 
a  time  is  coming  when  her  work  will  be  recognised  and  rewarded.  Of  course,  we 
may  be  so  ardent  in  earthly  pursuits  as  to  forget  everything  else ;  but  to  the 
thoughtful  worker  this  truth  comes  as  an  inspiring  impulse.  Conclusion:  We 
gaze  on  the  loveliness  and  quiet  of  the  country,  and  fancy  that  there  is  the  place  to 
lead  an  unworldly  life.  Nay,  there  is  worldiiness  there  as  truly  as  in  Wall  Street. 
Men  fight  about  fences  as  we  do  about  contracts.  Here,  indeed,  in  wealth  and 
fashion  and  sensuality,  worldiiness  takes  root  with  satanio  force ;  but  here  also  are 
the  finest  specimens  of  Christian  character  iUustraled.  {R.  S,  Storrs,  D.D.) 
Sanctified  toil : — 1.  The  rights  of  wealth  are  secured  by  diligence.  2.  The  snares 
of  wealth  are  obviated  by  a  fervent  spirit.  3.  The  responsibilities  of  wealth  are 
discharged  by  serving  the  Lord.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Worship  at  work  : — Here  is — 
1.  The  diligent  hand.  2.  The  fervent  heart.  3.  The  single  eye.  (Ibid.)  Fer- 
vent In  spirit — I.  What  is  it  to  bb  febvent  in  sfibit  ?  To  be  serious  and  earnest 
in — 1.  The  exercise  of  graces;  in  our — (1)  Love  to  God  (Deut.  vi.  6;  Matt.  xxii. 
37).  (2)  Desires  of  Him  (Psa.  xlii.  1,  2).  (3)  Trust  in  Him  (Job  xiii.  25).  (4) 
Bejoioing  in  Him  (1  Pet.  i.  8).  (6)  Zeal  for  His  glory  (1  Cor.  x.  31),  which  yet 
must  be — (a)  Tempered  with  knowledge  (chap.  x.  2).  (6)  Kegulated  by  His  Word. 
(5)  Repentance  {Job  xlii.  6,  6).  (7)  Faith  in  Christ  (James  ii.  26).  2.  The  per- 
formance of  duties  in — (1)  Prayer  (1  Cor.  xiv.  15).  (2)  Hearing  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  31). 
(3)  Meditation  (Psa.  xxii.).  11.  Why  thus  febvent  in  spieit?  1.  The  end  of 
God's  giving  us  such  active  spirits  is  that  we  might  employ  them  for  Him  (Prov. 
zvi.  4).  2.  These  are  businesses  of  the  greatest  concern  (Deut.  xxx.  15).  3.  What- 
soever is  not  done  fervently  is  no  good  work  (Eccles.  ix.  10).  Conclusion :  1. 
Bewail  your  former  indifference.  2.  Be  more  serious  for  the  future.  Consider — 
(1)  They  are  great  works  you  perform  (2  Cor.  ii.  16).  (2)  Tou  cannot  be  too  serious 
in  them  (Luke  xvii.  10).  (3)  Heaven  will  recompense  all  your  labours  (1  Cor.  xv. 
68).  (Bp.  Beveridge.)  Fervency  of  spirit : — I.  Wheeein  it  consists — 1.  In  zeal 
for  God's  glory.  2.  Prompted  by  God's  love  in  the  heart.  3.  Awakened  and  sus- 
tained by  God's  Spirit.  II.  What  aee  its  evidenceb  ?  1.  Diligence.  2.  Fidelity. 
3.  Cheerful  effort.  4.  Constancy.  HI.  Whebe  is  it  necessabt?  Everywhere. 
1.  In  the  Church.  2.  In  the  world.  3.  In  the  family.  4.  In  retirement. 
(J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Fervency  a  test  of  spirituality : — Among  the  wonders  which 
science  has  achieved,  it  has  succeeded  in  bringing  things  which  are  invisible  and 
impalpable  to  our  senses  within  the  reach  of  our  most  accurate  observations. 
Thus  the  barometer  makes  us  acquainted  with  the  actual  state  of  the  atmosphere. 
It  takes  cognisance  of  the  slightest  variation,  and  every  change  is  pointed  out  by 
its  elevation  or  depression,  so  that  we  are  accurately  acquainted  with  the  actual 
state  of  the  air,  and  at  any  given  time.  In  like  manner  the  Christian  has  within 
him  an  index  by  which  he  may  take  cognisance,  and  by  which  he  may  measure  the 
elevation  and  degrees  of  his  spirituality — it  is  the  spirit  of  inward  devotion.  How- 
ever difiQcult  it  may  seem  to  be  to  pronounce  on  the  invisibilities  of  our  spirituality, 
yet  there  is  a  barometer  to  determine  the  elevation  or  depression  of  the  spiritual 
principle.  It  marks  the  changes  of  the  soul  in  its  aspect  towards  God.  As  the 
spirit  of  prayer  mounts  up,  there  is  true  spiritual  elevation  ;  and  as  it  is  restrained 
and  falls  low,  there  is  a  depression  of  the  spiritual  principle  within  us.  As  is  the 
spirit  of  devotion  and  communion  with  God,  such  is  the  man.  {H.  G.  Salter.) 
Fervour  of  spirit : — The  word  "  fervent,"  in  our  tongue,  would  seem  to  indicate 
heat  that  prevails  to  such  an  extent  as  to  break  into  a  flame.  In  the  Greek  it  is  to 
be  boiling  hot.  But  whether  it  be  the  dry  heat  or  the  wet,  it  comes  to  the  same 
point — namely,  feeling,  carried  up  to  the  point  of  disclosure.  I.  Fervency  is  the 
iiAW  OF  Cheistian  CONDUCT,  FEELING,  AND  LIFE.  We  are  to  havc  "  fervid  charity  " ; 
not  languid  and  somnolent  charity,  but  a  charity  that  flames,  that  boils.  There  is 
no  feeling  which  answers  to  the  test  of  the  Word  of  God  that  is  not  fervent.  1. 
But  are  not  the  deepest  feelings  often  voiceless  ?  Yes,  and  latent  feeling  is  often 
the  deepest  and  the  best ;  and  there  are  other  expressions  of  it  besides  those  of  the 
tongue.  The  eye  expresses  it,  the  hand  expresses  it.  The  best  mother  is  not  the 
one  who  kisses  her  babe  the  oftenest,  but  the  one  that  takes  care  of  it  the  best. 
The  best  friends  are  not  those  that  for  ever  hang  upon  your  neck,  but  those  whose 
whole  life  and  occupation  have  found  out  how  to  serve  you  by  the  ten  thousand 
amenities  of  love.    But  feehng  must  develop  itself  somehow.     Feeling  that  does 


6ie  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tn. 

not  do  anything  is  like  a  candle  onlighted,  or  a  fire  of  green  wood  that  smokes  and 
does  not  bam.  2.  The  religions  side  of  human  nature  mast  glow.  "Let  your 
light  shine  before  men."  We  mast  carry  the  light  of  feeling  out  to  a  boisterooa 
world ;  and  the  feeling  is  to  be  carried  up  to  an  intensity  such  that  it  will  bum  or 
shine  out,  and  be  able  to  withstand  the  influences  that  are  streaming  from  life  on 
every  side.  Therefore  you  see  it  coupled  with  "Not  slothful  in  business."  Yon  are 
to  carry  your  fervency  into  business ;  you  are  to  adapt  it  to  your  business ;  yon  ar* 
to  make  it  a  part  of  your  business,  and  so  a  part  of  your  religion.  S.  A.  great 
many  Christians  claim  that  there  is  a  Uving  force  in  them ;  but  when  yop  look  yon 
never  see  it — it  is  never  disclosed.  For  the  law  of  force  is  fervency,  and  no  man 
can  work  with  any  great  competency  except  by  strong  feeling.    II.  The  gbbat 

TBUTHS  or  THE  GOSPEL  ABE  TO  BE  ACCEPTED  IN  THEIB  PLENITUDE  AND  BEALITT  ONLY  IW 

A  rEBVENT  STATE  OF  HIND.  As  I  Understand  faith,  it  is  such  a  quickening  of  the 
mind,  such  an  expansion  of  its  power,  such  a  liJninousness  shining  through  it  of 
the  fires  of  a  sanctified  imagination  working  on  moral  and  spiritual  elements,  that 
the  whole  man  is  lifted  up  into  a  higher  sphere,  and  reasons  upon  things  that  are 
not  in  the  vulgar  court  of  a  mere  justice  of  the  peace,  but  in  the  spiritual  court  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  What  is  God  to  the  great  mass  of  men  ?  A  fate ;  a  fear ;  a 
dread ;  an  abstraction ;  a  machinist ;  a  power  hid  behind  government ;  a  law ;  a 
something ;  a  nothing.  But  when  the  soul  has  been  kindled,  and  the  understand- 
ing is  regnant,  and  aJl  the  best  affections  cluster  around  ihe  reason  to  give  it 
expression,  the  heavens  cannot  contain  God,  and  the  earth  is  full  of  His  glory  and 
companionship.  There  is  but  one  way  in  which  you  can  have  a  sound  theology, 
«nd  that  is  by  living  so  near  to  God  that  you  have  the  witness  of  the  Divine  Spirit 
in  you  that  you  are  the  sons  of  God.  If  you  can  breathe  into  the  Church  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  such  a  vitality  of  faith  as  that  the  members  of  it  are  living  in  a 
fervent  and  burning  zeal  of  Christian  charity,  you  need  not  trouble  yourself  about 
doctrinal  beliefs  ;  they  wiU  take  care  of  themselves.  But  if  you  spend  all  your 
force  upon  the  externalities  of  doctrine  and  of  church  organisation,  you  wiU  have  a 
huge  casket  with  a  spurious  jewel  in  it.  III.  All  unfebvent,  dull,  and  dbowst 
PBEACHiNG  18  HEEETicAL.  Anything  that  turns  people  out  of  the  way,  and  imperils 
their  souls,  is  heresy ;  and  of  all  heresies  there  is  none  more  deadly  than  a  drowsy 
preacher.  And  yet,  when  a  man  comes  that  wakes  up  the  congregation,  there  are 
a  great  many  men  that  look  up  and  say,  "  Who  knows  whereunto  this  thing  will 
grow  7  "  Why,  yes,  if  sleep  be  piety,  what  will  become  of  religion  if  men  wake  up? 
But  life  is  above  all  price ;  and  a  man  who  is  fit  to  preach  at  all,  must  be  fit  to 
preach  because  he  has  the  power  of  inflammation.  A  man  that  cannot  boil,  and 
that  cannot  make  anybody  else  boil ;  a  man  that  cannot  be  blown  into  a  flame,  and 
-cannot  kindle  a  flame  in  others,  is  not  fit  to  preach.    IV.  All  the  conceptions  of 

BELIGIODS   LITE   THAT  ESTEEM    8TEONO   FEELING   TO   BE  VULOAB  ABE   UNCHB18TIAN  AND 

TTNPHIL080PHICAL ;  they  are  utterly  unallied  to  the  whole  nature  of  grace,  or  to  the 
disclosure  of  God's  feeling  in  the  human  soul ;  and  yet  there  are  a  great  many  who 
have  such  a  conception.  The  substitution  of  decorum  for  emotion,  of  polish  for 
deep  feeling,  of  taste  for  conscience — in  other  words,  the  worship  of  culture — there 
can  be  nothing  wider  from  the  true  spirit  of  the  gospel  than  that.  When  men  are 
thoroughly  trained  and  cultivated,  and  have  religious  feeling,  and  have  it  fervently 
and  deeply,  it  is  a  great  deal  better  that  they  should  express  it  with  refinement  and 
with  genius,  if  it  can  be  so  expressed ;  but  to  have  decorum,  and  taste,  and  cold 
intellectuality,  and  none  of  the  fire  of  feeling,  is  to  be  idolatrous.  It  is  to  worship 
the  senses,  and  that  on  a  very  low  plane  of  life.  It  is  better,  a  hundredfold,  that 
there  should  be  the  utmost  tumult  of  revival  than  that  there  should  be  simply  a 
decorous  stupor.  Conclusion  :  And  now,  are  you,  that  are  grouped  into  a  church, 
living,  with  real  glow  and  fervour,  a  religious  life  ?  Do  you  love  God,  or  do  you 
only  say  you  love  Him  ?  Do  you  love  your  fellow-men  as  yourself,  or  do  you  only 
say  that  you  do  in  routine?  Do  you  enjoy  religion?  Are  you  working  in  your 
several  spheres  with  fervour?  Is  it  not  time  that  you  should  wake  out  of  your 
sleep  ?  The  Master  is  going  by,  and  the  cry,  "  The  Bridegroom  cometh,"  will 
sound  in  your  ears  before  long.  Are  your  lamps  filled  and  burning  ?  Do  men  feel 
the  fire  and  the  flame  ?  Are  you  a  power  among  men  ?  May  the  Spirit  of  light, 
life,  fire,  and  power  come  down  into  the  hearts  of  every  one  of  the  members  of  this 
church,  and  of  all  disciples  of  every  name  gathered  together  this  morning,  brushing 
the  ashes  of  the  past  away,  kindle  on  the  old  altar  a  new  flame  that  shall  never  go 
out.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  On  the  obligations  to  fervour  of  spirit : — 1.  Fervour  of 
epirit  is,  in  general,  opposed  to  lukewammesa  and  indifference.     It  denotes  ao 


CBif.  zn.]  BOMANS.  617 

xmoommoD  application  of  mind,  and  a  warmth  of  zeal  bordering  on  transport,  that 
moves  every  faoalty  of  the  sool,  and  carries  all  before  it  in  the  pursuit  of  what  we 
highly  value  and  desire.    It  does  not  consist  merely  in  a  few  emotions  of  natural 
piety,  neither  is  it  a  sudden  blaze  of  religious  fervour,  which  flashes  for  a  moment 
like  a  meteor  and  as  quickly  disappears.    It  is  a  permanent  and  abiding  principle 
of  action,  a  beam  from  the  Sun  of  Kighteousness,  which,  bright  at  the  outset,  shineth 
more  and  more,  tUl  it  reaches  the  fulness  of  its  meridian  splendour.    2.  When  this 
Ib  displayed  in  its  fullest  extent,  it  is  one  of  the  noblest  ornaments  of  the  Christian. 
It  is  to  the  spiritual  life  what  health  is  to  the  natural.    It  renders  that  active  and 
spirited  which,  without  it,  were  dull  and  almost  lifeless.     3.  As  to  our  obliga- 
tions to  be  fervent,  note  that — I.  It  is  enjoined  by  God's  positive  coumand. 
The  Scriptures  abound  in  exhortations  not  merely  to  serve  the  Lord,  but  to  do  so 
with  fervency  and  zeal,  to  work  while  it  is  day,  for  the  night  oometh,  when  no  man 
can  work.    Many  are  the  precepts  which  require  us  to  be  up  and  doing,  to  be 
zealous  in  good  works,  &o.    There  is   nothing   so   offensive  to   God  as  luke- 
warmness  and  indifference.     II.  God  has  a  just  right  to  it.    He  gave  us  our  being 
at  the  first ;  by  His  providence  our  lives  are  dally  sustained.    Is  it  possible  to 
render  anto  God  more  than  His  goodness  gives  Him  a  right  to  claim  ?    All  this, 
however,  is  but  a  small  part  of  the  obligation  which  His  mercy  has  laid  you  under. 
Think  only  on  the  wonders  of  redeeming  love.     Can  you,  then,  exceed  in  gratitude 
to  such  a  Friend,  and  serve  Him  with  too  much  zeal?    HI.  The  DiFncnLTiES 
connected  with  the  service  of  God  bequibb  it.    Beligion  is  not  a  matter  of  easy 
acquirement.    The  enemies  we  have  to  encounter  are  numerous  and  powerful,  and, 
through  them,  we  must  fight  our  way  to  the  ground  which  shall  be  our  reward. 
Within,  our  hearts  are  deceitful  above  all  things,  and  desperately  wicked  ;  then  we 
have  depraved  appetites  to  restrain,  and  passions  fed  by  indulgence  to  subdue. 
Has  any  of  you  made  the  attempt,  and  do  you  find  it  an  easy  matter  ?    Besides,  all 
who  would  love  God  and  Christ  Jesus  must  expect  to  meet  with  persecution. 
Amid  so  many  perils,  what  need  is  there  of  fervour  1      Amid  such  obstacles,  what 
but  a  zeal  that  ^ows  no  bounds  would  enable  us  to  resist  and  overcome  the  enemies 
of  our  salvation  I    IV.  Let  the  example  of  the  saints  animate  too  to  cuiiTrvATH 
it.     What  was  the  distinguishing  characteristic  of  Abraham,  of  Elijah,  of  Samuel, 
of  Daniel,  and  of  the  others?     It  was  zeal  for  the  Lord,  manifesting  itself  by 
obedience,  holy,  fervid,  and  strenuous  exertion  to  promote  the  glory  of  God.    In 
none,  however,  did  this  spirit  more  immediately  display  itself  than  in  our  blessed 
Lord  and  Saviour.     "The  zeal  of  Thine  house  hath  eaten  Me  up."    (G.  Milligan.) 
Enthusiasm  : — I.  What  is  enthusiasm  ?    Enthusiasmos  means  the  fulness  of  Divine 
Inspiration,  an  absorbing,  a  passionate  devotion  to  some  good  cause,  the  state  of  those 
whom  St.  Paul  here  describes  as  "fervent,"  Uterally  boiling  in  spirit,  the  spirit  of  man 
when  transfigured,  uplifted,  dilated  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  Without  enthusiasm  of  some 
noble  kind  a  man  is  dead,  and  without  enthusiasts  a  nation  perishes.     There  are 
two  forms  which  enthusiasm  has  assumed — the  enthusiasm  for  humanity,  and  the 
enthusiasm  for  individual  salvation.  When  the  two  have  been  combined ;  when  the 
sense  of  devotion  has  been  united  with  the  exaltation  of  charity,  it  has  produced 
the  most  glorious  and  blessed  benefactors  of  the  world.     What  was  Christianity 
itself  but  such  an  enthusiasm  ?    Learnt  from  the  example,  caught  from  the  Spirit 
of  Christ,  the  same  love  for  the  guilty  and  the  wretched,  which  brought  the  Lord 
of  glory  down  to  the  lowest  depths,  was  kindled  by  His  Spirit  in  the  heart  of  all  His 
noblest  sons.  Forgiven,  they  have  longed  with  others  to  share  the  same  forgiveness, 
and  they  have  been  ready  to  do  all,  and  to  dare  all,  for  His  sake  who  died  for  them. 
Again  and  again  this  Divine  fire  has  died  out  of  the  world ;  again  and  again  has  it 
been  rekindled  by  God's  chosen  sons.    What  would  the  world  have  been  without 
them  ?    Ask  what  the  world  would  be  without  the  sun.    II.  The  enthusiasm  op 
the  btot)ent,  abtist,  discoverer,  man  of  science — what  else  could  have  inspired 
their  infinite  patience  and  self-sacrifice  ?    It  plunged  Roger  Bacon  into  torture  and 
imprisonment ;  it  made  Columbus  fact  the  terrors  of  unknown  seas ;  it  caused 
years  of  persecution  to  Galileo,  to  Kepler,  to  Newton,  to  the  early  geologists,  to 
Charles  Darwin.    What  supported  them  was  the  fervency  of  spirit  which  prefers 
labour  to  sloth,  and  love  to  selfishness,  and  truth  to  falsehood,  and  God  to  gold. 
in.  The  enthusiasm  of  the  reformer.    Think  what  Italy  was  fast  becoming  when 
Savonarola  thundered  against  her  corruption  and  apostacy.    Think  how  an  intoler- 
able sacerdotal  tyranny  would  have  crushed  the  souls  of  men  had  not  Wycliffe 
braved  death  to  give  the  people  of  England  their  Bible.    Think  what  truths  would 
have  been  drowned  in  deep  seas  of  oblivion  if  Huss  had  not  gone  calmly  to  the 


518  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [coiX.  hl 

stake.  Think  what  a  sink  of  abominations  the  nominal  Church  of  Ood  might  now 
have  been  if  the  voice  of  Lather  had  never  shaken  the  world.  Think  how  the 
Church  of  England  might  now  be  settling  on  her  lees  if  such  men  as  Wesley  and 
Whitefield  had  not  driven  their  fellows  back  to  the  simplicity  which  is  in  Christ 
Jesus.  IV.  The  enihdsiasu  or  ihb  missionabt.  In  the  first  centuries  every 
Christian  looked  on  it  as  a  part  of  his  life  to  be  God's  missionary,  and  for  centuries 
the  Church  produced  men  like  Boniface  and  Columban.  Then  for  one  thousand 
years  the  darkness  was  only  broken  by  here  and  there  a  man  Uke  St.  Louis  of 
France,  or  St.  Francis  of  Assisi.  It  is  to  Count  Zinzendorf  and  the  Moravians 
that  we  owe  the  revival  of  missionary  zeal.  In  the  last  century  missionaries  were 
regarded  as  foolish  and  rash,  and  I  know  not  what.  When  Carey  proposed  to  go 
as  a  missionary  to  India,  he  was  told  that  if  God  wished  to  convert  the  heathen 
He  would  doubtless  do  so  in  His  own  way.  Think  of  John  Eliot,  the  lion-hearted 
"  apostle  of  the  Indians,"  and  his  motto  that  prayer  and  painstaking  can  accomplish 
everything.  Think  of  young  and  sickly  David  Brainerd  going  alone  into  the  wild 
forests  of  America  and  among  their  wilder  denizens,  with  the  words  "  Not  from 
necessity  but  from  choice,  for  it  seems  to  me  that  God's  dealings  towards  me  have 
fitted  me  for  a  life  of  solitariness  and  hardship."  Think  of  Adoniram  Judson  and 
the  tortures  he  bore  so  cheerfully  in  his  Burmese  prison.  And  we,  too,  in  these 
days  have  seen  Charles  Mackenzie  leave  the  comforts  of  Cambridge  to  die  amid  the 
pestilent  swamps  cf  the  Zambesi,  and  Coleridge  Patteson,  floating,  with  his  palm 
branch  of  victory  in  his  hand,  over  the  blue  sea  among  the  Coral  Isles.  Nor  do 
I  know  any  signs  more  hopeful  for  the  nation  than  these,  that  our  public  schools 
are  now  founding  missions  in  the  neglected  wastes  of  London,  and  our  young 
athletes  are  going  out  as  poor  men  to  labour  in  China  and  Hindustan.  Y.  Thb 
BNTHDSiASM  OF  ooB  SOCIAL  PHILANXHR0PI8TS.  Who  cau  measure  the  good  done  by 
St.  Vincent  de  Paul  when  he  founded  his  Sisterhoods  of  Mercy  ?  What  man  has 
done  more  for  multitudes  of  souls  than  John  Pounds,  the  Plymouth  cobbler,  who 
became  the  founder  of  ragged  schools  ?  What  a  light  from  heaven  was  shed  on 
countless  wanderers  by  Eobert  Kaikes,  John  Howard,  and  Elizabeth  Fry  1  Think, 
too,  of  the  effort  of  Clarkson,  Wilberforce,  Sharp  and  Garrison  in  their  efforts  to 
liberate  the  slave.  Conclusion  :  There  are  questions  even  more  pressing  and  vital 
now  than  the  slave  trade  was  in  the  days  of  our  fathers.  Shame  be  on  us  if  we 
prove  ourselves  degenerate  sons  1  There  are  two  particular  evils  which  we  must 
either  conquer  or  be  ruined  by  them.  One  is  drink,  the  other  is  uncleanness.  Are 
we  to  be  such  cowards  as  to  leave  these  arrows  to  rankle  and  gangrene  in  the  heart 
of  England  ?  If  the  Parliament  of  England  will  not  deal  with  them,  then  the  people 
of  England  must   deal   with   them.      {Archdn.  Farrar.)  A  fervent  piety: — 

I.  The  importance  and  the  advantages  of  servinq  the  Lord.  Piety  is 
enforced  in  these  respects.  Its  obHgation  is  indispensable  ;  its  beauty  is  supreme, 
and  its  utihty  is  universal.  It  is  not  so  much  a  single  virtue,  as  a  constellation 
of  virtues.  Here  reverence,  gratitude,  faith,  hope,  love,  concentre  their  rays, 
and  shine  with  united  glory.  The  moat  illiterate  man,  under  the  impressions  of 
true  devotion,  and  in  the  immediate  acts  of  Divine  worship,  contracts  a  greatness  of 
mind  that  raises  him  above  his  equals.  Thereby,  says  an  admired  ancient,  we 
build  a  nobler  temple  to  the  Deity  than  creation  can  present.  Piety  is  adapted  to 
the  notions  of  happiness  and  chief  good  which  all  men  entertain,  although  these 
notions  were  as  various  in  themselves  as  the  theories  of  philosophers  have  been 
about  their  object.  Hither  let  the  man  of  the  world  turn,  that  he  may  find  durable 
riches,  more  to  be  desired  than  gold  and  all  earthly  possessions.  Piety  is  the 
foundation  of  virtue  and  morality.  True  devotion  strengthens  our  obligations  to  a 
holy  life,  and  superadds  a  new  motive  to  every  social  and  civil  duty.  A  good  man 
is  the  guardian  angel  of  his  country.  I  shall  only  add  on  this  head,  that  by  serving  the 
Lord  here,  we  have  an  earnest  and  anticipation  of  the  happiness  of  the  heavenly 
state.  Here  the  sun  faintly  beams,  as  in  the  dubious  twilight ;  there  he  shines 
forth  in  full  meridian  glory.  II.  To  expiiAin  that  fervour  of  spirit  so  beqotmtb 
IN  the  exercises  of  devotion,  and  enforce  it  with  a  few  arguments.  1.  By 
fervour  of  spirit,  in  general,  is  meant  an  uncommon  application  of  mind  in  the 
performance  of  any  thing,  a  warmth  bordering  upon  transport,  that  moves  every 
spring  of  the  heart,  and  carries  aU  before  it,  to  gain  its  end.  So  that  by  a  fervency 
of  spirit  in  serving  the  Lord  must  be  understood  an  ardent  and  active  desire  of 
loving  the  Lord,  of  worshipping  Him  in  sincerity,  and  obeying  His  commands  with 
all  our  heart,  with  all  our  soul,  with  all  our  mind,  and  with  all  our  strength.  True 
fervour  of  spirit  proceedeth  from  above.    It  is  a  beam  from  the  Father  of  lights, 


CHAP,  xn.]  BOMANS.  619 

pare  and  benign,  which  at  once  enlightens  and  warms  the  mind.  2.  To  engage  us 
more  effectually  to  the  performance  of  this  part  of  our  duty,  let  us  consider  the 
general  obligations  we  lie  under,  as  rational  creatures,  to  serve  the  Lord  with 
fervency  of  spirit,  and  then  the  particular  obligations  that  arise  from  Christianity. 
(1)  In  the  first  place,  as  the  Almighty  is  the  Creator  of  the  world,  and  the  Father 
of  the  human  race.  He  is  likewise  their  Preserver,  and  the  Author  of  order  and 
harmony  in  the  universe.  Seeing  then  He  upholds  our  existence,  and  is  the  Parent 
of  so  many  mercies,  has  He  not,  as  our  supreme  Benefactor,  a  title  to  the  service  of 
our  whole  lives,  and  to  all  the  fervour  of  our  spirits  ?  (2)  This  will  appear  still 
more  when  we  consider  the  superior  obligations  which  we  are  laid  under  by  Chris- 
tianity. While  many  nations  are  sitting  in  darkness  and  the  shadow  of  death,  on 
ns  hath  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  arisen  in  full  glory.  What  thanks,  what  services, 
shall  we  not  then  render  to  our  Supreme  Benefactor,  who  has  translated  us  from 
the  kingdom  of  darkness  into  the  kingdom  of  His  Son  1  {J.  Logan.)  Religious 
fervour : — I.  Fervocb,  in  general,  is  opposed  to  lukewarmness  or  indifference, 
and  denotes  that  edge  or  keenness,  that  activity  and  diligence,  which  we  commonly 
exert  in  the  pursuit  of  any  object  we  highly  value  and  wish  to  possess.  Now  the 
fervour  whereof  my  text  speaks  hath  religion,  or  the  service  of  God,  for  its  object. 
Love  to  God  is  the  principle,  the  law  of  God  is  the  rule,  and  His  glory  the  end  of 
all  its  operations.  But  as  there  are  several  counterfeits  of  this  gracious  temper,  I 
shall  endeavour  to  exhibit  the  properties  of  true  Christian  fervour.  1.  That  as  the 
service  of  God  is  the  proper  object  of  true  Christian  fervour,  this  renders  it  neces- 
sary that  we  be  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  laws  of  God,  that  we  may  know 
what  particular  services  He  requires  of  us,  and  will  accept  at  our  hands.  2 .  As  our 
fervour  should  be  employed  in  the  service  of  God,  or  in  those  duties  that  God  hath 
plainly  commanded,  so  it  ought  Ukewise  to  aim  for  His  glory,  otherwise  it  is  unhal- 
lowed passion,  which  debaseth  everything  that  proceeds  from  it.  If  God  is  glorified 
by  his  sufferings,  the  fervent  Christian  hath  gained  his  end.  3.  That  this  gracious 
temper  extends  its  regards  to  all  God's  commandments.  It  declines  no  duty  that 
bears  the  stamp  of  His  authority.  4.  The  distinguishing  property  of  true  Christian 
fervour  is  this :  It  will  make  us  peculiarly  attentive  to  our  own  behaviour,  and  begin 
with  correcting  what  is  faulty  in  ourselves.  5.  Though  true  fervour  begins  at  home, 
yet  it  is  not  always  confined  there.  It  was  the  speech  of  a  wicked  Cain,  "  Am  I  my 
brother's  keeper  ?  "  The  warm-hearted  Christian  extends  his  good  offices  to  all 
around  him,  and  useth  all  that  power  and  influence  which  his  station  gives  him  to 
discourage  vice  and  to  advance  the  kingdom  of  Christ  in  the  world.  6.  That  thia 
fervour  must  be  always  under  the  direction  of  Christian  prudence,  that  it  may  not 
break  out  into  indecent  heats,  and  carry  us  beyond  the  limits  of  our  office  or  station 
in  the  society  to  which  we  belong.  II.  To  recommend  and  enforce  this  gracious 
TEMPER.  Consider — 1.  That  God  deserves  the  most  zealous  and  active  service  we 
can  pay  to  Him.  2.  God  not  only  deserves  such  service  as  I  am  pleading  for,  He 
likewise  demands  it,  and  will  not  be  put  off  with  anything  less.  If  any  imagine  that 
Christ  came  into  the  world  to  relax  their  obligations  to  a  holy  life,  they  are  grossly 
mistaken  ;  and  if  they  act  upon  that  principle,  they  shall  find  themselves  fatally 
disflppointed  at  last.  3.  A  motive  to  fervour  and  diligence  in  the  service  of  God 
ariseth  from  the  difficulties  that  attend  our  duty.  It  is  no  easy  matter  "  to  pluck 
out  a  right  eye,  and  to  cut  off  a  right  hand."  Besides,  in  the  ordinary  course  of 
events,  "  all  that  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  must  suffer  persecution  "  in  one 
kind  or  other.  Such  are  the  difficulties  that  attend  religion ;  and  do  not  these 
make  zeal  or  fervour  necessary.  4.  That  we  should  be  fervent  in  spirit,  serving  the 
Lord  ;  because  it  is  absolutely  impossible  that  we  can  do  too  much.  One  thing  is 
certain,  that  the  most  serious  Christians,  when  they  came  to  die,  have  always 
lamented  their  former  negligence ;  and  the  time  is  at  hand  when  all  the  world  shall 
confess  that  holy  diligence  was  the  truest  wisdom.  {R.  Walker.)  Serving  the  Lord. 
— Serving  the  Lord: — I,  What  is  it  to  serve  God?  It  implies — 1.  Our  devoting 
ourselves  wholly  to  Him  and  His  way  (2  Cor,  viii.  5  ;  Matt.  vi.  24).  2.  Subjecting 
ourselves  to  His  will  and  laws  (Psa.  ii.  11, 12).  3.  Worshipping  Him  (Matt.  iv.  10; 
Luke  ii.  37).  4.  Walking  in  holiness  and  righteousness  before  Him  (Luke  i.  74, 
75).  5.  Improving  all  for  His  glory.  H.  How  should  we  serve  Him?  1. 
Reverently  (Heb.  xii.  28,  29;  Psa.  ii.  11).  2.  Obediently  (1  Sam,  xiL  U).  3. 
Sincerely  (John  iv.  24 ;  Psa.  Ii.  6),  4.  Readily  and  willingly  (1  Chron.  xxviii.  9). 
5.  Only  (Matt.  iv.  10).  6.  Wholly  (Deut.  x.  12;  Psa.  cxix.  6).  7.  Continually 
(Luke  i.  75).  III.  Wht  serve  the  Lord?  1.  He  made  us  (Prov.  xvi.  4).  2. 
Maintains  us  (Acts  xvii.  28).    3.  Has  redeemed  us  (1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20).    Coaclosion; 


520  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m 

1.  Unless  TOO  serve  Him  you  must  Berre  sin  and  Satan  (Matt  vi.  24).  2.  His 
Berrioe  is  the  only  liberty  (Kom.  viii.  21),  and  the  highest  honour  (1.  Sam.  ii.  30). 
3.  Yon  vowed  to  serve  Him  in  baptism  (Deut.  xxvi.  17, 18).  4.  All  you  can  do  is 
much  less  than  you  owe  Him  (Luke  xvii.  10).  5.  If  you  serve  Him  He  will  cause 
all  things  to  serve  you  (chap.  viii.  28).  6.  He  will  reward  you  hereafter.  (Bp. 
Beveridge.)        Serving  the  Lord: — I.  What  this  impijes.    1.  Self-consecration. 

2.  The  repudiation  of  all  other  service.    3.  Complete  devotion  to  His  cause.    4.  A 
steady  aim  at  His  glory.     II.  Whs  shoxtld  wb  xmoEBTAEB  it?    It  is — 1.  Due. 
2.  Eeasonable.     3.  Honourable.     4.   The  end  of  our  being.     {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
Serving  the  Lord: — It  is  said  of  Sister  Dora  that  no  matter  at  what  hour  the 
hospital  door-bell  rang,  she  used  to  rise  instantly  to  admit  the  patient,  saying,  "The 
Master  is  come,  and  calleth  for  thee."        Serving  the  Lord ;— The  harmony  of 
Scripture  is  admirable.    He  who  weighed  the  mountains  in  scales  has  had  a  clear 
eye  to  the  adjustment  of  truth  in  His  Word.    While  the  doctrinal  part  of  Scripture 
is  exceeding  full,  the  practical  part  is  not  one  whit  less  copious.    In  this  verse  this 
harmony  is  noteworthy.    The  Christian  is  not  to  be  a  worse  tradesman  because  of 
his  religion,  but  a  better.    At  the  same  time,  we  must  not  neglect  the  spiritual 
because  of  the  pressing  demands  of  the  temporal.    The  holy  fire  within  our  souls 
is  to  be  constantly  burning.      I.  Thb  essentials  op  all  tbue  service  to  God. 
1.  Divine  acceptance.    If  a  stranger  should  of  his  own  accord  visit  your  farm,  and 
should  commence  driving  the  horses,  milking  the  cows,  reaping  the  wheat,  and  so 
on,  if  you  had  never  employed  him  he  would  be  fulfilling  the  part  of  an  intruder 
rather  than  the  office  of  a  servant.    Now  it  is  not  every  man  who  is  fit  to  be 
tk  servant  of  God.    How  should  the  thrice  holy  God  be  served  by  hands  unwashed 
from  sin  r     Unto  the  wicked  God  saith,  "  What  hast  thou  to  do  to  declare  My 
statutes?"      (1)  Hast  thou  then  been  bought  with  the  great  Master's  money? 
Only  the  redeemed  ones  are  reckoned  by  the  Lord  as  servants  in  His  household. 
The  ungodly  are  slaves  to  Satan.     (2)    God's  servant  has  been  won  by  power 
as  well  as  bought  with  price.    Hast  thou  been  compelled  by  Divine  grace  to  leave 
thy  sins?    Israel  would  for  ever  have  made  bricks  in  Egypt  if  the  Lord  had  not 
brought  them  forth  with  an  outstretched  arm.     (3)  God's  servants  are  always  such 
as  are  bom  in  His  house  as  well  as  bought  with  His  money.    Preliminary  to  all 
holy  service  must  be  regeneration.    That  which  cometh  from  the  crab  will  still  be 
sour,  plant  the  tree  where  you  will.    A  sinner  is  unsuitable  for  service  till  he  be 
new-created.    2.  We  must  render  our  obedience  to  the  Lord  Himself.     Much  that 
is  done  religiously  is  not    done  unto  God.     Whose  honour  do  you   seek?   for 
remember  that  which  is  uppermost  in  thy  heart  is  thy  master.     Sinister  motives 
and  selfish  aims  are  the  death  of  true  godliness.     3.  We  must  serve  God  in  the  way 
of  His  appointment.     If  anything  be  done  without  orders,  it  may  be  excessive 
activity,  but  it  is  not  service.    How  many  think  they  are  serving  God  when  they 
have  never  turned  to  His  commandments  1    What  God  doth  not  bid  you  hath  no 
power  over  yonr  conscience,  even  though  pope  and  prelate  decree  it.    4.  We  must 
serve  God  in  His  strength.    Those  who  attempt  to  perfect  holiness  without  waiting 
upon  the  Holy  Spirit  for  power,  will  be  as  foohsh  as  the  apostles  had  they  com- 
menced preaching  without  power  from  on  high.    Nothing  will  last  but  that  which 
is  wrought  by  Divine  power.     5.   We  must  stand  continually  ready  to  obey  the 
Lord's  will  in  anything  and   everything  without  distinction.      He  who  enlists 
surrenders  his  will  to  the  discipline  of  the  army  and  the  bidding  of  the  Captain. 
What  hast  thou  to  do  with  likings  and  dislikings  ?     Servants  must  like  that  which 
their  masters  bid  them.     IL  Some  of  the  modes  in  which  we  may  serve  the 
Lord.     1.  It  was  an  ordinance  of  David  that  the  soldiers  who  watched  by  the  stuff 
should  be  accounted  to  be  as  true  soldiers  as  those  who  joined  in  the  actual  conflict. 
Hence  I  would  say  a  word  to  those  of  you  who  cannot  serve  the  Lord  in  direct 
activities.     If  the  tongue  speak  not,  yet  if  the  life  speak  thou  shalt  have  done  God 
no  small  homage.     If  thou  canst  not  help  the  cause  of  God  in  any  other  mode,  at 
any  rate  there  is  open  to  thee  that  of  fervent  prayer.    I  doubt  not  that  many  sick 
beds  are  doing  more  for  Christ  than  our  pulpits.    But  in  addition  to  this,  the  very 
weakest  and  worst  circumstanced  can  speak  at  least  now  and  then  a  word  for  Christ. 
Mother,  with  those  babes  around  you,  you  have  a  field  of  labour  among  them. 
You  whose  occupations  engross  your  time,  I  cannot  imagine  that  God  has  given 
even  to  you  a  light  which  is  quite  covered  with  a  bushel.    They  who  give  thousands 
to  the  cause  of  Christ  do  well,  but  they  do  no  better  than  the  widow  who,  having 
two  mites,  gave  all.     2.  But  while  we  make  room  for  comfort  for  those  who  abide 
by  the  stufiE,  we  do  not  desire  to  console  the  idle  ;  we  are — (1)  To  make  known  the 


ORAP.  xn.]  ROMANS,  531 

gospel  of  Christ  It  is  a  sad  proof  of  oar  want  of  zeal  that  London  is  still  so  grossly 
ignorant  of  this.  We  are  not  responsible  that  the  EUndoo  or  African  worships  his 
idols,  bat  we  are  responsible  that  he  has  not  heard  of  the  atoning  sacrifice  of 
Christ.  (2)  Throagh  this  we  shoald  aim  at  the  conversion  of  sinners.  We  are 
not  to  be  self-complacently  content  with  having  merely  spoken  the  truth,  we  are 
to  look  for  signs  following.  (3)  The  reclamation  of  backsliders.  (4)  The  edification 
of  one  another.  IIL  The  commendation  which  is  dce  to  this  service.  To  serve 
God  is — 1.  The  nataral  element  of  godliness.  Heavenly  spirits  enjoy  unbroken  rest, 
but  they  find  their  rest  in  serving  Qod  day  and  night.  Surely  it  is  as  much  the 
•lement  of  a  Christian  to  do  good  as  for  a  fish  to  swim,  or  a  bird  to  fiy,  or  a  tree 
to  yield  her  fruits.  2.  The  highest  honour.  How  men  pride  themselves  on  being 
attached  to  the  train  of  great  men  I  Bat  what  must  it  be  to  have  God  for  your 
Master.  S.  The  highest  pleasure.  The  happiest  members  of  any  church  are  the 
most  diligent.  4.  Soul  education.  No  man  grows  to  be  a  perfect  Christian  by 
lying  on  the  bed  of  sloth.  Our  manhood  is  developed  by  exercise.  IV.  The  pbssemt 
KBED  07  this  sebviok.  There  is  need  enough  of  it  in  this  city.  The  ignorance, 
poverty,  misery,  iniquity  of  London  reek  before  God,  and  yet  we  gather  in  a  little 
quiet  place  by  ourselves,  and  we  use  the  rosewater  of  self-complacency,  and  think 
^t  everything  goes  well     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  12.  Rejoicing  In  bop«. — I.  What  is  it  to  bejoiob  ?  1.  Negatively — (1)  Not 
to  have  the  senses  pleased.  (2)  Nor  does  it  consist  in  the  imagination.  2.  Posi- 
tively ;  it  consists  in — (1)  The  removal  of  sorrow  from  the  heart  (Psa.  xlii.  6).  (2) 
The  soul's  content  and  satisfaction  (Luke  i.  47).  II.  What  is  hope?  It  consists 
in — (1)  The  belief  of  good  things  to  be  had  (1  Pet.  i.  13).  (2)  The  expectation  of 
them  (Psa.  xlii.  5).  (3)  Making  use  of  all  lawful  means  for  obtaining  them  ^Heb. 
z.  23-25 ;  Esther  iv.  14).  HI.  What  is  it  to  bejoiob  ra  hope  ?  To  rest  satisfied 
with  the  expectation  of  the  good  things  God  has  promised.  1.  An  Interest  in 
Christ  (1  Pet.  i.  8 ;  Rom.  viii.  32-34).  2.  The  pardon  of  sin  (Psa.  xxxii.  6).  8. 
The  love  of  God  (chap.  v.  1).  4.  The  working  together  of  all  things  for  our  good 
(chap.  viii.  28).  6.  Continual  supplies  of  grace  (2  Cor.  xii.  9).  6.  A  joyful  resur- 
rection (1  Cor.  XV.  19,  20).  7.  The  enjoyment  of  God  for  ever  (Psa.  xlii.  2).  IV. 
What  obottnds  have  we  to  hope  fob  these  thinos,  so  as  to  bejoice  m  it  ?  1.  The 
faithfulness  of  God  (Tit.  i.  2).  2.  His  power  (Matt.  xix.  26).  3.  The  merits  of 
Christ  (2  Cor.  i.  20).  Conlusion  :  Rejoice  in  hope.  1.  Otherwise  you  dishonour 
God  by  mistrusting  His  promises  (chap.  iv.  20).  2.  You  dishonour  religion  by 
accusing  it  of  uncertainties.  3.  Ton  deprive  yourself  of  happiness.  4.  The  more 
joyful  in  hope,  the  more  active  in  duty.  5.  Rejoice  in  hope  now ;  in  sight  here- 
after. {Bp.  Beveridge.)  Rejoicing  in  hope : — I.  The  bouece  of  this  jot — Hope. 
1.  Glorious.  2.  Certain.  11.  Its  natube.  1.  Sweet.  2.  Solid.  3.  Spiritual.  4. 
Purifying.  Ill,  Its  expeession.  1.  Lively.  2.  Practical.  3.  Constant.  IV.  Its 
IMPORTANCE  to — 1.  Ourselves.  2.  The  Church.  3.  The  world.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
Rejoicing  in  hope  : — 1.  Hope  is  an  instinct  of  the  soul.  "  Thou  didst  make  me  to 
hope  when  I  was  upon  my  mother's  breasts."  As  an  instinct — (1)  It  implies  the 
existence  of  a  prospective  good,  and  the  possibility  of  coming  into  its  possession. 
(2)  It  is  one  of  the  strongest  and  most  operative  forces  in  our  nature.  Hesiod  tells 
us,  that  the  miseries  of  all  mankind  were  included  in  a  great  box,  and  that  Pandora's 
husband  took  oft  the  lid,  by  which  means  all  of  them  came  abroad,  but  hope 
remained  still  at  the  bottom,  2.  The  real  worth  of  this  instinct  to  man  depends 
upon  the  direction  it  takes.  (1)  "  Wrongly  directed,  it  is  a  fawning  traitor  of  the 
mind."  The  goodly  scenes  it  spreads  out  to  the  soul  turn  out  to  be  a  mere  mirage. 
False  hopes  are  like  meteors  that  brighten  the  skies  of  the  soul  for  a  moment,  only 
to  leave  the  gloom  more  intense.  They  are  mere  blossoms  on  fruitless  trees, 
pleasing  the  eye  for  the  hour,  then  fading  away  and  rotting  into  dust.  Few  things 
are  more  distressing  than  the  loss  of  hope.  Longfellow  compares  it  to  the  "  setting 
of  the  sun."  Solomon  speaks  of  it  as  "  the  giving  up  of  the  ghost."  (2)  Rightly 
directed,  is  among  the  chiefest  of  our  blessings.  It  is  that  which  gives  sunshine  to 
the  sky,  beauty  to  the  landscape,  and  music  to  life.  Such  is  the  hope  of  which  the 
apostle  here  speaks.  Two  things  are  essential  to  a  "  joyous  hope."  I.  A  right 
OBJECT.  1.  It  must  not— (1)  Be  selfish.  So  constituted  Is  the  soul,  that  the  hope 
that  is  directed  exclusively  to  its  own  happiness  never  satisfies.  Down  deep  in  the 
soul  is  the  feeling  that  man  has  to  live  for  something  greater  and  nobler  than  him- 
self. (2)  Be  incapable  of  engaging  all  our  powers.  (8)  Less  lasting  than  its  own 
existence.    Man  can  never  be  fully  happy  whose  hope  is  directed  to  the  transient 


622  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  za» 

and  the  dying.  2.  That  which  will  give  a  joyoas  hope  is  moral  goodness — assimi- 
lation to  the  image  of  God.  II.  A  csbtain  foundation.  Unless  a  man  has  good 
reason  to  believe  that  the  object  he  hopes  for  is  to  be  gained,  he  cannot  rejoice  in 
his  hope.  Three  reasons  for  believing  that  a  soul,  guilty  and  depraved,  can  be 
brought  into  possession  of  true  goodness,  and  restored  to  the  very  image  of  Gk)d, 
are — 1.  The  provisions  of  the  gospel.  The  Ufe  and  death  of  Christ,  the  agency  of 
the  Spirit,  and  the  disciplinary  influences  of  human  life  are  all  divinely  appointed 
methods  to  re-create  the  soul  and  to  fashion  it  into  the  very  image  of  God.  2.  The 
biographies  of  sainted  men.  History  abounds  with  examples  of  bad  men  becoming 
good.  3.  The  inward  consciousness  of  moral  progress.  The  man  who  has  got  this 
hope  is  conscious  that  he  has  made  some  progress,  and  that  the  steps  he  has  taken 
have  been  the  most  difficult.  His  past  efforts  are  aids  and  pledges  to  future  success. 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Patient  In  tribulation. — I.  What  are  tribulations?  What- 
soever— 1.  Is  hurtful  tons.  2.  Yexeth  us.  H.  What  is  it  to  be  patient?  1. 
Not  to  murmur  agaiust  God  (Exod.  xvi.  3).  2.  Nor  despair  of  deliverance  (Psa. 
xlii.  5).  3.  Nor  use  unlawful  means  to  get  out  of  them.  4.  To  rest  satisfied  with 
them  (1  Sam.  iii.  18).  6.  To  be  thankful  for  them  (Job  L  21,  22  ;  1  Thess.  v.  18). 
TTT-  Why  abe  we  to  be  patient  ?  1.  They  come  from  God  (2  Sam.  xvi.  10-12 ; 
Psa.  xxxix.  2).  2.  Are  no  more  (Lam.  iii.  39),  but  less  than  we  deserve  (Ezra  ix.  13). 

3.  Impatience  does  not  heighten  them.  4.  By  patience  we  change  them  into 
mercies  as  in  Job,  Joseph,  David.  Conclusion :  Be  patient.  1.  No  afflictions  but 
others  have  borne  (1  Pet.  iv.  12,  v.  9).  2.  Christ  has  undergone  more  than  we  can 
(chap.  viii.  29  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  23,  iv.  13).    3.  God  knows  how  to  deUver  us  (2  Pet.  ii.  9). 

4.  By  patience  you  make  a  virtue  of  necessity.  5.  WiU  do  you  much  good  by  them 
(Heb.  xii.  6-8).  {Bp.  Beveridge.)  Patient  in  tribulation  :—L  Tribulation  is 
UNAVOIDABLE  IN  THIS  LIFE.  1.  Ordained  of  God.  2.  For  wise  purposes.  II.  Should 
be  BORNE  with  PATtENCB.  1.  Not  indifference.  2.  But  in  silence.  3.  Without 
repining.  4.  With  resignation.  HI.  The  bbasons.  1.  God  is  kind.  2.  Life  is 
but  a  probationary  state.  3.  Consolations  are  provided.  3.  The  results  are 
glorious.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Patient  in  tribulation : — Some  have  floated  on  the 
sea,  and  trouble  carried  them  on  its  surface,  as  the  sea  carries  cork.  Some  have 
sunk  at  once  to  the  bottom,  as  foundering  ships  sink.  Some  have  run  away  from 
their  own  thoughts.  Some  have  coiled  themselves  up  in  stoical  indifference.  Some 
have  braved  the  trouble,  and  defied  it.  Some  have  carried  it,  as  a  tree  does  a  wound, 
until  by  new  wood  it  can  overgrow  and  cover  the  old  gash.  A  few  in  every  age 
have  known  the  divine  art  of  carrying  sorrow  and  trouble  as  wonderful  food,  as  an 
invisible  garment  that  clothed  them  with  strength,  as  a  mysterious  joy,  so  that  they 
suffered  gladly,  rejoicing  in  infirmity,  and,  holding  up  their  heads  with  sacred 
presages  whenever  times  were  dark  and  troublous,  let  the  light  depart  from  their 
eyes,  that  they  might  by  faith  see  nobler  things  than  sight  could  reach.  (H.  W. 
Beecher.)  Patient  in  tribulation : — All  birds  when  they  are  first  caught  and  put 
into  the  cage  fly  wildly  up  and  down,  and  beat  themselves  against  their  little 
prisons ;  but  within  two  or  three  days  sit  quietly  on  their  perch,  and  sing  their  usual 
notes  with  their  usual  melody.  So  it  fares  with  us,  when  God  first  brings  us  into 
a  strait ;  we  wildly  flutter  up  and  down,  and  beat  and  tire  ourselves  with  striving 
to  get  free  ;  but  at  length  custom  and  experience  will  make  our  narrow  confinement 
spacious  enough  for  us ;  and  though  our  feet  should  be  in  the  stocks,  yet  shall  we, 
with  the  apostles,  be  able  even  there  to  sing  praises  to  our  God.  {^Bp.  HopUnt.) 
Continuing  instant  In  prayer. — I.  What  is  prayer  ?  1.  The  hearty  desire.  (1)  Mental 
(1  Sam.  i.  13  ;  Eph.  v.  10).  (2)  Oral  (John  xvii.  5).  2.  Of  necessary  things.  (1) 
Spiritual,  for  the  life  to  come,  (a)  Sense  of  sin  (Luke  xiii.  3).  (6)  Faith  in  Christ 
(Luke  xvii.  5).  (c)  Pardon  of  former  transgressions  (Psa.  Ii.  9).  (d)  Subduing 
present  corruptions  (Psa.  xix.  12,  13,  cxix.  133).  («)  The  continual  influences  of 
His  grace  and  spirit  (Psa.  Ii.  10 ;  Luke  xi.  13).  (2)  Temporal,  for  this  life  (1  Tim. 
iv.  8;  Prov.  xxx.  8).  3.  From  God.  (1)  God  aJone  is  to  be  worshipped  (Matt.  iv.  10). 
(2)  God  alone  understands  our  prayers  (Isa.  Ixiii.  16).  (3)  He  alone  can  answer 
them  (Psa.  Ixv.  2).  (4)  He  commands  us  to  call  to  Him  (Jer.  xxxiii.  3 ;  Psa.  L  15). 
(5)  Christ  directs  U8  to  pray  to  Him  (Matt.  vi.  9).  See  the  error  of  Papists,  who 
pray  to  the  Cross.  To  the  Virgin  Mary,  <fcc.  St.  Roche  for  the  plague.  St.  Apol- 
lonia  for  the  toothache.  St.  Eulogius  for  horses.  St.  Anthony  for  hogs.  St.  Gallus 
for  geese,  &o.  U.  Why  should  we  pray  ?  1,  God  hath  commanded  it  (1  Thess. 
V.  17).  2.  Encouraged  us  with  a  promise  (Psa.  L  15 ;  Matt.  vfL  7).  3.  Made  it 
the  condition  of  aJl  promises  (Ezek.  xxxvL  37).  4.  It  is  part  of  Divine  worship. 
6.  Hereby  we  give  glory  to  God.    (1)  Of  omnipresence  (Psa.  cxxzix.  2,  3).    (2)  Of 


CBAT.  xxu]  ROMANS.  68B 

omniscience  (Psa.  oxxxix.  7).  (3)  Of  omnipotence.  6.  All  blessings  are  sanctified 
by  it  (1  Tim.  iv.  6).  7.  Only  by  this  we  acknowledge  oar  dependence  upon  Him. 
lifl.  How  SHOuiiD  WB  PRAY.  1.  Before  prayer,  consider  (Psa.  x.  17).  (1)  Who  is  it 
yon  go  to  pray  to  (Exod.  xxxiv.  6).  (2)  What  you  have  to  pray  for  (1  John  v.  14^. 
(3)  How  unworthy  yon  are  to  ask  or  receive  (Gen.  xxxii.  10).  (4)  That  Christ  is 
interceding  for  you  (Eph.  iii.  12 ;  Heb.  vii.  25).  2.  In  prayer.  (1)  Pray  with  that 
humility,  reverence,  and  submission,  as  becomes  a  sinful  creature  (Qen.  xviii.  27 ; 
Luke  xviii.  13;  Ezra  ix.  6).  (2)  Utter  nothing  rashly  before  Him,  nor  mingle 
stories  with  petitions  (Eccles.  v.  1,  2).  (3)  Let  every  petition  proceed  from  the 
heart  (John  iv.  24).  (4)  Pray  only  in  the  name  of  Christ  (John  xiv.  13,  14,  xvi. 
23;  Heb.  vii.  25).  (5)  Let  your  affections  and  apprehensions  go  together  (1  Cor. 
xiv.  15).  (6)  Pray  in  faith  (Mark  xi.  24  ;  James  i.  6).  (7)  Without  wrath  (1  Tim. 
ii.  8 ;  Matt.  vi.  14,  15).  (8)  For  others  as  well  as  for  yourselves  (1  Tim.  ii.  1 ; 
Eph.  vi.  18).  (9)  To  the  right  end  (James  iv.  3).  (10)  Add  praise  to  prayers 
(Phil.  iv.  6 ;  1  Tim.  iL  1).  (a)  Praising  God  is  all  that  He  expects  for  His  mercies. 
(6)  It  is  the  best  sacrifice  we  can  offer  (Psa.  Ixix.  30,  31).  (c)  It  is  the  work  of 
Heaven  (Kev.  vii.  9,  10,  xix.  1).  3.  After  prayer.  (1)  Consider  what  you  have 
prayed  for.  (2)  Expect  it  (Psa.  v.  3).  (3)  Use  means  for  obtaining  it.  IV.  When 
SHOULD  WE  PRAY  ?   Or  how  continue  instant  in  prayer  (Eph.  vi.  18 ;  1  Thess.  v.  17). 

1.  Be  always  in  a  praying  frame.  2.  Take  all  occasions  of  praying.  3.  Never 
faint  in  prayer  (Luke  xviii.  1 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  8,  9).  4.  Make  prayer  your  daily  exer- 
cise. (1)  We  must  serve  God  daily  (Luke  L  75).  (2)  The  sacrifices  of  the  Old 
Testament  were  daily  (Numb,  xxviii.  3  ;  Acts  iiu  1).  (3)  Christ  directs  us  to  ask 
our  daily  bread  (Matt.  vi.  11,  33).  (4)  The  saints  in  all  ages  prayed  daily  (Psa.  Iv. 
17,  oxix.  164 ;  Dan.  vL  10 ;  1  Kings  viii.  48 ;  Luke  ii.  37).  (5)  The  heathen  and 
the  Turks  do  it.  (6)  We  need  daily  mercies.  (7)  We  receive  them.  5.  Objection. 
I  have  oft  prayed,  but  am  never  heard  (Job  xxi.  15).  (1)  However,  we  are  bound  to 
serve  God.  (2)  If  we  get  no  good  it  is  our  own  fault,  (a)  As  to  the  matter  (1  John 
V.  14).  (6)  Means  (James  L  6).  (c)  End,  of  prayer  (James  iv.  3).  (3)  Perhaps  you 
never  expected  it.  (4)  Or  have  not  used  the  right  means  for  it.  (5)  You  have  not 
prayed  long  enough  (2  Cor.  xii.  9 ;  Luke  xviii  1).  (6)  Though  you  have  not 
received  that  required,  you  have  other  mercies  (2  Cor.  xii.  9).  (7)  You  may  be 
answered,  and  not  know  it.  Conclusion :  Continue  instant  in  prayer.  1.  Other- 
wise ye  live  in  continued  sin.  2.  Prayer  is  the  most  honourable  work.  3.  The 
most  pleasant  (Psa.  Ixxxiv.  10).  4.  The  only  way  of  getting  real  mercies  (James  i.  5). 
5.  Bight  praying  is  a  sign  of  a  true  convert  (Acts  ix.  11).  (Bp.  Beveridge.) 
Instant  in  prayer : — Prayer  is  the  natural  duty  of  religion.  Its  observance  is  as 
natural  as  conversation  between  men.  The  Scriptures  urge  a  constant  and  careful 
performance,  then,  not  only  as  a  duty,  but  a  privilege.  The  subject  suggests  an 
inquiry  as  to — I.  The  matter  and  subject  op  pbayer.  1.  Generally,  it  is  to  petition 
God  to  bestow  upon  us  all  that  is  good,  and  to  deliver  us  from  all  that  is  evil :  the 
puraoit  of  virtue,  the  direction  of  our  affairs,  immortal  happiness.  2.  Particularly, 
our  own  individual  requirements,  according  to  our  particular  weaknesses  and  diffi- 
culties, should  form  the  groundwork  of  our  petitions.  II.  The  specific  directions 
OF  the  apostle — "  Continuing  instant."  We  are  not  to  make  it  a  mere  formal 
duty.  It  is  to  be  the  constant  effort  and  breath  of  our  very  existence.  We  are 
hereby  taught — 1.  That  worldly  duties  are  not  inconsistent  with  heavenly  thoughts. 

2.  That  God  may  be  worshipped  at  all  times.  3.  That  religion  is  not  a  thing  to  be 
pat  off  till  we  have  leisure  and  opportunity.  III.  The  contrast  which  this  direc- 
tion AFTORDS  TO  ALL  FALSE  SYSTEMS.  We  are  taught  that  God  is  worshipped  by  the 
mind  and  thoughts,  and  not  by  external  observances.  How  different  to  heathen 
worship  1  Even  the  Jews'  religion  was,  to  a  great  extent,  formal.  (J.  Jortin,  D.D.) 
Instant  in  prayer : — When  a  pump  is  frequently  used,  but  little  pains  are  necessary 
to  have  water ;  the  water  pours  out  at  the  first  stroke,  because  it  is  high.  But  if 
the  pump  has  not  been  used  for  a  long  while,  the  water  gets  low,  and  when  yoa  want 
it  yoa  must  pump  a  long  while,  and  the  water  comes  only  after  great  efforts.  It  is 
so  with  prayer ;  if  we  are  instant  in  prayer,  every  little  circumstance  awakens  the 
disposition  to  pray,  and  desires  and  words  are  always  ready.  But  if  we  neglect 
prayer  it  is  difficult  for  us  to  pray ;  for  the  water  in  the  well  gets  low.  {Felix  Neff.) 
Instant  in  prayer  doesn't  exactly  mean  that  we  should  be  praying  every  instant, 
though  we  can  be  doing  that  also,  but  not  if  we  are  to  think  a  prayer,  or  speak  a 
prayer,  for  how  could  we  then  be  getting  on  with  other  things  that  need  all  our 
attention  at  the  time  ?  Bat  there  are  prayers  that  are  not  spoken  or  even  thought 
of.    You  have  seen  the  mariner's  compass.    When  the  ship  is  tossing  about,  the 


524  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  ioair.  zn. 

oompasB  trembles  and  swings  to  and  fro,  bnt  it  always  comes  back  and  points  straight 
to  the  north.  That's  where  it  wants  to  go  to ;  every  time  it  points  to  the  north  it 
seems  to  pray,  "  Let  me  go  there  1  "  Now  why  is  this  needle  so  constant  aboat  this 
wish  to  go  northward?  Because  it  has  got  in  it  a  spirit  that  belongs  to  the  distant 
Pole,  and  so,  even  while  it  is  busy  in  telling  the  sailors  how  to  steer,  it  is  itself 
always  turning  to  the  north,  because  its  life  lies  that  way.  So  we  may  be  very  busy 
about  other  things,  and  need  to  fix  all  our  attention  npon  them ;  but  if  oar  heart  is 
right  with  Jesus,  we  shall  be  always  wanting  to  do  things  for  His  sake,  and  do  tbem 
right ;  and  that  big  wish  that  is  always  in  the  heart  is  a  continual  prayer.  {J.  R, 
Howat.)  Instancy  in  prayer : — I.  The  impost  of  thb  injunotiom.  This  is  indi- 
cated by  the  employment  of  the  word  in  other  Scriptures  {e.g..  Acts  i.  14,  ii.  42; 
Bom.  xiii.  6 ;  Acts  viii.  13,  x.  7  ;  Eph.  vi.  18).  These  show  the  meaning  of  the 
word ;  steadfastness  or  perseverance  as  a  habit.  In  this  sense  the  passage  has 
many  parallels  (Eph.  vi.  18  ;  Philip,  iv.  6 ;  1  Thess.  v.  17).  In  the  widest  sense, 
therefore,  the  injunction  lays  upon  us — 1.  The  habitual  maintenance  of  a  prayerful 
spirit.  2.  The  embracing  of  opportunities  for  prayer.  8.  The  improvement  of 
occasions  of  prayer.  You  will  find  these  everywhere,  in  the  commonest  experi- 
ences of  every  day.  4.  Watchfulness.  II.  Considebations  bt  which  the  injunc- 
tion MAT  BE  COMMENDED  AND  ENFOBCED.  1.  What  a  mighty  powOT  of  restraint  would 
such  an  *•  instancy  of  prayer  "  exercise !  2.  What  a  spiritual  elevation !  3.  What 
peace  amid  conflicting  cares  1  4.  What  strength !  (J.  M.  Jarvie.)  Prayer, 
daily  : — As  those  who  keep  clocks  wind  them  up  daily,  lest  the  weights  should  ran 
down,  and  the  clock  stop ;  so  we  must  set  apart  some  portion  of  every  day  for 
meditation  and  prayer,  lest  our  hearts  should  so  far  descend,  through  the  weight  of 
the  cares  of  this  world,  that  our  course  in  godliness  should  be  hindered  and  stopped. 
(Cawdra^.)  Prayer  hindered,  not  defeated : — For  so  I  have  seen  a  lark  rising  from 
his  bed  of  grass  and  soaring  upwards,  singing  as  he  rises,  and  hopes  to  get  to  heaven, 
and  climb  above  the  clouds ;  but  the  poor  bird  was  beaten  back  with  the  loud  sighings 
of  an  eastern  wind,  and  his  motion  made  irregular  and  inconstant,  descending 
more  at  every  breath  of  the  tempest  than  it  could  recover  by  the  liberation  and  fre- 
quent weighing  of  his  wings,  till  the  little  creature  was  forced  to  sit  down  and  pant, 
and  stay  till  the  storm  was  over ;  and  then  it  made  a  prosperous  flight,  and  did  risa 
and  sing,  as  if  it  had  learned  music  and  motion  from  an  angel,  as  he  passed  some- 
times through  the  air  about  his  ministries  here  below.  So  is  the  prayer  of  a  good 
man.  {Jeremy  Taylor.)  Prayer,  nightly : — It  is  said  of  that  good  old  man,  John 
Quincy  Adams,  that  he  never  went  to  his  rest  at  night  until  he  had  repeated  the 
simple  prayer  learned  in  childhood — the  familiar  "  Now,  I  lay  me  down  to  sleep." 
Perpetual  prayer : — L  What  is  hebe  bequibed  ?  1.  Continuance  in  personal  and 
secret  prayer  primarily.  In  these  times  Christ's  saying  is  reversed.  Men  seem  to  say, 
If  you  pray  openly,  the  Father  wiU  reward  you  in  secret.  And  if  a  man  have  a  taste 
for  prayer  meetings  and  none  for  private  prayer,  he  should  give  up  the  prayer 
meetings  until  he  recover  the  taste  for  secret  prayer.  2.  Paul  speaks  of  continu- 
ance ia  the  sense  of  importunity  and  perseverance.  "Instant,"  means  earnest, 
pressing,  and  urgent.  The  precept  implies  the  danger  of  non-continuance — of  a 
lack  of  earnestness  and  urgency.  Now  this  danger  arises  from — (1)  Scepticism 
about  prayer.  Men  are  often  tempted  to  ask,  "  What  profit  shall  we  have  if  we  pray 
to  Him  ?  "  Then  we  may  be  beset  by  unbelief  as  to  God's  hearing  our  prayers  in 
particular.  (2)  Indifference.  Men  do  not  care  to  pra^.  There  is  no  very  pressing 
want ;  no  very  urgent  danger.  The  man  is  looking  simply  on  the  surface  of  his 
life.  n.  Why  is  this  bequibement  made  ?  Habitual  prayer — 1.  Keeps  in  habitual 
exercise  the  first  principles  of  our  religious  life,  <fec.  You  cannot  pray  without 
bringing  into  exercise  faith,  trust,  hope,  and  love.  Now  these  principles  are  not 
intended  to  be  within  us  like  gems  in  a  casket,  but  are  like  muscles.  Work  them, 
and  they  will  be  strengthened  ;  give  them  nothing  to  do,  and  they  will  shrink,  and 
when  you  want  them,  they  will  not  be  in  a  state  to  serve  you.  2.  Keeps  a  man  face 
to  face  with  God.  This  is  the  right  position.  We  never  see  any  matter  as  we 
ought  to  see  it,  except  we  look  God  in  the  face  about  it.  3.  Recognises  the  two 
great  blessings  of  the  Christian  economy.  And  what  are  these  ?  (1)  The  mediation 
of  Christ.  (2)  The  ministration  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  4.  Is  the  constant  use  of  the 
highest  agency  which  Christians  can  employ.  What  has  prayer  done  ?  Conquered 
the  elements,  healed  the  diseased,  restored  life,  &c.  Prayer  moves  the  hand  which 
moves  the  world.  5.  Is  second  only  to  ceaseless  praise  in  the  loftiness  and  in  the 
sacredness  of  the  habit.  6.  Is  in  harmony  with  God's  present  method  of  govern- 
ment.   The  basis  of  that  government  is  atonement,  i.e.,  an  embodied  supplication 


esAF.  zn.]  ROMANS.  S25 

for  mercy.  {S.Martin.)  Prayer  unceasing : — Fletcher's  whole  life  was  a  life  of 
prayer ;  and  bo  intensely  was  his  mind  fixed  apon  God  that  he  sometimes  said,  "I 
would  not  move  from  my  seat  withoat  lifting  up  my  heart  to  God."  "Wherever 
we  met,"  says  Mr.  Vaughan,  •'  if  we  were  alone,  his  first  salute  was,  •  Do  I  meet  you 
praying  ? '  And  if  we  were  talking  on  any  point  of  divinity,  when  we  were  in  the 
depth  of  our  discourse  he  would  often  break  off  abruptly  and  ask,  •  Where  are  our 
hearts  now  t '  If  ever  the  misconduct  of  an  absent  person  was  mentioned,  his 
usual  reply  was,  'Let  us  pray  for  him.'"  Constant,  instant,  expectant: — I. 
Instant.  The  Greek  word  means  "  always  applying  strength  in  prayer  " ;  "  blessed 
is  the  man  whose  strength  is  in  Thee."  Brooks  saith  that  the  word  is  a  metaphor 
taken  from  hunting  dogs,  which  will  never  give  up  the  game  till  they  have  got  it. 
Prevalent  prayer  is  frequently  spoken  of  in  Scripture  as  an  agony — "  striving 
together  with  me  in  your  prayers,"  and  as  "  wrestling."  We  must  go  with  our 
whole  soul  to  God  or  He  will  not  accept  us.  We  are  to  pray  as  if  all  depended  upon 
our  praying.  How  are  we  to  attain  to  this  urgency  ?  1.  Let  us  study  the  value  of 
the  mercy  which  we  are  seeking  at  God's  hand.  Whatever  it  is  that  thou  art  asking 
for,  it  is  no  trifie.  If  it  be  a  doubtful  tbiug,  lay  it  aside :  but  if  thou  art  certain 
that  the  blessing  sought  is  good  and  necessary,  examine  it  as  a  goldsmith  inspects 
a  jewel  when  he  wishes  to  estimate  its  worth.  2.  Meditate  on  thy  necessities.  See 
thy  soul's  poverty  and  undeservingness.  Look  at  what  will  happen  to  thee  unless 
this  blessing  come.  3.  Endeavour  to  get  a  distinct  consciousness  of  the  fact  that 
God  must  give  thee  this  blessing,  or  thou  wilt  never  have  it.  4.  Eagerly  desire  the 
good  thing.  Stand  not  before  God  as  one  who  will  be  content  whether  or  no. 
There  are  times  when  you  must  say,  "  I  will  not  let  Thee  go,  except  Thou  bless  me." 
6.  Now  comes  the  tug  of  war  ;  you  are  to  plead  with  all  your  might.  Gather  up  all 
your  faculties  to  see  whether  this  thing  be  a  matter  of  promise  or  no.  When  you 
have  found  the  promise,  plead  it  by  saying,  "  Lord,  do  as  Thou  hast  said."  If  you 
do  not  seem  to  prevail  with  one  promise  seek  out  another  and  another,  and  then 
plead,  "  For  Thy  name's  sake,  for  Thy  truth's  sake,  for  Thy  covenant's  sake  "  ;  and 
then  come  in  with  the  greatest  plea  of  all,  "  For  Jesus'  sake."  6.  Still  there  is  one 
thing  more  wanted,  and  that  is  strong  faith.  You  cannot  be  instant  in  prayer,  nay, 
Tou  cannot  offer  an  acceptable  prayer  at  all  except  as  you  believe  in  tbe  prayer- 
hearing  God.  II.  Constant — "  continuing."  Go  back  to  the  hunting  dog.  We 
saw  him  rushing  like  the  wind  after  his  game,  but  this  will  not  be  enough  if  it  only 
lasts  for  a  little ;  he  must  continue  running  if  he  is  to  catch  his  prey.  It  is  a  sign 
of  failure  in  the  iron  trade  when  the  furnaces  are  blown  out;  when  business 
flourishes  the  fire  blazes  both  day  and  night ;  and  so  will  it  be  with  prayer  when 
the  soul  is  in  a  fiourishing  state.  If  prayer  be  tbe  Christian's  vital  breath,  how  can 
he  leave  off  praying  ?  "  That  is  difficult,"  says  one.  Who  said  it  was  not  7  All 
the  processes  of  the  Christian  life  are  difficult ;  but "  the  Spirit  helpeth  our  infirmi- 
ties." Prayer  must  be  continuous,  because — 1.  It  is  so  singularly  mixed  up  with 
the  whole  gospel  dispensation.  2.  It  is  connected  with  every  covenant  blessing.  3.  It 
has  been  connected  with  every  living  spiritual  experience  you  have  ever  had.  4.  There 
is  no  time  when  we  can  afford  to  slacken  prayer.  6.  Such  remarkable  gifts  are 
vouchsafed  to  importunity.  6.  The  continuance  of  our  instancy  in  prayer  is  the 
test  of  the  reality  of  our  devotion.  Earnest  men  of  business  cannot  afford  to  open 
the  shop  and  do  a  little  occasional  trade,  and  then  put  up  a  notice,  "  The  proprietor 
of  this  shop  has  gone  out  for  an  excursion,  and  will  resume  his  business  when  he 
feels  inclined  to."  Beware  of  spasms  of  prayer.  III.  Expectant.  It  is  not  in  the 
text  verbally,  but  it  must  be  there  really,  because  there  will  be  no  such  thing  as 
instancy  or  constancy  unless  there  is  an  expectation  that  God  can  and  will  give  that 
which  we  seek.  Go  back  to  our  dog  again  :  he  would  not  run  at  so  great  a  rate  if 
he  did  not  expect  to  seize  his  prey.  If  some  people  looked  out  for  answers  to  prayer 
they  might  soon  have  them,  for  their  prayers  would  be  answered  by  themselves.  I 
■was  reminded  of  that  by  a  little  boy  whose  father  prayed  in  the  family  that  the 
Lord  would  visit  the  poor  and  relieve  their  wants.  When  he  had  finished,  his  little 
boy  said,  "  Father,  I  wish  I  had  your  money."  "  Why  so  ?  "  "  Because,"  he  said, 
"  I  would  answer  your  prayers  for  you."  I  like  better  still  that  story  of  the  good 
man  at  the  prayer-meeting,  who  reading  the  list  of  prayers  found  one  for  a  poor 
widow  that  her  distress  might  be  relieved,  so  he  began  to  read  it,  but  stopped  and 
added,  "  We  won't  trouble  the  Lord  with  that,  I  will  attend  to  that  myself."  The 
Lord  might  well  say  to  us,  "  Thou  sayest,  Thy  kingdom  come ;  arise  and  help  to 
apake  My  kingdom  come  !  "  I  shall  close  by  recommending  to  all  of  you  one  simple 
hoft  very  comprehensive  prayer.     It  was  offered  by  a  poor  man  in  Fife,  and  it  wai 


(20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [oHAf.  zn. 

copied  OQt  by  the  Duchess  of  Gordon,  and  found  among  her  papers  when  she  died. 
"  0  Lord,  give  me  grace  to  feel  mj  need  of  Thy  grace  1  Give  me  grace  to  ask  for 
Thy  grace  1  Give  me  grace  to  receive  Thy  grace  1  And  when  in  Thy  grace  Thoa 
hast  given  me  grace,  give  me  grace  to  use  Thy  grace !  "    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  13,  14.  Dlstrlbutlug  to  the  necessity  of  sainta — I.  Who  abs  ihb 
BAINTS  ?  1.  All  that  truly  believe  in  Christ  are  sanctified.  2.  All  that  profess  to 
believe  in  Him  (Philip,  i.  1 ;  Col.  i.  2 ;  Bev.  vii.  9).  XL  Whit  itecessities  ?  That 
they  need  our — 1.  Advice.  2.  Prayers  (1  Tim.  ii.  1).  8.  Estates.  III.  What  is 
IT  10  DiSTBiBDTB?  1.  To  givc  them  freely.  2.  To  communicate  with,  because 
Christians  (1  Cor.  xii.  26,  27).  IV.  Who  ought  to  give?  1.  Every  one  is  to  be 
willing  to  give  (2  Cor.  viii.  13).  2.  They  only  are  actually  to  give,  who  have  any- 
thing of  their  own  to  give  (1  John  ill.  17  ;  Isa.  Izi.  8).  3.  Hence  men  of  a  lower 
estate  are  bound  to  give  too  something  (Eph.  iv.  28).  V.  How  uuch  is  evebt  one 
SOUND  TO  GIVE  7  1.  In  general,  bountifully  (2  Cor.  ix.  6).  2.  Proportionably  to 
our  estates  (1  Cor.  zvi.  2).  3.  More  than  we  spend  on  our  lusts.  4.  As  much  as  is 
not  necessary  for  ourselves  (2  Cor.  viii.  14).  5.  Sometimes  what  is  necessary 
(2  Cor.  viii.  3).  VI.  How  ought  wb  to  give?  1.  Out  of  a  sense  of  duty,  not  for 
vainglory  (Matt.  vi.  1,  2).  2.  Out  of  love  and  pity  to  our  brother  (1  Cor.  xiii.  3). 
3.  Willingly  (2  Cor.  viii.  10,  12).  4.  Cheerfully  (Rom.  xii.  8;  2  Cor.  ix.  7). 
6.  Readily,  without  delay  (Prov.  iii.  27,  28).  6.  Thankfully  (1  Chron.  xxix.  13, 
14).  7.  For  a  right  end.  (1)  Not  for  praise  from  men.  (2)  Much  less  salvation 
from  God.  (3)  But  for  His  honour  (Prov.  iii.  9).  Conclusion — Repent  of  your 
neglect  of  this  duty.  Perform  it  for  the  future.  Consider — 1.  The  law  of  God 
commands  it.  2.  The  law  of  nature  (Matt.  vii.  12).  3.  God  hath  made  it  our 
brother's  due,  and  so  we  rob  him  unless  we  give.  4.  A  blessing  is  connected  with 
it  (Acts  XX.  35).  5.  Hereby  we  imitate  God  (Matt.  v.  48 ;  Lake  vi.  36).  6.  Unless 
we  give  we  have  no  love  for  God  (1  John  iii.  17).  7.  Nor  true  religion  (James  i. 
27).  8.  What  we  have  is  not  our  own,  but  God's,  to  be  laid  out  according  to  His 
will  (Luke  xvl.  12 ;  1  Chron.  xxix.  11).  9.  Yet  Himself  will  repay  us  what  we 
have  so  disbursed  (Prov.  zix.  17).  10.  Hence  this  is  the  way  to  lay  up  our 
treasures  in  heaven  (1  Tim.  vL  17-19 ;  Matt.  vi.  19,  20).  11.  It  is  the  best  way  to 
prosper  and  sanctify  what  ye  have  here  (Prov.  xxviii.  27 ;  Deut.  xv.  7-11).  12. 
You  shall  be  judged  according  to  your  performance  or  neglect  of  this  duty  (Matt. 
XXV.  34-42).  (Bp.  Bevendge.)  Liberality  to  Christian  brethren: — I.  Specially 
NEEDED,  n.  Specially  claimed.  III.  Specially  bewaeded.  {J,  Lyth,  D.D.) 
Expressions  of  Christian  love: — I.  Benevolence.  1.  To  the  brethren.  2.  To 
strangers.  3.  To  enemies.  H.  Sympathy.  1.  With  the  happy.  2.  With  the 
sorrowful.  IH.  Unity.  1.  In  Christian  feeling.  2.  This  requires  humility  in 
aim,  in  thought.  {Ibid.)  Given  to  hospitality. — Hospitality: — I,  Implies — 
1.  Our  indifferency  about  the  world.  2.  Willingness  to  communicate  what  we 
have  to  others  (1  Tim.  vi.  17).  3.  Our  supplying  strangers  as  well  as  others  with 
necessaries  (1  Pet.  iv.  9).  II.  Reasons.  1.  A  priori.  We  should  do  to  others  as 
we  would  have  them  do  to  us  (Matt.  vii.  12).  2.  A  posteriori.  Because  of  the 
good  we  may  get  by  it.  Some  have  entertained  angels  (Heb.  xiii.  2 ;  Gen,  xviii.  3, 
xix.  2);  and  prophets  (1  Kings  xvii.  10-16;  2  Kings  v.  8-34;  Matt.  xxv.  43). 
{Bishop  Beveridge.)  Christian  hospitality  : — I.  Its  teials.  1.  The  whim  and 
eccentricity  of  the  guest.  There  are  a  great  many  excellent  people  whose 
temperament  makes  them  a  nuisance  in  any  house  where  they  stay.  On  short 
acquaintance,  they  will  keep  unseasonable  hours,  have  all  the  peculiarities  of  the 
gormandiser  or  the  dyspeptic,  and  in  a  thousand  ways  afflict  the  household  which 
proposes  to  take  care  of  them.  Added  to  all,  they  stay  too  long.  Gerrit  Smith, 
the  philanthropist,  asked  at  his  breakfast  table,  on  the  day  when  he  hoped  that  the 
long-p70tracted  guests  would  depart,  "  0  Lord,  bless  this  provision,  and  our  friends 
who  leave  us  to-day  1 "  But  there  are  alleviations.  Perhaps  they  have  not  had 
the  same  refining  influences  about  them  that  you  have  had.  Perhaps  it  is  your 
duty,  by  example,  to  show  them  a  better  way.  Perhaps  they  are  sent  to  be  a  trial 
for  the  development  of  your  patience.  Perhaps  it  is  to  make  your  home  the 
brighter  when  they  are  gone.  When  our  guests  are  cheery,  and  fascinating,  and 
elegant,  it  is  very  easy  to  entertain  them ;  but  when  we  find  in  them  that  which  is 
antagonistic  to  our  taste  and  sentiment,  it  is  a  positive  triumph  when  we  can  be 
**given  to  hospitality."  2.  The  toil  and  expense  of  exercising  it.  When  you  intro- 
duce a  foreign  element  into  the  domestic  machinery,  though  you  may  declare  that 
they  must  take  things  as  they  find  them,  the  Martha  will  break  in.    The  ungovem* 


eaxf.  xn.]  ROMANS.  527 

able  Btove,  the  nnmasticable  joint,  the  delayed  marketing,  the  difficulty  of  being 
presentable,  Ac.  Yet  we  may  serve  God  with  plate,  and  cutlery,  and  broom,  just  as 
certainly  as  with  psalm-book  and  liturgy.  But  yoa  are  not  to  toil  unnecessarily. 
Though  the  fare  be  plain,  cheerful  presidency  of  the  table  and  cleanliness  of 
appointments  will  be  good  enough  for  anybody  that  ever  comes  to  your  house. 
I  want  to  lift  this  idea  of  Christian  entertainment  out  of  a  positive  bondage  into 
a  glorious  inducement.  Suppose  it  were  announced  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
would  come  to  town  this  week,  what  woman  in  this  house  would  not  be  glad  to 
wash  for  Him,  or  spread  for  Him  a  bed,  or  bake  bread  for  Him  ?  He  Is  coming. 
••  Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it  to  one  of  the  least  of  these,  My  brethren,  ye  have 
done  it  to  Me."  II.  Its  rewards.  1.  The  Divine  benediction.  When  any  one 
attends  to  this  duty,  God's  blessing  comes  upon  him,  upon  his  companion,  upon 
his  children.  2.  The  good  wishes  and  prayers  of  our  guests.  I  do  not  think  one's 
house  ever  gets  over  having  had  a  good  man  or  woman  abide  there.  George 
Whitefield  used  to  scratch  a  text  on  his  window,  and  in  one  case,  after  he  left,  the 
whole  household  was  converted  by  it.  The  woman  of  Shunem  furnished  a  little 
room  for  Elisha,  and  all  the  ages  have  heard  the  consequences.  On  a  winter  night 
my  father  entertained  Trueman  Osborne,  the  evangelist,  and  that,  among  others, 
was  the  means  of  saving  my  soul.  How  many  of  our  guests  have  brought  to  us 
condolence,  and  sympathy,  and  help!  It  is  said  of  St.  Sebald,  that  in  his 
Christian  rounds  he  used  to  stop  for  entertainment  at  the  house  of  a  poor  cart- 
wright.  Coming  there  one  day,  he  found  him  and  his  family  freezing  for  the  lack 
of  fuel.  St.  Sebald  ordered  the  man  to  bring  some  icicles  and  throw  them  on  the 
hearth  ;  whereupon  they  began  to  blaze  immediately,  and  the  freezing  family  were 
warmed  by  them.  How  often  have  our  guests  come  in  to  gather  up  the  cold, 
freezing  sorrows  of  our  life,  kindling  them  into  illumination,  and  warmth,  and  good 
cheer.  He  who  opens  his  house  to  Christian  hospitality,  turns  those  who  are 
strangers  into  friends.  Some  day  you  will  be  sitting  in  loneliness,  watching  a 
bereavement,  and  you  will  get  a  letter,  and  there  you  wUl  read  the  story  of  thanks 
for  your  Christian  generosity  long  years  before,  and  how  they  have  heard  afar  off 
of  your  trouble.  When  we  take  people  into  our  houses  as  Christian  guests,  we  take 
them  into  our  sympathies  for  ever.  In  Dort  a  soldier  stopped  at  a  house,  desiring 
shelter.  At  first  he  was  refused  admittance,  but  when  he  showed  his  credentials  he 
was  admitted.  In  the  night-time  two  ruffians  broke  in,  but  no  sooner  had  they 
come  over  the  door-sill  than  the  armed  guest  met  them.  There  are  no  bandits 
prowling  around  to  destroy  our  houses ;  but  how  often  our  guests  become  our 
defenders.  We  gave  them  shelter  first,  and  afterwards  they  fought  for  our  reputa- 
tion, for  our  property,  for  our  soul.  3.  We  shall  have  hospitality  shown  to  us  and 
to  ours.  In  the  upturnings  of  this  life,  who  knows  where  we  may  be  thrown,  and 
how  much  we  may  need  an  open  door  ?  There  may  come  no  such  crisis  to  us,  but 
our  children  may  be  thrown  into  some  such  strait.  Among  the  Greeks,  after  an 
entertainment  they  take  a  piece  of  lead  and  cut  it  in  two,  and  the  host  takes  one 
half  and  the  guest  the  other  as  they  part.  These  are  handed  down  from  generation 
to  generation,  and  after  awhile  perhaps  one  of  the  families  in  want  or  in  trouble  go 
out  with  this  one  piece  of  lead  and  find  the  other  family  with  the  corresponding 
piece,  and  no  sooner  is  the  tally  completed  than  the  old  hospitality  is  aroused,  and 
eternal  friendship  pledged.  So  the  memory  of  Christian  hospitality  will  go  down 
from  generation  to  generation,  and  the  tally  will  never  be  lost.  {T.  Be  Witt 
Talmage,  D.D.)  Bless  them  wMch  persecute  you — Never  curse,  but  only  bless 
your  persecutors : — 1.  From  virtues  towards  suffering  brethren,  the  apostle  now 
passes  to  the  spirit  to  be  maintained  towards  persecutors.  2.  All  wrongs  are  hard 
to  be  endured ;  and  the  Christian  knows  that  he  ought  not  to  suffer  for  righteous- 
ness' sake,  and  that  his  persecutors  are  deserving  of  punishment.  If,  therefore,  he 
can  secure  protection  by  an  appeal  to  legal  authority,  he  ought  to  make  that  appeal. 
But  when  there  is  no  such  appeal  then  comes  in  the  temptation,  not  simply  to  lodge 
an  appeal  with  the  great  supreme  Judge,  but  to  invoke  His  interposition  to  smite 
the  persecutor  with  a  curse.  The  feeling  that  I  am  wronged  is  strengthened  by 
the  conviction  that  my  wrong  is  detrimental  to  God's  kingdom,  and  therefore  an 
injury  to  the  race.  Punishment,  therefore,  would  be  agreeable  to  strict  justice,  but 
would  it  also  be  good  for  me  to  invoke  or  for  God  to  inflict  ?  Not  so,  says  the 
apostle.  Not  so,  says  Jesus.  "Ye  know  not  what  manner  of  spirit  ye  are  made 
of,"  &c.  Therefore  "bless  them  which  persecute  you,"  &c.  3.  The  command 
and  example  of  our  Lord  ought  to  be  decisive  for  all  Christians  (Matt.  v.  43-48). 
But  why  ought  we  thus  to  act  towards  persecutors  ?    I.  Thb  vkbbsoutob  usuAUit 


sag  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xju 

IB  BT?x  BESBNTiNa  WHAT  HB  coNCEiYES  TO  BE  A  WBONQ,  not  odIj  against  hlmself  and 
society,  but  against  his  religion  and  his  God.  There  are,  no  doubt,  men  who  avail 
themselves  of  the  opportunity  afforded  by  the  prevalence  of  the  persecuting  spirit  to 
give  effect  to  their  private  hatreds,  or  to  enrich  themselves  by  unrighteous  plunder. 
And  others  are  stung  into  persecuting  activity  because  the  Christian's  holy  con- 
versation rebukes  their  iniquity.  But  real  persecutors  are  moved  by  zeal  for  what 
they  conceive  to  be  religion.  It  may  be  a  false  religion,  as  idolatry  or  an  incom- 
plete religion,  as  Judaism,  or  a  corrupted  religion,  as  Eomanism  ;  but  whatever  the 
special  character  of  the  reUgion  whose  interests  are  supposed  to  be  in  danger,  it  will 
be  that  which  is  generally  regarded  as  being  true.  This  it  is  which  gives  such 
relentless  and  terrible  earnestness  to  persecutors.  They  verily  think  with  them- 
selves that  they  ought  to  do  these  things ;  and  that  they  are  doing  God  service. 
This,  of  course,  will  not  avail  to  justify  their  conduct ;  but  it  furnishes  one  reason 
why  we  should  bless  those  who  persecute  us.  For  they  are  impelled  by  conscience, 
and  by  their  apprehension  of  what  is  due  from  them  to  society  and  to  God.  II. 
The  time  fob  the  cubsinq  has  not  yet  come,  but  is  kept  back,  in  order  that  il 
possible  the  injurious  men  may  be  brought  to  a  better  mind.  God  was  more 
wronged  by  men  than  we  can  ever  be.  Yet  He  not  only  exercised  a  marvellous 
forbearance,  but,  out  of  earnest  pity  for  the  offenders,  spared  not  His  own  Son  in 
order  to  bring  back  the  guilty  race.  We  have  been  saved,  and  therefore  these 
pecfple  who  are  still  without  hate  us.  But  God  loves  them  still,  and  His  purpose  is 
to  save  them,  and  He  requires  of  us  to  do  what  we  can  to  accomplish  this  desirable 
result,  ni.  Eeal  pebsecutobs  abb  usually  men  who  abe  wobth  winning.  They 
are  men  whose  force  of  character  and  power  of  aggressive  work  would  be  of 
immense  service  in  the  cause  of  truth  and  righteousness.  Hence  Saul  is  far  more 
likely  to  become  a  chosen  vessel  of  the  Lord  than  his  prudent  master  Gamaliel. 
And  though  every  persecutor  is  not  a  Saul,  yet  if  he  is  earnest  of  persecution  he  is 
a  man  of  more  than  ordinary  power  for  service  in  the  cause  of  Christ.  Therefore 
curse  him  not,  but  only  bless  him  still.    IV.  Thebe  is  much  moee  hope  of  the 

CONVEBSION  OF    EARNEST   PEBSECUTOBS   THAN  MIGHT  AT  FIBST  APPEAB.      There  is  Small 

hope  of  those  who  can  listen  to  the  gospel  and  go  away  as  indifferent  as  when 
they  came.  But  the  man  who  persecutes  earnestly,  feels  strongly,  and  thinks 
vigorously ;  and  when  his  violence  has  somewhat  abated  his  wrath,  and  he  begins 
to  feel  in  what  an  unpleasant  business  he  is  engaged,  he  is  almost  sure  to  think  of 
some  other  aspects  of  the  question.  The  truth  may  then  begin  to  scintillate  within 
his  soul,  growing  brighter  as  he  pursues  the  meditation,  till,  by  the  grace  of  the 
Spirit  of  truth,  his  heart  relents,  his  conscience  begins  its  work  of  self-accusation, 
and  he  is  won.  Maintaining,  as  we  do  most  firmly,  the  miraculous  character  of 
Saul's  conversion,  that  does  not  hinder  us  from  admitting  the  probability  that  the 
spirit  in  which  Stephen  died,  and  in  which  others  less  noted  submitted  to  the  fiery 
persecution,  may  have  made  a  profound  impression  on  the  zealot's  mind.  "  The 
blood  of  the  martyrs  is  the  seed  of  the  Church."  Men  learned  to  live  and  die  in  the 
spirit  of  our  text,  and  the  exhibition  of  such  a  spirit  has  availed  to  save  myriads. 
Conclusion :  Whatever  the  result  of  such  self-denial  here,  it  will  not  fail  of  its 
reward  hereafter  (Matt,  v.  11,  12;  Heb.  xii.  2).  (W.  Tyson.)  Blessing  persecu- 
tors : — When  the  trial  of  Sir  Thomas  More  was  ended,  and  he  was  judged  guilty  of 
death,  being  asked  if  he  had  anything  to  say,  he  replied :  "  My  lords,  I  have  but  to 
say  that,  like  as  the  blessed  apostle  St.  Paul  was  present  at  the  death  of  the  martyr 
Stephen,  keeping  their  clothes  that  stoned  him,  and  yet  be  now  both  saints  in 
heaven,  and  there  shall  continue  friends  for  ever,  so  I  trust,  and  shall  therefore 
pray,  that  though  your  lordships  have  been  on  earth  my  judges,  yet  we  may  here- 
after meet  in  heaven  together,  to  our  everlasting  salvation  :  and  God  preserve  you 
all,  especially  my  sovereign  lord  the  king,  and  grant  him  faithful  counsellors." 
(if.  0.  Mackey.)  Blessings  on  persecutors  : — At  Samatave  (Madagascar)  on  the 
eve  of  the  bombardment  by  the  French,  all  the  natives,  from  the  governor  down- 
wards, were  at  a  prayer-meeting,  and  there  were  no  prayers  for  the  Uves  of  their 
enemies,  and  no  cries  for  vengeance  upon  them.  Prayers  for  a  righteous  vindica- 
tion, for  guidance,  for  faith  to  trust  where  they  could  not  see,  and  for  eventual 
peace  and  goodwill  were  the  only  petitions  of  the  much-injured  Malagasy. 
(G.  Shaw.)  How  to  treat  persecutors : — The  text  teaches  us — I.  How  we  should 
ITEVEB  TBEAT  ouB  PEBSECUTOBS.  "  Cursc  Hot."  The  temptation  to  revengeful 
retaliation  is  not  easy  to  be  resisted  by  even  the  most  docile.  We  "  must  be 
manly,"  and  when  annoyed  by  persecution  we  are  extremely  liable  to  regard 
manliness  as  the  synonym  of  pugnacity.    To  turn  again  upon  a  formidable  fo« 


our.  xn.]  BOMANS.  529 

reqaires  courage,  bat  that  may  be  moral  oowardioe.  Maoh  of  the  courage  that  ia 
orowDed  with  honours  is  mere  animalism.  To  refrain  from  injuring  one  who  haa 
injured  us  is  the  highest  type  of  manliness.  To  persecute  persecutors — 1.  Will  do 
you  no  good.  Is  revenge  sweet  ?  Yes ;  if  the  triumph  of  devils  over  a  soul  taken 
captive  is  sweet.  2.  Will  do  you  harm.  It  will  only  inflame  those  passions  which 
Christ  came  to  stamp  out.  3.  Will  injure  your  persecutors.  It  will  only  incense 
them  in  their  persecuting  work.  II.  How  wb  should  always  treat  oub  persecu- 
TOBS.  "Bless  them  that  persecute  you."  The  word  is  twice  used.  All  our 
treatment  of  persecutors  must  be  in  harmony  with  it.  God,  Christ,  the  Spirit,  and 
the  angels  are  saying  to  you,  *'  Bless  your  persecutors  I  "  But  how  f  1.  With 
your  pity,  i.e.,  the  pity  which  can  weep  over  the  erring  ones  (Luke  xix.  41).  All 
who  are  antagonistic  to  Christianity  need,  if  they  do  not  deserve,  it.  2.  With  your 
patience.  They  may  see  their  folly  by  and  by,  and  repent  of  it.  Christ  had 
patience  with  Saul,  the  champion  of  persecutors.  And  since  the  "  chief  of  sinners  " 
was  converted,  do  not  despair  of  any.  3.  With  your  prayers  (Matt.  v.  44).  In 
proportion  as  we  can  pray  for  Ood  to  bless  our  bitterest  enemies  are  we  Christ- 
Uke  (Acts  vii.  60).  4.  With  your  pardon.  There  is  no  force  in  the  universe  so 
mighty  and  God-like  as  that  of  forgiving  love.  5.  If  need  be,  with  the  blessings  of 
your  purse  (ver.  20).  No  persecutor  can  stand  that  long  (1  Pet.  iii.  9).  "  It  is 
nard,"  you  say.  Yes ;  but,  like  every  other  diflScult  thing,  it  becomes  easy  by 
practice  and  perseverance.  The  lesson  is  only  to  be  learnt  at  the  Cross.  (E.  D. 
Solomon.) 

Ver.  15.  Rejoice  with  them  that  do  rejoice. — The  Christian's  joy  and  grief: — 
There  are  some  who  only  rejoice  over  their  own  happiness,  only  weep  at  their  own 
miseries.  They  are  ruminating  animals — always  chewing  the  cud  of  their  own 
private  joy  or  grief.  If  they  are  in  good  health,  if  they  are  getting  on  in  business, 
if  the  world  smiles  upon  them,  they  are  happy.  If  they  are  unwell,  or  poor,  or  in 
bad  reputation,  they  are  miserable.  A  thoroughly  selfish  man  would  grieve  more 
over  an  attack  of  dyspepsia,  or  the  loss  of  a  five-pound  note,  than  over  the  destruc- 
tion of  a  nation,  or  the  ruin  of  a  world.  Note — I.  The  Christun's  jot.  1.  He 
rejoices  in  all  the  happy  lower  creatures.  "  God  looked  upon  all  that  He  had  made, 
and  behold  it  was  very  good."  In  this  the  Christian  man  is  a  follower  of  God  as  a 
dear  child.  "  He  prayeth  well,  who  loveth  well,  both  man  and  bird  and  beast,"  &c. 
2.  He  rejoices  in  all  the  pure  human  joys  of  his  fellow-men,  like  Him  who  attended 
the  wedding-feast  of  Cana  of  Galilee.  3.  He  rejoices  in  the  progress  of  the  king- 
dom of  God.  Every  conversion,  every  time  of  hallowed  fellowship,  every  act  of 
kindness,  all  tidings  of  good  being  done  in  any  part  of  the  world,  fill  his  heart  with 
joy.  II.  The  Christian's  grief.  He  grieves — 1.  Over  the  special  sins  and 
Borrows  with  which  he  is  brought  into  contact.  2.  Over  the  sin  and  sorrow  of  the 
world,  when  he  "  enters  into  the  fellowship  of  Christ's  sufferings."  The  more 
shallow  any  nature  is,  the  less  capacities  it  has  for  joy  and  grief;  the  finer  and 
deeper  a  nature,  the  more  sensitive  it  is  to  both.  A  racehorse  is  more  sensitive 
both  to  pleasure  and  pain  than  a  dray-horse.  The  Christian  has  both  a  deeper  joy 
and  a  deeper  grief  than  others,  because  he  lives  a  deeper  and  a  wider  life,  because 
his  heart  trembles  into  sympathy  with  human  gladness  and  sorrow  all  over  the 
world.  {R.  Abercrombie,  M.A.)  The  cordial  interest  in  the  events  that  befall 
our  fellow-creatures : — I.  What  we  abe  to  do,  and  how  we  are  to  be  disposed, 

FOB   TAKING   A    CORDIAL    INTEREST    IN    THE     PROSPEROUS    OR    ADVERSE    CONTINGENCIES 

OP  OUB  FELLow-CEEATUBES.  1.  Would  wc  lejoicc  with  the  joyful  and  weep 
with  the  sorrowful,  or,  would  we  take  a  cordial  interest  in  the  good  and  ill 
that  happens  to  other  persons,  we  should  before  all  things  seriously  consider 
in  what  a  variety  of  ways  mankind  are  connected  together,  and  how  great  an 
influence  the  happiness  or  the  misery  of  one  has  upon  the  happiness  or  the 
misery  of  others.  We  should  therefore  call  to  mind  how  many  things  we  possess 
in  common,  and  how  much  more  important  these  things  are  than  those  whereby  we 
are  distinguished  from  each  other.  We  have  all  the  same  rational,  immortal 
nature,  the  same  origin  and  the  same  destination.  We  are  likewise  obnoxious  to 
the  same  wants,  infirmities,  passions,  errors,  follies,  and  failings,  and  the  greater  or 
less  degree  in  which  we  are  obnoxious  to  these  evils,  depends  not  so  much  on  our 
behaviour  and  our  deserts,  as  on  the  circumstances  in  which  the  Buler  of  the  world 
has  placed  us.  Can  or  should  differences  weaken  or  dissolve  the  ties  of  aflSnity  and 
the  social  benefit  that  connect  us  all  together  ?  Are  there  not  similar  discrepancies 
even  between  the  children  of  one  father,  who  were  bom  and  brought  up  in  the  same 
VOL.  n.  84 


630  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  zxt, 

house  ?  2.  Would  we  farther  rejoice  with  them  that  rejoice,  and  weep  with  them 
that  weep,  would  we  take  a  cordial  interest  in  the  good  and  ill  that  happens  to 
others;  we  must  understand  the  good  and  the  ill  that  befalls  them,  that  which  occasiong 
them  joy  or  sorrow.  We  must  therefore  pay  attention  not  only  to  what  passes  among 
our  friends  or  acquaintance,  or  in  the  place  and  the  country  where  we  happen  to  Uve, 
but  likewise  to  what  is  going  forward  in  the  rest  of  the  great  world,  in  order  to  form 
just  and  lively  conceptions  of  it.  How  many  opportunities  and  motives  will  then 
occur  to  the  Christian  philanthropist  to  rejoice  with  them  that  rejoice,  and  to  weep 
with  them  that  weep,  as  he  perceives  here  the  light  of  knowledge,  of  the  sciences, 
tuid  of  true  religion  making  progress,  and  there  still  the  clouds  of  ignorance,  of 
superstition  and  error,  hanging  heavily  over  a  country ;  if  he  here  see  courage, 
liberty,  generous  sentiments,  there  pusillanimity,  bondage,  and  a  servile  disposition 
prevail ;  if  he  in  this  place  hear  a  happy  people  rejoicing  in  the  blessings  of  the 
harvest,  or  the  vintage,  and  yonder  another  groaning  beneath  the  sword  of  the 
destroyer  or  under  the  arrows  of  pestilence.  Is  he,  however,  unable  or  unwilling  to 
travel  in  his  imagination  so  far ;  yet  vivid  representations  of  what  passes  in  his 
place,  among  his  neighbours,  in  his  district,  will  warm  his  heart  to  charity,  and  one 
while  inspire  him  with  joy,  at  another  bring  tears  into  his  eyes.  3.  In  order  to  this 
we  must  thirdly  take  a  real  interest  in  the  good  and  ill  that  befall  others.  We  must 
consider  their  joys  and  sorrows,  their  prosperous  or  disastrous  adventures  not  as 
objects  irrelative  to  us,  and  about  which  it  would  be  absolute  folly  in  us  to  be  either 
glad  or  sorry,  because  we,  perhaps,  can  discern  only  an  exceeding  remote  connec- 
tion, or  even  none  at  all,  between  their  situations  and  ours.     II.  How  w£  should 

EXPRESS  AND  EVINCE,  BOTH  IN  WOBD  AND  DEED,  OUB  COBDIAL  PABTICIPATION  IN  THE  GOOD 

AND  ILL  THAT  BEFALL  OTHERS.     1.  That  we  may  rcjoico  with  them  that  rejoice,  we 
should  not  disapprove,  not  condemn,  not  scare  away  their  joy,  if  it  be  but  rational 
and  innocent,  by  dark  looks  and  churlish  gestures,  not  censure  it  as  being  incom- 
patible with  virtue  and  godliness.   2.  Neither  should  we  kill  nor  diminish  the  joy  of 
others  by  requiring  that  it  should  always  be  exactly  proportionate  to  the  value  of 
the  objects  at  which  they  rejoice,  and  indeed  to  the  worth  that  we  attribute  to  them. 
Joy  is  a  matter  of  sensation,  and  the  feelings  admit  not  of  being  rigidly  restricted 
to  those  regulations  which  cold-hearted  philosophers  lay  down  for  them.    3.  Would 
we  rejoice  with  them  that  rejoice,  let  us  rather  put  ourselves  in  their  situation,  view 
the  good  and  agreeable  that  happens  to  them,  as  it  were  with  their  eyc3,  and  in  this 
respect  too  become  all  things  to  all  men.     4.  Would  we  be  of  the  number  of  such 
as  rejoice  with  them  that  rejoice,  we  should  show  it  in  action  or  by  works.     We 
should  try  to  promote  the  satisfaction  and  happiness  of  others  by  all  manner  of 
means.     We  should  procure  them  encouragements,  opportunities  and  means  for 
the  enjoyment  of  a  harmless  and  genial  pleasure,  according  to  their  inclinations, 
their  circumstances,  their  wants,  and  capacities.    5.  FaraUel  duties  lie  on  os  in 
regard  to  the  afflicted  and  unhappy.    Throw  no  violent  obstruction  in  the  way  of 
that  flood  of  tears  which  reUeves  their  heart ;  rather  mingle  your  tears  with  theirs. 
Have  indulgence  and  compassion  for  them,  even  though  the  expression  of  their  grief 
be  reaUy  excessive.   (G.  J.  Zollikofer.)      Fellowship  in  joy : — Sympathy  is  a  duty  of 
our  common  humanity,  but  far  more  of  our  regenerated  manhood.    Those  who  are 
one  in  the  higher  life  should  show  their  holy  vinity  by  true  fellow-feeling.    Joyful 
sympathy  is  doubly  due  when  the  joy  is  spiritual  and  eternal.    Rejoice — I.  With 
THE  coNVEBTS.    1.  Some  delivered  from  lives  of  grievous  sin.    All  saved  from  that 
which  would  have  ruined  them  eternally,  but  certain  of  them  from  faults  which 
injure  men  in  society.     2.  Some  of  them  rescued  from  agonising  fear  and  deep 
despair.    Could  you  have  seen  them  under  conviction  you  would  indeed  rejoice  to 
behold  them  free  and  happy.    3.  Some  of  them  have  been  brought  into  great  peace 
and  joy.     The  blissful  experience  of  their  first  love  should  charm  us  into  sym- 
pathetic  delight.    4.  Some  of  them  are  aged.    These  are  called  at  the  eleventh 
hcur.    Bejoice  that  they  are  saved  from  imminent  peril.    5.  Some  of  them  are 
young,  with  years  of  happy  service  before  them.     6.  Each  case  is  special.    In 
some  we  think  of  what  they  would  have  been,  and  in  others  of  what  they  will  be. 
There  is  great  gladness  in  these  new-bom  ones,  and  shall  we  be  indifferent  ?    IL 
With  theib  friends.     1.  Some  have  prayed  long  for  them,  and  now  their  prayers 
are  heard.    2.  Some  have  been  very  anxious,  have  seen  much  to  mourn  over  in 
the  pact,  and  feared  much  of  evil  in  the  future.    3.  Some  are  relatives  with  a 
peci^iar  interest  in  these  saved  ones.    Parents,  children,  brothers,  &o.    4.  Soma 
are  expecting,  and  in  certain  cases  already  receiving,  much  comfort  from  these 
newly  saved  ones.    They  have  already  brightened  the  family  circle,  and  made 


CHAP,  xn.]  ROMANS.  581 

heayy  heEuis  glad.  Holy  parents  have  no  greater  joy  than  to  Bee  their  children 
walMng  in  the  truth.  Do  we  not  share  their  joy  ?  III.  With  those  who  bbodghi 
THEM  TO  Jssus.  The  spiritual  parents  of  these  converts  are  glad.  The  pastor, 
relative,  teacher,  or  friend,  who  wrote  or  spoke  to  them  of  Jesus.  What  a  joy 
belongs  to  those  who  by  personal  effort  win  souls  I  Endeavour  to  win  the  same 
joy  for  yourself,  and  meanwhile  be  glad  that  others  have  it.  IV.  With  the  Holt 
Spibit.  He  sees — 1.  His  strivings  successful.  2.  His  instructions  accepted.  3. 
His  quickening  power  operating  in  new  life.  4.  The  renewed  mind  yielding  to  His 
Divine  guidance.  5.  The  heart  comforted  by  His  grace.  Let  us  rejoice  in  the 
love  of  the  Spirit.  V.  With  the  anqels.  1.  They  have  noted  the  repentance  of 
the  returning  sinner.  2.  They  will  henceforth  joyfully  guard  the  footsteps  of  the 
pilgrim.  3.  They  expect  his  life-long  perseverance,  or  their  joy  would  be  prema- 
ture. He  is  and  will  be  for  ever  their  fellow-servant.  4.  They  look  one  day  to 
bear  him  home  to  glory.  The  evil  angel  makes  us  groan ;  should  not  the  joy  of 
good  angels  make  us  sing  in  harmony  with  their  delight  ?  VI.  With  the  Lord 
Jesds.  His  joy  is  proportioned — 1.  To  the  ruin  from  which  He  has  saved  His 
redeemed  ones.  2.  To  the  cost  of  their  redemption.  3.  To  the  love  which  Ha 
bears  to  them.  4.  To  their  future  happiness,  and  to  the  glory  which  their  salvation 
will  bring  to  Him.  Conclusion :  Do  you  find  it  hard  to  rejoice  with  these  newly 
baptized  believers  ?  Let  me  urge  you  to  do  so,  for  you  have  your  own  sorrows,  and 
this  communion  of  joy  will  prevent  brooding  too  much  over  them.  (C  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Fellowship  in  joy : — Mr.  Haslam,  telling  the  story  of  his  conversion, 
says,  "  I  do  not  remember  all  I  said,  but  I  felt  a  wonderful  light  and  joy  coming 
into  my  soul.  Whether  it  was  something  in  my  words,  or  my  manner,  or  my  look, 
I  know  not ;  but  all  of  a  sudden  a  local  preacher,  who  happened  to  be  in  the  con- 
gregation, stood  up,  and  putting  up  his  arms,  shouted  out  in  Cornish  manner, 
'  The  parson  is  converted  I  the  parson  ia  converted  I  Hallelujah  1 '  And  in 
another  moment  his  voice  was  lost  in  the  shouts  and  praises  of  three  or  four 
hundred  of  the  congregation.  Instead  of  rebuking  this  extraordinary  *  brawling,* 
as  I  should  have  done  in  a  former  time,  I  joined  in  the  outburst  of  praise ;  and  to 
make  it  more  orderly,  I  gave  out, '  Praise  God  from  whom  all  blessings  flow,'  which 
the  people  sung  with  heart  and  voice,  over  and  over  again."  Sympathy : — 1» 
Sympathy,  it  may  be  said,  is  an  accident  of  temperament,  and  cannot  be  a  duty.. 
There  are  those  who  cannot  help  being  distressed  by  the  troubles  of  others,  and 
being  made  happier  for  the  happiness  of  others.  On  the  other  hand  there  are 
those  who  are  naturally  cold  and  cannot  help  it.  But  the  same  objection  might  be 
urged  against  other  duties.  Indolence  and  intemperance  may  be  largely  the  result 
of  hereditary  tendencies,  but  as  industry  and  temperance  are  manifest  duties  it  ia 
unsafe  to  regard  their  opposites  merely  as  diseases.  Some  children  are  naturally 
docile  and  affectionate,  others  the  reverse  ;  but  to  be  obedient  and  loving  are  duties 
and  their  opposites  grave  faults.  Some  have  naturally  a  kind  disposition,  others 
have  a  bad  temper.  And  yet  good  temper  is  not  a  mere  fortunate  accident,  nor  is 
a  bad  one  a  mere  constitutional  calamity— it  is  a  vice.  So  while  some  men 
find  it  easier  than  others  to  rejoice,  Ac,  sympathy  is  one  of  the  great  moral  virtues. 
2.  There  is  nothing  about  it  in  the  Ten  Commandments,  but  in  the  Christian  code- 
it  stands  side  by  side  with  justice,  truthfulness,  &o.  It  is  not  merely  an  ornament 
of  character,  but  as  essential  a  part  of  Christian  life  as  worship.  The  obligation 
must  not  be  so  qualified  as  to  be  practically  suppressed.  There  are  people  with 
whom  it  is  easy  to  sympathise,  but  as  it  is  our  duty  to  be  honest  to  all,  the  obliga- 
tions of  sympathy  are  equally  general.  This  precept  is  only  an  application  of  the 
great  commandment,  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  The  duty 
arises  from  the  discovery  that  has  come  to  us  through  Christ  of  the  intimacy  of  our 
relations  to  all  mankind.  All  men  are  dear  to  the  heart  of  God,  and  therefore 
they  must  be  dear  to  us.  3.  We  owe  sympathy  to  other  men  because  it  is  an 
effective  means  of  contributing  to  their  moral  perfection,  and  because  by  withhold- 
ing it  we  inflict  on  them  grave  moral  inquiry.  In  men  and  women  who  have  many 
admirable  qualities  there  are  grave  defects  of  temper  and  spirit.  They  remind  one 
of  noble  trees  that  require  warmth  and  sunshine,  but  which  have  been  discouraged 
by  gloomy  skies,  and  chilled,  tormented,  by  cold,  harsh  winds.  We  may  not  be 
able  to  do  much  to  recover  those  who  are  morally  lost,  but  we  may  all  do  something 
to  lessen  the  hardness  and  add  to  the  moral  grace  of  those  with  whom  we  live. 
Sympathise  with  a  man  in  his  prosperity  and  you  do  much  to  protect  him  from  its 
perils.  If  you  know  that  a  man  is  carrying  on  his  business  on  dishonourable 
principles,  whether  he  is  getting  richer  or  poorer,  you  are  bound  to  refuse  him  your 


53fl  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHAf.  XXU 

moral  approval.  Bat  if  yon  begin  to  have  hard  thoaghta  of  him,  and  if  he  feeli 
that  yon  have  no  delight  in  his  honest  prosperity,  yon  are  not  only  unjast  to  him, 
yon  may  do  him  serious  moral  harm.  If  you  are  cold  to  him  because  he  is  richer 
than  you,  he  will  be  cold  to  you  because  you  are  poorer  than  he  is.  If  you  think  of 
his  wealth  with  discontent,  he  will  think  of  it  with  exaggerated  complacency. 
There  is  always  danger  that  when  a  man  gets  rich  he  will  cease  to  have  a  brotherly 
heart  towards  other  men;  it  is  the  duty  of  his  old  friends  to  do  what  they 
can  to  save  him  from  that,  not  by  preaching  to  him,  unless  they  are  sure  they  can 
preach  well,  but  by  rejoicing  with  him  in  his  riches.  The  same  law  holds  in  rela- 
tion to  success  in  public  Uf  e,  &c.  So  when  trouble  comes  upon  men  your  sympathy 
may  lessen  the  bitterness  of  their  grief,  and  may  prevent  them  from  yielding  to  a 
hard  resentment  against  God  and  the  whole  order  of  the  world.  But  remember 
that  what  they  want  is  not  your  ingenious  philosophy,  but  just  a  touch  of  your  heart. 
4.  Some  people  have  what  is  called  the  gift  of  sympathy,  and  a  charming  gift  it  is, 
but  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  between  the  gift  and  the  grace.  Sympathy  with 
misfortune  may  be  followed  by  no  endeavour  to  lessen  it,  and  sympathy  with  joy 
may  be  followed  in  an  hour  by  a  sarcasm  or  a  sneer.  5.  If  it  is  a  duty  to  give 
sympathy,  it  is  also  a  duty  to  receive  it.  By  rejecting  it  we  harm  the  person  who 
offers  it,  for  we  check  the  growth  of  a  form  of  moral  perfection.  It  is  a  sin  to  dis- 
courage a  man  who  wants  to  be  truthful ;  it  is  also  a  sin  to  discourage  the  man 
who  wants  to  show  that  he  shares  our  trouble  or  our  gladness.  And  we  wrong 
oorselves,  for  we  confirm  our  unbrotherly  selfishness.  6.  This  sympathetic  spirit 
has  not  really  to  be  created  even  in  those  whose  natural  temperament  is  unsym- 
pathetic. It  is  in  our  heart  somewhere,  and  would  show  itself  if  it  had  a  fair 
chance.  But  it  must  be  cultivated,  and  it  is  only  by  a  deliberate  effort  to  measure 
the  magnitude  of  a  great  trouble,  and  to  realise  some  of  the  innumerable  elements 
of  misery  in  it,  that  some  of  us  can  ever  come  to  feel  adequate  sympathy  with  it. 
And  a  similar  effort  is  necessary  to  sympathise  perfectly  with  a  great  happiness. 
But  self-discipline  is  not  enough.  If  we  abide  in  Christ  we  may  come  to  have  that 
sensitiveness  to  suffering  which  moved  Him  to  compassion  when  He  saw  the 
blind,  Ac,  and  which  made  Him  weep  over  the  grave  of  Lazarus ;  and  we  may  come 
to  have  that  sympathy  with  common  joys  which  prompted  Him  to  change  water 
into  wine.  (iJ.  W.  Dale,  LL.D.)  Benefit  of  sympathy  : — Everyman  rejoices 
twice  when  he  has  a  partner  of  his  joy.  A  friend  shares  my  sorrow,  and  makes  it 
but  a  moiety ;  but  he  swells  my  joy,  and  makes  it  double.  For  so  two  channels 
divide  the  river,  and  lessen  it  into  rivulets,  and  make  it  fordable,  and  apt  to  be 
drunk  up  by  the  first  revels  of  the  Syrian  star ;  but  two  torches  do  not  divide,  but 
increase  the  flame.  And  though  my  tears  are  the  sooner  dried  up  when  they  run 
on  my  friend's  cheeks  in  the  furrows  of  compassion,  yet,  when  my  flame  hath 
kindled  his  lamp,  we  unite  the  glories  and  make  them  radiant,  like  the  golden 
candlesticks  that  burn  before  the  throne  of  God,  because  they  shine  by  numbers,  by 
light,  and  joy.  Human  sympathy  : — Though  the  lower  animals  have  feeling, 
they  have  no  fellow-feeling.  Have  not  I  seen  the  horse  enjoy  his  feed  of  corn  when 
his  yoke-fellow  lay  a-dying  in  the  neighbouring  stall,  and  never  turn  an  eye  of  pity 
on  the  sufferer  ?  They  have  strong  passions,  but  no  sympathy.  It  is  said  that  the 
wounded  deer  sheds  tears;  but  it  belongs  to  man  only  to  "  weep  with  them  that 
weep,"  and  by  sympathy  to  divide  another's  sorrows,  and  double  another's  joys. 
When  thunder,  following  the  dazzling  flash,  has  burst  among  our  hills,  when  the 
horn  of  tbe  Switzer  has  rung  in  his  glorious  valleys,  when  the  boatman  has  shouted 
from  the  bosom  of  a  rock-girt  loch,  wonderful  were  the  echoes  I  have  heard  them 
make  ;  but  there  is  no  echo  so  fine  or  wonderful  as  that  which,  in  the  sympathy  of 
human  hearts,  repeats  the  cry  of  another's  sorrow,  and  makes  me  feel  his  pain 
almost  as  if  it  were  my  own.  They  say,  that  if  a  piano  is  struck  in  a  room  where 
another  stands  unopened  and  untouched,  who  lays  his  ear  to  that  will  hear  a  string 
vrithin,  as  if  touched  by  the  hand  of  a  shadowy  spirit,  sound  the  same  note  ;  but 
more  strange  how  the  strings  of  one  heart  vibrate  to  those  of  another ;  how  woe 
weakens  woe ;  how  your  grief  infects  me  with  sadness  ;  how  the  shadow  of  a  pass- 
ing funeral  and  nodding  hearse  casts  a  cloud  on  the  mirth  of  a  marriage  party ; 
how  sympathy  may  be  so  delicate  and  acute  as  to  become  a  pain.  There  is,  for 
example,  the  well-authenticated  case  of  a  lady  who  could  not  even  hear  the  descrip- 
tion of  a  severe  surgical  operation,  but  she  felt  all  the  agonies  of  the  patient,  grew 
paler  and  paler,  and  shrieked  and  fainted  under  the  horrible  imagination.  (T. 
Guthrie,  D.D.)  Law  of  sympathy  : — As  in  the  electric  shock  every  one  feels  the 
same  shock  who  holds  the  same  chain ;  or  as  in  the  singular  acoustic  law  by  which 


oiur.  xa.j  ROMANS.  638 

BeTeral  ioBtrumentB  have  a  sympathetio  vibration,  so  that,  if  one  note  be  struck 
violently  on  one,  there  will  be  a  faint  vibration  on  the  other ;  or  like  the  still  more 
delicate  and  mysterious  tracery  of  nerves  which  run  throughout  the  whole  human 
body,  the  meanest  member  cannot  suffer  without  all  the  members  feeling  with  it. 
Sympathy : — I  want  to  tell  you  how,  a  few  years  ago,  I  got  up  sympathy  with  a 
family  in  Chicago,  where  I  was  living.  It  is  very  unhealthy  in  the  summer,  and  I 
attended  the  funerals  of  a  good  many  children.  I  got  hardened  to  it,  like  a  doctor, 
and  could  go  to  them  without  sympathy.  One  of  my  little  scholars  was  drowned, 
and  werd  was  sent  by  the  mother  that  she  wanted  to  see  me.  I  went.  The  drip- 
ping body  was  there  on  the  table.  The  husband  was  a  drunkard,  and  was  then  in 
the  corner  drunk.  The  mother  said  she  had  no  money  to  buy  a  shroud  or  coffin, 
and  wanted  to  know  if  I  could  not  bury  Adeline.  I  consented.  I  had  my  little 
girl  with  me  then.  She  was  about  four  years  old.  When  we  got  outside  she  asked : 
"  Suppose  we  were  poor,  pa,  and  I  had  to  go  down  to  the  river  after  sticks,  and 
should  fall  in  and  get  drowned,  and  you  had  no  money  to  bury  me,  would  you  be 
sorry,  papa  ?  "  and  then  she  looked  up  into  my  eyes  with  an  expression  I  had  never 
before  seen,  and  asked  :  "  Did  you  feel  bad  for  that  mother?  "  I  clasped  her  to 
my  heart  and  kissed  her,  and  my  sympathy  was  aroused.  My  friends,  if  you  want 
to  get  in  sympathy  with  people,  consider  how  you  would  feel  in  their  place.  Let 
ns,  working  for  the  Master,  have  compassion  on  the  unfortunate,  and  sympathy  for 
those  who  need  our  sympathy.  (D.  L.  Moody.)  The  demands  of  Christian  syni- 
pathy : — 1.  Joy  and  sorrow  are  the  two  chief  elements  of  hfe.  They  often  meet  in 
the  one  event ;  what  is  sorrowful  to  one  is  joyful  to  the  other.  They  are  often 
very  near  each  other  in  this  life  of  uncertainty  and  change.  An  hour  beyond  the 
present  time  may  transfer  us  from  one  to  the  other.  Often  the  morning  is  bright, 
but  the  evening  dull  and  cloudy  and  vice  versd.  2.  Joy  and  sorrow  modify  each 
other,  and  life  requires  both  to  make  it  complete.  Continual  sorrow  would  make 
men  sad  and  sour  ;  and  perpetual  joy  would  make  men  too  light  in  character,  and 
disqualify  them  as  the  comforters  of  the  afflicted  ;  but  by  their  co-operation  they 
make  men  more  fit  in  this  world  to  work  and  sympathise.  The  sweet  makes  the 
bitter  tolerable  ;  and  the  bitter  imparts  a  Kind  of  tonic  quality  to  the  sweet.  Con- 
fining ourselves  to  the  latter  clause,  we  shall  view  calamities — I.  Thbough  some  ov 
THSiB  causes.  1  A  willing  ignorance  of  law.  Many  fevers,  explosions,  ship- 
wrecks, Ac,  arise  from  igjnorance  of  the  laws  of  things;  and  there  is  no  excuse  for 
oor  ignorance  of  most  of  them.  2.  Presumption.  Bepeated  transgression  of  law, 
because  it  has  often  happened  hitherto  without  any  calamity,  often  costs  men 
dearly.  3.  Mercenary  selfishness  and  ambition.  From  a  love  of  money  sanitary 
improvements  are  neglected ;  and  in  our  mines  means  of  safety  are  neglected 
because  there  is  a  little  expense  in  the  introduction  of  them.  4.  Careless  indiffer- 
ence. We  by  custom  become  nsed  to  things,  and  act  carelessly;  where  others, 
unused  to  the  same  things,  are  timid  and  careful,  and  often  save  themselves.  II. 
Thbouoh  some  of  theie  habrowino  distresses  and  results.  Calamities,  by 
reason  of  their  frequent  occurrence,  lose  their  impression  upon  us.  Like  the  loss 
of  life  in  times  of  war,  they  become  things  of  little  power  because  of  their  frequent 
occurrence.  However  we  view  and  feel  them,  it  is  clear  that  the  results  from  them 
are  grave  and  glaring.  1.  They  reduce  our  estimate  of  human  life.  We  value  our 
own  life  above  all  things,  and  the  simplest  duty  of  religion  is,  to  do  to  others  as  we 
would  that  others  should  do  unto  us.  We  too  often  reverse  this,  and  by  blindness 
and  selfishness  make  human  life  the  meanest  of  all  things.  2.  They  harden  men 
religiously.  People  are  amazed  that  they  do  not  change  the  heart  and  life  of  men. 
But  can  the  widow  melt  into  tenderness  of  religious  emotions  when  she  broods  over 
her  great  loss  and  hard  lot,  and  all  the  while  attributes  it  to  the  carelessness  of 
others  ?  Can  the  orphan  be  made  more  religious  when  he  thinks  of  the  way  bis 
nearest  friend  in  life  has  been  taken  away  ?  If  they  attribute  their  calamities  to  God. 
do  they  present  Him  in  that  amiable  character  as  to  attract  the  heart  in  love  to 
Him  ?  3.  They  diminish  the  goodness  and  enjoyment  of  life.  4.  They  increase 
the  burden  of  society.  Who  are  to  provide  for  the  widows  and  the  fatherless  ?  6. 
But  the  distress  of  such  calamities  to  the  immediate  individuals  themselves  is 
beyond  language  to  describe.  III.  On  Christian  ground  and  in  Christian  light, 
Christianity — 1.  Brings  out  the  purest  and  the  noblest  sympathies  of  the  soul  to 
meet  and  comfort  distress.  All  done  to  the  distressed  under  its  influence  is  done 
by  love,  hence  it  is  both  pleasurable  and  lasting.  It  leads  the  afflicted  to  an  ever- 
living  Father,  to  the  sympathy  and  love  of  a  Saviour,  and  the  comfort  of  His  Spirit ; 
it  brings  them  into  fellowship  with  all  the  good ;  and  gives  a  hope  of  a  heaven  of 


584  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTILITOR  [oha».  jb. 

happiness  after  the  sorrows  of  life  will  end.  2.  Teaches  men  to  make  earthlj 
things  subordinate  to  the  want  and  support  of  persons  in  their  woes  and  sorrows. 
3.  Makes  it  a  part  of  Christian  life  to  assist  the  needj  and  ameliorate  the  woes  of 
men.  "  Blessed  are  the  merciful,  for  they  shall  obtam  mercy  "  is  its  first  and  last 
teaching.  4.  Is  catholic  and  impartial  in  its  aid  and  comfort  to  distress  and  misery. 
It  asks  no  questions  as  to  nationality,  rank,  sect,  and  creed ;  it  views  all  as  human 
creatures  in  want  and  distress.  5.  Lessens  the  misery  of  humanity.  It  does  this 
to  the  mind  of  men  by  its  spiritual  provisions,  and  to  their  bodies  and  outvmrd 
wants  by  making  all  material  things  subordinate  to  human  want  and  woe.  6. 
TJnites  men  so  closely  to  each  other  as  to  make  them  responsible  for  the  good  and 
comfort  of  one  another.  IV.  Thbouoh  theie  lessons  to  vb.  Calamities  as  these 
teach  US — 1.  To  be  more  submissive  and  satisfied  with  the  ordinary  Uls  and  mis- 
fortunes of  life.  2.  The  necessity  of  studying  the  laws  of  human  life  more,  and 
understanding  them  better.  8.  That  we  are  so  nearly  related  to  one  another  that 
the  life  and  interest  of  all  are  very  much  in  the  hands  of  each  other.  4.  That 
great  calamities  all  result  from  the  repeated  neglect  of  small  things.  5.  To  do  all 
we  can  to  comfort  and  help  those  in  cUstress.    (T.  Eughet.) 

Yer.  16.  Be  of  the  same  mind  one  towards  another. — Unity: — I.  Whit  a 
ntPLiES.  1.  One  spirit.  2.  One  aim.  8.  One  way.  IE.  How  to  sbouhb  it.  1. 
Suppress  ambition.  2.  Be  condescending  to  inferiors.  3.  Be  modest  in  the 
expression  of  your  own  opinion.  (J,  Lyth,  D.D.)  Mind  not  high  things: — I. 
What  hioh  thinos  ?  1.  Negatively — not  the  highest  or  heavenly  things  (Col.  iiu 
1-2;  Matt.  vi.  33).  2.  Positively— of  this  world  (Jer.  xlv.  6).  Great— fl)  Riches 
(Tim.  vi.  19) ;  (2)  Honours ;  (3)  Power  and  place  (Acts  v.  36) ;  (4)  Employments; 
(5)  Pleasures.  II.  How  not  mind  them  ?  Not  so  as — 1.  To  think  of  them  (Psa. 
i.  2).  2.  To  desire  them  (Col.  iii.  2 ;  Psa.  Ixziii.  25).  8.  To  hope  for  them.  4.  To 
admire  them  (Luke  zxi.  5,  6).  5.  To  labour  after  them  (John  vi.  27;  Matt.  vL  83). 
in.  Why  not  mind  them  ?  1.  They  are  below  you.  (1)  As  ye  are  rational  crea- 
tures. (2)  As  believing  Christians.  2.  Tou  have  higher  things  to  mind  (Phil.  iii. 
20).  3.  Minding  of  earth  and  heaven  both  is  inconsistent  (Matt.  vi.  24 ;  1  John  ii. 
15).  Conclusion :  Mind  not  high  things.  Consider  they  are — 1.  Uncertsdn.  2. 
Inconstant  (Prov.  xxiii.  5).  3.  Unsatisfying  (Eccles.  i.  8 ;  iv.  8).  4.  Dangerous 
(1  Tim.  vi.  10).  5.  Momentary  (Luke  xii.  20).  (Bp.  Beveridge.)  Mind  not  high 
thing* : — I.  The  import  op  this  pbohtbition.  It  forbids — 1.  Pride.  2.  Assumption. 
3.  Foolish  ambition.  II.  Its  impobtancb.  These  evils  are — 1.  Very  offensive  to 
God.  2.  A  source  of  misery  to  ourselves.  3.  A  cause  of  serious  evil  both  in  the 
Church  and  the  world.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Condescend  to  men  of  low  estate. — 
Condescension : — I.  The  conduct  enjoined.  A  behaviour — 1.  Humble.  2.  Affable. 
3.  Condescending.  II.  Its  excellencies.  It  is — 1.  Magnanimous.  2.  Christlike, 
in.  Its  impobtance.  It  is  essential  to  the  Christian  character.  IV.  Its  motives. 
Differences  of  condition  are  accidental,  temporal,  designed  to  afford  opportunity  for 
the  development  of  this  spirit.  {Ibid.)  Considerateneas  towards  inferiors: — 
Knowing  how  anxious  the  troops  in  Cabul  would  look  for  their  letters,  Captain 
(afterwards  Sir  Henry)  Lawrence  and  his  wife — because  the  Government  could 
not  afford  a  post-clerk  1 — would  sit  up  half  the  night  sorting  them,  after  the 
multiform  duties  of  revenue  collector,  engineer,  commissariat  officer,  and  pay- 
master, had  been  discharged.  But  this  was  only  one  instance  out  of  many  of 
Lawrence's  exquisite  regard  for  others.  {H.  A.  Page.)  Be  not  wise  In  your  own 
conceits. — I.  As  to  rational  wisdom  ob  knowledge.  1.  Of  natural  causes.  (1) 
You  know  »ot  the  first  constitution  of  them  (Job  xxxviii.  4-6).  (2)  Nor  Gtod's 
present  disposal  of  them  (Acts  xvii.  28).  (3)  Nor  their  own  working  and  nature.  2. 
Future  events  (James  iv.  13,  14.)  (1)  You  know  not  the  causes  that  must  concur 
to  produce  them.  (2)  Nor  whether  God  will  set  them  on  work  or  no,  or  hinder 
them  (James  iv.  15 ;  1  Cor.  iv.  19).  3.  The  providences  of  God  (Psa.  cxxxix.  5, 
6).  (1)  To  the  evil  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  3,  22).  (2)  To  the  good.  4.  The  intrigues  of  state 
(Prov.  XX.  3).  5.  The  spiritual  estate  of  others  (Matt.  vii.  1).  (1)  You  know  not 
your  own  condition  (1  Cor.  ii.  11).  (2)  There  is  no  way  in  the  world  whereby  to  know 
others.  6.  The  interpretation  of  Scripture  (Mark  xii.  24).  (1)  Prophecies  (Acts 
viii.  30,  31).  (2)  Mysteries  (Eom.  xi.  33).  (3)  Difficult  places  (2  Pet.  iii.  15,  16).  7. 
Determination  of  theological  controversies.  8.  Be  not  then  wise  in  your  own  con- 
ceits.  (1)  It  is  a  sin  (Isa.  v.  21 ;  Prov.  iii.  7).  (2)  You  are  not  wise  fJob  xi.  12). 
(3)  This  will  hinder  you  from  true  wisdom  (Prov.  xxvi.  12).  But — (1)  Have  low 
thoughts  of  your  own  knowledge.     (2)  Labour  each  day  to  know  more— (a)  Of 


OHAP.  xn.]  ROMANS.  636 

God ;  (5)  Of  Christ  (1  Cor.  ii.  2).  n.  As  to  peactical  wisdom.  1.  Wherein  ?  (1) 
We  must  not  conceit  ourselves  to  be  saints  (1  Tim.  i.  15  ;  Isa.  Ixv.  5 ;  Luke  xviii. 
11).  (2)  Nor  that  we  are  holier  than  others.  (3)  Nor  that  we  perform  duties 
aright,  (a)  Beading  the  Scripture.  (6)  Praying  (James  iv.  8).  (c)  Hearing  (Acta 
ii.  37).  {d)  Mediation  (Phil.  iii.  20).  (4)  Nor  that  we  exercise  graces  aright,  (a) 
Repentance  (2  Cor.  vii.  10).  We  may  repent  of  some  sins,  not  of  all :  and  our 
repentance  is  proportional  to  none  of  our  sins.  (5)  Faith.  It  may  be  only  histori- 
cal, or  partial  (John  i.  12),  or  upon  wrong  grounds — education,  not  Divine  testimony 
(1  John  V.  10),  or,  not  on  Christ  only  (Phil.  iii.  8,  9).  (c)  Love.  We  do  not  love 
God  with  all  our  hearts  (Matt.  xxii.  37),  nor  constantly,  (d)  Trust.  It  may  be  only 
for  spirituals  (1  Pet.  v.  7),  and  not  with  all  our  heart  (Prov.  iii.  5).  (e)  Thankful- 
ness. Not  proportional  to  our  mercies,  or  not  for  all  things  (1  Thess.  v.  18).  (/) 
Charity.  It  may  be  from  wrong  principles  (Matt,  vi.),  or  in  a  wrong  manner  (Rom. 
xii.  8).  2.  Why  not  thus  conceited  of  ourselves?  (1)  We  know  not  our  own 
hearts  (Jer.  zvii.  9).  (2)  We  are  too  apt  to  have  too  high  thoughts  of  ourselves. 
(3)  This  will  keep  us  from  looking  after  true  holiness.  3.  Uses :  Be  not  wise  in 
your  own  conceits.  (1)  Many  have  been  mistaken  (Matt.  vii.  22).  (2)  The  less 
holy  yon  are,  the  more  yon  are  apt  to  conceit  yourselves  to  be  so.  (3)  These  con- 
ceits of  hohness  are  not  consistent  with  true  grace  (James  iv.  6).  (4)  Therefore, 
80  long  as  you  conceit  yourselves  to  be  holy,  you  may  conclude  yourselves  to  be 
sinful.  (5)  You  shall  not  be  judged  by  your  own  conceits,  but  by  the  law  of  God. 
4.  Directions.  (1)  Oft  consult  your  own  hearts  (Psa.  iv.  4).  (2)  Compare  your 
actions  with  God's  laws.  (3)  Still  remember  what  a  fearful  thing  it  is  to  be  mis- 
taken in  a  thing  of  this  weight.  (Bp.  Beveridge.)  Be  not  wise  in  your  own  con- 
ceitt; — I.  Thb  conduct  condemned.  1.  An  undue  estimate  of  one's  own  opinion. 
2.  The  immodest  expression  of  it.  II.  Its  prevalence.  Even  among  Cluristian 
professors.  III.  Its  obioin.  1.  Ignorance.  2.  Pride.  IV.  Its  impbopbiett.  1. 
It  is  o£fensive  to  others.  2.  It  destroys  unity.  3.  It  is  utterly  opposed  to  the  Spirit 
of  Christ.  4.  It  exposes  a  man  to  merited  humiUation.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Be  not 
wise  in  your  own  conceits : — I.  The  teupeb  descbibed.  The  persistent  assertions 
of  your  own — 1.  Opinions.  2.  Judgment.  3.  Plans.  II.  Its  follt.  It  assumes 
— 1.  That  yon  have  nothing  to  learn.  2.  That  you  are  incapable  of  error.  3.  That 
you  are  wiser  than  everybody  else.  III.  Its  evil.  1.  It  offends  others.  2.  Gene- 
rates strife.  3.  Is  inconsistent  with  the  Christian  spirit.  (Ibid.)  Self  wisdom  v. 
Divine  wisdom : — The  text  repeats  the  warning  of  xi.  25,  and  recalls  Prov.  iii.  7. 
But  it  is  not  to  be  understood  of  speculative  opinion.  It  refers  to  the  practical 
"prudence  "  which  guides  men  in  business  and  in  the  ventures  and  contingencies 
of  life.  It  might  be  rendered — "Become  not  prudent  by  yourselves."  The  accepted 
translation  is  unfortunate,  suggesting  a  sense  the  word  never  bears.    Note — L  Thb 

SPECIAL   DANOEB    ChBISTIANS   ABE   IN  WITH  BESFECT   TO   THIS   PBUDENCE.      1.    It  is  the 

result  of  a  natural  instict.  The  general  source  of  it  is  the  tendency  to  make  "self" 
the  measure  and  end  of  everything.  The  selfish  man  is  short-sighted  and  self- 
opiniated  ;  or  he  gives  undue  weight  to  the  maxims  of  earthly  prudence.  2.  It  is 
confirmed  by  the  general  opinion  and  practice  of  men.  The  proverbs  of  the  world 
are  for  the  most  part  mercenary  ;  the  moralities  of  heathen  philosophy,  so  far  as 
practical,  are  but  a  refined  selfishness.  3.  The  nobler  life  of  man  is  thereby  pre- 
vented. In  modern  times  the  recognition  of  the  independence  of  all  nations  in 
regard  to  the  highest  interests  has  been  wondrously  fruitful.  For  a  man  or  a  nation, 
therefore,  to  shut  out  wilfully  the  consideration  of  others,  and  to  "  become  prudent, 
merely  for  or  bj'  itself,"  is  for  it  to  lose  its  place  in  the  commonwealth  of  knowledge, 
civilisation,  and  true  progress.  4.  The  gravest  dangers  threaten  within  the  sphere 
of  religion.  How  common  is  the  error  '*  Save  yourself "  as  a  religious  duty.  Let 
ns  beware  lest  we  have  but  exchanged  the  honest  "  competition  "  of  the  market- 
place for  a  "  consecrated  selfishness  "  baptized  with  the  name  of  Christ  1  The 
Gentile  converts  were  in  danger  of  despising  the  "  cast  off  "  Jews,  and  of  thinking 
the  grace  of  God  was  henceforth  to  be  their  own  monopoly.  Paul  warned  them 
against  the  error  (chap.  xi.  33-36).  Because  of  similar  prejudices,  missions  to  the 
heathen  have  been  obstructed.  Only  when  we  rise  to  the  height  of  this  conception 
of  Christianity  can  it  be  a  perfect  salvation  for  ourselves  as  individual  Christians. 
II.  How  THIS  DANGEB  IS  TO  BE  AVEBTED.  1.  By  constant  and  prayerful  study  of  the 
Word  of  God.  2.  By  considering  the  examples  of  holy  men,  especially  of  Christ 
Himself.  3.  By  remembering  that  we  are  aU  members  of  the  body  of  Christ,  which 
is  His  Church.  The  good  of  all  men  is  to  be  sought.  Each  must  labour  towards 
the  universal  ends  of  Christ's  kingdom  as  a  "  member  in  particular."    4.  By  giving 


696  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xh. 

heed  to  the  voice  of  God's  Spirit  within  as.  It  led  Peter  and  Paul  to  wider  fields 
of  QsefolnesB.  The  "  mind  of  Christ "  will  ever  lead  na  to  deny  ourselves,  and  take 
np  our  cross  and  follow  Him.  Bat  in  so  doing  we  shall  discover  a  Diviner  wisdom. 
In  losing  our  life  we  shall  find  it.  "  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,"  &o.  {St, 
John  A.  Frere,  M,A.) 

Ver.  17.  Recompense  to  no  man  evil  for  evil. — Kon-retaliatlon  .•— I.  What  xvna 
ABE  WE  NOT  TO  BE00MPEM8E  ?  1.  Not  to  hate  othcTs  because  they  hate  as  (Matt.  v.  44). 

2.  Not  to  curse  others  because  they  curse  us  (2  Sam.  xvi.  10 ;  Matt.  v.  44^.  8. 
Not  to  defraud  others  because  they  defraud  us  (Lev.  xix.  13 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  6).  4. 
Not  to  speak  evil  of  others  because  they  speak  evil  of  us  (Tit.  iii.  2 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  9). 
6.  Not  to  neglect  our  duty  to  them  because  they  do  it  to  us.  (1)  Praying  for  them 
(1  Tim.  ii.  1).  (2)  Pitying  their  miseries  (Rom.  xii.  15).  (3)  Helping  them  in 
their  necessities  (Gal.  vi.  10).  II.  Why  not?  1.  It  is  contrary  to  the  rule 
(Matt.  vii.  12).  2.  Hereby  we  do  ourselves  more  injury  than  they  did.  3.  Yea, 
and  more  than  we  can  do  them.  Conclusion  :  Consider — 1.  None  can  hinder  as 
without  God  (Isa.  xlv.  7).    2.  Injuries  patiently  borne  are  both  occasions  of  virtue. 

3.  It  is  better  to  bear  an  injury  than  to  cause  one.  4.  We  must  foUow  the 
Saviour's  example  (1  Pet.  ii.  23).  5.  It  is  one  of  the  noblest  virtues  of  a  Christian 
to  live  above  injuries.  {Bp.  Beveridge.)  Retaliation  is — I.  Natobal.  II. 
Foolish.  It — 1.  Fails  to  accomplish  its  own  end.  2.  Makes  matters  worse.  III. 
Unjustifiablb.  Because  it  is — 1.  To  take  the  law  into  our  own  hands.  2.  To 
assume  the  prerogative  of  God.  lY.  Unchbistian.  Because — 1.  Opposed  to  the 
Spirit  of  Christ.  2.  Inimical  to  our  own  moral  development.  3.  Utterly  forbidden. 
{J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Provide  things  honest  In  the  sight  of  all  men. — 1.  How 
PBoviDE?  1.  Think  of  them  (1  Tim.  iv.  15).  2.  Intend  them  (Psa.  xvii.  3). 
3.  Endeavour  them  (2  Pet.  i.  5).  4.  Practise  them  (1  John  iii.  18).  5. 
Continue  the  practice  of  them  (1  Cor.  xv.  58;  Bev.  ii.  25,  26).  II.  What 
honest  things?  1.  Towards  God.  (1)  Love  to  His  person  (Deut.  vi.  5).  (2) 
Faith  in  His  words  (1  John  v.  10).  (3)  Trust  on  His  promises  (Heb.  xiii.  5,  6). 
(4)  Fear  of  His  threatenings  (Amos  iii.  8).  (5)  Obedience  to  His  precepts.  2. 
Towards  men.  (1)  To  our  superiors,  subjection  (Bom.  xiii.  1).  (2)  To  our 
inferiors,  humility.  3.  To  all:  (1)  Truth  (Lev.  xix.  11).  (2)  Equity  (Lev.  xix. 
35,  36).  (3)  Love  (Matt.  v.  45).  (4)  Honour  (1  Pet.  ii.  17).  (5)  Prayers 
(1  Tim.  ii.  1).  UI.  How  ra  the  sight  of  ali>  hen  7  1.  So  as  to  make  open 
profession  of  our  religion  (Rom.  i.  16).  2.  To  manifest  our  integrity  in  it  unto 
all  (2  Cor.  viii.  21).  IV.  Why  in  the  sight  of  all  men?  1.  Negatively.  Not 
to  gain  credit  for  them  (Matt.  vi.  1).  2.  Positively.  (1)  To  stop  others  false 
accusing  us  (1  Pet.  iii.  16).  (2)  To  be  an  example  to  others  (1  Cor.  xi.  1).  (3) 
For  the  glory  of  God  (Matt.  v.  16;  1  Pet.  ii.  12).  V.  Use.  Provide  things 
honest,  &c.  Hereby  you  will — 1.  Keep  your  conscience  void  of  offence  towards 
God  and  men  (Acts  xxiv.  16).  2.  Excite  others  to  virtue  (James  v.  20.  3.  Be  an 
honour  to  religion.  4.  Be  certain  of  God's  blessing  here  (Psa.  xxxix.  12).  5.  Be 
entitled  to  heaven  hereafter.  (Bp.  Beveridge.)  Providing  things  honest  in  the 
sight  of  all  men : — I.  The  impobt  of  this  pbecept.     1.  Not  merely  live  honestly. 

2.  But  pay  attention  to  things  approved  and  beautiful  in  the  estimation  of  men. 

3.  This  implies  a  regard  not  only  for  general  consistency,  but  a  respect  for  the 
amenities  of  life.  II.  Its  impobtance.  1.  The  Christian  is  the  highest  style  of 
man.  2.  Should  be  inferior  to  none  in  moral  and  social  excellence.  3.  Should 
recommend  his  profession.  (J,  Lyth,  D.D.)  Getting  an  honest  living: — I. 
Peovide.  Such  is  the  message  of  the  whole  Bible.  Right  through  industry  is 
commended,  idleness  anathematised.  Need  we  remind  you  of  Solomon  ?  Paul  ia 
quite  as  good  in  his  way.  "  If  any  man  will  not  work,  neither  shall  he  eat." 
Starve  them  outl  Summary  procedure,  but  salutary.  Again,  "if  any  provide  not 
for  his  own,  especially  of  his  own  house,  he  hath  denied  the  faith,"  &c.  Yes;  for 
it  is  part  of  "  the  faith  once  delivered  unto  the  saints  "  that  we  should  "  provide." 
1.  It  is  well  that  we  have  to  do  so.  No  man  is  to  be  pitied  on  account  of  it.  A 
fine  thing  is  work.  It  braces  the  soul  like  iron,  quinine,  or  water,  the  body.  An 
experienced  African  traveller  says,  "  We  sicken  more  from  inactivity  than  from 
malaria."  2.  Provide.  What  ?  "  Things  " — (1)  Necessary,  Our  absolute  wants 
are  to  be  met,  (2)  But  luxuries  come  under  the  phrase  before  us.  Used  in 
moderation  they  are  not  sinful.  If  they  were,  God  would  not  set  us  so  bad  an 
example  as  to  give  them  to  us.     What  is  the  blush  on  the  apple  and  the  bloom  on 


OBAP.  zn.]  ROMANS.  537 

the  peaoh,  the  fragranoe  of  the  rose  and  the  masio  of  the  falling  wave  ?  Loxurj. 
The  oak  not  only  affords  as  wood,  but  adorns  the  landscape ;  nor  does  it  yield  an 
inch  less  wood  becaase  it  is  a  thing  of  beanty.  Even  so,  we  shall  not  be  worse, 
bat  better,  if  we  have  a  few  good  piotares  on  our  walls  and  ornaments  on  our  tables, 
if  we  enjoy  the  last  tale  or  the  newest  poem.  The  infinite  Father  gives  Hia 
children  toys  as  well  as  tools.  3.  Don't  expect  others  to  provide  for  you  ;  do  it 
yourself.  We  should  cultivate  a  manly  spirit  of  independence  and  self-help. 
According  to  a  certain  sage,  every  man  has  three  fortunes,  a  head  and  a  pair  of 
hands;  would  that  all  made  a  diligent  use  of  these  fortunes.  "  God  helps  those 
that  help  themselves,"  and  we  should  refuse  to  aid  any  others.  II.  Pbovidb 
THINO8  honest.  How  may  we  do  that?  Nobody  will  have  much  difficulty  in 
finding  out,  if  he  wishes  to  make  the  discovery.  There  are  sundry  practices  which 
may  well  be  looked  at  in  the  light  of  the  text.  1.  It  is  not  an  uncommon  thing  for 
men  to  get  into  debt  when  they  know  they  have  small  chance  of  paying.  We  are 
well  aware  of  the  mode  in  which  this  is  palliated  When  a  mob  of  rioters  were 
about  to  attack  a  fiour-mill,  Luther  stood  between  it  and  them.  "  Master,  we  must 
live,"  they  cried.  *•  I  don't  see  that :  you  •  must '  be  honest,"  answered  the  brave 
reformer.  Existence,  precious  though  it  be,  is  not  to  be  bought  at  any  price.  But 
men  are  seldom,  indeed,  called  to  make  such  a  desperate  sacrifice.  "  Trust  in  the 
Lord,  and  do  good,  so  shalt  thou  dwell  in  the  land,  and,  verily,  thou  shalt  be  fed." 
"  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,"  Ac.  Encouraged  by  these  assurances,  let 
none  of  us  compromise  his  integrity.  "Owe  no  man  anything."  Bather  than 
involve  himself  in  debt  Lord  Macaulay  sold  the  gold  medals  which  he  had  won  at 
Cambridge.  2.  Sometimes  goods  are  sold  for  what  they  are  not.  We  occasionally 
speak  about  "  getting  goods  under  false  pretences,"  but  are  they  never  got  rid  of 
under  false  pretences?  What  is  the  meaning  of  the  common  caution,  "Beware 
of  spurious  imitations  "  ?  Think,  also,  of  adulteration.  How  shamefully  is  the 
public  sometimes  imposed  on  in  what  it  eats  and  drinks.  3.  It  is  possible  for 
persons  in  situations  to  be  lax  in  their  notions  of  their  duty  to  their  employers.  If 
I  engage  to  serve  another  for  a  given  amount  of  remuneration  for  a  certain  period, 
I  thereby  sell  him  my  time,  my  energy,  my  talent,  and  if  I  withhold  it  I  am  not 
honest.  III.  Provide  things  honest  in  the  bight  op  all  men.  Not  only  be 
honest,  but  let  your  honesty  be  seen.  As  Bengel  remarks  in  connection  with  our 
text :  "  A  gem  should  not  merely  be  a  gem ;  it  should  be  properly  set  in  a  ring, 
that  its  splendour  may  meet  the  eye."  "In  the  sight  of  all  men."  1.  For  our 
own  Bakes.  In  the  long  run  he  is  trusted  who  is  trustworthy;  integrity  wins 
confidence.  If  I  deal  with  a  man  and  he  deceives  me,  I  mentally  put  a  black  mark 
against  his  name,  and  warn  others  of  him.  Thus  his  unrighteousness  injures  him, 
as,  indeed,  it  ought  to  do.  More  money  is  to  be  made  by  going  straight  than  by 
going  crooked.  2.  For  the  Church's  sake.  Nothing  is  so  prejudicial  to  the 
interests  of  religion  as  lack  of  uprightness  in  men  professing  to  be  godly.  Such 
monstrosities  remind  one  of  what  a  traveller  saw  in  a  Eussian  church — to  wit,  a 
fellow  devoutly  counting  his  rosary  with  one  hand  and  picking  a  pocket  with  the 
other.  Robert  Burns  wrote,  "  An  honest  man's  the  noblest  work  of  God."  He 
was  right.  (T.  i?.  Stevenson.)  Honourable  dealing: — A  young  man  in  a  dry- 
goods  store  in  Boston  was  endeavouring  to  sell  a  customer  some  goods.  He  had  a 
quantity  on  hand  which  he  much  desired  to  dispose  of,  as  they  were  not  of  the 
freshest  style  ;  and  the  man  seemed  inclined  to  take  them.  When  the  goods  had 
been  examined,  and  the  bargain  was  about  to  be  concluded,  the  customer  inquired : 
"  Are  these  goods  the  latest  style  ?  "  The  young  m'-n  hesitated.  He  wanted  to 
sell  the  goods,  and  it  appeared  evident  that  if  he  said  they  were  the  latest  style, 
the  man  would  take  them.  But  he  could  not  tell  a  lie,  and  he  replied :  "  They  are 
not  the  latest  style  of  goods,  but  they  are  a  very  good  style."  The  man  looked  at 
him,  examined  some  other  goods  of  later  style,  and  said  :  "  I  will  take  those  of  the 
older  style,  and  some  of  the  new  also.  Your  honesty  in  stating  the  facts  will  fasten 
me  to  this  place."  The  man  not  only  sold  his  goods,  and  kept  a  good  conscience, 
but  he  also  retained  a  customer,  whom  he  might  never  have  seen  again  if  he  had 
not  spoken  to  him  the  exact  truth.  There  is  no  permanent  gain  in  falsehood  and 
deception.  Righteousness  and  truth  are  a  sure  foundation.  ("  The  Christian," 
Boston,  U.S.A.)  An  honest  man: — Robert  Burns  wrote,  "An  honest  man's  the 
noblest  work  of  God."  He  was  right.  A  man  who  is  honest  all  round,  honest, 
towards  God,  and^  honest  towards  his  fellow-creatures,  is  the  noblest  work  of  God, 
When  urged  by  his  wife  not  to  allow  his  conscience  to  stand  in  the  way  of  fortunea 
MUtoB  said,  "  I  am  resolved  to  live  and  die  an  honest  man."    Let  us  say  the  same. 


538  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xh. 

*'  Come  gain  or  loss,  come  evil  report  or  good  report,  come  weal  or  woe,  I  am 
resolved  to  live  and  die  an  honest  man." 

Vers.  18.  If  it  be  possible,  as  much  as  lietb  in  you,  live  peaceably  with  idl  men. 
— Live  peaceably  with  all  men  : — I,  If  possiblb.  By  maintaining  a  spirit — 1. 
Upright.  2.  Meek.  3.  Peaceable.  II.  If  not  possible.  1.  Leave  yonr  cause  in 
God's  hands.  2.  Show  kindness  to  yonr  enemies.  3.  So  shall  you  secure  a  noble 
conquest.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  How  to  live  at  peace  with  all  men : — I.  Watch  oveb 
TODRSBLF.  1.  Do  not  retaliate.  2.  Be  honest.  3.  Cultivate  a  peaceable  spirit. 
II.  Commit  toubself  to  God.  1.  Instead  of  avenging  yourself  let  Him  undertake 
your  cause.  2.  Retribution  is  His  prerogative.  3.  He  will  certainly  defend  the 
right.  III.  Conciliate  vodb  enemies.  By  kindness.  You  will  thus  achieve  a 
noble  conquest  over  evil  in  yourself,  and  subdue  enmity  by  love.  {Ibid.)  Peace 
with  all  men : — I.  Is  not  always  possible.  1.  Some  are  unreasonable.  2.  Others 
contentious.  3.  With  many  it  is  impossible  to  be  at  peace  without  sacrificing 
conscience,  n.  ShouiiD  be  maintained  as  fab  as  possible — by  1.  Patience.  2. 
Prudence.  3.  ConciUation.  HE.  If  impossible,  cannot  be  sought  without 
ADVANTAGE.  The  attempt  secures — 1.  Peace  of  conscience.  2.  The  approbation  of 
God.  3.  And  consequently  Divine  interposition  in  our  favour.  (Ibid.)  Peace- 
ableness: — I.  The  general  impobt  of  the  exhortation.  1.  That  we  should 
have  a  hearty  love  and  value  for  peace  as  far  as  it  may  be  obtained.  2.  That  we 
Btudiously  direct  our  conduct  so  as  may  be  most  likely  to  reach  this  end.  II.  What 
IS  implied  in  the  qualifications  added.  1.  It  is  evidently  intimated  that  it  is 
not  always  possible  or  in  our  power  to  reach  the  desirable  end  of  peace.  Those 
who  "  seek  peace  and  pursue  it,"  according  to  the  exhortation  (Psa.  xxxvi.  14)  yet 
sometimes  find  that  it  files  from  them.  (1)  Sometimes  this  falls  out  in  common 
life,  through  the  perverse  humours  and  unreasonable  obstinacy  of  those  with 
whom  we  have  to  do.  There  are  people  in  this  world  so  captious  as  to  take  offence 
without  any  foundation.  (2)  Sometimes  it  is  not  morally  possible  to  be  at  peace 
with  men,  because  they  will  not  be  at  peace  with  us,  unless  we  will  violate  a  good 
conscience.  Peace,  though  so  desirable  a  blessing,  is  not  to  be  purchased  at  any 
rate.  For  instance — (a)  Neither  truth  nor  holiness  are  to  be  sacrificed  to  peace. 
That  would  be  to  sacrifice  our  peace  with  God  and  with  our  own  consciences  for  the 
Bake  of  peace  with  men,  which  for  certain  would  be  much  too  dear  a  bargain. 
(6)  Nor  should  we  decline  any  service  we  are  capable  of,  to  the  interest  of  Christ  or 
of  our  country,  for  fear  of  some  people's  offence.  Christian  courage  should 
extinguish  such  fears.  2.  This  addition  greatly  enforces  the  precept,  when  it  may 
consist  with  higher  obligations.  We  must  not  venture  everything  for  peace,  but  we 
should  esteem  it  worth  a  great  deal  of  pains  and  self-denial.  If  we  can  compass  it 
by  any  means  that  are  fit  for  us  to  use,  we  should  endeavour  it.  3.  It  is  implied, 
farther,  that  we  shall  have  reason  to  be  content,  though  we  should  miss  our  aim, 
if  we  have  performed  our  part.  Then  the  breach  of  peace  may  be  your  affliction, 
but  it  will  not  be  your  sin.  III.  The  extent  prescbibed  fob  oub  aim  in  this 
matter  :  •'  Live  peaceably  with  all  men."  1.  We  should  endeavour  to  live  peace- 
ably with  all  men  at  large,  as  far  as  we  have  any  concern  with  them.  Setting  aside 
the  consideration  of  their  religion  or  their  virtuous  character,  we  are  obliged  by 
the  dictates  of  nature,  and  of  Christianity  too,  to  study  peace  with  them  as  our 
fellow-creatures  ;  and  to  this  end — (1)  We  should  be  careful  to  behave  inoffensively 
to  all — to  "  give  no  offence,  neither  to  the  Jews,  nor  to  the  Gentiles,  nor  to  the 
Church  of  God"  (1  Cor.  x.  32),  that,  if  possible,  we  may  prevent  any  difference 
from  arising.  (2)  We  are  equally  concerned,  in  order  to  peace,  not  to  be  quick  in 
taking  offence.  Many  people  might  soon  have  received  proper  satisfaction  for  an 
injury  done  them  if  they  had  not  themselves  overrated  it  and  carried  their  resent- 
ment beyond  all  regular  bounds,  till  they  made  a  small  breach  wide  and  most 
difficult  to  be  healed.  (3)  We  should  be  desirous  to  regain  peace  as  soon  as  possible 
whenever  a  difference  actually  arises.  The  implacable  are  reckoned  among  the 
greatest  sinners  (Rom.  i.  31).  2.  We  should  endeavour  to  cultivate  a  more  peculiar 
peace  and  harmony  with  all  our  fellow  Christians  as  such.  IV.  The  impobtancb 
OF  A  peaceable  SPIRIT  IN  CHRISTIANITY.  It  is  many  ways  recommended  in  the 
gospel ;  as — 1.  By  showing  us  the  great  evil  of  an  unpeaceable  spirit.  It  is  the 
fruit  of  carnality,  or  of  an  undue  ascendant  which  some  fieshly  motive  or  other 
hath  over  us  (1  Cor.  iii.  3).  2.  By  representing  a  peaceable  disposition  in  a  very 
advantageous  light.  It  is  one  of  "  the  fruits  of  the  blessed  Spirit "  (Gal.  v.  22).  It 
is  mentioned  as  one  principal  thing  wherein  the  spiritual  kingdom  of  God,  or  true 


CBir.  xn.]  EOMANS.  S89 

religion  in  the  hearts  of  men,  consists  (Eom.  xiv.  17).  Christ  saw  fit  to  make  it  the 
Bubjeot  of  one  of  His  beatitudes  (Matt.  t.  9).  8.  By  the  Uvely  expressions  of  snoh 
a  temper  in  the  example  of  Christ.  He  was,  on  the  one  hand,  a  pattern  for 
observing  the  proper  limitations  to  be  attended  to  in  all  pursuits  after  peace ;  He 
ever  preferred  truth  and  duty  to  it,  an  obedience  to  His  Father  to  the  pleasing  of 
men ;  and  so  must  we.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  as  far  as  was  consistent  with  His 
higher  engagements  He  ever  showed  a  strong  disposition  to  peace.  4.  By  the 
account  it  gives  us  of  the  heavenly  world,  as  a  state  of  perfect  love  and  harmony, 
trhere  there  are  no  jarring  notes  and  affections.  When  a  good  man  dies  he  "  enters 
into  peace  "  (Isa.  Ivii.  2).  By  way  of  reflection,  then — 1.  This  may  be  sufficient  to 
vindicate  Christianity  from  the  reproaches  which  have  been  cast  upon  it  for  the 
animosities  that  have  abounded  among  Christians.  The  precepts,  the  patterns, 
the  principles  of  Christianity,  all  lead  another  way ;  they  directly  lead  to  peace- 
ableness.  2.  This  may  be  a  proper  subject  of  trial  and  self-examination.  If  we 
make  no  conscience  of  this  duty  of  peaceableness,  we  have  not  yet  entered  into  the 
spirit  of  true  Christianity.  3.  Let  us  aU,  as  we  are  exhorted  in  the  text,  cultivate 
and  exercise  a  peaceable  and  healing  disposition.  This  is  the  likeliest  way  to 
dispose  others  to  be  at  peace  with  us.  (J.  Evans,  D.D.)  The  duty  of  living 
peaceably : — I.  Livb  pbaoeablt  whbm  possiblb.  All  that  disturbance  of  man's 
peace  which  springs  from  our  lower  nature  we  are  bound  everywhere  to 
restrain.  Let  me  mention  some  provocatives  from  which  we  may  and  should 
abstain.  1.  Offensive  language.  Many  that  have  great  power  of  speech  do  not 
feel  that  God's  law  is  to  regulate  the  use  of  their  tongues.  There  are  Christian 
heads  of  families  who  shoot  across  the  table  from  day  to  day  words  which  stir  up 
the  worst  feelings  which  men  can  have.  Many  and  many  a  household  has  no 
chimney  which  carries  away  the  smoke  of  these  conflicts,  and  the  smoke  falls  down, 
leaving  harm  where  it  rests.  As  much  as  lieth  in  your  tongue,  then,  live  peaceably 
with  your  wife,  your  children,  your  servants,  and  your  fellow-men.  2.  Provoking 
carriage.  A  man  can  look  as  well  as  speak  speech.  A  nod  of  the  head,  a  Lifting 
ap  of  the  eyes,  a  shrug  of  the  shoulder,  the  whole  manner,  is  as  powerful  as  speech. 
We  have  no  right  to  be  provoking  in  our  attitudes.  3.  An  unconscious,  and  stUl 
more,  an  intended,  insolent  conduct  of  pride  toward  men.  Frequently  the  very 
presence  of  a  man  who  is  filled  with  a  spirit  of  self-importance  is  an  insult.  The 
duty  of  humihty  is  not  simply  a  duty  of  the  closet.  4.  Selfishness.  The  ten 
thousand  jealousies  and  envies  which  are  current  in  business  circles  arise  from 
inconsiderate  selfishness.  5.  The  untrained  disposition  of  jocosity.  I  mean  all 
forms  of  teasing,  jesting,  irony,  sarcasm,  wit,  which  are  indulged  in  at  another's 
expense,  and  which  are  not  "  convenient. "  Ordinarily,  this  is  practised  where  the 
victim  has  no  power  of  resistance.  You  often  see  persons  pulling  little  children's 
hair,  saying  things  that  stir  up  little  children's  feelings  ;  exposing  things  that  they 
do  not  want  to  have  known,  in  order  to  see  the  flush  on  their  cheeks  ;  or  creating  a 
laugh  at  their  expense.  Saying  disagreeable  things  in  a  calm  and  ironical  way  is 
inexcusable  There  is  a  teasing  which  is  pleasant,  and  causes  nobody  suffering  ; 
but  teasing  for  the  sake  of  making  other  people  uncomfortable  is  fiendish.  6.  The 
habit  of  contradiction  and  argument.  We  know  what  it  is  to  be  a  "bully."  We 
see  men  boasting  of  their  strength,  and  saying  provoking  things  in  the  hope  of 
getting  into  a  quarrel  with  their  fellow-men.  There  are  men  who  may  be  called 
logical  bullies.  If  you  say  anything,  they  dispute  it.  Argument  leads  to  disputa- 
tion speedily,  and  disputation  to  quarrelling,  and  quarrelling  to  ill-will.  7. 
Soandalmongering.  There  are  men  who  have  an  intuition  for  discovering  faults  in 
others.  They  see  them  as  quick  as  lightning ;  and  they  tell  of  them  wherever  they 
go.  There  are  men  who  are  vampires,  feeding  on  their  fellow-men  in  this  way. 
And  the  amount  of  ill-will  that  is  created  in  a  neighbourhood  by  tale-bearers  is 
astounding.  The  only  excuse  which  men  give  for  thus  reporting  things  that  are 
evil  in  regard  to  others  is  that  they  are  true.  But  you  have  no  right  to  report 
anything  evil  of  a  man,  even  if  it  is  true,  unless  you  have  a  benevolent  purpose. 
Every  man  has  his  train  of  infelicities.  But  as  they  sprung  from  him  they  ought 
not  to  be  carried  far  away  from  him.  A  scandal-monger  is  like  one  who  carries 
coratraband  goods ;  and  the  partaker  is  as  bad  as  the  thief.  8.  Indiscreet  frankness. 
Telling  men  unpleasant  truths  about  themselves,  telling  them  what  other  people 
have  said  about  them — this  is  generally  unwise.  Blurting  out  the  truth  about 
people  into  their  faces  is  impolite.  There  is  an  impression  that  if  a  man  has 
a  truth  he  should  let  it  fly,  hit  where  it  may.  A  doctor  might  as  well  scatter  bis 
drugs  through  the  community,  as  a  man  tell  all  he  knows  about  people  indis- 


640  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  xa, 

criminately.    Truth,  being  a  medicine,  instead  of  being  thrown  abont  heedlessly, 
and  with  brutal  barbarity,  is  to  be  administered  with  care  and  discretion.    9. 
Indiscreet  urgency  in  religious  teaching.     [There  are  many  religious  persons  who 
go  about  with  an  incisiveness  and  pertinacity  which  annoy  and  vex  people,  and 
introduce  an  element  of  disquiet  by  which  more  harm  than  good  is  done.    II.  Thxbs 
Afis  TiuKS  IK  WHICH  Tou  ouiNOT  LITE  FEACEABLT.    1.   There  are  cases  in  which, 
when  you  are  commanded  by  the  law  to  do  evil,  you  will  be  obliged  to  resist,  and 
make  great  disturbance.    And  there  are  a  great  many  other  cases  where,  in  your 
business  relations  and  social  connections,  you  will  be  placed  in  circumstances  in 
which  the  interest  of  others  pushes  you  toward  the  commission  of  evil,  but  in 
which  you  must  not  do  it.    A  river  complains  to  the  rock  on  its  bank  of  the  noise 
which  it  is  making.     Why  does  the  rock  make  the  noise  ?    Because  it  will  not 
budge,  and  the  water  will.     So  that  it  is  the  water,  and  not  the  rock,  that  makes 
the  noise.    The  rock  stood  there,  and  had  a  right  to  stand  there ;  and  if  the  water 
would  beat  against  it  and  make  a  noise,  it  was  not  the  rock's  fault.     The  man 
who  is  free  from  wickedness  is  accused  by  wicked  men  of  making  aU  the  turmoil 
and  excitement,  but  he  does  not.    You  recollect  that  when  the  tyrant  had  vexed 
and  annoyed  Israel  through  years  of  misrule,  and  the  prophet  had  attempted  to 
see  that  the  laws  were  obeyed,  and  that  the  welfare  of  the  people  was  maintained, 
the  king  said  to  him,  "  Art  thou  he  that  troubleth  Israel  ?  "    2.  Christian  virtue 
sometimes  stands  in  the  way  of  men's  pleasure.    Sometimes  it  happens  that  an 
individual  is  solicited  to  taste  wine  which  conscientiously  he  cannot  touch,  and  he 
stirs  up  great  resistance  by  refusing.     3.  Those  who  are  called  to  teach  unwelcome 
truths  must  make  up  their  minds  not  to  live  peaceably.    No  man  can  preach  the 
truth  faithfully  without  offending  men.    Our  Master  could  not  do  it.    The  apostles 
could  not.    4.  You  cannot  attempt  to  oppo«e  men's  worldly  interests  for  the  sake 
of  pubUc  morality,  for  the  reformation  of  the  community,  for  the  purification  of  the 
ballot,  without  rousing  up  an  immense  amount  of  anger.    But  somebody  must  do 
these  things.    No  Christian  man  has  a  right  to  see  the  city  in  which  he  lives  go 
down  like  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  and  put  out  no  hand  or  voice  to  save  it.  Christian 
men   are  bound  to   be   "  lights "   and  "  salt."    (H.    W.   Beecher.)        Christiana 
exhorted  to  live  peaceably: — I.  The  ddtt  hebb  enjoined.     The  expression  may 
be  taken — 1.  For  the  actual  enjoyment  of  peace  vrith  all  men :  in  which  sense  he 
only  lives  peaceably,  whom  no  man  molests.    This  cannot  be  here  intended,  because 
— (1)  So  to  live  peaceably  is  impossible  in  consequence  of — (o)  The  contentious, 
unreasonable  humour  of  many  men.   There  are  some  that,  like  so  many  salamanders, 
cannot  live  but  in  the  fire,  and  so  long  as  there  be  such,  how  can  there  be 
undisturbed  quietness?    God  must   first  weed  the  world  of  all  ill  dispositions 
before    a   universal  peace  can  grow  in  it.     (&)  The  contrary  and  inconsistent 
interests  of  many  men.     There  is  nothing  which  men  prosecute  with  so  much 
vigour  as  their  interest,  and  the  prosecution  of  contrary  interests  must  needs  be 
carried  on  by  contrary  ways,  which  will  be  sure  to  thwart  one  another.    (2)  What 
is  the  matter  of  duty  ought  to  be  in  the  power  of  him  to  whom  it  is  enjoined. 
But  it  is  not  in  my  power  to  enjoy  peace  vrith  all  men,  since  this  depends  upon 
their  behaviour  towards  me.     If  a  man  will  be  my  enemy,  I  cannot  prevent  him. 
2.  Wherefore  it  is  clear  that  the  text  is  to  be  understood  for  a  peaceable  behaviour 
towards  all  men  ;  in  which  case  he  lives  peaceably  by  whom  no  man  is  molested. 
It  consists  therefore  in — (1)  A  forbearance  of  hostile  actions.    In  a  way  of — (a) 
Prevention,  i.e.,  abstinence  from  an  injurious  invasion  upon  the  rights  of  another, 
whether  as  to  his  person  or  estate.     (6)   Non-retaliation  (1  Cor.  xiii.  7).    Fire 
sometimes  goes  out  as  much  for  want  of  being  stirred  up  as  for  want  of  fuel.    He 
who  affronts  his  brother  breaks  the  peace ;   but  he  who  repays  the  ill  turn 
perpetuates  the  breach.    And  perhaps  the  greatest  unquietness  is  not  so  much 
chargeable  upon  the  injurious  as  the  revengeful.      A  storm  ruins  nowhere  but 
where  it  is  withstood  and  repelled.     (2)  A  forbearance  of  injurious,  provoking 
words.    Rabshakeh  broke  the  peace  with  Hezekiah  as  much  by  his  railing  as  by 
his  army.     Men  resent  ugly  words  with  more  acrimony  than  they  would  stabs. 
And  the  reason  is,  because  a  wound  directs  an  evil  only  to  a  man's  person,  but  an 
ill  word  renders  him  miserable  as  far  as  he  is  known.    Besides,  it  hurts  him  so  as 
to  put  the  reparation  absolutely  out  of  his  power  ;  for  it  lodges  his  infamy  in  other 
men's  thoughts,  which  he  cannot  come  at  so  as  to  rectify  them.    II.  What  abb 

THE    HBASUBES    AND    PBOPOBTIONS    BY    WHICH    IT    IS    TO    BB   DETEBMINED.      "If   It   be 

possible,"  i.e.,  morally,  lawfully  possible  (Oen.  xxxix.  9 ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  8).     Where, 
then,  the  breaking  of  the  peace  is  not  unlawful,  there  the  maintaining  of  it  ceases 


CBAP.  xn.]  ROMANS.  541 

to  be  s  necessary  daty.    Apply  this  to — 1.  War.    (1)  Is  it  lawful?    Tes,  if  in  a 
good  caose,  yiz. — (a)  Defensive;  in  order  to  repel  tm  evil  designed  to  the  public; 
and  therefore  is  an  act  of  self-preservation,    (b)  Offensive ;  for  revenging  a  pablio 
injory  done  to  a  commonity,  and  so  is  an  act  of  justice.    And  further,  the  Baptist, 
Christ,  and  the  apostles  judged  the  employment  of  a  soldier  lawful.    (2)  When  and 
where  ought  it  to  be  judged  so?    When  those  with  whom  we  are  at  peace— ^a) 
Declare  that  they  will  annoy  us  unless  we  mangle  our  bodies  (1  Sam.  xi.  2).     [b) 
Declare  war  with  us,  unless  we  renounce  our  religion,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Armada, 
(c)  Injure  us  as  a  nation  so  as  to  blast  our  honour,  which  honour  is  as  necessary  to 
the  welfare  and  support  of  a  nation  as  its  commerce,     {d)  Declare  war  with  ua 
unless  we  will  quit  our  civil  rights.    2.  Self-defence.    (1)  If  a  man  has  no  other 
means  of  escape  it  is  lawful  from — (a)  The  great  natural  right  of  self-preservation, 
which  is  as  full  in  individuals  as  in  public  bodies,    [b)  That  place  where  Christ 
commands  His  disciples  to  provide  themselves  swords.    To  have  allowed  them  the 
instruments  of  defence,  and  at  the  same  time  to  have  forbid  the  use  of  them 
as  unlawful,  had  been  irrational,    (c)  The  suffrage  of  the  civil  law.     (2)  What  are 
those  things  which  may  be  thus  defended,    (a)  Life.    For  where  it  is  lawful  to 
live,  it  is  lawful  to  do  all  those  things  without  which  life  cannot  be  preserved.    (5) 
Limbs.    For  who  knows  bat  the  loss  of  a  part  may  bring  the  destruction  of  the 
whole  f    (c)  Chastity.    For  this  is  as  irreparable  as  life  itself ;  and  to  lose  one's  life 
is  indeed  a  misery,  but  it  is  no  dishonour,     (d)  Estate  or  goods.     Before  I  pass  on 
I  shall  add  that  whatsoever  is  lawful  for  a  man  to  do  for  himself,  is  lawful  for  him  to 
do  for  his  neighbour ;  for  we  are  commanded  to  •'  love  our  neighbour  as  ourselves." 
(8)  The  conditions  required  to  legalise  such  a  defence  of  ourselves  and  fortunes. 
(a)  That  the  violence  offered  be  so  apparent,  so  great  and  pressing,  that  there  can 
be  no  other  means  of  escape,     (b)  That  all  possibiUty  of  recourse  to  the  magistrate 
for  a  legal  protection  be  taken  away.    In  which  case  the  law  leaves  every  man  to 
his  own  natural  defence,     (c)  That  a  man  designs  merely  his  own  defence,  without 
any  revenge  towards  the  person  who  thus  invades  him.    8.  Litigation.     This  is 
allowable  when  it  is  to  secure  the  execution  of  justice  in  the  proper  acts  of  it 
between  man  and  man.    If  Chiistianity  prohibits  aU  pursuit  of  a  man's  right  at 
law,  then  its  observance  unavoidably  draws  after  it  the  utter  dissolution  of  all 
government  and  society.    He  that  has  the  strongest  arm,  the  sharpest  sword,  the 
boldest  front,  and  the  falsest  heart,  must  possess  the  world.    Tet  since  men  are  too 
prone  to  stretch  their  just  allowances  beyond  their  bounds,  note  those  conditions 
that  are  required  to  warrant  men  in  their  law  contentions,     (a)  That  a  man  takes 
not  this  course  but  upon  a  very  great  and  urgent  cause.     Every  little  wrong  and 
trespass  is  not  a  sufficient  warrant  for  me  to  disturb  my  neighbour's  peace.     (6) 
That  a  man  be  willing,  upon  any  tolerable  and  just  terms,  to  agree  with  his 
adversaiT,  rather  than  to  proceed  to  a  suit,    i^c)  Supposing  great  cause  and  no 
satisfaction,  that  the  injured  person  manage  his  suit  by  the  rule  of  charity,  and 
not  with  any  purpose  to  revenge  himself  upon  his  adversary.    III.  Thb  means 
coNDucraiiB  TO  ocB  PERFOBMANCE  OF  THIS  EXCELiiENT  DUTY.    1.  A  carcful  Suppres- 
sion of  all  distasteful,  aggravating  apprehensions   of  any  ill  turn    or    unkind 
behaviour  from  men.    It  is  the  morose   dwelling   of  the  thoughts    upon    an 
injury  that  incorporates  and  rivets  it  into  the  mind.    2.  The  forbearing  of  all 
pragmatical  or  malicious  informations.    "  He  that  repeateth  a  matter  separateth 
very  friends."    The  reporting  what  such  a  one  said  or  did  is  the  way  to  kindle 
such  heart-burnings  between  persons,  as  oftentimes  break  forth  and  flame  to  the 
consumption  of  families,  courts,  and  perhaps  at  length  of  cities  and  kingdoms. 
3.  That  men  would  be  willing  in  some  cases  to  waive  the  proseontion  of  their  rights. 
As — (1)  When  the  recovery  of  a  right  seems  impossible :  prudence  and  duty  then 
call  upon  a  man  to  surcease  the  prosecution  of  that,  and  rather  to  follow  peace. 
(2)  When  that  right  is  but  trivial,  but  the  recovery  of  it  troublesome  and  contentions. 
That  which  being  lost  makes  a  man  not  much  the  poorer,  nor  recovered,  much  the 
richer,  cannot  authorise  him  to  enter  into  the  din  of  a  long  contest.    {3)  When  a 
recompense  is  offered.     (4)  To  reflect  upon  the  great  example  of  Christ,  and  the 
strict  injunction  lying  upon  us  to  follow  it.    We  shall  find  that  his  whole  life 
went  in  constant  recession  from  his  own  rights,  in  order  to  the  peace  of  the  public. 
6.  Not  to  adhere  too  pertinaciously  to  our  own  judgments  of  things  doubtful  in 
themselves  in  opposition  to  the  judgment  of  those  who  are  more  skilful  in  those 
things.    IV.  The  motives  and  abquments  bt  which  this  dtjtt  mat  bb  enforced. 
1.  The  excellency  of  the  thing  itself.     "  Peace  "  is  a  Divine  title  (chap.  xv.  33 ; 
Xm.  ix.  6).    The  first  message  that  was  sent  from  heaven  upon  Christ's  nativity  was  a 


649  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xn, 

message  of  peace  (Lake  ii.  14).  His  whole  doctrine  is  called  "  the  gospel  of  peace," 
and  "  the  word  of  peace  "  (chap,  x,  15).  The  last  legacy  that  He  bequeathed  to  Hia 
disciples  was  peace  (John  ziv.  27).  Peace  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the 
hearts  of  believers  {Go\-  ▼•  22),  and  both  the  effect  and  reward  of  piety  is  peace 
(chap.  XV.  13).  2.  The  excellency  of  the  principle  from  which  it  proceeds.  It  is 
from  a  pious,  generous,  and  great  mind.  Little  things  are  querulous ;  and  the 
wasp  much  more  angry  and  troublesome  than  the  eagle.  3.  The  blessing  entailed 
upon  it  by  a  peculiar  promise  (Matt.  v.  9).  Note  two  instances  of  this  blessing 
that  attend  the  peaceable  in  this  world.  (1)  An  easy,  undisturbed,  and  quiet  enjoy- 
ment of  themselves.  (2)  Honour  and  reputation.  Their  report  survives  them, 
and  their  memory  is  blessed.  {R.  South,  D.D.)  Peaceable  living  not  always 
possible : — The  wisest  men,  the  best  men,  the  most  thoughtful  men,  the  men  who 
are  most  studious  of  peace,  may  have  contention  forced  upon  them.  Lot  could  not 
live  peaceably  with  the  inhabitants  of  Sodom — to  his  great  credit.  Moses  could  not 
live  at  peace  with  Egypt,  when  he  saw  his  people  oppressed.  It  would  have  been 
a  shame  if  he  could.  Samuel  could  not  live  at  peace  when  the  king,  despotic, 
arrogant,  fractious,  was  misleading  the  people.  David  could  not  live  at  peace  with 
Saul — Saul  would  not  let  him.  The  prophets  could  not  live  at  peace  with  the 
idolatrous  people  whom  they  were  sent  to  instruct  and  rebuke,  and  who  would  not 
be  corrected  nor  reformed.  Jesus  could  not  live  at  peace.  The  most  genial,  and 
gentle,  and  meek,  and  merciful,  and  loving  of  all  beings  was  He ;  and  yet  it  was 
unpossible  that  He  should  live  at  peace  with  His  own  countrymen,  in  His  own 
time.  Therefore  you  find  it  said,  "If  it  be  possible."  In  this  great  quarrelsome 
world  it  is  not  made  obligatory  on  a  man  to  be  at  peace  with  his  fellow-men  anyhow. 
The  command  begins  with  the  implication  that  it  is  not  always  possible.  The 
qualification  is,  "  as  much  as  lieth  in  you."  You  may  be  at  discords  ;  but  see  to  it 
that  you  do  not  produce  them.  Let  them  be  the  result  of  other  men's  misconduct,  and 
not  of  yours.  \H.  W.  Beecher.)  Peaceableness  : — Here  is — I.  The  pbefaok — 
"  If  it  be  possible."    Which  words  may  be  looked  on — 1.  As  limiting  the  command. 

(1)  "  If  it  be  possible  " ;  for  it  may  be  impossible  (Matt,  xviii.  7).  Because  of — (a) 
other's  malice  (James  iv.  1).  (b)  Our  own  conscience  (Acts  xxiv.  16)  in  reproving 
others ;  in  standing  for  the  truth.  (2)  '•  As  much  as  in  you  lies."  (a)  That  we 
do  not  disturb  the  peace  ourselves.  (6)  Nor  give  occasion  to  others  to  do  it. 
2.  As  strengthening  the  command,  so  that  we  are  to  perform  it  to  the  utmost  of 
our  power.  II.  The  command.  "  Live  peaceably  with  all  men."  Here  is — 1.  The 
command.    What  is  it  to  live  peaceably  ?     (1)  Give  offence  to  none  (Matt,  xviii.  7). 

(2)  Pass  by  others'  offences  to  you  (1  Cor.  xiii.  7).  (3)  Construe  things  in  their 
best  sense  (1  Cot.  xiii.  6).  (4)  Part  with  something  of  your  own  right  (Gen.  xiii.  8, 9). 
(5)  Have  a  care  of  those  passions  that  cause  strife  (James  iv.  1).  (a)  Anger 
(Eph.  iv.  26,  31).  (6)  Envy  (James  iii.  14).  (c)  Pride  (Prov.  xiii.  10).  (d)  Hatred 
and  malice  (1  Jonn  iii.  15).  (e)  Implacableness  (Rom.  i.  31 ;  Psa.  cxxx.  5-7).  2.  The 
extent — "  To  all  men"  (Heb.  xii.  14).  1.  To  superiors  (Rom.  xiii.  1 ;  Matt.  xvii.  27). 
2.  Inferiors.  8.  Equals.  Conclusion  :  Consider — 1.  Ye  know  not  where  the  least 
strife  may  end.  2.  It  disturbs  you  as  much  as  others  (Luke  xxi.  19).  3.  If  you 
live  in  peace,  God  will  be  with  you  (1  Kings  11-13  ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  11).  {Bp.  Beveridge.) 
Irascible  persons  not  to  be  provoked : — In  the  Jardin  des  Plantes  we  saw  a  hooded 
snake  in  a  most  unamiable  condition  of  temper.  There  was  a  thick  glass  and  a 
stout  wire  between  us,  and  we  did  nothing  but  look  at  him,  yet  he  persisted 
in  darting  at  us  with  the  utmost  vehemence  of  malice,  until  the  keeper  requested  as 
to  move  away,  with  the  advice  that  it  was  not  well  to  irritate  such  creatures. 
When  one  meets  with  an  irascible  person,  on  the  look  out  to  pick  a  quarrel,  ill- 
conditioned,  and  out  of  elbows  with  the  whole  world,  it  is  best  to  move  on,  and 
let  him  alone.  Even  if  he  can  do  you  no  harm,  and  if  his  irritation  be  utterly 
unreasonable,  it  is  best  to  remove  all  exciting  causes  of  provocation,  for  it  is  never 
wise  to  irritate  vipers.  You  do  not  on  purpose  walk  heavily  across  the  floor  to 
teach  a  gouty  man  that  you  have  no  respect  for  his  tender  feelings  since  he  ought 
not  to  be  so  susceptible ;  neither  should  yoa  vex  those  afflicted  with  a  bad  temper, 
and  then  plead  that  they  have  no  right  to  be  so  excitable.  If  our  neighbours' 
tempers  are  gunpowder,  let  us  not  play  with  fire.    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  19-21.  Avenge  not  yourselves,  but  rather  give  place  unto  wrath. — Avenge 
not  yourselves  : — The  prohibition  urged  by  snch  considerations  as — 1.  Our  own  peace 
and  happiness.  There  is  nothing  so  wretched  as  the  harassing  disquietudes  of  angry 
imd  revengeful  passions.    The  spirit  of  revenge  is  like  the  shelving  rocks  in  the 


CHAP,  xn.]  ROMANS.  518 

bottom  of  the  deep,  which  cause  the  waters  to  boil  in  the  foaming  whirlpool — tha 
Bpirit  of  forgiveness  and  love  keeps  the  soul  "  Cabn  and  unruffled  as  a  summer  aea." 
2.  Self-partiality  unfits  us  for  measuring  correctly  the  amount  of  injuries  done  to 
ourselves,  and  consequently  the  amount  of  vengeance  due.  No  man  is  a  proper 
judge  in  his  own  cause.  3.  We  are  very  incompetent  judges  of  the  motives  by 
which  others  are  actuated.  We  may  inflict  "  vengeance  "  where  there  ought  to  be 
approbation  and  grateful  reward.  4.  When  we  do  exceed  in  our  vengeance,  what 
is  the  consequence  ?  All  such  excess  is  injury.  This  injury  calls  for  revenge  in 
return.  Thus  there  is  no  prospect  but  of  perpetuated  wrong,  and  interminable 
hostility.  Thus  there  is  wisdom  in  the  interdiction — Divine  wisdom  in  Deity 
retaining  the  right  to  recompense  in  His  own  hands.  He,  and  He  alone,  can 
infallibly  appreciate  the  amount  of  culpability  ;  and  can  alone,  therefore,  apportion 
the  punishments.  {K.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  The  sinfulness  of  private  revenge: — I. 
What  this  revenge  is  that  is  so  sinful  and  dishonouring  to  God,  whose  provincb 
ALONE  VENGEANCE  IS.  1.  There  is  a  public  and  authoritative  revenge,  belonging  to 
such  as  are  invested  with  a  lawful  authority.  This  is  necessary,  and  is  done  by 
the  authority  of  God.  Thus  the  magistrate  has  power  to  revenge  wrongs  in  the 
state  (chap.  xiii.  4),  Church-rulers  in  the  Church  (2  Cor.  x  6),  and  masters  in 
families  (Gen.  xvi.  6).  And  persons  wronged  seeking  redress  from  those  to  whom 
the  public  revenge  belongs  is  a  lawful  thing  (Luke  xviii.  3).  2.  There  is  a  private 
and  personal  revenge  which  is  sinful,  viz.,  that — (1)  Taken  by  those  in  authority, 
out  of  ill-will  to  the  wrongdoer.  They  are  revengers  to  execute  (chap.  xiii.  4)  not 
their  own  wrath,  but  God's.  (2)  Sought  from  those  in  authority,  which  is  neither 
necessary  for  the  public  good,  nor  the  amendment  of  the  offender,  nor  the  safety  of 
the  party  hurt.  Let  those  take  heed  who  fly  to  their  law  pleadmg  on  every  trifling 
occasion,  just  to  gratify  their  own  passion  (Matt.  v.  40).  (3)  Taken  by  those  not  in 
authority  nor  acting  in  a  public  capacity,  but  at  the  command  of  their  passion,  (a) 
By  words.  The  tongue  is  as  real  an  instrument  of  revenge,  as  the  hands,  swords, 
or  spears,  (b)  By  deeds  (Prov.  xxvi.  39),  (c)  By  omission  of  duty  owing  to  the 
offending  party,  contrary  to  ver.  20.  Besiegers  may  revenge  themselves  as  much 
by  starvation  as  by  storming.  II.  The  sinfulness  and  dishonour  xo  God  in  this 
BETENOE.  1.  It  is  directly  opposite  to  the  love  of  our  neighbour,  the  fundamental 
law  of  the  second  table  (Lev.  xix.  18).  2.  It  is  unjust  violence,  as  assuming  and 
exercising  a  power  which  God  never  gave  us.  And  as  unjust  violence  ever  was  so 
it  will  ever  be  highly  dishonourable  to  God  the  Judge  and  Protector  of  all  (Gen.  vi. 
11).  Men  are  not  left  like  beasts,  among  whom  the  stronger  command  the  weaker ; 
but  God  has  set  laws  for  both.  3.  It  cannot  reach  the  true  ends  of  revenge,  which 
God  hath  settled,  viz.,  the  amendment  of  the  party  offending  (chap.  xiii.  14),  the 
public  good  (Deut.  xix.  20),  and  the  safety  of  the  wronged  (1  Tim.  ii.  2).  Private 
revenge  only  irritates  the  party  smarting  by  it,  gives  a  scandalous  example  to  others, 
and  involves  the  revenger  and  others  in  much  trouble.  4.  It  is  void  of  all  equity : 
for  in  it  a  man  is  accuser,  judge,  and  executioner,  aU  in  his  own  cause.  Who  would 
reckon  that  fair  in  another's  case  ?  6.  It  is  an  invading  of  authority,  a  taking  out 
of  their  hand  what  God  has  put  in  it.  Therefore  the  apostle  immediately  subjoins 
the  duty  of  subjects  and  magistrates  (chap  xiii.).  Family  revengers  invade  the 
Master's  authority ;  Church-revengers  the  authority  of  the  Church-rulers ;  and 
civil  revengers  the  office  of  the  magistrate.  6.  It  is  an  invading  of  the  authority 
of  God  (Psa.  xciv.  1 ;  Nah.  i.  2).  He  only  is  fit  to  have  it  in  His  hand  :  for  He  is 
omniscient ;  we  know  httle,  and  are  liable  to  mistakes ;  He  is  without  passions,  we 
are  ready  to  be  bhnded  by  them  :  He  is  the  common  Father  and  Judge  of  all,  most 
just  and  impartial,  we  are  prejudiced  in  our  own  favours.  III.  Practical  improve- 
ment. 1.  We  may  hence  take  occasion  to  lament — (1)  The  state  of  human  nature 
in  general.  (2)  The  state  of  our  nature  in  particular  so  ready  to  revenge.  2. 
It  serves  to  reprove — (1)  Those  who  allow  themselves  in  scolding  those  who  they 
conceive  have  wronged  them  (2  Sam.  xvi.  7,  8 ;  Matt.  iv.  31,  v.  22).  (2)  Those  who 
end  their  quarrels  in  blows  and  fightings  (Matt.  xxvi.  52;  Gal.  v.  19-21.)  (3) 
Those  who  are  sure  to  do  an  ill  turn  to  those  who  have  wronged  them,  if  it  lie  in 
their  power.  (4)  Those  who  make  no  conscience  of  doing  their  duty  to  those  who 
have  wronged  them,  but  carry  towards  them  as  if  their  offence  loosed  them  from 
all  bonds  of  duty  to  them,  and  so  satisfy  their  revenge  (Matt.  v.  44-46).  3.  Eevenge 
not  yourselves,  but  rather  give  place  to  the  wrath  of  your  adversary.  To  press  this, 
I  offer  the  following  motives.  (1)  This  is  true  excellency  and  bravery  of  spirit,  (a) 
In  this  ye  will  resemble  the  spirit  Jesus  was  actuated  by  (1  Pet.  ii.  23  :  Luke  xxiiL 
34).    "  Ye  shall  be  as  gods  "  was  the  height  of  ambition  that  men  assired  to  very 


BU  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  {cms.  xxt. 

soon.  Behold  an  allowable  way  how  we  may  be  like  oar  Lord  I  (&)  Te  will  show  a 
generous  contempt  of  the  impotent  malice  of  an  evil  world  (Lake  xxi.  19).  The 
moon  retains  her  brightness  though  the  cur  barks  at  her.  (c)  Ye  will  show  yoar- 
Bslves  masters  of  your  own  spirit  (Prov.  xvi.  32).  (d)  Ye  may  overcome  him  that 
wrongs  you  (ver.  20).  (2)  Consider  the  wrong  done  to  God  by  your  revenging  your- 
selves. Ye  impeach — (a)  His  justice,  as  if  He,  like  Gallio,  cared  for  none  of  these 
things.  (&)  His  wisdom,  saying  in  e£fect  that  God's  method  of  vengeance  is  not 
fitted  to  reach  the  end.  (c)  His  veracity,  and  refuse  to  believe  His  word,  that  He 
will  repay.  (3)  Revenge  is  a  most  ensnaring  thing.  It  is  a  sacrifice  to  passioUf 
and  involves  the  soul  in  guilt  sometimes  past  remedy.  (4)  It  is  inconsistent  with 
peace  with  heaven  and  pardon  (Matt.  vL  15).  4.  Objections:  (1)  The  Scripture 
saith  "  Eye  for  eye,  and  tooth  for  tooth."  Answer :  That  was  the  law,  the  execu- 
tion of  which  was  committed  to  the  magistrate,  and  does  not  belong  to  private 
persons.  (2)  If  we  put  up  with  one  injury,  we  will  get  more.  Answer :  Ver.  20 
says  not  so.  (3)  It  is  not  manly  not  to  revenge  affronts  and  wrongs.  Answer :  It 
is  childishness.  It  is  brutishness ;  anger  a  dog,  and  he  will  be  ready  to  fiy  at  your 
face.  It  is  foolishness  (Eccles.  vii.  9).  Was  David  not  manly  that  revenged  not 
himself  on  Saul?  Saul  says  otherwise  (1  Sam.  xxiv.  18-21).  (4)  How  then  should 
we  do  in  the  case  of  affronts  and  wrongs  ?  (a)  Arm  yourselves  with  meekness  smd 
patience.  (&)  Learn  to  bear  with  one  another,  and  to  be  always  ready  to  forgive 
(CoL  UL  13;  Matt,  xviii.  21,  22).  (c)  In  matters  of  weight,  where  redress  is 
necessary,  apply  to  those  for  it  who  are  vested  with  authority  for  that  end  (chap, 
xiii.  4).  Only  do  it  not  from  a  spirit  of  revenge,  (d)  Where  redress  is  not  to  be 
expected,  put  the  matter  in  the  Lord's  hand,  and  wait  for  Him  (Prov.  xx.  22).  («) 
Live  by  faith,  keeping  your  eye  on  Christ  the  fountain  of  strength,  the  pattern  of 
meekness,  and  on  the  judgment  to  come,  when  justice  shall  be  done  to  every  one. 
(T.  Boston^  D.D.)  Revenge,  a  noble : — A  letter  from  Lady  Frederick  Cavendish, 
written  in  answer  to  a  request  of  the  Bev.  S.  Lloyd,  who  had  asked  permission  to 
dedicate  to  her  a  sermon  upon  the  assassination  of  the  Chief  Secretary,  said : 
"  The  Dublin  disclosures  do  indeed  teach  the  awful  lesson  contained  in  the  last 
verse  of  the  third  chapter  of  2  SamueL  You  will,  I  am  sure,  forgive  me  if  I  beg 
you,  before  sending  the  MS.  to  the  printers,  to  look  through  it  first,  with  the 
special  view  of  seeing  if  there  is  any  word  that  could  be  turned  into  a  desire  for 
vengeance.  You  will  readily  understand  how  I  must  shrink  from  any  such  feeling. 
I  would  rather,  as  far  as  I  reverently  may,  adopt  the  Lord's  prayer  on  the  Cross — 
*  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  do.'  The  law,  I  know,  must 
take  its  course,  for  the  sake  of  the  unhappy  country  itself.  I  pray  that  neither  the 
unspeakable  greatness  of  my  sorrow  nor  the  terrible  wickedness  of  those  men  may 
ever  blind  either  myself  or  any  of  the  English  people  to  the  duty  of  patience, 
justice,  and  sympathy  in  our  thoughts,  words,  and  deeds  with  regard  to  Ireland  and 
its  people  at  large."  Revenge,  meanness  of: — ^Eevenge  is  a  cruel  word:  manhood, 
some  call  it ;  but  it  is  rather  doghood.  The  manlier  any  man  is,  the  milder  and 
more  merciful,  as  Julius  Ctesar,  who,  when  he  had  Pompey's  head  presented  to 
him,  wept,  and  said,  "  I  seek  not  revenge,  but  victory."  (J.  Trapp.)  Revenge, 
punishment  of: — On  him  that  takes  revenge,  revenge  shall  be  taken;  and  by  a  real 
evil  he  shall  dearly  pay  for  the  goods  that  are  but  airy  and  fantastical.  It  is  like  a 
rolling  stone  which,  when  a  man  hath  forced  up  a  hiU,  will  return  upon  him  with  a 
greater  violence,  and  break  those  bones  whose  sinews  gave  it  motion.  (Bp.  Taylor.) 
The  Christianas  conduct  under  injury  : — I.  The  occasion  is  common — arising  out  of — 
1.  Human  depravity  in  general ;  or — 2.  The  hatred  of  wicked  men  to  that  which  is 
good.  II.  The  duty  is  plain — 1.  Bear  with  patience.  2.  Yield  to  the  wrong.  3. 
Leave  it  to  the  judgment  of  God.  IH.  The  reason  is  cogent.  Vengeance — 1. 
Is  the  prerogative  of  God.  2.  Will  certainly  be  executed.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
"  Avenge  not  yourselves  " : — "  What  ?  "  will  be  the  reply,  "  when  our  memory  ia 
smarting  with  the  sense  of  injury ;  when  our  neighbour  has  transgressed  all  the 
laws  of  God  and  man  towards  us,  are  we  to  show  him  that  mercy  which  we  do  not 
receive  ?  Are  our  hands  to  be  tied  by  religion,  while  his  are  at  full  liberty  ?  What 
security  would  there  be  then  remaining  for  our  property  or  our  persons ;  and  to 
what  end  are  we  to  be  mocked  by  these  gifts  of  strength,  or  courage,  which  we  are 
forbidden,  even  in  self-defence,  to  employ? "  1.  In  answer  to  these  objections,  we 
may  remark,  first,  that  to  repel  or  resist  an  injury  is  not  forbidden.  Self-defence 
is  a  very  different  thing  from  revenge.  The  latter  cannot  plead  necessity.  2.  Bat, 
secondly,  it  is  not  only  our  duty  to  do  our  enemies  no  harm,  we  must  if  they  need 
our  assistance  be  ready  to  do  item  good.    "  If  thine  enemy  hanger,  feed  mm ;  if 


our.  xn.]  ROMANS.  645 

he  thirst,  give  him  drink."  And,  strange  as  it  maj  seem,  this  is  the  wisest  as  well 
as  the  most  Christian  course  we  can  pursue.  In  the  first  place,  hj  these  acts  of 
kindness  we  make  our  own  task  easier  of  combating  oar  resentment  and  extinguish- 
ing every  spark  of  malice  in  our  hearts.  Again,  in  point  of  safety,  this  is  the  best 
and  surest  coarse.  If  we  are  apprehensive  of  future  injuries  from  our  enemy,  what 
method  so  likely  to  indispose  him  to  mischief  ?  But  lastly,  if  it  fail  to  oonciliata 
him,  there  is  One,  at  least,  a  migh^  friend,  a  powerful  defender,  whose  assistanoa 
we  gain.  God  is  on  the  side  of  the  merciful.  It  is  true,  besides,  that  there  is 
nothing  to  a  proud  temper  so  painful  as  to  owe  an  obligation  to  an  enemy.  {Bp. 
Eeber.)  On  conduct  under  vjrongi : — I.  It  is  an  important  question,  whetheb 
THB  0BJ20T  07  BKVBMas  BB  BBALLT  AM  XMSKT.  WroDg  may  exist  uowbere  but  in 
onr  own  erring  fancy,  or  diseased  acuteness  of  feeling.  U.  But  if  the  conduct  of 
GOT  neighbour  have  given  us  substantial  hurt,  another  necessary  question  will  next 
arise: — Was  thk  injuby  which  hb  infuctbd  intentional  7  It  is  i^'.  impossible 
that  we  regard  as  a  deliberate  affront  that  which  was  intended  as  an  act  of  the 
warmest  kindness.  How  often  are  the  affectionate  warnings  of  a  wise  counsellor 
construed  by  a  headstrong  youth  into  an  assumption  of  superiority  ?  III.  Suppose 
now  that  there  exist  both  injury  and  malevolence  ;  it  yet  remains  for  our  attentive 
recollection,  webthbb  wb  wbbb  not,  oxrssBiiVBs,  thb  zibst  aooressobs  ?  Did  not 
oar  adversary  inflict  the  wound  in  self-defence?  in  resistance  of  oox  improper 
deportment  ?  IV.  But  indeed,  in  point  of  prudence,  whether  we  ourselves  were  the 
original  aggressors  or  not,  a  bstobtbd  offenob  is  new  matteb  or  pbovocation, 
and  almost  infallibly  ensures  a  reiterated  blow.  It  may  be  that  the  wrath  of  the 
foe  has  spent  itself  in  the  first  assault.  He  may  have  been  satisfied ;  he  may  have 
forgotten  you.  What  folly  then  will  it  now  be  to  rekindle  that  fiame  which  had 
died  away  of  itself.  Y.  In  the  next  place  it  deserves  continual  remembrance,  that 
BBVBNOE  IS  NOT  BT  ANT  HBANS  oiTB  PBOviNcx.  God  alouc  is  qualified  to  apportion 
the  measure  of  retribution,  because  He  alone  has  a  full  and  exact  view  of  the  injury. 
Add  to  this,  that  there  is  something  exceedingly  preposterous  and  presumptuous  in 
one  sinful  beiug's  becoming  the  judge  and  executioner  of  another.  VI.  If,  how- 
ever, it  should  be  pretended,  that  thus  wholly  to  transfer  the  exercise  of  recompense 
to  the  Almighty,  or  to  His  established  vicegerent,  is  an  effort  of  principle  too  diffi- 
cult to  be  at  all  times  expected  from  frail  humanity,  vabious  and  weighty  con- 

BIDEBATIONS    YET    BEMAIN     FOB    OVEBOOHINa    AN    INCLINATION   TO    BEVENQE.      Hardly 

the  most  violent  would  deem  resentment  equitable,  if  the  aggression,  after  inflicting 
a  momentary  pain,  shall  in  the  course  of  events,  or  by  a  combination  of  circum- 
stances, have  in  any  degree  conduced  to  the  advantage  of  the  sufferer.  That 
calumny  which  has  humbled  us  in  the  opinion  we  had  falsely  conceived  of  ourselves, 
and  reduced  our  mental  stature  to  its  just  dimensions ;  any  substantial  injustice 
which  has  furnished  us  with  experience  of  the  deceitf ulness  of  the  world  and  intro- 
duced QB  to  an  acquaintance  with  true  religion,  ought  surely  to  soften,  even  to 
dispel  our  ill-will  towards  the  individual  who  hath  been  the  unconscious  bestower 
of  these  spiritual  benefits.  VH.  This  view  of  the  subject  suggests  another  of 
similar  nature;  I  mean  the  pbopbiety  of  BEOABDiNa  the  wound  we  have  sus- 
tained AS  HAVING  PROCEEDED  ORIGINALLY  FROM  GoD ;  and  him  whom  we  call  our 
enemy  as  no  more  than  the  weapon  of  Divine  justice  which  chastises,  or  of  Divine 
goodness  which  seeks  our  amendment  The  injury,  viewed  in  this  light,  is  invested 
with  an  air  of  sacredness,  and  anger  appears  to  border  on  rebellion  and  impiety. 
VIII.  Eeflection  on  the  present  condition  of  odb  enemy  wiU  further  be  highly 
useful  in  appeasing  a  vindictive  disposition.  Without  any  retributive  severity  on 
our  part,  he  may  already  be  sufficiently  punished.  Malignity  is  unhappiness.  IX. 
Or  should  our  adversary  be  a  stranger  to  these  delicate  sensations,  it  will  be  yet 
well  to  remember,  that  the  more  destitxtte  he  is  of  vibtx7b,  so  much  the  more 
IS  he  AN  object  of  Divine  displeasubb.  Shall  we  seek  to  overwhelm  misery  by 
adding  the  venom  and  lash  of  our  malevolence  to  the  sting  of 'conscience,  or  the 
blow  of  Heaven  ?  And  even  if  all  things  in  the  present  world  go  on  smoothly  with 
him,  ought  we  not  next  to  reflect  that  this  enjoyment  is  probably  but  temporary  ? 
It  may  only  be  a  gleam  of  sunshine,  preparatory  to  a  terrible  storm.  X.  Yet  if,  in 
open  deflance  of  all  these  cogent  arguments,  we  will  surrender  ourselves  to  the 
inward  fiend,  and  proceed  to  retaliate  ;  we  must  not  forget,  when  contemplating 
the  present,  or  the  probable  recompense  of  our  adversary's  injustice,  that  by  this 

MEASURE   WE  RENDER   OURSELVES   LIABLE   TO  ALL  THE   SAME   EVILS.      We   OOUtract  the 

internal  disquietude  and  self-torment  belonging  to  a  malignant  temper ;  we  involve 
ourselves  in  the  hazard  of  receiving  present  correction  from  above.     XI.  This 
VOL.  u.  Q5 


646  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

leads  us  on  to  that  great  evangelical  motive,  which  is  more  weighty  and  persaasive 
than  all  those  that  have  preceded  it :  "If  ye  foegivh  not  men  theeb  trespasses, 

NEITHER  WILL  YOUB  HEAVENLY  FaTHEB  FORGIVE  TOU  YOURS."      Who   is   he  that  shall 

look  this  plain  proposition  in  the  face,  and  continue  for  another  moment  to  foster 
rancour  against  an  enemy  ?  XII.  For  practising  the  sacred,  we  may  say  empha- 
tically, the  Christian  duty,  which  the  various  reasons  now  collected  recommend,  a 
concluding  motive  presses  itself  upon  our  regard,  in  the  ErAMPLES  held  forth  by 
Scripture.  Among  these  the  leading  one  is  that  of  God  Himself ;  and  it  is  brought 
forward  by  our  Lord,  indeed,  when  enjoining  the  love  of  enemies  (Matt.  v.  23,  24). 
Even  under  the  Jewish  dispensation  instances  of  this  virtue,  as  prompted  by  the 
native  impulse  of  a  pious  or  tender  disposition,  are  not  wanting.  Joseph  wept  on 
the  necks  and  amply  provided  for  the  wants  of  his  unkind  brethren.  David  forgave 
Saul  for  his  inveterate  and  unprovoked  hatred.  {J.  Grant,  M.A.)  Vengeance 
is  Mine ;  I  will  repay,  saith  the  Lord. — I.  Yenqeance  is  the  prerogative  of 
God.  He  claims  it — 1.  As  the  Supreme  Euler.  2.  As  the  fountain  of  law.  3.  As 
the  Judge  of  all.  II.  Will  inevitably  be  exercised  upon  evil  doers.  1.  This  ia 
essential  to  moral  government.  2.  Is  affirmed  by  Scripture.  3.  Abundantly  sus- 
tained by  example.  4.  Will  be  terribly  demonstrated  in  the  last  day.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
Vengeance  belongs  to  God  : — A  person  happened  to  complain  in  the  hearing  of  a 
pious  man  of  some  conduct  which  had  been  manifested  towards  him  by  his  neigh- 
bours, and  concluded  by  saying  that  he  had  a  large  portion  of  vengeance  in  store 
for  them.  "You  have  stolen  it,  then,"  was  the  answer;  "for  I  know  it  does  not 
belong  to  you  of  right,  because  God  says,  'Vengeance  is  Mine;  I  will  repay.'" 
{Clerical  Library.)  Therefore,  if  thine  enemy  hunger,  feed  him. — Kindness  to 
an  enemy  is — I.  Beautiful  in  its  exhibitions.  II.  Magnanimous  in  its  spaar. 
III.  Christian  in  its  suggestion.  IV.  Triumphant  in  its  results.  (J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  The   triumph   of   Christian  love: — I.    Is  possiblb    over   the  worst 

ENEMY.  II.  Is  SECURED  BY  KINDNESS.  1.  Treat  him  gently.  2.  Minister  to 
his  need.  3.  Especially  seek  his  salvation.  III.  Is  completed  by  patience. 
1.  These  coals  of  fire  may  melt  his  heart.  2.  Must  awaken  shame.  3. 
And  if  he  repent  not  will  attract  the  just  vengeance  of  God.  {Ibid.)  In 
80  doing,  thou  Shalt  heap  coals  of  fire  on  his  head. — Does  that  mean  that 
thou  shalt  be  taking  the  most  effectual  means  of  melting  him  into  a  state  of 
penitence — "As  artists  melt  the  sullen  ore  of  lead,  By  heaping  coals  of  fire  upon 
its  head  "  ?  or  is  there  an  allusion  to  the  melting  of  wax ;  or  to  the  hardening  of 
clay;  or  to  the  practice  of  throwing  firebrands  upon  the  heads  of  besiegers  of 
cities  ?  Possibly  there  may  have  been  no  conscious  reference  to  any  one  of  these 
things.  For,  altogether  apart  from  any  such  references,  fire  is  frequently  employed 
in  Scripture  as  the  symbol  of  any  strong  passion,  or  of  the  instrument  by  which  it 
finds  expression  or  works  out  its  purposed  result.  "  Our  God  is  a  consuming  fire." 
"  Upon  the  wicked  He  shall  rain  snares,"  &o.  But  the  fire  of  God  which  descended 
to  consume  His  people's  offerings  was  a  token,  not  of  kindling  wrath,  but  of 
gracious  acceptance.  By  a  coal  of  that,  the  trembling  prophet  was  purged  from 
sin,  and  stood  in  assured  favour.  Love  also,  as  well  as  anger,  is  as  fire :  the  coals 
thereof  are  coals  of  fire,  the  fire-flame  of  Jehovah  (Cant.  viii.  6).  The  Lord  Jesus 
baptized  His  people  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire.  And  obviously  these  coals 
of  fire,  heaped  upon  the  head  of  an  adversary,  are  not  coals  of  burning  vengeance, 
but  coals  of  fervent  love,  the  fire-fiame  of  Jehovah,  adapted  to  melt  down  his  hard- 
ness, and  to  win  him  for  ever  to  virtue  and  to  God.  And  if  the  result  be  really 
accomplished,  you  will  have  conquered  an  enemy,  won  an  adoring  friend,  and  saved 
a  soul  from  death.  {W.  Tyson.)  How  to  overcome  an  enemy  :— I  once  took  a 
nugget  to  a  gold-melter  to  be  assayed.  A  friend  in  the  trade  explained  to  me  that 
it  was  not  enough  to  subject  the  metal  in  the  crucible  to  the  greatest  heat  from 
under  the  pot :  this  would  only  heat  the  gold  to  the  furnace-heat,  but  could  not 
melt  it  into  fluid,  until  the  charcoal  was  put  on  the  top  of  the  crucible  as  well  as 
under  it ;  and  then  it  would  be  molten.  "  Thus,"  said  he,  "  the  Christian  is  bidden 
to  soften  down  and  subdue  his  hardest  adversary  in  the  Scriptural  metaphor  taken 
from  our  trade — '  If  thine  enemy  hunger,  feed  him  ;  if  he  thirst,  give  him  drink  : 
for,  in  so  doing,  thou  shalt  heap  coals  of  fire  upon  his  head,'  i.e.,  effectually  melt  and 
overcome  him."  (J.  B,  Owen.)  Be  not  overcome  of  evil,  hut  overcome  evil  with 
good. — Overcoming  evil  with  good : — I.  The  import  of  the  precept.  1.  How  evil 
may  overcome  us.  2.  How  we  may  overcome  it.  II.  The  excellence  of  it.  1. 
It  counteracts  our  evil  propensities.  2.  Assimilates  us  to  Christ.  3.  Promotes  on 
earth  the  happiness  of  heaven.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)        Overcoming  evil  with  good :~ 


CHAP,  xn.]  ROMANS.  647 

In  the  year  1818,  Tomatoe,  the  king  of  Huahine,  one  of  the  South  Sea  islands, 
embraced  the  gospel.  Some  of  the  heathen  islanders  resolved  on  the  destruction 
of  him,  and  of  those  who,  with  him,  had  become  followers  of  Christ.  The  enemy 
laid  their  plan,  and  had  purposed  to  burn  to  death  those  whom  thej  seized.  But 
the  plot  was  discovered ;  the  small  band  of  Christians  were  on  the  shore  in  readi- 
ness to  meet  their  foes  as  they  leaped  from  their  canoes,  and  soon  gained  a  complete 
victory.  And  now  these  heathens  looked  for  nothing  but  death,  and  that  a  cruel 
death.  How  great,  then,  was  their  surprise  when  the  Christians  assured  them  that 
they  meant  not  to  touch  a  hair  of  their  head,  because  Jesus  had  taught  them  to 
treat  kindly  their  bitterest  foes  I  They  went  further — they  prepared  a  sumptuous 
feast,  and  asked  the  captives  to  sit  down  and  partake.  Some  of  these  were  so 
amazed  as  to  be  unable  to  taste.  At  last  one  of  them  arose  (one  of  the  heathen 
leaders),  declared  himself  no  longer  a  follower  of  helpless  idols,  stated  his  cruel 
intentions  had  he  been  successful,  but  that  this  utterly  unlooked-for  kindness  of  the 
Christians  had  fairly  overcome  him,  so  that  he  could  only  admire  their  humanity 
and  mercy.  The  result  of  all  was  that  in  a  few  days  every  idol  in  the  island  had 
been  cast  away ;  for  the  heathen,  melted  by  all  this  kindness,  joined  the  Christiana. 
Overcome  evil  with  good : — The  text  sets  before  us  two  things,  and  bids  us  choose 
the  better.  You  must  either  be  overcome  of  evil,  or  you  must  yourself  over- 
come evil.  The  words  remind  me  of  the  Scotch  officer  who  said  to  his  regiment, 
"  Lads,  there  they  are :  if  ye  dinna  kill  them  they'll  kill  you. "  Overcome,  or  be 
overcome.  There  is  no  avoiding  the  conflict ;  may  we  be  as  ignorant  of  what  it 
is  to  be  vanquished  as  the  Briti^  drummer  boy  who  did  not  know  how  to  beat  a 
retreat.  With  regard  to  the  evil  of  personal  injury — I.  The  common  method  is  xo 
OTEBCOHE  EVIL  WITH  EVIL.  "  Givc  hun  a  Roland  for  his  Oliver."  '*  Give  him  as 
good  as  he  sends."  "  Sauce  for  the  goose  is  sauce  for  the  gander."  "  Be  six  to  hia 
half  dozen."  I  might  go  on  with  a  score  of  proverbs  all  inculcating  the  sentiment 
of  meeting  evil  with  eviL  1.  This  is  a  most  natural  procedure.  You  need  not 
train  your  children  to  it ;  they  will  of  their  own  accord  beat  the  post  against  which 
they  stumble.  But  to  which  part  of  us  is  it  natural  ?  To  the  new  nature  or  the 
animal  in  ns  ?  "  Good  for  evil  is  Godlike  ;  good  for  good  is  man-like :  evil  for  good 
is  devil-Uke ;  evil  for  evil," — what  is  that  ?  Beast-hke.  Surely  we  cannot  allow 
the  lower  part  of  our  triple  nature  to  dictate  to  our  heaven-born  spirit.  That 
returning  evil  for  evil  looks  like  rough  and  ready  justice  I  admit,  but  is  any  man 
prepared  to  stand  before  God  on  the  same  terms  ?  2.  It  is  very  easy.  If  you  make 
it  a  rule  that  nobody  shall  ever  treat  you  with  disrespect  without  meeting  his  match, 
you  need  not  pray  God  to  help  you.  The  devil  will  help  you,  and  between  the  two 
the  thing  may  be  very  easily  managed.  But  is  that  which  is  so  easy  to  the  very 
worst  of  men  the  right  procedure  for  those  who  ought  to  be  the  best  of  men  ?  3. 
By  many  it  has  been  judged  the  more  manly  course.  Years  ago  a  gentleman  felt  it 
necessary  to  wipe  out  an  insult  with  blood.  The  spirit  oi  Christianity  has  by 
degrees  overcome  this  evil,  but  even  now  to  be  gentle  is  considered  to  be  unworthy 
of  a  man  of  spirit.  Now  there  is  but  one  model  of  a  Christian  man,  and  that  is 
the  man  Christ  Jesus,  and  whatever  is  Christly  is  manly.  Hear,  then,  how  He 
rebukes  John  for  calling  for  fire  to  consume  the  Samaritans,  and  Peter  for  assaulting 
Malchus,  and  His  prayer  for  His  murderers.  4.  It  does  not  succeed.  Nobody  ever 
overcame  evil  by  confronting  it  with  evil.  Such  a  course  increases  the  evil.  When 
a  great  Are  is  blazing  it  is  a  strange  way  of  putting  it  out  to  pump  petroleum  upon  it. 
And  what  is  worse,  when  we  assail  evil  with  evil  it  injures  us  most.  Our  enemies 
are  not  worth  putting  ourselves  out  about,  and  ten  minutes  of  a  palpitating  heart, 
and  of  a  disturbed  circulation,  causes  us  greater  real  damage  in  body  than  an 
enemy  could  inflict  in  seven  years.  Let  us  not  so  please  our  foes.  Evil  for  evil  is 
an  edged  tool  which  cuts  the  man  who  uses  it :  a  kind  of  cannon  which  is  most 
dangerous  to  those  who  fire  it,  both  in  its  discharge  and  in  its  recoil.  If  you  wished 
to  destroy  your  enemy  it  would  be  wise  to  make  him  a  present  of  it.  5.  It  does  not 
bear  inspection.  If  we  cannot  pray  about  it,  or  praise  about  it,  or  think  about  it  on 
our  death-bed,  let  us  let  it  alone.  II.  The  Divine  method  of  overcoming  evil  with 
GOOD.  1.  This  is  a  very  elevated  mode  of  procedure.  "Ridiculous  I  "  says  one; 
"  Utopian,"  cries  another.  Well,  if  it  be  difficult  I  commend  it  to  you  because  it  is 
BO  ;  what  is  there  which  is  good  which  is  not  also  difficult  ?  Soldiers  of  Christ  love 
those  virtues  most  which  cost  them  most.  2.  It  preserves  the  man  from  evil.  If 
evil  assails  you,  and  you  only  fight  it  vdth  good,  it  cannot  hurt  you,  you  are  invul- 
nerable. If  a  man  has  slandered  you,  but  you  never  leturn  him  a  reproachful 
word,  he  has  not  hurt  your  real  character ;  the  dirt  which  he  has  thrown  has  missed 


us  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat,  xa.' 

yoa,  for  you  have  none  to  throw  back  npon  him.  The  very  thing  your  enemy  wanti 
is  to  make  yon  descend  to  his  level,  bat,  as  long  as  yoa  remain  anprovoked,  yoa 
vanquish  him.    Believe  me,  yoa  are  provoking  yoar  adversary  terribly  if  yoa  are 
quite  calm  yourself,  you  are  disappointing  him,  he  cannot  insert  his  poisoned  darts, 
for  you  are  clad  in  armour  of  proof.  8.  It  is  the  very  best  weapon  of  offence  against 
the  opposer.    William  Ladd  had  a  farm  in  one  of  the  states  of  America,  and  his 
neighbour  Pulsifer's  sheep  were  very  fond  of  a  fine  field  of  grain  belonging  to  Mr. 
Ladd,  and  were  in  it  continually.     Complaints  were  of  no  use,  so  one  morning 
Ladd  said  to  his  men,  "  Set  the  dogs  on  those  sheep,  and  if  that  won't  keep  them 
out,  shoot  them."    After  he  had  said  that,  he  thought  to  himself,  "This  will  not 
do.     I  had  better  try  the  peace  principle."    So  he  countermanded  the  order,  and 
rode  over  to  see  his  neighbour  about  those  troublesome  sheep.    "  Neighbour,"  said 
he,  "I  have  come  to  see  you  about  those  sheep."    "Yes,"  Pulsifer  replied,  "I 
know.    You  are  a  pretty  neighbour,  and  a  rich  man,  too,  and  going  to  shoot  a  poor 
man's  sheep !  "    Then  followed  some  strong  language,  but  Ladd  replied,  "  I  am 
sorry  for  it ;  but,  neighbour,  we  may  as  well  agree.    It  seems  I  have  got  to  keep 
your  sheep,  and  it  won't  do  to  let  them  eat  all  that  grain,  so  I  came  over  to  say  that 
I  will  take  them  into  my  homestead  pasture  and  I  will  keep  them  all  the  season." 
Pulsifer  looked  confounded,  and,  when  he  found  that  Ladd  was  in  earnest,  said, 
"  The  sheep  sha'n't  trouble  you  any  more.    When  you  talk  about  shooting,  I  can 
shoot  as  well  as  you ;  but  when  you  speak  in  that  kind  way  I  can  be  kind  too."  The 
sheep  never  trespassed  on  Ladd's  lot  any  more.  That  is  the  way  to  kill  a  bad  spirit. 
It  is  much  the  same  as  when  a  certain  duke  proclaimed  war  against  a  peaceful 
neighbour,  who  was  resolved  not  to  fight.    The  troops  came  riding  to  the  town,  and 
found  the  gates  open  as  on  ordinary  occasions.    The  children  were  playing  in  the 
streets,  and  the  people  were  at  work ;  and  so,  pulling  up  their  horses,  the  soldiers 
inquired,  "  Where  is  the  enemy?  "    "  We  don't  know,  we  are  friends."    What  was 
to  be  done  under  the  circumstances  but  to  ride  home?    So  it  is  in  life,  if  you  only 
meet  evil  with  good,  the  bad  man's  occupation  is  gone.     4.  Sometimes  it  is  the 
means  of  the  conversion  of  evil  men.    Some  years  ago  a  wicked  sailor  was  engaged 
in  tarring  a  vessel,  and  there  came  along  an  old  Christian  man.   One  of  the  sailor's 
mates  said,  "  Jack,  you  could  not  provoke  that  man."    Jack  was  quite  sure  he 
could,  and  it  became  the  subject  of  a  wager.    The  wicked  fellow  took  his  bucket  of 
tar,  and  threw  it  right  over  the  good  old  man.     The  old  man  turned  round  and 
calmly  said  to  him,  "  Christ  has  said  that  he  who  offends  one  of  His  little  ones  will 
find  that  it  were  better  for  him  that  a  mill-stone  had  been  tied  about  his  neck,  and 
that  he  were  cast  into  the  sea  :  now,  if  I  am  one  of  Christ's  little  ones,  it  will  be 
very  bad  for  you."    Jack  slunk  back  dreadfully  ashamed  of  himself.     What  was 
more,  the  old  man's  quiet  face  haunted  him  ;  and  those  tremendous  words  broke 
>iim  down  before  the  mercy-seat.     He  asked  and  found  pardon  ;  he  sought  out  the 
old  man,  confessed  his  fault,  and  received  forgiveness.    Now  suppose  the  old  man 
had  turned  round  on  him,  who  could  have  blamed  him  ?    But  then  there  would 
have  been  no  triumph  of  grace  in  the  Christian,  and  no  conversion  in  the  sinner. 
5.  It  reflects  great  honour  upon  Christ.     When  one  of  the  martyrs  was  being 
tortured  the  tyrant  said  to  him,  "  And  what  has  your  Christ  ever  done  for  you  that 
you  should  bear  this  ?  "     He  replied,  "  He  has  done  this  for  me,  that  in  the  midst 
of  all  my  pain,  I  do  nothing  else  but  pray  for  you."    Ah,  Lord  Jesus,  Thou  hast 
taught  us  how  to  conquer,  for  Thou  hast  conquered.     Conclusion :  Everything  that 
is  admirable  may  be  said  of  this  method  of  overcoming  evil  with  good.     1.  A 
Christian  man  is  the  noblest  work  of  God,  and  one  of  his  noblest  features  is  readi- 
ness to  forgive.     The  Emperor  Adrian,  before  he  reached  the  throne,  had  been 
grievously  insulted.     When  he  had  attained  the  imperial  purple  he  met  the  man 
who  had  used  him  ill.     The  guilty  person  was,  of  course,  dreadfully  afraid  of  his 
mighty  foe.    Adrian  cried  out,  "  Approach.     You  have  nothing  to  fear ;  I  am  an 
Emperor !  "    Did  this  heathen  feel  that  his  dignity  lifted  him  above  the  meanness 
of  revenge  ?   Then  let  those  whom  Christ  has  made  kings  unto  God  scorn  to  render 
evil  for  evil.    2.  Good  for  evil  is  congruous  with  the  spirit  of  the  gospel.    Were  we 
not  saved  because  the  Lord  rendered  to  us  good  for  evil  ?    3.  This  spirit  is  the 
Spirit  of  God,  and  he  that   hath  it  becomes  like  to  God.      (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Chi  revenge : — I.  The  bevengeful  man  is  overcome  bt  various  evils.     1.  By  his 
passions,  which  subdue  his  reason.    He  becomes  the  author  of  slavery  to  himself, 
and  is  his  own  tyrant.     2.  An  angry  man  is  not  only  enslaved  by  his  passions,  but 
he  is  frequently  overcome  by  his  adversary.    Fury  and  rage  generally  defeat  their 
own  designs,  by  taking  men  wholly  off  their  guard,  and  leaving  them  open  to  th« 


tBAT.  xn.]  ROMANS.  649 

attacks  of  their  more  wary  opponents.  8.  A  roTengefol  passionate  man  is  in 
danger  of  being  OTereome  in  a  yet  worse  sense ;  he  is  in  danger  of  being  harried 
into  Buoh  crimes  as  will  not  only  affect  his  peace  and  reputation  at  present,  bat  will 
hazard  his  eternal  happiness  hereafter,    n.  Soicb  oomsidebations  to  enablk  men 

TO   SUBDUE   A   BBVKNQErUL  TBUPEB,   AHD  TO  PBKTSNT  THE   ILL  HFTEOTS   OF   IT.      1.   He 

who  finds  himself  naturally  addicted  to  passion  ought  to  guard  perpetually  against 
the  first  tendencies  to  resentment  in  his  mind.  2.  It  will  probably  be  of  use  to  the 
persons  for  whose  service  this  discourse  is  intended,  to  let  them  know  the  opinion 
of  wise  men  concerning  this  spirit  of  revenge.  And,  in  their  sense,  it  is  owing  to  a 
littleness  of  mind,  while  they  who  have  studied  human  nature  have  observed  thai 
men  of  the  weakest  capacities  are  generally  most  Uable  to  it.  This  is  the  con- 
carring  opinion  both  of  ancient  poets  and  philosophers ;  and  hence  it  was,  no  doubt, 
that  a  great  man  observed,  "  that  the  vulgar  wrote  their  injuries  on  marble,  but 
their  benefits  on  sand."  It  was  also  finely  said  by  Cicero,  that  "Gsesar  forgot 
nothing  but  injuries  " ;  and  a  distinguished  person  among  the  moderns,  when  his 
memory  was  appealed  to  for  the  support  of  an  invidious  story,  replied,  "  he 
remembered  to  forget  it."  III.  Let  ke  endbavoub  to  exhort  you  to  study  and 
BB  BECONoiLED  TO  YouB  owH  TEUE  iMTEBEST.  1.  Whenever  you  meet  with  any- 
thing shocking  in  the  common  behaviour  of  life,  whenever  you  are  alarmed  by 
unpremeditated  offences,  remember  your  own  frailties,  remember  your  God, 
infinitely  indulging  to  these  frailties  ;  and  from  these  motives  be  forbearing,  for- 
giving to  others.  2.  Happy  is  the  man  who  can  attain  to  this  mastery  of  morality, 
and  gain  that  command  of  passion  and  superiority  of  judgment  which  is  necessary 
to  carry  him  on  sweetly  through  all  the  rufiSes  of  human  life.  The  possessor  of 
such  a  temper  may  be  said  to  have  in  him  the  virtue  of  the  load-stone,  he  wins  the 
affections  of  others  to  himself,  draws  them  insensibly  to  his  own  point,  and  leads 
them,  by  degrees,  into  the  same  good-natured  disposition  he  enjoys.  3.  This 
amiable  temper  does  not  only  conciliate  the  goodwill  and  esteem  of  men  towards  us, 
but  peculiarly  entitles  us  to  the  praise  of  being  formed  after  the  image  of  God.  (J. 
SmedXey,  M.A.)  Charity  and  kind  offices,  the  beit  conquest  over  an  enemy : — ^Tne 
advice  is  short,  comprised  in  a  few  words ;  but  it  is  withal  full  and  instructive,  and 
carries  a  great  deal  of  good  matter  in  it.  The  apostle's  manner  of  wording  the 
thing  is  observable  ;  for  there  is  a  particular  force  and  beauty  in  the  very  expression. 
Being  sensible  that  the  forgiving  an  injury  or  the  not  revenging  it  is  commonly 
looked  upon  as  a  kind  of  yielding  to  an  adversary  (which  is  what  the  pride  of 
human  nature  is  most  averse  to),  he  prudently  anticipates  the  thought,  and  gives 
it  quite  another  turn,  insinuating  that  all  desire  of  revenge  is  yielding  and  sub- 
mitting to  an  enemy ;  is  as  much  as  confessing  that  he  has  disturbed  us  to  that 
degree,  that  we  are  no  longer  able  to  command  our  temper  and  to  be  really  masters 
of  ourselves.  Overflowing  with  rage  and  resentment  upon  such  occasions  is  betray- 
ing a  httleness  of  mind,  and  proclaiming  our  own  defeat.  I.  Be  not  ovebcoub 
OP  EVIL.  Suffer  not  any  affront  to  get  the  better  of  yoa.  1.  Let  not  any  affront  or 
injury  have  the  superiority  over  your  reason,  considering  yourself  now  only  as  a 
man,  without  taking  in  the  additional  consideration  of  your  being  a  Christian  also. 
A  passionate  furious  warrior  neither  sees  an  advantage  nor  knows  how  to  use  it ; 
while  he  is  all  fire,  and  no  conduct,  he  does  but  expose  his  forces,  and  at  length 
becomes  himself  an  easy  prey  to  the  enemy.  But  a  man  of  cool  and  steady  courage, 
who  does  nothing  precipitately,  he  is  the  man  that  maintains  his  ground,  and 
comes  off  victorious  in  the  end.  2.  But  further,  to  advance  to  a  yet  higher  con- 
eideration,  put  the  case  thus :  Suffer  not  any  affronts  or  injuries  to  get  the  better 
of  your  piety,  or  of  your  duty  towards  God.  God  permits  us  not  to  revenge,  or  resent 
our  own  wrongs.  This  is  no  more  than  every  master  of  a  family  will  demand  ; 
that  any  disputes  in  his  family  among  his  servants  be  decided  by  him,  and  left  to 
his  censure  and  correction.  But  a  question  here  arises  by  the  way,  whether,  after 
a  man  has  referred  his  cause  to  God,  laying  aside  all  thoughts  of  revenging  himself, 
he  may  then  pray  to  God  to  avenge  him,  or  may  take  pleasure  in  observing  that 
the  Divine  vengeance  has  fallen  down  upon  his  adversary.  Much  may  be  pleaded 
on  both  sides.  What  seems  to  me  to  come  nearest  to  the  truth,  is  as  follows  :  The 
peace  of  the  world  is  much  concerned  in  this — that  we  never  avenge  ourselves  but 
refer  all  vengeance  to  God.  This  is  the  main  thing ;  and  if  this  be  carefully 
observed,  we  may  be  the  less  solicitous  about  the  rest.  There  is  a  just  pleasure 
which  a  good  man  may  take,  in  seeing  the  Divine  vengeance  fall  upon  very  bad 
men,  because  such  men  are  enemies  to  mankind;  and  so  rejoicing  in  their  faU  is 
rejoicing  in  the  public  good.    And  for  the  same  reason  it  may  not  be  improper,  in 


660  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XH 

Bome  oases,  to  beg  of  God  to  curb  or  pnnish  them,  in  such  a  way  as  His  wisdom 
sb^  see  proper.  And  it  is  of  sncb  cases  as  tbese  tbat  I  understand  some  Scripture- 
imprecations,  if  they  be  really  such ;  which,  besides,  were  pronounced  by  persona 
extraordinarily  commissioned  to  imprecate,  as  from  God.  As  to  private  injuries, 
in  which  the  public  is  very  little  or  not  at  all  concerned,  there,  as  I  conceive,  is  no 
room  left  for  rejoicing  in  the  Divine  judgments  upon  the  adversaries  ;  first,  because 
we  are  very  uncertain  whether  those  judgments  are  brought  upon  them  on  any  such 
account  as  we  might  fondly  suppose  ;  and  next,  because,  as  we  are  all  sinners,  we 
kuow  not  whether  we  ourselves  are  not  justly  liable  to  the  same  or  greater.  3. 
Having  shown  how  we  ought  not  to  suffer  any  offence  or  injury  to  get  the  better  of 
our  piety  towards  God,  I  have  but  one  step  more  to  advance ;  namely,  not  to 
suffer  it  to  prevail  over  our  charity  towards  man.  This  article  I  make  distinct  from 
the  former,  inasmuch  as  not  taking  revenge  upon  an  adversary  is  one  thing,  and 
doing  him  kind  offices  is  another.  I  say  then,  let  not  any  injurious  usage  of  an 
enemy  prevent  our  doing  him  good.  II.  Overcomb  bvil  with  good.  This  implies 
all  the  kind  offices  towards  an  enemy  which  we  are  capable  of  doing,  consistent 
with  our  own  safety,  or  with  our  obligations  to  others.  Our  blessed  Lord's  instruc- 
tions upon  this  head  may  serve  as  a  good  comment  upon  this  part  of  the  text 
(Matt.  44,  45).  1.  The  overcoming  evil  with  good,  may  be  understood  of  conquer- 
ing an  enemy  by  kindness,  so  that  he  may  cease  to  malign  us ;  for  then  the  evil  is 
overcome,  as  it  is  put  an  end  to.  Such  a  conduct  contributes  much  to  the  peace  of 
society,  and  to  the  general  good  of  mankind,  which  is  alone  sufficient  to  recommend 
it  with  every  wise  and  considering  man.  And  that  it  may  not  be  suspected  that 
there  is  anything  of  tameness  or  mean-spiritedness  in  this  conduct,  the  advantaige 
in  point  of  dignity  and  esteem  really  lies  on  the  side  of  the  good-natured  and 
peaceable  man.  There  is  a  greatness  of  mind  shown  in  being  above  little  piques 
and  childish  altercations.  There  is  triumph  and  conquest  seen  in  the  command  a 
man  has  over  his  own  temper  and  passions.  2.  That  there  is  yet  another  kind  ol 
conquest  to  be  obtained,  by  persevering  in  doing  good  against  evil.  For  though 
you  do  not  thus  conquer  the  man's  pride  or  ill  nature,  yet  you  conquer  your  own 
passions.  There  is  a  kind  of  contest  and  emulation  in  such  a  case  which  shall  be 
first  weary  and  vanquished,  the  malice  and  iniquity  of  one,  or  the  patience  and 
goodness  of  the  other.  He  who  abides  in  doing  good  against  evil  may  be  said  to  be 
a  person  of  invincible  kindness  and  generosity,  unconquerable  love  and  charity. 
3.  I  know  but  one  objection  of  any  moment  against  this  conduct,  which  is  this : 
that  it  may  seem  to  give  too  much  encouragement  to  malicious  men  to  persist  in 
their  iniquity,  and  may  also  strengthen  their  hands  against  ourselves  to  do  us  the 
more  mischief.  To  which  I  answer  that,  were  it  really  true  that  it  carried  this 
single  inconvenience  with  it ;  yet,  so  long  as  there  are  innumerable  conveniences 
on  the  other  side,  more  than  sufficient  to  counterbalance  it,  this  single  difficulty 
ought  to  be  no  objection  against  it.  But  I  have  this  thing  to  add  further ;  that  the 
principles  which  I  have  been  maintaining  do  not  oblige  a  man  to  lay  himself  open 
to  his  enemy,  or  to  give  himself  up  into  his  power.  He  may  do  him  kind  offices, 
without  making  a  friend  or  a  confidant  of  him  ;  may  oblige  and  serve  him  without 
running  into  his  arms.  The  Scripture  bids  us  be  kind  and  generous;  and  yet  bids 
us  also  beware  of '  ill  men,  and  not  to  deliver  ourselves  up  thoughtlessly  into  their 
hands.  Love  and  charity  are  one  thing,  easiness  and  folly  another.  (D.  Water- 
land,  D.D.)  Wrath  conquered  by  love: — A  very  good  man  once  said,  *'  If  there 
is  any  one  particular  temper  I  desire  more  than  another,  it  is  the  grace  of  meekness ; 
quietly  to  bear  iU-treatment,  to  forget  and  forgive  ;  and  at  the  same  time  that  I  am 
sensible  I  am  injured,  not  to  be  overcome  of  evil,  but  to  overcome  evil  with  good." 
But  this  sentiment,  be  it  remembered,  could  be  learned  only  from  heaven.  It  did 
not  belong  to  the  systems  of  heathen  philosophy.  At  the  dawn  of  the  age  of  mercy, 
a  Pliny  said,  but  had  learned  the  sentiment  from  that  very  religion  he  affected  to 
despise,  "  I  esteem  him  the  best  good  man,  who  forgives  others,  as  though  he  were 
every  day  faulty  himself  ;  and  who  at  the  same  time  abstains  from  faults,  as  if  he 
pardoned  no  one."  But  it  was  One  from  heaven,  who  came  down  in  all  the  amiable- 
ness  of  God,  and  taught  the  world  principles  of  kindness ;  that  to  forgive  is  possible, 
and  that  the  meek  are  blessed.  I.  When  mav  it  be  considered  that  one  is 
OVERCOME  OF  EVIL  ?  This  is  a  calamity  that  may  doubtless  happen  to  the  good 
man,  but  is  a  matter  of  every  day's  occurrence  to  the  multitudes  of  the  ungodly. 
I  remark,  then,  that  a  man  is  overcome  of  evil — 1.  When  ill-treatment  excites  the 
angry  passions,  and  produces  harsh  and  ill-natured  language.  This  unhappy  result 
was  perhaps  the  very  design  of  the  onset.     The  foe  has  gained  his  whole  object, 


CEAP.  xn.]  ROMANS.  651 

and  his  antagonist  is  vanqaished.  2.  One  is  still  more  completely  overcome  of 
evil,  when  he  settles  down  into  confirmed  hatred  of  the  offender.  By  suffering 
anger  to  rest  in  his  bosom,  he  becomes  in  God's  esteem  a  fool.  8.  One  is  overcome 
of  evil  when  he  indulges  designs  of  revenge.  We  suffer  ourselves  to  be  driven  from 
the  delightful  duty  of  doing  good  to  all  men,  the  only  post  where  we  can  be  happy, 
4.  We  are  overcome  of  evil,  when  the  ill-treatment  of  one  leads  as  to  suspect  the 
friendship  of  others.  Our  apprehensions  are  the  very  demons  that  break  the  tie  of 
friendship,  and  dissolve  the  bonds  of  brotherhood.  Tbey  beget  distance,  caution, 
jealousy,  and  neglect,  and  the  result  is  abandonment  and  hatred.  5.  We  are  more 
yet  completely  overcome  of  evil,  when  abuse  begets  habitual  sourness  of  temper. 
6.  One  is  overcome  of  evil,  when  he  attempts  unnecessarily  a  public  vindication  of 
his  character.  I  say  unnecessarily,  for  it  cannot  be  denied  that  a  good  man,  with- 
out his  wish,  may  be  forced  into  such  a  measure.  Often  is  this  the  very  object 
which  some  malicious  foe  would  accomplish,     n.  How  hay  we  save  ourselves 

FBOM    THE     SHAME    AND     INJOBT   OP    BEXNO     THUS    VANQUISHED?      1.    He    who    WOUld 

designedly  injure  us  does  himself  a  greater  injury.  There  is  in  nature,  or  rather 
in  the  Divine  purpose,  a  principle  of  prompt  and  powerful  reaction.  Let  one  attack 
your  character,  and  sure  as  life  he  hurts  his  own.  Let  him  spread  an  ill  report, 
and  that  report  will  recoil  upon  his  own  reputation.  Or  would  he  merely  disturb 
your  peace,  let  him  bat  alone,  and  his  own  peace  is  injured  more  than  yours.  God 
can  give  you  a  peace  that  nothing  can  disturb.  If  you  must  unjustly  suffer,  God 
can  support  you  and  comfort  you,  but  this  He  will  not  do  for  the  man  who  wrongs 
yon.  Now  if  the  man  who  intended  to  iujure  us  has  wounded  himself,  then  we 
should  pity  him,  and  pray  for  him,  and  not  study  a  duplicate  revenge.  2.  If  we 
resist  evil  we  are  invariably  injured.  The  foe  is  the  more  courageous,  the  more 
fierce  and  prompt  the  repulse  he  meets  with.  He  exhibits  now  a  prowess  that  he 
could  never  have  summoned,  had  he  coped  with  mere  non-resistance.  A  slanderous 
report  is  repeated  and  magnified,  because  it  has  been  wrathfully  contradicted.  3. 
It  will  calm  us  in  an  hour  of  onset  to  feel  that  wicked  men  are  God's  sword.  4.  It 
will  be  a  timely  and  sweet  reflection,  for  a  period  of  abuse,  that  ill-treatment  is 
among  the  all  things  that  shall  work  together  for  our  good.  5.  It  should  ever  be 
our  reflection  in  the  hour  of  attack,  that  to  be  like  Christ  we  must  not  resist  evil. 
6.  Finally,  there  is  the  direct  command  of  God.  No  precept  can  be  more  binding 
than  the  text.  A  Christian  is  but  a  pardoned  rebel,  and  may  not  avenge  himself. 
And  aU  others  may  well  fear  to  be  vindictive,  lest  wrath  come  upon  them  to  the 
uttermost.  With  the  same  measure  that  we  mete,  it  shall  be  measured  to  us  again. 
ni.  How  MAT  WB  OVEBCOME  EVIL  WITH  GOOD  7  1.  To  do  this  will  require  the 
sacrifice  of  bad  passions.  The  unrenewed  heart  has  a  keen  relish  for  revenge.  2. 
If  one  treats  us  unkindly  we  must  treat  him  well.  If  he  defame,  let  us  say  the 
kindest  things  possible  of  him.  If  he  hurt  our  interest,  let  us  advance  his.  If  he 
will  not  oblige  us,  we  must  do  kindnesses  to  him.  If  he  deals  reproach,  we  must 
practise  no  retort  (D.  A.  Clark.)  How  to  conquer  evil  (children's  sermon) : — • 
One  of  our  most  familiar  proverbs  tells  us  that  "  two  blacks  do  not  make 
a  white,"  which  means  that  whether  other  people  do  right  or  wrong,  we  must 
always  try  to  do  right.  We  must  try  to  conquer  badness  by  goodness.  I. 
OvEECOMB  EVIL  TEMPEBS  WITH  GOOD  TEMPEB.  Somc  oue  is  vcry  cross  with 
you.  Your  natural  impulse  is  to  be  just  as  cross  in  return.  But  to  do  that  is 
to  own  yourself  beaten,  and  no  Englishman  likes  to  be  defeated.  Besides,  it  will 
be  like  pouring  oil  upon  the  flame  of  the  angry  person.  Then  try  the  opposite 
plan.  Keturn  a  smile  for  a  frown  ;  courtesy  for  rudeness.  It  will  not  be  long  before 
you  win  the  day.  There  was  once  a  quarrel  between  the  wind  and  the  sun.  Each 
claimed  to  be  the  strongest,  and  one  morning  they  agreed  to  put  their  powers  to  the 
proof.  A  traveller  had  just  set  out  well  wrapt  up  in  a  warm  overcoat,  and  the  wind 
challenged  the  sun  to  see  which  of  them  could  make  him  take  off  his  coat.  So  it 
swept  down  from  the  N.E.,  and  howled  past  the  poor  traveller;  but  the  harder  it 
blew,  the  closer  he  buttoned  his  coat,  and  at  last  the  wind  gave  up  in  despair.  Then 
the  sun  began  to  peep  out,  and  as  the  wind  fell,  and  the  sunshine  became  more 
powerful,  the  traveller  loosed  first  one  button,  and  then  another,  until  his  coat  was 
quite  unfastened.  And  the  sun  kept  on  shining  until  the  traveller  took  his  coat 
right  off.  Then  the  wind  acknowledged  that  the  sun  was  mightier.  It  is  just  so  in 
our  lives.  If  one  meets  you  who  wears  a  shabby  coat  of  ill-temper,  your  frowning 
won't  make  him  lay  it  aside.  But,  if  you  meet  him  with  a  smile,  he  will  soon  throw 
it  away  in  disgust.  II.  Ovebcome  evil  wokds  with  good  words.  In  olden  times 
the  Bword  was  the  principal  weapon  in  war,  and  soldiers  used  to  learn  to  do  very 


553  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHiv.  m. 

wonderful  feats.  They  woold  split  a  splinter  as  it  stood  oreet  upon  the  table,  or 
divide  an  apple  opon  your  hand  without  letting  the  edge  of  the  sword  touch  joxa 
paJm.  But  the  hardest  feat  was  to  out  through  a  down  pillow.  In  the  sieges  of 
those  days  soldiers  used  great  battering  rams  to  knock  down  the  walls.  But  those 
who  were  inside  used  to  let  down  bags  of  chaff  and  beds,  and  the  strokes,  which 
would  have  made  a  breach  in  the  solid  walls,  fell  quite  harmlessly  upon  these  soft 
cushions.  Both  the  sword  and  the  ram  found  soft  things  to  be  the  hardest  to  pene* 
trate.  The  best  defence  against  the  weapons  of  anger  is  not  harshness,  but  gentle- 
ness. A  little  boy  was  one  day  playing  where  there  was  an  echo.  "  Hallo  I "  he 
shouted.  "  Hallo  I "  said  Echo.  •*  Who  are  you  ?  "  he  asked.  "  Who  are  you  f  " 
was  the  reply.  And  he  fsmcied  that  some  other  boy  was  mocking  him,  and  became 
very  angry.  "  Why  don't  you  come  out  ?  "  he  cried.  "  Ck)me  out  I "  answered 
Echo.  Quite  exasperated,  he  shouted,  "I'U  fight  youl"  and  the  voice  replied, 
"  Fight  you  I  "  Then  the  little  fellow  ran  home  and  told  his  mother  that  there  was 
a  boy  in  the  forest  who  mocked  him  and  made  fun  of  him  and  threatened  to  fight 
him.  And  his  wise  mother,  who  knew  all  about  the  echo,  smiled,  and  said,  "  Bun 
out  again  and  shout, '  I  love  you,'  and  see  what  answer  comes."  So  the  child  ran 
out  and  shouted  •'  I  love  you,"  and  Echo  replied,  "  I  love  yon."  Is  it  not  a  beauti- 
ful lesson  ?  If  you  make  faces  before  the  mirror,  you  see  all  the  ugly  looks  reflected 
on  its  bright  surface.  And  so  the  people  around  us  often  reflect  our  own  temper 
and  speech.  "A  soft  answer  tumeth  away  wrath."  III.  Otbbcoui  bvil  dkeds 
WITH  oooD  DEEDS.  This  is  what  the  apostle  especially  refers  to  in  our  text.  There 
was  a  publichouse  where  many  young  men  used  to  gather  on  the  Lord's  day,  and 
an  old  man  named  William  Haywood  was  grieved  to  see  so  many  treading  the  path 
of  the  destroyer.  So  be  used  to  take  his  stand  outside  the  windows,  sing  "  Praise 
God,  from  whom  all  blessings  flow  " ;  and  then,  with  earnest  pleading,  warn  the 
revellers  of  their  folly  and  sin,  and  point  them  to  Christ.  This  made  these  wild 
young  fellows  very  angry,  and  one  day  one  of  them,  who  had  filled  a  pail  with  foul 
water,  came  behind  him  and  emptied  it  on  his  head.  They  thought  that  would 
anger  him  beyond  endurance,  and  that  he  would  be  ashamed  to  talk  to  them  any 
more.  But  no.  The  old  man  exclaimed  :  "  Bless  the  Lord,  0  my  soul,  and  all 
that  is  within  me  bless  His  holy  name  I  "  And  then,  falling  on  his  knees,  he  prayed 
for  the  reckless  men.  They  were  melted  by  his  words,  and  slunk  away  ;  and  the 
ringleaders  became  devoted  Christians.  Oh  1  if  boys  and  girls  woold  learn  this 
lesson,  what  happy  homes  there  would  be  I  In  most  cases  it  seems  to  be  quite 
otherwise.  A  brother  and  sister  come  to  words  about  a  mere  trifle,  and  words  lead 
to  blows,  and  perhaps  for  many  days  these  foolish  children  will  spite  one  another, 
and  make  each  other  miserable.  (O.  H.  James.)  Evil  overcome : — A  delegate  of 
the  Christian  Commission,  passing  among  the  wounded  at  Gettysburg,  said  to  a 
wounded  confederate  officer,  •'  Colonel,  can  I  do  anything  for  you  ?  "  *'  No  1  "  was 
his  defiant  reply.  The  offer  was  repeated,  after  a  time,  with  like  result.  The  air 
became  offensive  from  heat  and  wounds.  The  delegate  offered  to  put  cologne  on 
his  han^erchief.  The  officer,  bursting  into  tears,  said,  "  I  have  no  handkerchief." 
"  Tou  shall  have  one,"  said  the  delegate,  wetting  his  own,  and  giving  it  to  him. 
The  subdued  rebel  said,  "  I  can't  understand  you  Yankees :  you  fight  us  like 
devils,  and  then  you  treat  us  like  angels.  I  am  sorry  I  entered  this  war."  The 
power  of  good  over  evil: — 1.  Christianity,  it  has  been  said,  is  deficient  in  the 
masculine  virtues.  Our  answer  is  that  in  this  chapter  you  have  a  catalogue  of 
Christian  virtues,  and  amongst  them  is  one  which  does  not  always  find  a  place 
even  in  the  virtues  of  the  world :  the  virtue  of  hatred.  We  are  to  abhor  what  is 
evil.  Christianity  is  not  deficient  in  contending  power.  She  recognises  that  there 
is  an  enemy  to  be  fought,  and  she  is  determined  to  contend  against  it.  2.  But  it 
may  be  said,  "  Hatred  of  evil  is  not  victory  over  it ;  and  it  is  an  imbecile  kind  of 
virtue  which  contents  itself  with  indignation  and  does  not  apply  itself  to  some 
remedy."  The  apostle  gives  the  remedy.  Because  we  abhor  evil  we  will  not 
therefore  be  overcome  by  evil;  we  will  not  ally  ourselves  with  any  evil,  even 
though  we  imagine  that  the  alliance  will  give  us  a  transient  victory  over  it.  The 
only  weapon  wherewith  we  will  encounter  it  is  good.  3.  But  is  it  possible  to 
overcome  evil  with  good  ?  I.  The  teaching  of  all  odr  experience  is  that  this 
IS  the  best  method  of  encodnteeing  evil.  There  are  two  methods  by  which  we 
may  oppose  evil;  the  one  is  the  method  of  impulse,  the  other  of  reflection.  In 
the  first  heat  of  virtuous  indignation,  we  are  inclined  to  cry  out,  "  Away  with  such 
a  fellow  from  the  world  ;  it  is  not  fit  that  he  should  live."  But  that  is  only  making 
the  alliance,  for  the  moment,  with  the  evil,  to  overcome  it.    Now  the  other  method 


CHAT,  zn.]  ROMANS.  553 

is  far  better.  It  says,  "  I  will  not  meet  peiseontion  with  violence,  falsehood  with 
falsehood.  Against  falsehood  I  will  present  truth,  against  violence  righteoasneBS." 
Let  me  appeal  to  the  simplest  spheres  within  the  experience  of  man.  1.  Take  the 
physical  sphere.  The  ancient  theory  regarding  disease  was  that  the  element  of 
evil  mast  be  expelled  at  all  costs,  and  the  result  of  medical  treatment  was  the 
utter  weakening  of  the  patient,  his  death  often,  in  the  endeavour  to  secure  his 
cure.  But  a  milder  and  a  wiser  spirit  has  gradually  grown  up,  and  men  have  come 
to  see  that  they  must  support,  by  every  means,  the  life  withhi  the  man.  Give  the 
patient  vigour,  and  the  natural  forces  will  cast  off  the  evil.  2.  How  do  you  deal 
with  your  children  ?  Are  you  trying  to  teach  them  to  excel  in  any  particular  art 
by  pointing  out  their  faults  and  failures?  You  know  that  is  not  the  way  to 
success.  You  may  criticise  if  you  will;  but  the  spirit  of  criticism  has  never 
educated  any  one.  The  spirit  of  appreciation,  the  spirit  of  imitation — these  are 
the  secrets  of  power.  8.  It  is  true  also  in  moral  matters.  There  are  three  great 
enemies  which  assail  us  in  the  three  different  periods  of  our  life.  (1)  The  child 
has  its  enemy — the  spirit  of  energetic  force  which  is  longing  for  some  occupation. 
How  long  will  you  deal  with  the  child  whose  mere  animal  restlessness  has  become 
troublesome  to  you  ?  Do  you  believe  in  the  virtue  of  teaching  him  to  sit  still  ? 
No  ;  you  give  him  something  to  do.  You  withhold  him  from  the  evil  by  giving 
him  the  good.  (2)  Later  comes  the  other  passion.  The  energy  begins  to  show 
itself  in  attachments  and  enthusiasms  to  hero  worship,  or  the  worship  of  woman- 
hood.  Are  you  going  to  meet  that  with  the  everlasting  "  Nay  "  ?  If  so,  you 
create  a  miserable  failure,  because  you  give  no  fair  opportunity  for  the  sweet  and 
ennobling  attachments  of  life ;  you  forget  to  overcome  the  evil  by  giving  it  the 
good.  (3)  Later  on,  life  has  lost  the  elasticity  of  youth,  and  you  have  reached 
the  time  when  your  great  desire  is  quietude.  There  comes  upon  you  sorrow  and 
bereavement  and  loss,  and  your  cry  to  kindly  friends,  who  gather  round  you  with 
their  fussy  sympathy,  is,  "  Let  me  alone  that  I  may  bewail  myself  a  little."  The 
man  of  sorrow  who  has  felt  the  vacant  chaff  well  meant  for  grain  that  his  fellows 
have  flung  as  something  to  satisfy  the  hunger  of  his  sorrow — do  not  tell  him  to 
foiget,  to  cease  to  grieve  ;  tell  him  that  sorrow  is  the  dowry  of  God  upon  the  heart 
that  can  love,  and  that  there  is  no  experience  of  God  that  is  not  in  itself  the 
promise  of  some  new  power ;  and,  therefore,  the  opportunity  of  some  wider  useful- 
ness. Give  him  occupation ;  tell  him  of  the  activities  of  sympathy  which  are 
really  the  natural  result  and  desires  of  the  heart  that  sorrows  truly,  and  his  soul 
will  wake  up;  he  will  see  the  life  that  he  thought  useless  is  useless  no  longer. 
You  overcome,  then,  the  evil  by  the  good.  4.  It  is  true  also  in  the  religious  world. 
Israel's  evil  was  idolatry.  The  prophets  spoke  and  the  prophets  failed ;  and  at 
last  came  the  terrible  penalty — the  Exile,  which  purged  out  the  old  leaven.  But 
there  was  no  positive  element  in  their  religious  life.  When  they  returned  they  did 
not  worship  gods,  but  they  idolised  themselves,  and  Phariseeism  grew  upon  the 
ruins  of  the  overthrown  idolatry  of  the  past.  Then  came  God  manifest  in  the  flesh, 
and  men  have  since  found  in  Him  who  is  to  be  loved  and  reverenced,  that  there 
was  the  good  that  was  to  expel  the  evil.  H.  It  is  ibbational  to  suppose  that  wb 
CAN  overcome  it  ts  ANT  OTHEB  WAT,  for  this  Tcasou : — There  are  three  elements  in 
the  consideration ;  and  he  who  seeks  for  mere  antagonism  to  kill  the  evil — 1.  For- 
gets the  man.  For  what  is  your  idea  about  evil  ?  Is  it  a  thing  that  is  so  part  of 
man's  manhood  that  his  very  individuality  is  concerned  in  it,  or  is  it  like  a  disease  ? 
The  truth  is  that  the  evil  is  in  the  man ;  and  hence  your  aim  is  not  to  kill  the 
man,  but  rather  to  deliver  him  from  the  power  of  evil.  To  meet,  therefore,  evil 
by  violence,  by  the  spirit  which  makes  an  easy  alliance  with  the  very  wrongs  which 
are  denounced  of  God,  fails  of  its  purpose,  for  it  kills  in  its  attempt  to  cure. 
2.  Forgets  the  law.  If  we  have  any  faith  in  the  moral  order  of  the  universe,  our 
answer  to  every  temptation  to  meet  evil  with  evil  is  this,  "  I  grant  it  might  answer 
to-day ;  but  am  I  sure  it  would  answer  in  the  long  run  ?  "  Our  Master  was  tempted 
for  the  great  gain  to  do  the  little  wrong.  But  His  answer  was  No  I  and  that  must 
be  ours.  And  why?  Because  the  laws  that  govern  the  world  are  the  laws  of 
righteousness.  It  is  never  worth  while  to  do  evU  that  good  may  come.  (1)  This 
is  written  large  upon  the  history  of  the  world.  You  never  can  carry  on  the  progress 
of  the  world  if  you,  at  every  provocation  and  delay,  impatiently  grasp  hold  of  the 
law,  and  subvert  the  very  principles  on  which  the  world  has  been  built.  (2)  It  is 
written  large  in  the  story  of  the  Church.  Whenever  she  followed  the  arms  of  the 
enemy  it  turned  against  her ;  her  right  hand  forgot  her  cunning ;  she  became  the 
travesty  of  her  former  self — no  longer  in  gorgeous  array,  going  forth  conquering 


654  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  za. 

and  to  conquer,  but  livid  with  the  power  of  that  evil  with  which  she  became 
incorporated.  Ton  cannot  challenge  the  victorious  and  eternal  laws  of  God,  and 
you  can  only  meet  and  overcome  the  evil  by  the  good.  8.  Forgets  God;  for 
Buppose  we  are  tempted  to  make  use  of  some  transient  evil  to  achieve  some  great 
good.  The  little  falsehood,  the  little  elasticity  of  conscience,  declares  that  you  do 
not  believe  that  God  is  eternally  good,  and  that  you  believe  in  the  energy  of  evil 
more  than  in  the  energy  of  good.  Bat  the  Cross  tells  us  that  victory  lies  in  the 
hands  of  him  who  will  use  the  Divine  weapons  and  eschew  the  carnal  ones;  by 
that  Christ  overcame  evil  with  good.  {Bp.  Boyd  Carpenter.)  The  Christian 
and  his  adversaries : — There  are — I.  Adveksabies  of  the  gospel.  It  is  a  mistaie 
to  say  that  these  are  now  more  numerous  or  formidable  than  they  were.  The 
*'  higher  criticism,"  the  antagonism  of  modern  science  to  the  Bible,  &c.,  only 
present  in  a  fresh  form  the  difficulties  that  have  always  confronted  the  Christian. 
The  enemies  of  truth  may  be  more  active,  and  we  may  be  more  thrown  into 
contact  with  them,  and  so  the  evil  may  be  more  apparent,  but  there  is  no  reason  to 
believe  that  it  is  more  widespread,  or,  save  from  the  position  of  some  of  its 
advocates,  more  pernicious.  The  question  is.  How  are  we  to  deal  with  it  so  as 
to  produce  the  best  results?  The  true  answer  is  that  of  the  text.  1.  We  are 
overcome  with  evil  if  we  indulge  in  a  spirit  of  mere  antagonism.  Those  against 
whom  we  have  to  contend  need  the  gospel,  and  have  the  same  right  to  a  share  in  its 
provision  as  ourselves,  A  spirit  of  self -righteousness  may  dispose  us  to  look  down 
upon  them,  and  a  feeling  of  uncharitableness  may  lead  us  to  provoke  them  with  our 
denunciations.  We  may  be  more  anxious  to  overwhelm  an  adversary  than  to  win 
a  soul.  We  forget  that  Christ  bears  with  them,  and  so  our  zeal  becomes  unchrist- 
like.  2.  But  we  are  not  less  overcome  with  evil  if  we  speak  in  a  tone  which 
betrays  an  indifference  to  the  truth.  Desire  to  win  the  champions  of  error,  the 
effort  to  do  them  more  than  justice,  must  not  degenerate  into  a  latitudinarian 
charity.  To  shrink  from  the  faithful  exposure  of  error,  lest  the  feelings  of  some 
should  be  wounded,  to  talk  as  though  sincerity  were  everything,  this  is  to  abuse 
liberty,  and  thus  to  be  overcome  with  evil.  3.  There  is  a  more  excellent  way,  and 
that  is  to  overcome  error  by  confronting  it  with  the  truth.  The  effort  of  the 
Christian  should  not  be  always  to  meet  objections,  but  rather  to  exhibit  the  gospel 
in  its  own  simplicity.  Many  a  heart,  perplexed  by  the  adversaries'  subtleties,  and 
bewildered  by  our  best  answers,  would  be  won  by  a  faithful  proclamation  of  the 
truth.  II.  Seciabian  advebsabies.  1.  There  has  been  too  much  of  a  sectarian 
spirit  in  all  ages.  Not  only  have  there  been  differences,  but  alienation  of  heart. 
There  has  been  a  disposition  to  disbelieve  in  the  existence  of  goodness  beyond  our 
own  pale.  A  spirit  of  rivalry  has  introduced  itself,  and  men  have  done  for  the  love 
of  party  what  they  would  not  do  from  pure  Christian  motive.  And  where  a  man's 
convictions  are  strong,  it  is  very  hard  for  him  to  appreciate  the  position  of  those 
who  differ  from  him,  and  unless  there  be  restraining  influence,  there  will  naturally 
be  a  strong  display  of  feeling.  But  such  restraining  power  there  is,  and  its  sway 
ought  to  be  more  widely  felt.  The  children  of  one  family,  the  redeemed  of  one 
Saviour,  should  never,  amid  their  differences,  forget  their  essential  unity.  2.  But 
there  is  more  danger  here  than  in  the  war  against  scepticism,  lest  we  yield  too 
much  to  the  demands  of  that  charity  which  exists  only  so  long  as  an  opponent  is 
content  to  hold  his  own  opinions  in  abeyance.  Many  virtually  say  to  all  who 
differ  from  them,  "  Be  silent  on  every  point  of  separation,  never  raise  your  voice 
against  what  you  deem  to  be  evils,  lest  you  offend  us,  and  then  we  will  meet  you." 
This  is  no  charity  at  aU.  The  true  language  of  charity  is,  ''Hold  your  own 
opinions  firmly  ;  I  may  not  be  able  to  accept  them,  but  I  will  believe  your  sincerity. 
I  claim  only  the  Uke  liberty  as  my  right ;  I  will  wear  no  trammels,  and  I  will  impose 
none ;  so  long  as  we  rejoice  in  a  common  salvation,  march  under  a  common  banner, 
whatever  be  our  other  differences  we  will  love  as  brethren."  Truth  is  not  ours  to 
trifle  with ;  to  keep  it  hidden  lest  some  friend  might  be  offended  with  something 
in  its  appearance.  This  indeed  is  to  be  overcome  with  evih  By  faithfulness  and 
all  carefulness  in  relation  to  the  scruples  of  our  brethren ;  by  firmness  blended 
with  gentleness,  we  shall  best  approve  our  own  Christianity,  and  advance  the 
Interests  of  truth.  III.  Pebsonaij  adveesabies.  Let  a  man  take  an  earnest, 
upright,  straightforward  course,  and  he  may  expect  to  have  some  foes.  Envy 
will  raise  up  some  who  grudge  him  every  honour.  Differences  of  opinion  too  often 
degenerate  into  personal  antagonisms,  and  there  are,  besides,  those  offences  which, 
in  our  imperfect  state,  always  will  arise.  It  is  very  important  that  in  them  all  the 
Chiistian  should  indicate  that  the  spirit  dwelling  in  him  is  other  than  that  which 


CBAt.  xu.]  ROMANS.  655 

has  its  place  in  the  world.  On  the  world's  theory  retaliation  is  justifiable.  Bnt  to 
the  Christian  it  stands  condemned  by  the  precepts  and  the  example  of  his  Lord. 
We  who  have  had  so  much  forgiven,  mast  ourselves  forgive.  We  must  conquer 
hatred  by  a  display  of  that  charity  that  is  not  easily  provoked,  and  which  thinketh 
no  evil.  Be  it  ours  then  to  overcome  evil  with  good.  There  are  two  aspects  in 
which  we  may  ever  regard  human  characters  and  deeds.  The  one  is  uncharitable ; 
the  other  kind.  The  one  presents  every  feature  of  another's  character  in  the  worst 
light;  the  other  labours  to  discover  the  good.  (J.  O.  Rogers,  B.A.)  The  great 
eonfiict: — I.  The  command  to  hold  out.  "Be  not  overcome  of  evil."  1.  The 
Christian  ought  to  be  unconquerable,  for  he  has  an  inexhaustible  power  to  resist 
all  onsets.  If  he  desert  not  his  position,  his  supplies  cannot  be  cut  off.  This 
injunction  was  peculiarly  appropriate  to  the  Church  at  Bome,  where  power  was 
almost  deified.  The  apostle,  no  doubt,  had  this  in  view  when  he  declared  that 
the  gospel  was  the  power  of  God.  He  now  urges  the  exercise  of  this  latent  power. 
Numberless  assaults  have  been  made  on  the  Church  of  Christ,  but  it  still  thrives. 
It  has  sustained  what  were,  apparently,  many  defeats  ;  but  it  soon  rallied,  and  gave 
fresh  proofs  of  its  invincibility.  2.  Taken  in  its  connection,  the  text  gives  pro- 
minence to  sufiFering.  Christians  are  discomfited  when  they  lose  the  power  of 
Buffering  in  a  Christlike  spirit.  The  moment  they  begin  to  fight  evil  on  its  own 
low  level,  their  high  position  is  already  taken.  Vengeance  is  a  weapon  too  dangerous 
for  them  to  handle.  In  God's  hand  it  is  the  flashing  sword  of  justice ;  the  Christian, 
however,  is  more  likely  to  hurt  himself  than  to  wound  his  adversary  with  it.  A 
hasty  temper  is  a  vulnerable  point  in  a  good  man's  character.  "  He  that  hath  no 
rule  over  his  own  spirit  is  like  a  city  that  is  broken  down,  and  without  walls."  A 
graphic  portraiture  that — a  city  easily  sacked ;  faUing  a  prey  to  the  firstcomer ;  so  is 
he  who  has  lost  control  over  himself.  On  the  other  hand,  "  He  that  ruleth  his  spirit 
is  better  than  he  that  taketh  a  city."  He  has  subjugated  his  greatest  enemy,  and,  as 
a  consequence,  is  endowed  with  a  vast  power  of  resistance.  11.  Fattl  advances  boldly 
FBOM  THE  DEFENsrvB  TO  THE  OFTENSivB.  A  besieged  city  remains  unconquered  as 
long  as  the  hostile  forces  are  kept  outside  the  walls ;  but  the  besieging  army  must 
be  repelled  before  it  can  claim  a  victory.  In  virtue  of  the  resources  available  to 
him,  the  Christian  is  able  to  endure  a  long  siege ;  but  it  is  his  imperative  duty  to 
advance  and  put  to  flight  the  army  of  the  alien,  for  it  is  with  the  conqueror  that 
Christ  promises  to  share  His  throne.  And  inasmuch  as  we  have  a  Captain  made 
perfect  through  suffering,  we  are  urged  to  follow  on  bravely  in  His  steps.  The 
lines  on  which  the  great  conflict  should  be  waged  are  clearly  indicated  in  His  life 
and  death.  His  command  to  fight  evil  after  His  own  example  may  be  taken 
as  a  certain  guarantee  of  His  presence  and  assistance.  Let  this  inspire  ns  with 
nndaunted  courage  in  our  direst  extremities.  lU.  The  means  whbbeby  to  aohiete 
THE  victoby.  Much  hberty  is  afforded  us  in  the  choice  of  our  weapons,  for  we  are 
only  confined  to  the  world  of  good ;  and  that  is  very  large.  But  we  are  strictly 
forbidden  to  fetch  any  from  the  enemy's  camp.  Nor  is  there  the  slightest  necessity 
for  employing  foreign  arms,  seeing  that  the  most  effective  are  manufactured  in  our 
own  country.  In  the  opinion  of  the  world  they  are  harmless;  in  moments  of 
weakness  we  are  tempted  to  distrust  their  efficacy  ;  still  the  command  holds  good — 
"  Overcome  evil  with  good."  Kindness  is  the  only  instrument  we  are  permitted  to 
use.  This  is  the  return  fire,  and  it  cannot  but  eventually  silence  the  enemy's  guns, 
and  that  without  slaying  the  gunners.  The  artillery  of  evil  is  poor  compared  with 
that  of  good.  Touching  instances  are  afforded  of  the  subduing  efficacy  of  good  in  the 
history  of  Saul  and  David.  The  weapons  here  prescribed  were  the  weapons  which 
the  Saviour  Himself  wielded  in  His  terrific  conflict  against  the  kingdom  of  evil. 
He  died  for  enemies,  and  slew  the  enmity  of  man  through  His  Cross,  thus  con> 
verting  an  enemy  into  a  friend — the  highest  and  oompletest  victory  imaginable. 
(W.  Jenkins,  M.A.)  The  rule  of  the  Christian  warfare : — 1.  The  world  is  a  battle- 
field,  and  we  are  all  not  only  under  arms,  but  imder  fire.  No  man  lives  to  himself; 
the  whole  fabric  of  society  suffers  for  the  misdeeds  of  one  of  its  members.  Every 
prodigal  brings  dishonour  on  the  home,  every  deed  of  violence  lessens  our  sense  of 
personal  security,  every  adulterer  weaJcens  the  integrity  of  the  marriage  bond, 
every  dishonesty  hardens  us  against  strangers,  <fec.  Hence  we  are  concerned  not 
only  in  the  evU  done  to  ourselves,  but  in  that  done  anywhere.  2.  And  we  should 
be  moved  to  protect  the  community  as  fellow-workers  with  Christ.  Every  true 
Christian  has  a  touch  of  the  knight  errant  in  him.  He  is  his  brother's  keeper,  and 
this  view  of  Divine  chivalry  is  shared  by  many  a  one  who  has  been  blamed  as  a 
busybody.     When  Christians  first  appeared  people  called  them  "the  men  that 


65$  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU8TRAT0S.  [chip.  zn. 

tnmed  the  world  npside  down."  L  Bb  kot  oteboovs  or  btil.  Don't  yield  to  it. 
Don't  turn  your  back  apon  it  and  say,  "  It  is  no  basiness  of  mine."  What  shoald 
we  think  of  the  man  who  shrank  away  from  some  great  famine  or  pestilence 
without  a  kind  thought  or  deed  for  the  su£Ferersf  However  safe,  he  would  be 
overcome  of  the  evil.  When  we  shut  our  eyes  from  any  general  trouble  we  yield 
to  it.  And  when  the  evil  threatens  ourselves  the  rule  still  holds  good.  II.  Oveb- 
couE  Bvn.  WITH  oooD.  We  may  not  be  content  with  a  mere  protest  against  evil. 
In  the  great  battle  we  may  not  deliver  our  shot  and  then  step  back,  saying,  "  I 
have  done  my  part."  We  must  hold  on  until  we  win  or  until  the  Captain  oaUs  as 
out  of  the  ranks.  1.  Suppose  the  evil  we  contend  agsdnst  is  a  personal  one.  A 
man  has  injured  you.  The  world  might  say,  "  Get  your  revenge."  The  apostle 
says,  "  Conquer  it  by  good."  Never  let  the  enemy  say  he  has  silenced  you.  Some 
day  repay  him  with  an  unexpected  thrust  of  goodness.  And  in  order  to  do  this 
you  must  fight  against  the  evil  in  the  man  rather  than  against  the  man  himself. 
Even  when  you  are  compelled  to  enforce  the  law  against  him,  do  not  sting  or 
degrade  him.  2.  Suppose  the  evil  be  general — the  prevalence  of  immorality  or 
infidelity.  If  you  think  you  cannot  do  away  with  it  altogether,  do  not  yield  to  it 
yourself.  If  yon  live  in  a  dirty  street  you  can  keep  your  own  doorstep  clean.  If 
you  can  do  no  more  yon  can  be  a  Noah  or  an  Elijah.  You  may  have  to  fight  single* 
handed,  but  with  the  power  which  backs  you,  you  can  do  that.  But  you  must 
strive  lawfully — viz.,  by  doing  good.  The  best  answer  to  deceit  is  fair  dealing. 
Darkness  flies  before  the  light.  Falsehood  is  built  on  sand,  and  will  some  day 
come  down  of  itself.  Don't,  then,  pull  it  down;  but  prove  the  strength  of  truth  by 
building  upon  the  rock.  {Harry  Jones,  M.A.)  The  best  war/are  (children's 
sermon) : — To  "  overcome  evil  with  good  "  is — I.  Thb  cheapest  wabfabb.  War  is 
one  of  the  dearest  things  that  men  have  to  do  with.  The  Napoleonic  wars  cost 
England  £200,000  every  day.  It  costs  the  nations  of  Europe,  to  keep  up  the 
preparations  of  war,  £200,000,000  every  year.  What  a  frightful  sum  to  pay,  just 
for  the  sake  of  killing  men.  Why,  with  a  very  small  part  of  that  sum  we  could 
clothe  and  feed  all  the  poor  people  in  the  world,  and  send  missionaries  wherever 
they  were  needed.  But  to  "  overcome  evil  with  good  "  it  is  not  necessary  to  buy 
guns,  swords,  &e.  Kind  words  cost  nothing;  and  kind  actions  cost  nezt  to  nothing. 
II.  The  PLEiSANTEST.  The  other  warfares  in  which  men  engage  are  very 
unpleasant  from-  1.  The  labour  involved.  Soldiers  often  have  to  make  long 
and  fatiguing  journeys,  with  heavy  burdens  on  their  backs.  Think  of  what  British 
soldiers  during  the  Indian  Mutiny  had  to  suffer,  and  Napoleon's  army  in  the 
Bussian  campaign.  But  there  is  no  toil  or  labour  like  this  connected  with  this 
warfare.  Here,  the  enemy  against  whom  we  have  to  fight  is  "  Evil,"  and  we  may 
find  it  in  the  ugly  dispositions,  either  in  ourselves  or  those  around  us.  We  have 
no  toilsome  journey  to  undertake  to  find  it.  2.  The  danger.  But  those  who  are 
engaged  in  the  best  warfare  are  perfectly  safe.  God  takes  care  of  them.  "  Who 
is  he  that  can  harm  you,  if  ye  be  followers  of  that  which  is  good  ?  "  3.  The  pain 
and  suffering.  But,  in  "  the  best  warfare,"  no  blood  is  shed ;  no  bones  are 
broken;  no  wives  are  made  widows;  no  children  made  orphans.  This  warfare 
heals  wounds,  but  never  infiicts  them.  It  saves  life,  but  never  destroys  it.  HI. 
The  most  epfectuaii.  Kindness  will  conquer  when  nothing  else  can.  There  is 
the  greatest  difference  in  the  world  between  conquering  by  power  and  conquering 
by  kindness.  The  former  is  like  building  a  dam  across  a  stream  of  water ;  the 
latter  is  like  drying  up  its  springs.  The  one  is  like  keeping  a  lion  from  doing 
harm  by  chaining  him ;  the  other  changing  his  nature  and  turning  him  into  a 
lamb.  IV.  The  most  honoubablb.  Beasts  and  men  conquer  by  force,  but  God 
conquers  by  love.  If  we  try  to  conquer  by  kindness  or  love,  we  are  imitating  God. 
Alexander,  Csesar,  and  Napoleon,  tried  to  conquer  the  world  by  power,  but  they  did 
not  succeed.  Jesus  is  trying  to  conquer  the  world  by  love.  He  is  succeeding.  He 
will  succeed.  V.  All  mat  engage  in  it.  When  they  are  enlisting  soldiers  for 
an  army,  they  will  only  take  men,  and  men  not  too  old,  or  too  young.  But  old  and 
young,  women  and  children,  sick  and  lame,  may  take  part  here,  as  well  as  strong 
men.  {R.  Newton,  D.D.)  True  moral  conquests  : — These  words  imply — 1. 
That  good  and  evil  are  in  this  world.  This  fact  distinguishes  this  from  other 
worlds.  In  heaven  there  is  good  only ;  in  hell  evil  only.  On  earth  both  co-exist, 
though  both  coalesce.  2.  That  evil  must  be  overcome.  Its  victory  is  ruin.  No 
man,  however  bad,  wishes  evil  to  triumph.  3.  That  the  way  to  overcome  evil  is 
by  the  force  of  good.  I.  This  is  the  only  effective  method.  Can  evil  be  overcome 
by  evil,  error  by  error,  selfishness  by  selfishness,  anger  by  anger,  Ac.  ?    The  idea  is 


eRAP.  xm.]  BOiTANS.  657 

»  philosophical  absurdity,  and  all  history  shows  it  to  be  an  impossibility.  Like 
begets  like  the  whole  oniverse  through.  This  is  the  only  effective  method  in 
overcoming  evil.  1.  Directed  against  oarselves  from  society.  Axe  there  those 
who  seek  oar  injury  ?  Can  we  overcome  them  by  resentment  or  violence  ?  The 
constitution  of  the  human  mind  must  ever  render  such  efforts  futile.  Here  is  the 
effective  plan — "If  thine  enemy  be  hungry,  feed  him,"  (fee.  2.  As  it  is  found 
existing  everywhere  in  the  world.  Falsehood,  profanity,  dishonesty,  &c.,  are  to 
be  put  down  only  by  good.  Truth  alone  can  conquer  error,  honesty,  craft,  Ac. 
4.  As  existing  in  our  own  hearts.  Here  it  is  to  be  overcome,  not  by  tormenting 
oarselves  by  self-scrutiny,  bat  by  strengthening  the  good  that  is  within  us,  and 
getting  more.  The  traveller  who  would  escape  the  mists  that  hang  aboat  moun- 
tain-sides must  ascend  the  higher  zones.  So  he  who  would  escape  the  darkness  of 
polluting  thoughts  and  feelings,  must  struggle  upwards  into  the  purer  atmosphere 
of  good  (Phil.  iv.  8).  Evil  within  will  only  yield  to  the  expulsive  power  of  the  good. 
n.  This  is  the  Divinely  practised  method.  1.  The  evil  of  intellectual  error  God 
overcomes  by  the  good  of  intellectual  truth.  The  world's  errors  in  relation  to  being 
and  well-being,  to  virtue,  duty,  happiness,  Qod,  man,  destiny,  lie  as  a  dark, 
oppressive  atmosphere  upon  its  heart.  God  overcomes  this  by  a  revelation  of 
truth — the  Bible.  2.  The  evil  of  enmity  towards  Him  He  overcomes  by  the 
good  of  His  love  toward  it.  Men  are  enemies  to  God  by  wicked  works.  Their 
opposition  to  heaven  is  their  greatest  crime  and  curse.  *'  God  so  loved  the  world," 
(fee.  3.  The  evil  of  corrupt  life  He  overcomes  by  the  good  of  a  perfect  life.  {D. 
Thomat,  D.D.)  Value  of  indirect  effort$ : — You  see  that  this  wrought-iron  plate 
is  not  flat ;  it  sticks  op  a  little  towards  the  lips — "  cockles,"  as  we  say.  How  shall 
we  flatten  it  ?  Obviously,  you  reply,  by  hitting  down  on  the  part  that  is  promi- 
nent. Well,  here  is  a  hammer,  and  I  give  the  plate  a  blow.  Harder,  you  say. 
Still  no  effect.  Another  stroke,  and  another,  and  another.  The  prominence 
remains ;  yoa  see  the  evil  is  as  great  as  ever — greater  indeed.  But  this  is  not  all. 
Look  at  the  warp  which  the  plate  has  got  near  the  opposite  edge.  Where  it  was 
flat  before,  now  it  is  curved.  A  pretty  bungle  we  have  made  of  it.  Instead  of 
earing  the  original  defect  we  have  produced  a  second.  Had  we  asked  an  artizan 
practised  in  "  planishing,"  he  would  have  told  ub  that  no  good  was  to  be  done,  but 
only  mischief,  by  hitting  on  the  projecting  part.  He  would  have  taught  us  how 
to  give  variously  directed  and  speciaUy  adjusted  blows  elsewhere,  BO  attacking  the 
evu  not  by  direct  but  indirect  action.    (Herbert  Spencer.) 


CHAPTER  Xra. 


TsBB.  1-7.  let  every  bouI  be  Bubject  unto  the  higher  powers.  For  there  Is  no 
power  but  of  God. — Let  every  soul  be  subject  unto  the  higher  powers : — I.  Evbbt 
BOUii,  or  man  (Ex.  xii.  4;  Gen.  xlvi.  27).  1.  Secular  person.  2.  Ecclesiastical  or 
religions.  II.  The  object.  "  The  higher  powers,"  or  chief  magistrates  established 
in  each  nation.  1.  To  see  that  God  be  rightly  worshipped  (2  Chron.  xiv.  2,  4 ;  xvii. 
6,  9).  2.  To  preserve  peace  (1  Tim.  ii.  2 ;  Psa.  Ixxii.  7).  3.  To  execute  justice  (Psa. 
Izxii.  2;  Rom.  xiii.  4).  III.  The  act.  "Be  subject."  We  owe  them — 1.  Prayers 
(1  Tim.  ii.  1).  2.  Fear  (Prov.  xxiv.  21 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  17).  3.  Not  to  speak  evil  of  him 
rEocles.  X.  20;  2  Pet.  ii.  10  ;  Jude  8).  4.  Dues  (ver.  7).  5.  Subjection  and  obedience 
(Tit.  iii.  1).  (1)  Otherwise  the  magistrates'  power  is  in  vain.  (2)  The  public  good 
depends  upon  our  obedience.  (3)  We  are  bound  to  obey  for  fear  (Rom.  xiii.  2,  5). 
(4)  For  the  Lord's  sake  (Rom.  xiii.  5).  (5)  He  that  resisteth,  resisteth  the  ordinance 
of  God.  IV.  The  season  of  the  command.  "  All  power  is  of  God."  This  appears 
— 1.  From  Scripture.  (1)  Every  power  is  ordained  of  God  (vera.  1-2)  (2)  The 
magistrate  is  the  minister  of  God,  AuTovpybv  (ver.  4).  (3)  By  God  kings  reign  (Prov. 
vii.  16,  16).  (4)  They  judge  under  Him  (2  Chron.  xix.  5,  6,  7).  (5)  He  sets  up 
kings  (Dan.  ii.  21,  37 ;  v.  21).  (6)  God  first  ordained  the  power  of  the  sword  in  the 
hand  of  men  (Gen.  ix.  6).  (7)  God  gave  particular  direction  for  choosing  most  of 
the  kings  of  Israel ;  as  Saul,  David,  Jehu :  and  so  now.  2.  From  reason.  (1)  He 
is  the  first  cause  of  all  things  (John  xix.  11).  (2)  All  power  depends  on  Him  (Acts 
xvii.  28).  (3)  As  the  stream  from  the  fountain.  3.  All  power  in  men  is  God's  power 
in  their  hands  (2  Chron.  xix.  6).     4.  Power  is  good  and  necessary,  therefore  from 


668  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  xm. 

God  (James  i.  17).  5.  It  is  part  of  the  la\7  of  nature  (Bom.  ii.  14,  15).  {Bp. 
Beveridge.)  Subjection  to  the  higher  powers  : — I.  The  duty.  1.  Respects  all  legiti- 
mately constituted  authority.  2.  Extends  to  all  persons,  without  distinction.  3. 
Requires  submission  in  all  matters  not  aSecting  conscience.  II.  Its  foundation. 
Power  is — 1.  Derived  from  God.  2.  Is  an  ordinance  of  God.  S.  Is  established  hj 
the  providence  of  God.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Obedience  to  law : — I.  Subjection  to 
THE  HioHEB  POWEBS.  Not  abjcct  subjcction  to  governments,  whatever  their  cha- 
racter ;  but  intelligent,  manly  subordination  to  a  divinely  ordered  arrangement — 
the  social  framework  and  the  national  dominion.  Many  are  the  corruptions  and 
oppressions  of  rulers  and  the  imperfections  and  perversions  of  constitutions.  Never- 
theless there  is  a  Divine  ordination,  as  of  marriage  and  home,  so  of  nationality. 
Per  se,  government  is  essential  to  the  perfection  of  human  life,  and  so  far  as  it  does 
not  hinder  our  obedience  to  God  as  the  direct  Sovereign  of  our  souls,  we  are  properly 
obligated  to  obey  it.  Divine  Providence  may  have  so  ordered  our  lives  that  we  may 
be  overshadowed  by  pagan  authorities.  While  we  approve  not  the  perversions  of 
depraved  legislators — their  intemperance.  Sabbath  desecration,  profanity,  luxury 
and  ambition — we  can,  notwithstanding,  hold  ourselves  in  dignified  yielding  to 
normal  law.  When  the  corruptions  or  misapplications  of  government  become 
glaring  and  intolerable,  the  right  of  revolution  is  rightly  appealed  to,  and  then  may 
"  God  speed  the  right."  II.  Spibitdal  authobitt.  Aside  from  references  to  political 
governments,  the  whole  paragraph  may  have  a  truer  application  to  spiritual  authority. 
Bulk  Pharisaic  ecclesiasticism  and  Papal  domination  are  extremely  abhorrent  to 
every  soul  whom  the  truth  and  grace  of  God  have  made  free.  But  Church  officers 
and  institutions  founded  on  the  gospel  are  the  reflex  of  the  Lord's  own  kingdom. 
These  powers  are  "ordained  of  God" — apostles,  deacons,  elders;  with  regulations 
for  Sabbath  observance,  pubUo  worship,  evangelistic  progress.  That  one  or  more 
persons  should,  therefore,  in  any  community  decry  creeds,  church  association, 
ministerial  functions  and  labours,  Ac,  must  be  a  grievous  evil.  Satan  can  quickly 
divide  and  scatter  the  fold  by  such  disorganisers  and  malcontents  if  the  least  heed 
be  paid  them.  At  suitable  public  anniversaries  we  should  look  into  the  Magna 
Charta  of  our  Christian  rights  and  experiences.  {Homiletic  Monthly.)  The  duty 
and  obligations  of  civil  obedience : — L  The  duty  which  we  owe  to  civil  govebnobs. 
1.  Submission.  This  injunction  is  given  to  "  every  soul."  And  with  regard  to  its 
^..Jii,  extent,  Peter  says,  "  Submit  yourselves  to  every  ordinance  of  man."  If  anything, 
indeed,  were  enjoined  on  us  inconsistent  with  God's  will,  "we  are  to  obey  God 
>  rather  than  man,"  as  did  the  three  Hebrew  youths,  Daniel,  and  Peter.  For  the 
commands  of  the  greatest  potentates  in  the  world  are  of  no  weight  against  the 
paramount  authority  of  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords.  When,  however, 
they  are  not  at  variance  with  the  law  of  God,  the  Scriptures  expressly  enjoin  an 
unreserved  obedience.  2.  Support  (ver.  6,  7).  Expenses  must  be  incurred,  both  in 
carrying  on  affairs  and  in  supporting  the  dignity  and  remunerating  the  labours  of 
the  officers  of  state.  Hence  there  must  be  taxes,  "  tribute  "  and  "  custom."  Hence 
all  shrinking  from  bearing  our  proportional  weight  of  the  public  burdens  is  not 
only  against  the  law  of  the  land,  but  the  Word  of  God.  Christ  Himself  paid  taxes 
from  which  He  was  properly  exempt.  3.  Respect.  "  Pear  to  whom  fear ;  honour 
to  whom  honour,"  i.e.,  reverential  homage  due  to  kings  and  principal  rulers,  and 
the  respect  due  to  all  who  are  in  authority.  Here,  then,  is  forbidden  everything 
that  is  disrespectful  either  in  manner  or  language.  The  blazoning  abroad  the  faults 
of  our  rulers,  so  as  to  degrade  them  in  the  eyes  of  others,  is  an  ofience  against  God. 
When  Korah,  &c.,  gathered  themselves  together  against  Moses,  you  know  how  God 
expressed  His  indignation  against  these  contemners  of  constituted  authority.  The 
Scriptures  regard  it  as  a  daring  thing  to  "speak  evil  of  dignities,"  to  "despise 
dominion."  II.  The  gbounds  on  which  oub  obligation  bests.  1.  The  penalty 
which  those  incur  who  transgress.  A  law  becomes  a  dead  letter,  unless  its  penalties 
are  enforced:  and  it  is  the  duty  of  such  as  are  in  authority  to  be  "  a  terror  to  evil 
works,"  and  not  to  "  bear  the  sword  in  vain,"  for  they  are  appointed  "  as  the 
ministers  of  God,  as  revengers  to  execute  wrath  on  him  that  doeth  evil."  Yea,  it  ia 
said  that  they  that  resist,  "  shall  receive  to  themselves  damnation."  We  acknow- 
ledge this  is  a  low  motive.  Still,  low  as  it  is,  we  fear,  so  great  a  lack  of  higher 
principle  prevails  amongst  us,  that,  were  it  not  employed,  such  a  thing  as  obedience 
would  hardly  be  known.  Each  would  be  an  Ishmael.  2.  The  advantage  we  derive 
from  civil  government  (vers.  3,  4).  So  appalling  is  the  evil  of  the  want  of  a  regular 
>  government,  that  the  very  worst  government  is  better  than  no  government  at  all 
(^ee  Judges  xviii.).    We  have  so  long  enjoyed  the  blessings  of  an  equitable  govem- 


flKAP.  xm.]  ROMANS.  55f 

ment,  in  which  even  the  king  dare  not,  if  he  woald,  invade  the  righta  of  the  beggar, 
and  in  which  every  crime  is  prosecuted,  and,  in  consequence,  we  have  been  bo  long 
privileged  to  "  sit  each  one  under  his  vine  and  under  his  fig-tree,  none  daring  to 
make  us  afraid,"  that  we  seem  almost  to  forget  that  we  owe  this  happy  seourity, 
not  to  any  improvement  in  man  himself,  but  to  a  well-ordered  government.  It  might 
help  us  to  realise  these  advantages  if  we  were  to  suppose  for  a  time,  a  suspension 
of  the  laws  throughout  the  land ;  and  that  every  one  was  left  to  follow  the  full  bent 
of  his  own  will,  without  fear.    3.  The  consideration  of  the  authority  wherewith 
they  are  invested  (ver.  1).     This  applies  to  all  that  hold  legitimate  authority.    It 
is  not  necessary,  in  order  to  make  any  power  the  ordinance  of  God,  that  it  should 
be  nominated  by  God  Himself :  as  Moses,  and  Saul,  and  David  were,  for  instance. 
For  the  apostle  is  speaking  of  the  Roman  emperors,  who  were  elected  by  the  army. 
It  is  mutual  consent  and  contract  that  makes  two  persons  man  and  wife ;  and  yet 
matrimony  is  God's  ordinance;  and  the  subjection  under  which  the  wife  is  required 
to  be  unto  her  own  husband  in  everything  arises  not  just  from  mutual  contract, 
but  from  God's  appointment.   Again,  one  becomes  master,  and  another  servant,  by 
consent  and  covenant :  but  the  master's  authority  over  the  servant  is  derived,  not 
simply  from  the  covenant  entered  into,  but  from  the  ordinance  of  God.    Hence, 
when  Israel  murmured  against  Moses  and  Aaron,  Moses  says  to  them,  "  Your  mur- 
murings  are  not  against  us,  but  against  the  Lord."    And,  moreover,  when  Israel 
rejected  Samuel  as  their  ruler  God  regarded  it  as  a  rejection  of  Himself.      (J. 
Sandys,  A.M.)         Christian  duties  towards  civil  rulers  : — These  duties  are  enforced 
on  two  grounds — I.  That  they  abe  ordained  o»  God,  and  therefore  ought  to  be 
obeyed  as  a  matter  of  conscience.    This  implies — 1.  That  it  is  according  to  God'a 
purpose  that  society  should  be  organised  into  self-governing  communities  for — (1) 
Protection  against  aggressions  from  withotit.    (2)  For  the  restraint  of  wrong-doing 
and  the  promotion  of  prosperity  within.     2.  That  government  must  assume  some 
form.    The  administration  cannot  be  left  to  chance.   There  must  be  a  constitution, 
clearly  defined,  and  generally  known  and  approved.     The  first  form  of  government 
was  that  of  the  family.   But,  as  families  multiplied,  each  having  a  variety  of  rights, 
out  of  which  would  arise  differences  not  to  be  easily  settled,  some  more  general  form 
became  necessary.    Government  by  patriarchy  having  fallen  through,  many  other 
forms  are  possible,  and  have  become  actual.    Which  then  is  the  one  ordained  of 
God  ?  This  does  not  concern  the  apostle.   The  general  rule  assumed  seems  to  have 
been  that,  as  every  community  is  likely  to  secure  for  itself  that  form  of  government 
which  is  best  suited  to  it,  at  any  period  of  its  development,  so  that  form  of  govern- 
ment actually  existing  is  the  one  which  is  of  God's  ordination  for  that  people  at 
that  time.    For  the  apostle  speaks  not  of  what  ought  to  be,  but  of  "  the  powers 
that  be."    3.  That  there  must  be  powers,  i.e.,  living  persons  invested  with  both 
authority  and  power  to  administer  government,  and  that  to  these  the  Christian 
must  render  conscientious  obedience.    But  it  does  not  follow  that  he  is  to  take  no 
part  in  insisting  that  the  ruling  powers  exercise  their  proper  functions  legitimately. 
For  the  governors  have  no  more  right  Divine  to  do  wrong  than  have  those  who  are 
governed.    Only  this  was  a  matter  in  which  Christians  had  at  that  time  no  special 
concern,  and  in  respect  to  which  it  was  no  part  of  the  apostle's  purpose  to  give 
instructions.    4.  That,  whatever  the  form  of  government,  the  real  Divine  purpose 
is  for  the  punishment  of  evildoers,  and  for  the  good  of  them  that  do  well.    The 
government  is  made  for  the  people,  and  not  the  people  for  the  government.  To  the 
masses  it  matters  httle  what  form  of  government  obtains,  but  it  matters  much 
indeed  whether  the  government  rules  according  to  wise  or  unwise  principles.    Yet, 
after  all,  any  government  at  all  is  better  than  none,  and  none  is  possible  if  no 
obedience  is  to  be  secured.    5.  That  each  ought  to  be  subject  and  to  render  respect- 
ful obedience  out  of  conscience  towards  God.  Of  course,  there  are  limits  to  obedience 
(Acts  iv.  17-9).     When  Rome  required  of  the  Christians  to  render  homage  to  an 
idol,  they  were  under  imperative  obligation  not  to  obey.     And  so,  while  it  is 
incumbent  upon  every  one  to  render  to  all  officials  their  due,  we  are  not  bound  in 
conscience  to  render  that  which  is  not  due.      If  any  state  functionary  should 
oppressively  demand  illegal  taxes  or  service  for  illegal  purposes,  the  duty  of 
obedience  has  no  place.    If,  indeed,  the  service  is  not  in  itself  immoral,  it  may 
be  found  to  be  a  matter  of  prudence  to  submit;  but  a  man  is  not  morally  bound 
thereto :  his  conscience  leaves  him  free  to  refuse.     But,  with  such  obvious  excep- 
tions, the  duty  of  submission  is  universal.     II.  That  they  have  the  eight,  power, 
AND  will  to  punish  THOSE  WHO  DISOBEY.     Obedient  subjects  have  nothing  to  fear. 
The  magistrate  is  the  minister  of  God  to  them  for  good ;  and  those  who  do  good 


{60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [obat.  zm 

ehall  have  protection  and  praise  of  the  same.  Bat  he  has  been  entrusted  also  with 
the  sword,  the  right  and  power  to  punish,  even  onto  death,  those  who  disobey. 
That  this  motive  of  fear  shoald  be  urged  appears  somewhat  strange.  Any  who 
were  cUsposed  to  refuse  obedience  must  have  known  that  they  did  it  at  the  risk  of 
punishment.  But  some  may  have  been  fanatic  enough  to  persuade  themselves  that 
a  heathen  power  could  have  no  moral  right  to  enforce  obedience,  and  that  God 
would  held  them  harmless  for  their  disobedience.  Such  are  reminded  that  God, 
under  whom  these  very  rulers  were  marshalled,  was  on  their  side,  and  would  sustain 
them  in  the  enforcement  of  subjection  and  obedience.  Therefore,  if  you  cannot  be 
moved  to  obedience  on  any  higher  ground,  yet  do  learn  obedience  through  fear. 
Even  of  the  wrath  of  God,  who  will  sustain  by  His  almighty  arm  the  just  authority 
of  these  powers  which  are  of  His  own  ordination  and  appointment.  (W.  Tyson.) 
The  Christian  view  of  the  State : — What  has  our  religion  to  say  to  our  patriotism  f 
What  is  the  final  meaning  of  our  relation  to  the  State  under  which  we  live? 
I.  To  begin  with,  the  Bible  teaches  ns  to  taxe  a.  fjb  hiqheb  view  of  thb 
NATION  THAN  ANT  WE  ABB  ACCUSTOMED  TO  HEAB.  In  God's  Word,  the  State 
is  not  a  mere  machine  for  keeping  order  and  peace.  The  nation  is  not  pro- 
fane, but  sacred ;  not  secular,  but  Divine.  The  government  derives  its  sanctions 
not  merely  from  expedience  or  convenience,  but  from  the  appointment  of  God. 
You  know  how  elaborately  this  idea  is  wrought  out  in  the  Old  Testament. 
Jehovah  is  the  actual,  almost  visible  Eing  of  the  Hebrew  commonwealth.  He 
establishes  His  covenant  with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  He  it  is  that  leads  the 
nation  out  of  bondage  into  freedom.  No  matter  who  sits  upon  the  throne,  at 
Jerusalem,  or  in  Samaria,  whether  it  be  David  or  Saul,  an  Ah  ab  or  a  Hezekiah, 
still  Jehovah  is  their  true  King.  From  Him  cometh  promotion ;  in  His  name 
prophets  speak ;  by  Him  princes  rule,  and  kings  decree  judgment.  But  some  one 
says,  all  this  may  be  true  of  Israel.  It  is  easy  enough  to  see  God's  hand  there. 
Bat  here  is  our  new  nineteenth  century,  where  nothing  is  sacred,  how  shall  we 
recognise  the  Divine  ?  In  authorities,  chosen  as  ours  are,  out  of  the  seething 
cauldron  of  our  practical  politics,  how  can  we  feel  that  the  powers  that  be  are 
ordained  of  God  ?  The  man  who  does  not  see  God's  hand  in  our  nation's  past 
history  has  read  its  records  to  very  small  purpose.  Upon  every  shining  page  rests 
the  finger  of  God  as  truly,  if  not  as  visibly,  as  in  Judaea.  Tou  may  see,  if  you  will, 
nothing  but  a  happy  combination  of  chances — a  happy  chance  that  placed  the 
fairest  portion  of  the  Western  Continent  in  the  hands  of  the  progressive  Anglo- 
Saxon  race ;  a  happy  chance  that  wafted  to  our  shores  the  Pilgrims  and  the 
Cavaliers,  the  high-spirited  Huguenot,  and  the  thrifty  German.  "  In  the  provi- 
dence of  God,"  says  Charles  Sumner — and  a  truer  student  of  history  never  lived — 
"there  are  no  accidents."  He  who  sees  God's  hand  in  history  at  all,  must  be 
blind  indeed  if  he  does  not  see  His  guiding  in  our  nation's  story.  "  If  the  Lord 
Himself  had  not  been  on  our  side,  now  may  Israel  say,  if  the  Lord  Himself  had  not 
been  on  our  side,  when  men  rose  up  against  us,  they  had  swallowed  us  up  quick, 
when  they  were  so  wrathfuUy  displeased  at  us.  II.  Nor  is  it  only  a  question  of  the 
past :  God  is  now  in  the  nation's  midst.  God's  baud  is  still  leading.  Thus  the 
state,  in  its  own  place,  and  for  its  own  work,  is  as  divine  as  the  Church  herself. 
Nor  is  this  all.  Just  as  individuals  are  sent  into  the  world  with  a  calling  from  God 
to  do  some  great  work,  so  nations  may  have  a  mission.  Was  not  the  Hebrew 
nation  called  of  God  to  keep  alive  in  the  world  the  knowledge  and  the  worship  of 
the  one  true  God  ?  Was  not  the  Greek  nation  sent  by  God  to  spread  broadcast  its 
golden  wealth  of  culture  and  civilisation?  Was  not  the  Boman  nation  sent  to 
impart  its  iron  strength,  its  splendid  instinct  of  law  and  order  to  the  barbarian 
hordes  of  Central  and  Northern  Europe  ?  Was  not  the  English  people  chosen  to 
colonise  and  settle  the  new  worlds,  and  to  pave  the  way  for  this  marvellous  nine- 
teenth century  of  ours  ?  Such  a  mission,  such  a  calling  impose  upon  each  of  us  a 
mighty  responsibility — a  responsibility  which  not  a  few  of  us  are  all  too  willing  to 
shirk.  These  earthly  "  powers  "  speak  to  us  of  a  higher  sovereignty  which  we 
must  acknowledge.  They  point  us  to  a  "  King,  eternal,  immortal,  invisible,"  to 
whom  we  all  owe  allegiance.  There  is  one  will  that  we  wish  to  be  done,  on  earth 
as  in  heaven,  in  the  State  as  in  the  Church,  in  politics  as  in  religion,  and  that  is  the 
will  of  Him  who  rules  in  righteousness.  And  now  what  is  this  again  but  to  say 
that  righteousness  must  rule  ?  For  the  will  of  God  is  the  supremely  righteous 
will.  Nor  is  this  all.  For  our  country's  sake,  for  our  King's  sake,  let  us  be  good 
men  and  true.  Thoreau  well  says,  "  It  matters  not  half  so  much  what  kind  of  a 
vote  you  drop  into  the  ballot-box  once  a  year,  as  what  kind  of  a  man  yoo 


asut.  zm.]  ROMANS.  661 

drop  oat  of  bed  into  the  street  every  morning."  (£>.  R,  Dalrymple.)  Qovemort 
and  subjects : — I.  With  besfeot  to  aovEBKOBS.  The  apostle  declares — 1.  That 
they  are  ordained  of  God  (ver.  1)  ;  that  their  authority  is  the  ordinance  of 
God  (ver.  2);  that  they  are  the  ministers  of  God  (ver.  4,  6).  Not  that  these 
expressions  signify  that  God  had  appointed  one  particular  form  of  government, 
all  deviations  from  which  are  unlawful.  There  is  not  the  least  ground  for 
such  an  opinion  from  history,  or  the  reason  of  the  thing.  Can  any  one  imagine 
that  Paul  intended  to  declare  that  the  Roman  emperors,  who  manifestly  usurped 
and  maintained  their  authority  by  force  of  arms,  had  their  commission  immediately 
from  God  ?  or  that  he  would  not  have  said  the  same  things  had  the  republic 
continued?  2.  That  the  sole  business  of  all  governing  power  is  to  consult  the 
good  of  society  by  maintaining  peace  and  virtue  in  it  (vers.  3,  4,  6).  Governors 
are  not  persons  exalted  by  Heaven  to  a  height  above  their  neighbours,  to  be  arbi- 
trators, at  their  own  pleasures,  of  the  lives  and  fortunes  of  their  f  el'  /creatures, 
and  to  receive  the  servile  homage  of  whole  nations,  but  persons  called  by  the  provi- 
dence of  God  to  a  laborious  task ;  not  to  live  in  ease,  but  to  watch  day  and  night 
for  the  good  of  that  society  in  which  they  preside.  Their  office,  indeed,  is  a  glorious 
office ;  but  the  glory  of  it  doth  not  consist  in  the  outward  majesty  of  the  governor, 
and  the  servility  of  the  subject,  but  in  the  happiness  derived  from  the  labours  of 
the  supreme  head  to  aU  the  members  of  the  body  politic.  And  that  governor  who 
contradicts  the  character  here  laid  down,  who  is  not  a  terror  to  evil  works  but  to 
good,  is  not  the  governor  to  whom  Paul  presses  obedience.  And  much  less  if  he 
manifestly  act  contrary  to  the  only  end  of  his  institution.  And  this  may  serve  to 
explain  yet  farther  in  what  sense  these  higher  powers  are  from  God,  viz.,  as  they 
act  agreeably  to  His  will,  which  is,  that  they  should  promote  the  good  of  society, 
which  St.  Paul  all  along  supposes  them  to  do.  And  consequently,  when  they  do 
the  contrary  they  cannot  be  said  to  be  from  God,  or  to  act  by  His  authority.  11. 
With  respect  to  subjects.  1.  The  duty  of  submission  and  non-resistance  is  laid 
down  in  such  absolute  terms,  that  many  have  been  induced  from  hence  to  think 
that  the  Christian  rehgion  denies  the  subject  all  liberty  of  redressing  grievances. 
And  yet  methinks  if  the  apostle  had  done  nothing  but  enforced  the  duty  of  obedience 
it  would  be  reasonable  to  judge  from  the  nature  of  the  thing  and  the  absurdities  of 
the  contrary,  that  he  meant  this  only  as  a  general  rule  rather  than  to  imagine  that 
he  should  absolutely  conclude  whole  nations  under  misery  without  hopes  of  redress. 
2.  But  the  apostle  so  explains  his  own  doctrine  by  the  reasons  he  gives  for  this 
obedience,  and  the  account  he  gives  of  the  duty  of  governors,  as  to  leave  subjects 
all  the  Uberty  they  can  reasonably  desire.  For  though  he  doth  at  first  press  upon 
them,  in  nnlimited  words,  an  obedience  and  non-resistance  to  the  higher  powers, 
yet  he  manifestly  limits  this  obedience  to  such  rulers  as  truly  answer  the  end  of 
their  institution  (vers.  3-5).  As  far  as  they  deflect  from  God's  will,  so  far 
they  lose  their  title  to  these  declarations,  so  far  are  they  excluded  from  Paul's 
argument.  These  persons  are  the  ministers  of  God  for  the  good  of  society  ;  there- 
fore they  must  be  obeyed.  But  it  will  not  follow  from  hence  that  obedience  is  due 
to  them,  if  they  ruin  the  happiness  of  society.  And  therefore  to  oppose  them  in  such 
cases  cannot  be  to  oppose  the  authority  of  God.  Nay,  tamely  to  sit  stiU  and  see 
the  happiness  of  society  entirely  sacrificed  to  the  irregular  will  of  one  man  seems  a 
greater  contradiction  to  the  will  of  God  than  any  opposition  can  be.  For  it  is  a 
tacit  consent  to  the  misery  of  mankind.  Whilst  he  commands  submission,  he  puts 
no  case  of  princes  acting  contrary  to  the  purpose  of  their  institution,  much  less  of 
princes  who  make  an  express  contract  with  their  people  and  afterwards  break  it. 
Nor  doth  he  mention  anything  of  a  passive  submission  in  such  cases,  but  plainly 
leaves  nations  to  the  dictates  of  common  sense  and  the  law  of  self-preservation. 
But  some  may  say.  Where,  then,  is  the  great  virtue  of  submission  to  governors,  if 
it  is  to  be  practised  towards  none  but  such  as  answer  the  ends  of  their  institution  ? 
But  it  is  easy  to  reply.  That  there  is  an  indispensable  duty  upon  all,  subjects  as  well 
as  others,  to  regard  the  public  interest ;  and  if  their  submission  help  to  destroy  and 
ruin  that,  their  submission  cannot  be  a  virtue.  The  great  objection  against  this  is 
that  it  may  give  occasion  to  subjects  to  oppose  their  superiors.  But  a  rule  is  not 
bad  because  men  may  mistake  in  the  application  of  it  to  particular  instances,  or 
because  evil  men  may  satisfy  their  own  passions  under  its  supposed  sanction.  The 
contrary  doctrine  we  know  by  an  almost  fatal  experience  may  be  very  much  abused. 
The  truth  ought  not  to  be  concealed,  or  to  suffer  in  the  opinions  of  men  for  the 
sake  of  accidental  inconvenience.  Conclusion :  It  is  highly  requisite  that  all  in 
authority  should — 1.  Be  happy  in  a  public  spirit,  and  a  true  regard  to  the  public 
VOL. IL  86 


662  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

interest.  2.  Have  a  deep  sense  of  religion,  of  the  great  importance  of  virtne,  and 
of  the  bad  influence  and  malignity  of  vice  and  immorality.  3.  Have  a  great  love 
to  justice,  and  regard  to  peace.  4.  Show  a  blameless  example.  [Bp.  Hoadley.) 
Human  magistracy  : — Note — I.  That  human  magistracy  of  some  kind  or  other  la 
or  Divine  appointment.  Taking  the  word  "  ordained  "  in  the  sense  of  permit,  all 
the  governments  of  the  world,  good  or  bad,  aye,  all  things,  even  the  most  sinful, 
are  ordained  of  God  (Dan.  iv.  32  ;  Deut.  ii.  21 ;  John  xix.  11).  But  taking  the  word 
in  the  sense  of  decreed  it  means  that  the  principle  of  civil  government  is  of  Divine 
appointment.  1.  Man's  social  tendencies  indicate  this.  Some  men  are  royal  in 
their  instincts  and  powers,  and  are  evidently  made  to  rule;  others  are  servile, 
feeble  in  faculty,  and  made  to  obey.  There  is  a  vast  gradation  of  instinct  and 
power  in  human  society,  and  it  is  an  eternal  principle  in  God's  government  that 
the  lesser  shall  serve  the  greater.  2.  Man's  social  exigencies  indicate  it.  Every 
community,  to  be  kept  in  order,  must  have  a  recognised  head.  Hence,  man  in  his 
most  savage  state  has  a  chief.  II.  That  the  human  magistracy  which  is  of 
Divine  appointment  is  that  which  pbouotes  good  and  discodbages  evil.  The 
Divinely  appointed  rulers  of  whom  the  apostle  speaks  are  not  "  a  terror"  to  good 
works,  but  to  "  the  eviL"  They  are  those  who  "  praise  "  the  •'  good"  ;  those  that 
are  "  ministers  of  God  for  good."  To  determine,  therefore,  what  kind  of  civil 
government  is  really  of  Divine  appointment,  and  that  is  to  be  obeyed,  you  must 
ascertain  what  is  the  "  good  "  which  it  is  to  promote,  and  the  "  evil "  which  it  is 
to  discourage.  What  is  "  good  "  ?  Obedience  to  the  Divine  will.  The  standard 
of  virtue  is  not  the  decree  of  an  autocrat,  nor  public  sentiment,  even  when 
organised  into  constitutional  law ;  but  the  will  of  God.  "  Whether  it  be  right  in 
the  sight  of  God,"  &c.  The  civil  government,  therefore,  that  does  not  harmonise 
with  this  is  not  the  government  of  which  the  apostle  is  speaking.  We  may  infer — 
1.  That  the  infringement  of  human  rights  is  not  in  accordance  with  the  will  of 
God,  and  therefore  not  •'  good."  2.  "The  promotion  of  injustice,  impurity,  and 
error,  is  not  according  to  the  will  of  God,  and  therefore  not  "  good."  Opposition 
to  governments  is  sometimes  a  duty.  Daniel,  &c.  HE.  That  the  human  magistracy 
which  promotes  the  '•  good  "  and  discourages  the  "  evil "  is  authobised  to  enfobcb 
OBEDIENCE  AND  8UPP0ET  (ver.  4).  The  magistrate  is  Divinely  authorised  to  punish 
transgressors  and  rebels.  But  coercion  has  its  rules  and  limitations.  I.  The 
sword  should  never  be  used  but  from  benevolent  desires.  "  The  new  command- 
ment "  is  the  law  of  humanity ;  nothing  can  justify  its  violation.  Punishment 
should  not  be  inflicted  for  the  sake  of  giving  pain  and  gratifying  revenge,  but  for 
the  sake  of  doing  good  and  serving  the  criminal.  2.  The  sword  should  not  be  used 
for  the  purpose  of  taking  life.  The  advocates  of  capital  punishment  and  war  insist 
that  the  sword  is  used  here  as  the  emblem  of  destruction,  whereas  it  is  the  emblem 
of  righteous  coercion.  IV.  That  such  obedience  and  support  are  binding  upon  ail 
CLASSES  OF  the  COMMUNITY.  Disobcdience  to  such  a  government  is — 1.  Impious. 
To  resist  it  is  to  resist  "the  ordinance  of  God."  Bebellion  against  a  righteous 
human  government  is  rebellion  against  God.  2.  Self-injurious.  A  righteous 
ruler  is  •'  the  minister  of  God  to  thee  for  good."  He  aims  at  thy  good.  To  resist 
him,  therefore,  is  to  wrong  thyself.  Conclusion  :  This  passage  does  not  teach 
that  we  are  bound  to  obey  laws  that  are  not  righteous,  to  honour  persons  that  are 
not  honour-worthy.  If  we  are  commanded  to  honour  the  king,  the  precept  implies 
that  the  king's  character  is  worthy  of  his  office.  Some  kings  it  is  religious  to 
despise.  The  obligation  of  obedience  is  ever-dependent  upon  the  righteousness  of 
the  command.  {D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  EaUbhf- citizenship  (election  sermon): — 1. 
Government  is  a  Divine  institution  for  the  preservation  of  society  and  the  happiness 
of  mankind.  As  to  the  substance, "  the  powers  that  be  are  ordained  of  God  "  ;  as  to 
the  form,  they  are  left  to  the  decision  of  each  country  and  age,  and  are  "  ordinances 
of  man  "  ;  but  whether  under  the  name  of  monarchy,  aristocracy,  or  democracy, 
governments  equally  claim  reverence  as  the  depositaries  of  authority  and  the  con- 
servators of  order.  2.  In  the  duties  enumerated  in  the  previous  chapter  there  la 
this — "  He  that  ruleth  (let  him  do  it)  with  diligence."  By  the  British  constitution 
the  people  are  the  ultimate  despositaries  of  power.  "  Every  ordinance  of  man  " 
which  is  to  be  obeyed  "  for  the  Lord's  sake  "  is  such  as  the  people,  by  their 
representatives,  make  it.  Every  elector  is,  therefore,  in  some  measure  responsible 
for  the  framing  of  those  ordinances,  and  should  therefore  labour  •♦  with  diligence  " 
that  they  be  in  accordance  with  truth  and  justice,  for  the  good  of  men  and  the 
glory  of  God.  3.  There  cannot  be  a  greater  mistake  than  that  on  becoming 
Christians  we  escape  from  our  obligations  as  citizens.    Beligion  was  designed  to 


CHAT,  xm.]  ROMANS.  563 

train  as  for  heaven,  not  by  unfitting  as  for  the  duties  of  earth,  bat  by  enabling  as 
to  perform  them  rightly.  Eeligion  would  be  an  injury  to  the  world  if  it  withdrew 
the  best  men  from  it.  True  piety  is  nurtured  and  developed,  not  by  avoiding  any 
portion  of  our  duties  as  men,  but  by  diligently  performing  them.  4.  Politics  is  the 
science  and  practice  of  legislation  for  the  pubUc  good.  Bightly  to  be  political  is 
the  same  thing  as  to  promote  the  welfare  of  the  people  and  the  peace  of  the  world. 
Christianity  does  indeed  condemn  the  bitterness,  the  factious  spirit,  the  selfish 
ambition  which  have  too  often  disgraced  political  life ;  but  Christianity,  instead  of, 
on  this  account,  excusing  its  votaries  from  their  duties  as  citizens,  calls  upon  them 
all  the  more  to  sanctify  politics  by  the  nobler  aspirations  and  purer  motives  ot 
religious  faith.    What,  then,  is  the  duty  of  a  Christian  elector?    I.  To  ascebtain 

WEO  AMONGST    THB    CANDIDATES    ABB,    ON    THE   WHOLE,   UOST   SUITED   FOB  THE   OFFICE 

o»  BEPBESENTATiVE.  Not  Wealth,  rank,  personal  friendship,  nor  any  favour  received 
or  hoped  for,  should  determine  his  choice,  but  fitness,  both  by  character  and 
opinions,  to  promote  the  public  good.    II.  To  orvB  effect  to  his  conviction  bt 

ENDEAVOUBINO   TO   BBINO   HIS   FELL0W-BLECT0B3  TO   THB  SAME   OPINION  WITH   HIMSELF. 

But  in  80  doing  he  will  avoid  all  unfairness  in  speech  and  conduct.  As  aa 
employer,  as  a  customer,  it  will  never  occur  to  him  to  urge  his  appeal.  His  only 
weapon  will  be  rational  persuasion.  He  will  never  become  a  mere  partisan. 
Firmly  holding  his  own  opinions,  he  will  do  nothing  opposed  to  the  meekness  and 
gentleness  of  Christ.  III.  So  quietly  and  seriously,  but  promptly  and  resolutely, 
TENDBB  HIS  VOTE.  He  will  uot  allow  personal  convenience,  indolence,  or  fear  to 
prevent  the  discharge  of  his  duty  to  his  country,  and  the  exercise  of  that  solemn 
function  as  one  of  "  God's  ministers  "  to  which  he  has  been  "ordained,"  but  the 
opportunity  for  which  so  seldom  occurs.  Conclusion :  Let  all  of  us,  then,  do  oar 
duty  to  our  Qod  and  our  country.  1.  Zealously.  2.  Patriotically.  8.  Charitably. 
4.  Prayerfully.  (Newman  Hall,  D.D.)  Humanjiuthority : — I.  Is  debived.  H. 
Is  LIMITED.      1.  To  restrain  evil.    2.  To  encourage  good.    III.  Is  vested  with 

THE   FOWEB  OF  BEWABD  AND  PUNISHMENT.      lY.   MiNISTEBS  TO  THE  OENEBAL  WELFABB.  . 

V.  Demands  bespbct.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  Oiriitian's  ^political  relations : — I.  "^  ' 
-  ^JBE  OBioiM-AgD  NEED  OF  CIVIL  GOVEBNMENT.  If  "  tTic  powers  that  be  "  (civil 
government)  "  are  ordained  of  God,"  we  infer  that  civil  society  itself  is  ordained 
of  God.  This  will  be  manifest  when  we  consider — 1.  Man's  natural  impulses  for 
society.  The  instincts  of  our  nature  dispose  us  to  live  in  society,  and  to  seek 
sympathy  and  assistance  from  others.  "  Solitary  confinement "  is  one  of  the  most 
terrible  punishments  which  can  be  inflicted.  2.  Man's  natural  position  and 
circumstances.  By  means  of  society  the  race  is  preserved,  and  civilisation 
developed.  If  human  beings  were  completely  isolated,  the  race  would  degenerate 
and  become  extinct.  Man  needs  the  aid  of  civil  authority  to  protect  his  life  and 
property  from  the  malice  and  power  of  the  evilly-disposed.  II.  The  obligation  of 
OBEDIENCE  TO  CIVIL  AUTHOBiTT.  In  civil  society  laws  are  enacted  and  govemmenta 
appointed  to  enforce  the  right  and  put  down  the  wrong.  And  all  rightly  disposed 
persons  willingly  subject  themselves  to  this  authority.  This  must  needs  be — 1.  As 
a  matter  of  duty,  not  of  fear  only.  The  fear  of  punishment  is  a  check  upon  evil- 
doers, and  thus,  in  a  measure,  prevents  lawlessness.  With  evildoers  obedience  is 
a  matter  of  compulsion  or  of  expediency.  But  there  is  another  standard,  that  of 
duty,  which  some  take  who  are  not  disposed  to  admit  that  "  the  powers  that 
be  are  ordained  of  God."  2.  As  a  matter  of  conscience  towards  God.  No  human 
government  is  infallible.  But  the  Christian,  from  love  and  conscience  towards 
God,  yields  a  cheerful  obedience  to  "  the  powers  that  be,"  so  long  as  the  civil  laws 
do  not  conflict  with  the  Divine.  HI.  The  duty  of  bevebence  to  official  DiaNrrv. 
I.  As  to  oar  "  dues  "  to  the  public  revenue.  The  language  implies  that  we  are  not 
to  regard  the  levied  rates  as  gifts  to  the  government,  but  as  debts.  2.  As  to  our 
respect  for  oflBcial  distinction.  "  Fear  to  whom  fear  ;  honour  to  whom  honour  " 
(2  Pet.  ii.  10).  In  no  society  or  government  shall  we  find  matters  exactly 
agreeable.  But  we  must  remember  that  the  basis  of  society  is  mutual  forbearance 
and  self-sacrifice  for  mutual  benefit.  Our  dislikes,  then,  should  not  prevent  us 
from  rendering  due  reverence  to  official  dignity,  as  well  as  to  rank,  talent,  and  all 
true  worth.  The  whole  of  the  apostle's  teaching  shows  that  we  are  bound  to  render 
obedience  on  the  ground  that  government  is  an  "  ordinance  of  God."  But  this 
implies  that  the  government  shall  not  enact,  nor  its  authorities  seek  to  enforce 
anything  that  would  require  disobedience  to  the  will  of  God.  Hence  we  conclude — 
1.  That  this  precludes  all  illegal  action  against  government  on  the  part  of 
Christians.    2.  That  it  permits  aJl  legal  means  for  the  redress  of  any  real  injustice. 


564  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (ohap.  zn% 

8.  That  the  obligation  of  obedience  is  ever  dependent  on  the  righteonsneaa  of  tha 
command.    [J.  W.  Kaye,  M.A.)        The  effect  of  religion  on  a  nation's  grandeur: — 
1.  Beligion  seoores  subordination.    2.  Subordination  law.    3.  Law  freedom.    4. 
Freedom  fame.     5.  Fame  respect  and  power.     (G.  Croby,  LL.D.)        St.  Paul't 
retpect  for  Roman  law : — The  warmth  with  which  the  apostle  speaks  of  the 
fanotions  of  civil  governors  may,  at  first  sight,  seem  surprising,  when  we  remember 
that  a  H61ius  was  in  the  Prsefecture,  a  Tigellinus  in  the  Frsetorium,  a  Gessioa 
Fbms  in  the  provinces,  and  a  Nero  on  the  throne.    On  the  other  hand,  it  must  be 
borne  in  mind  that  the  Neronian  persecution  had  not  yet  broken  out ;  and  that  the 
iniquity  of  individual  emperors  and  governors,  while  it  had  free  rein  in  every 
question  which  affected  their  greed,  ambition,  or  lust,  had  not  as  yet  by  any  means 
destroyed  the  magnificent  ideal  of  Boman  law.     If  there  were  bad  rulers,  there 
were  also  good  ones.     A  Cicero  as  well  as  a  Yerres  had  once  been  provincial 
governors ;  a  Barea  Soranus  as  well  as  a  Felix.     The  Boman  government,  corrupt 
as  it  often  was  in  special  instances,  was  yet  the  one  grand  power  which  held  in 
check  the  anarchic  forces  which  but  for  its  control  were  "  nursing  the  impatient 
earthquake."  If  now  and  then  it  broke  down  in  minor  matters,  and  more  rarely  on 
a  large  scale,  yet  the  total  area  of  legal  prescriptions  was  kept  unravaged  by 
mischievous  injustice.    St.  Paul  had  himself  suffered  from  local  tyranny  at  Philippi, 
but  on  the  whole,  up  to  this  time,  he  bad  some  reason  to  be  grateful  for  the 
impartiality  of  Boman  law.    At  Corinth  he  had  been  protected  by  the  disdainful 
justice  of  Gallio,  at  Ephesus  by  the  sensible  appeal  of  the  public  secretary ;  and 
not  long  afterwards  he  owed  his  life  to  the  soldier-like  energy  of  Lysias,  and  the 
impartial  protection  of  a  Festus  and  even  of  a  Felix.    Nay,  even  at  his  first  trial 
his  imdefended  innocence  prevailed  not  only  over  all  the  public  authority  that 
could  be  arrayed  against  him  by  Sadducean  priests  and  a  hostile  Sanhedrin,  but 
even  over  the  secret  influence  of  an  Aliturus  and  a  Poppsea.    It  is  obvious, 
however,  that  St.  Paul  is  here  dealing  with  religious  rather  than  political  prejudices. 
The  early  Church  was  deeply  affected  by  Essene  and  Ebinotic  elements,  and  St. 
Paul's  enforcement  of  the  truth  that  the  civil  power  derives  its  authority  from  God, 
points  to  the  antithesis  that  it  was  not  the  mere  vassallage  of  the  deviL     It  waa 
not  likely  that  at  Bome  there  should  be  any  of  that  fanaticism  which  held  it 
nnlawful  for  a  few  to  recognise  any  other  earthly  ruler  besides  God,  and  looked  on 
the  payment  of  tribute  as  a  sort  of  apostasy.    It  is  far  more  likely  that  the  apostle 
is  striving  to  counteract  the  restless  insubordination  which  might  spring  from 
regarding  the  civil  governor  as  a  spiritual  enemy  rather  than  a  minister  of  God  for 
good.     (Archdeacon  Farrar.)        Obedience  to  legal  authority  : — Whilst  command- 
ing the  allied  army  in  Portugal,  the  conduct  of  the  native  population  did  not  seem 
to  Wellington  to  be  either  becoming  or  dutiful.    "  We  have  enthusiasm  in  plenty," 
he  said,  "  and  plenty  of  cries  of  •  Viva.*    We  have  illuminations,  patriotic  songs, 
and  fetes  everywhere.    But  what  we  want  is,  that  each  in  his  own  station  should 
do  his  duty  faithfully,  and  pay  implicit  obedience  to  legal  authority."        Law  i» 
the  shadow  of  God's  justice : — Law  is  a  great  and  sacred  thing.     It  is  nothing 
less  than  a  shadow  upon  earth  of  the  justice  of  God.     The  forms  which  sur- 
round it,  the  rules  which  govern  it,  the  dignity  and  honour  which  belong  to  its 
representatives  are  all  the  outworks  of  a  thing  in  itself  entitled  to  our  reverence. 
But  when  the  machinery  of  law  is  tampered  with,  as  was  now  the  case  by  Jezebel, 
when  a  false  witness  or  a  biassed  judge  contributes  to  a  result  which,  if  legal,  is 
not  also  moral,  then  law  is  like  an  engine  off  the  rails,  its  remaining  force  is  the 
exact  measure  of  its  capacity  for  mischief  and  for  wrong.    Then,  indeed,  if  ever, 
summum  jus  is  summa  injuria.    {Canon  Liddon.)        Reverence  for  law ; — So  it  is 
with  loyalty,  the  reverence  for  order  and  law  incarnated  in  a  man,  reverence  for 
the  king,  as  God's  vicegerent  and  visible  symbol.    With  their  politics  I  have  no 
sympathy,   but  for  the  loyalty  of  the  old  Cavaliers  to  Charles  I  have  intense 
admiration.    He  stood  to  them  not  merely  as  the  man  Charles  Stuart,  but  as  the 
embodiment  of  Law,  Order,  Divinity ;  hence  they  were  willing  to  lay  down  all  they 
had  for  his  sake,  to  peril  life  and  limb  in  defence  of  his  rights.     Who  can  read  the 
tale  of  that  heroic  woman  who,  when  the  life  of  her  beloved  queen  and  mistress 
was  sought,  bravely  made  her  own  frail  white  arm  a  bolt  across  the  door  to  guard 
her  from  danger,  and  held  it  there  until  the  shattered  bone  refused  longer  to  obey 
her  will,  without  saying  that  she  did  this,  not  as  friend  for  friend,  but  as  subject 
for  queen  ?    If  we  are  not  loyal  now,  it  is  because  loyalty  lacks  objects  on  which  to 
bestow  itself,  not  because  the  deep  perennial  feeling  of  the  heart  is  less  strong  than 
it  was  of  old.     [George  Dawson.)        Civil  government  an  ordinance  of  God ; — It 


euAt.  zm.]  ROMANS.  665 

Beems  very  plainly  and  explicitly  taught  here,  that  civil  government  is  an  ordinance 
of  Ood,  and  that  obedience  to  our  lawful  rulers  is  a  Christian  duty.  We  say  again, 
Ood  does  not  ordain  any  particular  form  of  government,  but  He  does  ordain 
government.  He  does  not  say  yon  must  be  ruled  by  an  emperor,  a  king,  a 
generalissimo,  or  a  president.  But  He  does  say  you  must  have  a  ruler  and 
administrators  of  law.  They  must  exist  and  administer  in  the  form  best  adapted 
to  secure  the  highest  good  of  the  people.  God  does  not  say  you  must  have  a  king; 
and  "  the  king  can  do  no  wrong."  But  He  says  government  must  exist,  and  bt 
respected  and  obeyed,  so  long  as  it  subserves  its  true  end — the  general  good.  H 
it  fails  to  do  this,  you  must  not  run  into  anarchy  and  chaos,  but  wisely  and  firmly, 
in  proper  ways,  reform  or  revolutionise,  and  establish  a  better  system,  or  choose 
better  men.  The  Protectorate  under  CromweU  was  a  revolutionary  measure,  but 
it  was  justifiable  because  the  monarchy  under  Charles  had  failed  to  secure  the  true 
end  of  government — the  good  of  the  people.  But  it  was  only  a  temporary  measure, 
and  prepared  the  way  for  what  came  at  last,  an  admirable  system  of  constitutional 
government,  under  which  England  has  steadily  and  increasingly  prospered  for  two 
hondred  years.    (£.  P.  Rogers,  D.D.) 

Vers.  3-6.  For  mlers  axe  not  a  terror  to  good  wotka.—The  duties  of  rulers  and 
tubjects : — I.  Or  bulebs.  1.  To  protect  the  good.  2.  To  restrain  the  evil.  8.  To 
reward  merit.  II.  Of  subjects.  1.  To  respect  authority.  2.  To  do  good.  3. 
And  thereby  merit  praise.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D. )  Do  that  which  is  good,  and  thou 
Shalt  have  praise  of  the  same. — Conscientiousness  : — When  the  Emperor  Nicholas 
was  in  England,  in  1844,  industry  in  Russia  could  hardly  be  said  to  exist,  and  the 
Czar  was  extremely  anxious  to  introduce  machinery  of  all  sorts  into  his  arsenals, 
BO  as  to  become  independent  of  foreign  makers.  With  this  object  he  visited  a 
number  of  large  establishments  in  the  Midland  Counties  and  the  North  ;  and  one 
Sunday  morning  Mr.  James  Nasmyth,  the  inventor  of  the  steam  hammer,  and 
proprietor  of  large  works  at  Patricroft,  was  much  surprised  at  the  appearance  in 
his  garden  of  an  officer  in  a  carriage  and  a  gorgeous  uniform,  whose  chasseur,  still 
more  gorgeous  than  his  master,  was  sent  up  to  disturb  the  old  gentleman's  Sabbath 

rest  by  loudly  announcing,  "Prince   K ."    The  prince  himself  walked  in, 

smoking  a  cigarette,  and  informed  Mr.  Nasmyth  in  good  English  that  the  Czar 
intended  to  honour  the  Patricroft  works  with  a  visit  on  that  afternoon.  "  Indeed  I  " 
replied  their  owner,  •*  I  regret  that  his  majesty  will  not  see  much,  as  it  is  Sunday." 
♦•  But  it  would  be  easy,"  rejoined  the  aide-de-camp,  coolly  helping  himself  to  a 
bon-bon  which  his  chasseur  handed  him  oat  of  a  handsome  box,  "  to  start  the 
works  for  a  few  hours.  Mr.  Nasmyth  might  be  sure  of  his  majesty's  favour." 
"  Sir,"  replied  Mr.  Nasmyth,  "  the  favour  of  my  God  is  more  important  to  me  than 
that  of  your  master.  And  if  I  were  inclined  to  break  the  Sabbath  for  him,  my 
men  would  not."  "  Would  you  not  start  the  works  for  Queen  Victoria  on  Sunday  ?  " 
asked  the  astonished  aide-de-camp.  "  Her  Gracious  Majesty,"  replied  the  old 
Briton,  "  would  never  suggest  such  a  thing."  The  Czar  did  not  visit  Patricroft. 
For  he  is  a  minister  of  God  to  thee  for  good. — The  ministry  of  civil  rulers  : — The 
civil  ruler  is — I.  A  minister  of  God.  1.  Paul  does  not  say  he  ought  to  be  so,  or 
it  would  be  well  if  he  would  consent  to  be  so,  but  that  "he  is."  It  is  not  in  hia 
pleasure  not  to  be  so.  He  must  be  so,  if  he  rebel  against  it  ever  so  fiercely.  Nero'a 
will  might  be  devilish  ;  every  power  which  he  wielded  was  Divine.  He  had  been 
appointed  to  rule  the  world  which  he  tormented  by  Him  who  loved  that  world- 
2,  How  would  such  a  doctrine  affect  the  Eoman  Christians  ?  They  could  not 
confound  vital  power  with  those  outside  accidents  of  it  which  our  vulgar  nature 
prompts  us  to  adneire  when  they  recollected  from  whom  it  came,  and  they  must 
have  hated  every  wanton  exercise  of  it.  The  effect  of  regarding  Nero  as  a  minister 
of  God  was,  no  doubt,  to  make  them  patient  under  his  government,  and  afraid  to 
engage  in  any  mad  schemes  for  subverting  it.  But  this  faith  gave  strength  to  their 
cries  that  the  earth  might  be  delivered  from  all  her  oppressors,  assured  them  that 
those  cries  would  not  be  in  vain,  and  made  them  welcome  their  own  sufferings  as 
steps  towards  the  redemption,  3.  Those  who  attempt  to  find  apologies  for  tyranny 
in  Scripture,  sometimes  ask,  "  If  Nero's  power  was  ordained  by  God,  what  subjects 
can  pretend  that  the  powers  which  are  over  them  have  some  lower  origin  ?  "  I 
answer,  •'  Certainly  none."  And  subjects  would  be  most  unwise  if  they  wished 
otherwise.  For  it  imports  that  every  power  is  a  trust,  and  implies  responsibility  to 
a  judge  whom  the  greatest  criminal  cannot  escape.  Read  Roman  history  in  the 
light  of  St.  Paul's  sentence.     Every  sting  of  conscience  which  visited  Nero  that 


566  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip,  xnt 

night  when  he  knew  himself  to  be  his  mother's  murderer  was  a  message  to  him, 
"  Thou  art  God's  minister,  and  thoa  hast  used  His  sword  against  thy  own  flesh 
and  blood."  The  assassin  by  whom  he  fell  at  last  was  saying,  "  Thou  art  God'a 
minister ;  and  so  am  I,  guilty  like  thyself,  but  ordained  to  call  thee  to  Bis  judgment- 
seat."  4.  Surely,  if  rulers  and  people  believed  this,  it  would  be  something  more 
than  the  notion  that  they  may  be  brought  to  the  bar  of  "  public  opinion."  But  let 
those  who  confess  the  power  of  public  opinion  ask  themselves  whether  it  requires 
any  more  credulity  to  acknowledge  the  presence  of  a  living,  personal  ruler  ?  IL  A 
minister  of  God  to  thes.  1.  A  strange  assertion  1  A  minister  of  God  to  the 
Boman  world  the  emperor  might  be,  however  little  he  fulfilled  his  ministry.  But 
a  minister  of  God  to  some  individual  member  of  the  Roman  Church,  who  must 
have  counted  it  the  best  privilege  of  his  obscurity  that  the  emperor  would  never 
hear  of  him,  never  inquire  after  him,  how  could  he  be  such  to  that  man  ?  In  this 
way :  When  a  man  was  taken  into  the  Christian  Church,  he  contracted  affinities 
and  obligations  to  Jew  and  Greek,  barbarian  and  Scythian,  bond  and  free.  But  he 
might  easily  forget  these,  and  fancy  that  the  Church  was  an  isolated  body.  The 
fact  of  being  under  a  common  civil  ruler  deepened  and  expanded  the  doctrine.  Nor 
was  the  benefit  destroyed  by  the  character  of  the  ruler.  If  he  was  an  oppressor, 
there  was  more  necessi^  of  falling  back  on  the  Source  from  which  his  authority 
proceeded,  in  prayer  that  His  will  might  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven.  2. 
But  I  am  far  more  desirous  to  assert  the  truth  in  reference  to  those  rulers  who 
confess  their  calling  and  try  to  fulfil  it.  So  far  as  they  contribute  to  the  health 
and  growth  of  the  body  politic,  so  far  they  must  be  ministers  of  God  to  each  one 
of  us  personally.  For  are  they  not  quickening  our  hearts  and  hopes,  and  enabling 
us  to  enter  more  truly  the  kingdom  of  God  ?  It  is  impossible  that  all  true  human 
rule  should  not  be  like  the  Divine  rule  in  this,  that  it  is  most  minute  when  it  is 
most  comprehensive ;  that  it  calls  for  the  most  personal  loyalty  when  it  is  most 
generally  even  and  just.  HI.  "  A  minister  of  God  to  thee  fob  oood."  1.  St.  Paul 
writes  this  to  men  who  might,  in  a  short  time,  be  lighting  the  city  as  torches  to 
cover  the  guilt  of  him  who  set  it  on  fire.  Well !  and  was  he  not,  and  was  not 
Charles  IX.  in  France,  and  Philip  II.  in  the  Netherlands  ?  Were  they  not  ministers 
of  God  for  good  to  those  whom  they  sent  beyond  the  reach  of  their  crimes,  to  cry 
beneath  the  altar  for  the  day  when  the  earth  should  no  more  conceal  her  blood  or 
cover  her  slain  ?  And  it  wiU  be  known,  some  day,  to  how  many  men,  governments 
the  most  accursed  have  been  ministers  of  good,  by  leading  them  from  trifling  to 
earnestness,  by  changing  them  from  reckless  plotters  into  self-denying  patriots,  by 
turning  their  atheism  or  devil-worship  into  a  grounded  faith  in  the  God  of  Truth. 
Many  such,  I  fear,  will  rise  up  in  judgment  against  those  who  live  in  happier 
circumstances.  2.  But  the  apostle  was  enabled  to  proclaim  this  principle  on  other 
grounds.  As  he  believed  Christ  to  be  the  King  of  men,  he  could  not  help  believing 
that  all  human  society  was  organised  according  to  the  law  which  He  embodied. 
"  The  Chief  of  all  is  the  servant  of  all."  He  could  not  doubt  that  if  the  emperor 
believed  this  he  would  be  a  blessing  to  the  world ;  that  he  was  a  curse  to  it  because 
he  thought  the  world  was  to  minister  to  him,  and  not  he  to  it.  He  could  not  doubt 
that  every  Christian  ought  to  maintain  the  truth  which  Nero  set  at  naught,  and 
that  if  he  did,  it  would  prove  itself  in  his  case — Nero  would  be  a  minister  of  God 
for  good  to  him.  3.  How  did  the  faith  that  there  is  a  constitution  for  nations, 
which  kings  did  not  create,  work  itself  into  the  heart  of  modem  Europe? 
When  a  mediator  between  God  and  man  is  rejected,  you  must  have  an  absolute 
caliph  or  sultan,  and  a  government  carried  on  by  mere  officials;  you  cannot 
have  the  confession  of  a  relationship  between  the  sovereign  and  his  subjects, 
involving  mutual  obligation.  This  is  involved  in  the  faith  of  a  Son  of  Gk)d 
and  a  Son  of  Man.  Whatever  has  suffocated  that  faith — be  it  ecclesiastical 
pretension,  or  revolt  against  that  pretension,  be  it  the  worship  of  money,  or 
the  worship  of  a  tyrant  instead  of  a  father — undermines  constitutional  liberty.  To 
bring  forth  that  faith  in  its  fulness  before  the  nations  which  nominally  confess  it, 
is  to  help  them  to  break  their  poHtical  fetters.  {F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.)  The 
functions  of  the  ruler: — I.  To  maintain  law  and  ordeb.  1.  As  the  minister  of 
God.  2.  For  the  benefit  of  man.  H.  To  punish  cbime.  1.  For  this  purpose 
he  is  invested  with  the  power  of  life  and  death.  2.  Must  use  it  righteously. 
3.  As  responsible  to  God.  4.  For  the  suppression  of  evil.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The 
relative  dttt  'es  of  rulers  and  subjects : — I.  The  nature  of  civil  govebnmbnt. 
1.  The  events  of  the  seventeenth  century,  which  changed  the  form  of  government 
and  placed  its  institutions  on  a  new  footing,  naturally  gave  rise  to  searching 


OHAP.  zm.]  EOMANS.  567 

inquiries  into  the  origin  of  lawful  authority.  ^1)  Filmer  maintained  that  kings 
had  a  Divine  hereditary  right  to  their  thrones  in  virtue  of  Adam's  absolute  and 
arbitrary  dominion  over  his  offspring.  But  we  read  of  no  grant  of  any  such 
dominion  which,  had  it  existed,  would  have  rendered  slavery  coeval  with  the  first 
human  family,  and  would  nullify  the  claims  of  all  monarchs  excepting  the  true 
heir  of  Adam,  if  he  could  be  found.  (2)  Sidney  and  Locke  endeavoured  to  base 
the  relation  between  rulers  and  subjects  on  the  supposition  that  an  agreement  waa 
originally  entered  into  by  the  first  founders  of  a  state,  which  involved  a  tacit 
compact  between  all  succeeding  members  of  it.  But  we  have  no  evidence  of  any 
such  social  compact  having  ever  been  made.  (3)  It  seems  more  satisfactory  to 
regard  government  as  arising  from  the  nature  of  man,  though  stUl  having  its  first 
elements  in  the  relation  between  the  head  of  a  family  and  the  children.  The  idea 
of  authority  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  submission  on  the  other,  thus  gained,  would 
easily  prepare  the  way  for  the  union  of  a  number  of  families  under  one  head.  2. 
Beason  cannot  fail  to  discern  the  importance  of  civil  government  to  save  society 
from  a  disorder  which  must  soon  have  issued  in  its  dissolution,  if  not  in  the 
destruction  of  the  very  race  itself.  Accordingly,  in  the  Scriptures,  we  find  civil 
government  very  clearly  recognised  as  a  Divine  institution ;  and  the  general  obliga- 
tion to  obedience  is  enforced  under  penalty  of  the  consequences  of  resisting  an 
ordinance  of  God.  But  though  God  has  given  His  own  sanction  to  the  institution 
we  have  no  evidence  that  any  one  particular  form  has  been  prescribed,  or  even  that 
uniformity  in  this  respect  would  be  a  good.  When  it  is  said,  "  the  powers  that  be 
are  ordained  of  God,"  the  meaning  is,  that  as  government  is  designed  for  the 
Becxirity  and  happiness  of  society,  every  government,  whatsoever  its  form,  which  in 
any  particular  country  promotes  this  end,  is  agreeable  to  the  will  of  God.  Until 
Saul  reigned,  the  human  form  of  the  theocratic  government  had  been  substantially 
a  sort  of  republic.  The  monarchy,  however,  after  it  became  established,  received 
the  Divine  sanction.  U.  Thb  ties  which  severallt  attach  to  the  aovEBNiita 
FOWEB  AND  THE  QOTEBNED.  1.  The  duties  of  rulcrs.  (1)  To  remember  their 
responsibiUty  to  God.  "  He  that  mieth  over  men  must  be  just,  ruling  in  the  fear 
of  God."  When  it  is  considered  that  the  happiness  of  millions  is  entrusted  to 
them,  how  deeply  should  they  feel  that  they  have  a  "  Master  in  heaven  I  "  (2)  To 
act  exclusively  for  the  public  good.  Not  only  does  the  text  describe  the  civil  ruler 
as  a  "  minister  of  God  for  good,"  bat  pagan  sages ;  Aristotle  defines  a  king  as  "  one 
who  governs  for  the  good  and  profit  of  his  people,  and  not  for  his  own  ends. "  The 
doctrine  that  a  ruler  has  a  right  to  hold  power  merely  for  his  own  sake  is  a  mon- 
strous perversion  of  the  useful  principle  of  hereditary  or  vested  right.  Happily, 
this  doctrine  has  been  repudiated  in  our  own  country  by  the  revolution  of  1688. 
Memorable  examples  of  the  same  principle  have  occurred  in  France  and  Belgium. 
(3)  To  exercise  their  high  function  so  as  to  make  the  civil  government  a  moral  power 
and  influence.  A  military  despotism  may  be  obeyed  because  it  cannot  be  resisted ; 
a  government  which  seeks  to  gain  its  ends  chiefiy  by  a  system  of  espionage ;  brib- 
ing may  be  equally  dreaded,  but  such  governments  will  never  be  respected.  (4)  To 
create  the  persuasion  of  general  good  and  benevolent  intention  on  their  part. 
Bulers  may  often  commit  errors,  but  these  will  be  viewed  patiently  if  uprightnesa 
of  intention  is  manifest ;  but  not  the  most  splendid  talents  nor  even  great  servicea 
will  compensate  for  the  want  of  sincerity.  Not,  however,  that  a  statesman 
may  not  modify  his  opinions  from  conviction ;  but  how  many  pledges  have  been 
made  on  the  hustings  only  to  be  broken  when  some  prospect  has  dazzled  the 
vision!  Either  let  such  pledges  never  be  made,  or  let  them  be  kept,  or  let  those 
who  cannot  keep  them  retire  from  the  scene.  This  uprightness  of  intention  must 
be  shown  especially  in  appointments  to  places  of  trust  and  profit.  (5)  To  be  well 
informed  on  the  main  topics  with  which  they  are  called  to  deal.  Want  of  enlarged 
views  and  ignorance  of  men  and  things  may  lead  to  reckless  and  sudden  changes 
for  which  the  mind  of  a  nation  is  not  prepared,  and  indeed  has  often  produced 
revolutions.  (6)  To  see  that  the  laws  are  impartial,  and  that  they  are  impartially 
administered.  It  is  the  dictate,  both  of  Scripture  and  of  reason,  that  there  should 
not  be  one  law  for  the  rich  and  another  for  the  poor.  The  same  principle  of 
impartiality  might  be  applied  to  the  economy  of  trade,  of  education,  and  even  of 
religion.  (7)  To  set  a  good  example.  If  rulers  are  profligate,  what  readier  way  to 
the  demoralisation  of  a  people  1  The  morals  of  the  higher  classes  tend  to  become 
more  and  more  an  index  to  those  of  the  people.  (8)  To  be  patriotic.  His  country 
claims  the  statesman's  highest  aims  and  best  services.  He  should  be,  then,  a  man 
of  peace.     Of  all  the  calamities  that  can  befal  nations,  war  is  by  far  the  greatest. 


668  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  xm 

Peace  fnmiBhes  upright  and  wise  mlera  the  opportnnity  of  domestic  improTement. 
2.  The  duties  of  subjects.  (1)  To  obey  the  laws,  or  else  the  very  design  of  ciyil 
goyemment  and  the  plain  injunctions  of  Scripture  go  for  nothing.  Of  course  we 
ought  to  "  obey  God  rather  than  men,"  but  we  should  remember  that  this  was  said 
by  those  who,  as  inspired  men,  could  not  mistake  as  to  what  is  obedience  to  God. 
Before,  therefore,  we  resist  the  ordinance  of  man,  let  us  be  sure  Uiat  it  really  does 
clash  with  the  plain  ordinance  of  God.  The  supremacy  of  the  law  implies  that 
the  subject  surrenders  the  right  of  redressing  his  private  wrongs  to  the  political 
society  of  which  he  is  a  member,  otherwise  offences  would  often  not  be  punished  at  all, 
for  the  aggressor  might  be  the  stronger ;  or,  if  not,  the  aggressor  might  be  punisbed 
from  revenge.  Besides,  one  retaliation  would  lead  to  another,  and  there  would  be 
no  end  to  this  reciprocal  brute  force,  but  in  the  destruction  of  one  or  both  of  the 
parties.  Still  it  must  be  admitted  that  if  a  robber  or  a  murderer  were  to  attack  us 
we  should  certainly  be  justified  in  repelling  him,  in  self-defence,  because  we  cannot 
at  the  moment  command  the  protection  of  society.  (2)  To  honour  his  rulers,  but 
not  by  insincere  flattery,  and  servile  fawning  for  the  sake  of  advantage.  To 
reverence  the  Sovereign,  in  whom  the  dignity  and  power  of  the  state  is  embodied, 
is  a  natural  sentiment  as  well  as  a  religious  duty ;  while  "  despising  government "  is 
strongly  condemned  (2  Pet.  ii.  10).  Still  as  it  would  be  irrationaJ  to  suppose  that 
rulers  are  infallible,  it  cannot  be  wrong,  on  certain  occasions,  to  find  fault  with 
their  public  acts.  Our  Saviour  and  the  apostles  did  so,  but  censures  should  be 
tempered  with  the  recollection  that  nothing  is  more  easy  than  to  sit  in  judgment  on 
men's  motives  only  because  we  ourselves  may  be  of  a  different  opinion.  Much 
more  has  been  effected  towards  the  removal  of  bad  laws  by  sober  and  persevering 
remonstrance  than  by  unmeasured  abuse.  The  Christian  law  of  courtesy  has 
as  much  claim  to  operation  here  as  in  any  of  the  other  intercourses  of  life.  (3)  To 
pray  for  them.  In  thus  doing  we  are  praying  for  the  community  at  large,  and  for 
the  whole  world,  the  interests  of  which  are  affected  by  the  international  measures 
of  rulers,  and  especially  of  our  own,  whose  policy  is  felt  over  the  globe.  (4)  To  pay 
the  taxes.  The  machine  of  government  must  always,  in  a  state  of  society  like  our 
own,  be  expensive ;  but  the  complaint  respecting  taxation  has  too  often  been  well- 
grounded  in  consequence  of  the  self-interest  and  extravagance  of  rulers  themselves. 
Again  ;  a  tax  may  have  a  wrong  object,  or  it  may  be  so  levied  as  to  bear  dispropor- 
tionably  on  the  relative  means  of  those  who  have  to  pay  it.  But  still,  when  it  is 
imposed  constitutionally,  it  must  be  submitted  to.  (5)  To  do  all  in  their  power  to 
exert  a  salutary  influence  over  their  rulers,  so  as  to  render  the  machine  of  govern- 
ment as  perfect  an  instrument  as  possible  for  promoting  the  freedom  and  happiness 
of  the  governed.  If  rulers  ever  forget  this  high  and  religious  destination  and  enact 
tyrannical  laws,  and  if  no  milder  measures  avail  to  remedy  intolerable  oppressions, 
subjects  are  justified  in  resisting  these  encroachments.  But  usually  the  best  and 
most  direct  means  of  exercising  a  salutary  influence  on  public  affairs  is  the  election 
of  8'ich  men  for  members  of  parliament  as  are  Ukely,  from  their  character  and 
principles,  to  seek  the  general  good.  Hence  it  is  one  of  the  most  incumbent  duties 
of  subjects  to  use  uprightly  and  with  an  enlightened  mind  the  elective  franchise. 
Few  notions  have  less  foundation  in  reason,  or  in  Scripture,  than  that  "  religion 
has  nothing  to  do  with  politics."  That  a  passion  for  party  poUtics  may  injure  the 
spirit  of  religion  is  not  to  be  doubted ;  but  this  only  proves  that  what  is  even 
obhgatory  may  be  engaged  in  with  a  wrong  state  of  mind,  and  thus  become  evil. 
{J.  Hoppus,  LL.D.)  But  If  thou  do  that  which  Is  evil,  be  afraid ;  for  he  bearetb 
not  tbe  sword  in  vain. — Duty  of  the  magistrate : — I.  We  must  place  the  bwobd 

AND   FASTEN    IT,    TOO,    IN    ITS    PBOPER    PLACE,    THE    HAND   OF    THE   MAGISTRATE.       1.    God 

giveth  the  power,  the  magistrate  hath  it :  God  lendeth  the  sword,  the  magistrate 
bears  it.  And  though  ambition  hath  presented  this  power  under  divers  forms  of 
popularity,  aristocracy,  and  monarchy,  yet  the  commission  and  seal  is  still  the 
same.  The  king's  broad  seal,  what  is  it  ?  The  matter  is  wax ;  a  small  piece  of 
money  will  buy  a  greater  quantity  :  but  having  the  image  aud  superscription  of  my 
prince,  it  is  either  my  pardon,  or  my  liberty,  or  my  charter,  or  my  possessions.  So 
the  magistrate,  what  is  he  ?  My  fellow,  dust  and  ashes,  nay,  a  sinful  man.  And 
yet,  as  "  the  minister  of  God,"  he  is  sealed,  and  hath  the  image  and  superscription 
of  the  Deity.  2.  But  though  God  hath  conveyed  His  power,  yet  He  hath  not  done 
it  to  every  man  upon  the  same  terms  ;  not  to  Joab  the  captain  as  to  David  the  king  ; 
not  to  Shaphan  the  chanceller  as  to  Josiah  on  the  throne  ;  not  to  Gallic  the  deputy 
as  to  Caesar  the  emperor;  not  to  the  under-officers  as  to  the  judge ;  not  to  the  judge 
as  to  the  king.     No  private  man  may  be  a  swordsman.    If  Peter  will  be  drawing  tc 


tBUf.  zin.]  ROMANS.  669 

lop  off  an  ear  he  most  hear,  "  They  that  use  the  sword,"  Ao,  (Matt.  xzvi.  52).  8. 
ks  God  bath  given  the  sword  to  the  magistrate,  so  hath  He  fastened  it  to  his  hand. 
No  discontent  shall  move  it,  no  argument  stir  it,  no  murmuring  sheath  it ;  no  time, 
no  calling,  no  liberty  free  or  privilege  from  the  power  of  it.  Behold  St.  Paul  here, 
upholding  that  sword  which  he  was  to  feel,  adoring  that  power  he  sunk  onder,  and 
bowing  to  majesty  when  the  throne  was  Nero's.  II.  Wb  mdst  now  piaoe  thb  "  non 
FBUSTBA  "  UPON  THE  swoED.  *'  Wherefore  the  sword  ?  wherefore  authority  ?  "  **  That 
we  may  lead  a  quiet  and  peaceable  life  in  all  godliness  and  honesty  "  (1  Tim.  ii.  2) ; 
that  every  man  may  sit  under  his  own  vine,  and  under  his  own  fig-tree  ;  that  the 
poor  man  may  keep  his  lamb,  and  the  jawbone  of  the  oppressor  be  broken ;  that 
peace  may  shadow  the  commonwealth  and  plenty  crown  it.  Authority  is  not  only 
"  not  in  vain,"  but  "  profitable  "  and  necessary.  God  could  have  governed  us  with- 
out a  sword,  but  it  was  not  good  for  men  to  be  so  governed.  We  love  and  fear  at  a 
distance.  And  as  the  object  is  either  nigh  or  remote,  so  it  either  affects  or  frights 
us.  ••  We  fear  man  more  than  God,"  and  the  shaking  of  his  whip  than  the  scor- 
pions of  a  Deity.  1.  The  magistrate,  like  God  Himself,  "  governs  us  by  that  which 
is  adverse  to  us,"  curbeth  the  transgressor  by  the  execution  of  penal  laws.  2.  No 
magistrate  doth  simply  will  the  affliction  of  the  offender,  or  punish  only  to  show  his 
authority,  but  for  the  amendment  of  the  offender  and  the  peace  of  the  commonwealth. 
You  who  are  invested  with  this  power  remember  the  end.  Bemember  you  were  placed 
with  a  sword  to  pursue  the  wicked,  to  run  after  the  oppressor,  and  take  the  prey 
out  of  his  mouth.  And  in  doing  this  you  defend  and  safeguard  the  innocent.  The 
death  of  one  murderer  may  save  a  thousand  lives.  The  neglect  hereof  heaps  injury 
upon  injury.  (1)  The  first  Ughts  upon  God  Himself,  of  whose  Divine  power  this 
power  is  a  very  beam.  By  injustice  men  undervalue  Him,  and  put  Him  below  His 
vassal,  as  ii  His  omnipotency  were  weaker  than  man.  His  honour  cheaper  than  a 
fee,  heaven  at  a  lower  price  than  a  bribe,  and  Christ  Himself  not  worth  forty  pieces 
of  silver.  (2)  From  God  the  injury  descends  to  the  commonwealth.  It  brings  in 
that  which  it  should  cast  out.  Sin  unpunished  makes  a  greater  breach  than  sin  com- 
mitted. For  adultery,  murder,  drunkenness,  deceit,  may  give  the  blow,  but  injustice 
wounds.  (3)  Many  times  the  injury  falls  upon  the  offender,  whose  greatest  punish- 
ment it  is  that  he  is  so  much  wronged  as  to  be  befriended,  and  so  much  favoured  as 
to  be  unpunished.  (4)  But  the  wrong  rests  and  dwells  in  the  magistrate,  who  in  a 
manner  abjures  his  office,  degrades  himself  by  his  connivance,  and  makes  the 
sword  less  terrible  by  not  using  it ;  the  not  executing  the  law  upon  the  greatest 
working  a  secret  and  reserved  contempt  thereof  in  the  meanest.  {A.  Farindon, 
D.D.)  Mistaken  clemency  in  courts  of  justice : — Mirabeau  once  said,  "  We  live  in 
an  age  where  wrong  constantly  triumphs  over  right,  and  where  justice  itself  is  a 
Ue."  There  can  be  no  greater  curse  to  a  nation  than  a  corrupt  judge  and  a  per- 
jured juror,  and  the  Bible  distinctly  declares  that  God  will  call  all  such  to  a  terrible 
account.  It  has  ever  been  the  case  that  where  wholesome  and  just  laws  have  failed 
to  be  strictly  administered  lawlessness  and  crime  have  abounded.  Mercy  to  a  great 
criminal  often  means  cruelty  and  injustice  to  the  people.  This  mistaken  clemency 
leads  to  serious  evils.  1.  It  confuses  the  public  conscience  as  to  the  distinction 
between  right  and  wrong.  2.  It  undermines  respect  for  law  and  rulers.  3.  It  tends 
to  anarchy,  mob,  and  lynch  law.  4.  It  jeopardises  the  securities  and  rights  of 
society,  and  is  subversive  of  morality  and  order.  (Homiletic  Monthly.)  The  sword 
the  symbol  of  righteous  authority  : — The  sword  is  not  only  the  breaker,  it  is  more 
constantly  the  preserver  of  national  peace.  Physical  force  in  quiescence  is  like  a 
sentinel,  guarding  our  liberties  and  our  laws.  The  magistrate,  as  well  as  the  soldier, 
bears  not  the  sword  in  vain.  Though  it  be  seldom  drawn  from  its  sheath,  it  is  the 
commanding  symbol  of  righteous  authority.  (E.  Johnson,  M.A. )  Wherefore  ye 
must  needs  be  subject  .  .  .  for  conscience'  sake. — The  Christian's  subjection  to  the 
civil  authority  is — I.  Necessabt.  Because — 1.  It  is  a  Divine  ordinance.  2. 
Essential  to  the  general  good.  U.  OBLiarNG.  1.  Not  only  for  wrath,  2.  But  con- 
science' sake.  III.  Complete.  Because  it  is — 1.  Willing.  2.  Sincere.  3.  Con- 
scientious. (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Subjection  for  conscience'  sake  : — Our  notions  about 
pubhc  duty  are  low  altogether,  because  we  often  look  upon  civil  society  either  as  a 
matter  of  mutual  convenience  only  between  man  and  man,  or  else  as  an  injustice 
and  encroachment  made  by  the  rich  and  powerful  on  the  rights  and  welfare  of 
others.  But  as  Christ  has  ennobled  and  sanctified  the  dearest  of  our  domestic 
relations,  that  of  marriage,  by  comparing  it  to  the  tender  and  affectionate  care  with 
which  He  watches  over  those  who  are  united  in  one  body  to  Him  as  the  Head,  so 
are  our  public  relations  raised  by  being  equally  connected  with  the  service  of  our 


670  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohai,  xm. 


Lord.  Laws  and  governments  are  His  ordinance,  just  as  marriage  is  His  ordinance, 
or  the  relations  between  parents  and  their  children.  They  are  His  ordinange, 
because  He  knew  that  without  them  we  should  be  in  a  state  hardly  better  than  that 
of  beasts ;  because  He  willed  that  some  image  of  His  own  just  government,  how- 
ever faint,  should  exist  in  the  world;  some  power  that  should  put  down  the  most 
violent  forms  of  evil,  even  though  it  could  not  touch  those  which  lurk  within  the 
heart,  nor  reward  the  virtue  of  the  good.  And  hence  "laws  are  entitled  to  our 
obedience,  not  only  for  wrath,  but  also  for  conscience*  sake;  that  is,  not  only 
because  we  may  incur  a  penalty  if  we  disobey  them,  but  because,  whether  we  do  or 
no,  we  are  certainly,  by  disobeying  them,  doing  that  which  is  displeasing  in  the  sight 
of  God."  (T.  Arnold,  D.D.)  For  tMs  cause  pay  ye  tribute  also. — Why  sJiaU  we 
pay  taxes  f — Because — 1.  Government  must  be  supported.  2.  The  governor  as  well 
as  the  labourer  is  worthy  of  his  hire.  3.  The  governor  is  God's  minister.  4.  It  is 
a  conscientious  duty.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Render  therefore  to  all  their  dues. 
—We  owe— I.  To  God — 1.  Fear  (Matt.  x.  28).  By  reason  of— (1)  His 
sovereignty  (Mai.  i.  6).  (2)  His  justice.  (3)  His  power  (Jer.  v.  22).  2. 
Love  (Deut.  vi.  5) ;  for— (1)  His  excellency  in  Himself  (Cant,  v.  16).  (2)  His 
love  to  us  (1  John  iv.  10,  11).  3.  Desires  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  25).  Because  He  is— (1) 
The  ocean  of  happiness  in  Himself  (Matt.  xix.  17).  (2)  The  fountain  of  it  to 
us  (Psa.  xxxvi.  9).  4.  Faith  in  what  He  saith  (1  John  v.  10).  (1)  Because  of  His 
nwn  veracity  (Heb.  vi.  18).  (2)  The  certainty  of  the  revelations  confirmed  by 
miracles  (2  Pet.  i.  18,  19).  5.  Trust  on  what  He  promises  (Prov,  iii.  5  ;  Bom.  iv. 
20).  Because  of — (1)  His  freedom  in  making  them.  (2)  His  faithfulness  in  keep- 
ing them  (Deut.  vii.  9).  6.  Thankfulness  (1  Thess.  v.  18).  Because— (1)  We  are 
unworthy  of  any  mercy  (Gen.  xxxii.  10).  (2)  It  is  all  we  can  return  (Micah  vi.  8). 
7.  Obedience  (1  Sam.  xv.  22).     (1)  Which  should  be— (a)  Sincere  (Eom.  vi.  17). 

(6)  Universal  (Luke  i.  6 ;  Psa.  cxix.  6).  (c)  Constant  (Luke  i.  75).  (2)  This  we 
owe,  by  reason  of  our — (a)  Creation,  (b)  Preservation  (Acts  xvii.  28).  (c)  Redemp- 
tion (1  Cor.  vi.  20).  (d)  Vow  in  baptism,  (e)  Our  profession  of  the  Christian 
religion  (2  Tim.  ii.  19).  8.  Honour  and  adoration  (Mai.  i.  6).  (1)  Of  His  wisdom 
(Rom.  xi.  33).  (2)  Omniscience  (Psa.  cxlvii.  6).  (3).  Omnipresence  (Psa.  cxxxix. 
6,  7),     (4)  Omnipotence  (Matt.  xix.  26).     (5)  Mercy  (Exod,  xxxiv.  6).     (6)  Justice. 

(7)  Eternity  (Exod.  iii.  14).  9.  Then  render  unto  God  His  dues.  Consider — (1)  Other- 
wise you  rob  God  (MaL  iiL  8).  (2)  You  rob  yourselves,  your  happiness  consisting 
in  obeying  God.  You  rob  yourselves — (a)  Of  the  comforts  of  a  good  conscience  (2 
Cor.  i.  12).  (b)  Of  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost  (Rom.  xiv.  17).  (c)  Of  the  favour  of 
God  (Isa.  lix.  2).  (d)  Of  a  blessing  here  (Deut.  xxviii  1).  (e)  Of  happiness  here- 
after (Heb.  vii.  14).  (3)  By  paying  Him  His  due  you  secure  yourselves — (a)  From 
present  curses  (Mai.  h.  2 ;  chap.  viii.  28).  (b)  Future  torments  (2  Thess.  i.  8,  9). 
(4)  He  will  call  you  to  account  (2  Cor.  v.  10).  (5)  Render  His  due,  and  He  will 
render  to  you  His  promise  in  heaven  (Matt.  xxv.  46).  II.  To  men.  1,  Superiors, 
civil,  ecclesiastical,  economical.  (1)  Subjection  (chap.  v.  1;  Tit.  iii.  1).  (2) 
Tribute  (Matt.  xvii.  24-27).  (3)  Custom,  (a)  We  ought  to  have  a  care  of  the 
public  good.  (6)  It  is  a  debt  of  gratitude  for  the  benefits  we  receive  from  the 
magistrate,  (c)  A  debt  of  justice  for  his  trouble  in  the  management  of  public 
affairs  (Rom.  xiii.  6).  (4)  Fear  (Prov.  xxiv.  21).  (5)  Honour  (1  Pet.  ii.  17).  (a) 
So  as  to  acknowledge  them  to  be  ordained  of  God.  (6)  Love  them  for  their  office 
sake,  (c)  Be  thankful  for  the  benefits  we  receive  from  them,  (d)  Fidelity  and 
allegiance  (2  Sam.  xx,  2).  (e)  Entertain  no  iU  thoughts  of  his  person  or  actions 
(Eccles.  X.  20).  2.  Inferiors  (Job  xxxi.  13-15).  (1)  Humility  and  respect  (PhiL  ii.  3). 
(2)  Charity  and  relief  (1  Tim.  vL  17  ;  Job  xxxi.  16-21).  Consider— (a)  He  that  pities 
the  poor,  lends  to  God  (Prov.  xix.  17).  (&)  This  is  the  only  way  to  lay  up  our  treasures 
in  heaven  (Matt.  vi.  19,  20).  UL  To  all.  1.  Love  (ver.  8).  (1)  This  is  Christ's 
npecial  command  (John  xiii.  34).  (2)  Without  this  we  have  no  love  for  God  (1  John 
iv.  20,  21).  2.  Honour  (1  Pet.  ii.  17).  Because— (1)  None  but  excel  us  in  some 
things  (Pnil.  ii.  3).  (2)  All  are  made  in  the  image  of  God  (Gen.  i.  26).  (3)  We 
are  all  professors  of  the  Christian  religion  (Mark  ix.  41 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  7).  3.  Chari- 
table thoughts  (1  Cor.  xiiL  5).  (1)  We  know  not  others'  hearts  (1  Cor.  ii.  11).  (2) 
Nor  God's  intentions  towards  them  (James  iv.  12).  4.  Do  good  to  all  (Gal.  vi  10). 
(1)  Hereby  we  imitate  God  (Matt.  v.  44,  45).  (2)  Give  glory  to  God  (Matt.  v.  16). 
5.  Speak  well  of  all  (James  iv.  11).  6.  Pray  for  all  (1  Tim.  ii.  1 ;  Matt.  v.  44),  for 
their — (1)  Temporal  good.  (2)  Spiritual  (1  Tim.  ii.  4).  7.  Be  just  and  honest  ta 
all  (Matt.  vii.  12 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  6) ;  otherwise,  if  we  defraud  others,  we  can  get  no 
good  by  it  (Prov.  x.  22),  but  much  hurt  (Hag.  L  6).    8.  Render  to  all  their  dues. 


CXAP.  xm.]  ROMANS.  S71 

Consider — (1)  Unless  we  render  them  to  men  we  cannot  to  God.  (2)  Unless  we  do 
tiiis  we  sin  against  the  very  light  of  natare.  (3)  God  will  bring  as  into  judgment 
for  all  unjust  dealings.  (Bp.  Beveridge.)  Our  debts  : — It  is  one  degree  of  thrift 
to  bring  oar  debts  into  as  few  hands  as  we  can.  Oar  debt  here  we  cannot  bring  into 
fewer  than  these  three :  L  Ocb  dbbts  to  Goo.  Consider  them  to  be  our  sins,  and  we 
dare  not  come  into  reckoning  with  Him,  bat  we  discharge  ourselves  entirely  on  oar 
Surety,  Christ ;  but  yet  of  that  debt  we  must  pay  an  acknowledgment,  an  interest,  as 
it  were,  of  praise  for  aU  we  would  have  and  prayer  for  all  we  would  have.  II.  Ocb 
DEBTS  TO  MAN.  Our  Creditors  are — 1.  Persons  above  us.  To  these  we  owe  in  matter  of 
substance,  tribute,  and  custom  ;  and  in  matter  of  ceremony,  fear,  and  honour.  2. 
Persons  below  us  to  whom  we  owe  counsel  to  direct  them  and  relief  in  compassion  of 
their  suSerings.  III.  Oub  debts  to  otibselves.  1.  Some  of  these  are  to  be  tendered 
at  noon,  i.e. ,  to  be  paid  in  our  best  strength  and  prosperity  in  the  course  of  our  lives. 
2.  Others  are  to  be  tendered  at  night  at  our  deaths.  Conclusion :  Bender  therefore 
to  all  their  dues.  1.  For  your  debt  to  God  we  bring  you  to  Church,  This  is  no  place 
to  arrest  in,  but  yet  the  Spirit  of  God  calls  upon  you  for  these  debts.  Praise  Him  in 
His  holy  place,  and  pray  to  Him  in  His  house,  which  is  the  house  of  prayer.  2.  For 
your  debts  to  man  we  send  you  to  court  to  pay  those  owing  to  superiors ;  to  hospitals 
and  prisons  to  pay  those  owing  to  inferiors.  And  though  courts  and  prisons  be  ill- 
paying  places,  yet  pay  your  debts  of  substance  and  ceremony,  of  tribute  and  honour, 
at  court ;  and  your  debts  of  counsel  and  relief  to  those  who  need  them  in  the  darkest 
corners.  3.  For  your  debts  to  yourselves,  make  even  with  yourselves  all  the 
way  in  your  lives,  lest  your  payment  prove  too  heavy,  and  you  break,  and  your 
hearts  break  when  you  come  to  see  that  you  cannot  do  that  upon  your  death  bed. 
{J.  Donne,  D.D.)  The  rights  of  the  ruler  are  here — I.  Defined.  1.  Support.  2. 
Submission.  3.  Respect.  II.  Enfobced.  1.  As  due.  2.  As  recognised  by  God. 
8.  As  imperative  on  all  Christians.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Tribute  to  whom  tribute 
iB  due,  custom  to  whom  custom. — Tribute  and  custom : — There  is  some  difficulty 
about  the  distinctive  signification  of  ^Spoc  (tribute),  and  rlXoc  (custom).  By  some 
the  former  is  regarded  as  a  tax  upon  land ;  by  others,  as  upon  property  generally, 
whether  movable  or  immovable.  Those  critics  who  give  to  <p6poQ  the  wider  signifi- 
cation, limit  riXoc  to  a  capitation  tax ;  and  those  who  confine  <p6poe  to  a  tax  upon 
land  give  rlXoc  a  larger  meaning,  as  signifying  a  tax  upon  merchandise  as  well  as 
upon  persons.  Judging  from  the  apostle's  use  of  the  word,  (p6f>oe  was  the  general 
term  for  all  contributions,  and  was  used  in  the  same  way  that  the  word  "  taxes  "  is 
sometimes  largely  used ;  and  in  its  limited  sense  it  appUes  to  all  burdens  upon 
landed  or  personal  property ;  while  tsXoq  was  a  capitation  tax  which  Christ  told 
Peter  to  pay  for  himself  and  his  Lord.  {J.  Knight.)  Honour  to  whom  honour. — 
Horwur  to  whom  honour  is  due : — Lord  Dartmouth  is  the  person  to  whom 
Newton's  Letters  "  in  the  Cardiphonia "  to  a  Nobleman,  are  addressed,  and  to 
whom  Cowper  alludes,  "  And  one  that  wears  a  coronet  and  prays."  It  is  said  that 
after  the  prince  came  to  the  throne,  on  a  public  day  Lord  Dartmouth  appeared  at 
the  levee,  when  one  of  the  attendant  noblemen  said,  "  I'll  bet  Dartmouth  has  been 
at  prayer  to-day."  " Tes,  and  please  your  majesty,"  said  Lord  Dartmouth,  "I 
thought  it  right  first  to  pay  my  duty  to  my  God  and  then  to  my  king."  "  Well  said, 
Dartmouth,"  replied  his  majesty, "  and  like  yourself."    {Scottish  Christian  Herald.) 

Ver.  8.  Owe  no  man  anything. — Owe  no  man  anything: — This  precept  may 
signify  either  to  leave  not  our  debts  unpaid,  or  never  get  into  debt.  It  may  be 
looked  to  as  a  repetition  of  "  Bender  unto  all  their  dues  "  (debitum,  debt).  Be  in 
no  man's  books.  If  he  be  an  individual  with  whom  you  are  dealing,  pay  when  you 
buy.  Or  if  it  be  the  government,  pay  the  tax  when  it  becomes  due.  The  injunc- 
tion in  this  latter  or  more  rigorous  meaning  of  it  is  far  from  being  generally 
adhered  to.  Perhaps  it  may  not  at  all  times  suit  the  conveniences  or  even  the 
possibilities  of  business,  that  each  single  transaction  should  be  a  ready-money 
transaction.  Perhaps  even  in  the  matters  of  famUy  expenditure  it  might  save 
trouble  to  pay  at  certain  terms.  There  can  be  no  doubt,  however,  that  in  the  first 
interpretation  of  it,  it  is  a  matter  of  absolute  and  universal  obligation.  Though  we 
cannot  just  say  that  a  man  should  never  get  into  debt,  we  can  feel  no  hesitation  in 
saying  that,  once  in,  he  should  labour  most  strenuously  to  get  out  of  it.  For — 1.  In 
the  world  of  trade  one  cannot  be  insensible  to  the  dire  mischief  that  ensues  from 
the  spirit  of  unwarrantable  speculation.  The  adventurer  who  trades  beyond  hia 
means  is  often  actuated  by  a  passion  as  intense  and  as  criminal  as  the  gamester. 
Bat  it  is  not  the  injury  alone  which  is  done  to  his  own  character  that  is  to  ba 


572  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  zm. 

deprecated,  nor  the  min  that  bankruptcy  brings  upon  his  own  family.  Over  and 
above  these  evils  there  is  a  far  heavier  disaster  to  tiie  working  classes,  gathered  in 
hundreds  around  the  mushroom  establishment,  and  then  thrown  adrift  in  utter 
destitution  on  society.  This  frenzy  of  men  hasting  to  be  rich,  like  fever  in  the  body 
natural,  is  a  truly  sore  distemper  in  the  body  politic.  2.  If  they  who  trade  beyond 
their  means  thus  fall  to  be  denounced,  they  who  spend  beyond  their  means,  and  so 
run  themselves  into  debt,  merit  the  same  condemnation.  We  can  imagine  nothing 
more  glaringly  unprincipled  and  selfish  than  the  conduct  of  those  who,  to  uphold 
their  place  in  the  fashionable  world,  build  or  adorn  or  entertain  at  the  expense  of 
tradesmen,  whom  they  hurry  on  to  beggary  with  themselves.  3.  But  there  is 
another  and  more  interesting  application  of  this  precept,  one  which,  if  fully  carried 
out,  would  tell  more  beneficially  than  any  other  on  the  greatest  happiness  of  the 
greatest  number,  viz.,  that  men  in  humble  life  should  learn  to  find  their  way  from 
the  pawn  office  to  the  savings  bank — so  that,  instead  of  debtors  to  the  one,  they 
should  become  depositors  in  the  other.  That  it  is  not  so  is  far  more  due  to  the 
want  of  management  than  to  the  want  of  means ;  and  it  needs  but  the  kindness 
and  trouble  of  a  few  benevolent  attentions  to  put  many  on  the  way  of  it.  (T. 
Chalmers,  D.D.)  Debt : — I.  Is  a  common  and  bkrious  evil.  1.  It  robs  the  creditor 
of  his  right,  and  often  involves  him  in  serious  perplexity  and  trouble.  2.  It  robs 
the  debtor  of  his  independence,  and  not  unfrequently  of  his  moral  principle.    II.  Is, 

WHEN  VOLTJNTABILT  INCUBEED,  A  BREACH  OF  CHRISTIAN  CONSISTENCY.     It  implies — 1.  A 

defective  morality.  2.  A  want  of  love  to  our  neighbour.  3.  A  blinded  conscience. 
III.  Should  be  carefully  avoided.  1.  By  living  within  our  income.  2.  By  cutting 
off  all  unnecessary  expenses.  3.  By  incurring  no  liabilities  which  we  have  not  a 
reasonable  prospect  of  meeting.  4.  By  the  utmost  economy.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
The  guilt  and  folly  of  being  in  debt : — I.  The  propriety  op  the  direction  in  the 
TEXT.  To  be  in  debt  will  expose  us  to  defraud  others  of  their  just  due.  2.  Is 
injurious  to  the  general  interests  of  society.  3.  Involves  whole  families  in  suffering. 
4.  Subjects  us  to  great  sacrifices.  5.  Is  prejudicial  to  our  improvement  in  useful 
knowledge.  6.  Is  unfavourable  to  religion.  7.  Is  in  direct  opposition  to  God's 
command.  II.  Some  considerations  to  aid  a  strict  coMPLiiNCE  with  rr. 
1.  Debt,  however  long  foreborne,  will  one  day  be  required.  2.  Bemember 
the  worth  of  time.  3.  Avoid  luxury.  4.  Never  exceed  your  income.  5.  Never 
despise  honest  labour.  6.  Avoid  depending  on  speculation  and  artifice.  7. 
Never    neglect    the    duties    of    religion.      {J.    W.    Cannon,  M.A.)  Owe    no 

man  anything : — I.  The  most  likely  means  op  payino  what  we  owe.  1. 
The  first  mean  is  diligence  in  business.  Make  no  unnecessary  delay,  nor  set 
about  it  with  a  slack  or  unskilful  hand.  2.  The  second  mean  is  frugality,  or  the 
avoiding  of  expense  whenever  it  can  properly  be  avoided.  3.  A  third  mean  is 
exactness.  "  Put  all  in  writing,"  says  the  son  of  Sirac,  "  that  thou  givest  out  or 
receivest  in."  Punctual  payment  is  material.  The  last  effect  of  exactness  is  to 
ensure  the  payment  of  what  we  owe  at  death.  It  is  the  concluding  evidence  of  an 
honest  man  to  leave  his  affairs  in  order.  II.  The  sacrifices  which  must  sometimes 
BE  MADE  to  JUSTICE.  1.  One  must  sometimes  bear  the  reproach  of  selfishness  in 
order  to  pay  debt  or  keep  out  of  it.  2.  Fashion  must  often  be  quitted  for  the  sake 
of  justice.  In  order  to  perceive  and  obey  this  call,  consult  your  own  understand- 
ing. What  is  the  consequence  of  being  unfashionable  ?  I  am  censured,  and  ridi- 
culed, and  despised.  But  what  is  the  consequence  of  being  unjust?  _  My  own 
heart  condemns  me.  3.  Vainglory  must  be  checked  for  the  sake  of  justice.  The 
pleasure  in  sumptuous  possessions  is  slight,  "beholding  them  with  the  eye."  If 
they  be  unpaid,  looking  at  them  calls  up  the  painful  remembrance.  4.  Generosity 
must  be  checked  when  it  would  encroach  on  justice.  The  parting  with  money 
inconsiderately,  so  far  from  being  approved,  is  become  a  proverbial  folly.  Soma 
make  a  flash  of  affected  generosity  who  are  not  very  scrupulous  in  paying  what 
they  owe,  nor  about  fraudulent  courses  provided  they  be  gainful.  5.  Compassion 
must  be  bounded  by  justice.  We  are  required  to  do  justly  and  to  love  mercy.  Let 
the  love  of  mercy  be  cherished,  and,  when  justice  permits,  let  its  dictates  be  obeyed. 
StiU  it  is  the  part  of  a  wise  man  to  examine  the  claims  that  are  made  on  his  com- 
passion. By  rejecting  false  ones  he  can  indulge  compassion  with  more  effect,  and 
it  partakes  more  of  the  nature  of  virtue.  6.  Friendship  may  prompt  a  man  to 
involve  himself  by  loan  or  suretyship.  7.  The  dictates  of  natural  affection  must 
be  checked  when  they  encroach  on  justice.  Let  a  man  reveal  to  his  family  his 
real  circumstances,  and  establish  an  order  conformed  to  them.  8.  Pleasures 
ixmocent  in  themselves  may  prove  too  costly.    From  that  moment  they  cease  to  be 


OBtf.  xtn.]  ROMANS.  679 

innocent.  9.  An  immoderate  desire  of  wealth  leada  to  injustice.  What  is  the 
oonseqaence,  for  example,  of  adventuring  in  trade  beyond  what  jour  capital  admits 
ht  and  justifies?  10.  Sloth  must  be  conquered.  It  is  fatal  to  justice  as  well  aa  to 
every  other  virtue.  "  The  slothful  is  brother  to  him  that  is  a  great  waster."  Ha 
is  equally  exposed  to  poverty,  and  to  all  the  temptations  the  poor  are  under,  to  be 
nnjust  11.  False  shame  must  be  combated.  12.  Bestitution  is  the  last  sacrifice 
to  be  made  to  justice.  There  are  two  cases,  the  case  of  things  found,  and  of  things 
acquired  unjustly.  III.  Such  are  the  sacrifices  to  be  made  to  justice.  They  are- 
costly;    but   THB  BLBSSINOS  ABB  IN  PBOPOBTION    QBBAT.       1.  To   be    OUt   Of   debt   is^ 

accounted  a  part  of  happiness.  2.  Peace  at  the  latter  end  is  the  portion  of  the 
npright.  The  pleasures  of  iniquity  are  but  for  a  moment.  The  splendour  of 
extravagance  fades.  To  live  and  die  an  honest  man  is  a  worthy  object  of 
ambition.  (S.  Charters.)  Avoidance  of  debt: — Owe  no  man  anything.  Keep 
out  of  debt.  Avoid  it  as  you  would  avoid  war,  pestilence,  and  famine.  Hate 
it  with  a  perfect  hatred.  Dig  potatoes,  break  stones,  peddle  in  tinwares,  do  any> 
thing  that  is  honest  and  useful,  rather  than  run  into  debt.  As  you  value  comfort, 
quiet,  and  independence,  keep  out  of  debt.  As  you  value  good  digestion,  a  healthy 
appetite,  a  placid  temper,  a  smooth  pillow,  pleasant  dreams,  and  happy  wakings, 
keep  out  of  debt.  Debt  is  the  hardest  of  all  taskmasters ;  the  most  cruel  of  all 
oppressors.  It  is  as  a  millstone  about  the  neck.  It  is  an  incumbus  on  the  heart. 
It  spreads  a  cloud  over  the  whole  firmament  of  man's  being.  It  ecHpses  the  sun ; 
it  blots  out  the  stars ;  it  dims  and  defaces  the  beautiful  blue  sky.  It  breaks  the 
harmony  of  nature,  and  turns  to  dissonance  all  the  voices  of  its  melody.  It 
furrows  the  forehead  with  premature  wrinkles ;  it  plucks  the  eye  of  Hs  light.  It 
drags  the  nobleness  and  kindness  out  of  the  port  and  bearing  of  a  man ;  it  takes 
the  soul  out  of  his  laugh,  and  all  stateliness  and  freedom  from  his  walk.  Come 
not,  then,  under  its  crushing  dominion.  But  to  love  one  ajiotber. — Honesty 
and  love: — I.  Honesty  gives  every  one  his  due.  II.  Love  does  more,  it 
gives  itself,  and  thus  fulfils  the  whole  law.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Honest  dealing 
and  mutual  love : — These  two  things  are  closer  together  than  we  are  wont  to 
imagine.  Said  a  foremost  physician  not  long  ago,  when  asked  how  far  the 
facility  with  which  American  constitutions  break  down  was  occasioned  by  over- 
work, *'  It  is  not  overwork  either  on  the  part  of  the  people  who  work  with  their 
brains,  or  with  their  hands.  The  most  fruitful  source  of  physical  derangement 
and  mental  and  nervous  disorders  are  pecuniary  embarrassments  and  family  dis- 
sensions." The  two  things  lie  close  together.  The  father,  crowded  beyond  endur- 
ance by  the  strain  to  maintain  a  scale  of  living  long  ago  pitched  too  high,  the 
mother  consciously  degraded  by  the  domestic  dishonesty  that  draws  money  for 
marketing  and  spends  it  for  dress  ;  the  sons  and  daughters  taught  prodigahty  by 
example,  and  upbraided  for  it  in  speech — what  can  come  to  such  a  home  but 
embittered  feeling  ?  How  can  love  reign  in  a  household  where  mutual  confidence 
and  sacrifices,  where  the  traits  that  inspire  respect  and  kindle  affection  are  wanting? 
Not  to  pay  one's  debts  is  as  sure  and  as  short  a  road  as  can  be  found  to  the  extinc- 
tion of  confidence,  the  destruction  of  respect,  and  the  death  of  love.  Where  now 
shall  we  look  for  a  corrective  ?  I  answer,  in  a  higher  ideal  of  the  true  wealth  and 
welfare  of  the  nation,  and  so  of  the  individuals  who  severally  compose  it.  It  was 
Epictetus  who  said,  long  ago,  "  Ton  will  confer  the  greatest  benefit  upon  your  city, 
not  by  raising  the  roofs,  but  by  exalting  the  souls  of  your  fellow-citizens,  for  it  is 
better  that  great  souls  should  live  in  small  habitations  than  that  abject  slaves 
should  burrow  in  great  houses. "  Let  us  then  pay  every  debt  but  the  debt  which  we 
can  never  wholly  pay,  whether  <to  God  or  our  neighbour,  which  is  the  debt  of  love. 
But  let  us  gladly  own  that  debt,  and  be  busy  every  day  of  our  lives  in  making  at 
least  some  small  payment  in  account.  As  we  gather  about  the  family  board  let  us 
remember  the  homeless  and  unbef  riended,  and  be  sure  that  we  have  done  something 
to  make  sunshine  in  their  hearts,  no  matter  what  gloom  may  reign  without.  (Bp. 
H.  C.  Potter.)  The  debt  of  Christian  love: — I.  The  atfectionate  exhortation. 
This  calls  upon  us  to  endeavour  to  be  always  out  of  debt,  while  always  in  debt. 
Some,  indeed,  read  the  text  as  a  doctrinal  statement.  "  Ye  owe  no  man  anything 
but  to  love  one  another  " ;  all  that  I  would  inculcate  is  reducible  to  this  :  obey  the 
law  of  love  to  others,  in  all  its  branches,  and  then  you  will  "  render  to  all  their 
dues."  But  there  is  sufficient  reason  to  interpret  our  text  according  to  our  present 
translation.  Thus  interpreted — 1.  It  does  not  mean — Ye  sin  if  ye  ever  contract  a 
debt,  or  do  not  discharge  it  the  moment  it  is  contracted.  On  this  principle,  commerce 
would  be  almost  annihilated ;  many  a  conscience  would  be  continually  fettered ;  and 


574  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [oHAf.  nn. 

the  precept  itself  would  be  found  impracticable.  But  it  insists  on  the  punctual  and 
conscientious  payment  of  all  lawful  debts,  which  indeed  is  required  by  common 
honesty.  "  The  wicked  borroweth,  and  payeth  not  again."  "  Woe  unto  him,  .  .  . 
that  useth  his  neighbour's  service  without  wages,  and  giveth  him  not  for  his  work." 
2.  But  it  means  more.  Ye  owe  duties  to  every  one,  and  these  you  are  to  fulfil.  In 
every  relationship  of  life  you  have  dues  to  render,  and  all  your  various  duties  to 
man  result  from  your  supreme  duty  to  God.  You  are  a  debtor  first  and  above  all  to 
God  Himself,  owing  Him  ten  thousand  talents  and  more,  and  having  nothing  where- 
with to  pay.  That  debt  Christ  has  paid  for  you.  Believe  ye  this  ?  Then  God,  for 
Christ's  sake,  has  freely  forgiven  you.  From  being  His  debtors  as  to  guilt,  ye  become 
His  debtors  as  to  gratitude,  and  this  debt  He  would  have  you  pay  in  charity  to  all 
mankind.  Would  ye,  then,  be  honest  in  the  full  Christian  sense  ?  "  Owe  no  man 
anything."  Be  ever  discharging  the  obligations  under  which  God  has  graciously 
laid  you,  to  love  Him,  and  to  love  your  brother  also.  3.  And  yet  ye  must  ever 
be  in  debt.  We  can  never  do  enough  in  serving  God  and  benefiting  man.  When 
allpecuniary  debts  are  paid,  this  debt  of  love  to  one  another  remains,  and  is  stiU  bindmg. 
4.  But  whence  our  means  of  paying  this  great  debt  of  love  ?  By  having  the  love 
of  God  continually  shed  abroad  in  the  heart.  The  more  we  receive,  the  more  we 
are  in  debt  to  God ;  and  hence  the  more  we  do,  the  more  we  may  do  in  carrying  out 
love  to  God  and  man,  in  all  the  relationships  of  life.  U.  The  comfbehensive 
MOTIVE.  "For  he  that  loveth  another,  hath  fulfilled  the  law."  "But  we  are  not 
under  the  law,  but  under  grace."  True,  but  for  what  object?  "That  we  should 
Berve  in  newness  of  spirit,  and  not  in  the  oldness  of  the  letter,"  Thus  is  the 
believer  not  without  law  to  God,  but  under  the  law  to  Christ.  All  whom  the  Spirit 
leads  to  Christ  for  pardon.  He  forgives  freely,  and  then  consigns  them  back  to  the 
training  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  writes  the  law  of  God  upon  the  heart,  and  enables 
them  to  write  it  out  in  the  life.  And  that  law  is  love ;  "  love  is  the  fulfilling  of 
the  law."  None  obey  the  law  of  God  as  those  who  look  to  Christ  as  "  the  end 
of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that  believeth."  {J.  Hambleton,  M.A.) 
The  debt  of  love  to  our  neighbour: — I.  This  is  a  debt  which  eveby  man  owes. 
There  are  relations  in  which  men  seem  slow  to  recognise  dues  and  obligations. 
They  recognise  the  relation  between  the  ordinary  creditor  and  debtor,  master  and 
servant,  as  well  as  the  obligations  founded  upon  it.  They  forget  that  the  very 
existence  of  certain  relations  involves  a  corresponding  obligation,  whether  we  have 
voluntarily  assumed  them  or  not.  The  child  enters  into  relations  with  its  parents 
without  any  act  of  its  own ;  and  yet  the  child  is  bound  to  render  filial  honour, 
obedience,  and  love.  The  highest  relation  man  can  have  is  to  God.  This  exists 
before  the  act  of  any  recognition  on  the  part  of  the  creature;  but  it  imposes 
certain  obligations  which  the  creature  is  bound  to  meet.  In  the  preceding  verses 
Paul  speaks  of  the  relation  of  the  subject  to  the  ruler ;  the  citizen  to  the  state. 
Our  birth  introduces  us  to  the  rights  of  citizenship,  but  we  are  born  to  duties  just 
as  much  as  to  rights ;  and  as  long  as  we  remain  under  the  protection  of  the  State, 
we  are  bound  to  render  to  Caesar  the  things  that  are  Caesar's,  just  as  we  are  bound 
to  render  unto  God  the  things  that  are  God's  ;  and  that,  as  Paul  informs  us,  "  for 
conscience'  sake."  The  debts  we  owe  the  State  are  just  as  binding  as  any  debts  we 
voluntarily  contract.  And  these  dues  (ver.  7)  lead  Paul  to  speak  of  that  greatest 
debt,  loving  one  another.  Although  you  may  say  with  a  feeling  of  independence 
and  superiority,  "  I  do  not  owe  a  dollar  to  any  man,"  here  is  a  debt  you  owe  to  every 
man.  "  The  fool  hath  said  in  his  heart,  there  is  no  God  "  ;  and  the  same  spirit 
spoke  through  Cain — "  Am  I  my  brother's  keeper  ?  "  The  atheist  denies  his  rela- 
tion to  God  and  the  obligation  which  it  involves ;  the  spirit  of  selfishness  refuses 
to  recognise  its  relation  to  its  neighbour ;  but  the  Spirit  of  Christ  teaches  a  differ- 
ent lesson.  It  is  not  left  to  my  choice  or  caprices — it  is  a  debt.  I  owe  it  not  to  a 
select  number  of  men,  but  to  every  man,  for  every  man  is  my  neighbour.  According 
to  Paul  this  debt  is  love  (Matt.  xxii.  36-38).  H.  What  abe  we  to  do  with  this 
DEBT  ?  1.  We  must  pay  this  debt  as  every  other.  The  Lord  is  not  satisfied  with 
our  recognition  of  the  duty,  for  He  says,  "  Thou  shalt  love."  We  must  pay  it — 
(1)  By  scrupulously  abstaining  from  doing  any  evil  to  our  neighbour,  for  ••  love 
worketh  no  ill  to  his  neighbour."  (2)  By  doing  all  the  positive  good  to  him  we 
can.  2.  And  yet  this  is  the  one  great  debt  which  we  are  always  to  owe.  Love  is 
the  inexhaustible  fountain  out  of  which  all  words  and  deeds  of  kindness  flow. 
That  fountain  must  ever  remain  open  and  full.  Without  such  a  fountain  all  the 
streamlets  would  fail.  Let  a  man  love,  and  he  will  strive  to  render  unto  all  their 
dues,  and  to  owe  no  man  anything.     The  absence  of  love  makes  cruel  creditors  and 


OHAF.  zm.]  ROMANS.  SIS 

unprincipled  debtors.  Love  is  indeed  "  the  fulfilment  of  the  law,"  and  the  unful- 
filled law  everywhere  reveals  the  absence  of  love.  By  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of 
ein,  and  of  this  great  sin,  too,  that  we  owe  this  great  debt  of  love,  and  have 
become  great  debtors  by  not  paying  it.  But  the  law  is  also  "our  school- 
master to  bring  us  unto  Christ."  We  shall  never  be  able  to  pay  this  greatest 
of  all  debts  until  we  have  become  the  pardoned  debtors  of  our  Heavenly 
Father.  The  love  of  God  begets  our  love.  He  alone  can  enable  us  to  be 
diligent  in  paying  a  debt  that  can  never  be  entirely  paid  off.  (Gf.  F.  Krotel,  D.D.) 
The  debt  of  love  : — 1.  As  private  persons,  in  your  mutual  traffic  with  one  another, 
it  will  necessarily  happen  that,  whatever  your  stations  in  life  are,  you  must  incur 
debts,  and  stand  accountable  to  one  another  for  certain  goods  and  commodities 
received,  for  labour  done,  or  for  money  borrowed.  When  St.  Paul  therefore  directs 
you  to  owe  no  man  anything,  he  only  means  that  you  are  not  to  incur  debts 
wantonly,  nor  keep  in  debt  needlessly.  But  there  is  one  debt  which,  he  says,  you 
can  never  discharge.  This  debt  is  the  debt  of  Christian  love.  2.  Examine  into  the 
reasons  on  which  it  is  founded,  and  why  this  exertion  of  Christian  love  is  a  debt 
of  that  kind,  which  can  never  be  paid  so  fully  as  to  absolve  us  from  any  further 
payment  of  it.  (1)  The  first  reason  is  founded  on  the  relation  in  which  we  stand 
to  Almighty  God.  The  innumerable  benefits  which  we  daily  and  hourly  receive  at 
His  hands  demand  the  constant  tribute  of  love  and  gratitude ;  but  we  have  no  way 
cf  expressing  this  affection  so  effectually  as  by  acts  of  kindness  to  our  fellow- 
creatures.  (2)  The  force  of  the  next  reason  depends  on  the  frame  and  constitution  of 
human  nature,  which  is  so  replete  with  wants  and  weaknesses,  consisting  indeed  of 
various  kinds,  yet  distributed  in  pretty  equal  proportion  among  the  species,  that  it 
is,  morally  speaking,  impossible  for  us  to  be  independent  one  of  another.  (3)  The 
last  reason  consists  in  the  very  nature  of  the  principle  itself,  and  of  those  intrinsic 
properties,  without  which  it  ceases  to  be  the  thing  which  we  mean  by  the  terms  we 
use  to  define  it.  Now,  were  benevolence  a  passive  principle  that  contented  itself 
with  being,  what  the  word  imports,  only  a  well-wishing,  not  a  well-doing  quality, 
it  might  not  be  required  to  be  in  constant  use  and  exertion.  But  when  used  to 
denote  Christian  love  and  charity,  and  to  have  the  same  meaning  with  these  terms, 
it  implies  a  strenuous  and  unwearied  exercise  of  one  of  the  most  active  faculties  of 
the  human  soul,  which  is  better,  perhaps,  expressed  by  the  term  beneficence.  Our 
charity  must  therefore  be  commensurate  with  our  life ;  it  must  act  so  long  as  we 
act,  for  if  it  ever  faileth  it  ceaseth  to  be  charity,  because  we  see  that  the  apostle 
tells  us  it  is  one  of  its  essential  properties  never  to  fail  or  cease  from  acting.  3.  On 
these  three  reasons  we  build  this  conclusion  that  the  debt  of  charity  or  benevolence 
to  our  neighbour  is  a  debt  which  we  must  take  all  opportunities  of  paying  him,  and 
of  which  we  must  only  close  the  payment  when  death  closes  our  eyes.  May  we  not 
assure  ourselves  that  a  soul  actuated  by  so  Divine  a  principle  here  on  earth,  must, 
of  all  other  things,  be  best  prepared  to  participate  the  joys  of  heaven  ?  (TT.  Mason, 
M.A.)  Heaven's  cure  for  the  plagues  of  sin  : — I.  The  natube  op  love.  There  are 
two  mnds  of  affection  that  have  this  title.  One  is  an  approbation  and  affection  for 
a  character  that  pleases  us  ;  the  other  is  an  ardent  good-will  towards  beings  capable 
of  happiness.  Both  of  these  affections  are  exercises  of  the  Divine  mind.  And 
both  of  them  are  enjoined  upon  man.  God  and  angels  and  all  holy  beings  we  are 
obligated  to  look  upon  with  complacency,  and  towards  all  men  we  are  bound  to 
exercise  good-wiU.  We  may  wish  well  to  all  men,  and  still  be  willing  to  see  the 
convict  imprisoned  and  executed.  This  the  good  of  the  civil  community  demands, 
and  this  benevolence  assents  to,  nay,  even  requires.  II.  How  this  atfection  will 
OPERATE.  Here  the  path  of  our  thoughts  is  plain.  Love  worketh  no  ill  to  his 
neighbour.  It  will  neither  kill,  nor  steal,  nor  covet,  nor  defraud,  nor  witness 
falsely.  It  will  lead  to  the  discharge  of  every  debt  but  one,  and  that  one  the  debt 
of  love  ;  it  will  delight  to  owe  and  pay,  and  still  owe  for  ever.  Those  whom  we 
love  we  wish  happy ;  and  in  proportion  to  the  strength  of  that  affection  will  be  the 
energy  exerted  to  accomplish  that  object.  If  to  be  calm  and  content  will  render 
them  happy,  we  shall  be  reluctant  to  rufi3e  their  temper  or  move  their  envy.  If  to 
be  rich,  and  respected,  and  wise  will  make  them  happy,  we  shall  wish  their  success 
in  business,  their  increased  respectability,  and  their  advance  in  knowledge.  If 
health,  and  ease,  and  long  life,  and  domestic  friendship  will  add  to  their  enjoy- 
ments, we  shall  wish  them  all  these  ;  and  what  we  wish  for  them  we  shall  be  will- 
ing, if  in  our  power,  to  do  for  them.  But  if  only  the  grace  of  God  can  make  them 
blessed,  it  will  be  our  strongest  wish  and  our  most  ardent  prayer  that  God  would 
Banotify  them.     IIL  The  duty  of  benevolence.    And  here  I  would  premise  that 


67«  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [oha».  xm. 

I 
the  good-will  which  I  urge  is  to  be  exercised  toward  friend  and  foe.  It  is  a  pars 
and  disinterested  affection,  hence  is  the  offspring  of  a  heavenly  temper.  I  wonld 
urge  it  npon  myself  and  my  fellow-men — 1.  By  the  example  of  God,  How  constant 
and  how  varied  are  the  operations  of  the  Divine  benevolence !  Life  and  health,  and 
food  and  raiment  are  ^s  gifts,  and  are  bestowed  on  His  friends  and  His  foes. 
Now  the  whole  Bible  jast  urges  apon  every  man  this  same  expanded  benevolence. 
Yon  are  required  to  be  a  worker  together  with  God.  2,  We  are  urged  to  the  same 
duty  by  the  command  of  God.  God  does  not  exhibit  His  example  before  us,  and 
leave  it  to  our  option  whether  we  will  do  like  Him.  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neigh- 
bout  as  thyself."  And  the  Scriptures  teach  us  what  the  effect  of  this  love  will  be. 
It  will  lead  to  an  affectionate  deportment  and  a  readiness  to  serve  each  other.  It 
begets  a  spirit  of  forbearance,  of  truth,  of  unanimity,  of  self-denial,  of  meekness, 
and  forgiveness.  3.  Benevolence  affords  its  possessor  a  permanent  and  high  enjoy- 
ment. It  is,  in  its  nature,  a  sweet  and  calm  affection,  has  its  origin  in  heaven,  and 
exerts  a  sanctifying  influence  upon  every  other  exercise  of  the  souL  If  I  know  that 
I  love  my  fellow-men,  I  am  conscious  that  I  feel  as  God  does,  and  as  He  commands 
me  to  feel.  I  see,  in  that  case,  the  image  of  my  Creator  in  my  heart.  Hence  it 
begets  joy  and  hope.  But  this  is  not  all ;  a  benevolent  heart  makes  all  the  happi- 
ness it  sees  its  own,  and  thus  widens,  indefinitely,  the  sphere  of  its  enjoyment.  It 
has  a  real  pleasure  in  another's  joy,  and  still  does  not  diminish  the  good  on  which 
it  feeds  and  thrives.  IV.  Thb  happiness  it  communicates  to  othebs.  I  would  then' 
urge  all  the  believers  and  the  unbelievers  to  love  their  fellow-men,  from  the  fact 
that  by  putting  forth  this  affection  you  can  create  a  world  of  happiness.  In  the' 
first  place,  look  about  you  and  see  what  need  there  is  of  more  happiness  than  atj 
present  exists,  what  abundant  opportunity  there  is  for  your  exertion.  You  cannot 
be  ignorant  that  you  live  in  a  ruined  world,  where,  if  you  are  disposed  to  be  kind,! 
you  can  find  abundant  employment.  You  can  find  misery  in  almost  every  shape' 
and  shade.  Would  it  not  be  desirable  to  apply  a  remedy  if  you  might  to  this  com-' 
plicated  malady  ?  Be  willing,  then,  to  practise  the  benevolence  required,  and  the, 
remedy  is  applied  and  the  cure  effected.  Can  you  quit  the  world  peaceably  till  what> 
you  can  do  has  been  done,  to  fertilise  the  moral  waste  over  which  you  expect  so 
Boon  to  cast  a  lingering,  dying  look  ?  V.  The  dtino  love  of  Cheist.  It  was  in  the 
cure  of  this  very  same  distress  that  He  came  in  the  fiesh  and  died  on  the  tree. 
Enter,  then,  upon  the  work  of  making  your  fellow-men  happy,  and  you  are  in  the 
very  vineyard  where  the  Lord  Jesus  laboured.  He  has  already  rescued  from  the 
ruins  of  the  apostasy  a  great  multitude  that  no  man  can  number.  The  work  is 
going  on,  and  He  invites  your  co-operation.  Remarks:  1.  In  the  want  of  this 
benevolence,  how  strong  is  the  proof  we  have  that  men  are  wholly  depraved  1  2. 
We  see  the  necessity  that  men  should  be  renewed.  Place  selfish  hearts  in 
heaven  and  they  would  there  be  as  fruitful  as  elsewhere  in  misery.  3. 
How  pleasant  is  the  prospect  of  a  millennium  I  Then  the  benevolence  we 
contemplate  will  become  general.  Men  will  be  employed  in  rendering  each 
other  happy.  (D.  A.  Clark.)  Love  a  debt  to  our  neighbour: — L  Exceed- 
tNGLY  obeat.  Because  —  1.  The  creditors  are  so  many.  2.  Its  liabilities 
are  so  numerous.  8.  It  can  never  be  fully  discharged.  U.  Unspeakably  sweet. 
Because — 1.  Not  lightly  incurred.  2.  It  helps  us  to  discharge  all  others.  3.  It 
harmonises  with  God's  love.  4.  Every  attempt  to  discharge  it  is  a  source  of  plea- 
sure. (J.  Lythf  D.D.)  Love  a  debt  due  to  all  men: — I.  A  gbeat  debt.  1.  As 
due  to  BO  many — all  men.  2.  Requiring  so  much  to  pay  it — sometimes  our  life 
(1  John  iii.  16).  n.  A  lasting  debt.  Though  always  being  paid,  yet  never  dis- 
charged. The  more  that  is  paid  the  more  is  felt  to  be  due.  The  principle  is 
deepened  and  made  more  active  by  the  practice.  HI.  A  pleasant  debt  (Phil.  ii.  1). 
Every  payment  of  it  gladdens  and  enlarges  the  heart.  IV.  An  honoubable  debt. 
1.  Necessary  to  our  moral  nature.  2.  It  makes  us  Godlike  and  Christlike  (Eph.  iy. 
82,  V.  1,  2 ;  1  John  iv.  8).    (T.  RoUngon,  D.D.) 

Vers.  9,  10.  Thon  shalt  not  commit  adultery  .  .  .  and  If  there  be  any  other 
commandment,  it  is  briefly  comprehended  in  this  .  .  .  Thou  shalt  love  fhy  neigh- 
bour as  thyselil — The  comprehensiveness  of  love : — It  comprehends — I.  Tee  wholb 
LAW.  II.  The  letteb  and  the  spibit.  HI.  Oob  neighboub  as  oueselves.  {J. 
Lyth,  D.D.)  The  love  of  our  neighbour: — I.  The  object  of  the  affection. 
Love  of  our  neighbour,  or  benevolence,  seeks  the  good  of  others,  suid  in  its  noblest 
form  is  the  perfection  of  God.  IL  Its  pbopeb  extent.  "  As  ourselves."  This 
implies— 1.  That  it  is  to  be  of  the  same  kind.    We  have  a  common  interest  in 


oaif.  xxn.]  ROMANS.  677 

others  and  in  onrselTea.  2.  That  it  is  to  bear  a  certain  proportion  to  onr  love  for 
oorselves.  What  this  proportion  is  to  be  is  not  easily  decided,  for  affection  is  not 
easily  measored;  bat  as  to  actions,  the  expression  of  affection,  the  more  others 
occupy  oar  thoughts  the  better,  provided  we  neglect  not  ourselves.  3.  That  it  is  to 
equal  our  love  for  ourselves,  No  ill  consequences  can  ensue  from  this,  for — (1) 
Men  have  other  affections  for  themselves  not  felt  for  others.  (2)  They  are  specially 
interested  in  themselves.  (3)  They  have  a  particular  perception  of  their  own 
interest,  so  that  there  is  no  fear  of  self  neglect.  III.  Its  influencb  on  oub  genebaii 
TEUPEB.  1.  To  produce  all  charitableness.  2.  To  fit  men  for  every  relation  and 
duty.  3.  To  moderate  party  feeling.  4.  To  prevent  or  heal  all  strife.  IV.  What 
IT  INCLUDES — all  virtue.  It  prompts  men — 1.  To  seek  the  greatest  happiness  of 
all,  which  is  itself  a  discharge  of  all  our  obligations.  2.  To  the  practice  of  aU 
personal  virtues — temperance,  &o.,  and  certainly  a  neglect  of  these  virtues  implies 
a  deficiency  of  love  to  others.  (Bp.  Butler.)  Love  worketh  "o  iU  to  his 
nelghboor. — The  working  of  love : — L  Love  is  bssentiillt  ah  active  pbinciplb. 
IL  Wobes  mo  ill.  1.  In  deed.  2.  In  word.  3.  In  thought.  IIL  Must  wobk 
ooon.  1.  Wherever  it  has  opportunity.  2.  To  the  extent  of  its  ability.  lY.  Is 
THEBEFOBE  the  FULEiLLiNa  OF  THE  LAW.  1.  Negatively.  2.  Positively.  {J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  The  work  of  love : — The  Arabian  commentators  of  Mahomet  attempted 
to  make  a  law  applicable  to  every  relation  in  life.  They  published,  it  is  said,  a 
code  containing  seventy-five  thousand  rules  ;  but  cases  soon  arose  to  which  none  of 
these  rules  would  apply.  The  New  Testament  adopts  another  method.  It  deals  in 
broad  and  fundamental  principles  capable  of  universal  application.  It  gives  as  in 
plain  words  a  law  of  love.  This  suggests  principles  which  are  universal  and  eternal. 
It  gives  a  life  rather  than  a  rule.  L  "  Love  wobeeth  no  ill  to  his  neiohboub.  " 
This  is  a  broad  truth.  One's  neighbour  is  primarily  the  one  near — the  near 
dweller,  any  one  with  whom  we  have  to  do.  Christ  has  for  ever  answered  the 
question,  "  Who  is  my  neighbour  ? "  1.  The  spirit  of  this  statement  strikes  a  blow 
at  all  kinds  of  business  which  injure  one's  neighbour.  It  meets  the  servant  and 
the  master,  the  maid  and  her  mistress;  it  enters  the  counting-house  and  the 
workshop ;  it  confronts  the  lawyer  and  his  client,  the  physician  and  his  patient, 
the  pastor  and  his  people.  It  enters  the  social  circle  and  hushes  the  voice  of  the 
slanderer.  It  stands  like  an  incarnate  conscience  across  the  track  of  the  vile  wretch 
who  would  rob  youth  of  purity  and  glory.  It  lifts  a  voice  against  the  man  who 
destroys  his  neighbour  with  strong  drink.  It  thunders  its  condemnation  in  the  ear 
of  the  gambler.  It  lifts  before  us  the  great  white  throne,  and  enables  us  to  anti< 
cipate  its  final  decisions.  2.  This  law  of  love  also  opposes  all  forms  of  bad  example. 
The  man  who  desecrates  God's  day,  disbelieves  God's  book,  and  disobeys  God's 
Son,  is  an  enemy  to  his  neighbour.  No  man  has  a  right  to  set  a  bad  example 
before  men.  The  man  who  misleads  the  young  may  blight  the  lives  of  coming 
generations.  3.  This  law  reaches  those  who  are  only  negatively  good.  No  man 
has  a  right  to  remain  in  that  position.  Your  good  name,  while  you  remain  in  that 
attitude  to  God,  makes  your  infiuence  the  greater  and  your  condemnation  the 
heavier.  Have  you  accepted  Christ  as  your  personal  Saviour  ?  Then  come  to  the 
Church.  For  the  sake  of  your  neighbour  come  into  the  ranks.  Confess  Christ ; 
march  in  line  with  His  people.  Thus  will  you  work  no  ill  to  your  neighbour.  IL 
But  it  is  clearly  implied  that  love  wobks  well  to  one's  neighboub.  This  is  a  step 
in  advance.  It  cannot  rest  in  the  mere  negative  condition.  Love  does  not  simply 
do  no  ill ;  it  does  well.  It  understands  that  to  withhold  good  when  it  might  be  done, 
is  as  truly  sin  as  to  devise  eviL  Paul  (1  Cor.  xiii. )  shows  that  it  is  the  principle 
without  which  all  other  gifts  are  worthless.  The  Corinthian  chapter  is  the  inspired 
commentary  on  the  Eoman  text.  What  a  world  this  would  be  if  this  love  dominated 
all  the  actions  of  men  I  Social  life  would  be  regenerated ;  commercial  life  be  con- 
secrated;  heaven  would  be  begun  on  earth.  (R.S.  Macarthur,D.D.)  Therefore 
love  la  the  fulfilling  of  the  law. — Love  the  fulfilling  of  the  law  : — Love  is — I.  The 
BEST  EXPOsrroB  OF  the  law.  It  teaches  us  to  keep  it — 1.  Conscientiously  as  in  the 
sight  of  God.  2.  Sincerely  with  the  whole  heart.  3.  Fully  in  every  point.  4. 
Perfectly,  not  merely  negatively.  II.  The  best  keepeb  ,of  the  law.  It  fulfils  it 
with — 1.  Delight.  2.  All  its  strength.  3.  Constancy.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Love: — 
I.  Beaches  the  full  extent  of  the  law.  1.  It  keeps  the  whole  law  ;  not  only  its 
prohibitions,  but  also  its  precepts.  2.  Keeps  it  perfectly,  not  only  with  the  hands, 
but  with  the  heart.  3.  Is  never  weary.  II.  Makes  its  peefobmancb  east.  1.  It 
draws  help  from  a  Divine  source.  2.  Supplies  Divine  strengtlL  3.  Guarantees  the 
Divinest  reward.  (Ibid.)  Lov  eia  the  fulfilling  of  the  law  hec&MBe  it — I.  Teaches 
VOL.  II.  87 


678  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

ETEETTHiNO.     1.  It  unfolds  the  spirit  of  the  law.     2.  Strengthens  the  voice  of  con- 
Bcience.    3.  Resolves  all  difficult  questions.     II.  Does  everythinq.     1.  Is  not  con- 
tented with  the  appearance.     2.  Does  not  stop  short  half-way.    3.  Seeks  not  for 
reward.  HI.  Rewaeds  everything.  1.  The  good  intention.  2.  The  secret  act.  3.  The 
greatest  sacrifice.    (Ibid.)      Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law  because  the  love  of  God 
and  man  is  the  so«Z  of  every  outward  duty,  and  a  cause  that  will  produce  these  as  eflfects. 
(R.  Baxter.)      Love  fulfils  law  : — A  religion  which  can  announce  this  as  its  distinc- 
tive principle  needs  bring  no  further  credentials  of  its  heavenly  origin.   Michael  Angelo 
need  not  carve  his  name  on  his  own  statuary,  nor  Raphael  write  his  on  his  pictures. 
The  song  tells  you  what  is  the  bird  which  sings.     And  so  our  text  is  unlike  the  trees 
that  spring  out  of  merely  human  soil.     Its  fragrance  and  its  fruit  announce  it  to 
be  a  slip  from  the  tree  that  grows  in  the  midst  of  the  Paradise  of  God,  and  whose 
leaves  are  for  the  healing  of  the  nations.     I.  Love  is  the  substance  of  the  demands 
or  the  law  ;  it  is  their  very  essence  and  quintessence.     1.  A  tree  may  have  a 
thousand  branches,  and  ten  thousand  leaves,  all  of  them  having  a  different  direc- 
tion and  shape ;  but  they  all  arise  out  of  life.    So  all  the  commandments  are  but 
the  outward  forms  of  an  inward  spirit,  and  that  spirit  is  love.     2.  Law  does  not 
fall  so  pleasantly  on  the  ear  as  love.     It  is  like  a  spiked  wall  between  us  and 
tempting  fruit ;  or  like  the  warning  guide-post,  "  No  road  this  way,"  precisely  at 
the  spot  where  the  path  seems  to  lose  itself  in  the  most  enchanting  scenery.      But 
this  is  a  false  view  of  law.    Love  could  not  be  the  fulfilling  of  it  if  it  were  of  this 
nature,  but  the  abolishing  of  it.     For  what  is  law  ?    A  wanton  restraint,  a  needless 
burden,  the  arbitrary  exaction  of  a  superior  authority,  and  thus  superfluous  cir- 
cumscription of  our  liberty,  and  wilful  limitation  of  our  pleasures?    No  1    It  is  but 
Buch  a  limitation  and  restraint  as  secures  for  each  man  the  largest  sweep  of  liberty. 
It  is  true  that  if  there  were  no  human  laws,  certain  individuals  would  be  able  to 
indulge  their  wills  and  passions  over  a  much  wider  field  ;  but  what  of  the  people 
generally  ?     The  man  who  can  go  beyond  his  just  bounds  of  right,  can  only  do  so 
by  invading  the  bounds  of  another.     This  is  the  essence  of  tyranny.     Liberty  can 
only  live  where  law  is  the  supremest  thing.    No  man  resents  a  just  law,  but  he 
who  is  at  heart  an  enemy  to  the  righteous  claims  of  his  fellow-men.    Law  is  a 
hedge ;  but  no  hedge  is  thorny  and  repulsive  to  a  man  who  does  not  wish  to  break 
through  and  trample  upon  the  sacred  privileges  of  his  neighbour.     3.  Can  you  find 
a  law  of  God  which  is  in  itsell,  and  on  all  sides  of  it,  a  dark  and  repulsive  thing  ? 
I  know  of  no  law  of  His  which  has  not  in  its  very  heart  this  command,  "Be 
happy."     This  has  ever  been  the  view  of  good  men.     "  Oh  1  how  love  I  Thy  law  I 
it  is  daily  my  delight."    "  Great  peace  have  they  that  love  Thy  law."    "  Of  law," 
Hooker  has  said,  "  there  can  be  no  less  acknowledged  than  that  her  seat  is  the 
bosom  of  God,  her  voice  the  harmony  of  the  world ;  all  things  in  heaven  and  earth 
do  her  homage,  the  very  least  as  feeling  her  care,  and  the  greatest  as  not  exempted 
from  her  power ;  both  angels  and  men,  and  creatures  of  what  condition  soever, 
though  each  in  differing  sort  and  manner,  yet  all  with  uniform  consent,  admiring 
her  as  the  mother  of  their  peace  and  joy."    II.  Obedience  is  to  arise  from  love. 
1.  There  may  be  what  men  esteem  the  fulfilling  of  a  law  for  which  they  have  no 
respect.     There  is  the  fulfilling— (1)  Which  arises  from  fear,  and  despots  may  feel 
flattered  and  feel  safer  as  they  see  a  population  pale  with  terror  at  their  power. 
But  that  power  is  always  the  safest  which  inspires  love.    The  law  of  God  can  never 
be  obeyed  through  terror.      Only  think  of  a  man  obeying  God  because  he  dreads 
Him.    Think  of  him  saying,  "  If  God  were  not  as  powerful  as  He  is,  I  would  set  my 
heel  upon  His  laws ;  but  I  am  no  match  for  Him,  and  therefore  I  submit  and 
obey."     Nay,  you  neither  submit  nor  obey.     You  might  do  this  in  the  case  of  an 
earthly  king,  whose  laws  are  satisfied  if  they  receive  an  external  obedience.     But 
God  is  a  King  and  a  Father,  who  says,  "Thou  shalt  love  " ;  not,  "  Thou  sbalt  dread 
the  Lord  thy  God."    He  is  a  Monarch  whose  laws  you  cannot  obey  except  by 
loving  Him.     He  clearly  discriminates  between  what  seems  obedience  and  what  is. 
"  This  people  draweth  nigh  unto  Me  with  their  lips,  but  their  heart  is  far  from  Me." 
You  fathers  know  that  it  is  not  worth  the  name  of  obedience  if  your  child  serve  you 
from  dread  of  consequences.     (2)  Which  is  prompted  by  a  mere  sense  of  interest. 
This  is  little  better  than  that  we  have  just  considered.     Of  course  obedience  brings 
sooner  or  later  its  own  reward.     But  there  is  a  great  difference  between  pursuing  a 
course  which  is  profitable,  and  pursuing  it  because  it  is  profitable.      A  faithful 
servant  of  a  monarch  may  be  paid  for  his  service ;  but  if  he  serves  only  for  his  pay, 
he  is  not  a  faithful  servant.     Will  it  be  said  that  this  seems  to  strike  against  the 
promises  of  the  joys  and  glories  of  Heaven  ?     No,  they  are  far  more  gracious  gifts 


OBAP.  xm.]  ROMANS.  579 

than  wages.  "When  Christ  says,  "  I  will  make  thee  raler  over  many  things,"  it  is 
not  because  we  have  deserved  it.  And  hence  the  saints  in  heaven  cast  their 
crowns  at  the  feet  of  Him  that  sits  upon  the  throne,  saying,  "  Thou  art  worthy,  O 
Lord,"  (fee.  And  the  crowns  are  not  given  to  those  who  have  served  for  gain ;  they 
are  given  to  those  who  hi.ve  served  from  love.  The  fulfilling  of  the  law  from  love 
creates  now  its  own  heaven  within  the  man.  2.  The  law  of  service  is  the  law  of 
love.  This  was  so  with  Christ.  "I  delight  to  do  Thy  will,  0  God."  And  the 
service  we  render  to  Christ  must  be  like  that.  •'  Lovest  thou  Me  ?  "  &c.  And  this 
tmth  applies  equally  to  our  relations  to  our  fellow-men.  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy 
neighbour  as  thyself."  There  is  far  too  much  of  the  spirit,  in  these  times,  which 
regards  men  as  so  many  competitors  on  the  great  arena  of  life,  each  one  feeling  that 
he  loses  what  another  gains,  and  that  he  must  do  the  best  for  himself,  leaving  the 
weaker  to  go  unpitied  to  the  wall.  But  Christ  came  to  teach  us  a  holier  and  more 
blessed  law,  viz. ,  that  we  are  all  brethren,  brethren  in  nature,  brethren  in  Him, 
because  He  partook  our  nature,  and  "  is  not  ashamed  to  call  us  brethren."  (E. 
Mellor,  D.D.)  Love  the  essence  of  obedience  : — I.  The  natube  of  true  love.  It 
is — 1.  Universal,  extending  to  being  in  general,  or  to  God  and  all  His  creatures. 
2.  Impartial.  It  regards  every  proper  object  of  benevolence  according  to  its 
apparent  worth  and  importance  in  the  scale  of  being.  3.  Disinterested.  Merce- 
nary love  can  never  form  a  virtuous  character.  11.  True  love  is  the  fulfillino 
OF  THE  LAW.  1.  It  couforms  the  heart  to  God.  God  is  love.  "  Be  ye  therefore 
perfect,  even  as  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven  is  perfect."  If  the  moral  perfection 
of  man  consists  in  conformity  to  the  moral  perfection  of  God,  and  the  moral 
perfection  of  God  consists  in  love,  then  love  must  be  the  fulfilling  of  the  law.  2. 
It  answers  the  full  demand  of  the  law.  When  a  certain  man  asked  our  Saviour, 
"Which  is  the  great  conmiandment  in  the  law?  "  He  replied,  "  Thou  shalt  love," 
&o.  So  Paul  says,  "  The  end  of  the  commandment  is  charity  out  of  a  pure  heart." 
By  this  he  declares  that  charity  or  true  love  fully  answers  the  spirit  and  design  of 
the  law.  3.  It  makes  us  feel  and  act  in  every  respect  just  as  God  requires.  So  far 
as  we  possess  it,  we  shall  both  internally  and  externally  obey  every  Divine  command. 
4.  It  restrains  men  from  everything  which  God  forbids.    (N.  Emmons,  D.D.) 

Vers.  11-14.  And,  knowing  the  time,  that  now  It  Is  high  time  to  awake  out  of 
Bleep. — A  call: — I.  To  awaee.  Because — 1.  It  is  high  time.  2.  The  night  of 
mibelief  is  past.  3.  The  day  of  salvation  is  at  hand.  II.  To  duty.  1.  To 
repentance — "  Put  ofiE  the  works  of  darkness,"  2.  To  faith — "  Put  on  the  armour 
of  light."  3.  To  action—"  Walk  honestly,"  Ac.  4.  To  holiness—"  Put  on  Christ " 
— the  Source  of  new  life.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Time  closing  in  upon  us  : — •'  The  time  is 
short,"  or,  as  we  might  perhaps  render  it  so  as  to  give  the  full  force  of  the  metaphor, 
the  time  is  pressed  together.  It  is  being  squeezed  into  narrower  compass,  like  a 
sponge  in  a  strong  hand.  There  is  an  old  story  of  a  prisoner  in  a  cell  with  con- 
tractile walls.  Day  by  day  his  space  lessens — he  saw  the  whole  of  that  window 
yesterday,  he  sees  only  half  of  it  to-day.  Nearer  and  nearer  the  walls  are  drawn 
together,  till  they  meet  and  crush  him  between  them.  So  the  walls  of  our  home 
(which  we  have  made  our  prison)  are  closing  in  upon  us.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Knowledge  of  time : — I.  That  knowledge  of  time  which  we  should  secure.  We 
should  know  time  in  its — 1.  Nature.  2.  Use.  3.  Value.  4.  Management.  5. 
Termination.  II.  The  effects  which  it  is  calculated  to  promote.  1.  Unfeigned 
gratitude  to  God.  2.  Deep  contrition  of  soul.  3.  Fervent  application  to  the 
throne  of  grace.  4.  Sincere  desires  to  live  more  fully  unto  the  Lord.  (Biblical 
Museum.)  Knowledge  of  time  : — We  should  know  time  in  its — I.  Worth. 
Estimated  at  the  value  of— 1.  Life.  Time  the  measure  of  life  of  a  being  capable 
of  thought,  endowed  with  conscience,  gifted  with  immortality.  2.  What  able  to 
be  done  during  its  progress.  Speaking  of  W.  Wilberforce,  Sir  Jas.  Mackintosh 
said,  "  I  am  full  of  admiration  that  the  short  period  of  the  life  of  one  man,  well 
and  wisely  directed,  can  do  so  much  and  exert  such  influence.  How  precious  is 
time  1  How  valuable  and  dignified  human  life,  which  in  general  appears  so  base 
and  miserable  1 "  Illustrate  with  Howard,  Kaikes,  &c.  II.  Responsibilities.  Our 
relation  to  God.  Knowledge  of  salvation.  Duties  in  our  sphere  of  life.  Influence  we 
exert.  Ignatius  when  he  heard  the  clock  strike  said,  "  Now  I  have  one  hour  more 
to  account  for."  III.  Uncertaintt.  Commercial  institutions  and  projects  abun- 
dantly prove  this,  but  he  who  counts  on  time  presumes  on  probability  that  has 
even  more  impressively  proved  its  questionableness  (James  iv.  13,  14).  IV. 
Bbbvitt.    The  years  of  Jacob  were  an  hundred  and  thirty,  yet  he  says,  "  Few  and 


^ 


680  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha?.  xm. 

eyil,"  &o.  Moses  again,  "  Like  the  grass,"  Sto.  When  wa  look  over  the  first 
chapters  of  Chronicles,  to  read  which  is  like  entering  a  great  world-cemetery,  how 
we  are  stnick  with  the  shortness  of  life  at  the  best  I  Y.  Fowbblessnsss.  It 
cannot  destroy  sin,  or  take  away  its  guili  It  cannot  act  for  as.  It  cannot  destroy 
the  soul,  though  it  ends  the  life.  YI.  Irbevocablenxss.  The  wave  that  washea 
at  your  feet  may  return.  The  waters  of  the  river  as  they  roll  to  the  sea,  eaaght  up 
in  mist,  may  again  flow  down  the  mountains  into  its  channel,  bat  an  hour  onc« 
gone  in  the  roU  of  millenniums  shall  never  return.  We  can  recall  a  messenger,  but 
not  the  last  moment.  One  life  here,  only  one,  is  given,  how  precious  should  it  be  I 
(G.  McMichael,  B.A.)  Time  to  awake: — I.  The  exhobtation.  These  words 
are  appropriate  to  the  first  Sunday  in  the  year.  When  the  bells  ring  out  the  old 
year  and  ring  in  the  new,  they  seem  to  chime,  "  Now  it  is  high  time  to  awake  oat 
of  sleep."  1.  St.  Paul  is  speaking  not  to  those  who  were  asleep  in  siu,  but  to 
active  Christians.  And  there  are  few  things  in  Scripture  more  striking  than  the 
remonstrances  addressed  to  such.  Ordinarily  little  or  no  account  seems  taken  of 
their  progress,  but  they  are  dealt  with  as  having  yet  much  to  do.  The  nominal 
Christian  ought  to  be  much  struck  with  this.  If  he  who  has  been  long  labouring 
is  thus  admonished,  what  must  be  the  state  of  those  who  have  not  yet  taken  the 
first  steps  in  Christianity?  2.  But  the  real  Christian  may  also  &id  cause  for 
alarm,  notwithstanding  the  promises  in  his  favour.  And  when  we  call  to  mind 
that  in  the  parable  all  the  virgins,  the  wise  as  well  as  the  foolish,  slumbered,  we 
cannot  but  conclude  that  there  is  no  privilege  to  godly  men  of  dispensing  with 
watchfulness.  It  is  vigilance,  not  indolence,  to  which  believers  are  elected.  The 
best  proof  that  a  man  is  not  elect,  is  his  making  election  his  pillow,  and  going  to 
sleep  upon  his  own  predestination.  3.  Oar  text,  however,  may  be  taken  in  a 
comparative  sense.  The  righteous  may  "not  sleep  as  do  others."  Yet  you  may 
find  so  vast  a  disproportion  between  the  energy  exerted  and  the  energy  demanded, 
that  the  actual  wakefulness  is  practical  listlessness.  Spiritual  slumber  is  not 
necessarily  the  folding  up  of  every  power  and  faculty,  but  the  not  developing 
them  in  the  necessary  degree.  Some  energy  is  still  torpid,  some  affection  is  still 
spellbound,  and  thus  the  whole  man  is  not  spiritually  roused.  And  over  and 
above  the  slumber  of  certain  faculties,  those  which  are  awake  are  but  half  awake. 
Where  is  that  struggling  which  would  result  from  the  combination  of  an  eye  all 
faith  and  a  heart  all  love  ?  II.  The  motive  bt  which  St.  Paul  stbives  to  stib 
Chbistlans  feom  compabativb  indolence — • '  Now  is  our  salvation  nearer  than  when 
we  believed."  1.  This  argument  which  is  drawn  from  the  greater  nearness  of  death 
is  not  of  equal  urgency  when  applied  to  believer  and  unbeliever.  In  applying  it  to 
the  latter,  I  just  tell  him  that  he  has  less  time  in  which  to  escape,  and  therefore 
less  likelihood  of  obtaining  deliverance.  He  must  do  it  before  daybreak,  and  "  the 
night  is  far  spent."  But  when  I  turn  to  the  believer,  there  is  by  no  means  the  same 
appearance  of  force  in  the  motive.  If  a  man  be  secure  of  salvation,  to  tell  him 
that  the  end  is  at  hand  does  not  look  like  urging  him  to  exertion.  But  here  comes 
in  that  balancing  of  statements  which  is  discernible  through  the  whole  of  the  Bible. 
The  only  Scriptural  certainty  that  a  man  will  be  saved  is  the  certainty  that  he  will 
struggle.  Struggling  is  incipient  salvation.  It  is  an  in  tenser  struggle  which  marks 
a  fuller  possession.  If,  then,  a  man  would  show  that  his  salvation  is  nearer,  he 
must  also  show  that  he  is  more  wakeful,  more  in  earnest.  2.  There  are  two  reasons 
why  the  consciousness  of  having  less  time  to  live  should  urge  Christians  to  be 
increasingly  earnest.  (1)  There  is  much  to  strive  for  even  if  a  man  be  secure  of 
salvation.  The  degree  of  our  happiness  in  the  next  life  will  be  mainly  determined 
by  our  attainments  in  holiness  in  this.  We  are  here  on  a  stage  of  probation,  so 
that,  having  been  once  recovered  from  apostasy,  we  are  candidates  for  a  prize  and 
wrestlers  for  a  crown.  Christianity  does  not  allow  the  believer  to  imagine  that 
everything  is  done  when  a  title  to  the  kingdom  is  obtained.  And  if  one  man 
become  a  ruler  over  ten  cities,  and  another  over  five,  and  another  over  two,  each 
receiving  in  exact  proportion  to  his  improvement  of  talents,  then  it  is  clear  that 
our  strivings  will  have  a  vast  influence  on  our  recompense.  To  tell  the  Christian, 
therefore,  that  his  salvation  is  nearer  than  when  he  believed,  is  telling  the  wrestler 
that  his  glass  is  running  out,  and  there  is  the  garland  not  won ;  it  is  telling  the 
warrior  that  the  shadows  are  thickening  and  the  victory  is  not  complete.  Is  it  a  time 
to  sleep  when  each  moment's  slumber  may  take  a  pearl  from  the  crown,  a  city  from 
the  sceptre  ?  (2)  There  remains  less  time  in  which  to  glorify  God.  If  there  were 
no  connection  between  what  we  do  in  this  life,  and  what  we  shall  receive  in  the 
oext,  it  would  still  be  impossible  for  true  Christians  to  be  indolent.    Forasmuch  as 


OBtf.  xjs.]  ROMANS,  681 

faith  makes  as  one  with  Christ,  there  mast  be  commnnity  of  intereat.  And  it  is  a 
spectacle  which  should  stir  all  the  anxieties  and  sympathies  of  the  believer — that 
the  world  which  has  been  ransomed  by  Christ's  blood  is  nevertheless  overspread 
\rith  impiety.  And  over  and  above  this  dishonour  to  his  Lord,  there  is  the 
wretchedness  which  an  ungodly  race  is  weaving  for  its  portion  ;  and  he  cannot  fail 
to  long  and  to  strive  that  he  may  be,  in  some  degree,  instrtunental  in  the  salvation 
<rf  his  fellow-men.  Where,  then,  can  you  find  a  stronger  motive  to  energy  than  is 
famished  by  the  shortness  of  the  period  during  which  we  may  resist  the  progress  of 
iniquity  and  win  souls  for  Christ  1  And  what,  then,  is  the  text  but  an  admonition 
that  nerve  and  sinew,  time  and  talent — all  must  be  centred  more  fixedly  than  ever 
in  the  service  of  Christ,  lest  we  are  summoned  to  depart  ere  we  have  done  the  little 
which  with  all  our  strenuousness  we  might  possibly  effect  for  the  Lord  and  His 
kingdom?  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Time  to  awake: — I.  The  condition  supposed. 
One  of — 1.  Insensibility.  2.  Inactivity.  3.  Peril.  II.  The  admonition  given. 
Awake  to — 1.  Consideration.  2.  Action.  3.  Diligent  effort.  HI.  The  uoxrvES 
suooEBTSD.  L  It  is  high  time.  2.  The  crisis  draws  on.  3.  Too  know  it.  {J. 
Lyth,  D.D.)  High  time  to  awake  out  of  $Uep  : — I.  Tks  state  feom  which  a 
CHANGE  IS  DEBiBED.  Sleep  describes — 1.  The  state  of  unconverted  men  (1  Thess. 
T.  4-8  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  34).  Sleep  is  a  season  of — (1)  Forgetfulness,  and  men  by  nature 
are  forgetful  of  the  ends  of  their  being,  of  their  true  character — of  the  awful 
aitribotes  of  eternity,  <&c.  (2)  Ignorance,  and  the  unconverted  man  has  no 
diecemment  as  to  spiritual  things.  (3)  Insensibility,  and  the  natural  man  is 
onalarmed  and  secure  amidst  all  the  danger  by  which  he  is  surrounded.  A  man 
may  be  awake  as  to  all  tbe  things  of  time,  and  asleep  as  to  all  the  concerns  of 
eternity.  2.  Of  many  who  have  made  a  profession  of  the  gospel  and  felt  its  power. 
Once  they  were  roused  from  the  slumbers  of  spiritual  death,  but  they  are  gone 
back.  Their  strong  impressions  have  subsided,  their  souls  have  left  their  first  love ;  ^ 
they  did  run  well,  but  they  have  been  hindered.  In  the  world  there  is  a  constant  ^^ 
influence  to  produce  this  stupor.  Worldly  business,  pleasure,  honour  and  applause, 
become  the  means  of  bringing  us  into  a  state  of  declension.  How  dreadful  when 
the  child  of  the  day  thus  goes  back  into  darkness,  and  stretches  out  his  form, 
asking  for  a  little  more  sleep  and  a  little  more  slumber  I  H.  The  nature  or  the 
CHANGE  BT  WHICH  THIS  STATE  IS  TO  BE  BEVEB8ED.  1.  It  is  a  chauge  which  produces 
a  complete  reverse.  It  is  awaking  out  of  sleep.  This  chauge  is  called  a  being 
tamed  from  darkness  to  light — a  being  quickened — becoming  children  of  the  light 
and  of  the  day,  &e.  The  expression  signifies  that  the  understanding  receives  a 
full  impression  of  the  reality  of  the  world  to  come.  The  man  acts  as  though  he 
beheved  that  the  true  end  of  life  is  to  glorify  God ;  and  hence  he  seeks  to  obtain  a 
change  of  heart  and  life — cultivates  holy  principles,  practises  holy  actions,  and 
has  respect  in  all  things  to  the  recompense  of  the  reward.  2.  The  only  way  by 
which  this  change  can  be  effected  is  by  the  powerful  operation  of  the  Spirit  on  the 
mind.  The  slumber  is  so  potent  that  none  but  He  can  awake  from  it.  The 
anodyne  is  so  powerful  that  none  but  the  great  Physician  can  apply  a  suitable 
remedy.  Where  He  is  not,  there  is  dark  midnight,  or  the  light  only  of  a  phantom, 
or  the  pale  beams  of  the  moon  shining  upon  snow,  displaying  the  very  dreariness 
and  barrenness  of  nature  1  3.  Yet  human  instruments  are  employed.  Those  who 
are  awakened  to  the  sense  of  the  danger  of  their  fellow-men  are  sent  out  by  God  • 
to  awaken  others.  HI.  The  motives  which  should  induce  you  to  awake.  1. 
Enough  of  your  time  has  passed  in  an  unaroused,  unawakened  state  already.  2. 
The  difficulty  of  awakening  grows  with  the  progress  of  delay. '  The  sleep  of  the 
body,  indeed,  becomes  lighter  as  we  approach  the  morning  season.  But  this 
slumber  becomes  deeper  and  heavier,  till  the  individual  sleeps  the  sleep  of  death. 
Every  time  you  hear  in  vain,  you  grow  more  sleepy,  and  the  preacher's  voice 
becomes  only  as  so  much  music  to  lull  you.  You  have  so  long  listened  to  the  rolling 
of  the  thunder  that  your  ears  are  now  deaf  to  its  sound.  The  Cross  has  so 
frequently  been  presented  to  you  that  its  brightness  has  no  longer  any  attraction. 
8.  The  uncertainty  and  speedy  termination  of  life.  Who  is  there  that  knows  how 
long  he  has  to  live  ?  Can  any  of  you  say,  "  Go  thy  way  for  this  time  ;  when  it  is 
more  convenient,  I  will  attend  to  these  things  "  ?  You  know  not  that  you  will  live  ^ 
till  to-morrow.  (J.  Parsons.)  High  time  to  awake: — I.  There  is  sometimes  a  r 
TENDENCV  IN  Chbistians  TO  SLEEP.  How  many  settle  down  into  dreamy  stationari- 
ness.  This  state — 1.  Follows  upon  the  religious  life  losing  its  first  freshness  and 
novelty.  2.  Is  induced  by  a  false  conception  of  the  atonement  and  the  nature  of 
««l>ation.    Men  have  been  taught  to  consider  salvation  bestowed  in  its  completeness 


(82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xm, 

upon  believing  that  Christ  is  the  sacrifice  for  the  world's  sin,  and  all  that  thereafter 
remains  is  heaven ;  whereas  salvation  simply  begins  then — nothing  more.  3.  la 
encouraged  by  the  worldly  maxims  and  excitements,  the  spirit  of  mammonism, 
amidst  which  so  many  live.  God  and  duty,  and  all  spiritual  realities  seem  often  to 
fade  away  into  mere  phantoms  in  the  clash  and  hurry  of  commerce.  That  only 
seems  real  which  is  visible  and  present.  And  the  result  is  that  the  soul  passes  by 
almost  imperceptible  degrees  into  a  state  of  moral  slumber.  4.  Comes  through  the 
growth  of  some  moral  weakness  or  sinful  habit — oovetousness,  love  of  pleasure, 
passionateness — that  has  not  been  controlled  or  weeded  out  of  the  character  at  the 
beginning  of  the  new  life ;  or  through  the  influence  of  companions  of  a  worldly 
type ;  or  from  the  mind  becoming  unsettled  on  some  of  the  questions  of  theology 
and  Biblical  criticism.  Many  a  man,  tossed  on  a  sea  of  doubt  and  uncertainty 
concerning  creeds  and  theological  systems,  gradually  loses  his  former  spiritual 
intensity,  and  languidly  suffers  the  work  of  salvation  to  remain  stationary.     IL  As 

A  CORRECTIVB  OP  INACTION  AND  TOEPOB,  AND  TO  IN8PIBB  ONCK  MORE  WITH  HOL? 
ENTERPRISE  ANY  WHO  SLEEP,  THERE  IS  A  TWOFOLD  INCENTIVE.       1.    "  NoW  is  OUr  Salva- 

tion  nearer  than  when  wB  believed."  This  points  to — (1)  The  fact  of  the  Christian 
life  having  been  begun.  It  is  a  great  point  gained  to  have  made  a  definite  beginning 
in  a  good  work.  After  the  first  few  stages  there  begins  to  be  accumulated  a  f acid  of 
experience ;  the  sense  of  strangeness  goes,  and  the  faculties  begin  to  adapt  them- 
selves to  the  new  mode  of  life,  and  the  man  soon  begins  to  have  a  foretaste  of  some 
of  the  fruits  of  his  labour.  Past  conquests  lend  a  power  for  future  triumphs. 
Attainment  facilitates  yet  further  attainment.  (2)  The  grand  revelations  of  the 
other  life,  which  are  fast  approaching.  But  the  measure  of  every  one's  heaven 
hereafter  depends  upon  the  spiritual  meetness  which  has  been  developed  in  him 
here.  And  the  time  that  remains  to  any  of  us  for  casting  off  the  works  of  dark- 
ness and  putting  on  the  armour  of  light  is  ceaselessly  gliding  away,  whether  we 
use  it  or  no.  The  opportunities  with  which  each  year  comes  laden  go  into  the  grave 
of  the  past  with  it.  The  portals  of  the  future  are  coming  fast  into  sight,  and  soon 
they  wall  open  for  you  to  pass  through.  There  is  no  time  to  waste  in  dreamy 
indolence.  2.  "  The  night  is  far  spent,  the  day  is  at  hand."  The  present  life  is  a 
time  of  shadow  and  obscurity.  Purposes,  duties,  attainments,  are  often  mis- 
interpreted, and  mis-valued.  Now,  in  passing  into  the  future  we  pass  into  the  day. 
That  is  a  world  of  hght  in  which  we  shall  both  know  ourselves  and  be  known  as  we 
really  are.  Therefore,  be  ready  for  the  time  of  revelation.  Awake  1  put  off  the 
works  of  darkness ;  put  on  the  armour  of  light.  Each  fresh  day  should  see  ua 
awake  and  diligent.  For  the  most  Christ-like  is  never  enough  like  Christ.  (T. 
Hammond.)  Wake  up  I  Wake  up  I — I.  Some  professing  Christians  seeu  to 
BE  ASLEEP  with  REGARD  TO  OTHERS.  Faul  has  been  bidding  us  to  pay  attention  to 
relative  duties,  and  exhorting  us  to  keep  the  law  of  love,  which  is  the  essence  of 
law ;  and  now  he  interjects  this  sentence.  So  he  means  that  many  Christiana 
are  in  a  sleepy  state  with  reference  to  their  obligations  to  others.  True  godliness 
makes  a  man  look  to  himself,  and  feel  his  personal  obligations  and  responsibilities. 
But  there  is  a  danger  lest  a  man  should  say,  "  Other  people  must  see  to  them- 
selves, and  I  must  see  to  myself."  The  principle  of  individuaUty  might  be  thus 
pushed  to  an  unwarrantable  extreme.  No  man  can  compass  the  ends  of  life  by 
drawing  a  little  line  around  himself  upon  the  ground.  There  are  outgoing  lines  of 
life  that  bind  us  not  only  with  some  men,  but,  in  fact,  with  aU  humanity.  We  are 
placed,  therefore,  in  a  most  solemn  position ;  and  it  is  with  regard  to  this  that  it  is 
high  time  that  we  should  awake  out  of  sleep.  1.  Into  what  a  deep  slumber  some 
professing  Christians  have  fallen !  How  utterly  insensible  they  are  to  the  sins  and 
sorrows  of  those  around  them.  They  say,  "  What  is  to  be  will  be,  and  the  Lord's 
purpose  will  be  fulfilled ;  there  will  be  some  saved  and  others  lost,"  as  coolly  as  it 
they  were  talking  of  a  wasp's  nest.  As  for  those  that  are  lost  1  They  dare  not 
injure  their  logic  by  indulging  a  little  mournful  emotion.  2.  Others  are  prone  to  be 
overtaken  with  an  oft-recurring  sleep.  I  know  a  brother  who  often  takes  forty 
winks  in  the  day-time  :  you  may  nudge  him,  and  he  will  wake  and  listen  to  you, 
but  he  goes  to  sleep  again  in  a  few  minutes  if  you  let  him  alone.  Who  can  blame 
the  sleeper  when  it  is  a  question  of  infirmity  or  sheer  exhaustion  ?  Well,  without 
blaming  any  for  the  weakness  of  the  fiesh,  I  take  this  sleepy  habit  to  be  a  fit  illus- 
tration of  the  state  of  some  Christians.  They  have  fits  and  starts  of  wakefulness, 
and  then  off  to  sleep  again.  At  that  missionary  meeting  you  woke  up  when  yoa 
heard  the  cry  of  the  perishing  heathen ;  but  have  you  cared  much  about  China  or 
India  since  then  ?    You  do  at  times  get  on  fire  with  love  for  souls,  but  then  after 


CHAP,  xni.]  ROMANS.  683 

the  sermon,  or  the  week  of  special  services  has  ended,  you  go  to  sleep  again.  Many 
Sunday-school  teachers  there  are  of  that  kind.  3.  Others  fall  into  a  kind  of 
Bomnambulistio  state.  If  we  judged  them  by  their  outward  actions  we  should 
think  they  were  wide  awake,  and  they  do  what  they  do  very  well.  Persons  walk 
along  giddy  heights  safely  enough  when  fast  asleep,  where  they  would  not  venture 
when  wide  awake.  And  we  have  known  professors  going  on  very  carefully,  exactly 
where  others  have  fallen,  and  have  attributed  it  to  the  grace  of  God,  whereas  in 
part  it  has  been  attributable  to  the  fact  that  they  were  spiritually  asleep.  It  is 
possible  to  appear  very  devout,  to  sing  hymns,  to  hear  sermons,  to  teach  in  the 
Sunday  School,  to  pay  your  religious  contributions  punctually,  maintain  the  habit  . 
of  prayer,  and  yet  you  may  be  a  somnambulist.  4.  A  very  large  number  of  us  are 
half  asleep.  II.  It  is  high  time  that  they  should  awake.  And  why  ?  Because 
— 1.  What  right  have  believers  to  be  asleep  at  all  ?  The  Lord  has  saved  us  from 
the  sleep  which  is  the  first  cousin  to  death — from  indifference,  unbelief,  hard- 
heartedness.  2.  A  great  many  opportunities  have  already  slipped  away.  You  who  ^ 
have  been  converted,  say  these  ten  years,  what  have  you  done  for  Christ  ?  You  y 
have  been  eating  the  fat  and  drinking  the  sweet,  but  have  you  fed  the  hungry  ?  If 
you  have  been  saved  a  week,  and  you  have  done  nothing  for  Christ  during  that  week, 
you  have  already  wasted  more  than  enough.  3.  There  were  so  many  people  that 
had  a  claim  upon  us,  who  are  beyond  our  power  now,  even  if  we  do  wake  !  Have 
yon  ever  felt  the  sadness  of  neglecting  to  visit  a  person  who  was  ill  until  you  heard 
that  he  was  dead?  Many  are  passing  away  from  us  and  from  the  sphere  of  our 
influence.  Your  children,  for  instance.  Parents,  avail  yourselves  of  your  oppor- 
tunities. 4.  We  have  plenty  of  enemies  that  are  awake  if  we  are  not.  Protes- 
tantism may  slumber,  but  Jesuitism  never  does.  The  prince  of  the  power  of  the 
air  keeps  his  servants  well  up  to  their  work.  5.  It  is  daylight.  The  sun  has  risen.  ^/ 
We  are  getting  far  into  the  gospel  dispensation.  Can  you  sleep  still  ?  6.  Our  Lord 
was  awake.  How  did  His  eyes  stream  with  tears  over  perishing  Jerusalem  1  The 
zeal  of  God's  house  consumed  Him.  Ought  it  not  to  consume  us  ?  7.  Our  own 
day  may  be  over  within  an  hour  or  two.  The  preacher  may  be  delivering  his  last 
sermon.  You  may  go  home  to-night  to  offer  the  last  prayer  at  the  family  altar 
which  you  will  ever  utter  on  earth.  You  may  open  shop  to-morrow  morning  for 
the  last  time.  III.  Thebe  is  something  worth  waking  fob.  Paul  does  not  say, 
"  If  you  do  not  wake  you  will  be  lost."  He  speaks  in  a  gospel  tone,  '•  Now  is  your 
salvation  nearer  than  when  you  believed."  1.  It  is  nearer  in  order  of  time.  How 
long  is  it  since  you  believed  ?  Ten  years  7  You  are  ten  years  nearer  heaven,  then. 
Ought  we  not  to  be  more  awake  ?  The  farther  we  are  off  from  heaven,  the  less  we 
may  feel  its  influence.  Some  of  you  are  sixty  years  nearer  to  heaven  than  you  were. 
Would  you  like  to  Uve  those  sixty  years  over  again  ?  Would  you  like  to  go  back 
and  clamber  again  the  Hill  Difficulty,  and  slide  down  again  into  the  Valley  of 
Humiliation,  &c.  ?  Rejoice  that  you  are  so  much  nearer  heaven.  Therefore,  keep 
wide  awake,  and  looking  out  for  it.  2.  In  point  of  preparation.  If  we  are  getting 
more  ready  for  heaven,  we  ought  to  be  more  awake,  for  sleepiness  is  not  the  state  of 
heavenly  spirits.  If  thou  art  more  fit  for  heaven  thou  hast  more  love,  more  pity  ; 
then  reach  out  both  hands  to  bring  another  poor  soul  to  Christ.  3.  In  point  of 
clearness  of  realisation.  If  I  can  realise  that  in  so  short  a  time  my  eternal  salva- 
tion shall  be  consummated,  I  cannot  any  longer  neglect  a  single  opportunity  of 
serving  my  Master.  Conclusion  :  Oh,  ye  unconverted  men,  must  I  read  the  text  as 
it  would  have  to  run  if  it  were  written  to  you  ?  "  It  is  high  time  that  you  should 
awake  out  of  sleep,  for  now  is  your  damnation  nearer  than  when  you  first  heard 
the  gospel  and  rejected  it."  God  grant  you  grace  to  take  heed  and  to  beheve  in  Christ. 
(C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  wakeful  Christian : — I.  The  sleep.  Sleep  is  a  state  which  can 
only  be  declared  of  Christians.  The  unconverted  are  dead,  and  require  not  an 
awakening,  but  a  resurrection.  What  does  this  injunction  betoken  ?  A  state  of — 1.  /^ 
Spiritual  apathy.  Sleep  implies  unconsciousness.  There  may  be  sublimities  around 
the  sleeper,  but  he  sees  them  not ;  harmonies,  but  he  hears  them  not ;  dangers,  but  he 
feels  them  not.  So  when  Christians  are  asleep  they  are  reduced  to  a  state  in  which 
the  religious  senses  are  untouched.  2.  Eeligious  inactivity.  There  is  a  spot  in  the 
Atlantic  called  the  Saragossa  Sea,  which  is  subject  to  long  calms,  and  is  covered 
with  a  thick,  entanghng  seaweed ;  and  nothing  of  all  he  has  to  encounter  on  the 
wide  ocean  fills  the  experienced  mariner  with  more  genuine  dread  than  to  be  caught 
in  the  meshes  of  this  region  of  dead  calm  and  entangling  weeds.  The  religious 
life  has  its  Saragossa  Sea,  in  which  individuals  and  Churches  too  often  lie 
becalmed  and  entangled  in  the  weeds  of   conventional   habits  and   formalism. 


584  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  zia 

8.  Dalliance  \nth  ain.  The  context  ahows  a  sad  state  of  things,  the  reason 
for  which  was  the  recent  conversion  of  the  Roman  Christiana  from  heathen* 
ism,  or  the  prevalence  of  Antinomianism.  And  while  there  is  not  now  "  the  same 
excess  of  riot,"  still  there  is  considerable  proneness  to  conform  to  the  customs 
of  irreUgioos  people  in  pleasure.  II.  The  call  to  awake.  This  state  of  wake- 
fulness is  a  condition  the  very  opposite  of  the  sleep  referred  to.  It  means,  there- 
fore— 1.  Deep,  intense  religious  consciousness.  2.  Active,  self-denying  labour.  3. 
The  mortifying  of  the  flesh,  and  a  clear,  unmistakable  protest  against  the  evil 
ways  of  the  world.  HI.  Thb  beasons  job  wakefulness.  1.  The  nature  of  the 
Christian  profession.  "  Let  us  put  on  the  armour  of  light."  Here  the  Christian  ia 
presented  to  us  as  a  soldier.  One  of  the  duties  of  his  life,  therefore,  is  to  fight.  A 
work  demanding  real,  earnest  care  and  watchfulness,  and  calculated  to  draw  forth 
our  utmost  energies.  A  drowsy  soldier  is  a  contradiction.  It  follows,  then,  from 
this  symbol,  that  the  Christian  should  not  be  asleep.  We  are  now  in  the  midst  of 
the  fray ;  let  us,  then,  be  awake,  "  putting  on  the  armour  of  light,"  which  alone 
will  secure  us  the  victory  in  the  conflict  with  darkness.  2.  The  closeness  of  the 
end.  "  For  now  is  our  salvation  nearer,"  &o.  As  the  days  slip  from  our  grasp,  each 
remaining  moment  should  become  more  intensely  precious  to  us.  3.  The  character 
of  the  times.  '•  Knowing  the  time."  Never  did  any  age  since  the  establishment  of 
Christianity  possess  such  claims  upon  the  earnest,  sober  attention  of  the  Church  as 
the  present.  Our  age  is  one  eminent  for — (1)  Its  secular  activities  in  the  direction 
of  commerce,  science,  and  education.  Shall  the  Church  alone  remain  quiescent  in 
the  midst  of  this  torrent  of  activity  ?  It  is  here,  as  it  often  is  with  travellers  by 
train,  which,  by  its  very  swiftness,  lulls  to  sleep,  but  as  it  slackens  speed  the 
sleeper  wakens  up  and  looks  around.  So  the  rate  at  which  the  train  of  secular 
pursuits  hurries  Christians  along  and  lulls  them  into  a  state  of  obliviousness  of 
spiritual  things.  Let  us  be  as  intrepid  in  the  things  of  God  as  we  are  in  those  of 
our  own.  (2)  Its  activity  in  the  dissemination  of  error.  The  two  grand  errors  of 
the  age  are  priestism  and  scepticism — twin  sisters,  though  not  on  very  amicable 
terms  with  each  other.  (3)  Its  abounding  wickedness.  Here,  then,  is  a  powerful 
reason  for  wakefulness.  A  living  Church  is  the  grand  antidote  to  all  the  evils  inci- 
dental to  our  civilisation.  It  is  its  duty  pre-eminently  to  seek  to  leaven  this  civili- 
aation.  (A.  J.  Parry.)  The  sUeper  arcmsed  : — I.  The  sinneb'b  bleep.  A  state 
of — 1.  Forgetfulness.  2.  Misapprehension.  3.  Fancied  security.  4.  Fleshly 
delight.  II.  The  exhortation.  It  implies — 1.  An  altered  view  of  things.  2. 
Voluntary  effort.  3.  Energy.  4.  Compliance  with  terms.  III.  The  season.  1. 
Life  is  fleeting.  2.  Judgment  is  near.  3.  God  is  calling.  {W.  W.  Wythe.) 
Sleep  : — And  as  it  was  with  Jonah,  so  it  is  now  with  many  a  soul.  In  the  midst  of 
the  waves  and  storms  of  life,  with  only  a  short  step  between  them  and  the  world  to 
come,  they  are  sleeping.  They  are  wide  aw£ike  as  far  as  their  temporal  needs  and 
pleasures  are  concerned,  but  they  are  asleep  to  aU  spiritual  interests.  When  we 
are  asleep  we  are — I.  In  dabeness.  The  fairest  sights  may  be  around  as,  but,  so 
long  as  we  are  asleep,  for  us  they  do  not  exist.  And  so  it  is,  sometimes,  in  spiritual 
sleep.  This  world  in  which  we  live  is  instinct  with  the  life  of  God.  There  is  not 
a  hill  or  valley,  a  wind  or  storm,  a  bird  or  beast,  a  leaf  or  flower,  bat  has  something 
to  say  to  us  of  God.  And  yet  there  are  some  who  say,  "  There  is  no  God  " :  they 
are  sleeping  the  death  of  infidelity.  Now,  though  it  is  not  probable  that  any  of  you 
are  sleeping  this  sleep  of  darkness,  yet  drowsiness  generally  comes  before  sleep. 
Take  care,  then,  you  do  not  give  way  to  the  drowsiness  that  precedes  the  slumber 
of  infidelity.  Do  not  encourage  infidel  thoughts.  Beware  of  the  beginnings  of 
doubts.  As  often  as  doubt  assails  you,  fly  in  prayer  to  God  for  the  strengthening 
of  your  faith.  II.  Doing  nothing.  A  sleeping  man  is  no  better  than  a  dead  man, 
80  far  as  present  action  is  concerned.  And  if  the  soul's  activity  is  intercourse  with 
God,  and  work  for  God,  is  not  that  soul  asleep  that  does  not  care  to  speak  to  God, 
to  work  for  God  ?  Is  it  not  wonderful  that  God  bears  with  our  indifference  ?  He 
is  not  indifferent  towards  us.  Shall  we,  then,  dare  any  longer  to  sleep  away  our 
lives  in  inactivity  ?  III.  Sometimes  dbeam,  and  then  we  live  amidst  fancy  forms. 
And  it  is  possible  to  sleep  spiritually  the  sleep  of  delusion.  1.  Formalism  is  the 
Bleep  of  delusion.  If  we  fancy  that  by  the  punctual  performance  of  the  outward 
duties  of  religion  we  can  save  our  souls,  one  day  we  shall  wake  up  to  find  ourselves 
the  victims  of  a  delusion.  There  is  only  One  who  can  save  us — Christ  ;  and  unlesa 
we  take  Him  to  be  our  Saviour,  Church  ordinances  avail  us  nothing.  2.  Self- 
righteousness  is  the  sleep  of  delusion.  How  many  fancy  that  it  must  be  well  with 
them,  because  once  they  were  "  converted."    To  rely  on  anything  short  of  present 


CMAP.  xni.]  ROMANS,  685 

perseverance  aloog  the  road  which  God  has  pointed  ont  to  as,  is  to  trust  to  a  dela- 
Bion.    IV.  SoHBTniBS  people  abb  pxtt  to  sucep,  by  means  of  some  drag.    This 
sleep,  however,  has  not  the  restfolness  of  natural  sleep.    And  it  is  possible  to  drug 
the  soul  to  seeming  sleep  by  deliberate  perseverance  in  any  known  sin.    The  con- 
science becomes  hardened,  and  all  for  a  time  seems  peace.  But  it  is  not  true  peace. 
"  There  is  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked."     (J.  Beeby.)         The  peril  of 
Bleep : — A  short  time  ago  a  locomotive  engine  was  speeding  along  the  North- 
west line,  whilst  the  two  men  who  were  in  it  lay  fast  asleep.    A  sharp-eyed  signal- 
man, from  his  look-out,  was  alert  enough  to  see  how  matters  stood,  and  without  a 
moment's  delay  telegraphed  in  advance  to  lay  a  fog-signal  on  the  line,  that  the 
detonation  might  rouse  the  sleepers.    Happily,  it  was  done  in  time ;  and  startled 
from  what  might  have  been  a  fatal  slumber,  the  men  shut  off  steam,  reversed  the 
engine,  and  averted  a  terrible  calamity.     It  is  no  breach  of  charity  to  suspect  that 
some  of  you  are  hasting  on  to  destruction,  but  know  it  not,  for  your  conscience  ia 
asleep  ;  and  I  would  lay  a  fog-signal  on  the  line  that,  ere  you  pass  another  mile, 
the  crashing  sound  may  rouse  you  to  your  danger,  as  you  hear  the  voice  of  eternal 
truth  declaring,  •'  If  ye  live  after  the  flesh,  ye  shall  die  !  "     {T.  Davidson.)    Beware  ^ 
of  sleeping  .—John  Bunyan  tells  us  "  that  when  Hopeful  came  to  a  certain  country, 
he  began  to  be  very  dull  and  heavy  of  sleep.    Wherefore  he  said,  •  Let  us  lie  down 
here  and  take  one  nap.'    '  By  no  means,'  said  the  other,  '  lest  sleeping,  we  wake  no 
more.'    'Why,  my  brother?    Sleep  is  sweet  to  the  labouring  man;  we  may  be 
refreshed  if  we  take  a  nap.'    •  Do  you  not  remember,'  said  the  other,  *  that  one  of 
the  shepherds  bid  us  beware  of  the  Enchanted  Ground?     He  meant  by  that, 
that  we  should  beware  of  sleeping.' "    "  Therefore  let  us  not  sleep,  as  do  others ; 
but  let  us  watch  and  be  sober."    Slumbering  and  backsliding  are  closely  allied. 
The  breaking  day  admonishes  us — 1.  To  awake  from  sleep.    2.  To  contemplate  the 
Bun  of  salvation.    3.  To  cleanse  ourselves  from  the  works  of  darkness.    4.  To  put 
on  the  clothing  of  light.     5.  To  betake  ourselves  to  diligence  and  duty.      (J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)      The  dawn  of  the  great  day  .-—St.  Paul  is  here  the  watchman  of  the  Church. 
Standing  between  night  and  day,  he  proclaims  "  the  time,"  and  announces  the  end 
of  darkness  and  the  approach  of  light.    His  appeal  regards  the  Church  as  being 
in  a  midway  state  between  perfect  night  and  perfect  day.  The  words  "  pilgrims  "  of 
"the  dawn  "  borrowed  from  St.  Peter  help  us  to  understand  Paul.    Let  us  trace  the 
effect  of  this  keynote  in  the  interpretation  of  the  passage.    The  dawn  proclaims  the 
end  of  night ;  it  is  only  the  mingling  of  darkness  and  light ;  but  it  is  the  sure  pro- 
mise of  a  day  that  must  reach  its  perfection,  and  upon  which  the  shadows  of  even- 
ing shall  never  falL     I.  Knowino  the  time.    1.  The  word  carries  us  back  to  our 
Lord's  proclamation  of  the  hour  when  the  night  of  death  that  had  rested  on  man- 
kind had  ended,  and  the  light  of  eternal  life  began  (John  v.  25).    Doubtless  the 
darkness  that  preceded  Christ's  advent  was  not  perfect  night.     In  the  deepest 
midnight  of  heathenism  some  rays  of  truth  and  virtue  struggled  with  the  darkness, 
and  over  one  favoured  land  the  moon  and  the  stars  shone  brightly.    The  earlier 
revelation  was  "  a  light  shining  in  a  dark  place  until  the  day  should  dawn."     But 
Christ  was  Himself  the  dawn  and  the  morning  star  of  His  own  coming  day.    And 
tins  day — the  new  era — is  the  time  Christians  know.    2.  Knowing  the  time  means 
experimental  acquaintance  with  its  privileges  and  responsibilities.    This  knowledge 
is  attained  (Eph.  v.  14)  when  the  Great  Awakener  pours  the  light  of  conviction  into 
the  chambers  where  sinners  sleep  the  sleep  of  death,  and  gives  them  the  light  of 
hfo.    (1)  They  sleep  no  more.      They  have  been  plunged  into  the  waters  of  a 
spiritual  baptism  which  has  awakened  and  invigorated  them  to  the  utmost,  and 
there  is  an  expectation  in  the  morning  air  that  keeps  every  thought  alert,  and 
inspires  activity — viz.,  of  Him  who  shall  come  in  the  broadening  day.     (2)  The 
guilty  wakefulness  of  the  night  is  also  past.  The  morning  reveals  the  hidden  things 
of  night  and  makes  them  hateful.     They  have  "  cast  off  the  works  of  darkness," 
detesting  the  habiliments  of  night  in  which  they  slept  and  sinned.     3.  So  far  we 
have  caught  the  appeal  as  expressing  complete  severance  between  night  and  day. 
The  light  is  divided  from  the  darkness  absolately.     In  the  New  Testament  two 
states,  and  only  two,   are  distinguished :  there  are   ' '  children   of  night  "   and 
"  children  of  the  day."    But  the  peculiarity  of  this  passage  is  that  it  gives  promi- 
nence to  a  certain  interval  of  transition,  which  reality  requires  and  the  Scripture 
never  denies.    The  Christian  state  is  at  the  best,  in  many  respects,  no  better 
than  the   dawn.     II.  The  niqht  is  onlt  "fab  spent"  and  the  day  onlt  "at 
HAND."    1.  It  might  be  supposed  from  the  watchman's  cry  that  the  whole  band  wer« 
slumbering,  or  at  least  only  half  awake.    But  the  language  is  only  general  to  find 


68«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xni 

oat  the  individual.  There  is  from  age  to  age  a  faithful  saccession  of  watchers  and 
holy  ones,  and  when  the  Bridegroom  shall  approach  all  will  be  wakeful  enough ; 
but  till  then  the  pilgrim  company  shall  never  lack  those  who  move  "  like  men  Uiat 
dream."  And  it  is  the  duty  of  all  who  know  the  time  to  echo  the  apostle's  cry. 
And  here  is  the  everlasting  argument,  "  It  is  high  time  .  ,  .  walk  honestly  as  ii> 
the  day. "  2.  There  is  danger  inseparable  from  the  dawn.  And  when  the  apostle 
says,  •'  Put  on  the  armour  of  light,"  he  suggests  the  whole  mystery  of  evil  that  wars 
against  the  pilgrims  of  the  dawn.  The  powers  of  darkness  are  awakened  into  more 
malignant  activity  by  the  morning  light.  Never  did  they  so  furiously  rage  as  they 
did  around  Him  who  ended  their  reign.  But  He  did  not  banish  them,  and  so  they 
haunt  the  travellers.  They  cannot  retard  the  day,  but  they  make  its  progress  a 
perpetual  contest,  so  unlike  the  progress  of  the  natural  day  in  which  dawn  glows 
into  morning,  and  morning  melts  into  midday,  &c.  Here  the  victory  is  the  result 
of  a  desperate  and  unremitting  warfare.  That  victory  will  be  the  perfect  light  of 
holiness ;  the  "  armour  "  that  insures  the  victory  is  '*  light. "  3.  It  is  characteristic 
of  this  midway  state  that  the  salvation  of  the  Christian  company  is  regarded  as 
incomplete.  The  perfect  day  will  bring  a  full  salvation,  but  that  is  only  "  nearer 
than  when  we  believed."  The  Church  is  only  in  the  dawn  of  the  day  of  redemption. 
That  day  will  be  perfect  when  Christ  shall  come  "  without  sin  unto  salvation." 
in.  The  dawn  is  the  promise  of  the  coshno  day.  1.  Ejiowing  the  time.  The 
Church  is  appealed  to  as  exercising  a  firm  faith  in  the  gradual  consummation  of  the 
dawn  into  day.  The  words  remind  these  early  travellers  of  the  great  secret  that 
the  Lord  is  at  hand,  bringing  with  Him  all  that  their  hope  can  conceive.  But  His 
coming  will  be  to  His  Church  the  regular  and  peaceful  consummation  of  a  day 
'  already  begun.  To  the  ungodly  a  catastrophe,  to  slumbering  Christians  a  sore  amaze- 
ment, it  will  be  to  those  who  '•  wait  for  His  appearing  "  what  day  is  to  the  traveller 
who  waits  for  the  morning.  2.  But  knowing  the  time  does  not  signify  any  precise 
knowledge  of  its  future  limits.  We  are  shut  up  to  faith,  which  must  in  all  things 
rule  until  the  vision  of  Christ  shall  begin  the  reign  of  sight.  "  All  things  continue 
as  they  were  "  is  the  cry  of  unbelief.  "  Lo  here  is  the  promise  of  His  coming,  or 
lo  there  "  is  the  cry  of  impatient  credulity.  But  simple  faith  waits  on  in  hope  that 
makes  no  calculation.  Our  Lord  may  brighten  any  hour—  from  cock-crowing  to 
the  third  hour  and  the  sixth — into  perfect  day.  3.  This  being  the  common  prospect 
it  is  not  wonderful  that  the  Christian  state  is  that  of  joyful  hope.  Nothing  is  more 
beautiful  and  more  symbolical  of  eager  expectation  than  the  dawn.  True  the 
individual  Christian  has  cares,  conflicts,  fears  to  moderate  his  joy.  But  he  is  to 
look  over  all  these  lower  glooms  to  the  brighter  horizon  into  which  these  things 
merge.  He  must  lose  his  particular  sorrow  in  the  general  joy.  He  is  one  of  the 
company  that  shall  receive  the  Lord.  4.  But  the  apostle  reserves  for  the  last  his 
solemn  exhortation  to  prepare.  "  The  day  is  at  hand,"  and  the  pilgrims  are 
bidden  to  anticipate  it  in  the  holy  decorum  of  their  lives,  and  to  be  clothed 
with  the  only  garment  worthy  of  the  day,  Christ  Himself.  {W.  B.  Pope,  D.D.) 
Desidia  and  Alacritas  : — It  is  a  merciful  arrangement  that  we  live  by  days,  and  are 
able  to  begin  afresh  every  twenty-four  hours.  The  Christian  life  is  an  awaking — a 
dressing ;  and  each  morning's  waking  and  dressing  may  recall  to  us  its  nature. 
Look  at  these  verses  carefully  and  you  will  see  the  writer's  meaning,  though,  with 
a  true  delicacy,  he  only  hints  at  it.  When  we  rise  from  our  beds  we  are  dishevelled, 
unpresentable :  we  cannot  get  about  the  duties  of  the  day  until  we  have  put  off  the 
dress  of  the  night,  until  we  have  washed  and  combed  ourselves,  and  put  on  a  more 
suitable  attire.  Thus  there  is  a  surprising  difference,  in  any  nice  and  well-regulated 
person,  between  the  night  and  the  day  appearance.  The  word  "  honestly  "  should 
rather  be  "  decently,"  for  it  just  expresses  this  difference.  Here  are  certain  speci- 
men-words  which  describe  that  nocturnal  condition  of  the  soul.  The  question  hits 
ns  hard  when  we  attempt  to  interpret  them  fairly.  First,  revellings  and  drunken- 
ness. This  is  not  the  boozing  of  the  poor,  who  drink  to  forget  their  poverty  and 
benumb  their  pain.  It  is  the  self-indulgence  of  the  well-to-do,  of  good  food,  the 
hours  spent  over  the  pot  or  the  decanter.  It  is  the  unhealtliy  occupation  with 
gaieties  which  prevent  us  from  putting  on  Christ  Jesus.  Then  chamberings  and 
wantonness.  These  are  the  thoughts  of  our  chambers,  the  wanton  imagination  on 
our  beds,  the  loose  fancies,  the  rein  flung  on  the  neck  of  passion.  They  are  more 
important  to  mention  than  the  overt  acts  of  vice,  for  they  are  the  letting-out  of 
waters.  Given  these,  the  rest  will  follow.  These  are  "  the  provision  of  the  flesh  to 
fulfil  the  lusts  thereof  "  ;  they  are  the  steps  down  to  the  gates  of  death.  The  last 
pair,  strife  and  jealousy,  are  as  fatal  to  the  reclothing  in  the  Divine  garment,  Christ 


OBir.  zm.]  ROMANS.  687 

Jesns — as  truly  the  unseemly  dress  of  the  night — as  those  more  soandalous  faults 
which  axe  called  vices.  These  are  poisons  at  the  springs  of  life.  They  prohibit 
the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit.  These  three  couplets  of  evil  are  but  specimen-words 
— evil  is  manifold,  ubiquitous — but  they  help  us  to  answer  the  question,  Have  we 
put  off  this  "  garment  spotted  by  the  flesh  "  ?  It  was  this  searching  passage  that 
proved  the  turning-point  in  the  life  of  Augustine.  By  the  grace  of  God  it  may  fetch 
any  of  us  off  our  unhallowed  couch  and  clothe  us  in  the  raiment  of  the  day.  It 
was  at  Milan  where  the  troubled  spirit  had  come  to  seek  help  of  the  saintly  Ambrose. 
He  was  with  the  brother  Alypius  in  the  garden.  They  had  been  reading  the  Epistles 
of  Paul.  Augustine  rose  in  agitation  and  paced  up  and  down,  when  he  heard  a 
clear  child's  voice  singing  from  a  house  in  the  vicinity,  •'  Take  and  read,  take  and 
read. "  As  if  commanded  from  heaven  he  hastened  back  to  the  seat,  and  took  up 
the  book  which  they  had  been  reading  together.  There  was  this  verse  staring  him 
in  the  face.  The  Latin  is  "  Not  in  feasts  and  tipphngs,  not  in  chambers  and 
immodesties,  not  in  contention  and  emulation ;  but  put  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  do  not  make  provision  for  the  flesh  in  concupiscence."  The  entrance  of  the 
Word  gave  light.  Presently,  Alypius  brought  Augustine  to  Monica  to  tell  her  that 
the  mother's  prayer  was  answered.  But  assuming  that  we  are  in  the  great  cardinal 
sense  awakened  and  reclothed,  still  there  remains  the  daily  renewal  of  it,  the 
parable  of  our  diurnal  round.  Christ  is  a  perfect  garment,  but  it  is  necessary  to  put 
Him  on  afresh,  readjust,  and  with  loving  care  fit  Him  on,  as  the  mornings  come 
round.  But  I  can  tell  you  better  about  this  if  I  draw  the  portraits  of  two  friends  of 
mine.  Their  names  are  Desidia  and  Alacritas.  The  one  dreams  she  is  awake ;  the 
other  is  awake.  Desidia  is  not  at  all  uncomely,  but  for  a  certain  lethargic  look  in 
her  eye  and  a  drag  in  her  gait.  She  begins  the  day  with  a  very  ample  attention  to 
her  person.  The  time  she  spends  on  her  hair-dressing  and  her  toilet  would  make 
three  of  her  devotions,  Sundays  included.  And  her  heart  is  in  it,  which  I  can  hardly 
say  about  her  devotions.  Desidia  has  nothing  particular  to  do,  which  is  fortunate, 
for  she  never  has  time  to  do  anything.  I  asked  her  once  to  undertake  some  work 
for  her  Saviour,  which  she  refused  so  flatly  that  I  ventured  to  inquire  if  He  were 
her  Saviour.  Alacritas,  on  the  other  hand,  always  fills  me  with  admiration ;  and 
I  would  gladly  change  my  sex  to  be  like  her.  She  is  never  in  a  hurry,  and  yet  is 
always  moving.  She  has  so  much  merriment  and  gaiety  of  heart,  that  grave,  re- 
ligious folk  at  first  take  exception  to  her,  and  question  whether  a  true  Christian 
could  ever  have  so  exchanged  the  spirit  of  heaviness  for  the  garment  of  praise.  But 
I  chance  to  know  that  this  sunshine  comes  from  prayer,  and  it  is  like  a  good  medi- 
cine in  the  house.  I  should  have  thonght  it  would  take  twice  as  long  to  get  oneself 
up  so  charmingly  as  Alacritas  does,  I  mean  as  compared  with  the  artificial  fripperies 
of  Desidia.  Yet  Alacritas  gets  a  good  hour  for  prayer  before  breakfast ;  she  does  a 
great  deal  of  household  work,  she  visits  the  poor,  and  her  needle  is  busy  for  them ; 
she  never  seems  to  miss  a  service  at  the  church.  And  yet  she  reads  more  good 
literature  in  a  month  than  Desidia  does  in  a  year.  Desidia  and  others  of  her  family 
pity  Alacritas  because  she  has  little  or  nothing  to  do  with  plays  and  dances.  How 
dull  it  must  be  for  her,  they  sayl  {R.  F.  Horton,  D.D.)  Dressing  in  the 
morning : — It  is  a  great  mistake  for  a  man  not  to  know  the  times  in  which 
he  lives,  and  how  to  act  in  them ;  and  when  he  does  not  know  the  time  as  to 
the  day  of  his  own  life,  so  as  to  apply  his  heart  unto  wisdom.  What  is  the  time  oi 
day  with  the  Christian  ?  It  is  no  longer  the  dead  of  the  night,  "  the  day  is  at  hand." 
A  little  while  ago  the  dense  darkness  of  ignorance  was  about  us ;  but  the  gospel  has 
made  us  light  in  the  Lord.  The  day-star  is  shining  upon  us,  and  we  look  for  a 
perfect  day.  It  is  not  as  yet  full  day  with  us.  The  sun  has  risen,  but  it  is  not  yet 
noon.  Note — I.  The  morning  call.  1.  Awake — "  It  is  high  time  to  awake  out  of 
sleep."  (1)  Arise  from  the  sleep  of  inaction.  Do  not  let  your  religion  consist  in 
receiving  all  and  doing  nothing.  (2)  Leave  also  all  lethargy  behind  you.  At  night 
a  man  may  yawn  and  stretch  himself ;  but  when  the  morning  comes  he  should  be 
brisk,  for  the  day  will  be  none  too  long.  (3)  Have  done  with  dreaming.  You  who 
are  not  of  the  night  must  not  dote  on  the  world's  shadows,  but  look  for  eternal 
realities.  2.  Cast  off  your  night  clothes.  "  Cast  off  the  works  of  darkness."  The 
man  who  is  just  awakened  shakes  off  his  bed  clothes  and  leaves  them.  The  cover 
let  of  night  is  not  our  covering  by  day.  Sins  and  foUies  are  to  be  cast  off  when  we 
put  on  the  garments  of  light.  I  have  known  a  man  profess  to  be  converted,  but  he 
has  merely  put  religion  over  his  old  character.  This  will  never  do  :  Christ  has  not 
come  to  save  you  in  but /rom  your  sins.  3.  Put  on  your  morning  dress.  "Let  us 
put  on  the  armour  of  light. "    Does  not  this  warn  us  that  a  day  of  battle  is  coming  ? 


588  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  xm. 

Be  wise,  then,  and  dress  according  to  what  yon  will  meet  with  daring  the  day. 
Young  converts  think  that  they  have  got  to  heaven,  or  very  near  it ;  bat  the  tin» 
is  not  yet.  Yoa  are  in  an  enemy's  country :  put  on  the  armour  of  light.  Perhaps  before 
yoa  get  down  to  breakfast  an  arrow  will  be  shot  at  you  by  the  great  enemy.  Tour 
foes  may  be  found  in  your  own  household,  and  they  may  wound  you  at  your  own 
table.  The  Greek  word,  however,  may  be  understood  to  signify  not  only  armour, 
but  such  garments  as  are  fitted  and  suitable  for  the  day's  work.  These  should  be 
pat  on  at  once,  and  our  soul  should  be  dressed  for  service.  Some  people  are  too 
fine  to  do  real  service  for  the  Lord.  When  the  Duke  of  Wellington  asked  one  of 
our  soldiers  how  he  would  like  to  be  dressed  if  he  had  to  fight  the  battle  of  Waterloo 
again,  he  answered  that  he  should  like  to  be  in  his  shirt  sleeves.  4.  Walk  forth 
and  behave  as  in  the  light.  '*Let  as  walk  honestly,  as  in  the  day,"  let  our 
demeanour  be  such  as  becomes  daylight.  How  should  a  child  of  light  conduct 
himself  ?  "  Honestly  "  may  mean  decently,  with  decorum  and  dignity.  In  the 
middle  of  the  night,  if  yoa  have  to  go  about  the  house,  you  are  not  particular  as  to 
how  you  are  dressed ;  but  you  do  not  go  out  to  your  business  slip-shod,  but  arrayed 
according  to  your  station.  Let  it  be  so  with  you  spiritually :  hoUness  is  the  highest 
decency,  the  most  becoming  apparel.  5.  Renounce  the  deeds  of  darkness.  If  we 
have  put  on  the  garments  of  light,  it  behoves  us  to  have  done  with  the  things  that 
belong  to  the  night.  (1)  Sensuality,  "  rioting  and  drunkenness."  If  a  drinking 
bout  is  held  it  is  usually  at  night.  (2)  Impurity,  "  not  in  chambering  and  wanton- 
ness." It  is  an  awful  thing  when  a  man  calls  himself  by  the  name  of  Christian, 
and  yet  can  be  unchaste  in  conversation,  lascivious  in  spirit,  wicked  in  life.  (3) 
Passion,  '•  strife  and  envying."  Brawls  are  for  the  night.  U.  Thb  uoBioNa  oospel. 
"  Put  ye  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  In  Christ  there  is — 1.  Covering  for  nakedness. 
There  is  in  Him  a  complete  and  suitable  apparel  for  thy  soul,  by  which  every 
blemish  and  defilement  shall  be  put  out  of  sight.  2.  A  garment  suitable  for  every- 
day work.  All  the  power  to  be  holy,  forgiving,  heroic,  enthusiastic  in  the  service 
of  God,  comes  through  Christ  when  we  are  in  Him.  3.  Apparel  for  dignity.  God 
Himself  asks  no  purer  or  more  acceptable  array.  A  seraph  wears  nothing  but 
created  brightness,  but  a  child  of  God  clothed  in  Christ  wears  uncreated  splendour. 
4.  Armour  for  defence.  The  man  that  lives  as  Christ  would  live,  is  thereby  made 
impervious  to  the  shafts  of  the  enemy.  5.  Raiment  for  all  emergencies.  This 
garment  will  never  wax  old ;  it  will  last  you  all  the  desert  through,  and  what  is 
more,  it  is  suitable  for  Canaan,  and  you  shall  keep  it  on  for  ever.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Present  and  future : — I.  Pbeseni  state.  Let  us  think  how  matters  stand,  and 
mend  our  ways.  1.  We  have  time,  i.e.,  season;  a  particular  opportunity  for  pre- 
paration. Time  is  a  wonderful  idea.  Compared  with  eternity  it  is  but  a  speck  in 
the  heavens,  a  grain  of  sand  on  the  shore,  and  yet  it  has  given  birth  to  creation,  and 
its  cycles  have  brought  wondrous  revelations.  The  battlefield  of  good  and  evil  is 
here.  Time  reached  its  majority  when  the  "  fulness  of  time  "  came.  "  Millions  of 
money  for  an  inch  of  time,"  cried  Queen  Elizabeth  on  her  death-bed.  The  bid  was 
too  low.  Like  Cassandra,  there  was  a  warning  in  the  voice.  The  woman  in  despair 
of  her  soul  said,  "  Call  back  time  again,  then  there  may  be  a  hope  for  me :  but  time 
is  gone  for  ever !  "  "  Take  time  by  the  forelock."  2.  We  are  too  indifferent  to  the 
value  of  time.  We  turn  the  day  into  night  by  our  inactivity,  and  we  sleep  when  we 
ought  to  work.  The  night  means  our  indifference  to  the  illumination  of  the  Word 
and  Spirit.  We  see  darkly  through  a  glass.  When  the  final  day  breaks,  we  shall 
wonder  at  the  beauties  we  might  have  seen  before.  The  boy  who  was  bom  blind 
was  cured.  Some  time  after  the  operation  he  was  led  out  of  the  dark  room,  and 
the  shade  lifted.  He  exclaimed,  ••  Why  didn't  you  tell  me  that  the  earth  was  so 
beautiful?  "  When  we  see  Jesus  as  He  is,  we  shall  put  some  such  question.  Sleep 
indicates  inactivity  to  make  our  election  sure.  We  are  like  somnambulists,  walking 
among  great  realities  without  knowing  it.  8.  Nevertheless  there  are  hopeful  signs. 
Two  words  are  used  in  contrast  to  the  above — believed  and  nearer.  There  is  faith, 
we  have  believed  in  Jesus.  By  prayer  we  have  advanced  some  steps.  Columbus 
and  his  men  smelled  the  breeze  before  they  saw  the  land.  We  have  a  good 
hope  through  grace.  H.  Future  expectation.  That  is  "  the  end  of  your  faith, 
even  the  salvation  of  your  souls."  1.  Freedom  from  sin.  2.  Beyond  care  and 
anxiety.  Providence  to-day  has  its  dark  days,  but  there  perpetual  light.  No  tears 
shall  be  shed,  for  no  sorrow  shall  be  felt.  3.  In  possession  of  immortality.  Away 
with  carelessness,  and  let  us  be  earnest — "  Work,  for  the  night  is  coming,"  <feo. 
{Weekly  Pidpit.)  Preparation  for  Christ's  coming  : — I.  A  solemn  besponsibilitt. 
**  Knowing  the  time."    Ignorance  is  a  cause  of  sin,  and  is  sometimes  a  just  excose 


COUP,  xm.]  ROMANS.  589 

for  it.  A  blind  man  may  fall  into  a  pit ;  a  sleeper  cannot  be  blamed  for  his  sleep. 
But  it  is  different  with  these  spiritaal  slnmberers.  The  watohman's  cry  resounds 
(1  Thess.  ▼.  1-6).  Taught  from  earliest  infancy,  instraoted  in  schools,  with  God's 
Word  open  and  preached,  what  can  we  urge  as  an  excnse  for  indifference?  II.  A 
ooNnmoN  OF  damoeb.  "  It  is  high  time  to  awake  out  of  sleep."  This  sleep — 1.  Is 
an  infataation  of  Satan.  He  lulls  the  soul  into  false  security.  2.  C!omes  from  the 
weakness  of  our  nature.  Persons  in  bad  health  often  sleep  much.  8.  Arises  from 
our  own  sloth.  Like  a  person  sleeping  in  a  house  on  fire,  unless  the  deadly  charm 
is  broken,  we  must  be  consumed.  IIL  An  ttbgent  outt.  "  To  awake  out  of  sleep." 
The  cry  of  the  gospel  trumpet  is  "  Awake  I  "  As  the  captain  said  to  Jonah, "  What 
meanest  thou,  0  sleeper?  "  so  the  Holy  Spirit  says  to  the  sinner.    We  have  here — 

1.  Life  depending  on  exertion.  How  many  a  man  has  saved  his  life,  home,  repu- 
tation,  by  energy!  It  is  so  with  eternal  life.  2.  Exertion  depending  on  self- 
determination.  It  is  for  us  to  wake,  and  to  do  so  demands  an  effort.  IV.  A 
BOLBUN  uoTivB.  "  Now  is  our  salvation  nearer."  This  may  mean — 1.  The  advance 
toward  final  consummation.  Every  moment  brings  us  closer  to  the  approach  of 
judgment — that  day  which  to  the  believer  is  the  day  of  salvation.  Each  throb  of 
the  heart  and  each  beat  of  the  pulse  is  the  requiem  of  a  departed  moment.  2.  The 
accumulation  of  privileges.  When  the  apostle  wrote,  the  good  news  had  advanced. 
It  was  easier  to  awake  and  believe.  And  if  religion  had  advanced  in  those  early  days, 
what  is  it  now  ?  Surely,  salvation  is  nearer  now ;  it  is  about  us,  in  our  midst. 
Will  you  not  awake  and  enter  into  the  glorious  rest  of  the  Son  of  God  ?  (P. 
Thomas,  D.D.)  The  earthly  and  tJ^'heaverdy  ttate  of  the  good : — I.  Thebe  is  a  vast 
OONTBAST  BETWEEN  THE  TWO.  1.  Here  salvatiou  is  m  process,  there  in  perfection. 
"Now  is  salvation  nearer."  2.  Here  existence  is  night,  there  day.  Life  before 
death  is  night,  suggestive  of  imperceptibility.  The  Christian  sees  "  through  a  glass 
darkly  "  now.  His  life  after  death  is  "  day."  Death  opens  the  eyes  on  a  bright 
universe.  II.  The  eabthly  state  is  BAPinLy  expibino,  the  heavenly  is  about  to 
DAWN.  "  The  night  is  far  spent,  the  day  is  at  hand."  Whilst  this  is  true,  even  of 
the  youngest  Christian,  it  is  pre-eminently  true  of  those  who  are  far  advanced  in 
life.    III.  The  sxpiBiNa  of  the  eabthly,  and  the  appboaoh  of  the  heavenly,  abb 

A  POWEBFUL  ABOUlfENT  FOB  SPIRITUAL   EABNEBTNESS.       "  KuOWing  the   time,  that   HOW 

it  is  high  time  to  awake  out  of  sleep."  1.  The  work  we  have  to  do  is  most  urgent. 
(1)  The  renunciation  of  all  evil.  "Cast  off  the  works  of  darkness."  Ignorance, 
crime,  Ac.  (2)  The  adoption  of  sJl  good.  "  Put  on  the  armour  of  light"  (Eph.vi. 
2-17).  2.  The  time  for  accomplishing  it  is  rapidly  contracting.  Let  us  awake 
therefore.  The  lost  years  of  your  existence,  the  interests  of  truth,  the  value  of 
souls  calls  on  you  to  awake.  Sleep  not  on  the  shore  while  the  mighty  billows  of 
eternity  are  approaching.  {Ibid.)  The  need  of  special  exertion: — Consider — 1. 
The  time.  2.  Its  claims.  3.  Its  duties.  4.  Its  incitements.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
Sleeping  Christians: — I  have  lately  read  in  the  newspaper — I  am  sure  I  do  not 
know  whether  to  believe  that  it  is  true — an  account  of  a  youth  in  France,  twenty 

J'ears  of  age,  who  has  been  lying  sleeping  for  a  fortnight,  nourished  only  upon  a 
ittle  gruel  given  with  a  spoon,  and  that  he  was  in  the  same  state  a  year  ago  for 
nearly  a  month.  Whether  this  has  actually  occurred  to  anybody  or  not,  I  have 
known  many  oases  of  Christians  who  have  laid  like  that  spiritually.  ((7. 
H.  Spurgeon.)  Now  Is  our  salyation  nearer  than  when  we  believed.— 
The  nearness  of  salvation  a  motive  to  vigilance : — ^It  is  a  charge  which  has  been 
sometimes  brought  against  religion  that  it  cherishes  an  indolent  spirit,  and  that 
the  assurance  of  salvation  which  it  gives  tends  to  make  men  careless  about  further 
attainments  in  excellence.  Accusations  of  this  nature  are  easily  repelled  by 
exhibiting  the  spirit  of  the  gospel,  which  is  a  spirit  of  active  goodness,  by  a 
reference  to  many  of  its  precepts,  and  by  detailing  the  strenuous  efforts  of  its 
genuine  disciples  to  go  on  to  perfection.  I,  Let  us  attend  to  the  view  here  given 
4f  THE  PBiviLEOE  OF  GOOD  usN — "  Now  is  their  salvation  nearer  than  when  they 
believed."  1.  This  expression  intimates  that,  in  the  day  of  believing,  the  soul's 
connection  with  salvation  commences.  It  is  at  that  happy  season  that  a  man  is 
brought  from  a  state  of  condemnation  into  a  state  of  acceptance,  and  that  a 
principle  of  holiness  is  implanted  in  the  soul.  Then  the  man  begins  that  course 
which  terminates  in  everlasting  life.  The  distance  between  faith  and  complete 
salvation  has  been  in  some  instances  short.  Quickly  has  the  perfection  of  glory 
followed  the  formation  of  grace,  but  in  other  cases  there  art  many  years  betwixt 
them.  It  belongs  to  Him  to  regulate  this  who  is  the  Author  and  the  Finisher  of  faith. 

2.  It  is  intimated  that  at  death  the  believer's  salvation  is  completed.    3.  Chris- 


590  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [obap.  zm. 

tians  advanced  in  life  are  warranted  to  conclude  that  their  salvation  is  very  near. 
How  happily  is  this  consideration  adapted  to  lighten  the  infirmities  of  old  age  I 
"Lift  up  your  heads  with  joy,  for  your  redemption  draweth  nigh."  IL  Let  us 
attend  to  the  view  which  is  here  given  of  the  duty  beqdibed  op  them.  1.  It  inti- 
mates that  saints  sometimes  fall  into  a  state  of  indolence  and  carelessness.  How 
cold  and  stupid  are  the  hearts  of  saints  in  such  circumstances  when  they  engage  in 
prayer  1  2.  The  text  intimates  that  Christians  ought  to  rouse  themselves  up  to 
vigilance  and  activity.  Meditation,  casual  and  unsettled,  must  give  place  to  eager 
and  fixed  contemplation ;  and  vrith  the  feelings  of  a  heart  which  regards  Jesus 
Christ  as  all,  we  must  follow  hard  after  Him.  3.  It  intimates  that  the  consideration 
of  our  present  circumstances  will  show  us  the  necessity  of  exciting  ourselves  to 
this  vigilance  and  activity.  It  was  peculiarly  unsuitable  in  the  Romans  to  slumber, 
since  the  gospel  of  salvation  had  so  lately  arisen  on  them  with  healing  in  its  wings. 
Let  it  be  considered,  too,  that  the  present  is  a  time  marked  by  the  peculiar  activity 
of  some  in  the  cause  of  Christ.  Can  you  slumber  while  they  thus  hold  forth  the 
Word  of  life  ?  HI.  Let  us  now  consider  how  you  should  be  excited  to  this  vigilance 
and  activity  by  the  neaeness  of  toub  salvation.  1.  Here  the  appeal  may  be  made 
to  your  gratitude.  Think  what  God  hath  done  and  what  He  still  intends  to  do  for 
you.  2.  Consider  how  unsuitable  sloth  is  to  the  prospects  before  you.  You  are 
soon  to  associate  with  those  who  serve  God  day  and  night  in  His  temple ;  and  shall 
you  now  slumber  ?  3.  Consider  how  injurious  to  others  your  carelessness  and  sloth 
may  be.  If  you,  whose  age  and  attainments  show  that  your  salvation  is  so  near, 
slumber,  it  must  damp  the  ardour  of  the  young  disciple.  4.  Consider  how  detri- 
mental indolence  will  be  to  your  own  interest  and  happiness.  If  you  slumber  with 
salvation  so  near,  you  will  provoke  God  to  awaken  you  by  a  shock  dreadful  and  try- 
ing. There  is  another  view  which  may  be  taken  of  this  argument  which  may  add 
to  its  influence.  As  the  ship  which  is  within  a  few  hours'  sail  of  the  haven  has 
sometimes  been  driven  out  to  sea  to  struggle  for  weeks  with  winds  and  waves,  till 
the  crew  are  exhausted  with  hunger,  fear,  and  toil,  so  has  the  indolence  of  saints 
been  punished  by  a  prolonged  stay  in  this  scene  of  trouble,  instead  of  having  an 
entrance  ministered  to  them  abundantly  into  the  kingdom  of  the  Saviour.  Con- 
elusion:  1.  How  happy  are  they  who  have  obtained  precious  faith  through  the 
righteousness  of  God  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  I  2.  Let  saints  be  exhorted  to 
nse  every  means  of  excitement  to  this  holy  activity.  3.  Let  the  consideration  of 
the  nearness  of  salvation  reconcile  you  to  affliction  and  to  death.  4.  Let  the  young 
be  exhorted  to  activity  in  goodness  and  piety.  5.  Finally,  how  solemn  are  the 
lessons  suggested  by  this  subject  to  unconverted  men !  Salvation  is  far  from  the 
wicked ;  and  what  is  most  horrible,  ye  have  put  it  from  you,  and  judged  everlasting 
life  unworthy  of  your  acceptance.  {H.  Bel/rage,  D.D.)  Approaching  salvation : — It 
is  the  characteristic  and  the  privilege  of  man  that  he  lives  not  only  in  the  present,  but 
is  able  to  review  the  past,  and  anticipate  the  future.  This  faculty  is  connected  with 
his  moral  responsibility,  and  is  a  sign  of  his  immortal  existence.  That  he  very 
imperfectly  employs  it  is  a  painful  but  unquestionable  truth.  Our  contemplation 
is  directed  to — I.  An  intbrestino  febiod  in  the  past — •*  when  we  believed."  There 
are  few  persons  who  must  not  cherish  some  interesting  remembrances.  Some,  of 
course,  derive  more  excitement  from  the  past  than  others,  but  no  remembrances 
can  ever  possess  a  charm  to  be  named  with  this.  He  who  can  look  back  to  when 
he  believed,  looks  back  upon  a  period  of  unparalleled  moment  and  eternal  influence. 
••When  you  believed."  Think  of  that  event.  1.  In  the  agency  by  which  it  was 
accomplished.  Faith  did  not  arise  from  the  spontaneous  influence  of  your  own 
mind,  or  from  the  influence  of  others.  It  was  the  work  of  God  wrought  upon  you 
by  the  ministry  of  His  gospel,  the  private  admonition  of  a  friend,  the  perusal  of  His 
Word,  or  by  affliction.  But,  whatever  the  instrumentality,  faith  is  the  gift  of  God. 
2.  In  the  influences  by  which  it  was  attended.  Then  began  feelings  to  which  you 
were  before  strangers :  then  arose  penitence,  impelling  you  to  mourn  over  your  vile* 
ness :  love,  binding  you  in  firm  attachment  to  ffim  who  died  for  you :  hope,  irra- 
diating the  otherwise  darkened  future :  holiness,  beginning  the  grapd  process  by 
which  it  would  refine  every  faculty  by  assimilating  them  to  the  Divine  likerress. 
"  When  you  believed,"  old  things  passing  away  and  all  things  becoming  new.  3. 
In  the  privileges  to  which  it  introduced  you — pardon  and  reconciliation  with  God ; 
righteousness  and  full  acceptance  in  the  Beloved ;  liberty  from  the  tyranny  of  sin 
and  of  Satan,  adoption  into  the  Divine  family,  &o.  U.  An  infinite  blessino  which 
IB  VUTXTBK.  ••Our  salvation"  of  final  reward  and  happiness.  The  apostle  hera 
— L  Assumes  that  faith  has  an  established  connection  with  salvation.    Bevelatioa 


OHtf.  zm.]  ROMANS.  691 

unites  in  one  solemn  and  most  conolnBire  pledge,  th&t  having  throagh  grace  believed, 
and  being  hj  that  graoe  in  that  faith  preserved,  we  shall  enjoy  the  delights  which 
are  treasured  np  in  the  everlasting  kingdom.  Faith  is  the  first  step  in  the  pilgrim- 
•Age  which  leads  to  the  celesHal  rest ;  the  first  launch  in  the  voyage  which  wafts  to 
the  celestial  haven  ;  the  first  stroke  in  the  conflict  which  issues  in  celestial  triumphs. 
2.  Summons  Christiana  to  meditate  upon  their  salvation.  As  they  have  been 
directed  to  an  exercise  of  memory,  so  they  are  directed  to  an  exercise  of  anticipation. 
The  more  you  commune  with  the  time  when  you  believed,  the  more  also  you  will 
i^ommune  with  the  time  when  you  shall  be  saved.  Turn,  then,  as  from  the  bud  to 
the  flower,  from  the  root  to  the  tree,  from  the  babe  to  the  man,  from  the  faint  out- 
lines to  the  finished  picture,  from  the  first  tremulous  notes  of  the  music  to  the 
Bounding  of  the  full  harmony  of  the  spheres,  from  the  streaks  of  the  early  dawn  to 
the  splendour  of  the  meridian  day.  Think  of  your  coming  victory  over  the  last 
enemy,  of  the  flight  of  your  spirit  to  paradise,  of  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  of 
your  public  recognition  and  welcome  in  your  perfected  nature  by  the  Judge  before 
the  assembled  universe,  of  your  enjoyment  in  that  perfected  nature  of  heaven.  This 
is  your  salvation,  and  will  you  not  gladly  retire  from  the  vulgar  objects  of  this 
perishing  world,  and  ascending  to  the  summit  of  the  Delectable  Mountains,  look 
through  the  clear  azure  upon  the  fair  and  sublime  inheritance  which  is  reserved  for 
you  ?  3.  Urges  Christians  to  recognise  their  ow»  personal  advance  towards  salva- 
tion. Some  amongst  you  are  very  near  to  salvation  indeed.  Your  conversion  ia 
far  back  in  the  distance.  And  as  to  those  to  whom  the  probabilities  of  prolonged 
life  may  seem  strong,  how  can  they  tell  but  that  at  this  very  moment  they  may  be 
on  the  verge  ?  With  every  morning  dawn,  and  evening  shadow,  there  ought  to  be 
the  renewed  reflection,  "  Now  is  our  salvation  nearer  than  when  we  believed. "  III. 
The  PBAoncAL  results  which  a  Chkistian  reference  to  the  paep"  and  the  future 
MUST  leqitimatelt  SECURE.  There  ought  to  be — 1.  The  cultivation  of  Christian 
hohness.  To  secure  and  to  advance  in  holiness  was  the  apostle's  prominent  object. 
*'  Let  us,  therefore,  cast  off  the  works  of  darkness,"  Ac.  If  there  be  any  who  imagine 
that  the  prospects  indicated  may  lead  to  licentiousness,  let  them  receive  their  final 
refutation.  Those  who  are  entitled  to  anticipate  salvation  must  be  holy.  (1)  To 
evince  the  genuineness  and  reality  of  their  faith.  If  faith  does  not  purify,  it  is  a 
fiction.  (2)  That  they  may  be  morally  fitted  for  the  world  they  have  finally  to 
inherit.  That  world  is  consecrated  to  unsullied  and  universal  holiness.  Seeing  ye 
look  for  such  things,  what  manner  of  persons  ought  ye  to  be  in  all  holy  conversation 
and  godhness?  2.  The  cultivation  of  Christian  activity.  "It  is  high  time  to 
awake  out  of  sleep."  The  wakefulness  and  diligence  here  summoned  has  respect 
not  only  to  our  own  salvation,  but  also  to  the  salvation  of  others.  This  must  be, 
that  the  whole  of  Christian  character  may  be  developed,  and  that  the  whole  of 
Christian  duty  may  be  performed.  Earnest  activity  in  this  high  vocation  is  urged  by 
the  nearness  of  our  own  salvation  ;  and  because  of  the  nearness  of  our  own  salvation 
therefore  our  opportunities  for  usefulness  are  rapidly  contracting.  For  this  reason  "  it 
is  high  time  to  awake  out  of  sleep."  3.  The  cultivation  of  Christian  gratitude.  Gratitude 
does  indeed  become  us  when  we  consider  the  value  of  the  blessings  which  are  imparted, 
or  the  principle  upon  which  those  blessings  are  secured  and  bestowed.  {J.  Parsons.) 
Timely  reflections  : — 1.  We  commonly  speak  of  "  salvation"  as  the  state  intowhicn 
the  believer  in  Jesus  is  introduced  when  he  passes  from  death  unto  life ;  but  here  it 
means  eternal  glory.  2.  Observe  the  date  from  which  the  apostle  begins  to  reckon. 
He  does  not  say  our  salvation  is  nearer  than  when  we  were  christened  or  con- 
firmed, but  than  when  we  believed.  What  could  ever  come  of  what  is  before 
believing  ?  It  is  all  death,  and  not  worth  reckoning.  But  then  we  started  on  our 
voyage  to  heaven.  3.  Between  these  two  points  we  are  now  sailing ;  and  at  the 
close  of  the  year  it  seems  meet  just  to  note  where  we  are,  and  to  congratulate  my 
fellow  believers  that  we  are  nearer  the  eternal  port  than  when  we  first  slipped  our 
cable.  In  going  to  Australia  it  is  the  custom  to  toast  "  Friends  behind,"  till  they 
get  half  way;  and  then  it  changes,  "Friends  ahead."  Note — I.  The  things 
BEHIND.  1.  Recollect  when  you  believed.  Of  all  days  that  on  which  you  first  left 
6h(ft:e  was  the  brightest  of  all ;  and  you  know  that  those  who  go  to  dwell  on  the 
other  side  of  the  world  look  back  with  satisfaction  at  the  day  when  they  left. 
2.  Since  then  you  have  had  a  good  number  of  storms.  Tou  have  seen  one  washed 
overboard  that  you  thought  very  dear.  You  have  yourselves  suffered  loss  ;  happy 
were  yon  if  by  that  you  found  peace  and  safety  in  Christ.  You  remember,  too, 
when  you  had  to  sail  slowly  in  the  thick  fog,  and  keep  the  whistle  sounding.  Yoa 
have  been  nearly  but  not  quite  wrecked.     Above  all  the  billows  Jehovah's  power 


899  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cms.  xxn. 

has  kept  70a.  8.  Ton  have  had  a  great  deal  of  fair  weather,  too,  since  70a  left 
port.  We  have  sailed  along  with  a  favoaring  breeze.  Life  is  not  the  dreary  thing 
that  some  men  say  it  is.  4.  Behind  as,  too,  how  many  opportanities  of  service 
have  we  left  ?  Many  other  ships  sailed  with  os,  and  some  of  these,  alas  1  have  • 
been  wrecked  before  oar  eyes ;  bat  we  had  opportanities  of  bringing  some  of  the 
shipwrecked  ones  to  safety.  Did  we  always  doit?  II.  Things  ahead.  1.  More 
storms.  It  is  not  over  yet ;  but  they  mast  be  fewer  than  they  were.  2.  Fairer  winds. 
Christ  will  be  with  as ;  our  communion  with  Him  shall  be  sweet.  There  are  these 
Sabbaths  ahead,  the  outpourings  of  the  Spirit,  covenant  blessings,  <&c.  Let  as, 
then,  be  comforted,  and  pass  on.  3,  More  opportunities — and  you  young  people 
especially  should  be  looking  out.  Do  not  let  as  waste  any  more.  4.  But  looking 
BtUl  further  ahead,  when  we  remember  we  are  nearer  our  salvation  think  of  what 
that  salvation  wiU  be.  First,  we  shall  see  Jesus.  Oh,  what  a  heaven  to  be  with 
Him  I  Then,  next  to  Jesus,  we  shall  be  with  all  the  bright  spirits  who  have  gone 
before  ns.  I  do  not  think  Bowland  Hill  was  at  all  foolish  when  he  said  to  an  old 
woman  upon  her  dying  bed,  "  As  you  are  going  first,  take  my  love  to  the  four  great 
Johns — John  who  leaned  on  Jesns's  bosom,  and  John  Bunyan,  and  John  Calvin, 
and  John  Enox,  and  tell  them  poor  old  Rowly  will  be  coming  by  and  by."  I  can- 
not doubt  but  that  the  message  was  delivered.  Conclusion :  There  are  some  of  yon 
who  are  not  nearer  your  salvation  than  when  you  believed ;  because,  first,  you  never 
did  believe ;  and,  secondly,  that  which  you  are  nearer  to  is  not  salvation.  (C7.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Cause  for  spiritual  rejoicing : — The  one  reason  here  urged  for 
epiritual  activity  and  rejoicing  is  the  near  approach  of  the  day  of  complete  redemp* 
tion  to  the  believer.  Under  tiie  image  of  "  night,"  the  apostle  represents  the  state 
of  partial  enlightenment  and  sanctification,  and  consequent  fear  and  conflict  with 
evil.  But  "  the  night  is  far  spent,  the  day  is  at  hand."  •'  Now,"  Paul  exclaims, 
In  a  transport  of  joy,  "  is  our  salvation  nearer  than  when  we  believed  " — ^nearer  as 
to  time  and  space — nearer  as  it  respects  completion  and  reward.  Both  time  and 
the  Spirit's  work  have  brought  the  great  consummation  nearer.  And  surely  such 
a  fact  may  well  fill  us  with  rejoicing,  and  spur  us  on  to  redoubled  efforts  to  make 
car  calling  and  election  sure.  I.  Salvation  is  nigh.  1.  Actually  nigh.  "  The 
night  is  far  spent."  Life  here  is  short  at  best— death  is  nigh,  heaven  but  a  little 
way  off.  2.  Relatively  nigh.  (1)  "  Nearer  than  when  we  believed."  (2)  Nearer  at 
the  close  of  each  year,  each  day.  Every  moment  rolls  on  the  gladsome  time  I 
3.  Nearer  as  to  the  preparation  for  it.  "  Salvation  "  is  a  life,  a  work,  a  growth,  a 
consummation,  a  progress  from  first  principles  to  complete  and  glorious  develop- 
ment and  crowning.  The  Christian  is  put  to  school  at  conversion,  and  year  by  year 
he  grows  in  grace  and  love  and  holiness,  till  his  graduation  day.  His  path  is  aa 
"  the  shining  light  that  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day."  U.  What 
FOLLOWS?  1.  "The  night  is  far  spent."  (1)  The  night  of  spiritual  conflict.  (2) 
The  night  of  mystery — seeing  things  as  through  a  glass  darkly — will  soon  see  as  we 
are  seen,  and  know  as  we  are  known.  (3)  The  night  of  sin  and  suffering.  The  day 
that  is  coming  will  bring  absolute  deliverance  from  evil  in  every  form.  2.  «« The 
day  is  at  hand."  Not  only  will  the  darkness  be  gone  for  ever,  but  the  day  of  perfect 
and  eternal  sunlight  will  have  come.  Not  only  will  there  be  a  deliverance,  but  a 
crowning.  The  salvation  will  be  a  salvation  from  death  to  life ;  from  sin  to  holi- 
ness ;  from  shame  to  glory,  Divine  and  everlasting.  3.  And  this  salvation  is  nearer 
the  Christian's  grasp  to-day  than  when  he  first  believed.  Eevolving  suns  bring  it 
continually  nearer.  Great  promises  have  already  been  realised ;  great  victories 
won ;  many  a  rough  place  passed  over  and  many  a  weary  footstep  measured  off ; 
many  a  Sabbath  day's  journey  made :  and  already  the  "  delectable  hills  "  are_  in 
sight ;  angels  are  bending  over  the  battlements  of  heaven  to  welcome  the  approaching 

Eilgrim ;  and  soon  the  conflict  will  cease,  and  glory  immortal — so  long  contemplated 
y  faith  and  longed  for — will  be  a  blessed  realisation.  So  near  to  heaven  I  So 
Boon  to  be  done  with  earth  and  sin  and  evil  and  conflict  I  So  soon  to  stand  with 
the  ransomed  on  the  heights  of  glory  and  shout,  "  Thanks  be  to  God,  who  hath 
given  us  the  victory  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  I "    (Homiletic  Monthly.) 

Ver.  12.  The  night  Is  far  spent,  the  day  Is  at  hand.— TAc  night  and  the  day : — 
These  words  contain — I.  A  bepbesentation  of  this  life  and  of  the  life  to  ooue. 
1.  This  life  is  the  night.  Our  condition  in  this  state  is  one  of — (1)  Ignorance. 
What  feeble  conceptions  have  we  of  God  1  What  mistakes  do  we  make  respecting 
tiie  methods  of  Divine  grace.  He  who  knows  most  confesses  "  that  we  know  in 
part,  and  prophesy  in  part."    (2)  Danger.    In  the  night  of  this  life  "your  adver» 


OSiY.  zm.]  ROMANS.  69S 

■aty,  the  devil,  as  a  roaring  lion,  walketh  aboat,  seeking  whom  he  may  deToar." 
Nor  is  he  a  solitary  agent.  Besides,  how  many  natural  ills  sarroand  nsl  (3) 
.  Trouble.  2.  The  next  life  's  day.  Heaven  will  be  a  day  of— (1)  Knowledge.  Good 
men  will  there  see  things  as  they  are,  God  as  He  is,  and  know  even  as  they  are 
known.    (2)  Safety.    (3)  Happiness  (Bev.  vii.  15-17).    II.  Am  iLDMONiTioN  of  thb 

DBPABTtJRX  or  THK  FOBUEB,  AMD   OF  THE  AFPBOAOH  OF  THB  LATTBB.      We  are  informed 

of  this  fact  by — 1.  Bevolving  periods  of  time.  2.  The  doctrines  of  the  gospel. 
There  is  not  one  of  them  which  does  not  terminate  in  heaven.  Christians  are 
justified  and  sanctified  that  they  may  be  capacitated  to  enjoy  heaven.  3.  The 
ordinances  of  the  gospel.  Why  do  we  unite  in  songs  of  praise,  but  in  the  hope  of 
ere  long  uniting  in  the  praises  of  heaven?  4.  Surrounding  objects,  combined  with 
our  own  bodily  infirmities.  {Essex  Congregational  Bemembrancer.)  The  night 
and  tJie  day : — Tou  have  here  a  view  of  life  opposite  to  the  one  taken  by  our  Lord. 
Speaking  of  what  is  coming  He  says,  "  The  night  oometh,"  and  speaking  of  what 
now  is,  "  Work  while  it  is  called  day."  He  looks  upon  us  as  labourers  in  the  field, 
who,  when  the  night  comes,  must  leave  their  work  done  or  undone,  which  must 
stand  till  the  great  light  comes  again  to  show  exactly  how  it  was  left.  Paul,  how-  / 
ever,  regards  us  as  soldiers  in  a  campaign.  The  night  is  come,  and  we  have  W  ^^ 
encamped  for  the  night ;  the  uniform  is  laid  off ;  some  are  sitting  round  the  camp- 
fire,  some  are  walking  about,  some  are  playing  tricks,  some  are  doing  what  they 
would  not  dare  to  do  in  the  day.  A  voice  is  heard, "  The  night  is  far  spent — put  on 
your  armour,  be  ready."  L  Thb  pbesent  dabkmess.  1.  Suppose  you  are  ou  a  hill, 
say  a  mile  from  the  Thames.  It  might  be  that  you  could  neither  see  the  river  nor 
the  objects  on  it,  but  that  would  not  prove  that  they  did  not  exist.  The  only  fact 
is  that  they  and  you  are  in  darkness.  Light  does  not  create  things ;  it  only  makes 
them  manifest.  So  we  are  dwelling  in  the  midst  of  ten  thousand  grand  and 
mysterious  realities,  but  we  do  not  see  them  because  of  the  shadows  that  lie  on  our 
souls.  2.  By  misapprehension  we  are  liable  in  the  dark  to  take  the  distant  for  the 
near,  the  little  for  the  great,  the  common  for  the  valuable,  and  vice  versd.  As  the 
armour  is  scattered  in  the  night  the  breastplate  looks  no  brighter  than  the  trunk  of 
a  tree,  the  helmet  than  a  stone,  <&c.  And  the  things  which  are  symbolised  by  thesa 
pieces  of  armour  do  not  always  seem  to  us  of  their  proper  value.  There  is  the 
girdle  of  truth — of  unutterable  price  and  value  ;  but  in  this  dim  world  men  think 
that  an  ingenious  deception  is  better.  The  breastplate  of  righteousness — why, 
many  a  man  thinks  more  of  a  royal  or  municipal  decoration.  The  helmet  of 
salvation — many  a  woman  prefers  a  new  bonnet  to  that.  3.  The  dark  brings  us 
false  anticipations.  "When  a  man  walketh  in  the  darkness  he  knoweth  not 
whither  he  goeth."  A  man  looking  into  the  dark  forms  an  incorrect  estimate  of 
what  is  before  him.  He  has  no  power  to  calculate  where  he  will  be  after  five  steps 
or  ten.  This  is  pre-eminently  the  condition  of  the  man  who  is  going  straight 
towards  eternity.  4.  Darkness  is  often  the  time  of  dreaming.  The  sleeping  soldier 
dreams  probably  not  of  battlefields,  but  of  sheepfolds,  &c. ;  and  in  the  midst  of  the 
dream  bursts  in  the  cry,  "  To  arms  1 "  So  it  may  be  that  thy  imagination  is  full  of 
a  life  to  be  that  never  will  be ;  with  plans  for  this  very  year  that  will  never  be 
carried  out,  11.  The  coming  day.  "  The  night  is  far  spent."  I  know  not  in  your 
case  how  far.  The  reason  why  we  are  in  the  dark  is  that  this  part  of  the  world  is 
turned  away  from  the  sun,  and  we  are  sitting  in  the  shadow  of  our  own  world. 
And  so  the  reason  why  we  do  not  see  God  and  heaven  is  simply  because  we  have 
turned  away  from  that  side  of  heaven.  Absence  from  the  Lord  is  night-time  ;  the 
presence  of  the  Lord  is  the  break  of  day.  All  you  know  is  by  faith  ;  but  the  time 
of  sight  is  coming.  The  moment  is  fixed,  but  God  will  never  tell  it.  But  it  is  at 
hand  1  The  Judge  is  at  the  door.  HI.  The  duty  to  which  we  ake  called. 
1.  "  Cast  off  the  works  of  darkness  " — everything  that  people  wUl  venture  to  do  in 
the  dark,  but  not  in  the  light.  Even  here  we  have  certain  lamps — dim,  it  is  true — 
but  which  cast  light  on  our  affairs.  The  lamp  of — (1)  Civil  law.  Is  there  anything 
in  your  action  that  if  brought  out  to  a  court  of  justice  would  be  stamped  as  guilty  ? 
(2)  "Commercial  integrity.  Many  a  thing  that  would  escape  the  former  lamp  would, 
if  brought  to  this,  appear  odious.  Is  there  in  your  ways  anything  that,  if  subjected 
to  the  keen  eye  of  half  a  dozen  honourable  men,  would  be  pronounced  mean  and 
shabby  ?  (3)  Domestic  honour.  Many  a  thing  that  will  escape  the  other  two  would 
look  very  vile  under  this.  Is  there  aught  in  thee  which  would  appear  shameful  in 
the  eyes  of  those  who  love  thee  ?  (4)  Church  discipline.  Is  there  anything  that, 
if  brought  under  the  knowledge  of  your  brethren,  would  compel  them  to  say,  "  It  is 
sin "7  Cast  them  all  off.  2.  "Put  on  the  armour  of  light."  Look  at  the  man 
VOL.  u.  88 


i 


694  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xm 

who  has  got  the  polished  shield,  breastplate,  &c.,  &q.  As  long  as  it  is  night  they 
look  poor  and  common ;  but  when  the  great  sun  begins  to  play,  look  at  them,  how 
they  shine  in  the  light  I  Everything  beautiful  welcomes  the  light ;  and  righteous- 
ness, peace,  truth,  &c.,  are  akin  to  the  light.  Don't  say,  •'  There  they  are,  I  can 
find  them  when  I  seek  them  "  ;  or,  "  I  shall  have  time  enough  when  the  alarm  is 
sounded  "  ;  or,  "  I  know  some  one  who  will  get  them  for  me."  Put  them  on,  so 
that  when  the  day  dawns  you  may  be  ready.  "But  the  day  has  not  broken 
yet."  No ;  if  it  had  you  would  have  had  no  time  to  put  the  armour  on. 
"But  I  have  no  armour,  no  girdle  of  righteousness,"  &c.  Then  "  put  on 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ" — there  is  all  the  armour  you  need.  {W.  Arthur,  M.A.) 
The  departing  night  and  coming  day  : — I.  The  fact  stated.  The  apostle  reverses 
the  sense  in  which  our  Lord  uses  these  words  (John  ix.  4).  Jesus  contrasts  the 
present  scene  with  the  darkness  of  the  grave,  while  the  apostle  contrasts  it  with 
the  bright  heaven  that  lies  beyond  it.  1.  "  The  night "  is  a  picture  of  the 
Christian's  present  state.  In  comparison  with  other  men,  and  with  his  own 
former  condition,  he  is  in  broad  day.  But  the  apostle  is  not  thinking  of  these 
things.  As  he  contemplates  eternity,  he  feels  that  believers  are  all  still  in  dark- 
ness. And  the  figure  accords  with  our  own  experience  and  feelings.  Night  is  a 
season  of  cheerlessness,  incertitude,  perplexity,  inaction,  and  danger.  Who  is 
there  that  does  not  feel  his  spiritual  condition  here  to  be  the  same  ?  But  it  is  our 
ignorance  that  this  figure  most  forcibly  represents.  Night  throws  a  veil  over  the 
face  of  things.  The  traveller  may  be  passing  through  the  most  beautiful  scenes, 
but  he  might  almost  as  well  be  going  over  a  desert.  So  with  us.  What  do  we 
know  of  the  things  we  most  wish  to  know  ?  Ours,  however,  is  not  a  night  of  total 
darkness.  The  stars  shine  above  us,  and  something  like  the  mild,  steady  rays  of 
an  unclouded  moon  reach  us ;  but  it  is  night  still,  and  we  long  for  the  shadows  to 
flee  away.  2.  "  The  day  "  signifies  heaven.  "  There  shall  be  no  night  there." 
Nothing  to  endanger,  impede,  bewilder,  or  distress.  Everything  we  wish  done 
away  with  here  shall  be  done  away  with  there.  And  there  shall  jdl  which  we  have 
BO  long  wished  to  see  come — sunshine,  brightness,  beauty,  and  happiness.  Travel 
on  a  bright  day  through  a  beautiful  country,  with  tbe  glorious  sun  shining,  and 
all  nature  exulting  in  his  shining.  Then  transfer  this  scene  to  heaven.  There 
shines  in  unclouded  splendour  the  Sun  of  Righteousness.  This  glorious  light  is 
ever  shining  on  the  most  glorious  objects,  and  we  shall  behold  these  objects,  and 
the  same  light  on  ourselves  shall  cause  us  to  "  shine  forth  as  the  sun  in  the  king- 
dom of  our  Father."  Now  this  day  is  near.  II.  The  advice  given  is  grounded  on 
the  fact  stated.  "  Let  us  cast  off,"  &o.  1.  Before,  however,  we  can  do  this,  there 
is  something  else  to  be  done.  Paul  has  in  bis  mind  a  man  asleep,  who  must  in 
the  first  instance  awake.  Like  a  fellow-traveller  or  a  fellow-soldier  who  has  risen 
before  us,  Paul  announces  the  approaching  morning,  and  bids  us  rise.  Now  all 
this  supposes  that  Christians  may  sink  into  a  state  of  spiritual  negligence,  sloth, 
and  torpor.  And  it  shows  us  that  out  of  such  a  state  we  must  be  roused  before  we 
can  obey  this  exhortation.  2.  We  are  to  "  cast  off  the  works  of  darkness,"  so 
called,  because  they  court  secrecy,  and  because  they  are  connected  with  the  prince 
of  darkness.  It  is  impossible  to  fall  into  a  state  of  spiritual  indifference  without 
getting  some  of  these  unclean  things  upon  us.  And  th  y  are  to  be  got  rid  of  in 
the  first  place.  There  is  not  a  greater  delusion  than  to  think  we  can  be  clothed 
in  the  graces  of  Christ's  Spirit  while  we  are  holding  fast  any  beloved  sin.  As  to 
our  bodies,  we  may  put  a  clean  garment  over  an  unclean  one,  but  we  can  never  get 
our  minds  imbued  with  any  one  Christian  grace  as  long  as  we  are  harbouring  any 
one  unchristian  lust.  Hence  we  are  to  "  cleanse  ourselves  from  all  filthiness  of  the 
flesh  and  spirit,"  in  order  to  "perfect  holiness  in  the  fear  of  God."  3.  The 
roused-up  man  is  addressed  as  a  warrior,  and  told  to  put  on  the  "armour  of 
light."  (1)  The  source  of  this  is  Divine.  Like  the  light,  holiness  is  heaven-bom. 
As  evil  desires  and  works  proceed  from  Satan  in  his  dark  world,  so  all  "holy 
desires,  all  good  counsels,  and  all  just  works,"  proceed  from  God  in  His  bright 
world.  This  armour  is  a  part  of  God's  own  nature.  He  is  Light — "  glorious  in 
holiness  "  ;  His  purity  gives  Him  His  splendour.  So  when  He  communicates  Hia 
holiness  to  us.  He  communicates  with  it  a  portion  of  His  own  glory.  We  look  for 
safety  and  victory  only  from  the  armour  He  gives  us,  but  that  armour  dignifies  us  aa 
we  go  forth  to  the  fight  in  it.  2.  This  holiness  accords  well  with  the  heaven  to 
which  we  are  going.  It  is  light,  something  harmonising  with  the  splendid  day 
which  is  soon  to  break  on  us.  The  expression  intimates  ' '  meetness  for  the  inherit- 
anoe  of  the  saints  in  light."    {C.  Bradley, M.A.)         Day  at  hand: — I.  The  niohi 


CEAP.  xm.]  ROMANS.  59S 

— 1.  Of  time  and  mystery.  2.  Of  sin  and  sorrow.  3.  Of  individual  experience. 
n.  Ths  DAT — 1.  Of  eternity  and  revelation.  2.  Of  righteousness  and  salvation. 
8.  Of  final  deoirion.  III.  Thb  depabtdbb  of  one  and  the  neab  afpboach  of  thb 
OTBEB — 1.  Evident.  2.  A  call  to  activity.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Preparation  far  the 
day : — I.  What  wb  abs  to  oast  off.  1.  Works  that  consisted  with  a  tune  of 
ignorance.  2.  That  will  not  bear  the  light.  3.  That  spring  from  darkness,  n. 
What  abb  wb  to  put  on  ?  1.  Armour,  offensive,  defensive.  2.  Of  light.  III. 
Why  t    "  Because  the  night,"  &c.    (Ibid.)  Preparation  for  the  day  : — I.  Thb 

FACT  A8SBBTBS.  1.  In  reference  to  Borne  and  the  heathen  world  at  large,  the  night 
of  Ckntile  ignorance  and  vice  was  far  spent,  and  the  day  of  gospel  knowledge,  grace, 
and  blessing  was  at  hand.  2.  In  reference  to  the  Christian  Church  at  Bome,  tha 
night  of  imperfect  acquaintance  with  the  gospel  was  far  spent,  and  the  clear  day  of 
spiritual  light  was  at  hand.  3.  In  reference  to  each  individual  Christian,  whoso- 
ever and  wheresoever  he  may  be,  the  night  of  temptation,  trial,  and  trouble  is  far 
spent,  and  the  day  of  heavenly  glory  and  bliss  is  at  hand.  II.  The  exhobtation 
roTTMDED  ON  THIS  FACT.  1.  From  the  practice  of  all  sin.  The  dress  to  be  "cast 
off "  is  "  the  works  of  darkness,"  so  called  because — (1)  Their  source  is  darkness. 
(2)  Their  scene  of  action  is  darkness,  as  far  as  man  can  render  it  so.  (3)  Their 
end  is  the  "  blackness  of  darkness  for  ever  "  1  Sin  must  return  to  the  place  from 
whence  it  came  ;  and  woe  to  him  who  shall  be  found  in  its  company  at  the  time  I 
2.  To  the  pursuit  of  all  holiness.  "  Let  us  put  on  the  armour  of  light."  In  Eph. 
tL  13-17  he  enumerates  the  several  particulars  of  the  Christian  armour.  But  it 
is  more  briefly  described  in  ver.  14.  1.  Make  the  example  of  Christ  your  pattern. 
8.  Seek  for  union  with  Christ  as  your  strength.  (J.  Jowett,  M.A.)  The  dawn : 
— The  whole  time  between  His  first  coming  and  His  second  may  be  looked  at  aa 
the  dawn,  the  daybreak ;  light  still  struggling  with  darkness,  the  darkness  only 
slowly  receding,  but  yet  ever  receding — retreating  step  by  step,  and  pierced  through 
and  through  as  it  retreats  by  the  glitteriog  shafts  of  the  true  king  of  day.  {dip. 
Trench.)  Put  on  the  armoiiT  of  light. — The  armour  of  light  is — 1.  Divine  in  its 
origin.  5.  Excellent  in  its  nature.  3.  Essential  in  its  adoption.  4.  Invincible 
in  its  nse.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  armour  of  light : — ^Beligion  is  the  best  armour 
a  man  can  have,  but  the  worst  cloak.  {Bunyan.)  The  armour  of  light : — It  is  a 
habit  of  the  Apostle  Paul  to  present  almost  everything  in  its  dual  aspect — e.g.,  the 
"  flesh  "  fails  and  corrupts ;  the  "  spirit "  quickens  and  nourishes  ;  "  sin  "  con- 
demns and  slays ;  "  grace  "  justifies,  purifies,  saves  ;  "  death  "  is  swallowed  up  of 
"  life."  Here  is  the  same  method  in  another  of  its  applications.  There  is  one  who 
is  told  the  night  is  almost  gone ;  that  the  morning  is  coming,  that  it  is  time  to 
put  off  all  the  works  of  darkness,  and  to  stand  waiting  for  the  glow  of  the  sunrise. 
And  he  wishes  to  do  it.  But  how  hard  the  work  is  !  How  difBcult  to  distinguish  I 
These  '•  works  of  darkness  "  are  not  all  wicked  and  horrible.  They  are  things  that 
may  be  helpful  or  inimical,  according  to  circumstances.  "  And  here  I  stand,"  one 
has  to  think,  "  in  the  dark,  to  watch  against  evil,  to  put  it  away,  to  keep  it  away. 
No !  you  would  have  little  chance  of  coming  out  of  it  into  morning  in  that  way — 
in  the  way  simply  of  resistance  to  evil  by  inward  strength  and  wisdom.  Our  apostle 
never  proposes  action  in  that  way.  He  had  tried  it,  and  knew  what  it  ended  in. 
"  Try  it,"  saith  he,  "in  this  way."  "  Put  off  " ;  and  in  the  same  act,  "  put  on." 
Put  on  what?  Not  "  the  works  of  light,"  although  he  might  have  said  that  with 
propriety  ;  but  "  the  armour  of  light " — thus  conveying  to  us  the  sentiment  that 
Christian  faith,  in  proportion  as  we  live  in  it,  and  Christian  virtues,  in  proportion 
as  we  put  them  on,  become  a  soldier's  armour.  Live  the  Christian  life  fully,  and 
you  will  become  like  an  armed  man.  Put  on  this  armour,  then.  It  can  be  done 
easily,  quietly.  Many  a  gentle  soul  is  clad  in  it.  Many  a  battle  is  fought  and  won 
without  dust,  or  noise,  or  blood — by  soul-confidence ;  by  heart  faith ;  by  patient 
waiting ;  by  looking  to  Christ ;  by  longings  for  heaven.  Courage  I  you  who  are 
striving,  and  you  who  are  weary,  and  you  who  are  longing  for  more  tiian  you  can 
express.  "The  night  is  far  spent,  the  day  is  at  hand."  (A.  Raleigh,  D.D.) 
The  armour  of  light : — I.  Its  natube.  1.  The  military  girdle,  that  which  was 
intended  to  give  support  and  firmness  to  the  body :  "  Having  your  loins  girt  about 
with  truth" — i.e.,  absolute  sincerity  in  the  consecration  of  ourselves  to  the  service 
of  Christ,  our  great  Head.  2.  "  The  breastplate  of  righteousness  "  :  all  holiness, 
inward  and  outward.  And  as  the  breastplate  defended  the  vital  parts,  so  whatever 
injuries  we  may  sustain,  they  cannot  reach  the  conscience  while  this  breastplate  is 
there.  And  when  the  conscience  is  kept  pure,  all  is  safe.  3.  "  Your  feet  shod 
with  the  preparation  of  the  gospel  of  peace."    This  refers  to  the  greaves  and  shoes, 


694  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

which  were  designed  to  give  a  firm  footiDg  and  to  goard  against  hidden  traps.  Na 
man  is  in  a  state  of  preparation  for  the  Christian  conflict  but  he  who  is  at  peac* 
with  Ood.  Bat  pardoning  love  and  regenerating  grace,  having  set  the  man  free 
from  sin,  give  him  firm  ground,  and  enable  him,  standing  fast  in  the  Lord  and  the 
power  of  His  might,  to  beat  down  every  enemy  that  assails  him.  4.  "  The  shield 
of  faith,*'  the  use  of  which  is  "  to  qaench  all  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked  one  "  : 
in  aUnsion  to  those  firebrands  which  were  sometimes  shot  along  with  the  arrows, 
or  to  the  arrows  themselves,  the  iron  heads  of  which  had  been  previously  heated, 
in  order  to  inflict  more  intolerable  pain.  This  shield  quenches  the  fiery  darts — 
(1)  Of  persecution.  (2)  Of  temptation  and  affliction.  5.  "  An  helmet  the  hope  of 
salvation."  It  defends  the  head,  the  very  vital  part.  Despair  chills  exertion.  6.  "  The 
Bword  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  the  Word  of  God."  (1)  Our  Lord  Himself  has  given 
us  an  instance  of  its  defensive  power  in  His  own  temptation.  (2)  But  the  Christian 
is  to  carry  on  an  offensive  warfare  by  zealously  and  consistently,  on  all  proper 
occasions,  proclaiming  the  truth  of  God.  U.  Wht  it  is  CAiiLEO  "  the  abmocb  of 
liiGHT."  1.  With  reference  to  its  origin,  which  is  heavenly.  It  is  therefore  well 
called  the  whole  armour  of  God.  Though  it  is  true  that  sincerity,  righteousness,  faith, 
suppose  acts  of  the  will,  and  a  certain  state  of  the  affections,  yet,  nevertheless,  they 
are  wrought  in  man  by  God,  and  are  found  only  in  the  regenerate.  2.  Because  it 
is  only  found  where  Christianity  exists  and  exerts  its  proper  influence.  No  man  is 
seen  in  the  armour  of  light  but  a  true  Christian.  We  find  no  instance  in  which  the 
philosophy  of  ancient  times  made  a  warrior  such  as  the  apostle  describes,  armed 
him  with  armour  like  this,  and  led  him  on  to  victory.  St.  Paul  tried  whether 
Pharisaism  would  do;  so  that,  "touching  the  righteousness  of  the  law,"  he  was 
"  blameless."  Tet  he  was  held  in  the  bondage  of  pride,  and  prejudice,  and  anger. 
Take  our  modem  infidel  philosopher,  with  reason  and  virtue  on  his  lips,  and  with 
pride,  selfishness,  and  passion  in  his  heart.  3.  Because  it  corresponds  with  the 
character  of  our  dispensation,  which  is  a  dispensation  of  light.  III.  The  motives 
WHICH  SHOULD  INDUCE  VB  TO  ABBA.Y  ooBSRLVES  IN  THIS  ABMOUB.  Consider — 1.  The 
degraded  state  of  the  man  who  is  not  invested  with  it.  2.  The  moral  elevation 
which  it  gives  to  every  one  who  is  invested  with  it.  3.  That  you  must  either  con- 
quer or  be  conquered.  {R.  Watson.)  A  luminous  character: — Humboldt  tells  us 
that,  after  bathing  among  the  noctilucce  in  the  phosphorescent  water  of  the  Pacific, 
his  skin  was  luminous  for  hours  after.  In  a  spiritual  sense,  is  it  not  true  that 
when  we  bathe,  so  to  speak,  mind  and  heart  in  the  truths  and  influences  of 
Christianity,  allowing,  seeking  their  appropriate  effect  upon  us,  the  whole 
character  shines  with  a  heaven-given  light  and  beauty,  that  we  can  bear  aboat 
with  us  into  the  conmion  scenes  and  daily  duties  of  life  ? 

Vers.  13,  14.  Let  us  walk  honestly,  as  in  the  day. — Rule$  for  tealking  tn  the 
day  : — I.  In  oenekal.  Walk  honestly  (Tit.  ii.  12).  1.  Soberly.  2.  Righteously. 
3.  Godly,  n.  In  particulah.  1.  Not  in  rioting  and  drunkenness  (Isa.  v.  13).  (1) 
This  deprives  us  of  the  use  of  reason.  (2)  And  so,  for  the  present,  blots  out  tie 
image  of  God.  (3)  Makes  men  unfit  for  duty  (Luke  xxi.  34 ;  Hos.  iv.  11).  (4) 
Exposeth  a  man  to  all  other  sin.  (5)  Hath  a  particular  curse  entailed  upon  it 
(Isa.  V.  11 ;  Prov.  xxiii.  29,  30,  &c.).  2.  Not  in  chambering  and  wantonness  (Heb. 
xiii.  4).     To  avoid  this — (1)  Be  careful  to  keep  a  good  conscience  (Gen.  xxxix.  9). 

(2)  Watch  over  your  spirits  (Mai.  ii.  16).  (3)  Pray  against  it  (Psa.  cxix.  37).  3. 
Strife  and  envying.  (1)  They  are  signs  of  a  carnal  mind  (1  Cor.  iii.  3  ;  Gal.  v.  19, 
20 ;  James  iii.  14,  15).     (2)  Proceed  only  from  pride  and  ignorance  (1  Tim.  vi.  4). 

(3)  Produce  confusion  and  evil  works  (James  iii.  16,  17).  4.  But  put  ye  on  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  (1)  By  baptism  (Gat  iii.  27).  (2)  By  faith,  we  put  on — (a)  His 
righteousness,  (i)  Christ  took  our  nature  upon  Him  (John  i.  14).  (ii)  Suffered 
for  our  sins  (Isa.  liii.  5.  6).  (iii)  By  this  He  expiated  our  sins,  and  purchased 
righteousness  for  us  (1  John  ii.  2).  (iv)  All  beUevers  are  interested  in  all  His 
Bufferings  and  righteousness  (Gal.  ii.  16).  (v)  Hence  their  sins  are  hid,  as  it  were, 
from  the  eyes  of  God  (chap.  viii.  33,  84 ;  Phil.  iii.  8,  9).  (b)  His  graces,  (i) 
Humility  (1  Pet.  v.  5 ;  Matt.  xi.  29).  (ii)  Self-denial  (Matt.  xvi.  24).  (iii)  Tem- 
perance (1  Cor.  vii.  31).  (iv)  Patience  (Luke  xxi.  19;  James  i.  3).  (v)  Thankful- 
ness (1  Thess.  V.  18).  (vi)  Heavenly-mindedness  (Phil.  iii.  20).  (vii)  Charity 
(Acts  X.  38;  James  i.  27).  (viii)  Constancy  and  perseverance  (Rev.  ii.  26).  III. 
Use.  1.  Put  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Consider — (1)  Your  sins  are  many,  and  it 
is  only  by  Him  they  can  be  pardoned  (1  John  ii.  1).  (2)  Your  sins  are  strong,  and 
only  by  Him  subdued.     (3)  God  angry,  only  by  Him  appeased  (Matt.  iii.  17).     (4) 


caAT.  zm.]  ROMANS.  691 

YooT  hearts  oorrapted,  only  by  Him  cleansed  (1  Gor.  i.  2).  (5)  Toar  sools  art 
immortal,  and  it  is  only  by  Him  that  they  can  be  saved  (Acts  xvi.  80,  81).  (Bp. 
Bevertdge.)  How  the  Chri$tian  ought  to  walk  : — I.  Consistently — as  in  the  day. 
n.  TaaiPEKATBLT— sobjecting — 1.  Appetite.  2.  Sense.  8.  Passion,  IIL  Likb 
Chbibt.  1.  Denying  himself.  2.  Condemning  sin  in  the  flesh.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
Chrittian  sincerity  : — Standing  near  the  remarkable  spring  at  Ewell,  in  Surrey,  and 
watching  the  uprising  of  the  waters,  one  sees  at  the  bottom  of  the  pool  innumerable 
circles  with  smaller  circles  within  them,  from  which  extremely  fine  sand  is  con- 
tinually being  upheaved  by  the  force  of  the  rising  water.  Tiny  geysers  upheave 
their  little  founts,  and  from  a  myriad  openings  bubble  ap  with  the  clear  crystal. 
The  perpetual  motion  of  the  water  and  the  leaping  of  the  sand  are  most  interesting. 
It  is  not  like  the  spring-head  in  the  field,  where  the  cooling  liquid  pours  forth  per- 
petually from  a  spout,  all  unseen,  till  it  plunges  into  its  channel ;  nor  like  the 
river  head  where  the  stream  weeps  from  a  mass  of  mossy  rock ;  but  here  are  the 
fountains  of  earth's  bidden  deeps  all  unveiled  and  laid  bare,  the  very  veins  of 
nature  opened  to  the  pubho  gaze.  How  would  it  amaze  us  if  we  could  in  this 
fashion  peer  into  the  springs  of  human  character  and  see  whence  words  and 
actions  flowl  What  man  would  wish  to  have  his  designs  and  aims  exposed  to 
every  onlooker  ?  But  why  this  aversion  to  being  known  and  read  of  all  men  ?  The 
Christian's  motives  and  springs  of  action  should  be  so  honest  and  pure  that 
he  might  safely  defy  inspection.  He  who  has  nothing  to  be  ashamed  of  has  nothing 
to  conceal.  Sincerity  can  afford,  like  our  first  parenlts  in  Paradise,  to  be  naked  and 
not  ashamed.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Put  ye  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. — Put  on 
Chritt : — I.  Thebe  is  a  wondebfol  fitness  in  Christ's  chajucter  to  meet  the  condi- 
TiOM  of  sinners.  Put  on  Christ  as — 1.  Your  hope  before  God.  2.  Your  sanctifica- 
tion.  3.  Your  help.  4.  Your  exemplar.  H.  There  is  this  fitness  in  nothino 
ELSE  than  Christ.  III.  Therefore,  if  we  woxtld  be  happy,  we  must  make  use  or 
Cbbibt  fob  ourselves.  Put  Him  on  in  your — 1.  Thoughts.  2.  Affections.  3.  Con- 
versation. 4.  Profession.  {Matthew  Wilkt.)  How  and  why  we  are  to  put  on 
Christ : — I.  What  is  intended  by  "  putting  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Chbist."  In  the 
East  garments  are  of  greater  importance  than  with  us.  The  finest  were  there 
accumulated,  preserved  with  the  greatest  care,  and  constituted  a  considerable  part 
of  wealth.  Hence  more  frequent  allusions  are  made  to  this  than  we  are  accustomed 
to  use.  In  the  Bible,  qualities  of  character  are  often  represented  by  clothing.  Job 
says,  "  I  pat  on  righteousness  as  a  robe."  In  Isaiah  the  Messiah  is  introduced  as 
"  olaid  with  zeal  as  with  a  cloak."  Our  Lord  represents  the  accepted  character  of  a 
believer  by  the  wedding  garment  of  a  guest,  and  Peter  exhorts  us  to  be  "  clothed 
with  humility,"  <So.  We  put  on  Christ — 1.  When  we  make  an  open  profession  of  His 
name.  It  is  not  enough  to  believe.  Latent  faith  can  at  the  best  only  edify  its 
possessor.  But  the  Church  is  intended  to  be  the  light  of  the  world.  Whoever 
conceals  his  religion  must  accept  the  consequence.  "  Whoso  is  ashamed  of  Me," 
&e.  2.  By  cultivating  an  acquaintance  with  the  doctrines,  imbuing  our  minds  with 
the  spirit  and  sentiments,  of  the  gospel.  All  the  doctrines  of  Christianity  are 
intended  to  expel  our  native  corruption,  and  raise  us  nearer  to  the  character  and 
will  of  God.  We  cannot  then  put  on  Christ,  without  the  serious  perusal  of  the 
Scriptures,  and  the  devout  contemplation  of  the  Cross.  8.  When  we  imitate  His 
example.  Other  models  are  imperfect,  and  unsafe  for  universal  imitation  :  but  that 
challenges  our  entire  pursuit.  One  great  end  of  His  obedience  unto  death  was  that 
He  might  leave  us  an  example  whose  steps  we  might  follow.  In  order  to  obey  the 
will  of  God  you  cannot  adopt  any  method  so  simple  and  sure  as  to  inquire,  "  How 
can  I  this  day  act  in  a  manner  most  consonant  to  the  mind  of  Christ  ?  "  II.  Why 
abb  we  to  put  on  Christ  ?  1.  That  Christ  may  be  glorified  by  us.  If  we  love  Him, 
we  shall  desire  to  glorify  Him  :  but  what  can  tend  so  much  to  His  glory,  as  to  let  men 
see  the  efiScacy  of  His  doctrine  on  our  character?  Nothing  can  be  so  calculated  to 
counteract  infidelity  and  convince  men  that  there  is  a  Saviour.  2.  That  we  may 
experience  religious  peace  and  joy,  by  making  it  clear  to  ourselves  that  we  belong 
to  Him.  You  never  knew  a  person,  however  depressed  by  poverty  or  sickness, 
who,  if  he  sincerely  served  the  Lord,  was  not  happy.  3.  That  we  may  best  prepare 
for  a  dying  hour,  and  for  the  solemn  scenes  beyond.  This  is  to  put  on  the  wedding 
garment ;  the  want  of  this,  in  the  day  when  the  King  comes  in  to  see  the  guests, 
will  leave  a  man  speechless!  {Robert  Hall,  M. A.)  Putting  on  Christ: — The 
Hebrew  language  one  continual  picture.  Every  fact  and  emotion  rendered  by  an 
image.  The  truth,  e.g.,  that  Christ  is  life,  and  that  apart  from  Christ  is  no  life,  is 
Bet  forth  most  often  by  vivid  metaphors.    The  general  significance  of  the  present 


698  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  znii 

metaphor  is  that  the  old  sinfol  life  is  to  be  doffed  like  a  soiled  and   sordid 
garment,  and  the  new  nature  which  Christ  gives  and  inspires,  is  to  be  put  on  like 
a  new  and  shining  robe.     L  Tby  to  be  likbi  Chbist.    Love  what  Christ  loved,  hate 
what  Christ  hated.    The  next  clause  helps  to  explain  this  part  of  the  meaning,  by 
giving  us  its  opposite,    n.  But  perhaps  you  will  say,  "  If  that  be  all,  any  moralist 
might,  in  other  language,  tell  us  the  same.    We  read  something  like  it  in  every 
noble  teacher.     We  know  in  our  best  moments  that  we  are  mean,  guilty  creatures, 
but  we  do  not  know  how  to  be  otherwise.    You  bid  us  seek  for  nobler  manners  and 
purer  tastes ;  you  might  as  well  bid  the  snared  bird  to  fly,  or  the  worm  to  throw 
oft  liie  rock  which  is  crushing  it  to  earth."     Well,  the  gospel  of  Christ  has  broken 
the  snare,  and  rolled  away  the  rock.    To  put  on  Christ  is  to  shabe  His  miqht,  to 
come  into  quickening  electric  personal  contact  with  Him,  to  derive  magnetic  force 
from  His  personality,  to  live  by  His  Spirit,  and  so  to  be  born  again  and  to  become 
a  new  creature.    III.  We  look  at  our  ruined  selves,  our  corrupted  hearts,  our  wasted 
lives,  and  "  abhor  ourselves  in  dust  and  ashes."    How  can  we  ever  stand  before 
God,  who  chargeth  even  the  angels  with  folly,  and  in    whose  sight  the  very 
heavens  are  not  clean?    Ah,  but  there  is  yet  another  and  more  blessed  meaning 
of  "  putting  on  Christ,"  and  it  is  to  be  found  in  EtiM ;  not  trusting  in  our  own 
righteousness  which  is  as  filthy  rags,  but  being  clad  in  the  white  bobb  of  Hia 
poEoiviNO  qbacb.    How  heart-broken  have  been  the  last  utterances  of  even  the 
greatest  men  1     (Grotius.     Bacon  and  Shakespeare  in  their  wills.)    Conclusion : 
Such,  then,  is  the  meaning  of  this  Divine  message.     Break  with  your  past  self ; 
come  to  Christ  for  strength,  and  by  prayer  to  Him  and  earnestly  seeking  Him,  be 
quickened  and  transformed.    And  as  it  means  this  hope  for  the  future,  and  this 
strength  in  the  present,  so  also  it  means  forgiveness  for  the  past.    Say  not,  then, 
that  the  meaning  is  not  clear ;  strive  rather  to  make  it  yours  by  blessed  experience. 
{Archdn.  Farrar.)         Putting  on  Christ:—!.    What  is  implied  in  this?    This 
is  a  figurative  expression  for  an  interest  in  Christ,  union  with  Him,  and  conformity 
to  Him.    1.  As  our  wisdom,  for  our  illumination.    (1)  To  give  light  to  our  under- 
Btanding  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures.    (2)  To  correct  and  rectify  oar 
judgment  on  all  points  of  necessary  belief.    (8)  To  inform  our  conscience  in  all 
matters  of  practice.     (4)  To  guide  our  wiU,  and  influence  our  affections,  in  the 
subjects  of  our  choice,  desire,  pursuit,  and  expectation.     2.  As  our  righteousnera, 
for  our  justification.      3.  As  the  source  of  the  Spirit,  and  of  grace,  for  onr 
sanctification.      4.    As   our   example,  for    our    direction    and    improvement   in 
holiness.    This  is  considered  by  interpreters  as  the  chief  thiog  meant.    Chrysos- 
tom  remarks,  "It  is  a  common  phrase  that  a  person  has  put  him  on,  whom  he 
imitates."    The  kings  of  Persia,  on  their  coronation-day,  put  on  a  robe  which 
the  first  Cyrus  wore  before  he  was  king,  to  remind  them  of  imitating  his  exem- 
plary temper  and  behaviour.    Certainly  one  grand  end  of  the  appearance  of  Christ 
m  our  nature,  was  to  set  us  an  example  of  blamelessness,  usefulness,  holiness  (John 
xii.  26 ;  Col.  ii.  6 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  21 ;  1  John  ii.  6).    Hence,  those  that  have  put  on 
Christ  will  conduct  themselves  as  directed    in  the  context.     They  will  walk 
"honestly,"  in  a  manner  becoming  their  privileges.     II.   Wht  we  ought  to 
DO  so.     1.  That  "  being  clothed,  we  may  not  be  found  naked,"  destitute  of  Uie 
robe  of  righteousness,  and  garment  of  salvation.     2.  For  decency,  it  being  a 
shame  to  be  unclothed,  especially  garments  being  provided  for  us.     3.  For  defenoe 
against  error,  sin,  misery,  the  wrath  of  God,  an  accusing  conscience,  and  all  the 
consequences  of  neglect.    4.  For  ornament ;  that  we  may  not  be  without  the 
wedding  garment,  and  therefore  be  excluded  from  the  marriage  feast.    {J.  Bctwob.) 
PiUting  on  Christ : — I,  The  duty  enfobced.    1.  To  put  on  Christ  is  to  endeavour 
to  be  like  Him,  to  have  Him  on  is  to  succeed  in  the  attempt.    It  is  the  investment 
of  the  soul  with  the  virtues  which  adorned  His  character,  just  as  a  man  clothes  hia 
body  with  articles  of  dress.     Many  a  man  has  so  done  this  as  to  put  others  in  mind 
of  Christ ;  he  was  so  Christlike ;  just  as  if  one  of  His  followers  after  His  departure 
had  put  on  the  garments  which  Christ  had  worn.    Does  any  one  of  us  put  others 
in  mind  of  Jesus  7     2.  To  put  on  Christ  does  not  mean  any  mechanicEd  attempts 
after  mere  external  likeness,  as  clothes  may  be  put  on  a  lay  figure,  or  a  portrait 
wrought  on  canvas.    What  is  meant  is  not  so  much  a  studied  imitation  of  what 
in  Him  may  have  met  the  eye  of  observers,  as  the  culture  of  a  deep  internal 
sympathy  with  His  Spirit  which  manifested  itself  in  words  and  deeds.    You  may 
put  royal  robes  on  a  corpse,  and  in  particular  lights  and  distances  it  may  seem  alive. 
In  the  same  way  a  mere  simulated  likeness  to  Christ  maybe  put  on  a  dead  spiritual 
nature ;  but  this,  so  far  from  representing  Him,  presents  only  an  aggravated  imag* 


CHAP,  im.]  ROMANS.  691 

of  His  worst  enemies  whom  He  denounced  as  "  whited  sepulchres."  Christ  is  not 
to  be  put  on  over  the  natural  man,  but  the  natural  man  becoming  spiritual,  a 
visible  Christ  comes  out  as  an  emanation  from  within  ;  just  as  His  inward  essential 
glory  came  out  on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration.  3.  To  put  on  Christ  is  not 
synonymous  with  the  being  clothed  with  Christ's  justifying  righteousness,  and  so 
hiding  our  sins  from  the  sight  of  God  ;  it  rather  refers  to  sanctification — a  subjec- 
tive participation  of  Ufe  through  Christ,  and  the  consequent  outgrviwth  of  conformity 
to  Him.  It  comes  after  justification.  "  As  many  as  have  been  baptized  in  Christ 
have  put  on  Christ,"  Ac.  4.  The  precept  suggests  the  moral  perfection  of  Christ- 
No  caution  is  given,  as  if  there  were  some  things  which  were  not  to  be  put  on. 
There  is  no  fear  of  your  being  too  much  like  Him.  It  would  not  do  to  speak  thus 
of  any  one  else,  however  distinguished.  In  every  otber  character  there  is  some- 
thing to  be  excepted,  e.g.,  Abraham's  duplicity,  David's  bloodguiltiness,  &o. 
Nevertheless  (1)  There  were  things  in  Christ  we  cannot  and  must  not  imitate. 
Here  we  distinguish  between  an  example  and  a  pattern.  The  latter  is  to  be 
literally  traced,  just  as  the  engraver  produces  the  facsimile  of  a  painting ;  the 
former  may  be  something  whose  form  we  cannot  repeat,  but  whose  principle  we 
may  imbibe  and  infuse  into  other  acts  different  in  form  but  of  the  same  kind. 
Thus  we  cannot  like  Christ  perform  miracles,  but  we  can  cultivate  the  spirit  of 
love  which  moved  Him  to  do  what  He  did.  We  shall  not  be  tempted  as  He  was  ; 
but  the  same  parts  of  our  nature  will  be  assailed ;  and  we  can  learn  to  resist  as  He 
resisted,  with  the  sword  of  the  Spirit.  It  might  not  be  right  for  us  to  go  into  the 
company  of  sinners  as  He  did,  nor  employ  His  terrible  invectives ;  but  we  can 
cherish  the  spirit  which  led  Him  to  seek  the  lost,  and  sympathise  with  His  repug- 
nance to  evil.  We  have  not  Christ's  personal  religion  which  had  no  repentance. 
(2)  There  were  many  acts  of  personal  holiness  and  relative  virtue  which  our 
Lord  could  not  exercise.  He  was  not  a  merchant,  magistrate,  or  head  of  a 
household.  But  He  embodied  the  principle  of  universal  obedience,  and  fulfilled 
every  obligation  arising  from  all  the  relations  which  He  could  or  did  sustain 
towards  God  and  man.  This  is  what  we  are  to  do,  and  to  learn  from  Him  to  do. 
n.  To  VTHOU  THE  DOTT  APPEETAIN8.  The  words  are  addressed  to  a  Christian 
Church,  who  have  received  the  gospel.  Those  who  beUeve  in  Christ,  and  are 
reconciled  to  God  by  Him,  are  required  to  put  Him  on.  But  let  no  man  go  on 
Binning  in  the  supposition  that  some  day  by  Divine  grace  he  may  become  converted 
and  then  put  on  Christ.  This  should  be  remembered  by  the  children  of  Christian 
families  particularly.  Let  their  earliest  lesson  be  to  strive  to  be  like  Christ,  and 
after  many  a  failure  they  may  gradually  come  to  a  sense  of  forgiving  mercy  which 
will  not  be  lessened  by  their  endeavours  before  they  knew  the  precise  nature  of 
their  obligations  to  Him.  III.  How  it  is  to  bx  cabbied  out.  To  put  on  Christ 
there  must  be — 1.  A  thoroughly  honest  desire  to  be  hke  Him.  This  needs  deep 
consideration  and  prayer  for  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  2.  A  frequent  and 
devout  study  of  the  character  of  Jesus  in  order  to  understand  both  its  form  and 
spirit.  3.  A  study  of  what  Christ  taught  and  required.  4.  A  deliberate  and  habitual 
effort  to  realise  ail  this  in  personal  character  and  life.  5.  Seasons  of  special  self- 
examination  as  to  likeness  or  unlikeness  to  Christ.  6.  Carefulness  to  guard  against 
religious  acts  becoming  formalities.  IV.  The  blessedness  of  sxtlfillino  this 
DUTY.  1.  It  constitutes  the  most  solid  and  satisfactory  proof  of  inward  religion. 
The  spiritual  processes  of  contrition,  faith,  forgiveness,  (fee,  are  all  inward  and 
secret,  and  so  there  is  a  necessity  for  the  practical  fruits  of  these  in  likeness  to 
Christ,  to  be  brought  forth,  so  that  the  Christian  and  others  may  have  full  demonstra- 
tion that  he  is  born  of  God.  2.  It  is  the  only  way  of  securing  that  peace  and 
comfort  which  specifically  belong  to  the  religious  life.  The  peace  of  the  sinner  flows 
into  him  entirely  from  without;  the  peace  of  a  saint  from  purified  affections  and 
Godlikeness,  and  in  proportion  as  he  puts  on  Christ  will  this  be  secured  to  him  in 
Christ's  companionship.  3.  It  is  the  great  secret  of  spiritual  strength,  safety,  and 
perseverance.  The  text  gives  us  the  meaning  of  "  the  armour  of  light."  4.  It  is 
the  best  preparation  for  the  day  of  His  coming,  when  they  only  who  are  like  Him 
will  be  able  to  see  Him  as  He  is.  {T.Binney,LL.D.)  Christ's  character  the souVt 
true  garment : — The  soul  requires  a  garment  as  well  as  the  body,  and  the  true 
garment  of  the  soul  is  the  character  of  Christ.  This  is — I.  A  most  ikdispensablb 
oabment.  Sin  has  stripped  the  soul  of  its  true  attire,  and  three  things  mark  ita 
history  everywhere.  1.  Moral  shame.  It  shrinks  from  the  eye  of  scrutiny.  2. 
Painful  exposure.  It  is  at  the  mercy  of  the  elements  around  it.  3.  Bobing 
expedients.    From  the  time  that  our  first  parents  sewed  their  fig  leaves,  every  soul 


600  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHA».  xm, 

has  been  busy  at  eome  garment.  The  old  Pagan  world  was  fall  of  each  manofao- 
tares,  nor  is  the  modem  religions  world  destitute  of  saoh  self-made  robes,  bat  thej 
are  all  "  filthy  rags."  II.  A  most  pbbcious  oabhsnt.  The  most  yalaable  thing  in 
the  world  is  moral  goodness,  whose  most  perfect  form  is  the  character  of  Christ. 
This  garment  is — 1.  Ever  beautiful.  "  How  great  is  His  beauty."  "  We  beheld 
His  glory,"  *o.  The  highest  beings  in  the  universe  admire  this  robe.  2.  Ever 
enduring.  The  costly  robes  of  princes  shall  rot,  even  the  heavens  themselves 
shall  be  folded  np  as  a  vesture,  but  the  character  of  Christ  shall  last  for  ever.  III. 
A  HOST  AVAiLABLB  OABMEMT.  We  are  Constantly  patting  on  the  characters  of 
others.  This  assimilation  is  a  law  of  oar  social  being.  Our  characters  are  formed 
on  the  principle  of  imitation.  The  character  of  Him  is  most  easily  attainable  by 
ns.  He  has  the  most — 1.  Lovableness.  He  whom  we  love  most  we  shall  imitat« 
most.  Christ  is  infinitely  lovable.  2.  Accessibleness.  He,  if  lovable,  with  whom 
we  can  have  the  most  &ee,  constant,  and  uninterrupted  access,  will  impress  as 
most  easily  with  his  characteristics.  Christ  is  ever  with  us.  "  Our  fellowship  ia 
indeed  with  the  Father,  and  with  His  Son  Jesus  Christ."  (D.  Thomat,  D.D.) 
The  garment  of  salvation : — I.  What  is  it  to  put  on  the  Lobd  Jesus  Christ?  It 
implies  the  taking  of — 1.  His  merit.  2.  His  spirit  and  temper.  3.  His  badge,  and 
making  a  public  profession  of  being  His  servants.  H.  How  abb  wb  to  do  this  T 
By — 1.  An  internal  application  of  Him.  Thus  we  put  on  Christ  before  God,  and 
make  Him  our  only— (1)  Plea.  (2)  Ground  of  justification.  (3)  Hope  of  glory. 
2.  An  external  profession  of  Him,  by  works  before  men.  (JR.  Cecil,  M.A.)  The 
believer't  dress  cast  every  other  in  the  shade.  I.  Costlt.  It  cost  the  King  of  Glory 
His  life  and  death  (Phil.  ii.  6-8).  II.  Cohfobtablb.  It  fills  the  soul  with  peace 
and  joy  (chap.  xv.  13).  III.  Complete.  It  leaves  not  part  of  body  or  soul  exposed 
(OoL  ii.  10).  IV.  Comely,  in  the  eyes  of  God,  angels,  and  men  (Eiek.  xvi.  14). 
V.  Globious  (2  Cor.  iii,  18).  VL  Dubablb  (Heb.  xiii.  8).  VII.  Divinb  (Jer.  xxiiL 
6).  (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  The  best  dress  (Children's  Sermon) : — It  is — I.  A  nbw 
DBES&  1.  It  is  not  our  natural  dress.  2.  It  is  of  peculiar  excellence.  IL  A  bioh 
DBE8&  To  put  on  Christ  is  to  put  on — 1.  Humility,  as  the  tunic,  always  worn, 
fitting  the  body  close.  2.  Love,  as  the  cloak,  often  taken  ofF  to  cast  round  others. 
8.  Truth,  as  the  girdle,  making  the  wearer  strong  and  ready  for  work.  4.  Obedience, 
as  the  sandals.  ILL  A  Chubch  dbesb,  because — 1.  It  is  the  best.  It  is  right  to 
wear  the  best  dress  in  church.  2.  It  is  sacred.  IV.  A  coubt  dbbsb.  Toa  will 
wear  this  dress  in  heaven.  Keep  it  well,  then ;  yon  are  to  see  the  King  in  it.  (/. 
Edmond,  D.D.)  The  drama  of  life : — The  apostle  meant,  "  Personify  Christ ;  act 
His  part"  Never,  it  is  true,  shall  we  be  perfect  as  the  Master  was ;  but  by  patience, 
prayer,  and  effort  we  may  come  to  resemble  Him  closely.  A  young  artist  may  be 
twitted  as  he  sits  before  his  model  with,  "  Are  you  vain  enoagh  to  think  that  yon 
can  paint  as  well  as  Titian  or  Turner?"  He  will  reply,  "No,  but  I  hope  by 
industry  to  make  fair  copies  of  their  pictures."  L  Directions.  1.  Study  your 
part  welL  No  success  without  this.  Alexander  carried  a  copy  of  Homer  with  him 
in  all  his  campaigns.  Eminent  orators  have  studied  Demosthenes  and  Cicero. 
Lord  Wolaeley  has  made  war  his  one  study.  How  widely  Dickens  observed  1  So 
success  in  our  line  cannot  be  achieved  without  habitual  regard  to  Christ.  "  Be- 
holding as  in  a  glass,"  &o.  A  saint  had  a  vision  of  Christ  on  which  he  gazed  so 
long  that  he  afterwards  found  in  his  own  hands  and  feet  the  marks  of  the  nails. 
A  mere  fable,  but  one  with  an  impressive  moraL  2.  Attend  to  private  preparation. 
Solitary  discipline  has  ever  preceded  public  proficiency  in  musicians,  soldiers,  <ftc. 
Communion  with  God  will  keep  us  right  in  our  fellowship  with  man.  3.  Be  an 
enthusiast.  He  who  has  no  higher  ambition  than  to  get  through  his  part  will 
never  be  a  good  actor.  "How  comes  it,"  asked  a  bishop  of  Garrick,  "that  I,  in 
expounding  Divine  truths,  produce  so  little  effect,  while  you  so  easily  rouse  the 
deepest  feelings  of  your  audience  by  the  representation  of  your  fiction  ? " 
"Because,"  said  the  actor,  "I  recite  fiction  as  if  it  were  truth,  while  you  deliver 
truth  as  if  it  were  fiction."  U.  Encouragements.  1.  You  have  a  prompter — the 
Holy  Ghost,  "  He  shall  bring  all  things  to  your  remembrance,"  &c.  Napoleon  IH. 
wrote,  "  I  always  make  my  great  uncle  my  model,  his  spirit  accompanying  me,  and 
enabling  me  to  succeed  in  the  same. "  We  may  make  a  higher  boast  than  that.  2. 
Others  have  acted  their  part  well.  3.  Never  mind  though  you  act  badly  at  first 
When  Kemble  made  his  first  appearance  he  was  laughed  down;  so  was  Disraeli 
4.  You  will  be  applauded  if  you  act  your  part  well — by  God  and  the  good.  (T.  R. 
Stephenson. )  Persuasives  and  dissuasives : — Here  is — L  A  persuasivb  to  holi- 
ITESS — put  on  Christ.      1.  His  humility  and  self-denial.      2.  His  meekness  and 


CRiF.  xm.l  ROMANS.  601 

patience.  8.  His  parity  and  fervent  seal.  IL  A  disscabitb  fbou  six.  1.  Gaard 
against  its  occasions.  2.  Check  the  first  desire.  8.  Mortify  its  lusts.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
PuttiTig  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ : — There  are  two  methods  of  moral  improvement : 
first,  acting  from  ourselves  according  to  an  abstract  principle ;  and,  secondly,  living 
over  again  the  example  of  aotaal  excellence.  It  is  the  latter  method  to  which  the 
text  points.  It  is  certainly  a  very  remarkable  power  which  God  has  given  as,  of 
realising  in  ourselves  a  character  different  from  our  own.  We  cannot  fail  to  see  in 
saoh  a  constitution  the  Divine  purpose,  not  only  that  we  should  enter  into  the  feel- 
ing of  others,  but  moreover  that  we  should  enrich  our  own  nature ;  not  be  confined 
strictly  to  our  native  tendencies  and  original  biases,  but  borrow  others'  wisdom,  copy 
others'  virtue,  and  incorporate  into  our  own  being  a  thousand  exotic  excellences.  A 
consideration  of  some  of  the  modes  in  which  this  representing,  realising  power 
operates  may  help  us  to  understand  it  as  a  moral  faculty,  and  consecrate  it  to  the 
highest  uses.  Do  we  not  see  a  very  familiar  display  of  it  in  the  genius  of  the  poet, 
by  which  he  conceives  of  characters — creatures  of  his  imagination,  yet  true  to 
nature— distinguished  from  one  another  and  from  himself  in  their  modes  of 
thought  and  actuating  passions,  and,  through  all  the  variety  of  situations  in  which 
they  may  be  placed,  severally  well  sustained?  Nothing  is  more  common  than  this 
representation  in  the  Bible  itself.  Sacred  historian,  psalmist,  and  prophet  are  con- 
tinually  figuring  certain  characters  before  our  minds  as  examples  or  warnings. 
The  parables  of  our  Lord  are  commonly  but  portraitures  to  our  spiritual  fancy  of 
diverse  moral  characters  ;  and  we  can  learn  the  lesson  He  intends  only  by  a  vigor- 
ons  nse  of  this  representing  and  reproducing  power.  The  exercises,  too,  of  the 
human  voice  in  recitation  and  oratory,  only  set  before  us  in  tones  what  the  pen  has 
first  traced  in  simple  words.  From  the  child  that  is  taught  to  speak  the  sentiments 
of  some  saint  or  martyr  in  his  earliest  declamations  at  school,  to  the  grave  debater 
In  legislative  halls ;  from  the  narrator  at  the  fireside,  to  the  lively  rehearser  of 
inspired  pages  of  human  composition,  or  the  edifying  reader  of  the  sacred  Word  of 
Ood,  what  do  we  see  throughout  but  this  very  endeavour  of  the  soul  to  personate 
and  put  on  the  meaning  and  feeling  of  some  other  character,  and,  so  far  as  it  is 
understood  and  believed  to  be  a  noble  character,  to  adopt,  appropriate,  and  live 
over  again  its  nobleness  ?  Or,  to  illustrate  the  subject  from  more  homely,  univer- 
sally known  facts,  the  strong  working  of  this  assimilating  power  of  the  soul  will  not 
be  doubted  by  any  who  have  noticed  how  in  daily  life  we  continually  fashion  each 
other,  and  are  fashioned  by  those  we  are  with  ;  who  have  observed  the  contagion  of 
custom  in  a  community,  the  transfer  of  manners,  the  mutual  likeness  oftea  obtain- 
ing both  of  moral  traits  and  visible  expression  between  husband  and  wife,  and  more 
or  less  all  the  dwellers  under  a  single  roof,  and,  in  short,  the  transforming  force 
npon  our  own  hearts  from  the  scenes  we  enter,  the  presence  we  stand  in,  the  books 
we  read,  the  images  we  contemplate.  This  impersonation  of  the  soul,  in  the  use 
and  actual  bearing  of  every  man,  exceeds  in  subtlety  and  extent  all  the  imaginations 
that  poetry  has  ever  expressed.  Therefore  is  not  the  Divine  wisdom  toward  us 
shown,  when  the  Scripture  fixes  on  this  fundamental  instinct  as  a  moral  power  to 
be  dedicated,  for  its  main  employment,  to  our  spiritual  growth  ?  Like  the  painter 
who  drew  in  a  single  likeness  the  transcript  of  what  was  best  in  each  selected 
countenance,  we  shall  be  continually  transferring  from  the  vast  galleries  of  Provi- 
dence and  Holy  Writ,  from  the  society  of  the  present  aud  the  past,  and  from  the 
face  of  those  on  earth  or  in  heaven,  the  manifold  moral  beauty  which  is  "  every 
creature's  best,"  and  thus  put  that  imitative  and  personating  faculty,  by  which  we 
pass  into  another's  heart,  to  its  highest  designed  use.  The  justice  we  admire,  the 
charity  we  love,  the  holy  zeal  and  endurance  we  revere,  the  fervent  adoration  and 
self-devotion  which  makes  our  hearts  bum — all  these  we  possess  and  become.  The 
whole  gospel  is  preached  and  summed  up  in  that  single  exhortation.  "  To  put  on 
Christ " ;  "  to  be  found  in  Him,  not  having  our  own  righteousness "  ;  to  be 
"  clothed  "  with  His  meekness  and  humility  ;  to  have  "  His  spirit,"  and  "  the  same 
mind  in  us  that  was  also  in  Him  "  ;  to  open  our  hearts  for  His  "  abode,"  and  have 
Him  "  formed  within  us,  the  hope  of  glory" — who  but  recognises  at  once,  in  this 
so  controverted  and  abused  language,  the  burden  of  the  New  Testament  ?  And 
wherein  is  the  sense  of  this  language,  if  not  in  the  appropriation  of  His  worth  to 
our  nature,  by  the  force  of  sympathy,  and  of  a  twofold  spiritual  consciousness 
operating  to  unite  Him  to  ourselves  ?  Thus  the  Divine  graces  of  His  character  are 
not  impressed  in  the  way  of  mere  commandment  alone  ;  but,  as  the  beauty  of  the 
landscape  and  the  fragrance  of  flowers  possess  our  outward  senses,  so  these  finer 
influences  sink  into  the  deeper  perceptions  of  the  spirit.    No  poet's  imagination,  no 


€02  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cms.  «T. 


speaker's  expression,  no  artist's  fancj,  no  friendship's  experience,  and  no  other 
character  on  the  historic  page,  can  work  on  us  the  elevating  transformation  which 
\re  feel  in  gazing  on  onr  Master  as  He  appears  in  the  artless  evangelic  accounts, 
till  oar  whole  thought  becomes  identified  with  the  object  of  our  regard,  and  He 
appears  to  us,  not  in  human  articles  of  theoretic  belief,  but  shines  with  a  living 
glory  into  our  real  knowledge  and  love.  Neither  can  any  simple  self-culture, 
which  has  perhaps  been  too  much  our  method,  any  laborious  efforts  of  will, 
any  works  or  merits  of  ours,  suffice  for  our  salvation,  and  lift  us  into  the 
highest  Divine  frame,  without  this  admiring  absorption  of  mind  into  the  model 
and  mould  of  perfection,  by  which  we  "put  on  Jesus  Christ."  (C.  A.  Bartol.) 
Robed  in  Christ's  righteousness : — The  moment  the  man  believes  in  Jesus  Christ 
he  is  in  the  righteousness  of  Christ — ^perfectly  righteous ;  he  has  put  upon 
him  the  Saviour's  garments.  You  heard  Mr.  Weaver  say  on  this  platform — I 
thought  it  was  a  good  illustration — that  one  day  he  met  with  a  very  poor  man  who 
was  in  rags.  This  man  being  a  Christian,  he  wished  to  befriend  him  ;  he  told  him 
if  he  would  go  home  with  him,  he  would  give  him  a  suit  of  clothes.  "  So,"  said 
Bichard,  ••  I  went  upstairs  and  took  off  my  second  best,  and  put  on  my  Sunday  best, 
for  I  did  not  want  to  give  him  my  best.  I  sent  the  man  upstairs,  and  told  him  he 
would  find  a  suit  which  he  could  put  on  ;  it  was  my  second  best.  So  after  he  had 
put  on  the  clothes,  and  left  his  rags  behind,  he  came  down  and  said, '  Well,  Mr. 
Weaver,  what  do  you  think  of  me?  '  •  Well,'  I  said, '  I  think  you  look  very  respect- 
able.' 'Oh,  yes,  but,  Mr.  Weaver,  it  is  not  me;  I  am  not  respectable,  it  is  your 
clothes  that  are  respectable.'  And  so,"  added  Mr.  Weaver,  "  so  is  it  with  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ ;  He  meets  ns  covered  with  the  rags  and  filth  of  sin,  and  He  tells  as 
to  go  and  put  on  not  His  second  best,  but  the  best  robe  of  His  perfect  righteous- 
ness ;  and  when  we  come  down  with  that  on,  we  say,  •  Lord,  what  dost  Thou  think 
of  me  ?'  and  He  says,  •  Why,  thou  art  all  fair,  My  love ;  there  is  no  spot  in  thee.' 
We  answer, '  No,  it  is  not  me,  it  is  Thy  righteousness ;  I  am  comely  because  Thou 
art  comely ;  I  am  beaotifal  because  Thou  art  beaatiiaJL' "    {0.  H.  Spurgeon.) 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


Yebs.  1-12;  Elm  that  Is  weak  In  the  faith  receive,  hnt  not  to  donbtfdl  disputa- 
tions.— Strong  and  weak : — Here  is  a  lesson — I.  Fob  those  who  abb  stbono  in  thb 
FAITH.  1.  Not  to  provoke.  2.  Nor  despise  those  who  are  weak.  II.  Fob  thosh 
WHO  ABE  WEAK.  Not  to  judge  their  stronger  brethren.  IH.  Fob  both.  1.  To  think 
and  let  think.  2.  To  give  each  other  credit  for  sincerity.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The 
weak  in  the  faith  to  he  received,  or  tJ^e  duty  of  mutual  forbearance: — 1.  "Faith"is  not 
here  used  in  the  sense  of  confidence  in  Christ,  but  of  the  faith.  The  question  was, 
did  Christianity  or  did  it  not  require  abstinence  from  certain  meats,  and  observance 
of  certain  fasts  and  festivals  ?  The  man  who  maintained  that  it  did  is  here  held 
to  be  weak  in  the  faith.  He  had  but  faintly  grasped  the  breadth  of  Christ's  redeem- 
ing work ;  while  he  who  had  attained  superior  light,  and  had  been  set  free  from  all 
such  scruples,  was  therefore  strong  in  the  faith.  2.  Now,  the  apostle  assumes  that 
the  latter  was  right.  Had  he  been  wrong,  there  could  have  been  no  discussion,  and 
there  could  be  no  just  ground  for  a  moment's  toleration  of  him.  But  he  was  not 
wrong  (ver.  14).  The  Mosaic  law  on  these  subjects  had  been  done  away  in  Christ 
(Col.  ii.  16,  17).  8.  The  question  was  whether  the  man  who  conscientiously 
abstained  and  observed  might,  or  might  not,  be  received  into  the  Church.  He  was 
certainly  not  required  in  order  to  salvation  to  disregard  the  Jewish  festivals,  nor 
to  eat  unclean  meats.  But  it  never  could  be  tolerated  that  he  should  set  up  his 
scrupulous  conscience  as  the  normal  standard  of  Christian  faith  (Gal.  ii.  3-5 ;  iv. 
9-11 ;  V.  1-4).  No  one  must  bind  burdens  upon  men  which  the  Lord  had  not 
bound.  Hence  the  weak  in  faith  is  to  be  received,  but  not  to  judgings  or  condemna- 
tions of  opinions.  If  he  is  content  to  enjoy  the  advantages  of  fellowship  with 
you,  without  insisting  that  you  are  all  wrong,  let  him  be  received;  but  if  bis 
object  is  to  promote  contention,  &c,,  then  he  has  no  rightful  place  amongst  you. 
I.  Let  not  the  strong  in  the  faith  despise  them  that  abb  weak,  for  their 
convictions  rest  ultimately  upon  Divine  revelation.  The  law  of  Moses  was 
of  Divine  authority,  and,  although  done  away  in  Christ,  was  sabject  to  it. 


eHAP.  xiy.]  ROMANS.  803 

Therefore  it  was  not  sarprising  if  some  o{  the  Jewish  converts  still  felt  ln> 
sup«rable  objections  to  its  abandonment.  It  was  a  matter  of  conscience,  and  the 
man  who  respects  his  conscience  deserves  respect,  even  when  prejudiced  and 
wrong  (ver.  6).  The  strong,  therefore,  must  not  put  a  stumbling-block  in  their 
brother's  way.  This  may  be  done — 1.  By  a  contempt  of  his  scruples.  The  dis- 
position to  sneer  at  his  stupid  weakness  will  not  convince  him  that  he  is  either 
stapid  or  weak,  but  will  rather  drive  him  utterly  away  from  those  who  tolerate 
Buch  an  ungenerous  spirit,  and  perhaps  to  apostasy.  Now,  though  the  strong  had 
a  perfect  right  to  disregard  the  distinctions  of  meats,  he  had  no  right  to  imperii 
the  salvation  of  any  one  for  whom  Christ  died  (ver.  17).  The  weak  are  not  required 
to  abstain  from  meats,  but  you  are  not  bound  to  eat  them  (1  Cor.  viii.  13).  2.  By 
example  or  persuasion.  It  was  quite  lawful  for  the  strong  to  employ  argument  in 
order  to  convince  the  weak  that  he  misapprehended  the  character  and  purpose  of 
Christianity :  but  it  was  not  lawful  for  him  to  laugh  at  his  scruples,  and  to  assure 
him,  without  adducing  proof,  that  there  could  lOxUy  be  no  harm  in  eating,  &o. 
That  might  be  quite  true  for  him,  but  it  would  not  be  true  for  his  weak  brother. 
If  this  man  presumed  to  eat  the  meat,  or  to  disregard  the  day,  while  his  scruples 
remained,  his  own  conscience  would  accuse  him  of  unfaithfulness.  Thank  God  for 
thy  Uberty  (ver.  22) ;  but  use  it  lawfully  (Gal.  v.  13 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  16 ;  1  Cor.  viii.  9). 
II.  The  weak  in  the  faith  are  not  to  judge  ob  condemn  the  strono  in  the  faith, 
the  thing  to  which  they  are  always  predisposed.  Incapable  of  grasping  compre- 
hensive principles,  that,  e.g.,  of  Christian  love,  they  feel  to  require  a  miSdtitude  of 
minute  prescriptions.  Days  and  meats  and  dress  must  all  be  fixed  by  enactment. 
And  so  being  most  punctiliously  conscientious  themselves,  are  ready  to  condemn 
brethren  who  are  not  equally  scrupulous.  Admit  them  into  the  Church  by  all 
means,  says  the  apostle  ;  but  they  must  lay  aside  this  censorious  spirit.  For  it  is 
not  suffered  them  to  usurp  the  place  of  the  great  Supreme.  These  matters  are  in 
themselves  morally  indifferent  (ver.  14 ;  1  Tim.  iv.  4).  Let  every  man  be  fully 
persuaded  in  his  own  mind,  and  act  upon  his  own  convictions.  Your  judgment  is 
not  binding  upon  any  conscience  but  your  own.  As  to  all  other  matters  there  must 
be  mutual  forbearance  and  charity.  Yet  it  is  for  each  one  to  see — 1.  That  he  is 
loyally  and  earnestly  devoted  to  the  service  of  his  Lord.  Whether  strong  or  weak 
his  object  must  be  to  approve  himself  unto  the  Lord  in  everything,  and  for  the 
Lord's  sake  to  promote  the  comfort  and  perfection  of  aU  his  brethren.  2.  That 
conscience  is  not  offended.  Happy  is  he  that  condemneth  not  himself  in  that  which 
he  alloweth  in  his  own  practice.  Where  there  is  doubt,  respect  that  doubt.  Seek 
that  your  conscience  may  be  well  informed.  {W.  Tyson.)  The  treatment 
of  the  weak : — Weak  Christians  have  infirmities,  but  infirmity  supposes  life ; 
and  we  must  not  despise  them  in  heart,  word,  or  carriage.  We  must  rather 
deny  ourselves  than  offend  them.  We  must  support  them — bear  them  as  pillars 
bear  the  house,  as  the  shoulders  the  burden,  as  the  wall  the  vine,  as  parents  their 
children,  as  the  oak  the  ivy ;  and  this  because — 1.  They  are  brethren.  Are  they 
not  of  the  same  body  ?  Shall  the  hand  cut  off  the  little  finger  because  it  is  not  as 
large  as  the  thumb  ?  Do  men  throw  away  their  corn  because  it  comes  into  the 
bam  with  chaff  7  II.  They  are  weak.  Bear  with  them  out  of  pity.  In  a  family, 
if  one  of  the  little  ones  be  sick,  all  the  larger  children  are  ready  to  attend  it,  which 
they  need  not  do  if  it  were  well.  HI.  Christ  does  so.  "  Bear  ye  one  another's 
burdens,  and  so  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ " — the  law  of — 1.  His  command.  2.  Hia 
example.  He  takes  special  care  of  the  lambs,  will  not  quench  the  smoking  flax, 
and  is  touched  with  a  feehng  of  our  infirmities.  {Philip  Henry.)  The  duty 
of  forbearance  in  matters  of  opinion : — Differences  of  opinion — I.  Most  necessarily 
ARISE  even  amono  CHRISTIANS,  oot  of — 1.  Human  ignorance.  2.  The  different 
constitution  of  the  mind.  II.  In  trivial  matters  indicate  weakness  op  faith 
IN  THOSE  WHO  ARE  RioiDLY  SCRUPULOUS.  They  do  uot  Understand  the  spirituality 
and  liberty  of  the  gospel.  III.  Should  be  maintained  in  the  spirit  op  love.  1. 
The  strong  may  not  despise  the  weak.  2.  The  weak  and  scrupulous  may  not  judge 
the  strong.  IV.  Abe  op  infinitely  less  importance  than  Christian  brotherhood. 
He  whom  God  has  received  must  be — 1.  Respected.  2.  Treated  as  a  brother 
beloved.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Religious  toleration: — The  argument  for  this  ia 
founded  on — I.  The  nature  and  condition  of  man.  He  is  imperfect,  and  therefore 
shonld  also  be  tolerant.  There  is  nothing  more  universal  than  ignorance,  and 
henoe  there  should  be  no  virtue  more  universal  than  toleration.  The  facility  with 
which  we  all  absorb  error  and  fall  into  prejudices,  should  make  us  alwayg 
readj  to  tolerate  many  shades  of  religious  opinion.     It  is  folly  to  demand  a  unity 


e04  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tr?. 

of  belief  in  a  world  where  there  is  no  one  wise  bnt  God,  and  no  one  good  except 
Ood.  Some  of  the  best  men  have  been  the  victims  of  great  errors.  All  intolerance 
is  based  upon  egotism.  It  proceeds  from  the  assumption  that  yon  have  reached 
the  ideal.  The  dreadful  Popish  persecutions  all  originated  in  a  human  egotism 
that  cried,  "  I  have  found  it  I  "  They  had  become  the  exponents  of  Ood.  Whereai 
now  history  shows  that  in  all  oases  the  persons  exiled  or  put  to  death  held  a  better 
creed  at  the  time  than  those  who  forced  upon  them  the  bitter  fate.    II.  In  the  fact 

THAT  THB  IDEAS  OVEB  WHICH  MOST  BLOOD  HAS  BEEN  SHED  HAVE  BUBSEQUENTLT  BEEK 

tBovsN  EiTHEB  T7SELESS  OB  FALSE.  But  oue  might  have  premised  that  the  most 
intolerance  would  always  be  found  gathered  about  the  least  valuable  doctrine, 
because  the  most  valuable  doctrines  are  always  so  evident  that  no  thumb-screw  or 
faggot  is  ever  needed  to  make  the  lips  whisper  assent.  No  man  has  ever  been  put 
to  death  for  heresy  regarding  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  But  when  a  church  comes 
along  with  its  "legitimacy,"  its  Five  Points,  its  Prayer  Book,  or  its  Infant  Baptism, 
then  comes  the  demand  for  the  rack  and  the  stake  to  make  up  in  terrorism  what  is 
wanting  in  evidence.  When  witnesses  were  wanting,  the  high  priests  rent  their 
clothes.  If  God  has  so  fashioned  the  human  mind  that  all  its  myriad  forms  can 
agree  npon  doctrines  that  are  most  vital ;  and  if ,  as  a  fact,  persecution  has  always 
attached  itself  to  the  small,  then  we  would  seem  to  have  the  curse  of  God  visibly 
revealed  against  intolerance.  (D.  Swing. )  Toleration : — A  Quaker,  after  listen- 
ing to  Wiiitefield's  preaching,  came  up  to  him  and  said,  "  Friend  George,  I  am  as 
tbou  art.  I  am  for  bringing  all  to  the  life  and  power  of  the  everlasting  God ;  and 
therefore  if  thou  wilt  not  quarrel  with  me  about  my  hat,  I  will  not  quarrel  with  thee 
about  thy  gown."  {J.  R,  Andrews.)  Toleration:  it$  value: — Sailer,  afterwards 
Bishop  of  Begensburg,  could  be  identified  with  no  party,  and  was  hated  by  each. 
Napoleon  prevented  his  promotion  at  one  time  by  assuring  the  king  he  was  a  mere 
hanger-on  to  the  Roman  court ;  the  Pope  refused  it  at  another  because  he  suspected 
his  attachment  to  the  Church.  ...  He  was  one  of  the  mildest  and  most  tolerant 
of  men — mild  to  excess.  It  is  told  that  having  preached  one  morning  near  Salzburg, 
the  parish  clergyman  rose  up  and  said  he  would  preach  himself  in  the  afternoon,  as 
Sailer  had  made  the  doors  of  heaven  too  wide.  "  Ton  are  excellent  at  bandages," 
said  one  of  his  friends,  "  but  a  bad  operator."  "  Very  possibly,"  he  replied ;  "  in 
my  life  I  have  seen  more  wounds  healed  by  a  good  bandage  than  by  a  knife. "  (Dr. 
Stephenson.)  Unity  to  be  maintained  in  spite  of  differences  of  opinion : — L  How 
IT  IB  IMPEBILLED.  1.  By  forciug  our  own  opinions  on  others.  2.  By  overestimating 
our  own  practice.  II.  How  it  may  be  peomoted.  1.  By  forbearance  (ver.  8).  2. 
By  humility  (ver.  4).  3.  By  aiming  at  personal  conviction  (ver.  6).  4.  By  keeping 
in  view  the  glory  of  God  (ver.  6).  HI.  Whbbeon  it  bests.  1.  The  common 
assurance  that  we  serve  one  Lord.  2.  That  we  are  all  redeemed  by  Him.  IV. 
What  it  bequibes.  1.  That  we  avoid  all  unbrotherly  conduct.  2.  That  we  all 
submit  to  God.  3.  That  we  remember  our  final  account.  {J.  Lyth,  D.  D .)  Religioia 
disputations: — This  chapter  is  written  to  dissuade  men  from  acting  the  part  of 
religious  critics.  It  cannot  be  said  that  men  are  indifferent  to  religion  in  other 
folks.  It  is  only  to  rehgion  in  themselves  that  they  are  comparatively  indifferent. 
Men  are  so  accustomed  to  criticise  each  other's  church  service,  &c.,  tnat  they  lose 
the  very  spirit  of  religion.  The  apostle  dissuades  everybody  from  it.  A  little 
spring  comes  out  from  the  side  of  a  mountain,  pure  and  cooL  Two  men  are  deter- 
mined that  that  spring  shall  be  kept  perfectly  pure  and  drinkable.  One  wants  it  to 
be  done  in  one  way,  and  the  other  in  another  way ;  and  they  are  so  zealous  to  keep 
the  spring  pure  that  they  get  to  quarrelling  about  it,  and  tramp  through  it,  and 
make  it  muddy.  They  defile  it  in  their  very  zeal  to  keep  it  pure ;  and  the  water 
flows  down  turbid  and  unfit  to  drink.  Now,  men  are  so  determined  to  glori^  God 
that  they  act  like  the  devil.  They  are  so  determined  that  charity  shall  prevail  that 
they  slay  men.  They  are  so  determined  that  a  kind  spirit  shall  exist  that  they  will 
not  have  a  word  to  say  to  a  man  who  does  not  believe  in  their  catechism.  They 
are  so  determined  that  the  world  shall  be  generous  that  they  stir  up  all  manner  of 
corrupting  appetites  and  passions.  They  condemn  their  fellow-men,  saying,  '•  Well, 
they  are  not  orthodox.  They  are  not  true  believers.  They  do  not  belong  to  the 
true  Church.  There  are  no  covenants  for  them."  So,  under  one  pretence  and 
another,  the  great  Christian  brotherhood,  through  the  ages  past,  has  been  turmoiled 
and  distracted ;  and  the  world  has  seen  the  spectacle  of  anything  but  what  Ood 
meant  to  establish  in  the  world.  The  Church  by  which  He  meant  to  make  known 
His  manifold  wisdom,  has  made  manifest  narrowness,  sectarianism,  selfishness, 
unjust  partialities,  and  all  manner  of  irritable  jealousies.  It  has  not  made  manifatt 


«BAP.  ziT.]  HOMANS.  60S 

the  beauty  of  Qoi,  the  Bweetoess  of  Christ  Jeans,  nor  the  love  of  the  Spirit  It  is 
a  faot  which  I  think  can  be  stated  withoat  fear  of  oontradiotion,  that  the  general 
aspect  of  religion,  as  presented  by  chorohes  throughoat  Christendom,  is  not  winning 
and  attractive,  and  that  the  "  beaaty  of  holiness,"  of  which  the  Soriptares  speak, 
has  not  yet  blossomed  out  in  the  world.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Praetieal  godlines* 
better  rectifiei  the  judgment  than  doiibtful  ditputatiom : — 1.  The  weak  one  is — (1) 
Not  one  that  is  weak  and  sick  to  death,  erring  in  the  foundation  of  faith — one  vrao 
doth  "  not  hold  the  Head"  (Col.  ii.  19),  who  "  denieth  the  Lord  that  bought  him  " 
(2  Pet.  ii.  1 ;  2  John  10).  (2)  Nor  one  who  is  sick  about  "  questions  "  (1  Tim.  i. 
4,  V.  13;  2  Tim.  u.  13).  (3)  But  one  who,  though  he  hath  embraced  the  Saviour, 
yet  is  not  of  a  mature  judgment,  clear  enough  about  the  abolition  of  ceremonial 
observations,  things  [whioh]  he  judgeth  ought  to  be  forborne  or  done.  2.  Charity 
is  enjoined  towards  such.  "  Take  them  to  you,  receive  them  into  your  houses  " 
(chap.  xii.  13 ;  Luke  v.  29).  When  they  fly  for  their  religion  and  lives,  supply  their 
wants,  though  not  just  of  your  opinion.  Do  not  force  them  to  practise  what  they 
cannot  freely  do,  but  receive  them  into  your  arms,  love  and  converse,  that  you 
may  instruct  them  and  win  them  into  your  communion.  Let  not  little  differ- 
enoes  cause  the  greatest  distances  (ver.  3).  3.  The  limitation  of  this  exception. 
"Not  to  doubtful  disputations."  L  Disputations  abb  not  basilt  JUDaKD  of  bt 
snOH  AS  ABB  WBAK  IN  FAITH.  This  is  evident  from  the  first  dispute  that  ever  was  in 
the  world.  1.  By  this  first  dispute  with  the  serpent,  oar  first  parents  were  foiled 
when  in  uprightness  and  strength  of  the  image  of  God.  But  now  sinful  man  is  in 
a  much  more  dark  and  doleful  state.  For — (1)  He  cannot  form  an  idea  of  any> 
thing  as  it  is  in  itself  (1  Cor.  viii.  2 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  5).  (2)  His  judgment,  therefore, 
must  needs  be  dubious  or  wrong  whereby  he  is  to  compare  things  that  differ  or 
agree  (Hosea  ix.  7 ;  Isa.  v.  20 ;  Heb.  v.  14).  (3)  His  conclusions,  therefore,  must  needs 
be  distorted  from  these  premisses ;  and  the  errors  in  the  first  and  second  concoction 
are  not  corrected  and  amended  by  the  third.  He  who  cannot  make  one  straight 
step,  can  never  take  three  together.  2.  As  we  are  lame  in  our  feet  by  our  naturals, 
BO  even  those  who  by  the  light  of  the  gospel  and  grace  are  brought  over  to  better 
understanding,  yet  by  virtue  of  the  old  craziness  they  are  not  thoroughly  illuminated 
and  refined.  The  very  apostles  themselves  were  plainly  told  by  our  Saviour  of  His 
sufferings  and  resurrection,  yet  "they  understood  none  of  these  things"  (Luke  xviii. 
33,  34,  xxiv.  45).  Paul  says,  We  "  know  "  but  "  in  part "  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12).  We  see 
but  one  side  of  the  globe.  These  weak  Jews  were  zealous  for  their  ceremonies ;  the 
Oentiles,  as  hot  for  theirs ;  let  no  man  think  himself  infalUble,  for  these  were  all 
mistaken.    3.  Nothing  so  convulseth  men's  reason  as  interest.    II.  Thb  pbacticb 

OF  HOLY  DUnXS  IS  THE  BBADT  WAT  TO  HAVB  OUB  WCSDB  ENLIOHTBNBD  IN  THB  KNOWLEDOB 

OF  PBiNCEPLES.  Thesc  practical  duties — 1,  Give  light  (John  iii.  21).  The  very 
entrance  into  the  command  giveth  light  (Psa.  oxix.  130) ;  the  door  is  a  window  to 
him  that  hath  a  weak  sight.  2.  Advance  light.  Every  step  a  man  takes  he  goeth 
into  a  new  horizon,  and  gets  a  further  prospect  into  truth.  3.  Keep  from  error  or 
help  out  of  it.  Communion  with  the  saints,  e.g.,  as  in  a  team  if  one  horse  lash  out 
of  the  way,  if  the  others  hold  their  course,  they  will  draw  the  former  to  the  right 
path.  ••  If  any  man  will  do  this  will  of  God,  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine  "  (Psa. 
XXV.  14).  III.  Christian  charitt  and  bboeption  will  sooneb  win  weak  ones  to  thb 
TBiTTH  than  biois  abquuents.  1.  Opposition  breeds  oppositions.  When  men  dis- 
pute, they  jostle  for  the  way,  and  so  one  or  both  must  needs  leave  the  path  of 
truth  and  peace.  The  saw  of  contention  reciprocated,  with  its  keen  teeth  eateth 
up  both  truth  and  love ;  for  such  contentions  are  rather  for  victory  than  truth. 
2.  Loving  converse  taketh  off  those  prejudices  which  hinder  men's  minds  from  a 
true  knowledge  of  others'  principles  and  practices.  3.  Sincere  love  and  converse 
breed  a  good  opinion  of  persons  who  differ  from  us.  They  can  taste  humility, 
meekness,  and  kindness,  better  than  the  more  speculative  principles  of  religion. 
(T.  Woodcock,  A.M.)  Untoise  disputations : — Such  facts  remind  us  of  an  incident 
that  occurred  on  the  south-eastern  coast.  A  noble  ship  with  its  crew  and  passengers 
was  in  awful  perU,  having  struck  on  a  sunken  rock.  Having  been  observed  by  those 
on  shore,  the  lifeboat  was  run  down  to  the  beach.  Everything  was  in  readiness 
when  a  most  unseemly  quarrel  arose.  There  were  two  rival  crews,  each  of  which 
claimed  the  right  to  man  the  boat,  and  to  receive  any  remuneration  that  might  be 
earned  by  pulhng  out  to  the  wreck.  Neither  crew  would  give  way  to  the  other,  and 
■0  the  boat  was  not  launched,  and  while  those  men  were  wrangling  with  each  other 
the  ship  and  all  on  board  her  went  under  the  raging  billows.  That  was  a  sad  scene. 
Boi  in  the  eyes  of  Heaven  it  must  be  a  still  sadder  spectacle  to  see  the  Church 


606  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [ohap.  xif. 

wasting  her  time  and  energies  in  disputing  about  points  of  doctrine  and  discipline, 
and  yet  leaving  vast  multitudes  of  men  to  perish  in  their  sin  and  misery  and  despair. 
(Chrigtian  Journal.)  Christian  forbearance : — Let  each  receive  every  other  in  his 
individuality,  and  that  not  to  doubtful  disputations.  We  are  not  to  attempt  to 
Bhape  men  to  that  which  we  think  they  ought  to  be  in  a  hard  and  systematic  manner. 
In  churches  we  see  exhibited  certain  styles  of  character.  The  lines  have  been  laid 
down  with  accuracy.  The  members  are  to  believe  such  and  such  things,  and  they 
are  to  observe  such  and  such  bounds  and  theological  lines,  or  else  they  are  like  a 
plant  that  is  in  a  pot  that  is  too  small  for  its  roots,  and  they  are  dwarfs  all  the  rest 
of  their  lives.  There  are  a  few  Christians  (I  would  to  God  there  were  more)  in 
whom  the  kingdom  of  God  is  like  an  oak  or  cedar  of  Lebanon ;  but  there  are  many 
who  are  called  Christians  in  whom  tbe  kingdom  of  God  is  no  bigger  than  a  thimble. 
There  are  men  who  have  a  few  catechetical  ideas,  who  are  orthodox,  and  who  make 
no  mistakes  in  theology ;  but  woe  be  to  the  man  who  does  not  make  any  mistakes. 
Count  the  sands  of  the  sea,  if  you  can,  without  misreckoning.  A  man  that  has  a 
hundred  ducats  or  dollars  may  count  them  and  make  no  mistake ;  but  multiply 
them  by  millions,  and  then  can  he  count  them  without  any  mistake  ?  I  am  sorry 
for  a  man  who  does  not  make  mistakes.  If  you  have  a  huge  bucket,  and  a  pint  of 
water  in  it,  you  will  never  make  the  mistake  of  spilling  the  water ;  but  if  a  man  is 
carrying  a  huge  bucket  full  of  water  he  will  be  certain  to  spill  it.  (H.  W.  Beecher.) 
Disputations  to  be  avoided ;— John  Wesley,  a  man  whose  bitterest  enemy  could  not 
fairly  accuse  him  of  indifference  to  the  doctrines  and  faith  "  once  delivered  to  the 
Baints,"  wrote  thus  liberally  and  large  heartedly  to  a  correspondent :  "  Men  may  die 
without  any  opinions,  and  yet  be  carried  into  Abraham's  bosom ;  but  if  we  be  without 
love,  what  will  knowledge  avail  ?  I  will  not  quarrel  with  you  about  opinions.  Only 
Bee  that  your  heart  be  right  toward  God,  and  that  you  know  and  love  the  Lord  Jesus 
CSirlst,  and  love  your  neighbours,  and  walk  as  your  Master  walked,  and  I  ask  no  more. 
I  am  sick  of  opinions.  Give  me  a  good  and  substantial  religion,  a  humble,  gentle 
love  of  God  and  man."  Christian  contention : — God  grant  that  we  may  contend 
with  other  churches,  as  the  vine  with  the  olive,  which  of  us  shall  bear  the  best 
fmit ;  but  not,  as  the  brier  with  the  thistle,  which  of  us  will  be  most  unprofitable  I 
(Lord  Bacon.)  Contagious  contention  : — As  a  Uttle  spark  many  times  settetb  a 
whole  house  on  fire ;  even  so  a  contentious  and  froward  person,  of  a  little  matter  of 
nought,  maketh  much  debate  and  division  among  lovers  and  friends.  As  we  see 
one  coal  kindle  another,  and  wood  to  be  apt  matter  to  make  a  fire ;  so  those  that 
are  disposed  to  contention  and  brawling  are  apt  to  kindle  strife.  (Cawdray.)  Test 
of  controversy  : — A  cobbler  at  Leyden,  who  used  to  attend  the  public  disputations 
held  at  the  academy,  was  once  asked  if  he  understood  Latin.  "No,"  replied  the 
mechanic;  "but  I  know  who  is  wrong  in  the  argument."  "How?"  replied  his 
friend.  "  Why,  by  seeing  who  is  angry  first."  Christian  liberty  : — In  such  points 
as  may  be  held  diversely  by  diverse  persons,  I  would  not  take  any  man's  liberty 
from  him ;  and  I  humbly  beseech  all  men  that  they  would  not  take  mine  from  me. 
{Abp.  Bramhall.) 

Vers.  3,  4.  Let  not  him  that  eateth  despise  him  that  eateth  not — Strong  and 
weak : — I.  The  btbonq  should  not  despise  the  weak  brethren.  1.  Tenderness 
and  sensitiveness  of  conscience  is  a  quality  as  precious  as  it  is  rare.  2.  The  clearer 
light  of  the  strong  is  due  to  God's  special  mercy  and  their  superior  advantages.  3. 
He  who  is  good  enough  for  Christ  should  not  be  rejected  by  man.  4.  Possibly,  for 
aught  one  could  tell,  their  brother's  prejudices  might  decrease,  and  he  ultimately 
outshine  the  strongest  of  the  strong  in  Christian  usefulness.  U.  The  weak  shouu) 
AVOID  CENsoRioDSNESS.  1.  Difference  of  opinion  will  ever  exist  upon  minor  questions. 
Ko  two  minds  regard  the  same  subject  exactly  alike.  Two  artists,  looking  at  the 
same  landscape  under  like  circumstances,  will  behold  it  with  different  eyes,  and 
will  represent  it,  though  truthfully,  yet  according  to  their  own  previous  education 
and  peculiar  stamp  of  mind.  2.  It  is  the  office  of  God  alone  to  judge,  and  we 
should  be  charitable  to  others,  but  severe  on  ourselves.  A  weak  brother,  in  regard- 
ing his  strong  brother's  conduct,  was  like  a  man  beholding  an  object  through  a 
mist.  3.  Supposing  our  brother  to  be  somewhat  mistaken  in  trivial  points,  yet 
God  is  willing  to  receive  him ;  and  shall  we  venture  to  excommunicate  and  un- 
church him,  or  withdraw  from  his  fellowship  ?  Might  not  such  conduct  irritate  his 
mind,  stamp  deeper  his  prejudices,  and  lead  him  to  magnify  the  importance  of 
these  really  subordinate  and  less  essential  questions  on  account  of  which  he  is 
despised,  and  thus  neglect  or  depreciate  fundamental  truths  ?     "  Errors,"  writes 


out.  ziT.]  ROMANS.  607 

John  Soott,  "  like  paper  kites,  are  manj  times  raised  and  kept  np  in  men's  mindl 
by  the  incessant  bluster  of  over-fieroe  opposition."  Conolusion :  The  weak  and  the 
strong  have  their  representatives  in  all  ages  of  the  CShurch.  The  former  are  the 
oonservatiTe,  and  the  latter  are  the  liberal  elements.  Both  parties  are  necessary  in 
the  present  order  of  things.  They  may  be  compared  to  the  centripetal  and  centri- 
fugal forces  which  keep  the  Church  in  its  due  orbit  of  practice.  (C  Neil,  M.A.) 
God  batli  received  him. — Accepted  him  in  Christ,  adopted  him  into  His  family, 
approved  of  that  which  the  weak  brother  condemned.  Their  conduct  was  pleasing 
to  God  because  according  to  gospel  truth  and  liberty,  not  from  laxity  or  flesh 
pleasing,  but  from  religious  principle.  Man  often  condemns  when  God  receives, 
and  vice  vers&.  Believers  therefore  are  to  be  temperate  in  judging  as  well  as  in 
living.  God's  views  and  conduct  are  to  guide  us — 1.  In  our  judgment  of  things, 
2.  In  our  treatment  of  persons.  The  question  in  regard  to  a  brother  is.  Does  God 
receive  him  ?  The  great  question  for  ourselves  is,  Does  God  receive  me  ?  {J. 
Robinscm,  D.D.)  Who  art  thou  that  Judgest  another  man's  servant  ? — Censori- 
outness : — I.  The  practice  condemned.  1.  Not  all  judgment.  2.  But  measuring 
and  condemning  others  by  our  own  standard.  3.  1  h  s  is  exceedingly  common. 
n.  The  evil  of  it.  1.  It  is  impertinent,  because  beyoud  our  province.  2.  Pre- 
sumptuous because  it  is  to  invade  the  prerogative  of  God.  3.  Perilous,  because 
God  may  justify  whom  we  condemn,  and  the  condemnation  falls  back  on  ourselves. 
(J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  God  the  defender  of  those  who  are  unjustly  censured: — He — 1. 
Challenges  the  offender.  2.  Asserts  His  own  prerogative.  3.  Defends  the  right. 
(Ibid.)  Christian  liberty  on  debatable  ground  (text  and  ver.  15) : — 1.  A  certain 
divine  has  said  that  "  since  Jeremy  Taylor  and  Bichard  Baxter,  English  Protes- 
tantism has  had  no  great  casuists. "  Nor  is  this  to  be  regretted.  "  It  is  safer  to 
leave  men  to  the  guidance  of  those  great  and  obvious  moraJ  laws,  whose  authority 
every  pure  and  honest  heart  acknowledges."  But  as  to  what  are  those  laws,  the 
world  has  never  been  entirely  agreed.  On  the  one  hand  is  the  denial  of  all  such 
moral  laws.  The  nihilist  and  socialist  agree  in  repudiating  all  moral  restrictions. 
The  utilitarian  has  his  selfish  statute  of  limitations  to  personal  liberty.  The 
Christian  disciple  finds  the  sum  of  obligation  in  one  word — love.  2.  We  are  now 
to  consider  Christian  liberty,  as  Paul  unfolds  it.  In  doing  so  we  are  not  to  forget 
that  "  the  great  and  obvious  moral  laws  "  of  the  Christian  system  are,  like  their 
Author,  "  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever,"  but  that  the  scene  and  the 
conditions  of  their  manifestation,  in  human  conduct,  are  ever  shifting.  The  open 
questions  at  Corinth  and  Bome  in  the  first  century  touch  us  not  at  all,  except  as 
illustrations  of  a  principle ;  while  they  may  be  the  living  questions  of  the  hour  in 
India  and  China.  I.  Libestt  is  not  fbbedom  to  do  as  one  pleases.  1.  Nobody 
on  earth  enjoys  such  liberty.  Liberty  is  limited  by  conscience,  by  the  views  of 
others,  by  our  health,  by  lack  of  means,  by  lack  of  courage,  by  hereditary  traits  and 
disabilities.  We  cannot  believe  what  we  please,  for  we  are  limited  by  the  laws  of 
thought  and  evidence.  We  are  limited  in  our  conduct  by  society.  No  man  lives  to 
himself  in  the  trades,  the  schools,  or  the  professions.  We  cannot  divorce  liberty 
from  law.  This  would  be  to  bring  in  anarchy.  2.  Strictly  speaking,  personal  and 
Christian  liberty  are  the  same.  What  is  morally  binding  upon  a  Christian  man  is, 
in  a  sense,  binding  upon  everybody.  What  any  man  may  rightly  do  as  accountable 
to  God,  a  Christian  may  do.  It  will  always  be  the  duty  of  every  man  to  love  God 
and  his  neighbour,  and  to  put  his  liberty  under  the  limitations  of  that  reigning 
principle  of  love.  3.  Christ  bound  this  as  a  yoke  upon  the  necks  of  His  disciples, 
to  draw  this  world  out  of  the  sloughs  of  selfishness  up  on  to  the  table  lands  of 
righteousness,  and  brotherhood,  and  consequent  peace.  Some  things  are  for  a 
Christian  man  innocent  and  harmless.  If  he  abstain  in  things  indifferent,  it  is  not 
because  it  is  morally  wrong  to  indulge,  but  out  of  deference  to  the  conscience  or 
scruples  of  others,  or  the  possible  peril  to  which  his  example  might  expose  those 
not  so  strong.  His  Lord  and  Master  "  pleased  not  Himself."  And  *'  it  is  enough 
for  the  disciple  that  he  be  as  his  Master."  II.  Christian  liberty  is  the  liberty 
TO  BE  Chbistlike.  When  a  man  becomes  the  disciple  of  Christ  he  advances  into 
a  higher  realm  of  liberty  than  that  of  the  merely  ethical  right ;  into  the  liberty, 
the  self-sacrifice,  and  self -forgetfuln ess  of  love.  To  the  man  who  has  put  on  Christ 
this  is  the  grandest  liberty  in  earth  or  heaven.  The  one  absolutely  free  man  who 
ever  walked  the  earth  was  Jesus.  The  truth  makes  other  men  free.  He  was  the 
Tmth,  and  so  was  Freedom  itself.  Saul  of  Tarsus  becomes  the  slave  of  Christ  and 
the  child  of  liberty  at  the  same  moment.  This  slave  of  Christ  was  the  freest  man 
in  Chreeoe  or  Bome.    To  his  great,  strong  nature,  his  skilled,  dialectic  mind,  meats 


608  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xw. 

and  drinks  and  speoial  days  were  indifferent  matters ;  every  oreatore  of  God  was 
good  and  to  be  received  with  thanksgiving.  Bat  all  were  not  able  to  make  their 
way  through  this  tangled  mass  so  easily.  All  conld  not  so  easUy  shake  off  the 
influence  of  the  past.  III.  The  libebtt  to  bb  Chbistlieb  is  all  ths  IiIbbbtz 
WB  HAVB.  In  this  light — 1.  If  Christian  brethren  are  disposed  to  stand  upon  their 
rights  and  do  what  they  think  themselves  honestly  entitled  to  do,  Christian  liberty 
gives  to  their  brethren  who  differ  from  them  no  right  of  censorious  judgment.  So 
long  as  he  is  true  to  his  convictions  in  his  bolder,  freer  course,  **  he  shall  be  holden 
np ;  for  God  is  able  to  make  him  stand,"  and  in  condenming  him,  we  may  be  violating 
the  royal  law  of  charity.  2.  Christian  liberty  gives  no  warrant  to  any  to  follow  the 
example  of  such  at  the  expense  of  conscience.  Though  it  be  not  immoral  to  enjoy 
it  in  and  by  itself,  it  is  sinful  in  the  man  who  thus,  against  his  conscience,  imitates 
the  freer  Christian.  3.  The  rights  of  Christian  conscience  are  above  the  rights  of 
Christian  liberty.  And  so  far  is  this  from  being  a  burdensome  yoke,  worn  from 
love  to  Christ  and  men,  it  is  a  yoke  easy  and  light  and  joyous.  4.  The  question 
arises,  Are  the  weak  always  to  give  law  to  the  strong  ?  There  are  limits  to  self- 
abnegation.  Weakness  is  a  bad  thing ;  and  if  a  constant  homage  be  paid  to  it,  it 
tends  to  make  others  weak.  I  may  think  it  right,  for  the  sake  of  my  own  moral 
vigour  and  for  that  of  those  who  are  in  danger  of  becoming  morbidly  scrupulous, 
to  live  the  bolder  freer  life  which  my  own  conscience  approves.  We,  then,  that  are 
strong,  ought  to  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak,  and  not  to  please  ourselves ;  .  .  . 
for  even  Christ  pleased  not  Himself.  It  is  not  the  weak  giving  law  to  the  slnrong ; 
it  is  the  strong  giving  law  to  himself  in  accordance  with  eternal  principles  of 
heavenly  love.  Tea,  it  is  Christ,  the  mighty,  leading  the  way  in  self-abnegation, 
and  we,  who  have  the  mind  of  Christ,  following  on  as  best  we  can.  The  infant  in 
the  cradle :  Is  that  weak,  puny  thing  always  to  give  law  to  mother-love  ?  Does 
infantile  weakness  give  law  to  mother-love,  or  does  mother-love,  obedient  to  ita 
own  instinct,  tie  itself  down  to  the  cradle — the  freest  thing  this  side  the  love  of 
Christ  on  this  earth  t  But  the  mother  ties  herself  down  to  infantile  weakness  only 
BO  long  as  she  must,  and  for  the  sake  of  leading  weakness  up  on  to  the  heights  of 
strength.  And  so  let  us  do  toward  the  weak  everywhere.  {H.  C.  Haydn,  D.D.) 
The  tervant  of  God :  hit  privileges  and  immunity : — I.  The  Cheistian  is  thb 
SEBVANT  OF  God.  The  highest  designation  he  can  wear.  Worn  by  Christ,  angels, 
the  best  of  men.  He  is  the  servant  of  God.  1.  By  creation.  He  was  made  to 
serve — to  glorify  God.  2.  By  purchase,  and  at  what  a  cost — the  precious  blood  of 
Christ.  3.  By  willing  consecration.  II.  The  sebvamt  of  God  is  besponsiblb  to 
HIS  Masteb.  1.  To  Him  supremely  in  indisputable  duties.  Christians  are  under 
obligations  to  their  fellow-men  in  innumerable  matters,  but  largely  because  their 
fellow-men  in  certain  relationships  are  the  representatives  of  God.  We  cannot  pay 
our  debts  to  God  directly,  but  we  conform  to  the  Divine  law  of  honesty  by  paying 
our  creditors.  The  servant  discharges  her  duties  to  God  through  diligent  domestic 
service.  2.  To  Him  only  in  doubtful  matters.  Upon  matters  about  which  there 
is  no  clear  Divine  pronouncement,  and  in  conforming  or  nonconforming  to  which 
cor  only  guide  is  conscience,  our  only  referee  is  God.  This  is  obvious  from  the 
very  fact  that  men  differ  so  widely  about  them,  and  from  the  fact,  too,  that  so 
often  variant  opinions  are  right.  The  man  who  ate  only  herbs  was  right — they 
agreed  with  his  constitution,  and  were  not  forbidden  by  Divine  law.  The  man  who 
ate  meat  was  right — it  nourished  his  body,  and  was  allowed  by  the  law  of  Christ. 
Circumstances,  however,  might  make  either  harmful  or  wrong.  Who  was  to  be  the 
judge  here  ?  Not  another,  for  no  man  has  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  whole  of 
another  man's  circumstances.  The  obvious  appeal  therefore  is  to  the  omniscient 
God.  (1)  To  God  he  stands.  He  must  learn  from  God  what  is  right  in  given 
circumstances.  If  he  obeys  he  stands  before  God  upright.  And  no  man  must 
impugn  his  moral  rectitude.  (2)  If  he  disobeys,  acts  contrary  to  the  promptings 
of  conscience  and  the  indications  of  providence,  he  falls.  He  has  fallen  from  his 
moral  rectitude.  But  this  being  a  matter  between  a  man  and  his  Maker,  it  is 
criminal  for  hie  fellow-creature  to  interfere.  HI .  This  Masteb  will  itfhold  His 
SEBVaNT  (chap.  xvi.  25  ;  1  Pet.  i.  5 ;  Jude  24).  1.  He  has  promised  to  do  so.  (1) 
To  guide  him  by  His  counsel,  so  that  he  shall  safely  thread  his  way  through 
Btumbling-blocks  over  which  hemight  fall.  (2)  To  uphold  him  with  His  right  hand 
when  in  slippery  places  where  he  might  fall.  The  promise  of  God's  supporting  grace 
covers  the  whole  of  life.  2.  This  promise  is  very — (1)  Needful.  Were  the  Chris- 
tian left  to  the  instincts  of  an  unenlightened  conscience,  or  to  the  judgment  of  his 
fellow-mortals,  he  would  be  most  unsafe.    Hence  the  need  of  that  infallible  wisdom 


m.]  E0MAN8.  609 

and  almighty  strength  he  hM  in  Qod.  (2)  Enooaraging.  If  tho  Lord  ii  on  our 
gide  wc  may  b«  independent  of  man'a  oensorea,  and  hare  the  comfort  of  His  witness 
that  we  are  in  the  right.  (3)  Admonitory.  Beware,  then,  of  onoharitable  estimates. 
If  the  brother  yon  condemn  ia  apprOTed  of  Ood,  yon  impugn  God's  judgment. 
H«M}e  the  indignant,  "  Who  art  thou  f  "  Ac  Conclusion.  In  disputable  matters. 
1.  Let  each  mind  his  own  business.  3.  Let  each  see  that  his  business  is  pleadng 
to  God.  (J.  W.  Bum.)  MeddUtome  people  : — I  knew  a  man,  in  my  youth,  an 
elderly  man,  who  was  a  great  obserrer  of  human  nature.  I  will  not  say  of  him,  as 
it  was  said  of  Olirer  Cromwell,  that  he  oould  look  through  a  man's  skin  right  to 
his  baokbone^but  he  had  a  most  shrewd  knowledge  of  mankind.  A  young  man 
used  to  converse  with  him,  occasionally,  on  this  very  theme  of  human  eharaoter ; 
and,  one  day,  after  a  long  conversation  upon  it,  the  young  man  said,  "  Ah  I  well ; 
there  are  all  sorts  of  people  in  the  world."  "  Nay,"  said  the  elder  man,  "  there  ia 
ooe  sort  wanting."  "  "V^at  sort  is  that  ?  "  asked  the  young  man  cr^  r'y.  ••  The 
people,"  replied  the  elder  man,  **  who  mind  their  own  business,  and  let  other 
people's  business  alone."  (Thonuu  Cooper.)  Minding  one'i  own  butiMti:^- 
A  lady  made  a  complaint  to  Frederick  the  Oreat,  King  of  Prussia  :  "  Tonr  Majesty," 
said  she,  "  my  husband  treats  me  badly."  "  That's  none  of  my  business,"  said  the 
king.  "  But  he  speaks  ill  of  yoa,"  said  the  lady.  "  That,"  said  he,  "  is  none  of 
yoor  business." 

Ters.  6,  6.  One  man  esteemeth  one  day  above  another. — The  Sabbath  que$tum  .*— 
It  has  been  argued — "  If  we  adopt  the  supposition,  that  a  Christian  Sabbath  law  was 
then  in  force,  the  propriety  of  the  apostle's  counsel  of  forbearance  must  appear  ques* 
tionable,  inasmuch  as  it  must  have  been  regarded  by  all  as  of  indispensable  obligation. 
How,  then,  oould  Paul  have  affirmed  that  "he  that  regardeth  not  the  day,  to  the 
Lord  he  doth  not  regard  it "  f  We  reply,  that  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  Sabbath 
was  included  in  the  apostle's  representation  at  all.  For — I.  Ths  wbolb  bbasomino 
HAS  »EFBBENCB  TO  oBBBBVAMCBs  DiSTDicTLT  JxwisH.  But  the  Sabbath  was  no  such 
instituUon ;  it  was  instituted  for  mankind  at  the  creation.  If  so,  then  it  wm  not 
among  the  things  that  ' '  vanished  away  "  with  the  Jewish  dispensation.     U.  In 

OCWTBOVEBST    UMQUALTFIBD   TBBMS  ASM  ALWAT8  TO  BB  CMOBBSTOOD   AOCORDIirO   TO   THB 

SZTXNT  OP  THB  suBjBCT  IS  DiBPUTB.  Suppose,  e.g.,  iu  a  controversy  respecting 
the  propriety  of  certain  days  long  observed  in  the  Bomish  and  Anglican  churches, 
a  person  might  nse  the  language  before  us,  and  speak  of  one  man  * '  esteeming  one 
day  above  another,"  while  "  another  esteemed  every  day  alike,"  without  being 
nnderstood  to  refer  to  Sunday.  No  one  would  think  of  such  a  thing ;  but  simply 
of  the  days  in  question.  So  the  present  difference  was  about  days  of  Jewish 
observance ;  and  therefore  the  previous  question  would  demand  settlement,  Was 
the  Sabbath  one  of  these?  UI.  Tbb  IaLsqtjlqz  cu^not  bb  ukdbbstood  with  no 
QUiuncATioN ;  for  then  it  would  follow  that  they  were  under  obligation  to  appro- 
priate no  day  whatever  to  religious  services.  Now  let  us  try  this  in  application  both 
to  the  seventh  and  to  the  first  day  of  the  week.  1.  As  to  the  former — those  whose 
argument  I  am  considering,  hold  the  continued  obligation  of  the  seventh  day  upon 
Jewish  believers,  till  the  final  overthrow  of  the  nation.  Very  well,  then ;  if  it  did 
continue  obligatory  its  observance  oould  not  be  optional  and  left  to  the  mere  per- 
suasion of  every  man's  own  mind.  2.  As  to  the  latter — it  is  clear  that  if  the 
reference  be  to  it,  the  apostle's  language  leaves  all  at  perfect  liberty  to  observe  it 
or  not.  It  is  vain  to  say,  that  by  agreement  of  the  Church,  its  stated  meetings  for 
worship  were  held  on  thiat  day ;  for  the  terms  of  the  passage  contradict  such  agree- 
ment.  From  which  it  would  follow,  that  here  was  a  church  that  had  no  fixed 
observance  of  social  worship,  but  every  one  left  to  do  what  was  ' '  right  in  his  own 
eyes."  Whether  such  a  state  of  things  be  consistent  with  that  God  who  is  not  the 
Author  of  confusion,  I  leave  you  to  judge.  The  passage,  therefore,  having  reference 
to  Jewish  days  of  the  week,  does  not  in  the  least  invalidate  the  fact  of  the 
observance  of  the  first  day,  as  it  had  no  place  among  the  days  in  dispute.  And 
it  it  has  no  bearing  against  the  observance  of  the  first  day,  it  leaves  the  reasonings 
for  it  from  other  sources  in  full  force.  IV.  Although  thb  Sabbath  was  not  a 
pBOULiABLV  Jewish  institxjtion,  tet,  beino  enjoined  upon   the   Isbaelitks  »t 

UOnVES  FEOXTLIAB  TO  THEMSELVES,  IT  BEOAUB  SO.  Wb  HAT  ADUIT,  THBBEFOBB, 
TEAT  THE  AP08TLB   BEFEE8  TO  IT  IN  THB   UOHT    IN    WHICH    IT    WAS    CONTENDED    FOB 

BT  THB  ADHERENTS  ov  THB  LAW — becauso,  if  the  Original  and  universal  Sabbath 
vras  transferred  to  "  the  first  day  of  the  week  "  in  commemoration  of  the  finished 
work  of  redemption,  then  it  oould  only  be  as  a  pui  of  the  Jewish  law  that  the 
VOL.  n.  89 


610  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xit. 

retention  of  the  seventh  day  was  contended  for.  And  this  view  of  the  case  saitB 
well  with  the  apostle's  argument,  and  avoids  the  difficulty  as  to  there  being  no  daj 
at  all  on  which  they  were  at  one,  as  to  the  duty  of  spending  it  differently  from  other 
days.  {R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  The  religious  non-observance  of  the  Sabbath: — Con- 
sider— I.  The  prikoiple  on  which  Paul  declabed  the  bepeal  of  the  Sabbath. 
1.  Christ  had  vindicated  all  for  God :  therefore  there  was  no  one  thing  more  God's 
than  another.  (1)  God's  parental  right  to  all  humanity.  "  There  is  neither  Jew 
nor  Greek,"  &o.  (2)  God's  property  in  all  places :  therefore  there  could  be  no  one 
place  intrinsically  holier  than  another.  (3)  The  sanctification  of  all  time.  To 
assert  that  Sunday  is  more  God's  day  than  Monday,  is  to  maintain  Monday  is  less 
His.  2.  It  is  not  at  all  inconsistent  with  this,  that  just  as  it  became  desirable  to 
set  apart  certain  places  for  worship,  in  which  the  noise  of  business  should  not  be 
heard,  so  it  was  desirable  to  set  apart  certain  days  for  worship.  But  then  all  such 
were  defensible  on  the  ground  of  wise  and  Christian  expediency,  and  not  on  that  of 
a  Divine  command.  Accordingly  in  early  times  the  Church  felt  the  necessity  of  sub- 
stitutuig  something  in  place  of  the  ordinances  which  had  been  repealed.  And  the  Lord's 
day  arose.  II.  The  uodificationb  of  this  view.  1.  With  reference — (1)  To  those 
who  conscientiously  observed  the  day.  "  He  that  observeth  the  day,  observeth  it 
to  the  Lord."  Let  him  act  then  on  that  conviction,  (a)  The  spiritual  intent  of 
Christianity  is  to  worship  God  every  day  in  the  spirit.  But  had  this  law  been  given 
to  the  anspiritual  Jews,  instead  of  turning  every  week-day  into  a  Sabbath,  they 
would  have  transformed  every  Sabbath  into  a  week-day.  Therefore  the  law 
specialised  a  day,  in  order  to  lead  them  to  the  broader  truth  that  every  day  is  God's. 
Now,  so  far  as  we  are  in  the  Jewish  state,  the  fourth  commandment  is  indispensable. 
For  who  is  he  who  needs  not  the  day  ?  He  is  the  man  so  conformed  to  the  mind 
of  Christ,  that  he  needs  no  carnal  ordinances  to  kindle  spiritual  feelings,  seeing  he 
is,  as  it  were,  in  heaven  already.  The  Sabbath  was  made  for  man.  The  need  of  it, 
therefore,  is  deeply  hidden  in  human  nature.  He  who  can  dispense  with  it  must  be 
holy  and  spiritual  indeed.  And  he  who,  still  unholy  and  unspiritual,  would  yet 
dispense  with  it,  would  fain  be  wiser  than  his  Maker.  (6)  No  man,  therefore,  who 
knows  himself  or  the  need  of  his  brethren  will  wantonly  desecrate  it.  And  no 
such  man  can  look  with  aught  but  grave  apprehensions  on  a  scheme  which  will 
invite  millions  to  an  unreligious  use  of  the  day  of  rest.  (2)  To  the  religious  non- 
observance  of  the  Sabbath.  He  who,  not  observing  it,  observeth  it  not  to  the  Lord, 
feels  that  Christ  has  made  him  free  and  strives  to  live  all  his  days  in  the  spirit.  But  he 
who,  not  trying  to  serve  God  on  any  day,  gives  Sunday  to  toil  or  pleasure,  his  non- 
observance  is  not  rendered  to  the  Lord.  He  may  be  free  from  superstition ;  but  it 
is  not  Christ  who  has  made  him  free ;  and  Paul  would  not  have  said  that  his  liberty  is 
as  acceptable  as  his  brother's  scrupulosity.  2.  Here,  then,  we  are  at  issue  with  the 
defenders  of  public  recreations  on  the  Sabbath-day.  With  respect  to — (1)  The 
grounds  on  which  they  are  approved.  They  claim  liberty ;  but  it  is  not  Christian 
liberty.  They  demand  a  license  for  non-observance ;  only,  it  is  not  "  non- 
observance  to  the  Lord."  The  abolition  of  Judaism  is  not  necessarily  the  estab- 
Ushment  of  Christianity ;  to  do  away  with  the  Sabbath-day  in  order  to  substitute 
the  Sabbath  of  all  time  given  up  to  God,  is  well.  But  to  do  away  with  the  special 
rights  of  God  to  the  Sabbath,  in  order  merely  to  substitute  the  rights  of  pleasure, 
or  of  Mammon,  or  even  the  license  of  profligacy,  that  is  not  St.  Paul's  "  Christian 
liberty  I  "  (2)  The  assumption  that  public  places  of  recreation,  which  humanise, 
will  therefore  Christianise  the  people.  Esthetics  are  not  religion.  It  is  one  thing 
to  civilise  and  polish ;  it  is  another  thing  to  Christianise.  The  worship  of  the 
beautiful  is  not  the  worship  of  holiness ;  nay,  the  one  may  have  a  tendency  to  dis- 
incline from  the  other.  It  was  so  in  ancient  Greece,  when  the  arts  debilitated  and 
sensuaUsed  the  nation's  heart.  No ;  the  change  of  a  nation's  heart  is  not  to  be 
effected  by  the  infusion  of  a  taste  for  artistic  grace.  Not  art,  but  the  Cross  of 
Christ.  3.  On  the  other  hand,  we  dissent  from  those  who  would  arrest  such  a 
project  by  petitions  to  the  legislature.  (1)  It  is  a  return  to  Judaism.  It  may  be 
(uite  true  that  such  non-observance  of  the  day  is  only  a  scheme  of  mere  pecuniary 
speculation.  Nevertheless  there  is  such  a  thiug  as  a  religious  non-observance  of 
the  day ;  and  we  dare  not  "  judge  another  man's  servant."    We  dare  not  refuse  a 

fiublic  concession  of  that  kind  of  recreation  to  the  poor  man  which  the  rich  have 
ong  not  hesitated  to  take  unrebuked.  We  cannot  substitute  a  statute  law  for  a 
repealed  law  of  God.  We  may  think  that  there  is  much  which  may  lead  to 
d^jigeroos  consequences  in  this  innovation  ;  but  we  dare  not  treat  it  as  a  crime. 
(3)  Ooeioion  is  in  danger  of  injuring  the  conscience.    It  is  always  dangerous  to 


CBAf .  ziT.]  ROMANS.  611 

multiply  restrictions  and  requirements  beyond  what  is  essential,  because  men  feel- 
ing themselves  hemmed  in,  break  the  artificial  barrier  with  a  sense  of  guilt,  and 
thereby  become  hardened  in  conscience  and  prepared  for  transgression  against 
commandments  which  are  Divine.     (3)  There  is  a  danger  of  mistaking  a  "  positive  " 
law,  which  is  one  laid  down  for  special  purposes,  and  corresponds  with  statute 
laws  in  things  civil,  and  a  moral  law,  which  is  one  binding  for  ever,  which  a  statute 
law  may  declare,  but  can  neither  make  nor  unmake.     Now  when  men  are  rigorous 
in  regard  to  laws  positive,  the  tendency  is  to  a  corresponding  indifference  to  the 
laws  of  eternal  right.     The  Pharisees  who  observed  the  Sabbath,  and  tithed  mint, 
anise,  and  oummin,  neglected  justice,  mercy,  and  truth.    And  so,  many  a  man 
whose  heart  swells  with  what  he  thinks  pious  horror  when  he  sees  the  letter 
delivered  or  the  train  run  upon  the  Sabbath-day,  sits  calmly  in  a  social  circle  and 
scarcely  feels  uneasy  in  listening  to  its  slanders,  and  surveys  the  relations  of  the 
rich  and  poor  in  this  country,  and  remains  calmly  satisfied  that  there  is  nothing 
false  in  them.     No,  it  may  be  that  God  has  a  controversy  with  this  people.     But  if 
judgments  are  in  store  for  our  country,  they  will  fall — not  because  public  permission 
is  given  to  the  working  classes  for  a  few  hours'  recreation  on  the  day  of  rest — but 
because  we  prefer  pleasure  to  duty,  and  traffic  to  honour ;  and  because  we  love  our 
party  more  than  our  Church,  and  our  Church  more  than  our  Christianity  ;  and  our 
Christianity  more  than  truth,  and  ourselves  more  than  all.     {F.  W.  Eobertson,  M.A.) 
Let  every  man  be  fully  persuaded  In  hla  own  mind. — Christian  liberty  : — 1.  Under 
the  Christian  dispensation  much  is  left  to  the  determination  of  a  man's  own  con- 
science.   2.  He  must,  however,  be  fully  persuaded  in  his  own  mind — whatsoever  is 
not  of  faith  is  sin.    3.  It  follows  this  liberty  may  not  be  infringed  by  the  dictation 
of  others.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)        Christian  liberty  : — I.  Its  nattjbe — it  is  the  right  of 
determining  our  own  conduct  in  things  indifferent.    II.  Its  extent.    It  reaches  to 
all  matters — 1.  Not  determined  by  the  Word  of  Qod.     2.  Not  settled  by  human 
relations,  or  law.    3.  Not  calculated  to  offend  the  consciences  of  others.    HI.  Its 
test.    1.  Can  we  do  it  to  the  glory  of  God  ?    2.  Can  we  give  Qod  thanks  t    {Ibid.) 
Bigotry  : — 1.  There  had  been  a  hot  discussion  upon  the  subject  of  dietetics.    There 
were  some  vegetarians  who  quarrelled  with  those  who  thought  it  right  to  eat  flesh. 
Paul  decides  the  matter,  "  Now,  let  this  quarrel  stop.    Ton  men  who  want  to  eat 
herbs,  eat  herbs.    You  men  who  want  to  eat  flesh,  eat  it.    Your  own  consciences 
must  rule :  '  Let  every  man  be  fully  persuaded  in  his  own  mind.' "    2.  This  lays 
down  a  principle  applicable  to  ten  thousand  cases  of  conscience.    The  religious 
world  is  divided  into  a  great  variety  of  sects.    WhUe  our  conscience  will  not  allow 
as  to  choose  some  of  these  beliefs,  we  must  allow  to  others  the  liberty  of  conscience 
which  we  demand  for  ourselves.    3.  The  air  and  the  sea  keep  pure  by  constant 
circulation,  and  there  is  a  tendency  in  religious  discussion  towards  moral  health. 
Between  the  fourth  and  sixteenth  century  the  Church  proposed  to  keep  down  all 
error  by  prohibiting  free  discussion ;  but  the  world  has  found  out  that  you  cannot 
ehange  men's  beliefs  by  twisting  off  their  heads.   Let  error  run  I   Only  let  the  truth 
run  with  it,  and  in  the  long  run  truth  will  win.    4.  A  king  who  had  a  great  deal  of 
trouble  with  his  subjects  was  afterwards  imprisoned,  and  to  while  away  the  time  he 
made  watches  and  clocks,  and  tried  to  make  the  watches  tick  alike,  and  the  clocks 
strike  alike.    Of  course  he  failed.    Then  he  said  to  himself :  "  What  a  very  foolish 
king  I  was !    How  could  I  expect  to  make  all  my  subjects  alike?  "    I.  The  causes 
OF  biootbt.     1.  Wrong  education  in  the  home.     There  are  some  who  caricature 
and  throw  slurs  upon  other  denominations  in  family  circle  and  produce  little  bigots 
ten  years  old.     2.  The  superior  power  of  any  one  denomination.    People  think  that 
all  other  churches  are  wrong,  and  that  theirs  is  right,  because  it  happens  to  be  more 
fashionable,  wettltby,  or  influential.    3.  Ignorance.    Knowledge  enlarges  the  mind. 
A  thorough  bigot  is  the  man  who  thinks  he  knows  a  great  deal,  but  does  not.    In 
the  East  there  is  an  obelisk ;  one  side  of  it  is  white,  another  blue,  another  green. 
Some  travellers  went  to  look  at  that  obelisk,  and  soon  got  into  a  fierce  contest — one 
saying  that  it  was  white,  another  blue,  &c.     '«  Stop  this  contest,"  said  some  one. 
••  I  walked  aU  round,  and  find  you  are  all  right  and  all  wrong."  If  there  is  any  man 
to  be  pitied,  it  is  the  man  who  has  just  one  idea  in  his  head.    II.  Its  evils.     1.  It 
cripples  investigation.     The  different  denominations  were  intended,  by  holy  rivalry 
and  honest  competition,  to  keep  each  other  wide  awake.     While  each  denomination 
ought  to  preach  aU  the  doctrines  of  the  Bible,  I  think  that  it  is  the  mission  of  each 
more  emphatically  to  preach  some  one  doctrine,  e.g.,  the  Calvinistic  Church  to 
preach  the  sovereignty  of  God,  the  Arminian  man's  free  agency,  the  Episcopal  the 
importance  of  order  and  solenan  ceremony,  the  Baptist  the  necessity  of  ordinances 


612  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBAfOB.  [chajp.  xtt, 

tbe  Oongregfttional  th«  indiyidnal  responsibility  of  its  membfirs,  the  If  athodiat  holf 
enthusiasm ;  but  when  one  »&ja,  "  All  otheri  »re  wrong,  and  I  am  right,**  from  the 
realm  of  God's  txnth,  orer  which  the  archangel  might  flj  from  eternitj  to  etemitf 
withoat  touching  the  limits,  they  shat  themselves  oat,  and  die  like  blind  moles 
under  a  com-Bheaf.  2.  It  prejudices  people  against  Christianity.  The  perpetiud 
bombardment  of  other  sects  drives  men  away  from  religion.  Yon  go  down  the  street 
and  you  see  a  contest  and  hear  the  report  of  firearms.  Ton  are  not  foolish  enough  to  go 
through  t^at  street.  3.  It  hinders  the  Church's  triumph.  How  maoh  wasted  energy  1 
Suppose  there  were  a  common  enemy  riding  up  the  Narrows  to-morrow  morning, 
and  our  batteries  around  New  York  were  to  fire  into  each  other,  you  would  cry  oat, 
"  National  suicide  I  "  And  yet  while  all  the  navies  of  darkness  have  been  ridiiig  up 
the  bay,  sect  has  been  warring  with  sect,  and  belief  with  belief,  and  there  has  been 
suicide  instead  of  conquest.  IIL  How  to  oub>  it.  1.  By  a  reialisation  of  our  own 
infirmities  and  weakness.  If  we  make  so  many  mistakes  upon  other  things,  ought 
we  not  to  be  a  little  modest  in  regard  to  our  religious  belief  ?  2.  By  dwelling  ehiefly 
upon  those  things  on  which  we  agree,  rather  than  upon  those  in  which  we  differ. 
The  gospel  platform  is  large  enough  to  hold  all  who  put  their  trust  in  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  3.  By  realising  that  all  denominations  of  Christians  have  yielded 
beneficent  institutions  and  noble  men,  and  therefore  are  to  be  respected.  One  gava 
to  the  world  a  Robert  Hall  and  an  Adoniram  Judson ;  another  gave  a  Latimer  and 
a  Melvill ;  another  a  Wesley  and  a  Summerfield,  &o.  4.  By  toiling  in  Christian 
work  with  men  of  other  beliefs.  Here  are  two  men  in  hostility.  Let  them  go  and 
kneel  by  that  dying  woman  and  commend  Christ  to  her  soul.  If  they  went  into 
that  room  with  antipathies,  they  will  come  out  with  love.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage, 
D.D.)  The  value  of  a  firm  eanvietion  of  the  right: — I.  To  ouasaLVM.  1.  We 
act  on  fixed  principles.  2.  Are  preserved  from  wavering.  3.  Secure  inward  peace. 
n.  To  OTHZBS.  1.  They  know  with  whom  they  have  to  do.  2.  Can  put  confidence 
in  as.  3.  Derive  benefit  from  our  example.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Strong  eonvie- 
tuynt  in  religion : — The  apostle  teaches  that  in  every  circumstance  we  should  have 
a  firm  conviction  as  to  duty,  and  act  accordingly.  We  should  reach  eonolusiona 
concerning  right  and  wrong  upon  our  own  responsibility.  I.  Thb  paavAiUMa  want 
OF  STBONO  BELiGious  cx)KvicTioNS.  1.  Paul's  faith  was  not  a  vague,  eloady  senti- 
ment, but  his  very  life.  He  was  not  a  fanatic  ;  yet  he  was  willing  to  even  die  for 
his  principles.  The  martyrs  of  the  early  church — Savonarola,  Hubs,  Wiolif, 
Lather,  Calvin,  the  Puritans — furnish  examples  of  people  governed  by  strong  con- 
victions in  the  sphere  of  faith  and  practice.  2.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  most  Chris- 
tians are  not  characterised  by  such  earnest  convictions  in  our  day.  The  masses  do 
not  think ;  they  let  the  press  do  their  thinking  for  them.  It  is  too  possible  to  have 
oar  editors,  lecturers,  professors,  and  preachers  do  our  thinking  for  us.  This  intel- 
lectual lassitude  is  especially  blameworthy  in  religion.  Sunday-school  teachers 
should  strive  to  have  views  of  their  own  concerning  Bible  subjects,  not  relying 
implicitly  upon  any  mere  "lesson  helps."  Church  members  should  cultivate 
independence,  depth  and  eamestncBs  of  thought.  We  are  each,  in  our  separate 
personalities,  to  stand  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ.  We  are  to  be  judged  for 
our  thinking  and  acting ;  not  for  those  of  others.  II.  Ihobntives  to  thb  cultiva- 
tion or  STBONO  BKLIGI0U8  CONVICTIONS.  1.  A  pcrsou  of  stroug  religious  convictions 
will  be  an  active  figure  in  life.  This  explains  the  prominence  in  the  anti-slavery 
movement  of  men  like  Wendell  Phillips,  Whittier,  and  Beecher.  Followers  of 
Christ,  with  an  intense  belief  in  the  need  and  power  of  the  gospel,  will  be  inside 
the  vineyard  instead  of  standing  in  the  market-place  idle.  2.  The  possession  of 
strong  religious  convictions  gives  the  believer  a  purpose  in  life,  gives  life  a  meaning 
and  a  definite  end.  To  live  for  Christ,  to  believe  in  that  life  is  to  have  life  directed 
to  a  definite  port,  to  supply  compass,  quadrant,  chart,  helm,  and  pilot,  to  keep  it  in 
the  straight  hue  through  waves  and  storm  till  the  voyage  is  over.  No  life  was  ever 
a  failure  that  was  genuinely  lived  for  Christ.  3.  Truth  is  promoted  where  emphatic 
views  of  things  prevail.  The  hardest  class  of  hearers  are  those  who  have  no  opinions 
and  do  not  care  what  tbe  truth  is.  A  mind  which  tends  to  earnest  thinking  is  like 
fertile  soil.  It  may  be  full  of  weeds  now ;  but  even  that  is  better  than  a  soil  that 
will  support  no  life  whatever.  A  sea-captain  would  rather  encounter  an  opposing 
breeze  than  to  be  held  in  a  dead  calm.  (G.  F.  Greene.)  Be  true  to  yourself : — 
I.  There  ae^  ciecumstances  undeb  which  this  exhoetation  has  a  peculiae  mean- 
ing. 1.  As  a  young  artist,  lawyer,  doctor,  Ac,  enters  upon  his  profession,  advisers 
gather  about  him,  and  some  kind,  thoughtful  old  man  says,  "  I  have  but  one  thing 
io  say  to  you,  be  true  to  yourself."    2.  At  times  communities  sink  down  into  a  sort 


OBiP.  ziT.]  ROMANS.  61S 

ol  dead  contentment.  Enterprise  Is,  comparatiTelj  speaking,  nnknown;  men 
read  little  tmd  think  less ;  religion,  for  the  most  part,  is  a  repetition  of  things,  and 
everything  goes  on  in  a  servile  and  ignoble  routine.  Now,  under  snoh  oiroomstanees, 
it  is  a  wholesome  thing  for  a  man  to  stir  men  op,  and  inspire  them  with  oariositj, 
and  make  them  long  for  other  views  of  trath,  and  nobler  ideals  of  life.  Then,  when 
tiMre  is  resurrection  from  idoth,  stupidity,  and  base  conformity  to  a  vulgar  life, 
there  is  power  in  the  maxim,  "  Be  true  to  yourself."    II.  To  bh  tbus  to  TonssELr 

von  IflTBT  UHDIBeTAKD  THAT  THXBB  IB  A  DBVIUSH   Aim  A  DlVIIfB    SBUT   IN   BVBBT   UAH. 

L  Now  the  lower  animal  self  no  man  can  afford  to  be  true  to.  Shall  you  say  to  a 
man  who  lives  ioi  eating  and  drinking,  or  to  an  old  miser,  "  Be  true  to  yourself  "  ? 
FMelity  to  self  has  been  their  damnation.  One  man  is  true  to  himself :  he  is  a  pea- 
OMk.  Another  man  is  true  to  himself :  ha  is  a  monkey.  Another  man  is  true  to 
fateeelf :  he  is  a  lion,  or  a  tiger,  or  a  bear.  I  say,  in  regard  to  your  whole  lower 
baV,  "  Deny,  discipline,  educate,  restrain  that  self."  2.  But  then,  there  is  a  Divine 
s«lf.  God  comes  into  our  consideration.  Our  mind  takes  in  a  nobler  sphere,  a 
laager  range.  Now,  in  regard  to  this  higher  self,  be  true  to  it.  (1)  Every  child 
who  comes  out  of  his  father's  house  should  be  exhorted,  "  Be  true  to  yourself,  as  a 
man  of  honour."  The  spirit  of  honour  is  one  of  the  things  without  which  society 
w««ld  be  bankrupt.  No  man,  therefore,  ought  to  go  into  society  without  having  it. 
I  lave  to  hear  a  man,  where  there  is  ocoasion  for  it,  say,  "  Do  you  doubt  my  honour, 
ek?"  It  is  not  best  that  be  should  talk  much  about  it,  or  boast  of  it ;  but  he 
ooght  to  have  it,  and  it  should  be  fashioned  on  those  elements  which  constitute  a 
CStfistian  gentleman.  Sir  Philip  Sidney  was  considered  a  perfect  gentleman  ;  but 
not,  I  take  it,  on  such  a  pattern  as  1  Cor.  xiii.  prescribes.  Oh  that  I  could  make  a 
b«ith  of  that  chapter,  and  roll  men  in  it  till  the  colour  struck  through  and  through  ! 
What  perfect  gentlemen  I  would  make  of  them  t  This  is  a  thing  of  education.  It 
ia  a  work  for  the  table  and  for  the  nursery.  It  is  a  process  which  we  are  to  carry 
alpng  with  religious  instruction.  Toung  men  !  do  not  adopt  that  base  and  servile 
maxim,  "  When  you  are  in  Rome  do  as  Romans  do."  You  might  aa  well  say  to  a 
man,  "  Among  foxes  do  as  foxes  do ;  among  wolves  do  as  wolves  do ;  among  lions 
d*  as  lions  do."  No ;  b«  a  man  always  and  everywhere;  and  never  forget  that  the 
mere  sensitive  your  honour  the  better  for  you.  And  if  others  are  unl^e  you,  let 
yoar  light  so  shine  that  men  shall  see  in  your  religion  the  type  of  higher  character. 
(3)  Cultivate  conscience,  too,  which  is  something  more  comprehensive  than  honour. 
(a)  Do  you  tell  me  that  you  cannot  get  along  and  be  an  honest  man  ?  I  say  that 
yoa  cannot  afford  to  get  along  then.  I  reply  to  you  as  Talleyrand  replied  to  a  man 
who  said,  "  Why,  you  know  I  must  live  " — "I  do  not  see  that."  Do  you  say,  "  I 
mast  have  money  "?  Ah  1  that  ends  it  for  you.  "  They  that  will  be  rich,"  says 
the  apostle,  "fiJl  into  temptation  and  a  snare."  "The  love  of  money  is  the 
root  of  all  eviL"  If  you  cannot  maintain  your  integrity  and  succeed,  less  success 
wkh  a  clear  conscience  will  bring  you  more  happiness.  And  success  surely  comes 
with  conscience  in  the  long  run,  other  things  being  equaL  Capacity  and  fidelity 
aM  commercially  profitable  qualities,  {b)  Be  true  to  yourself,  also,  as  a  conscience- 
bearer  against  ridicule.  Many  a  man  from  fear  of  this  goes  aside  from  what  he 
understands  to  be  the  truest  and  best  things.  "Let  every  man  be  fully  persuaded 
in  his  own  mind."  Do  not  comply  with  others'  opinions  unless  they  commend 
themselves  to  your  judgment.  Do  that  which  you  think  is  right,  whatever  others 
may  say  or  think,  (c)  Be  true  to  yourself  against  sympathetic  bias  through  your 
best  affections.  We  hear  people  who  have  done  what  they  knew  was  wrong  say  : 
•'  I  could  not  say  'No,'  and  disoblige  one  who  has  been  so  kind  to  me."  No  one 
ever  became  a  full  man  without  some  cross-bearing,  (d)  Be  true  to  your  conscience 
against  aU  those  society  compliances  which  may  be  easy  and  pleasant,  but  which  in 
the  end  lower  the  tone  of  your  manhood  and  self-respect.  (3)  Be  true  to  yourself, 
likewise,  as  a  Christian  man — a  man  according  to  the  pattern  of  Christ  Jesus.  Be 
true  to  that  manhood  which  has  for  its  father,  God ;  for  its  friend,  Christ ;  for  its 
light,  the  Holy  Ghost.  Conclusion :  In  attempting  to  be  true  to  yourself,  beware 
of  conceit,  narrow-mindedness,  indecent  haste,  of  that  laziness  which  refuses  to 
read  or  think,  of  that  presumption  which  leads  you  to  suppose  you  can  safely  depart 
from  the  results  of  centuries  of  experience.  So  be  true  to  yourself,  not  in  any 
vandal  spirit,  but  with  humility  and  meekness,  with  teachableness,  with  yearnings 
for  a  higher  and  better  life.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Christian  casuistry: — 1.  There 
are  questions  relating  to  the  degree  of  our  conformity  to  the  world,  and  to  the  share 
it  is  lawful  to  take  in  its  company  and  amusements,  about  which  there  is  the 
gnatest  indecision  from  the  absence  of  any  decisive  principle  of  authority  to  bear 


614  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  nf. 

apon  them.  And  so  the  mind  flnctnates,  for  while  one  class  dogmatises  with  all  the 
readiness  of  minds  that  are  thoroughly  made  np,  others  wait  till  a  clear  reason  ap- 
prove itseU  to  their  judgments,  ere  they  utter  a  confident  deliverance.  2.  When  the 
renunciation  of  these  things  is  laid  down  for  the  observance  of  the  young  disciple 
in  the  shape  of  so  many  categorical  impositions — I.  It  is  tebt  possiblb  that  hi 

HAT  BS  THEBEBT  MISLED  AS  TO  THB  DESIOM  AMD  NATUBB  OF  ChBISTIANITT.    1.  For  theSe 

acts  of  abstemiousness  occupy  the  place  of  works,  and  may  minister  the  com- 
plaoency  of  self-righteousness.  And,  besides,  they  are  such  acts  as  do  not  necessarily 
imply  any  graceful  or  elevated  morality,  and  may  be  the  mere  heartless  austerities 
of  Pharisaical  devoteeship — the  morose  penances  of  one  who  denies  himself  that 
gratification  which  he  nevertheless  is  stUl  most  desirously  set  upon.  So  Christianity 
instead  of  a  religion  of  freedom,  because  her  only  control  is  that  of  heavenly  prin> 
ciple  over  delighted  votaries,  may  be  transformed  into  a  narrow  system  of  bigotry, 
whose  oppressive  mandates  of  "  touch  not,  taste  not,  handle  not,"  bear  no  relation 
whatever  to  the  spiritual  department  of  our  nature.  2.  For  this  reason  it  is  greatly 
better,  with  every  young  inquirer  at  least,  to  begin  at  the  beginning — to  aim  a  blow 
at  the  root  of  his  corruption,  instead  of  mangling  and  lacerating  at  one  <A  its 
branches ;  instead  of  charging  him  with  a  matter  of  doubtful  criminality,  to  put  it 
direct  to  his  conscience,  whether  the  world,  or  He  who  made  it,  has  the  greatest 
ascendency  over  him.  After  having  reached  his  convictions  on  this  point  we  would 
tell  him  that  the  thing  for  adjustment  was  not  the  habitual  attendance  of  his  p^- 
son  upon  places  of  amusement.  We  should  rather  move  the  previous  question — or 
proceed  to  the  order  of  the  day.  The  point  of  immediate  urgency  is  his  general 
state  with  God.  Our  indictment  is  not  that  he  has  been  incidentally  seen  in  plaoea 
which  lie  without  the  territory  of  sacredness,  but  that  from  that  territory  he  is 
wholly  an  outcast  and  a  wanderer.  3.  On  the  personal  settlement  of  this  question 
a  great  personal  change  takes  place.  Other  glories  than  those  of  this  world's 
splendour  now  engage  the  affections ;  and  other  paths  than  those  of  this  world's 
dissipations  are  now  the  ways  of  pleasantness.  It  may  not,  however,  be  with  the 
fierce  intolerance  of  a  bigot  that  he  looks  on  the  amusements  of  other  days,  but 
simply  with  Uie  indifference  of  one  who  has  found  his  way  to  higher  and  better 
amusements.  And  should  the  result  be  that  he  keeps  himself  from  the  ball-room 
or  the  theatre,  this  result  is  only  one  among  the  many.  n.  Ix  gives  to  the  asHEBAij 

ITS  AH  APFEABANCB  07  NABB0WNES3   TO   OUB   BELIQION  WHICH  BEALLT  DOBS  NOT  BBIiOSd 

TO  IT.  1.  Better  surely  to  impregnate  the  man's  heart  first  with  the  taste  ani 
spirit  of  our  religion ;  and  then,  if  this  should  supersede  the  taste  and  affection  for 
the  frivolities  of  life,-it  impresses  a  far  nobler  character  of  freeness  and  greatness, 
than  when  it  is  merely  a  reluctant  compliance  with  a  rigid  exaction  of  what  seems 
to  be  an  unreasonable  intolerance.  Better  that  it  spring  up,  in  kindly  vegetation 
from  the  soil  of  the  new  nature,  than  be  forced  forward  at  the  call  of  an  uncom- 
promising  or  unmeaning  dogmatism.  The  new  wine  that  was  put  into  old  bottles 
had  not  yet  done  with  its  fermentation ;  and  the  bottles  that  had  lost  their  elasticity 
did  not  expand  to  the  process,  but  burst,  so  that  both  wine  and  bottles  were  destroyed. 
And  the  same  may  often  be  the  result  of  prematurely  putting  into  an  nnregenerated 
man  those  new  observations  which  are  in  most  pleasing  accordancy  with  the  whole 
desire  and  habit  of  an  altogether  Christian.  When  the  new  wine  is  put  into  a  new 
bottle,  both  are  preserved.  The  commandment  to  renounce  the  amusements  of  the 
world  ceases  to  be  grievous,  or  rather  ceases  to  be  necessary.  He  is  taken  up  with 
something  else  that  he  likes  better.  As  the  new  wine  is  suited  to  the  new  bottle,  so 
are  the  present  habits  of  the  present  heart  of  the  new  creature  in  Jesus  Christ  oar 
Lord.  The  reply  that  was  once  given  by  an  aged  Christian  to  the  question  of  an 
anxious  beginner  whether  he  should  now  continue  to  go  to  the  theatre  was  that  he 
might  go  as  long  as  he  could.  And  was  this  not  greatly  better  than  admitting  him  to 
doubtful  disputation  7  2.  But  still  it  may  be  asked.  Is  it  not  true  that  in  all  the 
amusements  referred  to  the  spirit  of  earthliness  has  the  predominancy ;  and  that 
the  places  where  they  are  held,  leave  their  company  on  the  broad  way  ?  Grant  this 
to  be  true,  and  that  aU  these  assemblages  were  broken  up  and  their  visitors 
dispersed,  these  visitors  may  still  keep  on  the  broad  way ;  and  we  cannot  see  what 
is  gained  by  drawing  thousands  away  from  the  theatre  and  ball-room,  if  they 
shall  all  tarry  at  any  point  short  of  the  conversion  of  their  souls.  We  should 
feel  as  if  nothing  had  been  effected  by  pulling  any  one  away  from  the  theatre, 
if  we  had  not  pulled  them  across  the  mighty  line  of  separation  that  marks 
off  the  region  of  grace  from  the  region  of  unconverted  nature.  Whitfield  once 
preached  for  several  days  at  one  of  the  great  London  fairs,  and  we  may  be  sure  that 


esAP.  ht.]  ROMANS.  61S 

he  was  not  content  with  denoancing  with  intemperate  and  untimely  zeal  as  a  gross 
Abomination  the  scenes  of  madness  wherewith  he  was  surrounded.  He  wetit  there 
charged  with  the  gospel,  and  his  errand  was  not  to  put  down  one  of  the  modifica* 
tions  of  worldliness,  but  all  worldliness.  He  did  not  break  up  the  fair,  but  he  did  a 
great  deal  better,  he  gathered  out  of  it  a  harvest  for  eternity.  3.  To  intrude  a 
sermon  now  into  any  place  of  amusement  would  be  impossible,  and  could  not  be 
tolerated.  But  among  her  other  caprices  fashion  has  been  known  to  send  her 
votaries  to  church ;  and  to  vary  by  a  sermon  on  the  Sabbath  the  giddy  round  of 
her  week-day  entertainments.  And  should  any  of  her  enamoured  followers  be  now 
listening,  we  would  have  them  to  know  that  it  is  not  with  any  of  those  entertain- 
ments that  we  are  holding  controversy.  We  are  charged  with  one  far  more 
tremendous.  Our  direct  affirmation,  and  let  them  carry  it  to  their  consciences  and 
try  it  there,  is,  that  they  hve  without  God  in  the  world ;  and  that  in  the  whirl  of 
time's  gratifications  and  concerns,  they  have  buried  all  effective  consideration  of 
eternity.  Be  first  Christians,  and  then  we  may  satisfy  your  curiosity  about  the 
lawfulness  or  unlawfulness  of  theatres.  Conclusion  :  A  heart  with  rightly-set 
affections  and  desires  is  the  best  of  casuists.  If  the  heart  in  its  various  regards  be  as 
it  ought,  this  is  our  securest  guarantee  that  the  history  in  its  various  manifestations 
will  be  as  it  ought.  The  new-born  desire  of  a  Christianised  heart  is  worth  the 
catalogue  of  a  thousand  solutions  to  a  thousand  perplexities.  We  need  scarcely 
■peak  on  the  details  of  Sabbath  observation  to  him  who  already  loves  that  hallowed 
dky.  Give  us  a  heart  set  on  the  things  that  are  above,  and  what  call  for  warning 
against  the  amusements  of  the  world  the  man  who  in  the  midst  of  higher  and 
better  engagements  feels  their  utter  insipidity !    {T.  CfialmerM,  D,D.) 

Vers.  7-9.  For  none  of  us  liveth  to  himself — None  ofxu  liveth  unto  hinuelf: — 
This  is  seen  in — I.  Success,  which  can  be  secured  only  by  co-operation.  When 
one  devotes  himself  to  one  kind  of  work  and  another  to  another,  the  results  of  their 
labours  are  brought  together  to  complete  a  perfect  mechanism.  Thus  by  these 
labour  exchanges  the  experience  of  all  is  made  to  benefit  each.  One  man  does  not 
make  a  whole  pin.  II.  Cdbiositt.  We  are  anxious  to  know  about  our  neighbours. 
It  may  be  denounced  by  some  as  impertinence,  but  after  all  God  has  made  us  look 
at  others — "  Look  not  every  man  on  his  own  things."  God  said  early,  "  Where  is 
thy  brother?"  And  it  was  a  Cain  who  replied,  "Am  I  my  brother's  keeper?" 
It  is  true  that  this  curiosity  often  degenerates  into  gossip.  It  is  evil  when  we  speak 
of  others  only  to  criticise  their  garb,  &o.  It  is  a  higher  use  of  curiosity  when  we 
want  to  know  not  how  a  dress  fits,  but  whether  these  people  have  on  the  wedding 
garment ;  not  whether  such  an  one  is  of  obscure  origin,  but  whether  she  belongs 
to  the  family  of  God.  It  is  a  right  cariosity  when  we  inquire  about  our  brethren 
in  foreign  lands.  The  Lord  has  joined  us  together  by  a  bond  of  brotherhood,  as 
the  very  curiosity  we  manifest  in  each  other  shows.  HI.  Oub  love  of  society. 
The  child  wants  other  children  to  play  with  just  as  soon  as  it  knows  anything. 
The  young  man  or  woman  goes  forth  in  search  of  companions.  The  old  man, 
though  becoming  deaf,  still  desires  to  be  told  by  the  voice  of  affection  of  what 
is  said.  A  child  plays  around  while  his  elders  converse  about  politics,  science,  or 
literature,  and  he  seems  not  to  hear.  But  let  one  tell  of  a  friend  dying,  or  a  battle 
raging,  or  a  dreadful  accident,  and  the  child  will  at  once  drop  his  playthings  and 
cease  his  sports  to  listen.  Why  is  this  ?  Because  there  are  common  bonds  which 
unite  us  all,  and  because  we  are  not  made  to  live  to  ourselves.  Everything  that 
touches  one  heart  awakes  an  echo  in  another.  There  is  no  punishment  more 
dreadful  than  solitary  confinement.  The  reason  of  men  so  confined  sometimes  has 
given  way.  Human  beings,  when  they  could  not  have  men  to  talk  to,  have  talked 
to  beasts.  Baron  Trenck,  in  his  solitary  dungeon,  made  a  friend  of  a  spider.  The 
greatest  of  poets  made  the  desolate  Lear  talk  to  the  clouds  and  the  winds.  All 
these  things  serve  to  show  that  "  no  man  liveth  to  himself."  IV.  The  dispositioii 
TO  IMITATE.  The  girl  saw  her  mother  nurse  the  baby,  and  must  have  a  doU.  The 
boy  saw  his  father  chop  the  wood,  and  must  have  an  axe  and  a  saw.  This  principle 
is  in  the  very  heart  of  man,  for  God  has  put  it  there.  V.  The  judgment  we  roBH 
or  OURSELVES  AND  OTHERS.  When  we  turn  away  from  a  beggar  we  cannot  help 
feeling  that  we  have  done  wrong,  and  we  begin  to  reason  so  as  to  relieve  our 
conscience  from  a  sense  of  having  failed  in  duty.  We  came  home  tired.  We  were 
told  that  a  neighbour  was  ill,  without  a  friend  to  do  anything  for  him.  We 
hesitated,  but  went  to  bed.  Next  morning  we  learned  that  he  had  died  in  the 
night,  alone,  and  without  any  one  to  speak  to   him  of  a  Saviour.     Then  we 


tie  THS  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOIL  [ohat.  xit. 

reproached  oarselreB.  Whjt  Was  it  not  right  to  take  rest?  Certainly ;  bat 
God  had  tanght  ns  not  to  lire  for  oarselres  alone,  and  we  condemned  oarselves  for 
ooi  Belfisbness.  If  we  had  gone  we  might  hare  had  a  pain  in  the  head  next  day, 
but  the  heart  would  have  felt  all  right.  Here  was  a  generoos,  benerolent  man, 
doing  all  he  could  for  the  welfare  of  lociety,  and  trying  to  help  the  poor  every  way 
possible.  When  h«  died,  what  a  funeral !  The  secret  was  that  that  man  did  not 
liTC  for  himself.  There  was  another  man,  just  as  honourable  and  nioral,  bat 
a  miser.  When  he  died  there  were  no  tears,  only  a  host  of  relatives  fighting  over 
his  hoard.  We  admire  heroes,  not  because  they  are  men  of  blood,  but  because  they 
live  not  for  themselves,  but  for  others,  for  their  country.  Think  of  Howard,  whos« 
name  still  lives  as  a  synonym  for  all  that  is  self-denying  and  beneficent.  So  is  it 
with  Miss  Nightingale,  Luther,  Calvin,  and  Wesley.  Conclusion :  If  we  should  not 
live  for  ourselves,  for  what  ought  we  to  live  ?  1.  To  live  few  Christ  is  the  only 
way  to  live  for  humanity.  Many  have  tried  to  live  for  their  friends  and  failed.  A 
priest,  thinking  be  was  doing  the  European  inhabitants  of  the  Spanish  colonies  a 
favour,  suggested  that  the  African  race  could  better  stand  the  climate  and  the  work 
of  the  tropics.  In  that  way  slavery  was  originated  in  this  part  of  the  world,  and 
what  a  price  it  has  cost  us  to  free  ourselves  from  the  curse  1  2.  When  we  live  for 
Christ  we  take  Him  as  our  pattern  and  live  for  humanity.  Then  will  we  lift  up  the 
fallen,  deanse  the  leper,  lead  the  blind,  Ste.  8.  We  have  to  be  introduced  to  Christ 
by  some  one  who  knows  Him.  But  introduced,  we  can  introduce  others.  {Bp. 
Sinyason.)  None  of  %u  liveth  to  hinuelf: — Each  living  man  bears  a  relation  to 
his  whole  race :  his  having  lived  will  never  cease  to  be  felt  thronghout  the  onlverse. 
We  own  each  other,  and  God  owns  us  all.  A  man  never  stsmds  alone,  unrelated 
to  anything,  but  his  closest  relation  is  always  to  his  Creator.  A  willow  tree  may 
stand  far  from  the  banks  of  the  stream,  and  with  no  apparent  support,  except 
fiom  the  ground  about  its  trunk ;  bat  what  are  its  roots  doing  ?  Down  burrowing 
amid  the  rocks,  forcing  a  way  through  the  earth,  seeking  for  openings,  pushing 
whithersoever  is  the  smell  of  moist  soil,  diving  to  the  level  of  the  cool  well,  and 
drinking  deep  of  its  nourishing  waters,  shooting  out  by  the  brook  side  many,  many 
rods  away,  till  its  banks  are  fringed  like  a  shawl,  seeking  everywhere  for  nutriment, 
which  gives  life  to  the  tree  above  them.  This  is  what  the  roots  are  doing ;  and 
man  is  like  a  tree,  only  his  roots  shoot  upward  as  well  as  downward ;  his  firmest 
tie  is  to  the  heart  of  God,  as  his  surest  and  best  supply  is  from  thence;  but  he  is 
also  indissolubly  connected  with  all  below  him  and  round  about  him.  Who,  then, 
ean  say,  "  I  am  mine  own ;  I  stand  alone,  unrelated,  anlinked,  solitary,  nnin- 
fiuenced  and  uninfluencing  "  ?  Such  a  thing  cannot  be ;  and  so  it  is  written  by 
the  unerring  pen  of  inspiration — "  None  of  us  liveth  to  himself,  and  no  man  dieth 
to  himself."  (H.  W.  Beeeher.)  None  Uveth  unto  hinuelf: — ^I  was  not  bom  for 
myself  alone ;  my  country  claims  a  part,  my  relations  claim  a  part,  and  my  friends 
claim  a  part   in   me.      (Plato.)  Ths  duty  of  not  living  to  ovrsdoei : — It 

is  the  excellence  of  oor  rational  nature  that  by  it  we  are  capable  of  living 
to  some  known  end,  and  of  governing  our  lives  and  conduct  by  some  role, 
whereas  brute  creatures  necessarily  live  and  act  at  random,  just  as  the  present 
appetite  influences  them.  Let  us,  then,  make  the  most  of  this  our  prerogative 
by  proposing  to  ourselves  the  noblest  end  of  human  life,  and  engaging  in 
Boch  a  course  of  action  as  will  reflect  the  greatest  honour  upon  oar  nature, 
and  be  productive  of  the  most  lasting  happiness.  I.  We  should,  according  to 
this  apostolical  maxim,  by  no  means  confine  oar  regards  to  ourselves,  and  have 
our  own  pleasure,  profit,  or  advantage  in  view  in  everything  we  undertake ;  bat 
LOOK  OUT  OF,  AKD  BETOND  oTTBSELVBS,  and  take  a  generous  concern  in  the  happiness 
of  all  our  brethren  of  mankind ;  make  their  sorrows  our  sorrows,  their  joys  our 
joys,  and  their  happiness  our  pursuit ;  and  it  is  in  this  disinterested  conduct,  and 
in  this  only,  that  we  shall  find  our  own  true  happiness.  1.  This  disinterested 
conduct  of  man  is  most  agreeable  to  the  course  of  nature  without  us.  The  sun, 
the  moon,  the  planets,  and  comets,  are  strictly  connected,  and  combined  into  one 
system.  Each  body,  though  so  exceedingly  remote  from  the  rest,  is  admirably 
adapted,  by  its  situation,  magnitude,  and  velocity  in  its  orbit,  to  the  state  of  the 
whole,  in  those  respects  and  many  others.  This  connection,  probably,  also  extends 
to  the  remotest  bodies  in  the  universe,  so  that  it  is  impossible  to  say  that  the 
withdrawing  of  any  one  would  not  in  some  respect  or  other  affect  all  the  rest.  The 
clouds  and  the  rain  are  designed  tc  moisten  the  earth,  and  the  sun  to  warm  it,  and 
the  texture  and  juices  of  the  e&rth  are  formed  so  as  to  receive  the  genial  influences 
of  both,  in  order  to  ripen  and  bring  to  perfection  that  infinite  variety  of  plants  and 


OBAP.  ziT.]  R0MAN8.  617 

fraits,  the  seedi  of  which  are  deposited  in  it.  Are  not  all  plants  likewise  suited  to 
the  various  kinds  of  animals  which  feed  upon  them  ?  The  various  kinds  of 
^nimftla  are,  again,  in  a  thousand  ways  adapted  to,  and  formed  for,  the  use  of  one 
another.  That  brute  animals  are  excellently  adapted  to  the  use  of  man,  and  were, 
therefore,  made  to  be  eubservient  to  the  use  of  man,  man  will  not  deny.  The 
strength  of  some,  and  the  sagacity  of  others,  are  as  much  at  our  command,  and  are 
as  effectually  employed  for  our  use,  as  if  they  belonged  to  ourselves.  2.  The 
situation  of  man  in  this  world,  or  the  external  circumstances  of  human  nature, 
oblige  us  to  assert,  with  Paul,  that  no  man  liveth  to  himself,  and  no  man  dieth  to 
himself.  Man  bdmself  is  but  a  link,  though  the  highest  link,  of  this  great  chain, 
all  the  parts  of  which  are  closely  connected  by  the  hand  of  our  Divine  Author. 
Nay,  the  more  extensive  are  our  powers,  either  for  action  or  enjoyment,  on  that 
very  account,  the  more  multiplied  and  extensive  are  our  wants ;  so  that,  at  the 
same  time  that  they  are  marks  of  our  superiority  to,  they  are  bonds  of  our  connec- 
tion with,  and  signs  of  our  dependence  upon,  the  various  parts  of  the  world  around 
OB,  and  of  our  subservience  to  one  another.  The  rich,  if  they  would  receive  the 
greatest  advantages  from  society,  must  contribute  to  the  happiness  of  it.  If  they 
act  upon  different  maxims,  and  think  to  avail  themselves  of  the  pleasures  of 
society  without  promoting  the  good  of  it,  they  will  never  know  the  true  pleasures 
of  society.  And,  in  the  end,  they  will  be  found  to  have  enjoyed  the  least  them- 
selves who  have  least  contributed  to  the  enjoyment  of  others.  Thus  it  appears 
from  a  view  of  the  external  circumstances  of  mankind  that  man  was  not  made  to 
live  to  himself.  The  same  truth  may  be  inferred — 3.  From  a  nearer  inspection  of 
ihe  principles  of  human  nature  and  the  springs  of  human  actions.  Whence  is  that 
quick  sensibility  which  we  are  conscious  of  with  respect  to  both  the  joys  and  the 
sorrows  of  our  fellow-creatures  if  their  happiness  or  misery  were  a  matter  of  indif- 
ference to  us  7  Can  we  feel  what  is  sometimes  called  the  contagion  of  the  passions 
when  we  find  that  our  minds  contract  a  kind  of  gloom  in  the  company  of  the 
melancholy,  and  that  this  melancholy  vanishes  in  company  which  is  innocently 
cheerful,  and  question  the  influence  of  social  connections?  Much  less  can  the 
reality  or  the  power  of  the  social  principle  be  doubted  when  a  fellow-creature  in 
distress  calls  forth  the  most  exquisite  feelings  of  compassion,  attended  with  instant 
efforts  towards  his  relief.  Doth  not  the  sense  of  honour  in  the  human  breast 
derive  all  its  force  from  the  influence  which  social  connections  have  over  us  ?  Of 
what  use  could  it  be  but  to  beings  formed  for  society  ?  Lastly,  of  what  doth  devo- 
tion itself  consist  but  the  exercise  of  the  social  affections  7  What  are  the  disposi- 
tions of  our  minds  which  are  called  forth  into  action  in  private  or  public  prayer, 
but  reverence  for  true  greatness,  humility,  gratitude,  love,  and  oonfldence  in  God, 
as  the  greatest  and  best  of  beings  ;  qualities  of  the  most  admirable  use  and  effect 
in  social  life.  II.  Having  given  this  general  view  of  the  social  turn  of  our  whole 
natures,  whereby  we  are  continually  led  out  of  ourselves  in  our  pursuit  of  happi- 
ness, I  shall  now  consider  farther  how  all  oub  appetites  and  passions,  which  are 
the  springs  of  all  our  actions,  do,  in  their  own  nature,  tend  to  lead  us  out  of  oub- 
SELVES,  and  how  much  our  happiness  depends  upon  our  keeping  their  proper 
objects  in  view,  and  upon  our  minds  being  thereby  constantly  engaged  upon  some- 
thing foreign  to  themselves,  after  which  I  shall  show  what  are  the  Attest  objects 
thus  to  engage  our  attention.  Our  benevolence,  for  instance,  leads  us  immediately 
to  relieve  and  oblige  others.  Pleasure,  indeed,  always  attends  generous  actions, 
but  the  satisfaction  we  receive  in  our  minds  from  having  done  kind  offices  to  others 
is  far  less  pure,  and  less  perfectly  enjoyed,  if  at  all,  when  we  had  any  private 
gratification  in  view  before  the  action.  In  like  manner,  he  who  courts  applause 
and  does  worthy  actions  solely  to  obtain  it,  can  have  no  knowledge  of  the  genuine 
pleasure  arising  either  from  the  good  action  itself  or  the  applause  that  is  given  to 
it,  because  he  is  sensible  in  his  own  mind  that  if  those  who  praise  bis  conduct  were 
acquainted  with  the  real  motive  of  it  they  would  be  so  far  from  admiring  that  they 
wQuld  despise  him  for  it.  It  is  chiefly  an  anxious  solicitude  about  ourselves,  and 
the  appearance  we  shall  make  in  the  eyes  of  others,  which  is  the  cause  of  that 
affectation  and  constraint  in  behaviour  which  is  so  troublesome  to  a  person's  self, 
and  so  ridiculous  in  the  eyes  of  others.  This  trifling  remark,  being  so  frequently 
verified,  may  serve  to  show  that  these  sentiments  are  by  no  means  merely  specula- 
tive, but  that  they  enter  into  the  daily  scenes  of  active  life.  Indeed  they  are  in 
the  highest  sense  practical,  and  upon  them  depend  those  maxims  of  conduct  which 
contain  the  great  secret  of  human  happiness,  and  which  are  confirmed  by  every 
day's  experience.    Why  are  persons  whose  situation  in  life  obliges  them  to  constant 


618  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohap.  xW. 

labour,  either  of  body  or  mind,  generally  more  happy  than  those  whose  circom- 
stances  do  not  lay  them  ander  a  necessity  to  laboor  ?  Persons  thos  employed  have 
not  much  leisure  to  attend  to  the  idea  of  self,  and  that  anxiety  which  always 
attends  the  frequent  recurring  of  it,  whereas  a  person  who  has  no  object  foreign  to 
himself,  which  necessarily  engages  his  attention,  cannot  have  his  faculties  fully 
exerted,  and  therefore  his  mind  cannot  possibly  be  in  that  state  of  vigorous  sensa- 
tion in  which  happiness  consists.  III.  We  now  come  to  see  what  considebatiohs 
BBAWN  FBOM  THJE  HoLY  ScBiPTUBES  will  further  Confirm  and  illustrate  this  maxim 
of  human  conduct  which  was  first  suggested  by  them.  Nothing  is  more  frequent 
with  the  sacred  writers  than  to  exhort  men  to  the  practice  of  their  duty  as  the 
command  of  God,  from  a  principle  of  love  to  God,  of  love  to  Christ,  and  of  love  to 
mankind,  more  especially  of  our  fellow  Christians,  and  from  a  regard  to  the 
interest  of  our  holy  religion — motives  which  do  not  at  all  turn  the  attention  of  our 
minds  upon  themselves.  This  is  not  borrowing  the  aid  of  self-love  to  strengthen 
the  principles  of  benevolence  and  piety,  but  it  is  properly  deriving  additional 
strength  to  these  noble  dispositions,  as  it  were,  from  within  themselves,  indepen- 
dent of  foreign  considerations.  {J.  Priestley,  LL.D.)  Related  life : — L  **  No  man 
LiTBTE  UNTO  HIMSELF. "  1.  We  gather  about  the  grave  of  one  who,  while  he  lived,  with- 
drew himself  largely  from  contact  with  men,  and  from  the  activities  of  his  generation; 
and  we  say  of  him, "  There  was  a  man  who  lived  entirely  to  himself. "  No,  he  did  not ! 
That  reserve  and  isolation  are  as  definite  a  power  in  the  world  as  the  marching  of 
a  regiment.  When,  on  the  sea,  the  wind  suddenly  becomes  chill  and  the  fog 
thickens,  and  the  commander  paces  the  deck  with  anxious  face,  you  know  that  you 
are  in  the  neighbourhood  of  an  iceberg — though  the  iceberg  has  cabled  you  no 
message.  And  just  so  with  those  moral  icebergs.  The  air  grows  chillier  whenever 
they  approach.  The  frost  of  their  selfishness  nips  the  kindly  buds  of  other  lives 
and  makes  them  as  fruitless  as  their  own.  2.  And  if  this  is  so,  how  clearly  we  see 
the  force  of  the  text  when  we  look  at  some  character  of  an  opposite  type !  Here  is 
a  man  with  fine  sympathies  and  endowments  whose  life  seems  to  be  engrossed  in 
his  business  or  his  studies.  What  an  influence  he  could  wield,  we  think,  if  be  could 
Bet  out  of  that  narrow  round  which  holds  him  to  such  petty  cares  I  But  every  one 
of  those  cares  touches  some  other  life.  His  partners,  clerks,  workmen,  children, 
and  servants — all  these  are  conscious  that  something  warmer  and  ampler  than 
the  starved  currents  of  their  own  being  has  flowed  into  their  lives  through  him. 
8.  In  a  word,  all  life  in  man  is  consistent — the  highest  form  of  it  with  the  lowest 
— the  life  of  the  soul  with  the  Ufe  of  the  nerves.  There  are  two  sets  of  nerves, 
those  of  motion  and  those  of  sensation,  running  side  by  side  like  a  railway  with  a 
double  track.  One  set  of  nerves  or  tracks  brings  us  the  incoming  trains — the 
tidings  and  influences  from  without ;  the  other  set  dispatches  the  influences  from 
within.  To  have  both  these  sets  of  nerves  constantly  doing  their  duty — to  have 
my  eye  and  ear  and  the  nerves  which  are  connected  with  them  correctly  reporting 
to  me  the  beauty  and  the  melody  that  are  outside,  and  then  to  have  lips  and  every 
organ  of  expression  accurately  transmitting  to  others  the  thought  and  purpose  that 
are  within — this  is  life.  But  suppose  that  while  my  nervous  system  is  receiving 
impressions  it  has  become  incapable  of  expression.  It  would  be  paralysis,  and 
paralysis  is  simply  an  incipient  form  of  death.  Life  is  virtually  impossible  without 
expression,  and  that  expression  for  ever  betrays  the  man  that  is  behind  it.  There 
are  many  who  are  trying  to  live  to  themselves  in  the  sense  that  they  are  trying  to 
keep  the  quality  of  their  lives  a  secret.  Let  me  exhort  them  to  desist  from  such 
an  impossible  imdertaking.  The  world  will  be  quick  to  find  out  what  brings  the 
throb  into  your  pulse  and  the  Ught  into  your  eye.  And  therefore  your  Ufe  will  be 
worthier  and  happier  if  you  frankly  recqgnise  that  it  is  the  law  of  your  being 
to  betray  itself.  II.  "  No  man  dieth  to  hImbelf."  1.  Does  this  mean  that  when 
a  man  comes  to  his  death-bed,  his  end  must  needs  reveal  himself,  and  so  strongly 
influeiice  others  ?  Hardly ;  for  there  is  a  physical  terror  of  death  which  is  the 
characteristic  of  certain  timid  and  sensitive  natures,  and  the  more  devout  the 
character,  the  keener  often  is  its  dismay.  And  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  persons 
with  such  force  of  will,  that  the  acted  career  they  have  been  playing  all  along, 
they  play  with  equal  composure  to  the  very  end.  2.  The  significance  of  death  is 
to  be  found  in  the  temper  and  purpose  with  which  it  is  contemplated  and 
approached.  Do  we  understand  that  the  process  of  Ufe  is  double,  and  that  every 
step  forward  is  a  progress  in  decay  and  an  experience  of  death  ?  The  worn-out 
weariness  of  the  octogenarian  utters  itself,  incipiently,  in  the  tired  slumber  of  the 
ehild.     Man  is  acting,  from  the  beginning,  with  a  certainty  in  view.    And  how  ia 


nut.  xiT.]  ROMANS.  611 

he  ftotiDg  7  Knowing  that  he  will  die,  is  he  asing  his  life  as  if  it  were  a  vestibal* 
oraterminuB?  ConBoioas  that  a  part  of  himself  will  drop  away  into  the  grave 
and  a  part  endure  beyond  it,  is  he  living  for  what  will  perish,  or  rather  for  what 
will  last?  For  what  is  it  that  happens  at  death  T  (1)  We  have  been  too  basy  to 
recognise  clearly  the  character  and  quality  of  a  man  who  lived,  it  may  be,  right 
alongside  of  as.  Bnt  suddenly  he  falls,  and  then  all  the  past  somehow  pieces 
itself  together  and  becomes  an  intelligible  whole ;  and  behind  the  mannerisms,  or 
whatever  it  was  that  sometimes  offended  as,  we  see  the  shining  track  of  a  noble 
Christian  life.  And,  looking  back  over  sach  a  pathway,  we  realise  how  *'  no  man 
dieth  to  himself  " ;  we  see  how  death  groups  together  and  garners  op  the  whole 
drift  of  the  man's  career,  and  we  thank  God  for  one  more  good  example.  (2)  To 
sach  a  portraiture  there  must  needs  be  an  opposite.  Did  you  ever  think  to  your- 
self with  a  shudder  that  yoa  were  glad  some  one  was  dead  ?  Here  is  a  life  that 
has  touched  nothing  that  it  has  not  debased.  But  the  misery  of  the  death  of  a  bad 
man  is  that  it  has  so  enormous  a  propagating  power.  Their  burial  gaJvanises  into 
new  life  all  the  memories  of  their  dreary  past.  {Bp.  H.  C.  Potter.)  Living 
to  ulf : — The  first  question  which  arises  as  we  meet  these  words  is  as  to  their 
scope  and  sweep.  Must  we  not  begin  by  putting  them  under  limitations?  Is 
it  true  ?  Are  there  not  multitudes  of  persons  who  are  living  to  themselves  T  We 
ought  not  to  limit  any  truth  until  we  find  it  impossible  to  do  otherwise.  Truth  as 
it  comes  from  the  lips  of  a  man  specially  endowed  to  speak  it  is  always  hkely  to  be 
greater  than  our  comprehension  of  it.  First  of  all,  we  know,  as  a  matter  of  fact, 
that  no  man  is  simply  an  individual.  An  individual  life  would  have  to  start  as  it 
was  said  of  the  life  of  Melchisedek,  without  father  and  without  mother.  We  all  of 
OS  are  related.  Whether  we  choose  to  acknowledge  it  or  not,  the  fact  remains. 
We  need  not  concern  ourselves,  however,  about  remote  ancestries.  Those  imme- 
diately back  of  us  have  influenced  us  more  or  less.  We  see  family  likenesses 
extending  not  alone  to  facial  expression,  bnt  family  likenesses  extending  to 
character.  If  yoa  find  a  proud  and  obstinate  mother  you  are  pretty  sure  in  a 
family  to  find  also  a  proud  and  obstinate  son ;  if  you  find  a  weak  and  indolent 
father  you  will  not  be  surprised  if  somewhere  in  the  family  you  find  a  still  weaker 
and  more  indolent  daughter.  Our  relationships  count  for  something.  They  are 
not  mere  matters  of  arrangement  or  of  convenience.  Soul,  as  well  as  body, 
descends.  And  yet  every  man  has  something  which  individualises  him.  There  is 
a  spark  as  it  were  of  spiritual  life  in  every  one  of  as,  as  there  is  a  spark  of 
electricity  in  every  drop  of  water  and  in  every  grain  of  sand.  Electricity  in  matter 
seems  in  a  certain  way,  and  remotely,  to  represent  spirituality  in  mind.  Very  well, 
then,  take  only  these  two  facts — the  fact  of  relationship  to  others  making  our  life 
•  continuation  of  their  life,  and  the  fact  of  each  of  us  having  a  distinct  personality 
— and  how  mysterious  it  is  I  And  yet  nobody  can  deny  the  facts.  Now  this 
relation  to  others  from  whom  we  cannot  free  ourselves  shows  that  the  good  in  as 
tad  the  evil  in  us  are  not  entirely  our  own,  and  that  no  man  can  be  judged  simply 
as  an  individual.  It  is  not  our  own  till  we  adopt  it  as  our  own.  Belated  all  round 
as  we  are,  then,  does  it  not  become  clearer  and  clearer  that  the  apostle  simply 
indicates  a  universal  law  of  life  when  he  says,  "  For  none  of  us  liveth  to  himself, 
and  no  man  dieth  to  himself  "  ?  It  is  manifestly  impossible  that  any  man  should 
live  to  hiDMelf  in  unrelated  and  uninfluential  independence  of  others.  Every  man 
Is  related  all  round.  Is  it  not  clear  that  no  good  man  lives  to  himself?  The  very 
idea  of  goodness  implies  unselfishness,  kindness,  sympathy.  When  a  man  intelli- 
gently and  voluntarily  co-operates  with  God,  "  Uves  unto  the  Lord,"  as  St.  Paul 
phrases  it,  then  we  all  agree  that  he  is  not  living  to  himself.  And  yet  if  we  look 
into  the  matter  sufficiently  close  we  shall  find  that  there  is  a  sense  in  which  a  man 
is  never  so  much  living  to  himself  or  for  his  own  interests  as  when  he  is  volun- 
tarily living  to  Gk)d.  The  laws  of  the  universe  are  such  that  benevolence  ultimately 
hangs  np  by  the  neck  the  man  whose  penuriousness  has  blinded  his  eyes  to  the 
fact  that  he  has  been  occupying  himself  aU  his  life,  like  Haman  of  old,  in  gallows* 
building.  For  Uving  to  himself,  mark  you,  is  an  impossible  task.  In  some  degree 
or  other  every  man  is  multiplying  himself,  his  character  does  not  remain  at  home, 
but  it  travels  abroad.  Is  there  not  great  comfort  in  the  fact  that  no  man  can  be 
good  without  doing  good  ?  We  used  to  be  taught  in  the  days  gone  by  that  we  must 
not  think  of  ourselves,  but  we  must  be  good  and  unselfish.  Did  we  not  feel  at  the 
time  that  there  was  something  impossible  and  unnatural  in  that  advice?  Self  is 
here  with  us,  we  cannot  rid  ourselv3s  of  it.  The  consciousness  of  self  I  cannot 
escape.      (Beuen  Ihomat,  DJ>.)        None  of  us  liveth  to  himself:— I.   Ssmsu 


630  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  nv. 

HI  WHICH  THIS  a  TBtm.  1.  Thai  of  personal  Inflaence  over  oar  fellows,  fl) 
Many  a  godless  man  is  eneooraging  himself  in  the  way  to  perdition  dj 
some  foolish  or  sinful  word  or  deed  of  a  professing  Christian ;  and  also  many 
in  whom  all  that  is  good  dates  from  some  solemn  word  said  by  a  Lelierer 
who  never  knew  what  that  word  was  to  do.  And  the  hamblest  exercises  this 
inflaence  just  as  truly  as  the  mightiest.  The  little  child  that  died  before  it  ever 
spoke  an  articulate  sentence  may  have  done  more  than  the  wisest  and  greatest  to 
permanently  affect  the  whole  character  and  life  of  its  parents.  There  is  a  sense  in 
which  the  most  selfish  man  cannot  live  and  die  to  himself.  He  will  inflaence  by 
the  tone  and  atmosphere  of  his  life.  Every  professing  Christian  is  an  epistle 
known  and  read  of  all  men.  By  his  entire  life  he  is  saying,  "  One  thing  is  needful : 
seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness " ;  or  else,  "  All  theee 
things  are  very  well  to  talk  of,  but  give  me  the  main  chance."  (2)  And  as  we 
cannot  live,  neither  can  we  die  to  ourselves.  Our  death  is  the  testing-time  of  all 
our  life,  the  thing  that  fixes  the  character  of  it  all.  And  what  different  influences 
oome  from  different  deaths !  Think  of  the  hardening  effect  of  a  death  of  which 
yoa  say,  "  Ah,  he's  gone  ;  no  great  loss  to  anybody  but  himself  " ;  and  then  think 
of  the  effect  of  a  death  about  which  you  say,  "  Well,  religion  must  be  a  real  and 
wonderful  thing  to  have  kept  a  man  up  in  suffering  as  it  did  there ! "  And  very 
naturally  Balaam's  wish  will  follow.  2.  That  of  mutual  dependence.  The  work  of 
many  of  you  is  rather  for  your  children  than  for  yourselves :  and  even  the  young 
should  know  that  their  parents'  happiness  is  dependent  on  their  turning  out  well. 
Effects,  reaching  to  millions  of  people,  oome  of  causes  in  human  beings  thousands  of 
miles  away,  and  never  seen  nor  known.  A  fancy,  in  a  savage  race,  for  some  article 
of  British  manufacture,  will  increase  the  comforts  of  many  homes  in  a  great 
manufacturing  town.  Or  a  people  arise  in  war  for  slavery ;  and  the  consequence 
is  felt  in  trade  and  religion  all  over  the  world.  We  are  gradually  finding  oat 
that  the  welfare  of  one  race  or  nation  is  the  welfare  of  alL  We  are  learning 
to  cast  away  the  infidel  question,  "  Am  I  my  brother's  keeper?  "  and  are  learning 
instead  those  wise  words  of  a  heathen,  "  I  am  a  human  being,  and  I  feel  that 
I  have  something  to  do  with  everything  human  1 "  which  are  an  echo  of  St.  Paul's. 
Yes,  my  friend,  there  are  some  who  could  not  do  well  for  a  while  yet  without  you. 
There  are  those  whom  almost  every  human  being  would  miss  if  he  were  taken 
away.  Very  few  lives  could  be  quenched  without  loss  and  grief  to  some  one.  II. 
Thb  sense  in  which  Paul  meant  it.  1.  The  text  is  a  step  in  an  argument. 
Paul  has  been  arguing  for  toleration,  and  showing  that  though  men  may  differ  on 
points  short  of  the  great  essential  doctrines  of  salvation,  they  may  yet  be  oonscien- 
tious  and  devoted  Christians.  So  we  are  to  recogniee  as  Christians  all  whom  God 
would  recognise.  Everything  the  true  Christian  does,  the  apostle  says  he  does  as 
for  his  God  and  Saviour.  "For  none  of  us  liveth  unto  himself,"  <feo.  And  thus 
the  great  truth  taught  is  that  the  Christian  does  not  live  to  himself  in  the  sense  of 
thinking  mainly  of  sell  His  will  is  subordinated  to  God's ;  his  great  end  is  not  to  get 
on  in  life,  but  rather  ••  to  glorify  God  and  enjoy  Him  for  ever."  Now,  in  this  sense 
of  the  phrase,  many  do  live  entirely  to  themselves  and  not  at  all  to  God.  There 
uo  people  who  could  not  seriously  say  that,  from  Monday  morning  to  Saturday 
night,  they  bestow  any  real  thought  on  anything  beyond  the  horizon  of  this  world. 
2.  Here,  then,  we  have  a  test  by  which  to  try  the  reality  of  our  Christian  pro- 
fession and  character.  Would  it  be  a  safe  thing  for  any  one  to  say  to  this 
congregation.  We  differ  one  from  another  in  a  great  many  respects ;  but  there  is 
one  thing  in  which  we  are  all  agreed,  "  None  of  us  liveth  to  himself,  and  none  of  us 
will  die  to  himself ! "  We  are  all  living  and  will  die  to  God.  But  this  great 
test  is  one  that  is  thoroughly  accepted  by  people  who  are  not  Christians,  who 
hold  very  cheap  the  fair  words  of  the  man  in  whom  all  is  tainted  with  the  plague- 
spot  of  selfishness.  The  great  secret  of  usefulness  is  the  ceasing  to  live  to  yourself  I 
"  They  glorified  God  in  me,"  said  St.  Paul  of  those  who  heard  of  his  conversion ; 
and  God  shall  be  glorified  in  each  of  us,  whether  in  life  or  in  death,  if  we  be  truly 
devoted  to  Him.  {A.  K.  H.  Boyd,  D.D.)  Beligiout  $eljishness : — Do  we  all  live 
up  to  the  spirit  of  the  text  in  our — I.  Pbatbrs  7  The  Lord's  Prayer  is  all  in  the 
plural  number.  Our  Saviour's  prayers  were  and  are  essentially  intercessory.  So 
were  Daniel's,  Paul's,  Jeremiah's,  Abraham's.  In  fact,  all  the  great  prayers  of  the 
Bible  are  intercessory.  But  is  it  not  with  most  of  us,  my  wants,  my  sorrows,  my 
difficulties,  my  soul  ?  Is  not  the  thought  of  others  a  very  small  part  when  yoa  are 
npon  your  knees,  and  thanksgiving  for  others  the  smallest  of  aJl  ?  May  not  thia 
be  a  reason  for  the  very  few  answen  yon  have  had  ?    God  tamed  the  captivity  <^ 


'.  HT.J  ROMANS.  621 

Job  when  he  prayed  for  his  friends.  Insoribe  it  in  yoar  oratory  as  the  life  of  yoar 
prayers — "  None  of  as  liveth  to  himself."  U.  Bsuoious  lus.  The  religion  of  most 
men  consists  of  little  more  than  going  to  ohnrch,  reading  religious  books,  and  now  and 
then  talking  to  some  religious  person.  Whereas  every  Christian  is  to  be  a  leavening 
element,  placed  in  this  world  to  germinate  and  extend  truth.  Every  feeling  which  Qod 
gives  a  man  is  the  property  of  the  Church  and  of  the  world.  III.  Conversation. 
The  right  rule  for  this  is,  that  there  should  be  a  reciprocity,  and  that  each  person 
should  try,  according  to  the  character  of  the  persons  to  whom  he  is  talking,  to  get 
good,  or  to  do  good,  but  the  tendency  is  to  think  far  more  of  the  good  we  may  get 
than  of  that  we  may  give.  lY.  Beuoious  tibws.  Most  of  as  live  in  a  very 
narrow  system  of  ideas.  God  forbid  that  we  should  be  so  liberal  as  to  profesa 
to  find  truth  everywhere  and  leave  it  nowhere.  But  so  the  more  essential  truths 
are  held,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  is  magnified,  we  ought  not  to  break  up  the  great 
continent  of  truth  into  so  many  little  islands,  on  which  each  puny  man  takes  his 
stand,  and  says,  "  This  is  the  Church."  Y.  Chubch  wobk.  Can  it  be  a  right  state 
when,  out  of  such  a  congregation  as  this,  there  is  such  a  Uttle  band  to  be  found 
of  those  who  give  themselves  to  any  expressed  work  of  usefulness  ?  How  many 
are  living  in  their  little  daily  circle,  attending  to  their  own  health,  or  their  own 
business,  or  their  own  souls  i  But  will  the  kingdom  of  Qod  ever  be  spread  in  this 
way?      {J.  Vaugkan,  M.A.)  Religious  seHUhnets : — The  Emperor  Constantine 

said  to  one  who  was  dissatisfied  with  every  church  he  had  attended,  "  Some  are  so 
supremely  selfish  that  they  would  construct  a  special  heaven  for  themselves  and 
their  friends."  [S.  Milner.)  Selfish  and  unselfish  workers  : — Of  all  things  beware 
of  that  most  mortal  selfishness,  that  greedy  selfishness,  which  makes  a  man 
onwilling  to  labour,  for  fear  that  somebody  else  will  get  the  benefit  of  his  labour 
instead  of  himself.  Bemember  Him  who  for  ever  and  for  ever  labours  for 
something  or  somebody  beside  Himself.  What  can  the  sparrow  give  to  Ck>d? 
And  yet  God  every  morning  thinks  of  the  sparrow.  What  can  ten  myriad, 
myriad  worms  on  uie  earth  give  back  to  God?  And  yet  Ood  never  forgets  the 
worm.  What  return  can  the  great  tribe  of  insects  make  to  God  for  His  watchful 
care  ?  Piping  on  their  tiny  instruments  they  can  raise  no  song  of  praise  worthy 
of  His  hearing.  All  living  creatures  on  the  broad  universe  receive  God's  bene- 
faction ;  and  it  Is  His  joy  to  work  for  their  benefit.  {H.  W.  Beeeher.)  Self 
or  Christ ;  which  is  it  t — I.  The  settiko  aside  or  self.  Kot  annihilating  it, 
but  giving  it  its  proper  place.  Selfishness  is  the  master-sin,  the  master-curse  of 
man.  The  selfish  man  is  not  like  one  looking  round  on  a  noble  landscape,  and 
forgetting  himself  in  the  beauty  of  the  wide  expanse,  but  like  one  carrying  a 
mirror  with  him,  so  that  every  object  is  seen  in  connection  with  self,  and  is  only 
admired  as  it  helps  to  set  off  self.  The  apostle  reverses  all  this.  From  the 
Christian's  life,  death,  and  all  between,  self  has  been  displaced.  The  first  setting 
aside  of  self  is  in  the  matter  of  justification  before  God ;  for,  previously,  man's 
object  was  to  amend,  improve,  or  mortify  self,  in  order  that  he  might  recommend 
himself  to  God.  The  Holy  Spirit,  however,  shows  that  self  can  contribute  nothing 
towards  man's  acceptance  with  God.  What  is  conviction  of  sin  but  just  the  setting 
aside  of  self  t  From  that  point  it  proceeds  onwards  throughout  a  man's  whole  life. 
Others  may  live  and  die  to  themselves,  but  not  we  who  have  been  "  bought  with  a 
price."  How  this — 1.  Elevates  life  1  That  which  degrades  life  is  the  introduction 
of  self,  but  now  life  is  lifted  up  into  its  true  glory — the  position  which  God 
originally  designed  for  man.  2.  Takes  away  life's  littlenesses.  3.  Establishes  smd 
strengthens  life.  4.  Secures  us  against  all  failure  and  disappointment.  H.  The 
SXTBSTITUTE  roB  SELF.  1.  In  the  matter  of  our  standing  before  God.  As  the  first 
thing  the  Holy  Spirit  does  is  to  set  aside  self,  in  the  matter  of  justification  and 
acceptance,  so  His  next  is  to  present  to  us  the  Son  of  God  as  the  true  ground  of  our 
acceptance.  Having  taken  Him  in  the  place  of  self,  we  find  ourselves  at  once 
••  accepted  in  the  Beloved."  2.  As  the  object  for  whom  we  live.  In  Him  we  find 
an  object  worth  Uving  for.  (1)  What  solemnity  is  thus  thrown  over  life  1  All  its 
parts  and  movements  are  now  consecrated  to  the  Lord.  (2)  What  dignity  this 
imparts,  both  to  life  and  death  1  (3)  What  importance  now  attaches  to  life  I  All 
triviality  has  passed  out  of  it.  (4)  What  an  imperishable  character  is  thus  imparted 
to  life  I  It  was  self  formerly  tnat  ruined  everything.  He  is  come  in,  who  is  "  the 
same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever,"  and  He  imparts  His  immortality  to  us. 
(5)  What  an  incentive  to  zeal  this  gives  us  I  (6)  What  a  reason  for  consistency  and 
holiness  of  life  I  Everything  we  do  tells,  not  merely  upon  our  comfort,  earthly 
prospects,  good  name,  bot  upon  the  glory  of  Christ.    HI.  The  uakmbb  vx  whiob 


683  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Xtf. 

SHIS  SUBSTITUTION  IS  siTEGTED  (ver.  9).  Christ's  claim  over  as  as  Jehovah  is 
etemaJ,  and  nothing  can  be  added  to  it.  But  His  claim  over  as  as  the  Christ  is  a 
fiuperadded  claim.  This  claim  He  has  made  good  by  His  death  and  resarrection. 
Nor  can  any  one  dispute  it  or  present  a  rival  one,  for  no  other  has  done  what  He 
did.  1.  The  least,  then,  that  we  can  give  Him  is  oar  life ;  the  undivided  service  of 
our  being,  in  every  part.  2.  Our  death  is  to  be  His.  In  dying  He  thought  on  us ; 
60  in  dying  let  us  think  on  Him.  Our  death  is  to  be  for  His  glory.  3.  Our  eternity 
is  to  be  His.  He  ever  liveth  for  us;  let  us  anticipate  the  ever  living  for  Him.  {H. 
Bonar,  D.D.)  The  action  of  presence  : — 1.  One  of  the  most  remarkable  pheno< 
mena  in  chemistry  is  that  which  is  known  as  "catalysis,"  or  the  "action  of  presence" 
— socalledbecausethe  mere  presence  of  a  certain  substance  among  the  atoms  of  another 
substance  produces  the  most  extensive  changes  upon  these  atoms ;  and  yet  the  body 
thus  operating  is  itself  unchanged.  Thus,  e.g.,  starch  is  converted  into  »ugar  and 
gum,  at  a  certain  temperature,  by  the  presence  of  an  acid  which  does  not  partici- 
pate in  the  change.  A  current  of  hydrogen  gas  directed  upon  a  piece  of  polished 
platinum  will  take  fire,  and  yet  the  platinum  will  remain  completely  unaltered. 
Very  many  of  the  most  important  actions  of  growth  and  decay,  of  life  and  death 
throughout  the  animal  and  vegetable  kingdoms,  are  produced  by  this  oatalytio 
power.  We  find  illustrations  also  in  the  attractions  of  cohesion  and  gravitation, 
in  the  resemblance  of  many  animals  to  the  soil  on  which  they  live,  or  the  objects 
by  which  they  are  surrounded,  and  in  the  regional  resemblance  subsisting  between 
all  the  plants  and  animals  belonging  to  one  continent  and  its  dependencies. 
Ascending  higher,  we  find  the  influence  of  this  principle  in  the  obaracteristio 
features  of  mental,  moral,  and  physical  likeness  which  the  inhabitants  of  a 
particular  district  acquire;  and  in  the  resemblance  so  often  noticed  between  the 
countenances  of  husband  and  wife  who  have  Uved  long  together.  2.  But  it  is  in 
the  social  world  that  we  see  the  most  striking  examples.  Human  beings  are  un> 
oeasingly  exerting  unconscious  infiuence  upon  one  another,  and  producing  results 
of  the  most  vital  and  lasting  importance.  The  very  presence  of  some  is  like  sun- 
shine, while  the  society  of  others  acts  like  a  dark  cloud.  We  feel  at  once  at  our 
ease  in  the  presence  of  some  people,  and  awkward  and  reserved  in  the  presence  of 
others.  On  a  large  scale  we  see  the  effects  of  the  same  law  in  the  conventionalities 
of  life,  in  fashions,  in  the  enthusiasm  of  a  crowd,  in  the  panics  of  trade,  and  in 
moral  epidemics.  3.  The  hem  of  Christ's  garment  was  instinct  with  healing  power; 
and  the  very  shadow  of  the  apostles  shed  silent  virtue  on  the  sick  laid  by  the  way- 
side. And  so  in  a  manner  is  it  with  Christians  still.  But  this  nameless  influence 
is  different  in  different  cases.  The  natural  man  often  shines  through  the  new  man, 
and  produces  an  alien  impression.  One  is  morose  and  bigoted ;  his  very  presence 
acts  like  an  acid.  Another  is  Pharisaically  strict,  and  makes  sad  the  heart  that 
God  has  not  made  sad.  A  third  is  morbid,  oppressed  with  little  fidgety  difficulties 
and  trials.  All  these  Christians  are,  insensibly  to  themselves,  producing  an  effect 
upon  others  quite  contrary  to  what  they  wish:  they  are  giving  a  wrong  idea  of 
their  religion  to  the  world.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  Christians  who  produce 
in  others  a  sense  of  their  close  relation  to  God,  and  breathe  around  them  an 
atmosphere  as  healthy  and  exhilarating  as  the  air  on  a  mountain-top.  They  give 
an  adequate  representation  of  what  Christianity  is  and  does.  Note  respecting  this 
spiritual  catalysis— I.  Its  tbuthtulnbss.  We  say  of  children  that  they  instinc- 
tively know  those  who  love  them,  and  go  to  such  at  once ;  while  no  kind  words  or 
sweet  looks  will  allure  them  to  the  side  of  those  who  are  not  lovers  of  the  little 
ones  at  heart.  What  is  this  but  just  the  impression  which  a  true  character  is 
making  upon  a  heart  gifted,  by  virtue  of  its  simplicity,  with  an  insight  unknown  to 
the  wise  and  prudent?  So  also  every  one  has  noticed  the  fondness  of  animals  for 
certain  persons,  and  their  aversion  to  others.  Every  Christian  is  producing  two  sets 
of  influences.  One  is  the  involuntary  influence  of  his  real  character ;  the  other  is 
the  influence  of  what  he  says  and  does  for  a  special  purpose.  Now  these  two 
carrents  may  be  opposed  to  one  another.  The  character  may  be  saying  one  thing, 
the  lips  and  conduct  another.  But  in  vain  does  a  man  profess  to  be  what  he  is  not. 
The  mask  worn  for  a  purpose  continually  slips  aside,  and  reveals  the  natural  face 
behind.  There  is  a  species  of  animalcule  called  Botifera,  hving  in  tufts  of  mosses, 
which,  when  placed  under  the  microscope,  is  found  to  be  transparent  as  crystal. 
Ton  see  all  its  internal  organs  and  the  processes  of  life  as  you  see  the  works  of  a 
watch  through  the  glass.  We  are  like  this  creature.  I  may  not  be  able  to  tell  why 
I  think  a  certain  person  is  not  a  genuine  character,  but  I  have  an  instinctive  feeling 
that  he  is  not  what  he  pretends  to  be.    II.  Its  oonstanot.    Not  more  constantlj  ii 


CBAP.  xxw.]  ROMANS.  «2t 

the  son  shinliig,  or  a  flower  exhaling  its  fragrance,  than  the  Christian  is  radiating 
or  exhaling  influence  from  his  character  upon  those  around  him.  What  a  man 
Toluntarilj  chooses,  sajs,  or  does,  is  only  occasional.  But  what  he  is — that  is 
necessarily  perpetual.  I  cannot  always  speak  a  word  for  Christ,  but  I  can  always 
live  for  Him.  The  voluntary  language  of  what  I  say  or  do  is  spasmodic,  and  liable 
to  continual  interruption ;  but  the  language  of  what  I  really  am  is  as  continuous 
as  my  life  itself.  Just  as  the  leaven,  by  its  mere  presence,  changes  the  particles  of 
meal  in  the  midst  of  which  it  is  hid,  so  does  each  human  being,  by  Iw  mere 
presence,  affect  for  good  or  evil  those  with  whom  he  associates.  III.  lis  besponbi- 
BELiTY.  This  we  do  not  always  acknowledge.  We  are  responsible,  we  say,  for  the 
influence  that  we  desire  to  produce  upon  others  ;  but  for  the  voluntary  effect  of  our 
life,  we  think  we  are  no  more  responsible  than  we  are  for  the  involuntary  beating 
of  our  hearts.  We  cannot,  however,  thus  repudiate  our  responsibility.  For  what 
is  our  character  ?  The  sum  of  our  thoughts,  feelings,  and  actions.  This  character 
we  ourselves  have  formed,  and  while  we  cannot  help  the  silent  influence  of  our 
character,  when  formed,  we  are  responsible  for  the  formation  of  it.  Our  very 
accountability  to  God  rests  upon  our  ability  to  build  up  a  good  character ;  and  if 
we  are  judged  according  to  the  goodness  and  evil  of  our  character  iteelf,  we  may 
certainly  be  held  responsible  for  the  good  or  evil  influence  which,  unknown  to  us, 
it  produces  upon  others.  We  cannot  Uve  in  the  world  and  escape  this  responsibility, 
because  we  cannot  live  in  the  world  and  not  exert  a  moral  influence  upon  others. 
The  radiation  of  heat  from  one  object  to  another,  the  equalisation  of  temperature, 
is  not  more  certain  in  the  physical  world  than  the  distribution  of  influence  in  the 
moral.  {H.  Macmillan,  D.D.)  Influence  : — I.  The  poweb  of  human  influence. 
1.  Nothing  in  the  universe  is  self-contained.  There  is  an  intimate  connection  and 
mutual  dependence  existing  between  aU  things  and  beings.  This  is  true  in — (1)  The 
angelic  world  (Heb.  i.).  (2)  In  the  world  of  nature.  Not  a  single  atom  of  matter, 
ray  of  light,  <feo.,  stands  alone.  The  fall  of  a  bullet  (so  says  Mr.  Grove)  '*  changes 
the  dynamical  condition  of  the  universe."  Bacon  affirms  that  "  All  things  that 
have  affinity  with  the  heavens  move  upon  the  centre  of  another  which  they  benefit." 
(3)  The  human  world.  The  interdependence  of  one  another  is  an  absolute  fact. 
Isaac  Taylor  has  well  said,  "  On  principles  even  of  mathematical  calculations  each 
individual  of  the  human  family  may  be  demonstrated  to  hold  in  his  hand  the  / 
centre  lines  of  an  interminable  web-work  on  which  are  sustained  the  fortunes  of  V 
multitudes  of  his  successors."  2.  Influence  binds  us  to  one  another  and  the  world. 
It  is  twofold.  (1)  Direct  and  palpable.  Such  is  seen  in  the  active  employment  of 
that  moral  power  which  we  all  possess,  e.g.,  in  teaching,  &o.  (2)  Indirect  and 
imperceptible.  This  is  the  most  constant,  uniform,  and  powerful.  We  all  come 
beneath  this  law.  Each  soul  born  into  this  world  increases  or  diminishes  the  sum 
total  of  human  happiness  or  woe.  Every  deed,  word,  thought,  and  emotion  must 
sometimes  be  known  and  influential.  Wliat  an  awful  solemnity  does  this  give  the 
present  life ;  how  closely  does  it  link  the  future  with  the  present !  "  Yonder  "  is 
but  an  outgrowth  of  this  "  here  "  and  "  now."  II.  Human  influences  should  bb 
coNSKCBATED  TO  God's  SEBvicE.  1.  God  claims  this  power  as  peculiarly  belonging 
to  Him.  His  empire  is  as  extensive  as  space  and  eternity,  "  He  is  sovereign  Lord 
over  life"  and  "death."  Either  with  or  against  our  wills,  our  influence  must 
minister  to  His  purposes.  2.  The  Christian  who  realises  the  principles  of  the  text 
consciously  and  willingly  consecrates  this  power,  "  his  life,"  "  his  death  "  to  God. 
In  every  state  of  being  we  belong  to  Christ.  3.  All  claims  to  service  rest  either 
upon — (1)  Ownership.  (2)  Authority,  or — (3)  Engagement.  Upon  each  and  aU  of 
these  grounds  God  claims  our  conscious  consecration.     HI.   The  aovantaqes 

BESULTINO  FBOM  AN  UNRESEBVED   C0N8ECKATI0N  OF  INFLUENCE  TO  THE  DiVINE  SERVICE. 

1.  The  end  of  life  in  its  holiest  and  highest  form  is  answered.  The  springs  of  an 
action  determine  its  value,  selfishness  is  adverse  to  usefulness.  A  disinterested 
Christian  Ufe  alleviates  much  moral  and  physical  misery.     2.  Is  the  fountain  of  the 

Eurest  and  most  permanent  happiness.  3.  Gilds  the  close  of  life  with  unspeakable 
ght  and  peace.  (J.  Foster,  B.A.)  Influence,  a  child's : — In  a  cemetery  a  little 
white  stone  marked  the  grave  of  a  dear  little  girl,  and  on  the  stone  were  chiselled 
these  words — "  A  child  of  whom  her  playmates  said, '  It  was  easier  to  be  good  when 
she  was  with  us ' " — one  of  the  most  beautiful  epitaphs  ever  heard  of.  Infliience, 
a  ehild^i : — A  gentleman  was  once  lecturing  in  the  neighbourhood  of  London.  In 
Uie  coarse  of  his  address  he  said,  "  All  have  influence."  There  was  a  rough  man 
at  the  other  end  of  the  room  with  a  little  girl  in  his  arms.  "  Everybody  has  influence, 
tren  that  little  child,"  said  the  lecturer,  pointing  to  her.    "  That's  true,  sir,"  cried 


624  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohif.  zit. 

the  man.  Everybody  looked  round,  of  coarse ;  bat  the  man  said  no  more,  and  th« 
lecturer  proceeded.  At  the  close  the  man  came  np  to  the  gentleman  and  said,  "  I 
beg  joar  pardon,  sir,  bat  I  could  not  help  speaking.  I  was  a  drunkard ;  but  as  I  did 
not  like  to  go  to  the  public-house  alone,  I  used  to  carry  this  child.  As  I  came  near 
the  public-house  one  night,  hearing  a  great  noise  inside,  she  said,  '  Don't  go, 
father.'  'Hold  your  tongue,  child.'  'Please,  father,  don't  go.'  'Hold  your 
tongue,  I  say.'  PreBcntly  I  felt  a  big  tear  on  my  cheek.  I  could  not  go  a  step 
farther,  gir.  I  turned  round  and  went  home,  and  have  never  been  in  a  pubUc-hoase 
since — thank  God  for  it.  I  am  now  a  happy  man,  sir,  and  this  little  girl  has  done 
it  all ;  and  when  you  said  that  even  she  had  influence  I  could  not  help  saying, 
•  That's  true,  sir ' ;  all  have  influence."  (Freeman.)  Influence,  inevitable : — That 
which  a  man  is,  that  sum  total  made  up  of  the  items  of  his  beliefs,  purposes, 
affections,  tastes,  and  habits,  manifested  in  all  he  does  and  does  not,  is  contagious 
in  its  tendency,  and  is  ever  photographing  itself  on  other  spirits.  He  himself  may 
be  as  unconscious  of  this  emanation  of  good  or  evil  from  his  character,  as  he  is  of 
the  contagion  of  disease  from  his  body,  or,  if  that  were  equally  possible,  of  the 
contagion  of  good  health ;  but  the  fact,  nevertheless,  is  certain.  If  the  light  is  in 
him,  it  must  shine ;  if  darkness  reigns,  it  must  shade ;  if  he  glows  with  love,  it 
will  radiate  its  warmth ;  if  he  is  frozen  with  selfishness,  the  cold  will  chill  the 
atmosphere  around  him ;  and  if  corrupt  and  vile,  he  will  poison  it.  Nor  is  it 
possible  for  any  one  to  occupy  a  neutral  or  indifferent  position.  In  some  form  or 
other  he  must  affect  others.  Were  he  to  banish  himself  to  a  distant  island,  or 
even  enter  the  gates  of  death,  he  still  exercises  a  positive  influence,  for  he  is  a  loss 
to  his  brother — the  loss  of  that  most  blessed  gift  of  Qod,  even  that  of  a  living  man 
to  living  men,  of  a  being  who  ought  to  have  loved  and  to  have  been  beloved.  (N. 
Macleod,  D.D.)  Living  for  others: — "I  live  not  wholly  for  myself,"  said  a 
beautiful  flower  one  fair  morning,  as  it  lifted  to  the  son  its  crest  sparkling  with 
dewdrops.  "  I  live  not  wholly  for  myself.  Mortals  come  and  gaze  on  me,  and 
breathe  my  fragrance,  and  go  away  better  than  they  came ;  for  I  minister  to  their 
perceptions  of  the  beautiful.  I  give  to  the  bee  his  honey,  and  to  the  insect  his 
food;  I  help  to  clothe  the  earth  in  beauty."  "I  live  not  wholly  for  myself,"  said  a 
wide-spreading  tree.  "  I  give  a  happy  home  to  a  hundred  hving  beings;  I  grant 
support  to  the  living  tendrils  of  the  vine ;  I  absorb  the  noxious  vapours  in  the  air ; 
I  spread  a  welcome  shadow  for  man  and  beast ;  and  I,  too,  help  to  make  earth 
beautiful."  "  I  live  not  wholly  for  myself ,"  said  a  laughing  mountain  streamlet. 
"  I  know  that  my  tribute  to  the  ocean  is  small,  but  still  I  am  hastening  to  carry  it 
there.  And  I  try  to  do  all  the  good  I  can  on  my  way.  The  tree  and  the  flower 
love  my  banks,  for  I  give  them  life  and  nourishment ;  and  even  the  grass  which 
feels  my  influence  has  a  greener  hue.  The  minnows  And  life  and  happiness  in  my 
waters,  though  I  glide  onward  only  a  silver  thread ;  and  men  and  animals  seek  my 
brink  to  assuage  their  thirst,  and  enjoy  the  shadow  of  the  trees  which  I  nourish. 
I  live  not  wholly  for  myself."  "I  live  not  wholly  for  myself,"  said  a  bright-hued 
bird,  as  he  soared  upwards  into  the  air.  "  My  songs  are  a  blessing  to  man.  I  have 
seen  the  poor  man  sad  and  despondent  as  he  went  home  from  his  daily  work,  for  he 
knew  not  how  to  obtain  food  for  his  little  ones.  Then  I  tuned  one  of  my  sweetest 
lays  for  his  ear,  and  he  looked  upward,  saying :  '  Behold  the  fowls  of  the  air ;  for 
they  sow  not,  neither  do  they  reap,  nor  gather  into  barns ;  yet  my  heavenly  Father 
f  eedeth  them.  Am  not  I  better  than  they  7  '  and  the  look  of  gloom  changed  to  one 
of  cheerfulness  and  hope.  I  live  not  wholly  for  myself. "  "  I  live  not  wholly  for 
myself,"  should  be  the  language  of  every  thinking,  reflecting  mind.  It  is  the 
language  of  duty,  guiding  to  the  only  paths  of  happiness  on  earth,  and  preparing 
the  soul  for  unalloyed  bUss  throughout  "the  measureless  enduring  of  eternity." 
(Great  Thoughts.)  Every  man  has  a  good  or  evil  influence : — The  fact  that  no 
man  can  evade  the  responsibility  of  living  either  for  good  or  for  evil  in  this  world, 
is  strikingly  set  forth  by  Dr.  Chalmers  in  the  following  weighty  paragraph: — "Every 
man  is  a  missionary  now  and  for  ever,  for  good  or  for  evil,  whether  he  intends  it  or 
designs  it  or  not.  He  may  be  a  blot,  radiating  his  dark  influence  to  the  very  circum- 
ference of  society ;  or  he  may  be  a  blessing,  spreading  benediction  over  the  length 
and  breadth  of  the  world ;  but  a  blank  he  cannot  be.  There  are  no  moral  blanks ; 
there  are  no  neutral  characters.  We  are  either  the  sower  that  sows  and  corrupts, 
or  the  light  that  splendidly  illuminates,  and  the  salt  that  silently  operates ;  but 
being  dead  or  alive,  every  man  speaks."  The  power  of  influence  : — Look  at  those 
concentric  rings  growing  wider  and  wider,  rolling  their  fair  ripples  among  the  reedy 
sedge,  tipping  the  overhanging  boaghs  of  yonder  willow,  stirring  the  nest  of  m$ 


CBMT.  zrr.]  BOMANS.  625 

startled  \rater-hen,  prodaoing  an  inflaenoe,  slight  bat  oonsoious,  to  the  farthest 
margin  of  the  lake  itself.  That  idle  word — that  word  of  heat  or  soorn — flung  from 
my  Ups  in  oasnal  company.  "Oh,"  you  say,  "it  produced  a  momentary  impression 
apon  the  mind  of  those  who  listened  to  it,  and  that  is  all."  No ;  it  is  not.  Believe 
me  it  is  not.  It  deepened  that  man's  disgust  at  godliness ;  and  it  sharpened  the 
edge  of  that  other  man's  sarcasm  ;  and  it  shamed  that  half-convinced  one  out  of 
his  penitent  misgivings;  and  it  exerted  an  influence,  slight  but  determining, 
npon  the  destinies  of  that  immortal  life.  Oh,  this  is  a  terrible  power  that  I 
have — this  power  of  influence.  And  I  cannot  get  rid  of  it.  It  clings  to  me  like 
the  shirt  of  Nessus  upon  Hercules.  It  looks  through  my  eye :  it  speaks  from 
my  lips ;  it  walks  abroad  with  me.  I  cannot  live  to  myself.  I  must  either 
be  a  light  to  illuminate  or  a  tempest  to  destroy.  (W.  M.  PuTuhon.)  Influence, 
permanent : — The  pulsations  of  the  atmosphere,  once  set  in  motion  by  the  human 
voice,  cease  not  to  exist  with  the  sounds  to  which  they  gave  rise.  Strong  and 
audible  as  they  may  be  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  speaker,  and  at 
the  immediate  moment  of  utterance,  their  attenuated  force  soon  becomes  inaudible 
to  human  ears.  The  waves  of  the  air  thus  raised  perambulate  the  earth  and 
ocean's  surface ;  and,  in  less  than  twenty  hours,  every  atom  of  its  atmosphere 
takes  up  the  altered  movement  due  to  that  infinitely  small  portion  of  the  primitive 
motion  which  has  been  conveyed  to  it  through  countless  channels,  and  which  must 
continue  to  influence  its  path  throughout  its  future  existence.  Thus  considered, 
what  a  strange  chaos  is  this  wide  atmosphere  we  breathe  I  Every  atom,  impressed 
with  good  and  with  ill,  retains  at  once  the  motion  which  sages  and  philosophers 
have  imparted  to  it,  mixed  and  combined  in  ten  thousand  ways  with  all  that  la 
worthless  and  base.  The  air  is  one  vast  library,  on  whose  pages  are  for  ever  written 
all  that  man  has  ever  said,  or  woman  whispered.  There,  in  their  mutable  but 
unerring  characters,  mixed  with  the  earliest  as  well  as  with  the  latest  sighs  of 
mortality,  stand  for  ever  recorded  vows  unredeemed,  promises  unf ulfllled,  perpetna- 
ting  in  the  united  movements  of  each  particle  the  testimony  of  man's  changeful 
will.  (Babhage. )  Influence,  perpetuity  of: — It  is  a  high,  solemn,  almost  awful 
thought  for  every  individual  man,  that  his  earthly  influence,  which  has  had  a 
beginning,  will  never,  through  all  ages,  were  he  the  very  meanest  of  us,  have  an 
end  1  What  is  done  is  done ;  has  already  blended  itself  with  the  boundless,  ever> 
living,  ever-working  universe,  and  will  also  work  there,  for  good  or  for  evil,  openly 
or  secretly,  throughout  all  time.  Influence,  penonal : — The  greatest  works  that 
have  been  done  have  been  done  by  the  ones.  The  hundreds  do  not  often  do  much, 
the  companies  never  do  :  it  is  the  units,  just  the  single  individuals,  that,  after  all, 
are  the  power  and  the  might.  Take  any  church, — there  are  multitudes  in  it ;  but 
it  is  some  two  or  three  that  do  the  work.  Look  on  the  Reformation  I — there  might 
be  many  reformers,  but  there  was  but  one  Luther :  there  might  be  many  teachers, 
but  there  was  but  one  Calvin.  Look  ye  upon  the  preachers  of  the  last  age,  the 
mighty  preachers  who  stirred  up  the  churches — there  were  many  coadjutors  with 
them ;  but,  after  all,  it  was  not  Whitefield's  friends,  nor  Wesley's  friends,  but  the 
men  themselves,  that  did  it.  Individual  effort  is,  after  all,  the  grand  thing.  A 
man  alone  can  do  more  than  a  man  with  fifty  men  at  his  heels  to  fetter  him.  Look 
back  through  all  history.  Who  delivered  Israel  from  the  Philistines? — it  was 
solitary  Samson.  Who  was  it  gathered  the  people  together  to  rout  the  Midianites  ? 
— it  was  one  Gideon,  who  cried,  "  The  sword  of  the  Lord  and  of  Gideon  !  "  Who 
was  he  that  smote  the  enemy  ? — it  was  Shamgar,  with  his  ox-goad ;  or  it  was  an 
Ehud,  who,  with  his  dagger,  put  an  end  to  his  country's  tyrant.  Separate  men — 
Davids  with  their  slings  and  stones — have  done  more  than  armies  could  accomplish. 

iC.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Influence,  posthumous : — Da  Vinci's  famous  painting  of  "  The 
jord's  Supper,"  originally  adorning  the  dining-room  of  a  convent,  has  suffered 
such  destruction  from  the  ravages  of  time,  war,  and  abuse,  that  none  of  its  original 
beauty  remains.  Yet  it  has  been  copied  and  engraved ;  and  impressions  of  the 
great  picture  have  been  multiplied  through  all  civilised  lands.  Behold  a  parable 
of  posthumous  influence.  Influence,  small,  its  valvs : — "I  have  no  more  influence 
than  a  farthing  rushlight,"  said  a  workman  ;  to  whom  his  friend  gave  reply,  ••  WeU, 
a  rushlight  does  much.  It  may  burn  a  haystack  or  a  house — nay,  it  helps  me  to 
read  God's  Word.  Go  your  way,  and  let  your  rushlight  so  shine  before  men  that 
they  may  glorify  your  Father  in  heaven."  Influence,  unconscious  : — It  is  related 
that  when  Thorwaldsen  returned  to  his  native  land  with  those  wonderful  marbles 
which  have  made  his  name  immortal,  chiselled  with  patient  toil  and  glowing 
aspiration  during  his  studies  in  Italy,  the  servants  who  opened  them  scattered 
VOL.  n.  40 


626  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  ht. 

upon  the  ground  the  straw  in  which  they  wsre  packed.  The  next  summer,  flowera 
from  the  gardens  of  Borne  were  blossoming  in  the  streets  of  Copenhagen  from  the 
seeds  thus  accidentally  planted.  The  genius  that  wrought  grandly  in  marble  had 
unconsciously  planted  beauty  by  the  wayside.  Influence,  unconsciotis,  its  power  : — 
Many  years  ago  an  intelligent  youth  was  apprenticed  in  the  town  of  Poole.  Ha 
had  been  piously  trained  by  his  good  parents,  but  unhappily,  having  left  home,  he 
yielded  to  temptation,  neglected  the  reading  of  his  Bible,  disregarded  the  Sabbath, 
and  gave  up  prayer.  John  was  gradually  declining  from  bad  to  worse,  when  one 
night  a  new  apprentice  arrived.  On  being  pointed  to  his  little  bed,  the  youth  put 
down  his  luggage,  and  then,  in  a  very  silent  but  solemn  manner,  knelt  down  to  pray. 
John,  who  was  busily  preparing  for  rest,  saw  this.  He  did  not  raise  a  laugh,  as 
many  youths  would  have  done ;  conscience  troubled  him.  God's  Holy  Spirit  strove 
with  Vii'm  :  it  was  the  turning-point  in  his  life.  He  again  began  to  pray,  sought 
the  Saviour,  and  was  enabled  at  length  to  rejoice  as  one  of  God's  forgiven  children. 
A  few  years  afterwards  he  began  to  preach  to  others.  He  ultimately  devoted  him- 
self altogether  to  the  ministry,  and  became  one  of  the  most  laborious,  successful, 
and  honoured  of  God's  servants.  His  writings  are  to  be  found  in  many  languages, 
and  in  almost  every  part  of  the  world,  and  his  name  will  probably  be  had  in  grate* 
ful  remembrance  as  long  as  time  shall  last.  A  few  years  ago  a  funeral — such  a 
funeral  as  is  seldom  seen — took  place  in  one  of  our  great  manufacturing  towns. 
Clergymen,  ministers,  civic  authorities,  merchants,  and  thousands  of  men  of  all 
classes  were  paying  honour  to  the  departed.  Shops  were  closed,  and  the  whole 
town  seemed  wrapt  in  mourning,  as  though  some  great  prince  had  fallen.  And 
who  was  the  departed?  None  other  than  John  Angell  James,  of  Birmingham,  the 
author  of  "  The  Anxious  Inquirer,"  once  the  boy  whose  turning-point  in  life  was 
brought  about  by  the  unflinching  and  devout  example  of  his  fellow-apprentice. 
The  object  of  life : — To  whom,  for  whom  do  we  live  ?  This  is  a  question  of  the 
utmost  importance  to  everybody,  even  when  we  look  at  it  singly ;  but  this  import- 
ance acquires  an  awful  character  when  we  cast  our  thoughts  forward  from  this 
question  to  the  next.  To  whom,  for  whom  shall  we  die  ?  And  each  person  will 
have  to  make  his  own  answer.  I.  Most  men  live  to  themselves.  Some  hunt 
after  riches,  others  after  pleasure,  others  after  ease  and  comfort,  others  after  power, 
others  after  honour  and  a  good  name,  a  few  after  knowledge  ;  but  aU  for  themselves. 
However  the  tunes  may  change,  the  same  keynote  runs  through  them  all — self,  self, 
self.  Where  do  we  hear  of  any,  labouring  for  the  sake  of  gaining  riches,  pleasure, 
Ac,  for  others?  A  few,  indeed, here  and  there,  are  not  unwilling  to  spend  the  odds 
and  ends  of  their  time  for  the  good  of  others,  who  will  eat  the  dinner  themselves, 
and  then  call  in  their  neighbours  to  pick  up  the  crumbs  under  the  table.  Thus  far 
tlie  natural  man  may  mount.  But  so  long  as  our  natural  heart  continues 
unchanged,  so  long  will  self  be  the  idol  which  that  heart  worships,  and  the  taint  of 
selfishness  cleave  even  to  our  least  blamable  actions.  II.  How  stsange  that  heh 
SHOULD  LrvE  TO  THEMSELVES  I  For  WO  canuot  fail  to  see  that  by  our  very  nature 
we  were  made,  not  to  live  to  ourselves,  but  to  each  other.  1.  We  are  brought  into 
the  world  by  others.  We  cannot  grow  up  without  others ;  nor  learn  to  walk,  to 
speak,  to  do  anything  without  others.  All  that  we  learn  by  reading  we  learn  from 
others,  most  of  whom  have  been  long  lying  in  their  graves.  The  tea  you  drink 
comes  from  China ;  the  cotton  for  your  clothes  from  India  or  America.  2.  It  is 
impossible  for  any  person  to  live  wholly  for  himself;  at  least  unless  he  shuts  him- 
self up  in  a  cell  or  a  wilderness.  But  this  is  an  act  so  contrary  to  our  nature,  that 
no  one  would  frame  such  a  design,  unless  with  a  purpose  of  living,  not  for  himself, 
but  for  God.  In  their  ordinary  condition  men  have  numberless  wants,  which  bind 
them  together,  and  make  them  dependent  on  each  other.  The  help,  which,  during 
the  period  of  our  entire  helplessness,  was  given  through  the  stirrings  of  natural 
affection,  we  cannot  obtain,  when  we  are  grown  up,  except  by  helping  others  in 
furn.  The  richest  man  oannot  live  without  the  ministries  of  his  poorer  brethren : 
nor  can  he  gain  their  help,  except  by  making  them  in  some  measure  sharers  in  his 
riches.  The  reason  why,  as  society  advances,  men  are  set  apart  for  differem 
trades,  is,  because  they  will  help  each  other  far  more  than  each  man  could  ever 
help  himself  by  following  every  trade  at  once.  III.  Men  should  not  ltvb  to 
THEMSELVES,  BUT  TO  GoD.  The  tcxt  is  morc  especially  meant  as  a  warning  against 
one  particular  branch  of  selfishness — self-will.  It  tells  us  that  we  are  not  to  live 
according  to  our  own  will,  but  according  to  a  higher  will  than  our  own.  1.  This 
too  is  a  lesson,  which  the  whole  order  of  our  nature  and  condition  in  the  world 
and  the  constitution  of  sooiety  are  meant  to  teach  us.    It  is  plainly  one  of  the 


OBAF.  xiT.]  ROMANS.  627 

reasons  why  we  are  bom  so  helpless,  and  continue  so  long  in  childhood,  in  order 
that  we  may  learn  to  obey,  so  that  oar  stubborn  will  may  be  mortified  and  crnshed. 
Again  in  after  life,  whatever  we  do,  if  we  are  to  do  it  successfully,  we  must  do 
patiently,  obediently,  confonring  our  will  to  nature,  watching  the  course  of  the 
seasons,  and  ploughing  and  sowing  accordingly,  ministering  to  nature,  to  the  end 
that  nature  may  minister  to  us.  Moreover,  when  men  unite  into  societies,  they 
are  constrained  to  sacrifice,  each  his  own  will,  to  the  will  of  the  society,  which  is 
set  up  on  high  as  law,  and  claims  obedience  from  all.  2.  Yet  all  these  forces, 
mighty  as  they  would  seem  to  be,  are  totally  unable  to  subdue  our  self-will.  In 
spite  of  all  the  lessons  of  experience,  we  cling  to  the  persuasion  that  happiness 
consists  in  having  our  own  way,  although  no  man  ever  had  his  own  way  without 
falling  sooner  or  later  into  the  bottomless  pit.  3.  Nor  is  there  any  power  mighty 
enough  to  deliver  us  from  the  bonds  of  selfishness,  except  the  free  Spirit  of  Christ. 
We  must  learn  to  live  to  God,  to  do  all  things  for  His  glory,  and  with  an  eye  to 
His  will,  and  we  shall  then  learn  to  live  for  others.  The  Christian  must  endeavour 
to  fashion  himself  after  the  perfect  pattern  set  before  him  by  his  Lord.  For  Jesua 
lived  not  to  Himself,  but  to  God,  not  seeking  His  own  happiness,  but  the  happiness 
of  all  mankind.  This  was  the  very  purpose  for  which  He  left  His  throne  and  died 
upon  the  Cross.    {Archdeacon  Hare.)        The  end  of  life : — I.  It  is  God's  design 

THAT   WE   SHOULD    NOT     CONFINE   OtTB   BEOABDS   TO   OURSELVES,    BUT   EXTEND   THEU   TO 

CUB  FELLOW-MEN.  Various  Considerations  may  be  presented  in  support  of  this  pro- 
position. 1.  The  duty  relating  to  man  enjoined  in  the  moral  law  is,  "  Thou  ehalt 
love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  2.  This  testimony  of  Scripture  is  confirmed  by  the 
gregarious  tendencies  of  man.  The  instinct  implanted  in  our  nature  by  the  Author 
of  our  being,  which  leads  men  to  cling  together  and  to  form  themselves  into  com- 
munities for  mutual  assistance  and  protection,  affords  no  small  proof  of  the 
Creator's  design  that  they  should  be  fellow-helpers  of  each  other.  3.  Additional 
eonfirmation  of  this  truth  may  be  found  in  our  social  relations.  (1)  Men  cannot 
marry  within  certain  limits  of  consanguinity  without  their  offspring  becoming 
degenerate.  Thus  God  has  placed  the  ban  of  His  displeasure  upon  the  exclusive- 
nesB  of  caste.  (2)  Bich  and  poor  have  to  combine  for  the  accomplishment  of  given 
ends.  Without  the  combination  of  the  one's  capital  with  the  other's  labour, 
various  results  now  obtained  would  not  be  realised.  Capital  can  purchase  the  raw 
material;  but  how,  without  labour,  can  it  be  transported  and  manufactured? 
Labour,  again,  can  build  the  house;  but  capital  is  necessary  to  procure  the 
material  and  the  site.  (3)  The  division  of  labour  and  union  of  workmen  teaches 
me  the  same  truth.  I  cannot  look  on  a  building  or  a  vessel  without  being  reminded 
that  such  works  could  not  have  been  produced  by  any  number  of  individuals  work- 
ing in  a  state  of  isolation.  To  how  many  beside  the  agriculturist  are  we  indebted 
for  our  food  I  To  how  many  beside  the  draper  for  our  clothing  I  It  may  be  said, 
almost,  that  every  man  is  indebted  to  every  man,  and  that  every  man  is  to  some 
extent  the  servant  of  the  humblest  man  that  lives.  And  it  is  with  nations  as  with 
individuals.  The  superabundant  produce  of  one  may,  for  the  profit  of  both,  be 
exchanged  with  the  manufacture  of  another,  whose  produce  is  insufficient  to 
support  its  teeming  population.  II.  It  is  God's  design  that  we  should  not 
IJVB  to  oueselves,  but  fob  THE  PBOMOTioN  OF  His  GLORY.  1.  The  Same  law  which 
requires  us  to  love  our  neighbour  as  ourselves,  also  requires  us  to  love  God 
supremely.  2.  The  nature  of  man  echoes  this  verdict  of  inspiration.  When  I  look 
at  heathen  nations,  I  find  them  everywhere  in  their  own  way  acknowledging  their 
obligations  to  a  God.  There  is  a  law  written  on  every  man's  heart  to  the  effect 
that  as  we  are  indebted  to  God  for  the  origin  and  maintenance  of  our  existence,  we 
owe  Him  our  supreme  regard  and  constant  service.  3.  Our  conviction  is  strength- 
ened when  we  survey  the  external  world.  {W.  Landels.)  Living  and  dying 
to  the  Lord : — This  is  an  instance  of  Paul's  way  of  rising  from  a  particular 
question  to  a  general  principle.  A  doubtful  disputation  springs  up,  on  a 
small  and  narrow  point  of  casuistry,  as  to  meats  or  days.  Instead  of  its  being 
discussed  by  subtle  argumentation  and  a  fine  balance  of  small  reasons  for  and 
against,  the  case  is  at  once  carried  into  a  region  of  spiritual  thought  and  duty, 
from  whence  there  may  be  got  both  a  nearer  insight  into  heaven  and  a  larger  over- 
sight of  earth.  I.  The  fact  stated.  1.  Negatively.  There  is  a  sense  in  which 
we  speak  of  a  man  living  to  himself,  when  he  acts  with  a  selfish  eye  to  his  own 
Interests  or  pleasure.  Is  this  the  explanation  here  ?  It  might  be  so,  were  it  not 
for  what  follows ;  for  no  selfish  man  dies  for  his  own  profit.  When  dying  or  not 
dying  to  one's  self  is  connected  with  living  or  not  living  to  one's  self,  it  is  plain 


ess  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha?.  nr. 

that  Btates  of  being,  not  deeds  or  actions,  must  be  intended.    There  can  be  no 
reference  to  what  is  matter  of  volontarj  choice,  but  rather  to  what  is  ordered  and 
arranged  for  as.     (1)  And  in  a  sense  the  text  is  true  of  the  onregenerate  as  well  aa 
of  the  regenerate,     (a)  I  enter  the  bnsy  hall  of  commerce  or  the  haunt  of  g&iety 
and  dissipation,  and  not  one  in  either  place  is  living  really  to  himself.    The  life 
yon  are  Uving,  whether  in  the  pursuit  of  gold  or  pleasure,  is  not  indeed  to  your- 
Belves.     Yon  heap  up  riches,  and  know  not  who  shall  gather  them.    You  live  in 
wantonness,  but  you  live  in  vain.    A  man  cannot  isolate  himself  in  this  great  and 
goodly  universe  of  being.    He  cannot  become  either  a  hermit  or  a  god.    (b)  And 
how  awfully  true  is  it  of  the  ungodly  that  none  of  them  dieth  unto  himself  I    Did 
any  one  of  the  company  of  Corah  die  to  himself  t    Or  take  those  who  close  a  life 
of  vanity  with  self-righteous  decorum  or  mere  slumbering  insensibility,  does  any 
one  of  them  die  to  himself  for  his  own  benefit,  as  if  his  death  were  for  himseU 
alone  ?    How  great,  ye  godless  ones,  is  your  madness  I    If  you  could  live  to  your- 
selves, or  die  to  yourselves,  then  indeed  ye  might  have  some  apology  for  trifling  as 
you  now  do  with  life's  precious  gift  and  death's  awful  doom.    (2)  But  it  is  of 
believers  that  the  apostle  speaks.   For  the  believer  both  life  and  death  are  invested 
-with  new  character  and  value :  and  it  must  be  with  reference  to  this  character  and 
Talue  that  it  is  here  said  of  him  that  he  does  not  live  or  die  to  himself.    Your  new 
life  and  death,  then,  believers,  are  not  to  yourselves.^   (a)  As  if  they  belonged  to 
yon  as  being  purchased  or  procured  by  you.     (6)  As  if  for  your  own  sakes  and  on 
your  own  account  merely  they  were  given  to  you.     (c)  As  gifts  terminating  in 
yourselves.     They  have  respect  to  something  out  of  and  beyond  yourselves.     2. 
Positively.    (1)  The  life  you  have  got  is  not  only  from  Him ;  it  is  also  and 
•emphatically  to  Him.    You  are  not  made  spirituaUy  alive  merely  for  your  own 
comfort  and  peace.    It  is  for  Himself  that  He  has  redeemed  and  renewed  and 
<iuickened  you  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  22 ;  1  Tim,  i.  16).    (2)  And  so  also  as  to  death.    Very 
different,  indeed,  is  your  death  from  that  of  unregenerate  men.    Even  they  die 
tinto  the  Lord,  who  endures  with  much  long-sufiFering  the  vessels  of  wrath  fitted 
io  destruction.    But  to  you  death  is  no  more  penal ;  it  has  no  more  sting.    It  is  a 
falling  asleep ;  a  departing  to  be  with  Christ.    And,  with  all  its  blessedness,  it  is 
unto  the  Lord.    Your  hopeful  death,  like  your  holy  life,  you  owe  to  Him.    And 
your  being  enabled  thus  to  die  is  unto  Him.     He  is  glorified  in  your  dying.    8. 
These  views  may  tend  to  soothe  our  spirits,  in  the  contemplation  of  the  lives  and 
deaths  of  God's  people.     (1)  They  often  have  a  troubled  course  in  life.    But  the 
explanation  is  found  in  this,  that  none  of  them  liveth  to  himself.    God  has  other 
ends  to  serve  by  it  besides  the  believer's  own  peace,  or  even  his  salvation.    (2) 
And  to  their  death  may  this  same  consideration  reconcile  us.    These  deaths  may 
seem  to  be,  many  of  them,  premature.    One  consolation  we  have  in  the  assurance 
that  for  themselves  to  be  with  Christ  is  far  better ;  but  the  text  suggests  that  their 
death  is  not  for  their  own  sakes  merely,  but  to  advance  the  Lord's  cause  and 
promote  the  Lord's  ends.    U.  The  iNrEEENCE  deduced.    "  Whether  we  live  or 
die,  we  are  the  Lord's."    1.  All  men  are  the  Lord's,  whether  they  will  or  no.    It 
is  tame  of  unbehevers  that  living  and  dying  you  are  the  Lord's.    He  has  you  in  His 
grasp,  and  you  cannot  escape.    Ah !  were  either  of  these  two  things  otherwise, 
your  case  might  not  be  so  desperate  as  it  is.    If  your  life  and  death  were  unto 
yourselves;  or  if  you,  living  and  dying,  were  still  your  own,  you  might  have 
some  apology  for   your  unconcern,  and  for  living  and   dying  as  you  please. 
But  do  but  consider  what  it  is  to  belong  absolutely  and  helplessly  to  that  very  Lord 
who  tells  you  that,  live  and  die  as  you  may,  it  is  to  Him  and  to  His  ends.    Oh  I 
surely  "  it  is  hard  for  yon  to  kick  against  the  pricks !  "    Consider  who  this  Lord 
is.     Is  it  not  He  who,  at  a  great  price,  has  purchased  this  lordship  over  you,  this 
ownership  of  you  ?    It  is  Jesus  who  died  and  rose  again,  to  whom  the  Father  has 
given  power  over  all  flesh.    2.  But  again,  I  turn  to  you  who  believe.     (1)  It  is  your 
comfort  to  know  that,  whether  you  live  or  die,  you  are  the  Lord's;  and  very 
specially  to  know  this  in  connection  with  the  assurance  which  goes  before.     What 
a  guarantee,  both  for  the  safe  preservation  and  for  the  right  ordering  of  your  life, 
as  a  life  that  you  live  not  unto  yourselves,  but  unto  the  Lord  1     And  if  thus  living 
unto  Him,  you  are  so  securely  His,  how,  as  regards  your  dying,  may  you  cast  all 
your  care  upon  Himl     (2)  The  text  is  applicable  tor  admonition  as  well  as  for 
comfort.     It  gives  the  death-blow  to  all  selfishness,  both  as  regards  your  judgment 
of  others,  and  as  regards  your  management  of  yourselves.     For  the  fact  that  yon 
live  and  die  unto  the  Lord,  makes  you  the  Lord's  in  respect  of  your  obligation, 
whether  you  live  or  die,  to  feel  and  own  yourselves  to  be  His,  and  to  seek  not  youi 


CBM.  ht.]  ROMANS.  629 

own  ends,  but  His.  {R.  S.  CandlUh.)  Chrittian  devotedness : — I.  No  sun  uteth 
TO  HZUSELT.  This  is  essentially  oharaoteristio  of  the  true  Christian ;  for  a  man  who 
lives  to  himself,  by  the  sentence  of  the  text,  is  not  a  Christian.  The  Christian — 1. 
Begards  the  great  end  of  his  being.  Human  existence  must  have  an  object.  God  acts 
not  in  anything  without  design.  What  am  I  ?  and.  Why  am  I  ?  are  questions  we  ought 
frequently  to  ask ;  and  be  who  acts  according  to  the  answer  which  the  Scripture  gives, 
will  live  not  to  himself,  but  to  the  Lord.  2.  Habitually  respects  the  approbation  of 
God.  (1)  Through  faith  in  the  atoning  sacrifice  of  Christ.  For  no  man  can  be 
sooeptable  to  God  but  through  that.  (2)  Through  the  active  employment  of  that 
moral  power  which  faith  in  Christ  gives  to  maintain  that  character,  and  to  do 
those  works  which  God  approves.  8.  Feels  an  interest  in  the  cause  of  Christ.  To 
live  onto  ourselves  is  quite  incompatible  with  this.  We  must  renounce  either  the 
one  or  the  other.  "  If  any  man  will  be  My  disciple,  let  him  deny  himself."  4.  la 
concerned  for  the  temporal  miseries  of  his  suffering  fellow-men.  He  who  lives  to 
the  Lord  will  follow  His  example  in  going  about  doing  good.  Nor  is  this  work  of 
charity  obstructed  by  the  most  earnest  concern  for  the  salvation  of  men.  II.  No 
Chbistian  uan  dieth  to  himself.  This  is  his  reward  for  not  living  to  himself. 
God  takes  his  cause  into  His  own  hands,  and  binds  up  his  death  with  His  own 
plans.  1.  It  may  be  in  judgment  to  others.  So  many  prayers  are  lost  to  the 
world ;  an  influence  is  withdrawn ;  a  light  is  quenched  ;  one  fewer  is  left  to  stand 
between  the  living  and  the  dead.  It  may  be  in  judgment  to  families  who  have 
refused  admonition,  and  to  unfaithful  churches,  and  to  nations.  Properly,  indeed, 
do  we  often  pray  that  God  would  spare  useful  hves.  2.  It  may  be  hastened  in 
mercy  to  him.  The  righteous  are  often  taken  away  from  the  evil  to  come.  3.  It 
is  deferred,  in  many  cases,  in  mercy  to  others.  He  is  sometimes  to  endure  the  evil 
to  oome,  and  his  private  feelings  are  to  give  place  to  the  public  good.  Thus 
Jeremiah  was  doomed  to  weep  over  the  destruction  of  his  people.  St.  Paul  desired 
to  depart ;  yet  it  was  needful  for  him  to  continue.  4.  In  all  cases  God  is  glorified 
by  his  death.  Perhaps  in  extreme  suffering  we  may  show  a  power  of  patience,  a 
great  triumph,  an  abundant  entrance  into  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord.  Perhaps  our 
death  may  be  a  calm  dying  into  life ;  a  summer  wave  gently  rippling  to  the  shore. 
It  is  enough.  Let  us  live  to  Him,  and  in  our  death  we  shall  glorify  God.  III.  Hs 
IB  THEBEFOBB  THE  Lord's  IK  LIFE  AND  DEATH,  to  do  His  will,  to  be  acknowledged, 
guarded,  blessed,  and  honoured  as  His.  The  Christian  man  is  the  Lord's — 1.  In 
Ufe.  Life  includes — (1)  Our  earthly  blessings  ;  and  they  are  given  as  far  as  they 
really  tend  to  our  advantage.  (2)  Our  afflictions ;  for  these  we  have  comfort, 
support,  and  a  glorious  issue.  (3)  The  period  in  which  we  are  to  be  trained  up  for 
the  maturity  of  holiness.  2.  In  death.  The  Christian  man  has  served  in  the 
outer  apartments  of  the  house ;  he  is  now  called  into  the  presence-chamber. 
(B.   Watson.)  The  Christian's  mission: — I.  The   NEOATrvE   presentments   of 

THE  TBUTH  INVOLVED.  1.  Nouc  of  US  ought  to  Uvc  to  himsclf ;  for  God  has  an 
original  claim  upon  the  service  of  every  one  of  us,  based  upon  the  right  of  creation, 
the  mercy  of  continued  being,  the  mystery  of  redemption,  the  derivation  from  Him 
of  a  spiritual  nature,  gifts,  and  covenants,  and  revelations,  and  hopes  of  heaven. 
2.  None  of  us  can  do  so.  We  have  duties  to  discharge,  which  it  must  be  to  the 
injury  of  others  if  we  neglect ;  a  moral  example  to  hold  up,  which  must  influence, 
either  for  good  or  evil,  some  subordinate  mind.  A  man  cannot  dwell  apart ;  nor 
divest  himself  of  the  necessity  of  doing  some  good  or  harm  every  day.  3.  Nor  is 
this  view  to  be  limited  to  the  present  generation.  Our  good  or  our  evil  deeds  live 
after  us.  No  man  dieth  to  himself.  We  believe  in  the  joyous  meetings  of  the 
redeemed.  To  their  unutterable  sorrow  the  ungodly  shall  have  meetings  Ukewise, 
as  well  with  those  whom  they  have  tempted,  as  with  those  who  have  tempted 
them.  II.  The  atfiemative  view.  1.  "For  whether  we  Uve,  we  live  unto  the 
Lord."  This  expression — (1)  Implies  the  possession  of  a  life  derived  from,  centred 
in,  devoted  to  Christ.  A  man  must  Uve  before  he  acts.  (2)  Asserts  a  great  rule 
of  duty.  We  "live  unto  the  Lord  "  when  we  live  for  the  good  of  His  people,  for 
the  honour  of  His  cause,  for  the  extension  of  His  Church,  for  the  glory  of  His 
name.  And  the  consciousness  that  we  are  so  living,  and  must  so  live,  is  one  of 
the  first  indications  of  the  renewed  mind.  2.  "  Whether  we  die,  we  die  unto  the 
Lord."  Christians  can  neither  live  useless  lives,  nor  die  useless  deaths.  1.  God 
gets  to  Himself  honour  from  the  dying  hours  of  a  Christian  by  the  blessing  to 
survivors,  often  occasioned  by  the  affecting  circumstances  of  his  removal. 
A  man  may  be  permitted  to  win  souls  to  Christ  by  his  death,  whom  he  could 
never  win  to  seriousness  in   his   life.     2.  A   gpod   man  dies  unto  the  Lord, 


630  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xm 

becaaee  his  removal  may  assume  the  aspect  of  a  witness  or  a  jadgment,  and  so 
become  a  vindication  to  a  faithless  world  of  the  rectitude  of  our  Maker's  ways.  It 
is  the  world's  loss ;  the  loss  of  so  many  fervent  prayers,  so  much  of  beneficent 
influence,  so  much  of  bright  example  to  lure  to  heaven  and  lead  the  way.  3.  A 
Christian  "  dies  unto  the  Lord,"  because  he  dies  to  the  glory  of  the  Lord ;  to  the 
honour  of  His  grace,  to  the  vindication  of  His  faithfulness,  to  the  magnifying  ol 
His  gospel,  to  the  illustration  of  His  unchanging  love,  to  the  swelling  of  Hia 
redeeming  triumphs  in  the  life  of  the  world  to  come.  He  dies  to  the  Lord  who 
dies  in  the  Lord.  4.  ••Whether,  therefore,  we  Uve  or  die,  we  are  the  Lord's." 
Such  is  the  apostle's  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter.  It  tells  of— (1)  Our  safety  in 
all  worldly  changes.  The  Great  Ruler  of  the  universe  has  a  property  in  us,  and 
He  will  guard  and  keep  His  own.  (2)  Our  original ;  of  our  kindred  with  immortal 
natures;  of  our  designation  to  endless  life.  (3)  Our  perseverance  in  faith  and 
holiness,  and  of  our  final  triumph  over  death  and  the  grave.  Jesus  ••  having  loved 
His  own  which  were  in  the  world,  loves  them  unto  the  end."  (D.  Moore,  M.A.) 
The  Divinity  of  the  inner  and  outer  life  of  the  good : — The  context  suggests — 1. 
That  there  is  a  variety  of  grades  in  Christian  attainments — ••  weak  in  faith  "  and 
the  ••  strong."  The  causes  of  this  diversity  are  difference  in  mental  capacity, 
methods  of  education,  in  the  period  of  adopting  Christianity,  in  the  means  of 
improvement  and  the  manner  of  employing  them,  Ac.  2.  That  those  in  the 
lowest  grades  of  Christian  attainment  have  generally  displayed  an  undue  attach- 
ment  to  religious  ritualism.  •'  Another  who  is  weak,  eateth  herbs."  3.  That  tho 
lowest  grades,  who  act  in  conformity  with  their  sincere  conviction,  demand  the 
generous  respect  of  all.  ••Let  not  him  that  eateth  despise  him  that  eateth  not." 
Had  this  always  been  acted  upon  the  Church  would  have  been  spared  all  acri- 
monious controversies,  schisms,  and  persecutions.  4.  That  the  grand  characteristio 
common  to  every  grade  in  Christian  attainment  is  devotedness  to  the  Lord  (ver.  6). 
The  text  is  but  an  amphfication  of  this  idea.  I.  Christ  is  the  Sovereign  of  thb 
Christian's  inner  life.  '•  We  live  unto  the  Lord."  Whatever  power  controls  the 
soul  is  iho  true  sovereign.  The  political  Caesars  are  but  impotent  pretenders 
compared  with  this.  The  supreme  love  is  ever  this  power.  The  text  suggests  in 
relation  to  this  inner  sovereignty  of  Christ — 1.  That  it  is  a  principle  of  rule  which 
stands  opposed  to  all  personal  aims.  "  None  of  us  liveth  unto  himself."  There  ia 
a  sense  in  which  no  man  can  live  unto  himself.  Man  is  a  link  in  the  vast  chain 
of  being.  He  cannot  move  without  influencing  others.  But  what  the  apostle 
means  is,  that  we  Christiana  live  not  to  self  as  a  supreme  end.  Whilst  it  is  the 
glory  of  man's  nature  that  he  cannot  live  unto  himself,  it  is  his  shame  that  he  will 
strive  to  do  so.  Is  there  a  crime  on  the  black  scroll  of  human  depravity  that  may 
not  be  traced  to  this  source  ?  Now,  St.  Paul  intimates  that  living  unto  the  Lord  is 
the  very  opposite  of  this ;  it  is  to  Uve  as  He  lived  who  "  pleased  not  Himself."  2. 
That  it  is  a  principle  of  rule  held  supreme  amidst  aU  the  variations  of  life.  ••  We 
live."  '•  We  die."  It  is  not  long  since  we  commenced  life :  not  far  hence  we 
shall  close  it.  Now,  the  Christian  holds  the  principle  of  Divine  rule  within  him 
supreme  amidst  all  these  changes,  even  in  the  greatest  death  itself.  ••  Not  My  will, 
but  Thine,  be  done."  Perhaps  these  variations  are  but  the  types  of  future  changes. 
Eternity  is  not  a  scene  of  monotony.  Death  here,  to  the  good  man,  is  but  an 
out-birth  to  a  higher  life ;  and  may  it  not  be  that  holy  souls  will  emerge  into  higher, 
and  still  higher,  forms  of  being  for  ever  ?  But  there  will  never  be  a  change  as  to 
this  governing  principle  of  the  soul.  But  why  yield  up  our  existence  so  entirely  to 
the  influence  of  another  ?  fl)  It  is  the  only  course  congenial  with  our  spiritual 
being.  To  live  to  seU  is  to  offer  the  greatest  indignity  to  that  soul  whose  relations 
are  infinite,  and  whose  sympathies  were  intended  to  compass  the  world.  Happiness 
is  defined  as  loving  and  being  loved.  But  the  selfish  man  has  no  generous  love 
within  him  ;  and  because  of  this  others  have  no  heart  to  love  him.  The  soul  must 
go  out  of  self,  and  be  filled  with  God  in  order  to  fill  self  with  joy.  (2)  It  is  the 
only  course  agreeable  to  the  universal  law  of  right.  We  are  absolutely  the  Lord's. 
To  consecrate  our  all  to  Him  is  therefore  our  •'  reasonable  service."  (3)  It  is  the 
only  course  that  wiU  ensure  the  approbation  of  God.  God's  smile  is  the  glory  of 
heaven,  and  His  frown  the  midnight  of  hell.  Surely,  then,  to  seek  His  favour  is 
the  highest  dictate  both  of  wisdom  and  duty.  And  those  who  now,  and  at  the  last 
day,  will  secure  the  "  Well  done  I "  are  those  who  are  inspired  and  ruled  by  the 
benevolent  spirit  of  Jesus.  II.  Christ  is  the  Sovereign  or  his  outer  life  (ver.  9). 
1.  Let  it  not  be  suppose*  that  He  is  the  Sovereign  of  both  in  the  same  sense.  (1) 
Hia  sovereignty  over  the  inner  life  is  dependent  upon  individual  choice.    Fof 


CBAP.  zitO  ROMANS.  631 

Jesus  to  force  His  yraj  to  power  over  the  human  heart  woold  be  to  destroy  haman 
responsibility.  Nothing  can  rale  the  soul  that  it  does  not  love,  and  there  is  no 
power  that  can  force  it  to  love.  This  inner  sovereignty,  then,  is  by  the  suffrage  of 
mind.  "We  are  made  willing."  But  not  so  with  the  outer.  Christ  sits  on  Hia 
throne  independent  of  the  volitions  of  the  universe.  "  He  must  reign  " ;  to  Him 
every  knee  shall  bow.  (2)  His  sovereignty  over  the  inner  life  is  a  Christian  virtue. 
To  be  ruled  by  the  benevolent  spirit  of  Christ  has  ever  been  felt  and  acknowledged 
praiseworthy.  But  the  sovereignty  of  Christ  over  our  outward  circumstances  ia 
not  to  us  a  virtue.  We  had  no  power  in  raising  Him  to  the  throne,  nor  does  Hia 
continuance  there  depend  on  us.  (3)  His  sovereignty  over  the  inner  life  is  limited. 
In  every  age  the  numbers  who  have  spiritually  yielded  to  His  sceptre  have  been  few 
comparatively  ;  but  this  external  government  stretches  over  the  race,  as  it  exista 
here,  and  in  eternity,  "  the  dead  and  the  living."  (4)  His  sovereignty  over  the 
inner  life  is  ever  a  blessing,  but  over  the  outer  it  is  frequently  a  tremendous  curse. 
The  man  who  enjoys  His  inner  reign,  exults  beneath  His  outward  sceptre.  But  the 
man  who  rebels  against  Him  in  his  heart,  writhes  under  His  external  authority. 
The  mighty  forces  of  government,  which  work  in  favour  of  willing  subjects,  proceed 
in  dread  array  against  Him  as  a  rebel.  2.  The  basis  and  extent  of  Christ's  outward 
authority.  (1)  It  is  founded  on  His  death  and  resurrection.  It  is  here  implied 
that  these  facts  occurred  by  Christ's  own  personal  intention,  (a)  "  For  to  this  end 
He  died."  Not  because  of  any  law  of  mortality  or  violence,  but  simply  because  Ha 
purposed  it  (Heb.  ii.  14) .  Have  you  anything  analogous  to  this  in  the  history  of 
our  world?  It  may  be  said  that  many  men  have  been  found  wiUing  to  die ;  but 
their  willingness  was  nothing  more,  at  most,  than  a  desire  to  die  now  rather  than 
then.  The  question  never  rested  with  them  to  decide  whether  they  would  die 
or  not.  But  Christ  chose  to  die,  whilst  He  might  have  avoided  it  for  ever 
(John  X.  17, 18).  But  wherein  is  the  moral  propriety  of  this  ?  To  die  by  self- 
resolution,  what  is  it  but  suicide?  The  reply  is  this :  that  Christ  was  what  no 
man  is — the  Proprietor  of  His  own  existence,  {b)  He  rose  as  well  as  died,  by  Hia 
own  personal  purpose.  It  is  not  said  that  He  was  revived,  but  that  He  revived. 
This  is  wonderful,  and  there  is  but  one  way  of  explaining  it :  Jesus  was  God-man. 
The  man-nature  died,  and  the  God-nature  revived  it.  Now,  these  two  facts  are 
the  basis  of  His  mediatorial  authority.  "  I  am  He  that  liveth  and  was  dead,  and 
am  alive  again,  and  have  the  keys  of  death  and  hell."  (2)  This  outward  authority 
extends  over  tbe  "  dead  and  hving."  Conclusion  :  If  Christ  is  the  "  Lord  of  the 
dead  and  the  living,"  then — 1.  There  is  nothing  accidental  in  human  histoiy.  Ha 
presides  over  all  the  acts  of  our  being.  2.  The  departed  are  still  in  existence. 
Had  the  apostle  believed  that  all  that  remained  of  the  dead  was  the  dust  that  lay 
in  their  graves,  would  he  have  spoken  of  Jesus  as  their  Lord  ?  3.  Death  is  not 
the  introduction  to  a  new  kingdom.  4.  We  may  anticipate  the  day  when  death 
shall  be  swallowed  up  in  victory.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  Lord  of  the 
dead  and  the  living : — When  our  Lord  had  reached  the  end  of  His  redeeming 
work  He  announced  to  His  Church,  "  All  power  is  given  unto  Me  in  heaven 
and  in  earth."  This  explained  the  whole  mystery  of  His  life  on  earth,  and 
coimected  it  vrith  His  future  reign  in  heaven.  The  text  is  an  echo  of  the  Saviour'a 
final  saying.  I.  Ths  Bedsemeb's  douikiom  oveb  hem.  This  ia  declared  to  be  the 
end  of  His  ministry  on  earth.  1.  His  death  was  a  means  to  an  end.  (1)  This 
great  intention  pervades  the  Scriptures.  It  was  the  eternal  purpose  of  the  Trinity, 
the  meaning  of  the  first  promise,  the  keynote  of  psalm  and  prophecy.  When  He 
came  it  was  a  King  that  angels  worshipped.  His  miracles  were  wrought  to  illustrate 
His  kingship,  and  His  teaching  was  based  npon  it.  In  the  agony  of  death  He 
spoke  in  the  spirit  of  a  King.  (2)  Without  His  death  this  dominion  could  not  be 
reached.  He  might  have  come  as  the  Son  of  God  incarnate  to  assume  His  rightful 
away,  but  that  could  only  have  been  in  wrath  to  vindicate  His  Father's  violated 
law,  and  hence  would  have  been  the  ruin  of  our  race.  But  the  government  He 
came  to  obtain  demanded  that  man  should  be  redeemed  from  another  power  and 
then  brought  back  to  his  lost  estate  of  obedience  and  love,  (a)  Sin  had  dominion 
over  man  in  virtue  of  the  penalty  of  violated  law.  The  Eedeemer  died  to  atone  for 
sin,  to  absorb  its  sentence  in  Himself,  and  thus  to  reign  in  the  bestowment  of  pardon 
and  peace.  (5)  Sin  had  dominion  over  man  through  the  law  of  evil  ruling  in  his 
nature.  By  His  atoning  death  the  Eedeemer  obtained  for  man  the  Spirit  of  a  new 
life  making  him  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death.  2.  His  resurrection  declared 
that  His  end  was  attained,  and  that  His  empire  was  won.  II.  The  administbatiom 
07  THAI DOuimoN.    1.  Its  extent.     The  words  "Lord  of  the  dead  and  living."    (1) 


639  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Xxt. 

P]A3e  the  \7h0le  race  ander  Christ's  feet,  (a)  The  phrase  gives  mankind  its  distinct 
definition.  Elsewhere  the  Redeemer's  dominion  is  the  entire  creation.  (()  Itsuggesta 
the  whole  sad  history  of  oar  ruin  and  wretchedness.  We  are  a  dying  race,  from 
generation  to  generation  snccnmbing  to  our  mortal  enemy.  But  oar  Redeemer  is 
ruling  over  our  ruin  and  translating  it  into  salvation.  Our  death  His  government 
turns  to  life,  (c)  It  is  not,  however,  the  living  and  the  dead,  but  the  dead  and 
living.  The  dead  must  have  the  pre-eminence,  for  they  are  the  bulk  of  our  race, 
eanotified  to  oar  thought  by  their  mystery  and  maltitude.  (d)  But  it  is  the  lan- 
guage of  mortals.  Clurist  has  no  dead  subjects.  All  live  to  Him,  as  He  told  the 
Sadducees.  (e)  It  prescribes  the  limits  of  the  Redeemer's  lordship  which  is  to  last 
while  mankind  are  made  up  of  dead  and  living.  When  death  is  swallowed  up  in 
victory  it  will  cease,  and  God  shall  be  all  in  alL  (2)  Distribute  our  Lord's 
dominion  over  two  provinces,  (a)  He  is  the  Lord  of  the  world  of  disembodied 
spirits.  He  entered  this  world  and  Death  yielded  Him  the  keys  which  had  been 
His  from  the  beginning,  but  now  became  His  by  another  right.  But  here  the  light 
fails  us,  and  the  evangelical  record  which  follows  the  Lord's  passion  to  His  fi^al 
cry  suspends  its  story  till  He  opens  His  Ups  to  Mary ;  and  we  do  well  to  respect  its 
silence.  The  same  restraint  is  laid  upon  us  when  we  speak  of  the  nature  of  Christ's 
empire  here.  Concerning  one  great  province,  that  tenanted  by  those  who  died 
without  the  gospel,  all  we  can  say  is  that  Christ  is  their  Lord.  Concerning  those 
who  have  sinned  against  all  revelation,  inward  and  outward,  He  is  their  Lord  too, 
and  only  their  Lord.  Over  the  remaining  province,  paradise,  Christ  rules,  but 
there  He  also  is,  and  all  who  enter  follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  He  goeth.  (6) 
We  must  now  return  to  the  living.  He  is  their  absolute  Lord.  It  is  the  probation 
of  every  man  who  hears  the  gospel  to  accept  or  reject  His  sway.  Rejection  of  that 
sway  seals  every  man's  fate;  while  acceptance  is  the  foundation  of  personal 
religion.  2.  Its  character  (ver.  7).  The  Lord  to  whom  we  have  submitted  has 
become — (1)  The  director  of  our  being.  We  live  unto  the  Lord.  His  loyal  subjects 
have  renounced  self,  and  taken  Him  to  be  their  supreme  Lord  (ver.  6).  (2)  The 
r'.iRpof^er  of  oar  being.  We  die  to  the  Lord.  Death  is  part  of  our  sum  of  duty. 
(  W.  B.  Pope,  D.D.) 

Ver.  8.  For  whether  we  live,  we  live  unto  the  Lord.— TA*  Christian  idea  of 
life : — ^I.  The  Christian  idea  of  litk  :  **  To  the  Lord  we  live :  to  the  Lord  we 
die."  That  idea  of  life  is  founded  on  ver.  7.  In  one  aspect  that  is  a  universal 
and  inevitable  law.  Now,  Paul  says  that  what  all  other  men  must  do  unconsciously, 
the  Christian  does  consciously.  Life  has  two  aspects — the  voluntary  and  the 
involuntary.  Both  these  spheres  of  life  are  to  be  consecrated.  1.  In  the  Christian 
idea  the  whole  of  those  marvellous  activities  that  rise  from  our  will  are  to  be  one 
scene  of  dedication  to  God.  This  seems  visionary  and  impossible.  I  believe  it  is 
practicable  and  attainable.  To  illustrate  this.  Our  voluntary  actions  are  most 
powerfully  influenced  by  silent  currents  of  emotion  which  only  now  and  then  flash 
into  sight.  Just  as  in  the  ocean,  underneath  the  constant  motion  of  its  waves, 
there  are  deep  currents  setting  in  one  fixed  direction,  undisturbed  by  the  roar  of 
the  storm,  and  moving  on  still  when  calmness  rests  on  the  sea — so  in  the  life  of  the 
soul.  Tou  see  this  in  great  transgressors.  The  silent  progress  towards  crime 
culminates  suddenly  in  outward  action,  and  the  unseen  smouldering  fire  leaps  out 
in  flame.  You  see  it  in  great  discoverers.  They  had  long  been  seeking  for  a  truth ; 
in  a  moment  it  revealed  itself,  and  the  silent  train  of  inquiry  dashed  then  to  its 
result.  We  see  it  in  ourselves.  We  have  found  temptation  suddenly  assume  a 
gigantic  and  almost  irresistible  strength  after  periods  of  carelessness  or  un  watchfulness 
over  our  inner  life.  Or  we  have  often  found,  after  long  fear  and  foreboding  of  some 
trial,  a  strength  of  soul  arise  which  enables  us  to  bear  it.  Now,  if  these  silent, 
secret  tendencies  of  thought  and  feeling  control  so  much  of  our  voluntary  life,  may 
not  that  life  be  wholly  consecrated,  if  a  great  silent  consecration  be  the  strong 
impulse  of  our  being  ?  Have  we  not  met  with  men  whose  lives  were  silent  prayers, 
who  have  made  us  feel — even  by  passing  words  and  trifling  things — that  Christ  was 
being  "  formed  within  them  "  ?  Such  men  apparently  forget  the  future  in  their 
work,  but  really,  never.  Present  a  temptation  to  them,  and  their  strength  of 
resistance  manifests  itself.  If,  then  we  are  dedicated,  we  "  live  unto  the  Lord." 
2.  Bat  there  are  the  inevitable  occurrences  in  life.  Against  them  our  wills  are 
powerless.  Constantly  do  we  feel  the  truth  of  the  proverb, "  Man  proposes,  but 
God  disposes. "  Now  the  question  arises.  How  can  such  things  be  consecrated ; 
can  we  consecrate  the  unknown  and  inevitable  ?    We  caimot,  but  we  can  dedicate 


OHiP.  ziT.]  ROMANS.  685 

oonelves  by  aooepting  the  inevitable  aa  ooming  from  the  hand  of  oar  Father.  Not 
in  mechanical  Bubmission,  like  slaves  broken  into  discipline  by  the  lash  ;  not  in 
hard  stoicism,  like  the  creatures  of  an  inscrutable  and  remorseless  fate ;  bat  in 
patient,  trustful  resignation,  as  children  who,  though  they  cannot  trace  the 
Father's  plan,  can  yet  repose  on  the  knowledge  of  His  love.  To  the  man  who 
ean  thus  see  God's  glory  through  the  windows  of  life,  all  adverse  circumstances 
become  consecrations.  Disappointments  bear  on  their  bitter  winds  the  sounds 
of  songs.  Great  sorrows  may  rend  the  temple  of  life,  but  they  will  reveal 
within  an  altar  and  a  sacrifice  kindled  by  a  Divine  fire.  Therefore,  "whether 
we  die,  we  may  die  onto  the  Lord."  II.  Thb  motive  by  which  this  consb* 
OBATioN  HAT  BE  BEALisEO  (ver.  9).  There  are  two  aspects  of  this — 1.  By  the 
power  of  His  love  Christ  is  Lord  over  oar  voluntary  life.  Christ  must  possess  us, 
and  we  must  yield  up  our  hearts  daily  as  living  sacrifices  to  God  through  Him.  It 
may  be  said,  "But  this  is  ideal  and  impossible,  and  would  generate  a  morbid 
pietism."  I  do  not  say  we  can  always  be  consciously  acting  under  the  power  of 
Christ's  love.  But  a  deep  communion  with  Him  may  so  penetrate  us  with  His 
Spirit  as  to  hallow  and  glorify  all  our  life,  and  thus  "  we  may  live  onto  the  Lord." 
2.  Christ  is  Lord  over  the  inevitable  events  of  life.  All  things  are  given  into  His 
hands.  He  is  Eing  over  our  whole  histories.  Our  disappointments,  failures, 
sorrows,  "  death's  agonies  and  fears,"  are  known  to  and  sympathised  with  by  Him. 
iE.  L.HuU,  B.A.)  A  consecrated  life  : — I.  Iuplies — 1.  Complete  submission  to 
Christ's  authority.  2.  Devotion  to  Him  as  our  highest  aim.  3.  Subserviency  to 
His  designs.  II.  Secubes — 1.  Happiness.  2.  Honour.  3.  Blessing.  4.  Soccess. 
6.  Final  salvation.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Living  unto  the  Lord  : — I.  What  this  is. 
It  is  the  consecration  to  Christ  of  the  life.  1.  Intellectual  To  think  for  Him, 
stody  Him,  understand  His  will,  read  His  Word.  2.  Emotional.  To  make  Him 
the  object  of  oar  love,  joy,  hope.  3.  Practical.  To  use  the  mouth  to  speak  for 
Him,  the  hands  to  work  for  Him,  the  feet  to  carry  His  messages.  4.  Spirituid. 
To  be  one  with  Him.  U.  How  this  is  to  bb  accomplished.  1.  By  His  living 
onto  us.  This  He  has  done  and  still  does.  2.  By  His  drawing  as  to  Himsell 
This  He  does  by  the  allurements  of  His  love.  3.  By  our  willing  surrender  to  His 
attraction.  4.  By  definite  acts  and  a  permanent  spirit  of  self -consecration.  III.  Fob 
WHAT  PUBFOss  THIS  IS  DONE.  1.  Supremely — for  Christ's  glory.  2.  Mediately — 
for  the  benefit  of  the  world.  8.  Subordinately — for  oar  own  perfection.  IV.  To 
WHAT  ISBDB  DOBS  THIS  TEND?  I.  Christ's  Universal  supremacy  in  fact  as  well  as 
by  righi  2.  A  regenerated  universe.  3.  Endless  personal  reward.  (/.  W.  Bum.) 
Living  unto  the  Lord : — I.  Livimo  ckto  thb  Lobd  may  be  considered  as  including 
the  following  particulars — 1.  That  we  make  His  will  the  rule,  the  only  rale,  of  our 
conduct.  2.  That  we  make  His  approbation  our  governing  aim,  and  to  study  to 
please  Him  in  all  that  we  do.  3.  "That  we  make  His  glory  our  end  in  everything 
we  do.  4.  That  we  be  wholly  resigned  to  His  disposal ;  blessing  Him  at  all  times, 
in  adversity  as  well  as  in  prosperity,  making  Him  as  welcome  to  take  from  us  as  to 
give  onto  us.  6.  That  we  be  so  thoroughly  devoted  to  Him  as  to  account  that  we 
Uve  not  at  all,  but  in  so  far  as  we  serve  Him  and  show  forth  His  praise.  II.  Apply 
this  description  of  genuine  Christianity  as  a  measdbe  ob  standard  fob  helpino  us 
TO  JUDOB  or  ODB  spiBnnAL  CONDITION.  1.  Of  what  weight  is  the  authority  of  God 
in  yoar  hearts  ?  2.  Whom  do  yoa  seek  to  please,  and  whose  approbation  do  you 
principally  covet  ?  3.  What  regard  do  you  feel  for  the  honour  of  your  Lord  ?  4. 
What  is  it  that  gives  the  highest  value  to  everything  in  your  esteem  ?  Conclusion 
— 1.  Unless  we  live  unto  the  Lord  we  shall  counteract  the  very  design  of  that 
marvellous  love  He  hath  manifested  towards  us  in  giving  Himself  for  us  an  offering 
and  sacrifice  to  God  for  a  sweet-smelling  savour.  2.  We  are  therefore  obliged  to 
live  unto  the  Lord,  as  we  regard  the  honour  of  our  Master,  and  the  credit  of  that 
saving  reHgion  which  He  taught.  3.  We  are  bound  to  live  in  the  manner  I 
described  by  the  strictest  ties  of  justice  and  equity  (1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20).  (R.  Walker.) 
Living  unto  the  Lord : — 1.  Christ  is  the  giver  of  our  life.  2.  He  is  tne  sustainer 
of  our  life.  3.  He  ha«  redeemed  our  hfe.  4.  He  should  therefore  have  the 
devotion  of  our  life.  5.  Then  He  will  be  the  rewarder  of  our  life.  (Ibid.)  Working 
at  to  the  Lord : — Let  me  say  this — we  want  to  work  as  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord. 
We  know  that  the  apostle  in  writing  to  Timothy  in  the  Second  Epistle  says  when  he 
was  speaking  of  his  adversaries,  "Notwithstanding,  the  Lord  stood  with  me  and 
strengthened  me."  There  is  such  a  thing  as  working  under  the  eye  of  men.  I 
was  in  a  factory  the  other  day  in  Fife,  and  the  head  of  the  firm  took  me  through 
it ;  and  while  there  was  considerable  activity  and  diligence  on  the  part  of  the  hands 


684  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn-. 

employed,  I  noticed  when  the  master  stood  beside  the  man  or  woman  engaged 
in  a  certain  work  that  there  was  a  kind  of  special  care.  They  were  working  under 
the  master's  eye.  Ah !  my  brethren  and  my  sisters,  if  we  know  that  the  Lord  is 
with  us  in  the  pulpit  or  in  the  class  or  as  we  speak  to  individual  souls  we  shall 
seek  to  do  the  work  as  under  His  eye.  (W.  Lockhart.)  And  whether  we  die,  we 
die  unto  the  Lord. — Dying  unto  the  Lord : — I.  What  is  it  to  die  unto  the  Lobd  ? 
To  have  a  view  to  the  glory  of  God  in  all  that  pertains  to  our  death.  1.  In  the 
state  of  our  views  and  feelings  in  the  prospect  of  death.  It  is  not  to  be  wondered 
at  that  the  ungodly  should  fear  death.  But  when  God's  people  are  alarmed  it  is  a 
disparagement  to  Christ.  When,  however,  they  look  forward  to  death  with  holy 
calmness  and  no  longer  regard  it  as  the  king  of  terrors,  trusting  in  the  sufficiency 
of  Christ  to  bear  up,  God  is  glorified.  Such  count  not  their  lives  dear  to  them. 
2.  In  the  frame  of  our  mind,  and  the  tenor  of  our  actions,  during  the  various 
preparatory  exercises  which  may  precede  death.  (1)  A  deathbed  brings  around 
you  affectionate  friends,  and  places  you  in  a  situation  to  speak  with  effect  and  with 
power  on  Christ's  behalJE.  Many  good  men  and  women  are  found  on  their  death- 
beds to  be  eminent  and  successful  preachers  of  righteousness.  (2)  You  may  glorify 
God  also  in  the  meditations  of  your  own  hearts  by  the  resignation  with  which  you 
endure  the  chastenings  of  your  Father.  3.  Amidst  the  struggle  and  pain  with 
which  death  is  attended.  Some  only  of  God's  saints  are  privileged  thus  to  give 
glory  to  God.  Times  of  trial  and  persecution  are  the  seasons  in  which  God  has 
been  most  signally  glorified  amidst  the  last  sufferings  of  His  saints.     II,  What 

MEANS  SHOULD  BE  EMPLOYED  THAT  WE  MAT  BE   PEEPAKED  TO   DIE    UNTO  THE  LOBD  ?      1. 

Enrich  your  minds  with  the  stores  of  Divine  truth.  A  deathbed  needs  these 
supports,  and  they  are  then  very  precious.  2.  Do  not  entangle  yourself  needlessly 
with  the  concerns  and  cares  of  the  world.  Many  Christians,  by  erring  in  this 
respect,  greatly  disturb  the  peace  of  their  dying  hours,  and  impair  the  force  and 
value  of  their  testimony.  3.  Mortify  all  the  evil  tempers  and  corrupt  feelings  of 
the  natural  heart.  Fretfulness  and  impatience,  excessive  concern  about  personal 
indulgences,  and  discomposure  at  apparent  neglect  sit  ill  on  a  dying  Christian. 
These  can  only  be  obviated  by  attending  when  yon  are  in  health  to  the  right 
ordering  of  every  feeling  and  temper,  and  by  self-denial.  4.  Accustom  yourselves 
to  just  and  scriptural  notions  of  death.  Considering — (!)  The  uncertainty  of  your 
dying  hour.  (2)  How  near  it  is.  (3)  Its  consequences.  5.  Learn  to  lean  with  a 
simple,  childlike  trust  on  Christ.  The  nearness  of  Christ  to  the  dying  man  is  the 
great  concern,  and  then  all  helps  and  accessories  may  be  withdrawn.  (S.  Smith.) 
Dying  unto  the  Lord : — It  is  true  that  no  earthly  friend  can  accompany  us  through 
the  swellings  of  Jordan.  But  though  we  may  then  be  alone  in  one  sense,  yet  we 
need  not  in  another :  the  Saviour  has  promised  to  accompany  us.  He  says,  "  When 
thou  passest  through  the  waters,  I  will  be  with  thee."  See  that  child  who  has  to  go 
through  a  dark  plantation  at  the  dead  hour  of  night.  Does  he  fear  ?  No.  Why  ? 
Simply  because  his  father's  hand  is  locked  in  his.  The  presence  of  his  father  dis- 
misses his  fears.  So,  when  we  are  in  the  hands  of  our  heavenly  Father,  we  need 
not  fear.  He  who  holds  up  worlds  can  surely  protect  us,  and  He  has  pledged  Him- 
self to  do  so  if  we  fully  trust  ourselves  to  Him.  {J.  Whitson.)  Dying  unto  the 
Lord : — "  Paid  the  debt  of  nature."  No ;  it  is  not  paying  a  debt :  it  is  rather  like 
bringing  a  note  to  a  bank  to  obtain  solid  gold  in  exchange  for  it.  In  this  case 
you  bring  this  cumbrous  body,  which  is  nothing  worth,  and  which  you  could  not 
wish  to  retain  long :  you  lay  it  down,  and  receive  for  it,  from  the  eternal  treasures, 
liberty,  victory,  knowledge,  rapture.  {J.  Foster.)  Dying  unto  the  Lord: — 
A  lieutenant  in  an  Iowa,  regiment  was  brought  into  the  hospital,  wounded  in 
the  shoulder.  At  first  it  was  thought  that  he  would  recover;  but,  after  a 
few  days,  he  rapidly  declined.  Just  before  his  death,  a  lady  nurse  said  to 
him,  "  Lieutenant,  you  have  but  a  few  moments  to  live  :  if  you  have  any 
word  to  send  to  your  wife  and  little  one  in  Iowa,  you  must  speak  it  very  quickly." 
He  looked  up  at  her,  his  face  shining  like  an  angel's,  and  said,  "  Tell  my  wife  that 
there  is  not  a  cloud  between  me  and  Jesus."  {O.  S.  F.  Savage.)  Living  and 
dying  unto  the  Lord : — I.  Beal  Chbistians  abe  the  Lobd's.  1.  By  election.  2. 
By  redemption.  3.  By  sanctification.  4.  By  adoption.  He  has  received  them 
into  His  holy  family,  and  entitled  them  to  all  the  privileges  and  blessings  of  it.  U. 
They  abe  willing  both  to  live  and  to  die  to  the  Lobd.  There  is  no  medium 
between  men's  living  and  dying  to  God,  and  their  living  and  dying  to  themselves 
(ver.  7).  They  are  willing— 1.  To  live  to  Him,  by — (1)  Self-dedication.  (2)  Sub- 
mission to  His  government.    (3)  A  cheerful  and  universal  obedience  to  His  com* 


.  xiy.]  ROMANS.  685 

mands.  (4)  Promoting  the  interests  of  His  kingdom.  2.  To  die  nnto  the  Lord. 
(1)  As  to  (he  time  when  they  shall  die.  (2)  As  to  the  place  of  their  dying.  (3)  Av 
to  all  the  other  oiroomstanoes  of  their  death,  whether  with  disease  or  accident,  &o. 
Conolaslon :  If  Christians  are  willing  to  live  and  to  die  to  the  Lord,  then — 1.  The  life 
of  a  real  Christian  is  a  life  of  self-denial.  2.  They  live  much  happier  than  those 
who  live  to  themselves.  8.  Their  life  is  an  exemplary  life.  4.  Their  death,  though 
a  gain  to  them,  is  a  loss  to  the  world.  6.  They  are  willing  to  bury  their  friends  who 
die  to  the  Lord,  whenever  they  are  called  to  the  trial.  (N.  Emmons,  D.D.) 
Whether  we  live,  therefore,  or  die,  we  are  the  Lord's. — We  are  the  Lord's : — I. 
Ltvino.  1.  Consecrated  to  Him.  2.  At  His  disposal.  8.  Under  His  protection. 
4.  Acknowledged  and  blessed  by  Him.  II.  Dyino.  1.  When  and  where  He 
pleases.  2.  Glorifying  Him.  8.  Delivered  by  Him.  4.  Claimed  as  His  property 
for  ever.  (/.  Lyth,  -D-D^  We  are  the  Lord's : — I.  By  voluntaby  sacrifice. 
1.  We  live  to  Him.  2.  We  die  to  Him.  II.  Bt  inalienablb  biqht.  L  In  life. 
3.  In  death.    (Ibid.) 

Yer.  9.  For  to  this  end  Christ  both  died  and  rose,  .  .  .  that  He  might  be  Lord 
both  of  the  dead  and  living. — How  we  should  improve  the  end  of  Christ's  death  and 
resurrection  : — Christ's  death  and  resurrection  are  firmly  believed,  and  often  con- 
sidered by  us ;  but  too  little  attention  is  paid  to  the  end  of  both.  I.  What  is  this 
Bin>  t  1.  That  He,  as  man,  might  be  the  lawful  possessor  of  the  dead  and  living.  Man 
has,  by  sin,  forfeited  all  he  has  and  is,  into  the  hands  of  justice.  Christ,  by  His 
death,  has  satisfied  justice,  and  purchased  us  for  Himself :  and  in  consequence  of 
His  resurrection  He  rescues  us,  both  the  living  and  the  dead  (Phil.  ii.  6-10).  2. 
That  He  might  be  their  Deliverer,  Protector,  and  Ruler,  defending  them  from  their 
enemies,  and  reigning  in  and  over  them.  8.  That  He  might  be  their  Master,  that 
they  might  obey  His  will,  and  promote  His  glory :  His  sufferings  and  death  supply 
the  greatest  inducement  to  this,  and  procure  grace  for  us :  His  resurrection  confers 
that  grace,  and  enables  us  to  live  to  Him.  4.  That  He  might  be  the  Head  and 
Husband  of  the  dead  and  living.  Lord  sometimes  means  husband.  His  death 
manifests  His  love  to  His  spouse,  the  Church  (Eph.  v.  25) :  His  being  raised,  makes 
Him  able  to  fulfil  the  part  of  a  husband  (chap,  vii  4),  including  union  (1  Cor.  vl. 
17),  communion,  maintenance,  guidance,  government.  Hence  it  appears  that  the 
dead  are  not  dead  :  He  will  not  be  the  Husband  of  the  dead.  6.  That  He  might  be 
the  Judge  of  the  dead  and  the  living  (vers.  10-13 ;  Acts  xvii.  81).  This  honour  is 
conferred  upon  Him  as  a  fit  reward  of  His  sufferings  and  death :  He  rose  to  give 
full  assurance  of  it:  He  is  thereby  capacitated  to  exercise  it.  II.  Thb  use  wb 
SHOtTLD  UAHB  OF  THIS  DOCTRINE.  Did  He  die  and  rise  again — 1.  That  He  might 
be  our  Owner?  Then  let  us  give  Him  His  own  (1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20).  2.  That  He 
might  be  our  Governor  7  Then  let  us  be  subject  to  Him  in  heart  and  life,  and 
dependent  on  His  protection.  3.  That  He  might  be  our  Master  ?  Then  let  us  live 
to  Him  (2  Cor.  v.  14,  15) ;  this  is  our  duty,  in  justice  and  gratitude.  4.  That  He 
might  be  our  Husband?  Then  how  great  the  honour  and  happiness  He 
designs  for  us  I  Let  us  immediately  embrace  it.  5.  That  He  might  be  our  Judge  ? 
Then  let  us  keep  the  awful  day  in  view,  and  prepare  for  it.  (J.  Benson. ) 
Christ,  Lord  of  the  dead  and  the  living : — This  Lordship^I.  Provides  the  only 

SOLID  AND    SATISFACTORY  ASSURANCE   OF   THB    FUTURE    REUNION    AND    RECOGNITION    OF 

His  followers.  The  question  that  rises  oftener  than  any  other  to  the  lips  of  the 
bereaved  touches  this  point  of  reunion.  You  may  try  to  construct  a  heaven  out 
clean  off  in  all  its  sympathies  and  attachments  and  recognitions  from  this  world  we 
are  in  now.  But  you  will  almost  certainly  then  have  before  the  mind  a  heaven 
practically  destitute  of  sympathies  and  attachments,  too  vague  to  awaken  expecta- 
tion, too  unreal  to  inspire  enthusiasm.  He  who  rofut  is  the  Lord  of  the  living  and 
the  dead.  They  are  not  two  families,  but  one,  beca:\8e  they  are  all  in  Him,  in 
spite  of  the  transient  curtain  that  hangs  between  the  departed  and  ourselves — 
a  curtain  that  probably  has  its  only  substance  in  the  eyes  of  our  fiesh.  The  resur- 
rection of  the  body  of  Jesus  signifies  the  literal  reality  of  all  that  is  promised  the 
Christian  in  his  future  home — the  actual  identity  of  the  person  here  and  the  person 
there,  and  the  actual  renewal  of  affections  and  their  interchange ;  for  what  is  the 
identity,  or  the  blessing  of  it,  if  the  heart  has  got  to  begin  its  whole  history  afresh  ? 
It  signifies  the  actual  restoration,  too,  of  the  society,  only  in  more  exalted  forms, 
of  those  who  have  believed  and  worshipped  the  same  Saviour  here.  There  will  be 
no  confusion  of  persons,  no  obliteration  of  the  lines  that  mark  off  one  soul  from 
another.    We  shall  be  just  as  distinct  persons,  with  all  personal  faculties,  affeO' 


636  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  nr. 

tions,  sympathies,  Babstanoes,  yes,  and  appearances,  as  we  are  now.  In  those 
celestial  congregations  there  will,  no  doubt,  be  something  to  be  recognised  hj,  in 
feature  or  form,  inbred  on  earth  and  indestructible  by  dissolution.  Hence  the  need 
of  a  glorified  resurrection  body,  to  be  set  free  at  the  last  change — following  the 
analogy  still  of  His  body  who  died  and  rose  the  same.  II.  Suoqests  that  oub 
BESCBBECTioH  LiFX  WILL  BE  SOCIAL  AS  WELL  AS  INDITIDUAL.  As  everything  in  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  has  its  type  and  model  in  the  Person  of  our  Lord,  so  in  the 
rising  of  His  form,  and  the  subsequent  interviews  with  His  disciples,  we  see  a  pro- 
mise that,  literally  and  for  ever,  those  to  whom  He  imparts  His  Spirit  will  move 
together  in  a  famUy  order  and  freedom  about  Him.  Nothing  less  than  this  can  be 
taught  us  by  the  parable  of  Lazarus,  by  the  inspired  images  of  the  Apocalypse,  by 
the  company  of  saints  made  perfect ;  but,  more  than  all  these,  by  the  reappearing, 
in  the  body,  of  the  Lord  of  the  dead  and  the  living.  Whither  would  the  forth- 
going  soul  take  its  strange  journey  if  there  were  no  centre  of  spiritual  attraction, 
no  Christ  receiving  the  believer  to  Himself  where  He  is  ?  (Bp.  Huntington.) 
Christ's  Lordship : — L  Its  natube.  1.  Universal.  He  is  Lord  over  all  the  dead 
and  all  the  living ;  but  in  a  peculiar  manner  over  His  Church,  even  as  a  husband  is 
lord  over  his  wife,  which  is  a  lordship  with  sweetness.  It  is  indeed  a  lordship  ; 
but  it  is  such  as  is  good  for  His  subjects.  Christ  accounts  Himself  happy  in  His 
Church,  which  is  His  fulness,  and  QSph.  i.  23)  the  Church  is  most  happy  in  His 
government.  2.  Independent.  Only  His  Father  joins  with  Him.  All  human 
authority  is  derived  from  Him  (Prov.  viii.  15).  "  King  of  kings,"  He  is  Lord 
Paramount  over  all.  3.  Complete.  He  is  a  Lord  of  the  whole  man,  body  and  sooL 
He  sits  in  the  throne  of  conscience.  There  He  prescribes  laws  to  it,  pacifies, 
stablishes,  and  settles  it  against  all  fears.  He  bows  the  neck  of  the  inward  man, 
and  brings  it  wholly  to  be  subject  to  Him.  4.  Eternal.  Other  lords  have  nothing 
to  do  with  men  when  they  are  dead,  because  they  are  lords  over  the  outward  man 
only.  But  Christ's  lordship  is  when  we  are  gone  hence,  and  then  more  especially. 
For  then  we  are  more  immediately  with  Him  (Phil.  i.  23).  6.  Excellent.  He 
hath  all  things  that  a  lord  should  have.  (1)  Authority.  He  purchased  it,  and 
His  Father  gave  it  Him  (Psa.  ii.  8 ;  Matt,  zxviii.  18 ;  John  xvii.  2).  (2)  All  graces 
and  virtues  fit  for  a  lord  and  governor — righteousness,  wisdom,  bounty,  Eififections, 
&o.  (Psa.  xlv.  6).  (3)  Strength.  Answerable  to  His  authority ;  for  He  is  a  Lord 
that  is  God.  II.  Deductions  fbom  it.  We  see — 1.  That  the  grounds  of  a  Christian's 
faith  and  comfort  are  very  strong.  God  doth  all  to  ends,  it  being  a  point  of  wisdom 
to  prefix  an  end,  and  work  to  it.  Here  the  greatest  work  hath  the  greatest  end. 
2.  That  the  principal  points  of  religion  have  an  influence  on  all  the  particulars. 
For  one  is  the  cause  of  another,  and  one  depends  upon  another.  Christ  is  proved 
to  be  Lord  of  all,  because  He  died  and  rose.  3.  The  truth  of  the  Catholic  Church, 
from  the  first  man  living  to  the  end  of  the  Church,  under  one  head  Christ  (Heb. 
xiii.  8 ;  Acts  iv.  12).  4.  The  blessedness  of  being  under  the  sovereignty  of  Christ. 
To  be  Solomon's  servant  was  accounted  a  great  happiness  (1  Kings  z.  8).  What 
shall  we  think  of  those  that  are  under  Christ,  who  is  greater  than  Solomon  (Matt, 
zii.  42).  For  Christ's  servants  are  so  many  kings  (Eev.  i.  6),  and  such  kings  as  do 
not  rule  over  slaves,  but  over  the  greatest  enemies  of  all.  A  Christian  can  think 
with  comfort  upon  those  enemies  that  make  the  greatest  tyrants  quake — death, 
sin,  and  the  law.  Therefore,  those  Christians  that  are  afraid  of  death,  forget  their 
dignity.  If  Christ  be  their  Lord  when  they  die,  what  need  they  fear  to  die  ?  5. 
The  duty  we  owe  to  our  Lord— (1)  To  live  to  Him.  This  we  do — (a)  When  we 
know  and  acknowledge  Christ  hath  a  full  interest  in  us.  Upon  this  issues  all  other 
obedience.  (6)  When  we  are  directed  by  His  will,  and  not  our  own.  Christ 
squared  His  life  immediately  according  to  His  Father's  will  (Psa.  xl.  7).  So  all 
that  are  Christ's  must  have  the  same  spirit,  (c)  When  we  aim  at  the  glory  of 
Christ  in  all  things  (1  Cor.  x.  31).  The  contrary  to  this  the  apostle  complains  of 
(Phil.  ii.  21).  (2)  To  die  to  Him.  This  we  do  when  we  know  and  acknowledge 
that  Christ  hath  power  over  us  when  we  die,  and  (a)  thereupon  submit  ourselves  to 
Him,  and  not  murmur  when  He  comes  to  call  for  our  life,  (b)  When  upon  any 
good  occasion  He  calls  for  our  life  in  standing  for  a  good  cause — for  the  Church  or 
State— we  are  ready  to  lay  it  down,  (c)  When  we  carry  ourselves  so,  when  death 
comes,  as  we  may  express  such  graces  as  glorify  God,  and  when  we  study  to  do  all 
the  good  we  can,  that  we  may  die  fruitfully.  6.  What  we  may  expect  from  Christ, 
and  what  we  ought  to  return  to  Him  again.  For  relations  are  bonds,  (a)  That 
He  will  make  us  willing  and  able  subjects.  He  is  such  a  Head  as  quickeneth  dead 
members ;  such  a  Husband  as  makes  His  spouse  beautiful.    A  king  cannot  altflt 


cBif.  ST.]  ROMANS,  M7 

hi«  snbjects ;  bat  He  is  sach  a  King  as  ean,  and  does.  He  takes  them  oat  of  a 
oontrary  kingdom,  as  being  not  bom  His  subjects,  bat  "  born  anew  by  the  Spirit." 
(b)  Advanoement.  The  meanest  man  that  is  a  sabjeot  to  Christ  is  a  king,  and  a 
Jung  over  that  which  all  others  are  slaves  to.  They  rale  over  others,  bat  they  are 
in  thraldom  to  their  own  lusts.  7.  How  to  carry  ourselves  to  men  otherwise 
affected.  Christ  rules  over  us,  both  living  and  dying  ;  therefore  be  not  the  servants 
of  men,  but  "  in  the  Lord  " — i.e.,  so  far  as  it  may  stand  in  the  will  and  pleasure  of 
Him  that  is  the  Lord  of  lords.  For  when  the  authority  of  any  superior  doth 
countermand  against  the  will  of  this  Lord,  it  ceaseth  to  bind.  {R.  Sihbe$,  D.D.) 
Chritt's  lordship  over  the  dead  and  living  .•—I.  It  is  plainly  a  medutoblu.  loed- 
BHip  THAT  Christ  is  here  said  to  have.  It  is  altogether  apart  from  the  supreme 
dominion  belonging  to  Him  as  God,  and  from  that  universal  lordship  which  has 
been  conferred  on  Him  as  Mediator.  The  apostle  is  teaching  a  lesson  of  Christian 
forbearance.  You  differ  from  one  another  about  some  doubtful  points.  But  do 
not  judge  one  another.  Let  every  man  judge  for  himself.  Tou  are  not  one 
another's  lords.  Nay,  yon  do  not  belong  to  yourselves.  Too  all  belong  to  Christ, 
who,  that  He  might  be  your  Lord,  both  died  and  rose  again.  Thus  far  the  argu> 
ment  tells  for  its  being  a  restricted  lordship.  But  why  is  there  any  mention  made 
of  the  dead  as  distinct  from  the  living  ?  It  is  the  living  only  who  are  or  can  be 
concerned  about  the  rule.  But  the  living,  who  have  to  do  with  the  rule  and  the 
reason  for  it,  are  soon  to  be  themselves  the  dead.  Tou  are  to  look  at  the  point  in 
dispute  in  the  light  in  which  it  will  appear  to  yon  when  yon  are  dead.  Tou  are 
equally  amenable  to  the  Lord  now  as  then.  Dead,  you  will  completely  own  ECis 
lordship;  living,  own  it  all  the  same.  The  lordship  of  Christ,  therefore, 
is  a  lordship  over  His  people ;  and  such  a  lordship  over  them  living,  as 
has  its  type,  one  may  say,  as  well  as  its  consummation,  in  His  lordship 
over  them  when  dead.  II.  The  comkection  between  this  lordship  of  Christ 
AKD  His  death  im>  resttrreotiom  is  vert  oloss.  "  To  this  end  "  (Heb.  ziL  2) 
— 1.  It  is  the  appropriate  reward,  the  natural  fruit  and  issue  of  His  dying 
and  rising  again,  that  He  is  Lord.  Christ  died  and  rose  again,  not  as  an  isolated 
private  individual,  transacting  with  the  Father  for  Himself  alone.  He  bore  a 
representative  character.  He  had  gathered  up  in  His  one  single  person  all  the 
interests  of  all  His  people.  Lordship  over  them  is  really  involved  in  His  dying  and 
rising  again.  He  has  them  as  much  at  His  disposal  as  He  has  His  own  body.  2. 
Yet  there  is  not  much  of  apparent  lordship  here.  He  appears  rather  as  passive 
than  as  active.  Dying  and  rising  again.  He  stands  forth  as  not  Lord,  bat  servant. 
Bat  it  is  through  this  service  that  He  reaches  His  lordship.  And  the  lordship 
answers  to  the  service  in  aU  respects.  (1)  The  persons  interested  are  the  same. 
He  is,  no  doubt,  Lord  over  all  mankind ;  but  what  is  here  asserted  is  a  lordship 
which  only  true  believers  can  acknowledge — viz.,  a  lordship  founded  on  the  Lord's 
dying  and  rising  again.  They  may  not  be  more  absolutely  in  His  hands,  aa 
mediatorial  Lord,  than  all  creation  is.  And  in  both  cases  His  mediatorial  lordship 
is  the  fruit  of  his  dying  and  rising.  But — (a)  There  is  intelligence  and  consent  in 
the  one  case  that  we  cannot  find  in  the  otner.  {b)  There  is  a  real  distinction,  as 
regards  the  dependence  of  Christ's  lordship,  in  His  dying  and  rising  again,  between 
the  two  cases.  It  is  indispensable  to  the  accomplishment  of  the  end  for  which  He 
died  and  rose  again,  that  He  should  have  as  part  of  His  recompense  this  wide  pre- 
rogative  of  universal  lordship.  But  the  end  itself,  the  joy  set  before  Him,  was 
surely  a  lordship  more  peculiar  and  more  precioas  (John  zvii.  1,  2).  (2)  There  is 
a  correspondence  between  the  lordship  itself  and  that  on  which  it  rests,  and  from 
which  it  flows.  It  rests  on  service  and  flows  from  service — the  service  of  sacrifice. 
But  He  died  and  rose  not  that  He  might  be  different  as  Lord  from  what  He  was  as 
dying  and  rising.  No.  He  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.  It  would 
seem,  therefore,  that  His  lordship  must  be  in  some  sense  a  continuation  of  His 
service.  Christ,  as  His  people's  Lord,  cannot  be  to  them  different  from  what  He 
was  when  as  the  Father's  servant  on  their  behalf  He  died  and  rose.  3.  Thus, 
carrjring  back  the  lordship  into  the  dying  and  rising,  we  may  see,  even  in  the 
hamiliation,  the  real  glory  of  the  exaltation.  He  is  Lord,  when  He  dies  and  rises 
and  lives ;  Lord,  in  their  life  and  in  their  death,  of  those  for  whom  He  dies  and 
rises  and  lives.  His  dying  and  living  again  is  in  itself  an  act  of  lordship  over 
them.  HL  In  the  light  of  this  conkection,  oonsideb  the  lordship  or  Christ 
IN  its  bearino  upon  those  over  whom  it  is  exercised.  1.  As  dying  and  rising. 
He  is  Lord  of  His  own  dead.  (1)  Giving  them  victory,  and  taking  from  death  his 
fting.     (2)  Beceiving  them  to  Himself.     (3)  Changing  their  mortal  bodies,  that 


688  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA*.  XIT. 

they  may  be  fashioned  like  onto  His  own  glorious  Body.  (4)  Leading  them  among 
the  many  mansions  of  His  Father's  house,  and  finding  them,  as  He  roles  them, 
congenial  subjects.  2.  The  Lord  of  you  living ;  the  Lord  of  your  life — of  the  Ufa 
which  you  have  in  Him  as  dying  and  rising.  Surely  it  is  a  blc3  ed  lordship  for  you 
now  to  realise  and  own.  Is  not  that  a  source  of  confidence  alike  in  life  and  in 
death?  And  is  it  not  also  a  motive  to  most  thorough  self -surrender  ?  (it.  £f. 
Candlish,  D-D.)  The  dominion  of  Christ  over  mankind  is — I.  Medutobial.    1. 

As  God,  He  reigns  in  His  own  eternal  right.  2.  As  man,  by  the  appointment  of 
the  Father.  II.  Absolute.  He  has  all  power — 1.  To  determine  their  conditions. 
2.  To  pardon  and  save  them.  2.  To  command  their  service.  8.  To  decide  theii 
eternal  lot.  UI.  TTntvebsal.  It  includes  the  living  and  the  dead.  lY.  Biqhtbous. 
It  is  secured  by — 1.  His  death.    2.  His  resurrection.    {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 

Yer.  10.  But  why  dost  thou  Judge  .  .  .  then  set  at  nought  thy  brother  ?  for  we 
shall  all  stand  before  the  Judgment  seat  of  Christ — The  guilt  of  judging  and  con- 
ttmptuousness : — To  the  weak  and  scrupulous  the  apostle  says,  '*  Why  judge  ?  "  To 
the  strong  and  liberal,  "Why  despise?"  I.  The  supeemact  of  oonsciencb.  1. 
This  principle  is  the  master  thought  of  the  chapter  (vers.  5, 12, 13).  Nothing  is  to 
supersede  personal  conviction.  (1)  Human  passions  are  not  to  bar  Christian  rights. 
For  matters  that  do  not  interfere  with  the  happiness  of  others  do  not  mind  the  denial 
of  your  Christian  character  by  fallible  men.  Feel  that  you  owe  allegiance  to  Christ, 
and  in  that  feeling  be  calm.  (2)  There  is  no  appeal  to  public  authority.  Unif ormi- 
tarians  would  have  thought  tnis  just  the  occasion  for  the  Church  to  decide  once  for 
aU,  and  so  put  an  end  to  variety.  But  as  the  great  apostle  would  not  interfere,  no 
Church  has  a  right  to  rule  in  these  matters.  2.  But  let  us  not  mistake  supremacy 
of  conscience  for  that  of  the  individual  will.  The  apostle  asserted  the  sanctity  of 
convictions,  but  we  must  not  exalt  our  opinions  to  the  rank  of  convictions.  H. 
The  viohtion  of  the  biqhts  of  conscience.  1.  By  unchristian  judging.  Judging 
is  persecuting ;  it  was  the  procedure  of  the  dark  ages.  But  consider  the  judg- 
ment that  is  not  peculiar  to  Bome,  but  which  belongs  to  human  nature.  Take  these 
oases  cited  by  the  apostle — Sabbath  observance,  and  abstinence  from  things  pro- 
nonnced  worldly.  How  do  we  treat  those  who  do  not  hold  our  views  on  these 
matters  ?  You  hear  insinuations  about  laxity  or  Sabbath  breaking  or  worldliness : 
then  about  socinianism  or  infidelity  ;  then  immorality.  This  is  judging.  It  is  not 
life  or  liberty  that  is  assailed,  but  character.    Look  at  the  wrong  of  this.    Note — 

(1)  Its  arrogance.  Such  judging  is  only  to  be  defended  on  the  claim  of  infallibility, 
and  therefore  Bome  is  consistent,  but  Protestants  are  not.  Are  those  who  judge 
free  from  human  frailty  ?    Or  are  they  not  generally  the  weakest  of  both  sexes  ? 

(2)  Its  failure  to  procure  what  it  aims  at — uniformity  of  opinion.  This  is  the  ideal 
good  which  men  have  tried  for  ages  to  attain,  but  is  Christendom  more  united  than 
in  the  apostle's  days  ?  (3)  It  destroys  free  inquiry.  We  boast  in  opposition  to 
Bome,  of  our  free  and  open  Bible.  But  do  we  not  really  say,  "  Here  is  the  Bible ; 
read  it  for  yourself ;  but  find  these  doctrines  there  and  no  others."  Hence  men  will 
not  bear  to  hear  the  truth.  They  think  they  have  it  already  in  the  compass  of  a 
Eingle  mind,  and  they  come  to  church  to  hear  it  repeated.  2.  By  contemptuous- 
ness.  The  sin  of  judging  is  the  sin  of  the  narrow  minded ;  the  sin  of  tbe  liberal 
minded  is  contempt  for  narrowness  and  scorn  for  scruples.  There  is  a  distinction 
between  largeness  of  view  and  largeness  of  heart.  A  narrow  mind  is  not  always  a 
narrow  heart.  There  are  worse  things  than  narrow  views.  The  missionaries  often 
hold  narrow  views,  and  yet  these  men  give  their  lives  to  turn  men  to  God,  and 
shame  those  of  larger  views.  Take  heed  how  ye  despise  any  of  God's  little  ones, 
for  what  is  largeness  of  view  compared  with  devotedness  of  life  ?  Good  men  usually 
cling  to  a  superstition  or  a  form  for  the  sake  of  some  deep  truth  with  which  it 
stands  connected.  (F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  A  lesson  in  charity  : — Peter  Cooper 
of  New  York,  a  man  who  spends  a  large  amount  of  money  on  philanthropic  objects, 
took  a  great  interest  in  a  Woman's  Art  School.  One  day  he  stood  watching  the 
portrait  class  in  that  institution,  whilst  they  were  drawing  a  likeness  of  the  same 
model  from  different  positions.  One  scholar  took  the  face  in  profile ;  another  had 
it  turned  a  little  into  the  shadow ;  a  third  saw  more  of  the  full  face,  and  represented 
it  accordingly ;  whilst  others  worked  still  further  into  the  light  or  away  from  it.  Of 
course  the  portraits  thus  taken  were  very  different;  some  of  them,  indeed,  so 
different,  that  any  one  unacquainted  with  the  original  might  have  been  almost 
excused  for  thinking  that  they  were  portraits  of  different  people.  Mr.  Cooper 
observing  the  scene,  said, "  Such  a  sight  as  this  should  be  a  lesson  in  charity,  when 


CHAP.  xiT.)  ROMANS.  680 

we  peroei-ve  how  the  same  person  may  be  bo  different,  according  to  the  way  ha  ii 
looked  at  by  various  people."  {Sunday  at  Home.)  Charity  in  judging  other*  ;— 
It  is  a  comfortable  thought  that  the  smallest  and  most  turbid  mud-pad^e  can  con- 
tain its  own  picture  of  heaven ;  it  shall  be  a  symbol  to  me  that  even  a  human 
breast  that  may  appear  least  spiritual  in  some  aspects  may  still  have  the  oapabilitj 
of  reflecting  an  influite  heaven  in  its  depths,  and  therefore  of  enjoying  it.  Let  ns 
remember  this  when  we  feel  inclined  to  deny  all  spiritual  life  to  some  people,  in 
whom,  nevertheless,  our  Father  may  perhaps  see  the  image  of  His  face.  This  dull 
river  has  a  deep  religion  of  its  own — so,  let  us  trust,  has  the  dullest  human  soul,  though 
perhaps  unconsciously.    (W.Hawthorne.)       Eeproofofcensoriousnest: — Observe— 

1.  The  characters  reproved.  Those  who — 1.  Judge  others.  2,  Despise  others.  II. 
Their  reproof.  1.  They  forget  that  all  are  amenable  at  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ. 

2.  That  they  invade  the  prerogative  of  God.  3.  That  they  must  give  account  of  them- 
selves. {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  pidgment  seat  of  God  : — 1.  I  suppose  •*  Christ  " 
slipped  into  certain  MSS.  because  Paul  had  been  speaking  of  Christ,  and 
it  was  thought  to  be  natural  that  he  should  continue  to  use  the  same  name.  He 
knew  that  Christ  is  God,  and  when  he  was  speaking  of  Him  it  was  no  deviation  for 
him  to  call  Him  God.  It  was  necessary,  too,  because  he  was  about  to  quote  an  Old 
Testament  passage  which  speaks  of  the  sovereignty  of  God,  which  is  to  be  confessed 
by  all  mankind.  It  would  have  been  most  important  to  draw  a  distinction  between 
Christ  and  God  if  there  had  been  any  doubt  as  to  His  divinity.  2.  St.  Paul  men- 
tioned the  future  judgment,  that  by  its  influence  the  Eoman  Christians  might  cease 
the  mischievous  meddlesomeness  of  judging,  when  the  Judge  was  at  the  door.  A 
day  is  to  come  when  men  shall  be  judged  after  a  better  fashion  than  we  can  judge. 
How  dare  we,  then,  travesty  God's  great  assize  by  ourselves  mounting  the  throne. 
Moreover,  we  impudently  intrude  ourselves  into  the  office  and  prerogative  of  Christ. 
•'It  is  all  needless,  too  ;  for  both  your  brother  and  yourself  will  stand  before  the 
judgment  seat  of  God,  who  will  manage  the  affairs  of  men  far  better  than  you  can."  '^ 
And,  finally,  your  judgment  is  unprofitable :  you  would  spend  your  time  better  if  ^ 
you  would  recollect  that  you  will  be  yourselves  examined  by  an  unerring  eye.  This 
judgment  will  be  : — I.  UNivERSAii — "  all."  There  will  come  a  judgment  for  the  strong 
and  for  the  weak.     No  elevation  in  piety  will  exclude  us,  and  no  weakness  will  serve 

as  an  excuse.  The  man  of  one  and  the  man  of  ten  talents  must  alike  be  reckoned 
with.  What  a  motley  throng  will  gather  at  that  assize,  of  all  nations  and  peoples 
and  tongues  I  Persons  of  all  ages.  Kings  and  paupers,  saints  and  sinners,  will  be  ' 
arraigned.  II.  Personal  (ver.  12).  If  it  only  dealt  with  actions,  words,  and 
thoughts,  the  account  would  be  solemn  enough,  but  we  must  each  one  give  an  \ 
account  of  himself,  of  what  he  was  as  well  as  what  he  did,  of  what  was  in  his  heart  j 
BB  well  as  of  that  which  came  out  of  it  in  his  deeds.  IH.  Dfvinb,  and  therefore — 
1.  According  to  truth.  God  will  make  no  mistakes.  2.  By  the  supreme  standard 
of  perfect  justice.  3.  Most  searching.  4.  Impartial.  5.  Final.  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  final  judgment : — This  is  often  spoken  of  as  the  most  terrible  event  in  himian 
history.  And  so  it  will  be,  and  the  happiest  too.  "  We  must  all  stand,"  &c. ;  then 
— L  Lite  is  not  a  set  of  rroken  AouroENTs  and  confused  occurrences.  It 
seems  to  be  so — act  seems  separated  from  act,  and  thought  from  thought,  and 
thought  from  act,  and  we  often  know  not  what  to  make  of  life.  But  then  life  will 
appear  in  its  completeness  and  its  meaning  be  clear.  This — 1.  Should  cause  as  to 
look  more  into  the  bearings  of  our  life.  We  ought  not  to  live  at  haphazard,  but 
thoughtfully.  2.  Should  elevate  life,  and  redeem  it  both  from  hopelessness  and 
vulgarity.  II.  We  shall  be  independent  of  the  misjudgments  of  men.  There  is 
a  sense  in  which  a  concern  for  what  our  neighbours  think  of  us  may  be  just  and 
proper.  Nothing  is  more  valuable  than  the  words  of  the  good  and  wise.  But  we 
ought  not  to  be  distressed  in  mind  and  hindered  in  our  work  by  the  unjust  judg- 
ments of  the  world.  In  the  long  run  we  may  get  even  better  judgments  from  the 
world  if  we  seek  to  live  in  the  spirit  of  the  judgment  of  Christ.  But  let  those  who 
fight  against  God's  people  remember  that  they  grasp  a  blade  without  a  handle. 
Comfort  yourselves,  then,  that  Christ  is  Judge,  and  will  vindicate  righteousness. 
III.  Wb  ought  to  make  preparation  for  so  solemn  an  event.  If  you  are  invited  to 
meet  some  grand  personage  on  some  special  occasion  and  make  no  preparation,  yoa 
will  be  given  to  feel  your  want  of  preparedness  by  the  contempt  of  those  who  are 
about  you.  Should  we,  then,  as  men  of  common  sense,  make  no  preparation  for  the 
■npreme  event  in  our  history.  Do  not  prepare  in  a  spirit  of  fear,  bat  as  a  ma  tter  of 
right,  and  as  an  expression  of  love  ?  We  are  not  to  get  up  ourselves  in  fine  rags  and  ''^—-f' 
gilt,  bat  meet  oar  Judge  in  the  robe  of  character  which  He  has  fashioned  and  ' 


640  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  nr. 

adorned.  IV.  We  nbed  eats  no  tjncsbtaintt  as  to  the  oeoisiom.  We  know  th« 
Jadge  and  Hia  method.  We  can  Uierefore  jadge  ourselves  now.  Everything 
.righteous  and  noble  will  be  approved;  everything  base  and  bad  will  be  con- 
I  denined.  Eight  is  right  eternally ;  wrong  is  wrong  for  ever.  Have  we  repented,  <S;o.  ? 
V.  Tbitlinq  excuses  will  not  fob  one  moment  be  tolebated.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
The  final  judgment : — 1.  Christ  Himself  spake  of  judgment,  but  never  after  thia 
fashion.  He  never  spoke  of  Himself  as  put  upon  His  trial,  but  always  as  the  Judge. 
Here,  however,  Paul  speaks  of  himself  as  appearing  at  the  judgment.  What  is  the 
[fair  inference?  Clearly,  that  high  as  Paul  was,  Jesus  Christ  is  far  higher.  God 
/cannot  be  judged,  but  every  intelligent,  accountable  creature  will  be  judged.  Jesua 
Christ  was  not  a  creature,  but  God  manifested  in  humanity.  2.  Religious  truths 
frequently  conceal  each  other.  This  truth  of  the  judgment  day  hides  from  some 
eyes  the  fact  of  the  judgment  which  is  going  on  every  day.     You  are  all  now  upon 

Jour  trial.    And  there  are  certain  results  of  this  trial  that  are  akin  to  sentence, 
toes  not  the  drunkard  and  the  sensualist  of  every  shape  suffer  a  present  punish* 
ment  ?    Are  not  integrity  and  truthfulness  generally  recognised  with  favour  ?  3.  By 
the  mention  of  this  fact,  the  Apostle  Paul  teaches  the  members  of  the  Church  in 
Home  to  be  liberal  in  the  estimate  they  form  of  each  other.    There  is,  however,  a 
false  liberality.    There  are  some  that  would  apply  these  remarks  to  the  facts  and 
doctrines  of  the  gospel,  and  to  moral  principles.    Now  hear  what  the  same  man 
wrote :  *•  Though  we,  or  an  angel  from  heaven,  preach  to  you  any  other  gospel  than 
J  that  ye  have  received,  let  him  be  accursed."    I.  The  cebtainty  of  jcdoment.    The 
j  emphasis  of  the  text  is  in  the  words  "We  shall."    Judgment  is  no  probability. 
But  what  is  judgment  7    There  is  trial — the  idea  of  really  testing  the  character,  (rf 
summing  up  and  judg^g  the  totality  of  a  man's  life.    Then  there  is  the  disclosure, 
the  bringing  out  of  everything.    Then  there  is  decision  upon  the  case,  and  sentence. 
Let  us  consider  some  facts  which  make  this  appear  certain.    1.  There  is  a  looking 
for  of  judgment  in  every  man.    When  Adam  and  his  wife  had  eaten  of  the  fruit 
I  they  hid  themselves.    What  was  this  but  an  expression  of  expectancy  that  God 
I  would  come  and  judge  them  I    Is  this  peculiar  ?    No.    What  do  the  fears  and  the 
remorse  of  the  man  who  has   done  wrong  say  but  that  he  expects  judgment  I 
2.  This  Divine  and  real  judgment  seems  needful.     "  Wherefore  doth  the  way  of 
the  wicked  prosper  ? "    Look  at  the  mistakes  that  occur  concerning  men.    A  man 
la  in  reputation  for  religion  and  may  have  a  heart  as  black  as  helL     Now,  is  thia 
to  be  perpetual  ?    No  ;  there  is  a  sort  of  necessity  in  God's  nature  to  put  everything 
right  and  to  give  to  every  man  his  real  character.    3.  It  is  indicated  by  present 
punishment  and  reward  on  a  limited  scale.    During  the  storm  you  have  often  heard 
the  thunder  at  the  distance  before  the  tempest  has  broken  over  your  dwelling,  and 
just  so  may  you  hear  the  trumpet  of  the  future  judgment  in  what  you  now 
experience  when  you  have  done  wrong.    4.  By  the  voice  of  Old  Testament  and 
New  God  speaks  to  you  of  this  judgment.    H.  OuB  personal  appeabance  jb  oebtain. 
,  There  will  be  no  escape  from  a  final  Divine  trial.    You  may  leave  a  pious  home  to 
I  get  far  from  what  you  call  cant,  but  you  will  not  escape  from  this  judgment.   There 
IwiU  be  no  evasion,  excuse,  proxy.     III.  Chbibt  will  be  the  Judoe,  and  mark 
what  this  involves.    The  Judge  will  be — 1.  Visible.     Christ  has  taken  His  human 
nature  to  heaven.    2.  Competent,  and  the  multitude,  without  exception,  will  feel 
that  competency.    Just  as  you  often  have  been  conscious  of  the  presence  of  great- 
ness when  you  have  been  with  some  man  whose  intelligence  very  far  exceeded  your 

— own,  so  will  it  be  felt  before  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ     (S.  Martin.)        Future 

judgment : — I.  The  fact.    1.  All.     2.  Shall  stand.     3.  At  the  judgment  seat  of 
Christ.    II.  The  cebtainty  op  it.    1.  Attested  by  reason  and  revelation.    2.  Con- 
firmed by  the  oath  of  God.    HI.  The  issue.    Every  one  shall  give  an  account — 
1.  Of  himself.    (1)  His  conduct  to  man.    (2)  To  God.     2.  Before  God  Himself. 
{J.  Lyth,  D.D.)        The  final  tribunal : — In  the  establishment  of  this  we  see — I.  Thh 
/honoub  and  dignity  with  which  this  invests  indivtdcal  human  lives.    Look  at 
r  \Bociety.    A  few  men  are  eminent,  but  the  millions  lead  ordinary  lives.    We  are 
\  limited,  fettered,  and  we  are  ready  to  say,  "  What  is  man  ?  "    Yet  God  is  to  judge 
\  him,  and  individually.    A  human  court  puts  honour  on  man's  nature  by  his  very 
trial.    A  leopard  leaping  from  his  cave  to  tear  asunder  his  victim  is  not  a  subject  of 
arrest  and  trial.     He  is  shot,  and  that  is  the  end  of  it.     Man  has  a  knowledge  of 
Gk)d  and  of  immortal  verities.    Therefore  he  is  judged.    II.  The  significance  of 
the   humblest   life   and  of  the  humblest  act  of  any  life.      Too  often  we 
/  gauge  character  and  success  by  their  oonspicuousness.    We  note  the  obsequies  of 
(file  great,  but  who  notes  the  pauper's  funeral?    But  the  text — 1.  Gives  a  signifi- 


CB4r.  XZT.3  ROMANS.  Ul 

osnM  to  the  poor  man's  death.    2.  We  are  apt  to  measure  oar  own  lives  by  oar    J 
larger  efforts,  and  forget  the  little  acts  that,  lilce  drops,  go  to  make  op  the  oon.  | 
tinnons  stream  of  life.     It  is  these  smaller  actions  that  at  once  show  and  shape  ' 
character.     Christ  represents  the  good  as  amazed  at  the  final  judgment  becanse 
Bach  little  acts  as  the  cup  of  water  were  remembered ;  and  so  the  wicked.    Phidiaa 
polished  the  back  of  his  statues,  for  he  said  that  though  men  saw  not  his  work,  the 
gods  beheld  it.    Every  deed,  however  small  or  secret,  comes  under  the  cognisance 
of  God.    To  neglect  to  adjust  our  inward  life  to  this  truth  and  cultivate  the  merely 
oatward  exhibitions  of  character  is  as  irrational  as  it  would  be  to  burnish  the 
ornaments  of  an  engine  and  build  the  boiler  of  defective  metal,  or  decorate  the  out- 
side of  an  edifice  while  its  foundations  and  walls  are  insecure.    III.  How  majestic 
Air  ATTBiBUTS   IS   uam's   comscienob.      True,  conscience  may  be  mistaken ;    but, 
enlightened  by  the  Holy  Spirit  it  is  the  echo  of  Ood's  voice.    Its  remorse  is  an  echo 
of  His  rebuke,  and  its  approval  an  echo  of  His  benediction.   We  may      '^cipate  the 
final  tribunal.    Judging  ourselves  now,  we  shall  not  at  last  be  condemned.    How  ^ 
wicked,  then,  it  is  to  put  out  this  eye,  to  suffocate  the  voice  of  God  within  us  I    It 
is  moral  suicide.     lY.  Thb  sbcbet  of  tbue  independence  fbou  the  world.     If  ^ 
God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ?    Paul,  Pascal,  Luther,  Wilberforce,  &c.,  ^ 
swong  loose  from  entangling  criticisms,  undismayed  by  human   censure  in  the 
thought  of  their  persontil  responsibility  to  their  Judge.     "  It  is  a  small  matter  that  ^ 
we  be  judged  of  man's  judgment " ;  this  was  their  word.     So  may  the  maligned  ' 
wait  calmly  for  the  final  vindication.    V.  The  beauty  and  sionificancb  of  thb  "^ 
Savioub's  wore.    Christ  does  not  abolish  judgment ;  He  claims  it  as  His  own  and    i 
thus  asserts  His  Divinity.    No  man,  no  angel,  can  assume  this  function.    It  belongs    \ 
to  Omniscience  alone.    We  learn  how  it  is  accomplished — by  the  self-conviction  of    / 
the  sinner.    Before  Christ  on  earth  they  who  accused  another  stood  self-convicted,    / 
and  went  away  one  by  one.    "  He  told  me  all  I  ever  knew,"  said  another.    It  was   , 
on  the  Gross  that  atonement  was  completed.    It  is  on  that  ground  we,  as  believers,    < 
are  saved.    The  lustre  of  the  Cross  is  shed  on  the  judgment  throne.    The  Judge  is    1 
OUT  Eedeemer,  friend,  and  advocate.     We  can  have  "  boldness  in  that  day,"  for  we    \ 
are  in  Him.    VI.  Thb  dutt  of  accepting  and  the  privileqe  of  PRocLAiMiNa  thb 
OLOBious  oosPEii  OF  THB  SoN  OF  GoD.    Before  His  face  we  must  stand.     We  can-    ! 
not  postpone  the  day.    Nearer  it  comes  every  hour.     Are  yon  ready  for  it  ?    Only   i 
tn  Qirist  can  yoa  be  serene  and  safe,  contemplating  its  approach,     (i?.  S.  Storrs, 
D.D.) 

Vers.  11,  12.  As  I  Uve,  salth  the  Lord,  exery  knee  shall  t>ow  to  Me,  and  every 
tongne  shall  confess  to  God. — The  final  subjection  of  mankiJid  to  Ood  will  be — 
I.  UNivEBSAii.  II.  OoHPLETB.  It  inoludcs — 1.  An  acknowledgment  of  His  supre- 
macy. 2.  Submission  at  His  feet.  3.  The  confession  of  every  tongue.  U.  Cebtain. 
God — 1.  Has  sworn.  2.  Is  true.  8.  Is  able  to  effect  it.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Two- 
fold eubjugation  of  humanity  to  Ood  (text  and  Exod.  x.  17 ;  Acts  ix.  6).  This 
passage  is  taken  from  Isaiah  xlv.  23,  and  predicts  the  universal  subjugation  of  man- 
Kind  to  the  Divine  will.  This  does  not  mean  universal  salvation,  for  there  is  a 
twofold  subjugation — the  one  represented  by  Pharaoh  and  the  other  by  Paul. 
I.  The  one  is  by  conviction  of  God's  terrible  poweb  ;  the  other,  by  conviction  of  His 
LOVE.  An  overwhelming  sense  of  God's  great  power  compelled  Pharaoh  to  •' bow 
his  knee  "  before  the  Almighty.  He  felt  that  further  rebellion  would  be  his  ruin ; 
and  for  a  moment  he  yielded.  Paul's  subjugation  sprung  from  a  conviction  of  God's 
love  in  Christ.  The  voice  said  to  him, "  I  am  Jesus  whom  thou  persecutest."  This 
brought  him  down,  smote  his  rebellious  wiU,  reduced  him  to  subjection.  So  it  is 
ever ;  wicked  men  and  devils  are  made  to  bow  by  a  sense  of  God's  force  and  God's 
power.  Good  men  and  angels  bow  from  a  sense  of  His  love.  H.  The  one  subju- 
gation involves  moral  anguish,  the  other  moral  enjoyment.  What  a  state  of  agony 
and  alarm  was  Pharaoh  in  1  But  what  joy  came  into  Paul  at  the  heavenly  voice  of 
Mercy  I  The  one  subjugation  therefore  involves  heaven,  the  other,  hell.  1.  In  the 
one,  there  is  the  sense  of  slavery;  in  the  other,  a  sense  of  freedom.  2.  In  the  one, 
there  is  a  sense  of  overwhelming  terror;  in  the  other,  a  sense  of  hopefulness. 
3.  In  the  one,  there  is  the  sense  of  Divine  favour  ;  in  the  other,  the  sense  of  Divine 
antagonism.  IH.  The  one  becomes  a  ministry  of  destruction  to  others;  the 
other,  a  ministry  of  salvation.  Pharaoh,  the  moment  the  panic  abated,  rushes  on 
and  brings  destruction  on  himself  and  his  hosts.  Paul  begins  a  beneficent  ministry 
which  issues  in  the  salvation  of  thousands.  Conclusion :  In  which  way  wilt  thou 
be  subjugated  ?  It  is  not  for  thee  to  determine  whether  thou  shalt  bow  thy  knee  of 
VOL.  n.  41 


643  TRE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xi^ 

not :  thy  knee  must  bow,  thy  tongue  must  confess ;  but  it  is  with  thee  to  determine 
how  thou  wilt  do  it — by  a  sense  of  God's  power  or  of  His  love,  by  coercion  or  by 
choice.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  So  then  every  one  of  us  shall  give  account  of  him- 
self to  God. — The  last  account : — L  By  whom  rbndebed.  1.  By  ourselves.  2. 
Respecting  all  that  we  have  done,  enjoyed,  or  suffered.  II.  Befobe  whom. 
1.  God.  2.  The  searcher  of  hearts.  3.  Who  sees  in  secret  and  rewards  openly. 
(J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Human  accountability : — The  argument  of  this  chapter  goes  to 
prove  that  Christians  are  not  mutual  judges,  but  fellow-servants  of  Christ.  The 
truths  wrapped  up  in  these  words  are  principles  to  guide  us  in  our  daily  life,  as 
well  as  predictions  about  the  great  day.  These  principles  are— I.  The  uNivEBSAi-iTr 
of  human  accountabihty.  ••  Every  one  of  us."  The  old  and  young,  rich  and  poor, 
ignorant  and  cultured,  rejector  of  religion  and  professor,  <feo.  "  I  saw  the  dead, 
small  and  great,  stand  before  God."  11.  Its  individuality.  *•  Of  himself.'* 
Christianity,  while  in  some  aspects  the  true  socialism,  is  also  the  great  indi- 
vidualiser.  It  teaches  the  right  use  of  the  pronoun  "I."  It  empties  it  of  pride, 
vbut  crovms  it  with  responsibility.  In  the  judgment,  "  the  books  wiU  be  opened," 
and  amongst  them  Memory  and  Conscience.  These  will  be  quite  sufficient  to  con- 
demn. Their  revealings  have  made  kings  tremble  on  their  thrones,  and  will  make 
sinners  quake  before  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ.  III.  Its  solemnity.  It  is  to 
God.  He  "  with  whom  we  have  to  do,"  is  the  All-wise,  All-holy,  All-good.  And  all 
sin  is  against  Him,  though  it  be  also  against  His  creatures.  Conclusion:  Our 
subject  gives  light — 1.  On  our  tendency  to  pass  judgment  on  others.  We  may  not 
judge ;  but  we  all  must  be  judged.  2.  On  the  intervention  of  sacerdotal  authority. 
All  priestism  is,  by  the  principles  of  our  text,  cleared  away,  that  the  relationship  of 
man  to  God  may  be  intense,  close,  vivid.  3.  The  erection  of  social  standards  of 
right  and  wrong.  We  are  to  guide  our  life,  not  by  maxims  of  markets,  professions. 
Churches,  but  the  law  of  Him  to  whom  we  must  give  account.  (U.  R.  Thomas.) 
Human  accountability  : — I.  The  account  to  which  the  text  befees  (ver- 10)  is — 
1.  Certain.  It  must  be  given.  2.  Individual.  "  Every  one  of  us."  3.  Particular. 
Every  one  shall  give  an  account  *'  of  all  the  deeds  done  in  the  body."  4.  Near. 
Though  the  reference  is  to  the  day  of  judgment,  death  wiU  summon  us  to  an  imme- 
diate interview  with  our  Judge.  II.  The  Being  to  whom  this  account  must  bb 
GIVEN.  God.  1.  Who  is  omniscient,  and  cannot  therefore  be  deceived  (Psa. 
cxxzix.  1-4).  2.  Who  is  just,  and  cannot  therefore  be  biased  in  His  decisions 
(chap.  ii.  6-11).  3.  Who  is  omnipotent,  and  able  therefore  to  carry  into  full  effect 
the  sentence  wnich  He  pronounces.  HI.  The  influence  which  the  pbospect  should 
HAVE  UPON  YOU.  It  should  induce  you — 1.  To  apply  immediately  to  Christ  for  His 
saving  grace,  and  to  devote  yourselves  unreservedly  to  His  service.  2.  Solemnly 
to  think  of  your  last  account,  until  your  souls  are  affected  with  such  a  strong  and 
abiding  sense  of  it,  as  shall  give  it  an  influence  on  your  whole  conduct.  (Essex 
Congregational  Remembrancer. )  Personal  responsibility  : — These  words  assert 
with  great  precision  individual  responsibility.  This  dealing  in  judgment  with 
each  separate  soul  according  to  its  special  history  makes  the  judgment  in- 
comparably more  awful.  For  not  only  does  it  imply  a  closer  act  of 
scrutiny,  but  it  also  individualises  the  shame  which  will  belong  to  the  wicked 
in  that  day.  This  truth  of  individual  accountability  needs,  however,  to  be 
vindicated  from  the  misapprehensions  which  are  apt  to  cloud  it.  L  Let  as 
BEOABD  the  individual  IN  EELATioN  TO  HIMSELF.  "  Evcry  OHO  of  US  shall  give 
account  of  himself."  The  exact  meaning  of  the  words  is  more  specific  :  it  is  con- 
cerning himself,  just  as  if  a  steward  were  called  to  give  account  of  the  particular 
properties  entrusted  to  his  management.  God  has  laid  to  every  man's  charge 
,  the  care  of  himself ;  not  to  each  man  the  care  of  some  other  man ;  the  dying 
V  flesh,  but  above  all  the  never-dying  soul.  I  do  not  mean  that  each  man's 
care  is  to  be  a  selfish  one  for  himself  alone,  or  that  we  are  not  called  to  labour 
for  other  men's  souls  as  well  as  for  our  own.  But  this  still  springs  from  our 
solemn  charge  of  ourselves.  It  must  be  our  opportunities  and  powers,  not  the 
opportunities  and  powers  of  other  men,  of  which  we  must  make  use.  It  is 
still  the  right  use  of  ourselves,  though  it  be  for  the  good  of  others,  for  which 
we  are  responsible.  II.  Let  us  look  at  the  individual  in  belation  to  otheb  men, 
and  to  our  actions  in  common  with  other  men.  Man  can  never  act  alone,  and 
least  of  all  in  this  age  of  associated  effort.  We  act  together,  and  thus  we  gain  an 
idea  of  common  action  in  which  we  drown  out  of  sight  our  individual  resp'^nsi- 
bility.  However  devout  a  congregation  may  be,  for  instance,  there  will  be  cause 
to  lament  over  some  careless  faces,  some  unbended  knees,  some  silent  tongues. 


cnur.  ht.]  ROMANS.  Mt 

Think  yoa  that,  were  each  of  tbem  placed  singly  face  to  face  with  the  awfnhiess  of 
Ood,  they  would  dare  to  act  in  His  presence  if  they  stood  alone,  as  they  act  in  Hia 
house  amid  the  general  crowd  of  worshippers  ?  Or,  to  take  another  case,  can  wa 
doubt  that  the  vastness  of  the  number  of  unsaved  souls  in  the  world  diminishes  to 
each  man's  consciousness  the  awfulness  of  being  an  unsaved  soul  ?  In  reality  the 
number  fearfully  increases  it,  for  Heaven  might  weep  over  such  a  spectacle  as  a 
world  of  lost  souls.  III.  Let  us  look  at  the  individual  m  helation  to  God  and 
TO  the  dutt  that  be  owes  Him.  For  here  another  common  error  at  once  starts  to 
yiew.  It  is  the  notion  of  some  men  that  the  iudividual  obligation  of  work  and  toil  and 
self-sacrifice  for  God  is  lessened,  because  others  share  the  obligation  with  ourselves. 
It  is  our  duty  to  do  our  share,  we  say,  but  why  should  we  take  more  than  our  fair 
proportion  of  the  burden?  Thus  we  are  led,  instead  of  doing  each  one  his  best  in 
the  service  of  our  Master,  to  measure  oat  just  what  we  think  to  be  our  own  share 
of  the  common  work.  Whether  it  be  money,  or  labour,  or  talent,  or  time,  we  are 
asked  to  contribute,  let  us  do  it,  each  one  for  himself  and  to  the  utmost  of  hia 
opportunity.    If  each  man  did  his  duty  all  men  would  do  their  duty.    IV.  Therb 

TET  KEMAIN8  ANOTHER  ASPECT  OF  THE   MATTER,  WHICH  BELONGS  EQUALLY  TO  ALL   THESB 

THREE  RELATIONS.  It  suggests  the  motive,  graciously  supplied  in  the  rich  harmony 
of  the  Divine  dealings,  which  shall  stimulate  the  effort  that  it  sweetens.  For  the 
doctrine  of  individual  accountability  has  its  complement  in  the  doctrine  of  indi- 
vidual recompense.  If  the  obligation  be  personal,  so  will  be  the  reward  which  will 
crown  the  discharge  of  it.  (Canon  Oarbett.)  Human  accountability : — Bishop  Butler 
was  once  walking  with  his  chaplain.  Dr.  Forster,  when  he  suddenly  turned  towards 
him,  and,  with  much  earnestness,  said,  "I  was  thinking.  Doctor,  what  an  awful  thing 
it  is  for  a  human  being  to  stand  before  the  moral  Governor  of  the  world,  to  give  an 
account  of  all  his  actions  in  this  life."  Scrutiny  of  the  judgment  day  : — The  head- 
light of  a  locomotive  is  terrible,  if  you  stand  near  enough  to  oatoh  the  full  glare  of 
it.  As  it  sweeps  around  the  "  Horse-shoe  Curve  "  of  the  Alleghanies,  or  aloog  the 
edges  of  the  Sierra  Nevadas,  how  far  ahead,  and  how  deep  down,  and  how  high  up 
it  dashes,  and  there  is  instantaneous  revelation  of  mountain  peak  and  wild  beasts 
hieing  themselves  to  their  caverns,  and  cascades  a  thousand  feet  tall  clinging  in 
white  terror  to  the  precipices  1  But  more  intense,  more  far-reaching,  more  sudden, 
swifter,  and  more  tremendous  is  the  headlight  of  an  advancing  Judgment  Day, 
under  which  all  the  most  hidden  affairs  of  life  shall  come  to  discovery  and  arraign- 
ment. I  quote  an  overwhelming  passage  of  Scripture,  in  which  I  put  the  whole 
emphasis  on  the  word  '•  secret"  :  *'  God  shall  bring  every  work  into  judgment,  with 
every  secret  thing,  whether  it  be  good  or  evil."  {T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  God  will 
require  an  account  of  items: — Recollect,  again,  that  your  account  will  have  to  be 
particular.  God  will  go  into  all  the  items  of  it.  At  the  day  of  judgment  you  will 
not  have  to  cast  up  a  hurried  account  in  the  gross,  but  every  item  shall  be  read. 
Can  you  prove  that  ?  Yes.  "  For  every  idle  word  that  man  shall  speak,  he  shall 
be  brought  into  account  at  the  day  of  judgment."  Now,  it  is  in  the  items  that  men 
go  astray.  "  Well^"  says  one,  *'  if  I  look  at  my  life  in  the  bulk,  I  am  not  very  much 
ashamed,  but  it  is  those  items,  those  little  items — they  are  the  troublesome  part  of 
the  account  that  one  does  not  care  to  meddle  with."  Do  you  know  that  all  yester- 
day was  made  up  of  littles  ?  And  the  things  of  to-day  are  all  little,  and  what  you 
do  to-morrow  will  all  be  little  things.  Just  as  the  tiny  shells  make  up  the  chalk 
hills,  and  the  chalk  hills  together  make  up  the  range,  so  the  trifling  actions  make 
up  the  whole  account,  and  each  of  these  must  be  pulled  asunder  separately.  Tou 
had  an  hour  to  spare  the  other  day — what  did  you  do  ?  Tou  had  a  voice — how  did 
you  use  it  ?  You  had  a  pen — you  could  use  that — how  did  you  employ  it  ?  Each 
particular  shall  be  brought  out,  and  there  shall  be  demanded  an  account  for  each 
one.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Individual  responsibility  : — How  helpful  is  it  to  read 
that  Paul, who  stood  so  far  above  us  all,  should  confess  himself  to  be  "  one  of  us"  ! 
It  was  a  singular  mark  of  the  apostolic  character  that  each  and  all  emphasised 
their  close  relation  to  the  community  in  which  they  ministered.  In  this  they 
followed  His  steps  who  said,  "  I  am  among  you  as  one  that  serveth."  What  a  rebuke 
to  all  spiritual  pride  and  ecclesiastical  assumption  I  Let  him  who  is  chief  among  you 
be  the  servant  of  all.  And  yet,  whilst  the  apostle  claimed  this  community,  he  drew 
the  lines  of  individuality  with  no  hesitating  hand.  "  Every  one  of  us."  We  have 
in  the  text — I.  A  solemn  summons,  in  the  midst  of  all  that  is  opposed  to  the  Divine 
wilL  By  this  summons  there  are  certain  facts  very  plainly  implied.  1.  If  "  every 
one  of  us  "  is  to  give  an  account  unto  God,  then  the  dream  of  the  materialist  is 
certainly  false.     There  is  a  God,  and  with  that  God  man  has  to  do.     The  traditioni 


644  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxt,| 

of  all  people,  the  consent  of  the  moral  sense  in  man  ererywhere  endorse  that  which 
the  Scripture  bo  explicitly  implies.    2.  This  accountability  before  (Jod  ia  an  ever- 
present  fact.    Do  not  postpone  it  antil  death  comes.    It  is  a  constant  relation  in 
which  man  stands.     To  bring  the  whole  nature  into  accord  with  the  law  and 
character  of  God — this  is  the  dictate  of  our  sense  of  true  accountability.    3.  But 
beyond  this  life  work  there  is  a  final  criticism  and  jadgment  to  come.     This  ia 
involved  in  the  very  relations  we  hold  to  this  God,  and  the  solemn  thought  of  such  an 
assize  is  constrained  by  the  anticipation  of  death  itself.    II.  A  Dsnsrra  LmiTATioif . 
"  Himself."    1.  We  are  responsible  in  our  mutual  relations  for  the  influence  that  we 
exert  over  one  another.    "  No  man  liveth  to  himself,"  &o.    But  our  responsibiJity 
/  for  each  other  ends  there.   Our  accountability  for  ourselves  is  more  immediate,  and 
/  cannot  be  evaded.    We  are  not  our  brother's  keeper  in  this  world  except  for  hia 
/  good.    Look  well  to  thyself.    Leave  others  to  God.    Thou  hast  enough  to  do  with 
thine  own  vineyard.    2.  But  the  account  is  not  the  less  varied  because  it  is  bo 
individual.     Think  of  how  many  component  parts  you  are  formed,  and  for  each  one 
a  responsibility  exists  before  God.    Therefore  let  other  people  alone,  and  look  to 
your  own  house.     III.  A  suggested  pbepabation.    We  may  give  an  account  now ; 
we  shall  do  it  finally  in  a  more  manifest  way.    1.  Recognise  your  individuality. 
Look  yoorselves  in  the  face.    Never  allow  yourself  to  be  lost  in  the  family,  the 
Church,  or  in  society.    You  came  into  the  world  subject  to  this  solitary  responsi- 
bility ;  you  wiU  go  out  of  the  world  in  the  same  way.    It  is  the  condition  in  which 
the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  comes  to  you.    2.  Train  your  conscience  to  utter  distinct 
commands  and  prohibitions  to  you  as  an  individual.  Take  not  the  worldly  maxims 
of  common  living  in  this  world  ;  take  not  the  practice  of  the  Church.     There  is  no 
rnle  except  that  which  is  contained  in  the  character  and  the  life  of  the  God-man. 
(5.   fl.    Tyng,  D.D.)         Fertonal  responsibility  : — 1.    The  revelation  of  a  judg- 
ment to  come  is  one  of   the  chief   guarantees  of   human  morality,   and  one 
of  the  most  impressive  illustrations  of  human  greatness.    Are  we  not  in  danger  all 
of  us  of  losing  the  vivid  sense  of  personal  responsibility  for  our  own  life  ?    And  if 
the  sense  of  personal  responsibility  is  lost,  reverence  for  duty  is  lost  too.  TiMre  can 
be  no  morality  apart  from  moral  freedom,  and  it  is  to  this  that  the  reveliition  ot 
future  judgment  appeals.    Nearly  everything  else  has  been  determined  for  you,  but 
/lor  your  moral  conduct  you  yourself  are  responsible.    2.  Most  of  us  had  very  little 
/  freedom  of  choice  as  to  the  trade  or  the  profession  that  we  should  f oUow ;  but  we 
/  can  work  honestly  or  dishonestly  in  the  trade  or  profession  in  which  we  are  engaged. 
/  It  did  not  lie  within  our  choice  what  language  we  should  speak,  but  it  does  lie 
/  within  our  choice  whether  we  shall  speak  the  truth  or  not.     The  limits  of  oar 
'    physical  health  and  vigour  are  determined  for  us  by  the  constitution  with  which  we 
were  born ;  but  it  lies  with  ourselves  whether  we  wiU  be  sober  or  drunkards.     It  did 
not  lie  within  our  choice  whether  we  would  be  born  in  a  heathen  or  in  a  Christian 
land,  among  Eomanists  or  among  Protestants  ;  but  it  does  lie  within  every  man's 
choice  whether  he  will  honour  and  welcome  whatever  light  comes  to  him.    3.  In 
many  of  us,  in  these  days,  the  sense  of  our  personal  responsibility  is  faint  and 
feeble.     We  are  awed  by  the  vast  range  and  irresistible  action  of  material  forces. 
What  are  we  that  we  should  assert  a  freedom  that  does  not  belong  to  the  planets  or 
to  the  ocean  ?    But  I  decline  to  surrender  my  dignity  in  the  presence  of  material 
immensity.    The  tides  rise  and  fall  by  an  eternal  necessity,  but  the  passions  which 
ebb  and  flow  in  my  heart  I  can  check  and  control.    The  planets  are  bound  by 
irreversible  forces  to  the  orbits  in  which  they  travel ;  but  instead  of  being  irre- 
sistibly swung  by  a  force  over  which  I  have  no  control,  I  choose  for  myself  the 
rough  path  of  duty  which  leads  to  heights  where  I  breathe  the  air  of  heaven  and  see 
its  glory,  or  the  smoother  path  which  descends  to  darkness  and  death.    I  am 
greater  than  the  planets  and  the  sea :  they  are  subject,  I  am  sovereign ;  they  are 
bound,  I  am  free.     My  own  conscience  assures  me  of  this,  and  it  is  confirmed  by 
the  voice  of  God.     The  living  God  who  is  above  Nature  declares  that  I,  too,  am 
above  Nature,  and  that  I  must  give  an  account  of  myself  to  Him.     4.  Then  the 
physiologist  comes,  and  he  tells  me  that  I  inherit  in  my  very  blood,  in  the  structure 
of  my  brain,  in  the  vigorous  or  feeble  fibre  of  my  nervous  organisation  the  results 
of  the  vices  and  the  virtues  of  a  long  line  of  ancestors.    But  though  the  conditions 
of  life  have  been  determined  for  me,  my  life  itself  is  my  own,  and  that  has  not  been 
determined  for  me ;  the  material  in  which  I  shall  work  has  been  given,  the  way  in 
which  I  shall  treat  it  has  not  been  given.     I  may  have  been  born  with  a  craving  for 
physical  excitement ;  is  that  to  be  my  excuse  if  I  go  home  drunk  ?    And  to  God 
gome  of  the  noblest  forms  of  moral  life  may  be  found  where,  to  your  eyes  and  to 


XIV.)  EOMANS,  645 

mine,  there  is  the  least  dignity  and  grace.    One  man  is  placed  under  conditions — 
not  of  his  own  choice— which  make  it  possible  for  him  to  do  very  little  beyond 
getting  the  rongh  ore  of  goo<>ness  out  of  the  black  and  gloomy  mine ;  he  has  got  it 
with  the  sweat  of  his  brow,  with  pain  and  peril.     To  him  God  will  say :  "  Well 
drae  I  "    Another  man  has  the  ore  at  his  feet  to  start  with.     It  is  not  enough  for 
faim  to  bring  that  to  God ;  he  must  bring  pure  metal  extracted  from  it.    And  the 
third  has  the  metal  to  begin  with.  He  fails,  and  fails  disastrously,  unless  he  works 
it  into  form  of  noble  usefulness  and  gracious  beauty.    Each  man  will  have  to  give 
account  of  himself  to  God.    And  God  only  can  judge  of  the  worth  of  each  man's 
w€rk,  because  God  only  knows  the  conditions  under  which  each  man's  work  is  being 
ONrried  on.    Channing's  schoolmaster  said  to  one  of  his  schoolfellows :  "  Why  are 
not  you  a  good  child  like  William  Channing  ?  "    "  Ah  !  "  said  the  little  boy,  "  it  is 
ao  easy  for  William  Channing  to  be  good."    And  perhaps  we  have  looked  round 
upon  friends  of  ours  to  whom  a  conflict  that  we  have  to  maintain  is  altogether 
tmnecessary.    The  foes  we  have  to  fight  with  they  never  meet ;  the  victories  which 
we  have  to  win  for  ourselves  were  won  for  them  generations  ago  by  the  ancestors 
whose  blood  is  in  their  veins.     ShaU  we  complain  T    God  forbid  I    Let  us  do  for 
oar  posterity  what  their  ancestors  have  done  for  them  ;  and  let  us  take  the  rough 
conations  of  our  actual  life,  making  the  best  of  them,  rejoicing  in  this,  that  we 
have  to  give  account  of  ourselves  to  God.     6.  This  conception  of  the  relations 
bc>tween  man  and  God  relieves  human  life  of  its  awful  gloom  and  confusion,  and 
ooctains  the  promise  of  a  Divine  order.     You  tell  me  that  there  are  great  masses 
of  men  that  have  never  had  a  chance  of  moral  goodness.    They  have  to  give 
an  account  of  themselves  without  their  chance,  if  so  it  be.    And  this  concep- 
tion of  our  relationship  to  God  invests  with  dignity  the  life  alike  of  the  obscurest 
and  most  illustrious  of  our  race.    The  material  triumphs  of  which  we  are  so  proud 
am  the  result  of  a  spiritual  energy  that  has  come  to  us  from  generations  which 
b«lieved  that  man  was  the  lord  of  all.   And  when  that  consciousness  of  sovereignty 
has  been  extinguished,  we  shall  decline  to  meaner  levels  and  to  inferior  forms  of 
lila.  But  this  is  not  to  be  our  destiny.    We  are  free,  and  we  know  it ;  and  if  to  this 
freedom  there  are  mysterious  limitations,  if  achievement  hesitates  and  falters,  and 
foUows  far  behind  purpose,  the  Christian  gospel  has  its  word  of  power  and  of  grace 
for  ns  in  this  great  trouble.    {R.  W.DaU,LL.D.)       Respomibility,  unavoidable  : — 
fi«v.  John  Thomas  of  Serampore  was  one  day,  after  addressing  a  crowd  of  natives 
(A  the  banks  of  the  Ganges,  accosted  by  a  Brahmin  as  follows :  "  Sir,  don't  you  say 
that  the  devil  tempts  man  to  sin  ?  "    "  Yes,"  answered  Mr.  Thomas.     "  Then,"  said 
the  Brahmin,  "  certainly  the  fault  is  the  devil's  :  the  devil,  therefore,  and  not  man, 
ought  to  suffer  the  punishment."    Mr.  Thomas,  observing  a  boat  with  several  men 
on  board  descending  the  river,  replied,  "Brahmin,  do  you  see  yonder  boat?" 
"  Yes."    "  Suppose  I  was  to  send  some  of  my  friends  to  destroy  every  person  on 
board,  and  bring  me  all  that  is  valuable  in  the  boat :  who  ought  to  B\iSer  punish- 
ment—I for  instructing  them,  or  they  for  doing  this  wicked   act  ? "     *'  Why," 
answered  the  Brahmin,  with  great  emotion,  "you  ought  all  to  be  put  to  death 
together."    "Ah,  Brahmin,"  replied  Mr.  Thomas ;  "  and  if  you  and  the  devil  sini 
together,  the  devil  and  yon  will  be  punished  together."  \ 

Vers.  13-15.  Let  us  not  therefore  Judge  one  another  any  more :  but  Judge  this 
rather,  that  no  man  put  a  8tuml>ling-block  ...  in  Ills  brother's  way. — Limitations 
of  Christian  liberty : — It  is  limited — I.  In  its  extent  ;  by  a  tender  regard  for  the 
weak.  Love — 1.  Avoids  offence.  2.  Eespects  the  convictions  of  others.  3.  Denies 
itself.  II.  In  its  object  ;  the  furtherance  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  1.  By  guard- 
ing against  reproach.  2.  By  esteeming  spiritual  blessings  above  all  others.  3.  By 
promoting  the  work  of  God  in  others.  III.  In  its  RuiiE  of  action  ;  faith.  1.  Allows 
only  what  faith  permits.  2.  Avoids  what  faith  does  not  endorse.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
The  voluntary  limitation  of  Christian  liberty  : — I,  Its  extent.  It — 1.  Avoids 
offence.  2.  Yields  its  conscious  right  for  the  sake  of  others.  3.  Guards  against 
the  appearance  of  evil.  II.  Its  encoukaqements,  1.  The  kingdom  of  God  suffers 
no  disadvantage.  2.  The  weak  brother  is  spared.  3.  Private  conviction  and  action 
are  not  sacrificed.  {Ibid  )  Things  indifferent : — I.  What  things  are  indifferent  f 
Things— 1.  Not  forbidden.  2.  That  have  in  themselves  no  moral  value.  3.  That 
are  clearly  ascertained  as  such  by  an  enlightened  conscience.  II.  When  do  thbt 
CBASB  TO  BE  SO?  1.  When  they  become  a  stumbling-block  to  others.  2.  When 
they  infringe  the  law  of  love.  3.  When  they  oppose  the  work  of  Christ — when  they 
ooeasion  reproach.     (Ibid.)        In  guarding  against  offence  we  mv^t  take  care — 1/ 


646  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xnd 

To  preserve  our  personal  liberty.  2.  Not  to  violate  the  law  of  love.  {Ibid.) 
Personal  respontibility : — In  the  early  part  of  his  letter  to  the  Bomans  the  apostle 
expounds  the  fundamental  doctrines  of  the  Christian  religion.  In  this  latter  part 
he  applies  these  doctrines  to  the  problems  and  duties  of  daily  life.  In  the  Roman 
Church  he  is  confronted,  as  ministers  of  the  gospel  are  confronted  even  to  the 
present  day,  with  two  antagonistic  parties,  the  legal  and  the  spiritual,  the  con- 
servative and  the  liberal,  or,  as  he  terms  them,  the  weak  and  the  strong.  How  to 
reconcile  these  two  parties  in  the  one  Christian  Church  is  the  problem  which 
engages  the  attention  of  him  who  has  the  care  of  all  the  Churches.  A  recognition 
of  the  Lord's  authority,  a  desire  to  execute  the  Lord's  purpose,  and  a  confession  of 
the  Lord's  goodness,  characterise  both  parties.  But  while  there  is  good  on  both 
sides,  there  are  on  both  sides  manifestations  of  evil.  A  spirit  of  uncharitablenesa 
is  seen  in  the  judgments  of  both,  and  to  this  the  apostle  directs  his  teaching  as  he 
urges  the  exhortation,  "  Let  us  not  therefore  judge  one  another  any  more."  1.  The 
first  argument  against  this  habit  of  uncharitable  criticism  is  found  in  the  truth  that 
judgment  belongs  unto  Goi,  man  being  incompetent  to  render  it.  "  Why  dost  thoa 
judge  thy  brother?  For  we  shall  all  stand  before  the  judgment-seat  of  God."  The 
Omniscient  alone  is  competent  to  judge.  (1)  We  have  not  suflBcient  knowledge  ol 
the  mind  of  the  Master  to  determine  the  standard  of  action.  "Who  hath  known 
the  mind  of  the  Lord,  or  who  hath  been  His  counsellor  ?  "  My  conception  is  my 
working  standard.  It  is  the  Master's  commission  to  me.  His  word  to  my  brother 
may  be  different.  We  may  move  in  opposite  directions  and  yet  both  fulfil  the  pur- 
pose of  one  controlling  mind.  Let  me  be  assured  that  my  feet  are  planted  on  the 
troth,  but  let  me  beware  how  I  deny  that  my  brother  stands  upon  the  truth  because 
he  does  not  occupy  the  same  square-foot  of  ground  on  which  I  stand.  No  man  has 
a  monopoly  of  truth.  (2)  Again,  we  are  incompetent  to  judge  because  we  have  not 
sufficient  knowledge  of  the  mind  of  the  feUow-servant  to  determine  the  motive 
with  which  his  action  is  performed.  "  Let  not  him  that  eateth  not  judge  him  that 
eateth ;  for  the  Lord  hath  received  him."  Ofttimes  man  can  look  no  farther  than 
the  outward  appearance.  God  looketh  upon  the  heart.  He  weighs  the  motive. 
Yet,  spite  of  their  incompetence,  how  free  men  are  to  usurp  this  Divine  prerogative 
of  judgment  I  Without  God's  knowledge,  without  God's  love,  they  are  quick  to 
condemn.  Before  the  bar  of  God  each  is  responsible  for  himself  alone.  2.  In  this 
solemn  fact  the  apostle  finds  his  second  argument  against  the  habit  of  judging 
others.  "  Each  one  of  us  shall  give  account  of  himself  to  God :  let  as  not,  there- 
fore, judge  one  another  any  more."  God  does  not  hold  as  responsible  for  oar 
brother's  action ;  but  He  does  hold  us  responsible  for  our  influence  upon  him.  The 
large  demands  of  the  Divine  Judge  upon  the  Christian  in  relation  to  his  brethren, 
the  apostle  now  urges  especially  upon  the  strong.  There  is  reason  in  making  the 
application  especially  to  the  strong,  for  in  the  matters  under  discussion  they  alone 
have  freedom  of  choice.  The  strong  Christian  may  eat  or  forbear  eating.  He  may 
observe  the  day  or  not  observe  the  day.  The  weak,  however,  in  his  present  mond 
condition,  has  no  choice.  To  those  who  have  the  larger  opportunity  the  truth  is 
the  more  broadly  applied.  But  we  are  not  obliged  to  think  that  the  entire  doctrine 
of  the  relation  of  the  strong  to  the  weak  is  set  forth  in  this  chapter.  Were  that 
the  case  it  might  seem  as  if  Paul  exsJted  the  weak  man's  conscience  to  a  place  of 
tyranny.  This  surely  is  not  his  teaching.  Truth  is  supreme.  Opinion  can  never 
usurp  her  throne.  If  the  weak  brother's  opinion  is  not  the  truth,  his  position  is 
open  ro  attack,  and  in  the  fuUer  presentation  of  the  truth  it  may  be  necessary  to 
oppose  it.  Paul  himself  was  constantly  leading  in  such  opposition.  Not  only  may 
the  position  of  the  weak  brother  be  attacked  ;  there  are  times  when  his  scruples 
have  to  be  disregarded.  They  may  always  be  disregarded  by  you  when  they  are 
opposed  to  a  clear  conviction  of  your  duty.  ' '  Let  each  man  be  fully  persuaded  in 
his  own  mind,"  and  he  need  not,  he  must  not  desist  out  of  regard  for  another's 
conscience.  But  if,  after  sufficient  and  candid  study,  he  is  fully  assured  that  it  is 
his  duty  to  act,  he  must  act,  however  his  action  may  grieve  his  weaker  brother. 
Even  in  matters  which  may  be  termed  indifferent,  the  scruples  of  the  weak  brother 
may  deserve  to  be  set  aside.  Paul  himself  is  our  example.  To  him  circumcision 
is  nothing.  At  one  time,  on  account  of  the  Jews,  he  circumcises  Timothy.  At 
another  time,  when  certain  came  to  spy  out  the  Christian's  liberty  and  to  bring  him 
into  bondage,  he  refuses  to  circumcise  Titus.  To  these  he  "  gave  place  in  the  way 
of  subjection,  no,  not  for  an  hour,  that  the  truth  of  the  gospel  might  continue  " 
with  the  Christian  disciples.  There  are,  therefore,  grounds  on  which  the  position 
of  the  weak  brother  may  be  attacked  and  his  scruples  disregarded.    Nevertheless, 


CHAP,  zrr.]  ROMANS.  647 

there  are  groands  on  which  the  position  of  the  weaker  brother  must  be  respeoted, 
and  his  scruples  receive  special  regard.  "If  because  of  meat  thy  brother  is 
grieved,  thou  walkest  no  lonper  according  to  love."  My  act  is  not  right  simply 
because  it  does  not  harm  me.  As  a  child  of  God  I  must  look  upon  the  things  of  others. 
Christianity  is  satisfied  with  no  standard  but  that  of  love.  If  this  is  true  Chris- 
tian doctrine  the  application  in  Christian  ethics  is  clear.  Justice  is  conformity  to 
a  standard ;  the  Christian  standard  of  hfe  is  the  loving  nature  of  God.  I  cannot 
therefore  be  just  in  the  Christian  sense  unless  I  have  love.  Not  what  is  good  for 
me  alone,  nor  what  is  good  for  my  brother  alone,  but  what  is  best  for  all,  is  to 
determine  my  action  as  a  child  of  God.  But  the  law  of  love  is  not  satisfied  with 
the  attainment  of  anything  less  than  the  best  good  of  all.  There  are  many  goods. 
They  are  of  divers  values.  Freedom  in  eating  and  drinking  is  a  good,  but  this  is  not 
the  highest  good  which  Christianity  has  to  bestow.  "  For  the  kingdom  of  God  ia 
not  eating  and  drinking ;  but  righteousness  and  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost." 
The  man  who,  in  his  zeal  to  estabUsh  the  right  to  eat  and  drink,  or  the  right  to  the 
free  observance  to  a  religious  day,  cares  not  how  much  he  disturbs  the  peace, 
diminishes  the  joy,  and  undermines  the  righteousness  of  his  brethren,  really 
places  the  minor  above  the  major,  the  subordinate  above  the  supreme.  In  seeking 
a  good,  he  misses  the  best  good  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  But  the  strong  may  say 
in  way  of  defence  :  Inasmuch  as  nothing  is  unclean  of  itself,  may  we  not  encourage 
other  to  imitate  us  in  customs  which  are  not  opposed  to  any  law  of  righteousness  ? 
No,  says  the  apostlo,  not  so  long  as  the  weak  brother  considers  the  thing  unclean, 
or  the  act  unrighteous.  The  end  of  Christianity  is  not  right  conduct,  viewed 
apart  from  its  motive,  but  virtuous  character.  Christianity  has  not  attained  its 
ideal  when  certain  legal  decrees  have  been  obeyed,  but  only  when  certain  moral 
experiences  have  been  evoked.  A  merely  legal  system  might  be  satisfied  with 
formally  correct  conduct,  but  a  vital  religion  demands  a  godly  character.  The 
teaching  is  sharp  and  decisive.  "  Whatsoever  is  not  of  faith  is  sin."  Whatsoever 
is  done  without  consent  of  the  moral  nature,  whatsoever  is  done  contrary  to  what 
one  beheves  to  be  right,  is  sin.  This  is  striking  doctrine.  But  does  not  our  best 
ethics  confirm  this  view  ?  Do  we  not  frequently  see  the  unhappy  results  of  sub- 
mission to  precepts  which  may  be  right,  and  yet  are  in  opposition  to  the  beliefs  of 
the  heart  ?  In  such  submission  the  man  surrenders  his  freedom,  the  birthright  of 
moral  manhood.  He  submits  to  the  rule  of  his  fellow-men.  In  opposition  to  the 
teaching  of  Christ,  ' '  Call  no  man  master,"  he  yields  his  sovereignty  and  lets 
others  lay  down  the  law  of  his  life.  Whatsoever  is  not  of  faith  is  of  foreign 
dictation.  It  is  the  act  of  the  bondman,  not  of  the  freeman.  By  such  conformity 
the  man  benumbs  his  sense  of  obligation.  It  is  this  sense  which  binds  him  to  the 
eternal  truth.  It  is  like  the  cable  which  holds  the  buoy  to  its  moorings.  The  sense 
of  obhgation  is  the  one  assuring  evidence  that  God  has  not  forgotten  us.  This 
binds  us  to  the  eternal  throne.  Like  the  clue  which  Ariadne  gave  to  Theseus,  it 
leads  through  devious  ways  out  into  the  world  of  light,  of  life,  and  of  love ;  it  leads 
to  the  throne,  to  the  feet,  to  the  heart  of  God.  Lose  this  thread  and  the  soul 
is  left  alone,  "  in  wandering  mazes  lost."  Cherish  your  own  sense  of  obligation  ; 
beware  how  you  injure  another's.  More  fundamentally  still,  the  performance  of  an 
act  which  is  contrary  to  the  soul's  belief,  to  which  the  consent  of  the  moral  nature 
is  not  given,  is  essentially  subordination  of  the  impulse  to  live  for  others  to  the 
impulse  to  live  for  one's  self.  The  teachings  of  this  chapter  become  intelligible 
in  proportion  as  we  come  to  understand  the  end  which  Christianity  seeks  to  attain. 
Christianity  aims  not  simply  to  cause  our  actions  to  conform  to  a  certain  legal 
standard,  but  rather  to  make  us  partake  of  the  nature  and  thus  of  the  blessed 
experiences  of  the  ever-blessed  God.  (T.  D.  Anderson.)  Personal  responsibility  ;— 
The  discussion  which  we  reach  in  this  part  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  turns  not 
on  great  and  plain  matters  of  righteousness  and  equity,  on  which  there  can  be  but 
one  opinion.  It  is  not  aimed  against  our  judging  a  wrong  to  be  what  it  is,  for  how 
can  we  help  condemning  the  violator  of  law  ?  but  it  all  has  reference  to  daily 
questions  where  there  is  no  positive  rule  for  any  one  but  such  as  grows  up  in  the  com- 
munity and  shifts  with  changing  circumstances.  The  private  conscience  properly 
asks,  Is  this  right  for  me  ?  The  social  conscience  asks,  Is  this  right,  all  things  con- 
sidered ?  So  the  well-trained  moral  sense  of  the  Christian  is  broad  in  its  scope  and 
miselfish  in  its  utterances.  Practical  duties  in  the  New  Testament  are  seen  to  be 
the  sequence  of  sublime  truths.  We  see  that  there  could  not  help  being  wida 
differences  in  temperament  and  attainments  among  such  converts,  and  that  many 
Berioaa  complications  might  arise  in  their  attempts  to  walk  according  to  the  n«w 


$48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  xit. 


■Way  of  life.  It  is  bo  everywhere  in  modem  times  in  the  missionary  fields.  We 
cftn  see,  from  our  own  selves,  how  strong  the  temptation  would  be  to  "  take  posi- 
tions upon  such  matters  where  there  was  no,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,"  and  where 
for  that  very  reason  men  grow  pugnaciously  sure.  First  of  all  we  note  that  while 
he  places  himself  on  the  side  of  the  strong  and  says  that  nothing  is  unclean  of 
itself,  he  does  not  try  to  change  the  feelings  of  either  party  for  the  sake  of  a  dull 
and  heartless  uniformity  of  practice.  He  does  not  turn  to  the  weak  brother  and 
say  to  him,  Give  up  your  absurd  scruples  t  or  belabour  him  with  proofs  that  he 
ought  to  be  free  from  the  law.  Nor  does  he  say  to  the  strong,  You  have  no  right 
to  a  freedom  upon  things  not  free  to  others  I  Give  up  your  hberty  for  the  common 
good  I  On  the  contrary,  he  tells  him  to  keep  his  faith  as  to  all  these  things  and  have 
it  before  God.  And  for  the  establishment  of  this  he  sets  up  a  great  landmark  in 
morals.  We  are  personally  accountable  for  ourselves  unto  Gk)d,  and  are  never 
called  upon  to  sit  in  judgment  upon  others  who  are  the  servants  of  the  same  God 
and  show  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  in  their  lives.  Of  course  we  must  condemn 
wickedness  wherever  we  behold  it.  While  we  are  our  brother's  keeper  and  owe  him 
ft  debt  of  loving  care  and  sympathetic  influence,  we  are  not  his  overseer,  divinely  set 
np  to  regulate  every  attitude  of  his  mind  and  the  small  details  of  his  conduct. 
Christian  love  may  degenerate  into  officiousness.  The  apostle  shows  that  we  ought 
to  cultivate  a  regard  for  another's  conscience  all  the  more  if  it  is  weak.  God  is 
speaking  through  it.  To  him  that  esteemeth  a  thing  to  be  profane,  to  him  it  ia 
profane.  By  your  inconsiderate  freedom,  he  says,  yon  may  actually  destroy  your 
brother  who  will  stand  by  your  side  at  the  judgment-seat  and  for  whom  Christ  died. 
But  besides  this,  love  is  more  than  liberty.  What  is  liberty  ?  Does  not  all  turn 
upon  the  use  we  make  of  Uberty  and  the  nature  of  the  thing  about  which  we  are 
free  ?  One  observation  seems  proper  at  this  point  as  to  the  use  of  wine.  It  is  of 
the  Lord  that  Christian  sentiment  should  favour  the  weaker  side  everywhere,  but 
the  question  may  fairly  arise  whether  the  strong  have  any  rights  or  any  place  for 
the  use  of  their  freedom.  The  words  of  Paul  are  clear  that  if  we  have  faith  that 
gives  us  liberty  we  are  to  hold  it  before  God  and  not  to  create  a  sin  for  ourselves 
because  another  has  found  one.  In  the  constant  movements  towards  a  better  social 
life  more  and  more  attention  is  given  to  the  poor  and  the  oppressed,  to  the  victims 
of  appetite  and  of  evil  in  all  its  forms,  and  more  is  asked  of  evei7  Christian  to-day 
in  the  way  of  personal  sacrifice  than  ever  before.  But  the  practical  guide  upon  a 
thousand  matters  of  daily  conduct,  where  we  ask.  Shall  we  dance  ?  Shall  we  play 
cards  ?  Shall  we  attend  the  theatre  ?  Shall  we  visit  and  ride  on  the  Lord's  Day  ? 
Is  found  within  these  great  lessons  of  the  apostle.  He  says.  Whatsoever  is  not  of 
faith  is  sin.  That  •'  faith  "  is  not  the  common  belief  of  the  Christian,  but  a  regu- 
lative principle  derived  from  the  Word  of  God  and  the  practices  of  His  people. 
For  us,  then,  if  serious  questions  arise,  let  there  be  a  simple  rule.  We  can  abstain. 
We  can  be  safe.  We  can  place  ourselves  where  no  act  of  ours  can  by  any  possi- 
bility destroy  the  delicate  bloom  of  another's  faith,  and  where  we  give  up  a  trifle 
and  have  a  kingdom  of  peace  within  1  {E.  N.  Packard.)  Personal  right*  : — 
Well,  is  there  no  other  question?  Yes,  oh  yes,  there  is  another  question. 
What  is  that?  It  is  the  great  question  as  to  what  a  man  may  do  with  his 
rights.  Paul  takes  the  ground  that  every  man  must  assert  his  personal  rights. 
Now  the  question  is,  having  once  shown  that  I  can  indulge  in  such  and  such 
pleasures  without  any  harm  to  me,  and  with  some  benefit,  shall  I  go  on  and  indulge  in 
them  without  any  regard  to  the  effect  which  my  indulgence  may  have  on  others  ? 
"  Oh  no,"  says  Paul.  "  There  is  no  harm  in  your  eating  meat  dedicated  to  an  idol, 
but  if  your  brother  sees  you  do  it,  and,  misunderstanding  the  whole  of  it,  is  led 
conscientiously  into  wrong,  then  you  do  not  act  wisely  or  kindly  ;  for  you  use  your 
right  to  break  down  his  conscience  and  his  right."  There  are  two  principles  in 
regard  to  rights.  The  first  is  to  ascertain  and  vindicate  them,  and  the  next  is  to 
subject  them  to  the  law  of  love.  There  are  a  great  many  things  that  I  have  a  right 
to,  till  love  comes  and  says,  "  WUl  you  not  forbear  them  for  the  sake  of  others  ?  " 
I  have  a  right  to  eat  meat ;  but  for  me  to  do  it  under  circumstances  such  that  my 
whole  household  are  led  to  eat  it,  and  they  are  thrown  into  a  fever,  is  wrong.  For 
the  sake  of  keeping  my  children  well,  I  would  abstain  from  eating  meat.  I  have 
a  right  to  drink  wine ;  but  if  I  found  that  my  drinking  wine  would  lead  poorer  men 
to  drink  whiskey,  or  the  young  men  around  me  to  drink  wine,  I  would  say  to  myself, 
"  Shall  I  use  a  right  of  mine  in  such  a  way  as  to  destroy  my  fellow-men  for  whom 
Christ  died  ?   That  would  not  be  acting  wisely  nor  well."    {H.  W.  Beecher.  Self- 

denial  for  others : — A  friend  told  me  that  he  was  visiting  a  lighthouse  lately,  and 


CBAF.  xiT.]  ROMANS.  649 

Baid  to  the  keeper, "  Are  yoa  not  afraid  to  live  here  ?  it  is  a  dreadf al  place  to  be  oon- 
Btantiy  in."  "No,"  replied  the  man,  "I  am  not  afraid.  We  never  think  of  our- 
eelves  here."  "  Never  think  of  yourselves  I  How  is  that  ?  "  The  reply  wa«  a 
good  one.  "  We  know  that  we  are  perfectly  safe,  and  only  think  of  having  oar 
lamps  bnming  brightly,  and  keeping  the  reflectors  dear,  so  that  those  in  danger 
may  be  saved."  That  is  what  Christians  ought  to  do.  They  are  safe  in  a  hoose 
built  on  a  rock,  which  cannot  be  moved  by  the  wildest  storm,  and  in  a  spirit  of 
holy  unselfishness  they  should  let  their  h'gbt  gleam  across  the  dark  waves  of  sin, 
that  they  who  are  imperilled  may  be  guided  into  the  harbour  of  eternal  safety. 
(Sword  and  Trowel.)  SelJUhiiess  : — ^A  man  is  called  selfish,  not  for  pursuing  his 
own  good,  but  for  neglecting  his  neighbour's.  (Abp.  Whately.)  The  lacrednest  of 
man : — While  from  the  beginning  the  kindly  affections  of  men's  nature  have  been 
largely  developed,  outside  of  their  own  households  they  have  seldom  felt  them- 
selves under  much  obligation  to  men,  and  outside  their  acquaintanceship  and 
nation  are  felt  a  hundred  obligations  of  aversion.  And  it  is  one  of  the  tokens  of 
the  Divine  inspiration  of  the  truth  that  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself  " 
has  been  the  declaration  of  the  Divine  law  from  the  earliest  period.  And  there  is 
no  duty  that  the  Apostle  Paul  so  developed  as  this.  Note — I.  Thb  qbottnc  on  which 
HE  PUTS  HEN  IS  THE  OBOUND  OF  THEiB  SACBEDKESS.  1.  Christiana  are  tempted  to 
judge  men  by  standards  that  are  not  the  highest  nor  the  most  Christian.  (1)  We 
are  tempted  to  put  value  upon  men  according  to  their  social  relationships.  A  man 
may  be  very  low  in  the  social  scale,  and  we  may  be  accustomed  in  measuring  him 
to  call  him  a  brute,  and  worthless,  but  the  man  has  some  other  value  besides  that 
which  consists  in  his  relationship  to  society.  (2)  Nay,  a  man's  economic  value 
may  be  nil.  There  are  many  who  do  not  produce  as  much  as  they  eat.  They  are 
sick  or  shiftless,  and  die  useless  paupers.  And  we  are  apt  to  speak  of  them  with 
contempt  as  being  the  "  dregs  of  society."  2.  And  yet,  low  as  they  are,  their  value 
may  be  beyond  count.  (1)  For  every  man  is  God's  creature  in  a  sense  that  none  of 
the  inferior  animals  are.  He  is  made  after  the  image  of  God.  (2)  More  than  this, 
every  man  is  made  sacred  by  what  has  been  done  for  him.  In  the  old  days  the 
colonists  were  forbidden  to  manufacture  anything  for  themselves.  The  privilege 
of  furnishing  these  things  to  them  was  reserved  to  the  Crown.  Not  only  that,  but 
the  very  timber  of  the  country  was  sorted  out,  and  wherever  a  valiant  pine  or  a 
noble  oak,  fit  for  the  masts  or  for  the  ribs  of  ships  was  found,  the  Broad  iijrrow  was 
stamped  on  it.  The  tree  was  in  no  respect  different,  but  when  people  saw  the 
Broad  Arrow  they  said,  "  That  is  the  king's."  Now  it  is  not  an  arrow,  it  is  a  cross 
that  is  stamped  upon  every  living  soul.  For  every  human  being  Christ  died ;  and 
this  is  made  to  be  the  sign  and  token  of  the  value  that  is  in  every  man  (ver.  15). 
(3)  Again,  men  are  to  be  greatly  respected  for  their  development  into  immortality. 
Although  there  is  but  very  little  value  in  acorns,  when  they  are  planted  they  will 
become  trees ;  but  what  they  will  be  when  a  hundred  years  have  dealt  with  them 
no  man  can  tell.  And  though  men,  as  seeds,  are  comparatively  insignificant,  when 
they  shall  have  been  planted  again,  in  a  fairer  clime  and  in  a  better  soil,  and  shall 
have  been  under  a  higher  culture,  they  will  then  unfold  their  real  and  true  selves,  to 
which  they  will  not  come  in  their  relationship  to  time  and  society.    II.  Ii  is  upon 

THE    OBOUND    OF    THE    VALUE    THAT    INHEBES    IN    MEN    THAT    WB    MUST    NOT    PUT  ANY 

STUMBLiNO-BLocE  IN  THEIB  WAT.  It  is  a  casc  In  which  the  highest  are  to  serve  the 
lowest.  It  is  being  to  men  what  mothers  are  to  children.  What  father  is  there 
that  does  not  subdue  himself  to  the  level  of  the  cradle  ?  Accomplishments,  tastes, 
and  liberties  are  commanded  to  serve  the  wants  of  the  little  one.  We  must  use  our 
liberty  and  our  strength  for  men,  not  them  for  our  strength  and  liberty.  1.  It  is 
right,  if  a  man  is  worshipping  superstitiously,  to  supplant  the  superstition  by  a  more 
rational  worship.  If  I  go  into  a  Catholic  church,  and  there  stands  the  font  of 
sacred  water  by  the  door,  and  I  perceive  one  and  another  dipping  their  hands  in 
and  making  the  sign  of  the  cross  with  the  utmost  reverence,  I  do  not  follow  their 
example ;  I  have  no  need  of  it ;  and  yet  I  should  abuse  my  liberty  if  I  were  to  ridi- 
cule the  act,  or  if  I  were  to  use  my  hberty  and  my  intelligence  to  oppress  the  oon- 
Bciences  of  those  that  were  lower  and  less  than  I.  To  a  person  who  performs  the 
act  it  may  seem  sacred ;  and  if  you  cast  contempt  upon  it  you  may  be  a  violator  of 
what  is  sacred  to  him,  and  therefore  you  may  put  a  stumbling-block  in  his  way. 
Idolaters  were  not  treated  with  disrespect  by  Christ  and  His  apostles.  When  Paul 
Btood  in  the  midst  of  the  radiant  idols  at  Athens  be  never  spoke  of  them  in  such  a 
way  as  to  wound  the  feelings  of  any  one  who  believed  in  them.  2,  It  is  sometimes 
B&id  of  men,  "  They  do  not  preach  all  that  they  believe."    They  would  be  fools  il 


650  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha?.  nr. 

they  did.  You  might  as  well  say  to  the  mother  who  has  a  medicine  ohest,  "  Give  aU 
the  medicine  there  is  in  that  chest,"  as  to  say  to  a  man,  • '  Preach  all  that  yon  believe." 
A  man  preaches  to  build  men  up.  Are  you  to  reproach  a  man  for  not  putting  aU 
the  materials  for  building  into  every  edifice  that  he  constructs  ?  If  a  man  builds 
of  brick  he  does  not  think  it  necessary  to  exhaust  the  whole  material  that  the 
country  affords.  Aiid  a  man  that  teaches  is  not  teaching  for  the  sake  of  unsettling 
men.  There  are  those  who  pile  sermon  upon  sermon  the  year  round,  loosening 
everything,  and  at  last  nothing  remains.  But  it  is  said,  "They  are  bold  men." 
Yes;  and  they  may  do  harm  with  their  boldness.  "Well,  they  are  honest." 
Honesty  is  a  good  thing ;  but  even  that  should  be  handled  prudently.  It  is  better 
that  men  should  have  truth  than  that  they  should  have  delusion  and  falsity ;  but  it 
is  not  wise  that  the  change  should  be  made  too  abruptly.  Where  a  man  has  on  a 
filthy  garment,  it  is  better  that  he  should  wear  it  than  that  he  should  go  naked. 
Don't  take  it  from  him  until  you  have  a  better  one  to  put  in  the  place  of  it.  3.  A 
man  has  a  right,  in  the  employment  of  his  wealth,  to  have  regard  for  the  comfort 
end  refinement  of  himself  and  his  household.  But  no  man  has  a  right  to  such  a 
use  of  wealth  as  shall  be  exclusive  and  selfish.  A  man  has  a  right  to  the  use  of  his 
property,  but  he  must  use  it  charitably.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  those  that  are 
poor  are  not  to  rail  at  rich  men,  but  are  to  act  according  to  the  spirit  which  is  con- 
tained in  the  gospel  (vers.  2,  3).  4.  There  are  very  many  pleasures  which  I  avoid, 
not  because  I  have  the  slightest  conscience  respecting  the  things  themselves,  or 
because  I  suppose  they  would  be  otherwise  than  beneficial  to  me,  but  because  my 
example  should  be  such  as  not  to  mislead,  but  lead  aright,  the  young  men  of  the 
community,  who,  in  looking  upon  what  I  did,  if  I  indulged  in  all  those  things  which 
were  harmless  to  me,  might  venture  on  things  that  I  could  do  safely,  and  they  could 
not.  6.  This  should  be  carried  still  further.  I  hold  that  there  is  no  one  thing  that  is 
more  perilous  to  young  men  than  the  usages  of  society  in  the  matter  of  intoxica- 
ting drinks.  Nevertheless,  if  I  observe  that  my  brother,  in  a  neighbouring  church, 
holds  a  contrary  view,  I  have  no  right  of  disputation  over  his  conscience.  I  may 
wish  that  he  could  see  as  I  do ;  I  may  even  attempt  to  give  him  the  light  that  I 
have  ;  but  if,  after  all,  in  the  exercise  of  his  own  judgment  and  discretion,  he  says, 
♦'  I  stand  in  my  Uberty  before  God,"  I  have  no  right  to  cast  an  imputation  on  him  and 
his  liberty.  (H.W.Beecher.)  I  know ...  that  there  is  nothing  imclean  of  Itself . — 
How  the  same  thing  may  be  clean  and  unclean : — I.  Nothing  is  UNCiiEAU  of  itself.  1. 
Every  creature  of  God  is  good.  2.  May  be  lawfully  used.  3.  When  sanctified  by  an 
enlightened  conscience.  II.  Everything  becomes  unclean.  1.  When  abused.  2.  When 
used  by  him  that  esteems  it  unclean.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  But  if  thy  brother  be  grieved 
with  thy  meat,  now  walkest  thou  not  charitably. — The  duty  of  sacrificing  private 
enjoyment/or  another's  benefit : — I.  The  case  supposed.  The  enjoyment  though  lawful, 
is  a  stumbling-block  to  another.  IL  The  apostle's  decision  of  it.  It  is  a  violation 
of  the  law  of  love,  because  selfish  in  itself,  injurious  in  its  effect.  III.  The  con- 
BEQUBNT  DDTT.  Of  abstinence,  lest  you  destroy  him  for  whom  Christ  died,  leav- 
ing you  an  example  of  self-sacrifice.  {Ibid.)  Destroy  not  him  with  thy  meat, 
for  whom  Christ  died. — Christ's  death,  a  man's  destruction  : — I.  Christ  died  to  save 
ALL.  "  He  is  the  propitiation  ...  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world."  His  death 
was  a  fact  in  the  Divine  government  in  which  all  are  interested,  a  provision  of 
Divine  mercy,  like  the  sun,  the  air,  and  the  various  elements  of  nature,  from  which 
all  could  derive  the  same  supplies.  II.  Though  He  died  to  save  all,  some  will  bk 
destboyed.  The  truth  has  no  practical  infiuence  on  a  man  unless  he  studies  it,  and 
he  may  study  it  or  not,  rightly  or  not,  the  provision  does  not  stream  its  blessings 
into  a  man,  irrespective  of  his  choice  or  efforts.  The  sun  will  not  give  its  light  to 
a  man  unless  he  open  his  eyes,  nor  will  the  water  allay  his  burning  thirst  unless  he 
drinks  it  in.  "  Ye  will  not  come  unto  Me,"  &o.  in.  This  destbuction  mat  be 
effected  by  a  bbotheb.  One  man  can  and  often  does  spiritually  ruin  another  by 
his  suggestions,  his  spirit,  his  example.  Whilst  God  saves  man  by  man  the  devil 
damns  man  by  man.  Through  man  the  spiritually  restorative  and  destructive  forces 
of  the  universe  are  everlastingly  working.  IV.  The  bbotheb  may  do  this  by  a 
TBiFLiNO  THING — "  meat."  By  urging  thy  ceremonial  observances  thou  art  likely 
to  ruin  him ;  leave  him  free  to  his  own  conscience.  As  an  invisible  atom  can 
destroy  animal  life,  a  little  sin  can  damn  a  soul.    (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Yer.  16.  Let  not  then  your  good  be  evil  spoken  o£— We  ought  not,  for  wa 
have  none  too  much.  We  may  through — 1.  Ignorance.  2.  Levity  of  temper. 
8.  Moroseness.    4.  Want  of  stability.    6.  Improvidenoe.    6.  A  namber  of  little 


CHA».  XIV.]  ROMANS  eSl 

things  which,  like  dnst  upon  a  diamond,  obscure  its  lustre,  though  each  particle  ia 
almost  nothing.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Let  not  your  good  be  evil  spoken  of : — 1.  The 
Bible  speaks  much  of  the  beaity  of  holiness.  It  represents  Jesus  as  the  altogether 
loTely.  His  beauty  consists  in  His  perfect  ezoeUence,  in  the  absolute  symmetry  of 
His  whole  character.  2.  Believers  are  epistles  of  Christ.  They  are  His  witnesses. 
It  is  their  solemn  duty  to  make  a  fair  representation  of  what  He  is,  and  what  His 
religion  is  before  the  world.  3.  There  are  two  ways  in  which  professors  dishonour 
Christ,  and  make  a  false  representation  of  Him  and  His  religion — when  by  breaking 
the  law  they  give  men  to  understand  that  Christ  allows  suck  transgressions,  and 
when  they  cause  even  their  good  to  be  evil  spoken  of,  i.e.,  when  they  so  act  on  right 
principles  as  to  give  those  principles  a  bad  character,  or  so  conduct  themselves  as  to 
mislead  others  as  to  the  true  nature  of  the  gospel.  This  is  done — I.  When  men  bo 
USB  THsiB  Cbbistian  libebtt  AS  TO  INJUBB  TBEiB  BBETHBSN.  The  distinctions 
between  months,  days,  and  meats  had  been  abolished.  It  was  right  that  this 
fact  should  be  asserted  and  taught,  and  that  Christians  should  act  upon  this 
liberty ;  but  if  they  so  used  it  as  to  destroy  their  brethren,  they  sinned  against 
Christ,  and  caused  their  good  to  be  evil  spoken  of.  So  now  in  regard  to  temper- 
ance, men  may  make  such  a  use  of  truth,  and  so  act  on  true  principles  as  to  do 
great  harm.  U.  When  undue  stbess  is  laid  on  tbifleb.  Paul  says  that  reUgion 
does  not  consist  in  meat  and  drink  ;  and  to  act  as  though  it  did  is  to  slander  the 
gospel.  This  is  true  of  fanatics  of  all  classes,  and  all  bigots.  They  belie 
religion,  as  the  tattooed  New  Zealander  or  painted  Indian  misrepresent  the  human 
face  divine.  UL  Bt  the  banotiuoniocs,  who  make  a  false  representation  of  religion 
and  cause  it  to  be  evil  spoken  of  when  they  hold  it  up  thus  caricatured  before  men. 
rV.  By  the  CEN80BI0US.  Not  ouly  in  making  non-essentials  of  too  much  import- 
ance, but  also  in  misrepresenting  the  spirit  of  their  Master.  His  religion  does  not 
justify  their  harsh  judgments.  V.  By  those  who  cabby  any  bioht  pbinciple  to 
EXCESS.  1.  By  the  Puritans  in  regard  to  the  Sabbath,  to  things  indifferent  in 
]  worship,  to  days  of  religious  observance.  2.  By  Quakers  in  regard  to  dress  and 
'conformity  to  the  world.  3.  By  those  who  deny  the  Church  any  liberty  in  her 
organisation.  In  every  case  of  this  kind  the  human  degrades  the  Divine.  What 
is  indiSerent  is  made  essential,  and  what  is  essential  is  made  indifferent.  ((7. 
Hodge,  D.D.)  Qood  evil  spoken  of  (Missionary  Sermon) : — Our  good  is  evil 
spoken  of — I.  Ir  we  pbopaoate  auono  othebs  that  which  we  do  not  beceive  fob 
oubselyes.  Create  any  great  system  of  efforts,  and  there  will  be  many  blindly 
carried  away  with  it.  Many  are,  therefore,  induced  to  enrol  themselves  in  our 
missionary  associations.  "  Come,  see  my  zeal,"  said  the  ancient  king,  "  for  the 
Lord  of  Hosts."  Was  not  his  zeaj  selfishness  rather  ?  But  "  Jehu  took  no  heed 
to  walk  in  the  law  of  the  Lord,"  <feo.  JI.  When  we  violate  that  bolemnity  which 
IS  appbopbiate  to  all  such  TBANSAcnoNS.  May  it  not  be  feared  that,  in  some  cases, 
too  great  a  temper  of  flippancy  has  pervaded  our  assemblies,  and  characterised  our 
institutions  7  Could  a  traveller,  in  exploring  the  vestiges  of  an  ancient  city,  pass  along 
its  fallen  theatres,  its  broken  aqueducts,  its  prostrate  temples,  with  levity?  Could 
a  philanthropist  proceed  through  the  walls  of  the  lazaretto,  or  the  cells  of  a  prison, 
in  a  careless  and  unfeeling  mood  ?  Could  a  negotiator  address  the  revolted  and  the 
insurgent  with  a  sportive  look  and  in  a  jocular  tone  ?  Let  us  copy  His  faithfulness 
who  upbraided  Capernaum,  and  imitate  His  compassion  who  wept  over  Jerusalem ; 
remembering  that  we  are  now  labouring  in  the  same  course,  and  should  know  the 
fellowship  of  the  same  sufferings.     III.   When  we  fobget  that  dub  estimatb 

which  we  should  take  0¥  what  is  distant  and  of  what  IB  NEAB  IN  THE  CONDITION  OF 

MANKIND.  Cast  your  eyes  on  your  native  land.  Tens  of  thousands  are  before  you, 
most  imbruted,  most  immoral.  And  these  are  your  kinsmen ;  a  thousand  ties  of 
brotherhood  make  them  one  with  yourselves.  Cast  your  thoughts  upon  the  distant 
realms  of  idolatry.  You  cannot  tell  how  great  is  that  dar^ess,  for  there  is  no 
contrasting  light ;  you  cannot  tell  the  dimensions  of  that  misery,  for  there  is  no 
ineasure  by  which  you  can  gauge  them.  And  in  some  districts  of  our  favoured 
kingdom  there  are  more  Christian  pastors  than  these  societies  have  scattered 
around  the  circumference  of  the  globe.  Now,  our  good  may  be  evil  spoken  of  if  we 
adopt  any  invidious  partiahty  in  our  judgments.  There  are  no  souls  more  precious 
than  those  which  throng  the  margins  of  the  Indus,  the  Ganges,  and  the  Nile ;  but 
the  souls  are  alike  precious  which  throng  the  majestic  strands  of  the  Severn,  the 
Eumber,  and  the  Thames.  FV.  If  we  fobget  the  pbopobtion  which  should  bxisi 
between  effobt  and  pbayeb.  There  is  a  devotion  which  becomes  selfishness.  It 
wzaps  itself  in  a  contemplative  dream ;  it  will  make  no  sacrifice,  engage  in  no  axex • 


K2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Hf. 

tion.  There  is  an  exertion  which  becomes  impious.  It  is  fall  of  noise  and  ostente- 
tion.  Now,  it  is  necessary  that  devotion  and  activity  be  blended.  Our  labonr  mast 
be  habitual,  not  accidental — our  devotion  most  be  habitual,  and  not  fitful.  Look 
at  the  apostles — what  were  their  prayers  ?  Pentecost  fully  come — what  were  their 
deeds  ?  Think  of  angels — they  do  always  behold  the  face  of  their  God ;  but  they 
are  winds — they  are  flames  of  fire.  Think  of  the  Son  of  God,  how  He  spent  whole 
nights  in  prayer  1  you  see  Him  going  about  doing  good.  Let  our  prayers  ssuictify 
our  efforts — let  our  efforts  authenticate  our  prayers ;  let  us  take  heaven  by  violence 
through  the  means  of  the  one,  and  earth  by  violence  through  the  means  of  the 
other.  V.  When  wb  call  in  the  aid  of  wobldlt  EXorrBUENT.  Have  all  our  institu- 
tions to  say  that  they  are  unspotted  from  the  world  ?  Has  there  been  no  strange 
fire  which  we  have  offered  before  the  Lord  ?  Has  there  been  no  suppression  of 
truth,  no  evasion  of  facts,  no  adornment  of  narrative  ?  Surely,  if  our  purpose  be  to 
captivate  the  world  to  the  Saviour,  we  must  be  on  our  guard,  lest,  in  attempting  it, 
we  ourselves  be  led  captive  by  the  world.  VI.  If  we  entbbtain  a  light  view  ov 
THE  ETEBNAL  DANOEB  ov  THE  HEATHEN.  Make  Christianity  a  question  of  compara- 
tive advantage,  of  ameliorated  state,  a  measure  to  give  an  Increase  of  light  already 
sufficient,  a  confirmation  to  hopes  already  well  founded,  and  the  missionary 
apparatus  will  soon  come  to  neglect ;  men  will  necessarily  decry  it,  as  an  unmean- 
ing toy  and  a  gaudy  superfluity.  VH.  Lr  wb  obtrude  pabtx  opinions  and  binqu- 
iiABiTiES.  How  pleasing  is  it  that  ours  is  a  common  cause,  and  that  now,  more  than 
ever,  ours  is  a  common  spirit.  When  the  infidel  and  the  scomer  see  we  are  moving 
in  our  different  tracts,  and  yet  are  moving  under  a  common  influence  and  for  a 
common  purpose,  we  shall  thus  vindicate  our  good,  and,  in  the  absence  of  all  that 
is  little  in  sectarianism,  we  shall  have  our  good  compelled  to  be  spoken  well  of. 
Vni.  When  these  is  ant  disposition  to  dispabage  the  missionaby  chabaoteb. 
We  have  formed  a  heroism  of  principle  and  a  dint  of  courage  which  were  unknown ; 
we  can  bring  forth,  confidently,  men  who  have  died  unshrinkingly  as  martyrs.  Can 
we  ever  use  one  term  of  detraction  towards  these  men  ?  Can  we  ever  yield  to  them 
a  supercilious  patronage  and  a  grudging  support  ?  We  are  honoured  that  they  wiU 
go — we  are  honoured  that  we  may  sustain  them.  Let  us  remember  that  the  very 
life — credit — character  of  oar  missionary  institutions,  must  depend  on  the  men 
whom  we  entrust  with  this  work ;  and  when  they  have  been  thus  faithful  in  their 
work,  let  us  give  to  them  all  that  cordiality  of  confidence  which  they  so  well  deserve, 
and  which  it  would  be  unjust  to  refuse.  IX.  When  wb  apply  a  haesheb  bulb  to 
ouB  convebts  than  we  apply  to  ocbselveb.  The  former  may  occasionally  be  carried 
away  by  error ;  but  let  us  think  of  our  own  deviations  at  home.  We  should,  indeed, 
be  disheartened  if  ever  we  had  to  report  of  any  of  our  native  Churches  abroad  what 
the  apostles  had  to  report  of  Corinth  and  of  Galatia.  X.  Ip  we  at  all  encoubaob 
THE  HOPE  of  an  cnscbiptubal  CONSUMMATION.  Bemembcr  that  the  present  dispensa- 
tion is  a  spiritual  one ;  that  it  is  complete,  and  nothing  can  be  added  to  it ;  that  it 
is  an  unearthly  one,  and  therefore  cannot  admit  of  secular  aggrandisement ;  and  it 
is  a  final  one — it  therefore  aUows  of  no  ulterior  revelation.  What  know  you  other 
than  this — than  that  all  the  world  should  be  Christians  1 — other  than  this,  that  the 
gospel  shall  be  universally  preached  ?  This  is  your  consummation :  you  desire  here 
no  other  paradise  but  to  see  the  earth  filled  with  the  trees  of  righteousness.  XI.  If 
WE  DO  NOT  FOLLOW  UP  OUB  BXEETioNB  AND  IMPBOVB  OUB  SUCCESS.  We  have  made  a 
lodgment,  and  God's  salvation  has  been  openly  showed  in  the  sight  of  the  heathen ; 
and  there  have  been  those  who  have  gone  up  to  occupy  the  breach.  Shall  we  leave 
them  to  perish  ?  We  have  sown  the  seed ;  the  harvest  is  come — it  invites  the 
sickle.  Who  would  not  enter  with  ecstasy  into  such  a  field,  and  crowd  as  labourers 
into  such  a  harvest?  (R.  W.  Hamilton,  D.D.)  Our  good: — (Christian  liberty.) 
I.  Is  EVIL  SPOKEN  OF — 1.  By  the  enemies  of  the  truth,  when  tney  see  a  want  of 
harmony  in  the  Church.  2.  By  the  weak,  when  they  condemn  the  free  conduct  of 
their  stronger  brethren.  3.  By  the  strong,  when  they  give  offence  to  the  consciences 
of  the  wesJc.  U.  Must  be  pboteoted.  1.  Against  what?  (1)  Beproach.  (2)  In 
consequence  of — (a)  Offence,  (b)  Misuse.  2.  How  ?  (1)  By  not  laying  too  much 
stress  on  matters  unessential.  (2)  By  a  supreme  regard  for  those  things  that  are 
Indispensable.  8.  Why?  Thereby — (1)  We  serve  Christ.  (2)  Win  the  approba- 
tion of  men.  (/.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Misrepresented  goodness: — Some  men  seek  to 
Impress  the  world  by  their  goodness  when  they  really  have  no  goodness.  Such  were 
the  Pharisees.  But  the  apostle  has  in  view  men  who  have  goodness,  but  who  do 
themseVes  injustice.  We  need  to  be  careful  about  the  manifestation  of  our  religion, 
as  well  as  about  the  reality  of  it.    It  is  possible  to  be  very  good<  and  yet  so  to  Mi 


«H4P.  ziT.]  EOMANS.  659 

M  to  pat  men  oat  of  conceit  with  religion  itself.  There  is  a  book  entitled  "  Boses  : 
How  to  grow  and  How  to  Show  them."  Anybody  might  say,  "  Ah !  the  question 
is,  how  to  grow  them.  Bring  your  flower  into  fulness  of  glory,  and  it  will  show 
itself  and  win  the  prize."  But  it  is  just  for  want  of  this  particular  skill  that  many  a 
olever  grower  has  missed  the  prize.  So  it  is  with  character.  Our  good  to  be  evil 
spoken  of.  I.  By  badmess.  A  serious  spirit  is  a  true  spirit,  and  one  we  should  ever 
cherish.  But  bow  easy  it  is  to  turn  it  into  sourness,  and  thus  make  a  grand 
character  repulsive  I  With  all  our  solemnity  there  ought  to  be  cheerfulness.  A 
man  who  is  all  laughter  counts  for  little,  a  man  who  is  all  groans  counts  for  less ; 
but  he  who  lets  a  hopeful  spirit  shine  through  all  his  religion  does  much  to  recom- 
mend his  faith.  H.  By  nabbowness.  The  world  often  miscalls  a  noble  self- 
denial  strait-lacedness,  and  we  must  be  prepared  for  it.  But  there  is  sometimes  a 
self-denial  that  is  really  narrowness,  and  that  damages  the  reputation  of  good  men. 
This  illiberality  of  mind  sometimes  reveals  itself  in  an  orthodoxy  that  prevents  a 
man  from  looking  calmly  and  boldly  at  religious  questions,  sometimes  in  a  harsh, 
exclusive  denominationalism ;  sometimes  in  an  asceticism  which  makes  a  man 
intolerant  of  recreations;  sometimes  in  a  fear  of  worldly  conformity.  Let  as 
beware  of  this  suspicious,  conceited,  uncharitable  spirit.  Let  as  hold  a  theology 
as  broad  as  judgment,  mercy,  and  truth.  Christ  stood  at  the  utmost  remove  from 
the  pettifogging  Pharisee.  He  was  the  ideal  Gathoh'o.  Let  it  be  thus  with  us. 
ni.  By  babdness.  1.  Tou  may  see  this  in  business  men  sometimes.  A  Christian 
trader  is  in  all  things  severely  conscientious.  And  yet  nobody  likes  him.  The 
reason  is  his  conscientiousness  looks  very  much  like  selfishness,  and  is  currently 
reckoned  as  such.  Now,  he  might  be  all  that  a  smart  business  man  needs  to  be, 
and  yet  be  popular  into  the  bargain.  He  wants  to  understand  the  by-play  of  life — 
how  to  soften  the  severe  rigid  laws  of  the  business  sphere  with  little  acts  of  for- 
bearance, patience,  generosity.  2.  And  you  may  see  this  hardness  in  family  life. 
It  was  said  of  the  mother  of  one  of  our  most  distinguished  women  that  she  did  her 
duty  to  her  children,  made  sacrifices  for  their  welfare,  and  yet  there  was  no 
sympathy  in  it  all.  And  the  gifted  daughter  grew  ap  feeling  that  the  lack  of  warmth 
and  love  in  her  early  training  was  a  lifelong  loss.  Oh,  what  a  grand  thing  is 
graciousness  in  all  our  spirit  and  conduct  I  Some  excellent  people  are  sadly  wanting 
here.  They  do  not  know  how  to  show  their  roses — they  thrust  the  posy  into  your 
face  and  you  are  more  scratched  with  the  thorns  than  regaled  by  the  fragrance. 
We  often  hear  about "  diamonds  in  the  rough  " ;  there  are  Christians  after  that  order, 
bat  it  is  a  serious  defect  to  be  in  the  rough — Christ's  diamonds,  like  Himself,  ought 
to  be  fall  of  beauty  and  grace.  lY.  By  unseasonablekebs.  Character  is  timeliness, 
a  fine  perception  of  what  is  becoming  to  the  persons,  to  the  place,  to  the  hour.  If 
we  do  not  attend  to  this  our  mirthfulness  may  be  reckoned  levity,  our  strictness 
intolerance,  our  hberality  weakness,  our  large-mindedness  licence.  We  have  need 
to  pray  constantly  that  "  we  may  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  His  vrill  in  all 
wisdom,"  (fee. ;  so  shall  we  serve  the  apple  of  gold  in  the  basket  of  silver.  Let  as 
not  despise  this  matter.  Do  not  say,  Let  us  get  the  solid  thing,  and  never  mind 
ihe  rest.  A  jeweller  works  altogether  with  gold  and  gems ;  but  it  is  not  enough  to 
mix  these  anyhow.  So  we,  as  Christians,  must  be  careful  how  we  arrange  our 
precious  material,  for  of  the  virtues  we  may  make  an  eyesore  or  a  picture.  We 
must  work  with  judgment,  sympathy,  courtesy,  or  our  good  will  be  evil  spoken  of. 
{W.  L.  Watkinson.)  Reputation : — I.  Nothing  is  mobs  easily  destboyed  thak  ▲ 
GOOD  BEPUTATioN.  Tou  may  be  years,  a  life-time  even,  in  building  it  up,  and  yet  a 
moment,  a  single  act,  may  suffice  to  destroy  it.  A  breath  of  scandal  may  blast  it, 
an  indiscretion  may  tarnish  it,  a  "  dead  fiy  "  in  the  ointment  may  make  it  offen- 
sive. How  sedulously  should  we  guard  it  1  H.  Nothino  on  eabtb  is  so  valuablb 
OB  so  POTENT  AS  A  GOOD  NAWE.  Wealth  bcside  it  is  dross.  Office,  station,  fame,  are 
nothing  worth  in  comparison.  Talent,  learning,  and  gifts  of  oratory,  pale  and  fade 
in  the  presence  of  it.  1.  For  our  own  sake  we  should  sacredly  guard  it— for  it  is 
our  crovm  jewel,  the  one  potential  element  of  usefulness  we  possess.  2.  For 
society's  sake  we  should  do  nothing,  omit  nothing,  that  will  tend  to  obscure  it. 
For  Cdirist's  sake  and  the  Church's  sake,  we  are  bound  to  guard  it  as  we  would 
guard  life  itself :  to  wound  it  is  to  wound  Christ  in  the  house  of  His  friends,  and 
bring  reproach  upon  His  Church.  Oh,  it  is  these  tarnished  reputations,  these  soiled 
garments,  these  discredited  names,  in  the  household  of  faith,  that  so  weaken  the  testi- 
mony of  the  Church  and  fill  the  mouths  of  scoffers  and  infidels.  {Homiletic Monthly.) 
The  importance  of  a  good  man  taking  care  of  his  reputation : — Character  and 
reputation  are  not  convertible  terms.    1.  A  bad  man  may  have  a  good  reputation. 


654  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xit. 

He  may  have  the  art  of  so  concealing  the  reigning  elements  of  his  character  as  to 
give  to  his  compeers  a  false  impression.  Hence,  in  all  circles  there  are  counterfeits 
that  pass  for  true  coin.  The  miser  in  heart  passes  for  a  philanthropist;  the 
sensualist  in  heart  for  a  man  of  chastity.  2.  A  good  man  may  have  a  bad  reputa- 
tion. Genuine  saints  have  often  been  regarded  as  great  sinners.  Against  this  the 
text  is  a  warning.  I.  Thebb  is  a  danoeb  in  this,  arising — 1.  From  some  things  in 
society.  (1)  Its  envy.  All  men  instinctively  feel  that  goodness  is  an  excellency, 
and  those  who  have  it  not  naturally  envy  those  who  possess  it.  The  ugly  envy 
beauty,  the  poor  wealth,  the  obscure  fame,  the  depraved  excellence.  The  delight  of 
envy  is  ever  to  mal-represent  its  object.  (2)  Its  self-complacency.  All  men  desire 
to  be  on  good  terms  with  themselves,  ana  to  be  regarded  by  society  as  worthy  of 
honour.  But  tiie  virtues  of  the  good  flashing  on  the  lives  of  the  corrupt  tend  to 
destroy  this.  A  bad  man  in  the  presence  of  a  good  man  must  feel  self-condemned. 
(3)  Its  stupidity.  The  great  bulk  of  society  are  so  dull  in  relation  to  spiritual 
virtues  that  moral  distinctions  are  disregarded  by  them,  and  they  often  confound 
good  with  evil.  2.  From  some  things  in  the  good  man  himself.  The  more  goodness 
a  man  has  in  him,  the  less  suspicious  he  is,  the  more  confiding,  and  the  more 
regardless  of  conventional  proprieties.  He  is  natural,  and  like  all  natural  objects 
shows  himself  as  he  is.  He  is  likely  to  care  no  more  for  what  men  think  of  him 
than  trees  for  the  opinion  of  the  birds,  or  flowers  for  the  opinion  of  spectators. 
Great  goodness  is  constantly  making  conventional  mist^es  and  trampling 
artificial  properties  underfoot.  H.  Thebb  is  am  evil  in  this.  A  man's  power  to 
do  good  depends  greatly  upon  the  faith  that  society  has  in  his  goodness.  If  society 
suspects  his  genuineness  or  disinterestedness,  he  may  preach  like  Paul,  but  he  will 
accomplish  but  little  good.  Hence  it  has  often  happened  that  truly  good  men  and 
powerful  preachers  have,  by  disregarding  certain  recognised  proprieties  of  society, 
destroyed  their  usefulness  for  ever.  Conclusion :  Hence,  because  of  this  danger 
and  evil,  let  us  walk  "  circumspectly,"  not  as  fools,  but  as  wise ;  let  us  avoid  the 
very  appearance  of  evil,  knowing  that  the  loss  of  reputation  tends  to  disqualify  us 
for  usefulness.  (D.  Thomas,  DJ).)  On  the  imprudent  way  of  discharging  sacred 
duties  : — Perhaps  there  never  was  a  time  since  the  world  began  in  which  so  much 
was  done  for  the  cause  of  God  and  of  truth,  as  at  the  present.  Yet  it  becomes  us 
to  rejoice  with  trembling,  and  to  act  with  care.  In  proportion  to  our  zeal,  is  the 
enemy's  malignity ;  while  we  act,  the  world  watches,  and  connects  the  cause  with 
the  demeanour  and  temper  of  those  who  have  espoused  it.  Sacred  duties  may  be 
discharged  in  such  a  way  as  that  they  may  be  evil  spoken  of,  and  neutralised  com- 
pletely in  their  influence  and  effect.  Take  the  case  of — I.  Social  pbateb.  Our 
good  may  be  evil  spoken  of — 1.  When  the  prayer-meeting  is  left  without  some  wise 
and  judicious  leader.  2.  When  they  are  converted  into  anything  but  what  they 
profess  to  be — meetings  for  prayer — when  the  time  is  much  occupied  in  exhortation, 
or  discussion.  3.  When  the  language  employed  in  prayer  is  pompous  and  inflated. 
4.  When  undue  familiarity  with  God  is  used  in  prayer.  5.  When  prayers  are  spun 
oat  to  an  unreasonable  and  wearisome  length.  Whitfleld  once  said  to  a  good  man 
who  had  fallen  into  this  error,  "  Sir,  you  first  prayed  me  into  a  good  frame,  and 
then  you  prayed  me  out  of  it."  6.  When  much  time  is  occupied  in  prayer  with 
such  petitions  as  are  only  applicable  to  the  case  of  the  leader.  H.  The  visitation 
OF  the  sick.  This  duty  is  improperly  discharged.  1.  When  the  conversation  is 
confined  entirely,  or  chiefly,  to  the  disease  under  which  the  patient  labours. 

2.  When  an  indiscriminate  offer  is  made  of  the  consolations  of  the  gospel,  which 
belong  to  believers  only.  3.  When  special  reference  is  not  had  to  the  peculiar 
circumstances  of  the  case  in  prayer.  4.  When  there  is  harshness  or  severity  in  the 
manner  of  address.  IH.  Domestic  bbligion  and  instbuction.  1.  Where  there 
are  no  stated  periods  for  the  observance  of  family  religion  and  instruction,  but  it  is 
left  to  convenience,  or  caprice — to  inclination,  or  to  chance.  2.  When  the  reading 
and  explanation  of  the  Scriptures  do  not  form  a  great  part  of  domestic  instruction. 

3.  When  the  duty  is  hurried  over  with  carelessness  and  haste.  4.  When  there  are 
no  inquiries  made,  as  to  their  increase  in  the  knowledge  and  understanding  of 
Divine  things.  IV.  Activb  employment  in  beligious  and  benevolent  institutions. 
Such  as  Bible  associations  and  Sunday  Schools.  Conclusion :  Observe  some  general 
principles,  the  observance  of  which  are  of  importance  in  efforts  to  do  good.  1.  Look 
well  to  your  motives.  If  they  are  wrong,  your  conduct  cannot  be  acceptable  to 
God,  nor  is  it  likely  to  do  your  Christian  profession  credit  before  men.  2.  See  that 
your  spirit  and  temper  are  always  suitable  to  the  character  you  sustain,  and  the 
objects  which  you  have  in  view.     3.  Do  aa  much  good  as  yoa  possibly  can  in 


CDBAT.  ziT.]  ROMANS.  655 

private.  4.  Never  talk  much  in  what  you  do,  or  of  what  you  do.  Let  your  works, 
and  not  your  words,  praise  you  in  the  gate — and  rather  imitate  the  deep  and  silent 
river,  that  pursues  its  noiceless  way,  and  is  only  known  by  the  fertility  and  luxuri- 
ance it  diffuses  in  its  course — than  the  impetuous  brook,  that  attracts  the  eye  by  its 
clamour,  only  to  behold  its  shallowness.  5.  Persevere  in  all  you  undertake,  and 
then  your  activity  will  not  be  attributed  to  the  mere  impulse  of  the  moment,  but 
look  more  like  the  result  of  conviction  and  principle.  6.  Let  there  be  a  cheerful 
alacrity  in  all  you  do,  that  it  may  appear  to  spring  from  a  willing  mind,  and  be 
esteemed  rather  your  relaxation  than  your  work.  7.  Avoid  the  introduction  of  your 
own  particular  religious  tenets.  8.  Never  do  evil  that  good  may  come.  9.  Seek 
to  do  good,  abstracted  from  all  the  evil  which  may  be  connected  with  it.  10.  Never 
refrain  from  doing  good,  for  fear  of  its  being  evil  spoken  of.  11.  Refer  all  that  is 
good  in  what  you  do  to  God,  and  all  that  is  evil  to  yourselves.  12.  Cherish  an 
abiding  sense  of  your  own  helplessness,  and  ever  rely  on  the  power  of  God  for 
strength,  the  Spirit  of  God  for  direction,  and  the  work  of  Christ  for  acceptance. 
13.  Keep  your  great  account  in  view — and  the  Lord  grant  you  may  find  mercy  of 
the  Lord  in  that  day.     (r.  Raffies,  LL.D.) 

Vers.  17,  18.  For  the  Mngdom  of  Ood  Is  not  meat  and  drink. — Ood'i  king- 
dom:— I.  The  description  given  of  the  einodom  of  God.  1.  The  import 
of  the  term.  Christ's  spiritual  kingdom  established  on  earth — His  dominion 
over  His  redeemed  people,  having  its  seat  In  the  soul,  and  extending  over 
the  entire  life.  This  is  a  kingdom  totally  diverse  from  all  others — one  not 
in  word  or  mere  outward  form,  but  in  soul-subduing,  life-transforming  power, 
one  that  ultimately  brings  every  thought  into  harmony  with  Christ's  holy 
mind  and  will,  2.  Its  peculiar  characteristics.  (1)  Negatively.  It  is  "  not 
meat  or  drink,"  i.e.,  it  does  not  consist  in  the  observance  of  distinctions  between 
different  kinds  of  food  and  drink,  or  in  any  merely  external  forms.  (2)  Positively. 
It  is — (a)  Holy  conformity  to  God — "  righteousness."  {b)  A  mild  and  gentle 
demeanour — "  peace."  (c]  Spiritual  gladness  of  heart — '•  joy."  (d)  The  presence 
and  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  producing  all  these.  II.  The  chabacteb  of  thb 
TBUE  SPIRITUAL  SERVICE  OF  Christ  (vcr.  18).  Obscrve — 1.  The  indispensable 
requisites  of  Christ's  service.  In  order  to  serve  Christ,  we  must  possess  and 
manifest  righteousness,  and  peace  and  joy,  through  the  power  of  the  Spirit 
of  God.  For  these  things  there  is,  there  can  be,  no  substitute.  "Without  that, 
however  great  your  knowledge  and  profession  and  zeal  may  be,  your  service 
is  a  vain  oblation.  2.  In  what  respect  Christ  is  served  by  these  things. 
(1)  His  authority  as  a  Master  is  acknowledged.  Christ  has  expressly  enjoined 
these  things  on  all  His  followers,  (a)  "  Be  ye  therefore  perfect."  (fc)  "Learn  of 
Me,  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart."  (c)  "  Ask  and  ye  shall  receive,  that  your 
joy  may  be  full."  (2)  His  power  as  a  Saviour  is  made  manifest.  These  are  not 
the  natural  product  of  the  human  heart.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  their  alone  Fountain- 
spring.  (3)  His  example  as  a  forerunner  is  imitated.  Was  not  His  an  example  of 
righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  7  (4)  Witness  is  borne  to  the  nature  and  design  of 
ffls  gospel.  Serving  Christ  in  these  things,  we  declare  plainly  to  the  world,  in  a 
way  they  can  far  better  understand  than  by  any  verbal  statement,  what  Christ  has 
come  to  do  in  and  for  man  1  III.  The  blessed  resitlt  of  that  service.  There 
will  be — 1.  Divine  acceptance.  The  ground  of  a  guilty  sinner's  acceptance  before 
God  is  exclusively  Christ's  finished  work ;  but  our  text  speaks  not  of  that  accept- 
ance, but  of  the  believer's  acceptance  of  his  Heavenly  Father.  God's  complacency 
and  delight  in  a  holy  life.  2.  Human  approval.  Such  a  life  as  that  delineated  in 
our  text  cannot  but  commend  itself  even  to  the  world.  It  is,  however,  only  men 
of  God  who  can,  in  the  fullest  sense  of  the  word,  appreciate  it.  (P.  Moriion.) 
The  kingdom  of  God  consists  in — 1.  Eighteousness  in  respect  to  God.  2.  Peace 
with  respect  to  others.  3.  Joy  in  respect  to  yourself.  (T.  Robinson,  D,D.)  The 
kingdom  of  Ood: — A  peasant  boy  was  asked,  "What  is  the  kingdom  of  God?" 
He  paused,  and  with  an  expression  of  seriousness  and  devotion  which  I  shall  never 
forget,  placing  his  hand  on  his  bosom,  he  said,  "  It  is  something  here  1 "  and  then 
raising  his  eyes,  he  added,  "  and  something  up  yonder  I "  {J.  Leif child,  D.D.)  The 
constitution  of  the  kingdom  of  God : — I.  Not — 1.  Abstinence  from  earthly  pleasure. 
2.  Observance  of  external  forms.  3.  The  adoption  of  a  religious  deportment.  4. 
Zeal  for  orthodoxy.  II.  But — 1.  Righteousness  in  faith  and  life.  2.  Peace  with 
God  and  man.    3.  Joy  in  sorrow  and  reproach.     {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Distinguish- 

ing  marks  of  the  kingdom  of  God: — Every  kingdom  ia  renowned  for  some  dis« 


656  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cmr.  hv. 

tinotive  feature.  Rome  was  conspicuous  for  its  warlike  propensities.  The  Grecian 
States  were  celebrated  for  their  love  of  the  fine  arts.  France  is  eminent  for  its 
taste.  The  American  States  are  famous  for  their  enterprise.  But  the  distinguishing 
mark  of  the  kingdom  of  God  is  "  righteousness,  and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghost."  The  inward  and  $piritual  character  of  the  kingdom  of  Ood: — L  I» 

ITS  PBiviLBGES.  As  somc  paiutcrs  can  produce  a  striking  likeness  by  a  few  clear 
though  rapid  strokes  of  the  pencil,  so  is  it  with  this  beautiful  sketch  of  the  new 
man.  1.  The  first  lineament  is  righteousness.  By  this  must  be  meant  an  entire 
justification  and  freedom  from  every  charge  and  condemnation  which  sin  might 
urge,  and  which  God's  broken  commands  might  pass  upon  the  Christian.  This 
is  the  choicest  mercy  in  the  catalogue  of  mercies.  It  is — {1)  An  enriching  mercy, 
entitling  to  every  good.  (2)  A  most  voluminous  mercy,  in  which  there  is  more 
than  can  be  counted  or  imagined.  2.  Peace  is  another  uneament.  Pardoning  love 
hath  subdued  enmitv  against  God.  Peace  hath  been  made  by  the  blood  of  the 
Cross.  This  is  one  oi  the  most  gracious,  as  it  is  one  of  the  most  blessed,  fruits  of  the 
Spirit.  3.  Joy.  It  is  the  privilege  of  God's  children  to  rejoice,  as  the  distinguished 
objects  of  His  adopting  love.  A^d,  surely,  when  the  Spirit  bears  witness  with  the 
Christian's  spirit  that  he  is  a  child  of  God,  he  hath  the  elements  and  materials  for 
a  holy  joy,  which  the  world,  with  all  its  pleasures,  can  never  give,  and  which,  with 
all  its  enmity,  it  is  impotent  to  take  away.  II.  In  its  duties.  1.  It  is  righteous- 
ness in  the  Holy  Ghost.  Not  only  is  the  satisfaction  of  Christ's  perfect  merit 
imputed  to  the  soul,  but  the  work  of  his  sanctification  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  making 
the  believer  one  with  Him,  is  commenced  within  the  heart.  Then  will  conscience 
be  made  of  every  duty  towards  God  and  man.  Faith  is  in  the  soul,  as  lightning  in 
the  air,  which  purifies;  as  fire  in  the  metal,  which  refines.  The  heart,  which 
heretofore  was  the  thoroughfare  of  Satan,  becomes  the  enclosure  of  God.  2.  Peace 
also  is  a  duty  to  the  subjects  of  the  Great  Salem  ;  and  as  wars  and  fightings  oome 
of  the  lusts  of  men,  so  will  the  disciples  of  Jesus  be  self-denying  men,  in  order 
that  they  may  dwell  in  peace  with  Him  and  with  each  other.  3.  And  how  shall  ^ 
the  Christian  manifest  his  joy  as  a  duty  ?  Even  by  the  holy  delight  which  he  | 
takes  in  that  service  which  is  perfect  freedom.      {R.  P.  Buddicom,  M.A.)  The' 

tpirituality  of  the  kingdom  of  God : — These  words  do  not  infer  that  we  may  eat  and 
drink  as  we  please ;  the  very  opposite  is  implied,  namely,  that  whether  we  eat^  or 
drink,  righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost  should  determine  our  spirit 
and  conduct.  The  doctrine  is,  that  the  kingdom  of  God  ifi  not  founded  on  things 
outward,  or  any  artificial  arrangement  of  these ;  but  on  the  absolute  difference 
between  right  and  wrong,  happiness  and  misery ;  and  that,  accordingly,  its  design 
is  to  estabhsh  virtuous  dispositions  and  holy  joys.  This  doctrine  is  manifestly  in 
direct  antagonism  to  the  tendency  at  Rome  to  indulge  in  disputation  about  the 
obligation  of  existing  customs,  and  needs  to  be  taught  in  the  present  day.  There 
is  a  very  general  disregard  of  the  spirituality  of  Christ's  kingdom,  and  of  the 
sufficiency  of  its  truths  to  meet  the  wants  of  man.  To  make  the  tree  good,  that 
its  fruit  may  be  good,  is  a  process  far  too  slow  and  undemonstrative  for  this  enter- 
prising age.  Accordingly,  we  are  overwhelmed  with  "improvements,"  "  reforms," 
"  schemes,"  ••  societies,"  and  "movements,"  to  effect  a  speedy  and  decided  change. 
Note — I.  The  design  of  the  kingdom — viz.,  the  diffusion  of  righteousness, peace, 
and  joy.  1.  Societies  are  formed  with  a  leading  object  in  view.  Zeal  for  that 
object  is  the  distinguishing  mark  of  the  members  of  each  society.  Diversity 
of  taste  and  opinion  is  tolerated  so  long  as  it  does  not  interfere  with  the  interests 
to  be  promoted.  There  are  religious  communities  of  whose  institutions  distinctions 
of  meat  and  drink  form  an  essential  part.  Such  is  the  general  character  of 
Hrndooism  and  Mohammedanism.  Such  was  the  general  character  of  Pharisaism. 
John  the  Baptist  adopted  similar  means  of  distinction ;  he  came  neither  eating 
nor  drinking,  nor  clothing  himself  like  other  men.  But  Christ,  instead  of  building 
up  such  walls  of  partition,  removed  them,  and  strove,  by  the  example  of  loving, 
familiar  intercourse,  to  overcome  deep-rooted  antipathies.  Henceforward,  "  right- 
eousness, peace,  and  joy,"  are  to  be  the  distinguishing  tokens  of  His  subjects — not 
any  style  of  living  or  appearance  peculiar  to  them  as  members  of  a  community. 
2.  Tried  by  this  test,  Romanism,  and  all  imitations  of  it,  must  stand  condemned ; 
but  let  us  apply  it  to  ourselves  as  members  of  a  Church  claiming  to  be  scriptural. 
We  belong  to  different  grades  of  society,  and  have  different  tastes  and  habits, 
Hence  there  is  no  small  risk  of  uncharitable  judgments.  Simple  tastes  and  manners 
to  some  appear  little  short  of  barbarous,  and  refined  tastes  and  manners  to  othen 
voluptuous  and  worldly.     How  uncalled  for  these  insinuations  I    To  any  disposed 


eair.  nr.]  ROMANS.  657 

to  make  maoh  of  outward  distinctions,  we  mast  ask — (1)  What  of  righteonsness  ? 
Is  not  the  first  thing  desirable — a  heart  right  with  God  ?  (2)  What  of  peace  ?  Is 
not  peace  Christ's  great  le^jacy  to  His  disciples  ?  and  peacemaking  the  duty  He  has 
blessed,  as  peculiarly  that  of  the  children  of  God?  (3)  What  of  joy?  Is  it  not  the 
will  of  God  that  we  should  rise  above  anxiety  and  discontent,  to  grateful,  hopeful 
joyf  Murmuring  about  ourselves  or  our  fellow-Christians  is  neither  right  nor 
profitable.  (4)  What  of  Divine  grace  as  the  source  of  all  spiritual  excellence  ?  God 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  not  to  be  limited  by  man's  prescription  of  meats  and  drinks,  days 
and  times,  dress  and  postures.  II.  Thb  fitness  of  the  design.  1.  It  accords 
with  the  extent  of  the  kingdom.  God,  as  the  rightful  sovereign  of  all  men  every- 
'where,  commands  them  to  return  to  their  allegiance.  The  kingdom  must  therefore 
include  men  of  all  nations.  How  great  the  diversity  of  conditions  of  existence  I 
And  in  His  wisdom  and  love  God  has  provided  a  system  adapted  to  all  these  con- 
ditions. A  religion  eminently  spiritual  and  practical,  having  very  few  and  simple 
ordinances  of  worship,  Christianity  belongs  specially  to  no  clime,  grade,  or  class. 
2.  It  accords  with  the  number  and  variety  of  the  enemies  to  be  overcome.  Con- 
fessedly there  is  a  great  deal  of  irreligion  and  vice  in  the  world ;  and  no  religion  is 
worthy  of  the  name  that  does  not  engage  its  adherents  to  a  course  of  resolute 
opposition  to  these  evils.  Bat  there  is  a  great  deal  of  sin  and  misery  where  these 
evils  are  neither  seen  nor  heard.  Seemly  forms  of  religion  and  correct  moral 
deportment  have  not  been  sufficient  to  satisfy  the  heart  and  purify  the  conscience. 
Churches  have  been  rent,  homes  made  desolate,  and  hearts  broken,  by  men 
"touching  the  righteousness  which  is  of  the  law  blameless."  We  do  not  need 
more  fasts,  zeal  for  traditions  and  customs ;  we  need  a  religion  that  will  strike  at 
the  root  of  all  the  evil  in  our  nature.  This  reUgion  we  find  in  Christianity,  which 
obliges  as  to  follow  after  righteousness,  peace,  and  joy.  3.  It  accords  with  the 
attributes  of  God  ;  for  there  is  blasphemy  in  the  very  supposition  that  the  Divine 
Being  can  be  satisfied  with  a  religion  chlefiy  ceremonial  or  outwardly  correct.  He 
is  a  Spirit ;  and  they  that  worship  Him  must  worship  in  spirit  and  in  truth.  4. 
It  accords  with  the  character  of  Christ.  How  strange  that  His  name  should  have 
been  given  to  such  systems  as  have  borne  it !  So  far  from  patronising  externalism, 
He  exposed  Himself  to  the  wrath  of  the  Ritualists  of  that  day  ;  so  far  from  affect- 
ing pecoliarity  of  living,  He  exposed  Himself  to  the  calumny  that  He  was  k 
gluttonous  man  and  a  winebibber.  Everywhere  and  always  He  proclaimed  the 
necessity  of  a  righteousness  exceeding  that  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees.  Were  He 
this  day  amongst  us,  no  word  of  sympathy  would  be  heard  from  Him  with  those 
who  compass  sea  and  land  to  make  one  proselyte,  and  only  succeed  in  perverting 
his  better  nature.  His  sympathy  would  be  with  those  who  assert  their  freedom 
from  the  commandments  of  men,  and  who  joyfully  own  their  obligation  to  love  and 
obey  their  "  Father  which  is  in  heaven."  5.  It  accords  with  the  destiny  of  all  true 
subjects  of  the  kingdom.  There  must  be  a  meetness,  as  well  as  a  title,  belonging 
to  eJl  the  heirs  of  glory.  A  training  of  the  soul  in  righteousness,  peace,  and  joy, 
we  can  well  believe  to  bring  about  a  meetness  for  the  society  of  the  spirits  of  the 
just  made  perfect ;  but  we  are  at  a  loss  to  conceive  how  a  round  of  forms  and  cere- 
monies, or  a  careful  conformity  to  usages  and  example,  in  matters  wholly  of  this 
world  and  of  this  body,  can  constitute  any  such  preparation.  (W.  Limont.)  The 
kingdom  of  God  is  a  soul-kingdom  : — Why  was  it  called  a  kingdom  at  all?  Well, 
since  a  man's  disposition  is  the  fountain  from  which  all  his  enjoyments  that  are 
worth  having  spring  in  this  world,  the  condition  of  the  soul  becomes  a  kingdom  in 
the  sense  that  it  represents  to  men  the  idea  of  felicity.  The  old  notions  were  that 
a  king  was  about  the  happiest  man  on  earth.  Hence  the  phrase,  "  Happy  as  a 
king."  Therefore  in  the  description  of  the  disposition,  which  is  the  soul-kingdom, 
it  is  called  a  king's  dominion,  or  a  king-dom.  But  there  is  a  more  important 
reason — namely,  that  a  king  in  his  kingdom  dominates,  controls,  governs.  It  is 
the  disposition  of  men,  their  character,  that  controls.  Their  enjoyment,  all  their 
life,  depends  upon  what  they  are  in  themselves,  and  inside  of  themselves.  If  a 
man's  soul  is  one  that  works  itself  out  in  righteousness,  in  peace,  in  joy  in  the 
Holy  Ghost,  that  is  the  dominating  influence  which  controls  the  whole  Hfe.  Now 
I  aver  that  men  are  happy  in  the  exact  proportion  in  which  their  dispositions  are 
qualified  to  make  happiness.  The  enjoyment  of  men  is  in  the  ratio  in  which  they 
have  a  right  inward  condition.  A  man  who  has  right  feelings  and  right  disposi- 
tions, either  finds  happiness  or  makes  it.  It  will  happen  to  a  man  who  is  all  right 
in  himself.  He  either  finds  or  makes  life  a  blessing.  A  man  who  is  in  good  health, 
who  has  a  right  temperament,  all  of  whose  dispositions  are  noble,  and  who  is 
Toi..  n.  42 


658  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xiv. 

hopeful,  courageous,  and  cheerful,  loving  God  and  loving  men,  thanks  nobody  for 
making  him  happy ;  he  is  happy  of  himself.  The  human  soul  was  just  as  much 
made  to  produce  happiness  as  a  music-box  was  made  to  produce  music.  If  it  be  in 
a  right  and  normal  condition,  harmonised  with  God,  with  the  epirit-world,  for 
which  we  are  being  trained,  and  with  men,  then  it  is  happy.  The  soul  must  needs 
produce  its  own  happiness  out  of  the  harmony  of  its  own  condition ;  but  men  dp 
not  believe  in  this.  You  will  find  young  men  saying,  "  If  I  were  as  rich  as  Vander- 
bilt,  would  not  I  enjoy  myself?"  Do  you  enjoy  yourself  now?  "No — oh,  no." 
Then  you  would  not  then.     {H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  essentials  of  Christianity  : — 

I.  A  NEGAirvE  DESCKiPTioN  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OP  GoD.  "  Meat  and  drink  "  includes 
the  carnal  and  sensational  in  every  shape  and  form.  True  religion  is  not — 1. 
Ceremonial  observances.  Godliness  is  at  a  low  ebb  when  great  importance  is 
attached  to  external  rites.  Ceremonialism  is  the  respirator  worn  by  a  Church  when 
its  lungs  are  too  weak  to  breathe  the  bracing  atmosphere  of  revealed  truth.  Con- 
sumption has  set  in,  and  in  time  it  will  die  of  exhaustion,  and  be  decently  buried 
in  the  grave  of  formality.  This  was  the  case  with  the  Jewish  Church.  The  temple 
services  were  carried  on  with  regularity  and  gorgeousness,  while  the  soul  of  religion 
was  gone.  2.  The  gratification  of  the  appetites.  Pagan  converts  ran  to  the 
other  extreme — religion  to  them  was  a  matter  of  cookery,  confectionery,  and 
stimulants.  Previous  to  their  conversion  they  had  been  accustomed  to  associate 
worship  with  gluttony,  drunkenness,  and  licentiousness  of  the  lowest  type.  Their 
countrymen  indulged  in  the  wildest  revelries  while  celebrating  the  festivities  of 
Bacchus  and  Venus.  What  wonder,  then,  that  such  should  come  into  the  Church, 
expecting  it  to  furnish  them  with  fresh  opportunities  to  pamper  their  carnal 
appetites?  They  even  turned  the  Lord's  Supper  into  a  carousal.  3.  iEsthetic 
ideahsm.  Many  minds  have  been  so  "corrupted  from  the  simplicity  that  is  in 
Christ "  by  what  is  called  higher  criticism,  as  to  lose  all  relish  for  doing,  and  they 
spend  their  time  in  dreaming.  In  this  state  of  mind  they  devise  for  themselves  an 
ideal  Christ,  no  more  like  the  real  Christ  of  the  gospels  than  the  sensitive  plant 
that  grows  in  the  hothouse  to  the  hardy  oak  whose  giant  arms  defy  the  storm.  To 
the  ideaUst  the  Bible  is  a  poetical  perfumery  to  regale  the  jaded  senses,  and  not 
the  voice  of  God,  saying,  "  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it."  The  house  of  prayer 
is  a  floral  hall,  where  the  roll  of  music  soothes  the  feelings,  and  the  dim  light  plays 
softly  on  the  eye,  and  fashion  displays  the  contents  of  its  costly  wardrobes ;  and 
not  the  house  of  God,  where  sincerity  agonises  and  devotion  sheds  tears  of  penitence 
and  joy.  11.  A  posiTrvK  description  of  tbuk  beliqion.  It  consists  in — 1.  Bight- 
ness  of  motive — "  Eighteousness."  One  of  the  old  schoolmen  has  said  that 
"  manners  make  the  man."  That  is  true  as  far  as  society  is  concerned ;  but 
motives  make  the  man  in  the  sight  of  God ;  external  accomplishments  go  for 
nothing  if  the  moving  springs  of  character  are  crooked  and  unrighteous.  But  how 
are  they  whose  motives  are  wrong  and  character  corrupt  to  be  made  right  ?  For  it 
is  written,  "There  is  none  righteous,  no  not  one."  " By  the  deeds  of  the  law  there 
shall  no  flesh  be  justified  in  His  sight."  But,  thank  God,  there  is  a  way  of  escape 
— "Being  justified  freely  by  His  grace  through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ 
Jesus."  "Not  by  worki  of  righteousness  which  we  have  done,"  Ac.  2.  Tran- 
quillity of  mind — "peace" — (1)  "With  God.  The  old  enmity  against  the  Divine 
character  and  government  is  slain,  the  hostile  parties  become  reconciled,  and  the 
peace  which  passeth  all  understanding  fills  the  believer's  mind — "  For  He  is  our 
peace,  who  hath  made  both  one."  Tranquillity  of  mind  is  simply  impossible  until 
this  reconcihation  is  effected.  Who  can  be  free  from  fear  whilst  the  sentence  of 
condemnation,  like  the  sword  of  Damocles,  hangs  over  his  head  ?  (2)  With  our- 
selves. Conscience  gives  up  accusing,  the  passions  are  kept  under  restraint,  and 
the  little  kingdom  within,  once  in  a  state  of  insurrection,  becomes  quiet  and  sub- 
dued and  loyal  to  the  Prince  of  Peace.  But  distinguish  between  a  state  of  indif- 
ference and  a  state  of  peace.  The  former  resembles  the  oppressive  stillness  of  the 
atmosphere  before  the  storm,  and  the  latter  the  bright  sunshine  and  verdant  soil 
after  the  storm.  Many  are  lulled  to  sleep  in  false  security,  like  the  drunkard  who 
slept  on  the  beach  fancying  himself  at  home ;  the  advancing  tide  rudely  awoke  him 
to  a  sense  of  his  danger,  but  in  trying  to  escape  he  only  went  deeper  into  the  water 
and  was  swept  away  by  the  current.  ' '  For  when  they  shall  say.  Peace  and  safety, 
then  sudden  destruction  cometh  upon  them,"  &o.  3.  Jubilation  of  heart — "  joy  in 
the  Holy  Ghost."  (1)  Eighteousness  is  the  lowest  stage  in  Christian  experience; 
peace  is  the  middle  state ;  joy  is  the  crowning  state.  Eighteousness  is  the  founda- 
tion of  the  temple  safe  and  sound ;  peace  is  the  superstructure,  roofed  in,  affording 


OHAP.  TIT.]  ROMANS.  659 

shelter  to  the  weary,  heavy-laden  soul ;  joy  is  the  tower,  with  a  peal  of  bells  giving 
forth  a  clear  musicaJ  expression  of  the  incalculable  advantages  of  a  holy  life.  Or, 
to  change  the  figure,  righteonsness  is  the  "root  of  the  matter,"  strong  and  healthy; 
peace  is  the  flower,  fine  and  fragrant ;  joy  is  the  fruit,  ripe  and  delicious,  (2) 
Many  Christians  remain  throughout  life  in  a  state  of  righteousness — are,  indeed, 
"  alive  onto  God  through  Christ  our  Lord  " — but  their  spiritual  life  is  of  the  lowest 
type.  Others  have  advanced  a  step  higher,  and  have  attained  to  a  state  of  peace. 
Sovereigns,  when  first  minted,  are  rung  on  a  sounding-iron,  and  those  that  do  not 
give  oat  a  clear  sound  are  reckoned  "dumb,"  and  are  sent  back  to  be  melted  again. 
The  "  dumb  blanks  "  are  good  gold,  but  as  they  lack  the  ringing  sound,  they  are  not 
allowed  to  pass  into  the  press-room  to  receive  the  last  impression  of  the  die.  Even 
80  those  Christians  who  have  reached  a  state  of  peace  and  never  advance  further ; 
they  are  good  gold,  nevertheless  they  are  "  dumb  blanks,"  and  have  need  of  being 
re-melted,  so  as  to  reach  that  jubilant  state  of  feeling  which  breaks  out  into  exulta- 
tion. (3)  The  inspirer  of  this  joy  is  the  Holy  Ghost.  There  is  another  kind  of  joy 
produced  by  stimulants ;  it  rattles  on  the  tongue,  flashes  in  the  eye,  leaps  in  the 
heart,  and  breaks  out  into  all  kinds  of  riotous  comicalities.  All  this  boisterous 
gaiety  leaves  the  heart  sad  and  sorrowful,  and  it  ends  in  gloom  and  despair.  "  Even 
in  laughter  the  heart  is  sorrowful,"  Ac.  This  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost  is — (a) 
Demonstrative  in  its  character.  The  outpouring  of  the  Divine  Spirit  on  the  day  of ' 
Pentecost  was  a  most  exciting  scene ;  and  during  seasons  of  great  awakening  this 
has  been  repeated,  (b)  Permanent.  "As  sorrowful,  yet  always  rejoicing."  To 
possess  it  is  to  possess  the  most  precious  of  treasures,  the  sweetest  of  pleasures, 
and  the  richest  of  feasts  ;  it  is  a  constant  summer  in  the  soul,  and  a  heaven  in 
miniature.  {W.  A.  Orijiths.)  True  religion : — I.  Neoativelt.  Does  not 
consist — 1.  In  anything  of  a  mere  external  kind.  2.  In  orthodox  opinions  or 
right  modes  of  worship.  3.  In  a  system  of  observance  that  is  either  constrained 
by  fear  or  is  employed  as  a  sort  of  compromise  to  ward  off  the  Divine  displeasure, 
or  made  a  ground  of  claim  in  the  way  of  merit  to  the  Divine  favour.  4.  In  mere 
temporary  feeling,  be  those  feehngs  of  what  kind  they  may.  II.  Positivblt.  It 
does  consist  in — 1.  Righteousness.  (1)  Justifying.  (2)  Internal.  (3)  PraoticaL 
2.  Peace.  (1)  As  opposed  to  hostility.  (2)  As  opposed  to  condemnation.  (3) 
Internal  tranquility.  3.  Joy.  (1)  Of  faith.  (2)  Of  love.  As  implying — (o) 
Gratitude,  (b)  Complacency.  (3)  Of  hope.  {Josiah  Hill.)  Moral  goodness,  or 
true  religion  is — I.  Thb  bbign  of  God  in  the  boul.  The  reign — 1.  Of  reality, 
in  contradistinction  to  that  of  appearance.  2.  Of  spirit,  in  contradistinction  to 
that  of  matter.  3.  Of  love,  in  contradistinction  to  that  of  selfishness.  4.  Of  the 
absolute,  in  contradistinction  to  the  reign  of  the  contingent  and  fleeting.  II.  A 
BPiBiTUAL  SEBvicB  BENDERED  TO  Chbist  (ver.  18).  Not  in  meat,  drink,  and  mere 
ceremonies,  but  in  spiritual  exercises.  "  Bighteonsness,  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghost."  To  serve  Christ  is  the  grand  end  of  being ;  to  serve  Christ  is  to  serve  in 
the  highest  sense  your  own  interests,  the  good  of  the  universe,  and  the  will 
of  God.  III.  The  highest  glory  of  man.  It  ensures  two  things  —  1.  The 
favour  of  God.  "Acceptable  to  God."  To  please  God — what  is  higher  than 
this  ?  To  have  His  smile,  to  enjoy  His  friendship  and  fellowship.  2. 
The  favour  of  men.  "Approved  of  men."  Chris  I  ly  goodness  commands 
the    involuntary    homage    of    all    consciences.       (D.    Thomas,    D.D.)  But 

rlghteousnesB.— Righteousness  of  life  as  the  fruit  of  righteousness  by  faith. 
Righteousness  practised  as  the  effect  of  righteousness  imparted.  Righteousness 
before  man  as  the  evidence  of  righteousness  before  God.  Believers  are  to  be  filled 
with  the  fruits  of  righteousness  (Phil.  i.  11).  Death  to  sin  and  life  to  righteousness 
fruits  of  Christ's  death.  (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  The  kingdom  of  God  righteousness: 
I.  It  is  based  upon  bighteousness.  If  we  trace  earthly  kingdoms  up  to  their 
origin  this  wiU  scarcely  be  affirmed  of  any  of  them.  Whatever  may  be  said  about 
its  present  procedure,  what  existing  throne  has  not  been  erected  on  the  ruin 
of  human  rights  and  liberties?  But  God  reigns  by  right.  We  belong  to  Him 
as  His  creatures  and  His  children.  U.  Its  Monarch  is  bighteous.  Many 
potentates  are  manifestly  unrighteous,  and  of  the  very  best  it  can  only  be  affirmed 
that  on  the  whole  they  rule  righteously.  Compassed  by  infirmity,  with  the  best 
intentions,  they  are  often  betrayed  into  deeds  which  charity  is  compelled  to  cover. 
But  that  astounding  fiction  when  otherwise  applied,  "the  king  can  do  no  wrong," 
is  absolutely  and  ever  true  in  regard  to  God.  III.  Its  laws  abe  bighteoos.  Of 
none  other  can  this  be  said.  The  best  system  has  some  bad  laws — legislation,  part 
of  which  presses  inequitably  on  some  portion  of  the  community,  and  which  ifl 


660  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip,  xi?.' 

endured  becaase  of  the  righteousness  of  the  rest.    Bat  Gbd's  laws  are  all  good,  and 
good  to  all  alike.    IV.  It  Ams  at  the  fboduction  of  biohteous  chabacteb.    The 
best  earthly  governments  are  content  if  the  people  are  contented  and  law-abiding, 
i.e.,  if  their  subjects  are  materially  prosperous  and  do  not  break  the  law.    Bat  the 
members  of  God's  kingdom  are  urged  to  keep  His  laws  with  a  view  to  their  own 
moral  perfection  and  the  ultimate  moral  perfection  of  the  world.     Hence  the 
kingdom  of  the  future  is  to  be  one  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness,  and  the  people 
thereof  are  to  be  all  righteous.     {J.W.  Burn.)         Peace. — The  kingdom  of  Ood  a 
kingdom  of  peace : — This  is  one  of  its  notable  characteristics  as  pourtrayed  in  the 
Bible.    I.  Its  chiet  is  the  Pbinob  of  Peacb.    II.  Its  bulb  was  XNAuanBAXEO  bt 
thb  pboolauation  of  peace.    "  Peace  on  earth."    III.  Its  measubes  abb  pacific. 
Its  only  wars  are  against  the  enemies  of  peace.    lY.  Its  subjects  abe  peaceable. 
Disturbance  here  is  disloyalty  and  treason,     V.  Its  onivebsal  establishment  will 
8E0UBE  woBLD-wiDE  PEACE.     Arbitration,  treaties,  alliances,  (fee,  will  only  effect 
partial  and  temporary  peace.     (Ibid.)       And  joy  in  the  Holy  Ohost. — The  kingdom 
of  Ood  a  kingdom  of  joy  : — I.  It  was  hebalded  as  such.    "  Behold  I  bring  you 
good  tidings  of  great  joy."     II.  As  such  it  pbomotes  the  joy  of  its  subjects. 
* '  Happy  are  the  people  whose  God  is  the  Lord."    III.  Its  subjects  thebefobb 
ABB  COMMANDED  TO  BE  JOTTFUL.    "  Bejoice  evermore."    (Ibid.)        Joy  in  th«  Holy 
Ghost : — 1.  Not  natural,  but  spiritual.    2.  Not  imaginary,  but  real.     3.  Not  depen- 
dent on  external  circumstances,  but  upon  the  revelations  of  the  Spirit  to  faith.    4. 
Not  transitory,  but  permanent.     5.  Not  extinguished  in  death,  but  perfected  in 
heaven.      {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)         Joy : — Jesus  is  the  bringer  of  spiritual  spring  into 
the  soul.    When  He  comes  the  time  of  the  singing  of  birds  comes  with  Him.     He 
is  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  who  turns  January  into  May.     Beally,  we  ought 
to  understand  that  God  allows  every  child  of  His  to  make  his  own  almanac.    We 
can  have  warm  weather,  and  flowers  and  fruits  and  bird-songs  all  the  year  through 
if  we  only  live  in  the  rays  of  Christ's  countenance.    The  sorest  sorrows  of  life  are 
of  our  own  making.     We  shut  out  God's  larks  from  our  hearts,  and  bring  in  the 
bats  and  hooting  owls  of  miserable  anbelief.     These  birds  of  evil  omen  disappear 
when  the  dayspring  on  high  visits  our  souls.     (T.  L.  Cuyler.)     For  he  that  in  these 
things  Berveth  Christ  Is  acceptable  to  God,  and  approved  of  men. — The  ideal 
character  and  service : — I.  The  ideal  chabacteb.     1.  Righteousness.     This   ia 
characteristic  of  the  man  who  is  right — (1)  With  God.    (a)  Through  justifying 
faith.     (6)  By  a  sanctified  experience.     (2)  With  man  through  a  dutiful  fulfilment 
of  the  obligations  of  every  human  relationship.    (3)  With  both  in  thought,  resolve, 
word,  deed.    2.  Peace.    This  marks  the  man  who — (1)  Has  made  his  peace  with 
God.     (2)  Is  at  peace  with  man.     (3)  Has  a  peaceful  mind.    3.  Joy.    This — (1) 
Flows  from  the  other  two.    (2)  Wells  up  from  a  grateful  heart.     (3)  Streams  over 
in  a  glad  and  beneficent  life.     U.  The  ideal  sebvice.     1.  In  these  things  we 
serve  Christ.    Christ's  work  is  to  make  us  righteous,  Ac.    "  We  are  His  workman- 
ship created  in  Christ  Jesus."    When  we  work  out  what  He  works  in  we  are 
workers  together  with  Him  and  so  serve  Him.    What  shall  we  say  about  the  man 
who  professes  to  be  the  servant  of  Christ,  and  is  unrighteous,  quarrelsome,  or 
morose?    These  characteristics  defeat  Christ's  end  in  the  world,  and  bring  dis- 
honour on  his  Master's    name  and  cause.      2.    In  these  things  we  are  —  (1) 
Acceptable  to  God.    Because — (a)  They  are  conformable  to  His  own  nature.    He 
is  "the  righteous  Father,"  "the  God  of  Peace,"  "the  blessed  God."    (6)  They 
accomplish  His  design  in  creation,  providence,  and  grace.     (2)  Approved  of  men, 
even  when  unacceptable   in  the  case  of  bad  men.      The  natural  conscience  is 
compelled  even  when  depraved  to  silently  applaud  what  is  righteous,  &c.    {J.  W. 
Burn.)         Men's  approbation  desirable : — 1.  For  their  own  sakes.    2.  For  the  sake 
of  the  Master  whom  we  serve.     3.  For  our  own  comfort  and  influence.    To  please 
God  the  surest  way  to  be  approved  of  men.      (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Christianity 

approved  : — It  would  not  be  a  fair  thing  to  test  a  philosophy,  or  a  body  of  political, 
or  scientific  truth,  by  the  conduct  and  character  of  the  men  that  professed  it ;  but 
it  is  a  perfectly  fair  thing,  under  certain  conditions  and  in  certain  limits,  to  test  a 
system  of  practical  morality,  which  professes  to  do  certain  things  with  people's 
character  and  conduct,  by  its  professors.  It  is  just  as  fair,  when  a  creed  comea 
before  our  notice  which  assumes  to  influence  men's  conduct,  to  say,  "  Well  I 
I  should  like  to  see  it  working,"  as  it  is  for  any  of  you  mill-owners  to  say,  when 
a  man  comes  to  you  with  a  fine  invention  upon  paper,  •'  Have  you  got  a  working 
model  of  it  ?  Has  it  ever  been  tried  ?  What  have  been  the  results  that  have  been 
secured  by  it?"    Or  as  it  would  be  to  say  to  anybody  that  claimed  to  have  got 


flSA».  ZIT.]  ROMANS.  661 

ft  ••  medicine  that  will  cure  consumption,"  to  say, "  Have  you  any  oases  t  Can  yon 
qnote  any  cures  ?  "  So  when  we  Christians  stand  up  and  say,  "  We  have  a  faith 
which  is  able  to  deaden  men's  minds  to  the  world ;  which  is  able  to  make  them 
nnselfish ;  which  is  able  to  lift  them  up  above  cares  and  sorrows ;  which  is  able  to 
take  men  and  transform  their  whole  nature,  and  put  new  desires  and  hopes  and  joya 
into  them,"  it  is  quite  fair  for  the  world  to  say,  "  Have  you  ?  Does  it  ?  Does  it  do 
BO  with  you  ?  Can  you  produce  your  lives  as  working  models  of  Christianity  ?  " 
(J.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Yen.  19,  20.  Let  us  therefore  follow  after  the  things  which  make  for  peace.— 
Thing$  which  make  for  peace ;— I.  What  these  things  abb.  1.  Righteousness. 
a.  Humility.  8.  Love.  4.  Faith.  H.  Wb  must  follow  thbm.  1.  Earnestly. 
9.  Prayerfully.  8.  With  steady  faith  in  our  ultimate  attainment  of  them.  III. 
Thb  besult.  Eternal  life  in  heaven  with  God  and  Christ.  (J.  H.  Tarson.) 
The  things  which  make  for  peace: — 1.  A  peaceable  temper.  2.  Peaceable  measures. 
8.  Peaceable  methods.  Things  to  be  sought  after : — I.  Things  which  make  fob 
PEAOB.  1.  Essentials  in  which  we  all  agree.  2.  Objects  which  we  all  desire.  3. 
Blessings  in  which  all  can  share.  II.  Things  that  edut.  1.  Ejiowledge.  2. 
Faith.  3.  Love.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  endeavours  of  the  true  Christian  for  tha 
welfare  of  his  brethren : — I.  Wherein  they  consist.  Endeavours  after — 1.  Peace. 
2.  Edification.  H.  What  abb  thb  common  hindbances?  Offences  which — 1. 
Destroy  mutu^  confidence.  2.  Injure  weak  consciences.  III.  How  abb  they  to 
BB  ovEBcoME.  1.  By  avoiding  the  occasions  of  offence.  2.  By  encouraging  in 
others  the  growtii  of  faith.  3.  By  abstaining  from  everything  that  might  lead 
another  to  act  in  opposition  to  his  own  conscience.  (Ibid.)  For  meat  destroy 
not  the  work  of  God.— TAy  weak  brother : — I.  Weak  as  he  is,  is  a  wobk  of  God. 
n.  May  easily  be  debtboyed  ;  for — 1.  Though  all  things  are  pure — 2.  They  may 
become  a  cause  of  offence — 3.  Especially  to  him  that  is  weak.  III.  Thebefobb 
abstain.  1.  The  enjoyment  is  Uttle.  2.  The  consequence  dreadful  to  contem- 
plate.    8.  The  sacrifice  noble.    (Ibid.) 

Ver.  21.  It  Is  good  neither  to  eat  flesh  nor  to  drink  wine  nor  anything  whereby 
thy  brother  Btumbletb. — It  is  good  not  to  drink  wine : — Many  object  to  total 
abstinence  because  it  is  not  insisted  on  in  the  New  Testament  in  so  many  words. 
True ;  but  Paul  appeals  to  our  honour,  conscience,  brotherly  feelings,  and  that  to 
the  Christian  ought  to  be  equivalent  to  a  command.  I.  Abstinence  embodies  thb 
BPiBiT  OF  the  oospel.  "  We  that  are  strong,"  <feo.  (chap.  xv.  1).  This  principle 
is  recognised  in  the  State.  Laws  tire  framed,  not  for  the  rich  and  powerful,  but 
the  poor,  the  oppressed,  "  the  submerged  tenth."  So  in  the  home — the  infant, 
the  feeble,  the  invalid  have  the  first  claim.  So  in  the  Church — the  sinner,  the 
weakling  should  be  our  supreme  care.  Unlike  the  world  saying,  "Let  the  devil 
take  the  hindmost,"  or  Cain  asking,  "  Am  I  my  brother's  keeper?  "  Paul  declares, 
"  If  meat  make  my  brother,"  <to.  He  practised  what  he  preached.  Illustrated  by 
his  taking  the  vow  solely  for  the  sake  of  his  weaker  brethren.  Christ  also  taught 
Belf -abnegation,  and  enforced  it  by  His  example.  If  we  were  in  personal  peril 
every  one  would  admit  we  should  abstain.  Our  neighbour  is,  and  Christ  said, 
"  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  Christ  gave  His  life  a  ransom  for 
many.  We  are  therefore  treading  in  His  footsteps  when  we  sacrifice  our  opinions 
and  our  tastes  for  the  sake  of  our  brother  who  is  in  danger  of  stumbling.  II.  It 
fulfils  the  golden  principle  that  undeblies  the  text.  1.  The  case  is  desperate. 
"  Diseases  desperate  grown  by  desperate  appliance  are  relieved."  The  surgeon  cuts 
off  a  limb  that  he  may  save  a  life.  The  fireman  pulls  down  a  house  that  the 
devouring  flames  may  not  consume  a  city.  Even  if  drink  were  one  of  "the  good 
creatures  of  God,"  it  is  Christlike  to  give  it  up  for  the  sake  of  those  it  is  destroying 
body  and  soul.  2.  We  are  free  from  a  terrible  responsibility.  Meroz  was  cursed 
for  its  neutrality.  Let  us  not  share  its  fate  by  aiding  the  foe  or  holding  aloof  in 
the  battle  that  is  raging  between  the  Church  and  the  drink  traflSo.  3.  "  None  of 
us  liveth  to  himself,"  &c.  By  taking  decided  temperance  views  no  one  can  quote 
our  example  for  a  moderation  that  may  lead  to  fatal  excess.  ^  4.  Our  usefulness 
will  be  increased.  We  can  better  help  the  drunkard  back  to  sobriety  and  Christ  when 
we  support  him  by  our  practice.  5.  We  shaU  be  rewarded.  It  may  cost  a  struggle 
to  surrender  the  convictions  and  habits  of  a  Hfetime.  But  if  abstinence  be  right  we 
are  simply  confessing  that  we  are  wiser  to-day  than  we  were  yesterday.  Having  done 
it  for  Christ's  sake,  we  may  safely  leave  ourselves  in  His  hands.    {W,  Wakinsha>x>,\ 


662  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip,  ht, 

Chrittian  abstinenee : — I.  The  genebal  pbinciplb  of  oub  text  is  that  it  is  the  duty 
of  every  Christian  scrnpulonsly  to  avoid  all  those  things  which  have  a  tendency 
to  lead  others  to  sin.  This  principle  I  would  seek  to  maintain  because — 1.  Its 
philosophy  is  sound.  Mankind  are  imitative  animals.  What  others  do,  rather 
than  what  God  says,  is  the  constant  inquiry.  This  gives  to  example  its  mighty 
influence.  It  is  surely  most  rational  that  Christians,  who  possess  powerful  influence 
by  their  example,  should  inquire,  whether  in  their  meats  or  their  drinks,  their  dresa 
or  their  manners,  they  are  Ukely  to  lead  others  to  evil.  2.  Its  philanthropy  is 
obvious.  Cain  proudly  asked,  "  Am  I  my  brother's  keeper  ?  "  and  betrayed  the 
apathy  of  his  murderous  heart  when  he  asked  the  question.  We  are  taught  to 
love  our  neighbour.  And  how  can  I  do  that  better  than  by  scrupulously  avoiding 
everything  which  has  a  tendency  to  lead  my  friend,  the  members  of  my  family,  to 
sin.  3.  Its  piety  is  unquestionable.  The  whole  life  of  the  Son  of  God  was  an 
exemplification  of  the  principle  before  us.  II.  The  peculiab  application  op  this 
PBiNciPLE  to  the  pbesekt  SUBJECT.  We  Bsk  you  to  abstain — 1.  Not  from  wholesome 
food,  but  from  poisonous  drink.  St.  Paul  laid  it  down  as  an  axiom,  that  the  Chris- 
tian disciple  should  forego  that  which  was  healthful,  and  pleasant,  for  the  sake  of 
bis  weak  brethren ;  but  we  ask  you  to  give  up  that  which  is  baneful,  for  which 
yon  can  say  nothing  but  that  it  affords  you  a  temporary  gratification,  and  may  lead 
on  to  habits  that  may  corrupt  the  mind  and  destroy  the  body.  2.  Not  from  that 
which  may  trouble  a  tender  conscience,  but  from  that  which  will  debase  moral 
character.  The  Jewish  converts  were  scrupulous  concerning  the  use  of  certain 
meats  and  drinks,  and  lest  they  should  be  tempted  to  eat,  and  thus  bring  guilt  on 
their  conscience,  the  apostle  persuades  them,  out  of  kindness  to  their  brethren,  to 
abstain.  But  we  are  asking  you  to  regard  moral  character,  for  you  are  likely  by 
moderate  use  of  ardent  spirits  to  form  the  habit  that  pollutes  the  soul  of  man.  3. 
From  that  which,  if  innocent  to  yourselves,  may  be  ruinous  to  others.  As  the 
Gentiles  could  eat  and  drink  with  a  safe  conscience,  so  yon  may  use  ardent  spirits 
60  diluted  and  so  seldom,  that  you  may  escape  the  mischief;  but  what  about 
others — your  children  and  servants,  e.g.  ?  Conclusion :  To  strengthen  the  argument 
I  appeal  to  you — 1.  On  behalf  of  yourselves.  2.  For  the  sake  of  your  country. 
Drunkenness  is  the  source  of  disease,  poverty,  and  immorality.  3.  For  the  sake  of 
our  Churches.  Many  strong  men  have  been  wounded  by  the  hateful  practice.  4. 
For  the  sake  of  missions.  The  use  of  ardent  spirits  has  been  a  fearful  hindranoe. 
{J.  Blackburn.) 

Vers.  22,  23.  Hast  thou  faith  ?  Have  It  to  thyself  before  God. — Duties  in  regard 
to  things  indifferent : — Some  things  are  unlawful  in  their  own  nature,  and  can  never 
be  right.  Others  are  wrong  because  forbidden,  and  only  as  long  as  the  prohibition 
continues,  and  only  to  the  parties  concerned.  Others  are  wrong  on  the  ground  of 
expediency,  and  therefore  are  sometimes  wrong  and  sometimes  right.  It  is  not 
always  easy  to  discriminate  these  classes.    I.  Thebe  abe,  however,  cebtain  cbitebia 

BY    WHICH    WE    CAN    DISTINGUISH    THE    NATUBALLY    WBONG    FBOM    THE     NATUBALLY    Ilf- 

siFFERENT.  1.  One  of  these  is  to  be  found  in  our  moral  constitution.  We  can  see 
intuitively  that  malice,  envy,  pride,  &o.,  are  in  their  nature  wrong.  They  are  evil, 
not  because  they  are  forbidden,  nor  because  of  their  injurious  tendency,  but  they 
are  essentially  evil.  2.  The  Scriptures  condemn  such  things  as  are  in  their  nature 
evil,  not  for  one  people,  nor  for  a  limited  period,  but  for  all  men  always.     II.  Fob 

THINGS    INDIFFERENT    IN    THEIB    NATUBE    THE    SCBIPTCBES    LAY   DOWN   THE    FOLLOWIMO 

BULE8.  1.  If  prohibited  for  any  special  reason,  they  are  unlawful  while  that  pro- 
hibition lasts.  2.  When  the  prohibition  is  removed,  they  are  right  or  wrong 
according  to  circumstances.  (1)  They  are  wrong  when  their  use  or  enjoyment 
would  do  harm  to  others.  (2)  They  are  right  when  no  such  evil  is  to  be  appre- 
hended. (3)  That  principle  is  never  to  be  sacrificed  to  expediency,  i.e.,  when 
doing  or  not  doing  anything  would  imply  the  denial  of  an  important  truth.  AH 
these  principles  are  illustrated  by  the  apostle's  conduct  and  teaching.  These  were 
circumcision,  observance  of  Jewish  holy  days,  and  eating  meats  prohibited  by  the 
Mosaic  law,  or  which  had  been  offered  to  idols.  Paul  taught — (a)  That  there  was 
no  harm  in  doing  or  neglecting  them.  If  a  man  chose  to  circumcise  his  son,  or  to 
keep  a  holy  day,  or  to  abstain  from  certain  meats,  he  was  free  to  do  so.  (6)  That 
he  must  not  make  his  judgment  a  rule  of  duty  to  others.  He  must  not  condemn 
those  who  thought  or  acted  differently  (ver.  4).  (c)  But  if  any  of  these  things 
became  a  source  of  evil,  caused  the  weak  to  offend,  then  the  law  of  love  forbids  our 
indulging  in  them,  or  availing  ourselves  of  our  Christian  liberty,    {d)  But  if  any  of 


OBiP.  xnr.]  ROMANS.  663 

these  things  were  urged  as  a  matter  of  duty,  or  a  condition  of  salvation,  then  it 
became  a  sin  to  make  them  necessary.  Paul,  therefore,  although  he  circumcised 
Timothy,  refused  to  allow  Titus  to  be  circumcised.  It  is  difficult  to  determine 
whether  compliance  with  the  prejudices  of  others  is  right  or  wrong.  Our  Lord 
disregarded  Jewish  prejudices  in  regard  to  the  Sabbath.  In  other  cases  He  com< 
plied  in  order  to  avoid  giving  offence.  III.  There  abe  cebtain  pbincipleb  impob- 
TANT  TO  HAVE  FIXED  AS  GUIDES  OF  CONDUCT.  1.  Nothing  is  right  or  wrong  which  is 
not  commanded  or  forbidden  in  Scripture.  2.  We  must  stand  fast  in  the  liberty 
wherewith  Christ  has  made  us  free,  and  not  allow  any  rule  of  duty  to  be  imposed 
on  us.  3.  In  the  use  of  this  liberty,  and  while  asserting  and  maintaining  it,  we 
should  not  so  use  it  as  to  do  harm  to  our  neighbours,  4.  Nothing  indifferent  can 
be  a  proper  ground  of  Church  discipline  or  a  condition  of  Church  fellowship.  These 
principles  are  often  violated,  as  in  the  course  pursued  by  many  on  slavery,  temper- 
ance, tobacco,  dress,  Church  ceremonies,  &c.  {C.  Hodge,  D.D.)  Happy 
iB  he  that  condenmeth  not  himself  In  that  thing  wMch  he  alloweth. — The 
management  and  offices  of  conscience : — There  is  a  great  difference  of  opinion 
among  good  men  respecting  many  things  in  religion.  They  are  not  altogether 
agreed  respecting  moral  duties.  There  is  one  point,  however,  in  which  we 
are  all  agreed — which  is,  the  necessity  of  every  man's  following  the  dictatea 
of  his  own  conscience.  The  man  that  violates  his  own  conscience  stands  con- 
denmed  in  bis  own  mind  ;  whilst  "  He  is  happy  that  condemneth  not  himself  in 
that  thing  which  he  alloweth."    I.  The  offices  of  conscience.    It  is  given  us  as — 

1.  A  secret  monitor.  "  The  spirit  of  man  is  the  candle  of  the  Lord."  It  testifies 
beforehand  respecting  the  quality  of  the  act  proposed,  and  operates  as  a  stimulus 
if  the  act  be  good,  and  as  a  check  if  the  act  be  evil.  2.  An  authoritative  judge.  It 
is  Qod's  vicegerent  in  the  soul.  Sometimes  conscience  exercises  this  authority  im- 
mediately, as  in  the  cases  of  Adam  and  David.  At  other  times  it  delays  its  verdict 
nntil  some  occasion  give  reason  for  speaking  plainly  the  truth,  as  in  the  case  of 
Joseph's  brethren.  Sometimes  it  delivers  judgment,  and  so  produces  humiliation, 
as  in  the  case  of  Peter ;  at  other  times  it  will  drive  a  man  to  despondency,  as  in  the 
ease  of  Judas.  H.  Oub  duty  to  oub  consciences.  We  ought — 1.  To  get  our  con- 
Bciences  well  informed.  Conscience  prescribes  no  rules,  but  gives  testimony  to  a 
rule  before  existing.  Nor  does  any  man  ever  commit  sin  by  following  its  dictates. 
8t.  Paul  siimed,  of  course ;  but  not  because  he  followed  the  dictates  of  his  con- 
science, but  on  account  of  his  not  having  his  conscience  well  informed.  He  did  it 
"  ignorantly,  through  unbelief."  We  must  always  look  to  God  to  guide  us  by  His 
Word  and  Spirit.  Nor  should  we  hastily  imagine  that  our  views  are  correct ;  we 
must  be  jealous  of  ourselves  lest  Satan  deceive  us ;  "  Take  care  that  the  light  that 
is  in  you  be  not  darkness,"  &e.  2.  To  consult  it  on  all  occasions.  To  act  first, 
and  afterwards  to  make  inquiries,  is  a  certain  way  to  involve  ourselves  in  guilt.  To 
do  anything  without  a  careful  inquiry  into  the  quality  of  the  action,  is  presump- 
tuous. Nor  is  the  testimony  of  conscience  always  easily  obtained ;  sometimes, 
indeed,  it  speaks  instantaneously ;  but  generally  it  requires  time  to  make  a  fair 
estimate  of  the  circumstances ;  and  then,  if  they  have  respect  to  God  only,  we 
should  consider  the  example  of  Christ ;  or  if  it  be  in  respect  to  man,  we  should 
change  places  with  the  person  concerned.  If  we  doubt  concerning  the  lawfulness 
of  anything,  we  are  self -condemned  if  we  perform  it,  for  "  whatsoever  is  not  of  faith 
is  sin."  We  should  pause  in  such  a  case,  and  deliberate,  until  we  see  our  way 
clearly — and  determine  not  to  proceed  in  anything  until  we  are  fully  persuaded  in 
our  own  minds.  3.  To  keep  it  upright  and  tender.  Conscience  may  easily  be 
warped,  and  silenced  too,  so  that  it  will  give  no  testimony  until  awakened  by  some 
flagrant  enormity.     III.  The  happiness  of  confobmity  to  conscience.     1.  Peace. 

2.  Confidence.  3.  The  favour  of  God.  (C.  Simeon,  M.A.)  The  danger 
of  contracting  unallowable  habits  : — I.  The  foundation  on  which  the  caution 
IN  THE  TEXT  IS  BUILT.  1.  There  are  some  things  which  are  in  themselves 
indifferent,  but  are  sinful  by  accident.  (1)  When  they  are  indulged  to  excess ; 
when  we  spend  too  much  time  about  them ;  or  indulge  them  to  a  degree  that  is 
injurious  to  the  health  of  body  or  peace  of  mind.  (2)  Indifferent  things  may 
become  unlawful  by  being  unseasonable.  Not  only  the  beauty  and  success,  but  the 
very  lawfulness  of  an  action  often  depends  upon  opportunity.  (3)  Another  way 
whereby  an  indifferent  action  may  become  sinful  is  its  giving  offence  to  others, 
2.  There  are  other  kinds  of  actions  which  some  men  inadvertently  carry  into  com- 
mon practice  that  are  not  only  circumstantially  but  essentially  evil  in  themselves. 
And  the  great  danger  of  contracting  any  habits  of  this  kind  lies  here,  that  they 


664  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xif. 

wear  off  a  sense  of  the  evil  of  them.  IL  In  what  manmeb  this  happiness  is  to  bb 
ATTAiNBD.     1.  Let  US  See  in  what  manner  bad  habits  are  originally  contracted. 

(1)  Sometimes  by  implicitly  following  the  examples  of  others ;  especially  their 
superiors ;  especially  if  these  have  been  distinguished  for  their  wisdom  and  piety. 

(2)  Another  thing  that  often  draws  men  unawares  into  a  sinful  course  of  actions  is 
precipitancy  or  inattention  to  the  nature  and  consequences  of  them.  Before  we 
indulge  in  any  kind  of  temper  or  conduct  that  is  like  to  become  a  habit,  we  should 
ask  ourselves  three  questions,  (a)  What  is  it  ?  is  it  in  its  own  nature  good,  bad,  or 
indifferent  ?  (b)  Whither  does  it  tend  7  what  influence  will  it  have  on  the  temper 
of  my  mind  or  the  health  of  my  body  ?  (c)  Where  will  it  end  t  how  will  it  appear 
in  the  review  ?  and  what  will  be  the  certain  consequence  if  it  settle  into  a  habit  ? 

(3)  Men  are  often  betrayed  into  an  unlawful  conduct  by  venturing  boldly  on  the 
very  verge  of  vice  or  going  to  the  utmost  bounds  of  what  is  lawful.  The  precise 
limits  of  virtue  and  vice  are  indiscernible  ;  or,  rather,  the  passage  from  the  one  to 
the  other  is  through  so  easy  and  gradual  a  shade  that  men  oftentimes  insensibly 
slide  out  of  the  former  into  the  latter,  and  are  got  far  into  the  regions  of  vice  before 
they  are  aware.  And  the  danger  of  this  appears  still  greater  when  we  consider  the 
nearer  approach  we  make  to  a  sinful  object,  the  stronger  is  its  attraction.  (4) 
Another  common  source  of  wrong  conduct,  and  what  frequently  betrays  men  into 
bad  habits,  is  the  undue  influence  of  the  appetites  and  passions,  in  opposition  to 
the  dictates  of  conscience  and  reason.  (5)  Another  thing  that  deceives  some 
unwary  minds  into  a  wrong  course  of  conduct  is  the  false  names  that  are  given  to 
sinful  actions,  whereby  the  evil  of  them  is  concealed  and  their  deformity  disguised. 
(6)  The  most  common  reason  that  men  so  generally  condemn  themselves  in  the 
things  which  they  allow,  is  because  they  forget  to  form  their  judgment  by  the 
principles  and  their  Uves  by  the  rules  of  Christianity.  2.  How  they  are  to  be  con- 
quered. (1)  The  difficulty  of  the  attempt.  The  reason  that  men  so  seldom  succeed 
in  their  attempt  to  break  off  a  bad  habit  is  because  they  do  not  set  about  it  in  good 
earnest  or  in  a  right  way.  (2)  If  we  would  succeed  in  it  we  must  often  renew  and 
reinforce  our  resolutions  to  persevere,  (a)  As  all  bad  habits  are  contracted  by  a 
frequent  repetition  of  bad  actions,  so  they  are  conquered  by  a  frequent  repetition  of 
the  opposite  good  ones,  (b)  Temptations  are  more  weakened  by  decliiiing  than 
opposing  them,  (c)  To  suppress  the  flrst  motions  and  avoid  the  remote  occasions 
of  sin  is  the  easiest  way  to  conquer  it.  (d)  Let  us  especially  beware  of  indolence, 
self-confldence,  in  a  time  of  prosperity.  For  when  we  are  least  apprehensive  of 
danger  it  is  then  oftentimes  the  nearest.    III.  Illustbatb  the  tbuxh  of  thb  pbo- 

POSrriON  CONTAINED  IN  THE  TEXT,  AND  SHOW  WHEBEIN  THB  HAPPINESS  HERB  HENTIONBD 

DOTH  CONSIST.  This  happiness  may  refer  both  to  the  present  and  future  world.  1. 
With  regard  to  the  present  world  the  man  who  condemns  not  himself  in  the 
thing  which  he  alloweth  is  happy  in  two  respects  especially.  (1)  This  gives 
him  the  best  evidence  he  can  have  of  his  security.  One  who  takes  so  much  care 
to  please  God  must  have  the  fear  of  Him  before  his  eyes  and  the  love  of  Him  in 
his  heart.  (2)  This  constant  care  to  keep  our  heart  and  conduct  conformable  to 
the  Word  of  God  will  inspire  us  with  great  freedom  and  comfort  of  mind  when 
we  have  access  to  Him  in  prayer.  Aiii  what  more  comprehensive  happiness 
can  we  conceive  than  this  ?  2.  This  happiness  reaches  beyond  the  bounds  of  time, 
and  will  attend  us  in  the  world  of  spirits,  where  we  shall  be  happy  beyond  all  that 
words  can  paint  or  thought  conceive.  Conclusion :  1.  How  well  is  Christianity  adapted 
to  promote  the  happiness  of  civil  society  I  If  it  does  not  permit  us,  even  in  matters 
of  indifference,  to  do  anything  that  would  unnecessarily  offend  our  neighbour,  this 
implies  our  duty  to  cultivate  the  greatest  tenderness  and  good- will  towards  him.  2. 
We  see  that,  considering  the  condition  of  our  natures  as  frail  beings  and  our  con- 
nection with  creatures  as  imperfect  as  ourselves,  we  are  under  an  indispensable 
necessity  of  exercising  continual  circumspection  and  frequent  self-denial  and 
patience  in  order  to  keep  our  conscience  clear.  3.  Let  us  take  care,  then,  what 
habits  we  contract,  and  diligently  examine  those  we  have  already  contracted.  (/. 
Mason,  M.A.)  Better  be  sure  than  sorry: — "Better  be  sure  than  sorry  1  " 
said  a  garden-worker,  when  his  employer  expressed  a  doubt  whether  it  was 
necessary  to  cover  a  certain  vegetation  to  protect  it  from  frost.  "  Better  be 
sure  than  sorry  I  "  A  man  who  is  not  sure  is  very  likely  to  be  sorry.  He 
who  takes  things  on  trust  will  be  quite  likely  to  be  cheated  and  disappointed 
at  last.  The  business  man  who  treads  in  uncertain  paths,  who  is  not  sure 
of  his  course,  is  very  likely  to  be  sorry  he  has  taken  it.  Keep  on  the  safe  side. 
Do  not  give  yourself  the  beneflt  of  eveiy  doubt.    Be  lenient  to  others'  faults,  but 


CHAP.  XT.]  ROMANS.  665 

■triot  regarding  yoor  own.  If  there  be  an  act  which  in  your  own  mind  is  doubtful 
or  questionable  in  its  character,  take  the  course  of  wisdom  and  prudence.  It  would 
be  a  terrible  thing  to  be  mistaken  in  the  final  day ;  it  is  better  to  be  sure  here  than 
to  be  sorry  at  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ.  (Christian  Journal.)  And  ho  that 
donbteth  is  damned  if  he  eat,  because  he  eateth  not  of  faith. — Doubtful  actions : — 
1.  Doubt  of  its  rectitude  makes  the  action  doubtful.  2.  Doubtful  actions  bring 
condemnation.  3.  Condemnation  implies  sin.  4.  The  sin  lies  in  the  want  of  faith. 
5.  Therefore  all  doubtful  actions  should  be  avoided.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Doubtful 
things  .•—Resolved,  that  I  will  never  do  anything  about  the  lavrfulness  of  which  I 
am  doubtful,  unless  I  am  equally  doubtful  whether  it  be  lawful  to  omit  the  doing  of 
it.  {Jon.  Edwards.)  For  whatsoever  Is  not  of  faith  is  sin. — I.  How  this  is 
OTTEN  uisAPPLiBD.  1.  When  all  the  virtues  of  the  heathen — 2.  The  morality  of 
the  unconverted — 3.  The  proprieties  of  civilised  life — are  denounced  as  polished 
vice.  IL  How  n  ought  to  be  appued.  1.  To  Christian  believers.  2.  As  a  rule 
for  the  regulation  of  all  doubtful  actions.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Whatsoever  it  not  of 
faith  is  sin : — L  In  obdeb  tob  wobes  to  be  acceptable  to  Qoo  they  must — L,  Be 
done  by  His  grace.  2.  Spring  from  a  principle  of  faith.  II.  The  bpibit  which 
leads  a  uan  to  belt  on  his  unassisted  efeobts  as  bendebino  him  meet  to  bbceivb 
OBACX  IB  SIN,  because  it  involves  a  denial  of — 1.  Christ's  atonement.  2.  Human 
infirmity.  3.  The  need  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  help.  Lessons :  1.  For  reproof.  2. 
Correction.  3.  Instruction  in  righteousness.  {W.  Webster,  M.A.)  Whatsoever 
it  not  of  faith  is  sin : — I.  Explain  the  proposition.  Some  actions  are  doubtful ;  in  this 
case  compliance  is  sinful,  because  it  discovers — 1.  A  contempt  of  God's  authority 
and  favour.  2.  Light  views  of  the  evil  of  sin.  3.  A  great  want  of  self-denial  and 
resolution.  4.  Some  prevailing  bad  principle  or  motive  of  action.  5.  And  leads  to 
greater  irregularities.  IL  Some  pbactical  beflections.  1.  How  aggravated  the 
guilt  of  presamptuous  sin.  2.  We  should  show  a  tender  regard  for  others  that  we 
do  not  lead  them  into  sin.  8.  In  all  doubtful  cases  it  is  best  to  keep  on  the  safe 
Bid*.    (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 


CHAFTEB  XV. 

Tibs.  1-8.  We  then  that  are  Bttong  ought  to  hear  the  Inflrmities  of  the  weak 
and  not  to  please  ourselves. — The  weak  and  the  strong : — This  noble  aphorism 
contains  the  highest  philosophy  and  the  purest  religion.  We  have  here — I.  Thb 
PBiNCiPLB  oy  AssocuTioN.  How  much  has  this  come  to  the  fore  1  We  have  Life, 
Fire,  and  Co-operative  "Associations."  Men  begin  to  see  the  advantages  of  these 
things,  and  we  should  not  forget  that  it  was  Christianity  which  gave  the  key-note 
to  their  existence.  But  Paul  goes  further.  He  would  have  the  whole  world  one 
vast  co-operative  association — men  and  women  associating  in  all  things,  and  re- 
membering that  they  are  members  of  one  great  family,  and  acting  as  such.  II.  The 
LAW  OF  ASSISTANCE.  This  would  be  a  poor  world  if  we  were  not  to  lend  a  helping 
hand  one  to  another ;  the  strong  man  is  to  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak.  He  is 
to  do  so  by  advice,  by  bestowing  alms,  by  giving  encouragement,  by  kindly  help. 
How  highly  does  our  Lord  praise  those  who  helped  others  (see  parable  of  Good 
Samaritan),  and  Himself  set  us  the  example.  III.  The  law  of  equalisation.  The 
inhabitants  of  this  world  are  diverse;  they  differ  in  character,  appearance,  and 
position.  The  law  of  our  text  teaches  the  rich  to  help  the  poor,  the  strong  the 
weak,  and  so  adjust  the  inequalities  of  life.  {D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  duty  of  the 
strong  to  the  weak  : — The  context  suggests — 1.  That  conscientiousness  has  respect 
often  to  very  unimportant  matters.  Some  Christians  in  Rome  had  a  conscientious 
belief  concerning  diet.  There  have  always  been  men  in  the  Church  who  have  made 
a  conscience  of  trifles.  2.  That  the  conscientiousness  of  one  man  is  no  rule  for  the 
conduct  of  another.  Because  one  man  in  the  Church  exalts  trifles,  whilst  respect- 
ing his  sincerity,  I  am  not  bound  to  follow  his  example.  3.  That  conscientiousness 
directed  to  unimportant  matters  indicates  great  weakness  of  character.  Men  who 
attach  importance  to  trifles  Paul  regards  as  "  weak  "  men.  Now  what  is  the  duty 
of  strong  men  to  such  ?  Not  to  despise  and  denounce  them ;  to  force  them  to 
renounce  their  trivialities  nor  to  grant  them  a  mere  toleration ;  bat  to  bear  their 


666  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt. 

infirmities.  This  is  a  duty — I.  Not  vkby  pleasant  to  self.  The  language  seema 
to  imply  that  it  wonld  be  more  pleasant  to  detach  one's  self  altogether  from  such. 
Nothing  is  more  irritating  to  strong  men  than  the  twaddlings  of  little  souls.  But 
Paul  says,  notwithstanding  the  disagreeableness  of  it,  you  must  come  down  to  their 
little  world,  and  be  loving  and  magnanimous.  Don't  kick  at  their  toys,  but  show 
them  something  better.  The  most  painful  thing  is  that  they  regard  themselves  aa 
strong,  and  that  in  proportion  to  their  very  feebleness  is  their  insolence.  If  they 
confessed  their  weakness  there  would  be  some  pleasure  in  ••  bearing  their  infirmities." 
II.  Truly  gratipyino  to  thb  weak  (ver.  2).  1.  The  weak  man,  by  this  treatment, 
is  gratified  by  the  reception  of  "good."  The  breath  of  a  nobler  spirit  upon  him 
has  dispersed  in  some  measure  the  fumes  about  his  soul,  broadened  his  horizon, 
»nd  touched  him  into  a  fresher  life.  He  is  pleased  because  his  moral  circulation  is 
quickened,  and  he  feels  himself  a  stronger  man.  2.  The  "  good  "  he  has  received 
is  through  his  "  edification."  Not  through  flattering  his  prejudices,  but  by  in- 
doctrinating his  soul  with  higher  truths.  IIL  Pee-eminently  Chbistlike  (ver.  3).  v 
To  "bear  the  infirmities"  of  others  Christ  sacrificed  Himself.  How  Christ  bore  \ 
with  His  disciples  !  (Ibid.)  The  duty  of  the  strong  to  the  weak : — Christians  are  / 
a  band  of  pilgrims  from  the  city  of  Destruction  to  the  Jerusalem  above.  Though 
none  are  in  perfect  health — none  without  some  burden,  yet  some  are  comparatively 
healthy,  strong  and  unencumbered ;  others  are  weak  and  sickly,  and  very  heavy 
laden.  The  former  class  are  not  to  form  themselves  into  a  separate  band,  and  push 
forward,  regardless  of  what  may  become  of  their  less  fortunate  brethren,  leaving 
them  to  follow  as  they  may.  No,  they  are  to  remain  what  the  Lord  of  the  pilgrims 
made  them,  one  society — a  band  of  brothers.  The  strong  and  unencumbered  are 
to  help  forward  the  weak  and  burdened.  They  are  not,  indeed,  in  order  that  the 
whole  company  may  appear  alike,  to  pretend  that  they  also  are  weak  and  heavy 
laden ;  still  less,  if  possible,  are  they  voluntarily  to  reduce  themselves  in  these 
respects  to  a  level  with  their  brethren ;  but  they  are  patiently  to  submit  to  such 
inconveniences  as  arise  out  of  their  connection  with  such  companions,  and  while 
using  every  means  to  have  their  diseases  cured,  and  their  strength  increased,  and 
their  burdens  removed  or  lessened,  they  must  not  at  present  attempt  to  make  them 
move  faster  than  they  are  able,  as  that  would  be  likely  to  produce  stumbling  and 
'■xCi  t"  •  falling.  How  happy  would  it  have  been,  how  happy  would  it  be,  if  all  the  weak 
*  Q  '  were  treated  by  the  strong  as  Feeblemind  in  the  '*  Pilgrim's  Progress,"  says  he  was 
.,  treated  by  his  brethren:  "Indeed,  I  have  found  much  relief  from  pilgrims,  though 
none  was  willing  to  go  so  softly  as  I  am  forced  to  do ;  yet  still  as  they  came  on,  - 
they  bid  me  be  of  good  cheer,  and  said  that  it  was  the  will  of  the  Lord  that  comfort 
should  be  given  to  the  feeble  minded,  and  so  went  on  their  own  pace."  (/.  Brown, 
D.D.)  The  strong  to  bear  with  the  weak  : — 1.  There  are  three  stages  of  develop- 
ment in  human  life  and  society.  (1)  That  in  which  men  regulate  their  life  by  rules. 
Such  things  you  may  do,  and  such  things  you  may  not  do.  (2)  The  higher  life 
of  principle,  when  men  open  up  a  consideration  of  the  reasons  of  the  why  you  shall 
do  so  or  not  do  so.  (3)  The  higher  development  is  reached  when  to  rules  and 
principles  is  added  intuition,  the  flash  by  which  men  discover  right  and  wrong  by 
their  harmony  or  their  discord  with  their  own  moral  faculties.  2.  As  men  go  up 
along  the  scale,  they  change  gradually ;  and  men  that  during  all  the  early  part  of 
their  life  have  been  subject  to  rules,  begin  to  substitute  their  own  intelligence  for 
them.  A  little  child  is  told,  "  No,  you  must  not  go  there."  When,  however,  the 
child  comes  to  be  fourteen  or  fifteen  years  of  age,  we  no  longer  say,  "  You  shall  not 
do  this  or  that  thing  " ;  but  "  You  must  study  the  peace  of  the  farciily  " ;  or,  "  You 
must  see  to  it  that  you  do  nothing  to  interfere  with  health."  Instead  of  having 
practical  rules,  he  begins  to  have  principles  by  which  to  guide  himself.  Note — 
I.  The  dangers  incident  to  this  development.  1.  Christians  who  are  on  the 
lower  plane — where  they  act  from  rules — are  strongly  incUned  to  believe  that  those 
who  go  higher  and  act  from  principles  are  acting  from  lawlessness,  because  they  are 
not  acting  from  considerations  once  in  force.  Hence,  religious  development  may 
seem  deterioration.  A  conscientious  idolator,  e.g.,  cannot  dissociate  religion  from 
the  use  of  superstitious  observances ;  and  if  a  native  near  to  such  an  one  forsakes 
the  god  of  his  father,  and  turns  to  Jehovah,  the  convert  may  seem  as  if  he  was 
abandoning  all  religion.  He  is  abandoning  the  only  religion  that  this  heathen  man 
knows  anything  about.  And  I  can  understand  how  to  an  honest  Bomanist,  when 
one  neither  will  tell  his  beads,  nor  respect  holy  hours,  nor  accept  the  voice  of  the 
priest,  it  should  seem  as  if  he  abandoned  all  religion.  2.  On  the  other  hand,  while 
there  are  dangers  of  this  kind  to  those  who  are  left  behind,  there  are  many  dangers 


CHAT,  rv.]  ROMANS.  667 

incident  to  those  who  go  up ;  and  it  was  to  those  especiallj  that  the  apostle  wrote. 
And  this  is  not  so  strange  after  all.  (1)  We  know  that  sodden  obanges,  e.g. ,  from 
barbarism  to  civilisation  do  not  prove  oeneficial  to  adults.  If  you  take  a  Chinaman, 
twenty -five  or  thirty  years  old,  and  bring  him  into  New  York,  he  becomes  a  kind  of 
neuter.  He  is  neither  a  good  Chinaman  nor  a  good  American.  As  a  tree  trans- 
planted, and  shorn  of  roots  below,  and  of  branches  above,  is  slow  to  regain  itself, 
and  perhaps  never  will  make  its  old  top  again,  so  it  is  with  human  transplantation. 
(2)  Among  civilised  men  sudden  violent  changes,  e.g.,  from  great  poverty  to  great 
wealth,  are  not  beneficial.  (3)  Sudden  and  violent  moral  changes  carry  their 
dangers,  too.  There  are  men  who  have  trained  their  consciences  all  their  life  long 
to  believe  that  right  or  wrong  consisted  in  the  performance  of  certain  duties.  But 
by  and  by  it  was  made  known  to  them  that  being  a  Christian  depends  on  love,  and 
not  on  a  certain  routine ;  and  that  the  law  is  the  law  of  freedom.  And  this  is  a 
new  liberty ;  and  new  liberty  stands  very  close  on  to  old  license.  And  men  who 
begin  to  feel  their  freedom  are  Uke  birds  that  have  been  long  in  a  cage,  and  do  not 
know  what  they  can  do  with  their  wings,  and  fly  to  where  they  are  quickly  seized 
bv  the  hawk.  With  this  sense  of  intoxication  comes  a  certain  contempt  for  the 
old  state.  When  a  bean  comes  up  it  brings  up  its  first  two  leaves  with  it — great 
thick  covers,  full  of  nutriment,  to  supply  the  stem  until  it  begins  to  develop  other 
leaves,  and  to  supply  itself.  Now  suppose  the  bean,  looking  down,  should  say  con- 
temptuously, "  What  a  great  clumsy  stiff  leaf  that  is  down  there  1  See  how  fine, 
how  delicate  the  blossoms  are  that  I  am  having  up  here  " — why  the  whole  of  this  up 
here  came  from  that  down  there.  And  yet,  how  many  persons,  as  they  are 
developing  into  a  higher  religious  life,  feel,  as  the  first-fruits  of  their  spiritual 
liberty,  contempt  for  their  past  selves,  and  for  other  people  who  are  in  that  state 
from  which  they  have  just  emerged  I  Then  comes  almost  spontaneously  the  air  of 
superiority ;  and  then  the  judging  men,  not  by  comparing  their  conduct  with  their 
views  of  duty,  but  by  comparing  their  conduct  with  your  views  of  duty — which  is 
the  unfairest  thing  you  can  do  to  a  man.  In  other  words,  dictation  and  despotism 
are  very  apt  to  go,  with  arrogant  natures,  from  a  lower  stage  to  a  higher  one. 
II.  Thb  apostle's  pbescbiftion  fob  this  state.  Superiority,  he  tells  us,  gives  no 
right  to  arrogate  authority.  Because  I  am  an  architect,  or  a  statesman,  or  in  any 
direction  God  has  given  me  eminent  gifts,  and  culture  to  develop  them,  I  have  no 
right  of  authority  over  others.  Leadership  does  not  go  with  these  relative  superior- 
ities; but  responsibility  does.  "We,  then,  that  are  strong  ought  .  .  .  not  to 
please  ourselves  " — which  is  generally  considered  the  supreme  business  of  a  man  I 
When  a  man  has  acquired  money  and  education,  he  makes  it  his  business  to  render 
himself  happy.  He  fills  his  mansion  with  luxuries,  that  he  may  not  be  mixed  up 
with  the  noisy  affairs  of  life.  But,  says  the  apostle,  ye  that  are  strong  have  no 
right  to  do  any  such  thing.  You  ought  to  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak.  All 
human  trouble  ought  to  roll  itself  on  to  the  broadest,  not  on  the  feeblest,  shoulders. 
Bich  men  are  to  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  poor.  If  a  rough  and  coarse  man  meets 
a  fine  man,  and  the  question  between  them  is  as  to  which  shall  give  preference  to 
the  other,  the  man  that  is  highest  up  is  to  be  the  servant  of  the  man  that  is  lowest 
down.  Everywhere  this  is  the  law.  "  Let  every  one  please  his  neighbour."  What  I 
are  we  to  be  mere  pleasure-mongers?  No ;  " Let  every  one  of  us  please  his  neigh- 
bour for  his  good  to  edification '  — please  him  in  that  sense  which  shall  make  a 
better  man  of  him.  As  a  watchmaker  never  can  see  a  watch  that  is  out  of  order 
that  he  does  not  feel  instinctively  impelled  to  take  hold  of  it  and  put  it  in  order, 
BO I  feel  like  putting  my  hand  on  a  man  that  is  too  small,  and  making  him  large. 
Paul  says  that  you  must  not  do  it  rudely,  authoritatively,  but  that  you  must  please 
him.  And  there  is  more — "For  even  Christ  pleased  not  Himself,"  <fec.  Well, 
that  is  a  hard  task ;  and  therefore  the  apostle  adds,  "  Now  the  God  of  patience," 
&o.  1.  If  this  seems  impossible  to  any  of  you,  if  it  even  seems  romantic  and 
fanciful,  I  reply  that  you  see  it  every  day.  Not  in  business  or  in  politics.  Bat  go 
where  father  and  mother  have  a  little  commonwealth  of  their  own,  and  where  the 
children  are,  and  see  if  the  wisest  and  the  strongest  and  the  best  are  not  absolutely 
the  servants  of  the  poorest  and  the  weakest.  Now,  if  you  can  do  it  in  the  family, 
yon  can  do  it  out  of  the  family.  2.  If  this  be  so,  we  see  the  application  of  it  to 
those  who  are  set  free,  by  larger  thinking,  from  the  narrow  dogmas  of  the  past. 
What  is  the  evidence  of  your  superiority  ?  Every  change  of  latitude,  as  yon  pass 
towards  the  equator  from  the  poles,  is  marked,  not  by  the  thermometer,  but  by  the 
garden  and  the  orchard ;  and  I  know  that  I  am  going  toward  the  equator,  not  so 
much  by  what  the  navigator  tells  me  as  by  what  the  sun  tells  me.    The  evidence  of 


668  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rr. 

going  np  in  the  moral  scale  is  not  that  yon  dissent  from  your  old  dogmas,  and  have 
rejected  your  ordinances,  and  given  wide  berth  to  your  Churches.  If  you  have  gone 
higher  up,  let  us  see  that  development  in  you  of  a  true  Christian  life  which  shall 
show  that  you  are  higher.  What  use  is  your  freedom  of  thought,  if  with  that 
freedom  you  do  not  get  half  as  many  virtues  as  men  who  have  not  the  freedom  of 
thought  ?  3.  Those  who  have  risen  above  others  are  not  at  liberty  to  divide  them- 
selves from  those  with  whom  they  are  not  in  sympathy.  To  bring  the  matter  right 
home,  you  are  frugal,  and  your  brother  is  a  spendthrift.  You  take  the  air  of 
superiority,  and  talk  about  him,  and  say,  "  William  is  a  sorry  dog.  He  never 
could  keep  anything."  And  the  implication  of  it  is,  "I  am  difierent"  But  the 
apostle  says,  "  Are  you  superior  to  lum  because  you  are  frugal  7  Then  you  are  to 
bear  with  his  spendthriftness."  I  put  on  you  the  responsibility  of  taking  care  of 
him.  Tou  are  to  bear  with  him ;  and  you  are  to  do  it  not  for  your  own  pleasure, 
nor  for  his  mere  pleasure,  but  for  his  pleasure  to  edification,  that  Christ  may  save 
his  soul.  Here  is  a  man  that  says  of  his  neighbour,  "  He  is  an  exacting,  arrogant, 
brute  creature."  Yes,  but  Christ  died  for  him,  as  He  died  for  you ;  that  hard  man 
is  your  brother ;  and  you  are  to  seek  his  pleasure  to  edification.  If  there  is  either 
that  ought  to  serve  the  other,  it  is  the  good  man.  That  is  what  you  do.  Good  men 
pay  the  taxes  of  bad  men.  Patriotic  men  pay  the  war  bills  of  unpatriotic  men.  The 
good  bear  up  the  bad,  and  are  their  subjects.  4.  There  is  an  application,  also,  to 
the  various  sects.  A  Church  is  nothing  but  a  multitude  of  families.  All  you  want 
is,  that  those  that  are  purest,  those  that  are  "  orthodox,"  shall  bear  with  those  that 
are  not  orthodox.  You  must  go  down  and  serve  those  that  have  a  poor  worship. 
The  higher  must  serve  the  lower.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  conduct  of  the  strong 
towards  the  weak : — I.  Defined.  1.  We  must  bear  with  their  infirmities.  2.  This 
will  require  the  sacrifice  of  our  own  will  to  please  others.  3.  But  the  end  is  their 
edification.  U.  Enfobced.  1.  By  the  example  of  Christ.  2.  Who  sacrificed 
Himself.  8.  And  bore  oar  infirmities.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Bearing  the  infirmitie$ 
of  the  weak : — Not  very  long  ago  a  valued  friend  requested  me  to  visit  a  young 
woman,  lodging  in  an  alley  in  Holbom,  who  was  dying  of  the  most  painful  of  all 
diseases.  The  small  room  was  delicately  clean  and  neat ;  and  on  the  little  table 
stood  a  jar  adorned  with  a  few  country  flowers,  the  offering  of  an  early  friend.  By 
the  bedside  stood  a  pale  young  woman,  with  a  gentle  and  sympathising  countenance, 
smoothing  tiie  sufferer's  pillow.  It  was  scarcely  whiter  tlian  her  face  ;  the  mouth 
and  chin  of  which  were  covered  by  a  cambric  handkerchief,  to  veil  the  ravages 
which  her  terrible  disease  had  made.  After  a  few  inquiries  of  the  nurse,  I  spoke 
a  Uttle  to  the  sufferer ;  and  then  remembering  that  it  must  seem  so  easy  for  one  in 
comparative  health  to  speak  to  her  of  the  goodness  of  God,  but  how  much  harder 
it  must  be  for  her  to  believe  it,  lying  there,  hour  after  hour,  in  anguish,  which 
Buffered  her  scarcely  to  sleep  by  night  or  by  day,  increasing  during  the  thirteen 
months  past,  and  leaving  no  hope  of  alleviation  in  the  future  but  by  death,  I 
thought  it  best  to  tell  her  all  that  was  passing  in  my  mind.  And  then  I  added,  "  If 
you  can  believe  that  the  blessed  Saviour,  who,  when  He  was  on  earth,  healed  all 
manner  of  disease  with  a  touch  or  a  word,  and  who  has  the  same  healing  power 
now,  yet  withholds  it  from  you,  does  so  from  some  infinitely  wise  and  loving  reason, 
it  would  do  me  good  to  know  it.  If  it  be  so,  will  you  just  lift  up  your  finger  in 
assent  ?  "  She  raised  her  pale,  transparent  hand,  and  waved  it  over  her  head  with 
an  expression  in  her  sunken  eyes  which  almost  glorified  her  face.  I  could  not  help 
saying  to  her,  when  I  could  command  my  voice  enough  to  speak,  "  I  believe  that 
one  wave  of  your  hand  gives  more  honour  to  your  Saviour  in  the  sight  of  all  the 
angels  of  heaven,  than  whole  years  of  any  little  services  which  He  might  permit 
me  to  render  Him,  in  comparative  health  and  ease ;  because  your  faith  is  so  much 
more  severely  tried."  It  seemed  a  new  and  delightful  thought  to  her,  that  patience 
having  its  perfect  work,  would  glorify  her  Saviour.  She  had  just  meekly  borne, 
because  it  was  His  will.  The  tears  gathered  in  her  eyes,  and  she  made  sign  for  her 
slate,  and  wrote  upon  it,  "This makes  me  so  happy.  How  wonderful  and  how  kind, 
if  He  will  make  glory  for  Himself  out  of  such  a  poor  creature  as  me  I "  Soon  after 
she  added,  '*  He  has  taught  me  to  say  of  Him,  My  Beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am  His. 
He  has  forgiven  aU  my  sins.  He  loves  me  freely.  He  fills  me  with  peace  and  joy 
in  believing."  When  her  companion  came  downstairs,  I  asked  her  if  she  tried  to 
go  out  for  a  little  fresh  air  sometimes,  and  had  any  one  to  relieve  her  occasionally 
of  the  nursing  by  night.  She  said,  "  I  take  a  turn  in  the  alley  to  get  a  Uttle  fresh 
air  now  and  then ;  but  I  should  not  like  to  leave  her  for  many  minutes,  nor  to  be 
fleeping  much,  while  she  is  suffering."    "  Is  she  your  sister  ?  "  I  inquired.    "  Ho, 


CBiP.  rv.]  ROMANS.  669 

ma'am,  we  are  no  relationB,"  was  her  answer ;  "  we  were  fellow-servants  together 
ftt  an  hotel  in  the  West  End.   And  once,  when  I  was  ill,  she  nursed  me  very  kindly ; 
■o  when  this  terrible  illnesp  came  on  her,  I  could  not  let  her  leave  her  place  alone 
to  go  among  strangers— for  she's  an  orphan ;  so  I  left  with  her."    "  And  may  I 
venture  to  ask,  how  are  you  both  supported?  "    "  She  had  saved  a  good  bit,  which 
lasted  some  time ;  and  now  I  have  still  some  left  of  my  own  savings  whilst  I  was  a 
housemaid."    "A  housemaid!  a  queen!"  I  thought  to  myself,  and  could  have 
laid  down  my  hand  for  her  to  walk  over,  and  felt  it  honoured  by  her  touch. 
That  woman  of  a  royal  heart  sent  me  through  London  that  day  feeling  the 
whole  world  better,  because  I  had  met  with  such  an  instance  of  disinterested, 
Belf-sacrificing  love.     One  word  revealed  its  inner  secret.    "We  are  as  good  as 
sisters,"  she  said;    "we  both  know  that  our  Saviour  loves  us,  and  we  love 
Him,  and  want  to  love  Him  better."     {Englith  Hearts  and  English  Eandt.) 
Bearing  the  infirmitiet  of  the  weak ;— 1.  In  the  grouping  of  nature  dissimilar  things 
are  brought  together,  and  by  serving  each  other's  wants  and  furnishing  the  comple- 
ment to  each  other's  beauty,  present  a  whole  more  perfect  than  the  sum  of  all  the 
parts.    The  several  kingdoms  of  nature  are  not  like  our  political  empires,  enclosed 
with  jealous  boundaries.     They  form  an  indissoluble  economy ;  the  mineral  sub- 
duing itself  with  a  basis  for  the  organic,  the  vegetable  supporting  the  animal,  the 
vital  culminating  in  the  spiritual ;  weak  things  cliuging  to  the  strong,  as  moss  to 
the  oak's  trunk,  and  the  insect  to  its  leaf ;  death  acting  as  the  purveyor  of  life  and 
life  playing  the  sexton  to  death.    Mutual  service  in  endless  gradation  is  clearly  the 
world's  great  law.  2.  In  the  natural  grouping  of  human  life  the  same  rule  is  found. 
A  family  is  a  combination  of  opposites ;  the  woman  depending  on  the  man,  whose 
very  strength,  however,  exists  only  by  her  weakness ;  the  child  hanging  on  the 
parent,  whose  power  were  no  blessing  were  it  not  compelled  to  stoop  in  gentleness ; 
the  brother  protecting  the  sister,  whose  affections  would  have  but  half  their  wealth,^ 
were  they  not  brought  to  lean  upon  him  in  trustful  pride ;  and  even  among  seeming 
equals,  the  impetuous  quieted  by  tbe  thoughtful,  and  the  timid  finding  shelter  with 
the  brave.    8.  This  principle  distinguishes  natural  society  from  artificial  associa- 
tion.      The  assortment  of   civilisation  unites  all  elements  that  are  alike  and 
separates  the  unlike.  Instead  of  throwing  men  into  harmonious  groups  it  analyses 
them  into  distinct  classes.    Life  is  passed  in  the  presence  not  of  uneqaals  but  of 
equals.    Only  those  who  of  the  same  sect,  rank,  or  party  and  are  found  in  the  same 
society.    Not  that  this  is  entirely  evil.    To  live  among  our  equals  teaches  self- 
reliance  and  self-restraint,  and  enforces  a  respect  for  other's  rights,  and  a  vigilant 
guardianship  of  our  own.    But  while  it  invigorates  the  energies  of  purpose  it  is  apt 
to  blight  the  higher  graces  of  the  mind ;  and  in  confirming  the  moralities  of  the 
will  to  impair  the  devoutness  of  the  affections.    A  man  among  his  equals  is  hke  a 
schoolboy  at  his  play,  whose  eager  voice,  disputatious  claim,  defiance  of  wrong, 
and  derision  of  the  feeble,  betray  that  self-will  is  wide  awake  and  pity  lulled  to 
sleep.    But  see  the  same  child  in  his  home,  and  the  deferential  look,  the  hand  of 
generous  help,  show  how  with  beings  above  and  beneath  him  he  can  forget  himself 
in  gentle  thoughts  and  quiet  reference.    And  so  it  is  with  us  all.    The  world  is  not 
given  to  us  as  a  playground  or  a  school  alone,  where  we  may  learn  to  fight  our 
way  upon  our  own  level ;  but  as  a  domestic  system,  surrounding  us  with  weaker 
souls  for  our  hand  to  succour,  and  stronger  ones  for  our  hearts  to  serve.  4.  The  faith 
of  Christ  throws  together  the  unlike  ingredients  which  civilisation  had  sifted  out 
from  one  another.    Every  true  Church  represents  the  unity  which  the  world  had 
dissolved.    The  moment  a  man  becomes  a  disciple  his  exclusive  self-reliance 
vanishes.     He  trusts  another  than  himself ;  he  loves  a  better  spirit  than  his  own ; 
and  while  living  in  what  is  human  aspires  to  what  is  Divine.    And  in  this  new 
opening  of  a  world  above  him  a  fresh  light  comes  down  upon  the  world  beneath 
him.    Aspiration  and  pity  rush  into  his  heart  from  opposite  directions.    If  there 
were  no  ranks  of  souls  within  our  view  ;  if  all  were  upon  a  platform  of  repubUcan 
equality,  no  royalty  of  goodness  and  no  slavery  of  sin ;  if  nothing  great  subdued  us 
to  allegiance,  and  nothing  sad  and  shameful  roused  us  to  compassion,  I  believe  that 
all  Divine  truth  would  remain  inaccessible  and  our  existence  be  reduced  to  that  of 
intelligent  and  amiable  animals.    5.  A  great  Eoman  poet  and  philosopher  was  fond 
of  defining  religion  as  a  reverence  for  inferior  beings :  and  if  this  does  not  express 
its  nature  it  designates  one  of  its  effects.    True  there  could  be  no  reverence  lot 
lower  natures  were  there  not  to  begin  with  the  recognition  of  a  Supreme  Mind ;  bat 
from  that  moment  we  certainly  look  on  all  beneath  with  a  different  eye.  It  becomes 
ftn  object,  not  of  pity  and  protection  only,  but  of  sacred  respect ;  and  oar  sympathj, 


670  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt. 


which  had  been  that  of  a  hamane  fellow-creature,  is  converted  into  the  deferential 
help  of  a  devout  worker  of  God's  will.  And  so  the  loving  service  of  the  weak  and 
wanting  is  an  essential  part  of  the  discipline  of  the  Christian  life.  Some  habitual 
association  with  the  poor,  the  dependent,  the  sorrowful,  is  an  indispensable  source 
of  the  highest  elements  of  character.  If  we  are  faithful  to  the  obligations  which 
Buch  contact  with  infirmity  must  bring,  it  will  make  us  descend  into  healthful  depths 
of  sorrowful  affection  which  else  we  should  never  reach.  Yea,  and  if  we  are  un- 
faithful to  our  trust ;  if  sorrows  fall  on  some  poor  dependent  charge,  from  which 
it  was  our  broken  purpose  to  shield  his  head,  still  it  is  good  that  we  have  known 
him.  Had  we  hurt  a  superior,  we  should  have  expected  punishment ;  had  we 
offended  an  equal,  we  should  have  looked  for  his  displeasure ;  and  these  things  once 
endured  the  crisis  would  have  been  past.  But  to  have  injured  the  weak,  who  must 
be  dumb  before  us,  and  look  up  with  only  the  lines  of  grief  which  we  have  traced, 
this  strikes  an  awful  anguish  into  our  hearts.  For  the  weak,  the  chUd,  the  out- 
cast, they  that  have  none  to  help  them,  raise  up  an  Infinite  Protector  on  their  side, 
and  by  their  very  wretchedness  sustain  the  faith  of  justice  ever  on  the  throne.  {J. 
Martineau,  LL.D.)  The  survival  of  the  weak  : — The  text  is  a  curt  statement  of 
one  of  those  revolutionary  principles  which  lean  back  upon  the  example  and  teach- 
ing of  Christ.  No  rule  of  living  is  more  familiar  than  that  we  must  be  ready  to 
deny  ourselves  in  a  lesser  to  gain  some  greater  good.  But  the  rule  of  the  text,  in 
many  quarters,  came  upon  the  world  as  an  utter  novelty.  In  some  languages  the 
very  word  "  unselfishness  "  is  wanting,  and  philanthropy  in  its  deeper  channels  is 
unknown,  even  among  the  most  cultivated  classes  who  know  not  Christ.  L  This 
IS  NOT  LAW  IN  THE  BBUTE  CREATION.  1.  Beneath  man  all  life  is  engaged  in  a  fierce 
struggle  for  existence.  Each  is  bent  on  his  own  profit.  The  strong  look  out  for 
themselves.  The  weak  go  to  the  wall.  If  the  fittest  do  not  always  survive,  the 
most  cunning  and  the  strongest  do.  The  infirm  are  preyed  upon  or  left  mercilessly 
to  perish.  2.  An  exception  is  found  in  the  generous  instinct  of  motherhood,  but 
for  which  most  animal  races  would  become  extinct.  Another  exception  is  afforded 
by  lie  domestic  animals.  The  dog  will  risk  his  life  in  his  master's  service,  and  die 
of  a  broken  heart  when  he  is  dead.  But  once  left  to  roam,  these  animals  also  seem 
to  abandon  themselves  to  the  brute  principle  of  utter  selfishness.  II.  The  law  or  thb 

BBTTTE  CREATION  PREDOMINATES  LARaELT  AMONG  MEN  WHERE  THE  POWER  OF  THE  GOSPEL 

IS  NOT  FELT.  1.  Humau  life  is  also  a  struggle  for  existence.  Man,  too,  like  the  brute, 
is  forced  to  be  continually  at  work  to  keep  off  hunger,  disease,  and  death.  In  the 
rush  for  fame  and  success  the  strong  trample  upon  the  feeUng  of  the  weak  and 
increase  their  own  strength  by  preying  upon  their  infirmities.  2.  Out  of  this  root 
have  come  all  despotisms,  servitudes,  and  inhumanities.  It  is  the  human  way  to 
enforce  the  brutal  principle  of  surviving  by  the  sufferings  and  humiliations  of  the 
weak.  Wars  have  for  the  most  part  grown  out  of  the  determination  to  exalt  one's 
self  by  the  losses  of  another.  If  a  nation  was  weak,  a  stronger  one  would  do  in 
about  the  same  way  what  the  fierce  king  of  the  forest  does  with  the  passing  gazelle. 
All  slavery  was  for  the  most  part  in  the  first  instance  the  outcome  of  the  principle 
which  the  text  tears  to  shreds.  It  is  not  so  long  ago  that  tortures  were  applied  to 
the  weak  on  rack  and  in  cell,  which  could  yield  no  profit  except  to  the  morbid 
appetite  of  the  strong.  3.  The  spirit  is  not  extinct.  The  refinement  of  the  methods 
by  which  strength  makes  merchandise  of  the  weaknesses  of  the  infirm  may  cover 
up  the  brutality  of  the  instinct,  but  does  not  change  it.  III.  The  gospel  has 
ANNOUNCED  ANOTHER  LAW  OF  LIFE  FOR  MAN.  Here  love  and  uot  forcc  is  supreme. 
Here  no  man  liveth  unto  himself.  1.  The  struggle  for  self-existence  goes  on.  The 
effort  to  survive  is  pressed.  "  Give  all  diligence  to  make  your  calling  and  election 
sure."  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation."  ••  The  kingdom  of  heaven  sufiereth 
violence,"  Ac.  The  obligation  to  help  ourselves  loses  none  of  its  emphasis.  But 
with  self-care  is  coupled  concern  for  others,  and  those  two  draw  the  chariot  of  a 
regenerated  life  to  the  highest  attainment  and  to  the  approval  of  God.  The  Chris- 
tian law  summons  each  to  afford  to  others  the  most  opportunity  for  the  develop- 
ment of  their  faculties.  2.  The  world  utters  often  a  motto  which  is  good  as  far  as 
it  goes.  It  is  a  great  advance  upon  brutehood — "  Live  and  let  live."  But  behind 
this  half-truth  selfishness  may  hide  itself.  "  Live  and  help  others  to  live  "  is  the 
motto  of  the  gospel.  "  Look  out  for  Number  One  "  is  a  favourite  maxim  of  the 
street,  which, pushed  alone, is  the  brutal  principle  in  full  sway.  "Do  good  unto  all 
men  "  is  a  maxim  coming  from  a  different  atmosphere.  3.  A  chief  test  of  Chris- 
tian civilisation  is  the  consideration  with  which  the  strong  regard  the  infirmities  ol 
the  weak.    The  home  for  the  aged,  the  hospital,  the  refuge,  <&o.,  are  the  glory  ol 


CHIP.  IT.]  ROMANS.  671 

oar  civilisation,  as  the  brothels,  the  gambling  dens,  the  saloons,  &c.,  are  its  dis< 
grace,  bat  not  its  despair ;  for  so  long  as  the  Gross  lifts  high  its  spectacle  of  mercy, 
the  principle  that  the  "  strong  ought  to  bear  the  infimuties  of  the  weak  "  will  go 
among  men  like  a  stream  of  waters,  pure  as  crystal.  Our  literature  bears  witness  to 
the  infusion  of  this  human  principle.  The  "  Song  of  the  Shirt "  has  a  large  circle 
of  sympathetic  readers.  Lowell's  "  Sir  Launfal "  and  a  thousand  other  poems  have 
their  interest  from  the  Christly  spirit  of  regard  for  the  weaknesses  of  others 
which  they  magnify.  We  read,  as  indicative  of  a  great  heart,  the  incident  of  Luther, 
who,  instead  of  joining  in  the  chase,  caught  the  hunted  hare  and  hid  it  under  his 
cloak,  because  the  chase  reminded  him  of  the  way  in  which  Satan  hunts  for  souls. 
And  we  step  aside  from  his  widely  known  deeds  to  the  incident  in  Mr.  Lincoln's  life 
when,  on  his  way  with  other  lawyers  to  the  court,  he  stopped  to  replace  two  young 
birds  who  had  been  blown  out  of  their  nest,  saying,  "  I  could  not  have  slept  if  I 
had  not  restored  those  little  birds  to  their  mother."  It  was  a  most  noble  thing, 
when  Naples  was  suffering  from  the  ravages  of  cholera,  for  King  Humbert  to  turn 
aside  from  the  races,  where  he  had  made  appointment  to  be,  and  to  hasten  to  the 
relief  of  his  people.  For  the  motto,  "The  fittest  survive,"  the  gospel  substitutes 
the  watchword,  "  The  lost  must  be  saved."  IV.  In  Chbist  we  havb  the  fdll  em- 
I  BODiMENT  OF  THE  LOFTT  RTTLB.  Who  had  better  right  to  please  Himself  than  the 
1  Son  of  God  ?  But  of  Him  it  is  said,  "  Even  Christ  pleased  not  Himself."  He 
'  humbled  Himself  unto  the  death  of  the  Gross,  that  He  might  bear  our  griefs  and 
carry  our  sorrows.  (P.  S.  Sckaff,  D.D.)  Bearing  the  infirmitiet  of  the  weak: — 
A  reporter  called  to  a  little  bootblack  near  the  Gity  Hall  to  give  him  a  shine.  The 
little  fellow  came  rather  slowly  for  one  of  that  lively  guild,  and  planted  his  box 
down  under  the  reporter's  foot.  Before  he  could  get  his  brushes  out  another  large 
boy  ran  up,  and  calmly  pushing  the  little  one  aside,  said  :  "  Here,  you  go  sit  down, 

1^^^  Jimmy."  The  reporter  at  once  became  indignant  at  what  he  took  to  be  a  piece  of 
outrageous  bullying,  and  sharply  told  the  new-comer  to  clear  out.     "  Oh,  dat's  all 

^-^  right,  boss,"  was  the  reply ;  "  I'm  only  going  to  do  it  fur  him.  You  see  he's  been 
sick  in  the  hospital  for  mor'n  a  month,  and  can't  do  much  work  yet,  so  us  boys  all 
turn  in  and  give  him  a  lift  when  we  can.  Savy  ?  "  "  Is  that  so,  Jimmy,"  asked 
the  reporter,  turning  to  the  smaller  boy.  "  Yes,  sir,"  wearily  replied  the  boy  ;  and, 
as  he  looked  up,  the  pallid,  pinched  face  could  be  discerned  even  through  the  grime 
that  covered  it.  "  He  does  it  fur  me,  if  you'll  let  him."  "  Gertainly,  go  ahead  1 " 
and  as  the  bootblack  plied  the  brush  the  reporter  plied  him  with  questions.  "  You 
Bay  all  the  boys  help  him  in  this  way  ?  "  "  Yes,  sir.  When  they  ain't  got  no  job 
themselves,  and  Jimmy  gets  one,  they  turns  in  and  helps  him,  'cause  he  ain't  very 
strong  yet,  ye  see."  "  What  percentage  do  you  charge  him  on  a  job  ?  "  "  Hey  ?  " 
queried  the  youngster.  "  I  don't  know  what  you  mean."  "  I  mean,  what  part  of 
the  money  do  you  give  Jimmy,  and  how  much  do  you  keep  out  of  it  ?  "  "  You  bet 
your  life  I  don't  keep  none.  I  ain't  no  such  sneak  as  that."  "  So  yon  give  it  all  to 
him,  do  you  ?  "  "  Yes,  I  do.  All  the  boys  give  up  what  they  gets  on  his  job.  I'd 
like  to  catch  any  fellow  sneaking  it  on  a  sick  boy — I  would."  The  shine  being 
completed,  the  reporter  handed  the  urchin  a  quarter,  saying,  "I  guess  you're  a 
pretty  good  fellow,  so  you  keep  ten  cents  and  give  the  rest  to  Jimmy."  "  Gan't  do 
it.  sir ;  it's  his  customer.  Here,  Jim  1  "  He  threw  him  the  coin,  and  was  off  like 
a  shot  after  a  customer  for  himself,  a  veritable  rough  diamond.  In  this  big  city 
there  are  many  such  lads  with  warm  and  generous  hearts  under  their  ragged  coats. 

iN.  Y.  Commercial  Advertiser.)  Imperfections;  why  permitted: — Imperfections 
lave  been  Divinely  appointed,  that  the  law  of  human  life  maybe  effort,  and  the  law 
of  human  judgment  mercy.  (T.  H.  Leary,  D.C.L.)  Self -pleasing  : — I.  Whence 
DOES  IT  AEisE  ?  From  the  secret  feeling  in  man  that — 1.  His  own  views  are  the 
most  correct.  2.  His  own  plans  the  best.  3.  His  own  words  the  wisest.  4.  His 
own  doings  the  most  excellent.  In  a  word,  that  he  is  superior  to  all  others.  U. 
What  abe  its  exhibitions  ?  1.  A  harsh  judgment  of  others.  2.  Self-adulation. 
8.  Forwardness.  III.  How  must  it  be  ovebcome  ?  1.  By  bearing  the  infirmities 
of  the  weak.  2.  By  endeavouring  to  please  others  for  their  good.  3.  By  a  believing 
contemplation  of  the  character  of  Ghrist.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Against  self- 
pleasing  : — I.  We  ought  not  to  please  ourselves.  "We,"  i.e.,  strong  Christians. 
Among  Christians  there  are  the  strong  and  the  weak,  and  always  will  be.  You 
^  notice  that  the  apostle  has  no  corresponding  exhortation  to  the  weak,  one  reason 
^  for  which  may  be  that  very  few  are  willing  to  regard  themselves  as  such.  1.  As  to 
self -pleasing,  it  never  is  good.  (1)  In  its  first  and  lowest  form  it  is  pure  animality. 
The  tiger  pleases  himself  when  he  seizes  the  fawn ;  and  the  fox  when  he  carries  th« 


672  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap,  xt* 

fowl  away  to  his  den.  'Tis  no  sin  in  either ;  it  is  their  instinct  and  necessity.  And 
if  a  man  will  do  the  like  he  has  no  pre-eminence  above  the  beast.  (2)  It  is  of  the 
essence  of  sin  which  in  one  form  is  just  the  enormous  exaggeration  of  the  self.  It 
is  the  little  unit  trying  to  take  itself  oat  of  all  relations  and  beyond  laws.  It  is  the 
plant  repudiating  the  soil  that  feeds  it,  insulting  the  air  and  light  on  which  it  hves. 
It  is  the  figure  one  presenting  itself  as  an  epitome  of  the  whole  science  of  numbers. 
If  self -pleasing  were  to  get  into  the  heart  of  the  physical  world  there  would  be  no 
growth ;  for  growth  is  secured  by  one  part  allowing  nourishment  to  flow  through  it 
to  another,  and  in  the  joint  combination  of  all  organs  to  provide  for  the  nourish- 
ment of  the  whole.  And  it  is  in  such  a  world  that  man  stands  up  and  says,  "  I  live 
to  please  myself  " — man  who  was  made  to  show  the  greatness  of  service,  made  in 
the  image  of  the  God  who  serves  all.  (3)  It  always  tends  to  meanness  of  character. 
It  is  clean  against  magnanimity,  patriotism,  and  the  charities  of  life.  (4)  It  tends 
to  corruption,  just  as  anything  must  rot  when  it  ceases  to  give  and  take ;  just  as 
stagnant  water  becomes  unfit  for  use.  (5)  It  always  inflicts  injury  and  misery  upon 
others.  (6)  It  is  so  enormously  difficult  to  the  self  that  is  always  seeking  to  be 
pleased,  as  to  be  ultimately  quite  impossible  of  realisation.  More,  and  yet  more, 
must  be  had  of  this,  and  that,  until  more  is  not  to  be  had.  2.  So  much  for  self- 
pleasing  in  general.  But  here  is  a  peculiar  form  of  it — the  Christian  form  of  an 
unchristian  thing.  (1)  The  beginning  of  Christianity  in  a  human  soul  and  life  is 
the  death  of  self  begun.  But  the  process  of  dying  is  a  lingering  one — it  is  a  cruci- 
fixion. Many  and  many  a  time  self  says,  "  I  will  not  die."  (2)  Christian  people, 
then,  ought  to  be  constantly  on  their  guard  against  this  thing.  There  is  no  one 
whom  it  will  not  beset.  The  vivacious  will  have  it  presented  to  them  in  forms  of 
excitement,  which  will  draw  them  away  from  the  duties  of  daily  life  and  of  Chris- 
tian service.  The  modest  and  retiring  will  think  that  it  can  injure  no  one  that 
they  should  take  their  rest.  In  fact,  all  the  vices  are  but  different  dresses  which 
the  old  self  puts  on  as  it  goes  up  and  down  the  world  murmuring,  "  We  ought  to 
please  ourselves ! "  Please  the  higher  self  and  welcome — your  conscience,  love,  the 
powers  of  the  Christian  life — and  then,  not  you  alone,  but  angels  and  God  Himself 
win  be  pleased.  But  as  to  pleasing  that  other  self,  all  danger  and  all  soul-death  lie 
that  way.  "  Let  that  man  be  crucified."  Put  fresh  nails  into  the  hands  and  the  feet. 
(3)  But  "  the  strong  " — why  should  they,  at  least,  not  please  themselves  ?  "  The 
strong"  here  are  the  advanced  men  in  the  Christian  community,  the  men  of 
higher  intelligence  and  clearer  faith  who  have  come  out  into  an  ampler  Uberty. 
Surely  it  were  better  that  such  men  should  have  their  way.  Strength  is  a  beautiful 
thing  both  in  the  region  of  thought  and  of  action.  Yes,  but  it  is  beautiful  no 
longer  when  it  becomes  intolerant  of  anything  that  is  not  as  strong  as  itself.  So, 
then,  we  who  are  strong  ought  not  to  drive  when  we  find  we  cannot  lead ;  nor  wax 
impatient  of  delays  which  are  inevitable ;  nor  lose  temper — for  that  will  show  that 
we  ourselves  are  growing  weaker;  nor  even  to  think  ungenerous  thoughts,  but 
rather  seek  to  settle  our  strength  in  this— in  the  universal  charity  which  "  beareth 
all  things,  believeth  all  things,  hopeth  all  things,  endureth  all  things,"  and  then,  as 
the  result,  achieveth  all  things.  II.  If  not  oubselves,  then  whom  ?  Our  '•  neighbour." 

1.  "  Every  one  of  us  1 "  Not  one  can  be  exempted.  'Tis  no  use  to  plead  peculiarity 
in  temperament  or  circumstance.  You  have  a  neighbour,  and  you  must  please  him. 

2.  But  here  comes  a  difficulty.  If  the  neighbour  is  to  be  pleased  by  me  why  should 
not  he  please  in  return?  If  there  be  an  obligation  it  must  surely  be  mutual. 
And  so  we  shall  end  in  self-pleasing  after  all.  Besides,  how  do  I  know  that  to 
please  him  will  profit  biTT)  ?  He  may  be  self-vdlled,  or  luxurious,  or  cowardly ;  and 
if  I  please  him  I  may  very  likely  nourish  in  him  these  bad  qualities.  But  here  is 
the  safeguard,  "  I  am  to  please  my  neighbour  for  his  good  to  edification."  It  is  not 
that  one  is  to  yield  to  another  simply  because  he  wishes  it.  That  would  be  child- 
ishness, and  would  produce  very  bad  fruit.  And  there  is  no  room  for  concession  in 
matters  of  vital  importance.  It  would  be  a  cruel  kindness  to  a  fellow-Christian  to 
yield  to  him  in  any  matter  affecting  saving  truth  or  duty.  The  whole  question  is 
about  things  less  than  vital.  This  way  may  seem  best  to  me  ;  may  be  best  for  me. 
Yet  it  may  not  be  the  best  for  all.  Or  it  may  be  abstractly  the  best  for  all,  and  yet 
It  is  not  to  be  forced  on  them.  B.  For  good  to  adification.  Why,  what  is  that  but 
pleasing  the  new,  the  better  self  in  the  man,  just  as  I  seek  to  please  it  in  my  own 
breast?  HI.  Was  not  this  just  the  behavioub  of  Christ  Himself?  "Even 
Christ,"  "  who  was  with  God,"  "  who  was  God,"  pleased  not  Himself  by  retaining 
that  condition,  when  a  great  need  arose,  and  when,  by  a  change  in  His  state,  He 
could  supply  the  need.     "  He  was  rich,  and  for  our  sakes  He  became  poor," 


CKiP.  xy.]  BOMANS.  678 

drc.  And  when  He  was  here  He  never  spared  Himself.  He  never  ohose  the 
easier  way.  Shall  I  then  please  myself,  and  say  that  I  am  following  Him? 
Shall  I  not  rather  gaze  anew  at  this  great  sight — a  holy,  happy  being  deny- 
ing  Himself,  and  suffering  for  others  through  life  and  death  ?  [A.  Raleigh,  D.D.) 
The  warning  against  selfishness: — Selfishness  is — I.  An  tjglt  thing.  One  thing 
that  helps  to  make  our  bodies  look  beautiful  is  when  the  different  parts  are  all  of  a 
proper  size  or  shape.  But  suppose  we  should  see  a  boy  or  girl  with  a  head  as  big 
as  a  bushel,  and  with  feet  as  large  as  an  elephant's !  And  when  we  give  way  to 
wrong  feelings  one  part  of  the  soul  becomes  larger  than  it  ought  to  be.  There  ia 
nothing  that  makes  a  person  look  so  ugly  as  selfishness.  1.  Anne  Dawson  was  a 
little  girl,  lying  in  bed  with  a  fever.  In  the  same  room  was  her  brother,  busily 
engaged  in  making  a  boat.  The  noise  was  very  distressing,  and  his  sister  begged 
him  to  stop.  But  he  still  went  on.  Presently  she  said,  "  Bobbie  dear,  please  get 
me  a  glass  of  cold  water?  My  throat  is  very  dry,  and  my  head  a  -'a  terribly." 
But  Bobbie  paid  no  attention  till  she  asked  a  second  time,  when  he  called  oat 
sharply :  "  Wait  awhile,  Anne,  I  am  too  busy  now."  Again  his  sister  pleaded  for  a 
drink.  Then  he  hastily  poured  out  some  water  from  a  pitcher  which  had  been 
standing  all  day  in  the  sun.  "  Oh  !  not  that  water,  brother,"  said  Anne,  in  a  gentle 
tone,  "  please  bring  me  some  fresh  and  cool  from  the  spring."  "  Don't  bother  me 
80,  Anne.  You  see  how  busy  I  am.  I'm  sure  this  water  is  good  enough."  And 
the  selfish  boy  went  on.  "  Oh,  my  poor  head  I  "  said  Anne,  as  she  sipped  a  little  of 
the  warm  water,  and  then  lay  back  on  her  pillow.  That  was  her  last  movement. 
She  died  that  night.  For  thousands  of  gold  and  silver  I  would  not  have  had 
Robert's  feelings  when  he  stood  by  the  grave  of  his  sister  and  thought  of  all  this. 
We  cannot  imagine  anything  more  ugly  than  this  makes  him  appear.  2.  But 
sometimes  we  can  understand  a  tbing  better  by  contrasting  it  with  its  opposite. 
Some  time  ago  an  accident  occurred  in  a  coal  mine.  Two  boys  managed  to  get 
hold  of  a  chain,  and  had  the  hope  of  being  saved  if  they  could  hold  on  till  help 
came.  Very  soon  a  man  was  lowered  down,  and  he  first  came  to  a  boy  named  Daniel 
Harding,  who  said :  '•  Don't  mind  me.  I  can  hold  on  a  little  longer ;  but  there  is 
Joe  Brown  just  below  nearly  exhausted.  Save  him  first."  Joe  Brown  was  saved, 
and  so  was  his  unselfish  friend.  How  beautiful  his  unselfishness  makes  him 
appear!  II.  A  disaobekable  thing.  When  the  things  about  us  mind  the 
laws  which  God  has  made  td  govern  them,  then  they  are  all  agreeable.  The 
light  is  pleasant  to  see ;  the  wind  is  pleasant  to  hear ;  and  the  fragrance  of 
flowers  is  pleasant  to  smell,  just  because  the  sun,  wind,  and  flowers  act 
according  to  the  laws  which  God  has  made  for  them.  And  God's  law  for 
us  is,  that  "  we  ought  not  to  please  ourselves."  If  we  mind  this  law  it  will 
make  us  unselfish,  and  then  we  shall  always  be  agreeable.  But  if  we  do  not  mind 
this  law,  this  will  make  us  disagreeable.  1.  A  Christian  lady  talking  to  her  class, 
said,  "  When  I  was  a  little  girl,  my  grandma,  who  was  dangerously  ill  when  I  was 
playing  with  my  doll,  asked  me  to  bring  her  a  glass  of  water.  I  did  not  mind  her 
at  first,  but  when  she  called  me  again,  I  carried  the  water  to  her  in  a  very  unkind 
way.  She  said,  » Thank  you,  my  dear  child ;  but  it  would  have  given  me  so 
much  more  pleasure  if  you  had  only  brought  the  water  willingly. '  She  never  asked 
me  to  do  anything  for  her  again,  for  soon  after  she  died.  It  is  forty  years  ago 
to-day  since  this  took  place ;  and  yet  there  is  a  sore  spot  in  my  heart  which  it  left 
there,  and  which  I  must  carry  with  me  as  long  as  I  live. "  2.  And  now  we  may 
take  some  illustrations  in  the  way  of  contrast.  Two  little  girls  nestling  together  in 
bed  one  night  were  talking  about  their  Aunt  Bessie,  who  happened  to  be  passing  at 
that  moment.  So  she  listened  and  heard  Minnie  say,  "  Do  you  know  what  it  ia 
that  makes  my  Aunt  Bessie's  forehead  so  smooth  ?  "  "  Why,  yes,  she  isn't  old 
enough  to  have  wrinkles."  "  Oh  I  she  is,  though ;  but  her  forehead  is  smooth 
because  she  is  so  unselfish,  and  never  frets.  I  always  like  to  hear  her  read  the 
Bible,  for  she  lives  just  like  the  Bible.  She's  just  as  sweet,  and  kind,  and  unselfish 
as  it  tells  us  to  be.  And  this  is  what  makes  Aunt  Bessie  so  pleasant."  Our  next 
story  is  about  Turner,  the  great  landscape  painter,  who  was  a  member  of  the 
committee  which  arranges  about  hanging  up  the  pictures  in  the  Royal  Academy. 
On  one  occasion  when  they  were  just  finishing  their  work.  Turner's  attention  was 
called  to  a  picture  by  an  unknown  artist  who  had  no  friend  in  the  Academy  to 
watch  over  his  interest.  "That  is  an  excellent  picture,"  said  Mr.  Turner.  "It 
must  be  hung  up  somewhere  for  exhibition."  "  That  is  impossible,"  said  the 
other  members  of  the  committee.  "  There  is  no  room  left."  Whereupon  the 
generous  artist  deliberately  took  down  one  of  his  own  pictures,  and  put  the  painting 
VOL.  II.  43 


674  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

of  this  unknown  artist  in  its  place.  In  what  an  interesting  light  his  unselfishness 
presents  him  to  our  view  1  III.  A  sinfol  thino.  When  we  commit  sin  in  most 
other  ways  we  only  break  one  of  God's  commandments  at  a  time.  But  when  we 
give  way  to  selfishness  we  break  six  of  God's  commandments  aU  at  once.  How  ? 
Well,  when  Jesus  was  explaining  the  ten  commandments,  He  said  that  the 
substance  of  the  six  on  the  second  table  was,  that  we  should  love  our  neighbours  as 
ourselves.  But,  if  we  are  selfish  we  cannot  love  our  neighbours.  Selfishness  ia 
the  root  out  of  which  any  sin  may  grow.  It  is  like  carrying  powder  about  us  in  a 
place  where  sparks  are  flying  all  the  time.  A  dreadful  explosion  may  take  place  at 
any  moment.  Many  years  ago  there  lived  in  Egypt  an  old  man  named  Amin.  A 
great  famine  came  upon  the  land  just  as  it  once  did  in  the  days  of  Joseph.  Amin 
had  a  great  store  of  wheat  in  his  granaries.  When  bread  began  to  get  scarce  his 
neighbours  came  to  him  to  buy  grain.  But  he  refused,  saying  that  he  was  going  to 
keep  his  stock  tUl  all  the  rest  of  the  grain  in  the  land  was  gone,  because  then  he 
would  be  able  to  get  a  higher  price  for  it.  Many  died  of  starvation,  and  yet  this 
selfish  man  still  kept  his  stores  locked  up.  At  last  the  hungry  people  were  willing 
to  give  him  any  price  he  asked,  and  then  with  a  cruel,  selfish  smile  he  took  the 
iron  key  of  his  great  granary.  He  opened  the  door  and  went  in.  But  in  a  moment 
all  his  hopes  of  great  gain  faded  away  like  a  dream.  Worms  had  entered  and 
destroyed  aU  his  grain.  Hungry  as  the  people  were  they  yet  raised  a  great  shout  of 
gladness  for  what  happened  to  that  wretched  man.  They  saw  that  it  was  God's 
judgment  which  had  come  down  upon  him  for  his  selfishness,  and  that  it  served 
him  right.  But  such  was  the  effect  of  his  disappointment  upon  the  old  man 
himself,  that  he  fell  down  dead  at  the  door  of  the  granary.  His  selfishness  killed 
him.  (iJ.  Newton,  D.D.)  The  strong  helping  the  weak  : — Coleridge  tells  of  a 
midshipman  in  his  fourteenth  year  going  into  action  for  the  first  time,  knees  totter- 
ing, courage  failing,  and  a  fit  of  fainting  hastening  on,  when  Sir  Alexander  Ball 
saw  him,  touched  him,  and  said,  "  Courage,  my  dear  boy  I  you  will  recover  in  a 
minute  or  so.  I  was  just  the  same  when  I  first  went  out  in  this  way."  It  was  as 
if  an  angel  spoke  to  him.  "  From  that  moment  I  was  as  the  oldest  of  the  boat's 
crew."  You  can  help  one  another,  and  you  should  for  your  own  sake.  Bearing 
the  infirmities  of  the  weak : — We  must  not,  however,  despise  them,  not  in  heart, 
word,  or  carriage.  We  must  rather  deny  ourselves  than  offend  them.  We  must 
support  them,  bear  them  as  pillars  bear  the  house,  as  the  shoulders  a  burden,  as 
the  walls  the  vine,  as  parents  their  children,  as  the  oak  the  ivy ;  and  this  because 
they  are  brethren.    (P.  Henry.) 

Vers.  2,  3.  Let  every  one  of  ns  please  his  neighbour  for  his  good  to  edification. — 

The  character  of  Christian  courtesy  : — The  great  aim  of  the  gospel  is  to  raise  our 
views  and  desires  above  this  life,  and  furnish  us  with  pure  and  powerful  principles 
in  the  direction  of  our  words  and  actions,  far  above  the  will  of  fallen  man.  Bat 
while  it  invites  us  to  lay  up  our  treasure  in  heaven,  it  instructs  us  in  every- 
thing that  may  best  contribute  to  bless  the  life  of  man  on  earth.  I.  Thb  dutt 
HEBE  ENJOINED.  1.  Tou  are  not  to  make  the  pleasing  of  men  the  reason  or  rule  of 
your  conduct  in  any  case,  for  the  sake  of  their  praise,  or  of  any  reward  from  them. 
That  would,  indeed,  be  to  please  them  rather  than  God,  and  instead  of  God.  But 
you  are  to  study,  if  possible,  to  please  your  neighbour  as  a  duty  which  God  requires, 
and  which  you  must  continue  to  do  whether  men  praise  you  for  it  or  not.  2.  This 
pleasing  our  neighbour  is  not,  in  any  respect,  to  be  placed  in  opposition  to  the 
pleasing  of  God,  or  to  be  followed  in  anything  that  would  be  displeasing  in  His 
sight.  We  are  not  allowed  to  put  their  good,  or  their  good-wiU,  in  place  of  the 
glory  of  God,  but  only  in  place  of  our  own  gratification ;  "  not  to  please  ourselves, 
but  every  one  to  please  his  neighbour."  3.  We  are  called  to  sacrifice  our  own 
pleasure  to  his,  whenever  our  doing  so  would  tend  to  his  good,  or  to  the  edification 
of  others ;  but,  when  it  would  not  be  for  good,  we  must  refuse  to  please  any  of  our 
fellow-creatures,  however  much  it  might  expose  us  to  their  dislike.  4.  Keeping 
these  points  in  view,  you  will  be  better  able  to  guard  against  two  very  opposite 
errors  on  this  subject,  which  require  to  be  considered.  (1)  There  is  a  pleasing  of 
others  which  many  study  merely  as  an  art,  and  to  which  young  persons  are  trained 
by  certain  forms,  as  a  branch  of  their  education.  This  is  only  a  seeming  preference 
of  others,  which  is  far  from  real  humility.  This  is  a  preference  of  others  also  only  in 
trifles,  while  they  would  refuse  to  do  much  for  the  real  good  of  those  whom  they 
seem  so  desirous  to  please.  It  is  in  itself,  in  short,  as  far  as  it  is  the  invention  of 
men,  a  mere  tissue  of  hypocrisy,  which  the  children  of  this  world  cast  around  them, 


CHIP.  XT.]  BOMANS.  675 

rather  for  the  purpose  of  hiding  their  selfish  and  malignant  feelings  than  of  express- 
ing their  benevolent  dispositions.  (2)  There  is  a  disposition  in  some  persons,  on  the 
other  hand,  not  only  to  neglect  the  pleasing  of  others  as  an  art,  but  also  to  despise 
it  as  a  duty.  They  think  it  suflScient  that  they  give  no  just  cause  of  offence  to  any 
one ;  but  take  little  care  to  guard  against  the  appearance  of  disregarding  them. 
They  will  do  much  for  men's  real  welfare,  but  will  show  no  indulgence  to  their 
weaknesses.  The  clearer  your  knowledge,  the  sounder  your  judgment,  the  stronger 
your  faith,  the  more  may  be  expected  from  you,  in  bearing  the  infirmities,  and  even 
the  censures  of  others,  in  denying  yourselves  in  many  things  for  their  sake,  and  in 
/  doing  whatever  you  lawfully  may  to  please  them  for  their  good.  II.  The  beason 
j  AssioNED  FOB  THIS  DUTY.  "  Eveu  Christ  pleased  not  Himself."  1.  Observe  the 
j  force  of  the  expression,  "  even  Christ."  The  act  of  submission  was  lower,  the 
degree  of  the  sacrifice  was  greater  in  His  case,  than  it  ever  possibly  can  be  in  ours ; 
how  shall  we  refuse  to  serve  those  with  whom  we  must  rank  in  His  sig'it  as  fellow- 
creatures  ?  2.  But  let  us  contemplate  more  particularly  the  character  of  our  Lord 
in  the  respect  here  specified  by  the  apostle,  namely,  that  "  He  pleased  not  Himself." 
In  one  sense,  indeed,  it  may  be  said  that  He  always  pleased  Himself,  inasmuch  aa 
He  never  had  one  wish  or  feeling  that  was  contrary  to  what  He  knew  to  be  right,  and 
conducive  to  the  good  of  others.  But  let  us  consider  with  how  much  reason  He  might 
have  insisted  that  others  should  please  and  honour  Him  in  every  iota,  instead  of  Hia 
yielding  any  point  to  satisfy  their  prejudices  or  serve  their  infirmities.  [J.  Brewster.) 
Pleasing  our  neighbour  for  good : — The  gospel  does  not  come  down  in  its  require- 
ments to  the  level  of  our  imperfections.  Its  plan  of  perfection  is  no  treadmill.  It 
is  ever  ahead  of  us.  I.  Who  is  mt  neiohbodb  ?  1.  He  that  dwells  near  me.  2. 
He  that  is  my  countryman.  3.  He  that  is  my  fellow-man.  4.  He  that  is  a 
follower  of  Christ  II.  The  social  duty  here  commended  and  commanded.  1. 
Sympathy.  2.  Tenderness.  3.  Esteem.  4.  To  be  more  ready  to  speak  good  of 
him  than  evil.  UI.  The  object  to  be  held  in  view.  1.  To  please  him  for  his 
good.  2.  To  please  him  for  his  edification,  that  his  character  may  be  built  up  in 
truth  and  righteousness.  lY.  Some  seasons  fob  this.  1.  The  example  of  Christ. 
He  pleased  not  Himself,  but  gave  Himself  for  us  all.  2.  The  imitation  of  Christ. 
Be  ye  followers  of  Me.  V.  Reflections.  1.  In  this  Epistle  we  have  eleven  chapters 
devoted  to  the  exposition  of  doctrines,  and  five  to  some  chief  social  duties.  2.  Were 
.  we  to  reaUse  these  social  duties,  earth  would  become  a  place  more  like  heaven,  and 
make  it  sweeter  and  easier  for  us  all  to  live.  (L.  0.  Thompson.)  On  pleasing 
men : — Some  men  seek  to  build  up  their  fellow-men  remotely,  e.g.,  by  education, 
political  economy,  the  application  of  natural  laws.  But,  except  as  the  administrators 
of  such  forces,  they  have  no  personal  relation  to  the  work.  They  have  no  sympathy 
for  individuals.  Their  pleasure  is  left  out  of  the  question.  Then  there  are  others 
who  seek  to  do  good,  but  without  any  idea  of  the  relation  of  this  good  to  the 
character  to  be  formed  in  men.  There  are  persons  that  relieve  suffering  without 
asking  how  the  relief  can  build  up  the  sufferer  into  permanent  goodness.  There 
are  others  who  seek  to  give  the  most  transient  pleasure  without  any  concern  either 
for  good  or  for  edification.  They  please  men  without  any  consideration  of  whether 
the  means  which  they  employ  are  right  or  wrong.  2.  Now,  the  apostle  joins  all 
three  together.  Tou  are  to  please  men ;  and  you  are  to  please  them  so  that  you 
shall  do  them  good.  But  all  this  in  such  a  way  as  to  effect  a  permanent  building 
of  character.  One  man  may  go  through  a  farm  only  to  glean  flowers  and  fruit,  to 
,  find  pleasure  there,  and  to  give  pleasure  transiently.  Another  may  find  pleasure, 
/  to  be  sure,  and  he  may  also  here  and  there  strive  to  do  a  little  good.  He  may  ( 
/  destroy  some  vermin,  pluck  up  some  weeds,  and  plant  and  rear  a  few  flowers.  A  [ 
I  third  may  unite  all  these  things  with  a  comprehensive  culture  that  shall  deepen  the  ^ 
I  soil,  augment  its  crops,  and  develop  its  resources  of  beauty,  pleasure,  and  profit  at  / 
\  the  same  time.  This  is  the  right  way,  and  we  are  to  cultivate  each  other  in  the 
same  way.  I.  Men  abe  benefited  simply  by  being  pleased.  Of  course  men 
would  not  be  profited  by  having  only  pleasure  in  this  world.  That  is  provided  for, 
however.  Men  need  trouble,  and  they  will  have  it.  But  men  need  pleasing  as 
well.  And  the  art  of  pleasing  is  an  important  element  in  moral  culture.  For  when 
men  are  in  a  state  of  pleasedness  they  are  more  inclined  to  good  influences  than 
,  when  they  are  not  pleased.  Dr.  Kane  said  that  there  was  no  nautical  skill  that 
was  so  important,  while  wintering  in  the  North,  as  one  man  among  the  crew  that', 
could  play  the  fiddle.  Why?  Because  it  is  indispensable,  under  such  circum- I 
stances,  that  the  men  should  be  kept  in  a  cheerful  state  of  mind.  And  this  same 
element  of  cheerfulness  is  necessary  in  all  the  various  situations  in  life.    It  may  be 


676  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XT. 

better  to  strike  at  deeper  results ;  but  it  is  not  best  to  despise  those  which  be  near 
the  surface.  It  may  be  that  a  miner,  by  sinking  a  shaft,  will  find  more  gold  in  the 
veins ;  but  it  is  not  best  for  him  to  despise  the  specks  of  gold  that  are  thrown  up 
with  the  soil  in  the  process,  n.  Thb  habit  or  pleasing  men  is  quite  as 
nmisPEMSABLB  FOB  ouB  OWN  SAKE  AS  FOB  THEiBS.  It  keeps  the  mind  and  heart 
on  the  side  of  benevolence.  It  gradually  frames  your  character  into  the  Divine. 
And  a  man  may  be  earnest  and  conscientious ;  and  yet,  if  he  carries  himself  in  such 
a  way  that  the  pleasing  of  others  is  no  part  of  his  daily  conduct,  he  cannot  be 
thought  to  be  a  perfect  man.    IIL  The  human  mind  has  been  endowed  with 

FACULTIES  whose   VERT   END   SKEM8  TO   BE   THE   MINI8TBATI0N   OF   PLEA8UBB.       People 

seem  to  think  that  God  must  be  a  great  utilitarian,  and  that  He  always  makes 
things  for  uses.  But  wherever  you  see  that  God  has  walked  in  the  world,  you  see 
that  He  has  had  an  eye  to  beauty.  There  is  something  on  the  globe  besides  what 
men  can  eat,  drink,  and  wear.  God  made  the  earth  beautiful  that  the  higher 
feelings  might  be  fed.  We  are  organised  for  something  more  than  the  mere 
practical  duties  of  life.  1.  The  human  mind  is  made  to  act  with  cheerfulness. 
You  know  the  difference  between  a  rusty  and  a  polished  piece  of  iron.  The  rusty 
piece  reflects  nothing.  Polish  it,  and  how  every  one  delights  to  look  at  it  I  Now, 
the  difference  between  polished  and  rusty  iron  is  the  difference  between  cheerful- 
ness and  no  cheerfulness.  A  cheerful  doctor  gives  his  medicine  the  moment  he 
steps  inside  the  room.  Those  sepulchral  doctors — I  wonder  that  anybody  gets  well 
under  their  care.  A  clergyman  whose  face  glows  with  health,  hope,  and  cheer  haa 
looked  consolation  into  his  friend  before  he  has  spoken  a  word.  But  a  minister, 
whose  face  says,  "  Hark  I  from  the  tomb  a  doleful  sound,"  I  marvel  how  ha 
should  be  twice  sent  for,  unless  it  might  be  on  the  ground  of  the  benefits  ol 
affliction  1  And  in  all  relations  of  life  the  same  is  true.  2.  The  tendency  to  please 
is  still  more  powerful  where  cheerfulness  is  joined  to  good-nature.  I  aometimea 
preach  better  under  the  influence  of  the  flowers  that  stand  on  the  desk  before  me. 
They  do  not  know  that  they  are  helping  me,  whether  I  do  or  not.  There  are 
persons  that  are  pleasant  when  they  come  into  your  presence,  that  are  pleasant 
while  they  stay,  and  their  memory  is  sweet  when  they  are  gone.  There  are  other 
persons  whom  you  know  to  be  good,  and  who  you  feel  assured  want  to  do  you  good, 
but  whose  presence  is  painful  to  you.  3.  When  God  put  wit  and  humour  into  the 
human  soul.  He  put  them  there  to  be  to  the  soul  what  the  hearth  is  to  the  family, 
whose  burning  wood  snaps  and  sends  up  sparks,  and  throws  light  into  all  parts  of 
the  room,  and  chases  darkness,  and  imparts  pleasure  to  all  within  the  reach  of  ita 
influence.  But  such  is  the  heathenism  of  public  opinion,  that  where  a  man  uses 
his  conscience  to  urge  truth,  and  his  reason  to  enforce  it,  people  think  that  ia 
all  right ;  but  that  where  a  man  uses  mirthfulness  to  illustrate  it  and  make  it 
acceptable,  people  think  it  is  not  right.  4.  The  same  is  true  of  imagination.  Yoa 
cannot  conceive  that  the  imagination  should  be  given  a  man  except  for  pleasure. 
The  imagination  is  what  vines  and  mosses  are  that  cover  hard  places,  and  beautify 
things  that  are  not  lovely  in  their  own  nature.  IV.  We  now  see  the  mistake  of 
HAKiNo  MOBAL  QUALITIES  UNPLEAsiNo,  as  though  it  was  a  uecessity  that  they  should 
be  so.  Men  seeing  that  cheerfulness,  fancy,  &c.,  are  concomitants  of  unlawful 
pleasure,  suppose  them  to  be  wicked,  and  steer  away  from  them  because  they  see 
bad  men  employ  them.  But  because  Cleopatra  wore  roses,  must  a  virtuous  woman 
not  wear  one?  Because  orgies  are  carried  on  with  music,  is  music  defiled f 
Things  are  not  defiled  because  they  are  used  for  bad  purposes.  There  is  an 
impression  that  moral  attributes  have  a  certain  hard  and  rugged  nature  of  their 
own,  and  that  they  are  genuine  in  proportion  as  they  are  unlovely.  Many  persons 
want  a  man  to  speak  the  truth  very  much  as  a  bull-dog  speaks.  But  throughout 
the  New  Testament  moral  qualities  are  enjoined  to  be  exercised  graciously  and 
attractively.  "  Let  your  light  so  shine,"  &c.  Hence  bluntness,  coarseness,  are  not 
to  be  preferred.  A  disagreeable  piety  is  impious  by  so  much  as  it  is  disagreeable. 
Virtue  is  lovely,  and  you  are  not  to  slander  it  by  acting  as  though  to  be  pious  was 
necessarily  to  be  void  of  everything  that  is  pleasure-giving.     V.  This  view  will 

PEESENT  A  MUCH  HIGHEB  IDEA  OF  GOOD    MANNERS   THAN    IS    OFTEN  PRESENTED.      WC  are 

usually  taught  good  manners,  because  they  are  important  to  our  making  our  way  in 
the  world ;  but  good  manners  stand  on  a  Christian  ground.  A  man  is  bound  so  to 
conduct  himself  in  all  the  thousand  usages  of  society,  as  that  his  presence  shall  be 
a  pleasant  and  not  a  disagreeable  thing,  or  a  burden  to  his  fellow-men.  There  are 
persons  in  society  who  diffuse  an  element  of  comfort  and  joy  wherever  they  go. 
We  say  of  some  persons,  "They  are  well-bred."      VI.  This  vnw  will  qivb  k 


OBAt.  XT.]  ROMANS.  677 

UOBAL  SANCTION  TO  ALL  THOSB   MINOB  USAGES  OT  SOaETY  WHICH  TEND  TO  IfAEE   UEN 

KOBE  PLEA6AXT.  MsDy  persoDS  saj,  "What  is  the  use  of  salutations?  Why 
should  I  raise  my  hat  to  a  Ipdy,  or  say  '  Good  morning '  when  we  meet,  or  '  Good- 
bye '  when  we  part  ?  "  Well,  for  my  part,  I  think  that  even  good  folks,  without 
sooh  Uttle  ceremonies,  are  like  grapes  packed  for  market  without  leaves  between 
them.  They  will  crush,  and  come  in  mashed.  Even  good  folks  need  to  have  little 
courtesies  between  them  to  keep  them  from  attrition.  And  to  take  society  and 
divest  it  of  all  these  httle  civilities,  would  be  to  deteriorate  it  and  carry  it  toward 
the  savage  state.  And  if  you  think  that  these  things  are  of  no  use,  it  is  because 
you  never  put  your  heart  into  them.  When  you  want  to  manage  men,  do  as  bee- 
keepers do.  Here  are  two.  One  goes  to  the  hive,  thrusts  his  hand  rudely  into  the 
midst  of  them,  and  very  soon  he  has  his  bees  all  over  him,  and  he  moves  himself 
very  rapidly !  Another  man  gets  a  bowl  of  sugar  and  water  and  washes  his  hands 
all  over,  and  goes  with  the  utmost  quietness  and  serenity,  and  opens  the  hive  and 
pnta  his  hand  in  gently,  and  the  bees  find  everything  sweet,  and  they  will  not  sting 
him  or  fly  away.  And  people  say,  "  Wonderful  1  that  man  has  a  real  magnetic 
power  with  bees."  So  he  has,  when  he  has  sugar  and  water  on  his  hands.  Now, 
when  you  want  to  manage  men,  wash  your  hands  with  sugar  and  water  1  Con- 
clusion :  If  yon  carry  these  thoughts  home,  I  think  you  will  find  there  a  great 
sphere  for  the  reformation  of  minor  morals.  In  the  family  the  law  of  pleasing 
ODght  to  extend  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest.  You  are  bound  to  please  your 
children,  and  your  children  each  other ;  and  you  are  bound  to  please  your  servants, 
if  you  expect  them  to  please  you.  Some  men  are  pleasant  in  the  household,  and 
nowhere  else.  But  the  opposite  is  apt  to  be  the  case.  We  expend  all  our  polite- 
neBS  in  places  where  it  will  be  profitable — where  it  will  bring  silver  and  gold.  My 
friends,  our  kindness  should  begin  at  home.  It  should  not  stay  there  ;  but  there  it 
should  begin,  and  there  it  should  be  nourished.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  On  pleasing 
all  men : — 1.  Undoubtedly  this  duty  is  incumbent  on  all — "  every  man  "  ;  neigh- 
boar,  too,  means  every  other  man.  Only  as  Paul  says  elsewhere,  "  If  it  be 
possible  as  much  as  lieth  in  you  hve  peaceably  with  all  men,"  so  we  are  to  please 
all  men  if  possible.  But  strictly  speaking  it  is  not ;  but  if  we  use  our  utmost 
diligence,  let  the  event  be  what  it  may,  we  have  done  our  duty.  2.  The  apostle 
limits  this  direction,  otherwise  it  would  be  attended  with  mischievous  consequences. 
We  are  to  please  them  for  their  good  ;  not  barely  for  the  sake  of  pleasing  them  or 
ourselves,  much  less  to  their  hurt ;  nor  for  their  temporal  good  merely,  but  for 
tljeir  edification,  so  as  to  conduce  to  their  spiritual  and  eternal  good.  We  may  do 
this — I.  By  removinq  htodrances.  We  must  avoid  everything  which  tends  to 
displease  wise  and  good  men.  1.  Now  cruelty,  hatred,  malice,  &c.,  are  displeasing, 
and  so  is  that  temper  so  prevalent  in  common  life — ill-nature.  We  must,  then, 
avoid  these,  and  whatever  resembles  them,  as  sourness,  sternness,  suUenness  on  the 
one  hand  ;  peevishness  and  fretfulness  on  the  other.  2.  Next  to  these  nothing  is 
more  disgustful  than  pride  and  haughtiness  issuing  in  an  assuming,  arrogant, 
overbearing  behaviour.  Even  great  learning  and  shining  talents  will  not  make 
amends  for  this.  3.  Almost  as  disgustful  is  a  passionate  temper  and  behaviour. 
Hence  passionate  men  have  seldom  many  friends.  4.  We  must  "  put  away  all 
lying."  Addison  said,  "  Of  all  vices  this  has  never  found  an  apologist "  ;  but  he 
wrote  before  Lord  Chesterfield,  whose  apology  for  it  is  the  best  that  could  be  made 
for  BO  bad  a  cause.  As  lying  can  never  be  commendable,  so  neither  can  it  be 
pleasing.  5.  But  is  not  flattery  a  species  of  lying,  and  has  it  not  been  regarded  in 
all  ages  as  a  means  of  pleasing  ?  Yes,  flattery  is  pleasing  for  a  while,  but  when  the 
mask  drops  off  we  are  pleased  no  longer.  If  a  man  continues  to  flatter  after  his 
insincerity  is  discovered  it  is  disgusting.  6.  Dissimulation  is  displeasing,  and 
guile,  subtlety,  cunning,  and  the  whole  art  of  deceiving.  Even  those  who  practise 
it  most  are  not  pleased  with  it  in  others,  nor  fond  of  conversing  with  those  who 
practise  it  on  themselves.  II.  By  using  the  means  that  dikectly  tend  to  this 
end.  Only  remember  that  there  are  those  whom  we  cannot  expect  to  please.  It  is 
now  as  when  our  Lord  said,  "  The  men  of  this  generation  are  like  unto  children 
sitting  in  the  market-place,"  &c.  But  leaving  these  f reward  ones  to  themselves, 
we  may  hope  to  please  others  in  the  following  way.  1.  Let  love  not  visit  you  as  a 
transient  guest,  but  be  the  constant  temper  of  your  soul.  Let  it  pant  in  your 
heart,  sparkle  in  your  eyes,  shine  on  all  your  actions,  and  speak  with  your  tongue. 
2.  Study  to  be  lowly  in  heart.  "  Be  clothed  with  humility."  Eeject  the  favourite 
maxim  of  the  old  heathen,  "  The  more  you  value  yourself  the  more  others  wiU 
value  you."    Not  so.     Both  God  and  man  "  resist  the  proud."     3.  Pray  that  you 


678  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XT. 


the  whole  conversation. "  I  have  Been  as  real  courtesy  in  an  Irish  cabin  as  could 
be  found  in  St.  James's  or  the  Louvre.  6.  What  is  the  root  of  that  desire  to  please 
which  we  call  courtesy  ?  The  same  apostle  that  teaches  it  teaches  us  to  honour  all 
men,  and  the  Master  teaches  us  to  love  all  men.  Join  all  these  together,  and  what 
will  be  the  effect  ?  When  a  poor  wretch  cries  to  me  for  an  alms,  I  look  and  see 
him  covered  in  rags.  But  through  these  I  see  an  immortal  spirit  redeemed  by 
Christ's  blood.  The  courtesy,  therefore,  which  I  feel  and  show  toward  him  is  a 
mixture  of  the  honour  and  love  which  I  bear  to  the  offspring  of  God,  the  purchase 
of  Christ,  the  candidate  for  immortality.  6.  Take  all  proper  opportunities  of 
declaring  to  others  the  affection  you  really  feel  for  them.  This  may  be  done  in 
such  a  manner  as  is  not  liable  to  the  imputation  of  flattery  ;  and  experience  shows 
that  honest  men  are  pleased  by  this.  7.  Speak  to  all  men  the  very  truth  in  your 
heart.  In  all  company  and  on  all  occasions  be  a  man  of  veracity.  "  In  simplicity 
and  godly  sincerity,"  &c. — "  an  Israelite  indeed."  8.  To  sum  up  all :  if  you  would 
please  men,  please  God.  {John  Wesley,  M.A.)  Pleasing  others : — 1.  How  far 
may  we  do  this  ?  2.  What  should  be  our  motive  ?  3.  What  are  the  best  means  ol 
doing  it  ?  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Pleasing  others : — There  is  such  a  thing  as  pleasing 
another  by  flattery,  and  encouraging  him  in  his  prejudices.  Hence  the  restrictive 
phrase  ••  for  his  good."  We  are  not  to  be  men-pleasers  (1  Cor.  x.  33;  Gal.  i.  10), 
unworthy  trimmers,  and  religious  weathercocks.  Nor  are  we  to  try  to  gain 
popularity  by  pandering  to  the  weakness  or  follies  of  others.  We  are,  however, 
to  lay  ourselves  out  to  please  our  neighbour  in  the  manner  indicated.  No 
one  ever  succeeds  in  an  undertaking  unless  he  make  it  a  matter  of  business. 
We  must  be  professionals,  not  amateurs,  in  the  holy  practice  of  advancing 
llie  spiritual  interests  of  others.    (C.  Neil,  M.A.)        The  duty  of  pleasing  oth€r$ 

is — I.   FoiTNDED  IN  THE  LAW  OP  ChKISTIAN  LOVE.      11.    LllflTED   BY   WHAT  TEia>B  TO 

EDIFICATION,  in.  FniiiTLLED  by — 1.  Searing  with  their  infirmities.  2.  Acknow- 
ledging their  excellencies.  3.  Seeking  their  good.  (J.  Lyth,  DJ).)  Christ 
not  pleasing  Himself :  Christian  and  social  tolerance : — I.  The  bttlb  or  fob- 
BEABANCE  AS  LAID  DOWN  BT  THE  APOSTLE.  1.  There  Were  two  classcs  in  the  Boman 
Church  who  refused  liberty  to  others.  There  were  the  men  of  despotic  conscience, 
and  the  men  of  despotic  intellect ;  and,  that  we  may  cover  the  whole  ground  of 
character,  we  may  add  there  are  men  of  despotic  will  To  one  or  other  of  these 
classes  belongs  almost  every  case  of  undue  interference  with  Christian  and  social 
liberty.  In  all  these  cases  there  may  be  much  that  is  good,  but  there  is  a  subtle 
form  of  self-gratification  at  the  root  of  it,  a  mistaken  self-assertion,  which  does  not 
leave  room  for  other  natures  to  develop  themselves  in  freedom.  2.  It  may  be  asked 
if,  in  no  case,  we  are  warranted  to  interfere  with  our  fellow-men.  Most  certainly 
we  cannot  remain  indifferent  to  what  they  do  and  are,  if  we  have  any  regard  for 
God's  truth  and  their  welfare.  Bat  we  should  be  very  sure  that  it  is  regard  to 
God's  truth  and  another's  welfare  that  actuates  us,  and  not  the  mere  wilfulness 
that  seeks  its  own  way.  We  have  to  learn  that,  within  the  limits  of  what  is  not 
positively  wrong,  every  one  has  the  right  to  be  himself.  It  is  frequently  very  hard 
to  allow  this,  especially  when  there  are  close  relationships.  Husband  and  wife, 
parents  and  children,  brothers  and  sisters.  And  it  most  difficult  of  all  to  make 
allowance  for  each  other's  variety  of  nature,  and  to  remain  side  by  side  without 
undue  interference  with  one  another's  peculiarities.  3.  It  is  here  that  the  further 
principle  of  this  passage  comes  in,  that  we  are  not  merely  to  refrain  from  constrain- 
ing others  mto  our  way,  but,  as  far  as  we  can,  we  are  to  meet  them  in  theirs.  If 
there  be  a  separation  of  taste,  instead  of  compelling  them  to  surrender,  we  are  to 
forbear,  and  if  the  thing  be  harmless  for  us,  and  it  will  gratify  them,  we  are  to  take 
part  in  their  pursuits.  But  is  there  no  limit  to  this  surrender  ?  Yes,  We  are  to 
please  our  neighbour  "for  his  good  to  edification."  This  is  the  end,  and  the  end 
prescribes  the  limit.  Such  a  principle  saves  Christian  compliance  from  sycophancy 
or  characterlessness.  But  within  two  limits — the  indulgence  of  our  fellow-men  in 
sin,  and  the  compromise  of  our  own  true  nature — there  is  ample  scope  for  the  exer- 
cise of  endless  charity  and  compliance.  The  tree  that  has  its  firm-fixed  root  and 
upright  stem  has  also  its  spreading  branches  and  thousand  waving  twigs,  which 
yield  to  the  breeze  and  salute  the  gentlest  movement  of  the  surrounding  air.  How 
beautiful  strength  is,  when  it  thus  melts  away  at  its  extremities  into  kindliness 
and  courtesy  1    U.  This  fobbeabance  is  illustbated  bt  Chbist's  exauplb  (ver.  3). 


CHAP,  xv.]  ROMANS.  67J 

1.  The  qnotation  is  from  Psa.  Ixix. ,  in  which  the  speaker  is  David ;  but  the  apostle 
takes  the  words  as  completed  in  Christ,  which  this  manner  of  dealing  with  the 
Psalms  gives  us  a  light  to  read  the  Psalms  in.  Wherever  a  man  is  uttering  a 
breathing  of  the  Divine  life,  it  is  not  merely  Christ  that  he  is  implicitly  looking  for- 
ward to,  but  it  is  Christ  that  is  breathing  and  speaking  in  him.  2.  To  prove  the 
disinterested  forbearance  of  Christ,  he  cites  a  passage  that  shows  his  self-devotion 
to  God.  Right  action  toward  man  flows  naturally  from  right  feeling  toward  God.  1/ 
self-pleasing  has  been  sacrificed  on  the  Divine  altar,  it  has  received  its  death-blow  in 
every  other  form.  We  have  to  show  that  this  was  a  characteristic  of  Christ  in  His 
intercourse  with  men — forbearance  and  freedom.  He  presented  tbe  Divine  will,  and 
pressed  it  on  men  as  the  rule  of  all  life,  but  He  refrained  carefully  from  crushing 
their  nature  in  its  free  development.  (1)  We  see  this  in  the  variety  of  character 
which  His  earthly  life  drew  around  it.  His  disciples  represent  the  extremes  of 
temperament.  He  is  careful  never  to  stamp  on  them  a  hard  uniformity,  but  leaves 
them  to  their  own  natural  development,  and  aids  them  in  it.  Then,  outside  this 
circle,  we  have  groups  of  all  possible  colours.  How  different  from  founders  of 
human  systems,  who  cannot  be  satisfied  anless  their  formulas  are  repeated,  and 
their  minutest  features  reflected,  by  aU  their  scholars.  (2)  Christ  not  merely 
refrained  from  interfering  with  free  growth  Himself,  but  He  interposed  to  defend 
others  when  they  were  interfered  with.  What  a  lesson  there  is  to  contending, 
narrow-minded  rehgionists,  in  Lake  ix.  49 1  What  an  admonition  to  those  who 
would  impose  their  own  way  of  work  upon  every  other,  when  Martha's  complaint  is 
80  gently  but  firmly  met  I  (John  xii.  7).  (3)  Turn  now  from  His  earthly  life  to  the 
work  He  carries  on  by  His  Spirit,  which  is  to  enter  into  each  nature  by  itself,  and 
unfold  it  from  its  own  germ  and  centre.  It  is  for  wise  reasons  that  a  visible  Head 
is  removed  from  the  Christian  Church.  We  can  perceive  how  the  disciples  started 
np  into  stronger,  broader  men,  under  this  new  influence,  and  how  their  characters 
struck  out  on  all  sides  into  more  marked  individuahty.  How  different  are  the 
apostles  and  the  epistles  of  the  same  apostle,  caused  by  the  variety  of  development 
in  the  churches  to  which  they  were  addressed  I  And  Christ  is  still  teaching  us  to 
look  with  an  approving  eye  on  every  honest  effort  to  do  good  and  to  take  pleasure 
in  the  wide  variety  of  human  character  and  Christian  grace.    HI.  Some  of  the 

ASTANTAOEB  THAT  WOUIiD  BKStJLT  FBOM  ACTING  ON  THIS  PBINCIPLE.      1.    If,  in  Christian 

or  social  intercourse,  we  wish  to  deliver  any  man  from  what  we  think  error,  we 
must  do  so  by  putting  him  in  the  way  of  convincing  himself.  To  beat  him  down 
by  unreasoning  opposition,  or  even  by  an  irresistible  argument,  may  please  us,  but 
is  not  likely  to  gain  him.  To  respect  a  man's  freedom,  never  to  press  him  so  hard  as 
to  himiiliate  him,  to  give  him  the  clue  that  may  help  him  to  guide  himself  to  tho 
right,  is  according  to  the  Divine  model,  and  would  aid  us  in  serving  at  the  same 
time  both  our  fellow-men  and  the  truth.  2.  Take  the  family  circle.  Authority 
must  exist,  but  when  authority  makes  itself  felt  at  every  turn,  freedom  is  gone,  and 
influence  vanishes  with  it.  Constitutional  government  here,  as  elsewhere,  is  the 
great  thing  to  be  aimed  at — that  is,  firm  law  on  certain  great  essentials,  but  free- 
dom within  this  to  grow  up  according  to  taste  and  temperament.  If  we  wish  those 
we  are  influencing  to  become  valuable  for  anything,  it  must  be  by  permitting  them 
to  be  themselves.  They  will  do  very  Utile  if  they  turn  out  dead  transcripts  of  us. 
3,  In  pursuing  such  a  course  we  shall  best  succeed  in  elevating  and  broadening  our 
own  nature.  If  we  could  bring  all  around  us  into  our  own  mould,  we  should  only 
have  narrowed  ourselves  in  the  process  of  constraining  others.  But,  if  we  enter 
into  sympathy  with  their  pursuits,  we  not  merely  grow  in  unselfishness,  but  add 
something  to  our  intellectual  nature  which  was  not  there  before.  Conclusion :  In 
all  this  work  there  are  needed  two  great  qualities,  love  and  wisdom.  Neither  will 
suffice  alone.  Love  in  its  earnestness  is  often  too  narrow,  and  wisdom  in  its  breadth 
may  be  too  cold.  They  are  the  hght  and  heat  of  the  moral  world  which  must  go 
together.  (J.  Ker,  D.D.)  Making  others  happy: — 1.  A  man's  soul  is  like  a 
garden  belonging  to  an  old  neglected  mansion.  It  is  full  of  excellent  things  running 
to  waste.  Now  a  garden  has  no  right  to  be  dilapidated.  It  is  made  on  purpose  to 
confer  pleasure  and  profit.  So  the  soul  of  man  is  full  of  good  dispositions  and  kind 
impulses ;  but  besides  these  it  is  fuU  of  the  stinging  nettles  of  pride,  and  vanities 
flaunting  coarse  colours.  A  soul's  power  to  produce  pleasure  or  pain  in  another  is 
very  great.  We  are  commanded,  therefore,  to  produce  pleasure.  It  is  not  left 
optional  with  us  whether  men  shall  be  made  happier  by  our  going  among  them. 
And  not  occasionally  by  a  gleam  and  a  smile.  It  is  to  enter  into  the  whole  carriage 
of  our  lives.    2.  This  is  neither  a  small  nor  an  unimportant  business.    The  making 


«80  TSE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  XT. 


others  happj  is  one  of  the  best  manifestations  of  the  Christian  disposition,  and  tha 
closest  imitation  of  Christ's  example.  Our  duty  as  Christians  is  not  simply  to  go 
out  after  men  ontside  of  morality.  All  abont  us  society  is  full  of  men  whose  lives 
average  but  very  little  sweetness.  And  it  is  for  us  to  seek  to  make  them  happier. 
Some  men  move  through  life  as  a  band  of  music,  flinging  out  pleasure  to  every  one, 
far  and  near.  Some  men  fill  the  air  with  their  sweetness  as  orchards,  in  October 
days,  fill  the  air  with  the  perfume  of  ripe  fruit.  Some  women  cling  to  their  own 
houses  like  the  honeysuckle  over  the  door,  yet,  like  it,  fill  all  the  region  with  the 
subtle  fragrance  of  their  goodness.  How  great  a  bounty  and  a  blessing  is  it  so  to 
hold  the  royal  gifts  of  the  soul  that  they  shall  be  music  to  some,  and  fragrance 
to  others,  and  life  to  all  I  It  would  be  no  unworthy  thing  to  live  for  to  fill  the 
atmosphere  with  a  brightness  which  others  cannot  create  for  themselves.  3.  Men 
neglect  frequently  these  very  simple  and  very  obvious  truths,  because  there  is  still 
a  remnant  of  asceticism  among  good  men,  "  Oh,"  say  they,  "  make  men  better, 
and  then  their  happiness  will  take  care  of  itself."  But  much  of  men's  selfishness 
and  sin  springs  from  their  own  unhappiness.  And  whatever  shall  take  that  away 
wUl  tend  to  make  them  better.  Again,  men  say,  "  My  business  is  to  be  honest, 
and  just,  and  not  to  make  people  laugh."  Yet  you  have  no  business  to  be  just  and 
honest  in  such  a  way  that  those  who  stand  next  to  you  shall  be  less  happy  by  your 
way  of  being  so.  No  one  has  a  better  right  to  be  a  hedgehog  than  a  hedgehog;  but 
is  he  a  good  neighbour  ?  A  thistle  belongs  to  the  ordained  economy  of  nature ;  and 
yet  is  it  the  model  of  a  man  ?  How  many  men  there  are  who,  rude  of  speech,  go 
thrusting  here,  and  piercing  there,  and  treading  down  sensitiveness  on  every  side, 
with  no  other  excuse  except  this:  "Well,  1  believe  in  a  straight,  out-and-out  kind 
of  man.  Jack  Blunt  is  my  model !  "  Undoubtedly,  and  a  very  bad  model  very  well 
imitated,  too  I  4.  We  are  not  at  liberty  to  please  by  pandering  to  the  bad  elements 
in  men's  characters.  We  must  move  upon  the  right  feelings  in  men,  and  not  stir 
up  the  wrong  ones,  nor  the  evil  ones.  In  order  to  this  there  must  be  a  discipline 
in  ourselves.  In  the  free  intercourse  of  human  life  you  carry  to  men  the  faculties 
that  are  active  in  you,  and  tend  to  excite  in  them  precisely  the  same  feelings.  If 
you  are  irritable,  you  tend  to  produce  irritation.  If  you  are  proud,  you  tend  to 
excite  the  resistance  of  pride.  And  these  feelings  never,  in  you  nor  in  any  other 
person,  ministered  to  cheer.  They  are  sand  in  the  teeth.  No  man  can  be  happy 
himself,  or  promote  happiness  in  other  men,  until  he  has  learned  to  put  to  sleep 
these  malign  faculties  every  day.  The  whole  machinery  of  life,  then,  needs  a  great 
deal  of  oiling  in  you  in  order  that  you  may  minister  to  the  wants  of  others.  5.  We 
are  not  simply  to  carry  happiness  to  those  that  are  around  about  us.  In  the  olden 
time  it  was  thought  that  we  should  love  our  friends  and  hate  our  enemies.  In  the 
modem  time  it  has  been  thought  that  we  should  love  our  own  denomination,  and 
hate  those  that  are  heretical.  Therefore  there  has  been  felt  to  be  a  solemn  duty 
incumbent  on  the  Catholic  to  hate  Protestants,  and  there  has  been  felt  to  be  a 
corresponding  duty  on  the  other  side.  Now,  it  is  my  business  as  a  Protestant 
Christian  man  so  to  treat  all  Catholics  that  I  shall  please  them,  for  their  good,  to 
edification.  For  a  thousand  years  the  experiment  has  been  tried  of  bombarding 
men  into  love  and  faith ;  and  with  what  luck  ?  Is  it  not  time  to  see  if  we  cannot 
please  men  into  unity ;  if  we  cannot  drop  the  things  that  are  disagreeable,  and 
insist  upon  the  things  that  are  pleasing,  for  good,  to  edification?  As  it  is  in 
religious  matters,  so  should  it  be  in  civil.  There  are  times  when  men  must  stand 
in  politics  for  principles,  and  at  such  times  men  cannot  avoid  giving  pain.  But  this 
furnishes  no  criterion  for  the  average  of  cases.  Ordinarily,  men  who  come  together 
knowing  that  they  are  on  different  sides  in  philosophy,  or  in  politics,  or  in  business, 
if  they  be  Christian  men,  should  bear  in  mind  that  they  are  to  "  please  one  another 
for  good  to  edification,"  and  not  irritate  and  chafe  and  hurt  each  other.  6.  If  these 
views  are  correct,  then  there  is  a  new  element  of  personal  piety  that  should  enter 
into  the  conception  of  every  one.  We  ask  men  whether  they  are  willing  to  leave  off 
every  known  sin,  &c.,  but  how  seldom  do  we  qaestion  men  as  to  beneficence  of  dis- 
position I  When,  then,  we  are  bringing  men  into  the  kingdom  of  God  we  should 
inspire  them  with  heroic  enterprise  in  doing  good ;  but  there  are  thousands  of  men 
who  are  attempting  to  do  good,  who  never  had  it  enter  their  minds  that  they  were 
to  make  happiness.  If  I  were  to  carry  home  this  subject  to  the  household,  are 
there  not  many  families  that  would  bear  some  reformation  ?  On  the  other  hand, 
how  many  households  are  there  that  call  themselves  Christiaus,  and  have  a  right 
to,  because  all  day  long  each  one  is  shining  on  the  others ;  because  each  one  is 
removing  obstructions,  taking  away  attritions,  smoothing  asperities,  and  seeking  to 


«BAF.  XT.]  ROMANS.  -  '       6dl 

make  all  amiable  and  all  happy?  When,  after  the  long,  loathsome  voyage,  I  entered 
the  channel,  and  saw,  dim  upon  the  horizon,  the  blue  line  of  shore,  and  smelled 
the  strange  odour  in  the  air,  J  said  to  the  captain,  "  What  is  this  smell?  "  " Bless 
your  heart  I  "  said  he,  "  it  is  the  land-smell. "  All  the  smells  of  the  sea  put  together 
were  never  so  sweet  as  that.  There  are  persons  so  lovely  that  you  cannot  go  near 
to  them  without  perceiving  that  they  exhale  gladness  and  cheer  and  happiness. 
Blessed  are  such  I  I  believe  in  revivals  ;  but  I  have  never  known  any  revivals  that 
did  not  need  to  have  other  revivals  in  them.  I  have  known  men  revived  from 
intemperance  and  from  wickedness,  who  went  into  churches  and  into  neighbour- 
hoods where  they  set  themselves  np  on  their  orthodoxy  and  their  propriety,  and 
carried  themselves  so  unsocially,  so  offensively,  that  they  exerted  no  happiness- 
producing  power.  No  person  has  drunk  in  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  who 
does  not  make  other  persons  happier  when  he  comes  to  them.  (H".  W.  Beecher.) 
Making  tunshine  in  thady  placei : — 1.  Life  is  a  big  bundle  of  littles,  intended  to  be 
tied  together  by  love.  Life's  joy  depends  on  what  cords  bind  you  and  what  hand 
ties  them.  Bound  together  we  must  be,  either  by  cords  of  silk  or  by  iron  fetters. 
How  much  our  happiness  is  placed  in  the  power  of  others  I  The  thoughts,  looks, 
words,  and  actions  of  others  can  in  a  moment  fill  us  with  joy  or  sorrow.  The  sen 
Borium  of  our  life  seems  sometimes  like  a  great  and  beautiful  spider's  web,  in  which 
eveiythread  is  sensitive,  we  at  the  centre  giving  out  and  receiving  back  again  a  thou- 
sand  pulsations  of  joy  and  sorrow.  To  change  the  figure,  our  hearts  are  a  telephonic 
centre,  from  which  we  send  out  varied  messages,  and  get  them  back,  too.  Messages 
of  tenderness  and  of  scorn,  of  healing  and  mischief.  Who  of  us  can  live  to  our- 
selves ?  2.  How  much  we  each  have  it  in  our  power  to  make  others  happy  I  Surely 
here  is  a  realm  of  Christian  duty  little  regarded  by  us,  and  I  fear  less  practised. 
How  many  persons  in  this  age  of  keen  competition,  when  life  is  a  race,  have 
pondered  Christ's  words  about  loving  their  neighbour  as  themselves?  Even  in 
family  and  social  life  how  many  need  to  ponder  the  sin  of  being  constant  misery- 
makers  !  If  one  person  kills  another  in  passion,  we  call  that  murder.  But  if  a 
hard,  selfish  nature  frets  another  and  a  loving  nature  to  death,  what  do  we  call 
that  ?  We  find  in  our  text — I.  A  centre.  No  man  can  please  his  neighbour  who 
does  not  please  himself.  We  cannot  give  what  we  have  not  got.  Without  a  fixed 
centre  there  can  be  no  circle.  Now,  if  a  Christian  man  is  to  please  himself,  he 
needs  that  three  features  shall  be  prominent  in  his  experience.  1.  Let  him  make 
np  his  mind  as  to  what  is  life's  true  idea,  and  lovingly  pursue  it.  Much  of  our  joy 
in  life  depends  on  what  we  expect.  If  I  expect  a  large  gift  and  get  a  little  oue,  or 
nothing,  I  am  vexed  and  disappointed  ;  but  if  I  expect  little  and  get  much,  then  I 
am  easily  pleased.  If  I  have  made  up  my  mind  that  the  world  is  a  workshop  to 
make  men ;  that  God  and  men  are  the  workers,  circumstances  the  tools ;  each  day 
an  opportunity  for  new  efifort  and  new  knowledge ;  failure  only  a  revelation  of  the 
ideal  and  another  chance  for  progress ;  if  I  have  settled  that  love  is  life's  one  great 
end  and  prize,  then,  with  a  noble  discontent,  which  rests  ever  and  yet  never,  I  may 
be  happy  in  myself.  2.  But  this  happiness  will  only  be  secure  as  my  motive  is  right 
and  my  helper  is  ever  near.  To  live  to  push  myself  to  the  front,  or  even  to  please 
men,  will  never  give  full  pleasure  to  the  heart.  He  who  commands  and  inspires 
me  must  himself  be  perfect,  or  his  imperfection  will  in  turn  become  mine.  Christ 
must  be  the  keynote  of  life's  song  and  the  singer's  inspiration.  To  please  Him  is 
to  lead  self  to  its  highest  ideal  and  aspiration  and  joy.  Would  we  please  self,  our 
motto  must  be,  "  For  me  to  live  is  Christ."  Self  lost  in  Christ  is  life's  full  gain. 
8.  Yet  one  thing  more  is  needed.  Every  day  and  hour  brings  me  a  heap  of  failures. 
What  am  I  to  do  with  these  ?  Carry  them  hourly  to  Christ  for  His  loving  forgive- 
ness, which  deepens  penitence,  heartens  trust,  and  inspires  to  new  and  nobler  service. 
n.  The  circumference  of  our  text  is — that  no  man  can  truly  please  himself  unless 
he  seeks  to  please  his  neighbour.  1.  Selfish  joy  is  a  paradox.  A  great  thinker  has 
said,  '•  No  man  has  a  right  to  all  his  rights  "  ;  the  measure  in  which  he  determines 
to  have  them  is  the  measure  of  his  meanness — the  measure  of  his  willinghood  to 
forego  them  is  the  measure  of  his  manhood  and  nobleness.  Where  to-day  men  are 
too  selfish  to  labour  for  the  common  weal,  politics  become  degraded,  the  national 
conscience  debased,  and  the  poor  trampled  upon.  2.  But  what  language  can  fully 
describe  the  holy  gladness  of  being  permitted  to  help  and  bless  one's  fellow-men  ? 
What  a  royal  gift  it  is  to  carry  sunshine  about  with  you ;  to  be  like  the  flowers, 
making  people  happy  without  knowing  it ;  to  hght  your  neighbour's  candle  by  your 
own,  thus  losing  nothing  and  giving  much.  If  we  could  doom  each  man  to  live  and 
labour  merely  for  himself,  then,  whatever  has  lent  any  virtue  to  work,  whatevsr 


683  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  Xf. 

has  prompted  courage  and  self-sacrifice,  the  very  beauty  of  home  life  itself,  most 
perish.  I  am  told  if  you  play  a  fiute  beneath  a  great  church  bell,  too  large  for  you 
to  stir,  and  listen  close  till  the  right  note  flows  forth  a  silver  rivulet  of  melody,  that 
mass  of  metal  will  respond  with  a  myriad  waves  of  sound  in  low,  soft  unison.  So, 
if  a  man  will  live  Kke  Christ  hved — not  to  please  himself — then  not  only  will  he 
most  truly  please  himself,  but  a  thousand  hearts  will  vibrate  to  the  melody  of  that 
man's  self-sacrificing  love.  III.  The  conclusion  of  our  text  is — that  no  man  can 
either  truly  please  his  neighbour  or  himself  who  does  not  seek  to  please  both  for  a 
worthy  reason.  "We  must  seek  to  please  for  the  permanent  building  up  of  character. 
1,  All  can  please  if  they  only  try.  True,  some  have  dispositions  naturally  winsome 
and  agreeable,  and  others  as  naturally  acid  and  disagreeable ;  but,  not  the  less, 
every  man  has  this  command  laid  upon  him.  2.  Merely  to  give  pleasure  may, 
unless  guarded,  be  a  snare.  We  may  seek  to  please  only  to  find  opportunity  for 
display,  or  to  secure  men's  applause.  We  may  want  the  partnership  of  others  in 
gaiety  or  dissipation,  and  we  may  please  them  only  for  the  sake  of  keeping  us  com- 
pany. These  methods,  and  many  others,  pull  men  down  and  never  build  them  up. 
Our  work  is  to  build  men  up  for  good  and  for  God.  3.  All  our  life  would  be  lifted 
to  a  level  of  nobility  if  our  pleasure  were  to  seek  to  do  men  good  in  a  glad  spirit. 
It  was  a  noble  resolve  of  the  blacksmith  who  said,  whatever  others  do,  ''I  have 
resolved  not  to  undersell  but  excel  my  neighbours."  Yet  all  secondary  efforts  to 
either  please  or  bless  men,  however  laudable  they  may  be — and  they  are — yet  con- 
certs, entertainments,  lectures,  all  of  them  wiU  bring  us  much  disappointment ;  but 
the  one  work  which  will  give  us  largest  pleasure  and  noblest  fruit  is  to  sing  to  men 
the  old,  old  story  of  Jesus  and  His  love.  4.  Nothing  is  more  important  than  that 
men  who  do  seek  to  build  up  others  for  good  should  do  it  in  a  pleasing  way.  I  have 
no  patience  with  good  people  representing  God  or  His  service  in  any  unlovely  light. 
Scolding  seldom  builds  men  much  higher  ;  silence  is  best  when  we  cannot  praise. 
To  tell  men  what  God  has  done  for  them,  and  wants  to  do  for  and  in  them,  and  to 
show  them  how  glad  and  restful  His  service  makes  us — this  is  the  best  service  we 
can  render  the  truth  and  our  fellow-men.  Conclusion :  Love  is  the  great  river  that 
flows  through  and  sweetens  human  life.  Let  us  each  one  take  care  what  we  put 
into  that  river  of  love.  Some  carelessly  throw  in  the  broken  potsherds  of  strife  and 
ill-will.  Some  poison  the  stream  with  the  miserable  ambition  of  getting  rich  at  any 
cost.  Others  foul  the  stream  with  grossnesses  and  impurity.  Every  man  should 
feel  that  he  is  responsible  for  the  fulness,  and  purity,  and  beauty  of  life's  river  of 
love.  {R.  H.  Lovell.)  Christian  courtesy : — 1.  The  apostle  makes  a  special  appli- 
cation of  this  principle  to  the  conduct  of  the  strong  towards  the  weak.  Taken  by 
itself,  it  is  the  injunction  of  the  comprehensive  duty  of  courtesy.  The  etymology 
and  frequent  usage  of  the  word  would  confine  it  to  what  is  outward,  i.e. ,  polished 
manners.  Court,  courtier,  courtesy,  are  nearly  allied.  But  the  word  has  a  higher 
meaning.  To  court  is  to  endeavour  to  please  ;  courtesy  is  the  desire  and  effort  to 
please  arising  from  a  good  motive  and  directed  to  a  right  end.  The  sycophant 
desires  to  please,  but  not  for  edification.  He  acts  from  a  selfish  motive  for  a  selfish 
object.  Every  Christian,  so  far  as  his  Christianity  moulds  and  controls  his  charac- 
ter, is  courteous.  2.  The  sum  of  Christian  wisdom  is  to  be  Christlike  (ver.  3). 
Nothing  can  exceed  the  courtesy  of  Christ  and  His  condescension,  kindness,  and 
tenderness  to  the  humble,  poor,  suffering,  and  penitent.  "  Woman,  hath  no  man 
condemned  thee  ?  "  &c.  Many  of  the  earlier  Christians  wished  to  expunge  that  para- 
graph. But  no  purer,  brighter  ray  shines  upon  the  life  of  our  Lord  than  thai 
which  fell  upon  Him  when  He  uttered  these  words.  I.  Codbtesy  has  a  NEOATrvB 
BIDE.  It  is  manifested  by  avoiding  to  give  pain — 1.  By  impressing  others  with 
their  inferiority,  their  position,  knowledge,  talents,  force  in  argument,  liberality. 
The  strong  among  the  Romans  despised  the  narrowness  and  weakness  of  their 
scrupulous  brethren.  2.  By  in  any  way  hurting  their  feelings.  II.  The  positivb 
OF  THIS  viBTDE  is  the  eudcavour  to  please,  to  heal  wounded  feelings,  to  inspire 
confidence  and  affection.  (C.  Hodge,  D.D.)  Edification : — I.  Its  necessity.  All 
need  it.  1.  Some  have  yet  to  be  built.  Children,  e.^.,  have  unformed  characters 
which  require  to  be  formed.  2.  Some  are  built  awry.  Many  young  men  have 
characters  malformed,  and  the  task  is  to  get  them  into  form.  3.  Some  have  tumbled 
down.  There  are  those  whose  character  is  a  wreck,  and  the  work  in  their  case  is 
one  of  reformation.  H.  Its  means.  The  builder  must  conform  to  law.  The  great 
principles  on  which  successful  building  depends  must  be  "  pleased."  Outrage  the 
laws  of  gravitation,  proportion,  &c.,  and  the  builder  wiU  labour  in  vain.  1.  For  the 
want  of  "pleasing"  them— (1)  Some  are  never  built  at  all.    With  the  best  of 


OBAP.  It.]  ROMANS.  <8S 

intentions,  abundant  materials,  and  assidaons  efforts,  a  builder  may  erect  a  heap 
instead  of  an  edifice.  How  much  advice,  instruction,  ^c,  are  expended  on  a  child, 
only  to  be  thrown  away  becarse  expended  in  a  repulsive  form  I  (2)  Others  are  pulled 
down.  When  a  man  has  gone  wrong,  instead  of  trying  to  put  him  straight  in  the 
proper  way,  his  "  friends  "  often  take  him  to  pieces.  (3)  'When  character  has  been 
ruined,  instead  of  collecting  and  re-building  the  ruins,  how  often  is  it  that  they  are 
scattered  beyond  recovery  1  Harsh  sensures,  cutting  sarcasms,  so-called  "plain 
truths  "  never  yet  succeeded  in  reforming  a  broken  character.  2.  In  each  case  the 
on^-thing  needful  is  to  give  pleasure.  Put  a  child,  a  youth,  a  man  in  good  humour, 
give  him  hope,  persuade  him  that  duty  is  delightful,  and  the  work  of  construction 
or  reconstruction  is  almost  half  accomplished.  The  application  is — 1.  To  parents. 
2.  To  preachers.  8.  To  teachers.  (J.  W.  Bum.)  Edification  : — In  the  process 
of  building  a  material  edifice  four  things  are  necessary.  They  are  equally  essential 
in  the  edification  of  character.  I.  A  stable  foundation — Christ,  the  Rock  of  Ages. 
IL  Sound  materials — faith,  hope,  love,  zeal,  Ac.  III.  The  combination  of  utilitt 
AND  oraoe  in  the  stbuotube.  The  Christian  is  to  be  beautiful  as  well  as  useful. 
rV.  Pebfeotion  at  the  finish.  The  Christian  is  to  be  a  perfect  man  in  Christ 
Jesus.  (Ibid.)  ^  Edification  and  pleasure : — When  Handel's  oratorio  of  the 
"Messiah"  had  won  the  admiration  of  many  of  the  great,  Lord  Kinnoul  took 
occasion  to  pay  him  some  compliments  on  the  noble  entertainment  which  he  had 
lately  given  the  town.  "  My  lord,"  said  Handel,  "  I  should  be  sorry  if  I  only  enter- 
tained  them  ;  I  wish  to  make  them  better. "  It  is  to  be  feared  that  many  speech- 
makers  at  public  meetings  could  not  say  as  much ;  and  yet  how  dare  any  of  ua 
waste  the  time  of  our  fellow  immortals  in  mere  amusing  talk  I  If  we  have  nothing 
to  speak  to  edification,  how  much  better  to  hold  our  tongue  I  (0.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Seeking  to  edify : — A  fine  example  of  a  word  fitly  spoken  is  found  in  Dr.  Bush- 
nell's  biography.  An  intelligent  but  not  religious  young  lady,  after  spending  a 
social  evening  with  the  good  doctor's  family,  was  escorted  home  by  her  courteous 
host.  On  their  way  the  brilliant  starlight  led  them  to  talk  of  astronomy.  The 
doctor  spoke  of  the  law  of  harmony  which  held  each  little  star  in  its  appointed 
place,  and  then  turning  to  the  bright-minded  girl,  with  a  winning  smile,  be  said, 
"  Sarah,  I  want  to  see  you  in  your  place."  This  was  all  he  said  that  was  personal, 
bat  the  thought  thrilled  her  young  soul  as  if  it  had  dropped  upon  her  from  the 
skies.  Its  effect  was  to  win  her  to  discipleship.  "  A  word  spoken  in  season,  how 
good  it  is  I  " 

Ver.  3.  For  even  Christ  pleased  not  Hlmselt — Tfie  telf -denial  of  Christ : — I.  Its 
azBHPLiFiCATioN.  1.  He  had  the  right  to  please  Himself.  2.  He  ceded  it.  (1) 
Seeking  not  His  own  ease.  (2)  Bearing  the  reproach  of  others.  8.  For  the  bene- 
fit of  mankind.  IL  Its  design.  1.  For  faith.  2.  For  imitation.  8.  For  motive. 
{J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Imitation  of  Christ  makes  a  trifle  the  highest  virtue.  (T.  Robin- 
son, D.D.)  Self-forgetfulness : — Amongst  the  Roman  Christians  there  was  a  great 
strrfe  about  a  very  smaU  matter.  Might  a  Christian  eat  meat,  or  must  he  live  on 
herbs  ?  And  we  may  be  certain  that  there  would  be  the  loud  assertion  of  individual 
rights,  and  everywhere  self  would  be  very  conspicuous.  It  must  have  grieved  the 
apostle  to  be  compelled  to  take  part  in  any  such  strife.  He  must  have  been  con- 
scious of  a  deep  descent  when  he  came  down  from  the  heights  of  chap.  viii.  into 
the  arena  where  professed  Christians  were  engaged  in  such  a  dispute.  But  he 
brought  the  power  of  the  Cross  to  bear  upon  it,  and  instantly  lifted  it  into  a  higher 
region.  He  showed  the  contending  men  that  in  connection  with  their  very  dilfer- 
ences  there  were  glorious  possibilities  of  maintaining  Christ's  own  spirit  and  grow- 
ing up  into  Christ's  own  hkeness  (vers.  1-3).  Note — L  The  spibit  of  Chbist.  The 
motto  of  selfish  human  nature  is  "  Every  man  for  himself,  and  God  for  us  all " ; 
and  there  are  some  of  us  who  would  change  the  latter  part  of  the  motto,  and  whose 
joy  would  be  greater  if  they  could  believe  that  God  is  a  great  deal  more  for  them 
than  He  is  for  others.  The  spirit  of  Christ  was  the  very  reverse  of  this.  With 
Him  thoughts  of  others  were  first,  thoughts  of  self  were  last.  He  came  into  this 
world  of  which  He  had  been  the  Creator,  and  of  which  He  was  the  rightful  ruler, 
"  not  to  be  ministered  unto,"  Ac.  Wherever  He  was  found  He  was  there  for  the 
good  of  others.  1.  Look  at  His  miracles.  Who  can  fail  to  discern  there  a  care 
for  others  that  never  sleeps  ?  In  connection  with  this  it  is  very  significant  that  our 
Lord's  first  temptation  was  to  work  His  first  miracle  for  His  own  relief.  A  little 
while  afterwards  the  Jews  were  in  the  wilderness.  They  had  not  fasted  forty  hours, 
and  we  do  not  read  that  any  of  them  complained  of  hanger.    But  Christ  made  • 


e84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOB.  [CHA»„  If. 

feast  for  five  thousand  who  would  not  turn  one  stone  into  bread  for  Himself.  He 
that  came  to  minister,  Ac,  must  not  strike  the  wrong  keynote  of  His  life  by 
making  His  first  miracle  a  miracle  for  ffis  own  personal  reUe'.  In  our  Lord's 
triumph  over  the  next  temptation  you  can  see  the  same  thoughtful  love  for  the 
good  of  others.  He  could  have  cast  Himself  from  the  pinnacle  of  the  temple,  and 
no  doubt  it  would  have  brought  Him  great  applause,  but  whose  tears  would  it  have 
wiped  away  ?  So  He  kept  His  Divine  resources  in  all  their  virgin  freshness  and 
fulness  tiU  presently  the  lepers  crossed  His  path  and  He  could  clcAnee  the^n.  We 
remember  where  the  glory  first  broke  forth.  He  who  the  other  day  would  not  tuffa 
Btones  into  bread  to  appease  His  own  hunger  turned  the  water  into  wine  to  relieve 
His  friends  from  embarrassment.  Put  the  first  temptation  and  the  first  mirade 
Bide  by  side,  and  how  there  flames  out  this  ever  blessed  truth, "  Even  Christ  pleased 
not  Himself."  2.  After  His  first  journey  of  mercy  He  went  back  again  to  Nazareth. 
He  had  gone  to  Capernaum,  Ac,  and  had  conferred  many  blessings ;  but  He  returned 
as  poor  as  He  had  left  it.  The  people  had  heard  what  He  had  done  :  He  knew  what 
was  in  their  hearts.  He  said,  "  Ye  will  say  to  Me,  Physician,  heal  Thyself."  Why 
did  not  He  who  had  done  so  much  for  others  better  His  own  circumstances  ?  We 
must  not  be  astonished  at  their  incredulity.  Here  was  a  new  thing  in  the  earth. 
Here  was  a  man  unspeakably  rich  in  resources,  unspeakably  lavish  in  His  gifts ; 
and  He  lived  and  died  in  deepest  poverty.  3.  As  in  life,  so  in  death  Christ  pleased 
not  Himself.  When  His  burden  of  woe  was  becoming  so  heavy  that  His  heart  waa 
like  to  break,  the  soldiers  led  by  Judas  went  to  seize  Him  ;  He  put  forth  His  power 
and  they  fell  to  the  ground.  He  soon  made  it  manifest  that  the  deed  of  gentle 
violence  had  not  been  wrought  for  His  own  deliverance,  but  for  the  deliverance  of 
others.  "  Take  Me  and  let  My  disciples  go  their  way."  The  daughters  of  Jeru- 
salem dropped  their  tears  upon  His  way  of  grief.  He  bade  them  stay  their  tears, 
not  because  He  spurned  their  sympathy,  but  because  He  would  have  them  keep 
their  energies  for  their  own  sorrow.  How  many  more  instances  there  are  in  that 
crucifixion  that  one  might  cite  to  the  same  purport !  The  cup  of  sorrows  was  held 
up  to  Him.  Many  and  diverse  were  the  elements  in  that  cup.  Judas  put  into  it 
all  the  poison  of  his  treachery,  Peter  the  bitterness  of  his  denial,  the  people  the 
foul  stream  of  their  ingratitude,  the  soldiers  their  cruelty,  the  priests  and  Pharisees 
their  deadly  malignity,  Herod  his  mockery,  Pilate  his  unrighteousness,  and  the 
crowd,  aided  by  the  malefactor,  their  brutal  and  blasphemous  revilings.  And  there 
were  other  bitter  elements  there,  the  reality  and  terribleness  of  which  are  testified 
to  by  Scripture.  Yet  He  drank  that  cup  that  sinners  might  live.  11.  The  dutt  op 
THE  DISCIPLE.  Lay  stress  on  the  word  "  even. "  1.  Surely  if  anyone  could  have 
done  it  wisely,  and  safely,  and  beneficially,  He  could  have  done  it.  He  had  no 
thought  but  what  was  wise,  no  will  but  what  was  good,  no  fear  but  what  was  sin- 
less, no  desire  but  what  was  honourable,  and  yet  He  hesitated  not  to  take  His 
ijihoughts,  desires,  and  will,  and  bind  them  with  cords  for  sacrifice,  and  lay  tbem 
\ipon  the  altar.  If  Christ  could  deny  Himself,  what  passion  of  ours  is  too  noble, 
what  pleasure  too  precious,  what  desire  too  honourable,  what  prejudice  and  pre- 
possession too  precious  to  be  fastened  to  the  Cross  for  ever,  if  the  will  of  God  and 
the  claims  of  brotherly  kindness  and  charity  demand  the  sacrifice  ?  2.  A  Christ 
without  self-denying  love  could  not  have  saved  the  world.  A  church  without  self- 
denying  love  cannot  carry  on  the  work  of  Christ.  (1)  And  if  our  selfishness  give 
birth  to  uselessness  He  will  visit  it  with  the  punishment  of  perpetual  uselessness. 
The  man  that  did  not  use  his  talent,  that  did  not  employ  his  power  for  doing  good, 
was  punished  in  part  by  having  the  capacity  for  doing  good  taken  away.  (2)  On 
the  other  hand,  ii  our  generous  love  give  birth  to  usefulness,  our  usefulness  shall 
be  rewarded  by  greater  capacity  and  wider  sphere  for  service.  The  man  that  had 
turned  his  talent  into  six  talents,  he  was  not  welcomed  into  rest,  he  was  welcomed 
into  wider  work.    (C.  Vince.) 

Ver.  4.  For  whatsoever  things  were  ■written  aforetime  were  written  for  our 
learning. — Tlie  Holy  Scriptures :— I.  What  week  the  Scbiptukes  given  os  fob? 
1.  "  Our  learning."  They  are  God's  gift  of  light  to  a  dark  world  when  it  had  lost 
its  way  and  was  groping  for  the  wall  like  the  blind.  (1)  As  an  intellectual  boon 
elone  we  should  prize  them.  They  answer  man's  inquiries  as  to  the  origin  and 
history  of  the  world,  <&c.,  in  a  way  which  meets  the  anticipations  of  a  reasoning 
and  reflective  mind.  (2)  For  our  learning  also  on  great  moral  subjects ;  how,  e.g., 
it  comes  that  there  are  found  in  man  such  strange  contrarieties  of  good  and  evU ; 
and  how,  even  while  hedged  in  by  influences  which  bind  him  to  the  present  world,, 


tBM».  XT.]  ROSUNS,  685 

he  is  oonsoioas  of  onextingriishable  aspirations  after  a  higher  and  unseen  life.  (3) 
For  our  learning,  as  respects  God  Himself.  "  The  world  by  wisdom  knew  not 
Ood."  My  mind  pants  for  information  about  Him  in  the  relations  of  parent, 
benefactor,  judge.  But  all  this  must  come  from  Himself  alone.  Neither  nature, 
nor  reason,  nor  observation,  nor  conscience  could  ever  have  helped  us  to  it.  2. 
That  through  the  patience  and  comfort  which  these  Scriptures  afford  to  the  troubled 
loul  we  might  have  hope.  We  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God ;  that  is,  of  the 
glory  which  shall  be  revealed  hereafter — the  mighty  developments  of  the  world 
unseen.  And  this  hope  comes  to  us,  is  strengthened  and  kept  alive  by  patience 
and  comfort  of  the  Word.  The  Word  is  our  hope,  especially  in  all  times  of  afQic> 
tion.  Over  and  over  again,  in  the  119th  Psalm,  does  David  back  up  his  petitions 
for  all  good  with  the  argument,  "  according  to  Thy  Word,"  and  he  well  knew  his 
warrant.  The  Scriptures  were  given  for  that  very  end.  II.  Thb  fbelimos  with 
WHICH  WB  should  appboach  THB  STUDY  01  THB  ScBiPTUBES.  1.  Deep  revereuoe. 
Ood  will  have  His  name  hallowed,  for  it  is  holy ;  but  His  Word  He  seems  to  make 
holier  still— •'Thou  hast  magnified  Thy  Word  above  all  Thy  name."  We  are  to 
receive  it,  not  as  the  word  of  man,  but  as  it  is  in  truth,  the  Word  of  God.  2. 
Diligence,  earnest  effort,  a  high  appreciation  of  its  worth.  "  I  rejoice  at  Thy  Word 
as  one  that  findeth  great  spoil,"  says  David.  As  in  prayer,  we  have  not,  because 
we  oak  not ;  so  in  our  Scripture  reading,  it  is  to  be  feared,  we  find  not  because  we 
seek  not.  Is  there  any  human  science  in  which  proficiency  would  ever  be  obtained 
if  its  first  principles  were  to  be  studied  with  no  more  of  eoncentration  and  of 
thought  than  most  men  give  to  the  study  of  the  Bible  ?  If  we  will  not  be  at  the 
pains  to  learn,  we  can  have  no  claim  either  to  the  comfort  or  the  hope.  3.  Strong 
faith,  large  expectations,  a  deep  persuasion  of  the  suflQciency  of  Scripture  for  all  its 
ordained  and  appointed  ends.  A  book  is  commonly  nothing  more  than  just  an 
assemblage  of  words  which  move  not,  neither  do  they  speak  ;  but  the  Word  of  (}od 
has  all  the  properties  of  the  most  active  and  powerful  agents  in  the. universe.  It 
is  a  spirit,  and  can  breathe ;  it  is  a  fire,  and  can  consume ;  it  is  a  hammer,  and  can 
crush ;  it  is  a  sword,  and  can  cleave ;  it  is  a  rain,  and  can  soften ;  it  is  leaven,  and 
can  spread ;  it  has  a  vitality  which  can  be  claimed  by  nothing  else.  The  only  limit 
which  can  be  put  to  its  power  is  that  imposed  by  our  own  unbelief.  If  not 
restrained  by  this,  every  promise  becomes  endorsed  with  a  yea  and  amen. 
(D.  Moore,  M.A.)  Inspiration : — The  connection  between  the  different  parts  of 
the  text  is  this  :  First,  the  apostle  lays  down  a  Christian's  duty  (vers.  1,  2).  After 
that  he  brings  forward,  as  the  sanction  of  that  duty,  the  spirit  oi  the  life  of  Christ 
(ver.  3).  Next  he  adds  an  illustration  of  that  principle  by  a  quotation  from  Psalm 
Ixix.  Lastly,  he  explains  and  defends  that  application  (ver.  4).  So  we  have  the 
principle  upon  which  the  apostles  used  the  Old  Testament,  and  we  are  enabled  to 
nnderstand  their  view  of  inspiration.  This  is  the  deepest  question  of  our  day.  In 
the  text  we  find  two  principles.  I.  That  Sceipturb  is  oi  untvbbsal  application. 
1.  This  passage  quoted  was  evidently  spoken  by  David  of  himself.  Nevertheless, 
Paul  applies  it  to  Christ.  Nay,  more,  he  uses  it  as  belonging  to  all  Christians 
(ver.  4).  ••  No  prophecy  of  Scripture  is  of  any  private  interpretation."  Had  the 
Psalm  applied  only  to  David,  then  it  would  have  been  of  private  interpretation  ; 
instead  of  which,  it  belongs  to  humanity.  Take,  again,  the  prophecy  of  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem.  That  seemed  limited  to  Jerusalem ;  but  had  it  ended 
tiiere,  then  you  would  have  had  a  prophecy  of  private — i.e.,  peculiar,  limited — 
interpretation :  whereas  our  Bedeemer's  principle  was  this :  that  this  doom  pro- 
nounced on  Jerusalem  was  but  a  specimen  of  God's  judgments.  The  judgment 
coming  of  the  Son  of  Man  takes  place  wherever  there  is  evil  grown  ripe,  whenever 
corruption  is  complete.  2.  Promises  and  threatenings  are  made  to  individuals, 
because  they  are  in  a  particular  state  of  character ;  but  they  belong  to  all  who  are 
in  that  state,  for  "God  is  no  respecter  of  persons."  (1)  Take  an  instance  of  the 
state  of  blessing.  There  was  blessing  pronounced  to  Abraham;  but  the  whole 
argument  in  this  Epistle  is,  that  it  was  made,  not  to  his  person,  but  to  his  faith. 
••  They  who  are  of  faith,  are  blessed  with  faithful  Abrahana."  (2)  Take  the  case  of 
threatening.  Jonah  went  through  Nineveh,  proclaiming  its  destruction ;  but  that 
prophecy  was  true  only  while  it  remained  in  its  evil  state ;  and  therefore,  as  they 
repented,  and  their  state  was  thus  changed,  the  prophecy  was  left  unfulfilled.  In 
1  Cor.  X.  the  apostle  tells  of  the  state  of  the  Jews  in  the  wilderness,  and  shows  that 
whosoever  shall  imitate  them,  the  same  judgments  must  fall  upon  them.  "  All 
these  things  happened  unto  them  for  ensamples."  "  There  hath  no  temptation 
taken  you  but  such  as  is  common  to  man."    (3)  Take  a  case,  applied  not  to  nations, 


686  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha?.  X?. 

bat  to  individuals.  Hebrews  xiii.  qnotes  from  the  Old  Testament,  "  I  will  neyer 
leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee"  ;  and  the  apostle's  inference  is,  that  we  may  boldly 
say,  "  The  Lord  is  my  helper,"  &c.  Now  this  was  a  promise  made  to  Jacob ;  but 
the  apostle  does  not  hesitate  to  appropriate  it  to  all  Christians ;  for  it  was  made, 
not  to  Jacob  as  a  person,  but  to  the  state  in  which  Jacob  was ;  to  all  who,  like 
Jacob,  are  wanderers  and  pilgrims  in  the  world.  The  promises  made  to  the  meek 
belong  to  meekness;  the  promises  made  to  the  humble  belong  to  humility.  8. 
And  this  it  is  which  makes  this  Bible  our  Book.  The  teachers,  the  psalmists,  the 
prophets,  and  the  lawgivers  of  this  despised  nation  spoke  out  truths  that  have 
struck  the  key-note  of  the  heart  of  man ;  and  this  not  because  they  were  of  Jewish, 
but  just  because  they  were  of  universal  application.  The  orator  holds  a  thousand 
men  for  half  an  hour  breathless ;  but  this  Word  of  God  has  held  a  thousand  nations 
lor  thrice  a  thousand  years  spell-bound ;  held  them  by  an  abiding  power,  even  the 
tmiversality  of  its  truth ;  and  we  feel  it  to  be  no  more  a  collection  of  books,  but  the 
Book.  II.  That  all  Sceiptxjbe  beabs  towaeds  Jesus  Chbist.  1.  St.  Paul  quotes 
these  Jewish  words  as  fulfilled  in  Christ.  "  The  testimony  of  Jesus  is  the  spirit  of 
prophecy."  We  must  often  have  been  perplexed  at  the  way  in  which  the  apostles 
quote  passages  in  reference  to  Christ,  which  originally  had  no  reference  to  Him. 
In  our  text,  e.g.,  David  speaks  only  of  himself;  and  yet  St.  Paul  refers  it  to  Christ. 
Promises  belong  to  persons  only  so  far  as  they  are  what  they  are  taken  to  be ;  and, 
consequently,  all  unlimited  promises  made  to  individuals  can  only  be  true  of  One 
in  whom  that  is  fulfilled  which  was  unfulfilled  in  them.  Take  the  magnificent 
destinies  Balaam  promised  to  the  people  whom  he  was  called  to  curse.  Those 
promises  have  never  been  fulfilled,  nor  does  it  seem  likely  that  they  ever  will  be 
fulfilled  in  their  literal  sense.  To  whom,  then,  are  they  made ?  To  Israel?  Yes; 
BO  far  as  they  developed  God's  own  conception.  Balaam  says,  "  God  hath  not 
beheld  iniquity  in  Jacob,  neither  hath  He  seen  perverseness  in  Israel."  Is  this  the 
character  of  Israel,  an  idolatrous  and  rebellious  nation  f  Jesus  is  that  pure  and 
spotless  One.  Christ  is  perfectly  all  that  every  saint  was  partially.  Consequently 
St.  Paul  would  not  read  the  Psalm  he  quotes  as  spoken  only  of  David.  The  pro- 
mises are  to  the  Christ  within  David;  therefore  they  are  applied  to  the  Christ 
when  He  comes.  2.  Now,  let  us  extract  from  that  this  application.  Scripture  is 
full  of  Christ.  From  Genesis  to  Bevelation  everything  breathes  of  Him — not  every 
letter  of  every  sentence,  but  the  spirit  of  every  chapter.  Get  the  habit  of  referring 
all  to  Christ.  How  did  He  f eel  ?— think  ?— act  7  So  then  must  I  feel,  and  think, 
and  act.  Observe  how  Christ  was  a  Uving  reality  in  St.  Paul's  mind.  "  Should  I 
please  myself  ?  "  "  For  even  Christ  pleased  not  Himself."  "  It  is  more  blessed  to 
give  than  to  receive."  {F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  Scripture  the  birthright  of  all : 
— I.  The  aboument  fob  the  untvebsal  study  or  the  Scbiptubes.  1.  There  are 
different  modes  in  which  God  might  be  pleased  to  reveal  Himself  to  mankind.  (1) 
In  creation  God  hath  disclosed  His  power,  wisdom,  and  love.  This  is  an  open 
volume,  which  all  men  may  read.  (2)  God  has  revealed  Himself  in  Providence. 
And  here,  too,  the  revelation  is  plainly  intended  for  all.  This  Book,  so  far  as  it 
goes,  is  unsealed.  2.  Observe  at  this  point,  however,  that  neither  volume  discloses 
what  it  is  most  essential  for  a  human  being,  such  as  man  actually  is,  to  be  informed 
of.  And  therefore  it  was  quite  to  be  expected  beforehand  that  God  should  make 
some  clear  revelation  of  His  will  and  design  respecting  our  race.  This  revelation 
we  have  in  His  Word.  (1)  Now,  would  it  not  be  an  anomalous  thing  if,  unlike 
the  other  and  less  perfect  disclosures,  this  were  to  be  stamped  with  exclusiveness  t 
(2)  If  the  Scriptures  were  intended  for  only  partial  perusal,  we  might  surely  expect 
that  this  limitation  would  be  clearly  defined  in  the  Scriptures  themselves,  (a)  The 
Scriptures  have  been  in  use  from  the  earliest  times  by  the  people,  as  well  as  by  the 
priesthood  (Deut.  xvii.  18 ;  xxxL  11,  Ac),  (b)  The  people  were  commended  for 
studying  them,  and  sometimes  rebuked  for  the  neglect  of  them.  How  repeatedly 
Christ,  in  addressing  the  people,  presupposes  them  to  have  read  the  records  of 
inspiration  I  '•  Have  ye  not  read  ?  "  or,  "  Have  ye  never  read  ?  "  The  New  Testa- 
ment Scriptures  contain  not  one  single  intimation  to  any  other  effect  than  that  they 
were  to  be  universally  studied.  In  the  Acts  we  find  the  Bereans  commended  for  the 
study  of  them.  When  St.  Paul  '•  charges  "  the  Thessalonians,  "  by  the  Lord,  that 
this  Epistle  be  read  unto  all  the  holy  brethren,"  and  tells  the  Colossians,  "  when 
this  Epistle  is  read  among  you,  cause  that  it  be  read  also  in  the  Church  of  the 
Laodiceans,  and  that  ye  likewise  read  the  Epistle  from  Laodicea."  The  Revelation 
opens  with,  "  Blessed  is  he  that  readeth,  and  they  that  hear  the  words  of  this 
prophecy,  and  keep  those  things  which  are  written  therein."    H.  The  objections 


eHA*.  XT.]  ROMANS.  687 

THAT  ARE  ALLEOED   AGAINST   THE  UNIVERSAL  STUDY  OP  THE    SCRIPTURES.      1.    The  best 

that  Borne  has  to  allege  is,  "  the  evil  which  has  in  some  instances  arisen,  and  may 
again  arise,  from  the  indiscreet  use  of  God's  Word."  We  freely  admit  that  many 
have  drawn  from  the  Scriptures  doctrines  opposed  to  God's  truth,  and  pemiciona 
to  man's  welfare.  But  what  if  some  few  have  perverted  a  blessing  into  a  ourse  ? 
Is  that  any  reason  for  withholding  the  blessing  from  others?  Who  made  the 
Bomish  Church  the  guardian  to  step  in  and  prevent  the  Scriptures  from  working 
injury?  We  know  that  in  support  of  this  objection  the  Bomanists  will  appeal  to 
the  assertion  of  St.  Peter,  that  in  Paul's  Epistles  "  are  some  things  hard  to  be 
understood,  which  they  that  are  unlearned  and  unstable  wrest,  as  they  do  also  the 
other  Scriptures,  to  their  own  destruction."  But  this  proves  that  in  Peter's  time 
the  Scriptures  were  in  free  use,  or  how  could  the  abuse  of  them  have  arisen  7  But 
11  they  are  *'  unlearned  and  unstable  "  persons  who  wrest  the  Scriptures,  surely  it 
were  a  strange  mode  of  rectifying  the  mischief  to  keep  them  still  in  a  state 
of  ignorance.  And  the  apostle  does  not  throw  out  the  shadow  of  a  hint  that  the 
Scriptures  were  not  to  be  used.  2.  But  the  objection  referred  to  is  not  the  real 
secret  of  Romish  opposition  to  the  free  use  of  the  Bible.  That  Church  dares  not 
let  her  doctrines  and  her  practices  be  brought  to  the  standard  of  Scripture.  She 
knows  that  if  people  are  allowed  to  read  the  Holy  Scriptures  otherwise  than  by  the 
permission  of,  and  under  colour  of  the  interpretation  of  the  priest,  they  will  find 
the  doctrine  of  justification  stated  very  differently  from  the  way  in  which  it  is  put 
forth  in  her  teaching.  They  will  find  far  less  made  of  outward  means,  and  a  vast 
deal  more  of  the  inward  and  spiritual  grace ;  far  less  of  human,  and  a  vast  deal 
more  of  a  Saviour's  merits.     (Bp.  R.  Bichersteth.)  Dispositions  for  reading  the 

Scripture : — The  book  of  nature  obscured  by  the  Fall.  Philosophy  from  it  could 
not  find  out  God.  The  Scriptures  given  to  reveal  Him.  Let  us  consider — I.  Thh 
GRAND  DESIGN  OP  THE  SCRIPTURE.  1.  For  the  Communication  of  knowledge  of— 
(1)  God.  (2)  Ourselves.  (3)  The  invisible  world.  2.  For  our  comfort  in  every 
state  of  mind  and  condition  of  life.  3.  For  our  hope.  The  hope  of  eternal  life, 
fount^ed  on  true  faith  as  a  solid  foundation.  Knowledge,  consolation,  and  hope 
constitute  the  things  for  which  we  should  look.  II.  The  dispositions  with  which 
WB  should  read  them.  1.  Attention.  (1)  The  mind  should  be  free  from  vain 
and  worldly  thoughts  and  disordered  passions.  (2)  The  most  convenient  seasons 
should  be  chosen  to  answer  this  end.  (3)  To  secure  attention,  we  should  consider 
it  is  God  who  speaks.  (4)  Bead  wil^  deliberation.  (5)  Not  read  too  long  a  time. 
Historical  books  an  exception.  2.  Frequently,  regularly,  and  diligently,  they 
should  be  read.  This  will — (1)  Give  familiarity.  (2)  Enable  us  to  meditate  on 
them.  (3)  Increase  our  relish  for  them.  (4)  Enlarge  and  confirm  our  knowledge. 
Thus,  as  we  take  food  for  nourishment  every  day,  so  shall  the  soul  receive  ita 
proper  aliment  which  will  nourish  it  unto  life  eternal.  3.  With  judgment  and  dis- 
crimination. (1)  Distinguish  what  is  God's  Word.  Malachi  quotes  a  speech  of 
the  wicked,  "  It  is  in  vain  to  serve  God,  and  what  profit  is  it  that  we  have  kept  Hia 
ordinances?  "  St.  Paul  quotes  the  Epicureans,  "Let  us  eat  and  drink,  for  to-morrow 
we  die."  Job's  friends  were  wrong,  and  "  God  was  wroth  with  them  because  they 
had  not  spoken  the  thing  that  was  right."  (2)  Put  no  forced  construction  on  any 
part  that  will  contradict  other  portions.  As — "  The  Lord  hardened  Pharaoh's 
heart."  "Christ  has  delivered  us  from  the  law."  "No  man  liveth  and  sinneth 
not."  "By  the  deeds  of  the  law  no  flesh  living  can  be  justified."  "  God  cannot 
tempt  any  man  "  to  evil.  "  We  are  under  the  law  to  Christ."  "  He  that  is  bom  of 
God  doth  not  commit  sin."  Faith  must  produce  the  fruit  of  good  works.  (3) 
Consider  the  speaker ;  the  characters  spoken  to ;  the  occasion ;  the  allusion ;  tne 
end  ;  the  connection ;  the  meaning  in  similar  passages.  Instance  of  mistake,  St. 
Paul's  advice  against  marriage  in  1  Cor.  vii.,  whereas  he  only  speaks  in  reference 
to  a  peculiar  time  of  persecution  (ver.  26).  (4)  Above  all,  the  improvement  must 
be  observed.  "These  things  are  written  that  ye  might  believe."  Also  St.  James, 
"  If  any  man  be  a  hearer  of  the  Word  and  not  a  doer,  he  is  like  unto  a  man,"  &o. 
4.  We  must  read  them  with  faith  and  submission.  (1)  Eeceive  them  as  if  we  saw 
everything  with  our  eyes,  or  heard  God  speak.  (2)  Avoid  vain  reasonings,  needless 
curiosity,  and  rash  inquiries,  which  often  terminate  in  doubt  and  infidelity.  (3) 
We  must  receive  precepts  and  promises,  commands  and  threatenings,  however  con- 
trary to  our  passions.  5.  We  must  read  them  with  piety  and  prayer.  (1)  Pioua 
intention,  a  love  of  truth,  a  disposition  to  believe  and  obey.  "An  honest  and  good 
heart,  which  hears  the  word  and  keeps  it,  and  brings  forth  fruit  with  patience. " 
(2)  Prayer  before  reading,  accompanying  it,  and  ending.    This  disfMsition  will 


688  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  x?. 

znalce  ns  attentive,  diligent,  discriminating,  thonghtfal,  and  faithfal.  (2>.  Maeafee.) 
mat  we,  through  patience  and  comfort  of  the  Scriptorea,  might  have  hope. — Th$ 
twofold  genealogy  of  hope  : — There  is  a  river  in  Switzerland  fed  by  two  uniting 
Streams,  bearing  the  same  name,  one  of  them  called  the  "white,"  one  of  them  the 
"  gtey,"  or  dark.  One  comes  down  from  the  glaciers,  and  bears  the  half -melted 
enow  in  its  white  ripple ;  the  other  flows  throagh  a  lovely  valley,  and  is  discoloured 
by  its  earth.  They  unite  in  one  common  current.  So  in  these  two  verses  (4  and  13) 
we  have  two  streams,  a  white  and  a  black,  and  they  both  blend  together  and  flow 
out  into  a  common  hope.  So  both  halves  of  the  possible  human  experience  are 
meant  to  end  in  the  same  blessed  result.  I.  We  have,  first  of  all,  xhb  hops  that 
18  THB  CHILD  OF  THE  NiQHT,  and  bom  in  the  dark.  *'  Whatsoever  things,"  says 
the  apostle,  "  were  written  aforetime,  were  written  for  our  learning,  that  we,  through 
patience  " — or  rather  the  brave  perseverance — "  and  consolation  " — or  rather, 
perhaps,  encouragement — "  of  the  Scriptures  might  have  hope."  The  written  word 
is  conceived  for  the  source  of  patient  endurance  which  acts  as  well  as  suffers.  This 
grace  Scripture  works  in  us  through  the  encouragement  which  it  ministers  in  mani- 
fold ways,  and  the  result  of  both  is  hope.  So,  you  see,  our  sorrows  and  difficulties 
are  not  connected  with,  nor  do  they  issue  in,  bright  hopefulness,  except  by  reason 
of  this  connecting  link.  We  cannot  pass  from  the  black  frowning  oUffs  on  one  side 
of  the  gorge  to  the  sunny  tablelands  on  the  other  without  a  bridge — and  the  bridge 
for  a  poor  soul  from  the  blackness  of  sorrow  to  the  smiling  pastures  of  hope,  with 
all  their  half -open  blossoms,  is  builded  in  that  book,  which  tells  us  the  meaning  and 
purpose  of  them  all,  and  is  full  of  the  histories  of  those  who  have  overcome,  have 
hoped  and  not  been  ashamed.  Scripture  is  given,  among  other  reasons,  that  it  may 
encourage  us,  and  so  may  produce  in  us  this  great  grace  of  active  patience,  if  we 
may  call  it  so.  The  first  thing  to  notice,  then,  is  how  Scripture  gives  encourage- 
ment— for  such,  rather  than  consolation,  is  the  meaning  of  the  word.  It  seeks  to 
make  us  strong  and  brave  to  face  and  to  master  our  sorrows,  and  to  infuse  into  as 
a  high-hearted  courage.  It  would  be  a  poor  aim  to  comfort  only;  bat  to  encourage 
—to  make  strong  in  heart,  resolved  in  vdll,  and  incapable  of  being  crushed  in  spirit 
by  any  sorrows — that  is  a  purpose  worthy  of  the  Book,  and  of  the  God  who  speaks 
through  it.  This  purpose,  we  may  say,  is  effected  by  Scripture  in  two  ways.  It 
encourages  us  by  its  records,  and  by  its  revelation  of  principles.  Who  can  tell  how 
many  struggling  souls  have  taken  heart  again  as  they  pondered  over  the  sweet 
stories  of  sorrow  subdued  which  stud  its  pages,  Uke  stars  in  its  firmament  ?  We 
are  all  enough  of  children  to  be  more  affected  by  the  living  examples  than  by  disser- 
tations however  true.  But  Scripture  has  another  method  of  ministering  encourage- 
ment to  our  often  fainting  heart.  It  cuts  down  through  all  the  complications  of 
human  affairs,  and  lays  bare  the  innermost  motive  power.  It  not  only  shows  us  in 
its  narratives  the  working  of  sorrow  and  the  power  of  faith,  but  it  distinctly  lays 
down  the  source  and  the  purpose,  the  whence  and  the  whither  of  all  suffering. 
They  all  come  from  my  Father,  and  they  all  come  for  my  good.  With  that  double 
certitude  clear  before  us,  we  can  face  anything.  The  slings  and  arrows  that  strike 
are  no  more  flung  blindly  by  an  "  outrageous  fortune,"  but  each  bear  an  inscription, 
like  the  fabled  bolts,  which  tells  what  hand  drew  the  bow,  and  they  come  with  Hia 
love.  Then,  further,  the  courage  thus  born  of  the  Scriptures  produces  another 
grand  thing — patience,  or  rather  perseverance.  It  is  something  to  endure,  and  even 
while  the  heart  is  breaking,  to  submit  unmurmuring ;  but,  transcendent  as  it  is,  it 
is  but  half  of  the  lesson  which  we  have  to  learn  and  to  put  in  practice.  For  if  all 
our  sorrows  have  a  disciplinary  purpose,  we  shall  not  have  received  them  aright 
unless  we  have  tried  to  make  that  purpose  effectual  by  appropriating  whatsoever 
spiritual  teaching  they  each  have  for  us.  Nor  does  our  duty  stop  there.  It  is  that 
dogged  persistence  in  plain  duty,  that  tenacious  continuance  in  our  course,  which 
is  here  set  forth  as  the  result  of  the  encouragement  which  Scripture  gives.  Many 
of  us  have  all  our  strength  exhausted  in  mere  endurance,  and  have  let  obvious  duties 
slip  from  our  hands,  as  if  we  had  done  all  that  we  could  do  when  we  had  forced 
ourselves  to  submit.  Submission  would  come  easier  if  you  took  up  some  of  those 
neglected  duties,  and  you  would  be  stronger  for  patience  if  you  used  more  of  your 
strength  for  service.  Take  the  encouragement  which  Scripture  gives,  that  it  may 
animate  you  to  bate  no  jot  of  heart  or  hope,  but  still  bear  up  and  steer  right  onward. 
And  let  the  Scripture  directly  minister  to  you  perseverance  as  well  as  indirectly 
supply  it  through  the  encouragement  which  it  gives.  It  teaches  us  a  solemn  scorn 
of  ills.  It  summons  us  to  diligence  by  the  visions  of  the  prize,  and  glimpses  of  the 
dread  fate  of  the  slothful,  by  all  that  is  blessed  in  hope  and  terrible  in  foreboding. 


0BA».  ZT.)  ROMANS.  689 

by  appeals  to  an  enllghtendd  eelf-regard,  and  by  anthoritatiye  oommands  to  con- 
acienoe,  by  the  pattern  of  the  Master,  and  by  the  tender  motives  of  love  to  Him  to 
which  He  Himself  has  given  voice.  All  these  call  on  as  to  be  followers  of  them  who, 
through  faith  and  perseverance,  inherit  the  promises.  Bat  we  have  yet  another 
itep  to  take.  These  two,  the  encouragement  and  perseverance  produced  by  the 
right  use  of  Scripture,  will  lead  to  hope.  The  lion  once  slain  houses  a  swarm  of 
bees,  who  lay  up  honey  in  its  carcase.  If  we  can  look  back  and  say,  "  Thou  hast 
been  with  me  in  six  troubles,"  it  is  good  logic  to  look  forward  and  say,  "  and  in 
seven  Thou  wilt  not  forsake  me."  H.  So  much  then  for  the  genealogy  of  one  form 
of  the  Christian  hope.  But  we  have  also  a  hope  that  is  bobh  of  thb  dat,  the 
child  of  sunshine  and  gladness.  "  The  God  of  hope  fill  you  with  all  joy  and  peace 
in  believing,  that  ye  may  abound  in  hope."  So  then  "  the  darkness  and  the  light 
are  both  alike  "  to  oar  hope,  in  so  far  as  each  may  become  the  occasion  for  its 
exercise.  We  have  seen  that  the  bridge  by  which  sorrow  led  to  hope  was  perse> 
Terance  and  courage ;  in  this  second  analysis  of  the  origin  of  hope,  joy  and  peace 
are  the  bridge  by  which  faith  passes  over  into  it.  Paul  has  found,  and  if  we  only 
put  it  to  the  proof  we  shall  also  find,  that  the  simple  exercise  of  simple  faith  fills 
the  soul  with  "  all  joy  and  peace."  Gladness  in  all  its  variety,  and  in  fall  measure, 
calm  repose  in  every  kind,  and  abundant  in  its  still  depth,  will  pour  into  my  heart 
as  water  does  into  a  vessel,  on  condition  of  my  taking  away  the  barrier  and  opening 
my  heart  through  faith.  "  Trust  and  thou  shalt  be  glad."  In  the  measure  of  thy 
trnst  shall  be  the  measure  of  thy  joy  and  peace.  Notice,  further,  how  indissolubly 
OOimected  the  present  exercise  of  faith  is  with  the  present  experience  of  joy  and 
peace.  It  is  only  while  we  are  looking  to  Jesus  that  we  can  expect  to  have  joy  and 
peace.  There  is  no  flashing  light  on  the  surface  of  the  mirror,  but  when  it  is  turned 
fall  to  the  sun.  Any  interruption  in  the  electric  current  is  registered  accurately  by 
an  interruption  in  the  continuous  line,  perforated  on  the  telegraph-ribbon ;  and  so 
every  diversion  of  heart  and  faith  from  Jesus  Christ  is  recorded  by  the  fading  of 
the  sunshine  out  of  the  heart,  and  the  silencing  of  all  the  song-birds.  Always 
believe  and  you  will  always  be  glad  and  calm.  Observe,  again,  how  accurately  the 
apostle  defines  for  us  the  conditions  on  which  Christian  experience  would  be  joyful 
and  tranquil.  It  is  "  in  believing,"  not  in  certain  other  exercises  of  mind,  that  these 
blessings  are  to  be  realised.  And  the  f orgetfulness  of  that  plain  fact  leads  to  many 
good  people's  religion  being  very  much  more  gloomy  and  disturbed  than  God 
meant  it  to  be.  For  a  large  part  of  it  consists  in  sadly  proving  their  spiritual  state, 
and  gazing  at  their  failures  and  imperfections.  There  is  nothing  cheerful  and 
tranquiUising  in  grubbing  among  the  evils  of  your  own  heart,  and  it  is  quite  possible 
to  do  that  too  much  and  too  exclusively.  Then,  the  second  step  in  this  tracing  of 
the  origin  of  the  hope  which  has  the  brighter  source,  is  the  consideration  that  the 
joy  and  peace  which  spring  from  faith,  in  their  turn  produce  that  confident  antici* 
pation  of  future  and  progressive  good.  Herein  lies  the  distinguishing  blessedness 
of  the  Christian  joy  and  peace,  and  that  they  carry  in  themselves  the  pledge  of  their 
own  eternity.  It  is  not  true  of  this  gladness  that  "  Hereof  cometh  in  the  end 
despondency  and  madness,"  but  its  destiny  is  to  "  remain  "  as  long  as  the  soul  in 
which  it  unfolds  shall  exist,  and  "  to  be  full  "  as  long  as  the  source  from  which  it 
flows  does  not  run  dry.  So  that  the  more  we  experience  the  present  blessedness, 
which  faith  in  Christ  brings  us,  the  more  shall  we  be  sure  that  nothing  in  the 
future,  either  in  or  beyond  time,  can  put  an  end  to  it ;  and  hence  a  hope  that  looks 
with  confident  eyes  across  the  gorge  of  death  to  the  "  shining  tablelands "  on 
the  other  side,  and  is  as  calm  as  certitude,  shall  be  ours.  I  saw,  not  long  since,  in 
a  wood  a  noass  of  blue  wild  hyacinths,  that  looked  like  a  little  bit  of  heaven  dropped 
down  upon  earth.  You  and  I  may  have  such  a  tiny  bit  of  heaven  itself  lying 
amidst  all  the  tangle  of  our  lives,  if  only  we  put  our  trust  in  Christ,  and 
so  get  into  our  hearts  some  little  portion  of  that  joy  that  is  unspeakable, 
and  that  peace  that  passeth  understanding.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Patience, 
comfort,  and  hope  from  the  Scriptures : — 1.  This  is  the  text  from  which  old  Hugh 
Latimer  was  wont  to  preach  continually  in  his  latter  days.  Certainly  it  gave 
him  plenty  of  sea  room.  2.  The  apostle  declares  that  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures 
are  meant  to  teach  New  Testament  believers.  Things  written  aforetime  were 
written  for  our  time.  The  Old  Testament  is  not  outworn ;  apostles  learned  from 
it.  Nor  has  its  authority  ceased ;  it  still  teaches  with  certainty.  Nor  has  its 
Divine  power  departed ;  for  it  works  the  graces  of  the  Spirit  in  those  who  receive 
it — patience,  comfort,  hope.  3.  In  this  verse  the  Holy  Ghost  sets  His  seal  upon 
the  Old  Testament,  and  for  ever  enters  His  protest  against  all  anderyaluing  of  that 
VOL.  n.  44 


690  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

sacred  volame.  4.  The  Holy  Scriptures  produce  and  ripen  the  noblest  graces. 
Let  us  carefully  consider — I.  The  patience  of  the  Scbiptubes.  1.  Such  as  they 
inculcate.  Patience — (1)  Under  every  appointment  of  the  Divine  will.  (2)  Under 
human  persecution  and  satanic  opposition.  (3)  Under  brotherly  burdens  (Gal. 
vi.  2).  (4)  In  waiting  for  Divine  promises  to  be  fulfilled.  2,  Such  as  they  exhibit 
in  examples.  (1)  Job  under  divers  afflictions  triumphantly  patient.  (2)  Abraham, 
Isaac,  and  Jacob  patiently  waiting  as  sojourners  with  God,  embracing  the  covenant 
promise  in  a  strange  land.  (3)  Joseph  patiently  forgiving  the  unkindness  of  his 
brethren,  and  bearing  the  false  accusation  of  his  master.  (4)  David,  in  many  trials 
and  under  many  reproaches,  patiently  waiting  for  the  crown,  and  refusing  to  injure 
his  persecutor.  (5)  Our  Saviour  patient  under  aU  the  many  forms  of  trial.  3. 
Such  as  they  produce  by  their  influence.  (1)  By  calling  us  to  the  holiness  which 
involves  trial.  (2)  By  revealing  the  design  of  God  in  our  tribulations,  and  so  sus- 
taining the  soul  in  steadfast  resolve.  (3)  By  declaring  to  us  promises  as  to  the 
future  which  make  us  cheerfully  endure  present  griefs.  II.  The  comfort  of  the 
ScEiPTUEES.  1.  Such  as  they  inculcate.  (1)  They  bid  us  rise  above  fear  (Psa. 
xlvi.  1-3).  (2)  They  urge  us  to  think  little  of  all  transient  things.  (3)  They  com- 
mand us  to  find  our  joy  in  God.  (4)  They  stimulate  us  to  rejoice  under  tribula- 
tions, because  they  make  us  like  the  prophets  of  old.  2.  Such  as  they  exhibit. 
(1)  Enoch  walking  with  God.  (2)  Abraham  finding  God  his  shield  and  exceeding 
great  reward.  (3)  David  strengthening  himself  in  God.  (4)  Hezekiah  spreading 
his  letter  before  the  Lord.  Many  other  cases  are  recorded,  and  these  stimulate  our 
coarage.  3.  Such  as  they  produce.  (1)  The  Holy  Spirit,  as  the  Comforter,  uses 
them  to  that  end.  (2)  Their  own  character  adapts  them  to  that  end.  (3)  They 
comfort  us  by  their  gentleness,  certainty,  fulness,  graciousness,  adaptation,  per- 
sonality, &c.  (4)  Our  joyous  experience  is  the  best  testimony  to  the  consoling 
power  of  the  Holy  Scriptures.  III.  The  hope  of  the  Sckiptures.  Scripture  ia 
intended  to  work  in  us  a  good  hope.  A  people  with  a  hope  will  purify  themselves, 
and  will  in  many  other  ways  rise  to  a  high  and  noble  character.  By  the  hope  of 
the  Scriptures  we  understand — 1.  Such  a  hope  as  they  hold  forth.  (1)  The  hope 
of  salvation  (1  Thess.  v.  8).  (2)  "  The  blessed  hope,  and  the  appearing  of  our 
Lord  "  (Titus  ii.  13).  (3)  The  hope  of  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  (Acts  xxiii.  6). 
(4)  The  hope  of  glory  (Col.  i.  27).  There  is  a  good  hope,  a  lively  hope,  the  hope 
set  before  us  in  the  gospel.  2.  Such  a  hope  as  they  exhibit  in  the  lives  of  saints. 
A  whole  martyrology  will  be  found  in  Heb.  xi.  3.  Such  a  hope  as  they  produce. 
(1)  We  see  what  God  has  done  for  His  people,  and  therefore  hope.  (2)  We  believe 
the  promises  through  the  Word,  and  therefore  hope.  (3)  We  enjoy  present  blessing, 
and  therefore  hope.  Let  us  hold  constant  fellowship  with  the  God  of  patience  and 
consolation,  who  is  also  the  God  of  hope ;  and  let  us  rise  from  stage  to  stage  of  joy 
as  the  order  of  the  words  suggests.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Holy  Scriptures  a 

tource  of  comfort : — There  is  much  in  this  text  as  to  the  Scriptures.  1.  Written 
for  our  learning.  2.  Help  to  patience.  3.  Full  of  comfort.  4.  Support  of  hope. 
Let  us  take  one  branch — the  "comfort  of  the  Scriptures."  Whatever  are  our 
burdens,  there  is  comfort  here.  I.  Are  we  burdened  xjndeb  a  sense  op  sin? 
Many  are  so,  like  David  (Psa.  li.).  The  Bible  does  not  make  light  of  this,  but 
rather  reveals  the  greatness  and  number  of  our  sins.  Yet  it  is  full  of  comfort, 
telling  of  the  way  of  forgiveness,  pointing  to  the  fountain  opened.  It  is  a  pro- 
clamation of  mercy,  a  message — yea,  many  messages—  from  a  loving  Father.  U. 
Are  we  troubled  by  difficulties  of  Christian  lifb  and  conflict?  There  is 
"  comfort  in  the  Scriptures."  1.  The  Bible  tells  of  "  grace  sufficient  for  thee."  2. 
It  points  to  One  who  can  be  touched  in  our  behalf,  who  is  our  Captain  and  Deliverer. 
8.  It  gives  bright  examples,  too,  of  many  who  "  out  of  weakness  were  made  strong." 
III.  Are  we  anxious  about  temporal  affairs  ?  How  many  words  of  direction  and 
encouragement  meet  us  1  Promises  in  the  sermon  on  the  mount,  and  lessons  from 
the  lilies  and  the  fowls.  Invitations  to  cast  every  care  on  Him  who  careth  for  us. 
In  the  Scriptures  also  the  veil  over  the  future  is  uplifted,  and  the  better  and 
enduring  inheritance  exhibited.  IV.  Are  we  buffering  fbom  bereavement? 
With  our  Bible  in  hand  we  suffer  not  as  others  who  have  no  hope.  Our  minds  are 
diverted  from  second  causes  to  "  It  is  the  Lord."  We  read  the  eleventh  chapter  of 
John,  and  are  soothed  by  the  sympathy  there  manifested,  V.  Are  we  buedened 
WITH  FEAR  op  DEATH  ?  There  is  still  comfort  in  the  Scriptures.  Only  let  us  oome 
to  Him  in  whom  is  salvation,  and  then  the  last  enemy  is  destroyed.  They  promise 
victory  (1  Cor.  xv.) ;  a  house  not  made  with  hands  (2  Cor.  v.) ;  a  prepared  place 
(John  xiv.).    No  evil  to  be  feared  (Psa.  xxiii.),  and  from  the  Apocalypse  gleams  of 


CBAP.  XT.]  ROMANS,  691 

glory  to  be  seen.  {J.  Lancaster,  M.A.)  The  Scriptures  tJu  foundation  of  Christian 
hope,  and  patience  a  means  of  it : — These  words  in  their  connection  show  us  that 
Christ  and  the  great  truth?  of  Christianity  are  to  be  found  where  a  superficial 
observer  would  not  expect  to  find  them.  The  preceding  verse,  quoted  from  Psa. 
Izix.  9,  would  appear  to  be  meant  only  of  David  ;  and  yet  the  apostle  was  taught  to 
consider  them  as  also  referring  to  Christ,  of  whom  David  was  a  type.  We  have 
similar  instances  in  Psa.  xxii.  8, 18 ;  Izix.  21 ;  xi.  6,  7 ;  cii.  25,  26.  Indeed,  our 
Lord  Himself  intimates  that  He  is  the  great  subject  of  the  Old  Testament  (John 
V.  39).  L  What  is  thb  "hope"  of  which  the  apostle  speaks,  and  how  it  appears 
THAT  IT  IS  OF  iMPOBTANCB  WB  SHOULD  POSSESS  IT.  1.  It  will  be  readily  allowed 
that  spiritual  and  eternal,  not  carnal  and  temporal,  things  are  the  objects  of  a 
Christian's  hope — viz.,  God  and  His  salvation  (Lam.  iii.  26),  or  the  privileges  and 
blessings  of  the  gospel.  2.  But  as  the  subjects  of  this  hope  are  already  believers 
in  Christ  (Eph.  i.  3-7  ;  Col.  L  13),  the  attainment  of  these  things  is  not  properly 
the  object  of  their  hope,  for  these  are  already  possessed ;  but  a  continuance  of 
these  blessings,  together  with  guidance,  protection,  succour,  and  consolation  in  all 
difficulties  and  trials,  timely  deliverance  from  them,  perfect  holiness  and  meetnesa 
for  heaven  (Gal.  v.  5),  perseverance  in  grace,  and,  especially,  eternal  life  (Titus  i.  2), 
or  the  glory  of  God  (Cbron.  v.  2).  3.  The  Christian  hope  is  an  earnest  desire  after 
this,  in  consequence  of  a  discovery  of  its  great  excellency,  by  the  Holy  Spirit 
(1  Cor.  ii.  9, 10).  Thus  the  first  Christians  (Phil.  i.  23 ;  2  Cor.  v.  4-8),  and  even  pious 
Jews,  expressed  their  desire  (Psa.  xvii.  15 ;  Ixxiii.  24).  4.  It  is,  moreover,  a  well- 
grounded  and  lively  expectation  of  it,  arising  from  our  being  entitled  to  it^(l)  Aa 
justified  (Titus  iiL  7).  (2)  As  being  children  and  heirs  (Bom.  viii.  17).  (3)  As 
being,  in  a  measure  at  least,  prepared  for  it,  in  proportion  to  our  sanctificatlon  and 
recovery  of  God's  image  (Col.  i.  12).  (4)  As  having  an  earnest  of  it  (Eph.  L  14), 
and  being  in  the  way  to  it.  6.  The  fruits  of  this  hope  are  joy  (chap.  v.  1,  2), 
gratitude  (1  Pet.  i.  3),  humility,  and  patience  (1  Thess.  i.  3),  not  being  weary  of 
well-doing  (Gal.  vi.  9 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  68),  aspiring  after  complete  purity  (1  John  iii.  3). 
6.  Hence  we  leam  the  vast  importance  of  this  hope  ;  it  is  closely  connected  with 
the  whole  of  rehgion.  (1)  The  Christian  life  is  a  voyage,  and  hope  an  anchor 
(Heb.  vi.  19),  which  we  may  not  seem  to  want  when  wind  and  tide  are  for  us;  but 
when  they  are  against  us,  it  will  be  necessary  to  preserve  us  from  losing  the  way 
we  have  made,  from  getting  aground  on  the  sand-banks  of  this  world,  from  being 
dashed  on  the  rooks  of  pride  and  self-confidence,  or  swallowed  up  in  the  whirlpools 
of  despondency.  (2)  Christianity  is  a  warfare :  if  righteousness  be  a  breastplate, 
Ac,  hope  is  a  helmet;  it  defends  the  head,  where  any  injury  received  would  be 
peculiarly  dangerous.  II.  The  provision  God  has  made  for  oub  attaining  this 
HOPE  in  giving  us  THE  SCRIPTURES.  1.  The  Scripturcs  reveal  the  great  object  of 
this  hope,  and  bring  life  and  immortality  to  light,  which  neither  the  Oght  of  nature 
nor  any  other  religion  can  do.  2.  They  discover  the  foundation  on  which  we  must 
build  it — the  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ.  (1)  These  seal  the  doctrine  which 
informs  us  about  eternal  life  and  the  way  to  it,  and  so  remove  the  first  great  hindrance 
to  our  hope — our  ignorance,  and  unbelief.  (2)  They  expiate  sin  and  procure  our 
forgiveness,  and  so  remove  the  second  hindrance — our  guilt  and  condemnation. 
(3)  They  procure  for  us  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  removes  the  third  hindrance — our 
depravity.  (4)  Christ,  as  "  the  first-fruits  of  them  that  sleep,"  is  our  forerunner, 
giving  us  an  example  of  immortality  being  destined  for  man.  3.  They  furnish 
the  seed  and  ground,  as  of  faith,  so  of  hope,  in  their  doctrines,  precepts,  and 
promises,  laying  a  foundation  for  faith,  the  root  of  hope,  and  showing  us  the  way 
in  which  we  may  arrive  at  the  object  of  it.  4.  They  furnish  us  with  many  and 
very  bright  examples  (Heb.  xi.  13,  16,  26).  III.  The  means  through  which  we 
MAY  RETAIN  AS  WELL  AS  ATTAIN  IT.  "Through  patienco,"  (fee.  1.  In  one  point  of 
view  patience  is  the  effect  of  hope ;  in  another  it  is  a  cause.  An  appetite  for  food 
is  an  effect  of  health,  and  yet  a  cause  of  it ;  an  inclination  and  ability  to  use 
exercise  and  be  active  is  an  effect  of  health,  and  yet  a  cause  thereof.  And  thus 
may  we  say  of  patience.  Thus  it  is  mentioned  as  a  fruit  of  hope  (1  Thess.  i.  3) 
and  as  a  cause  of  it  (Bom.  v.  2).  2.  As  to  the  respects  in  which  patience  is 
necessary,  there  must  be — (1)  A  patient  investigation  and  study  of  the  Scriptures. 
(2)  A  patient  progress  through  the  various  parts  of  Christian  experience ;  we 
cannot  step  at  once  from  our  first  awakening  into  glory.  (3)  A  patient  exercise  of 
all  our  Christian  graces  as  occasions  call  them  forth.  (4)  A  patient  performance 
of  all  Christian  duties  (Bom.  ii.  7  ;  Matt.  vii.  21 ;  Heb.  v.  9 ;  Rev.  xxii.  14).  (o) 
Above  all,  a  patient  endurance  of  afflictions,  which  are  chastisements  of  oar 


69t  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  rr. 

f fttilts,  trials  of  oar  grace,  purifying  fires ;  in  this  respect  especially  we  have  need 
of  patience  (Heb.  x.  36).  (6)  But  the  word  here  used  also  means  enduring,  per- 
severing to  the  end.  In  all  these  respects  patience  must  minister  to  hope,  and  be 
a  cause  of  an  increase  and  confirmation  of  it.  8.  But  how  shall  this  "  patience  have 
its  perfect  work  "  in  us  ?  Through  the  consolation  of  the  Scriptures.  They  must 
be  the  medicine  and  food,  the  strength  and  refreshment  of  our  souls.  {J.  Benson.) 
The  Bible  is — 1.  A  lesson  book  of  instruction.  2.  A  school  of  patience.  S.  A  well- 
spring  of  comfort.  4.  A  solid  foundation  of  hope.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  Bible : — 
In  it— L  Wb  contebse  with  the  past — acquiring  lessons  of — 1.  Instruction.  2. 
Patience.  8.  Experience.  U.  We  find  comfobt  fob  the  pbesent.  III.  Wa 
DEBiTE  HOPE  FOB  THE  FUTUBE.  {Ibid.)  The  value  and  use  of  the  Bible  : — I.  The  Bible 
COMES  TO  us  with  three  great  powers,  each  of  which  is  a  guarantee  of  its  truth,  and 
should  cause  us  to  value  it  above  all  other  books.  It  comes  to  us  with  the  power  of 
—1.  Tradition.  Sayings  that  are  handed  on  by  word  of  mouth  become  altered ;  and 
so  doubtless  it  would  have  been  with  God's  words  had  He  not  caused  them  to  be 
written,  and  then  to  be  delivered  to  appointed  guardians,  charged  to  keep  them 
inviolate.  We  should  thank  God,  then,  that  He  has  given  us  His  holy  Church, 
Jewish  and  Christian,  to  be  "a  witness  and  keeper "  of  His  Word,  thereby 
enabling  us  to  know  that,  in  believing  it,  we  are  not  following  "cunningly  devised 
fables."  2.  Prophecy.  The  Bible  contains  the  history  not  only  of  the  past  and 
present,  but  also  of  the  future.  And  we  feel  sure  that  all  that  is  predicted  will  be  ful- 
filled, just  because  all  that  was  prophesied  concerning  the  Jews,  and  Jerusalem,  and 
Christ  has  been  fulfilled.  And  then,  if  the  prophecies  of  the  Bible  are  true,  all  else 
which  it  contains,  we  may  be  sure,  is  true.  3.  Edification.  Parts  of  the  Bible  may 
be  hard  to  understand,  but  none,  however  unlearned,  ever  yet  studied  it,  prayerfully 
and  humbly,  without  finding  that  it  built  them  up  in  faith  and  love.  Did  ever  you 
find  any  other  book  like  it  in  this  respect?  II.  How,  then,  8Hoxn:.D  we  use  the 
Bible  so  as  to  prove  that  we  really  value  it  ?  1.  We  should  read  it  every  day. 
Although  we  talk  much  about  the  blessing  of  an  "open  Bible,"  yet  to  a  large 
number  the  Bible  is  kept  like  some  rare  treasure  to  be  looked  at,  not  used.  It  is  a 
very  good  thing  to  read  the  Bible  through  continuously,  endeavouring  to  grasp  the 
teaching  as  a  whole.  But  it  is  a  good  thing  also  every  day  to  read  a  few  verses, 
that  all  day  long  we  may  have  in  our  minds  some  word  of  God  to  rest  upon.  And 
if  we  can  commit  them  to  memory,  so  much  the  better.  Then,  in  time,  we  should 
have  our  minds  stored  with  holy  thoughts,  and  when  Satan  approached,  "the  sword 
of  the  Spirit "  would  be  ready  to  our  hand.  2.  We  should  read  with  the  definite 
desire  of  hearing  God's  voice.  And  this  implies  that  we  must  read  in  a  humble  and 
teachable  spirit ;  not  approaching  the  Bible  with  our  minds  prejudiced,  or  that  we 
may  find  some  confirmation  for  our  own  theories  and  practices,  but  saying  simply, 
"  Lord,  what  wouldest  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  3.  In  order  that,  in  the  reading  of 
the  Bible,  we  may  thus  listen  for  and  respond  to  the  voice  of  God,  we  must  prepare 
our  hearts  and  minds  by  earnest  prayer.  4 .  As  the  Bible  is  the  best  book  of  private 
devotions,  use  it  as  such.  5.  Do  not  be  perplexed  because  there  are  some  things  in 
the  Bible  which  you  cannot  understand.  "  If  any  man  will  do  His  will,  he  shall 
know  of  the  doctrine."  6.  Try  to  see  Jesus  there,  and  to  realise  the  work  that  He 
accomplished  and  the  example  that  He  set.  (J.  Beeby.)  The  Old  Testament : 
its  trustworthiness,  value,  and  purpose : — The  apostle's  purpose  in  making  the 
quotation  of  ver.  3  was  to  bring  about  a  more  brotherly  feeling  between  the  two 
great  divisions  of  the  Buman  Church  (ver.  1).  He  might  have  illustrated  his  point 
by  referring  to  many  acts  in  our  Lord's  life,  but  he  refers  to  a  passage  in  Psa.  Ixix. 
instead.  But  although  David  in  it  is  describing  his  own  troubles,  a  Jewish  Chris- 
tian would  not  have  been  surprised  at  St.  Paul's  applying  the  words  to  our  Lord, 
for  he  would  have  known  that  some  Jewish  books  already  understood  these  words  of 
the  promised  Messiah  ;  but  a  convert  from  heathenism  would  have  had  many  diflS- 
culties  to  get  over  in  accepting  this.  "  Why  should  a  psalm  written  by  David,  and 
referring  to  David's  circumstances  more  than  a  thousand  years  before,  be  thus  used 
to  pourtray  the  life  and  character  of  Jesus?  "  This  difficulty  Paul  meets  by  laying 
down  a  broad  principle  which  includes  a  great  deal  else  besides.  "  Whatsoever 
things,"  &c.  Consider  some  of  the  truths  which  this  statement  seems  to  imply.  I. 
The  trustworthiness  of  the  Old  Testament.  1.  Unless  a  book  or  a  man  be 
trustworthy,  it  is  impossible  to  feel  confidence  in  it  or  in  him,  and  confidence  is  the 
very  first  condition  of  receiving  instruction  to  any  good  purpose.  Just  as  wilful  sin 
is  incompatible  with  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  soul,  so  inveracity  is 
incompatible  with  the  claim  of  a  book  to  have  been  inspired  by  the  Author  of  all 


OBA».  X?.]  ROMANS.  69S 

trnth.  Thos  in  the  Book  of  Deateronomy,  long  addresses  are  ascribed  to  Moses, 
and  Moses  describes  a  series  of  events  of  which  he  claims  to  have  been  an  eje* 
witness.  If,  then,  these  addresses  and  narratives  were  composed  by  some  Jew,  who 
lived  many  centuries  after  Moses,  and  imposed  the  book  apon  the  conscience  of  the 
Jewish  people  as  the  work  of  Moses  himself,  sach  a  representation  is  irreconcilable 
with  the  veracity  of  the  book.  Or  if  a  striking  prediction  in  Dan.  viii.  abont  Anti- 
oohns  Epiphanes  was  really  written  after  the  event,  the  book  in  which  it  occurs  ifl 
not  a  trustworthy  book.  Unless  there  be  such  a  thing  as  inspiration  of  inveracity 
we  must  choose  between  the  authority  of  some  of  our  modem  critics  and  any  belief 
in  inspiration — nay,  more,  any  belief  in  the  permanent  value  of  the  Scriptures  as 
sooroe  of  Christian  instruction.  Nobody  now  expects  to  be  instructed  by  the  falsa 
Decretals.  Certainly  every  trustworthy  book  is  not  inspired ;  but  a  book  claiming 
inspiration  ought  at  least  to  be  trustworthy,  and  a  literature  which  is  said  to  be 
inspired  for  the  instruction  of  the  world  must  not  fall  below  the  level  which  ia 
required  for  the  ordinary  purposes  of  human  intercourse.  2.  For  Christians  it  will 
be  enough  to  know  that  our  Lord  has  set  the  seal  of  His  infallible  sanction  on  the 
whole  of  the  Old  Testament.  He  found  the  Hebrew  canon  just  as  we  have  it,  and 
He  treated  it  as  an  authority  which  was  above  discussion.  Nay,  more,  He  went  out 
of  His  way  to  sanction  not  a  few  portions  of  it  which  our  modern  scepticism  too 
eagerly  rejects.  When  He  would  warn  His  hearers  against  the  dangers  of  spiritual 
relapse.  He  bade  them  remember  Lot's  wife  ;  when  He  would  point  out  how  worldly 
engagements  might  blind  the  soul  to  the  coming  judgment.  He  reminds  them  how 
men  ate  and  drank,  &o.,  until  the  day  that  Noah  entered  the  Ark  ;  when  He  would 
put  His  finger  on  that  fact  in  past  Jewish  history  which,  by  its  admitted  reality, 
would  warrant  belief  in  His  own  coming  resurrection,  He  points  to  Jonah  three 
days  and  nights  in  the  whale's  belly  ;  when  standing  on  the  Mount  of  Olives  with 
the  Holy  City  at  His  feet,  He  would  quote  that  prophecy,  the  fulfilment  of  which 
would  mark  for  His  followers  that  this  impending  doom  had  at  last  arrived.  He 
desires  them  to  fee  to  the  mountains,  when  they  shall  see  "  the  abomination  of 
desolation  spoken  of  by  Daniel  the  prophet  standing  in  the  Holy  Place."  The 
trustworthiness  of  the  Old  Testament  is  inseparable  from  the  trustworthiness  of  our 
Lord.  IL  That  the  Jewish  Scriptores  have  a  world-wide  and  endubino  value. 
Some  instruction,  no  doubt,  is  to  be  gathered  from  the  literature  of  every  people, 
but  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  great  deal  in  the  very  finest  uninspired  literature 
that  cannot  be  described  as  permanently  or  universally  instructing ;  and,  therefore, 
when  the  apostle  says  of  a  great  collection  of  books  of  various  characters  and  dates, 
and  on  various  subjects,  that  whatsoever  was  contained  in  them  had  been  set  down 
for  the  instrnction  of  men  of  smother  faith  and  a  later  age,  we  think  it  an  astonish- 
ing assertion.  Clearly,  if  the  apostle  is  to  be  believed,  these  books  cannot  be  like 
any  other  similar  collections  of  national  laws,  records,  poems,  and  proverbs.  There 
must  be  in  them  some  quality  or  qualities  which  warrant  this  lofty  estimate.  And 
here  we  may  observe  that  as  books  rise  in  the  scale  of  excellence,  they  tend  towards 
exhibiting  a  permanence  and  universality  of  interest.  They  rise  above  the  local 
and  personal  incidents  of  their  production ;  they  show  qualities  which  address  them- 
selves to  the  minds  and  heart  of  the  human  race.  This  is  the  case  within  limits  of 
our  own  Shakespeare.  And  yet  by  what  an  interval  is  Shakespeare  parted  from  the 
books  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  1  His  great  dramatic  creations  we  feel  are  only  the 
workmanship  of  a  very  shrewd  human  observer,  with  the  limitation  of  a  human 
point  of  view,  and  with  the  restrictive  moral  authority  which  is  all  that  the  highest 
humtin  genius  can  claim.  But  here  is  a  Book  which  provides  for  human  nature  as 
a  whole,  which  makes  this  profession  with  an  insight  and  faithfulness  that  does  not 
belong  to  the  most  gifted.  Could  any  moral  human  author  ever  have  stood  the  test 
which  the  Old  Testament  has  stood  ?  For  what  has  it  been  to  the  Jewish  people 
through  the  tragic  vicissitudes  of  their  wonderful  history — to  Christendom  for  nine- 
teen centuries  ?  It  has  formed  the  larger  part  of  the  religious  note-book  of  the 
Christian  Church,  it  has  shaped  Christian  hopes,  largely  governed  Christian  legis- 
lation, supplied  the  language  for  Christian  prayer  and  praise ;  the  noblest  and  the 
saintliest  souls  have  fed  their  souls  on  it.  Throughout  the  Christian  centuries  the 
Old  Testament  has  been  a  mine  constantly  worked,  and  far  to-day  from  being 
exhausted.  Its  genealogies,  apparently  so  long  and  so  dry,  may  remind  us  when  we 
examine  the  names  attentively  of  the  awful  responsibility  which  attaches  to  the 
transmission  of  the  gift  of  life,  of  a  type  of  character  which  we  had  ourselves  per- 
chance modified,  to  another,  and,  perhaps,  a  distant  generation  ;  or  sometimes  they 
suggest  the  care  with  which  all  that  bears  upon  the  human  ancestry  of  our  Lord  and 


691  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  «t. 

Saviour  was  treasared  np  in  the  records  of  the  people  of  revelation.  Those  minnta 
ritual  directions  of  the  law  shonld  bring  before  as  first  one  and  then  another  aspect 
of  that  to  which  assuredly  they  point — the  redeeming  worth  of  our  Lord  Jesna 
Christ,  m.  That  a  second  ob  ceepeb  sense  of  Scbiptubb  constantly  ttndeblies 
THE  PKiMABT  LiTEBAL,  suPEBFiciAL  SENSE.  1.  Nobody,  of  course,  would  cver  expect 
to  find  the  second  sense  in  an  uninspired  book,  however  well  written.  In  Maoaulay's 
History,  e.g.,  we  read  what  he  has  to  say  about  the  events  which  he  describes,  and 
there  is  an  end  to  it.  But  this  is  not  true  of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures.  In  the 
account  in  Genesis  of  Abraham's  relations  with  Hagar,  Sara,  Ishmael,  and  Isaac, 
the  apostle  bids  us  see  the  Jewish  and  the  Christian  Covenants,  and  the  spiritual 
slaves  of  the  Mosaic  law,  and  the  enfranchised  sons  of  the  mother  of  us  aU.  And 
in  like  manner  St.  Paul  teaches  the  Corinthians  in  his  First  Epistle  to  see  in  the 
Exodus  and  in  the  events  which  followed  it,  not  a  bare  series  of  historical  occur- 
rences, but  the  fellowship  of  Christian  privileges  and  of  Christian  failings.  2.  The 
neglect  of  this  secondary  and  spiritual  sense  of  Scripture  has  sometimes  led  Chris- 
tians to  mis-apply  the  Old  Testament  very  seriously.  Thus,  for  instance,  both  the 
soldiers  of  Baymond  of  Toulouse  and  the  Puritans  appealed  to  the  early  wars  of  the 
Israelites  as  a  sanction  for  indiscriminate  slaughter.  Dwelling  on  the  letter  of  the 
narrative  they  missed  its  true  and  lasting  but  deeper  import,  the  eternal  witness 
that  it  bears  to  God's  hatred  of  moral  evil,  and  the  duty  of  making  war  upon 
those  passions  which  too  easily  erect  their  Jericho  or  their  Ai  within  the  Christian 
soul  itself,  and  are  only  conquered  by  resolute  perseverance  and  courage.  3.  This 
second  sense  of  Scripture  is  especially  instructive  as  a  guide  to  the  knowledge  and 
love  of  Christ,  who  is  the  end  as  of  the  law,  so  of  the  whole  of  the  Old  Testament, 
to  every  one  that  believeth.  Prophecies  such  as  Isaiah's  of  the  virginal  birth,  and 
of  the  Man  of  Sorrows,  or  of  Psa.  zxii.  and  ex. ,  can  properly  be  referred  to  no  one 
else.  But  there  is  much  which  has  a  primary  reference  to  some  saint,  or  hero,  or 
event  of  the  day,  which  yet  in  its  deeper  significance  points  on  to  Him.  All  this 
great  deliverance  from  Egypt  and  Babylonia,  foreshadowed  a  greater  deliverance 
beyond;  all  these  elaborate  rights  of  purification  and  sacrifice,  which  have  no 
meaning  apart  from  the  one  sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world,  and  that  socces- 
Gion  of  saints  and  heroes  who,  with  all  their  imperfections,  point  onwards  and 
upwards  to  One  who  dignifies  their  feebler  and  broken  lives  by  making  them  in  not 
a  few  respects  anticipations  of  His  glorious  self.  (Canon  Liddon.)  The  Bible  meet* 
life's  deepest  necessities  : — The  psalmists  never  hesitated  to  say  that  the  Bible,  aa 
they  had  it,  met  all  life's  deepest  necessities  :  "  This  is  my  comiortin  my  affliction, 
for  Thy  word  hath  quickened  me  "  (Psa.  cxix.  50) ;  "I  remember  Thy  judgments  of 
old,  0  Lord,  and  have  comforted  myself  "  (Psa.  cxix.  52) ;  "Unless  Thy  law  had 
been  my  delight,  I  should  then  have  perished  in  my  affliction "  (Psa.  cxix.  92) ; 
"  Trouble  and  anguish  have  taken  hold  on  me :  yet  Thy  commandments  are  my 
delights  "  (Psa.  cxix.  143).  A  book  of  which  all  this  can  be  said  the  world  vrill  not 
willingly  let  die.  Whatever  is  held  by  the  heart  is  held  longest.  The  friend  that 
will  sit  up  all  night  when  we  are  in  pain  and  weariness  is  not  a  friend  we  can  easily 
cast  off.  Many  a  summer-holiday  acquaintance  we  can  well  dismiss ;  but  the  friend 
that  knows  us,  that  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother,  that  is  the  same  in  winter  and  in 
summer,  that  is  tenderer  in  affliction  even  than  in  joy,  is  a  friend  whose  name  will 
stand  at  the  top,  and  will  survive  the  going  away  of  many  whose  affection  was 
superficial,  and  whose  relation  to  us,  though  ostentatious,  was  flimsy.  If  the 
psalmists  could  say  all  this,  what  can  we  say  ?  If  the  dawn  was  so  beautiful,  what 
of  the  mid-day  ?  If  the  spring  was  so  trim,  what  of  the  harvest  ?  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Comfort  of  the  Scriptures  : — The  best  commentary  upon  the  Bible  is  experience. 
The  man  who  can  stand  np  and  say,  "  I  have  been  in  affliction,  sorrow,  darkness, 
weakness,  poverty,  and  the  Bible  has  proved  itself  to  be  a  counsellor  and  light  and 
guide  and  friend,"  is  one  of  the  best  annotators  the  Bible  ever  had.  (Ibid.) 
Patience,  comfort,  hope : — Among  the  manifold  changes  and  chances  of  this  mortal 
life,  there  are  three  things  which  we  all  need,  and  which,  the  more  we  have,  the 
happier  we  shall  be.  These  are  patience,  comfort,  and  hope.  The  three  are  closely 
connected.  Hope  produces  patience,  and  in  the  patience  of  hope  there  is  comfort 
amid  all  the  trials  of  life.  All  these  three  are  to  be  sought  from  God.  1.  Patience. 
How  much  need  we  aU  have  of  it !  How  it  sweetens  life  and  lessens  its  ills  I  On 
the  other  hand,  what  mischief  impatience  does  I  Patience  finds  difficulties  in  God's 
Word,  mysteries  too  deep  for  human  intellect.  Impatience  turns  away  in  a  rage 
from  these  and  takes  refuge  in  the  dreary  darkness  of  unbelief.  But  patience  waits  in 
quiet  trost  npon  God  for  mysteries  to  be  unfoMad.    Patience  is  not  blind  to  the 


CHAP.  XT.]  BOMANS.  695 

many  dark  problems  in  the  history  of  the  world  and  in  human  nature.  It  seefl 
them.  It  grieves  over  the  slow  progress  of  good,  the  seeming  triumph  of  evil.  But 
impatience  scoffingly  denies  that  there  can  be  a  God  and  a  superintending  Provi- 
dence. 2.  Comfort.  Ah,  what  a  rich  store  of  that  is  to  be  found  in  the  Scriptures  of 
God  I  There  the  soul  that  is  weighed  down  by  the  burden  of  its  sin,  the  heart  that 
is  broken  learns  how  though  its  sins  be  as  scarlet  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow. 
There  the  afflicted  learn  that  they  are  not  suffering  under  the  strokes  of  an  angry 
God,  but  that ' '  whom  the  Lord  loveth  He  chasteneth,  and  scourgeth  every  son 
whom  He  receiveth."  They  see  the  Captain  of  their  salvation  made  perfect  through 
Bufferings.  3.  Hope.  Ah,  how  richly  hope  is  sustained  by  the  glorious  promises 
of  which  the  Scriptures  are  full  1    {J.  E.  Vernon.) 

Vers.  5-7.  Now  the  God  of  patience  and  consolation  gfrant  you  to  be  llkemlnded. — 
The  God  of  patience  : — When  we  say  God  is  patient  four  things  are  implied.  I. 
Peovocation.  Where  there  is  nothing  to  try  the  temper  there  can  be  no  patience. 
Humanity  provokes  God.  The  provocation  is  great,  universal,  constant.  Measure 
His  patience  by  the  provocation.  II.  Sensibilitt.  Where  there  is  no  tenderness 
or  susceptibility  of  feeling,  there  may  be  obduracy  and  stoicism,  but  no  patience. 
Patience  implies  feeling.  God  is  infinitely  sensitive.  "  Oh,  do  not  this  abominable 
thing,"  &c.  III.  Knowledge.  Where  the  provocation  is  not  known,  however  great, 
and  however  sensitive  the  being  against  whom  it  is  directed,  there  can  be  no  patience. 
God  knows  all  the  provocations.  IV.  Poweb.  Where  a  being  has  not  the  power  to 
resent  an  insult  or  to  punish  a  provocation  though  he  may  feel  it  and  know  it,  his 
forbearing  is  not  patience,  it  is  simply  weakness.  He  is  bound  by  the  infirmity  of 
his  nature  to  be  passive.  God  is  all  powerful.  He  could  damn  all  His  enemies  in 
one  breath.  {D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Paftence  o/ God  (text  and  Nahum  i.  3) : — I.  The 
MATCBE  OF  THIS  PATIENCE,  OB  SLOWNESS  TO  ANQEB.  1.  It  is  a  modification  of  the 
Divine  goodness.  While  goodness  respects  all  creatures,  patience  has  as  its  object 
only  the  sinner.  2.  This  patience  is  not  the  result  of  ignorance.  Every  trans- 
gression is  in  full  view  of  Him  who  is  one  Eternal  Now.  And  yet  the  Lord  delays 
His  thunders  !  3.  This  perfection  does  not  result  from  impotence  (chap.  ix.  22  ; 
Numb.  ziv.  17).  4.  Neither  does  it  result  from  a  connivance  at  sin,  or  a  resolution 
to  suffer  it  with  impunity.  5.  It  is  grounded  on  the  everlasting  covenant,  and  the 
blood  of  Jesus.  Why  was  not  patience  exercised  to  the  fallen  angels  ?  Because 
Jesus  had  not  engaged  to  atone  for  them,  as  He  had  engaged  to  become  the  surety 
of  man.  II.  Some  of  the  most  iLLusTBions  manifestations  of  it.  1.  When 
our  first  parents  sinned,  patience  held  them  in  being,  gave  them  an  oppor- 
tunity of  securing  a  better  Eden,  and  pointed  them  to  that  Messiah  who  should 
repair  the  ruins  of  the  fall.  2.  When  the  old  world  had  corrupted  its  way  before 
God,  for  120  years  He  bore  with  its  enormities,  sent  His  Spirit  to  strive  with  them, 
and  His  messengers  to  warn  them.  8.  When  the  Canaanites  indulged  in  every 
abomination,  He  delayed  for  four  hundred  years  to  infiict  on  them  the  punishments 
they  deserved.  4.  When  the  Gentile  nations,  instead  of  adoring  the  God  of  heaven, 
had  placed  the  vilest  passions  and  the  grossest  vices  in  the  seat  of  the  Divinity,  the 
Lord  "  left  not  Himself  without  witness  "  (Acts  xiv.  17).  5.  When  the  Israelites, 
notwithstanding  His  numberless  miracles  and  amazing  mercies,  rebelled  against 
Him,  did  He  not  bear  with  them  ?  But  why  do  I  mention  particular  examples  f 
There  is  not  a  spot  on  our  globe,  there  is  not  an  instant  that  has  elapsed,  there  is 
not  a  human  being  that  has  existed,  that  does  not  prove  the  forbearance  of  our  God. 
Consider  the  number,  the  greatness,  and  the  continuance  of  the  provocations  against 
Him  by  His  creatures  whom  He  hath  surrounded  with  blessings,  for  whose  redemp- 
tion He  gave  His  Son.  6.  Consider  the  conduct  of  God  towards  those  whom 
He  is  compelled  ultimately  to  punish.  Before  the  judgment  He  solemnly  and  affec- 
tionately warns  them.  If  they  are  still  obstinate,  He  delays,  gives  new  mercies, 
that  their  souls  at  last  may  be  touched.  If  He  must  punish,  He  does  it  by  degrees 
(Psa.  Ixxviii.  38).  If  at  last  He  must  pour  out  His  vengeance  upon  the  incorrigible 
sinner,  He  does  it  with  reluctance.  "  Why  wilt  thou  die  ?  "  "  How  shall  I  give 
thee  up,  Ephraim  ?  "  IIL  The  beasons  why  He  exekcises  such  long-sdfferino. 
Lovely  as  is  this  attribute,  its  exercise  has  often  appeared  mysterious  to  the  pious, 
and  has  been  abused  by  the  sinner.  Yet  a  little  reflection  would  have  convinced 
them  that  in  this,  as  in  all  the  other  proceedings  of  His  providence,  the  manifold 
wisdom  of  God  is  shown.  He  is  patient — 1.  From  His  nature  (Lam.  iii.  33).  2. 
That  this  perfection  may  be  glorified.  There  can  be  no  exercise  of  it  in  heaven, 
since  there  will  be  nothing  to  require  it ;  none  in  hell,  since  there  will  be  nothing 


e9«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [CHA».  XT. 

bat  wrath  (Isa.  xlviii.  9).  8.  In  conseqaenoe  of  the  prajers  of  pioas  anoestors,  and 
of  the  promises  made  to  them  and  their  offspring  after  them.  Ah!  careless 
children  of  pious  parents,  yoa  know  not  how  much  yoa  are  indebted  to  them.  4. 
From  the  mixtore  of  the  wicked  with  the  pious,  and  the  near  relations  subsisting 
between  them.  From  love  to  His  dear  children,  He  spares  His  enemies  (2  Kings 
zzii.  18,  20).  5.  Because  the  number  of  His  elect  is  not  yet  completed,  and  because 
many  of  the  descendants  of  these  wicked  men  shall  be  trophies  of  His  grace.  Had 
a  wicked  Ahaz  been  out  off  at  once,  a  pious  Hezekiah  would  never  have  lived  and 
pleaded  the  cause  of  Qod.  6.  Because  the  measure  of  their  sins  is  not  yet  filled  ap 
(Zech.  v.  6,  &c.).  7.  That  sinners  may  be  brought  to  repentance  (2  Pet.  iii.  15). 
8.  That  sinners  who  continue  impenitent  may  at  last  be  without  excuse.  9.  That 
God's  power  may  be  displayed ;  the  greatness  of  His  protection  and  providence  be 
manifested  in  preserving  the  Church  in  the  midst  of  her  enemies.  10.  That  He 
may  exercise  the  trust  of  His  servants  in  Him,  and  the  "  patience  of  His  saints  " ; 
that  He  may  call  forth  the  graces  of  the  righteous,  and  try  their  sincerity.  IV. 
Infbbences.  Is  God  infinitely  patient?  1.  With  what  love  to  Him  should  the 
consideration  of  this  attribute  inspire  us  ?  2.  What  a  motive  to  the  deepest  repent- 
ance  (chap.  il.  4).  8.  Let  us  imitate  Him  in  this  perfection  of  His  nature.  4. 
What  a  source  of  comfort  is  this  to  believers,  fi.  Then  how  patient  should  we  be 
in  all  the  afflictions  with  which  He  visits  us  ?  6.  Who,  then,  will  not  grieve  at  the 
reproaches  and  insults  that  are  cast  upon  him  ?  {H.  Kollock,  D.D.)  The  grace  of 
patience : — "  It  takes  a  brave  soul  to  bear  all  this  so  grandly,"  said  a  tender-hearted 
doctor,  stooping  over  his  suffering  patient.  She  lifted  her  heavy  eyelids,  and  looking 
into  the  doctor's  face,  repUed,  "  It  is  not  the  brave  soul  at  aU ;  God  does  it  all  for 
me."  PauVt  prayer : — I.  The  title  he  gives  to  God,  "The  God  of  patience 
and  consolation,"  i.e.,  a  God  that — 1.  Bears  with  us.  2.  Gives  us  patience  and 
comfort.  II.  The  hebct  he  beos  ov  God.  1.  The  foundation  of  Christian  love 
and  peace  is  laid  in  likemindedness.  2.  This  likemindedness  must  be  according  to 
Christ.  3.  It  is  the  gift  of  God.  HI.  The  end  of  his  desibb.  That  God  may  be 
glorified— 1.  By  Christian  unity.  2.  As  the  Father  of  Christ.  (M.  Henry.) 
Unity  : — I.  Its  natube.  "  Likeminded."  II.  Its  motives.  1.  The  character  of 
Ood.  2.  The  mind  and  will  of  Chrisi  III.  Its  soubcb.  God.  (J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  Christian  unity  : — 1.  Flows  from  the  God  of  patience  and  conso- 

lation. 2.  Is  conformable  to  the  mind  and  will  of  Christ.  8.  Finds  ex- 
pression in  the  united  praises  of  God,  even  the  Father  of  Christ.  {Ibid.) 
According  to  Christ  Jesus. — Jesus'  view  of  life : — How  did  the  Christ  look  upon 
the  lives  of  men?  We  may  be  sure  that  He  saw  all  the  strange  minglings  of 
comedies  and  tragedies  which  so  confuse  and  exhaust  us.  If  we  feel  at  times  the 
myriad  multiplicity  and  infinite  confusions  of  life,  and  wonder  what  it  all  means 
and  is  worth,  we  may  be  perfectly  sure  that  the  most  sensitive  and  receptive  soul 
that  ever  was  found  in  fashion  as  a  man  felt  life  as  we  never  have.  He  measurell 
in  His  own  experience  our  temptations,  and  His  life  took  in  Gana  of  Galilee,  a  sick 
room  in  Capernaum,  the  market-place  before  the  temple,  the  streets  of  the  city, 
the  country  towns  by  the  sea,  the  Master  in  Israel,  the  multitude  of  the  people, 
the  whole  world  of  His  day  and  of  all  days — our  world-age  and  God's  eternity. 
Remembering  thus  that  Jesus  lived  as  never  poet,  philosopher,  or  novelist  has 
lived,  in  the  real  world  of  human  motives  and  hearts,  with  our  real  human  life  a 
daily  transparency  before  His  eye,  open  now  these  Gospels  and  see  if  yon  can  find 
there  in  Jesus'  view  of  our  Ufe,  in  His  thought  of  us,  any  such  sense  of  the 
emptiness,  vanity,  strangeness  of  life,  as  we  have  often  felt  resting  like  a  shadow 
over  our  thoughts.  Did  not  He  look  upon  things  as  contradictory  to  goodness  and 
God  as  anything  we  have  ever  seen  under  the  sun  ?  And  with  purer  eyes  ?  Did 
not  He  feel  with  larger  sympathy  and  warmer  heart  the  broken,  tangled,  bleeding 
lives  of  men?  Did  not  He  bear  the  sin  of  the  world  ?  Where,  then,  is  our  human 
word  of  doubt  among  His  words  ?  Where  is  the  echo  of  man's  despair  among  the 
sayings  of  our  Lord  ?  He  could  weep  with  those  who  mourned ;  but  He  sf  ake 
and  thought  of  life  and  the  resurrection  before  the  grave  of  Lazarus.  You  cannot 
say  that  He  did  not  understand  our  sense  of  life's  mystery  and  brokenness.  He 
saw  it  all  in  Mary's  tears.  He  read  it  in  the  thoughts  of  disciples'  hearts.  Why, 
then,  did  He  never  reproduce  our  common  human  weariness  and  doubt  in  Hia 
thought  of  hfe  ?  It  is  not  an  endless  wonder  to  Him.  He  sees  our  life  surrounded 
by  the  living  God.  He  sees,  beneath  our  world,  undergirding  it,  God's  mighty 
purpose.  He  sees  above  the  righteous  Father.  He  sees  the  calm  of  eternity.  And 
knowing  life  better  than  yoa  or  I  do,  knowing  such  things  as  you  may  have  heard 


«■!».  XY.]  B0MAN8.  607 

yesterday  or  may  experience  to-morrow — enongh  BometimeB  to  make  men  wonder 
whether  there  be  a  God,  or  truth,  or  anything  of  worth — Jeans  Christ,  in  full,  open 
view  of  all  life,  said,  "  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled,  neither  let  it  be  afraid.  Ye 
believe  in  Qod ;  believe  also  in  Me."  We  begin  to  come  now  in  sight  of  the  con- 
clusion to  which  I  wish  to  lead.  The  evangelists  could  not  possibly  have  omitted 
this  common  human  characteristic  if  the  character  of  Jesus  had  been  the  creation 
of  their  own  imaginations.  Ton  will  find  shadow  after  shadow  of  oar  human 
questioning  crossing  the  path  of  Buddha,  and  lingering  upon  the  heights  of  human 
genius,  but  not  the  shadow  of  a  passing  doubt  or  fear  over  all  Jesus'  conversation  with 
men.  How  could  the  Son  of  man  look  thus  in  the  joy  and  triumph  of  a  God  upon 
Buoh  a  strange  thing  as  our  life  is  ?  It  was  because  He  saw  the  coming  order  and 
the  all-sufficient  grace  for  life.  It  was  because  He  knew  that  He  was  Lord  of  the 
creation  from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  and  the  world  sooner  or  later  ia 
to  be  according  to  Christ!  According  to  Christ  1  This  is  the  keyword  for  the 
interpretation  of  the  creation.  Everything  comes  right,  as  it  takes  form  and  being 
according  to  Christ.  Everything  in  life  or  death  shall  be  well,  as  it  enda  in 
accordance  with  Christ.  This  is  the  keynote  for  the  final  harmony — According  to 
Christ  I  We  shall  understand  life  at  )ast,  we  shall  find  all  its  shadows  turned  to 
light  by  and  by,  if  we  take  up  our  lives  and  seek  to  live  them  day  by  day  according 
to  Christ.  Every  man  who  can  read  the  New  Testament  can  begin,  if  he  chooses, 
to  order  his  life  according  to  Christ.  He  may  not  understand  the  doctrines.  But 
when  he  goes  down  to  his  office  or  store,  and  looks  his  brother-man  in  the  face,  he 
may  know  what  things  are  honest  and  of  good  report  according  to  Jesus  Christ. 
When  he  goes  to  his  home  he  may  know  what  manner  of  life  there  is  according  to 
Christ.  Yes,  and  when  trouble  comes,  or  sickness,  or  we  near  the  end,  then  we 
may  know  how  we  need  not  fear,  nor  be  troubled,  according  to  Christ.  In  our 
churches,  too,  we  may  be  of  many  minds  on  many  subjects,  but  we  ought  to 
know  also  how  to  be  of  the  same  mind,  if  we  are  willing  to  think  and  to  jndge  M 
things  by  this  one  infallible  rule  —  According  to  Christ.  {Newman  Smyth, 
D.D.)  That   ye   may   with    one   mind   and   one    mouth    glorify  Ood. — 

The  elementt  of  unity  : — 1.  One  God  and  Father.  2.  One  Lord  and  Saviour. 
8.  One  heart  and  mind.  4.  One  mouth  and  language.  5.  One  object  and 
aim,  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Christian  unanimity  : — With  our  mind  we  must  think 
the  same  things,  ere  with  our  mouth  we  can  speak  the  same  things.  Were  we  then 
more  slow  to  speak  of  the  things  on  which  we  differ,  and  more  ready  to  speak  of  the 
things  on  which  we  agree,  it  would  mightily  conduce  to  the  peace  and  unity  of  the 
visible  Church.  The  members  of  the  Church  at  Rome  differed  in  regard  both  to 
meats  and  days ;  and  Paul  as  good  as  enjoined  silence  about  these,  when  he  bade 
them  receive  each  other,  but  not  to  doubtful  disputations.  But,  on  the  other  hand, 
he  bids  them  join  with  one  mouth,  as  well  as  one  mind,  in  giving  glory  to  God.  (T. 
Chalmers,  D.D.)  Christians  and  the  glory  of  Ood  : — In  explanation  of  the  com- 
mand to  glorify  God — it  may  seem  strange  and  presumptuous  to  speak  of  such 
poor,  sinful,  worthless  beings  as  we  are,  as  glorifying,  or  as  capable  of  glorifying 
God.  But  the  perfect  Christian  may  be  compared  to  a  perfect  mirror,  which,  though 
dark  and  opaque  of  itself,  being  placed  before  the  sun  reflects  his  whole  image,  and 
may  be  said  to  increase  his  glory  by  increasing  and  scattering  bis  light.  In  this 
view,  we  may  regard  heaven,  where  God  is  perfectly  glorified  in  His  saints,  as  the 
Armament,  studded  with  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand,  and  thousands  of  thou- 
sands of  mirrors,  every  one  of  them  reflecting  a  perfect  image  of  God,  the  sun  in 
the  centre,  and  filling  the  universe  with  the  blaze  of  His  glory.  (H.  G.  Salter.) 
The  glory  of  God  the  end  of  man's  creation : — I  have  a  clock  on  my  parlour  mantel- 
piece. A  very  pretty  little  clock  it  is,  with  a  gilt  frame,  and  a  glass  case  to  cover  it. 
Almost  every  one  who  sees  it,  says,  •*  What  a  pretty  clock  1 "  But  it  has  one  great 
defect — it  will  not  run ;  and  therefore,  as  a  clock,  it  is  perfectly  useless.  Though 
it  is  very  pretty,  it  is  a  bad  clock,  because  it  never  tells  what  time  it  is.  Now,  my 
bad  clock  is  like  a  great  many  persons  in  the  world.  Just  as  my  clock  does  not 
answer  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  made — that  is,  to  keep  time— so,  many  persona 
do  not  answer  the  purpose  for  which  they  were  made.  What  did  God  make  us  for  7 
"  Why,"  you  will  say,  "  He  made  us  that  we  might  love  Him  and  serve  Him." 
WeU,  then,  if  we  do  not  love  God  and  serve  Him,  we  do  not  answer  the  purpose  for 
which  He  made  us :  we  may  be,  like  the  clock,  very  pretty,  and  be  very  kind,  and 
very  obliging ;  but  if  we  do  not  answer  the  purpose  for  which  God  made  us,  we  are 
JQst  like  the  clock — bad.  Those  of  my  readers  who  live  in  the  country,  and  have 
seen  an  apple-tree  in  full  blossom,  know  what  a  beautiful  sight  it  is.    But  suppose 


698  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAP.  XT. 

it  only  bore  blossoms,  and  did  not  produce  fruit,  yon  would  say  it  is  a  bad  apple-tree. 
And  so  it  is.  Everything  is  bad,  and  every  person  is  bad,  and  every  boy  and  girl  ia 
bad,  if  they  do  not  answer  the  purpose  for  which  God  made  them.  God  did  not 
make  us  only  to  play  and  amuse  ourselves,  but  also  that  we  might  do  His  will. 
Glorifying  God : — The  time  when  Venn  passed  from  the  state  of  nature  into  the 
state  of  grace  seems  to  have  been,  not  when  he  threw  away  his  cricket  bat,  but 
when,  in  the  exercise  of  his  ministerial  function,  he  was  arrested  by  an  expression  in 
the  Form  of  Prayer,  which  he  had  been  accustomed  to  employ,  without,  however, 
apprehending  its  true  import.  "  That  I  may  live  to  the  glory  of  Thy  name,"  was 
the  expression.  As  he  read  it,  the  thought  forcibly  struck  him,  "What  is  it  to  live 
to  the  glory  of  God's  name  ?  Do  I  live  as  I  pray  ?  What  course  of  life  ought  I  to 
pursue  to  glorify  God  ? "  The  prosecution  of  the  inquiries  thus  suggested  led  to  a 
juster  conception  of  "  the  chief  end  of  man,"  which,  with  characteristic  conscien- 
tious energy,  he  straightway  followed  out  by  a  corresponding  change  in  his  mode  of 
life.  We  can  imagine  with  what  depth  of  sympathy  and  interest  this  circumstance 
would  be  listened  to  by  Lady  Glenorchy,  who,  at  a  later  period  of  his  life,  was  Venn's 
intimate  friend,  and  whose  religious  liie,  like  his,  was  dated  from  her  serious  atten- 
tion to  the  noble  answer  given  to  the  question  which  stands  first  in  the  Assembly's 
Shorter  Catechism,  "  Man's  chief  end  is  to  glorify  God,  and  to  enjoy  Him  for  ever." 
Wherefore  receive  ye  one  another  as  Christ  also  received  us. — Mutual  conciliation 
enforced  by  the  example  of  Christ: — I.  How  Chbist  recefved  us.  1.  When  we 
were  weak  and  guilty.  2.  Freely  and  heartily.  3.  To  fellowship  in  glory.  IL  How  wa 
SHOULD  RECErvB  ONE  ANOTHEE.  1.  Kindly,  Overlooking  all  infirmities  and  differences 
of  opinion.  2.  Sincerely,  with  the  heart.  3.  Into  brotherly  fellowship,  as  heirs 
together  ot  the  grace  of  God.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Christian  fellowship : — I.  Thk 
BEA80NABLENES8  OF  THIS  PBACTiOE,  wbercby  it  wiU  appear  to  be  the  duty  of  those 
who  profess  the  religion  of  Christ  to  agree  together,  and  form  themselves  into  par- 
ticular societies.  1.  Without  such  an  agreement  to  unite  together  in  the  practice 
of  Christianity,  there  can  be  no  such  thing  as  public  worship  regularly  maintained 
among  Christians,  nor  public  honours  paid  to  God  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  2.  Without 
an  agreement  to  keep  up  such  societies  for  worship,  the  doctrines  of  Christ  and  His 
gospel  could  not  be  so  constantly  and  extensively  held  forth  to  the  world,  and  there 
would  be  no  rational  hope  of  the  continuance  or  increase  of  Christianity  among 
men.  U.  The  advantages  of  such  an  agreement  fob  Christian  fellowship.  1. 
It  gives  courage  to  every  Christian  to  profess  and  practise  his  religion  when  many 
persons  are  engaged  by  mutual  agreement  in  the  same  profession  and  practice.  2. 
It  is  more  for  the  particular  edification  of  Christians  that  such  societies  should  be 
formed,  where  the  Word  of  Christ  is  constantly  preached,  where  the  ordinances  of 
Christ  are  administered,  and  the  religion  of  Christ  is  held  forth  in  a  social  and 
honourable  manner  to  the  world.  3.  Such  a  holy  fellowship  and  agreement  to 
walk  together  in  the  ways  of  Christ  is  a  happy  guard  against  backsliding  and 
apostacy,  it  is  a  defence  against  the  temptations  of  the  world  and  the  defilements  of 
a  sinful  age.  4.  Christians  thus  united  together  by  mutual  acquaintance  and  agree- 
ment can  give  each  other  better  assistance  in  everything  that  relates  to  religion, 
whether  public  or  private.  IIL  The  persons  who  should  thus  receive  onh 
another  in  the  Lord,  or  join  together  in  Christian  fellowship.  All  that 
Christ  has  received  to  partake  of  His  salvation  (chap.  xiv.  1-3,  17, 18).  This  is 
the  general  rule :  but  it  must  be  confessed  that  there  are  some  Christians  whose 
sentiments  are  so  directly  contrary  to  others  in  matters  of  discipline  or  doctrine, 
that  it  is  hardly  possible  they  should  unite  in  public  worship.  But  let  every  person 
take  heed  that  he  does  not  too  much  enlarge,  nor  too  much  narrow  the  principles 
of  Christianity,  that  he  does  not  make  any  article  of  faith  or  practice  more  or  less 
necessary  than  Scripture  has  made  it,  and  that  he  does  not  raise  needless  scruples 
in  his  own  breast,  nor  in  the  hearts  of  others,  by  too  great  a  separation  from  such 
as  our  common  Lord  has  received.    IV.  The  duties  which  plainly  arise  fbou 

SUCH  AN  AGREEMENT  OF  CHRISTIANS  TO  WALK  AND  WORSHIP  TOGETHER  FOR  THK  SUPPORT 

of  their  RELIGION.  1.  All  the  duties  which  the  disciples  of  Christ  owe  to  their 
fellow  Christians  throughout  the  world  are  more  particularly  incumbent  upon  those 
who  are  united  by  their  own  consent  in  the  same  religious  society  (GaL  vi.  10).  2. 
Those  who  are  united  by  such  an  agreement  ought  to  attend  on  the  public  assem- 
blies and  ministrations  of  that  Church,  where  it  can  be  done  with  reasonable  con- 
venience ;  for  we  have  joined  ourselves  in  society  for  this  very  purpose.  3.  It  ia 
the  dnty  of  persons  thus  united  to  maintain  their  Church  or  societv  by  receiving  in 
rew  members  amongst  them  by  a  general  consent.     4.  In  order  to  keep  the  Church 


OSAP.  zv.]  B0MAN8.  699 

pare  from  sin  and  scandal,  they  should  separate  themselves  from  those  that  walk 
disOTderly,  who  are  guilty  of  gross  and  known  sins  (2  Thess.  ii.  6  ;  1  Cor.  v.  4,  5,  7,  " 
11,  13).  6.  It  is  necessary  that  officers  be  chosen  by  the  Church  to  fulfil  several 
offices  in  it  and  for  it.  6.  It  is  the  duty  of  those  whose  circumstances  will  afford  it, 
to  contribute  of  their  earthly  substance  toward  the  common  expenses  of  the  society. 
And  each  one  should  give  according  to  his  ability :  this  is  but  a  piece  of  common 
justice.  7.  Everything  of  Church  affairs  ought  to  be  managed  with  decency  and 
order,  with  harmony  and  peace  (I  Cor.  xiv.  40,  xvi.  14).  V.  Reflections.  1.  How 
beautiful  is  the  order  of  the  gospel  and  the  fellowship  of  a  Christian  Church.  How 
strong  and  plain  are  the  foundations  and  the  ground  of  it.  It  is  built  on  eternal 
reason  and  the  relations  of  things,  as  well  as  on  the  "Word  of  God.  2.  How  little 
do  they  value  the  true  interests  of  Christian  religion,  the  public  honour  of  Christ 
and  His  gospel,  or  the  edification  and  comfort  of  their  own  souls,  who  neglect  this 
holy  communion.  3.  How  criminal  are  those  persons  who  break  the  beautiful 
order  and  harmony  of  a  Church  of  Christ  for  trifles.  4.  When  we  behold  a  society 
of  Christians  flourishing  in  holiness,  and  honourably  maintaining  the  beauty  of  this 
sacred  fellowship,  let  us  raise  our  thoughts  to  the  heavenly  world,  to  the  Church  ol 
the  first-bom,  who  are  assembled  on  high,  where  everlasting  beauty,  order,  peace, 
and  holiness  are  maintained  in  the  presence  of  Jesus  our  common  Lord.  And  when 
we  meet  with  little  inconveniences,  uneasiness,  and  contest,  in  any  Church  of  Christ 
on  earth,  let  us  point  our  thoughts  and  our  hopes  still  upward  to  that  Divine  fellow- 
ship of  the  saints  and  the  spirits  of  the  just  made  perfect,  where  contention  and 
disorder  have  no  place.    (I.  WatU,  D.D.) 

Vers.  8-13.  Now  .  .  .  Jesus  Christ  was  a  minister  of  the  drcumcislon. — Christ 
a  minister  of  the  Old  Testament : — I.  He  ministebed  undeb  it.  1.  As  a  Jew.  2. 
In  conformity  with  the  law.  8.  To  the  Jews.  II.  Unfolded  its  meanino.  As  the 
truth  of  God.  HI.  Confibmed  its  pbomises.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Christ  the  bond 
o/ unton  between — 1.  Old  and  New  Testaments.  2.  Jew  and  Gentile.  3.  God  and 
man.  (Ibid.)  What  is  Christ? — I.  To  the  Jew.  1.  The  example  of  perfect 
righteousness.  2.  The  witness  of  the  truth  of  God.  3.  The  Fulfiller  of  the  Old 
Testament.  II.  To  the  GENrrLB.  1.  The  personal  manifestation  of  God's  mercy. 
2.  ^he  reconciler  of  Jew  and  Gentile  in  one  brotherhood.  3.  The  Mediator  of  the 
New  Covenant.  III.  To  all  uaneind.  1.  The  source  of  hope.  2.  The  Prince  of 
joy  and  peace.  3.  The  dispenser  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  (Ibid.)  That  the  Gentiles 
might  glorify  Qod  for  His  mercy. — God's  mercy  to  the  Gentiles  : — 1.  Part  of  God's 
original  purpose.  2.  Predicted  by  the  prophets.  3.  Accomplished  in  Christ. 
(I6id.)  Mercy  : — I.  Whebein  it  consists.  II.  Fob  whom  it  is  designed.  IH. 
How  MUST  IT  BE  MADE  KNOWN  ?  IV.  What  IS  ITS  EFFECT  ?  1.  Glory  to  God.  2.  Joy 
among  men.      (Ibid.)  The  praises  of  the  Gentiles  : — 1.  Respect  the  mercy 

of  God.  2.  Are  elicited  by  its  proclamation.  3.  Shall  be  universal — rising 
from  many  hearts — in  many  tongues.  4.  Are  especially  due  to  Christ.  (I&id.) 
Rejoice,  ye  Oentiles,  with  His  people. — "  Rejoice,  ye  Gentiles  " ; — In  certain  circum- 
stances it  is  necessary  to  commit  particular  privileges  to  the  custody  of  the  few,  in 
order  that  when  the  fulness  of  time  shall  have  come  such  advantages  may  be  the 
heritage  of  the  many.  It  is  not  in  human  nature,  however,  to  desire  to  share 
great  blessings  with  the  multitude.  The  spirit  of  monopoly  is  more  or  less  natural 
to  us  all.  It  is  one  of  the  many  ugly  forms  of  selfishness  showing  itself  wherever 
there  is  an  advantage,  say — power,  territory,  wealth,  position,  fame,  knowledge — 
which  the  hand  of  man  can  grasp.  Now,  the  extraordinary  privileges  which  the 
children  of  Abraham  possessed  during  many  centuries  made  them  selfish  and 
exclusive.  They  did  not  desire  that  the  Gentiles  should  be  fellow-heirs.  It  was 
reserved  to  the  Son  of  God  to  make  that  common  which  had  been  exclusive  and 
that  universal  which  had  been  local.  Referring  to  this  the  apostle  saith  in  our 
text,  quoting  from  one  of  the  prophets,  "  Rejoice,  ye  Gentiles,  with  His  people." 
The  day  upon  which  the  angels  sang,  "Peace  on  earth  and  goodwill  amongst 
men,"  the  day  upon  which  God's  Son  said,  "  God  so  loved  the  world  that  He  gave 
His  only  begotten  Son,"  the  day  on  which  He  charged  the  apostles  to  go  into  all 
the  world,  the  day  when  Philip  met  the  eunuch,  and  Peter  visited  Cornelius,  and 
Paul  turned  his  steps  towards  the  Gentiles,  were  as  early  spring  days  in  the  history 
of  the  nations,  giving  promise  that  the  dark  and  barren  times  of  ignorance  were  well 
nigh  gone,  and  that  the  desert  should  rejoice  and  blossom  as  the  ruse.  I.  The  dtttz 
or  Chbistian  exaltation.  What  are  our  characteristic  advantages  as  Christians  ? 
1.  To  live  under  no  ban  or  system  of  exclusion,  as  far  as  God's  providence  is  con- 


TOO  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [oha».  x?. 

cemed,  is  cause  lor  rejoicing.  Jerusalem  is  no  longer  the  place  where  men  oagfat 
to  worship.  Palestine  is  no  longer  the  chosen  land.  All  the  earth  is  hallowed 
ground.  2.  To  be  turned  from  idols  to  the  one  true  and  living  God  is  cause  for 
rejoicing.  He  who  worships  the  God  who  is  Light  becomes  light.  He  who  worships 
the  Holy  becomes  holy.  He  who  worships  the  God  who  is  Love  becomes  love. 
3.  To  have  God  speaking  to  us  is  cause  for  rejoicing.  And  God  doth  speak  to  as, 
Christians,  by  EUs  Holy  Spirit  and  by  His  Word.  4.  To  have  a  sin-offering  which 
we  may  appropriate  as  for  our  sins  is  also  cause  for  rejoicing.  5.  To  have  God  not 
only  permit  our  worship,  but  seek  it,  is  also  cause  for  joy.  6.  Moreover,  not  less 
should  we  rejoice  in  this,  that  Gentiles  as  well  as  Jews  have  become  the  people  of 
God.  n.  This  pobitiom  involves  oebtain  obligations.  What  are  they?  All 
men  need  the  power  and  the  riches  of  the  Christian  dispensation.  No  man  is 
above  the  need  of  Christianity.  No  man  is  below  its  reach.  Civilisation  cannot 
take  the  place  of  the  Christian  dispensation.  No  being  can  make  the  Gkntile 
rejoice  but  Jesus  Christ.  It  strikes  me  that  before  we  can  pray  more,  give  more,  do 
more,  we  must  rejoice  more  in  our  own  privileges.  Our  advantages,  as  Christians, 
must  be  more  real  to  us.  There  is  great  danger,  not  only  of  our  underrating  our 
own  Christian  advantages,  but  of  our  selfishly  resting  in  the  enjoyment  of  our 
privileges.  Ohl  exorcise  the  Jewish  exclusive  spirit.  Exclusiveness  and  Chris- 
tianity are  as  inconsistent  as  any  two  things  can  be.  Say  to  others,  "  Bejoice 
with  me."  (S.  Martin.)  And  again  Esaias  saith.  There  shall  be  a  root 
of  Jesse  ...  in  Him  shall  the  Gentiles  trust  —  Jestu  Christ  the  proper 
oJyect  of  trutt  to  the  Gentiles : — The  Messiah,  in  prophecy,  was  to  havo 
dominion  over  the  whole  earth.  In  the  preceding  sentences  the  apostle  quotes 
several  passages  relative  to  the  admission  of  the  Gentiles,  with  a  view  to  conciliate 
the  Jews.  God,  as  he  had  previously  argued,  is  the  God,  not  of  the  Jews  only,  but 
of  the  Gentiles  also ;  and  Isaiah  bad  distinctly  predicted  the  Messiah  aa  "  a  root  of 
Jesse,"  which,  though  it  might  appear  as  "  a  root  in  a  dry  ground,"  spoiled  of  its 
branches,  and  without  appearance  of  its  vegetating,  should  yet  "  stand  for  an  ensign 
to  the  people."  "  He  that  shall  rise  to  reign  over  the  Gentiles,  in  Him  shall  the 
Gentiles  trust."  Consider — I.  The  principle  o»  trust.  1.  This  is  necessary  to 
the  existence  of  society.  The  evidence  of  character  is  not  the  cause  of  our  con- 
fidence  in  others  :  the  first  instance  of  trust  cannot  be  accounted  for,  but  as  the 
result  of  Divinely  implanted  instinct.  Children  instinctively  confide  in  their 
parents.  All  our  information  concerning  external  objects  is  matter  of  trust.  The 
patient  trusts  his  physician,  the  subject  bis  governor ;  all  are  always  trusting  each 
other.  Nothing  can  be  more  anti-social  or  mischievous  tban  tbe  violation  of  trust. 
2.  Trust  supposes  our  own  inferiority.  We  trust,  for  instruction  or  protection,  in 
one  whom  we  regard  as  our  superior  in  respect  to  each :  our  reliance  on  him  is  the 
measure  of  our  self-distrust.  3.  What,  then,  is  it  for  which  the  Gentiles  trust  the 
Messiah  ?  Not  for  any  present  interest,  but  for  our  eternal  destiny :  it  is  that  we 
may  escape  an  evil  and  attain  a  good,  not  otherwise  possible.  H.  The  QOALxnoA- 
TioNS  THAT  JUSTIFY  OUR  TRUST.  Three  things  are  required  as  the  basis  of  our  con- 
fidence  in  any  being :  his  voluntary  engagement  ?  his  probity  and  goodness ;  and 
his  ability  to  fulfil  the  promised  undertaking.  Each  of  these  exists  perfect  in 
Christ.  1.  He  has  entered  into  a  voluntary  engagement ;  He  has  held  Himself 
forth  as  the  object  of  our  trust.  "  I  give  unto  My  sheep,"  He  says,  "  eternal  life." 
"Every  one  that  believeth  in  Me,  I  will  raise  him  up  at  the  last  day."  2.  His 
probity  and  goodness  cannot  be  questioned.  He  bears  all  the  marks  of  perfect 
ingenuousness ;  as  when  we  find  Him  entreating  His  hearers  to  count  the  cost  of 
becoming  His  disciples ;  or  when  He  says,  "If  it  were  not  so,  I  would  have  told 
you,"  He  looked  upon  our  race  with  a  Divine  compassion,  put  on  our  flesh,  toiled, 
agonised,  bled,  and  died.  He  was  free  to  have  left  such  a  work  alone ;  but  Ho 
engaged  in  it  that  God  might  be  just  and  sinners  justified.  We  cannot  question 
His  sincerity  or  benignity.  3.  Nor  can  we  distrust  His  power.  Can  He  who  calmed 
the  winds,  walked  tbe  waves,  raised  the  dead,  &o.,  be  supposed  insufficient  here  7 
He  who  foretold  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  the  sufferings  of  His  people,  the 
triumph  of  His  cause,  must  Himself  be  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords.  By  rising 
from  the  dead.  He  proves  that  He  has  all  power  in  earth  and  heaven.  IH.  Soiib 
LEADiNO  PROPERTIES  OF  THIS  TRUST  IN  Jesus.  To  be  Valid  and  saving  it  must  be — 1. 
A  solemn,  deliberate  act ;  the  effect  of  "  seeing  the  Son,"  recognising  in  Him  those 
quaUties  which  justify  unlimited  confidence.  You  should  "  know  whom  you  have 
believed,"  &o.  2.  Exclusive,  centred  in  Christ  alone  (Jer.  xvii.  5).  Trust  not  ia 
any  qoalities  or  works  of  yoor  own.    He  will  never  divide  His  glory  with  another. 


'0H1».  XT.]  JiOMANS.  701 

r ^ — ' — ~~ 

It  was  the  ruin  of  the  Jews,  that  they  went  about  to  establish  their  own  righteous- 
ness, while  the  Gentiles,  ignorant  of  the  whole  business,  found  Him  whom  they 
Bought  not.  8.  Humble  and  penitential.  We  must  acknowledge  and  feel  our  utter 
unworthiness ;  otherwise  we  contradict  our  profession.  Humility  and  confidence 
dwell  together  in  perfect  harmony.  4.  Submissive  and  obedient.  They  are  the 
foremost  to  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ,  who  place  their  entire  affiance  in  Him :  con- 
strained by  His  love,  which  constrained  Him  to  die  for  them,  they  bind  His  precepts 
on  their  hearts.  It  is  a  practical  trust,  that  sets  in  motion  all  the  springs  of  action, 
purifies  all  the  powers  and  affections :  for  Christ  saves  by  His  merit  those  only 
whom  He  rules  by  His  authority.  (JR.  Hall,  M.A.)  The  world  trusting  in  Chri$t : 
— I.  The  grand  tendency  or  the  races.  To  trust.  1.  What  creature  is  more 
dependent  on  nature  than  man  ?  Birds,  beasts,  and  fishes  can  do  without  him,  but 
he  is  dependent  upon  them.  2.  What  creature  is  more  dependent  upon  his  own 
species  ?  Man  comes  into  the  world  the  most  helpless  of  all  creatures.  For  years 
he  Uves  by  the  help  of  others.  No  one  is  independent  of  his  fellow.  3.  What 
creature  is  more  dependent  on  God?  All  live  in  and  by  Him;  but  man  requires 
more  from  Him  than  any  other  creature,  viz.,  spiritual  illumination,  strength, 
salvation.  No  wonder,  then,  that  a  being  so  dependent  should  crave  for  objects  on 
which  to  rely.  This  tendency  to  trust  explains— (1)  The  reign  of  imposture.  The 
power  of  Mahomet,  Confucius,  the  Popa,  and  priestcraft  is  begotten  and  nourished 
by  man's  tendency  to  trust.  (2)  The  prevalence  of  disappointments.  Why  other- 
wise is  every  heart  the  grave  of  so  many  frustrated  hopes,  broken  plans,  and  wrecked 
friendships  ?  The  great  need  of  the  world,  therefore,  is  a  trustworthy  object.  TL 
The  evangelic  provision  tor  the  race.  1.  What  attributes  ought  He  to  have  to 
make  all  happy  who  trust  in  Him  ?  (1)  He  should  be  all  perfect  in  excellence.  If 
we  trust  our  being  and  destiny  to  the  keeping  of  one  in  whom  we  discover  moral 
imperfections,  we  shall  soon  grow  wretched  in  the  exercise  of  such  trust.  (2)  He 
should  be  all-sufficient  in  resources.  If  we  trust  unboundingly  in  one  who  is  not 
capable  of  taking  care  of  us,  our  trust  will  end  in  agony.  (3)  He  should  be  unalter- 
able in  being,  character,  and  capacity.  If  we  trust  one  who  is  given  to  change, 
there  will  be  constant  misgiving.  2.  Now,  where  is  the  being  who  answers  these 
conditions?  Only  in  the  gospeL  (1)  Is  not  Christ  all-perfect,  the  incarnation 
of  virtue  itself  ?  (2)  Has  He  not  all-sufficient  resources  ?  He  is  all-wise  to  guide, 
all-powerful  to  guard,  fJl-good  to  bless.  He  is  able  to  do  '•  exceedingly  abundant," 
Ac.  (3)  Is  He  not  unchangeable,  "  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever "  ? 
in.  The  blessed  ruxoBE  of  the  race.  "  In  Him  shall  the  Gentiles  trust."  This 
prediction  has  been  partially  fulfilled.  Since  Peter's  sermon  in  the  house  of 
Cornelius  down  to  this  hour  Gentiles  have  been  trusting  in  Him.  The  partial  fulfil- 
ment is  a  pledge  that  all  men  shall  trust  in  Him.  What  harvests  have  already 
sprung  from  the  one  grain.  When  all  men  trust  in  Him,  three  things  will  be 
secured.  1.  Spiritual  peace.  "  He  will  keep  them  in  perfect  peace,"  &o.  ^  2. 
Social  unity.  All  men  will  be  united  to  each  other  by  being  thus  united  to  Christ. 
No  more  domestic  broils,  social  animosities,  national  confiicts,  or  ecclesiastical 
strifes.  3.  Moral  elevation.  All  men  being  thus  vitally  connected  with  Christ, 
will  become  more  and  more  assimilated  to  His  moral  attributes.  Conclusion : 
Learn — 1.  The  world's  need  of  the  gospel.  If  men's  destiny  depends  upon  the 
object  of  their  trust  and  Christ  is  the  only  object  of  trust  that  can  render  them 
happy,  then  is  not  the  gospel  a  necessity  ?  2.  The  way  to  preach  the  gospeL  It  is 
to  hold  Him  forth,  not  yourself,  nor  your  notions  and  theologies,  but  Christ  as  the 
object  of  the  world's  trust.  The  hungry  world  does  not  want  your  analysis  of  bread, 
but  the  "  bread  of  life  "  itself.  Humanity  does  not  want  our  speculation  about 
Christ,  but  Christ  Himself.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Trusting  in  Christ:—!.  Man 
must  have  an  object  of  trust.  2.  Christ  is  the  only  ground  of  trust.  3.  Shall 
become  the  trust  of  the  world.    (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 

Ver.  13.  Now  the  Ctod  of  hope. — The  blessing  given  to  the  Church  at  Romej — I.  A 
mnbdiction  pronounced.  "  Filled  " — 1.  With  what  ?  "  joy  and  peace  in  believing." 
2.  By  whom?  "  the  God  of  hope."  8.  To  what  end r  "  that  ye  may  abound,"  Ac. 
n.  A  FACT  STATED.  1.  The  high  estimate  in  which  Paul  held  the  Boman  converts. 
2.  The  reminder  that  was  needed  by  them,  so  that  they  should  not  forget  God's 
mkoe.  ni.  A  OBEAT  progress  m  Christian  enowledgb  implied  (ver.  14).  The 
Bomans  were — 1.  Filled  with  knowledge.  2.  Able  to  admonish  their  erring  fellow 
dristians.  (J.  Hanson.)  Christian  privileges : — I.  The  privileoes  o»  tbus 
Cbaishans.    1.  Joy.    2.  Peace.     3.  Hope.     II.  The  method  of  sECHBiKa  thkil 


703  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt. 

1.  God  the  source.  2.  Faith  in  Christ  the  means.  8.  The  Holy  Ghost  the  agent. 
{J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  A  round  of  delight*  : — 1.  The  apostle  desired  for  the  Bomana 
the  most  delightful  state  of  mind.  See  the  value  of  prayer,  for  if  Paul  longs  to  see 
his  friends  attain  the  highest  possible  condition,  he  prays  for  them.  2.  Paul's 
making  this  state  a  subject  of  prayer  implies  that  it  is  possible  for  it  to  be  attained. 
There  is  no  reason  why  we  should  hang  our  heads  and  five  in  perpetual  doubt.  We 
may  not  only  be  somewhat  comforted,  but  we  may  be  full  of  joy,  Ac.  3.  The  fact 
that  the  happy  condition  described  is  sought  by  prayer  is  a  plain  evidence  that  the 
blessing  comes  from  a  Divine  source.  Notice  concerning  this  state : — I.  Whenob 
IT  COMES.  From  •'  the  God  of  hope."  The  connection  is  instructive.  1.  To  know 
joy  and  peace  through  believing  we  must  begin  by  knowing  what  is  to  be  believed 
from  Holy  Scripture  (ver.  4).  Where  He  is  revealed  as  the  God  of  hope.  Unless  God 
had  revealed  Himself  we  could  have  guessed  at  hope,  but  the  Scriptures  are  windows 
of  hope  to  us,  and  reveal  the  God  of  hope  to  inspire  us  with  hope.  Faith  deals  with 
the  Scriptures  and  with  the  Gk>d  of  hope  as  therein  revealed,  and  out  of  these  it 
draws  its  fulness  of  joy  and  peace.  At  least  three  of  the  apostle's  quotations  call  us 
to  joy  (vers.  10-12).  2.  The  apostle  leads  us  through  the  Scriptures  to  God  Him- 
self, who  is  personally  to  fill  us  with  joy  and  peace ;  i.e.,  He  is  to  become  the  great 
object  of  our  joy.  Our  God  is  a  blessed  God,  so  that  to  believe  in  Him  is  to  find 
happiness  and  rest.  When  you  think  of  God,  the  just  One,  apart  from  Christ,  you 
might  well  tremble,  but  when  you  see  Him  in  Jesus,  His  very  justice  becomes 
precious  to  you.  The  holiness  of  God  which  aforetime  awed  you  becomes  supremely 
attractive  when  you  see  it  revealed  in  the  person  of  Jesus.  How  charming  is  "  the 
glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Christ."  His  power,  which  was  once  so  terrible,  now 
becomes  delightful.  3,  God  is,  moreover,  called  the  God  of  hope  because  He 
worketh  hope  and  joy  in  us.  Peace  without  God  is  stupefaction,  joy  madness,  and 
hope  presumption.  This  blessed  name  of  "  God  of  hope "  belongs  to  the  New 
Testament,  and  is  a  truly  gospel  title.  The  Bomans  had  a  god  of  hope,  but  the 
temple  was  struck  by  lightning,  and  afterwards  burned  to  the  ground.  Exceedingly 
typical  this  of  whatever  of  hope  can  come  to  nations  which  worship  gods  of  their 
own  making.  The  hope  which  God  excites  is  a  hope  worthy  of  Him.  It  is  a  God- 
like hope — a  hope  which  helps  us  to  purify  ourselves.  He  who  graspeth  this  hope 
hath  a  soul-satisfying  portion.  It  is  a  hope  which  only  God  would  have  contrived 
for  man,  and  a  hope  which  God  alone  can  inspire  in  men.  II.  What  it  is,  1.  It 
is  a  state  of  mind— (1)  Most  pleasant,  for  to  be  fiUed  with  joy  is  a  rare  delight, 
reminding  one  of  heaven.  (2)  Safe,  for  the  man  who  has  a  joy  which  God  gives 
him  may  be  quite  easy  in  the  enjoyment  of  it.  (3)  Abiding.  We  may  drink  our 
full  of  it  without  surfeit.  (4)  Most  profitable,  for  the  more  a  man  has  of  this  joy 
the  better  man  he  will  be.  The  more  happy  we  can  be  in  our  God  the  more 
thoroughly  will  the  will  of  Christ  be  fulfilled  in  us,  for  He  desired  that  our  joy 
might  be  fulL  (5)  Which  has  varieties  in  it.  It  is  joy  and  peace ;  and  it  may  be 
either.  Peace  is  ]oy  resting,  and  joy  is  peace'dancing.  Joy  cries  hosanna  before 
the  Well-beloved,  but  peace  leans  her  head  on  His  bosom.  We  work  with  joy  and 
rest  with  peace.  (6)  Which  is  also  a  compound,  for  we  are  bidden  at  one  and  the 
same  time  to  receive  both  wine  and  milk — wine  exhilarating  with  joy,  and  milk 
satisfying  with  peace.  "Ye  shall  go  out  with  joy,  and  be  led  forth  with 
peace."  Yon  shall  lie  down  in  the  green  pastures  of  delight,  and  be  led 
by  the  still  waters  of  quietness.  2.  The  joy  and  peace  here  spoken  of  are 
through  believing.  You  come  to  know  the  God  of  hope  through  the  Scriptures, 
which  reveal  Him ;  by  this  you  are  led  to  believe  in  Him,  and  it  is  through  that 
believing  that  you  become  filled  with  joy  and  peace.  It  is  not  by  working  nor  by 
feeling.  8.  This  joy  and  peace  are  of  a  superlative  character,  "  Fill  you  with  all 
joy."  He  means  with  the  best  and  highest  degree  of  joy,  with  as  much  of  it  as  you 
can  hold.  4.  Notice  the  comprehensiveness  of  his  prayer.  (1)  "  All  joy  " ;  that  is 
joy  in  the  Father's  love,  the  Son's  redeeming  blood,  the  Holy  Ghost's  indwelling ; 
joy  in  the  covenant  of  grace,  in  the  promises,  in  the  doctrines,  in  the  precepts,  in 
everything  which  cometh  from  God.  (2)  All  peace — ^with  God,  of  conscience,  with 
one  another,  even  with  the  outside  world,  as  far  as  peace  may  be.  5.  Observe  the 
degree  of  joy  and  peace  which  he  wishes  for  them — "  that  ye  may  be  filled."  God 
ftlone  knows  our  capacity  and  where  the  vacuum  lies  which  most  needs  filling.  Aa 
the  sun  fiUs  the  world  with  light,  even  so  the  God  of  hope  by  His  presence  lights  up 
every  part  of  our  nature  with  the  golden  light  of  joyous  peace.  IIL  What  it  lbads 
to.  "Lead  to?  What  more  is  wanted?"  When  a  man  brings  you  into  a 
ehamber  vaulted  with  diamonds,  walled  with  gold,  and  floored  with  silver,  we 


0Bir.  XT.]  ROMANS.  701 

should  be  BstoniBhed  if  he  said,  "  This  is  a  passage  to  something  richer  stilL"  Tet 
the  apostle  directs  as  to  this  fulness  of  joy  and  peace  thAt  we  may  by  its  meani 
reach  to  something  else — "  that  yon  may  abound  in  hope,"  &c.  How  often  do 
great  things  in  the  Bible,  like  the  perpetual  cycles  of  nature,  begin  where  they  end 
and  end  where  they  begin.  If  we  begin  with  the  God  of  hope,  we  are  wound  ap 
into  holy  joy  and  peace,  that  we  may  come  back  to  hope  again,  and  to  abounding 
in  it  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  1.  The  hope  here  mentioned  arises,  not  out 
of  believing,  but  out  of  the  joy  created  in  us  by  our  having  believed.  This  hope 
drinks  its  life  at  the  fountain  of  personal  experience.  2.  The  text  speaks  of  an 
abounding  hope.  Much  hope  must  arise  to  a  Christian  out  of  his  spiritual  joy. 
Grace  enjoyed  is  a  pledge  of  glory.  Acceptance  with  God  to-day  creates  a  blessed 
hope  of  acceptance  for  ever,  3.  "By  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  is  partially 
mentioned  by  way  of  caution,  because  we  must  discriminate  between  the  fallacious 
hope  of  nature  and  the  certain  hope  of  grace.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Gospel  bles$- 
ingt : — I.  The  blessings  dekived.  1.  Joy.  2.  Peace.  3.  Hope.  H.  The  soubob 
WHENCE  THEY  FLOW — the  God  of  hope.  in.  The  measure  in  which  they  may  bk 
ENJOYED.  IV.  The  means  by  which  they  ABE  attained,  v.  The  poweb  by  which 
they  ABE  effected.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  unbounded  beneficence  of  God  in  the 
history  of  a  Christian  : — This  is  seen  in  : — I.  The  chabacteb  He  assumes  towabds 
THEM.  "  God  of  hope."  In  this  chapter  the  apostle  speaks  of  Him  as  the  God  of 
patience,  and  the  God  of  peace.  Patience  implies  something  to  provoke,  viz.,  sin. 
The  history  of  the  Almighty  towards  us  and  our  race  is  a  history  of  patience.  Peace 
implies  benevolence,  rectitude,  and  freedom  from  all  anger,  remorse,  fear,  the 
necessary  elements  of  inward  commotion  and  outward  war.  God  is  peaceful  in 
Himself.  The  storms  of  all  the  hells  in  EUs  great  universe  ruffle  not  the  infinite 
tranquility  of  His  nature.  He  is  peaceful  in  His  aim.  The  constitution  of  the 
universe,  the  principles  of  moral  law,  the  mediation  of  Christ,  and  the  work  of  the 
Spirit  show,  that  He  desires  to  diffuse  peace  throughout  this  stormy  world.  He  is 
peaceful  in  His  working.  How  quietly  does  He  move  in  accomplishing  His  sublime 
decrees.  But  in  the  text  He  is  styled,  God  of  hope  ;  an  appellation  more  significant 
than  either  of  the  other  two,  and  more  interesting  to  us  as  sinners.  It  does  not 
mean  that  God  is  the  subject  of  hope.  God  is  infinitely  above  hope ;  Satan  is 
infinitely  below  it ;  this  is  the  glory  of  the  one,  it  is  the  degradation  of  the  other. 
1.  God  is  the  object  of  hope.  What  is  hope?  Is  it  expectation?  No.  "We 
expect  sorrow  and  death.  Is  it  desire  ?  No.  A  poor  man  may  desire  to  live  in  a 
mansion,  a  lost  spirit  to  dwell  in  heaven.  But  put  these  two  things  together. 
Hope  is  the  expectation  of  the  desirable — God — His  favour,  society,  friendship.  Now 
that  God  should  thus  reveal  Himself  is  a  wonderful  exhibition  of  love.  The  mind 
never  points  its  hopes  to  a  being  that  it  has  offended ;  it  always  looks  to  those  that 
It  has  pleased.  But  here  is  God,  whom  the  world  has  injured,  revealing  Himself  as 
the  object  of  its  hope.  2.  God  is  the  author  of  hope.  Before  man  can  possess  real 
Christian  hope  he  must  have — (1)  Ground  to  expect  it.  What  reason  have  we  to 
expect  that  the  God  of  inflexible  justice  and  immaculate  purity  will  be  favourable  to 
ns  ?  Thanks  be  to  Him,  He  has  given  us  firm  ground  in  the  atonement  of  His  Son. 
(2)  Appetite  to  desire  it.  The  reason  that  there  is  so  little  real  Christian  hope  is 
because  men  do  not  want  God.  This  appetite  is  produced  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  II. 
The  blessings  He  imparts  to  them.  1.  The  nature  of  the  enjoyment.  "  Joy  and 
peace,"  i.e.,  complete  happiness.  How  delightful  is  the  calm  of  nature  after  a 
thunderstorm  I  How  still  more  precious  is  the  peace  of  the  empire  after  a  long 
war  I  But  how  infinitely  more  so  is  the  peace  •'  that  passeth  all  understanding  I  " 
The  great  causes  of  aU  mental  distress  are — (1)  Eemorse.  God  removes  this  by  the 
application  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  As  oil  smooths  the  troubled  waters,  so  the 
atonement  of  Christ  calms  the  agitated  breast.  "Being  justified  by  faith,"  &c.  (2) 
Anger.  God  takes  this  away,  and  fills  the  heart  with  love.  (3)  Apprehension.  God 
removes  this  by  assuring  us  of  His  constant  presence  and  guardianship.  "  Thou 
shalt  keep  him  in  perfect  peace,"  &c.  2.  The  plenitude  of  the  enjoyment.  "  Fill 
you,"  <fec.  Not  a  mere  taste,  a  transient  thrill,  but  a  fulness  of  deep  spiritual 
nappiness.  Have  you  ever  seen  a  person  filled  with  delight  ?  The  tender  mother 
that  clasps  in  her  arms  a  beloved  chUd,  &c.  Now  God  wishes  His  people  always  ifi 
be  filled  with  all  joy — intellectual,  social,  religions :  to  have  as  much  joy  as  their 
▼easels  can  hold  in  this  world.  Christians  have  not  lived  up  to  this,  and  in  oonge- 
qaence  have  led  the  world  to  associate  the  idea  of  sadness  with  that  religion  whose 
•'ways  are  ways  of  pleasantness,"  &c.  It  is  our  duty  to  have  joy.  "  Bejoioe  ever* 
more,"  <&o.   3.  The  condition  of  the  enjoyment.    What  is  this  t  Painful  i>enanoetf 


704  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  X7. 

Great  attainments?  Difficult  labours?  No.  "Believing."  An  act  that  can  b« 
performed  at  any  time  in  any  place.  4.  The  design  of  the  enjoyment.  That  we 
may  "  abound  in  hope,"  &c.  This  is  very  remarkable.  God  wishes  us  to  be  filled 
with  happiness,  that  we  may  expect  the  more.  The  more  favours  we  receive  from 
an  individual  the  less  we  have  to  expect ;  but  the  reverse  is  the  case  with  God. 
God's  disposition  to  bestow  is  infinite,  •'  He  is  able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly 
above  all,"  &c.  Let  us  come  to  God  with  enlarged  expectations.  We  can  never 
weary  Him,  for  it  is  His  delight  to  give.  We  can  never  exhaust  His  fulness,  for  it 
is  infinite.  What  a  view  does  this  give  us  of  heaven  I  We  shall  be  always  antici- 
pating ;  and  the  more  we  receive  the  more  we  shall  anticipate.  HL  The  agency 
WHICH  He  emplots  foe  them.  "Through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  What 
an  exhibition  of  mercy  is  this  1  Had  God  employed  the  greatest,  the  oldest,  or  the 
noblest  spirit  for  this  purpose,  it  would  have  been  wonderful  mercy ;  but  He  employs 
His  Holy  Spirit  who  is  equal  with  Himself.  We  are  not  sufficiently  impressed  with 
the  value  of  this  Infinite  gift.  We  profess  to  estimate  the  gift  of  His  Son  to  bleed  and 
die  for  us.  True,  the  world  could  never  be  saved  without  that ;  but  it  is  equally  true  that 
the  world  could  never  be  saved  without  the  operations  of  the  Spirit.  (D.  Thomas,D.  D.) 
Prayer  to  the  God  of  hope  : — All  men  desire  to  be  happy;  but  very  few  obtain  the 
happiness  which  they  covet.  All  happiness,  except  that  of  the  Christian,  is 
but  counterfeit.  It  is  like  the  morning  cloud  and  early  dew.  Yet  even  the  true 
Christian  often  falls  short  of  the  blessedness  which  he  might  enjoy.  I.  Thb 
ENCouRAGiNQ  CHARAOTEK  HERB  GrvEN  OF  GoD.  This  manner  of  speaking  expresses 
Eomewhat  more  than  if  Paul  had  called  God  the  Author  or  the  Giver  of  Hope.  It 
ia  meant  to  teach  us  that  this  is  His  distinguishing  characteristic,  that  hope  springs 
from  Him.  1.  Even  if  we  had  no  revelation  of  His  gracious  purposes,  the 
probability  would  be  that  there  is  hope  from  Him ;  for  we.  His  guilty  creatures, 
are  not  yet  finally  lost — "He  hath  not  dealt  with  us  after  our  sins."  2.  This 
probability  is,  however,  increased  to  certainty  by  the  gospeL  The  great  design  is 
to  encourage  our  hope.  It  reveals  God's  unspeakable  gift  to  make  reconciliation 
for  iniquities.  It  exhibits  God  as  a  present  Father  and  Friend,  and  assures  an 
eternity  of  blessedness  in  Christ.  II.  The  blessings  which  may  be  sought  fbom 
Him.  1.  Joy.  This  may  be  thought  by  the  penitent  too  great  a  blessing  to  be 
expected ;  yet  thy  Lord  allows  thee  to  expect  it.  Nay,  thou  art  even  commanded 
to  rejoice  in  the  Lord.  This,  however,  like  all  other  duties,  is  hard  to  fulfil.  We 
are  often  unfaithful ;  this  unfaithfulness  begets  distrust ;  and  this  interrupts  our 
joy  in  the  Lord.  We  have,  therefore,  cause  to  pray  that  God  would  bestow  on  us, 
and  preserve  to  us,  this  inestimable  blessing.  2.  Peace.  This  is  a  gift  more 
common,  perhaps,  than  the  other ;  a  gift,  also,  of  a  more  uniform  and  abiding 
nature.  The  continuance  of  joy  depends  in  some  measure  on  bodily  constitution ; 
but  the  soul  may  enjoy  peace  under  the  greatest  trials.  This  was,  in  fact,  the 
dying  bequest  of  Jesus — "Peace  I  leave  with  you."  It  is  a  holy  calmness  and 
tranquility,  springing  from  faith  in  the  promises  of  God.  Let  the  apostle's  example 
encourage  you  in  this  prayer,  both  for  yourselves  and  for  those  whom  you  love.  8. 
Hope.  Joy  and  peace  are  present  blessings ;  but  hope  has  respect  to  things  future. 
We  have  already  seen  that  the  character  of  God  is  calculated  to  raise  our  expecta- 
tion of  these  fnture  mercies.  Now,  then,  we  must  pray  for  strength  to  hope  for 
them.  We  are  too  apt  to  rest  satisfied  with  the  present  enjoyments ;  and,  even 
when  we  look  forward  to  the  things  which  God  hath  prepared  for  iliem  that  love 
Him,  this  is  too  often  done  with  a  cold  heart  and  a  languid  eye.  This  is  our 
infirmity  and  our  sin.  We  ought  rather  to  forget  the  things  which  are  behind,  &c. 
4.  The  prayer  of  the  apostle  implies  that  we  should  set  no  bounds  to  our  requests 
for  these  blessings.  It  is  no  scanty  measure  of  joy,  and  peace,  and  hope,  which  he 
prays  for.  Hath  He  not  said,  "  Open  thy  mouth  wide,  and  I  will  fill  it "  ?  If,  then, 
our  joy,  our  peace,  or  hope  be  defective,  we  are  not  straitened  in  Him ;  but  we 
are  straitened  in  our  own  bowels.  III.  The  way  in  which  wb  may  expect 
these  blessings  to  be  communicated.  1.  On  our  part.  Faith  is  the  instrument. 
It  is  faith  in  His  Word,  which  alone  can  make  known  to  us  the  existence  of  such 
gifts.  When,  however,  the  discovery  is  made,  true  faith  leads  a  man  one  step 
further,  constraining  him  to  say,  "  Here  is  all  my  salvation  and  all  my  desire."  2. 
On  God's  part,  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  promised,  for  the  communication  of 
His  gracious  gifts.  Faith  is,  indeed,  the  hand  which  grasps  the  gift ;  but  all  these 
worketh  that  one  and  the  self-same  Spirit,  dividing  to  every  man  severally,  in  such 
kind  and  in  such  proportion,  as  He  wJl.  {J.  Jowett,  M.A.)  The  God  of  hope  : — 
Z.  What  is  implied  in  this  titlb.    1.  The  expression  is  peculiar :  He  is  termed 


OBi».  XT.]  ROMANS,  705 

ihe  God  of  peace  (ver.  33),  of  grace  (1  Pet.  v.  10),  of  love  and  peace  (2  Cor.  xiii. 
11),  of  patience  (ver.  6),  and  the  meaning  is  not  only  that  He  is  the  Autnor  of  these 
graces  in  as,  but  also  that  they  exist  in  Him.  But  the  case  is  different  with  respect 
to  hope :  this  cannot  exist  in  Ood,  as  He  has  every  good  in  possession,  and  has 
nothing  for  which  to  hope.  In  this,  and  in  this  chiefly,  the  Creator  differs  from  all 
His  creatures.  II.  The  beasonb  why  God  has  this  title.  1.  There  is  in  Him  tha 
most  stable  foundation  for  the  most  glorious  hopes  to  all  His  rational  creatures. 
The  most  solid  ground  for  hope  is  offered — (1)  In  His  nature  and  attributes,  e.g.. 
His  self-existence,  supremacy,  eternity ;  His  infinite  power,  wisdom,  love  and  mercy, 
and  even  His  justice,  Christ  having  died.  (2)  In  the  relations  in  which  He  stands 
to  us.  What  may  not  His  offspring  expect  from  such  a  Creator,  Preserver,  and 
Redeemer ;  His  subjects  from  such  a  King ;  His  servants  from  such  a  Master  ? 
What  may  not  we.  His  children,  hope  for  from  such  a  Parent?  (3)  In  what  He  haa 
already  done.  He  has  given  His  Son  for  the  redemption  of  manl  iul,  and  His 
Spirit's  influence.  And  He,  who  withheld  not  His  own  Son,  what  gift  can  He  deny  ? 
(4)  In  what  He  has  promised  still  further  to  do :  to  receive  us  to  be  with  Jesus,  to 
raise  our  bodies,  to  give  us  the  vision  and  enjoyment  of  Himself,  and  the  society  of 
Baints  and  angels  for  ever  I  2.  He  is  the  great  object  of  our  hope.  The  main 
thing  we  hope  for  is,  the  vision,  love,  and  enjoyment  of  Him  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  24).  8. 
He  is  also  the  Author  of  our  hope.  By  freely  justifying  us,  and  by  giving  us  peace 
with  Him  ;  by  adopting  us  into  His  family ;  regenerating  us  by  His  grace  ;  consti- 
tuting us  His  heirs,  and  giving  us  an  earnest  of  our  future  inheritance  in  our  hearts 
(1  Pet.  i.  3 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  17).  HI.  Application  and  improvement.  1.  What  an 
antidote  against — (1)  Distress,  on  account  of  all  present  troubles  (chap.  viii.  16, 
17 ;  Heb.  xi.  13-16).  (2)  Doubt,  fear,  despondency,  and  despair.  2.  What  a  death- 
blow to  the  carnal  expecters  of  a  Mohammedan  paradise !  God  Himself  is  the  true 
object  of  hope.  And  what  a  help  to  spiritual-mindedness  ?  How  necessary  the 
question.  Are  we  "  begotten  again  to  a  lively  hope  "  ?    {J.  Benson.)       Hope : — Thia 

Erayer  is  closely  connected  with  the  preceding  (vers.  5,  6),  and  the  more  obvious  link 
etween  them  is  **  In  Him  shall  the  Gentiles  hope  " ;  but  the  note  of  hope  had  been 
struck  before  (ver,  4J.  The  apostle,  however,  loses  sight  of  the  connection  and  gives 
as  his  solitary  petition  for  this  grace  in  a  manner  perfectly  independent.  Let  us 
study  the  prayer  in  regard  to — I.  The  God  to  whom  it  is  addressed.  Who  derives 
many  of  His  names  from  the  gospel  which  manifests  His  glory.  As  that  gospel 
rests  on  an  accomplished  propitiation,  He  is  "  the  God  of  grace,"  "  the  Father  of 
mercies  " ;  as  it  displays  its  present  effects  in  the  soul,  He  is  "  the  God  of  peace," 
and  His  name  of  names  is  love ;  as  it  reserves  its  blessedness  for  the  future.  He  is 
"the  God  of  hope,"  i.e.,  the  Fountain  of  the  entire  Christian  salvation  as  it  is  not 
yet  revealed.  This  includes — 1.  A  wide  range :  there  is  hardly  an  aspect  of  the 
redeeming  work  which  "the  God  of  hope"  does  not  preside  over.  His  Son  is 
"  Jesus  Christ  which  is  our  hope  "  (1  Tim.  i.  1) ;  the  gospel  is  the  foundation  of  a 
great  hope  (Col.  i.  23) ;  the  Christian  vocation  is  summed  up  in  hope  (Eph.  i.  18)  ; 
salvation  is  our  comprehensive  hope  (1  Thess.  v.  8).  2.  An  interminable  perspeo. 
tive.  The  future  is  a  glorious  sequence  of  revelations  which  the  God  of  hope  haa 
yet  to  disclose  (Rom.  viii.  20,  24).  There  is  the  hope  of  the  glorious  appearing  of 
our  Lord  and  Saviour  (Titus  ii.  3),  the  hope  of  the  resurrection  (1  Thess  iv.  13),  the 
hope  of  final  deliverance  from  every  evil  (1  Thess.  v.  8),  the  hope  of  eternal  life 
(Rom.  vii.  20),  the  hope  of  glory  (Titus  i.  2  ;  iii.  7) ;  and  it  would  be  easy  to  show 
that  every  one  of  these  forms  of  the  one  great  gospel  blessing  is  referred  to  God  as 
its  Author  (Col.  i.  27  ;  Rom.  v.  2  ;  2  Cor.  iii.  12).  H.  The  fulness  of  the  blessino 
which  it  asks.  Though  other  terms  are  found  here,  they  all  pay  tribute  to  thia 
grace.  Faith  is  the  root  of  hope ;  the  peace  and  joy  which  are  the  fruits  of  faith 
are  the  nourishment  of  hope ;  and  the  abundance  of  hope  is  made  the  perfection 
of  the  Christian  life  as  a  state  of  probation.  1.  Faith  and  hope  are  so  inseparable 
that  their  only  scriptural  definition  makes  them  all  but  identical  (Heb.  xL  1) ;  and 
they  are  one  in  this  that  their  objects  are  invisible  (chap.  viii.  25).  But  they  differ 
in  this,  that  faith  has  to  do  with  the  present,  but  hope  vrith  the  future  ;  or  faith 
brings  the  past  and  hope  the  future  into  the  reality  of  the  present  moment.  Faith 
rests  upon  the  "  It  is  finished  "  already  spoken  ;  hope  rejoices  in  the  assurance  of 
another  "  It  is  finished  "  which  the  creation  waits  to  hear.  But  faith  must  have  tha 
pre-eminence  as  the  parent  of  hope ;  for  while  we  can  conceive  of  a  faith  without 
hope,  we  cannot  conceive  of  a  hope  that  does  not  believe  in  its  object.  Hence  tha 
apostle  here  utters  his  prayer  in  a  circuitous  manner,  and  takes  faith  on  the  way. 
2.  There  is  an  evident  connection  in  Paul's  mind  between  the  fruits  of  faith  and 
VOL.  u.  45 


706  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  xt. 

the  abounding  in  hope.  He  borrows  from  the  previous  chapter  (ver.  17).  Peace  ia 
the  blessed  settlement  of  the  controversy  between  God  and  the  sinner  as  respects  the 
past;  while  joy  is  the  present  good  cheer  of  the  soul  as  encompassed  by  mercies, 
but  feeling  the  present  rather  than  thinking  of  the  past  or  future.  Now  these 
two  demand  a  third  to  fill  up  the  measure  of  the  Christian  estate  ;  peace  touching 
the  guilty  past,  and  joy  in  the  fruitful  present,  do  not  so  much  cry  out  for  as 
naturally  produce  good  hope  for  the  unknown  future.  3.  But  of  all  these  there  may 
be  measures  and  degrees.  Nothing  is  more  characteristic  of  St.  Paul  than  his 
insistance  on  the  increase  even  unto  perfection  of  every  grace.  The  notion  of 
fulness  enters  into  every  department  of  his  practical  theology.  Here  we  have  set 
before  us  the  abundance  of  peace,  joy  and  hope  as  the  result  of  the  abounding  power 
in  us  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  But  the  term  reluctantly  submits  to  exposition.  It  ia 
chiefly  to  be  defined  by  negatives,  though  they  are  positive  enough  for  man's 
desire.  To  be  filled  with  peace  is  to  be  dispossessed  of  the  last  residue  of  a  servile 
dread  before  God,  and  to  have  risen  beyond  the  possibility  of  unholy  resentments 
towards  man  ;  to  be  filled  with  joy  is  to  have  vanquished  the  sorrow  of  the  world,  to 
find  elementa  of  rejoicing  even  in  tribulation,  and  to  possess  a  serene  contentment 
that  finds  nothing  wrong  in  nature,  providence,  or  grace;  to  abound  in  hope  ia 
expressed  by  another  word  that  rather  brings  the  answer  of  the  prayer  down  into 
the  region  of  our  own  endeavour.  The  God  of  hope  bestows  its  increase  rather  aa 
the  fruit  of  our  patience  and  fortitude.  Hence  the  marked  allusion  to  the  "power 
of  the  Holy  Ghost."  Hope  is  strengthened  by  the  habits  of  endurance  and  resist- 
ance. While  all  graces  demand  His  inworking,  these  demand  His  power.  4. 
Abounding  in  hope  is  prayed  for  as  the  end  and  result  of  the  fulness  of  joy  and 
peace.  This  indicates  that  these  more  tranquil  graces  are  instruments  for  the 
attainment  of  that  more  strenuous  grace.  Joy  and  peace  minister  to  hope.  The 
assurance  of  reconciliation  cannot  rest  in  itself,  but  must  muse  on  that  which  ia  to 
oome;  how  can  it  but  encourage  the  expectation  of  all  the  fruits  of  a  justified 
eatate  ?  The  soul,  no  longer  weighed  down  under  the  burden  of  sin,  by  a  holy 
necessity  springs  upward.  Peace  is  not  hope,  but  it  sets  hope  free.  So  also  joy,  by 
an  equally  Divine  necessity,  encourages  endurance  and  fortitude,  and  the  hopeful 
expectation  of  the  great  release.  Hope  in  this  case  ministers  as  it  is  ministered 
unto  (chap.  v.  2).  Conclusion :  Hope  is  in  some  sense  the  highest  of  the  proba- 
tionary graces.  It  is  the  servant  of  many  of  them,  but  is  itself  served  by  all. 
What  would  everything  else  be  without  this?  The  mere  imagination  of  the  with 
drawal  of  hope  withers  the  rest,  and  wraps  all  in  darkness.  Charity,  of  course, 
has  the  pre-eminence  by  every  right ;  but  as  the  grace  of  our  stern  probation-hope 
has  its  own  peculiar  pre-eminence.  It  imparts  its  strength  to  all  other  graces,  so 
that  they  without  it  cannot  be  made  perfect.  It  divides  the  triumphs  of  faith,  and 
enters  largely  into  the  self-denials  and  labours  of  love.  Aa  it  respects  the  present 
life  hope  is  in  some  sense  the  abiding  grace.  Then  comes  a  supreme  moment  when 
hope,  or  faith  working  by  hope,  is  the  only  anchor  of  the  soul ;  and  when  it  has 
endured  its  final  strain  it  will  be  glorified  for  ever.  With  all  its  fruition  it  will 
have  its  everlasting  anticipation  of  glories  not  yet  revealed.  {W.  B.  Pope,  D.D.) 
The  secret  of  joy  and  of  hope: — Joy,  peace,  hope:  a  fair  triad  which  all  men 
seek,  and  few  find  and  retain.  They  are,  for  the  most  of  us,  like  bright-winged, 
sweet-voiced  birds  that  dart  and  gleam  about  us,  and  we  hear  their  voices,  but 
nets  and  cages  are  hard  to  find.  This  prayer  opens  up  the  way  to  find  joy, 
peace,  and  hope.  Notice  that  the  text  begins  with  "the  God  of  peace  fiU  you 
with"  these  things,  and  it  ends  with  "through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost." 
So,  then,  there  are  here  three  stages.  There  ia,  first,  the  Divine  gift,  which 
underlies  everything.  Then  there  is  the"  human  condition  of  making  that  gift  our 
own  ;  and  then  there  is  the  triumphant  hope  which  crowns  joy  and  peace,  and  is 
their  result.  I  ask  you,  then,  to  look  at  these  three  things  with  me  this  morning. 
I.  The  only  source  of  true  jot  and  peace  is  God  Himselt.  The  only  way  by 
which  God  can  give  any  man  joy  and  peace  is  by  giving  him  Himself.  No  gifts 
of  His  hand,  apart  from  Him ;  no  mere  judicial  act  of  pardon,  and  removal  from 
a  state  of  condemnation,  are  of  themselves  enough  to  fill  a  human  heart  with  calm 
gladness.  And  if  there  is  ever  to  be  tranquillity  in  this  disturbed  being  of  mine, 
if  the  conflict  between  duty  and  inclination,  between  passion  and  principle, 
between  present  and  future,  between  flesh  and  spirit,  is  ever  to  be  hushed,  it 
must  be  because  God  dwells  in  us.  Notice  the  bold  emphasis  of  the  apostle's 
prayer.  "  The  God  of  hope  fill  you  with  all  joy  and  peace."  So  then,  where 
God  comes  and  is  welcomed  by  uomble  obedience  and  trustful  love,  ther«  is  a 


OBir.  ST.]  ROMANS.  707 

tolnesB  of  these  precious  gifts.  So  as  that  a  man  has  as  much  gladness  and 
peace  as  he  can  hold.  There  is  the  difFerence  between  Christian  joy  and  all 
other.  In  all  others  there  is  always  some  part  of  the  nature  lacking  its  satis- 
faction. Only  when  we  puf  the  colouring  matter  in  at  the  fountain-head  will 
it  tinge  every  little  ripple  as  it  runs.  Only  when  we  have  God  for  the  joy  of 
our  hearts  and  the  peace  of  our  else  troubled  spirits  will  the  joy  be  full.  Other- 
wise, however  abundant  the  flood,  there  will  always  be  some  gaunt,  barren  peak 
lifting  itself  parched  above  the  rejoicing  waters.  No  man  was  ever  glad  up  to 
the  height  of  his  possibility  who  found  his  joy  anywhere  else  than  in  God. 
And,  then,  mark  that  other  word,  too,  **all  joy  and  peace."  From  this  one 
gift  comes  an  infinite  variety  of  forms  and  phases  of  gladness  and  peace.  And 
BO  it  is  wise,  in  the  highest  regions,  to  have  all  our  investments  in  one  security ; 
to  have  all  our  joy  contingent  upon  one  possession.  One  pearl  of  great  price  is 
worth  a  million  of  little  ones.  One  sun  in  the  heavens  outshines  a  million  stars ; 
and  all  their  lustres  gathered  together  only  illuminate  the  night,  while  its  rising 
maJces  the  day.  So  if  we  want  joy  and  peace,  let  as  learn  that  we  are  too 
great  and  too  miserable  for  any  but  God  to  give  it  us.     11.  And  now  thb  huuak 

CONDITION   OF  THIS   DiVINK   GIFT   OF   WVJJj  AND   MANIFOLD  JOY  AND  PEACE.       "  Fill  yOO 

with  all  joy  and  peace  in  believing."  Believing  what  ?  He  does  not  think  it 
necessary  to  say,  partly  because  all  his  readers  knew  who  was  the  object  of  faith, 
and  partly  because  there  was  more  prominent  in  his  mind  at  the  moment  the  act 
of  faith  itself  than  the  object  on  which  it  rests.  They  who  thus  trust  in  Jesus 
Christ  are  they  to  whom,  on  condition  of,  and  at  the  moment  of  their  trust  or 
faith,  God  gives  this  fulness  of  joy  and  peace.  Altogether  apart  from  any  considera- 
tion of  the  thing  which  a  man's  faith  grasps,  the  very  act  of  trust  has  in  itself  a 
natural  tendency  to  bring  joy  and  peace.  When  I  can  shift  the  responsibility  off 
my  shoulders  on  to  another's,  my  heart  is  lightened  ;  and  there  comes  a  great 
eaJm.  Christian  faith  does  not  wriggle  out  of  the  responsibilities  that  attach  to 
a  human  life,  but  it  does  bring  in  the  thought  of  a  mighty  hand  that  guides  and 
protects ;  and  that  itself  brings  calm  and  gladness.  You  fathers  have  got  far 
more  anxious  faces  than  your  little  children  have,  because  they  trust,  and  you  are 
responsible  for  them.  Trust  God,  and  it  cannot  be  misplaced,  and  the  vessel  can 
never  be  swept  out  of  the  centre  of  rest  into  the  hurtling  rage  of  the  revolving 
storm  around.  Nor  need  I  do  more  than  just  remind  you  of  bow,  in  the  object 
that  the  faith  grasps,  there  is  ample  provision  for  all  manner  of  calm  and  of 
gladness,  seeing  that  we  lay  hold  upon  Christ,  infinite  in  wisdom,  gentleness, 
brotherliness,  strength.  Oh,  if  only  we  keep  hold  of  Him  there  can  be  but  little 
in  any  future  to  alarm,  and  little  in  any  present  to  disturb  or  to  sadden.  But 
note  how  the  communication  from  God  of  joy  and  peace,  in  their  fulness  and 
variety,  is  strictly  contemporaneous  with  the  actual  exercise  of  our  faith.  Our 
belief  is  the  condition  of  God's  bestowal,  and  that  is  no  arbitrary  condition.  It  is 
because  my  faith  makes  it  possible  for  God  to  give  me  Himself  that  He  only  gives 
Himself  on  condition  of  my  faith.  You  open  the  door,  and  the  daylight  wiU  come 
in.  You  remove  the  hermetical  sealing,  and  the  air  will  rush  into  the  vacuum. 
Only  mark  this,  as  long  as  you  and  I  keep  up  the  continuity  of  our  believing, 
so  long,  and  not  one  moment  longer,  does  God  keep  up  the  continuity  of  His 
giving.  Because  there  are  such  spasmodic  and  interrupted  acts  of  faith  on  our 
part,  we  possess  such  transient  and  imperfect  gifts  of  joy  and  peace.  Let  me  drop 
one  more  word.  Their  are  other  kinds  of  religion  and  religious  exercise  than  that 
of  trust.  There  is  no  promise  of  peace  and  joy  to  them.  "  Fill  you  with  all  joy 
and  peace  "  in  poking  into  your  own  hearts  to  see  whether  you  are  a  Christian  or 
not.  That  is  not  the  promise.  "Fill  yon  with  all  joy  and  peace"  in  painfully 
trying  to  acquire  certain  qualities,  and  to  do  certain  duties.  That  is  not  the 
promise.  III.  And  so,  lastly,  thb  issue  of  this  God-given  joy  and  peace  is 
HOPE.  The  apostle  did  not  tell  us  what  was  the  object  of  the  faith  that  he  en- 
joined. He  does  not  tell  us  what  is  the  object  of  the  hope  either  ;  and  I  suppose 
that  is  because  he  is  not  thinking  so  much  about  the  object  as  about  the  thing. 
And  this  is  the  teaching  here,  that  if  a  man,  trusting  in  God  in  Jesus  Christ,  has 
all  this  flood  of  sunny  gladness  lying  quiet  in  his  heart,  there  will  be  nothing  in 
any  future  that  can  alarm.  For  the  peace  and  joy  that  God  gives  bear  witness  in 
themselves  to  their  own  immortality.  Ah,  there  is  a  difference  between  all  earth's 
gladnesses  and  the  joys  that  Christian  people  may  possess.  In  all  earthly  blessed- 
ness there  blends  ever  the  unwelcome  consciousness  of  its  transiency.  Therefore 
the  best  demonstration  of  a  heaven  of  blessedness  is  the  present  possession  of 


% 


708  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOB.  [chap.  XT.' 

"joy  and  peace  in  believing."  These  are  like  the  floating  timber  and  seeds  thai 
Columbus  saw  the  day  before  he  sighted  land.  But,  brother,  is  there  any  reasoa 
to  suppose  that  you  will  find  a  heaven  of  blessedness  beyond  the  grave,  in  close 
contact  with  the  things  that  you  do  not  like  to  be  in  contact  with  now  ?  We  must 
begin  here.  We  must  here  exercise  the  faith.  We  must  here  experience  the 
peace  and  the  joy,  and  then  we  may  have  the  hope.  Then,  rich  and  blessed  with 
Buch  gifts  from  such  a  Giver,  we  may  venture  to  say,  "  To-morrow  shall  be  as  thia 
day,  and  much  more  abundant,"  and  that  hope  shall  not  be  put  to  shame.  {A. 
Maclaren,  D.  D.)  Christian  hope : — ^L  Comes  fbom  God.  1.  Worldly  hope  rests  apon 
favouring  circumstances — our  own  powers.  It  hangs  often  upon  a  slender  thread. 
"  Hope  centred  in  that  child. "  How  often  parents  with  broken  hearts  have  said  that. 
2.  Few  are  atheists  in  theory,  but  many  are  such  in  their  feelings.  They  are  hopeless 
because  they  are  godless.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Christian  is  first  of  all  a  believer 
in  God  as  revealed  in  Christ.  God  therefore  is  the  giver  and  the  foundation  of  hia 
hope.  n.  Comes  "  thbough  jot  and  peace  in  believing."  1.  It  comes  not  to  a 
heart  that  is  without  faith.  It  comes  not  from  a  creed  repeated,  or  held  merely 
intellectually.  It  comes  from  a  faith  that  yields  the  affections,  the  will,  the  whole 
life  to  God.  Are  there  •'  Christians  "  without  faith  ?  Then  they  are  also  without 
hope.  Are  they  without  "  joy  and  peace  "  ?  Then  they  are  also  without  hope.  2. 
Peace  and  joy  in  believing  make  God  known.  This  is  the  logic  of  the  heart.  "  Such 
joy  and  such  peace  can  come  only  from  God."  The  joy  of  pardon  and  cleansing  is 
the  faith  that  only  God  can  pardon  and  cleanse.  3.  "  Peace  and  joy  in  believing  " 
are  the  firstfruits  of  Heaven.  They  are  like  the  two  faithful  spies  who  came  back 
loaded  with  the  rich  clusters  of  the  promised  inheritance.  Larger  faith,  permanent 
faith,  mean  larger  and  more  permanent  hope.  Being  •'  justified  by  faith,"  our 
tribulations  work  patience,  our  patience  experience,  our  experience  hope.  4. 
And  this  hope  is  for  others  as  well  as  for  ourselves.  The  man  whose  hope  is  con- 
fined to  his  individual  interests  is  not  a  Christian.  Under  the  stimulus  of  "  joy 
and  peace  in  believing "  we  argue :  "  The  God  who  has  pardoned  my  sins  can 
pardon  others."  III.  Is  by  the  poweb  of  the  "  Holt  Ghost."  1.  Like  all  other 
elements  of  the  Christian  life,  hope  is  inspired.  It  is  not  a  natural  impulse.  The 
lack  of  hope  argues,  then,  a  lack  of  spiritual  life.  Do  we  find  persons  professing 
faith  in  Christ,  and  yet  living  drearily  ?  It  may  mean  enfeebled  health,  or  over- 
taxed nerves.  It  may  mean  also  that  they  have  not  "  received  the  Holy  Ghost." 
And  when  we  remember  this  saintly  apostle  who  writes  of  hope,  yet  has  an 
enfeebled  body,  and  nerves  constantly  taxed  by  toils  and  perils,  we  can  conclude 
what  the  lack  of  despondent  Christians  most  commonly  is.  2.  Our  hope  is  not  for 
the  sanguine  only,  but  for  persons  of  every  shade  of  temperament.  Conclusion : 
1.  Our  hope  is  not  a  selfish  emotion.  God  never  inspires  mortals  with  any  sort  of 
selfishness,  not  even  with  religious  selfishness.  The  hope  we  cherish,  if  it  reflects 
the  spirit  of  Christ,  will  be  large-hearted.  It  will  rest  upon  "  the  God  of  Hope," 
as  the  God  who  rules  over  all  the  world.  2.  It  is  an  exclusively  Christian  pos- 
session. Such  is  the  unavoidable  inference  from  the  text.  Men  who  are  not  Chris- 
tians are  *' without  God  and  without  hope."  (E.  McChesney,  Ph.D.)  Joy  and 
peace  in  believing. — Joy  and  peace  in  believing  : — Consider — I.  The  sotjbcb 
OF  this  desibed  good.  God  sometimes  permits  the  use  of  titles  descriptive  of 
what  He  is  in  Himself,  and  sometimes  of  names  denoting  His  relation  to  His 
creatures.  In  the  former  sense  we  apply  such  designations  as  "  the  God  of  mercy," 
"  the  God  of  love,"  "  the  God  of  truth."  Examples  of  the  latter  are  "  the  God  of 
peace,"  "  the  God  of  patience,"  "  the  God  of  all  consolation."  In  the  text  He  is 
"  the  God  of  hope,"  because — 1.  He  is  the  Fountain  from  which  all  hope  must  flow. 
Hope,  like  its  sister  Faith,  is  one  of  those  "  good  and  perfect  gifts  "  which,  pass 
through  what  intermediate  channels  it  may,  must  come  down  to  us  "  from  the 
Father  of  lights."  And  this  hope,  which  God  begets  in  us,  is  "a  lively  hope" — 
that  is,  God  invests  spiritual  objects  with  a  new  attractiveness,  and  creates  within 
us  longing  desires  after  their  attainment.  2.  He  is  the  object  on  which  all  hope 
must  terminate.  God  can  never  raise  an  expectation  in  His  creatures  for  the  mere 
purpose  of  disappointing  them.  It  might  be  optional  whether  He  should  give  to  ua 
a  ground  of  hope  or  not ;  but  having  given  us  cause  to  hope,  it  is  no  longer  an 
option  whether  such  a  hope  shall  be  fulfilled.  "  God  cannot  deny  Himself."  And 
although  God  may  and  will  take  His  own  time,  we  must  not,  as  in  the  case  of 
human  promises,  allow  the  heart  to  sicken  at  hope  deferred.  Delays  with  God  are 
but  invisible  means  of  hastening  mercy.  "  He  that  believeth  "  must  "  not  make 
haste."    "In  due  season  we  shall  reap,  if  we  faint  not."     XL  The  pabtiouiiAB 


«rAP.  XT.]  ROMANS.  709 

BLBssiMOS.  1.  Joy  is  one  ot  those  early  fraits  of  the  Spirit  which  flow  from  a  sens* 
of  oar  interest  in  the  promises — a  well-grounded  persaasion  of  oar  having  a  part  in 
the  great  propitiation.  It  is  a  joy  with  which  "  a  stranger  intermeddleth  not," 
and  of  which  even  adversity  depriveth  ns  not.  Hence  this  joy  is  to  be  distinguished 
from  every  other  as  having  God  for  its  object.  It  is  not  in  riches,  which  have 
wings — not  in  honours,  which  may  fail — not  in  health,  which  may  languish,  &c. ; 
bat  it  is  Isaiah's  joy  when  he  said,  "  My  soul  shall  be  joyful  in  my  God."  It  is  the 
Virgin's  joy  when  she  said,  "  My  spirit  has  rejoiced  in  God  my  Saviour."  It  is  the 
apostle's  joy  when  he  said  to  the  Pbilippians,  "Rejoice  in  the  Lord  alway."  And 
this  may  serve  to  explain  the  paradox,  "  sorrowful,  yet  always  rejoicing."  For  the 
Christian  has  meat  to  eat  that  the  world  knows  not  of.  2.  Peace — (1)  The  peace  of 
reconciliation  with  a  God  offended.  (2)  The  peace  of  conscience  for  a  law  infringed. 
(3)  The  peace  of  an  assured  conscience.  The  apostle  would  have  us  filled  with 
peace — the  true  peace — the  peace  which  was  the  Father's  token,  the  Son's  legacy, 
the  Spirit's  seal  and  earnest  unto  the  day  of  a  complete  redemption.  This  is  a 
♦'peace  which  the  world  cannot  give."  8.  "In  believing."  We  might  have 
expected  "  after  ye  have  believed,"  as  if  joy  and  peace  were  not  to  be  looked  for  at 
the  outset  of  our  Christian  course,  but  the  recompense  of  an  advanced  and  estab- 
lished faith.  But  no ;  you  should  expect  the  blessing  as  you  believe,  and  because 
yoa  believe.  Faith  is  the  hand  which  takes  the  blessing  at  God's  hand.  III.  Thb 
FBtnr.  1.  In  ver.  4  and  here  the  respective  functions  of  the  Word  and  the  Spirit  in 
our  salvation  are  beautifully  brought  together.  Perfectly  distinct  as  these  agencies 
are,  yet  their  joint  operation  issues  in  the  same  result.  The  reason  is,  that  one  ia 
the  agent  and  the  other  the  instrument  in  this  great  work.  The  Word  of  God  ia 
•'  the  sword  of  the  Spirit " ;  it  is  that  by  which  He  works.  The  Word  cannot 
convert  without  the  Spirit ;  and,  as  a  rule,  the  Spirit  does  not  convert  without  the 
Word.  And  here  the  Word  and  the  Spirit  join  together  to  make  us  "  abound  in 
hope."  2.  What  is  the  hope  in  which  we  are  to  rejoice  and  abound?  Why,  we 
"  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God  "  ;  we  "  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  "  that 
shall  be  revealed.  We  "  abound  in  hope "  of  entering  a  world  without  sin, 
suffering,  and  death.  (D.  Moore,  M.A.)  The  present  happiness  of  believers  : — 
I.  Faith   nattjballt  tends  to   fill  the  soul  with   the   most   pleasant   and 

DELIGHTFUL  FULNESS,  PLEASURE,  AND  HOPE.  II.  ThOUQH  FAITH  NATUBALLT  TENDS 
TO  FILL  THB  SOUL  WITH  THB  MOST  PLEASANT  AND  DELIGHTFUL  FEELINGS,  YET  EVEN 
TBUB  ChBISTIANB  DO  NOT  ALWAYS  FULLT  ENJOY  THEM.  III.  We  MUST  LABOUR  TO 
REMOVE   THB   OBSTACLES    WHICH   PREVENT    OUR    FULL     ENJOYMENT     OF    THIS   SPIRITUAIi 

HAPPINESS.  (D.  Savile,  M.A.)  Joy  and  peace  in  believing: — There  are  a  large 
number  of  persons  who  profess  to  have  believed  in  Christ,  but  who  assert  that  they 
have  no  joy  and  peace  in  consequence.  Now  I  shall  suppose  that  these  are  not 
raising  this  difficulty  by  way  of  cavil,  and  that  they  are  not  labouring  under  any 
bodily  sickness  such  as  might  bring  on  hypochondriacal  feelings.  We  begin  with 
two  observations — 1.  That  joy  and  peace  are  exceedingly  desirable  for  your  own 
Bakes  and  for  the  sake  of  your  acquaintances,  who  set  down  your  despondency  to 
your  religion.  2.  Do  not  overestimate  them  ;  for,  though  eminently  desirable,  they 
are  not  infallible  evidences  of  safety.  Many  have  them  who  are  not  saved,  for  their 
joy  springs  from  a  mistake,  and  their  peace  rests  upon  the  sand  of  their  own 
imaginations.  It  is  a  good  sign  that  the  spring  is  come,  that  the  weather  is  warm  ; 
but  there  are  mild  days  in  winter.  A  man  may  be  in  the  lifeboat,  but  be  exceedingly 
ill,  and  think  himself  to  be  still  in  periL  It  is  not  his  sense  of  safety  that  makea 
him  safe.  Joy  and  peace  are  the  element  of  a  Christian,  but  he  is  sometimes  out 
of  his  element.  The  leaves  on  the  tree  prove  that  the  tree  is  alive,  but  the  absence 
of  leaves  will  not  prove  that  the  tree  is  dead.  True  joy  and  peace  may  be  very 
satisfactory  evidences,  but  their  absence,  during  certain  seasons,  can  often  be 
accounted  for  on  some  other  hypothesis  than  that  of  the  absence  of  faith.  3.  Do 
not  seek  them  as  the  first  and  main  thing.  Let  your  prayer  be,  "Lord,  give  me 
comfort,  but  give  me  safety  first."  Be  anxious  to  be  happy,  but  be  more  anxious 
to  be  holy.  I.  The  text  may  be  used  to  cobrect  two  common  and  dangerous 
ERRORS.  1.  That  there  is  a  way  of  joy  and  peace  through  self.  Some  look  for 
them  through  good  works.  Now  if  we  had  never  sinned,  joy  and  peace  would  have 
been  the  consequences  of  perfect  holiness ;  but  since  we  have  broken  God's  law  any 
rational  joy  and  peace  are  impossible  under  the  covenant  of  works.  You  have 
broken  the  alabaster  vase  ;  you  may  preserve  the  fragments,  but  you  cannot  make 
it  whole  again.  Many  who  are  conscious  of  this  say,  "  Then  I  will  do  my  best." 
Yes ;  but  a  man  who  is  drovniing  may  say  that,  but  it  is  no  solace  to  him  as  the 


710  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  «i, 

billows  close  over  him.  Some  try  the  plan  of  ecrapnloas  observance  of  all  religioaa 
ceremonies.  These  things  may  be  good  in  themselves ;  bat  to  rest  in  them  wUl  be 
your  rain.  2.  That  of  turning  the  text  apside  down.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  joy 
and  peace  in  believing,  and  some  therefore  infer  that  there  is  such  a  thing  aa 
believing  in  joy  and  peace.  Ton  will  get  peace  just  as  the  florist  gets  his  flower 
from  the  bulb ;  but  you  wUl  never  get  the  bulb  from  the  flower.  To  trust  Christ 
because  you  just  feel  happy  is — (1)  Irrational.  Suppose  a  man  should  say  daring  a 
panic,  "  I  feel  sure  that  my  bank  is  safe,  because  I  reel  so  easy  about  my  money  ** ; 
you  would  say  to  him,  "  That  is  no  reason."  Suppose  he  said,  "  I  feel  sure  thai 
my  money  is  safe,  because  I  believe  the  bank  is  ssie."  That  is  good  reasoning. 
But  here  yon  put  the  effect  in  the  place  of  the  cause.  If  a  man  should  say,  *'  I 
have  got  a  large  estate  in  India,  because  I  feel  so  happy  in  thinking  about  it,"  that 
is  no  proof  whatever.  But  if  he  says,  "  I  feel  very  happy,  because  I  have  got  an 
estate  in  India,"  that  may  be  right  enough."  (2)  Irreverent.  You  say  to  God, 
"  Thou  tellest  me  to  trust  Christ  and  I  shall  be  saved.  Well,  I  cannot  trust  Christ, 
but  I  can  trust  my  own  feeling,  and  if  I  felt  very  happy  I  could  believe  that  He 
would  save  me."  (3)  Egotistical.  Here  is  a  person  who  has  the  Divine  promise — 
*'  He  that  believeth  on  Him  is  not  condenmed  " ;  and  instead  of  confiding  in  this, 
he  says,  "  No,  I  shall  believe  nothing  which  I  do  not  feel."    II.  The  oeeat  tbuth 

07  THB    TEXT  IS,  THAT  BELIEVINO    IN    ChBIST    IS    THE    TBUB    OBOUND    FOB    JOT  AMD 

FBACE.  Believing  in  Christ  is  trusting  Christ.  "  But  what  sort  of  a  Christ  is  this 
I  am  to  confide  in?  Is  He  worthy  of  my  trust?  "  The  reply  is  this,  "  We  have 
trusted  Christ  " — 1.  Because  of  the  wonderful  union  of  His  natures.  He  is  Ck>d, 
and  whatever  God  undertakes  He  is  able  to  accomplish.  But  He  is  man,  and  has 
the  requisite  tenderness  to  deal  with  sinners.  2.  Because  of  the  evident  truthful- 
ness of  His  character.  Could  we  suspect  the  Saviour  we  should  find  it  difficult  to 
trust  Him ;  but  as  we  cannot  imagine  a  cause  for  suspecting  Him,  we  feel  shut  ap 
to  believing  Him.  Millions  of  spirits  bear  witness  to  the  trustworthiness  of  Christ. 
He  did  not  fail  one  of  them.  3.  Because  He  was  sent  of  God  on  purpose  to  save. 
Now  if  this  be  so,  and  Christ  comes  into  the  world  and  says,  "  Trust,  and  I  will 
save  you,"  He  has  God  to  back  Him,  and  the  honour  of  the  Trinity  is  pledged  to 
every  soul  that  comes  to  Christ.  4.  Because  the  merit  of  His  sufferings  must  be 
great  enough  to  save  ns.  5.  Because  He  rose  again  from  the  dead,  and  now  He 
ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us.  Wherefore,  "  He  is  able  to  save  to  the 
nttermost."  III.  The  pbinciplb  of  the  text  is  of  constant  application  :  jot  and 
f EACE  ALWATS  COME  THBOuoH  BEUEViNO.  We  do  not  slways  have  joy  and  peace, 
but  still,  in  the  main,  joy  and  peace  are  the  result  of  believing.  E.g. — 1.  As  soon 
as  a  person  is  saved,  one  of  the  earliest  evidences  of  spiritual  life  is  a  great  battle 
within.  Some  have  the  notion  that  as  soon  as  they  are  saved  they  shall  never  have 
to  fight.  Why,  it  is  then  that  you  begin  the  campaign.  But  you  shall  have  joy 
'And  peace  while  the  fighting  is  going  on.  2.  Remember  that  even  after  yoa  are 
secure  in  Christ,  and  accepted  before  God,  you  may  sometimes  get  despondent. 
Christian  men  may  have  a  bad  liver,  or  some  trial,  and  then  they  get  depressed. 
But  what  then  ?  Why  then  you  can  get  joy  and  peace  through  believing.  (C.  H. 
Spur g eon.)  Joy  essential: — Joy  has  been  considered  by  Christian  people  very 
largely  as  an  exceptional  state ;  whereas  sobriety — by  which  is  meant  severity  of 
mind,  or  a  non-enjoying  state  of  mind — is  supposed  to  be  the  normal  condition.  I 
knew  a  Boman  Catholic  priest  that  was  as  upright  and  conscientious  a  man  as  I 
ever  met,  who  said  he  did  not  dare  to  be  happy ;  he  was  afraid  that  he  should  lose 
his  soul  if  he  was ;  and  he  subjected  himself  to  every  possible  mortification,  saying, 
"It  is  not  for  me  to  be  happy  here;  I  must  take  it  out  when  I  get  to  heaven. 
There  I  expect  to  be  happy."  That  was  in  accordance  with  his  view  of  Christianity. 
Now,  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  it  should  be  understood  that  health  of 
soul  and  joyfulness  are  one'and  the  same  thing.  You  cannot  be  healthy  in  soul  and 
not  be  happy.  The  true  idea  of  religion  is  one  that  makes  men  happy  by  making 
them  happiable ;  that  brings  them  into  that  soul-knowledge,  and  into  that  concord 
of  soul,  out  of  which  comes  happiness.  Remember  that  the  state  of  suffering,  if 
you  must  suffer,  is  the  abnormal  state,  and  that  a  true  Christian  is  a  man  who  is  a 
happy  Christian.  You  may  say,  "  I  cannot  be  happy."  Very  well,  then  you  can- 
not be  an  ideal  of  true  Christianity.  You  are  not  able  to  reach  the  highest  condition 
of  which  the  human  soul  is  capable.  It  does  not  foUow  because  a  man  has  one  leg 
shorter  than  the  other,  and  is  obliged  to  limp,  that  limping  is  a  part  of  the  beat 
■tate  of  man.  The  man  whose  legs  are  lithe,  and  who  can  run  like  a  roe,  is  a  true 
man  physically,  in  so  far  as  that  is  concerned ;  and  the  man  who  is  maimed,  and 


«HAP.  XT.J  ROMANS,  711 

oannot  do  this,  is  physioally  so  much  less  than  a  true  man  as  he  fsJls  short  of  th« 

gossibility  of  it.  {H.  W.  JBeecher.)  A  cheerful  hope : — A  hopeless  life  is  a  bitter 
fe.  Surely  the  heart  is  broken  when  hope  is  gone.  Thank  God,  this  is  a  raro 
thing.  You  tread  upon  the  wild  flower  in  the  field,  and  for  a  time  it  is  crushed ; 
but  ere  the  next  morning  comes,  when  the  dew  is  on  the  grass,  it  stands  erect  again. 
And  when  deep  trouble  comes  the  heart  may  be  crushed  for  a  time,  but  it  ia 
generally  only  for  a  time.  It  is  wonderful  how  people  will  recover  and  see  there  ig 
still  something  left.  Here  is  a  bankrupt :  his  plans  are  frustrated,  his  heart  is 
bruised.  For  a  time  he  droops  his  head  despondently,  but  he  is  soon  ready  to  make 
another  start.  He  adapts  himself  to  his  circumstances,  and  finds  hope  rising 
within  him.  "  I  may  yet  be  in  comfortable  circumstances,"  he  says,  and  again  he 
oan  work  with  a  will.  It  is  beautiful,  though  sometimes  very  sad,  to  see  how  the 
poor  consumptive  patient  will  retain  hope  to  the  last.  "  It  is  only  a  little  cold," 
she  says ;  "  I  shall  soon  be  strong  again."  "  We  are  saved  by  hope,"  says  Paul, 
and  there  is  a  depth  of  meaning  in  his  words.  People  often  say,  "  While  there  is 
life  there  is  hope  "  ;  but  would  it  not  be  truer  still  to  say,  "  While  there  is  hope 
there  is  life  "  ?  This  cheerful  hope  is  the  Christian's.  All  things  are  his,  not  in 
possession,  but  in  prospect.  The  heart  can  cherish  no  desire  which  is  not 
abundantly  spread  out  before  him.  "  Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither 
hath  it  entered  into  the  heart  of  man  to  conceive,  what  things  God  hath  prepared 
for  those  who  love  Him."  (/.  Matthews.)  Through  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Ohost. — The  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost : — Power  is  the  peculiar  prerogative  of  God. 
**  Twice  have  I  heard  this,"  &o.  If  He  delegates  a  portion  of  it  to  His  creatures, 
yet  still  it  is  His  power.  This  prerogative  is  to  be  found  in  each  of  the  three 
persons  of  the  Trinity.  We  shall  look  at  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in — I.  Ths 
ODTWABO  AND  TI8IBLK  DISPLAYS  OP  IT.  1.  In  oreatiou  works  (Job  xxvi.  13  ;  Psa.  civ. 
29 ;  Gen.  i.  2).  But  there  was  one  instance  of  creation  in  which  the  Spirit  was 
more  especially  concerned,  viz.,  the  formation  of  the  body  of  Christ.  "  The  power 
of  the  Highest  shall  overshadow  Thee,"  <&o.  2.  In  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  Some- 
times this  is  ascribed  to  EUmself ,  sometimes  to  God  the  Father.  He  was  raised  by 
the  Father,  who  said,  "  Loose  the  Prisoner — let  Him  go.  Justice  is  satisfied."  He 
was  raised  by  His  own  majesty  and  power  because  He  had  a  right  to  come  out. 
But  He  was  raised  by  the  Spirit  as  to  the  energy  which  His  mortal  frame  received 
(chap.  viii.  11 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  18).  3.  In  works  of  witnessing.  When  Jesus  went  into 
Jordan  the  Spirit  proclaimed  Him  God's  beloved  Son.  And  when  afterwards  Jesus 
raised  the  dead,  healed  the  leper,  &o,,  it  was  done  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  who 
dwelt  in  Him  without  measure.  And  when  Jesus  was  gone  the  master  attestation 
of  the  Spirit  was  when  He  came  like  a  rushing  mighty  wind,  and  cloven  tongues. 
And  all  through  the  apostle's  ministry  "  mighty  signs  and  wonders  were  done  by 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  many  believed  thereby."  4.  The  works  of  grace.  Under  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  the  uncivilised  become  civilised,  the  savage  polite,  the 
drunkard  sober,  &o.  U.  Tkb  inward  Ain)  spiBrrnAL  uantfestation.  The  former 
may  be  seen,  this  must  be  felt.  The  Holy  Ghost  has  a  power  over — 1.  Men's 
hearts.  Now  these  are  very  hard  to  affect.  If  you  want  to  get  at  them  for  any 
worldly  object  you  can  do  it.  But  there  is  not  a  minister  breathing  who  can  win 
man's  heart  himself.  He  can  win  his  ears,  his  eyes,  his  attention ;  but  he  cannot 
reach  the  heart.  The  Holy  Spirit  can.  He  can  "  Speak  with  that  voice  which 
wakes  the  dead."  2.  The  will.  This,  especially  in  some  men,  is  a  very  stubborn 
thing.  I  can  bring  you  all  to  the  water,  and  a  great  many  more ;  but  I  caimot 
make  you  drink ;  and  I  don't  think  a  hundred  ministers  could.  But  the  Spirit  of 
God  can  make  us  willing  in  the  day  of  His  power.  3.  The  imagination.  Those 
who  have  a  fair  share  of  imagination  know  what  a  difficult  thing  it  is  to  control. 
It  will  sometimes  fly  up  to  God  with  such  a  power  that  eagles'  wings  cannot  match 
it ;  but  it  is  also  potent  the  other  way,  for  my  imagination  has  taken  me  down  to 
the  vilest  kennels  and  sewers  of  earth.  Can  you  chain  your  imagination  ?  No ; 
but  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  can.  HL  Its  fut0re  and  desibed  effects.  Ha 
has — 1.  To  perfect  us  in  holiness.  The  Christian  needs  two  kinds  of  perfection — 
of  justifieation  in  the  person  of  Jesus,  of  sanctifioation  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  At 
present  corruption  still  rests  even  in  the  breasts  of  the  regenerate,  but  the  day  ia 
coming  when  God  shall  finish  the  work  which  He  has  begun.  2.  To  bring  on  the 
latter-day  glory.  3.  To  raise  the  dead.  That  same  power  which  raised  Christ 
from  the  dead  shall  also  quicken  your  mortal  bodies.  Practical  inferences  :  1.  The 
Spirit  is  very  powerful,  Christian  1  (1)  Then  you  never  need  distrust  the  power  ol 
God  to  carry  you  to  heaven.     (2)  Why  should  you  doubt  anything  ?    8.  Sinners^ 


713  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oBAr.  XT. 

there  is  some  hope  for  you.  I  cannot  save  you,  but  I  know  my  Master  can. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Our  urgent  need  of' the  Holy  Spirit  (text,  and  ver.  19) : — 
1.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  necessary  to  the  Church  for  its  own  internal  growth  in 
grace.  Hence  ver.  13,  where  the  apostle  attributes  the  power  to  be  filled  with  joy 
and  peace  in  believing,  and  to  abound  in  hope,  to  the  Holy  Ghost.  But  the  power 
of  the  Church  outside,  to  be  aggressive,  is  this  same  energy  (ver,  19).  If  the  Church 
is  to  be  happy  and  holy  within  herself,  and  if  she  is  to  conquer  the  world  for  Christ, 
she  must  have  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  2.  The  power  of  the  Church  for 
external  work  will  be  proportionate  to  the  power  within.  (1)  There  are  two  cottages 
in  winter.  From  the  roof  of  one  the  snow  has  disappeared,  while  the  other  is  still 
covered  with  it.  The  reason  is  that  there  is  a  fire  burning  inside  the  one,  but  the 
other  is  untenanted.  So  where  worldliness  and  formalism  lie  thick  upon  Churches 
there  is  not  the  warmth  of  Christian  life  within ;  but  where  hearts  are  warm  with 
Divine  love  through  the  Spirit  of  God,  evils  vanish  and  beneficial  consequences 
follow.  (2)  Here  is  a  trouble  arising  between  different  nations.  Everybody  knows 
that  one  of  the  hopes  of  peace  lies  in  the  bankrupt  condition  of  the  nation  which  is 
likely  to  go  to  war.  Thus  is  it  in  the  great  battle  of  truth.  The  strength  or  weak- 
ness of  a  nation's  exchequer  affects  its  army  in  its  every  march,  and  in  like  manner 
its  measure  of  grace  influences  the  Church  of  God  in  all  its  actions.  (3)  The  rising 
of  the  Nile  depends  upon  those  far-off  lakes  in  the  centre  of  Africa.  If  there  be  a 
scanty  supply  in  the  higher  reservoirs,  there  cannot  be  much  overflow  in  the  course 
of  the  river  through  Egypt.  So  if  the  upper  lakes  of  fellowship  with  God  are  not 
weU  filled  the  Nile  of  practical  Christian  service  wUl  never  rise  to  the  flood.  You 
cannot  get  out  of  the  Church  what  is  not  in  it.  We  must  ourselves  drink  of  the 
living  water  till  we  are  full,  and  then  out  of  the  midst  of  us  shall  flow  rivers  of 
living  water.  Out  of  an  empty  basket  you  cannot  distribute  loaves  and  fishes,  how- 
ever hungry  the  crowd  may  be.  The  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  manifested  in — 
I.  The  quickening  of  souls  to  spibitcaii  lite.  1.  All  the  spiritual  life  which 
exists  in  this  world  is  the  creation  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Every  growth  of  spiritual 
life,  from  the  first  tender  shoot  until  now,  has  also  been  His  work.  You  will  never 
have  more  life,  except  as  the  Holy  Ghost  bestows  it  upon  you.  2.  The  Holy  Spirit 
is  absolutely  needful  to  make  everything  that  we  do  to  be  alive.  We  are  sowers, 
but  if  we  take  dead  seed  in  our  seed-basket  there  will  never  be  a  harvest.  How 
much  there  is  of  Church  work  which  is  nothing  better  than  the  movement  of  a 
galvanised  corpse.  How  much  of  religion  is  done  as  if  it  were  performed  by  an 
automaton,  or  ground  off  by  machinery.  3.  As  the  Spirit  is  a  quickener  to  make 
ns  and  our  work  alive,  so  must  He  specially  be  with  us  to  make  those  alive  with 
whom  we  have  to  deal  for  Jesus.  As  well  may  you  try  to  calm  the  tempest  with 
poetry  or  stay  the  hurricane  with  rhetoric  as  to  bless  a  soul  by  mere  learning  and 
eloquence.  We  are  utterly  dependent  here,  and  I  rejoice  in  this.  If  I  could  have 
a  stock  of  power  all  my  own  apart  from  the  Spirit,  I  cannot  suppose  a  greater 
temptation  to  pride  and  to  living  a  distance  from  God.  H.  The  enliohtenment  of 
His  people.  1.  This  He  has  done  by  giving  us  His  Word ;  but  the  Book,  inspired 
though  it  be,  is  never  spiritually  understood  by  any  man  apart  from  His  personal 
teaching.  The  letter  you  may  know,  but  no  man  knows  the  things  of  God  save  he 
to  whom  the  Spirit  of  God  has  revealed  them.  2.  If  professors  be  not  taught  of 
the  Spirit  their  ignorance  will  breed  conceit,  pride,  unbelief.  Sorrow  too  comes  of 
ignorance.  Hadst  thou  known  the  doctrines  of  grace  thou  hadst  not  been  go  long 
a  time  in  bondage  !  Half  of  the  heresy  in  the  Church  of  God  is  not  wilful  error, 
but  error  which  springs  of  not  submitting  the  mind  to  the  hght  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
If  He  will  but  enlighten  the  Church  thoroughly  there  will  be  an  end  of  divisions. 
Practical  unity  wiU  exist  in  proportion  to  the  unity  of  men's  minds  in  the  truth  of 
God.  3.  We  find  in  this  gracious  operation  our  strength  for  the  instruction  of 
others  ;  for  how  shall  those  teach  who  have  never  been  taught  ?  "  Son  of  man,  eat 
this  roll " ;  for  until  thou  hast  eaten  it  thyself  thy  lips  can  never  tell  it  out  to 
others.  It  is  the  law  of  Christ's  vineyard  that  none  shall  work  therein  till  first  of 
all  they  know  the  flavour  of  the  fruits  which  grow  in  the  sacred  enclosure.  An 
ignorant  Christian  is  disqualified  for  great  usefulness  ;  but  he  who  is  taught  of  God 
will  teach  transgressors  God's  ways,  and  sinners  shall  be  converted  unto  Christ. 
III.  The  obeation  in  believers  of  the  spirit  of  adoption.  1.  We  are  regene- 
rated by  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  so  receive  the  nature  of  children ;  and  that  nature  He 
develops  and  matures.  This  is  of  very  great  importance,  for  sometimes  the  spirit 
of  slaves  creeps  over  us.  2.  This  will  have  a  great  effect  upon  the  outside  world. 
A  body  of  professors  performing  religion  as  a  task  can  have  but  small  effect  upon 


CHAP.  XT.]  ROMANS.  718 

the  Binners  around  them.  But  bring  me  a  Church  made  up  of  men  who  know  they 
are  accepted  and  beloved,  and  are  perfectly  content  with  the  great  Father's  will ; 
pat  them  down  in  the  midst  of  ungodly  ones,  and  they  will  begin  to  envy  them 
their  peace  and  joy.  IV.  Sanotification.  1.  Holiness  is  the  entirety  of  our  man- 
hood fully  consecrated  to  the  Lord  and  moulded  to  His  will.  This  is  the  thing 
which  the  Church  of  God  must  have,  but  it  can  never  have  it  apart  from  the 
Sanctifier,  for  there  is  no  holiuess  but  what  is  of  His  operation.  2.  And  if  a 
Church  be  destitute  of  holiness  what  effect  can  it  have  upon  the  world  ?  Scoffers 
utterly  despise  professors  whose  Uves  contradict  their  testimonies.    V.  Pbayeb. 

1.  The  strength  of  a  Church  may  pretty  accurately  be  gauged  by  her  prayerfulness. 
But  all  acceptable  supplication  is  wrought  in  the  soul  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  2. 
Furthermore,  when  we  come  to  deal  with  sinners  we  know  that  they  must  pray. 
"  Behold  he  prayeth  "  is  one  of  the  earliest  signs  of  the  new  birth.  But  can  we 
make  the  sinner  pray  ?  VI.  Fellowship.  1.  In  the  apostolic  benediction  we  pray 
that  we  may  receive  the  communion  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  gives  us  fellowship 
with  God  Himself.  Our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father  and  with  His  Son  Jesus 
Christ.     So,  too,  our  fellowship  with  one  another  is  always  produced  by  the  Spirit. 

2.  If  you  are  to  tell  upon  the  world  you  must  be  united  as  one  living  body.  A 
divided  Church  has  long  been  the  scorn  of  Antichrist.  VII.  In  His  officb  of 
Pasaclexe.  1.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  our  friend  and  Comforter.  Many  a  heart  would 
break  if  the  Spirit  of  God  had  not  comforted  it.  This  is  a  very  necessary  work,  for 
if  believers  become  unhappy  they  become  weak  for  service.  2.  He  is  the  Advocate 
of  the  Church — not  with  God,  for  there  Christ  is  our  sole  Advocate,  but  with  man. 
The  grandest  plea  that  the  Church  has  against  the  world  is  the  indwelling  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  All  the  evidences  of  the  truth  of  Christianity  which  can  be  gathered 
from  analogy,  history,  and  external  facts,  are  nothing  whatever  compared  with  the 
operations  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  If  we  have  the  Spirit  of  God  amongst  us,  and 
conversions  are  constantly  being  wrought,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  thus  fulfilling  His 
advocacy,  and  refuting  all  accusers.    (Ibid.) 

Vers.  14-21.  And  I  myself  also  am  persuaded  of  yoiL — PauVs  testimony  to  the 
Church  in  Rome : — I.  Its  substance.  Fall  of — 1.  Goodness.  2.  Knowledge.  3. 
Sanctified  ability.  II.  Its  value.  1.  Honest.  2.  Inspired.  3.  Kind.  (J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  Christian  policy  : — The  apostle — I.  Pbaises,  but  does  not  flatter.    II. 

Humbles,  but  does  not  demean  himsele.  III.  Maonifies  his  office,  but  not  him- 
self. (Ibid.)  Attributes  of  Christian  character : — Paul's  characteristic  delicacy 
is  seen  in  "  I  myself  am  persuaded,"  &a.,  which  corresponds  with  chap.  i.  8.  It 
was  no  flattering  compliment,  but  a  just  commendation.  Exhortations  are  to  be 
accompanied  with  courtesy  (1  Pet.  iii.  8).  Christian  gifts  and  graces  are  to  be  duly 
commended.  Love  esteems  a  brother  above  rather  than  below  his  work  (chap.  xii. 
10).  The  Romans  were  commended  for  their — I.  Goodness.  1.  Moral  excellence 
in  general  (Eph.  v.  9J.  2.  Kindness  to  one  another  in  particular  (2  Thess.  i.  11). 
II.  Knowledge.  Spiritual  knowledge  is  a  believer's  privilege.  It  is  the  Spirit's 
oflBce  to  impart  it  (John  xvi.  13  ;  1  Cor.  ii.  10-12  ;  1  John  ii.  20,  27).  Such  know- 
ledge is  to  be  greatly  desired  (Phil.  L  9 ;  Col.  ii.  2).  All  treasures  of  wisdom  and 
knowledge  hid  in  Christ  (Col.  ii.  3  ;  1  Cor.  i.  30).  This  knowledge  is  necessary  to 
comfort,  holiness,  and  usefulness,  and  embraces  all  the  subjects  of  revealed  truth, 
doctrines,  duties,  dispensations,  &c.  The  deep  things  of  God ;  things  freely  given 
us  of  God  (1  Cor.  ii.  10, 12).  Goodness  and  knowledge  rarely  combined  in  the  world, 
but  both  are  given  in  and  with  Christ.  These  are  the  heart  and  the  head  of  the 
new  man  (Eph  iii.  24),  and  are  to  be  taken  in  their  fulness  (Isa.  Iv.  3 ;  Luke  i.  53). 
Paul's  large  hearted  love  is  seen  in  the  terms  he  employs.  He  delights  to  point  to 
the  fulness  behevers  enjoy  in  Christ.  They  should  grow  in  grace  and  knowledge. 
m.  Abilitt  to  admonish  one  another — to  put  each  other  in  mind  of  duty  as  to 
matter  by  knowledge,  as  to  manner  by  goodness.  This  may  be  done  either  publicly 
or  privately  (Heb.  iii.  18,  x.  25  ;  Col.  iii.  16).  (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Essential 
qualifications  of  a  Christian  minister : — I.  He  most  dischabge  his  functions  with 
WISDOM  AND  humilitt.  1.  Rccognising  good  where  it  already  exists.  2.  Humbly 
putting  those  who  have  beheved  in  mind  of  common  duties  and  privileges.  S. 
Seeking  the  salvation  of  the  unconverted — in  the  name  and  for  the  glory  of  God. 
II.  He  must  have  a  special  call.  1.  Attested  by  the  gifts  and  power  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  2.  Approved  first  of  all  in  a  narrower  sphere  of  labour.  3.  Directed 
especially  to  the  ignorant  and  unconverted.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  publication 
qf  the  gospel : — L  Its  objects.    1.  To  confirm  those  who  believe  in  grace  (vers. 


714  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  «f. 

14, 15).  2.  To  save  and  sanctify  the  onbelieving  (ver.  16).  3.  To  promote  ths 
oaase  of  God  (ver.  17).  II.  Its  success.  1.  Proceeds  from  the  power  of  the 
Spirit  of  Christ  (vers.  18,  19).  2.  Beaches  all  who  learn  the  knowledge  of  Hia 
name  (vers.  20,  21).  (Ibid.)  Mutual  admonition  : — "  Of  his  extreme  humility, 
I  experienced  an  instance  wnich  at  once  astonished  and  embarrassed  me.  One  day, 
in  conversation,  Mr.  Wilberforce  kindly  gave  me  some  advice.  I  expressed  my 
thanks,  and  said  bow  much  I  should  feel  indebted  if,  in  conversation  or  correspon- 
dence, he  would  at  all  times  be  my  counsellor,  and,  if  necessary,  correct  me,  and 
point  out  my  faults.  He  suddenly  stopped  (for  we  were  walking  together),  and 
replied,  'I  will;  but  you  must  promise  me  one  thing.'  'With  pleasure,'  I  answered, 
little  thinking  what  it  was.  '  Well,  then,*  continued  Mr.  Wilberforce,  '  in  all  your 
conversation  and  correspondence  with  me,  be  candid  and  open,  and  point  out  my 
faults.'  "      {Memoir  of  Wilberforce.)  Reproof  should   be  judicious : — Eeprove 

mildly  and  sweetly,  in  the  calmest  manner,  in  the  gentlest  terms,  not  in  a  haughty 
or  imperious  way,  not  hastily  or  fiercely ;  not  with  sour  looks,  or  in  bitter  language, 
for  these  ways  do  beget  all  the  evil,  and  hinder  the  best  efforts  of  reproof ;  they  do 
certainly  inflame  and  disturb  the  person  reproved ;  they  breed  wrath,  disdain,  and 
hatred  against  the  reprover  ;  but  do  not  so  weU  enlighten  the  man  to  see  his  error, 
or  affect  him  with  a  kindly  sense  of  his  miscarriage,  or  dispose  him  to  correct  his 
fault.  Such  reproofs  look  rather  like  the  wounds  and  persecutions  of  enmity  than 
as  remedies  ministered  by  a  friendly  hand ;  they  harden  men  with  rage,  and  scorn 
to  mend  upon  such  occasion.  If  reproof  doth  not  savour  of  humanity  it  signifieth 
nothing ;  it  must  be  like  a  bitter  pill  wrapped  in  gold,  and  tempered  with  sugar, 
otherwise  it  will  not  go  down,  or  work  effectually.  (J.  Barrow.)  Nevertheless, 
brethren,  I  have  written  the  more  boldly. — St.  Paul's  ministry : — I.  Its  genebal 
NATXJBB.  1.  Paul  was  "  the  minister  of  Jesus  Christ."  The  word  is  compounded 
of  two  words,  signifying  a  work  and  that  which  belongs  to  the  public ;  the  character 
described,  therefore,  is  that  of  one  devoted  to  the  public  welfare — one  called  ol 
God  out  of  a  private  into  a  public  station,  who  therefore  became  public  property, 
and  who  could  not,  without  manifest  impropriety,  make  his  own  ease,  or  influence, 
or  aggrandisement,  the  objects  of  his  pursuit.  2.  Paul  was  employed  in  thia 
ministry  for  "  the  offering  up  of  the  Gentiles  to  God,"  in  which  there  is  an  allusion 
to  the  priestly  office.  He  evidently  considered  himself  an  evangelical  priest ;  one 
who  was  to  be  the  mouth  of  God  to  the  people,  and  the  mouth  of  the  people 
to  God.  (1)  He  points  out  his  duty,  which  was  to  offer  the  Gentiles  to  God.  (2) 
He  relates  his  experience  of  success — the  reward  of  his  labour,  viz.,  the  presenting  to 
God  those  who  were  saved  through  his  instrumentality.  3.  The  means  by  which 
he  was  thus  enabled  to  prepare  and  to  present  to  God  such  an  acceptable  oblation : 
by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  fully.  The  gospel  is  called  the  gospel  of 
God,  and  of  Christ,  both  in  reference  to  its  Divine  authority,  and  in  reference 
to  its  subject:  it  is  of  God,  and  it  speaks  concerning  God.  II.  Its  sphebe.  1. 
"  Where  Christ  was  not  named."  Such  a  people — (1)  Were,  of  course,  ignorant  of 
Christ,  of  His  character,  relations,  salvation.  (2)  Could  not,  therefore,  believe 
in  Christ.  Hence  they  derived  no  spiritual  benefit  from  His  mediation ;  they  had 
no  hope  of  being  with  Him  for  ever.  (3)  Could  not,  of  course,  be  happy.  All  thak 
Christians  enjoy  or  hope  for  is  through  Christ  alone.  Through  Him  they  are 
justified,  renewed,  sanctified,  consoled,  strengthened,  &o.  Without  Christ  ia 
misery.  Yet  such  is  the  miserable,  the  awful  condition  of  countless  millions. 
Christ  ia  not  named  among  them.  They  have  no  Bibles ;  no  gospel  ministry ; 
no  Christian  Sabbaths.  2.  The  apostle  preached  "  from  Jerusalem  round  about  to 
Dlyricum";  places  about  one  thousand  miles  from  each  other.  "Bound  about," 
i.e.,  diverging  into  all  the  neighbouring  places,  and  stUl  pushing  onwards  till 
he  had  filled  the  country  with  his  doctrine.  This  statement  should  be  improved 
by  us — (1)  In  reference  to  our  own  country.  Let  those  who,  tifter  mature  delibera- 
tion and  earnest  prayer,  feel  it  to  be  their  duty  to  confine  themselves  to  domestic 
labours,  be  careful  to  cultivate  a  missionary  spirit.  Let  them  not  rest  till  in  every 
town  and  village  they  have  "  fully  preached  the  gospel  of  Christ."  Negligence 
in  this  respect  will  be  criminally  inexcusable  in  such  a  country  as  this,  where 
no  impediment  is  presented  by  the  existing  government,  but  where  every  facility  ia 
afforded.  2.  And  chiefly  in  reference  to  heathen  lands.  We  must  take  care  of 
home,  but  we  must  not  overlook  other  places.  The  gospel  must  be  planted  in  place 
after  place,  till  its  influence  has  spread  over  the  whole  earth.  III.  The  testimont 
OF  God  by  which  it  was  accompanied.  Through  "mighty  signs  and  wonders," 
and  "  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God  " ;  without  which  all  else  would  have  been 


.  XT.]  ROMANS.  715 

▼ain.  Miracles  are  not  absolutely  necessary  to  the  saecees  of  the  Christian  ministry, 
and  never  were  the  direct  canses  of  conversion.  The  faithf al  record  of  the  miracles 
wrought  in  attestation  of  thr  trnth  in  the  days  of  the  apostlea,  answers  every 
purpose  of  miracles  themselves.  If  the  apostles  had  the  auxiliary  of  miracles,  we 
have  the  auxiliary  of  Bibles  gradually  translating  into  every  language.  We  hav* 
the  advantage  of  patronising  governments,  e.g.,  the  Spirit  of  God  can  and  doei 
convert  without  miracles.  The  larger  outpourings  of  this  Spirit  must  be  sought  in 
fervent,  persevering  prayer.  IV.  Its  kftects.  The  Gentiles — 1.  Were  made 
obedient.  Theirs  was  the  obedience  of  faith,  of  profession,  of  practice.  They 
were  Christians  doctrinally,  experimentally,  and  practically.  2.  Were  offered  to 
God.  The  preachers  made  no  improper  use  of  their  influence ;  their  only  aim  was 
to  bring  men  to  know,  love,  and  serve  God.  The  true  missionary  spirit  is  not 
A  sectarian  spirit,  and  it  is  injured  whenever  it  becomes  so.  3.  Were  an  acceptable 
offering  to  God.    Y.  The  PBiviLEaE,  happiness,  and  honoub  bealised  by  Paul  in 

BEING   PEB&niTED    TO     EXEBCISE     THIS   UISSIONABT  VOCATION.        He    Speaks    Of    it    aS 

♦•  grtuse  given  to  him  of  God."  He  accounted  it — 1.  A  privilege.  He  does  not  talk 
of  the  burden,  danger,  or  expense,  but  the  favour  to  be  so  employed.  No  Christian 
will  account  it  a  burden  to  support  missions,  or  to  engage  in  actual  service,  if  it  be 
clearly  his  duty.  The  missionary  has  no  right  to  talk  of  making  sacrifices,  he  is 
but  doing  his  duty ;  he  is  honoured  by  God  in  being  allowed  so  to  labour.  Mean 
is  that  man  who  accounts  the  labours  of  a  missionary  to  be  mean.  2.  An  honour. 
"  I  have  whereof  I  may  glory  through  Jesus  Christ."  3.  A  happiness.  "  I  glory  "; 
I  exult — I  rejoice  greatly.  Let  Christians  consider  that  a  share  in  all  this  privilege, 
honour  and  happiness  is  offered  to  their  acceptance.  Let  ministers  beware  how 
they  keep  back  from  such  work.  And  let  all  Christians  see  to  it  that  they  promote 
the  cause  by  their  contributions,  their  influence,  and  their  prayers.  {J.  Bunting, 
D.D.)  Tha.%  I  should  be  a  minister  of  Jesus  Christ  to  the  Gentiles. — The 
ministerial  office : — I.  Its  functions.  1.  To  serve  Christ.  2.  To  offer  spiritual 
sacrifices.  3.  To  preach  the  gospel.  U.  Its  acceptableness.  1.  In  its  power. 
2.  In  its  fruits.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  Christian  miniatry : — I.  Its  natube.  1. 
The  word  "  minister  "  imports  any  one  who  transacts  the  affairs  consigned  to  his 
charge,  whether  they  be  religious  or  civil.  It  is  therefore  used  in  relation  to — (1) 
The  Jewish  priesthood.  "Every  high  priest  standeth  daily  ministering."  (2) 
Christ,  the  antitype  of  that  priesthood,  who  hath  "  obtained  a  more  excellent 
ministry."  (3)  Aiigels.  "Are  they  not  all  ministering  spirits?"  (4)  Civil 
magistrates,  who  "  are  God's  ministers."  (5)  Persons  who  perform  acts  of  kindness. 
"If  the  Gentiles  have  been  made  partakers  of  your  spiritual  things,  their  duty 
is  also  to  minister  to  you  in  carnal  things."  "  Epaphroditus  .  .  .  ministered 
to  my  wants. "  2.  The  oflBce  to  which  the  apostle  refers  was  emphatically  a  sacred 
ofBce,  partly  peculiar  and  temporal,  consisting  in  the  exercise  of  agencies  which 
were  strictly  miraculous  ;  and  partly  general  and  spiritual,  consisting  in  the 
proclamation  of  certain  truths  relating  to  eternal  interests.  The  former  depart- 
ment passed  away  with  a  single  generation,  but  the  latter  is  to  be  exercised  till  the 
end  of  time.  3.  The  office  is  connected  with  "  Jesus  Christ."  The  mode  in  which 
Paul  received  it,  as  recorded  by  himself,  is  one  of  the  most  wondrous  events  recorded 
in  the  annals  of  mankind.  Thenceforth,  renovated  by  that  grace  of  which  ha 
gpeaks  in  ver.  15,  he  lived  as  a  devoted  servant  of  Him  whose  cause  he  once 
laboured  to  destroy.  It  is  from  Christ  alone  that  all  ministers  derive  their  existence 
and  authority.  Every  one  of  us  hath  received  grace  according  to  the  measure 
of  the  gift  of  Christ.  Nothing  can  save  men  from  the  guilt  of  blasphemous 
intrusion  into  this  office,  except  their  introduction  to  it  by  a  power  which  is  itself 
Divine.  Intellect,  imagination,  eloquence,  are  nothing  if  they  be  not  consecrated 
by  the  Spirit  of  the  Holy  One,  nothing  but  the  trappings  of  the  traitor.  II.  Its 
dibeotion.  "  To  the  Gentiles,"  i.e.,  all  nations  who  were  not  numbered  amongst 
the  famUy  of  Israel.  The  Christian  economy  was  expressly  constituted  that  it 
might  be  applied  to  the  race  generally.  This  fact  had  been  declared  in  prophecy, 
and  by  the  Lord  Himself.  1.  This  commission  was  directed  to  the  Gentiles  with 
a  marked  and  peculiar  emphasis.  "  Depart ;  for  I  will  send  thee  far  hence  unto 
the  Gentiles."  Hence  he  exclaims,  "Inasmuch  as  I  am  the  Apostle  of  the 
Gentiles,  I  magnify  my  office."  The  ministers  of  Christ  must  be  always  ministera 
of  the  Gentiles  until  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  be  brought  in.  When,  therefore, 
Christian  men  carry  forth  throughout  the  nations  the  instrumentalities  and 
energies  of  Christ's  religion,  they  are  doing  nothing  more  than  carrying  oak 
the  essential  principles  of  that  religion.     2.  This  oommission  was  needed  at 


Tie  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  1?. 

this  period.  The  Gentiles  were  idolaters,  and  their  hands,  in  consequence, 
were  rife  with  the  very  foulest  abominations.  The  same  spiritual  need  still 
spreads  over  the  vast  track  of  the  Gentile  nations  ;  God's  power  has  indeed 
been  felt  over  not  a  few.  Yet,  what  are  these  among  so  many?  Begard  the 
existing  state  of  a  large  proportion  of  our  own  population  ;  regard  those  who 
own  the  influence  of  a  superstition,  bearing  the  name  of  Christ  only  to  blaspheme 
it ;  regard  the  state  of  those  who  own  the  power  of  the  false  prophet  of  Mecca ; 
and  then  regard  the  state  of  those  over  whom  there  still  hangs  the  unbroken  cloud 
of  idolatry,  and  what  a  fatal  mass  of  need  and  destitution  is  here,  pleading  tenderly 
and  powerfully  that  with  apostolic  zeal  there  should  go  forth  a  ministry  to  the 
Gentiles  I  III.  Its  theme.  "  The  gospel " ;  a  system  which,  as  its  chosen  name 
imports,  was  glad  tidings,  and  one  which  confers  on  man  all  the  blessings  which 
are  identified  with  the  happiness  of  his  immortal  nature.  Note — 1.  Its  precise 
adaptation  to  the  state  and  the  wants  of  those  to  whom  it  comes.  It  is  adapted — 
(1)  To  the  ignorance  of  the  Gentiles,  unfolding  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
Divine  truth.  (2)  To  their  guUt,  setting  forth  the  all-suflScient  propitiation  for  sin. 
(3)  To  their  pollution,  purifying  and  refining  the  heart.  (4)  To  their  debasement, 
lilting  up  the  fallen  spirit  so  that  man  appears  but  a  little  lower  than  the  angels. 
(5)  To  their  misery,  instilling  the  peace  which  passeth  understanding.  2.  This 
gospel  has  a  certain  mode  of  administration.  It  ought  to  be  administered — (1) 
Faithfully.  Every  one  of  its  facts  and  principles  should  be  announced  in  the 
precise  proportion  in  which  we  find  them  in  the  Word  of  God.  (2)  Freely.  Its 
glad  tidings  must  be  proclaimed  to  all  men  everywhere,  regarding  all  men  as  equal 
and  inviting  all  to  buy  the  great  provision  without  money  and  without  price.  (3) 
Zealously.  The  famine  is  in  the  land,  and  it  is  for  us  to  distribute  the  bread 
of  heaven ;  the  plague  is  in  the  city,  and  it  is  for  us  to  apply  the  medicine ;  the 
wreck  is  upon  the  breakers,  and  it  is  for  us  to  go  and  snatch  the  perishing  from  the 
billows.  Where  is  the  chilling  and  heartless  argument  that  would  forbid  ?  IV. 
Its  besults.  The  labours  of  the  apostle  were  exercised  in  the  express  expectation 
that  multitudes  would  embrace  the  gospel.  Contemplating  this  result,  he  presents 
those  in  whom  it  must  be  accomplished  under  a  very  interesting  figure — that  of  an 
oblation  to  God.  Further,  he  states,  this  offering  so  presented  to  be  '*  acceptable," 
being  sanctified  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  whose  agency,  working  through  the  ministry, 
accomplished  the  transformation  and  renewal  of  the  Gentiles — ^being  hkened  unto 
the  fire,  which,  under  the  Levitical  dispensation,  purified  the  oblation,  and  was  at 
once  the  instrument  and  the  token  of  its  acceptance  with  God.  The  language 
before  us  shows — 1.  That  the  success  of  the  Christian  ministry  is  always  to  be 
ascribed  to  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  This  is  owned  in  the  words  before 
us,  and  in  vers.  18, 19.  Nothing  is  more  manifest  throughout  the  gospel  than  that 
the  Word  is  nothing  but  the  instrument  of  the  Spirit ;  that  by  the  Spirit  the  Word 
is  rendered  effectual  to  renovate  and  to  redeem.  '•  Not  by  power,  nor  by  might," 
&c.  2.  That  this  success  shall  be  of  vast  and  delightful  extent.  The  apostle 
clearly  anticipates  that  the  Gentiles  should  receive  the  gospel  generally,  and  that 
it  should  establish  a  redeeming  empire  over  all  the  nations.  Take  the  series 
of  prophecies,  the  heads  of  which  he  quotes  in  preceding  verses  (Psa.  xviii. ;  Deut. 
xxzii. ;  Psa.  cxi. ;  Isa.  xi.),  the  application  made  of  which  by  the  apostle  rebukes 
the  unauthorised  application  made  of  them  by  theorists  of  our  own  day  to  the 
personal  reign  of  Christ.  But  passing  this  by,  they  tell  us  of  a  period  which  is  to 
come,  by  the  instrumentality  and  agency  we  have  described,  when  the  reign  of 
peace  and  of  blessedness  shall  be  universal  (see  specially  Isa.  xi.).  3.  That  this 
success  is  to  redound  in  one  mighty  ascription  to  God.  The  presentation  of  the 
Gentiles  as  a  sacrifice  means  that  in  their  conversion  God  is  to  be  honoured,  that 
bU  the  glory  may  be  to  Him.  (1)  Ministers,  who  are  the  instruments  of  this 
conversion,  must  ever  render  such  a  tribute,  renounciTig  all  pretensions ;  and  when 
the  sacrifice  is  laid  upon  the  altar,  exclaiming,  'Tot  unto  us,  0  Lord,  not  unto 
us,"  &c.  (2)  Men,  who  are  the  subjects  of  this  conversion,  must  ever  render  such 
a  tribute,  acknowledging  grace  in  all  its  sovereignty  and  freeness,  and  in  each 
instance  transforming  the  statement  of  doctrine  into  the  song  of  praise — "  Of  Hia 
own  mercy  He  has  saved  us,"  <$;o.     {J.  Parsons.)  The  Christian  missionary : — 

1.  His  WORK.    To  preach  the  gospel  to  the  heathen  with— 1.  Priestly  consecration. 

2.  Devotion.  3.  Patience.  11.  His  aim.  That  they  may  become — 1.  An  offering 
to  God.  2.  Acceptable.  3.  Holy.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  I  have  therefore  whereof 
I  may  glory. — Of  what  may  a  Christian  glory  f — I.  Of  fellowship  with  Christ. 
L  By  faith.    2.  In  the  service  of  God.    II.  Of  the  success  which  God  orvES  «im, 


.  XT.]  E0MAN8.  717 

bccaose  his  laboar— 1.  Is  acknowledged  by  God.  2.  Brings  glory  to  God.  III. 
Or  THB  powsB  or  God  which  is  nt  him.  1.  Aooomplishing  what  is  beyond  the 
ability  of  man.  2.  Inspiring  unselfish  zeal.  3.  Constraining  abounding  oharity. 
ilbid.)  The  Chrittian  glorUs  : — I.  In  Chrkt,  as — 1.  The   foundation   of  hl« 

nope.  2.  The  object  of  his  love  and  imitation.  The  Head  of  his  profession.  II. 
In  THB  ssBTioE  OT  Chbist  as  most — 1.  Glorious.  2.  Honourable.  8.  Bemunera- 
tive.  III.  In  ths  thikos  or  God  as  most — 1.  True.  2.  Sublime.  8.  Enduring. 
(Ibid.) 

Vers.  18,  19.  For  I  will  not  dare  to  speak  of  any  of  those  things  which  Christ 
hath  not  wrought  by  me,  to  make  the  Gentiles  obedient— Paur«  iucces$ : — I.  Its 
BXTENT.  1.  Matter  of  notoriety.  2.  Needed  no  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  apostle 
■  to  exaggerate  it.  U.  The  means.  1.  Word.  2.  Deed.  III.  TEra  poweb.  1. 
Christ's.  2.  Exerted  through  the  Holy  Spirit.  8.  Displayed  in  signs  and  wonders. 
(J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  work  of  missions : — I.  Its  object.  To  make  the  Gentiles 
obedient  to  the  gospel.  II.  Its  aosnoies  and  means.  1.  Christ,  the  Supreme 
Director,  who  works  in  ns  to  will  and  to  do.  2.  Converted  men,  the  instruments  by 
word  and  deed.  8.  The  Spirit  of  God,  the  efficient  power  displayed  in  signs  and 
wonders.  III.  Its  bphebe.  1.  Commencing  at  Jerusalem.  2.  Embracing  the 
Gentile  world.  8.  Throughout  which  the  gospel  must  be  fully  preached.  (Ibid.) 
Invincible  power : — One  of  Satan's  artifices  is  to  induce  men  to  attempt  to  reduce 
the  gospel  to  a  mere  system  within  the  reach  of  human  intellect;  and  in  this 
Attempt  they  have  gone  far  to  deny  and  reject  everything  supernatural.  But  so 
long  as  we  have  the  Book  of  God  in  our  hands,  and  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God 
to  accompany  its  hallowed  truths,  we  shall  dare  to  insist  upon  that  gospel  being 
••  the  power  of  God  unto  the  salvation  of  every  one  that  believeth."  Paul  always 
advocated  the  old-fashioned  doctrine,  "  It  is  not  by  might  or  by  power,"  &c.  Note — 
I.  The  success  of  Paul's  PBKAOHnra  the  oospel.  1.  "  I  have  fully  preached  the 
gospel  of  Christ "  (Rom.  xv.  19).  Then  it  was  a  pure  gospel  (Gal.  i.  8,  9).  He 
did  not  mix  law  and  gospel  together  (Bom.  iii.  20 ;  Eph.  ii.  8).  In  his  preach- 
ing I  mark  four  things  prominent :  and  a  man  does  not  preach  a  pure  gospel 
who  does  not  preach  all  four.  (1)  Principles  (1  Cor.  iii.  11).  What  principles? 
They  are  summed  up  in  "  By  grace  are  ye  saved ''  (Eph.  ii.  8).  Well,  then, 
there  is  nothing  for  works,  as  he  urges  elsewhere  (chap.  xi.  6).  (2)  Privileges 
(Gal.  iv.  6;  Bom.  viii.  16).  (3)  Promises.  Paul  dwelt  on  these  with  delight, 
but  he  never  set  them  forth  as  dependent  upon  creature  doings,  or  as  subject 
to  contingencies  (2  Cor.  i.  20).  f4)  Precepts.  In  his  Epistles,  which  he  com- 
mences with  doctrine,  and  proceeds  with  experimental  godliness  ;  but  he  always 
closes  with  the  most  pressing  exhortations  to  "  every  good  word  and  work."  2.  His 
success  in  the  pure  preaching  of  the  gospel.  He  talks  about  •'  mighty  signs  and 
wonders  "  and  names  one  in  the  preceding  verse,  viz.,  that  the  Gentiles  should  be 
made  •'  obedient  by  word  and  deed."  It  is  one  of  the  greatest  miracles  when  God 
brings  a  poor  ruined  sinner  down  to  obedience  to  the  sceptre  of  Christ.  Paul's  suc- 
cess lay  in — (1)  The  rescuing  of  Satan's  slaves.  (2)  Eefreshing  and  establishing  the 
Churches  of  the  living  Qoi,  so  that  they  were  "  built  up  in  their  most  holy  faith." 
(3)  Thus  the  glorifying  of  Jesus'  name.  H.  Its  kfticienct.  It  was  by  the  power 
of  the  Spirit  of  God — and  truly  such  "mighty  signs  and  wonders"  are  never 
accomplished  by  any  other  power.  This  power — 1.  Is  invincible — it  is  sure  to 
conquer,  and  accomplish  that  for  which  it  was  designed.  Every  other  power  is 
found  to  be  conquerable  I  The  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  so  invincible,  that  the 
most  stubborn  hearts  must  yield,  and  the  most  confirmed  habits  of  idolatry, 
or  of  licentiousness,  are  vanquished.  2.  Defies  all  hostility.  8.  Is  new  creating. 
All  creation,  in  a  spiritual  point  of  view,  is  a  chaos  under  the  fall,  until  the  Spirit 
calls  to  a  new  state  of  existence  the  souls  that  were  destitute  of  it.  III.  Paul's 
TBiuMPH  concerning  HIS  SUCCESS.  1.  The  wonders  of  God's  grace,  the  miracles 
accomplished,  the  triumphs  of  the  Cross,  and  the  extension  of  the  Eedeemer's 
kingdom,  made  Paul  rejoice.  Here  is  a  criterion  by  which  we  are  to  judge  of  every 
faithful  minister  of  Christ.  2.  Moreover,  in  all  his  exultations  he  took  care  to 
neutralise  and  give  the  negative  to  the  boastings  of  proud  free  will.  (J.  Irons.) 
The  power  of  the  gospel  .-—I.  Its  soubce,  God.  II.  Its  medium,  the  Spirit  of  God. 
ni.  Its  EVIDENCE,  •'  Signs  and  wonders " — miraculous,  moral  and  spiritual. 
(/.  Lyth,  D.D.)  So  that  from  Jerusalem,  and  round  about  imto  Dlyricum,  I  hare 
taUj  preached  the  gospel  of  Christ — The  preaching  of  the  gospel : — I.  In  what 
jjOHT  IS  THE  GOSPEL  TO  BE  PBEACHBD  BT  ITS  MiNisTEBS.     Surcly  in  the  samo  in 


718  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xt, 

which  it  was  preached  by]the  apostle,  viz. — 1.  As  it  reveals  the  ground  of  a  sinner'g 
acceptance  with  God.  2.  As  it  famishes  the  only  perfect  rule  of  moral  conduct, 
and  the  only  efficient  motive,  love.  3.  As  it  unveils  the  mysteries  of  a  future  state. 
II.  How  THE  APOSTLE  PREACHED  THE  GOSPEL.  1.  FuUy.  He  shunned  not  to  de- 
clare the  whole  counsel  of  God ;  he  instructed,  exhorted,  and  warned  that  they 
might  grow  in  grace  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ  {Acts.  xx.  20).  The  gospel  should 
be  thus  fully  preached.  (1)  Because  it  is  connected  with  the  spiritual  and  eternal 
interests  of  the  hearers.  A  physician  would  be  considered  in  the  last  degree 
criminal  who  trifled  with  his  patient ;  but  the  gospel  minister  is  charged  with  the 
cure  of  souls.     (2)  Because  failure  here  will  contract  awful  guilt  upon  the  preacher 

glzek.  iii.  17-21).  2.  Extensively.  Paul  carried  it  from  Jerusalem  to  Illyricum. 
e  was  not  weary  in  well-doing,  but  continued  active  and  diligent  to  the  end. 
"  The  glory  of  the  Lord  will  be  revealed,  and  all  flesh  shall  see  it  together."  But 
how  many  places  are  there  yet  destitute  of  sufficient  means  of  grace  1  This,  then, 
is  a  call  upon  our  zealous  exertions.  Conclusion :  Note — 1.  That  natural  and  ac- 
quired talents  may  be  efficiently  employed  in  promoting  the  cause  of  religion.  This 
is  well  illustrated  in  the  case  of  Paul.  What  are  the  talents  God  has  entrusted  to 
you  ?  Wealth  ?  Influence  ?  Zeal  ?  Use  them  all  for  God.  2.  The  gospel  is  worthy 
of  all  acceptation.  (D.  Jones.)  The  evangelisation  of  the  world  a  practicable 
work : — I.  Let  us  estimatb  Paul's  missionabv  work.  Note — 1.  The  length  of 
time  during  which  it  was  done.  He  began  very  shortly  after  his  conversion,  and 
carried  it  on  till  his  martyrdom  ;  a  period  of  about  thirty  years.  From  those  thirty 
years  the  time  spent  in  Arabia  and  in  prison  has  to  be  deducted.  2.  The  helps  by 
which  the  work  was  done.  (1)  His  strong  faith  that  the  gospel  was  the  power  of 
God  to  every  one  who  believed.  (2)  His  fervent  love  to  Christ.  (3)  His  great  love 
to  mankind.  (4)  His  good  natural  capacity  and  education.  (5)  The  gift  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  bestowed  upon  him  so  largely.  (6)  His  companions.  (7)  His  Roman 
citizenship.  3.  His  hindrances.  (1)  He  was  a  Jew,  and  the  great  contempt  in 
which  the  Jewish  race  was  held  by  the  Gentiles  must  have  been  an  inomense 
hindrance  to  the  apostle  as  he  went  about  preaching  salvation  through  a  crucified 
Jew.  (2)  He  was  by  no  means  a  strong  man  physically.  He  suffered  much 
through  infirmity  of  the  flesh.  (3)  His  speech  was  not  acceptable  to  some.  Not 
only  did  the  unconverted  Athenians  ask,  "  What  will  this  babbler  say  ?  "  but  there 
were  Christians  at  Corinth  who  pronounced  his  speech  "  contemptible."  (4)  His 
ungenerous  critics  did  acknowledge  that  his  writings  were  weighty  and  powerful ; 
but  in  regard  to  them  he  laboured  under  a  very  great  disadvantage.  The  art  of  printing 
had  not  been  invented,  and  if  he  wrote  an  epistle  intended  for  more  Churches  than 
one,  well,  then,  it  was  slowly  passed  from  one  to  another.  And  not  only  so  ;  those 
who  had  the  charge  of  Churches  did  not  always  like  to  read  Paul's  epistles  to  the 
people  (1  Thess.  x.  27).  Here  in  the  apostolic  age  is  the  germ  of  the  evil  practice 
of  withholding  the  Word  of  God  from  the  laity.  (5)  Travelling  in  those  days  was 
very  slow,  difficult  and  dangerous,  whether  by  land  or  sea.  (6)  The  apostle  chose 
to  labour  for  his  own  support  at  his  trade  as  a  tent-maker.  (7)  He  was  hindered  by 
Jews  and  Judaisers  wherever  he  met  with  them.  (8)  The  other  apostles  were  not 
very  much  in  sympathy  with  him.  4.  The  extent  of  his  work.  To  say  nothing  of 
his  preaching  at  Damascus  and  neighbourhood,  from  Jerusalem,  substantially 
through  Asia  Minor  together  with  Macedonia  and  Achaia,  westward  to  the  shores  of 
the  Adriatic,  the  apostle  preached  the  gospel  of  Christ.  •'  And  not  only  so  "  he 
could  say,  "  I  have  fuUy  preached  it."  This  work  was  by  no  means  of  a  superficial 
character.  As  to  the  results,  they  were  various  ;  sometimes  very  few  were  conver- 
ted, sometimes  very  many.  The  power  of  the  gospel  was  acknowledged  by  enemies 
of  Christ  at  Thessalonica  and  Ephesus.  Therefore  the  apostle  really  did  so 
evangelise  that  large  tract  of  country,  and  if  the  Churches  planted  in  those  regions 
had  done  their  duty,  most  certainly  all  the  inhabitants  would  have  been  brought  to 
CSirist.    n.  From  this  summary  of  the  apostle's  work  we  may  learn  that  thb 

aVANGELISATION  OF  THE  WORLD  IS  REALLY  A  PRACTICABLE  THINQ.  This  iS  nOt  Univer- 
sally acknowledged.  Of  course,  a  very  large  proportion  of  those  who  do  not  believe 
the  gospel,  utterly  deny  it,  and  there  are  Christian  people  who  do  not  seem  to  be 
very  strongly  convinced  of  it,  for  if  they  were,  surely  they  would  think  of  it,  pray 
for  it,  and  give  towards  it  more.  1.  Here  was  a  great  work  done  through  God's 
grace  by  this  one  man  in  a  space  of  thirty  years.  Sixty  periods  of  thirty  years 
have  passed  by  since.  Now,  supposing  that,  during  these  periods,  there  had  been 
in  each — that  is  in  each  generation — just  one  man  like  Paul,  the  world  would  have 
been  more  nearly  evangelised  than  it  ia.    2.  Compare— Paul's  helps  with  our  own. 


CHIP.  XV.]  E0MAN3.  71» 

___     ___     —.^  I 

8.  Whatever  Paul's  helps  might  be,  his  hindrances  were  greater  than  oars.  Con* 
elusion :  Then  the  evangelisation  of  the  world  has  not  proceeded  just  becaass 
CHiristians  have  not  done  their  duty.  But  for  the  apathy  of  our  forefathers  wa 
should  not  be  held  accountable.  Let  us  cheer  ourselves  with  the  thought  that  the 
work  is  really  practicable.  And  certainly  the  results  of  Christian  missionary  effort 
in  modem  times  are  such  as  to  encourage  the  most  sanguine  hope.  The  evangeli- 
sation of  the  whole  world  is  quite  within  the  reach  of  practical  religion.  It  can  be 
done :  it  ought  to  be  done :  let  it  be  done  1    (if.  Stowell  Brown.) 

Ver.  20.  I  have  strlved  to  preach  the  gospel,  not  where  Christ  was  named,  lest 
I  Bhould  build  on  another  man's  foundation. — St.  PauVs  method  of  procedure  : — St. 
Paul  "strived,"  even  made  it  a  point  of  honour — matter  of  holy  ambition  to  preach 
Christ  in  Christless  regions,  and  not  where  his  brethren  had  been  before.  Chris- 
tian love  is  always  tender  of  the  rights  of  others.  The  truest  ambition  is  to  serve 
God  in  the  best  and  most  devoted  manner.  Worldly  ambition  is  the  perversion  of 
a  right  principle.  The  objects  worthiest  of  man's  ambition  and  effort  are — 1.  To 
bring  the  greatest  glory  to  God  and  to  Christ.  2,  To  impart  the  greatest  amount  of 
happiness  to  men.  3.  To  act  with  the  greatest  uprightness  and  courtesy  to  all. 
Paul's  ambition  the  principle  in  every  true  missionary,  e.g.,  Morrison,  Carey, 
Martyn,  Jndson,  WilUams,  Moffatt.  He  and  they  sought  new  fields  of  labour. 
Such  fields  are  more  difficult  to  cultivate.  More  rich  and  abundant  in  the 
return.  (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  St.  Paul's  evangelistic  methods  : — I.  Obsebve  thb 
apostle's  methods.  1.  He  went  to  those  who  needed  him  most.  2.  Encountered 
the  diflSculties  of  untried  ground.  3.  Was  ambitious  to  build  on  an  independent 
foundation.  II.  Inquire  how  fab  they  abb  worthy  of  imitation.  1.  Circum- 
stances are  now  much  altered ;  others  have  laboured,  and  we  must  enter  upon 
their  labours.  2.  Yet  neglected  neighbourhoods  deserve  special  attention.  3. 
Difficulties  are  not  to  be  shunned.  4.  Every  Christian  labourer,  while  he  respects  the 
rights  of  others,  should  aim  at  leaving  the  distinct  impression  of  his  own  efforts  some- 
where. (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Foundation  work : — 1.  The  converse  is  1  Cor.  iii.  10. 
When  Paul  was  converted  he  stood  high  among  his  own  people  for  knowledge  and 
executive  talent.  He  took  the  lead  in  putting  down  Christianity.  One  would 
suppose  that  such  a  man,  being  converted,  would  have  gone  to  Jerusalem,  and  put 
himself  at  the  head  of  the  Christian  movement.  But  instead  of  this,  he  secretly 
went  to  Arabia,  returning  thence  to  Damascus.  Then  he  went  to  Jerusalem  ;  but 
he  stayed  there  only  a  fortnight,  and  departed  into  Asia  Minor,  where  he  laboured 
for  fourteen  years.  When  he  went  back  to  Jerusalem,  it  was  but  for  a  brief  stay ; 
and  he  declares  that  he,  by  preference,  preached  the  gospel  in  places  where  nobody 
had  been  before  him.  He  was  not  after  a  settlement  or  a  good  salary.  Paul's 
feeling  was  "  I  will  take  foundation-work.  Let  other  men  have  the  building  upon 
that."  2.  Now,  foundation-work  is  always  the  hardest,  as  the  figure,  namely,  the 
rearing  of  a  structure  here  implies.  Look  at  those  immense  stores  thXt  are  going 
up  in  great  cities ;  in  proportion  as  they  go  up,  they  must  preliminarily  go  down; 
and  the  consequence  is  that  the  laying  of  foundations  is  no  small  business.  It  is 
the  most  awkward,  difficult,  and  unrequiting ;  when  you  have  worked  your  best, 
your  work  is  all  hidden  out  of  your  sight,  and  nobody  thanks  you  for  it.  3.  Now, 
that  a  man  should  like  to  do  that  work  is  scarcely  possible.  Offer  a  man  a  job,  and 
ask  him  which  part  he  would  prefer.  "  The  frescoing "  says  the  man,  •'  so  that 
people,  when  they  come  in,  should  say  '  What  a  genius  I '  I  should  like  to  have  my 
name  somt where  up  there  to  show  who  did  it,"  But  if  a  genius  should  come  and 
say,  "  Wny,  let  me  dig,  and  clear  away,  and  lay  the  foundations,  other  men  may 
build  the  superstructure,"  people  would  say,  "There  are  thousands  who  can  do 
that,  but  there  is  not  one  in  a  thousand  who  is  able  to  do  what  you  can  do."  And 
that  is  true.  But  is  there  no  way  io  which  the  great  mass  of  men  can  labour  at 
foundation-work  so  as  to  be  happy  ?  This  has  been  the  problem  of  ages.  I  see 
streaming  from  Paul's  example  light  upon  it.  Note — I.  The  motives  by  which  PauIi 
WAS  actuated.  1.  Christian  pride.  (1)  He  never  tired  of  declaring  that  he  was 
not  one  whit  behind  the  chiefest  of  the  apostles,  not  for  the  sake  of  praise,  but 
becanse  he  would  not  have  his  message  discredited.  His  temperament  was  such  as 
would  make  bun  feel  himself  quite  as  much  as  he  was.  So  he  says,  "  I  am  not 
behind  any  man.  I  am  a  match  for  anybody."  (2)  Then  such  a  man  ought  to  do 
work  that  nobody  else  can  do  as  well  as  he.  He  ought  to  say,  "  My  business  is  to 
work  where  nobody  else  will  work,"  which  is  in  keeping  with  the  Master's 
saying,  "He   that   would   be    chief,    let  him  be  a  Bervant."     Thoosanda   ol 


720  THE  BIBLICAL  LLLUSTBATOB,  [ohaf.  t% 

men  want  something  to  do.  Oh  I  that  the  spirit  of  Paul  was  among  yonng 
scholars,  preachers,  operatives.  Then  they  would  say,  not,  "Who  will  show 
me  a  good  parish?"  not,  "Who  will  show  me  a  remunerative,  or  honourable 


set  it  to  work.  2.  The  feeling  he  never  got  over — that  he  had  persecuted  the  Church. 
Most  persons  would  have  said,  "Don't  feel  so  bad  about  this  matter,  all  you  had  to 
do  was  to  turn  when  you  saw  your  mistake,  and  quit  it."  That,  however,  did  not 
satisfy  him.  Oh,  to  have  persecuted  Jesus  1  The  more  he  thought  of  it,  the  worse 
he  felt ;  and  he,  as  it  were,  put  upon  himself  tasks  which  no  other  man  would  take 
by  way  of  making  amends  for  that  wrong.  That  is  the  kind  of  penance  which  one 
may  well  glory  in.  The  humility  of  his  fall  was  as  magnificent  as  his  pride.  3. 
Heroic,  enthusiastic  love  of  Christ.  This  filled  his  whole  soul.  And  he  felt, 
"  There  is  nothing  that  love  cannot  do."  The  deeper  the  love,  the  more  it  glodfies 
in  sacrifice.  ' '  God  commendeth  His  love  toward  os,"  <&c.  And  so  Paul  said,  "  Give 
me  the  hardest  work,  for  the  hardest  work  will  show  the  greatest  love."  4.  The 
feeling  that  in  doing  foundation-work  he  was  making  a  contribution  to  the  happi> 
ness  of  his  kind.  This  he  intimates  in  1.  Cor.  iii.  10.  Elsewhere  he  repeatedly 
speaks  of  sowing  and  not  reaping,  the  others  may  reap  where  he  has  sown.  He 
felt  that  he  was  making  the  way  easier  for  somebody  else  ;  that  he  was  bearing 
pain  that  others  might  not  have  pain  to  bear.  II.  Thb  lessons  that  Paul's 
EXAMPLE  TEACHES.  1.  That  there  is  to  be  a  consecration  of  men's  pride  in  work. 
Every  true  man  should  feel,  *'  I  bring  to  my  work  the  worth  that  is  in  it,  no  matter 
how  low  it  is.  I  am  doing  this  work."  False  pride  says  to  a  man,  "  Why  are  you 
bothering  yourself  with  these  trifles  ?  This  is  not  becoming  to  you.  You  are  a 
man  that  ought  to  come  up  higher."  If,  1800  years  ago  you  had  gone  to  Jerusalem, 
who  would  have  been  the  man  the  least  to  be  envied  there  ?  He  who  was  about  to 
be  led  out  to  crucifixion.  But  go  to  Jerusalem  to-day,  and  find  a  place  where  He 
put  His  foot,  and  a  milhon  pilgrims  from  every  nation  crowd  thither,  willing  to  bow 
down  and  kiss  that  place.  Why,  what  did  He  give  to  it  ?  Himself.  It  was  the 
manliness  and  divinity  of  the  Man,  it  was  the  soul-element  which  He  brought  to  it, 
that  consecrated  the  place,  and  made  it  a  shrine  for  the  eternities.  When  men 
consecrate  themselves  to  their  labour,  that  labour  is  no  more  ignominious.  The 
trouble  with  men  who  labour  at  disagreeable  work  is  that  while  the  work  is  mean, 
the  workman  is  meaner.  2.  That  there  should  be  a  spirit  of  benevolence  connected 
with  one's  work.  Men  who  are  doing  low  work  are  working  for  their  fellow-men; 
Do  you  suppose  the  builder  of  Eddystone  Lighthouse,  workmg  through  winter  and 
summer  to  lay  the  foundations  of  that  magniticent  structure,  never  thought,  "  how 
many  ships  coming  home  from  foreign  lands  and  bringing  the  husband,  the  son,  the 
lover,  wiU  run  safely  into  harbour  by  reason  of  this  work  that  I  am  now  doing  ? 
Let  men  who  are  working  in  life  think,  for  their  encouragement,  how  many  will 
probably  be  blessed  by  their  work.  When  the  cook  raises  the  bread  and  bakes  it, 
and  it  comes  out  of  the  oven,  should  she  think,  "  Oh,  those  dear  little  hungry 
children!  how  happy  it  will  make  them  alll  "  or  should  she  think,  "  Well,  now, 
my  mistress  cannot  say  but  that  I  am  the  smartest  cook  in  the  kitchen  "  ?  3. 
That  men,  as  Christians,  should  recognise  that  there  is  a  providence  that  supervises 
all  human  affairs.  If  they  reflect  upon  what  Christ  said — "  Not  a  sparrow  falls  to 
the  ground  without  your  Father's  notice  " — they  will  derive  a  comfort  from  that 
source  which  they  can  obtain  from  no  other.  Take  that  faith  into  your  disagree- 
able work,  and  say,  '•  I  am  serving  my  Lord  and  Christ,  and  His  providence  is 
ordaining  my  work."  "Lord,  wilt  Thou  receive  this  mixed  labour  of  mine?" 
Then  He  will  say  "  Yes ;  inasmuch  as  you  do  the  least  and  the  lowest  of  these 
duties,  I  accept  them."  Then  it  becomes  a  question  of  allegiance — of  love. 
Where  there  is  love,  it  can  transmute  everything  and  make  it  radiant.  4.  That 
immortahty  should  be  taken  into  account.  Eeflect  "  I  am  working  but  for  a  little 
time  here.  Ere  long  I  shall  be  translated,  and  then  the  last  shall  be  first  and  the  first 
shall  be  last.  Dives  was  seen  far  down,  and  the  beggar  was  seen  in  Abraham's 
bosom.  There  will  be  a  redistribution."  Why  is  it  that  in  circumstances  of  peril 
a  poor  ignorant  woman,  giving  her  life  for  others,  doing  what  others  would  not  do, 
becomes  immortal  ?  Grace  Darling,  who  has  saved  so  many  lives  at  the  risk  of 
her  own — what  was  it  that  gave  her  a  name  ?  It  was  that  she  heroically  performed 
an  unrequited  service  which  was  not  demanded  of  her.  Now,  in  this  great  world  of 
unrewarded  service,  do  you  suppose  God  forgets  ?    (H.  W.  Beecher.) 


OBAT.  XT.]  BOMANS.  721 

Ter  21.  Bat  as  It  la  written.  To  wbom  He  was  oot  spoken  of;  they  sliall  seei 
— Prophecy  and  the  mean*  of  it$  fulfilment : — This  ambition  of  the  apostle  was  the 
means  of  fulfilling  a  prophecy  with  respect  to  the  spread  of  the  gospel  in  heathen 
conntries.  Thus  it  is  that  God  fulfils  His  predictions  and  His  purposes.  He 
gives  His  people  an  earnest  desire  to  be  the  means  of  accomplishing  them  at  the 
moment  when  He  designs  their  accomplishment.  It  will  be  thus  that  the  gospel 
will  at  last  be  efFectually  carried  to  every  country  under  heaven.  It  is  thus  that 
modem  missionaries  have,  in  some  measure,  carried  the  gospel  to  the  heathen, 
and  although  the  slothfulness  of  the  people  of  Ood  in  former  ages  is  not  without 
blame,  it  is  becanse  the  time  to  fulfil  God's  predictions  to  the  nations  was  not  come 
that  a  like  ambition  to  that  of  Paul  was  not  found  more  generally  to  animate 
Christians.  Whenever  the  Lord  has  work  to  do,  He  raises  up  men  with  a  heart  to 
perform  it.  This,  however,  is  no  excuse  at  any  particular  time  for  indifference  or 
want  of  effort  to  spread  the  gospel.  {R.  Haldane.)  Missionary  toil: — I.  Its 
DrnicxniTiEB.  1.  Untried  ground.  2.  A  foundation  must  be  laid.  8.  Particular 
obststoles  removed,  &o.  II.  Its  enoooraoembnts.  1.  The  nature  of  the  gospel, 
2.  Its  actual  successes.  3.  The  faithful  promise  of  God.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Missions  : 
—1.  Thb  object  of  missionaby  zeal.  To  speak  of  Christ,  and  to  make  Christ 
known.  If  a  heathen  could  say,  "  I  am  a  man,  and  nothing  human  is  foreign 
to  me,"  how  much  more  should  our  hearts  burn,  when  we  are  told  that  the 
knowledge  of  Christ  is  at  present  limited  to  one-third  of  the  human  race  1  Surely 
this  is  an  object  sufficient  to  justify  missionary  efforts.  II.  The  ohabacteb  of 
mssiONABT  LAB0UB8.  To  go  forth  and  to  preach  the  gospel  of  Christ.  Leaving  it 
to  Mahomet  to  draw  the  sword  and  enforce  obedience,  for  the  weapons  of  our 
warfare  are  not  carnal,  our  appeal  is  not  to  secular  authority,  for  the  religion  of 
Christ  made  its  way  against  that  authority.  III.  The  pbomises  of  missionabt 
■TJCCESS.  We  can  appeal  to  "  It  is  written,"  and  I  should  hke  to  know  what 
nineteen  centuries  have  done  to  invalidate  Paul's  testimony.  IV.  The  extent  or 
uiBBioNABY  CLAIMS.  If  Jesus  lookcd  bcyond  His  conflicts  and  trials,  and  saw  of 
the  travail  of  His  soul,  can  we  be  indifferent  to  that  on  which  His  heart  was  set 
now  He  is  in  heaven  ?  If  He  anticipated  much  as  the  reward  of  His  labours, 
can  we  be  satisfied  that  He  should  receive  but  little  ?  Did  He  say,  "  I,  if  I  be 
lifted  np,  will  draw  all  men  unto  Me  "  ?  Shall  not  we  aim  to  lift  Him  up  by  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel,  and  say  to  perishing  men,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God, 
who  taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world  "  ?  {Jt.  C.  Dillon,  D.D. )  The  claims  of 
missions : — 1.  There  are  millions  still  who  have  not  heard  the  gospeL  2.  The 
gospel  is  not  only  adapted  to  their  case,  but  intended  for  them.  3.  The  obligation 
rests  on  us  to  send  it.  4.  The  successful  result  is  certain — predicted — exemplified. 
{J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 

Vers.  22-24.  For  which  canse  I  have  been  mnch  hindered  trom  coming  to 
yon. — Paul's  desire  to  visit  the  Roman  Church: — The  apostle  had  mentioned  in 
the  beginning  of  his  letter  this  desire  which  he  had  long  cherished  (chap.  1.  9-13). 
He  here  repeats  it.  The  cause  which  had  frustrated  its  accomplishment  was  the 
principle  mentioned  in  vers.  20-2L  New  openings  had  presented  themselves  in 
succession,  for  a  long  period,  *•  in  these  parts  " — Macedonia,  Achaia,  and  the 
surrounding  districts,  and  while  there  remained  a  spot  of  earth  which  had  not 
been  visited  by  the  gospel,  he  could  not  be  satisfied.  On  the  principle  of  preach- 
ing '*  where  Christ  was  not  yet  known,"  it  is  likely  he  would  not  have  thought  of 
Bome  had  there  been  no  "  region  beyond "  into  which  he  might  be  the  first  to 
carry  the  truth.  Even  Bome,  the  metropolis  of  the  world,  is  not  here  his 
primary  object.  It  is  only  secondary  and  by  the  way.  He  would  "  make  his 
journey  into  Spain,"  and  take  Italy  in  passing  (ver.  24).  Here  is — I.  Open 
HONESTY.  He  does  not  pretend  that  Bome  was  the  immediate,  far  less  the  sole, 
object  of  his  proposed  journey.  He  does  not,  for  the  sake  of  ingratiating  himself, 
make  more  of  the  believers  at  Bome  than  the  truth  warranted.  There  is  often 
great  danger  of  insincerity  arising  from  this  cause.  We  wish  to  impress  those  to 
whom  we  speak  or  write  with  their  holding  a  prominent  place  in  our  regards  ;  and 
we  tacitly  leave  them  to  think  that  we  have  come,  or  purpose  coming,  to  see 
them,  when  the  real  object  of  our  visit  is  different.  There  is  too  much  of  this 
kind  of  hypocritical  courtesy  even  amongst  Christians.  When  we  cannot  be 
courteous  but  at  the  expense  of  truth,  it  is  better  to  say  nothing  at  all.    H,  Eeal 

AFFECTION,     ACCOMPANIED     WITH     GENTJINB     POLITENESS — the     poUtonCSS     of     honeSt 

feeling.    It  appears — 1.  In  his  confidence  in  their  kindness  to  himself.    He  does 
VOL.  n.  46 


732^  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt. 

not  hesitate  to  express  his  assurance  that  they  would  help  him  forward.  Thia 
confidence  is  always  one  of  the  marks  of  true  friendship.  Whenever  we  feel  it 
necessary  to  make  many  apologies  for  presuming  to  request  or  to  expect  a  favour, 
it  is  a  proof  that  friendly  confidence  does  not  exist.  There  is,  however,  a  tact 
and  propriety  in  such  matters.  There  are  persons  who  have  a  knack  of  availing 
themselves  of  the  slightest  acquaintance  for  taxing  others  with  trouble  and 
expense.  But  still,  where  there  is  true  friendship,  there  will  be  mutual  freedom, 
and  the  fullest  confidence  that  it  will  be  a  pleasure  to  our  friend  to  serve  and  to 
help  us.  Then  Paul  had  friends  at  Borne  to  whom  he  could  have  said  as  he  does 
to  Philemon  (ver.  19),  and  with  regard  to  them  all,  he  confided  in  the  interest 
they  felt  about  the  cause  in  which  he  was  engaged.  This  is  a  ground  of  confi- 
dence on  which  ministers  of  the  gospel  may  often  have  to  presume  in  prosecuting 
their  work  (3  John  5-8).  2.  In  the  pleasure  with  which  he  anticipates  their 
company,  and  his  desire  to  be  with  them  for  as  long  a  time  as  his  ulterior  objects 
and  engagements  would  permit.  But  he  does  not  speak  of  being  fully  satisfied, 
or  even  simply  of  being  satisfied  with  their  company :  he  speaks  in  the  terms  of 
heartfelt  love,  and  yet  of  the  most  unexceptionable  courtesy — "  if  first  I  be  some- 
what filled."  He  knew  he  might  not  have  it  in  his  power  to  stay  so  long  as  his 
inclination  might  dictate ;  but  he  hoped  to  be  able  to  spend  some  short  time  with 
them.  In  many  cases,  there  is  little  pleasure,  and  less  profit,  in  merely  seeing 
individuals  for  an  hour  or  for  a  day.  The  most  valuable  characteristics  require 
time  to  elicit.  The  superficial  are  soonest  known,  because  there  is  least  to  know. 
If,  on  the  other  hand,  they  are  well-known  fiiends,  the  fondness  of  true  friendship 
always  produces  a  lingering  reluctance  to  part.  But  duty  ought  to  dictate  against 
inclination.  When  an  important  object  demands  our  presence  elsewhere,  however 
fascinating  or  improving  the  company  of  our  friends,  it  must  not  be  allowed  to 
detain  ns ;  nor  should  we,  in  such  cases,  attempt  to  detain  those  whom  we  might 
even  like  to  keep  permanently.  Conclusion  :  The  apostle  did  see  Rome.  But  it 
was  in  another  way  than  he  thought  of.  He  went  thither  as  "  a  prisoner  in  bonds." 
It  was  the  way  in  which  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  send  him :  and  he  himself  found  that  it 
contributed  to  the  benefit  of  his  cause  (Phil.  L  12-14).  Let  us,  in  all  our  schemes, 
while  we  trust  in  God  for  their  fulfilment,  trust  with  submission,  leaving  everything 
in  His  hands  as  the  Infinitely  Wise.  {R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  PauVs  desire  to 
visit  Rome: — I.  Its  occasion.  1.  Not  curiosity.  2.  But  because  Eome  was  to 
him — (1)  A  new  sphere  of  Christian  effort.  (2)  An  important  centre  of  Christian 
influence.  IL  Irs  intensity.  It  survives  hindrances,  time,  4c.  IH.  Its  bequ- 
liATioN :  By  other  claims  and  duties.  IV.  Its  anticipated  accomplishment  was — 
1.  Associated  with  wider  schemes  of  Christian  enterprise.  2.  Brightened  with  the 
hope  of  profitable  Christian  intercourse.  3.  Overruled  by  Providence.  {J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  A  good  purpose  : — L  May  be  long  hindebed  by  many  causes,  even  by 
success.  IL  Must  not  be  belinquished.  III.  Ought  to  be  cabeied  ©ut  as 
BOON  AS  Peovidenoe  OPENS  THE  WAY.  (Ibid.)  Desire : — My  brethren,  we  might 
well  pause  here  to  observe  a  feature  of  our  common  human  nature.  The  impulsive 
force  in  life  is  not  thought,  not  will,  but  desire.  Thought  sees  its  object,  will  gives 
orders  with  a  view  to  attaining  it ;  but  without  desire  thought  is  powerless,  and 
will,  in  the  operative  sense,  does  not  exist.  Desire  is  to  the  human  soul  what 
gravitation  is  to  the  heavenly  bodies.  Ascertain  the  object  of  a  man's  desire, 
and  you  know  the  direction  in  which  his  soul  is  moving.  Ascertain  the 
strength  of  a  man's  desire,  and  you  know  the  rapidity  of  the  soul's  movement. 
In  l£e  memorable  words  of  St.  Augustine,  "  Whithersoever  I  am  carried 
forward,  it  is  desire  that  carries  me."     (Canon  Liddon.)  The   unwearying 

teal  of  the  Apostle  Paul :  —  I.  Its  evidences.  1.  In  the  foundation  and 
direction  of  so  many  Christian  Churches.  2.  In  sacrificing  his  private  wishes  to 
his  great  work.  3.  In  imperilling  his  own  life  in  ministering  to  the  saints.  II. 
Its  buppobts.  The  consciousness — 1.  That  his  labours  were  successful.  2.  That 
he  was  sustained  by  the  prayers  of  others.  3.  That  he  could  commend  himself 
and  others  to  the  care  of  the  God  of  peace.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  True  missionary 
zeal  is — L  Unweabyinq.  1.  It  survives  hindrances.  2,  Desires  ever  to  extend  its 
sphere  of  operation.  II.  Peudent.  It — 1.  Proceeds  cautiously.  2.  First  dis- 
charging those  duties  which  are  most  imperative.  III.  Wise.  1.  It  does  not 
overlook  nearer  claims  in  its  desire  to  meet  those  which  are  more  distant.  2. 
Paul's  zeal  reached  to  Spain,  the  boundary  of  the  then  known  world — but  he 
would  not  pass  by  Eome.  IV.  Compbehensive.  He  does  not  forget  the  mother 
Church,  but  makes  his  new  spheres  of  labour  subservient  to  its  prosperity — 1.  By 


OBAP.  XY.]  ROMANS.  nS 

proofs  that  its  efforts  have  not  been  nnsaocessfaL  2.  By  material  help  in  tint  of 
need.  8.  By  the  happy  effect  which  the  examples  of  the  converted  heathen  might 
have  upon  the  careless  at  home.    (Ibid.) 

Vers.  25-27.  But  now  I  go  onto  Jemsalem  to  minister  nnto  the  saints. — 
Paul's  present  mission : — Paul  is  now  at  the  end  of  his  second  journey  to  Greece, 
and  at  Corinth  (chap.  zvi.  1,  23).  When  writing  to  Corinth,  his  Jerusalem 
journey  uncertain  (1  Cor.  xvi.  4).  Bomans,  therefore,  was  written  after  Corinthians. 
Duty  now  called  Paul  to  take  money  to  Jerusalem  rather  than  the  gospel  to  Borne. 
There  is  a  time  for  every  work,  and  everything  is  beautiful  in  its  season.  To  be 
faithful  in  littles  is  to  be  faithful  in  all.  Obedience  to  every  call  of  duty  learned 
in  the  school  of  Christ.  Paul's  visit  to  Jerusalem  was  fraught  with  danger,  yet 
was  of  the  deepest  importance,  viz.,  to  overcome  the  prejudices  of  Jewish  against 
Oentile  believers,  and  to  onite  both  more  closely  in  Christian  love.  Christian 
union  to  be  promoted  before  evangelising  new  countries  as  essential  to  success. 
This  mission  was  in  accordance  with  the  recommendation  of  the  council  of  Jeru- 
salem (Gal.  ii.  10).  Ministering  to  the  poor  not  beneath  an  apostle,  as  it  was  not 
beneath  the  apostle's  Master.  Often  the  best  way  to  the  heart  is  to  help  with  the 
hand,  and  the  cost  of  sympathy  is  the  best  proof  of  its  sincerity.  What  Paul 
could  not  give  himself,  he  moved  others  to  give.  A  double  benefit  is  conferred  in 
exciting  the  liberality  of  others.  The  giver  and  the  receiver  are  both  blessed 
(Acts  II,  35  ;  2  Cor.  ii.  10-14).  (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Liberality  to  the  poor  : — 
1.  Is  a  Christian  duty.  2.  Should  be  a  pleasure.  8.  May  be  a  debt  of  justice. 
4.  Is  always  a  blessing.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  True  Christian  zeal  is  ready — 1.  To 
go  anywhere.  2.  To  engage  in  every  good  work.  (Ibid.)  Liberality : — To 
dispense  our  wealth  liberally  is  the  best  way  to  preserve  it  and  to  continue  masters 
thereof ;  what  we  give  is  not  thrown  away  but  saved  from  danger ;  while  we  detain 
it  at  home  (as  it  seems  to  us)  it  really  is  abroad  and  at  adventures  ;  it  is  out  at 
sea,  sailing  perilously  in  storms,  near  rocks  and  shelves,  amongst  pirates ;  nor  can 
it  ever  be  safe  till  it  is  brought  into  this  port  or  insured  this  way ;  when  we 
have  bestowed  it  on  the  poor,  then  we  have  lodged  it  in  unquestionable  safety,  in 
a  place  where  no  rapine,  no  deceit,  no  mishap,  no  corruption  can  ever  by  any 
means  come  at  it.  All  our  doors  and  bars,  all  our  forces  and  guards,  sJl  the 
circumspection  and  vigilancy  we  can  use,  are  no  defence  or  security  at  all  in 
comparison  to  this  disposal  thereof  :  the  poor  man's  stomach  is  a  granary  for  our 
com  which  never  can  be  eihausted ;  the  poor  man's  back  is  a  wardrobe  for  our 
clothes  which  never  can  be  pillaged;  the  poor  man's  pocket  is  a  bank  for  our 
money  which  never  can  disappoint  or  deceive  us ;  all  the  rich  traders  in  the  world 
may  decay  and  break,  bat  the  poor  man  can  never  fail  except  God  Himself  turn 
bankrupt ;  for  what  we  give  to  the  poor,  we  deliver  and  intrust  in  His  hands,  out 
of  which  no  force  can  wring  it,  no  craft  can  filch ;  it  is  laid  up  in  heaven,  whither 
no  thief  can  climb ;  where  no  moth  or  rust  doth  abide.  In  despite  of  all  the 
fortune,  of  all  the  might,  of  aJl  the  malice  in  the  world,  the  liberal  man  will  ever 
be  rich,  for  God's  providence  is  his  estate,  God's  wisdom  and  power  are  his 
defence ;  God's  love  and  favour  are  his  reward ;  God's  Word  is  his  assurance,  who 
hath  said  it,  that  "  he  which  giveth  to  the  poor,  shall  not  lack  " ;  no  vicissitude  of 
things  therefore  can  surprise  or  find  him  unfurnished  ;  no  disaster  can  impoverish 
him,  no  adversity  can  overwhelm  him ;  he  hath  a  certain  reserve  against  all 
times  and  occasions :  he  that  •'  deviseth  liberal  things,  by  liberal  things  shall  he 
stand,"  saith  the  prophet.  (J.  Barrow.)  Liberality  and  its  opposite: — The 
great  ocean  is  in  a  constant  state  of  evaporation.  It  gives  back  what  it  receives, 
and  sends  its  waters  into  mists,  to  gather  into  clouds,  and  so  there  is  rain  in  the 
fields,  and  storm  on  the  mountain,  and  beauty  everywhere.  But  there  are  men  who 
do  not  believe  in  evaporation.  They  get  all  they  can,  and  keep  all  they  get,  and 
BO  are  not  fertilisers,  but  only  miasmatic  pools.  Consecration  of  carnal  things  :—- 
A  missionary  of  the  China  Inland  Mission  says,  "  There  is  one  gentleman  down  in 
the  southern  part  of  my  province,  a  man  of  wealth  among  the  Chinese,  a  man  of 
landed  property,  but  one  who  considers  the  whole  of  his  time  and  influence  and 
means  must,  as  a  matter  of  course,  be  at  the  feet  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  We  never 
told  him  that.  He  said,  •  Why,  the  Lord  has  redeemed  me ;  He  shed  His  blood, 
He  spared  nothing  in  working  out  my  redemption ;  therefore  I  consider  that 
granary  of  mine,  full  of  rice,  is  for  the  use  of  the  brothers  and  sisters  if  they  need 
it.'"  (China's  Millions.)  For  It  hath  pleased  them  of  Macedonia  and 
Achala  to  make  a  certain  contribution  for  the  poor  saints. — Collection*  in  ths 


TSl  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  XT.' 

Church : — I.  How  thbt  ought  to  bb  beqabded.  1.  As  a  service  doe  on  aeeoont 
of  spiritaal  benefits  received.  2.  Or  as  an  expression  of  Christian  love  to  tht 
needy.  II.  How  ouoht  thbt  to  bb  suppobted?  1.  Not  of  necessity,  or  by  con- 
Btraint.  2.  But — (1)  As  a  pleasure.  (2)  As  a  fruit  of  grace  acceptable  to  God. 
(/.  Lyth,  D.D.)  ColUctiom  for  the  poor : — After  the  breaking  op  of  the  Christian 
community  at  Jerasalem  on  the  martyrdom  of  Stephen,  those  who  remaiued  wer* 
much  persecuted,  and  became  poor.  The  apostle  was  much  concerned  about  them, 
and  exhorted  the  Churches  at  Corinth,  Galatia,  Thessalonica,  and  Philippi  to  make 
a  collection  In  their  behalf,  which  might  be  sent  by  the  hand  of  trustworthy 
persons,  he  also  promising  to  accompany  them.  It  was  when  on  that  mission  he 
was  apprehended.  The  collection — I.  Was  a  niJXTjver.  27).  The  gospel  came 
through  a  Jewish  channel,  and  from  Jerusalem.  We  cannot  say  of  what  service 
the  Christian  poor  have  been  to  the  cause  of  truth  and  to  ourselves.  God  has 
heard  their  prayers,  blessed  their  labours  in  former  days,  and  we  are  their  debtors. 
Lei  not  our  alms  be  made  in  the  spirit  of  mere  pity,  but  under  a  sense  of  obliga- 
tion. "  He  that  giveth  to  the  poor  lendeth  to  the  Lord."  II.  Was  to  bb  ststem- 
ATICALLT  made  (1  Cor.  zvl.).  It  was  some  time  after  the  contribution  was  sent  to 
Jerusalem,  but  the  Churches  stored  weekly.  Sunday  was  the  day  of  thanksgiving 
for  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  and  it  was  meet  that  each  Christian  should  honoor 
the  day  by  consecrating  his  gilt  to  the  Lord.  This  is  the  only  scriptural  method  of 
giving.  The  portion  is  thoughtfully  laid  aside  for  the  service  of  God,  and  brings  a 
blessing  on  the  giver.  lU.  Was  to  be  liiBESALLV  akd  cHEBSFULiiT  hade.  "  GK)d 
loveth  a  cheerful  giver."  No  gift  is  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God  except  it 
comes  from  the  heart.  To  give  from  custom  or  from  shame  is  not  an  act  of 
worship.  Our  compassion  for  those  in  want  excites  the  heart  to  give  largely  and 
lovingly.  IV.  Was  to  be  made  fob  the  qijOby  of  God  (2  Cor.  ix.).  The  thanks- 
giving of  the  poor  saints  at  Jerusalem  was  twofold — for  relief  in  their  poverty,  but 
principally  because  the  gospel  was  bearing  fruit  in  other  lands.  V.  Was  to  bbab 
THB  STAMP  OF  Jesus.  He,  though  rich,  became  poor  for  our  sakes.  As  He,  so  we 
must  endeavour  to  enrich  others.     {Weekly  Pulpit.)  The  claims  of  poor  sainti 

are — 1.  Founded  in  the  ordinations  of  Providence.  2.  Strengthened  by  the  ties  of 
■Christian  brotherhood.  3.  Stronger  than  national  prejudice.  4.  Should  be  met 
"with  pleasure.     {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  poor  stand  in  the  place  of  Christ: — 

itlacaulay,  in  his  essay  on  Milton,  says — "  Ariosto  tells  a  story  of  a  fairy  who,  by 
some  mysterious  law  of  her  nature,  was  condemned  to  appear  at  certain  seasons 
in  the  form  of  a  foul,  poisonous  snake.  Those  who  injured  her  during  the  period 
^f  her  disguise  were  for  ever  excluded  from  participation  in  the  blessings  which 
«he  bestowed.  But  to  those  who,  in  spite  of  her  loathsome  aspect,  pitied  and  pro- 
tected her,  she  afterward  revealed  herself  in  the  beautiful  and  celestial  form 
■which  was  natural  to  her,  accompanied  their  steps,  granted  all  their  wishes,  filled 
their  houses  with  wealth,  made  them  happy  in  love  and  victorious  in  war."  So 
what  is  done  to  Christ  in  His  disguised  and  lowly  form,  of  the  poor  and  sick  of 
earth,  is  a  test  of  our  character  and  our  love,  and  will  be  rewarded  by  Him  when 
He  comes  in  His  glory.  Retrenchment  must  not  begin  at  the  house  of  God  : — A 
Christian  who  had  made  heavy  losses  asked  his  pastor  about  the  missionary 
collection.  He  said,  "  I  have  made  it  already ;  but,  knowing  that  you  had 
been  a  great  loser  this  year,  I  did  not  think  it  proper  to  call  upon 
you  for  your  usual  donation."  — "  My  dear  sir,"  replied  the  gentleman, 
"  it  is  very  true  that  I  have  suffered  great  losses,  and  must  be  prudent 
in  my  expenditures ;  but  retrenchment  must  not  begin  at  the  house  of  God." 
If  the  Gentiles  have  been  made  partakers  of  their  spiritual  things,  their  duty  is 
also  to  minister  unto  them  in  carnal  things. — Our  ohligations  to  the  Jews : — I.  Oob 
OBLIGATIONS  TO  THE  Jews.  We  have  received  "  of  their  spiritual  things."  1.  With 
the  patriarch  Abraham  was  made  that  covenant,  on  the  footing  of  which  every 
blessing  that  we  hope  for,  in  time  or  eternity,  is  secured  to  us.  But  Abraham  has 
further  conferred  a  mass  of  obligations  upon  us,  in  that  he  illustrated  the  life  of  faith 
in  his  conduct.  Who  doubts  what  is  the  duty  of  the  Christian,  when  he  sees  what  the 
father  of  the  faithful  did  ?  2,  From  Moses  we  had  the  law,  that  law  which  showa 
us  our  need  of  the  covenant,  and  shuts  us  up  to  it.  When  we  come  to  God  and  lay 
hold  of  this  covenant,  the  same  law,  which  is  a  schoolnraster  to  bring  us  to  Christ, 
becomes  a  light  to  our  feet,  and  a  lamp  to  our  paths.  3.  Take  the  prophets,  and 
see  what  they  have  given  us,  in  the  shape  of  piomises  of  Christ  and  spiritual 
blessings.  4.  Who  reads  the  Psalms  and  does  not  feel  a  sense  of  obligation  to 
David,  that  he  ever  onfolded  so  all  the  workings  of  his  own  heart  for  oar  edification 


CBAV.  IT.]  ROMAN'S.  nS 

•nd  for  oar  comfort?  6.  Remember  the  apostles,  who  exhibited  the  Saviour,  and 
Uid  down  their  lives  that  we  might  know  Him,  and  enjoy  all  the  blessings  of  the 
gospel,  Now  the  text  sajs  that  we  have  received  their  spiritual  things,  and  that, 
oonaeqaently,  we  are  their  debtors.  Perhaps  yon  will  say,  they  were  far  distant ; 
we  were  indebted  to  them,  bat  what  have  the  Jews  of  the  present  day  done  unto  us? 
Bat  Qod  blessed  the  Jewish  nation  in  spite  of  all  their  rebellion,  for  Abraham's  sake, 
and  preserved  a  light  onto  Judah  for  a  thousand  years  for  David's  sake  i  Well, 
then,  if  He,  at  the  distance  of  so  many  centuries  regarded  Abraham,  and  David, 
BnA  vouchsafed  to  the  most  nnworthy  persons  blessings  for  tbeir  sakes,  surely  let 
not  as  talk  of  the  unworthiness  of  the  existing  generation,  but  remember  our  obliga- 
tions to  the  generations  that  are  past.  But  we  are  expressly  told  that  the  Jews  are 
beloved  of  God  for  their  fathers'  sake ;  shall  they  not,  then,  be  beloved  by  us  for 
their  fathers'  sake  t  II.  The  betdbn  wb  snouiiD  bendeb  to  theh.  1.  To  seek  for 
oorselves  those  blessings  which  they  have  transmitted  to  as  (Heb.  ii.  3,  4).  In 
embracing  the  Saviour,  and  giving  ourselves  up  to  Him  as  Abraham  did  in  a  life  of 
faith,  and  as  all  the  patriarchs,  and  prophets,  and  apostles  did.  2.  To  make  them 
partakers  of  the  blessings  which  yoa  yourselves  have  received.  If  the  apostles 
ware  debtors  to  the  Gentiles,  much  more  are  we  debtors  to  the  Jews.  The  Gentiles 
had  done  nothing  for  them ;  the  Jews  have  done  everything  for  us  (chap.  xi.  30-31). 
Conclusion :  1.  Now,  suppose  there  were  famine,  and  every  one  of  you  had  given  to 
his  steward  a  large  sum  of  money,  to  supply  the  wants  of  the  sick  and  dying,  and 
instead  he  wasted  the  money  on  himself,  who  would  not  be  filled  with  indignation  ? 
Oh,  let  conscience  speak,  and  it  will  show  you  that  you  are  much  bound  to  strive 
for  the  salvation  of  the  Jews,  as  well  as  for  your  own  ;  and  if  you  do  not  you  are 
a  robber.  2.  But  some,  perhaps,  may  say,  the  time  is  not  come.  Where  has  God 
told  yon  that  ?  What  have  you  to  do  with  the  times  and  seasons  ?  Did  not  the 
apostles  search  and  seek  them  out  at  the  peril  of  their  hves  ?  3.  But  they  won't 
receive  it;  they  are  hardened.  Pray,  tell  me  what  you  yourselves  were?  And 
whose  fault  is  it  ?  Ours,  who  have  treated  them  with  such  contempt.  What  would 
yoa  have  been  if  they  had  treated  you  as  you  have  treated  them  T  4.  Do  you  ask. 
How  shall  I  do  it  ?  In  any  way  you  can — by  prayer,  by  sending  them  instruction, 
by  giving  them  the  Bible.  (C  Simeon,  M.A.)  MinUtration  to  the  need  of  thoie 
who  have  contributed  to  our  spiritual  benefit  not  an  act  of  generosity  but  of  debt  ;— 
I.  The  benefits  BECErvED.  1.  Spiritual  things.  2.  Of  infinite  value.  3.  Of 
enduring  importance.  U.  The  payment  bequibed.  1.  Carnal  things.  2.  Worth- 
less in  comparison,  and  perishable  in  their  nature.  lU.  The  duty  implied.  A 
duty  of — 1.  Love.  2.  Gratitude.  3.  Justice.  IV.  The  bpibit  in  which  it  should 
BS  pxBFOBMED.  With  pleasure  as  the  expression  of  grateful  feeling  to  man  and 
God.  (J.  Lytk,  D.D.)  The  duty  of  spiritual  and  carnal  beneficence : — This 
comparison  between  spiritual  and  carnal  things  is  still  more  distinctly  made  in 
1  Cor.  ix.  11 — where  the  apostle  speaks  of  the  right  which  he  and  Barnabas  had 
earned  to  a  maintenance  from  their  hands.  In  this  matter,  too,  there  is  great  room 
for  the  condemnation  of  professing  Christians — because  of  their  gross  practical 
insensibility  to  the  rule  of  equity  here  laid  down.  It  is  in  virtue  of  this  that  the 
instructors  even  of  large  and  opulent  congregations,  have  often  so  parsimonious  an 
allowance  doled  out  to  them  ;  and  if  so  wretched  a  proportion  of  their  own  carnal 
be  given  in  return  for  spiritual  things  to  themselves,  we  are  not  to  wonder  at  the 
still  more  paltry  and  inadequate  contributions  which  are  made  by  them  for  the 
spiritual  things  of  others.  The  expense  of  all  missionary  schemes  and  enterprises 
put  together,  a  mere  scantling  of  the  wealth  of  all  Christendom,  argues  it  to  be 
still  a  day  of  exceeding  small  things — a  lesson  still  more  forcibly  held  out  to  us  by 
the  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  at  our  own  doors  who  are  perishing  for  lack  of 
knowledge.  There  is  a  carnal  as  well  as  a  spiritual  benevolence.  That  the 
oamal  benevolence  makes  some  respectable  head  against  the  carnal  selfishness  of 
our  nature,  is  evinced  by  the  fact  that  so  very  few  are  ever  known  to  die  of  actual 
starvation.  That  the  spiritual  benevolence  falls  miserably  behind  the  other,  is 
evinced  by  the  fact  of  those  millions  more  in  our  empire,  who,  purely  from  want  of 
the  churches  which  ought  to  be  built,  and  of  ministers  who  ought  to  be  maintained 
for  them,  are  left  to  wander  all  their  days  beyond  the  pale  of  gospel  ordinances — 
and  so  to  live  in  guilt  and  die  in  utter  darkness.  Verily  in  such  a  contemplation  it 
might  well  be  said  even  of  this  professing  age — Are  ye  not  yet  altogether  carnal  ? 
{T.  Chalmers,  D.D.) 

Yei.  29.  And  I  am  sure  that,  when  I  come  unto  yon,  I  shall  come  in  the  falnesg 


726  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cOAP.  XT, 

of  the  blessing  of  the  gospel  of  Christ — TJie  fulness  of  the  blessing  of  the  gospel 
of  Christ : — Separation  is  one  of  the  evil  fruits  of  sin.  God  loves  union.  When 
He  created  Adam  He  bound  together  the  whole  family  of  man  in  one  common  link. 
Hence  it  is  one  great  end  of  the  gospel  to  restore  this  union,  which  was  one  leading 
Bubjectin  the  Saviour's  intercessory  prayer  (John  xvii.).  Christianity  imparts  to  us 
^e  love  of  one  common  God  and  Saviour,  and  infuses  into  all  one  common  spirit. 
St  Paul  had  imbibed  largely  of  this  spirit.  He  knew  what  it  was  to  feel  communion 
of  spirit  even  in  the  absence  of  all  personal  knowledge.  Such  was  the  case  with 
regard  to  the  Church  at  Eome  (chap.  i.  8,  xv.  22,  29).  Note — I.  The  subject  op 
THE  apostle's  confidence.  To  carry  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation  to  those  who  are 
altogether  ignorant  of  them — this  might  seem  to  be  one  sense  in  which  the  minister 
of  Christ  might  be  said  to  "  come  in  the  fulness  of  the  blessing  of  the  gospel  of 
Christ."  Nor,  perhaps,  is  this  application  wholly  to  be  excluded.  If  he  chiefly 
refers  here  to  his  ministry  within  the  Church,  he  yet  might  include  the  blessing  of 
adding  to  its  numbers  from  without.  And  certainly  the  conversion  of  sinners  must 
be  one  great  blessing  for  which  we  are  to  look  as  the  end  of  our  work.  Tet  it  is  of 
the  ministry  to  the  saints  that  Paul  more  expressly  speaks.  Hence,  observe  that 
this  expectation  will  be  realised — 1.  If  Christ  should  become  more  precious  to  the 
flock.  "  To  you  that  believe  He  is  precious."  All  you  want  is  treasured  up  in  Him. 
We  come,  then,  "  in  the  fulness  of  the  blessing  of  the  gospel  of  Christ,"  if  the 
fruit  of  our  ministry  be  to  make  Him  to  dwell  in  our  thoughts  and  hearts — if  it  be 
to  set  £[im  always  before  us  in  all  things,  and  to  do  all  things  in  His  name.  2.  If 
the  Holy  Ghost  in  all  His  operations  should  be  more  honoured  by  us.  We  are 
placed  under  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit.  He  is  our  teacher,  sanctifier,  pre- 
server; and  our  progress  must  be  in  proportion  as  we  are  taught  by  and  made 
submissive  to  Him.  "  If  we  live  in  the  Spirit,  let  us  also  walk  in  the  Spirit " ;  and 
then  we  "  shall  come  in  the  fulness,"  &o.  3.  If  the  ordinances  of  the  Church,  as 
such,  should  be  more  valued  by  us,  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  head  of  His  Church,  has 
provided  for  its  edification.  It  is  by  submitting  to  His  ways,  and  not  walking  in 
our  own,  that  we  may  hope  to  be  buUt  up  in  holy  things.  If  we  come  to  them  not 
as  mere  forms,  but  as  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God,  then  shall  we  have 
just  cause  to  adopt  the  language  of  the  text.  4.  If  Christ  shall  be  more  magnified 
by  us.  This  will  be  in  proportion  as  we  are  transformed  into  the  image  of  Christ, 
and  are  able  to  manifest  His  holy  character.  To  have  the  mind  that  was  in  Christ, 
to  make  Him  the  centre  around  which  we  move,  is  included  in  "  the  fulness  of  the 
blessing  of  the  gospel  of  Christ."  II.  The  gboonds  on  which  he  bests  his  oonpi- 
dencb.  1.  Not  any  power  or  wisdom  in  himself.  These  weapons  he  knew  well  are 
too  weak  to  be  employed  in  so  great  a  warfare.  2.  Something  personal,  however, 
might  have  had  to  do  with  it — e.g.,  (1)  His  own  conviction  of  the  great  truths 
which  he  ministered.  He  could  say,  "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed,"  Ac.  Now, 
this  must  unquestionably  tend  to  engender  confidence  as  to  the  success  of  the 
ministry,  when  we  can  speak  of  those  things  which  we  know  of  a  truth  in  our  own 
souls.  (2)  His  consciousness  of  sincerity,  and  purity  of  intention  (2  Cor.  ii.  17, 
iv.  7).  It  inspires  confidence  to  feel  that  it  is  at  no  partial  exhibition  of  God's 
trulii  we  aim ;  no  favourite  doctrine,  no  select  portions,  but  the  whole  of  God's 
revealed  counsel  so  far  as  He  teaches  it  to  ns.  3.  These,  however,  after  all,  may  be 
termed  rather  auxiliaries  of  the  apostle's  confidence  than  its  foundation;  the 
foundation  of  it  is  doubtless  to  be  found  primarily,  in  the  promised  blessing  of  God, 
and  the  presence  of  Christ  in  all  His  ordinances.  "  Paul  may  plant,  and  Apollos 
water,  but  God  giveth  the  increase."  {W.  Dodsworth,  A.M.)  The  fulness  of  the 
blessing  of  the  gospel  of  Christ : — I.  The  natube  of  these  blessings — 1.  Spintnal 
2.  Undeserved.  3.  Blessings  of  peace.  II.  Theib  abundance  in  their — 1.  Variety. 
2.  Supply.  3.  SufiSciency  for  all,  in  this  life  and  the  next.  HI.  Thbib  fbeb 
dispensation.  1.  To  saints.  2.  To  sinners.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  fulness  of 
gospel  blessing  : — That  was  a  privileged  man  who  could  say  this.  Did  he  do  so  in 
the  confidence  of  apostolic  power,  in  the  strength  of  some  special  Divine  mission  ? 
I  think  not.  There  are  many  who  carry  with  them  their  own  atmosphere,  radiators 
of  holiness,  overflowing  with  affection  and  full  of  heaven,  whom  you  cannot  be  near 
and  not  feel  that  "  a  virtue  goes  out  of  them  "  ;  their  very  presence  is  a  benediction. 
And  those  are  the  same  men  who  are  lowly  enough  to  confess  the  power,  not  their 
own,  but  Christ's.  But  who  are  they  ?  Those  who  live  so  near  to  God  that  they 
are  always  breathing  in  the  Divine ;  and  such  was  Paul.  Observe  these  words  in 
their  series  and  their  climax.  I.  Cheist.  And  in  His  holy  anointing  is  all  which 
jTou  eaa  ever  want  for  time  or  for  eternity.    A  ransom  paid,  a  life  hidden,  a  friend 


CHAP.  XV.]  ROMANS.  727 

at  the  throne,  a  brother  at  the  side ;  all  love,  and  all  loveliness.  II.  The  aosPEL. 
For  you,  poor  miserable  sinner,  He  died.  He  has  "  loved  you  with  an  everlasting 
love," — between  you  and  heaven,  between  you  and  God,  there  is  no  barrier. 
III.  The  blessino  op  the  go8i?el  of  Christ.  1.  You  are  at  peace.  You  know  it 
in  your  heart's  deep  secret  places  that  you  are  safe.  2.  You  shall  serve  Him,  see 
Him,  be  like  Him,  enjoy  Him  for  ever,  3.  And  your  forgiveness  shall  become  your 
holiness.  He  is  in  you,  and  you  in  Him,  by  Uving  union.  Therefore  "  as  He  is,  so 
shall  you  be  in  this  world."  4.  You  shall  be  blessed  and  be  a  blessing.  lY.  Thb 
FULNESS  OF  THE  BLESSINO  OF  THE  oospEL  OF  Chbist.  It  is  all  done.  No  fact  in 
history  more  sure,  more  complete.  The  heavens  are  not  complete  ;  the  angels  are 
not  perfect.  But  His  work  and  His  people  are.  An  eternity  of  happiness — of 
usefulness,  and  of  God.  Conclusion  :  1.  Do  not  be  afraid  of  a  full,  free  gospel.  It 
will  neither  make  you  presumptuous  nor  indolent.  Nothing  humbles  like  being 
loved.  And  how  shall  a  man  conquer  his  sins,  and  do  good  works,  if  he  have  not 
a  motive?  What  motive  is  strong  enough  but  the  love  of  God?  2.  Therefore, 
let  me  take  care  to  preach,  and  you  to  receive,  a  fuU  gospel.  Not  half  fear  and  half 
hope ;  not  half  seU  and  half  Christ ;  not  a  partial  pardon ;  not  a  change  which  is 
to  come  ;  not  a  possible  heaven.  3.  Now,  when  we  meet,  we  are  to  come  together 
with  this  "  blessing."  Woe  to  me  if  I  do  not  so  preach  as  to  bring  '*  this  fulnesa 
of  the  blessing  "  to  you  1  And  woe  to  you  if  you  do  not  so  pray  as  to  briug  it  to 
me  I  Very  great  is  my  privilege  to  preach  it,  and  very  large  wiU  be  your  loss,  if, 
from  prejudice,  or  fear,  or  unbehef,  or  Satan's  wiles,  or  men's  false  teaching,  you 
refuse  it,  or  add  to  it  conditions  which  God  has  never  placed — or  abate  one  iuta 
from  it.  4.  And  to  one  another  you  are  to  be  a  "  blessing."  When  you  go  to  a 
man,  and  try  to  speak  faithfully  to  him,  when  you  are  teaching  your  child,  when 
you  engage  in  some  work  of  mercy,  or  in  each  day's  common  converse,  or  recognise 
the  promise.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  fulness  of  the  blessing  : — A  doctor  may 
come  with  healing  or  with  failure,  because  his  remedies  are  fallible.  A  statesman 
may  come  with  progress  or  retrogression,  because  his  measures  are  only  faUible ; 
but  a  servant  of  Christ  comes  with  nothing  but  blessing.  Indeed,  the  house  of  God 
is  the  one  place  on  earth  where  blessing  abounds  always.  The  home  may  be 
miserable ;  business  disappointing ;  the  Senate  House  the  scene  of  turmoil ;  but  in 
the  house  of  God  there  broods  unruffled  peace.  Blessedness  is  the  watermark  of 
Christianity,  and  just  as  you  know  a  five-pound  note  by  the  watermarks  upon  it,  so 
you  will  know  the  message,  as  to  whether  it  is  Divine,  by  this :  it  makes  men 
blessed.  Its  morality  is  the  high  road  to  blessedness.  The  life  of  its  Founder  ia 
the  blessed  life.  His  death  leads  to  man's  reconciUation  with  God.  His  resurrec- 
tion tells  as  that  man's  last  enemy  is  destroyed.  Its  message  is  well  called  a 
gospel.  I.  It  IS  A  oebtaim  blessino.  1.  Because  the  messenger  is  sent  of  God. 
God  can  make  all  things  sure ;  not  man,  but  God.  Paul  had  often  said  to  God, 
"  0  Lord,  let  me  preach  the  gospel  at  Bome,"  and  God  at  length  heard  his  prayers ; 
bat  what  a  strange  answer  it  was !  But  all  through  life  he  had  been  led  to  see  that 
the  God  who  had  called  him  to  that  work  of  the  ministry  would  also  show  him 
when  and  where  he  was  to  carry  on  the  ministry.  Now  that — (1)  Helps  the  hearer. 
There  is  a  communication  from  heaven;  it  comes  through  the  man — very  imperfect, 
but  the  trappings  of  the  messenger  must  never  make  us  forget  his  Divine  message. 
(2)  It  helps  the  speaker.  He  is  taken  away  from  man ;  he  breaks  through  the 
ensnaring  influences  of  the  sense,  and  he  sees  nothing,  feels  nothing  but  God  and 
the  souls  of  men.  2.  When  the  people  are  prepared  to  receive  the  message.  There 
is  a  vital  difference  between  a  prepared  and  an  unprepared  people.  You  may  have 
the  best  seed  in  the  world,  but  unless  you  choose  carefully  the  best  soil  you  will  not 
get  the  best  fruit.  There  is  a  mysterious  power  of  self-choosing  in  every  one, 
which  enables  men  to  resist  all  appeals.  Vain,  then,  are  all  our  reasonings  and 
pleadings.  They  are  showers  on  a  rock,  sunlight  on  a  barren  desert.  II.  A 
FULL  BLESSING.  There  is — 1.  The  fulness  of  giving  that  comes  from  the  Divine 
love  to  us.  To  all  things  else  there  is  a  hmit,  and  it  is  very  difficult  for  us  to  rise 
to  the  conception  of  a  Being  whose  power  is  illimitable.  We  see  suggestions  of  it 
in  the  sky,  the  rolling  prairie,  and  the  immense  sea.  Now,  the  same  God  rules  in 
grace  as  in  Nature  ;  and  in  His  dealings  with  the  spirits  of  men  we  may  expect  He 
will  exercise  the  same  largeness.  And  we  are  not  disappointed.  Indeed,  the  great- 
ness of  the  gospel  baffles  many.  They  measure  the  Infinite  Eeason,  love,  and 
plans  by  the  littleness  of  their  own ;  and  when  they  find  themselves  confronted  by 
the  incarnation,  deity,  atonement,  and  resurrection  of  Christ,  they  find  the  greatness 
and  the  glory  too  much  for  their  faith.    Bat  so  it  should  not  be  with  as.    It  is  said 


728  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cmr.  XT. 

that  the  Highlanders  who  dwell  among  the  rocky  fastnesses  get  a  strength  and 
heroism  which  do  not  come  oat  of  the  plain.  It  is  so  in  spiritual  things.  Her* 
the  air  is  keen.  The  mountain  solitudes  of  truth  are  trodden  bj  few ;  but  when 
onoe  we  have  stood  on  those  glorious  heights  we  know  Qod  as  we  have  never  known 
Him  before.  But  just  as  in  the  mountain  regions  there  will  be  here  and  there  a 
little  oh^et  where  the  sun  rests  in  quiet  and  cheering  warmth,  so  the  truth  of  God 
Bubdivides  itself,  and  rests  on  every  converted  heart.  2.  The  ifulness  of  the  human 
reception.  On  the  Divine  side  there  is  love  given  to  us ;  on  the  human  side  there 
is  faith  receiving  God's  gifts.  "  Not  the  hearer  only  of  the  Word."  Oh,  how  often 
we  stop  here  1  We  think  that  a  ministry  is  successful  when  numbers  of  attentive 
hearers  are  drawn  to  hear  the  word ;  and  this  is  so  far  a  great  gain.  But  pews  may 
be  full,  and  yet  hearts  may  be  empty.  What  we  must  pray  for  is  not  that  these 
seats  may  be  full  only,  but  our  souls  also.  The  whole  question  of  our  having  a  full 
blessing  or  of  having  half  or  none  hangs  upon  our  faith.  It  is  not  faith  in  oar 
minister,  in  one  another,  in  this  building,  and  in  these  outward  services.  These, 
DO  doubt,  are  all  helpful  gifts,  but  our  great  need  is  a  full  faith  in  Christ.  {S. 
Pearson,  M.A.)  Thefulnest  of  the  gospel: — I.  In  what  it  consists.  In — 1.  A 
full  Christ  for  empty  sinners.  2.  A  fall  salvation  for  lost  sinners.  3.  A  full 
assurance  for  doubting  sinners.  4.  A  full  restoration  for  fallen  sinners.  5.  A  full 
comfort  for  sorrowful  sinners.  6.  Fulness  of  food  for  huogiy  sinners.  7.  Fulnesa 
of  love,  joy,  hope,  peace  for  all.  II.  What  wb  abb  to  do  with  it.  1.  Believe  it. 
2.  Beceive  it.  3.  Enjoy  it.  4.  Live  it.  5.  Impart  it.  6.  Die  with  it  in  our  hearts 
and  on  our  tongues.  (Bp.  Villiers.)  The  blessings  of  the  gospel : — I.  Thb  oospel 
ORiGiKATES  FRou  A  souBCE  07  8UPBEMS  ELEVATION.  1.  Men  form  their  opinions  of 
existing  systems  by  referring  to  the  character  of  their  founders.  The  absence,  e.g.,  of 
dignity  and  worth  in  the  founders  of  systems,  is  always  converted  into  an  argument 
against  the  principles  they  have  propounded ;  and  vice  versd.  This  mode  of 
reasoning  is,  of  course,  liable  to  abuse,  but  if  it  be  applied  aright  to  the  gospel  and 
its  Founder,  it  will  be  discovered  as  possessing  every  claim  on  reverence,  admiration, 
and  love.  To  Christ  the  gospel  is  indebted  for  its  existence ;  and  hence  in  the  text 
the  association  of  His  name.  Christ  unfolded  its  promises  and  principles,  estab- 
lished its  laws,  performed  its  confirmatory  miracles,  bestowed  its  efficacy,  and  oon« 
Btituted  those  arrangements  by  which  it  was  to  be  propagated  in  the  world. 
2.  There  are  truths  with  regard  to  Him  which  render  Him  a  character  of  match- 
less elevation.  (1)  He  was  without  sin.  (2)  His  human  nature  was  invested  with 
an  especial  appointment  from  God  the  Father.  (3)  He  was  essentially  and  eternally 
Divine.  (4)  Besides  these  dignifying  truths  with  regard  to  Christ,  there  are  Hia 
resurrection,  ascension,  and  session  as  the  triumphant  Mediator  at  the  right  hand 
of  the  Majesty  on  high.  Wonder,  then,  at  the  amazing  dignity  which  the  gospel 
receives  in  consequence  of  its  association  with  such  a  Being,  and  measure  the 
imperious  claim  which  the  gospel  possesses  on  the  reverence,  faith,  and  obedience 
of  mankind.  II.  The  oospel  is  fraught  with  abundant  blessings  to  the  wobld. 
The  very  term  "gospel"  verifies  this  proposition.  Note — 1.  The  nature  of  the 
blessings  which  the  gospel  is  able  to  impart.  When  we  speak  of  these  we  seem  as 
though  we  stood  at  the  entrance  of  a  beauteous  garden,  within  whose  limits  we 
cannot  stir  a  step  without  plucking  flowers,  and  beholding  fruits  on  the  trees  of  life, 
whose  •*  leaves  are  for  the  healing  of  the  nations."  The  gospel  imparts  to  man — 
(1)  A  knowledge  of  God  and  of  all  spiritual  truth  (chap.  xvi.  25 ;  2  Cor  iv.  6 ; 
2  Tim.  i.  9,  10).  The  communication  of  this  knowledge  is  essential  to  all  real 
dignity,  to  all  moral  worth,  and  to  the  introduction  of  man  into  that  state  where 
"  we  shall  know  even  as  also  we  are  known."  (2)  A  deliverance  from  the  guilt  and 
the  power  of  sin  (chap,  iii,  23-26 ;  Eph.  ii.  12-17).  Will  any  one  compare  the 
difference  between  a  state  of  condemnation  and  of  jastification,  of  pollution,  and 
of  holiness,  and  not  at  once  perceive  that  here  are  given  blessings  so  vast  that  no 
intellect  can  compute  them,  and  no  fancy  conceive  them  ?  (3)  Abundant  consola- 
tion and  support  amidst  all  sorrow  (2  Cor.  iv.  8,  9,  17,  18).  2.  The  extent  to  which 
these  blessings  are  to  be  diffused.  A  great  portion  of  the  value  of  the  blessing 
depends  upon  its  extent.  Now,  if  the  gospel  had  possessed  but  a  restricted  constitu- 
tion, so  as  by  implication  to  pass  a  sentence  of  outlawry  on  any  portion  of  the 
human  family,  there  would  be  a  vast  subtraction  from  its  value.  But  its  expan- 
siveness  was  indicated  in  prophecy,  by  Christ's  parables,  instructions,  and  example, 
and  by  those  series  of  commissions  which  He  gave  to  His  apostles.  Its  operations 
truly  have  been  as  yet  imperfect,  yet  there  is  to  arrive  an  era  when  the  gospel  shall 
become  the  property  of  our  race.    "  The  knowledge  of  the  Lord  shall  cover  the 


OBAP.  XT.]  ROMANS,  129 

earth,"  &o.  And  bo  replete  shall  be  the  then  weight  of  blessing,  when  the  groan- 
ings  of  creation  shall  have  been  hashed,  when  its  travailing  shall  hare  been 
terminated,  and  when  peaoe  and  liberty  and  joy  shall  have  become  the  charter  of 
onr  free  and  emancipated  race,  that  then  shall  be  totally  verified  the  title  of  the 
gospel,  "  the  fulness  of  the  blessings  of  the  gospel  of  Christ."    lU.  Thb  iomistbt 

IS    THB    APPOINTBD    IMSTBUttKNT    rOB   CONTBYINa    THX    BLBSBINOS   OF    THB    OOSPEIi    TO 

HAKsnn).  The  apostle  is  speaking  as  one  engaged  in  the  exercise  of  the  ministry 
of  the  Word.  It  mast  be  dear  that  there  is  here  a  connection  instituted  between 
the  ministry  and  the  efficacy  of  the  gospel  (chap.  x.  13-17 ;  2  Oor.  v.  1&-20). 
There  is  a  solemn  call  on  us — 1.  To  acquire  a  perfect  knowledge  of  its  contents, 
and  freely  and  faithfully  to  declare  it  to  our  fellow-men.  2.  To  honour  the  ministry 
by  giving  "  earnest  heed  "  to  the  things  which  yon  hear,  remembering  that  he  that 
despiseth  as  despiseth  not  man,  bat  Ood.  In  conclusion,  let  me  remind  yoa^ 
1.  Of  the  awfal  danger  that  will  be  incurred  on  yoar  part  by  the  rejection  of  the 
gospeL    2.  Of  yoar  duty  to  assist  in  its  propagation.     (J.  Pariom.) 

Yers.  80-33.  Nov  I  beseech  yon  .  .  .  that  ye  strive  together  with  me  in  your 
prayers. — Paul't  request  for  prayer: — Observe — I.  Thb  apostle's  request — that 
they  would  pray  for  him.  Especially  for — 1.  His  protection.  2.  The  suooesa  of 
bis  mission.  II.  The  ABonMEMTS  hb  uses.  1.  For  Christ's  sake ;  for  the  love  of 
Christ,  that  His  cause  might  be  promoted,  &o.  2.  For  the  love  of  the  Spirit, 
wrought  in  ns,  exhibited  to  as.  III.  Thb  anticipated  besult.  1.  A  prosperous 
journey  to  Bome.  2.  The  mutual  joy  and  edification  of  all.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
Pleading  for  prayer : — The  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  held  a  very  useful  and  glorious 
office ;  but  when  we  consider  his  struggles,  we  do  not  wonder  that  he  was  some- 
times in  great  sorrow  of  heart.  He  was  so  now.  So  he  wrote  to  his  brethren  to 
pray  for  him.  Does  it  astonish  you  that  a  man  so  rich  in  grace  should  do  so  ?  It 
need  not ;  for  such  always  feel  most  their  dependence  upon  God's  people.  The 
larger  a  man's  trade,  the  more  be  is  dependent  upon  those  around  him.  The 
apostle  did  a  great  business  for  his  Lord,  and  he  felt  that  he  could  not  carry  it  on 
unless  he  had  the  co-operation  of  many  helpers.  He  did  not  want  what  are  called 
"  hands "  to  work  for  him,  but  hearts  to  plead  for  him.  In  a  great  battle  the 
general's  name  is  mentioned  ;  but  what  could  he  have  done  without  the  common 
soldiers  7  Wellington  will  always  be  associated  with  Waterloo  ;  but,  after  all,  it  was 
a  soldiers'  battle.  Every  minister  is  in  much  the  same  condition  as  PauL  In  the 
text  there  is — I.  Pbateb  asked  fob.  Here  is — 1.  A  request  to  the  people  of  God 
for  prayer  in  general.  (1)  He  asks  it  for  himseU.  It  reminds  us  of  Carey,  who 
says,  when  he  goes  to  India,  "  I  will  go  down  into  the  pit,  but  brother  Fuller  and 
the  rest  of  you  must  hold  the  rope."  A  man  cannot  be  charged  with  egotism  if  he 
begs  for  personal  support  when  he  is  labouring  for  others.  (2)  He  asks  it  of  his 
"brethren."  He  seems  to  say,  "Show  this  token  of  your  brotherhood.  Yoa 
cannot  go  up  with  me  to  Jerusalem,  and  share  my  danger,  but  you  can  by  yoar 
prayers  surround  me  with  Divine  protection."  (3)  He  asks  them  to  "agonise  " — that 
is  the  word,  a  reminder  of  the  great  agony  in  Gethsemane.  The  apostle  felt  that 
an  agony  alone  was  too  bitter  for  him,  and  he  therefore  cries,  '•  I  beseech  you,"  <fcc. 
Now,  as  the  disciples  ought  to  have  sympathised  with  the  Saviour,  but  did  not,  I 
trust  that  the  unfaithfulness  to  the  Master  will  not  be  repeated  upon  His  servants. 
When  the  uplifted  hands  of  Moses  are  known  to  bring  a  blessing,  Aaron  and  Hur 
must  stay  them  up  when  they  are  seen  to  grow  weary.  (4)  He  asks,  "  for  the  Lord 
Jesus  Cburist's  sake."  What  an  argument  1  As  you  cannot  repay  what  yon  owe 
to  Christ  personally,  repay  it  to  His  servant  by  your  prayers.  But  he  adds 
another  argument.  "For  the  love  of  the  Spirit."  H  the  Spirit  of  God  has  indeed 
loved  you  and  proved  it  by  quickening  and  sanctifying  you ;  if  He  has  created  a  love 
in  you,  which  is  stronger  than  mere  natural  affection,  then  pray  for  me.  Why  do 
you  think  the  apostle  at  that  special  time  asked  these  brethren  to  pray  for  him  so? 
(a)  He  was  going  up  to  Jerusalem,  and  the  Jews  would  seek  to  slay  him ;  but  he 
believed  that  God  could  overrule  all  things.  We  believe  this ;  therefore  let  us  pray 
that  all  opposition  to  His  gospel  may  be  overcome,  (b)  He  was  afraid  that  the 
Jewish  believers  would  be  cold  to  him,  and  therefore  prays  that  the  Spirit  may 
warm  their  hearts,  so  that  the  offerings  from  the  Grecian  Churches  might  foster  a 
sense  of  hearty  fellowship.  Do  you  not  also  believe  that  there  is  not  only  a  Provi- 
dence that  shapes  our  ends,  but  a  secret  infiuence  which  moulds  men's  hearts? 
Therefore  we  urge  you  to  plead  with  God  that  we  also  may  have  acceptance  with 
His  people.     2.  A  statement  of  the  apostle's  desires  io  detail.    We  should  pray  for 


730  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CBiS.  !▼; 

something  distinctly.  Some  prayers  fail  from  want  of  precision.  It  is  as  if  a  regi- 
ment of  soldiers  should  all  fire  off  their  guns  anyhow.  Paul  gives  his  friends  three 
things  to  pray  for :  (1)  That  he  might  be  delivered  from  them  that  did  not  believe 
in  Judaea.  He  was  delivered,  but  not  in  the  manner  he  hoped  for.  Against  all 
oppositions  from  without  let  us  pray.  (2)  That  his  service  which  he  had  for 
Jerusalem  might  be  accepted  of  the  saints.  This  also  was  granted.  (3)  That  he 
might  come  unto  them  with  joy  by  the  will  of  God ;  and  might,  with  them,  be 
refreshed.  This  petition  also  was  heard,  but  not  as  Paul  might  have  desired.  He 
did  come  to  them  according  to  the  will  of  God,  and  may  have  been  on  his  way  to 
Spain,  but  certainly  he  was  on  his  way  to  prison,  as  he  had  not  purposed.  There- 
fore  pray  for  a  blessing,  and  leave  the  way  of  its  coming  to  the  good  Lord  who 
knoweth  all  things.  II.  The  blessing  given.  1.  Paul,  with  all  his  anxiety  to 
gain  the  prayers  of  his  friends,  cannot  finish  without  a  benediction  upon  them. 
Jl)  "Now  the  God  of  peace."  What  a  blessed  namel  In  the  Old  Testament  He 
IS  the  •'  Lord  of  Hosts  " ;  but  that  is  never  the  style  in  the  New  Testament.  (2) 
"  Be  with  you,"  not  only  "  peace  be  with  you,"  but,  better  far,  the  source  and 
fountain  of  peace.  When  *•  the  God  of  peace  "  makes  peace  with  Himself,  and  so 
keeps  our  minds  at  peace  within.  He  also  creates  peace  with  one  another.  (3)  With 
you  all,"  not  with  some  of  you,  with  Priscilla  and  Aquila,  but  with  Mary,  Amplias, 
&o.  Unless  all  are  at  peace,  none  can  be  perfectly  quiet.  One  brother  who  is 
quarrelsome  can  keep  a  whole  Church  in  trouble.  2.  Paul  seems  to  imply  that 
this  will  be  the  result  of  their  prayer.  If  you  wUl  but  strive  together  with  me  ia 
your  prayers,  then  the  God  of  peace  wiU  be  with  you.  We  may  view  it  as  the 
reward  of  such  prayer,  or  as  a  necessary  condition  and  cause  of  true  prayer.  (C 
H.  Spurgeon. )  Player  besought  for  the  ministry : — I.  The  object  or  thb 
apostle's  request — the  prayers  of  the  people.  Observe  the  importunity  of  hia 
spirit,  and  the  fervency  of  his  manner.  Ministers  need  the  prayers  of  their  people, 
if  we  consider  them — 1.  As  men.  They  are  men  of  like  passions  with  ourselves, 
and  are  surrounded  by  manifold  temptations.  2.  As  Christians.  They  want 
refreshing  with  the  same  water,  and  stand  in  need  of  the  same  heavenly  food  as. 
you  do.  3.  As  officers  of  the  Church — as  stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  God.  4. 
Their  work — to  negotiate  matters  with  others  on  behalf  of  God.  5.  Their  danger. 
They  are  on  a  hill,  and  far  more  the  objects  of  observation  than  others.  A  failure 
in  an  ordinary  member  is  a  serious  matter,  and  is  often  attended  with  distress ;  but 
a  failure  in  a  minister  is  attended  with  more  serious  consequences.  6.  Their 
responsibility.  II.  The  pleasing  eueegenot  on  which  he  founds  it.  1.  "  For 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  sake."  The  honour  of  Christ  is  bound  up  with  the  success 
of  the  ministry  of  the  gospel.  So  the  apostle  appealed  for  prayer,  not  for  his  own 
sake,  though  he  might  have  put  it  upon  that  ground,  but  for  his  Master's.  2.  "  For 
the  love  of  the  Spirit."  (1)  The  love  which  the  Spirit  has  wrought  in  us.  Love  to 
God,  to  ministers,  to  souls,  is  but  a  feeling  which  has  been  wrought  in  as  by  the 
Holy  Spirit.  (2)  The  love  which  the  Spirit  has  to  us.  We  are  in  the  habit  of 
onderrating  this  love.  We  dwell  on  that  of  the  Father,  and  the  Son ;  but  we 
seldom  dwell  on  the  love  of  the  Spirit.  And  yet  that  love  is  most  manifest  He 
strives  with  us,  bears  with  us,  checks  as  in  oar  wanderings,  and  creates  as  anew. 
in.  The  specific  end  which  he  had  in  view.  1.  Mutual  joy.  Ministers  some- 
times come  in  fear  and  in  sorrow.  2.  Mutual  improvement.  "  That  I  with  you 
may  be  refreshed."  (J.  Beaumont,  M.A.)  The  love  of  the  Spirit — The  love  of 
the  Spirit: — Consider — I.  The  impost  of  the  expbession  heee  used.  It  may 
mean  either  the  love,  of  which  the  Spirit  is  the  author  in  the  heart  of  the  believer ; 
or  the  love  of  which  the  Spirit  is  Himself  the  object ;  or  most  probably,  the  love 
which  the  Spirit  bears  to  them  that  believe.  II.  "  The  love  of  the  Spirit  "  as 
A  MOTIVE  TO  Christian  obedience.  The  Spirit  shows  love,  as  much  as  the  Father 
or  the  Son ;  and  the  love  of  the  Spirit  is  as  much  a  motive  to  duty  as  the  grace  of 
Christ  itself.  As  the  love  of  Christ  is  displayed  chiefly  in  an  external  work,  so  the 
love  of  the  Spirit  is  exhibited  in  His  internal  operation  on  the  souL  In  order  to 
illustrate  this  love;  consider — 1.  The  absence  of  anything  on  our  part  fitted  to 
attract  that  Holy  Agent.  "  Not  of  works,  but  of  His  mercy.  He  saves  us  by  the 
renewing  of  the  Holy  Spirit."  That  the  Spirit  of  God  should  dwell  in  a  holy  mind 
may  be  well  believed ;  but  what  manner  of  love  was  this  which  impelled  the  Spirit 
to  inhabit  such  a  mind  as  that  of  the  natural  man  I  2.  The  fruits  of  the  Spirit ; 
••  love,  joy,  peace,"  Ac,  of  what  high  value  are  these  1  3.  The  happiness  imparted 
by  the  Spirit.  The  word  of  promise  has  no  power  to  comfort  until  it  is  applied  by 
the  Spirit  of  promise.    If  we  abound  in  hope,  it  is  through  the  power  of  the  Holy 


OHA*.  XT.]  ROMANS.  731 

Spirit.  He  is  emphatically  the  Comforter ;  no  trae  joy  without  His  influence ;  and 
Be  is  the  grand  and  only  preparation  for  eternal  happiness.  4.  This  love  is  dis- 
played in  His  continual  operation  on  the  heart,  amidst  so  much  opposition,  and  so 
much  ingratitude.  III.  Improvement.  Surely  we  should — 1.  Show  returns  of 
love  to  this  Spirit  of  love.  2.  Show  ourselves  meek  and  docile  to  such  a  Teacher 
and  Guide,  and  prize  His  influence.  3.  Vindicate  His  character  from  all  low 
notions  of  His  person,  dignity,  power  and  importance.  4.  Pray  in  the  Spirit,  walk 
in  the  Spirit,  war  after  the  Spirit.  {R.  Hall,  M.A.)  The  love  of  the  Spirit: — 
Consider  this — I.  In  the  forms  of  its  evidence.  1.  The  dictation  of  the  Holy 
Scriptures.  "  Holy  men  of  old  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost." 
Had  His  influences  been  withholden,  there  would  have  been  no  Bible  ;  and  without 
the  Bible  think  of  the  hopeless  wretchedness  in  which  we  should  have  been  plunged. 
2.  His  teachings.  For  however  incomparable  the  blessed  Book  may  be  of  itself, 
yet  in  the  spirituality  of  its  particular  meanings,  it  can  only  be  understood  and 
realised  through  the  same  power  that  produced  it.  "  Now  we  have  received,  not 
the  spirit  of  the  world,  but  the  Spirit  which  is  of  God ;  that  we  might  know  the 
things  that  are  freely  given  to  us  of  God."  3.  His  work  in  relation  to  the  Saviour 
who  was  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  anointed  by  Him  and  filled  with  Him  with- 
out measure.  4.  His  offices  which  He  fills,  and  the  provisions  which  He  makes  for 
as,  answering  to  the  spiritual  necessities  of  our  nature.  Convincing  of  sin,  con- 
verting, witnessing,  sanctifying,  comforting,  Ac.  U.  Its  object.  Not  that  His 
own  happiness  may  be  advanced  by  it,  nor  that  it  was  forced  into  exercise  by  any 
worthiness  of  ours.  No ;  as  it  sprung  spontaneously  out  of  the  law  of  His  own 
nature — for  "God  is  love" — so  it  disinterestedly  devoted  itself  to  the  promotion  of 
our  present  and  immortal  good.  III.  The  effects  it  should  pbodocb.  1.  Love 
begets  love ;  and  surely  we  should  do  Him  all  the  honour  we  can.  2.  A  humble 
and  unreserved  dependence  upon  Him.  3.  An  excitement  to  our  prayers.  4.  A 
sincere  purpose,  an  energetic  endeavour,  to  avoid  all  that  wUI  vex  and  grieve  the 
Holy  Spirit.  5.  A  full  display  of  the  graces  of  the  Spirit  in  our  lives.  (T.  J. 
Judkin,  M.A.)  The  love  of  the  Spirit: — The  Bible  is  emphatically  a  revelation, 
and  not  an  argument ;  its  teachings  are  dogmatic  and  absolute.  Tou  look  in  vain 
in  the  Bible  for  anything  like  an  elaborate  argumentation  to  prove  the  doctrine  of 
the  Trinity.  The  inspired  writers  everywhere  take  it  for  granted.  Deny  it,  and 
there  are  profound  mysteries  which  perplex  us  all.  A  truth  also  equally  clear  in 
the  Scriptures  is  this,  that  the  Three  Persons  of  the  Godhead  are  equally  interested 
in  the  great  scheme  of  human  redemption.  I.  His  bestrainino  love.  All  men 
are  everywhere  wicked  in  heart  and  life,  tyrannised  over  by  the  sin  which  dwells 
within  them.  They  might  be  worse ;  men  feel  that  they  are  not  left  to  the  uncon- 
trolled power  of  the  evil  passions ;  they  are  conscious  of  an  opposite  power.  Even 
savages  and  cannibals — the  most  degraded  and  ignorant  of  our  race — testify  that 
they  are  conscious  of  some  power  beside  an  evil  one  acting  upon  them.  And  hence 
the  idea  obtains  in  a  large  portion  of  the  heathen  world  that  there  must  be  two 
divinities — a  bad  and  a  good  divinity ;  and  this  is  the  only  way  in  which  they  can 
account  for  the  great  truth  of  which  they  are  conscious.  It  is  not  the  mere  fruit  of 
fancy.  And  this  is  also  true  of  ourselves.  How  many  evils  have  been  averted,  how 
many  bad  passions  have  been  restrained,  how  many  schemes  of  wickedness  have 
been  overthrown  by  the  direct  action  of  the  Holy  Ghost  on  men's  minds,  no  man 
can  possibly  tell.  A  gigantic  scheme  of  wickedness  is  concocted  by  half-a-dozen 
persons ;  but  previous  to  its  consummation,  one  of  the  company  has  a  strange 
sense  of  uneasiness  which  he  cannot  help,  and  he  is  restless  by  day  and  night. 
His  wife  or  his  nearest  friend  observes  there  is  something  on  his  mind.  But  the 
restlessness  grows  upon  him,  the  man  is  miserable.  Now,  what  ails  the  man  ? 
Who  has  caused  him  to  stagger  in  his  fiendish  enterprise?  No  human  voice 
reasoned  with  him ;  it  is  the  Holy  Ghost  in  love  that  acted  directly  without  any 
human  agency  upon  that  man's  conscience  and  heart.  A  man  is  studying  to 
commit  murder.  The  would-be  murderer  lies  under  the  shadow  of  the  tree  waiting 
for  his  intended  victim.  By  and  by  he  hears  the  sounds  of  human  footsteps — a 
strange  irresolution  paralyses  him — and  instead  of  springing  forward  to  execute 
his  purpose,  he  falls  back  powerless.  Again  I  say,  what  aUs  the  man  ?  What  haa 
acted  upon  his  mind  ?  No  human  being  has  reasoned  with  him ;  but  he  is  so 
acted  upon  by  the  direct  agency  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Oh  I  just  think  for  a  moment 
what  would  have  been  the  state  of  the  world  now  if  all  the  evil  passions  of  men 
had  been  carried  out  to  the  utmost.  U.  The  love  of  the  Spirit  convictino. 
The  provisions  of  redemption  are  ample,  and  there  is  no  want  that  we  can  feel,  bat 


789  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  it. 

yfhski  is  filled  by  Christ  Jesas.  Bat  there  are  difficulties  that  stand  in  the  way. 
Man  does  not  feel  his  need  of  these  provisions,  man  is  not  conscious  that  he 
requires  a  Savioar,  he  does  not  entertain  the  same  views  of  sin  that  God  does,  and 
he  thinks  he  can  do  without  redemption.  "  Oh  1  "  he  says,  "  sin  is  only  a  harmless 
gratification  of  human  passions,  over  which  I  am  not  responsible,  which  were  bom 
with  me  into  the  world."  And  so  men  do  not  see  any  grandeur  and  reality  in  the 
scheme  of  redemption.  Man  plays  gaily  and  foolishly  on  the  verge  of  an  awful 
precipice  in  a  blindfolded  condition,  and  knows  not  the  terrible  death  under  his 
feet.  K  you  would  make  him  watchful,  and  to  turn  away  from  the  verge  of  that 
danger,  you  must  convince  him  there  is  danger.  Man  will  never  seek  liberty  until 
he  is  convinced  of  his  bondage ;  he  will  never  seek  or  appreciate  the  remedy  until 
he  is  made  conscious  of  his  disease.  Who  is  to  awake  his  mind  and  give  him  this 
sight,  and  thus  prepare  him  for  the  reception  of  mercy  ?  It  is  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
He,  out  of  love  to  us,  has  made  suitable  provision  for  bringing  home  to  individual 
consciences  the  sense  of  sin  and  danger.  He  has  embodied  for  us  God's  thoughts, 
which  man  could  never  have  discovered,  and  has  raised  up  men  to  commit  these 
thoughts  to  writing,  and  has  raised  up  a  succession  of  men  to  apply  these  truths. 
He  does  not,  for  instance,  convince  the  drunkard  of  drunkenness,  or  the  blasphemer 
of  blasphemy.  That  is  not  the  mode  in  which  the  Spirit  operates  on  human  con- 
sciences. But  He  convinces  men  of  the  sinfulness  of  their  nature,  that  sin  is  in 
them ;  generally  speaking,  the  light  is  shed  inwardly,  and  the  man  sees  himself, 
not  his  life,  and  he  is  horrified.  If  the  Holy  Ghost  awakens  within  you  a  sense  oi 
sinfulness.  He  does  not  rest  there,  but  reveais  to  you  at  the  same  time  a  remedy, 
and  that  you  must  perish,  not  because  you  have  sinned,  but  because  you  reject  the 
only  Saviour  from  sin.  It  is  a  rough  process,  and  God  has  rough  mercies  as  well 
as  tender  mercies.  But  there  is  another  difficulty  in  the  way.  Even  when  man  is 
convinced  of  his  sin  and  danger,  Jesus  is  not  the  first  remedy  that  he  repairs  to,  as 
a  rule.  There  is  something  so  humiliating  in  being  saved  by  another,  that  a  man 
will  try  a  variety  of  ways  before  he  submits  to  God's  way.  He  will  give  up  a  bad 
habit,  hope  to  reform  himself,  and  thus  divide  the  glory  of  salvation  with  Jesus  by 
doing  a  little  for  himself ;  and  it  is  the  Holy  Ghost  who  follows  the  sinner  in  his 
wanderings,  drives  him  out  of  these  false  refuges.  It  is  the  love  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
as  though  driving  a  man  into  the  only  path  which  will  lead  him  into  immortality 
and  blessedness.  III.  Thebb  is  thk  fobbeabino  love  of  the  Spibit.  A  mother 
displays  a  vast  amount  towards  her  child,  when  she  watches  the  sickly  infant  by 
day  and  by  night.  No  doubt  that  is  a  high  manifestation  of  love,  because  it  is 
shown  while  the  child  is  not  capable  of  appreciating  that  affection,  but  it  is  not  the 
highest.  That  child  grows  up  to  youth  and  manhood,  and  he  becomes  a  profligate, 
and,  not  only  neglectful,  but  positively  cruel.  She  cannot  cast  him  out  of  her 
heart,  she  yearns  for  him  still,  and  nothing  would  rejoice  the  mother  more  than  to 
see  the  lad  return.  And  such  is  the  love  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  a  love  which 
survives  ingratitude,  insult,  rebellion,  blasphemy.  He  presents  Himself  to  you 
again  and  again,  not  for  the  purpose  of  asking  a  gift,  but  of  conferring  one.  H 
you  were  in  a  condition  of  temporal  distress,  and  a  neighbour  heard  of  it  who  knew 
nothing  about  you,  and  out  of  pure  benevolence  offered  to  alleviate  your  sorrow, 
you  would  feel  you  were  not  capable  of  saying — "  I  will  not  accept  his  offer,  but 
prefer  to  remain  in  my  condition."  And  if  you  did  refuse  his  offer  of  assistance, 
the  benefactor  would  not  be  very  likely  to  offer  himself  another  time.  No, 
humanity  would  say,  "  such  a  wretch  as  that  deserves  no  relief;  let  him  aJone.'' 
And  this  is  the  conduct  of  some  of  you  towards  the  Holy  Ghost.  His  forbearance 
is  Divine,  but  it  has  limits.  IV.  His  condescending  lovb.  Now  the  work  of 
Christ  has  relation  to  the  Lawgiver ;  the  work  of  the  Spirit  has  relation  to  the  law 
breaker.  Jesus  Christ  had  to  offer  a  demand  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Lawgiver, 
but  the  Holy  Spirit  has  to  come  and  make  the  sinner  willing  to  accept  of  the 
provision.  The  blessed  Saviour  had  no  difficulty  in  persuading  the  Father  to  accept 
of  His  substitution  on  behalf  of  humanity.  But  here  lies  a  sad  truth.  When  the 
Holy  Ghost  comes  to  man.  He  finds  it  difficult  to  persuade  man  to  accept  of  the 
provisions  of  Christ,  and  yet  He  condescends  to  repeat  His  visit.  You  admire  the 
condescension  of  a  man  like  Howard,  who  penetrated  distant  countries,  and  exposed 
himself  to  rude  insults,  who  entered  hospitals  and  prisons,  and  visited  the  guilty 
and  degraded.  But  what  shall  we  say  of  the  condescending  love  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
when  we  remember  the  theatre  He  has  selected  for  His  signal  action,  for  His  most 
powerful  operations.  It  is  a  stupendous  exhibition  of  the  condescending  love  for 
that  Spirit  to  come  down  and  live  for  hundreds  and  thousands  of  yean  m 


OBAt.  XT.]  ROMANS.  7S8 

the  vflest  place  in  the  oniTerse  —  the  heart  of  hamanity.  {B.  Roberti.) 
TbaX  X  xnay  be  delivered.  —  T?ie  propriety  of  prayer  for  temporal  deliver- 
ance :  —  How  different  is  this  from  Uie  language  of  Ignatias,  who  seemed 
rather  to  call  for  the  prayers  of  his  brethren,  that  he  might  be  honoured  with  a 
crown  of  martyrdom,  than  to  be  preserved  from  his  enemies.  Christians  ought  to 
be  willing  to  give  their  lives  for  Christ  rather  than  deny  Him  or  refuse  to  do  any 
part  of  His  known  will.  But  it  is  not  only  lawful  but  dutiful  to  take  every  proper 
means  for  their  deliverance  out  of  danger.  If  even  an  apostle,  in  the  cause  of 
Christ,  was  so  desirous  of  preserving  life,  what  shall  'we  think  of  those  who 

?>rofess  a  spirit  of  indifference  respecting  it,  which  would  wantonly  throw  it  away  ? 
R.  Haldane.)  Two  important  elements  of  ministerial  comfort  and  success: — I. 
Delivebamcx  fbom  thxm  that  beuetb  not.  Because — 1.  They  hate  the  truth. 
2.  Interpose  difiSculties.  3.  Prevent  success.  II.  Acceptakcb  wtth  the  Chxtboh. 
Because — 1.  It  encourages  zeal.  2.  Makes  labour  delightful.  3.  Insures  prosperity. 
{J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  That  I  may  come  imto  you  with  Joy  by  the  will  of  God,  and  may 
with  you  be  refreshed. — The  pastor's  incoming  (inaugural  sermon) :  I.  On  what 
GBOUNDS  f  I  have  come — "  by  the  will  of  God."  1.  In  planning  his  own  move- 
ments, Paul  exercised  Christian  common-sense.  Thus  his  work  was  distinguished 
from  that  of  Peter,  &o.  (Gal.  ii.  9).  Thus  he  abstained  from  Jerusalem  and 
Corinth  (2  Cor.  i.  23),  and  varied  his  plans.  But  he  ever  consulted  the  will  of  God, 
and  found  it  sometimes  identical  with  his  own,  and  sometimes  not  (2  Cor.  i.  17 ; 
Acts.  xvi.  7).  He  was  sure  he  ought  to  see  Bome  (Acts  xix.  20),  and  long  desired  it 
(ver.  23),  and  prayed  for  it  (chap.  i.  10;  xv.  30).  Yet  he  found  that  God's 
will  was  different  from  his  as  to  time  and  manner.  2.  The  will  of  God  ia  that 
which  He  sees  best  to  be  done,  or  to  be,  for  all  creatures.  Every  star  that  shines 
is  an  embodied  will  of  God.  But  there  is  a  higher  region  of  intelligence  and  love. 
Nature  is  blindly  obedient.  Far  above  it  are  the  hosts  that  are  little  miniatures  of 
God.  Christ  could  ask  for  nothing  more  than  that,  as  in  heaven,  so  on  earth, 
God's  will  might  be  done.  3.  Now,  it  is  the  privilege  of  a  Christian  not  only  to 
have  the  written  will  of  God  in  general,  but  to  be  able  also  to  ascertain  God's  will 
as  to  our  separate  movements.  This  was  afforded  to  Israel  by  the  "  pillar  of  oloud 
and  fire,"  and  is  not  less  so  now.  Let  a  man  do  three  things — clear  his  heart  of 
self-will ;  use  his  best  judgment,  aided  by  counsel ;  and  pray.  And  is  it  pre- 
sumptuous to  believe  that  through  the  blended  circumstances,  the  many  counsels 
and  prayers,  I  am  here  by  the  will  of  God  ?  II.  With  what  pubpose  ?  Note — 1. 
The  sphere  within  which  the  effect  of  the  ministry  is  to  be  sought.  The  pastor 
aims  at  an  effect  on  the  spirit  of  man.  When  the  six  days  have  run  you  down ; 
when  your  spirit  is  weary,  dull,  and  almost  without  holy  thought  or  desire,  yoa 
need,  and  I  hope,  will  find  rest  and  refreshment  here.  2.  The  identity  of  the 
preacher's  experience  and  his  hearers'.  I  preach  not  a  Saviour  that  I  do  not  need 
myself.  ••  With  you  "  I  come  to  "  be  refreshed  " ;  with  the  same  nature  and  needs, 
and  to  the  same  supply.  In  this  identity  lies  one  of  the  chief  charms  of  the 
ministry.  HI.  In  what  hood?  "With  joy."  There  is  in  the  responsibilities  of 
the  ministry  much  to  oppress.  Yet  I  do  come  with  joy — 1.  That  there  is  such 
refreshment  provided  for  weary  souls.  2.  That  I  am  permitted  the  honour  of 
ministering  the  same,  and  to  stand  in  the  happy  relationship  which  never  fails  to 
rise  out  of  a  faithful  ministry.  3.  That  the  Lord  Himself  will  be  with  us.  4.  In 
hope  of  the  final  joy  of  the  Lord.  Conclusion  :  All  this  turns  on  one  condition. 
Paul  did  not  hope  for  it  in  his  case  apart  from  prayer  (vers.  30-33).  {S.  Hebditch.) 
Spiritual  refreshment: — I.  Needed.  1.  The  Christian  is  often — (1)  Weary.  (2) 
Hungry.  (3)  Thirsty.  2.  This  arises  from — (1)  The  labour  and  conflict  of  life.  (2) 
The  world's  spiritual  barrenness.  II.  Peovided.  L  In  the  means  of  grace — prayer, 
hearing,  reading,  singing,  partaking  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  in  Christian  fellow- 
ship (Prov.  xxvii.  17).  2.  By  Christ  Himself.  "  Come  unto  Me,"  &c.  (Psa.  xxiii ; 
Mark  vi.  31).  HI.  Should  be  enjoted.  1.  The  consequences  of  its  enjoyment. 
(1)  Augmented  strength.  (2)  Invigorated  courage.  (3)  Happy  feelings.  2.  The 
consequences  of  its  neglect.  (1)  Feebleness.  (2)  Fear.  (3)  Misery.  (J.  W. 
Burn.)  Vow  the  God  of  peace  be  with  you  aH—The  God  of  peace  : — Whatever 
may  be  the  amount  of  agitation  in  the  universe,  there  is  one  Being  without  one 
ripple  upon  the  clear  and  fathomless  river  of  His  nature.  Three  things  are  implied 
in  this.    That  there  is  nothing — L  Malion  in  His  natube.     Wherever  there  If 

JeA>usy,  wrath,  or  malice,  there  can  be  no  peace.    Malevolence  in  any  form  or 
legree  is  soul-disturbing.     In  whatever  mind  it  exists  it  is  like  a  tide  in  the  ocean, 
producing  eternal  restlessness.    But  the  Infinite  hetfft  is  love.    U.  BEXOBSsrvt.. 


734  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  XT. 

Wherever  conscience  acoases  of  wrong  there  is  no  peace.  Moral  self-complaisance 
is  essential  to  spirit  peace.  God  has  never  done  wrong,  and  His  infinite  consoienca 
smiles  npon  Him  and  blesses  Him  with  peace.  Ill,  AppBEHENsr^B.  Wherever 
there  is  a  foreboding  of  evil,  there  is  a  mental  disturbance.  Fear  is  essentially  an 
agitating  principle.  The  Infinite  has  no  fear.  He  is  the  absolute  master  of  His 
position.  (D.  Thomat,  D.D.)  The  Ood  of  peace : — I.  Hia  natubb  is  peace.  II. 
His  PT7BP0SE  is  peace.  UI.  His  pbesencb  secures  peace.  1.  In  every  heart.  2. 
Among  Christian  brethren.  3.  From  foes  without,  i.  Under  all  circumstances. 
(J,  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  God  of  peace : — I.  God  is  thb  original  possessob  of  this 
BLESSING,  IH  ITS  ETERNAL  AND  INFINITE  FULNESS.  In  the  Divine  nature  all  is  in 
harmony,  because  all  is  perfect.  Truth,  justice,  wisdom,  and  goodness,  are  in  the 
nature  of  things  consistent  with  themselves  and  with  each  other.  If  it  were 
possible  for  the  infinite  nature  to  be  swayed  by  storms  of  passion,  and  changed  by 
course  of  time  and  events,  for  the  hand  that  upholds  all  worlds  to  tremble — even 
the  destruction  of  all  worlds  would  be  a  less  calamity  than  this.  But  this  is  the 
one  grand  impossibility;  ••  Though  we  believe  not.  He  abideth  faithful ;  He  cannot 
deny  Himself."  And  since  there  is  no  discord,  strife  or  change  in  His  nature, 
these  must  arise  from  something  contrary  to  it.  He  can  have  no  delight  in  them. 
EUs  works  must  reflect  His  character,  and  He  must  delight  to  fill  and  bless  the 
hearts  of  His  creatures  with  the  image  of  His  own  Divine  peace.  U.  God  is  the 
AtJTHOB  AND  GtVEB  OF  PEACE.  1.  Between  Himself  and  His  sinful  creatures.  The 
first  announcement  of  the  gospel  was  "  Peace  on  earth,"  its  first  invitation, 
"  Acquaint  thyself  with  Him,  and  be  at  peace."  The  Word  of  God  sounds,  indeed, 
an  awful  note  of  alarm  against  those  who  are  resting  in  a  false  peace.  "  There  is 
no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked."  But  this  is  only  like  the  cry  of  "  fire !  " 
when  you  are  asleep,  and  your  roof  is  burning  over  you ;  or  of  •'  breakers  a-head  1 " 
when  your  ship  is  driving  on  towards  a  lee  shore.  You  are  told  your  danger  that 
yon  may  escape  it.  If  you  will  lay  down  your  arms  and  fling  open  the  gates  to 
receive  your  King,  He  will  enter,  not  as  an  Avenger  or  a  Judge,  but  a  Bedeemer  and 
Friend  (Isa.  i.  19).  Peace  with  God's  law,  or  in  other  words,  freedom  from  con- 
denmation,  is  the  first  blessing  which  the  gospel  offers.  As  soon  as  we  believe  in 
it,  it  is  ours  (1  John  i.  9 ;  Eom.  v.  1).  The  cause  of  this  exercise,  of  God's  pardon- 
ing  mercy,  is  His  love  to  His  guilty  child.  And  the  end  for  which  it  is  bestowed  is 
to  bring  back  the  estranged  heart,  and  fill  it  withlove  to  Him.  So  the  peace  which 
God  offers  is  not  merely  peace  with  the  law,  but  peace  with  Himself.  2.  God 
makes  the  heart  at  peace  with  itself.  The  carnal  heart  is  at  enmity  not  only  with 
God,  but  with  itself.  Pleasure  it  may  have,  but  not  peace.  Sin  has  destroyed  the 
balance  of  our  nature,  which  only  the  influence  of  God's  Spirit  can  either  preserve 
or  restore.  The  love  of  God  being  absent,  the  ruling  affection  of  the  soul  is  want- 
ing. First,  the  word  of  Christ  applied  to  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  brings 
back  God  to  the  throne  of  the  heart,  and  love  to  Him  becomes  the  ruling  affection. 
Next,  this  puts  the  law  of  God  in  a  wholly  new  Ught.  Its  condemning  terror  being 
taken  away  by  the  blood  of  the  Cross,  we  find  that,  instead  of  an  enemy,  it  is  a 
friend.  So  the  schism  between  duty  and  inclination,  law  and  love,  conscience  and 
will,  is  healed.  Then,  as  nothing  so  divides  the  soul  as  the  multitude  of  varying 
aims,  and  nothing  so  unites  it  as  to  have  all  its  powers  absorbed  in  one  practical 
pursuit ;  the  gospel  gives  us  a  single  object,  and  that  the  noblest  to  live  for — the 
glory  of  Christ ;  and  a  single  hope,  and  that  the  most  precious  and  certain — eternal 
life  in  inseparable  union  with  Christ  and  His  Church.  3.  When  the  soul  is  thus  at 
peace  with  God,  and  at  peace  with  itself,  it  is  comparatively  an  easy  thing  to  keep  it  at 
peace  in  the  midst  of  all  outward  causes  of  trouble.  He  could  easily,  if  He  pleased, 
keep  us  out  of  the  reach  of  trouble  ;  but  He  sees  it  fitter  and  happier  to  make  us 
experience  His  power  to  give  peace  in  the  midst  of  it.  He  has  given  us  our  hope 
in  Him  "  as  the  anchor  of  the  soul,"  and  He  will  have  it  proved  in  the  storm.  And 
the  greatest  triumph  of  Divine  peace  is  that  which  our  Saviour  promises,  "  These 
things  have  I  spoken  unto  you  that  in  Me  ye  might  have  peace  "  (Isa.  xxvi.  3).  4. 
The  fullest  manifestation  of  God's  character  as  the  God  of  peace  is  to  be  revealed 
and  enjoyed  hereafter.  There  is  a  world  of  peace.  There  ren  a  aeth  a  rest  for  the 
people  of  God.  {E.  R.  Conder,  D.D.)  The  God  of  peace: — Note — I.  The  titlb. 
Mars  amongst  the  heathens  was  called  the  god  of  war ;  Janus  was  worshipped  in 
periods  of  strife;  but  our  God  styles  Himself  the  God  of  peace.  Although  He 
permits  war  sometimes  for  necessary  purposes,  and  has  even  styled  Himself  the 
Lord,  mighty  in  battle,  yet  His  holy  mind  abhors  bloodshed.  Peace  is  His  delight. 
L  This  is  10  with  all  the  Persons  in  the  Trinity.    (1)  God  the  Father  is  the  God  of 


ORAP.  xn.]  ROMANS.  785 

peace,  for  He  planned  the  great  covenant  of  peace ;  He  JQstifies,  and  thereby  im- 
plants  peace  in  the  souL     (2)  God  the  Son  is  the  God  of  peace ;  for  "  He  ia  oar 

Eeace,"  &o.  He  makes  peace  between  God  and  man,  in  the  conscience  and  in  the 
eart,  and  in  the  Church.  (3)  The  Holy  Ghost  is  the  God  of  peace.  He  of  old 
bronght  peace  out  of  confusion,  by  the  brooding  of  His  wings.  So  in  dark  chaotio 
souls  He  is  the  God  of  peace.  When  by  earthly  cares  we  are  tossed  about,  He 
says,  "Peace  be  still."  He  it  is  who  on  the  Sabbath-day  briogs  His  people  into  a 
state  of  serenity.  And  He  shall  be  the  God  of  peace  at  life's  latest  hour,  and  land 
xiB  aare  in  heaven.  2.  He  is  the  God  of  peace  because — (1)  He  created  nothing  but 
peace.  See  if  in  the  great  harp  of  nature  there  is  one  string  which  when  touched 
by  its  Maker  giveth  forth  discord ;  see  if  the  pipes  of  this  great  organ  do  not  all 
play  harmoniously  1  When  God  made  the  angels  did  He  fashion  one  of  them  with 
the  least  ill-will  in  His  bosom  ?  Go  into  the  Garden  of  Eden :  there  is  nothing  ol 
tumult.  (2)  He  restores  it.  Nothing  shows  a  man  to  be  much  fonder  of  peace 
than  when  he  seeks  to  make  peace.  "  Blessed  are  the  peacemakers."  God  is  the 
great  Peacemaker.  When  Satan  fell,  there  was  war  in  heaven.  God  made  peace 
there,  for  He  smote  Satan.  But  when  man  fell,  God  made  peace  not  by  His  power, 
bat  by  His  mercy.  (3)  He  is  the  Preserver  of  peace,  (a)  When§ver  I  see  peace  in 
the  world,  I  ascribe  it  to  God.  So  combustible  axe  the  materials  here  that  I  am 
ever  apprehensive  of  war.  "  Whence  come  wars  and  fightings  ?  Come  they  not 
from  your  lusts  ?  "  If,  then,  we  desire  peace  between  nations,  let  us  seek  it  of  God, 
who  is  the  great  Pacificator,  [b)  There  is  an  inward  peace  which  God  alone  can 
keep.  Is  thy  peace  marred  ?  Go  to  God,  and  He  can  say,  "  Peace,  be  still  " ;  for 
He  is  the  God  of  peace.  (4)  He  shall  perfect  and  consummate  it  at  last.  There  is 
war  in  the  world  now ;  but  there  is  a  time  coming  when  there  shall  be  peace  on 
earth  and  throughout  all  God's  dominions.  H.  The  benediction.  1.  Its  necessity. 
Because  there  are  enemies  to  peace  always  lurking  in  all  societies.  (1)  Error.  (2) 
Ambition.  •'  Diotrephes  loveth  to  have  the  pre-eminence,"  and  that  fellow  haa 
spoiled  many  a  happy  Church.  (3)  Anger.  (4)  Pride.  (5)  Envy.  2.  Its  appro- 
priateness. We  indeed  ought  to  have  peace  amongst  ourselves.  Joseph  said  to 
his  brethren  when  they  were  going  home  to  his  father's  homse,  "  See  that  ye  fall 
not  out  by  the  way."  Te  have  aU  one  father,  ye  are  of  one  family.  The  way  is 
rough ;  there  are  enemies  to  stop  you.  Keep  together ;  stand  by  one  another ; 
defend  each  other's  character.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Peace  with  all : — I.  Whenob 
IT- FLOWS — from  the  God  of  peace.  II.  How  it  is  becubbd — by  His  presence. 
m.  What  is  thb  sssult — peace— 1.  Within.  2.  Withoat.  8.  With  all.  {J. 
Lytht  DJ).) 


CHAPTEB  XYL 


Vbhb.  1-16.  The  eondusion  of  the  EpUtle : — 1.  This  Is  acareely  the  kind  ol 
conclusion  that  one  would  have  expected.  One  would  have  thought  that  the  rapt 
apostle,  having  been  borne  to  the  loftiest  circles  of  contemplation,  would  have  now 
flung  his  inspired  pen  upon  the  page  he  had  immortalised.  Instead  of  this,  he 
threads  his  way  into  many  of  the  minutest  details  of  Christian  life,  and  concludes 
his  unparalleled  effort  by  blessing  many  who  had  lightened  his  toU.  2.  We  dare 
now  approach  the  apostle.  While  he  was  pursuing  some  of  the  issues  of  his 
"  great  argument,"  we  could  but  gaze  with  fearf  ulness  (chap.  xi.  33).  Now  he  speaks 
friendship's  simple  and  holy  word  we  can  better  see  the  man.  This  summary  of 
friendly  reminiscences  and  fraternal  salutations — I.  EeveaiiS  the  true  bond  oi 
uoBAi,  UNITT.  1.  Look  at  the  representative  character  of  the  list.  Ton  have  men 
and  women,  old  and  young,  prisoners  and  freemen,  apostles  of  note  and  persons 
who  are  lost  in  obscurity ;  men  of  prudence  and  of  enthusiasm.  What  is  the 
secret  of  union  between  such  a  community  and  the  solitary  apostle  ?  Love.  This 
is  the  indissoluble  bond.  Every  other  tie  snaps.  Some  persons  have  suggested 
that  Paul  was  not  the  most  lovable  of  men.  Probably  this  was  so  according  to  the 
common  canons,  but  so  much  the  worse  for  the  common  canons.  Paul  was  a  man 
who  made  enemies  every  day,  but  the  man  who  is  most  hated  ia  also  the  man  who 
ia  most  loved.    While  forty  Jews  would  enter  into  a  tow  to  kiU  him,  Prisoilla  and 


736  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

Aquila  would  lay  "  down  their  own  necks  "  to  save  him  from  a  blow.  You  could 
not  comprehend  this  man  in  one  day's  acquaintance.  He  did  not  publish  a  full 
edition  of  himself  every  day.  He  must  be  much  known  to  be  much  loved.  Hence 
the  affection  of  this  representative  community.  They  had  sat  with  him  by  the 
quiet  fireside ;  in  the  man-revealing  company  of  little  children ;  they  had  heard 
him  thrill  the  vast  assembly ;  they  had  listened  to  him  praying  within  their  own 
homes ;  they  had  seen  him  make  Felix  quake  and  turn  Agrippa  pale ;  and  the 
closeness  of  their  acquaintance  explained  the  depth  of  their  affection.  2.  Here  is 
encouragement  for  all  true  moral  labourers.  You  may  meet  with  much  ingrati- 
tude, yet  if  you  truly  labour  you  will  come  into  a  large  estate  of  love,  and  love  will 
do  more  for  us  than  genius  or  wealth  or  prestige.  II.  JusimES  the  employment 
OF  both  sexes  in  moral  service.  Note — 1.  The  honourable  mention  which  ia 
made  of  certain  beloved  sisters ;  and  it  is  not  to  be  overlooked  that  they  are 
referred  to  as  directly  connected  with  Church  work.  Phebe  was  a  deaconess  and 
went  to  Rome  on  a  Church  errand.  The  apostle's  testimony  concerning  her  is 
brief,  but  fuU  of  significance.  It  is  as  though  he  had  said,  When  the  eye  sees  her 
it  blesses  her.  Little  children  hail  her  presence  as  they  hail  the  morning  sun- 
shine. Misery  dries  its  eyes  when  she  approaches ;  she  never  puts  out  her  hand 
except  to  succour  the  servants  of  Christ.  Priscilla  was  a  "  helper  in  Christ  Jesus  " ; 
the  beloved  Persia  •'  laboured  much  in  the  Lord " ;  and  Mary  "  bestowed  much 
labour."  Thus  shall  the  righteous  be  had  in  everlasting  remembrance.  If  you 
ask  me  whether  I  object  to  a  woman  preaching,  I  answer,  I  never  object  to  any 
woman  doing  a  good  thing.  Apart  from  this,  however,  there  is  much  Church-work 
which  a  woman  can  do  much  better  than  a  man.  At  the  same  time  note  Titus  ii. 
1-5.  2.  The  great  diversity  in  their  methods  of  operation.  Tryphena  and 
Tryphosa  laboured  in  the  Lord ;  Persis  laboured  "  much  "  in  the  Lord.  Tryphena 
and  Tryphosa  may  represent  either  those  who  can  only  do  a  little,  but  who  do  that 
little  with  all  their  heart ;  or  those  halt-day  teachers  who  could  come  both  times, 
but  prefer  not  to  do  so ;  our  attendants  who  regulate  their  evangelical  zeal  by  the 
barometer,  and  who  are  now  sunny  as  July,  now  sullen  as  November.  On  the 
other  hand,  Persis  is  always  at  work ;  she  can  never  do  enough ;  her  godly 
ambition  is  never  satisfied.  3.  That  all  those  persons  laboured  "  in  the  Lord."  U 
you  ask  me  whether  unconverted  persons  should  teach  in  the  Sabbath  School,  I 
answer — Teach  what  ?  If  the  Sabbath  School  aims  to  teach  the  way  of  salvation, 
then  how  can  those  who  do  not  know  that  way  teach  it  ?  How  can  the  man  who 
does  not  know  geometry  teach  geometry?  It  is  argued  that  many  by  so  doing  have 
found  salvation.  I  know  it.  I  rejoice  in  it.  At  the  same  time  it  is  a  risky 
experiment.  Would  you  engage  a  dishonest  man  to  teach  your  children  honesty, 
in  the  hope  that  by  so  doing  he  might  become  conscientious  ?  Would  you  engage 
an  unskilled  man  to  teach  your  children  music,  with  the  hope  that  he  himself 
might  gain  skill  through  practice  ?  If  some  teachers  have  become  saved,  may  not 
some  scholars  have  been  lost,  or  have  received  wrong  ideas  of  religion?  The 
school  had  better  be  taught  by  one  man  who  loves  Jesus  than  by  a  thousand  who 
have  only  heard  of  Him.  HI.  Waebants  the  exercise  of  discrimination  as  to 
THE  RESPECTIVE  MERITS  OF  MORAL  LABOURERS.  The  apostlo  conuects  the  highest 
encomium  with  some  names,  and  only  mentions  others.  As  an  honest  man  he 
entertains  different  opinions  about  different  people.  He  loves  some,  and  others  he 
lovee  very  much.  Imagine  the  Church  assembled  to  hear  this  letter  read.  To  one 
name  there  is  a  compliment,  to  another  none  I  Amplias  is  "  my  beloved  in  the 
Lord,"  while  not  a  word  is  said  about  Philologus  or  Julia  I  Andronicus  and  Junia 
are  "  of  note  among  the  apostles  " ;  while  Nereus  and  his  sister  are  coldly  men- 
tioned without  a  flower  being  flung  to  either  of  them  !  Apelles  is  "  approved  in 
Christ " ;  but  not  a  word  is  said  about  Olympas  1  Think  what  jealousy  might  have 
been  flred  in  the  Eoman  breast  1  Only  grace  could  overcome  the  passions  under 
Buch  circumstances.  Let  us  beware  of  envy.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  conclusion  of 
the  Epistle  as  a  revelation  of  PauVs  character : — As,  in  the  main  body  of  the  Epistle, 
Paul  appears  to  have  been  a  very  knowing  man,  so,  in  these  appurtenances  of  it, 
he  appears  to  have  been  a  very  loving  man.  {Matthew  Henry, )  The  salutations : 
— I.  Why  should  such  a  cataloqoe  op  obscure  names  find  a  place  in  what  was 

INTENDED   TO  BE   A  UNIVERSAL  AND    PERMANENT    REVELATION     OF    THE    DiVINB    WZLIi  f 

1.  It  is  obvious  to  remark  that  if  by  mentioning  them  by  name  was  fitted  to  answer 
a  good  end  in  the  Church  for  whose  advantage  the  Epistle  was  primarily  written, 
that  is  a  sufficient  reason.  Such  kind  remembrances  were  plamly  fitted  to  knit 
more  closely  the  bonds  of  Christian  love  between  them  and  the  apostle,  and 


08A».  zn.]  ROMANS.  737 

between  him  and  the  as  yet  unknown  members  of  the  Chnrch.  To  the  persons 
noticed  it  must  have  been  gratifying  and  stimulating,  and  while  elevating  them  in 
the  estimation  of  their  brethren,  it  enlarged  their  sphere  of  nsefol  influence.  It 
must  have  been  felt  by  all  as  a  compliment  to  the  Church,  and  have  called  forth 
kindly  feelings  from  all  toward  Paul.  2.  But  the  passage  is  useful  for  all  time  and 
in  all  places.  (1)  It  strongly  corroborates  the  evidence  of  the  genuineness  of  the 
Epistle.  It  could  not  have  occurred  to  a  forger  to  have  introduced  suoh  a  train  of 
salutations,  especially  as  the  author  had  never  been  at  Bome.  (2)  It  presents  a 
very  lovely  picture  of  living  Christianity  both  in  the  writer  and  those  whom  ha 
greets.  We  see  how  well  the  principles  of  that  religion  harmonise  with  and  draw 
forth  all  that  is  amiable  and  tender  in  the  human  constitution ;  how  consistent  a 
deep  knowledge  of  Christianity  and  an  ardent  zeal  for  its  progress  are  with 
the  dignified  proprieties  of  an  advanced  state  of  civilisation,  and  the  gentle 
charities  and  graceful  delicacies  of  the  most  refined  friendship.  The  <  things  con- 
sidered, the  passage  is  a  striking  illustration  of — '•  All  Scripture  ...  is  profitable." 

II.   How   OAIfB   THB    APOSTLB   TO  BB   SO   tNTIMATB   WITH    TEB    INHABITANTS  07  A   OITT 

HB  HAS  NEVEB  SEEN  ?    Some  supposc  that  Aquila  and  Priscilla  (Acts  xviii.  2, 8, 11) 
had  given  him  much  particular  information  respecting  members  of  the  Boman 
Church.    Perhaps  so ;  but  the  true  account  seems  to  have  been  this.    Bome  was 
then  the  metropolis  of  the  world.    There  was  a  constant  influx  of  persons  from  all 
qnarters  of  the  empire  to  that  city.    Paul  had  now  for  nearly  thirty  years  been 
engaged  in  various  parts,  and  it  is  not  at  all  wonderful  that  many  of  his  converts 
should  have  taken  up  their  residence  in  the  capital.    A  man  who  for  thirty  years 
had  mixed  with  society  throughout  the  leading  towns  of  England  and  Scotland,  on 
visiting  London  for  the  first  time  would  be  likely  to  find  himself  in  the  midst  of 
friends.    Besides  the  ordinary  reasons  which  make  men  leave  the  provinces  for  the 
metropolis  there  was  this,  that  till  the  imperial  persecutions  Christians  seem  to 
have  been  safer  in  Bome  than  anywhere  else.    {J.  Brown,  D.D.)     The  salutations : 
— The  change  from  sustained  argument  and  lofty  appeal  to  these  simple  greetings 
is  like  a  descent  from  the  heart  of  some  grand  moontain  scenery  to  the  levels  of  • 
country  garden.    Note — I.   Thb  pabticulab  salutations.    1.  The  term  may  be 
simply  equivalent  to  our  own  ordinary  message  of  Christian  remembrance  or 
regard.    In  one  place,  howcv  r,  it  becomes  more  definite.    ••  Salute  one  another 
with  a  holy  kiss."    The  kiss  \  as  no  more  than  the  clasp  of  the  hand  among  our- 
selves.    But  it  early  acquired  a  certain  specific  meaning  in  the  Christian  fellowship 
nnder  the  name  of  "  the  holy  kiss,"  "  the  kiss  of  charity,"  or  "  the  kiss  of  peace." 
It  is  mentioned  by  Justin  Martyr  as  a  recognised  part  of  the  communion-service. 
The  custom  remained  for  centuries  as  a  symbol  of  reconciliation,  and  its  spirit  still 
survives  wherever  "  brethren  dwell  together  in  unity."    2.  There  is  another  mark 
of  primitive  times  in  "the  church  that  is  in  their  house,"  ••  the  brethren  that  are 
with  them."    The  Boman  believers  met,  not  in  one  large  hall,  but  in  different 
private  houses.    Our  Epistle  would  have  to  travel  from  one  to  another  till  all  had 
opportunities  of  hearing  it.     One  advantage  of  this  lay  in  the  fact  that  they  would 
be  Uttle  likely  to  catch  the  eye  of  the  government.    Another  lay  in  the  homeliness 
and  heartiness  which  they  imparted  to  the  Christian  service  and  life,  which,  with 
our  more  finished  organisations,  we  are  very  liable  to  lose.    "  Where  two  or  three 
are  gathered  together,"  Ac.    3.  We  have  no  photographs  of  those  ancient  saints, 
yet  as  we  read  we  can  see  them,  and  catch  their  look  of  pleasure  as  each  name  ia 
uttered  and  each  greeting  received.    Shadows  they  are  to  the  casual  reader,  but 
every  name  represents  a  separate  Christian  soul,  and  usually  a  vivid  phrase  of 
description  helps  to  stamp  the  name  upon  the  memory.    (1)  In  one  verse  is  a 
batch  of  bare  names,  all  unknown.    One  wonders  what  manner  of  men  were  these 
Jver.  14).    (2)  Here  is  another  list,  with  a  certain  sense  of  domestic  life  underlying 
it,  but  nothing  more  (ver.  15).    (3)  Others,  again,  are  marked  by  a  single  term  of 
affection  or  of  commendation  (ver.  9).     (4)  But  we  have  wider  openings  into 
character  in  the  salutations  to  those  of  the  household  of  Aristobulus  and  Narcissus. 
Both  would  have  large  retinues  of  slaves,  and  it  is  to  slaves  that  the  present 
reference  is  probably  to  be  applied.     (5)  "  Salute  Herodion  my  kinsman."    The 
word  is  also  applied  to  five  others.    Had  Paul,  then,  so  many  Christian  cousins? 
It  would  be  gratifying  to  believe  it,  but  as  he  speaks  of  "  My  brethren,  my  kinsmen 
according  to  the    flesh,"  meaning   his    fellow-countrymen,  no   doubt   he  here 
addresses  Christian  Jewe.     (6)  There  is  an  exquisite  touch  in  the  notice  of  Bufus 
(ver.  13),  who  has  been  sometimes  identified  as  the  son  of  Simon  the  Cyrenian ; 
but  the  name  was  common.    Who,  and  what,  however,  was  she  who  had  twa 
VOL.  n.  47 


738  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xti. 

claimants  on  her  motherly  attention  ?  Perhaps  when  Paul's  mother  had  cast  him 
off  this  Christian  lady  took  in  the  great  friendless  man,  and  treated  him  like  her 
own  Bufus,  and  made  him  welcome  to  her  home,  as  Peter  was  to  Mary's  home  in 
Jerusalem.  (7)  Here,  again,  are  glimpses  of  Christian  experience,  which  would  be 
otherwise  unknown  to  us  (vers.  5,  7).  For  "  Achaia  "  in  the  former  passage  most 
of  the  ancient  MSS.  have  "  Asia."  Epenetus  then  was  probably  an  Ephesian,  led 
to  Christ  at  the  time  of  Paul's  first  visit,  the  firstfruits  of  his  ministry  there,  and 
the  pledge  of  aU  that  followed.  In  Andronicus  and  Junia  we  have  firstfruits  of  the 
gospel  during  its  yet  earlier  triumphs,  while  Saul  was  breathing  out  slaughter 
against  the  name  of  Jesus.  Were  they  among  the  "  strangers  of  Eome  "  converted 
at  Pentecost  ?  It  appears  so,  and  as  "  apostles  "  in  the  broader  acceptation  of  the 
word  they  were  noted  for  their  energy  and  success.  They  were  •'  fellow-prisoners  " 
also ;  the  trials  as  well  as  the  labours  of  the  kingdom  they  had  bravely  borne.  (8) 
The  best-known  names  are  Priscilla  and  Aquila.  Comrades,  "  helpers  in  Christ 
Jesus,"  at  whose  side  Paul  had  so  often  sat  stitching  the  tough  hair-cloth,  and, 
when  work  was  laid  by,  had  so  joyfully  bent  in  prayer !  He  thought  of  all  that 
fellowship ;  but  here  his  most  vivid  recollection  is  of  some  extremity  of  danger, 
when  that  gallant  pair  interposed  at  the  risk  of  limb  and  life  to  save  "  the  light  of 
Israel."  Paul  never  forgot  a  kindness  or  forsook  a  friend.  (9)  We  must  not  fail 
to  glance  round  the  group  that  surrounds  the  apostle  as  he  dictates  these  last 
sentences.  They  are  waiting  to  add  their  salutations.  There  are  his  brother- 
missionaries  ;  first,  Timotheus,  specially  singled  out  as  "  my  workfellow,"  then 
Lucius,  Jason,  and  Sosipater,  strangers  to  him  a  few  years  ago,  but  now  his  very 
*'  kinsmen  "  in  Christ.  There  sits  the  scribe,  interrupting  the  writing,  and  insert* 
ing  his  own  greeting  in  his  own  name  (ver.  22).  The  hospitable  Gaius,  under 
whose  roof  they  all  gathered,  next  breathes  his  brotherly  blessing.  And  finally 
occur  the  names  of  two  Corinthian  Christians  who  would  seem  to  have  come  in  by 
accident.  Both  Erastus,  the  "  chamberlain  of  the  city,"  and  Quartus,  probably  a 
slave,  in  Christ  Jesus  are  on  the  same  level ;  one  sentence  serves  to  carry  word 
from  both.  II.  The  gbnebaIi  impbessions  which  the  saldtations  abb  fitted  to 
liEAVE.  Note — 1.  Their  heartiness.  There  are  those  who  hold  that  either  to 
bestow  praise,  or  to  accept  it,  is  inconsistent  with  Christian  simplicity.  No  doubt 
there  is  a  danger  lest  we  become  elated  with  a  sense  of  our  usefulness.  Yet  as  the 
Lord  Himself  hath  need  of  us,  welcomes  every  earnest  effort,  and  says  of  it,  ••  Well 
done  1 "  He  will  scarcely  deny  us  the  privilege  of  saying  "  Well  done "  to  one 
another.  Let  the  eye  run  down  this  single  page  and  mark  how  well  these  saints 
did.  Let  us  be  by  all  means  honest  and  candid,  where  it  is  needful,  in  censuring 
our  brethren's  faults,  but  shall  not  honesty  carry  us  also  in  the  opposite  direction  ? 
2.  Their  earnest  and  affectionate  friendliness.  The  apostle  sits  down,  as  an  elder 
brother  might,  and  is  on  the  warmest  terms  with  every  one — the  slaves  no  less  than 
the  masters,  simple  "  brethren  "  equally  with  chamberlains.  What  was  this  but 
treading  in  the  track  of  the  Master  who  had  said,  "  Whosoever  shall  do  the  will  of 
My  Father  in  heaven,  the  same  is  My  brother  and  My  sister  and  mother  "  ?  No 
one  can  urge  that  we  have  too  much  of  that  spirit  in  our  modem  churches.  And 
yet  how  many  of  our  social  and  ecclesiastical  troubles  would  pass  if  it  more 
generally  prevailed  1  3.  If  these  Christians  reaUy  loved  one  another  with  so  ardent 
an  affection  what  did  they  do  to  prove  it  ?  The  answer  is  that  they  "  laid  down 
their  own  necks"  for  one  another;  they  "bestowed  much  labour"  on  their 
brethren.  They  threw  their  houses  open  for  hospitable  entertainment  and  united 
worship.  They  stood  ready  to  help  a  foreign  sister  in  whatever  business  she  might 
have  in  hand.  The  poor,  the  sick,  the  friendless,  became  the  special  objects  of 
their  care.  That  can  have  been  no  hollow  profession  which  inspired  the  confession 
from  their  enemies,  *'  Behold  how  they  love  one  another  I "  Conclusion :  The 
Epistle  closes  in  an  atmosphere  of  warm  and  genial  affection.  We  too  wish  one 
another  well.  Is  it  not  enough  ?  Nay  ;  there  is  another  voice  to  be  heard,  and  a 
more  gracious  greeting  to  be  bestowed,  and  a  dearer  fellowship  to  be  enjoyed  (ver. 
24).  {W.  Brock.)  The  salutations  to  the  Church  at  Rome  prove  that  Christianity 
— I.  Not  only  teaches  fbiendshxp,  but  sanctifies  it.  II.  Not  onlt  bequibes 
THE  pbopbieties  OF  LIFE,  BUT  BEAUTIFIES  THEM.  Here  are — 1.  Salutations  to 
friends.  2.  Commendations  of  merit.  3.  Tokens  of  respect  for  the  aged  and 
experienced.  4.  Kind  words  for  all.  IIL  Not  only  inculcates  love,  but  bn- 
VOBOES  THE  PBACTicB  OF  IT.  1.  Somo  Buccoured  the  Church.  2.  Some  helped  the 
minister.  3.  All  loved  one  another.  IV.  Not  only  insists  ttpon  love  and  piety, 
BUI  BieBisousiiT  BBWABDS  THBM.    Consider  this  honourable  record.    1.  Mark  tiae 


CHIP.  XVI.]  ROMANS.  789 

epeoial  distinctions  it  exhibits.  2.  Be  sore  that  the  same  will  be  the  case  in  the 
entries  made  in  the  book  of  life.  (.7,  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  salutations  of  St.  Paul : 
—I.  Thbow  uoht  upon  the  apostle's  chabacter.  We  are  at  once  reminded  of 
"  the  care  of  all  the  churches  '  which  rested  upon  him.  He  had  not  founded  this 
Boman  Church,  and  yet  with  what  a  warmth  of  Christian  affection  does  he  regard 
it,  while  there  are  some  in  it  whom  he  mentions  with  an  emphasis  of  special  regard 
whom  he  had  known  in  other  Churches.  With  the  burden  of  aU  the  Churches 
weighing  upon  his  heart  every  hour  he  forgets  no  act  of  kindness.  II.  REFUTma 
THB  Petbinb  origin  op  THE  RoMAN  Churoh,  upou  which  the  assumptions  of  the 
Papacy  are  based.  There  is  no  well-authenticated  evidence  that  Peter  ever  lived  in 
Rome  at  all.  He  is  spoken  of  as  "  the  apostle  of  the  circumcision,"  just  as  Paul 
was  "  the  apostle  of  the  uncircumcision,"  and  we  expect  to  find  him  exercising  hia 
pastorate  at  Jerusalem  rather  than  at  Rome,  and  accordingly  it  is  to  Jerusalem 
that  Paul  goes,  and  there  he  repeatedly  finds  him.  But  on  the  supposition  that  he 
presided  over  this  Church,  it  must  have  been  by  the  time  that  Paul  wrote  this 
Epistle.  And  if  so,  could  Paul  have  omitted  his  name  from  these  salutations  ? 
And  if  Peter  had  ever  been  there  at  an  earlier  period,  would  there  have  been  no 
grateful  reference  now  to  the  good  which  he  had  done  ?  The  truth  is  that  the 
first  link  in  the  chain  of  argument  for  the  papal  supremacy  is  wanting,  and  this 
makes  the  rest  worthless.    LQ.  Give  us  ikformation  as  to  the  manner  in  which 

MEMBERS     WERE     TRANSFERRED     FROM     ONE     CsUBOH     TO    ANOTHER.        Phcbe    WaS    a 

deaconess  in  the  Church  at  Cenchrea,  and  probably  a  widow  possessed  of  con- 
siderable worldly  substance,  whose  business  now  carried  her  to  Rome.  And  so  she 
brings  with  her,  written  by  Paul  in  his  own  name  and  in  that  of  the  Church,  a 
cert^oate,  in  which  not  only  her  Church  membership  is  attested,  but  witness  is 
borne  to  the  many  good  services  she  had  performed  in  her  native  Church  ;  and  her 
brethren  at  Rome  are  asked  to  recompense  her  in  some  degree  for  her  ministries  of 
love.  Note  two  valuable  and  interesting  facts — the  oneness  of  all  the  Churches  ia 
those  primitive  times,  and  the  fact  that  membership  in  one  at  once  secured  a 
loving  welcome  into  every  other.  Phebe  was  to  feel  that  she  was  really  passing^ 
from  one  home  to  another.  What  a  lesson,  if  not  a  rebuke,  to  our  Churches  in  this 
matter  I  The  transference  of  members  is  too  much  a  mere  cold  formality,  alike  in 
giving  and  receiving,  and  hundreds  of  persons  change  their  residences  without  a 
letter  of  commendation  at  all.  Is  it  any  wonder,  then,  that  so  many  pass  out  of 
sight  altogether  ?  IV.  iNDiCATiNa  those  who  are  worthy  of  special  commenda- 
tion. 1.  There  are  those  of  whom  Paul  speaks  with  great  warmth,  because  of  their 
general  Christian  excellence  and  eminence.  Such  were  Epenetus,  Staohys,  Amplias, 
and  Apelles.  2.  Then  there  were  others  who  stood  forth  as  specially  distinguished 
by  one  particular  excellence.  (1)  We  distinguish  among  the  givers  Aquila,  Pris- 
cSla,  and  Urbane  his  helpers,  and.  Phebe,  "the  succourer,"  &o.  The  form  which  this 
liberality  took  was  doubtless  shaped  by  outward  circumstances,  but  the  rehef  of 
the  poor,  the  orphan,  and  the  widow,  defraying  the  expenses  of  a  constantly 
extending  evangelism,  and  the  hospitable  entertainment  of  Christian  strangers, 
were  prevailing  forms  of  goodness.  We  know  that  one  great  aim  of  the  early 
teachers  was  to  educate  its  members  to  habits  of  giving,  so  that  it  should  not  be  a 
mere  fitful  effort.  It  was  the  gospel  that  first  did  earnest  battle  with  the  selfish- 
ness of  man,  and  turned  beneficence  into  a  system.  And  when  Julian  tried  to 
engraft  such  beneficence  upon  the  sapless  tree  of  paganism,  he  complained  that 
while  the  heathen  did  nothing  for  the  support  of  their  own  poor,  the  Christians 
ministered  to  the  wants  of  all.  (2)  Then  how  many  an  earnest  worker  there  was 
in  that  Church,  such  as  Mary,  Tryphena  and  Tryphosa,  and  Persis  I  The  form  of 
their  sacred  labour  would  also  be  shaped  by  their  natural  capacities,  by  the  wants 
of  the  Church  and  the  community,  and  also  by  the  advice  of  pastors.  Many  would 
teach,  and  others  would  be  found  lodging  strangers,  relieving  the  afflicted,  and 
diligently  following  every  good  work.  (3)  And  there  were  earnest  sufferers  too, 
such  as  "  Andronicus  and  Junia,"  who  had  been  Paul's  companions  in  prison  ;  and 
"  Priscilla  and  Aquila,  who  for  his  life  had  laid  down  their  own  necks."  Thus  did 
the  spirit  already  begin  to  show  itself  which  was  afterwards  to  shine  forth  in  many 
a  glorious  martyrdom.  V.  Show  the  important  place  which  Christian  women 
held  in  the  early  Church,  and  which  we  may  therefore  conclude  they  were 
intended  to  hold  as  workers  in  all  ages  in  the  Church  of  Christ.  In  this  brief 
enumeration  of  sixteen  verses  nine  or  ten  women  are  named  as  having  been  fellow- 
helpers  with  the  apostle,  and  having  consecrated  themselves  to  "  the  fellowship  of 
the  ministry  to  the  saints."    No  doubt  the  peculiar  condition  of  society,  which  to 


740  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XTC' 

a  great  extent  isolated  women,  rendered  the  laboars  of  Christian  women  indispen- 
sable.  And  it  would  seem  as  if  a  splendid  sphere  of  usefulness  were  at  this  hoar 
opening  up  before  Christian  women  in  connection  with  missionary  enterprise  in  the 
East.  There  are  more  than  fifty  millions  of  women  in  India  who  are  only  accessible 
by  the  gospel  through  women.  VI.  Illustbatb  the  domestic  chabactbb  o» 
Chbistianitt.  On  one  occasion  at  least,  when  mentioning  a  husband  and  wife, 
the  apostle  speaks  of  "the  Church  which  was  in  their  house."  It  may  be  that  a 
number  of  the  Christians  were  accustomed  to  come  together  in  a  private  house  for 
social  worship.  But  the  kernel-thought  around  which  all  the  others  gather  is  that 
all  the  members  of  that  family  were  Christian  believers,  and  that  they  therefore 
formed  a  little  Church,  as  every  such  family  does,  with  its  worship,  its  Christian 
teaching,  its  mutual  oversight,  and  its  unity  and  love.  Conclusion :  1.  Suppose 
the  apostle  were  now  on  earth,  and  were  to  write  a  letter  to  this  congregation, 
should  I  be  spoken  of  as  one  who  had  "  succoured  the  saints  "  ?  &o.  2.  In  Paul's 
later  Epistles  his  salutations  become  fewer  and  fewer — the  greater  number  of  those 
whom  he  had  known  having  died.  It  is  a  solemn  thought,  "  The  night 
Cometh  wherein  no  man  can  work."  (A.  Thomson,  D.D.'^  Apostolic  com- 
mendations and  cautions : — For  many  reasons  this  chapter  is  a  fitting  ooncla- 
sion  to  the  Epistle.  For — (1)  It  indicates  to  us  that  doctrine  is  subservient 
to  personal  piety.  (2)  That  very  sacred  social  ties  should  exist  between  a  pastor 
and  bis  people.  (3)  That  right  relationship  to  Christ  creates  a  right  mutual 
relationship  between  men.  Note — I.  The  commendations  and  geeetinos  op  thb 
APOSTLE.  The  commendation  of  Phebe,  who  is  as  a  sweet  flower  in  the  landscape 
where  the  apostle  himself  is  a  majestic  oak,  and  all  the  commendations  and  greet- 
ings that  follow,  lead  us  to  look  at  true  Church  fellowship — 1.  In  its  variety. 
There  are  men  and  women  of  varied  (1)  stations,  (2)  characters,  (3)  services. 
There  is  the  chamberlain  and  the  slave ;  the  active  and  passive  temperament,  the 
laborious  and  the  hospitable.  2.  Its  common  elements.  Common — (1)  Relation- 
ship, "Our  sister."  (2)  Service,  "  Succourer  of  many."  (3)  Principle,  "As  it 
beoometh  saints."  II.  His  cautions.  The  saddest  fact  in  this,  and  in  all  these 
early  letters,  is  the  tone  in  which  the  apostle  has  to  speak  to  many  professed 
Christians.  In  his  words  of  caution  about  one  and  another  we  notice — 1.  The 
moumfnlness  of  the  fact  that  professed  Christians  have  to  be  so  spoken  of.  2. 
The  discernment  and  courage  needed  rightly  to  deal  with  such  characters.  IIL 
The  GREETINGS  PBOM  ONE  Chubch  TO  ANOTHER.  Here  Corinth  greets  Borne.  Chris- 
tianity creates  relationships  that  are — 1.  Cosmopolitan.  The  inherent  element  o{ 
a  Church  is  that  it  is  Catholic.  2.  Cordial,  "  Holy  kiss."  3.  Practical,  "  Receive." 
(U.  R.  Thomas.)  Personal  messages: — 1.  If  a  modem  clergyman  were  writing 
to  his  old  parishioners,  what  would  be  more  natural  than  at  the  end  of  the  letter 
he  should  add  affectionate  remembrances  to  any  poor  pensioners  and  aged  widows 
whom  he  had  known  ?  Felix  Neff,  the  Apostle  of  the  High  Alps,  two  days  before 
his  death,  being  scarcely  able  to  see,  traced  the  following  lines  at  different  inter- 
vals, in  large  and  irregular  characters,  "  Adieu,  dear  friend  AndrS  Blanc,  Antoine 
Blanc,  all  my  friends,  Pelissiers  whom  I  love  tenderly,  Francis  Dumont  and  his 
wife,  Isaac  and  his  wife,  beloved  Deslois,  Emilie  Bonnet,  Ac,  Alexandrine  and  her 
mother,  all,  all  the  brethren  and  sisters  of  theirs,  adieu,  adieu."  2.  Doubtless  when 
Paul's  greetings  were  first  read  in  the  little  churches  they  would  have  been  listened 
to  with  the  deepest  interest.  The  slave  or  the  poor  woman  who  heard  his  or 
her  name  mentioned,  "  How  kind,  how  good  it  was  of  Paulus  to  remember  me  I 
What  a  help  it  is  to  me  to  know  that  the  dear  and  holy  apostle,  with  the  care  of 
all  the  churches  upon  him,  and  living  as  he  does  in  the  midst  of  plots  and  of 
perils,  yet  thinks  of  and  prays  for  me  1  If  I  be  dear  to  him,  must  I  not  also  be 
dear  to  his  Lord  and  to  mine  ?  "  3.  But  why  should  it  be  to  us  a  part  of  our  publio 
worship  to  hear  these  salutations  read  to-day?  There  is  no  more  in  these  names 
of  Amplias,  &c.,  than  in  the  names  of  Brown,  or  Jones,  or  Smith.  They  were  just 
the  names  of  poor,  ordinary  persons,  on  whom  the  nobles  or  the  careless  women 
would  have  looked  down  with  scorn.  And  yet  very  genuine  lessons  may  be  learned 
from  these  lists  of  names.  Note — I.  The  overflowing  ai-fectionateness  op  thb 
HEART  OF  Paul,  which  should  teach  us  the  lesson  of  kindliness,  the  family  affection  of 
the  Christian  life.  Christians  needed  each  other's  help  in  those  days.  They  were 
as  lambs  among  wolves.  "  See  how  those  Christians  love  one  another,"  said  the 
envious  heathen  then.  Alas  1  they  would  have  little  cause  to  say  so  now.  But 
these  lists  of  names  may  at  least  serve  to  remind  us  of  the  beauty  of  the  lost  ideaL 
II.  His  REGARD  FOR  CHRISTIAN  WOMEN,  which  should  teach  as  the  glory  of  Cfarif* 


CHAP,  m.]  ROMANS.  741 

tian  womanhood.  The  world  has  never  recognised  the  yast  debt  it  owes  to  Ohris* 
tian  women.  Even  la  this  day,  thoagh  women  do  more  than  men  in  the  great 
works  of  quiet,  anobtrusive  charity,  and  are  incomparably  more  thorough,  patient, 
tender,  skilfal,  and  self-denying  than  the  vast  majority  of  men,  yet  they  might  well 
complain  that  they  are  far  less  oared  for  in  onr  public  exhortations  than  men. 
Well,  it  was  not  so  with  Paul  In  this  chapter  alone  seven  Christian  women  aro 
recognised  with  words  of  gentleness  and  praise.  In  this  day  the  minds  of  holy 
and  noble  women  may  well  be  pained  by  the  mock  deference  and  hypocritical  compli- 
ments which  are  paid  them.  There  is  not  the  faintest  trace  of  this  in  Paul.  For 
foolish  and  unworthy  women  he  had  words  of  deserved  scorn.  In  days  when 
women  hved  for  the  most  part  in  unavoidable  ignorance  and  seclusion,  and  were 
shamefully  regarded  as  the  mere  chattels  and  servants  of  man's  caprice  and 
wickedness,  Paul's  illuminated  soul  had  recognised  the  sacred  and  beautiful  typo 
of  Christian  womanhood.  III.  His  honotjb  fob  slaves,  which  should  teach  aa 
the  dignity  of  man  as  man.  Mant  whom  Paul  hebe  salutes  abb  slaves  and 
usN  OF  POOB  AMD  UEAM  CONDITION.  It  is  the  Daturo  of  the  world  to  fawn  upon  the 
great;  they  are  ashamed  to  know  the  poor.  A  slave  was  as  great  as  a  CsBsar, 
because  for  slave  and  CsBsar  Christ  had  died.  Nay,  a  despised  slave  might  ba 
much  more  to  him.  For  man  in  himself  is  less  than  nothing ;  he  is  great  in  God 
only,  if  he  is  great  at  all.  A  few  short  days  both  emperor  and  slave  would  die, 
and  then  the  one  might  be  wailing  in  outer  darkness,  while  the  other,  amid  acclaim 
of  angels,  might  tread  "  the  heavenly  Jerusalem's  rejoicing  streets."  IV.  His 
DisoBmiNATiNO  EULOGIES.  Being  addressed  to  Christians — in  days  when  to  be  a 
Christian  was  to  be  persecuted — he  was  writing  presumably  to  good  men.  Yet 
even  between  good  men  there  is  a  difference,  and  Paul  uses  only  the  language  of 
deserved  praise.  What  comfort  there  is  in  the  thought  that,  as  God  bestows  on  as 
different  gifts,  so  also  He  expects  from  us  different  forms  of  service  I  All  branches 
cannot  bear  the  same  fruit ;  "all  members  have  not  the  same  office."  Mary  has 
her  work,  and  Phebe  hers;  Urbane  has  his  work,  and  Apelles  his;  and  some  of  ns, 
perhaps,  think  with  a  sigh  that  we  do  little  or  no  work.  Well,  if  we  are  but  trying 
to  do  what  little  we  can,  let  us  be  content.  We  may  then  be  hke  Asyncritus, 
Phlegon,  Hennas,  Hermes,  and  Patrobas,  of  whom  nothing  is  said.  Better  to  be 
the  nameless  ciphers  of  Christianity  than  to  be  of  the  world's  guilty  kings.    V. 

ThB   HEBE   CASUAL    MENTION   OF  THESE   NAMES   BT   PaUL    HAS   GIVEN    THEM  A   BOBT   OF 

iMMOBTALiTT.  Horace  might  have  sung  of  them — he  does  actually  mention  one  or 
two  of  the  same  names  ;  Seneca  might  have  mentioned  them  among  his  brilliant 
aphorisms ;  Tacitus  might  have  introduced  them  in  his  histories,  yet  they  would 
still  have  been  incomparably  less  eternised.  Little  thought  those  slaves  and 
poor  women  that  their  names  would  be  on  our  lips  to-day,  in  what  was  then  a 
remote  and  savage  island.  Centuries  after  they  are  dead  we  still  speak  of  them, 
and  yet,  grotesque  their  names  certainly  are — Phebe,  Hennas,  Hermes,  Nereus— 
names  of  heathen  gods  and  goddesses  in  which  people  had  quite  ceased  to  believe, 
half  jocosely  given  to  the  slaves  of  their  families ;  Stachys,  a  com  ear ;  Asyncritus, 
the  incomparable ;  Persis,  the  Persian  woman,  known  only  by  her  nationaUty ; 
Tryphena  the  "  wanton,"  and  Tryphosa  "  the  luxurious  " — names  perhaps  once 
insultingly  given  to  a  class,  now  meekly  borne.  They  had  other  names,  new 
names,  in  heaven.  Five,  ten,  fifteen  years  hence,  and  how  many  of  you  who  hear 
me  will  be  utterly  forgotten  1  Fifty  years  hence,  all  but  one  or  two  of  as,  it  may 
be,  will  be  lying  in  our  coffins,  our  names  perhaps  already  illegible  on  the  worn 
stone,  and  nobody  knowing  or  caring  who  lies  below.  No  Paul  will  mention  ns. 
And  what  does  it  matter  ii  our  names  are  written  in  "  the  Lamb's  Book  of  Life  "  ? 
{Archdeacon  Farrar.)  Apostolic  greetings  : — I.  They  abe  valuable  as — 1.  A 
source  of  gratification  to  the  persons  named.  2.  A  stimulus  to  themselves  and 
others.  3.  A  tribute  to  the  Christian  community  at  Eome.  4.  A  corroboration  of 
the  genuineness  of  the  Epistle.  5.  A  means  of  promoting  union  between  the  Jews 
and  Gentiles,  and  both  and  himself.  II.  Teue  CHRiSTXANiry  is  chabactebised 
BY — 1.  Whatever  is  tender  and  amiable  in  human  nature.  2.  The  graceful  pro- 
prieties of  an  advanced  civilisation.  3.  The  gentle  charities  and  delicacy  of  refined 
friendship.  Grace  sanctifies  the  courtesies  of  life  and  refines  the  manners.  It  is 
quite  friendly  to  the  graces  and  amenities  of  social  intercourse.  Forms  of  polite- 
ness are  most  beautiful  when  animated  by  spiritual  Ufe.  IH.  Thebb  abb  fivb 
CLASSES  MENTIONED  IN  THESE  QKEETiNGs.  1.  Helpers  and  fellow-labourers,  as 
Aquila,  Mary,  &c.  2.  Eelatives  and  countrymen,  as  Andronicus,  &o.  3.  Paul's 
own  converts  and  well-known  friends,  as  Epenetos,  <&c.    4.  Societies,  as  the  church 


742  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip,  svfc 

in  Aqoila's  honse.  5.  Households,  or  parts  of  snch,  as  that  of  Aristobolaa,  Ac. 
rV.  In  these  orbetinos  hat  be  noticed— 1.  The  kindness  of  Paul  in  naming  so 
many.  2.  Special  regard  to  individaals,  combined  vith  love  to  all.  8.  Gratefal 
remembrance  of  past  kindnesses.  4.  Those  specially  distinguished  who  laboured 
most.  The  care  of  the  Churches  did  not  efface  remembrance  of  persons.  Be- 
lievers least  likely  to  forget  their  friends.  Their  mutual  remembrance  lively 
because — 1.  Founded  in  a  spiritual,  therefore  deep  affection.  2.  Kept  always 
fresh  at  the  throne  of  grace.  Those  are  well  remembered  who  are  remembered 
before  God.  V.  In  those  gbeeted  we  have — 1.  A  group  of  star  pictures  of 
apostolic  times.  2.  A  lovely  representation  of  living  Christians.  3.  A  splendid 
testimony  to  the  riches  of  Divine  grace.  Boman,  Greek,  and  Hebrew  names 
promiscuously  introduced.  (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  The  true  aristocracy : — Many 
names  in  "  The  Peerage  "  have  won  their  distinction  by  intrigues  and  base  services 
rendered  to  bad  kings,  and  there  are  many  who  study  and  prize  such  books  more 
than  the  Book  of  books.  The  register  before  us  is  given  by  a  man  before  whose 
intellectual  and  moral  greatness  the  most  brilliant  names  in  worldly  peerages  sink 
into  contempt.  The  names  that  this  great  man  enrols  are  those  of  poor  women, 
obscure  men,  and  slaves.    I.  The  chief  interest  which  a  tbclt  great  uan  has  m 

OTHERS  IS   in   their   CHARACTER,    BATHER  THAN   IN   THEIB   CONDITION.      In  thiS  list  Ot 

twenty-six  names  there  are  those  who  differ  in  their  sex,  age,  worldly  position,  Ac,  yet 
the  apostle  overlooks  all  these  differences,  and  expresses  an  interest  only  in  their 
character.  Why?  Because  this  is — 1.  The  only  real  property.  It  is  the  only 
thing  that  a  man  can  caU  his  own.  2.  The  only  property  man  can  carry  with  him. 
Everything  else — bouses,  lands,  gold,  and  silver — he  leaves  behind.  But  his  moral 
character  he  carries  over  Jordan.  8.  That  which  determines  his  destiny.  From  it 
must  bloom  his  paradise  or  flame  his  hell.    II.  The  character  which  enlists 

THE   PBOFOUNDEST  INTEREST  OF  A  TRTJLT  GREAT  MAN  IS  THE   ChRISTLT  ONE.      "  WhO 

labour  in  the  Lord."  1.  Living  and  working  in — (1)  The  Spirit.  (2)  Purpose.  (3) 
Character,  and  (4)  Moral  temper  of  Christ.  2.  Why  should  a  Christly  character 
command  such  tender  sympathy?  Because  it  is — (1)  The  highest  reflection  of  his 
Master.  Good  men  are  incarnations  of  Him  whom  all  heaven  adores.  (2)  The 
highest  organ  of  usefulness.  It  is  in  itself  the  strongest  argument  against  all  infi< 
delities,  and  the  strongest  proof  of  the  Divinity  of  the  gospel.  III.  Those  who  enubt 

THE   chief  interest    OF  A  TRTTLY  GREAT   IIAN   ARE   THE   U08T    HONOURABLE   OF  THBIB 

AGE.  Who  will  deny  or  question  this?  Parasites  and  sycophants  have  always 
shown  more  sympathy  of  their  miserable  natures  for  martial  pageantry,  official 
pomp,  than  for  Christly  character.  (D.  Thomas,  D.B.)  Whom  does  the  apostle 
distinguish  as  worthy  of  the  highest  estimation : — Those  who,  like — I.  Peebe,  are 
Buccourers  of  many.  n.  Priscuxa  and  Aquila,  helpers.  III.  Ep^netus,  Andbo- 
mcus  and  Jcnu,  have  long  and  faithfully  served  Christ.  lY.  Ampliab  and 
Apelles,  beloved  and  approved  in  the  Lord.  Y.  Persis,  labour  much  in  the 
Lord.  YI.  AsTNCBiTxis,  and  others,  steadfast  in  Christian  fellowship.  In  a  word, 
all  who  are  eminently  distinguished  by  Christian  love.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Romans, 
but  not  Romanists : — The  text — I.  Illustrates  the  various  relations  of  fahiliks 
TO  THE  Church.  1.  In  ver.  3  you  have  a  household  in  which  the  husband  and  the 
wife  were  joined  to  the  Church.  When  two  loving  hearts  pull  together  they 
accomplish  wonders.  What  different  associations  cluster  around  the  names  of 
Ananias  and  Sapphira !  I  do  not  know  why  Paul  placed  the  wife  first,  for  in 
the  Acts  it  is  the  reverse.  Perhaps  it  was  because  PrisciUa  was  first  in  energy  of 
character  and  attainments  in  grace.  Whether  the  wife  be  first  or  second  matters 
little  if  both  be  truly  the  servants  of  Gcd.  Pray  unceasingly  that  your  life-com- 
panions may  be  converted  to  God.  Paul  spoke  of  the  Church  that  was  in  their 
house.  It  is  well  when  a  Christian  family  judge  that  the  parlour  will  be  honoured 
by  being  used  for  a  prayer  meeting.  Such  a  dwelling  becomes  like  the  house  of 
Obededom.  2.  In  ver.  7  Andronicus  and  Junia  represent  part  of  a  very  remark- 
able household,  for  they  were  kinsmen  of  Paul,  and  they  were  converted 
to  God  before  Paul  was.  I  have  wondered  whether  the  conversion  of  Adro- 
nicus  and  Junia  excited  in  him  his  fury  against  Christ ;  but  it  is  more  than 
probable  that  their  prayers  were  part  of  the  means  of  his  conversion.  This 
should  act  as  a  great  encouragement  for  all  who  desire  the  salvation  of  their 
houBeholds.  Out  of  persecutors  God  can  make  apostles.  3.  In  ver.  10  we 
have  a  family  whose  head  was  not  a  Christian.  Why  leave  Aristobulus  out? 
Because  he  had  left  himself  out;  he  was  no  believer,  and  therefore  there 
could  be  no  Christian  salutation  sent  to  him.     The  kingdom  of  God  was  in 


CBA».  xn.]  ROMANS.  744 

his  house,  and  yet  he  was  unblessed  by  it.  Where  are  you,  Aristobulus  ?  The 
Lord  sends  a  message  of  grace  to  your  child  and  wife,  but  not  to  you,  for  you  have 
not  given  your  heart  to  Him.  Another  instance,  and  a  worse  one,  is  in  ver.  11. 
There  was  a  Narcissus  at  this  yeriod  who  was  extremely  rich,  and  as  bad  as  he  was 
rich.  Yet  while  blasphemous  songs,  gluttony,  and  licentiousness  made  his  man- 
sion a  very  hell,  there  was  a  saving  salt  in  the  slaves'  dormitory.  He  who  blacks 
your  shoes  may  be  one  of  the  beloved  of  the  Lord,  while  you  who  wear  tbem  may 
be  without  God  and  without  hope  in  the  world.  4.  In  ver.  12  we  have,  I  suppose, 
two  sisters :  where  were  their  brothers,  their  father,  their  mother  ?  How  often 
there  are  in  the  Church  two  humble,  faithful  women,  and  all  the  rest  far  off  from 
God  I  Brother,  let  not  your  sister  go  to  heaven  alone.  Father,  if  your  daughters 
be  children  of  God,  do  not  you  remain  His  enemy.  6.  In  ver.  15  we  have  a  brother 
and  sister.  It  is  pleasant  to  see  the  stronger  and  weaker  sex  thus  associated.  But 
had  they  no  other  relatives  ?  Depend  upon  it,  they  often  prayed  together  for  all 
the  rest.  6.  In  ver.  13  there  are  a  mother  and  her  son.  When  a  godly  woman  is 
a  tender  mother,  it  is  no  wonder  if  her  sons  become  believers,  for  the  mother's  love 
and  example  draw  them  towards  Jesus.  There  is  a  legend  connected  with  Bufus 
and  Alexander,  that  when  their  father  Simon  was  compelled  to  bear  the  Gross,  one 
carried  his  father's  pick,  and  the  other  his  spade.  If  they  cannot  bear  the 
Cross,  they  will  at  least  help  their  father  by  carrying  his  tools.  Who  marvels  i£ 
Alexander  and  Bufus  saw  their  father  carry  Christ's  Cross  so  well,  that  they,  too, 
ahould  afterwards  count  it  their  glory  to  be  followers  of  the  Crucified.  11.  Snows 
WHAT  ABB  POINTS  OF  INTEREST  AHONO  CHRISTIANS.  In  a  Worldly  Community  the 
point  of  interest  is,  how  much  is  a  man  worth  ?  Now  Paul  does  not  make  a  single 
reference  to  any  one  on  account  of  his  position,  property,  or  office,  except  so  far  as 
those  may  be  implied  in  the  service  which  each  person  rendered  to  the  cause  of 
God.    The  points  of  interest  with  Paul  are — 1.  Their  service  for  the  Church  (vers. 

1,  2).  It  is  a  distinction  among  Christians  to  be  allowed  to  serve,  and  the  moat 
menial  employment  for  the  Church  is  the  most  honourable.  So  Phebe  shall  have 
her  name  inscribed  in  this  golden  book  of  Christ's  nobility,  because  she  is  the 
servant  of  the  Church,  and  because,  in  being  such,  she  succoured  the  poor  and 
needy.  2.  Their  labour  (ver  6).  Mary  was  one  of  those  useful  women  who  took 
personal  care  of  the  preacher,  because  she  believed  the  life  of  God's  servant  to 
be  precious.  Then  follow  Tryphena  and  Tryphosa,  "  who  labour  in  the  Lord  " ; 
and  Persis,  who  "  laboured  much  in  the  Lord."  I  do  not  suppose  Tryphena 
and  Tryphosa  were  angry  because  the  apostle  made  this  distinction,  but  it  is 
certainly  a  very  explicit  one.  Degrees  in  honour  among  believers  are  graduated 
by  the  scale  of  service  done.  3.  Their  character.  Yer.  13  cannot  allude 
to  Bufus'  election,  since  all  the  rest  were  chosen  too,  but  must  mean  that 
he  was  a  choice  man  in  the  Lord.  Apelles  was  "  approved  in  Christ," 
a  tried  and  experienced  believer.  Epsenetus  (ver.  6)  is  singled  out  because 
of  the  time  of  his  conversion.  While  every  minister  feels  a  peculiar  attach- 
ment to  all  his  converts,  he  has  the  tenderest  memory  of  the  first  ones. 
What  parent  does  not  prize  above  all  others  his  first  child?    lU.  Bbveals  ths 

OENERAI.  LOVE   WHICH   OUGHT   TO   EXIST  IN    THE    ChURCH     OF     GoD.        1.    The    whols 

passage  shows  the  love  of  the  apostle  towards  the  brethren  at  Bome.  He  would 
not  have  taken  the  trouble  to  write  all  this  to  them  if  he  had  not  really  loved 
them.  And  it  shows  that  there  were  Christians  in  those  days  who  were  full  of 
love  to  each  other.  The  holy  kiss  marked  their  fervour  of  love.  1.  The  early 
Christians  were  accustomed  to  show  their  love  to  one  another — (1)  By  practical 
help.  I  do  not  think  that  the  apostle  alluded  to  any  Church  business,  but  to  her 
own.  I  do  not  know  what  it  was,  and  it  was  no  part  of  an  apostle's  commission  to 
tell  us  other  people's  business  ;  but  whatever  business  it  was,  if  any  Christian  in 
Rome  could  help  her  he  was  to  do  so.    (2)  When  it  involved  great  sacrifices  (ver.  4). 

2.  Christian  love  in  those  days — (1)  Had  the  great  respect  for  those  who  had  suf- 
fered for  Christ  (ver.  7).  (2)  Honoured  workers  (ver.  6).  Paul  speaks  of  the  labourers 
over  and  over  again  with  intense  affection.  (3)  Had  its  specialities.  "  My  well- 
beloved  Epsenetus,"  "  Amplias  my  beloved,"  &c.,  &c.  There  were  some  whom  he 
liked  better  than  others,  and  even  the  Lord  had  a  disciple  whom  He  loved  more 
than  the  rest.  There  are  Christian  people  whom  you  could  Uve  with  in  heaven 
comfortably  enough,  but  it  is  a  severe  trial  to  bear  with  them  on  earth  ;  but  since 
God  puts  up  with  them,  so  ought  you.  (4)  Was  wont  to  respect  seniority  in 
spiritual  life ;  for  Paul  speaks  of  some  who  were  in  Christ  before  himself.  (5)  Did 
not  overlook  the  most  obscure  members  of  the  Church.     '*  Salute  Asynciitas, 


744  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cmr.  m, 

Phlegon,  Hermas,"  Ac.  We  know  nothing  about  those  good  people.  They  were 
like  the  most  of  as,  commonplace  individuals ;  but  they  loved  the  Lord,  and  there- 
fore  Paul  sent  them  a  message  of  love  which  has  become  embalmed  in  the  Holy 
Scriptures.  It  were  better  to  be  the  meanest  Christian  than  to  be  the  greatest 
sinner.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  truly  honourable  in  the  Church  of  Christ : — 
I.  Tbbib  distinction.  1.  In  general  they  are  all  recognised  as  brethren  in  Christ. 
Are  we?  In  particular  they  are  distinguished  by— (1)  Faithful  and  zealous  service. 
(2)  Patient  suffering.  (^)  Long  and  consistent  attachment  to  the  cause  of  Christ. 
(4)  Eminent  piety  and  Christian  love.  Do  any  of  these  features  apply  to  us  ?  XL 
Its  value.  1.  Their  names— (1)  Are  in  good  report;  are  ours?  (2)  Are  im- 
mortalised, and  will  endure  as  long  as  the  Word  of  God;  will  ours?  2.  Thia 
record  of  them  is  the  guarantee  that  their  names  are  in  the  book  of  life ;  are  ours  ? 
(<7.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Christian  love  is — 1.  Large  in  its  comprehensiveness.  2.  Kind 
in  its  expressions.  3.  Just  in  its  acknowledgments.  4.  Tender  and  affectionate 
to  all.    {Rid). 

Vers.  1,  2.  I  commend  unto  yon  Phebe. — Pheie  of  Cenehrea: — 1.  Cenchrea  was  a 
thriving  sea-port  town  about  eight  miles  from  Corinth,  from  which  the  Corinthian 
commerce  was  carried  on  with  the  East.  Thence  Paul  had  sailed  for  Jerusalem 
on  a  former  occasion,  and  had  established  a  Church  there.  Phebe,  travelling 
westward,  would  pass  through  Corinth,  and  embark  from  the  opposite  shore  at 
Lechseum,  whence  ships  sailed  for  Italy.  2.  There  are  indications  that  she  was  a 
person  of  considerable  influence,  and  even  wealth.  She  had  "  business  "  on  which 
it  was  necessary  to  travel  to  the  capital.  She  was  "  a  succourer  of  many" ;  and 
the  original  word  implies  the  ideas  which  we  connect  with  patronage  and  protection. 
Add  to  this  that  she  was  probably  a  widow,  since  only  in  that  character  could  she 
have  travelled  so  independently.  3.  Her  Christian  character  is  very  distinctly 
brought  out.  The  apostle  guarantees  this  when  he  calls  her  "our  sister."  The 
Roman  brethren  may  receive  her  with  perfect  confidence  as  one  vrith  them  "  in  the 
Lord."  At  Cenchrea  she  was  not  only  a  recognised  member,  but  an  active  and 
useful  ••  servant  of  the  Church."  Many  would  translate,  "  a  deaconess."  The 
letter  of  Pliny  to  the  Emperor  Trajan,  written  early  in  the  second  century,  speaks 
of  two  Christian  women,  "who  were  called  ministers,"  having  been  examined  by 
torture.  This  looks  as  if  a  female  order  of  some  kind  existed  in  the  Churches  of 
Asia  Minor  at  that  time.  In  the  New  Testament  itself,  besides  this  passage,  the 
only  similar  indications  are  in  1  Tim.  iii.  11,  where  for  vrives  some  would  read 
women,  i.e.,  women  deacons;  and  Titus  ii.  3.  But  these  are  too  vague  to  sustain 
any  very  definite  conclusion.  The  probable  fact  is  that  there  was  no  actual  order 
of  deaconesses,  but  that  wherever  a  Christian  woman  showed  capacity  and  enjoyed 
sufficient  leisure,  she  was  joyfully  accepted  as  a  fellow-labourer.  She  would  do 
such  work  as  elders  and  deacons  failed  to  do  so  well,  or  could  not  do  at  all,  and 
perhaps  would  be  entrusted  with  the  relief  of  the  poor.  A  glorious  sphere  is  opened 
by  the  gospel  to  women.  Those  of  them  who  are  without  domestic  ties  may  find 
a  place  in  the  very  van  of  the  Christian  army.  In  the  most  dangerous  districts  of 
Paris,  in  India  and  China,  English  ladies  labour  with  a  devotedness  and  a  success 
never  exceeded  by  the  stronger  sex.  Without  neglecting  her  home,  the  matron 
may  have  her  class  or  district,  and  shed  a  heavenly  influence  round.  The  cry  for 
woman's  rights  finds  its  best  satisfaction  here.  Happy  are  those  Churches  where 
the  gentler  gifts  and  graces  set  themselves  to  the  sterner  qualities  of  the  other. 
4.  Phebe,  then,  is  about  to  sail  for  Rome,  and  will  arrive  a  stranger  in  the  mighty 
metropolis.  Paul  asks  that  the  necessary  attentions  may  be  bestowed  on  her. 
I.  He  puts  his  request  in  a  veby  practical  form.  The  errand  on  which  she  goes 
is  one  connected  probably  with  law.  Now  a  foreigner  would  be  at  a  terrible 
disadvantage.  She  might  readily  become  a  victim  of  some  unprincipled  prac- 
titioner. Bribery  or  intimidation  might  be  used  against  her.  "Assist  her," 
therefore,  is  Paul's  entreaty  to  the  brethren.  Make  her  cause  your  own.  Counsel 
her  as  to  the  wisest  procedure  to  adopt,  and  see  that  she  is  not  wronged.  Would 
that  our  sentiments  were  reduced  to  this  form.  It  is  comparatively  easy  to  give 
alms,  and  kind  words,  and  prayers.  What  is  often  most  wanted  is  a  little  trouble. 
Here,  for  instance,  is  a  man  in  want  of  a  situation ;  can  we  not  procure  one  for 
him  ?  There  is  a  sick  woman  without  medical  attention ;  can  we  not  provide  it  ? 
Here  some  young  man  is  beginning  business;  how  much  would  a  Uttle  sound 
advice  be  worth  to  him  !  II.  Consider  the  mutual  character  which  is  to 
t^istinguish  our  Christian  friendship.     Phebe  had  done  nothing  for  the  brethren 


OHA*.  tn.]  ROMANS.  US 

at  Borne.  Why,  then,  should  they  be  sammoned  to  her  side  ?  Beoanse  she  has 
helped  others.  Now  let  her  be  helped  in  turn.  The  cap  of  cold  water  is 
to  go  round  from  hand  to  hard.  Some  fainting  brother  seeks  your  coonsel  or 
comfort.  Do  not  refuse  him ;  your  own  turn  will  soon  come.  Or  perhaps  your 
turn  has  come.  Take  freely  what  your  friends  offer;  you  will  have  ample 
opportunity  to  repay  it.  For  there  is  a  freemasonry  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ 
wluoh  we  should  never  fail  to  recognise.  III.  All  our  attentions  to  onb  anotheb 
ABB  to  spbino  fbom  ocb  alleoianos  to  Ciibist.  •'Receive  her  in  the  Lord,  as 
becometh  saints."  There  ought  to  be  a  certain  characteristic  warmth  and  unction 
in  Christian  kindness,  distinguishing  it  from  aU  other.  How  should  we  welcome 
our  King,  if  He  Himself  landed  on  our  shores,  and  came  to  our  house-doors,  and 
Bought  our  hospitality,  or  desired  our  aid  ?  So  are  we  to  receive  and  succour  one 
another.  (W.  Brock.)  Phebe,  a  true  sister  of  mercy  : — L  Heb  commendation. 
1.  A  servant  of  the  Church.  2.  A  snccourer  of  many.  3.  Especially  of  the 
apostle.  4.  Prompted  not  by  fee  or  reward,  but  by  faith  and  love.  IL  Heb 
BEcoMUENDATioN.  1.  By  inspired  authority.  2.  To  the  Church  in  Rome  as 
worthy  of  help.  3.  In  everything.  HI.  Heb  cbedentials  and  claims.  1.  The 
Epistle  which  she  bore.  2.  The  general  rule  of  Christian  charity.  It  becometh 
saints  to  help  such.  {J.Lyth,D.D.)  Phebe's  Church  certificate : — We  discover 
in  this  letter  of  commendation — I.  A  pbacticaIi  exhibition  op  tboe  theological 
OBEATNEss.  All  are  bound  to  confess  that  the  apostle  had  a  mind  of  the  h^hest 
type.  In  this  letter  he  had  gone  into  deeps  and  soared  to  heights  of  thought  over- 
whelmingly solemn  and  grand.  Yet,  notwithstanding  this,  he  comes  down  to 
write  a  certificate  of  the  character  of  a  pious  woman,  who  belonged  to  a  little 
Church.  He  was  not  one  of  those  theologians  who  consider  it  almost  beneath  them 
to  be  courteous  and  kind  to  the  private  Church  members.  Nor  was  he  one  of  those 
who  scarcely  condescend  to  notice  anything  in  people  but  their  beliefs ;  he  notices 
the  kindness  and  the  social  usefulness  of  this  woman.  Theology  must  not  be 
substituted  for  kindness ;  nay,  the  theology  which  does  not  make  us  amiable  is 
not  the  theology  of  the  gospel.  II.  A  becognition  of  the  pbinceple  op  Christian 
COMMUNISM.  The  language  of  this  Church  certificate  implies — 1.  Common  relation- 
ship. "Oar  sister."  The  universal  Church  is  a  famUy  of  which  Christ  is  the 
bead.  2.  Common  service.  The  service  which  she  had  rendered  in  Cenchrea  was 
of  interest  to  those  good  people  in  Rome.  You  have  a  son  in  some  distant  part ;  a 
friend  of  his  calls  upon  you  with  a  letter  from  him,  introducing  him  to  your 
confidence  and  regard ;  in  that  letter  you  are  told  that  the  bearer  had  rendered 
signal  service  to  your  son  more  than  once ;  will  not  love  for  the  writer  induce  you 
to  regard  the  service  as  done  to  yourself,  and  to  treat  the  bearer  as  your  friend  7  It 
should  be  so  in  the  Church.  3.  Common  principle.  "  As  it  becometh  saints." 
Saints  profess  to  be  concerned  for  the  good  of  their  fellow-men — not  their  own. 
Act  becoming  that.  Saints  profess  to  love  all  those  who  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Act  worthy  of  that,  <feo.  III.  An  instance  op  the  poweb  op  one  humble  individual 
TO  bendeb  signal  sebvices  to  a  whole  community.  In  the  Apostolic  Church  there 
were  female  ofiScers,  deaconesses,  whose  work  was  to  minister  to  the  necessities  of 
the  saints  (1.  Tim.  v.  10) ;  and  if  ever  they  were  needed  it  is  now.  The  men  are 
so  absorbed  in  business  that  in  most  cases  they  can  only  be  mere  nominal  officers. 
Why  should  there  not  be  appointed  in  every  Church  women  who,  being  free  from 
the  pressure  of  secular  engagements,  can  devote  their  time  and  energies  to  works 
of  usefulness  ?  We  do  not  know  how  Phebe  "  succoured  Paul " ;  but  we  see 
that  a  humble  woman  could  inspire  an  apostle.  Every  person  has  some  power  of 
usefulness,  and  should  use  his  talent.  IV.  An  illustration  op  the  advantages  op 
Chbistun  excellence  even  in  this  wobld.  In  this  case—  1.  It  secured  the 
approval  of  Paul.  Perhaps,  as  now,  many  sneered  at  or  misrepresented  this 
woman  as  she  toiled  on  in  works  of  usefulness ;  but  Paul  observed  her.  2.  It 
secured  from  the  apostle  an  introduction  to  the  good.  What  a  blessing  was  this  1 
Better  have  the  sympathy  of  one  noble  soul,  than  the  hosannas  of  thoughtless 
millions.  V.  An  intimation  op  the  dutt  op  the  Chubch  to  begabd  the  secular 
claims  op  its  members.  "  That  ye  assist  her,"  &c.  Paul  wishes  to  excite  the  same 
interest  towards  her  as  he  felt  himself.  We  are  commanded  to  "  bear  one  another's 
burdens,"  &o.,  because  secular  anxiety  is — 1.  A  temptation.  2.  Suffering,  8. 
A  hindrance  to  usefulness.  YI.  A  suggestion  as  to  the  kind  op  pebsons  that 
should  bb  recommended  fbom  one  Church  to  anotheb.  Paul  recommended 
Fbebe  because  of  her  undoubted  excellence  and  great  usefulness.  We  know,  from 
painfol  experience,  that  many  *'  letters  of  dismission"  are  empty  formalitiei  and 


746  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [omi.  xyi. 

taoit  falsehoods.  Persons  are  thus  introdaced  from  one  Charoh  to  another,  who, 
instead  of  being  helps  are  hindrances ;  who,  instead  of  "  saccooring "  their 
ministers  are  their  torment.  It  is  time  for  this  imposture  to  be  exposed.  Worth- 
less and  troublesome  members  we  will  dismiss  with  pleasure  to  any  pastor  that 
applies  for  them,  and  the  good  and  valuable,  like  Phebe,  we  will  cordially 
recommend.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Vers.  3-5.  Greet  Frlscllla  and  Aqnlla. — Priscilla  and  Aquila,  PauVs  helpers : — 

1.  Theib  service.    1.  Toil.    2.  Sacrifice.    11.  Theie  motives  of  action.     1.  Faith. 

2.  Love.  3.  Hope  in  Christ.  III.  Theib  eewabd.  1.  On  earth — the  thanks  of 
the  apostle.  2.  In  heaven,  life  everlasting.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  A  Christian  family 
helping  their  minister : — Aquila  was  a  Jew  of  Pontus  who  had  made  his  residence 
in  Home.  But  a  company  of  thieves  in  Judsea,  having  fallen  on  one  Stephanus,  a 
servant  of  the  emperor,  robbed  his  baggage,  and  slain  the  soldiers  who  guarded  it, 
an  edict  was  passed  requiring  all  Jews  to  leave  that  city.  In  consequence  of  this 
edict,  Aquila,  with  his  wife,  came  to  Corinth,  and  there  wrought  in  his  occupation, 
which  was  that  of  a  tent  maker.  Paul  coming  from  Athens  to  Corinth,  meets  with 
them  and  takes  lodging  in  their  house,  working  at  the  same  occupation.  It  was 
probably  at  this  time  tbat  they  first  gained  the  knowledge  which  they  were  able  to 
impart  to  Apollos.  Paul's  residence  with  them  laid  a  foundation  for  a  friendship 
which  lasted  tiU  death  (2  Tim.  iv.  19).  How  worthy  they  were  of  his  affection  and 
esteem  we  learn  from  the  text.     I.   Thet  webb  happily  united  in  all  theib 

CONCEBNS,   AND   ESPECIALLY   IN  THE   OEEAT   CONCERNS   Or  EELIGION.      On  all  OCCasionS 

they  are  both  mentioned  together,  and  appear  patterns  of  conjugal  union.  They 
dwelt  together  in  days  of  tranquility,  and  jointly  shared  in  the  calamities  of 
banishment.  With  united  hands  they  laboured  in  the  occupation  by  which  their 
household  was  supported.  As  this  is  the  most  important  relation  in  life,  they  who 
sustain  it  ought,  above  all  things,  to  study  mutual  peace.  The  Christian  pair, 
animated  by  one  soul,  will  readily  participate  in  each  other's  labours  and  sorrows, 
and  will  cheerfully  communicate  to  each  other  their  own  pleasures  and  joys.  Little 
differences  of  opinion  will  be  composed  by  mutual  condescension.  Unavoidable 
infirmities  will  be  viewed  with  the  comforting  eye  of  pity,  not  with  the  insulting 
eye  of  disdain.  In  the  important  concerns  of  religion,  they  will  walk,  as  being  heirs 
together  of  the  grace  of  hfe.  A  family,  educated  under  the  care  of  heads  thus 
united,  will,  by  the  smiles  of  heaven,  grow  up  in  knowledge  and  piety,  and  become 
a  little  Church  of  Christ.  II.  They  webe  the  apostle's  helpebs  in  Chbist  Jesus. 
1.  By  their  hospitality.  For  a  considerable  part  of  the  time  that  he  preached  in 
Corinth,  he  abode  in  their  house.  The  minister  is  to  preach  the  gospel,  not  for 
filthy  lucre;  but  then,  they  who  are  taught  must  communicate  to  him  who 
teacheth,  so  that  he  may  wait  on  his  teaching  without  distraction.  2.  By  a 
faithful  attendance  on  his  ministry.  Heads  of  families  in  this  way  greatly  assist 
their  minister.  This  shows  a  good  example  to  their  children,  and  invites  others  to 
accompany  them.  Thus  they  animate  their  minister  and  raise  his  hopes  of  success. 
But  then  let  your  attendance  be  grave  and  devout,  and  on  what  you  hear  let  your 
remarks  be  made  at  the  proper  time  and  place.  3.  By  their  conversation  and 
example  (Acts  xviii.).  4.  By  their  prayers.  6.  By  their  self-sacrifices  (ver.  4). 
m.  They  had  a  Church  in  their  house.  We,  then,  who  have  the  care  of  families, 
ought  to  make  them  Churches.  For  this  end  we  must  dedicate  our  children  to  God, 
and  bring  them  up  in  His  fear.  Greater  societies  are  formed  from  smaller; 
Churches  grow  out  of  families  ;  and  the  spirit  and  complexion  of  the  latter  will  be 
transfused  through  the  former.  (J.  Lathrop,  D.D.)  Who  have  for  my  life  laid 
down  their  necks. — The  unbounded  affection  of  Priscilla  and  Aquila  for  Paul : — L 
Paul  deserved  it.  He  had  rendered  them  the  greatest  service  which  one  human 
being  could  render  to  another.  Through  his  instrumentality  they  had  been  won  to 
Christ,  trained  for  usefulness,  built  up  in  their  most  holy  faith.  And  the  same 
may  be  said  of  thousands  of  ministers.  If  the  debt  of  love  be  owing  at  aU  it  is 
surely  to  those  who  have  rendered  others  soul  service.  II.  They  showed  it.  Not 
by  amiable  feelings,  graceful  compliments,  or  even  faithful  service.  All  these  were 
and  are  done.  But  so  is  something  more.  The  expression  "placed  their  neck 
under "  the  sword  or  axe,  is  figurative,  but  implies  the  act  of  exposing  one's  life, 
and  occurred  either  at  Corinth  (Acts  xviii.  12-17)  or  at  Ephesus  (1  Cor.  xv.  32 ; 
2  Cor.  i.  8,  xii.  23).  This  extreme  form  of  service  is  not  now  required  except  in 
the  ease  of  missionaries,  to  whom  it  has  often  been  rendered.  But  ordinary 
ministers  need  protection  and  should  have  it.    1.  Their  character  is  assailed  by 


our.  XVI.]  ROMANS.  U1 

▼esomous  slander.  Let  not  chivalrous  defenoe  be  wanting  at  whatever  cost.  2. 
Their  peace  of  mind  is  endangered  by  cantankerous  opposition.  Let  no  member 
of  the  Church  absent  himself  from  a  stormy  meeting  lest  his  own  tranquility  be 
disturbed.  3.  Their  health  is  often  threatened  by  overwork,  under  pay,  vexatious 
conditions  of  labour  and  unsanitary  dwellings.  This  is  often  only  for  want  of 
thought.  But  love  not  only  "  thinketh  no  evil,"  it  should  stimulate  thought  and 
sacrifice  for  the  pastor's  good.  Conclusion:  1.  If  your  minister  is  set  for  the 
defence  of  the  gospel,  the  least  you  can  do  is  to  defend  him.  2.  Tou  need  not 
boast  that  you  woiild  be  willing  to  lay  down  your  necks  for  him  if  required.  This 
will  never  be  required.  But  he  needs  protection  for  his  character,  tranquility  and 
health.  In  rendering  this  you  will  do  nothing  heroic,  but  you  will  do  what  is 
useful  and  acceptable,  which  is  better.  {J.  W.  Bum.)  Likewise  greet  the 
Church  which  is  In  their  house. — The  Church  in  the  house : — I.  Its  fobus.  1.  The 
cottage  meeting.  2.  The  social  Christian  circle.  3.  The  pious  family.  11.  Its 
advantages.  1.  God's  blessing.  2.  Domestic  happiness.  3.  Anticipated  union 
in  heaven.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  Church  in  the  house  : — A  Church  is  a  company 
of  believers,  meeting  statedly  in  Christ's  name,  more  or  less  fully  organised  with 
office  bearers,  with  the  ordinances  of  Christ  duly  administered  among  them,  and  is 
not  dependent  on  numbers  (Matt,  xviii.  20).  There  were  various  such  Churches 
already  at  Bome  (vers.  14,  15).  The  meeting-place  of  a  Church  will  be  dependent 
on  circumstances.  The  house  of  Aquila  being  sufficiently  commodious,  although 
destitute  of  most  of  the  accessories  with  which  we  are  familiar,  was  a  meeting-place 
of  the  Church.  Private  houses  (Acts  ii.  46)  were  the  birthplaces  of  Christian 
worship,  and  pubUo  buildings  were  not  erected  till  the  third  century.  When  it 
became  dangerous  to  meet  even  in  private  houses  the  Christians  assembled  in  the 
catacombs.  Aquila's  house  became  a  Church  wherever  he  went,  which  shows  us 
that  zeal  for  Cluist's  cause  should  be  carried  about  with  us.  Mere  professors  often 
leave  their  religion  behind  them.  Grace  in  a  family  converts  a  household  into  a 
Church.  Beligion  is  to  be  manifested  in  the  family  as  a  household  thing.  Wherever 
Abraham  had  a  tent  Jehovah  had  an  altar.  (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Salute  my 
well-beloved  Epssnetus,  who  is  the  first£ruits  of  Achaia  unto  Christ. — Ejxznetus,  the 
first  convert  of  Achaia  (Asia  is  the  reading  preferred  by  the  best  authorities) : — This 
honourable  distinction  implies — I.  Pbivileoe.  II.  A  bbadt  reception  or  Chbist. 
III.  BESPONsiBiLrrT.  IV.  Honoub.  V.  Peomisb  of  success.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
First/ruits  unto  Christ : — The  firstfruits  under  the  law  were  an  offering  made  to 
God  of  the  first  ripe  fruits  before  the  harvest  was  begun.  In  allusion  to  this 
Christ  is  called  "  the  firstfruits  of  them  that  slept,"  because  His  resurrection  is  an 
earnest  and  pledge  of  the  resurrection  of  believers.  The  sanctifying  and  comforting 
influences  of  the  Spirit  are  called  the  firstfruits  of  the  Spirit,  as  earnests  of  heavenly 
happiness.  James  tells  us  that  God  hath  begotten  us  "  that  we  should  be  a  kind  of 
firstfruits  of  His  creatures "  (Bev.  ziv.  4).  By  a  like  allusion  the  apostle  calls  the 
first  converts  in  a  particular  place  the  firstfruits  of  that  place  unto  Christ  Now 
consider  this  man,  dwelling  in  the  midst  of  heathen,  on  the  preaching  of  the 
apostle,  coming  out  from  among  a  corrupt  and  idolatrous  multitude,  and,  by  his 
example  and  conversation,  inviting  his  feUow-citizens  to  turn  to  the  living  God ;  and 
will  you  not  admire  his  integrity,  zeal  and  fortitude  ?  Note — L  How  a  fobwabdness 
TF  BEiJGiON  MAT  DiscovEB  ITSELF.  In — 1,  Early  religion.  Epaenetus  enjoyed  not 
your  early  advantages,  but  it  seems  probable  that  he  accepted  the  first  invitation  to 
Christ  He  gave  to  Christ  the  firstfruits,  if  not  of  life  itself,  yet  of  that  part  of 
life  in  which  he  was  favoured  with  the  heavenly  call.  All  have  now  this  call  in 
their  youth.  2.  An  open  profession  of  it,  and  a  diligent  attendance  on  the  means 
of  it  3.  A  maintenance  of  the  profession  and  practice  of  it,  though  it  should 
involve  the  charge  of  singularity.  Epaenetus  professed  the  religion  of  the  gospel 
when  all  around  him  were  in  a  different  sentiment  and  practice.  4.  A  zeal  for 
great  and  essential  things.  There  are  many  who  are  forward  in  little  matters ; 
zealous  for  or  against  opinions,  forms,  <feo. ,  but  this  is  only  forwardness  in  a  party 
design.  The  Christian  is  zealous  to  maintain  good  works,  and  abounds  in  the 
proper  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  6.  Labours  to  promote  it  among  others.  When  Paul 
calls  his  beloved  Epaenetus  the  firstfruits,  he  intimates  that  a  rich  harvest  followed. 
This  forward  Christian  doubtless  assisted  Paul  greatly.  6.  Aspirations  after  greater 
eminence  in  rehgion.  II.  This  fobwabdness  is  comuendable.  1.  As  an  evidence 
of  sincerity.  2.  On  account  of  its  usefulness.  The  slothful,  negligent  Christian 
emboldens  sinners  in  their  transgressions,  and  confirms  them  in  their  stupidity. 
&  As  it  is  honourable  to  Christ    To  Him  belong  the  firstfruits  of  yoor  lives.    H« 


748  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  ifl.' 

is  honoured  by  the  increase  of  His  sabjects.  By  your  forwardness  yon  will  con- 
tribute to  this  increase.  4.  As  an  imitation  of  Christ.  He  was  in  early  life  about 
His  Father's  business.  5.  Because  it  is  in  the  highest  degree  rational.  It  is 
regarding  things  according  to  their  nature  and  importance.  6.  We  have  no  promise 
of  success  on  any  other  condition.  (1)  This  is  the  command  of  Christ.  "  Seek  first 
the  kingdom  of  God."  Strive  to  enter  in  at  the  straight  gate.  (2)  Tliis  is  the 
direction  of  the  apostle.  The  promise  is  only  to  those  who  give  diligence  to 
make  their  calling  and  election  sure.  (3)  It  is  by  forwardness  in  religion  that  yoa 
become  entitled  to  the  constant  aids  of  God's  grace.  (<7.  Lathrop,  D.D.)  Afirtt 
convert  remembered : — Epaenetus  was  the  first  convert  in  Aohaia,  the  richest  of  all 
the  Greek  provinces.  Chalmers  in  his  fascinating  book  on  New  Guinea  gives  ua 
the  name  of  the  first  female  convert  in  New  Guinea.  If  yoa  and  I  were  sent  to 
labour  in  a  country  like  that  we  would  take  special  note  of  our  first  convert.  I 
knew  a  person  who  when  he  began  his  work  had  but  one  person  to  sit  at  his  feet. 
Did  not  he  take  note  of  that  person  ?  He  has  never  forgotten  her  and  never  will. 
A  true  missionary  never  forgets  his  first  convert,  never  forgets  any  convert,  and 
Paul  did  not  forget  Epsenetus,  the  first  convert  to  Christ  in  Achaia.     (D.  Stuart.) 

Vers.  6,  7.  Greet  Mary,  who  bestowed  much  labour  on  us. — Mary's  terviee : — 1, 
Well  directed.  2.  Diligently  performed.  3.  Eightly  dictated.  4.  Abundantly 
rewarded.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  Maryt  of  the  New  Testament : — I.  Two  weeb 
BELATXD  TO  Chkist — Mary  the  mother  of  Jesus,  and  Mary  her  sister.  U.  Two 
MiNisTEBBD  TO  Chbist — Mary  of  Bethany  and  Mary  Magdalene.  III.  Two 
BHOWED  kindness  TO  Christ's  seevants — Mary  the  mother  of  John,  whose  sur- 
name was  Mark,  and  Mary  of  Bome.  (Ibid.)  A  working  woman: — Have  yoa 
the  slightest  desire  to  be  loved,  would  you  have  your  presence  a  welcome  one  in 
palace  and  cottage  alike,  would  you  be  admired,  respected,  revered,  would  yoa  feel 
all  sweet  human  sympathies  clustering  around  you  while  you  live,  and  know  that 
the  tears  of  a  multitude  of  friends  would  be  shed  upon  your  grave  when  yoa  die, 
you  must  be  a  working  woman — living  and  working  for  others,  denying  yourself  for 
others,  and  building  up  for  yourself  a  character,  strong,  symmetrical,  beautiful.    If 

1  were  you  I  would  rather  be  that  impalpable  and  quietly  gUding  shadow  which  the 
wounded  soldier  kissed  as  the  noble  Florence  Nightingale  passed  down  between  the 
hospital  beds,  than  the  golden  calf  of  luxury  who  has  no  thought  above  her  per- 
sonal ease  and  nourishment.  {Great  Thoughts.)  Salute  Andronicus  and  Jonla. — 
Andronicus  and  Junia : — Probably  husband  and  wife,  or  brother  and  sister.  Grace 
adorns,  sanctifies,  and  sweetens  every  relation  of  life.  Natural  relationships  not 
absorbed  by  union  with  Christ.  The  distinction  of  these  persons  was  that  they 
were — I.  Kinsmen  op  Paul,  either  in  the  wider  or  more  restricted  sense.  Paul's 
nephew  at  Jerusalem  warmly  attached  to  his  uncle.  Grace  recognises  the  ties  of 
kindred.  These  ties  drawn  still  closer  by  a  common  faith.  II.  Paul's  fellow 
PEisoNEES.    When  and  where  unknown.    Valuable  undesigned  coincidence  with 

2  Cor.  vi.  5,  zi.  23.  Paul  had  been  often  in  prison,  but  the  history  speaks 
only  of  one  imprisonment  (Acts  xvi.  23)  before  the  date  of  this  letter. 
Others  mentioned  afterwards  as  his  fellow  prisoners  (Col.  iv.  10 ;  Phil.  ii.  2,  3). 
Chains  for  Christ  greater  honour  than  chains  of  office.  lU.  Of  note  amono  thb 
APOSTLES.  They  were  not,  of  course,  apostles  in  the  strictest  sense,  viz.,  of  the 
company  appointed  by  Christ  Himself  (Matt.  x.  2),  but  in  the  wider  sense,  viz., 
messengers  (2  Cor.  viii.  23).  Amongst  these  Andronicus  and  Junia  were  highly 
distinguished.  There  are  different  ranks  among  believers,  as  there  were  among 
David's  worthies  who  were  honoured  according  to  bravery  and  zeal.  Not  only 
eincerity,  but  eminence  in  grace  to  be  desired.  Grace  distinguishes  more  than 
gifts,  but  the  best  gifts  are  to  be  coveted.  Paul's  relations  apparently  lived  in 
Jerusalem  (Acts  xxiii.  16).  Andronicus  and  Junia  therefore  in  circumstances  to  be 
well  known  to  apostles.  Possibly  the  gospel  was  brought  by  them  to  Kome.  IV. 
In  Christ  befoee  Paul.  The  distinguishing  characteristic  of  a  true  Christian  is  to 
be  in  Christ.  The  believer  is  in  three  positions — in  Adam  by  nature,  in  Christ  by 
faith,  in  the  Church  by  baptism.  To  be  in  Christ  is  to  be  one  with  Him  as  a  member 
of  His  body.  Note  Paul's  humility.  He  readily  accords  pre-eminence.  These 
kinsmen  may  have  been  among  the  converts  at  Pentecost.  Priority  of  union  with 
Christ  to  be  regarded  as  an  honour.  Age  in  Christ  makes  venerable.  Paul  delights 
to  refer  to  his  conversion.  The  time  of  our  anion  with  Christ  never  to  be  forgotten. 
(T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Andronicus  and  Junia: — I.  Their  relation  to  Christ. 
This  includes  thrse  things.     1.  An  impressive  knowledge  and  beliei  of  Hi» 


CBir.  zn.]  ROMANS.  T49 

ehanoter  uid  work.  2.  An  interest  in  the  blessinga  possessed  by  Ohrist.  8.  A 
likeness  to  Christ.  II.  A  distinouishiko  oibcumstamcb  of  theib  sttbjectiom  to 
Chbibt.  Paul's  friends  were  Christians  before  himself.  Note  the  importance  ol 
an  early  relation  to  Christ.  1.  How  many  evils  are  avoided.  (1)  An  awfolly 
deladed  mind.  (2)  Inveterate  habits  in  sin.  (3)  Much  of  poignant  regret.  (4) 
The  awful  danger  of  being  taken  away  in  a  state  of  enmity  against  God.  2.  How 
many  positive  advantages  are  gained.  (1)  The  pleasures  of  religion  are  enjoyed 
through  life.  (2)  There  is  the  present  satisfaction  of  being  under  the  promised 
eare  and  blessing  of  the  Divine  Bedeemer.  (3)  There  is  the  elevating  hope  that 
death  will  be  gain.  {Essex  Congregational  Remembrancer.)  A  fourfold  fellow- 
ship : — 1.  Of  family.  2.  Of  suffering.  3.  Of  service.  4.  Of  grace.  Who  also 
were  in  Christ  before  me.— In  Christ : — I.  What  is  it  to  be  "  in  Christ  "  ?  1.  We 
are  in  Christ — (1)  By  virtue  of  the  Divine  plan  and  purpose  (Eph.  i.  4 ;  2  Tim.  i. 
9).  (2)  When  our  sins  are  forgiven  (Col.  ii.  11-14).  (3)  By  regeneration(2  Cor. 
T.  17).  And  in  connection  with  this  Christ  is  said  to  be  "  our  Ufe."  (4)  Wnen  we 
are  justified  (chap.  viii.  1).  (5)  When  we  make  profession  of  faith  in  Chiist's  name. 
(6)  By  holy  walking  (Col.  ii.  6).  (7)  At  His  coming.  2.  This  union  is — (1)  Deep 
and  indestructible.  (2)  A  union  which  is  the  source  of  reciprocal  delight.  II.  W« 
UAT  BB  *'  m  Chbist,"  as  fab  as  thb  oevblopuent  and  bvidenoe  of  it  18  00H> 
OEBNED,  AT  DIFFERENT  PERIODS.  Andronicus  and  Junia  were  in  Christ  before  Paul. 
1.  When  we  are  young,  as  soon  as  the  truth  of  Jesus  can  be  received  into  the 
tmderstanding  and  the  heart,  the  child  may  be  "in  Christ."  We  have  instances 
in  Holy  Scripture  of  early  piety :  Joseph,  Moses,  David,  Josiah,  Daniel  and  the 
three  Hebrews,  John  the  Baptist,  and  Timothy.  When  we  enter  upon  the  serious 
businesses  and  occupations  of  life  :  Christ  says,  "  Take  My  yoke  upon  you  "  ;  and  if 
you  receive  Christ's  yoke  and  bear  His  burden,  you  are  '•  in  Christ."  2,  When  we 
are  married.  We  read  that  marriage  is  to  be  only  "  in  the  Lord."  Are  you  going 
to  be  "  heirs  together  of  the  grace  of  Hfe  "7  3.  Are  you  forty,  and  not "  in  Christ "  ? 
Tour  peril  is  extreme.  It  is  a  rare  thing  for  a  person  to  be  converted  after  forty. 
4.  I  come  to  age.  We  deny  not  that  a  man  may  be  brought  unto  Christ,  just  when 
he  is  about  to  expire,  as  the  thief  upon  the  cross  was ;  but  I  beg  of  you  that  yon 
leave  not  a  question  of  such  profound  importance  to  such  a  conjuncture  as  that. 
Augustine  said,  touchingly — '•  I  wm  too  late  in  knowing  Christ. "  "  'Twill 
save  us  from  a  thousand  snares  to  mind  religion  young."  HI.  It  is  a  obeat 
privileob  to  BE  "  IK  Christ."  The  apostle  speaks  of  that  which  was  of  first 
advantage,  and  it  is  compared  with  other  advantages.  In  Phil.  iii.  Paul  gives 
an  account  of  all  his  Hebrew  advantages,  and  counts  all  things  bnt  loss  for 
the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ.  But  let  me  advert  to  other  privileges. 
1.  National  privileges.  It  was  a  privilege  to  be  a  Roman,  and  the  apostle 
Talued  that  privilege.  It  is  a  privilege  to  be  an  Englishman,  and  there  are  peculiar 
privileges  belonging  to  some  positions  in  our  country,  but  all  of  them  put  together, 
in  comparison  with  the  advantage  of  being  "  in  Christ,"  are  as  nothing.  2.  What 
a  privilege  is  the  sight  of  the  eye,  and  the  brightness  of  the  sun  1  Is  there  no 
privilege  in  the  spiritual  vision  and  the  glory  of  the  Sun  of  Bighteousness  ?  3. 
What  a  value  in  life  1  What  is  the  spiritual  life  worth  ?  4.  And  especially 
viewed  in  the  light  of  eternity.  If  not  "in  Christ"  when  yoa  die,  yon 
will  die  in  your  sins.  "  In  Christ,"  or  no  resurrection  of  glory  at  the 
last  day,  but  a  resurrection  of  judgment  and  condemnation.  {J.  Stratten.) 
The  common  bond : — This  passage  furnishes  an  interesting  illustration  of  the  Chris- 
tian love  of  those  early  days,  and  how  the  gospel  knit  men's  hearts  together  across 
the  earth  at  a  time  of  the  world's  history  when  the  intercourse  of  man  with  man 
was  small,  and  travelling  dangerous,  laborious,  and  slow.  Yet  the  nnmber  of  names 
mentioned  shows  how  largely,  even  then,  the  tenderness  of  Christian  love  could 
draw  heart  to  heart,  and  unite  even  personal  strangers  in  a  true  brotherhood. 
I.  The  phrase  "  in  Christ "  implies  the  attainment  of  safett  in  Christ.  The  lan- 
guage is  founded  on  the  idea  of  a  refuge,  as  if  a  man  surrounded  with  foes  and  in 
danger  of  his  life  should  fiy  to  some  stronghold,  and  be  in  safety.  It  may  be  that 
the  devil  attacks  you  with  some  strong  temptatio  ;  it  may  be  that  God  has  visited 
you  with  solemn  convictions,  and  you  know  not  where  to  find  peace.  It  may  be 
that  life  is  slipping  swiftly  by ;  health  failing  you,  death  drawing  near,  whither 
shall  you  look  for  help  ?  There  is  but  one  refuge ;  one,  where  the  power  of  sin  will 
be  broken ;  one,  where  the  tormenting  sense  of  guilt  will  be  removed  by  the  atoning 
blood  of  Christ ;  one,  where  declining  Ufe  will  cease  to  alarm  you,  where  death  itseU 
will  lose  its  fears,    n.  The  words  "  in  Christ "  imply  xnnoN  with  Chbist.    Here 


760  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  xtW 

the  living  idea  which  natarally  oocnrs  is  that  of  a  vine  branch,  living  by  anion  with 
the  root  and  partaking  of  its  life,  just  as  oar  Lord  said,  "  Abide  in  Me.  He  that 
abideth  in  Me,  the  same  bringeth  forth  mach  frait."  Here  we  take  a  step  farther 
than  mere  safety.  It  is  not  from  the  punishment  of  sin  alone  we  need  to  be  saved, 
but  from  the  stain  of  its  pollutions.  Why,  what  is  religion  but  life  ?  and  life  is 
joy.  There  is  joy  in  the  state  into  which  we  enter  when  we  become  children  of 
God,  and  look  up  to  the  great  Being  who  made  the  heavens  and  the  earth  and  all 
things  therein,  and  call  Him  with  happy  confidence,  "  Our  Father,  which  art  in 
heaven."  It  is  not  all  over  with  us  when  we  die  ;  the  best  is  to  come  in  the  cloud- 
less heaven  prepared  for  those  who  love  God.  HI.  To  be  "  in  Christ "  implies  thb 
BEST  OP  THE  sotJL  whou  it  has  found  Him,  and  the  satisfaction  with  which  it  dwells 
content  in  Him.  Here  we  have  the  idea  of  search.  Like  the  merchantman  in 
search  of  goodly  pearls,  we  look  for  the  object  of  our  desire  in  every  direction,  and 
pursue  eagerly  our  search  till,  in  some  happy  moment,  we  find  the  precious  thing 
for  which  we  are  seeking,  and  then  we  rest.  It  would  be  as  easy  to  satisfy  a  man 
with  the  playthings  of  a  child,  as  to  satisfy  with  things  perishing  a  soul  that  will 
live  for  ever.  We  search  and  are  disappointed.  How  often  in  common  life  we  use 
the  phrase  of  a  person  or  of  a  thing  that  has  disappointed  us,  "I  did  not  find  what 
I  expected  in  him  or  in  it "  ?  But  we  may  find  all  in  Christ.  (CaTion  Garbett.) 
In  Christ : — These  words  were  very  familiar  and  very  precious  to  the  early  Chris- 
tians. So  much  so,  that  they  inscribed  them  on  the  tombs  of  their  departed  friends, 
as  the  catacombs  in  Bome  and  other  ancient  burial  places  still  show  you.  And  it 
was  thought  enough  to  wipe  away  a  mourner's  tears  to  see  on  his  friend's  grave  the 
inscription,  "  In  Christ."  The  preposition  "  in,"  as  found  in  our  New  Testament, 
has  a  variety  of  significations  in  accordance  with  the  various  meanings  of  the  word 
which  it  translates.  It  is  here  employed  to  represent  presence,  or  inclosure ;  as, 
when  we  say,  *•  in  a  kingdom,"  "  in  a  family,"  "  in  a  house,"  "  in  the  body."  Not 
as  when  we  say  *'  in  a  valley,"  meaning  upon  the  surface ;  thus,  you  say,  *'  a  house 
in  a  valley,"  meaning  upon  the  surface  of  the  ground  constituting  a  valley ;  bat,  as 
when  you  say,  "in  a  mountain," or  "in  a  river,"  representing  the  idea  that  the 
thing  of  which  you  speak  is  contained  or  inclosed.  "  In  Christ,"  is  used  in  our 
New  Testament  not  unfrequently  with  this  signification ;  as,  when  we  read  of  "  faith 
in  Christ,"  "  hope  in  Christ,"  "  truth  in  Christ."  And  persons  are  said  elsewhere 
to  be  in  Christ — thus,  "  babes  in  Christ " — "  fallen  asleep  in  Christ."  There  you 
Bee  the  word  can  have  no  other  idea  connected  with  it  than  that  of  inclusion — ^that 
of  being  contained ;  it  cannot  be  by  Christ,  or  after  Christ,  or  before  Christ ;  "  If 
any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new  creature."  You  will  observe  that  this  is  distinct 
from,  and  something  in  advance  of,  faith  in  Christ,  and  truth  in  Christ.  Although 
the  two  things  in  reality  are  connected,  yet  you  will  see  that  there  is  a  distinction 
between  saying  that  a  man's  faith  rests  in  Christ,  and  that  the  man  himself  is  in 
Christ.  The  two  things  we  know  are  in  reality  connected,  but  you  will  observe  that 
the  ideas  are  distinct.  The  words,  "  In  Christ,"  represent  some  personal  relation 
and  connection ;  for  you  will  observe  the  phrase  is  not  "  hope  in  Christ,"  or,  aa 
elsewhere,  "  faith  in  Christ."  The  idea  is  not  that  of  any  particular  faculty  or  sus- 
ceptibility having  Christ  for  its  object.  The  idea  is  that  of  the  individual,  in  all 
his  life,  being  intimately  connected  with  Christ.  Notice  that  this  connection  is 
begun  in  time.  There  was  a  time  when,  according  to  Paul's  own  idea,  he  was  not 
in  Christ.  Now,  very  close  union  is  indicated  by  Christ  Himself,  as  existing  between 
Himself  and  His  disciples.  "  He  that  eateth  My  flesh  and  drinketh  My  blood, 
dwelleth  in  Me,  and  I  in  him."  "At  that  day  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  in  the  Father, 
and  ye,"  mark,  "  ye  in  Me."  Elsewhere,  by  His  apostle,  Christ  teaches,  "  He  that 
is  joined  unto  the  Lord,  is  one  spirit,  for,"  he  adds,  "  we  are  members  of  His  body, 
of  His  flesh,  and  of  His  bones."  There  are  certain  analogies  which  will  here  assist 
ua.  You  know  that  Christ  is  called  "the  last  man";  "the  last  Adam";  "the 
second  Adam."  Adam  was  a  representative  man.  And  there  are  particular  ideas 
involved  in  these  general  thoughts.  For  example,  as  an  advocate,  Christ  represents 
as ;  and,  if  Christ  as  an  advocate  represents  as,  we  appear  before  God  in  Him. 
Again,  Christ  is  called  "  the  chief  corner-stone."  As  the  several  stones  are  one  la 
the  comer,  so  are  believers  one  in  Christ ;  and  the  same  thought,  you  observe,  is 
inyolved  in  Christ  being  the  "Head."  Again,  He  is  called  "  the  true  vine";  and 
His  disciples  "  are  the  branches."  But  there  are  certain  doctrines  which  throw 
light  npon  this  expression.  Let  me  just  remind  you  that  "  all  have  sinned,  and 
come  short  of  the  glory  of  God  "  ;  and,  except  we  are  redeemed  by  the  Saviour,  we 
are  nngodly.     We  are  not  in  the  spiritual,  and  in  the  most  blessed,  sense  living  in 


CBAP.  xn.]  ROMANS.  T61 

God.  In  the  lowest  sense  we  all  "  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being  "  in  Him— 
jast  as  plants,  and  trees,  and  flowers,  the  grass  of  the  field,  the  beasts  of  the  field, 
the  birds  of  the  air,  and  the  rish  of  the  sea,  live  in  Him ;  but  in  the  highest  sense, 
the  ungodly  cannot  live  in  Him  while  they  are  ungodly.  Instead  of  being  of  the 
Father,  they  are  of  the  world.  Their  element  is  not  God.  And  this  is  our  great 
fault ;  this  is  the  source  of  our  wretchedness ;  this  is  the  root  of  all  our  wickedness. 
Look  further.  God  loves  the  world,  and  desires,  in  the  most  blessed  sense,  that  men 
should  be  brought  back  to  Him.  Then,  to  restore  them  to  union  with  Himself,  Ha 
gives  His  Son  to  be  a  Mediator.  Now  suppose  that  I  receive  this  truth,  what  have 
I  done  ?  I  have  not  my  own  case  in  hand  as  a  suffering,  sinful  man.  I  am  not 
trying  to  be  my  own  advocate.  My  case  is  in  Christ ;  it  is  entirely  represented  in 
Him.  It  is  not  only  in  His  hand,  but  it  is  involved  in  His  very  position ;  because 
unless  there  were  sinners  there  could  not  be  a  Mediator.  "  In  Christ  "— 
then  your  iniquities  are  forgiven,  and  your  transgression  is  covered.  "  la 
Christ " — then  by  His  obedience  you  are  accounted  righteous.  "  In  Christ " 
— then  the  Spirit  of  Christ  dwells  with  you.  "  In  Christ  " — then  you  are 
joint  heirs  with  Christ.  "In  Christ" — then  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ, 
and  it  cannot  be  taken  away.  (S.  Martin. )  The  blessedness  of  being  early  in 
Christ : — L  It  makes  oub  wobk  easieb.  How  easy  to  bend  the  pliant  twig  !  How 
hard  to  move  the  sturdy  tree  1  An  old  man,  one  day  taking  a  child  on  his  knee, 
entreated  him  to  seek  God  now.  With  artless  simplicity  the  little  one  asked, 
••  Why  do  not  you  seek  God?  "  The  old  man  answered,  his  utterance  half  choked 
with  tears,  "  I  would,  child,  but  my  heart  is  hard — my  heart  is  hard  1 "  II.  Cub 
WORK  IS  BETTEB  DONE.  He  who  invites  us  to  remember  Him  "  in  the  days  of  our 
youth,"  will  show  His  love  by  affording  abundant  help.  III.  Life  is  made  mobb 
HAPPv.  Conscience  testifies  that  we  have  chosen  the  "  good  part,"  and  that  God  is 
our  Friend.  The  power  of  temptation  is  weakened.  The  growth  of  graces  is  pro- 
moted. Unreasonable  doubts  and  fears  are  removed.  The  sting  of  death  is 
effectually  plucked  away.  Religious  ways  are  ways  of  pleasantness  and  peace. 
Great  peace  have  they  who  love  God's  law.  IV.  It  saves  us  fbom  being  destruo- 
TrvE  EXAMPLES  TO  0THEB8.  When  Lord  Peterborough  was  the  guest  of  F6n61on, 
he  exclaimed,  "If  I  stay  here  any  longer,  I  shall  become  a  Christian  in  spite  of 
myself."  A  young  man,  who  was  about  to  be  ordained  to  the  ministry,  stated  that 
at  one  period  he  had  been  nearly  betrayed  into  infidelity.  •'  But,"  he  added, 
"  there  was  one  argument  in  favour  of  Christianity  which  I  could  never  refute — the 
consistent  conduct  of  my  own  father  1 "  In  contrast  with  such  examples  for  good, 
imagine  the  terrible,  soul-destroying  influence  of  evil  men !  V.  It  fits  one  fob  am 
BXALTED  POSITION  OF  DSEFDLNESS  IN  God's  KINGDOM.  "  Early  piety,"  says  Henry, 
"  it  is  to  be  hoped,  will  be  eminent  piety.  Those  that  are  good  betimes  are  likely 
to  be  very  good.''  Take  an  old,  time-wrinkled  man,  and  endeavour  to  teach  him 
the  arts  of  a  soldier,  or  to  make  a  scholar  or  tradesman  of  him.  What  painful 
plodding,  and,  oftentimes,  what  unavailing  effort  1  But  the  young  can  master  any- 
thing. VI.  We  are  CERTAIN  OF  A  HEAVENLY  BE  WARD.  As  iu  a  Well- appointed  army 
the  soldier's  pay  is  regulated  by  the  time  of  service,  so  is  it  with  the  followers  ol 
Christ.  Long  years  of  "  patient  continuance  in  well-doing  "  will  be  recompensed 
with  the  highest  seats,  the  brightest  crowns,  and  the  most  ecstatic  enjoyment.  {J. 
N.  Norton,  D.D.)  The  privilege  of  being  early  in  Christ : — Everything  is  beau- 
tiful in  its  season.  What  spring  is  in  the  natural  year,  youth  is  in  the  life  of  man. 
If  that  precious  season  is  lost,  it  is  a  dreadful  thing ;  rather  there  should  be  the 
sowing  to  the  Spirit,  that  we  may  reap  life  everlasting.  It  is  therefore  a  beautiful 
order  that  the  young  should  remember  their  Creator  in  the  days  of  their  youth. 
Hence  it  was  that  Paul  spake  of  himself  as  "  one  bom  out  of  due  time  " — not  born 
at  the  right  season.  And  hence  it  is  that  he  attaches  such  distinction  to  Andronicus 
and  •Junia.  I.  What  is  it  to  be  in  Cheist  ?  Probably  the  common  answer  is — • 
"  To  be  a  Christian."  But  what  is  it  to  be  a  Christian  ?  To  be  baptized  ?  Then 
indeed  the  whole  baptized  population  of  our  land  were  in  Christ.  But  is 
there  any  man  in  his  senses  that  dares  to  affirm  that?  There  is  a  sense, 
indeed,  in  which  all  who  are  baptized  are  in  Christ :  they  are  under  solemn 
obligations  to  Christ ;  they  have  His  name  upon  them ;  they  have  the  symbol 
ol  His  service  traced  upon  their  brow.  But  this  will  only  enhance  their  guUt 
and  aggravate  their  condemnation,  if  this  be  all.  And  yet  there  is  a  sense  in 
which  being  baptized  into  Christ  is  being  in  Christ,  but  that  is  when  the  sign  of 
the  water  poured  on  the  child  is  authenticated  by  a  new  birth  onto  righteoosneuu 
Baptism  is  the  outward  and  visible  representation  of  the  grafting  of  a  sonl  IntA 


762  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [<m*.  xn. 

Christ.  Now  when  the  gardener  wishes  to  graft  a  scion  from  one  tree  into  another, 
he  inserts  it  into  a  little  aperture,  and  afterwards  surrounds  it  with  clay  and  straw, 
and  binds  the  whole  round  with  strong  bands.  And  thus  the  grafting,  as  far  as  man 
can  accomplish  it,  is  done.  But  in  order  that  the  grafting  may  take  effect,  the  bark  of 
the  stem  must  grasp  and  coalesce  with  the  little  slip,  and  that  little  slip,  putting 
forth  its  fibres  and  its  stems,  must  also  grasp  the  bark  of  the  stem,  and  so  there 
must  be  a  reciprocal  union.  Then  the  grafting  is  effectual.  Even  so  it  is  in  the 
grafting  of  a  soul  into  Christ.  Baptism  and  all  the  means  of  grace  are  what 
men  can  use  and  ought  to  use ;  but  in  vain  are  all  the  means  of  grace,  except  the 
union  of  the  soul  with  Christ  takes  place.  That  union  is  accomplished  on  the  part 
of  Christ  by  putting  His  own  Spirit  into  the  soul,  and  on  the  part  of  the  soul  by 
believing  in  Christ.  And  if  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  however  duly 
baptized,  however  moral,  he  is  none  of  Christ's.  Therefore  to  be  in  Christ  is 
represented  by  every  figure  of  adhering  union.  II.  What  is  the  inestimablk 
BiiESSiNO  OF  BEiNO  THUS  IM  Chbist  ?  And  here  all  thought  fails  us ;  for,  if  a  man 
be  out  of  Christ,  he  is  under  sin  and  the  power  of  Satan ;  but  he  that  is  in  Christ  is 
delivered  out  of  the  bondage  of  corruption  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  sons  of  Qod. 
And  "  if  any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new  creature  "  ;  all  things  are  his — "  whether 
Paul  or  ApoUos,"  Ac.  He  is  safe  from  every  peril,  secure  from  all  evils :  God  is  hit 
Father,  angels  are  his  attendants,  and  all  things  work  together  for  his  good.  lU.  Thb 
XJNSPEAKABLE  BLESSING  OF  BEING  FOUND  EABLT  IN  Cheist.  To  be  early  in  Christ — 
1.  Is  to  be  in  Christ.  At  the  right  time,  as  Christ  Himself  designs  that  we 
shoold  be.  For  I  have  no  doubt  that  infant  baptism  is  of  Christ.  Circumcision 
was  enjoined  upon  every  child  of  God's  professing  people,  so  that  the  child  who  was 
not  circumcised  was  to  be  cut  off  from  Israel.  2.  Will  save  from  thousands  of 
evils  and  dark  stains.  Out  of  Christ  the  child  knows  not  what  may  become  of  it,  how 
he  may,  like  the  prodigal,  debase  himself  until  he  is  feeding  the  swine.  But  to  be 
early  in  Christ  is  to  be  early  in  the  ark,  in  the  stronghold,  out  of  the  reach  of  Satan. 
S.  Will  augment  usefulness.  The  stream  that  runs  a  little  way  to  the  ocean  can 
leave  but  little  greenness  and  beauty  on  its  banks ;  but  the  river  that  winds  its  crystal 
way  through  many  a  valley  and  over  many  a  plain — oh  1  what  rich  blessing  it  scatters 
along  its  course  I  And  so  it  is  in  comparison  with  the  man  who  has  but  a  little  course 
in  which  to  serve  God,  when  he  has  wasted  his  best  years  in  sin.  (Canon  Stowell.) 
Early  consecration : — I.  In  its  belation  to  God.  1.  Our  first  clear  duty  is  to 
know  and  glorify  God.  He  has  made,  preserved,  and  redeemed  us.  It  is,  there- 
fore, utterly  ignoble  to  ask  with  how  little  we  may  satisfy  His  claim.  A  duke  of 
Brittany  during  a  long  imprisonment  vowed  that  if  he  regained  his  Uberty  he  would 
give  to  the  Church  his  weight  in  gold,  and  did  so  conscientiously,  for  he  went  into 
the  balance  clad  in  all  his  armour.  When  Don  Carlos,  the  son  of  Philip  II.,  lay  ill, 
he  made  a  like  vow,  but  on  his  recovery  placed  himself  in  the  scale  clad  in  damask 
and  fur.  We  see  at  a  glance  which  is  the  more  excellent  way.  2.  We  glorify  God 
the  most  when  we  come  to  Him  soonest  (Eph.  i.  12^,  with  the  free-offering  of  a  life 
unviolated,  fresh,  and  full  of  all  glorious  possibilities — far  more  than  we  can  by 
laying  fortunes  at  His  feet  in  distant  years  (Micah  vii.  1).  II.  In  its  relation  to 
CUB  OWN  LIFE.  It  is  our  business  to  make  the  best  of  our  life  throughout,  and 
early  consecration  gives  perfection — 1.  To  our  youth.  It  secures  to  the  full — (1) 
The  grace  of  early  days.  Like  the  firefly  on  a  flower,  or  the  rainbow  above  a 
waterfall,  what  was  already  beautiful  the  grace  of  God  makes  doubly  so.  (2j  The 
joy  of  youth.  The  light-hearted,  free  joyousness  of  life's  golden  dawn  is  not 
damped  by  the  fear  of  God,  only  conserved  and  raised.  (3)  The  spirit  of  youth. 
Bo  far  from  destroying  enthusiasm,  the  love  of  God  only  renders  more  intense  and 
pure  the  generous  fire.  (4)  AH  the  beautiful  characteristics  of  youth.  The  angel 
John  saw  in  the  sun  would  not  dim  the  hght :  religion  in  youth  is  that  angel 
giving  new  splendour  to  Ufe.  2.  To  our  manhood.  A  wasted  youth  tells  injuriously 
on  the  later  stages  of  life.  When  the  trees  in  the  spring-time  are  nipped  by  the 
frost  they  never  quite  recover.  But  early  in  Christ  means  a  strong,  pure,  blessed 
manhood  (Lam.  iii.  27).  It  is  an  unspeakable  advantage  to  serve  the  apprenticeship 
of  life  under  Christ.  He  can  make  us  workmen  needing  not  to  be  ashamed  in  that 
most  difficult  art — the  art  of  hving.  3.  To  our  age.  Andronicus  and  Junia  were 
admirable  people  to  the  last.  Age  is  much  what  we  make  it,  desolate  old  age 
being  the  bitter  fruit  of  self-will  and  indulgence,  a  bright  old  ag6  the  fruit  of 
discipline.  The  French  artist  Millet  used  to  say  to  his  pupils,  "  The  end  of  the 
day  is  the  proof  of  the  picture."  That  which  will  bear  the  test  of  the  twilight  hour 
ig  true  in  character  as  well  as  in  art.    III.  In  hb  belation  to  bocial  dutt.    1. 


CBAf.  xn.}  ROMANS.  7St 

Early  in  Christ  we  best  serve  oar  generation.  Andronioos  and  Jania  were  famous 
workers  in  their  generation.  As  a  rule  the  world  can  owe  but  little  to  men  saved 
in  the  eleventh  hour.  At  eventide  we  hear  men  say,  "  Well,  it  is  too  late  to  make 
a  good  day's  work  of  a  bad  one."  2.  None  who  in  early  life  devote  themselves  to 
Christ  ever  live  to  regret  having  done  so.  Protracted  investigation  only  shows  them 
the  reality  of  the  rock  on  which  they  have  built ;  the  experiences  of  life  only  prove 
the  preciousness  of  Christ's  truth  and  grace  ;  the  sorrows  of  life  only  cause  them 
to  cherish  with  profounder  satisfaction  the  consolations  and  hopes  of  faith.  3. 
None  who  in  later  Ufe  devote  themselves  to  Christ  but  wish  they  had  done  so 
earUer.  Was  not  this  really  the  wish  of  Paul  here  ?  Andronious  and  Junia  were 
rejoicing  in  Christ  while  he  was  haling  men  and  women  to  prison.  4.  That 
portion  of  oor  life  which  had  no  spiritual  experience  in  it  we  feel  was  lost,  no 
matter  our  worldly  delights,  knowledge,  wealth,  social  triumphs.  Pontius,  the 
biographer  of  Cyprian,  passes  by  the  early  period  of  his  history  with  the  remark 
that  a  man's  actions  should  be  recorded  not  from  the  time  of  his  first,  but  of  his 
second  birth  (chap.  vi.  20,  21).  5.  Few  who  finally  fail  to  devote  themselves  to 
Christ  but  feel  that  the  fatal  mistake  of  their  life  was  their  early  neglect  of  Christ. 
(1)  The  external  difficulties  of  beginning  multiply  with  time,  until  in  the  course  of 
years  they  become  apparently  insurmountable.  The  aged  sinner  is  conscious  that 
the  gossamer  thread  which  once  held  him  from  Christ  has  become  an  iron  fetter, 
and  the  rivulet  separating  from  the  great  inheritance  a  river.  (2)  The  internal 
difficulties  increase — the  failure  of  sensibility,  will-power,  Ac,  renders  the  beginning 
of  a  new  life  almost  incredible  to  him  who  has  for  years  resisted  the  Holy  Ghost. 
It  is  always  diffionlt  to  make  the  great  renunciation,  but  the  initial  difficulty  is 
never  less  than  in  life's  opening  years  (1  John  ii.  14 ;  Prov.  viii.  17  ;  Isa.  xxvi.  9). 
{W.  L.  Wathinson.)  Early  piety,  beauty  of: — Early  in  the  morning  the  dew  still 
twinkles  on  the  leaves,  the  maiden  blush  of  dawn  remains  and  reveals  an  opening 
beauty,  which  is  lost  to  those  who  rise  not  to  see  the  birth  of  day.  There  is  s 
beauty  about  early  piety  which  is  indescribably  charming,  and  unutterably  lovely  in 
freshness  and  radiance.  We  remark  in  childhood  an  artless  simplicity,  a  child-like 
confidence,  which  is  seen  nowhere  else.  There  may  be  less  of  knowing,  but  there 
is  more  of  loving ;  there  may  be  less  of  reasoning,  but  there  is  more  of  simply 
believing  upon  the  authority  of  revelation  ;  there  may  be  less  of  deep-rootedness, 
but  there  is  certainly  more  of  perfume,  beauty,  and  emerald  verdure.  If  I  must 
choose  that  part  of  the  Christian  life  in  which  there  is  the  most  joy,  next  to  the 
land  Beulah,  which  I  mast  set  first  and  foremost  by  reason  of  its  lying  so  near  to 
Canaan,  I  think  I  would  prefer  that  tract  of  Christian  experience  which  lieth 
toward  the  sun-rising,  which  is  sown  with  orient  pearls  of  love,  and  cheered  with  the 
delicious  music  of  the  birds  of  hope.  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Early  piety,  importance 
of: — If  the  tree  is  permitted  to  grow  up  and  to  grow  old,  with  the  intention  of 
making  it  new  then,  there  is  danger,  lest,  through  storms  or  fire  or  war,  it  may  be 
suddenly  destroyed.  And,  even  though  it  were  protected  from  all  these  risks,  it  is 
strange  that  any  one  should  deliberately  desire  that  the  soil  and  sun  and  air  should 
be  enjoyed  by  that  tree,  and  wasted  in  bearing  bitter  fruit  all  the  days  of  its 
strength,  and  only  make  a  good  tree  in  its  old  age,  when  it  scarcely  has  sap 
sufficient  in  its  veins  to  bear  any  fruit  at  all.  See,  reader,  in  this  plain  parable, 
how  foolish,  how  false,  how  blasphemous,  is  the  desire  that  throbs  cowardly  and 
covertly  in  many  young  hearts,  to  waste  the  broad  sunny  surface  of  life  in  sin,  and 
throw  a  narrow  strip  of  its  withered,  rugged  edge  at  last  as  an  offering  to  God  !  If 
yon  have  no  desire  to  be  good  and  do  good  throughout  the  Ufe  on  earth  that  lies 
before  you,  how  can  you  desire  to  be  good  and  do  good  in  the  eternity  that  lies 
beyond  ?  Be  not  deceived.  He  who  is  weary  of  sin  wants  to  be  quit  of  it  now,  and 
instantly  to  enjoy  a  new  life.  He  who  says  he  wants  to  be  holy,  but  would  rather 
pat  off  the  date  of  the  change,  lies  to  himself,  to  the  world,  and  to  God.  (W.  Arnot, 
D.B.)  Early  piety,  enduring  : — As  a  vessel  will  long  retain  and  keep  the  savour  of 
that  wherewith  it  is  first  seasoned ;  even  so,  if  children  be  taught  good  things  while 
they  be  young  and  tender,  they  will  abide  the  longer  vrith  them.  _  (Gawdray.) 
Youth,  the  root  of  age : — It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  in  old  age  it  is  too  late  to 
mend,  that  then  you  must  inhabit  what  you  have  built.  Old  age  has  the  foundation 
of  its  joy  or  its  sorrow  laid  in  youth.  You  are  building  at  twenty.  Are  you  build- 
ing for  seventy  ?  Nay,  every  stone  in  the  foundation  takes  hold  of  every  stone  in 
the  wall  up  to  the  very  eaves  of  the  building ;  and  every  deed,  right  or  wrong,  that 
transpires  in  youth,  reaches  forward,  and  has  a  relation  to  all  the  afterpart  of  man's 
life.  A  man's  life  is  not  like  the  contiguous  cells  in  a  bee's  honeycomb ;  it  is  more 
VOL.  n.  48 


754  TRE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

like  the  separate  parts  of  a  plant  which  unfolds  out  of  itself,  every  part  bearing 
relation  to  all  that  antecede.  That  which  you  do  in  youth  is  the  root,  and  all  the 
afterparts,  middle  age  and  old  age,  are  the  branches  and  the  fruits,  whose  character 
the  root  will  determine.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Priority  in  Christ — 1.  Is  a  privilege. 
2.  Confers  honour.  3.  Demands  proficiency.  4.  Should  guarantee  usefulness. 
6.  Commands  respect.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  blessedness  of  being  betimes  in 
Christ : — L  What  is  the  import  of  being  in  Christ  ?  1.  Some  are  in  Christ 
only  externally,  as  by  baptism  entered  into  His  Church.  2.  Some  are  also  in  Christ 
by  vital  union  (Eph.  v.  30;  1  Cor.  vi.  17;  John  vi.  56).  II.  The  blessedness 
ANNEXED  TO  THE  BEDJa  THUS  IN  Chbist.  You  may  sec  this — 1.  In  the  union  itself, 
as  it  is— (1)  Most  intimate  and  endearing.  Christ  is  compared  to  a  foundation  for 
our  support,  a  vine  for  our  fruitfulness,  a  head  for  vital  importance,  a  husband  for 
the  most  tender  love.  This  is  the  ground  of  that  sympathy  that  there  is  between 
Christ  and  His  members  (Heb.  iv.  15 ;  Col.  i.  24  ;  Acts  ix.  4).  (2)  Most  honourable. 
No  title  among  men  is  comparable  to  that  of  being  a  member  of  Christ.  Angela 
are  subject  to  Him,  but  are  not  styled  His  body  (Eph.  i.  23 ;  Heb.  ii.  16).  How 
great  is  their  dignity  who  are  thus  allied  to  the  Lord  of  glory  (1  Cor.  ii.  8).  (3) 
Most  enriching  (Eph.  iii.  8  ;  Col.  i.  19 ;  John  i.  16  ;  1  Cor.  i.  80,  iii.  21, 23).  (4) 
Most  comfortable.  Nothing  can  be  wanting  to  their  support  who  are  taken  into  it. 
(5)  Immediate.  Every  member  stands  equally  near  the  Head:  they  are  all  in 
Him  (1  Pet.  iv.  5,  6 ;  Eph.  ii.  22 ;  1  Cor.  xii.  13 ;  Col.  ii.  19).  (6)  Inseparable. 
2.  In  some  instances  of  the  happiness  that  belongs  to  those  who  are  found  in 
Christ.  They — (1)  Have  their  sins  pardoned  (Psa.  xxxii.  1 ;  CoL  i.  14).  (2)  Are 
freed  from  sin's  reigning  power  (chap.  vii.  24,  25,  viii.  2).  (3)  Are  rescued  from  the 
tyranny  of  Satan  (Eph.  ii.  2).  (4)  Are  delivered  from  the  curse  and  condemnation 
of  the  law,  and  so  from  hell  (John  iii.  18 ;  Kom.  viii.  1 ;  Gal.  iii.  13).  (5)  Are 
brought  into  a  state  of  favour  with  God  whose  lovingkindness  is  better  than  Ufe 
(Psa,  Ixiii.  3 ;  Eom.  v.  1).  (6)  Are  adopted  into  His  family,  that  of  which  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  head  (John  i.  12 ;  Eph.  ii.  19  ;  Eom.  viii.  17).  (7)  Have 
the  privilege  of  free  access  to  God  and  are  always  welcome,  being  made  accepted  in 
the  Beloved  (Eph.  i.  6).  (8)  Have  their  perseverance  secured  while  they  live ;  the 
reception  of  their  souls  to  heaven  at  death ;  a  glorious  resurrection  of  their  bodies, 
and  a  blessed  eternity.  UI.  There  are  specul  advantages  of  being  earlt  in 
Christ.  1.  This  is  the  best  preservative  from  sin,  so  displeasing  to  God,  and 
which  will  fill  the  guilty  with  so  much  horror  in  the  review.  2.  Hereby  you  will 
be  saved  from  being  destructive  examples  to  others;  drawing  them  on  in  sin 
together  with  yourselves.  3.  You  will  be  fitted  for  more  eminent  service  for  God 
and  your  generation ;  be  common  blessings  in  helping  to  keep  off  judgments,  and 
bring  down  mercy  upon  the  places  of  your  abode.  4.  You  will  be  especially  dear 
to  heaven ;  in  the  number  of  those  whom  God  and  Christ  will  delight  to  favour 
and  honour.  5.  This  will  speak  you  signal  instances  of  the  sovereignty  and  riches 
of  grace  that  may  be  matter  of  comfortable  reflection  to  you  aU  your  days.  6.  You 
win  be  most  like  to  attain  a  comfortable  evidence  of  the  sincerity  and  truth  of 
grace,  and  so  that  you  are  the  objects  of  God's  eternal  choice.  7.  Your  great  work 
upon  earth  wiU  be  over,  being  early  provided  for  a  blessed  eternity.  8.  If  you  are 
longer  spared  you  will  have  a  fair  advantage  of  making  a  greater  proficiency  in 
grace,  and  so  enlarge  your  capacity  for  greater  glory.  IV.  Application.  Is  it  the 
happiness  of  some  to  be  in  Christ  before  others  ?  Hence  learn — 1.  That  a  state  of 
nature  is  a  Christless  state,  and  so  a  very  miserable  one  (Eph.  ii.  12).  2.  How 
dangerous  must  it  be  to  rest  in  a  mere  profession,  and  what  multitudes  are  like  to 
perish  as  looking  no  farther  1  (Matt.  vii.  21 ;  1  John  iii.  23).  3.  How  unreasonable 
is  the  backwardness  of  sinners  to  close  with  an  offered  Saviour  1  And  yet  how 
commonly  is  it  discovered  I  4.  With  what  seriousness  should  every  one  concerned 
about  his  everlasting  happiness  or  misery  take  up  and  pursue  the  inquiry.  Am  I  in 
Christ,  yea,  or  no  ?  (D.  Wilcox.)  Old  age  in  Christ : — The  date  of  this  Epistle 
is  A.D.  58 ;  the  apostle  was  converted  in  a.d.  34.  So  that  Andronicus  and  Junia 
had  been  disciples  for  more  than  twenty-four  years.  They  were  therefore  advanced 
in  life.  May  we  not  suppose  that  they  were  known  to  Him  when  He  was  a 
persecutor?  L  The  characteristic  features  of  aged  Christians.  1.  Stability 
in  the  faith.  2.  FertiMty  in  holiness.  3.  Expectancy  of  blessings.  H.  Thb 
advantages  which  they  confer  on  the  Church.  1.  They  afford  encouragement 
to  the  fearful.  2.  They  suggest  caution  to  the  inexperienced.  III.  Their  speciaii 
CLAIMS  TO  ODB  REGARD.  They  claim — 1.  Our  veneration.  2.  Our  sympathy  on 
acooont  of  their  infirmities.    8.  Our  assistance.    (J.  Blackburn.)        Age,  what 


OTAP.  XVI.]  BOMANS.  755 

men  reap  in  : — A  yonng  man  came  to  a  man  of  ninety  years  of  age  and  said  to  him, 
"  How  nave  you  made  out  to  live  so  long  and  be  so  well  ?  "  The  old  man  took  the 
youngster  to  an  orchard,  and,  pointing  to  some  large  trees  full  of  apples,  said,  "  I 
planted  these  trees  when  I  wad  a  boy,  and  do  you  wonder  that  now  I  am  permitted 
to  gather  the  fruit  of  them  ? "  We  gather  in  old  age  what  we  plant  in  our  youth. 
Bow  to  the  wind  and  we  reap  the  whirlwind.  Plant  in  early  life  the  right  kind  of 
a  Christian  character,  and  you  will  eat  luscious  fruit  in  old  age,  and  gather  these 
harvest  apples  in  eternity.     {T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)        The  Christian  sage: — 

1.  His  PBTviLEGE.  1.  Early  conversion,  2.  Experience,  3.  Prospects.  II. 
Dtitieb.     1.  To  counsel     2.  Exhort,     3.  Encourage.    III.  CtiAtms  to — 1.  Bespect. 

2.  Veneration.    3.  Sympathy.     {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 

Vers.  8-11.  Greet  Amplias  my  beloved  in  the  Lord. — Amplias  was  probably  one 
of  Paul's  converts,  I.  "  My  beloved."  1.  As  his  own  son  in  the  gospel,  or — 
2.  From  special  grace  observed  in  him.  3.  Warm  attachment  shown  by  him.  4. 
Eminent  devotedness  to  the  cause  of  Christ.  Degrees  of  attachment  consistent  with 
Christian  love.  Of  the  twelve,  Peter,  James,  and  John  most  beloved  (Matt.  xvii.  1). 
Of  these  John  especially  beloved  (John  xiii.  23).  II.  *•  In  the  Loed."  Beloved — 
1.  Not  after  the  flesh  (2  Cor.  v.  16).  2.  For  Christ's  sake.  3.  As  a  member  of 
the  same  body  of  Christ.  Those  truly  beloved  who  are  beloved  in  the  Lord. 
(T.  Bobinson,  D.D.)  Amplias  the  beloved  in  the  Lord: — This  description 
implies — 1,  His  true  conversion.  2.  His  lovely  character.  3.  His  happiness — 
loving  and  beloved.  4.  His  final  salvation — beloved  by  God.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
The  tomb  of  Amplias  : — The  archsBological  researches  in  Borne  of  recent  years  have 
thrown  much  light  upon  the  life  of  the  early  Christians  in  that  city;  but  no 
discovery  has  produced  such  interest  as  that  just  annouaced  of  the  tomb  of 
Amplias.  Who  was  AmpUas  ?  Who  were  his  friends  ?  Why  was  he  buried  in 
this  particular  place  ?  The  answers  to  these  questions  are  all  furnished  by  the 
discovery  of  his  tomb ;  and  a  flood  of  light  is  let  in  upon  the  times  of  the  early 
Boman  Christians.  His  tomb  stands  in  one  of  the  catacombs  excavated  in  the 
time  of  Domitian,  on  the  ground  then  belonging  to  Flavia  DomitiUa,  his  niece. 
Boman  history  preserves  the  fact  that  Flavia  became  a  Christian.  Amplias,  the 
friend  of  Paul,  must  have  been  a  distinguished  man.  Because  he  was  buried  in 
Flavia's  cemetery,  we  judge  they  were  personally  acquainted.  By  Paul's  greeting 
we  imagine  he  was  a  minister  of  the  New  Word.  Then  the  tomb  is  of  such 
a  character  that  only  the  possessor  of  great  wealth  could  have  constructed  so 
remarkable  a  resting-place.  Was  this  the  work  of  Flavia,  niece  of  the  great 
Domitian  ?  Was  it  erected  at  the  cost  of  his  family  ?  or  by  the  early  Christians  of 
Bome?  These  questions  may  be  answered,  for  the  investigations  are  not  yet 
concluded.  All  that  we  know  at  present  is  that  there  is  no  tomb  in  the  catacombs 
that  equals  it  for  the  beauty  of  its  adornments  and  the  variety  of  pictorial  illustra- 
tions. The  frescoes  in  the  Golden  House  of  Nero,  and  the  adornments  of  the  house 
of  Germanicus  in  the  Palatine,  are  not  to  be  compared,  so  it  is  reported,  with  the 
symbolic  illustrations  of  the  tomb  of  Amplias,  the  teacher  of  Flavia ;  the  beloved  of 
Paul.  (Christian  Commonwealth.)  Unknown  Christians  : — Of  Amplias  and  Stachys 
nothing  is  known  except  that  they  were  "  beloved  in  the  Lord  "  by  the  apostle,  the 
objects  of  his  high  Christian  esteem  and  affection.  The  day  is  coming  when  it  will 
be  seen  that  to  have  been  the  friend  of  an  apostle  was  really  a  higher  honour  than 
to  be  the  favourite  of  a  Boman  emperor,  and  when  the  eulogiums  of  historians 
and  poets,  procured  by  a  lavish  expenditure  of  labour  and  suffering,  would  be 
gladly  exchanged  for  the  simple  record  that  Paul  loved  them  because  they  loved 
Christ,  {J.  Brown,  D.D.)  Salute  Urbane,  our  helper  in  Christ,  and  StachyB  my 
beloved, — Urbane  and  Stachys: — L  Theib  names.  "Citizen"  and  "Ear  of 
Corn,"  suggestive  of — 1,  Town  and  country.  (1)  XJrbanus  may  well  represent 
a  busy  civic  character,  briuging  all  the  qualities  necessary  for  and  exhibited  in 
commercial  and  political  life  to  the  service  of  the  Church.  The  modem  XJrbanus 
is  the  consecrated  merchant  or  town  councillor.  (2)  Stachys  may  represent  the 
Lady  Bountiful  of  some  rural  district  whose  temperament,  unfit  for  the  bustle  and 
fashion  of  the  city,  is  exactly  suited  to  the  quiet  work  and  influence  of  the  village 
church,  2,  Polish  and  simplicity.  (1)  Urbane  is  a  word  that  has  become  technical 
for  refined  manners,  and  we  may  imagine  Urbanus  combining  business  energy 
with  gentlemanly  deportment — two  things  which  should  never  be  separated 
certainly  in  church  life,  (2)  In  Stachys  we  miss  much  of  the  polish  and  suavity 
of  Urbanus,  but  there  is  a  charm  about  her  natural  homely  manners  that  renderg 


75d  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Xft, 

her,  in  her  sphere,  do  less  asefnl.  II.  Theib  place  ts  histobt.  Who  they  were 
no  one  knows :  yet  every  one  would  like  to  know.  No  onenviable  position.  There 
are  many  whom  we  know  well  that  we  wish  we  knew  nothing  about.  A  stroke  of 
the  pen,  however,  has  made  them  immortal.  There  were  those  then  living  who 
wonld  have  given  thousands  of  gold  and  silver  for  a  similar  record  in  a  book  far  less 
widely  circulated  than  the  Bible.  Urbanus  and  Stachys  are  known  throngh  the 
wide  world  eighteen  centuries  after  their  death,  and  learned  men  are  making 
researches  if  haply  they  may  find  their  names  on  some  tomb  or  in  some  con- 
temporary record.  Why  this  ?  Simply  because  of  their  relationship  with  Christ 
and  His  Church.  So  millions  to-day  whom  no  historian  would  think  worth 
mentioning  are  in  the  Lamb's  Book  of  Life,  and  will  be  held  forth  for  the  admira- 
tion of  a  universe  when  many  of  the  world's  greatest  names  shall  have  perished. 
TTT,  Theib  RELATIONSHIP  TO  THE  APOSTLB.  Urbanus  was  "  our  helper."  Stachys 
was  "  my  beloved."  The  one  sustained  a  general  relationship  to  Paul  and  to  others 
beside  Paul :  but  the  other  sustained  a  special  relationship  to  the  apostle  himself. 
We  have  aU  a  circle  of  acquaintances  wide  enough  to  include  a  great  many ;  but 
we  have  also  an  inner  circle  where  few  indeed  move.  The  former  belong  to  others 
as  well  as  us ;  the  latter  to  ourselves  alone.  And  so  in  the  Church.  There  are 
scores  perhaps  that  may  be  depended  on  to  do  general  work  for  the  common  good, 
but  there  are  only  a  few  whom  the  minister  may  count  as  bis  own,  and  upon  whom 
he  may  depend  for  special  work  out  of  peculiar  regard  for  himself.  lY.  Theib 
ENCOMirm.  1.  Urbanus  with  his  masculine  qualities  is  an  active  helper.  Useful 
in  many  a  good  word  and  work  he  is  a  man  to  admire.  He  makes  his  mark,  is 
always  in  evidence,  and  men  wonder  how  the  Church  would  get  on  without  him. 
2.  But  Stachys  is  a  woman  to  be  loved.  She  can  only  pray,  give  the  apostle  many 
a  quiet  word  of  encouragement,  and  do  such  unobtrusive  work  as  her  nervous 
shrinking  temperament  will  enable  her  to  do.  Here  we  have  Martha  and  Mary, 
Peter  and  John  over  again.  Conclusion — 1.  Let  each  do  what  he  or  she  can,  each 
in  his  own  way  in  the  Church.  2.  Let  each  receive  timely  and  fitting  encourage- 
ment. 8.  Let  each  be  sure  of  an  appropriate  reward.  (J.  W.  Bum.)  Every 
Christian  worker  shall  be  recognised: — Christian  workers  shall  be  like  the  stars,  in 
the  fact  that  they  have  a  light  independent  of  each  other.  Look  up  at  night,  and 
see  each  world  shows  its  distinct  glory.  It  is  not  like  the  conflagration,  in  which 
you  cannot  tell  where  one  flame  stops  and  another  begins.  Neptune,  Herschel, 
and  Mercury  are  as  distinct  as  if  each  one  of  them  were  the  only  star.  So,  oar 
individualism  will  not  be  lost  in  heaven.  A  great  multitude — yet  each  one  as 
observable,  as  distinctly  recognised,  as  greatly  celebrated,  as  if  in  all  the  space 
from  gate  to  gate,  aud  from  hill  to  hill,  he  were  the  only  inhabitant.  No  mixing 
np ;  no  mob ;  no  indiscriminate  rush.  Each  Christian  worker  standing  out 
illustrious.  All  the  story  of  earthly  achievement  adhering  to  each  one.  His  self- 
denials,  and  pains,  and  services,  and  victories  published.  Before  men  went  out  to 
the  last  American  war,  the  orators  told  them  that  they  would  all  be  remembered 
by  their  country,  and  their  names  be  commemorated  in  poetry  and  in  song.  But  go 
to  the  graveyard  in  Bichmond,  and  you  will  find  there  six  thousand  graves,  over 
each  one  of  which  is  the  inscription :  "  Unknown."  The  world  does  not  remember 
its  heroes.  But  there  will  be  no  unrecognised  Christian  worker  in  heaven.  (Great 
Thoughts.)  Apelles,  approved  In  Christ. — Apelles  was  preferred,  found  to  be 
genuine  after  trial.  This  is  the  meaning  of  the  word  in  Bomans  xiv.  17,  18  ;  1  Cor. 
ix,  27.  Consider  I. — The  essential  elements  which  compose  so  intebestino 
A  CHARACTEE.  Uulcss  wc  be  "  approved  in  Christ,"  it  is  but  of  little  consequence  by 
whom  else  we  are  approved.  Note  here — 1.  Sincerity  of  principle.  The  apostle 
prayed  for  the  Philippians  tbat  they  might  be  "  sincere,  and  without  offence," 
i.e.,  pure,  transparent.  The  idea  is  taken  from  holding  up  a  substance  to  the  light, 
to  see  if  there  be  any  flaw  or  defect  in  it.  (1)  There  must  be  sincerity  as  to  the 
principles  we  adopt,  and  the  state  in  which  we  are  found  before  Christ  our  Saviour. 
(2)  This  is  most  important  to  youth.  Insincerity  secretly  corrupts,  like  a  canker 
at  the  root  of  a  tree,  or  a  moth  in  a  garment.  2.  Self  denial  and  fortitude  in 
rendering  those  sacrifices  and  services  which  religion  requires.  "  If  auy  man  will 
come  after  Me,  let  him  deny  himself."  It  is  recorded  by  the  apostle,  "  Demas  hath 
forsaken  me,  having  loved  this  present  world,"  The  young  man  whom  Christ 
loved  had  one  essential  defect,  he  could  not  deny  himself.  3.  Stability,  uniformity, 
and  perseverance  in  the  profession  of  religion.  (1)  The  goodness  of  some  is  "  like 
the  morning  cloud  and  the  early  dew."  There  is  blossom,  the  flower  expands — but 
the  wind  of  temptation  passes  over,  and  all  the  beauty  and  vigour  is  gone.     Under 


OBAT.  XVI.]  ROMANS.  757 

Btrong  excitement  of  mind,  they  make  a  profession  of  religion,  bnt  that  profession 
if  not  stable.  (2)  There  are  many  circumstances  which  tend  to  prove  our  stability 
— the  reproaches  of  the  world,  afflictions,  the  falls  of  professors,  <fec.  But  why  should 
these  things  shake  you  ?  Who  was  the  most  illustrious  oharaeter — the  man  of 
sorrows,  who  was  crowned  with  thorns,  or  Gsssar  seated  on  his  throne?  4.  A 
temper  and  disposition  of  mind  according  with  the  gospel  of  Christ — humility, 
doeility,  moderation,  devotion,  benevolence.  U.  Sous  considbrations  abisino  out 
OP  THB  NOTios  wB  HAVE  TAK£K  Of  THIS  CHABACTEB.  1.  It  is  a  far  more  truly  amiable 
and  admirable  distinction  than  the  most  splendid  qualities  which  may  otherwise 
b«  attained.  It  is  natural,  especially  to  youth,  to  seek  for  splendid  qualities.  But 
what  are  these  compared  with  religion  f  Suppose  it  had  been  said,  "  Salute 
Apelles,  who  is  eloquent,  rich,  learned,"  and  bo  on — what  would  it  all  have  been 
compared  with  this,  "  approved  in  Christ "  T  Let  this  make  you  content :  covet  not 
the  riches  and  greatness  of  the  world.  There  is  not  an  individual  in  the  world 
whom  you  need  envy.  2.  This  character  is  attainable  by  every  Christian,  however 
humble  his  talent,  and  comparatively  mean  his  circumstances.  3.  If  we  be 
approved  of  Christ  now,  the  day  is  coming  when  all  will  feel  the  value  of  this 
approbation.  The  day  is  coming  when  some  will  be  disapproved.  Notwithstanding 
all  their  pretensions,  to  some  it  will  be  said,  "  I  never  knew  you,  I  never  approved 
of  you  1 "  To  others,  who  have  been  devoted  to  His  service — who  have  walked  in 
His  ways,  He  will  say  before  assembled  worlds,  "  Come,  ye  blessed,"  &o.  (F.  A. 
Cox,  LL.D.)  Apellet  was  a  tried  Christian,  i.e.,  one  who  has  been  tried  and  has 
stood  the  trial.  "Tribulation,"  says  the  apostle,  "  worketh  patience,"  i.e., 
perseverance,  and  this  perseverance  '*  worketh  experience,"  i.e.,  trial ;  it  proves  the 
individual ;  it  is  the  test  of  the  reality  and  strength  of  his  faith,  and  if  he  abides 
the  test  he  is  an  approved  Christian.  Many,  alas  t  do  not  stand  the  test,  and  prove 
themselves  "  reprobates  " — unapproved  either  of  God  or  man.  Tried  Chiistiang 
deserve  to  be  honoured.    {J.  Brown,  D.D.) 

Ters.  10,  11.  Them  which  are  of  Aristobnlns'  household.  —  TAe  hoiueholdi 
of  Aristobulus  arid  Narcissut  : — We  do  not  know  anything  about  these  two 
persons,  men  of  position  evidently,  who  had  large  households.  But  learned  com- 
mentators of  the  New  Testament  have  advanced  a  very  reasonable  conjecture  in  regard 
to  each  of  them.  As  to  the  first  of  them,  Aristobulus — that  wicked  old  Eing  Herod, 
in  whose  life  Christ  was  born,  had  a  grandson  of  the  name,  who  spent  all  his  Ufa 
in  Borne,  and  was  in  close  relations  with  the  emperor  of  that  day.  He  had  died 
some  httle  time  before  the  writing  of  this  letter.  As  to  the  second  of  them,  there 
is  a  very  notorious  Narcissus,  who  plays  a  great  part  in  the  history  of  Home  just  a 
little  while  before  Paul's  period  there,  and  he,  too,  was  dead.  And  it  is  more  than 
probable  that  the  slaves  and  retainers  of  these  two  men  were  transferred  in  both 
cases  to  the  emperor's  household  and  held  together  m  it,  being  known  as  Aristo- 
bulus's  men  and  Narcissus's  men.  And  so  probably  the  Christians  among  them  are 
the  brethren  to  whom  these  salutations  are  sent.  I.  The  penetbatino  poweb  of 
Chbistian  truth.  I  think  of  the  sort  of  man  the  master  of  the  first  household  was 
if  the  identification  suggested  be  accepted.  He  is  one  of  that  foul  Herodian  brood, 
in  all  of  whom  the  bad  Idumsean  blood  ran  corruptly.  The  grandson  of  the  old 
Herod,  the  brother  of  Agrippa  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  the  hanger-on  of  the 
Imperial  Court,  with  Boman  vices  veneered  on  his  native  wickedness,  was  not  the 
man  to  welcome  the  entrance  of  a  revolutionary  ferment  into  his  household  ;  and 
yet  through  his  barred  doors  had  crept  quietly,  he  knowing  nothing  about  it,  that 
great  message  of  a  loving  God,  and  a  Master  whose  service  was  freedom.  And  in 
thousands  of  like  cases  the  gospel  was  finding  its  way  underground,  undreamed  of 
by  the  great  and  wise,  but  steadily  pressing  onwards,  and  undermining  all  the 
towering  grandeur  that  was  so  contemptuous  of  it.  So  Christ's  truth  spread  at 
first ;  and  I  believe  that  is  the  way  it  always  spreads.  II.  The  untting  povraa  op 
Chbistian  sympathy,  a  considerable  proportion  of  the  first  of  these  two  households 
would  probably  be  Jews — if  Aristobulus  were  indeed  Herod's  grandson.  The  prob- 
ability that  be  was  is  increased  by  the  greeting  interposed  between  those  to  the 
households — "  Salute  Herodian."  The  name  suggests  some  connection  with  Herod, 
and  whether  we  suppose  the  designation  of  "  my  kinsman,"  which  Paul  gives  him, 
to  mean  "  blood  relation  "  or  '•  fellow-countryman,"  Herodian,  at  all  events,  was  a 
Jew  by  birth.  As  to  the  other  members  of  these  households,  Paul  may  have  met 
some  of  them  in  his  many  travels,  but  he  had  never  been  in  Borne,  and  his  greet- 
ings are  more  probably  sent  to  them  as  conspicuous  sections,  numerically,  of  the 


758  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

Boman  Church,  and  as  tokens  of  his  affection,  though  he  had  never  seen  them. 
The  possession  of  a  common  faith  has  bridged  the  gulf  between  him  and  them. 
Slaves  in  those  days  were  outside  the  pale  of  human  sympathy,  and  almost  outside 
the  pale  of  human  rights.    And  here  the  foremost  of  Christian  teachers,  who  Was  a 
freeman  bom,  separated  from  these  poor  people  by  a  tremendous  chasm,  stretches 
a  brother's  hand  across  it  and  grasps  theirs.     The  gospel  that  came  into  the  world 
to  rend  old  associations  and  to  split  up  society,  and  to  make  a  deep  cleft  between 
fathers  and  children  and  husband  and  wife,  came  also  to  more  than  counterbalance 
its  dividing  effects  by  its  uniting  power.    III.  The  tbanquilisino  poweb  of  Chbis- 
TUX  EESiGNATioN.    They  were  mostly  slaves,  and  they  continued  to  be  slaves  when 
they  were  Christians.    Paul  recognised  their  continuance  in  the  servile  position, 
and  did  not  say  a  word  to  them  to  induce  them  to  break  their  bonds.    Of  course, 
there  is  no  blinking  the  fact  that  slavery  was  an  essentially  immoral  and  unchris- 
tian institution.    But  it  is  one  thing  to  lay  down  principles  and  leave  them  to  be 
worked  in  and  then  to  be  worked  out,  and  it  is  another  thing  to  go  blindly  charging 
at  existing  institutions  and  throwing  them  down  by  violence,  before  men  have  grown 
np  to  feel  that  they  are  wicked.    And  so  the  New  Testament  takes  the  wise  course, 
and  leaves  the  foolish  one  to  foolish  people.    It  makes  the  tree  good,  and  then  its 
fruit  will  be  good.     But  the  main  point  that  I  want  to  insist  upon  is  this :  what  was 
good  for  these  slaves  in  Bome  is  good  for  you  and  me.    Let  us  get  near  to  Jesus 
Christ,  and  feel  that  we  have  got  hold  of  His  hand  for  our  own  selves,  and  we  shall 
not  mind  very  much  about  the  possible  varieties  of  human  condition.     IV.  Thb 
CONQTTEBINO  FOWKB  OF  Cebistian  FAITHFULNESS.     It  was  not  a  Very  likely  place  to 
find  Christian  people  in  the  household  of  Herod's  grandson,  was  it  ?    Such  flowers 
do  not  often  grow,  or  at  least  not  easily  grow,  on  such  dunghills.    And  in  both  these 
cases  it  was  only  a  handful  of  the  people,  a  portion  of  each  household,  that  was 
Christian.     So  they  had  beside  them,  closely  identified  with  them — working,  per- 
haps, at  the  same  tasks,  I  might  almost  say  chained  with  the  same  chains — men 
who  had  no  share  in  their  faith  or  in  their  love.     It  would  not  be  easy  to  pray,  and 
love  and  trust  God  and  do  His  will,  and  keep  clear  of  complicity  with  idolatry  and 
immorality  and  sin,  in  such  a  pigsty  as  that ;  would  it  ?    But  these  men  did  it. 
And  nobody  need  ever  say, "  I  am  in  such  circumstances  that  I  cannot  live  a  Chris- 
tian  life. "    There  are  no  such  circumstances,  at  least  none  of  God's  appointing. 
There  are  often  such  that  we  bring  upon  ourselves.  And  then  the  best  thing  is  to  get 
Qut  of  them  as  soon  as  we  can.  But  as  far  as  He  is  concerned,  He  never  pats  anybody 
anywhere  where  he  cannot  live  a  holy  lite.      (A,  Maclaren,  D.D.)        Aristobului' 
household  : — Aristobulus  was  probably  Aristobulus  the  younger  (Joseph.  Antiq.  xx., 
1,  2),  the  grandson  of  Herod  the  Great,  and  brother  of  Agrippa  and  Herod,  kings 
of  Judsea  and  Chalois,  who  lived  in  Bome  in  a  private  station  (Joseph.  Jewish 
Wars  U.  xi.  6),  and  died  there  not  before  a..d.  45.    Being  very  friendly  to  the 
Emperor  Claudius  (Joseph.  Ant  L  o.)  he  may  have  bequeathed  his  slaves  to  him, 
and  they  thus  become  part  of  Cesar's  household,  though  still  distinguished  by  the 
name  of  their  late  master.    As  servants  of  Aristobulus  many  of  them  would  natu- 
rally be  Jews,  and  so  likely  to  become  hearers  of  the  gospel.    (Archdeacon  Gifford.) 
Aristobulus'  household  : — It  deserves  notice  that  Paul  does  not  send  his  Christiaji 
remembrances  to  Aristobulus,  but  to  his  household.    Perhaps  he  was  dead,  or  fiot 
a  Christian.     A  Christian  man  may  not  have  a  Christian  household,  and  a  family 
may  be  all  Christians  with  the  exception  of  its  head.    It  is  a  happy  thing  when 
the  whole  of  a  family  is  Christian,  not  in  name  merely,  but  in  deed  and  truth ; 
when  as  in  the  case  of  Lydia  and  the  gaoler  salvation  comes  not  only  to  the  heads 
of  a  family  but  "  to  all  their  house."    It  is  not  always  so  ;  and  when  it  is  not  so. 
Christians  in  unchristian  families  have  a  peculiar  claim  on  the  kind  notice  of 
Christian  ministers.    (<7.    Brown,  D.D.)     Herodion  my  TtlnffmaTi. — My  kinsman 
Herodion: — I.  His  psrviLEaE.  Belationship.  1.  To  an  apostle.  2.  To  Christ.  H.  Hia 
CLAIM  TO  BEUEMBBANOE.    1.  Dear  as  a  relative.    2.  Dearer  still  as  a  Christian 
brother.    {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)        Them  that  be  of  the  household  of  Narcissus,  wbich 
are  In  the  Lord. — The  household  of  Narcissus  : — As  in  the  case  of  Aristobulus, 
the  salutation  is  not  sent  to  Narcissus,  but  to  those  of  his  household — not  to 
all,  but  to  that  part  of  it  which  was  Christian.     This  Narcissus  probably  was 
the  favourite  freedman  of  Claudius,  a  very  rich  but  a  very  wicked  man.    Very 
good  men  may  be  domestics  of  bad  men.    Obadiah,  who  "feared  the  Lord  from  his 
youth  "and  "  feared  Him  greatly,"  was  a  steward  of  Ahab,  one  of  the  worst  of  the 
Israelitish  kings.    A  venerable  Scotchman  occupied  a  confidential  place  in  the 
household  of  one  of  the  most  dissolute  of  our  princes,  and  might  be  found  at 


CBil.  XTi.]  ROMANS.  .  759 

midnight  and  after  it  in  his  little  chamber  reading  Marshall  on  "  Sanctification,"  or 
Boston's  "  Crook  in  the  Lot,"  while  waiting  the  return  of  his  master  and  his  companions 
from  their  midnight  revels.  Christians  do  not  act  like  themselves  when  they 
place  themselves  in  ungodly  families ;  but  as  in  the  cases  referred  to,  they  may 
obviously  be  placed  there  by  Providence,  and  when  they  are  so,  they  have 
peouUar  opportunities  for  "  adorning  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour,"  and 
"  holding  forth  the  word  of  life,"  and  are  specially  entitled  to  kind  notice 
from  their  minister.  (J.  Brown,  D.D.)  The  household  of  Narcissus: — 
Divided — I.  In   theib   views    of   Chbist — some  in  Christ — some  not.     II.   In 

THEIB    0BJBCT8    AND    AIMS.      III.    In    THEIR  ENJOYMENTS.      IV.    In    THEIB    ESTIMATION 

OF  THE  APOSTLE.  V.  In  THEIB  PB0SPECT8.  (J.  Lytk,  D.D.)  Tryphena  and 
Tryphosa,  who  labour  In  the  Lord  .  .  .  the  beloved  Persia,  which  laboured 
much  in  the  Lord. — 1.  It  is  good  to  labour  in  the  Lord.  2.  It  is  better  to 
labour  much.  3.  Best  of  all  to  deserve  the  Christian  title  "beloved."  {J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  Tryphena  and  Tryphosa  : — Learn — I.  That  bad  names  need  not  hindeb 
GOOD  SEBviCE.  "Tryphena"  means  wanton,  and  "Tryphosa"  luxurious.  We 
should  hardly  expect  excellence  of  any  kind  from  persons  bearing  such  names  as 
these ;  yet,  notwithstanding  their  names,  they  laboured  in  the  Lord.  The  worst 
names  have  been  attached  to  the  best  men— Quakers,  Methodists,  Banters,  &g.  ; 
and  the  men  thus  designated  have  not  taken  the  trouble  to  repudiate  their  designa- 
tions, but  have,  through  evil  report,  "  laboured  in  the  Lord."  An  evil  name,  how- 
ever, is  a  serious  disadvantage,  and  parents  cannot  bo  too  careful  in  avoiding  the 
selection  of  names  for  their  children  of  which  in  after  life  they  may  be  ashamed. 

II.  Sinful  women  may  become  useful  saints.  It  is  not  improbable  that  these 
names  were  deserved,  and  were  used  to  designate  a  certain  class.  If  so,  note — 1. 
The  power  of  Divine  grace.  Bahab,  the  woman  of  Samaria,  the  woman  in  Simon's 
house,  are  proofs  that,  under  the  gospel,  the  most  wanton  may  become  pure ;  and 
the  history  of  Christian  enterprise  teems  with  instances  of  those  who,  bred  in  the 
lap  of  luxury,  have  become  the  most  laborious  in  the  cause  of  Christ.  They  have 
had  much  forgiven,  because  they  have  loved  much,  and  their  much  love  has 
constrained  them  to  a  life  of  intense  devotion.  2.  The  magnanimity  and  courage 
of  the  apostle.  People  of  this  class  are  usually  shunned,  even  after  strong  and 
varied  proof  of  change  of  heart  and  life ;  men  and  women  are  afraid  of  compro- 
mising their  reputation  by  associating  with  them.  But  in  Paul's  case  the  disciple 
was  not  above  his  Master,  who  gloried  in  the  title  of  "  the  friend  of  publicans  and 
sinners."  III.  Companionship  desecbated  by  sin  may  be  consecrated  by  obace. 
These  women,  if  not  sisters,  were  doubtless  friends  before  their  conversion.  If  one 
sinner  destroyed  much  good,  two  sinners,  acting  in  conjunction,  will  destroy  very 
much  more — and  sinners  usually  act  in  company.  The  same  holds  good  in  an 
opposite  way,  when  converted  men  and  women  act  in  concert.  "  Two  are  better 
than  one."  Conclusion :  1.  There  is  encouragement  under  the  most  discouraging 
circumstances  for  earnest  Christians.  2.  There  is  hope  for  the  most  abandoned. 
8.  Converted  men  and  women  should  seek  to  make  their  companions  in  sin  com- 
panions in  Christian  service.  (J.  W.  Burn.)  Iheportrait  of  a  Christian  woman: 
— Persis  was — I.  A  Christian.  1.  She  occupies  a  place  in  a  Ust  of  Christians.  2. 
She  must  have  been  "  in  Christ,"  or  she  could  not  have  laboured  for  Him.  n.  A 
LOVABLE  Chbistian.  Not  merely  known  to  and  esteemed  by  Paul,  but  one  whose 
Bweet  disposition  endeared  her  to  all  with  whom  she  came  in  contact.  Christians 
should  manifest  the  power  of  grace  in  their  tempers.  The  more  real  and  deep  the 
inner,  the  more  sweet  and  lovable  the  outer  life.     Like  Christ,  because  in  Christ. 

III.  An  activb  Chbistian.  The  words  imply  labour  that  brings  weakness  and 
weariness — not  kid-gloved  philanthropy,  but  genuine  and  persevering  Christian 
toil.  What  a  noble  sphere  for  like-minded  Christian  women  still.  Let  them,  then, 
especially  those  free  from  absorHng  domestic  duties,  seek  to  become  followers  of 
Persis.  (T.  S.  Dickson,  M.A.)  Labour  in  the  Lord: — This  is  the  language  of 
approbation.  Persis  is  not  warned  lest  she  step  behind  the  place  assigned  her  in 
the  Church,  or  lest  she  allow  her  zeal  to  make  her  singular.  What  was  approved 
in  Christians  eighteen  hundred  years  ago  would  be  approved  in  Christians  now.  I. 
The  nature  of  that  laboub  which  St.  Paul  commends  in  Persis.  1.  He  is  not 
speaking  of  secular  labours.  He  does  not  praise  Persis  because  she  performed  the 
ordinary  duties  of  life  in  a  conscientious  spirit.  This,  indeed,  she  would  do ;  but 
such  is  the  case  with  aU  Christians.  It  does  not  distinguish  one  Christian  above 
another.  2.  Nor  is  he  speaking  of  works  of  charity  alone,  or  he  would  have  praised 
Persis  as  one  who  was  "  glad  to  distribute,"  ready  "  to  do  good."    3.  Labooi  io 


760  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat,  xn, 

the  Lord  waa  labour  in  promoting  the  knowledge  and  spirit  of  the  gospeL  Persia, 
like  others  who  laboured  with  Paul  in  the  gospel  (1  Cor.  zvi.  16j,  had  become  a 
teacher — that  is,  was  able  to  declare  to  others  what  the  Lord  had  done  for  ber  soul, 
and  to  lay  those  first  principles  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ  which  the  simplest  believer 
may  communicate  to  his  ignorant  or  sinful  neighbour ;  which,  in  truth,  he  must 
be  prepared  to  communicate  before  he  can  exercise  the  commonest  duties  of  charity. 
Some,  perhaps,  may  be  of  opinion  that  such  work  should  be  left  to  the  appointed 
minister  ;  but  can,  or  should,  anything  withhold  the  Christian  from  imparting  hia 
own  conviction  or  experience?  How  otherwise  could  Christians  obey  the  precepts 
to  warn,  edify,  exhort,  and  comfort  one  another  7  Every  Christian  makes  one  of  a 
"  chosen  generation,  a  roysJ  priesthood,  an  holy  nation  " ;  and  it  is  his  duty,  as 
well  as  his  privilege,  to  communicate  "  that  which  is  good  to  the  use  of  edifying." 
IL  What  should  induob  Pebsis  to  dndebtxkb  this  labour?  1.  As  a  disciple 
of  Christ,  she  was  actuated  by  those  feelings  which  would  not  allow  her  to  rest 
satisfied  with  having  found  for  herself  the  way  to  heaven.  Let  those  dis- 
trust their  own  state  who  can  be  so  satisfied.  Where  there  is  love,  there 
will  be  anxiety  about  the  unconverted:  love  cannot  exist  without  it  (Acts 
xvii.  16 ;  Prov.  xiiv.  11,  12).  2.  She  was  excited  by  the  feeling  of  thank- 
ful love  towards  the  Lord  for  whom  she  laboured.  This  love  makes  the  Chris- 
tian desire  that  fresh  trophies  should  be  added  to  His  Cross,  new  jewels  to  His 
crown.  And  certainly  that  love  must  be  very  lukewarm,  and  such  as  Christ 
will  not  deign  to  accept,  which  will  be  outdone  by  the  disciples  of  evil,  and  which 
takes  the  benefit  but  neither  regards  the  honour  of  the  benefactor,  nor  complies 
with  his  commands.  UI.  The  blessinos  which  follow  such  ZtABOim  in  the  Lobo. 
It  is  truly  "  twice  blessed."  It  blesseth  him  who  works  and  him  on  whom  the 
labour  is  bestowed.  {Abp.  Sumner.)  Bufos  chosen  In  the  Lord,  and  his  mother 
and  mine. — Rufus : — I.  His  flaok  in  histobt.  The  son  of  Simon  the  Cyrenian, 
whom  Mark  mentions  (chap.  xv.  21),  with  his  brother  Alexander,  as  well  known  to 
the  Church.  Christ's  Cross,  laid  on  Simon,  brought  blessing  to  his  wife  and 
children.  II.  His  distinction.  1.  Chosen,  i.e. — (1)  Elected,  as  proved  by  his 
works  (1  Thess.  i.  4-6).  (2)  Choice.  Excellent,  as  seen  in  his  life  and  labours 
(2  John  i.  13).  It  is  good  to  be  a  chosen  Christian ;  better  still  to  be  a  choice  one. 
2.  In  the  Lord— i.e.,  in  union  with  Christ  (Eph.  i.  4).  ^1)  Union  with  Christ  the 
evidence  of  election  in  Christ.  (2)  True  excellence  only  attainable  in  union  with 
Christ.  III.  His  belationshipb.  1.  Natural.  "  His  mother."  He  was  the  godly 
son  of  a  godly  mother.  It  is  a  double  blessing  when  both  parent  and  child  are  in 
the  Lord.  2.  Spiritual.  "  And  mine."  He  owed  his  brotherhood  \yith  St.  Paul 
probably  to  his  mother's  attention  to  the  apostle.  {T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Ruftu  : 
— L  Chosen  in  the  Lobd.  1.  Truly  converted.  2.  Through  sanctification  of  the 
Spirit  and  belief  of  the  truth.  3.  Hence  a  choice  man.  II.  Blessed  with  a  pious 
MOTBEB,  whose  matcmal  kindness  and  Christian  character  are  tenderly  acknow- 
ledged by  the  apostle.  III.  Pbivileged  with  the  fbiendship  of  Paul.  (J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  Asyncritus,  Fhlegon,  Hermas. — Asyncritu$  and  hit  companions : — Christian 
fellowship  is — 1.  A  necessity.  2.  A  privilege.  3.  A  safeguard.  4.  A  duty  and  an 
earnest  of  eternal  happiness  in  Christ.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Uncalendared  saints : 

— ^Asyncritus,  Phlegon,  and  Hermas,  to  us  are  little  more  than  empty  names ;  but  if 
we  knew  as  much  about  them  as  their  friend  Paul  did,  it  is  quite  possible  that  we 
would  have  given  them  the  whole  chapter.  The  servants  of  God  do  not  write 
history  after  the  fashion  of  the  world.  The  sacred  writer  immortalises  the  obscure 
worker  who  sheds  abroad  the  fragrance  of  a  holy  violet-life  in  the  dingy  alley  or 
fever-haunted  court ;  whilst  the  secular  scribe  reserves  his  greenest  laurels  for  the 
man  who  dances  on  a  tight  rope  or  who  floats  down  Niagara  in  a  cask  1  The  best 
part  of  the  world's  history  is  still  unwritten.  The  profane  historian  would  have 
bxiried  Asyncritus  and  Phlegon  in  eternal  obUvion ;  but  wherever  this  Epistle  is  read, 
their  names  will  be  honourably  mentioned.     I.  The  Bible  is  eichly  stocked  with 

examples   which   ABE    WELL   SUITED   EOB   ALL   CLASSES   OF   SOCIETY.       It  is   DOt  a  Book 

for  patricians,  nor  for  plebeians,  but  for  all  without  distinction.  It  sets  before  us 
extraordinary  men  as  examples  to  extraordinary  men — Moses  as  an  example  to 
national  leaders,  Joseph  as  an  example  to  prime  ministers,  Elijah  as  an 
example  to  religious  reformers,  <fec.  But  when  we  read  of  Asyncritus,  &c., 
we  see  that  the  Bible  is  also  full  of  examples  for  ordinary  people.  And  it 
is  right  that  it  should  be  so,  for  the  world  is  almost  entirely  populated  by 
very  ordinary  people.  II.  Obscuee  men  have  done,  and  abb  still  doing, 
BPUSNDiD  BBBViCE  roB  Chbist.     All  OUT  bcst  men  are  not  in  the  front.    These 


(SAP.  zn.]  ROMANS.  761 

simple  men  lived  in  a  city  wholly  given  np  to  heathenism;  yet  they  braTelj 
held  their  ground  against  crushing  odds,  fearlessly  upheld  the  Christian  banner, 
and  helped  to  drive  back  the  tide  of  Paganism,  and  prepare  a  throne  for  Christ  in 
the  very  centre  of  the  world's  power.  Qold  is  no  less  gold  because  hidden  in  the 
bowels  of  the  mountains,  and  courage  is  no  less  courage  because  sometimes  veiled 
in  obscurity.  Our  danger  is  to  mistake  noise  for  power  and  fanaticism  for  zeal. 
All  the  great  powers  are  silent  powers.  The  bugler  is  more  noisy  than  the  field- 
marshal,  but  he  is  not  so  indispensable  on  the  field  of  battle.  God  was  not  in  the 
thunder  nor  in  the  wind,  but  in  the  still  small  voice.  The  great  merchant  is  almost 
entirely  dependent  on  the  labours  of  faithful  men  whose  names  are  baried  in 
obscurity.  The  ablest  of  our  cabinet  ministers  mainly  depend  upon  the  obscure 
permanent  officials  for  their  information.  And  in  religious  circles  the  minister 
frequently  gets  all  the  credit,  when  it  should  be  shared  with  the  Church  officers  and 
the  Church  members  who  assist  him.  In  eulogising  Apollos,  we  must  not  forget 
Priscilla  and  Aquila.  That  unknown  man  who  keeps  the  lights  burning  in  his 
lighthouse  has  been  the  means  of  saving  hundreds  of  lives.  Obscure  friends,  your 
life  is  worth  living.  Like  the  coral  insects  of  the  Pacific,  you  are  building  better 
than  you  know.  So  was  Luther,  when  translating  the  Bible  in  the  Castle  of  Wart- 
burg,  and  the  Pilgrim  Fathers,  when  they  landed  on  Plymouth  Bock.  Let  us  work 
on,  for  the  deed  will  be  immortal,  whether  the  doer's  name  is  known  or  not.  The 
name  of  the  widow  who  cast  her  mites  into  the  temple  is  forgotten,  but  her  deed 
will  live  on  throughout  all  eternity.     III.  Peominbnt  men  SHOtrLD  be  grateful  to 

OBSOUBB   HEN   FOB  THE   FBOMIMEMOE   WHICH   THEY   ENJOY.      Hills  WOUld  be  impossible 

without  valleys.  We  may  be  only  the  pedestals  for  the  statues,  but  the  statues 
should  not  forget  the  debt  they  owe  to  the  pedestals.  The  top-stone,  resting  in  the 
glad  sunshine,  must  not  forget  that  it  owes  a  debt  to  the  foundation-stone  which  ia 
buried  out  of  sight  in  the  dark,  damp  earth.  Of  what  use  would  Wellington  have 
been  on  the  field  of  Waterloo  without  his  men?  Johnson  without  his  Boswell 
would  not  be  the  power  in  England  that  he  is  to-day.  Samuel  was  a  splendid 
man,  but  his  unostentatious  mother,  Hannah,  had  the  making  of  him.  John 
Wesley  gets  all  the  credit  for  the  Methodist  revival,  but  his  mother  should  be  a 
sharer  in  the  glory.  Where  would  Leonidas  have  been  but  for  his  three  hundred 
Spartans  ?  Who  can  tell  how  much  our  prominent  men  in  Church  and  State  owe 
to  some  village  schoolmaster  or  country  minister  ?  Lord  Shaftesbury  confessed 
that  his  life  was  entirely  moulded  by  a  God-fearing  nursemaid.  Elopstock,  in  the 
very  height  of  his  popularity,  strewed  flowers  over  the  grave  of  his  old  school- 
master. Paul  never  forgot  his  debt  to  Asyncritus  and  Phlegon,  who  so  faithfully 
witnessed  for  Christ  in  that  hot-bed  of  idolatry  called  Bome.    lY.  Obscobe  mem 

SHOULD    NOT    BE    JEALOUS    OF    THEIB    MOBB    FAVOURED    BBETHBEN.       AsyncritUS   and 

Phlegon  were  not  envious  of  Paul's  power  and  influence.  If  we  have  only  one 
talent,  let  us  not  be  jealous  of  those  who  have  five.  Conspicuous  people  are  not 
always  happy  people.  The  statesman  may  have  the  plaudits  of  his  friends,  but  he 
has  also  the  bitterest  invectives  of  his  foes.  It  is  the  loftiest  tree  that  is  exposed 
to  the  full  force  of  the  hurricane.  What  a  pleasant  thing  it  must  be  to  be  a  Prime 
Minister  of  England  or  a  Chief  Secretary  for  Ireland  in  these  times !  "  Uneasy 
lies  the  head  that  wears  a  crown."  If  you  are  only  an  ordinary  man,  do  not 
grumble  because  you  are  not  extraordinary.  Think  of  a  watch  saying,  •'  I  will  not 
keep  time  because  I  am  not  a  town  clock  "  I  Think  of  a  candle  refusing  to  give 
light  because  it  is  not  a  Jupiter  I  Do  not  envy  the  five-talent  men,  but  compensate 
yourself  by  using  your  one  talent  wisely  until  it  becomes  five.  Carey  could 
not  do  the  work  of  Shakespeare,  nor  Luther  the  work  of  Melancthon,  nor 
Bunyan  the  work  of  Milton.  The  eye  cannot  do  the  work  of  the  ear,  and  the  foot 
cannot  do  the  work  of  the  hand.  V.  Obscube  men  should  not  dbift  into 
DESPONDENCY  AND  INACTIVITY.  "  I  am  nothing ! "  Quite  so.  But  add  God  to  the 
nothing,  and  the  total  will  amount  to  something  !  Like  Naaman,  we  all  want  to 
do  some  great  thing  or  nothing.  There  are  only  a  few  men  who  can  do  anything 
great.  Suppose  a  star  were  to  say,  "  I  will  extinguish  myself,  for  the  heavens  can 
well  do  without  me  " ;  or  a  sand-grain,  "  I  am  only  a  speck  of  dust ;  the  vast 
ocean-shore  can  well  do  without  me."  Ah !  but  what  if  all  the  stars  and  sand- 
grains  were  to  repeat  the  same  story  7  All  trifles  are  great  trifles.  A  spoonful  of 
water  will  set  in  motion  the  hydraulic  power  that  will  lift  up  many  tons  of  iron, 
and  a  drop  of  faithful  Christian  service  will  send  a  movement  through  aU  the 
eternities.  A  rod  with  God  behind  it  will  divide  the  sea.  A  stripling  shepherd 
with  God  at  his  right  hand  will  vanquish  the  Philistine.    Do  not  wait  for  great 


762  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m, 

occasions,  for  there  are  only  a  few  men  who  can  do  anything  truly  great.  In  a 
church  of  500  members,  you  will  not  find  more  than  ten  five-talent  men,  and  if 
they  double  their  talents  the  total  will  only  amount  to  100.  Then  suppose  the 
remaining  490  have  only  one  talent  each,  and  that  they  double  it,  the  total  will 
amount  to  980  talents.  There  you  have  980  against  100.  There  is  a  tremendoua 
quantity  of  unused  power  in  the  Church.  The  humblest  acts  of  the  humblest  men 
often  have  the  greatest  events  hinging  upon  them.  A  cordial  hand-shake  with  a 
heart-throb  in  it  may  save  a  soul.  A  genial  smile  with  a  httle  of  the  angel  in  it 
may  redeem  a  family.  If  you  cannot  handle  the  oar,  do  send  a  cheer  to  those  who 
are  battling  with  the  breakers.  VI.  Obscure  men  who  fill  theib  quiet  sphebeb 
EFFICIENTLY  wiLii  BE  PEOMOTED  BY  GoD  TO  WIDER  SPHERES.  Listen  to  the  pro- 
mise :  "  Thou  hast  been  faithful  over  a  few  things,  I  will  set  thee  over  many 
things."  By  improving  present  opportunities,  you  open  the  gate  for  wider  service. 
Fill  well  the  sphere  you  have,  and  you  will  fit  yourself  for  a  higher  one.  "  To  him 
that  hath  shall  more  be  given."  If  you  are  only  a  tract  distributor,  do  your  work 
thoroughly,  and  the  King  will  promote  you.  Because  David  was  eflQcient  as  a 
shepherd,  God  made  him  a  king.     VII.  At  the  great  day  the  obscure  ones  will 

BECOME   prominent,   AND   MANY  OF  THE   PROMINENT  WILL  BE  CONSIGNED  TO  OBSCURITY. 

•'  Many  shall  be  last  that  are  first,  and  first  that  are  last."  If  the  granite  does  not 
keep  your  name  conspicuous  before  the  eyes  of  the  world,  God  has  registered  it  in 
heaven.  Work  on  quietly  in  the  shade,  then,  and  your  handiwork  will  one  day  be 
exhibited  in  the  sunshine.  Asyncritus  and  Phlegon  may  yet  stand  side  by  side 
with  Paul  and  ApoUos.      {J.   Ossian   Davies.)  And    all    the  saints  which 

are  with  them.  —  Uncalendared  saints : — The  Bible  saint  is  a  holy  or  godly 
person.  Philologus  and  Julia,  Nereus  and  his  sister,  and  Olympas,  were 
not  all  the  saints  there  were  in  Eome.  Paul  saw  fit  to  mention  these,  but  there 
were  the  unmentioned  ones,  who  were  saints  nevertheless.  The  faithful  Christiana 
of  to-day  cannot  all  be  mentioned  among  the  leaders.  Salute  all  1  No  one,  how- 
ever humble,  is  to  be  forgotten.  I.  The  best  and  hardest  work  of  the  Church 
HAS  BEEN  DONE  BY  THESE  UNNAMED  CHRISTIANS.  I  have  ofteu  uoticed  iu  the  hallway 
of  public  buildings  one  or  more  large  tablets  sunken  into  the  wall.  On  the  tablet 
are  engraved  the  names  of  the  architect,  the  mayor  of  the  city,  and  a  few  other 
great  names.  Who  laid  the  bricks  to  form  that  wall  ?  Who  wrought  in  wood  and 
in  metal  the  elegant  finishing  and  sumptuous  furnishing?  Nay,  whose  hands 
carved  in  this  marble  slab  the  few  names  that  are  thus  designed  to  go  down  to 
fame  ?  The  uncalendared  workmen  are  many,  but  without  them  there  could  be 
neither  foundation-stone  nor  key  to  arch.  They  laboured  in  the  heat,  and  often  in 
the  rain  ;  they  laid  the  brick  and  lifted  the  stone  into  place ;  they  laboured  faith- 
fully— and  are  forgotten  I  But  these  same  uncalendared  workmen  did  in  their 
sphere  as  good  work  as  did  the  architect  in  his.  I  have  also  learned  that  the  un- 
calendared saints  do  the  largest  share  of  God's  work,  and,  because  they  do  that 
work  for  God,  are  willing  to  remain  unknown  and  unsung.  There  never  yet  was  a 
revival  of  the  true  sort  for  which  God  will  not  award  praise  to  the  uncalendared 
saints  as  well  as  to  those  whose  names  come  prominently  before  the  public  eye. 
These  uncalendared  ones  must  do  most  of  the  plodding  work.  They  must  raise 
and  disburse  the  money  of  the  local  church,  visit  the  sick,  care  for  the  children. 
God  bless  the  uncalendared  saints  who,  because  they  work  not  for  notoriety  but  for 
Jesus'  sake,  are  willing  to  do  everything  and  be  nothing.  These,  not  the  great 
names,  constitute  the  strength,  the  hope,  of  the  Christian  Church.    11.  As  A  bulb, 

THE  MOST  DESERVING   HAVE   THE   LEAST    EXPECTED    TO    BE   PLACED    ON    THE    CALENDAR. 

I  imagine  the  people  of  our  text  were  no  exception.  Paul  was  not  the  man  to  make 
this  mention  as  a  species  of  flattery,  nor  as  a  matter  of  policy.  Philologus  and 
Julia,  Nereus  and  Olympas,  never  dreamed  that  their  names  were  to  be  embalmed 
for  ever  in  the  Holy  Word.  It  is  not  so  difficult  as  many  suppose  to  become  a 
leader  in  a  church  or  even  in  a  denomination — to  have  one's  name  printed  in  the 
papers  as  the  distinguished  layman  or  minister  Mr.  So-and-so ;  not  so  difficult  to 
get  on  the  calendar  the  world  looks  at,  if  one  is  willing  to  use  a  few  of  the  means 
that  such  a  desire  would  suggest.  Such  was  the  desire  and  method  of  the  Pharisees 
in  Christ's  time.  They  sought  for  a  calendar  fame  and  got  it.  But  to  be  placed  on 
the  list  of  saints  by  loving  hearts — hearts  that  have  been  helped  by  you — is  quite 
another  matter.  I  have  my  calendar  of  saints,  those  who  have  made  themselves 
such  to  me.  The  fact  is  that  when  a  Christian  seeks  to  be  known  as  one  who 
ought  to  be  placed  on  the  calendar  and  known  as  an  unusual  saint,  without  tha 
or^ary  saint's  failings,  then  that  Christian  is  in  the  way  of  destroying  the  v^iy 


OHif .  xvi.]  EOMANS,  T68 

first  qualification  of  a  true  saint — i.e. ,  humility,  which  will  keep  a  true  Christian 
from  making  any  such  claim.  The  almsgiving,  the  fasting,  the  praying,  the  whole 
Christian  life  and  profession,  are  to  be  without  ostentation,  "  and  thy  Father,  which 
seeth  in  secret,  shall  reward  thee  openly."  Saints  are  found  in  the  everyday  life  of 
every  rank  of  society.  For  Jesus'  sake  they  are  doing  and  bearing,  praying  and 
hoping,  unconsciously  fitting  themselves  for  the  calendar  which  some  soul  is  making 
out — for  every  Christian  is  seen  and  read  of  men.    III.  It  was  a  great  thing  to 

BB  BEMEMBEBED  BY  PaUL  IN  ONE  OF  HIS  LETTEB8,  EVEN  THOUGH  IT  BE  ONLY  ONE  OF  THE 
NUMBER    REFERRED   TO    AS  "  ALL    THE   SAINTS   WHICH  ABE   WITH   THEM."      It  WiU  be  an 

unspeakably  greater  joy  when  the  uncalendared  saint  below  becomes  the  calendared 
saint  above.  There  the  list  will  be  made  up  of  all,  and  not  of  a  favoured  few  as  in 
the  Catholic  Church.  On  that  calendar  we  may  all  of  us  have  our  names  written 
in  characters  that  wiU  never  fade.  What  does  it  matter,  then,  if  here  we  are  un- 
calendared, if  the  great  world  does  not  know  or  care  if  we  have  honour  and  receive 
the  recognition  which  is  perhaps  our  due  ?  In  the  end  the  world  shall  fade  away, 
but  enduring  honour  shall  be  given  him  whose  name  is  enrolled  on  the  heavenly 
calendar.      (J.  H.    Yeoman.)  Valuable    dust:  —  Where  goldsmiths    are    at 

work,  the  very  dust  is  valuable.  I  stood,  two  days  ago,  in  a  room  from  the 
sweepings  of  the  floor  of  which  there  is  annually  extracted  more  than  two  thousand 
dollars'  worth  of  the  precious  metal ;  and  if  these  had  been  carelessly  thrown  upon 
the  dust-bin,  there  would  have  been  just  so  much  loss  to  the  owners  of  the  estab- 
lishment. Now,  in  the  Bible — which  is  more  to  be  desired  than  gold — the  portions 
that  in  other  books  may  be  accounted  dry  as  dust,  and  hastily  skipped  over  by  the 
reader,  have  an  element  of  value,  not  only  because  of  their  own  importance,  but 
also  because  very  frequently  there  is  found  in  them  some  suggestive  expression 
which  more  than  rewards  for  the  patient  perseverance  that  was  required  for  their 
examination.  Nothing  can  well  be  less  interesting,  in  itself  considered,  than  a 
genealogical  table  of  names  and  dates  and  ages,  yet  we  cannot  forget  that  it  is  just 
such  a  place  that  we  come  upon  the  prayer  of  Jabez,  which,  by  its  very  contrast 
with  the  details  in  the  midst  of  which  we  find  it,  seems  almost  like  a  fountain  in 
the  desert,  or  like  the  well-known  Alpine  flower  in  the  vicinity  of  the  glacier. 
{W.  M.  Taylor.) 

Vers.  17-20.  Now  I  beseech  yon,  brethren,  mark  them  which  cause  divisions. — 
A  caution  against  schismatics : — I.  Thbib  characteb  descbibed.  They — 1.  Cause 
divisions.  2.  Occasion  offences.  3.  Pervert  doctrines.  11.  Their  principles 
EXPOSED.  1.  Their  motives  are  impure.  2.  Their  words  deceptive.  3.  Their 
victims  the  simple.  HI.  Their  influence  counteracted  by — 1.  Obedience.  2. 
Wisdom.  3.  Purity.  IV.  THEm  destruction  cebtain.  Enemies  of  the  God  of 
peace,  they  will  perish  with  Satan  whom  they  serve  shortly.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
Divisions  in  the  Church  arise  from  a  want  of  Spiritual  life : — Some  of  the  old 
Roman  walls  are  compacted  with  such  excellent  cement  that  it  would  be  almost 
impossible  to  separate  one  stone  from  another  ;  in  fact,  the  whole  mass  has 
become  so  consolidated  that  you  cannot  distinguish  one  stone  from  another. 
Happy  the  Church  thus  built  up,  where  each  cares  not  only  for  his  own  prosperity, 
but  for  the  prosperity  of  all.  And  yet,  what  are  some  Churches  but  semi-religioua 
clubs,  mere  conventions  of  people  gathered  together?  They  have  not  in  them  that 
holy  soul  which  is  the  essence  of  unity.  The  body  would  soon  become  disjointed 
if  the  soul  were  not  in  it ;  and  if  the  Spirit  of  Christ  be  absent,  the  whole  fabric 
of  the  outward  Church  falls  to  pieces;  for  where  there  is  no  life  there  can  be 
no  true  union,      {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Danger  of  divisions:  — If  two  ships  at  sea, 

being  of  the  same  squadron,  be  scattered  by  storm  from  each  other,  how  should 
they  come  to  the  relief  of  each  other  ?  If,  again,  they  clash  together,  and  fall  foul, 
how  should  the  one  endanger  the  other  and  herself  too  ?  It  was  of  old  the  Dutch 
device  of  two  earthern  pots  swimming  upon  the  water,  with  this  motto,  "  If  we 
knock  together,  we  sink  together."      (J.    Spencer.)  Danger  from  within  the 

Church : — "  The  disposition  to  grumble  seriously  threatened  the  well-being  of  the 
Church,  it  formed  the  gravest  danger  it  had  yet  to  encounter.  The  earth  is  exposed 
to  two  perils — the  first  arises  from  the  storms  bearing  upon  it  from  vdthout ;  the 
second  from  volcanic  forces  assailing  it  from  within.  Of  the  two,  the  most 
dangerous  is  the  volcanic  force.  Let  the  winds  break  as  they  will,  the  earth 
continues  firm  under  our  tread  and  steadfast  in  its  orbit.  But  when  internal  firea 
burst  forth,  the  earth  quakes  to  its  foundations,  and  the  solid  rooks  shiver  and  split. 
The  gravest  danger  to  the  Church  arises  from  within ;  it  is  the  spirit  of  discontent 


%U  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xn, 

in  the  members.  (S.  Jonet.)  Danger  of  diuetuioni : — The  Jesuits  who  came  to 
Germany  were  called  •'  Spanish  priests."  They  took  possession  of  the  universities. 
"  They  conquered  us,"  says  Banki:,  •'  on  our  own  ground,  in  our  own  homes,  and 
stripped  us  of  a  part  of  our  country."  This,  the  acute  historian  proceeds  to 
Bay,  "  sprang  certainly  from  the  want  of  understanding  among  the  Protestant 
theologians,  and  of  sufficient  enlargement  of  mind  to  tolerate  unessential  differences. 
The  violent  opposition  among  each  other  left  the  way  open  to  these  cunning 
strangers,  who  taught  a  doctrine  not  open  to  dispute."  (Hallam.)  Danger  of  dis- 
sension : — It  is  said  that  when  the  cranes  fall  out  among  themselves,  the  fight  is  so 
fierce  that  they  beat  down  one  another,  and  so  are  taken  as  they  fight.  (J.  Speticer.) 
And  offences  contrary  to  the  doctrine  which  ye  have  learned ;  and  avoid  them. — 
True  doctrine  : — The  question  is  not  whether  a  doctrine  is  beautiful,  but  whether  it 
is  true.  When  we  want  to  go  to  a  place,  we  don't  ask  whether  the  road  leads  through 
a  pretty  country,  but  whether  it  is  the  right  road,  the  road  pointed  out  by  authority, 
the  turnpike-road.  (Archdeacon  Hare.)  Contagion  of  false  doctrine  : — Sin  is  like 
the  bale  of  goods  which  came  from  the  East  to  this  city  in  the  olden  time,  which 
brought  the  pest  in  it.  Probably  it  was  but  a  small  bale,  but  yet  it  contained  in  it 
the  deaths  of  hundreds  of  the  inhabitants  of  London.  In  those  days  one  piece 
of  rag  carried  the  infection  into  a  whole  town.  So,  if  you  permit  one  sin  or  false 
doctrine  in  a  Church  knowingly  and  wittingly,  none  can  tell  the  extent  to  which 
tiiat  evil  may  ultimately  go.  The  Church,  therefore,  is  to  be  purged  of  practical 
and  doctrinal  evil  as  diligently  as  possible.  That  soar  and  corrupting  thing  which 
God  abhors  must  be  purged  out,  and  it  is  to  be  the  business  of  the  Christian 
minister,  and  of  all  his  fellow  helpers,  to  keep  the  Church  free  from  it.  (0.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Danger  of  error: — Let  us  beware  of  the  first  wrong  direction  of 
thought  and  feeling ;  however  minute  the  degree,  fearful  may  be  the  after-deviations. 
The  voyager  enters  a  current  which  seems  propitious ;  there  is  no  apparent  diversion 
from  his  course ;  his  bark  speeds  well ;  his  oar  does  not  toil,  nor  his  sail  strain ; 
in  his  confidence  all  promises  success.  But,  while  he  examines,  scarcely  does 
it  seem  that  he  has  advanced.  Much  again  and  again  reminds  him  of  what  he  has 
noticed  just  before.  A  strange  familiarity  impresses  his  sense.  Still,  current  flows 
into  current ;  while  onward  and  buoyant  is  his  track.  Soon  he  feels  an  unnatural 
vibration.  Where  he  glided,  he  now  whirls  along.  The  truth  seizes  upon  him ; 
he  is  sweeping  a  whirlpool.  Long  since,  he  has  entered  the  verge  of  a  maelstrom, 
and  he  is  now  the  sport  of  its  gyrations.  No  power  is  left  his  helm  or  mast ;  he  is 
the  trembling,  unresisting  prey.  He  hears  the  roar ;  he  is  drawn  into  the  suck  of 
the  vortex.  Not  only  the  circle  lessens,  the  very  surface  slopes  ;  the  central  funnel 
and  abyss,  dark-heaving,  smooth,  vitreous,  yawns.  The  mariner  shrieks,  the  skiff 
is  swallowed  up,  where  the  waters  only  separate  to  close,  where  the  outermost 
attraction  was  but  the  minister  to  the  famine  of  this  devouring  maw.  (22.  W. 
Hamilton,  D.D.)  Separation :  lawful  and  unlawful : — To  separate  such  as  agree 
in  the  truth  of  Christ  is  an  impious  and  sacrilegious  divorce;  but  to  defend  a 
conspiracy  for  promoting  lies  and  impious  doctrines,  under  the  pretext  of  peace 
and  unity,  is  a  shameless  calumny.  The  Papists  have  no  foundation  for  exciting, 
by  artful  guile,  an  unfavourable  impression  and  low  opinion  of  us  believers,  from 
this  passage ;  for  we  do  not  attack  and  confute  the  gospel  of  Christ,  but  the  false- 
hoods of  the  devil  by  which  it  has  hitherto  been  obscured.  {J.  Calvin.)  For 
they  that  are  such  serve  not  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  hut  their  own  belly. — 
Dividers  and  heretics : — 1.  Their  motive.  2,  Theix  procedure.  3.  Their  victims. 
Dividers  and  heretics : — I.  Theib  chakioteristics.  1.  They  serve  not  the  Lord 
Jesus.  (1)  Their  motive  and  profession  was  insincere.  Our  motive  in  religious 
matters  to  be  carefully  examined.  Satan  often  served  in  Christ's  uniform.  (2) 
Christ  is  entitled  to  our  service — (a)  As  God.  (6)  As  Mediator,  (c)  From  gratitude 
to  Him  and  obedience  to  the  Divine  command.  (3)  To  serve  Christ  is — (a)  To  aim 
at  His  glory,  (b)  To  promote  His  interest,  (c)  To  do  His  will.  (4)  Christ  is  to 
be  served  with  all  our  powers.  2.  They  serve  their  own  belly.  Merely  to  get 
a  living  and  for  their  own  personal  gain  (2  Cor.  xi.  12,  20 ;  Phil.  iii.  18,  19 ;  GaU 
vi.  12;  Titus  i.  10,  11).  Private  interests  served  under  the  pretence  of  Christiem 
zeal.  Men  can  make  a  gain  of  godliness  instead  of  making  godliness  a  gain.  n. 
Their  methods.  1.  Good  words.  Pretending  a  great  interest  in  your  welfare 
(Psa.  Iv.  21).  Satan  transferred  into  an  angel  of  light  (2  Cor.  li.  14,  15).  2.  Fair 
speeches,  lit.  blessing ;  a  stronger  word  than  the  former.  Speaking  well  of  you ; 
promising  well  to  you.  Having  men's  persons  in  admiration  for  advantage  (Jude 
16).    Showing  not  only  a  bland  spirit,  but  an  affected  piety.    The  foulest  errorg 


mu.  xn.]  ROMANS,  76S 

are  often  introduced  nnder  the  fairest  promises.  Satan  is  a  skilfal  fowler  and 
knows  well  how  to  set  his  snare.  Soul  destroyers  are  remarkable  for  seductive 
address  (Gen.  iii.  2,  Ac. ;  2  Cor.  xL  3).  Flatterers  should  be  always  suspected. 
Sweet  tastes  are  not  always  wholesome.  III.  Theib  effects.  1.  Deceiving. 
Deceived  themselves  they  seek  to  deceive  others.  Deceiver,  Satan's  most  charac- 
teristic title  (John  viii.  44 ;  Rev.  xii.  9).  He  practises  his  deception  through  his 
deceived  followers.  Deceivers  more  to  be  feared  than  open  persecutors.  2.  The 
simple,  innocent,  unsuspecting,  inexperienced — those  who  are  not  sufficiently 
guarded  and  grounded  in  the  truth.  More  distinguished  for  honesty  than  penetra- 
tion ;  without  malice  themselves  and  suspecting  none  in  others,  and  so  the  natural 
prey  of  designing  men  (2  Pet.  ii.  14 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  6).      {T.  Eohimon.)  Difficult 

detection : — The  French  have  grown  so  clever  at  imitating  pearls,  that  a  jeweller  in 
the  Exhibition  shows  a  necklace  which  purports  to  be  a  mixture  of  true  pearls  and 
false ;  and  he  challenges  his  customers  to  single  out  the  real  ones  if  he  can.  No- 
body has  yet  succeeded.  .  .  .  We  are  told  that  there  is  only  one  way  by  which 
they  can  be  detected,  and  that  is  by  their  specific  weight;  the  false  are  much 
lighter  than  the  real  pearls.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  For  your  obedience  is  come  abroad 
unto  all  men. — Obedience  of  faith : — 1.  Consists  in  a  hearty  reception  of  the  gospel 
and  compliance  with  its  teachings.  2.  Is  a  source  of  great  satisfaction  to  every 
faithful  minister.  3.  Needs  to  be  confirmed  by  wisdom  and  simpUcity.  (<7.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  But  yet  I  would  have  you  wise  unto  that  which  is  good,  and  simple 
concemlng  evil. — Accessories  to  obedience  : — '*  But  yet."  Obedience  is  good,  but 
needs  to  be  guarded.  Teachableness  needs  discretion  for  its  companion.  Pliable 
tempers  require  a  double  guard.  The  greater  the  grace  received  the  more  need 
of  caution.  The  richest  vessels  carry  the  strongest  convoys.  Living  Churches 
and  Christians  Satan's  most  coveted  prey.  Holy  joy  in  others  leads  to  holy 
jealousy  over  them  (2  Cor,  xi.  2).  I.  Wise  unto  good.  Wisdom  is  to  know  what 
is  good,  to  embrace  it,  to  hold  it  fast,  to  practise  it,  and  to  promote  it.  It  includes 
understanding,  discrimination,  prudence,  and  discretion,  and  is  necessary  to  avoid 
being  ensnared  by  the  crafty.  The  Boman  Christians  had  already  perhaps  been 
none  too  cautions.  The  good  includes  doctrine,  practice,  and  experience.  The 
highest  wisdom  is  to  know  the  will  of  God  and  to  do  it,  and  the  most  profitable  that 
which  makes  us  wise  unto  salvation.  U.  Simple  concebning  evil.  1.  Simplicity 
is — (1)  Harmlessness ;  like  an  animal  without  horns.  Believers,  in  respect  of  evil, 
are  to  be  as  children  (1  Cor.  xiv.  20),  wise  as  serpents  but  harmless  as  doves  (Matt. 
X.  16).  (2)  As  contrasted  with  "wise" — ^without  cunning,  dexterity,  or  skill. 
Unknowing  and  unpractised  in  the  ways  of  evil ;  ignorant  of  the  depths  of  Satan 
ffiev.  ii.  24).  2.  Evil  is — (1)  Moral,  i.e.,  sin.  (2)  Harm  done  to  others.  {T. 
jRobinson,  D.D.)  True  religion: — If  this  Epistle  had  been  lost  in  the  streets 
of  Borne,  and  had  been  picked  up  by  some  Boman  philosopher,  after  reading 
all  the  wonderful  things  which  would  have  filled  his  mind  with  amazement,  I 
think  he  would  have  called  this  a  golden  sentence.  \  /hat  a  comprehensive  and 
beautiful  wish.  I.  The  chabactbbistics  of  tbue  beligion.  1.  "Wise  to  that 
which  is  good "  includes — (1)  An  intelligent  comprehension  of  the  nature 
of  acceptable  goodness,  which  is  neither  morality  without  religion  nor  religion 
without  morality.  It  is  neither  secular  virtue  without  any  root  in  reli^ous  faith, 
nor  is  it  the  mere  profession  of  religious  truth,  or  the  mere  enjoyment  of  religious 
excitement,  or  the  mere  attention  upon  religious  ceremonies  distinct  from  real, 
downright  morality  of  Ufe.  These  two  things  must  be  combined ;  and  then  there 
is  a  perfection  about  the  human  character  that  the  man  who  has  to  do  with  God 
cannot  but  have  to  do  with  man  under  the  influence  of  feelings  that  belong  to  God. 
(2)  The  application  of  this  knowledge  to  practical  life ;  for  wisdom  is  the  practical 
application  of  knowledge.  To  be  wise  unto  that  which  is  good  is  to  see  to  it  that 
the  principle  of  religious  faith  shall  be  the  root  and  spring  of  holy  moral  action. 
Yet  how  many  professors  are  very  knowing  as  to  the  theory,  but  want  the  "wisdom" 
of  the  manifestation  of  the  thing  as  a  practic  A  law.  (3)  The  being  alive  to  what- 
ever will  promote  or  retard  this.  Most  me  are  like  horses  to  a  chariot,  one 
dragging  and  another  backing,  one  starting  aside  and  another  standing  still.  But 
where  there  is  a  predominant  principle,  it  will  subordinate  everything  to  itself,  and 
make  obstacles  stepping-stones  to  the  object.  Now,  if  a  Christian  man  has  for  his 
ruling  principle  a  desire  to  advance  in  acceptable  goodness,  and  if  he  is  "  wise  "  in 
relation  to  it,  he  will  be  alive  to  favourable  circumstances.  Aye,  and  how  "  wise  " 
such  a  man  will  becorce  in  relation  to  self-ki  owledge  1  He  will  draw  upon  his 
memory  and  upon  his  experience.    From  pa  t  failures  he  will  draw  principles^ 


768  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

of  oaation.  He  will  be  "  wise  "  to  nnderstand  his  weakness  as  well  as  his  strength, 
and,  guarding  against  weakness  and  seeking  to  increase  strength,  there  will  be 
a  practical  wisdom  perpetually  manifested  in  the  way  in  which  he  wiU  seek  to 
improve  opportunities  and  avoid  hindrances.  (4)  Promptitude  and  tact  in  doing 
good.  And  the  man  that  is  really  ' '  wise  to  that  which  is  good  "  will  acquire  a 
talent  for  saying  and  doing  things  without  giving  the  least  offence,  leaving  an 
impression  upon  men  which  shall  lead  them  to  God.  2.  "  Simple  concerning  evil." 
(1)  The  happy  simplicity  of  ignorance.  Often  the  knowledge  of  evil  is  evil,  and 
many  a  man  has  lived  to  regret  that  he  has  had  any  acquaintance  with  it.  (2) 
Perfect  candour,  guUelessness,  simplicity  of  purpose  and  manner  and  language. 
How  unenviable  is  the  reputation  of  some  men,  who  seem  to  be  perpetually  acting 
upon  the  principle  of  language  being  given  "to  conceal  the  thoughts."  It  is 
painful  to  have  to  do  with  such  people.  (3)  Thinking  no  evil  of  our  brother.  Some 
men  are  ever  suspecting  and  acting  with  every  man  as  if  he  might  one  day  be  an 
adversary.  Let  us  have  more  faith  in  one  another.  Even  though  we  may  some- 
times be  deceived,  still  do  not  let  us  give  up  faith  in  man.  (4)  Steady  simplicity 
of  purpose  in  the  resistance  of  evil.  Man  cannot  say  with  his  Master,  * '  The  evU 
one  cometh  and  hath  nothing  in  me " ;  but  by  the  grace  of  God  there  must 
be  perfect  clearness  of  character,  unspottedness  from  the  world.  No  paltering  with 
evil,  but  a  manly  front,  arising  from  the  rectitude  of  purpose,  with  which  we  desire 
to  glorify  God.  H.  The  wat  in  which  we  may  seek  to  bealise  it.  1.  Frequent, 
deep,  and  devout  meditation  upon  the  ultimate  object  of  religion.  That  object  is  not 
numbers,  faith,  profession,  religious  pleasure,  all  this  it  gives,  but  it  gives  and 
demands  something  more.  Everything  is  to  terminate  in  more  and  more  practical 
••  fruits  of  the  Spirit "  and  a  holy  Ukeness  to  the  God  that  gave  it.  Now  Christian 
men  should  meditate  upon  it,  and  that  would  aid  them  in  realising  it.  2.  Steady, 
constant,  and  conscientious  use  of  the  means  of  grace  as  means.  Not  to  find  the  end 
in  the  mere  coming  in  contact  with  the  means,  and  in  the  pleasure  which  they  produce ; 
but  to  use  these  things  as  means  to  strengthen  and  nourish  faith,  holy  feeling,  and 
motives,  and  to  lead  the  man  from  the  Church  into  the  family  and  all  the  thorough- 
fares of  the  world,  there  to  act  and  to  live  out  the  principles  which  the  means 
of  grace  cherish  and  strengthen  within  him.  3.  Act  the  text.  The  really  doing 
a  good  thing  has  a  happy  reflex  operation,  both  upon  a  man's  understanding  and 
heart.  Get  over  some  suggestion  of  selfishness  or  feeling  of  revenge,  go  and  forgive 
thy  brother,  or  visit  the  wretched  and  poor,  go  with  simplicity  of  purpose  and 
desire  to  manifest  thy  love ;  and  then  come  and  read  thy  Bible.  It  is  wonderful  how 
beautiful  thou  wilt  perceive  the  truth  to  be ;  and  how  every  word  from  that  very 
preparation  of  the  heart  will  come  with  power  upon  thy  soul,  and  strengthen 
within  thee  every  holy  purpose.  But  come  from  your  hours  of  dissipation,  your 
places  of  frivolous  amusement,  come  after  actually  committing  some  act  of 
violence,  and  read  thy  Bible ;  how  it  will  strengthen  the  sceptic  within  thee  1  how 
it  will  oloud  thine  eye  I  how  it  will  make  thee  find  reasons,  or  attempt  to  find  them, 
for  denying  and  disbelieving  this  Divine  thing  I  Conclusion :  1.  Not  only  is  the 
gospel  pre-eminently  a  practical  thing,  but,  whether  Christianity  be  true  or  false, 
it  will  be  blessedness  to  the  world  for  its  spirit  to  become  practically  universal.  2. 
Christianity  bears  upon  it,  in  these  attributes,  the  indications  of  the  source  from 
which  it  comes.  Take  the  character  that  the  world  admires ;  why,  if  that  spirit 
were  to  become  universal,  if  there  were  nothing  to  counteract  it  in  the  virtues 
of  Christian  men,  the  world  would  become  like  the  infernal  pit.  3.  Admitting  that 
a  great  many  Christians  are  far  inferior  to  the  demands  of  the  Book,  a  vast  many 
of  them  are  superior  to  the  world.  "  The  fruits  of  the  Spirit "  do  appear  in  some 
degree ;  and  after  all,  what  would  the  world  be  if  there  were  not  a  Christian  Church 
with  a  Bible  in  it  in  the  midst  of  them  ?    (T.  Binney.) 

Yer.  20.  And  the  Cod  of  peace  shall  bruise  Satan  under  yotir  feet  shortly. — 
Satan  bruised  by  the  God  of  peace  : — There  were  two  victories  to  b  obtained  over 
Satan.  By  the  first,  his  head  was  to  be  bruised  under  the  feet  of  Christ ;  and  by 
the  second,  the  rest  of  his  body  will  be  bruised  under  the  feet  of  believers.  Of  the 
second  of  these  victories,  Paul  here  speaks.  In  the  first  prediction,  God  speaks  aa 
the  Lord  of  Hosts,  the  God  of  war — •'  I  will  put  enmity."  The  war  continues  till 
the  bruising  of  Satan's  head  has  taken  place  and  his  empire  is  overthrown,  and 
when  it  is  subverted,  peace  is  made,  and  God  is  the  God  of  peace.  As,  then,  the 
Beed  of  the  woman  has  bruised  the  head  of  the  serpent,  so  His  people  will,  through 
Cbrist,  likewise  bruise  Satan.    The  apostle  says  not  we  shall  bruise  him  under  our 


CHAP,  xn.]  ROMANS.  767 

feet,  bat  God  shall  do  it ;  yet  be  sajs  not  He  shall  bmise  him  under  His  own  feet, 
but  under  yours.  The  victory  shall  be  ours  though  wrought  by  Him ;  and  He  shall 
do  it  shortly.  Some  understand  this  of  the  final  victory  that  all  the  Lord's  people 
will  obtain  at  last  over  Satan  and  all  his  emissaries.  But  though  they  will  not  be 
free  from  the  attacks  of  this  subtle  adversary  as  long  as  they  are  in  the  body,  yet 
from  the  phrase  "  speedily,"  or  "  shortly,"  as  well  as  from  the  immediate  reference 
to  the  power  of  God  in  the  Church,  it  appears  rather  to  refer  to  a  present  victory. 
It  is  consistent  with  God's  wisdom  to  permit  Satan  to  try  His  people ;  but  when 
they  are  sufficiently  tried,  they  are  delivered  from  the  temptation.  So  it  was  with 
the  Son  of  God  Himself.  Satan  was  for  a  time  permitted  to  harass  Him,  but  at  last 
he  was  dismissed.  In  like  manner,  Churches  and  individual  Christians  are  all  to  be 
tried  in  various  ways  ;  but  if  they  abide  the  trial  they  shall  be  delivered  from  the 
temptation,  and,  in  the  most  emphatic  and  extensive  sense,  they  shall  aU  at  last 
braise  Satan  under  their  feet.  They  shall  obtain  a  complete  victory  over  him  in 
the  day  of  the  appearing  of  their  Almighty  Lord,  who  will  then  cast  him  into  the 
lake  of  fire  and  brimstone.  On  that  day  the  full  import  of  this  expression  will  be 
seen.  {R.  Haldane.)  Victory  over  the  disturber  of  peace  : — Consider : — I.  How 
Satan  disturbs  the  Church.  By  divisions,  &c.  (ver.  17).  II.  The  certainty  or 
ouB  delivebance.  By  the  God  of  peace.  III.  The  signal  manner  in  which  He  wiui 
EFFECT  IT.  He  will  bruise,  &c.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  wonderful  conquest : — Earth 
is  the  scene  of  a  great  moral  struggle  between  truth  and  error,  right  and  wrong, 
God  and  Satan.  This  fact  invests  our  planet  with  an  interest  which  perhaps 
attaches  to  no  other  portion  of  the  universe.  The  text  prophesies  a  conquest,  in 
every  aspect  wonderful  on  account  of — I.  The  gigantic  fob  that  is  overcome, 
"  Satan."  1.  The  word  means  first  an  accuser,  a  calumniator,  and  then  an  enemy. 
The  Bible  represents  him  as  the  introducer  of  evil  into  the  universe,  the  leader  of 
all  the  hosts  of  wickedness,  in  hell  and  on  earth ;  at  once  the  instigator  and  the 
strength  of  all  o^  position  to  the  cause  of  virtue  and  the  well-being  of  humanity.  2. 
To  crush  him  is  to  destroy  the  root  of  the  upas,  to  dry  up  the  fountain  of  sin  and 
misery.  He  shall  be  "  bruised"  ;  his  purposes  thwarted,  his  influence  destroyed, 
his  powers  paralysed  ;  the  crushed  victim  of  his  own  gigantic  follies  and  stupendous 
wickedness.  What  a  blessed  event  in  the  history  of  the  universe  this  will  be  I  H. 
The  character  of  the  glorious  conqueror.  "  God  of  Peace."  How  sublimely 
strange — not  the  God  of  vengeance,  the  God  of  war.  Note — 1.  That  God  has  the 
consciousness  of  a  sufficiency  of  power  for  the  work.  There  can  be  no  peace  of 
mind  to  one  who  has  the  faintest  suppicion  of  his  own  insufficiency.  Anxious 
doubt  would  fill  the  spirit  with  agitation.  Mighty  as  Satan  is,  he  is  feebleness 
itself  in  the  grasp  of  Omnipotence.  2.  That  God  is  free  from  all  malevolent  emotions 
in  the  work.  Where  anger,  revenge,  Ac. ,  exist,  there  can  be  no  peace.  They  agitate 
the  heart.  God  crushes  Satan  from  impulses  the  most  benevolent.  3.  That  God  has  a 
consciousness  of  rectitude  in  the  work.  Whenever  a  being  has  misgivings  as  to  the 
rightness  of  a  course  of  action,  he  cannot  be  in  the  enjoyment  of  peace.  God  feels  He 
has  a  right  to  crush  Satan  the  usurper,  &o.  HI.  On  account  of  the  creatures  from 
WHOM  THE  conquest  IS  ACHIEVED,  Satan  is  under  the  feet  of  angels.  They  tower  in 
virtue,  blessedness,  and  dignity,  in  spheres  abovehis  influence.  It  is  over  men  he  has 
conbnl,  God  will  put  him  under  men's  feet.  1.  Completely.  "  Under  your  feet," 
indicating  entire  subjection.  He  will  rise  no  more.  2.  Speedily.  "  Shortly." 
The  conquest  is  not  far  off — (1)  In  the  individual  history  of  good  men.  At  death, 
by  God's  grace,  they  obtain  the  entire  mastery  over  Satan.  Death  wiU  be  "  shortly  " 
with  all  of  us.  (2)  In  the  general  history  of  this  world.  Satan  has  been  ruling 
the  world  for  ages,  still  a  period  shall  come  when  he  shall  be  put  under  its  feet. 
Though  this  period  may  be  many  ages  distant,  still  in  a  sense  it  is  close  at  hand — 
(a)  To  us.  We  die,  and  the  intervening  period  is  as  nothing.  Only  as  the  few 
hours  of  a  refreshing  sleep,  (b)  To  God.  "  One  day  is  with  the  Lord  as  a  thousand 
years,"  <fec.     Let  us,  then,  take  heart.      (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Satan  under  the 

control  of  God : — We  looked  into  the  Botanical  Gardens  at  Kome,  and  saw  a  leopard 
walking  to  and  fro  upon  the  terrace.  He  appeared  to  be  quite  loose,  but  we  were 
morally  certain  that  he  was  chained  in  some  way.  We  saw  no  chain,  but  we  were 
as  much  at  ease  as  if  we  could,  because  we  were  sure  there  must  be  one  somewhere. 
So  is  it  with  Satan,  affliction,  temptation  or  trial— there  is  a  Divine  restraint  upon 
them ;  whether  we  see  it  or  not,  the  tether  is  there.  Let  us  trust  and  not  be  afraid. 
God  will  take  in  the  enemy  a  link  or  two  if  he  becomes  too  malicioas.  Dread  not 
the  foe,  bat  bless  God  for  the  chain.    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 


768  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

Vers.  21-24.  Tlmotlieus  my  workfeUow,  and  Lnclos  and  Jason,  and  Soslpater, 
my  kinsmen,  salute  you. — Timotheiu  the  workfellow : — I.  What  co-operation  in  thb 
CAUSE  OF  Christ  ntPLiEB.  1.  One  faith.  2.  One  spirit.  3.  One  aim.  4.  One  effort. 
II.  What  it  secures.  1.  Peace.  2.  Love.  3.  Success.  4.  Honour.  {J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  Natural  and  spiritiial  relationships : — 1.  Paul  and  Timothy.  2.  Paul  and 
his  kinsmen.  (Ibid.)  Lucius: — Either  Luke,  now  with  Paul  (Acts  xx.  5),  or 
Lucius  of  Cyrene  (Acts  xiii.  1),  or  both.  One  name  often  appears  under  different 
forms.  Jason: — A  convert  of  Thessalonica  (Acts  xvii.  5,  7),  who  entertained 
Paul  at  much  risk,  and  accompanied  him  to  Corinth,  as  usual  in  those  times  (chap. 
XV.  24 ;  Acts  xx.  4).  Sosipater  of  Berea  (Acts  xx.  4).  These  were  Paul's  kins- 
men, relations  both  by  nature  and  grace.  The  holy  lives  of  relatives  a  joy  to 
believers.  Yet  note  that  Timothy  a  workfellow  is  named  before  them.  (T.  Robin- 
son, D.D.)  The  greetings  of  the  saints  derive  value  : — I.  From  the  character  op 
those  who  send  them.  1.  They  are  God's  children.  2.  Love  us  for  Christ's  sake. 
8.  Seek  our  truest  happiness.  4.  Hence  their  good-will  is  better  than  that  of  the 
most  distinguished  children  of  this  world,  n.  From  theib  import.  1.  They  are 
not  mere  formalities.  2.  But  heartfelt  wishes — and  silent  intercessions.  3.  Whose 
essential  meaning  is  expressed  in  ver.  24.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Mutual  salutations : 
— 1.  Are  not  only  courteous,  but  Christian.  2,  Should  be  the  symbol  of  heartfelt 
love,  and  unity  in  Christ.  3.  Should  be  accompanied  with  earnest  prayer.  4.  Are 
then  of  real  and  essential  value.  (Ibid.)  I  Tertius,  who  wrote  this  epistle, 
salute  you  In  the  Lord. — Tertius  : — We  often  see  in  old  religious  pictures  a  small 
portrait  of  the  artist  on  his  knees  in  a  corner.  This  is  such  a  picture  of  the  man 
who  had  the  humble  task  of  writing  this  Epistle  from  Paul's  burning  lips.  We 
never  hear  of  him  before  or  after ;  just  one  little  gleam  of  a  light  falls  upon  him,  aa 
sometimes  you  may  see  a  star  peep  out  for  a  moment,  with  a  great  bank  of  black- 
ness on  either  side  of  it — but  one  gleam  of  light  and  one  word  makes  this  man 
immortal.  "  I  Tertius,  who  wrote  this  Epistle,"  will  last  as  long  as  the  Bible,  and 
longer  too.  Note  here : — I.  A  very  bemaekable,  because  unconscious  example  op 
THE  STRANGE  UNITING  POWER  OP  COMMON  FAITH.  The  Church  in  Bome  knew  nothing 
about  Tertius  ;  so  it  was  needful  to  introduce  himself.  1.  Here,  then,  is  an  utter 
stranger  to  a  body  of  people  in  Bome,  possibly  separated  from  them  by  race, 
nationality,  education,  and  all  the  deep  clefts  which  split  humanity  up  into  so  many 
nncommunicating  or  hostile  forces.  And  he  stretches  out  his  hand  across  all  this, 
and  says,  "  Here  is  a  brother's  hand.  God  has  made  us  of  one  famUy."  And  look 
how  beautifully  he  pushes  himself  in :  "  I  salute  you  in  the  Lord.  It  yon  want  to 
know  why  I  speak  to  you,  I  point  to  Christ's  name.  You  and  I  are  one  in  Him, 
and  so  we  can  salute  each  other."  The  world  was  all  broken  up  by  great  deep 
clefts  frowning  against  each  other,  and  Christianity  threw  across  what  seemed  to  be 
mere  gossamer  threads,  but  what  has  drawn  the  frowning  precipices  together,  and 
of  the  twain  has  made  one.  2.  These  early  Christians  loved  each  other  all  the  more 
because  the  world  hated  them.  The  pressure  of  antagonism  forced  them  together,  as 
loosely  compacted  substances  are  squeezed  together  by  the  hydraulic  press.  Chris- 
tianity is  a  great  deal  more  loosely  compacted  than  when  the  world  sat  upon  it ; 
but  take  this  lesson — do  not  put  your  experience  within  any  little  ring  fence.  You 
are  tall  enough  to  look  over  it,  however  high  it  is  ;  and  though  you  may  talk  about 
"  oux  Church,"  do  not  fancy  that  that  is  the  same  as  Christ's  Church,  and  that  yon 
are  to  keep  all  your  sympathy  for  your  own  Church,  Put  your  hand  out,  be  sure 
that  your  brother  there  will  grasp  it ;  and  make  the  effort  after  the  pattern  of  this 
voice  from  Corinth,  that  shouted  across  the  water  to  the  people  in  the  mother-city. 
Do  not  let  our  faith  have  less  of  a  uniting  power  than  the  infantile  faith  of  those 
early  Christians.  11.  The  dignitt  op  subordinate  work.  1,  The  man  was  very 
little  more  than  a  machine ;  he  sat  there  to  put  down  whatever  Paul  told  him. 
Yes  I  But  he  is  evidently  proud  of  his  work,  with  the  kind  of  pride  that  a  true  man 
may  have,  not  that  it  has  been  done  well,  but  that  God  has  given  it  to  him  to  do  at 
alL  "  I  have  not  done  much  in  the  world,  but  I  have  done  that,  at  any  rate.  If  it 
had  not  been  for  me  you  Boman  Christians  would  not  have  had  this  in  your  hand." 
2.  And  Tertius  was  qaite  as  necessary  as  Paul,  before  the  letter  could  get  finished. 
All  the  bits  of  a  machine  are  equally  important,  because  if  the  smallest  screw  drops 
out,  the  whole  thing  stops.  However  minute  a  link  of  a  chain  may  be,  if  it  drops 
oat,  the  whole  thing  is  at  an  end.  And  so  in  God's  work  there  is  no  such  thing  aa 
"  great "  and  "  small."  Besides,  nobody  can  tell  what  is  big  and  what  is  little.  If 
it  had  not  been  for  Tertius  you  would  not  have  had  your  New  Testament,  as  yoa 
have  it.    He  did  not  know  what  he  was  doing,  and  none  }f  us  know  what  we  are 


0SA».  ZTL]  E0MAN8.  7«9 

doing  when  we  are  working  for  the  Master.    "  The  eye  cannot  say  to  the  hand,  I 
have  no  need  of  thee."    The  wise  and  seeing  people  in  the  Church,  the  clever,  and 
educated  people,  cannot  say  to  the  people  with  no  views  or  insight  to  speak  of,  but 
can  do  the  work  that  they  are  directed  to  do — •'  I  have  no  need  of  thee."    Every 
note  in  the  great  score  is  needed  for  the  total  effect,  and  the  Master  foresaw  its 
power.    Every  instrument  in  the  orchestra  is  needed,    in.  What  is  the  best  thino 
TO  Bx  KBMEMBEBED  BY?    Very  beautiful  to  see  how  in  this  good  man's  mind  there 
was  evidently  present  the  desire  to  live  in  the  affections  of  those  to  whom  he  had 
been  the  means  of  bringing  God's  truth.    And  there  is  no  such  sacred  tie  as  that 
And  it  is  right  that  he  who  has  helped  you  in  any  way  to  feel  Christ  nearer  or  more 
precious  to  you,  should  seek  to  have  and  to  keep  a  place  in  your  hearts.     Only,  let 
us  remember  that  it  was  "  in  the  Lord  "  that  Tertius  wanted  the  Eoman  Christiana 
to  love  him.     And  it  is  not  mere  admiratory  esteem,  affection  of  an  earthly  sort  that 
a  true  minister  seeks  from  his  flock.    IV.  "  I  wrote  this  Epistle."    T";  \i  is  aU  his 
life  that  we  know  anything  about.    All  the  rest  of  it  has  shrunk  away  and  been 
forgotten.    Into  how  little  a  space  the  important  facts  of  a  life  can  be  con- 
densed.    It  takes  acres  of  roses  to  make  a  phial  of  essence  of  roses.    And  it  takei 
days  and  years  to  be,  and  do,  that  which  can  be  spoken  in  a  line.    Well  1  Tertiug 
did  not  care  what  of  his  life  was  known  or  unknown  by  other  people  ;  but  he  did 
want  that  other  people  should  know  that  he  had  written  this  Epistle.    Will  it  be  an 
epitaph  of  that  sort,  in  five  or  six  words,  that  will  do  for  us  ?   This  is  my  ambition, 
that  this  at  least  may  be  engraven  on  my  tomb  :  "  A  servant  of  Christ,  who  helped 
some  people  to  know  His  wlLI,  and  to  do  it  for  His  love's  sake  "  ?    If  so,  all  the  rest 
may  well  go.    If  so,  it  matters  very  little  what  may  become  of  our  names  or  reputa- 
tion.    He  has  said,  *'  Surely  I  will  never  forget  any  of  their  works."    {A.  Maclaren, 
D.D.)        Tertius  the  scribe: — Why  Paul  employed  an  amanuensis  we  cannot 
certainly  tell.     That  he  did  so  usually  is  undoubted,  and  only  wrote  the  concluding 
sentence  to  show  that  the  Epistle  was  genuine  (1  Cor.  xvi  21 ;  Col.  iv.  18 ;  2  Thess. 
iii.  17).    It  has  been  supposed  that  he  laboured  under  a  chronic  defect  of  sight, 
arising  from  the  effect  of  "  the  light  from  heaven  above  the  brightness  of  the  sun  " 
which  fell  on  his  astonished  eyes  on  the  way  to  Damascus,  and  to  which  it  has  been 
supposed  that  there  are  various  references  in  his  writings,  especially  Gal.  iv.  13-15. 
It  is  not  unlikely  that,  like  many  literary  men,  he  did  not  write  a  very  legible  hand. 
Some  have  supposed  there  is  a  reference  to  this  in  Gal.  vi.  11.    Every  man  has  hia 
own  gift,  and,  in  the  employment  of  it  may  be  useful.    Tertius  could  not  have  com- 
posed this  Epistle ;  but  he  could  probably  write  it  better  than  its  author.     The 
greatest  of  men  has  not  every  qualification,  and  may  be  much  the  better  for 
the  assistance  of  those  who  are  immeasurably  his  inferiors.      {J.  Brown,  D.I>.) 
OaioB  mine  host,  and  of  the  whole  Church,  saluteth  you. — Gains  the  host : — I.  A 
MAN  CHARACTERISED  BY  A  SINGLE  VIRTUE.    It  is  noteworthy  that  most  of  the  saints 
immortalised  in  this  chapter  have  just  one  distinguishing  mark.    Doubtless  they 
were  not  wanting  in  other  qualities  necessary  to  the  symmetry  of  Christian 
character,  but  one  excellence  seems  to  be  prominent.    1.  It  is  better  to  use  one 
talent  well  than  to  neglect  or  imperfectly  employ  five  talents.    One  ripe  apple  on  a 
bough  is  worth  more  than  twenty  green  ones.    Many  Christians  richly  endowed 
are  far  kss  useful  than  those  poorer  furnished,  but  who  do  what  they  can  vnth  all 
their  might.     Gaius  may  have  been  no  eloquent  preacher,  no  sagacious  adminis- 
trator, no  zealous  evangelist ;  but  his  means  enabled  him  to  dispense  hospitality, 
and  he  did  this  well.    2.  Gains'  excellence  at  first  sight  shows  at  a  disadvantage 
beside  those  who  were  "  beloved,"  who  *'  laboured  in  the  Lord,"  who  were  Paul'a 
"  helpers,"  &c.    Yet  he  did  what  he  could,  and  in  the  Master's  estimation  to  give 
a  cup  of  cold  water  in  the  name  of  a  disciple  is  sometimes  better  than  to  do  many 
mighty  works  in  His  name.    But — II.  This  virtue  included  a  vast  numbeb  of 
otheb  virtues.    Probably  no  virtue  stands  alone ;  certainly  hospitality  does  not. 
Apart  from  the  fuller  portrait  of  Gaius  in  3  John  we  can  gather  from  the  text — 1. 
Hia  devotion  to  the  apostle.    "Mine  host."    And  he  who  was  devoted  to  the 
apostle  was  devoted  to  the  apostle's  Master.     "  Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done,"  &c. 
2.  His  courage.    It  required  no  small  amount  of  moral  heroism  to  shelter  the 
leader  and  members  of  a  sect  everywhere  spoken  against.    3.  Disinterestedness. 
•'  Not  many  noble,"  &c.    There  was  nothing  to  gain,  but  everything  to  lose.    4. 
Large-hearted  Christian  love.    He  was  not  a  "  boon  companion,"  but  ••  the  host  of 
the  whole  Church."    If  charity  be  a  distinguishing  Christian  grace  surely  Gaiua 
must  have  been  an  eminent  Christian.    III.  This  vibtue  was  wobth  becordino, 
▲in)  IS  WORTHY  OF  IMITATION  J  because  of — 1.  Its  usefulness.    How  much  Chria- 
VOL.   U.  id 


77»  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat,  xvi 

tianitj  was  indebted  to  this  good  man  only  the  day  will  declare.  Think  what  ii 
must  have  been  to  the  apostle  and  the  Church  to  have  had  one  house  that  was 
always  open,  one  table  always  spread,  one  heart  always  ready  to  sympathise,  one 
hand  always  ready  to  help.  2,  Its  neglect.  "  Given  to  hospitality  "  was  a  common 
and  required  mark  of  the  early  Christians,  which  has  largely  dropped  from  the 
modern  Christian  ethics.  Yet  how  much  good  might  be  done  if  more  of  onr  rich 
men  were  to  invite  Church  workers,  particularly  the  humble  ones,  to  their  homes. 
(J.  W.Burn.)  Hospitality,  in  its  widest  sigoificance,  is  a  form  of  sympathetic  rela- 
tion to  other  men,  by  which  we  open  to  them  our  house,  our  family  circle,  and  let 
outsiders  share  the  advantages  of  our  own  family  life.  In  ancient  and  mediaval 
times  this  virtue  was  practised  to  a  wider  extent  than  at  present,  because  the  state 
of  the  law  was  then  imperfect,  the  roads  insecure,  and  public  houses  of  entertain- 
ment, where  refreshment  might  be  had  for  money,  were  few.  A  certain  character 
of  sacredness  and  individuality  was  attributed  to  a  stranger  thus  received,  and  this 
feeling  has  been  maintained  among  all  nations.  And  however  past  and  present 
circumstances  may  differ,  hospitality,  both  in  its  broader  and  narrower  meanings, 
should  be  continually  exercised  (chap.  xii.  13),  partly  by  entertaining  strangers, 
partly  by  affording  access  to  our  domestic  circle  to  the  stranger  who  has  inspired 
us  with  confidence;  now  by  collecting  about  us  those  who  are  deprived  of  the 
advantages  of  family  life,  now  by  inviting  friends  who  have  families  of  their  own, 
in  exhilarating  social  meetings.  (Bp.  Martensen.)  Erastus,  the  chamberlain  of 
the  city. — Perhaps  the  apostle's  helper  in  Ephesus  (Acts  xix.  22).  Mentioned  in 
connection  with  his  own  city,  Corinth  (2  Tim.  iv.  20).  An  undesigned  coincidence, 
riobably  on  receiving  he  accompanied  Paul  for  a  time.  He  was  the  public  steward 
or  treasurer,  town  clerk  or  recorder — an  oflBce  of  high  respectability — mentioned 
by  Josephus.  The  gospel  suits  and  gains  all  classes.  Tet  not  many  noble  called 
(1  Cor.  i.  26).  Grace  is  compatible  with  high  position  and  manifold  avocations. 
Christians  may  hold  ofiSce  under  heathen  rulers  (Neh.  i.  1).  To  serve  Christ  we 
need  not  abandon  worldly  business.  {T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Erastus  the  chamber- 
lain : — "  Not  many  wise  after  the  flesh,  not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble,  are 
called,"  but  there  were  exceptions ;  and  in  some  places  not  a  few.  If,  when  a 
Christian,  Erastus  retained  of&ce,  the  fact  speaks  highly  of  his  reputation  as  a 
citizen  and  a  functionary.  The  disciples  of  Jesus  are  still  members  of  society; 
and  if  on  any  occasion  their  fellow-citizens  call  them  to  any  situation  of  authority 
and  influence,  not  requiring  anything  inconsistent  with  their  Christian  principles, 
it  may  even  become  an  imperative  duty  for  them  to  obey.  Whatever  station  we 
are  called  in  providence  to  fill,  let  us  see  to  it  that  we  never  act  the  part  of  a 
trimming  worldly  policy.  In  every  situation  "let  your  light  shine."  There  is 
danger,  when  Christians  are  placed  in  situations  of  worldly  honour  and  influence, 
of  their  getting  secularised :  sad  is  it  when  this  is  the  case  ;  for  it  is  alike  Injurious 
to  the  spiritual  interests  of  the  individual  and  to  the  cause  of  Christ.  Oh,  for  grace 
according  to  our  situation — that  God  in  all  things  may  be  glorified  I  (R.  Wardlaw, 
D.  D.)  Quartus  a  brother. — It  is  easy  to  make  a  little  picture  of  this  brother. 
He  is  a  stranger  to  the  Church  in  Rome,  and  is  evidently  a  man  of  no  especial 
reputation  in  the  Church  at  Corinth.  He  has  no  wealth  like  Gains,  nor  civil  posi- 
tion like  Erastus,  nor  wide  reputation  like  Timothy.  But  he  would  like  the 
Bomans  to  know  that  he  thought  lovingly  of  them,  and  to  be  lovingly  thought  of 
by  them.  So  he  begs  a  little  corner  in  Paul's  letter,  and  gets  it ;  and  there,  in  his 
little  niche,  like  some  statue  of  a  forgotten  saint,  scarce  seen  amidst  the  glories  of 
a  great  cathedral,  "  Quartus  a  brother  "  stands  to  aU  time.    Note — I.  How  deep 

AND   REAL   THESE  WOBDS   SHOW  THE  NEW  BOND  OF  ChBISTIAN  LOVE   TO   HAVE   BEEN.      A 

little  incident  of  this  sort  is  more  impressive  than  any  amount  of  talk  about  the 
uniting  influence  of  the  gospel.  Quartus  was  a  Corinthian,  and  there  was  little 
love  lost  between  Rome  and  Corinth,  The  world  then  was  like  some  great  field  of 
cooled  lava  on  the  slopes  of  a  volcano,  all  broken  up  by  a  labyrinth  of  clefts  and 
cracks,  at  the  bottom  of  which  one  can  see  the  flicker  of  sulphurous  flames.  Great 
gulfs  of  race,  language,  religion,  and  social  condition,  far  profounder  than  any- 
thing of  the  sort  which  we  know,  split  mankind  into  fragments.  And  all  these 
disintegrating  forces  were  bound  together  into  an  artificial  unity  by  the  iron  clamp 
of  Rome's  power,  holding  up  the  bulging  walls  that  were  ready  to  faU— the  unity  of 
the  slave-gang  manacled  together  for  easier  driving.  Into  this  hideous  condition 
of  things  the  gospel  comes,  and  silently  flings  its  clasping  tendrils  over  the  wide 
gaps,  and  binds  the  crumbling  structure  of  human  society  with  a  new  bond,  real 
and  living.    And  we  see  the  very  process  going  on  before  our  eyes  in  this  messags 


CHAP.  XVI.]  ROMANS.  771 

from  "  Quartus  a  brother."  1.  It  reminds  us  that  the  very  notion  of  humanityi 
and  of  the  brotherhood  of  man,  Ib  purely  Christian.  A  world-embracing  society, 
held  together  by  love,  was  not  dreamt  of  before  the  gospel  came ;  and  if  you  wrench 
away  the  idea  from  its  foundation,  as  people  do  who  talk  about  fraternity,  and 
seek  to  bring  it  to  pass  without  Christ,  it  is  a  mere  piece  of  Utopian  sentiment — a 
fine  dream.  But  in  Christianity  it  worked.  The  gospel  first  of  all  produced  the 
thing  and  the  practice,  and  then  the  theory  came  afterwards.  The  Church  did  not 
talk  much  about  the  brotherhood  of  man,  or  the  unity  of  the  raoe ;  but  simply 
ignored  all  distinctions,  and  gathered  into  the  fold  the  slave  and  his  master,  the 
Boman  and  his  subject,  fair-haired  Goths  and  swarthy  Arabians,  the  worshippers 
of  Odin  and  of  Zeus,  the  .Tew  and  the  Gentile.  2.  And  before  this  simple  word  of 
greeting  could  have  been  sent  some  profound  new  impulse  must  have  been  given 
to  the  world.  What  was  that  ?  What  should  it  be  but  the  story  of  One  who  gave 
Himself  for  the  whole  world,  who  binds  men  into  a  unity  because  of  His  common 
relation  to  them  all,  and  through  whom  the  great  proclamation  can  be  made : 
"There  is  neither  Jew  nor  Greek,"  <fcc.  Brother  Quartus'  message,  like  some  tiny 
flower  above-ground  which  tells  of  a  spreading  root  beneath,  is  a  modest  witness  to 
that  mighty  revolution,  and  presupposes  the  preaching  of  a  Saviour  in  whom  he 
and  his  unseen  friends  in  Borne  are  one.  3.  So  let  us  learn  not  to  confine  the  play 
of  our  Christian  affection  within  the  limits  of  our  personal  knowledge.  Like  this 
man,  let  us  sometimes  send  our  thoughts  across  mountains  and  sea.  He  and  the 
Bomans  were  strangers,  but  he  wished  to  feel,  as  it  were,  the  pressure  of  their 
fingers  in  his  palm.  II.  Qtjabtus  belonged  to  a  Church  which  was  bemarkablh 
FOB  ITS  mssENSioNS.  One  "said,  I  am  of  Paul,"  <Src.  I  wonder  if  Quartus  belonged 
to  any  of  these  parties.  It  is  quite  likely  that  he  had  far  more  love  to  the  brethren 
in  Bome  than  to  those  who  sat  on  the  same  bench  with  him  in  the  upper  room  at 
Corinth.  For  sometimes  it  is  true  about  people,  as  well  as  about  scenery,  that 
"  distance  lends  enchantment  to  the  view."  A  great  many  of  us  have  much  keener 
sympathies  with  "  brethren  "  who  are  well  out  of  our  reach  than  with  those  who 
are  nearest.  Do  not  let  your  Christian  love  go  wandering  away  abroad  only,  but, 
keep  some  for  home  consumption.    III.  How  simply,  and  with  what  UNcoNsciouft 

BEAUTY,    the    DEEP  REASON   FOB  OUB   ChBISTIAN   UNITY  IS   GIVEN   IN   THAT   ONE   WORD, 

A  "  BROTHER."  "  Never  mind  telling  them  anything  about  what  I  am,  tell  them  I 
am  a  brother,  that  will  be  enough."  We  are  brethren  because  we  are  sons  of  one 
Father.  The  great  Christian  truth  of  regeneration  is  the  foundation  of  Christian 
brotherhood.  That  is  the  true  ground  of  our  unity,  and  of  our  obligation  to  love 
all  who  are  begotten  of  God.  All  else — identity  of  opinion,  practice,  and  cere- 
monial, local  or  national  ties,  and  the  like — all  else  is  insufScient.  It  may  be 
necessary  for  Christian  communities  to  require  a  general  identity  of  opinion  and 
form  of  worship  ;  but  if  ever  they  fancy  that  such  are  the  grounds  of  their  spiritual 
unity,  they  are  slipping  off  the  real  foundation,  and  are  perilling  their  character  as 
Churches  of  Christ.     IV.  How  strangely  and  unwittingly  this  good  man  has 

GOT    HIMSELP    AN    IMMORTALITY    BY    THAT    PASSING    THOUGHT     OP    HIS.       One    loving 

message  has  won  for  him  the  prize  for  which  men  have  joyfully  given  life  itself^ 
an  eternal  place  in  history.  How  much  surprised  he  would  have  been  if,  as  he 
leaned  forward  to  Tertius  and  said,  "  Send  my  love  too,"  anybody  had  told  him 
that  that  one  act  of  his  would  last  as  long  as  the  world  1  And  how  much  ashamed 
some  of  the  other  people  in  the  New  Testament  would  have  been  if  they  had  known 
that  their  passing  faults — the  quarrel  of  Euodia  and  Syntyche  for  instance — were 
to  be  gibbeted  for  ever  in  the  same  fashion  I  When  a  speaker  sees  the  reporters  in 
front  of  him  he  weighs  his  words.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Distinctions  even  in  the 
Church  : — Here  is — I.  Gaius  the  respectable.  1.  Known  of  all.  2.  Hospitable  to 
all.  3.  Beloved  and  well  reported  of  all.  II.  Erastus  the  official.  1.  Esteemed 
and  honoured  by  those  without.  2.  Not  many  wise,  not  many  noble,  are  called.  III. 
Quartos  a  brother.  Unknown,  yet  well  known;  "  prized  and  loved  by  God  alone." 
{J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you  all — The 
pastor^s  parting  blessing ; — The  Christian  is  a  man  of  generous  actions,  but  his 
wishes  go  far  beyond  his  deeds.  Where  he  cannot  be  beuefieent  he  is  benevolent. 
Thus  the  great  heart  of  the  apostle  relieved  itself;  though  he  would  have  been 
willing  to  lay  down  his  life  for  the  brethren,  yet  he  did  not  think  it  idle  to  give 
them  his  blessing.  Long  has  the  benediction  lain  in  the  Epistle  like  the  wheat  in 
the  Egyptian  catacomb,  but  there  is  a  vitality  in  it  yet ;  lo,  it  buds  and  brings  forth 
good  to  us  after  the  lapse  of  eighteen  centuries.  I.  What  is  meant  by  the  obacb 
OF  OUB  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?    1.  The  grace  which  was  revealed  in  Christ.    2.  The 


77a  2 HE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  xirfc^ 

grace  which  comes  to  as  throagh  Christ.  Oar  Lord,  as  it  were,  took  oat  of  th« 
river-bed  of  grace  the  great  rock  which  blocked  ap  the  water-courses.  3.  Ths 
grace  which  comes  to  as  with  Christ.  Those  peculiar  bl«sings  which  come  to 
souls  who  abide  in  Christ,  who  are  not  drowning  men  barelj  landed  on  the  shore, 
but  have  life  abundantly.  4.  All  the  grace  that  is  in  any  way  connected  with  Christ. 
Elsewhere  he  extends  the  benediction  to  the  love  of  God  and  the  commonion  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  Bat  the  shorter  form  is  intended  to  comprehend  all  the  rest.  In 
many  of  his  epistles  the  apostle  suuis  up  with  "  grace  be  with  yoa  all,"  without 
mentioning  any  person  of  the  Godhead.  So  that  "  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesua 
Christ "  is  synonymous  with  grace  as  such  ;  and  comprehends  all  the  various  dis- 
plays of  grace.  He  wishes  the  saints  all  the  grace  they  need,  or  can  desire,  and 
that  the  Infinite  God  can  give.  6.  When  the  text  is  the  desire  of  our  heart,  wa 
mean — (1)  May  the  love  of  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you,  and  may  you  know  tbat  yoa 
have  it.  (2)  May  His  mercy  be  with  you,  as  shown  by  the  full  pardon  of  all  your 
sins,  and  your  knowledge  of  it.  (3)  May  you  be  the  subjects  of  His  work  constantly. 
(4)  May  you  have  His  peace.  (5)  May  you  exhibit  the  grace  which  shone  so 
brightly  in  Him,  and  was  seen  by  men  and  angels  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father. 
II.  With  whom  is  this  grace  to  bb  ?  1.  With  all  the  saints.  (1)  You  all  need  iL 
{2)  You  all  may  have  it.  (3)  There  is  no  grace  which  yoa  may  not  have,  and  which 
you  ought  to  be  content  to  go  without.  It  is  grievous  to  see  how  we  stunt  ourselves, 
and  appear  content  with  a  poor  form  of  spiritual  life.  2.  All  the  saints,  i^. — (1) 
Church  oflScers.  (2)  Church  workers.  (3)  Church  members,  poor,  rich,  young, 
and  old.  3.  This  benediction  is  limited  to  the  saints.  In  Philemon  and  Galatiana 
the  apostle  says,  "  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  your  spirit."  It  it 
only  meant  for  spiritual-minded  men,  for  such  as  have  been  born  again  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  In  1  Cor.  xvi.  21-24  he  pronounces  a  solemn  curse  upon  those  whom 
he  feels  he  cannot  bless,  because  they  are  so  base  as  not  to  love  the  infinitely  loving 
Jesus,  ni.  What  will  bb  the  result  nr  this  obaob  be  with  you  all  ?  Blessed 
consequences  will  accrue  to — 1.  Yourselves.  (1)  You  will  love  God  better.  (2) 
You  will  be  much  in  prayer,  for  this  eminently  distinguished  his  character.  (3) 
You  will  walk  with  God,  even  as  he  did.  2.  Your  fellow  Church-members.  (1) 
You  will  love  each  other  with  a  pure  heart  fervently,  (2)  Your  speech  will  be  to 
edification.  3.  Your  families.  The  servants  will  find  the  house  a  home,  and  the 
children  will  become  children  of  God,  when  the  master  and  mistress  are  filled  with 
the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus.  4.  The  world.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  grace  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ : — 1.  What  it  supposes.  2.  What  it  includes.  3.  For  whom 
it  is  desired.  4.  How  it  is  secured.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Grace  for  all ;— Grace — 
1.  Is  needed  by  alL  2.  Is  provided  for  all.  3.  Is  offered  to  all.  4.  Is  supplicated 
for  alL  6.  May  be  enjoyed  by  all.  {Ibid.)  Fellowship  with  Christ : — On  Christ 
faith  feeds.  I  saw  a  group  of  lovely  ferns  the  other  day  in  a  grotto,  from  the  roof 
of  which  continually  distilled  a  cool,  clear,  crystal  rain :  these  ferns  were  perpetually 
fresh  and  beautiful,  because  their  leaves  were  continually  bathed  in  the  refreshing 
drops.  Although  it  was  at  a  season  when  verdure  was  scant,  these  lovely  ferna 
were  as  verdant  as  possible.  I  observed  to  my  friend  that  I  would  wish  to  live  in 
the  everlasting  drip  of  grace,  perpetually  laved,  and  bathed,  and  baptized  in  the 
overflowing  of  Divine  fellowship.  This  makes  a  man  full  of  faith.  If  Moses  had 
faith  you  do  not  wonder,  for  he  had  been  forty  days  upon  the  mount.  If  we  have 
communed  with  God  it  shall  be  a  marvel  if  we  doubt,  and  not  that  we  beUeve. 
Feed  faith  with  the  truth  of  God,  but  especially  with  Him  who  is  the  truth.  {C.  H. 
Sjpurgeon.) 

Vers.  25-27.  Now  to  mm  that  Is  of  power  to  stabllsh  yon  according:  to  my  gospel. 
— Apostolic  praise  : — What  a  doxology  I  Full  of  Divine  melody  ;  full  of  grace  and 
truth  I  I.  The  Stablisheb.  He  is  the  Creator.  (1)  He  is  the  mighty  God.  He 
is  "of  power"  (literally,  '♦able")  to  stablish  you.  (2)  The  fountain-head  of  the 
mystery  of  hidden  wisdom.  (3)  He  is  the  everlasting  God  (Psa.  xo.  1).  (4)  He  ia 
the  God  only  wise.  Such  is  our  Stablisher  1  Can  we  fear  or  be  discouraged  ?  Shall 
our  weakness,  or  frailty,  or  the  number  of  our  foes  appal  us  ?  H.  The  stablishino. 
The  word  expresses  steadfastness,  fixture,  and  strength  (see  Luke  ix.  51 ;  Eom.  i. 
11 ;  1  Thess.  iii.  2,  13 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  17,  iii.  3 ;  James  v.  8 ;  1  Pet.  v.  10).  It  assumea 
that  on  our  part  there  is  weakness,  wavering,  changeableness ;  that  there  is  peril. 
The  process  of  stablishing  is  what  we  need  so  much ;  it  is  more  than  being  "  kept 
from  falling,"  and  we  require  both.  The  gospel  (1)  says  to  us,  "  Be  steadfast  " ; 
(2)  shows  us  what  steadfastness  is;  (,3)  supplies  ua  with  the  means  of  stead- 


«HA».  xn.]  ROMANS.  Tit 

fastness.  In  clasping  that  gospel,  we  are  holding  that  which  alone  can  keep  us 
from  being  moved,  in.  The  btabushed.  These  are,  first  of  all,  the  saints  at 
Borne,  "called,"  "beloved  of  God,"  whose  "faith  was  spoken  of  throughout 
the  whole  world."  They  needed  "  stablishing,"  though  apostles  were  their 
pastors  and  teachers.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  The  doxology  .-—This  Epistle  is 
remarkable  for  the  number  of  its  endings.  The  invocation  at  the  end  of 
chap.  XV.  may  be  regarded  as  closing  the  Epistle  itself.  Then  the  first 
benediction  (chap.  xvi.  20)  was  doubtless  intended  to  be  indeed  the  con- 
clusion of  the  whole.  But  now  Paul's  companions  desired  to  send  greetings, 
which  having  been  done,  we  have  the  benediction  a  second  time  (ver.  24).  The 
pen  of  Tertius  was  now  put  down.  The  Epistle  must  be  read  aloud  for 
review  and  correction.  What  was  done  in  the  latter  respect  we  cannot  tell.  But 
the  apostle  and  his  companions  were  filled  with  profound  emotions  ;  and  so  Tertius 
was  bidden  to  again  take  up  the  pen,  and  to  write,  "  Now  to  Him,"  (fee.  And  then 
the  MS.  was  devoutly  rolled  up  and  sealed,  and  delivered  to  Phebe.  Notice — I. 
The  establishment  op  the  Boman  Ghbistums  in  the  faith.  Observe^l.  That 
In  respect  to  which  the  establishment  is  to  be  effected :  the  gospel.  It  is  described 
in  respect  to — (1)  Its  subjective  medium  and  source — ' '  my  gospel."  Not  that  "  hia 
gospel "  differed  essentially  from  the  "  gospel  "  of  any  other  apostle,  though  he  had 
not  learnt  it  from  any  of  them  ;  but  it  was  his  as  distinguished  from  all  corrupted 
gospels  (Gal.  i.  6, 7).  (2)  Its  objective  character  and  contents.  (1)  It  is  the  revela- 
tidn  of  a  mystery  which — (a)  had  been  kept  silent  in  eternal  times,  ».«.,  from 
eternity  up  to  the  time  of  the  advent  of  Christ ;  but — (6)  had  now,  since  the  ap- 
pearance of  Christ,  been  made  fully  manifest.  It  is  the  great  mystery  of  redemp- 
tion through  the  One  Divine-human  Mediator,  so  called,  not  In  respect  to  its  incom- 
prehensible character,  but  because  it  never  could  have  been  imagined  by  unaided 
human  reason,  nor  appreciated  by  men  before  it  had  been  evolved  in  history 
(Eph.  i.  9;  2  Tim.  i.  9,  10).  (2)  Enigmatical  portions  of  the  truth  concerning  it 
were  disclosed  from  time  to  time  in  type  and  prophecy ;  but  given  in  such  separate 
fragments,  that  there  was  not  skill  to  bring  piece  to  piece,  and  so  combine  the 
whole  as  to  discover  the  mystery.  Even  the  prophets  themselves  were  perplexed 
&s  to  what  could  be  the  true  significance  of  their  predictions  (Pet.  i.  10-12). 
(3)  But  now,  since  the  advent,  the  whole  mystery  had  been  manifested,  and  the 
time  for  silence  has  passed  away :  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,"  Ac.  2.  The 
estabUshment  itself.  (1)  This  was  not  simply  that  they  should  become  so  stead- 
fast as  never  to  apostatise ;  nor  only  that  they  should  so  maintain  personal  faith  in 
Christ  to  inherit  everlasting  life ;  but  also  that  they  should  have  such  a  clear 
tmderstanding  of  the  spirit  and  purpose  of  Christianity ;  such  a  grasp  of  its  various 
facts  and  truths,  as  that  they  should  be  in  no  danger  of  enfeebling  the  gospel  by 
heterogeneous  additions,  or  by  an  incomplete  apprehension  or  enunciation  of  its 
truths.  (2)  Those  who  should  thus  be  firmly  established  in  the  truth  concerning 
Christ,  are  also  supposed  to  hold  firmly  to  Him,  by  personal  living  faith,  who  ia 
Himself  the  Truth.  II.  The  ascription  of  qlokt  to  the  only  wise  God  thbough 
Chbist,  who  was  able  to  do  this  thino  for  theu.  1.  The  ability  here  spoken  of  ia 
not  an  ability  of  mere  power,  but  one  which  is  manifested,  and  which  becomes 
effective,  through  wisdom.  Men  are  established  in  the  truth  by.  a  clear  apprehen- 
sion of  it,  and  of  its  grounds  and  bearings  (Eph.  iv.  14  ;  Heb.  v.  12-14).  God  haa 
made  abundant  provision  to  present  to  believers  the  truth  in  an  unmistakable 
form,  and  to  give  them  every  aid  in  mastering  that  form.  2.  But  the  establish- 
ment includes,  not  only  apprehension  and  belief,  but  also  love,  of  the  truth.  And 
in  all  this  God  has  manifested  not  His  sole  wisdom  only,  but  His  surpassing  love ; 
and  we  may  be  fully  assured  that  He  who  thus  appeals  to  the  understanding  by 
intelligible  truth  for  the  purpose  of  salvation  will  also,  by  the  gentle  and  persuasive 
influence  of  love,  appeal  to  the  heart.  3.  And  this  ascription  of  praise  to  the 
only  wise  God  through  Christ  who  is  able  to  do  this,  was  itself  also  intended  to  be 
one  of  the  means  to  promote  this  very  end.  There  are  contained  therein  both 
incentive  and  encouragement.  {W.  Tyson.)  Praise: — I.  Belongs  to  God — aa 
— 1.  The  God  of  power.  2.  The  only  wise.  II.  Is  due  to  God.  1.  For  every- 
thing. 2.  But  especially  for  the  gospel.  (1)  Its  revelation.  (2)  Publication. 
(3)  Successes.  III.  Is  awakened  bt  God.  1.  Through  faith.  2.  In  the  preaching 
of  the  gospel.  IV.  Is  presented  to  God.  1.  Through  Christ.  2.  In  glory. 
3.  For  ever.  [J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Stablished  in  the  gospel: — In  the  introductoiry 
words  of  the  Epistle,  Paul  declares  his  strong  desire  to  visit  Eome,  that  ita 
members  might  be  established  in  the  faith.    As,  then,  he  commences  the  Epistle 


774  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cmr.  m. 


with  the  expression  of  this  object,  it  is  natural  that  he  shoald  close  it  with  the 
ascription  of  glory  to  Him  who  was  able  to  do  it.    I.  The  hatebial  in  which  thb 
ESTABLISHING  IS  TO  TAKE  PLACE.    1.  "  My  gospel."    (1)  The  gospel  as  preached  by 
Paul.     Already  there  had  appeared  those  who  proclaimed  another  gospel,  ol 
whom  he  says,  "  let  him  be  accursed."    His  gospel  was  that  which  this  Epistle 
especially  expounded.     (2)  But  the  gospel  is  not  a  mere  intellectual  object  set 
forth  in  order  by  the  reason,  and  made  evident  in  logical  and  eloquent  speech ;  it 
is  something  which  a  man  possesses  in  the  inner  nature  of  his  being.    It  was  a 
spiritual  Ufe  for  Paul.    2.  The  preaching  of  Jesus  Christ.    Paul's  gospel  was  the 
fact  that  Jesus  was  the  Saviour  of  the  world,  and  the  Christ  of  God.    3.  It  is 
easy  now  to  see  the  substance  of  the  Christian  character  in  which  believers  are  to 
be  established.    (1)  It  consists  in  the  apprehension  of  a  truth.    That  truth  is — (o) 
Historic.    The  facts  of  the  life,  death,  resurrection  and  ascension  of  Jesus,  Hia 
glory  and  power  given  to  Him  of  God.    (6)  Doctrinal.    The  relations  which  these 
facts  bear  to  one  another,  to  man,  to  God,  to  the  Divine  government,  to  sin,  to  the 
destiny  of  the  race  and  the  universe.    (2)  This  substance  of  the  Christian  character 
is  moral  and  personal.     When  a  man  rightly  apprehends  these  truths,  he  cornea 
into  moral  relation  to  them.     He  beheves  them ;  this  belief  produces  a  becoming 
state  of  the  emotions ;  these  emotions  act  upon  the  character,  will,  conscience, 
and  life.     The  man  not  only  believes,  he  also  lives.    Now,  in  this  sphere  of  the 
believer's  condition  there  will  be  growth,  and  for  the  development,  as  for  the  com- 
mencement of  this,  the  Holy  Ghost  is  ceaselessly  engaged.     (3)  As  the  central  fact 
and  power,  both  of  doctrine  and  life,  is  the  preaching  of  Jesus  Christ,  we  ever 
need  to  be  more  fully  instructed  in  the  life  of  Jesus,  more  clearly  to  apprehend  it, 
more  strongly  to  feel  His  relation  to  us,  more  completely  to  have  our  lives  and 
hearts  submitted  to  His  control,  and  consecrated  to  His  service.     IL  The  natube 
OF  THIS  ESTABLISHING.     The  word  signifies  the  supporting,  the  solidifying  of  any- 
thing.    Thus,  a  prop  set  under  an  object  that  might  fall,  the  fastening  of  what 
was  shaking  and  unstable,  the  setting  of  a  liquid  into  firm  consistency,  are  all  ex- 
pressed by  words  of  kindred  origin  with  the  word  "  establish."    It  is  not  difficult, 
then,  to  perceive  the  application  of  the  term  to  the  faith  and  life  of  a  Christian 
man.    It  is  clearly  no  external  ratification.     No  such  foreign  act  as  confirining 
by  bishop,  or  approval  by  the  Church  or  its  officers,  is  contemplated.     But  it  is 
that  work  of  Divine  grace  upon  the  heart  after  belief,  whereby  the  knowledge  and 
the  faith,  with  aU  the  graces  that  spring  therefrom,  are  made  more  clear  and 
strong,  and  the  soul  more  able  to  contend  and  to  continue,  untU  the  final  victory  is 
attained.    Establishment  in  the  faith — 1.  Consists  in  an  increase  of  knowledge  of 
the  facts  and  truths  of  the  gospel.    Deeper  and  deeper  will  the  believer  drink  into 
the  teaching  of  that  gospel,  and  every  draught  shall  freshen  and  quicken  and 
establish  him  in  the  faith.     The  best  means  of  dealing  with  the  prevailing  spirit  of 
unbelief  is  not  controversial  defence ;  the  truth,  the  history,  the  doctrine,  is  its  own 
best  defence.    Rich  in  this  lore,  the  cunning  craftiness  of  men  will  assault  you  in 
vain.     Justified  by  this  learning,  you  will  meet  the  mightiest  attack  of  the  enemy 
uiunoved  as  the  stony  rock  when  it  receives  the  beat  of  ocean's  waves  and  breaks 
them  into  harmless  foam  that  only  laves  its  brow  and  makes  it  glisten  with  a 
brighter  radiance.    2.  Must  take  place  in  the  moral  and  spiritual  nature  of  the 
man.    We  may  increase  in  knowledge  without  any  corresponding  incresise  in 
virtue.    The  little  brook  that  babbles  as  it  runs,  when  it  has  reached  the  plain, 
grows  to  a  broad,  deep  river,  but  is  silent  in  its  onward  majestic  flow.    The  waves 
of  the  streamlet  only  glistened  in  the  light.     The  bosom  of  the  river  reflects  a 
heaven  upon  its  calm,  still  surface.    So  shall  the  soul  grow  in  its  love  for  God  and 
Christ,  its  blessed  experiences  of  mercy  and  grace.     Less  show  and  excitement, 
but  the  enjoyment  of  a  fuller  blessing,  a  richer  knowledge.     3.  Beaches  forth  into 
the  life,  and  controls  it.     At  first,  the  power  of  the  truth  was  intermittent,  partial ; 
but  as  the  confirming  went  on,  the  life  became  fuller  of  golden  deeds  of  a  Divine 
and  celestial  beauty.    The  altar  of  our  surrender  was  ever  builded  higher  and 
made  wider,  until  at  last  it  filled  all  the  space  of  life,  and  life  became  a  complete 
consecration.      III.  The  poweb  by  which  this  confiemation  shall  be  secobbd. 
It  is  a  Divine  work.    He  who  gave  the  foundation  of  our  faith  alone  can  establish 
us  in  it,  as  He  alone  will  crown  it  at  last.     It  is  quite  certain  that  we  can  do 
nothing  of  ourselves,  for  as  life  proceeds  we  learn  our  helplessness,  our  vanity. 
But  our  God  has  power  to  hold  us  up.      His  grace  is  limitless,  and  by  thia 
established,  we  shall  not  fail.     {LI,  D.  Bevan,  D.D.)        Establishing  grace  : — L 
Its  neobssitt.     II.  Its  boxjbce.     The  God  of  power.    III.  Its  means.    1.  The 


otur.  XVI.]  ROMANS.  775 

gospeL  2.  The  gospel  of  PauL  3.  The  gospel  preached.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
According  to  the  revelation  of  the  mystery. — The  world's  mystery  unfolded 
in  Christ : — I.  The  mystery.  The  word  "  mystery "  in  Scripture  implies  not 
necessarily  that  the  fact  or  Cruth  cannot  be  imderstood,  but  that  it  is  not 
known  except  as  revealed  from  God.  It  is  a  favourite  word  of  Paul's.  Except 
in  three  passages  of  the  Gospels  (Matt.  xiii.  11 ;  Mark  iv.  11 ;  Luke  viiL  10), 
and  four  places  in  the  Revelation  (Rev.  i.  20 ;  x.  7 ;  xvii.  5 ;  xvii.  7),  Paul  is 
the  only  writer  who  employs  the  word,  and  he  uses  it  twenty  times.  In  several  of 
these  cases  of  Pauline  usage,  the  term  refers  to  that  great  fact  of  the  universality  of 
the  gospel  (Eph.  iii.  6).  And  this  mystery  forms  one  of  the  great  subjects  of  this 
Epistle.  It  may  be  interesting  to  refer  to  some  of  the  passages  and  there  learn 
what  this  great  mystery  is  (chap.  i.  6,  6,  13,  15 ;  iii.  29 ;  iv.  11 ;  ix.  25,  26,  30 ; 
X.  11-13  ;  xi.  11,  30 ;  xv.  8-21).  The  mystery,  then,  is  the  universality  of  the 
gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  All  men  have  sinned.  But  all  men  may  be  saved  by  the 
free  and  sovereign  grace  of  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  This  was  the 
sublime  truth  which  Paul  desired  firmly  to  estabUsh  in  the  imperial  city  of  the 
world,  in  order  that  there  might  then  go  forth  to  all  mankind  a  power  greater 
than  that  of  Rome,  more  splendid  than  her  glory,  more  searching  than  her 
law,  more  victorious  than  her  legions,  and  which  should  abide  when  Rome 
should  have  crumbled  into  ruins.  This  mystery  has  been  revealed  to  you.  If  you 
have  received  it,  are  you  living  in  its  blessedness,  and  up  to  the  measure  of  the 
fulness  of  its  freedom  and  life  ?  IL  Its  concealment.  "  Which  was  kept  silent 
in  the  sonian  periods."  1.  The  past  ages  received  concerning  this  great  truth  no 
voice  from  the  Divine  silence.  Men  knew  nothing  of  this  gracious  scbeme  of 
salvation  for  the  universe.  (1)  The  Jew  did  not  know  it.  If  he  regarded  his  God 
as  also  the  creator  and  ruler  of  other  men,  they  at  least  bore  to  Him  some  inferior 
relation,  and  if  they  were  to  be  blessed  at  all,  it  was  to  be  by  and  through  the  law 
of  Moses.  (2)  The  Gentile  had  altogether  failed  to  gain  a  glimpse  of  it.  Each 
people  held  itself  to  be  autochthonous,  sprung  from  the  soil ;  all  the  rest  were 
strangers,  aliens,  slaves.  Humanity  was  unknown,  and  anything  like  a  moral 
dealing  with  the  individual  that  was  to  be  of  universal  application,  had  never  been 
hinted  at  in  the  whole  range  of  Gentile  philosophy  and  faith.  (3)  And  now  those 
who  have  not  themselves  accepted  this  gracious  mystery  in  practice  wholly  ignore 
the  idea  that  the  entire  human  race  is  dealt  with  in  ihe  atonement  of  Jesus,  and 
that  the  purpose  of  God  includes  that  whole  race  within  His  love  and  power.  Even 
within  the  Church,  how  few  fully  understand  or  obey  the  law  which  declares  that 
there  is  in  Jesus  Christ  neither  bond  nor  free,  &o.  2.  What  wisdom  may  we  not 
find,  yea,  what  grace,  in  the  concealment  of  this  truth !  The  world  had  to  be  and 
is  still  being  prepared  for  it.  All  those  denominationalisms  which  are  only  the 
Judaisms  of  the  modern  world,  and  the  patriotisms  which  at  best  are  but  pagan 
virtues,  are  nothing  but  the  concealment  of  the  truth  of  the  human  unity  in  Jesua 
Christ,  which  is  part  of  the  plan  of  God  when  He  will  perfect  the  society  of  man 
in  the  breaking  down  of  nationalities  and  ecclesiasticisms  in  a  world-wide  union. 
Happy  souls  who  catch  some  glimpses  of  this  bright  day  I  Happier  they  who  help 
on  its  coming,  and  make  this  their  gospel,  the  preaching  of  Jesus  Christ  according 
to  the  unveiling  of  the  mystery  whidi  in  the  past  ages  of  the  Divine  purpose  had 
not  been  uttered  unto  men.  IIL  Its  manifestation.  1.  The  mystery  was 
manifested  in  the  character  of  Christ.  While  our  Lord  was  a  Jew  and  was  careful 
of  all  Mosaic  ordinances,  yet  the  '*  enthusiasm  of  humanity"  glowed  within  Him. 
His  parables,  sermons,  conversations,  works  of  charity  and  power,  and  death,  are 
stamped  with  the  mark  of  human  nature,  and  have  in  them  not  a  trace  of  the 
Israelite.  He  predicts  the  fall  of  the  sacred  city,  affirms  the  universal  worship  of 
the  God  of  heaven,  and  points  with  sublime  assurance  to  the  fact  that  when  He 
has  been  crucified.  He  will  draw  all  men  unto  Him.  2.  And  the  history  of  the 
Church  reflects  the  quality  of  its  Master's  work.  At  first  baptized  with  a  spirit 
which  promised  a  universal  scope,  then  narrowing  down  to  the  dimensions  of  a  new 
Jewish  sect.  Divine  providence  compelled  it  to  pass  beyond  the  limits  within  which 
its  leaders  would  have  confined  it,  until  it  proved  itself  to  be  a  world-wide  Church, 
every  road  in  life  leading  to  its  sacred  courts.  3.  And  does  not  the  history  of  the 
Church  prove  this  in  every  succeeding  age?  What  nation  has  been  able  to  resist 
its  advance?  The  seed  of  the  kingdom  grows  in  every  soil.  Conclusion:  1.  In 
respect  of  the  inexplicable  and  perplexed  events  and  conditions  of  human  life  we 
have  only  to  await  the  Divine  time,  and  all  shall  be  made  clear.  2.  Learn  from 
thiB  mystery  the  measure  and  the  inspiration  of  our  preaching.    "  Accordiag  t« 


77ft  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

the  revelation  of  the  mystery."  For  every  man  is  the  mercy  obtained ;  to  every 
man  its  grace  offered.  3.  This  mystery  being  for  a  world,  awaits  your  acceptance. 
{LI.  D.  Bevan,  D.D.)  The  mystery  of  the  gospel : — ^The  gospel  is — L.  A 
UTSTEB's — ^long  kept  secret.  II.  A  mystery  beveajleo.  1.  By  the  prophets. 
2.  Apostles.  III.  A  mystery  revealed  by  the  comsiandment  of  God.  IV.  A  mystery 
revealed  by  the  commandment  of  God  to  all  nations.  V.  A  mystery  revealed  by 
the  commandment  of  God  to  all  nations  fob  the  obedience  of  faith.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D. ) 
And  by  the  Scriptures  of  the  prophets,  according  to  the  commandment  of  the 
everlasting  God,  made  known  to  all  nations  for  the  obedience  of  faith. — Th4 
universal  gospel : — 1.  Bevelation  is  perfected  in  promulgation.  That  which  has 
been  made  manifest  in  Jesus  Christ  is  to  be  made  known  by  the  Church  unto  all 
nations.  2.  The  means  of  this  information  is  the  Scriptures  of  the  prophets. 
Which  from  Eph.  iii.  3-6  we  must  not  limit  to  either  those  of  the  ancient  or  the 
later  dispensation.  The  later  Scriptures  supplement  and  expound  the  former,  and 
thus  come  to  the  obedience  of  faith.        I.  The  qosfel  as  a  scheme  of  univebsal 

SALVATION  IS  BEVEALED  IN   OBDEB  THAT  IT   MAT  BE   FOBLISHED   TO  ALL  HEN.      1.    God 

might  have  adopted  some  method  of  treatment  of  the  race  which  was  not  a 
matter  for  revelation.  There  must  be  a  great  part  of  the  Divine  system  of  the 
universe  which  deeply  affects  man  which,  perhaps,  he  never  will  and  never  can 
know.  Indeed,  very  much  of  the  physical  constitution  of  things,  by  which  the 
circumstances  of  our  daily  life  are  determined,  is  wholly  unknown  to  us.  We  find 
it  out  only  by  patient  observation  after  long  ignorance,  repeated  failure,  constant 
mistake.  The  system  of  nature  is  left  for  man  to  find  it  out  for  himself.  But  this  ii 
not  so  with  the  gospel.  It  must  be  made  known,  to  be  effective.  There  are  no 
esoteric  or  exoteric  doctrines  in  Christianity.  All  need  it,  all  may  receive  it ;  it 
must  be  made  known  to  all,  and  this  universal  knowledge  must  be  a  knowledge  of 
all  the  truth.  When  Jesus  was  revealed,  nothing  was  to  be  kept  back.  "  All  the 
truth,"  and  "  All  the  world "  are  the  twin  legends  of  His  revelation.  2.  Thus 
nothing  which  conceals  from  men  the  truth  or  seeks  to  produce  spiritual  effect 
other  Uian  by  the  influence  of  truth  clearly  apprehended,  can  be  in  harmony  with 
the  gospel.  Two  evils  are  contrary  to  this  clear  law  of  gospel  promulgation,  viz : 
the  sacrifice  of  intelligent  apprehension  to  mere  feeling  and  sentiment ;  and  the 
production  of  religious  ends  by  mechanical  services.  The  former  is  the  error  of  the 
fanatic,  the  latter  of  the  sacerdotalist.  II.  The  law  of  this  fbomuloation  is  the 
COMMANDMENT  OF  THE  Etebnal  God.  1.  We  might  Seek  for  illustrations  of  this 
command  in  the  words  of  Christ,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,"  &c,  or  in  His  appoint- 
ment of  those  who  should  be  "  witnesses  unto  Him,"  &o.  (Acts.  i.  8),  or  in  the 
vision  of  Peter,  or  in  the  word  to  Ananias  concerning  Saul,  or  to  any  other  of  those 
direct  appointments  of  the  gospel  ministry  in  its  relation  to  the  entire  race.  But 
we  prefer  to  understand  by  the  "  command  of  the  eternal  God  "  that  everlasting 
purpose  which  lay  at  the  base  of  the  methods  of  the  Divine  procedure.  Any  con- 
ception  of  the  gospel  which  is  less  than  this,  must  necessarily  be  incomplete. 
Creation  lies  in  the  bosom  of  redemption.  Salvation  by  Christ  is  not  a  mere  scene 
enacted  as  part  of  a  vast  drama  upon  the  theatre  of  time  and  nature.  The  world, 
with  all  its  physical  characteristics,  &o.,  its  human  story  are  but  episodes  in  vast 
movements  and  evolutions  of  salvation.  2.  Science  boasts  that  it  has  relegated  the 
earth  and  all  earthly  things  to  their  proper  place  as  very  minor  items  in  the 
universe  of  being.  But  such  science  forgets  that,  after  all,  its  universe  must  be  a 
universe  which  thought  transcends.  I  can,  in  imagination,  pass  beyond  the  utmost 
limits  of  your  natural  universe,  and  I  can  rise  to  a  height  of  moral  being,  beyond 
the  uttermost  reach  even  of  my  thought.  Thus,  vast  though  the  universe  may  be, 
I  am  greater  even  than  all  the  worlds,  and  it  is  with  this  range  of  being  that  the 
eternal  God  is  concerned  in  the  redemption  of  Jesus  Christ.  Hence,  the  consum- 
mation of  the  spiritual  ends  of  the  Divine  purpose  is  the  only  infinite.  It  is  this 
that  circumscribes  the  universe.  It  is  this  that  antedates  creation.  3.  The 
gospel  is  thus  no  expedient  put  in  to  prop  the  falling  race,  the  temporal  cure  of  an 
accidental  injury  to  man.  The  salvation  of  the  entire  race  of  man  is  part  of  that 
universal  gathering  of  all  things  into  one  in  Christ  which  has  been  the  everlasting 
purpose  of  God's  almighty  will.  Upon  this  ocean  of  eternal  will,  time  and  being 
float,  as  the  barques  which  the  waves  lift  and  the  currents  bear.  And,  as  a  part  of 
this  commandment  of  the  eternal  God,  the  mystery  is  revealed  and  made  known 
unto  all  nations.  4.  If  this  be  so,  with  what  calm  equanimity  shall  we  not  regard 
the  phases  through  which  the  Divine  designs  move  on  to  their  accomplishment. 
We  see  the  world  in  its  apostacy,  overwhelmed  by  a  flood,  and  threatened  with 


CHAP,  xvl]  ROMANS.  777 

complete  destruction.  Over  the  raging  of  that  catastrophe  moves  the  oalm  purpose 
of  the  eternal  God.  We  behold  patriarchal  ages  when  one  family,  and  it  but  feebly, 
maintained  the  pare  faith.  Ho^  the  flame  flickers ;  but  we  know  the  eternal  God 
is  overhead,  and  His  purposes  depend  not  upon  the  choice  and  fleeting  life  and 
character  of  man.  It  is  the  time  of  the  Mosaic  economy,  and  one  people  is  chosen, 
one  family  is  priestly,  one  land  alone  has  received  the  light  of  God's  revealed  grace ; 
and  we  are  affronted  by  its  idolatry  and  sin.  Shall  we  fear  for  the  outcome  T  Not 
at  all.  The  purposes  of  God  are  ripening  fast,  and  millenniums  are  only  the 
moments  of  ttie  Eternal.  And  so  of  our  own  age  and  time.  Perchance  we  lift  the 
old  lament  or  mocking  cry  ;  "  The  fathers,  where  are  they?  "  Ac.  Lift  up  your  eyes 
and  see  the  clear,  calm  stars  of  an  eternal  purpose.  The  tempest  reaches  but  a  few 
fathoms  below  the  surface,  and  the  waves  that  strew  the  ocean  with  wrecks  are 
only  ripples  in  the  mighty  currents  that  roll  unceasing  i^  the  sovereign  will  of  God. 
The  gospel  is  His ;  its  proclamation  is  His  command.  And  when  the  eternal 
throne  crumbles  into  ruin,  then,  and  then  only,  shall  the  evangel  of  God's  grace 
and  Christ's  redemption  be  an  empty  sound.    HI.  Tms  Divine  pubpose  of  the 

PBOMTTLOATION   OF     THE   QOSPEL   HAS  BEEN   MADE   KNOWN     BT    THE     UTTEBANOES    OF     A 

CONTINUBD  sEBiES  OF  iNSPiBED  PBBS0N8.  There  has  ever  been  a  witness  amongst 
men,  the  sum  of  whose  testimony  has  been  to  make  known  to  all  nations  the 
mystery  of  a  universal  salvation.  A  Divine  purpose  has  ever  been  accompanied  by 
a  prophetic  word.  IV.  The  xjiiTiMATE  end  of  this  pdblishinq  of  the  mtstebx 
IS  THE  OBEDIENCE  OF  FAITH  AMONO  ALL  NATIONS.  1.  Paul  here  letums  to  the 
opening  ideas  and  expressions  of  the  Epistle,  one  of  which  is  the  "  obedience  of 
faith."  By  this,  some  understand  that  obedience  which  springs  from  faith.  But 
this  does  not  seem  altogether  to  suit  the  word  as  it  is  used  in  the  first  passage. 
Others  give  to  faith  the  meaning  of  "  the  Christian  truth  " — a  signification  which 
belongs  to  the  word  in  the  later  usage  of  the  Church  and  not  in  the  New  Testament. 
Is  it  not  rather  that  obedience  which  counts  as  faith  itself,  that  yielding  of  the 
heart  and  the  will  to  the  revelations  of  God  which  is  the  ground  of  justification  on 
its  human  side  ?  (chap.  x.  3).  To  accept  the  grace,  to  believe  in  God  through 
Jesus  Christ,  is  to  render  the  obedience  of  faith.  This,  then,  is  the  object  which  is 
Bought  by  the  divulging  of  the  mystery.  2.  The  end,  then,  of  an  apostolic  ministry 
is  more  than  a  mere  testimony.  Some  have  held  that  the  gospel  is  only  a  test, 
whereby  the  elect  and  non-elect  are  discovered.  Men  say,  on  the  one  hand,  We 
have  preached  the  truth,  the  hearer  must  take  the  responsibility.  On  the  other 
hand,  men  say.  We  have  heard  the  truth ;  it  does  not  compel  our  faith ;  it  cannot 
be  for  us.  Now,  to  both  of  these  Paul  says,  "  Made  known  to  all  nations  for  the 
obedience  of  faith."  Shall  we  dare  to  rest  content  that  we  have  spoken  even  the 
whole  of  the  Divine  grace,  and  not  seek  by  every  means  in  our  power  to  induce 
men  to  obey  ?  How  is  it  with  you  who  have  believed  ?  Are  you  content  with  a 
world  still  disobedient,  with  your  city  full  of  the  faithless,  with  your  homes,  your 
very  pews,  occupied  by  those  who  resist  the  gospel  ?  And  what  shall  I  say  to  you 
who  hear  and  refuse?  Yoo  heap  judgment  on  yourselves.  There  is  no  hope 
but  in  the  gospel.  If  you  do  not  obey,  with  faith  in  God's  way  of  salvation,  there 
is  nothing  for  you  in  this  world  but  disappointment,  and  in  the  world  to  come 
eternal  death.  3.  The  promulgation  of  the  gospel  is  not  merely  that  men  may 
know ;  the  object  of  its  being  known  is  the  obedience  of  faith.  Will  you  believe  ? 
Then  you  take  Jesus  Christ  not  only  as  your  atonement,  but  as  your  Lord,  your 
pattern,  your  rule,  your  guide.  (LI.  JD.  Bevan,  D.D.)  To  God  only  wise 
tM  glory  through  Jesus  Christ  for  ever.  —  The  universal  doxology  :—Ji  you 
consult  the  Eevised  Version,  you  will  there  find  the  accurate  reproduction 
of  the  Greek  words,  "  to  the  only  wise  God,  through  Jesus  Christ,  to 
whom  be  the  glory  for  ever."  The  words,  "  through  Jesus  Christ,"  and  the 
place  of  the  words  "  be  the  glory  "  at  the  end  of  the  passage,  furnish  at  once  the 
representation  of  the  original.  It  is  clear  that  after  the  lengthened  construction 
of  the  twenty-fifth  and  twenty-sixth  verses,  the  apostle  intends  by  the  words,  "  to 
the  only  wise  God,"  to  complete  and  explain  the  pronoun  "  to  Him,"  with  which 
the  whole  passage  commences.  So  far  it  is  clear.  Then  comes  the  expression, 
•'tiirough  Jesus  Christ,"  understood  by  some  to  be  the  instrument  through  whom 
the  glory  is  given,  and  by  others  the  person  by  whom  God  is  the  only  wise.  Neither 
of  these  interpretations  perfectly  contents  me.  Have  we  not  the  true  parallel  to 
this  passage  in  the  words  of  St.  Paul  to  the  elders  at  Ephesus :  "  And  now  brethren, 
I  commend  you  to  God  and  to  the  word  of  His  grace  who  is  able  to  hold  you  up." 
The  idea  is  not  altogether  foreign  from  that  of  establishing  which  we  have  in  the 
YOU  n.  60 


778  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  xn. 

passage.  Would  not  such  a  prayer  more  naturally  find  its  place  at  the  end  of  th« 
Epistle  than  even  a  doxology,  the  latter  being  generally  more  incorporated  into  the 
very  substance  of  the  letter  itself  ?  Might  not  this  be  one  of  the  prayers  to  which 
Paul  refers  in  the  opening  words  of  the  Epistle  (ver.  i.  9) — prayers,  the  end  of  which 
was  this  very  establishing  of  his  correspondents?  Then  the  phrase  "  through  Jesus 
Christ "  is  natural  and  appropriate,  the  entire  construction  of  the  clause  easy  and 
unbroken,  the  concluding  relative  fittingly  introduced,  referring  to  Jesus  Christ 
just  mentioned,  the  ascription  of  glory  to  Him  being  quite  in  harmony  with  other 
such  ascriptions,  found  in  other  portions  of  the  apostle's  writings.  We  shall  there- 
fore base  our  discourse  upon  the  passage  viewed  as  a  combined  prayer  and  doxology, 
as  if  the  words  ran,  "  To  the  only  wise  God  do  I  look  for  aid  and  blessing  upon  you, 
through  Jesus  Christ,  to  whom  be  the  glory  of  the  eternal  ages.     Amen."    I.  The 

CONSIDERATION  OF  THE  GOSPEL  AS  A  SCHEME  OF  UNIVERSAL  SALVATION,  NATDRALLT 
DIRECTS  THE  ATTENTION  OF  THE   DEVOUT   AND   EARNEST  HEART  TOWARDS  THE  ONLY  WISH 

God.  Christianity,  though  rich  in  its  ideas,  is  also  always  a  practical  and  an 
efficient  system.  It  is  not  the  parent  of  dreams,  it  is  not  a  mere  poet.  It  presents 
the  dream  only  as  the  token  of  what  it  will  produce.  It  chants  its  sublime  rhapsodies 
only  as  preludes  of  what  shall  be  the  song  of  triumph  when  its  redeeming,  its  new 
creating  work,  is  done.  Thus,  is  it  an  ideal  man  that  it  would  paint  ?  It  manifests 
Him  and  makes  us  touch  Him,  and  hear  Him,  and  walk  with  Him,  and  live  in  the 
light  of  His  beauty  and  perfectness,  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ.  Or  is  it  a  Divine 
power  which,  it  declares,  man  needs?  This  power  it  gives  to  man.  The  Holy  Ghost 
is  shed  abroad.  The  Comforter  has  come,  and  has  abided  for  all  the  past  years, 
and  throughout  all  the  world  He  is  now  dwelling  as  a  real  and  actual  strength  and 
grace  and  life  among  the  saints.  So  with  this  conception  of  the  perfected  and 
glorified  Church  of  the  redeemed :  the  race  restored  and  made  one  not  only  with 
itself  but  with  its  God  and  Governor,  its  Lord  and  Buler.  It  is  the  gospel  of  Jesua 
Shrist  which  supplies  the  conception.  Nowhere  else  has  the  grand  vision  been  dis- 
played. II.  Such  turning  of  the  heart  God  wards  demands  the  mediaiion  o» 
Jesus  Christ,  not  only  as  the  means  of  finding  God,  but  also  as  the  instrument 
THROUGH  WHOM  GoD  WILL  BESTOW  ALL  GRACE.  Two  attributes  that  necessarily  are 
involved  in  this  mystery  of  a  world's  salvation  are  clearly  displayed.  The  one  is 
power  and  the  other  love.  All  natural  reasoning  upon  the  state  of  man  and  hia 
relation  to  God  would  lead  us  to  conclude  that  the  only  possible  end  of  human  life 
must  be  everlasting  destruction  and  eternal  loss.  All  that  we  can  see  is  the  law 
and  the  sin.  Man  needs  no  revelation  to  make  this  plain.  But  the  gospel  declares 
that  man  can  be  rescued,  and  rescued  without  any  loss  of  the  dignity  of  law,  with- 
out any  lessening  of  the  sanction  and  obligations  of  moral  duty.  This  is  done  by 
a  sacrifice  on  the  part  of  God,  not  of  the  law,  but  of  Himself,  at  a  vast  cost  of 
Buffering  and  shame,  and  weakness  and  death,  all  borne  in  the  person  of  Jesus 
Christ.  What  is  tbis,  then,  but  the  wisdom  which  we  have  seen  God  alone 
possesses  in  the  fashion  and  guise  of  love?  Nay,  it  is  love  itself.  And  all  so 
necessarily  and  inherently  Divine,  that  the  love  becomes  a  showing  of  that  very 
being  of  God  which  is  Love.  But  this  thought  of  a  world's  salvation  that  leads  as 
to  our  God  is  not  only  a  thought  of  love,  but  also  a  thought  of  power.  To  bring  it 
about  will  need  a  strength  far  beyond  any  wielded  by  a  human  arm.    HI.  The 

CONCLUSION  OF  THIS   GoDWARD  ASPECT  WILL  BE  THE  ASCRIPTION  OF  ETERNAL  GLORY  TO 

THE  Author  of  this  salvation.  This  glory  is  ascribed  to  the  God  of  salvation  by 
the  conscious  and  uttered  praises  of  the  redeemed.  How  wonderful  is  that  song  of 
praise  which  ever  ascends  to  the  eternal  throne  1  And  what  will  be  the  ascription 
of  glory  when  earth  is  exchanged  for  heaven,  and  the  curtains  of  the  eternal  world 
are  withdrawn,  and  the  redeemed  race  has  entered  into  its  promised  inheritance  of 
bliss !  But  the  glory  that  will  be  rendered  to  the  Author  of  our  salvation  will  not 
be  the  mere  ascription  of  praise  from  the  assembled  myriads  of  the  redeemed ;  it  is 
to  be  found  also  in  the  very  nature  and  character  of  the  salvation  itself.  You  all 
remember  how  the  architect  of  St.  Paul's  Cathedral  has  no  tomb  or  sculptured 
monument,  to  bear  his  name  and  tell  the  story  of  his  skill  in  carven  effigy,  or  cut 
npon  the  lasting  brass.  A  brief  inscription  over  the  entrance  of  the  cathedral 
gives  his  name,  and  then  bids  yon  "  if  you  seek  his  monument  to  look  around." 
And  such  as  this  is  the  true  ascription  of  glory  to  the  Lord.  It  is  not  the  mere 
voices  of  the  angels ;  it  is  their  hosts  themselves,  kept  in  their  places,  holden  in 
their  high,  unfallen  blessedness.  It  is  not  the  cry  of  jubilant  triumph  from  the 
creation  of  life ;  it  is  that  very  creation  itself,  in  its  being,  in  its  growth,  in  its 
perfectness,  made  by  His  word,  sustained  by  His  power,  completed  for  the  great 


emir,  xvt.]  ROMANS.  779 

parpoBes  of  His  changeless  will.  lY.  Thb  pbateb  aitd  dozoloot  of  teb  eabnbbt 
Cbbistiai?  wobeham  will  beceitie  the  accobdant  acclaim  07  THE  UNITEB8B.  The 
word  Amen  is  used  as  the  expression  of  agreement,  of  consent,  of  assurance,  of 
certainty.  The  doxology  uttered  by  St.  Paul  is  such  as  all  will  unite  in.  The 
prayer,  the  commending  to  God,  the  giving  of  glory,  are  the  consentaneous 
expressions  of  all  who  may  catch  the  ideas  and  hear  the  words.  1.  It  is  the  consent 
of  wonder.  All  will  marvel  at  the  great  achievement  of  God  and  His  Christ.  In 
Bwe  and  reverence  profound  the  universe  shall  cry,  "Amen."  2.  It  is  the 
consent  of  delight.  Throughout  the  universe  of  spiritual  being,  then  freely 
traversed  by  the  purified  minds,  all  parts  being  in  harmony,  a  communication 
opened  up  between  all  spheres,  the  delight  shall  spread  when  the  glory  of  God 
Bhall  be  seen  in  the  heavens.  3.  It  is  the  consent  of  approval.  God's  right  to 
judge  will  be  recognised,  and  His  higher  right  to  save  wiU  be  equally  assured. 
Splendid  will  be  the  state  of  heaven ;  high  will  be  the  joys  of  that  serene  condition. 
But  chief  of  all,  men  and  angels  will  perceive  the  justice  and  the  righteousness  of 
that  salvation  which  the  human  race  shall  gain.  4.  Then  finally,  this  consent  shall 
be  the  consent  of  all.  Not  a  single  spirit  in  the  entire  universe  shall  hold  back  its 
acclaim.  All  men  who  shall  be  saved  must  surely  join  in  the  '•  Amen."  It  will  be 
Impossible  that  any  of  the  redeemed  will  be  silent.  {Ibid.)  God  only  wise : — In  the 
beginning  of  the  doxology  he  praises  God's  power,  and  at  its  close  His  wisdom.  God 
also  is  the  only  wise  in  the  sense  that  in  the  scheme  of  salvation  He  acted  without 
counsel  from  any,  and  in  a  method  which  none  other  could  have  devised.  Ha 
wrought  the  best  ends  by  the  best  means.  He  solved  problems  which  never  other- 
wise could  have  been  solved.  He  removed  barriers  which  He  alone  could  remove. 
He  reconciled  contradictions  which  were  incapable  of  reconciliation,  except  by 
Divine  knowledge.  He  effected  a  scheme  of  redemption  which  is  simple  in  itself, 
adapted  to  man  everywhere,  and  which  is  of  such  a  nature  as  to  attract  all  who 
have  minds  to  think  and  hearts  to  feel.  He  caused  "  mercy  and  truth  to  meet 
together."  He  broke  down  all  partition  walls  which  existed  between  Himself  and 
the  sinner,  and  between  Jew  and  GentUe.  He  united  the  claims  of  justice  and 
purity  with  the  pleadings  of  love  and  grace.  In  redemption,  even  more  than  in 
creation,  we  adore  "the  manifold  wisdom  of  God,"  and  behold  Him  as  One  who 
has  no  second,  but  stands  alone  in  His  glory,  infinitely  removed  from  all  His 
creatures  in  heaven  and  earth.  (C.  Neil,  M.A.)  Ood's  wisdom: — I.  What 
WISDOM  IS.  It  consists  in — 1.  Acting  for  a  right  end.  2.  Observing  all  circum- 
Btances  for  action.  3.  Willing  and  acting  according  to  the  right  reason  and 
judgment  of  things.  Wisdom  and  knowledge  are  two  distinct  perfections.  Know- 
ledge hath  its  seat  in  the  speculative  understanding,  wisdom  in  the  practical.  II. 
SoMK  PBOPOsmoNS  IN  GENEBAL  coNCEBNiNQ  THE  WISDOM  OF  GoD.  1.  There  is  an 
essential  and  a  personal  wisdom  of  God.  The  essential  wisdom  is  the  essence  of 
God,  the  personal  wisdom  is  the  Son  of  God  (Luke  vii.  35 ;  1  Cor.  i.  24).  2.  It  is 
Dot  a  habit  added  to  Ood's  essence,  as  it  is  in  man,  but  it  is  His  essence.  It  is  like 
the  splendour  of  the  sun,  the  same  with  the  sun  itself.  3.  It  is  the  property  of  God 
alone.  He  is  only  wise.  (1)  Necessarily.  He  cannot  but  contrive  counsels,  and 
exert  operations  becoming  the  greatness  of  His  nature.  (2)  Originally.  Men 
acquire  wisdom ;  God  goes  not  out  of  Himself  to  search  it  (chap.  xi.  34 ;  Isa.  xl.  14), 
(3)  Perfectly.  There  is  no  cloud  upon  His  understanding.  (4)  Universally.  Wis- 
dom in  one  man  is  of  one  sort,  in  another  of  another  sort.  But  God  hath  an 
nniversal  wisdom.  His  executions  are  as  wise  as  His  contrivances.  (5)  Per- 
petually. The  wisdom  of  man  is  got  by  instruction  and  lost  by  dotage.  But  "  the 
Ancient  of  days  "  is  an  unchangeable  possessor  of  it  (Job.  xii.  13  ;  Psa.  xxxiii.  11). 
(6)  Incomprehensibly  (Psa.  xcii.  5 ;  Eom.  xi.  33).  (7)  Infallibly.  The  wisest  men 
often  design  and  fail ;  God  never  fails  of  anything  He  aims  at  (Isa.  Iv.  11 ;  ProT. 
xxi.  30).  in.  The  pboofs  of  God's  wisdom.  1.  God  could  not  be  infinitely  perfect 
without  wisdom.  All  the  other  perfections  of  God  without  this  would  be  as  a  body 
without  an  eye,  a  soul  without  understanding.  God,  being  the  first  Being,  pos- 
sesses whatsoever  is  most  noble  in  any  being.  2.  Without  infinite  wisdom  He 
could  not  govern  the  world.  He  could  not  be  an  universal  governor  without  a 
nniverBal  wisdom ;  nor  the  sole  governor  without  an  inimitable  wisdom ;  not  an 
independent  governor  without  an  original  and  independent  wisdom ;  nor  a  per- 
petual governor  without  an  incorruptible  wisdom.  3.  The  creatures  working  for 
an  end,  without  their  own  knowledge,  demonstrates  the  wisdom  of  God  that  guides 
them.  As  there  was  some  prime  cause,  which  by  His  power  inspired  them  with 
their  several  instincts,  so  there  must  be  some  supreme  wisdom  which  moves  and 


780  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  eHA».  m. 

gnides  them  to  their  end.  4.  Ood  is  the  fountain  of  all  wisdom  in  the  oreatares, 
and  therefore  is  infinitely  wise  Himself.  As  He  hath  a  fulness  of  being  in  Himself, 
because  the  streams  of  being  are  derived  to  other  things  from  Him,  ao  He  hath  a  ful- 
ness of  wisdom,  because  He  is  the  spring  of  wisdom  to  angels  and  men  (Job.  zzxii. 
8;  Dan.  ii.  21).  lY.  Whebeim  it  apfeabs.  1.  In  creation.  As  in  a  musical 
instrument  there  is  first  the  skill  of  the  workman  in  the  frama,  then  the  skill  of  the 
musician  in  stringing  it  proper  for  such  musical  notes  as  he  will  express  upon  it, 
and  after  that  the  tempering  of  the  strings,  by  various  stops,  to  a  delightful 
harmony,  so  is  the  wisdom  of  God  seen  in  framing  the  world,  then  in  tuning  it, 
and  afterwards  in  the  motion  of  the  several  creatures  (Psa.  civ.  24 ;  Prov.  iii.  19 ; 
Jer.  X,  12).  This  wisdom  of  the  creation  appears  in — (1)  Its  variety  (Psa.  civ.  24). 
(2)  Its  beauty  and  order,  and  in  the  situation  of  the  several  creatures  (Eccles.  iii. 
11).  (3)  The  fitness  of  everything  for  its  end,  and  the  usefulness  of  it.  Divine 
wisdom  is  more  illustrious  in  this  than  in  the  composure  of  the  distinct  parts,  as  the 
artificer's  skill  is  more  eminent  in  fitting  the  wheels,  and  setting  them  in  order  for 
their  due  motion,  than  in  the  external  fabric  of  the  materials  which  compose  the 
clock.  (4)  The  linking  all  these  useful  parts  together,  so  that  one  is  subordinate 
to  the  other  for  a  common  end.  2.  In  His  government  of  man — (1)  As  a  rational 
creature,  (a)  In  the  law  He  gives  to  man,  which  is  suited  to  his  nature,  happiness 
and  conscience,  {b)  In  the  various  incUnations  and  conditions  of  men.  Some 
are  inspired  with  a  particular  genius  for  one  art,  some  for  another.  The  rich  have 
as  much  need  of  the  poor  as  the  poor  have  of  the  rich.  (2)  As  fallen  and  sinfuL 
God's  wisdom  is  seen  in — (a)  The  bounding  of  sin  (Psa.  Ixxvi.  10).  (6)  The  bring- 
ing glory  to  Himself  out  of  sin.  (c)  Bringing  good  to  the  creature  out  of  sin.  The 
redemption  of  man  in  so  excellent  a  way  was  drawn  from  the  occasion  of  sin.  The 
devil  inspired  man  to  content  his  own  fury  in  the  death  of  Christ,  and  God  ordered 
it  to  accomplish  His  own  design  of  redemption.  The  sins  and  corruptions  remain- 
ing in  the  heart  of  a  man,  God  orders  for  good,  and  there  are  good  effects  by  the 
direction  of  His  wisdom  and  grace.  (3)  As  converted  (Eph.  i.  11,  12).  Divine 
wisdom  appears — (a)  In  the  subjects  of  conversion.  Who  will  question  the  skill 
that  alters  jet  into  crystal,  a  glow-worm  into  a  star,  a  lion  into  a  lamb,  and  a  swine 
into  a  dove  ?  (&)  In  the  seasons  of  conversion.  The  prudence  of  man  consists  in  the 
timing  the  execution  of  his  counsels ;  and  no  less  doth  the  wisdom  of  God  consist  in 
this,  (c)  In  the  manner  of  conversion.  So  great  a  change  God  makes,  not  by  a  destruc- 
tion, but  with  a  preservation  of,  and  suitableness  to,  nature,  (d)  In  His  discipline. 
8.  In  redemption.  The  wisdom  of  God  is  seen  here — (1)  In  that  the  greatest  different 
interests  are  reconciled,  justice  in  punishing  and  mercy  in  pardoning  (chap.  iii.  24, 
25).  (2)  In  selecting  the  fittest  person  for  this  work.  He  by  whom  God  created 
the  world  was  most  conveniently  employed  in  restoring  it  (Heb.  i.  2).  He  was  the 
light  of  men  in  creation  (John  i.  4),  and  therefore  it  was  most  reasonable  He  should 
be  the  light  of  men  in  redemption.  Who  fitter  to  reform  the  Divine  image  than 
He  that  first  formed  it  ?  Who  fitter  to  speak  for  us  to  God  than  He  who  was  the 
Word  ?  (John  i.  1).  (3)  In  the  two  natures  of  Christ,  whereby  this  redemption 
was  accomplished.  This  union  was  the  foundation  of  the  union  of  God  and  the 
fallen  creature.  He  had  a  nature  whereby  to  suffer  for  us,  and  a  nature  whereby 
to  be  meritorious  in  those  sufferings.  (4)  In  manifesting  two  contrary  affections 
at  the  same  time,  and  in  one  act :  the  greatest  hatred  of  sin,  and  the  greatest  love 
to  the  sinner.  (5)  In  overturning  the  devil's  empire  by  the  nature  He  had  van- 
quished, and  by  ways  quite  contrary  to  what  that  malicious  spirit  could  imagine. 
(6)  In  giving  us  this  way  the  surest  ground  of  comfort,  and  the  strongest  incentive 
to  obedience.  The  rebel  is  reconciled,  and  the  rebellion  shamed  ;  God  is  propiti- 
ated and  the  sinner  sanctified  by  the  same  blood.  (7)  In  the  condition  He  hath 
settled  for  the  enjoying  the  fruits  of  redemption ;  and  this  is  faith,  a  wise  and 
reasonable  condition,  and  the  concomitants  of  it.  (8)  In  the  manner  of  the  pub- 
lishing and  propagating  this  doctrine  of  redemption,  (o)  In  the  gradual  diacoTeries 
of  it.  (6)  In  using  all  proper  means  to  render  the  belief  of  it  easy,  (c)  In  th« 
iiuriraments  He  emplojed  in  th«  pablishing  it.    (5.  Charnock,  BJ).) 


Date  Due 


i>* 


2  1  '39 


Ag  g  Q  ^iO 


4sr^ 


$^-      '45yaMJi«fc 


„Mu.-rimnWj»^j. 


m  z^ 


immmmmmm 


fE9    '53 


P-9 


