











The Library 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 


WEST FOOTHILL AT COLLEGE AVENUE 
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA 





Feo aes Lt 0, 
Cee: ise \ 


\\ 





THE EPISTLE TO THE PHILIPPIANS 


THE 
“R.T.S.” DEVOTIONAL COMMENTARY 


every volume of which is primarily and distinctly a 
devotional volume, now consists of over 40 volumes, 
representing both the Old and New Testaments. The 
authors include such able and competent writers as 
the Rt. Rev. H. C. G. Moule, Bishop of Durham ; 
Canon Dawson-Walker, D.D.; the Rev, T. W. Gilbert, 
D.D.; the Rev. Dr. Griffith Thomas; the Rev. Dr. 
J. D. Jones (of Bournemouth); the Revs. J. M. E. Ross, 
M.A. ; Dr. Charles Brown; Dr. W. H. Rigg, and others. 

The R,T.S. is now actively engaged in completing 
this series, under the editorship of the Rev. C. H. Irwin, 
D.D.; and a complete list, giving particulars of the 
volumes already published, as well as those in prepara- 
tion, will gladly be sent, post free, on application. 


THE RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY 
4 BOUVERIE STREET, LONDON, E.C.4 


THE EPISTLE TO THE 
PHILIPPIANS 


(A DEVOTIONAL COMMENTARY ) 


By 
Rev. F. B. MEYER, B.A. 
nt 


SIXTH IMPRESSION 


@ 


LONDON 
THE RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY 
4 BOUVERIE STREET, E.C.4 


Theology Library 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 
Califernia 


First Edition June 1905 

Second Impression July 1905 
Third Impression April 1906 
Fourth Impression December 1912 
Fifth Impression September 1921 
Sixth Impression August 1929 


Made in Great Britain 


PREFACE 


In this Devotional Commentary on the Epistle to 
the Philippians, I have not attempted anything of 
the merely critical or exegetical; but have en- 
deavoured honestly to ascertain the meaning of the 
Apostle, and to beat out his pure and unalloyed 
gold. 

The most amazing thing which meets one per- 
petually in the prolonged and deep study of such a 
treatise as this, is that those early believers should 
have been able to appreciate and digest such 
compressed and profound teaching. When we bear 
in mind all the explanation, expansion, application, 


‘~and enforcement which these apostolic paragraphs 


“have received in the course of the centuries, and 
.when, after we have dene our best, we are still 
conscious that we have by no means plumbed the 
depths, or scaled the heights, or explored all the 
treasures, we are compelled to feel that the Divine 
- Fire is burning here, and to take off the shoes from 


“our feet in acknowledgment that in a pre-eminent 


_-manner, God is here. Every blue crevasse, every far 

horizon, every glimpse into a perfect human love, and 
every word of God has the same characteristic of 
Infinity. 
; 5 


Preface 


To Dr Moule, the Bishop of Durham, to my friend, 
Dr Noble, of Chicago, and to Dr Campbell Morgan, 
for suggestions, which I have wrought into the seventh 
chapter (pp. 63-71), I desire to express my deep 
obligations. 

It seems to me, if I may be allowed to say so, 
that this Book, more completely than any single 
one besides, contains the essence of the messages 
with which I have been entrusted. 

That the Infinite Spirit who inspired may, by 
manifesting the Truth, unfold the deep things of God 
to all who peruse these pages is the sincere desire 
and prayer of the author. 

F. B. Meyer. 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 
PREFACE , ‘ - ; : 5 2 5 


CHAPTER I. 1, 2. 
THE VESTIBULE OF THE EPISTLE . : . 11 


CHAPTER I. 3, 4. 
PRAYER AND INTERCESSION . - A ° 18 


CHAPTER I. 5-11. 
GROUNDS AND PURPOSES OF PRAYER > ; 26 


CHAPTER I. 12-18. 
Tur FURTHERANCE OF THE GOSPEL : : 33 


CHAPTER I. 19, 20. 
Goop out oF EVIL . e = : : 43 


CHAPTER I. 21-26, 


WHETHER TO LIVE OR TO DIE! = F ; 52 


CHAPTER I. 27-30. 


Toe MANNER OF LIFE WHICH BECOMES THE 
GOSPEL 5 A r ‘ : 5 63 


CHAPTER II. 1-4. 


Tur ENTWINING OF CHRISTIAN HEARTS , i 72 


Contents 


PAGE 


CHAPTER Il. 5-8. 


He Emptiep HIMSELF . f ' > F 81 


CHAPTER II. 9-11. 


THE NAME oF NAMES . : : ; ; 92 


CHAPTER II. 12, 13, 
Tur DIvINE ENERGY IN THE HEART ‘ ae 202 


CHAPTER II. 14-16. 
StTaRs TO SHINE: VOICES TO SPEAK 5 ve bk: 


CHAPTER It.. 17, 18. 
THE SACRIFICIAL SIDE OF THE CHRISTIAN LIFE 121 


CHAPTER II. 19-30, 
Not SorRow UPON SORROW . - 3 a «128 


CHAPTER III, 1-3. 


THE TRUE CIRCUMCISION 5 ' : , kD 


CHAPTER III. 4-9. 
SELLING ALL TO BUY THE PEARL . 2 ° 6260 


CHAPTER III. 10, 11. 
THE SoUL’s QuEST - . : . . 160 


CHAPTER III. 12. 
APPREHENDED TO APPREHEND : - a 170 


8 


Contents 


CHAPTER ITI. 18, 14. 


ONWARDS AND UPWARDS i : : 


CHAPTER III. 15, 16. 


THE ATTAINMENTS OF THE CHRISTIAN LIFE 


CHAPTER III. 17-21. 


BuURGESSES OF HEAVEN : 5 2 


CHAPTER IV. 1-6. 
THE LORD IS AT HAND : 5 ® 


CHAPTER IV. 7. 


THE SENTINEL OF THE HEART ° e 


CHAPTER IV. 8, 9. 


THE GOVERNMENT OF OUR THOUGHTS e 


CHAPTER IV. 10-13. 


ALL THINGS ARE POSSIBLE TO Him THAT BE- 


LIEVETH : : Z 
CHAPTER IV. 14-20. 
FILLING AND FILLED . ‘ ; . 
CHAPTER IV. 21-23. 
CLOSING SALUTATIONS . ° . ‘ 


PAGE 


177 


186 


197 


207 


216 


229 


247 


257 





I 


THE VESTIBULE OF THE 
EPISTLE 


PHIL. t. 1, 2 


Pavu and Timotheus, the servants of Jesus Christ, to all the 
saints in Christ Jesus which are at Philippi, with the bishops and 
deacons : 

Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our Father, and from 
the Lord Jesus Christ. 


Tus is the tenderest_of all the Epistles. There is Phil. i. 


no chiding or rebuke. It is suffused throughout } 2 
with words of good cheer, of j joy and peace, though 
it was written in bonds to which the Apostle makes 
frequent reference (i. 7, 13, 14, 16). There is no 
trace of despondency or loom, and though sent 
to a Church which he had not seen for five or six 
years, there appeared no necessity for those strictures 
and reproofs with which the other Epistles are filled. . 


If, as is supposed, this Epistle was written at the Date and 
Occasion of 


beginning of Paul's imprisonment in Rome, we must (0 Boise, 
assign to it the date A.D. 62. It is the beginning of 
the precious prison literature of the Church which is 
amongst our greatest treasures. It was a persecuted 
Apostle writing to a persecuted Church, but his 
soul was unfettered and unchoked by prison damp. 
Perhaps his hired house in its discomfort would 
compare favourably with the gaol at Bedford, which 
Bunyan describes as ‘a den,’ but the Apostle was 
11 


Phil. i. 
1,2 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


conscious, as Bunyan never was, of the daily clank 
of the chain which accompanied every movement. 

The occasion of the writing of this Epistle is clearly 
indicated by the references which the Apostle makes. 
Philippi stood at the head of the Aigean Sea, about 
nine miles from the coast. Its earliest name was the 
Fountain City, afterwards it was enlarged by Philip, 
the king of Macedonia, and called after himself. It 
was the scene of the great battle between Brutus 
and Cassius on the one side, and Octavius and 
Antony on the other. In commemoration of the 
decisive victory of imperialism over republicanism, 
its consuls and lictors (Acts xvi. 20). The great 
Kgnatian Way passed through it; and as a Roman 
colony situated on this great thoroughfare, it 
was flourishing and wealthy, though now it is a 
desolation, trodden only by the traveller and 
shepherd. 

The Apostle had been brought there in answer to 
the vision of the man of Macedonia, but had met 
with a poor response. His first sermon was preached 
to a few devout Jews, especially women, who, unable 
to erect a synagogue, were wont to gather by the 
riverside on the Sabbath day. The story of the 
opening of Lydia’s heart, and the subsequent 
formation of a Christian Church, which was favoured 
with two visits on the part of the Apostle, is too 
well-known to need detailed retelling. 

Epaphroditus, whom the Philippians had sent 
with their greeting and pecuniary assistance, had 

12 


The Vestibule of the Epistle 


fallen ill during his stay at Rome, and as the tidings Phil. i. 
of this misfortune caused great anxiety to his fellow- I, 2 
disciples, on his recovery the Apostle hastened his 

return and entrusted to his care messages of grati- 

tude and affection; hurrying him back, that by his 
presence he might dissipate the anxiety which had 

cast a gloom over the entire Christian community. 

It is sufficient to say that this Epistle has received 
unmistakable testimony as to its authenticity and 
genuineness. It is referred to by Ignatius and 
Polycarp, quoted by Clement, Irenzeus, and Tertullian, 
and bears in its texture abundant evidence of having 
issued from the heart and mind of the great Apostle 
to the Gentiles. 

* * * * * 

Years before, when quite a youth, Timothy had ‘Paul and 
been brought to Christ on Paul’s first visit to Lystra. Timoty, 
Having been well instructed by his mother, Eunice, servants of 
and his grandmother, Lois, when Christ was iene 
presented as the fulfilment of the Old Testament 
by Paul, he received Him with all the ardour of 
young manhood. The Apostle ever after considered 
him as ‘his own son in the faith.’ During the seven 
following years he grew in knowledge and love, and 
on Paul’s second visit he was judged capable of 
accompanying him, and sharing his hardships and 
labours on behalf of the Gospel. 

The two names are associated in 2 Corinthians, 
Colossians, Philippians, and 1 and 2 Thessalonians, 
and we can never forget the touching last letter 
which the Apostle dictated to him from the Mamer- 
tine prison on the eve of martyrdom. It is worthy 

13 


Phil. i, 
2 


Anema ate 


Saints and 
Saintship. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


of notice that the Apostle, who will presently refer to 
the saints at Philippi, classes himself with Timothy 
as the ‘bond-slaves of Christ Jesus.’ There is no 
assumption, no priestly prerogative, no pretentious- 
ness in this simple designation. Though the Apostle 
had much in which he might glory, when he reviewed 
the work of his crowded life, he had so great an 
estimate of his Master, Christ, that in His presence 
he took the lowliest place ;—the bought chattel of 
Him who had purchased him, not with corruptible 
things, but with His precious Blood. Men would 
have little fault to find with the ministers of the 
Churches, if they breathed the same » spirit of sim- 
plicity, humility, and abandonment to the will of the 
great Master. 
* * % * * 

‘To all the saints nm Christ Jesus which are at 
Philippi, with the bishops (R.V. marg. overseers) and 
deacons. The word ‘saint’ is frequently used by 
the Apostle, in the opening words of the Epistles. 
In that to the Romans, he describes believers as 
‘called to be saints.’ So in 1 Cor. i. 2, see also Eph. 
i. 1; Col. i. 2. We are not to infer from this that 
they were perfect in character, but that they were set 
apatt from the world, by the cross of Christ and the 
anointing of the Holy Spirit, for high and holy 
service in the world. Men use this term of the 
departed, and canonise their fellow-believers only 
after many years have elapsed since they passed to 
the service of the eternal world. But the Apostle 
did not hesitate to describe very imperfect men and 
women, who needed a large amount of tuition and 

14 


The Vestibule of the Epistle 


admonition, as saints; thus imputing to them God’s Phil. i. 
great ideal, as perhaps the likeliest means of inspiring I, 2 
them to deserve the title. 

Is not this a true way of dealing with men? Do 
not be content with rebuking them when they do 
wrong, but lay your hand upon their shoulder, and 
tell them that you are sure that they are aReeR of | 
better things, that the angel lies hidden in the’ 
marble, that the possibility of saintship is deep down 
in the soul, in virtue of the regenerating grace of the 
Spirit, who is forming Christ within. Thus you will 
inspire hope, resolve, high purpose, and the resolute 
intention that the character and walk shall not fall 
beneath this great word with which God does not 
hesitate to designate all who are incorporated ina 
living union with His Son. 

Would you be asaint indeed? Then live ‘in Christ 
Jesus’ as your King (Christ), and in Jesus in all the 
human relationship of daily life (Jesus). Let Him be 
your atmosphere and environment, your protection 
from the assaults of evil from without, and the 
sweet fragrance which will exhale through the inner 
sanctuary of your nature, in speech and act. 

As to the ‘bishops and deacons’: ‘There is now Bishops and 
no question,’ and this is endorsed by Bishop Ellicott, P°#¢°s 
‘that in the Holy Scriptures, the two titles of 
“bishop” and “presbyter” are applied to the same 
person. For this see Acts xx. 17, 28. Bishop 
Lightfoot affirms, ‘It is a fact now generally recog- 
nised by theologians of all shades of opinion, that in 
the language of the New Testament the same officer 
in the Church is called indifferently “bishop,” or 

15 


Phil. i. 
I, 2 


THe: 


combined * 


Salutation. 


\ 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


“elder,” or “presbyter.”’ He goes on to say: ‘The 
opinion hazarded by Theodoret, and adopted by 
many later writers, that the same officers in the 
Church who were first called apostles came after- 
wards to be designated bishops, is baseless.” Accord- 
ing to this dictum ‘a New Testament bishop is a 
New Testament presbyter, and New Testament 
bishops and presbyters are simply ministers of Jesus 
Christ and pastors of churches.’ 

Dr Moule in his valuable book, Philippian Studies, 
says: ‘It is important to remember that our word 
bishop cannot properly translate the Greek word as 
it is used in the New Testament, for it is not used 
there as the special title of a superintendent pastor 
set over other pastors.’ For the office of deacon we 
have simply to refer to Acts vi In the early Church 
there were evident ranks of gift, but not of grace. 
As believers gathered at the Lord’s Table, or Love 
Feast, there was no distinction but that of humility 
and service. All were redeemed by the same Blood, 
stood on the same level; and each strove to be the 
lowliest and humblest of all. 

* * * * * 

“Grace to you and peace from God our Father 
and the Lord Jesus Christ.’ Grace was the western, 
and Peace the eastern salutation. The Apostle com- 
bines them. He desired that his absent friends might 
know more and more of the free favour of God, of 
forgiveness and acceptance, and of the enjoyment 
of help and comfort. He would also have them 
know that peace which filled his ow art, amid 
trials of no ordinary description, and which was 

16 


The Vestibule of the Epistle 


bequeathed by the Master,—‘ My peace I leave with Phil. i. 
you, My peace I give unto you.’ 1,2 

Notice how closely he conjoins the Father and the 
Redeemer. He did not think that he was robbing 
God of His unity or supremacy when he included 
our Lord in the same sentence. Though all his 
early training had recognised the Oneness of the 
Divine Nature, he had no scruple in adding to God 
the Father the Lord Jesus Christ. 

It is remarkable to notice also the number of times 
in which he mentions the Saviour’s name. It occurs 

ty times in this Epistle, that is, on an average, in | 
every two or three verses, but this is characteristic 
of the New Testament, and especially of the writings 
of this Apostle. He was a slave of Jesus Christ ; he 
viewed all saints as living, with himself, in Christ ; 
his life was full of Christ ; Christ was his te to: die 
was to depart to be with Him ; his_rejoicing was i in 
Christ Jesus ; and steadfustness was only possible, 
as he and his ‘converts stood fast ‘in the Lord.’ The 
Lord was always at hand to him, and because all 
believers were in Christ, they could count on God to 
supply all their need. 

Let us rejoice to know that ‘grace and peace’ are | 
not exhausted, but that they flow down to us still in 
this remote century, and amid the altered circum- 
stances of modern life. Christ was, and is, and is 
to come. In Him the Church still exists, cnreagh 
Him she is still supplied with grace upon grace, 
and unto Him she will be gathered without spot, 
or wrinkle, or any such thing. 


B iF 


Phil. i. 
3, 4 
The 


Prayers of 
St Paul. 


II 
PRAYER AND INTERCESSION 


Pun. i. 3, 4 


I THANK my God upon every remembrance of you, 
Always in every prayer of mine for you all making request 
with joy. 


Tue Epistles of St Paul are full of allusions to hig 
prayers. We might almost call them his prayer-book. 


Let us verify that assertion by turning to the Epistles 
as they come on the pages of the Bible. 

Rom. i. 9: ‘God is my witness, whom I serve in 
my spirit in the Gospel of His Son, how unceasingly 
I make mention of you, always in my prayers making 
request,’ etc. 

1 Cor. i. 4: ‘I thank my God always concerning 
you, for the grace of God which was given you in 
Christ.’ 

Eph. i. 16: ‘I cease not to give thanks for you, 
making mention of you in my prayers.’ 

Eph. iii. 14: ‘ For this cause I bow my knees unto 
the Father.’ 

Col. i. 3: ‘We give thanks to God, the Father of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, praying always for you.’ 

Col. ii. 1: ‘I would have you know how greatly I 
strive for you, and for them at Laodicea, and for as 
many as have not seen my face in the flesh.’ 

18 


Prayer and Intercession 


1 Thess. i. 2: ‘We give thanks to God always for Phil. i. 
you all, making mention of you in our prayers.’ 3,4 
2 Thess. i, 11: ‘To which end we also pray always 
for you.’ 
2 Tim. i. 3: ‘I thank God, . . . how unceasing is 
my remembrance of thee.’ 
Philemon 4: ‘I thank my God always, making 
mention of thee in my prayers.’ 
These texts are sufficient to substantiate the asser- 
tion that the Epistles of St Paul abound in allusions 
to his prayers on behalf of his converts ; and just as 


our Lord Jesus Christ ever lives to intercede, so 
the true pasion, Sunday School teacher, or Christian 
friend, should day esa ceasing, re- 
member the saved and unsaved of his charge in 
prayer. 

But there was a special liberty in the Apostle’s Prayer: with 
prayer, for in verse 4 he says: ‘Always in every news poe 
supplication of mine, making my supplication with 
joy. Those of us who know what it is to pray, 
are familiar with the alternations that come over 
the soul when it waits before God. There are some 
tracts and passages in our daily prayer-life which we 
tread with difficulty and tears. For those who seem 
so obdurate ; for those who appear to have turned 
their backs determinedly upon God; for certain 
Churches that appear hopelessly desolate and barren, 
we plead with strong crying and tears. We tread 
these acres of our prayer-life, with weeping, sowing 
seed destined to bear an abundance of harvest fruit. 

There are other parts of our daily prayer-life that 
are illumined with joy. When we come to pray for 

19 





Phil. i. 
3) 4 


Our 
Private 
Prayers. 


Cultivate 


the Habit. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


a beloved child, for some kindred spirit, for some 
blessed work of God which enjoys the perpetual 
dew of His favour, then it is easy to pray, and we 
make our supplication and request with joy. We 


' know exactly what St Paul meant, when he said 


that there was a liberty, a freedom, a gladness in 

prayer which suffused his heart as he prayed for the 

Philippians. 
* 


* * %& ¥ 


Nothing would be better for most of us than a- 
great revival in our habits of private prayer. We 
cannot do as Luther, who was accustomed to say, 
‘I have so much work to do to-day that I cannot 
get through it with less than three hours of prayer’; 
or as Bishop Andrewes, who regularly set apart five 
hours each day for private devotion; or as Law, the 
author of the Serious Call, who was accustomed, as 
the clock rang out each third hour, to turn to pro- 
longed prayer, allocating to each occasion some special 
subject. Our habits of life, and perhaps our methods 
of thought, forbid our adopting anything quite so 
absorbing and prolonged; but that we should pray 
more, that we should labour in prayer as Epaphras 
did, that we should cultivate the art of prayer, is 
clear. 

Habits of prayer need careful cultivation. The 
instinct and impulse are with us by the grace of the 
Holy Spirit, but we need to cultivate the gracious 
inward movements until they become solidified into 
an unbending practice. 


As far as possible, we should set apart one period 
in each day for prayer, and there can be no question 
20 


Prayer and Intercession 


that the morning hour is best. When the body is Phil. i. 
fresh from sleep, and before the rush of daily thought, 3, 4 


care, and activity invades the mind, ere we hold inter- 
course with our nearest and dearest, then the bells 
ring for matins, and it is wise to heed their call. 

‘Give Him thy first thoughts 

So shalt thou keep 

Him company all day 

And in Him sleep.’ 
It is good, also to have an oratory. There should Use an 
be, as far as possible, one room and one spot in the Oratory. 
room, or one garden path, or a walk over the moor or 
beside the sea, where our seasons of private devotion 
are spent, and our prayers are wont to be made. The 
posture is a secondary matter. Many a heaven-moving 
prayer has been uttered whilst the feet have been 
plodding along the road, or the hands plying their 
toils, or when weakness has chained the body to the 
couch. Whilst Paul was floating for a night and a 
day in the deep, his soul was as much wrapt in the 
spirit of prayer as when he was in a trance in the 
temple. 

A rich man, visited by his pastor, was in sore 
distress because when praying during the night he 
had not removed his nightcap. His scruples were, 
however, allayed by the wise and skilful reply, ‘Some 
people pray, as Christians mostly do, with their shoes 
on and their heads uncovered ; others, like the Jews 
and Mohammedans, pray with their heads covered 
and their shoes off. Now, I daresay, my friend, when 
you prayed, you had not your shoes on?’ ‘No, sir, 
I hadn’t,’ was the eager answer, and the troubled soul 

21 


as 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


was comforted. But it would have been better far 
if it had never been troubled. It is of real service 
to have the fixed closet, and the habitual attitude 
there ; but it is a great mistake to magnify any of 
these accidents and circumstances as though they 
were essential. 

The main point for each of us is to have a spirit 
of prayer, so that the exercise be not irksome and 
tedious, but that the spirit may spring to it with 
delight. We must not, however, wait for the high 
tide to rise before we launch forth on the voyage. 
If there is not deep water, we must make what use 
we can of the shallows. If we cannot step off to the 
big ship, we must make for it in the little boat which 
draws only a foot or two of water. If the gale is not 
blowing to fill our flagging sails, we must make what 
use we can of the light breezes that dimple the calm 
and lethargic ocean. Good is it when the soul leaps 
towards the prayer-hour, as a child to mother, or wife 
to husband ; but failing this eager desire, let us pray 
because we ought, and because the supreme Lover 
of Souls will be disappointed if we do not appear 
at the trysting-place to keep our appointment. 


The ways by which the sluggish soul can be in- 
cited_to pray are various, and hints may be jotted 


down here which will be useful. 

When the hour for prayer arrives, allow time for 
staying on the threshold of the temple, to remember 
how great God is, how greatly He is to be praised, 
how great your needs are. Remember the distance 
between you and Him, and be sure that it is filled 
with love. Recall the promises that bid you to ap- 

22 


Prayer and Intercession 


proach. Consider all the holy souls that have Phil. i. 
entered and are entering those same portals; and 3 4 
do not forget the many occasions in which the 
lowering skies have cleared, the dark clouds have 
parted, and weakness has become power during one 

brief spell of prayer. 


We specially need the aid of the Holy Spirit, who A still 
helps our infirmities in prayer. He kindled the spark "teed. 


of devotion at the first, and knows well how to fan 
it into a flame. It is good to confide in Him, to 
confess that you would but cannot pray, that your 
desires are languid and your love cool, that the lips 
which should be touched with fire are frost-bitten, 
that the wings which ought to have borne you to 
Heaven are clipped. He understands and loves 
to be appealed to, and will assuredly quicken the 
flagging soul until it shall mount up as on eagle 
wings, running without wearying, and walking with- 
out faintness. One look to the Spirit of Prayer will 
find Him in the heart. As our Teacher He begins 
to repeat the words of petition, which we lisp after 
Him. As our Comforter and Paraclete He stands 
beside us, showing us where to aim our petitions, 
and steadying our trembling hands. As the Spirit 
of Life, he makes us free from the law of sin and 
death. 


‘Felt art Thou, and relieving tears 
Fall, nourishing our young resolves ; 
Felt art Thou, and our icy fears 
The sunny smile of love dissolves.’ 


It is advisable to use the Bible specially, and Helps to 


afterwards some spirit-stirring book, be it memoir yeas aa 
23 


Phil. i. 
34 


A Condition 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


or spiritual treatise, to stir up the black hot coals 
and compel them to break into a heaven-ascending 
flame. The story of George Muller, of James Gilmour, 
or of David Brainerd, the writings of Samuel Ruther- 
ford, Andrew Murray and Frances Ridley Havergal, 
the poetry of Horatius Bonar and John Keble, are 
of perennial use in this direction. 

Sometimes it will be the confession of recent back- 
sliding and inconsistency, which have drawn a veil 
over the face of Christ; sometimes the overflowing 
of thanksgiving, as you count over your blessings, 
one by one; sometimes the urgency of need to inter- 
cede for some beloved friend or friends ; but always, 
if you look for it, you may discover some wave of 
blessed helpfulness, which, flowing up on the shore 
of your life, will, as it recedes, afford you an oppor- 
tunity of passing out with it from the high and dry 
stones to the bosom of the heaving ocean. 


One condition of successful prayer must never b 
of Successful forgotten. We must believe that is, and tha 


Prayer. 


2  ————— 
The Father is the object of our prayer, through the 
mediation of our Lord Jesus, and by the aid of the 
Holy Spirit ; but however we conceive of it, whether 
the Father, or the Son, or the Holy Spirit, is the. 
prominent object before our thought, we must believe 
that there is an eye that witnesses our poor endea- 
vours, an ear that listens, a mind that can be im- 
pressed and affected by our requests. But further, 
we need a living faith which reckons on the faith- 
fulness of God, and believes that it has already re- 
ceived its petitions, when i are founded on specific 


Prayer and Intercession 


promises and evidently prompted by the Holy Spirit. Phil. i. 
When we pray, it is not enough merely to speak a3 4 
long list of requests into the ear of God, it becomes 

us to wait after each one, and to receive by an appro- 
priating act of the soul. It is as though we saw 
God take from the shelves of His storehouse the 
boon on which we had set our heart, label it with 
our name, and put it aside until the precise moment 
arrived in which He could bestow it on us without 
hurt. But whether it is in our hands or not is of 
small matter, because ‘ye know that we have_ the 
petitions that we desired of Him.’ Well may George 
Herbert sing :— 


‘Oh, what an easy, quick access, 
My blessed Lord, art Thou! how suddenly 
May our requests Thine ear invade! 
To show that state dislikes not easiness. 
If I but lift mine eyes, my suit is made: 
Thou canst no more not hear, than Thou canst die, 


‘Since then these three wait on Thy throne, 
Ease, power, and love; I value prayer so, 
That, were I to leave all but one, 
Wealth, fame, endowments, virtues, all should go; 
I and dear prayer would together dwell, 
And quickly gain, for each inch lost, an ell.’ 


25 


Phil. i. 
5-11 

A 
Conscious- 


ness of 
Kinship. 


Ill 


THE GROUNDS AND PURPOSES 
OF THE PRAYER 


Pa. oer 


For your fellowship in the gospel from the first day until now ; 
Being confident of this very thing, that He which hath begun a 
good work in you will perform 7 until the day of Jesus Christ : 
Even as it is meet for me to think this of wri , because I have 
you in my heart; inasmuch as both in af bonds, and in the 
defence and confirmation of the gospel, ye all are partakers of my 
race, 
For God is my record, how greatly I long after you all in the 
bowels of Jesus Christ. 
And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more 
in knowledge and zn all judgment ; 
That ye may approve things that are excellent ; that ye may be 
i and without offence till the day of Christ ; 
sci filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus 
Christ, unto the glory and praise of God. 


THE ground of his intercession was threefold. First, 
it arose from his_conscrousness of their kinship, We 
find this in verse 5: ‘I make supplication with joy 
for your fellowship.’ The Greek word there is going 
shares—having in_common:—‘I make supplication 
with joy because of your fellowship in furthering the 
Gospel.’ (See also verse 7.) 
; It was the consciousness that those for whom he 
| prayed were so closely akin to him in their deter- 
| mination and aims, that quickened the wheels of his 
supplication. Had they not shown this fellowship 
by sending repeatedly to his necessity, as we learn 
26 


Grounds and Purposes of the Prayer 


from the close of this Epistle? The Philippian Phil. i. 
Church, though very poor, had sent again and again 5-11 
generous gifts to supply the Apostle’s wants, and 
this proved that they and he were animated with the 
same determination. 
But more than this, there was the wireless tele- 
graphy which bore out to the storm-tossed ship of 
his life the prayer and sympathy of his converts. 
For us also there are kindred spirits in different 
parts of the world, who are able by their prayer to 
send vibrations of holy energy into our souls, and 
when we pray for such we are able to make supplica- 
tion with joy. . 
Secondly, the Apostle recognised that he was in the Living 


line of God’s purpose. This always makes it easy to With Got 
pray. ‘Being confident of this very thing, that He 


which began a good work in you will perfect it until 

the day of Jesus Christ.’ He mentions two days in » 
these verses—‘ From the first day,’ and ‘the day of 

Jesus Christ,’—and he says that between those two 

days, God, who began the work on the first day, 

and who will perfect it on the last day, is maintain- 

ing and building it up step by step. 

‘That first day of our Christian life was due to sa 
interposition of the grace of God. ‘In the beginning 
God created.’ The longer we live, the more sure we 
are that the beginning of the good work within must 
be attributed to God. No pastor, no mother, no 
teacher began it, but in the depth of our heart, by 
His Holy Spirit, God laid the first foundation stone 
of the new life, and amid all our sins, failures, 
and backslidings, He has been building up the 

27 


Phil. i. 


S-i1 


Impelled by 
Affection. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


work He commenced, and He cannot leave it. 
At Baalbec we find the remains of unfinished 
temples which man has abandoned half com- 
plete ; but nowhere in the universe do we find un- 
finished worlds, half-made suns left incomplete, 
though many in the making. We go into the artist’s 
studio and find there unfinished pictures covering 
large canvas, and suggesting great designs, but which 
have been left, either because the genius was not 
competent to complete the work, or because paralysis 
laid the hand low in death ; but as we go into God’s 
great workshop we find nothing that bears the mark 
aT las of ainda Goa ee 
we are sure that the work which His grace has begun, 
the arm of His strength will complete. It is easy to 
pray for a soul when you know that God also is at 
work perfecting it. 

Thirdly, Hes tender affection towards them (vv. 7,8). 
He says: ‘I have you in my heart .. . and God is 
my witness, how I long after you all in the tender 
mercies of Christ Jesus.’ The Apostle had got so 
near the very heart of his Lord that he could hear 
its throb, detect its beat, nay, it seemed as though 
the tender mercies of Jesus to these = were | 
throbbing in his own heart. 

Let us live like this. You have shildaed: in your 
schools that greatly trouble you, boys and girls whose 
restless and obstinate natures seem to resist every 
overture ; men and women meet you daily in your 
home-life, whom you cannot love with the love of 
natural affection ; but, let every one of us get back 
to the heart of Jesus Christ until it pours its contents 

28 


Grounds and Purposes of the Prayer 


into ours, until we begin to yearn over the lost with Phil. i. 
the compassions of Jesus. Before you pass round 5-II 


that unkind story, before you say you will never / 
speak to that man again, before you treat another 
with distance and coldness, get back to the heart of 
Jesus Christ, until His tender compassions shall fill 
yours. Then you can make supplication with joy. 

* * * * * 


He says in verse 9: ‘This I pray, that your love Subject 
may abound yet more and more.’ The Greek word ae 


is—That your love shall pour over—as the bucket 
which stands under a streamlet issuing from a fissure 
in the rocks pours_oyer on all sides; I pray, he says, 
that your love may pour over towards each other, 
and specially towards God. Oh, that we might know 
this and be perfected in love, that there might be > 
room for nothing more, that this might affect our 
whole being ; for, depend upon it, when the love of 
God really fills the heart, the accent of the voice, the 
movements of our body, the look on the face, the 
demeanour, everything is affected. Too often we 
show the worried expression, the querulous tone, the 
over-strained nervous system, but through all this the 
love ought to pour, carrying away the discontented 
gloomy look, so that when we return to our dear 
ones at the close of the day, the entire household 
may feel that because we have come, sunlight and 
the love of God are flooding the house, which during 
the day had missed the music of our presence. Let 


‘your love abound yet more and more.’ 
‘In all knowledge.’ When this love enters a 
man’s heart he knows. ‘Everyone that loveth is 
29 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


Phil. i. born of God, and knoweth God.’ Words infinitely 
5-11 deep, but corroborated here, because our Apostle 
prays that their love may abound more and more in 

all knowledge and discernment. When the fishers 

had tossed all night and taken nothing, and the grey 

dawn was breaking on the beach, it was the eye of 

him that loved which discerned the figure of the 

Master standing beside the fire of coals, and John 

said to Peter, ‘It is the Lord.’ If your love abounds 

more and more, you will not only know, but you will 

discern, you will be able to detect the traces of the 

footsteps of your Lord where other men fail to detect 

them, and hear His voice amid the jangling mart 

and the hubbub of the city. 

* * * * * 

Results: The effect of that love will be threefold. (1) Dis- 
ie a crommation. ‘That you may discriminate between 
: things that differ’ (v. 10, marg. R.V.). Such, 
without doubt, is the true rendering of the Greek, 

and we are reminded of Isaiah’s words, which 

predict that the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon 

the Messiah, and make Him ‘ of quick understanding.’ 

The margin gives it quick of scent. When one has 

been on the ocean for a week, breathing the pure 

ozone, it is marvellous how quick one is to detect 

poisonous smells. This is well, and if we were 

quicker of scent, and detected the noisome effluvia 

which indicate corruption and disease, we should 

more certainly be saved from taking the poison into 

our systems. A man who has lost the sense of smell 

may go into the midst of disease without knowing 

it, but the man who is quick of scent is warned of 

30 


Grounds and Purposes of the Prayer 


danger. And the soul that loves deeply is marvel- Phil. i. 
lously quick to detect anything which may hurt or 5-11 
offend the loved one. It is so with the nature that 
loves God. It discerns, it discriminates, and amid 
the darkness or the grey dawn of our life, when 
things are so mixed, that they appear like one 
another, though really different, the love that loves 
God perfectly, discerns, and distinguishes between 
things that differ. A man’s growth in grace is 
indicated by the delicacy of the discrimination that 
rules in his life. As he gets nearer God he detects 
in himself habits, and practices, ways of behaviour, 
and of business, which he once permitted without 
seeing evil in them, but now puts aside as unfit, to 
follow only the good. This is the first effect of 
perfected love. 

(2) Sincerity. ‘That you may be sincere and Results: 
without offence’ (v. 10). Just as the X-rays passing Sincerity. 
through the limb wiil show at once the fracture, 
or the result of some accident, so the X-rays of God’s 
truth are always searching the heart, and when a 
man is living in perfect love, he also lives in perfect 
truth, for love and truth are one; and the man who 
lives in love does not mind meeting the searching rays 
of God’s truth, which show that he is no hypocrite. 

3) Fruitfulness. It makes us ‘full of the fruits Results: 
of Leone which are through Jesus Christ’ 'itfulness. 
(v. 11). An orchard is fair to see in the spring 
when there is promise of the blossom, but it is fairest 
in autumn, when every tree is laden to the ground 
with fruit. Let us seek this. The pruning is ever 
going on; the sunshine, and rain; but the whole 

31 


eeereminnereenes 


Phil. i. 
5-11 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


discipline is making you full of luscious fruit, that 
thirsty souls may come to partake of the ripe fruit of 
your life, and turn from you to glorify and praise 
God. Be sure that love unites the believer very 
closely with the true Vine, and to be in living unison 
with Christ involves that we shall bear much fruit. 

But all this is only ‘through Jesus Christ.’ Do 
not concern yourself so much with the fruit end of 
the bough, but with the end of fibrous wood which is 
connected with the vine. See to it that you live 
always in union with Jesus Christ, for without Him, 
severed from Him, you can do nothing. Abide in 
Him, and let Him abide in you. Let the one agony 
of your life be to keep near to Jesus. See to it that 
every morning in your prayer you touch Him, that 
you meditate on the Bible, that all day the union is 
kept unbroken, so that the living Christ may pour 
through you the sap of His own vitality, and fill you 
with the fruits of righteousness. 

Is this your life? It may be from to-day. If you 
have never become united to Jesus Christ, the Divine 
man, you may become so by one look of faith. Then 
go forth to bear the fruit of a holy life to the glory of 
God, so that your life may praise Him in concert 
with the seraphs around His Throne. 

‘Thy love, Thy joy, Thy peace 
Continuously impart 
Unto my heart, 


Fresh springs that never cease, 
But still increase.’ 


32 


IV 


THE FURTHERANCE OF THE 
GOSPEL 


Pui. i. 12-18 


Bur I would ye should understand, brethren, that the things 
which happened unto me have fallen out rather unto the furtherance 
of the gospel ; 

So that my bonds in Christ are manifest in all the palace, and 
in all other places ; 

And many of the brethren in the Lord, waxing confident by my 
bonds, are much more bold to speak the word without fear. 

Some indeed preach Christ even of envy and strife; and some 
also of good will: 

The one preach Christ of contention, not sincerely, supposing to 
add affliction to my bonds : 

But the other of love, knowing that I am set for the defence of 
the gospel. 

What then? notwithstanding, every way, whether in pretence, 
or in truth, Christ is preached ; and I therein do rejoice, yea, and 


will rejoice. 


a 7] 
Oe" 


Xo: 


In Psalm Ixxvi., breathing courage and confidence, Phi], j, 
which exalts the mighty Sovereign of all and 12-18 
magnifies His mighty power, the Psalmist tells us Man’s 


that the wrath of man shall be made to praise God. 


Purpose 
and God’s 


The wicked may plot against God, seeking to injure Power. 


His servants and obstruct the progress of His 
truth, and within certain limits they may appear to 
succeed ; but when they expect to reap the harvest 


of their evil machinations, they suddenly find_them- 
selves put to the worse, and God takes all that the 
had meant for the suppression of the Gospel, to 


ee ee ee ee 
promote its progress and triumph, There are few 


fe) 33 


LA e. 


Phil. i. 
12-18 


St Paul's 
yearning 
for Rome. 


| 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


instances establishing this fact more striking than 
the story of the Apostle, for the misfortunes which 
befell his human life, and the difficulties over which 
he was compelled to make progress, were used by 
God to promote the highest interests of that very 


. Gospel which was so dear to his heart, and for which 


he suffered so much. 

How eagerly he set his heart upon reaching Rome! 
In the Epistle to the Roman Christians, he tells them 
that he hopes presently that he may see Rome, not 
only that he may comfort them and be comforted by 
them, but because Rome was the metropolis of the — 
world. From the golden mile-stone that stood in 
the Forum the mighty roads emanated to the far 
East and West. What Jerusalem was during the 
one week of the Passover, Rome was always. The 
statesmen who filled her Senate would be com- 
missioned to all parts of the known world as consuls 
and prators; the soldiers who gathered in her 
barracks might be despatched to the far Euphrates 
on the one hand, or the white cliffs of Britain on the 
other. To reach Rome seemed like standing in some 
telephonic centre, from which a whisper would 
reverberate to the ends of the world. 

The Apostle Paul was a great strategist. He 
knew the value of cities; they were the head of 
waters, into which if seed were dropped the current 
would carry it everywhere. Therefore, as he had 
spoken in Jerusalem, the heart of Palestine; at 
Antioch, the heart of Syria ; at Ephesus, the heart 
of Asia Minor ; and at Athens, the heart of Greece, 
he was desirous of preaching at Rome also, the heart 

34 





The Furtherance of the Gospel 


of the empire of the world. No doubt he expected Phil. i 
to get there as to other places, paying his own 12-18 
passage, going freely, and being welcomed by the 
little Churches of the saints, which were beginning 
to shed their light amid the surrounding gloom. But 
it was not thus that Paul accomplished his life- 
purpose. He came to Rome a prisoner, his passage 
paid as a convict by the Roman Government; and 


the hatred of his enemies was the breath of the 
Almighty that wafted him to his chosen destination. 

Thus, constantly, God allows men to rage madly 
against His Gospel up to a certain point, which may 
Be she yiace, Tecnrakenas aT pain, but there 
is always a ‘thus far and no further,’ and the Gospel 
proceeds upon the very lines which God from all 
eternity had determined. 

This wonderful truth, which is capable of almost 
endless application, meets with three very remarkable 
illustrations in this paragraph. 

* * * * * 

‘My bonds became manifest in Christ throughout Paul’s Im- 
the whole pretorian guard, and to all the rest’ ered 
(vy. 13). It would be better translated—to the whole upon the 
circle of the imperial life-guards. We are all familiar 9°“ 
with the fact that the Apostle was chained to a 
Roman soldier during the entire term of his two 
year’s imprisonment, the soldier being changed every 
six hours. What an exquisite torture this must have 
been to a sensitive nature like his! Bad enough 
never to be alone, but still worse to have to spend 
the long hours always in company with a man chosen 
from the Roman guard. 

35 


Phil. i, 
12-18 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


In the Epistles of Ignatius, the good bishop of 
Antioch, who was entrusted to such guards to bring 
him from his see at Antioch to be thrown to the wild 
beasts, describes himself as fighting day and night 
with ten leopards, who, the more kindness was shown 
them, waxed worse and worse. Though we may 
well imagine that some of the soldiers chained to 
the Apostle may have been quiet and wistful men, 


- eager to know the truth, yet, quite as likely, others 


would fill the room with ribald songs and jokes, 


z , and turn into blasphemous ridicule the words they 
* heard the Apostle speak to those who came to visit 
~ him. 


At times the hired room would be thronged with 
people, to whom the Apostle spoke words of life; 
and after they withdrew the sentry would sit beside 
hin, filled with many questionings as to the meaning 
of the words which this strange prisoner spoke. At 
other times, when all had gone, and especially at 
night, when the moonlight shone on the distant 
slopes of Soracte, soldier and Apostle would be left 
to talk, and in those dark, lonely hours the Apostle 
would tell soldier after soldier the story of his own 
proud career in early life, of his opposition to Christ, 
and his ultimate conversion, and would make it clear 
that he was there as a prisoner, not for any crime, 
not because he had raised rebellion or revolt, but 
because he believed that He whom the Roman 
soldiers had crucified, under Pilate, was the 
Son of God and_the Saviour of men. As these 
tidings spread, and the soldiers talked them over 
with one another, the whole guard would become 

36 


The Furtherance of the Gospel 


influenced in sympathy with the meek and gentle Phil. i, 
Apostle, who always showed himself so kindly to 12-18 
the men as they shared, however involuntarily, his 
imprisonment. 

How absolutely consistent the Apostle must_have The witness 
been! If there had been the least divergence, day of the Con- 
or night, from the high standard which he upheld, ca laa 
his soldier-companion would have caught at it, and 
passed it on to others. The fact that so many 
became earnest Christians, and that the Word of 
Jesus was known far and wide throughout the 
pretorian guard, indicates how absolutely consistent 
the Apostle’s life was. Do you not see how this 
applies to your own life? You may be bound to 
unsympathetic companions, as the Apostle to his 
soldier, as Ignatius to his ten leopards, or as Nicholas 
Ridley, afterwards Bishop and martyr, to the bigoted 
Roman Catholic Mayor of Oxford; but by your 


meek consistency _and_purity of life you may win 
these for God, and what might therefore have 
appeared an obstacle to your growth in grace, and 
to the progress of the Gospel, may turn out just the 
opposite. See to it that you so live and speak that 
it may be so. 

* * # % * 


‘Most of the brethren in the Lord, being confident The Im- 
through my bonds, are more abundantly bold to Pusgnment: 
speak the word of God without fear’ (v. 14). That upon the 
is, courage was supplied them by the striking (acu 
example of this noble man. Many who realised 
that, notwithstanding his chains and bonds, he was 
as enthusiastic in spreading the Gospel as he had 


37 


Phil. i. 
12-18 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


been when his life was at his own disposal, and that, 
in spite of every difficulty and obstacle, he was still 
doing so much for the Gospel he loved, were rebuked 
for their lack of zeal and said: ‘If the Apostle is so 
strong and brave and energetic, when there is every 
reason for him to slacken and mitigate his energy, 
how much more reason there is for us, who have 
unrestrained liberty of action, to be unceasing in our 
endeavours for that Gospel for which he suffers.’ 
The man who works for Christ when everything is 
against him stirs those up who have no such difli- 
culties ; just as he who makes confession for truth 
and righteousness, when there are many reasons for 
him to hush his voice, incites others to break forth 
in confession of Jesus Christ. They who dare to 
speak for God, even to death, are the means of 
stirring others to heroic defence of the Gospel. 
Think, for instance, of one of the greatest men that 
ever lived in England—a man whose name is almost 
forgotten now, but who is immortally associated with 
the cadence and splendid diction of the Bible— 
William Tyndale. It was his avowed purpose that 
every plough-boy in England should be able to know 
as much of the Bible as the priests. To accomplish 
this he appealed to the Bishop of London, but 
received no sympathy, and sorrowfully discovered 
that England could not hold the translator of the 
Bible. He was compelled to flee from England to 
Hamburg, from Hamburg to Cologne, from Cologne 
to Worms, and finally to Antwerp, where he was 
executed as a martyr; but not before he had put 
his imprimatur upon the magnificent English of the 
38 


The Furtherance of the Gospel 


Bible, and had invested the Scriptures with priceless Phil. i. 
interest for the minds and hearts of those who had 12-18 
watched his noble life, his beneficent career, and his 

bloody death, so that out of his ashes there sprang a 
hundred, nay, a thousand men, to scatter the Bible 

for which he died. 

This may also be the case with you who are called A Call 
to suffer for the Gospel. It may seem as if your *° 9° 
voice were being hushed in blood and tears; but 
others are being made bold. Many a young man in 
that worldly society or godless counting-house is 
saying ‘If he dares to stand for God, I too will be a 
hero’; so that the very effect of your example is to 
stimulate weaker ones ‘to become confessors and 
martyrs for Jesus Christ. Has not this been the 
result of the wholesale martyrdoms of Chinese mis- 
sionaries and converts ? 

* * * * % 

‘Some indeed preach Christ even of envy and The Im- 
strife, and some also of goodwill.’ ‘What fie ¢ Prsgasacet ¢ 
Only that in every way, whether in pretence or in upon the 
truth, Christ is proclaimed; and therein I rejoice, ection id 
yea, and will rejoice’ (v. 15, 18). There were two Truth. 
parties in Rome. The one loved Paul enthusiasti- 
cally, and accepted his teaching; the other, though 
professedly Christian, held by the Temple, the Phari- 
sees, and the old restrictions of Judaism. They 
avowed Christ, but often looked backward to the 
Old Covenant, and tried to weave the two together. 

Paul’s coming aroused these to more earnestness in 

promoting their own views of Christianity, but he 

said: ‘It does not matter, if Christ is preached ; 
39 


Phil. i, 
12-18 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


they do not love me, they do not come to me for 
help, they are doing all they can to make my life 
difficult ; but nevertheless, if my Lord Jesus Christ 
is being preached, I am more than thankful.’ Per- 
haps that explains why God has permitted the 
various denominations to divide England between 
them. Perhaps it is better that it should be so, 
because one stirs up the other. It may be that the 
efforts of the Nonconformists stir to more activity 
the members of the Church of England, and vice 
versa. In any case the various doctrines of 
Christianity are more likely to be strongly enforced 
and maintained, when they underlie the very 
existence of a body of Christians, than if they 
were held in common by all. 

All through the history of the world God_has 
taken what _seemed_to be a hindrance and obstacle, 
and, if only His servants were patient and true to 
Him, has converted_it into a pulpit from which they 
could better promulgate the truth. Remember how 
Nebuchadnezzar harried the Jews. It seemed as if 
the holy city was never again to wield an influence 
for good over the world; but the chosen people 
were scattered with their Scriptures throughout the 
world, and the word of God was magnified much 
more than it could have been by their concentra- 

ion in their own city. The devil stirred up the 

Jews to murder Christ, but the grain of wheat 

which fell into the ground to die, no more abode 

alone, but has covered the world with the harvests 

of rich grain. The Emperors persecuted the early 

Church, but only drove the disciples everywhere 
40 


The Furtherance of the Gospel 


preaching the Word. King Charles chased_the Phil. i. 
Puritans out of England, but they landed on Ply- 12-18 
mouth Rock, and founded the great Christian 
commonwealth across the Atlantic. Out of the 
awful Civil War the conditions arose that made it 
possible for Abraham Lincoln to free the slaye, 
and again the wrath of man turned out to further 
the Gospel of Jesus Christ. 
‘Careless seems the great Avenger, 
History’s pages but record 
One death-grapple, in the darkness, 
’T wixt old systems and the Word. 
Truth for ever on the scaffold, 
Wrong for ever on the throne ; 
Yet that scaffold sways the future, 
And, behind the dim unknown, 
Standeth God within the shadow, 
Keeping watch upon His own.’ 


So it will be in our life. Let us begin to rejoice go it may 

at difficulties, to rejoice when Satan rages. The be with us. 
power which is used against us, God will convert 
for our good; only let us always cherish the eager 
expectation and hope that Christ may be magnified 
in our body, whether by life or by death, whether 
by joy or by shame, whether by good fortune or by 
misfortune, whether by success or by failure. Christ, 
Christ, Christ, the Blessed Christ—not the Bible 
alone, not the creed alone, not doctrine alone, but 
Christ, Christ, Christ, always Christ manifested in 
our body, whether it be by life or by death. 

Is Christ dear to you? Do you live for Him? 
Is the one passion and aim and purpose of your 
nature to glorify Him? Can you say: To me to 

41 


Phil. i. 
12-18 


The Epistle to the Philippians 
live is Christ, and to die is gain? Qh, let us from 


to-day begin to live for this ! 

And if you are discouraged and disheartened, be 
of good cheer. When you are devoted to Christ, 
your very bonds will become electric chains through 
which the pulsations of energy shall go to others, 
and your very troubles will be pulpits from which 
you shall preach the unsearchable riches of Christ. 

Storms cannot shipwreck the Gospel; they waft 
it forward. Its foes contrive ingenious devices to 
gbstruct_it, but they awake to discover that all 
they had done to hinder is used to help. The lines 
of rail and_the rolling stock which the enemy elabo- 
rated for incursions of hostile intent, are found to 
be simply invaluable to bear forward the precious 
message of the Gospel they would overthrow. It 
will be found, doubtless, at the end of all things, 
that the beneficent purposes of God have not been 
hindered one whit, but promoted and fostered, by 
all that has been done to frustrate them. This_is 
the mystery of God's providence—that, so far from 
being set aside by evil, evil helps by furnishing the 
material on which the fire of the Gospel feeds, and 
flames to the furthest limits of God’s universe. 


42 


v 


GOOD OUT OF EVIL 
Pui. i, 19, 20 


For I know that this shall turn to my salvation through your 
prayer, and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ. 

According to my earnest expectation and my hope, that in 
nothing I shall be ashamed, but that with all boldness, as always, 
so now also Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be 
by life, or by death. 


As we have seen, there were two_parties in Rome. Phil. i. 
The one was devoted to the Apostle, and were doing 19, 20 
their best to help him in the preaching of the Gospel The Two 
of our Lord. These disciples were imbued with the P*tes- 
spirit of their master, and were carried along in the 
current of his own devotion. ‘In his bonds, and 
in the defence and confirmation of the Gospel, they 
were all partakers with him of grace.’ The work 
they did was of good-will and of love, because they 
knew that he was set for the defence of the Gospel. 

The other party reftised to accept the Gospel in its 
simplicity. They belonged to the Judaising party, 
and held that it was necessary for a man to pass 
hrough the ceremonies of the old covenant, in order 
to participate in the benefits of the new. Throughout 
his life the Apostle was constantly troubled by the 
presence of these men, and his stay in Rome seems 
to have stirred them up to still greater activity. 
. They preached Christ of envy and strife, not sincercly, 
43 


Phil. i, 
19, 20 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


but of faction, thinking to raise up affliction in his 
bonds. 

But out of this aggravation of his anxictics he 
managed to extract _a new-found joy, to quote his 
own inimitable words, ‘What then? only that in 
every way, whether in pretence or in truth, Christ 
is proclaimed ; and therein I rejoice, yea, and will 
rejoice. When the heart is absolutely right with 


God, when God is the one great fact which underlies 


all facts, it is able to elicit joy for every circumstance 
in life, as musicians music from the roar of the torrent, 
and the rush of the storm. 

It is a serious question which each should ask, Is 
God_the underlying fact in my life? Do I detect 
His presence in every storm, shower, and sunbeam, 
in the dark night as well as in the day, in my losses 
and sorrows as well as in my halcyon hours of 
summer joy? To such an one every wind wafts 
argosies across the sea laden with blessing, dreaded 
evils pass him by without molestation, the very 
Judases of life bring cups which have been mixed 
by the Father’s hand. When God is real to us, and 


we receive all things either by His permission or 


‘\ appointment, we can find occasions for joy where 


Why Paul 
Rejoiced. 
For Christ 
was 
Proclaimed 


other men see unmitigated grief, chinks of blue in 
the dark sky, and songs in the night. 
2 * * * * 

Paul was glad, first because Christ was proclaimed. 
So long as that name was being passed from lip to 
lip, and enquiry was excited into all that it stood for, 
and men were beginning to feel after Him, if haply 


they might find Him as the Saviour from their sins, 
44 


Good Out of Evil 


and the solution of life’s mysteries, he was satisfied. Phil. i, 
Better half a loaf than no bread, and better the 19, 20 
preaching of Christ from wrong motives than not at 

all. Better Christ pilloried than not lifted up before 

the thought of the time. A good man may be glad 

when the world’s press deals with Christian truth, 

even though it be travestied and misrepresented, it 

is better thus than that men should lose interest in 
Christianity. Nothing is more fatal than apathy 


and neglect. 


Paul_rejoiced because_he saw_that_everything Forall would | 
would turn out right for hum. ‘1 know that this tn out 
shall turn to my salvation.’ There has been a good ee 
deal of controversy as to what he meant by ‘salvation.’ 

Of course he was already fully saved, except that his 
body bore the marks of humiliation and suffering. 
It has been thought by some that he referred to his 
hope that his life might be preserved, and that release 
from captivity was not far away. In the Epistle to 
Philemon, which was written from Rome at the time 
of the writing of this Epistle, he says, ‘Prepare me 
‘also lodging, for I hope that through your prayers I 
shall be granted unto you.’ But it seems better to 
think that he believed that the coming of our Lord 
‘depended upon the extension of the Gospel through- 
out_the known world, and that, therefore, all the 
preaching of the Cross which disseminated the know- 
ledge of the Gospel, brought nearer that day to which 
he so often refers as the day of Christ, when the 
topstone should be placed upon the edifice, and com- 
plete salvation would come, not to him only, but to 
all those who loved the appearing. This yields a 
45 


Phil. i. 
19, 20 


For Christ 
was being 
Magnified. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


good sense to the passage. He rejoiced in the 
preaching of this hostile faction, because it made 
Christ better known, and in so far as men knew 
and accepted Him, the coming of His Kingdom was 
hastened, which meant peace, joy, deliverance, and 
perfect life. When that long expected day was 
inaugurated, the last remains of sin would be destroyed 
in his heart, and the body of his humiliation would 
be changed for a body in the likeness of Christ. In 
this sense the word ‘salvation’ is employed else- 
where—‘He shall appear the second time without 
sin unto salvation.’ 


How often has God overruled the designs and 
deeds of evil men for the glory of His name, the 
success of His Kingdom, and the salvation of His 
saints. What they mean for evil He turns to good. 
The oppression of Pharaoh, as we have seen, secures 
the establishment of Israel in their own land. The 


persecution of the Sanhedrin forced the early 


Christians to become evangelists throughout the 
empire. The Pope’s bull against Luther inaugurated 
modern Protestantism. The persecution of the 
Stuarts urged the Pilgrim Fathers to lay the founda- 
tions of the great commonwealth in the United 
States. Truth has again and again been brought to 
the scaffold, and wrong has swayed the sceptre, but 
God is ever standing within the shadow ‘keeping 
watch upon His own.’ Be of good cheer, lift up 
your heads, your redemption draweth nigh! 

Paul rejoiced also because Christ _was being 
magnified. The word ‘expectation’ has in it the 
idea of the uplifted head (Luke xxi. 28), the out- 

46 


Good Out of Evil 


stretched neck (Rom. viii. 19). It is as when one 
stands on tiptoe, anxiously looking for the advent of 
an anticipated prosperous issue out of affliction. 
The expectation of creation which waits for the 
revelation of the sons of God, had its counterpart in 
the Apostle’s experience as he craned his neck in 
intense hope and anticipation that the great purpose 
of his life would be realised in the magnifying of the 
Lord. Each morning, as he arose, his soul was 
stirred with passionate thought and ambition that 
the hours should be as full as possible with whatever 
might promote the glory of his Master. Whatever 
event happened, he always questioned how far it 
would enhance men’s estimation of the Lord. He 
thought comparatively little of what befell himself 
in the various incidents of his life, so long as each 
one furnished an increment of glory to the Master 
who filled the entire horizon of his affections. 

In the original Greek, their prayer and the supply 
of the Holy Spirit are so classed together as to be 
practically one. It is as though the Apostle felt 
that if only his Philippian friends would unite in 
earnest intercession, there could be no doubt as to 
the response. For them to pray for the Holy Spirit 


Phil. i. 
19, 20 


would be equivalent to his reception of Him. There _ 


are some prayers, concerning the answer to which 
we cannot be sure, for they deal with matters which 
are outside the promises of God, but wherever we 
claim for ourselves or others, things which God_has 
offered us in Christ, we may be sure that to ask is 
to have, 

Throughout the Epistles the Apostle is constantly 

es 47 


Prayer 
besought. 


Phil. i. 
19, 20 


‘The 
Supply of 
the Spirit 
of Jesus 
Christ.’ 


TT 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


asking for the rs_of his fellow disciples. 
bids them ‘help together by prayer.’ In that touch- 
ing exhortation at the close of the Epistle to the 
Romans, he entreats them to strive together in their 
prayers for him that he might be delivered from his 
enemies, and might come to them with joy by the will 
of God ; and in the Epistle to Ephesus and, probably, 
to the other Asiatic churches, he bids the disciples to 
pray always with all prayer and supplication in the 
Spirit, watching thereunto with all perseverance and 
supplication for all saints, adding significantly, ‘and 
for me.’ Itis hardly possible to over-estimate the value 


of prayer, when some kindred soul really unites itself 


with us, in our temptations, sorrows, and efforts in 
the service of Christ. Full often some special influx 
of faith, hope, and courage is due to the fact that 
God is moving someone who loves us to strong 
entreaty and intercession on our behalf. The angels 
visited Sodom, laid their hands on Lot, and led him 
forth because Abraham, yonder on the heights, was 
pleading with God that if there were ten righteous, 
He would not destroy the city, not knowing that 
God was more eager to save Sodom than he to pray 
for it. 

‘The supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ~ is a 
most interesting phrase. The Apostle describes the 
Holy Spirit as pre-eminently ‘the Spirit of Jesus 
Christ.’ Elsewhere he speaks of Him ‘as the Spirit 
of the Son,’ ‘as the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus,’ 
‘as the Spirit of Jesus.” There is ample warrant for 
this. Our Lord was conceived of the Holy Ghost, 

48 : 


Good Out of Evil 


anointed by the Spirit at the waters of Baptism, 
filled with the Spirit as He was led up to be 
tempted, wrought His miracles and spoke His words 
in the power of the Holy Spirit, yielded Himself to 
the Father in death by the power of the Eternal 
Spirit, and was raised from the dead on the third 
day by the Spirit of Holiness, who is pre-eminently 
the Author of Resurrection Life. During the forty 
days, it was ‘through the Holy Spirit that He gave 
commandment to the apostles whom He had chosen.’ 
In answer to His intercession, He received the Holy 
Spirit in Divine fulness into His risen and exalted 
nature, and throughout the Acts He is represented 
ag communicating the Spirit to those who seek Him 
by faith. Throughout this dispensation our Lord is, 
so to speak, the depository or storehouse of the 
Holy Spirit. It need hardly be said that the Spirit 
is equally Eternal and Divine with the Father and 
the Son, but during the present age, in the Divine 
economy, He is specially communicated through the 
nature of the Risen Lord to all members of His 
mystical Body, the Church, and works through them 
upon the world. We may be thankful, indeed, that 
as the blood circulates between the heart and the 
most distant member of the body, so does the Spirit 
of God unite us with Christ our Master. We are 
one with Him ; the very thoughts and emotions that 
occupy Him are conveyed to us ; because He lives 
we live also, by the direct impartation of His life. 
The word supply demands our attention. It occurs, 
with its kindred verb, several times in the New Testa- 
ment. It contains a suggestion of the choir or 
D 49 


Phil. i. 
19, 20 


‘Supply.’ 


Phil. i. 
19, 20 


How to feel 
as St Paul 
did. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


singing entertainment, which was supplied on 
public occasions by some wealthy citizen to grace a 
triumphal entry, or celebrate some auspicious anni- 
versary. It stands for the free and spontaneous 
furnishing of that which enriches and quickens the 
lives of others. It is as though the Apostle felt, 
that in answer to the prayer for which he pleaded, 
there would be a constant impartation into his 
nature of that Divine Spirit whose entrance brings 
joy and strength. 

It is an important question to ask how far we 
know that same Spirit, who enables sufferers to 
discover reasons for thankfulness in their afflictions, 
lifts us out of our private tribulation into the great 
current of adoration and praise which is ever flowing 
towards the Throne of the Lamb, turns anxieties 
and privations into fountains of blessing and salva- 
ses chit oghat ae teeeak a urpose that 
Jesus should be glorified whether by life or death. 

As we read these wonderful paragraphs, and see 
how eager the Apostle was for the ‘greatening’ of 
Jesus, we feel the infection of his spirit and long to 
be animated by the same passion. There is no way 
of catching its fire, except by studying and obeying 
the laws on which the Holy Spirit is supplied to 
saints still. Nor is it enough to be acquainted with 
the method of operation, we must assiduously obey 
them, being sure that the Holy Spirit is a Spirit of 
method and order, and that He will immediately 
respond to the feeblest appeal made for His succour. 

Let the poor dweller beside the Nile make the 
smallest channel in the time of flood, and the re- 

50 








Good Out of Evil 


sponsive water wil! forthwith flow into his little Phil. i, 
garden plot; so if by obedience and faith the 19, 20 
channel is open towards the Blessed Spirit, there can 

be no doubt that He will immediately fill the heart 

with His abundance; though the glad recipient of 

His bounty will not concentrate his thought upon 

the Spirit of Jesus Christ, but pass through Him to 

Jesus Christ Himself. Just as we do not specially 

dwell upon the light which is the medium between 

the sun and our earth, but through sunlight live in 
contact with the mighty sun and orb of day ; so those 

that are fullest of the Holy Spirit are fullest of the 

glory of Christ, and are most eager that He should 

be magnified in their bodies, whether it be by life or 

by death. 


51 


Phil. i. 
21-26 


Life and 
Death. 


VI 


WHETHER TO LIVE, OR TO 
DIE! 


Put. 1. 21-26 


For tome to live is Christ, and to die ¢s gain. 

But if I live in the flesh, this is the fruit of my labour: yet 
what I shall choose I wot not. 

For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and 
to be with Christ; which is far better: 

Nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for you. 

And having this confidence, I know that I shall abide and con- 
tinue with you all for your furtherance and j Joy of faith ; 

That your rejoicing may be more abundant in Jesus ‘Christ for 
me by my coming to you again. 


Omit the words ‘Christ’ and ‘gain’ and you are re- 
minded how very close life and death lie; they are 
separated only by a comma. Life is the vestibule 
of death, and death follows closely upon life. The 
little babe is born and dies; the flower opens and 
fades ; the spring seems hardly to have unfurled 
herself in summer before the leaves begin to fall; 
you clasp the hand of your friend in vigorous life 
to-day, to-morrow you hear that he has passed 
beyond the confines of our world. Life and death, 
the systole and diastole, the beat and throb of the 
pulse, the swing of the pendulum hither and thither. 
Every man stands where that comma stands, between 
life and death; all men are balancing between the 
two. 

Probably there is not a single man or woman—the 

52 


Whether to Live or to Die 


exceptions, at least, are very rare—that does not at Phil. i. 
some time of life count the gain of life against 21-26 
death ; and there is the balance on one side or the 
other, and sometimes the equilibrium. Now life is 
the heavier, and again death. So Hamlet and Paul 
may be compared, as representing two classes of men. 
There is the one class, represented by Hamlet, who 
weigh the evils of life and death; there are other 
men, like St Paul, who weigh the blessings. 

Hamlet weighs the sorrows of life, from which | 
death would relieve him, against the terrors of death, | 
from which life delivers him. ‘To be, or not to be, | 
that is the question.’ There are the sorrows of life, 
the whips and scorns of time, the rich man’s pride, 
the proud man’s contumely ; and as he weighs these 
up upon the scale, he thinks that probably it would 
be better to die to escape them; but when he 
considers what death might bring, what dreams 
might come in death’s sleep, he turns back to life as 
after all to be preferred. 

St Paul, on the other hand, is impressed with the 
riches of life and death. He does not know which 
to choose, because each is so sweet. Life is sweet, , 
because it is Christ; death is sweet, because it is | | 
more of Christ. And so he balances the one against | 
the other, and presently exclaims: ‘I am in a strait 
between the two. I do not know which of them to 
choose, but on the whole death preponderates, death 
is gain, to depart is far better.’ So that we have 
just these two thoughts—the blessings of life, and 
the blessings of death, as regarded by the Apostle 
Paul. 

53 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


Phil. i. ‘To me to live is Christ.’ We may picture the 
21-26 Apostle Paul_ landing on the quay at Neapolis, the 
shana port of Philp. “fie tees tae travel and toil. 
essings of ; we ns 
Life. Evidently a pggr and somewhat insignifican§ man, 
unattended save by two or three as poor as himself. 
As he lands upon the busy quay he encounters many 

different men. ‘There, for instance, is the merchant ! 
receiving his wares from the Orient, and preparing 
them for transit; he cries: ‘To me to live is wealth,’ 
Near him are the men who carry the packages from 
' the ships to the emporiums of trade, or the great 
warehouses=the poor slaves—for them to live is 
| ul and suffering, heavy blows and _ privations. 
3 Beside stands the philosopher, in his hand the scroll 
' with the mystic words of wide knowledge, and as he 
looks upon the toil of the trader he prides himself 
that he lives for a superior aim, as he says: ‘To me 


to live is knowledge.’ Near to the little group is a 


be soldier, who looks with contempt upon the man of 

, letters, and cries: ‘To me to live is fume.’ Then the 

shadow of Octayius, the mighty emperor, who not 

far from Philippi won the great battle that gave him 

the empire of the known world, seems to rise amongst 

the group, crying in awful accents: ‘To me to live is 

ure. Amid all these voices the affirmation of the 

i. y | Apostle strikes in: ‘To me to live is not wealth, nor 

' hard work, nor literature, nor fame, nor glory, but 

| ist. Christ first, last, midst, all in all, and 
perpetually Christ.’ 

Christ-The  1f you had asked the Apostle just what he meant, 

Deets of our he would probably have replied, as William Tyndale 


x brings out in his translation, that Qhrist_ must be the 


54 


{ 


Whether to Live or to Die 


origin of our life. The Day of Pentecost meant that Phil. i. 
from that moment, and onward, the Holy Spirit 21-26 
should bring the germ of the Christ-life, and sow it 

in the soil of our spirits, so that the very nature of 

Jesus glorified, transfigured and Divine, might be 

sown in the soil of our humanity, as incorruptible 

seed, to reproduce in endless succession the growth 

of the Christ-life. 

Christ must be the essence of our life. As we The Essence 
reckon ourselves dead to our own selfish existence, * He 
Jesus Christ will take its place, so that we may be 
able to exclaim with the Apostle: ‘I live, yet not I, 
but Christ liveth in me.’ 

Christ must also be the model of our life. Hivery The Model 
man workstoa model. Consciously or unconsciously, uF Life. 
we are always imitating somebody; and every true 
Christian will endeavour, in ever-growing perfectness, 
to approximate to the measure of the stature of his 
Lord. ‘It is enough that the disciple should be as 
His master.’ 

Christ must also be the aim_of our_life. We The Aim of 
desire to make Him known, loved, and revered, that ee 
His will may be done on earth as it is done in 
Heaven; that others may know Him as we know 
Him, love Him as we love Him, live for Him as we 
live for Him; that He may be the crowned King of 
men, putting down war and strife, and hastening on 
that. glorious consummation, for which the Church 
prays and creation groans. 

Christ_must_be the solace of our life. Amid all The — 
the storm, strife, and tumult, there is no cleft where si od rae 
the Christian finds safe abiding, but in the riven 

55 


Phil. i. 
21-26 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


Rock of Ages, in the side of the pierced Christ, in 
the heart of the Redeemer, the doors of which always 
stand open, and He is evermore bidding us come to 
Him for rest. 


The Reward © Christ must_be the reward of our life. The one 


of our Life. 


mS 


f 
o 


hes 
Blessings 
of Death. 


Death a 
Birth. 


reward for every Christian man is to get more of 
Christ ; the one crown for every brow is to know 
Him better; the one infinite gain that comes for 
every labour, every tear, every act of sacrifice, is that 
Christ gives Himself, nearer, dearer, better than 
ever. 

This enabled the Apostle, and enables us, to say, 
‘Life is good ; it is worth living.’ To live down here 
for Christ, to live in fellowship with Christ is to 
have the key to nature, to beauty, to love, to every- 
thing that is true and good. Life with all its dark- 
ness and sorrow is, after all, a good thing when a 

an can say, ‘To me to live is Christ.’ 

* * %* * 











* 


But ‘to die is gain.’ What are the blessings to 
which death introduces us? Let us weigh them up. 
First, death is a beginning. The world says it is an 
end ; Scripture says it is the beginning of an endless 
series. Take, for instance, the term employed by the 
Apostle Peter. He spake of his exodus, ‘his goin 
out.’ As the exodus was the beginning of the 
national life of Israel, their going out into freedom, 
so death is the exodus of the spirit into the freedom 
of eternity. The Apostle Paul speaks of death as a 
birth: ‘The first-born from the dead.’ It is the emerg- 
ence of the spirit from the cramped, confined con- 
ditions of the first stage of its being into its true 

56 


Whether to Live or to Die 


existence. He also speaks, in this passage, of death Phil. i, 
as a loosing. ‘Having a desire to depart.’ The 21-26 
Greek word there is marvellously beautiful ; it is the 
unmooring of a vessel from its anchorage. We some- 

times sing of the close of life thus :— 


‘Safe home, safe home in port! 
Rent cordage, shattered deck, 

Torn sails, provisions short, 
And only not a wreck.’ 


How much truer is the conception suggested by 
Tennyson’s description of the death of Arthur :— 

‘So said he, and the barge with oar and sail 

Moved from the brink, like some full-breasted swan, 

That, fluting a wild carol ere her death, 


Ruffles her pure cold plume and takes the flood, 
With swarthy webs.’ 


Secondly, in death we become free. It is the peathis 


freeing of an imprisoned spirit: ‘We that are in Freedom. 
this tabernacle do groan being burdened, not that we 

would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality 

might be swallowed up of life.’ It is freedom from 

sin, freedom from the limitations of mortality, freedom 

from temptation, sorrow, care, and the anticipation 

and natural shrinking from death itself. 

Thirdly, death teaches us to discover our true selves. Death 
You remember Rudyard Kipling’s poem about the reveals Self. 
ship that thought she was a lump of rivets and iron ; 
but after a while she was loosed, and glided out to 
the ocean to be tested by the storm and the tempest. 

But it was only as the winds screamed through her 
cordage, and every timber was strained, that she 
suddenly discovered that she was a ship. And so we 


57 


Phil: 
21-26 


After Death 
with Christ. 


And so far 
better. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


do not know what we are, until we are loosed, until 
our nature, which is full of strange yearnings and 
discontent, finds its real consummation and bliss in 
eternity. 


In death also the Christian who has lived Christ here 
passes through the veil and sees Christ. He is with 


Christ in a sense in which we cannot be with Him 
here. Here we walk by faith, there by sight, and 
we shall see His face, and His name shall be in our 
foreheads. 

We can have no sympathy with the idea of some 
people who suppose that when we die we go into a 
kind of swoon, and stop there until the Judgment. 
Paul says: ‘I shall see Christ, I shall be with Christ ; 
for me to live is Christ, to die is gain, for I shall be 
with Christ, which is far better. To be asleep 
would not be far better. If there is in reserve for us 
an experience far better than to live with Christ 
down here, it cannot be a negation, it must consist in 
more of Christ: nothing less would compensate the 
soul. When the spirit leaves for a little while the 
body which has been its humble friend, its companion 
and vehicle, laying it aside for a moment to take it 
again one day in transfigured beauty, it passes 
immediately into the presence of Jesus Christ, where 
it knows Him as it is known, and sees Him f; 
faec. 

This seems something of what Paul meant when 
he said that death was gain. There was the begin- 
ning of the real life; there was the liberation, the 
emancipation of his life, so that it might find itself in 
the presence of Christ, and in Christ the recovery of 

58 


Whether to Live or to Die 


all_beloved ones that had gone before. Probably Phil. i. 


they are with us now by their sympathy, their 21-26 


prayer, their thought of us. But we have to be with 
Him before we can be literally with them. When 
you find Christ you will find all your loved ones 
again in Him. Bret Harte, in a poem quoted in 
this connection by Dr Campbell Morgan, says :— 


‘As I stand by the Cross, on the lone mouutain’s crest, 
Looking over the ultimate sea, 

In the gloom of the mountain a ship lies at rest, 
And one sails away from the lea ; 

One spreads its white wings on the far-reaching track, 
With pennant and sheet flowing free ; 

One hides in the shadow with sails laid a-back, 
The ship that is waiting for me. 


But lo! in the distance the clouds break away, 
The gate’s glowing portals I see, 

And I hear from the outgoing ship in the bay 
The song of the sailors in glee. 

So I think of the luminous footprints that bore 
The comfort o’er dark Galilee, 

And wait for the signal to go to the shore 
To the ship that is waiting for me.’ 


Do you catch that thought? Two ships lying against 
the shore; one ship speeding out to sea in sunlight, 
the other ship waiting. That is your friend who has 
gone to Heaven, your wife, your child; this is your 
ship waiting for you. Some day you shall embark 
on that ship, the ship that is waiting for you. Mind 


that when that moment comes for loosing the shore- 
rope, you are ready. ee 


* ¥ * * * 


59 


Phil. i. 
21-26 
The Choice 


between the 
two. 


Life’s 
Opportuni- 
ties. 


The 
Privilege of 
Suffering. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


‘Nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful 
for you.’ It is blessed to go when the Gate Beautiful 
opens to us, but there are reasons why the balance 
of choice may fall for the prolongation of life here. 
Granted that we shall know Christ there, yet here we 
may know Him as the angels cannot. They have 
never been tempted, have never fallen into sin, have 
never been solaced and comforted as we have been, 
have never continued with Him in all His trials and 
temptations, have never known Him forgiving sin 
with unwearied tenderness and pity, and lifting from 
the gates of death. 

Granted that we may serve Him yonder, yet we 
can hardly do such work for Him there as here. 
Tears do not need to be wiped in that fair world. 
Words of comfort are devoid of meaning. There are 


no_prodigals to come home, no backsliders to be 


restored, no lost sheep to be sought. 
It is a good thing also to live for Christ here, 


because we have_the opportunity of suffering for 
Him, Only here can we be nailed to His Cross, 
bear some of His shame, share our proportion of the 
blasphemy which is hurled upon His blessed person, 


or be reproached with His reproaches. Shakespeare 
makes King Henry say upon the field of Agincourt : 


‘For he to-day that sheds his blood with me 

Shall be my brother ; be he ne’er so vile, 

This day shall gentle his condition : 

And gentlemen in England now abed 

Shall think themselves accursed they were not here. 


So surely those who are beyond the reach of the pain 
60 


Whether to Live or to Die 


and trouble of this world,—babes like flowers nipped Phil. i. 
in early infancy,—will for ever be the losers because 21-26 
they never had the chance, as we have had, of 
standing alongside of Jesus Christ in this great 
battle. 
It is also good to live in this world as long as we The. 
may, because of the opportunities of helping others. Helgise® ot 
When a man thinks it quietly over, however great Others. on 
his longing it may be, to be gone, he reasons thus with 


himself: ‘I can do good while I stay. I would like 


to be away, but there are downtrodden ones I may 
_ uplift, there are weaklings who want_my help, there 
are lost ones to be saved, and for their sake I cannot 
wish to be gone before my time. Let me remain as 
a pilot at his wheel, as the shepherd near his flock, 
--as a sentry at his post, as long as I can help one 
other soul.’ 

Often there come glimpses of the city ; often there 
- are love tokens thrown over its walls; often bunches 
_ of the everlasting flowers fall at our feet ; often there 
~-are quaffs of the water of life; often the heavenly 


“ones come and walk beside us, and speak of things 


~ in words that we cannot possibly reproduce. There 
~ are high moments in our life when the tide rises, 
when the chalice of our joy is full; but we turn back 
from the radiancy of glory, and the joys beyond 
compare, glad to abide in the flesh as long as there 
is one more lesson to learn, one more errand to fulfil, 
one more thirsty soul to refresh, one more backslider 
to bring home. 

As His Lord did, so His great Apostle turned His 
back on the open door of Paradise, descended from 

61 


Phil. i. 
21-26 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


the Transfiguration Mount, and set His face stead- 
fastly to bear the Cross for a little longer. To abide 
in the flesh was manifestly better for these Philippian 
disciples especially, and indeed for many others in all 
the Churches, which Paul had been the means of 
founding ; and there was borne in upon his mind 
the conviction that his willinghood to wait was 
accepted. ‘Having this confidence,’ he said—‘the 
confidence that I can help you best by remaining 
with you—I know that I shall abide, and continue 
with you all for your progress and joy in the faith, 
that your rejoicing may be more abundant in Jesus 
Christ for me, by my coming to you again.’ Not yet 
the final appearance before Nero: not yet the death- 
sentence: not yet the beheading beyond the city 
gate! A brief respite would be granted in which he 
would be able to pay another and farewell visit! 
One more meeting and parting, one more coming in 
and going out, one more Welcome and Good-bye. 
So the Lord had chosen for him, and so they 
required his help. He was therefore willing to turn 
back from the opened Heaven, with the immediate 
gain of death, to a few more tears, toils, and conflicts 
ere He should realise that the time of departure had 
really come (2 Tim. iv. 6, 7). 


62 


VII 


THE MANNER OF LIFE WHICH 
BECOMES THE GOSPEL 


Puiu. i. 27-30 


Onty let your conversation be as it becometh the gospel of 
Christ: that whether I come and see you, or else be absent, T may 
hear of your affairs, that_ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind 
striving together for the faith of the gospel ; 

And in “nothing terrified by your adversaries: which is to 
them an evident token of perdition, but to you of salvation, and 


that of God. 

For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to 
believe on Him, but also to suffer for His sake ; 

Having the same conflict which ye saw in me, and now hear 
to be in me. 


Tue Apostle had been in suspense; on the one Phil. i, 
hand, the supreme interest of living was that he 27-30 


might know and serve Christ; on the other hand, potrceee) 


to die would be gain because it would usher him into 
an un existence with wider horizons and opportunities. 
Which of the two to choose had thrown him into 
difficulty and suspense. Finally, however, he had 
come to the conclusion, that, in all probability, the 
hour for striking his tent, weighing his anchor, and 
departing to be with Christ had not come, and that 
he would have still to abide in the flesh, staying at 
his post, maintaining his witness on behalf of the 
Gospel, and bearing the burden and weight of the 
63 





Phil. i. 
27-30 


How to live 


meanwhile. 


Our ‘Con- 
versation.’ 


Jy 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


Churches which looked to him as their father. As 
far as_he was concerned, it was infinitely better to 
go to be with Christ, but for the sake of the work 


that needed him, he realised that it was more 
necessary _to remain with his fellow-believers, as 
their comrade and helper, so as to promote their 
progress in the knowledge of God, and their joy in 
believing. 

He counted, therefore, with almost absolute 
certainty that he would return again to Philippi, 
and already he seemed to hear their shouts of 
rejoicing as he disembarked at the quay, and was 
welcomed by the membership of the Church which 
had come down to Neapolis to greet him. In order 
that that glad hour might be a sky without clouds, 
that there might be nothing to jar on the greatness 
of their mutual gladness, he urged that their con- 
versation (lit. their citizenship) should be worthy 
of the Gospel of Christ, so that whether he came to 
see them or was compelled still to be absent, he 
might hear good tidings of their steadfastness, unity, 
undaunted courage, and willingness to suffer. 

The word conversation is the rendering of a Greek 
word, which is familiar to us in the terms ‘police,’ 
‘politics,’ ‘politicians.’ Its primary reference is 
to cities and city life. The Apostle thought of the 
Philippian disciples as citizens. They were citizens 
of Rome in the first instance, but they were also 
citizens of the Heavenly Jerusalem. Later on in 


this Epistle he says, ‘Our conversation (lit. citizen- 
ship) is in heaven’ Is not this true of us all? 


Much as we glory in our earthly citizenship, we 
64 


The Life which becomes the Gospel 


have more to glory in when we remember that we Phil. i, 
are under _a Divine Sovereign, that we owe allegi- 27-30 
ance to Heavenly laws, and that we have burgess 
rights in the City of God. This, Macaulay tells us, 

in his eloquent description of the Puritans, was 
their pride and boast, and it may be ours. We 
desire a better country, that is, an heavenly, and 
believe that God has prepared for us a city. We 
confess that we are pilgrims and strangers on the 
earth, because we greet from afar the Celestial City, 

the home of God’s elect. 

The word, in the course of usage, obtained a 
wider significance than citizenship, and refers to the 
manner of life which is incumbent on all those, who T7e!T¢ Vow 
by faith have become children of the Jerusale 
which is above. We have daily to live in a manner 
which becomes our high calling and great profession. 

‘That ye stand fast.’ It is comparatively easy we must be 
to mount up with wings, to run without wearying, Steadfast. 
and even to walk without fainting, but the hardest 
matter is to stand fast. Not going back, not yield- 
ing to the pressure of circumstances, not cowering 
before the foe, but quietly, resolutely, and de- 
terminedly holding our ground. This note rings 
through the Apostle’s writings. ‘Having done all,’ 3 
he cries, ‘see that ye withstand i in the evil day, aud STN KY 
stand’ (Eph. vi. 13, 14). In this Epistle, we shall 
find him bidding his brethren ‘stand fast in the 
Lord’ (iv. 1). Evidently, in his judgment, stead- 
fastness was of supreme importance in the make-up 
of character. 

It is good to begin, but it is better to keep on 

E 65 


Phil. i. 
27-30 


We must 
preserve the 
Spirit of 


Unity. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


steadily to the end. It is much when the young 
soldier, well equipped for battle, steps out into the 


early dawn, with the light shining upon his weapons, 
but it is more important far, if, in the late afternoon, 
he is found standing in the long thin line, resisting 
the perpetual onset of the foe. We are told of 
Daniel, that he ‘continued’ (Dan. i, 21). This, 
perhaps, is the greatest tribute to him, that through 
decades he did_not swerve from his loyalty to God, 
or devotion to the high interests which were com- 
mitted to his charge. The men that are steadfast 
in their loyalty to truth, in their prosecution of 
duty, in their holding the post assigned to them by 
the providence of God, are those which leave the 
deepest impression on their contemporaries. It is 
not the flash of the meteor which the world really 
wants, but the constant radiance of the fixed star. 
What though the storm beats in your face, and 
every effort is made to dislodge you, though it seems 
as if you were forgotten in that lone post of duty, 
till stand fast: the whole situation may depend 
upon your tenacity of purpose, the campaign may 
e decided by your holding your ground without 
flinching. If the Master has put you as a light on 
the cellar stair, never desert that post because it is 
lonely and distasteful, and because the opportunity 
of service comes rarely. To be found doing your 
duty at the unexpected moment, when His footfall 
is heard along the corridor, will be a reward for) 
years of patient waiting. 

‘In one spirit, with one mind (R.V. soul) striving 
together (lit. wrestling) for the faith of the Gospel.’ 

66 
















The Life which becomes the Gospel 


The idea of the Apostle is derived from the ancient Phil. i, 
games, when men might wrestle side by side against 27-30 
those of another city or nation. We put each other 

in good heart when we stand and strive shoulder to 
shoulder. The regiments which are drawn from the 

same locality, are most likely to give a good account 

of themselves in the battle. Every care should be 
taken to guard against the outbreak of misunder- 
standing and jealousy, for these, more than anything 

else, will induce a spirit of disunion, which is the 

sure precursor of failure. 

To use the illustration of our Lord, the homes that In the 
are united are irresistible in their impact upon men, #°™* 
the household which is divided against itself cannot 
stand. So it is with the alliances, leagues, and 
parties of human politics; so it is with the army, 
with federations of operatives, or in the adminis- 
tration of the affairs of state. Directly there are 
suspicions, jealousies, envies; so soon as men are 
alienated by the spirit of faction and intrigue; 
directly parties are for themselves rather than for 
the state ;—paralysis ensues. 

In Church life, it is of course necessary that each In the 
should preserve his individuality. Each stone in the Ch¥rch. 
foundation of the New Jerusalem must flash with 
its own lustre. Each star must shine with its own 
glory; each ray in the prism must be itself, or the 
pure beam of light cannot be produced. The very 
glory of our common Church life is in the play 
and mutual interaction of different temperaments, 
dispositions, and character. A dull uniformity is 
much to be feared. ‘If the different members of 


67 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


Phil. i. each Church were similar, if all held the same 
27-30 views, all spoke the same words, all viewed truth 
from the same stand-point, they would have no 
unity, but would be simply an aggregate of atoms 
—the sand pit over again.’ But amid all these 
differences there may be a true unity, the different 
notes may make one splendid burst of music, the 
different regiments may be animated by a common 
heroism, the crowd of Medes, Parthians, Elamites, 
Mesopotamians, Cretans and Arabians, Jews and 
Gentiles, may make one Church, of whom it may 
be said “They continued with one accord in the 
temple, and in breaking bread at home.’ What- 
ever we do as members of Christian organisations, 
we should lay stress upon the things in which we 
are agreed, and refuse to be alienated over incon- 
siderable matters, about which we differ. 
We must ‘In nothing affrighted by the adversaries, which 
Ce in 18 to them an evident token of perdition, but to you 
the Presence of salvation, and that from God.’ The adversaries 
OF our 4s, include the virulent hate of Jews who dogged the 
footsteps of the Apostle, and sought to overthrow 
his work, and the strong hatred _of the Gentiles, 
which showed itself in the cruel scourging and 
imprisonment to which Paul and Silas had been 
subjected ten years before. The origin of the word 
translated affrighted, suggests the behaviour of a horse 
when it becomes scared, springs aside, or dashes off 
wildly. It is an expression of panic and dismay ; as 
if one should say, ‘It is vain to resist, the enemy 
is too strong.’ 
In point of fact, our adversaries bluster much, but 
68 


The Life which becomes the Gospel 


effect very little. They come near to us, as Goliath Phil. i. 
to David, threatening the terrible things that they 27-30 


are prepared to perpetrate for our undoing, but 
when they discover that we manfully hold our own, 
they recoil as the waves from the rocks and cliffs 
of the shore. It seems, sometimes, as though the 
ocean would prevail, the mighty waves, mountain 
high, come towering towards the coast, but within 
a moment there is nothing to show for their fury 
but a mass of foam. It was so with the Spanish 
Armada, when with loud defiance it was hurled 
against Elizabeth; it was so with the long strife 
that followed the burning of John Huss and Jerome 
at Prague, when all Europe arrayed itself against 
their followers in vain. ‘Lo the kings assemble 
themselves, they pass away together; they saw it 
and then were they amazed; they were dismayed 
and were stricken with terror; trembling took hold 
of them there, and pain as of a woman in travail ; 
with the east wind Thou breakest the ships of 
Tarshish.’ 


fim 
(Spo Tec 


Undaunted courage becomes the servant of God. Courage 


It shone in the faces of the three young men, who 


becomes 
God’s 


told the king that they would not bow down to servant. 


his graven image. It inspired the apostles, who 
told the Sanhedrin that they must obey God rather 
than men. It flamed forth in Luther’s lonely stand 
against the papacy. ‘Be of good comfort, Master 
Ridley,’ said Latimer, ‘and play the man, we shall 
this day light such a candle, by God’s grace, in 
England, as I trust shall never be put out” In 
these words was evidence of the undaunted courage 
69 


Phil. i. 
27-30 


We must 
accept 
Suffering 
as a Gift 
from God. 


Our Victories 


are our 
Lord’s. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


which has never failed to animate the martyrs of 
Jesus. It is impossible to ordinary flesh and blood, 
but, by faith, we may receive the lion-heart of Him, 
who is not only the Lamb as it had been slain, but 
the Lion of the tribe of Judah. 

‘To you it hath been granted in the behalf of 
Christ, not only to believe on Him, but also to suffer 
in His behalf; having the same conflict which ye 
saw in me, and now hear to be in me.’ How greatly 
these words must have encouraged the Philippian 
Christians! They realised that the Apostle looked 
upon them as fellow soldiers in the same fight as 
that in which for a life-time he had been engaged, 
Their steadfastness and victory at Philippi would 
make his own resistance easier, just as his heroism 
in Rome sent a thrill of courage and hope into 
that far distant city. They were comrades, fellow 
soldiers, entrusted with similar responsibility on 
behalf of the dear Lord who was leading the 
fight, 

The same thought was in the mind of the Master, 
when, on the return of the seventy from casting out 
a few demons, He said, ‘I beheld Satan fallen as 
lightning from heaven.’ He encouraged them by 
reminding them that their victories were His. So is 
it always. There is not a single lad at whom shoes 
are thrown in the bedroom by his school-fellows, 
because he says his prayers beside his bed ; there 
is not a girl who brings on herself the derisive 
epithets of her fellow factory hands, because she 
reads her Testament in the dinner hour; there is not 
a single working man who endures obloquy and 


70 


The Life which becomes the Gospel 


reproach, the hiding of his tools, and exclusion from Phil. i. 
the companionship of his fellow workmen, because 27-30 
he dares to rebuke their blasphemous and impure 
conversation, who is not sharing in that same con- 
flict, which is always raging between heaven and 
hell. 

In that conflict suffering is inevitable, but let us Suffering for 


hrist 
dare to recognise that suffering for Christ’s sake is a jg = (ow 


gift. ‘It is gwen to you on behalf of Christ,’ He 
entrusts money to some, learning to others, gifts of 
speech and organisation to others, but to some, who 
may well stand in the inner circle, He gives the 
prerogative to suffer. Accept your suffering as a 
precious gift from His hand, and dare to believe 
that in and through it all, you are filling up that 
which is behind of His own suffering, for His Body’s 
sake, which is the Church. You are being admitted 
into His Gethsemane to watch with Him, your 
suffering is precious in His sight, and will have a 
distinct and undoubted effect in hastening the advent 
of His Kingdom. 


71 


Phil. ii. 
I-4 

Fellowship 
is essential 


to growth o 


character. 


Such 
Fellowship 
is Com- 
munion, 


Vill 


THE ENTWINING OF 
CHRISTIAN HEARTS 


Pui. ii. 1-4 


Ir there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of 
love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, 

Fulfil ye my joy, that ye be like-minded, having the same love, 
being of one accord, of one mind. 

Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory ; but in lowliness 
of mind let each esteem other better than themselves. 

Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on 
the things of others. 


Feurowsuie is essential to the true development of. 


character. Eyer since the Creation it has not been 
good for man to be alone. The Swiss Family 
Robinson was always more interesting to me than 


¢ Robinson Crusoe, because the latter was alone on the 


island, whilst the former was a family group. No 
man can be satisfied to live by himself. It may be 
necessary, but he will not attain his full growth. 
He needs fellowship with those above him, with 
those beside him, and with those below him, in 
order to attain his full maturity. 

Such fellowship must be inward rather_than 
outward. It must be communion rather than com- 
munication ; it must be in spirit and sympathy more 
than in outward form. If a man is only conscious 
that he is in sympathy with kindred souls he does 
not so much mind if they be silent. If there be at 
this moment some noble angel who has been com- 


72 


The Entwining of Christian Hearts 


missioned by the Almighty to undertake a distant Phil. ii. 
errand to one of the environs of the universe, and 1-4 
who at this moment is plying his mighty flight 
through ether, intent on executing the purpose of 
the Most High, his noble bosom heaving with adora- 
tion, devotion, and praise, even though his back 
should be turned to the metropolis of the universe 
from which he has started, in those distant seas of 
space, from which no answering angel voice re- 
sponds to his, and where his voice alone awakens 
the echoes with the praise of the Eternal, he prob- 
ably is not conscious of solitude, or loneliness, or 
isolation, because his heart is beating in sympathy 
with the great host of beings he has left behind him. 

It is not necessary, therefore, that we should have 
outward contact with people to derive the develop- 
ment of character, which comes from sympathy ; if 
the contact is inner and heart to heart, it is enough 

for the achieving of the Divine purpose. 

This fellowship will best come to us through @ It must come 
common medium. Of course, there are many cases pha 
of affinity in which man is drawn to man, and woman Medium. 
to woman, and man to woman, by a sort of inward 
attraction and approximation of heart to heart. But 
this is not so strong for the most part as their 
common adherence to a common interest. There 
may be the aggregation of sand-grains, which have 
been moistened and compressed until they appear to 
cohere, but directly they become dry they disintegrate 
and fall apart, atom from atom; whereas, supposing 
a number of grains of iron dust to accumulate around 
a common magnet, because the iron attracts them to 

73 


Phil. ii, 
I-4 


The Medium 
may be a 
Common 
Sentiment. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


itself it attracts them also to one another, and there 
is no disintegration, but a perpetual welding. So 
it is with groups of men. Men may be pressed to- 
gether from without, whose union is but temporary. 
But again, other men may embrace one common 
principle, and become compacted into a cohesive 
whole. For the most part it is better, therefore, for 
us to adhere to one another because of their 
adhesion to a common centre or medium. 

This knitting mediwm may be a common sentiment. 
For instance, take the children of a home—a brother 
and sister. Their spirits came, God alone knows 
whence, but they met together in this common 
family circle. The common life of the father, of the 
mother, of the dear old ancestral residence, of the 
antique furniture, of the garden, or farm,—these 
create the common sentiments that yield for those 
two a medium of unusual attractiveness. So it is 
with two artists. Their common interest in the 
beautiful, that they catch bewitching nature in her 
shyest moods, that they are students together of the 
secrets of creation—these common sentiments will 
draw them together. They may have met in some little 
village, never having known each other before, but 
from that week which they spend together, they 
become welded by a common sentiment. So it is 
with two reformers, men who have come from 
different parts of England, who speak different 
dialects of English; they meet in a common council 
chamber, hear some great programme unfolded, and 
leap to their feet with enthusiastic acclamation, 
Then, as they leave the hall by the same staircase, 

74 


~The Entwining of Christian Hearts 


talking casually, the two men find themselves drawn Phil. ii, 
together ; and from that moment a tie is wrought 1-4 
between them which will unite them like Cobden and 
Bright—brothers for the remainder of their existence. 


Higher and better than the adhesion to a sentiment Better still, a 


is a common devotion to a person, That is what See 
made the unity of the Cave of Adullam. David's 
followers had come from all parts of Israel; they 

were, many of them, men of rude and rough char- 

acter; some were debtors, some outlaws; but as 

soon as they reached that spot and gathered around 

the magnetic personality of David, they became con- 
solidated into a fellowship, before the impact of 

which the kingdom of Saul fell. He could not resist 

the mighty impulse of that united band of brothers, 

that gathered each to the other, because they 
gathered around David. And in our own English 

story, what made the unity of the Table Round, 

which drove out the heathen and righted wrong 
throughout the whole country, except the fact that 

King Arthur was there, the leader, the prince, the 

centre, in whom each of the units found union and 
cohesion with every other ? 

What is it that makes the British Empire? Is it 
not because distant colonies, countries, cities, and 
vast extended territories find their centre of unity 
in the personality of the Sovereign? In the old 
village life of England, the fact that men, women, 
and children came for water to the common well, 
that stood in the centre of the village green, made 
the whole village become one by its common attrac- 
tion to that moss-grown well. 


75 


Phil. ii. 
I-4 


Best of All: 


God the 
Medium. 


| 


| 


—— 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


It is best of all when that medium is God Himsei/- 
—God in the person of Christ. You can see that in a 
minute, if you have noticed the change that comes 
over a family when religion enters it. Before religion 
came the father, mother, and children were bound by 
a certain bond to each other; there were no jars, no 
jealousy, no strife; but when a revival comes over 
the Church, and the larger number, if not all, in the 
household become truly regenerate, there is a new 
depth, a new blessedness in the family life. God is 
in the meals, God is in the play and recreation ; the 
thought of God persuades and permeates the whole 
house. The presence of God gives a new meaning 
to every affection, pursuit, engagement, and faculty— 
a new wealth and beauty pour into them all. 

Two men may have been drawn to each other by 
a common sentiment. After a while they become 
religious, each begins to love God. They love one 
another better, touch one another at deeper points, 
become in every way more to one another. Those 
two men have taken the bulb of friendship, which 
could hardly thrive in the cold atmosphere to which 
it was exposed, and have planted it amid the kindly 
atmosphere of the love of God, and the poor sickly 
plant has unfurled a fragrance and beauty of colour 
which had never before been possible. So you see, 
however great the drawings we have to one another 
on the same and lower platform of common interests 
or sentiments towards a given centre, there is no 
such fellowship as that which is born in us when 
we are welded together in a common love to 
Jesus Christ and a common devotion to the interests 


76 


The Entwining of Christian Hearts 


of His kingdom. This is the basis of closest fellow- Phil. ii. 
ship, when our souls are bound together by a strong 1-4 
deep attachment to God in Christ. 

% * * * * 

According to this passage there are five bonds of 
union and fellowship in the Gospel. 

The first bond is the consolation which ts in Bonds of 
Christ. For consolation let us substitute exhorta- jean 
tion, or, better still, persuasiveness, so that we might 
put it that the first bond of Christian fellowship is 
Christ’s persuasiveness. That Jesus Christ is inte- 
rested in every Church fellowship is obvious, but we 
do not always realise how much He is always doing 
to persuade us to maintain it. Have there not been 
times in your life when you have been greatly in- 
censed, but have realised that there was a voice 
speaking within your heart, and a gentle influence 
stealing over you, a yearning towards the brother 
about whom you had cherished hard and unkind 
feelings? That has been the persuasiveness of 
Christ. It is He who has besought you to check 
that word, to refrain from writing that letter, to 
abandon that bitter and offensive way which had 
seemed so befitting a method of repaying your 
enemy to his face. It was Christ who was per- 
suading you to drop the weapon from your hand, 
and to reach it out in brotherhood, and this because 
He was so eager to keep the unity of the Spirit un- 
broken in the bond of peace. 


The second bond is the comfort of love. The The Comfort 
Greek word will bear this rendering—zf you_know ° Love. 
the tender cheer that love gives ; that is, see to it 
rd 


Phil. ii. 
I-4 


The Fellow- 
ship of _ 
Spirit. 3 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


that you maintain the bond of Christian fellowship 
by meeting your fellow Christians with the tender 
cheer of love. We all know what tender cheer is, 
when men have been out all day and tried, almost 
beyond endurance. As they come out of the storm, 
the depression of their spirit and their health may 
have conspired to reduce them to the lowest depth 
of darkness—then as the door opens, and they see 
the ruddy glow of the fire, and the wife comes to 
meet them, and the child is there with its prattle, 
for a moment it seems almost worth while having 
known the weariness and depression because of the 
contrasted cheer that greets them. All around us 
in the world are Christian hearts which are losing 
faith; many hands hang down, and knees shake 
together. Let us see to it that by the kindly cheer 
of a smile, the grasp of a hand, the welcome of a 
word, we do something to draw those péople into 
the inner circle of Christian love. 

The third bond is the fellowship of the Spirit. 
The word means fo share the Spirit, the going in 
common with the Spirit. They who live near God 
know what that fellowship is ; they know that they 
are always accompanied; that they are never for 
one moment by themselves ; can never enter a room 
with the consciousness of vacancy; can never travel 
in an empty car with a sense of isolation and 
solitude: there is always the fellowship of the 
Spirit. Whatever any one man knows of this 
fellowship every other knows. Each Christian 
person is conscious of the same Presence, making 
evident and obvious to us the same Jesus Christ. 


78 


The Entwining of Christian Hearts 


The same atmosphere is lighted by the same sun; Phil. ii. 
and in proportion as we have fellowship with the 1-4 
same Spirit we cannot lose our temper with each 

other, or be hard, cross, and unkind. 

The fourth bond is, ‘ Bowels of mercies.’ The old + Bowels of 
Greek word stands for humanness aud pity. In the Mercies.’ 
former clause we were called upon to manifest the 
kindly cheer, that welcomes the weary soldier on his re- 
turn from the campaign, for equals of whose heart- 
sorrow we have some inkling ; but now we are to show 
fellowship for our dependants and subordinates, for 
the fallen, the weak, the weary, for those whose spirits 
cry out in agony. And in acting thus we are doing 
what we can to co-operate with Christ in His con- 

‘solation, and with the Holy Ghost in His fellowship, to 
build up and compact the Church into a living unity. 

The fifth bond is one common mind and purpose— A Common 
‘That ye be like-minded, being of one accord and of Pie 
one mind.’ It recalls the sentence in the book of 
Chronicles which tells us that every day men came 
from all Israel with one mind to make David king. 
So the deepest thought in Christian fellowship, and 
that which makes us truly one, is the desire to make 
Jesus King, that He may be loved and honoured, 
that thousands of souls may bow the knee and con- 
fess that He is Lord. Oh! that this were ever the 
prominent thought among us. 

In such an atmosphere, where all love one another 
and live for the common object of the glory of Jesus, | 
three things follow :— i 

(1) Party spirit dies—‘Uet nothing be done Three 
through strife or partizanship.’ One cannot say, I Results. 


79 


\ LAAL 


Phil. ii. 
I-4 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


am of Apollos; another, I am of Cephas; because 
all are of Christ. 

(2) There is absolute humility. Each thinks the 
other better than himself. Why? Because each looks 
upon the best things in another and the worst things 
in himself; and it is only when you compare what 
you know yourself to be with what you think others 
are, that you become absolutely humble. By com- 
paring what we sadly deplore in ourselves with what 
we admire in others it is not difficult to think every- 
body better than ourselves. Out of this there comes— 


(3) The habit is formed of looking upon other men’s 
things and not upon our own. ~ We acquire a wide 
ah we begin to see 
something of Him in people who have been accus- 
tomed to very different surroundings from ourselves. 
We realise that those who do not belong to our fold 
may yet belong to the same flock. When we love 
Christ best it is wonderful how soon we discover 
Him in people who do not belong to our Church, or 
denomination, or system, but who also love Him 
best, are living the same life, and filled with the 
same spirit. We never relax our loyalty to our 
special Church, but we enlarge our sympathy to 
embrace the great Church, the Body of Christ. 

Perhaps you have not yet entered the life of love! 
You do not know what the love of God is—your sin 
has made you evil and selfish. But if you are willing 
to abandon your selfish, sinful life, and kneel at the 
foot of the Cross, asking for forgiveness and salva- 
tion, step by step you will enter that experience 
which we have been describing, and which is in this 
world as an oasis amid wastes of wilderness sand. 

80 


IX 
HE EMPTIED HIMSELF 


Pui. ii. 5-8 


Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus : 

Who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be 
equal with God: 

But made Himself of no reputation, and took upon Him the 
form of a servant, and was =e in the likeness of men: 

And being found in fashion as a man, He humbled Himself, 
and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. 


In the whole range of Scripture this paragraph Phil. ii. 
stands in almost unapproachable and unexampled 5-8 
majesty. There is no passage where the extremes of pee and 
our Saviour’s majesty and humility are brought into combined. 
such abrupt connection. Guided by the Spirit of 
God, the Apostle opens the golden compasses of his 
imagination and faith, and places the one point upon 
the supernal Throne of the eternal God, and the 
other upon the Cross of shame where Jesus died, 
and he shows us the great steps by which Jesus 
approached always nearer and nearer to human sin 
-and need; that, having embraced us in our low 
estate, He might carry us back with Himself to the 
very bosom of God, and that by identifying Himself 
with our sin and sorrow He might ultimately identify 
us with the glory which He had with the Father 
before the world was. And this wonderful de- 
scription of His descent to our shame and sorrow 
is here cited by the Apostle, that it might be a living 

F 81 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


Phil. ii, impulse and inspiration to ourselves, not to look 
5-8 upon our own things, not to hold them with a tight 


grasp, but to be willing to stoop for others to shame, 
sorrow, and_spitting; fulfilling God’s purpose of 
mercy to the world, even as Jesus Christ, who 
became the instrument and organ through which 
God’s redemptive purpose wrought. ‘ Let this mind 
be in you.’ Think these thoughts. Never look 
exclusively upon your own interests, never count 
anything of your own worthy to stand in the way, 
but always be prepared to the last point to deny 
yourself, that the redemptive purpose of God may 
flow through the channel of your life to those that 
sorely need His blessed help. It is a wonderful 
thing that, day by day, in our poor measure, we may 
repeat the purpose and the work of Jesus Christ our 
Emmanuel. 

No rhetoric or metaphor of ours can add to the 


splendour of these words, but in the simplest possible 
way we will stand on these seven successive slabs of 


chrysolite. 
' * * * * * 
Christinthe First, HE was In Tue Form or Gop. The 
ee of Greek word translated “form” means a great deal 
0p 2" more than the external appearance ; it stands for the 


essence of God’s nature, so that we may say that 
esus Christ possessed the essence of the Divine 
quality and nature from all eternity. This exactly 
grees with other words of Scripture, as when we 
are told, He is ‘the image of the invisible God.’ 
Again, ‘ Being the effulgence of His glory,’ ic. He 
was the outshining beam of the Father’s glory ; ‘and 
82 


He emptied Himself 


the very image of His substance,’ ie. He corresponded Phil. ii. 


to the Divine Nature, as a seal to the die. Again, 5-8 


‘The Word was with God, and the Word was God.’ 
‘All things were made by Him.’ And then, as we 
overhear that marvellous communion between the 
Son and the Father, in_ John xvii, we notice His 
reference to the glory He had with the Father before 
the worlds were made, and with which He asks the 
Father to glorify Him in His human nature again. 
All these deep words prove that whatever God was 
in the uncreated eternity of the past,—the infinite, 
the incomprehensible, the all-holy, and the all- 
blessed,—that was Jesus Christ, who was absolutely 


one with Him, as spirit and soul are one in the 
organisation of our nature. 
% * %* % % 


Secondly, THERE WAS NO ROBBERY WHEN Hk It was not 


CLAIMED EQuaLiTy WITH . Indeed, as R.V. Rober. 


puts it, it was not a thing to be grasped, because He 


was so sure of it. It was conceded to Him univer- 
sally; He counted it no robbery; He thought it 
detracted nothing from the Father’s infinite glory 
when He stood on an equality with Him; and it is 


remarkable to notice how in the four courts of. iP 
earthly life He prosecuted His claim. There+are® *. 


four courts for us all. 


PAL eee 


In the court of His intimates. On the highway Four Courts. 


to Cesarea Philippi, He asked His disciples whom 

men took Him to be; and Peter cried, ‘Thou art 

the Christ, the Son of the living God.’ This could 

not have meant that the Lord Jesus was the Son as 

we are sons. That would have been a meaningless 
83 


Phil. ii. 
5-8 


\ 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


response. There was something more than that. 
And Jesus took it to be more, because He said, 
‘Flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but 
My Father which is in heaven.’ In those words He 
took to Himself the prerogative of equality with God. 
You remember how He said afterwards: ‘Ye 
believe in God,’—give Me the same faith, ‘ believe also 
in Me.’ He thought it not robbery to receive the 
faith that man gives to God. He said significantly : 
“My Father and I,’—‘ We will come and make our 
abode with him.’ He thought it not robbery to 
enter the human soul and to share its occupancy 
with the Father. With His intimates He always 
spoke of Himself as One with the Father, in an 
incomprehensible, mysterious, but essential oneness. 

So also in_the court of public opinion. He said, 
‘IT and My Father are One,’ with an emphasis that 
made the Jews catch up stones to cast at Him, 
because, being a man, He claimed to be God. And 
He also told them that all men were to honour the 
Son even as they honour the Father. He thought it 
not robbing God to accept the honour men gave 
to Him. 

So also in the court of justice. We know how 
harpricaian ecu Tn aa Him to declare 
His essential nature, and said, ‘ Art Thou the Son of 
the living God?’—using the word son in the sense 
the Jews always did use it, as intimating essential 
Deity ; and He said, ‘Thou sayest that I am: and 
hereafter ye shall see the Son of man coming in the 
glory of God,’—for He did not think it robbery to 
share God’s prerogative and place. 

84 


He emptied Himself 
Finally, in the court of death. When death came, Phil. ii, 


and He hung upon that cross of agony, He did not 5-8 
for a moment retract all that He had said, but opened 
the gate to the dying thief, and assured bin that he 
would be that day with Him in Paradise,—for He 
did not think it robbing God to assume the right of 
opening the gates of forgiveness and life. 

All through His earthly life He insisted upon it 
that He was God’s equal, God’s fellow, and that He 


was One with the Father. 
* * * * 


Thirdly, He EMPTIED ot This was evi- He emptied 


dently by His free will and choice. He emptied Himself 
Himself of His glory. As Moses veiled the glory 
that shone upon his face, so Emmanuel veiled the 
glory that irradiated from His Person. We are told 
they need no sun in heaven, because His Presence is 
sun. What an effulgence of light must have streamed 
from Jesus, the Second Person of the Holy Trinity, 
in those uncreated ages! But when He stepped 
down to earth He veiled it,—the Word became flesh 
and tabernacled among us,—the Shekinah- nature 
was shrouded, so that it was not able to penetrate, 
save on the Mount of Transfiguration, when, for a 
moment, the voluntary act by which Christ hid His 
intrinsic splendour was laid aside, and it welled out 
in cascades and torrents of blinding light. 

But probably we are specially here taught that He 
emptied Himself of the use of His divine attributes. 
This is a profound truth which it is necessary to 
understand if you would read rightly the lesson of 
our Saviour’s life. Men have been accustomed to 

85 





Phil. ii. 
5-8 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


think that the miracles of Jesus Christ were wrought 
by the putting forth of His intrinsic and original 
power as God: that when He hushed the storm, and 
the waves crouched like whelps to His fect,—that 
when He raised the dead, and Lazarus sheeted with 
grave-clothes came forth,—that when He touched 
the sight of the blind, and gave eyeballs to those that 
had been born without their optics,—that all this 
was done by the forthputting of His own original, 
uncreated, and divine power; whereas a truer under- 
standing of His nature, specially as disclosed in 
the Gospel by St John, shows that He did nothing 
of Himself, but what He saw the Father doing ; that 
the words He spoke were not His own words, but as 
He heard God speaking He spoke ; that the works 
He did were not his own, but_the Father's -who sent 
Him, for when they said on one occasion ‘Show us 
the Father,’ He replied, ‘He that hath seen Me hath 
seen the Father; the words I speak to you I speak 
not from Myself, but the Father that dwelleth in Me 
He doeth His works.’ His human life was one of 
faith, even as ours should be: ‘As the living Father 
hath sent Me, and I live by the Father, even so he 
that eateth Me shall live by Me.’ Frequently He 
paralleled our experience with His own; and no 
doubt the story of the Vine in which He depicts 
our dependence upon Himself, had long been in His 
thought as an emblem of His own dependence upon 
the Father. He chose to live like this. He volun- 
tarily laid aside the exercise of His omnipotence, that 
He might receive power from God; absolutely and 
voluntarily forewent the use of attributes that lay. all 
- 86 





He emptied Himself 


around Him, like tools within the reach of the skilled Phil. ii, 
mechanic, that He might live a truly human life, 5-8 
weeping our tears, and receiving the plenitude of His 
Father’s power. 

* * * * * 


Fourthly, He Took upon Him THE FoRM oF A Christ in the 
SERVANT. The infinite God, with whom He was as “ 
One, desired to achieve certain purposes in our world; 
and the blessed Christ, the Second Person in the 
Trinity, undertook to be the medium and_ vehicle 
through which the Father might express Himself: 
and just as the words that issue from our mouth are 
impressed with our intelligence—the liquid air around 
us yielding itself to the movements of the larynx, so 
that what is in our mind is communicated and 
conveyed to others as they listen—so Jesus Christ 
became the Word of God, impressed with the thought, 
mind, and intention of God, so that the Father was 
able, through the yielded nature of the Son, to do, 
say, and be everything He desired. Christ was the 


erfect expression of the Being of Him whom no 


man hath seen, or can see. 
It is so absurd, therefore, to divorce Jesus from 


the Father. Preachers have made an awful mistake 
when they have spoken of the Atonement as though 
Jesus intervened to appease the Father, to satisfy 
something in God that needed satisfaction before He 
could love. On_the contrary, the whole Bible sub- 
stantiates the belief that God was in Christ; and 
that what Christ did, God did through Him, and 
that the death on the cross was the act of the entire 
Deity. What wonder, then, that the Father said, 
87 








The Epistle to the Philippians 


Phil. ii, ‘Behold My Servant whom I have chosen, Mine 
58 elect, in whom My soul is well pleased. [will put 
My Spirit upon Him, and He shall show judgment 


to the Gentiles.’ 
* * * * * 


In the Fifthly, Hs Was MADE IN THE LIKENESS OF 


Fikeness of aren, He must know what the experiences of a 
human body are, what childhood and boyhood, and 
what it is to pass through the various stages of man- 
hood. It was needful that He should be as perfectly 
united with man as He was perfectly united with 
God, so that He might be made a merciful and 
faithful High Priest, to make intercession for our 
sins—for all these reasons—He did not abhor the 
Virgin’s womb, but was made man. Let us not fear 
too much the mystery and burden of human life. 
Our Lord and Master has gone this way before us, 
and has left a track behind, as they who traverse 
the Australian bush break twigs or branches along 
their route, to serve as a guide to those who follow. 
It is good to be born, that we may have a share in 
the nature He has worn. 

* * * * & 


Christ Sixthly, He prep, He need not have died, 
eee because He was sinless ; eath was only the 
result of sin. Adam sinned ane so died; Jesus did 


not sin, and therefore needed not to pass through 

death’s portal. From the Mount of Transfiguration, 

He might, had He chosen, have stepped back into 

heaven, as Adam might have been caught back to 

God, if he had not eaten of the forbidden fruit. Had 

our first parents not yielded to temptation, our race 
88 


He emptied Himself 


would still have peopled the world, and would have Phil. ii. 
passed away, as, at the Second Advent, those will, 5-8 
who are alive and remain,—suddenly changed, not 
seeing death, and their mortality swallowed up of life. 
From the Mount of Transfiguration Jesus Christ 
could have stepped into heaven, His body passing in 

a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, through its 
supreme transfiguration. But, had this been the 
case, He would never have made the reparation due 

to the holy law which man had broken. And there- 
fore, with calm deliberation, and with full knowledge 

of all that awaited Him, He came down the moun- 
tain-side, and yielded Himself to death. He laid 
down His life at the cross, and bowed His meek 
head beneath death’s sceptre. He had power to lay 
down His life, as a voluntary gift and sacrifice for 
our race ; and He used it. Though Lord of all, He 
became obedient to the last dread exaction of human 


penalty: and, through death, destroyed him_ that 
had_the power of death. 


* * * * * 


Seventhly, Hz cHosE THE MOST DEGRADING AND Even the 
————— TSC 7 Death of the 
PAINFUL FORM OF DEATH. There were several Cross, 
methods of death—by decapitation, by the stoppage 
of the heart’s action, or by drinking poison. The 
death of the cross was the death of the slave, the 
most shameful and ioviovaintbust™ > Cicero sald that it 
was far, not only from the bodies but the imagination 
of Romans. Therefore, since this death was the most 
shameful through the exposure of the person, the 
most degrading, the most painful known to man, the 
Saviour chose it. He could not have gone any lower. 

89 


Phil. ii. 
5-8 


That Mind 
must be in 
Use 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


One has sometimes imagined how He might 
have died—in the home of Bethany, with the 
window open towards Jerusalem, Mary wiping the 
death-dew from His brow, and Martha waiting on 
His every need, whilst Lazarus gave Him a brother's 
help. But this could not be the Lord’s choice, in 
view of the fact that He must taste death for every 
man, and be made a curse, and be able to put His 
everlasting arms beneath those of His followers, who 
have died the most excruciating and shameful deaths. 
glory, our thrones of comfort, respect, and power, if 
by doing so we may be the better able to succour 
others. We must be willing to take the form of 
servants, to wash one another’s feet, to submit even 
to shame and spitting, to misunderstanding and 
opprobrium, if we shall thereby help to lift the 
world nearer God. ‘There is no other way of sitting 
with Jesus on His throne, no other method by which 
we may assist Him, however feebly, in His work of 
saving others. There are plenty among us like the 
two brethren who would sit right and left in the 
Kingdom, who will never be able to attain thereto 
because they will not pay the price of drinking His 
cup and being baptised with His baptism. They 
will not take the low seat, or stoop to the obscure 
and unnoticed tasks: they love the honour that 
comes from human applause, and the notoriety 
which accrues from conspicuous notices in the daily 
press. God help and forgive us for yielding to these 
insidious temptations, and give us the Spirit of our 
Lord, that the same mind may be in us as in Him. 

90 


He emptied Himself 


Kepler, when he first turned his telescope to resolve\Phil. ii. 
the nebulw, said, ‘I am thinking over again the|5-8 
first thoughts of God’; but surely it is given to us 

to think still earlier thoughts than those of Creation, 

even those which were in the heart of the Lamb who 

was slain in the Divine Purpose before the worlds 

were framed. 


91 


Phil. ii. 
Qg-II 

A Name 
above every 
Name, 


x 
THE NAME OF NAMES 


Putt. ii. 9-11 


WaeEreErore God also hath highly exalted Him, and given Hima 
name which is above every name: 

That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in 
heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth ; 

And that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ zs Lord, 
to the glory of God the Father. 


Tuts is the other side of the subject we last con- 
sidered. Then, we contemplated the descent ; now, 
the ascent: the one, His humiliation; the 
other, the glory to which God_hath 
Him. We ought to put this passage alongside of 
Eph. i. 15-23, where the Apostle asserts that God 
displayed in the person of Jesus His mightiest power, 
when He raised Him from the dead, and set Him at 
His own right hand, far above all principality and 
power, might, and dominion, and every name that is 
named, not only in this world, but in that which is 
to come. Indeed all through the New Testament the 
Father's agency in the exaltation of His Son is 
distinctly accentuated; and we are constantly re- 
minded of the contrast between the action of men, 
who with wicked hands crucified and slew Him, and 
the action of God, who raised Him from the dead. 
There are two interpretations, which are suggested 
by the Authorised and Revised Versions. We are 
92 


The Name of Names 


told in the R.V. that God highly exalted Him, and Phil. ii, 
gave Him the name which is above every name—the 9-11 
emphasis on the definite the ; and if we should accept 
this rendering, it would convey the meaning that the 
infinite God gave to Jesus, His perfected Servant, 
His own incommunicable name of Jehovah. The 
name which is above every name is manifestly the 
name of Jehovah, which the Jews held to be so 
sacred that they never mentioned it, never even wrote 
it. It is important for us to realise that in Jesus 
Christ there blend at this moment the perfected 
beauty of the Man and the excelling glory of Jehovah 
—the glory which He had with the Father before 
the world was made. That is so deep and blessed a 
truth that we may be quite prepared to admit it is 
included in the meaning here, for our Saviour is God. 

But after looking carefully into the matter from 
every point of view, it seems better to come back to 
the conclusion suggested by the Authorised Version— 
that the name of Jesus, which was given to Him in 
His birth, has been recognised as the highest type of 
being in the whole universe, and that this name, or 
more especially the nature for which the name stands, 
is the loftiest and suprem supreme type of character, which 
is highly exalted above all other characters and types 
of being. His is the conquering name; the name The Name 
which shall become victorious; the name which is °f J@s¥s: 
destined to supremacy—the name of Jesus. It was 
given to Him first by the angel Gabriel, when in his 
annunciation to the mother he said, ‘Thou shalt 
conceive and bring forth a son, and shalt call his 
naine Jesus. And when Joseph was considering 

93 


Phil. ii. 
Q-II 


Here is 
Instruction. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


whether or not he should put away Mary, then 
espoused to him but not yet married, the angel of 
God, in a dream, told him to take to himself Mary 
his wife, because she would bear a son, to whom they 
must give the name Jesus. This name of Jesus was 
borne by our Lord throughout His earthly life, and 
often used by His apostles after His ascension, as the 
spell and talisman of victory, when they wrought 
miracles in His name. It is repeatedly referred to 
in the Epistles, and especially in that to the Hebrews, 
and evidently stands for the highest type of being. 
In the whole realm of existence this is the name 
which is above every name, that at the name of 
Jesus, the Saviour, every knee should bow in heaven, 
in earth, and in hades. 

(1) We obtain instruction. We are familiar with 
the phrase, ‘Survival of the fittest;’ by which we 
understand that amid the shocks and collisions of 
creation certain types of creature-life, stronger than 
others, broad-shouldered and powerful, have pushed 
their way to the front, and have crushed out the 
weaker. Amid the strife chronicled by history, 
certain races of mankind inevitably go down, whilst 
others forge their way to the front and hold positions 
of supremacy. Similarly, in the life of the world 
around us, where everything is being searched and 
tested to the uttermost by the ordeal of time, probation, 
and trial, certain types of character are constantly 
being thrust downward, or hurled against the wall 
in the impetuous rush, whilst others come easily to 
the front. Thus, perpetually, different types of ideal 
and character are acknowledged as supreme. 

94 


The Name of Names 


As we look around us, in the great arena of life, Phil. ii. 
we are often disposed to imagine that the type of g-II 
character represented by power, by the giant’s grip, 
by sinew and muscle, is the supreme and victorious 
one. At other times we are disposed to think that 
the type of the scientist and philosopher, the man of 
wise thought and penetrating investigation, is the 
elect, the ideal type. Again we are disposed to think 
that the man of wealth, who by his ingenuity has suc- 
ceeded in accumulating a fortune or in building up 
a great business, exhibits the ideal type. Thus amid 
the cross-lights of this world we are greatly perplexed; 
for when we turn to the life of Jesus Christ, the 
sweet, gentle, self-denying, and forgiving life, » life, which 
appeared to be unable to hold its own against the 
antagonism and malice of men, we are apt to conclude 
that that type at least is too tender, too gentle, too 
retiring and unobtrusive to become the dominant 
type. Yes, we exclaim, the race is to the strong, the 
sceptre for the wise, the throne for the man of wealth ; 
but the cross is for the character that_lives to love 
and forgive, and save. It is good, therefore, to come 
into the sanctuary of God, to leave behind us our 
newspapers and novels, the standards of the market- 
place and the forum, and to submit our minds 
beneath the influence of this word which lets in 
eternity upon time, which allows the light that plays 
around the throne of God to strike in upon us; and, 
as we see things for one brief hour, not from the 
standpoint of our fellows, but of the angels—not 
judging by the standards of this world, but by those 
of the other world into which we so soon shall come 

95 


The Epistle to the Philippians 
Phil. ii, . —we shall find that the dominant type of character 


g-I1 which is to endure, to last supreme when all other 
types of character, which men have worshipped and 
idolised, have passed away as the mists of winter 
before the summer, is the name and nature of Jesus 
Christ, the Saviour and Redeemer of men. 

This is what God hath chosen. Here is the 
survival of the fittest. Here is the supreme conception 
of character. This, this is what. eternity enthrones. 
This is what dominates angels and demons. The 
nature that stoops, loves, forgives, saves ; this is the 
ideal type. God hath given Him a name above 
every name—Jesus, Saviour. 

ernie (2) We get great encouragement. It is of infinite 
Sac eee importance to know what God loves best. We are 
destined to live with Him for ever, to see Him face 
to face, and be for ever in His presence. It is of 
the highest importance, therefore, to us, to know 
what is His chosen_ideal, that we may begin to 
shape ourselves by it, that we may emulate it, that 
we may ourselves seek to be endued by it, so that 
hereafter we may be taken to the bosom of God as 
His chosen friends and children. If we desire to 
know a man we must converse with him, enter his 
study, handle and look at his books, and gaze round 
the walls at the pictures he has chosen to adorn 
them. 

If we know a man’s ideal, we know him. If we 
can only get God’s ideal, we may know Him. 
Where can we find it?’ In creation ?—No, not His 
deepest. In proverb and prophecy ?’—No, not His 
deepest. In angels excelling in strength ?—No, not 

96 


The Name of Names 


His deepest. In the perfection of moral character? Phil. ii. 
That is nearer, but it is not His deepest. The name 9-11 
that is dearest to God is Jesus; and the character 


which is dearest to God is that which bears, forgives, 


and loves even to death, that it may save. That 
which God sets His heart upon for evermore is 
redemptive love, which He glorifies, raising it to the 
highest place that heaven affords. 

‘ Ah, we will not fear Thee more, our God! We 
have stood under the thunder-peal hurtling through 
the air, and trembled ; we have beheld the lightning- 
flash revealing our sin and making us cry for shelter ; 
we have watched Thy march through history, and 
there have been traces of blood and tears behind on 
Thy track; and as we look out into the eternal 
future our hearts stand still. We are but leaves in 
the great forest of existence ; bursting bubbles upon 
the mighty ocean of being ; but when we come to see 

hat Thine ideal is in the Divine Man who died for 

us, we fear Thee no more, but approach with the 
confidence of a little child; for if Thou dost love the 
Man Christ Jesus, and we love Him too, we can 
meet Thee in the Cross with its dying agony.’ It is 
a great encouragement to know that God’s ideal is 
the Man who died. 

Our God seems sometimes to come near us and 
say: ‘There is never a soul that stoops, stripping 
itself that it may wash the feet of another ; there is 
never a soul that sheds tears over the ruin of those 
it loves, as Jesus did on the Mount of Olives over 
Jerusalem ; there is never a soul that pours out its 
life-blood even unto death; there is never a soul 

G 97 


Dee ti aries a eae Ll 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


Phil. ii. that denies itself to the uttermost, that is not dear 

9-11 to Me. I notice it, though the great world passes 
by unwitting and careless; I bend over those who 
tread in the earthly pathway trodden by My Son, 
My well beloved ; and though the midnight darkness 
may gather over the head, extorting the cry, “My 
God, my God, why hast Thou forsaken?” I do not 
forget, I cannot forsake; and presently, when the 
earth has passed away like the shadow of the cloud 
upon the hills, I will gather such, and bear them 
upward, taking them to My bosom, and enthroning 
them right and left of My Son. He that drinks the 
cup which Jesus drank of, and is baptised with the 
baptism with which he was baptised, though for- 
gotten, ignored, crushed and trampled underfoot 
by men, shall sit beside the Son of Man in His 
kingdom.’ 

Oh, let us take heart, as we think of God’s 
ideal; let us be encouraged, for now we know 
what God is, and that ultimately He will vindicate 
our work of faith, and labour of love, and patience 
of hope. 

Here is _ (3) We get exhortation. The name of Jesus is, then, 

Exhortation. dear ¢¢ God. What then? Let it be your plea, for 
it is said that whosoever believeth in that Name 
shall receive remission of sins. Convicted sinner, 
longing to have a clue to the maze, go at this 
moment into the presence of the great God and 
plead the name of Jesus. Let your one cry be 
founded upon what He was, and is; and just so 
soon as you utter that name, in the spirit of the 
name, God accepts, forgives, and saves. 

98 


The Name of Names 


Live in that_name—in the temper and character Phil. ii. 
of Jesus—day by day; let His Gospel imbue and 9-11 
colour your character ; let the uatation oF the lite Toe 
of Jesus be the one object of your ambition. There ; 
is no other clue to life amid the misery and sorrow 
of the world. Sometimes it seems hard to remember 
that children laugh, that the sun shines yet, that 
the crocuses and snowdrops are preparing to break 
through the clods of winter. We live oppressed 
beneath the infinite anguish and agony of the world ; 
it is so dark, so terrible with its sin and sorrow, 
with its overcrowding and drink and passion; and 
there is one’s own broken life, and all the mystery 
and perplexity of God’s dealings. We can find no 
clue to it except to follow the ideal_of Christ, livin 
to save; every day by patient and tender forbear- 
ance making someone happier; lifting the burden 
from some shoulder, sending a rift of light into some 
darkened heart. There is no other clue for the 
difficulty and perplexity of life. 

Sunday School teacher, never let the lesson pass Speak of 
without allowing the Name of Jesus Christ to ChS+ 
mingle with your words, like the breath of flowers 
in the summer air. Preacher, see to it that that 
Name rings through your utterances, your first word 
and your last. It is the only spell and talisman of 
victory; it is the one name that will overcome the 
power of the devil in temptation, and before which 
the evil spirits that beset us in our hours of weak- 
ness and depression give back. It is the watchword 
for those who approach the portals of eternity; the 
talisman of victory in the hour of death. 

99 


Phil, ii. 
9-11 


Reverence 


His Name. 


Confess 
Him, 


The Epistle to the Philippians 
As soon as you utter the name of Jesus, you 


arrest the Divine ear. Therefore in every prayer, 
before you break out into adoration, praise, con- 
fession, or entreaty, speak in the ear of God that 
name. Remember that Jesus said: Whatsoever ye 
ask the Father in My Name, in My Nature, accord- 
ing to the ideal of My life, He will give you. Let 
the name of Jesus winnow out of your prayers 
everything proud, selfish, and vindictive; let them 
be poured like liquid and gleaming metal into that 
precious mould. 

Reverence that name. ‘In the name of Jesus 
every knee shall bow.’ Let us never utter it with- 
out the prefix Lord. Let Him be always the Lord 
Jesus, If God speaks His name with marked 
emphasis, we must treat it with devout reverence. 
I greatly shrink from too great familiarity with the 
precious name of our Lord. A man has to be very 
near the Great Brother who can call him familiarly 
by His name. 

‘And every tongue confess.’ Let_us confess that 
He_is Lord. God the Father has made Him His 
ideal type; make Him your ideal type. God has 
just put the sceptre into His hand, do you put the 
sceptre into His hand also. God has enthroned 
Him, do you enthrone Him too, and to-day look up 
and say: ‘Henceforth, Blessed Jesus, Thou shalt 
be Lord and King; Lord of my life, King of my 
mind and heart; my Lord and my God.’ 

And remember that that is the one _hope of the 
future. That name of Jesus, whispered first by 
Gabriel to Mary and to Joseph, spread through a 

100 


The Name of Names 


comparatively small circle of His immediate followers, Phil. ii. 
but at Pentecost the Holy Ghost caught it up, and 9-14 
spoke it in thunder; and ever since it has been 
spreading through the world and through the 
universe, and we are yet to see the time when the 
loftiest angels shall bow beneath it, when all men 
shall own it, and the very demons acknowledge it. 
‘Jesus I know, and Paul I know,’ was the sad 
confession of a fallen spirit centuries ago. 

This name of our Lord—the last name spoken on 
earth, the first name uttered in heaven—the name 
that comprehends grace, the name that spells glory, 
for He has gone to prepare a place for us. We 
have passed the shortest day; yonder is the spring 
and summer of the morning land, and we anticipate 
the time when we shall sit with Him ; bearing that 
name with Him; and perhaps going forth to all 
parts of the universe to tell of it, to kindle hearts 
and lives with it, to unfold, as only redeemed men 
can, the full meaning and significance of the name 
Jesus. 





101 


Phil. ii. 
12, 13 


A Personal 
Injunction. 


XI 


THE DIVINE ENERGY IN 
THE HEART 


Pui. ii. 12, 13 


WHEREFORE, my beloved, as ye have always obeyed, not asin my 
presence only, but now much more in my absence, work out your 
own salvation with fear and trembling. 

For it is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of His 
good pleasure. 


THis text stands between two remarkable injunc- 
tions, the first personal— ‘Work out your own 
salvation with fear and trembling’; the second 
relative—‘Do all things without murmurings and 
disputings ; that ye may be blameless and harmless, 
children of God without rebuke.’ 

The personal mjunction—‘ Work out your own 
salvation.’ There is a sense in which we are saved 
from guilt and the wrath of God directly we come 
to the Cross ; but there is a sense also in which our 
salvation from the power of sin will not be complete. 
until we stand before God in perfect beauty, and in 
that sense we have to work it out. God gives us 
salvation in the germ, but the growth of the tree of 
our life has to elaborate this primal thought. And 
we are to do it with ‘fear and trembling,’ because 
so much is involved for ourselves and for others, for 
evermore, if the work is left incomplete. This is the 

102 


The Divine Energy in the Heart 


great aim to which all other aims must be subservient Phil. ii. 
—the accomplishment of our soul’s salvation, God 12, 13 
and we working together. As the husbandman and 

God work together for the harvest, and as the miner 

. and God work together for the provision of coal in 

our homes and factories, so we are_to work together 

with God for the full accomplishment of His purpose 

and our blessedness, in the ultimate salvation of our 

souls from every evil ingredient. This is a very deep, 
searching, and important work. Are you engaged in it? 

The relatwe imjunction—your attitude to _others. A Relative 
‘That ye may be harmless,’ i.e. that your life shall !junction. 
not injure another ; blameless, z.e. that no one should 
have any proper blame to attach to you; without 
rebuke, 1.e. in the sight of God. And this, not in 
heaven, but in the midst of ‘a crooked and perverse 
generation.’ A traveller in Japan was surprised to 
find a country given up to arctic winter, in which, 
nevertheless, there is the abundant tropical growth 
of oranges and bamboos. He was _ surprised, 
whilst the winds were sweeping across the snowy, 
icy plains of Japan, to find all these tropical plants, 
which he could only account for by the fact that the 
country had been volcanic, and that the hidden fire 
still burnt under the soil, so that, whilst winter reigns 
in the climate, summer reigns in the heart of the 
earth, and therefore the tropical plants are able to 
thrive. And we, in the midst of a very frigid, arctic 
world, a rebellious generation, are called to live the 


ha i OIE UE 


tropical life of eternity, to be blameless, harmless, 
and without rebuke. A man may say to himself, 


It is impossible for me to realise those two injunc- 
103 








The Epistle to the Philippians 


Phil. ii, tions; but our text lies between them and says, Do 

12, 13 not despair, do not abandon hope of being harmless, 
blameless, and without rebuke, for God will assume 
the responsibility of making you obedient to His own 
ideal—‘It is God which worketh in you both to will 
and to work, for His good pleasure.’ Work out what 
He works in. 

Six Now this sublime text strikes six dominant notes : 

Dominant / God’s Personality—‘ it is God’; God’s Immanence 2 

otes. SS > 
3—‘in you’; God’s Energy — ‘ worketh in you’; 
4God’s Moraliiy=He works in you ‘to will’; God’ss” 
Efficiency—He works in you ‘to work’; God's ulti-- 
mate Satisfaction—‘ for His own good pleasure.’ 
* * * * * 

God’s Gop’s Prersonaity.—‘ It is God that—’ Take 

Personality. away 7, and transpose the other words—God is, Or 
if you like to strike out the word zs, you leave the one 
great word God. And God is the answer to every 
question of the mind, to every trembling perturbation 
of the heart, to every weakness of appetite, and to 
every strong hurricane of temptation. The soul, the 
lonely individual soul, not knowing whence it has 
come, knowing almost as little whither it goes, con- 
fronting the question of weakness and sin and death 
and eternity, and the deep, deep problem of moral 
evil, can only answer every complaint by the one 
all-sufficient, all-comprehending monosyllable God. 
This is our one sheet-anchor—God made us, God 
knew our constitution, God knew our environment, 
God knew our temptation, the temptations that 
would assail us, and yet God redeemed us to Him- 
self, and made us His own by the blood of Christ. 

104 


The Divine Energy in the Heart 


Now, if He be a Being of perfect benevolence, He Phil. ii. 
cannot have done so much without assuming to 12, 13 
Himself the responsibility of realising the object of 
the tears, longings, and prayers, which He has put 
by His own hand within our nature; and, therefore, 
we must throw back on Him the responsibility (we 
doing our part), of making us blameless, harmless, 
and unrebukable before Him. 
* * * * * 

Gop’s ImmaNnENcE.— Distinguish between justifica- God's 
tion and sanctification. In justification, which is an ™™@nence. 
instantaneous act upon the part of God, as soon as 
the soul of man trusts Christ, God imputes to man 
the righteousness of Jesus Christ, so that he stands 
before God, in Christ, accepted and beloved. But if 
that were all it would resemble those curious Eastern 
processions where they marshal all the beggars of the 
market-place, and fling over their shoulders white or 
purple dresses embroidered with gold, so that the 
procession is composed of a number of the raggedest, 
dirtiest, laziest men in the kingdom, who look for an 
hour respectable. And if justification were all, God 
would simply throw white robes. upon us. But our 
hearts would fester; and, therefore, having justified 
us by an instantaneous act of His grace, He under- 
takes our sanctification by His immanence (from the 
Latin word im and maneo to remain). 

Deeper than the body, deeper than the soul with 
intellect, imagination, and volition, lies the spirit, 
and into the spirit of man the Spirit of God comes, 
bringing the germ of the nature of the risen Christ, 
so that the Holy Spirit reproduces it within us. 

105 


Phil. ii, 
12, 13 


God’s 
Energy. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


This is the immanence of God; and this is the 
distinctive peculiarity of our holy religion—that God 
can be in us, not robbing us of individuality, but side 
by side with it, clothing Himself with it, so that just 
as He was in Isaiah, but Isaiah greatly differs from 
Jeremiah, just as He was in John, but John was 
an altogether different man from Peter, so God enters 
the human spirit, and, without robbing us of our 
power of volition, individuality, or personality, He 
waits within, longing to burst through every restraint, 
and to reveal Himself through us in all the beauty and 
glory of His nature. Hide yourself, and let God work 
through you His own perfect ideal. 
* * * * * 

Gop’s Enrerey.—He works. He is not anabsentee 
in creation ; He is not an absentee in providence; He 
is not an absentee in the spirit of man; but He works 
so unobtrusively that we do not always realise the 
mighty forces which are at work within us. Froude 
and Carlyle, in Carlyle’s house, had a conversation 
one day about God’s work, and Froude said that 
God’s work in history was like His work in nature, 
modest, quiet, and unobtrusive. Carlyle replied 
sadly and solemnly—for it was a day of one of his 
darker moods—“ Ah, but, Froude, God seems to do 
so little !”—as though he expected that God would 
resemble a world-conqueror, whose personality is 
always attracting attention. 

If you had been present during creation, as Milton 
puts it, you might only have heard flute-like music. 
You would not have heard the voice that said, Light 
be! or that bade the waters give place. You would 

106 


The Divine Energy in the Heart 


not have seen the mighty hands moulding the earth. Phil. ii. 
All would have been done by natural processes, so 12, 13 
simply, so ordinarily, you would hardly have recog- 
nised the greatness of the Creator. 

And so in our heart. O son of man, thou hast not 
realised it, that all through these years the infinite 
God has been imprisoned in thy spirit ; and thy tears, 
thy sighs, thy regrets, thy yearnings, the rejuvenation 
of thy conscience, which thou hast so often affronted 
and injured,—prove that the Holy, mighty, and loving 
God is within thy spirit, fretting against the evil as 
John Howard fretted against the evils of the lazaretto 
and the prison, longing to make thy heart pure and 
sweet, if only thou wilt yield to Him. 

* * * % % 


Toe Divine Morauiry.—He works in us to will. The 


That is, He does not treat us like a machine, He Divine 
deals with us as moral agents who can say yes and ee 
no. He is not going to compel us to be saints, He 
is not going to force us to be holy. If thou wilt, 
He much more wills, and thou dost will because He 
willed before. The will of God wants to take thee up 
into itself, as the wind that breathes over a city waits 
to catch up the smoke from a thousand chimney-pots, 
and waft it on its bosom through the heavens. 

You may always know when God is willing within 
you—first, by a_holy discontent with yourself. You 
are dissatisfied with all that you have ever done, and 
been. Secondly, you aspire; you see above you the 
snow-capped peaks, and your heart longs to climb 
and to stand there. Thirdly, these are followed by 


the appreciation of the possibility of your being 
107 


Phil. ii. 
13,13 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


a man refuses to believe that he can be a saint, 
he never will become one. If a man says, I cannot 
hope to be more than conqueror, God Himself cannot 
save him. When the Spirit of God is within you, 
there rises up a consciousness that you have the 
capacity for the highest possible attainments, because 
you were made and redeemed in the image of God, 
and because the germ of the Christ-nature has been 
sown in your spirit. Two men go through a picture- 
gallery. Hach sees the same masterpiece. One 
says, I cannot imagine how that can be done. The 
other man says, I also am a painter. That second 
man is capable of producing a picture which also 
shall outlive. You must believe that you can be a 
saint, even you. You must dare to believe it, because _ 
the Christ-germ is sown in your character, and 

because God is working in you to will and to do. 
Fourthly, the determination, [wil]. There should 


tbe a moment in the history of us all when each shall 


ay—Cost what it may, I will not yield again; I 
will arise to be what God wants to make me; I will 
yield myself to Him; I will reckon myself to be 
dead indeed unto sin, and alive unto God through 
Jesus Christ; I will yield myself to the power that 

orketh in me. Discontent, aspiration, appreciation 

f the possibilities of saintliness, and resolve. 

The will of God is working in you to-day. Cannot 
you take those four steps? Are you going back to 
live the old self-indulgent life? If so, these words will 
be a curse to you, for nothing injures the soul so much 
as to know the truth and yet fall back into the ditch. 

108 


The Divine Energy in the Heart 


% bs = - * Phil. ii. 

‘He Works To Work. —Does God allow babes 12, 13 
to want milk, and then, in the eternal ordering of Gods Work 
things, not provide milk? Does not the longing of 
the little child argue that somewhere, presumably in 
the mother’s breast, there is the supply? Do the 
swallows begin to gather around the eaves of our 
houses, longing for a sunny clime, and is there no 
such realm of sunshine to be reached over land and 
sea? Do the young lions in the winter roar for food, 
that God does not furnish? Do you think that God 
is going to give us this discontent with at 
this yearning after Himself, and is going to mock 
us? That would be the work of a devil. If you 
hold that God is good and loving and holy, your 
very aspirations are a proof that He who works in 
you to will, is prepared to work in you to do. But, 
till now, we have done so much by our own resolu- 
tions, that we have shut His doing out. If only we 
would relinquish our efforts after sanctification, as 
once we relinquished those after justification, and if 
we said to Him: ‘Great God, work out Thine own 
ideal in my poor weak nature,’ He would will and 
He would work. God’s morality and God’s efficiency 
are co-equal. 

* * * % % 

Gon’s Satisraction.—‘ For His good pleasure.’ God’s __ 
When He made the world, He said it was very Satisfaction, 
good; then sin came, and selfishness; and the dull 
dark ages passed, till Jesus came, who opened His 
nature to the Father, though He were the Son of 
God. The mystery of the Incarnation lies in this: 

109 


Phil. ii. 
12, 13 


An Appeal 
to you. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


our Lord gave up the exercise of His inherent deity 
as the Son of God, and became dependent on the 
Father, and the Father wrought perfectly through 
the yielded nature of the Son. Oh, ponder this! 
The Father wrought perfectly in the yielded nature 
of Jesus, and the result was summed up in the cry, 
‘This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well 
pleased.’ In some such manner it is possible to walk 
worthy of God unto all pleasing. It is possible to 
have this testimony, even in our mortal life, that we 
have pleased God. At the end of every day, as we 
lie down to sleep—we may hear the whisper of 
God’s voice saying, ‘Dear child, I am pleased with 
you.’ But you can only have it by allowing Him in 
silence, in solitude, in obedience, to work in you, to 
will and to do of His own good pleasure. 

Will you begin now? He may be working in you 
to confess to that fellow-Christian that you were 
unkind in your speech or act. Work it out. He 
may be working in you to give up that line of 
business about which you have been doubtful lately. 
Give it up. He may be working in you to be 
sweeter in your home, and gentler in your speech. 
Begin. He may be working in you to alter your 
relations with some with whom you have dealings 
that are not as they should be. Alter them. This 
very day let God begin to speak, and work and 
will; and then work out what He works in. God 
will not work apart from you, but He wants to work 
through you. Let Him. Yield to Him, and let this 
be the day when you shall begin to live in the power 
of the mighty Indwelling One. 

110 


















XII 


STARS TO SHINE: VOICES 
TO SPEAK 


Pu. ii. 14-16 


Do all things without murmurings and disputings : 
That ye may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God, with- 
out rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, among 
f whom ye shine as lights in the world: 
4 Holding forth the word of life; that I may rejoice in the day of 
Christ, that I have not run in vain, neither laboured in vain. 


WHENEVER we review the past, our souls are filled Phil, ii, 
with gratitude to God for all the wonderful way that 14-16 
He has led us; but, as we thank Him, we are filled Retrospect. 
with a sorrowful and infinite regret, and we cannot 
forget, amid the many mercies we recall, the story of 
our repeated failure and shortcoming. Yet, mingling 
with gratitude and sorrow are hope, resolve, and the 
decision that the past shall be buried by the past, 
and that we will step forward to an entirely new life 
of prayer, consecration, and devotion. These three 
words—thankfulness, confession, and resolve—surely 
characterise the feelings of all intelligent and thought- 
ful persons, who by regeneration, through the Holy 
Spirit applying the Word of Truth, and by adoption 
into the family of God, have been dissociated from 
this sinful and adulterous generation, and are 

111 


Phil. ii. 
14-16 


Our Ideal 
as the 
Children of 
God. 

The 


Negative 
Side. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


reckoned among the children of the resurrection, 
heirs of God and joint heirs with Christ. 

In this paragraph we are brought face to face with 
the Divine ideal—an ideal which, alas! we have too 
little realised, but which henceforth shall be realised 
with new hope. We discover, also, the infinit 
sources of power which we have not always realised 
—that God works in us. We are also taught to set 
ourselves, with new persistency, to the working out 
of that which God is working in. 

* * * * * 

If you will follow out the paragraph step by step, 
link by link, you will see that there is the negative 
and the positive side. There is, first, the NEGATIVE 
sipE. ‘Do all things without murmurings and dis- | 
putings, that ye may be the sons of God, without 
rebuke,’ or, as the R.V. puts it, more accurately, 
without blemish. To be without blemish is per- 
petually held up as the supreme ideal of the Christian 
life. ‘He chose us in Him before the foundation of 


the world, that we should be holy and without 


blemish before Him in love.” ‘That it (the Church) 
should be holy and without blemish.’ ‘To present 


_ you holy and without blemish.’ The Lamb of God 


was without blemish, and we are called to be the 
same. There is the more necessity that we should 
rise to the level of our high calling, because our lives 
are cast into the midst of a community of distorted 
vision and oblique ways—‘a crooked and perverse 
generation.’ This description of society is as true 
to-day as it ever was. Whether we look at political 
or social life, the newspapers or the streets, the tone 
112 


Stars to Shine: Voices to Speak 


of conversation in the drawing-rooms or on ocean Phil. ii. 
steamers, everything vindicates the adjectives of the 14-16 
Apostle. 

The prime method of being without blemish is to 
do all things ‘without murmurings and disputings.’ 
Do not allow yourselves to fall into discontented 
moods, and do not indulge in bitter conflict with 
others. Murmurings stand for all sorts of ill- 
concealed, half-checked, and half-uttered complaints; 
They are the low grumblings of a man who is 
swayed inwardly by impatient thoughts and hard 
feelings. Disputings are murmurings come to the 
surface, and breaking out into captious and angry 
discussions. Keep the heart and the tongue right by 
the grace of God, and you will be blameless and 
harmless, the sons of God, without blemish. 

Blamelessness is faultlessness, stainlessness—cor- 
rectness in all the externals of life, as Zacharias and 
Elisabeth were, who walked in all the commandments 
and ordinances of the Lord blameless. Harmlessness 
refers to the essential purity, simplicity, and sincerity, 
which should characterise all followers of Christ, 
because there is no admixture of evil thoughts or 
desires in their aims or conduct. 

Secondly, there is the PosiTIvE side. Phillips Our Ideal: 
Brooks says: ‘It is the sincere and deep conviction ES iggete 
of my soul, that if the Christian faith does not 


eulmingia-and complete Hself in the eflaé to siake 
itself known to all the world, that faith_appears to 
me to be a thoroughly unreal and insignificant thing, 
destitute of power for 9 singe gnc jucapar'e of F power for a single life, and ineapable o 
being convincingly proved to be true.’ He says also: 
ae eat 





Phil. ii. 
14-16 


Shine as 
Stars. 


ore 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


‘Always the enlargement of the faith brings the 
endearment of the faith; and to give the Saviour to 
others makes Him more thoroughly our-own. 

Such thoughts were in the Apostle’s heart when 
he urged his converts to shine and hold forth the 
word of Life. (1) If they were Christians at all, 
they must be stars shining amid the darkness of the 
world. The image before his mind was that of a 
new star floating into sight, taking its place among 
the constellations of the skies, and shedding forth its 
beams, so as to reproduce its own luminosity as 
widely as possible, though with the stillness which 
has no audible voice or language. Here is the con- 
sistency and beauty of a holy soul, endeavouring to 


ass on its nature to other souls, that they too ma 
be light in the Lord. 


As we look out on nature, we find that the object 
for which every flower spreads its colour and per- 
fume is to attract the bee, so that it may propagate 


_ its kind. The flower must reproduce itself, or show 


itself unworthy of the Gardener who produced it not 
for itself alone. Every living thing exists to pass on 
its nature ; and surely the Christian soul cannot be 
content unless it has sent itself forward into other 
lives and coming generations. 

One of the most interesting studies is that of induc- 
tive electricity. When two wires lie side by side, and 
a stream of electricity is sent through the one, a faint 
vibration and reproduction of it will be perceived in 
the other. It is in this way that, on the long lines 
of American travel, you are able to telegraph from 
your moving train to the city you are nearing. The 

114 


Stars to Shine: Voices to Speak 


wires along the track are sympathetic with the trans- Phil. ii. 
mitter on the train. For the same reason, when 14-16 
speaking through the telephone, one can hear the // 
murmur of other wires. It is not that they really 
touch, but they are deeply sympathetic. 

There is something like this in our influence upon Our 
other souls. There are induced currents for good or oe 
bad. You, as a child of God, cannot come in con- Souls. 
tact with other men who belong to this crooked and 
perverse generation, without starting within them 
the vibrations of your own holiness, the yearning for 
something better than they are, the appetite, the 
hunger and thirst, after the unseen and the eternal, 
the condemnation of their sin, and the creation 
within them of the vibrations and waves of desire to 
be other than they are. It is also true that you 
cannot come in contact with a bad man, whose mind 
is steeped in vice, and whose life is full of base and 
disgraceful actions, without a corresponding current 
being induced in yourself. We are always, for good 
or bad, affecting those who are in close contact with 
us, and this altogether apart from our volition, and 
simply by the strength of our character. 

Hence it is that Richter, the great German 
thinker, says: ‘If thou knowest how every black 
thought of thine, and every jealous thought, takes 
root outside of thee, and goes on for half a century 
pushing and boring its healing or poisonous roots 
through the earth, ah, how carefully wouldst thou 
grow, how carefully wouldst thou choose and think!’ 

And Bishop Huntingdon is on the same line when 
he says: ‘There is some nameless influence going 
115 


3 VU § 


Phil. ii. 
14-16 


A great 
Responsi- 
bility. 


aan) 


— 


f Fe 
h_f P.A a 
# » *s s @ f : Pa = 
g if f » A 4 Gt A (+--+ aati 
i ad ee “a 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


out from the very least conscious thing in God’s 
creation, which alters and shapes in its measure 
every man, woman, and child within its influence.’ 
It is almost terrible to live with these thoughts 
pressing on one’s heart—that one can never speak a 
word, never transact a piece of business, that one’s 
face is never seen lighted up with the radiance of 


- God, or clouded and despondent, without it being 


made harder or easier for other men to live a good 
life. Every one of us, every day, resembles Jero- 
boam, the son of Nebat, who made other men sin; 
or we are lifting other men into the light, and peace, 
and joy of God. No _man liveth to himself, and no 
man dieth to himself; but the life of every one is 
telling upon an increasing number of mankind. 
What a solemn responsibility it is to live! What 
infinite regret should oppress our souls at the 
thought that we have flung shadows over so many 
lives which God meant to be happy ; that we have put 
so many stumbling-blocks in people’s ways to whom 
God meant that we should offer stepping-stones ; that 
our life has been for the shame and sorrow rather than 
for the uplifting and comfort of those around us! 
Ours can never be sunshine, the intrinsic light of 
the sun. At the most we shall never be able to 
diffuse more than the borrowed light of the star; 
but this is something, and we may shine amid the 
dark night which has rested on mankind ever since 
the sun went down on Calvary in blood-red skies. 
Ere long the dawn will break on the sky, and we 
shall become invisible amid the radiance of the 


coming Lord. 
116 


Stars to Shine: Voices to Speak 
Yy (2) Besides being a star, we must be a voice ; we are Phil. ii. 


to hold forth the word of Infe. We cannot hold 14-16 
forth the word without words. It is our duty to voices to 
speak to those in our immediate circle, that there speak for 
may be no regret at the end of life. This wonderful ss 
gift of human speech, the most marvellous faculty 
with which any one of us is endowed, must be used 
to pass on the word of the Kingdom. Lay yourself 
before God, and your mouth in the very dust, and \ | 
ask that the Holy Spirit may take your lips, and set 
them on fire for Himself, that you may be able not 
only to shine with the mild radiance of a stainless 
and beautiful character, but that you may utter the! 
word of Life to those who have never given heed to 
it. Surely the contemplation of such an ideal must 
fill us with infinite regret. As we go over item after 
item, we see that there is not one trait to which we 
can lay claim without considerable misgiving. We 
are not without blemish! We have not refrained 
from murmurings and disputings! We have not 
been blameless and harmless! As we catch sight of 
God’s ideal, we abhor ourselves. As we hear the 
perfect music, we lament our own discordant notes. 
As we see the solemn troops and sweet societies of 
Heaven, we realise how coarse and unrefined our 
manners are. There cannot be an evening in our 
life in which, as we review the day, we do not require 
the precious Blood of Christ. 

* 


* * * * 


a ow 


The past is gone, never to be recalled; and if we The Power 


are to trust our resolutions, we must certainly and by which 
4 <« eal is 
inevitably fall again. But our text says that God is rendered 


117 possible, 


Phil. ti. 


14-16 


Rate sey ene 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


in us; that God, who makes the universe His home, 
has come to dwell in our hearts, not as a stranger 
who tarries for a night, but as an abiding, indwelling 
guest; and that our God is in us to will and to 
work of His own good pleasure. We have often 
been conscious of it. Have there not often been 
within us induced currents of Divine electricity, 
promptings and inspirations to unselfishness, purity, 
and devotion, which, alas! we have too often 
resisted? Ponder again the wondrous message! 

God works in us to will. He does not overpower 
our will, or treat us as automata which He can 
move at His choice. He approaches us as intelli- 
gent beings, who may refuse, as they may accept and 
yield. At the most He can only suggest certain lines 
of conduct, but it is left to us to say whether we will 
make them our own or not. Do you not sometimes 
feel rising up within you a great desire, a yearning, a 
drawing, a purpose to be other than you are? Ah! 
this is God working in you to wish and will. Be 
very thankful, because you know that God is taking 
pains with your character, only be sure to let Him 
have your eager and complete response. 

God works im us to work. God never works in us 
to will without. empowering us to perform that to 
which He prompts. He has with Him a sufficiency 
of power equivalent to our necessity, and if we will 
turn to Him for it, He will enable us to carry out 
every prompting of His will. We may not remember 
the moment when He entered; we may not have 
heard the sound of His feet along the passage-way 
of our heart; He may have stolen in on the morn- 

118 


Stars to Shine: Voices to Speak 


‘ing light, in the waft of the wind, or on the fragrance Phil. ii. 
of flowers—but He is in thy soul_ and mine, He is 14-16 
come to take our side against sin. The Father waits 

to make the child like Himself, first by prompting 

him to will good things, and then by energising him 

to do the things He wills. That is our hope; and 

our only hope for the coming days, that they may be 

better than the past, is the recognition that our ideal 

is God’s for us, and He waits to make it a living fact. 

* * * % * 

Is there anything in life or heart which has Our Duty to 
of late caused you solicitude? Have you been may 
doubtful about a certain line of conduct? Has works a 
something which you did in the past arisen 
and made you feel that you ought to make 
restitution and reparation? Is there some one 
habit, a method of life, an inner idol, an un- 
opened cupboard, which has not been consecrated 
absolutely to Him? Do you realise that there is the ~~ 
constant pressure by Another than yourself dealing _ . 
with it? Do you hear the thud of the engine deep. ~ 
down in your soul; the movement of the piston that 
sends the quiver of the vibration through the whole 
of your being? Be very thankful, for God is come 
to fight the evil of your nature, as a mother sets 
herself beside her child to fight the disease which is 
sapping his life. 

But God’s efforts on our behalf will be abortive 
unless we work out what He works in. If He wills 
in us to break with some evil habit, we must will the 
same. Our will must yield to His, as the skiff to the 
stream that bears it on its current. If He bids us 

119 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


Phil. ii. take up our bed and walk, we must dare to believe 
14-16 that we can do it, and availing ourselves of His 
might, we must spring to our feet. If He sends us 
on His divine errands, we must not be rebellious nor 
hold ourselves back. Our salvation lies in achieving 
deliverance from every form of sin, and it is only by 
degrees that we learn all that sin is, and become 
emancipated from its dominion and love. 
With Fear Let us do this ‘with fear and trembling.’ If an 
illustrious artist spends a morning with one of his 
students, helping him to finish some picture at which 
he has been working hard but unsuccessfully, the 
young man does not fear the artist, but trembles lest 
he may not make the best possible use of his kind- 
' ness. So, my soul, when the great God comes to 
thee, and says, ‘I am going to save thee from thy 
sins,’ thou must take good heed to garner up all His 
gracious help with miserly care, full of anxiety lest 
thou shouldest fail to avail thyself of the least trust, 
| the smallest prompting. He will do His work 
effectually and thoroughly ; let Him have full scope, 
and thou shalt be more than satisfied. 

Oh, Thou who workest through the universe, who 
fulfillest Thine own high purpose, so that seraphs, 
angels, and all holy beings are infilled by Thee, come 
to-day and fill us, infill our whole nature, then spirit, 
soul, and body shall be impenetrated by Thine energy, 
and shall realise Thine ideal! 


Trembling. 


120 


XIII 


THE SACRIFICIAL SIDE OF 
THE CHRISTIAN LIFE 


Pan... ii. 17, 18 


Yu, and if I be offered upon the sacrifice and service of your 
faith, I joy, and rejoice with you all. 

For the same cause also do ye joy, and rejoice with me. 

AGAIN the Apostle refers to the ‘day of Christ.’ Phil, ii, 
He was constantly anticipating the coming of the 17, 18 
Lord. His early Epistles specially abound in refer- 
ences to that event which would bring to light the 
hidden things of darkness, and make manifest the 
counsels of all hearts, so that each man should have 
his praise from God. He spoke of his being alive 
and remaining unto the coming of the Saviour, and 
as anticipating that his mortality would be swallowed 
up of life. Often, amid his imprisonment, he must 
have listened for the sounding of the trumpet of 
God, and the songs which accompanied his returning 
Lord. Invariably he so lived and laboured, that 
whenever that day came, whether to close his earthly 
life or afterwards, he might receive the reward, which 
would be to him what the crown of amaranth was 
to the successful competitor in the games. 

* * * * * 

Paul's incessant fear was that he might run or Paul’s great 
labour in vain. There are many expressions of it. ** 
In one place he expresses the fear lest all the work 

121 


Phil. ii. 
17, 18 


How is it 
with us? 


A Condition 
of Success. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


which he had built upon the foundation, which God 
had previously laid, should be burned up, and he 
should suffer loss; in another he gives utterance to 
the dread lest he should be a castaway (or rejected) 
as one who had no right to the prize; here, he uses 
the words ‘in vain’ as though some mistake on his 
part should obliterate all the results of the work, 
which he had laboriously sought to achieve for his 
Lord. 3 

A very solemn inquiry is suggested to us all. Are 
we running in vain? Are we labouring in vain? 
Life is full of running to and fro, and incessant 
labour, but we may gravely ask whether at the end 
there will be aught to show commensurate with the 
energy we have expended. So many days are lived 
in vain! So many books are written in vain! So 
many sermons preached in vain! So many philan- 
thropic activities expended in vain! 

It is, however, certain that before any service that 
we do for God or man is likely to be of lasting and 
permanent benefit, it must be saturated with our 
heart’s blood. That which costs us nothing will not 
benefit others. If there is no expenditure of tears 
and prayer, if that love, of which the Apostle speaks 
in another place, which costs, is wanting, we may 
speak with the tongues of men and of angels, may 
know all mysteries and all knowledge, may bestow 
all our goods to feed the poor, but it will profit 
nothing. Let us rather seek to be poured forth as a 
libation than to do much without feeling the least 
travail of soul. As the fertility of Egypt in any year 
is in direct proportion to the height that the waters 

122 


[yen vat 


2 ave Ss TV fy i 


~The Sacrificial Side of Christian Life 


‘of the Nile measure on the Nilometer, so the amount Phil. ii. 
of our real fruitfulness in the world is gauged by the 17; 18 
expenditure of our spiritual force. 

It was because Moses was prepared to be blotted 
from the Book of God for his people that he carried | 

- them for forty years through the desert, and deposited 
them on the very borders of the Promised Land. It 
was because Jesus wept over Jerusalem that He was ; 
able to send a Pentecost on the guilty city. It was 
because Paul was prepared to be accursed for his 
brethren according to the flesh, that he was able to 
turn so many from darkness to light, and from the 
power of Satan unto God. It is when Zion travails 
that she brings forth her children. No heart pangs, 
no spiritual seed. 

The Christian life should be a sacrifice. Where The Call for 
faith in Christ is a reality, it will lead not simply to a S4fce- 
life service, which becomes a liturgy, but also to 

sacrifice. ‘I beseech you, therefore, brethren, by the 
mercies of God to present your bodies a living sacrifice, 
holy, well-pleasing to God, which is your reasonable 
service.’ 

There is only one sacrifice which can take away 

sin, and which was offered once for all. ‘When He 

had offered one sacrifice for sins, forever He sat down 
on the right hand of God’: ‘ By one offering He hath 

perfected forever them that are sanctified.’ But the 

whole Church of God is called to follow the Master’s 

steps in the sacrifice of her life for men. She must 

fill up that which is behind of the sufferings of Christ ; 

she must be prepared to suffer with Him; she must 

surrender the joy that is set before her of ease, and 

123 


Phil. ii. 
17, 18 


Have we 


our | 
Sacrifice ? 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


luxury, and earthly power, in order that she may go 
out to her Lord without the camp, bearing His 
reproach. He is the Lamb of God which taketh 
away the sin of the world, and by His one sufficient 
sacrifice has opened the way into peace, but there is 
a sacrifice of what the world deems choicest and best 
in order that the highest interest of men should be 
better served, which is the peculiar prerogative, not 
only of the Church of Christ collectively, but of each 
individual soul. 

Is there sacrifice in your life and mine? I knew, 
for instance, of the case of a young girl, who promised 
her mother upon her dying bed, that she would not 
accept an offer of marriage until she had seen the 
younger children well started in life, and had per- 
formed the last offices for her father. I do not here 
comment upon the unwisdom of a mother exacting 
such a pledge from her child, but only cite the fact. 
As a result, when, three years after her mother’s 
death, Love looked into the window of that girl’s 
soul, and one who was altogether suitable for her 
asked her to be his wife, she felt bound to refuse, 
and nobly stood by her charge until the whole family 
passed out of her care into homes of their own. It 
was a supreme relinquishment of all that a woman 
holds dearest, but how noble it was! 

Is not sacrifice of this sort constantly being de- 
manded of us, have we not all to turn from the doors 
that stand wide open on our mountains of trans- 
figuration, in order to descend into the valley, where 
the cross of self-denial stands with wide-open arms, 
awaiting us? Whenever such is the case, our faith 

124 


The Sacrificial Side of Christian Life 


is working out in sacrifice, our obedience to the will Phil. ii. 
of God is enabling us to surrender all things, that we 17, 18 
may more efficiently do the high work of Jesus for 

others. We may well doubt whether we are true 
followers of the Crucified, or have entered into any 

true experience of His religion, unless there is the 

trace of the Cross somewhere, whether known to 

men, or known only to Christ. 

When a deluded man set himself up as the Christ 

of to-day, the indignant crowd that gathered around 
the doors of his church demanded that he should show 
them his hands, meaning that if he were the Christ, 
the marks of the nails would certainly be apparent. 
It was a just request. People know well enough 
that Christ stands for sacrifice, and that His followers 
can expect no better treatment than He experienced. 
And again we may put the question to ourselves: 
Does our faith cost us anything, and is our service to 
man and God often sealed by blood ? 

The Apostle was willing to yield his life’s blood Pee pra A 
as a lbation. Moses said, ‘He that offereth his ‘ 
oblation must offer wine for the drink offering, the 
fourth part of an hin shall he prepare with the 
burnt offering or for the sacrifice, for each lamb’ 
(Numbers xv. 5). This was doubtless in the Apostle’s 
mind when he spoke of being poured out as a drink 
offering upon the sacrifice and service of their faith. 

(See R.V. margin.) 

What unity there was between his sufferings in 
Rome and theirs in Philippi! It seemed to him as 
though they had reached a common altar, and were 
engaged in one common act of devotion. Not only 

125 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


Phil. ii. did their faith lead them to considerable sacrifice 
17, 18 in order to supply his needs, but it was likely to 
extort a still greater surrender, even of life itself 
in the defence of the truth; but in that same cause 
it was not improbable that sooner or later he would 
have to shed his blood. There was indeed an if in 
the case. ‘Jf I am offered,’ etc., but whilst Nero 
was on the throne, and the hatred of the Jews so 
virulent, there was little hope that he would escape. 
The prospect, however, did not fill him with 
dread. On the contrary, he anticipated it as though 
it were a marriage. The thought that he was con- 
summating the faith and service of the Philippians, 
who had first learnt to love God through his 
ministry, was a cause of infinite delight. 
hag 8 of It was thus that the martyrs pressed to the 
"scaffold and stake, rejoicing that they were counted 
worthy to suffer for Christ's name. So great was 
the enthusiasm in the early days, that the Church 
authorities had to publish edicts, prohibiting the 
Christians of their time from hazarding their lives, 
or throwing them needlessly away. When once the 
soul has caught sight of the true significance of life, 
and has learnt the privilege which is within its 
reach, of identifying itself with the Son of God in 
His great act of Redemption, a similar glow of joy 
begins to cast its radiance over passages of life that 
hitherto had been dark and forbidding. The joy of 
the Lord becomes a source of altogether new 
strength. Partnership with Jesus in the redemption 
of the world, opens the door to partnership in those 
fountains of blessedness that rise within His soul, 
126 


The Sacrificial Side of Christian Life ‘ 


and to which He referred, when He said, ‘ Your Phil. ii. 
heart shall rejoice, and your joy no one taketh from 17, 18 
you’: ‘These things have I said unto you that My 

joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be 

full.’ 


127 


Phil. ii, 


19-30 


XIV 
‘NOT SORROW UPON SORROW’ 


Puiu. ii. 19-30 


But I trust in the Lord Jesus to send Timotheus shortly unto 
you, that I also may be of good comfort, when I know your state. 
For I have no man likeminded, who will naturally care for your 


” state. 


For all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ’s. 

But yo know the proof of him, that, as a son with the father, 
he hath served with me in the gospel. 

Him therefore I hope to sand presently, so soon as I shall see 
how it will go with me. 

But I trust in the Lord that I also myself shall come shortly. 

Yet I supposed it necessary to send to you Epaphroditus, my 
brother, and companion in labour, and fellow-soldier, but your 
messenger, and he that ministered to my wants. . 

For he longed after you all, and was full of heaviness, because 
that ye had heard that he had been sick. 

For indeed he was sick nigh unto death: but God had mercy on 
him ; and not on him only, but on me also, lest I should have 
sorrow upon sorrow. 

I sent him therefore the more carefully, that, when ye see him 
again, ye may rejoice, and that I may be the less sorrowful. 

Receive him therefore in the Lord with all gladness ; and hold 
such in reputation : 

Because for the work of Christ he was nigh unto death, not 
regarding his life, to supply your lack of service toward me. 


THE Bible is so Divine because it is so human. 
This chapter began with the sorrows of the Son of 
God; it ends with the sorrow of His Apostle; and 
the Holy Spirit does not deem it incongruous to 
deal first with the wonderful condescension of our 
blessed Master from the supernal Throne to the 
Cross of shame, and then to turn back to what 
128 


Not Sorrow upon Sorrow 


was transacting in a human breast, of hope and Phil. ii. 
fear, of sorrow and joy, on the banks of the muddy 19=30 
Tiber. So, beloved, however great God is, and . ° 
however vast the range and circumference of His I .: 
interests, there is not one tear that you shed, one | 
sorrow that you feel, that is not of exceeding 
importance and care to Him. The Great Cod, 

who, in the Person of His Son, stooped from the 

Throne to the Cross, and is now exalted above 

all conception, yet thinks of His prisoner in the 

hired house at Rome, and sees to it that the ™ 
pressure of sorrow shall not be too great for the 
delicate machinery of his frail heart to sustain. __ 

THe Facts AS HERE STaTED.—The Philippian 
Church ; the Apostle Paul ; Timothy ; Epaphroditus ; 

God. 

(1) The Church at Philippi (vv. 25, 30). For ten The Church 
years the Christians there had not assisted the 2* Philippi. 
Apostle; not that they had forgotten him, but 
because they had had no opportunity. He was in 
circumstances where they could not reach him. It 
might have been supposed that they had forgotten, 
but such love as theirs never forgets. It may not 
be able to furnish assistance, but it still burns on 
the altar of the heart. 


Be loyal to your love; whatever else you forget } 
in_ the world, never forget the claims of friendship. | 


Let love be cherished above all other treasures. 

Trust each other’s love, and when there is no 

sign or token, still believe that your friend is loyal, 

and only awaiting the moment when his help 

may reveal an undying, unaltering affection. The 
I ~ 129 


Phil. ii. 
19-30 


SOANEA 


The 
Imprisoned 
Apostle. 


—_ 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


Philippians were only waiting until the time came, 
the time when they could help best. Give a man 
bread when he is hungry, drink when he is thirsty, 
and clothes when he is naked; watch your moment. 
Ah, if we would but watch the timely moment, 
when some spirit is failing, when hope threatens to 
expire, when heart and soul faint, and would strike 
in then, how many desperate deeds we should arrest, 
and how many heart-broken ones we should en- 
courage to face with fresh hope the difficulty and 
responsibility of life! Be true to your friends; 
trust your friends ; redeem the opportunity. 

(2) The Apostle Paul. He could preach, but he 
was a handcuffed prisoner; and in that dreary 
apartment, from which he looked out wearily upon 
liberty, he was often lonely. He had sent every- 
body away whom he could trust, except Timothy 
and Epaphroditus. But he was extremely anxious 
about the welfare of his Philippian friends; and he 
knew that they were equally anxious about him; 
he gave up, therefore, the one man of all others 
who was dear to him — Timothy—and sent him 
to bring word about their state, and that they might 
be comforted in knowing about his. Because the 
Philippians were so true in their love to him, he 
counted no sacrifice too great to show his love to 
them. The man who Jives_nearest_ God_is always 
nearest _his fellows, and he who is most sensitive 
towards God is most sensitive towards man, and 
will rather go without his dearest and nearest, to 
show how much he is prepared to do to sympathise 
with and help others. Be always willing to sacrifice 

130 


Not Sorrow upon Sorrow 


your Timothies if you may give a ray of comfort to Phil. ii. 

the ¢ distant friends at Philippi. 19-30 
ey-r ’mothy. Timothy loved Paul as a child his The Helper, 

father (v. 22, R.V.). He had been delicately reared ; T#™9tY. 

his eonatibiGen was weak, so much so that the 

Apostle even advised him to take a little wine for 

his often infirmities; and perhaps he was too sensi- 

tive to stand against strong opposition and dislike. 

But, with all this, he was a man of rare sweetness 

of disposition and grace of character. He had great 

faith in the Lord Jesus, and was staunch and 

loyal to his friend. Probably his love to Paul 

strengthened his character, and the demand that 

Paul made on him brought out his noblest and best, 

so that young Timothy grew to be a hero under 

the touch of love. What a wonderful power love 

is—the right kind of love! There is a selfish, 

hurtful, harmful love that enervates and injures its 

objects; there is another, an unselfish love, that 

draws out the best and noblest, making the timid 

strong and brave, and eliciting the hero that had 

lain buried in the soul. Timothy would therefore 

be sent to Philippi, as soon as the Apostle knew 

how his trial would turn out; and probably the 

Apostle would closely follow oe (vv. 23, 24). 

(4) EHpaphroditus. The Apostle speaks of « My 
Epaphroditus, who was to carry this Epistle, as the Brother.” 
minister and apostle from Philippi, because he had 
brought the gifts of Philippi over sea and land. 

He describes him also, with exquisite delicacy, as 

My brother. There is no kinship so close as that 

brotherhood into which a common love to God 
131 


Phil. ii, 
19-30 


Epaphro- 
ditus, the 
Suppliant. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


brings two men. ‘My brother, my fellow-worker, 
my fellow-soldier’ (v. 25, R.V.). Epaphroditus was 
a man of much less gift than Paul, yet Paul seemed 
to forget the disparity and speaks of him as his 
equal—my fellow-worker and fellow-soldier, because 
to work for Christ, and to fight side by side in the 
ranks of Christ’s Gospel, must bring soul close to soul. 
Epaphroditus is probably referred to as Epaphras 
in Col. iv. 12, and there we learn that he laboured 
fervently in prayer, that the distant Churches might 
be perfect in all the will of God. The word used 
of this good man’s prayer, is agonise; he agonised 
as a gladiator in an amphitheatre, or an athlete in 
an arena. He was so intense in his intercession for 
his brethren in the faith, that it seemed as though 
his very veins stood out as whipcord, and his whole 
soul was knit into an agony. ‘This simple man 
prayed so earnestly that Paul said he was like a — 
gladiator wrestling in the amphitheatre. He had 
fallen sick; perhaps he had taken Roman - fever 
when diving down into some of the worst parts of 
Rome to look after lost men, who, like Onesimus, 
had gone astray, and in one of these terrible dens 
of infamy, where the air was heavy with disease and 
impurity, this good man Epaphroditus was taken 
ill (v. 30). When tidings came to the Apostle, they 
nearly broke his heart, because he feared that his friend 
would die, and he be unable to visit him or to help. 
Epaphroditus was, however, spared, but in his con- 
valescence was sore troubled, because, somehow, the 
Philippians had come to hear of his sickness, and 
would naturally be filled with profound anxiety 
132 


Not Sorrow upon Sorrow 


about it. So delicate is love in its sensitiveness. 
It is a difficult question to decide how much love 
ought to tell the loved one. You might have 
supposed Epaphroditus ought to tell, and would be 
glad to tell, his Philippian friends. But he thought 
otherwise. He felt that they had trouble and 
responsibility and anguish enough, and he did not 
want to add one additional burden to those who were 
already weighted to the ground. 

Perhaps it is wise, when we are so far away from 
those we love that they cannot possibly help us, to 
keep back something of the pain and sorrow through 
which we are going; but with those whom we are 
meeting day by day we should not be reticent, for 
reticence is often the death-blow of love. The only 
thing about which we do well to be reticent to our 
intimate friends is when we have been slighted or 
injured. Under such circumstances it is good not 


Phil. ii. 
19-30 


Reticence 
and 
Frankness. 


to speak, because, maybe, we shall magnify the slight | 


into an actual wrong, whilst if we do not speak about 
it we shall forget it. 

In other things it is well to be frank. Confidence 
is the native air of love. Those words of Lord 
Bacon’s, in his inimitable essay upon Friendship, 
are perfectly true. ‘We know,’ he says, ‘that 
diseases of stoppings and suffocations are most 
dangerous to the body ; and it is not much otherwise 
in the mind. You may take sarza to open the liver, 
steel to open the spleen, flower of sulphur for the 


lungs, castoreum for the brain; but no receipt. 


openeth the heart but a true friend, to whom you | 


may impart griefs, joys, fears, hopes, suspicions, 
133 


al 


Phil. ii. 
19-30 


God’s Care. 


_ 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


counsels, and whatever lieth upon the heart to 
oppress it, in a kind of civil shrift or confession.’ 

. We must admire Epaphroditus, whose love was so 
sensitive that he said: ‘They cannot help me; if 
they were near enough to nurse me I would tell them, 
but they are too far away.’ But when he knew that 
tidings of his illness, but not of his convalescence, had 
reached them, the news almost caused a relapse. 

(5) God. St Paul lived in a very atmosphere of 
love. Think of it. All around, the world lay in hate, 
malice, and envy; but in that hired room in Rome 


_ there was the intense focus-point of love. In the midst 


of winter all around, there was summer in that hired 
house. In the midst of the dark night of heathenism 
there was the one beautiful spot of heavenly life. 
The Philippian gifts were all about the place, 
showing they had not forgotten him. So far from 
forgetting them, the Apostle was thinking of sending 
Timothy, though it seemed like tearing a part of 
himself away. Timothy was, also, as intent on 
serving him as a child a father, and daring to share 
his bonds and shame. In addition, there was 
Epaphroditus anxious because the Philippians were 
anxious, and distressed beyond measure because he 
added to their grief. There was a perfect hothouse 
of love—palms, fruits, and flowers ina tropical atmo- 
sphere amid the wintry climate. And out of all that 


- there came this blessed faith in God that He would 


not add sorrow to sorrow. Paul said to himself: 

‘I am quite sure God is just like man, only better. 

I am quite sure that God is as thoughtful and 

sensitive as we are about one another. I would not 
134 


Not Sorrow upon Sorrow 


let Epaphroditus die, unless there were some urgent Phil. ii, 
reason to the contrary ; if I could spare a servant of 19-30 
mine sorrow I would.’ He argued from the love of 
which he was personally conscious to the love above 

him, and said : God is like a father, mother, brother, 
sister, friend, all in one. The most tender, gentle, 
sensitive being in the whole universe is God, and 

He will not add sorrow to sorrow. There must be 
sorrow, that I may learn to sympathise with sorrow, 

that my heart may be open towards all who suffer ; 

but there will be no needless adding of sorrow to 
sorrow. cc a noble conception is presented to 


us here of uman love lifts man to understand __ 


the Divine Re ! We argue from the human to the 
Divine : ‘How much more shall your heavenly Father 
give good things to them that ask Him.’ He will 
not overdrive His flock; nor give us more than we fy 
can bear; nor add one drop of needless ane to our \ 
heart’s burden: he hed Pwaever rg Ue } i cn ve * 
is rs B Ws spea 

WE MAY ied THREE ConcLusions.—First, Christ and 
that Christ recognises human Sriendships. Love is Seer ‘ig 
the one thing that makes life worth living. One has 
said: ‘I would rather be condemned to be led out 
and hung, if I knew one human soul would love me 
for a week beforehand and honour me afterwards, 
than live half a century to be nothing to any living 
creature. That life is richest which has most true 
friends; that life is most worth living which is 
surrounded by the truest and tenderest hearts. But 
do we prize human love enough? Do we requite 
it as we should? Are we not too careless of these 

135 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


Phil. ii, pearls of spiritual wealth? Do we not break the 
19-30 necklace and loose the pearls too recklessly? Are 
there not people in our own home-circle who, if they 
were to die this week, would haunt our memory 
with infinite regret? ‘George,’ she said, ‘I wasa 
foolish girl, but I always loved you.’ But the 
kisses that poured from the husband’s lips were too 
late to arrest the death, and undo the lovelessness 
of his treatment of the one whom he promised to 
love with all his heart; and he must suffer always 
afterwards the gnawing of a constant sorrow. 
How eminently careful we ought to be to be loyal 
to love; to be sensitive not needlessly to hurt, and 
never to fall beneath the high standard put by Jesus 
Christ in his loyalty to Mary, Martha, and Lazarus, 
and the rest. Jesus Christ recognises human love. 
Lacordaire, the great French preacher, said, ‘ Above 
all things, be kind. Kindness is the one thing in which 
we most resemble God and help men. Kindness in 
mutual relations is the | principal “charm “of” life’ Tt 


would, perhaps, be better to use the word love instead 
of kindness ; for kindness is often mere philanthropy, — 
whereas love i is of God. Christ honours friendship. 
Godasour Secondly, we may dare to impute to God the 
Friend feelings that we impute to our dearest friend. 
‘That I might not have sorrow upon sorrow.’ 
Some people are always asking the question, Do 
you love God? It is far better to dwell on the 
assurance that God loves you. It is a far more 
important thing to reckon that God loves you, than 
for you to try to love God. It is no wonder that 
people abstain from our places of worship, and go 
136 


Not Sorrow upon Sorrow 


away into sin and worldliness, because the Church Phil. ii. 
has insisted so constantly that they must love God, 19-30 
and they cannot; whereas if the Church would tell 
people that God loves them, and that they may abso- 
lutely reckon on His love, there would be an attraction 

in the message which would draw them to the Saviour. 

In God’s love they may always dare to impute the 

very delicacy and tenderness which Paul felt towards 
Philippi, or Epaphroditustowardshis fellow-Christians, 

‘And so beside the silent sea 
I wait the muffled oar : 


No harm from Him can come to me 
On ocean or on shore, 


‘I know not where His islands lift 
Their fronded palms in air ; 
I only know I cannot drift 
Beyond His love and care.’ 


Always know and believe in the love of God. 
God is Love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth 
in God, and God in him. 

Thirdly, the love of God, when it is believed in, Influence of 
makes us very sensitive to other people. We have the ie: of 
our blessed human friendships. From these we rise 
to conceive of God, and from God we come back to 
love all men. As with waterfalls, the water drop- 
ping from a great height scatters a spray, which 
makes the stones and boulders array themselves 
in verdure; so the love of God, falling upon our 
hearts, will make us very tender towards our fellow- 
Christians and all men. We must love the suffer- 
ing and the lost, the loveless and implacable, with 
something of the love that fills the heart of God, 

137 


Phil. ii. 
19-30 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


and which never fails. From individuals we rise 
to God, from God we return to individuals, and 
from individuals we go forth to the great world. 

Love is the only clue to the mysteries of life. As 
one grows older and knows more, one is more 
absolutely appalled at the mysteries of sin, and 
pain, and evil, and there is no clue but to believe 
that God loves, and that in our turn we must love. 
St John says: ‘Herein is love made perfect that 
we may have boldness in the Day of Judgment.’ 
When the worlds crash to ruin, when the universe 
is in the throes of dissolution, and the eternal 
certainties are revealed, the only thing which will 
make the soul strong and unmoved will be the 
sense that the eternal God has loved it in Christ, 
and that it has sought to live a life of tender holy 
love, which it will continue to live for evermore. 

If you do not love God, or are not conscious that 
God loves you, what have you to make you bold 
in the Day of Judgment? But here stands the 
Christ Who loves you, Who in love came to die 
for you, Who by the Spirit is knocking at the 
door of your heart, Who is pouring out to you 
a very torrent of love. Have you been disloyal to 
it? Have you tried its patience to the uttermost? 
Have you repaid it as Othello did the loving 
devotion of Desdemona? Ah, will not your hell 
be your remorse, that you thus refused the love of God 
in Christ? God help you. Believe that God loves you 
in Christ, and go forth to live a life of perfect love, 


/ not causing sorrow upon sorrow, either to Him who 
_ loves you so unutterably, or to any other living soul. 


138 


XV 
THE TRUE CIRCUMCISION 
Putt, iii. 1-3 


FINALLY, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord, To write the same 
things to you, to me indeed 7s not grievous, but for you “t is safe. 

Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision. 

For we are the circumcision, which worship God in the spirit, 
and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh. 


THERE is a difference of opinion amongst scholars as Phil. iii, 
to the precise meaning of the Apostle when he wrote I-3 

this word ‘Finally.’ Bishop Lightfoot, for instance, 
supposesthathe hadalreadysaid all that he intended to 

say,and was bringing his letter to a close. In that case 

we should accept the alternative rendering, Farewell / 

which is suggested in the margin for Rejoice. This 

would justify the paraphrase: ‘And now, my 
brethren, I must wish you farewell. Rejoice in the 

Lord.’ 

It is better, however, to hold that though Finally 
indicates that the Apostle is approaching the end of 
the Epistle, it is not necessarily a very near approach. 
(See 1 Thes. iv. 1; 2 Thes. iii. 1.) In this case we 
might adopt the following paraphrase: ‘My letter 
draws to its close. Its key-note has been the duty 
of joy, and it shall be so to the end.’ 

Three Christian duties are enjoined in this brief 
paragraph: We are to rejoice in the Lord; we are 

139 


Phil. iii. 
1-3 


Christian 
Joy. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


to beware; and we are to examine ourselves that we 
be of the true circumcision. 
* * * * * 

Tue Dury or Curist1an Joy.—The Joy, which 
is the fruit of the Holy Spirit’s work in the heart, 
coming next to Love, and before Peace, in the 
enumeration given by the Apostle in Gal. v. 22, is 
unlike anything which is produced from the natural 
soil of the heart. It is altogether peculiar to the 
regenerate soul. It differs from the overflowing 
good spirits of perfect health, for it persists amid 
weakness and pain; it differs from mirthful merri- 
ment, with its ‘quips and cranks,’ for it persists in 
dark hours as well as bright; it differs from mere 
happiness, for it persists amid the loss of all things. 
Those who have seen it reflected on the face of God’s 
children will bear witness to the unearthly beauty of 
expression which it generates. Of this there is a 
beautiful story told by Dr Trumbull, who describes 
‘What a boy saw in the face of Adoniram Judson.’ 
One evening, he saw a stranger arrive by train in his 
native town, whose appearance greatly attracted him. 
He had never seen such a light on a human face 
before, and at last it dawned upon him that the man 
was the great missionary, with whose picture he was 
familiar. He hurried to summon his own minister, 
and the little lad was soon forgotten as the two fell 
into deep conversation; but the boy circled about 
them, steadfastly looking on that face. Until the 
day he died, he was accustomed to speak of its 
beautiful light that shone like the sun. That surely 
was the reflection of this inner joy. 

140 


The True Circumcision 


In the American version of Psalm xxxiv. 5, we Phil. iii. 
read, ‘They looked unto Him and were radiant.’ 1-3 
The ‘solar look’ is a well-known expression for the ie i goee 
smile that shone on the faceof Rowlands of Llangeitho; 
and Margaret Fuller in her diary says, ‘Emerson 
came into our house this morning with a sunbeam in 
his face.’ Nothing more certainly indicates that we 
have fellowship with God than the radiance of that 
joy in our step, bearing, and look. The joy of the 
Lord arises from leaving all our burdens at His feet ; 
from believing that He has forgiven the past as 
absolutely as the tide obliterates children’s writing 
in the sand; that nothing can come which He does 
not appoint or permit; that He is doing all things as 
wisely and kindly as possible; that in Him we have 
been lifted out of the realm of sin, sorrow, and death 
into a-region of Divine light and love; that we have 
already commenced the eternal life, and that before 
us for ever, there is a fellowship with Him so 
rapturous and exalting that human language can 
only describe it as unspeakable. 

It is a duty for us to cultivate this joy. We must A Thing 
steadfastly arrest any tendency to murmur and Maus 4. 
complain ; to find fault with God’s dealings; or to 
seek to elicit sympathy. We must as much resist 
the temptation to depression and melancholy as we 
would to any form of sin. We must insist on 
watching the one patch of blue in the dark sky, sure 
that presently it will overspread the Heavens. We 
must rest upon the promises of God in certain faith 
that He will triumph gloriously, and that the future 
will absolutely vindicate the long story of human 

141 





Phil. iii. 
I-3 


Rejoicing in 
the Lord. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


pain. We must cultivate a cheery optimism, and an 
undaunted hope. We must resolve to imitate him, 
of whom the poet sings, that he— 

‘Never turned his back, but marched breast forward, 

Never doubted clouds would break, 

Never dreamed, though right were worsted, wrong would 

triumph, 
Held we fall to rise, are baffled to fight better, 
Sleep to wake.’ 


Moreover, we are to rejoice ‘in the Lord.’ ‘In 
His presence is fulness of joy, and at His right hand 
there are pleasures for evermore.’ We need not 
relegate the fulfilment of these sweet words to the 
far future, but now and here, as we live in fellowship 
with Him, we shall discover that -Christ’s presence, 
made real to us by the Holy Spirit, is the ‘deep, 
sweet well of joy.’ We may not be able to rejoice 
in our circumstances, friends, or prospects, but we 
can always rejoice in Jesus Christ, whose Nature is 
the key to the understanding and unlocking of all 
mysteries, the Well-spring of hope, the Day-star in 
our hearts, till ‘the morning breaks and the shadows 
flee away.’ 

It is not difficult to be bright and gay amongst 
comparative strangers and friends, but often those 
who are at their best in the social circle, are depressed 
and taciturn with the immediate inmates of their 
homes. Does not the wife sometimes shyly confess 
to herself the wish that her husband might shed the 
same genial warmth on the breakfast-table, when 
they are together, as he did on the social circle of 
the previous evening? But surely, if there is one 

142 


The True Circumcision 


company in all the world where one should over Phil. iii. 
abound with joy, it is among those to whom our face 1-3 


is as the sun. If it is clouded, shadows fall on all 
things, if it shines with unobscured beauty, all things 
partake of a new radiancy. __ 


f Thou shalt rejoice in all the good which the Lord Do not be 
thy God giveth thee’; ‘Every creature of God is “4 of Joy: 


good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received 
with thanksgiving.’ God is always putting into our 
lives bright and blessed things to be used for Him. 
Do uot think it necessary to introduce thorns to your 
roses, and clouds for the unflecked blue sky. God 
loves to see His children glad, and so long as you are 
able to look up from the joy that fills your heart to 
Him who gave it, connecting the gift with the 
Giver, there is no reason why you-should not drink 
to the full every cup of blessing which He places in 
your hand. 

We shall hear the Apostle returning to this 
injunction in iv. 4. To quote his own words, ‘To 
write the same things to you, to me indeed is not 
irksome, but for you it is safe.’ Apparently, he was 
constantly exhorting them to Christian joy, he was 
repeating the advice he had often given, laying stress 
where he had often laid it, with him it was ‘ precept 
upon precept, line upon line,’ and the teacher who 
reaffirms and repeats is sure to win in the end. 

Tux Dury or Taxina Heep.—He adds, 
‘Beware of dogs. Amongst the Ancients, dogs 
stood as representatives of certain human qualities. 
For the Greek, they stood for ferocity, impudence, 
grecdiness; for the Jew, for degradation and unclean- 

143 


Beware of 
Dogs. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


Phil. iii, ness. In the Apocalypse the term is applied to those 
I-3 who are destitute of moral qualifications for entering 
the New Jerusalem—‘ Without are the dogs, and the 
Sorcerers, and the fornicators, and the idolaters, and 
Rw?! % everyone that loveth and maketh a lie’ Every 
ae traveller in the East knows how herds of dogs prowl 
through the streets, each pack holding its own street 
against all comers; they have neither homes nor 
owners, feeding on the refuse of the streets, quarrelling 

amongst themselves, and attacking the passers-by. 
We are bidden, therefore, to beware of men of a 
quarrelsome and contentious spirit, who under the 
guise of religion hide impure and unclean things ; 
and who are not only defiled, but defiling in their 
influence. If, in our circle of friends, there is one 
whose influence lowers the tone of our own life, who 
suggests and arouses thoughts and desires that tend 
to the gratification of the flesh, the tendency of 
whose conversation is towards the kitchen of our 
lower nature, rather than to the observatory of our 
spirit life, it is our duty to be carefully on our guard, 
and, if possible, to break off from familiarity and 

even acquaintance. 
And of Evil ‘Beware of evil workers.’ These are not quite the 
Workers. same as evil doers. They are not set upon doing all 
the harm they can in the world, but are fanatical, 
unbalanced, and unable to distinguish between a part 
and the whole, magnifying some microscopical point 
in Christianity until it blinds the eye to the symmetry, 
proportion, and beauty of Heaven’s glorious scheme. 
These people are the ‘Cranks’ of our Churches; 
they introduce fads and hobbies; they exaggerate 
144 


The True Circumcision 


the importance of trifles; they catch up every new Phil. iii. 
theory and vagary, and follow it to the detriment of 1-3 
truth and love. 

It is impossible to exaggerate the harm that these 
people do, or the desirability of keeping clear of 
them, they are the pests of every Christian com- 
munity they enter; and their influence over young 
and unwary spirits is in a high degree pernicious. 
The Apostle tells us that when we speak, we must 
observe the ‘proportion of faith.’ No exhortation 
could be more necessary, and whenever any person 
makes a hobby of one special aspect of the Gospel, 
always agitating that one point, exaggerating it, and 
concentrating upon it an amount of attention that 
should be evenly diffused over the entire system of 
truth, let us beware, for such an one, intentionally or 
not, is an evil worker. 

Beware of-the concision. These years of the The | 
Apostle’s life were greatly embittered by the an- Cosion. 
tagonism of the Judaising teachers who dogged his 
steps. They did not deny that Jesus was the 
Messiah, or that His Gospel was the power of God 
unto salvation, but they insisted that the Gentile 
converts could only come to the fulness of Gospel 
privilege through the Law of Moses; they urged 
that Gentiles must become Jews before they could 
be Christians ; they asserted that if the new converts 
were not circumcised after the manner of Moses, 
they could not be saved (Acts xv. 1). Throughout 
his whole career, the Apostle offered the most 
strenuous opposition to these men and their teaching. 

He went so far as to say that they were traitors to 
K 145 


Phil. iii. 
I-3 


Un- 
authorised 
Demands. 


cece 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


the highest traditions of the past, and that the rite 
they insisted on, under such circumstances, and when 
viewed as a condition of salvation by the Blood of 
Christ, was only a mutilation and cutting of the 
flesh. It was not circumcision in the true, deep 
sense of the term. The distinction lies between the 
words concision and circumcision, the one ‘a cutting,’ 
the other a sacred rite. 

Similarly, in our own time, we must beware of 
those who say that men must pass through certain 
outward rites before they can be saved. Still 
amongst us are to be found teachers and writers, 
the purport of whose words certainly is that, in 
addition to faith in our Lord, there must be certain 
acts of obedience to the institutions of the Church. 
They demand baptism, attendance at the confessional, 
and strict obedience to fasts, mortifications, and acts 
of self-denial, as conditions of salvation. Against 
all these we must be steadfastly on our guard, 
because they obscure and belittle the Gospel, and 
divert men’s thoughts from Him who is the only way 
to the Father. 

It is specially difficult to be on our guard against 
these false teachers, because they approach us under 
the guise of earnestness, sympathy, and religious 
sentiment. It is not so difficult to watch against 
the outwardly profane and rebellious, but the most 
wary may be snared by the specious appeals of those 
who seem more religious than themselves. It was 
therefore that the Apostle feared, in his time, lest by 
any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve with his 
subtlety, so the minds of his converts should be 

146 


The True Circumcision 


corrupted from the simplicity which is in Christ Phil. iii. 
(2 Cor. xi. 3). It is when Satan comes to us as an 1-3 
angel of light that he is most to be dreaded. 

THe Duty or Ser - Examination. — The Examine 
analogue of circumcision in the Christian dispensa- ¥*S¢!v¢s- 
tion is clearly not Baptism, but a ‘putting off the 
body of the sins of the flesh.’ We must be circum- 
cised in the ‘circumcision of Christ,’ 2.e. in the , 
cutting away of all the energy of our self-life, the | 
placing the grave of Jesus between ourselves and 
the past, and the rising with Him into a realm of 
liberty and victory, to which He passed by the door; 
of Resurrection (Col. ii. 11, 12). 

Specifically, the Apostle gives us the three notes 
of the true circumcision, by possessing which, we 
show ourselves to be the true descendants of 
Abraham, and in the true line of spiritual heredity 
and blessing; ‘For he is not a Jew which is one 
outwardly; neither is that circumcision which is 
outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew which is one 
inwardly ; the circumcision is that of the heart, in 
the spirit and not in the letter; whose praise is not 
of men but of God’ (Rom. ii. 28, 29). 

Do we belong to this holy category? Are the Worship 
three credentials on which the Apostle insists evident Right? 
in us? Do we worship God in the spirit? The 
word translated worship means first to do servant's 
work, then to do religious service, and sometimes 
priestly duty. Do we understand what it is to live 
in the temple of worship, performing every duty as 
to the Lord? Is our worship, whether in public or 
private, mechanical in outward posture and routine, 

147 


Phil. iii, 
1-3 


Is our 
Confidence 
Right ? 


Jake 
Parsons. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


or do we know what it is to worship the Father ‘in 
spirit and in truth,’ and ‘to be in the Spirit on the 
Lord’s Day?’ Do we glory (exult) in Christ Jesus ? 
Is He our boast and pride? Is following Him our 
highest ideal? Is the pursuit of His ‘Well-done’ 
our loftiest endeavour ? 

Are we amongst those who put no confidence in the 
flesh? All through the Epistles the flesh stands for 
self—the self that seeks to justify itself, that en- 
deavours to sanctify itself, that is always fussily 
endeavouring to win men for God, but has never 
learned to be submerged beneath the mighty tide 
and current of God’s Spirit. If your religious life is 
one of self-effort and self-complacency, you must 
stand back ; it is not for you to handle the priceless 
pearl ; your eyes cannot detect its superlative beauty, 
excellence, and worth. But let all humble souls, 
who have nothing in which to glory, save the Cross 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, who put no confidence 
in themselves, but wholly rest upon the unmerited 
grace of God, lift up their faces with exceeding great 
joy. These are the true children of Abraham. 

Do we rejoice in Christ Jesus? Dr James H. 
Taylor wrote some years ago of the curious old 
New England character named Jake Parsons. ‘The 
change in his life was notorious, so significant and 
revolutionary had it been. He lay down to sleep 
one night an absolutely drunken, worthless wretch, 
having well-nigh lost his power of speech through 
his dissipation, loved only by the fragment of the 
family that was left to him. He woke up the next 
morning an absolutely changed man. For nearly 

148 


The True Circumcision 


forty years after that, he lived a life without blemish Phil. iii. 
or spot. Hight years after the change, someone !-3 
asked him what had produced it. This is the 
explanation he gave: “That night, Jesus Christ 
appeared in my sleep. His face, as I saw it, seemed 
so pure, so lovely, so friendly to me that when I 
awoke I forgot my old vices, and so loved my Saviour 
that I could not displease Him. He did not speak 
to me, He only looked at me; but His look told me 
that there was hope for me, that I could be forgiven, 
that I could be purified. I looked at Him, and cried 
like a child; I felt that I was a vile, miserable, 
wicked wretch, filthier than a dunghill. I cannot 
tell how I felt. When I looked at Him I was too 
happy to be afraid; but when I looked at myself I 
was too afraid to be happy. I forgot all about rum 
and tobacco, I was thinking so much about Christ, 
so pure, so lovely, so beautiful, so friendly.” ’ 

One who knew him well, so Dr Taylor said, 
wrote: ‘For thirty-five years he lived a blameless 
life, beloved by everybody. On a fine summer 
morning, my friend writes, the glorious old new 
creature would crawl out of doors, and seating 
himself on the grassy bank in front of his humble 
home, turning his sightless face to the sun to feel 
its warmth, would say: “The door opened into 
heaven just a little crack. I shall know Him. 
He will look just so.” So he lived until he fell 
asleep in Jesus.’ God give us grace that till the 
eternal joy overtakes us as a flood we may live in 
the joy of a similar vision. 


149 


XVI 


SELLING ALL TO BUY THE 
PEARL 


Putt. iii. 4-9 


THovucH I might also have confidence in the flesh. If any other 
man thinketh that he hath whereof he might trust in the flesh, I 
more: 


Circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, of the tribe 


of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews; as touching the law, a 
Pharisee ; 

Concerning zeal, persecuting the church ; touching the righteous- 
ness which is in the law, blameless. 


a Heh what things were gain to me, those I counted loss for 
Christ. 

Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the excellency 
of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; for whom I have 
suffered the loss of all things, and do count them dwt dung, that 
I may win Christ, 

And be found in Him, not haying mine own righteousness, 
which is of the law, butthat which is through the faith of Christ, 
the righteousness which is of God by faith : 


Phil. iii. In one of His most exquisite parables, our Saviour 
4-9 - depicted a man leaving his house in the morning 
The Pearl of with a heavy bag of gold, and making his way to 
ee ES ae market-place, where pearl-sellers displayed the 
precious ocean gems. He was seeking goodly 
pearls, and passed from stall to stall with the eye 
and touch of the connoisseur ; but from each stall he 
turned away dissatisfied. At last he approached one 
of the sellers, and saw before him on the tray the 
most exquisite, perfect, and transparent pearl that 
150 


Selling All to Buy the Pearl 


his eyes had ever lit on. Asking the price, he dis- Phil. iii, 
covered that it would take all the pearls he had 4-9 
bought, and all the gold in his pouch, to procure it. 
On starting, he had meant to get the pearls and 
keep his house and estate, but he learnt that to win 
that he must sell even these; and so pearls and 
gold, home and heritage, were all gladly parted with, 
that that one most priceless jewel might be his own. 
And always afterwards, when the purchase was con- 
cluded, though he was homeless and solitary, the 
fact that he had got that pearl more than com- 
pensated him ; he counted all things else but loss. 

When our Lord spoke that marvellously beautiful 
parable, He must have had Saul of Tarsus in His 
eye—a man with a rich religious nature, capable of 
an infinite hunger after God, who passed from one 
stall to another amid the religions of the world, seek- 
ing for the best. But finally, when he came where 
the gem of heaven and earth and sea, the pearl of 
great price, lay, translucent and glistening, he gladly 
sacrificed all he possessed to win it; and in this 
marvellous paragraph he tells us that he counted all 
things else as loss and refuse compared with Jesus 
Christ. Oh, that we may understand the superlative 
excellence of Jesus, and turn from everything that 
would divide our heart with Him! 

Norick HOW THE APOSTLE USES THE POWER 
or ConTrast.—There are many ways by which we 
set forth the value of any possession. We may 
speak of its rarity; dilate upon its quality; or we 
may set it in contrast with things that men value. Let 
us look upon these contrasts, so enhancing ‘the Pearl.’ 

151 


Phil. iii. 
4-9 

The Know- 
ledge of 
Christ and 
the Practice 
of Judaism. 


Christ and 
Sacramental 
Grace. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


(1) He contrasted ‘ the excellency of the knowledge 
of Christ Jesus’ with the ancient and holy system 
of Judaism. The Apostle speaks of Judaism with 
profound reverence and affection. His was not a 
profane and irreverent soul, that could speak ruthless 
words about the holy system which, for so many 
centuries, had satisfied his forefathers, and which, in 
his own early life, had been so treasured and dear. 
He never could forget that the architecture of 
Judaism had been given by God on Sinai’s Mount ; 
that the ritualism of the Tabernacle had _ been 
wrought out in the laboratory of the Divine mind ; 
that the breath of God had quivered upon the lips of 
its prophets, and His fire burnt upon the hearts of 
its seers. He never could forget the generations 
of holy souls which in Judaism had found their 
solace, their inspiration, and their comfort; and 
therefore, with reverent, loving, and tender words, 
he spoke about that hoary system. What though 
the light of evening was now shining upon the hills 
of Zion! What though, ere long, Jerusalem itself 
must lie beneath the foot of the invader! Still 
Judaism was dear to him. But contrasted with 
Jesus Christ, and with that new view of God that 
Jesus Christ had brought, in which the veil was torn 
away, and the soul stood face to face with incarnate 
Deity, Judaism with all its sacred sanctions was but 
so much loss. 

(2) He contrasted the knowledge of Christ, next, 
with the virtue of sacramental efficacy. He mentions, 
first, the sacrament of circumcision. He says: 
‘Circumcision was administered to me, not in 

152 


Selling All to Buy the Pearl 


mature life, as to a Gentile proselyte, but in my Phil. iii, 
infancy. On the eighth day I received the initial 4-9 


rite, the badge of the Jew, the seal of the covenant,’ 
He made much of it. It is right that we should 


make much of the holy sacraments of our religion. 


Chiefest amongst our religious memories, treasured 
with unfeigned delight, are certain great moments 
when we have sat at the Table of our Lord with His 
saints, and have feasted high, whilst the tide of holy 
joy has borne us beyond the shores of earthly delight, 
to the very bosom of our Saviour. Sacraments have 
meant much to us, but how much to others! Paul 
said: Though I value beyond compare the sacra- 
ments of Judaism, what are these compared to the 
living Christ? They are but the empty grave from 
which He has gone forth ; they are but the cerements 
of the tomb, whilst the living Christ passes along 
the Easter path. . 


(3) He contrasted the knowledge of the Lord with Christ and 


high pedigree. To have been circumcised was much, 
but even if he had been the child of a Jewish 
proselyte he would have been circumcised the eighth 
day. It did not prove that he had the pure blood of 
Abraham flowing through his veins; therefore he 
says: ‘I was born a Hebrew; mine was the stock 
of Israel, the prince with God; I was of the tribe of 
Benjamin, from which Saul came, the first king of 
Israel ; and -which, amid the general faithlessness, 
clung still to Judah in maintaining the Temple rites. 
Moreover, I was a Hebrew of Hebrews; no Gentile 
blood had ever intermingled in our family.’ How 
good some count it to be able to trace back their 
153 


High Birth, 


Phil, iii. 
4-9 


Christ in 
Contrast 
with 
Pharisaism. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


pedigree to the Normans, or to the Saxons who 
preceded the Conquest. Some such pride might 
have been the Apostle’s. He looked upon Rome, 
and Babylon, and Greece, but knew his descent lay 
further back than any. They might boast their 
splendour, but he came of the man who crossed the 
Euphrates, and settled in Palestine as the friend of 
God. In him flowed the blood of Moses, who dared 
behold God face to face; of Joshua, who bade the 
sun stand still ; of Jeremiah and the prophets. But 
he cries: Compared to Christ, it is nothing. The 
soul that has won Him is related to a higher family ; 
has received the title of a nobler lineage ; is linked, 
not with the fathers of saintly piety, but to the ever- 
lasting Father, the eternal God, through Jesus Christ, 
the great Brother Man, who has lifted man into 
union with God. Compared with Him, high lineage 
and ancient pedigree are but dross. 

(4) He contrasted the knowledge of Christ with his 
membership in a noble order of men. Before Agrippa 
he said: ‘I lived a Pharisee’; and before the Council 
he cried: ‘I ama Pharisee, and the son of a Pharisee.’ 
He here boasts it again—‘ As touching the lawa Phari- 
see.’ The Pharisee in our time has come to be looked 
upon as the embodimentof pride, arrogance, and super- 
cilious contempt and scorn; but away back in the 
history of Israel the Pharisees stood for the purest, 
strictest morality. They were the maintainers of the 
Law amid the indifference of their time. They 
opposed the great parties of the courtly Herodians and 
of the sceptical Sadducees. What if they made their 
phylacteries broad! It showed that they reverenced 

154 


Selling All to Buy the Pearl 


the very text of the Word of God. What though Phil. iii, 
they built the tombs of the prophets! At least they 4-9 
had reverence for the great past. What though they 
flaunted an outward piety! At least there was the 
outward recognition of God. There was much to 
condemn, but they stood for the unity of the God- 
head, the resurrection of the Hereafter, and the 
strictest interpretation of the law. But Paul said 
that all this was as nothing to him now; he was 
prepared to be cast out by the Pharisees, to become 

an outcast and an alien, and be treated as the off- 
scouring of all things. To have Christ was an infinite 
compensation, which made all the rest seem but loss. 

(5) He contrasted the knowledge of Christ with his christ in 
own great reputation—‘ As touching zeal, persecuting ar 
the Church.’ Everybody knew how devoted he was Reputation. 
to Judaism, and how intent in uprooting Christianity. 
Breathing fire and sword, he swept like a tornado 
through Palestine. The disciples trembled when he 
came near any city in which they were gathered, for 
there was every fear that he would drag them before 
the Councils and commit them to prison. In many 
cases he ruthlessly stamped out the infant church in 
blood. There was nothing he would not do, so 
relentless, so merciless, so unsparing. And with all 
this, he was building up such a reputation as would 
have given him prominence in all aftertime in his 
fatherland and amongst his fellow-countrymen. It 
is not a small thing for a young man of thirty to 
build up a reputation like that, because it means 
high marriage, power, wealth and prestige. It means 
everything that a man cares for and seeks ; but when 

155 


Phil. iii. 


Christ in 
Contrast 
with 
Personal 
Uprightness. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


Paul stood, with everything of this world alluring 
him on the one hand, and with Christ on the other 
calling him to the cross, torture, isolation, poverty, 
and everything the flesh of man hates, he said: I am 
married to Christ, and in Him am married to suffering, 
sorrow, and loss; but I look on it as a man who has 
made a good bargain—for I have won the Pearl, Christ. 

(6) He contrasted the knowledge of Christ with the 
satisfaction of blameless character—‘ As touching 
the righteousness which is in the law, found blame- 
less.’ There is a tribunal always in session, a tribunal 
before which we are all constantly being tried ; and 
we ourselves often sit upon that tribunal to try those 
above us, on our level, and beneath us. But in our 
quiet hours we leave that judgment-seat, and apply 
to ourselves the standards which we have been 
applying to our fellows. At such times we cannot 
but notice how, compared with many around us, our 
own character appears blameless and flawless. 
Thank God, we say, after we have been consider- 
ing the case of the drunkard, the miser, or the 
dissipated, we are not as they are. And as we 
apply to ourselves the standard beneath which so 
many of our fellows have been condemned, we are 
disposed to take to ourselves considerable credit. ‘I 
go to church, I pay my subscriptions, I do not drink, 
I do not indulge the ficsh, I keep my tongue in 
control; my dearest and nearest cannot accuse me 
of being anything but a loving, tender man; my 
life is blameless.’ Thereupon we conclude that we 
are right. 

These are the people that it is hardest to win for 

156 


Selling All to Buy the Pearl 


Christ. They are enclosed and encased within the Phil. iii, 
armour of their self-righteousness ; they are so com- 4-9 
placent that when the strongest sermons are levelled 
against congregations they shelter themselves beneath 
their armour-plate, and say: The sermon is good for 
others, but it cannot mean us. When a man wakes 
up suddenly to see that in God’s sight all that counts 
for nothing; when Christ comes to him and casts 
the X-rays upon his inner life; when he sees the 
glory of the Great White Throne compared with the 
linen he has been washing for years with such 
arduous punctiliousness ; when he sees that what he 
thought to be white and clean is only as filthy as 
rags to the Son of God, there comes the greatest 
fight of his life. Many a man would be prepared to 
give up his church, to renounce his sacraments, to 
step out from his high family, with its pedigree, and 
from the blamelessness of his earlier life; many a 
man would be prepared to sacrifice his reputation for 
earnestness: but when it comes to saying that his 
righteousness is but filthy rags ; that the boat he has 
been constructing will not carry him across the 
mighty deluge of waters; that the tower he has 
built upon the reef will not resist the autumn storm, 
in counting even his blamelessness as loss and dross— 
yea as dung—then there comes the greatest fight. 

(7) He contrasted the knowledge of God’s Righteous- Contrasted 
ness which is by faith, with his own righteousness, pea 
uhich was of the law. In the Epistle to the Romans 
the Apostle clearly describes the righteousness, which 
is of the law, ‘ That the man which doeth these things 
shall live by them’ (Rom. x. 5). The doing of the 

157 


Phil, iii, 
4-9 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


things prescribed by the Law in the heart, or the 
Law on the Tables of Stone, has occupied the minds 
and governed the activities of legalists and ritualists 
from the beginning of the world. It was this that 
prompted Luther to fastings and scourgings, beneath 
which his body was reduced to an extremity, and 
that encouraged Bunyan to hope that an outward 
reformation would satisfy the outcry of his conscience. 
But such men have always found their efforts un- 
availing. However zealous they may be in going 
about to establish their own righteousness, men 
discover that what has seemed a white and flaw- 
less robe is only as filthy rags, in the searching light 
of the great white throne. 

But the Righteousness which is ‘of God,’ because 
it was designed by His wisdom, and is offered by 
His unmerited grace, requires no ‘going about.’ 
There is no need to say, ‘Who shall ascend unto 
heaven,’ or ‘Who shall descend into the deep.’ ‘The 
word of faith is nigh thee.’ Its one condition is the 
open hand of a faith, that takes what the risen 
saviour offers. Just as soon as the soul trusts Him— 
not merely believing about, but in Him,—in that 
moment it is clothed upon with the Righteousness of 
Christ, wrought out by His perfect obedience unto 
death, which is ‘unto all and upon all them that 
believe’ (Rom. iii, 22). It is only necessary to 
abandon our own righteousness to gain Christ and 
His righteousness. We cannot have both. But 


‘when we have resolved to drop the one, that we 


may take the other; in making the choice, we 
suddenly find ourselves in Him, and arrayed in the 
158 


Selling All to Buy the Pearl 


beauteous dress, Who was made sin for us that we Phil. iii. 
might be made the Righteousness of God (2 Cor. 4-9 
v. 21). 

Have youcometoHim? The time is coming when 
you will have to be found somewhere. The Apostle 
says, ‘That I may be found in Him.’ You will have 
to be found by the swirling tides of sorrow, by some 
supreme temptation, by the final test of death; you 
will have to be found in the Judgment; you will 
have to be found in the dissolution of the Heavens 
and the Earth. When God comes to find you, 
where will you be found? In the cardboard of your 
own goodness, or in the completed Righteousness of 
Jesus Christ, which He wrought out on the Cross in 
tears and blood, and which is yours directly you look 
with penitent trust towards Him? God grant that 
when you are found, it may be with the Pearl of 
great price in your hand, and with the Righteousness 
of Jesus Christ upon your soul! 


159 


XVIL 
THE SOUL’S QUEST 
Pui. iii. 10, 11 


Tat I may know Him, and the power of His resurrection, and 
the fellowship of His sufferings, being made conformable unto His 
witty any means I might attain unto the resurrection of the 

ead. 

Phil. iii, Tur Apostle in these wonderful verses twice uses 
10, I the word Resurrection ; and surely we must interpret 
it by his well-known teaching, in which he speaks of 
experience. In Romans vi. and Colossians ii. and 
iii, he is not dealing with the resurrection of the 
body, but with that entrance into a higher state of 
thought and experience which centres around the 

risen Lord. 
Paul and the It is impossible to suppose that the Apostle had 
Resurrection any doubt as to the resurrection of his body, whether 
of the Body. : 
at the coming of the Lord or afterwards. Surely it 
could never have entered into his mind that any 
excellence in Christian attainment could affect his 
sharing with the saints in the first resurrection, when 
suddenly, ‘in the twinkling of an eye,’ the great 
transformation will come to those who are alive and 
remain, whilst resurrection will come to those who 
have fallen asleep. The fact that he belonged to 
Christ, was a member of His mystical Body, and 

160 


fe 


The Soul’s Quest 


had given evidence of the depth and sincerity of his Phil. iii. 
conversion, was enough to secure his enjoyment in 10, II 
the privileges of the first resurrection, altogether 
apart from the renunciations which he had described 
in the foregoing paragraph. Clearly then, the resur- 
rection of the verses before us has to do with the 
life hidden with Christ in God, in whom we died 
indeed unto the world and sin, and are alive unto 
God through Jesus Christ. 

We have already seen that Paul was willing to 
‘count all things but loss for the excellency of the 
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord.’ Here he 
strikes that note again, and says that he counts all 
things but loss if only he may win Christ. In one 
of his quaint poems, Quarles tells us how he loves 
the earth, the air, the sea, and the heavens. He 
calls them ‘the spangled suburbs of the celestial 
city’; but they cannot give him a satisfaction in 
which he can rest, and he has to strike through all 
these outward facts and forms to arrive at God and 
see them in Him. 

‘In having all things, and not Thee, what have I? 

Not having Thee, what have my labours got? 

Let me enjoy but Thee, what further crave I? 

And having Thee alone what have I not? 


I wish nor sea, nor land, nor would I be 
Possessed of heaven, if heaven unpossessed Thee.’ E 


Such thoughts must have been in the Apostle’s mind, 
enabling him to make nothing of his losses, and every- 
thing of his gains, when he turned from the world, 
its joys and hopes, its religion and righteousness, to 
Jesus Christ—‘his exceeding Joy.’ 

L 161 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


Phil. iii. Let us consider the soul’s quest for the personal 
10, II Christ ; for the power of His Resurrection ; for the 
fellowship of His sufferings; for the likeness of His 


risen glory. 
The Soul’s ‘That I may know Him.’ We cannot be put off 


Nee te the by a doctrine about Christ, or by the Book which 
Christ. from end to end speaks of Christ, or with a hearsay 
or second-rate knowledge of Christ, we need to 
press through all these ante-rooms, passing from one 
to another, to stand in the personal presence of the 
Living Saviour. This is the prerogative of all holy 
souls; they are permitted not simply to know about 
Him, but_to know Him, not only to read of His 
excellency and beauty in the Book that is fragrant 
with the myrrh, aloes, and cassia of His presence, 
but to have fellowship with the Apostles, who saw, 
heard, beheld, and handled the Word of Life. 

This is the heart_and_essence_of Christianity. 
Other religions are content with ornate rites, an 
elaborate priesthood, an intricate system of doctrine 
and regulations, but the Christian, taught by the 
Holy Spirit, refuses to rest in any of these, and in 
comparison with the Master counts them as so much 
refuse. 

We may know Him personally, intimately, face to 
face. Christ does not live back in the centuries, nor 
amid the clouds of heaven: He_is near us, with us, 
compassing our path and our lying down, and ac- 
quainted with all our ways. But we cannot know 
Him in this mortal life except through the illumina- 
tion and teaching of the Holy Spirit. Let us ask 

i Him to shed His clear beams on the face of Jesus, 
162 


The Soul’s Quest 


so that it shall haunt our day-dreams and our Phil. iii. 
nights. 10, II 

We should never rest until we know Him as we We must not 
know our friend, and are able to read without speech fest until we 
the movements of His soul. We should know by a Him’, 
quick intuition what will please and what will hurt 
His pure and holy nature. We should know where ~“ 
to find Him; should be familiar with His modes of 
thought and methods of action; should understand 
and identify ourselves with His goings forth, as, day 
by day, He goes through the world healing and 
saving. What a difference there is between the 
knowledge which the man in the street has of some 
public character and that which is vouchsafed to the 
inner circle of his home; and we must surely know 
Christ, not as a stranger who turns in to visit for the 
night, or as the exalted King of men,—there must be 
the inner knowledge as of those whom He counts 
His own familiar friends, whom He trusts with His 
secrets, who eat with Him of His bread (Psalm 
xli. 9). 

To know Christ in the storm of battle; to know 
Him in the valley of shadow; to know Him when 
the solar light irradiates our faces, or when they are 
darkened with disappointment and sorrow ; to know 
the sweetness of his dealing with bruised reeds and 
- smoking flax ; to know the tenderness of His sym- 
pathy and the strength of His right hand—all this 
involves many varieties of experience on our part, 
but each of them, like the facets of a diamond, will 
reflect the prismatic beauty of His glory from a new 
angle. 

163 


Phil. ‘iii. 
10, II 

The Soul’s 
Quest for the 
Power of 
His Resur- 
rection. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 
The Risen Christ is full of all authority and power. 


We remember the two mountains of His life,—the 
one at the beginning, the other at the end. On the 
first, Satan offered Him the authority and glory of 
the world, if only He would perform one act of homage, 
and so evade the experiences of the Cross and grave. 
It was as though he said, ‘Son of God, if Thou wilt 
do homage to me, Thou needest not sweat the bloody 
sweat of Gethsemane, or undergo the scourging of 
Gabbatha, or the shame of Calvary.’ But the Lord 
would not heed the suggestion, but descended the 
rugged valley path, passed by way of the Cross to the 
glory ; and was therefore able on the other mountain 
—that of the Ascension—to say ‘All power (authority) 
is given to Me in heaven and upon earth,’ 
Addressing the beloved apostle, some years after, 
Jesus said, ‘I am the First and the Last, and the 
Living One, there was His Life in its perennial and 
Divine fountain,—‘ I became dead, and behold, I am 
alive for evermore, there was His Life in its vic- 
tory over death,—‘ and have the keys of death and 
the unseen world,’ there is Life regnant over all the 
unseen spaces and powers. As the waters of a 
river, passing through various soils, take up into 
themselves the quality of each, so the life of Christ 
in its human aspect, passing through the successive 
scenes of His earthly ministry, acquired qualities 
with which it stands possessed for ever. Listen to 
His glorious words—‘ Be of good cheer, I have 
overcome...’ ‘To him that overcometh will I 
give to sit with Me in My throne, as I also over- 
came and sat down with My Father in His throne.’ 
164 


The Soul’s Quest 


What power emanates from the Risen Christ! He Phil. iii. 
is the Divine storage of eternal and solar forces. ‘In 10, II 
Him all fulness dwells.’ An electric battery just a rom 
charged, is not fuller of dynamic energy than Christ Lord. = 
is of zonial and resurrection power ; and directly the 
soul is united to Him by a living faith, it is as when 
we touch a battery with our hand, and its stored 
forces begin to thrill our body. This is what the 
Apostle meant when he spoke about the ‘power of 
His Resurrection.’ He meant that to the believing 
soul, the power of the life which resides in Christ 
pours into the receptive spirit, forthwith it rises from 
the grave of passion in which it had been imprisoned, 
escapes from the bondage of corruption by which it 
was held, and goes forth into the glorious liberty of 
the sons of God. Just as the Christ could not be 
holden by the bands of death, so the soul which 
trusts Him is emancipated, enthused, raised into an 
altogether new atmosphere, breathes the ozone of 
eternity, is thrilled by the powers of the unseen, and 
meets all appeals from the lower world with an 
abundance of life, which is impervious to disease, 
infirmity, and temptation. Just as a really healthy 
life may pass through microbes of disease, which 
would effect the overthrow of less vigorous and 
buoyant health, so the soul which is infilled with 
the Resurrection power of Christ, is more than a 
conqueror in the midst of the most virulent tempta- 
tion, whether arising from its own heredity or the 


combined power of the pit. 
* % * tt a 


165 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


Phil. iii. Notice the Apostle’s order. He does not put the 
10, Ir fellowship of Christ’s sufferings as the first thing 
Foe ie, which the soul must seek; he does not expect that 
the Fellow- we should go about the world making death and the 
ele grave our main goal and object. His doctrine is. 
Sufferings. ) healthier far. He says, Seek to know the Risen, 
‘ Lord, open your hearts to Him that the power of 
His 2 resurrection life may enter and infill, and in the/ 
fulness of your joy you will not stay to count the 
cost of having fellowship with His sufferings. The 
experience of suffering will, so to speak, be forgotten 
in the radiancy of your exultation. As the pain of 
the woman in travail is forgotten amid the joy of 
bearing a child into the world, so will the keenest 
suffering seem but a pin-prick compared with the 
eternal weight of glory. 
Often Christian people go through the world with 
a lugubrious expression on the face, much as some 
ancient ascetic would have done, as though looking 
for their graves. It is far better to tread the path- 
ways of life, seeking to know the power of the Risen 
Life, for when that is within, it counts all things but 
loss, and even death a gain. 


Conditions It is inevitable that if we are to know much of 
of the Risen Sos . ; ; 
Life. Christ’s Resurrection, and in proportion as we know 


it, we shall drink of the cup of His sufferings. Every 
step further into the Risen Life will involve some 
deeper and more poignant pang of pain. Men will 
misunderstand us, as they misunderstood Him, men 
will drop away from us and leave us alone, as they 
left Him, we shall be compelled to stand in the 
pillory of hatred and rejection. To be received by 
166 


The Soul’s Quest 


Christ into His secret, will necessarily secure our Phil. iii. 
exclusion from the familiar intercourse of the world ; 19, 11 
to stand with Him in the height, will have its 
counterpart in our being thrust down into the 
depth ; to have fellowship under the open heaven of 

God, with the voice of the Father, and the descend- 

ing Dove, will certainly involve the being driven into 

the wilderness to meet the full brunt of temptation. 

But the soul that really loves Christ will not shrink 

from the ordeal, it will be glad to enter into His 
sufferings, because it realises that to know these is 

to know Him, and that the very distance into which 

the meteor is driven in the darkness, is in proportion 

to the close proximity and length of its fellowship 

with the sun that attracts it into its inner circle. 

Baxter said in this connection: ‘A cheap religion 
is not usually accompanied with any notable degree 
of comfort. Although the person be a sincere-hearted 
Christian, he cannot have much peace or joy. A 
confirmed Christian is one that taketh self-denial for 
one half of his religion.’ How true this is! and it is 
absolutely certain that you may judge your heights 
by your depths, and gauge the amount of Resurrec- 
tion Power which is within you by the depths of 
your sympathy with, and understanding of, the Cross 
of Christ. You may doubt indeed if you have been 
admitted into the fulness of the one, unless you have 
gone down into the depths of the other. 

The Risen Life involves the recognition of all Fla reeds 
human interests, the loving reciprocity of friendship ¢ Care 
and comradeship, the fulfilment of all the duties that paalseaen = 
devolve upon us, though performing them all from Life, 

167 


Phil. iii, 
10, II 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


another standpoint. The Risen Lord called Mary by 
the familiar name, sat in the social circle with the 
beloved band of His apostles, went forth to minister 
to their physical needs,—as on the morning when 
He prepared fish and bread for them,—gtood u 
from His throne in vivid sympathy with the martyr 
who was being stoned to his death, and came to 
encourage the disciple who wrought in the mines of 
Patmos. But there was a difference in it all. He 
came from another sphere to succour them. So it 
will be with us; the Resurrection life does not mean 
that we are indifferent to any human tie or call, but 
that we have laid hold of a new source of power by 
which it may be fulfilled. Our life is no longer fitful, 
with the spasmodic energy of our own impulse, but 
fed from the perennial fountains of Christ’s life. 
Because He lives we live also; His life constrains 
us ; His Spirit fills us ; we are already in the heavenlies 
even as He was (John iii. 13). 

We utilise the forces of a higher plane of being 
than that which other men can utilise. Discoverers, 
from Archimedes to Edison, may use the physical 
forces of the unseen. Christian science may employ 
its psychical forces, but we touch those spiritual 
forces which are resident in the Holy Spirit, and 
with which the nature of the Risen Lord is replete. 
Just as there is a distinction between the civilised 
man and the savage, because the former is able to 
use those mighty energies of which the untutored 
child of nature knows nothing, so there is a great 
difference between the man who has entered into 
the power of Christ’s Resurrection and other men. 

168 


The Soul’s Quest 


As electricity is a higher form of power than that Phil. iii, 
of water or gas, so the Christian who lives in union 19, IT 
with the Risen Christ is able to exert a higher 

form of power than others. He knows the secrets 

of God, and obeys the laws of a life which is far 
removed from that which he used to live. Through 

death to his self-life, he has commenced to use the 

power of the Eternal Word, ‘ Who was, and is, and 

is to come.’ 


169 


Phil. iii. 
12 


Paul appre- 
hended of 
Christ Jesus. 


XVIII 
APPREHENDED TO APPREHEND 


Pui. iii. 12 


Noras though Thad already attained, either were already per- 
fect: but I follow after, if that I may apprehend that for which 
also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus. 

Wer may compare these words with those which 
the Apostle uttered in the presence of Agrippa: 
‘Wherefore, O king Agrippa, I was not disobedient 
unto the heavenly vision.’ That vision included his 
appointment to be a minister and a witness of all 
the things which he had seen, and of those in which 
fresh revelations were to be made, the promise of 
deliverance from the people and the Gentiles, and the 
prevision of the marvellous results that would accrue 
from his testimony to the Gentiles (Acts xxvi.16-18). 

With these words to help us we can better under- 

stand the purport of this striking phrase. 
* * * * * 

PAUL REALISED THAT HIS CONVERSION HAD 
BEEN HIS APPREHENSION BY Gop.—To hear some 
men speak you would suppose that the initiative in 
their religious life had come from themselves, that 
the first approaches towards God emanated from 
their own hearts, that they were independent of 
Him until they voluntarily put themselves within 
the range of His care and help. Nothing could be 


further from the truth. As well might the flower 
170 


Apprehended to Apprehend 


speak of discovering the sunshine and turning its Phil. iii, 
face thitherwards. / The initiative of the religious 12 | 
life does not come from man but from God. ° The 

first steps in reconciliation are not on our side 

but on His. If we seek God it is only because He 

has been seeking us from early childhood, and has 
contrived the span of our life and the location of our , 

home with special reference to our feeling after Him 

and finding Him (Acts xvii. 26, 27). J 

When a man turns to God, the first thing he God's Love 
realises is that throughout the wild wanderings of realised in 
his youth, and amid all the fret and war of his 2 ieeeae 
manhood, even when he has been most stubborn 
and rebellious, God’s.love has never ceased to seek 
him. The true comparison for the soul is not 
that it is immured in dark galleries and cata- 
combs, out of which it presently seeks to escape, 
but that God comes into the intricacies of its 
rebellion and wandering, calling tenderly and 
earnestly, awakening it from its stupefaction, shed- 
ding on fast-closed eyes beams of light to startle the 
drowsy sleeper, and eliciting by every method in his 
power a quick response. We love because we were 
first loved; we seek because we were sought; we 
leave our far country, not only because hunger 
impels, but because frequent missives from our 
Father's house tell us that He cannot be at rest 
until we are again seated at His table. 

Paul realised that from his earliest hour, God had As it was by 
been about his path and his ways. When he was Paul. 
circumcised the eighth day, when he was brought up 
as a son of the law, when he was engaged in perse- 


171 








Phil. iii. 
I2 


When Christ 


apprehends 
us it is for a 
Great 
Purpose. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


cuting the Church, when he was working out for 
himself a righteousness in which to stand the 
searching inspection of the great White Throne, 
in and through all the Spirit of God had been 
near, teaching, admonishing, and stimulating his 
quest for the Pearl of great price. Finally, he 
recognised that on the day, ever memorable, of 
his journey to Damascus, the love of God in 
the Person of Christ had apprehended or seized 
upon him. 

After all, is not this conversion? We grasp the 
hand of Christ because He has grasped ours, we are 
apprehended to live after the highest and noblest 
ideals because His hand has been laid upon us in 
arrest. 

‘That I may apprehend that for which also I was 
apprehended by Christ Jesus.’ When God brings us 
to Himself, it is to realise some lofty ideal on which 
He has. set His heart. In some cases, the eye 
beholds, as Moses did in vision, the tabernacle which 
it is to build, it stands in clearly defined outlines, 
with every knop and tassel, every. curtain and fringe, 
every pillar and hook perfectly designed. In other 
cases, the pattern is only revealed step by step and 
day by day. Each morning the Spirit of God 
presents to us in the circumstances of our life, and 
in the impulse of our heart, some new item in the 
great conception, and calls on us to fulfil it,—thus 
the temple groweth into a dwelling place for the 
Eternal. 

Whichever method God may adopt with you, 
whether in the early morning of life you stand upon the 

172 


Apprehended to Apprehend 


mountain and see the completed plan, or your eyes Phil. iii. 
are holden so that you are permitted to see it only 12 

by piecemeal, yet be sure that there was a great 

thought in His heart when He drew you out of the 

horrible pit and from the miry clay, and set your 

feet upon a rock, and established your goings. 


Thal) life there ought to be the human response to We must not 
the Divine call. We do not become saints against —— to 
; A pprehend 
our will or in violation to our free agency. Wethatfor _ 
must be workers together with God, working out aes 
what He works in. We must first see something of us. 
the goal to which our steps are to be directed, and 
then we must mount up with wings as eagles, run 
without being weary, walk without being faint. It 
is possible for each of us to turn our backs upon the 
heavenly vision, shut our ears to the Divine call, and 
take the downward course. The poet Dante caps 
his description of the rich young man who went 
away sorrowful, by calling it The Great Refusal. 
Herod and Pilate, Felix and Agrippa, all refused to 
apprehend that for which they were apprehended, 
and their course has been followed by myriads. 

There is a modern instance in the biography of The Case of 
John Stuart Mill, aptly quoted by Dr W. M. Taylor on sisi 
in this connection. These are his words: ‘I was in 
a dull state of nerves, such as everybody is occasion- 
ally liable to, unsusceptible to enjoyment or pleasure- 
able excitement—one of those moods when what 
is pleasure at other times becomes insipid or 
indifferent—the state, I should think, in which con- 
verts to Methodism usually are, when smitten by 
their first conviction of sin. In this frame of mind it 

173 


Phil. iii. 
I2 


We must not 


be content 
with a 
Partial 
Attainment. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


occurred to me to put the question directly to myself: 
“Suppose that all your objects in life were realised ; that 
all the changes that you are looking forward to could 
be completely effected at this very instant, would this 
be a great joy and happiness to you?” and an irre- 
pressible self-consciousness distinctly answered, No. 
At this my heart sank within me; the whole founda- 
tion on which my life was constructed fell down, all 
my happiness was to have been found in the continual 
pursuit of this end, the end that ceased to charm, 
and how could there ever again be any interest 
in the means? I seemed to have nothing left to live 
for.’ But, when earthly projects fell down, did not 
the Lord draw near, laying on him His arresting 
hand, and beseeching him to adopt a more stable 
foundation for his life? And is it not clear that he 
too made a great and deliberate refusal to feel after 
God if haply he might find Him, who is not far from 
any one of us ? 

‘Not as though I had already attained, either were 
already perfect.’ And again, ‘Brethren, I count not 
myself to have apprehended.’ As Paul looked at the 
result of his work, the large cities which had become 
permeated with Christian truth, the flourishing 
Churches which looked to him as their founder, the 
Epistles which he had written, and the commanding 
influence of his spoken words, surely he might have 
counted himself to have apprehended. He did not 
do so because as he drew nearer to the attainment of 
God’s ideal, some new phase opened, as when we are 
climbing the hills, and having reached the vantage- 
ground on which our eyes have been set during hours 

174 


Apprehended to Apprehend 


of arduous toil, we see another height rising beyond. Phil. iii. 
The more the glory shone on the face of Moses, !4 
the quicker he was to veil it from view; the 
higher the soul rises into likeness with Christ, the 
deeper its humility. When we see what Christ is in 
the glory of His Person, and in the greatness of His 
love, we feel that our own attainments are as molehills 
to Alps. 

A friend discovered Thorwaldsen in tears, and on 
asking why the distinguished sculptor was giving way 
to depression, he received this reply, ‘Look at that 
statue. I have realised my ideal, and therefore fear 
that I have reached the high-water mark of my 
profession. When a man is satisfied, he ceases to 
grow.’ 

It is also said that Tennyson was seventeen years 
in writing ‘In Memoriam.’ He wrote the little 
song ‘Come into the Garden, Maud’ fifty times , 
before he gave it to the public. The wife of a 
distinguished painter said, ‘I never saw my husband 
satisfied with one of his productions.’ Thus self- 
dissatisfaction lies at the root of our noblest 
achievements. 

re_is no condition a cout | in. t ine i 





past. ie: us sainit far we tase ack aie to that 
identification with the Death of Christ, with His 
Resurrection, or with the gift of Pentecost, to that 
deliverance from the power of sin, and that con- 
formity to His perfect image to which we have been 
called with a heavenly calling. Even if we are kept 
from known and outward sin, how much shortcoming 
175 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


Phil. iii. there is in our hearts. If we have ceased doing the 
things that we ought not to do, alas for us, there are 
so many things that we fail to do. 


Paul not He knew Him whom he had believed, and therefore 
discouraged 


though he he said, ‘I press_on toward the goal.’ Depression, 
had not fully which makes us slacken our steps, is from below, 


ss Syke cae humility, which makes us more eager to attain 
God’s purpose, is from above. Never yield to dis- 
couragement, never sit down face to face with 
failure or imperfection as though these were a 
necessary part of your life. God can forgive failure, 
but He cannot forgive those who abandon their high 
quest, and allow their hands to hang down and their 
knees to fail. Grasp the banner again, young soldier, 
and rush forward into the fight. Let past failure 
be an incentive to more commanding achievements. 
Remember that Christ is always just in front; His 
grace is sufficient; dare to claim the fulfilment of 
His own promise, ‘ My grace is sufficient for thee.’ 

It seems as though these words of Paul are 
characteristic of his eager spirit through all the ages. 
Not only did he press on through obloquy and 
reproach, through imprisonment and _ threatened 
death; but from the excellent glory into which he 
has passed, we seem to hear those same clarion 
notes, ‘I press on. Pressing on in the knowledge 
of God, pressing on in high and noble service, 
pressing on only a few steps behind the Lamb as 
He goes ever conquering and to conquer, pressing 
on until the pulling down of all rule and authority 
and power has been accomplished, and God has 
become all in all. 

176 


XIX 
‘ONWARDS AND UPWARDS’ 


Puit. iii. 13, 14 


BRETHREN, I count not myself to have apprehended; but 
this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and 
reaching forth unto those things which are before, 

I press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of 
God in Christ Jesus, 


Taat word calling frequently occurs in the Epistles Phi], iii, 
—‘ Ye see your calling brethren, how that not many 13, 14 
wise, not many mighty, are called.’ And again, The Divine 
‘That ye may know what is the hope of His calling’ aia 
—the hope to which He calls you. And again, 
‘Who hath called us with a holy calling.’ And 
again, ‘Partakers of a heavenly calling. And 
again, ‘Ye were called in one hope of your 
calling’ —to which we have been called in the 
unity of the Spirit. The wireless telegraphy of 
God’s Spirit is ever bringing the Divine call to 
every soul. It is circling around you in the— 
tremulous vibrating air. If only your ears were 
attuned to it, you would detect the low sweet 
voice of God, nearer, clearer, stronger, intenser, 
more thrilling, more eager. The voice of God calls, 
calls you. 
* * % * * 
To what goal does God beckon us, with the prize The Glory 


glittering in the pes ae it, held before us by Deen 
M 


Phil. iii, 
13, 14 


God’s Call 
to you. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 
the pierced Hand? What_is God's goal and mark ? 


The Apostle, in his early life, was bent on becoming 
a Rabban, one of the elders of the people, the chief 
of the Pharisee party. He was filled with ideals 
and hopes, which he had long revolved in his eager 
mind ; but as his palfrey bore him towards Damascus, 


' suddenly he beheld an ideal, presented to him in 


the person of Jesus of Nazareth, before which all 
the former ones paled in their beauty, as the 


' morning star pales before the sunrise. He saw the 


hollowness of being merely a Pharisee; the for- 
mality, the externalism, the inadequacy of the desire 
which had hitherto inspired his nature. Forth- 
with he became inspired with a new purpose, and 
set himself to aim at the spotless loveliness, the 
ideal of strength, sweetness, might, mercy, purity 
and gentleness combined in the character of 
Jesus, so that from that moment he cried, ‘I 
surrender everything; my hopes, aims, ambitions, 
ideals—I cast them all away, as a man casts dross, 
and till I die, it shall be my passionate desire to 
realise in my own character, day by day, something 
of the beauty and glory which I have seen upon the _ 
face of the Man of Nazareth. This one thing I do: | 


.; Luopress toward the mark for the prize of the high | 
calling of God.’ 


God’s voice is calling you to-day to that, to be like 
Jesus ; to know Him, to love Him better, to resemble 
Him more completely, to strike off from your character 
a little more of the encompassing stone, and to bring 
out some new line and lineament of the perfect 
statue. 

178 


‘Onwards and Upwards’ 


It_is a high calling because it comes from above, Phil. iii. 
from God ; the conception of it has emanated from 13, 14 
His heart. It is a high calling because it is worthy [tis a High 
of God. It is a hegh calling because it is so much ~ oe 
above the ideals of men. Men strive to get money, 
forgetting that there are no pockets in a shroud ; seek 
for pleasure, forgetting that the pleasures of this world 
are like the snow upon the river, ‘a moment white, 
then gone for ever’ ; strive after fame and supremacy, 
forgetting that there must come a moment when their 
remains will lie beneath the pall on which the crown 
and sceptre of empire rest, to be assumed by 
another. When once the eye has caught sight of 
this vision, it is attracted by a light above the 
brightness of the sun of wealth, above the bright- 
ness of the sun of fame, above the brightness of 
the sun of rank, above the brightness of the sun 
of worldly power. The lofty ideal glistens before 
each of us of becoming like our Master, knowing 
Him, feeling the power and fascination of His 
resurrection, tasting the fellowship of His suffer- 
ings, and being conformed to Him in His death, 
rising day by day higher and nearer to Him in 
His royal beauty, the Divine Man, God’s ideal for 
us all. 

It is also a high calling because always above our A Calling 
highest_aspirations. How touching is that story Rae 
told already of the great sculptor, who, after years 
of work, achieved a statue so perfectly fashioned 
that he could discover no line that needed to be 
retouched, no feature that needed to be remodelled. 

It stood there in absolute beauty, and a friend found 
179 


Phil. iii. 
13, 14 


A Calling 
that 


summons us 
Heaven- 
wards, 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


him in tears beside it, as he said, ‘I shall never do any- 
thing better than that, it is the consummation of my 
ideal.’ Thank God, we may follow after the perfect 
beauty of Christ for untold ages, but shall never be 
found weeping because there are no more worlds 
to conquer. There will always be a new Alp 
rising above Alp, a beautiful and more beautiful 
conception calling us to leave that which we have 
already attained. 

And then this is a high calling because it 
summons us to where Christ sits at the right hand 
of God. It compels us to look upward, and set 
our affections upon things above, not in things on 
the earth. ‘Alas,’ you say, ‘it is too great for me; 
remember what I am, poor dust and ashes, full of 
failure and infirmity; I have so often tried and 
succumbed ; there can be no possible hope for me to 
realise it; it is but a mockery to incite me to 
this great quest.’ But remember, Paul started from 
a lower level than yours; he was a blasphemer, and 
had trampled under foot the Blood of Jesus. 
Remember also that this high calling is ‘in Christ, 
and if you are in Christ, you have got your foot upon 
the first rung of the ladder, upon the first step of the 
staircase. It is ‘in Christ.’ You cannot be in 
Christ without having Christ in you; and God 
has put the Spirit of His Son within you that 
you may evolve what is involved. God has con- 
signed to your keeping His Beloved, that hour by 
hour you may strike away that which is of self and 
sin, that the beauty of Jesus Christ may become 
more conspicuous before the eyes of men, 

180 


‘Onwards and Upwards’ 


* * * * * Phil. iii. 

(1) ‘Dhis one thing Ido.’ The Apostle says we 13, 14_ 

must be discontented with what we have attained, oases ed ne 
and intent on the one goal which lies before us. None Realised. 
of us can doubt that success in life is not attained 
by genius, but plodding industry. A man may be 
swift as Asahel, of fleetest foot, but if he does not set 
his mind upon a distinct goal he will be outstripped 
by a man of slower foot, but more resolute purpose. 
It is not the hare that runs and sleeps, but the 
tortoise that plods on towards a determined point 
that wins the race. It is so in business, in art, in 
war, and in love. 

Many men are born into the world who are clever Abundant 
at a number of things, but succeed in nothing. There #@!P. 
are others who concentrate their minds upon one 
thing and succeed, though they have not half the 
genius of their competitors. And ‘the one thing’ 
we must set our minds upon, and pursue with un- 
remitting diligence, is God’s ideal presented to us in 
Jesus Christ. And it is good to know that every 
incident in life may be made to conduce to our high 
purpose. As the bee will get honey from a thousand 
different flowers, so we can accumulate the honey of 
a holy character from every flower in the garden 
of our life. Every circumstance may be pressed 
into our service for the attainment of a more Christ- 
like character. 

The votary of pleasure must sometimes retire from 
the giddy whirl of amusement, to recruit exhausted 
energies. A London season only lasts for two or 
three months, and then the fashionable world must 

181 


Phil. iii, 
13, 14 


Are our 
circum- 
stances co- 
operating ? 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


go to the country, or the seaside resort, to recuperate. 
The business man who never gets relief from its 
pressure will be unable to hold his own against com- 
mercial competition. So with the student; he works 
up for the examination, straining every nerve for it, 
and then lays aside his studies and goes off to 
mountain or shore. 

But_everything in life may help you. to be like 
Christ! In your moments of solitude you will most 
easily make headway ; but the hours of conflict and 
temptation will be the times in which you will be 
able to achieve most of the likeness of Christ. When 
you lose the harvest of your toils; when the tongue 
of slander detracts from your good name; when you 
have to bear, day after day, the scornful and averted 
look of your fellows ; when all your life is overcast by 
the shadow of death, and you have no more heart to 
live ; in days of discouragement and disappointment 
spent in the solitude of your chamber ; in days when 
you sit in the darkened room, where the beloved one 
is slowly passing from your embrace, and the precious 
life is ebbing from the heart drop by drop—in all 
these times, when you are made aware of something 
which is not as sweet, or beautiful, as it might be, 
you may take the opportunity of becoming more 
perfectly fashioned towards the likeness of your 
Lord. 

The.men who do one thing in the world are bound 
to_succeed. Remember the story of the greatest of 
orators, Demosthenes, who set himself resolutely to 
cure a defect in his speech, by speaking, with pebbles 
in his mouth, against the roar of the sea, Men 

182 





‘Onwards and Upwards’ 


who are able to bend themselves upon one thing must Phil. iii. 
be successful in its achievement. Oh, that we may 13, 14 
say: ‘Come weal, come woe, prosperity or disap- 
pointment, sunshine or shadow, we will never rest, 

day nor night, but press towards the mark of increas- 

ing likeness to Christ, that men may be reminded in 

us of Him!’ 

(2) If we would press on, we must learn to forgel. The Duty of 

We are all tempted to live in the past, to look up at Forgetting. 
the fading laurels which we have gained, as though 
they could never be equalled or surpassed; to say, 
‘We shall never do anything so good as that again, 
never be able to reach quite so high, or realise quite 
so much; to paint so fair a picture, to execute so 
beautiful a statue.’ This is fatal. Never rest upon 
your past attainments; forget them. Forget the 
rapture of your first communion ; the earliest ad- 
dresses and sermons, which you used to feed and 
rest upon ; the trophies which attended your earliest 
efforts ; do not quote these things as your highest ; 
do not.look back, lest, like Lot’s wife, you be petrified, 
and unable to advance. 

Forget the innocence of your penance Do not 
say with Hood— 


‘I remember, I remember, 
The house where I was born,’ 


and end by lamenting that you were nearer heaven 

when a boy than you are now. Innocence is good, 

but purity is better. The breath of a child’s sleep is 

fragrant and soft; but give me the deep slumber of 

the man who rests after a well-fought field. Not 
183 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


Phil. iii. untempted innocence, but the strength which comes 

13, 14 of victorious conflict should be our aim. 

No morbid And do not dwell upon past sin. When a new 

elie ig boy comes to the philanthropist, a boy who has 

Past. seen and known sin enough to blight his life 
for ever, the wise philanthropist says, ‘My boy, I 
want you to forget the past.’ He fits him out with 
new clothes, and tries to wipe out the memory of the 
degrading sins in which he has played a part. And 
the boy breaks from his past, and steps up into an 
entirely new life under that fostering care. 

Remember There may be things in our past of which we are 

tent ashamed, which might haunt us, which might cut the 
sinews of our strength. But if we have handed them 
over to God in confession and faith, He has put them 
away and forgotten them. Forget them, and, 
leaving the past attainments, the innocence of 
childhood, and the sin which has vitiated and 
blackened your record, reach forward to realise the 
beauty of Jesus. Do not be content with anything 
less. But it is important never to allow the imperfect 
and second-best to pass unconfessed. ‘Too often we 
have done it, whispering: ‘ Yes, I have failed, let it 
pass’; instead of confessing to God and man, and 
crying: ‘Never more; I will be Christlike, I will be 
pure with the purity of Jesus, I will be tender, sweet, 
and gentle as Christ was. My God, I hear Thee 
calling ; I hear Thee calling, I will arise; Excelsior, 
excelsior, I will climb. Never a day shall pass that 
does not see some added beauty of Christ to my 
heart and life, through the power of Thy Holy 
Spirit.’ 

184 


‘Onwards and Upwards’ 
“T_press.toward.the mark for the prize.’ What? Phil. iii. 


Heaven? No, Heaven has been won by the merits 13, 14 
of the Lord Jesus. A throne? A crown? No, for Shere isa 
these are the gifts of free grace. What, then, is the se 
prize ? 

God calls us to the goal, but there is a prize 
beyond and in addition to the goal. What? Blessed- 
ness! To be Christlike is to be blessed. When we 
have overcome some temptation there has been such} 
a sense of blessedness. When we have gone through 
some awful hour of trial, and have come out unsoiled 
and unscathed, there has been such a rapture in our 
souls. When we have stepped up to higher things 
on our dead selves, there has been such peace. 

Do you know it? When you have accomplished 
something you did not think you could do; when 
you have made some sacrifice you thought you never 
could achieve ; when you have done a noble thing— 
you have not thought about the nobility or loveliness 
of it, but there has been a delightful inner conscious- 
ness. One hardly knows what to call it. Bloom! 
The bloom of the flower! The light on the cloud! 
The hue of health on the face! The kiss of God! 
The ‘ Well done, good and faithful servant!’ That 
is worth living for. This prize may be won here, and | 
not yonder only. Every night after a day spent like | 
this it seems as though God puts into our hearts, as | 
we lie down upon our pillow to sleep, a jewel, which | 
is part of our prize, and the accumulation of the 
jewels will make the felicity of Paradise. 





185 


Phil. iii. 


15, 16 


The 
Disrobing 
oom. 


xx 


THE ATTAINMENTS OF THE 
CHRISTIAN LIFE 


Pum. iii. 15, 16. 


Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded: and 

if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this 
wericahclea whereto we have already attained, let us walk by 
the same rule, let us mind the same thing. 
THESE words suggest, that there is a great difference 
in the attainments of Christian people; and in 
endeavouring to bring this home, so that any who 
are laggard and sluggard may be quickened in the 
path of holiness, we may regard this chapter as 
falling naturally into a suite of some seven apartments, 
each of which leads to another, as in so many of the 
picturesque and princely homes of England. May 
God’s Spirit help us to discover in which room we 
are already, and having discovered it, to press on to 
the next. 

‘Circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, 
of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of Hebrews; as 
touching the law, a Pharisee; as touching zeal, 
persecuting the Church; as touching the righteous- 
ness which is in the law, found blameless. Howbeit 
what things were gain to me, these have I counted 
loss for Christ’ (vv. 5-7). In the grey light of the 
dawn, we see the young Pharisee, decked out in all 

186 


The Attainments of the Christian Life 


the paraphernalia of the dress of his order. His are Phil. iii. 
the phylacteries, his the broad borders covered with 15, 16 
texts, his the sacred cord as son of the law, over 
these the garment of zeal, and over this again a robe 

that seems spotless—‘ the righteousness of the law,’ 

in which he accounts himself to be blameless. Around 

the room are burnished mirrors, and as he considers 

his array in the grey light he imagines himself to be 
highly commendable and likely to stand a good 
chance, not only in this world, but in the next. He 

can only think these things, because the light is so 

dim. Were it brighter, he would descry blemishes 

in his fairest robes. 

Bunyan well describes such a man in his picture The Two 
of Ignorance. You may remember how the two Pilgrims. 
older pilgrims talked to the brisk youth as he walked 
beside them. They asked, ‘How will you fare at 
the gate?’ 

‘T shall fare as well as other people,’ was the 
reply. 

‘What have you to show that will cause the gate 
to open, when you come to it ?’ they inquired. 

‘I know my Lord’s will; I have been a good liver 
all my life; I pay every man his own; I pray con- 
stantly and fast; I pay and give alms; my heart is 
a good heart ; I will never believe that it is as bad 


as you say.’ 
In his Grace Abounding John Bunyan still further Bunysa' s 
describes this condition :— aa 


‘Now,’ he says after his outward amendment, ‘I 
was become godly ; now I was become a right honest 
man. Though as yet I was nothing but a poor 

187 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


Phil. iii. painted hypocrite, yet I was proud of my godliness. 
15, 16 I betook me to my Bible, and began to take great 
pleasure in reading, but especially with the historical 
part thereof; for as for Paul’s Epistles, and such 
like Scriptures, I could not away with them, being 
as yet ignorant either of the corruptions of my nature 
or of the want and worth of Jesus Christ to save us.’ 
‘The new birth did never enter into my mind; 
neither knew I the comfort of the word and promise, 
nor the deceitfulness and treachery of my own 
wicked heart. As for secret thoughts, I took no 

notice of them.’ 
Legal Whilst we stand gazing into this room, the grey 
Righteous- ight grows into the morning, and beneath its beams 
ar the young Pharisee, beholding himself in the mirrors 
around, flings off first the blameless robe of his legal 
righteousness, then strips off his zeal, then casts 
away his Pharisaic dress, puts aside his reliance upon 
the ordinances of Hebrewism. After stripping off 
one thing after another, as the revealing light shows 
how utterly sullied and blemished his robes are, he 
tramples them beneath his feet, and counts them as 
refuse and loss. He is horrified to think that if he 
had not known the light which came from the risen 
Lord, he might have gone forward to face the Great 
White Throne, and only then have discovered his 

mistake. 
Have you entered this room? Have you stood 
eneath the light of God till you abhorred yourself? 
Have you come to see, with St Augustine, that the 
works in which you have been priding yourself are 
‘splendid sins?’ Do you realise that, apart from 
188 


The Attainments of the Christian Life 


the righteousness of Jesus Christ, your righteousness Phil. iii, 
is as filthy rags? Oh, soul, thou wilt be as certainly 15, 16 
lost as Ignorance was, who was carried to hell from 

the very gate of heaven, unless thou too standest in 

the revealing light of God, to show thee the in- 
sufficiency of anything and everything apart from a . 
simple dependence upon the righteousness of His 

Son. ; 

‘And be found in Him, not having a righteousness The Robing 
of mine own, even that which is of the law, but that *°°™ 
which is through faith in Christ, the righteousness 
which is of God by faith’ (v. 9). ‘One day,’ says 
Bunyan, ‘as I was passing into the field, and that 
too with some fear dashed on my conscience, fearing 
lest yet all was not right, suddenly, this sentence fell 
upon my soul, “Thy righteousness is in Heaven,” 
and methought withal, I saw with the eyes of my 
soul, Jesus Christ at God’s right hand: there was my 
righteousness; . . . I also saw, moreover, that it 
was not my good frame of heart that made my 
righteousness better, nor yet my bad frame of heart 
that made my righteousness worse ; for my righteous- 
ness was Jesus Christ Himself, “'The same yesterday, 
to-day, and for ever.” ’ 

In this, the robing room, the soul which had been 
stripped of all dependence upon itself, its frames, its 
feelings, its good desires, its alms, its prayers, its 
baptism, its conversion, its church membership,— 
and having put all’ these beneath its feet, receives 
from the hand of God a perfected righteousness, the 
righteousness which is from God by faith, a robe 
which the fingers of Christ have woven, a justification 

189 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


Phil. iii. which His blood has purchased, and which His hand 
15, 16 bestows to the open hand of faith. 

Hast thou realised this? Hast thou attained unto 
his? Art thou standing arrayed in this ?—for in 
eath, and judgment, and eternity, nothing will avail 
hee but to be clothed in the perfect spotless 

righteousness of Christ, who was made sin for us, 
though He knew no sin, that we might be made the 
Righteousness of God in Him. 

The Roomof ‘That I_ may know Him, and the power of His 

Fellowship resurrection, and the fellowship of His sufferings, 

with Jesus. becoming conformed unto His death’ (v. 10). As 
we look into that chamber, we find that hard by the 
entrance is a deep grave-like aperture. It looks as 
though a tomb had been hollowed out in the stone 
floor ; beyond is a table on which the bread and wine 
commemorate the body and blood of Christ ; against 
the wall a rough and heavy cross is planted ; affixed 
to the wall are a scourge, and a crown of thorns. 
The room, therefore, might seem forbidding, were it 
not that a celestial light shines full upon the thorn- 
crown, and whilst we look, it seems as though it were 
gleaming with jewels, as though the topaz, jasper, 
carbuncle, and all manner of precious stones had been 
caught amid the thorns, and become woven into its 
texture. Every day the true-hearted soul must enter 
that room. We must never really get beyond it in this 
life. It must constantly be our resort, that we may 
know Christ and the power of His Resurrection. 

The order of this verse appears to stand in the 
reverse direction to our experience. It begins with 
knowing Him; then it passes to the power of His 

190 


The Attainments of the Christian Life 


resurrection, then to the fellowship of His sufferings, 
and lastly, to conformableness with His death. 
With many, the reverse is the way by which they 
are led. That is, they begin by being ‘ conformable 
to His death.’ Do you know what it is to lie down 
in that grave of Christ, till the voices of the world’s 
tumult and the throb of passion subside, till you 
realise how little this world is, and how much 
eternity? Have you attained to this? Have you 
become conformed unto His death? What was that 
death? In its judicial aspect, an atonement for 
human sin; but looking at it from the human and 
personal side it was the bringing of every natural 


Phil. iii. 
15, 16 
Conformable 


to the Lord’s 
Death. 


desire into absolute subjection to the Will and Law. 


of God—the desire to live, the desire for love, the 
desire for popular adulation, and human friendship. 


From the earliest of His recorded temptations, our | 


Lord made this the rule of His Life. He would not 
gratify the natural appetite of hunger until He was 
certain of being in the line of His Father’s Will. 
This is what the Cross means, and this involved 
Calvary. If, then, our Master would not make 
stones of the desert bread, to feed His natural 
hunger, because the Father had not bade Him eat, 
we may not yield, even to what seems natural, until 
our Father says we may. And if we carry out that 
principle of subordinating everything to the will of 
the Father, we shall certainly come to the Cross, and 
out of the Cross comes the diadem of victory. You 
conform to His death, you eat of His flesh, you 
drink of His blood, and then pass on to know the 
power of His resurrection. 
191 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


Phil. iii. But as we have seen, the reverse is also true, and 

15, 16 happy are they who have experienced it. They begin 
by knowing Jesus in the most intimate and blessed 
fellowship, and almost without realising it they are 
led on to realise that they are walking with Him, 
not in the energy of their own nature, but in the 
powers of His Resurrection. The Spirit of Holiness, 
who raised their Lord from the dead, is doing the 
same for them, they experience the mighty energies that 
emanate from the risen Saviour, and in His strength 
walk on their high places. But in doing so, they are 
brought in contact with the virulent hatred of their 
fellows. As men hated the Master of the House, they 
hate those of His household. The full tide of human 
opposition surges up against them, as an adverse cur- 
rent which breaks in clouds of spray on the undaunted 
progress of an ocean steamer. Presently the beast that 
ascendeth out of the bottomless abyss makes war 
against them, and overcomes and kills them, and their 
dead bodies lie in the street of the great city, which 
spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also 
their Lord was crucified ; but after three days and 
an half the Spirit of Life from God enters into them, 
and they stand upon their feet, and they hear a great 
voice from heaven saying unto them, ‘Come up 
hither.’ (See Rey. xi. 6-12.) They know the fellow- 
ship of Christ’s sufferings, and are made conformable 
unto His death, but they attain to His Resurrection. 
They drink of His cup, and are baptised with His 
Baptism, and so come to sit on His Throne. 

The Room ‘Brethren, I count not myself yet to have appre- 


ae ae hended ; luloue thine L_do, forgetting the things 


The Attainments of the Christian Life 


which are behind, and stretching forward to the things Phil. iii. 
which are before, L.press on toward the goal, unto 15, 16 
the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus’ 

(vv. 13, 14). In this room are various pictures of 
Alpine ascents, photographs of the high summits 
which other souls have scaled. Around are the 
prizes that have been won in the arena by successful 
conflict. On every side are the marks of achieve- 
ment; and in the midst of the room, unfurled as 
though it were soon to be grasped and borne forth, 

is a banner with the ‘strange device,’ Lzcelsior | 
Everything, therefore, that betokens past achieve- 
ment is accounted but as the stepping-stone to still 
further effort. The soul leaves behind it as a mere 
memory, the things which it has attained, however 
great and beautiful in themselves, because some 
higher ascent calls to it. Is this the attitude of 
your soul ? 

Have you learnt to forget? Are you living upon Have you 
your past attempts, their failure, or success, for any Bist op i 
of these will cut the sinews of your strength? You . 
must forget even your sins, God forgets them, saying, 

Try again. You must forget your innocence, the 
innocence of your childhood; purity tried by fire is 
better. You must forget, also, your realised ideals. 
You must forget things which have become dear to 
you, but which have hindered you, clinging to you as 
barnacles to the bottom of the great steamer, hinder- 
ing its progress. You must forget all that, and from 
this day must confess that you have not attained, 
that you are not perfected, but are going to climb to 
the rare heights of Christ-likeness; always doing 
N 193 Y gee 


Phil. iii, 
15, 16 


The Room 
of Compas- 
sion, 


The Room of 


Expectant 
Hope. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


what Christ would do, if He were in your place; 
always taking as the sufficient question of your life, 

‘What would Jesus do if He were situated as 
I am?’ 

‘Many walk, of whom I told you often, and now 
tell you even weeping, that they are the enemies of 
the Cross of Christ ; whose end is perdition, whose 
god is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame’ 
(vv. 18, 19). There is a tear bottle here, in which 
the tears of Christ were caught once, though long 
since they have been transmuted into the pearls that 
glisten in His crown. But that tear bottle is there 
for the tears of those disciples who have learnt His 
compassion ; for as the Redeemer wept, so do His 
redeemed weep still, and say, even weeping, of 
others, ‘They are the enemies of the Cross of Christ.’ 
May that compassion, like a fountain, send the tears 
in rills from our eyes. God forbid that we should 
live in such a world as this, without weeping over 
the enemies of the Cross; and it should be borne in 
mind that the enemies of the Cross, here referred to, 
are not those who have rejected Christ, but those 
who once professed Christianity, and had the creed 
and reputation of godliness, but in their heart of 
hearts, and in their lives, have denied the Lord that 
bought them. 

‘Our citizenship is in Heaven; from whence also 
we wait for a Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ’ (v. 20). 
This room has a window looking East ; and it is so 
situated that it is hardly possible to descry the river ; 
for the view lies across the river, to a fair and beauti- 
ful horizon ; and the soul which has passed through 

194 


The Attainments of the Christian Life 


the earlier stages, stands with eye fixed, and every Phil. iii. 
nerve and muscle strained, looking for the dawn, 15) 16 
whilst the morning star shines clear in the sky. ‘We 

look for a Saviour.’ It is the saved soul that waits 

for the Saviour. We are saved from the wrath of 

God ; we are being saved day by day from the power 

of sin; but, oh, we long for Him~who shall appear 

the second time, without sin, unto salvation ! 

‘Who shall fashion anew the body of our humilia- The Room of 
tion, that it may be conformed to the body of His Ree ion: 
glory, according to the working whereby He is able 
even to subject all things unto Himself’ (v. 21). To 
subject. Look at this. He who, in the second 
chapter was subjected, in this chapter subjects. 
You must be subjected before you can subject. 

(1) We confidently anticipate the moment when 
the body of our humiliation, which has so often 
limited and hindered us in our work, which has 
hungered and thirsted, fainted and grown weary, 
whose eyes have failed, whose knees have faltered, 
and hands hung down, shall exchange its corruption 
for incorruption, its mortality for immortality, being 
transfigured into the likeness of the body of His 
glory—ethereal, vigorous, incapable of fatigue but a 
perfected instrument for a perfected nature. 

(2) We anticipate much more than that. Death, 
thou shalt be subdued. Grave, thou shalt be sub- 
dued. Sin, sorrow, pain, evil, ye shall be subdued. 
The Lord comes to subdue you as we confidently 
expect. This room enshrines masterpieces of art, 
commemorating the great past. That picture is of 
the overthrow of Pharaoh; and that of the destruc- 

195 


Phil. iii. 
15, 16 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


tion of Midian; and that of the defeat of those 
mighty Assyrian hosts which menaced Hezekiah ; 
and here are the cross and empty grave—symbols of 
the victory of the Son of God over the world, the 
flesh, and the devil. Yes! He shall overcome ; it is 
His right. He shall subject all things unto Himself; 
it is the Father’s promise. The kingdoms of this 
world shall become the kingdoms of our God, and of 
His Christ, and He shall reign for ever. Let us 
hasten unto the coming of that day of God! 


196 


XxI 


BURGESSES OF HEAVEN 
Putt. iii. 17-21 


BreTHREN, be followers together of me, and mark them which 
walk so as ye have us for an ensample. 

(For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell 
you even weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ: 

Whose end 7s destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose 
glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things.) 

For our conversation is in heaven; from whence also we look for 
the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ: 

Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like 
unto His glorious body, according to the working whereby He is 
able even to subdue all things unto Himself. 

Tue Greek word translated conversation is, a8 we Phil. iii, 
saw in i. 27, the root from which we derive our 17-21 
word politics, politician, policeman, and such like ; 

and the true rendering in each case should be citizen- 

ship. In the earlier passage it might be rendered : 

‘Be true citizens of God’s commonwealth—let your 

life befit your high calling to be burgesses of the 

New Jerusalem’; and in this passage it might be 
rendered: ‘Your city home is in heaven.’ 

The same thought pervades the Scriptures. ‘Now 
they desire a better country, that is, a heavenly’ 
(Heb. xi. 16). ‘The city which hath foundations, 
whose builder and maker is God’ (v. 10). Even the 
patriarchs descried and greeted from afar the palaces 
of that heavenly city. And the inspired writer takes 
up the same attitude when he says: ‘ Here we have 
no continuing city, but we seek one to come.’ 

197 


Phil. iii. 
17-21 


Our Citizen- 


ship in 
Heaven. 


Like 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


% * ® % ® 


If we would resemble the saints of past days we 
must conceive of our citizenship as being in Heaven. 
That a man should be a citizen of a city, but live in 
a foreign country, is not an unusual circumstance. 
In these days when men are scattered so widely over 
the world, many of the citizens of London are to be 
found in India, Burmah, and Australia, on a visit for _ 
temporary purposes; and so the anomaly is often 
presented of men being strangers in the place where 
they are resident, but most at home in the city from 
which they are absent. 

What is true of the pilgrim-life was pre-eminently 
true of Jesus Christ, who said of Himself, ‘He that 
came down from heaven, the Son of Man who is in 
heaven,’ as though during His earthly life He recog- 
nised that His citizenship in His Father's city remained 
unimpaired, and that residence for thirty years amongst 
men did not naturalise Him as a citizen of earth. 

In the collect for Advent Sunday we are told that 
the Son of God came to visté us in great humility ; 
and four times over in the Gospels the Lord’s life on 
earth is described as a visit. All the time He was 
amongst men, He was a citizen of that city, therefore 
He lay in a borrowed manger; His body was de- 
posited in a borrowed grave; He had not where to 
lay His head; and when every man went to his own 
home, He went to the Mount of Olives. Throughout 
His life He was a pilgrim and foreigner as all the 
fathers were. 

And what is true of Jesus Christ should be true of 


a like every Christian. As Lady Powerscourt puts it: ‘The 


198 


Burgesses of Heaven 


Christian is not a man who, standing on earth, looks Phil. iii, 
up to heaven; but who, being in heaven, looks down 17-21 
upon earth, and throughout his life he recognises that 
he is a foreigner indeed.’ And this very aspect of 
the Christian will bring him into conflict with the 
men of this world, for when he says in his Master’s 
words: ‘I am not of this world, I am from above, 
ye are from beneath,’ they gnash their teeth at him, 
and cast him out, as the citizens of Vanity Fair did 
Christian and his companion. One of the Puritans 
sweetly says: ‘It cannot be expected that the men 
of this world can ever understand the Christian life, 
because they have never been in the City from which 
he hails, and therefore are altogether ignorant of its 
manner of life and mode of speech.’ The world is 
unable to recognise us, because our language, speech, 
dress, manner, and method of life are altogether 
different from that which is in vogue in its society. If 
unconverted men lay their hands upon your shoulders 
to hail you as one of themselves, begin to question 
in your own heart whether you are truly living as one 
of the citizens of the New a erusalem, Fi 

In a memorable moment, when the Apostle had This Citizen- 
been delivered from his sen: he asserted his right to page 
be interrogated without scourging, on the ground of Birthright. 
his being a Roman citizen. The chief captain was 
immediately informed and hastened to his side. ‘A 
Roman? With great price I obtained this right!’ 
‘Ah!’ the Apostle said, ‘but I was freeborn, my 
birth carried with it the right of citizenship.’ Yes, 
and the residence of a thousand years in Heaven 

199 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


Phil. iii, would not make us more certainly citizens of the New 
17-21 Jerusalem, than we are at this moment, if we are 
born from above. Grant that we still live on this side 
of the veil which hides the transient from the enduring, 
the temporal from the eternal, the seen from the 
unseen, yet, 80 soon as we are regenerate of the Holy 
Spirit, in the first moment of our new life, we become 
enrolled in the list of burgesses, we have the franchise 
of the New Jerusalem given to us, our names are 
entered upon its directory. Though as yet we have 
not taken up the right, and entered into the enjoy- 
ment of all that awaits us, we have, nevertheless, the 
right to enter in through the gate into the city. This 
may not help you much now, but, I pray you, meditate 
on it for a few moments daily, and you will find it 
becoming a growing force to withdraw you from the 
things of this world, and to attach you to the things 
of the other world; you will come to reckon that 
you must set your affection on that city to which you 
belong, that you must lay up your treasures there 
where neither moth nor rust corrupt, and that you 
must regulate your conduct by the regulations that 
rule in that city. Every regenerate person, by the 

| fact of the new birth, has obtained the franchise of 
' the City of God. 
* * * * * 


To belong to Athens was the glory of Greece, and though the 
Sectr ps a Smaller states and cities were in perpetual conflict, 
Matter of | every Greek was proud of her peerless beauty and 
et Bsc culture. The citizen of Rome, travelling afar, bore 
himself as a stronger, prouder man, because he could 
say, ‘I am a Roman.’ And if we could really see 


200 


Burgesses of Heaven 


things as they are, and disentangle ourselves from Phil. iii, 
the net of the material, there is nothing of which we 17-21 
should be more proud, than to belong to that great 
commonwealth which includes all pure and holy souls 
of every age, and which shall stand when all cities 
and politics, all thrones and empires have disappeared, 
as the foam on the wave that bears it. 

Men speak of Rome as the eternal city. She has 
no right to that title. There is only one eternal 
city, because its foundations cannot be impaired by 
revolution or change; because its walls are founded 
on God’s eternal covenant of truth; and because all 
its laws and regulations are based upon the principles 
of eternal truth. From out of those city gates 
proceed the angels to all parts of the universe, but 
they return to it, as the metropolis of life. Thither 
the kings and princes of science, of literature, of 
music, of art bring their treasures. The saints of 
every age find their home there. Her light is 
brighter than the sun’s; there is no temple because 
God is her Temple; her river is the Holy Spirit of 
God; her flowers are of amaranth; her streets are 
of gold; her walls of jasper; her gates of pearl ; 
God Himself is her architect and King. Who may 
not be rightly proud to belong to such a city! The 
Goths who conquered the Roman Empire for God 
broke upon it like an avalanche from another world; 
and because they were so utterly indifferent to its 
attractions, they were easily able to overcome it. 
Who can overcome the world, but those who have 
our faith—the faith which detaches from this world, 
because it attaches us to the unseen and eternal, in 

201 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


Phil. iii. Godand His Christ? The Church of God will 
17-21 never be able to conquer the world so long as she 
is part of it, but only as she comes on the world 

from the sphere above it, with the impulse and 

impetus of those who believe that their city lies 

beyond the stars. 

% % 


*% * * 
We are to The Apostle says that there were men in that time 
srr worthy who professed the Cross, but who were ‘enemies of 


the Cross.’ Neither Paine nor Voltaire ever in- 
flicted such awful havoc on the religion of Jesus 
Christ as those false professors who have borne His 
name, but been destitute of His grace and power. 
Such men, the Apostle says, mind earthly things. 
They were made to face God like kings, but they are 
always rooting in the earth like swine ; their ambitions 
are limited by the horizon of time and sense. They 
glory in things of which they ought to be ashamed ; 
appetite is their God, and destruction their end. 
A story is told of a man of wealth who was taking 
his friend round his magnificent mansion, in which a 
| spacious chamber was dedicated to be a chapel. 
The visitor, who thought of little else than good 
living, on entering the chapel, said: ‘What a mag- 
nificent kitchen this would make.’ Whereupon his 
host replied: ‘You are mistaken, this is not a 
kitchen ; when I have made my belly my God, then 
I will make my chapel my kitchen, but not before.’ 
How many men there are whose one thought is set 
on eating and drinking, and the gratification of 
sensual appetite. There is no chapel in their life, 
it is all kitchen. 
202 


Burgesses of Heaven 


. * : * $ Phil. iii, 

That word whence, by the peculiar construction of 17-21 

the Greek, does not refer to the heavens, but to the [Ve aS 
city gate. It is a very tender and fragrant thought tire i 
that whilst transacting our business on the lowlands City Gates. 
of earth, we may ever keep our eye on the city gate 
into which He entered, whom we love, and through 
which He will most certainly come again as a 
Saviour. ‘Whence, also, we look for the Saviour,’ 
‘He shall come the second time without sin unto 
salvation.’ In these dark and dreadful days the 
Church needs to turn with unceasing hope towards 
the Second Advent. Oh! when will those pearly 
gates open! When will that cavalcade issue forth! 
When through the dim haze will the Lord come, 
riding upon His white horse, and followed by the 
army of Heaven. Come quickly, come quickly, O 
Saviour of men, Who by Thy first coming didst put 
away our sin, and by Thy second coming will put 
the crown on the work of salvation by raising and 
changing our mortal body! 

In the old version we read our vile body. When Our Vile 
Archbishop Whately was dying, he asked his Body- 
chaplain to read to him. The chaplain took up this 
paragraph reading it as it stands in the A.V. 

‘Stop, said the Archbishop, ‘not “vile body,” if 
you please, but body of our humiliation.’ The 
body is not vile in the ordinary significance of the 
word, because Jesus bore it, because His blood 
purchased it, because the Spirit makes it His 
Temple, and because it has been so often the 
medium by which holy impressions have gone forth 
203 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


Phil. iii. to others. Not vile; but the body of our humilia-| 
17-21 tion, because it cramps, confines, and limits us; it 
needs sleep and food ; it retains in its very organism 
the impression of past sins; it is a clanking chain, 
that holds us down when we would fain rise, so 
that one understands something of what chained 
eagles feel, when they fret against the iron bars of 
their cage, and pine to soar on outspread pinions to 
the sun. 

‘The body of our humiliation,’ but it shall be 
transfigured. It shall rise from its dust, and shall 
be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an 
eye, into the likeness of ‘the body of His glory.’ 
We stand upon the transfiguration mount, and be- 
hold the body of His glory. We wait with Mary at 
the open grave, and see the body of His glory. 
Finally, from the Ascension Mount, we follow the 
body of His glory, and behold it, shining as the sun. 
It seems impossible to believe that one day we shall 
be like Him, and that our mortal shall be radiant 
with immortality like His. 

How shallit How shall these things be? There is but one 
be? answer. ‘By the working whereby he is able to 
subdue all things unto Himself.’ Say this over 
and over again. When the devil is strong, when 
passion rages, when you cannot be the man you 
would, when it seems as though the world were 
hopelessly corrupt and the wrongs of time refuse to 
be adjusted, repeat these words to yourself, as a sweet 
refrain: ‘The power by which He is able to subdue 
all things unto Himself.’ Oh, take to Thyself Thy 
great power and reign! Begin now with obdurate 
204 


nest 


Burgesses of Heaven 


wills, with proud and evil hearts, with indomitable Phil. iii. 
pride, with passion and lust. Subdue these, O 17-21 
Christ, and cause us to be transfigured in the spirit, 

that whilst in the body of humiliation, we may live 
worthily of our citizenship, and ultimately rise to 

the life immortal. 

It is said that as the cattle, which may have been ia bal of 
greatly demoralised by the tossing of the vessel and ** Coming. 
the discomfort of their quarters, draw near land, at the 
end of a tedious voyage, and scent the breeze, which 
comes over the ship laden with the fragrance of the 
clover, the effect is immediate, they begin to revive, 
and toss their heads as though they were keenly 
conscious that the voyage was almost over, and that 
the familiar pasture -lands were within reach. So 
should we look with reviving hope for the coming 
of Christ, who will put down all rule and authority 
and power, will subdue all things to Himself, and 
complete our salvation which begins with the for- 
giveness and deliverance from the curse, which 
proceeds to the ever deepening emancipation from 
the power of corruption, and which will end when 
this body of humiliation is delivered from the last 
remains and traces of the fall, and raised in the 
perfect beauty of the everlasting morning. 

Is it wonderful that in the first verse of the 
following chapter, the Apostle turns to the Philippians 
as his ‘beloved and longed for brethren,’ and bids 
them stand fast? The vision and hope of future 
glory, when these mortal bodies shall be conformed 
to the Body of the glory of our Risen Lord, and 
when the privileges of our heavenly citizenship shall 

205 


Phil. iii, 
17-21 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


be fully realised, were surely enough to hold them 
steady as the anchor holds the ship. By all the 
promises that had been made to them, by all the 
hopes they cherished, by all the glory which was 
already flushing the horizon, he urged them to stand 
fast in the Lord, watching that they should not lose 
their reward, and waiting until the fulness of the 
times should bring in the fulness of their redemption. 


206 


XXII 
‘THE LORD IS AT HAND,’ 


Put. iv. 1-6. 


_ THEREFORE, my brethren, dearly beloved and longed for, my 
Joy and crown, so stand fast in the Lord, my dearly beloved. 

I beseech Euodias, and beseech Syntyche, that they be of tho 
same mind in the Lord. 

And I intreat thee also, true yokefellow, help those women 
which laboured with me in the gospel, with Clement also, and 
im; other my fellow-labourers, whose names are in the book of 

e 


Rejoice in the Lord alway : and again I say, Rejoice. 
. or your moderation be known unto all men. The Lord 7s at 
and. 
Be careful for nothing; but in every thing by prayer and sup- 
ON ei with thanksgiving let your requests be made known unto 
0 ad 


Tuat has generally been thought to indicate the Phil, iv, 
Apostle’s belief in the Lord’s imminent advent, which, 1-6 
as we know, was a prevalent motive with the early Paul and the 
Church. If a missionary left his native land, and Kor¢s, 
crossed the ocean with the Evangel, as the burnished 
mirror of the water shone with the path of the 
sunbeams, it seemed to him that at any moment, 
down those sunbeams, the Lord might come. When 
the primitive Christian said good-bye to his fellow- 
Christian, it was without too great a pang of regret, 
because they expected soon to meet in the presence 
of Christ. Every tremor in the air, every catastrophe, 
every political change appeared to them like the first 

207 


Phil. iv. 
I-6 


The Lord 
ever near. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


note of the archangel’s trumpet, like the footfall 
of the coming Prince. This consciousness of the 
imminent advent was a mighty lever, by which to 
lift the whole state of thought and feeling in the 
early Church to those higher levels, the best and 
most glorious levels, which the Church of God has 
ever attained. 

But for one or two reasons such does not appear 
to be the meaning here. First, the Greek word does 
not lend itself to that significance. The better 
rendering undoubtedly would be ‘the Lord is near.’ 
Secondly, at the end of the third chapter, the Apostle 
had been dilating upon the expectant attitude in 
which we wait for the Saviour, and it would be 
hardly compatible with that to find him immediately 
saying, The Lord is here. Thirdly, it is interesting 
to notice that the Apostle’s anticipation of the advent 
of Christ was, as the years passed, largely affected by 
his growing conception of the nearness of Christ, so 
that all life was to be lived ‘in Him.’ He never 
gave up his hope of the advent, but he became 
gloriously influenced by the larger thought that all 
life must be ensphered in Christ. 

Whilst inditing this paragraph he became suddenly 
overshadowed with the consciousness that the Lord 
Jesus Christ was literally present in his hired room, 
nearer to him than the sentry, nearer to him than 
Epaphroditus, nearer to him than Timothy, his 
beloved son, and he burst out with this exclamation, 
which his amanuensis at once wove into the fabric 
of the Epistle: ‘The Lord is near; He is with me 
in my room, and He is with you in Philippi; and we 

208 


The Lord is at Hand 


are all included and encircled in the golden fence of Phil. iv. 
His presence.’ 1-6 

There is a similar instance of this in Ps. cxix., 
where the holy author stays in the midst of the royal 
sweep of his work, and cries: ‘Thou art near, O 
God.’ We all know times like that. We have been 
walking in the midst of some beautiful landscape, 
the river rushing past, flowers dipping their cups 
silently into its brink, the gentle air moving through 
the quivering leaves above, the insect life humming 
its varied music, and all nature suffused with the smile 
of the sun. Then, all suddenly, there has been borne 
in on us the consciousness of a spiritual presence ; 
we have felt a breath on our faces, a thrill in our 
hearts, and, behold, He who came to John on the 
Isle of Patmos has come to us; and, lo, the radiant 
glory of Christ has excelled that of the sun. ‘Thou 
art near, O God; the Lord is near.’ 

In the church, when saying your prayers mechani- As Side leas 
cally, falling in with the murmur of repetition as 
you have done a thousand times, standing listlessly 
listening to the people singing, or joining with them 
without much heart; sitting apparently intent on 
the words of the minister whilst your thoughts have 
been far away on your business or pleasure, suddenly 
there has been as it were the music of golden bells, 
and you have realised that the old promise was being 
fulfilled: ‘There am I in the midst.’ Without open- 
ing the door, without the sound of a footfall, the | 
Lord Jesus has glided into the shut apartment of 
your nature, and you have said, ‘The Lord is near.’ 


What a mighty ee presence is to some of eee 
O 


2 


Phil. iv. 
1-6 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


us!. To a man, the presence of a pure and noble 
woman has often put a cool hand upon a fevered 
forehead, stayed the throb of passion, and called him 
back to sanity and manhood. And to a woman how 
much there is in the presence of her husband, lover, 
brother, or friend! How strong and calm she 
becomes when she is made conscious of that pres- 
ence! With some of us there is the radiant vision 
given by memory of a beloved parent, of the sainted 
minister of our childhood, or of the servant of God 
whose fragrant biography we have read. How many 
of us have been calmed, quieted, and restrained by 
the presence through memory and recollection of 
someone whom we have loved and lost! How 
pathetic it was when our late beloved Queen in 
dying called thrice, ‘Albert, Albert, Albert!’ How 
certainly those words revealed the presence in which 
she had lived! Probably there are many men and 
women whose lives are lived in the consciousness of 
the presence of the Angel of their Pilgrimage. How 
often we have been restrained from things we are 
glad we never did, and words we are thankful we 
never said, by the thought that the angels were at 
hand, and we knew that they would blush, that their 
holy natures would be hurt, unless we were strong, 
gentle, and pure. 

But, oh! if every one of us would live, not in the 
presence of the beloved wife or noble woman; of 
the strong, brave husband; of the holy memory, or 
of the peerless angel, but in the presence of the Lord 
Jesus, saying perpetually to ourselves, ‘The Lord is 
near, the Lord is at hand,’ there is not one of us that 

210 


The Lord is at Hand 


would not spring up into an altogether new life, as Phil. iv. 
flowers do when from the arctic they are removed to 1-6 

the tropic soil, and instead of being environed by 

frost become the nurslings of the sunny air. If every 

one of us could do as the late Mr Spurgeon did, who 

said that he did not recollect spending a quarter of 

an hour without the distinct thought of the presence 

of Christ, life would become ever so much better, 
brighter, and stronger than it is. 

The presence of Jesus Christ is brought home to The 
us by the Holy Ghost, who is the Spirit of Remem- hse es 
brance, making Him real, recalling our wandering 
thoughts, and concentrating them on Him until He 
stands out luminous and kingly in our life. That is 
Christianity. With too many the Christian religion 
consists in living back in the past. They linger in 
Gethsemane rather than in Joseph’s garden, with its 
empty grave. This is the life of the Roman Catholic, 
or of those who have been nursed in Protestant 
schools of thought, but have never learnt the meaning 
of the Lord’s Ascension. But true Christianity does 
not postpone the presence of Christ to the future, or 
recall it from the past, but lives in the sense that He 
as. Hence the Gospel by St John contains such 
recurring phrases as: I am the Vine; I am the Good 
Shepherd ; I am the Door; I am the Resurrection 
and the Life. Christ lives in the present tense, and 
blessed is the soul that has learnt that lesson. 

The whole of this paragraph (verses 1-7) crystallises 
around this thought. 

Verse 1: Steadfastness. The man who is back- Steadfast- 
wards and forwards, mercurial, easily up to boiling °°** 

211 


Phil. iv. 
I-6 


In the Lord. 


Like- 
minded-ness. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


point, and as soon down to zero, who is on the hooks 
and off ten times a week, now like a seraph flashing 
with zeal, now like a snail crawling in lethargy, who 
is everything by fits and starts and nothing long, will 
not have a happy Christian experience, nor will his 
influence tell in the Church or on the world. He 
may be a genius, but he will be a meteor dying in 
the dark. It is better to have for a friend and 
fellow-worker a man of less brilliance and with fewer 
ideas, who will be occupied by one thought, and 
give it regular and patient expression. In life, as in 
war, it is not the man that makes brilliant dashes, 
but he who can pursue a plan of strategy, week after 
week, that succeeds. 

The source of stability is to stand fast in the Lord. 
Our only hope of stability is in union with ‘the 
Rock.’ 

There is a sculpture in Spain of the Crucifixion, 
which is the only one of the kind. A fierce light 
falls on it from a hidden window. One hand is 
nailed to the Cross, the other is stretched out. The 
story is that lovers plighted their troth there, and 
afterwards, when the man was faithless, the woman 
came back to plead her case beneath the Cross, and 
the hand disengaged itself, and stretched towards 
her, whilst a voice said : ‘I was witness.’ Probably, 
however, the old sculptor meant that if one hand is 
nailed to the Cross in atonement, the other hand is 
quick to help; and if you want help to be stable, 
you will find a very present help in the thought that 
He is near. , 

Verses 2, 3: Be of the same mind. These two 

212 


The Lord is at Hand 


women, Euodia and Syntyche, had fallen out; two Phil. iv. 
women of whom the Apostle says: ‘They laboured 1-6 
with me in the Gospel,’ and the Greek word is—they 
agonised by my side. What a tribute to women! 
All through the centuries they have wrought beside 
their ministers. Compute what the churches owe to 
women. Many of them must have been disbanded 

if holy women had not bound them together by their 
presence and their prayer. Think of all the children 
like Chrysostom—‘ golden-mouthed ’—who have been 
reared by Christian mothers ; of all the hymns in our 
hymn-books we owe to women. But Euodia and 
Syntyche had fallen out. They were of different 
dispositions, and could not understand each other. 
They had been made on a different plan. Paul knew 
that neither Clement nor his fellow-labourers could 
put them right, but that if those two women came 
into the presence of Jesus they would find it easy to 

be of one mind. In the presence of the sun hard 
icicles flow together. 

Verse 4: Rejoice always. When your children Rejoicing. 
are around you, and when crépe is on your knocker ; 
when your books show a good profit on the year’s 
trading, and when your best schemes have miscarried; 
‘Rejoice always.’ Amid your tears keep a trustful, 
restful, joyful heart, not rejoicing in your gifts, in 
your successes, in your friends, but in Him—rejoice 
in the Lord, in the presence of the Lord, for He is 
always there. The secret of perennial joy is in the 
realised companionship of the Redeemer. 

Verse 5: Moderation. The Revised Version says Forbearance. 
forbearance. We should say in modern English 

213 


Phil. iv. 
I-6 


Garrisoned 
in Christ. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


sweet reasonableness. Luther, in his translation, 
renders it yieldingness. Of course, we can never 
yield principle ; we can never yield to men who are 
doing the devil’s work in the world; but a good 
many have edges and corners which concern tempera- 
ment rather than principle, and we who know them 
ought to yield, just as the boat in descending a very 
narrow streamlet has to take the course of the 
stream. It is easy to bear all, to endure all, to believe 
all, when the overshadowing presence of the Lord 
Jesus is realised. 

Verse 7: The peace of God, which passeth all 
understanding, shall guard your hearts and your 
thoughts in Christ Jesus. It is only in the presence 
of Christ that this peace becomes ours. 

Worried and anxious with the fluctuation of stock 
and share markets, his employés and subordinates 
trying him; the master unreasonable; affairs in a 
tangle; a man comes home from his day’s work 
feeling thoroughly out of heart. His wife meets him 
at the door, her face calm and restful there is a 
sense of peace and serenity, like the scent of flowers, 
in the room where she had been awaiting him. She 
knows that the frost has gathered about him, as the 
frost. gathered on the Majestic one winter day when 
it came into New York harbour, after battling with 
the Atlantic. She ministers to his needs, and 
presently elicits, without seeming to do it, the story 
of the day. Without realising the change which is 
transpiring, he pours his confidences into her ear, and 
as he does so, the thaw sets in, his heart softens, and 
by-and-by it seems as though the white-robed Angel 

214 


The Lord is at Hand 


of Peace passes from her heart to his to keep its Phil. iv. 
affections and thoughts. We all know something 1-6 
like that ; and that is the idea of the Apostle, to live 
in the presence of Jesus, and to turn to Him from 
every anxiety and worry, so as to allow His presence 
to saturate and soothe the soul. 

The Lord is at hand. Say it when you need to be 
stable. Say it when Euodia has quarrelled with 
Syntyche. Say it when your joy threatens to fail. 
Say it when you are irritated and think there is no 
reason you should yield so persistently to another. 
Say it when you are worried and anxious. Until 
you come into that presence many things will seem 
impossible, which beneath the light of those deep 
tender eyes will become easy as newly mown lawns 
to tired feet. 

Are you one to whom the presence of Jesus is 
dreadful? Then Heaven can be no place for you, 
where He is Lord. Bring your strong will to Him; 
ask Him to break or bend it; give yourself to Him, 
and ask the Holy Spirit that from this moment, in 
temptation, in sin, when torn with conviction, when 
smarting with pain, in perplexity, in death, and in 
judgment, the one thought of your life may be that 
the Lord is at hand. 


215 


Phil iv. 
7 
The 


Apostles’ 
Campaign. 


Conditions 
of Warfare. 


XXIII 


THE SENTINEL OF THE 
HEART 


Putt. iv. 7 


Anp the peace of God, which passeth all understanding, shall 
keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus. 


In the course of our Lord’s instructions to His 
Apostles, in which He appointed their route, and 
gave them their commission, He did not hesitate to 
tell them of the unfriendly reception with which the 
world would receive their ministry. They would be 
as sheep amid wolves; would be delivered up to 
councils, and scourged in synagogues; would be 
brought before governors and kings; would be hated 
of all men for His name’s sake; would be driven 
from city to city; would be called upon to lay down 
their lives—very rough and unfriendly would be the 
response of men to the ministry that meant only 
good. 

He did not hesitate also to strip them of all 
needless encumbrance. They were to carry no purse 
and no money ; they were not to provide a scrip in 
which to place the victuals that kindly hands might 
offer them ; they were to be content with one coat, 
not even reserving a second against wear and tear or 
inclement weather; they were to refuse the heavy 

216 


The Sentinel of the Heart 


boots shod with metal which the Roman soldiers had Phil. iv. 
introduced into the country, and to be content with 7 
simple sandals; they were to be satisfied with the 
pilgrim’s staff, if they happened to possess it—other- 
wise they were not to endeavour to procure one; 
they were to start out in fellowship with God, whose 
workmen they were, sure that He would at least 
supply them with food. Like the soldiers of whom 
the Apostle speaks, they were not to encumber 
themselves with baggage. Their movements were to 
be unimpeded, their hearts free from all anxious 
thought and care, their faith in perpetual exercise in 
Him who had called them to work in His great 
harvest field. 

On arriving at any new town or village, the Welcome or 

Gospel messengers were to ask of the first group U2welcome- 
they met the names and residences of any who were 
known throughout the place as generous and well- 
disposed ; to such they were to make application for 
hospitality during their brief sojourn in the place. 
On reaching the threshold of the house, they were to 
utter, with something more than a formal greeting, 
the Eastern benediction, ‘Peace be to this house.’ 
They were then to wait, carefully noting the result. 

It might be that no ‘son of peace’ would be found 
within the doors; no calm, quiet face would welcome 
them with a smile; no heart at leisure from itself 
would be able to answer them back with words of 
peace; but instead, there would be the scowl, the 
cold and formal manner, the evident antipathy. 

On the other hand, the ‘son of peace’ might be Welcomed 
discovered within that household—the householder where.'4 

217 Peace’ was. 


Phil. iv, 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


himself, or his wife, or little child, or someone more 
obscure amongst the servants. There would be an 
instant welcome from that soul, which was in living 
affinity with the greeting of peace; and this would 
at once indicate that such a house was the pre- 
destined home in which the heralds of the Gospel of 
Peace should stay, eating and drinking such things 
as were set before them, until they departed to fulfil 
their commission elsewhere. How simple, primitive, 
and beautiful the whole arrangement was, and how 
Oriental ! 

The meeting between the Apostles, commissioned 
to bear with them the peace of Christ, and the ‘son 
of peace,’ fulfilling in some Hebrew home an obscure 
life, on whom the benediction of a larger peace than 
he had ever known would henceforth rest, suggests 
that there are two kinds of peace in the world—that 
of Christ and that of man, that which comes from 
above and that which is elaborated through the 
process of human thought and prudence, the one 
that passes understanding and the other that is 
within the limits of understanding. It may be, that 
from this moment, the peace that passeth under- 
standing shall come in to abide in hearts which up 
till now have been content with something less than 
God’s best. It may be, that some will understand, 
as never before, what Jesus meant when He said: 
‘ My peace I give unto you; not as the world giveth, 
give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled.’ 
Who is there that does not long for His peace? Who 
does not desire to have something better than the 
peace with which the world contents itself? 

218 


The Sentinel of the Heart 


In many a Jewish home this type of character Phil. iv. 

could be found ;—men who owned their vineyard, or 7 
gathered the berries of their olives, enjoyed the 5 art eas 
comfort of their modest patrimony, were happily understood 
married, and rejoiced in the filial affection of their 
children. They supported the local synagogue, 
stood well with their neighbours and friends, gave 
generously to the poor, and did not fail to attend the 
great annual feasts at Jerusalem. Their life flowed 
through the years easily and pleasantly, like a river 
gliding between its banks in the verdant plains— 
such men might be called ‘sons of peace.’ Their 
houses would be open to the entertainment of 
strangers; their manner would be suave and pleasant ; 
there would be no grudging on their table, no stinting 
of their gifts ; they would have no foes, but would bask 
in the sunshine of universal favour. Like Job, such 
men would look forward to dying in their nest, to 
passing from the town or village where they had 
spent their happy days to rest in Abraham’s bosom. 
Surely, however, the peace of such characters is not 
of the highest type. The comfort and prosperity of 
their lives are largely dependent on the substantial 
buildings and ample provision which they have made 
for themselves. 

Are there not many men of to-day like these? Modern 
They are comfortably provided for, have a balance at Parallels. 
their bankers’, are possessed of good health and good 
spirits, are happily wedded, the parents of noble 
children, and surrounded by everything that can 
promote the well-being and prosperity of life; and 
surely the conditions and foundations of such peace 

219 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


Phil. iv. are well within the limits of anyone’s understanding. 

7 They look round their lives to see any possible source 
of trouble or annoyance that may be menacing them, 
and having discovered it, they do their best to pro- 
vide against it. They go round the house of their 
life to see how far it is secure against tempests and 
flood, and wherever they discover a weak spot they 
use their best endeavour to strengthen it, and having 
done all, they retire to the interior and rest in peace, 
in fancied security against whatever storm may 
arise. 

Some The peace of one man arises from the fact that he 

Grounds of has managed to secure a competence, or to accumu- 
late a little balance in the bank; his peace of mind, 
as he looks forward upon old age, is due to the fact 
that there is something to secure him against want. 
Another accounts himself safe because he is allied 
with rich friends, or enjoys good health, or is held in 
high social esteem, and he comforts himself in view 
of any contingency by saying: ‘ My friends will help 
me through ; the momentum of my life will carry me 
over these rapids ; I have done so much for others, 
surely they will stand by me when my evil day 
arrives.’ Yet another finds his peace in some system 
of thought which he has elaborated, and in virtue of 
which he holds himself ready to answer any puzzling 
question that may be addressed to him. What- 
ever controversy may be hurtling through the 
world, he feels it cannot come near him, so care- 
fully has he wrought out his system as a wall of 

as defence. 


Uncertain All these men are ‘sons of peace.’ They have 
Grounds. 220 


The Sentinel of the Heart 


peace which can be easily understood. They are not Phil. iv. 
in trouble as other men, not plagued as other men; 7 
from year to year the stream of their life flows evenly 
forward. They have homes, incomes, abounding 
vigour, high spirits, happy family relations, and 
perhaps some faith in God as their Father and 
Redeemer ; but it is easy to see the foundations upon 
which the superstructure of their peace rests. It is | 
very pleasant and innocent, but there is always a | 
serious liability of its being disturbed. As someone 
suggests, it reminds one of Robinson Crusoe when he 
first landed upon his island. He built his hut, reared 
his stockade, planted his cornfield, penned in his goats, 
primed his gun, but he knew nothing of the land that | 
lay beyond the thin fringe of trees which skirted the | 
shore, and at any moment, from the unknown terri- 
tory beyond, a horde of cannibals, or herds of wild 
beasts, might sweep down upon the spot which he 
had selected for his home. His peace was limited, 
and was always liable to be suddenly broken. It is 
not enough for us to have the peace which arises 
from earthly conditions, and the possession of good 
things. There is a deeper, sweeter peace, which the 
Apostle describes as passing all understanding; and | 

our Lord refers to it when He says: ‘My peace I ‘ 

give, not as the world giveth.’ 

This was the peace of Christ and His Apostles. The Peace 
There was nothing to account for it. Not theirs the riparia 
settled home; not theirs the wife and child; not standing. 
theirs the provision against the future ; not theirs a 
universal love and welcome ; not theirs the prospect 
of a serene old age, surrounded by troops of friends. 

221 


a, 


Phil. iv. 
7 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


It seemed as though they were sent forth as men 
doomed to death, and made a spectacle to the world, 
and to angels, and to men. But notwithstanding all, 
there was a peace which was absolutely independent 
of external conditions, whether of joy or sorrow. Is 
it not evident that the quality of their peace was 
infinitely higher than that which we have dis- 
cussed? It had heights and depths, breadths and 
lengths, that passed the understanding of ordinary 
men. 

Imagine an apostle coming to such a home as we 
have described—coming out of the storm of some 
terrible persecution, coming as a fugitive from a 
distant city, coming as Paul came to Athens from 
Bercea, and yet with the peace of God upon the face, 
the light of heaven shining in the eye, betraying the 
restful and calm demeanour of the tranquil soul. 
Would not the ‘son of peace’ who had carefully 
hedged himself around with every earthly barrier 
against discomfort and tribulation, realise that there 
was a Divine quality in the peace which kept the 
heart and mind of his visitor ? 

To return to the illustration already employed. 
Such peace may be well compared to the coming of 
ambassadors from the interior of the country on 
which the poor shipwrecked mariner has landed, to 
tell him that beyond the line of trees that guard the 
coast there is a friendly Emperor, that the country is 
Christian, that the people are hospitable, that there 
is awaiting him the goodwill of those with whom his 
lot would henceforth be cast. These Apostles of 
Christ, who breathed His peace, did not fear the 

222 


The Sentinel of the Heart 


unknown, since it was well known to Him ; did not Phil. iv. 
fear the future, for it was present to Him; were not 7 
startled at the change in circumstances, since their 

peace did not depend upon external things, but upon 

Him who is First and Last, and who guaranteed the 

supply of all need. 

‘Christ is our Peace.’ ‘He has made peace by This Peace 
the Blood of His Cross.’ He has come to us with rh sa 
the tidings that God is reconciled, and desires that Christ. 
we should be reconciled with Him; He breaks 
down our stubborn rebellion, and brings us into 
harmony with the Father's will; changes the heart 
of stone into the heart of flesh ; teaches us that our 
salvation does not depend on what we are to feel, 
but on the over-abounding love of God; convinces 
us that He who has done so much for our salvation 
will not forget the body, with all its varied need, 
and opens up to us the heart of the Father, so true 
and tender, so set upon our help, that within its 
limits all fulness dwells, pledged to our supply. 

All through the agitating scenes of our Lord’s It isthe 
arrest and death, He bore Himself as one in whose dwelt in the 
heart the peace of God reigned in unbroken calm. Ji of 
He said: ‘These things have I spoken unto you, : 
that in Me ye may have peace. In the world ye 
shall have tribulation, but be of good cheer, I have 
overcome the world.’ Spat upon, mocked, scourged, 
crucified, He never for a single moment lost His 
kingliness of mien. In the midst of the excitement 
in the garden, when being led forth as a felon, He 
was able to work a miracle on the ear of Malchus ; 
and when standing before Pilate, the royalty of His 

223 


Phil. iv. 


This Peace 
is intended 
to keep our 
Hearts and 
Thoughts. 


Conditions of 


Reception. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


manhood was so apparent, that the governor was con- 
vinced that He had done nothing amiss, and became 
His advocate. My peace He said, and says. The 
peace that filled His heart is His gift to all that are 
united with Him by a living faith. 

The word keep is the term for sentry duty. It 
is as though the peace of God, like some sentinel 
angel, went to and fro before the portal of our 
inner life, keeping back all intruders who would 
break in upon the purity of our affections, or the 
integrity of our thoughts. How often we have been 
flurried and agitated! How suddenly things have 
broken in upon us which have rocked the waters 
of the inner lake to storm! How frequently the 
fever of the world has entered, for want of a dis- 
infecting barrier, to raise the pulses of our souls to 
fever heat! But all this may be prevented when 
the peace that passeth understanding keeps us. 

The conditions of receiving this peace are three- 
fold. Beanwxious for nothing. ‘Anxiety’ comes from 
the same root as anger, and refers to the physical 
act of choking. Worry chokes the life of faith ; it 
does not help us to meet our difficulties ; so far from 
this it unfits us, for our mind is too flurried to think 
clearly and carefully, our hand trembles too much 
to perform the delicate operation. Therefore, the 
perpetual injunction of the New Testament to the 
children of God, is, as Jesus puts it, ‘Take no 
anxious thought.’ We must watch against it as 
against any other temptation ; we must resist the 
first intimation of the overshadowing blight of 
care; we must turn from to-morrow’s threatened 

224 


The Sentinel of the Heart 


difficulty to the face of God who is ‘the same Phil. iv. 
yesterday, to-day, and forever.’ He will be there, 7 
and He will be for judgment when we have to sit 
in judgment and give our decisions as certainly as 
He will be for strength when we have to turn the 
battle from the gate. 

We are to be anxious about nothing, however 
great or trivial. The storm that threatens to engulf 
the house of our life, and the gnawing of the 
tiny mouse in the cellar; the bankruptcy which 
may sweep away the accumulation of years, and 
the few coins that we may have mislaid! Nothing 
in the whole range of our life should give us 
anxiety because there is nothing which is not within 
the circumference of God’s care, nothing which gives 
us annoyance is too small for the notice of our 
Heavenly Father, who has a cure for every ailment, 
a foil for every weapon of the adversary. 

In everything by prayer and supplication let your Be prayerful 

: about Every- 
requests be made known unto God. Prayer is more thing. 
general, supplication more specific. Whenever the 
least shadow of care threatens our life we should 
go at once to our knees, and in the silence of 
private prayer hand over the burden and responsi- 
bility to our Infinite and All-wise Father. We have 
to make our requests known. Not that He will 
always give us what we ask, but will read into 
our prayers the meaning that we would put in 
them, were we as well informed as He is of what 
is best. There need not be undue urgency or 
excitement, or the play of profound emotion; in 
quietness and confidence will be our strength, the 
P 225 


Phil. iv. 
7 


Be thankful 
for Anything. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


least whisper will enter into the depths of God’s 
nature, the tiniest tremor of our heart will be 
noticed, the least as well as the greatest of our 
demands will be met. 

Go over the mercies of the past. Count your 
blessings; remember all the way which the Lord 
your God has led you; see how His loving-kind- 
ness has been encompassing your path and your 
lying down, your going out to service and your 
coming in to rest through long years. Has there 
not been a plan in your life? Are you not con- 
scious of a Divine purpose? Do you not realise 
that the hand of the Potter has been moulding 
you into a vessel for His use? Is not the sweet 
reasonableness of many mysteries that once puzzled 
you beginning to reveal itself? Have you not a 
clue to the maze? As you stand on the eminence 
of the years, can you not see that the path by 
which you have come through the valley is the 
directest and safest? How much we have to be 
thankful for, how often we have been stayed on 
the very brink of ruin, how marvellously we have 
been withdrawn from the doing or saying that 
which would have shattered our usefulness! Oh 
my heart, take the harp from the willows, and 
commence where thou wilt to praise thy God; and 
as the song of praise begins to steal up in faltering 
notes at first, but with ever more certainty and 
thankfulness, the clouds will break, the chink of 
blue sky will widen until the whole vault of heaven 
is clear, and the peace of God like a pure, strong, 
beautiful angel will descend to act as sentry to the 

226 


The Sentinel of the Heart 


heart and mind,—to the heart, keeping out unholy Phil. iv. 
affection, and to the mind, checking the entrance of 7 
rebellious, restless, and distracting thoughts. 

Those that have this peace can unlock its stores The 
for others. It is as though, like Rebekah of old, Benediction 

of Peace. 

they draw from deep wells, and are able to wet 
the lips of thirsty travellers from the overflowing 
of their buckets. Their presence calms, soothes, and 
quiets the restless and perturbed spirit. No such 
nurses for the sick room, no such confidants in 
hours of anxiety, no such strong and wise advisers 
in perplexity! The hand of the priest or minister 
can be stretched out to invoke upon the congregation 
the peace of God, but the people may go away uncom- 
forted ; whilst one quiet heart, which has drunk 
deep into the peace of Christ, radiates it forth 
with the velocity and virtue of the newly discovered 
metal radium. 

Of course, such peace needs a quiet and sympa- 
thetic heart, able to appreciate and respond. As in 
wireless telegraphy, the instrument at the receiving 
must be in perfect harmony with that at the trans- 
mitting station ; so there must be some knowledge 
of peace, some yearning desire for it, some recipro- 
city, if the Divine peace is to find entrance. The 
‘son of peace’ receives the higher, purer quality 
which the apostle of peace brings. God ever says 
to these souls, ‘Ye shall see greater things than 
these.’ If He has given the nether, He will add the 
upper springs also. 

But there are cases in which this reciprocity is with- 
held. ‘ Your peace shall return to you again.’ The 

227 


Phil. iv. 
7 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


salutation to peace excites the frown, the refusal, the 
chilling reply—what then! Is it lost? Nay, verily, 
it comes back to the heart from which it origi- 
nated. The peace comes back to roost, as the 
dove to Noah’s ark when the patriarch put forth 
his hand and took her in to himself; or as the 
waves dashing against the sea wall, and unable to 
effect an- entrance through its stony barrier, return 
their unspent force to the heart of mother-ocean 
from which they sprang. Thus does the peace 
which we would communicate to others, but they 
will not receive, come back to our own hearts, 
Nothing is lost in this world which is done for 
God, and no word spoken for Him can be in vain. 
With infinite care He causes us to be enriched by 
the beneficence we intend for others, but which they 
will not receive. 


228 


XXIV 


THE GOVERNMENT OF OUR 
THOUGHTS 


Puiu. iv. 8, 9 


‘FINALLY, \ brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever 
thittgs-aré honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things 
are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of 
good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, 
think on these things. 

Those things, which ye have both-tearned,.and received, and 
heard, and seen in me, do: and thé God of peace »shall be with 
you. Se oeor 


Ws last spoke about the peace of God which, like a Phil. iv. 
white-robed sentry, keeps the heart with its affec- 8, 9 
tions, and thoughts, with all their busy and some- Phe God of 
° . eace. 
times too promiscuous crowd. We have now to 
speak about the God of peace; and blessed though 
the peace of God may be, to have the God from 
whose nature peace emanates is infinitely preferable. 
One main constituent of our text is the word think ; 
another the word do. 

Thinking and doing are the conditions on which 
the God of peace will tarry in the heart. To think 
rightly, and to do rightly—these will bring the 
blessed dove of heaven to brood in the nest of your 
soul. Almost everything in life depends on the 
thoughts, as the forest lies in the acorn, and Scrip- 
ture itself lays stress upon this. The wise man says; 
‘Keep thy heart with all diligence ; for out of it are 
the issues of life;’ and, again, we have it: ‘As a 
man thinketh in his heart so is he.’ In this context 

229 


Phil. iv. 
8, 9 


Thinking 
and Doing. 


Thought and 


Character. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


we notice that the peace of God is to keep our 
thoughts; and, again, our text says: ‘Think on 
these things.’ The control of your thought, the 
government of your mind, this is all important for 
three reasons. 

(1) Because thinking about things prepares you 
Sor doing them. If you allow a matter to revolve in 
your mind, if you turn it, over and over and consider 
it from every aspect, and dwell upon it, it becomes 
comparatively easy to do it. It is as though the 
thoughts lay down the tram lines, upon which 
presently the car of action proceeds. The thoughts 
lay the wires which presently convey the message. 
No doubt many of you have again and again ex- 
perienced this, that when you have come to some 
great crisis in your life, you have passed through it 
with perfect ease, because you had so often rehearsed 
the matter. When you came to act, it was as though 
you had passed through the experience before, your 
thought had so entirely prepared you for it. It is of 
the utmost importance therefore that you take care 
what you think, because thought is the precursor, 
herald, and forerunner of action. 

(2) Thought is also important, because tt has a 
reflex effect upon the whole character. As you think, 
so you are almost without knowing it. Wordsworth 
refers to this ; he says :— 


‘We live by admiration, love, and hope; 
As these are well and wisely fixed, 
In dignity of being we ascend.’ 


If a man cherishes bad thoughts, almost unwit- 
230 


The Government of our Thoughts 


tingly he deteriorates ; he cannot help it. There is a Phil. iv. 
profound philosophy in Rom. i., where it says that 8, 9 
because they refused to retain God in their minds, 
but cherished their vile lusts, God gave them up to 
their passions to defile themselves. If a man is 
perpetually cherishing unholy, impure, and untrue 
thoughts, he will become an unholy, impure, and 
untrue man. Our character takes on the complexion 
and hue of our inward thinking, If a man is ever 
cherishing noble thoughts, he cannot help becoming 
noble ; if he is generous in his thought, he will be in 

his act ; if he is loving and tender in his thought, he 
will be loving and tender in his bearing. Thoughts 

are the looms in the wonderful machinery of the 
inner life, which are running day and night, and 
weaving the garments in which the soul shall be 
arrayed. If you will care for your thoughts, the 
thought will mould character reflexively and uncon- 
sciously. 

(3) Thought affects us because we naturally pursue Thought and 
our ideals. Columbus, after long thinking, came to !4¢@!s- 
the conclusion that the earth was round, and that 
conviction determined him to launch his little boat 
and steer westward. Washington thought that 
government must be based on universal suffrage and 
free vote of the people, and this led to the formation 
of the United States. Wilberforce thought that 
every man was equally free in the sight of God, 
created and redeemed to be responsible to God only, 
apart from the holding of his fellow-man. Young 
men and women may read these words in whom 
great thoughts are formulating themselves, and if 

231 


Phil. iv. 


8,9 


Thought 
often un- 
noticed. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


they are not to be mere enthusiasts, mere weak 
dreamers, the time must come when they will yoke 
the car of their thought to the star of their ideal, and 
presently a life will tower up before their fellows that 
shall leave a definite impression for blessing upon the 
race. If you are to be any more than a dreamer and 
enthusiast, young friend, your thought must, sooner 
or later, take shape in your industry and energy, even 
in the sweat of your brow, and the suffering of 
martyrdom. 

It is a remarkable touch in John Bunyan’s de- 
scription of Ignorance, as he walks beside the two , 
elder pilgrims, that he says: ‘My heart is as good as. 
any man’s heart ’—and adds, ‘As to my thoughts, | 
I take no notice of them.’ Probably there are! 
scores of people who take no notice of their 
thoughts. They leave the castle gate of their soul 
perfectly open for any intruder that may wish to 
enter, either from heaven or hell; and so it befalls 
that the thoughts of the world, of vanity, of im- 
purity, thoughts which are inspired by demons, but 
which are arrayed in the garb of respectable citizens, 
pour into the great gateway of the soul, filling the 
courtyard with their tumultuous uproar. Without 
discrimination, thought, or care on their part, they 
allow themselves to be occupied and possessed with 
thoughts of which they have every reason to be 
ashamed ; they teem in and out, and do just as they 
will. This is the reason why you sometimes find 
your heart filled with passion; it is because Guy 
Fawkes has entered in disguise with his fellow- 
conspirators, and under long flowing robes has intro- 

232 


The Government of our Thoughts 


duced explosives. This is why our hearts become Phil. iv. 
filled with hatred, malice, and all uncharitableness, 8) 9 
with thoughts against God, and against our fellows. 

We do not watch the great courtyard gate. 

Think carefully, think reverently, says the Apostle ; Think 

take care how you think. We might almost say you 'verent!- 
can live as you like, if you are only careful how you 
think. At the great dock gates they will feel down 
the casual labourers before permitting them to enter 
the great warehouse, and again when they come out. 
We are told that in some of the great hospitals they 
will search the visitors, especially on Sunday after- 
noon, lest they should introduce deleterious food, 
which might neutralise the physicians’ treatment. 
When there was the dynamite scare in London, how 
carefully the policemen examined everybody who 
had business in the House of Commons, lest a bomb 
might be introduced. If only we had a scrutator 
standing at the door of our heart to examine every 
thought as it entered; nay, if we could have there 
the Angel Ithuriel, of whom Milton speaks, and the 
touch of whose spear showed that the devil lurked 
in the toad that squatted by Eve’s ear and whispered 
her his secret, how often in what seems a respectable 
thought entering the courtyard gate we should dis- 
cover a traitor, who had come from the very pit to 
set our heart on fire with sin. 

It would appear that to arrest the tide of evil The | 
thoughts that threatens us is what St Paul means Sted | 
when he says he is crucified with Christ. When newly 
converted there is nothing that we suffer from so 
much as the collision between the intrusion of those 

233 


Phil. iv. 
8,9 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


thoughts and the new divine principle, which has 
entered us. Just for a few hours watch carefully at 
the gateway of your hearts, and see if it be not 
sometimes almost an agony to exclude those which 
you must suspect. In beginning to do this, many 
would learn, perhaps for the first time, what the 
Cross of Christ means. It might bring the very 
perspiration to your forehead, in the awful conflict 
against certain fascinating thoughts, so winsome, so 
bright, so attractive, that offer themselves with the 
most insinuating grace. In earlier days, when one’s 
standard was not quite so high, when one was less 
aware of the insidious temptation that lurks in the 
most graceful and attractive thoughts, one would 
have permitted them to enter, but now how great a 
fight goes on at the great gate of the soul, not only 
against bold bad thoughts, but against the more 
pleasing and seductive ones. 
* * * * * 

But supposing we were left merely with this con- 
stant watching and antagonising of evil thoughts, life 
would be almost intolerable. Remember, therefore, 

| that not the negative only but the positive, not 
destruction only but construction, ts the law of the 
Christian life. Not the grave of Christ, but the 

resurrection power, is our hope; and hence St. Paul 
says, ‘Think on these things ’—and he gives you six 
standards of thoughts. 


Think onthe ‘ Whatsoever things are true.’ Keep out of your 


True. 


mind the false, but admit the true, because every 

life, every government, all politics, all business, all 

great commercial undertakings, all books and systems, 
234 


The Government of our Thoughts 


which are not founded upon truth crumble sooner or Phil. iv. 
later. If you could visit this world in the future, 8,9 

you would find that the falsehoods which now stalk 

across its arena, and seem as strong as thistles in 

spring, will have passed away. Consider things that 

are true. 

‘Whatsoever things are honourable. The word On the 
in the Greek is grave—reverent—respect-compelling Honourable. 
—everything which is respectable, which makes for 
itself a court of respect. Exclude from your mind 
all that is dishonourable, and admit only what is 
worthy of God. 

‘“Whatsoever things are just.’ Be absolutely just On the 
to other people in your estimate, in giving them their Just. 
dues. If they be above you, criticise them justly ; if 
on your level, deal with them as you would wish 
them to deal with you; if beneath you, be just. 
Everything unjust in speech or habit prohibit ; every- | 
thing which is just foster. 

‘Whatsoever things are pure. Here is the fight on the 
for a young man’s life, to arrest the impure, however Pure. 
bedizened and bedecked, and to admit into his heart 
only that which is perfectly pure, pure as the lily, as 
God’s ether, as the light. 

‘Whatsoever things are lovely.’ That conduct On the 
which is consistent with 1 Cor. xiii, which proceeds Lovely. 
from the heart of love and thaws the ice of selfishness, 
which has accumulated upon others. 

‘ Whatsoever things are of good report.’ Like the And on the 
elders who obtained a good report; like Mary, of Ehings of 
whom Jesus said, ‘She hath done what she could ;’ Report. 
like the man with his ten talents, to whom the Lord 

235 


Phil, iv. 
8,9 


A High 
Ideal. 


But attain- 
able by 
Faith, 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


said, ‘Well done, good and faithful servant.’ Any- 
thing, the Apostle says, which is virtuous, and any- 
thing which wins praise of God or man, think on 
these things. 

Let these six sisters stand at the sobétad of your 
soul, and challenge every thought as it offers itself, 
admitting only those thoughts ‘which approve them- 
selves as true, just, pure, lovely, and of good report. 
O God, let these six angels come into our souls, and 
from now until we meet Thee, let us give the entire 
control of our nature up to their serene, strong, 
wholesome restraint, that all that is inconsistent with 
them may be abashed, and everything which is 
consistent with them admitted to infill and dwell 
within us. 

You say the ideal is high. Yes, but listen; we 
must believe that each of these attributes was won 
by Christ for us all—zwon by Him. They were native 
to Him, but they were won because He pursued 
them through temptation. He kept them as His 
own, face to face with the most terrific temptations 
ever presented to a moral being. Having endured 
all, He died, rose, and bore to God’s right hand a 
humanity in which these things were eternal and 
inherent. Thence he sent down the Holy Spirit 
to reproduce His risen humanity in every one who 
believes. 

Faith is the power with which we receive through 
the Holy Ghost the nature of Jesus Christ into our 
hearts; so that instead of talking about justice, purity, 
and self-restraint as so many abstract qualities, we 
speak about Him in whom those attributes are in- 

236 


The Government of our Thoughts 


carnated. By faith we receive Him, and having Phil. iv. 
received Him, we receive them. Let the Holy Spirit 8, 9 


reproduce Him. 

Just now we said, Let those six sisters stand at 
the gateway and test all our thoughts. Butitis better 
to say, Let Jesus Christ stand at the gateway and 
test them, because He can not only test but roll back 
the tide of evil thought, as easily as He could make 
Niagara leap back, did He choose. It is mere 
stoicism and stoical philosophy to say: Watch your 
thoughts. It is Christian philosophy to say: Let 
Christ keep your thoughts, testing them, hurling 
back the evil, and filling the soul with Hi His glorious 
presence, 

This is the secret of the indwelling presence of the 
God of Peace. He abides where the heart is kept 


, free from evil thoughts, and filled with the Spirit of 
‘the Son. ‘The God of Peace shall be with you.’ 


237 


Phil. iv. 
10-13 


Bound: 
Received 
with Joy. 


XXV 


ALL THINGS ARE POSSIBLE TO 
HIM THAT BELIEVETH 


Puiu. iv. 10-13 


Bur I rejoiced in the Lord greatly, that now at the last your 
care of me hath flourished again ; wherein ye were also careful, but 
ye lacked opportunity. 

Not that I speak in respect of want: for I have learned, in what- 
soever state I am, therewith to be content. 

I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound: 
every where and in all things I am instructed both to be full and 
to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need. 

I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me. 

For ten years the Philippian Church had been unable 
to send material aid to its beloved founder. It was 
not because his love for them, or theirs to him had 
cooled, but they had lacked opportunity. ‘Previously, 
his friends had contributed, even beyond their power, 
to aid him in relieving the need of their poorer | 
brethren in Judea. In addition to this, they had 
sent, ‘once and again,’ to relieve his personal wants. | 
Then for some time their help had ceased; but | 
just recently, in his sore destitution during his — 
Roman imprisonment, their love for him had flamed | 
out in generous bounty, and they had sent by Epa-/ 
phroditus, substantial proof that their care for him 
had flourished again. —~ 
This was a matter of great satisfaction to the 
much-tried Apostle. It touched his generous nature ; 
it was an evidence that the love he so greatly prized, 
238 we 


a 


1) pa? = 
b 


A 
al 


All Things are Possible 


was as fresh and strong as ever, It seemed to him Phil. iv. 
that the Master Himself was gratified with the sacri- 10-13 
fices they had made; but he hastened to add, that 
they must not for a moment suppose that he was 
dependent upon outward gifts for contentment and | 
peace. His secret of happiness was not in circum- 
stances, but in his peace of heart ; he would not_admit 
that his joy was‘ lessened’ when ‘his circumstances 
were more straitened, and enhanced when they 
brimmed with moments His _Serenity lay beyond __ 
the range of storms, in Christ. , The secret of the 
Lord was with him, the high mountains of God’s 
protection defended from ruffling alarm the lake of 
the inner life, he possessed the white stone, with the 
name written on it. He wanted them to understand 
that he did not for a moment reflect on their long 
silence, or speak in respect of want, for he had 
‘learned in whatsoever state he was, therewith. to 
be content.’ 

It has been said, that contentment produces in Poikintciet 

some measure all the effects which the alchemist aig aera 
usually ascribes to the philosopher’s stone ; and_if Fluctuation. 
it does not_bring riches, it-achieves the same object 
by banishing the desire for them. How true this is. 
We become rich either by possessing the abundance 
of this , world, or by losing our desire for it} by 
‘ abounding in everything, or by being content to 
have nothing; and surely of the two conditions, 
in such a changeful world as this, the latter is 
both safer and happier. 

The world is constantly compared to the sea, with 
its fluctuation of tide, its alternation of storm and 

239 


Phil. iv. 
10-13 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


calm. We are reminded by Isaiah of ‘the troubled 
sea which cannot rest,’ and unhappy are they whose 
all is embarked upon this troublous scene, having no 
fixity of tenure, no stability of possession, but driven 
by the wild winds of change, and often of panic. 
To have little and to be content with it, is better far 
than to have great riches invested in the Stock 
Exchange, where a man may be a millionaire to-day 
and a pauper to-morrow. Well may the Apostle, in 
another and later Epistle, speak of ‘ uncertain riches,’ 
and urge the disciples not to trust in them, but in 
the Living God ‘who gives richly all things to 


' enjoy.’ Often, in human experience, the mountains 


are carried into the heart of the seas, the waters roar 
and are troubled, and the rocks are shaken by the 
swelling waters ; but how good it is at such times to 
frequent the banks of the river, whose streams make 
glad the city of God, and whose placid upper waters 
reflect the jasper of God’s throne! To be indepen- 
dent of circumstances, to set them at defiance, to 
be as happy when hungry as when filled, to be 
at rest when suffering need as when abounding, to 
resemble the compass which is so swung as to be 
unaffected by the motion of the ship, to have the 
jewel of a Divine peace which the thieving hands of 
anxiety and care cannot touch, surely, only thus can 
we discover the gleam of a life which is no longer at 
the mercy of the elements, but resembles the shaft of 
light which penetrates the murky cloud, and strikes 
through the storm itself, but is too ethereal to be 
disturbed by the rush of the wind or the dash of the 
foaming breaker. 
240 


All Things are Possible 


Where shall we find it? Where barns are full of Phil. iv. 
grain, and the sheds of cattle? Where mansions 10-13 
overlook miles of parkland and landscape? Where yen 

: 5 : : ontentment 
the feet sink ankle-deep in the rich piles of the is oftenest 
carpets, and upholsterers have done their utmost to — where 
furnish the rooms with dazzling elegance ; where the expected. 
murmur of the outer world hardly enters, and where 
distracting care has no twig on which to perch? 
Not there. When human life is surrounded by every 
circumstance of comfort and luxury, it is very often 
fullest of ennui, complaining and discontent ! 

The causes for it may be ignoble and superficial— 
that some other beauty outshines, that some other 
house is more splendidly furnished, that some other 
life attracts more notoriety, that there is a touch of 
frost in the air to-day, or a degree or two more of 
heat. 

If we would find content, let us go to homes 
where women are crippled with rheumatism, or 
dying of cancer, where comforts are few, where long 
hours of loneliness are not broken by the intrusion 
of friendly faces, where the pittance of public charity 
hardly suffices for necessary need, to say nothing of 
comfort, it is there that contentment reveals itself 
like a shy flower. How often in the homes of the 
wealthy one has missed it, to find it in the homes of 
the poor! How often it is wanting where health is | 
buoyant, to be discovered where disease is wearing | 
out the strength! So it was with the Apostle, who 
was in the saddest part of his career. Bound to the | 
Roman soldier, enclosed in some narrow apartment, | 
in touch with only a few friends who made an effort 

Q 241 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


to discover him, away from the happy scenes of 
earlier years, and anticipating Nero’s bar, he breaks 
out into these glorious expressions of equanimity. 
- He had learned how to be abased in the valley of 
shadow, he wore the flower heartsease in his button- 
hole. 

The idea of it has been always present to the 
minds of men, but the power by which the ideal 
could be realised has been lacking. For instance, 
Cicero who. wrote volumes of incitement to courage 
and manly virtue, when he was driven into exile, 
though it was by no means onerous, wearied his 
friends with puerile and unmanly murmurings. It 
was the same with Seneca, whose books are full of 
stoic endurance and superiority to suffering, but as 
soon as he was exiled from Rome, he filled the air 
with abject complaints, and was not ashamed to fall 
at the feet of a worthless freedman to induce him to 
procure a revocation of his exile and permission to 
return from Sardinia to the metropolis. 

How different was the great Apostle! Though 
deprived of every comfort, and cast as a lonely man 
on the shores of the great strange metropolis, with 
every movement of his hand clanking a fetter, and 
nothing before him but the lion’s mouth ‘or the 
sword, he speaks serenely of contentment: 

In the previous chapter, he tells us that he had 
not attained, but was following after. He refused 
to be content with what he had already accomplished 
for himself or others, his whole soul was on fire to 
apprehend more absolutely that for which Christ 
had apprehended him, but whilst he could not be 

242 


Sines 


All Things are Possible 


content with the spiritual attainment or service, he Phil. iv. 
| was absolutely content with the circumstances of his 10-13 
lot. Looking up into the face of Jesus, he confessed 
‘his discontent; looking around at the prison, the 

gaoler, and the future, since these were all contained 

in the will of God for him, he was absolutely 

satisfied, because infinite love had permitted them. 

He longed that men might be turned from dark- Nor indiffer- 
ness to light, and from the power of Satan to God. £fce *s the 
He could never be content until his Master was the world around 
enthroned King of the world; and strove with wae 
unabating determination, according to the working 
of the mighty Spirit of God, ‘to present every man 
perfect in Christ Jesus.’ His eager spirit partici- 
pated in the very travail of Christ for His body’s 
sake, the Church. He was willing to be accursed 
for his brethren, the unbelieving Jews. But amid 
all this, he was content with the poor raft on which 
he was navigating the stormy seas. It was enough 
for him that God had willed his circumstances, and 
that Christ was his partner and friend. His was 
the spirit of the Psalmist, when he said, ‘Whom 
have I in heaven but Thee, and there is none on 
earth beside Thee? My heart and flesh faileth, but 
God is the strength of my-heart, and my portion for 
ever. “ 

Just as our Lord ‘learned obedience by the thingsPaul had 
that He suffered,’ so the Apostle acquired the habit earned ee 
of contentment by practising it. He had schooled ~ 
himself, by constantly applying the Cross of Jesus 
to his ambitions, bis murmurings, his tendency to 
complain. He had accustomed himself to dwell 

243 


j 
/ 


Phil. iv. 
10-13 


= = “) « \ “4 eae | 
Neh g ret tae? : ei \ 7 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


upon the bright side of things, to lay more stress 
upon what he had than upon what he lacked. It 


' was the habit of his life to take his lot from God, to 
» look upon it as illumined by perfect wisdom ond 
_ perfect love. He refused to listen to the dark and 


Three Con- 
ditions for 

the Grace of 
Content: 


sinister suggestions flung into his soul by the tempter. 
Yes, we can do a great deal to elaborate the faculty 
of contentment ; the germ of it is in our hearts by 
the grace of God, but the flower and fruit demand 
our constant heed. 


All is of God, and God is good. Every wind ( 


blows from the quarter of His love, every storm 


~ wafts us nearer the harbour, every cup, though 


ment + resented by the hand of Judas, is mixed by the 
ust, P Y y 


H owe in — 
Will of God. 


)Father of our spirits. It is not possible for 
a man to be thrust by his brethren in the pit, 
‘unless God permit it, and therefore we may say 
with Joseph, ‘It was not you that sent me hither, 
but God.’ Habituate yourself, oh Christian soul, to 


‘believe that not only what God appoints but a tat 


{ 


y 


i? 
(2) We must 
turnto Christ 
as the com- 
plement of 
our Need. 


aoe 
a 


He permits, is in the sphere of His will! It is His 
will for you to be full to-day ‘or to be empty to- 
morrow; to abound to- day or) to be abased to- 
morrow ; He has a reason, though He may not tell 
it, and benatse you know that the reason satisfies 
| Hise you may be content. 

Teshs Christ is sufficient) The greater our lack, 
the larger our supply. ‘To them that have no 
might He increaseth\strength)’ To the ignorant He 
is wisdom, to the unholy sanctification, to the en- 
slaved redemption. His miracles manifested the 
supply of His royal nature to the need around Him; 

244 


All Things are Possible 


His purity cleansed the polluted flesh of the leper ; Phil. iv. 
His life poured into the arteries of death; His 10-13 
strength made good the helplessness of the paralysed. 

Receive from Christ ‘grace upon grace,’ and look 

upon the emptiness and need of your spirit as the 

greater reason why you should claim all from Him. Yate 


The prophet Isaiah says, that ‘they that_ wait 3) ‘We must 
do all thing: 


ee upon the Lord change, their strength’ (Isa. xl. 31) i. Christ's 3 


A.V. margin). They begin life with the strength of Strength. 
young manhood, which boasts that it is well able to 
realise its dreams with its natural vigour, but as life 
goes on they tire and faint, the youths faint and are 
weary, the young men utterly fall. Then it is that 
they learn to avail themselves of the strength of the 
Everlasting God, the Creator of the ends of the 
earth, ‘Who fainteth not, neither is weary.’ Moses 
no longer trusts in the blow of his mailed fist, but 
by faith feeds his soul from the fountains of omni- 
potence ; Peter no longer vaunts his ability to follow 
Christ even to death, but receives the power and 
anointing of the Holy Ghost, and becomes bold as a 
lion ; Paul no longer speaks of his Pharisaic ancestry, | 
and all the qualities which he had counted so much 
gain, but is content to be weak with Christ, that 
with Christ he may receive and depend upon the 
power of God. This change must come to us all. 
Whatever our need, we must turn for its supply to” 
the fulness of God in Christ. As we keep open the 
avenue of our soul to our Lord, He will pour His 
strength into our nerveless and helpless nature. 
Nay, He will not merely give\ us His strength, but 
will bei in us ‘the power of God unto salvation. We 
ey 245 


— #3} 


Phil. iv. 


10-13 


The Epistle to the Philippians 
need not simply the strength of Christ, but Christ 


‘who gives strength, _that we may be able to say with 
| thé Apostle, ‘I can do all things’ —whether it is to 


live or die, whether it is to be abased or abound, 
whether it is to be full or empty—‘ through Christ 
that strengtheneth me.’ 

Practice these three conditions, and you will learn, 
perhaps in dark hours of fink and on the hard 
benches of the school of affliction, the art of con- 
tentment which shall enrich your life more than if 
the mines of Ophir were unlocked for your wealth. 


246 


XXVI 
FILLING AND FILLED 


Putt. iv. 14-20 


NorwitHsTanpine ye have well done, that ye did communicate 
with my affliction. 

Now ye Philippians know also, that in the beginning of the 
gospel, when I departed from Macedonia, no church communicated 
with me as concerning giving and receiving, but ye only. 

For even in Thessalonica ye sent once and again unto my 
necessity. 

Not because I desire a gift: but I desire fruit that may abound 
to your account. 

But I have all, and abound: I am full, having received of 
Epaphroditus the things which were sent from you, an odour of a 
sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, wellpleasing to God. 

But my God shall supply all your need according to His riches 
in glory by Christ Jesus. 

Now unto God and our Father be glory for ever and ever. 
Amen, 


y 6 ke 


i LAs 


; ‘ 


THE Apostle had already made it clear, that though Phil. iv. 


for a long interval he had received nothing from the 14-20 


Philippian Church, he did not complain, but realised 
that there were sufficient reasons which accounted 
for the cessation of their gifts. He did not deny 
that he had been straitened in outward circum- 
stances, but he had been content because he dis- 
cerned the will of God in every dispensation, and 
was able to do all things in union with the Living 
Christ. He had found that his legitimate necessities 
had been met, and that God had dealt with him as 
with Elijah, to whom the feathered fowl, and the 
247 


Phil. iv. 
14-20 


The Gift and 
its Return. 


* Fulfil.’ 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


slender resources of the widow of Zarephath, minis- 
tered daily provision. He rejoiced, however, that 
his friends had been able to send again to his 
necessity, not for his sake alone, but for theirs, 
It was not that he sought for a gift, but for fruit 
that might be reckoned to their account. 

No Church had done for Paul what the Philippian 
Church had. In the early days they had sent once 
and again to minister to his need; and now their 
present, forwarded by the hand of Epaphroditus, 
redounded still further to their credit. It was ‘an 
odour of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well- 
pleasing to God.’ How could he repay them for 
the gifts they had sent when they were able, and for 
the desire to send when they were not. It was 
clear that he must always be hopelessly in debt to 
them so far as material supplies were concerned, but 
he could pray and make intercession on their behalf, 
and remind the Master that all kindness shown to 
the servant imposed an honourable obligation on the 
Master, and out of all this arose the assurance that 


his ‘God would fulfil every need of theirs according 


to His riches in glory in Christ Jesus.’ 
To translate the Greek word as R.V. does by fulfil 


connects this verse with the preceding one, and 
brings out the designed and beautiful harmony. The 
Apostle was filled because he had received from 
Epaphroditus the gifts of his friends, and now God 
would fulfil their need. What they had done in the 
lower sphere for him would be repeated in a higher 
sphere by God. The measure with which they had 
meted out their stores for the imprisoned Apostle 
248 


a 


a 


Filling and Filled 


would be returned to them brimming to the full, not Phil. iv. 
with the supplies for physical need, but with the 14-20 
eternal and unsearchable riches of heaven, which are 

in Christ Jesus. 

This is a constant law of God’s world. ‘Give, and Give and 
it shall be given unto you: good measure, pressed Receive. 
down, shaken together, running over, shall be given 
into your bosom. For with what measure ye mete, it 
shall be measured to you again.’ Lend your boat for , 

a whole afternoon to Christ that it may be His float-— 
ing pulpit, and He will return it to you laden with 
fish. Place your upper room at His disposal for a 
single meal, and He will fill it and the whole house © 
with the Holy Spirit of Pentecost. Place in His 
hands your barley loaves and fish, and He will not »-— 
only satisfy your hunger, but add twelve baskets full 
of fragments. The Philippians sent three or four 
presents to a suffering and much needing servant of 
God, and from that moment they might reckon that _ 
every need of theirs would be supplied. Such small 
acts on our part are recompensed with such vast 
returns. We scratch the surface of the soil and 
insert our few little seeds, and within a few months 
the acreage is covered by a prolific harvest in which 

a hundredfold is given for every grain which we 
seemed to throw away. 

God refuses to be in debt to any man. He takes God’s 
info His exchequer the accounts of all outlay made hese ” 
by His stewards for the relief of need and pg 
and He repays with interest. When the Good 
Samaritan was leaving the village inn, on the morn- 
ing after the memorable rescue of the wounded 

249 


Phil. iv. 
14-20 


But give 
cheerfully. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


traveller, he said to the host, ‘Take care of him, 
and what thou spendest more, when I come again, 
I will repay.’ Evidently, he was well-known on the 
road, he had often been at that inn before, and had 


_ established his character by honourable and generous 


treatment. They knew that his word was his bond, 
and that whatever was expended in reason would 
secure an ungrudging repayment. And if this be 
true of man how much more of God. He hands over 
to us cases in which He is deeply interested, saying 
as He does so, ‘Take care of these, expend what 


_ is necessary, and I will repay.’ May we not 
_ reckon on God for this? According to our faith 


it will be to us. 

Whenever, therefore, we feel impelled to make 
provision for others, let us do it as unto God, not 
simply out of human pity, but from a deep sense of 
obligation to our Heavenly Father, let us do it 
gladly, freely, generously. ‘God loveth a cheerful 
giver. Three things will happen—(1) We shall 
send a thrill of gratitude into some weary and faint- 
ing soul, encouraging it to hope in God because it 
has found that its hope in man has not been mis- 
placed. (2) The odour of the act will be fragrant 
as it steals upward to mingle with the adoration and 
service of Heaven. There is no longer need to offer 
propitiatory sacrifices, for they have been done away 
in view of the sacrifice made by our Lord when He 
once offered Himself without sin unto God, but there 
is room in the Christian dispensation for the sacrifice 
of praise (Heb. xiii. 15), for the living sacrifice of 
ourselves (Rom. xii. 1), and for the acceptable 

250 


Filling and Filled 


sacrifices of Christian beneficence which, as this Phil. iv. 
paragraph tells us, are well-pleasing to God. (3) 14-20 
We may also reckon that He will fill to the brim the 
measure with which we have meted out for others, 

and take it as a certainty that He will fulfil every 

need according to His riches. If our measure was 
filled with sand grains, He will return it filled with 

gold dust ; if it was filled with pebbles, He will hand 

it back replete with diamonds ; if it contained neces- 
saries for the physical life, He will restore it brimming 

over with spiritual riches. 

It may be answered that many who have given Charity 
lavishly for God’s cause have afterwards come to Stas by 
penury and need, and their benefactions seem to $ 
have been lost like argosies that go down at sea. In 
any case, there has been no return to brighten the 
straitened circumstances of declining years. Three 
answers may be given. First, it may be that the gifts 
were not rendered with a single eye for the glory of 
God, but for some lower motives of display, ostenta- 
tion, or self-advertisement ; therefore, they had their 
reward. They were done to be seen of men, they 
received the recognition and applause of men, and 
God refused to recognise any obligation for further 
recompense. 

Secondly, it is necessary, before these laws of the 
spiritual world operate on our behalf, that we should 
definitely and by faith appropriate them. There is 
no promise which does not require to be claimed. 

As the angel of electricity will not step forth to 

illumine our rooms unless we turn the switch when 

we pass through the door, so we must not complain 
251 


Phil. iv. 
14-20 


God’s 
Return. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


that the laws of the spiritual world do not bring us 
help unless by faith we appropriate their service. 
Whenever, therefore, we expend alms for the relief of 
need, let us definitely put our money into God’s bags, 
which wax not old: we should specifically lay up 
treasure in heaven, we should pay our money, so to 
speak, into the bank of His faithfulness, and reckon 
that there will be a definite return. It may be taken 
as an axiom that in this world there is a return for 
every gift that we lay on the altar of self-sacrifice— 
not of reward but of free grace. We must not make 
the gift in order to get the reward, but having made 
the gift in the name of Christ, and for the fulfilment 
of His redemptive purpose, we may certainly believe 
that in ways that we may not be able to define God 
will supply all our need. 

Thirdly, it should be borne in mind that though there 
may be apparent straitness, there may be a wealth of 
content, a gold mine of peace and joy, the precious 
stones of spiritual grace, which correspond to the 
riches in glory of which the Apostle speaks. When 
life was young, they gave of their temporal things, 
and now as the evening shades gather, God gives 
them not temporalities but spiritualities. They sowed 
carnal things and reap spiritual ones (1 Cor. ix. 11). 

‘All your need,’ From the moment that we draw 
our first breath in this world to the last sigh of 
expiring life, we are full of needs. The babe has its 
cradle needs, and the patriarch those that arise from 
the wearing out of his faculties, and his growing 
dependence on others. The body has physical need, 
the mind its hunger for truth, the heart its insatiable 

252 


Filling and Filled 


longing for love, the spirit for spiritual sustenance Phil. iv. 
and quickening. Our human nature is one great 14-20 
bundle of need, it is always crying aloud for satis- 

faction ; and as civilisation advances, the variety and 
multiplicity of our need is ever on the increase. 

We must distinguish between our needs and our Needs and 
desires. It is possible to want a good many things Desires. 
which we do not need. We often want.things which 
it would injure us greatly to have. Paul wanted to 
be delivered from his thorn, but his real need was for 
more grace. We want a great many things which it 
is not possible for our Heavenly Father to give us, 
except to the great detriment of our best life. There 
is no promise that God shall supply all our desires or 
wishes, there is a certainty that He will fulfil all our 
need. 

Some may read these words whose needs are 
clamant,—the need for guidance, for help against 
temptation, for the quickening of languishing de-, 
votional life, the need for daily bread or employment. » 

Let all such take this to their heart for their comfort 
that God will supply all their need. ‘My God shall 
fulfil every need of yours.’ 

‘In Him are all the treasures of wisdom and know- Christ is 
ledge hidden.’ ‘It pleased the Father that in Him eke: 
should all the fulness dwell.’ ‘In Him dwelleth all our Need. 
the fulness of the Godhead bodily.’ The Divine- 

Human nature of Christ is replete with every possible 

supply for His people. ‘He filleth all in all.’ Those 

that trust Him can say, as the Apostle did of the 

Philippian gifts, ‘I have all things and abound; I am 

filled, having received from Christ the things that 
253 


Phil. iv. 
14-20 


The Prime 
Necessity. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


came from God, and which were treasured in Him for 
my enrichment and thanksgiving.’ The teaching of 
the Apostle is full of this thought, as when he says, 
‘T thank my God always concerning you, for the grace 
of God which was given you in Christ Jesus; that in 
everything ye were enriched in Him” (1 Cor. i. 4, 5), 
and again, ‘Blessed be the God and Father of our 
Lord Jesus Christ who hath blessed us with every 
spiritual blessing in the heavenly places in Christ’ 
(Eph. i. 3). Peter also affirms the same thought. 
‘Grace to you, and peace be multiplied in the know- 
ledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord ; seeing that His 
Divine power hath granted unto us all things that 
pertain unto life and godliness’ (2 Peter i. 2, 3). 

Christ is the complement (7.e., the completement) 
of every soul. Just as the dark face of the moon 
taken with her first crescent of light makes a complete 
circle, so the unseen Redeemer together with our 
infinite need makes a complete man after God’s 
stature. The greater our deficiency the larger His 
supply. 

The prime_necessity, however, ts that_we should 
rection #2 $8 0, and avail ourselves of alt.the trenewres 
that are prepared for our use in_our Risen Lord. 
Too often we act as if we had to meet the demands 
of life from our own limited exchequer, instead of be- 
lieving that we have been taken into partnership with 
the Son of God, and can at any moment draw upon 
His all-sufficiency. What would you think if a clerk, 
who was sent to a distant land to open a branch of 
some great business firm, were to seek to meet the 
expenses out of his own limited salary, when the head 

254 





Filling and Filled 


of the firm had told him to draw upon his credit to Phil. iv. 
any extent which he deemed necessary? But we 14-20 
make the same mistake when we meet the calls of 
life apart from the boundless wealth which is placed 
to our credit in Jesus. 

A story is told by Dr Richard Newton of an old 
and poverty-stricken Indian, who many years ago 
made his way into a Western settlement in search of 
food to keep him from starving. A bright coloured 
ribbon was seen around his neck, from which there 
hung a small, dirty pouch. On being asked what it 
was, he said it was a charm given him in his younger 
days. He opened it, and took out a worn and 
crumpled paper, which he handed to the person 
making the inspection. It proved, on examination, 
to be a regular discharge from the federal army, 
signed by George Washington himself, and entitling 
him to a pension for life. Here was a man with a 
promise duly signed, which if presented in the right 
place would have secured him ample provision, yet 
he was wandering about hungry, helpless, and forlorn, 
and begging bread to keep him from starving. What 
a picture of many Christians who are in need of every- 
thing when they might be rich and full! Perhaps 
their own life has not been generous, certainly their 
faith has never put in its claim to God’s great bank 
of promise. 

Let us remember that we are dealing with a We deal 
Father. ‘Now unto our God and Father be the es a 

% 3 2 ather. 
glory for ever. The Father's eye is on His children, 
and a Father’s hand is stretched out to their relief. 
Let us be of good cheer. Two sparrows are sold for 
255 


Phil. iv. 
14-20 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


a farthing, but five for two farthings, that is, sparrows 
are so cheap that one can be thrown into the bargain, 
but that odd sparrow cannot fall to the ground with- 
out the notice of the Father. Surely we are of more 
value than many sparrows, and we may count on 
Him with absolute certainty. Nowhere in the world 
does He make birds, fish, young lions, or babes, 
without supplying the food which He has taught 
them to require. He cannot do worse by us; we 
dare not think that He has implanted needs which 
He is unable and unwilling to meet. Only let us 
make Him our confidant, going through life with 
a free-handed generosity that gives, and with an 
absolute trust which takes, making our requests 
known unto Him, and receiving the fulfilment of 
every need, out of which shall arise to Him who 
loves us, cares for us, and sustains us, glory unto 
the ages of the ages. 


256 


XXVII 


CLOSING SALUTATIONS 
Puiu. iv. 21-23 


SALvrTE every saint in Christ Jesus. The brethren which are 
with me greet you. 
‘ mt the saints salute you, chiefly they that are of Czsar’s house- 
old. 
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen. 
{ It was written to the Philippians from Rome by Epaphroditus. 


PROBABLY, at this point, the Apostle took in hand ppiy jy. 
the style with which his amanuensis had _ been 21-23 
rapidly penning his glowing thoughts, that in the 

clumsy letters, to which he refers in the Epistle 

of Galatians (vi. 11), probably due to his defective 
eyesight, he might append his autograph. 

‘Salute every saint in Christ Jesus.’ There were The 
many distinctions between the disciples in that dis- Universality 
tant city. Some who professed a lofty spirituality, Greetings. 
but lacked the spirit of loving concord ; some who 
were tinctured with the pharisaic disputations of 
his own earlier days; and some who were able 
to appreciate the deepest teachings of the nature 
of Christ which human words can unfold. It was 
enough, however, that they were in Christ Jesus, 
that He had accepted them, and that already they 
were separated from the corruption that is in 
the world through lust, and were set apart for the 
glorious purpose of the Son of God, and therefore, 

R 257 


Phil. iv. 


21-23 


Paul’s 
Humility. 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


their faithful friend was able to include them all 
in his tender salutation. 

How good it is when Christian love enables us to 
rise above sectarian strife, and the misunderstandings 
which are generated by the differences of our tempera- 
ment and education, so that we are able to view each 
other as common members of the Body, and contigu- 
ous branches of the Vine, praying for each other, and 
prepared to communicate grace by word and act. 
Let us salute every saint, whether belonging to our 
own Church, or to some other. It is enough to know 
that they with us are partakers of the grace of God, 
and if He loves, there must be something lovable 
upon which our hearts can fasten. 

* * * * * 

There is no trace of the priest in these simple 
words. Having sent his own personal greetings, 
he hastens to class with himself his colleagues, as 
Timothy and Mark, or his travelling companions, 
as Luke and Silas, or prominent believers who 
dwelt in Rome, and had the right of entrance into 
his hired room. They were brethren more or less 
unknown, but the Apostle recognised that they had 
as much right to salute the saints in Philippi as he 
had, and he hastened to strengthen his own message 
by the inclusion of their good-will. 

It is interesting to notice how fond the Apostle 
was of having others with him in his Christian work. 
Their fellowship gave him strength and comfort. 
Probably, he entered into the Spirit of the Master, 
who sent His disciples out two and two. Some: 
times, he allied himself with Barnabas, at other 

258 


Closing Salutations 


times with Silas, at other times with Mark. The Phil. iv. 
opening words of this Epistle show how closely he 22-23 
was associated with Timothy, ‘his own son in the 
faith.’ Two are better than one. It is a matter 
of great encouragement and strength when some 
kindred soul is united with us in any service. 

* * * * * 

‘All the saints salute you.’ The Apostle first The _ 
salutes for himself; then he associates the brethren Sore! 
that were with him; and now his voice seems to Christian 
have stirred a large circle of consenting hearts, and ~°’~ 
from them all a torrent of tender affection sets in 
towards the Philippian Church. There is every 
probability that the saints who here send greeting 
are those who themselves had been greeted and 
mentioned by name in Romans xvi. Bishop Light- 
foot, in an essay on this passage which is full of 
interest, has pointed out that many of the names 
mentioned by Paul in the last chapter of his letter 
to the Romans are identical with the names de- 
ciphered in sepulchral inscriptions, and known to 
have had a place in the Imperial household. Of 
these he specifies Ampliatus, Apelles, Stachys, 
Rufus and Hermes, and the two women, Tryphena 
and Tryphosa. These were almost certainly included 
in ‘all the saints.’ 

Thus this Epistle, so full of love, seems like a 
shuttle to have shot between these far removed 
centres of Christian life, uniting each to the other. 
Epaphroditus had brought a sweet savour of Philippi 
unto Rome, now this letter carries the fragrance of 
Roman Christianity to Philippi. It is thus that the 

259 


The Epistle to the Philippians 


Phil. iv. Churches in all ages have exchanged words and 


21-23 actions of Christian courtesy. 

% x * % * 
The ‘Especially them that are of Cesar’s household.’ 
eee The great commentator already referred to, has 


specially dis- Shown that the household of Cesar was a term 

tinguished. embracing a vast number of persons, not only 
in Rome, but in the provinces, all of whom were 
either actual or former slaves of the Emperor, and 
filled every possible description of office. There is 
every reason to believe that this term included 
household slaves who were in immediate attendance 
upon the Emperor; soldiers who through being 
attached to the prisoner had been constrained to 
hear the story of salvation, and yielded to the 
claims of Jesus: and perhaps beyond, there was 
a still wider circle of senators and knights, men of 
intellectual power and large wealth, who composed 
the Imperial retinue and court. The household of 
Ceesar was constituted by a vast concourse, many of 
whom were the agents of murders, bitter cruelties, 
and licentious intrigues, but large numbers of whom 
were men of upright character, who found it possible, 
amid such surroundings as those of Nero’s palace, to 
be simple followers of Jesus. It is as possible to be 
a Christian in a royal court as in a slum, in a 
fashionable circle as amongst peasants and labourers, 
amongst rulers as amongst the poor and destitute. 
Character may be independent of circumstances. 
Joseph may pursue his life of purity amid the cor- 
ruption of Egypt, and Daniel his life of prayer amid 
the idolatry of Babylon. 

260 


Closing Salutations 


Circumstances may differ; in some cases they are Phil. iv, 
more, whilst in others they are less favourable to 21-23 
the growth of Christian character, but Christianity 
is indigenous to all climates, and will flourish on any 
soil. It is like the corn plant which grows alike 
_ upon the alluvial soil of the Nile Delta, and the 
broad expanse of Western prairies. 

It speaks much for the earnestness of individual 
workers in those early days, when there were no 
great conventions, nor many eloquent and com- 
manding preachers, that such vast multitudes of 
believers were being gathered in every part of the 
known world through the individual effort of those 
who, like the first apostles, could say, ‘Come and see.’ 

* * * * * 


‘The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your The Final 
spirit.’ The Epistle begins with grace (v. 2) and Benediction, 
with grace it ends. It is impossible to define all 
that is meant by this comprehensive prayer. Illumi- 
nation for the soul, love for the heart, strength for 
the mind, purity for the character, help in every time 
of need, direction in all perplexity and difficulty—all 
these are included in the word grace. It was im- 
possible for the Apostle to know in detail all that 
his friends might be passing through amid the 
temptations and perils of Philippi, but he wished 
that always and everywhere, they might be conscious 
that the grace of the Lord Jesus beset them behind 
and before, encompassed their going out and coming 
in, enwrapped them in their lying down and rising 
up, canopied them with skies opening Godward, and 
was their shield and their exceeding great reward. 

261 
THEOLOGY LIBRARY 


CLAREMONT, CALIF, - 
(C902 


Printed in Great Britain 
by Turndull & Spears, Edinburgh 


CONCORDANCES 


By ROBERT YOUNG, LL.D. 


Analytical Concordance to the Bible 


A WORK WHICH CAN NEVER BH SUPERSEDED, 
300,000 REFERENCES. 1246 PAGEs. 5,000,000 Worps. 


No other Book of Reference for the Aid of Bible Study has stood the 
testoftimeas Young’s Concordance has done, Itis still without a rival. 


STYLES. 
Standard Edition. On Oxford India Paper. 
(2% inches thick). (1% inches thick). 
No. 1, Strongly bound in No. 3. Cloth Gilt, Bevelled 
Cloth Gilt, Boards, Burnished 
Red Edges. 
No. 2. Half-Morocco Gilt, No. 4. Whole Persian Limp, 
Square Corners, Round Corners, Red, 
Marbled Edges, Gilt Edges, Gilt Roll, 


By ALEXANDER CRUDEN, M.A, 


A Complete Concordance to the Old 


A Dictionary and Alpha- 


and New Testaments ; betial fade fo the Bible 
And the lege eoem * tesa " ome r by William 


Large Royal &vo. Cloth, 
THE STUDENTS’ EDITION. 


Containing a complete table of proper names with their meanings in 
the original languages—a Concordance of the proper names of the Old 
and New Testaments—a Concordance to the Apocrypha and a Com- 
pendium of the Holy Scriptures, ete, 





A Concordance to the Holy Scriptures 


ON THE BASIS OF CRUDEN. 
New Edition. Large Type. Cloth. 


Succeeding generations of Sunday School Teachers have placed this 
volume second to their Bibles, and multitudes of Bible Workers 
continue to find this edition the best. 


THE R.T.S., 4 BOUVERIE STREET, LONDON, E.C. 4. 


HISTORIES 


By SAMUEL GREEN, D.D. 


A Handbook of Church History 


From the Apostolic Era to the Dawn of the Reformation, 
With full dates, Chronological Tables and Index. 640 pages. 


By J. VERNON BARTLET, M.A., D.D. 


Early Church History 


It deals with the first four centuries of the growth of 
Christianity, and traces the gradual changes that took place 
in its beliefs and doctrines from the simple faith and purity 
of the early apostolic period, to the more rigid and liturgical 
methodism of the early Catholic Church, 





By J. H. MERLE D'AUBIGNE, D.D. 


A History of the Reformation of the 
Sixteenth Century 


Cheap Edition. In One Volume, with New and Complete 
Index. 





By ALFRED EDERSHEIM, M.A., D.D. 


The Bible History 


In Seven Vols., each complete in itself. Crown 8vo. 





Vol. Vol, 
I. The World before the flood,and | IV, Israel under Samuel, Saul, and 
the History of the Patriarchs. David, to the Birth of Solomon. 
‘II. The Exodus and the Wander- V. Israel and Judah, from the Birth 
ings in the Wilderness. of Solomon to the Reign of Ahab. 
III. Israel in Canaan under Joshua | VI. Israel and Judah from Ahab to 
and the Judges. the Decline of the Two Kingdoms. 


Vol. VII, Israel and Judah from the Decline of the Two Kingdoms 
to the Assyrian and Babylonian Captivity. 


THE SET ALSO SUPPLIED IN A NEAT BOX. 


Dr. Edersheim’s mastery of the Hebrew language and literature enables hi 
throw a flood of light upon the facts described. The work abounds in sea 
criticism, and in vivid illustrations of the sacred narrative. Its historical surveys, 
graphic descriptions, and skilfully executed portraits will be found admirable. 





THE R.T.S., 4 BOUVERIE STREET, LONDON, E.C. 4. 








BS2705 .M38 


Meyer, F.B. (Frederjauten h 
The ebiste to theo sana) 8 


BS Meyer, Frederick Brotherton, 1847-1929. 
2705 The epistle to the Philippians; a devotior 
M38 commentary. London, Religious Tract Society; 


C1929, 1905] 
261p. 2hem. (Devotional commentaries) 


1. Bible. N.T. Philippians--Commentarie: 


CCSC/mmb 


[690V. 





